

that executed With the Kabal and Kya clans of the Utmanzai Yusafzais. The 

Mansur section also signed an Agreement (No. CXI). In July 1862 the 
fanatics re-occupied Sitava, and sent: threatening. messages to the Nawab of 
Amb ; as the Gaduns failed after due warning to expel tliem, they were in 
July 1863 subjected to a blockade. The conduct of ihe Gaduns during the 
Ambela campaign was satisfactory, and in January 1864 they again executed 
Agreements (Nos. CXII to CXIV) not to permit the return of the Hindustanis 
to any part of their territory. They continued, however, every year to dis- 
regard these promises, and in 1870 a blockade was declared against them. They 
finally submitted to the payment of a fine of Rs. 8,285, and gave security 
that they would not violate British territory. In 1874 the Salar division 
of the tribe was fined for petty border offences. In 188] the Gaduns, who 
were then assisting the exiled Mukarrab Khan of Panjtar, hereditary Khan of 
the Khudu Khel, in his struggle with the Bam Khel, committed an outrage 
on British territory, A fine was imposed on the tribe, who paid it without 
demur. At the commencement of the Black Mountain Expedition of 1888, 
the Gaduns were concerned in an attack on Mr. Hastings, District Superin_ 
tendent of Police, Peshawar. The tribe was fined Rs. 1,000, which was paid. 

With this exception the conduct of the Gaduns since the outrage of 1881 has 


been satisfactory. 


4.—MOHMANDS, 


The Mohmards are a large tribe, occupying the hilly country on the 
north-west border of the Peshawar valley, adjoining Bajaur and Kunar to the 
north, and the district of Ningrahar to the west, the southern boundary 
being formed by the Kabul river. They own allegiance to the Amir of Kabul, 
from whom their chiefs receive cash allowances and the revenue of certain 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—fohkmands. 223 


districts in the direction of Jalalabad, amounting to about Rs. 70,000 
Torakzai. | Baizai. | Utmanzal. per annum. The tribe can turn out 16,000 
Halimzai, | Khwaizai, | Dawezai. fighting men, and is divided into six sections, 
each of which again is sub-divided into several clans. Owing to the direct 
influence exercised by the Amir Dost Muhammad over the Mohmands, it 
was chiefly through ‘this tribe that he endeavoured, after the annexation of 
the Punjab, to harass our border. The Chief, Saadat Khan of Lalpura, 
was also personally inimical to us, because, during our brief connection with 
the affairs of Afghanistan in 1841, he had been superseded in the chief- 
ship by his cousin, Torabaz Khan, who was, however, unable to maintain his 
ground after we had left the country. The tribe possessed peculiar facilities 
for causing annoyance, as two of the roads leading to Afghanistan pass 
through their territories, ; 
The principal sections with which we have had dealings are the Zarakzais,: 
‘to which belong the Chiefs of Lalpura, Michni, and Pindiali, and the Halim. 
zais. Both sections border on our districts, and were in the enjoyment 
of certain villages within the Peshawar district of the collective value of 
Rs. 10,000 per annum ; thus owibg joint allegiance to the British Govern- 
ment and to the Amir of Kabul. In 1850 and 1851 their raids and robberies 
were frequent. Large bodies of them entered the plain by night and destroyed 
our villages, massacring the people or carrying them off to the hills till 
ransomed by their friends. The grazing lands of our villages lie immediately 
under.the Mohmand hills, and at last scarcely a day passed without some of 
the cattle being carried off. 