


In 1852 circumstances occurred which rendered it necessary to punish the 
Ranizais and their neighbours, the Utman Khel*, 


The large village of Tangi, on the Swat river, was the residence of a 
powerful Chief named Ajun Khan, a young man of a restless, proud, and 
bigoted character. A large part of the village was held by him revenue free, 
but he desired the whole of it, and exemption from personal attendance at 
our courts; and from the interference of our revenue and police officials in his 
village. Finding that these demands were not likely to be complied with, he 


* A Pathan tribe, but unconnected with any of the surrounding tribes of thatrace, They 
occupy the hills north of Peshawar, between the Mohmandsand Ranizais, on both sides of the Swat 
river from the Koh-i-Mobr to the Khanora mountain. 


220 Punjab—North-Western Frontieor—Yusafzais. Part f 


adopted the course, not unfrequent during the Durani and Sikh rule, of 
removing to the hills, calling around him a band of adventurers, and leading 
them in acts of aggression upon British villages, in the hope that the Govern- 
ment would be induced to yield to such presspre and grant him the privileges 
he sought. He took up his quarters in the Utman Khel villages to the north 
of the district, and received in jagir several villages on the border from the 
Saiyid Akhund of Swat, who was himself anticipating the advent of the Bri- 
tish, and willingly received such fugitives, locating them on his border to act 
as an advance guard. The villages assigned to them were separated from 
British territory by the district of the Ranizais through which tkese malcon- 
tents were in the habit of passing in their forays on British villages. 


On the 6th March 1852 a detachment of the Guides was attacked at 
Gujar Garhi by one of these bands under the fugitive Mukarram Khan, As 
the outrage was clearly traced to the Ranizais, a force, under the command of 
Sir Colin Campbell, moved from Peshawar to coerce them, They submitted 
before hostilities actually commenced, and agreed to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000, 
surrendering three of their headmen as hostages; but these they afterwards 
repudiated and expelled their families from the district. 

On the night of the 20th April 1852 Ajun Khan, with a band of 200 
horsemen, attacked the large village of Charsada, which was the head-quarters 
of the Hashtnagar tahsil, The Taksildar, himself a Saiyid, wasimurdered 
and ‘cut to pieces, séveral other officials were similarly treated, and the 
tahsil treasury was plundered. The whole of the Hashtnagar tahsil was 
thrown into alarm and confusion. In all these acts the chief support of the 
rebels was the so called “ Padshah ” of Swat, and the aiders and ‘bettors were 
the Utman Khel and Ranizai tribes. 

For the signal chastisement of these tribes a force of 5,900 men was 
Collected near Tangi, on the Swat river, and Sir Colin Campbell proceeded in 
May against the Utman Khel, who numbered 5,000 matchlocks. They offered 
considerable resistance, but were finally driven from their strongholds with 
much loss, and their chief villages of Pranghar and Nawadand were complete_ 
ly destroyed. The force ‘passed on into Ranizai and captured the leading men 
of the tribe. 