


The district was becoming disorganised, and in October 1851 Sir Colina 
Campbell (Lord Clyde), who was then commanding at Peshawar, received 
orders to proceed against the tribe. He took the field with a considerable 
force, and attacked the Tarakzai and Halimzai clans, The whole tribe 
opposed themselves to him under Saadat Khan, and operations continued 
for three months, During that time their villages immediately on the border 
were destroyed, their towers were blown up, and in the several skirmishes 
which occurred many of their men were slain. The tribe became disheart- 
ened ; and when the fort of Michni had been completed and garrisoned, and 
police posts had been placed along the border, with towers of communication, 
the troops were withdrawn. Scarcely had this been done when, in April 1852, 
the tribe determined to make another combined effort. They were attacked 
and completely routed by Sir Colin Campbell, and from that day the tribe 


224 Punjab -North-Western Frontier—Mohmands. Part fr 


2 


never appeared against us in a hody, and left the three clang on our border to 
make their own arrangements. 

The Halimzais under their Malik, Ahmad Sher, at ‘once tendered their 
submission and entered into an Agreement (No. CXV). They were allowed 
to re-settle on payment of an annual tribute of Rs. 200, and ox condition 
of loyalty and good service. To these terms they have adhered with singus 
lar steadfastness, and in 1857 they were so useful to the local authorities 
that Abmad Sher received an annual grant in acknowledgment of their 
services. 


The Tarakzai Mohmands did.not at once succumb, but opposed to the 
utmost of their power the building of the fort which was to hold them in check. 
Finding, however, that the other clans rendered them no assistance, and that 
the feud was more injurious to themselves than to us, they also submitted, and 
were allowed to re-settle on payment of an annual tribute of Rs. 600. 
Their Chief, Rahimdad, was a crafty and restless man, and incited by 
him they again commenced a series of lawless acts, and finally the greater 
portion of them left their' villages in British territory and went to their hills in 
open feud in August 1854. A force was despatched against them under Sir 
Syduey Cotton, who attacked them by a movement on both sides of the Kabul 
river, and destroyed their principal villages of Shah Musa Khel and Sadin. 
Their losses on the occasion were severe, and the lesson was final. They sub- 
mitted unconditionally, and those who had thrown off their allegiance were 
only allowed to re-settle on payment of revenue assessed upon their lands 
amounting to Rs, 3,000 per annum. Those who had remained loyal con- 
tinued as before to hold their lands rent-free on payment of their share of the 
tribute. No written agreements were entered into, but these arrangements 
were successful. 


The Pindiali Mohmands (Tarakzais) long continued at feud with us, but 
at last, worn out by a ten years’ struggle and blockade, they sued for pardon 
. and peace; and in November 1860 their Chief, Nawab Khan, submitted 
unconditionally, and was pardoned, on making restitution to pur subjects for 
stolen property, and paying compensation for other injuries caused by his clan. 
In 1888 the Burhan Khel section gave some trouble in consequence of a dis- 
pute regarding their tribal allowance with Pirdost Khan, son of Nawab Khan. 
The shares of each were fixed, the Burhan Khel paid a fine, and since then the 
conduct of the Pindiali Mohmands has been goad. 