


5.—AFRIDIS. 


The Afridis are a large tribe of Pathans, inhabiting the lower and eastern- 
most spurs of the Safed Koh range to the west and south of the Peshawar 
district, including the valley of the river Bara, and portions of those of Chura 


- ; and Tirah. They are divided into eight 

i : Kambar Khel, 3 nie . 
es Sipah Kia. es Zakha Khel. Sections, and their total fighting strength, 
(8) Kamarai Khel.| (7) Aka Khel. which has been variously estimated, may 


(4) Malikdin Kbel.| (8) Adam Khel. 3 
be put at 27,000 men. Where the 


general interests of the tribe are concerned, the clans usually range themselves * 
into the two great factions of Samal and Gar—-the Samal faction including the 
Malikdin, Zakha, Aka, Sipah, and Kamarai Khels ; and the Gar, the Kambar 
and Kuki Khels. The Adam Khel belong to neither, but side with ove or 
the other as their interests may dictate. 

The (1) Kuki Khel is, after the Zakha Khel, the most aan and 
powerful section of the Khaibar Afridis, They number some 4,500 fighting 
men. Their summer quarters are in Bar Bara and Tordara, and in winter 
they move down to their settlements at the mouth of the Khaibar Pass, which 
they occupy as far as Ali Masjid and the caves of Kajurai. They are divided 
into two sections: (a) the Wadradankai, or settled, who occupy the country be- 
tween Jamrud and Ali Masjid, anda few hamlets and forts in the Lashora 
valley ; (4) the Tirah section who live in the-Rajghal, throngh which the Bara 
stream flows. 

They have been, since annexatien, more notorious for harbouring criminals 
and refugees.than for direct acts of aggression, and as they derive their means 
of subsistence chiefly from the sale of firewood in British cantonments, Gov- 
ernment has always possessed a ready means of punishing them for lawless 
acts. Such an act was committed in January 1857, when Dost Mubammad 
was encamped at Jamrud after his interview with Sir John Lawrence, whose 
camp was a few miles nearer Peshawar. A party of young officers rode beyond 


, 


Part I Pyupjab—N orth-Western Frontier—4/ridis, 227 


the Amir’s camp towards the pass, and were fired on by the Kuki Khel. One 
of the number, Lieutenant Hand, was so severely wounded that he died during 
the night. The crime having been brought home to men of the tribe, they 
were blockaded, and many of their men fell into. our hands. During these 
hostilities the mutiny broke out, but the blockade was continued in full force; 
and tvas s? injurious to the interests of the tribe that they paid a fine of 
Rs, 8,000 and entered into an Agreement (No. CXVII). 

The (2) Sipak, (3) Kamara, (4) Malikdin, and (5) Kambar sections of 
the tribe can muster in all about 12,200 matchlockmen, 

The (2) Sipak clan have a permanent village, Ilamgudar, two or three 
miles from Bara fort. They number about 1,500 fighting men. Sher Muham- 
mad is the present Chief. 

The (8) Kamarai isa small clan numbering about 1,200 armed men. Their 
summer settlements are in the Bara valley. They hold the Tsaukh Tangi Pass, 
which the Malikdin, Kambar, Sipah, and Kuki Khels must traverse in pro. 
ceeding to their own country from winter quarters. 