

The (4) Malikden are divided into four sections, two of which acknowledge 
Sultan Muhammad Khan as their Chief, while the other two follow Sarfaraz 
Khan, but the real Malik of Sarfaraz Khan’s party is Firoz Khan. The tribe 
_ has a permanent habitation at Chura in Tirah, where the two maliks reside, 
The strength of the tribe is between 4,000 and 5,000 fighting men. 


The (5) Kambar Khel is of the same stock as the Malikdin, but they 
belong to different factions, Their summer settlements are in the Tirah high- 
lands. Their armed strength is close upon 5,000 men. 

In winter all these clans migrate to the Kajurai valley, north of the Bara 
river, on the Peshawar border. This joint occupancy proved very incon- 
venient, -as it enabled them to allow members of- other tribes to pass through 
their settlements for purposes of robbery and theft, in which cases the respon- 
sible party could seldom be ascertained. On this account they refused on 
several pretexts to become jointly responsible. But in the early part of 1861, 
a party of villagers from British territory, who were grazing their cattle in the 
vicinity, were attacked by the Zakha Khel, who had been residing in Kajurai. 
One was killed, three were wounded, and their cattle were plundered. Some 
of the Kajurai men were seized, and further proceedings threatened, unless 
immediate reparation was made and an agreement entered into of joint respon- 
sibility’for the future. The. sections concerned sent their representatives to 
Peshawar, paid a fine of Rs, 1,000, and entered into the desired agreement, 


228 Punjab—North-Western Frontier — Afridis. Part I 


which closes that corner of the district against the Zakha Khel and other 
robbers. The Agreement (No. CX VIII) with the Sipah and Kamarai sections 
was made on the 24th April 1861; that with the Malikdin Khel and 
Kambar Khel was effected shortly afterwards, and is of the same tenor. 


The (6) Zakha Khelis the most important and powerful of all the sections 
of the Afridis, and can bring into the field when united, which is seldom the 
case, about 5,000 fighting men, They inhabit the Khaibar pass; and their 
chief strength lies in the fact that from Lakasar through Khaibar, Bazar, 
Bara, and Maidan of Tirah their country extends without passing through the 
limits of any other tribe. A Zakha can traverse the whole of the tribal lands 
without paying toll to any other Afridi clan. 


The Zakha Khel is divided into the Pakiai, who occupy the Khaibar and 
two or three villages of the Bazar valley ; the Khasrogi, Paiuda, Anaz, and 
Shan Khel, who reside in the Bazar valley ; and the Zia-ud-din of Shin Kamr. 
All these different sections have two or three forts each in the Bara valley. 
All the sections, except the Painda and Pakhai, migrate to Tirah during the 
summer months, Khawas and Wali Muhammad Khan are the present head 
Maliks of the tribe. 


The Zakha Khels have always been noted as bold and clever freebooters, 
but the British Government has never come into collision with them as a tribe, 
They were formerly divided into two great factions, led respectively by Bostan 
Khan and Aladad Khan. In August 1857 the clans under Bostan Khan 
entered into an Agreement (No. CXIX),'and their example was shortly after- 
wards followed by the remainder under Aladad Khan (No, CXX). Bostan 
Khan was killed in 1870. 