

In 1888 the Khan of Agror was removed from the border for complicity 
in many of the raids and disturbances of the past years, which it was proved 
he had fomented for his own ends. He has since been detained in Kangra 
under a warrant under Regulation III of 1818, and his estate has been attached. 

Abdulla Khan of Dilbori, finding that no good was to.be gained by 
threatening the armed intervention of the Chagarzais, surrendered himself tv 
the Deputy Commissioner in May 1889, was imprisoned for some months, and 
released early in 1890. 

Though no agreement has been entered into by the Chagarzais of the 
northern slopes of the Black Mountain, a large jirga of this clan visited the 
Deputy Commissioner in 1889, and professed resolves to remain in friendship 
and peace with Government, 

In November }887 a servant of Hichin Ali Khan of Seri, Chief of the 
Hasanzais, was charged with several murders inAgror, and was arrested and put 
on trial. Disregarding friendly messages asking him to send in the witnesseS 
named by his servant for his defence, Hashim Ali’Khan sent a raiding party 
into Agror, which, attacking a solitary hamlet at night, killed two men and 
carried off two others. In the following June Major Battye, with a company 
of the 2-5th Gurkhas, while making a route march on the Black Mountain, 
was attacked by a gang of Gujars and others of Akazai villages; Major 
Battye, Captain Urmston, and a few Gurkhas who had remained behind with 
a dooli in which was a wounded sepoy, were surrounded, overpowered, and 
killed. 

For some years past the glaring offences of the Khan Khel (Hasanzais) and 
Akazais had been met merely by the imposition of fines on paper and by a 
blockade, Unfortunately, the nature of the country makes it impossible to 
maintain an effectual blockade, and were it otherwise the clans could supply 
their wants from independent territory ; they had no trade to lose, and, assisted 
by the secret friendship, sympathy, and support of the Khan of Agror, were 
able to procure from Agror whatever they needed. 

Finding that the state of things on this border demanded strong measures 
t) punish the unatoned outrages of the past 20 years, Government deter- 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier— Fusafzais. 217 


mined in 1888 to send an expedition against the Hasanzais, Akazais, and 
Pariariwals. 

The whole Hasanzai clan were made responsible for bringing Hashim Ali 
Khan fo terms, as it was notorious that a man in his position could not have 
acted as he had done since he became titular Chief, without the connivance ' 
and support of the whole tribe. 

The Hasanzais were compelled to pay a fine of Rupees 7,500,fthe Akazais 
a fine of Rupees 4,000, and the Pariariwals Rupees 1,500, which they gave 
mostly in cattle, Hostages were taken from each clan. At the same time, 
before the force returned to British territory, the jirgas of the Hasanzais and 
Akazais made Agreements with Government .which are reproduced below 
(Nos, CIV and CV), 