

Khel clans at the annual rates of Rs, 1,008, Rs. 648 and Ks. 2,016 re- 
spectively. 

The (3) Lasktarzai section are sub-divided into (2) Mamuzai or Mah. 
mudeat, and (b) Alisherzat, 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Zaimukhis. 239 


In 1858 the Alisherzais entered into an engagement similar to that con- 
cluded with the Utman Khel on the 2nd August of that year (No. CKXXVIII). 

Having in 1869 raided on British territory and violated that treaty, they 
executed, on submission, a second Engagement (No. CXXXIX) in renewal 
thereof, 

In 1879, on the outbreak of the Afghan war, the two clans of the Lash- 
karzai joined the Zaimukhts in attacks on the Miranzai border. An account of 
these disturbances is given under the Zaimukhts, The rapid success of General 
Tytler’s force in December of that year so alarmed the Alisherzais that their 
jirgas attended and accepted the terms imposed, viz., payment of Rs. 4,000 
fine, and the surrender of 28 hostages. The Mamuzais also came in and accept- 
ed like terms ; but a short time afterwards they again turned hostile, and a 
blockade was established. In August 1880 they committed, with the Akhel 
and Alikhel, a serious raid on the Bagattu sarai, in which eight British subjects 
were killed. A settlement was effected in March 1883, and in November 
following they arranged for the payment of the balance of fines due. 

The (4) Hamsayas are divided into}{(a) Mishtt Khel, (2) Ali Khel, (c) 
Shekhan, aud (@) Malla or Muta Kiel. 

The Hamsayas are much mixed up geographically and politically with 
the Ismailzais. The Ismailzais however belong to the original Orakzai stock, 
while the Hamsayas consist of clans who, admitted first as dependents, are now 
more powerful and numerous than the Ismailzais themselves. Taking these 
two sections as separable into (¢) Western Gar clans and (b) Hangui Samil 
clans, the former would embrace the Ali Khel of the Hamsayas and the Akhel 
of the Ismailzais, and the latter the remaining clans of both sections. The 
Hangu Samil clans were under the direct management of the Khan of Hangu 
in the Kohat district until his deportation to Lahore in 1891. Since then 
they have been like the rest of these clans managed directly by the Deputy 
Commissioner of Kohat. 


‘ 


7.—ZAIMUKHTS. 

The Zaimukht tribe inhabit the hills to the south of the Orakzai, 
between the valleys of Miranzai and Kuram, They are divided into two main 
branches :—I, the Bayuk, or ‘Eastern Zaimukhts, and 11, the Mamozai, or 
Western Zaimukhis. The Bayuk branch’is subdivided into the (1) Khotdad 
Khel, comprising the Hasan Khel, Babakar Khel, and Tapai; and (2) the 
Kadu Khel, comprising the Ahmad Khel and Umar Khel. The Mamozat 


240. Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Zaimukhts. Part I 


branch is divided into the (1) Watizaz, (2) Daudzai, (3) Mandani, and (4) 
Manatuwal. 

The two branches of the tribe have a bitter blood feud, though at present 
a truce is maintained between them. The tribe are at feud with the Bangashes 
but are friendly with the Orakzais. 