

Subsequently to these proceedings Fort Mackeson in the plain between 
the two passes, and the police post of Shamshatu to command the entrance 

2H 


‘ 


234 Punjab—North-Western Frontier—A/fridis. Part I 


to the Jawaki pass, with patrolling roads and connecting towers, were 
constructed. 

During the disturbances of 1876-77 with the Pass Afridis, the Jawakis 
showed a certain sympathy with their kinsmen, but took no active part against 
the Government. They abandoned, however, contrary to the agreement of 1853, 
their tower on the Kotal, and failed to preserve the border secure from the 
raids of the blockaded Adam Khel, Being in consequence proceeded against by 
seizure of their men and property found in Kohat, they at once gave in their 
submission, adjusted the claims against them, and gave hostages for the 
maintenance of a strict neutrality. This engagement the Jawakis observed 
until the end of the pass difficulties in March 1877. 

In July 1877 the Jawakis suddenly gave up their peaceful attitude, di- 
rected a series of outrages against British territory; cut the telegraph wires on 
the Khushalgarh line, and attacked British subjects and villages with much 
audacity. This outbreak was attributed to anticipations on the part of the 
tribe that their pass allowance was to be reduced. On the settlement with 
the Pass Afridis, proposals came under consideration for the re-distribution of 
the allowances in a more equitable manner. No final decision had, however, 
been taken by the Punjab Government on the proposals made. But the pro- 
spect of alterations was used by interested persons to influence the Jawakis 
for evil. ne 

The continued outrages of the tribe at last rendered a military expedition 
necessary, Accordingly, Brigadier-General Keyes, on the 9th November 1877, 
entered the Jawaki valley with a considerable force; Brigadier-Genera! Ross 
at the same time operating from the Peshawar side. After a long and stubborn 
resistance the Jawakis at last gave in, and accepted the terms imposed upon 
them, which were ratified at a Darbar held at Peshawar on the 4th March 
1878, The terms included (a) the restitution of stolen property; (6) the 
payment of a large fine, and the surrender of hostages; (c) the occupation of 
the village of Jamu by British troops; (d) the opening of communications 
through the Jawaki country ; and (e) the withdrawal of the pass allowance. 
The terms also included a stipulation that four specified Maliks should be 
exiled from their villages, and they left for a while, but within a fortnight of 
the troops leaving the country they were back again, and one is still living at 
his village of Bori. Malik Mushki, of Shindand, the brother of another of 
the proscribed Maliks, continued for years to raid on British territory and 
gave infinite trouble, until his career was cut short by the surprise of his 
village, and the capture of himself and several of his relations by a force 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—4/ridis. 235 