

After the annexation of the Miranzai valley numerous raids were com- 
mitted by the Orakzais on our border, and in 1855 the Rabia Khel attacked 
and plundered the British village 6f Shabu Khel. A force proceeded against 
them under Brigadier-General Chamberlain, and on the Ist September 1855 
successfully carried their positions on the Samana range, inflicting considerable 
loss on the tribe. They immediately submitted, and on the 20th September 
1855 entered into an Engagement (No. CXXXV) for future good conduct, to 
which they adhered for a while, but during the Afghan war they commenced 
harassing our line of communications in the Miranzai valley. 


In November and December 1878 the Akhel with the Ali Khel 
Hamsayas, under the influence of emissaries from Kabul, displayed’ some 
hostile activity, but on the lst January 1879 a settlement was effected with 
them. This was soon disregarded, and throughout 1879 and 1880 the Akhel 
and the Ali Khel committed numerous outrages on the border. The fines 
imposed on this account were not paid up until 1891. 

The continued outrages committed by the Rabia Khel and three other 
Samil clans (Mishti, Sheikhan, and Mammuzai Deradar) of the Khanki valley, 


n the Miranzai expedition of 1891, a column was encamped for three days at Zera, one 
of the Sinah villages, 


238 _Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Orakzais. Part I 


rendered it necessary in 1891 to inflict punishment on them, It was found 
that the tribes had been supported in their course of outrage by the Khan 
of Hangu and his family, notably by his eldest son, Baz Gul Khan. The 
Khan and the male members of his family were therefore deported to Lahore, 
Baz Gul Khan being confined in the central jail. A force under Brigadier- 
General Lockhart occupied the strongholds of the offending tribes,who shortly 
after submitted unconditionally. Malik Makhmadin, the most flagrant offend- 

-ef, surrendered himself, after twenty of his villages and towns had been blown 
up. It was resolved to maintain a garrison on the Samana range, which 
divides Miranzai from the Khanki valley ; and for this purpose a small force 
was left there to cover the construction of fortified posts. 


The clans had accepted most unwillingly theimportant terms imposed by 
Government, viz., those providing for the construction of roads and posts on 
the Samana range, and for the payment of revenue for lands held to the south 
of the ridge. As soon as our troops were withdrawn a powerful combina- 
tion was formed of the various Orakzai tribes (Gar as well as Samil), together 
with a contingent of Afridis, with a view to getting the terms altered. 
On the 4th April 1891 a treacherous attack was made on the military 
guards protecting working parties on the range and the frontier at 
once burst into a blaze. This necessitated the second Miranzai expedition. 
Reinforcements were’ pushed up, the force was formed, and on the 17th April 
the Samana range was again in our hands. After several days’ fighting, in 
which the tribes suffered severely, they gave in unconditionally, and the whole 
of the Khanki valley, and the country beyond to the Marghan Kotal overlook- 
ing the Masuzai settlements, was traversed by the troops. In May and June 
1891 special Agreements (Nos.CKXXVI and CXXXVII) were made with 
the Akhel and Rabia Khel. By these agreements the tribes acknowledged 
the boundary claimed by the Government of India up to the crest and water- 
shed of the Samana range, agreed to build posts and furnish men to hold them, 
accepted responsibility for peace and good order, and undertook to pay teve- 
nue for land on the sunny side of the Sathanarange, Tribal service at the rate 
of Ra. 1,008 per annum each was granted to the Rabia Khel and the Akhel. In 
1892 the tribal service was extended to the Mishti, Shekhan and Muhammad 