


The responsibility of all these six tribes—Kuki, Sipah, Kamarai, Malikdin, 
Kambar, and Zakba Khels, in respect of the Khaibar pass, is now regulated 
by the joint Agreement (No. CXXI) concluded in 1881, 


By Article 9 of the Treaty of Gandamak (No. CXCIV) made -in 
1879, it was stipulated that the British Government should retain in its own, 
hands the control of the Khaibar and Michni passes, and of all political re- 
lations with the independent tribes inhabiting the territory directly attached 
thereto. 


Owing to the causes referred to at page 424, the treaty of Gandamak 
became null and void, but in the arrangements subsequently made with the 
Amir Abdur Rahman and set forth at page 425, its ‘provisions, so far ‘ag 


Part I Funjab— North-Western Frontier—4/ridis. 229 


regards, amongst other things, the Khaibar, were in the main adbered to. 
Consequently the pass, throughout its entire length as far as Dakka, opposite 
Lal pura, was placed under the contro] of the Punjab Government. The Afghans 
of the Khaibar, while always asserting their independence, received from the 
Auirs of Kabul allowances in consideration of keeping the pass open to trade. 
These allowances, irregularly paid, were ‘often suspended for years together, 
and when the road came under British control, it was practically closed to 
commerce, or merchandise was allowed to be conveyed along it only on pay- 
ment of dues so heavy as to be almost prohibitive. On the transfer of the 
pass, arrangements were at once initiated for placing the relations of the 
Afridis with the British Government on a satisfactory footing. The representa- 
tives of the various tribes came in, and a conference was held in the autumn 
of 1880 at Peshawar. After protracted negotiations a settlement was finally 
concluded, the terms of which are embodied in the Agreement (No. CXXI) 
executed in February 1881. The independence of the tribes is recognised, an 
annual subsidy of Rs. 87,540 is allotted in allowances to different sections 
of the tribes, and a body of Jezailchis (which has now developed into the 
Khaibar Rifles) under the charge and management of tribal headmen, is 
maintained for the protection of the pass, at a yearly cost to the Government 
of Rs. 87,392. In consideration of these payments, the Afridis accept 
entire and exclusive responsibility for the security of the road which traverses. 
the independent territory where the authority of the Kabul Government is 
not acknowledged. The British Government reserved the right, which they 
have since exercised, of levying tolls upon traffic carried through the Khaibar. 
Besides the Afridi tribes, the Shentoarzs of Landi Kotal also joined in exe- 
cuting the agreement, These are the Ali Sher Khel section of the Shinwaris, 
They hold the pass from the village of Lala Beg, the extreme limit of Afridi. 
rights in the Khaibar, to Landi Khana, 

The settlement has up to the present time worked effectively. 

The (7) Aka Khel is a large section of the Afridis, numbering 1,800: 
fighting men, whose summer residence is in Tirah, but they migrate: 
in the winter to the hills bordering on the Peshawar district between the 
Kohat pass and the Bara river, where they dwell in caves, grazing their 
dattle in the plain. They had frequently committed cattle thefts and rob- 
beries near the Kchat pass, but were not considered as hostile as others. In 
the autumn of 1854, when Lieutenant Hamilton, District Engineer, was 
encamped at Badabir, completing the Kohat. and Peshawar road, a large, 