

From 1853 down to 1876 the Galai Khel gave very little trouble. Thi 
was probably due to their knowledge that in the event of misbehaviour their 
trade with British territory in wood and salt would be stopped, thus causing - 
them considerable loss. 

Towards the close of 1875 negotiations were opened with the Galais for 
the construction of a good road through the pass. The work had been an 
ject with the British Government for many years, and the tribe was bound 
by treaty to undertake it. An option’ was yiven to the Galais either to do 
this, or to forego the allowances they received. The tribe generally were willing 
to agree to the proposals of the Guvernment, and the matter would have been 
amicably settled, but for the opposition of the Sheraki villages, This section, 
in order to embroil the tribe, resorted to open insult and outrage; and as the 
main body were either unwilling or unable to coerce the Shirakis, the Govern- 
ment found it necessary in February 1876 to impose a blockade, a measure 
which was followed by a certain amount of raiding on British territory. The 
Hasanzais and the Ashu Khel became involved in the quarrel, and in Augus ¢ 


* Vide page 233. 


Part I Punjab- North-Western Frontier—4/ridis. 2383 


1876 the blockade was extended to them. Their contumacy did not however 
last long, and in February their submission was proffered and accepted. The 
submission of the Pass Afridis soon followed, and in March 1877 their leaders 
came in and accepted the Government terms, which were the improvement, 
under Government supervision, of the rocky portion of the road north of the 
Kotal, the surrender of all plundered property belonging to British subjects, 
and the payment of a fine of Rs. 3,000. 

The (@) Jawaki clan live to the east of the Kohat pass, in the strip of 
independent territory which runs south from the Jawaki pass into the Kohat 
district, approaching the main military road halfway between Khushalgarh 
and Kohat. The clan numbers about 1,000 fighting men. 

The first Agreement concluded with the Jawakis is dated the 26th Decem- 
ber 1851 (No. CXXV). By it the clan accepted responsibility for crimes com. 
mitted in British territory by the portion of the clan living on the south side of 
the central range of hills dividing their country. 

By an Agreement (No. CXXVI) concluded on the 8rd December 1853 
they were admitted to ashare in the allowances for the protection of the Kohat 
Pass. They receive Rupees 2,000 per annum on this account. 

The Jawaki village of Bori had, throughout the Sikh rule, been notorious 
as the residence of freebooters, who plundered on the Attock road. After an- 
nexation its notoriety increased, and as it was strongly located in the mouth of 
the Jawaki Pass, criminals from the Peshawar and Rawal Pindi districts found an 
asylum there, and made it the point from which they started on their maraud- 
ing expeditions. It was therefore found necessary, in November 1853, to 
proceed against the place in force. Sir John Lawrence, then Chief Commis- 
sioner, accompanied the expedition, and the troops encamped in the plain 
between the Kohat and Jawaki passes. The force then proceeded to attack 
the Jawakis in their stronghold of Bori. The operations were difficult, and 
owing to the nature of the ground our loss was severe ; but the village and all: 
its towers were destroyed, and the Jawakis were driven from all the positions 
which they had occupied. The destruction of Bori had the desired effect, and 
in two months the clan submitted, and entered into an Agreement (No. 
CXXVIJ) on the 11th January 1854, engaging to abstain from raids them- 
selves, and to eject within two months all the fugitive freebooters with them. 
These engagements were strictly fulfilled by them. 