


The tribe have never given much trouble to the British Government, but 
their good behaviour is doubtless greatly due to self-interest. Trade with 
Kuram and Kabul by the Peiwar route almost entirely passes through the 
Zaimukht hills, and the tribe derives considerable benefit from the fees for the 
safe conduct of caravans. 

In 1858 an engagement, similar to that with the Orakzai clans (see No. 
CXXXVIII), was concluded with the Zaimulshts for the regulation of their 
intercourse with the British Government. 


During the Afghan war, in 1879, the Zaimukhts, aided by the Mamuzai 
and Ali Sherzai clans of the Lashkarzai division of the Orakzais, committed 
a series of offences on the Thal-Kuram road and the Miranzai border. 
Among these were the murder of two British officers, and an attack on a 
military.convoy. An expedition under General Tytler was sent against them 
in December 1879; the Zaimukht hills were traversed, and the settlements of 
the Watizais, the worst behaved section of the tribe, were destroyed. The 
submission of the tribes concerned soon followed. Heavy fines were realised 
and the surrender of hostageg was secured. ‘he tribe also agreed to keep 
open the road through the Zaimukht valley. In February 1880 the Maliks of 
the Zaimukhts made formal submission in open Darbar to the Lieutenant- 
Governor at Kohat. Since then they have beeu on the whole well conducted, 
though recent years have witnessed the rise of a noted freebooter among 
them—Sarwar Khan, alias Chikkai, a Manatuwal of Chinarak, who is by 
extraction a Zaimukht. He is a successful and daring thief, and there was 
at one time a heavy account against him for raids in British territory. 
At the close of 1890 he made submission, but then he received encourage- 
ment from the Governor of Khost and a visit to Kabul, and gave more trouble, 
especially in the Turi country. When arrangements were made at the end 
of 1892 for the temporary occupation of Kuram by British troops it was 
directed that Chikkai and his followers should be made to evacuate lands 
they had seized in lower Kuram; but they did so without waiting to be 
eoerced, and Chikkai made submission. 


Part I Punjab—North- Western Frontier—TZuris. 241 


8.—TURIS. 

The Turis are an independent tribe occupying the Kuram valley ; which 
is bounded on the north by the Safed Koh, aud on the south by Khost and the 
independent Mangal and Wazir tribes. 

The Turis of Kuram are not Afghans of pure descent, if Afghans at all. 
Their ancestors are believed to have migrated some four or five hundred years 
ago from Kohat to their present seats, driving out or subjugating the original 
Bangash inhabitants. They are supposed to have advanced originally from 
the cis-Indus country. The Bangashes who remained in Kuram are now the 
hamsayas or vassals of the Turis; but a large number are settled in the Mir- 
anzai and Kohat valleys in British territory. Besides the Bangashes, some 
Zaimukhts and Mangals and four families of Saiyids are resident in Kuram, 
subject to the Turis. : 