

The (2) Galati Khel live in the pass, and can muster about 900 match- 
locks. In 1849 the British Government entered into an agreement with che 
Galai Khel, by which the latter agreed to keep open communication through 
the pass in consideration of an annual payment of Rs, 5,700, of which 
Rs. 8,000 was to be paid to the Maliks and Rs. 2,700 to forty-five men to 
be placed at certain posts in the pass. 


Soon, however, the tribe began to be troublesome, Their suspicions were 
also aroused by the construction of a road from Kohat ; and there was dis- 
content regarding the salt regulations at the trans-Indus mines. 

On the 2nd February 1850 a party of sappers, engaged on the above 
road about 3 miles from Kohat, was attacked by the Galai Khel and the Akhor- 
wal clan of the Hasan Khel, and nearly all were killed or wounded. The 
Commander-in-Chief, Sir Charles Napier, who was at Peshawar, issued orders 
for the forcing of the pass, with the double object of strengthening Kohat 
and punishing the Afridis. This was accomplished between the 10th and 
18th February, with some loss to ourselves. The villages in the pass were 
partially destroyed, and a regiment of cavalry and one of infantry were left at 
Kohat. : 


In April hostilities were renewed, and a company of infantry from Kohat 
was placed in a post on the crest of the mountain. The post was soon found 
to be untenable, and the detachment was withdrawn. It was then resolved 
to try the effect of a blockade, and the Afridis were debarred from all ingress 
to or dealings with the Peshawar or Kohat valleys. 


.The agreement abovementioned was of course made void by these pro- 
ceedings, but the pressure of the blockade induced the Galai Khel in Sep- 
tember 1850 to sue for terms, and the British Government consented to 
Yenew their old allowances on condition of their being responsible for the 
security of the pass, In order to strengthen the arrangement, Rahmat Khan, 
‘a Chief of the neighbouring Orakzais, was admitted to a-share in the respon- 
sibility and was granted a personal allowance of Rs. 2,000 per annum and 


232 Punjab—N orth-Western Frontier—Afridis. Part I 


- ‘Rs. 6,000 as the pay of a mounted guard of 100 men of his tribe to be 
Maintained on the erest of the ridge near Kohat. The allowances as thus 
‘revised aggregated Rs. 13,700 per annum. 

This arrangement continued till the close of 1853, when the continueg 
misconduct of these Afridis necessitated a change. The Deputy Commis- 
sioner of Kohat proposed that the Bangashes, who inhabit the Kohat valley, 
should be entrusted with the road from Kohat to the crest of the mountain, 
and the Galai Afridis with their own defile only. This was stoutly opposed 
by the latter, who claimed the crest of the mountain as their own. The 
Bangashes advanced to take possession of it, but were driven back, and evinced 
their inability to cope with the Afridis. At this time the force which had 
destroyed Bori* was encamped in the neighbourhood, and it was arranged that 
a simultaneous movement should be made against the pass from both sides. 
Perceiving their danger, the Galai Afridis submitted and withdrew their claim 
to the crest of the mountain, leaving it to the Government to make what 
arrangements they pleased for the road. Accordingly, on the lst December 
1853, they entered into an Agreement (No. CX XIV) to maintain the pass, on 
the old terms, from Aimal Chabutra on the Peshawar side to the foot of the 
mountain, They also relinquished Rs. 800 of tie allowance to the Maliks 
in favour of the Basi Khel. The cost of this arrangement was Rs. 5,700. ° 