


230 Punjab—North-Western Frontier—4fridis. Part I 


body of about 3800 men of the Aka Khel came down a ravine from the 
hills, and‘ silently surrounding the camp, suddenly lit torches and attacked 
it. The sleeping inmates were nearly all slain, Lieutenant Hamilton was 
wounded ; the camp was plundered, and the tents fired. A small force at once 
“took the field under Colonel Cragie, and entering the Aka Khel hills, inflicted 
as severe punishment as it could on the tribe. At the same time they were 
effectually blockaded, which was a source of still greater injury to them, as 
they were dependent on Peshawar for their support during the wintér by the 
sale of firewood. Troops remained in front of them, and many of tbeir 
cattle and people fell into our hands or were killed in skirmishes. They did 
not, however, submit that season, and returned as usual in the spring to their 
summer settlements in Tirah, In the autumn of 1855, when they were about 
to migrate, steps were taken to continue the blockade, and finding themselves 
exposed to this, they sued for peace, finally consenting to pay a fine of 
Rs. 2,670, to abstain from plunder in British territory, and to give hostages for 
their future good conduct. An Agreement (No. CXXIT) to this effect was 
entered into with them on the 11th January 1856. 


One of the clans of the Aka Khel is the Bast Kiel, who share in the al- 
lowances given for the protection of the Kohat pass and occupy the hills close 
to the entrance of the pass. ‘This allowance, which in 1855 was forfeited in con- 
sequence of the events narrated above, was originally paid to them in conse- 
quence of their baving claims to a portion of the land between Kotkai and 
Aimal Chabutra, called Kalamsada. These claims gave rise to constant quarrels 
between the Basi Khel and the Akhorwals, a clan of the Hasan Khel section of 
the Adam Khel. As the.former refused to abide by the decision of the Com- 
missioner of Peshawar, which they had previously agreed to accept, they were 
in February 1867 debarred from entering British territory; but after a brief 
interval submitted. In consideration of their agreeing (No, CXXIII) to the 
. former terms, v7z., a truce on the Kalamsada question for seven years, the 
allowance hitherto paid to’them was raised from Re. 600 to Rs. 1,000 per 
anuum. The truce expired in April 1875, 

The (8) Adam Khel is a large and important, but completely distinct, com- - 

* (a) Galai munity of the Afridis. It is divided into 

‘3 ra he Gali Khel, four sections,* and can turn out about 3,500. 

(d) Jawaki matchlockmen, Located in the hills and 

glens westward of Jalala Sar, and in the glens on each side of the defile lead- 
ing from the Peshawar valley to Kohat, the Adam Khel hold the entire pass 


Part I Punjab—-North-Western Frontier—Afridts. 231 


in its grasp, The defile extends from near Aimal Chabutra, in the Peshawar - 
plain, for a distance of about 12 miles. The road then winds over a moun. 
tain, the crest of which forms the boundary between the Galai Afridis and 
the Bangashes, who occupy the Kohat valley. From this crest to Kohat is 
a distance of about 7 miles, the greater part of which is a descent through 
mountain gorges unoccupied by any tribe, 