


6—ORAKZAIS, 


The Orakzais are a Pathan tribe, inhabiting the mountains to the north 
and west of the Kohat district. ‘hey are bounded on the north and east 
by the Afridis, on the south by the Miranzai valley, and on the west by the 
Zaimukht country and the Safed Koh. With the exception of the two valleys 
inhabited by Afridis, the whole of the tract called Tirah is occupied by the 

(1) Daulatzai. | (3) Lashkarzai. Orakzais. They are divided into four main 

(2) Iemaiizai. } (4) Hamsaye. sections, the total strength of which amounts 
‘to about 29,500 fighting men. The clans, however, are but little influenced 
by common interests, 

‘To the (1) Daulatzai section belong seven or eight clans, the chief of which 
are the Bazoti, Utman Khel, Sipah or Sipaya, Mani Khel, Bar Muhammad Khel, 
and Firoz Khel, mustering a total fighting strength of 2,200 men. When the 
Bangashes failed to make good their position in the Kohat pass against the 
Galai Khel Afridis in 1853, they called to their aid these clans, and assigned 
to them a portion of the allowance of Rupees 7,700 per annum which they 
themselves received for the security of the pass from the crest to the Kohat 
entrance, Accordingly the Bazoti and Firoz Khels receive, under an Agreement 
concluded in December 1858, Rs, 2,000 (No. CXXX), and the Sipabs 
Rs. 500 (No. CXXXI). In 1855 when the Utman Khel came in they were, 
under clause 5 of the agreement of December. 1853, assigned a sare in the 
allowances of the Bazoti and Firoz Khels. This was recorded in an Agree- 
ment (No. CXXXIIJ) executed on the 2%nd March 1855. 

In 1868 these clans attacked some police posts in British territory, and a 
blockade was established against them. It was not sufficiently deterrent, and 
a small force destroyed the village of Garo in February 1869, Since then 
they have given little trouble. 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier— Orakzais. 237 


In April 1872 the Muhammad Khel section entered into an Agreement 
(No. CXXXIIT) to regulate their intercourse with the British Government. 

The Sipah, more generally known as Sipaya, inhabit the country to the 
west of the entrance to the Bazoti valley. They are but little affected by 
blockade; but they are very easily got at from either the Zera pass above 
Marai or the Dablai pass above Alizai.* Their summer seat is in Tirah, at 
Aniposh. Each village of the lower Sipah valley has its settlement at Ani- 
posh, In May 1872 the Sipahs of Aniposh entered into an Agreement 
(No. CXXXIV). In 1874 thé principal Saiyids of the Samilzai family became 
sureties for the Sipah section. 


In 1876 the Utman Khel sided with the Galai Afridis in the disputes re- 
garding the Kohat pass, and committed a few outrages. But arrangements 
were made for isolating the whole of the Daulatzai, and their conduct subse- 
quently -was quite satisfactory. 

The (2) Ismailzat section are sub-divided into nine clans, the chief of 
which are the Labia Khel, Mamazai, Aha Khel (now invariably known as the 
Akhel), Khadizat, Masuzai, and Mahamadzai, 