


from Kohat, on the 17th November 1889. Since then depredations on the 
Khushalgarh road and adjacent villages have absolutely ceased. 

The (6) Hasan Khel live immediately to the east of-the Kohat Pass, in the 
hills on the Peshawar side. They muster about 900 fighting men. The clan. 
has two great sections, the Tatar Khel or Akhorwal, and the Janaktort, The 
Janakhoris are so called from their inhabiting eleven villages i in the Janakhwar 
valley. 

The Hasan Khel and Ashu Khel were mixed up in the depredations ana 
insults which in 1854 brought down punishment on the Jawakis of Bori. 
During the investigations which took place on this occasion, it appeared that 
these clans were powerless against the Jawakis; but in the presence of the 
British’ force they were enabled to separate themselves, and entered into an 
Agreement (No. CXX VIII) on their own account on the 15th November 1853. 

In 1866 the Hasan Khel, having refused to make reparation for a series of 
outrages committed against British subjects in British territory, were subjected 
to a strict blockade. As this measure was ineffectual, preparations were made 
to coerce them by force of arms; but before the troops advanced, the clan sub- 
mitted unconditionally to the terms imposed upon them, gave hostages for 
their future good conduct, and signed an Agreement (No, CXXIX) similar 
to that executed by them in 1853, 

In 1874 there were some petty cases of plundering, on account of which 
it was found necessary to resort to reprisals; whereupon a satisfactory adjust- 
ment was made by the clan. 

The Hasan Khel, with the Ashu Khel, were in August 1876 included 
in the blockade established in consequence of the disputes with the Pass Afridis, 
an account of which has been given above. The Hasan Khel had been guilty 
of a few murders and robberies at Cherat previous to that date. On the 10th 
January 1877 a serious outrage was committed by them at Naushera. They 
were soon weary of their hostile attitude, and in February agreed. to 
the terms imposed by Government, and their submission was accepted. The 
terms were—consent to the construction of a road through the Hasan Khe} 
section of the pass, compensation for offences committed, responsibility for 
future crime, a suitable fine, and hostages for compliance with the terms 
accepted. ! : 


During the whole of the Jawaki expedition of 1877-78, the Hasan Khel 


and Galais adhered to their engagements, and maintained throughout a 
friendly neutrality. 


236 Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Orakzais. Part I 


The (ec) Ashu Khel are located to the south of Fort. Mackeson on the?first 
range of hills. They are an insignificant section, and number about 700 
matchlocks, 

The clan was, with the Hasan Khel, implicated in the depredations which 
in 1854 led to the punishment of the Jawakis of Bori. The circumstances 
which led to the Agreement (No. CKXVIII) of November 1853 have been 
referred to above. 


A) 


The clan was included in the blockade which was imposed in 1876 on the 
Pass Afridis (see above). 