


244 Punjab—North-Western Frontier— Waziris. Part I 


gave shelter to the murderers of Captain Mecham, and a ecnsiderable force was 
despatched against them under the command of General Chamberlain. 
Arrangements having been made with them and other clansimplicated, for the 
capture and surrender of the murderers, the objects of the expedition were 
attained without bloodshed. In 1869 the Kabul Khel were concerned in a raid on 
Thal. For this they were fined Rupees 2,000, and an Agreement (No. CX LV) 
was taken from them. In 1871 a sudden visit was made to the country’of the 
“Saifali clan of the Kabul Khel, the principal receivers of stolen cattle from the 
Bannu district, with the object of showing them that they were not safe 
from punishment. This resulted in their voluntarily signing an Agreement 
(No. CXLVI) to restore all stolen property and refuse shelter to heinous 
criminals. In 1874 reprisals were made on the Miamai section of the Kabul 
Khel for plundering. In March 1874 a military demonstration was made at 
Thal for the purpose of effecting a settlement of outstanding claims against 
various clans of the Utmanzais. <A satisfactory settlement was concluded in 


April with the Kabul, Khojal, and Tazi Khels, and the Malik Shahi. 


In 1872 the Baka and Jani Khels joined in the agreement given by 
certain sections of the Ahmadzais (see 2a/ra). 


During the Afghan war in 1880 some of the Mahmit Khel and Tori 
Khel, with other clans, were guilty of outrages. 


In October 1880 a military expedition under Brigadier-Generai J, Gor- 

don was sent into the Malik Shahi country to facilitate the collection of penal-* 
ties inflicted for minor offences committed by that clan and the Kabul Khel 
on the Kuram route, The jirgas of the clans came in and settled the demands 
against them, Throughout 1881 the Kabul and Hati Khels, with other 
clans on the Bannu border, still continued their depredations, In February 
1882 a further settlement was effected, and since then their conduct has been 
more satisfactory. 
1 The (4) Ah4madzats have two branches, the Shin Khel and the Kalu Khel. 
They are situated chiefly on the left bank of the Kuram river to the north of 
Bannu, They have also settlements to the south-west of the Mahsud Waziri 
country, Their fighting strength is about 9,300 men. The sub-divisions are (1) 
Hati Khel; (2) Sirki Khel; (8) Umarzai; (4) Nasri Khel, comprising the Tazi, 
Zali, Khojal, Bizan, and other claus; (5) Spirkai, comprising Muhammad, 
Sudhan, and Sada Khels. The first three sub-divisions are Shin; the last two 
Kalu Khel. O£ the total Ahmadzai population about one-half reside in 
British territory. 


Part I Punjab—WNorth-Western Frontier—Faziris, 245 


Punishment has occasionally been inflicted on the Umarzai and Spirkai 
ub-sections, both by pursuing them into their own villages and by excluding 
them from British territory, but on the whole the Ahmadzais have been well 
behaved. 

In June 1870 the Muhammad Khel, being dissatisfied with some ord er 
connected with their responsibility for the Kuram pass, fired on a detachment 
of troops on the Kuram road. They were proclaimed, and reprisals taken, 
Refusing to accépt the terms imposed by Government, which included the sur- 
render of the original offenders, they continued hostilities for many months 
and it was not till September 187] that the tribe surrendered unconditionally 
The Umarzai, Bizan, and Sudhan Khels, who had actively or passively aided 
the Muhammad Khels, were at the same time called to account and punished by 
fine and otherwise. In April 1872 the Umarzai, Mubammad, Bizan, and Hati 
Khels, with the Baka and Jani Khels of the Utmanzai division, entered into 
an Agreement (No. CX LVII) for the regulation of their frontier responsibility. 
In the end of 1872 the Muhammad Khel prisoners were released. _ 