

In January 1879, under the excitement of the time and of the Mahsud 
Waziri attack on Tank, the Zali Khel seized a small British outpost, but 
were soon reduced to submission. 

In 1890, in connection with the opening up of the Gomal pass for 
traffic, the Zali, Sirki, and Tazi Khel Waziris of Wano were offered and 
accepted service from Government for guarding and keeping open the pass, 
on an annual allowance of Rupees 10,980, Levies of these clans were accord- 
ingly entertained at a monthly cost of Rupees 915. 

The (5) Mahksud Waziris have their homes beyond the border in the 
northern Suliman hills between the Tochi and Gomal rivers. They are divided 
into three main branéhes: (1) the Bahlolzai, numbering 5,000 fighting men, 
and comprising the Aimal Khel, Shingi, Nana Khel, and Band Khel; (2) the 
Shaman Khel, with 2,200 fighting men, comprising the Chahar Khel, Khali 
Khel, Galleshahi, and Badinzai; and (3) the Alizai, with 5,500 fighting men, 

comprising the Shabi Khel and Amanzai. 

The Mahsud Waziris had for years remained hostile towards the British 
Government, and lawless bands, recruited from the sub-divisions of the tribe 
residing nearest to our border, had constantly plundered and harried the neigh- 
bouring British territory. The inconvenience of this had been somewhat less 
felt from the fact of their operations being almost entirely confined to the 
Tank border, This was not under direct British management, and Nawab 


246 Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Waziris. * Part I 


Shah Nawaz Khan, Khati Khel, Chief of Tank, contrived to carry on matters in 
_ahalf friendly, half defensive manner, which, though little satisfactory, it was 
deemed unadvisable tointerrupt. A crash eventually came when, in March 1860, 
in the absence of the Nawab and the chief military and civil authorities, the 
Mahsud tribe, headed by their most famous Malik, attempted to plunder the 
town of Tank, They were defeated with great'loss by a body of Punjab cavalry 
and some mounted police. This defeat was followed up within a month by 
dh expedition into the Waziri hills, Ransom was taken for one of the two chief 
towns of the tribe, and the other town was destroyed. The Mahsuds felt this 
blow heavily, but would not at first make peace. The force returned in May 
1860. In March 1861, after a year of comparative quiet, the heads of the 
tribes came down to sue for peace. Terms were offered them which they said 
they would not accept, and they returned to their hills. 
After this they tried to do all the mischief they could, but rather lost than 
won in dealing with our outposts. In June 1861 they again sued for terms; 
and whereas they had been before required to make peace as one body they 
were now allowed to deal with us by sections, there being three large divisions 
of the tribe. This was considered a boon; peace was made (No. CKLVIIT) 
with apparent good-will on both sides, the British Government securing to 
itself the power of indemnity for injuries by the confiscation of the merchan- 
dise of offending sections of the tribe. In less than two months the peace 
was broken by the murder of a party of grass-cutters. This was said to have 
been done at the instigation of a Malik who had not been a consenting party 
to the agreement. Two sections were concerned in this murder. All their 
tribesmen within reach and all their property were seized, and the tribe was 
excluded from British territory. This exelusion continued till the middle of 
October, when the heads of the tribe came down and made good the fine of 
Rupees 4,500 imposed upon them by the ternis of the agreement. Peace was thus 
temporarily restored, and an attempt was made to settle some of the Bahlolzai 
section in British territory and to give them service in the frontier militia. 
The experiment was not successful, and the Mahsuds continued their depreda- 
tions in the Tank valley, till in 1864 the Bablolzai section was excluded from 
trading in the Bannu and Dera Ismail Khan districts. A second attempt to 
employ the Mahsuds in agriculture and frontier service was made in 1866 and 
was partially successful ; but the Bahlolzai section could not abandon their old 
habits: murders and robberies in British territory were of common occurrence, 
and no punishment followed beyond exclusion from British territory. 
Wearied.at length of their continued proscription from intercourse with 