


In 1885, as a tentative measure and in the hope that the tribe would be 
able to manage their affairs more satisfactorily under his guidance, an Assist- 
ant; Commissioner of the Punjab service was appointed to the Thal outpost on 
their border, and empowered to make occasional visits to the Kuram. The 
experiment did not however answer, and in 1887 he was withdrawn from the 
Kuram valley, where he had spent ten months, 


Tn 1888 a joint British and Afghan Commission was appointed to settle 
outstanding disputes between the Turis and their Afghan neighbours, but this 
was to no purpose ; and the British Commissioner and his escort were conse” 
quently withdrawn. The Amir was informed of this unsatisfactory result, 
and warned that his officials should not interfere with the Turis, who were 
regarded as independent by the British Government. The Amir continued 
to complain of their conduct, and the Government of India offered to send an 
English officer to enquire. At the end of 1891 the robber Chikkai (who 
has been mentioned in connecticn with the Zaimukhts) returned from a visit 


a a a ts 
Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Waztris. 2438 


to Kabul and seized lower Kuram. Fighting went on, and the Turis appealed 
to the Government of India for help; till at the end of 1892 the Govern- 
ment of India determined to act on the wishes of the Turis and-a suggestion 
made by the Amir, and sent a Political Officer, accompanied by an escort of 
troops, to make some permanent settlement of affairs in Kuram. 


(II) DERAJAT FRONTIER. 


The portion of the north-western frontier which adjoins the Bannu, Dera 
Ismail Khan, and Dera Ghazi Kban districts, is occupied by a number of 
Pathan and Baluch tribes, the most northerly of which are the Waziris or 
Wazirs; then come the Dawaris, the Batanis, the Shiranis, and then a num- 
ber of Baluch tribes. 


1—WAZIRIS. 


The Waziris are a large tribe of Pathans who inhabit the hill country to 

. . : the west of the trans-Indus frontier, from 

2. Game . shanties. Thal in Miranzai to the Gomal pass, ‘Thera 

De Mopsud. are five great branches of the Waziris, divided 

into numerous sections and sub-sections, The fighting strength of the whole 
tribe is estimated at 44,000 men. 

(1). Lali and (2) Gurbaz are the most northerly branches of the tribe ; but 
with these we have never come into contact. 

The (3) Utmanzat and (4) Ahmadzai sections are also known by the name 
of the Darwesh Khel Waziris. 

The Utmanzais live chiefly on the right bank pf the Kuram river, 
and occupy the liills between that river‘and the valleys of Khost and Dawar. 
They are divided into three classes: (2) the Mahmit Khel, comprising the 
Hasan, Wuzi, and Bara clans; (4) the Ibrahim Khel, comprising the Manzar, 
Mada, and Tori clans; and (c) the Wali Khel, comprising the Kabul, Malik 
Shahi, Baka, and Jani Khels. 

The Mahmit Khel and the Ibrahim Khel are responsible for none of the 
frontier passes. 

One of the sections of the Utmanzais is the Kabul Khel, numbering about 
8,500 fighting men. Between 1851 and 1854 the Kabul Khel committed a 
number of raids, for which they were blockaded, and several of them wer 
seized in British territory. These measures resulted in their submission and 
the conclusion of an Agreement (No. CKLIV). In 1859 the Kabul Khel 