


The conduct of the Dawaris thereafter continued to be satisfactory until 
1876, but in March of that year they were summoned to answer for raids on 
a British military post. They came in and made restoration. In August 
1877 a small party of the tribe made a murderous attack on a police post at 
Kach Kot. The demand for the surrender of the criminals was neglected, and 
a blockade was accordingly proclaimed. But it was not till June 1878 that 
the Dawaris, under apprebSasion of a military expedition, tendered their sub- 
mission, and made reparation. | 


During the Afghan war, in 1879 and 1880, the Dawaris kept up a series 
of attacks on the lines of communication ; but these being mainly beyond the 
frontier, the Government of India declined to sanction the despatch, as pro- 
posed in 1881, of a military expedition to punish the valley and obtain satis- 


faction. ; 


Since then the conduct of the Dawaris has given little cause of complaint. 
2K 


250 Punjab—North-Western Frontier —Batanis. . Part 1 


3.—BATANIS. 

The Batanis hold the hills.on the borders of Tank and Bannu from the 
Gabar mountain’ on the north to the Gomal valley on tke south. They are 
Pathans. The fighting men of the sections beyond the border number over 
3,000 men, Their strength within British territory in the Tank plain is 
estimated at 1,450. The tribe has three main branches: (2) Dhannas, (6) 
“Tattas, (c) Uraspans. A.small Saiyid clan, called Koti, is affiliated to them. 

They have always been a troublesome race, bat in the expedition against 
the Mahsud Waziris in 1860 they gave the British force some little assistance. 
In 1865 a settlement was made with them, and a portion of the tribe was located 
in the Dera Ismail Khan district. In 1874 they entered into an agreement 
to be responsible for the border from the Kharoba pass to the Larzan. :On the 
re-organisation in 1875 of the Tank border in connection with the settlement 
of the Mahsud ‘Waziris (g. v.) the Batanis accepted (No. CLV) pass respon- 
sibility on the Tank as well as on the Bannu frontier; and were given service 
in the militia and border police. 

The tribe, however, failed to take any steps to prevent or resist the descent 
of the Mahsad Waziris on the occasion of their raid on Tank on the Ist 
January 1879. ; 

The Batanis were soon reduced. They were punished by the resumption 
of their service in the militia, and by a fine of Rs. 10,000. On the 27th 
March 1879 they renewed their Engagement (No, CLV]I). 

In April 1880 the Batanis of Jandula, under the excitement of the preach« 
ing of Mulla Adkar of Khost, gave some trouble, A detachment of troops 
was sent to punish them, and in May they came:jn and submitted. 

In February 1883 their frontier service, suspended in 1879, was, in 
recognition of their general good conduct, restored. 

In March 1883 certain sections of the tribe executed an Engagement 
(No. CLVII) for the passes entered therein. 

For some time past the Mahsud Waziris and the Batanis have been on 
hostile terms, but the peace of the border has not been seriously disturbed. 