

The tribes of Kuram and the neighbourhood are divided into two main 
factions, known as the (a) Tor-Gundi (black faction) and (6) Spin-Gundi 
(white faction). . 

The Turis can muster some 5,000 fighting men. They are divided into 
two branches—(a) Sargallz, and (6) Ciardai. The former has two sections—1, 
Hamza Khel; 2, Mastu Khel; the latter comprises three sections—1, Dupar- 
zai; 2, Ghundi Khel; 3, Alizat (the last two are also known collectively as 
Landizay.) 

In 1858, while thet British Government was engaged in reducing the 
Miranzai frontier to order, the Turis were hostile, but submitted, and on the 
9th March entered into an Engagement (No, CXL) for the maintenance of 
the peace of the border. 

In 1855 they again committed a raid on British territory, but finally 
submitted, and entered into a second Engagement (No, CXLI). 

For some years affairs were quiet, but about 1869 there was a recurrence 
of Turi aggression, which was mainly connected with the differences outstand- 
ing between them and the Waziri tribe. In that year the differences between 
the two tribes were adjusted, and the Turis entered into an Engagement 
(No. CXLIT) to respect British territory, and to refrain from attacking the 
Waziris. This engagement was on the whole well observed by the Turis ; 
but of late years the feud between them and the Waziris has increased in 
intensity, and the country around Biland Khel has witnessed some sanguinary 
encounters. In 1877 and 1878 the Turis were much occupied with their own 


internal affairs; they were cruelly oppressed by the local Governor, and at 
a1 


242 Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Turis. Part I 


length, in despair of receiving redress from the Amir, disavowed his authority. 
In 1878, on the outbreak of war with Afghanistan, British troops were 
despatched to the Kuram district, and occupied it, being well received by the 
people. The treaty of Gandamak (see No. CXCIV), which concluded 
the first stage of the war, provided by Article 9, that Karam sbould in future 
be treated as an assigned district to be administered by the British Govern- 
ment, who were to pay to the Amir of Kabul any excess of revenue over 
“expenditure. Under the settlement subsequently made with the Amir Abdur 
Rahman the district was definitely excluded from Afghanistan. This ar- 
rangement was, however, subsequently modified (No, CXLIII), the west- 
ern portion, Hariab and the Jajis, being restored before the close of 1880 to 
the Amir, while Kuram proper with the Turis and Bangashes—the Kuram 
river being fixed as the boundary—was declared independent. On the with- 
drawal of British troops from the valley, the tribes were informed that, so long 
as they desired it, the British Government would protect their independence 
against any interference on the part of the Amir, conditionally, on their follow- 
ing the advice which the British Political Officers might think proper to offer 
them. At the sdme time all desire to meddle in their internal affairs. was 
disclaimed. 
They are nominally governed jointly by Sayad Badshah Gul and Muham- 
mad Nur Khan, the chiefs of the two leading Turi factions. In practice these 
Sardars are unable to exercise much effectual control.. 