


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Wasiris. 247 


British territory, the Shaman Khel made full submission in Mareh 1878 on 
the terms (No. CXLIX) offered by the British Government, viz., that they 
should pay a fine of Rupees 8,000, be held responsible for the misconduct of 
individuals, and give twenty hostages as guarantees of future good behaviour. 
Their example was followed in 1874 by the Bahlolzai section (No. CL) of the 
Mahsuds. 

The experience of the past showed that the position of Tank, under a 
Nawab,in whose hands were vested not only the direct management of our 
relations with the Mahsuds, but also all powers of political and magisterial 
jurisdiction, was both a source of weakness in repelling raids and a fruitful 
cause of complications with the tribe. Accordingly a change of policy was in- 
augurated. In 1875 executive and police jurisdiction was withdrawn from 
the Nawab, and Tank was amalgamated with the Dera Ismail Khan district. In 
1876 another measure, which added greatly to the safety of the border, was ae- 
complished. The Batanis, a tribe which Jay between the border and the 
Mabhsuds of the higher hills, undertook the watch and ward of all passes on their 
frontier. Similar arrangements were made with the Mianis and Ghwarazais on 
the skirt of the Gomal valley, As the result of these measures, the record 

‘of crime against the Mahsuds became rapidly smaller, and more easy to deal 
with. From August 1877 to March 1878 the whole of the tribe was under 
blockade. 

On the lst January 1879 the peace was, however, rudely broken. A 
large body of about 3,000 Mahsuds suddenly descended from the hills upon the 
town of Tank, and sacked and burnt it. This was the signal for general dis- 
order, The Zali Khel of the Ahmadzai Waziris, the Mianis, Ghwarazais, and 
others were active in raiding, but they were soon reduced. The Batanis, 
who failed to offer any resistance to the raiders, were punished. But fora 
time nothing could be done against the Mahsuds beyond establishing a 
strict blockade, 

The outbreak was attributed in considerable measure to the intrigues of 
Umar Khan, a fanatical Mulla, acting under instructions from Kabul. In a 
second raid on the 19th January three British villages near Kot Nasran were 
attacked. Throughout 1879 and 1880 Mahsud raids were of constant occur- 
rence. The rigorous blockade which had been maintained for two years proving 
of no avail, a military expedition was despatched into the Mahsud country in 
April 1881. By July the Mahsuds had submitted to the terms imposed by Gov- 
ernment, The ringleaders of the raid on Tank were surrendered, and arrange 


248 ‘Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Dawaris. Part I : 
I 


ments were made to pay the fine of Rupees 30,000 imposed as a penalty, and to 
return the property plundered or its equivalent. On this the blockade was raised. 
The fine is being realised by a tax on Waziri imports into British territory. 
In 1884, on account of the good behaviour of the tribe, four of the surrendered 
Maliks were released ; and since then the tribe have been fairly well con- 
ducted. 