


« In 1890, in connection with the opening up of the Gomal. pass for traffic, 
the Alizai, Bahlolzai, and Shaman Khel sections of the Mahsud Waziris were 
offered and accepted (No. CLI) service from Government for guarding and 
* keeping open the pass, on an annual allowance of Rs. 30,456 in ‘addition to 
their old service allowance of Rs. 19,000. Mahsud levies were, under this 
arrangement, entertained at a monthly cost of Rs, 1,705, and personal emolu- 
ments amounting to Rs. 883 a month were bestowed on the leading Maliks. 
Further, the realisation of the tax imposed in 1879 on Waziri imports into 
British territory was suspended conditionally on their future. good behaviour. 
In January 1891 a meeting was convened at Pezu, with a view to settling 
the dispute that had arisen in consequence of a raid made by the Darwesh 
Khel on the Mahsuds in 1889, and the retaliatory raid by the latter on the 
former in 1890, as well.as other outstanding quarrels between these two 
sections of the Waziri tribe. The tribal claims arising out of the raids of 1889 
and 1890 were settled on the basis of a mutual compromise (No. CLII). The 
terms of the settlement of the other outstanding disputes are embodied in a 
separate Agreement (No, CLIII). 

During the cold season of 1890-91 a railway survey was carried out 
in the Gomal pass; and the behaviour of the tribe was good. throughout the 
operations. : 


2.—DAWARIS. 


South and east of the lands of the Utmanzai Waziris, and north of those 
-of the Mabsud Waziris, lie the two valleys of upper and lower Dawar. Dawar 
extends nearly due west of the point where the Tochi river breaks through the 
Suliman hills and enters the Bannu district. The Tochi flows through the whole 
length of the valleys. The lower valley is inhabited almost wholly by 
Dawaris of the Tapizai section, numbering 5,000 fighting men. In the upper 
valley there is a large proportion of Waziris, the Dawaris (of the Malai sec- 
tion) mustering 4,000 fighting men, and the Waziris, 3,000. 
The Dawaris are a tribe of doubtful origin. They claim ‘to be Karlanrai 


Part I : Punjab—North-Western Frontier —Dawaris, 249 


Afghans, but they are destitute of many of the manly and warlike qualities 
of the Pathan. 

In 1847 the British Government relinquished on the part of the Sikhs 
all rights to Dawar; and in 1855 the Government of India formally 
renounced in favour of the Amir Dost Muhammad Khan all claim to sove- 
reignty over Dawar. Nevertheless the country remained, as it was before 
independent of ‘Kabul, whose sovereignty over it has never been more than 
nominal. 

After the annexation of the Punjab, the British Government first came 
into contact with the Dawaris in 1851, when a party of them, in company 
with the Umarzai Waziris, attacked a police guard. They were driven off 
with heavy loss; and from that time to 1870 gave little trouble on our border. 


In 1870 the Dawaris sheltered and assisted the Muhammad Khel Waziris, 
then in rebellion against the British Government. For this they were fined 
Rs. 6,500. The upper Dawaris paid their share of the fine amounting to 
Rs. 1,500, but the inhabitants of the lower valley refused to do so, and 
maintained an insolent and defiant attitude. A small force was, therefore, 
despatched against them, and after the capture of one of their villages they 
submitted unconditionally and paid their share of the fine. They also entered 
into an Agreement in February 1872 (No. CLIV) similar to that executed 
with the Saifali section of the Kabul Khel Waziris (see p. 24:4). 