

The behaviour of the Batanis having continued to be satisfactory, the 
muaft grant of one-fourth of the revenue due on the lands held by the tribe in 

British territory, which had been suspended in consequence of their complicity 
in the Mahsud raid on Tank.on the 1st January 1879 was restored to them in 
December 1890. The re-organisation of the present Batani service and the re- 


Part I Punjab—North-Wéstern Frontier—Shiranis. 251 


distribution of the pay and Siladari allowances was at the same time carried 
ouf and an Agreement (No: CLVITI) was concluded with the tribe, 


4,—SHIRANIS. 


The Shiranis are a Pathan tribe, occupying the Takht-i-Suliman mountains 
and the country thence eastward to the border of the Dera Ismail -Khan. 
district. Their fighting strength is believed not to exceed 3,500 men. They 
are divided into three branches, viz., (2), Hasan Khel, (b) Uba Khel, and (c) 
Chukar Khel. 


For misconduct on the border a successful expedition was sent against 
the tribe in 1858. 

In 1874 they entered into an agreement acknowledging their responsibili- 
ty for crimes committed in British territory. From that time to 1882 
they gave no trouble; but at the end of 1882 they were guilty of several 
serious offences. A blockade was established on the Ist January 1883. In 
a short time they submitted and executed the Engagement (No. CLIX), dated 
the 13th July 1883, which was until 1890 the agreement binding on the tribe’ 
as a whole. 

_ In the end of 1888, a military survey expedition being about to visit the’ 
Takht-i-Suliman, an agreement was taken from the Chuhar Khel section, but 
it was only a special and temporary arrangement for the conduct of the section 
during the expedition. 

Geographically the Shirani8 are divided into the Bargha or western, and 
the Largha or eastern, Shiranis. The two sections are separated by the Suli- 
man range. The Bargha are under the control of the Baluchistan Agency, 
and the Largha under the Punjab Government. 


In 1890, in connection with the opening up of the Gomal pass for traffic, 
the Largha Shiranis were offered and generally accepted (No. CLX) service 
from Government for guarding and keeping open the pass, on an annual 
allowance of Rs. 6,804. This sum is paid in monthly instalments of 
Rs, 567 to selected Maliks. The Largha Shiranis also undertook to bring 
about the submission of the Khidarzai section of their tribe, who had refused to 
Come in, and held themselves responsible-for their future good conduct. 

The Khidarzais, a section of the Uba Khel Shiranis, had for many years 
Maintained a defiant -attitude towards the British Government. During the 
survey expedition to the Takht-i-Suliman in 1883 they attacked the escort, 
and after that their“conduét was anything but satisfactory. When the 


252 Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Miyanis. Part I 


Gomal pass negotiations were in progress they not only ignored the invitation 
to come in, but a party of Khidarzai raiders fired on a body of cavalry which 
was patrolling in the Kapip valley, some eight miles from Appozai. Still 
later they were concerned in an outrage which resulted in the death of Sakhu 
Khan, one of the principal well-disposed Shirani Maliks. They also harboured 
criminals from the Punjab and Baluchistan. It was eventually decided to 
eoeree the Khidarzais by military force. The expedition was. carried out in 
“October and November 1890 by a combined force acting from Appozai and 
Draband, The main force entered the country by the Chuhar Khel Dhana, a 
flying column under Sir G. White’s personal command crossing into the 
Anmar valley over the Murumuzh range. The-Punjab force was concentrated 
at Draband, a detachment being left at Domandi. The object of this force 
was to keep in check the Hasan Khel, who had recently displayed refractory 
tendencies. The country quietly submitted, and the only resistance offered was 
by a few desperadoes ; Murtaza Khan, the Khidarzai Chief, however, fled with 
the refugees. At Karam a final darbar was held, at which the result of the 
operations against the Khidarzais was announced to the assembled Shiranis 
by Sir Robert Sandeman. The tribe as a whole was fined Rs. 6,000 and 
all pending cases were settled. Hostages were taken for the fulfilment 
of the terms of settlement, including the surrender of Murtaza Khan and the 
refugees or their exclusion from the Shirani country. The fine imposed was 
shortly afterwards realised in full, and before long Murtaza Khan came in and 
gave himself up. On the completion of the Khidarzai expedition in March 
1891 a jirga of Largha Shirani headmen was assembled at Dera Ismail Khan 
when, in consideration of the duties referred to in the Agreement (No. CLXI), 
a sum of Rs, 917 per month was granted to the tribe in the form of service 
allowances. The jirga consented to furnish twelve leading men as hostages, 
as a pledge for the future good behaviour of the tribe, during the pleasure of 
the Government. 
The Khidarzai headmen, after undergoing 10 months’ imprisonment in 
jail, were released on the 21st September 1891, on paying the fines imposed 
on them and furnishing security for their future good behaviour, 