


§.—MIYANIS. 


The Miyanis, a division of the Shirani tribe, inhabit a portion of the 
Gomal valley. e 


On the opening up of the Gomal pass sanction was accorded to the con- 
struction of a post at Kashmirkarin the Miyani hills. This was subsequently 


Part I Punjab—North-Western Frontier—Miyanis. 2538 


garrisoned by Miyani levies, who had accepted service on the usual terms 
as to pay and allowances, 


No written agreements have been entered into by the Punjab Govern- 
ment with the border tribes to the south of the Shiranis except with the Lunds, 
the Khosas, the Gurchanis, and the Lagharis. These agreements are of the 
usual tenour, providing for the good conduct of the tribes. Expeditions in 
greater or less force have however on several occasions been undertaken against 
them, and they have frequently been excluded from British territory for raids 
committed in it, 


Baluchis are employed in the force known as the frontier militia. They 
garrison the minor outposts on the border, which they patrol in co-operation 
with the military, who occupy the larger posts, The scheme of the force was 
revised in 1878. The Baluch Chiefs living in our territories ave held respon- 
sible for the hills opposite to their lands. For this service they receive allow- 
ances from Government, amounting in all to Rs. 5,200 yearly. 


254 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Swatis—Nos. XCVII & XCVIII. Part I 


No. XCVII. 


Petition and AGREEMENT of the ALAHI JIRGA at ABBOTTABAD, 
dated Ist June 1875. 


We, the undermentioned, have come in asa Jirga, called by the British 
Government, although we have never been in to Government before, and have 
never had any understanding with Government before. 
~ We wish, however, for a peaceful solution, and bring forward the 
following points for acceptance :— : 

1st.—Regavding the list of offences said to have been committed 
by Alahi during past years, we only admit the attack on 
Mr. Scott’s camp, and that attack was made by the Musa 
Khel. We know nothing about: the other cases. We wish 
them ‘passed over, 

2nd.—We promise for the future on behalf of all Alabhi that we will 
not commit any offence in British territory, and if any 
thefts take place, and Government sends us word, we will 
exact punishment. 

3rd,—We sometimes have complaints against British subjects; we do 
not know anything of law and procedure, and hope that we 
may receive justice in some easy manner, 

4th.—The claim of the Kohistanis for loss of property is exaggerated ; 
about 126 head were taken in the flock; we offer Rs.-&40, 
and hope this will be accepted by Government. 

We cannot give blood-money, as we have a long score to settle with the 
Kohistanis on account of this item. 

SIGNATURES and Sxats of the ALAMI JirGA (8 Swatis, 11 Madda 


Khels, and 6 Gujars.) 


No. XCVITI. 


TRANSLATION OF AN AGREEMENT MADE BY THE WHOLE OF THE 
NanDAHAR JIRGA OF DapyaL, Kuan Kuet, Pansurrat, 
AND PANJGHOL SECTIONS, MADE AT OGHI ON THE 147TH 
November 1888. 