


No. CV. 


TRANSLATION oF AGREEMENT MADE BY AKAZAI JIRGA ON THE 
197rn OcToBER 1888=5tH Karak, SAMMAT 1945, av Karm- 
GALLI. 


We the headmen of the Akazai tribe have to-day before the Commissioner 


282 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier— Yusefzeis—No, CV. Part I 


of Peshawar at Kaimgalli agreed to the following terms for ourselves and on 
behalf of the whole of the Akazai tribe :— 

. (1) We will pay the fine of 84,000 to the British Government on account 
of offences formerly committed by ourselves and our tenantry in British ter- 
ritory in cash or cattle. This fine will be paid by Friday, ‘the 26th October 
1888. We may, if we can, surrender to the Government some of the leading 
Gujars and Syads who were concerned in the attack upon Major Battye. For 
such surrender the illustrious Government will remit such portion of the above 
fine as they consider advisable, 

(2) We the headmen of the Akazai tribe will surrender two Maliks from 
each section of our tribe as hostages to the Government. At present from 
amongst our deputation the following five Maliks,,vzz., 1, Asim Khan, Painda 
Khel; 2, Hazratulla Khan, Painda Khel; 8, Alfu Khan, Tawsan Khel; 4, 
Gujar Khan, Barat Khel; 5, Nur Jamal, Aziz Khel, will remain as hostages 
with the Government. The remaining Maliks of our Jirga will go back to 
arrange for the collection of the fine which, after being realized, will be laid 
by a‘full Jirga before the British authorities, and at that time the Govern- 
ment will take according to their pleasure further hostages. These hostages 
will remain with the Government during the pleasure of the Government, that 
is to say, that they will remain with the Government until the Government 
is satisfied with the good behaviour of our tribe. 

(3) We will try our best to recover all the arms or other property taken 
from Major Battye and Gurkha soldiers which may be found in our country 
or in the possession of our tribe or our tenantry, and we will return it to the 
Government, . 

(4) We the leading men of the Akazai tribe bind-ourselves on behalf of 
the whole tribe that in future we shall lay no claim to Shahtut, that we shall 
have no claim to the lands belonging to Shahtut, and we shall have no con- 
nection with them. No member of the Akazai tribe or any tenants of theirs 
will have claim to proprietary or agricultural rights in Shahtut lands. Further 
we agree on behalf of the whole of the Akazai tribe that whatever arcange- 
ments may be made by the British Government for the occupation or cultiva- 
tion of the said lands, no Akazai will interfere with those arrangements. 

(5) As troops will remain in our country until the above terms are fulfilled 
we the Akazai Jirga promise that none of the soldiers or other Goverament 
servants will be molested in any way by Akazai people or their tenants. 

(6) Hereafter no Akazais or their tenants will build any kind of building 
or graze their cattle to the east of the waterflow line of the Black Mountain 
on the Agror side (“ Hurda Pain”). We have no right of any kind in that 
part of the country and we will not interfere in any way with it. 