

(7) As our tribe is a branch or sub-section of the Isazai tribe, and the 
Khan of Seri is the chief of all the three sections of the Isazai tribe, we the 
Akazais, like our brethren the Hassanzais, hold ourselves responsible for the 
conduct of the Khan of the Khan Khels of Seri. 

(8) We bind ourselves that in future troops or officials of the British Gov- 
ernment are not to be molested if they march’ on the Black Mountain anywhere 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontioer— Fusafzais—No. CVI. 263 


within British territory or along the crest of the mountain on the boundary 
between our country and the territory of the British Government. We will 
not interfere in any way, and if we think that any loss has been caused to 
us by such marching, we will apply to Deputy Commissioner in Abbottabad 
by petition. 

P. §.—We have been allowed to pay the fine either in cash or in kind to 
the General Commanding the River Column on the bank of the Indus or to 
the General Commanding the troops at Karun in the Khan Khel country, 
and afterwards we will send a full Jirga of our tribe to the Commissioner of 
the Peshawar Division at Oghi. 


P, §.—Dad Khan will remain a hostage vice Alfu Khan, and Hassan 
Khan vice Gujar Khan. 


List of men who signed the Agreement, 


1, Asim Khan, son of Zarif Khan, Painda Khel; 2, Hazratulla, son of Amir 
Shah, Painda Khel; 8, Shah Sayid, son of Sayid, Painda Khel ; 4, Nasim Khan, 
son of Zarif Khan, Painda Khel; 5, Dad Khan, son of Khaista Khan, Tawsan 
Khel; 6, Alfu Khan, son of Azad Khan, Tawsan Khel; 7, Sahibzada Sayid 
Jamal, of Bimbal (a religious leader) ; 8, Shahdad Khan, son of Muhammad 
Azim Khan, Barat Khel; 9, Hassan Khan, son of Feroz Shah Kban, Barat 
Khel; 10, Miro Khan, son of Feroz Khan, Barat Khel; 11, Bari, son of Kali 
Khan, Biba Khel, Barat Khel; 12, Gujar Khan, son of Muhammad Khan, 
Barat Khel; 13, Khan Alam, son of Munib Shah, Barat Khel, of Darbani; 
14, Nur Jamal, son of Shah Najib, Aziz Khel; 15, Mir Zaman, son of Mirai, 
Aziz Khel; 16, Nur Ahmad, son of Mir Ahmad, Aziz Khel ; 17, Hassan, son 
of Ashrar, Aziz Khel, of Khan (Upper). 


oe 


No, OVI. 


AGREEMENT MADE BY THE HASANZAI AND AKAZAI WITH THE 
British GOVERNMENT AT SERI, DATED 29TH May 1891. 


‘We, the Maliks of the Hasanzai and Akazai clans, for ourselves and for 
our fellow-clansmen who have deputed us to represent them, hereby promise 
and agree as follows :— 

(1) We admit and understand that the British Government demands the 
surrender of Hashim Ali Khan. We are unable at present to give him up 
because he fied from our territories before this expedition, and has been and 
now is in the country of other independent clans. We bind ourselves never to 
permit Hashim Ali Khan, or Sikandar Khan, his brother, or Sheikh Ata 
Muhammad his uncle, or Turrabaz Khan, son of Sheikh Ata Muhammad, to 
settle in or return to our country. We also promise that if they .or any o 


et Se a aT I Ee ee a 
264 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier— Yusefzais—No. CVI. Part I 