


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontior—Yusafzais—No. CVII. 265 


No. OVII, 


AGREEMENT MADE BY THE Mapa KEL WITH THE BRITISH 
GOVERNMENT, DATED SERI, 38RD JUNE 1891, 


We Maliks of the Mada Khel clan have heard the terms of the agree- 
ment made by the Hasanzai and Akazai with the British Government and 
agree to and approve of them. For ourselves and for our fellow clansmen 
who have deputed us to represent them we promise to do all we can to secure 
ue fulfilment of that agreement, And we specially promise and agree as 
ollows :— 


1, We admit and understand that the British Government demands the 
surrender of Hashim Ali Khan. We are at present unable to give him up 
because he is now in the country of other independent clans, 


We bind ourselves never to permit Hashim Ali Khan, or Sikandar Khan, 
his brother, or Sheikh Ata Muhammad, his uncle, or Turrabaz Khan, son of 
Sheikh Atta Muhammad, to return to or settle in our country. 


We also promise that if they or any of them come into our power we will 
arrest and make them or him over to Government, 

2 We will not permit any of the Hindustani fanatics or their followers 
to settle in our country. 


8, If any of our clansmen or of our dependants or tenants dwelling in 
our country commit an offence in British territory, we will be responsible to 
muke satisfaction by restoring persons kidnapped, or property stolen, or its 
value, or by payment of blood-money, and we agree if such cases oécur to 
send in representatives to settle the case by jirga according to the custom of 
the country. And as our clansmen if injured in British territory get redress 
and justice, so we will be responsible for injuries to British subjects travelling 
in our country. If any of our clansmen have a claim against a British sub- 
ject or against any one dwelling in British territory, he will seek,satisfaction 
by preferring a petition to the Deputy Commissioner of Hazara in order ‘that 
the matter may be settled by law, or if possible by jirga and in accordance 
with the usage of the country. None of our clansmen shall arrest any British 
subject or detain the property of any British subject by way of “birampta”’ 
or in satisfaction of any claim for debt or damages, but all such claims shall 
. be referred to the Deputy Commissioner for settlement. 

4. We recognise and admit that the private estate of Hashim Ali Khan 
and his family named above is confiscated and the Government may make it 
over to any Khan-Khel it please, or to the clan on payment of tribute. 


5. We understand and recognise that as we are responsible for the con- 
duct of our nominal Chief, the Khan of Seri, we may elect any Khan we 
please, excluding Hashim Ali Khan, Sikandar Khan, Sheikh Ata Mubam- 
mad aud Turrabaz Khan and any person known to be hostile to Government, 
lf we prefer we may refrain from appointing any one Khan. 

2M 


2.66 Punjab—N.-W Frontier—Yusafzais—No. CVIII. Part I 


No. CVIII. 


AGREEMENT MADE by the Saryips and CHacGHarzar of 
PHARARI with the British GOVERNMENT, DATED OGHI, 
12th Jonp 1891. 