

Secondly—We, our tribe, and the residents of our country will not 
allow any member of any other tribes to pass through the limits of our 
country to commit any offence in British territory. 

Thirdly—We promise that the roads constructed by the British Gov- 
ernment in our country in the present Expedition will be maintained uuin- 
jured by ourselves and our tribe.—-Dated Oghi, 14th November 1888. 


Marks, Seals and Signatures, 


(Signed) I, Ghofar of Trund (seal) ; 2, Mahmud Khan (seal) ; 
8, Nawab Khan (seal) ; 4, Kalimulla Akhunzada (seal) ; 5, 
Juma (mark); 6, Yahya (mark) ; 7,"Nasrulla (mark) ; 8, 
Hussain Khan (mark) ; 9, Syad Abmad Shah (mark) ; 10, 
Habib Gul, Akbunzada (mark) ; 11, Malik Aman, son of 
Abbas (mark) ; 12, Malik Ghazan <(mark); 13, Mobin, 
(mark) ; 14, Sharif (mark) ; 15, Khairulla (mark) ; 16, Lal 
Khan (mark) ; 17, Azim (mark) ; 18, Sayid (mark) ; 19, 
Mir Abdulla (mark) ; 20, Karim Shah (mark); 21, Hadi 
Shah (mark) ; 22, Malik Azim, Trund (mark); 23, Malik 
(mark) ; 24, Gulzaman (mark) ; 25, Rahim Khan of Chir- 
mang (seal) ; 26, Abdulla Khan (mark). 


No. 0. 


Acrrement entered into by the Kauppun and Krag branch of. 
the Urmanzat PaTHAaNS and the SausarR Tourras of the 
Trans-Inpus Jypoons with the Bririsa GovERNMENT—1861. 


1. We do hereby conjointly and severally pledge ourselves not to permit 
the Synds, late of Sittanah, or the Hindustani fanatics and others associated 


Part I Punjab—N-W. Frontior—FYusafzais—No. C. 257 


with them, now at Mulkah, in the Amazye country and elsewhere, or any of 
them, or any other persons inimical to the British Government, or who have 
committed or intended to commit criminal acts against it, or any other persons 
except the members of the Utmanzai Pathans of Khubbul and Kyah and 
their cultivators, to establish themselves at Sittanah or within the lands 
pertaining thereto, or anywhere within the limits of our settlements; and 
should they endeavour to do so, we will ourselves unite to prevent or expel 
them ; and in the event.of any of the parties to this Engagement acting in 
contravention of its terms, that party will alone bear the blame, provided that 
the remaining parties shall be bound in that case to treat it as an enemy, and 
to continue to the best of their ability to give effect to the provisions of this 
Agreement, 


2. We will consider the friends of the British Government our friends 
and its enemies our enemies, and in the event of the Munsoor Tuppa of the 
itrans-Indus Jydoons, which is not a party to this Agreement, continuing 
or becoming refractory, we will, so far as the fulfilment of our present En- 
gagement requires, hold ourselves aloof from it, and in stich measures as the 
British Government may see fit to take, we will render our assistance for the 
furtherance thereof against it, and will give to any force employed to punish 
it, a free road through our country. 


8. Should any person residing within our settlements (including Mundee, 
Sittanah, and the lands pertaining thereto) enter the territory of the 
British Government and commit injury therein, we pledge ourselves to be 
responsible, and either to expel him from our country or to afford such redress 
as the said Government may demand. Further, we will permit no person or 
persons from beyond our borders to pass through our settlements for the pur- 
pose of committing injury in British territory, or, having committed injury 
therein, to return through our settlements to his or their place of refuge or 
abode, and failing in this we will afford such redress as the British Govern- 
ment may demand, Provided that for every infringement of this Article of | 
the Agreement each contracting tribe shall be held separately responsible. 