

4. We will not permit any person or persons conveying money,’ or arms, 
or ammunition, or aid of any kind whatever to the Hindustani fanatics, to 
pass through our settlements, 

5. We will aot harbour or render assistance to any fugitive, murderer, 
robber, or thief who has committed crime in British territory, nor will we 
permit him to come and abide within our settlements, Should he endeavour 
to do so, we will at once expel hini, Providéd that for every infringement 
of this Article, each tribe shall be beld separately responsible, and shall afford 
such redress as may be demanded. 

6. In the event ‘of any British subject committing injury within oor 
Settlements, we will not make reprisals, but will claim redress in British 
Courts. 

7. Provided that we shall not hereafter be entitled to claim exemption 
from the fulfilment of all or any of the terms of this Agreement, on the 
ground of inability by reason of discord among ourselves; and that for all 

2h 


258 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier— Yusafeais—No. CI. Part I 


the purposes thereof, we shall be held responsible for the acts of all residents 
within our settlements, whether members of the contracting tribes or not. 


Additional Articles with the Utmanzai of Khubbul and Kyah. 

8. We will not permit any person to convey green salt from our settle- 
ments across the Indus into British territory, whether he be resident in our 
settlements or not, 

§. Inasmuch as the Khubbul ferry of the Indus has been’ established 

~and a boat placed thereon for our convenience and advantage by the British 
Government, we hereby declare that we hold it and enjoy the privilege of 
using it, subject to such conditions as the British Government may see fit 
to impose; and, further, we will permit no residents within our settlements or 
others to cross the Indus to British territory on Shurnaeis by night; and 
those only shall be permitted.to cross on Shurnaeis by day, to whom permis- 
sion todo so may be granted by the British authorities on the security of 
respectable .Mullicks. 

10, Iuasmuch as we are permitted to hold free intercourse with British 
territory for trading and other purposes, without payment of tax or duty, we 
hereby agree to relinquish all claim to tax and duty on merchandise of every 
description belonging to resident traders of British territory in its passage 
through our settlements, as also to all duties heretofore Jevied on timber 
‘floated down the Indus by British merchants; and in return for the protection 
we receive in British territory, we agree to afford protection, to the best of our 
ability, to all merchants and others from British territory trading with or through 
our country, and we will, to the best of our ability, prevent robbers or others 
from exacting black mail or other imposts from them within our settlements. 

11..We will ourselves, as the proprietors, hold the lands of Sittanah, 
and ourselves arrange for tke cultivation and management thereof; and we 
will not give possession thereof, or of any part thereof, for purposes of cultiva- 