


them come into our power, we will arrest and make them or him over to 
Government. 

(2) Each clan.agrees within its own boundary to arrange for the protec- 
tion of any road which Government may make along the crest of the Black 
Mountain on its own border or within its territory and near our borders while 
such roads are in construction, ‘ 

(3) We agree to protect and preserve from injury roads which have been 
made inside our territory. 

'(4) If at any time Government should wish its troops to march along its 
frontier on our border on the Black Mountain our jirgas will attend to accom- 
pany the troops or officials of Government in a friendly and peaceful manner. 
Further, as British territory is open to us and as we are permitted to travel 
and trade in it without molestation, our country is equally open 'to the sub- 
jects, servants and officials of Government. 


If Government should send any official to visit our country, provided due 
notice is given to us in order that our jirga may take the precautions neces. 
sary owing to the state of our society, each clan will be responsible for his 
safety within its own limits, will furnish escort and arrange for his safety and 
comfort. 


(5) We will not permit any of the Hindustani fanatics or their followers 
to settle in our country. 


(6) If any of our clansmer or of our dependents or tenants dwelling in 
our country commit an offence in British territory, we will be responsible to 
make satisfaction by restoring persons. kidnapped, or property stolen, or its 
value, or by payment of blood-money. And we agree if such cases occur to 
send in representatives to settle the case by jirga according to the eustom of 
the country. 


And as our clansmen if injured in British territory get redress and justice, 
so we will be responsible for injuries to British subjects travelling in our 
country. If any of our clansmen have a claim against a British subject or 
against any one dwelling in British territory, he will seek satisfaction by 
preferring a petition to the Deputv Commissioner uf Hazara, in order that the 
matter may be settled by law, or if possible by jirga and in accordance with 
the usage of the country. None of our clansmen shall arrest any British 
subject or detain the property of any British subject by way of “ birampta” 
or in satisfaction of any claim for debt or damage, but all such claims shall 
be referred to the Deputy Commissioner for settlement. 


(7) We recognise and admit that the private estate of Hashim Ali Khan 
and his family named above is confiscated and the Government may make 
it over to any Khan Kbel.it please, or to the clan on payment of tribute. 


(8) We understand and recognise that as we are responsible for the con- - 
duct of our nominal chief, the Khan of Seri, we may elect any Khan we please 
excluding Hashim Ali Khan, Sikandar Khan, Sheikh Ata Muhammad and 
Turrabaz and any person known to be hostile to Government. If we prefer, 
we may refrain from appointing any one Khan. 