

,tion or otherwise to the Syuds Jate of Sittanah, or to the Hindoostani 
‘fanatics, or to the followers of either. 
Executed by the Salar Tuppa of Jydoons at Abbottabad, this twelfth day of 
September, One Thousand Fight Hundred and Sixty-one. 
Ereeuted by the Khubbul and Kyah branch of the Utmanzat Pathans 
at Abbottabad, this Seventeenth day of September, One Thousand Bight Hundred 
and Surty-one. ; 


No. CI. 


Transtation of an AGREEMENT executed by the UrManzat 
TRIBE, on 6th January 1864. 


We the undersigned Khavi Khan, Humeed, Peer Khan, Mauzullah, Azim- 


ullah, Reza, Mawaz, and Muhammud Khan, are the Mallicks and trustworthy 
men of the Ootmanzai tribes, and inhabitants of Khalkurdotcha. 


, Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontieor—Yusefzais—Nos. CII & CIIl. 259 


Whereas on the second appearance of the Hindustanees and Moulviesin the 
territories of Sittanah and Mundee, a force of the British Government came 
and burnt down their houses ; and whereas the Hindustanees being defeated by 
that force took to flight, we have now waited upon Major Hugh James, Commis- 
sioner and Superintendent, Peshawur Division, at Bhoor in the ilaqa of the 
Yoosufzais, and do hereby enter into an agreement containing the following 
two articles :— 

Lst.—That we will not, until ordered by Government, allow any body to 
settle in and inhabit Mundee and Sittanah, nor will we suffer the Moulvies and 
Hindustanees to pass through our country, or to enable them to settle in those 
places a second time, 

2nd.—-That whenever Government sends for us, we will present ourselves 
without making any excuse. 


We, being trustworthy persons, have executed this deed in the presence 
of the whole of our clan and with their permission and consent. 


Bhoor, -Ilaga of the Yoosufzai, } (Here follow the signatures.) 
Gtk January 1864. 


No. CII. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT executed by the AMAZAI CLAN 
on Lith January 1864. 


As we the undersigned Mouza Khan, Atum Khan, Sher Khan, Akrum 
Khan, Akhtur Khan, and Khairoollah Khan of the Amazai clan have present- 
ed ourselves before the Sirkar, and Government wishes to take an agreement 
from us to the effect that we will never allow-the seditious Hindustanees to 
remain in our country, we sincerely admit the propriety of entering into such 
agreement, and do hereby declare in writing that we will never at all suffer 
the Hindustanees to come into and remain in our country on any account 
whatever. 


Dated 11th January 1864. (Here follow the signatures.) 


No. CIII. 


Transzation of an Agreement executed by the Hassanyar 
TRIBE on 22nd January 1864. 


We the undersigned: Iladad, Humeed Khan, Door Khan, Fusul Khan, 
Hashem Ali, Abdoollah Khan, Shah Muzut, Luteef Khan, Toora Khan, Jubbar 


260 ; Punjab—N.-W. Frontier— Yusafeats—No. CIV. Part I 


Khan, Mulenadar, Naubut, Ahmud Khan, Astaf, Shah Rabee, Zareef, Nejab, 
Mooja, Dad Sher, Miroolee, Ruhmut-oollah, Noor Syud Akhoondzadah, 
Srnd Ajeeb, Bahadoor Shab, Muzzam Shah, Nizamuddeen, Hubeeb, Aluf 
Khan, Kadum Shah, Mauzoollah Khan, and Meezvo, are of the Hassanzai 
tribe, 