

We, the Jirgas (of the Muda Khail) having presented ourselves before 
the Sirkar, do hereby, of our own accord, conformably to the wish of Gov- 
ernment, make the following declarations :— 

Ist.—That we will never in any way allow the seditious Hindustanees to 
‘come and remain within the limits of our country. 

2nd.—That we will, at all times, maintain relations of concord and peace 
with the family of Muhammad Akrum Khan and not deviate from this 
declaration. 


8rd.—That as Kubool Khan Hussunzai has not appeared before Govern- 
ment in company with the Jirgah, we will now go back and try to move him 
to make his appearance, If he do so, well and guod, otherwise we will not 
maintain any intercourse with him. 


(Here follow the signatures.) 


No. CLV. 


AGREEMENT MADE RY Harsanzal Jing aT OaHt on 9TH 
NovEMBER 1888. 


We the undersigned Maliks of the Hassanzai clan, representing all 
sections except the Khan Khel, for ourselves, for the Maliks who are absent, 
and for our whole clan, declare and agree as follows :— 

(1) In obedience to the orders of the British Government we have caused 
Hashim Ali Khan, Khan Khel, to release the British subject who remained 

-in bis hands, and we have paid the fine imposed upon us, vz, Rs. 7,500, by 
surrendering cattle of that value. 


(2) We agree to give up such Maliks as may be demanded to be kept by 
Goverument as hostages for our good behaviour during the pleasure of Govern- 
ment. | 

(8) We admit our responsibility for the behaviour of the Khan of the 
Khan Khel, whoever he may be, that is, we aga tribe are responsible to control 
the Khan whom we may elect as chief, and to prevent him from committing 
or instigating offences in British territory. 

(4) The troops or servants or officials of the British Government are not 
to be molested if they march on the Black Mountain anywhere within British 
territory or along the crest, of the mountain on the boundary between our 
country and the territory of the British Government, 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier— Yusafzcis—No. CV. 261 


(5) We bind ourselves not to injure any of the roads which the British 
Government has made within our country. 


Marks, Seals and Signatures. 
(Signed) 1, Hamid, Laghman Khel, of Palosi (seal); 2; 


Paidad, Laghman Khel, of Palosi (mark); 8, Davwur 
Khan, Kotwal, Nowakilli (mark) ; 4, Hamid Siyah (black), 
Kotwal, of Nowakilli (seal) ; 5, Sayid Habib, Kotwal, of 
Nowakilli (mark) ; 6, Alum Khan, Kotwal; of Nowakilli 
(mark); 7, Rahmat-ulla Khan, Kotwal, of Nowakilli 
(mark) ; 8, Bostan, Kotwal, of Nowakilli (seal) ; 9, Alum 
Khan, Zakarya Khel, son of Jabbar Khan, of Garhi 
(mark); 10, Nur Dal, Zakarya Khel, of Garhi (mark) ; 
11, Abdulla Khan, Kaka Khel, of Marear (mark) ; 12, 
Zardar, Kaka Khel, of Nadan (mark) ; 13, Allium Khan, 
Kaka Khel, of Kotkai (mark) ; 14, Nurzali, Kaka Khel, 
of Kotkai (mark); 15, Khwedad Khan, Kaka Khel, of 
Kotkai (mark) ; 16, Wedad, Kaka Khel, of Kunhur (seal) ; 
17, Manur Khan, Mir Ahmad Khel, of Kandar (mark) ; 
18, Mukarrab Khan, son of Sherdad, Mir Ahmad Khel; 
of Kandar (mark); 19, Gulzaman, Mir Ahmad Khel, of 
Kandar (mark) ; 20, Jabbar Khan, Mir Ahmad Khel, of 
Kandar (mark) ; 21, Shah Alam Kishar, Mamu Khel, of 
Kandar (mark); 22, Mir Hamza, Mamu Khel, of Kunhar 
(mark) ; 28, Fagir, Nanu Khel, of Palosi (seal) ; 24, Sher 
Gul, Nanu Khel, of Palosi (mark); 25, Abdul Hamid, 
Nasrat Khel, of Kunhar (mark) ; 26, Sharif-ulla, Nasrat 
Khel, of Kunhar (mark); 27, Hamza, Dada Khel, of 
Kandar (mark); 28, Habibulla, son of Khair-ulla, Dada 
Khel, of Kandar (mark); 29, Arsala, Dada Khel, of 
Kandar (mark); 80, Sayid Habib, son of Yakub, Dada 
Khel, of Kandar (mark); 31, Sayid Azam Shah, Tilli 
Sayad, of Gangat (mark) ; 32, Bahadur Shah, Tilli Sayad, 
of Gangat (mark) ; 33, Kasim Shah, Tilli Syad, of Gangat 
~ (mark).. 