


_ We Saiyids and headmen of the Pharari Ilaqua hereby agree and pro- 
mise— 

(1) That we will never permit Hashim Ali Khan, Sikandar Khan, 
Sheikh Ata Muhammad, or Turrabaz, Khan Khel, who have been’ proscribed 
from the territories of the Hasanzai, Akazai, and Mada Khel, to settle or stay 
in our country, 


(2) If Government should make a road on its border along the crest of 
the ridge from Chittabut by Mana-ka-Danna towards the Jal pass, we will 
arrange for its protection within our limits while under construction. 


(3) If at any time Government should wish its troops or servants to 
march along its frontier in our neighbourhood, our jirga will attend to escort 
the troops or officials on our border and to do becoming service in a peaceful, 
friendly way. Further, just as British territory is open to us and as we are 
permitted to travel and trade in it without molestation, our country is equally 
open to the subjects, servants and officials of Government. 


If Government should send any official to visit our country, provided due 
notice is given to us in order that our jirga may take the precautions neces- 
sary owing to the state of our society, we will do our best to provide for his 
poral within our limits, will furnish escorts and arrange for his safety and 
comfort. 


(4) If any of our clansmen or of our dependants. or tenants dwelling in 
our country commit an offence in British territory, we will be responsible to 
make satisfaction by restoring persons kidnapped, or property stolen, or its 
value, or by*payment of blood-money, and we agree if such cases occur to send 
in representatives to settle the case by jirga according to the custom of the 
country. 


And as our clansmen if injured in British territory get redress, so we will 
be responsible for injuries to British subjects travelling in our country. If 
any of our clansmen have a claim against a British subject or against any one 
dwelling in British territory, we will seek satisfaction by preferring a peti- 
tion to the Deputy Commissioner of Hazara in order that the matter may be’ 
—e by law, or if possible by jirga and in accordance with the usage of the 
country, ’ . 


None of our clansnien shall arrest any British subject or detain the pro- 
perty of any British subject by way of “birampta” or in satisfaction of any 
claim for debt or damages, but all sych claims shall be referred to the Deputy 
Commissioner for settlement. 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier ~ Yusafzeis—Nos. CIX & CX 267 


(5) We will do all we can to secure the maintenance of the arrangemenis 
now made by Government with the other Black Mountain tribes, and we 
bind ourselves not to help or harbour or encourage any who may seek to give 
offence or interfere with those arrangements or disturb the peace of the border, 


(6) We will not permit any of the Hindustani fanatics or their followers 
to settle in our country. 


+ 


No. CIX. 


MEMORANDUM. 


The Bonair Jirgah have unreservedly submitted to the Government, and 
consented to carry out the following requirements :— 
* 1. To dismiss the army of all kinds on the Bonair pass. 