

2. To sexd a force to destroy Mulkah completely. 
8. To expel the Hindoostanees from the Bonair, Chumbla, and Amazai 
ands, ; 
4. To give as hostages the whole of their chief men till the above require- 
ments are fully carried out, 


No. CX. 


PRroorEpines of CoLoneL MAcKeEson, Commissioner of Peshawur, 
in the matter of the re-settlement of Ranezat. 

Whereas the Khans of the Ranezai have this day come to me and solicit- 
ed pardon of their past offences, and to be allowed to re-settle in their country 
on the following conditions :— 

1. If the Government require them to pay revenue, they will do so, 

2. If the Government desire to build a fort in Ranezai, they are at 
liberty to do so, 

8. If they are left by the Government to re-settle of themselves, they 
will do so. : : 

4, The Khans agree that they will always be ready to do service for 
the Government, and will not receive into their country any person evil-dis- 
posed to the Government, nor give such person a road through their count y. 

5. If an army comes against them too strong for them to cope with, 
they will come with their families into British territory. 


268 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Gaduns—No. CXI. Part I 


On hearing these offers the Khans were informed that the British Gov- 
ernment had no desire to extend its territories, nor to take revenue from 
Ranezai, but that it was incumbent on the said Government to protect its own 
borders from any aggression from Ranezai or elsewhere, in order that its sub- 
jects might remain in security and in the peaceful discharge of their several 
occupations ; if any such aggression is attempied, it must be punished. 

The Khans of Ranezai are hereby allowed peacefully to re-settle in their 
villages, and nobody will interfere with them. If in any way they commita 
breach of their promises, notice will not be given to them as before, but a Bri- 
tish force will be sent to capture and punish them. , 


° 


No. CXI. 


AGREEMENT entered into by the Munsoor Turpa of the TRANS- 
Inpus Jypoons with the British GOVERNMENT—1861. 


Whereas the Khubbul and Kyah branch of the Ootmanzai tribe and the 
Salar Tuppa of the trans-Indus Jydoons, on the 12th September 1861, and 
the 17th September 1861 respectively, entered into an Agreement with the 
British Government, the terms of which have at this time been read and fully 
explained to us by Major Adams, Deputy Commissioner of Hazara; we do 
hereby, on behalf of the whole Munsoor Tuppa, agree to hold ourselves and 
our tribe bound by the terms of the said agreement, as set forth in articles 
numbered 1, 8,4, 5, 6, and 7, in the same manner, and to the same extent, 
as the Salar Tuppa of Jydoons; and with reference to the Article numbered 2, 
not included in the above enumeration, we, considering the friends of the 
Government our friends, and their enemies our enemies, do hereby pledge 
ourselves, that in the event of any Tuppa or faction of any of the contracting 
tribes infringing the provisions of the Agreement, and becoming refractory, 
we will, so far as the fulfilment of our Engagement requires, hold ourselves 
aloof from it, and in such measures as the British authorities may see fit to 
take, we will render our assistance for the furtherance thereof against the 
said Tuppa, or faction, and will give to any force employed for its coercion 
a free road through our country. 