

Further, for the fulfilment of all the conditions of this engagement, we 
agree to be responsible for the villages of Chunnee held by Akhoon Khel, and 
Gobaie and Gobasurie held by Syuds, seeing that they are subject to our 
influence and unable to act in the matters to which this agreement has refer. 
ence, except with our aid and concurrence. | 


Executed at Abbottabad this 2nd day of October 1861. 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontior—Gaduns—Nos. CXII & CXIII. 269 


No. CXII. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT executed by the SaLAR CLAN 
of the Junoon tribe—1864. 


We the undersigned Mauzzam Khan, Kurum, Jehangeer, Meerbaz, 
Khanee, Shahbaz, Nooroollah, Abeed, and Humzah Khan are the Mullicks 
and trustworthy men of the Salar clan of the Judoon tribe. 


Whereas on the 2nd appearance of the Hindustanees and Moulvies in the 
territories of Sittana and Mundee, a force of the British Government came 
and burnt down their houses; and whereas the Hindustanees having been 
defeated by that force took to flight, we have now waited upon Major Hugh 
James, Commissioner and Superintendent, Peshawur Division, at Bhoor, in the 
ilaqa of the Yoosufzais, and do hereby enter into an agreement containing the 
following two articles: — 

Lst.—That we will not, until ordered by Government, allow any body to 
settle in and inhabit Mundee and Sittana, nor will we suffer the Moulvies 
and Hindustanees to pass through our country, or to euable them to settle 
in those places a second time. 

_ end.—That whenever Government sends for us, we will present ourselves 
Without any excuse. 

We, being trustworthy persons faithful, have executed this deed in the 

Presence of the whole of our clan and with their permission and consent. 


of the Yoosurzais, 
6th January 1864. 


Goozar Broor in the 1Laga 
(Here follow the signatures.) 


\ 


No. CXIII. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT executed by the Munsoor clan 
of the Jupoon tribe on 6th January 1864. 


We (the undersigned) Mullik Isav Khan, Gholam Shah, Futteh Khan 
Jumal, Sudder, Hoosee, Faizullah, Kaloo, Abbas, Salardeen, Poordil, and 
Jumal, (2nd), are of the Munsoor class of the Judoon tribe. 

Whereas on the second appearance of the Hindoostanees and Moulvees in 
the territories of Sittana and Mendee, a force of the British Government 
came and burnt down their houses, and whereas the Hindoostanees being 
defeated by that force took to flight, we have now waited upon Major Hugh 
James, Commissioner and Superintendent, Peshawur Division, at Bhoor, in the 
Tlaqa of the Yoosufzais, and do hereby enter into an agreement containing the 
following two articles :— 


1st.—That we will not, until ordered by Government, allow anybody to 
settle in and inhabit Mendee and Sittana, nor will we suffer the Moulvees and 


270 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Gaduns, Mohmands—Nos. CKIV & OXV. PartI 


Hindoostanees to pass through our country: or to enable them to settle in 
those places a second time. 

2nd.—That whenever Government sends — us, we will aetsent ourselves 
without any excuse. 