


8th.—An accredited agent-of the tribe shall be in attendance whenever 
summoned on the Government, who shall be prompt to perform whatever is 
required of him, If he shall be negligent in the performance of his duties, 
it shall rest with the Government to demand satisfaction from him; he. shall 
have no excuse, 


It is hoped that on satisfaction of this agreement those of our tribe who 
are confined under the orders of the British Government may be released. 


We pledge ourselves to observe the terms of the agreement, and hope 
that former offences may be overlooked, We offer Abdul Majid Khan Arbab 
as guarantee for our observance of this agreement, and pledge ourselves that 
if there be any misdeed on the part of any ,of the tribe above-noted, we will 
not attempt to screen him, and if any concealment be attempted, on the fact 
being proved, we will pay a fine of Rupees 1,000. 


Again, if any of our portion of the tribe commit an offence, and, on 
our demanding satisfaction from him, if he shall remove to Bostan Khan’s 
section of the tribe, it is right that Bostan Khan should not protect him until 
satisfaction has been rendered, and if any of Bostan Khan’s party sball 
commit offences against the Government and remove to our section of the 
tribe, we will not give him countenance or assistance, so as to prevent Bostan 
Khan from obtaining satisfaction from him. If there be any short-comings 
on our part in this agreement, we are deserving of reproof from the Govern- 
ment, as also is Bostan Khan. 


(Witnessed by)— (Signed by)— 
Arsas Manomep Amir Kuan AND Syap Gaonam, son of 
Syap AYAZUDIN, ALADAD, ARBAB 


ABpuL Majip Kuan. * 


24th August 1957,‘ ' 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—A/fridis—No. CXXI. 277 


-No. CXXI. 


AGREEMENT entered into by the ZakHa Kuet, ManixpIn Kuen, 
Kampar Kuen, Kamrat Kae, Srpan KueEt, and Kuxr 
KEL AFRIDIS, and the SuinwaRis of Lanpr Korat accept- 
ing responsibility for the Kuarpar Pass, dated February 
1881, 


We agree as follows :— 


1.—On the understanding that the British Government maintain poli- 
tical relations with us, while at the same time our independence continue to 
be fully recognized, we are,bound to exelude all other influence, and not to 
admit the interference of any other power between ourselves and the British 
Government. 

2.~—In consideration of receiving certain allowances, the amount of 
which Government has engaged to fix, we hereby undertake the responsibility 
of preserving order and security of life and property within the Khaibar pass. 

3.—All matters affecting |the pass arrangements, and especially the 
mavens of the road, shall be submitted to a combined council of all the Afridi 
tribes. ; 

Through this council arrangements will be made such as will provide for 
the security of the lives and property of all who use the Khaibar road without 
distinction of class or race, local being entitled to equal protection with foreign 
traffic ; and care will be taken that no inier-tribal or personal feuds are pur- 
sued on or near the road or posts. 