

4.—No traders or travellers will be allowed to enter the pass without 
an order authorizing them to proceed, which will be furnished by the persons 
responsible together with a sufficient guard for protection. 
__ _ Should any prospect of danger present itself, owing to the existence or 
likelihood of any disturbance on or near the road, we will be responsible for 
closing the pass, giving notice to that effect to the Khan of Lalpura and to 
the Political Officer at Jamrud, and will further make due provision for the 
safety of any trade or, travellers within the pass. 

5.—-Our responsibility for the security of the road is independent of aid 
from Government in the form of troops. It lies with the discretion of Gov- 
ernment to retain its troops within the pass or to withdraw them and to re- 
occupy at pleasure. 

6,—We will provide such number of men as Government may direct 
to carry on the duties of Jezailchis, of whom some force is absolutely neces- 
sary, to enable us to render the road secure. 
_ These men, having their head-quarters at Jamrad, will be subject to the 
Anspection of the Political Officer, and all arrangements which we make for 
the distribution of their duties shall be reported to him. Should we wish to 


278 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—4fridis—No. CKXXI. Part I 


employ them on any other duty than that of protecting the road, the permis« 
sion of the Political Officer must be obtained. 

We fully understand that these Jezailchis are not a Government force, 
and that although maintained at Government expense, they are being allowed 
merely as an additional means of enabling us to fulfil our engagements. 

7.—So long as we are in receipt of the Khaibar allowanves the right 
of collecting tolls rests with the British Government alone. We cannot 
claim any payments of traders or travellers. 

8.—All offences committed on the road shall be dealt with by the 
united council of all the tribes, whether individuals or sections of tribes are 
concerned, 

The council shall inflict punishment after the manner of our tribal 
customs, and compensation will be awarded to the injured party or parties. 


The action taken on the commission of any offence, or in regard to the 
punishment of the offenders, shall be reported to the Political Officer, through 
whom any compensation can be enforced by deductions from the allowances 
made by Government. 

9.—In consideration of the allowances of which we shall be in receipt, 
we further bind ourselves not to commit dacoity, highway robbery, or murder 
in British territory. Auy transgression of this condition will make our allow- 
ances liable to forfeiture in payment of fine or compensation due on this 
account. 


— 10.—All arrangements that we make in fulfilling our responsibility for 
the protection of the road shall be reported to the Political Officer. 

All convoys wishing to proceed through the pass shall be despatched 
periodically under a guard, and we are responsible for all trade or travellers 
admitted within the pass. 