


11.—We will maintain until further orders the standing posts or 
chaukis which have hitherto beea kept up along the road by the tribes, and 
have been paid for from the allowances. The tribal watchmen who occupy 
them will be employed either in guarding their assigned localities or in forme 
ing part of the escort on the periodical convoys, 

12,—Of the Government buildings situate in the pars, we consent to 
take some under our charge, guaranteeing their security; the rest should be 
dismantled by Government. 

We engage to hold the fort of Ali Masjid, understanding that Govern- 
oe will grant an additional company of 100 Jezailchis for this special 

uty. 

13.—We undertake to guarantee the safety of the Political Officer, or 
other official who may have occasion to visit the Khaibar pass, provided that 
sufficient notice be given us beforehand. 

14.—It is understood that the boundary fixed by Treaty of Government 
west of Landi Khana is the limit of our responsibilities. This is liable to 
subsequent alteration at the discretion of Government, 


Pa 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—4/fridis—No. CXXII. 279 


15.—Permanent arrangements will be made by which posts or expresses 
can be forwarded at any time, night or day. 

16.—We are prepared to take charge of the Khaibar pass in the manner 
above indicated from Landi Khana to Ali Masjid, and again from Ali Masjid 
to Jamrud, at once, or so soon as Government directs the withdrawal of troops 
from the whole of this road or any part of it. Meanwhile the tribes will pre- 
serve their present obligations. 

17.—We understand that we are exclusively responsible for the future 
management of the .Khaibar, and that Government in no way shares in this 
responsibility, and this position we accept. 


No, CXXITI. 


AGREEMENT OF THE AKA KHAIL—1856, 


Whereas on account of former offences, we have been blockaded by the 
Government, we now repent of our evil deeds, and agree to pay a fine of 
Rupees two thousand six hundred and seventy to the Government, and to 
abstain from the commission of crimes in future: and that if any member of 
our tribe shall commit murder in British territory, we will deliver him up; 
should he escape, we will confiscate his property, and not allow him to return 
to our lands without permission of Government. 


ql. If the Government require from us the price of blood, we will pay it. 


2. If any member of our tribe shall wound a British subject, we will 
pay such fine as the Government may demand. 


8, If any member shall rob or steal from a British subject and be 
apprehended, we shall not intercede for him; if he return to our settlement 
rae the theft be proved, we shall make good the property and levy a fine on 

im. 


4. If any of our women elope to British territory, we shall send a jirga 
of grey beards to arrange the matter, and if ske consents, will receive her 
back on giving security to Government for her safety. 

5. If any of our tribe clandestinely bring into British territory an enetny 
of the Government, and the latter is apprehended, we will pay a fine of 
Rupees fifty, and not intercede for such enemy of Government. 