

6. If any criminal comes to our lands, we shall restore any stolen pro- 
rerty he may have with him and eject him from our settlements, 

7. We will not assist auy criminal to escape from his captors who 
may have taken him beyond our habitations. ~ 


8. We will place a respectable man of each clan ag a hostage with the 
Government, 


280 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Afridie—No. CXXITII. Part I 


9. Until the above sum of Rupees two thousand six hundred and seventy 
is paid in full, we will not come to the city of Peshawur on pain of apprehen- 
sion, We will pay the money at the Thana of Badobair. 

10. In event of the breach of any of these engagements, the Government 
will allow us a month to meet their demand; after that time the Government 
are at liberty to. send our hostages to India, and to act as they may deem best. 

11. If we commit any aggression in the Kohat pass, our former pay of 
Rupees six hundred shall be stopped. 


12, If suspicion shall attach to us on the part of Government or any 
British subject, we will answer for the same on the case being investigated in 
the same manner as is done for British subjects. 


13. If punishment is to be enforced on any member of the tribe under 
the above agreements, we will allow an officer of Government to be present, 
that the Government may be satisfied of its being carried out. 


14. If we shall have any claim or charge against a British subject, 
we will not take the law into our own hands, but report the case to Govern- 
ment Officers for the same enquiry as is made where British subjects are the 
complainants. 


15. In regard to women who come from British territory to us, the 
same arrangements will be made as we have agreed to make.in cases when 
they go from us to British territory. 

16. Past offences to bé forgiven, and in addition to the permanent 
hostages, we will give others until such time as the fine is paid, when they 
will be released. 


Signed on 11th. January 1866. 


No. CXXIII. 


To the Heads of the Aka Kuait TRIBE, composed of Maroor 
Kuait, Mureur Kaas, SHere Kuar, Sunput Kuatt, 
Soortan Kuart, Munpa Kaatt, and others; also to the 
Heads of AkHor, composed of BonaxEr KuatL, PrerBuL 
Kuali, and Gupp14 Kain; also to the Heads of “ GuitER” 
AFREEDEE, composed of BostEE Kuatt, SHERUKKUE, YUR- 
Goon Kuait, Konegr, Soonsr Kuam, Tor Caurrur and 
Isrun KuarL—1867. 


Whereas .you have jointly left the adjustment of the “ Kullum Sadda ” 
boundary question in the hands of Government agreeably to a..document 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—A/ridis~No. CXXIV. 281 


signed at Kohat in November last by the Akhor and Gullee heads, and to a 
similar document signed by the Aka Khail on 2Ist April 1867, it is now 
therefore ordered as follows :— 

1st.—A truce of seven years to be fixed between the disputing parties, 
such truce to have effect alike in British territory and beyond the border. 


2nd.—In consideration of Akhor having formerly yielded the Kullum 
Sudda to the Bussee Khail, and although such cession of the land was made 
without the sanction or permission of Government, the bit of land which was 
measured by Meean Zyud Gool under orders of Major James, and which 
Akhor was allowed to cultivate, will now remain waste; the whole of the rest 
of the land under dispute will remain with Akhor. 