


1. We will not hereafter commit any crime in British territory. . 
2. We'will not bring with us into British territory any member of a 


tribe in hostility with the Government. 
_ 8. If any thief or murderer belonging to our tribe be apprehended in 
British territory, we will not intercede for him. 

4. If such thief or murderer escape to us, and the crime is proved, we 
will destroy his house and banish him from our settlements, restoring the 
value of the stolen property ; if there is no evidence against him, the accused 
may clear himself, if five members of his section of the tribe will swear to his 
Innocence. 

5. If any married or unmarried woman elopes to our settlements, we 
cannot give her up, but we will restore any property she may be proved to 


cr 


272 Punjab-N.-W. Frontier—Afridis~No. CXVIII. Part [ 


have carried off with her. If her friends come and make an arrangement, we 
will give her up to them, or to a “ jirgah ” of grey beards. 

6. If any thief or person in the service of Government escape from 
British territory into our settlements, we will eject him from the same, and 
ifhe has stolen property with him, we will restore it, 

7. If we have a money claim against any British subject, we will sue 
him in the Courts in proper form; we will also attend to answer any such 
claim against us or produce the acquittance bond of such claimant; we will 
not carry out our usage of reprisals in British territory, but in our own settle- 
ments we are at liberty to do so; and we will not take part with-any other 
tribe in hostilities against the British Government. 

8. Whenever required to do so, we will keep a representative with 
the Local Officers of Government, who are at liberty to call him to account in 
matter of neglect. 

9. Whereas there are many Afreedees in the service of Government, 
if any of them have a claim against us, the matter shall be settled by a 
“ jirgah ” of grey beards. . 

10. We give Arbab Mahomed Ameer Khan and Arbab Abdool Mujeed 
Khan as our securities for the payment of the fine and the fulfilment of these 
Engagements, and in consideration thereof the Government will release the 
persons and property of our tribe now in their hands. 


Signed on 14th August 1857, 


No. CXVIII. 


AGREEMENT of the MuturKs of the Srpan and Kummoratr 
TRIBES—1861. 


We agree on our own parts, and in behalf of our respective tribes of our 
own free will and accord as follows :— 


1. During the six months of the cold weather, when we reside in the 
lands called Kajooree, we will be responsible that no theft or crime is com- 
mitted on any British subject by any member of our tribes, or by any member 
of the Zakha Khail or other tribes passing through the said lands of Kajooree, 

2. So long as the Zakha Khail may remain at feud with the Govern- 
ment, we will not allow members of that tribe to take up their residence in the 
Kajooree Settlements. 

3. We are responsible that the tribes of Mullikdeen Khail and Kumber 
Khail shall send their representatives to the Government authorities on their. 
return from their summer settlements. 