


it shall rest with the Government to demand satisfaction from him; ke shall 
have no excuse. 


It is hoped that, on ratification of this agreement, those of our tribe who 
are confined under the orders of the British Government may be released ; 
we pledge ourselves to observe the terms of the agreement, and hope that 
former offences ‘may be overlooked. We offer Mula Isa, Khan Khel, as 
guarantee for our observance of this agreement, and pledge ourselves that 
if there be any misdeed on the part of any of the tribe above noted, we will 
- not attempt to screen him; and if any concealment be attempted on the fact 
being proved, we will pay a fine of Rupees 1,000. 

Again, if any of our portion of the tribe commit ‘an offence, and on our 
demanding satisfaction from him if he shall remove to Bostan Khan’s section 
of the tribe, it is right that Bostan Khan should not protect him until satis- 
faction has been rendered, and if any of Bostan Khan’s party shall commit 
offences against the Government and remove to our section of the tribe, we 
will not give Him countenance or assistance so as to prevent Bostan Khan 
from obtaining satisfaction from him. If there be any shortcomings on our 
part in this agreement, we are deserving of reproof from the Government, as 
also is Bostan Khan. 


Witnessed by— Executed by— 
Manomep Amin Kaan, Bostan Kuan, 
Asput Manp Kaay. 

Guotam Kanir. 


OrvER on the above AGREEMENT by CoLONEL EDWARDES. 


Bostan Khan, of the Zakha Khel, having presented himself through 
Shahzadah Jambur, and taken upon himself to. engage that no member of the’ 
Zakha Khel tribe under his influence shall be guilty of malpractices in British 
territory, and that he will undertake that in three or four days Malik Aladad 
Khan, the other chief of the tribe, shall come in and make arrangements 
regarding his portion of the clan, and as heretofore there has been enmity 
between the Government and the Zakha Khel, and the Zakha Khel have not 
been allowed across to the British territory,—now that Bostan Khan has 
solicited in the agreement he has executed, that ingress and egress may be 
allowed to the tribe, and that four persons of the tribe, named Nasir Shah, 
Mir Gul, Amir Shah, and Rahmat, may be released, the four persons are 
released on payment of Rupees 10 fine each, and, as it is hoped that after. 
three or four days Aladad Khan will bind himself by a similar agreement on 
the part of his tribe to that of Bostan Khan now executed, free ingress int? 
British territory is to be allowed to Bostan Khan’s branch of the tribe, and 
it is ordered that a copy of this, with a copy of the agreement, and a copy of 
the security bond of Malik Isa Khan providing that the Government entertain, 
friendly relations with the Zakha Khel, and that the tribe are’ to be allowed 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—dfridis—No. CXX. 275 


free access to British territory, be sent for the information of the Deputy 
Commissioner of Peshawar, 


Written on 15th August 1857. 