


“ 


Rartrication of AGREEMENT by Matrx Isa Kuay, of Saksanp, 
in the KHALIL SUB-DIVISION, 

I pledge myself, of my own free will and accord, that the engagements 
made by Bostan Khan on his own part, and in behalf of the Zakha Khel tribe, 
shall be observed. If there be any infraction thereof, I am responsible for 
the same, and in my security bond to that effect, and also that if there be any 
offence committed by persons of the tribes named in Bostan Khan’s agree- 
ment, and Bostan Khan should attempt to screen the offenders, F will, on 
proof of the same, pay fine of Rupees 1,000. 


Witnessed by—= Executed by— 


ABpuL MajdIp. Isa Kuan, 
Mauamap Amir Kyat. 


13th August 1857. 


No. CXX. 


AGREEMENT of ALADaD Kaan—1857. 


Ist.—We pledge ourselves to commit uo depredations or other misdeeds 
on the British border. 

2nd.—We will not allow any men of tribes obnoxious to the British 
Government to accompany us into British territory. 

Srd.—Tf£ any thief or murderer of our tribe be apprehended in British 
territory, we will offer no intercession for him. 

4th.—If any thief or murdeter come within our limits, and he be found 
guilty of the crime, we will at once expatriate him from his house, and seize 
his lands and fine him according to Afghan usage, and in case of theft, restore 
the amount of the property he has stolen. To establish his guilt, one witness 
besides the injured party is required, or the discovery of the stolen property 
on the offender. Failing these, oath on Koran will be taken from five 
members of the offender’s tribe, 

5th.—Reparation is not to be made in the event of any person of the 
tribe abducting the wife or daughter of a resident of British territory, but if 
he should have brought off any property also, that shall be restored ; if the 
parties deny that any property has been abstracted, an oath on the Koran shall 
be administered to them. 


If the parties shall become reconciled among themselves, they shall be 


allowed to return t ir : ‘ty shall be 
cuccae return to their homes, the apology of the offending party 


276 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—4fridis—No. CXX. Part I 


Tf the woman shall have fled of her own accord, a council of grey-beards 
of the tribe shall obtain guarantee for the safety of her person and restore her 
to her home. . 


6¢h.—I£ any thief or servant shall come into our territory, we will eject 
him and restore any property belonging to Government or its subjects which 
may be found on him. , 


7th.—I£ we should have any claim or suit in matters within the juris- 
‘ diction of the British Government, we will plead our case according to the 
regulations of the Government, and we will render at the Government Court 
any person of our tribe against whom claims may have been instituted, or 
satisfy the complaining party in the council of the tribe, and will not show 
hostility to any who may be on good terms with the British Government. 
Against others we will exercise our own discretion ; we will not assdciate with 
. any enemies of the British Government. 