


Dated 24th April 1861, 


ee 
Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—4fridis—No. CXIX. 2738 
I ct rt 


No. CXIX. 


AGREEMENT executed by Bostan Kuan of the Zaxna Kuen 
TRIBE—1857. 


Bostan Khan, of the Zakha Khel tribe, presents himself before Colonel 
Edwardes on the 13th August 1857, and on his own proper part, and as 
representative of the whole ‘council of the Pakhai, Zaodin, and Shan Khel 
sections, of his own free will and pleasure prom iseth — 

1st.—We pledge ourselves to commit no depredations or other misdeeds 
on the British border. ; 

2nd.—We will not allow any men of tribes obnoxious to the British Gov- 
ernment to accompany us into British territory. 

3rd.—If any thief or plunderer of our tribe be apprehended in British 
territory, we will offer no intercession for him. ¥ : 

4th.—If any thief or plunderer come within our limits, and he be found 
guilty of the crime, we will at once expatriate him from his house and seize 
his lands, and fine bim according to Afghan usage, and in: case of theft, restore 
the amount of the property he has stolen. 

To establish his. guilt, one witness, besides the injured party, is required, 
or the discovery of the stolen property on the offender. Failing these, oath 
on Koran will be taken from five members of the offender’s tribe. 

5th.—Reparation is not to be made in the event of any person of the 
tribe abducting the wife or daughter of a resident of British territory, but if 
he should have brought off any property also, that shall be restored; if the 
parties deny that any property has been abstracted, an oath on the Koran 
shall be administered to them, If the parties shall become reconciled among 
themselves, they shall be allowed to return to their homes, the apology of the 
offending party shall be sufficient. Jf the woman shall have fled of her own 
accord, a council of grey beards of the tribe shall obtain guarantee for the 
safety of her person and restore her to her home. 

6tk.—If any thief or servant of the British Government shall come into 
our territory, we will eject him and restore any property belonging to Gov- 
ernment or its subjects which may be found on him. 

_ %th.—IE£ we should have any claim or suit in matters within the jurisdic- 
tion of the British Government, we will plead our case according to the 
regulations of the Government, and we will ‘render at the Government Court 
any person of our tribe against whom claims may have been instituted, or 
satiefy the complaining party in the Council of the tribe, and will not show 
hostility to any who may be on good terms with the British Government; 
against: others (we will exercise our own discretion ?) ; we will not associate with 
any enemies of the British Government. 

8t2.—An accredited agent of the tribe shall be in attendance whenever 
summoned by the Government, who shall be prompt to perform whatever is 
Toquired of him, If he shall be negligent in the performance of his duties, 

2N 


SS eee 
274 Punjab—N -W. Frontier—Afridis—No. OXIX. Part I 