

We being trustworthy persons have executed this Deed in the presence 
of the whole of our clan and with their permission and consent. 

Goozur Buoor in the Inaga 
of the Yoosurzats, (Here follow the signatures.) 
6th January 1864. 


No. CXIV. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT executed by the Mapa Kaan 
Cian on 9th January 1864. 


As we the undersigned Syud Kulam, Synd Azum, Shahdad. Khan, 
Sirferaz Khan, Tooree Khan, Mujahut Khan, Ahmud Ali’ Khan, Humzah 
Khan, Ali Khan, Adum Khan, Syud Jelal, Panee, Shahzad, Amanoollah, 
Alum Khan, Muhammad Ali, Ashruf Khan, Mauzzum, Ameer Shah, Nejab, 
Kootoob Shah, Sher Ali, Jumal Khan, Dewan Shah, Futteh Khan, Muhe- 
bullab, and the whole of the Muda Khail Jirgah have presented ourselves 
before the Sirkar, and since Government requires from us an agreement 
containing two articles, the Ist to the effect that we will-never allow the 
seditious Hindustanees to remain in our country, and the 2nd, that we will 
firmly maintain the relations of. unanimity and harmony with the family of — 
Muhammad Akrum Khan, we openly and sincerely admit the expediency of 
executing such agreement, and do hereby declare in writing that we will not 
at all suffer the seditious Hindustanees to remain in our country; and 
secondly, that we will maintain the bonds of union and amity with the family 
of Muhammad Akrum Khan, Chief of Abat, and not deviate from this decla- 
ration. ' 

Dorsunp, (Here follow the signatures.) 


9th January 1864. 


Seal of Shah- 
dad Khan, 
Jemadar. 
No. CXV. 
AGREEMENT of the FALEEMZAI CLAN of the Mompnp TRIBE— 
1852. 


Ahmud Shere, Noor Gool, Mokurrum Huboo, Raheemdad, and seven 
other Mulliks of the Haleemzai tribe engage to pay a yearly tribute of two 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Mohmands, Afridis—Nos, CXVI & CXVII. 271 


hundred Rupees and promise obedience and service to Government, and if 
any fault be proved against them, they bold themselves liable to punishment, 
They consider the friends of the:Government to be their friends, and the 
Government enemies their foes. To which purpose they have executed this 
Agreement on 12th July 1852. 


No. CXVI. 


TRANSLATION of a Jacrr Sanap for Munammap AKBAR Kuan, 
MouMaAnpn, son of Navroz Kuan, the late Kuan of 
Larpura, dated 12th January 1880=29th Munarram 
1927 Hrsrt. 


Under the authority of His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India, all the jagirs and allowances, together with the Chiefship 
(Khani) of Lalpura, are hereby conferred by the Hon’ble the Lieutenant- 
Governor of the Punjab on Muhammad Akbar Khan, Mohmand, on condition 
of his loyalty and good service to the British Government, 


No. CXVII. 


AGREEMENT with the Carers of the Kooxr KuHat, Trise of 
AFREEDEES—1857. 


Whereas our tribe has been excluded from British territory, on account 
of the murder of a British officer, and we are unable to produce the murderers 
who have fled, we agree to pay a fine of Rupees three thousand on account 
of that crime, and we further voluntarily engage as follows :-— 