


4th.— We will be responsible for the safecy of the road passing through our 
limits, and see that the Boriwals do not commit theft on it, We will not 
allow any property, which the Boriwals may steal from Peshawar, to be 
detained in our country, but we will deliver up the property at once to the 
Deputy Commissioner. If any thief with stolen property from Kohat passes 
through our limits to Bori, we will either restore the property or pay com- 
pensation. : 
5th.—-Whenever we come to British territory for the purpose of trade, (we 
will not bring any man of another independent tribe along with us; and if any 
such person accompany us and is arrested in British territory, we will not 
stand security for him). 
6¢h.—To ensure proper observance on our part of the above conditions, we 
ive the following hostages (here follow the names of twenty-three residents 
of British territory) as securities to Captain Coke, Deputy Commissioner, 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Afridis—No. CKXVI. 285 


Kohat; that if we fail to abide by the conditions herein made, the above- 
named men will take the responsibility. upon themselves, 

We further beg that our following requests may be favourably enter- 
tained by the Deputy Commissioner and granted :— 

I.—That the following prisoners be released, (Here follow the names of 
jive men.) : 

JI.—That a general order may be issued to the effect that we ‘‘Paitao”* 
Jawakis are to have free ingress and egress into and from British territory 
for purposes of trade or for other lawful objects, and that no one should arrest 
us on account of previous hostilities. We on our part will not bring along 
with us any men of independent territory. If after the issue of this order any 
one interferes with us in the limits of the Peshawar district or any other 
British territory, relief should be granted to us as to other British subjects ; 
but we of course will not take the law into our own hands, and will report the 
ease to the Government officer for enquiry. 

TII.—-If any bad character of our tribe commits any offence without our 
knowledge, the Deputy Commissioner should not give immediate orders for 
his arrest, but should send us an order through our sureties, so that we may 
be able to hold our jirga at leisure and arrest and punish the offender and re- 
store the property or comply with any other order of Government. 


No. CXXVI. 


TRANSLATION of AGREEMENT entered into by the JowAKIn Ar- 
REEDEES on the 8rd December 1853. 


We Mullicks Seraj, Cassim, Shahwullee, Mooshkee, tribe Cassim Kheyl, 
Baburree, Sikaraj Mabiboolla, Mukhmud, Peeraj Oomray, tribe Ismaei Kheyl, 
all Mullicks, of Torkee Sheredeen, Khangool, Namdar Hawur, Mullicks of 
Jummoo, Sherebaz Sahib Khan, Yar Khan, Mukhmud Mujeeb, Mullicks of 
Paid; Nishan Mullicks of Gureeba; all of the tribe or Tuppah of Paitao 
Jowakih Afreedees, bordering upon British territory, assembled on the Kohat 
Kotul in presence of Captain Coke, Deputy Commissioner of Kohat, and 
after hearing and considering his wishes on the part of Government, hereby 
voluntarily enter into au engagement as follows:— 