


13th,—After ratification of this Treaty, we beg that the Deputy Com- 
missioner may issue orders to all Government officials to the effect that our 
tribe are to have free ingress and egress into and from British territory for 
purposes of trade and other lawful objects, in the same manner as British 
subjects, conditionally upon our proper bebaviour. 


14ih.—To ensure observance of this Treaty on our part, we engage to 
give four hostages, from Shurukkee and Zorghoon Kheyl one each, and two 
from Akhor, to remain permanently under Government surveillance in British 
territory ; these men to be occasionally relieved by approved substitutes. 

15¢k.—Formerly we received a “ mowajib” or pass allowance of Rupees 
5,700 per annum. The Chief Commissionér reduced this amount by Rupees 
800 per annum on account of the Bussee Kheyl, and we are satisfied. From 
opening of the pass after execution of this Treaty we shall receive Rupees 
5,400 according to the following details :— 


: Rs. 
To the Mullicks- . e P 3 e ‘ é 7 . 2-700 
To. Chowkidars .- . . - 5 ‘ F 2 - 2,700 


; Tora, - 5,400 
Kzeeuted on the Kohat Kotul, the Ist December 1853, 
(Here follow the siguatures.) 


ese 


284 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—A/fricis—No. CXXV. Part I 


No. CXXV. 


AGREEMENT with the JAwakr Arripis of Torx, Sorxi1, Jamu, 
Paya, and GHARIBA, dated 26th December 1851. 


We the undersigned Maliks Muhamadi, Siraj, Sarkan, Khairulla Khan 
Gul, Ghazah, Arsalla, Akhtari, Faujdar, Amin and Fakir, for ourselves per- 
sonally and as representing the whole Jawaki jirga, of Torki, Sorki, Jamu, 
Paya, and Ghariba, hereby agree in the presence of Captain Coke, the Deputy 
Commissioner, Kohat, as follows :— ; 

1st.—Any property or cattle belonging to British subjects that may have 
heretofore been stolen by our tribesmen, or may have been received in our 
country, or may have been ransomed from us, we ‘will on sufficient proof re- 
store the same in kind to the Deputy Commissioner, or else the value thereof. 


2nd.—If any member of our tribe commits theft, robbery, murder, mischief 
by fire, or other improper act or wounding any one in British territory, z.¢e., in 
the country lying between Kohat and Khushalgarh, and in the Khattak ilaqa, 
or if any one commits any crime, snch as theft, &c., without our information, 
and we come to know of the same, we will at once make him restore the pro- 
perty, and will exact a fine from him in addition, and if we do not hear of it 
ourselves, but are informed by the Deputy Commissioner (we will at once 
restore the property). 


If any one commits murder, and has not escaped from our territory, we 
will arrest him and deliver him up to the British authorities. Should he. 
however, have escaped, we will destroy his house. If he again returns to our 
settlements we will band him up to Government, 


3rd.—If we allow any one to pass through our limits, or permit our own 
tribesmen to come and go to Peshawar (British territory) #@ Bori for the pur- 
poses of committing theft, or if any Boriwal thief finding a paseage through 
our bounds, commits theft in British territory (Kohat ilaqa), we will be re- 
sponsible for the restoration of the property. 