

5th,—We all of us agree, that if any,of our tribe fire upon any picket or 
guard of Government troops or police or outpost, either within the bounds of 
the Peshawur or Kohat districts, and the fact be fairly established, Government 
may banish the hostages we have given withersoever it may seem good, and 
exact reparation from us; this Treaty having, by such act on the part of any 
of our tribe, become of no effect. 


6th, Subsequently to the ratification of this agreement, if any murderer, 
thief, adulterer, &c., a refugee from Government territory, seek shelter with 
us, we shall expel him from our bounds; such as may have previously resorted 
to our territory for shelter will be produced, if the Deputy Commissioner feels 
inclined to allow them to come, to an agreement. Those who may still remain 
with us will be prevented from doing any injury in Government territory, of 
to Government subjects :: we shall be their. sureties. 

7th.—Should any of our tribe commit murder in British territory, we shall 
at once expel him from his village, and his house shall be burnt and destroyed ; 
should the culprit be captured by Government, he may be treated like any 
other murderer, according to the pleasure of Government. 

8tk.—Should any Government subject bring. stolen property into our 
territory, 00 being informed of the fact, we shall restore the property, and 
expel the refugee. , 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier~4/ridis—No. CXXIV. 288 


9th.—We engage to maintain the posts and chowkies formerly established 
within our bounds by Colonel G. Lawrence and Captain Lumsden, at the 
same strength and in.the same numbers, for the safety of travellers through 
the pass, as follows :— : 


By Akhor, three chowkies of twenty-five men in all, viz., fifteen men at 
Eymul Chubootra, five at Woorsuck, five at Rookhi Woorsuck. 


By Shurukkee Zurghoon Kheyl and Tor Chupper, three chokies of twenty 
men in all, viz., ten at Runjoo Tungi, five at Sundabusta, and between Shu- 
rukkee and Kotul five men, 


10¢h.—-Government to arrange for three chowkies on the Kotul from the 
tribes of Dowlut Kheyl, Jowakies and Bungushes; should any of the two 
former commit depredations within our bounds, if attached to any Bungush 
faction, the Bungushes will arrange about it; if attached to any of the pass 
factions, we undertake the settlement ourselves; should the crime be com- 
mitted by members of any other tribe, we are responsible, 


_ _ L1th.—We undertake that none of our tribe commit theft or any: crime 
in Government territory. In the event of such happening, and of the capture 
of the offender, the law may take its course, If the offender and property 
reach our territory, the property will be delivered up. 

12¢h.— We request that the Government may be pleased to direct the 
release of any of our tribe now prisoners in Peshawur or Kobat, or that may 
have been sent: across the Indus, provided the offenders have not been guilty 
of murder, also that confiscated goods and cattle be released. 