

8. We agree to commit no erime of any kind:in British territory; if 
any member of our clans should do so and return to us, we will punish him by 
our Code, and take care that he shall not so offend again. 

4, Whereas the clan of Otman Khail forms with us the tribe of 
Dowlutzai, but they have not yet rendered any service or come in to the Govern- 
ment; should they hereafter do so, we will settle amongst ourselves the share 
they are to receive of the above Rupees two thousand; they will have no 
Separate claim on the Government; and after we have effected an arrange- 
ment with the Otman Khail, we will be responsible for their good conduct. 

5. Whereas our lands adjoin British territory, if any criminal comes 
to us, we will restore any Government property he may have, and eject him 
from our settlements. 

6. If any injury is sustained on the crest of the pass, we will be re- 
Sponsible for the same with the Bungushes to the extent of our share. 

7. We will be responsible that no man after stealing in British territory 
finds a passage through our lands, big 


290 . Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Orakzais_No. CKXXI Part I 


8. We will not permit any member of Our tribes to commit offences in 
the ‘Pass, in the boundary of the Adam Khail, and will be responsible in such 
cases, ’ 

9. We give as our securities Bahadur Shere Khan, Mullik Magoolah 
Khan, and Khitrab Shah Sahibzadah. 


Signed on 3rd December 1853. 


No. CXXXI. 


AGEEEMENT made by’ the Srpan (ORrakzats) TRIBE in connec- 
tion with Konar Pass arrangements on 6th December 1853. 


We the undersigned Sainuck Ahmed Shah, Zabita Khan, Moorad Khan, 
Sufdar Ali Shah, Roostum Ali, Abdool Hussun, Hyder Ali, Shawulee, Zam 
Khan, Jowabir Ali, Ahmed Shere, and Gholam, all Mullicks of the Sipab 
Tribe on the border of the Kohat district, being present on the Kotul, after 
conversing with Captain Coke, Deputy Commissioner, and fully understand- 
ing what is required of us, do hereby enter into an engagement with the 
British Government as follows :— 

1. The Bungush tribe having had a dispute with the Afreedees of the 
Kohat pass regarding boundaries, and having come into hostile collision with 
them on the Kotul, we of the Sipah tribe, owing to ancient friendship witb 
the Bungushes, came, when solicited, to their assistance. At the conclusio? 
of the affair (on the Kotul) we made an agreement with the Bungushes 
according to the four subjoined stipulations :— 

Ist.—That two men of our tribe should constantly remain as part of the 
garrison of the Bungush tower on the boundary. 

2nd.—That in all matters connected with the Kotul and its protection, 
we shall invariably side with the Bungushes, and bring our whole force to 
their assistance in case of need. ; 

8rd,—That in the event of any loss or injury occurring on the Kotul, we 
shall be responsible with the Bungushes in. proportion to the quota of men 
furnished by us. 

4th.—That although we formerly gave verbal promises that none of our 
tribe should commit theft, highway robbery, murder, or other crimes, within 
British territory, we now enter into this written engagement, that if any of 
our tribe be guilty of committing crimes of the above nature within British 
bounds, we shall be collectively responsible, and shall moreover restore plun- 
dered property, punishing the murderer or thief besides, according to Afghan 
custom, by burning his residence, and expelling him from his village; should 
the guilty party be captured in British territory, he may be dealt with as the 
British authorities deem fit; we shall make no intercession on his behalf. 
We have fully and voluntarily agreed to these four conditions. 