


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Orakzais—No. CXXXII. 291 


2. To ensure observance gn our part of the above conditions, we furnish 
the security of Syuds Hossein Ali Shah and Mirzain Ali Shah (of Merye, 
British territory}, and of Mullick Alayar Khan of Alizye (ditto) to this effect 
that if we fail to abide by the conditions herein made with the Bungushes in 
presence of the Deputy Commissioner of Kohat, the sureties here named 
shall be responsible, and will see reparation made. 

3. The Bungushes havé agreed that the sum of Rupees 500 per annum 
be paid to us from-their share of the Kotul allowance in return for our present 
Agreement, in presence of the Deputy Commissioner. 

4. If any of our tribe commit an offence in the Kohat pass, as theft or 
any other improper act, we undertake the responsibility of satisfying the 
demands of Government. Our share of Rupees 500, as above-mentioned, to 
be He as paid to us so long as the present Kohat pass arrangements 
endure. 


Executed the 6th December 1853. 
(Here follow the signatures.) 


No. CXXXII. 


AGREEMENT with the Urman Kuen of the DAULATZAI ORAKZAI, 
dated 22nd March 1855. 


We the undersigned Maliks Iwaz Khan, Khan Gul, Mian Alam Khan, 
Khwaja Nur Akram, Mansur Khan, Painda Khan, Abdul Sem, Kanir, Hassan 
Khalla Khan, Fakir, Mushki and Mian Akbar Hussain, of the Utman Khel 
clan, for ourselves personally and as representing the whole jirga of our tribe, 
aed voluntarily engage to Captain Coke, Deputy Commissioner, Kohat, as 
ollows :— 

1.— When we accompanied the Firoz Khel and Bazoti jirgas at the 
time of their entering into an engagement with the British Government; we 
were ill-disposed towards them, but we have-now come to terms with them 
and have agreed to take the following share from the Bazoti and Firoz Khe} 
allowances with effect from February 1855 :— 


Firoz Khels two shares, or two-fourths. 
Utman Khel one share, or one-fourth. 
Bazoti one ,, or one-fourth. 


We will maintain a post in the tower on the crest of the Kohat pass, 


2.—When any member of our tribe commits theft or other offence 
affecting person or property in the British territory and is apprehended there 
we will not intercede for him ; and if he escapes and returns to our settlements, 


292 Punjab—N.-W, Frontier—Orakzais--No. CX XXIII. Part I 


we will at once compel him to restore the property, and we will also expel him 
from our settlements with the consent of the jirga in a body, 

We further bind ourselves to the faithful performance of the terms of the 
engagemer t entered into with the British Government by the Firoz Khel and 
Bazoti clans. 


Signed 22nd March 1855. 


No. CXXXIII. 


ENGAGEMENT executed by the Musamman Kur, ORAKZAIS, 
comprising the clans of Bak MunammapdD KnHEL, ABDUL 
Aziz Kuen, and Mant Kuxt, dated 2nd April 1872. 


Whereas we Maliks (here in the original follow the names) of the sece 
tions of Miraji Khel, Allabdad Khel, Khoidad Khel, Saiad Khel (Bar Muham- 
mad Khel); Azbar Khel, Kaddam Khel, Balol Khel, Darwesh Khel (Abdul 
Aziz Khel) ; Ahmad Khel, Mast Ali Khel, Mir Waz Khel, Zakaria Khel, 
Sabzi Khel, Salur Khel, Badda Khel (Mani Khel), composing the Muhammad 
Khel tribe of Orakzais, have for some time past had dealings, but have never 
hitherto entered into a written treaty with the British Government. 