

3. That if any criminal or ‘murderer seeks an asylum from British 
territory with us, we will not grant such asylum, but will promptly eject such 
criminal or murderer from our settlements. 

4. That we will not allow any bad character or evil-disposed person to 
come or go in British territory under cover of the’ Perwannah ” to be grant- 
ed to us. 

5. That, in event of the breach of any of the above stipulations’ on our 
part or that of any resident of our settlement, it shall be open to the British 
Government to deal with us as they may deem fit. 


Signed on 15th November 1853, 


: _ No. CXXIX. 


AGREEMENT entered into with Mayor F. R. Poutock, Commrs- 
SIONER, PESHAWUR Division, and the MuLLIKs of JaNna- 
KHOR, KHoos Kunpao, Kunpur, Turoona, and Moosa- 
DURBA—1867. 


Whereas we the undersigned, in consequence of our having retracted 
from our agreement regarding the Kobat pass dispute between the Bolakee 
Khail and Guddia Khail and for subsequent offences, have been blockaded and 
excluded from British territory ; we now repent of our evil deeds, and agree to 
pay, if Government so demand it, a fine of Rupees 2,000, and to abstain from 
the commission of crimes in future, and faithfully adhere to the agreement 
entered into by our tribe with the Chief Commissioner of the Punjab on the 
15th November 1853. 

2, Whereas the Guddia Khail have taken refuge with our tribe, we 
agree to either arrange their dispute with the Bolakee Khail, according to 
the wishes of Government, or that the Guddia Khail shall adhere to the 
agreement made at Kohat, or else, we shall expel them from our tribe, and 
afford them no further aid or protection. 

3. We agree to restore all stolen: property proved to be now in our 
country, and we bind ourselves to adjust in the usual manner all cases between 
our tribe and British subjects. 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier —Orakzais—No. CXXX. ’ 289 


4, As sureties for our good faith in the above agreement, we leave the 
undermentioned members of our tribe as hostages with the Deputy Cominis- 
sioner of Kohat so long as Government demand their retention :— 

Mullik Adil Beg. | Mullik Ursilla, 
Mullik Moola Khoedad. Mullik Payon. 
Mollik Ujjul. 

The hostages to be relieved every three months by the samé number, and 
approved of by Government. 

(Here, in the original Persian ducument, followed the signatures of all 
the Hussun Khatl, Alla Khail, and Guddia Khail Mullits, as contracting 
barizes, and of the Jowakee Elders as wttnesses. | 


The 8th April 1867. 


No. CXXX. 
AGREEMENT of the Bezorer and Feroze Kaart Trrpes—1853. 


After Preliminaries— 

We of our own free-will and accord agree as follows :— 

The Government having been pleased to assign us an annual payment 
of Rupees two thousand, in consideration of our services on the crest of the 
pass, we agree to the following stipulations :— 

1. We will maintain a post of twelve armed men in the tower made over 
to us on the crest of the pass. 

2. In event of any disturbance taking place on the crest of the pass, 
we will proceed there in force and render assistance to the Bungushes. 