

1st-—Having iv consequence of former friendship with the Bungushes 
come to the help of the latter when contending with the Afreedees of the 
Kohat pass regarding their respective boundaries, we now engage to abide by 
the four following conditions :— 

I.—We agree to furnish an outpost on the Kotul with twelve armed mer, 
to be constantly present in a tower erected upon our own part of the Kotul. 


*ie, The Jawakis living on the “sunny” or south side of the central range of hills in Jawaki 
country. 


286 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier —A4fridis—No. CXXVII. Part I 


IL.—Having thus come to the-assistance of the Bungushes and agreed as_ 
above, we engage, in the event of any disturbance or fighting hereafter occur- 
ting on the Kotul, to come again to their aid with our whole force. 


III.—We shall share with the Bungushes the responsibility of any injury 
committed or loss sustained on the Kotul. 

IV.—Although-we formerly entered into agreement not to commit any 
crimes, as. murder, highway robbery, theft, &., in British territory, we 
hereby repeat our engagement, that if any of our tribe be found guilty of 
such crimes in British territory, we shall, as a body, be responsible. 

2nd.—To ensure a proper observance on our part of the above condi- 
tion, we give Meer Mobarrick Shah and Bahadoor Shere Khan as securities. 
In the event of failure gn our parts the above-named chiefs (residents of 
British territory) will take the responsibility upon themselves. 


3rd.—With the sanction of the Deputy Commissioner we shall hereafter, 
in consideration of this agreement, receive a share amounting to Rupees 2,000 
per annum, from the mowajib or allowance formerly granted to the Bun- 
gushes. 

4th,—Should any of our tribe commit any offence in the Kohut pass, 
we shall be responsible as above, and it is hereby arranged ‘that our share of 
mowajib, viz., Rupees 2,000 per annum, shall be duly paid to us so long as 
the agreement with the Afreedees of the pass endures. 


(Here follow the signatures.) 


No. CXXVII. 


TRANSLATION of AGREEMENT with the Jowaxin AFREEDEES 
(of Boree,)—dated 11th January 1854. 


We, Goolring, Moosakhan, Alum Shere, Futteh Shere, Mahomed 
Ameen, Mujeed Khan, Zerman, Mullicks of Boree, tribe Jowakih Mowalkheyl, 
for ourselves personally, aud as representing the whole Jeergah or council of 
grey beards of onr tribe, whose térritory bounds with that of the British 
Government, hereby voluntarily engage to Captain Coke, Deputy Com- 
missioner of Kohat, after considering well the matters to be arranged between 
Us — 

1st,—We undertake that all raids or depredations, or any crime whatever 
in Government territory as hitherto practised by men of our tribe, shall cease 
and determine. : 

2nd.—If any criminal from Government territory seek refuge with us 
we shall expel him, and whatever stolen property he may possees, we shall 
restore on due certification as to its nature and quantity, 

3rd,—Should any members of our tribe, or resident within our bounds, 
commit a crime ‘in British territory, and be there captured, we shall take no 
measures for his release ; should such person escape into our territory, we 