


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—4/ridis—No. CXXVIII. 287 


engage to restore any property he may have stolen, and we shall moreover 
punish the offender according to Afghan custom, and shall never thereafter 
allow him to repeat the offence within British territory. 

4th.—Refugees, Hindkees, &c., from beyond the Indus, who have taken 
shelter with us, will be required to leave our bounds within two months, 

5th.—We promise that, whenever the Deputy Commissioner of Kohat 
may have occasion to call fbr the assistance or co-operation of the other 
members of the Jowakih tribe, we shall be equally ready to render our services 
to Government. 

6th.—Several families of the Mahomdie tribe, known as Pukbie, have 
always been associated with us, and living with us; we undertake to be their 
securities in every respect, and hope the Government will forgive them the 
past; such members of other Afreedee tribes as may be living within our 
' bounds will similarly be restrained under our security. We request that these 
may be allowed access like ourselves to British territory. 

7tk.—To ensure the observance of the above conditions on our part, 
we tender the security of all the other Jowakih Mulliks of Patral, also of 
Syud Meer Mobarick Shah, Naib Mahomed Saeed Khan (of Goombut), and 
Bahadoor Shere Khan. Should any infraction of Treaty occur, they will be 
responsible for us. 

&th.—On ratification of the above, we request the Deputy Commissioner 
of Kohat to communicate with the Deputy Commissioner of Peshawar, in 
order that we may be allowed to proceed thither for lawful purposes ; we also 
request to be furnished with five copies of a purwannah to this effect, as also 
an urder which may prevent our: being captured beyond the Indus, in the 
Rawal Pindee district. ig 
_ 9th. —Seven of our tribe (five in Kohat, and two in Peshawur), are in 
prison ; we request that on ratification of this Treaty the Deputy Commissioner 
of Kohat may take measures for their release. 

_ 10th. —We agree not to bring Ahmeedee (a Government enemy) with us 
into British territory, nor any such obnoxious persons, 


(Here follow the signatures.) 


No. CXXVIII. 


AGREEMENT entered into with the Carer CoMMISSIONER of the 
PunsaB and the Munurks of JanakHor, Korner, Kunpao, 
Kunpur, Oocuut, Gapua, TuroneE, and Moosa Durra 
—1853. 

... Whereas we the undersigned have received permission to come and go at 
will in the territories of the British Government, -we therefore hereby agree— 
1. That neither we ourselves, nor any resident of our settlements, will 
hereafter commit any raid, theft, or other crime within the British territories, 


288 Punjab-N.-W. Frontier—4fridis No. CKXIX. Part I 


but will freely and quietly carry on our trade and other business in those terri- 
tories, 

2. That we will not give a passage through our settlement to any bad 
characters, thieves, or evil-minded persons, whether Afreedees or others, who 
may desire to obtain such passage for the purpose of committing crime in 
British territory, nor will we give such passage to thieves and others who may. 
come from British territory with stolen property. 