

38rd.—In consideration of the services and good conduct of the Bussee 
Khail, Government has allowed them Rupees 600 now (with reference to 
their long-standing claim to the Kullum Sudda, which has been disallowed) ; 
they will receive, during period of present agreement, an additional sum of 
Rupees 400. 

4th.—Except in the matters herein above set forth, the Agreement enter- 
ed into with Major Graham to remain in force, v7z., as regards the pass and 
road through it. The right of arbitrating and ruling in the matter of the 
Kullum Sudda boundary dispute wild sitll remain with Government at the 
expiration of this seven years’ agreement. 


— 


The contracting parties formally signed and executed the above Agree. 
ment in presence of Lieutenant Cavagnari, Officiating Deputy Commissioner. 


. (Sd.) F. R, Pottocr, 
Commr, and Superintendent. 
Dated 25th April 1867. 


No. CXXIV. 


Transtation of Treaty entered into with the GULLEE AFREE. 
DEES, or AFREEDEES of the Konat Pass, on the lst Decem- 
ber 1858. 


We the undersigned Mullicks Khan Mahomed, Ameer, Nooray, Meeroo, 

Taj Khan, and Eesaef Akhor; Meeran, Meer Shikar, Zaphta Khan, Joomma, 

and Jafir, Mullicks of Zurghoon Kheyl; Paienda Khan, Gool Khaa, Meah 

Shere Ahmed Kban, and Dost Mahomed, Mullicks of Sherukkee ; Mulla Khan, 
20 


1 
282 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—A/ridis—No. CXXIV. Part I 


Akrum, Sheeraz,.and Goolistan, Mullicks of Tor Chuppur, all assembled at 
the Kohat. Kotul, after hearing and considering the orders issued by Captain 
Coke regarding ourselves, voluntarily enter into Treaty with the British Gov- 
ernment as under :— 


Ist,—The British Government claimed the Kohat Kotul] as the Bungush 
-boundary, and we objected : now, however, waiving our objections, we made 
-the Kotul over to the Bungushes, Government subjects, the Government 
making such arrangements with regard to both sides of the Kotul known as 
Paitao and Sweree as may seem fit,.and establishing any posts of occupa- 
tion on the Kotul that may appear necessary. 

2nd.—Whatever property belonging to Government or its servants or 
-subjects may have fallen into our hands, we agree to deliver up; should any 
not be forthcoming, we shall take oath in regard to it, : 


3rd,—Property of merchants robbed in the pass between Zurghoon 
‘Kheyl, Boostee Kheyl, &c., by men of Boostee Kheyl, shall be restored. In 
regard to robberies by men of Benghoon Kheyl, the same course shall be 
pursued, but it will not be possible to restore fruits which may have decayed, 
and we beg the Government to forgive us as regards such. Should the people 
of Zurghoon Kheyl have disposed of any. articles, the prices will be restored, 
-proof on oath. of the value being tendered. 

4th,—Henceforward in the event of any highway or other robbery: heing 
committed between Eymul Chubootra on the Peshawur side to the Sweree 
side of the Kotul, on the Deputy Commissioner of Kohat issuing orders with 
lists of property said to be stolen, and giving fifteen days’ grace, we engage 
within the period either to restore the said property, or make good the loss, 