

Regarding the internal administration of the district and its protection 
against neighbouring independent tribes, the British Government does not 
wish to interfere, and the Turis will be left free to make their own arrange- 


PartI Punjab—N.-W. Frontier— Waziris—Nos. CXLIV: & CXLV. 805 


ments. In this matter also the British Government believes that it is con- 
sulting the interests of the tribe. ; 

In return for its recognition and support the British Government requires 
that the Turi tribe shal] conform in all respects to any advice which may be 
given them at any time on behalf of that Government. 


(Sd.) Joan Watson, Major-General. 


No. CXLIV. 


AGREEMENT of the headmen of the KaBpat KHEL WUZEEREES, 


I, Mahomed Malik of the Khojal Khel tribe, son of Purdil Vazir, make 
this agreement with the Deputy Commissioner of Kohat, that if the Sirkar 
is pleased to release the 17 men of the Kabal Khel and Gangi Khel tribe of 
Vaziris, who have been seized in consequence of the raids of these tribes, I 
will make good the amount of cattle stolen from the subjects of the British 
Government, amounting to Rupees 1,033. 

If after this these tribes should commit any further acts of plunder, I 
make myself answerable to restore the property itself, if it can be traced to 
the Vaziri country ; if it can be proved that the property has been stolen by 
the tribes, but cannot be traced, I will make good the amount in money, If 
the property cannot be traced or proved, I will then, if the Vaziris are sus- 
pected by the Government ryots, bring the suspected parties to the Sirkar’s 
court to answer to the complaint of the Government servants, when, if proved, 
the property shall be made good. 

The amount sale of camels and cattle now in the Government treasury, 
Rupees 800-11-0, to be applied to the liquidation of the property stolen; the 
remainder, Rupees 233-1-0, will be paid to the maliks of Nahar to indemnify 
them for their loss. , 

J ask on the part of the Vazir that the Deputy Commissioner will -issue 
a paras allowing us to trade with the salt mines without fear of being 
seized, 


No. CXLY. 


AGREEMENT of the headmen of the Kasal Kuen Wuzerress. 


We, the undersigned Maliks of the Kabal Khel tribe of the Vaziris 
hamed Naorang, Lal Khan, Rahmat Shah, Daoran, Gulraz and Malang of the 
Miami Section, Pirzada and Pan of the Paipali Section, Mula Abdur 
Rahim, Salih Pir, Akbardin and Barat of the Saifali Section, and Bangi aud 

2R 


306 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier —Waziris_No. CXLVI. Part I 


Husen of the Malikshahi Section, now present before Lieutenant Cavagnari, 
Deputy Commissioner of Kohat, appear on behalf of the Kabal Khel and 
solicit pardon from the British Government for the raid on Thal committed 
by certain members of our tribe; and we hereby agree to bind ‘ourselves to 
the performance of the terms demanded from us by the Government, which 
are as follow :— 


1st.—A fine of Rupees 2,000 having been imposed on the Kabal Khel 
tribe, we promise to pay the same at Hangu within three days from the date 
of this agreement, and as a guarantee of our good faith on this point, we 
give the Maliks of the Zaimukht, the Maliks of Biland Khel, and Malik 
Mahamad, Khojal Khel, Vazir, as sureties for the payment of the said fine 
within the stipulated period. 