


Watt 
Wazis. 


Payant Nasi. 


Farragh Shak 
Nmasi.. 


2Q 


298 


Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Orakzcis—-No. CKXXVII. 


Signature of —contd. . 


Sarp MuwamapD 
Sarp Nazir 
ApBas Kuan 
Mazip 
ArsuLa Kwan 
ZAMAN SHAH 
' ABDULLAH 
Mowasat Kwan Babbi Khel. 


Muuayopvin 
Nasar Kuan 
Sar ANDAI 
Mirpap 
Bazat 
ZarvaR KHAN 


-MunamaD 


MvuHAMAD 


“KHAIRULLAH 


Harm Afzal Nmasi. 


Azia 

MosTakim 
Mastan 

Sar Gu 
GHANNI 

Ipat Suan 
Suiraz Bea 
SatDak 

Harir Kuan 
ABDULLAH Kuan 
AZGHAR 

Hazrat Nour 
Hosain 
NakSHBAND . ; 


Ayaz Khel. 


Lbrahim Khel. 


Saddu Khel, 


Part I 


é 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Orakzais—No. CKRXXVILITI. 299 


No. CXXXVIII. 


AGREEMENT entered into by the Urman KueEt of the DavLarzar 
ORAKZAI—1858. 


We the undersigned agree— 

1. We will not commit crime against any resident of British territory. 

2, If any member of our tribe commits murder and is apprehended in 
British territory, we will not intercede for him, and if he return to us and 
the crime is proved against. him, we will banish him from the tribe, confiscate 
his property, and not allow him to re-settle without the permission of Gov- 
ernment. 


8. If any member of the tribe is appreberded for highway robbery 
or theft, we will not intercede for him, and if he escape and return to our. 
settlements—if the crime is established against him by two witnesses not 
hostile to our tribe—we will either restore the stolen property or its value to 
the owner therecf, and will further destroy his house; if there is no‘ proof 
against him, the Government will be satisfied by the oath of two of our tribe, 


4. If any other criminal comes from British territory to our settle- 
ments with stolen property, we will restore the same and eject the criminal 
from. our bounds. 

5. We will not bring into British territory any evil-disposed person ; 
if we do so, and he is apprehended, we will noé intercede for him. 

6. If any person elopes with a woman iato our settlements, and has 
property with him, we will restore it; if he denies having the property, we 
will administer an oath to that effect to the man and the woman, but we can- 
hot give up the woman. We will try to effect an arrangement by “ jirgah.”’ 
If a woman comes to our settlements, having left her parents or guardians, if 
a “ jirgah” of grey beards comes for ber and makes arrangemente, we will 
give her up to such “ jirgah.” 

7. If any resident of British territory has a money claim againsi any 
member of our tribe, and petitions the Government about it, let an order be 
Written to us, we will assemble the “ jirgah 7 and do justice, or send in the 
defendant to make reply in Court, 


8. If any member of our tribe has a money claim against a British 
Subject, we will not make reprisals, but prefer our complaint to the British 
authorities. 

9. We will not assist any hill tribe in any recusancy against the 
British ; if any member of our tribe should do so, and it be discovered, we 
will burn his house, banish him from our settlements, and not permit him to 
te-settlé witb us without the permission of Government, 