


2nd.—Whereas the men of Thal paid 1,500 Kabali rupees to. certain 
members of our tribe as ransom money for cattle carried off in the raid, we 
bind ourselves to pay that amount within 80 days’ time. The money to be 
paid subject to the oath of twelve elders of Thal, whom we have named to 
swear to the amount paid as ransom money to our tribe. 


8rd.— Whereas the Government has valued the Thal cattle carried off in 
the raid at 10 Rupees per head of kine and 2 Rupees per head of sheep and goats, 
whether the same be young or old, male or female, we agree to pay the sum 
of Rupees 5,286 on account of compensation according to the statement of the 
men of Thal, subject to the oath of Thal elders according to the Pathan 
castom. Such cattle as have been retained by members of our tribe shall 
be paid for in 80 days’ time, and the balance carried off by the Tazi Khel 
Vaziris shall be compensated for in 90 days’ time. We agree to the respon- 
sibility laid upon us to recover the same from the Tazi Khel, 


4th.— As a guarantee of our good faith in the performance of the terms 
of this agreement, we give the undermentioned men of our tribe as hostages 
to remain at Kohat during the pleasure of the Government, and to be dealt 
with as may be ordered in the event of any breach of faith on the part of 
our tribe. 

5th.—The hostages are also a guarantee on the part of the Kabal Khel 
that no further act: of hostility will be committed by that tribe in British 
territory, until the pending cases between the Vaziris and Tunis shall have 
been brought under settlement. 


No. CXLVI. 


AGREEMENT of the headmen of the SarraLt KHEL WUzEEREES. 


We, Malikdin, etc., and 88 others, being the whole Jirga of the Saifali, 
in person, on our own part, and as representing it on the part of the whole tribe 
of Saifali, having presented ourselves with our own free will and accord before 
Captain J. W. H. Johnstone, Deputy Commissioner of the district of Banu, 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier— Wasiris—No. CXLVI. 807 


through Khan Bahadoor Mahomed Hyat Khan, petition for and agree to the 
following conditions, 


‘Whereas certain persons of our tribe uséd for the purposes of trade to 
purchase at chenp rates stolen property belonging to British subjects, and for 
that reason our tribe was under the displeasure of and criminal in the eyes of 
the British Government; therefore to get pardon for ourformer misdeeds, we, ' 
being the heads of our tribe, according to the custom of ‘ Nanawat’ or other- 
Wise, throwing ourselves on.its mercy, have brought 40 sheep of the value of 
Rupees 200, and 10 camels, value Rupees 800, by way of peace-offering, and 
we pray that this peace-offering and fine be accepted, and we be forgiven, and 
for the future we agree to the following terms :— 


1st.—No member of our tribe shall commit in British territory any 
heinous offence, such as murder, robbery, etc., and we will, in so far as we 
can, check the thieves of our tribe, and if any member should bring any stolen 
property from British territory, we will cause it to be returned, or the whole 
tribe will pay the value thereof. 