

(4) that if any member ‘of our tribe shall have any claim against a 
Government subject, we will report the matter to Government for investiga- 
tion and settlement, that no reprisals or force shall be employed : 

(5) that all the conditions that have been agreed upon, between Gov- 
ernment and other tribes shall be fully performed by us: 

(6) that while promising that the two divisions of the tribe of Alisherzai, 
viz., “Sweri” and “ Paitao,” shall always act according to this treaty, we 
beg to offer Shadan Gul and Kalla Khan of Alisherzai, whose lands, &c., are 
ini the Kandi of Barat Khel in the,village of Torawari, within British territory, 
and Usman Shah (Miyan Khel) as sureties on our part, who will be held re- 
sponsible for any crimes committed by our tribe. 


Security Bond No. 1. for the payment of Rs. 1,100. 

We, Maliks, Bhangi of Darsamand and Mahmud of Nariyal of Bar 
Miranzai bind ouselves hereby to the payment of Rs. 1,100 fine, which has been 
inflicted on the tribe of Alisherzai of Orakzai, within three months of the date 
of this agreement. : 

Security Bond No. 2 for a farthful performance of the terms of the Treaty. 

We, Shadan Gul and Kalla Khan of the tribe of the Alisherzai, inhabit- 
ants'of Kandi Barat Khel, in the village of Torawari, in British territory, 
and Usman Shah (Miyan Khel) hereby are sureties for a faithful performance 
of all the terms entered in the treaty with the Alisherzais, and will always 
consider ourselves responsible for any violation of the above treaty. 


No. OXL. 
Treaty with the Turis dated 9th March 1853. 


We, the above-mentioned Maliks, request the release of our prisoners 
who had been confined by order of Captain Coke, Deputy Commissioner of 
Kohat, contingent on the performance of the following terms contained in 
the treaty :— 


1, We, the five tribes, Hamza Khel, Mastu Khel, Doparzai, Alizai, and 
Ghundi Khel, deliver to Government four men of position with their families 


302 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Zsris—No. CXLI. Part I 


ee ESSFSFSseeee 


as hostages for the restoration of order and the continuance of peace in the 
' territory under the rule of Khwaja Muhammad Khan ; that these hostages 
will, with permission of Government, return to us on being relieved by an 
equal number ; that if any member of onr tribe shall hereafter commit theft, 
robbery, or murder within the territories of the British Government, we will 
all be culpable and responsible, and Government may in such a case proceed 
against our hostages. 


2. That with a view to maintaining peace and good order in the Hangu 
territory, under Ghulam Hyder Khan, the following Maliks of Mandra Khel, 
viz., Moman, Darwan and Tarsam, stand sureties on our part and be held re- 
sponsible for any crime committed by our tribe ; that all property and cattle 
which have been carried off by us from Teri, Muhammad Khwaja, and the 
Khattak ilaqa will be returned to their owners according to decision of Khwaja 
Mubammad Khan (Rais of Teri) and Ghulam Haidar Khan of Hangu; ‘that 
for the restoration of the above-mentioned property, &c., the same Maliks of 
Kahi, Mandra Khel, have become sureties on our part; that with respect to 
the restoration of property belonging to the tribe of Khattak, we have Khwaja 
Muhammad Khan (Rais of Khattak) and Malik Salim of Dallan that it will 
be restored. 