


letter to the Government of India, which has ordered me to reply to Your 
Highness as follows :— 


. _“ Thave understood and communicated what Your Highness wrote regard- 
Mg Your cordiality towards the British Government, the wise and friendly 


304 Punjab—N:-W. Frontier—Turis—No. CXLITII. Part I 


arrangements about the frontier and the frontier tribes, and other matters. 
It is well known to Your Highness that in the letters addressed to Your 
Highness, to Turkistan, by the British authorities at Kabul, it was said that 
it was impossible to discuss the treaty made with the ex-Amir, Muhammad 
Yakub Khan, in respect to the north-western frontier (of India). And it was 
assumed that Your Highness had thoroughly understood the ideas expressed in 
those letters regarding the frontier districts occupied (by Government). There- 
fore the province of Kuram cannot be included in those cities (provinces), 
which the British Government admitted and acknowledged as the dependen- 
cies of the kingdom of Kabul. 

With regard to the Turis inhabiting the Kuram valley, Government has 
decided that they should not, according to the engagement made (with them) 
some time ago, be ‘placed under Your Highness; and that their independence 
conformably to their wish should be maintained, 

With respect to Hatiab, which is beyond the Peiwar Kotal to the weet, 
although it is, no doubt, also included in the districts occupied, the British 
Government, out of regard for Your Highness’ friendship, and with a view 
to strengthen your kingdom and also deeming it fit to let the Jajis (who 
inhabit that district) be under the government of an ally, has relinquished the 
said Jaji “ ilaka ” of Hariab to’ Your Highness. Arrangements for transfer- 
ring the government (of that “ ilaka”’) to Your Highness’ agents will be made 
when the British troops come down from the Kotal, 

Further, this letter has been addressed from the British Government 
through Major-General Watson, C. B. and V.C., the Officer in command of 
the British Force in Kuram, and signed by Major Arthur Conolly, the Political 
Officer of Hariab. 


PROCLAMATION issued to the Mauixs and people of the Turi 
‘tribe in Kuram. 


I, Major-General John Watson, Commanding the British Troops in the 
Kuram valley, am instructed to announce to the maliks and people of the Turi 
tribe that the British Government intends to withdraw its forces very shortly 
across the border. 

Under these circumstances, it has become necessary to make some arrange- 
ment for the future administration of the district, and the matter has been 
considered with an earnest desire to meet, as far as possible, the wishes of the 
people. The British Government understands that the Turi tribe desire their 
country to be made independent. Consequently, I have now to announce that 
the British Government recognises their independence, and, so long as the 
Turis desire it, will regard their country as having uo connection with the 
Amir of Kabul. 