

1. We will restore all cattle now with us plundered from British subjects, 
and any which may hereafter be ascertained to be with us, but the Govern- 
ment will not claim such cattle which may have been taken by the troops 
during hostilities. 

2. We will not, for the future, commit any crime of offence against 
the persons or property of British subjects. We will also restore any property 
stolen from British territory by members of other tribes passing through our 
lands. If the thief prove to be a member of our tribe, we will further exact a 
fine from him. If stolen property. is not traced to us, but only suspicion rest 


* Seca No» CXXXIILL. 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Orakzais—No. CKXXVI. 295 


on the tribe, we will administer an oath to two men of the suspected section ; 
if they will not swear, restitution of the property shall be made. 

3. We will leave five members of our tribe‘as hostages with the Deputy 
Commissioner, who will be exchanged from time to time. 


Signed on 20th September 1855. 


No. CXXXVI. 


AGREEMENT made at GuLIstan with AKHEL TRIBE on 25th 
May 1891. 


The Sarki Khel will furnish three men and the other three sections (Dalak 
Nmasi, Shmali Nmasi and Masan Khel) two men each for tribal service, who 
will be paid at Rs, 6 each per mensem or Rs. 648 per annum, Besides this 
they will furnish three havildars, viz., one from the Sarki Khel and two from 
the other three sections, to be appointed by themselves. These will get Rs. 10 
each per mensem or Rs, 1,008 in all including the pay of the remaining nine 
men, 

The Akhels undertook to build three towers* in their respective Bandas— 
ae. im N 

1 in Chauri Khula. | 1 in Ghlo China. 

1 in Shamshuddin Killa. 

They will be paid Rs. 200 for the construction of each tower. 


In return for this the Akhels agree to the following terms and for the 
carrying out of which they accept responsibility— 

1st.—They will allow no thieves to pass, or stolen property to be carried 
off through their limits. 

2nd.—They will allow no outlaw from British territory to enter their 
country, and any outlaw who now resides with them will be turned out by them 
at once ;/if he does not go to the Deputy Commissioner of Kobat, to have the 
case against him settled. 

&rd.—They will not give passage through their limits to any tribe which 
becoming-hostile to the British Government may wish them to give them pass- 
age so as to carry on hostility or commit offences, 

4th.—They will not carry on their own internal feuds on the sonth side 
of the Samana, and if any offence is committed in prosecution of these feuds 
in the said limits, it will be settled under the Frontier Crimes Regulation. 

5th.—If any British Officer wishes to go to the Akhel country on shoot- 
ing excursions, they will furnish him with an escort and be responsible for 
his safety. 


* Note.—A claim to the sites on which these towers were to be built, has been made by 
the Ali Khel, which has just been settled, and the towers will be built. 