

10. J£ a member of our tribe accompanies a party of robbers from 
another tribe to commit theft in British territory, the Government will not 
On his account hold us responsible, but the tribe whose party he accompanied. 


800 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier--Orakzais-No. CKXXIX. Part I 


11. If a member of our tribe purchases or receives in deposit from 
another tribe cattle which has been stolen in British territory, we will restore 
the same. 


12. We will obey all written orders of the Government addressed 
to us. . 


_ 13. If a debtor escapes to our settlements, we will endeavour to 
arrange the matter by “jirgah;” failing this we will send the paities to 
Court, provided that the debtor be not imprisoned, but an arrangement be 
made for the liquidation of the debt by instalments, 

14. We give the Mulliks of the Bezotee tribe as our securities; in 
event of any breach of the above Engagements, the Government is free to call 
them to account. 


15. The Government having forgiven our past offences on payment of 
Rupees one hundred and seventy-five, we are nat to be called to further 
aceount ‘for them, and we will be permitted to come and go at pleasure iu 
British territory. . 

16. In regard to the tower on the Pass, we agree to hold it on the 
same terms as the Bezotees and Feroze Khail; same with Alee Sherzai, 


Dated 2nd August 1858. , 
(A similar Agreement was entered into in 1858 by the Zaimukhts.} 


No. CXXXIX. 


Second ENGAGEMENT with the ALISHERZAI CLAN of ORAKZAI 
Tribe, dated 25th March 1870. 


Since the Alisherzai tribe have been, on account of their breaking the 
Treaty of 1858, prohibited all further intercourse with British territory, 
we, the above-named persons, having now personally appeared before Lieutenant 
Cavagnari, Deputy Commissioner of Kohat; Muhammad Hiyat Khan, Extra 
Assistant Commissioner; Mozaffar Khan, Thasildar of Hangu ; and Muhammad 
Amin Khan, Thanadar of Gandior, do, for our own part, as well as on behalf 
of the rest of our tribe, bind ourselves to a faithful performance of the 
following treaty ; and agree that the penalty of Rs. 1,1C0 inflicted on us for our 
past offences shall. be paid to Government without any further excuse; 
that we, ‘Sweri ” and “ Paitao,” will fulfil all the conditions agreed to by 
other tribes in treaty with the British Government, and at this time request 
that Government would permit our tribe to bave free passage to and from 
British territory. 

We agree 

(1) that if any member of our tribe shall commit any crime within the 
British territory, he shall receive such punishment as may be deemed proper, 
aud we be debarred from intercession ¢ 


Part I Punjab-N.-W. Frontier—TZuris—No, CXL. 301 


(2) that if any member of our tribe shall flee to us after having committed 
a crime within Government territory, he will be treated by us as other tribes 
do their members who offend : 

(8) that if any one shall abduct a woman together with property from 
British territory to ours, all the property found on him wil! be restored to Gov- 
ernment; that in case he shall deny the bringing away of any property, 
he shall be made to satisfy Government according to custom; that if any 
woman shall flee from het relatives because of a family quarrel and seek pro- 
tection with us, she shall be at once delivered to the jirga that may come to 
us to demand her: 