


8. That we request Government to issue orders to the people of Dallan to 
restore to us the property that has been awarded us by the arbitrators, and we 
offer this written agreement as a sanad or deed for the performance of the 
above terms. 


. 


No. CXL. 
Treaty with the Turis, dated 12th May 1855. 


Whereas the British Government has, because of the restoration of seven 
bullocks and one girl, carried off by us from the village of Dallan, pardoned 
our past crimes and promised to release the prisoners of our tribe sent to 
Lahore, aud to release our mules with their loads, which were seized at 
Nariyab, we, the above-named persons, bind ourselves to a faithful perform- 
ance of the terms detailed in the subjoimed treaty :— 


(1) that no member of our-tribe shall hereafter commit any crime within 
British territory ; 


_ (2) that if any member of a tribe at enmity with us should commit 
crime, he is liable to receive punishment from Government ; . 


_ (8) that we will never permit such a section to commit a raid on British 
territory, and that-in case we are powerless to prevent such a raid, we will 
inform the Maliks of the village threatened. 


ry 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Zuris—Nos. CXLII & CXLIII. 303 


No. CXLII. 
TREATY with the Turzt Trrsp, dated 8rd December 1869. 


We (here follow the names of the headmen of the various sections) 
Maliks of the Turi tribe, having been summoned before the Deputy Commis- 
sioner of Kohat at-Thall, for the adjustment of differences between our tribe 
and the Wazirs, do agree to the following settlement :— 


(Here follow & clauses of temporary effect.) 


6. We bind ourselves in future not to molest the Wazirs in British 
territory, nor will we permit any member of our tribe to pass through British 
territory, either going or returning, on plundering excursions against the 
Wazirs in independent territory. 


The British boundary shall be as follows :— 


On the North, from Cheodokot, along the hills known as “ Kohi 
Khadimukh,” Mamut Lattak, and Lattawali to the Zaimusht village of 
Adhmela. : 

On the West, the river Kurram. 

On the South, the Khaureh Algad, the extreme boundary of the Muham- 
madzai village. 

7. Should any member of our tribe commit a breach of this or any 
other agreement entered into with the Government, we will enforce any 
penalty that may be imposed on the offender. 

8. In future should any member of our tribe have any claim against the 
Wazirs.for any breach of the conditions now entered into by them and our 
tribe, we will prefer the same to the Government official within one month 
of the date of the occurrence. If we fail to do so, we shall not be permitted 
to bring forward the claim at any future period. 


(Here follow the signatures of the headmen of the Turt Jirga.) 


No. CXLIII. 


TRansLAtion of a copy of a letter from Masor Conouty, to the 
*Amir of Kazun, dated 38rd September 1880. 
After compliments.—I transmitted the translation of Your Highness’ 