

(16) we will, whenever Government may call on us, not refuse to swear 
as a, tribe to the innocence of any accused person should he ‘plead not guilty, 
doing so either “ gutallak” (i.e., by selection) or in whatever: way Govern- 
ment may desire ; 

(17) we will never, night or day, oppose the passage through our limits 
of a British pursuit party, but will assist them; if we free a thief from the 
pursuit party or conceal him and give him an asylum we will be bound to 
compensate to Government the amount of loss he may have inflicted ; 

(18) we are offenders before Government and liable to punishment if 
we do any act in contravention of this treaty ; 


(19) we will obey any orders that may be issued to us for any offence 
not provided for in this treaty after our jirga shall have been summoned and 
enquiry been made ; 

(20) we will treat’ any Government servant or other person sent by 
British Government to execute any order or sentence on us in our territory 
‘with respect and hospitality. 


Seal of Saiad Muhammad Hassan of Tirak and of the leading Maliks of 
the Muhammad Khel entered into at Hangu this 2nd day of April 1872. 


294 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Orakzais—Nos. CKKXIV & CXXXV. Part I 


No. CXXXIV. 


AGREEMENT with the ArnposH Srpayas of Trraug, dated 10th 
May 1872. 


“We, the Maliks of Sipaya Ainposh of Tirah, state as follows :— 


Whereas we and the men of Lower Sipaya are of the same clan, and had: 
one and the same agreement with the British Government ever since the estab- 
lishment of the British rule here; and whereas owing, of late, to our falling 
out with the Lower Sipayas on account of disputes regarding the allowances 
paid to us by the British Government, and, owing to our settlements being 
separate from those of the Lower Sipayas, the latter have entered into a sepa- 
rate agreement with the British Government, but we have not done so up to 
the present time. Now, we, considering ourselves also obedient to the Bri- 
tish Government, have appeared at Kohat, with Said Mubammad Hassan, 
Miyan of Tirah, whose disciples we are, before Captain Plowden, Deputy 
Commissioner, Kohat, and in the presence of Shahzada Sultan Jan, Extra 
Assistant Commissioner, enter into an agreement for ourselves and on behalf 
of our other clansmen that we will duly conform—through the medinm and 
upon the responsibility of Said Hassan Miyan—to the agreement containing 
20 sections entered into with fhe British Government by the Muhammad 
Khels* on the 2nd April 1872: provided that this agreement shall not in any 
way affect our claims against the Lower Sipayas to share in their allowances, 

We will also be responsible for any offence committed by any member of 
our clan while residing with the Lower Sipayas. . 


No. CXXXV. 


AGREEMENT entered into by the Cures of the Razran Kaarp 
TRIBE, 1855. 


Whereas pardon has been extended to us for past offences, and we have 
agreed to refrain from all further crimes in British territory, we voluntarily 
engage as follows :— 