


+ 


296 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Orakzeis—No. CXXXVII. Part I 


6th.—They will pay 8 annas per house per annum as revenue for the ham- 
lets situated on the sunny side of the Samana, and if any special reason, ¢.¢., mis- 
behaviour, etc., may arise, the Government will have the power to raise this 


amount, 
H. P. Luen, Major, 
Deputy Commissioner. 
Signature, Matix Mappu Sargr Kuet. 
Seal. »  Muuammap Suen Massan: Kuet. 
Signature, » Maxaapt Samatt Nasi. 
Mir Kaan Sarxi KueEt. 
» Sar Gor Sarxr Kae. 
» Nor Ivaz Sankt Kuen, 
Mowamap Datax Nuast. 
Mowazt Datak Nasi, 
Kaarrunian Kuan Datak Nasi. 
Maxkumap Mie Mausan Kaet. 
93 Yaru Mansan Kae. 
Kasra Mausan Kutt. 
Rasot Kuan Datak Nast. 
Sazp Saag Sarxr Kaew. 
; » SHer Aut Sarxr Kus. 
Witness,—Signature of K, B. Usman Kuan. 


No. CXXXVII. 


AGREEMENT made at Mastan with the Rasra KHEL TRIBE on 
1st June 1891. 


They, together with the two sections (the Ibrahim Khel section of the 
Ismailzais and Malik Nakshaband Sadda Khel) will furnish 9 men at Rs. 6 
each per mensem, and three havildars at Rs. 10 each per mensem, or Rs. 1,008 
in all per annum, whom they will appoint themselves. 

The Rabia Khels undertake to build three towers at places on the north 
side of the Samana commanding the Khanki route to be subsequently deter- 
mined, and will be paid Rs, 200 for the construction of each tower, 

Tn return for this, the Rabia Khels agree to the following terms, for the 
carrying out of which they accept responsibility — 

Ist. —They will allow no thieves to pass or stolen property to be carried 
off through their limits, 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Orakeais—No. CXXXVII. 297 


2nd.—They will allow no outlaw from British territory to enter their 
country, and any outlaw who now resides with them will be turned out by 
them at once; if he does not go to the Deputy Commissioner of Kohat, to have 


the case against him settled. 

3rd.—They wilt not give passage through their limits to any tribe, which 
becoming hostile to the British Government, may wish them to give them 
passage so as to carry on hostility or commit offences, 


4th,—They will not carry on their own internal fends on the south side 
of the Samana, and if any offence is committed in prosecution of their feuds 
in the said limits, it will be settled under the Frontier Crimes Regulation. 


5th.—If any British Officer wishes to go to the Rabia Khel country on 
shooting excursions, they will furnish him with an escgrt and be responsible 
for his safety, and 

6th.—They will pay 8 annas per house per annum as revenue for the 


hamlets situated on the sunny side of the Samana, and if any special reason, ¢.¢., 
misbehaviour, etc., may arise, the Government will have the power to raise 


this amount. 
H. P. Lerten, Major, 


Deputy Commisstoner. 


Signature of ZAMIM 
: Mastan 


Sauin Kaan 

Gut AHMAD 
Gauram SHan 
Pazin 

Zamam Kuan 
DarsaManpd 

Mir Hawas 
Marto 

Tanta SHan 
QaMBAR 

AZADI 

Movyammap Zaman. 
Min AFZAL 
Gautam Muwayuppin 