


(3). If the responsible tribe, according to Afghan custom, prove to the 
satisfaction of the Deputy Commissioner that the stolen property which has 
been passed through their bounds into foreign territory has been stolen or the 
theft of it abetted by any British subject or any one resident in British 
territory, we will be entitled to the same rights with respect to him or them 
with regard to realization of compensation or production of stolen property 
as is entered in condition (1). 


(4). All we heads of the Wazir tribes do solemnly agree that we will not 
allow, as far as lays in our power and knowledge, the passage by the roads 
running through the bounds for which we are responsible, of any outside 
criminals who may, with bad intent or with intent to robbery or theft or any 
other crime against the subjects, or against the rule of the British Govern- 


320 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Waziris—_No. CXLVII. Part I 


ment, wish to pass openly into British territory, nor will we openly or secretly 
give them shelter or assistance. If we do, we will agree, on condition of 
proof, to any punishment the Deputy Commissioner may award, or we will 
prove our innocence to his satisfaction by oath or otherwise. 


(5). We also agree that we will not as far as we know give shelter or 
assistance, or a passage secretly, to any outside thieves, or allow our tribe to 
do so. 


(6). Whenever we get notice that any thief or band of robbers is carrying 
off plundered or stolen property from British territory, we will at once pursue 
along the roads in the bounds for which we are responsible, and will, as far as 
we can, recover the property, and if any British official joins in the pursuit, we 
will assist him. 


(7). Now we state the mode of decision according to Wazir custom. In 
the case’ of any dispute between us responsible tribes or other tribes the deci- 
sion will be made in this way: Jf£ the responsible tribe stnte that a certain 
person is the criminal, or that he belongs to the criminal’s tribe, or that in 
his. village or tribe the plundered property has been seen, their decision will be 
made in one of two ways :— 


First.—That suspected person or the tribesman of the suspected person 
who has been seized will clear himself by himself and two other persons of 
his tribe whomsoever the Leputy Commissioner or the plaintiffs agree to 
swearing that neither the suspected person nor any other person of their tribe 
were principals in the crime, nor abettors, nor advisers to it, nor instigated it, 
nor is the stolen property in their tribe, nor did their tribe receive the 
property or shelter the criminal. On their doing this, that suspected person 
or persons or property which has been seized will be released, and the respon- 
sible tribe will be liable as if they had made no claim. In the case when, the 
stolen property has been seen with the tribe upon whom claim is made by 
persons of the responsible tribe, the person or persons of the tribe against 
whom claim is made will not be entitled to swear, but two persons who saw 
the property will swear, and the claim will be considered as established ; but if 
the Deputy Commissioner is doubtful, or the defendants dissatisfied, then, 
in addition to these two witnesses, headmen of the responsible tribe may be 
selected, and they will be required to swear that the witnesses have not been 
made up for the occasion. If persons on the part of the responsible tribe have 
thus sworn, then the claim will be established. If there are no eye witnesses, 
the defendants will be entitled to swear in the way stated above, 