


2ad.—We will not receive any property stolen from British territory from 
any other tribe, or allow it to be kept in our country ; and if any one should 
bring such property into our country, we, without the receipt of any ransom, 
will restore it. * 

8rd.—We will not give shelter to any criminal guilty of a heinous offence, 
such as a murderer or highway robber, or noted house-breaker absconded 
from British territory. If we should do so, the Government is at liberty to 
levy from us whatever fine may be suitable under the circumstances of the case. 
_  4th.—We also promise that if any British subjects should make a pursuit 
into our country for the recovery of stolen property or the apprehension of 
criminals, we will not interfere with them, and they shall be at liberty to seize 
the property or criminals anywhere outside our dwelling places and take them 
away, and we will assist such pursuers. 


5t4,—If£ any member of our tribe should commit an offence in British 
territory and be sentenced to punishment according to law, we will not in any 
way plead or petition for him, 


6tk,— We, in the carrying out of these conditions, are all severally and 
collectively responsible, all the members of the tribe being responsible sever- 
ally and collectively for the act of each member of it; and for whatever act 
which may be contrary to the agreement, the Government is at liberty to 
punish us, dealing with us as it'does with other frontier tribes, 

7tk.—To prove that we have entered into this agreement willingly and 
seriously, we give as securities for the .carryixg .out of it six persons, Vazir 
British subjects, and eight persons, Saifalis of Kuram. If we act contrary to 
our agreement, these persons will see that it is‘carried out. 


Securities of Ahmadzai Vaziris, 


Mani Khan <a saa .» Spirkai, 
Momit ... es eee oo Khojal Khel. 
Jumraz eae oon eee Mahamad Khel. 


3808 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Waziris—No. CXLVII. Part I 


Securities of Umarzat Vaziris. 


* Barak Khan a by . Baka Khel. 
Nipal Khan any see «.. dani Khel. 
Povandah Khan... oe ve. Malik Shahi. 

Securities of Kuram. 

Malik Din and Kustor ae ... Musa Khan Khel. 
Kuzzadir and Momit sex bes Ditto, 
Sohai and Narkum aa ... Lsakhel. 
Bozuk and Ghulla 3 ... Buda Khel. 


The securities of British territory bind themselves for the period of one 
year. For the future our whole tribe binds itself to this agreement for ever. 

8th,—Finally, we request that if it so happens that a member of our tribe 
should, contrarv to this agreement, commit a crime against a British subject, 
and we prove that we, without the assistance of Government, cannot properly 
coerce him, then the Government, so far as it sees good, will’ assist us in 
coercing him or them. 


No. CXLVII. 


AGREEMENT made by the Haruz Kuen, Bizzan Kurt, UMARZAI, 
MvusamMaD Kuezt, Baxxa Kuen and Janr KuHEtL of the 
DarwesH Kuet Wazirs in April 1872. 


Your Exce,tzncy,—In so far as now a map of our lands situated on the 
boundary of British territory, and showing the boundaries between each of us 
responsible tribes has been made, and we have by way of attestation put our 
seals and signatures to the same, we the Maliks and headmen whose names 
are attached by tribes at the end of this petition, with regard to our respon- 
sibility for the frontier included within our respective boundaries, do hereby 
agree to the following rules, and petition that the Government may be pleased 
to sanction the same for future observance and guidance. We on our part 
agree always to abide by them :— 