


If the fine be not levied in two years, as above noted, the balance to be 
recovered from the subsistence allowance of the hostages within each year. 


- 5.—To allow in future no member of our clan to commit any violent 
act in British territory, such as dacoity, theft, robbery or murder, 


6.—That, in the event of crime being committed in British territory by 
any member of our clan, the property plundered shall be restored by the 
offender or his section ; and in the event of their not restoring the stolen pro- 
perty, the hostages of that section shall be held liable to imprisonment or 
deportation, with a view to ensuring the return of the said property, ete. 

7.—That, in the event of any member of the clan murdering or wound- 
ing a British subject with sword, stone, shot, or in any other way, the sum 
of Rupees 600 may be realized by Government for a murder, and Rupees 300 
for wounding, either from the actual offender or his section. 


8.—On any offence committed in British territory being imputed to 
a member of our clan, the Deputy Commissioner shall be at liberty to call a 
“« jirgah” of the clan with a view to a settlement of the offence being effected. 


9.—In the event of any member or section of the clan not acting 
according to the decision of the “jirgah” or order of Government regarding 
any of the above offences, the hostages of the clan shall be liable to imprison- 
ment and deportation to wherever Government may direct, until the said 
decision or order be complied with by the clan. 


10.—The Galisha sub-division of the clan, having heretofore been at peace 
with Government and in the enjoyment of free intercourse with British terri- 
tory, are notwithstanding included in this arrangement; and will be held 
similarly responsible for any offences their sub-division may commit in British 
territory in future. They are, however, in consideration of their past friend- 
ship, absolved from paying any portion of the. fine imposed on the clan, and 
are not required to furnish any hostages,—those of the rest of the clan engag- 
ing voluntarily to be held responsible for the acts or omissions of the Galishas. 

11,—The following are the names of the superior and inferior Malliks of 
the clan now located at Derah Ismail Khan (permission to be given them 


4 


Part I Funjab—N.-W. Frontior—Waziris—No. CXLIX. 315 


every four months to visit their houses on providing substitutes to be approved 
of by the Deputy Commissioner, not more than one-third of the hostages to 
be changed within any four months) :— 


No. Name. Section. Residence, 


Superior Malliks. 


2 | Mallik Zainuldin . - | Badanzai 2 . { Tangiwalla. 
2 | Lall Gul . . : «|Chisr Khel, . | Maidanwalla. 
3 Wasila e ° e e ° Ditto e . Ditto. 

4 | Mina Din P P . +| Khalli Khel. 7 Ditto. 

6 | Attal Khan. , 7 . Ditto . ‘ Ditto. 
6|Hajee . 7 ‘ P -|Chiar Khel . - | Shaburwalla, 
7 |Sarmast . : ' > : Ditto . - Ditto. 

8 |Suhbat Khan . : . . Ditto : . | Bhangiwalla, 
9] Hakim Shah . * 3 ‘ Ditto 7 . Ditto. 
10 | Muhammad Dine - .|Khalli Khel. ‘ Ditto. 
11 | Hajee Mukhammad . : Ditto . ‘ Ditto. 