


7.—Dadin, Bajji Khel. 
8,~—Saddozi, Azboka. 


9.—Badin, ditto. : Anmat Kuen. 
10,—Mandar, Bai Khel. 
11.—Makhal, ditto. 1—Jaimak, Abdalli. 
32.—Masud Khan, ditto. 2.—Shahdir, Nazar Khel. 


3.—Sad Rehmat, ditto. 
4.—-Abdulrahman, ditto. 


‘Nana Kuet. §.—Ghazni, Malik Shahi. 

6.~ Ahmad Khan, - ditto. 

L—~Imam Shah, Jalal Khel. 7.—Fatteh Khan, ditto. 
2.—Haji Muhammad, ditto. 8,--Balak, Band Khel. 


3,.—Lalai, ditto. 9,—Khan Subah, Syad Khel, 
4.—Faujdar, Abdulrabman Khel. 


Pari t Punjab—N.-W. Frontier— Waziris—No. CL. : 8317 


These hostages will be allowed to go home in turn on giving their 
brothers or sons as substitutes to be approved of by the Deputy Commissioner. 

2.— We have paid into the Government treasury Rs. 5,585 as an indem. 
nity for the offences committed by us during the past year, and have also paid 
#1,500 in reparation for the late outrage committed by certain members of 
our clan in the Bain Pass,—total R7,085. 


8.—To pay a fine of 83,000 as an indemnity for our past offences ir 
British territory against property, to be levied on our convoys entering British 
territory at the following rates iv the course of one year :— 


Half-anna per bullock. 
One-anna per camel. 


Tf the whole of the fine is not realized in the course of one year, as above 
a, the balance is to be deducted from the subsistence allowance of our hos- 
ages, 

4,—-That in the event of a predatory crime being committed in British 
territory by any members of our claa, the property plundered shall be restored 
by the offender or his section, and in the event of their not restoring the 
stolen property, the hostages of that section shall be held liable to imprison- 
mone and deportation with a view to ensuring the return of the said pro- 
perty. ; 
5.—That in the event of any member of the clan murdering or wound- 
ing a British subject with sword, shot, stone, or in any other way, the sum of 
R600 may be realized by Government for the above offences, either from the 
actual offender or from the section to which he belongs. 

6.—On any offence committed in British territory being imputed to a 
member of our clan, the Deputy Commissioner shall be at liberty to call ina 
“jirga” of the clan with a view to a settlement of the offence being effected, - 
poe the real property stolen being restored or a compensation being paid 
or it. 

7.—In the event of any member or section of the clan not acting 
according to the decision of the “‘jirga,” or order of Government regarding 
any of the above offences, the hostages uf the clan shall be liable to imprison- 
ment and deportation to wherever Government may direct until the said deci- 
sion or order be complied with by the clan. is. 

8.—Permission to be given to hostages every four months to visit 
their homes on providing substitutes to be approved ‘of by the Deputy Com- 
missioner. Not more than ,one-third of the hostages to be changed within 
every four months. . 

9.—Members of our clan offending in British territory, if captured, will 
be punished according to the law. =~ ; 