


Second.—If a person or persons of the responsible tribe are suspected as 
being the criminals and there is no legal evidence against him or them, he or 
they and four connections of each selected by the trying officer will swear to 
the innocence of each, and on their doing so an acquittal will be ordered and the 
whole tribe will be liable as before, and if the presiding officer considers more 
evidence is required, he may call on the Malik of the suspected person or 
persons to swear that he does not know or consider the suspected person or 
persons to be the criminal or criminals. 


_Lhird.—In the same way, if any British subject or subjects are suspected 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—WVeziris—No. CXLVITII. 311 


of having aided or abetted the crime for which compensation has been taken 
fromm the responsible tribe in the case of there not being legal evidence, in the 
same way it will be required that they and four ‘connections for each person 
and the Malik swear to the innocence, and then he or they will be entitled to 
an acquittal, and the responsible tribe will be liable as before, 


(8). ‘We clearly understand that if any person or persons, whether subjects 
of the British Government or foreigners, found guilty in the judicial courts are 
sentenced according to law, the conditions above do not apply to these cases, 
but only in those in which legal evidence-is not forthcoming, and which it is 
considered ought to be decided by Wazir custom, by seizure of property, ete. 


(9). Finally, we all confidently state that if these rules are sanctioned and 
earried out, we shall be able fully to discharge our responsibilities, and erime 
will certainly be reduced, and the punishment of the real criminals will be an 
example and warning to others. “ Baramta,” or what we Wazir call ‘* Shaisa,” 
or seiznre of property as a reprisal, is an ancient and well known custom. If 
worked with discretion, it will not displease any tribe, and will have great 
advantage. 


Here follow the Signatures of the Jirgas of the Hathi Khel, Bizzan Khel, 
Umarzai, Muhammad Khel, Bakka Khel, and Jani Khel. 


No, CXLVIII. 


TRANSLATION of a TREATY OR AGREEMENT entered into by the 
Saanum Kzatt Section of the Munsoop WuzEEREE TRIBE 
with Caprain Munro, Orriciatine Deputy CoMMISSIONER 
of .Bunnoo, at Bunnoo, on Wednesday, the 19th June 1861. 


We, the undersigned, Mullicks of the Shanum Khail Division of the 
Muhsood Wuzeerees, viz., Peergul Khan, Sabib Khan, Alladad Khan, 
Kummurdeen Khan, Mairoodeen Khan, Shadee Khan, Said Omeen, Adil 
Shah, Abbass Khan, Zaincodeen Khan, Soorkummund Khan, Munsuh Khan, 
Khwaja Meer Khan, Alayar Khan, and Said Meer Khan, for ourselves, and 
as representing Shere Ali Khan, Poordil Khan, Khodadad and Hossein, other 
chief Mullicks of the Shanum Kbail now absent, being very desirous to con- 
clude a peace with the British Government, do hereby engage as follows :— 

Ist,—We undertake to maintain friendly relations with the British 
Government for the future. 