


(1). In so far as a rule in front of our lands in British territory the hills 
out of that territory to some distance belong to us, and for this reason from 
a long period we have been held responsible for the passes through them, and 
as that responsibility has not been defined, at times we suffer undeserved 
hardships; for this reason for the future we present the following agreement. 
We are responsible for all stolen property taken from British territory to 
foreign territory by any passes, roads or hills included within our boundaries 
as defined according to tribes in the map and list hereto attached in this 
way —_ 

(2).—We are in no way responsible until the Deputy Commissioner of 
the district has satisfied himself by enquiry that either by the evidence of track 1. 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Waziris—No. CXLVII. 3090 


or other evidence in truth stolen property has been taken through the bounds 
for which we are responsible into foreign territory. 


(6).—When he has thus satisfied himself, then he or any assistant to 
whom he has given special orders shall summon the headmen of the responsible 
tribe through whose bounds stolen property has been taken, and shall give 
them a certain period, whatever may appear fair under the circumstances of 
the case, with the object that within the period fixed the responsible tribe may 
recover the stolen property or pay its value according to the estimate of the 
officer in question, or pay the ransom paid for its recovery if the property is 
recovered by payment of ransom, or produce the real culprits, or point out for 
attachment and seizure in British territory property belonging to or members 
of their tribe, or of that tribe with whom the stolen property is, and will, 
poe to Afghan custom, prove the liability of such person, (persons or 
tribe. 


(c).—If within the fixed period we have the real criminals or sufficient, 
persons or property of their tribe or of that tribe with which the stolen property 
is seized in British territory, and prove their liability according to Afghan cus- 
tom, their compensation will be levied from that person or persons or tribe, 
and the responsible tribe will be free. 


(d).—I£ within the period fixed the responsible tribe do not recover the 
stolen property nor produce the criminal, nor have sufficient persons or pro- 
perty of his tribe seized, or are unable to prove their liability, then we will 
pay the value of the stolen property or the amount of ransom paid for its 
recovery or fine as the Deputy Commissioner decides, and we will be permitted 
at any time within three years to produce the criminal or have members of 
his tribe or property of his tribe, or of that tribe with whom the stolen pro- 
perty is, seized in British territory and be reimbursed our loss and expenses 
from him or them if we first prove his or their liability according to Wazir 
custom, 


(2). If itis proved that the criminal belongs to the tribe which is res- 
ponsible for the pass, road or bounds by which the stolen property has been 
taken to foreign territory, then the Deputy Commissioner may deprive us, 
80 far as he pleases, of all the rights contained in the first condition, and will 
take the plundered property or its value from responsible tribe. 