

2nd.—If any member of the Shanum Khai] Muhsood tribe hereafter 
commit an offence, directly or indirectly, against the British Government, we 
shall bear the responsibility as a tribe, and the British Government may exact 
reparation by seizure of our kafilahs, or otherwise as may be deemed requisite. 

8rd.—Should any member of either of the two other main divisions of the 
Muheood, viz., the Alizyes or Behlolzyes, be guilty of committing an offence 


312 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Wezirisx—No. CS LVIII. Part I 


within British bounds, he shall not receive aid or shelter from us, neither shall 
he be allowed to deposit any stolen property in our territory. 

4ih.—In like manner we promise not to afford shelter to absconded 
offenders from British territory, whether British subjects or members of other 
tribes, and especially do we undertake that Khwaja Hawes, Momrez, Deen, 
and Yar Gool, four of the absconded murderers of the late Captain Mecham, be 
not permitted to reside or take shelter within Shanum Khail limits. 


5th.—We hold ourselves answerable that there shall be no attacks made 
by the tribe in strength, nor any open violence by armed men within Govern- 
ment limits. With regard to thefts, we cannot in the same manner guarantee 
that none shall occur ; but we will use our utmost endeavours to repress suchy. 
and whenever injury has been inflicted within Government bounds by any 
member of our section, such as murder, theft, incendiarism, ete. the British 
Government shall be at liberty to indemnify itself from our kafilahs of mer- 
chandize, according to the following scale : — 


. 


For blood as wee ase Rs. 600. 0 0 
For a wound or blow causing the loss of a limb, or injury 
equal to it ‘ei ise wee yy 200 0 O 


For slight wound.—According to estimated injury. 
For incendiarism or other injury.—According to extent of damage done. 


6th,.—-As a guarantee of our good faith, we will place two hostages from 
our section of the tribe, one with his family and one without, in the hands 
of Government, to be lodged either at Tank or Bunnoo, as Government may 
direct, for the space of one year from this date. If, in the course of that’ 
year, no injury or offence is committed by the Shanum Khail Section of the 
Muhsoods in Government territory, the hostages will be entitled to release at 
the expiry of the prescribed period. In the event of the occurrence of any 
breach, or of the committal of any offence for which reparation has not already 
been provided in this Treaty, the release or detention of the hostages will be 
at the pleasure of the British Government. 

Having, as delegates from the Shanum Khail Section of the Muhsood 
Wuzeerees, undertaken to abide by the above conditions, we each and all attach 
our marks to the paper of Agreement, and trust the Government will accept 
this covenant on our. parts. 

(Here follow the marks or signatures.) 


SUPPLEMENTARY MEMORANDUM. 


The Agreement of which the above is a translation was signed and 
sealed at Bunnoo on the 19th June 1861 before me, Nawab Shah Newaz, 
Khan of Tank, and Sooltan Mahmood Khan, Tehseeldar, being also present, 
all the Muhsoods assembled in “jeerga” or council spontaneously repeating 