


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Wastris—No, CXLIX. 313 


the Mahomedan Creed both before and after the signature. The document 
was attested by the Commissioner of the Derajat Division at Buunoo, on the 
27th June 186). ; 

Similar Agreements were entered into at the same time and place by 
the Alizye and Beblolzye Sections of the Muhsoods, the former being repre. 
sented by Mullick Oomer Khan, Yaruck Khan, Peergool, Muteen Raz 
Mahomed, Ali Khan, Shoojab, Wilayut Khan, Tootee Khan, Duduck Khan, 
Sobun Khan, Zurai Khan, Walle Khan, Goolan, Ghurnee Gool, Ali Hybut, 
Baidul, Meer Khuk Gool Shah, and the latter by Mulligks Taj Mahomed, 
Latee Khan, Larsur Khan, Yar Mahomed, Mushuk, Gudhee, Hodee Khan, 
Hatim, Burkhoordar Dooranee Khan, Shukkur Khan Bhoojar, Mehrat, 
Khwaja Ahmed, Budha, Kuliundur Shah, Nana Dullai, in person, and as 
delegates from Zuberdust and Said Khan, Bhuttee Nubbee, Ikhlass, Shahbaz, 
Futteh Khan and other absent Mullicks of the Behlolzyes. 

It was moreover ruled that the six hostages (two from each section) 
should each be either the son, brother, or nephew of a Mullick, and that three 
of the hostages should be lodged at Bunnoo and. three at Tank, receiving sub- 
Sistence from Government. 


(Sd.) A.A. Munro, Lieutenant, 
Offictating Deputy Commissioner. 


No. CXLIX. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT entered into by the SHamawn 
Kuet branch of Mansup Wazirs with the British GovERN« 
MENT at Duran Ismart Kuan on the 28th April 1873. 


We, the undersigned Shaman Khel Malliks,—vzz., Zainuldin, Hakim, 
Wasila, Muna Din, Akhmad, Attal’ Khan, Khanzam, Sarmast, Makri, Zaffar 
Khan, Subbat Khan, Lall Shah Tagai, Amin Khan, Mukbammad Din, Hin- 
dustan, Abizar, Bakro, Baz Khan, Muhsin, Danneb, Hajee Muhammad, Dalla 
Khan, Khadim, Zanjir Khan, Hajee Khan, Mian Khan, Hajee Khan, Meer 
Ghazab,: Saidal,. Gor, Ahmad Shah,. Allahdesh, Nurai, Said Mir, Khowaja 
Ahmad, Mirza: Futteh Khan, Gulli Shah, Roz Shin, and Saidal Badanzai, 
Khalli Khel, Chiar Khel and Galisha Shaman Khels, residents of Tangi 
Maidan, Shahurwalla and Bhangi,—hereby submit to the British Government 
(with whom our clan bas been at enmity for a long time past, and in conse- 
quence of which nine of our clan, including Futteh Roz, the son of Mallik 
Sarmast Khan, Shaman Khel, have been seized and thrown into prison by the 

‘ British Government) and do hereby engage as follows :— 
is 1,—To maintain-friendly relations with the British Government for the 
ature. 


2. 


314 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—No. CXLIX. Part I 


2.—To give, as a guarantee of our good faith, 11 of our most influential 
Malliks and 9 of less note (in all 20) as hostages for location at Derah Ismail 
Khan (each of the former to receive subsistence allowance at the rate of 
Rupees 15 per mensem and the latter at 10). 


3.—These Malliks, or their brothers or sons, to continue to remain as 
hostages at Derah Ismail Khan, as Government may order. 


4.—To pay a fine of Rupees 3,000 as an indemnity for our past offences 
in British territory against property, to be levied in the following way, viz., 
1,000 rafters for roofing to be delivered at Tank by the clan, and the balance 
of the fine to be realized on our convoys entering British territory, at the 
following rates, in the course of two years, half being levied the first year, and 
the remaining half the next year— 
At 4 anna per bullock. 
», 1 anna per camel. 