


328 Panjab—N.-W, Frontier—Batanis—No. CLVI. Part I 


. 


The following is the rate of compengation we bind ourselves to pay in 
lieu of property carried off from British territory :— 


af Rs, 
For each camel carried off ‘ . ;: - 60 
Do. cowor bullock . ‘ e P - 10 
Do. buffalo . ‘ . 7 ‘ - 20 
* Do. ass ° F 7 : . . 7 
Do. sheeporgoat . . . « | 418 
Do, mare or horse . ° : Ps . Whatever is fixed by jirga. 
- Rs. 
Compensation for a,murder .. . . - 860 


Given under our hands this 2nd day of the month of February 1876. 


Here follow seals and signatures of Maliks and Headmen of the Tata, 
Dhanna, and Warspan Sections. 


No. CLVI. 


TRANSLATION Of an AGREEMENT with the BaTanis, dated 27th 
March 1879. 


We, the undermentioned Sat, Daulat Khan (and 18 others) Warspuns 
of the plains; Ashraf Khan (and 6 others) Dhannas_of the plains; Khushal 
(and 18 others) Tattas of the plains; Rakhman (and 7 others) Warspuns of 
the plains hereby hold ourselves responsible for the frontier passes from the 
Mulezai to both Girnis, including the intermediate passes in the Tank tahsil. 
Ifany hill offenders having stolen any property pass it through the frontier 
passes, or cause loss of life, we shall endeavour, as far as possible, to arrest the 
offenders with the stolen property and make them over to the Sarkar. If we 
fail in this we shall return the stolen property in kind or pay compensation on 
the following terms :-- 


We shall pay== 

Rs. 

Blood-money ° . . ° « 3860 
Wound-money - - + + ~~ According to the nature of 
the wound and as fixed by the Sarkar. No individual of our three sections 
will ever connive with the offenders. We shall try to the utmost of our power 
to arrest the offenders with the stolen property, Should any stolen property 
be traced to the hills, we shall return it, even though no tracks of the 
offenders or property be discovered in the pass. The value of property is 
entered below, and we have executed this agreement in presence of the Deputy 


aN 
Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Bafanis—No. CLVII. 329 


Commissioner of Dera Ismail Khan, so that it might remain a senad in the 
hands of the Sarkar :~ 


- Rs, 

Camel, male or female . Sins oh . . oe - 60 
Cow or bullock . P é . ‘ . . 10 
Buffalo * . 7 é ‘ ‘ : ; . » 20 
7 ‘ . . 7 


Donkey . . . . . 
Sheep or goat . : . A . 


Dated 27th March 1879. 


. 1-8 


Here follow seals and signatures. 
+ 


No, OLVII. . 


TRANSLATION of a Vernacular AGREEMENT made by the Baza, 
BABAK, and WuRGARA BATANIS on 31st March 1883. 


We, the Maliks, Lambardars and headmen of the Batani tribes, do here- 
by agree to take upon ourselves the responsibility of the safety of the follows 
Ing passes in the Bannu District :— 

1, Shamla. 

2. Chil Khana, 

8. Wuch Saroba. 
4. Tand Saroba. 
5. Sason. 

6. Khuha. 

7. Warmala. 

8. Nugram. 


9. Khanda. 
10. Kharoba, with passages called Rustina, Jhagranda and 
Mitaza, etc. 


And to promise that whenever any offender causes any injury to the Bri- 
tish subjects, we shall seize the offender and make him over to Government 
authorities, and shall recover all the stolen property taken through the passes 
We are responsible of ; or in default, ¢.¢., if we fail to hand the offenders over 
to Government or to recover the stolen property, we shall pay without any 
excuse such amount of compensation as Government may fix therefor, Fur- 
‘ther, we acknowledge that none of our two branches—Dhbanna and Wurgara— 
shall have intercourse with any offender or offenders, and shall try our best 