


to arrest such offenders and make them over to Government. a 


ars 


330 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Batenis--No. CLVII. Part I 


We also bind ourselves to recover that stolen property or pay its cost the 
thieves of which enter into our limits, though their tracks are not found in 
the passes of which we are responsible. 


We shall be liable to pay compensation for animals stolen from the British 
territory at the following rates :— 


Rs. 
Foy each camel . . 3 - ‘ - - 60 
Do. oxorcow . . . . ‘ . 16 
Do. buffalo . eS ‘ : - 40 
Do. ass. : P . , 5 Pe 4 
Do. _ sheep or goat . . . - (18 . 
: Do. horse or mare—Whatever amount Government, may fix according to 


the merits of the animal concerned. 


The following ts the detail of the Viability of passes :— 


Passes, ResponsipLheE Matixs. 
Half of Nugram 3 Baba Maliks, viz,, Raza Khan, Fatteh Khan and Saadat Khan, 
Warmala. son of Dilamir, by his agent, Hathi Khan. 
Kbuh 3 Baba Maliks, viz, Dilasa Khan, son of Daraz Khan 4, Nuzar 
Sason Shah, son of Alit Shah 3, and Mir Akbar, son of Chandan, 
with Maddo Khan 3. 
Tand Saroba 12 Baba and Wargara Maliks, vtz., Dilasa Khan, Nazar Shah, 
Wuch Mir Akbar and Maddo, Raza Khan, Saadat Kban, by his 
Chil Khana agent Hathi Khan, Fatteh Khan, Baba, Azad, Amir, son 


of Timar, Golla Khan, Aghzari, nepbew of Hamza Mir, 
Fatteh Khan Wurgara, and ‘Zonai, brother of Latai. 


Shamla 6 Baba Maliks, viz., Dilasa Khan, Nazar Shah, Mir Akbar and 
Maddo, Raza Khan, Saadat Khan, son of Dilamir, by his 
guardian Hathi Khan, and Fatteb Khan. 


Half Nugram Pass 17 Babak Maliks, viz., Dauran, son of Kamran, Jafiir, brother of 


Khbanda Pass Akbar Khan, Said Khan, son of Shahman, Dalakki, son of 
Karoha Pasa Bardavi, Lewatti, cousin of Kamran, 2nd Jaffir Khan, 


brother of Zaffar Khan, Hakim, brother of Said Amir, 
Feroz Khan, brother of Dauran, Amir Khan,’ Dauran, son of 
Ahmad Khan, Roshan, Sohel, son of Gulrang, Hakim Khar, 
Fatteh Khan, Akbar Khan 2nd, Kamran, son of Matai and 
Liwatti, cousin of Barai. 


rete tie_ npneromane es 


Given under our seals and marks this 31st day of March 1883. 


Here follow seals and marks. 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Batanis--No. CLVIII. $31 


No. CLVILI. 


ConDITIONs proposed to, and accepted by, the Burrrannis—1890. 


(2) Only Bhittanni cultivators shall be entitled to a share in the remission 
and should the land be cultivated by a person belonging to another tribe or 
caste, the said share shall revert to the Malik of that particular sub-section. 


(4) In the event of an offence being committed on the border aud not 
traced compensation will be paid by the mafidars and recipients of- service 
allowances within whose limits the offence has been committed in proportion 
to their share of the same. ‘The Deputy Commissioner shall, however, be at 
liberty in any suspicious case to realize the compensation from the whole tribe 
should he deem it advisable to do so. 


(c) Nomination for service shall be subject to the approval of the Deputy 
Commissioner, who is also at liberty to dismiss any nominee who for any 
reason is considered unfit for duty. 