


Owing to the evil deeds of some of the Shirani bad characters who have 
committed offences in British territory, the executive officers of Government 


Part I Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Shiranis—-No. CLIX. 333 


have shut out the tribe from British territory, We therefore now as repre- 
sentatives of all the Shiranis make the following promises in order to have the 
blockade raised :— 

(1) Rupees 2,530-3 are still due by us on account of compensation for 
offences committed by the tribe. All the stolen property that can be collect- 
ed will be now handed over to the executive officers of the Government. The 
Chaudwan dam and the water-mill which were burnt and destroyed by our 
tribe we will reconstruct with our own hands. The balance remaining after 
deducting value of cattle to be returned, and the labour we supply in repairing 
dam and re-building water-mill will be guaranteed in cash by a trustworthy 
surety resident of British territory, who will pay the amount due within a 
period of two months. The -said surety will make up the sum by levying one 
anna per rupee on our trade with, if necessary, the assistance of Government. 
If, however, we wish the blockade to be raised before tender of security, we 
will place a, number of our hostages (to be fixed' by Government) in British 
territory, atid the cost of their maintenance will be borne by ourselves so long 
as they remain in British territory. 

(2) As regards future offences, we engage to restore the actual stolen pro- 
perty or to point out the offenders or their property when they come down to 
the plains and make them over to the Sarkar within three months from date 
of committal of offences. If we fail to do this, the whole tribe will be liable 
to pay in compensatiod. These terms include the Khidarzais and Chuhar 
Khels, In the same manner, we shall be responsible for individuals of other 
tribes who may be in the Shirani limits. 


(3) We engage to expel outlaws who, having committed offences in 
British territory, seek refuge in our country, Mir Khan, Gandapur murderer, 
who is how with us, we will turn out from our country. We will send down 
Mir Ahmad, Mian Khel, and Muhammad Biluch to the plains if they agree to 
have their cases tried by jirga, otherwise we will expel them from our country, 


Dated 8th Ramzan 1800 Hijra according to 18th July 1883. Written 
by Mahmud Shirazi. 
(Sd.) Ghulam Nabi of Landi, Zarif) Mahmudzai Uba 
Khan, Khels. 

» Mulla Salim, Sultanzai of Sar Ragha. 
»», Mali, Mardanzai of Zar Shahi. 
» Kamran, Hasan Khel of Morga. 
»  Alawal, Mardanzai of Zar Shahi. 
» Bara Khan, Saltanzai of Sar Ragha. 
» Azim, Ibrahimzai of Drazan. 
»  Saidal, Shahezai of Shaikh Mela. 
» Chari, Shabezai of Drazan. 
x anki, Bakezai of Drazan. 
»»  Painda, Uryazai of Drazan. 
» Haidar, Mahmudzai of Landi. 

',  Abdulrahim, Ibrahimzai of Drazan, - 
» Saleh, Mamezai of Drazan.. 


#. So—As to the murder of Jhangi Ram, charged against us, we know 


334 Puanjab—N.-W. Frontier —Shiranis--No. CLX, Part I 