


To—H, A, AnDERSON, Esq., Deputy Commissioner, Banna, and J. 8, Donazp, Esq., Assistant 
Comwissioner iu charge of Sub-Division Tank. 
On the 4th January 1891 we presented an award in the two casés:— 

(1) Raid by Bakka Khels on Mahsuds ip Shaktu Pass; and 

(2) Raid by Mahsuds on Jani Khels in Kisora Pass ; 
and it was duly approved by you, Mr. H. A. Anderson and Mr. Donald. You 
both officers at the same time directed us (!) Abmadzai and Utmanzai Dar- 
wesh Khel Wazirs, (2) Alizai, Bahlolzai, and Shaman Kbel Mahsuds, to see 
whether some settlement could be made between us about our previous cases, 
and if some such settlement was practicable, we should let you know in what 
way it could he arranged. 

We are very thankful to Government for this. 

We have now consulted each other on this subject. 

Really we had made a settlement of our previous cases in the hills some 
eighteen months ago, and we re-affirm the settlement on the same footing io 
the different three cases, 

(Ferst)—Claims of Darwesh Khels against Manzai Alizai Mahsuds: 


Tn this case the Darwesh Khels have suffered much loss and the Manzai 
Alizais are the aggressors. When the Darwesh Khels collected a force (tora) 
to exact reparation from the Manzai Alizai Mahsuds and forces were despatch- 
ed by the two routes of Wana and Razmak, the Maliks and Motbars of this 
section of Mahsuds, Badshah Khan, Badardin Khan and Mir Salam Khan, 
came in for peace, and it was agreed that the Manzai Alizais should pay the 
Darwesh Khels twenty thousand rupees as compensation for their loss in three . 
instalments, IJ is to be noted that the amount of this compensation was sub- 
sequently reduced to rupees twelve thousand on the solicitation of the above 
named Maliks, The Manzai Alizais never paid these instalments, and we, the 
Darwesh Khels, had no hope whatever of reconciliation. When you, Mr. H. 
A. Anderson and Mr. J. S. Donald, so kindly gave us an opportunity of open- 
ing the question of settlement again, and we both parties confirm the settle- 
ment made in the hills anew, vzz., that Manzai Alizais will pay Rs. 12,000 to 
the Darwesh Khels in the coming hot season when both parties go into the 
hills. We, the Darwesh Khels, will also adjust the claims of Shabi Khel Ali- 
zais against the Darwesh Khels in the hills, the detail of loss not being 
known &t present. 


(Second) —Claims of Shaman Khel Mahsuds against Darwesh Khel Wazirs- 


Part I Funjab —-WN.-W. Frontier — Feziris~No. CLIII. $23 


We, the Darwesh Khels, admit that Shaman Khel Mahsuds have suffered 
much loss at our hands. We therefore confirm our former settlement made in 
the hills, z.e., that we, Darwesh Khels, will pay a compensation to the Shaman 
Khel Mahsuds for their loss, No detailed account of the loss of Shaman Khel 
Mahsuds has as yet been prepared because the Manzai Alizai Mahsuds have 
not yet paid the compensation money promised by them to the Darwesh Khels. 
As soon as this compensation money is paid, we, the Darwesh Khels, promise 
to adjust the loss of the Shaman Khels according to the accounts. Malik 
Nezam Khan, Albagh, Fatteh Roz, Babadarka, Haji Mubammad, Paio Shah, 
Daulat Khan, Allayin, Adildin, Pirang and Tufan Maliks of Shaman Khels 
are satisfied with this our assurance. : 