


(@) Service shall be permanent, and a nominee once appointed shall not 
be changed save on the Deputy Commissioner’s requisition or with his sanction. 
The distribution of Silladari may, however, be re-arranged with the consent of 
the whole jirga. 

(e) In the event of a post being established at Jandola no extra service 
grant will be expected, and the service connected with the post will be duly 
performed by the three sections of the tribe in proportion to their shares. 


(f) In case any District Officer visits the Bhittanni Hills, he will be 
provided with an escort, for which food only will be required. 


(7) Should any Militia Sowar, Footman, or Native Officer be sent any- 
where on special duty outside the Bhittanni country, the whole of the Silladari 
allowance may, at the Deputy Commissioner’s discretion, be paid to him. 


(4) In addition to the general responsibility of the tribe for- offences 
committed within its limits, the. Maliks will be held personally responsible 
for the safety of the passes situated in, or in the vicinity of, their lands. 
‘the Statement below gives a list of such passes, with the names of the Maliks 
responsible for the same. 


Statement showing the names of Bhittannt Melcks responsible for the Passes. 


Name of Section Names of Maliks of the Section 


No. Name of Pasa, responsible, responsible, 


Remarks, 


4 | 
pe _———— 


1 | From Bain Pass | Ali Khel . | Jabar Khan, Mansur Khan, Samandar 
to Khushak. Khan and Hamza Nur. 


Chinai. . | Chaplai . | Daulat Khan, Toti, Namdar, Danran, 

Ghaza, Didari, Shadi, Rahman, 
Shahbazi, Jhangi, Dur Khan and 
Amo, 


332 Punjab—N.-W, Frontier—Shiranis—No. CLIX. Part I 


Statement showing the names of Bhittannt Maliks ~contd. 


Name of Section Names of Maliks of the Section 


responsible, responsible, Bamares, 


No, Nome of Pass, 


Said Amin, Barani, Nawaz, Sarak, 
Hassan, Tor Khan, Shamsbir, Sher 
Gul and Mir Alam. 


Nasrat Khan, Isot Khan, Mian Khel, 
Barra Khan and Akil. 


Kata Gram. 


9(From  Tand{Tarai . <i 
Chinai to Kot 
Allahdad. 
Dhanna . | Adam Khan, Draz Khan, Raza Khan, 
Sher Muhammad, Adam, Walli Gul, 
Mirat Khan, Sher Gul and Khushal. 


Bhangi Khan, Kabir Khan, Sher 


3 | From Zam Tank | Tatta ( Umar- 
Muhamwad, Kalim Khan. 


to Girni Khurd| Khel). 
with Zeba Pass 


Abmad Khan, Rakhman, Mohabat, 
Balochai, Ahmad Khan, Marwat 
Khan, Bardar, Dinak. 


Tatta ( Niamat 
Khel). . 


Said Amin, Barani, Nawaz, Sarak, 
Hassan, Tor Khan, Shamshir and 
Sher Gul and Goddi. 


Tatta (Katta 
Gram). 


Tatta ( Shan 
Khel). 


Mir Azam, Sandak, Bhangi and 
Banochi. 


Kota, Katawaz, Zaman, Katawaz 2nd, 


Tatta (Abba 
Mamak and Jabar. 


Khel). 

Tatta (Sarha):.| Sher Khan, Lawat, Zamani, Mirani 
and Din Mubammad. 

Shakhai -|Payand, Sado, Bazid, Rahmati, 
Charakki, Zurif, Dost Muhaoomad 
and Brahim. 


(Sd.) LL. W. KING, 
; * Deputy Commissioner. 


No. CLIX. 


TRANSLATION of a Petition and Engagement, dated 18th July 
1883, presented by the SHtrani JIRGA. 
The object of these lines is as follows :— 