

8¢h,—That for due fulfilment of the above conditions of this agreement 
we, the people of the entire tribe, unitedly and severally hold ourselves respon- 
sible for our own distinct clan, and if we fail, British Government. is authorised 
to lay-an embargo on the property of each faction and to impose punishment 
on our tribe according to the frontier rules as is done with other tribes. 

9tk.—That in order to testify the free-will and sincerity with which we 
have made this agreement, the following men, respectable Maliks, British sub- 
jects, and men, respectable Maliks, subjects of independent territory, and who 
frequent British territory, are given as our securities to have the above named 
conditions fully carried out, The securities who are subjects of British 
territory are responsible for one year and we are for always. 


Names of securities for Mali tribe, Dour, Lower— 


British subjects. 


Saleh Khan 4 
Bhai Khan } . . . Maliks, Madan. 


Nia ’ . ,. Maliks of Mandio. 
Subjects of Independent .territory. 

Gulla Khan Mahsoud, 

Painda Khan. 

Hossain Khan. 


Seenrities for Tuppi Division, Black faction— 


British subjects. 


Ghaibi Khan Maliks. 
Tor Khan } ; , Sf aoete 


Part I Punjab—-N.-W. Frontier—Zatanis—No. CLV. $27 


Subjects of Independent territon Ye 


Amir Khan. Nizabut. 
Alim Subba. Sheja. 
Badrung. Mir Husen. 
Haibat. Wali. 

Yar Khan. . 


10th.—That lastly we pray that if at any time any one of our tribe act 
contrary to the above conditions in respect to the British State or to any 
British subject, and that we prove that we are unable to punish him properly 
without the help of Government, that the necessary aid may be granted us to 
enable us to do so. 


Signatures of the individuals named in the first instance. 


(True Translation.) 


(Sd.) . H. B. Beckerr, 
Offg. Deputy Commissioner. 


No. CLV. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT entered into by the BaTanis on 
the occasion of their accepting Pass responsibility, on the 
2nd February 1876. ’ 


We, the undersigned Maliks and headmen of the Batani tribe, do hereby 
hold ourselves responsible for the safe custody of our passes on the British 
border from the most northern Mullazai Pass to the Ghirni Kalan and Khurd 
Passes in the Tank ilaka of the Dera Ismail Khan District, with other inter. 
mediate passes between them, and do hereby agree to seize and make over to 
the British authorities any offenders causing any injury to British subjects, 
and to restore any property carried off through the passes for which we are 
responsible. Failing this, z.e., making over the offenders or property stolen, 
we bind ourselves to pay such compensation as may be fixed by the British 
Government, and we further declare that no member of our three branches, viz., 
Fatta, Dhanna and Warspun, will have or hold intercourse with any such ° 
offender or offenders, but, on the contrary, will do our best to seize and make 
over to the British Government. 

We further agree to recover and restore or make good the value of any 
property stolen and traced to the hills, even though the tracks are not found 
within the passes for which we are responsible, 