


Tangiwal, Dour, Upper. . . . ‘ . Rs. 1,500 
Sokhel Mali, Dour, Lower . ° . A ; +» x 3,090 
Haidar Khel Patti . . ‘ ‘ ‘ . » 2,000 


Total » 6,500 
of Government coin equal to ,, 8,320 of our coin. 


Having paid the above amount of fine, and having restored the four horses of 
the Government which were within our country, we solicit pardon for past 
offences, and freely and sincerely make the following promises for the 
future :-— 


Ast.—That we shall never give shelter or assistance to any individual, 
individuals, or tribe who after committing treason against the British State 
seek shelter or assistance in our country, but, on the other hand, we will do 
our best to carry out the orders of the Government as may be issued by the 
Deputy Commissioner of Bannu in regard to such man, men, or tribe. 


2nd.—That our tribe shall never be guilty of the offence of rebellion 
against the British Government, 

8rd.—That no man of our tribe shall ever commit any heinous offence 
such as murder, plunder, burglary, ete., within British territory, and that 
though we cannot be responsible for our entire tribe in regard to thefts, yet 
we shall endeavour our utmost to restrain the thieves among our tribes, and if 
at any time it is found that stolen property is brought into our country by 
any one of our tribe from British territory, we shall have either the stolen 
property restored or the whole tribe will be responsible for its value. , 

4th.—That we shall never receive any property stolen from British 
territory by any other tribe, nor will we give shelter or aid to the culprit, and 
if any one bring such property into our country, we will, if possible, restore 
it without ransom, or if not, we will never allow the perpetrator to remain in 


326 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—Dawaris—No, CLIV. Part I 


our country, and if the property be still in our country, we are responsible for 
either the restoration or payment of its value. 

5th.—That in future we sball never give shelter or aid to any British 
subject or subjects who having committed any heinous crime such as murder, 
highway robbery, burglary, ete., within British territory, seeks refuge in our 
country, and if we do give such shelter, Government may impose such 
amount of fine as the nature of the case may call for. 

. 6th.—That we agree and promise that we shall never prohibit the entry 
of any British subject into our ‘country who does so in the pursuit of an 
offender or for the restoration of property carried off from British territory, 
but on the contrary we will afford him every help in carrying out his object, 
and pursuing parties shall-have the authority to apprehend every offender 
within our country except within our dwelling houses and chauks, and to 
bring him to a Court of Justice. 

7th.—That if any man of our tribe at any time being convicted of the 
offence of breach of British Laws and Regulations be tried by a British Court 
of Justice.and punished, we shall never petition for him, 