


Jn 1839, when Captain A. Cunningham surveyed the Lahul district, the boundary between 
the States of Kulu and Chamba was formed by the Nalda and Chukam nullahs, two tributaries 
of the Chandrabhaga, the one on its left, and the other on its right bank. From the head of the 
Chukam nullah the Commissioners determined that nll the country to the eastward, which ig 
drained by the Bhaga, the Chandrabhaga, and their tributaries, belonged to the British district 
of Lahul; and that the boundary between Lahul and the Zanskar district, was the snowy range 
(cnlted Varalassa by Dr. Gerard) dividing the drainage of the Bhuga end Chandrabhaga from that 
of the Zanskar river, as marked in map (Pl. XX1X). 


Beyond the Baralacha Pass, to the eastward, the Commissioners found that there was an old 
well-known boundary ‘stone, called Phalangdanda, which marked the limit between Lahul and 
Ladak. This stone is noticed by Moorcroft (I, p. 220). It stands in the midst of an open plain 
on the righ’ bauk of the Yunam river. Ag there was no known or recognised boundary mark on 
the other gide of the stream, the Commissioners selected a remarkable cream-coloured penk, called 
Yuram, as the northern limit of the British territory on the left bank of the river. As this peak 
is situated at the end of one of the spurs of the great anowy chain, already determined as the 
northern limit of the Labul district, it forms a natural continuation of the boundary live from the 
westward, The bearing of the Turam peak from the Phalangdanda is 9° to the northward of west." 


As it appeared that the country to the eastward of the Phalangdanda belonged to Piti (Spiti), 
the Commissioners determined that the boundary between Piti and Ladak on the westward should 
be the Yunam river. A straight line was accordingly draws from the Phalangdanda to the junc- 
tion of the first nollah on the right bank of the Yunam, from which point the Yunam river forms 
the boundary as far as the junction of the Cherpa or Chereyf river. 


Part IT Jammu and Kashmir. 848 


On the appointment of the second Commission steps were taken to secure 
the co-operation of Chinese and Kashmir officials ; but no Chinese delegate 
appeared, and the demarcation of the boundary had to be abandoned. 


The northern as well as the eastern boundary of the Kashmir State is 
still undefined. 


On the north-west, from Hunza southwards along the frontier of Yasin, 
Darel, Thalicha and Chilas to Kaghan, no boundary appears to be officially 
recognised. 


On the south the only portion of the British-Kashmir boundary which 
has been regularly demarcated, is that which lies between the rivers Jhelum 
and Ravi from a point above Dulial to Madhopur, This settlement was made 
by Captain Abbott with the aid of Commissioners of the Lahore and Kashmir 
Darbars. But the Hazara exchange affected Captain Abbott’s decisions on 
the border between the Jhelum and the Chenab, as it gave to Kashmir the 
talukas of Kathna and Suchetgarh with part of Minawar, which had been 
awarded by Captain Abbott to Lahore. In 1847 the Government of India 
took over from Gulab Singh the districts of Sujanpur, part of Pathankot and 
certain lands between the Chaki and Beas rivers, asa set-off against charges 
on account of the maintenance of some hill Chiefs, who had removed irom 
Kashmir into British territory (see account of the minor jagirdars, infra). 