


On the Lahul side the southward course of the river Ravi is the boundary 
for most of the border between Madhopur and a point about 14 miles west- 
north-west of the town of Chamba. 


In 1846 a question arose as to whether under the treaty of Amritsar it 
was intended to make over the whole of Chamba, trans and cis-Ravi, to Kash- 
mir, When that treaty was made Gulab Singh was in possession of the 
district of Lakhimpur, which clearly belonged to the British territory acquired 
by the treaty of Lahore. | The Chamba Chief claimed the district of: 


Almost due north-east from this junction there is a remarkable square rock on the top of the 
hill, which, from its resemblance to a fort, has received the name of Lanka. This curious aud well- 
known peak was selected ns another fixed point in the boundary, to which a straight line should 
be drawn from the junction of the Cherpa river. Beyond this to thé eastward, the Commissioners, 
adhering to the principle which they bad first laid down, determined that the whole of the Cherpa 
valley-and its tributaries belonged to the British Government; and that the snowy range on its 
tight bank, which feeds all the northern affluents of the Cherpa river, should be the boundary 
hetweon Ladak and the British district of Piti. This same range extends towards the east past 
the southern end of the Chomoriri lake, where it forms the well-known boundary between Ladak 
and the Chinese territory. The Commissioners, therefore, determined that the boundary between 
Ladak and Piti should continue from the head of the Cherpa along this same range to the 
Chinese boundary, thus including within. Piti all the streams which water that district, aud giving 
to Ladak all the streams which water its southern district of Ratchu. 


344 Jammu and Kashmir, Part II 


Badrawar which had been granted to him by Ranjit Singh, but which was 
then held by Kashmir, and had undoubtedly been transferred to that State by 
the treaty of Amritsar. The Raja of Chamba had been tributary to the Sikh 
Darbar, and objected to occupying that position under Gulab Singh. 
These difficulties were settled by Colonel Lawrence, who made an arrangement * 
between the Kashmir and Chamba States and the British Government. The 
main points in it were that Kashmir retained Badrawar, and acquired 
Lakhimpur and Chandgraon, while Chamba on both sides of the Ravi became 
independent of Kashmir, the Raja transferring his allegiance to the British 
Government, 

After the conclusion of the treaty of Amritsar the intercourse of the 
British Government with Kashmir was for some time of an ordinary character. 
The conduct, however, of Maharaja Gulab Singh during the last struggle of the 
Sikhs in 1849 excited grave suspicions. -He died on the 4th August 1857, and 
was succeeded by his eldestson, Ranbir Singh. Both Gulab Singh and Ran- 
bir Singh rendered important services in the mutiny. The right of adop- 
tion was guaranteed to Maharaja Ranbir Singh by Sanad (No. CLXIV); 
and he was assured that, in the event of his death without natural issue 
and without adopting an heir, the British Government would recognise the 
succession of a collateral relative descended from the common ancestor of the 
family, Tlrov (Dbrav) Deo, subject to the condition that a nazarana of a 
year’s revenue of the State should be paid. 