


Ladak and Baltistan.—The early history of Ladak is obscure. The 
Province seems originally to have been a part of Chinese Tibet. At the 


340 a ammu and Kashmir. Part IT 


beginning of the seventeenth century it was conquered by the Balti Chief of 
Skardo. Then it became independent under a “Gyalpo,” or Chief of its 
own. Atthe end of the eighteenth century it was attacked by the Mughal 
tribe of Sokpos. The invasion was repelled with the aid of the Mohammadan 
Governor of Kashmir, and from this time till 1884 Ladak seems to have 
been an independent. tributary of Kashmir. Baltistan appears to have been 
independent under the Raja of Skardo till 1840. Ladak and Baltistan were 
conquered in successive campaigns by Gulab Singh’s troops, led by Zorawar 
Singh and Diwan Hari Chand, between the years 1834 and 1342. 

Kashmir has undergone many changes. At first it was ruled by Hindu 
and Tartar kings. Then came a Hindu dynasty which lasted till the begin- 
ning of the fourteenth century. The Muhammadan minister of the last 
Hindu king seized the government, and for more than two centuries and a 
half Kashmir remained independent under its own Muhammadan rulers. In 
1588 it was conquered by the Emperor Akbar, and the Mughal régime lasted 
. till the latter half of the eighteenth century, The country then became sub- 
ject to Ahmad Shah Abdali, and was administered by Afghan governors from 
Kabul till it was wrested from them by Ranjit Singh in 1819. From this 
year till 1846 it remained under the Sikhs, governors being appointed by the 
Lahore Darbar. Of these governors Mian Singh (1833-41), Ghulam Mohi- 
ud-din (1841-46), and Shaikh Imam-ud-din (1846) are the best known. 
Mian Singh was murdered by his mutinous troops in 1841. The Lahore 
Darbar then sent Raja Gulab Singh with Ghulam Mohi-ud-din to Kashmir. 
They succeeded in quelling the revolt, and the ‘latter remained as governor. 
He was a close friend and dependant of Gulab Singh. 

Gilgit appears to have been ruled till the beginning of the present céntu- 

ry by independent Rajas of the Trakhane dynasty, some of whom attained con- 
siderable power. Between about 1810 and 1842 there was a succession of 
revolutions. First, Sulaiman Shah of the Khushwakti family of Yasin con- 
quered Gilgit from the last Trakhane Raja. He was killed, and succeeded by 
Azad Khao of Punial, who again was killed and succeeded by Tari Shah of 
Nagar. The latter was followed by his son Shah Sikandar. He was killed 
aud succeeded by Gauhar Aman Khbushwakti of Yasin. Meanwhile Karim 
Khan, brother of Sikandar Shab, applied for aid to the governor of Kashmir. 
A Sikh force was despatched under Natha Shah ; Gauhar-Aman was defeated 
and expelled, and Karim Khan wasinstalled in 1842 as Raja of Gilgit, in 
subordination to the Sikh Government. 


Part Ir Jammu and Kashmir. 341 


By the beginning therefore of the Sutlej campaign the provinces which 
now constitute the State of Jammu and Kashmir had come more or less 
under the rulers of the Lahore State and one of its principal leaders, Raja 
Gulab Singh of Jammu. The battle of Sobraon was followed by the British 
occupation of Lahore and the submission of the Sikhs. Gulab Singh was 
deputed to treat for peace, and the result was the first Treaty of Lahore 
(No. XVI), signed on the 9th March 1846. This treaty left the British 
Government in possession of the country, hill and plain, between the rivers 
Beas and Sutlej, and of the hill country between the Beas and the Indus, 
including the provinces of Kashmir and Hazara, By the same treaty the 
British Government agreed, as a reward to Raja Gulab Singh for his services 
to the Lahore State in bringing about the restoration of friendly relations, 
to confer on him territories in the hills, to recognise his independence in such 
territories, and to admit him to a separate treaty. 