


Sarnsputanp Kuan, 
Chuhar Khel, 


Nur Uttan Kuan, | Mir Arzal. 
Syads. 
AtaL Suan, |  Frroze Suau. 
No, OLXI. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT, dated 23rd March 1891, entered 
into by the LaRGHAWAL SHIRANI MALIKS. 


We, the headmen of the Hassan Khel, Ubba Khel and Chuhar Khel 
sections of the Shirani tribe including the Sultanzai, Khiddarzai and Ismalzai 
sub-sections and the residents of Parwara, Drazand and Khamistana, have 
heard the orders of Government, unanimously accept the conditions detailed 
below, and agree that we will raise no objection to carrying them out. 


Conditions. 

1. Besides carrying out the agreement previously entered into by us the 
orders now announced will be complied with. : 

2, The three Passes, Zao, Khiddarzai and Chuhar Khel Dhana, will be 
Open to caravans and travellers for trade and other purposes, and the sections 
above named will be responsible for any loss of life or property occurring in 
them. No tolls of any kind will be levied on these routes. 


_ 8. European and Native officers and other public servants will be at 
liberty to travel in any ‘part of the Shirani country, and the tribe will be re- 
Sponsible for the safety of their lives and property and for supplying them 


336 Punjab—N.-W. Frontier—-Shiranis—No. CLXI. Part I 


with such Jadraggas (escort) as they may need. ‘These escorts will only be 
entitled to receive diet expenses, and will have no claim for further remunera- 
tion. : 

4, Arrangements for the suppression of crime and enforcing compliance 
with the orders of Government will be effected through the headmen of the 
tribe. 

5. If tha orders of Government are disobeyed, disregarded or ignored, the 
Government will be at liberty to occupy the Shirani country. 

6. Twelve selected headmen of the tribe will be detained at Dera Ismail 
Khan as a pledge of the future good faith of the tribe during the pleasure of 
Government. Besides these men the Deputy Commissioner will have power 
at any time to keep any of the headmen of the Khiddarzais or any other section 
of the tribe as hostages at Dera Ismail Khan as long as Government may de- 
sire, 

7, Ifa bad character belotiging to any section commits an offence on a 
British subject iu the Shirani country or in British territory, the sectioné con- 
cerned will be responsible for the apprehension and surrender of the offender. 
If that section fails in this, the whole tribe will be responsible for the surren- 
der of the culprits to Government, which may deal with him in any way it 
may deem expedient. If the tribe fails to surrender the offender, it shall be 
liable to pay the compensation and fine imposed by the Government after due 
consideration of the merits of the case. The Government shall also have the 
power to deduct the amount of compensation and fine from the tribal service 
emoluments, 

8. In consideration of the duties and responsibilities referred to above the 
Government has granted a sum of Rs. 917 to the tribe in the shape of service 
allowances. These allowances have been given on the condition that the 
posts will be built at the following places :— 