


* See Appendix 1. 
t+ See Appendix 2. 
JT See Appendix 3. 


Part II Jammu and Kashmir. 347 


es 


Up to 1877 political relations with’'Kashmir were conducted through the 
Government of the Punjab. In that year, however, the Political Officer 
in Kashmir was placed directly under the orders of the Government of 
India. 

In 1878 an Agreemeut (No. CLXVITI) was concluded, providing for the 
construction on certain conditions of telegraph lines from Jammu to Srinagar 
and from Srinagar to Gilgit. 

In 1888 an Agreement (No. CLXIX) was entered into for the construc- 
tion on certain conditions of a railway between Sialkot and Jammu. ‘The 
line was completed and opened to traffic on the 13th March 1890. In the 
original agreement the Darbar consented to provide funds for the construc- 
tion of the whole line, the portion spent on the section lying in British 
territory being treated as a loan from the State to the British Govern- 
ment. This arrangement was subsequently modified by a supplementary 
.Agreement (No. CLXX), wherein it was arranged that the British Govern- 
ment should pay for the British section of the line. In 1890 an Agreement 
(No. CLXXI) was drawn up for the construction of a new telegraph line 
from Sialkot to Jammu along the Jammu-Kashmir State Railway. 

During the year 1892 the Kashmir Darbar consented to transfer to the 
Indian Telegraph Department the working of all lines of telegraph in the 
Mabaraja’s territories, Similarly certain postal lines will be worked by the 
Indian Post Office. . 


Kashmir suffered severely from famine in the years 1878, 1879, and 1880. 
The calamity was aggravated by the inefficiency of the Administration. There 
were also two severe visitations of cholera in 1888 and 1892, 


The Maharaja Ranbir Singh died on the 12th September 1885, and was 
Succeeded by his eldest son, Pratap Singh, the present Chief, 


Up to this time the Government of India had been represented in Kashmir 
by an officer termed ‘ the Officer on Special Duty,” but on the late Maharaja’s 
death a Resident was appointed. He was instructed by the Government 
of India to endeavour to bring about administrative reforms which were 
urgently needed in Kashmir. In 1889 Maharaja Pratap Singh, whose 
administration since his accession had been a source of anxiety to the Govern- 
ment of India, voluntarily resigned all active participation in the government 
of his State. His Highness’s resignation was accepted, and the opportunity 


was taken to reorganise the administration, which was handed over to a 
: ! 


348 Jammu and Kashmir--Gilgit, Hunza and Nagar. Part If 


Council consisting of the Maharaja’s brothers and certain selected officials from 
the British service. It was stipulated that, though the Council should exercise 
full powers, they were to take no important step without consulting the Resi- 
dent, and were to be generally guided by his advice. In November 1891 the 
Maharaja was restored, at his own request, toa portton of his powers, The 
Council, which had on the whole worked satisfactorily, was continued, with 
the Maharaja as President. The condition requiring the Darbar to be guided by 
the Resident’s advice was maintained, and was fully accepted by the Maharaja. 