


nothing, We, however, agree to pay the blood-money if two witnesses swear 
Shiranis were the murderers, otherwise we accept the decision of the Sahib, 


Attested by me 14th July 1883. (Sd.) S, 8. THorsurn, 
Deputy Commissioner. 


4 


No. CLX, 


TRANSLATION of a PETITION, dated 4th February 1890, presented 
by SuHeranr Matixs. 


We beg respectfully to represent that we the Sherani Maliks went to 
Appozai in compliance with the Government invitation. The Government 
accepted the submission of the Bargha division of our tribe, and granted them 
service, and entered into agreement with them, they becoming responsible on . 
that side. Some of the men-of the Largha division did not come in, and con- 
sequently no settlement was arrived at with us, We therefore accompanied 
your camp to Dera. The Kidderzai Maliks have not come in‘and made sub- 
mission. In this they are to blame, and we therefore consider them our 
enemies. We the Maliks of the Uba Khel and Hassan Khel sections pray 
that a settlement be made with us on the following terms :— 


Istly.—That the Government may grant us service allowance, which we 
will distribute between us, and we will carry out any orders 
the Government may be pleased to give in regard to those 
members of our tribe who have not yet come in to tender 
their submission. 


Qndly.—That within six months we will engage to bring them im.and 
submit unconditionally, and in’ the meantime we will hold 
ourselves responsible for their good behaviour. If we fail to 
bring them in within that period, the service granted us may 
be forfeited. And in case the Government should decide 
to send a force against them, we will render every assistance 
jn our power and help the Government army and servants 
through any route within our limits. Should Government 
erect any fort or cantonment in our country, we will not 
object, but will render assistance in their construction. If 
Government opens routes in our country, we will protect them 
and our servants (levies) will serve in such posts as the 
Government may fix, and we will serve loyally. 


3rdly.—That if any bad character, member of our tribe, commits any 
crime and Government requires us to do so we will capture 
and surrender him. , 

4thly.—That if any offender, resident of British territory, commits a 
crime and takes refuge with us, we will surrender him on 
Government demanding it. 


Part I Punjab—N -W. Frontier —Shiranis—No. CLXI. 335 


We the Maliks will carry out Government orders fully, and hold ourselves 
responsible for all the acts of our tribe, We unanimously present this appli- 
cation and trust that it will be accepted. 


Uta Khel Maliks. 


Asput Rau Kaan, TUMANDAR. Noragz. 
Fatrea Kuan, Tumanpar. Davvu Kuay. 
Azim Kuan, Tors. Nawak. 
Azim Kuan, Sore. Bara Kuan. 
WALE, 

Hassan Khel Maltks. 
Patak Kuan, Tumanpar. MumammaD Kuan, © 
Kamran Kuan. Mir Asat Kuan. 
Ranim Kuan, AxgutaR Kuan. 
Suaunewaz Kuan. GULISTAN. . 
Mingan. Ma.xkort. 
Gut Kuan, Zar Kaan. 