

* (1). Moghal Kot, near the Chuhar Khel Dhana, 

(2). Nishpa Atal Khan Kohol, near the Khiddarzai Dhana. 

(3). Gandhi Kach, near the Zao Dhana. , 

(4). Drazand. 

(5). Domandi. 

These posts will be held by tribal levies in receipt of the service allow- 
ances,. but the Government will have power to reinforce the garrisons at these 
posts by placing other levies there. 


The levies will be geverally.footmen, but a few headmen shall also be 
appointed as sowars, The distribution of the service is as noted below— 


Rs. 
1 Jemadar. ‘ - ‘. _ j ‘ . + 80 per mensem. 
1Deffdr . . . . . « « 25 ditto. 
4 Havildars ; i r ‘ R . 60 ditto. 
8 Sowars , : : . ; . 160 ae 
61 Footmen ee en of tho 
Allowances to Malike . : . Nee 
917 


Part I 


Punjab—N-W. Frontier—Shirants—No. CLXI. 337 


The Silladari deductions will be made at the following rates— 


: Rs. 

Out of pay of a Sowar . : . . . - 6 per mengem. 
Ditto Footman : . . . - 2 ditto. 
Ditto Havildar . . . . © 3. ditto. 
Ditto Daffadar oe oe ehh ele CB ditto. 
Ditto Jemadar : : 7 ~~ ditto. 


9, Service shall be permanent, and once a nomination is made no change 
will be allowed without the consent of the Deputy Commissioner. In the 
case of negligence, disobedience or incompetency the Deputy Commissioner 
shall have power to dismiss, fine or transfer the individual in fault, Any 
alteration in the distribution of Silladari will be subject to the orders of the 
Commissioner of the Division. 


PART If. 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SANADS 


BBLATING TO 


THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR. 


From reports by the Punjab Government and the Resident in Kashmir and 
papers in the Foreign Office. 

The commonly known divisions of the territory comprised in the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir are the provinces of Jammu, Ladak, Baltistan, 
Kashmir and Gilgit. 

Jammu has from time immemorial been the capital of a Dogra Rajput dy- 
nasty. It had acquired some importance under a Chief named Rana Ranjit Dev 
by the end of the last century. -The neighbouring country was split up into a 
number of independent hill principalities, such as Kishtwar and Badrawar on 
the east, Basaoli on the south, Bhimbar and Rajaori on the west and north- 
west. These Chiefships were constantly quarrelling, and at the beginning of 
the present century had become more or less subject to the Sikh Govern- 
ment of the Punjab under Ranjit Singh. His service was joined about this 
time by three great-grandnephews of Ranjit Dev, namely, Gulab Singh, 
Dhyan Singh and Sachit Singh. They rose in favour, and Gulab Singh 
distinguished himself in 1820 by capturing the Chief of Rajaori, The princi- 
pality of Jammu had by then been annexed by the Sikhs, and Ranjit Singh 
conferred it upon Gulab Singh with the title of “Raja.” Shortly afterwards 
Dhyan Singh was made Raja of Punch (between Rajaori and Muzaffarabad), 
and Sachit Singh obtained the district of Ramnagar (just east of Jammu) as 
achiefship, Inthe course of the next fifteen years the three brothers, and 
especially the eldest, had subdued all the neighbouring hill principalities. The 
two younger brothers were killed about 1843, and all their estates fell to the 
survivor, except Punch, which was held by Jawahir Singh, son of Dhyan Singh. 
By the year 1844, therefore, Gulab Singh had acquired authority over nearly 
all the country included in the present province of Jammu. 