


The separate Treaty (No. CLXII) with Gulab Singh was concluded at 
Amritsar on the 16th March 1846, This treaty put him in possession of all 
the hill country and its dependencies between the Indus and the Ravi, 
including Kashmir, Ladak, Gilgit and Chamba, and excluding Lahul. 
In return he was to pay 75 lakhs of rupees. He was also required to refer 
disputes with neighbouring States to the arbitration of the British Government, 
and to assist with his whole force the British troops when engaged in the hills, 
His relations of dependence on the British Government were also gen- 
erally defined. ‘Thus the present State of Jammu and Kashmir was created 
by the British Government, when Gulab Singh was established as Maharaja 
under the treaty of Amritsar. 


Maharaja Gulab Singh had some difficulty in obtaining actual possession 
of the province of Kashmir. The Governor appointed by the Lahore Darbar, 
Shaikh Imam-ud-din, made for a time a successful resistance; and it was not 
till the end of 1846 that Maharaja Gulab Singh was established in Kashmir 
with the aid of both British troops and the Lahore Darbar. 

Nor was the occupation by Gulab Singh of the province of Hazara effected 
without opposition ; and it soon became apparent that the Maharaja would 
be unable to control the turbulent tribes in the hills of Hazara, Eventually, in 
1847, the Governor-General’s Agent, after some difficulty, negotiated an Agree- 
ment (No. CLXIII), on the basis of an exchange of territory, between the 
Lahore and Kashmir Darbars, by which the lands in the neighbourhood of 
Jammu were left with Gulab Singh, while most of the hill country, to the west 


342 Jammu and Kashmir. Part II 


of the Jhelum went to the Lahore State. Hazara was thus transferred to 
Lahore, and the Jhelum became the western boundary of the State of Kashmir, 
roughly speaking, between the towns of Jhelum and Muzaffarabad. 

A brief account of the other boundaries of the State is given below. 

In 1846 and 1847 two Commissions were appointed to demarcate the 
eastern boundary, They were to arrange—first, a boundary between British 
territory (now the districts of Lahul and Spiti) on the south and the Kashmir 
territory of Ladak on the north; and then a boundary between Ladak on 
the west and Chinese Tibet on the east. 

The first Commission submitted its report in May 1847, and it was ac- 
companied by an explanatory memorandum * and by a sketch map showing 
the boundary between the territories of Maharaja Gulab Singh and British 
India, as determined by the Commissioners. 


As regards the Ladak-Tibet boundary, the Commissioners could not, 
owing to Imam-ud-din’s rebellion in Kashmir, reach the Tibet border. Mr. 
Vans Agnew, one of the Commissioners, however, wrote a memorandum in 
which he pointed out that the line was, as he thought, already sufficiently 
defined by nature and recognised by custom, with the exception of its two 
extremities. 


* In laying down a permanent boundary through a mountainous country, it appeared to the 
Commissioners desirable to select such a plan as would completely preclude any possibility of future 
dispute. This the Commissioners believe that they have found in their adoption as a boundary, 
of such mountain ranges as form water-shed lines between the drainages of different rivers, as 
detailed below. 