

The most important jagirdar or feudatory under the Maharaja of Jammu 
and Kashmir is the Raja of Punch. This estate was allotted by Maharaja 
Ranjit Sitigh to Gulab Singh’s brother, Dhyan Singh, who had three sons, 
Hira Singh, Jowahir Singh, and Moti Singh. The eldest was killed in 1844. 
Jowahir Singh for a time got part of the Punch estate, but was on bad terms 
with Maharaja Gulab Singh, and eventually renounced all claims to the 
jJagir, on being granted an allowance. Jowabir Singh died in 1860, The 
jagir of Punch was conferred by Mabaraja Ranbir Singh on Moti Singh, 
who held it till his death in 1892, when he was succeeded by his son Baldeo 
Singh, 

The minor jagirdars may be divided into two classes, viz., the Chiefs of 
the old hill principalities in the neighbourhood of Jammu, and the Kakka 
Bambas, who are petty Muhammadan Rajas living on the banks of the Jhelum, 
between Baramula and Hazara. 


* Vide letter No. 180, dated the 22nd November 1887, from the Agent to the Governor 
General, North-West Frontier, and Resident at Lahore. 


Part II Jammu and Kashmir. 345 


x 


By the fifth article of the supplementary treaty of Lahore, dated the 
llth March 1846, the British Government agreed to “ respect the bond fide 
rights of those jagirdars”’ within the territories ceded by the Lahore State, 
who were “ attached to the families of the late Maharajas Ranjit Singh, Kharak 
Singh, and Sher Singh; and to maintain those jagirdars in their bond fide 
possessions during their lives.” In regard to the portions of the ceded terri- 
tories transferred by the British Government to Maharaja Gulab Singh, this 
obligation was imposed on the new ruler by the eighth article of the treaty of 
Amritsar. 

In 1846 a settlement was effected between the Maharaja and the Hill 
Chiefs under the guarantee of the British Government. Under the terms of 
titis settlement certain cash allowances, aggregating Rs. 62,200 per annum, 
were assigned (No, CLXV) in perpetuity to the Rajas of Rajaori, Jasrota, 
Mankot, Ramnagar, Basaoli, Kishtwar and others, The Chiefs were given the 
choice of remaining in or quitting the Maharaja’s territories, and most pre- 
ferred the second alternative. The share of the latter was Rs, 42,800, which 
the British Government undertook to pay. 


With the Kakka Bambas, who had been among the most formidable 
opponents of Maharaja Gulab Singh, an arrangement was made by the Kash- 
mir State, which was not guaranteed by the British Government. These 
Chiefs promised allegiance to the Maharaja, while be on his part promised 
to treat them kindly, to confirm all the grants made up to one year before the 
death of the Sikh Governor, Shaikh Mohi-ud-din, and to remit one-fifth of the 
tribute paid to the Sikhs. They are bound to supply a certain number of 
soldiers for the Maharaja’s service. The Chiefs mentioned in connection with 
this arrangement, were the Sultans of Muzaffarabad, Dopatta, Kotiyar, Uri, 
and Karnao, and the Rajas of Buniar, Chittar and Danuah, and Danuah and 
Kot, with Raja Muzaffar Khan Haibat- Khan Madhopuria. 