


In 1864 considerable reductions were made by the Maharaja in the cus- 
toms duties levied on goods imported into Kashmir; the method of collection 
Was simplified, and a transit duty of 5 per cent. on goods conveyed vid 
Srinagar was imposed in lieu of the fiscal exactions which had led to the 
abandonment of that trade route between British India, Tibet, and Eastern 
Turkistan. These liberal measures were followed by a marked increase in the 
trade between Kashmir and the adjoising British districts ; but as complaints 
of the exactions committed by Kashmir officials at Leh were of frequent 
2X 


346 - Jammu and Kashmir. Part IT 


occurrence, a British officer was deputed to Ladak in 1867 for the purpose of 
securing adherence to the tariff of 1664, and the confidence of traders was re- 
established. Al! duties in Ladak have now been abolished. 

In April 1870 a commercial Treaty (No. CLXVI) for the purpose of 
developing trade with Eastern Turkistan was concluded between the British 
Government and Kashmir. The Maharaja engaged to abolish all transit duties 
on goods passing between British India and Eastern Turkistan, and vice versé, 
and consented to the appointment of Joint Commissioners, one nominated by 
the British Government and one by the Maharaja, with power to arrange for 
the convenience of travellers on trade routes, to settle disputes, and to exercise 
limited magisterial jurisdiction. In return the British Government agreed 
to abolish the export duty on Kashmir shawls and to refund the cus- 
toms duty levied on all goods imported from British territory to Kashmir, 
whether for consumptiun there or for export to Eastern Turkistan. In 
1872 rules * for giving effect to Article 9 of this treaty were promulgated. 
They provide for the refund of duty paid on sea-borne'goods intended for ex- 
port beyond Kashmir, provided the goods are declared and sealed for transmis- 
pion in bond by certain specified routes. These rulest were modified in 1875, 
so as to allow of the refund on goods for Turkistan being made at Leh. 


In 1872 Rules (No. CLXVIT) were made by the Government of India, 
with the consent of the Maharaja, for regulating the powers of the British 
officer at Srinagar in respect of civil and criminal cases, for preserving order 
amongst visitors, and for the establishment of a mixed court for the decision of 
civil suits between European British subjects and their servants on the one 
hand and subjects of the Maharaja on the other. These rules were superseded 
in 1891, when the Resident and his Assistants were invested} with the necessary 
powers for enquiring into and trying criminal cases against European British 
subjects and certain others, They have been invested also with powers to 
dispose of civil suits in.which both parties are British subjects, or in which 
the defendant is'a European British subject, or a Native Indiau subject of 
Her Majesty not ordinarily. dwelling or carrying on business or personally 
. Working for gain within the territories of the Maharaja, The mixed 
court, established in 1872, which had not worked well, was at the same time 
abolished, ) 