

We, the undersigned, consent and agree that Captain J. Abbott, the 
Boundary Commissioner, having examined’ the revenue records of the coun try 
west of the Jhelum, shall, after deducting jagirs and rent-free lands, fix the 
yearly rent, after which lands producing half that rent shall be made over to 
Jammu from the Lahore territory. Captain Abbott shall then lay down a 
Well-defined boundary so as to prevent all future dispute, viz., on the west of 
the Jhelum river to the border of Mozufferabad, whence it is to follow the 


356 Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXIV. Part II 


Kurnaha river until such place as Captain Abbott can determine, a distinct 
and well-marked line across to the river Indus. This done, the mutual ex- 
change of territory shall be effected, after which it will behove both parties 
to adhere for ever to the terms now settled, but should difference arise, they 
are to be referred to the Agent, Governor-General, North-Western Frontier. 


This agreement is signed in the presence of Lieutenant-Colonel Lawrence, 
Agent, Governor-General, and is subject to the confirmation of the Governor- 
General of India, A copy of this agreement to be made over to each Durbar, 
and one to be lodged in the Agency Office. 


(Sd.) Dewan Jowata Sanat, 
Ai Dewan Dina Nata. 
3 Kazt Maukom-vpD-DIN. 
55 Rat Kisnen Cuan. 


(True translation.) 


(Sd.) HH. M. Lawrence, 


Agent, Governor-General, 
and Resident at Lahore. 


No. CLXIV. 


Apoption.SunnupD to Manarasan Runperr Sine BaHwapoor, 
Knigut of the Most Exaurep OxpdeEr of the Star of: In- 
DIA, CASHMERE.—1] 862. 


Her Majesty being desirous that the governments of the several Princes 
and Chiefs of India, who now govern their own territories, should be perpe- 
tuated, and that the representation’ and dignity of their Houses should be 
continued, I hereby, in fulfilment of this desire, repeat to you the assurance 
which I communicated to you in the Sealkote Durbar, in March 1860, that, 
on failure of natural heirs, the adoption of an heir into your Highness’ House, 
according to its usage and traditions, will be willingly recognized and confirm- 


ed by the British Government, 


Part II Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXIV. 


- 357. 


Be assured that nothing shall disturb the engagement thus made to you, 
solong as your House is loyal to the Crown and faithful to the conditions of - 


the Treaties, Grants, or Engagements which record its obligations to the 
British Government, 


(Sd.) CANNING. 
Dated 5th March 1862. 


Part If 


Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXvV. 


358 


"ET]BMSIOR 
“uN = ‘qazuIg 
“reupysypuy aug} és B eet | ot 6 2 “oid ‘od }* °° ezoding oe 009° o0g'T ONE qnandy ovyl¢ 
ons'g * IVLOL 
og °° Ws 
: PrUoNg avdAry 
003° °  yduig 
usasr ned, 
oo 0° *  yduig 
vous und iy 
000% * dug 
o1oqswmngg avAlly i 
“ey : 
“wna0s 
104 —? BMOL[OJ *e06T Jequin ‘suvktpy oyy 
SB peplatp eq 07 Cans “LEST onNe jo OST Sequing Uy ot 
8943 Yutjtig oy} MOIy 


pus 34304 OF8T 
Pred 2q 03 Qus's ‘Fu oUL, | g & 990% Jot S IT] YorBW diet Wory 