


Signature of the Maharaja of Cashmere. 


(Sd.) TT. D. Forsyra. 
ore, Mayo. 


This treaty was ratified by His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor 
General of India at Sealkote on the 2nd day of May 1870. 


(Sd.) C. U. Arrcuison, 
Offg. Secy. to the Govt. of India, 


Foreign Dept. 
No, CLXVII. 
Russ regulating the powers of the BririsH OFFIcER at 
SRINUGGUR—1872. 


1.—The British officer for the time being on duty at Srinuggur shall 
represent the British Government in Cashmere, and for the maintenance of 


~ 


Part IT Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXVtI. 863 


good order the following powers and duties are respectively conferred and 
im posed upon him : 

(2) He may direct any European British subject who is travelling or 
residing in Cashmere, and who is guilty of any gross misconduct, to leave 
Cashmere forthwith, and may punish any person knowing of such direction 
and disobeying the same with’ rigorous or simple imprisonment for a term 
which may éxtend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thou- 
sand rupees, or with both. 

() He shall receive, try, and determine in his Court (which shall be 
called “The Court of the British Officer in Cashmere”’) all suits of a civil 
nature between European British subjects, or between European British sub- 
jects and their servants, provided— 

(1) that the right to sue has arisen, or the defendant at the time of the 
commencement of the suit dwells, or carries on business, or personally works 
for gain, within Cashmere, 


(2) that the suit is not of the same nature as those suits of which the 
cognizance by the ordinary Civil Court of British India is barred by law. 

(c) He shall have the powers of a Magistrate of the first class as de- 
scribed in Section 20 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Act X of 1872) 
for the trial of offences committed by European British subjects or by Native 
British subjects, being servants of European British subjects. 

Provided that in the case of any offender being a European British sub- 
ject, he shall only have power to passa sentence of imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding three months, or fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or both ; 
and when the offence complained of is under the Indian Penal Code punish- 
able with death, or with transportation for life, or when it cannot, in the 
opinion of such officer, be adequately punished by him, he shall (if he thinks 
that the accused person ought to be committed) commit him to the Chief 
Court of the Punjab. 


2.—Fines shall be recovered in manner provided by Section 307 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure (Act X of 1872). 

3.—Sentences of whipping shall be carried into execution in manner 
provided by Sections 310, 811, 812 and 818 of the same Code. 


4.—Persons sentenced to imprisonment shall be transferred to, and con- 
fined in, the Sealkote or Rawul Pindee Jail. ; 


5.—The procedure in all civil suits between European British subjects, 
or European British subjects and their servants, shall be regulated by the 