

The area of Jammu and Kashmir is about 80,000 square miles. The 
population, including that of Gilgit, Skardu and Punch, amounts to 2,543,952. 
The revenue is about Rupees 47,00,000. ‘The military forces of the State 
number 9,970 of all arms. Of these, 3,900 have been placed at the disposal 
of the Government of lndia for Imperial Service. . 

His Highness Maharaja Pratap Singh was granted the honorary rank 
of Colonel in the British Army in 1888, and was created a Knight Grand 
Commander of the Star of India in 1892. He receives a salute of 19 guns, 
or 2] guns within the limits of his territories, 


GILGIT. 


From 1877 to 1881 a British officer was stationed as Political Agent 
at Gilgit, which is a division of the Kashmir State lying north of Kashmir 
on a tributary of the upper Indus, and separated from the main valley by 
high and difficult mountain ranges. In 188] it was deemed advisable to 
withdraw the Political Agent; but in 1889 the Agency was re-established. 
The garrison, which had previously consisted of ill-trained and inefficient 
Kashmir troops, was strengthened and placed upon a proper footing ; and the 
force was placed under the control of the British officers of the Agency. The 
improvement of the Gilgit road was also taken in hand. In 1891, owing to 
the hostile attitude of* the tribes of Hunza and Nagar (see page 349), it was 
found necessary to strengthen the garrison still further. This was done 
by sending up a detachment of British troops (infantry and artillery), by 
whom, in conjunction with Kashmir Imperial Service Troops, the Gilgit 
outpost is now held, 
HUNZA aynp NAGAR. 

Hunzaand Nagar are two small principalities situated to’the extreme north- 
west of Kashmir, They are divided by the Hunza river ; towards the north they - 
extend into the mountainous regiou which adjoins the juaction of the Hindu 


Part IT Jammu and Kashmir-—Hunza md Nagar, $49 


Kush and Mustagh ranges; towards the south they border on Gilgit ; and on 
the west Hunza is separated by a range of hills from Yasin, while the Mustagh 
mountains trending southward shut in Nagar on the east. 

There has been much ill feeling between Hunza and Nagar. The fort 
of Chalt and its counected villages, lying between their districts and Gilgit, 
have long been a source of contention between them. 

Both States are nominally subordinate to the Maharaja of Kashmir 
from whom they receive a yearly subsidy, but they have always been hard 
to control. 

In 1877 the Nagar Chief, with the assistance of the Kashmir Darbar, 
was enabled to oust the Hunza Chief from the possession of Chalt and the 
neighbouring villages; and from that year onwards the fort has been held 
by Kashmir troops. 


In 1886 Ghazan Khan, the Raja of Hunza, was murdered by his son 
Safdar Ali, who after his accession professed his submission to the Maharaja of 
Kashmir, In 1888, however, the two States combined, succeeded in ejecting 
the Kashmir garrison from Chalt, and even threatened Gilgit. Finally, how- 
ever, Chalt was re-occupied by Kashmir troops, 