


In 1890, however, Dir was conquered and occupied by Umra Khan, Chief 
of the neighbouring State of Jandol, and Muhammad Sharif Khan was 
obliged to take refuge in Swat. 


352 z Jammu and Kashmir—FYaghistan. Part II 


YAGHISTAN., 

Darel, Tangir, and Chilas are the most important States of the Shin 
republics of Yayhistan; Gor, Thalicha, Harban and Hudar are little more 
than villages. 

Darel, on the right bank of the Indus, can muster about 2,000 fighting 
men, and has paid a nominal tribute of gold dust to Kashmir since 1866, in 
which year the valley was overrun by an expeditionary force sent by the 
Mabaraja to punish the peuple for raiding into his territory. This did not 
prevent them from sending a contingent to join Pahlwan Bahadur of Yasin 
in his attack on Gilgit in 1880. 

Tangir, lying to the east of Darel, has no direct relations with Kashmir ; 
the Chitral Chief has a good deal of authority in this State, but the people do 
not acknowledge allegiance to him. 

Chilas is situated on the left bank of the Indus between the Tor valley 
and the range of Nanga Parbat, It was invaded avd subdued in 1851 by a 
force from Kashmir, and has since then paid a nominal tribute of gold dust 
to the Maharaja. 


nn RR — 


Part Il Jammu and Kashmir—No, CLXII. 353 


No. CLXIL. 


Treaty between the BRITISH GOVERNMENT on the one part and 
Manarasan GouasB Sine of Jummoo on the other, concluded 
on the part of the Brirish GovERNMENT by FREDERICK 
Currisz, Esquine, and BREvVET Mason Henny Monrcomery 
Lawrence, acting under the orders of the Rieut Honor. 
ABLE SIR HENRY HARDINGE, G.c.B., one of Her BriITaANNIC 
Magesty’s Most Honorasits Privy Cotncin, GOVERNOR- 
GENERAL, appointed by the Honorasie Company to direct 
and control all their affairs in the East Inpius, and by 
Manarasan Goxas Sine in person.—1846. 


ARrTICcLB 1.* 


The British Government transfers and makes over for ever, in indepen- 
dent possession, to Maharajah Golab Sing and the heirs male of his body, all 
the hilly or mountainous country, with its dependencies, situated to the east- 
ward of the river Indus and westward of the river Ravee, including Chumba, 
and excluding Lahul, being part of the territories ceded to the British Govern- 
ment by the Lahore State, according to the provisions of Article IV, of the 
Treaty of Lahore, dated 9th March 1846. 


ARTICLE 2, 


The eastern boundary of the tract transferred by the foregoing Atticle to 
Maharajah Golab Sing shall be Jaid down by Commissioners appointed by the 
British Government and Maharajah Golab Sing respectively for that purpose, 
and shall be defined in a separate Engagement after survey, 


Articce 8. 


_ In consideration of the transfer made to him and his heirs by the provi- 
sions of the foregoing Articles, Maharajah Golab Sing will pay to the British 
Government the sum of seventy-five Jakhs of Rupees (Nanukshahee), fifty 
lakhs to be paid on ratification of this Treaty, and twenty-five lakhs on or 
before the first October of the current year, a.p. 1846, 