


ARTICLE 4. 


_ The limits of the territories of Maharajah Golab Sing shall not beat any 
tiwe changed without the concurrence of the British Government. 


QZ 


354 Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXII. Part II 


ARTICLE 5. 


Maharajah Golab Singh will refer to the arbitration of the British Gov- 
ernment any disputes or questions that may arise between himself and the 
Government of Lahore or any other neighbouring State, and will abide by the 
decision of the British Government. 


ARTICLE 6, 


Maharajah Golab Sing engages for himself and heirs to join, with the 
whole of his Military Force, the British troops, when employed within the 
hills, or in the territories adjoining his possessions, 


ARTICLE 7. 


Maharajah Golab Sing engages never to take, or retain in his service, 
any British subject, nor the subject of any European or American State, with- 
out the consent of the British Government, 


ARTICLE 8, 


Maharajah Golab Sing engages to respect, in regard to the territory 
transferred to him, the provisions of Articles V, VT, and VII, of the separate 
Engagement between the British Government and the Lahore Durbar, dated 
March 11th, 1846. 


ARTICLE 9. 


The British Government will give its aid to Maharajah Golab Sing in 
protecting his territories from external enemies. 


ARTICLE 10, 


Maharajah Golab Sing acknowledges the supremacy of the British 
Government, and will in token of such supremacy present annually to the 
British Government one horse, twelve perfect shaw] goats * of approved breed 
(six male and six female), and three pairs of Cashmere shawls, 


This Treaty, consisting of ten articles, has been this day settled by 
Frederick Currie, Esquire, and Brevet-Major Henry Montgomery Lawrence, 
acting under the directions of the Right Honorable Sir Henry Hardinge, 


ere tt tren ne et eR A RR rR 


* In March 1884 it was arranged by mutual consent that in future the Maharajah should 
present, instead of 12 goats, 10 lbs. of pashm in its natural state as brought from Kashmir to 
Let, 4 ibs, of picked and assorted black wool, 4 ,lbs. ditto ditto grey wool, 4 \ba,'‘ditto ditto white 


wool, and 1ib of each of the three best qualities of white yarn. 


—— ee 


Part II - Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXIIT. 355 


.o.B., Governor-General, on the part of the British Government, and by 
Maharajah Golab Sing in person; and the said Treaty has been this day 
ratified by the seal of the Right Honorable Sir Henry Hardinge, a.c.B’, 
Governor-General. 


Done at Umritsur, the sixteenth day of March, in the year of Our Lord one 
thousand eight hundred and forty-siz, corresponding with the seventeenth day 


of Rubbee-ool-awul 1262 Hijree. 
(Sd.) H. HARDINGE, | Seal. | 


By order of the Right Honorable the Governor-General of India. 


(Sd) -F. CURRIE, 


(Sd) -F, CURRIE, 


(5) H. M. Lawrence. 


Secretary to the Government of India, 
with the Governor-General: 


No, CLXITI. 


AGREEMENT between the LaworE and Kasamir Darpars—1847. 


_ Agreement concluded between the Governments of Lahord and Jammu 
by Dewan Dina Nath and Rai Kishen Chand on the part of Maharaja Duleep 
Singh, and Dewan Jowala Sahai and Kazi Mohkum-ud-din on that of Maha- 
taja Golab Singh, in the presence of Lieutenant-Colonel Lawrence, Agent, 
Governor-General, North-Western Frontier, and Resident at Labore, and 
subject to the approval of the Governor-General of India, regarding the ex- 
change of the districts of Hazara, Pukli, Kahuta, ete., west of the River 
Jhelum for lands east of that river in the direction of Jammu. : 