


$80 Jammu and Kashmir—No,. CLXVI. Part II 


No. CLXVI. 


Treaty between the British GovERNMENT and His Hieu- 
. NESS ManarAJA RUNBEER SINGH, G.C.S.1., ManaRasa of 
JummMoo and CasHMERE, his heirs and successors, executed 
on the one part by Taomas Doveras Forsyra, oB., in 
virtue of the full powers vested in him by His Excet- 
LENCY the Ricut Hon’sue Ricnoarp SouTHWELL BourkKE, 
. Bart of Mayo, Viscount Mayo of Monycrower, BARON 
Naas of NAAS, K.P., G.M.S.I., P.c., ete.,,etc., ete., VICE- 
Roy and GOVERNOR-GENERAL of INDIa, and on the other 
part by His Hieuness MawarasA RUNBEER SINGH afore- 
said, in person.—1870. 


Whereas, in the interest of the hizh contracting parties and their res- 
pective subjects, it is deemed desirable to afford greater facilities than at 
present exist for the development and security of trade with Kastern Turkes- 
tan, the following Articles have, with this object, been agreed upon :— 


Artice 1, 


With the consent of the Maharaja, officers of the British Government 
will be appointed to survey the trade routes through the Maharaja’s territories 
from the British frontier of Lahoul to the territories of the Rulerof Yarkund, 
including the route vié the Chang Chemoo Valley. The Maharaja will depute 
an officer of his Government to accompany the Surveyors, and will render them 
all the assistance in his power. A map of the routes surveyed will be made, 
an attested copy of which will be given to the Maharaja, * 


ARTICLE 2. 


Whichever route towards the Chang Chemoo Valley shall, after examina- 
tion and survey as above, be declared by the British Government to be the 
best suited for the development of trade with Eastern Turkestan, shall be 
declared by the Maharaja to be a free highway in perpetuity and at all times 
for all travellers and traders. 


Artictz 3, 


For the supervision and maintenance of the road in its entire length 
through the Maharaja’s territories, the regulation of traffic on the free high 
way described in Article 2, the enforcement of regulations that may be here- 
after agreed upov, and the settlement of disputes between carriers, traders, 
travellers, or others using that road, in which either of the parties or both of 
them are subjects of the British Government or of any foreign State, two 
Commissioners shall be annually appointed, one by the British Government, 


Part II Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXVI. 361 


and the other by the Maharaja. In the discharge of their duties and as 
regards the period of their residence the Commissioners shall be guided by 
such rules as are now separately framed and may, from time to time, hereafter 
be laid down by the joint authority of the British Government and the 
Maharaja. : 


» 


ARTICLE 4, 


The jurisdiction of the Commissioners shall be defined by a line on each 
side of the road ata maximum width of two Statute oss, except where it 
may be deemed by the Commissioners necessary to include a wider extent for 
grazing grounds, Within this maximum width the Surveyors appointed under 
Article I shall demarcate and map the limits of jurisdiction which may be 
decided on by the Commissioners as most suitable, including grazing grounds ; 
and the jurisdiction of the Commissioners shall not extend beyond the limits 
so demarcated. The land included within these limits shal] remain in the 
Maharaja’s independent possession ; and, subject to the stipulations contained 
in this Treaty, the Maharaja shall continue to possess the same rights of full 
sovereignty therein as in any uther part of his territories, which rights shall 
not be interfered with in any way by the Joint Commissioners. 