


ARTICLE 5. 


The Maharaja agrees to give all possible assistance in enforcing the deci- 
sions of the Commissioners and in preventing the breach or evasion of the 
regulations established under Article 8, 


ARTICLE 6, 


The Maharaja agrees that any person, whether a subject of the British 
Government, or of the Maharaja, or of the Ruler of Yarkund, or of any 
foreign State, may settle at any place within the jurisdiction of the two 
Commissioners, and may provide, keep, maintain, and let for hire at differ- 
ent stages the means of carriage and transport for the purposes of trade. 


Articie 7, 


The two Commissioners shall be empowered to establish supply depdts 
and to authorize other persons to establish supply depts at such places 
on the road as may appear to them suitable; to fix. the rates at which pro- 
visions shall be sold to traders, carriers, settlers, and others, and to fix the rent 
to be charged for the use of any rest-houses or serais that may be established 
on the road. The officers of the British Government in Kullu, ete., and the 
officers of the Maharaja in Ladak, shall be iostructed to use their best 
endeavours to supply provisions on the indent of the Commissioners at market 
rates. 


Articie 8. 
The Maharaja agrees to levy no transit duty whatever on the aforesaid 


free highway ; and the Maharaja further agrees to abolish all transit duties 
3A 


362 Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXVII. Part II 


levied within his territories on goods transmitted in bond through His High- 
ness’ territories from Eastern ‘Turkestan to India, and mice versd, on which 
bulk may not be broken within the territories of His Highness. On goods 
imported iato, or exported from, His Highness’ territory, whether by the 
aforesaid free highway or any other route, the Maharaja may levy such import 
or export duties as he may think fit. 


ARTICLE 9. 


The British Government agree to levy no duty on goods transmitted in 
bond through British India to Eastern Turkistan, or to the territories of His 
Highness the Maharaja. The British Government, further agree to abolish 
the export duties now levied on shawls and other textile fabrics manufactured 
in the territories of the Maharaja, and exported to countries beyond the limits 
of British India. 

Articie 10. 

This Treaty, consisting of 10 Articles, has this day been éoncluded by 
Thomas Douglas Forsyth, ¢.3.,-in virtue of the full powers vested in him by 
His Excellency the Right Hon’ble Richard Southwell Bourke, Earl of. Mayo, 
Viscount Mayo, Monycrower, Baron Naas of Naas, K.P., G.M.S.1., P.0., 
ete., ete., Viceroy and Governor-General of India, on the part of the British 
Government, and by Maharaja Runbeer Singh, aforesaid; and it is agreed 
that a copy of this Treaty, duly ratified by His Excellency the Viceroy and 
Governor-General of India, shall be delivered to the Maharaja on or before the 
7th September 1870. 

Signed, sealed, and exchanged at Sealkote on the second day of Apri] in 
the year of Our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy, corresponding 
with the 22nd day of Bysack, Sumbut 1927. 