

In 1888 Captain A,G. A. Durand, an officer of the Quartermaster- 
General’s Department, visited Chitral for the purpose of keeping up friendly 
relations with the Mehtar. He was well received, and after his return the 
subsidy paid to the Mehtar by the Kashmir Darbar was raised first to Res. 
16,500 and then to Rs. 18,000, and an additional subsidy of Rs. 6,000 a year 
was granted by the British Government. 

Pahlwan Bahadur, the late Chief of upper Chitral, was also, though 
without any written agreement, for some years in receipt of a similar subsidy 
from Kashmir. He was, however, not satisfied with the way in which he 
was treated by the Darbar, and in 1880, having brought to a head the intrigues 


Part IT Jammu and Kashmir—Dir. 351 


which he had for some time been concerting, he openly invaded Kashmir terri- 
tory with forces recruited from Yasin, Darel, Tangir and Hunza. The expedi- 
tion was unsuccessful, and he returned home to find that Yasin had been 
occupied during his absence by Aman-ul-Mulk, whom he was unable to oust. 
All Chitral thus became united under one Chief, and Pahlwan Bahadur died a 
few years afterwards a homeless fugitive. 

The union of the whole country under Aman-ul-Mulk, whose sense of his 
own interests led him to rely upon Kashmir and the British Government, 
has done much to strengthen the Maharaja’s position in this direction. The 
Amir of Kabul bas been informed by the Government of India that he 
cannot be allowed to interfere in Chitral affairs, 

On the 80th August 1892, Mehtar Aman-ul-Mulk died and was succeed- 
ed by one of his younger sons named Afzal-ul~-Mulk. His succession was re- 
cognised by the Government of India; but shortly afterwards he was murdered 
by Sher Afzal, bis father’s brother, who seized the government of Chitral, but 


ve oon attacked and expelled by Nizam-ul-Mulk, the eldest son of Aman-ul- 
ulk. 
DIR. 


The small State of Dir lies to the south of Chitral. The Chief, Rahmatulla 
Khan, was indebted to the Maharaja of Kashmir for pecuniary assistance, 
which enabled him to assert his authority against his brother, Jamdad Khan, 
who, on the death of their father, Ghazan Khan, succeeded for a time in 
obtaining the Chiefship for himself. Rahmatulla Khan acknowledged the 
obligations under which he lay to the Maharaja, and there was for some years 
a tolerably close connection between Dir and Srinagar. But in 1875, 
offended at the way in which he was treated by an Agent sent by the Darbar 
to strengthen the connection, the Dir Chief broke off relations with Kashmir, 
and from that time till his death he cannot be said to have acknowledged. 
the Maharaja’s suzerainty, 


Muhammad Sharif Khan, son of Rahmatulla Khan, was, shortly after his 
accession, ¢ompletely defeated by Aman-ul-Mulk, with whom he went to war, 
and it seemed at one time not improbable that the influence which the latter 
had acquired in Dir might be used to establish more friendly relations between 
that State and Kashmir. 