

On the re-establishment of the British Agency at Gilgit in 1889, the 
Agent, Lieutenant-Colonel Durand, visited Hunza and Nagar, and the Chiefs 
bound themselves to accept his control, to permit free passage to officers 
deputed to visit their countries, and to put an end to raiding on the Yarkand 
toad and elsewhere. Subject to these conditions the Government of India 
sanctioned for the Chiefs small yearly allowances in addition to those already 
paid by the Kashmir Darbar. 

The Rajas, however, failed to act up to their engagements, and their atti- 
tude continued to be unsatisfactory. In May 1891 a combined force from 
Hunza and Nagar threatened the Chalt fort, but dispersed on the arrival of 
reinforcements from Gilgit. 


In November 1891 the Chiefs were informed that it was necessary to 
make roads to Chalt and on into their country. They refused to agree, insulted 
the British Agent’s messenger, and assembled their tribesmen in strong posi- 
tions, blocking the paths into their valley. Their positions, however, were 
carried after sharp fighting, and Nagar and Hunza were occupied. Raja Jafir 
Khan of Nagar, who had been acting under the ascendancy of his turbulent 
eldest son, Uzr Khan, at once submitted, and has been reinstated by the 


350 Jammu and Kashmir—Chitral. Part IT 


Kashmir Darbar, with the approval of the Government of India, as Chief of 
Nagar. Uzr Khan, with Safdar Ali Khan of Hunzaand his Wazir, Dadu, fled 
across the hills. Jafir Khan was formally installed by the British Agent at 
Gilgit on the 22nd September 1892. Muhammad Nazim, a half-brother to 
Safdar Ali, was recognised by the British Agent at Gilgit in March 1892 as 
provisional Governor of Hunza, and on the 15th September he was formally 
installed as Raja by the British Agent in presence of a representative of the 
Chinese Government. The subsidies paid to both Nagar and Hunza by the 
Kashmir State and by the British Government have been withdrawn. 


CHITRAL. 


Chitral was formerly divided into two States, vzz., lower or Chitral proper, 
and upper Chitral, including Yasin and Mastuj. Both States were governed 
by members of the same family, claiming descent from a common ancestor 
named Kathor. 

Aman-ul-Mulk, the Mehtar of lower Chitral and head of the Kathoria 
branch, for many years acknowledged allegiance to Kashmir. In 1878 
he accepted an Agreement (No. CLXXII) with the Maharaja, by which he 
acknowledged subordination to Kashmir, and undertook to receive an Agent 

from, and to send one to, the Darbar. Under this engagement he received 
an annual allowance of Rupees 12,000 from the Maharaja. 


In 1885 Chitral was visited by a British mission, which succeeded in 
establishing more friendly relations with the chief and his sons and in bring- 
ing them into closer contact with the Government of India. Later, that is 
in, the autumn of 1886 and in the spring of 1888 respectively, the two prin- 
cipal Sardars, Nizam-ul-Mulk and Afzal-ul-Mulk, visited India. 