

4. The Suchetgarh-Jammu Railway Telegraph line shall be kept in 
efficient repair by the officers of the Telegraph' Department of the Govern- 
ment of India, ‘The State Council of Jammu and Kashmir shall permit the 
said officers to remove such plants and trees as they consider interfere with 
or endanger the working of the telegraph line. 


5. The instruments, batteries, and materials connected therewith in the 
Railway Telegraph offices shall be supplied, maintained, and technically 
supervised by the officers of the Telegraph Department of the Government 
of India. 


' 6. The State of Jammu and Kashmir shall pay annually to the Gov- 
ernment of India, to cover the cost of maintenance and depreciation, Rs. 
13-8 per mile of wire which is used by the State of Jammu and Kashmir for 
purposes nos connected with the railway, ¢.¢., for through traffic between the 
Telegraph Office of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the Telegraph offices 
situated in British territory. All other charges of the Telegraph Department 
for the wires and Railway Telegraph offices along the railway from Suchetgarh 
to Jammu, including the Telegraph office in the terminal railway station at 
Jammu, shall be’ paid-by the North-Western Railway as a part of the working 
expenses under clause 6 of the agreement, dated the 4th July 1888, between 
the Government of India and His Highness Maharaja Partab Singh, Indar 
Mahindar Bahadur Sipar-i-Saltanat, Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, relative 
to the construction of a railway to Jammu. 


7. The charges due by the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be paid 
half-yearly through the Resident. 


372 Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXXI. , Part II 


8. The State of Jammu and Kashmir agrees to the .application, to 
those of the wires of the Suchetgarh-Jammu Railway Telegraph line which 
are used for railway purposes and to the Railway Telegraph offices, of the - 
provisions of the British Telegraph Act, XIII] of 1885, and such other Acts or 
legal provisions as have been or may heréafter be. passed by the British Gov- 
ernment with reference to telegraphs, igs atts 

9. The State of Jammu and Kashmir agrees to the application, td those 
of the wires of Suchetgarh-Jammu Railway Telegraph line which are used 
for railway purposes and to the Railway Telegraph offices, of any rules or 
regulations that are now or may hereafter be made applicable ‘to lines’ .of ' 
Telegraph in India, | 

10, The State of Jammu and Kashmir agrees that the SuchetgarheJammu 
Railway Telegraph line and the Railway Telegraph offices shall be open to , 
the inspection and supervision of the Director-General of Telegraphs and of 
any officer deputed by him for that purpose. é 


"11. The posts of the telegraph line under reference shall be erecte 
within the limits of the rail-road, 

12. This agreement is subject to the condition that, notwithstanding 
anything hereinbefore contained, all State messages shall he sent free, and 
the income from all private messages despatched from any Railway Station 
between Suchetgarh and Jammu where a Telegraph office may be opened, shall 
be credited to the State of Jammu and Kashmir as at present. 