


The capital required for the construction of the British section of the 
Jammu and Kashmir State Railway shall be provided by the Government of 
India, instead of being advanced as a loan by the Kashmir Darbar. 

3B 


370 Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXXI. Part IT 


2, So mich of clauses 4 and 7 of the agreement of the 14th July 1888, as 
relates to the followirg matters, namely— 

(2) the provision by the Darbar of the capital required for the con- 
struction of the section of the Jammu and Kashmir State Rail- 
way lying within British territory ; 

(2) the payment to the Darbar of interest on the capital which was to 
have been so provided ; and, 

(c) the repayment to the Darbar of such capital, 

is accordingly hereby cancelled: 


Seal. 


Prime Minister and President, Jammu 
and Kashmir State Council: 


(Sd.) RB, Panry Nispet, Colonel, 
Resident in Kashmir. 


- Dated 1st November 1890. 


Approved and confirmed by His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor- 
General in Council, 


(Sd.) .W. J. Coninenair, 


Off9. Secy, to the Govt, of India, 
Foreign Department. 
Viceroy’s Camp, Decut, 
The 18th November 1890. 


No. CLXXI. 


Acrerment between the British GovERNMENT and the Strate 
Counem of Jammu and Kasumir for the consTRUcTION, 
MAINTENANCE and WORKING of a LINE of TELEGRAPB 
between SucHErcarH and Jammu along the Jammu and 
Kasumir Strate Rattway—1890. 


Whereas the State of Jammu and Kashmir is deirous of having. a: line of 
telegraph constructed from Suchetgarh to Jammu Railway Station “along the 


ne a 


Part IT Jammu and Kashmir- No. CLXXTI. 371 


proposed railway from Sialkot to Jammu, the following terms are agreed upon 
by Colonel R. Parry Nisbet, C.I.E., Resident in Kashmir, on the part of the 
Government of India, duly empowered by the Viceroy and Governor-General 
of India in Council on that behalf, and by Raja Amar Singh, Prime Minister 
and President of the State Council, duly empowered by the State Council of 
Jammu and Kashmir on that behalf :— 


I, The Government of India agrees to construct, for the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir, a line of telegraph consisting of three wires, to be carried on 
suitable supports to be erected between Suchetgarh and the Jammu Railway 
Station at a cost of Rupees eleven thousand six hundred, more or less, and 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir agrees to pay to the Government of ‘India 
the cost of the line as the money may be required. 

The Government of India agrees to pay the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
for-such portions of the wire on the existing road line between Suchetgarh 
and Jammu as are found suitable and are used for constructing the new 
telegraph line between Suchetgarh and the Jammu Railway Station along the 
proposed railway. 

2. The line so constructed shall be called the Suchetgarh-Jammu Rail- 
way Telegraph line. 

8, With the consent of the Governor-General in Council extra wires 
may at any time be added by the Telegraph Department on terms and 
conditions to be agreed upon at the time between the State of Jammu and 
Kasbimir and the Government of India, ; 