

(5) the arbitrator shall have power to summon witnesses in cases referred 
to him ; 

(c) and the parties respectively shall produce before the arbitrator all 
books and documents within their possession or control, which the arbitrator 
may call for as relating to the matters referred ; 


‘ 


Part II Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXVIII. 865 


(d.) and the parties and their representatives in interest shall abide by and . 
perform the award. 


No. CLXVIII. 


AGREEMENT ENTERED into between the British GOVERNMENT 

and the CasHMERE StaTE in regard to the Construction of 

.TeLcecrars Lines from Jummoo to Srrnveeur and from 
Srinvecur to Gitert—1878. 


Whereas His Highness the Maharaja of Cashmere is desirous of obtaining 
the assistance of the British Government towards the construction of lines of 
telegraph from Jummoo to Srinuggur and from Srinuggur to Gilgit, the 
following terms are agreed upon by Major Philip Durham Henderson, 
C.S.I., Officer on Special Duty, in Cashmere, on the part of the British 
Government, duly empowered by the Viceroy and Governor-General in Coun- 
cil on that behalf, and by Baboo Nilumber Mookerjee, M.A., B.L., Judge of 
the Sadr Adalut of Cashmere, duly empowered by His Highness the Muahara- 
ja on that behalf: 


1. The British Government agrees to construct for the Cashmere State 

two lines of telegraph, each consisting of one wire, to be carried on such suita- 

le supports as are procurable in the vicinity, the one to be erected between 

Jummoo and Srinuggur at a cost of Rs. 21,600, more or less, and the other 

between Srinuggur and Gilgit at a cost of Rs. 31,900, more or less, provided in 
each case the following conditions are observed :— 


(a) That the transport of all telegraph materials from Sealkote to the 
Cashmere frontiet and within the limits of the Cashmere State shall be direct- 
y arranged and paid for by some duly authorized officer of the Cashmere 

tate. 

(2) That all laborers, whom the officer in charge of the construction of 
the line shall require to employ, shall be engaged and paid by a duly authorized 
officer of the Cashmere State. 

(c) That on due notice being given by the officer in charge of the con- 
struction of the line, the Cashmere Government shall, to the utmost of its 
power, comply with requisitions for transport or labor. 

(2) That sound seasoned deodar posts, wherever these are procurable, 
suitable for telegraph supports, shall be provided by the Cashmere, State and 
distributed along the route to be taken by the telegraph lines, in such manner 
as the officer in charge of the work may direct. 


(¢) That no brackets or insulators be used in the construction of the 


x 


866 Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXVITI. Part IT 


- lines, as their cost has not been provided in the estimated amounts stated 


above, - 


2, The British Government guarantees that all telegraph materials, in- 
cluding the wire supplied by it, shall be of the best quality used forits own 
lines, and that the lines shall be handed over to the Cashmere Government in 
full working order. : 