


13. This agreement shall be in force for a period of five years from 
the date of the railway from Suchetgarh to Jammu opening for traffic ; but so 
far as it relates to the State Telegraph line, it shall be optional with the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir at any time by giving six months’ previous notice 
to sever its line from the railway lines and construct its own line independ- 
ently, connecting it of course with the Government line on the boundary as 
at present. After the expiry of the said period of five years, a fresh arrange- 
ment shall be made for working those of the wires which are used for railway 
purposes and the Railway Telegraph offices upon terms to be agreed upon 
between the Government of India and the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 


| 


(Sd)  B. Parry Nisser, Seal of 
Resident in Kashmir. Rasa Amar SINGH, 
GuLmara, Prime Minister and President, Jammu and 
3rd July 1890. Kashmir State Council. 


Approved and confirmed by His Excelleney the Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India, 


(Sd.) W. J. Cuninanam, 
Sma : 
: Off9. Secy. to the Govt, of India 
d July 1890 : ? 
ARCS eee, Foreign Department, 


“ 
- a 
. 


Part Il: - Jammu and Kashmir—Chiirel_No. CLXXII. $720 


No. CLXXIT. 


True TRANSLATION of an EnaacEMment (made by the AMAN-UL- 
_ Mux, Ruler of CurTRat, with His Hicuness the Manarasa 
of Kasamrr—1878),. 


* With the sincerity of purpose and the cordiality of will, I (the Aman- 
ul-Mulk), do hereby execute this deed on my own part and on the part of my 
children, consisting of the followinz articles :— 


ARTIOLE 1, 


“Tengage that I will always sincerely endeavour to obey and execute 
the orders of His Highness the Maharaja, the Wali of Jammu and Kashmir, 
that I will overtly and covertly consider His Highness’s well-wishers and 
friends as my friends, and the®enemies of his Government as my enemies, 
that I will present the following ‘nuzzerana’ to His Highness annually as 
an acknowledgment of his paramount power :— 


“ Three horses, 
* Five hawks, 
* Five tezi dogs (hounds). 


ARTICLE 2. 


“One confidential Agent of His Highness shall always reside in Kashka 
(Chitral) and another at Yasin. Due attention and consideration shall be 
said to them, 


“In the like manner a confidential agent of mine shall reside at the 


Maharaja’s Durbar, and another on the part of the Ruler of Yasin shall 
Temain at Gilgit for the purpose of carrying out His Highness’s orders. 


Articie 38. 


_ “T shall receive a yearly mawajib (subsidy) of Rs. 12,000, Srinagar 
coinage, from His Highness’s Government, on condition of my acting 
upon the above articles and giving satisfaction to His Highness in every way, 

“If one of my sons be appointed in the place of one of the agents (above. 
Mentioned) His Highness’s Government will assign him an extra allowance— 


Rs, 
To self . ’ . . . . » 10,000 
To Sardar Nizam-ul-Mulk . * 4 » 2,000 
bing 
Q fy oe . Be 


PART III. 


TREATIES, ENGAGEMENTS, AND SANADS 


RELATING TO + 


BALUCHISTAN. 