


18. His Highness the Maharaja of Jammu and’ Kashmir, accompanied 
by his suite and servants with their luggage, shall, when travelling by ordi- 
nary train upon this railway, have the privilege of travelling free of any 
charge between Jammu and Sialkot ; suitable vehicles being reserved on each 
occasion for the exclusive use of the Maharaja and his party. 


14. His Highness the Maharaja shall also have the privilege of running 
free of any charge between Jammu and Sialkot two special return trains 
every year, consisting each of not more than eighteen railway vehicles of such 
description as may be required, 

15. Each of the ordinary daily trains shall have one carriage attached to 
it for the exclusive use of the State officials, each of the number of occupants 
paying a single fare. This carriage shall ordinarily be of the intermediate’ 
class, but shall be changed to one of another class upon the requisition of the 
Darbar. 


16. The site of the terminal station at the Jammu end of the line shall 
be fixed by the Darbar. 


17, His Highness the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir shall grant to 
the British Government full jurisdiction within those portions of land situated 
in His Highness’s territories which may be occupied from time to time by the 
Jammu and Kashmir State Railway or its premises. This cession of jurisdic- 
tion is restricted absolutely to railway limits, and to cases occurring within 
those limits, and does not confer any right of interference in the internal 
administration of His Highness’s territory. Accordingly, the railway ‘police 
shall forthwith surrender to the Darbar any accused person who, baving 
escaped from the custody of His Highness’s police, is in their custody, within 
railway limits. 


18. All the plants and trees along and within the whole line lying in the 


Part II Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXX, 369 


territory of His Highness the Maharaja shall also be considered the property 
of the Darbar. 


Dated at Srinagar this fourth day of July 1888, corresponding with 
twenty-third day of Har Samvat 1945. 


(Sd.)  T. CatcnELs Prowpsy, (Sd.) | In Vernacular, 
Resident in’ Kashmir. 
| Seal. 


This agreement was approved and confirmed by His Excellency the Vice- 
roy and Governor-General in Council. 


Foreian DEPARTMENT 
SIMLa, , r (Sd.) H. M. Duranp, 


The 14th July 1888. ) Secretary to the Government of India. 


No. CLXX. 


+ \ 

SUPPLEMENTARY AGREEMENT between the GOVERNMENT of INDIA 
and the Stare Councii of Jammu and Kasumtr, relative to 
the Funps required for the CONSTRUCTION of the Bririsa 
Seorion of the Jammu and KAsHMir Stats Ratmway—1890. 


Whereas on the 14th July 1888, an agreement was concluded between 
the Government of India and His Highness the Maharaja of Jammu and 
ashmir according to which it was settled, among other points, that all the 
Capital required for the construction of the whole line of Railway between 
Sialkot and Jammu should be provided by the Darbar, and that the Darbar 
Should receive from the Government of India interest at the rate of 4 per cent, 
per annum on the capital expenditure on the section of the line which lies 
within British territory; and whereas the Government of India has since un- 
dertaken to pay from Imperial Funds the amount required for the construction 
of the British section, the Government of India and the Kashmir State Coun- 
cil do hereby make and enter into a supplementary agreement as follows :— 