


Part III Baluchistan— Kalai. 3765 


Shuja. Sir A. Burnes preceded him. On the way Mulla Mubammad Hasan 
caused him to be robbed of the draft treaty which the Khan bad signed. The 
belief that this was done at the instigation of the Khan was studiously im- 
pressed on the British Government, and the Khan himself was prevented from 
going to Quetta by Mulla Muhammad Hasan, who frightened him into the 
belief that the British intended to make him a prisoner. The proofs of the 
Khan’s hostility were now apparently complete, and it was resolved to punish 
him when a fitting opportunity occurred. 

Accordingly, when General Wiltshire’s brigade was returning from Kabul 
in 1839, a detachment was sent to Kalat to punish the Khan. The town was 
taken by storm on the 13th of November. Mehrab Khan fell in the assault, 
aud his son Husain Khan fled. From the papers discovered in the fort the 
‘ treachery of Mulla Mubammad Hasan was fully proved, and he was made 
a prisoner. With the British army was one Shah Nawaz Khan, a youth of 
fourteen, descended in the direct male line from Mahabat Khan, who had 
been deposed by Ahmad Shah, This youthand his brother Fateh Khan had 
been imprisoned by Mehrab Khan, but had effected their escape. Shah ‘Nawaz 
Khan was set up by the British Government as Khan of Kalat; but the 
provinces of Sarawan and Kach Gandava were annexed to the dominions of. 


the Ruler of Kabul. 


Shortly after the accession of Shah Nawaz Khan, a revolution broke out, 
headed by Mehrab Khan’s sun, who had assumed the name of Nasir Khan. 
Shah Nawaz Khan was deposed, the British representative at Kalat was 
murdered, and there was open war between Nasir Khan and the British Gov- 
ernment. As the only means of quieting the country and doing tardy justice 
to the memory of the unfortunate Mehrab Khan, the British Government 
reversed its policy, established Nasir Khan in power, and restored to him the 
districts which had been annexed to Kabul. A Treaty (No. CLXXIV) was con- 
cluded with him on the 6th October 1841. ‘The maia feature in it was that it 
recognised Kalat as a dependency of Kabul. 


After the withdrawal of the British army from Kabul, this treaty became 
a dead letter. In 1842 a proposal was made to conclude a supplementary 
treaty, by which pecuniary aid should be substituted for military support to 
the Khan; but this suggestion was not acted upon. In 1854, however, when 
war between England and Russia was threatened, and it became of import- 
ance to strengthen British influence on the western frontier, 2 new Treaty 


(No. CLXXV) was concluded with the Khan, This abrogated the treaty of 


376 Baluchistan—Xalat. Part IIT 


1841, renewed the obligations of the Khan to oppose all enemies of the 
British Government, to act in subordination to the British Government, to 
enter into no negotiations with other States without its consent, and to receive 
British troops into his country if such a measure should be deemed necessary. 
By this treaty also the British Government granted to the Khan an annual 
subsidy of Rupees 50,000, on condition of his preventing his subjects from 
committing outrages within or near British territory, of his protecting 
merchants, and permitting no exactions on trade beyond certain specified 
duties. 