

The Darbar shall receive from the Government of India interest at the 
rate of 4 per cent. per annum on the capital éxpenditure on the section of the 
line which lies within British territory, from the date of payment. 

5. All moneys needed for additional works found necessary on the British 
section of the railway after first construction is completed, will ke found by 


the Government of India,‘and on similar works on the Kashmir section by 
the Darbar. 


6. The section of the line in Jammu territory shall be leased to, and work- 
ed by, the North-Western Railway for a period of five years from the date of 
opening to traffic. During this period the North-Western Railway shall main- 
tain the line in an efficient state, and shall pay to the Darbar 1 per cent. per 
annum on the capital expenditure on the Jammu section. The surplus net 
earnings on this section, in excess of the said payment of 1 per cent., during the 
period of five years, shall be divigled equally between the North-Western 
Railway and the Kashmir Darbar. In calculating net earnings, the rate 
of working expenses shall be taken at the average percentage of working 
expenses tio gross earnings on the Punjab section of the North-Western Rail- 
way, including the Jammu and Kashmir State Railway, for the same period, 
blus 5 per cent. per annum on gross earnings for the use of rolling stock, 


7. Subject to the payment of 4 per cent, interest provided in clause 4, 
the portion of the line in British territory shall remain the absolute property 
of the Government, of India, and the earnings of it shall belong solely to- 
that Government, The Government’ of India shall have the right at any 
time, after giving six months’ notice, to repay to the Darbar the capital 
expenditure advanced by it in respect of this section of the line, and the pay- 
ment of interest shall thereupon cease. , 


368 Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXIX. Part II 


8. The Government of India and the Darbar shall provide, at their 
respective charges and free of cost, to the North-Western Railway, the land 
required for railway purposes in their respective territories, 


9. After the expiry of the said period of five years, a fresh arrangement 
shall be made for working the line upon terms to be agreed upon between: the 
Government of India and the Darbar. 

10, The fares charged to passengers, the rates for goods, and the rates 
for railway materials, whether used in construction, maintenance, or working 
of the line, shall be such as are in general use on the Punjab section of the 
North-Western Railway. The line shall be worked in accordance with the 
general rules and regulations in force on Indian State Railways. 

11. The permanent-way, station, machinery, and other fittings shall be 
of the types used on Indian State Railways, and shall be obtained at the cost 
of the Darbar through the Government of India. 

12. Half-yearly pro formé accounts, showing the entire earnings of 
traffic and the working expenses, calculated as explained in clause 6 of this 
Agreement, incurred upon the Jammu and Kashmir State Railway, shall be 
supplied regularly by the North-Western Railway to the Darbar. 