


8, His Highness the Maharaja agrees to pay to the British Govern- 
ment, as the money may be required, the actual cost incurred by it in the con- 
struction and establishment of the lines, such cost being inclusive of— 

(1) The salaries and allowances of all members of the Indian Telegraph es- 
tablishment for the whole period they may be detained on duty in Cashmere 
and 

(2) The cost of insulating the line, or of any other changes in the origi- 
nal scheme that may he made hereafter with the concurrence, or at the request 


‘of the Cashmere State. . 


4, The salaries and allowances of all members of the Indian Telegraph 
establishment will be paid to them by the Government of India through the 
officer on special duty, and the amounts of such payments will be recovered 
subsequently from the Cashmere State, 


5. On the application in writing of the Cashmere State, the Telegraph 
Department will supply at cost price all telegraph instruments and material 
required from time to time for the maintenance and working of the telegraph 
lines and offices about to be established. 

6. On the application in writing of the Cashmere State, the Telegraph 
Department will afford such advice and instruction as may be required and 
desired by the Cashmere State for the maintenance and working of such tele- 
graph lines and offices. 

7. On the application in writing of the Cashmere State, the Telegraph 
Department will lend the services of any Native signallers, who may volunteer 
for the duty, and whose services can be spared, for such specified periods as 
may be sufficient to enable the Cashmere State to train its own signallers, 


8. The foregoing provisions are accepted by the British Government 
as a mark of friendship and good-will towards His Highness the Maharaja ; 
butitis to be understood that after the lines are delivered over to the Cashmere 
Government, no responsibility whatever attaches to the British Government 
in respect of their subsequent maintenance and working, 


(Sd.) =P, D. Hunperson, Major, 
Officer on Special Duty in Cashmere 


Gi) Nitomser Mooxenszz, 
Judge of the Sadr Adalut of Cashmere, 
The 9th Mareh 1878. 


Part II Jammu and Kashmir—No. CLXIX. . 867. 


No. CLXIX. 


AGREEMENT between the GovERNMENT of InDIA and His Hieu- 
NESS MawaRaJA PartaB Sinen, InpaR Maurnpar Bada- 
DUR, SIPAR-I-SALTANAT, Mawarasa of Jammu and Kasu- 


min, relative to the ConstRucTION of a Rattway to JamMu' 
—1888. 


1. The line shall be called the “* Jammu and Kashmir State Railway.” 


2, An estimate of the entire cost of constructing the ‘line on the .5 feet 
6-inch gauge from Sialkot to the left bank of the Tawi river at Jammu shall 
be submitted to the Kashmir Darbar for sanction. 

8. The whole line shall be constructed by the Darbar through its Chief 
Engineer, Major-General deBourbel, according to the standard dimensions 
prescribed by the Government of India, and shall be completed with the ut- 
most possible despatch. 

4, Allthe capital required for the construction of the whole line shall be 
provided by the Darbar. 