


BaLvonistan is an expression of political geography. It comprises the 
territory bounded by the borders of Sind and the lower Derajat on the east, 
the Arabian sea on the south, Persia on the west, and Afghanistan along the 


trough of the Helmand and Registan on the north. The most important 
divisions of Baluchistan are as follows :— 


Kalat proper, or the territory under the immediate rule of His High- 
ness the Khan of Kalat; 


Sarawan and Jhalawan, or the tracts belonging to the two leading 
Brahui clans and their Chiefs ; 

The assigned districts of Quetta and the Bolan ; 

The Chiefship of Las Bela ; 

Kharan ; . 

Makran, including Kej and Panjgur; 

The country inhabited by Baluch tribes, such as the Marris and 


Bugtis, along the Punjab and Sind borders ; 
British Baluchistan ; 


Bori and Zhob. 


KALAT, 


The first noteworthy Khan of Kalat was Abdulla Khan. At the com. 
Mencement of the eighteenth century, he affected to be independent of the 
Delhi empire, and reduced several provinces to his rule. During the 
reign of his son, Maliabat Khan, Nadir Shah invaded India, and annexed the 
Whole of the territories west of the Indus to his dominions. On the dis- 
memberment of the Persian empire, after the death of Nadir Shah, Kalat 
formed part of the territories over which Ahmad Shah Abdali established 


374 Baluchistan—Zalat. Part LIT 


his supremacy. Mahabat Khan, who was unpopular with his Chiefs, was 
deposed by Ahmad Shah, and his younger brother, Nasir Khan, was ap- 
pointed to rule in his stead. From this time the power remained with the 
younger branch of the family, till the attempt which the British Govern- 
ment made after the first Afghan war to change the succession. 


Nasir Khan was by far thé most distinguished of the Khans of Kalat. 
His rule was vigorous, although his political position was that of the head of a 
confederacy of Chiefs and not that of a despotic ruler. His policy of uniting 
the Baluch tribes so consolidated his power that he found himself strong enough 
to rebel against Ahmad Shah, who ceded to him the. districts of Shal, or 
Quetta, and Mastung. He also extended his authority to the south-west over 
Makran, Panjgur and Kej. He was succeeded in 1795 by his son Mahmud 
Khan, and he, in 1819, by his son Mehrab Khan, in whose time the political 
connection of the British Government with Kalat commenced. 


Mehrab Khan was a well-meaning but weak ruler. He disgusted his 
Chiefs by surrendering himself to the influence of one Daud Muhammad, a 
man of low extraction, for whom he sacrificed the hereditary minister, Fateh 
Muhammad. Daud Muhammad, however, was killed by Fateh Muhammad’s 
son, Naib Mulla Muhammad Hasan, who was restored to the hereditary office, 
but who never forgave the injury done to his father. To the revenge of 
Molla Muhammad Hasan are attributable the misfortunes which subsequently 
overtook Mehrab Khan. 


On the failure of Shah Shuja’s first attempt to recover his dominions in 
1833, he found refuge for a short time at Kalat before his return to his 
exile at Ludhiana, When the expedition of 1838 for the restoration of 
Shah Shuja was determined on, a British officer, Lieutenant Leech, was sent 
to Kalat to secure the co-operation of Mehrab Khan, through whose terri- 
tories the armies had to march. Mulla Muhammad Hasan, however, contrived 
to create a dislike between the Khan and Lieutenant Leech, and the latter left 
without attaining his object. The treacherous minister further caused it to be 
believed that the Khan had seized stores of grain which had been collected for 
the British troops, and wrote orders in the Khan’s name, but without his 
knowledge, inciting the tribes to rise and harass the British army on its line 
of march. Sir Alexander Burnes was deputed to Kalat to allay the supposed 
hostility of the Khan and to negotiate a Treaty (No. CLXXIII) with him- 
The treaty was signed contrary to the secret wishes of Mulla Muhammad 
Hasan, and the Khan agreed to proceed to Quetta to pay his respects to Shah 