

Code of Civil Procedure. The procedure in all criminal prosecutions shall be 
regulated by the Code of Criminal Procedure. 

_  6,—The said officer shall make rules to regulate the service and execu- 
tion of processes issuing from his Court, and shall fix the fees to be charged 
to suitors for serving such processes. ; 

7—All questions of law, or fact, or both, arising in cases before the 
‘said officer, shall be dealt with and determined according to the law adminis- 
tered in the Courts of the Punjab. 


364 Jammu and Kashmir—CLXVII. Part II 


8.—The said officer shall keep such registers, books, and accounts» 
and submit to the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab such statements of the 
work done in exercise of the aforesaid powers, as may, from time to time, be 
prescribed by the said Lieutenant-Governor. He shall also comply with such 
requisitions for records as the said Lieutenant-Governor may, from time to 
time, make upon him. P 

9.—Duties and fees of the same amount respectively as the Stamp duties 
and Court-fees prescribed by Act XVIII of 1869 and Act VII of 1870, 
shall be enforced by the said officer. 

‘10.—There shall be no appeal against any order, judgment, or decree 
passed by the said officer in a civil suit. But if, in the trial of any such suit, 
any question of Jaw or as to the construction of a document (which construc- 
tion may affect the merits of the decision) shall arise, he may draw up a state- 
ment of the case, and refer it for the decision of the Chief Court of the Punjab ; 
and he shall, on receipt of a copy of such decision, dispose of the case conform- 
ably thereto, 

And any person convicted on a trial held by such officer may appeal to the 
Commissioner of the Rawul Pindee Division ; and if such person be an Euro- 
pean British subject, he may appeal either to the said Commissioner or to the 
Chief Court of the Punjab. : 

11.—The appellant shall in every case give notice of the appeal to the 
said British officer in Cashmere, who shall, if necessary, instruct the officer 
empowered to prosecute the case, 


The Mived Court. 


12,—Civil suits between European British subjects or their servants not 
being subjects of the Maharaja on the one side, and subjects of His Highness 
the Maharaja of Cashmere on the other side, shall be decided by a Mixed 
Court composed of the said British officer and the Civil Judge of Srinuggur, or 
other officer especially appointed in this behalf by the Maharaja of Cashmere. 

13,—When the said British officer and the said Civil Judge or other 
officer are unable to come to a final decision in any such suit, they shall re- 
duce their difference into writing and refer it to a single arbitrator to be named 
by them. i 

14.—The arbitratcr so nominated shall proceed to try ‘the case, and his 
decision shall be final. ; 

15.—And in every case of a reference under these Rules— 

(2) the arbitrator shall be at liberty to proceed ex parte in case either party, 
after reasonable notice, neglects or refuses, without good and sufficient cause, 
to attend on the reference ; 