


ARTICLE 5. 


All provisions and carriage which may be obtained through the means of 
the Khan, the price of the same is to be paid without hesitation. 


Part III Baluchistan—Xalet—-No. CLXXIV. 389 


ARTIOLE 6. 


As much as Mehrab shows his friendship to the British Government by 
service and fidelity to the Saddozai family, so much the friendship will be 
increased between him and the British Government, and on this he should 
have the fullest reliance and confidence. , 

This agreement having been concluded, signed and sealed by Lieutenant- 
Colonel Sir Alexander Burnes, Kt., Envoy on the part of the Right Hon’ble 
George Lord Auckland, G.c.B., Governor-General of India, and Mehrab Khan, 
of Kalat, on the part of himself, the same shall be duly ratified by the Right 
Hon’ble the Governor-General. 


Done at Kalat, the 28th day of March, A.D. 1839, corresponding with the 
12th day of Muharram, 4.1. 1255. 


A. Burnzs, 
Envoy to Kalat. 


No. CLXXIV. 


Treaty entered into between the GoveRNMENT oF INDIA and 
MEER NusseeR Kuan, Chief of Khelat—1841. 


Whereas Meer Nusseer Khan, son of Mehrab Khan, deceased, having 
tendered his allegiance and submission, the British Government and His 
Majesty Shah Suja-ool-moolk recognise him, the said Nusseer Khan, and his 
descendants as Chief of the principality of Khelati-Nusseer on the following 
terms :— , 

ARTICLE 1. 


Meer Nusseer Khan acknowledges himself and his descendants the vassals 
of the King of Cabool, in like manner as his ancestors were formerly tae 
vassals of His Majesty’s ancestors. 


ARTICLE 2, 


_ OF the tracts of country resumed on the death of Meer Mehrab Khan, 
hamely, Cutchee, Moostung, and Shawl, the two first will be restored to Meer 
Nusseer Khan and his descendants through the kindness of His Majesty Shah 
Suja-ool-moolk. 


Artiore 8. 
Should it be deemed necessary to station troops, whether ‘belonging to 
the Honourable Company or Shah Suja-ool-moolk, in any ‘part of the territory 
of Khelat, they shall occupy such positions as may be thought advisable. 


890 Baluchistan—Xalat—No. CLXXIV. Part III 


ARTICLE 4. 


Meer Nusseer Khan, his heirs and successors, will always be guided by 
the advice of the British officer residing at his Durbar. 


ARTICLE 5. 


The passage of merchants and others into Afehanistan from the river 
Tndus on the one side, and from the sea-port of Soumeeanee on the other, 
shall be protected by Meer Nusseer Khan as far as practicable, nor will any 
aggression be practised on such persons, or any undue exactions made beyond 
an equitable toll to be fixed by the British Government and Meer Nusseer 
Khan. , 

ArticLe 6. 


. Meer Nusseer Khan binds himself, his heirs and successors, not to hold 
avy political communication or enter into any negotiations with foreign. 
powers without the consent of the British Government and of His Majesty 
- Shah Suja-ool-moolk, and in all cases to act in subordinate co-operation with 
the governments of British India and of the Shah; but the usual amicable 
correspondence with neighbours to continue as heretofore. 