


In 1888-89 Sardar Shabbaz Khan, Shah Jahan Khan, Shingul Khan, 
- and the chief Zhob Maliks made a request that Zhob as well as Bori might be 
brought under more direct British control, and enjoy the security which results 
from this control. When it was decided in 1889-90 to open up.the Gomal 
Pass the occupation of Zhob was sanctioned, and a Political Agent was appoint- 
ed to take charge of the district, in which were included Bori, and the 


Part III '  Baluchistan—FPishkéen, Sibi, Bori and Zhod. 387 


country of the Khetrans, Kibzais and Musa Khel. The country of the Bar- 
gha Shiranis, Zmarais, Isots, Jafirs, and Kharshins, tribes occupying different 
parts of the Suliman range and intervening between Zhob and the Punjab, 
was subsequently added to the district. 


In 1890 the Government of India décided that the line of the Gomal 
river between its junction with the Kundar and Kajuri Kach should be the 


limit of tribal jurisdiction between the Punjab Government and the Baluchis- 
tan Agency. 


388 Baluchistan—Kalet-No, CLXXIII. Part ITI 


CLXXIII. 


Artictes of an ENGAGEMENT concluded between the British 
Government and Meuras Kuan, the Chief of Kalat—1839. 


Warrras a Treaty of lasting friendship has been concluded between the 
British Government and His Majesty Shah Shuja-ul-Mulk, and Mehrab 
Khan, the Chief of Kalat, as well as his predecessors, has always paid homage 
to the Royal House of the Saddozais ; therefore, with the advice and consent 
of the Shah, the undermentioned Articles have been agreed upon by Mehrab 
Khan and his descendants from generation to generation. As long as the 
Khan performs good service, the following Articles will be fulfilled and pre- 
served :—~ p 

ARTICLE 1, 


As Nasir Khan and his descendants, as well as his tribe and sons, held 
possession of the country of Kalat, Kachhi, Khorstan, Makran, Kej; Bela, and 
the port of Soumiani in the time of the lamented Ahmad Shah Durani, they 
will in future be masters of their country in the same manner. 


ARTICLE 2, 


The English Government will never interfere between the Khan, his 
dependants, and subjects, particularly lend no assistance to Shah Nawaz 
Fateh Khan, and the descendants of the Mahabbatzai branch of the family, 
but always exert itself to put away evil from his house. In case of His 
Majesty the Shah’s dispieasure with the Khan of Kalat, the English Govern- 
ment will exert itself to the utmost to remove the same in a manuer which 
may be agreeable to the Shah and according to the rights of the Khan. ve 


’ 


ARrTIcLE 8. 


As long as the British army continues in the country of Khorasan, the 
British Government agrees to pay to Mehrab Khan the sum of one and a 
half lakh of Company’s rupees from the date of this engagement by half- 
yearly instalments. 


ARTICLE 4, 


Tn returo for this sam the Khan, while he pays homage to the Shah and 
continues in friendship with the British nation, agrees to use his best endea- 
vours to procure supplies, carriage, and guards to protect provisions and 
stores going and coming from Shikarpur by the'route of Rozan, Dadar, the 
Pass of Bolan, through Shal to Kuchlak from one frontier to another. 