

Nasir Khan died in 1857, his death being generally believed to have 
been caused by poison. There were three claimants for the succession, Azim 
Khan, brother of Mehrab Khan; his son of the same name; and Khudadad 
Khan, his half-brother. The last, then a youth, was selected by the Chiefs of. 
the country, but; soon embroiled himself with them. He also had to contend 
against the pretensions of Fateh Khan, the brother of our nominee, Shah 
Nawaz Khao, who was supported by Azad Khan of Kharan. But for the 
countenance and support of the British Government, Khudadad Khan could 
not have maintained himself in power. In 1859 the British Government 
gave the Khan Rupees 50,000, in addition to the subsidy paid under the 
treaty, to enable him to strengthen his hands and meet the cost of reducing the 
rebellious tribe of Marris, who had harassed the British frontier. This addi- 
tional grant was paid for four successive years, but little good resulted from-it, 
The leading Chiefs of Kalat conspired against Khudadad Khan, and on the 17th 
March 1868 proclaimed his cousin, Sherdil Khan, as their ruler, The town 
and fort of Kalat were surrendered to the rebels without,a show of defencee, 
and Khudadad Khan retired to Nasirabad in Kachi. Sherdil Khan was mur- 
dered by his own guards in May 1864, and Khudadad Khan was re-elected 
Chief of the State. He was recognised by the British Government as Khan 
of Kalat, and the payment of the subsidy of Rupees 50,000, under the treaty 
of 1854, which had been suspended during the disturbances inthe country, 
was renewed, ; 

In 1862 the Khan of Kalat signed an Agreement (No. CLXXVI) by 
which the boundary between Sind and Kalat was defined. A portion of 
this boundary, on the border of the Shikarpur District, was for some years 
disputed ; but it was finally settled in 1887 by an order of the Government 
of India. 

In 1863 an Agreement (No. CLX XVII) was made with Khudadad Khan, 
by which he engaged to secure the protection of the telegraph line passing 


Part III Baluchistan—Xalat. 377 


through Makran within the territories of the Chiefs of Baluchistan, in con- 
sideration of a subsidy of’ Rupees 5,000 a year to be paid to the Chiefs and 
distributed by the British Government. 

The history of Kalat after the restoration of Khudadad Khan was 
marked by constant conflicts between the Khan and his turbulent subjects. 
In quelling partial risings he met with a certain amount of success. Taj 
Muhammad Khan, the Chief of the Jhalawan country, was taken prisoner and 
placed in confinement, where he soon afterwards died, and the Jam of Las 
Bela was forced to take refuge in British territory. But in 1871 a come 
bination of the Brahui Chiefs ended in open rebellion. The causes of their 
discontent were alleged to be the resumption by the Khan of their hereditary 
lands and the introduction of changes which deprived them of their due share 
in the administration. The Khan, finding himself unable to coerce his 
subjects, implored British aid, and delegated to the Commissioner in Sind full 
powers to mediate a settlement. The malcontents were summoned to Jacob- 
abad, and an arrangement was effected, by which the Khan consented to 
restore to the Sardars their confiscated lands, to grant them the allowances 
customary in the time of Mir Nasir Khan the younger, and to allow them 
to live on their estates so long as they paid him proper allegiance. They, 
on the other band, were to restore all property plundered during their 
rebellion, the Khan consenting to forego all claims in regard to his own 
property. The opportunity was taken to impress upon the Sardars the duty 
of obedience to the legitimate authority of the Khan, and to warn His 
Highness that he would not be countenanced in high-handed interference 
with the rights of his subjects. 