


no opposition should be offered to the troops marching through the Marri 
country by Kahan to Harrand, and (5) that hostages should be given for the 
future good behaviour of the clan. ‘The tribe complied with these conditions ; 
and friendly relations were resumed on the former basis of tribal payments 
and service. 


Petroleum having been discovered in the Marri country, the Tumandar, 
‘Sardar Mebrulla Khan, executed in October 1885 an Agreement (No. 
CLXXX VII), by which he ceded to the British Government his rights to petro. 
leum and all other mineral oils in consideration of an annual cash payment. 


The title of Nawab was conferred in 1889 on both Mebrulla Khan, Chief 
of the Marris, and Shahbaz Khan, Chief of the Bugtis. The latter tribe 
hold the low hills to the south and south-east of the Marris, bordering on 
the Kachi plain and the Sind and Punjab borders. 


BRITISH BALUCHISTAN—PISHIN ann SIBI; BORI ayy ZHOB, 


The frontier districts of Pishin and Sibi, with their dependencies Shorarud, 


Thal-Chotiali and Harnai are under the administration of the Agent to 
38 


386 Baluchistan—Pishin, Sibi, Bori and Zhob. Part IIt 
® 


the Governor General in Baluchistan. Till 1878 they formed part of the 
dominions of the Amir of Afghanistan. When war with Afgbanistan was 
declared in that year they were immediately occupied by British troops, 
and under the Treaty of Gandamak (No. CXCIV), executed in May 
1879, their administration was to sremain with the British Government, 
any surplus revenue being paid to the Amir. In September 1879, how- 
ever, war broke out again, and ended in the abdication of Yakub Khan and 
the accession to power of the present Amir, Abdur Rahman Kban, He was 
informed that these districts had ceased to form part of Afghanistan ; 
and they have since remained in the possession of the British Government. 
They were incorporated with British India in the year 1887, and are officially 
known as the province of British Baluchistan. 
To the north of Harnai and Thal-Chotiali lie the valleys of Bori and Zhob. 
In consequence of outrages committed by the Kakars of Zhob a punitive expedi- 
tion was sent against them. It was,on the whole successful, Shah Jahan, 
the leading Zhob Chief, was deposed, a relation, Sardar Shahbaz Khan, being 
set up in his stead, An Agreement (No. CLXXXVIIJ) was taken from the 
Maliks of Zhob, Bori and the Musa Khel, by which they undertook to put a 
stop to raiding into British territory, to prevent Shah Jahan and his chief ad- 
herent, Saifulla Khan, from returning to Zhob, to paya fine of Rupees 22,000, 
and to rdise no opposition to the location in Zhoband Bori of British troops. 
In 1887 a British force was stationed at Loralai in the Bori valley for the: 
protection of ‘the frontier road from Dehra Ghazi Khan to Pishin, In the 
same year Bori and the country of the Khetran tribes, lying between Thal- 
Chotiali and the Panjab, were brought, with the acquiescence of the Chiefs and 
people, more directly under the political and administrative control of the 
Baluchistan Agency. About the same time Shah Jahan and Saifulla: Khan 
submitted, and were permitted to return, to their homes; and Sardar Shahbaz 
Khan, who was in delicaté health, deputed his authority to Shah Jahan’s 
eldest surviving son, Shingul Khan, who is now practically the Chief Sardar 
of Zhob and the Sanjar Khel Kakars, 