

These arrangements, however, were distasteful to the Khan. He resented 
the part taken in promoting them by his minister the Shahgasi, Wali Muham- 
mad Khan, He‘came under the influence of unworthy favourites, and quar- 
relled with Wali Muhammad 3 and it was not until the Political Agent, 
Whose appointment, after remaining in abeyance since 1864, had been recently 
Tevived; was on the point of leaving Kalat, that he consented to restore the 
Minister to his former position and dismiss the favourites. Finding his efforts 
to procure the recall of these men unavailing, the Khan ceased to look after 
his administration, took no steps to remedy the disorder which prevailed in 
Las Bela, or to compensate merchants for the plunder of their caravans, and 
Surrendered himself to fresh favourites. In March 1878 the Political Agent, 
accompanied by Wali Muhammad, withdrew from Kalat territory. In 


accordance ‘with the. treaty of 1854, the payment of the annual subsidy 
: . 38D 


378 Baluchistan—Xalat. Part IIT 


to the Khan was withheld, and he was informed that his obligations under 
the treaty to protect trade and secure the peace of the frontier remained 
unaltered, but that, in the event of disturbances occurring on the frontier, 
the British Government would be compelled to take its own measures for 
preserving order. 

With a view to secure unanimity of action in dealing with the Marris 
and Bugtis, the contro] of the relations of Government with them was in 
1871 placed in the hands of the Political Superintendent of the Upper Sind 
Frontier, to whom the Deputy Commiesioner of Dera Ghazi Khan was made 
subordinate in respect of these tribes. An addition to the sum of Rupees 32,400 
previously paid to the tribes for service on the Punjab frontier was author- 
ised, in order to maintain the tranquillity of the Sind and Punjab frontiers, 
and the money was to be paid to the Chiefs in the name of the Khan. This 
plan of dealing with the frontier tribes through the Khan provéd ineffec- 
tual. During the rebellion against the Khan the attitude of the Marris 
and Bugtis was uncertain: at its close an attack, said to have been insti- 
gated by the Khan, was made by the Brahuis on the section of the Marris 
to which the protection of the Bolan pass had been entrusted. The Marris 
retaliated by plundering caravans, and a state of chronic disorder ensued. 
Under these circumstances, the Khan was informed that until he showed 
both willingness and ability to put an end to plundering and outrages near 
the British frontier, the Government of India would take its own measures to 
protect its territories and subjects. Subjects of Kalat committing offences 
in British territory, if apprehended there, would receive the utmost penalty 
of the law, and, if they succeeded in escaping into Kalat, would be followed 
and punished. At length the state of anarchy prevailing on the frontier. 
became so intolerable that the Government of India decided to depute a 
special agent to effect, if possible, some settlement between the Khan and 
his Sardars, Captain Sandeman, the officer selected for this duty, convinced 
himself, during his first mission in 1875, that a modus vivendi could be 
arranged between the contending parties through the mediation of the 
British Government. The result of his labours was considered so far satis- 
factory that in the spring of the following year he was again deputed to 
Baluchistan ; and, ata Darbar held at Mastung in July 1876, he effected 
a formal reconciliation between the Khan and the leading Brahui Chiefs, 
the Baluch Chiefs being absent. 