


Jam Mir Khan, the father of the present Jam, succeeded his father Jam 
Mir Ali about the year 1840. For several years he endeavoured to throw off 
allegiance to Kalat and make himself independent. The last occasion was in 
1868, when the Jhalawan Brahuis with his connivance Jaid waste the Khan of 
Kalat’s territories. On this occasion he appropriated the revenues of two 
State villages, and threatened to renew hostilities with the Khan. The latter 
took the initiative and sent a force against the Jam, who sought refuge in 
British territory. At the instance of the British Government the Khan allowed 
him an income of Rupees 8,000 per annum, on condition that he remained with- 
in the British borders and abstained from intriguing in the affairs of Kalat. This 
allowance the Jam declined to receive, He lived for a time at Karachi, but as 
he still: continued to foment rebellion in Kalat and to hold treasonable corre- 
spondence with the subjects of the Khan, he was deported to Hyderabad (Sind) 
and thenceto Poona, In 1874 his son Jam Ali Khan escaped from‘ Hydera- 
bad, where he was under surveillance, and returned to Bela, which he ruled 
for the next three years, In 1877 Jam Mir Khan was pardoned and restored , 
to his former position. After his restoration he quarrelled with his son Jam 
Ali Khan, who was deported from Bela and detained under surveillance at 
Sibi till his father’s death, Jam Mir Khan died in January 1888. The 
succession was disputed, but eventually Jam Ali, the present ruler, was 
acknowledged as such by Government, and was installed by the Agent to 
the Governor-General on the 21st January 1889, when he accepted certain 
conditions (No. CLXXXI) prescribed by Sir Robert Sandeman. Jam Ali is a 
C.LE., and has heen granted a- personal salute of 9 guns. 


In December 1861 an Agreement (No. CLXXXII) was made with Jam 
Mir Khan for the protection of that portion of the Makran telegraph which 
traverses his territory, in consideration of a subsidy of Rupees 8,400 a year. 


The population of the Las Bela is estimated at 56,226, the principal 
tribe being Lumris ; arid the revenues are about’ Rupees 50,000 from customs 
and Rupees 1,50,000 from land revenue. The area is about 8,500 -square 
miles, 


Part LII Baluchistan— Kharan, Makran, 381 


KHARAN., ° 


The Chiefship of Kharan lies along the northern border of the territory 
of the Khan of Kalat, roughly extending from near Nushki west-south-west- 
wards to Panjgur. The principal tribe and ruling family are Naushirwanis, 
and their present head is Sardar Sir Nauroz Khan, K.C.I.E., who succeeded 
his father Azad Khan, when the latter died in 1886 at the reputed age 
of 99. The Chiefs of Kharan have at different times acknowledged subordina- 
tion to Kalat, Persia, and Afghanistan ; they are, however, in reality. Baluchis, © 
and in 1884 Sardar Azad Khan acknowledged allegiance to the Khan of 
Kalat by taking his place among the Sarawan Sardars at a Darbar held by 
the Governor-General’s Agent at Panjgur. In 1885 a settlement was made 
with Azad Khan, by which he undertook to do certain tribal service in con- 
“sideration of an annual payment of Rupees 6,000. This arrangement was 
originally intended to last: for Azad Khan’s life only, but it has been con- 
tinued with his son. 