


384 Baluchistan—Marris. Part IIL 


of his cousin Muhammad Hasan being rejected. The young Sardar was 
placed under the guardianship of his uncle Muhammad Ali, who was to act as 
Sardar, and was also appointed to be the Khan’s Naib. At the same time th® 
Kharan Sardar’s right to share in the revenues of three of the Panjgur villazes 
was admitted, Azad Khan undertaking to prevent bis tribe from raiding on 
Panjgur. The main points of this settlement have subsequently been re- 
affirmed more than once, but disputes between the Gickhis and Naushirwauis 
‘ continue. 

Boleda is a valley containing five villages and lying between Panjgur 
and Kej. The principal man in Boleda is a Naushirwani connected with the 
Kharan Sardar’s family. The Khan of Kalat has a claim to share in the 
revenue of some of the Boleda villages. 

Tump is a small district consisting of about 15 villages, and lies about: 
30 miles to the west of Kej. It belongs to the Gichkis. The principal 
Gichki Sardar is Mir Murad, who lives at Tump itself. ‘The Khan of Kalat 
has a claim to share in the revenue of the Tump district, and also in that of 
the tracts called Dasht and Kolanch lying to the south. 

Mand is a district lying to the west of Tump, a continuation of the 
same valley up to the boundary, which, as shown above, has been settled, of 
the Persian district of Pishin. 

The dominant tribe in Mand are the Rinds, who have about a dozen 
villages. They used to give trouble by raiding over the Persian: border 
and towards Gwadar. They are recognised by the Government of India as 
subjects of the Khan of Kalat, but he has practically exercised no control over 
them, and they pay him no revenue. 


’ 


MARRIS. 

The Marris are a Baluch tribe occupying the country from the Nari 
river and the outskirts of the Bolan on the west as far as the Sham plain 
close to the Punjab boundary on the east, and between Thal-Chotiali on the 
north and the Bugti tribe on the south. Itis unnecessary here to enter 
into their earlier history. The Marri country was however long a refuge 
for the most turbulent characters of the surrounding districts, and in 1858 
their depredations had become so extensive that the Khan of ‘Kalat was 
compelled to send a regular expedition against them. This broke their power 
for the time, but in the distracted state of affairs in Baluchistan which followed 
the accession of Khudadad Khan they gradually-recovered strength and 
became as troublesome as ever.’ Their position in a knot of’ difficult hills 


Part III : Baluchistan—Jfervis, 885 


interposing between the Punjab frontier, the Upper Sind frontier and the 
Kalat and Afghan districts of Kachi and Sibi, enabled them to carry on for 
years, almost with impunity, a system of raids on every side, All attempts to 
coerce them through the Khan of Kalat, their nominal ruler, having proved 
ineffectual owing to his weakness, it became necessary in about 1871 to 
adopt a new policy towards this tribe. Accordingly ‘since that year the 
British Government has dealt with them directly, paying them allowances in 
return for tribal service and on condition of good behaviour. Matters gra- 
dually improved, and our relations with the Marris remained on ‘a tolerably 
satisfactory footing till the disaster of Maiwand in 1880. On hearing of 
this the Marris broke out again, and, besides committing other acts of 
violence, attacked and looted a heavily-laden Government convoy on the Harnai 
tine in August 1880, General MacGregor was sent into their country with a 
force to exact retribution for these outrages. The Marris were unable to 
offer any resistance; and their two leading Chiefs, Mehrulla Khan and Karam 
Khan, came in and accepted the terms laid down by Government. These were 
(1) the restitution of the treasure and bullocks plundered from the convoy, (2) 
the payment of a fine of Rupees 20 000 to compensate private losses, (3) the 
payrhent of blood money for those slain, according to tribal custom, (4) that 