

In December of the same year His Highness the Khan met His Excellency 
the Viceroy at Jacobabad, and a new Treaty (No, CLXXVIII) was conclud- 


Part IIE Baluchistan—Xalat, Las Bela. 879 


ed on the 8th of that month. It re-affirmed the engagements made in 1854, 
and provided among other things for the location of troops in, and the con- 
struction of railway and telegraph lines through, Kalat territory; Political 
officers with suitable escorts were to be posted in the Khan's dominions ; and 
the British Government undertook to pay His Highness an annual subsidy of 
one lakh of rupees, which was to be supplemented by.a contribution of Rupees 
20,500 per annum for the development of traffic on the trade-routes running 
through his country. This treaty was the foundation of the Baluchistan 
Agency. Major Sandeman was on the 2lst February 1877 appointed Agent 
to the Governor General, with three Assistants. His head-quarters were fixed 
at Quetta. British troops were cantoned at Quetta and Mittri. Subsequently 
the territories under the political control of the Agent to the Governor- 
‘General were divided into distinct Agencies, of which Kalat forms one. 

During the Afghan war, His Highness the Khan loyally acted up to his 
engagements, and proved his willingness to assist the British Government 
by all means in his power. : 

In 1879 if was arranged that the district immediately surrounding 
Quetta should be administered by British officers, any surplus revenue 
being made over to the Khan. In 1883 a fresh Agreement (No, CLX XIX) 
was entered into by which the Khan agreed to lease the Quetta district to 
the British Government for an annual rent of Rupees 25,000, and, in con- 
sideration of a yearly payment of Rupees 30,000, he at the same time surren- 
dered his right to collect tolls on the trade passing through the Bolan pass. 

In 1880 the Khan made over to the British Government with full 
jurisdiction (No. CLXXX) the lands on which the Kandahar State Railway 
had been constructed. 

His Highness Mir Khudadad Khan is a G.C.S.I, and receives a salute of 
21 guns, of which two are personal to him. 

His Highness’s eldest son, Mir Mahmud, was born in 1864. 

The revenue’ of the State varies, and may be estimated at about eight Jakhs 
of rupees per annum, inclusive of the payments made to the Khan by the Gov. 
ernment of India; the area of Kalat, including Kharan and Makran, is about 
106,000 square miles ; the population is estimated at about 220,500, 


LAS BELA. 
‘The province of Las Bela is said to have been granted to an ancestor’ 
of the Jam by Abdulla Khan of Kalat, as a reward for sevices in- the 


380 Fe Baluchistan—Lae Bela, Part IIT 


field. The conditions of the tenure were that the Jam should acknowledge 
the supremacy. of the Kban and maintain a body of troops for service when 
required. On the death of Abdulla Khan, the grant was confirmed by 
Mahabat Khan to Jam Ali, from whom the present Chief, Jam Ali Khan, 
is regularly descended. 