


* Besides Kharan the Sardar holds lands in Panjgur, and he lays claim to 
Jalk, Dizak, and Kohak, the first and second of which are within the Persian 
boundary as defined under arrangements hereinafter referred to. 


The area of Kharan is about 15,000 square-miles, 


MAKRAN., 


Kej is the name of a valley or tract in the south-west of Baluchistan. 
It was formerly the seat of the rulers of Makran, when the several prov- 
inces of that country were united under the government of the Malik family. 
The Maliks were ousted by the Boleda family in the latter part of the seven- 
teenth century, and Makran became divided into separate Chiefships. The 
Boleda Amirs probably ruled over Kej for about three generations, when it fell 
into the hands of the Gichkis, who are of Rajput extraction. During the rule 
of Nasir Khan of Kalat the Gichkis agreed to pay half the revenues of Kej 
to the Khan on condition that he protected them from external aggres- 
sion. The Gichki Sardar was to manage the internal affairs of the country, but 
the Khan was empowered to appoint a Naib to look after his own share 
of the revenues. The Kalat Chief has frequently selected for this post 
the Gichki Sardar for the time being, but-for some years prior to 1889 
the two offices were held by different men, Mir Bahi Khan keing the 
-hereditary Sardar and Mir Shahdad Khan the Kalat Naib, In 1889 Mir Bahi < 


882 Baluchistan —Makran. Part IIT 


Khan represented that the appointment of Mir Shahdad Khan was dis- 
tasteful to him, and the Khan of Kalat consented to appoint another Naib in 
his stead in consultation with the Sardar. It was further agreed at this time 
that the new Naib should not interfere with the affairs of the Gichki tribes, 
which were to remain as heretofore in the hands of the Gichki Sardar, except 
so far as concerned the collection of half the revenue which is the Khan’s 
due, On Mir Shahdad Khan’s removal from the office of Naib, which was 
not finally carried out till 1891, Mir Mauladad Khan was temporarily ap- 
pointed in his stead to assist the Gichki Chief in the collection of revenue 
and the general administration of the country. In April 1892 Mir Abdul 
Karim, the cousin of the Gichki Sardar, was provisionally appointed as the 
Khan of Kalat’s Naib in Kej. Mir Bahi Khan died on the 7th of January 
1891, and was succeeded by his son Shah Umar, the present Gichki Sardar in 
Kej. The population of Kej is about 10,000 souls. 


In 1862 an Engagement (No. CLXXXIII) was made with Mir Fakir 
Muhammad, at that time the Khan of Kalat’s Naib in Kej, by which he agreed 
for an annual subsidy to protect the Makran telegraph which passed through 
his districts, The subsidy granted is Rupees 6,000, of which Rupees 1,000 
are paid-to the Chief of Pasni. 


In 1869 another Engagement (No. CLXXXIV) was concluded with 
Mir Fakir Muhammad, by which, in consideration of a payment of Rupees 
1,500 per annum, in addition to the subsidy formerly paid to him, he agreed, 
on behalf of himself and Mir Bahi Khan Gichki, to protect the line of tele- 
graph from Gwadar to the Bahu boundary in the Dasht. 