


It may be added here that similar Engagements (Nos. CLXXXV and 
CLXXXVI) for the protection of the telegraph were made with the Chiefs of 
Bahu; Dashtyari and Geh in Persian Baluchistan, and that the Chiefs of 
Jask also receive small allowances for the same purpose, 


To the west of Kej lie a number of petty Chiefships, which, under Boleda 
and Gichki rule, formed part of Makran. Dissensions among these Chiefs and 
their raids on Persian territory afforded Persia opportunities, which she was 
not slow to improve, of extending her frontier to the eastward until she had 
not only exacted tribute from the whole of Makran west of Kej, except a 


£ 


portion of the sea-coast about Charbar and Gwadar, but had asserted claims of- 


sovereignty over Kej and its dependencies, which were under the authority of 


* the Khan of Kalat. ¢ 


Part III Baluchistan—Hakran. 883 


The British Government, having treaty relations with Kalat, could not 
view with indifference the threats of aggression which were constantly held 
over the Khan’s subjects in Kej, and the expediency of putting a stop to these 
proceedings on the part of the Persian frontier authorities was impressed on 
the minister of the Shah. A proposal was then made by the Shah that the 
boundaries between Persia and Kalat should be defined by Commissioners on 
the part of England, Persia and Kalat. To this the British Government 
assented, and the Commissioners met on the frontier. The discussion was ter- 
minated at Tehran by the acceptance by the Shah in September 1871 of the 
opinion contained ina memorandum by Major-General Goldsmid, the British 
Commissioner. According to this memorandum Panjgur and Parom and other 
dependencies, with Kohak, Boleda, including Zamiran and other dependencies, 
Mand, including Temp, Nasirabad, Kej and all districts, dehs, and depen- 
dencies to the eastward, and Dasht with its dependencies as far as the sea—were 
declared to be beyond the Persian frontier. 


Claims were afterwards put forward by Persia to the small district of 
Kohak below the frontier districts of Jalk and Kalagan on the Persian side, 
Without pronouncing any opinion as to whether Kohak was Persian territory 
or not the British Government agreed that the boundary line of Kalat should 
be drawn to the east of Kohak. Kohak was occupied by the Persians in May 
1874, ; 


ad 


Panjgur is a district lying to the south-west of Kharan and the north of 
Kej. It came under the Khan of Kalat in the time of Nasir Khan. The inha- 
bited and cultivated part of Panjgur consists of a dozen villages or settlements 
in the extensive date groves along the banks of the Rakshanriver, Here also 
the Gichki tribe and family are predominant. The administrative arrange- 
ments as between the Gichki Chief and the Khan of Kalat are similar to those 
obtaining in Kej, The Khan shares in the revenues, and appoints a Naib to 
guard his interests, but beyond this he is not entitled to interfere. 


There used to be much hostility and raiding between the Gichkis of 
Panjgur and the Naushirwanis under Azad Khan of Khbaran, who claimed a 
Share in Panjgur revenues. The last conflict of importance was at the end of 
1882 when the Naushirwanis defeated a Panjgur force under the Gichki Sardar 
Mir Gajian, who was himself killed. Sir Robert Sandeman visited Panjgur in 
1884 and laid down the lines of a settlement of affairs there. This recognised 
Amir Khan, the minor son of Mir Gajian, as the Gichki Sardar, the claim 