

(3) The aforesaid sum of Rupees 25,000 (twenty-five thousand) shall be 
paid to His Highness without any deductions for cost of administration, so lon 
as the said District and Niabat are administered by the British Government. 

2. His Highness the Khan hereby transfers to the British Government 
absolutely, with effect from the Ist day of April 1888, all his rights to levy 
dues or tolls on the trade travelling through the Bolan to and from British 
Tadia and Afghanistan, as well as to and from Kachi and Khorasan, as pro- 
vided by the treaty of 1854, or on the trade travelling to and from British 
India and the districts of Sibi, Quetta, and Pishin. 

8. In return for the concession last mentioned the British Government 
agree to pay to His Highness the Khan the sum of Rs. 30,000 (thirty 
thousand) per annum free of all deductions, in two half yearly instalments, on 
the lst October and Ist April of each year beginning from the lst October 
1883. In addition, the Viceroy and Governor-General agrees to pay to the 
Sarawan and Kurd Sirdars a fixed sum yearly for certain service in the Pass 
representing their shares respectively of the transit and escort fees. 

4, In order to facilitate the arrangements of the British Government 
for the collection of tolls on its own behalf in the Bolan Pass, His Highness 
the Khan hereby cedes to the British Government full civil and criminal juris- 
diction and all other powers of administration within the limits of the said. 
pass and within the land purchased by the British Government at Rindali for 
a Railway station and other buildings, 


Seal of Mir Khudadad Khan, 


(Sd) -B, G. SANDEMAN, 
Agent Governor-General Biluchistan, Quetta Residency. 
8th June 1883. 


Khan of Kelat. 


400 Baluohistan—Kelat-No. CLKXX. Part IIT 


Seal of the Viceroy and Governor-General of India. 


| RIPON, 
Viceroy and Governor-General of India, 


This agreement was ratified by His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India at.Simla on Wednesday this 12th day of September 1883. 


(Sd)  C, GRANT, 


Secretary to the Government of India, 
Foreign Department, 


No. CLXXX. 


TRANSLATION of a Sanap dated 7th Rajab (16th June 1880) 
granted by His Hienness Mir Kuopapap Kuan, Kuan of 
Keuat, to the BRITISH GOVERNMENT. 


I, Mir Khodadad Khan, G.C.S.1., Khan of Kelat, do hereby make over 
in perpetuity to the British Government in gift the lands within my dominions 
on which the Kandahar State Railway has been constructed, together with the 
lands on either side of the line of railway for a distance of 200 yards, as well 
as those Jands on which all railway stations atid buildings have been erected. 
The object of my making this gift to the British Government is to show the 
friendship with which I regard the alliance existing between the British 

* This should run— Government and the Kelat State,* and to enable the 
“The British Government British Government to make their own arrangement 
is at liberty to make itsown for the protection of life and property within the 
me mee a limits of the railway without reference to the laws of 
+ Scent roe was the Kelat State.t But I beg that this may not 
“Without prohibiting the affect my right to realise the usual transit dues 