


The following is the detail of boundaries defined subsequent to the 
demise of my brother between pillars Nos, 8 and: J4, and approved by the 
Governments both of British India and of Beloochistan. This definition I 

‘also accept and approve :— 


Detazts. 

i i. i 10. Hara. 
2. Peace. = 11. Kuchruk. 
3. Mogro. 12. Koh Kulan. 
4, Kukro 13. Shukloo. 
6. Hahoo. 14. Dang Chungo. 
6. Khubar Gulo. 15. Gogird Dana. 
7. Mungur, ie Hesodees 
8. Jehluk. 2 SA MEO 
9 Chung. ah 


304 Baluchistan—Xalat—No. CLXXVII, Part TIT 


No. CLXXVII. 


Convention between the Brirish GovErnuent and His Hieun- 
NEss KnopapaD Kuan, Kuan of Kueiat and BELoocuis- 
ran, for the extension of the Electric Telegraph through 
such portions of the dominions of His Highness in Mekran 
as lie between the western boundary of the province under 
the feudatory rule of the Jam of Beyla and the eastern 
boundary of the territory of Gwadur—1863. 


Articie 1) 


‘That His Highness the Khan of Khelat shall afford protection to the 
line of telegraph and to the persons employed in its construction and main- 
tenance through the tract of the country lying between the western boundary 
of the province under the rule of the Jam of Beyla and the eastern boundary 
of the Gwadur territory. 


ARTICLE 2. 


That the British Government shall be at liberty to erect stations in such 
parts of the said country as they may deem most convenient for telegraph 


purposes. 


ARTICLE 3. 


That the material of the telegraph may be landed, free of duty, wherever 
the British Government may think most convenient on His Highness’s coast. 


ARTICLE 4, 


That the cost of material, Jabour, landing charges, housing, provisions, 
etc., shall be borne by the British Government, who will also make any 
arrangements they may consider most convenient regarding their own supplies, 
labour, ete., His Highness the Khan undertaking that no impediment shall be 
thrown in their way, but that, on the contrary, every protection and assistance 
shall be afforded on.his part. 


ARTICLE 5. 


That for the protection of the line and those' employed upon it, the 
British Government will agree to pay the annual sum of Rupees five thousand 
(5,000), and His Highness the Khan of Khelat is not to be called upon to go 
to any further expense than the above sum. 


Part III Baluchistan—Zalat—No. CLXXVII. 395 


ArticLe 6, 


That His Highness the Khan shall give notice through the Political 
Agent to the British Government of the proportions of the sum above men- 
tioned which he may wish to be paid to the various Chiefs to whom he will 
entrust the conservation of the line, it being understood that the whole sum 
paid by the British Government for that purpose will be expended amongst 
the Chiefs and people through whose country the line passes. On receipt of 
His Highness’s wishes in this respect, the sums will be paid to the named 
parties through the Political Agent or other officer appointed by the British 
Government. 


