


Article 8 of the Treaty of 1854, the British Government on its part engages 
to respect the independénce of Khelat, and to aid the Khan, in ease of need, 
in the maintenance of a just. authority and the protection of his territories 
from external attack, by such means as the British Government may at the 
moment deem expedient. 


ArticLe 4, 


For the further consolidation of the friendship herewith renewed and re- 
affirmed between the two Governments, it is agreed on the one hand that 
British Agents with suitable escorts shall be duly accredited by the British 
Government to reside permanently at the Court of the Khan and elsewhere 
in His Highness’s dominions, and on the other hand, that a suitablé represen- 
tative shall be duly accredited by His Highness to the Government of India. 


ARTICLE 5. 


Tt is hereby agreed that should any dispute, calculated to disturb the 
peace of the country, arise hereafter between the Khan and the Sirdars of 
Khelat, the British Agent at the Court of His Highness shall in the first 
place use his good offices with both parties to effect by friendly advice an 
amicable arrangement between them, failing which the Khan will, with the 
consent of the British Government, submit such dispute to its arbitration, and 
accept and faithfully execute its award. 


ARTICLE 6, 


Whereas the Khan of Khelat has expressed a desire on the part of him- 
self and his Sirdars for the presence in his country of a detachment of British 
troops, the British Government, in accordance with the provisions of Article 
4 of the Treaty of 1854, and in recognition of the intimate relations existing 
between the two countries, hereby assents to the request of His Highness, 
on condition that the troops shall be stationed in such positions as the British 

_ Government may deem expedient, and be withdrawn at the pleasure of that 
Government. 


~ 


Articoiy 7. 


It is also agreed that such lines of telegraph or railway as may be bene- 
ficial to the interests of the two Governments shall be from time to time con- 
structed by the British Government in the territories of the Khan, provided 
that the conditions of such construction be a matter of previous arrangement 
between that Government and the Government of His Highness, - 


Articie 8. 


There shall be entire freedom of trade between the State of Khelat and 
the territories of the British Government, subject to such conditions as the 
British Government may, at any time, in concert with the Khan of Khelat, 

eem necessary for the protection of fiscal interests. 


898 Baluchistan—Kalat—No. CLK XIX. Part IIL 


ARTIOLE 9. 


To aid Meer Khodadad Khan, his heirs, and successors, in the efficient 
fulfilment of the obligations contracted by them under the Treaty of 1854, 
and the present supplementary engagement, the British Government hereby 
undertakes to pay to the said Khan, bis heirs, and successors an annual sum 
‘of one lakh of rupees, so long as they shall faithfully adhere to the engage- 
ments heretofore and hereby contracted, 