

ArticLe 10. 

The British Government further undertakes to contribute Rupees twenty 
thousand five hundred annually towards the establishment of posts and 
development of traffic along the trade routes in His Highness’s territories, 
provided such money is expended by the Khan in the manner approved of by 
the British Government, 


Executed at Jacobabad, this eighth day of December one thousand eight . 
hundred and seventy-six Anno Domini. 
(Sd.) LYTTON, 


Viceroy and Governor-General of India, 


—_; 


Seal. | Seal of Khan of Khelat. 


ee 


No. CLXXIX. 


AGREEMENT entered into by His Higuwess the Kuan of Kenar 
Miz Kuupapap Kuan on the one part and by Sir Roser? 
SANDEMAN, K.C.S.I., Acznr to the GoveRNoR-GENERAL in 

_ BILUCHISTAN, on the other part, subject to the CONFIRMATION 
of His ExcreLutency the Viceroy in Covuncin executed at 
the Dasut PuaIn on the 8th day of June 1883. 


Whereas in the year 1879 an arrangement was finally agreed to between 
the British Government and His Highness Mir Khudadad Khan of Kelat by 
which the district and Niabat of Quetta were placed under the administration 
of the British Government on certain conditions and for a certain period, and 
whereas the period fixed by the said arrangement is almost expired, and 
whereas it has been found by experience to be to the advantage of both 
Governments that the district and Niabat of Quetta should be exclusively 
managed by the officers of the British Government, and whereas it appears. 
desirable to His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor-General of India and 
to His Highness the Khan of Kelat, that a similar arrangement should be 
made regarding the Jevy of dues and other matters connected therewith in 


Part LIT Baluchistan~Kalai—No. CLXXIX, 399 


the Bolan Pass in consideration of the losses suffered by His Highness the 
Khan of Kelat owing to the opening of the Hurnai route by the British 
Government, it is hereby declared and agreed as follows :— 

1. Mir Khudadad Khan of Kelat on behalf of himself and his heirs and 
successors hereby makes over and entrusts the entire management of the. 
Quetta District and Niabat absolutely and with all the rights and privileges 
as well as full revenue, civil and criminal jurisdiction, and all other powers of 
administration, to the British Government with effect from Ist April 1883 
on the following conditions :— 

(1) That the said District and Niabat shall be administered on behalf 
of the British Government by such officer or officers as the Governor-General 
in Council may appoint for the purpose. , 


(2) That in lieu of the annual surplus of revenue hitherto paid to His 
Highness the Khan under the arrangement of 1879 above cited, the British 
Government shall pay to His Highness on the 31st March in every year, 

»beginning from the 8lst March 1884, a fixed annual rent of Rs. 25,000 
(twenty-five thousand) which has been settled as a fair average equivalent of 
His Highness the Khan’s right to the annual net surplus of the revenues of 
the said District and Niabat. 