


ARticte 7. 


In case of an attack on Meer Nusseer Khan by an open: enemy, or of any 
difference arising between him and any foreign power, the British Govern- 
ment will afford him assistance or good offices as it may judge to be necessary 
or proper for the maintenance of his rights. 


ARTICLE 8. 


Meer Nusseer Khan will make due provision for the support of Shah 
Newaz Khan, either by pension to be paid through the British Government, 
on condition of that Chief residing within the British territory, or by grant 
of estates within Khelat possessions, as may hereafter be decided by the 


British Government. 


. Done at Khelat this 6th day of October A.D, 1841, corresponding with the 
20th Shaban A.H. 1257. 


Napanee 


Seal. 


(Sd,) AUCKLAND. 


(Sd.) Meer Nusszer 
Kaan. ‘ Seal. 


Ratified and signed by the Right Honourable the Governor General of 
India in Council, at Fort William in Bengal, this 10th day of January 1842. 


( 


(Sd.) ° T., H. Manpock, 
Secretary to the Government of India. _ 


Part III Baluchistan—Kalat—No, CLXXV. 391 


No. CLXXV. 


TREATY between the BRirisH GOVERNMENT and NussEER Kwan, 
Chief of Khelat, concluded on the part of the British Gov- 
ernment by Mason Joun Jacos, C.B., in virtue of full 
powers granted by the Most Nosiz the Marquis of Dat- 
HOUSIE, K.T., etc., Governor-General of India, and by Mzrr 
Nusszer Kuan, Chief of Khelat—1854. 


A Whereas the course of events has made it expedient that-a new agree- 
ment should be concltided between the British Government and Meer Nusseer 
Khan, Chief of Khelat, the following Articles have been agreed on between 
the said government and His Highness :— 


ArtIcLE 1 


The Treaty concluded by Major Outram between the British Government 
,and Meer Nusseer Khan, Chief of Khelat, on the 6th October 1841; is’ hereby 
annulled. 


ARTICLE 2. 


There shall be perpetual friendship between the British Government and 
Meer Nusseer Khan, Chief of Khelat, his heirs and successors. ; 


ArRticie 38. 


Meer Nusseer Khan binds bimself, his heirs and successors, to- oppose to 
the utmost all the enemies of the British Government, in all cases to act in 
subordinate co-operation with that Government, and to enter into no negotia- 
tion with other States without its consent, the usual friendly correspondence 
with neighbours being continued as before. 


ARTICLE 4: 


Should it be deemed necessary to station British troops in any part of 
the territory of Khelat, they shall occupy such positions as may be thought 
advisable by the British authorities. 


cy 
ArtTrIoLE 5. 


‘ Meer Nusseer Khan binds himself, his heirs and successors, to pre. 
vent all plundering or other outrage by his subjects within or near British 
territory ; to protect the passage of merchants to and fro between the British 
dominions and Afghanistan, whether by way of Sindh or by the sea-port of 
Soumeeanee, or other sea-ports of Mekran, and to permit no exactions to be 


392 Baluchistan—Kalat—No. CLXXV. Part III 