


realisation of the usual tran- (ggno) on merchandi 
sit dues (sung) which I (sung) erchandise. 
receive.” 

(Sa.) F.H. 


Seal of Mir Kuopapap Kaan, 
Khan of Kelat, 


Part III Baluchistan—Les Bela —No. CLXXXI. 401 


No. CLXXXI. 


MEMORANDUM of conditions subscribed to by Jam Aur Kuan on 
his succession to the Chiefship of Las Bela—1889. 


Whereas His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor-General has been 
pleased to sanction my succession to the Chiefship of the Las Bela State, I, 
the undersigned, Sardar Haji Jam Ali Khan, hereby accept the following con- 
ditions which have been explained to me personally by Sir Robert Sandeman, 
Agent to the Governor-General in Baluchistan. 

First.—I will always conduct the administration of the Las Bela State in 
accordance with the advice of the Agent to the Governor-General. 

Secondly.—1 will employ a Wazir approved by the Agent to the Gov- 

ernor-General. 
»  Thirdly—For a term of five years I will make no important change in 
the customs of the country or in the system of administration now established 
without the concurrence of the Agent to the Governor-General. I will parti- 
cularly avoid imposiog fresh burdens of taxation, and resuming muéfi grants. 
Further, before causing sentences of death to be executed, I will obtain the 
sanction of the Agent to the Governor-General. 

Fourthly.—I hereby grant a free pardon to all who have been hostile to 
me in the past, I will not.revenge myself upon them, nor harass them, ia 
any way. 

Fifthly.—I will make such allowances from the revenues of the Las Bela 
State as the Agent to the Governor-General may now, and in future from 
time to time, recommend for the widow, sons and family of my late father. 
I will similarly maxe suitable provision for Akhundzada Muhammad Nur, 
Vakil Walidad Khan, Sardar Sahib Khan Chutta, and other servants of the. 
Las Bela State, in accordance with the recommendations of the Agent to the 
Governor-General. 


No, CLXXXIT. 


TRANSLATION of AGREEMENT with the Jam of Bryza, dated the 
21st December 1861. 


Whereas it is in contemplation to carry on, as far as India, the commu- 
Nication now opened between Great Britain and other high States of Europe 
and Asia by continuing the line of Electric Telegraph from Constantinople 
and Bagdad, through Persia and Beloochistan, to Kurrachee, and whereas in 
the prosecution of this scheme of universal benefit, it has become necessary to 
take measures for the security and protection of the said contemplated line, 

3G 


. 


402 Baluchistan—Zss Bela~No. CLXXXII. Part III 


the high government of Bombay have deputed Major F. J. Goldsmid for the 
special purpose of entering into such negotiations with the several Chiefs 
holding territory between Kurrachee and Gwadur as may be deemed necessary 
for the due furtherance of the aforesaid undertaking. 

Now the lirie of coast from the Hubb river to Khos Kulmut or its 
vicinity, a distance of 240 measured miles, being within the territory of Jam 
Meer Khan, Chief of Lus Beyla, the undersigned, Major F. J. Goldsmid, on 
the part of the British Government, and with the knowledge and consent of 
its firm ally, Khodadad Khan, ruler of the sovereign State of Khelat, hereby 
makes agreement with Jam Meer Khan aforesaid for the construction, main- 
tenance, and protection of the Jine of Telegraph between the above-mentioned 
places. \ . 