

The detailed agreement is as follows - 


ARTICLE I. ‘ 


The materials for the line may be landed on any part of the coast between 
the Hubb river and Khos Kulmut, and all reasonable assistance will be ren- 
dered by the local authorities in ensuring its security and facilitating its con- 
struction, due payment being made for labour or articles supplied. 


ARTICLE 2, 


There wil] be two Telegraph stations erected for the residence and office 
of signallers, one at Soumeeanee and one at Ormara. 


ARTICLE 8, 


All individuals authoritatively employed in the construction, maintenance 
or use of the line aforesaid, shall receive such protection and assistance from 
the local authorities as will enable them to prosecute their work without let 
- or hindrance, due payment to be made for labour or articles supplied. 


i ARTICLE 4. 


A sum of Rupees 10,000* yearly shall be paid by the Political Agent at 
Khelat to the Jam of Beyla, on the understanding that he keeps up an estab- 
lishment of not less than men, on salaries of Rupees per mensem in 
the ageregate, for the due protection of the line, and rendering such assist- 
ance as from time to time may be required by the Telegraph employés 
stationed on the coast. 


*The amount of yearly payment must depend on further, reference as to the actual work 
required. But the undersigned is of opinion that the full sum may be double that fixed for the 
pay of a watching establishment here entered. For instance, supposing such establishment to be 
Rupees 330 per mensem, the yearly amount would be Rupees 3,960, cf which the double would 
be Rupees 7,920, This would be estimated in round numbers at Rupees 8,000. 


Part IIT Baluchistan—Kej—No. CLK XXIII. 403 


ARTICLE 5. 


Should it be authoritatively reported at any time that the said establish- 
ment is insufficient, and such injury be done to the line as would lead to the 
belief that due care was not exercised in its protection, the Political Agent, 
Khelat, will be empowered to call upon the Jam of Beyla to make such addi- 
tiona’ payment as will not exceed in the whole the amount of full yearly 


subsidy. 
ARTICLE 6, 


The annual payment to the Jam will commence from the date that five 
miles of Telegraph wire may be reported set up, all intermediate payment 
being made according to labour or articles supplied as previously provided. 


ARTICLE 7. 


Complaintg against individuals iu the employ of the Telegraph De. 
partment not capable of satisfactory adjustment will be referred to the Politi. 
eal Agent at Khelat. Any cases of urgency, whether in the nature of a com- 
plaint or otherwise affecting such persons, may be referred to the Magistrate 
or Commandant of Police,at Kurrachee as exceptional, should occasion require. 


2 


ARTICLE 8. 


Continued obstruction or injury to the line may cause revocation of this 
agreement on the part of government at any time, 


The agreement made between the parties hereto as above defined is to be 
Considered dependent for completion aud effect upon the approval of the Bom- 
bay Government. 