ARTICLE 7, 


That annual payment will commence from the date that the telegraph 
officers may report that 50 miles of the line have been erected, and that its 
conservation is complete for that distance. 


ARTICLE 8. 


That any disagreement between the Telegraph officials and the subjects 
of His Highness the Khan of Khelat shall be referred to the Political Agent 
at Khelat if it cannot be satisfactorily settled on the spot by the telegraph 
officers in communication with the Agent of His Highness. 


ARTICLE 9, 


Continued obstruction or injury to the line may cause revocation of this 
agreement at any time on the part of the British Government. 


(Sd.) M. Green, Major, 


Camry Kusumore; Actg, Political Agent to the Court of 
Uhe 20th Feb. 1863. His Highness the Khan of Khelat. 


AppitiovaL CLavsz (10) of a Convention with His HicHNEss 
the Kuan of Kueuat, for the passage of the Electric Tele- 
graph through his Mekran territory. 


ARTICLE 10. 


That His Highness the Khan of Khelat, with the view of accelerating 
the erection of the Electric Telegraph, agrees that the Enclish Government 
nay abe and make their own arrangements with the tribes (his subjects) 

ekran, 


8906 Baluchistan—Zalat—No. CLXXVIII. Part IIt 


It being understood that the above shall not include any cession of 
Khelat territory without his (the Khan’s) consent, and that, should offices or 
buildings be erected, their sites shall always be considered as belonging to the 
Khelat Government. 


On the part of the British Government. 


JACOBABAD, Upper SINpDH ; (Sd.) M. Green, Major, 
The 23rd March 1863. Acig. Political Agent at Khelat. 
ou (Sd.) Kuopapap Kuan, 
Ruler of Kikelat, 


No. CLXXVIII. 


TREATY between the British GovERNMENT and the KaELat 
StaTE—1876. 


a 

Whereas it has become expedient to renew the Treaty of 1854, between 
the British Government and Naseer Khan, Kban of Khelat, and to supple- 
ment the same by certain additional provisions calculated to draw closer the 
bonds of friendship and amity between the two Governments, the following 
additional Articles are herewith agreed upon between the Right Honorable 
Edward Robert Bulwer Lytton, Baron Lytton of Knebworth, in the County 
of Hertford, and a Baronet of the United Kingdom, Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India, and Grand Master of the Most Exalted Order of the Star of 
India, on behalf of the British Government on the one hand, and His High- 
ness Meer Khodadad Khan, Khan of Khelat, on the other :—~ 


ARTICLE 1, 


The Treaty concluded between the British Government and Meer Naseer 
Khan, Khan of Khelat, on the 14th of May 1854, is hereby renewed and 
re-affirmed. : 


ARTICLE 2, 


There shall be perpetual friendship between the British Government and 
Meer Khodadad Khan, Khan of Khelat, his heirs, and successors, 


ABTICLE -3. 


Whilst on his part, Meer Khodadad Khan, Khan of Khelat, binds him- 
self his heirs, successors, and Sirdars to observe faithfully the provisions of 


Part III Baluchistan—Xalat~No. CLXX VIII. 307 