


made beyond an equitable duty to be fixed by the British Government and 
Meer Nusseer Khan, and the amount to be shown in the Schedule annexed to 
this Treaty. 

Arvic Le 6, 

To aid Meer Nusseer Khan, his heirs and successors, in the fulfilment of 
these obligations, and on condition of a faithful performance of them year by 
year, the British Government binds itself to pay to Meer Nusseer Khan, his 
heirs and successors, an annual subsidy of fifty thousand (50,000) Company’s 
Rupees. 


ARTICLE 7. 


If during any year the conditions above mentioned shall not be faithfully 
performed by the said Meer Nusseer Khan, his heirs and successors, then the 
annual subsidy of fifty thousand (50,000) Company’s Rupees will not’ be paid 
by the British Government. ‘ 


None at Mustoong, this fourteenth day of May one thousand eight hundred 
and fifty-four. 
(Sd.) Joun Jacos, Major, 


Moustoone, Political Superintendent and Commandant 
14th May 1664, . on the frontier of Upper Sindh. 


SCHEDULE showing amount of duty to be levied on. merchan- 
dize passing through the dominions of the Khan of Khelat 
referred to in Article 5 of this Treaty. 

On each camel-load, without respect ‘to value, from the northern fron- 

tier 10 the sea, either to Kurrachee or other port, Company’s Rupees 6. 

On each camel, as above, from the northern frontier to Shikarpore, Com- 

pany’s Rupees 5. 

The same duties to be levied on merchandize passing in the contrary 
direction from the sea, or from Sindh to the Khelat territory. 


(Sd.) Joun Jacos, Major, 


Political Superintendent and Commandant 
on the frontier of Unper Sindh. 


The foregoing Articles of Treaty having been concluded between the 
British Government and the Khan of Khelat, and signed and sealed by Major 
John Jacob, C.B., on the one part, and Meer Nusseer Khan on the other, at 
Mustoong, on the 14th May A.D. 1854, corresponding with 16th Shaban A.H. 


Part III Baluchistan—Xalat—No. CLXXVI. - 393 


1270, a copy of the same will be delivered to His Highness, duly ratified by 
the Governor General in Council, within two months from this date. 


(Sd.) Datsovusie. 
95 J. Dosim, 
a5 J. Low. 
»  ¢. P. Grant. 
»  B, Peacock. 


Ratified by the Most Noble the Governor General in Council, Fort 
William, this 2nd day of June 1854, 
(Sd.) G. F. Epmonstons, 
Secretary to the Government of Indta. 


No. CLXXVI. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT made by His Hicungss the 
Kuan OF KuExAt, dated 24th Suffer 1279, corresponding 
with A.D. 21st August 1862. . 


I, Meer Khodadad Khan, the Khan of Khelat, do hereby voluntarily 
state that a Surveying Officer, on the part of the British Government, and 
Shahbaz Khan, Agent on the part of the Government of Beloochistan, were 


appa to define the boundary between my territory and that of: the 
ritish. 


They thoroughly examined the boundary according to the detail of durees 
or pillars numbered 1 to 8 and 14 to 80: the settlement of this portion was 


accepted and approved by my late brother, Meer Nusseer Khan, and I also 
accept and approve of the same, 