


er ai by the Governor-General of India in Council on 19th August 


CLXXXITI. 


Abstract TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT passed, under date 
the 24th January 1862, by Fuquzrer MaHomMeD Brzunso, 
Naib of Kedge to Mason F. J. GotpsmiD, Assistant Com. 
missioner in Sindh, on behalf of the British Government. 


M Under instructions from His Highness the Khan of Khelat, Fuqueer 
ahomed Bezunjo has presented himself before Major ¥. J. Goldsmid, 


404 Baluchistan—Kej— No. CLXXXIV. Part III 


Assistant Commissioner in Sindh, and learnt all the arrangements contemplated 
for the establishment of the proposed line of Telegraph. He states in the 
presence of that officer and Rais Rahmutoollah Khan, Agent of His Highness, 
that if the British Government intend to set the Electric Telegraph on the 
Mekran coast, he will use his best endeavours to protect and maintain it from 
Kalmut-bunder to Gwadur-bunder, and will provide the men required for that 
purpose. For this service he shall receive through the Political Agent, 
Khelat, and with the consent of the Khan, the sum assigned and deemed 
proper by the British Government. He will also lend assistance to the due 
establishment of the Electric Telegraph by protecting the materials and 
stores in such manfher that there shall be no obstruction to the work. It is 
understood that all articles supplied to the persons corinected with the Tele- 
graph shall be duly paid for by the receivers, 


Provided always that his responsibility in the above matter depends on 
his holding the office of Naib of Kedge. 


Signed in the presence of Major F. J. Goldsmid, Assistant Commissioner 
in Sindh, and in the presence of Rais Rahmutoollah, Agent of His Highness 
the Khan, under date the 24th January 1862. 


Note written before FuqurER MAnomeED of Kedge, and signed by 
Rais RagMurToottan KwHAN on the Ist February 1862. 


The word “‘ Gwadur-bunder” shall be understood to comprise {all lands 
within the recognized boundary of Gwadur. 


a 


Approved by the Governor General of India in Council on 19th August 
1862, 


No. CLXXXIV. 
TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT entered into by the Naze of 
KeEps,—1869. 


Tn continvation of, and in the terms of, the Agreement concluded in the 
year 1862 with the consent of the Khan of Beloochistan, Sirdar Meer Fuqueer 


Part IIT Baluchistan—Bchu, ete—No. CLXXXV. “405 


Mahomed, Naib of Kedj, now undertakes to guarantee the protection of the 
Telegraph line from the Gwadur to the Baho boundary, and also gives a 
similar assurance on the part of Meer Bhayan, Gitchki. ‘he British Govern- 
ment to pay the said Sirdar the sum of Rupees 1,600 annually, the Sirdar to 
place at the disposal of the Telegraph Superintendent two line-riders on 
Rupees 20 mouthly each, to be stationed between Gwadur and Baho. The 
pay of these guards to be deducted from the said sum of Rupees 1,500 and 
paid to the men through the Telegraph Superintendent. This agreement to 
have effect from Ist January 1869, 


The above memorandum was written on 11th February 1869, sealed by 
Fuqueer Mahomed. 