

While the Amir was thus engaged in hostilities at Kandahar, Abdur 
Rahman Khan left Bokhara with the countenance of its Amir, crossed the 
Oxus without resistance, and encamped at Akcha. Fateh Muhammad Khan, 
the Governor of Turkistan, marched to oppose him, but his troops mutinied 
and he was obliged to save himself by flight. By the 12th August 1865, 
Abdur Rahman had made himself master of Turkistan without a blow, and 
proceeded to make preparations for an advance on Kabul in the name ot the 
Amir of Bokhara, 

The Turkistan disaster failed to rouse Amir Sher Ali Khan from the 
settled gloom which had come over him since the death of his favourite, son, 
Muhammad Ali Khan, and he refused to leave Kandahar or take part in 
the management of affairs. Abdur Rahman marched without hindrance to 
Bamian, where he was joined by Muhammad Azim Khan. When he arrived 
within ten miles of Kabul negotiations were set on foot with the Amir’s eldest 
surviving son, Muhammad Ibrahim Khan, Governor of Kabul, for the release 
of the State prisoners and the restoration of their property, and an armistice 
was agreed upon, pending the ratification of these terms by the Amir. His 
consent was, however, refused. Abdur Rahman advanced on Kabul from four 
points, and on the 8rd March 1866 Ibrahim Khan was obliged to capitulate 
under promise of safety and freedom for himself and all the members of the 
Amir’s family in Kabul, while Muhammad Azim Khan was proclaimed Amir. 
On hearing of these events Sher Ali was at last roused to action, and on the 
26th April 1866 marched from Kandahar for Kabul with an army of 14,000 
men and 25 guns, Fateh Muhammad Khan being directed to make a simul- 
taneous advance from Jalalabad. On the 10th May 1866 a severe battle was 
fought at Shekhabad, where Abdur Rahman’sarmy was entrenched. Sher Ali 
Khan was completely defeated and fled from the field, leaving his camp and 
artillery in the hands of the enemy. Muhammad Afzal Khan was released 


420 Afghanistan. Part IV 


from his confinement in the fort of Ghazni, entered Kabul in triumph, and 
was proclaimed Amir of Kabul. Throughout these events the policy of the 
British Government was that of strict neutrality. No aid was given to either 
party, and the Afghans were left to settle their own quarrels, 
With his defeat at Shekhabad Sher Ali’s prospects began to brighten. 
The tyrannical conduct of the Kabul rulers alienated their army and the prin- 
cipal men of ote, and revolts and defections occurred on every side. Sher 
Ali rejected the proposal of the party in power at Kabul to leave him in 
peaceable possession of Herat and Kandahar, while they retained Turkistan 
and Kabul; he again marched on Kabul, but only to meet with another 
disastrous defeat near Kalat-i-Ghilzai in January 1867. He then rétired to 
Herat, and in a few days Kandahar fell into the hands of the victors, 


Muhammad Afzal Khan having thus become de facto ruler of Kabul and 
Kandahar, was recognised as such by the British Government, which also 
declared, in pursuance of the policy of neutrality, its determination to acknow- 
ledge, Sher Ali Khan as ruler of Herat as long as he maintained himself there 
and preserved his friendship for the British Government. Before the action 
of Kalat-i-Ghilzai, Sher Ali had received the adherence of his brother Faiz 
Muhammad Khan, who had quitted the opposite side in disgust at being 
refused the Governorship of Turkistan, to which he considered himself entitled 
for the assistance he had rendered to Abdur Rahman on his arrival from 
Bokhara. To him, therefore, Sher Ali repaired on leaving Herat in May 1867. - 
They advanced on Kabul, but after some slight successes were defeated in 
September of that year at Killa Alladad. ‘Faiz Muhammad Khan was killed 
‘and Sher Ali again retired to Herat. 