


* See Vol. X. . 


414 Afghanistan. Part IV 


t 


the murder of Shah Shuja. These disasters were retrieved by Generals Pollock 
- and Nott, who, with avenging armies, forced their way, the one by the Khaibar 

pass, and the other from Kandahar by Ghazni to Kabul. Having vindicated 

the honour of the British arms, the British army evacuated Afghanistan. 

Dost Muhammad was released and permitted to return to Kabul, and the 

Afghans were left to form any government they might choose. The tripartite 
treaty between the British Government, Ranjit Singh, and Shah Shuja con- 

tained a clause guaranteeing the integrity of Herat, and on the entry of the 

British troops into Afghanistan, Eldred Pottinger, through whose military 

talents and energy the efforts of the Shah of Persia to take Herat had been 

defeated, was appointed Political Agent. Yar Muhammad, however, chafed 

under the restrictions which the British mission placed on his tyranny, more 
particularly on his traffic in slaves, He made secret overtures to Persia and to the‘ 
Kandahar Sardars, who had taken refuge in Persia, for a league to expel Shah 

Shuja and the British from Kabul. Another Agent, Major D’Arcy Todd, was 
sent to Herat in 1839 under instructions from the envoy.at Kabul to negotiate an 
alliance with Shah Kamran. On the 9th June 1839 Articles (No, CXC) 

were given to Yar Muhammad acknowledging him as minister of Herat and 

the channel of all communications with Shah Kamran ; and on the 18th August 
a Treaty (No. CXCI) of perpetual peace and friendship was concluded, the 
terms of which were that the British Government should abstain from inter- 
ference in the internal administration of Herat, and assist Kamran with 
money and officers against all foreign encroachment ; and that Kamran should 
prohibit the sale of his subjects into slavery, should refrain from entering into 
hostilities or political correspondence with any foreign power except with the 
consent of the British Government, to whose arbitration all disputes with 
Shah Shuja were to be referred, should employ no European except subjects of 
Great Britain, and should facilitate trade. 


Within a few weeks after the treaty was signed Yar Muhammad was 
detected in renewed intrigues, offering to put Herat under the protection of 
Persia, and urging the Shah to join in a league for the expulsion of the Eng- | 
lish from Afghanistan. His insolent treatment of the. mission compelled 
Major Todd to withdraw and to suspend the subsidy of Rupees. 25,000 a 
month which was being paid to Herat. The envoy at Kabul earnestly urged the 
advance of a force to punish the Wazir for his treachery; but this did not 
meet Lord Auckland’s views, who disavowed Major Todd’s proceedings. Shortly 
afterwards the disasters occurred at Kabul which ended in the evacuation of 


a SN aS ae A it a a te 
Part IV Afghanistan. 415 


Afghanistan. No sooner was Yar Muhammad relieved of all apprehension of 
the interference of the British Government, than he strangled his sovereign, 
Shah Kamran, usurped the government of Herat, and professed himself a 
dependent of Persia. This was in 1842, 