


Assistance in money was also sent to Isa Kkan at Herat, but before it 
reached him he had been compelled to surrender to the Persians, who took 
possession of the city on the 23th October 1856 and created him Wazir of 
the province on behalf of the Shah. He was murdered within a few weeks 
by a party of Persian soldiers. 


By the treaty* of Paris concluded between England and Persiaon the 4th 
March 1857, the Persians were required to evacuate Herat. Before they 
withdrew they installed Sultan Ahmad Khan, better known by the name of 
Sultan Jan, as ruler of Herat, and the British Government did not refuse to 
recognise him as de facto ruler. This Chief was a nephew and son-in-law of 
Dost Muhammad. On the occupation of Kandahar by the Amir he had fled 
to Persia, where he was well received. He was supposed to be unfriendly to 


* See Vol. X. 


Part IV Afghanistan. : 417 


the British Government, and although relieved of the presence of a Persian 
army, he observed all the outward forms of dependence on the Shah, In 
consequence of a quarrel with Muhammad Sharif Khan, the Governor of 
Farrah, who was one of Dost Muhammad’s sons, Sultan Jan made an expedition 
against Farrah, which surrendered to him on the 30th March 1862, The 
Awir of Kabul immediately collected his forces to resent this aggression. He 
re-took Farrah on the29th June, and on the 28th July laid siege to Herat. 
After a siege of ten months, during which Sultan Jan died, the Amir took 
Herat by storm on the 27th May 1863. Having thus restored the western 
boundary of the Sadozai dominions, Dost Muhammad died on the 9th of June 
following. He wassucceeded in the Government of Kabul by his son Sher Ali 
Khan, who placed his third son, Muhammad Yakub Khan, in charge of 
Herat, and marched towards Kabul. 


The names of the sons of Amir Dost Muhammad were as follows?— 
, f J. Muhaminad Afzal Khan, Governor of Turkistav and Balkh. 
2. Muhammad Azim Khan, Governor of Kuram. 
3. Sher Ali Khan, Heir designate. 
{ 4. Muhammad Amin Khan, Governor of Kandahar. 
5. Muhammad Sharif Khan, Governor of Farrah and Girishk. 
6. Wali Muhammad Khan, Commandant of Akchah in Turkistan, under Afzal 
! Khan's orders. 
7. Faiz Muhammad Khan, stationed in Turkistan under Afzal Khan’s orders: 
( 8. Muhammad Aslam Khan, also under Afzal Khan’s orders. 
9. Muhammad Hasan Khan. 
10. Muhammad Husain Khan. 
11, Abmad Khan. 
12. Muhammad Zaman Khan. 
A struggle for power at once arose among the numerous sons left by Dost 
Muhammad Khan. The first to show disaffection: to the Government of Sher 
Ali Khan was his full brother Muhammad Amin Khan. The example was 
followed by other brothers, and by the time the Amir reached Girishk, at the 
end of July 1863, the family discord was complete. Early in 1864 the 
Amir, who had previously heen recognised by the British Government, 
sent an envoy, Muhammad Rajik Khan, to India to negotiate a new treaty, 
to apply for aid in warlike materials, and to obtain the recognition of the eldest 
son of the Amir, Mubammad Ali Khan, as heir-apparent. It was held that 