

During the second Punjab war Dost Muhammad descended from Kabul 
and re-occupied the Peshawar valley, but after the final overthrow of the 
Sikhs at the battle of Gujrat, the Amir fled back beyond the Khaibar on 
the approach of the British troops. For several years thereafter there was no 
intercourse between the British Government and the Amir, but the Amir 
did not cease to incite the hill tribes on the Peshawar frontier to annoy the 
British Government by perpetual hostilities. In 1850 he added Balkh to his 
dominions. Yar Muhammad, whose policy it was to maintain himself in real 
“independence while soothing the Shah of Persia by empty acknowledgments 
of allegiance, died in 1851, and was succeeded by his son, Saiyid Muhammad 


Khan. 


In 1854 Dost Muhammad Khan, finding himself weakened by the anta- 
gonism of his brothers in Kandahar, and by the interference of Persia, deput- 
ed his son, Ghulam Haidar Khan, to Peshawar, where, in March 1855, a 
Treaty (No. CXCII) was concluded, stipulating that there should be peace 
between the British Government and the Amir, that each should respect the 
territories of the other, and that the friends and enemies of the British Gov- 
ernment should be the friends and enemies of Kabul. 


After the treaty had been concluded and signed, Ghulam Haidar Khan 
‘intimated that it was the intention of his father’s Government to send troops 
to occupy Dawar.* This valley, together with other lands, cis and 
trans-Indus, had been relinquished by Shah Shuja to the Sikh Government, 
and after the annexation of the Punjab the British Government had a right to 
such tracts. But the right had never been asserted, and the Governor-General 
consented to the Amir’s occupying Dawar on his own behalf. This, however, 
was never done. 

Saiyid Muhammad Khan of Herat was deposed in 1855 by Muhammad 
Yusaf, grandson of Firoz and grandnephew of Shah Zaman, Shah Shuja, 
and Shah Mahmud, Thus the Sadozai family was once more restored at 
Herat in the person of Muhammad Yusaf. At this time Dost Muhammad, 
having quarrelled with his brothers, took possession of Kalat-i-Ghilzai, and 
soon afterwards, on the 6th ‘January 1856, of Kandahar. His ambition, 


* See page 248. 


416 Afghanistan. Part 1V 


however, was directed to the reduction of Herat, which he had always consi- 
dered to bean integral part of the Afghan dominions. Dreading the advance of 
Dost Muhammad, Muhammad Yusaf threw himself on the support of Persia, 
declared himself to be a vassal of the Shah, and offered to issue coin and have 
prayers read in the Shah’s name, He invited the assistance of a Persian 
army; but when it advanced found himself threatened both from east and 
west with the loss of his independence. Accordingly he hoisted the British 
flag at Herat and declared himself a subject of the British Government. This 
proceeding was repudiated by Lord Canning in the name of the Queen’s 
Government as a presumptuous and dishonest act. Muhammad Yusaf was soon 
after deposed by a faction in Herat headed by Isa Khan, and sent a prisoner to 
the Persian camp. The aggression of Persia on Herat, coupled with the insults 
which had been offered to the British mission at Tehran, led to the declaration 
of war between England and Persia in 1856. Measures were immediately 
taken to subsidise Dost Muhammad, who had consulted the British Government, 
and to encourage him to advance against the Persians. The result was the con- 
clusion of an Agreement (No. CXCITI) on the 26th January 1857, confirm- 
ing the treaty of 1855. Stipulations were made for the payment of a subsidy 
by the British Government to the Amir to enable him to strengthen his 
frontier, and for the deputation of British officers to Kandahar during the 
continuance of the Persian war tosee that the subsidy was appropriated to the 
object in view, as well as for the residence at Kabul and Peshawar respectively 
of a native envoy of the British and Kabul Government. 