


»  MutraHassan, ,, » PAHALWAN, Motibar, Bort. 
» Muza Manig, # » Att Kaan, Shakbozai. 
sy TanMmas Kuan, Sargari. +s Azra Kuan, Alizai. 


39 SHan Hossay, ” ‘ 33 Lunpak Kuan, Khiderzats. 


» Kuvsupin Kuan, Khwadadzai. Fe Hast, Utmankhel. 
9 Mir ALAM Kuan, Urgassi. % KanakHan, ” 

Camp Dunat, } (Sd.) BR. G. Sanpeman, President, 
The 22nd November 1884. Agent to the Governor. General. 


35 


PART IV. 


TREATIES AND ENGAGEMENTS 


RELATING TO 


AFGHANISTAN. 


> At the beginning of the present century the Durani empire, extending from 

Herat to Kashmir and from Balkh to Sind, which had been built up by Abmad. 
Shah Abdali, remained undivided in the hands of his grandson, Zaman.Shah. 
Having incurred the enmity of the powerful Barakzai tribe, Zaman Shah was 
deposed and blinded by his brother Mahmaud, who was supported by Fateh 
Khan and the Barakzais. He eventually died a pensioner of the British Gov- 
ernment at Ludhiana. In 1803 Shah Mahmud was driven out by Shuja-ul- 
Mulk, the younger brother of Zaman Shah; and Shah Shuja was still in pos- 
session of the undivided empire of Ahmad Shah at the time of Mr. Elphinstone’s 
mission in 1808. 


This mission was sent for the purpose of concerting with Shah Shuja 
the means of mutual defence against the threatened invasion of Afghanistan and 
India by the Persians in confederacy with the French. The mission was well 
received, and it resulted in the conclusion of a Treaty (No. CLXXXIX) of 
alliance, which was ratified by Lord Minto on the 17th June 1809. It was 
understood that the stipulations of the second article rendered it:incumbent 
on the British Government to assist Shah Shuja only in the event of an attack 
by the French and Persians for the purpose of fulfilling the terms of their 
confederacy, but not if Persia alone should invade Afghanistan without such 
a purpose, or in consequence of former enmity or recent disputes, 

Mr. Elphinstone had scarcely left Kabul ere Shah Shuja was driven out 
by Shah Mahmud with the aidof Fateh Khan. Wandering about for some 
years, the sport of fortune, now a captive in Kashmir, now the prisoner of Ranjit 
Singh at Lahore, in September 1816 Shah Shuja found an asylum in the British 
territories at Ludhiana. 


————+ SS ~ 
412 Afghanistan. Part IV 


In the meantime Fateh Khan Barakzai, who was the chief support of 
Shah Mahmud’s power, incurred his jealousy, and was blinded and slain, The 
death of Fateh Khan roused the vengeance of the Barakzai clan. Of the 
twenty brothers of Fateh Khan, one of the youngest, Dost Muhammad 
Khan, was foremost in avenging his murder. Shah Mahmud was driven 
from all his dominions, except Herat, and the whole of Afghanistan was 
parcelled out among the Barakzai, brothers. In the confusion consequent on 
this revolution Balkh was seized by the Chief of Bokhara, the Derajat by 
Ranjit Singh, and the outlying province of Sind assumed independence. In the 
partition of Afghanistan, Ghazni fell to the share of Dost Muhammad, but he 
soon established his supremacy at Kabul also, and thus became the most powerful 
of the Barakzai Sardars : his half-brother, Kohandil Khan, ruled conjointly with 
his brothers in virtual independence at Kandahar, while other districts had fallen 
to other sons of Paindah Khan Barakzai. 