

3.—That we Maliks of Zhob and Bori agree to pay within three 
months from this date a finé of Rs. 20,000 inflicted on us as a punishment 
for all attacks or offences committed by us against the British Government or 
its subjects. 

4.—That we the Musalkhel Maliks agree to pay within three months 
a fine-of Rs. 2,000 in condonement of the outrages committed by us in the 
raid on the coolies, and all other offences committed in British territory. 
Further that we will within this time prodace Maliks Baik Khan and Wazir 
Khan to tender their submission. 

5.—That we give the following men with two Motabars of the Sardar 
Khail, approved of by the Agent to the Governor-General for Biluchistan, - 
as hostages for the fulfilment of these terms; and they will remain present 
with the Government officers at Thal Chotiali until the amount of the above 
fine is paid by us, or as long as the British Government consider their presence 
to be necessary. 

6.—It is distinctly agreed to by us, Sardars and assembled Chiefs, that 
the British Government has the right to protect the railway line and trade 
routes by placing troops in Bori or in any way that may be deemed desirable 
by the British Government, Should it be finally decided to occupy Bori, all 
the Sardars and Maliks will recognise the justice of the measure by becoming 
the faithful and loyal subjects of the British Government. 

7.—I£ the Government of India consider it necessary, in order to 
secure the satisfactory fulfilment of the terms now settled, to place troops in 
Zhob or elsewhere, they have the right to do so. 

8,—The request of the Zhob, Bori, and Musakhel tribes, that the 
British Government should take measures to protectthe trade routes in their 


e 


Part III Baluchistan—Ziob, etc—No. CLXXXVIII. 409 


countries and settle internal quarrels and feuds between Sardars and Chiefs in 
the same manner as they do now with regards the Maris, Bugtis, Khetrang, ° 
Kakars, and other tribes of the Thal Chotiali district, will be forwarded by 
the Governor-General’s Agent for Baluchistan for the consideration and orders 
of the Government of India. : 


j_| ‘Seat or Sanpar S#anpaz Kuan, (Sd.) Gawan Kuan, Pakkazat. 


Jalalzai Jogizat. | Ganpax Kuan, 
(Sd.) Dost MunammaD Kuan, Jalalzai. »  Swavi Kuan, ‘ 


és Taupin, Jalalzat. Apaw Kuan, : 


. » 
» sate Kuan, Altkhel, .  Loxuar Kuay, 
“ AMAL Kay, ,, 


3 Miz MUHAMMAD, ,, 
»  Savsar Kuan, ,, 


s ‘3 Karrepan, Ismatlzat. 
» sea Munamatap, Alizai. »  SuLran Muwaamrap, Pakkazai. 
” oe Akhterzai. »  Brszarat Kwan, ” 
~» antes ” » Biswarat Kwan, Ismatlzai. 
A SavsaR Kuan, Dadzat. . Ustar Kuan, Pakkazat. 
4 Ramzan, Ausazat. . Astam Kaan, Gorazai, 
45 Dapeux, 5 


; ; as Kania Kuan, 95 
» _Bowsra, Dostza. » Bangsar Kuan, Kidzai. 
» Muro. 


as Mrayn Kaan, ” 
» Mora Kaorpm, Mirzai. » Karat Kuay, 5, 
»  JEBAN, Mirzar. » Moura Dana, ‘ 
i Macwak, ” 55 Sangaz Kuan, Musakhel. 
»  SIKANDAR, ” » Hassan Kuan, 5 
+ GHARIBIAN, ” ” Gut Mir Kray, ,, 
i Dinar, ” ” Navir Kuay, 2 
»  Muxnta Darez, ,, ai Janet Kuan, Kebzai. | 
»  Davrat Kuan, Khwadadzat. +s SamuanpD Kuan, ,, ; 
ss Janet Kuan, * si Kyanan Kuperzal, Motibar of 
” Kwatig, - Bort. 