


Original sealed before me by Mulla Dora. 


No, CLXXXV. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT made with the Curers of Bano 
and DustYarex for protection of the Telegraph Line. 


In consideration of the annual sum of Rupees 2,000 in equal shares of 
Rupees 1,000 each guaranteed to be made over to us by Colonel Goldsmid, 
Chief Director of the Telegraphs between India and the Telegraphs of other 
Governments, we, Deen Mahomed and Mahomed Ali, being the Chiefs of 
Baho Dustyaree, pledge ourselves to afford all security and protection in our 
power to the line of Telegraph about to be constructed by the British Gov- 
ernment from the boundary of the Kedj territory up to, Charbar, 


We also agree to assist in every way the officers and employés of the 
said Telegraph, and to place at the disposal of the Telegraph officers, when- 
ever required, at least four sowars at Rupees 20 each per month payable by 
the said officers, | 


This agreement to come into immediate effect, payment of subsidy being 
made half-yearly by Captain Ross or other British officers stationed at 
Gwadur, the first instalment being calculated from Ist January 1869. 


Failure to fulfil the conditions here specified will cancel all claim to the 
Subsidy, 


406 Baluchistan — Baku, ete. —No. ChLXXXVI. Part IIT 


Sealed by the above-named Meer Deen Mahomed and Meer Mahomed 
Ali in the presence of Colonel Goldsmid and Captain Ross, whose signatures 
are affixed in token of their engagements herein. 


No. CLXXXVI. 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT made with Suan Nusrur, Re- 
présentative of the Carer of Ga1u, for the protection of the 
Telegraph Line,—1869. 


In consideration of the annual sum of Rupees 3,000 guaranteed to be 
made over to Shah Nusrut, on behalf of the widow of the late Mir Abdullah. 
Khan, of Gaih, by Colonel Goldsmid, c.s., Director-in-Chief, Indo-European 
Telegraph, the aforesaid Shah Nusrat, on his own part and as representative 
of the Chiefdom of Gaih, pledges himself to afford security and protection 
to the line of Telegraph about to be constructed from Charbar to Sadeich. 

He further agrees in every way to assist the officers and emplovés of the 
said Telegraph in the work of construction and maintenance, on the under- 
standing that they shall obtain, from the Chief of Gaih, as many mounted 
men as may be requisite, to be paid by the Telegraph officers at the rate of 
Rupees 20 per mensem for each man. 

Payment of the said subsidy shall be made half-yearly by Captain Ross, 
or other British officer stationed at Gwadur ; the first instalment to be caleu-, 
lated from Ist January 1869. 

Should the aforesaid Shah Nusrut, on the part of the Chief of Gaih, 
fail to fulfil the above specified conditions, he shall forfeit all claim to the 
said subsidy, and this agreement shall be cancelled. 

Sealed by Shah Nusrut and Nowraz Khan in presence of Colonel Gold- 
smid and Captain Ross, whose signatures are affixed in token of their engage- 
ment herein at Charbar, this fifth day of March 1869. 