


d 


Seal of Seal of 
Nowraz Khan. Nowraz Khan. 


(Sd.) F. J. Goipsmip, 
Lieutenant-Colonet. 
E. C. Ross, 
Captain. 


33 


Part III Baluchistan— Marris—No. CLXXXVII. 407 


‘No, CLXXXVIL 


TRANSLATION of an AGREEMENT between the Britisa GoveRN- 
MENT on the one side and SARDAR MEHRULLA Kuan, Marrt 
Carer, on the other side. 


J, Sardar Mehrulla Khan, son of Nur Muhammad Khan, Bahawalanzi 
Guzni Marri, do hereby, in consideration of receiving from the British 
Government an allowance in the form of service to the amount of Rs. 800 
(three hundred) to be increased to Rs. 500 (five hundred) per mensem in the 
event of the experiment proving successful, cede in perpetuity to the said 
Government the exclusive right to all petroleum or other mineral oi) whatsover 
already found or which may hereafter be found at Khatan or in any other 
*part of the Marri country with full liberty for the said Government to extract 
and remove such petroleum or other oil in any manner and by any way that 
to it may seem fit, 


I empower the British Government to transfer to others all or any of 
the rights which it acquires under this agreement. 


T do further agree that in the event of the wells being abandoned the 
allowance shall cease. 


According to the old custom and procedure in force such mineral rights 
are the property of the Ruler or of the Sardar himself. I am therefore re- 
sponsible to answer to any claim or claims that may hereafter be brought for- 
ward by the Marris, and should any claims be proved before the Governor- 
General’s Agent for Baluchistan, I hereby bind myself to carry out his 


award, 
“~N 


Seal of S. Menrurna Kuan, 
Tumandar of Marris. 


The 24th October 1885, 


f 1, Seal of JataB Kuan, son of Murap Kuan, 


Guznt Marri, 
Witnesses, 
2. Mir Hasar Kaan, son of Batucn Kuan, 


Gaznt Marri, 
Executed in my presence. 
(Sd.) R. 1. Bruce, 
Agent to the Govr.Genl, in Baluchistan. 


408 Baluchistan—Zhob, ete—No. CLXXXVIII. Part III 


No, CLXXXVIII. 


TRANSLATION of the SETTLEMENT made between SarpsaR SHAH- 
BAZ KHaw and the Mauixs of Zon, Bort, and MuUsAKHEL, 
and the British GOVERNMENT— 1884. 


l.—That we, Sardar Shahbaz Khan, Maliks Dost Muhammad, Tajudin 
and Muhammad Mir, Jelalzai Jogizais, as well as all other Maliks of Zhob, 
Bori, and Musakhel, now -present execute this agreement in token of our 
submission to the power and supremacy of the British Government, and we 
engage to prevent our tribesmen from raiding or committing crimes in British 
territory. Should any tribesman commit a raid or an outrage we will seize 
him and make him over to the British authorities. 

2.—That we Sardars and Chiefs of Zhob engage to prevent the return 
to Zhob of Shah Jehan Sardar Khbail, excepting witb the sanction of the’ 
British Government, after Shah Jehan and the other chiefs who have fled 
with him have made full submission to the British Government, and on 
condition that such a request shall only be made by Sardar Shahbaz Khan, 
and a majority of the Council (jirga) of the headmen of Zhob. 