


no new treaty was necessary, as the one concluded with Dost Muhammad Khan 


} Both employed under Afzal Khan in Turkistan, 


* Brackets denote sons by the same mother. 


Bf 


418 Afghanistan. Part IV 


was still in force, and the envoy returned to Kabul without waiting for an 
answer to the other requests. 


In the meantime attempts made during the winter to bring about a recon- 
ciliation between the brothers had failed, and preparations for civil strife con- 
tinued in active progress. On the 20th April 1864 the Amir ordered the ad- 
vance of a body of 10,000 men and ten guns under Muhammad Ali Khan towards 
Bamian to meet Muhammad Afzal Khan’s invasion from the north. Simul- 
taneously a second division, 6,000 strong with eight guns, led by the Amir’s 
younger son, Muhammad Ibrahim Khan, and Muhammad Rajik Khan, moved 
to the southward to cope with Muhammad Azim Khan’s expected insurrection in 
Kuram. A collision was precipitated by the capture of the fort of Gardez on 
behalf of the Amir, but after one slight skirmish Muhammad Azim was aban- 
doned by his troops and obliged to seek refuge in British territory. He was 
permitted to reside at Rawal Pindi. 

In the meantime Muhammad Afzal Khan had proclaimed himself Amir in 
Turkistan and marched against the heir-apparent with a force of 25,000 men. 
An indecisive engagement in the defiles of the Hindu Kush took place on the 
8rd June 1864, and was soon followed by a reconciliation between the brothers 
on the basis of the restoration of Muhammad Afzal Khan tothe governorship 
of Turkistan, which was, however, to be shorn of the three districts of 
Maimana, Kunduz, and Kataghan. 

The promises made on this occasion were soon broken. Alarmed at the 
Amir’s menacing language, Abdur Rahman Khan, son of Muhammad Afzal 
Khan, fled to Bokhara, where he was honourably received, On hearing of his 
flight Amir Sher Ali Khan turned all his wrath upon the father, whom he caus- 
ed to be placed inirons, Fresh cause of disquietudé awaited the Amir in his 
rear. Muhammad Sharif Khan, another brother, had been left at Kabul, but 
fearing lest he should fall into the hands of the Amir, he determined not to 
await his return, and joined Muhammad Amin Khan, who was making stre- 
nuous efforts to put Kandahar into a state of defence. 

The Amir, leaving Fateh Muhammad Khan as Governor of Turkistan, 
commenced his return march to Kabul in October 1864, and after a short delay; 
caused by a rumour that the Amir of Bokhara was about to invade Afghan- 
istan in the interests of Abdur Rahman, entered the city with his prisonet, 
Muhammad Afzal Khan, in the following month. 

With the opening of the season of 1865 the Amir commenced prepara- 
tions for securing the eastern provinces of Kuram and Khost against 


Part IV Afghanistan. 419 


Muhammad Azim Khan, who had quitted British territory in March, and for 
crushing the more dangerous coalition at Kandahar in the south-west. It 
was Muhammad Azim’s policy to avoid an engagement till the Amir’s 
approaching necessity at Kandahar should give him an opportunity of action. 
He accordingly fled to the Waziri hills. On the 3rd June 1865 a severe 
action was fought at Kujhbaz between the Kabul and Kandahar forces. 
Muhammad Ali Khan was shot by his uncle Muhammad Amin Khan, who 
was in turn killed himself. The Kandahar force was completely defeated, their 
camp was plundered, and Muhammad Sharif Khan fied. 