


Shah Kamran, the son of Mabmud, managed to maintain a precarious 
footing at Herat. He was nephew of Zaman Shah, Shah Shuja-ul-Mulk, and 
Firoz-ud-din, and was the last remaining representative of the Sadozai princes 
in Afghanistan, Kamran was cruel and dissipated, and entirely ruled by his 
minister Yar Muhammad Khan Alakozai, an able but infamous man 'who 
bad risen to eminence by the murder of the other Chiefs. 


Shah Shuja had still a strong party in Kabul, and never lost hopes of 
recovering his kingdom. With this view, he concluded a treaty with Ranjit 
Singh in: 1833, marched through Sind, where he defeated the Amir, and ad- 
vanced on Kandahar, which he temporarily occupied. Here, however, he 
was signally defeated by Dost Muhamniad, and again fled to his asylum 
at Ludhiana. During the distractions which followed on these events, Ranjit 
Singh possessed himself of the valley of Peshawar. Roused by the aggressions 
of the Sikhs, Dost Muhammad resolved on declaring a religious war on them. 
He assumed the title of Amir-ul-Muminin, Commander of the Faithful, and 
called on all true followers of Muhammad to join in his expedition. With an 
immense army he advanced to the Peshawar valley, but Ranjit Singh sowed 
treason in the camp, and the army melted away. ‘Thus Peshawar was lost to 
the Amir. 


It had long been the policy of the British Government to raise a barrier 
in Persia to the invasion of India by France or Russia from the west, and no 
means had been spared to increase the influence of the British at the court of 


Part IV Afghanistan. 413 


Tehran. By her conquests in the north, however, resulting in the treaty* of 
Turkmanehai in 1828, Russia was enabled to obtain an ascendancy in Persia, 
which she employed to encourage the claims of the Shah to sovereignty over 
Herat and Weéstern Afghanistan. 

On the 23rd November 1837 Muhammad Shah, King of Persia, laid siege 
to Herat in pursuance of his ambitious policy for the re-conquest of Afghan- 
istan, It wason this occasion that Herat sustained the memorable ten months’ 
siege, and all the efforts of the Shah to capture it, aided by the advice and 
direction of Russian officers, were defeated. 


When the Persian army appeared before Herat, Dost Muhammad Khan 
was not disinclined to welcome a power from which he expected support in his 
designs against the Sikhs and in his attempts to recover Peshawar. 

Meanwhile Lord Auckland had sent a mission to Kabul under Captain 
Burnes. The mission was professedly a commercial one, but had also in view 
the checking of the advance of Persia and the establishment of peace between 
the Amir and Ranjit Singh. Dost Muhammad, however, was unable to obtain 
from the envoy the assurance which he hoped for of the good offices of the 
British Government in procuring the restoration of Peshawar, and he therefore 
turned to the Russians, from whom he hoped to obtain greater advantages than 
rom an English alliance. 

To check these aggressive measures on the part of Persia and Russia, the 
British Government in India determined to interpose a friendly power in 
Afghanistan between their frontier and Persia by re-establishing the Sadoza 
dynasty at Kabul and maintaining the independence of Herat as a separate 
State, It was believed that Shah Shuja would be welcomed by a powerful 
party in Kabul, to whom the Barakzai rule was odious. The restoration of 
the exiled monarch was resolved on, and with this object the tripartite treaty 
of June 1838 (see No. XIV) between the British Government, Ranjit Singh, 
and Shah Shuja, was executed. On the 8th of May 1889 Shah Shuja 
was crowned at Kandahar, and shortly afterwards Dost Muhammad sur- 
rendered himself and was carried a prisoner into Hindustan. The welcome,. 
however, which was expected for Shah Shuja from the people was not given. 
He was supported entirely by British bayonets. Insurrections soon broke out, 
which were headed by Muhammad Akbar Khan, the second son of Dost Muham. 
mad. They ended in the destruction of the small British force at Kabul and 