


‘¢ (4) The Western Afghan frontier between the dependencies of Herat 
and those of the Persian Province of Khorassan is well kown and need not 
here be defined.” 


Prince. Gortchakoff, on behalf of his Government, questioned whe- 
ther the Amir exercised actual sovereignty over Wakhan and Badakhshan. In 
regard to the north-westerp boundary he stated that the Russian information 
threw doubt upon the Afghan possession of Akcha, Sar-i-pul, Maimana, Shibar- 
ghan and Andkhui, but added that if the English Government adhered to ils 
opinion as to the expediency of including these places in Afghan territory, 
Russia would be disposed, as far as this portion of the boundary was con- 
cerned, to accept the line laid down by Her Majesty’s Government. 


In January 1873, Her Majesty’s Government again represented the 
grounds on which they based their contention, and this elicited a reply from 
Prince Gortchakoff that while, according to Russian views, Badakhshan and 
Wakhan still enjoyed a certain degree of independence, yet, as it was not 
desired to attach too great an importance to this detail, “ we do not refuse to 
accept the line of boundary laid down by England.” 


Part IV Afghanistan. 429 


This somewhat vague settlement, historically known as the Clarendon- 
Gortchakoff Agreement of 1872-73, was concluded without any reference to 
the Amir. ' 

During the next seven or eight years, the Russian Government con- 
tinued to advance slowly but unceasingly from the Caspian in the direction of 
Merv, and frequent reports were received of their occupation of that place. 
Accordingly, in February 1882, Earl Granville suggested the demarcation of 
the Russo- Persian frontier from Baba Durmaz to the point where the Russian 
frontier meets that of Afghanistan in the vicinity of the Hari Rud, and he 
threw out a suggestion that somethiny might be done with regard to the adja- 
cent Afghan frontier, certain details of which had been left unsettled by the 
Clarendon-Gortchakoff Agreement. Numerous communications passed be- 

> tween the two Governments, but without decisive result, until in Febru- 
ary 1884, while the question was still under consideration, official information 
was received that the Merv Turkmans had made their submission to Russia, 
and that the Czar had determined to accept them as his subjects. Upon this 
a memorandum was despatched to Her Majesty’s Ambassador at St. Peters- 
burg to communicate to the Russian Government, in which it was observed 
that the occupation of Merv seemed entirely inconsistent with the hitherto 
uniform assurances of the Russian Government that they had no intention 
of occupying the place. 

In their reply (March 1884), the Russian Government, after explaining 
their action in this connection, added that if Her Majesty’s Government 
should find it useful and practicable to complete the arrangements previously 
concluded between the two Governments by a more exact definition of the 
countries separating the Russian possessions from Afghanistan, Russia could 
only repeat its proposal of 1882, to continue from Khoja Saleh westward the 
line of demarcation agreed upon in 1872-78. 