


* The substance of General Goldsmid’s arbitral award is as follows :— 

That Sistan proper, by which is meant the tract of country which the Hamun on three of 
its sides and the Helmand on the fourth cause to resemble an island, should be included by a 
special boundary line within the limits of Persia; that Persia should not possess land on the right 
of the Helmand; that the fort of Nad Ali should be evacuated by Persian garrisons, and the 
banks of the Helmand above the Kobak bund given up to Afghanistan ; that the main bed of the 
Helmand below Kohak should be the eastern boundary of Persian Sistan, and that the line of fron- 
tier to the hills south of the Sistun desert should be so drawn as to include within the Afghan limits 
all cultivation on both banks of the river from the bund upwards, the Malik Siah Koh on the 
choio of hills separating the Sistan from the Kirman desert appearing to be a fitting point; that 
north of Sistan the southern limit of the Naizar should be the frontier towards Lash Jawain; that 
Persia should not cross the Hamun in that direction, her possession being clearly defined by a 
line to be drawn from the Naizar to the Koh Siah bill near Bandan; finally,.that no works were 
to be carried out on either side calculated to interfere with the requisite supply of water for 
irrigation on both banks of the Helmand. 


424 : Afghanistan. Part IV 


preparations were accordingly made for the despatch of a party of British 
and native officers of rank, but on the 21st September 1878, by the Amir’s 
orders, his officers at Ali Masjid refused to allow the British envoy to travel 
through the Khaibar pass. 

In spite of this public affront it was still deemed desirable, before pro- 
ceeding to extremities, to give Sher Ali a locus penitentia. An ultimatum was 
accordingly addressed to him, threatening him with war unless, by the 20th 
November, he signified his willingness to comply with the demands of the 
British Government, No answer baving been received by the prescribed date, 
British troops crossed the frontier on the 2ist November by three main lines 
of advance, viz., vid Kandahar, the Kuram and the Khaibar. 

The Afghans were everywhere defeated, the principal action of the cam- 
paign being fought at the Paiwar Kotal on the 2nd December. Shortly after 
this engagement Sher Ali, with the remaining members of the Russian 
mission, fled from his capital towards Turkistan, leaving his son Yakub Khan 
as regent at Kabul. 

Communications passed between Yakub and the British officers, but 
the British troops continued to advance till, towards the end of January 1879, 
they were in military occupation of a great part of Afghanistan. 

News having been received that Sher Ali had died at Mazay-i-Sharif 
on the 21st February 1879, negotiations were opened with Yakab Khan, 
which ended jin the Treaty of Gandamak (No.'CXCIV), signed on 
the 26th May. This provided, amongst other things, that the districts of 
Kuram, Sibi, and Pishin should be assigned districts, and should remain under 
British administration, any surplus of reventie over expenditure being handed 
over to the Amir. It was also arranged that the British Government should 
retain the control of the Khaibar and Michni passes, and of all relations 
with the independent tribes inhabiting the tervitory directly connected with 
those passes. 