


~ 


422 : Afghanistan. Part IV 


considerable force, he laid siege to Herat, which fell on the 6th May follow- 
ing. The Chiefs of that province, through whose assistance and treachery he 
had obtained possession of the city, assumed the whole power and control of 
the finances, and Yakub Khan found his position as ruler, and his ability to 
reward his followers, merely nominal, Under these circumstances he proceed- 
ed to Kabul, and was with some difficulty reconciled to his father, who ap- 
pointed him Governor of Herat, subject to the general control of trusted 
officials from Kabul. The check exercised by them was but slight, and Yakub 
Khan retained all the real power, though much hampered by the impoverished 
state of the province. The reconciliation between father and son was not 
sincere, and reports of Muhammad Yakub Khan’s intrigues and of the mea- 
sures he. was adopting for strengthening bis position at Herat were a constant 
source of “displeasure to the Amir. The estrangement on the son’s side was 
completed by the formal nomination of Abdulla Khan, the youngest son of 
the Amir, as heir-apparent in November 1878. No actual rupture, however, 
occurred, Yakub Khan’s main object now was to‘secure for himself the 
independent government of Herat and funds for carrying on the administra~ 
tion. With this view he suddenly resolved on a visit to Kabul. Before doiig 
so he stipulated that he should retain Herat, should not be detained at Kabul 
more than ten days, nor be compelled to wait on or see the heir-apparent, and 
should be allowed to take back with him all his adherents. These stipulations 
were agreed to by the Amir’s agents, Asmatulla Khan and Arsala Khan 
Ghilzai, who had proceeded to Herat to conduct Yakub Khan to Kabul, On 
his arrival on the Ist November 1874 he was treated ostensibly with kindness, 
but discussions as fo the policy to be observed towards him took place in the 
Amir’s Council, and resulted in his being placed under surveillance, 
the alleged reason being the Amir’s fear that he would make over 
Herat to Persia. Muhammad Ayub Khan, who had been left by Yakub 
Khan at Herat, retaliated by imprisoning some of the Amir’s officials 
at Herat, and made preparations for the defence of the city against the troops 
which the Amir had sent after his son’s arrest to take possession of it. Herat, 
however, fell without resistance, and Ayub Khan, deserted by his followers, 
was compelled to take refuge in Persia. 

For many years the title to the posseisson of Sistan had been in dispute 
between Persia and Afghanistan, and Persia bad more than once in- 
vited the interference of the British Government, notably so at the time 

‘ of the Amir Dost Muhammad Khan’s recovery of Herat in 1863. At that 


< 


Part IV Afghanistan. 423 


juncture the British Government was not prepared to interfere, and the Persian 
Government was informed that it must be left to both parties to make 
good their possession by force of arms. As Persia was bound by Article 6 
of the treaty of 1857 (see Vol. X) not to take up arms against Afghanistan 
without first inviting the friendly offices of the British Government, the effect 
of this refusal to interfere was to authorise an appeal to: arms. Since then 
the Persians had occupied a considerable portion of Sistan. Consequently 
disturbances and raids on both sides of the border took place, which were 
most injurious to the prosperity of the country and to the subjects of both the 
claimants inhabiting the neighbouring provinces, At length both Governments 
agreed to refer the question of the sovereignty and boundaries of the whole 
of Sistan on both sides of the river Helmand to the arbitration of the British 
Government, on the understanding that both ancient right and recent posses- 
‘sion were to be taken into consideration. It was also agreed that the final 
decision of the British Government should be binding on both parties, 
Accordingly, in the spring of 1872, Commissioners on behalf of the parties 
concerned and the British*Government assembled in Sistan, examined the 
lands in dispute, and heard the evidence produced on both sides. An award* 
was finally pronounced by Major-General Goldsmid, the Chief of the Mission, 
which, after some demur, was eventually accepted by Persia and Afghanistan 
and confirmed by the British Government. (See Persia, Vol. X, page 19.) 
From this period the relations between the Amir Sher Ali and the British 
Government became gradually more and more cold and constrained. In the 
course of 1878 matters came to acrisis. In July of that year a Russian mission 
was honourably received in Kabul. The Government of India thought it neces- 
sary to insist upon a similar reception being accorded to a British mission, and 