

Her Majesty’s Government accepted this proposal (29th April 1884) and 
suggested the appointment of a Joint Commission, to commence operations 
in the ensuing autumn. 

Considerable correspondence ensued as to the point from which the 
Commission should commence its labours, the basis of the delimitation, and 
the principles upon which the instructions to the Commission should be framed. 
Eventually it was arranged that General Sir Peter Lumsden, the British Com- 
missioner, and General Zelenoi, the Russian Commissioner, should meet at 
Sarakhs about the 18th October (1884). 


430 Afghanistan. Part IV 


.Sir P. Lumsden duly arrived from England on the frontier and joined 
his escort which bad been sent to meet him from India, But it now 
appeared that there were difficulties in the way of the demarcation, First, 
news was received that the Russian Commissioner wasill and unable to start, 
and then the Russian Government took exception to Sarakhs as the place of 
meeting, suggesting Pul-i-Khatun or some other spot south of Sarakhs. Next, 
a proposal was put forward that a zone should be ‘agreed upon between the 
two Governments, within which the Commissioners should ‘be instructed to 
limit their explorations. 

Meantime winter was coming on apace ; and the Russians had already ad- 
vanced on and occupied Pul-i-Khatun on the Hari Rud and Pul-i-Khishti on 
the. Murghab. Shortly before this Afghan troops had occupied Panjdeh, 
and the Russian Ambassador had called the very serious attention of Her 
-Majesty’s Government to, the fact. 

The British Commissioner had now (December 1884) settled down in 
winter quarters at Bala Murghab, and the Russians intimated that there 
would be still further delay in the arrival of their Commissioner, The 
question of the zone of enquiry was still being discussed in England, when 
on the 30th of March 1885 a Russian force attacked and defeated a considerable’ 
Afghan force at Pul-i-Khishti near Panjdeh. The British Commission, which 
was camped a few miles from the scene of conflict, immediately retired to 
Tirpul.on the Hari Rud. At this critical moment, the Amir was in India on his 
visit to the Viceroy at Rawal Pindi, War was averted, and negotiations were re- 
sumedin London, Sir Peter Lumsden was summoned to England to help in 
the negotiations there, and the charge of the Mission devolved upon Colonel 
Sir West Ridgeway. It was not, however, until the 10th of the following 
September that final arrangements for the demarcation were agreed to between 
the two Governments. <A copy of the Protocol signed on that occasion i8 
appended (No. CXCV). ‘ 

Two months later, the Joint Commission met as arranged at Zulfikar, 
on the 10th of November. The work of demarcation was started immediately, — 
and good progress had been made when a severe winter drove both parties 
into winter quarters shortly after Christmas. 

Work was resumed on the 12th of March 1886, and by the 18th of June 
the frontier was definitely fixed, and pillars were.constructed from Zulfikar on 
the Hari Rud to the meridian of Dukchi, a group of wells north. of Andkhui 
and within 40 miles of the Oxus. 