

Article 4 of the treaty further provided for the residence at Kabul 
of a British Agent, and Sir Louis Cavagnari, accompanied by British 
officers and a suitable escort, was appointed to this post. He held it till 
the lamentable outbreak of the 3rd September 1879, when nearly all the Resi- 
dency staff and establishment were massacred by the mutinous regiments 
in the Amir’s service. 

The British forces were once more put in motion to avenge this outrage, 
and before the close of October were again in military occupation of a great 


Part IV Afghanisten. 425 


part of Afghanistan. Yakub Khan, having voluntarily abdicated after this 
signal proof of his inability to control his own rebellous subjects, the British 
Government undertook the task of establishing some stable administration in 
the country. 

After full consideration it was deemed advisable to erect Kandahar and 

iis dependencies into a separate principality, of which Sardar Sher Ali, a 
Barakzai of Kandahar, was recognised as the Wali or Chief. No special 
arrangements ;were necessary for Herat, where’ Ayub Khan, brother of the 
ex-Amir, and Governor of that province during his short reign, still maintained 
himself in power. It was determined to retain Kabul itself temporarily under 
direct British administration, until its future government could be settled on 
some basis which should have a reasonable prospect of finality. 

’ -In the spring of 1880 Abdur Rahman Khan, who had long been a 
refugee in Russian territory, made his appearance, with a considerable body 
of followers, in Afghan Turkistan, whére he was cordially welcomed by the 
leading Chiefs, and succeeded in establishing his authority on the northern side 
of the Hindu Kush, This Sardar had a few adherents of note in Afghanistan 
proper, more especially in Kohistan, and from his known character and re- 
putation for ability, there seemed reason to believe that he might, with the 
countenance of the British Government, be able to establish himself more 
firmly on the throne ofj{Kabul than any of the other possible candidates for 
the Amirship. Negotiations were accordingly entered into with him, and, 
though he made at ‘first some attempts to raise the country and to assert his 
position as Amir of Afghanistan in his own ‘tight, he readily accepted the 
position offered to him by the Government of India, namely, that of Amir of 
Kabul, the Kandahar province being severed from Kabul and made into a 
separate principality, Matters having been satisfactorily settled, he was formally 
recognised as Amir at a Darbar held at Kabul on the 22nd July 1880. On the 
31st July and the following day a conference was held at Zimma, at which the 
wishes and intentions of the British Government were fully explained to him. 
No formal treaty was drawn up, but it was understood that he was to 
be assisted with arms and money by the Government of India to such an 
extent as might appear{to them to be necessary ; that he was to be recognised 
by them as Amir of Kabulj and its dependencies; that he might take such 
measures as he pleased to bring Herat under his control, but was not to inter- 
fere with the Wali of Kandahar; that Pishin, Sibi, and Kuram were to be no 
longer regarded as part of Afghanistan; that the British Government were to 