


» In April 1885 the Amir visited India and met the Viceroy, Lord Dufferin, 
at Rawal Pindi. General assurances of friendship and good-will were ex- 
changed, and His Highness then returned to his own country. 

, In 1886 and 1887 wide-spread and dangerous risings took place among 
the Ghilzai tribes. The movement was at first partially successful, but was 
finally put down by the Amir in 1887. 

In the autumn of 1888 the Amir’s cousin, Sardar Muhammad Ishak 
Khan, Governor of Turkistan, after having for several years evaded accepting 
repeated invitations to Kabul, threw off his allegiance, proclaimed himself Amir 
and commenced to march on Kabul, with the whole of the Turkistan army. 
He was, however, completely defeated by the Amir’s forces at the battle of 
Ghaznighak near Haibak on the 27th September. 1888. Sardar Ishak Khan 
fled, and is:now living in Samarkhand, where he receives a small allowance 
from the Russian Government. The Amir remained in Turkisfan until the 
middle of 1890, returning to Kabul on the 24th July of that year, 

About this time Abdur Rahman appears to have formed the determina- 
' tion to bring entirely under his subjection all the Hazara tribes, who had been 
more or less indepedent of Kabul, Sardar Abdul Kudus Khan, late Gov. 
ernor of Herat, was appointed to the Governorship of Bamian with orders to 
arrange for the complete subjugation of the Hazarajat. This has proved no 
easy task; and up to the close of the year 1892 the Hazaras had offered a deter- 
mined resistance. 

One of the most important-events in the reign of Amir Abdur Rahman 
Khan has been the delimitation of the North-Western Frontier of Afghan- 
istan. . 

Aé far back as 1869, in the reign of Amir Sher Ali Khan, negotiations 
for the purpose of defining the frontier had commenced between Her Majesty’s 
‘Government and the Government of His Imperial Majesty. the Czar. The 


428 Afghanistan, Part IV 


proposals of the British Government were met by counter-proposals by the 
Russian Government, and eventually, in 1872, Her Majesty’s Ambassador at 
St. Petersburg, under intsructions from Earl Granville, submitted to the 
Russian Government the following statement of the territories which Her 
Majesty’s Government considered as fully belonging to Afghanistan :— 


“‘(1) Badukshan with its dependent district of Wakhan from the Sari- 
kul (Wood’s Lake} on the east to the junction of the Kokcha river with the 
Oxus (or Penjah) forming the northern boundary of this Afghan province 
throughout its entire extent. 


(2) Afghan Turkistan, comprising the districts of Kunduz, Khulm, and 
Balkh, the northern boundary of which would be the line of the Oxus from 
the junction of the Kokcha river to the post of Khoja Saleh inclusive, om 
the high-road from Bokhara to Balkh. Nothing to be claimed by the Afghan 
Amir on tbe left bank of the Oxus below Khoja Saleh, 


* (8) The internal districts of Akcha, Siripool, Maimena, Shibbergan and 
Andkoi, the latter of which would be the extreme Afghan frontier possession 
to the north-west, the desert beyond belonging: to independent tribes of 
Turcomans. 