


On the Ist October 1867 Muhammad Afzal Khan died, and was suc- 
ceeded by his brother, Azim Khan, who was recognised as Amir of Kabul and 
Kandahar by the British Government, 


Not disheartened by these frequent reverses, Sher Ali busied himself in 
preparations to renew the struggle. In April 1868 Kandahar fell to the forces 
of his son, Muhammad Yakub Khan. Later on Sher Ali himself marched 
on Kabul; Muhammad Azim, deserted by his troops, fled to Turkistan, and 
Sher Ali entered Kabul in triumph on the 8th September 1868. 

The British Government regarded with satisfaction the re-establishment 
of a consolidated administration in Afghanistan, and, in order to strengthen 
the Amir’s authorify and enable him to meet the more pressing demands 


Part IV Afghanistan. 421 


on the exhausted revenues of the country, practical assistance in the shape of 
a gilt of six lakhs of rupees and 6,000 stand of arms was afforded to bim. 

In the meantime Muhammad Azim ‘and Abdur Rahman had collected their 
forces and marched from Turkistan on Kabul, A decisive engagement took 
place at Tinah Khan on the 8rd January 1869, which resulted in a complete 
victory for the Amir. His opponents fled to the Waziri hills, and finally 
reached Persia. Muhammad Azim Khan died on his way to Tehran on 
the 6th October 1869. 


Immediately after his restoration to power, the Amir Sher Ali had expressed 
a wish to have an interview with the Viceroy, Sir John Lawrence. The troubles 
in Turkistan prevented for a time the fulfilment of this intention, but on the 
defeat of Muhammad Azim Khan the proposal was renewed, and an interview 
between the Amir and the Earl of Mayo, Sir John Lawrence’s successor, took 
place at Umballa on the 27th March 1869. 


The Amir was informed on this occasion that, while the British Govern- 
ment bad no desire to interfere in the internal affairs of Kabul, yet it would 
view with severe displeasure any attempt on the part of the Amir’s rivals to 
disturb his position and re-kindle civil war. The Amir returned to Kabul on 
the 21st April 1869, taking with him as a further present from the British 
Governroent a sum of six lakhs of rupees and one heavy and one mountain bat- 
tery of artillery. , 

During the year 1869 the authority of the Amir remained unshaken, 
though minor disturbances took place and discord was rife among the members 
of his own family. Badakhshan was during this year brought under complete 
control. 


For some time the relations between Muhammad Yakub Khan and his 
father had been the reverse of cordial. Disappointed in his efforts to 
obtain recognition as heir-apparent he fled from Kabul with his younger 
brother, Muhammad Ayub Khan, in September 1870, and marched with 
a few troops on Ghazni. Finding the gates closed, he invested Kandahar, but 
was repulsed, and at Girishk was equally unsuccessful. He then retired to the 
Sistan border, Here negotiations for a reconciliation were commenced, but were 
broken off by the arrival of an army from Kabul to act against him. Yakub 
Khan took to flight, and during the early part of 1871 “wandered about the 
Sistan border, committing raids, and intriguing equally with the Persian 
authorities and the officials of the Amir. In April 1871, having collected a 