

3K 


426 Afghanistan. Part IV 


control the Michni and Khaibar passes and all relations with the independent 
hill tribes in the territory directly attached thereto; and that the foreign 
relations of Kabul were henceforth to be conducted subject to the approval of 
the Government of India. No mention was madeat the time of Khost, but at 
the Amir’s request, he was allowed a few months later to take possession 
of the district. 

The Amir arrived at Kabul on the 11th August 1880, and the same day, 
after a cordial farewell interview between His Highness and the chief British 
officials, the last of the British troops evacuated Kabul territory. Part of the 
force returned direct to Peshawar, but a strong division marched through 
Ghazni and Kalat-i-Ghilzai to Kandahar, which was at this time invested by 
Ayub Khan with an army from Herat. 

Ayub after much vacillation and prolonged preparation, had started from 
Herat in the preceding June with the intention of annexing Kandahar to his 
own principality. On the 27th July he met and defeated at Maiwand a 
British force which had been sent out to check his further progress, As 
he advanced on Kandahar he was joined by large numbers of tribesmen, and 
the garrison of that city was shut up within the walls, till the arrival, on the 
31st of August, of the relieving force under General Roberts, who, on the 
following day, attacked and completely defeated Ayub Khan. The Sardar fled 
across the Helmand to Herat, whither it was not thought necessary to follow him. 

The course of events had made it quite clear that the Wali, Sher Ali, 
could not. hope to maintain himself at Kandahar without the assistance of 
British troops, whom it was .impossible to keep there for an indefinite period. 
He was accordingly allowed, at his own request, to retire to British India on # 
pension, and the Government of India offered the Kandahar Province to Amir 
Abdur Rahman. His ‘Highness was not at first ready to accept the offer, 
urging want of arms, ammunition and transport, but eventually arrange- 
ments were made in accordance with which, in April 1881, the city was 
finally evacuated by British troops, and formally made over to a Governor 
depoted from Kabul. 

During the following summer Kandahar became temporarily subject to 
Ayub Khan, who again advanced from Herat, and succeeded for the time in 
expelling the Amir’s deputy. In September 188] he was once more defeated 
by @ force from Kabul, who followed up their success by advancing on Herat, 
and oceupying it after dispersing Ayub’s army. The Sardar himself fled to 
Persia, where, he remained under surveillance until the summer of 1887, when he 


Part IV Afghanistan. 427 


escaped from Tehran, and made nis way to the Afgehan frontier. He was, 
however, prevented from crossing the border by the prompt action taken by 
the Amir’s authorities in Herat. After undergoing great hardship in the 
Persian desert, he eventually surrendered to General MacLean on the adth 
November 1887, and was sent to India, with a very large following, in the 
ensuing January. The Sardar has undertaken in writing to live in India 
and never to do anything contrary to the wishes of the British Government, 
who have provided him and his principal followers with liberal pensions. 