


Part IV Afghanistan. 431 


Unfortunately the Joint Commission found it impossible to come to 
an agreement as to the spot at which the frontier line should enter the culti- 
vated tracts in the vicinity of the river, or actually meet the river. It is true 
that all the old papers bearing on the subject had spoken of Khoja Saleh being 
the frontier, but no place on the river could now be found which - both sides 
would admit to be the Khoja Saleh of the agreement of 1872-73. 

Accordingly, the Commission dissolved itself at Khamiab at the beginning 
of September 1886, and the British party returned to India vié Kabul, where 
they were honourably entertained by the Amir for about a week. 


The frontier line agreed to up to Dukchi is described in a Protocol (No. 
CXCVI) signed by the Joint Commissioners at Khamiab on the Ist September 
1886. ; 

In the following year Sir West Ridgeway was deputed to St. Petersburg 
to resume negotiations for the completion of the unsettled part of the bound- 
ary. Several meetings took place between the British Commissioner and 
Privy ‘Councillor Zinovieff and M, Lessar, and eventually a settlement was 
arrived at by mutual concessions. Afghanistan restored to the Sarik Turk- 
mans most of the land of which they bad been deprived between the Khushk 
and Marghab rivers, and Russia withdrew her claims to all the districts 
then in possession of the Afghans on the Oxus, and to the wells and pastures 
necessary for the prosperity of the Uzbegs of Afghan Turkistan. 


A copy of the final Protocol, dated the mi J uly 1887 embodying this 
settlem ent is annexed (No. CXCVIT). 

In January 1888 Majors Yate and Peacocke completed the demarcation 
of the revised portion of the frontier between the Khushk and the Murghab 
and between Dukchi and the Oxus. A description of the line of pillars is 
given in an Appendix,* 

While the British Commission was in the vicinity of Herat a local dis- 
pute as to the boundary between Persia and Afghanistan in the Hashtadan 
valley was brought to notice. The locality, which is not far from Kuhsan, was 
Visited and the conflicting claims were mapped. ‘After protracted correspond- 
ence both His Majesty the Shah and His Highness the Amir consented to 
refer the question to the decision of the Viceroy upon the report of Major- 
General Maclean, the Agent to the Governor-General for Khorassan, General 
Maclean proposed a compromise which was accepted by both sides and duly 


® Appendix No. 4. 


432. Afghanistan. Part IV 


carried into effect by demarcation on the spot during the months of March, 


April and May 1891. ’ 
The synopsis of boundary pillars demarcating the line as finally deter- 


mined is given as an Appendix.* 
Amir Abdur Rahman Khan is an Honorary G.C.S.I. He receives from 
the Government of India an annual subsidy of twelve lakhs of rupees. 


* Appendix No. 6. 


Part IV Afghanistan— No. CLXXXIX. 433 


No. CLXXXIX. 


TRANSLATION of the TREATY with the Kine of Cazoon, ratified 
on the 17th June 1809. 