


Arricte 1. 
There shall be perpetual peace and friendship between the British Govern- 
Ment and His Majesty Shah Kamran, his heirs and successors. 
ARTICLE 2. : 
The British Government recognises the government of Herat, as at 
Present constituted, as being vested in His Majesty Shah Kamran, his heirs 


f 


436 Afghanistan—No. CXCI. Part IV 


and successors, and the British Government engages not to interfere in any 
way with the internal administration of His Majesty’s dominions, 


ARTICLE 3. 


With a view to strengthen and perpetuate the concord subsisting between 
the British Government and Shah Kamran, an accredited British Agent shall 
always reside at the Court of His Majesty; in like manner, should His 
Majesty see fit, he will depute an accredited Agent to reside at the Durbar 
of the Governor-General. 

ARTICLE 4, 

The British government undertakes to provide His Majesty Shah Kamran 
with loans of money, with officers, and with all other means'that may be 
found necessary for the protection of His Majesty’s person and country, and 
to assist in the defence of His Majesty’s right and interests against all foreign 
encroachment to the utmost of its ability. 


ARTICLE 5. - 


With a view to enable the British Government efficiently to fulfil the 
obligation contained in the preceding Article, and to obviate all just ground 
of complaint on the part of other powers, His Majesty Shah Kamran agrees 
to prohibit for ever the practice of kidnapping or seizing human beings for 
the purpose of selling them into slavery by any of His Majesty’s subjects ; 
and should there be any persons now in a state of bondage within the limits 
of His Majesty’s authority, who may have been enslaved in the manner 
above-mentioned, His Majesty engages to exert his utmost endeayours to pro- 
cure the liberation of such persons. 


. ARTICLE 6. 


His Majesty Shah Kamran engages to co-operate with the British Gov- 
ernment and with His Majesty Shah Suja-ool-moolk to the utmost of his 
ability in preserving the integrity of their respective dominions against the 
encroachment of all foreign powers, but at the same time His Majesty Shah 
Kamran binds himself to, refrain from entering into hostilities with any 
foreign power without the advice and consent of the British Government and 
His Majesty Shah Suja-ool-moolk. 


ARTICLE 7. 


His Majesty Shah Kamran agrees on his part that, should any dispute 
arise between himself and His Majesty Shah Suja-ool-moolk as to the bound- 
aries of their respective territories or with regard to any other matter, the 
said dispute shall be referred to the arbitration and decision of the British 
Government, and the British Government further undertakes to use its best 
endeavours for the accommodation of all subsisting differences, or of such as 
may hereafter arise between His Majesty Shah Kamran and other powers. 


ARTIOLE 8. 
His Majesty Shah Kamran agrees to refrain from entering into any cor- 


Part IV Afghanistan—No. CXCII. 437 