


It was then decided that the synopsis of the boundary marks constructed 
by the Commission, prepared by Major Holdich, and sent to Colonel Kublberg 
on the 8rd August, should be annexed to the protocol. 


Colonel Kuhlberg speaking about the four last pillars regarding which 

@ discussion had taken place at the last sitting, said that Major Holdich 
ad corrected his first calculations, and it was found that these four marks 
Were more to the north than had been at first supposed. The Oi-Kul, for 
example, is a verst to the north of the position originally marked on the 
map. Colonel Ridgeway referred the matter to Major Holdich, who replied 
that there was nothing absolutely final in this, inasmuch as the computations 
had not been verified. It was not impossible that the first position assigned 


Part IV Afghanistan—No; CXCVI. 447 


to Oi-Kul was the better. He added that the position of the last mark near 
Imam Nazur had not been changed. Colonel Kuhlberg proposed to reconsider 
the last part of the frontier from Chichli. Colonel Ridgeway replied that in 
his opinion this question should be considered by the two Governments. 
Colonel Kuhlberg thought that in this case the two Commissioners should not 
sign the maps any further than Chichli, but Colonel Ridgeway preferred to 
leave the maps without any signature if they could not be signed up to 
Dakchi, the two Governments having in his opinion confirmed the frontier as 
far as that place. 

Colonel Ridgeway then proposed to attach to the protocol copies of the 
maps surveyed by Captains Kontratenko and Peacocke in the valleys of the 
Kushk and Kaahan, in accordance with the agreement reported in protocol 
No, 4. Colonel Kuhlberg having given his assent, Colonel Ridgeway remarked 
that since the month of April, Captains Peacocke and Guédeonoff had not been 
able to agree as to the extent of the land which should be ceded by Afghanis- 

otan for the construction of an embankment at Meruchak (regarding the con- 
struction of which an agreement had been arrived at on certain conditions 
reported in protocols Nos, 4 and 5) and the question had not been decided. 


It was thereupon agreed that the land to be ceded for the head of an 
embankment on the right bank of the Murghab should not exceed 150 yards 
in length by 76 yards in breadth, 

Colonel Ridgeway made it known that he had received a report concern- 
ing the destruction of certain boundary marks in the valley of Meruchak 
owing to recent inundations. . ; 


It was arranged that Colonel. Tarkanoff should be asked by Colonel 
Kuhlberg to co-operate with Mr. Merk, who would shortly be at Meruchak, 
for the reconstruction of these marks. 

Colonel Ridgeway, in regretting that in conjunction with his colleague 
he had not been able to entirely finish the work they had undertaken, could 
not allow the Commission to adjourn without expressing his sincere pleasure at 
the maintenance of cordial relations between the two Commissionis in spite of 
the difference of opinion which had arisen upon several claims. He could onl 
think that this was in a great measure due to the courtesy of Colonel Kuhlberg 
and his colleagues. He wished to add that the Russian topographical officers 
had had beyond comparison the most difficult part of the survey work, and 
he hoped that Colonel Kuhlberg would be good enough to thank them: from 
him in expressing to them his gratitude for the admirable execution of their 
difficult work. 