


ARTICLE 2. 


His Highness the Amir of Afghanistan and its dependencies engages, on 
the exchange of the ratifications of this ‘I'reaty, to publish a full and complete 
amnesty, absolving all his subjects from any responsibility for intercourse with 
the British Forces during the war, and to guarantee and protect all persons of 
whatever degree from any punishment or molestation on that account. : 


Artiote 8. 


His’ Highness the Amir of Afghanistan and its dependenciés agrees to 
Conduct his relations with Foreign States, in accordance with the advice and 
Wishes of the British Government. His Highness the Amir will enter into po 
engagements with Foreign States, and will not take up arms against any _ 


3M 


, 


442 Afghanistan—No. CXCIV. Part 1V 


Foreign State, except with the concurrence of the British Government. On 
these conditions, the British Government will support the Amir against any 
foreign aggression with money, arms, or troops, to be employed in whatsoever 
manner the British Government may judge best for this purpose. Should 
British troops at any time enter Afghanistan for the purpose of repelling 
_ foreign aggression, they will return to their stations in British territory as 
soon as the object for which they entered has been accomplished. 


ARTICLE 4. 


With a view to the maintenance of the direct and intimate relations now 
established between the British Government and His Highness the Amir of 
Afghanistan and for the better protection of the frontiers of His Highness’s 
dominions, it is agreed that a British Representative shall reside at Kabul, 
with a suitable escort in a place of residence appropriate to his rank and: dig- 
nity. It is also agreed that the British Government shall have the right to 
depute British Agents with suitable escorts to the Afghan frontiers, whenso- 
ever this may be considered necessary by the British Government in the inter- 
ests of both States, on the occurrence of any. important external fact. His 
Highness the Amir of Afghanistan may on his part depute an Agent to re- 
side at the Court of His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor-General of 
India, and at such other places in British India as may be similarly agreed 
upon. 


ARTICLE 5. 


His Highness the Amir of Afghanistan and its dependencies guarantees 
the personal safety and honorable treatment of British Agents within his 
jurisdiction; and the British Government on its part undertakes that its 
Agents shall never in any way interfere with the internal administration of 
His Highness’s dominions. 


ARTICLE 6. 


His Highness the Amir of Afghanistan and its dependencies undertakes, 
on behalf of himself and his successors, to offer no impediment to British sub- 
jects peacefully trading within his dominions so long as they do so with the 
permission of the British Government, and in accordance with such arrange- 
ments as may be mutually agreed upon from time to time between the two 
Governments, 


ARTICLE 7. 


In order that the passage of trade between the territories of the British 
Government and of His Highness the Amir of Afghanistan may be open and 
uninterrupted, His Highness the Amir of Afghanistan agrees to use his best en- 
deavours to ensure the protection of traders and to facilitate the transit of goods 
along the well-known customary roads of Afghanistan. These roads shall be 
improved and maintained in such manner as the two Governments may decide 
- to be most expedient for the general convenience of traffic, and under such 