


Part IV Afghanistan—No. CXCIV. 443 


financial arrangements as may be mutually determined upon between them. 
The arrangements made for the maintenance and security of the aforesaid 
roads, for the settlement of the duties to be levied upon merchandize carried 
over these roads, and for the general protection and development of trade 
with, and through the dominions of His Highness, will be stated in a separate 
Commercial Treaty, tu be concluded within one year, due regard being given 
to the state of the country. 


ARTICLE 8. 


With a view to facilitate communications between the allied Governments 
and to aid and develop intercourse and commercial relations between the two 
countries, it is hereby agreed that a line of telegraph from Kurram to Kabul 
shall be constructed by, and. at the cost of the British Government, and the 

, Amir of Afghanistan hereby undertakes to provide for the proper protection 
of this telegraph line. 


ARTICLE 9. 


In consideration of the renewal of a friendly alliance between the two 
States which has been attested and secured by the foregoing Articles, the 
British Government restores to His Highness the Amir of Afghanistan and 
its dependencies the towns of Kandahar and Jellalabad, with all the territory 
now in possession of the British armies, excepting the districts of Kurram, 
Pishin, and Sibi. His Highness the Amir of Afghanistan and its depend- 
encies agrees on his part that the districts of Kurram and Pishin and Sibi, 
according to the limits defined in the schedule annexed,* shall remain under 
the protection and administrative control of the British Government: that is 
to say, the aforesaid districts shall be treated.as assigned districts, and shall 
not be considered as permanently severed from the limits of the Afghan king- 
dom. ‘The revenues of these districts after deducting the charges of civil a 
ministration shall be paid to His Highness the Amir, 


The British Government will retain in its own hands the control of the 
Khyber and Michni Passes, which lie between the Peshawur and Jellalabad 
Districts, and of all relations with the independent tribes of the territory 
directly connected with these Passes. : 


ARtTIcLe 10, 


_ For the-further support of His Highness the Amir-in the recovery and 
maintenance of his legitimate authority, and in consideration of the efficient 
fulfilment in their entirety of the engagements stipulated by the foregoing 
Articles, the British Government agrees to pay to His Highness the Amir and 
to his successors an annual subsidy of six lakhs of Rupees. 


* Note.-—Omitted for the present. 


444 Afghanistan—No. CXCV, Part IV 


Done at Gandamak, this 26th day of May 1879, corresponding with the 
4th day of the month of Jamadi-us-sani 1296, A. H. 


(Sd.) AMIR MUHAMMAD [__] (Sd) N. CAVAGNARI, Major, 
YAKUB KHAN, ; Poltl. Officer on Spectal Duty- 


Seal. | 


This Treaty was ratified by His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor- 
General of India, at Simla, on Friday, this $0th day of May 1879, 