


respondence with foreign powers without the knowledge and consent of the 
British repregentative residing at his Court. 


ARTICLE 9. 


In acknowledgment of the steady support and friendship of the British 
Government, whose interests are identical with those of the Afghan nation, 
His Majesty Shah Kamran will never take individuals of any European nation 
(Ahli Furung) other than those belonging to Great Britain (Inglees) into his 
service, nor will he permit such Europeans to reside in his country. 


Artrote 10. 


His Majesty Shah Kamtan will remove all unnecessary obstacles to the 
freedom of commerce, and will adopt such arrangements for increasing the 
facilities of traders as may appear to His Majesty, with the counsel of the 
British representative at his Court, to be expedient, 


Artiots 11. 


The above ten Articles shall remain always in force so long as the 
sovereignty of Herat is vested in the family of Shah Kamran. 


Done and concluded at Herat the day and year above written, 


(Sd.) E, D’Arcy Topp, 
Envoy to Herat, 


Ratified by the Governor-General of India on 16th March 1840, 


No. OXCII. . 


Treaty between the British GovERNMENT and. His HicHNESS 
Ameer Dost Monummup KHAN, Wanze of CaBooi and 
of those countries of AFGHANISTAN now in his possession ; 
concluded on the part of the British GovernuEnt by JoHN 
Lawrence, Esquire, CHIeF Commissioner of the Punsas, 
in virtue of full powers vested in him by the Mosr 
NosLe JAmMus ANDREW, Marquis of DALHOUSIE, K.T.,- 
&c., GovERNoR GENERAL of Inp14; and on the part of the 
Amerre of Cazpoot, Dost Monummup Kuan by Srrpar 
Guoutam, Hypur Kuay, in virtue of full authority granted 
to him by His Hicuness.—1855. 


ARTICLE IsT, 
Between the Honorable East India Company and His Highness Ameer 


438 Afghanistan—No. CXCII. Part IV. 


eo 


Dost Mohummud Khan, Walee of Cabool and of those countries of Afghanistan 
now in his possession, and the heirs of the said Ameer, there shall be perpetual 
peace and friendship. 


ARTICLE 2ND. 


The Honorable East India Company engages to respect those territories 
of Afghanistan now in His Highness’s possession, and never to interfere 
therein. 


ARTICLE 3BD. 


His Highness Ameer Dost Mohummud Khan, Walee of Cabool and of 
those countries of Afghanistan now in his possession, engages on. his own 
part, and on the part of his heirs, to respect the territories of the Honorable 
East India Company, and never to interfere therein; and to be the friend of 
the friends and enemy of the enemies of the Honorable East India Company. 


Done at Peshawur this 80th day of March one thousand eight hundred 
and fifty-five, corresponding with the eleventh day of Ru he one thousand 
two hundred and seventy-one Hijree. 


a (Sd.) Joon Lawrenoe, 
on Chief Commissioner of the Punjab. 


Seal of Gholam| °? As the representative of Ameer Dost 
Hydur, heir- Mohummud Khan, and in person on his own 
apparent. account as heir-apparent. 


Ratified by the Most Noble the Governor-General at Ootakamund, this 
first day of May, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-five. 