


The faithful servants -of both States having agreed to this Treaty, the 
conditions of confirmation and ratification have been performed, and this 
document has been sealed and signed by the Right Hon’ble the Governor- 
General and the Honorable the Members of the Supreme British Govern- 
ment in India, this 17th day of June 1809, answering to the 1224 
of the Hijree. 


No. CXC. 


TRANSLATION of a’ Mevoranpvm of certain wishes and expecta- 
tions of Vizirr Yar Maunomep Kuan agreed to at Canpa- 
HAR, on the 9th of June 1839, between Masor Tonn, with 
the sanction of the Envoy and MInisrex at the Court of 
His Magesty Suan Svsa-ooL-MooLK, on the part of the 
Rieut HonorsaBLe the GOVERNOR-GENERAL, and NUJEEB 
Oottan Kuan, Envoy from Herat, on the part of Vizrer 
Yar ManomeD Kaan, | 


ArticLe 1. 


That the high in rank, &c., Yar Mahomed Khan, vizier of His Majesty 
Shah Kamran of Herat, shall henceforth be recognised as the vakeel or, 
medium of communication between the British and Herat authorities, and 
whoever shall disregard the vizier’s authority in this respect shall be considered 
as having acted contrary to the Jaws of friendship and the Treaty of amity. 


ARTICLE 2, 


Whatever sums may be expended at Herat by the British Government 
in restoring the prosperity of the country or for other purposes shall be paid 
in the first instance to the vizier Yar Mahomed Khan, who engages not to 
disburse the sum except in the presence, or with the consent and advice, of 
he British Political Officer at Herat. 


ARTICLE 3. 


The vizier engages not to act in any matter contrary to the wishes and 
advice of the British Political Officer at Herat, and will be guided in all that 
concerns the welfare of the two States by the counsel of the above-mentioned 


t 


Part IV Afghanistan—No. CXCI. 485 


e 


officer ; and should the British Agent interfere in the affairs of Herat without 
the knowledge and consent of the vizier, he shall be considered as endeavour. 
ing to disturb the friendship between the two States. 


Articiy 4. 

That the British Agent at Herat shall not, without the consent of 
the vizier, entertain as servants a greater number than one hundred of the 
people of Afghanistan, and of these hundred persons there shall be none 
of the vizier’s relations, unless permission to entertain them be obtained 
from Yar Mahomed. * 

ARTICLE 5. 

As the government of Herat is vested in the person and diceenamte 
of Shah Kamran, so is the office of vizier recognized in the person and 
descendants of Yar Mahomed Khan as long as they shall be worthy of 
the trust; and, in the event of their being unfit for the office, a subsistence 
> shall be provided for them by the British Government to place them above 
want and distress. 


Sealed by 
Major E. D’A. Todd 


and Nujeeb Oollah 
Khan. 


No. CXCI. 


Treaty of Frrenpsurp and ALLIANCE between the HonovuRABLE 
East Inpra Company and His Masssty San Kamran of 
Herat, concluded on the thirteenth day of August 1839, 
corresponding with the second day of Jemmadee-oos-sani 
1255 a.n., by Mason E. D’Arcy Topp, Envoy from the 
GOVERNOR GRNERAL of InpIA on the one part, and His 
Maggsty SHan Kamran for HIMSELF, his HEIRS and suc- 
CESSORS, on the other. 