


(Sd.) DALHOUSIE. 


By order of the Most Noble the Governor-General. 


—— 


Seal. | 


[a 


(Sd.) G. F, Epmonsrong, 


Secy. to the Govt. of India, 
with the Governor-General. 


Part IV Afghanistan—No. CXCIII. 439 


No. OXCITI. 


ARTICLES of AGREEMENT made at PesHawuR-on the 26th Jan- 
uary 1857 (corresponding with Jumadee-ool-Awul, 29th 
A.H. 1273), between AmzER Dost Monummup Kuan, 
Rutter of CaBoon and of those countries of Ar@HANISTAN 
now in his possession, 09 his own part, and Sir Joun Lawe 
‘RENCE, K.C.B., CHIEF COMMISSIONER of the PunsgaB, and 
LIEUTENANT-CoLONEL H. B. EDWARDES, C.B., COMMISSIONER 
of PEsHAWUR, on the part of the HononasLe East INpDIA 
Company, under the authority of the Rient HoNnoraBle 
CHaRLes JoHNn Viscount CANNING, GOVERNOR-GENERAL 
of Inpra in Councit. 
% 


1. Whereas the Shah of Persia contrary to his engagement with the 
British Government, has taken possession of Herat, and has manifested an 
intention to interfere in the present possessions of Ameer Dost Mohummud 
Khan, and there is now war between the British and Persian Governments, 
therefore the Honorable East India Company, to aid Ameer Dost Mohummud 
Khan, to defend and maintain his present possession in Balkh, Cabool, and 
Candahar against Persia, hereby agrees out of friendship to give the said 
Ameer one lakh of Company’s Rupees monthly during the war with Persia 
on the following conditions :— 

2. The Ameer shall keep his present number of Cavalry and Artillery, 
and shall maintain not less than 18,000 Infantry, of which 18,000 shall be 
Regulars divided into 13 Regiments. 


3. The Ameer is to make his own arrangements for receiving the money 
at the British treasuries and conveying it through his own country. 


4, British Officers, with suitable native establishments and orderlies, 
shall be deputed, at the pleasure of the British Government, to Cabool, or 
Candahar, or Balkh, or all three places, or wherever an Afghan army be 
assembled to act against the Persians, It will be their duty to see generally 
that the subsidy granted to the Ameer be devoted to the military purposes for 
which it is given, and to keep their own Government informed of all affairs, 
They will have nothing to do with the payment of ‘the troops, or advising the 
Cabool Government; and they will not interfere in any way in the internal 
administration of the country. The Ameer will be responsible for their safety 
and honorable treatment, while in his country, and for keeping them acquainted 
With all military and political matters connected with the war. 


. 5, The Ameer of Cabool shal] appoint and maintain a Vakeel at Pesha- 
ur. : 


440 Afghanistan—No. CXCIII. Part [IV 


6. The subsidy of one lakh per mensem shall cease from the date on 

which peace is made between the British and Persian Governments, or at any 
previous time at the will and pleasure of the Governor-General of India. 
7. Whenever the subsidy shall cease the British Officers shall be with- 
drawn from the Ameer’s country ; but at the pleasure of the British Govern- 
ment, a Vakeel, not a European Officer, shall remain at Cabool on the part 
of the British Government, and one at Peshawur on the part of the Govern- 
ment of Cabool. 