

8. The Ameer shaJ] furnish a sufficient escort for the British officers 
from the British border when going to the Ameer’s country, and to the British 
border when returning. 

9. The subsidy shall commence from Ist January 1857, and be payable 
at the British treasury one month in arrears. 


10, The five Jakhs of Rupees which have been already sent to the Ameer 
(three to Candahar and two to Cabool), will not be counted in this Agree- 
ment, They area free and separate gift from the Honorable Hast India 
Company. But the sixth lakh now in the hands of the mahajuns of Caboul, 
which was sent for another purpose, will be one of the instalments under this 
Agreement. 

11. This Agreement in no way supersedes the Treaty made at Peshawur 
on 30th March 1855 (corresponding with the llth of Rujjub 1271), by 
which the Ameer of Cabool engaged to be the friend of the friends and enemy 
of the enemies of the Honorable Hast India Company; and the Ameer of 
Cabool, in the spirit of that Treaty, agrees to communicate to the British 
Government any overtures he may receive from Persia or the allies of Persia 
during the war, or while there is friendship between the Cabool and British 
Governments. 


12. In consideration of the friendship existing between the British 
Government and Ameer Dost Mobhommud~ Khan, the British Government 
engages to overlook the past hostilities of all the tribes of Afghanistan, ang 
on no account to visit them with punishment. 

18. Whereas the Ameer has expressed a wish to have 4,000 muskets 
given him in addition to the 4,000 already given, it, is agreed that 4,000 
musketg shall be sent by the British Government to Tull, whence the Ameer’s 
people will convey them with their own carriage. 


| Seal. 


(Sd.) Jonny Lawrence, 


Chief Commissioner. 


(Sd.) Hersert B, Epwarves, 


= Commissioner of the Peshawur Division. 


a ac Naa alcatel 


Part IV Afghanistan—No. CXCIV. 441 


No. CXCILY. 


Treaty between the British GOVERNMENT and His HicHness 
MunamMap Yaxus Kwan, Amir of AFGHANISTAN and its 
DEPENDENCIES, concluded at GANDAMAK on the 26th May 
1879, by His Hicuness tHe Amir MunammMap Yaxkus 
Kuan on his own part, and on the part of the BririsH 
GovEeRNMENT by Magor P. L. N. Cavaenart, C.8.1., Poxrrr- 
CAL OFFICER on SpEctat Dury, in virtue of full powers vested 
in him by the Rient Honorasie Epwarp Rosgrt Lytton 
Butwer-Lytron, Baron Lytton of KNepworts, and a 

, BaRONET, GRAND MastTER of the Most Exattep OrpeR of 
the Star or Inpra, Knicut Granp Cross of the Most 
HonorasLte ORDER of the BatH, GRAND Master of. the 
OrpeER of the InpIan Empire, Viceroy and GOVERNOR- 
GENERAL of INDIA. 


The following Articles of a Treaty for the restoration of peace and amic- 
able relations have been agreed upon between the British Government and 
His Highness Muhammad Yakub Khan, Amir of Afghanistan and its depend- 
encies :—— : 


; ARTICLE lI. 


From the day of the exchange of the ratifications of the present Treaty 
there shall be perpetual peace and friendship between the British Government 
on the one part and His Highness the Amir of Afghanistan and its depend- 
encies, and his successors, on the other. 