

This proposal was likewise unacceptable to the Imperial Cabinet of 
Russia, who, looking at the question from a totally different point of view, 
maintained that, in view of the differences of opinion which had arisen between 


* 


e 


Part IV Afghanistan—No. CXCVII,. 449 


the respective Commissioners when discussing the bearing of the local inform- 
ation, the identity of the geographical names could alone serve as the basis 
for an equitable demarcation, that the Serai Khodja-Saleh, situated in the 
vicinity of the Ziaret known under the same name, should be considered 
as the extreme point of the Afghan possessions on the Amou-Daria, and that 
the frontier should be drawn immediately below the Serai in question. 

In the opinion of the Cabinet of Her Britannic Majesty a demarcation 
carried out under these conditions would be likely to entail serious inconve- 
bience, especially having regard to the fact that the canals used for the irriga- 
tion of the territory lying between Khodja-Saleh and Islim take their rise in 
the neighbourhood of Kilif, a circumstance which could not fail to be the 
source of continual disputes between the populations on either side of the 
frontier. In order to obviate these objections, the Cabinet of Her Britannic 
Majesty considered it preferable to give up the attempt to come to an under- 
standing as to a fresh frontier on the left bank of the Amou-Daria, and to 
authorise Sir W, Ridgeway to offer to the Imperial Russian Government in 
"exchange for the territory which they claimed on the left bank of Amou-Daria, 
compensation on another part of the frontier. This compensation related to 
the territory of which the Sarik Turkomans of Penjdeh as explained above had 
been dispossessed in consequence of the tracing of the frontier in conformity 
with the provisions contained in the Protocol of London of the 29th August 
(10th September) 1885. : 

This proposal having received the adhesion of the Imperial Russian 
Government, M. Zinoview and Sir West Ridgeway have agreed on the 
following provisions :— 


1. 


The frontier, the description of which is contained in the Annex to the 
present Protocol under the letter (A) and which is included between the pillars 
No. 1 and No, 19 and the pillars No, 36 and No.. 65, is considered as definitely 
settled. The trigonometrical points on the portion of the frontier line described 
above and included between pillars No, 19 and No, 36 are likewise admitted 
as definitive; the description of this, part of the frontier, as well as that of the 
part to the eastward of pillar No. 65, may be completed after the demarcation, 

The synopsis of pillars attached to Protocol No. 15, dated the Ist (18th) 
September 1886, is admitted to be correet and definitive as regards pillars 
No. 1 to No, 19, and No. 86 to No. 65; it will be completed subsequently by 
the synopsis of the pillars from No. 20 to No, 85 and by that of the pillars to 
the east of No, 65. 


- 2, 


Leaving pillar No, 19, the frontier shall follow a straight line up to the 
summit of the hill marked 2,740 on map No. 1 annexed to the present proto- 
col. This point, where pillar No. 20 shall be placed, is known under the deno- 
mination of “ trigonometrical station of Kara Tepe” (latitude 35° 17’ 49”, 
longitude 62°15'17’). Further on the line shall descend the crest of the hills, 
being directed from this point towards the confluence of the Kushk and the 