


Yakub Beg, a native of Piskand near Tashkand, was governor of the fort 
of Ak-Masjid (now fort Perovski) at the time of its capture by the Russians 
in August 1853, and from that time till his departure for Kashgar had taken 
a prominent part in the struggles between the different aspirants for power in 
Khokand, 


456 Eastern Turkistan. Part V 


Buzurg Khan Khoja was received with acclamation at Kashgar, and was 
at once installed as ruler: the real power however remained in the hands 
of Yakub Beg, while Buzurg Khan abandoned himself to the lowest pleasures. 
Discontented at the elevation of Yakub Beg, Sadik Beg withdrew, and raised 
a force to. attack Kashgar, but was defeated and obliged to flee; his sub- 
mission and that of other Kirghis and Kalmak Chiefs followed soon after- 
wards, 

The more eastern of the six cities had by no means welcomed the adven- 
turers from Khokand, and in 1865 a large army from Kuchar, Aksu, and 
Ush Turfan marched on Kashgar, but was signally defeated by Yakub Beg. 
This success was followed in September of the same year by the fall of 
the fort of Yangi Shahr. 


Buzurg Khan, discontented at the secondary position in which he was 
placed by the brilliant successes of Yakub Beg, attempted, with the aid, 
of Sadik Beg and the Tunganis, to assume the government of Kashgar, and 
sent a force against Yakub Beg, then absent on an expedition against the 
city of Yarkand. Yakub Beg hastened back, defeated his adversaries and 
besieged Buzurg Khan in the fort of Yangi Shabr. The fort fell after a siege 
which lasted six weeks, and Buzurg Khan was deprived of all authority and 
kept in honourable captivity by the victor. He continued however to intrigue 
for the throne, and was therefore imprisoned in the fort of Yangi Hisar: on 
his release he returned to his home in Khokand. 


Yakub Beg, having got rid of his rivals,. assumed the government with 
the title of Badaulat. The Khoja family still maintained an independent 
position in the eastern provinces, and shortly after the imprisonment of 
Buzurg Khan, a large army from Kuchar marched on Yarkand and expelled 
the Badaulat governor. Yakub Beg advanced against the enemy, and after a 
severe struggle regained possession of the city. After this success he adopted 
the title of Atalik Ghazi. Early in 1866 the Atalik Ghazi obtained posses- 
sion of the rich city and province of Khotan to the south-east of Kashgar, 
and during that year and the next received the submission of the rulers of Ush 
Turfan, Aksu, Kuchar, and Kurla, on the north-eastern frontier of his domi- 
nions, where the Khojas had endeavoured to establish a rival principality of 
confederated States. : ’ 


In 1869 Yarkand and Kashgar were visited by Messrs. Shaw and Hayward, 
who were received with kindness by the Atalik Ghazi. Towards the end of the 


. 


Part V Eastern Turkistan. 457 


same year the Atalik Ghazi sent an envoy to India to express his wish for the 
establishment of friendly relations with the British Government, the deve- 
lopment: of trade, and the visit of a British officer to his capital. Accordingly 
@ mission, composed of Mr. Forsyth, Mr. Shaw, and Dr. Henderson, proceeded 
to Yarkand in 1870 with a friendly letter to the Atalik Ghazi. In the 
meantime the Tunganis of Ush Turfan and Urumtsi had assembled in great 
force and advanced on Kuchar. To quell these disturbances the Atalik Ghazi 
was compelled to proceed to the frontier in person, and way thus absent from 
‘Yarkand on the arrival there of the mission. As there was no immediate 
prospect of the Atalik Ghazi’s return from the frontier, the mission left Yar- 
kand on its return to India in September 1870, In the following year the 
Atalik Ghazi again opened friendly negotiations by despatching an envoy 
with letters for Her Majesty the Queen and the Viceroy of India. 