


the north-north-west towards pillar No. 55, placed on a mound at the end of a . 


chain of hills which extends between the depression of Kui-Sarai and that in 
which the well of Khwaja-Ahmad is situated. From this pillar the frontier 
runs in a straight line northwards for a mile and a quarter towards pillar 
No. 56, which is situated on a natural elevation a few feet south of the road 
between Jalanguir and Meruchak, from thence it proceeds to pillar No. 57, 
2 miles to the north-north-west, and situated on the top of the heights which 
form the northern limit of the depression of Kui-Sarai. From this point the 
frontier runs to the north-north-east towards pillar No. 58, placed on one of 
the sandy mounds of the heights which command the plain extending to the 
west of Andkhoi; the frontier then turns rather more to the east towards 
pillar No. 59, placed on alow sandy hill about 24 miles to the east-south- 
east of the wells of Sari Mat. I next reaches in a north-north-westerly 
direction, pillar No. 60, placed between the wells of Chichli and Gokehah, 
about a quarter of a mile to the west of the wells of Chicbli. Leaving Gok- 


chah to Russia, and Chichli to Afghanistan, the frontier runs in a straight 


line to pillar No. 61, placed 300 feet to the east of the road which leads from 
Andkhoi to Sechanchi ; thence, following the same direction, it reaches pillar 
No. 62, placed on a well-defined sandy mound known by the name of Madali- 
Koum; the frontier line then reaches in an east-north-easterly direction pillar 
No. 638, placed to the north of Oikul, an elliptically shaped valley 3,600 feet 
in length, and at the bottom of which are situated two “ Kaks” or basins of 
fresh water, which remain within Afghan territory. Turning then in an 
east-south-easterly direction the frontier reaches in a straight line pillar No, 
64, placed on a sandy hill known by the name of Gichi-Kumi, and continues 
in a north-easterly direction as far as pillar No. 65, placed on the high road 
between Avdkhoi and Dugchi and Karki, ata point 4; miles to the south of 
Dugcehi, and 22 miles to the north of Sultan Robat. 


¢ 


PART V. 


TREATIES AND ENGAGEMENTS 


RELATING TO 


EASTERN TURKISTAN. 


From a Report by Surazon-Masor H. W. Bettew, C.8.1., and original papers 
in the Horeign Office. 


The region known as Yarkand or Kashgaria, or more correctly as the six 
cities of Eastern Turkistan, has been, except during the years 1862 to 1878, 
subject to the Chinese, who, invited‘originally by one of the factions of the then 
ruling Khoja dynasty, made themselves masters of the country early in the 
last century. In spite of several revolts headed by members of the Khoja 
family from their asylum in Khokand, the Chinese maintained their hold 
on Kashgaria until 1862. In that year however a religious insurrection of 
the Muhammadan Chinese called Tunganis took place, arid spread with 
rapidity over all the provinces of Kashgaria. In 1864an outbreak occurred 
in the city of Kashgar and the Chinese Governor shut himself up in the fort 
of Yangi Shahr about five miles south of the city. A Kirghiz Chief, Sadik 
Beg, was called in to restore order, but committed such excesses that he was 
expelled by the people. Joined by some Tungani troops, he made several 
attempts to capture Kashgar, but found himself unequal to the task, and sent 
an envoy to the Khan of Khokand to offer the government of the country 
to a descendant of its former rulers. The Khan accordingly despatched 
Buzurg Khan Khoja to Kashgar, and as he was unable at that time to render 
him any material aid, sent with him Yakub Beg, a soldier of fortune, to raise 
what force he could. 