


From pillar No. 36 placed on the right bank of the Murghab, about 3 
miles north of Meruchak Fort, on a height commanding the river, the frontier 
runs eastwards towards pillar No. 38, passing by pillar No. 87, which is 
situated on the road leading from the valley of Meruchak along the Galia- 
Chasma Chor, 


Pillar No, 38 is placed on an elevated point of the “ Chul” at about 11 
* miles from the valley of Meruchak. The frontier from thence continues in 
an east-north-easterly direction towards pillar No. 39, situated about a mile 
south-east of the spring of Khwaja-Gongourdak; after that in a straizht line 
and with north-easterly direction towards pillar No. 40 on an elevated point 
of the “Chul” from thence east-north-east towards pillar No. 41, situated on 
a height about 12 miles north of Kilawali; further on the frontier follows 
an east-north-easterly direction towards pillar No. 42, placed on a height 2 
miles west of the Pakana-Shor, and continues in the same direction as far as 
pillar No. 48. From this pillar the frontier runs in a south-easterly direction 
towards pillar No, 44, placed on the most elevated point of the watershed 
between the basins of the Kara Baba and the Kaissar, known by the name of 
Bel-i-Parandas. Following this line in a northerly direction the frontier 
reaches pillar No. 45 situated about 3 miles south-west of the well of Besh- 
dara. From thence it follows in a north-easterly direction a branch of the 
watershed, and arrives at pillar No. 46, situated at a distance of more than a 
mile to the south-west of the well of Beshdara. It runs from thence in an 
easterly direction irregularly towards pillar No. 47, situated abont 44 miles 
from the point where the road from Khwaja-Gachai and Kassawa-Kala 
crosses the Shor-Egri. From thence the frontier runs to the north-east along 
a secondary watershed towards pillar No. 48, and follows the same line as far 
as pillar No. 49 which is placed at the’ highest point of the watershed north 
of the Shor-Egri, and about 6 miles to the west of the confluence of the 
Shor-Gandabulak and the Shor-Egri. From thence the frontier runs in a 
straight line to the north-east, crossing the Shor-Gandabulak at pillar No. 
50, which is placed on a hill with two-peaks, rising from the line of water- 
parting between the Shor-Gandabulak and the Shor-Tara-Kui. Following 
the same direction it reaches Shor-Tara-Kui, where pillar No. 51 is placed near 
the road from Jalaiour on the Kaissar to Jalgun-Koudouk and Kara-Baba. 
The frontier passes thence in a north-easterly direction to pillar No. 52 at a 
point a mile to the north of the well of Alini. From this pillar the frontier 
runs north-north-east towards pillar No. 54; crossing the Daulatabad-Hazara- 
Koudouk road near pillar No. 58, Pillar No. 54 is placed on the highest point 
of a group of sandy hills 2 miles north of the well of Katar-Koudouk ; from 


1 
454 Afghanistan—No. CXCVII. Part IV 


thence the line of the frontier runs for about 10 miles with a slight inclination to 