

east of the local frontier marked E, F, G, on maps Nos. 9 and 10 annexed 
to the Protocol. On the other hand, the inhabitants of Bosagha shall retain 
the exclusive enjoyment of their canals as far as Konili, with the right of 


Part IV Afghanistan—No. CXCVITI, 451 


repairing ‘and supplying them .in accordance with the customs in force in 
regard to those of Khamiab, when the waters of the Amou-Daria are too low 
to supply directly the canal-heads of Konili. The officers who shall be 
_ charged to execute on the spot the provisions of the present Protocol between 
the above-named pillars shall be bound to place a sufficient number of inter- 
mediate pillars, taking advantage for this purpose as much as possible of the 
salient points. 


3. 


The clause in Protocol No, 4 of the 14th (26th) December 1885, prohi- 
biting the Afghans from making use of the irrigating canals in the Kushk 
Valley below Chahil Dukhter which were not in use at that time, remains in 
force, but it is understood that this clause can only be applied to the canals 
supplied by the Kushk. The Afghans shall not have the right to make use 
of the waters of the Kushk for their agricaltural works north of Chahil 

ukhter; but the waters of the Moghur belong exclusively to them, and they 
may carry out avy works they may think necessary in order to make use 
of them. 


4, 


The clauses in Protocols No. 4 of the 14th (26th) December 1885, and 
No. 15 of the Ist (13th) September 1886, relative to the construction of a 
dam on the Murghab, remain in force, M. Zinoview having expressed the 
wish that the obligation imposed on the Amir of Afghanistan to give up for 
this purpose a tract of land on the right bank of the Murghab under the con- 
ditions stipulated in the said protocols, should be extended to tke whole 
course of the river below the canal-head of Yaki-Yuz, Colonel Ridgeway is of 
opinion that the necessary steps to obtain the assent of the Amir might delay 
the conclusion of the present arrangement; but he is nevertheless convinced 
that the assent of the Amir to the cession under the same conditions, of a 
tract of land on the right ban can be obtained without difficulty, if later on 
the Imperial Government should inform’ Her Britannic Majesty’s Government 
of their intention of proceeding to the construction of a dam above the canal- 
head of Bendi-Nadiri, 


5. 


The British Government will communicate without delay to the Amir of 
Afghanistan the arrangements herein agreed upon, and the Imperial Govern- 
ment of Russia will enter into possession of the territory adjudged to them by 
the present protocol from the Ist (18th) October of the present year, 


6. 


The frontier agreed upon shall be locally demarcated by a Mixed Ccm- 
Mission, according to the signed maps. In cage the work of dematcation 


452 Afghanistan—No. CXCVII. Part IV 


should be delayed the line traced on the maps shall nevertheless be considered 
binding by the two Governments. 


(Sd.) W. Riverway. 
' “3 J. Zinoview, 