


(TRANSLATION. } 


Annex to Protocol No. 4. 


(A) . 
DESCRIPTION of the AFGHAN Frontier between the Heri-Rup 
and the Oxus (Amov-Darta). 


The frontier begins on the right bank of the Heri-Rud at a point marked 
on the map by pillar No. 1 about 8,500 feet distant from a smalJl tower 
situated on a mound at the entrance of the Zulficar Pass. Pillar No. 2 is 
placed on the top of the neighbouring rock which commands pillar No, 1. 
From pillar No, 2, the frontier turns to the north for a distance of about hulf 
a mile as far as pillar No. 3, which is situated on an eminence at the western 
extremity of a detached portion of the cliff. From thence the frontier runs in 
a straight line towards the top of a steep hill about a mile and a half distant 
in an east-north-easterly direction and reaches pillar No. 4, placed on a low 
mound in the plain. Beyond this pillar the frontier, taking a more easterly 
direction, runs for a distance of 4 miles as far as pillar No, 5, placed on an 
eminence, and well in view of the second line of heights on the northern side of 
a natural cavity in the rock. From this point the frontier runs in a south- 
easterly direction along the crest of the second line of heights as far as pillar 
No, 6, placed on the ridge of the northern cliff of the eastern defile, at a 
distance of about a mile from the centre of the defile, Pillar No. 7 is placed 
below pillar No. 6 near the road in the middle of the pass, and pillar No. 8 is 
on the top of the southern cliff facing pillar No, 6. The frontier then 
descends the crest of the second line of heights in a southerly direction, and 
erosses the path leading to Karez-Elias and Abi-Charmi ata point about 24 
miles distant from the bifurcation of the four roads converging at the eastern 
extremity of the defile of Zulficar. Pillar No. 9 is placed to the east of the 
path on asmall rock which overhangs it. From this pillar the frontier gra- 
dually ascends the fine of water-parting as far as the highest summit of the 
range of Deugli-Dagh, marked by pillar No. 10. At the eastern extremity 
of this range stands pillar No. 11. At a distance of about 94 miles ina 
south-easterly direction are three low hills. On the middle one is placed 
pillar No. 12. Again turning somewhat to the east the frontier runs towards 
pillar No. 18, placed beside the road about half-way between Ak-Robat and 
Sumbakarez, and thence to pillar No. 14, situated at a distance of 24 miles to 
the east on the top of a hill. 


Part IV Afghanistan—No. CXCVII, 453 


Pillar No. 15 is about 9 miles from Ak-Robat, on the road leading to 
An-Rohak , from thence the frontier runs in a straight line towards pillar No, 
16, placed on the more easterly and the higher of the two mounds of Koscha- 
Tehinguia, 54 miles north of An-Rohak. At about the same distance to the 
north-west of the spring of Islim stands pillar No. 17 placed on a flat-topped 
hill; on the side of the road between An-Rohak and Islim, on a gentle siope, 
is placed pillar No, 18 about 3 miles west of Islim, on the southern side of 
the stream, Pillar No. 19 is placed on the rounded crest of a small chain of 
heights 8 miles south of Islim. 