


Early in 1873 Saiyid Yakub Khan Tora arrived in India as an envoy 
from the Atalik Ghazi,and, after discussing the measures considered desirable 
for placing the relations between the British Government and his master’s 
dominions.on a satisfactory footing, proceeded to Constantinople. During his 
absence arrangements for the despatch of a second mission to Yarkand were 
made. Mr, Forsyth was again placed in charge, and the party, having been 
joined en route by Saiyid Yakub Khan, reached Yarkand in November 1873. 
On the occasion of the Saiyid’s mission to Constantinople, the Sultan con- 
ferred upon the Atalik Ghazi the title of Amir-ul-Muminin. Yakub Beg now 
changed his name to Yakub Khan and assumed the title of Amir. 

The British envoy was formally received by the Amir at Kashgar in 
December 1873, and on the 2nd February 1874 a commercial Treaty (No. 
CXCVIII) was signed between the British Government and the Amir of 
Yarkand ; and it was ratified by the Governor-General of India on the 13th 
April following. 

The mission returned to India in the summer of 1874, but owing to 
delays from various causes the ratifications of the Treaty were not exchanged 
till October 1876, when the Amir’s envoy arrived in Simla on a fresh mission. 

The question of deputing a permanent agent to Kasbgar in accordance’ 
with Article 6 of the treaty was under consideration, when in July 1877 


dues. The merchants of Djety-Shahr shall enjoy 
the same privilege in the towns of Turkistan. 


IV. All merchandize transported from Russia 
to Djety-Shuhr, or from that province into Russia, 
shall be liable to a tux of 24 per cent, ad valorem. 
In every case this tax shall not exceed the rate of 
the tax taken from Mussulmans being subject to 
Djety-Shahr. 


V. Russian merchants and their caravans shall 
be at liberty, with all freedom and security, to 
traverse the territories of Djety-Sbahr in pro- 
ceeding to countries conterminous with that pro- 
vince. Caravans from Djety-Sbahr shall enjoy 
the same advantages for passing through terri- 
tories belonging to Russia. 

These conditions were sent from Tashkend on 
the 9th of April 1872. - 

General von Kaufmann I., Governor-General 
of Turkistan, signed the Treaty and attached his 
seal to it, 

In proof of his assent to these conditions, 
Muhammad Yakub, Chief of Djety-Shahr, attach- 
ed his seal to them at Yangi-Shahr on the 8th of 
June 1872. 


de la perception légale des droits de douane. 
Les marchands de Djita-Schara jouiront du 
méme droit dans les villes du Turkistan, 

IV. Toutes les marchandises se rendant de 
Russie & Djita-Schara ou de cette province en 
Russie seront soumises & une taxe de 23°/, de 
la valeur des marchandises. En toute cas 
cette taxe ne doit pas dépasser le chiffre de 
celle qui est prélevée sur les musulmaus, sujets 
de Djita-Schara. , 

V. Les marchands russes et leurs caravanes, 
peuvent traverser en toute, liberté ct sécuricé 
le territoire de Djita-Schara pour se rendre 
dans les contrées limitrophes de cette prov- 
inces. Les caravanes de Djita-Schara jouiront 
des mémes avantnages pour traverser les terri- 
toires appartenant a la Russie. . 