

Colonel Kuhlberg thanked his colleague and said that the English topo- 
graphical officers having undertaken the triangulation as well as a considerable - 
portion of the survey, had had in his opinion their full share of the work. 

The present protocol having been corrected and read was then formally 
adopted, and the labours of the Commission were declared at an end. 


(Sd) J.R (Sd.) =P. Kunipere. 
' . Ripepway. : 


a E. L, Duranp. 


. 


448 Afghanistan—No. CXCVII. Part IV 


No. CXCVII. 


{ TRANSLATION. ] 
Demarcation of the North-West Frontier of Afghanistan. 


Prortocoy, No. 4. 
Sitting held at St. Petersburgh, 10th (22nd) July 1887. 


The Privy Councillor Zinoview and Colonel Sir West Ridgeway, having’ 
met with the object of coming to a definite uaderstanding as to the terms of 
an arrangement for the solution of the difficulties which arose on the occasion 
of the demarcation of the Afghan frontier on the left bank of the Amou- 
Daria, began by recapitulating the course which thé negotiations between them 
had taken up to the present time. 


As appears from the previous protocols, the Cabinet of London was of 
opinion that thé arrangement arrived atin 1873 between the two Governments 
had for its object to confirm the rights of the Amir of Afghanistan over all the 
districts of which Shere Ali Kban was in possession at that time, and that on 
this basis the district of Khamiab, which, in accordance with the information 
obtained on the spot, had been incorporated in Afghanistan long before the 
date of the arrangement in question, should also remain subject to the author- 
ity of the Amir Abdurrahman Khan. The Imperial Government of Russia 
could not adopt this view, and taking as a basis the text of the arrangement 
of 1873, they affirmed that the present state of things on the left bank of the 
Amou-Daria could not be considered as invalidating the rights of Bokhara 
resulting from that’ arrangement. ’ 


The Imperial Government considered it still less possible to sacrifice those 
rights, since, in consequence of the demarcation carried out in accordance with 
the terms of the Protocol of London of the 29th August (10th September) 
1885, the Sarik Turkomans of the Penjdeh Oasis had been dispossessed of the 
lands which they had previously held, and those lands had been included in 
the territory of Afghanistan. 


Having regard to this difference of opinion, and being desirous of proving 
their respect for the letter itself of the arrangement concluded between the 
two Governments, the Cabinet of Her Britannic Majesty has authorised Sir 
West Ridgeway to propose a frontier, which, starting from Dukcbi, the point 
to which the demarcation had already been carried out, would terminate at the 
Amou-Daria, in the neighbourhood of Islim. After a detailed examination 
obtained by their Commissioner on the spot, the British Cabinet had arrived 
at: the conclusion that Islim answered in every respect to the frontier point of 
Khodja-Saleh, of which mention is made in the correspondence relative to the 
arrangement, 