


In 1872 a Russiad Embassy visited Eastern Turkistan and a commercial 
Treaty* was concluded between the Russians and the Atalik Ghazi, by-which 
the former secured the privilege of trading without molestation in the Atalik 
Ghazi’s dominions, subject to a maximum duty of 24 per cent. on Russian 


goods entering the country. 


"© Conditions of Free Trude proposed by General Aide-de- 
co von Kavyaanm ¢o Yakus 8x@, Chief of Djety- 
arr, 


I. All Russian subjects, of whatsoever religion, 
shall have the right to proceed for purposes of 
trade to Djety-Shahr, and to all the localities 
aud towns subjected to the Chief of Djety-Shahr, 
which they may desire to visit, in the same way 
as the inhabitants of Djety-Shahr have hitherto 
been and shall be in the future entitled to prose- 
cute trade throughout the entire extent of the 
Russian Empire. ‘The honourable Chief of Djety- 
Shahr undertakes to keep a vigilant guard over 
the complete snfety of Russian sabjects within 
the limits of his territorial possessions and also 
over that of their caravans, and in general over 
everything that may belong to them. 


II, ‘Russian merchants shall be entitled to have 
earavanserais, in which they alone shall be able 
to store’ their merchandize, in all the towns of 
Djety-Shabr in which they may desire to have 
them. The merchants of Djety-Shabr shall enjoy 
the same privilege in the Russian villages. 


III, Russian merchants shall, if they desire it, 
have the right to have commercial agents (cara- 
vanbashis) in all the towns of Djety-Shahr, whose 
business it is to watch over the regular course 
of trade und over the legal imposition of customs 


Conditions pour ta liberté du commerce, proposées par 
L Aide de camp Général von Kaurmann au chef 
de Djita-Schura, YsKous Bre. 


I. Tous les sujets russes, & quelque reli. 
gion qu’ils appartiennent, ont le droit de se 
rendre pour affaires de commerce a Djita- 
Schara et dans toutes les localités et villes 
soumises au chef de Djita-Schara qu’ils vou- 
dront visiter,—tout comme les habitants de 
Djita-Schara étant autorisés jusqu’d présent 
et le seront & Vavenir & faire-le commerce 
sur toute l'éteodue de Vempire de Russie. 
L’honorable chef de Dijita-Schara s’engage & 
veiller avec vigilance & la compléte sécurité 
des sujets russes se trouvant dans les limites 
de ses possessions territoriales ainsi que de 
leurs caravanes, et en général de tout ce qui 
leur appartient. 


II. Les marchands russes seront autorisés 
& avoir dans toutes les villes de Djita-Schara, 
1A od ils le désireront, des caravausérails dans 
lesquels ils pourront exclusivement deposer 
leurs marchandises. Les marchanda de I)jita 
Schara jouiront du méme droit dans leg villes 
russes, 


JIT. Ties marchand@s russes ont le droit s’ils 
le désirent, d’avoir dans toutes les villes de 
Djita-Schara leurs agents de commerce (vara- 
vanbachi) qui auront pour mission la surveil- 
lance dela marche réguliére du commerce ef 


380 


Eastern Turkistan. Part V 