


3.—The goods intended for export to Cashmere or Central Asia shall be 
declared on invoices, and opportunity shall be given to the Collector or Deputy 
Commissioner, or the official at Sultanpoor appointed on that behalf, to inspect 
them as required. The packages shall be sealed in presence of the Collector 
or Deputy Commissioner, or an officer authorized by him, or in the case of 
packages declared at Sultanpoor in the presence of the official appointed on 
that behalf. 


4.—Goods sealed at any of the places mentioned in Rule I must not 
break bulk until the seals shall have been examined and certificates attested by 
one of the officials described in Rule IX ; otherwise all claim to refund of duty 
will be forfeited. 


5.—Goods intended for Cashmere or Central Asia, but contained in 
packages which it is necessary or desired to open on the route up-country 
from seaports, may more conveniently be declared, sealed, &c., at Amritsar 
or Sultanpoor. 


6.—The duty of which a refund is claimable under these rules is the 
customs duty specified in the Schedules of the Indian Tariff Act in force for 
the time being. The amount of such duty shall be calculated at the values 
assigned to goods in those Schedules. 


* Appointed by subsequent agreement in 1881. 


vi Appendix No. 2—Jammu and Kashmir. 


.7.—In, the case of goods sealed and declared at Caleutta, Bombay or 
Karachi, the officers empowered to grant certificates, and in the case of goods 
sealed and declared at Amritsar, the Deputy Commissioner, and in the case of 
goods sealed and declared at Sultanpoor, the official appointed on that behalf at 
Sultanpoor, will furnish the applicant with a certificate in the annexed form (A) 
specifying the numbers on the packages sealed by him or under his orders, 
the kind of goods, the gross weight, the destination,*and the amount of duty 
to be refunded in the event of the goods reaching Srinuggur, Jummoo or Leh, 
as the case may be, intact. The officers appointed to grant certificates should 
be furnished with the customs import tariff or fixed values, and with regard to 
ad valorem goods should be cautioned to investigate the claim as to drawback 
so as not to give drawback on the actual value of goods as laid down, say at 
Amritsar or Sultanpoor, which would include the cost of carriage from the 
sea-port at those places. Drawback should not be given on more than the 
customs tariff value at the port of importation. 


The officers empowered to grant certificates will keep a register of such 
certificates in serial order (B). 


8.—When the certificate described in the preceding Section shall have 
been granted, and the goods duly sealed, they may be conveyed by any route 
the applicant chooses. 


9.—The holder of certificate granted under Rule 7 will only be 
entitled to claim a refund on such certificate after it has been attested 
either-— é 


1. By the customs official* of His Highness the Maharaja on arrival 
of the goods at Jummoo or Srinuggur of His Highness’ dominions, or 