

gent. 
“Arnrrete 9. 
The rights and privileges enjoyed within the dominions of His Highness 


Part V - Bastern Turkistan—No CXCVIII. 4863 


the Ameer by British subjects under the ‘T'reaty shall extend to the subjects 
of all Princes and States in India in alliance with Her Majesty the Queen; 
and if with respect to any such Prince or State, any other provisions relating 
to this Treaty or to other matters should be considered desirable, they shall 
be negotiated through the British Government. 


ArtioLe 10. 


Every affidavit and other legal document filed or deposited in any Court 
established in the respective dominions of the high contracting parties, or in 
the Court of the Joint Commissioners in Ladakh, may be proved by an 
authenticated copy, purporting either to be sealed with the seal of the Court 
to which the original document belongs, or in the event of such Court having 


He seal, to be signed by the Judge or by one of the Judges of the said 
ourt. 


ArticLs 1). 


When a British subject dies in the territory of His Highnessthe Ameer 
his movable and immovable property situate therein shall be vested in his heir, 
executor, administrator, or other representative in interest or (in the absence 
of such representative) in the Representative of the British Government in 
the aforesaid territory. The person in whom such charge shall be so vested 
shall satisfy the claims outstanding against the deceased, and shall hold the 
surplus (if any) for distribution among those interested. The above provisions 


mutates mutandis shall apply to the subjects of His Highness the Ameer who 
‘ may die in British India. 


ARTICER 12. 


If a British subject residing in the territories of His Highness the Ameer 
hecomes unable to pay his debts or fails to pay any debt within a reasonable 
time after being ordered to do so by any Court of Justice, the creditors of 
such insolvent shall be paid out of bis goods and effects ; but the British Re- 
presentative shall not refuse his good offices, if needs be, to ascertain if the 
insolvent has not left in India disposable property which might serve to satisfy 
the said creditors. The friendly stipulations in the present Article sball be 
reciprocally observed with regard to His Highness’ subjects who trade in India 
under the protection of the laws. 


This Treaty having this day been executed in duplicate and confirmed 
by His Highness the Ameer, one copy shall, for the present, be left in the 
possession of His Highness, and the other, after confirmation by the Viceroy 
and Governor-General of India, shall be delivered to His Highness within 
twelve months in exchange for the copy now retained by His Highness. 

Signed and sealed at Kashgar on the second day of February in the year 
a ‘Lord 1874, corresponding with the fifteenth day of Zilhijj 1290 

ijree, 
(Sd.) T. Dovetas Forsytu, 


Envoy and Plenipotentiary. 


464 Hastern Turkistan—No. CXCVIII. " Part * 


Whereas a Treaty for strengthening the good understanding that now 
exists between the British Government and the Ruler of the territory of 
Kashgar and Yarkund, and for promoting commercial intercourse between the 
two countries, was agreed apon and concluded at Kashgar on the second day 
of February in the year of our Lord eighteen hundred and seventy-four, 
corresponding with the fifteenth day of Zilhijj twelve hundred and ninety 
Hijree, by the respective Plenipotentiaries of the Government of India and 
of His Highness the Ameer of Kashgar and Yarkund duly accredited and 
empowered for that purpose: I, the Right Hon’ble Thomas George Baring, 
Baron Northbrook of Stratton, ete., ete., Viceroy snd Governor General of 
India, do hereby ratify and confirm the Treaty aforeguid. 