

11,—Whatever transactions take place within the limits of the road 
shall be considered to refer to goods in bond. If a trader opens his load 
and disposes of a portion, he shall not be subject to any duty, so long as tbe 
goods are not taken for consumption into the Maharaja’s territory across the 
line of road. And goods left for any length of time in the line of road 
subject to the jurisdiction of the Commissioners shall be free. 

12,—Where a village lies within the jurisdiction of the Joint Commis- 
sioners, then, as regards the collection of revenue, or in any case where there 
is necessity for the interference of the usual Revenue authorities, on matters’ 
having no connection with the trade, the Joint Commissioners have no power 
whatever to interfere; but to prevent misunderstanding, it is advisable that 
the Revenue officials should first communicate with the Joint Commissioners 
before proceeding to take action against any person witbin their jurisdiction. 
The Joint Commissioners can then exercise their discretion to deliver up the 
person sought, or to make a summary enquiry to ascertain whether their inter- 
ference is necessary or not. 

13.—The Maharaja agrees to give Rupees 5,000 this year for the 
construction of the road and bridges, and in future years His Highness agrees 
to give Rupees 2,000 per annum for the maintenance of the road and bridges. 
Similarly, for the repairs of serais, a sum of Rupees 100 per annum for each 
gerai will be given. 


Should further expenditure be necessary,'the Joint Commissioners will 
submit a special Report to the Maharaja and ask for a special grant. This 
money will be expended by the Joint Commissioners, who will employ free 
labour at market rates for this purpose. The officers in Ladak and in British 
territory shall be instructed to use their best endeavours to supply labourers 
on the indent of the Commissioners at market rates. No tolls-shall be levied 
on the bridges on this line of road. : 


14.—As a temporary arrangement, and until the line of road has been 
demarcated, or till the end of this year, the Joint Commissioners shall exercise 
the powers described in these rules over the several roads taken by the traders 
through Ladak from Lahoul and Spiti, 


(Sd.) Mauarasa RuNBEER SINGH. 


” T. D. Forsyta. 


& 


JAMMU AND KASHMIR. 
APPENDIX No. 2—Page 346. 


ReviseD Rupes in respect to the Rerunp of Duty on Goods 
exported from Bririsa TERRITORY to CASHMERE or CENTRAL 
Asia vid CASHMERE. 


1.—The places agreed upon between the Punjab Government and the 
Maharaja of Cashmere as the places where goods may be declared and sealed for 
transmission in bond under these rules are Calcutta, Bombay, Amritsar, and 
Karachi.* Goods intended for Central Asia may be declared and sealed at these 
four places, and also at Sultanpoor in the Kullu Tehsil of the Kangra 
District, 


2.—Any merchant trading on his own account, and any merchant or - 
agent trading on account of the Maharaja of Cashmere, is entitled to claim 
refund of duty under these rules in the manner hereinafter described. 