

Ces conditions ont été envoyées de’ Tach” 
kent le 9 avril 1872. 

Le gouverneur général du Turkestan, M. 
Paide de camp général de Kauffmann Ier, a 
signé ce traité et y a apposé son sceau. 

Comme preuve de son assentiment A ces 
conditions, le chef de Djita-Schara, Mouham- 
med-Yucoub les a revétues de son scean & Jane 
gyschar le 8 juin 1872. 


Part V Eastern Turkistan. 459 


news was received of Yakub Khan’s death. The despatch of the mission was 
then indefinitely postponed. 


Meanwhile the country bad been getting into a disturbed state ; the people, 
discontented with the taxes laid on them by the Amir, had been inviting the 
Chinese to return; and the Chinese had advanced as far as the neighbour- 
hood of Wami, As the’Amir still had a show of power, they hesitated to 
advance further, but sent him a letter enclosing the signatures of many 
Turkis of position, who had written promising to come over to them if they 
advanced, and asking why he opposed them when his own people were against 
him. On receiving this the Amir committed suicide, and with his death the 
Andijami power ceased to exist. The Chinese, though by no means in 
strong military force, quietly re-occupied the country, reaching Yarkand and 

Kashgar. No opposition was offered, and by the spring of 1878 the country 
was once more completely in their hands. 


The Indian trade with Eastern Turkistan is of no great dimensions; the 
expectations formed by the Forsyth mission have never been realised, though 
that may in part be due to the great disadvantages our trade labours under. 
The Chinese absolutely forbid the sale of Indian tea, The only thing brought 
down to India in any quantity is charras, 


Some piece-goods are sent to: Yarkand, but they also are at a disadvant- 
age, as English goods have to pay duty entering and leaving every town, 
whereas Russian goods, once they are brought across the frontier, can be 
taken anywhere free of duty, the Russians having a special* treaty, which 
‘puts the roads across the Tian Shan on much the same footing as treaty ports, 
and there is a Russian Consul at Kashgar to see that the treaty is carried 
out. 

* Treaty between Russia and China concerning the re-establishment of Chinese authority in 


the li country, done at St. Petersburg, the 12th Kebruary 1881, with two Protocols dated the 
12th February 1881 and 7th August 1881. 


460 Kastern ‘Tarkistan—No. CXCVILI. Part V 


Li o 


No. CXCVIII. 


Treaty between the British Government and His Hicuness 
the AMesr Manomep Yaxoos Kuan, Rurer of the Terri- 
ToRY of Kasacar and Yarkunp, his heirs and successors, 
executed on the one part by Tuomas Doveuas Forsyra, 
c.B., in virtue of full powers conferred on him in that 
behalf by His Excentenoy the Riegat Hon’BLe THomas 
GrorcE Barine, Baron Nortrusroox of Srratron and a 
BARONET, MemBer of the Privy Counciy of Her Most 
Gracious Masrsty the Qunen of Great Britain and 
IRELAND, GRAND Master of the Most Exantep Orper of 
the Star of InprA, Viceroy and GovERNorR-GENERAL of 
Inp1a in Councit, and on the other part by Syop ManomepD 
Kuan Tooran, Mumper of the Ist Chass of the OrpER 
of Mrpsenix, etc., in virtue of full powers conferred on him 
by His Hieuness 1874. 