


Whereas it is deemed desirable to confirm and strengthen the good under- 
standing which now subsists between the high contracting perties, and’ to ' 
promote commercial intercourse between their respective subjects, the following 
Articles have been agreed upon :— 


Articir 1, 


The high contracting parties engage that the subjects of each shall be at 
liberty to enter, residé in, trade with, and pass with their merchandize and 
property into and through all parts of the dominions of the other, and shall 

“enjoy in such dominions all the privileges and advantages with respect to 

, commerce, protection, or otherwise, which are or may be accorded to the 
subjects of such dominions, or to the subjects or citizens of the most favored 
nation. 


@ ARTICLE 2. 


Merchants of whatever nationality shall be at liberty to pass from the 
territories of the one contracting party to the territories of the other with 
their merchandize and property. at all times and by any route they please ; no 
restriction shall be placed by either contracting party upon such freedom of 
transit unless for urgent political reasons to be previously communicated to 


Part V Eastern Turkistan—No. CXCVIITI. 461 


the other ; and such restriction shall be withdrawn as soon as the necessity for 
it is over, 


ARTICLE 3, 


European British subjects entering the dominions of His Highness the 
Ameer for purposes of trade or otherwise must be provided with passports 
certifying to their nationality. Unless provided with such passports they 
shall not be deemed entitled to the benefit of this Treaty. 


ARTICLE 4, 


On goods imported into British India from territories of His Highness 
the Ameer by anv route over the Himalayan passes which lie to the south 
of His Highness’ dominions, the British Government engages to levy no 
import duties. On goods imported from India into the territories of His 
Highness the Ameer no import duty exceeding 24 per cent. ad valorem 
shall be levied. Goods imported as above into the dominions of the contracting 
parties may, subject only to such excise regulations and duties and to such 
municipal or town regulations and duties as may be applicable to such classes 
of goods generally, be freely sold by wholesale or retail and transported from 
one place to another within British India and within the dominions of His 
Highness the Ameer respectively. 


Articte 5, 


Merchandize imported frem India into the territories of His Highness 
the Ameer will not be opened for examination till arrival at the place of econ- 
signment. If any disputes should arise as to the value of such goods, the 
Customs Officer or other officer acting on the part of His Highness the Ameer 
shall be entitled to demand part of the goods at the rate of one in forty in lieu 
of the payment of duty. If the aforesaid Officer should object to levy the duty 
by taking a portion of the goods, or if the goods should not admit of being 
so divided, then the point in dispute shall be referred to two competent 
persons, one chosen by the aforesaid Officer and the other by the importer, 
and a valuation of the goods shall be made, and if the referees shall differ ia 
opinion, they shall appoint an arbitrator whose decision shall be final, and the 
duty shall be levied according to the value thus established. 