

(3) The Resident in Kashmir for the time being shall exercise the powers 
of a High Court, as described in the said Code, in respect of all offences over 
which the jurisdiction of a Court of Session is exercised by any such Assistant 
except that, in cases in which the said Code requires the sentence of a Court. 
of Session to be confirmed by the High Court, the sentence shall be referred 
for confirmation to the Governor-General in Council instead of to the Resi- 
dent. 

(4) In the exercise of the jurisdiction of a Court of Session conferred on 
him by these orders, an Assistant may take cognizance of any offence asa 
Court of original criminal jurisdiction without the accused person being com- 
mitted to him by a Magistrate, and shall, when so taking cognizance of any 
offence, follow the procedure laid down by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1882, for the trial of, warrant cases by Magistrates, 

(5) A trial before an Assistant in the exercise of the jurisdiction of a 


Appendix No. $~Jammu and Kashmir. ix 


Court of Session conferred on him by these orders may be without jury or 
aid of assessors, 


(6) This part of these orders appties to all proceedings except— 
a) Proceedings against European British subjects or British subjects 
gs ag J J 
jointly charged with European British subjects ; and 


(6) Proceedings pending at the date of this notification, which should be 
carried on as if this notification had not been issued. 


PART II. 


Crvin JUSTICE. 


For the purposes of the exercise within the said territories of civil juris- 
diction in such cases as aforesaid— : 

(1) Every Assistant to the Resident in Kashmir for the time being may 
exercise the powers of a District Court, as described iu the Code of Civil Proce- 
dure, with jurisdiction in all original suits, whatever be the amount or value of 
the subject-matter, and in all other proceedings in which jurisdiction is confer- 
red on the District Court by the law for the time being in force, 

(2) Every Assistant to the Resident in Kashmir for the ‘time being may 
exercise the powers of a Court of Small Causes, with jurisdiction in all suits 
cognizable under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887, when the 
amount or value of the subject-matter does not exceed one thousand rupees. 


(8) Appeals shall lie, subject to the law for the time being in force, to the 
Resident in Kashmir from the decrees and orders of an Assistant, and the 
Resident shall exercise the powers of a High Court, 


PART III. 


Laws. 


(1) The provisions, so far as they can be made applicable in the circum- 
stances for the time being, and as amended for the time being by subsequent 
enactments of the Acts specified in the Schedule to this notification, are, for the 
purposes of such cases as aforesaid, hereby applied to the said territories, 


(2) Such portions of Foreign Department Notification No, 605-P., dated 
28th March 1873, as are inconsistent with these orders are hereby cancelled. 
Schedule, 