

Given under my hand and seal at Government House in Calcutta, this 
thirteenth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand eight bundred 
and seventy-four. 


(Sd.) NorrHBRoox, 


seal| 


APPENDICES. 


JAMMU AND KASHMIR. 
APPENDIX No. 1—Page 346. 


Ruues for the Gurpance of the Jornr CommIssIoNERS appointed 
for the New Rovurs to Eastern TURKESTAN. 


1.—As it is impossible, owing to the character of the climate, to retain 
the Commissioners throughout the year, the period during which they shall 
exercise their authority shall be taken to commence on ‘15th May, and to end 
on 1st December. 


2.—During the absence of either Commissioner, cases may be heard and 
Aecided by the other Commissioner, subject to appeal to the Joint Commis- 
sioners. 

8.—In the months when the Joint Commissioners are absent, i.e., 
between Ist December and 15th May, all cases which may arise shall be 
decided by the Wuzeer of Ladak, subject to appeal to the Joint Commis- 
sioners. 
. 4—The Joint Commissioners shall not interfere in cases other than 
those which affect the development, freedom, and safety of the trade, and the 
objects for which the Treaty-is concluded, and in which one of the parties or 
both are either British subjects or subjects of a foreign State. 


5.—-In civil disputes the Commissioner shall have power to dispose of 
all cases, whatever be the value of the property in litigation. 


6.—When the Commissioners agree, their decision shall be final in 
all cases. When they are unable to agree, the parties shall have the right 
of nominating a single arbitrator, and shall bind themselves in writing to 
abide by his award. Should the parties not be able to agree upon a single 
arbitrator, each party shall name one, and the two Commissioners shall name 
a third, and the decision of the majority of the arbitrators shall be final. 


7.—In criminal cases the powers of the Commissioner shall be limited 
to offences such as in British territory would be tried by a Subordinate Magis- 
trate of the First Class, and, as far as possible, the procedure of the Criminal 
Procedure Code shall be followed. Cases of a more heinous kind should be 
made over to the Maharaja for trial if the accused be not an European British 
subject ; in the latter case he should be forwarded to the nearest British Court 
of competent jurisdiction for trial, 

$.—All fines levied in criminal cases and all stamp receipts levied 
according to the rates in force for civil suits in the Maharaja’s dominions 
shall be credited to the Cashmere Treasury. Persons sentenced to imprison- 
ment shall, if British subjects, be sent to the nearest British jail, If not 
British subjects, offenders shall be made over for imprisonment in the Maha- 
raja’s jails. 


iv Appendix No, 1—Jammu and Kashmir. 


9.—The practice of cow-killing is strictly prohibited throughout the 
jurisdiction of the Maharaja. 

10.—If any places come within the line of road from which the towns 
of Leh, &c., are supplied with fuel, or wood for building purpose, the Joint 
Commissioners shall so. arrange with the Wuzeer of Ladak that those supplies 
are not interfered with. 