

Pillar No. 28C, standing on a ridge of the northern slope of the hill 
known as the Band-i-Chah-i-Khishti. The pillar is situated on an isolated 
knoll in the ridge, and some 800 yards to the north of a higher and sharper 


xii Appendix No. 4—Afghanistan. 


shoulder of the same ridge, Pillar No, 28B is situated 63 miles to the 
south-west, and pillar No. 24 rather more than 52 miles to the north-east. 


Pillar No. 24 stands on the western end of a long, steep, white hill, as seen 
from the south, on a point known as the Ziarat-i-Baba Taghi. ‘This pillar is 
built on the mound of stones marking the site of this Ziarat, and to the west 
of some graves. From this point the boundary turns east by south, and fol- 
lows the line of the watershed of the bundi-i-Chingarak Range. 


Pillar No. 24A is ‘built just to the north of the footpath running along 
the summit, where the boundary takes a turn to the south round the head of 
a steep-sided ravine or hollow running northwards, known as Kham-i-Sabz. 
a he No, 24B stands on the watershed at the south-east angle of the same 

ollow. ; 

Pillar No, 25 stands on the top of the Kotal above the Chashma-i-Chin- 
garak on the eastern side of the road, and distant about 62 miles in a direct 
line from pillar No. 24. 


Pillar No. 26 stands on a high hill with a steep bluf on its northern side 
covered with pistachio trees, some 12 miles from pillar No. 25. The pillar is 
built on a heap of stones close to some graves known as the Ziarat-i-Chingarak. 
Thence the line bends slightly southwards again still along the same water- 
shed round the head of a deep hollow with a spring in its south-eastern corner 
known as the Chashma-i-Gaz, and on to another high point, and thence on to 
pillar No. 27 on the point beyond that again, a high bluff without name and 
distant in a direct line from pillar No. 26 rather more than 42 miles. 


Pillar No. 28 stands on the eastern of two high points about 74 miles to 
the north-east of No. 27, and pillar No. 29 about 10% miles further on beyond 
that again in the same direction. 


The boundary follows the watershed all the way. 


Pillar No. 29 immediately overlooks the Kashan valley, and stands on a 
shoulder of the hill on the western side of the valley, just below the southern 
of the two peaks on its summit, and opposite’ a western bend of the river. 
Here the boundary leaves the watershed, and runs in a straight line across 
the Kashan valley in a north-easterly direction for rather more than 8 miles 
to pillar No. 30 which stands on a heap of stones on a rocky point at the 
summit of the hills on the eastern side of the valley, and immediately to the 
west of, and overlooking the mouth of, a precipitous gorge known as the 
Palang Khwawali. 


Between pillars Nos. 29 and 30 two intermediate pillars were erected to 
mark the line of crossing in the Kashan valley, The first, No. 29A, stands 
on the left or western bank of the Kashan stream on a bit of high bank 
between the Kashan and its affluent, the Kalimal, and just above its junction 
with the latter, at a distance of about $ of a mile from the domed reservoir at 
Tora-Shaikh, and abouf the same distance from pillar No.'29. Pillas No. 29B 
stands on the crest of the rocky ridge on the right or eastern side of the valley 
rather more than a mile from pillar No. 80. From pillar No. 30 the boundary 
follows the line of the watershed of the Torah-Shaikh Ridge running eastwards 
for rather more than 5 miles to pillar No. 31, erected on the top of a hill at. 