


Appendix No. 4—Afghanistan. xiii 


the point where the line of the watershed between the Kashan and the Mur- 
ghab rivers joins that of the Tora-Shaikh Ridge. From this point the 
boundary turns northwards and follows the line of the watershed between the 
Kashan and the Murghab Rivers for nearly 15 miles to pillar No. 32, 
Between Nos. 81 and 82 three intermediate pillars were erected. The first, 
No. 31A, on the northern side of the road which leaves the Kashan valley at 
Kak-i-Dowlat Beg and runs to Mangan. ‘The pillar stands on the top of the 
Kotal where the road crosses the watershed, and at a distance of nearly 5 
miles from pillar No. 31. 

The second, No. 31B, stands on a round-topped hich hill, about half a 
mile to the north of, and visible from, No, 381A. The third, No. 310, stands 
on the northern side of the road between Yaki Gachan in the Kashan valley 
and Tannur Sangi on the Murghab, at the top of the Kotal forming the 
watershed between the two valleys, and about 3} miles from pillar No. 82. 
Pillar No, 82 stands on the top of a conical hill, the highest bill on the 
watershed between the Kashan and the Murghab, and just at the point where 
the watershed divides near the head of the Kul-i-Madir-i-Naib, which runs 
northwards from there down to the Murghab. 


From pillar No. 32 the boundary turns in an east-north-east direction 
and runs in a straight line for a little over 8 miles to pillar No. 38, built on 
the top of a long high ridge and then on in a straight line for nearly 4 miles, 
again to pillar No. 34 on the top of the southernmost point of a high flat 
ridge between Shor Tatinur Sangi, and the next Shor on the west and about 
1} miles from Tannur Sangi itself. From thence the line crosses the Tanour 
Sangi Shor in a straight line, and runs on for a little more than ¢ of a mile to 
pillar No. 84A built on the top of a high rounded knoll on the east side of 
Tannur Sangi Shor, and between it and the Murghah, and thence on in the 
same straight line for a little under half a mile to pillar No. 35 built on the 
left bank of the Murghab, and close to the water’s edge 700 feet above the 
Yannur Sangi ford. 


From pillar No. 35 the frontier follows the course of the River Murghab 
till it joins pillar No. 36 at the northern end of the Maruchak valley. 


(Sd.) C, E. Yar, Leeut,-Col. 


” W. Peacocke, Major, RL. 
” Caprrainzs Kowarow. 
» P. Inyin. 


DESCRIPTION of the AraHan Fronvrer between the Hart Rup 
and the Oxus. 


From pillar No, 65 the boundary runs in a straight line for 2} miles in 
an east by south direction to pillar No. 66, which stands in the open plain 
close to the west side of the road from Andkui to Imam Nazar at a distance 


xiv Appendix No. 4-—-Afghanistan. 


of 3,500 feet to the south of the main well at Imam Nazar, Thence the line 
runs almost due east for some 9% miles to pillar No. 67, placed on the top of 
a sandy rise 20 yards to the west side of the road leading from Ak Khan 
Bhai Kak to Tash Kuduk and thence on in the same straight line for another 
43 miles to pillar No. 68 built on the east side of the road from Shibarghan 
to Kara Tepe Khurd and Tash Kuduk and 150 yards to the north of the main 
or southernmost of the two Kara Tepe Khurd Kaks, both of which remain 
on the Afghan side of the frontier, From pillar No. 68 the frontier turns in 
a nortb-easterly direction and runs in a straight line for 54 miles to pillar No. 
69 on the top of a slight rise 30 yards to the south of the road running from 
Kara Tepe Kalan to Dunguz Surt and thence on in the same straight line 
for 44 miles to pillar No. 70 built on a fairly high and solid mound among 
low sand hills half a mile to the east of the main road from Kara Tepe Kalan 
to Bosagha and exactly midway and in a straight line between the wells of 
east and west Katabaji, the former of which remains to Afghanistan and the 
latter to Bokhara. From this point the boundary runs due north in a straight 
line for nearly 6% miles to pillar No, 71 which stands about midway between 
the wells of Alikadim and Chahi, to the north side of the road between them 
and close to the point where the road from Alikadim #zé Deb Kilah to Kha- 
miab forks from the road to Chahi, The pillar stands on a iow rise in the 
dry water-course that runs past Alikadim westwards towards Dunguz Surt. 
From here the frontier runs north by east in a straight line for 63 miles to 
pillar No. 72 on a small patch of sound open ground amid sand hills, about 
half a mile outside the edge of the Khamiab cultivation and thence.on in a 
straight line for half a mile to pillar No. 73, built at the mouth of the road 
that runs through the cultivation along the Buz Arik canal. The pillar 
stands at the south-west corner of the compound of Muhammad Wali Sufi’s 
house. From pillar No. 73 the boundary ‘runs for 365 yards up the centre of 
this road to pillar No. 74 built on the east side of the road at the point where 
it erosses the Buz Arik canal by a wooden bridge, at the northern end of this 
bridge and on the western bank of the canal, which here turns off to the west 
into Bosagha land. From pillar. No. 74 the boundary follows the course of 
the Buz Arik canal for 3 miles through the cultivation to pillar No. 75, The 
canal throughout this distance belongs entirely to Bosagha, the trees along 
its left or southern bank belonging to Khamiab and those on its northern 
bank to Bosagha, 