


Pillar No, 75 is built on the northern bank of the Buz Arik or Yangi 
Arik canal at a distance of 15 yards to the east of the wooden bridge over 
that canal, situated about 200 yards to the north-east of Aral Bai’s house and 
250 yards north-west of Kara’s house. From this point the boundary turns 
northwards across the canals and river flats and runs pretty well iu a straight 
ine to the bank of the river. From pillar No. 75 the line follows a low 
earthen bank or ridge for 182 yards to pillar No. 76 on the top of the southern 
bank of the Mirza Beg Ibdal canal, and thence for 155 yards further during 
which it crosses the Mirza Beg Ibdal, the Nikcha, the Shaikh Arik, and the 
Saligh canals to pillar No. 77 built on the northern bank of the Saligh canal 
.50 yards to the east of the canal crossing east of Juma Bai’s house, and ata 
point marked by the remains of some old canal which bas been here cut 


Appendix No. 4—Afghanistan. EV 


through obliquely by the Shaikh Arik and Saligh canals, From here the 
boundary follows the line of the track running from the canal crossing above 
mentioned in a direction slightly to the east of north across the river flats to 
pillar No. 78 built on the south bank of a small creek crossed by the track, at 
a distance of 736 yards from pillar No. 77, and thence on in the same straight 
line to pillar No, 79 on the left bank of the Oxus just above flood-level and 
close to the west side of the track above mentioned. 

To mark the fact that under the terms of paragraph II of the St. Peters- 
burg Protocol No. 4 of Pa July 1887 the canals of Bosagha all along their 


course, that is to say as far as Koinli, shall be included in Russian territory, 
a subsidiary pillar, marked H in the map, was erected at the head of the Buz 
Arik canal in the Koinli District, close to the river bank and immediately to 
the south of the present canal-head. A small canal, called Penna Beg, takes 
off 50 yards to the south of the pillar. 


(Sd.) Cuas. E, Yatx, Lievt.-Col. 
3 W. Peacooxs, Major, RE. 
5 Capitaine N. Komanow. 


i P. ILyin, 


Appendix No. 5—Afghanistan, 


xVL 


‘MAIA WOIS H Ag _ 
f0o syayg “quujsip om § 
qnoge Wilusg go qurod qsoqSiq 
Om7 Sf “AA uo Hued qSiy ogy, 

“a}BINIIE LOTT Eq PINON Hg 
Aiqeqoud qyrq yo punosd youq 
Morty youysipur Aran g sUIIg 

-  _ ‘BEC Y-T-T8y 9q9 Jo 
AVG WSL ey, JO apa oq} uo 
8] JeA‘0} puuqiuqy W1a4sEA4\ StL, 

‘eroat saved gog (1) aujpid 03 
puu spiel yog'g gnoqe st feud 
Oq) WoIy soULIsIP sy ‘aSpea 
64} Woz saved OZ] JO soavjsIp 8 
qe ‘Ruvq 99x" 043 Jou 43a] eg 
WO poyeugis st 47 “STL ALOT 07 
Suyaco ojqisra you st Zfoszt [ru ong, 

“ssUq purqirg 
OY FO 4seK Og UO []Iq eoTU0D 
O[ABAATUAA & St [Iq [BMvIEyy oy, 
‘odUUzsIP Bu] B doz IVY 
“TYE eqs JO YULG egy soavay 41 
SrtA guiod egy cuoty paws; aq 
UG [BUD plo OG) Jo asmn0D ayy, 
“aaIQUOIy 
“SUUET, SSAA -WIION “AAS “IT 
qoagg ‘duyy Soarng uo payacur 
Ssvq Pusquug Jo “g wo TY ys 
“puvqieg Jo sums 
Worz saoud essoq OZO'T st T TBI 


“‘spivd QO[=seord a810q Z0I—"a}0 NN 
eS 