


Territorial possessions of the Amir of —— to be respected 

Territories claimed by the Amir of —— 

Trade. Facilities to be afforded by the ‘Amir to the pursuit “of — in his 
dominions + a es 

Treaty of alliance concluded with Dost Muhammad Khan of —— “a ves 

Treaty of alliance concluded with the Amir of —— 

Tribea connected with the Khaibar and Michni Passes. Control of relations with 


the — to be retained by the British Government ... eas ose 
:Turkistan, Government of — restored to Afzal Khan ... sae tee 
Tarkistan, Fateh Muhammad Khan appointed Governorof—~ ... ese 


Turkistan captured by Abdur Rahman Khan tas an 
Turkistan (Afghan). Amir Abdur Rahman Khan’s stay i ine oer 


Turkistan (Afghan). Districts comprised in —. . eee oes 
Turkisten (Afghan), Rebellion of the Governor of — ... -_ oes 
Umballa conference. Particulars regarding — eee bee tee 
Vakil on the part of the Amir to reside at Peshawar toe bas 
Wakhan. Afghan claim to — ... « 


Wakhan. Air's exercise of actual sovereignty over — ~"questioned by Russia |. 
Yakub Khan. Appointment of — as Goverument of Herat . 
Yakub Khan, Herat captured by — sis on 
Yakub Khan Herat placed in charge of — ws “oe 
Yakub Khan. Kandahar captured by — ... was a 
Pikub Khan placed under surveillance by the Amir... a3) 


Try 


SuBsz0r. Page. 
AFGHANISTAN—" 
Yakub Khan’s abdication of the Amirship of —— a ws ses 425 
Yakub Khan’s estrangement from the Amir of ——__... sas wie 4.22 
Yakub Khan’s flight from ——.., -_ vee vo 421 
Yakub Khan’s reconciliation with the Amir of —— ... on bas 422 
Yakub Khan’s relations with the Amir of —— see wie ake 421 
Yakub Khan’s rebellion sen see ane er 1b. 
Zaman Shah deposed by the Barakzai faction 411 
Zelenoi, General, Appointment of — as Russian Commissioner for’ "the delimi- 
tation of the Russo-Afghan frontier... seo eee a 429 
Zimma. Conference with Abdur Rahman Khan at — ses ee 425 
AFRIDIS — 
Account of the sae aoe = eae wee 226 
Adam Khel, a clan of the wee aes in oes 230 
Aka Khel, a clan of the ve esa se 229 
Aka Khel. Agreement concluded with the — ate ees oe 230 
Aka Khel. Expedition against the — ie ses at i ab. 
Aka Khel. Outrage committed by the —... vas on wef, 00. 
Anzai, a section of the Zakba Khel —~ _.... sag a oe 228. 
Ashu Khel, Agreements concluded with the — ee a ise 235 
Ashu Khel, a section of the Adam Khel —— ave aes see 236 
Asha Khel. Blockade of the — toe soe “ea oe { rd 
; 28 
Ashu Khel. Participation of the — in the misconduct of the Jawakis nee 16, 
Basi Khel, a section of the Aka Khel ~— ,,, os 280 . 
Basi Khel. Allowance to the — for the protection of the Kohat Pass... 1. 
Bori. Operations against — .. ste ie . 233 
Division of the —— into the Gar and Somal aes vee sa tee 226 
Fort Mackeson. Construction of — Si Es, es 233 
Galai Khel, a section of the Adam Khel ——~ ste Pa 281 
Galai Khel. Agreement of the — to keep open communication rough the 
Kohat Pass... one 1b, 
Galai Khel, Agreement of the — to maintain the Kohat Puss on the old 
terms see ae ‘es ait 232 
Galai Khel, Allowance made to the — wie ves -_ 231 
Galai Khel. Hostilities with the — sea ee see “a ab. 
Galai Khel. Outrage committed by the — ai ae ab. 
Galai Khel. Renewal of the old allowances to the — ... 2 48. 
Galai Khel. Refusal of the — to allow the Bangashes to control the rond from . 
Kohat to the crest of the mountain... “ tes 232 
Galais. Neutrality observed by the — during the Jawaki expedition of 
1877-78 wis he = we | 235 
Hasan Khel, a section of the Adam Khel —— at des e ab, 
Hasan Khel. Agreement concluded with the — a ee isi ab. 
Hasan Khel. Blockade of the —— ib, 
Hasan Khel. Neutrality observed by the - during “the Java expedition er 
of 1877-78... tb. 
Hasan Khel. Outrages committed by the — at Cherat and Naushera on ib, 
Hasan Khel. Participation of the — in the misconduct of the Jawakis “a ab. 
Independence of the recognised by the British Government .., we] 229 
Jamu. British occupation of — agreed to by the Jawakis a aise 234 
Janakhoris, a section of the Hasan Khel —— jas ies 2385 
Jawaki stronghold of Bori. Capture and destruction of the— ... ‘ise 233 
Jawakis, a section of the Adam Khel —— ib. 
Jawakis admitted toa share in the allowances for protection of the Kohat 4 
Pass ves ie nae to- 
Jawakis, Agreements concluded with the —~ aie es ws ib. 
Jawakis. Expedition against the — son vos ose ay 