


British guarantee for the perpetuation of the Raj of iy 


Capital sentences. Thakur’s powers regarding —— 
Compensation to —— for lands taken up for the contonments of Solon 


Kasauli 
Dulip Singh, the present Rana of — 


Feudal service to be rendered by the Rana oo 


Innes’ (Major-General) ostate— 
Assessment to be paid direct to Government 
Purchased by Rana 
Retained by the Hritish Government 


Kasnuli Cantonment formed within the estate of —~ .., 
Lapse of the estate of —— on the death of the Rana ... 


Mouse 


Paas, 


16 
WW 


Ba@eran, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir Bee 
BAHADURGARH— 


Subsecr. 


2 
Bacuat, Hill State in the Punjab— 


Patiala granted certain parganisin-—~ es ave va 
Patiala’s purchase of a portion of the estate of —— vee 

Pensions assigned to the family of the late Rana of —— ale ae 
Revenue settlement to be respected by the Rana of —~ ves ice 
Sanad conferring on Mahendar Singh the estate of —— hy tes 
Sanads conferring on Dalip Singh the estateof —— ... wei ar 
Territory retained in lieu of tribute ove tee ses 
Transit duties abolished by the Thakur of —~. oe ove aa 
Tribute payable by the Rann of és “eo Z 
Umed Singh’s claim to the estate of ——- admitted 


eve vee ” 


Estate confiscated for rebellion of the Chief of —— ___... ie 
Ismail Ali Khan granted —— ... ae wee see 
Pension granted to the ex-Chief of —~ - oe a8 sts 


BAHAWALPUR— 


Abolition of customs duties on salt by the —~ Stato ... aes 

Abolition of the British Agency in-—— __.., tee a 

Account of the Chiefship of oo 

Afghon War, -— troops employed on the frontier during the — 

Afghan War, Offer of the Nawab of —— to place a wilitary contingent at the 
disposal of the British Government during the— _... see 

Agreement with the —— State regarding salt revenue .., iss oa 

Aggressions not to be committed by the Nawab of ——. ae one 

Allegiance of the Nawab of —— oe wae bss 

Arbitration in disputes of the Nawab of —— se si ; 

Bahawal Khan, Nawab of ——. Death of — sie aie a 

Bhaung Barra conferred on the Nawab of —— ‘is se et 

British Agent at Mithankot not to engage in trade at —— see wee 

British Agent’s appointment and residence at —— es ne ase 

British assumption of the administration of —— one 

British guarantee fo the engagement between Sadik Khin and the Nawab of —— 

British jurisdiction not to be extended to --— set a6 vee 

British protection guaranteed to the Nawab of —— oes 

Cancellation of certain articles of the treaty of 1833... 

Compensation paid to salt manufacturers in the —-— State by the ‘British Gor- 


ernment set toe 
Compensation paid to the —— State for the loss of salt revenue... see 
Council (State) declared, as a specinl case, to be irremovable, except with the 
consent of the Punjab Government aca vee 


Cruelties practised by the Nawab of ——-__.... 
Duties leviahle on merchandise in transit through —— |. ai 
Duties of the Superintendents stutioned opposite M ithankot and Hariki ve 
Duties remitted on boats by the Nawab of —— ses 
Duties to be collected by officers of —— is was eed 
Duties to be levied on merchandise. Arrangement regarding — =. vee 
Ex-Nawab granted an asyluw in British territory ies 
Ex-Nawab placed under surveillance for attempting to violate his engngement te 
Fateh Khan’s succession to tbe masnad of -—— ae wee 
Ferry rates on the Sutlej revised by the Nawab of —— ot Oe 
Feudal service to be rendered by the Nawab of ——-___... 4 ne 
Foreign States. Nawab not to enter into relations with — " aes 
Goods liatle to transit duty in — wes tee te 
Hariki, Customs officials to be stationed opposite meas see a 
Indevendence effected by the rulers of ——- ... tes oe tes 
Independence guarantged to the Nawab of ——~- : 