


British Agent’s appointment and residence at the Court of the Amir of —— ...| 440 

British Agents. Right of the British Government to dopute — to the 
frontiers of —- ase sae 442 

British aid. Conditions of the grant of — to —_— oP sh a 4b, 


SubsEcr. 


AFGHANISTAN— 
British nid to -be refused to the Amir on Persia’s invasion of —— ay 
British army destroyed in —— ... F bee vee ues 
British attempt to restore the Sadozai dynnsty i in ——~ axe one 
British Mission to ——— turned back from Ali Masjid see S =e4 ave 
British neutrality during the intestine struggles in —— eee aes 
British officers’ deputation to —-~. Arrangement regarding — —.. ey 
British officers’ escort to be furnished by the Amir of — tue vee 


British officers’ withdrawal from 
hritish subjects to be permitted to trade freely i iu and its dependencies 
Burne’s (Captuin) mission to ——. Objects to be attained by — ... is 
Campaign of 1878-79 against —~ _ mo os vee 
Campaign of 1879-80 against —— ie 
Cavagnari, Sir Louis. Appointment of — as British Agent at Kabul hes 


Clarendon-Gortchakoff Agreement of 1872-73 we see 
Commercial treaty contemplated with ——~ re see ves 
Darbar held at Kabul i 1880 ... ate oti 
Dawar valley to be occupied by the Amir of — we on ve 
Dost Muhammad Khan, Amir, List of the sons of —.. se 
Dost Muhammnd Khan deported as a State prisonor to Hindustan ... ves 
Dost Muhammad Khan released by the British Government oes sea 
Dost Muhammad Khan. Strugglo for power among the sons of — ate 
Dost Muhammad Khan’s supremacy established in —— -_ ay 
Elphinstone’s mission to —— ... see 
Faiz Muhammad Khan, Adherence of — transferred to Sher Ali Khan ane 
Faiz Mubammad Khan defeated at Killa Alladad ry tas 
- Faiz enn Khan, son of Dost Muhammad Khan. Advance of — on 
abu see -_ ea at 
Farrah captured by Sultan Jan |. se ise an 205 one 


Fateh Khan Barakzni aa 

Fateh Muhammad Khan, Gov ettior of Turkistan 

Foreign relations of —— to be conducted subject to the ‘approval of the Govern- 
ment of India ... tee tee 

Foreign States, Amir of —— not to enter into relations with — 

Foreign States, Amir not to take up arms against — without British con- 

sent ... 
Gandamak, Treaty “of — between the British Government and Amir Yakub 


Khan of —~ .. sae is 
Ghazui allotted to Dost Muhammad Khan i in n the partition of —— se 
Ghilzai tribes. Rebellion of the — against the Amir’s authority... esi 
Ghulam Haidar Khan’s deputation to Peshawar by the Awir of ——~ see 


Girishk attucked unsuccessfully by Yakub Khan is 
Hashtadan Valley. Settlement of boundary dispute between Porsia and -——— 


in the — ove 
Hashtadan Valley. Sy nopsis of pillars demareating the ‘boundary botween Persia 
and —— ae toe 


Hazara tribes, Attempt of the Amir to bring the — under his subjection Pe 
Herat. Amir Abdur Rahman Khan to endeavour to bring — under subjection 
Herat. Arbitration in disputes of the ruler of — sas ry: see 
Herat. Arrangement for preserving the integrity of ~ -_ ve 
Herat. Ayub Khan in power at — rr tos 
Herat. British Agent’s employment of ser vantsat— ... “oe tes 
Herat. British Agent to reside at — bas aT ‘ea 
+ Herat. British aid guaranteed against foreign eneroachinents on — tes 
Herat. British flag hoisted at — 
Herat. British guarantee against interference in the internal administration of — ~— 
Herat. Dost Mubammad’s ¢ siege and capture of — oe 
Herat. Europeans not to be entertained in the service of the ruler of — ne 
Herat. Integrity of — guaranteed by the tripartite treaty te cee 
Herat. Isa Khan created Wazir of — for the Shah of Persia ie = 