


eoe one 


coe eve ove 


Abdulla Khan nominated heir-npparent by ~- 
Abdur Rahman Khan’s victory over the forces of -- 
Administration of affairs neglected by — 
Amin Khan’s rebellion against— 

Arms presented to -- 
British policy towards -~ “ds oes 
Death of —— aes vee 
Defeat of — at Kalat-i-Ghilzni... as 

Defeat of —— at Killa Alladud on 

Entry of — into Kabul 

Faiz Muhammnd Khan’s adherence transferred to ~- 
Flight of — towards Turkistan vee a 
Government of Herat and Kandahar rejected by -- 
Interview of ~- with the Viceroy at Umbualla 
Muhammad Ali Khan nominated heir-npparent of -—— . 
Pecuniary assistance afforded to-- for the re-estab- 


vee 
eee 


tee vee 


Presents made at the Umballa Darbar to — 
Retirement of — to Herat ee ene 
Succession of -~ to the masnad of Kabul ,,. 


toe 


Account regarding — oes on 
Assistance to be rendered by — on invasion of British 


eee ase 


Asylum i in British territory afforded to -- Ge 
Barakzai booty to be shared with Maharaja Ranjit singh 
British support given to -- for the maintenance of 


een eee eee 


Crowned. at Kandahar Mee eet ‘ae 


Paar. 


( vii ) 


ScssEcr. 


AFQHANISTAN= 


Shoja-ul-Mulk (Shah). Defeat of — by Dost Muhammad Khan... tes 

Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah). Flight of — to British territory tee ee 

Shuja-u)-Maulk {shah} Kandahar occupied by — 

Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah), Military aid to be afforded by Maharajn Ranjit Singh 

to -- 

Shoja-ul-Mulk (Shah). Missions to be exchanged between Ranjit Singh and —- 

Shuja-ul-Malk (Shah), Murder of — in Kabal se 

Shuja-ul- heer ie Shab): Policy mbion led the British Government to espouse the 
cause of — ss -_ 


Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah. Panjabi saci visiting Kabul to be protected by — 


Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah), Ranjit Singh’s interchange of presents with -- 


Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah). Ranjit Singh’s (Maharaje) territorial porsenions to be 
respected by ~- 
Shujn-ul-Mulk (Shah). Ranjit Singh’ 3 officers deputed ‘to Kabul to bo assisted 
in the execution of their commissions by — ses igs 
Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shnh). Ranjit Singh’s treaty with -— 
Shuja-ul-Mnlk (Shah). Reception of -- at Kabul ats 
Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shab). Refugees to be surrendered by aatgie Singh to — 
Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah). Sind Amirs defeated by -- a 
Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah), Sind tribute relinquished by -- sie 
Snuja-ul-Mulk (Shah). Subsidy to be paid to Ranjit Singh by —- 
Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah). Subsidy to the Amir to cense on the conclusion of peace 
with Persia... us ese ses 
Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah). Tripartite treaty cancelled on death of — a 
Shuja-ul-Mulk (Shah), - Tripartite trenty concluded with — 
Shuja-ul-Mulk’s een engagement not to enter into relutions with foreign states 
Shuja-ul-Mulk’s (Shah) engagement not to attack Herat oes se 
Sibi assigned to the British Government... es ons ise 
Sibi to be no longer regarded as part of —— vee vee us 
Subsidy granted to the Amir for military purposes _... és 
Subsidy paid by the British Government to Amir Abdur Rahman Khan des 


Subsidy to the Amir to cense on the conclusion of peace with Persia oe 
Tdeaeph. Arrangement for the construction of a line of -- from Kuram 
to Kabul eae eee te 