

ernment. a ee ore oes 174 
Felling of timber in forests of —_—, Arrangement regarding — se 173 
Feudal service to be rendered by the Raja of —~ ves vee 172 
Foreign States. Raja’s engagement not to enter into relations with — one ab. 
Forest accounts. Arraugement regarding — ‘ve we ooo { oe 
Forest profits to be shared with the Raja of —— eas ove eos 178 
Gopal Singh’s abdication of the Raj of —— Peers bee see 166 
Gopal Singh’s succession to the Raj of —— vee se 4d. 
Gulab Singh, Muharaja, granted the principality of —— te ae 841 
Infanticide to be suppressed by the Raja of —— saa sae she 172 - 
Tuterpretation of the term “ Horest ” ae eee see ive 176 


Jamwar forest excluded from the forest lease sea ses aes 177 


( xxi ) 


Supsect. 


Cuastpa in the Punjab— 


Kajjia forest excluded from forest lease —.... ee 
Kashmir. Chiefship of —— made independent of — .,, 
Kashmir. Territorial arrangement between.—— and — 
ease of the forests in —— ate 

Maladministration of the affairs of —~ _,.. 
Mutilation to be suppressed by the Raja of —— és 


Postal convention concluded with —— fe ave 


ane ase 


Powers to be exercised by the officers of the Forest Department in ——~ 


Protection of reserved forests in —— os a 
Protection of unreserved forests in —— oe Sue 
Punishment for forest offences in —~ ‘ ase 


Raja cedes claims to waif and windfall timbers on the Chenab and Ravi 


Rates to be paid to the Ruja for felling timber in the forests of —— 


Renewal of the forest lease of 1864 with the Raja of —— 


Renewal of the forest lease with the Raja of ——~. Arrangement regarding 


Right to timber in transit, uncovered by a pass ae 
Roads to be constructed by the Raja of —— ae 


Rules for forest conservancy in -— ie eee 
Salute allowed to the Ruja of -- ses see 
Sanad conferring on Sri Singh the Raj of —~ ae 


Sati to be suppressed by the Raja of —— ... ees 
Seigviorage rates for trees felled to be paid to the Raja of 
Sham Singh invested with full governing powers cis 
Sham Singh, the present Raja of —— soe vse 
Sham Singh’s succession to the Raj of —— wes 
Shisham grove reserved for the Raja of —— oes 
Slave dealings to be suppressed by the Raja of —— __... 
Suchet Singh’s claim to the Raj of —— —.., : 


Superintendent. Appointment of ——. to be temporarily maintained 


Transit duties to be abolished by the Raja of ——~ oes 


Trees on public roads, wells, or springs not to be felled 


Trees reserved for the Raja of —— aes nies 
Tribute payable by the Raja of —— sie es 
Tribute remitted for lands from —~ Ace vee 


Wazir to be appointed by the Raja of ——~— 
(See also “ Jammu and Kashmir.”) 


CHAMBERLAIN, BRIGADIER-GENERAL Siz NeyittE— 


Amazai clan’s opposition to the advance of ——— ae’ 
Kabul Khel Wuziris’ submission to sts re 
Rabia Khel Orakzais defeated by —— me ia 


Cuanpa Kaur, MAHARANI— 


° Allowance granted by the Lahore Darbar to —— hy 
Succession of —— to the sovereignty of Punjab ie 


CHABBaR on the Makran Coast— 
Bahu Chief’s engagement to protect the telegraph lines in —-~ 