


» IX : 3 


(| xvii) 


SuBsEcr, 
Buazt, a Cis-Satlej Jagir ... és sia see ids eee 
BHAWANI— 
Jind granted the pargana of —— ear 
Buapaitt, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir wee as ove 
Burosyowatl, 2 Cis-Sutlej Jagir eee ee toe oe tee 
Bursa, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ... toe ove ove as 
Biitasever or Kantor, Hill State in the Panjab 
Account of the Thakurai of —~— see sais wee 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Chief of —— see toe te 
Bachretu pargana restored to the Thakur of —— toe aoe . 
Basse pargana restored to the Thakur of —— ica oe 
Bijai Chand, present Raja of oo tee ove 


Bir Chand, the founder of ioe 
British guarantee for perpetuating the Thekurai of —— 
Capital sentences. Thakur’s powers in regard to — ae wit 
Compensation to —— for abolition of transit duties refused se es 
Council of Regency during minority of ind Chief of —~ see ies 
Dhami severed from —— 

Disputes with neighbouring Chiefs to be referred to. r peitieh courta by the 


Thakur of.-—— .., ah ea ese 
Feudal service to be rendered by the Thakur of ———_.., oo es 
Infanticide to be suppressed by the Thakur of ——- —..., as bes 
Lepers. Engagement to protect —— oon vee nee tae 
Madhan, an offshoot of —— aes ses one bee 
Mangal, once a dependency of -—— * toe 
Nazarang payable annually for parganas restored to Thakur of — or 


Requests of the Thakur of —— 
Rewards for services rendered during the muting conferred on Raja ‘Hira Chand 


of —— vee nae 
Roads to be constructed and kept i in repair by the Thakur of —— i 
Salute of the Thakur of —— increased oes 


Sanad conferring on Jagat Chand the territory of —— on right bank of Sutle. 
Sanad confirming the possessions on left bank of Sutlej of the Thakur of ~— 


Sati to be suppressed by the Thakur of soe see 
Slave-dealing to be suppressed by the Thakur of ee ves vee 
Successions to the Chiefship of —— ioe 


Territory not to be alienated by the Thakur ‘of —— without permission 


Theog, an offshoot of —— eee tos ove tee 

Transit duties abolished by the Thakur of —— ics 

Tribute. Exemption of Thakur from payment of —... “ve oe 
BIREAN, 2 Cis-Satlej Jagir isi Bed os cae “tee 
BrrHavLi— 

Kapurthala Chief granted the estate of. ——~ tna a0 
Brzan KusL— 

(See “ Waziris.”’) 

kraox Movntatn on the North-Western Frontier— 

Expeditions of 1888 and 1891 against the tribes of the —~ iy 

Wilde’s (Brigadier-General) expedition egainst the tribes inhabiting the —~ 4 
Bon, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir «+ vee ves oP eeu Ses 
Boxwana in Central Asia— 

Balkh seized by the Amir of ——~ _ <n ive fs 
Bort VILLaaz on the North-Western Frontier— 

Destruction of —— .., ase ane oon fs tee 


Paes. 


. ( xix ) 


Sussgor. 


Bort VaLury— 
(See “ Baluchistan.) 
Berrish Sonsyrots— 
Kashmir engagement not to employ ——_—S_—=... 
Bupwana in Jhajjar— 
Ismail Ali Khan granted —— ... 
Jind granted s portion of pargana —— 
Nabha Raja granted o portion of ——~ eee eee 
Patiala granted the district o& —— ase 
Buerr Trmes— ; 
(See “ Balachistau.’’) 


BunrpaLlan— 
(See “ Sahawaran.”) 
Bounvr Sratz in Oudh— ; 
Kapurthala Chief granted the —— wee on ws oer 
BUNERWALS — 