


Punjab Government’s assumption of the administration of tee tee ab. 


SUBJEOT, Paar. 

NgeLar— 

Shah Alam proclaimed Emperor of Hindustan by Ahmad Shah Abdali es 2 

Shah Alam released from the thraldom of the Mahrattas by Lord Lake vig 3 

Shah Alam replaced by the Mahrattas onthe throne of —— wae re 2 

Shah Alum’s proposal to Major Hector Mauro -_ tes is q 
Dena Nara, Diwan of the Punjab— 

Appointment of —— as a member of the Lahore Council of Regency Sec 46 
Deeasat Frontier— 

Account of the tribes inhabiting the —— _,.. er ni a 243 
Dagasat on the N.-W. Frontier— 

Ranjit Singh’s (Maharaja) seizure of the —— es Se we] 412 
Dssnis— 


(See * Swatis.’’) 
Daanpi in Hill States— 


Jagirdar excepted from jurisdiction of Bashabr si Mis oe] 438 
Powers of Jagirdar of —— fe a tee aay ave tb. 
Daan Hill State in the Punjab— 
Account of the Thakurai of —— mae sui oie st 120 
Adoption sannd conferred on the Rana of — vee ae see 105 
Begari supply commuted to a tributary payment és ia ve 120 
Beguarig to be supplied by the Rana of —— ... es ay am 152 
Cnpital sentences. Powers of the Rana as regards —.., ce oo W1 
Fateh Singh, the present Rana of —— at see sa «| 108 
Feudal service to be rendered by the Rana of ——~ Sea 4 ae 152 
Rana made independent of Bilaspur Ko Sci sie oes 120 
Reduction of the tribute of the present Rana of —— for life ete rn 
Rewards for services during the mutiny con erred on the Rana of ——~ iss tb. 
Roads to be constructed by the Rana of —— es st sae 152 
Sanad conferring on Govardhan Singh the Thakurai of —— ote avs tb. 
- Transit duties abolished by the Rana of —— oe ane sae Il 
Tribute of the Rana of —— __.., vee ace eee ove 120 
Dyanavra, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ar ae tes one Pre 67 
Duoanavra Lapxare, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir —— vss ‘se aT - id, 
Duayxas— : : 
(See “ Patanis.”’) 
Dain, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ... a eae wee tes ve 67 
Drazaann, a Cis-Sutlej State— ; 
Lapse of —— we see ie ie Gee ene 51 
Dir— 
Account of the Stateof ——_... 08 ws se we | 851 
Amon-ul-Mulk of Chitral. Defeat of the Chiefof —~by— ... os ab. 
ndandol, Annexation of —— to the State of — rc ace “ tb, 
Kashmir. Connection of —— with— .., ma ae oe 16. 
Kashmir. Relations of ——~ with — broken off by Rahmatulla Khan ore ab. 
Mubammad Sharif Khan, Chief of ——, Flight of —- to Swat... nee ab. 
Drwa Kaos, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir oh i tad oe ‘ 67 
DopaL— 
(See “ Swatis.’’) ? 
Dost Munastuap Kuan, of Kabul— 
(See “ Afghanistan”) 
Dvsana in the Delhi district-— 
Abdus Samad Khan granted the estate of —— tee oe ae 6 
Account of the Chiefship of —— or vee tee an ab. 
Allegiance to be rendered by the Nawab of ——~ ~ dig | 12 
cee rr rn rg rr, 


IX ; 4 


Svusszor. 
Dosana i in the Delbi District— 
- Contingent of horse to be furnished by the Nawab te ee 
Delhi Cownmissioner in charge of vee ite ve 
Hariana estates exchanged with villages in Rohtak _ _ eer 
Mumtaz Ali Khan, present Chief of ss8 ies 
Sanad conferring certain lands in Hariana on the Chief of —— =. aos 
Succession sanad conferred on the Nawab of —— toe eee a 
Successions to the Chiefship of —— vee oe tee on 
Donsrorp, BRiGapier-GenERalL— 
Expedition under ——- against the Utman Khel Gaduns -_ ise 
DoupaRzais— 