


Roads to be constructed by the Raja of —— sae 
Sairi estate restored to the Raja of —— 5 
Sairi family granted an allowance by the Raja of ——... 
Sanad confirming the possessions of the Raja of 


Shamsher Singh, the present Thakur of —— ie 
Timber to be supplied to the Raja of —— ... vee 
Transit duties abolished in ——.., oes we 
Tribute to be paid by the Raja of —~ an ve 
Villagers’ privileges for collecting fuel in forests of -—~ 

Zamindar’s privileges in forests of ——~ oes ws 


Bast Kusgt (Afridis)-—~ (Seo ** Afridis.”) 
A 18, 


Bast KHEL (Yusafzais) — 
(See * Yusafzais,”) 


BassE Pargava— 


Restoration of —— to Bilaspur .., eS see 
Batanis— 

Account of the —~ eee oes sas 

Dhannasg, a branch of the —— ... oes tes 

.Engagements entered into by the— eee ve 

Koti, a Sayad clan affiliated to the —— aes 


Muafi grant to the ——. Restoration of the — 


Pass responsibility on the Tank and Baunu frontier accepted by 


Punishment of the —— 
Service in the militia and border police given to the —— 


Tattas, a branch of the —— ine ave 

Uraspans, a branch of the ——... or es 
BawanuganviaN, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ess oe 
Bawanz pargana— 

Annexed to British dominions .., ive ee 
BaxaR— 

Oudh Wazir’s force defeated at the battle of —— se 
Bayoxs— 


(See * Zaimukhts.”) 


eee 


eee 


= ASE mampyring with the sanad of 1815 


ous 


the —_— 


v00 


Poo 


t 


wn 


O_—" 


139 


250 


250 
251 
250 


. ( xvii ) 


SuBsEcr. Paar. 


Bazoris— 
(See “ Orakzais.”’) 
BEas Rrvee in the Punjab— 


British Government to have contro! over the —— wee ies asi 41 
Besa, Hill State in the Punjab— 
Account of the Thakurai of re sae AS 121 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Chief of eee se ate 105 
Ancestors of Thakur of —-—- emigrated from Ujjain... asa oe 121 
Begari labour commuted to a tributary payment eae nea vee £8, 
Begaris to be supplied by the Thakur of aes ses on 155 
Capital sentences. Powers of the Thakur in répard to — 111 
Compensation granted to the Thakur of —— four lands taken up for the canton- 
ment at Kasauli ave seu ne 121 
Feudal service to be rendered by ‘the Thakor. of —~— Seine a soe 154 
Roads to be constructed by the Thakur of —— sis sr an 165 
Sanad conferring on Man Chand the Thakurai of —— ~ ‘ya tee 154 
_ Transit duties abolished by the Thakur of —— tee se eee 11 
Tribute payable by the Thakur of —— ary aka ie ais 121 
Udai Chand, the present Thakur of ——__... tee oa sas 1d, 
Benarezs in the North-Western Provinces—- 
Restored to Wazir of Oudh vee oes 2 
Shah Alam’s cession to the English of the district of —— 536 aie 7 
BrenGar— 
Alamgir’s (IT) son placed at the head of the expedition for the invasion of —— 1 
Balwant Singh concerned in the conspiracy for the invasion of —— ae 1b. 
Coalition formed for the invasion of —— vd, 
Kasim Ali’s poses to the Pra cas of Delhi for the office ‘of Subadar 
Q borhan eee ane eee ace 2 
Kuli Khan’s advance on —~ af ae ds 1 
Oudh Nawab joins the conspiracy for the i invasion of —— ene ee ib, 
Second invasion of —— io és Pe ise Pr 4b 
Somdar Singh concerned in the conspivacy for the i invasion of — ... on ad. 
Bentrivoz, Lorp Win1tamM— 
Ranjit Singh assured of British friendship by —— sea ane tes 24 
Ranjit Singh’s interview with —— re ves ees a 16 
Ber —. See Malaudh ... ie see ae nak ose 67 
BraDAUR— 
Patinla Maharaja granted jurisdiction over —— ve + “is 53 
Buassst, Hill State in the Punjab — 
Account of the Thakurai of — see “aa ees 119 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Chief of —~—~ wea on ea 105 
Begaris to be furnished by the Rana of —— ie es we { 149 
Begaris supply commuted to a tributary payment od - oe tb, 
Psa sentences, Thakur’s powers as sere _ ss tee oe nt 
® Singh, present Rana of —— Ses Gia we { 119 
Fon al service to be rendered by the Rana of —— as se ve | 148° 
Roads to be constructed by the Rana of —— ees tee 2 149 
Rudar Pal’s abdication of the Raj of —— .,. si ne ns lig 
Savad conferring on Rudar Pal shi Thakurai of tee aes see 148 
Sanad recognising Ran Babadur Singh as Rana of ——... ees ee lag 
Transit duties abolished by the Raua of —— a “ vot LU 
Tribute to be paid by the Rana of —— et he ve or 149 
BaARAULI— 
Nalagarh Raja granted the Thakurai of —— tes oon 132 
Nalagarh Raja to assign villages for the support of the "Rani of — bei ib 
Nolagarh Raja to construct roudsin ~— aie vs tee ab. 
Transfer of —— to Rana of Balsan ar vee ue +4 J14 