


( xv ) 


Sungxcr. Paae. 
BaLvcHistan— 

Kibzai country brought under the direct control of the —— Agenoy wee 387 
Las Bela. Account of the nee of -- ... an Pn aes 879 
Makran. Account of — we ae se sxe 38L 
Mand. Description of — ate oes was a oe 884 
Marris. Account ofthe—  . 4b. 

Marris, Control of relations with the — placed i in the. ‘hands of the Political 
Superintendent, Upper Sind Frontier _... ave ae ae 878 
Mittri. British troops cantoned at — oe st 379 
Musa Khel. Agreement taken from the Maliks of the — _ ses 886 
Musa Khel country brought under the direct control of the —— Agenty ‘ 387 
Panjgur. Account of — ‘i “ 383 
Pishin acquired by the British Government — Se ing 386 
Quetta, British troops cantoned at — sn fuk a, 879 
Quetta district leased to the British Government eas 8% oe 16. 
Quetta made the head-quarters of the —~ Agency... ib. 

a eas Major. Appointment of — as Agent to the Governor General 
‘or —— Sa eee oy 6. 
Shorarud acquired by the British Government os osé aie 886 
Sibi acquired by the British Government... . ‘ td, 
Thal-Chotiali acquired by the British Government . 4b. 
Tump. Description of — i ‘ 384 
Zhob. Agreement taken from the Malike of — Pe sy 386 
Zhob, Deposal of Shah Jahan, the lending Chief of — és s6 1b. 
Zhob. Punitive expedition against the Kakars of — .., sek ise 46. 
Zhob. Sardar Shahbaz Khan set up as the leading Chief of — ... es 1b, 


Zhob. Shingul Khau, the-present Chief Sirdar een the Sunjar Khel 


Kakara ae oe ib, 
Zhob Valley brought under the direct control of the ——~ ~ Agency .. wes 2b, 
Zmarais brought under the direct contro) of the —~ Agency tee sae 387 
Band KHEL— 
(See “ Waziris,*’) 
Banda Pareana in Delhi territory— 
Nijabat Ali Khan granted —— ... ane oss es vee 9 
BanaasHEs— 
(See “ Turis.”) 
Bara Kasi— 


(See “ Waziris.”) 


Banewat, @ Cis-Sutloj Jagir ie ee a ase ade 67 

Bareaua SHIRANIS— 

; (See “ Shiranis.”) 
Bap Munammap KHEL - 
(See “ Orakzais.”) 
BaRvaLa— 
Defeat of Sikhs by Ahmad Shah at --—— ate wee te 13 

BaRveEs, Siz ALEXANDER — 

Outrage committed on —— in Kalat ace ne on ia 875 

Mission of —— to Kabul ee oe ate ise on 413 

Mission of —— to Kalat ar bts sv ws te 374, 
BaRsaAT FaripPuR— 

: Jind granted — .., isi mr bis se tes 56 
BAsaR, & Cis-Sutlej Jagir ... ‘ete Fh wae ove ses 67 
BASHAHR, Hill State in the Punjab— 

Account of the Thakurai of —— ee wis ee wet) 4 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Raja of —— a we 105 
Agreements for the lease of the forests in —— ee ve { 136 


Sopsecr. 


Baseaue, Hill State in the Punjab— 


Paas. 


Agreements relating to waif, drift and windfall timber concluded with the Reis ¢ 138 


of te tee 
Begaris to be furnished by the Raja of ad 
Capital sentences. Powers of the Thakur in regard to — 


Compensation granted for-the abolition of transit daties by the Raja ‘of —- 


Dalthi. Payment by — to —— eet 
Fendal service to be rendered by the Raja — 
Fine imposed on the Raja of 


Forest. Definition of — a wes 
Forest officer’s powers in —— .., aes nes 
Forests. Payment for lense of — rr Per 
Kanaiti. Payment by — to see ies 
Kotkhai declared independent of ees Soe 
Kumharsain declared independent of —— ... vee 
Management of affairs delegated by Shamsher Singh to his son 
Rates for trees felled in the forests of —— «., tee 
Rawain severed from ——~ aes Re sae 