


Dasthyari Chief’s engogement to protect the telegraph lines in -—— 


Geh Chief’s engagement to protect the telegraph lines ia 


CHARDAIS—~ 


(See “ Turis.”) 


Cuenas Rrver— 
Chamba Raja’s cession of his claim to waif and windfall timbers on the —— 


Chamba Raja’s cession of his rights over the —~ see 


ase 


een 


wos 


40, 


Sunsgzor. Paaz. 


CHHATAR SINGH, Atariwala, Sikh Sardar— 


Punjab revolution headed by oe ove ves oes 21 
Carmas— 
(See “ Yaghistan.”) 
CHILIANWALA— 
Battle of —- eee eee see ove ove aoe 21 
Currrau— 
Account of ove oe seo toe wee 850 
Afzal-ul-Mulk’s succession as ruler of —~ ... wae a “ee 351 
Aman-vul-Mulk, Mehtar of Lower —— ses ats ae sea 850 
British Mission to —— Me tee vee oa ib. 
Durand’s (Lieutenant-Colonel A. @. A.) visit ‘to— |. ads tes ib, 
India visited by two principal Sardars of toe tee id. 
. Kabul Amir informed that he cannot be allowed to interfere in —— ‘ie 861 
Kashmir. Agreement of the Mehtar of Lower —~ with — ees soe 850 
Kashmir. Allegiance to — acknowledged by the Mehtar of Lower —— igs 1d, 
Kashmir. Subordination to + acknowledged by the Chief of Lower -—— tb. 
Kashmir. Subsidy paid by — to the Chief of Lower ——~ and its enhancement’) +}. 
Kashmir. Upper —— in receipt of a subsidy from — or a tb, 
Kashmir territory invaded by Pahlwan Bahadur a ove eed 861 
Pahlwan Bahaduar, Chief of Upper ——=_... eee ace ise 350 
Sher Afzal’s expulsion from —— by Nizam-ul-Mulk .., ave sia 351 
Sher Afzal’s usurpation of the government of —— ee a ae tb. 
Union of Upper and Lower ——~ under one Chief as ove ve ib. 
Cuorray, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ‘i ie sis is ae 67 
Cuorr Parrr, Umballa, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir oh sae vi a ab. 


Cavnar Kusi— a5 ts 
(See * Shiranis.”) 
Cis-Surrzs StaTes— 


Account of the ——— one oe nee wee 51 
British power. Establishment of — in the — age iss ves 1b. 
British protection extended to the Chiefs of the —~ ... 68 
Chiefs invited to eon with the British Government against the Khalsa sa 
arm e ase soe see eee 
Chiefs em the —— ees ove 51 
Commutation of the military servico of the Chiefs of the —— ses es ab. 
Dulip Singh renounces nll sovereign claims in the —— .., vee tes 40 
Dalip Singh’s possessions in the —— annexed to British territories 88 
Hones pee for Government purposes to pass free of duty through territory ; 
of the - -- ves one oe oo eo 6 
Jagirs confiscated in the—— Th a $0 ay 61 


Jagirs granted in the sue tee 1b. 
Jagirdars’ and zamindars’ rights in the —— guaranteed on condition of 


fidelity tos tee ees 38 
Kapurthalia Chiefs’ possessions in ‘the — confiscated . aun se ons 161 
Kapurthialla Sardar’s pledge to ae feudal service for hig possessions in 

the —— eve vee ves i one th 
Lapses on failure of heirs in the — tea ve ane ave 61 
Minor Chiefships. List of the —— i vee sos 67 
Proclamation extending British protection to ‘Chiefs of the annem ies 68 
Proclamation prohibiting Chiefs from committing aggressions on their neighbours 69 
Ranjit Singh’s engagement not to commit aggression on Chiefs of the——__,,, , 23 
Ranjit Singb’s jurisdiction ceased over the ve eos eee 63 
Rights and privileges guaranteed to the —— ‘aes Pa ii 68 
Service required from Chiefs of the —— in time of war we soe { oF 
Status of the Chiefs of tha ——... ae ee te “aes 51 