


Tribute, Chief’s exemption from —— —,.. ae ven one 68 


SuBJEcT. 


Cig-Suruzs StarEs. Minor Chiefs of— 
List of principal —— with revenue and tribute paid by thes vee 


Magisterial powers conferred on certain —— toe tee tae 
Privileges granted to certain —— see vee see oes 
Rewards granted to -—— for services during mutiny... on tee 
Status of —— ses vee _ tes ss on 
Succession rules for —— ate ads tne as sa 

Crrvz, Lorp— 
: Shah Alam induced by —-— to withdraw his forces eae ane ae 


Corroy, Str SzDNBY-— 
Tarakzai Mohmands defeated by a force under the command of —— 
Utmanzai Yusafzais’ services to the force under —— operating against the 


Sitava fanatics ... ws eas tee coe ses 

CRIMINALS not to be sheltered by the — - : 
Aka Khel Afridis ... we aus se ass see 
Akhel Orakzais . .., sae “ea oie Te asi 
Ashu Khel Afridis ... ies ae eae ses “wa 
Bazoti Khel Ornkzais oe tes age ea das 
Darwesh Khel Waziris ans Pan bige-a ak _ 
Dawaris ses See ae ake igs age 
Firoz Khel Orakzais see aa sed yea ws 
Galai Khei Afridis .,. ore iis vee eae abs 
Hasan Khel Afridis ... wae eae af ees as 
Jawaki Afridis ae ve aes tee wee fas 
Kuki Khel Afridis ... as <é aT aes ee 
Mahsud Waziris ... Ge dee wee sae oss 
Muhammad Khel Orakzais tee ase ee ene eee: 
Rabia Khel Orakzais eee eee vee ove see 
Saifali Waziris we Tone tes oe we os 
Salar Gaduns ies or aos one Sais on 
Shaman Khel Waziris oe eas cies ave te 
Shiranis ats ove Py seo vee 
Utman Khel Orakznis wae ese Si is . oe 
Utmanzai Yusvfzais ... ies ase Bak wis on 
Zaimukhts ae © oe st as jae ton 
Zakha Khel Afridis ... ade eee aa oye we 

Customs DUES— 
Jind Raja’s abolition of —— —.., eee ore vee sae 
Kalsin Chief’s abolition of —— on oe ise oo 
Patiala Maharaja’s abolition of —— we oe eee ee 
Sirmur Raja’s engagement not to levy —— ees one oes 

fo) 
D 

DapDRI— 

Confiscation of the estate of —— for rebellion of its Chief tee re 


Ismail Ali Khan and Faiz Mubammad Khan granted the pargana of -———- tee 
Pension granted to the ex-Chief of —- 


DALHOUSIE sanitarium in the Punjab—~ 


Chamba Raja’s cession of the —— sist sa toe we! 


Dazre Sune, Maharaja— 
(See “Punjab.”) 


DattHI--" 
Rights of Bashahr over —-.., tee we one on 


116 


( xxiv) 


SoBszor. Page. 
Ld 
DArrr— 
(See “Yaghistan.”) 
Dazxott, Hill State in the Punjab—~ 
Account of the Thakurai of —— ry) tee eae 124 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Rana of —— eee ons see 105 
Allegiance to be rendered by the Rana of ——= ive on vee 160 
Marwar. Rana’s ancestors emigrated from —— sae bee ase 124 
Ram Saran Singh, the present Rana of —— or eos to 1b. 
Sanad conferring on Sutes Ram the Thakurai of —— ... eee eas 160 
Dazwrsu Kuer— 
(See “ Waziris.’”’) 


Dasuryazr in Baluchistan— 
(See “ Makran.’’) 


Davpzais— 
(See “ Zaimukhts.”’) 
DAULATZAI8S— 
(See “Orakzais.’’) 
Dawaris— 
Account of the — eos pee ove soe aee 248 
Agreement entered into by the —— on 249 
Dawar. All rights to — relinquished by the British Government on the part of 
the Sikbs a - ib, 
Dawar. British claim to sovereignty over — renounced in favour of Amir . 
Dost Muhammad Khan __e.. tes tes vee we fs 95, 
Outrages committed by the — vee rry eee vee ib, 
Dawaz VaLLzy on the N.-W. Frontier— 
® Account of the inhabitants of the ——~ -_ tee aa ue] 248 
Kabul Amir permitted to occupy the —— ... as sie wef 416 
Dawezais— 
(See * Mohmands.”’) 
Deuea Don on the N.-W. Frontier— 
Annexation of ——~ to British territory oo oes ee cof UL 
Dr1aI— 
Account of the origin of British relations with the Court of —— .,, wef, 2 
Agreement concluded with Shah Alam, the Emperor of —— Me a 7 
Akbar-Shah's succession to the throne of —~ 506 Neg 3 
Bahadur Shab, Restrictions placed on the authority f= se oie i, 
Bahadur Shah convicted of charges preferred against him sae va id. 
Bahadur Shah deported'to Rangoon ove ove ne -_ 46. 
Bahadur Shah’s conduct during the ETD ioe vee avs ase ie 46, 
Bahadur Shah’s death was ve sie be NES ibe 
Bahadur Shah’s succession to the throne of - _ at fn 40. 
Charges preferred against Bahadur Shah, ex-King of —— ai as 1d. 
Chiefs in the districts of —— _.. ove vee Se% aaa 4b. 
Coalition formed against the English tee see “ie aie a | 
Death of Shah Alam, Emperor of —~ aay of 8 
mer of Bengal, Behar, and _ offered to the English by the Emperor 
on sue ase oes eos 2 
Emperor joined the British camp. as as ee at ad. 
Emperor murdered by bis Wazir aae ‘ee sa5 Bas 1 
Hostilities between Sikhs and Emperors of —~ ave eee re 18 
Imperial army defeated by the British forces 1 
Kasim Ali’s permeny for the office of Subadar of ‘Bengal to ‘the Emperor 
of ——— We vee vee tee oH 2 
Mabrattas in possession Of ——... ate one 3s 4b. 
Pecuniary provisions assigned for the support of the Emperor of —~» ote 8 