


Ranjit Singh’s treaty for regulating the navigation of the —— 


Rates of duty to be levied on merchandise by the —~ ... 
Supplementary treaty concluded with Maharaja Ranjit Singh regarding the 


levy of tolls on the —~ 


Tolls leviable in Bahnwalpur territory on boats navigating the ——... 


oe 


oe 


PaGE. 


29 
1 
41 
17 
32 
31 
26 
34 
17 
25 
380 


28 
195 


( xxxii ) 


: SUBJECT, 
Inpvs on the N.-W. Frontier— 
Tolls to be levied on boats navigating the —— vee toe 
Tolls to be levied on the ——. Arrangement regarding - _ eee eos 
Transit rates payable by mercantile boats navigating the —~ vee ves 
InvanTiomDE— : 
Kilaspur Rana’s engagement to suppress eee ves ees 
Chamba Raja’s engagement to suppress —— toe ar te 
Faridkot Raja’s engagement to suppress —~ tee vee ene 
Jind Raja’s engagement to suppress —— __.., tee tis -_ 
Mandi Ruja’s engagement to suppress tes jess ter vee 
Nabha Raja’s engagement to suppress —— ... . ses 
Patinla Mabaraja’s engagement to suppress ——~ _~ ies oe 
Suket Raja’s engagement to suppress tee tao tee ove 
Tarhoch Thakur’s engagement to suppress a's ste tee 
Innes, Mason-GekNERAL— 
( See “ Baghat.’’) 


IgazaIs—~ 


(See “ Yusufzais.”’) 


Ismart Att Kwan, of Bahadargurh— 


Service to be rendered by ——_... ies a or obi 


Ismamzars— 


(See “ Orakzais.’”) 


J 
Japvys— 
(See “ Gaduns,’’) 
JAGATGHAR in the Hill State of Baghat— 
Patiala granted the fort and estate of —— ... one tee vee 
Jamu anp KasomMIn— 
Account of the State of sive oo re 
Administration of -——. Reorganisation of the — saa tee toe 
Administrative reforms in ——. Resident to endeavour to bring about — or 
Adoption, Right of — guaranteed to the Maharaja of —— vo oe 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Maharaja of ——__... ses eo 


Appeals from decision of British officer at —— 
Arbitrator’s eEnounene for the disposal of diate cases in the Mixed Court 


at aes toe 
Arbitrator’s powers in 1 the Mixed Court at - _ tee oes 
Badrawar retained by —~— under an arrangement with Chamba oes Ses 
Baltistan conquered by Gulab Singh is oon vee ae 
Boundaries of the State of —— toe tee eee bee 
British officer's jurisdiction in ——— vee 
Chalt, Seizure of -- by the Chiefs of Hunza and Nagar and its ‘Ye-occupation 

by Kashmir troops ove oo tee 
Chamba. Chiefship of — made independent of —— ... “ee as 
Chamba granted to Raja Gulab Singh of Jammu aa one see 
Chamba. Territorial arrangement between —— and — ous vee 
Chandgraon acquired by the State of —— ... ie “ae sea 


Chilas. Nominal tribute paid to ——~ by the Shin republic of — Sc 
Chilas. Subjugation by the Maharaja of —— of the Shin republic of — oes 
Chitral, Engagement entered into by the Ruler of —with the Maharaja 
of —-- ses vee 
Chitral. Union of Upper and Lower. — under one Chief 2h 
Chitral (Lower), Allegiance to ——~ acknowleged by the Mehtar of — 
Chitral (Lower). Exchange of Agents with —— agreed to by the Mehtar of — 
Chitral (Lower), Subordination to ——~ acknowleged. by the Mehtar of ~_... 