

Nagar nominally subordinate to the Maharaja of —— ... 

Nazarana to be levied on succession of a collateral to the Raj of —— 


Ix 


Pace 


JAMAIU AND Kasumrn— 


Officers empowered to grant certificate for ‘refund of duty on Soot exported 


to —— coe .. | App. 2 
Payment of drawback on goods exported to —— ab. 
Political Officer in —— placed directly under the orders of the Government of 

India sé se “as “ei He 847 
Powers of the British Officer at —~ ae as Se ‘as 863 
Pratab Singh created a G.C.S.1. was 348 
Pratap Singh granted the honorary rank of Colonel in the British Ay my és #2. 
Pratap Singh’s resignation of active participation in the government of his 

State wee ss = we | 847 
Pratap Singh’s restoration to a portion of his powers ... ae ae 848 
Pratap Singh’s (Maharaja) succession to the Chicfship of —— .., foes 847 
Punch. Account of the jagir of — _ <n sis 844, 
Punch. Baldeo Singh’s succession to the Raj of — ... eee on 40. 
Panch. Raj of — conferred on Dhyan Singh ois 339 
Punjab Licutenant-Governor’s judicial powers over British Officer appointed 

to — ve eee soe oe eee 864 
Ramnagar district granted to Sachit Singh... see segs us 339 
Ranbir Singh’s succession to the Chiefship \ — ole sae 844 
Recovery of fines levied by the Court of the British Officer at —~ ha 863 
Register form for goods transmitted to —> «.. |] App. 2 
Resident. Appointment of a —- to represent the Government of India in 847 
Resident in —— and his Assistant invested with powers for enquring into and 

trying criminal cases against European British subjects and certain 

others 346 
Resident in ——~ and hia Assistant invested with powers to dispose ‘of civil suita ab. 
Revised rules for refund of duty on goods exported to —— see .. | App. 2 
Route to be selected to Eastern Turkistan Ae 860 
Rules for regulating the power of the British Officer at ‘Srinagar . aes sty 362 
Rules for regulating the proceedings of the Mixed Court at —~ ... se 364 
Rules for the guidance of the Joint Commissioners appointed to the new route 

to Eastern Torkistan ies oe - w. | App. E 
Salute allowed to the Maharaja of —— —.., sn me 3 348 
Shah Shuja resigns claims on —— 17 
Stamp Daties and Court Fees Act applicable to the Court of British Officer Sik 

at —— 

Suchetgarh taluka transferred to ‘the State of rc sue | 848 
Survey of trade routes to Yarkand. Arrangements rezarding — .. 360 
Telegraph line. Construction of a— from Sialkot to Jammu along the 

Jammu-Kashmir State Railway bas 347 
Telegraph lines. Construction of — from Srinagar to Jammu and ‘Gilgit ss 1b. 
Telegraph lines in —— territory. Trausfer of — to the Indian Fecererh 

Department... i tb. 
Title of ‘‘ Raja” conferred on Gulab Singh by the Lahore Darbar. : iis 339 
Transit duties levied by the Maharaja of —~ sag vee 845 
Transit duties to be abolished on the route to Eastern Tarkistan .., ats 882 


Yaghistan, Connection of the Shin republics of — with the Stateof —~ .., 352 
(See “ Turkistan, Eastern.”) ‘ 