


Sirhind Canal project. Aereneat regarding — (See “ Sirhind Canal »y a 80 


SvuBsEctr. Page 
JIND in the Punjab— , 
Slave-dealing to be suppressed by the Rajaof —~ _,.. sie eet a 
Succession guaranteed from Phulkian House on failure of heirs in —— ses { oe 
Successions to the Chiefship of —— tes tes se { be 
Telegraph line. Construction of a — in —— under consideration wea a 67 
Territorial possessions guaranteed to the Raja of —— .,, “é 92 
Territorial rewards conferred on the Raja of —— eee ase { a4 
Transit duties abolished by the Baja of ——~ re { ee 
Tributary payment. Raja released from — se sia ie 92 
Western Jumna Canal. Agreement regarding — fae eae A 97 
JUVBBAL, Hill State in the Punjab— 
Abdication of Rana Puran Singh of —— in ae of British Government ids 118 
Account of the Thakurai of —— 4s see a ab, 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Rana of —— ot oo ve tf) 105 
Begaris to be maintained by the Rana of ss ue wf 148 
Capital sentences, Thukur’s powers regarding — toe er) we] 1 
Feudal service to be rendered by the Rana of —— oie sae aye 148 
Fall powers restored to Rana Karam Chand ot —_— te ve] 2119 
Maladministration of the affairs of Te ose ine ab. 
Ministers guilty of treachery expelled from —— tee toe . ab. 
Padam Chand, the present Kana of ——__.. to tes -_ 8h. 
Rana Karam Chand’s powers restricted ies oo Se 4b. 
Sanad conferring on Rana Puran Chand the Thakurai of —~ tes oo 148 
Tarhoch incorporated with the Thakurai of —— és oes is 122 
Thakurai restored to Rata of —— vee vee see a 119 
Transit duties abolished in —— tv tos tee rr 111 
Tribute paid by —— ae one soe to ae 119 
JvBBO Magna, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir— ... oo ae see was 67 
JUSPALON, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir oon fee see tee éee: ¢d. 
KaBvui— K d 
See * Afghanistan.’ 
Kasvn Kuer— ( . 9 
(See “ Waziris,”) 
Kaox GAnDava— 
Kabu! Amir’s annexation of —— toe oy eos ave 875 
Kapu Kxurr— 
(See “ Zaimukhts,”) 
Kaniur— 
(See “ Bilaspur.”’) 
Karruat in the adie ‘ 
Allegiance tendered by the Chief of —— .., ees she sé 14 
Barsat Faridpur granted to Bhai Lal Singh of —— _ ans ss 56 
Katamsapa LayDs— ea 
(See * Afridis,”) 
Katar-t-Gurizal— 
(See ** Afghanistan.) 
Katart in Baluchistan— 
Account of the Chiefship of —— 873 
Additional clause relating to the telegraph through the Makran territory of the 
Khan of as id we | 895 


Additional subsidy granted to the Khan of ——~ oes tee ove 876 


(| xxxvii ) 


Kauat in Baluchistan— 

Afghan War. Loyalty of the Khan of —— during the — tae oes 

Agreement relating to the boandary between Sind and -—— sca ven 

Ahmad Shah Abdali. Supremacy of — established over —~ sa : 

Ahmad Shab’s transfer of the territory of —— to Nasir Khan - 

Baluchistan Agency. Establishment of the — aed are 

Bela Jam’s feudal obligation to the Khan of —— ae 

Boundary between Sind and —— ves 

Brahbui Chief’s rebellion against the Khan of —— ves 

Brahui Chief’s reconciliation with the Khan of —— 

British aid to the Khan of ——. Arrangement regarding _ 

British mediation sought by the Khan of —— for the settlement of his dispute 
with his disaffected Sardars soe aes “ 