


(See * Taris.”) 


DueanD, Lrevrenant-Cotoner A. G. A.— 
Deputation of —— to Chitral ... ove te es 
Deputation of ——- to Hunza and Nagar... aise ee 


E 


(See “ Turkistan, Eastern,’’) 


Evrurstone, Hon’sre MountsrvanTt— 
Mission of —— to Kabul ae Ae ais 


EVROPEAN (8)— 
Herat ruler’s engagement not to employ —— ee se 


EXCISE DUTIES-~ 


Eastern TURKISTAN— 


Jind Raja’s abolition of —— __., se vee va 

Patiala Maharaja’s abolition of —— ses ie S36 
EXtTEaDITIon—— 

Jind Raja’s adoption of rules for —~ ea one i>. 

Nabha Raja’s adoption of rules for —— we _ 


Patiala Maharaja’s adoption of rules for —— ws be 


FABRIDEOT in the Punjab— ‘i 
Account of the’ Chiefship of —~ ap oo te 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Raja of —- os se 
Afghan war. Employment of State troopsin —~ —.... ex 
Allegiance to be rendered by the Raja of —— wee i 
Bhallan, the founder of ——- ... _ oe Sa 
Bikram ‘Singh, the present Raja of —~ oes 
Compensation for the abolition of customs duties paid to the Raja of — 
Contingent of horse. Exemption of —— from furnishinga— |  .. 


Customs duty abolished by the Raja of —~- ia sei 
Feudatories of the Raja of ——... eas <a - 
Honorary titles conferred on the Raja of —~ cea ne 
Imperial service troops maintained by —— wa oes 
Infanticide to be suppressed by the Raja of —~ oe ae 
Jullunder Commissioner's politicul jurisdiction over ——~— a 
Jurisdiction over British subjects in —— ... _ was 
Kot-Kapura built by the Raja of —— ese vee ost 
Kot-Kapura, Confiscation of — ove 

Kot-Kapura rent-free holdings. Arrangement regarding ‘lapses of — 
Kot-Kapura restored to —— for services at Mudki ia ose 
Lands to be ceded for railway purposes by the Raja of —— Ae 


Materials for public works to be furnished by the Raja of ——~ ee 


850 
1349 


- 


( xxvii) 


SUBJECT. 
Farripxot in the Punjab— 
Military aid to A rendered by. the Raja of —— eee a“ o 
Nazarana Rules applicable to —— sae as doe “a3 
Postal convention concluded with —~- ow se8 ee eon 


Railway lands ceded in full jurisdiction by —— 
Rewards conferred for services rendered during the mutiny 


Sauad guaranteeing the possessions and rights of the Boia of —— sid 


Sati to be suppressed by the Raja of —— ... i 
Schedule of the acquired possessions of the Raja of —~ 
Schedule of the ancestral possessions of the Raja of —— 
Slave dealing to be suppressed by the Raja of ——~ it 
Territory confiscated from Nabha conferred on ——— —,.., 
Title of “ Raja” conferred on the Raja of —— 


Transit duties abolished by the Raja of ; _ 
Tributary payment. Exemption of —— from — Le 
Wazir Singh, Raja of —— eos oes eae 
FARRAH — 
(See * Afghanistan.) 
FARRUKHNAGAR-- 
Chief executed for rebellion eee ase tee 


Estate of the Chief of —— oonfiscated for rebellion 


Fatex Sines, Abluwalia— 
Assists Ranjit Singh... tee eee 36 
British guarantee to respect the possessions of ——~ —,, 


Holkar’s removal from the Punjab, Agreement with —— regarding ~~ 


Treaty of allinnce concluded with ——~ aie 