


Paq@R, 


(| xxxiii ) 


- SvuBsg0T, 


JaMMO aND KasHMIRn— 


Chitral (Lower). Subsidy paid by -—— tothe Mehtar of — and its enlfance- 
ment ves one 

Chitral (Upper). Chief of — in receipt of a subsidy from —— 

Chitral (Upper). Invasion of —— territory by the Chief of — ... 

Civil suits to be adjudicated by the British officer at —— under the Civil Proce 


dure Code 

Claims to a refund of duty to be exported to —— to be adjudicated under 
Indian Tariff Act 

Commercial engagement for the development of the trade with Eastern Turkis- 
tan concluded with Maharaja of —— .., aes sas wae 

Criminal powers of the British Officer at —— ae ‘es aes 


Customs duty reduced by the Maharaja of —— ai 

Darel. Nominal tribute paid to —— by the Shin republic of — 

Dir and ——. Connection between — 

Disputed cases in the Mixed Court of —~. Arrangement regarding _ 

Duties to be levied by the Maharaja on goods imported into, or exported from, 
—— to Eastern Turkistan ... re 

Execution of sentences of the Court of the British Officer at — 

Export duty abolished on goods Sapo trom British India from —— vee 

Famine in Kashmir one ean 

Gilgit. Karim Khan installed 28 Rajawf — in subordination to —_— 

Gilgit conquered by the Khushwakti family of Yasin ... ots 

Gilgit granted to Raja Gulab Singh of Jammu = 

Gulayeln Singh’s (Maharaja) mavens conduct during the Inst stroggles of the 

rag "Province of — made over to Raja Gulab Singh of Jammu io 

Hazara transferred to the Maharaja of Lahore 

Hill Chiefs of ——-. Settlement effected in favour af the — under British 


ees 


guarantee jae 
Honza, Withdrawal of the subsidy paid to — by the —— State ... ate 
Hunza nominally subordinate to the Maharaja of —— ... wee tes 
Imperial service troops of the —— State ... wee er bes 
Invoice form for goods exported to ——_—... we ves ; 
Jagirdars of —— 


Jammu. Account of the principality of — 
Jummu customs farmer to cent certificates for refund of duty on goods 


exported to Kashmir oes <3 
Jammu principality conferred on Gulab Singh is 
Koakka Bambas. Arrangement-made by the State of —— with the — ies 
Kashmir subject to Ahmad Shab Abdali __... see see 
Kashwir territory granted by the British Government to Raja Gulab Singh of 
Jammu eae tae wee 


Kashmir wrested from the Afghans by Ranjit Singh 
Kathna taluka transferred to the State of —~— see 


Kine-killing prohibited in the territory of —— ase vee . 

Ladak. Account of — eee see ase ote . 

Ladak conquered by Gulab Singh ase aa 

Ladak formerly an independent tributary of Kashmir ... sn 

Ladak granted to Raja Gulab Singh of Jammu se 

gare Darbar, Territorial arrangement between the — and the Mabar aja 
of — ia ie ae aes 

Lahore Darbar’s cession of Kashmir v8 oo 


Lakhiwpur acquired by the State of —~ .., 

Lands transferred to the British. Government as a set off against charges 
incurred for the maintenance of certain Hill Chiefs ~ 

Mixed Court at Srinagar. Abolition of the — ve * 

Nagar. Withdrawal of the subsidy paid to — by the —~ State . 