


JANAKHORI’S— 


JANI KHEL— 


JA8K in Baluchistan—- 


— 


(See “ Afridis.”) 
(See “ Waziris.”) 
(See “ Makran.”) 


JAUNSAR Parcawa— 


Annexed to British dominions .., sas sas wk eae 112 


JAWAKIS— 


(See “ Afridis.”) 


( xxxv ) 


SuskEor. Pace 


SuagsaB in the Delhi district— 
Account of —— 
Allegiance to be rendered by the Nawab of —— ae is 
Bahadurgarh formed part of —— or = vee 
Chief executed for rebellion sae 
Contingent of horse to be furnished by the Nawab of —— 
Dadri formed part of —— 
Estate confiscated for the rebellion of the Chief of ——~ 
Sanad granted to Nijabat Ali Khan for the district of —. 


2 


«a. * 
OS nRoOD Dom 


Juv in the Punjab — 
Account of the Chiefship of —— oes - 55 


Adoption privileges guaranteed to the Roja of —- ™ ae os 98 
Adoption snnad conferred on the Raja of —— . 95 
Allegiance to be rendered by the Chief of —— ae ik at 94, 
Badrukhan estate made over in part to —— Sea a i 59 
Barsat Faridpur granted to —— ie ae fo _ 56 
Bhawani granted to —— See , - id. 
Capital sentences, —— empowered to inflict - ~ me 93 
Contingent of horse. Exemption of the Raja of —— from fur nishing _ as 58 
Control of the distributaries of the Western Juamna Canal ae ca 98 
Council of Regency during minority of Chief of —— ,,, ae a 57 
Customs duty abolished by the Raja of ——.., a sda as 56 
Dayalpura Sikhs, feudatories of te me is ais 96 
Descended from the same stock as Patiala and Nabha ... ees ie { 2 
Encamping grounds for British troops to be given by the Raja of —. aa 93 
Excise duties abolished by — __... Sa6 vi se 4b. 
Feudal obligation to be rendered by the Raja Mt 5 ae 94 
Feudatories of the Raja of ——... ise . 95 
Honours conferred on Raja Raghbir Singh, Chief of — ss 7 67 
Imperial service troops maintained by ——... we one on 58 
Infanticide to be suppressed by the Raja of —— os 92 
Insignia of the Star of India conferred on Raja Raghbir "Singh, Chief of—— ... 57 
Jurisdiction over British subjects in ——~ ... eee oe 93 
Kharkanda granted to —— + oes a ssi 56 
Lands to be ceded for canals and works by — —_ whee vi a 81 
Lands to be ceded for railway purposes by the Raja t— ra oe 94, 
Materials for ‘public works to be furnished by the Rajaof-—— en 26. 
Military service to be rendered by the Rajaof—— —.... ae ws 92 
Nazarana on succession to be paid by —— ... ies by oo 93 
Nazarana paid for pargana Budwana conferred on ——— cee 96 
Patiala, Chief’s contention regarding appointment of a council of regency at 
— during the mivority of Maharaja Mahendar Singh “as vee 54, 
Political supervision of ——- placed under the Punjab ... one tes 57 
Postal conveution concluded witha— 4. see aes 1 91 
) Ranbir Singh, the present Chief of —— on 57 
Roads for military purposes to be kept-in repairs by the Raja of —— we 92 
Rules regarding pursuit and extradition of criminals adopted by —— tee 57 
Sanad conferring a portion of pargana Budwana on the Raja of —— te 96 
Sanad guoranteeing British protection to the Raja of —- ww on 92 
Sanad guaranteeing the sovereignty of the territorial nomen of —— ves 93 
Sati to be suppressed by the Raja of —— ... “ oe ee 92 
Schedule of the acquired possessions of the Raja of —— wee we 95 
Schedule of the ancestral possessions of the Raja of —— wee Tes 94 
Services of Raja of —— during Sutlej campaign rewarded we me 66 
Services rendered by Bhag Singh of —~ ... ies ves as 55 
Services rendered during Afghan war by Raja of —— oss a 87 
Services rendered during the mutiny by the Raja of ——~ 56 