

British representative murdered at —— 

British troops to be stationed in territory of the Khan ¢ i — “Ayrangement 


regarding —— .., eee _ se ee 
Burnes’ (Sir A.) mission to — vee one ves 
Burnes (Sir A.) robbed of draft treaty with — sat Sau 
Cancellation of the treaty of 1841 with the Khan of —— an we 
Causes of discontent among the Chiefs of —— se aya 
Conditions on which subsidy bas been granted to the Khan of —— a 
Conditions to be observed by the Sardars of the Khan of —— esa . 


Conspiracy against Mir Khudadad Khan of —~ 
Convention for the proteption of the pees concluded with the Khan 


C—— eee tee 


Daud Muhammad Khan’ a evil influence over the Khan of —— ts os 
Districts restored to the Khan of —— ees 
Enemies of the British Government to be opposed by the Khan of —— one 
Engagements made with —— in 1854 re-affirmed by the treaty of 1876 es 


Foreign States. Khan’s engagement not to enter into relations with — ww 


Shalawan Chief imprisoned by the Khan of —— ees oe ‘as 

Kachi restored to the Khan of — 

Kandahar State Railway. Lands occupied by the — ~ ceded with full juris- 
diction to the British Govarnment woe tes as oes 

Kej, 2 dependency of —— 

Khan to be guided by the advice ‘of the British representative at his Court 

Khan’s engagement to act in subordinate co-operation with the British Govern- 


ment see ove ove vee 
Khudadad Khan re- elected Chief of — ww ass isi ai 
Khudadad Khan’s election to the Khanate of —— aay oon tos 
Las Bela Jam’s flight into British territory ane aug vee 
Leech’s (Lientenant) mission te —- toe sus 
Mababat Khan, Chief of —— ; deposed by Ahmad Shah Abdali... oo 
Mastung district acquired by the Khan of —— wes sae ove 
Mastung restored to the Khan of —— ae sie ise sas 
Mehrab Khan’s rule in ——___... vai Pgs “4 sc we 
Merchants to be protected by the Khan of —— aos de ees 
Mulla Muhammad Hasan, Minister of ——. Treacherous conduct of == oot 
Nadir Shah’s annexation of —— oo see tne one 
Nasir Khan appointed Khan of —~ oe ase tee on 
Nasir Khan restored to the masnad of ——— vee oes 
Nasir Khan’s hostility towards the British Government ... ooo one 
Nasir Khan’s territorial acquisitions ove vee 
Outrage on British territory to be prevented ‘by the Khan of —— ... a) 
Panjgur acquired by the Khan of —~ “ eee Sai 
Persia and ——.' Definition of the boundaries between - _ sis ne 
Persin’s boundaries defined towards —— ats BA 


Quetta district. Lease of the — to the British Government ae is 


Katat in Baluchistan — 
Quetta district acquired by the Khan of —— 
Railway lines, Provision made for the construction of —= = throngh. ‘the Kban’s 


territory vee “ tee eee 
Revolution headed by “Nasir Khan in — ... “6 ae as 
Salute of the Khan of —— 
Sardars of Arrangement “for the settlement of disputes ‘between the 


Khan and the — 
mea oat aoe to be levied on merchandise passing through the ie ersten of 
the Khan of —— on 
Shah Nawaz Khan. Article regarding a proivsion ee _ ee eve 
Shah Nawaz Khan of deposed by Nasir Khan vee toe tee 
Shah Nawaz Khan recognised as Khan of Sos 
Shah Shouja afforded an asylum in —— aes toe ten a 
Sherdil Khan. Murder of — ... ase tee see Sez 
Sherdil Khan proclaimed ruler of —— 
Sind Commissioner empower’ to effect a settlement with tho ‘malcontents 
of —— on 