


Supnzszor. ry 


Maneaat, Hill State in the Punjab— 
Sanad conferri ing on Babadar Singh the Thakurai of —~ si 
Tilok Singh, the present Thakur of —~__,., eee oes 
Transit duties abolished by the Thakur of —— nae on 
Tribute payable by the Thakur of —— en eve oes 


Mani Kuxt— 
(See “ Orakzais.’’) 


Mansvr— 
(See ** Gaduns,’”) 
Manzazn Kaer— 
: (See  Waziris.”) 
Marzi— 
Account of the ——~. 


Afghan War. Misconduct of the — after the disaster of Maiwand | 


Agreement with the -—— for the cession to Government of the Chief’s rights 


* petroleum and other mineral oils Sa 
British Government. Direct control of the —~ assumed by the — 
Bugtis. Notice of the — -_ soe se 


Coercion of the —— by the British Government 


oan 


Control of relations with the —— placed in the hands of the Political Superinten- 


dent, Upper Sind Frontier ... jae eee ies 
Fine imposed on the —— bes vee 
Kalat. Khan of —, the nominal ruler of the - — wee 
Mehrulla Khan, Chief of the ——, granted the title of “ Nawal a, Se 


Service on the Punjab frontier. Addition to the sum paid to the —— for — 


Masto KurLt— 


(See “ Turis,”) 
Masurzais— 
(See ‘ Orakzais.”) 
Mecuam, CaPraIn— 
Murderers of —— sheltered by the Kabul Khel Waziris oe 
Msroarre, Mr,— 
Concludes treaty of Amritsar... oes ve oon 
Mission of -—— wa eee soe res ove 
Miaiais— 
(See “ Waziris.”) 
Mian Magna, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir oes oa oe on 


’ 


Micuy1 Pass— 
Control of the —— to be retained by the British Government eo 


Misutt Kazr— 
(See “ Orakzais.’’) 


MiTHANKOT on the N.-W. Frontier— 
Bahawalpur customs officers to be stationed opposite —— 
Bahawalpur Nawab to levy tolls on boats navigating the Indus opposite — 
British officer to reside at for the adjustment of disputes ae 
British officer to reside near 
Customs passes to be granted at ——. Arrangement regarding _. 
Invoice of cargo to be produced by merchants at—— ... 
Mabaraja’s officers to be stationed at 


een 


Indus ee oa wie tes ies 

Tolls to be levied abs —_— see ase ay) ae 
MI¥ANI8, a tribe on the N.-W. Frontier— 

Account of the —— dee aoe aee 

Kashmirkar post garrisoned by Miyani levies vee eee 

Tank. —~ concerned in raids on — oes act sas 


for the collection of duties on i 


Paas 


159 
124 
lil 
128 


244 


(i) 


SuBsscr. Paces 


MouMANDS—- 
Account of the —— 222 
Akbar Khan, Sanad granted to — conferring on hima the Chiefehip of Lalpurn 225 
Akbar Khan confirmed as Chief of Lalpura eee 226 
Alleginnce of the —— duc to the Amir of Kabul es ves Sis 222 
Allowances received by the —— from the Amir of Kabul jee oat 1b, 
Burhan Khel. Fine imposed on the — 224 
Barhan Khel section of the —~. Dispute of the — ~ regar ding "their tribal 
ullowance ae se tee 1. 
Defeat of the —— by the British near Shabkadar aa vos aa 225 
Defent of the —— by a British force under Colonel Macdonell _... . 1. 
Dost Muhammed (Amir). Attempt of — to harags our border through the —— 228 
Expedition under Sir Colin Campbell against the ——.., as tes tb, 
Halimzai tribute to the British Government bes jae sa 224 
- Halimaais, a section of the —— rat 2a’ ioe 223 
Halimzais. Agreement concluded with the —— is ves 224 
Halimanis, Lands possessed by the — in the Peshawar district... wef 238 
Halimzais permitted to resettle in the Peshawar district on cer ule conditions ... 224 
Lalpura, Amir of Kabul informed that the Khanship of s under British 
protection ae ae bes ay mes 226 
Lalpura Chief, a Tarakzai Mohmand vee ove an 223 
Lalpuve Khan’s responsibility for the Khaibar Pass... tne Sa 226 
Michni Chief, a Tarakzai Mohmand z sce te. 223 
Muhammad Sadik Khan acknowledged by the British Government as Khan of 
Lalpura aT iad ee i. 
Muhammad Sadik Khan appointed Chief of “Lalpura ve as o8 ab, 
Mubammad Sndik Khan defeated by British troops .., sas we 1b, 
Muhammad Shah Khan, appointed Chief of Lalpura ... was sae 225 
Nauroz Khan, son of Sandat Khan, deported to Kabul ... vee was ad. 
Outrages committed by the —— in British territory ... oes eat 223 
Pindiali Chief, a Tarakzai Mohmand sie ase a tb. 
Pindinli Mohmands. Feud of the — witb the British ... eee tes 224, 
Piadiali Mohmands. Submission of Nawab Khan, Chief of the — ae ab. 
Sandat Khan removed from the Chiefship of Lalpure and deported to Kabul ... 225 
Soltan Mubammad Khan. —— under — defented by the British tes 16. 
Swat Ruler. Disturbauces among the —— created by emissaries of the — ... #8, 
Tarakzai tribute to the British Government ar oo ie 224 
Tarakzais, a section of the —~ eee a 223 
Tarakzais. Expedition under Sir Sidney Cotton against the— .., ae 224 
Tarakzais, Lands possessed by the —— in the Peshawar distriot ... nes 223 
Tarakzais, Misconduct of Rahimdad, Chief of the — aie ie 224, 
Tarakzais, Misconduct of the —— see 1b. 
Tarakzais permitted to resettle in the Peshawar district on certain conditions one tb. 
Moryr Par@ana— 7 
Restoration of —— to the Mir of Kotaha .., wee we wef Ld 
Mopxi— 
Battle of —. wae see er vee oe oe 20 
MvunamMmaD Kuer-- 
, (See “ Waziris.”) 
MuxraJs, Diwan of Multan— 
Revolt of —— -_ ia on ase ase es 20 
MoLTAN on the N.-W. Frontier-—~ 
Anderson (Lieutenant) murdered at —— ... one one 2 20 
Bahawalpur Nawab rewarded a ane at — ase oe oe 188 
Mulraj (Diwan). Revolt of — or oe -_ ves 20 
Ranjit Singh seizes —— wes ove nee? see tes 16 
Shah Shuja renounces claims on tes on eke 17 
Vans-Agnew (Mr.) murdered at —~- see wes se ~ 20 