


: 3 


SUBJECT. 
Karvrrsata in the Punjab— 
Services rendered by Sardor Bikrama Singh... ‘ae 
Succession of Jagatjit Singh to the Raj of —— ie 


Suchet Singh assigned a provision from the revenues of —~ 
Talukdari estates in Oudh conferred on Raja Randhir Singh 


Title of “‘Raja’’ conferred on the Chief of 


Title of “ Raja-i-Rajagan ” conferred upon Homie Singh a8 8 hereditary distine- 


tion “ eee 
Trans-Sutlej acquisitions of the Chief of — is 
Trans-Sutlej possessions maintained to the Chief of —— 
Tribute payable by the Chief of —— toe gees 
Yalue of the Cis-Sutlej possessions of -—- ove 
Value of the Jalandhar estates of the Chief of —~ sis 

Kasavxi, Hill Station— 

Baghat Thakur granted compensation for lands in ~—.,,, 
Beja Thakur granted compensation for lands in —— 
Cantonment formed at —— “é aoe aes 


KasHGAB in Central Asia— 
(See “ Torkistan, Eastern.’’) 


KasHuin— . 
(See “ Jammu and Kashmir,”’) 
Kastm Arr Kuan, Subadar of Bengal— j 
Deposal, defeat and flight of —— oe oe 
Kasumrt, near Simla— - 
(See “ Keonthal.”) 
Kez in Makran— 
(See * Makran.”) 
KzontuHat, Hill State in the Punjab — 
Account of the Thakurai of ee 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Chief of —— ‘ge 
Balbir Sen, the present Raja of eee 


Capital sentences. Feudatory Chiefs’ powers ‘regarding —_— 


Capital sentences. Thakur’s powers regarding — 


Dhadi Jagirdar, of Raingarh district, not under jurisdiction of — 


Feudal service to be rendered by the ‘Raja of —— or 
Feudatories of —— ... sees PP 
Feudatories’ tribute to —— tes obe 


Ghund, a feudatory of —~- 
Kasumti. Jurisdiction in — ceded to British Government 
Koti, a feudatory of —— eee tee 

Madhan or Kiari, a feudatory of - 


Nandpur Jagirdar, of Raingarh district, not under jurisdiction of —— 


Patiala’s purchase of a portion of —— tee ves 
-Powers exercised by petty feudatory Chiefs of ——~ 


Raingarh or Rawin district exchanged for Simla with the Raja of - _ 


Ratesh, a feudatory of —— 


tee 


Rawin I agirday, of Raingarh district, not under jurisdiction of —— 


Rent for Kasumti paid to —— ... 


Rewards for services rendered during the mutiny conferred on the Raja Of ——- 


Roads to be maintained in estates of feudatories of —— 
Sanad conferring certain Thakurais on the Raja of —— 
Sanad conferring pargana Punnar on Raja of —— ase 
S8anad confirming the possessions of the Raja of —— ; 
Theog, a feudatory of —— _ ie 
Title of “ Raja” conferred on Chief of —— 


vee 


one 


eee 


( xii ) 


SussEor. 
KgontTxat, Hill State in the Panjab— 
Title of * Rana” conferred on Thakur of Koti a rr ais 
Transit duties abolished eee ae wae ay 


KHADIZAIS— 
(See * Orakzais,”) 


Kuarpar Pass— 


Afridi clans. Responsibility of — for the —— ay ee ees 
Afridis. -—— made over to the — AT ees ave sve 
Control of the — to be retained by the British Govornment on eos 
Lalpura Khan’s responsibility for the — ... se tee 


Punjab Government. —— placed under the control of the — ve 
Tolls upon the traffic carried through the ——~—. Reservation a peal right 