Account of —— or 
Babu. Agreement with tho chick of — for the protection of the telegraph 2 
Boleda. Account of — tee aes 
Boleds. Khan of Kalat’s right to share in the revenues of — bag one 
Boleda declared to be beyond the Persian frontier ,,, ... one oe 
Dasht. Khan of Kalat’s right to share in the revenues of — 

_ Dashtyari. Agreement with the Chief of — for the protection of the telegraph 
“Geh. Agreement with the Chief of — for the protection of the telegraph 


Jask. Allowance to the Chief of — for the protection 5 the telegraph wee 
Kej. Account of —— ae wes oe 
Kej. Kalat supremacy established over — oes vee ve 
Kej. Persia’s claim to sovereignty over — oe see Per 
Kej. Rule of the Boleda Amirs in — ves ees ves 
Kej. Rule of the Maliks in —.,.. aes wee 


Kej. Shah Umay, the present Gichki Sardar in — 

Kej. Subsidies to the Chief of — for the protection of ‘the telegraph 
Kej acquired by the Gichkis ... ae 
Kej agreement for the protection of the Gwadar telegr aph line... 
Kej agreement for the protection of the —— telegraph : 


Kej declared to be beyond the Persian frontier _ Re 
Kobak claimed by the Persians .. we 
Kobak declared to be beyond the Porainn frontier wae 


Kobak occupied by the Persians wee 
Kolanch, Khan of Kalat’s right to share in the revenues of —— ... te 
, Mand, Account*of — oes 
’Mand. Rinds of — recognised as subjects of the Khan of Kalat ... 


Mand declared to be beyond the Persian frontier ose 

Nasirabad declared to be beyond the Persian frontier ... one 

Panjgur. Account of — oi vee 

Panjgur. Amir Khan, the present Chief of — eo " ‘ 
Panjgur. Extent of the Khan of Kalat’s interference in ~ we vee 


Panjgur. Feud-between the Nanshirwanis and — 
Panjgar. Right-of the Kharan Sardar to share in the revenues of ‘three villages 


of —— es . 
Panjgur. Settlement of the affairs of ~ by ‘Sir Robert § ‘Sandeman. ees 
Panjgur acquired-by the Khan of Kalaé ... eos a 
Panjgur declared to be beyond the Persian frontier ... aes a 
Parom declared‘to be beyond the Persian frontiér aa see oe 


Persia and Kalat. Definition of the boundaries: between — ive 


( xlviii ) 


Makran— 
Persia. Tribute exacted by — from the whole of —— west of Koj ee 882 
Subsidies paid to the Chiefs of Bahu, Dushtyuari, Geh, Jask, and Kej for tho Bie: 
tection of the telegraph wee ite sas ous 16. 
Tump. Account of — toe eos 884 
Tomp. Khan of Kalat’s right to share in the revenues of — ove ate tb. 
Tamp declared to be beyond the Persian frontier een Mae tes 883 
Zamiran declared to be beyond the Persian frontier... oe ase 4b. 
MAtLaung, a Cis-8utlej Jagir och ted a ave ee 67 
Maxavy, Hill district in the Punjab— 
Bight of appeal to the British Government of the people of ——~ __,,, “33 133 
—— Forr— 
British retention of the —— _,., és as iis dee 132 
Nalagarh Raja granted the —~ _ eas ae a4 183, 
MazeEe Korua in the Punjab— 
Account of the Chiefship of —— si “5 62 
Compensation for loss of customs duty paid to the Nawab of —— .., = 63 
Contingent of horse. Exemption of the Nawab from furnishing —, vee], tbe 
Customs daties abolished in —— ais ab. 
Exercise of sovereign powers by the relations ‘of the Nawab of —— "limited wes 62 
Family custom for the partition of the estate on death of a Chie without . 
issue eae pee Ue 
Tbrahim Ali Khan, the present Nawab of —~ 63 
Mental eerily of Ibrahim Ali Khan. Temporary: management of State 
owing Oo— rry} eee vee eee the 
Personal mite granted to Torebins Ali Khon aes wie ven id 
Salute of the Chief of ——~ ons Bee as tbe 
Succession sanad conferred on the Chief of - —_— sea see ses 105 
Successions to the Chiefship of —— eee ves sa oe 62 
Matron Kuzr— 
(See “ Afridis,”) 
Matixevr, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir <i one das ves vie 67 
Marix SHaur Kuzr— 
(See “ Waziris.”) é 
Marizaws— 
(See “ Yusafzais,”) 
MALKALS(of Tikri)— 