


ee a ee 


( xlv ) 


SvuBsEcr. 


Lanore in the Panjab— 

Treaty conoluded between Sardars Ranjit Singh and Fateh Singh Ahluwalia for 
the removal of Jaswant Rao Holkar from the Punjab “a 

Treaty of perpetual alliance concluded with Mahnraja Ranjit Singh Of ck 

Treaty with Maharaja Kbarak Singh for regulating the duties on the Sutlej 


and Indus ats ves tie A as ise 
Lanui— 
Joint Commissioners’ jurisdiction over trade-routes from —_— fr Po 
Laxez, Lorp— 
Delhi Emperor released from the thraldom of the Mabrattas by —— see 
Dujana estate conferred on Abdus Samad Khan by —~- te tee 
Firozpur conferred on the Chief of Loharu by —— —... te aa 
Holkar pursued to the Punjab by —— eas wes wes eee 
Jind Chief granted territorial rewards by —— eas eee oe 
Jind Chief tendered allegiance to ——— ove oes a te 
Kaithal Chief tendered allegiance to —— .., te oe iss 
Mahratta power overthrown by ——- is ss ‘se re 
Ranjit Singh’s (Maharaja) proposals to ——~ ads ee ves 
LAKHIMPUR in the Panjab— 
Kashmir Chief granted the taluka of —— see ae tae 


Latr or Lenat-- 
(See “ Waziris,’’) 


LaLruraA— 
(See “ Mohmands,”) 
Latton, a Cis-Sutle] Jagir ... ea ive a vee tee 
Lams, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir .., aC sae ar eee tee 
Lanpizals-— 
(See “ Turis.’’) 


Lazeua SHIRANIS— 


(See * Shiranis.”) 
Las Beta in Baluchistan— 
Account of the Chiefship of —... tos 
Administration of ——~ to be conducted in accor dance with the advice of the 
Governor-General’s Agent... 
Agreement for the protection of the telegraph lines concluded with the Jam 


o-— 
Conditions subscribed ‘by Jam Ali Khan on his accession to the Chiefship of —— 
Deportation of Mir Khan, Jam, to Poona ... ay, ‘a ane 
Escape of the son of the Jam of —— eee ses sae es 
Intrigues of the Jam of —— tes ae aes -_ 
Jaw Ali Khan’s auccession to the ‘Chiefship of —— wee tee 
Jam Mir Khan’s allowances while a refugee in British territory eee ene 
Jam Mir Khan’s family. Provision for — ... aie ie wee 
Jam Mir Khan’s‘flight to British territory . ees aes us 
, Jam Mir Khan’s rebellious conduct was on oes to 
Jam Mir Khan’s succession to the Chiefship of —— _.. eee ove 
Province of —— conferred as a reward on an ancest0¥ of the Jam ... tee 


Salute granted to Jam Ali Khan vos 
Sentences of death in —— to be sanctioned by the Governor-General’s Agent .., 
Subsidy to the Jam of —— for protection of telegraph we on 


Telegraph agreement with the Jam of —— on tae 
Telegraph stations to be built in the territory of the J: am "of — . tee 
Wazir to be appointed in —— _... ase one eas oe 
LASEKARZAIS-— 
(See “ Orakzais.”) 
LAUDRAN, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ee ane oes vee oe 


Lena, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ... ace ise ei see 


Paar 


16, 


SuBgEcr. Paaz 


Leeon, Lirvrenant—- . 
Mission of to Kalat see oes Soe Ses is 874 


Lea in Central Asin— 
Labourers to be supplied from ———- for works on the route to Eastern Turkistan | App. 1 


Supply of fuel or wood for —— tse a se aes ib. 
Lzpgrs. Burning or drowning of — 

Bilaspur Thakor’s engagement to suppress —— sos aa 160 181 