


Stationing of British ‘troops i in -—, Arrangement relating to the ee 


Subsidy granted to the Khan of —— ove vee 
Subsidy of Rupees one lakh a year granted to the Khan of —~ ene toe 
Subsidy to the Khan for the protection of the felegren® lines vee 
Telegraph convention concluded with the Khan of ——.., oes oo 


Telegraph disputes. Jurisdiction for settlement of — 
‘Telegraph lines. Provision made for the construction of — through ‘the Khan's 


territo: one eee ave tne 
Telegraph sites to belong to the Khan of —— oes ove wee 
Telegraph stations in ———. Arrangement regarding — tee we 


Trade. Freedom of — conceded by the Khan of —— 
Traffic. Annual contribution for the development of — “on the trade routes in 


—-— territory ooo oon 
Transit duties to be levied in the ‘territory of the Khanof —— ry) 
Treaty concluded by Sir A. Burnes with the Khan of —— “ tae 
Treaty for abrogating the agreement of 1841 with the Khan of —— ws 
Treaty with Nasir Khan on bis recognition as the Khan of —— _... tee 
Troops. Provision made for the location of — in the Khan’s territory vee 
Wiltshire’s (General) capture of the town of —~ toe oe tee 
Katsia in the Punjab— ; 
Account of the Thakurai of —— vee fn vee 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Chief of —— eee ses tor 
Cession of land for railway by Chiefs of —— vee 
Compensation for abolition of customs duties paid to the Chief of ——- en 
Council of Regency appointed during minority of Mange Singh of ——~ tes 
Customs duty abolished by the Chief of —— ny tes 
Gurbakhsh Singh, the founder of — ses one 
Political control of ———~ under Commissioner of Delhi .. een eee 
Ranjit Singh, the present Chief of —~ _,,, te ve tee 
Successions to the Chiefship of —~ Sax ase eve tne 
Katy Kaet— . 
K (See “ Waziris.”’) 
AMARAIS— 
: (See “ Afridis.”) 
AM, 
pate (See # Afridis,”) 
Kanart1—~ : 
Rights of Bashahr over ———~ vee one eee sae vee 


KaNaNnDi Pargana— 
Nijabat Ali Kban granted the —— oes tee one ves 


116 


Sunsgor. Paes 
Kanavp in Jhajjar— 
Nabha Raja sold a portion of —-— oo one oes aes { ana 
Patiala sold the pargana of —-— vee we ves Ss 76 
KaNDAuHAB in Afghanistan— 
(See “ Afghanistan.”’) 
Kanera— 
Ranjit Singh occupies —— _ seo tes 4 16 
Karuntaata in the Punjab— 
Account of the Chiefship of = 161 
Act No. X of 1883 for settling the dispute “betweon the — State and Sardar |- 
Bikrama Singh ... 164 
Administration of the — State by a British i Superintendent during the minority 
of Raja Jagatjit Singh ee es ae 163 
Adoption sanad granted to the Raja of —— eee oy ove 169 
Ahlu, the family seat of the Chief of —— ... ose ata a8 161 
Ahluwalis.. Derivation of the style of — ... “ ab. 
Akona estates temporarily settled on Kaja Randhir Singh for sorvices rendered 
in Oudh we |. 162 
Appointment of a British Officer as Superiutendent of the — State 163 
Bari Doab estates re-lenased on life tenure to Nihal Singh of —~ pubes to British 
jurisdiction ees 162 
Bari Dob estates restored to the Chief of ——~ tes v6 ne 4d. 
Bari Doab estates’ estimated value ove oes ane jae 6b. 
Baundi conferred on the Chief of —— oes see ees te tb, 
Bikram Singh granted a provision from —— oy dei sea 163 
Bithauli conferred on the Chief of —— . tes sae 169 
British officer appointed to superintend the affairs of, —— ies tai 163 
British protection accorded to the Chief of —— ove tee pe 161 
Cis-Sutlej acquisitions of the Chief of —— ... 4b. ° 
Civil and police jurisdiction in Bari Doab estates of ——~ -""retuined by the British | 162 
Commutation of the service engagement of the Chief of —— we 8b. 
Confiscation of Cis-Sutle] States of ——- for hostility in first Sikh war ae 161 
Disputes between the —— State and Sardar Bikrama Singh saa as 164 
Dissensious in the family for the partition of the estate of —— 163 
ae antl estates temporarily settled on Raja Randhir Singh for services rendered 
in Oudh toe eee tay 162 
Feudal service to be performed by the Chief of mee a at 161 
Iustallation of Jagatjit Singh as Raja of —— Ree Ses an 163 
Investiture of Raja Jagatjit Singh, with fall governing powers eee es ob. 
Jalandhar Jagir. Estimated value of the —.., ees see. Sis 161 
Jassa Singh, the founder of the family of —— one vee was 46, 
Jassa Singh’s acquisitions aes one vee at, os ab, 
Kharak Singh, Chief of —— aes ase tee eas 163 
Kharak Singh, Raja. Death of — ai one eae ai ad. 
Khilat conferred on the Chief of —— 169 
Military service for jagirs in the Jalandhar Doab commuted for B pecuniary 
payment, 162 
Military service rendered by the troops of the —— State during the “Afghan War 
in 1878-79 en ees 164, 
Military service rendered in Oudh by a ais Randhir Singh eee one 162 
Nihal Singh, Chief of —— ae oan oy ib. 
Randhir Singh, Chief of —— ,.. ons tes 4d. 
Randhir Singh, Ruja, made a Knight of the Star of India te is 168 
Revenue of the estates of Baundi and Bithabli oes “ on 162 
Rewards for services in Oudh conferred on Chief of —— <b. 
Rewards for services rendered during the mutiny conferred on the Chiet of —. 6b. 
Salute allowed to the Chief of —— ace sas dan 164 
Sanad conferring certain estates on the Chief of Cae EE TTY tae ass 160 