


( Isiii ) 


SuBsEct. , PAGE 
Patraza in the Puojab— 
Telegraph receipts. Arrangement regarding the division of — —... ose 78 
Telegraph regulatious to be made applicable to——_—s... see re 79 
Territorial rewards conferred on the Maharaja of —— ... ide 7 } fe 
Tharugarh fort conferred on the Mabaraja of ——~ was ii tas 71 
Transit duties rbolished by the Maharaja of —— eee “one f : 
Tributary payment. Maharaja released from — ove ota eee 73 
Turnsatgowa pargane conferred on the Maharaja of —— vee aes 71 
PrRSiAN-FRENCH CoNFEDBRAOY— 
Kabul Ruler’s engagement for repelling the invasion of India by a — es3 433 
Peswawak on the N.-W. Frontier— 
Account of the pzincipal tribes inhabiting the frontier of ——- 209 
Dost Muhammad’s declaration of a religious war neni the Sikhs for the 
recovery of —— 412 
Dost Muhammad’s re- occupation of the valley of —— “during the ‘Second ‘Pun- 
jab War ooo vee tee yy eae ee 415 
Mobmand raids on the ~—~ distriot sas ae sis tee 223 
Ranjit Singh's (Maharaja) seizure of the valley of —— oes se 412 
Shah Shuja renounces claims on —~ _ tee wae vee 17 
PHULEIAN Famrty in the Cis-Sutlej States— 
Sikh Chiefs belonging to the —— ate ae ee aa 52 
Porz0cK, GENERAL 2 
Kabul disaster retrieved by ——— ons us vn we | 414 
Postal ConvENTION— 
Chamba —— aoe eee vee ove ony ane 91 
Faridkot — aoe we eee eee vee eee Ys) 
Jind so ae is tee tee aoe eon ore iB. 
Nabha se eee eee eee vee bee oes 45, 
Patiala —_—_« eee eee vee oe ory eee 86 
PorrinaEr, Carrain Erprep— 
Appointment of —— as Political Agent at Herat ies dies fee 414 
PRANGHAR in Yusafzai on the N.-W. Frontier— 
Cam pbell’s (Sir Colin) destruction of the village of —— a ak 220 
PROOLAMATIONS— 
Bahawalpur administration assumed by Government... a “6 201 
British occupation of the Punjab we a te sa 19 
Malwa and Sirbind Chiefs placed under British protection 035 68 
Malwa and Sirhind Chiefs prohibited from encroaching on their neighbours tes 69 
Sikh invasion of British territory ive ae ave on 87 
Pouncn—- 
(See “ Jammu and Kashmir. ”) 
Poursss— 
Administration entrusted to the Council of Regency... oe we 47 
Annexation of the —— $30 49 
+ Arbitration of British Govornment in disputes of the Lahore Darbar | 42 
Boundary Commissioners to be appointed for defining the territory of the 
Darbar exe tas aes 45 
British Agent appointed to control the administration ofthe —= ... on 46 
British garrison to occupy forts and fortified places in the-——- —... ead 47 
British garrisons left at Lahore ane oss we re { re 
British Government not to interfere in the affairs of the — os ve 43 
British occupation of the ——, proclaimed ... 20 
British subjects’ in the servioe of the Darbar invited ‘to return ‘to their alle- 
giance eee the eee tee rr tes 89 


a 


Ponsas— 


British subjects not to be entertained in the service of the Lahore Darbar without 
permission vee ee 42 
Chand Kaur (Maharani) granted 1 an allowance for her aupport Pe <a 47 
Chand Kaur’s (Maharani) succession to the sovereignty of the —— ae 19 
Chhatar Singh Atariwala’s rebellion in the —— ase ves 21 
Cis-Sutlej States’ sovereignty renounced by Dalip Sing bh 40 
Conference for arranging the preliminaries of a beat with the Government of 
Lahore wie nes os ate ve 20 
Dalip Singh, Maharaja: _ 
Assigned an allowance for his support... tee _ vee 49 
Dissatisfaction and foolish conduct of — ... eos se vee 21. 
Pardon accorded to — aoe 16. 
Possessions of — on left bank of the Sutlo} annexed to British tert tory so 38 
Residence of — in England ... ses ee 21 
Resignation by —~ of the sovereignty of thea-——  <., vee ove 49 
Succession of — to the sovereignty of the ——- toe ove ee} , 19 
Title to be retained by _— ee eee ooo aoe ose 49 
Death of Maharaja Kharak Singh : vee one ene ‘ai 19 
Death of Maharaja Nao Nehal Singh as vee is os ab. 
Death of Maharaja Ranjit Singh _ es ab, 
Delhi administration assumed by the Government of the - - 3 
Foreigners not to be entertained in the service of the Lahore Darbar without 
permission too oo 42 
Gulab Singh’s (Maharaja) independence recogaised by the Lahore Darbar oes 4b. 
Hazara ceded by the Lahore Darbar 40 
Hill countries ceded by the seid Darbar in part payment of the war indem- ‘ 
nit eee eee ees ad. 
Holkars r removal. from the —. ” Ranjit Singh’s agreement roganling _— oes 22 
Indemnity for war expenses to be paid by. the Lahore Darbar 40. 
as rights in ceded territories engaged to be maintained i in their integ- ug 
Koshinys ceded by the Lahore Darbar . |. tes wl, 40 
Khaibaris to be prevented from committing depredations i in the — ves 17 
Khalsa army. Lahore Government virtually in hands of — see vee 19 
Khalsa army. War of 1845 with — ia ai “98 ae ib. 
Khalsa army. War of 1848 with — re af ves tee 21 
Kharak Singh’s succession to the sovereignty of the ——— see oo 19 
Koh-i-Nur dramond to be surrendered by the Lahore Darbar se soe 49 
Mutinous troops to be disbanded by the Lahore Darbar ... 40 
Native agency to be employed for the conduct of the details of the administra- 
tion of the —— rry eee: vee eee 46 
Passage for British troops through the ——. Arrangement regarding ~ sae 41 
Payments made by the Lahore Darbar to the British Government ... eee ri 
Proclamation on Sikh invasion of British territory a vee 37 
Regency Council appointed for the conduct of ‘the administration of the ——, 46 
Re-organisation of the Sikh army in the —— ves tes a 44, 
Revolutions in the —— vee tee ons ose oe { 7 
Shah Shuja’s engagement with Maharaja Ranjit nih regar ging commercia) 
intercourse with the eae see tee 17 
Sher Singh Atariwala’s revolt in —— hee vee 21 
Sher Singh Mabaraja’s succession to the sovereignty of the —— sis jae 19 
Sikh army. S:rength of — to be maintained by the Lahore Darbar wel 4h 
Sikh army finally defeated at the battle of Sobraon —..., see oe 20 
Sikh army surrendered after the battle of Gujrat ooo rr 23. 