


SSS SSS —————————————————————————————————— 


PAREHALI, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir eae see wee ise eos 67 
Passrorts— . 


Ranjit Singh’s adoption of —— for the Indus -_ oad 17 
Yarkand. European British subjects toe obtuin ——~ for visiting _ vee 461 
« Paravnr in the Delhi District— 
Account of the Chiefship of —— one toe ae 4 
Allegiance to be rendered by the Nawab of ——~ a” esi 9 
Commissioner of Delhi in charge of —— during minor ity eee ose 4 
Contingent of horse to be furnished by the Nawab of —— en ie 
Faiz Talab Khan granted the jagir of —~ .., ws * ei {5 
Mumtaz Husain Ali Khan, Chief of —— ,., aoe sae a 4 
Railway lands ceded by Nawab of —— eke oe jas $b. 
Succession sanad granted to the Nawab cho aad ae 10 
Successions to the jagir of —— ... ae ia ass , 4 
PATIALA in the Punjab— 
Account of the Chiefship of ——- asa wee oF 51 
Adoption privilege guaranteed to the Maharaja of —— ,., sed asi 74 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Maharaja of —— aes ote iss 97 
Afghan war. Employment of State troops in —~ ee 56 
Agreement for working of Rajpura—— Bhatinda railway. oes - 5. 
Ajirgarh fort conferred on the Maharaja of —— See eer isi 71 
Ala Singh Sardar founded the capital of —— oe ove wes 52 
Allegiance to be rendered by the Maharaja of ——— ack At we 74, 
Badnihir pargana conferred on the Mabarajn of —~  .., ibs as vel 
Baghat pargana conferred on the Maharaja of —~ sae es 0b. 
Banthira pargana conferred on the Maharaja of —— ... was Ra $3. 
Begaris to be furnished by the Maharaja of —— eos ase vee ab. 
Bhadaur jurisdiction conferred on the Maharaja of —— eis sei 53 
Bharauli exchanged for Simla... es aed a 52 
Rharauli pargana conferred on the Maharaja aw es eas 7 
Capital sentences, Maharaja empowered to inflict — .., ea ess 74 
Cession of land for Delhi- Umballa-Kalka railway see “ae 55 
Chaprot pargana conferred on the Maharaja of —— eee ae val 
Contingent of horse. Exemption of from furnishinga— "|. iss 55 
Councils of Regency appointed during the minority of Chiefs of —— ... se 54 
Customs daty abolished in 52 


Encamping grounds to be assigned for British troops in ‘temttory of — = 73 


£ixcise duty relinquished by the Maharaja of —— to AY 72 
Feudal obligation to be rendered by the Maharaja of —— sai Bee 75 
Feudatories of the Maharaja of es wee ore eos #6, 
Imperial service troops maintained by — ... ues ais ‘as 55 
Infanticide suppressed by the Maharaja of —— ses sis Oe 
> 2nsignia of the Star of India conferred on the Maharaja of —— ae wee { 54 
Jagatgarh and its dependencies conferred on the agit of ——... iy 71 
Jaubal pargana conferred on the Maharaja of —— oss as ad, 
Jind Raja of same clan as the house of —— eo oo { ee 
Jind Raja’s contention as regards the appointment of a Council of Regency 
during the minority of the Chief of —— ose one abe 53 
Jurisdiction in telegraph cases in —— eos vee oo) eo 79 
Kanaud pargana sold to the Maharaja of one oe i { a 
Kemalli pargana conferred on the Maharaja of —— __.., te ” 7 
Keonthal pargana conferred on the Maharaja of —— ... se oe ab. 
Kbamanun sold to the Maharaja of-— .., vee an tes { 3 