


Partaza i in the Punjab— 


Kiatin pargana conferred on the Maharaja of 


Kuljaun pargana conferred on the Maharaja of ——~ ... vee tas 
Kusalla conferred on the Maharaja of —— ... we a ae 
Lands for railway purposes and roads to be ceded by —— ove -_ 
Lands to be ceded for canal and works by —~ ae ice one 
Lucherang pargana conferred on the meres of ——... ay vas 
Mahendar Singh, Maharaja of eee one tee 


Mahili pargana conferred on the Maharaja of. 
Materials for Railways and Public Works to be furnished by the Maharaja 
of ——— on payment ve tee ees ove 


Military service to be rendered by the Maharaja of —— oo tee 
Nabha Raja of same clan as the house of —— ve we 
Nabha Raja’s contention as regards the appointment of a Couneit of Regency 

during the minority of the Chief of —— eos vee 
Narendar Singh, Maharaja of ——~ 


Narnaul division conferred in perpetual sovercignty on the Maharaja. of eee Si 


Nazar. Exemption of Maharaja Rajendar Singh from presentation of — in 
Darbar ee 


Nazarana for Baghat pargana paid by the Maharaja of 


Nazarava for Keonthal pargana paid by the Maharaja of aay ios 
Nazarana paid by the Maharaja for territory conferred on him soe se 
Nazarana to be paid on succession on failure of adoption ae 

Officials deported for intrigues at ts aie ie 
Pallakoti pargana conferred on the Maharaja of — |. "wee ee 
Parlikhar pargana conferred on the Maharaja of —— .., one Se 
Phul Chaudhri, the founder of the house of — eae vee 

Postal convention concluded with —— vee 

Punjab Lieutenant-Governor to control the political administration of —— 
Rajendar Singh, the present Maharaja of —— ar oe 


Rajgarh fort conferred on the Maharaja of —— a 

Roads for wilitary purposes to be kept in repairs by the Maharaja of —_ 

Rules for extradition of criminals drawn up 

Sanad conferring certain parganas in Keouthal on the Mabar Aja Fs yetees 

Sanad conferring certain parganas on the Maharaja of —— 

Sanad conferring the Baghat pargana on the Maharaja of —- 

Sanad conveying assurance of British protection and guarantee of rights and pos- 

sessions to the Maharaja of —— w Ss 

Sanad guaranteeing the possessions of the Maharaja if sei 

Sangar pargana conferred on the Maharaja of —— 

Sati abolished by the Maharaja of —— es 

Schedule of acquired territory of the Maharaja of ——— .,, 

Schedule of ancestral possessions of —— __,.. 

Services rendered during Ist Sikh war by Mabaraja of —— 

Services rendered during the mutiny by the Mabaraja of —— vite 

Services rendered during the Nepal way by the Maharaja of —— .., 

Simla obtained in exchange for Bharauli__... 

Sirhind Canal agreement concluded with es Maharaja of — "(See Sihind 
Canal) _ 

Slave-dealing prohibited by the Maharaja of — — oe 

Sovereign powers to be exercised by the Maharaja of —— 


one 


Succession from Phulkian house on failure of heirs guaranteed ooo 


Sukchinepur fort conferred on the Maharaja of —— ve 
Taksal city, fort, and bazar. conferred on the Maharaja a 
Telegraph. Maharaja’s engagement to pny for the construction of the —_ 
Telegraph Act applicable to —— er 
Telegraph agreement concluded with the Maharaja of —— 