


ooo 


Supsxcr. Paes 
MusraraBap, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ve ee we sa ee 67 
MouriratTion— 
Chamba Raja’s engagement to suppress the practice of —— wi aes 172 
N 

NaBHa in the Punjab— 
Account of the Chiefship of —— we oa of 58 
Adoption privilege guaranteed to the Raja of. — oe aD eee 102 
Adoption sanad granted to the Raja of ~~. a3 sai es 103 
Allegiance to be rendered by the Chief of % oe sa 102 
Assassination of an aunt of Raja Bharpur Singh of ——~ aes sat 69 
PRadrukhan. Hirn Singh’s share of — made over to Jind toe on ad. 
Bhagwan Singh chosen as Raja of ——~ on failure of heirs Se See £2. 
Bharpur Singh, Chief of — ., ~ - i wld op 
Capital punishment, Knja empowered to inflict — fie See ie 102 


Chief of —— descended from the same stock as the Patiala and Jind Houses ...' { Hs 


Contingent. Exemption of —— from furnishing a —.,, Lhe oy 60 
Deposal of Raja Devendar Singh of ——... is < des 58 
Extradition code adopted by —— as ee i 60 
Feudal service to be rendered by the Raja of —— ae ie . on | 202 
Feudatories of the Raja of —— Si ee ae 103 
Gurbakhsh Singh, Minister, deported from —— ses es 59 
Hira Singh chosen as Raja of ——~ on failure of heirs .., aay wep (ab 
Imperial service troops maintained by —~ ... ne ae he 61 
Infanticide to be suppressed by —— es ‘ae 102 
Insignia of the Star of India conferred on Raje Hira Singh eee ves 59 
Jurisdiction over Britisn subjects in —— ... soe set 102 
Lands to be ceded for canuls and works by the Raja of —— a aa 81 
Lands to be ceded for railway purposes by the Raja of —~ 102 
Materials for public works to be provided for by the Raja of ——~ on ‘payment .. th, 
Military aid to be rendered by the Chief of —— ib. 
Nazarana levied on successions of Bhagwan Singh and Hira Singh ‘to the Raj 69 
of ais tee 
Nazarana paid for Kanaud and Budwana by the Raja : spe bes 104 
Nazarana to be paid by —~ on succession on failure of adoption... ib, 
Patiala Council of Regency. a bpemncer?: of — duri ee o minority of the Chief 
contested by —— ves 54 
Pension ausigued to the ex-Chief of —-.. es e a 58 
Personal salute granted to Raja Hira Singh ote ne ee aa 60 
Political supervision of placed under Punjab as se ds ib. 
Postal convention concldded with —— tes oes see tes 91 
Railway lands ceded with fall jurisdiction by —— a ais 60 
Sanad conferring portions of Kanaud and Budwana on the Raja of —~ we | 104 
. Sanad guaranteeing the possessions of the Chief of —— vos tae 101 
Sati to be suppressed by the Raja of —— ... oe oo bi 102 
Schedule of the acquired possessions of the Raja of —— wee we 103 
Schedule of the ancestral possessions of the Raja of —— tee afy sb. 
Services of the —— contingent in Afghanistan wee is bs 59 
Services rendered during the mutiny by the Rajaof—— -- =i, sis 58 
Sikh war. Conduct of Chief of —— during the — 58 
Sirhind Canal agreement concluded with the Raja of —~ —" (See Sirhind Canal ») 80 
Slave-dealing to be suppressed by —— rm ity sis a a4 
Sonthi Sikhs’ dispute with the Raja of ——, Settlement of — ie ‘ee f “60 
Succession from Phulkian House on failure of heirs guaranteed —.., a 40a 