


Alisherzais. Fine imposed cn the — oes 
paar ie The Zaimukhts joined by the — in attacks on the Miranzni 

order abe ie ues ass 
Bar Muhammad Khel, a section ‘of the Danlatzai —— +3 tes ae 
Bar Muhammad Khel. Agreement concluded with the — ves a 
Baz Gul Khan. The —— supported by ~— in their outrages on British torri- 


tor: oe oes se we 
Barotisn @ section of ‘the Daulatzai — wes ise 
Bazotis. Allowance received by the — for the protection of the Kohat Pass we 
Daulatzais, a clan of the —— .., ig ake rr se 
Daulatzais. Blockade of the — ‘we one ove shy 


Firoz Khel, a section of the Daulatzai —— 
Firoz Khel, Allowance received by the —— for the ‘protection ‘of the Kohat 


Pass toe eee ase fea oe 468 
Garo, Village of — "destroyed by a British force cas EA wea Ae 
Hamsayas, a clan of the-—— _... eee 


Hanga. Khan of —, with the male members of bis family, deported to Lahore 
Hangu. The —— ee by the Khan of — iu their outrages on Britich 


territory tse sae eis we see 
Ismailzais, a olan of the erry eis See ive vas 
Khadizais, a section of the Ismailzai —— ... vas ave toe 
Khanki valley. Outrages committed by clans of the — ee oo 
Lashkarzais, a clan of the ——— .., ses oes rr tee 
Makhwadin, Malik. Surrender of ~ aes are we , 
Malla or Mula Khel, a section of the Hamsaya —— wee ” 
Mamuzais, a section of the Ismailzais wee vee vee tee 
Mamuzais. Blockade of the — -_ a 
Mamuzais concerned in an attack on Bagattu Sarai... eee 
Mamuzai Deradar Khel, Outrages committed by the — ane eee 
Mamuzais, The Zaimukhts joined by the — in eri on the Miranzai 
border tee eon tes 
Mamuzais or Mahmudzais, a section of the Lasbkarzai ——~ - : 
* Mani Khel, a section of the Daulatzai —— aa tes ‘A. 
Masuzais, a section of the Ismailzai—— ee m~ 


Miranzai expedition (The second) ve eve : see 


Pace 


SUBJECT. ; Paes 
OBAKZAIS— 
Mishti Khel, a section of the Hamsaya —— S ea see 239 
Mishti Khel. Outrages committed by the — see se “ 237 
Mishti Khel. Tribal service extended to the — 5s ss we | 288 
Muhammad Khel. Tribal service extended to the—_... ae ate 46. 
Muhammadzais, a section of the Ismailzai sus ae ie 237 
Rabia Khel, a section of the Ismailzai se ee as ib. 
Rabia Khel. Acceptance by the — of tribal service... ae we] 238 
Rabia Khel. British village of Shahu Khel plundered by the — .., we | 287 
Rabia Khel, Engagement concluded with the —— “ tee 1. 
Rabia Khel. Expedition under General Chamberlain against the — es ib. 
Rabia Khel. Misconduct of the — during the Afghan war Sie tes 1b. 
Rabia Khel. Special agreement concluded with the —.. Sea se 238 
Rabia Khel. Strongholds occupied by General Lockbart toe tes ib. 
Raids committed by the ov the British border... ies 237 
Samana range. Akhel and Rabia Khel engagement to pay revenue for land on 
the sunvy side of the — a toe si ier Pr 238 
Sheikhan, a section of the Hamsaya —— ie ses we] 289 
Sheikhan Khel, Outrages perpetrated by the — sii a6 wif’ 237, 
Sheikhan Khel. Tribal service extended tothe—  ... Wek ies 238 
Sipah or Sipaya, a section of the Daulatzai —— ves 236 
Sipahs, Allowance received by the — for the protection ‘of the Kobat Pass... ab. 
Sipahs of Aniposh. Agreement concluded with the — saa vee 237 
Utman Khel, a section of the Daulatzai —— 236 
“ioe Khel, Allowance received by the ~ a the protection of the Kohat “ 
ass eee soe eee a e 
Utman Khel. Outrages committed by the — Sia on re 237 
Oupa— 
Allahabad District purchased by the Wazir of —- ‘ie Se ase 8 
Benares restored to the Wazir of —— ae ea or, ai 2 
Ghazipur restored to the Wazir of —— ae fe 16. 
Kasim Ali of Bengal afforded refuge by the Wazir of —_— eee wel 0B 
‘Kora District purchased by the Wazir of —— sie hee bee 8 
Kuli Khan put to death by the Wazir of —— <a a 1 
Title of “ Wazir” conferred by Alamgir II on the Nawab of —— <., a ib. 
Wazir restored to his dominions in -—~ —,,,, es see a 2 
Wazir’s deposal proposed ai ive > ess ast sae ib, 
P 
Parnpa Kari— 
(See “ Afridis, *”) 
PakuaI— 
(See “ Afridis, ”) 
Payazran, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir wea ae or) we - «| +67 
Paytrat in the Delhi Division— 
Mabratta power overthrown by Ahmad Shah Abdali at the battle of —— “2 2 
Pansenor— 
(See “ Swatis. ””) 
Pangaur in Makran— 
(See “ Makran. ”’) 
PaNomipar— 
(See ** Swatis. ’’) 
PANJOEBRA, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir or Sig si as ea 67 
PaBIARIWALS— 
’ (See “Swatis and Yusafzais, 