


country tes tas aes 
Chamberlain’s (Sir Nev ille) expedition against the — aes " 
Cotton’s (Sir Sydney) expedition against the —— ae a a 
Depredations committed by the —— ee oes rr eee 
Foundation of the colony of —~- oss Ms ase 


Gadun Maliks’ engagement not to permit the return of the — 

Hasanzai Yusafzais’ engagement not to’ permit the — to settle in their country 

Hasanzais’ engagement to prevent the —— forming settlement iu their territory 

Mada Khel Gaduns’ engagement for preventing the —~ formiog settlement in 
their iJaka “ 

Mada Khel Yusafzais’ “engagement not to permit the —_ to settle in their 
country 

Mansur Gaduns’ agreemont for preventing the — forming settlement in their 
iakn “ 

Pariari Saiyids’. engagement not to permit the —— to settle in their “country . 


inhabiting their ilaka se 


Salar Gaduns’ engagement for preventing the 
Utmanzai | clan’s services to Sir Sydney Cotton during his operations againat 


the +— 

Utmanzai Malike’ engagement not to peraut the —— to form sottlements i ia their 
territory eae 

Utwanzai Pathans’ engagement to prevent the —_— forming settlement i in their 
lands ane ae ae Sse rr oe 


( dxxii ) 


SusszEor. 


Stave TrRapE— 
Bilaspur Rana’s engagement to suppress the —— ots “as woe 
Chumba’s engagement to suppress the ——~ jae ooo eee 
Faridkot’s engagement to suppress ——~ ste seo doe ‘el 
Jind’s engagement to suppress the —— one ‘és wao® eet 
Mandi’s engagement to suppress the ——_.,, ove eee _ 
Nabha’s engagement to suppress the ——_,, as ae eee 
Patiala’s engagement to suppress the —— ... ae as tee 
Suket’s engagement to suppress the sie 7 
Tarhoch’s engagement to suppress the —~ ... aT say iss 


Sopzaon on the Sutlej— 
Khalsa army overthrown at —— Nee ‘oe ate Ses 


SomanA, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ... a * avs ee tee 
Soon in the Hill States, Punjab— 

Baghat granted compensation for cantonment lands at —— tes ves 
SoNMIANI, @ sea-port town in Las — F 

Telegraph station to be built at —— oo ees eve ou 


Sontai Sas ~— 
* Nabha Raja’s Peyent to the ——- vee “a toe on 


Sprxr-GuNnDI— 


(See ** Taris.”) 


(See * Waziris.”) 
Suse@au, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir— 1 ite See st eo 
SucoEssion — 
Dujana Chief guaranteed the privilege of —— ea eee wae 
Ioharu Chief guaranteed the privilege of —— vee we tee 
Maler Kotla Nawab guaranteed the privilege of ——_... vee isi 


Srregais— 


Pataudi Nawab guaranteed the privilege of —— aes oes tee 


(See “ Adoption.”) 
(See * Waziris,’’) 


SupHan Kaer~ 


SUKET in the Punjab~ 
Account vf ‘the Chiefship of ——- 
Administration of the —— State by a Council of Regency during the ‘Chief's 
minority sae oe 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Chief of —— ‘a ane oes 
British guarantee for the continuance of the Raj of —— te 
Deputation of an Assistant Commissioner as counsellor ane adviser to the Raja 


of —— vas a 
Disputes to be referred to British Courts by the Raja of — tee eve 
Dusht Nikandan ‘Sen, the present Raja of —— ae age tee 
Feudal service'to berendered by the Raja of —~— vee eas oo 
Infanticide to-be suppressed by the Raja of —— ve on vee 
Installation of Dusht Nikandan Sen as Raja of —— ... was ae 
Interference of the Punjab Government in the affairs of the ——- State sae 
Investiture of Dusht Nikandan Sen with full powers .., vas ave 
Lands not to be alienated by the Raja of —— ter tee 
Lepers’ drowning or burning im —— to be prohibited by the Raja ... wae: 
Maladministration of the —— State _ ot vas AY 
‘Rudar Sen deposed ... ee es ee vee eee 
Salute allowed to the Raja of et sis aor 
Sanad conferring on Ugar Sen the Raj of —— soe too tee 