


Sikb guns withdrawn from Sobraon to be surrendered by the Lahore Darbar <.. 43 
act property and treasure in ceded territory to be removed’ by the Lahore 
arbar 


200 : see vee ooe ae eee 


————ooSeSeeeeeS SS: 


& 


( lev ) 


SunsEct. 


PunrsaB— 
State property of the Lahore Darbar confiscated by the British Government 
Territories ceded by the Lahore Darbar —.. 
Trans-Sutlej States ceded in fall sovereignty by Maharaja Dalip Singh 
Treaty for the re-establishment of peace with the Government of Lahore 
(See * Cis-Sutlej States,” ** Lahore,” and-“ Ranjit Singh’) 
Punnak Panaana in the Hill States, Ruayab=- 
Keonthal Rana granted —~— si wae ace 


PorKHatl, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ati see ase or 


Q 


QurtTa-— 
(See “ Baluchistun.’’) 


R 
Rasta Kusr-- 
(See “ Orakzais.”) 

Rarxot, a-Cis-Sutlej ec 
Lapse of —— see eee 

Raitwaxys— 
Bahawalpur Nawab’s cession of land for —~ Mes ai 
Faridkot Raja’s cession of land for ——~ _., wei Seg 
Faridkot Raja’ 8 engagement to cede land for —— sis sei 
Jind Raja’s engagement to cede land for +-- tee eee 
Kalsia Chief’s cession of land for—— ..,... ei var 
Nabha Raja’s cession of land for ——~- * ees we 
Nabha Raja’s engagement to cede land for ——~ a oe 
Pataudi Nawab’s cession of land for —~ .., es vee 


eee tee eon 


Patinla Maharaja’s cession of land for 
Patiala Maharaja’s engagement to cede land for —— ,,, 


Ratnegarw or Rawin-- 
British retention of 


Exchange of with Keonthal "Raja for Simla 
Rarevr, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir hs ati a sy 
RasEwaAl, & Cis-Sutle}] Jagir as we Bs a 


Rame@any, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir (See also Malaudh) ... as A 
RamnaGar Disrrror— 

Grant of —— to Sachit Singh .., eae Ly 
Ranizals— ; 

9 ' (See “ Yusafzais.”) 
RaNJILEUE, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir wee oo if ons 
Ransit Sineu, Mawazasa— 

Account of the rise and progress of —— .., ove 

Afghan merchants to be protected by —_ 

Afghan officers deputed to the Punjab to ded seined i in nthe erection of theit 


commissions by — - $85 
Area of the territorial possessions of — we vw one 19 
Army maintained by —— Pty ees seg ses tb. 
Barakzai booty captured by Shah Shuja to be shared with —— or § aC 
Bentinck’s (Lord William) interview with —— », 16 
Bentinck’s (Lord William) letter of assurance of British. friendship to — $3 24 


roar TE A CTE OY EE ES 
IX . 9 


( Ixvi } 


SusseEor. 


Raysir Sinen, Mawanasa— 
British guarantee for the payment of Shah Shuja’s subsidy to —— ... 
British guarantee not to interfere in the affaira of —— ... see 
British guarantee to respect the possessions of —— 


Character and abilities of —— ... S ne 
Cis-Sutlej Chiefs exempted vont the jurisdiction of — ... an 
Death of .—— see oe 


Defensive alliance proposed by ~ —_, rejected 

Derajat seized by —— 

Holkar disappointed in his hopes “of procuring assistance ‘from _— 
Holkar’s removal from the Punjab. Agreement with —— respecting — 
Indus not to be crossed without a passport from —— Ss 
Metcalfe’s (Mr.) deputation on a mission to the Court of ——~ 


Military aid to be afforded by Shah Shuja to 