

TRIBUTE— 

Bagbal Thakur’ s——. Amount of — toe is 

Baghat Rana’s ——. ” ws ais oe 
Balsan Rana’s ——. aay sce A 
Bashabr Raja’s engagement to ‘pay — a a4 oes 
Bija Thakur’s ——. ‘Amount of — oie ats 
Bhajji Rava’s ——. ” is - 

Chamba Raja’ ss. v ry es 
Cis-Sutlej Chiefs’ and Jagirdars’ ——., ,, hue 

Dhami Rana’s —~. ” see 

Jubbal Thakur’s ——. ai Sek se 
Kapurthala Raja’s ——. oe a 
Kashmir Maharaja’s engagement regarding — _— se 

Kothar Rana’s ——~. -Amount of — ee ae 
Kumharsain Rana’s ——. ». ie als mi 
Kunhiar Thakar’s —. a ae ea a 
Mailog Thakur’s ——. ” ‘es wee a 
Mandi Raja’s —~—. ” ave ae bi 
Mangal Thakur’s ——. _ os eis au 
Nalagarh Chief’s ——. 3 Pry; nie be 
Suket Jagirdar’s —~. ~ ” oo oe - 
Tarhoch Thakur’s ——, ” one ae 7 

Toris— 


Account of the —— 

Afghanistan. —~ and Bangashes declared independent of —~ 
, Aggressions committed by the —— eae Sas 

Alizais, a section of the Chardai = 

Amir of Kabul warned that his officials should not interfere with the _ aH 242 


Badshah Gul, Sayad, the Chief of one of the two leading factions of the —— ,., tb. 
Bangashes of Kuram, the hamsayas or vassals of the —— eos “3 241 
Chardais, a branch of the —— ... vee eee ave ae 26, 
Duparzais, a section of the Chardai —- ... tb, 
Engagements entered into by the -— for maintenance of pene peace ‘of the border ab. 
‘Ghundi Khel, a section of the Chardai —— ao _ ats 48. 
Hamza Khel, a section of the Sargalli —— via ahs eee 3. 
Hariab restored to the Amir of Kabul a tee ee 242, 
Jajis. Control of the — restored to the Amir of Kabul ass oe 5. 
Kuram. Deputation of a Political Officer to ~ vee ans 4 243 


Kuram. Oppressive treatment of the ~—— by the Governor of — 


TURKISTAN — 


( Ixxviii’ ) 


Supszor, 
Tors — 
Kuram assigned to the British ... see vee * 
Kuram definitely excluded from Afghanistan. vee ose “ 
Kuram (Lower) seized by the robber, Chikkai ; tes ove ‘ 
Karam occupied by British troops vee i 
Kuram valley. Measures adopted for securing the peace ‘of the — ae 


Landizai, the collective name of the Ghundi Khel and Alizai —~ ... 
Mastu Khel, a section of the Sargalli x 
Muhammad Nar Khan, the Chief of one of the two leading factions of the — 


Sargallis, a branch of the —— ... a AG Pe 
Spin-Gundi, a principal faction of the tribes of Kuram ae he 
Tor-Gundi, a principal faction of the tribes of Kuram ... tee vee 
Waziris and -——. Adjustment of the differences between the — .., one 


Waziris and 


Feud between the—  .. aaa Jes vee 


(See “ Afghanistan.”) 


TuskisTan, EssteRN— 


Account of Yarkand or Kushgaria . v8 ea tn oes 
Aksu. Submission of — to Yakub Beg... use Sei oye 
Appointment of representatives. “ Arrangement regarding — 

Atalik. Ghazi’s re-opening of friendly negotiations with the British Government 
Atalik Ghazi’s wish to establish friendly relations with the British Government... 


British Envoy’s reception by the ruler of Kashgarh _.,. -_ Sai 
British mission (1st) sent to Kashgarh a oh soe vee 
British mission (2nd) despatched to Kashgarh vos see sos 
British subjects’ privileges in Kashgarh —.. tee 
British subjects’ rights and privileges to be extended to "subjects of Princes and 