


SHIKARPUR in Sind-- 


see ace aoe 


Shah Shuja renonnces all sovereign rights on —— en eT: 
Shah Shujo’s arrangement with Maharaja Ranjit Singh regarding — — ois Ww 
Sur, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ie a aes ave wi 67 


Sain KHEL— 
(Ses  Waziris.”) 


(See “ Waziris.”) 


Surner Kusi— 


Saiywaris (of Landikotal)— 


(See “ Afridis,””) 
SHIRANIS — 

Account of the ——- se 251 
Bargha or Western —— under the control of the Baluchistan Agency ss ib, 
Chuhar Khel,:n branch of the —— ar as “as ab, 
Hasan Khel, a branch of the —~ : ses ite 4b. 
Khidarzais, Coercion of the — by military "force a oe tee 252 
Khidarzais, Hostile conduct of the — 251 
Khidarzais. Responsibility for procuring the eubmiesion of. the - ~ ~ undertaken 

by the Largha —~ ave 16. 
Largha or Exstern under the control of the Punjab Government vos ab. 
Largha —~. Agreement with the — ou 252 
Largha ——. Service for guarding the Gomal Pass ncoopted ae the — wef 252 
Uba Khel, a branch of the —— < vd. 


Snvga-vL-Murs, SHAH-~ ; 
(See Afghanistan.”) 


SippHowat, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir wae SS Aes see sos wef, 67 

SrzanpRA, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir ies ses ase ay wef 48, 

Srze— ; 
Ahmad Shah Abdali defeated the —~— a ese ue ts 18 
British policy towards —— Chiefs sea “ai see te 14 
British territory invaded by the -—~ Rs oe wn on 19 
Conquests made by the —— Pa si ocd as 13 
Defeat of the —— at the battle of Gujrat... tos wee tee 21 
Defeat of the ——~at the battle of Sobraon .. ves ter 20 
Dost Muhammad’s declaration of a religious war against the —— .. tes 412 
Mahrattas check the progress of the ——_... ass ve te 14 
Mahrattas exact. tribute from the —— wes see tee a i ab. 
Muhammadan persecution of the ——- wee mus vee see 13 
Nanak, the founder of the —— ... we ss tee eee b. 


Rise and progress of the ——_... vee one ue aaa ib, 


Svsszor. 
Srrnt, a Cis-Sutlej Jagic .., see eee ove ae 
Smara— 
Territory o£ ——~ obtained from Patiala .... ons eee 
sinp— 


Ranjit Singh (Maharaja) to receive customary presents from Amirs be _ 

Shah Shuja renounces all rights in —— 

Shah Shuja’s arrangement with Maharaja Ranjit Singh "regarding — — 
SINGHPUERIAN, a Cis-Sutlej Jagir see hea des eae 
Srpan (Afridis)—~ 

(See '* Afridis,”) 
Srpaw o8 Sreara (Orakzais)— 
(See “ Orakznis.’’) 
Srrginp CanaL— 
Agreement with the States of Patiala, Jind and Nabha regarding ——~ 


Arrangement regarding cost of maintenance of too eos 
Arrangement regarding supply of funds for construction of ——~__,., 
British Government to have right of altering or extending — ase 
British supervision and management of —— ve ate 


Compensation for property destroyed by 
Disputes relating to the —~. Arrangement regarding settlement of _ 


aee 


ove 


Incidence of cost of ——- ov * 

Jurisdiction over offenders against “canal regulations soe 

Representations made by any State to be attended to by British officials in charge 
of the —— 

Resumption of the management of the —. __Atrangement regarding — 

Right of passage for——. Arrangement regarding — eas 