

Seigniorage to be paid to British Government wee see 

Tolls to be levied on the ——. Arrangement regarding — eee 


Carers in the Cis-Sutlej States — 
(See “ Cis-Sutloj States.”) 


Srrxr1 Kurt— 
(See “ Waziris.’’) 


Sremvr or Nawan, Hill State in the Punjab— 


Account of the Thakurai of —— ... tee tue 
Adoption sanad conferred on the Raja of —~ one see 
Afghan war. Employment of State ae al in-—— eee bes 
Balran originally a feudatory of ane see 
Bawar pargane annexed — tee ne on 
Capital sentences. Powers of the Raja reining — eee 


Conditions imposed on Fateh Parkash on grant of Chiefship of —— 
Diwan’s appointment. Cancellation of the restrictive clause as regards —~ 
Duties of any kind not to be levied in —~ .., ere te 
Fateh Parkash granted the Chiefship of —— i sae 


Feudal service to be rendered by the Raja of ——~ 


Imperial service troops maintained by ~~ 
Insignia of the Star of India conferred on Raja Shamsher Parkash of —- 


Jagatgarh severed from —— and granted to Patiala... one 
Jaunsar pargana annexed oes ass “3s on 
Jubbal claims descent from the former rulers of ee 5 agi 
Jubbal originally tributary to —— ves 


Karam Parkash excluded from the Chiefsbip oo toe 
Karam Parkash, the ruling Kaja of 
Gurkhas re ae ‘st ove aes 


sor 


at the time of the expulsion of the 


eee 


Cntr on 


( Ixxi_) 


Sussscr. 


Smacuz or NaHAN, Hill State in the Panjab— 


Kiarda Dun severed from —— ... wee aa ox te 
Militury service to be rendered by the Raja of —~__... sh a 
Morni fort and pargana made over to Kotaha see wee Pr 
Nazarana takenson restoration of the Kiarda Dun to —- ose eee 


Personal sulute allowed to the Raja of —— ... 
Police to be maintained by the Raja of —— for protection of travellers and 


merchants ee tee see vee eee 
Ratesh, an offshoot of — a aes 
Rewards conferred for services rendered by the Raja of —- during the mutiny... 
Roads to be made throughout —— aes sen er ies 
Roads to be maintained by the Raja of ——... sat is “Ss 


Sanad conferring ~— on Fateh Singh 
Sanad removing the restriction as regards oe appointment of a Diwan by the 


Raja of — _... wee ses aes Pe 
Sanad sartniig Kiarda Dun to the Raja t— re ive 
Shamsher Parkash, the present Raja of eee ace 
Tarhoch, formerly a part of —— tee ove one 
Territory severed from the Chiefship of ——~ rr ote ou 
Transit duties abolished by the Raja of —— “es eas . 
Tribute not levied on —— eee on su ves acs 

Sirana Corory on the N.-W. Frontier— 

Abmad Shah, the founder of the —— eis Ales +h ava 
Hindustanis expelled from the —— eve ase oe tes 
Malka. — resettled at — wee eee ery tos bee 


-———-FANATICS— 


Aknzai Yusafzais’ engagement not to permit the —— to settle in their country 

Amazai clin. Aid given by the — to the —— 

Amuzai Maliks’ engagement to prevent the —-—~ forming settlements in their 
territory ae one tee 

Bonerwal Jirga’s engagement to ‘expel the ——- from their lands. 

Chagarzai Yusafzais’ engagement not to permit the —— to settle in their 