


Froutier _ sae ses vee 
Wirrsyint, GENERAL— ; 
Kalat captured by —— ve toe oes toe ase 


Woz Kuzsr— 
(See “ Waziris.’”} 


Y 
Ya@uisTan — ? 

Account of the Shin republics of ——~ bes ve ves oe 
Chilas, a Shin republic of ——... _ see ace 
Chilas. Nominal tribute paid by — to Kashmir vo oe ve 
Chilas subdued by Kashmir... wes ver se eee 
Darel, a Shin republic of —— .., vee vee bes 

Darel. Nominal tribute paid by — to Kashmir vo 
Darel. Pahlwan Bahadur of Youn ae by ® contingent from — in an attack 
on Gilgit fee ins Per tes vee 
Gor, a Shin republic of —— - .,, ios sais aa wae 
Harban, a Shin republic of —— eee tes eee toe 
Hudar, a Shin republic of ——~- tes vee eee nee 
+ TTangir, a Shin republic of —— ‘ex sv és 
Tangir. Chitral Chief’s exercise of authority over —.. oes ses 
Thalicha, a& Shin republic of = i ooo oe eee vee 


Ysrkanp— 
(See “ Turkistan, Pastern.”) 
Yusar-- 
: (See “ Yusafzais.’’) 
Yusarzals — : 
Account of the ——. ise ar 


Agror, Ali Gauhar Khan’ 8 succession to the Khanship of — 

Agror. Ata Muhammad Khan,- Khan of —, removed to Lahore as B State 
prisoner iy vee 

Agror. Ata Mabammad Khan permitted to return to — ee + aes 

Agror. Construction of roads in -— ves 

Agror. Dispute between the Khan of — and Abdulla Khan of Dilbori a 

Agror. Jagir of the Khan of ~ confiscated and his estates placed under the 

; management of a British officer 

Agror. Khan of — removed from the border and his estates attached 

Agror. Life allowance granted to Ali Gauhar Khan of — 

Agror. Title of “ Khan Bahadur” conferred on Ali Gauhar Khan of — 


Agror valley. Tribal outrages in the — tes ose Se 
Ahmad Shah, Saiyid, the founder of the Sitana colony sa a 
Ajun Khan, of Tangi. Aggressions of — on British villages ee ae 
Akazais, a section of the Isazais toe tee 

Akaznis, a section of the Yusaf clan of the — —_— oa rr a 
Akazais. Agreement entered into by the —~ vee eo ou 


Akazais. Major Battye and Captain Urmston killed by n party from the 
villages of the — nee eee uae a oh 


eee ie ee Lo at tac ae OAS ct am ey a a gs rea 


Paes 


oe ; ( Ixxxiii) 


SUBJECT, | Pager 
Yusarzais— ‘ 

Aknzais, Outrage committed by the —‘on the British village of Ghanian —... 215 
Akazais. Proposed restoration of Shahtut tothe— ... oe a5 tb, 
Akazais. Territory of the — occupied by British troops S35 ae 218 
Akazais. Withdrawal by the — of their claim to Shatut ste -_ 217 
Akazais and others, Expedition against the — eee one td. 
Akazais concerned in an attack on a British Police post, at Oghi... ons 214 
Akazais to hold the village of Shahtut as British subjects oe sae 6. 
Amazais, a section of the Utmanzai clan of the —~- ... Bees 213 
Amaznis. Engagement of the — to exclude the Hindustanis from ‘their country 6, 
Amazais. Hostile action of the — during the Ambela campaign of 1863 a $6, 
Amb. Territories, cis and trans-Indus, held by the Nawab of — ... eae 8b. 
Ashuzais. Raid by — on Baroch wee tee te aa 219 
Bnio. Expedition against — ... aie a us wed 218 
Basi Khel, a section of the Chagarzais set is wef 215 
Black Mountain expedition of 1891 a Sse te 218 
- Black Mountain tribes. Expedition of 1868 ‘against the — ses eae 214 