

Mada Khel, @ section of the Ibrahim Khel .. 
Mahmit Khel, a clan of the Utmanzais sae 
Mabsud and Darwesh Khel ——, Settlement of a dispute between the — 
Mabeud country. Despatch of a military expedition into the ... 
Mahsuds, a branch of the ——... 

Mabeuds, Attempt to employ the — in agriculture and d frontier service 
Mahsuds. Hostilities with the — ses “a 
Malik Shahi country. Expedition sentintothe— ... 
Malik Shahi Khel, a section of the Wali Khel 

Malik Shahi Khel. Settlement of outstanding claims Sgninst the — 


eee eae oee 


eee eas 


Manzar Khel, a section of the Ibrahim Khel Ss ee 
Miamais, a section of the Kubul Khel see Pa eae 
Mianis concerned in raids ee ete 
Muhammad Khel, a section of the Spirkais ves F 
Muhammad Khel. Agreement with the — a 7 


Muhammad Khel. Punishment of the — ... 
Nana Khel, a section of the Bahlolzais we 
Nasri Khel, a clan of the Ahmnadzai —— 


Sada Khel, ’a section of the Spirkais . ose oe eee ’ 
Saifalis, a section of the Kabul Khel aa an ay: 

Saifalis. Agreement entered into by the — wits re a 
Shaman Khel, a clan of the Mahsud —— ... ce 


Shaman Khel, Agreement with the — tee tee 
Shaman Khel. Service for guarding the Gomnal Pass accepted by the — 


Shin Khel, a branch of the Ahmadzai —— oes a ses 
Shingi Khel, a section of the Bablolzais =... eee ee is 
Sirki Khel, a clan of the Ahmadzai —— ... . 
Sirki Khel, Service for guarding the Gomal Pass accepted by the — re 
Spirkais, » clan of the Ahmadzai —— see see ey 5 
Spirkais. Punishment inflicted on the— ... “ae eas 

Sudhan Khel, a section of the Spirkais ase ons sae 


Sudhan Khel. Punishment of the — 

Tank. Amalgamation of — with the Dera Ismail Khan district 
Tank. Executive and Police jurisdiction withdrawn from the Nawab of =... 
Tank sacked and burnt by the Mahsud —— 


Tazi Khel, a section of the Nasri Khel aoa vos 
Tazi Khel. Service for guarding the Gomal Pass accepted by the — one 
Yazi Khel; Settlement of outstanding claims agaiust the — vee tes 


Tori Khel, a section of the Ibrahim Khel ,.. ts 

Umar Khan, a fanatical Mulla, acting under instructions from Kabul. Intri- 
» gues of — ues eoe ve 

Umarzais, a clan of the Ahmadzai —~- —.. oe mn on 

Umarzais. Agreement with the — wie ais ns 

Umarzais. Punishment inflicted on the —... 

Utmanzais, a branch of the 


oon ae tee 


Wali Khel, a clan of the Utmanzais ote one 
Wuzi Khel, a section of the Mahmit Khel.. ta ves 
Zali Khel, a section of the Nasri Khel ace 

Zali Khel. Service for guarding the Gowal Pasa accepted by the ~ _ 
Zali Khel concerned in raids... $e te ate 
Zali Khel reduced to submission ats aes ius 


( Ixxxii ) 


Sunzeer. 


Westenn Jomna Canat— 


Adjudication of disputes regarding —~ .., vs iss 7 
Arount to be paid by Jind Raja for water from the ——~ Sea 

Control of the distributaries of the —— Set ine 
Jind Raja’s arrangements regarding distributaries of the —_— ts ove 


Jind Raja’s engagement for regulating the supply of water from tho ——- toe 


WILDE, BRIGADIER-GENERAL— 
Expedition under —— ee the Black Mountain Tribes of the North- Veen 