

States of India visiting Kashgarh va 
Buzurg Khan Khoja deputed by the Khan of Khokand to Kashgarh aye 
Buzurg Khan Khoja installed as ruler of Kashgarh __.., eve ae 
Chinese expelled by ‘l'unganis from Kasbgarh wae ws one 
Chinese originally masters of Kasbgarh _.., on ons 
Civil suits in Kashgarh, Arrangement for the settlement of — aw on 
Commercial agents’ appointment to Kashgarh sae tee 
Courts for the adjudication of civil and criminal cases in "Kashgurh.. “ ts 
Development of trade desired by the Atalik Ghazi ee ore va 
Duty on Russian merchandise imported into Kashgurh ,,, bee eos 
Envoy deputed by.the Atalik Ghazi to India ve vee ‘ses 


Envoy (2nd) deputed by the Atalik Ghazi ... 
Estates.of British as sa dying in Kashgarh. Arrangement regarding the dis- 


posal of — oe tee 
Forsyth (Mr.) deputed on & mission to: Kashgarh se, 8 088 toe ses 
Forsyth’s (Mr.) deputation a second time to Kashgarh .., toe ont 
Goods broken in bulk exempt from duty on the route to —~ aaa sia 
Goods imported to be subject to rules of the place of consignment ... ee 
Hayward’s (Mr.) visit to Kashgarh ‘es ais a5 


Henderson (Dr.) deputed on a mission to Kashgarh ees es F 
Import duty on goods exported from India into Kashgarh ate 
Joint Commissioners’ interference in revenue matters within their jurisdiction ies 


Joint. Commissioners’ powers in civil and criminal suits in -—— __.. veatd 


Kashmir Maharaja’s grant for repairs of roads and bridges on route to ——~-_, 
Kashmir rules for guidance of the Joint Commissioners appointed to the new 


route to —— 54 We 
Khokand, Khan of, offered the government o ‘of Keshgarh Ze ah 
Khoten acquired by Yakub Beg Sa Bs Ss 
Kuchar, Submission of — to Yakub Beg .. ‘aa ue oe 
urla, Submission of — to Yakub Beg _... se tee ; 
Ladak to supply Inbouvers for works on thie ronte to —— is : 
Ladak Wazir’s powers in —— .. ate tee 


Legal document’s reception in Courts, Arrangement regarding Saat aus 


Paas 


3 7 (. Isxix ) 


Subysor. 


mL _, 


TUREISTAN, EASTERN— 
Leh to supply labourers for works on the route to ——... 
Merchants to be permitted to pass without restrictions into Kashgorh 
Merchants’ disputes regarding duty. Arrangement for the settlement of —~ 
Passports to bo obtained by European British subjects viens Kashgarh 
Privileges of trade. Arrangement regarding — ee 
Recovery of debts. Arrangement for the — tee vee 
Ropresentatives’ status oes 
Russian commercial agents permitted to reside in territory of the Toler of .., 


Kashgarh eee eas eee 457 
Russian commercial treaty with the ruler of ‘Kashgarh .. dis ie 1. 
Russian Embassy’s visit to Kashgarh ee 43, 
Russian merchants privileged to establish warehouses in Kashgar. wee tb. 
Russian merchants’ privileges i in Kashgarh .,, a6 - 458 
Russian subjects’ privileges in Kashgarh oa a 457 
Sadik Beg’ 8 defent by Yakub Khan aes a at 456 
Sadik Reg’s unsuccessful attempt to enpture Kashgarh se, | 455 
Shaw (Mr.) deputed on a mission to Kashgarh bee “a vis 457 
Shaw’s (Mr.) visit to Kashgarh ac $0, 
Survey of trade routes to Kashgarh. Arrangement. With the ‘Mabaraja of 
Kashmir regarding — ee 860 
Title conferred on the ruler of Kasbgarh by ‘the Sultan of Constantinople we | . 458 
Tolls not to be levied on bridges on the route to —— ... ees | App. I 
Treaty of commerce concluded with the ruler of Kashgarh eee ved 460 
Tunganis’ rebellion in Kashgarh ins eo wae} 456 
Ush Turfan. Submission of — to Yakub Beg ste wes a 456 
Yakub Beg, Governor, expelled from Kashgarh oe ves ae 18. 
Yokub Beg sent by Khan of Khokand to Kashgarh ‘es 455 
Yakub Beg’s absence at the time of the srivel of the British mission to 
Kashgarh, Reasons for — ‘as a 457 
-Yakub Beg’s assumption of the government of Kashgarh sa i 456 
Yakub Beg’s recapture of Kashgarh bes ast tb, 
(See Jammu and ‘Kashmir. sy" 
U. 
Una Kuxt-- 
(See “ Shiranis.”’) 
Umar KHEL-~ 
(See  Zaimukhts.”) 
Umarzais-- 
(See “ Waziris.”) 
Usrpatia in the Punjab— 
Patiala’s engagement to allow waters of the SEE: to be aaa to the 