

The conduct of the Habsburg Monarchy is a clear example of the dilemma of how to deal with the resurgence of France, for there were deep divisions within the Court which sprang from two utterly opposed visions of where Habsburg interests lay. The more traditional view saw the Monarchy as a German power with vital interests to defend against French ambitions in the Empire. At the heart of this view was a deep attachment to the role of the Habsburg family as Holy Roman Emperors. This was the opinion that held sway at Court for most of the 1790s, when foreign affairs were directed by Count Thugut. Thus, the Monarchy remained a major force in the war against France. A different current of thought centred on the Emperor’s brother, Archduke Charles. Less bound by traditional ties and convinced that the defence of the small German states was a waste of resources, this faction saw the future of the Monarchy as a territorially compact power, based in central Europe and the Balkans. Therefore Russia was the real enemy for them, not France.

The war with France exposed the chief weaknesses of the Habsburg state, but in a very particular way: the division of the Monarchy into the Austrian and Hungarian crowns was a traditional source of military, financial and administrative complications. The wars of the 1790s revealed less the inability of the Monarchy to defend itself – in fact it proved a formidable force – than the diverging priorities of the two crowns. As long as France remained a regional power only, the Hungarian Diet in Tressburg (now Bratislava) saw little merit in whole-hearted support of the war effort. This was reflected in the limited troops and taxes it contributed in the 1790s. For the Magyar nobles, the most pressing problem was the anarchy and disorder across the border with the Ottoman Empire which was much closer to them than the Rhineland or northern Italy. The view was very different from Vienna, however. To Thugut and his circle, French aggression was an established fact that had to be confronted; to the Magyars it was a distant noise.

All this points to the relatively restricted influence France had in Europe by 1799. The Habsburgs had been able to hold the French advance in check almost single-handed until 1797 and had more than restored the military balance by 1799 with only minimal help from Russia and the Ottomans. Moreover, when it is remembered that this had been done without the full co-operation of almost half the Habsburg Empire the extent of French power assumes its true proportions. Nothing was decided in the west by 1799; the French Republic and the Habsburgs still contested for domination in the region and no one was more aware of this than the policy-makers of the Directory. That was why a faction among them panicked and turned to Napoleon. The Directory deserves great credit for its consolidation of French power but it had not proved itself capable of sustained, secure expansion. By 1799 its own weaknesses stood exposed. Perhaps the best tribute that can be paid to those at the centre of the regime was the realism that made them turn to reform led by a stronger executive under Napoleon. Ultimately this is what would separate France from her rivals: the ability to adapt in the face of relative failure.