

Map 1: Principal Napoleonic Battles, 1797–1815

A great deal has been made of the power and might of the state forged by the French revolutionaries, especially by posterity, yet in 1799, the truth is that most of this work was still to be done. The military fortunes of the French Republic were what most concerned the other powers of Europe and those fortunes had been decidedly mixed since hostilities had begun in 1792. Ultimately, every French advance had been repelled at some point or other and the reverses of 1798–99 were the most serious inflicted on France to date. The ruthless efforts of the Terror period, 1792–94, made France into a power to be feared and no state, large or small, was foolish enough to ignore the revival of French power and ambition. Nevertheless, the most important point about the nature of French power in 1799 was its limitations, not its extent. Throughout the 1790s France had emerged as a strong regional power in western Europe, but she was far from capable of dominating the whole continent or even of being a determining influence beyond the ring of weak states to her immediate east and south.

No one questioned the subversive nature of the ideology of the Revolution, nor did anyone wish to see France become the dominant force anywhere in Europe, regardless of who might rule her. However, the leaders of Europe were not agreed on what priority to accord the French threat, because it was more of a threat to some than to others. In this way French weakness, rather than French strength, was what really sapped the determination of the first two coalitions assembled against France in the 1790s. This was very clear from the behaviour of the major European states in 1799.

Britain was the only major power to see the threat of France as unquestionably her first priority and the only one to remain in the war continuously. This tenacity is explained in part by the proximity of the two states but even more by their long-standing colonial and maritime rivalries outside Europe, many of which dated back to the seventeenth century. It had little to do with the growing power of France in continental Europe. In direct contrast, Prussia decided simply to ‘write off’ her minor territorial losses to France in the Rhineland and withdraw into neutrality. In 1799 this was still a sensible course of action; it was a position she retained until 1806 and an important illustration of how limited the scope of the French threat actually was. The issue most important to the Hohenzollerns was the fate of Poland, which France could not influence. Until 1798 Russia took even less of a practical interest in what to her was a very localized conflict at the other end of Europe. Even in 1798–99 Paul I was drawn into the Second Coalition only because France had tried to extend her aggression into the Mediterranean, but it was soon apparent that the French had overreached themselves there. Paul’s withdrawal, early in 1800, was determined by the realization that the true interests of his country lay in defending the Baltic from British commercial domination, rather than in the fate of Germany and Italy.