

Copenhagen was the British equivalent of Marengo and Hohenlinden but Britain, like France and the Habsburgs, had been driven to breaking-point by the latest round of fighting. She now needed to reorganize not only her armed forces but her commercial networks. This was the context in which the British finally made peace with the French Republic at Amiens in March 1802. The only period of complete peace in the whole period 1792–1814 now began. It resulted from the mutual exhaustion of the three major protagonists, Britain, France and the Habsburgs, and the net result was to give Napoleon a free hand in continental western Europe. This was the price the partners of the Second Coalition saw they had to pay to consolidate their own positions. Napoleon, however, had no illusions about French limitations. The future of Europe for the next decade would now turn on how each of the great powers used the time they had just bought themselves.

### The Watershed: The Great Powers at Rest, 1801–05

The collapse of the Second Coalition wrought many vital changes at the heart of the major states of Europe. In the course of 1801 Tsar Paul was assassinated and replaced by his son Alexander I. The government of the Habsburg Monarchy also saw sweeping changes, as Archduke Charles returned to the military high command with the brief to reform the army, while the conduct of foreign affairs passed to Cobenzl, an experienced diplomat, and to Colloredo, the Emperor’s former tutor. In Britain, the long period of political stability under the ministry of William Pitt the Younger was shattered when he resigned in March 1801. This had been provoked by his confrontation with George III over the issue of Catholic Emancipation, itself a by-product of the hastily enacted abolition of the Irish parliament and its amalgamation with the British one as a panic response to a serious, French-backed rebellion in Ireland in 1798. It would be several years before a ministry of comparable authority emerged to lead the country. Pitt was replaced by Addington, a less decisive leader, if a better financier and administrator than Pitt. Pitt proved ruthless in opposition; together with his former rivals Fox, Grenville and the Whigs, he made the life of Addington’s government untenable and forced him to resign by 1804.

With the other powers thus absorbed in their own affairs, Napoleon set about exploiting the terms of Luneville to the full. France was now confirmed in the possession of Belgium, Luxembourg and the west bank of the Rhine, areas she had seized early in the revolutionary wars. Napoleon was also tacitly allowed to annex most of Piedmont directly to France, the first step beyond the ‘natural frontiers’ proclaimed in 1792. The French advance was further confirmed by the recognition by Britain and the Habsburgs of several ‘sister republics’ created by the French in the course of the 1790s. Napoleon became their official guarantor.

Luneville reclaimed for France much of what had been won under the Directory, but not all of it, due to the cautious approach adopted by Napoleon at this early stage in his rule. The old idea of a western Europe composed of small, weak buffer states, so central to the concept of balance in eighteenth-century diplomacy, had not yet been abandoned. Set beside the resurrection of those sister republics closest to the borders of France, was the sacrifice of the further-flung ones in central and southern Italy, where the Pope and the various branches of the Bourbons were restored. Nebulous plans for a sister republic on the eastern bank of the Rhine were definitively abandoned. Instead, from 1801 until 1805, the French preferred to exercise an indirect influence on the rivalries of the German princes. This was a consolidation for France, but not an advance. In Switzerland, in 1803, Napoleon actually dissolved the centralized ‘sister’ Helvetic Republic he inherited from the Directory, replacing it with a cantonal federation over which his control as ‘Mediator’ was indirect, if decisive. A firm commitment of 16,000 Swiss troops per annum was preferable to direct political control.