

#### The Campaigns of 1800–1801

Napoleon entrusted Switzerland, the main sector, to his closest rival, Moreau, while he led the smaller Reserve Army over the Alps and attacked an Austrian army under Melas in southern Piedmont. The early stages of the fighting revealed the fragility of the French armies as well as the strategic brilliance of Napoleon and Moreau. Suddenly Thugut’s elaborate, ambitious plans for a two-pronged Austrian offensive into France – across the Rhine into Lorraine and from northern Italy into Provence – evaporated. Kray withdrew to stronger positions on the Danube. It was a wise decision, if hardly what Thugut wanted. The quality of Kray’s army had declined sharply since the winter; desertion was rife, the supply system had broken down and disputes broke out between Kray and his staff. In these circumstances it is not surprising that Moreau was able to advance as far as the Danube but he could not bring even this battered army to a decisive battle.

In Italy, Melas confronted Napoleon at Marengo, in southern Piedmont, on 14 June. At this stage, the most striking feature of Napoleon’s campaign was a mixture of good leadership and stretched resources. The Austrians proved a match for Napoleon in the field. Marengo has been seen as the most fortuitous of Napoleon’s victories,1 and it need not have been decisive. It turned into a quick French victory because Melas, shaken by the fighting, asked for an armistice even though he could have withdrawn his troops to the Austrian fortresses in central Italy, the Quadrilateral, where there were another 80,000 fresh troops. As it was, the armistice ended the war in Italy. This was what Napoleon knew he needed most because even this short campaign had stretched his army; it had to rest and regroup.

By the terms of the armistice the Austrians left the French in virtual control of all Italy outside the Veneto. For the Habsburgs, this meant the loss of all the territory they had reconquered in 1799. Kray then concluded an armistice with Moreau and surrendered most of Bavaria to the French, and peace talks began at Luneville, in eastern France. When the Austrians insisted that they would not make peace without Britain, Napoleon renewed hostilities in November 1800. This time the French could concentrate on the one remaining front, the Danube, and Moreau won a major battle at Hohenlinden on 2 December 1800. It was the decisive blow that Napoleon had staked the campaign and his own survival on and Moreau gave it to him. Napoleon’s masterplan had succeeded because in Moreau and his troops a new, more disciplined army had emerged. This was the first clear sign that the awesome power many contemporaries had detected in the revolutionary armies since 1792 was now almost a reality.

Habsburg resistance all but collapsed. Thugut resigned and the alliance with Britain was repudiated. On 9 February 1801 France and the Habsburgs concluded the Peace of Luneville. The war of the Second Coalition was now over in continental Europe. Only Britain remained at war with France and her isolation was further increased by the successful diplomacy of Tsar Paul in the Baltic, where his League of Armed Neutrality closed northern Europe to British trade. The Danes and Prussians, with Russian backing, sealed the Baltic and the North Sea coast of Germany. Simultaneously, but independently, Napoleon initiated a joint Franco-Spanish invasion of Portugal, also aimed at stifling British commerce. By June 1801 the continent was sealed more effectively to the British than at any other point in the Napoleonic wars. The combined efforts of the Franco-Spanish alliance and the League of Armed Neutrality came much closer to defeating Britain than the Continental System which evolved from 1806 onwards. Whereas the later system was built on coercion and centred solely on France, the pincer movement of 1800–01 stemmed from a spontaneous identity of interest between France and Russia. It was potentially devastating but, as events turned out, unrepeatable. In part, this was because in 1801 British commerce still centred on European markets but by 1807 Britain was drawing most of her essential raw materials from the New World. The assassination of Tsar Paul in March 1801 did not immediately shatter the effectiveness of the League; in the first four months of 1801 not one British ship passed the Danish straits. The blockade – and the League – were broken by a ruthless naval action off Copenhagen on 2 April 1801 led by Nelson, which destroyed the Danish fleet. In the wake of this the new Tsar, Alexander I, moved to restore good relations with Britain.