

COUNTERFACTUAL THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS, 3

cessors who rely on low-effort strategies to simplify an otherwise intolerably
complex world (Kahneman, Slovic, and Tversky 1982). The price of cogni-
tive economy is, however, steep: increased susceptibility to systematic bi-
ases and errors. We itemize several ways in which reliance on simplifying
strategies might distort the conclusions we draw from counterfactual thought
experiments.

(1) What gets mutated? This is the ground floor for the entry of psycho-
logical bias into thought experiments. As Kahneman and Miller (1986) ar-
gue in their influential norm theory, the human perceptual apparatus is at-
tuned to notice change. The more abrupt or discontinuous the change, the
more likely people are to notice it, to try to explain it, and to generate
counterfactual scenarios in which they “mutate” the departure from nor-
mality to the more customary and expected default value (Commentary 2,
Olson, Roese, and Deibert). For example, experimental subjects generate

re “if only” thoughts and experience more regret upon learning that the
victim of a traffic accident had departed from her regular route to the office
than they do upon learning that the accident victim had adhered to her regu-
lar route. It is easier to “mentally undo” accidents or indeed other events that
constitute deviations from the routine.

‘Translating this well-replicated finding from the experimental literature
into the realm of world politics is no simple exercise. This volume, how-
ever, contains much evidence that departures from normality or the status
quo do indeed attract especially vigorous counterfactual speculation. These
departures can take diverse forms, including leadership transitions (Chapter
3, Breslauer; Chapter 6, Herrmann and Fischerkeller), revolutions (Chapter
8, Kiser and Levi), assassinations (Chapter 3, Breslauer), and unusually
intense policy debates in which the argument might easily have gone either
way (Chapter 4, Khong; Chapter 5, Lebow and Stein). Routine events fade
into the perceptual background and are rarely selected for mental manipula-
tion in thought experiments. Of course, not all social scientists conform to
the predictions of norm theory. Nomothetic investigators often invoke back-
ground conditions that change almost imperceptibly slowly (such as the size
of the middle class in early twentieth-century Russia or the “polarity” of the
pre-World War I balance of power). And chaos and complexity theorists
specialize in demonstrating the sensitive dependence of major outcomes on.
minor background conditions, such as the flapping of butterfly wings. Norm
theory fits idiographic better than nomothetic “counterfactualizing.”

(2) Once constructed, which counterfactual scenarios are judged plaus-
ible? The simplifying strategies that people use to impose cognitive order
carry a price tag. These strategies can tilt the playing field (arguably un-
fairly) in favor of certain counterfactuals over others. Consider the much
discussed trilogy of judgmental heuristics: anchoring, availability, and repre-
sentativeness (Tversky and Kahneman 1974). The anchoring heuristic could
lead people to be too quick to dismiss scenarios about hypothetical worlds