2 P. E. TETLOCK AND A. BELKIN

Psychological Perspectives on Counterfactual Reasoning

Up to this juncture, we have focused on normative perspectives on counter-
factual reasoning—on the criteria that people should use to generate and
judge counterfactual arguments. We now turn to psychological perspectives.
There is a thriving research literature in both cognitive psychology (Com-
mentary 2, Olson, Rocse, and Deibert) and linguistics (Commentary 1,
Turner) on how people actually generate and judge counterfactual claims.
‘These normative and psychological arguments should not, of course, be
viewed as two self-contained, hermetically sealed domains of discourse. The
psychological literature highlights a host of determinants of spontaneous
counterfactual reasoning that raise serious questions about the reliability and
validity of counterfactual thought experiments in world politics. Indeed,
‘when the topic is thought experiments, it is hard to say at what point epis-
temology and methodology end and psychology begins.

From a broadly psychological perspective, itis difficult to imagine avoid-
ing serious bias in thought experiments. Bias can ereep into every stage of
this inherently subjective process, from the initial selection of antecedents
(for “mental manipulation”) to the evaluation of connecting principles to the
‘willingness to entertain counterarguments and alternative scenarios. Bias ap
pears inevitable, in part because of the cognitive limitations and motiva-
tional inclinations of the thinker in whose mind the thought experiment
runs,” and in part because of the extraordinary complexity and ambiguity
of the task. The population of past events from which one can draw counter
factual antecedents is effectively infinite, from the flapping of butterfly
‘wings to the “structural polarity” of the international system. And the task of
assessing what would have happened in these hypothetical worlds (to which
no one has access) is obviously highly subjective. Consider the potential for
epistemic mischief.

Cognitive Biases

‘A useful starting point is the principle of bounded rationality (Simon 1957).
People, it is now widely conceded, are limited-capacity information pro-

‘he causal variables identified in that tory will probably not help FAA investigators to predict
future crashes. For example, pilots are often tired, but rarely crash, and many crashes occur
when pilots are well ested. This argument suggests that counterfactuals in world politics often
Tail the projctabilty test not because the underlying claims are false, but rather because there
are such complex interactions among causal variables and so much potential for randomly
istributed small causes to be amplified into large effects (a point reminiscent of chaos theor).
In this view, projectabilty is most likely o break down for explanations of low-lkelihood and
row-frequency events (exactly the sorts of suprising evens tht, psychologists argue, are most
likey to attract counterfactual speculation).