stors but short on cash. (The French "nobility" of that age, with its various forms, types, meanings, and local variations, is too complex a social organism for full dissection here.) The great families were the "court nobility," those who had entry to the King's court on everyday occasions. They used their advantage aggressively, hunting pensions, donations, appointments, and whatever else might be squeezed from the King's treasury, and they monopolized the highest ranks in the armed [Link] King felt that his regiments should be commanded by noblemen who were qualified by their birth and by the services of their ancestors, regardless of their own personal military abilities or lack thereof. Such favored individuals might serve briefly as lieutenants and captains (often on leave and seldom with troops) before becoming full colonels. The minor nobility, unless they attracted attention by some showy deed of unusual valor, were fortunate if thirty years of hard, competent service brought them promotion to major. Marshal Saxe snarled over this double standard: In France a young noble considers himself badly treated by the court if a regiment is not confided to him at the age of fifteen or twenty years. This practice destroys all emulation in the rest of the officers and the poor nobility, who are almost certain never to command a regiment, and, in consequence, to gain the more important posts whose glory is a recompense for the trouble and suffering of a laborious life.10 Ill will over such inequity, however, was not the only source of hostility between French officers. "Great lords and little lords" (so a medieval mins- tral sang) were equally opposed to allowing commoners to become officers. These "Commoners" were not the village drunkard's bastards but rather sons of the high middle class-intelligent, hardworking, soundly educated, and backed by family wealth. A good many had come into the army while it still was possible to purchase a company; most of them served well. The nobility felt the challenge that they offered: Not only did the nobles seek to bar more bourgeois officers from entering the service-this was the main objective of that regulation requiring all officer candidates to prove four generations of noble ancestry-but unofficial pressures were applied to force serving officers of bourgeois origin out of the army. They were accused of assorted offenses of commission and omission; specifically they were blamed-without a shred of proof-for the French defeat at Rossbach. Much fuss was made over the fact that Frederick the Great had only noblemen for officers. (He didn't, but after the Seven Years' War he threw out almost all of the nonnobles he had used.) The nobles' defenses against the bourgeois officer tightened and thickened. The "four generations" requirement was extended to would-be officers of the provincial militia and admittance to the Artillery and Engineer schools. Even the loophole allowed sons of nonnoble officers who had won the Cross of Saint Louis was narrowed. There was a third category of officer-the officiers de fortune, promoted out of the ranks for unusual bravery or long-term competence. Earlier, they might have been promoted as far as their abilities could take them. Now, they seldom rose beyond the grade of lieutenant, usually in the infantry grenadier companies or as regimental porte-drapeau (color bearer). Some aristocratic officers valued them: They were reliable, they knew their duties-and they knew their place. They could barely live on their pay and were routinely snubbed by their fellow officers. Even so, they could hardly be poorer than many of the minor nobles; frequently, they were better educated, some of those back-country "hobereaux" (sparrow hawks) being almost illiterate despite their titles. In fact, officiers de fortune came from all levels of French society; some had been soldats-gentilshommes (gentlemen rankers), men of good family who had enlisted as privates because of utter poverty or personal disgrace." Others were middle-class, educated, and able to handle paperwork. Another route to a commission was to serve as a gentleman-cadet. Each regiment had a few such boys between fifteen and twenty who were nominated by the colonels and appointed by the King. They had to be nobly born or the sons of senior officers or of captains who had been decorated with the Cross of Saint Louis. They had to perform all enlisted men's duties except fatigue details and win promotion through all the NCO grades; they were allowed three failures and would be sent home after a fourth. Kellermann came finally to his baton by this route. In short, the officers of the Royal Army were an ill-assorted lot, cherishing mutual resentments. Absolute and blind obedience to their King was the basis of their military spirit, but discipline was another matter entirely. At best, it was a sort of etiquette set up by the War Ministry, not to be taken too seriously. All officers considered themselves gentlemen and therefore basically equal regardless of military rank and grade. (Of course, bourgeois officers and officiers de fortune were definitely less equal, and scions of the haute noblesse a lot more equal, than the rest.) Except when in action or drilling troops, officers of higher grade but lower social status were expected to defer to junior officers of more illustrious family. The average officer was extremely easy to insult in matters of daily life and routine, especially when any military superior/social inferior failed to phrase his orders with due respect. Even Davout was unruly as a lieutenant. There was a constant stew of solicitation for favors, pensions, and promotions outside the normal system of awards and of efforts to gain the attention of, and influence with, members of the court nobility or the royal family. Such potent aid could help the individual officer's career tremendously, but it had a decidedly adverse effect on the morale of the army as a whole. Such court intrigue and favoritism could thrust a stranger into a regiment as its lieutenant colonel, blocking normal promotion, or rescue a scoundrel from deserved and overdue punishment. Many of the officers were bone-poor, living always on the edge of hardship, where the replacement of a dead horse or the purchase of a new uniform would plunge them desperately into debt. Sometimes they could get a free meal at their colonel's mess (it was an ancient lordly custom to keep open table for subordinates), but the reformers condemned this practice because officers abandoned their companies to enjoy such leisurely feasts. As a lieutenant, Jean-Baptiste de Rochambeau'Z and another young officer existed for some time chiefly on potatoes and lard. Davout's mother lived in a rented farm cottage and used the village mill and oven to make her own bread. But to be an officer was a living and an honorable one. The royal government's object was to maintain enough officers' positions to give every nobly born young gentleman who deserved it a commission when he reached a suitable age. Thus the needs of the aristocracy, not the size of the army, determined the number of officers. In 1789 there were 9,278 active officers to 162, 806 enlisted men. (Reportedly the officers subdivided as 6,333 nobles, 1,845 commoners, and 1,100 officiers de fortune.) Added to these was a horde of inactive officers, retired officers, would-be officers, and officers a la suite." The last was a handy form of charity, especially to foreigners. Reputedly Regiment Deux Ponts had forty-two lieutenant colonels a la suite. To avoid absolute confusion, they were forbidden to go into the town where that regiment was stationed unless invited. This surplus of officers forced the over-officering of companies and regiments, many companies having a capitaine en second in addition to the usual captain and lieutenants. Such collections of underworked officers, many of whom served only for survival and not out of a taste for military life, did not make for efficiency. Too many officers were bored, neglected their men, and kept away from their units as much as possible. Peacetime administration and training was left to the majors (who often had no estate except their commission and so would stay with the regiments while the colonels and lieutenant colonels went about their private affairs) and the other officiers de fortune. But these men, having no real hope of further promotion, eventually lost their zeal and grew gray in mind and body. The sergeants managed most of the instruction, drill, and administration, which goes far toward explaining how ex-sergeants like Massena, Soult, and Augereau knew what to do with the regiments the Revolution thrust upon them. Nowhere was this surplus of officers more apparent and more painful than in the vast number of generals. In 1787, for an army of 180,000 men (9,355 of them officers) there were 18 marshals of France, 225 lieutenant generals, and 538 marechaux de camp.14 (Frederick the Great had 103 generals for 195,000 men.) Only a fraction of these could be employed; fortunately, many of them did not want to serve during winter or bad weather. Even so, drastic measures had to be taken to keep down the number with the armies. Too many of them-creatures of Pompadour or Du Barrywere incompetent, grasping, and insubordinate, interested only in their own pomp and comfort. Their luxurious equipages blocked the roads, used up food and forage, and disheartened the hungry, weary soldiers who had to guard them. (During retreats they might have the unintended virtue of slowing the enemy's pursuit. Hussars seldom could resist stopping to plunder stalled baggage wagons and coaches!) But to send unwanted, useless generals back from the army was to loose a wild scene at Versailles. "The suppressed generals and their families are screaming like eagles," wrote one minister. "I am in the horror of these brawlings, which I offer to God ... in expiation of my sins."" The enlisted men had little consideration from their swarm of officers. Many captains didn't know the names of even three of their men. Food usually was poor: very few officers concerned themselves with its quality or serving; in peacetime, the cost of the men's hair powder, candles, and whiting (for white uniforms and crossbelts) was taken out of their far from generous ration allowance. Discipline became more Prussian; punishments were savage. A soldier who struck an officer had his offending hand chopped off before he was hanged. Outside their barracks, soldiers often found themselves barred from public gardens along with dogs, lackeys, and children, and generally cold-shouldered. (It was 1911 before the Congress got around to making such exclusion illegal in the United States.) There were more particular complaints. It had been normal for two soldiers to share a barracks bed, but for some reason-probably economythis number had been increased to three, which was almost unendurable in hot weather.16 Even more important-and the immediate cause of the military mutinies that ended the Royal Army's service to the King-was the question of soldiers' pay. Small as it was, in most regiments the officers subjected it to more or less illegal stoppages (in modern parlance, took a cut of it), usually disguised as a purchase, at inflated rates, of nonregulation items of uniform and the like. As in other European armies, soldiers might be excused from training in order to work as laborers, especially on governmental construction projects, but their officers kept their military pay while they were so employed. Finally, though men enlisted for six or eight years, they might be forced to serve for an indefinite additional period. One result was few reenlistments; officers experienced increasing trouble in keeping good NCOs and grenadiers. Another was heavy desertion, sometimes as much as one-third of the enlisted men in one year. The Prussian and Austrian armies were full of 