

## Preface and Acknowledgments

 Certain of mankind's greatest armies have passed like meteors, bursting out of chaos to storm across our history into enduring legend. Some have left us little more than a proud tradition; others, a changed world. To the cadenced thunder of their drums they pass, to the lilting of forgotten trumpets, riddled standards high about the Great Captains who shaped and led them: The pikes and muskets of Gustavus Adolphus's tautly disciplined Swedes and Scots; Oliver Cromwell amidst his Ironside horsemen and redcoat infantry: George Washington's tattered, hard-bitten Continentals; Napoleon's Grand Armde; the lean butternut ranks of Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia; George H. Thomas's indomitable Army of the Cumberland. Erwin Rommel's Afrika Korps and George S. Patton's Third Army were of their true lineage. The Grande Armee was the trenchant instrument with which Napoleon reshaped both Europe and the art of war. Swift-marching, furious in the attack, grimly enduring, high-hearted, stubborn in disaster, it still ranks among the few greatest of the great. It also was many men of many different nations-many heroes, not a few cowards, and the multitude who were neither but did their duty as they saw it. This book is about that army, and those men. Acknowledgments To my mother, Myrtle Welborn Elting, who gave me that wonderful publication, The Book of Knowledge, with its pictures of Napoleon and his white horse that caught my imagination even before I could read, and taught me her own love of history. To Ann, my wife, typist, and editor, whose steadfast and loving comradeship got me through this long task. To certain gallant gentlemen and scholars, some unfortunately no longer present: Brigadier General Vincent J. Esposito, who encouraged my Napoleonic research and gave me time for it "in addition to other duties"; Roger Forthoffer, retired commandant of the Gendarmerie Nationale and inspired explorer of forgotten archives; Eugene Leliepvre, official painter to the French Army; Paul Martin of the Strasbourg Museum; Dr. Jean Humbert of the Musee de l'Armde; Frederick P. Todd, student of old uniforms; Andrew Zaremba, student and veteran of the Polish Army; Anne S. K. (Mrs. John N.) Brown, gifted collector and historian; Dr. J. G. Kerkhoven, Curator of the Royal Dutch Army Museum; Dr. Tord Buggeland of the Maihaugen Museum, Lillehammer, Norway; Dr. Kay S. Nielsen of the Tojhus- museet, Copenhagen; Dr. Bengt Hermansson and Dr. Nils E. Herlitz of the Swedish National Defense Museum; and Dr. Alfred K. Hauge of the Norwegian Defense Museum. Also to Egon A. Weiss, once a soldier and then Librarian of the United States Military Academy; Guy C. Dempsey, Jr., of the new generation of Napoleonic scholars; and Donald D. Horward of Florida State University, authority on the Napoleonic epoch. Finally to Mr. Charles E. Smith, Vice President and Publisher of the Macmillan Publishing Company, who rescued this book from editorial confusion, and to Ms. Joyce Seltzer, Senior Editor of The Free Press, who saw it into press.