

Points of Information 1. The purist would require that Napoleon be styled "Napoleon Bonaparte" or simply "Bonaparte" until December 2, 1804, when he became Napoleon I, Emperor of the French. Because this book shifts constantly back and forth through 1792-1815, however, "Napoleon" is used throughout to avoid confusion. II. For brevity (and color) this text follows French practice by using "...th Ligne" for "...th Regiment of Infantry of the Line." III. Having grown up before the Revolution brought in its ruthlessly logical metric system, Napoleon and his contemporaries continued to use the old, highly variable French units of weights and measures. He reckoned short distances by toises (6 French feet), long distances by ligues (leagues, roughly 3 miles). The "foot" with which he measured the height of his soldiers was 9 "lines" (three-fourths of an inch) longer than our foot; consequently, a soldier standing just 5 feet tall by French measurement would be almost 4 inches taller by ours. IV. Members of Napoleon's family are mentioned in the text but not always described. For Louis and Jerome Bonaparte and pretentious Joseph, the oldest brother, see Chapter XIX. Lucien, the next son after Napoleon, was a political creature of intelligence, energy, ego, and considerable perversity. The key figure in Napoleon's coup d'etat of 18 Brumaire (November 9, 1799), he soon clashed with Napoleon and spent the following years in exile. He rallied to Napoleon in 1815 but was too much a stranger in France to have much influence. Of the three sisters, Elisa was the oldest and homeliest; when Napoleon gave her Tuscany and the tiny states of Lucca and Piombino to rule, she showed herself a talented administrator and a gifted patron of the arts. Caroline was pretty and treacherous. Pauline, the youngest, was beautiful and giddy, free-living, frank, and goodhearted. Loyal to Napoleon, she sent him one of her best cooks to cheer his exile on St. Helena. As a family, the Bonapartes were greedy for money, prestige, and (Pauline excepted) authority. One of history's finest examples of irony is Napoleon's comment on their claims in 1804: "When I listen to you, I can almost believe that His Majesty our father of blessed memory must have bequeathed us crown and realm."* They have been the target of many books but actually were no more sinful and incompetent than the other European royal families of their time, England's included. V. Talleyrand (Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Perigord) was Napoleon's Foreign Minister, 1799-1807. The son of high nobility, he had been lamed by a childhood accident; his family barred him from his inheritance and thrust him into the Church. He welcomed the Revolution but had to take refuge in the United States during the Terror. In all of his employments he was absolutely corrupt and selfish, working shamelessly to enrich himself from any source. (The famous XYZ affair of 1797, when he attempted to force a bribe of $250,000 out of the United States, was a minor example.) A man of unprepossessing appearance but great style and charm, he was a born intriguer with an amazing ability to get others to do his work, whether routine or dirty. His efforts to ensure himself a peaceful existence after the style of a wealthy pre-Revolutionary nobleman have often been mistaken for patriotism. VI. By 1792 militant emigres formed three tiny "armies": The Prince of Conde's on the upper Rhine; the "Army of the Princes" (Louis and Artois) with the Prussian invaders; and the Duke of Bourbon's in Flanders. Sickness and hardship practically destroyed the last two during 1792. Other emigre units formed in England but were wiped out by Hoche during an attempted invasion in 1795. Conde maintained a small force until 1800, serving with both Austrians and Russians. (Saint-Cyr observed that his headquarters was elaborate enough for an army of 100,000.) Survivors formed the Chasseurs Britanniques Regiment in the British service; others took service with various foreign armies. Upon becoming Emperor, Napoleon permitted practically all emigres to return and commissioned some of them in his foreign regiments. Some, like Narbonne, served him loyally, albeit with an occasional jest; others, like Bourmont, would betray him. VII. The chapter opening illustrations are by the late Herbert Knotel, the acclaimed authority on European uniforms. Mr. Edward J. Krasnoborski, master cartographer to the Department of History, U.S. Military Academy, prepared the endpaper map.