French deserters. (Steininger, who had vast experience in this business, remembered that the average citizen pitied and helped deserters, the monks at the St. Bernard monastery giving them better treatment than they did beggars and vagabonds. You did have to watch out for the peasants in frontier districts, since they often were bounty hunters.) There was a lighter side. Girard, of the Regiment Neustrie, was an intelligent young man whose determination to educate himself made him a corporal after a mere five years' service. On garrison duty at Wissembourg, he made many civilian friends, including a book dealer's daughter "who completed my education." These friends invited him to a ball. He asked for a pass to attend it, was refused, and-with some misgivings-slipped out of the barracks with the help of his squad to attend anyway. Since officers from his regiment would be there, his sweetheart disguised him en femme in one of her outfits. He was an immense success, his captain being the first to request the privilege of dancing with him. Then a hussar officer cut in, only to be elbowed away by the major of the Neustrie Regiment. The major was most gallant, but pressing; the civilian friends had some trouble separating him from his intended conquest. Back in the barracks he found that there had been an unscheduled bed check. Next morning, a hungover and disappointed major abruptly sentenced him to the conventional twenty-five blows for a night's AWOL. The senior captain interceded because of Girard's excellent record. Thereupon the major, in a tone which had nothing of the past evening's tenderness, demanded where he had been. "At the ball, sir." "I don't believe it!" "You should, sir. I was the young lady you danced with so often, plied with refreshments, tried to . . . " "Case dismissed!" Between wars the Royal Army was replenished by voluntary enlistments, frequently secured through trickery, enticement, or even crimping. Other armies of that day did much the same, and indeed it would be hard to draw any sort of line between a recruiting sergeant's routine wheedling and his frequent downright lying." Recruits came mostly from Paris and the other big cities; probably a third or less were country boys, though these were much prized. Officers with considerable estates might be able to get some of their tenants' sons to enlist. But most recruits came from the nation's froth and dregs: adventurers of all sorts, deserters from other armies, criminals released from prison on condition that they enlist, men on the run from their creditors or woman trouble, incapable artisans, and apprentice drunkards. A good recruiter had an eye for them all and worked on them with cajolery, wonderful lies, wine, food, and sometimes a cooperative doxy. The regular recruiter-usually an officer detailed from his regiment with a sergeant and a drummer or two, to literally "drum up" recruits-would be a showy figure, striding proud as Hector, hat or helmet cocked to one side, sword jutting from his hip, clad "to four pins ... superb in demeanor and swagger."18 His sergeant would echo him yet radiate benevolence and generosity. There was a definite difference between such authorized "recruiters" and the freelance racoleur, who gathered recruits for any army that would pay him for bringing them in. Those gentlemen sometimes were out-and-out crimps, luring or even kidnapping unsuspecting men into their "fours" (bakehouses), where they were held until someone (often an authorized recruiter) bought them. The racoleur had no nationality and worked along the thin edge of the law. Even so, he was far more respectable than the embaucheur, who attempted to persuade soldiers to desert and enlist in a foreign army. If caught in the act, the latter could expect a quick trial and quicker execution, yet the trade persisted. The infantry at the beginning of 1791 included the Vieux Corps, the regiments of Picardy, Piedmont, Navarre, Normandy, and Maine, all organized in 1562, and of Champagne, formed in 1575. After them came Auvergne and five other Petits Vieux Corps and the rest of the 102 infantry regiments, French and foreign." Under Choiseul, each regiment consisted of two battalions (except for the Regiment du Roi, which had four); each battalion had eight companies of fusiliers and one of grenadiers. Saint-Germain cut this to five companies per battalion but made the companies larger. He also, probably as a result of Broglie's experiments, gave each 2d Battalion a company of chasseurs (light infantrymen) in place of its grenadiers and assigned each regiment a small "auxiliary company" (sometimes called a "depot") for training and processing recruits •20 Infantry tactics were a source of bitter squabbling. Many officers agreed with Guibert and Saint-Germain that the Prussian "linear system" (ordre mincee) had proved itself unbeatable throughout the Seven Years' War. Infantry was to fight in lines three ranks deep, thus utilizing its available fire power. In its simplest form, long lines of infantry held the center; artillery spaced itself out along the battle line; and cavalry covered the flanks. Movements were slow and precise. Infantry fire was tightly controlled, each battalion firing on order as a sort of battery. This was bitterly opposed by officers favoring a "perpendicular system" (ordre profond), who asserted that it was stupid to attempt to convert Frenchmen into ersatz Prussians. The sensible infantry formation was a line of battalions in column, covered by swarms of skirmishers. (They had considerable preliminary disagreement among themselves as to the best size and composition of the columns.) Artillery should be employed in mass, and part of the cavalry held in reserve to exploit success. Infantry should be trained in individual marksmanship. The two "schools" wrangled continuously, to the point of giving the infantry a split personality. Both systems were tested in maneuvers; very large columns proved impractical, and linear tactics made a very good show. Consequently their adherents wrote the infantry drill regulations of 1776 and 1791, which did not mention skirmishers, were complicated, and included some showy but useless movements. When the wars came, columns and skirmishers were revived. French experience in North America during the Seven Years' War (our French and Indian War) and the American Revolution undoubtedly had much to do with the Royal Army's organization of twelve regular battalions of chasseurs a pied (light infantry). Light infantry had been the elite arm of General George Washington's Continental Army; the excellent British light infantry had shared the elite status of the British grenadiers. However, it is easy to overestimate the real magnitude of American influence on French military organization and tactics. Comparatively few Frenchmen served in North America. But a large part of the French Army had suffered indignities from Austrian or Prussian light troops since 1742 and had studied their operations. Those battalions and the chasseur companies of the French infantry regiments were intended-along with the new chasseurs a cheval-to take over the work formerly done by the disorderly "Free Corps" legions that France had raised for each war in a generally unsuccessful attempt to match the enemy's irregulars.21 Like the Free Corps, the first regular light troops formed in 1784 were "legions" of both light infantry and light cavalry, but these were soon separated into units of chasseurs a pied and chasseurs a cheval. Four battalions of the first were formed out of the infantry regiments Royal Italien and Royal Corse (Corsica). (These were still considered foreign troops, and as such retained their higher pay and other distinctions.) The others were recruited as far as possible from mountain or forest areas and took their names from the regions in which they were recruited: Provence, Dauphine, Corse, Alpes, Vosges, Cantabre, Pyrenees, Bretagne, Cavennes, Gevaudan, Ardennes, and Roussillon.22 Their uniforms were green, and each company included twelve carabiniers d pied armed with rifled carbines. (These probably were inspired by the German and Austrian jaegers rather than American riflemen. It is notable that the French never adopted the American and English custom of forming rifle battalions and regiments.) These chasseurs would become the Grande Armee's famous senior regiments of light infantry. The French cavalry was under repair and reconstruction. Its record through all the century's wars had been lackluster at best. It maneuvered and frequently charged at the trot because the cavalry captains, who owned their companies' horses, refused to wear them out by galloping." It also made much use of mounted fire action, its troopers popping off their pistols and carbines from their saddles-a practice that seldom hurt many of the enemy, but did leave the French likely to be caught at a standstill by enemy cavalry charging at the gallop. There were occasions, as at Minden in 1759, when it did attack gallantly, but seldom with much success. Equitation had achieved the status of an esoteric art, to be displayed with suitable ceremony in the riding hall, with little application to teaching Trooper Gros-Jean how to nurse his horse through a long, hungry campaign. The cavalry thus was overripe for modernization, which Choiseul proceeded to administer. The process was temporarily obstructed by the cavalry officers, who protested the wear and tear on their horses involved in testing new maneuvers, but they were squelched when Choiseul abolished their proprietorship. The new regulations provided for formations only two ranks deep; maneuvers were to be simple and rapid; cavalry would charge at the gallop and put its trust in its cold steel. These reforms did not otherwise touch the heavy cavalry (one regiment of carabiniers a cheval, twenty-four of cavalerie) appreciably, but the eighteen dragoon regiments were put through several changes. In 1776, in imitation of much earlier British practice, each regiment had been given a "light" company for scouting and outpost duty. Three years later those companies were detached and regrouped into six green- uniformed regiments of chasseurs a cheval. Since they proved a promising substitute for the more expensive hussars, six more regiments were added. The six regiments of hussars had been the most active and handy of all the cavalry, but were mostly foreigners. The 1st Regiment was still "The Bercheny" after its founder, the Hungarian nobleman Ladislas Berchenyi, who had come to France with 300 veteran hussars, refugees from Austrian rule and religious persecution, in 1730. Only two of Napoleon's marshals, Davout and Grouchy, began their careers as cavalry officers. Ney had been a competent sergeant of hussars, Murat a private (and something of a yardbird) in the chasseurs A cheval. Augereau claimed to have had considerable cavalry service. More than any other branch of the Royal Army, the cavalry had a reputation to regain. It would achieve that and far more, but only after an even more intense time of troubles. The Royal Corps of Artillery might be acknowledged among the world's finest, but its organization remained an amazing anachronism. Long considered part of the infantry, it did not attain the full status of a separate arm until 1774, and even then a few odds and ends of absolute independence apparently were not put straight until 1793. As late as 1789 the seven existing artillery regiments were still officially assimilated with one infantry regiment and required to mark their equipment with its designation.24 To identify themselves the artillery regiments therefore adopted the names of the artillery schools at which they were stationed: La Fere, Besancon, Strasbourg, Metz, Toul, Auxonne, and Grenoble. (Each regiment was, in effect, a school as well as a combat organization.) Artillery officers were carefully and thoroughly trained, their educat