ion beginning with service as enlisted men until they mastered the rudiments of their profession, but also stressing mathematics and the manufacture of weapons and ammunition. Like the Engineers (with whom they shared the informal title armes savantslearned arms) they were expected to pass both practical and written examinations, a requirement that set them quite apart from cavalry and infantry officers. Consequently, artillery officers tended to be men who had neither high birth nor family influence to aid their careers but did have the intelligence and industry to make their own way. Lieutenant Napoleon Bonaparte was an excellent (if slightly exotic, being from just- conquered Corsica) example of these petty nobles, as was Marmont. There was even an unusual proportion of officers out of the middle class who had managed to penetrate the tightening restrictions on their commissioning. Artillery being an arm that required much plain hard physical labor, its enlisted men were bigger and stronger than the average infantryman and drew the same "high" (extra) pay as infantry grenadiers. The drivers and horses that moved the guns, however, were provided by civilian contractors. The Corps of Artillery also included several companies of Miners, who worked in conjunction with the artillery during sieges, and companies of ouvriers (artificers), who built and repaired artillery vehicles and gun carriages. One enlisted artilleryman, Victor Perrin, made marshal, though he served initially as a bandsman rather than a gunner. Artillery employment had tended to be on the slow and stately side, in large part because its guns had been the long, heavy weapons of the Valliere "system." Guns had rarely been employed in mass, the general practice being to string artillery companies along the front of the army when it formed for battle." At the same time contemporary tactical doctrine called for two guns to be attached to each infantry battalion, further reducing any possible concentration of artillery fire. These "battalion guns" supposedly stiffened the infantry formation, but frequently they were little better than useless. The average infantry battalion commander didn't know what to do with them and so either gave his little artillery detachment senseless orders or left it to look out for itself during the battle's surge and countersurge. But French artillerists had noted the bold, swift handling of English and German guns at Minden and were rearming themselves with the more mobile Gribeauval cannon and restudying their tactics. Just as the Royal Corps of Artillery had only recently escaped from its incarceration in the infantry, so the Royal Corps of Engineers had sometime earlier established its independence from the artillery. It was a small organization of staff officers, carefully trained in their excellent engineering school at Mezieres. As in the artillery, its officers were largely from the minor nobility and middle class. A number of them were Huguenots, by tradition conscientious, studious, and hard-working, but still considered something outside polite society and so the target of snobbery and discrimination in the infantry and cavalry. Promotion in the engineers being largely by merit, they could expect reasonably fair treatment as officers of that arm. One notable feature of the Royal Army was its high proportion of foreign troops. As late as 1790, along with its seventy-nine French infantry regiments, it had twenty-three foreign-eleven Swiss, five German, three Irish, three Liegeois, and one Swedish. There were more foreign regiments in the heavy cavalry: Royal Efranger, Royal Piemont, Royal Allemand, and others. The hussar regiments were largely German; in the oldest ones at least the "word of command" was in German. Even a third of the new battalions of chasseurs a pied were foreign. Foreign troops drew higher pay than their French counterparts and hadthe Swiss especially-various privileges. Until 1791 they kept their own distinctive drum signals and marches. The German regiments were especially harshly disciplined, their officers and NCOs using their canes to punish minor infractions of discipline and drill. To further set them apart, the foreign regiments were uniformed in colors that contrasted strongly with the white of the French: Swiss and Irish had red coats; the Germans, Liegeois, and Swedes "deep sky blue." Supposedly they had no attachments in France and so would have no hesitation in putting down riot and rebellion with whatever harshness might be required. Except for some of the Swiss and German regiments, however, these foreigners were far from the tautly drilled and disciplined mercenaries of tradition. The lack of replacements had made it impossible to maintain the Scottish regiments of Albany, Royal Ecossais, and Oglivy, which-the last in particular-had been reputedly some of the best in the French service. The original six Irish regiments had dwindled to three-Dillon, Berwick, and Walsh-and there had been precious few Irishmen in their ranks for more than twenty years. In their place stood Belgians and Bretons and whomever else their recruiting officers could catch. Tradition has it that Augereau's first service was with the Irish regiment Clare, which soon got rid of him for reasons variously given. The three Liegeois regiments, Bouillon, Royal Liegeois, and Deux-Ponts, supposedly were recruited from the principality of the Prince-Bishop of Liege (now roughly eastern Belgium). They were forbidden to enlist Frenchmen, but took anyone else. Somebody checked Royal Liegeois and found Germans, Alsatians, Dutch, Flemings, Austrians, Swiss, Savoyards, and Italians, plus 119 miscellaneous deserters from other regiments and armies. Royal Suedois apparently was a similar mixture, with few if any real Swedes present. Swiss regiments were raised under definite contracts with the various cantons; many of them were practically the property of aristocratic Swiss families, which might or might not live up to their contracts. Some filled their regiments with miscellaneous Germans and other chance-caught strangers. Most of these mercenaries were blackbirds and fly-by-nights with little scruple about deserting, especially before a battle if the chances for an easy victory didn't appear too promising. One of them, J. Steininger, left a naif account of his adventures.26 Born in a Piedmontese barracks his father a Wiirttemberger serving in a Swiss regiment, his mother the company washerwoman, he grew up an enfant de troupe, successively fifer, drummer, and deserter. He passed through the armies of Piedmont, Wurttemberg, Austria, Holland, Prussia, Denmark, the Palatinate, Austria again, Bavaria, Piedmont again, and Naples-a total of fourteen desertions and never a formal discharge. Condemned to death for attempted desertion in Naples, he escaped to Corsica. There he enlisted in the French Army and soon deserted his regiment to join the Volunteers. The gendarmes brought him back, and he thereafter served dutifully until after Waterloo. Increasing numbers of Frenchmen, attracted by the higher pay and greater privileges of the foreign regiments, managed to fake a jargon that would pass for German or Italian-at least well enough to satisfy the calloused consciences of recruiting officers who badly needed men of any sort. Amid the multiplying disorders of the Revolution, the foreign regiments showed no more loyalty than the native French. If the Salm-Salm German regiment had a leading part in putting down the mass mutiny at Nancy in 1790, it was the Chateauvieux Swiss Regiment that began the affair. The major contribution of those regiments was simply that they brought some excellent soldiers-Kellermann, Lefebvre, Ney, Reynier, and many othersinto the French service and so eventually into the Grande Armee. France had always had a militia of one type or another; in the eighteenth century it operated under the designation "provincial troops." As with other reserve components in other nations, its history was one of reorganizations and re-reorganizations, of long periods of neglect and short ones of high priority. Militia service was thoroughly unpopular; men called up in wartime too often found themselves forcibly transferred to regular units at the war's end instead of being sent home. There was much local evasion of militia summonses and sometimes active resistance. The last important reorganization before the Revolution came in 1778. Service was to be for four years; selection was to be by lot, with no voluntary enlistments or substitutions permitted. Each parish throughout France was assigned its quota; theoretically, only unmarried men were liable, regardless of social status. As conceived, this could be considered the first application of national service in France. In practice, the old inequalities soon reappeared: Dependents and employees of the nobility and clergy were informally excused; there frequently was diddling with the lots; and married men were taken when there were not enough single ones in the parish. The poor and middling peasantry had to furnish most of the men. The men so levied were formed into 106 separate battalions, eighty of which were attached to regular regiments as their "garrison battalions," with the wartime mission of manning the regimental depots and garrisoning the towns and fortresses in which those depots were located. The other battalions formed thirteen "provincial regiments": seven assigned to the artillery, five (regiments d'etat-major) to the engineers, and one to Paris. Another, rejoicing in brown-and-green uniforms and a beltload of sidearms, was organized in 1789 for Corsica. All the grenadier companies, except the Paris Provincial Regiment's two, were detached to form thirteen regiments of Grenadiers Royaux.27 Up until 1782 the provincial units received limited field training, but very little active duty seems to have been required after 1763. The Paris politicians abolished all provincial forces in 1791-another of their many mistakes, since those regiments would have furnished excellent cadres for the volunteers called out in 1792. They did provide France with a sprinkling of officers and men who had some basic training and knew one end of a musket from the other. Somewhat surprisingly, a retired enlisted man had a more certain future than his officers. French kings from Henry IV on had recognized a responsibility toward aged and disabled soldiers. Louis XIV had created the Invalides in Paris as a hostel for them. This remained a refuge for the crippled and very aged. Men still capable of some service were organized into companies of "invalids" for garrison duty throughout France; men capable of supporting themselves were allowed retirement pay: half pay for sixteen years' service, full pay for twenty-five. After 1764, retired enlisted men were issued a uniform every eight years. In 1771 a simple Medaillon de Veterance (Veteran's Medal) was introduced for men with twenty-four years' service. At least one old sweat, Jean Thurel of the Touraine Regiment, earned three of them! By contrast, officers' pensions depended on the royal whim and favor of the moment. They usually were granted (sometimes after genteel begging), but they were neither certain nor uniform. In self-protection, therefore, the officers of many regiments organized mutual aid retirement funds known as concordats. These funds were raised in various ways, a common one being for each new captain to contribute from 1,000 to 4,000 francs. The government strongly opposed concordats, but they continued to operate, simply because they did give a retiring officer some cash in hand. As a stimulus to officer morale, Louis XIV had created the "Royal and Military Order of Saint Louis" (usually referred to as the "Cross of Saint Louis") in 1693 as a reward for merit and service. It had three separate grades, each with an increased pension: chevaliers, officers, and commanders. It might b