e awarded for some outstanding deed, but especially for length of service. Naturally a colonel out of the haute noblesse needed only eighteen years of consecutive service to win it; a lieutenant-poor nobleman or officier de fortune-needed twenty-eight. Also, an officier de fortune's prior enlisted service counted only as half-time, though war service counted double. The award of the cross conferred a certain "noble" status on its recipient; his sons could enter the military schools, though such privileges were gradually restricted from 1788 on. Rarely, remarkable deeds of valor might earn an enlisted man the cross. It was, however, awarded only to Catholics, which made many Swiss and German officers in the French service ineligible. Accordingly, Louis XV instituted the companion "Order of Military Merit" in 1759 for Protestants. Both orders were abolished by the National Assembly in 1792. The Veteran's Medal was left in existence but was no longer issued. Besides the excellent Artillery and Engineer schools, an important source of new officers was the provincial military schools founded by St. Germain in 1776. They were actually staffed and managed by various religious orders and varied considerably in efficiency. (Brienne, which Napoleon attended, was one of the best.) Their basic purpose seems to have been to educate the sons (between the ages of nine and fifteen) of the poor-but highly reproductive-minor nobility. Some students, including various foreigners, paid their own way. If certain students had a real taste and aptitude for the profession of arms-like Napoleon, Davout, Nansouty, Clarke, and Lauris- ton-they would be passed on to the Military School of Paris where two years of advanced schooling under conditions Napoleon found luxurious would earn a sous-lieutenant's commission. (Napoleon completed the course in one year.)28 Less gifted students might try for an appointment as a gentleman-cadet to some regiment. Getting this Royal Army, especially its officers and emphatically its generals, into proper uniform was a long, frustrating task.29 It was 1762 before all French infantry were definitely ordered to wear white instead of gray or anything else. At that same time Choiseul made it official that the artillery, engineers, and heavy cavalry would wear dark blue; the dragoons and chasseurs green; and the foreign infantry regiments their red or blue. The hussars retained their prerogative of having a distinctive uniform for each regiment. Officers were compelled to wear the epaulette, which they called "la guenille a Choiseul" (Choiseul's rag), or epaulettes appropriate to their grade. Regiments were distinguished by the color of their facings and buttons, but these were in great variety and no particular order. Also, they were likely to change suddenly if a colonel's mistress fancied another color, however unmilitary, or if some particular shade became fashionable. After 1779 the War Ministry attempted to arrange the various facing colors into a definite system to make regimental identification easier. They were still trying in 1791. Saint-Germain had wanted practical uniforms, but his successors favored eyewash. One attempt at a simpler uniform was thwarted by getting Marie Antoinette to laugh at it. In theory the King was well guarded; in practice, he was not. A large part of his Maison ("household troops")-the red-coated horsemen of the Gendarmes, Chevau-Legers, and Mousquetaires (Musketeers)-had proved both too expensive and too inefficient and so had been suppressed, along with the foot Gardes de la Porte. There remained four companies of mounted Gardes du Corps; the Cent-Suisse ("Hundred Swiss"), who were more doorkeepers and ushers than soldiers; and the two double-strength infantry regiments of the Gardes Franpaises and Gardes Suisses.30 Impressive in their tall bearskin caps and heavily braided coats, royal blue for the first, traditional red for the second, they were the King's own visible authority in his good city of Paris. The Swiss were staunch and would prove it before all history, but the French were poor soldiers, poorly led. Their record was far from honorable: They had run at Dettingen in 1743; two years later they had stampeded at the first lash of English musketry at Fontenoy, and they had done no compensating deed of valor since. Long duty in Paris had corroded their discipline and their military character; obviously their officers found campaigning against the ladies of Paris and Versailles more congenial than keeping their hard bargains in proper spirit and order. After all, from 1777 on they had had to prove three centuries of noble ancestry to be accepted as officers in the French Guards. Its mere lieutenants were the equivalent of lieutenant colonels in line regiments; its captains equaled full colonels. Gentlemen of such exalted quality could hardly be expected to take an interest in drilling sweaty privates or tending to the details of company administration." Being only a collection of very individual regiments, the Royal Army was an unwieldy, clumsy organism in the field. Regiments were formed, usually by twos, into brigades; brigades were assigned to the "center," "wings," and "reserve." Formations above regimental level, however, were temporary. None had permanent staffs, headquarters, or commanders. In 1758 Clermont-more accurately, his experienced chief of staff, the Count of Mortaigne-formed his army into "divisions" of two types. The first, consisting of two brigades, would be commanded by marechaux de camp32 assisted by brigadiers; the second, comprising two of the first type, by lieutenant generals. Previously a pool of general officers had accompanied each army, living around its headquarters in ... veritable cities of luxury, with their attendants, purveyors, bakers, butchers, merchants of all sorts, theatrical troupes, comedians, comediennes and their chambermaids, and other young ladies who are not all washerwomen or vivandieres. . . . Clermont himself brought along a troupe of dancers, monkeys, and trained crows. . . . Life at headquarters went like a country fair.....enlisted men and officers alike used every pretext to visit that land of plenty.33 From this happy place the generals did duty by seniority or rotation; on a day of battle they might be total strangers to the brigades assigned to them. Clermont's generals, being mostly of the high court nobility who believed, it had been said, that God would think twice before damning people of their quality, did not care for Mortaigne's modern ideas, especially the notion that they should leave the bliss of army headquarters to camp near their troops and actually keep an eye on their training, discipline, and supply. But the new system did limp along, hampered by recalcitrant generals and the lack of brigade and divisional staffs. (Generals had aides-de-camp, but these might be their own adolescent sons, legitimate and otherwise; Rochambeau grumbled that such young men loved their horses and didn't like to tire them out by riding away from headquarters.) In march 1776 Saint-Germain officially established divisions based on Broglie's maneuvers. France was divided into military departments; the troops stationed in each department formed a "division" to be commanded by a lieutenant general, assisted by two marechaux de camp. In practice, these new divisions consisted of from three to seven brigades, usually a mixture of infantry and cavalry but occasionally one or the other only. Artillery apparently was not regularly assigned to them. The lieutenant generals were supposed to be on duty with their divisions for approximately three and a half months, the marechaux de camp for four. They were to review their troops on arriving and just before departing; whenever possible, they were to stage large-scale field exercises. In 1788 four divisions were concentrated at Metz for five days of such testing. Soldiers received the wartime issue of 24 ounces of bread a day (the peace ration was 20 ounces); because the weather was bad an ounce of rice a day also was issued gratis. The soldiers however had to pay for the half-pound of meat issued to them. (Unfortunately, the Jewish contractors who provided the meat knew nothing about butchering and made a mess of their issues.) The supply of forage and straw, which was also by contract, was inexpertly done; the troops stole both, and lieutenants took over the contract wagons and abused their drivers. An Austrian observer had curt comments on the general sloppiness of the cavalry, hussars excepted, but Broglie felt that a good deal had been accomplished, if only in jacking up a few hundred careless officers. The worst curse of the new divisions was the never ending court intrigue inspired by unemployed generals who wanted the higher pay and perquisites that went with active duty. Right in the middle of the summer field training, Broglie complained, these carpet knights might contrive to get busy divisional commanders relieved and themselves appointed in their places. The newcomers would then denounce everything their predecessors had done and insist on applying their own pet ideas. The troops would be thoroughly confused and the summer wasted. The legacy of the Royal Army to the Grande Armee is difficult to unravel. It left numbers of trained and experienced officers, especially the essential specialists-staff officers, artillerymen, and engineers-as well as numbers of junior officers and NCOs whom the Revolution would hammer into generals. Its basic administrative system endured in the Ministry of War as a foundation for Napoleon's reforms and extensions. And it remained an echo of former times of order, regularity, and discipline, which, seen through the military storm of the Revolution, looked far more solid than they really were but were an inspiration none the less. And in certain regiments-reorganized, amalgamated, and shattered though the Revolution left them-old traditions still endured. In 1808 grenadier sergeants of the 102d Ligne still carried the fourches (militarized version of a pitchfork) given to their ancestral regiment in memory of embattled peasants fighting in its ranks against invaders, many wars before. The army had been a Royal Army-the King's army and not the nation's. For all the intelligence and devotion of its soldier-reformers, three great weaknesses finally brought it down. Lacking a proper means of recruiting, it took what men it could get by persuasion, fraud, or even force. It filled its ranks with foreign deserters, many of them unreliable and even criminal. England and Prussia made iron regiments of such men; the French Army no longer could. The great gulf between its officers and men had become an abyss as op portunity for promotion out of the ranks grew thinner every year. The officers as a whole set no good example to their enlisted men, failed to take care of them, and depended on harsh punishment in place of leadership. There was little national spirit or patriotism in the army. The King was its center and its motivating force, but Louis XVI had no comprehension of that responsibility. Like a medieval ruler, he put his trust in his great nobles and gave no thought to his common soldiers. And so the Army came to be another hotbed of revolutionary urges, full of restless, mistreated, unhappy men-men with muskets. Revolutionary agitation, helped by wine, women, and possibly a little silver, ran riot through its regiments. The criminal and deserter elements, the long-thwarted sergeants were ready for trouble. Everything depended on the King. There were ancient traditions of victory, some hard-working and imaginative officers, some still-solid regiments; a traditional code of loyalty. Had Louis XVI, even in this last hour, shown some personal force and presence, some interest in the elementary well-being of his soldiers, he might well have rallied the army to him. Louis remained well-meaning, passive, and t