

Prologue I have shown the Emperor, Monsieur le general Pino, the report which you have sent me. It is essential that you write your reports more legibly, and especially show the date plainly; that which you have written is not clear; one cannot tell whether it is the 11th, the 21st, or the 22d. Besides the date, it is always necessary to show the hour at which you write, and the place. Berthier in Memoires de Prince Eugene' On October 12, 1806, French cavalry swept abruptly through the little Saxon city of Zeitz, some 25 miles south of Leipzig. Chasseurs a cheval in dark green, jaunty hussars in brown-and-blue, white-and-blue, and greenred-and-yellow, they were the leading squadrons of the cavalry screen that shrouded the swift northward advance of the Emperor Napoleon's Grande Armee. Close behind the leading brigade, his white uniform a dazzle of gold braid, lace, and galloons, rode Marshal Joachim Murat, the army's cavalry commander. Probably he halted impatiently in the Zietz market square while his staff interrogated the local postmaster, minister, and mayor as to the whereabouts of the Prussian and Saxon armies for which his troopers were probing. Somewhere in Zeitz, at any rate, an inconspicuous civilian sifted through the gawking townspeople, identified himself as a French spy, and reported that the principal enemy army lay to the west and south around Erfurt. A staff officer fished pen, paper, and portable inkwell from his saddlebags, settled himself at a chair and table outside a nearby beer hall, and quickly converted the spy's report into several copies of a message to the Emperor. Murat handed one copy to an aide-de-camp, who buckled it carefully into the sabretache dangling from his sword belt, then put his eager horse into a gallop southward. A second copy went to a scar- faced brigadier of Murat's guides. A horse was found for the spy, and spy and brigadier pounded off together in the aide's wake. Ten minutes later another aide spurred away with orders to follow a different road from that taken by his comrades. A final copy went into the staff records folder, with the name of each messenger and the date and hour of his departure. The roads southward were filled with the infantry of Marshal Jean Bernadotte's I Corps, pressing forward through a low haze of dust and the hanging smell of sweat, onions, and rank French tobacco. Along the principal road waited a string of small cavalry detachments serving as estafettes; when the messengers' horses tired, they replaced them with troopers' mounts at those relay stations-the distinctive fawn-amaranth-and-white uniforms of Murat's aides and guides were authority enough for such an exchange. On into the deepening night they galloped, to be halted at last outside the city of Gera by a challenge from vedettes of the 1st Hussar Regiment, temporarily serving as Napoleon's escort,' their faded sky-blue uniforms almost invisible in the gloom. Directed to a nearby chateau, they were passed in by sentinels from the grenadiers of the Imperial Guard, tall, fierce-eyed veterans in lofty bearskin caps. And so they came to a quiet room where beside a crackling fire their Emperor worked over his orders for the next day. Beside him was a stocky older officer in equally simple uniform, Marshal Louis-Alexandre Berthier, Napoleon's chief of staff. Around them the quiet officers of the advance echelon of the Imperial Headquarters came and went. Even while Napoleon minutely interrogated the spy and the aides-decamp, their messages went into the routine staff processing. In the next room, where the Emperor's situation map lay spread across a banquet table, lighted by candles at each corner, Chef d'Escadron Louis Bacler d'Albe of the Topographical Engineers shifted pins with heads of various colors to indicate the last reported positions of the enemy and Murat's cavalry screen. Each messenger was given a receipt showing the time and place he had made delivery. Other messengers came striding in, to report with a clash of spurs and scabbard: a rider from Marshal Pierre Augereau VII Corps, 20 miles to the southwest; another from Marshal Louis Davout's III Corps, 20 miles to the northwest. All had the same word-the enemy was massing to westward around Erfurt and Weimar. Finally, his questioning finished, the Emperor turned to Berthier and began a rush of rapid, harsh-accented orders, seemingly too swift for pen to follow. Unperturbed, Berthier made quick entries in a green-covered notebook. The dictation over, he turned to his waiting staff. Breaking down Napoleon's general operations order, Berthier drafted specific orders for each of the major units involved. The finished versions were presented to the Emperor for any necessary corrections and additions and his approval. That secured, additional copies were written out, aides and staff officers summoned to deliver them. Meanwhile, Berthier went ahead with supplementary orders to ensure that the supply trains and supporting units further to the rear were properly redirected to follow the Grande Armee's westward wheel. One such order, dealing with the resupply of shoes and overcoats, went through the rear echelon of Imperial Headquarters, two days of ordinary marching (approximately 60 miles) farther south, and then on south and west to the Grande Armee's administrative headquarters, where Intendent General Pierre Daru wrestled with a chaotic logistical situation. Daru started what stocks he had been able to collect forward in requisitioned wagons and dispatched another urgent appeal to the Ministry of the Administration of War. Reaching the fortress city of Strasbourg, his courier handed this message to the local director of the Telegraph Service, who sent it off along the line of semaphore signal towers to Paris. At the Ministry, somehow, things always went more slowly than they should, but eventually a bored commissaire des guerres took notice of the message and summoned an equally bored clerk. - (;\,.;;tel "'J-. The Swiss Guard, 1791