

CHAPTER I All the King's Horses and the King's Men: The Royal Army Over and above the general quarrel which all sons of Adam maintain with their lot here below, the grievances of the French soldiery reduce themselves to two. First, that their Officers are Aristocrats; secondly, that they cheat them of their Pay. Carlyle, The French Revolution' In the young days of Louis XIV it had been the world's finest army, the conquering graycoats of Conde and Turenne. "Corporal John" Churchill, Duke of Marlborough, had beaten it at Blenheim, Malplaquet, and elsewhere, breaking its reputation of invincibility but not its spirit. Once English politicians had, for reasons sufficient unto politicians, skragged Marlborough, the French came surging back to bring Louis XIV's endless wars to an acceptable conclusion. Under Louis XV, the French Army slumped into slow decay. At first there were victories such as Fontenoy, but this Louis was the original roi faineant, careless and contemptuous of everything except his own idle pleasures. Competent generals grew old and died. Their replacements too often were noblemen whose major ability was that of pleasing the Marquise de Pompadour (once Jeanne Poisson, and so known to disrespectful Englishmen as "Jane Fish") and/or her principal successor, Madame du Barry. For those females were Louis's mistresses: They ruled France and its armies utterly with a pout, a smile, a flutter of eyelashes, a twitch of the hips. The best of ministers and generals must give way to their whims or give place to their favorites.2 The decay spread and deepened. French armies and not a few French generals got an ill fame for greedy, brutal looting and for being, as one unknown Paris gutter poet suggested, "more hungry than bold." When the weather turned bad, they left the field armies in droves for the comforts of home. In early 1758 a General Louis de Bourbon-Conde, Comte Clermont, took command of the French army in western Germany. Clermont was an incompetent officer who doubled in brass as a roue abbot of the Benedictine Order, the sort of commander who would insist on finishing his lunch before taking measures to meet an enemy attack, but his report on the condition of his troops was exact enough: "[T]his poor army is in a miserable state ... companies less than twelve men strong; with hospitals which are dirty and [stink]; no medical orderlies, little linen, little broth. In short, we are in an inconceivable mess; no discipline, either among the officers or the men; hardly any officers with their [units]."' To no one's surprise, Louis's last war (the Seven Years' War, 1756-63) was an utter French defeat, which wrecked France's army, navy, and finances and stripped France of practically all of its colonies. To add to the bitterness, there had been brave men and brave deeds in those colonies: Louis Joseph, Marquis de Montcalm, in Canada, and half-Irish Thomas Arthur de Lally in India. But Montcalm died of wounds at Quebec; Lally was falsely accused of treason and judicially murdered in Paris. In the muddle of that war a small, overconfident French army, acting together with the so-called Army of the Holy Roman Empire' and commanded by one of Pompadour's pet generals, had been demolished at Rossbach in 1757 by a smaller Prussian force under Frederick the Great. As battles went, Rossbach was nothing extraordinary, and the French had known defeat before. But this was the first time they had experienced it at the hands of Prussian troops, and Frederick had accomplished it with casual, almost contemptuous, expertise. The shame of it went deep among thoughtful Frenchmen; for some French officers, already unhappy with the collapse of French prestige, it was the proverbial last straw. Once the Seven Years' War was finished, those officers-much like German officers after World War I-forced a series of studies, experiments, and reforms. First among them was Etienne Francois de Choiseul, an able soldier-diplomat who took over the War and Navy ministries during 176471. His greatest stroke was to take possession of the infantry and cavalry regiments and companies, converting them from their colonels' and captains' private little business enterprises into permanent military organizations, and making the royal government responsible for the provision of recruits, remounts, and [Link] suppressed a world of abuses, though possibly at the sacrifice of certain personal ties between the better aristocrat officers and their plebian soldiers. It also involved the establishment of a definite system of administration and accountability for military funds, and the introduction of regimental quartiers-maftres (quartermasters) to handle supplies and records. To those reforms Choiseul added a cascade of lesser improvements, including the designation of the marechaussee as a military police; the founding of the veterinary school at Alfort; and a reorganization of the militia. The next strong Minister of War was Claude Louis de SaintGermain, who backed Gribeauval's rearming of the artillery, organized the army medical services on a military basis, formed territorial divisions, stopped the sale of commissions, created ten provincial military schools, reduced the royal guards, and generally tightened the army's organization. Unfortunately, he also tried to introduce Prussian-style discipline, including corporal punishment-normally in the form of blows with the flat of a saber-for routine disciplinary problems.' That was thoroughly foreign to the French temperament and so much resented. Colonel Louis-Marie, Viscomte de Noailles, commanding the Regiment des Chasseurs a Cheval d'AI- sace, thought that before applying any such punishment he should find out for himself "what effect strokes with the flat of the sword may have on a strong, courageous, well-balanced man, and how far his obstinacy could bear this punishment without weakening."6 Accordingly, he asked a friend to so whack him. The friend complied, to the extent of one blow, which he felt was quite enough to administer, let alone receive. (The standard punishment for a minor offense was twenty-five blows across the back, well laid on before the assembled regiment.) Philippe-Henri, Marquis de Segur, who held the War Ministry from 1780 into 1787, strengthened the Corps of Artillery, organized the Army Staff Corps, and continued with the eradication of service abuses. His work was continued into 1789 by a "Council of War" of senior officers, which simplified the army's command system and worked on new regulations. There also were highly talented officer-scholars, such as the brothers Jean and Jean-Pierre du Teil, who taught that artillery must be employed in mass and coordinated with infantry. Napoleon was one of their prized lieutenantstudents. Pierre Bourcet achieved international distinction for his works on staff organization and functioning and on mountain warfare. Jacques, Comte de Guibert's Essai General de Tactique, which called for citizensoldiers and a war of maneuver, was a resounding sensation (though the author later retracted most of it). Guibert also pressed for the adoption of Prussian organization and tactics, having succumbed to the hallucination, then popular among European intellectuals, that Frederick was an enlightened and liberal ruler. In a more practical sense, Marshal Victor de Broglie-one of the very few French commanders to win some credit from the Seven Years' War-worked with his troops to make the French Army flexible, substituting skirmishers and small, handy columns for the former long, brittle lines of infantry, and individual "fire at will" for the former massed volleys. His trial maneuvers were carried out in a very modern fashion, with realistic situations, skeleton "enemy" forces, umpires, and comprehensive final critiques. The reformers' efforts showed some definite results: French artillerymen, engineers, and staff officers were widely admired. Embryonic infantry and cavalry divisions appeared. The French expeditionary force in the United States during our Revolutionary War proved efficient and well-administered. (The paperwork covering its embarkation was amazingly modern, down to duplicate company rosters.) Unfortunately, however, these soldier-reformers had come too late: Their best efforts merely plastered over the cracks in an army that, like the French nation, was collapsing from within. In the long run their work would not be wasted; Napoleon, his marshals, and the Grande Armee would profit richly from it. But for the present it was mostly hard work thrown away. Neither Louis XV nor Louis XVI really supported these efforts at military reform, the first being too idle-minded, the second lacking any interest or knowledge. In fact, they continually thwarted the process. Choiseul was cast from office because Louis XV preferred a cooperative Du Barry in his arms to a competent man in his War Ministry.' Segur's work was tripped up by Louis XVI's championing of a decree requiring that all officer candidates have four generations of noble ancestry and submit original documents to prove it, a move that deepened the already strong dissensions among French officers. Bourcet's insistence that candidates for the staff corps must pass examinations and undergo a probationary period was most unacceptable to the haute noblesse: Gilded high-born youth has always considered prestigious staff positions its natural perogative. Probably the majority of the senior officers felt threatened by these reforms and used their influence at court, through whatever vertical or horizontal advocates they might possess, to thwart them. Right up until the Revolution, Louis XVI had personal control of half of the officer appointments and promotions. Since he knew nothing of matters military but was easily influenced-especially by Marie Antoinette, his giddy-pated queen-military efficiency and the good of the service were seldom his principal considerations. Under all this cross-hauling was the fact that the French Army actually had two different, increasingly contradictory missions. In addition to defending the realm against all enemies, foreign and domestic, it was the sole livelihood of much of the French nobility, especially of the minor nobility, "poor, ignorant, and brave, whose only trade and sole resource was war."8 Things had gone downhill for the French nobility for more than a century. Louis XIV had grown up amid their rebellions; during their so-called Fronde outbreaks of 1648 to 1654, he and his mother had been forced to flee Paris. One of the greatest French nobles, Louis II, Prince of Conde, close kinsman to Louis, could find it honorable-within his conception of that term-to take service under the King of Spain and wage war against France. Not surprisingly, once in authority Louis XIV proceeded to break the French nobility utterly to his service. They not only learned to come to heel but also to lie down, roll over, and play dead on command, and to beg for every tidbit of royal favor. In return, he granted them the privilege of officering his armies and expended them freely in his unceasing wars. They served honestly by their lights. When finally his wars were done, most of them had only old wounds that ached in the chill and rain, estates ruined by neglect while they were away, and personal fortunes gutted so that they might stay on active duty even in those last days when the King could no longer pay their wages. A few had made fortunes from royal gifts, embezzlement, or discreet looting, usually in the form of exaggerated "contributions" levied on occupied territory. It was held that an army commander should see that everything "was done with order. No pillaging, but he should not quibble too much with his officers over their little profits."9 Military service represented a living of sorts for the minor nobility and gentry, a source of prestige and even wealth for the great families-some of which might be long on ance