

CHAPTER III Enter la Grande Armee! You have to have seen the steadfastness of one of the forces trained and led by Bonaparte ... seen them under fierce and unrelenting fireto get some sense of what can be accomplished by troops steeled by long experience in danger, in whom a proud record of victories has instilled the noble principle of placing the highest demands on themselves. As an idea alone it is unbelievable. Clausewitz, On War' The Emperor Napoleon was a thrifty man. His parents had been poor Corsican nobility; as a young officer he had endured a bare existence. He was habitually generous with his family, with people who had done him favors in his younger years, with good soldiers and an occasional obliging young lady, but he saved almost half of his pay as Emperor of the French and had definite ideas as to how long his underwear should last. In that economizing mood, in December 1809 he totaled up the cost of his army and found that it came to approximately three times his Empire's total revenues. Of course, most of its regiments were stationed in allied, vassal, or occupied countries, which fed, clothed, and paid them, at least in part, but the army still held a first mortgage on the French economy. Uniform allowances for 1811 were reduced. Between 1792 and 1804 the French Army had fluctuated between 320,000 and 800,000 men. From 1804 to 1814 the total armed forces (including the navy, Gendarmerie, National Guard, veterans, and disciplinary units) reached an average of more than a million. The French Army in its largest sense consisted of the Imperial Guard; the "Active Army" (infantry, cavalry, artillery, engineers, train and medical troops, and foreign regiments "in my pay"); the "Army of the Interior" (gendarmerie, veterans, departmental companies, the Garde de Paris, schools, coast artillery, and active National Guard units); and troops from vassal or allied states.' In addition there was the largely civilian Administration de l'Armee, which was responsible for the army's logistics. Napoleon managed his army through his Ministry of War. That longestablished institution had been thoroughly knocked around during the Revolution; it even had been abolished during 1794-95. When Napoleon took over in late 1799 it was moribund, unable to pay, feed, or care for the French armies and ignorant as to their strength and dispositions. Put in as Minister of War, Berthier worked at reestablishing the army's supply system and sent staff officers to the headquarters of the armies and the military divisions to locate troop units and count noses. He was soon detached to organize the Army of the Reserve and get it over the Alps into Italy. Carnot replaced him, but then was sent to the Rhine frontier to prod Moreau into action. General Jean-Gerard Lacuee took over as "interim" Minister and won Napoleon's praise for his ability, diligence, and strict honesty. The Marengo campaign ended, Berthier resumed his duties as Minister of War. One substantial problem was to reconstruct the officers' dtats de service (service records), which had collapsed into complete disorder during the past ten years of confusion and neglect. Another was to bring the semiindependent artillery and engineer bureaus under definite authority. The army's historical service was revived, though its work met unexpected difficulties.' Berthier also established a system of bimonthly reports from all French armies (to be accompanied by maps) showing the location and strength of all friendly and enemy forces in their areas. In 1802 Napoleon transferred part of the War Ministry's responsibilities to a newly created "Ministry of the Administration of War."4 The Ministry of War thereafter was responsible for officer procurement, promotions, and assignments; troop organization, training, and movements; weapons and ammunition; the infantry, cavalry, artillery, and engineers; and pay, pensions, and special allowances. The Inspecteurs aux Revues were its agents. The Administration of War handled rations, fuel, barracks, hospitals, clothing, remounts, transport, forage, and payments for billeting and related expenses. It supervised Administration personnel in general, including the medical services. Berthier left the War Ministry in 1807 to concentrate on his duties as Napoleon's major general (chief of staff). He had handled both responsibilities efficiently, but the load had become too much for one man. His replacement was Henri-Jacques-Guillaume Clarke, a true son of the Wild Geese.' Clarke's family had been highborn enough to win him entry to the Royal military schools, including the advanced Military School in Paris. He served as a topographical engineer and showed a taste and talent for staff work. By 1793 he was a general of brigade and briefly chief of staff to the Army of the Rhine, but then was caught in the widespread dismissals of officers of noble birth. The Directory brought him back in 1795 to head the Bureau Topographique, the repository of military maps and plans. He was sent to Italy in 1797, ostensibly to open negotiations with the Austrians, actually as the Directory's spy in Napoleon's headquarters. He quickly fell under Napoleon's influence, serving as Napoleon's confidential secretary during 1800-1804 and as military governor of Berlin in 1806. Napoleon would also make him Count of Hunebourg, then Duke of Feltre. He was a hard worker, methodical and painstaking; also, he was financially honest and a foe of swindlers and looters. Unfortunately, though not without intelligence and common sense, he was not military-minded-he spent a lifetime as an army officer without becoming a soldier. He had charm and was elaborately courteous and flattering to his equals and superiors. Lavalette described him as "possessing all the suppleness of a man who wished to succeed in life" and also "that species of conduct you expect from an Irishman."' Subordinates found him conceited, rough-spoken, and often harsh. Frenchmen were baffled by his fascination with his own genealogy and his researches to prove himself a descendant of the Plantagenets.' He also was much more willing to commission a wet-behind-the-ears sprig of the nobility than a deserving enlisted man. His attempt to squeeze Amiel out of the 27th Chasseurs a Cheval to make room for a useless relative caused an uproar. What was worse, he was easily confused and stampeded. Clarke labored earnestly, but by 1812 it was evident that the War Ministry's still-growing responsibilities were overwhelming him. By 1814 his conduct was unsettling-so inefficient as to suggest treason. Napoleon wrote him somberly on February 24: "You answer me with nothings. I don't know how to cure fear; but a frightened man does nothing but stupid things."' After Napoleon abdicated, Clarke cast himself into the Bourbons' arms and there nestled happily. Command and control of troop units was exercised through both army commanders and the commanders of the military divisions. The military divisions, first organized in 1791, were territorial commands, roughly equivalent to the French departments. At the Empire's height there were thirty-two of them, each commanded by a general-usually a reliable officer, but too old or disabled for the hardships of active field service. Occasionally it would be a temporary assignment for an officer recovering from wounds or illness. These generals were responsible for all troops and fortresses within their divisions and for the preservation of law and order if the situation got beyond the control of the civil authorities. They were assisted by a small staff, including a commissaire-ordonnateur. Regiments assigned to the armies were organized into our familiar system of brigades, divisions, and corps. (Put aside the weapons and vehicles modern technology has provided, and there is really little difference between Napoleonic organizations and those of today.) A brigade normally consisted of two or more regiments;' a division of two or more brigades. Before 1800 armies were made up of separate divisions, usually temporarily as signed to ad hoc groupings designated "left wing," "center," "right wing," and sometimes "reserve" or "advance guard." The Revolutionary division had been a force of all arms (infantry, cavalry, artillery). Their sizes varied greatly: In 1796 Massena's division of the Army of Italy numbered approximately 13,000 men, but that was exceptional, just as Massena was an exceptional general. In 1800 General Joseph Pully's division in Macdonald's sideshow Army of the Grisons had only 3,035 men: a battalion of light infantry; two demi-brigades of line infantry; a company each of hussars, artillery, and engineers; and a detail of five gendarmes to keep the other 3,030 in line. In 1800 both Napoleon and Moreau began combining their divisions into corps d'armee (army corps)" with their own permanent staffs. Napoleon took the cavalry from his infantry divisions, assigning a minimum of it to the corps and concentrating most of it in a Cavalry Reserve, which he kept under his direct control. His corps therefore were infantry/ artillery forces with just enough light cavalry for scouting and security missions. A typical 1805-7 corps (Davout's III Corps at Auerstadt, October 18, 1806) had three infantry divisions, with a total of twelve line and one light infantry regiments; a cavalry brigade of three regiments of chasseurs a cheval; and fortysix guns, of which twenty-nine were in the infantry divisions and seventeen in the corps artillery. Its total strength was 28,874 infantry and 1,426 cavalry, plus its artillerymen. (Normally a corps also had several companies of engineers and pontoniers. Later, supply train and ambulance companies were added.) On the march such a corps took up approximately 12 miles of road space, the equivalent of a short day's march. Whenever the road net permitted, it moved in three or four columns to allow more rapid maneuver and deployment. It could operate independently, seeking, accepting, or avoiding combat as its commander chose. If attacked by superior forces, it was capable of holding its own-like Soult at Eylau and Lannes at Friedland-until other corps could close in to support it. The marshals who commanded the Grande Armee's corps were a prideful lot and not always a devoted band of brothers, but they seldom failed each other in combat, however stiff their personal relations might be. (It is certain that the virulence of their disputes has been considerably exaggerated by various authors with books to peddle.) The size of French regiments, divisions, and corps grew steadily into 1813. By 1811 the typical French infantry division being readied for the invasion of Russia numbered some 17,000 to 18,000 men, and its personnel were more heterogeneous than in 1805-6. The 3d Division of Oudinot's II Corps, admittedly an extreme example, had the 123d Ligne Infantry Regiment (mostly Dutch), the four Swiss regiments, the 3d Provisional Croat Infantry Regiment-and a howling need for bilingual officers. Davout's corps had a strength of 69,500, three times as many men as he had commanded in 1806. The proportion of artillery to infantry and cavalry likewise increased. In his early campaigns Napoleon, in part because of a shortage of horses, seldom could bring more than two guns per 1,000 men into action. In 1809 it was 3.87 per 1,000 at Wagram, without counting the heavy fortress artillery emplaced on Lobau Island to cover his left rear; at Borodino in 1812 he had 4.5 guns. Thereafter the proportion declined; at Leipzig and Waterloo there were approximately 3.5 guns per thousand men. The birth of the Grande Armee may be set at May 18, 1803, when England repudiated the Treaty of Amiens (signed March 27, 1802) and declared war on France, following the ancient and very profitable English procedure of authorizing its warships to seize French merchant vessels before issuing the formal declaration. After the Treaty of Luneville with Austr