 the number and condition of units actually serving. Returns came in promptly from the field armies, where the commanders still hoped for food and shoes, but the interior of France was a bucket of eels. The total was approximately 209 ligne19 and 42 legere demi-brigades. However losses from action, sickness (much of it brought on by hunger and lack of clothing), and desertion had reduced many demi-brigades from their original 2,400 officers and men to around 300; some had only 50. For all the soldiers' bravery and officers' devotion, there was a growing war weariness. Divisions that were shifted from one front to another might lose half or even two-thirds of their men en route, especially if their march took them near the soldiers' home districts. The Directory accordingly ordered a second amalgamation in early 1796 to consolidate their dwindling forces: Line infantry was to be reduced to 110 demi-brigades, light infantry to 30. The strength of each battalion was to be increased to 1,067 officers and men. That compression left some 15,000 officers and large numbers of NCOs surplus; these were either sent home or formed into special auxiliary companies to be drawn on to replace casualties. The demi-brigades' numerical designations were to be determined by lot. Also, the various existing legions, free companies, and separate volunteer battalions were embodied into the Regular units. The demibrigade cannon companies were reduced to two or three guns, but the light infantry finally got theirs. (All would be abolished in January 1798.) Each demi-brigade was given an extra depot company. This drastic reorganization hurt the morale of many demi-brigades, which had begun to develop their own identities and unit pride. Many wellliked officers had to be transferred. As an example, in the first amalgamation Suchet's Volunteer battalion had been joined with one Regular and another Volunteer battalion to produce the 211th Demi-Brigade. In 1796 the 211th was combined with other units to form the soon-to-be-famous 18th Demi-Brigade of line infantry-which represented the survivors of two Regular and fourteen Volunteer battalions. The army continued to dwindle. Though Carnot somehow found weapons and ammunition, fewer and fewer supplies were available. The leading figure of the Directory, Paul Francis Barras, was utterly corrupt, intent only on prolonging his pleasurable existence until he could devise some method of selling out with profit and safety. Carnot was forced into exile in 1797 because of his growing opposition to the aimless drifting of French policy and the Directory's need to wage war to support itself by plundering neighboring countries. The nation was in constant internal disorder; taxes were not collected, conscription faltered, and there were too few replacements to keep the combat units near full strength. Accordingly, in 1798 the demi-brigades were told to transfer the officers and men of their 3d battalions into the first two; thereafter the 3d battalions' cadres would be sent back to their depots to replace the companies there. As a possible solution, Jourdan, then sitting as a member of the Council of Five Hundred (the lower house of the French legislature), sponsored a permanent system of conscription to replace the emergency decree of 1793. Finally approved in September 1798, it declared that all Frenchmen were soldiers and responsible for the national defense. Whenever la Patrie was in danger, all of them-retired veterans included-might be required to serve. In peacetime the French Army would be raised by voluntary enlistment, conscription being applied only if there were not enough volunteers. There would be no bounties for first enlistments. Service would be for four years in time of peace, for the duration during war. Reenlistments would be for two-year hitches, the soldier's pay being increased each time he reenlisted. The conscription proper covered all men twenty to twenty-five, with the customary exemptions for health, dependents, civil service employment, or liability for naval service under the inscrits maritimes. Originally no substitutes were permitted, but political pressure soon forced the repeal of that provision. The local mayors maintained lists of the men subject to conscription in their respective cantons, and those lists were centralized by the departments. The departments were supposed to gather in their required number of conscripts, who would then be picked up by officers from the demi-brigades to which they were assigned. Military "Councils of Recruitment" were set up to deal with appeals for exemptions. On paper, this was an excellent, clear-cut law. In practice it was a failure, being too contrary to the current political situation. The average mayor was at least as crooked as a goat's hind leg, and the departmental prefect was probably no better. Parts of western and southern France were in semirebellion. The tales told by deserters and discharged veterans made military service exceedingly unattractive. Usually fewer than half the conscripts levied reported for duty. One of those who did was the sturdy half- orphan Jean Roch Coignet. He had worked for a horse dealer and was an expert rider; naturally, he hoped to be a hussar. Naturally, they put him in the infantry. Reaching Fontainebleau, he was received by indifferent officers and quartered in rundown barracks. There was no discipline; his battalion mutinied, and half went home. On every decadi ("tenth day," the Revolutionary calendar's replacement for Sunday) there was a Revolutionary fete, the soldiers singing the Chan! du Depart while their officers brandished their sabers with much shouting of "Vive la Republique!" In the evening people danced around the local "tree of liberty" and chanted, "Hang the aristocrats on the lamp post." All that did not impress Coignet. On first going into action at Montebello in 1800, he made the sign of the cross with his first cartridge. (He thereafter captured an Austrian gun single-handed; Berthier noted the feat, wrote down Coignet's name and outfit, and-better still-gave him some bread.) The officers of these French armies retained all the vices and the cupidity of the Royal Army. Officiers de fortune and former enlisted men naturally imitated the habits of their former noble superiors. Volunteer officers frequently had their fortunes to make and few scruples about how they did it. The biggest difference between them and the Royal Army's officers was that their manners were decidedly less polished. The fact that they usually had to find money, food, clothing, and transportation for their troops, sometimes even in France, by requisition put temptation continuously in their way; service in foreign countries offered opportunities to collect souvenirs. Such temptations were sharpened by their own raggedness and hunger. Their pay was in paper assignats, which had depreciated 99 percent by 1795-96. An officer who received 500 francs in pay would find that bread (when available) cost 10 francs a loaf; a cup of coffee was 20 francs, a horse 20,000. Colonels, lieutenant colonels, and majors often marched on foot, carrying their few possessions in packs. In the armies of Italie and Alpes, mounted officers could find no forage for their horses. Tobacco was almost priceless. Most of them, like the equally neglected officers of our Continental Army, continued to do their duty as best they could and suffered accordingly, not always quietly. The officiers de fortune and promoted NCOs among them were invaluable in forming the new army and in holding it together.20 But the task exhausted many of them, leaving them fit only for rear area assignments or retirement. The more poorly educated frequently proved unfit for promotion beyond captain or even lieutenant; many of them would remain such in the Grande Armee-brave, loyal, a bit threadbare, grumbling, and following. The generals who came up out of this officers corps were an astonishing variety. Those who survived to march with the Grande Armee would have their days in history. The others-killed, executed, or broken for incompetence-were an even gaudier lot. There was Jean Baptiste Kleber, a German from Lorraine, son of the Strasbourg upper middle-class, educated in the Munich military school, for some ten years an officer in the Austrian Army, later a successful architect. A handsome 6-foot lion of a man, he understood war; was splendidly courageous; loved glory, pomp, and ceremony, and was clean-handed, clement to the conquered, and beloved by his soldiers. Napoleon would later say that there was no sight as fine as Kleber going into battle, like the war god Mars in uniform. Always discontented and jealous of his superiors, he nevertheless repeatedly refused the command of an army. When assigned a position he disliked, his health would suddenly fail. Probably this was psychosomatic illness, but the Revolutionary armies had no psychiatrists. (They had not yet been invented. Had any been available, the Paris politicians would have guillotined them in selfdefense!) Napoleon left Kleber in command in Egypt, where he was assassinated in 1800. Kleber's friend Francois Marceau, the "boy general," got his first star in 1793 at the age of twenty-two (he looked even younger). A gentle, utterly gallant boy, excitable and chivalrous, he delighted in wearing a personally designed green hussar-style uniform that made him a conspicuous target among his infantrymen, and carried his fiancee's miniature on a chain about his neck. He was mortally wounded while fighting a masterly rearguard action in 1796. The Austrian commander, the Archduke Charles, sent his own surgeons in a vain effort to save Marceau's life. Later, the volleys the French fired over Marceau's grave were echoed by Austrian cannon adding their salute. A grimmer figure was Louis-Lazare Hoche, whom Napoleon acknowledged "a true man of war." Son of a groom in the King's stables, and assistant groom himself when he was tall enough, he enlisted in the French Guard in 1784. Like many of the Guard, he became an ardent revolutionist; unlike his comrades, he studied the military art. On the dissolution of the French Guard he passed to the Regulars; a captain in 1792, he was a general a year later. Tall, thin, straight, nervous, and high-chinned, his face scarred by a saber cut, he had a commanding presence and great courage. Some obscure illness sapped his strength, but he never spared himself. Originally coarse and dissolute, he steadily improved in character and knowledge. Though quick to denounce personal enemies as traitors, he showed rare common sense and decency in Vendee and was still developing when he died suddenly in 1797. Louis Charles Desaix (Des Aix before the Revolution) was one more poor nobleman's son. Very intelligent and well educated, he lived only for war and glory, constantly improving his skills, ready to learn from both defeat and friendly advice. He was pure in speech and life, scrupulous in money matters, humane, conscientious, and shy. Marmont remembered that his politeness came from the heart, that his bravery was a natural thing without display, and that he was strict with himself and an example to others. Per sonal hardship meant nothing to him, personal appearance far less. He usually wore an old blue coat that he had rather outgrown and could sleep happily among his soldiers wrapped in his ragged cloak. He might even forget to wear his sword. Finding himself thus weaponless amid a night bayonet fight in a vineyard, he pulled up a vine stake and laid about him as if it had been an enchanted blade. He had no social graces but noticed everything about him and had a wry humor. Lavalette left an affectionate description of him: Tall and dark-skinned, with fiery black eyes, jet-black hair, and flashing teeth, he had an odd face-his nose "seemed to descend from the top of his forehead.s21 Except in action, he was reserved and even melancholy; beh