ia (February 9, 1801) much of the French Army had been put on peace footing. Many of the Administration's personnel, including a good many medical officers, had been discharged. Now came a time of rapid, intensive rebuilding. In June 1803 the Armee des Cotes de 1'Ocean was activated along the English Channel in six big camps centered on (from west to east) Brest, Montreuil, Boulogne, St. Omer, Bruges, and Utrecht. The troops concentrated there were at first referred to collectively as "the Camp of Brest," etc., and later as "corps";" in 1805 they received numerical designations. The actual area covered by each corps was fairly extensive. Davout's III Corps, with headquarters at Bruges, had troops in Dunkirk, Ostend, and Walcheren Island. (Naturally, they suffered considerably from the coastal fevers in spite of Davout's continual care.) The corps commanders trained their men intensely and continuously, with much emphasis on individual marksmanship and swift maneuver, as well as amphibious operations for the projected invasion of England. To keep the troops interested there were occasional opportunities to squabble with English raiding parties and offshore patrols. Augereau, who had the VII Corps at Brest, did a good deal of his commanding from the comfort of his newly purchased chateau at Houssaye-en- Brie, Marbot and his other aides-de-camp galloping back and forth with his orders. Much of that galloping was caused by General of Brigade Jean Sarrazin, who had ability but no honesty and was somewhat off in the head; avoided by the other generals of VII Corps, he wrote Napoleon denouncing all of them-and Augereau to boot-as traitors. Napoleon sent the letter to Augereau. Augereau sent Marbot off franc etrier12 twice to get the matter straightened out. (Sarrazin later deserted to the English, committed bigamy, and died in utter misery.) In December 1804 the Armee des Cotes de I'Ocean generally applauded when Napoleon crowned himself Emperor of the French. No one refused the subsequent oath: "I swear obedience to the Constitution of the Empire and fidelity to the Emperor.s13 Eighteen generals of division became "Marshals of the Empire." The training continued, but by mid-1805 it was plain that even if by some miracle the French Navy did win temporary control of the English Channel, Napoleon would be unable to take advantage of it. Austrian armies were massing along their western frontiers, and Russians were reported on the way to join them. In August the Armde des Cotes de 1'Ocean gave birth to the Grande Armee. The choice of names was deliberate: French armies had always been named after the area in which they served; Grande Armee would offer no clue as to Napoleon's plan of operations; also, there was an imperially sonorous ring to it. There were some 150,000 men moving according to Berthier's scheduling in six corps and the Cavalry Reserve: twenty divisions of infantry, thirteen of cavalry, the Imperial Guard, artillery, engineers, and trains. Behind it a greatly diminished Armee des Cotes (approximately 30,000 under Brune) remained to watch the Channel. Below the Alps, Massena had the Armee d'Italie, 50,000 strong, with 18,600 more in a detached corps under St. Cyr farther south to watch Naples. And there were also garrisons in the frontier fortresses and seaports, and more troops mustering in the regimental depots. This Grande Armee of 1805 had had close to three years of training and discipline. Only one-third of its soldiers (including practically all of the officers and NCOs) were veterans of at least six years' service, but more than half of the cavalrymen and 43 percent of the infantry had seen some combat. Possibly one soldier in thirty was a veteran of the Royal Army and retained its traditions of exact discipline and precision in the details of the service. A larger proportion were from the volunteers of 1792-94, mostly solid, alert men of thirty- to thity-six years of age with something of the old Republican enthusiasm. The most numerous had been the conscripts called up in 1799-1800, who had known fewer hardships and victories such as Marengo and Hohenlinden. The rest were new soldiers, but thoroughly drilled and indoctrinated. Many junior officers were too old and poorly educated, often careless about routine duties, yet of proven bravery. Also, there was a serious shortage of horses for the cavalry and artillery. The Grande Armee of 1806 had become more professional and less enthusiastic. In the infantry, one soldier out of three had had less than a year's service yet had learned rapidly from their veteran comrades and would serve as bravely. Training had fallen off during the winter of 1805-6, since the troops had been widely distributed across southern Germany to prevent undue burdens on the allied German states. On the Rhine frontier Marshal Kellermann was making certain that new replacements moving eastward were taught how to shoot. As Prussia was overrun, military government was established in the occupied territory from the Rhine east to the Elbe. A general, with a company each of infantry and dismounted cavalry and a few gendarmes, was placed in charge of each of its principalities. They saw to the maintenance of law and order, the upkeep of the roads, and the collection of contributions and reported daily to Berthier on military and police matters. To keep them from temptation, the army's inspectors generals checked on the generals' activities and forwarded their own reports. Though the hardships of campaigning in Poland wore the Grande Armee almost to exhaustion and despair during late 1806 and early 1807, it still fought with veteran skill and toughness. Prolonged rest in winter quarters fully restored its military qualities and it entered the 1807 campaign rested, trained, and completely supplied and equipped. Napoleon had some 324,000 troops in Prussia and Poland, possibly a third of them Confederation of the Rhine and Polish troops. (That figure included 20,000 men in the hospitals, but not the estimated 25,000 missing, absent without leave, or otherwise unaccounted for.) In France there were approximately 150,000 more. There General Delaborde was training new conscripts at his camp at Pontivy in field operations with frequent changes of bivouacs, small maneuvers, and combined infantry/artillery tactics. Cavalrymen were taught mounted marksmanship. Eugene had 70,000 men in Italy, and Marmont 10,000 in Dalmatia. There were 15,000 more French and roughly twice as many Dutch in Holland, and 40,000 more in Naples. The first invasion of Spain in 1808 led to the formation of a large number of provisional regiments, mostly from conscripts. In April 1808 Napoleon described them as "all big boys of twenty years, with whom I am satisfied."" Marbot, who had a closer look at them, wrote that they didn't impress him, and he very much doubted that they impressed the Spaniards. They lacked experienced NCOs, and their officers were often either too young or too old. Grouchy remarked that you had to begin by training the officers and making them do their duty. The defeat of this invasion made it plain that veteran troops were needed in Spain. Consequently the Grande Armee was broken up. Davout was left with an "Army of the Rhine" (90,000) in control of Germany.15 Bernadotte was given a small (12,000) corps to guard the north German coast. The approximately 100,000 troops that went from the Grande Armee into Spain were veterans, but inferior to those of 1807. Victor's and Ney's corps had lost much of their training and discipline during a year of occupation duty in Germany. There was a considerable proportion of foreign troopsDutch, Poles, Germans, Italians, and Neapolitans-with attendant language difficulties. Prolonged service in Spain wore at French morale; some of the senior officers became too interested in getting rich. Back in the interior provinces they went after the guerrillas only by fits and starts, when intelligent administration and energetic campaigning-as Suchet demonstrated-could have cleared up the situation. Provisional units were gradually converted into regular regiments. At the same time, because counter-guerrilla warfare required small, flexible col umns, the French sometimes went back to the Revolutionary divisions of all arms. Thus one division of Lefebvre's IV Corps in 1808 had a 1st Brigade consisting of a Baden infantry regiment, a Nassau light infantry regiment, and a Baden artillery company; a 2d Brigade of two battalions of Dutch infantry, the Dutch 3d Hussar Regiment, a company each of Dutch horse artillery and engineers; and a 3d Brigade of the Hessian Infantry Regiment Erbprinz, a Frankfort battalion, a provisional battalion from the Garde de Paris, and a half-company of Hessian artillery. The division and the 3d Brigade were commanded by Frenchmen; a Baden colonel led the 1st Brigade, and a Dutch general the 2d. Of the troops sent into Spain from the Grande Armee in 1808, some were recalled for cadres or for replacements for the Guard; others, such as the Polish regiments, were brought back for the invasion of Russia. Except for the dead, the disabled, and deserters, the rest remained until the French were driven out in 1813-14. Napoleon had saddled himself with a two-front war, which increasingly had him borrowing from Peter to pay Paul-and finally picking Paul's pocket to give Peter a little something on account. The effects were felt almost immediately with the Austrian invasion of Bavaria and Italy in April 1809. The army that Napoleon improvised to meet it-Davout's veterans, troops from the Confederation of the Rhine (many of them now also veterans), and new conscripts-was not the Grande Armee of 1805-7. Possibly that was why Napoleon named it "The Army of Germany" instead. In France some infantry regimental depots had numbers of trained and equipped men on hand, others few or none. Napoleon assigned those replacements as they were needed, either to their own regiments or elsewhere. (Their destination was kept secret from the depot officers so that they would not be tempted to scamp their final instruction and issue them worn-out equipment.) If they were assigned to another regiment, they changed their buttons (stamped with the regimental number) after they joined it. Available chasseurs a cheval also were assigned where needed, though some thought had to be given to sending them to regiments with the same facing color. As for the hussars, the different regimental uniforms made them awkward to mix. Consequently the surplus troopers from the depots were organized as squadrons of guides and attached to the Army of Germany's corps for guard, courier, and escort duty, thus relieving the light cavalry regiments from their wasting service. The new 5th battalions all infantry regiments were then forming were put into provisional demibri- gades of two to four battalions each and used for garrison duty along the Rhine frontier and coast defense. (Later, some were involved in Junot's and Jerome's rear-area flubbings against Austrian raiders.) The military schools and the retired lists were stripped to provide officers. In this campaign's last great battle at Wagram, the Army of Italy fought beside the Army of Germany after a march through the Styrian Alps and Hungary to the Danube. During the armistice afterward, Napoleon got his new soldiers trained, equipped, and completely organized, making free use of any available Austrian resources. It was an excellent army, but toughminded Thomas Robert Bugeaud took note of certain developing weaknesses. Its "old soldiers" of 1805 and 1806 had actually been in their late twenties and early thirties, aged more by experience than actual years. The smaller armies of that time had permitted more attention to the quality of their selection and training. Now, with a two-front war, the stress was on quantity. Many old soldiers, encouraged to reenlist, were becoming too old; the new conscripts, call