 "The public buildings shall be turned into barracks....All saddle horses shall be seized for the cavalry; all draft horses not employed in cultivation will draw the artillery and supply wagons."" Application of this decree, however, was left to the departments. Some applied it honestly with few exemptions and no substitutes; in others, it was monkey business as usual. The general quality of the new soldiers (termed requisitionnaires) brought in by this levy was excellent, representing Frenchmen of all social levels. Men from the upper and educated classes came all the more willingly because of the outbreak of the well-named Reign of Terror, in which the extreme Jacobins led by Maximilien Robespierre proceeded on the principle propounded by one of their agents, Representative of the People Jean-Baptiste Carrier: "We will make a cemetery of France rather than not regenerate it in our own fashion."" It was better to die honorably on the frontier than stay home and be hunted down by Robespierre's agents on some trumped- up accusation of treason. To watch over the loyalty of its troops, the Ministry of War sent an average of three commissaires du conseil executif to every army to see to the political indoctrination of the troops and keep a special eye out for officers who did not display a wholehearted, loudmouthed adoration of liberty, fraternity, and equality. They used newspapers, bulletins, songs, and plays to inculcate revolutionary zeal. To detect the lack of it they established nets of undercover agents, whom the troops considered spies. To reinforce the commissaires, the National Convention dispatched its "Representatives of the People on Mission," selected from among their own members, to visit the armies and departements. Half of them were changed every month. Even members of the Committee of Public Safety, such as Carnot, served as Representatives at various times." Moreover, local Jacobin clubs and similar popular societies regularly spied for the Representatives and might be given the authority to arrest or suspend officers suspected of misbehavior. The power of the commissaires was awesome; that of the Representatives was absolute. As one of them proclaimed: "I know neither Generals nor special powers. As to the Minister [of War] he is like a dog on a race track. I alone should command here and I shall be obeyed.s14 Another, finding the Army of the Eastern Pyrenees insufficiently sans-culotte, summoned a hundred Jacobin "Civic Apostles" from Paris to aid him in evangelizing it. They were distributed through staffs and units and went to work preaching insubordination and other sans-culotte virtues. One of the most dreaded Representatives, Louis Saint-Just, was in his twenties, slim, handsome, and merciless. He carried his head high and proudly, one contemporary noted, "like Saint Sacrement" (the monstrance displayed during mass), had a captain of artillery executed in the trenches before Charleroi in 1794 for what he considered unnecessary delay in getting a battery into position, and stripped Strasbourg of shoes, shirts, and cloaks for the troops-but left most of that requisitioned material to rot in storage instead of issuing it. When his turn came to receive a "republican shave," he was not brave. The terror these Representatives inspired in civilian and soldier alike is often credited with saving France. Certainly they could get things moving, force generals to take action, enforce discipline among the soldiers, and secure supplies. But very few of them knew anything about armies or war; though some showed courage in action, most carefully kept out of danger. The operations they urged frequently were asinine; the generals they relieved or sent to the guillotine often had been better than the sans- culottes brought in to replace them. The Representatives squabbled among themselves and looted for themselves. As to the claim that terror spurred the army on, the truth probably is that it rattled as many commanders as it inspired. One of the worst features of this system of supervision, espionage, and bullying was the internal friction it created among the officers. Probably this was intentional, to break down any cohesion among them. Enlisted men were encouraged to denounce their officers as traitors or incompetents, the officers to denounce one another. Such denunciations often meant death or imprisonment, with little chance for the accused to defend himself. If you wanted your commanding officer out of the way so that you could take over his position, you denounced him; if your superior had you under arrest for cowardice, incompetence, or financial irregularities, you denounced him as an aristocrat and persecutor of virtuous patriots. On occasion one of the more conscientious Representatives might really investigate the case and actually see justice done. But Napoleon, Kellermann, and dozens of other loyal and efficient officers suffered undeserved imprisonment and were lucky to escape execution. One odd case was that of Captain Senot. Denounced as an aristocrat, he was stripped of his commission and put into the ranks. He would emerge in 1800 as tambour-major of the grenadiers of the Old Guard, famous for his bravery and tall elegance. Generally, it was a dirty business. In August 1793 General Jean Nicolas Houchard was required to take command of l'Armee du Nord (Army of the North). Very brave, wry-mouthed from an old wound, Houchard had been an officier de fortune and very happy as a captain of dragoons before the Revolution and his courage brought him promotion. He knew himself to be incapable of commanding an army but was given no choice. His predecessor, General Custine, was being tried, with the guillotine a certain ending, for treason and assorted sins-his real crime being that he had been popular with his troops. Houchard felt his own head loose on his shoulders. On his first day with Nord he discovered that all his staff had been put under arrest and all headquarters records sent to Paris-a Representative with Nord had considered the headquarters security insufficient. The same Representative also ordered a General Jacques O'Moran arrested because of a report that he had refused to drink to the health of a Jacobin leader. (O'Moran was guillotined.) Nonetheless, in spite of dubious generals and shaky troops, Houchard clubbed out a victory over the Austrians and forced an English army to lift its siege of Dunkirk. His own army being thoroughly disorganized, Houchard did not pursue. He was therefore arrested, charged with cowardice and treason, and sent to "look through the little window."" Between May 1793 and July 1794 twenty generals were executed; two or three may have deserved their fate. Though some of the Representatives (even Saint-Just on one or two occasions) sustained competent generals, their support was not to be trusted. Above all, the Paris politicians feared any general who might gain the affection of his troops or popular approval and so be able to oppose them. The newspapers they distributed to the army and the speeches they made to the troops emphasized that the soldiers' loyalty must be to the central government, that they must regard their officers-especially their generals-as potential traitors and be ready to denounce them on the least suspicion. One natural result of this treatment was that many competent officers attempted to avoid promotion, claiming insufficient experience, extreme youth, ill health, or any other plausible excuse. Long-nosed Jean Louis Reynier refused promotion to general in June 1794 while the Terror still raged across France and through its armies on the grounds of his extreme youth (he was only twenty-three); seven months later-the Terror, Robespierre, and Saint-Just being finished-he accepted a general's stars. (Napoleon remarked that one aged quickly on the battlefield.) Macdonald and others were ordered to accept promotion; as one Minister of War explained, officers could not be forced to become generals, but it would be a lot healthier for them at that moment if they did! Most officers also were careful to collect "certificates of civisme" which vouched for their patriotism, good conduct, competence, and revolutionary zeal. Such letters of commendation might be issued by Representatives, commissaires, local societies, or commanding officers. They were not a certain protection, but they usually sufficed. Nothing was too small to be noted: At Toulon in 1794, one Commissaire Pille got into a first-class frenzy when he discovered that enlisted men were playing piquet with old-fashioned cards that had-the horror of it!-kings, queens, and valets (jacks) instead of the new symbols of sans-culotte virtue. The whole bloody business is almost impossible to explain out of American experience. Yet in 1777 roly-poly John Adams of Massachusetts, devoted patriot and military idiot, wanted to shoot at least one American general for the loss of Fort Ticonderoga, though admitting that he himself was "too brittle ware" to risk any danger.16 The men who sat and disputed in the National Convention and the Committee of Public Safety were Frenchmen and mostly French politicians. If their revolution failed, they could expect to be hanged. They thus had risked their lives, their fortunes, and whatever degree of personal honor they might possess. Also, they were mostly very much afraid and had excellent reason for it, working as they did in constant danger from each other and from the Paris mob. Sensible, moderate behavior was hardly to be expected from them. While the army in general seemed cowed by commissaires and Representatives, there were increasing cases of defiance. As might be expected, cavalry regiments took the lead. They had not been amalgamated; volunteers had come into them only as replacements. In 1793 the 6th Chasseurs a Cheval faced down Representatives who wanted to snatch their colonel, Jean-Joseph Ange d'Hautpoul-a sprig of poverty-struck Gascon noblesse, proud, self-confident, pretentious, but good-hearted and the bravest man among them-as an aristocrat and therefore instinctively a traitor. "No d'Hautpoul, no 6th Chasseurs" ! 17 Next year the austere Carabiniers a Cheval gave another set of Representatives similar defiance. An even flatter challenge came when three Representatives (including Joseph Fouche, one of the most reptilian killers of the lot) sent Colonel Beaumont de la Boni- niere to the guillotine. Beaumont was definitely a noble, having been trained as one of the late Louis XVI's pages. Disregarding all that, his dragoons plucked him out of the executioners' hands-and Fouche and his colleagues crawled before them. Both d'Hautpoul and Beaumont were soon generals. Such episodes left the Representatives in the awkward position of asking support or even protection from the generals they had been harassing, much to the improvement of their manners. The most impudent act was that of the mulatto General Thomas Alexandre Dumas18 with the Armee des Alpes: Rather than see some civilians executed for attempting to save their village church bells from being melted down for cannon, he had the guillo tine accompanying Alpes burned, explaining that he was cold and needed firewood. Aside from bringing an end to the Terror, Robespierre's fall gave the army little help. Increasingly, it was neither fed, paid, nor clothed out of French resources but had to support itself and the French government by "liberating" neighboring nations. The 1793-94 amalgamation had partially miscarried. Authorized demi-brigades had not been activated. The light infantry occasionally found it had two or three demi-brigades claiming the same number. "Auxiliary" and "provisional" demi-brigades had been formed, along with new legions and independent battalions; by 1795 things were again in utter confusion. The new government (known as the "Directory" after the five-man committee that was its executive authority) called for a head count on