

CHAPTER II "Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite ": The Armies of the Revolution From this moment until our enemies shall have been driven from the territory of the Republic, all Frenchmen are permanently requisitioned for the service of the armies. Young men shall go forth to battle; married men shall forge weapons and transport supplies; women shall make tents and clothing and serve in hospitals; children shall make lint from old linen; and old men shall ... preach the unity of the Republic and hatred against kings... . Decree of National Convention' The deluge that Louis XV had predicted would follow his death had begun as a slow drizzle in May 1789 when King Louis XVI optimistically summoned the Estates-Generale to Paris to solve the French government's financial problems. By January 1793 the precipitation had increased to such a degree that it was deemed necessary to decapitate Louis (deposed in September 1792 and thereafter known as "Citizen Capet") in the name of "Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity." While the unfortunate Louis was "sneezing into the basket" of the guillotine, twenty-three-year-old Captain Napoleon Bonaparte was engaged in an unsuccessful attack on the island of Maddalena, just off Corsica, and narrowly escaping being lynched as an aristocrat by mutinous Marseilles sailors whose cowardice had caused the attack to miscarry. That failure was only one of the results of the anarchy that had flared through the French Army for the past three years, beginning with the mutiny of the French Guard in mid-1789 when it joined in the attack on the Bastille. (It then was transferred to the Paris National Guard, which was forming spontaneously at that time, as its "Center Grenadiers.") The National Assembly,' which represented whatever functioning government France had, undertook military reforms, abolishing corporal punishment and the need to prove noble ancestry to become an officer. For some rea son, it chose to recognize the infantry regiments according to Choiseul's older system, but it did raise new battalions of chasseurs a pied and increased all battalions of that arm to eight companies. All regiments and separate battalions were given numbers to replace their traditional names, which echoed centuries of royal rule. General Marie-Joseph de Lafayette, widely popular because of his services to the American Revolution, had been appointed commanding general of the National Guard. He now also sponsored organization of the first French horse artillery, which quickly proved effective and popular. The Assembly also attempted to straighten out the army's pay accounts, but this well-meant measure promptly backfired: In many regiments the enlisted men got out of hand when their claims were not accepted and paid off immediately. There were large-scale mutinies in Metz, Nancy, Caen, Lille, and throughout the southern provinces. Officers were assaulted, sometimes murdered or driven away from their units; regimental funds were plundered. More and more officers resigned or simply vanished over the frontiers. A large collection of them built up around the Rhineland city of Coblenz, where Louis-Joseph de Bourbon, Prince de Conde, began giving them military organization.' He was joined by the unpopular, glimmer-witted Count of Artois, Louis's youngest brother, and both began calling on the crowned heads of Europe for armed assistance. They were warned that their clamors would only endanger Louis and Marie Antoinette, but they continued to clamor. In eastern France, General Francois de Bouille, who had put down mutinies in Metz and Nancy by cold personal courage, gathered some halfway dependable regiments, mostly German. In late June Louis finally plucked up enough determination to flee Paris with his wife and children, hoping to join Bouille and rally sufficient support for a counterrevolution. He failed because of his own inertia and an honest desire to avoid bloodshed-and also because Count Hans von Ferson, Marie Antoinette's utterly devoted Swedish admirer, had insisted on supplying the royal family with an enormous new traveling coach which made their flight too conspicuous. Also, between incompetent officers and unwilling soldiers, the chain of cavalry detachments that Bouille had set up across eastern France to escort the royal family collapsed in a series of guardhouse farces. The flight of aristocratic officers was a fairly gradual process. Lafayette and many liberal-minded nobles stayed loyal until the storming of the Tuileries and the imprisonment of the royal family in August 1792 crushed their hopes of a constitutional monarchy. A few remaining optimists (including Louis Philippe, who would become "King of the French" in 1830) fled with Charles Dumouriez the next year. The increasingly savage attitude of the Paris politicians toward unsuccessful generals or officers whose only offense was to be nobly born naturally increased the number of officers seeking safety, until somewhere between a half and two-thirds of them did leave France. They termed their action "emigration," hence their common nickname, "emigres. " The French government considered it desertion, but in many cases it was simple self-preservation. Typically, the highest percentage of emigrants came from the socially preeminent cavalry, the lowest from the "mechanic" artillery and engineers, with their higher proportion of middle-class and Huguenot officers. In one sense, the army gained from its losses: The departing officers were replaced by officiers de fortune and NCOs who were of more revolutionary spirit and so more capable of handling like-minded recruits. By contrast, having no enlisted men and therefore no NCOs, the engineers were left short-handed and had trouble finding replacements for those of their officers who did depart. Meanwhile the still loyal noble officers held the army more or less together and fought its first battles against Austrians and Prussians under the shadow of the guillotine and in almost equal danger from their own disorderly troops. Dozens of those who served well and honestly died at the hands of their own countrymen because they did. Yet it was those men who first saved the Revolution. Other competent officers, up from the ranks or from the Volunteers, would come forward around them, but such men needed two or three years of experience before being ready for command. The Regular Army was growing increasingly unreliable; discipline was out in most of its regiments. That bulwark of civilization, the no-nonsense NCO, seemed an unnecessary instrument of tyranny to the political minds of the Assembly, who decreed that liberty, equality, and fraternity would be better served by letting the soldiers elect their corporals and sergeants. With discipline crumbling, desertion became easy. Recruits to refill the ranks were hard to come by. With much breast-beating over the necessity of an army of virtuous free citizens, the Assembly had abolished the customary enlistment bounty. In the new dispensation, you signed up for eight years; if you survived, there would be a bounty if you reenlisted for four years more. Young men willing to enlist went into the Volunteers, where discipline was easier, promotion quicker, and pay higher. Also, the Regulars were much troubled by agents and embauchers from the emigres around Coblenz and by disloyal officers who intended to emigrate and hoped to carry their regiments with them. The biggest losses were the Royal Allemand cavalry regiment and the 4th Hussars (formerly the Hussards de Saxe), the greater parts of which went over the frontier.' In some cases the defections were more calculated than spontaneous. The 1st Hussars (ex-Bercheny) were marched out along the frontier and harangued concerning their duty as loyal soldiers of Louis XVI to emigrate. What happened next is disputed, except that most of the regiment remained loyal to France and the rest left hurriedly. A number of heavy-handed sergeants from various regiments chose to accompany their superiors; Conde formed them into a provost company. The actual number of enlisted men emigrating was comparatively small, but much exaggerated in emigre proclamations and army rumor. When some forty soldiers accompanied the departing officers of the Dauphin Cavalry Regiment, reports had the whole regiment deserting, much to the hurt of French morale. During June, July, and August of 1791, disturbed by the obvious disorder of the Regular troops and also wanting soldiers of assured revolutionary zeal, the National Assembly had decreed the levy of 101,000 "National Volunteers." Of these, 25,000 would be assigned to the navy, which had practically collapsed; the remainder would be formed into 169 separate battalions, which would elect their own officers, NCOs, and grenadiers. Each departement was to furnish four battalions.6 The volunteers were required to uniform and equip themselves. Those too poor to do so were aided by friends or by funds raised from their whole community, but the results usually were somewhat improvised: a hat, a coat of some shade of blue, pantaloons, shoes or new sabots, homemade haversacks and belts. Veteran officers and NCOs might wear their old white uniforms. In some cases the officers were elected from a recommended list presented by the departmental authorities. A good number of them were veterans of the Royal Army or officers of the National Guard. Other units chose their own officers with all the freedom and electioneering of contemporary American militia musters. Young Ferdinand Emmanuel de Villeneuve- Bargemon claimed that the best qualifications for election were a loud voice, greater-than-average height, and an impressive moustache. (He may have been prejudiced: Two officers of that kidney had stuck him-when he was young and impressionable-with a lame horse.) Too many guardhouse lawyers, barracks politicians, and yardbirds did become officers, but the surprising thing is the number of experienced and competent men whom the Volunteers elected amidst all the popular excitement. Naturally, they sometimes regretted their choice. The 1st Battalion from the Pas-de-Calais chose an ex-sergeant named Godart as its commander; when he insisted on drilling them, they attempted to lynch him as a despot who despised liberty and equality. Education was not always an important qualification for a would-be officer; in fact, the Paris sans-culottes-in their own way as haughty and exclusive as any aristocrat- looked upon obvious book-learning as unbecoming a true patriot. Recruiting for the new Volunteers went surprisingly slowly, only eightythree battalions being formed by the year's end. Even those were only partially trained and equipped, though generally of good morale. Thus France was in no condition to risk a war, and there was no pressing reason why it should. Though in theory all kings were brothers, the other crowned heads of Europe (except Gustavus III of Sweden, who announced himself Marie Antoinette's "Knight" and was shortly thereafter assassinated by one of his own aristocrats) were able to contemplate Louis XVI's misfortunes with equanimity. Prussia, Austria, and Russia were preoccupied with the much more profitable business of divvying up Poland. Also, France had always been a troublesome, dangerous nation, prone to invasions, devastations, and annexations of its neighbors' territory. A weakened France therefore would suit the rest of Europe very well. And, if this revolution weakened France sufficiently, it might be possible to detach certain frontier provinces, such as Alsace and Lorraine, which France had seized during the past century. Unfortunately, the stew of French politics made some French politicians see war as a means of unifying their much-shaken country. Other Frenchmen saw it as a crusade to bring liberty, equality, and fraternity to the rest of Europe. After some "liberating" of small principalities along its eastern frontier, the French government rather cas