ull-weight of twelve fresh men against every yard of your exhausted line (which was only three deep when the action began) at their chosen point of impact. The new French military doctrine stressed the offensive, mobility, and the use of the bayonet instead of fire power. The French surged into Flanders, Holland, Germany, and Italy. Vincentius Zahn, the pastor of Hinterzarten in the Black Forest, watched them pass in 1796: One did not see [compared to the Austrian Army] so many wagons or so much baggage, such elegant cavalry, or any infantry officers on horseback below the grade of major. [Austrian infantry lieutenants had their own mounts.] Everything about these Frenchmen was supple and light-movements, clothing, arms, and baggage. In their ranks marched boys of fourteen and fifteen; the greater part of their infantry was without uniforms, shoes, money, and apparently lacking all organization, if one were to judge by appearances alone. But each man had his musket, his cartridge box, and cockade of [their] national colors, and all were brave and energetic. On duty, the soldier punctiliously obeyed his officer....These French rather resembled a savage horde [but] they kept good order, and only some marauders who followed the army at a distance....terrified the inhabitants. This French invasion failed, and Father Zahn saw them retreating: Their dress was truly bizarre; most marched barefoot; for clothing they had rigged themselves out with bed curtains, tapestries, peasants' smocks; some had mantles of various colors; some women's and choir-boys' clothing, with surplices and albs which they took from the churches; some of them were wearing young girls' stockings: You could call it a masquerade.30 It was a most peculiar army, in which companies of infantry christened themselves "Liberty," "Prudence," and the like, demanding to be so entered on the official records. For its first years it was overrun with camp followers, the government having decided that free French soldiers could marry without their captain's permission. Officers grumbled that too many soldiers were ducking out of the ranks just before an engagement, claiming that they must put their wives in a safe place. Even when the armies on the frontiers needed men, large forces-the "Revolutionary Armies"-were held in the interior to enforce the will of the Revolutionary government. Originally there was a single one, based on Paris, but others were formed at Lille, in Alsace, and other places as frankly terrorist organizations. Filled with militant revolutionists who felt it much safer and more profitable to make war on French civilians, they ranged the country with cannon and mobile guillotines, butchering and robbing in the name of the Republic. Their leaders-men like Carrier, Lebon, Fouche, and Ronsin-rejoiced in death and blood. When guillotining went too slowly, they turned to mass shootings, noyades (mass drownings), and that patriotic jest of "Republican marriages" (a male and a female prisoner, selected at random, bound together, and thrown into deep water). By December 1793, however, the central government decided that the local armees revo- lutionnaires were a threat to its existence. They were mustered, disarmed, and scattered as replacements through combat units. A year later the Paris army was found to be involved in plottings that even Jacobins considered outrageously anarchistic. Its commander, Ronsin, accordingly was "chopped," and his red-capped, black-uniformed, great-moustached toughs (Ronsin himself thought them the distilled essence of French criminality) were likewise given the opportunity to die for their country. Into 1798 war had managed to support war. Thereafter the Rhine frontier, Flanders, and northern Italy had been foraged bare as the armies came and went. Within France the government functioned less and less, but Barras's crew and a fat crop of hog-rich contractors, profiteers, and forestallers lived high in a Paris of desperate gaiety and diaphanous gowns. If a lady so half-revealed had lost a relative to the guillotine, she might wear a thin red ribbon about her neck. In 1798 there were mutinies among the French troops in Italy, especially in Rome, where the Directory used them to strip that city of everything valuable but ignored their hunger and half-nakedness. Next the Directory pushed its looting southward into Naples and peeled Switzerland. At the beginning of 1799 the French cavalry and infantry were at less than half strength, the artillery at barely two-thirds. Napoleon was isolated in Egypt with some of the army's best units. In the Armde d'Italie officers were selling whatever spare clothing they still owned to buy food. Except for the Guard of the Directory, the gendarmerie, and the Dutch contingent, the army was uniformed only in the sense that a profusion of tricolor sashes, ribbons, and plumes gave a semimilitary appearance to its rags. The year began with defeats in Italy, Germany, and Switzerland; only Massena's and Saint-Cyr's skill and Brune's combativeness kept France intact. But, finally victorious though it was, the army was staggering and hopelessly in want-and the English and the Austrians would be back again to try their luck once more. A hundred battles had harrowed the French Army. The neglects of its own government had been deadlier still. The patriotic enthusiasm and belief that had sent raw boys surging forward against the drilled professionals of old wars seemed stupid to the ragged starvelings in the ranks of 1799. Half aware of their fading morale, the Directory ordered that the bands play the patriotic airs of those first years-the "Chant du Depart," "Ah (a Ira," and the "Marseillaise"-more frequently. The bands played, the soldiers sang, but the old patriotic verses were sadly changed. It was a professional Army now, men who fought out of pride and comradeship; who had learned to loot to live, and had little reverence for anything or anyone. Yet they still were good soldiers. The demi-brigades that left their stations in Italy from sheer starvation marched and camped in order, even though most of their officers and sergeants had remained at their posts, trying to keep up enough of a show to convince the Austrians that the frontier defenses still were fully manned. Their generals were a wolf- breed, disrespectful of authority, independent-minded, and ambitious. All of them, officers and men together, were survivors-men of bronze, toughened to all hardship and all conditions of war, thoroughly fed up with the gros-ventres (big bellies) in Paris who had cheated and used them. They had won victory after victory, had fought all Europe to a momentary standstill, yet they had neither peace, shoes, nor a square meal. It was this army that made Napoleon Bonaparte First Consul at 1799's ending. And this army was the proven yet dangerous metal from which he forged his Grande Armee. 4er .ff&t CfoSU'(,lr.J o qeva/,(le/' o'csco-oron ""800 1st Regiment of Chasseurs a Cheval: Chef dEscadron, lsoo