ually declared war against Austria on April 20, 1792. That war-broken only by brief truces-would harrow Europe for the next twenty-three years. Once the "dogs of war" had been let loose, the Assembly belatedly attempted to strengthen its armed forces. It voted against using Volunteers to fill up the Regular regiments (most of which could put only one battalion into line), and-disregarding the fact that its original call for Volunteers had been barely half answered-called for forty-five more battalions. It also urged the formation of free corps in the eastern departments. With complete optimism, it then approved an offensive to liberate the Austrian Netherlands (modern Belgium), which was believed ready to welcome the French. The Austrians blocked this offensive, and a Prussian-Austrian army under Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick, accompanied by the small emigre "Army of the Princes," marched on Paris. The Assembly declared la Patrie in danger, called all enrolled National Guards to active duty, levied fortytwo more battalions of volunteers, lowered the age of enlistment from eighteen to sixteen, and promised bounties to all foreign soldiers who would desert to the French. With the intent of maintaining a revolutionary force around Paris, it drew five super-patriotic National Guardsmen from each canton in France. Grouped into battalions at Soissons, these Federes (Federals) proved a mutinous, unmitigated nuisance to everyone but the enemy. The response to the call for National Guardsmen and Volunteers, however, was excellent, some 600,000 coming forward. Not all of them could be equipped, even though the dragoons were stripped of their muskets to arm infantrymen, but enough were accepted to bring the army up to some 450,000 men. Unfortunately, these men did not equal the 1791 Volunteers in zeal and quality. Some of them were purchased substitutes, some had been told to volunteer. Liberally dosed with revolutionary propaganda, they tended to be fanatical, insubordinate, and unsteady in combat. It is prob able that their officers and NCOs had less experience than those of the 1791 Volunteers, the best retired soldiers having already returned to the service. Along with this new flood of Volunteers came various "legions" and "free corps," some of them raised by localities or even private individuals "of good will." They were usually strangely uniformed, to attract the wilder spirits and miscellaneous foreigners. The German Legion paraded its "light cuirassiers," "dragoon outriders," "arquebusiers," and light infantry. There were legions of the North, the Midi, the Allobroges, and Batavia. Volunteer cavalry boasted two regiments of Hussards de la Liberte and redcoated "National Dragoons of Lorient." The black-uniformed Hussards de la Morte, with their skull-and-crossbones insignia on their sleeves and sabretaches, would follow. These could be good and useful units, but a large proportion-especially the light cavalry-contained too many petits- maftres (young fops), who were too busy about their personal comforts to take care of their horses. There were plenty of officers but a great shortage of good ones; many regiments recruited old NCOs-immoral, incompetent, and frequently drunk-whom the Regulars and older Volunteer units would not accept.' The field armies were shaken down into a semblance of combatworthiness, but there were many instances of whole divisions dissolving in blind mass panics at the mere rumor of contact with the enemy. Finally having to pause for breath, these runaway patriots would accuse their commanders of having "betrayed" them (apparently by taking them where an unfeeling enemy might shoot at them) and then would regain their selfrespect by a frenzy of mob murder. After one such "Nous sommes trahis! Nous sommes coupes! Sauve qui peut!" ("We are betrayed! We are cut off! Every man for himself! "), General Theobald Dillon was butchered by his soldiers; his body, shockingly befouled and mutilated, was hung up by the heels in a Lille street. Rochambeau narrowly avoided like treatment. Lafayette's flight increased the soldiers' suspicion of their officers. Charles Dumouriez, who took over command from Lafayette, repeatedly had to take his life in his hands and his saber in his fist to beat his stampeding troops back into order.' When he could identify the cowards who started such panics, he had their heads and eyebrows shaved bare and cast them out of his army-an action which the Paris Jacobins informed him was lacking in equality and fraternity toward fellow patriots. Both Lafayette and Dumouriez formed their infantry brigades from one regiment of Regulars and two battalions of Volunteers, hoping to combine the former's steadiness with the latter's enthusiasm. Initially, however, the usual result was that each element acquired the other's bad habits and little else. Most of the Regulars were no longer steady; the Volunteers' enthusiasm was a tricky commodity that might explode in any direction. Relations between the two were itchy and iffy: Regulars were still in white, the Volun teers wore blue. Some Regular officers were condescending; some of their Volunteer counterparts were thorough roughnecks or politicians in uniform. The fact that the raw Volunteers got higher pay particularly stuck in the Regulars' craws. But for all these troubles, 1792 ended in victory. Kellermann halted Brunswick at Valmy. The Prussians had outrun their supply trains, the weather was one sheet of rain, the countryside hostile. Brunswick fell back to the frontier, dribbling dead, deserters, and wrecked wagons along every road. Dumouriez struck into Belgium, driving out the Austrians after a victory at Jemappes. It was a cold, miserable winter. The Volunteers went home in droves, in part because they had enlisted for only one campaign, in part because-like Confederate troops after the first Battle of Bull Run-they thought the war was won and over. The supply system collapsed, and soldiers plundered Belgium, turning the population against the French. With spring, the Austrians came back. Dumouriez was defeated, attempted to reach a treasonous agreement with the enemy, bungled his plot, and had to desert to the Austrians. That put both army and government into an uproar. All noble officers were regarded as prospective traitors; most of them were forced out of the army. The Volunteers continued to go home, merrily singing patriotic songs as they went. For such reasons, 1793 was a year of trying to rebuild an army in the midst of impending disaster, France having chosen to add England and Holland to its enemies. The Committee of Public Safety (the executive branch of the National Convention) carried through a drastic program of reorganization, "revolutionizing" the army in an attempt to wipe out any trace of Royal Army traditions and loyalties. A primary task was the consolidation of the army, which had become a jumble of Regular, Volunteer, federal, legionary, and free corps units, all differing in uniforms and unit organization. As a beginning, the Regulars and Volunteers were "amalgamated," one Regular and two Volunteer battalions being combined to form a three-battalion demi-brigade.9 These demi-brigades would be classed as ligne (line infantry) or legere (light infantry) depending on the classification of its Regular battalion. All men were to have the same uniform and the same pay. All new men called to active duty would be assigned to the existing demi-brigades as replacements instead of forming new units. As it happened, there were more than twice as many Volunteer as Regular battalions; consequently, some fifteen demibrigades were composed of Volunteers only. The legionary formations and free companies were broken up, their infantry going into the legere demibrigades, their cavalry to the hussars and chasseurs a cheval. Each demibrigade was to have a cannon company with six 4-pounders, manned by specially trained infantrymen. This excellent idea was considerably fouled up in application. To begin with, there was a war on: Because many units were actively engaged, the process was not completed until mid-1794. Also, the Ministry of War was in at least as much disorder as the armies in the field. A rapid succession of ministers, who either had not known what to do or were unable to get anything done, had climaxed when the latest one had visited Dumouriez's army to find out what that peculiar general was up to. Dumouriez turned him over to the Austrians, and the War Ministry fell into the hands of an extreme sans-culotte clique that was concerned more with the army's ideology than with its ration returns and payrolls. The various battalions' records (many of them already outdated or incomplete) were thoroughly scrambled. No definite official tables of organization and equipment for the demi-brigades seem to have been made available before June 1794, and the legere demi-brigades didn't get their cannon companies. Finally, new battalions and legions were formed even while the earlier ones were being amalgamated or disbanded. (In 1894, researchers in the War Ministry concluded that the resulting confusion "escapes analysis.")10 As a whole, this amalgamation greatly improved the army, giving it a definite basic organization that would pass on into the Grande Armee. Friction between Regulars and Volunteers dwindled as they became all soldiers together. At the same time the French government thus managed to drown the Regular infantry regiments in a sea of Volunteers, removing any possibility of their taking counterrevolutionary action. To protect the Republic, in February 1793 the National Convention decreed a levy of 300,000 men for that year. Wastage from battle, desertion, and disease had taken roughly 160,000 men out of the 450,000 under arms in November 1792. (Statistics for this era are only approximate, at best.) That was followed by an additional levy of 30,000 more for the understrength cavalry regiments. Each department was assigned a quota, which took into account the number of men it had with the armies at that time; all unmarried men from eighteen to forty were liable-volunteers if possible, conscripts if necessary. Their recruitment quickly became a national scandal. Most departments took their own sweet time responding to the summons; barely half the required number was raised, and the men produced included numbers of paid substitutes, few of whom were quality goods. There were criminals, drunkards, and deaf-mutes among the alleged volunteers. Both the enforced conscription (usually carried out by the same methods as the former militia levies) and the fact that the wealthy were allowed to hire substitutes were much resented. The worst of the affair was that the field armies got only part of these potential heroes, numbers of them being diverted into the armee revolution- naire. At the same time, this levy, coming on top of the execution of Louis XVI and the government's seizure of church property, started a nasty civil war in the Vendee area of western France. As the situation worsened during the summer and additional levies were ordered for service in Vendee, some departments began resorting to conscription. "Representatives of the People on Mission" from the National Convention declared local levees en masse (universal conscription) to get replacements for the armies. In the north it seems to have worked; in Alsace it brought in 20,000 farm hands armed with pikes and scythes, who (like contemporary American militia) ate as lustily as possible for several weeks and then suddenly all went home. The idea of universal service, however, was picked up by the central government. On August 23 the National Convention adopted it in a famous decree, the opening words of which are quoted at the beginning of this chapter. Unmarried citizens from eighteen to twenty-five would be called up first; if necessary, the upper age limit could be raised to thirty or even fifty. The decree went on: