ind that screen was a simple, charming soldier who won the friendship of men as diverse as Saint-Cyr and Napoleon. He died at Marengo in 1800, launching the attack that saved the day. In Upper Egypt he was remembered for some years as "the Just Sultan." Jean-Victor Moreau was a commanding figure, over 6 feet tall and stout. He was a cool, cautious, deliberate general who avoided risks, yet might explode into unexpected aggressiveness. Though the Revolution had guillotined his father, he served it loyally until 1797, when he was detected concealing Pichegru's pro-Royalist plottings and was stripped of his command. Though personally cold and inaccessible, he took the best care he could of his men and was much liked by them. He aided Napoleon's coup d'etat in 1799 but-egged on by his wife-became an increasingly reluctant subordinate. Pichegru involved him in the Bourbons' attempts to murder Napoleon. Napoleon exiled him, but he came back to the wars in 1813 as Tsar Alexander's military mentor. A French cannonball killed him soon afterward at Dresden-an incident both armies regarded as a probable divine judgment. As for Jean Charles Pichegru, a laborer's son educated for the priesthood who became a sergeant of artillery, he remains a man of mist and mysteries. He was big, ugly, powerful, and imposing, capable of keeping the wildest sans-culottes under discipline. The clouded evidence available suggests that his strongest quality as a general was his ability to choose able subordinates, including Desaix and Saint-Cyr. His courage was faultless: He could protect officers like Desaix and Savary from the Representatives and not tell them of the peril they had run until it was past. He also spared captured emigres, ignoring the National Convention's decree that they should be massacred. But he involved himself in intrigues with the Royalists and Austrians. Arrested in 1797, he was shipped to the "dry guillotine" of Cayenne, the original Devil's Island. He escaped, made his way to London and openly joined the Royalists, to die, an apparent suicide, in a French prison in 1803. The tragicomic element was not lacking, especially among the generals the politicians sent into Vendee. Whether because they wanted to advance the careers of sans-culotte commanders or because they thought such men would show greater zeal for a civil war of extermination, the Paris politicians came up with a grotesque array of them. The first, the former brewer and Paris National Guard commander Antoine Santarre preached insubordination to his own troops but swallowed his doctrines and damned them for cowards as he helped the wounded Berthier cover their howling flight. The Jacobins sent him to prison. He died in "black misery" in 1809, remembered only as the officer who ordered drummers to drown out Louis XVI's last words. After him came Jean Rossignol, for eight years a yardbird private in the Royal Army, later a goldsmith, frequently a coward, usually a thief, and always incompetent. He stole his guillotined predecessor's horses and marched with a headquarters detachment of whores. His own wife protested his appointment, but he had Robespierre's warm support. When the Representatives in Vendee sent him back as too obvious a bad joke, Robespierre returned him to duty. He was followed by a General Lechelle, one-time private and fencing master, who was barely able to sign his name and apparently wasn't certain how it should be spelled. Kleber dismissed him as "the most cowardly of soldiers, the worst of officers, and the most ignorant leader ever seen ... there was nothing comparable to his poltroonery and his inefficiency except his arrogance, his brutality, and his obstinacy."" Elsewhere there was Carteaux, a painter turned sans-culotte general, who looked almost as strikingly martial as Kleber but was a thorough bungler whose wife ran his headquarters and sometimes his army. Also serving in the south was a General Doppet, briefly a soldier in his youth and now a doctor. Because he was a fire-eating patriot, the Paris politicians made him a general over his honest protests and had him commanding various armies in southern France. Fortunately, his health soon failed. Finally there was that sans-culotte hero General Henri Latour, who, when ordered to Vendee, arrived, drank and sang with the grenadiers, then insulted them, embraced a black (sex unspecified), and finally was found sleeping off his intoxication among the camp butchers. Eight days later he was just another civilian. As was to be expected, Revolutionary military records became most strangely muddled; some were never straightened out. Chef de Brigade Vil- lot de la Tour was promoted to general in 1793 but was never notified of his promotion. He retired in 1811, still a colonel. In that same period some War Ministry clerk confused the service records of the two brothers Mequil- let and promoted the wrong one to general of division. Advised of his error, the rattled bureaucrat then sent the promotion to a third Mequillet. Supplying the armies soon became a hopeless business. In Paris, Jourdan told the Council of Five Hundred: "For two years I commanded 150,000 men......I never received more than 10,000 rations a day; I was forced to procure the rest for the army from the country in which it lived; and yet the Treasury always paid [for] the 150,000 rations into the hands of the public blood-suckers, the vampires who devour the substance of the people."" The supply system had begun in confusion, many, if not most, of the Royal Army's experienced commissaires des guerres having fled or been imprisoned in 1791 after the National Assembly abolished the Royal Army's administrative system. The commissaires had been civilians responsible for supply, evacuation, military justice, transportation, and other housekeeping functions. Saint-Germain, however, had required that all commissaires have five years' service as officers. The Assembly then set up its own administrative service but gave it a semi-independent status, which caused much friction with the army commanders, especially since the new commissaires were mostly professional patriots with little knowledge of what they were supposed to do. During 1793 Carnot got the service somewhat in hand, but in 1795 the Convention gave its commissairesordonnateurs (the senior commissaire with an army) complete independence: They were responsible only to the Republic and not at all to the army commander, though they should try to assist him and gain his confidence. The rationale for that peculiar arrangement undoubtedly was to give greater scope to the profitable swindling in which the commissaires were very often the partners or agents of Paris politicians, especially Barras's personal clique.24 The commissaires were responsible for collecting, storing, preparing, and issuing foodstuffs and clothing requisitioned in occupied territory, and for administering and disbursing money similarly procured. That provided endless opportunities for larcency; supplies and cash frequently evaporated before reaching the troops. In Italy in 1796, Napoleon's personally approved commissaireordonnateur, one of the few noted for energy and honesty, died unexpectedly just as the campaign opened. His chief assistant was incapable, but it was three months before Paris sent a replacement, who turned out to be a panicky eightball. The actual supply of the French armies was by contractors, supposedly under the supervision of the commissaire-ordonnateur and his staff. Usually all these gentlemen had their little private understandings as to the quality and quantity of supplies delivered and accepted. (This too was not unknown in United States history.) In 1796 Napoleon had to rely on two much-cursed companies that were supposed to supply the grain, flour, and bread, which they seldom furnished. A third, equally unreliable contractor was supposed to transport those rations. The contractor responsible for forage for the army's gaunt animals and another who was to provide medical supplies were similarly dishonest. The contractor for meat surprised everyone by proving efficient and reasonably honest, driving large herds of beef cattle forward through Barbet-infested country. A seventh contractor was responsible for the supply trains and, apparently, the artillery teams; his service must have been acceptable, because Napoleon used his chief agent, a Monsieur Thevenin, in 1807 to militarize the Grande Armee's transport service. The army's finances-currency exchange, sales of prizes and booty, and transmission of funds-had been entrusted to a group of Swiss, Genoese, and Jewish bankers. They did very well for themselves, hounding Napoleon for enormous repayments until he could master enough knowledge of high finance to get rid of them. Finally, the Army of Italy was haunted by a commissaire pour les contributions sent by the Directory to seize money, works of art, and anything else valuable and portable. He and Antoine Salicetti, the Directory's Representative to the Army of Italy, were both enthusiastic thieves on their own; the struggles between them probably were some of the bitterest of the whole Italian campaign. As much as possible, Napoleon got the army's administration under his own thumb. His comparative isolation in northern Italy gave him a freer hand than generals on the Rhine frontier could manage. In 1797 Desaix noted that Napoleon was refusing to pay the full contractors' prices for below-standard shoes and clothing. Also, he had put the contractors' trains on a military basis, uniforming and paying their employees out of army funds and charging the contractors for that expense. (Too frequently, contractors failed to pay or feed their employees.) This combination of commissaires and contractors infuriated other generals besides Napoleon. Jacques Coquille Dugommier, originally of the French West Indies, a brave and competent old soldier with a talent for embodying common sense in flaming "revolutionary" speech, rose to the defense of his neglected soldiers: There is everywhere the same delays, the same negligence.......For the least affair, important or not . . . nothing can be done without the presence of a civilian commissaire.... There is everywhere a swarm of agents of all species, an infinity of inspectors and of commissaires sent right and left at the expense of the Republic; they talk a lot, offer suggestions incessently, seem to do everything and accomplish nothing.........Send back all those exploiters!....[T]oday I have visited the hospitals; it is impossible to describe the revolting disorder.......While the neglect of the administrators lets [our] animals die of hunger, a criminal negligence carries away our brothers in arms in the hos- pitals.z5 Lacking competent and halfway cooperative administrative personnel, army commanders "struck" (as the French so aptly put it) the localities they overran with requisitions for supplies. Thus on April 21, 1796, Napoleon required the town of Mondovi in Piedmont to furnish a total of 47,500 rations of bread and meat and 8,000 bottles of wine. Shortly thereafter he was telling Massena to curb his officers, who were demanding shirts, underwear, and even horses from the citizens, and trying to restrain Sali- cetti, who was eager to strip Piedmont while Napoleon was hoping to generate pro-French sentiment through moderate treatment. In Germany it might be rougher, Philippe Rene Girault, with L'Armee de la Moselle in 1793, recalled: From time to time ... we would make expeditions into enemy territory....We would leave our camp after dark, followed by some fifty vehicles; we would fall suddenly on a village which we would devastate. We loaded the wagons with all we could find....the peasants were abused, sometimes killed; the women raped; everything was permitted. That could not last. When all was devastated we were reduced to oat cakes and potatoes ... in very small quan- tities.26 Whatever