 happened to the soldiers, administrative personnel seldom went hungry. During his hard-fisted defense of Genoa in 1800, Massena had lived on his soldiers' ration of bread baked from sawdust, starch, flaxseeds, bran, and a little flour swept from the crevices of the bins, holding out until his men were too weak to lift their weapons. Returning to France by ship with his staff, he was gnawing a gristly chunk of horsemeat when he saw his commissaire-ordonnateur and two assistant commissaires open a hamper containing cold chicken, a ham, and a pie, and prepare to dine graciously by themselves. They didn't. The Revolutionary armies began in a mixture of uniforms-Regulars in white, Volunteers mostly in blue, chasseurs a pied in green, cavalry and free corps in every color. The white uniform was finally forbidden, especially for officers, as evidence of Royalist sympathies, but replacement clothing came slowly if at all. Meanwhile, Representatives fretted because some Regulars still had Royal Army buttons with the fleur-de-lis insignia on their tattered trousers. Between graft and shortages of cloth and leather, all sorts of substitutes were necessary. Even in the relatively well-cared-for Armee d'Italie in 1797, the 20th Dragoon Regiment was wearing hats instead of regulation brass helmets, few of the horse artillerymen had boots, and soldiers' shoes were often made of sheepskin. At least they had shoes; in other armies there often were no shoes of any leather, in which case sabotswhich quickly wore out in the field-might be issued in their place. The soldiers were told with great eloquence that sabots were better than shoes because they would keep their feet drier. Also, they cost less than shoes and so would save the Republic money, which should make all true patriots happy to wear them. In December 1796 the Directory, in an uncharacteristic fit of generosity, ordered a pair of shoes or (if mounted) boots issued to every officer, but whether any of the footgear actually was distributed remains uncertain. In May 1790, the army had been ordered to wear the new Revolutionary tricolor cockade with its blue center and successive rings of white and red. That October the cravates of the regimental flags were changed from white to tricolor. Next year the infantry was supposed to discard its traditional cocked hats for leather helmets a la Tarleton'27 but those proved hot, uncomfortable, and soon smelly. The line infantry went back to its hats, while the light infantry experimented with various sorts of shakos. But the army grew steadily more ragged, clothing itself as best it could in whatever it could pick up. As unquestioning a patriot as Lefebvre declared that the clothing contractors were the army's most implacable enemies. In many regiments a professional leaven continued working, suppressed but stubborn. Volunteers might glory in filth and disorder, regarding a clean neck as a definite indication of Royalist sympathies, and latrines and garbage pits as extinct aristocratic institutions. Eventually some immaculate veteran-say Colonel Augereau, red-hot patriot and ex-deserter, fencing master, and sergeant in le bon Dieu alone knew how many different armies-would tell them to wash their tattered shirts, queue their hair, and police up the area. Argument with an Augereau was unhealthy. Former Regulars clung to the small distinctions of uniform or custom that once had set their old regiments apart. After preliminary scoffing, Volunteers picked these up, soon cherishing them as if they personally had earned them. The traditional distinctive uniforms worn by drummers, trumpeters, and bandsmen might be banned as servile emblems of despotism, but they soon came back again; Jacobin-minded General Victor was overjoyed to locate a cache of scarlet cloth so that he could give the band of the 57th Demi-Brigade coats of that nonregulation color. The 23d Regiment de Cavalerie, which had managed to get new coats of regulation blue by capturing an Austrian supply depot, was informed that the Republic could not even provide scarlet cloth for its customary facings. Undaunted, some troopers set up an informal ambush, baited with a couple of apparently wounded stragglers, for the red-cloaked irregulars that screened the Austrian Army. There were a few bloodstains to wash out, but the 23d soon paraded in proper uniform. From almost the beginning of these Revolutionary wars the French Army had the great advantage of operating by divisions, developed from the Royal Army's experiments. A normal composition would be four demibrigades of infantry (formed in two brigades), two regiments of cavalry, and two companies of artillery, one foot and one horse. Its staff would consist of an adjutant general, two adjoints, one or two engineer officers, and a commissaire des guerres. At full strength (which it seldom was) a division had from 10,000 to 12,000 men and 38 guns (including those of the demi-brigade cannon companies). Such an organization could operate independently, yet was not too large to support itself off the countryside. Five or six divisions, usually with some additional artillery and cavalry, formed an army; its divisions could move separately to "live" but mass quickly to fight. The army commander could maneuver freely; because he had to issue orders only to the division commanders, his staff work could be handled far more rapidly than in other European armies, where orders had to be sent to every brigade and often to every regiment. Finally, since these divisions were permanent organizations, they could learn to work as a team. Against those advantages, experience in combat showed definite problems. The average French general was independent but not too skilled; the average staff was inexperienced and apt to muddle. (Generals tended to fill up their staffs with sons, relatives, and friends; also, liberty, equality, and fraternity made it possible for civilians of no military experience to be brought into staffs as adjoints.) Their collective inefficiency resulted in many unnecessary actions, which killed men to no useful end. Especially when understrength, as it usually was, a division was big enough to get into trouble but sometimes not big enough to get out of it. The cavalry attached to the divisions often was used up early in the campaign; the average general didn't know what to do with it or how to take care of it. By 1797, commanders as dissimilar as Hoche, Napoleon, and Moreau were going back to separate divisions of infantry and cavalry, each with its own artillery." Napoleon was forming divisions of three brigades, one of them light infantry. The larger armies grouped their divisions into the old-style center, left wing, right wing, and reserve. That, however, was seldom satisfactory. These were temporary formations with only the most rudimentary staffs. The army commander commonly retained direct command of one of them, and his interest in its progress could keep him from seeing the "big picture." Also, an overcareful general like Moreau would pause periodically to get his troops sorted out again whenever operations changed his original dispositions. In the same fashion, a general charged with the temporary command of a wing, center, or reserve would keep the command of his own division, with comparable results. Beyond that, given the usual unruliness of French generals of this period, a wing commander, having only transitory authority, might have trouble getting his orders obeyed. While Hoche did some preliminary work on permanent larger formations, his death cut this short. Napoleon definitely formed his infantry divisions into corps with their own staffs, artillery, and attached cavalry in 1800. French tactics of this period grew out of the problem of how a few experienced officers and brave men could carry a mass of raw Volunteers and conscripts forward and keep them under some sort of control. The solution can be very roughly described as a combination of masses of skirmishers and small, handy columns. It took some time to develop: Contrary to common opinion, raw troops seldom make good skirmishers, being too hard to control and too prone to unreasoning panic. Competent French commanders toughened their men in small-scale raids and outpost squabblestermed affaires despostes-until they could learn to shoot straight and obey orders under fire. They also drilled them thoroughly, using barns and other shelters during bad weather. Movement into action was normally in column. Companies were formed in three ranks: A "column of companies" consisted of the eight fusilier companies of the battalion lined up one behind the other; in a "column of divisions" they formed two companies abreast, giving a depth of four companies.29 If the battalion's grenadier company were present, half of it might take position on each flank of the leading company or division. Either type, but usually the column of divisions, was used for attacks, once the skirmishers and (later) the artillery had sufficiently weakened the enemy line. Whole battalions frequently were deployed as skirmishers, a tactic dubbed "tirailleurs en grandes bandes. " A battalion column was handy, because it could move rapidly across all but the roughest terrain and still keep its formation, but it had less fire power than a battalion formed with its companies abreast in line. Therefore a line formation was favored for defensive fighting but was risky to use in an attack, because only the best-trained troops could advance in line across even open ground without falling into disorder. In the first battles French commanders needed superior numbers against their more professional enemies, pitching in one demi-brigade after another until the last ones drowned the worn-down enemy-unless the French suddenly came apart first and ran for it. That process was seldom magnificent, but the French learned. Volunteers and conscripts were of a higher average intelligence than the enemy's "walking muskets," and the French government's system of indoctrination convinced many of them that they fought for liberty, equality, and fraternity against the miserable slaves of foreign despots. From 1789 into 1793 the French Army barely hung on despite its victories at Valmy and Jemappes. Had the Allies shown a slightly greater willingness to close in and slug it out, they might have brought the ramshackle Revolution down in its own blood before the end of 1793. But the Allies had conflicting aims and no sense of urgency. Victorious in the north, they abandoned their offensive to pick up pennies-the Austrians to recover the Flanders fortresses, the British to secure Dunkirk for a future base. While they groped, the Terror raised men and sent them to the frontiers. Houchard won his fatal victories, and the tides of war flooded outward. From 1793 into 1797 Carnot directed fourteen armies, scraping out the essential minimum of weapons and supplies amid graft and confusion with the grim efficiency that brought him the title "Organizer of Victory." Prussian, Austrian, Spanish, Piedmontese, Neapolitan, and English generals did their professional best and eventually found that some vulgarian of a French ex-sergeant, whom they had completely outmaneuvered, would fail to recognize the hopelessness of his situation, or that a recent captain of French artillery would show a shocking disregard for the accepted system of strategy and tactics. Thereupon another military masterpiece would degenerate into a knock-down-drag-out grudge fight. Put yourself in their place. Swarms of skirmishers have enveloped your tight, strictly-dressed formations, firing from behind cover in a most unsoldierlike fashion. If you charge them with the bayonet, they drift awaystill shooting-and follow you when you return to your original position. Eventually your lines are in tatters. Then suddenly, out of the smoke, comes a howling, trampling, caterwauling rush of battalion columns, the bayonets and b