ed up a year or two ahead of time, were too young and soft. (Also, having grown up during the hardships of the Revolution, many may have lacked bodily strength.) Hard marching would leave a trail of broken-down, resentful veterans and exhausted conscripts. There still were plenty of tough veterans who formed the disciplined heart of every regiment and jealously maintained its traditions, but they needed firm handling (which they certainly got from Bugeaud), since they rejoiced in drinking, grumbling, and generally playing the old soldier. A Saxon officer, Ferdinand von Funck, noticed much the same thing: "Napoleon had the gift of improvising rough droves of conscripts, only just put into uniform, into soldiers on the enthusiasm of the moment, and of training Commanders" but could not replace enough of those graying regimental officers and NCOs who had marched away from the English Channel in 1805.16 However, 1810 and 1811 were-except to those luckless reinforcements sent into Spain-a time of relative peace, which meant training and reorganization. Some divisions could be put on peace footing, which made their divisional and brigade staffs available for reassignment (probably in Spain); their regiments were left under the command of the military division in which they were stationed. Everybody reverted to peacetime pay and had to be polite to civilians, but there was even an occasional opportunity for leave. However, it was cloudy to eastward. Tsar Alexander had signed a treaty of alliance with Napoleon at Tilsit in 1807 after the destruction of his army at Friedland. Within a year he was dickering with England and had reached a tacit understanding with Austria. He had interfered with the Polish military operations in 1809 and was now attempting to persuade Poland to make him its king, while massing troops along his western frontier. Napoleon did not want war, but it obviously lay in his path. He strengthened his artillery (which produced problems in educating its new battalions of train troops to handle and care for their horses properly). Infantry battalions were shuffled to mix the new conscripts in the 5th and 6th battalions with veterans from lower-numbered ones. No soldier, unless thoroughly literate, with less than two years' service could become a NCO. Eugene was carefully drilling the Army of Italy, and Davout was expanding his regimental schools, which taught reading, writing, and drill. The Grande Armee of 1812 was the most carefully and completely orga nized force Napoleon had ever commanded, with the most thoroughly prepared supply system. Its supply train troops were militarized, as was part of its medical service. Most of the troops were well-trained, though a good many were not sufficiently hardened for such a demanding campaign, and the Administration included too many cowards and incompetents. In summation, however this Grande Armee was too big (all available statistics are spongy, but more than 500,000 men went into Russia), at least for the corps commanders Napoleon had. He still had men enough for a two-front war; there were at least 175,000 veteran French troops in Spain, almost as many men training in the depots, and more in garrisons throughout the Empire. But he desperately needed the marshals-Soult, Suchet, and Marmont- and some of the generals whom he had to leave in Spain. The shattered forces that Eugene and Berthier rallied in Germany in early 1813 took the title of the Army of the Elbe." The new-built army Napoleon brought out of France was first called the Army of the Main. Once the two joined forces, it was again the Grande Armee. The Army of the Main had been trained as it marched. Many of its conscripts had never seen a musket before and hadn't the least knowledge of how to load one. Therefore there was target practice at every opportunity, with marksmanship contests. The best shot in each company received an award of two francs, and that was doubled and redoubled for battalion, division, and corps champions. Davout found that nine out of ten conscripts sent to his cavalry regiments had never touched a horse. Their sous-lieutenants were gendarmes with thirty years' service who had been considering retirement. The Emperor spent most of his personal treasure, carefully but freely, on remounts, the Guard, pay, and general war expenses. It was a raw army, but Ney praised its amateur soldiers. Pitted against the Prussian Guard at Lutzen, they were four times beaten back, but came on again a fifth time and won. Baron Ernst Odeleben, a Saxon officer attached to Napoleon's staff, commented The good military bearing which predominated in this raw army, sprung, as it were, from the earth and assembled by the wave of a wand, was truly admirable . . . the military spirit, the activity in marches, and the bravery of the young troops so rapidly formed and opposed to experienced soldiers excited no less astonishment." In all, new troops and old, Napoleon possibly had 500,000 men in Germany in 1813. He brought back close to 120,000 with the Grande Armee; an undetermined number retired with other columns or as stragglers; probably more than 100,000 were left in Hamburg, Magdebourg, Danzig, and other Polish and German fortresses. But even with the new conscripts hastily called up in 1814, they were not enough against all Europe and treachery in Paris. The Grande Armee ended officially with Napoleon's first abdication at Fontainebleau on April 6, 1814. But a year later it would rise again as !'Armee du Nord for its last, most desperate battles. The Grande Armee was Napoleon's unique creation. He worked steadily at improving its organization, tactics, and weapons, but he never had the breathing space to introduce one major reform he had contemplated for years, that of militarizing its Administration and bringing all administrative activities under the regular military chain of command. Just as it was his creation, so it was his home. He was another soldier there among soldiers, a father among his children. He could talk to themcollectively or man- to-man-in their own speech (not excluding a few popular expletives) and was an expert at the blague (blarney) or a quick fight talk. The Grande Armee gave him strange nicknames: "le Tondu" (the Shorn One), "Father Violet," and "John of the Sword." Together, they put fear into the souls of Europe's kings and foreign generations- a terrible reality and an enduring legend. •