s other units. For 1813, Napoleon ordered a far simpler outfit-approximately half as large as that of 1812-that would set an example to his new army and cut down the nuisance of having so many servants and vehicles around his headquarters. The pages had proved more trouble than they were worth and so would be left at home. New servants were to be selected more for physical hardihood than polished manners. The headquarters cooks, Napoleon's included, would serve simpler meals and no desserts. The 1814 organization was simpler still: a strong service Leger, backed by a train of thirteen vehicles, most of them light.14 Napoleon normally ate in his tent with Berthier, dining quickly and paying little attention to his food. Headquarters officers ate in shifts, according to rank. Such arrangements necessarily changed from time to time and from campaign to campaign. In 1807, while acting as Saxon liaison officer at Napoleon's headquarters in East Prussia, Funck had his luncheon and dinner at Berthier's "table" (headquarters mess) with Berthier's aides-decamp, Napoleon's officiers d'ordonnance, and other liaison officers from allied states. Since Berthier ate with Napoleon, an assistant chief of staff presided in his place. Only barley bread was available, and not much of that; the only relatively plentiful foods were potatoes, beef, and rice. Dried vegetables were a rare treat. They drank beer with their meals; with dessert there would be two bottles of undistinguished table wine for more than twenty officers. At its largest and most luxurious, the Maison Civile probably never furnished Napoleon the comforts a modern division commander gets from the routine ministrations of a competent staff and a reliable driver and dog robber. They were impressive for his day. All in all, the Maison Civile was efficient. It repaired its own vehicles and cobbled its own shoes. In Moscow Caulaincourt saw to the baking of biscuit to feed it during the inevitable retreat; at Smolensk during that retreat he had its horses sharp-shod so that they could keep their feet on icy roads. Napoleon later had most of its wagons destroyed, along with much of his personal baggage and papers, but used some of the remaining vehicles to carry wounded officers. Civilians though they were, the men of the Maison Civile frequently showed a courage and devotion worthy of the Grande Armee. In 1809, with much of the army headquarters sidetracked in Spain, its personnel had to be used for all sorts of military missions. Fezensac thought they showed zeal and intelligence. Probably a number of them had been soldiers and so knew something about the business. For example, the day after the battle of Wagram Napoleon sent a Monsieur Germain, one of his chamberlains, back to Lobau Island for a general inspection of its bridges, batteries, and magazines. He also was to check on the French river flotilla and to pay special attention to the hospitals being set up behind the army. Much the same thing happened in 1813, when the Maison Civile's outriders reinforced the gendarmerie d'elite on occasion. In 1812 Caulaincourt recorded that his people behaved with courage and coolness during the Moscow fire. Napoleon appreciated their services and their loyalty. When he left France for Elba following his first abdication in April 1814, he had arranged to have 2 million francs from his personal treasure distributed among certain valued officers and civilians, including a number from the Maison Civile: Count Fouler, his last equerry; Louis Constant Wairry, his valet; Louis Saint-Denis, "dit Ali," his second mameluke; Jardin, who had trained his horses; Gy, the senior outrider; Caesar, his coachman; Colin, his mess steward; two of the fourriers du palais, and a dozen more. Naturally, Louis XVIII welshed on the agreement, just as he did on the pension promised Napoleon, and paid no one. On becoming Emperor, Napoleon had recreated the Ecole des Pages, formed by Louis XIV and abolished by the Revolution. They numbered thirty-four boys from the best families of France and allied nations. Napoleon's attitude toward this institution seems to have been the same as his feelings for the Imperial hunting parties: a nuisance, but one ought to maintain the customs of the old French Kings. He took pains to see that the pages were trained as officers and horsemen. The older ones, like young Oudinot, who became the senior page in 1808, accompanied him to the wars for on-the-job training; occasionally the Emperor found one useful as a rest for his long telescope. He had appointed General Mathieu Gardane their "governor," because Gardane had been one of Louis XVI's pages, but later found that gentleman to be an "imbecile and an archimbecile."15 As previously noted, 1812 was supposedly the pages' last campaign, though Odeleben reported four of them with Napoleon in 1813. The Bourbons abolished the school in 1814. One feature of Napoleon's campaign outfit was its traveling library. The Emperor loved reading, history most of all, and had always kept himself well supplied with books while on campaign. (He was a drastic literary critic: If the first pages of a book did not catch his interest, he junked it, tossing it out of his carriage window or into the fire!) He had excellent libraries in all his residences, with small special reference libraries in his offices; and was a generous patron of libraries, bibliographers, and scholars. He also was meticulous in returning borrowed books. In 1808 he began the organization of a mobile reference library, which was to take the form of some 3,000 volumes of the classics, epic poetry, religion, history, geography, tragedy, and philosophy. These were to be printed on very thin paper with very small margins, edited by leading scholars, and provided with fine bindings. Careful as he was with his money, he was willing to allot a half- million francs for that project. But this library (or such of it as had been completed) was burned with other papers in Russia during the retreat. Also burned were some rare books he had borrowed from the King of Saxony's library. Back in Paris he ordered those replaced whatever the cost. With an empire that ran, in the relative peace of 1810 into early 1812, from the Portuguese frontier to the Vistula River and from the English Channel to the tip of Italy, Napoleon had a dozen armies, hundreds of garrisoned towns and fortresses, and scores of supply depots. He solved the problem of maintaining up-to-date knowledge of such forces by a series of reports-the famous livrets (notebooks) his Minister of War sent him twice a month. The livret par ordre numerique furnished a complete statement of the situation in every regiment in his armies: the names of its officers, its strength, the localities where it was stationed, the location of its depot, the number of sick and wounded, the number of recent conscripts assigned it, and the departements from which they came.16 A second livret showed the status of every (territorial) military division in his empire: number and type of barracks, number of beds in each, the names of the general commanding the division and of his staff and Intendence officers, and a detailed report on all troops in that division, including veterans and gendarmes. Artillery stores, including firearms and ammunition, were the subject of the third livret. The fourth dealt with conscription: The number of men due from each departement, the number reporting, and the units to which they were assigned. (The figures furnished a sort of political barometer for public opinion in the different departements.) Besides the livrets received from Clarke, Napoleon received others from his vassal Kingdoms of Italy, Naples, and Westphalia. Eugene, in Italy, was required to take extra pains, because his "artillery" volume had to differentiate between French and Italian weapons. And there were other reports, such as weekly feuille des mouvements showing the days of departure and arrival of units changing stations, and occasional special reports." All this went into Napoleon's omnivorous, computer-like memory for collation, comparison, and analysis. The unit strengths and the disposition of conscripts shown in the different livrets had better balance-or else! The livrets, along with the etats he received on campaigns from the forces under his immediate command, were Napoleon's favorite reading matter: He liked working through them more "than a girl loves novels."" He had an almost unfailing eye for padded entries and weasel-wording. Occasionally he slipped: In 1809 confusion between the names of generals Puthod and Pacthod resulted in the latter's receiving a promotion intended for the former, and several months of cross-correspondence ensued before the case was cleared up. Again, Napoleon wanted information on a General "Girard dit-Jeune" (called Young Girard); Berthier finally convinced him that he had a "Girard-dit-Vieux" and a plain "Girard" but no "Jeune." In the field (and on extended travels in time of peace) Napoleon was escorted by a piquet (detachment) of Guard cavalry, usually taken from its regiment of chasseurs A cheval, his original guides. This piquet's normal strength was a lieutenant, a trumpeter, and twenty troopers. When he dis mounted from his horse or vehicle, four chasseurs left their saddles, fixed bayonets to their carbines, and formed a square about him, moving as he moved, alert but spaced so as to allow him a free view. The picket was supported by a squadron of Guard cavalry, termed the "service squadron." Both duties were demanding and so were rotated among the Guard cavalry regiments. The Emperor rode fast and far, frequently starting off before the service squadron could get mounted and formed up. His impatience almost led him into a party of horse-stealing Cossacks in 1812, the morning after the battle of Maloyaroslavets. Only the self-sacrifice of the picket and junior staff officers covered him until the service squadron of grenadiers A cheval came down on the brawl. (And then one young officer, who wore a Russian-style overcoat and had wrenched a lance from a Cossack, was sabered by mistake. He got back to France, however, in one of the Emperor's carriages.) As armies grew larger and artillery was employed in increasing masses, Napoleon's staff and entourage became more of a target. The first serious instance seems to have been at Wagram in 1809, when Napoleon was described as riding under a canopy of Austrian cannonballs as he organized his final attack; a good many members of his staff had their horses killed. For 1812, therefore, Napoleon ruled that only the following would ride with him: Berthier, with one of his aides-de-camp; a senior officer of the army headquarters staff; Duroc and Caulaincourt; two of Napoleon's own aides-de-camp; two officiers d'ordonnance; the piquet; the equerry on duty; a page; Roustam; a guide; and Dr. Yvan. No outriders or servants moved with them, though M. Colin, the "controller of provisions," would bring forward a light lunch of bread and wine. One of the piquet, selected for strength and length of service, carried a portfolio containing maps of the area, a writing board, pens, paper, ink, penknives, pencils, dividers, pincushion, and pins for marking positions on maps. (An aide-de-camp was responsible for seeing the portfolio was fully stocked; the trooper carrying it was titled chasseur du portefeuille and considered himself a personage of consequence.) Some 1,200 feet to the right rear of this command group rode the rest of Napoleon's aides-de-camp and officiers d'ordonnance, with officers of the Maison, miscellaneous aides to aides-de-camp, and a "brigade" of spare horses. An equal distance to the left rear were the rest of Berthier's aides, essential officers from army headquarters, and the artillery and engineer commanders with their aides. The rest of the army headquarters staff and all remaining spare horses followed at least