

 '";> Officier iJ'Or'iJom,ant:e De ('£n1pere11r 1808-/8/5 Napoleon's Personal Staff: Officer d'Ordonnance, 1808-1815

CHAPTER V Grand Quartier-General Prince Poniatowski is a poor correspondent; he complains all the time instead of giving facts. An accurate strength return speaks for itself. Napoleon, cited by Fabry' The Napoleonic staff-indeed, much of modern staff organizationcame from Pierre-Joseph Bourcet's (1700-1780) work on staff organization and functioning. Earlier staffs, such as those of Oliver Cromwell, Marlborough, and some of Louis XIV's marshalls, had been efficient enough in their time but were temporary organizations, designed for campaigns of limited duration and distances. Bourcet wanted a permanent staff corps of select, specifically trained officers. His proposal was not exactly welcomed by the Royal Army's generals, but in 1783 Minister of War de Segur finally formed a Corps d'Etat Major. Officers chosen for it were to be trained in topography, history, geography, preparation of unit histories, reconnaissance, and the science of the art of war. Along with much else, this promising organization was abolished by the Revolution. Certain of its members, Berthier and Guillaume Mathieu Dumas included, continued to serve France, at more personal risk from Paris politicians than from the usual hazards of war. However, the Revolutionary government soon half-comprehended that it might have thrown the baby out with the bathwater. With awkward, improvised mass armies in action on all frontiers and several virulent civil wars going on inside them, France desperately needed officers who could write march orders, see that ammunition trains were up in time, balance a strength return, and read a map. Such men were in short supply, and the lot of those available was not always happy: Besides the fact that their previous service made them "suspect" as "aristocrats" and therefore undoubtedly traitors, they had to work with splendidly incompetent sans-culotte generals and uneducated, newly commissioned "rankers." (One of the latter threatened to take his saber to an instructor in map reading who began with the obviously asinine statement that the world was round.) Accordingly, in 1790 the government set up a system of adjutantsgeneraux, supposedly picked officers capable of handling basic staff functions. Their number was repeatedly increased, reaching 110 during 17991800. Also, in 1792 each army was given a chef d'etat-major (chief of staff); he was to have four adjutants-generaux as assistants, each of whom was to be aided by several officiers adjoints (attached officers) of his own choice, taken from combat units.2 Every division, advance guard, and large reserve was to have an adjutant general as its chief of staff. As might be expected, revolutionary political pressures and general revolutionary confusion resulted in many adventurers and incompetents receiving such appointments, but combat attrition slowly developed outstanding adjutant generals. Most of them, like Desaix and Kleber, were experienced officers. Some, like St. Cyr, were raw but highly intelligent. A good many, however, were simply stout fighting men with enough education to handle records and reports. One such was Michel Ney, who usually was found with his division's advance guard. Napoleon inherited this system, such as it was, and-after rebaptising the adjutants-generaux as adjutants-commandants and increasing their number-proceeded to use it. He was interested in Mathieu Dumas's 1805 proposal to reestablish a permanent staff corps, but there was never time for that. He chose his corps chiefs of staff carefully from the available general officers, usually making certain that they would be perfectly acceptable to the corps commander. (In 1809 Napoleon did bluntly refuse Augereau's request that his half-brother, Jean-Pierre Augereau, be made his chief of staff as "contrary to principles.")' Adjutants-commandants and adjoints were taken from the cavalry and infantry, artillery and engineer officers normally being restricted to their own staffs. Adjoints were to rotate between staff assignments and duty with troops, going back to their regiments and into the normal promotion pattern when their staff duty ended.' The Royal Army had no written regulations covering staff organization and operations. A draft set begun in 1788 vanished with the staff corps. A sketchy provisional instruction may have been issued in 1791, but most staff officers found no other schooling than the advice of older officers and the expensive lessons of their own experience. One of those so afflicted, Paul Thiebault, staff officer to Massena in 1796, underwent the devastating experience of not being able to answer all of General Bonaparte's questions on the state of Massena's division and decided at that point to become an authority on military staffs. Vain, venomous, and ambitious beyond his capabilities (his interesting and unreliable memoirs mangle reputations on every page), Thiebault nevertheless managed to produce an outstanding work.' Building on Berthier's simple instructions to the Army of the Alps in 1795 and to the Army of Italy in 1796 (apparently derived from the "lost" 1788 regulations, on which Berthier may have worked), he published an excellent Manuel des Adjutants-Generaux in 1800. In 1810, after service as chief of staff to Junot's corps in Spain, he expanded this into his Manuel General du Service des Etats-Majors . . . , a well-written, detailed work, including sample forms for various reports. The French Army used it for more than twenty years. Berthier's operational instructions were simple and should be engraved inside every modern staff officer's skull. The chief of staff is the headquarters pivot. He must see everything that comes in and sign (or at least approve) everything that goes out. The assistant chiefs of staff must keep abreast of the general situation in addition to running their own sections. Speed and accuracy are the most important factors in staff work. The staff exists only for the good of the army and so has no regular office hours. It works as long as may be necessary, rests when it has nothing left to do, takes care of the troops before consulting its own comfort, and is always ready to move out, regardless of the hour or "pain" involved. Up-to-theminute intelligence on enemy forces and actions must always be available; therefore reconnaissance must be continuous to the front and flanks, and its results reported promptly. (In broken country, where infiltration is easy, reconnoiter to your rear also.) Finally, the commander-in-chief must always be told the truth, the whole truth, and nothing else-no matter how unpleasant the results may be. The actual staffs themselves took their general form and functionings from that of the Army of the Alps, which Berthier organized in 1795, becoming larger and more elaborate as the armies increased in size and as Napoleon became First Consul and then Emperor. His Grand Quartier-General Imperial (Imperial Army Headquarters) consisted of Napoleon's Maison (household, a lingering medieval term), the Grand Etat-Major General (army staff), and the Intendance (administrative service). The Grande Armee itself was only one of this headquarter's manifold responsibilities. Napoleon used it to govern his empire from his saddle or the side of his campfire while he was in the field; through it, he and Berthier controlled French and allied forces on a dozen different fronts throughout Europe. Its organization varied from campaign to campaign, but never to any great degree; its 1806 setup described here is typical of its whole existence. Napoleon's Maison comprised his personal staff, the "General Officers near His Majesty"; his aides-de-camp and officiers d'ordonnance; and his cabinet (office). The general officers included Caulaincourt, Duroc, Clarke, acting as Napoleon's principal secretary; Constant Corbineau, Master of Horse to the Empress Josephine; and Mathieu Gardane, Governor of the Pages.6 The imperial aides-de-camp were picked soldiers, trained up in Napoleon's own school of war, specialists in their own branches of the service and capable of commanding forces of all arms. Competent, respected by the whole army, and authorized to speak in the Emperor's name, they might be detached from the Grande Armee on particularly important missions. Only rarely were all of them with Napoleon. (In 1806 one aide, the Scots-descended General of Artillery Alexandre Law, Comte de Lauriston, was in Dalmatia defending Ragusa against hill tribes and a Russian fleet.) Present were generals Jean-Leonard Lemarois, logistics specialist and organizer who could make bricks without either straw or mud; the gentle-seeming Anne-Jean-Marie Savary, light cavalryman and intelligence expert, who would break a Russian army at Ostrelenka and become Napoleon's dread Minister of Police; and Jean Rapp, another cavalryman and a blunt, brave, generous man whom soldiers called "the Intrepid" so often wounded that his many friends referred to him as a rare piece of old lace. Also present were the engineer Henri-Gratien Bertrand, hard-working, efficient, and exact; and big, ardent, rough- spoken Georges Mouton ("My sheep is a lion" was Napoleon's little jest), the infantryman who led the neck-or-nothing storm across the flaming bridge at Landshut.' They were men for all missions, leading improvised task forces to meet unexpected emergencies, massing artillery to support a decisive attack, clearing a snarled supply line, conducting large-scale reconnaissances, and sometimes handling minor diplomatic assignments. They had authority to require even marshals to hold reviews and showdown inspections so that they might examine the state of their troops. Isolated commanders trusted them to take Napoleon a factual account of their problems. They were loyal but not courtiers; they spoke the truth as they saw it and did not flatter. Napoleon gave them his trust, accepted their frankest advice and comments without rancor (if not without occasional anger), and counted them as friends. Each of those general officers had two or three aides-de-camp (called the "little aides-de-camp") of his own, usually lieutenants or captains, as assistants. Napoleon was apt to borrow them whenever his immediate supply of dashing young men on horseback ran short. The Emperor's officiers d'ordonnance ("orderly officers," a junior grade of aides-de-camp) were a new institution, intended as extensions of Napoleon's eyes and ears. They carried orders, conducted inspections, collected information, and reported back. There were to be twelve of them, but only half that number seem to have been present in 1806. Their organization was peculiar: Though their functions were strictly military, they were assigned to the Maison Civile under Caulaincourt's authority. They were mostly captains and lieutenants from the different combat arms, but several of the first appointees were civilians. One, then or later, was a Polish officer named Desire Chlapowski (spellings are varied). They were supposed to have an allowance of 6,000 francs a year from their families, which Napoleon would match from his personal funds. The army would give them the pay and allowances of a cavalry captain, plus eight rations of forage. Since they were always to accompany Napoleon, they must have eight good horses and "domestics" to care for them. At first they were uniformed in green and gold, but that combination often caused insensitive people to confuse them with Napoleon's green-liveried personal servants. In 1809, therefore, they were put into the sky-blue and silver worn by the Grand Ecuyer's staff. The Emperor's "cabinet" had three main divisions. The "Secretariat" with its civilian secretaries, librarian, and archivists, handled Napoleon's correspondence. After Louis de Bourrienne was fired for embezzlement, first Clarke, then Claude de Meneval, and then Agat