of the nearest French regiments began beating the generale. Coming into his cabinet, Berthier found only two of his aides-decamp and a few staff officer3. The rest had gone to watch the fire. Next morning there was an order: All staff officers would report for duty immediately every time the gendrale sounded. In addition to the usual operational reports on enemy forces and actions taken, the French command system required routine reports showing the situation of the army. The most basic of these was the etat de situation, submitted every day by each unit to its next superior headquarters in the chain of command, showing the unit strength, routes followed, actions, casualties, replacements received, supplies available, enemy situation, and present location. Corps summaries of the etats were to reach Napoleon by midnight. Every five days corps submitted a more extensive etat de situation sommaire (summary), and every fifteen days a detailed grand etat de situation. (All were made on standard forms, designed by Berthier.) The grands etats were submitted in duplicate, one copy being forwarded to the Ministry of War, where it went into the famous "livrets." Commissairesordonnateurs reported every ten days on the amounts of rations and supplies available to the units or installations for which they were responsible. It was difficult to keep these reports up to date during periods of heavy marching and fighting, yet it was precisely during those periods that Napoleon needed the best possible idea of the overall state of his forces. So long as the etats were promptly and accurately rendered, he could allow some delay in the submission of the more elaborate reports, but woe betide the man who-like Jomini-did not get them done immediately during the first lull. All regiments were required to keep a "journal of operations" that would form the basis of their continuing regimental histories, to be accompanied by supporting maps. That task had been much neglected during 1790-1800, but by 1806 most regiments were doing it well enough, those in Soult's and Davout's corps being especially praised. The senior engineer officer in each corps usually supervised their preparation. In turn, the unit journals were used in the preparation of official histories of battles and campaigns. Headquarters transmitted information to the troops they commanded through "orders of the day," which covered uniforms to be worn; the issue of rations, equipment, or clothing; punishments, promotions, and awards; and duty assignments. The original copy was signed by the commanding officer and kept on file: There is no better source for the daily life of a regiment. A sure sign of a jittery commanding officer and/or a sloppy staff (and, by natural sequence, confused soldiers) is the appearance of two or more orders of the day during the same day. Thiebault did allow that this might be necessary on extraordinary occasions, but then the second should be presented as a supplement to the first. Fortresses and fortified cities had their own staff hierarchy of officiers du place. Since they frequently were older than the average line officers or somewhat disabled ("limited service officers" in modern parlance), soldiers nicknamed them chiens-verts and verts-de-gris, implying that they had grown verdigris from lack of any useful activity. The commandant de place (fortress commander) might be a chef de bataillon, colonel, general of brigade, or general of division, depending on the post's size and importance. The old title gouverneur was frequently used but seems to have been proper only during peacetime. He was assisted by one or more adjutants de place, who were captains or lieutenants; a sous-lieutenant secretaire de place, who kept the fortress records; and a number of portiers-consignes (gatekeepers), trustworthy NCOs (in some cases retired) who kept records of everyone entering and leaving the fortress-a good check for spies and AWOL officers, which Napoleon sometimes found very interesting. All members of place staffs appear to have worn red vests and trousers, which should have made them conspicuous enough among line officers. Most fortresses also had artillery and engineer officers and an administrative staff of one or more commissaires des guerres, medical officers, and their assistants. The commandant was charged with the maintenance of law and order in peace and the defense of the place in war. He saw to the reception and billeting of troops passing through. If the place were besieged, his power was absolute, overriding any local civilian authority. Napoleon shook his commandants out occasionally, sending those who had recovered from old wounds back to field duty, shifting the best men into the most important fortresses, and-one suspects-moving those who had too obviously settled down to lead a happy life. One element of the conventional staff not included in the Grande Armee was the chaplain. Napoleon did not want them as a matter of principle, probably because many French Catholic clergymen were Royalist in their sympathies, but he did allow them in some of his foreign regiments. His "capitulation" with the Swiss government concerning the four regiments it furnished him provided that each was to have one Catholic and one Protestant chaplain. His Polish regiments likewise had their chaplains; two of them still served with his Polish remnants in 1814, one of them much renowned and loved. Moreover, his Spanish Regiment Joseph-Napoleon required a priest, and a priest accompanied Macdonald's XI Corps in 1813, winning a reputation for compassion and bravery. Beyond that, the Intendent General was ordered to appoint a priest (to be paid 100 francs a month) for each French army hospital in Poland. Another priest was (reluctantly) hired for one island garrison that included large numbers of refractaires, and Napoleon ordered a gratification of 500 francs in 1807 to a "Sieur" Casabassa, who had been holding services in the citadel of Alexandria without pay. Otherwise, when the Grande Armee needed religious assistance it went to the local clergy. Unfortunately, too many Frenchmen went into foreign churches only for some quick looting. Soult did quite well for himself thereby. Staffs had plenty of work to do between campaigns. In 1806, 1807, and 1809, the fighting done, Napoleon (and all the marshals who could wangle it) headed for Paris. Left in command of the Grande Armee, Berthier had to evacuate the wounded, demobilize the Confederation of the Rhine contingents, and gradually move the army out of Austrian (1806 and 1809) and Prussian (1807) territory as those nations carried out the terms of the peace treaties. Thereafter he settled it into billets in the allied German states, a difficult task, since there were relatively few areas that could support large forces of cavalry and artillery. At the same time the staffs had to enforce proper behavior among French troops and restrain the propensity of their German allies to loot each other's territory. (The Bavarians were especially enthusiastic about that.) Private exactions by French officers also had to be checked. General Jean-Pierre Mahler had wrung money from a city and, when challenged, claimed it was a gift. Berthier replied that enemies did not make voluntary gifts and made him turn the sum over to the army paymaster. When Bernadotte's chief of staff seized 5,000 pairs of shoes from a depot of Davout's corps, Berthier worked him over verbally, then took the cost of the shoes out of his pay. The 1809 campaign began with a major staff muddle. Much of the Grande Armee, including parts of its staff, were in Spain. Sent into southern Germany to begin preliminary preparations-inspect a Westphalian di vision, organize the engineer service, assist Daru, buy boats, check the fortifications of Augsburg and Ingolstadt-Berthier had no command authority (a point missed by even competent historians). Napoleon's orders from Paris were incomplete, overoptimistic, and garbled by a communications failure. Fortunately, the Austrians were slow, and Davout alert, and the crisis passed. For 1812 the Grand Quartier-Gdndral had been carefully reorganized and strengthened. There was even a historical section under Jomini, though he soon was dropped off at Vilna." However Russia was too vast, its roads too poor, the Grande Armee now too large and moving on too wide a front for its communication system to work effectively. Orders and reports were slow to arrive. Napoleon became increasingly frustrated, constantly snapping at Berthier. (It is possible that he realized, early in the campaign, that this time he had bitten off too much to chew!) At least twice, he projected large-scale reorganizations of the Grand Quartier-Gdndral, only to see them collapse because of the lack of enough staff officers and the distances involved. Each time Berthier picked up the pieces, and eventually Napoleon resumed their old relationship. Staff losses were heavy during the advance on Moscow, and heavier during the retreat, but Berthier and Monthion and its frost-nipped survivors were Eugene's right hand in his reorganization of the army. Those losses, however, hampered the Grande Armee in 1813. Odeleben, the Saxon officer with the Grand Quartier-General, was one of those who noted that the staff was neither as strong nor as experienced as the year before. Of Napoleon's most trusted aides-de-camp, Bertrand, Lauriston, and Mouton had become corps commanders; Rapp was cut off in Danzig. That threw more of a burden on the officiers d'ordonnance, especially their senior officer, Chef d'Escadron Gaspard Gourgaud. Berthier's staff likewise had fewer veterans. And again, the extent of the campaign, waged across the whole of Germany and northern Italy, spread the experienced officers too thinly. Napoleon's first abdication in April 1814 was the end of the Grand Quartier-Gdndral Imperial. What he mustered for 1815 was truly something else. At the best, staff work was difficult. Communications between units normally was by mounted messenger, at risk of accident, delay, or interception. Orders had to be written out with quill pen and ink, one copy at a time, often by the wind-tossed light of a campfire, sometimes while astride a nervous horse, not infrequently under fire. Language difficulties multiplied as the foreign contingents increased: A fair number of French officers spoke German or Italian, and Poles could be used as interpreters on the eastern frontiers, but in Spain it often was necessary to employ various dubious adventurers, such as former officers of the Spanish Swiss regiments and Flemish deserters from the Walloon Guards. It is therefore impossible to pin down many developments and changes in Napoleon's plans. The records are incomplete or (especially those of 1812) lost, and the hour at which many orders were received or important events occurred is not known.20 If anything went wrong, the automatic tendency among historians seems to have been to blame Berthier-a tendency fostered, it appears, by their uncritical acceptance of Jomini's spiteful version of Napoleonic history.21 • Courier [Link]/pl' o2'iertl/1er Berthier's Staff: Courier, 1809