his epaulettes; in 1799 he became a colonel. Somehow he got involved in diplomacy, especially French-Russian relations (he would be Napoleon's ambassador to Russia during 1807-11) and slipped under the influence of Alexander. A glutton for work, he was capable of simultaneously handling major responsibilities and a host of unrelated details. He served devotedly, yet his loyalty was increasingly "sicklied o'er" with a dragging pessimism. During the Hundred Days he was Napoleon's Foreign Minister; after Waterloo, Louis XVIII proscribed him, but Alexander secured his pardon.' His brother, General Auguste Caulaincourt, had been killed at Borodino leading his cuirassiers into the Russian "Great Redoubt." Caulaincourt was assisted by a number of ecuyers (equerries), selected for their knowledge of the care, training, and handling of horses. Under them came a small army of wagon masters, brigadiers (assistant wagon masters), piqueurs (outriders), coachmen, postilions, palefreniers (grooms), and veterinarians. He also had supervision over the emperor's pages and the officiers d'ordonnance-the last possibly to put their horses and domestics under firm control. The portion of the Maison Civile detailed for service in the field was subdivided into a number of self-sufficient units, each with its "bouche" (mess), "bedchamber," supply, and remount elements. Its hour of departure was kept secret, and its actual departure was always on short notice. Different units would move out by different roads, to the confusion of enemy intelligence, later regrouping along the Emperor's actual route. It grew steadily more elaborate and larger, as much from lessons learned during past campaigns as from Napoleon's growing desire for more comfort in the field. There had been times when only the lightest elements of the Maison Civile could keep up with the Grande Armee's advance and times when its supplies ran low. Napoleon took what he found: one day a palace with a baroque bedroom for every junior staff officer, a few days later a smoky, lousy hut. In early 1807 Napoleon wrote Josephine that he was staying in a tumbledown farmhouse, with some straw for his bed, amid wind and mud. Compared to a modern army headquarters company, the outfit that Napoleon-assisted by Berthier, Duroc, and Caulaincourt-organized for the 1812 campaign seems luxurious at first glance. But in fact it was carefully designed to take care of the commander of an army of some 500,000 men during a long campaign into Russia. The roads would be bad, and districts through which it advanced would have been thoroughly foraged by the Grande Armee's leading corps. Napoleon pared back the original proposal, considerably reducing the tentage and mess equipment.' This 1812 organization had four sections: the service Leger ("light service" or "pack service"), the service d'expedition ("forward service" or "field train"), the heavy baggage, and the equipage de selle (a pool of saddle horses; American cowboys would call it a "remuda"). All were escorted by detachments of gendarmeria d'elite to protect their contents and secure them any necessary right-of-way. The service leger was designed to support the petit quartier-general, which usually moved close behind the advance guard; it could split into two separate detachments, each of which could move with a different corps (and could, if necessary, subdivide itself into two smaller teams), thereby ensuring the Emperor the basic necessities of food and shelter wherever he went among the forward elements of the Grande Armee. (Understandably, the wagon master who commanded the service leger was required to have had previous service as an officer.) Except for two small field forges and two light Polish wagons loaded with "biscuit" (hard bread), all its baggagemess sets, four small tents, two folding beds, office and medical supplies, and bread, brandy, and rum-was carried by pack mules. (In going over the list of liquors previously taken, Napoleon canceled the sweet dessert vin de Lunel and ordered eight bottles of rum replaced with good brandy and a ninth with a bottle of vinegar.) Each man of the service ldger-the wagon master, two brigadiers, three stewards, two valets, four footmen, eight grooms, and two saddlers or farriers-had his own saddle horse or mule and also his own half-pint flask of brandy. (The old French "pint" was practically an English quart.) In case some accident during the march kept a service leger detachment from continuing to move as unit, the mules with the mess equipment were to be pushed ahead, followed by those carrying the tents; the two mules with the camp beds had only third priority. The service d'expedition supported the main body of Napoleon's personal headquarters. Its twenty-six vehicles10 and their 160 horses transported headquarters personnel, the large tents for the camp imperial, and miscellaneous light baggage. It also was supposed to carry 1,000 rations of biscuit, rice, and brandy; a reserve of 2,000 rations of biscuit; and unspecified amounts of wine, bread, and vegetables (probably dried). The heavy baggage had twenty-four vehicles, including Napoleon's big "berline" (traveling carriage), and 240 horses. Its load included headquarters secretaries, maps, records, and papers, personal baggage, and more rations." It also acted as a mobile depot for sick or disabled men and animals from the three other services. Its extra horses could be used to establish relay stations for headquarters carriages if rapid, long-distance movements by Napoleon and a small staff became necessary. Since it usually contained valuable state papers, the Emperor's berline always was escorted by an officer and several enlisted men from the Imperial Guard. An active commander who spent hours in the saddle, Napoleon required a reserve of spare mounts for himself and his immediate attendants. His 1812 equipage de selle consisted of 130 saddle horses, divided into ten "brigades" of thirteen horses each-two chevaux de bataille (chargers) and one cheval d'allure (easy-gaited riding horse) for Napoleon himself and one mount apiece for Caulaincourt, the equerry on duty, a page, Napoleon's mameluke, a guide (locally procured, who might officiate with a rope attached to his person, to ensure his devotion), an outrider, three mounted grooms, and Napoleon's surgeon. The grooms functioned as horseholders under the outrider's supervision. All four might have to give up their horses to officers whose mounts had been killed or exhausted. (Each brigade also had a dismounted groom, whom the rest probably regarded as a low, menial character. He remained behind with the equipage, where his duties would have included policing up the picket line and similar fragrant details.) In drawing up instructions for the equipage de selle, Napoleon gave his proclivity for detail-chasing free rein. The equipment of each of the horses for his personal use was to include a pair of pistols in the saddle holsters; every evening one of his mamelukes was to draw the charges from them and reload them, under the supervision of Caulaincourt or the equerry on duty. 'I In the field the mameluke was to carry a flask of brandy on a shoulder strap and have Napoleon's cloak and a spare coat in a roll across the pommel of his saddle. The page on duty would carry Napoleon's telescope; his saddle bags would contain an extra handkerchief and pair of gloves for Napoleon; a small supply of paper, pens, ink, pencils, and sealing wax; and a pair of dividers. Naturally, the surgeon brought along his instruments and bandages; the two mounted valets of the service Leger that followed Napoleon's party would have additional medical supplies. The outrider also carried a flask of brandy and stowed various Imperial trifles in his saddlebags. Everyone was to carry his own ration of bread or biscuit. (All of these directions were accompanied by minutely detailed annexes, since lost.) As major-general (army chief of staff), Berthier also had a considerable organization, set up along the same lines as Napoleon's. Both were supported by supply train units, in 1812 by a specially organized six-company battalion that was to carry a month's rations, including wine and brandy, for 6,000 men. One company supported the Maison, another Berthier's headquarters and staff, the other four the troops and civilian personnel of the Imperial headquarters and such detached groups and individuals as might have business with it. When the campaign moved rapidly, Napoleon continued catch-as-catchcan, utilizing any available buildings or the tents carried by the service Leger. When operations slowed, he would drop back to the camp imperial to deal with the accumulating business of his empire. Part or all of the service leger would follow to refit and resupply; needed elements of the heavy baggage would come forward. Duroc controlled the camp imperial, the core of which was eight large tents: Napoleon's; one for Duroc, Caulaincourt, and any other "grand officers" with the army; one for Napoleon's aides-de-camp; one for the officiers d'ordonnance; another for Napoleon's secretaries and the senior officers of his military and civil maisons; and three for their lower-ranking assistants. These were set up around a 600-by-1,200-foot rectangle; nearby were the designated places for vehicles, picket lines, the ambulance, kitchens, guard units, and the like. To prevent unauthorized tripping over Imperial tent ropes, it was forbidden to enter the camp except by two designated "gates," a formal one opposite the front of the Emperor's tent and a "service" entrance in the rear. At night the camp perimeter was marked out by lanterns, and a lantern was placed to illuminate the entrance of each tent. Every evening the aide-de-camp on duty made certain that a section of the service Leger was fully loaded and ready to move out; day and night an aide-de-camp, a page, a brigadier of the equipage de selle, and a sergeant of the service squadron were on duty (relieved every two hours) at the Emperor's tent, ready to alert their respective units if the Emperor gave the word to mount up. The horses of the duty staff and cavalry escort stood ready, bridled and saddled. And the Emperor's field kitchen always had a kettle of soupe (French for "slum" or "whatever you've got" stew) hot and ready to dish out to weary riders and quill-drivers alike. The "ambulance" (French for something between a first-aid station and a field hospital) tended what would now be termed the "Indians and broken-feather chiefs," since the Emperor, Berthier, and other very senior brass would have brought along their own personal medics, like Dr. Yvan who was Napoleon's "shadow" through all his campaigns. These, however, were conscientious professionals who would roll up their sleeves and pitch in when the available business opportunities swamped their less exalted brethern. Napoleon's tent-made according to his instructions: roomy, light, and strong-was striped light blue and white. It was divided into two "salons" (outer rooms), an office, and a sleeping chamber, all furnished with cleverly designed folding camp furniture.'; Roustam and Napoleon's personal valet slept on pallets outside his "bedroom," and various benighted officers might be accommodated in the salons when no other shelter was available. The selection and organization of the camp imperial's site was the responsibility of Duroc's marechal des logis and fourriers, assisted by the service d'expedition's escort of gendarmerie d'elite and sapeurs (combat engineers) of the Guard. A battalion of Old Guard infantry guarded the camp. Berthier's camp was set up some 900 feet from the camp imperial. It had tents for the army headquarters staff; the headquarters trains, including the attached supply train battalion, were parked with it. For security on the march and in camp, it had the Compagnie d'Elite du Grand-Quartier General, a battalion of Baden infantry, and variou