m former guide units were acceptable as enlisted men, but Napoleon would choose their officers! Though many such units were formed, their history is scant and piecemeal. Their size varied considerably, and their dress was more often hussarstyle than the prescribed dragoon uniform. A few became reasonably well known. Mortier formed a company in 1803 while commanding French forces in Hanover. Next year, that command-and its guides-passed to Bernadotte (and to Victor after Bernadotte was wounded) through the 1805-7 campaigns. They were thereafter taken into the Imperial Guard. Meanwhile in 1806 Mortier, again commanding in North Germany, formed a "picket" (small detachment) of guides, which seems to have been incorporated into Berthier's guides the next year.16 During 1805-6 Napoleon solved the guide problem by authorizing his marshals to take the elite company of a cavalry regiment for their escort. That was most unpopular with cavalry colonels; Davout's solution was to draw fifteen men from the elite company of each of his corps cavalry regiments. Other marshals did much the same. Another function of guide units was to furnish interpreters. In 1803, while mustering his army for a hoped-for invasion of England, Napoleon recruited a company of Guides-Interpretes de 1'Arm6e d'Angleterre in Paris and seaports along the English Channel. Men had to be less than thirty-five years of age and able to speak and translate English; they must have been in England and know something of its topography. Irishmen were accepted. The company remained on the Channel coast until 1807, when it was redesignated "Guides du Prince de Neufchatel," (Berthier's princely title) and sent east to join the Grande Armee in Poland. There they served as Berthier's guides and guards, moving just behind the service squadron of Guard cavalry. The next year they went into Spain with army headquarters and remained until 1811-no doubt their linguistic skills proved useful there. That year, recalled to France, they were rechristened "Compagnie d'Elite du Grand Quartier-General" (General Headquarters Elite Company) and resumed their 1807 duties. Enough for a cadre survived Russia; reconstituted, they served through 1813 and into 1814. After Napoleon's abdication, their few survivors went into the 2d Dragoon Regiment. In October 1805, offering generous pay and allowances, Napoleon ordered the formation of two squadrons of retired officers and noncommissioned officers to serve as interpreters and messengers. Unable to secure enough qualified volunteers, he ordered each dragoon regiment to provide two qualified soldiers with at least eight years of service. This organization was disbanded 30 June 1807, the ex-dragoons being assigned to Berthier's guides. Two units require further research. One is the "Company of Guides" (in 1812 Napoleon referred to them as "The Guides of the Army"), which apparently always served with the Grand Quartier-General. And tenuous evidence suggests that the other-"Guides of Napoleon"-might have been formed during the Hundred Days." Such small units, however, lacked the manpower to guard a headquarters as large as the Grand Quartier-General and its trains. Detachments of the Imperial Guard saw to Napoleon's own security, but those were combat troops, and the Emperor wanted them available for action. During 1805 a cavalry regiment was detailed for headquarters duty, but that weakened the Cavalry Reserve. Thereafter Napoleon used provisional cavalry units or trustworthy foreign troops. In 1809 he assigned to Berthier the 1st Provisional Regiment of Chasseurs a Cheval (composed of four squadrons detached from the 10th, 22d, and 26th Regiments of Chasseurs a Cheval) for escort and estafette duty, plus Berthier's own Neufchatel Battalion, an unspecified "Swiss battalion," a company of 100 gendarmes, and the "Company of Guides." In 1812 there was the 28th Chasseurs a Cheval, some Saxon light cavalry, gendarmes, the "Guides of the Army," and a battalion of Baden infantry, which Berthier praised for good conduct and efficiency. On occasion, the Grand Quartier-General threw out branch establishments. A "quartier-general volant" ("flying headquarters"), consisting of a senior officer, a few adjoints, and guides or orderlies, might be set up close behind the army's outpost line or cavalry screen to collect and organize all information concerning the enemy and rush it back directly to army headquarters. In Spain in 1808, Napoleon left Aide-Major- General Mathieu Dumas with a small staff at the northern communications center of Burgos to control and expedite the flow of reinforcements, supplies, and messages and to establish an intelligence network in northern Spain. When General Sir John Moore made his foredoomed stroke at the French communi cations, Mathieu Dumas showed high ability in promptly gathering troops to meet it. Similarly, a rear headquarters was established in 1813 under General Antoine Durosnal as "Commandant of French Troops and Garrisons in Saxony" to cover the Grande Armee's communications. (He also was told to get supplies to the hospitals.) Subordinate headquarters were minor versions of the Grand QuartierGeneral, becoming simpler as they fell lower on the military totem pole. In 1806 Murat's Cavalry Reserve had a staff of six aides-de-camp, a chief of staff (General Auguste Belliard), a sous-chef, and fourteen adjutantscommandants and adjoints, including two Polish officers and one engineer. Davout, commanding the III Corps, had six aides (the senior was Colonel Jean Burke), a general of brigade as chief of staff, four adjutantscommandants (one of whom functioned as sous-chef, with another in charge of all reconnaissances), five captain adjoints, and two Polish captains. The chief of staff, sous-chef, and senior aide could speak in Davout's name. This staff also included the general (and his staff) commanding the corps' artillery and a colonel of engineers. The administrative staff was an inspecteur aux revues, a commissaire-ordonnateur, two commissaires-ordi- naires, a senior medical officer, a corps paymaster, and "directors" for the bread, meat, forage, and postal service. Marshals also usually had one or more personal secretaries to help with office work. The commander of the attached gendarmerie was the corps provost marshal. Division staffs consisted generally of three aides-de-camp (the senior of whom was a chef de bataillon), an adjutant-commandant as chief of staff, three adjoints, possibly an attached Polish officer, and the officer commanding the division's artillery. To these might be added a sous-inspecteur des revues and a commissaire-ordinaire and their assistants. Being tactical organizations with no administrative functions, a brigade's staff consisted of a single aide-de-camp, to whom might be added one officier d'ordonnance (or "de correspondence"), temporarily detailed from one of its regiments. Napoleon disliked this practice, but even Davout had to employ it at times when casualties or distant missions had left him short-handed. Such officers retained their regimental dress but added the appropriate aide's brassard. Army, corps, and division headquarters all had a wagon master, who had charge of their wagon trains, saw that all vehicles were in good condition and properly marked with their unit number or owner's name, planned and controlled the train's marches, and kept unauthorized vehicles out of his column. Regimental wagon masters were sergeants; their vehicles normally were grouped into the division train under an adjutant or lieutenant wagon master, who was given a detachment of troops for escort. A wagon master's collateral duties included the collection and delivery of mail and sometimes such highly disagreeable chores as evacuating the dead from hospitals. (In Mainz during the 1813 typhus epidemic that could be done only by driving convicts to the task at gunpoint.) Thoughtful chiefs of staff checked their trains frequently. There were always senior officers who would try to bribe or bully the wagon master into allowing them to add extra horses and vehicles to his column and unauthorized vivandiers who would attempt to wheedle their rickety carts into it for greater safety. Staff relationships between army headquarters somewhat resembled those later adopted by the German Great General Staff: chiefs of staff corresponded directly. (In 1796 Berthier, with the Army of Italy, set up direct communication with General Jean Reynier, chief of staff of the Army of the Rhine and Moselle, through French diplomatic agents in Switzerland.) Apparently it was believed that chiefs of staff could settle various mutual problems among themselves more easily than if their respective commanders' egos got involved. Berthier spent months in that roughneck Army of Italy, teaching subordinate staffs to put in citations for distinguished conduct promptly and to keep their "journals of operations" up-to-date. He was decreasingly polite with generals and adjutants-general who forgot to put the hour and date of writing on their letters or submit reports on time. It was an educational process that would be transferred to the Grande Armee and would last through 1814. In 1813, even Antoine H. Jomini, a coming military theoretician and chief of staff to Ney, would be slapped under arrest for sending in a strength return in the wrong form and failing entirely to submit his bimonthly status report. (Wrung by such disregard for his self-asserted genius, Jomini deserted to the Russians.) An approved form for messages was established;" letters were numbered in sequence; registers were kept on orders sent and received, with copies of the orders attached. Officers rendering reports were to distinguish emphatically between what they themselves had seen and what had been told them. An officer receiving an order from a higher headquarters gave the messenger a receipt, then noted on the order the date and hour he received it; later, he would add the day and hour of his headquarters reply and, when appropriate, a summary of that response. In both orders and reports the names of places, streams, and enemy commanders were underlined. There was, to the distress of many gallant officers, emphasis on proper handwriting and-far worse-correct spelling. During 1806-7 Davout was constantly chewing on his excellent corps cavalry commander, General Maruluz (actually Jacob-Francois Marola) for wild varients in his spelling of the names of villages. (They were in Poland, where every village seemed to have six names: Polish, Prussian, Russian, and the phonetic hashes the average Frenchman made of each.) It was made a court-martial offense to throw away any headquarters correspondence without the chief of staff's permission, as it was for any staff officer to open correspondence addressed to the chief of staff, unless the latter had given him authority to do so. Two hours before dusk each evening each corps sent a staff officer to army headquarters with its latest reports. The officer would be fed and assigned a place to sleep, if only under a leaky tree, until Napoleon's orders were ready for him to carry back early the next morning. (During 1812 that requirement was doubled: Every morning each corps would send an officer to the Grand Quartier-General to report any events during the night.) All division commanders, accompanied by their senior artillery and engineer officers, were to be with their advance guards by 4:00 AM. to go over intelligence reports collected during the night and to issue their own preliminary orders. Also, in very modern style, each division was to have a liaison officer at its corps headquarters, and adjacent divisions were to exchange liaison officers. Another staff regulation was the result of a peacetime accident. After the end of the 1809 campaign, the Grand Quartier-General was set up in Schonbrunn Palace outside Vienna. A bad fire broke out in a neighboring village, and drummers 