

• ' ' /! (

 r ..- ,. ' ,1 t\· • ' • 1 ' ,. t , • •• .J l i , 1 t• • /I'

## '<) ccqyer,§'ral}O Costume ae .go/o, (80$

 General Caulaincourt, Grand Ecuyer, Ceremonial Uniform, 1805

CHAPTER IV The Imperial Way You must be a soldier, and then a soldier, and again a soldier, bivouac with your advance guard, be in the saddle night and day, march with your advance guard to have the latest information, or else stay in your harem. You make war like a satrap. Good God, is it from me that you have learned that? From me who, with an army of 200,000 men, am at the head of my skirmishers. Napoleon' It had been very well for the General Napoleon Bonaparte of 1796-97after all, just another French general, if a promising and sometimes disquieting one-to travel in an ordinary coach between battles. A general could not study reports or maps astride a galloping horse. (Even gentle, well-trained horses usually object to having a map suddenly unfolded right behind their ears and take unpredictable action to remove that nuisance.) Also a coach was more comfortable for long trips, conserving the general's energy. (By our modern foam rubber standards, travel in such a vehicle would make a ride in a 1943 jeep seem like a nap in a deep feather bed. But, as Porthos said, "Everything degenerates.")' So transported, General Bonaparte raced across Italy and France, followed by a small squall of his aides, staff, and guides. The only mentioned improvement to his coach was the substitution of heavy artillery wheels for the more fragile civilian variety. On the few occasions when he could get Josephine away from her Paris delights (which too often included the intimacies with some boudoir hussar or other), she might travel with him during the war's slack periods.' He then sometimes took connubial liberties with her, allegedly to the embarrassment of whatever staff-jacks might be accompanying them. Other generals did as much or more, and frequently with ladies not their wives, but their fingerings have not been recalled for the titillation of posterity. They never made emperor. General Bonaparte had lived simply with little show. But the Emperor Napoleon must ride to the wars with a certain pomp and circumstance, calculated to awe enemies and impress allies. It was even more important that he be able to continue his functions as France's civilian chief of state, even while engaged in commanding his armies in the field-something he could not do out of his hip pocket. So the big green traveling coach that Emperor Napolon I used on the road between campaigns and battles was a mobile command post, roomy, strongly built, and wonderfully constructed for riding ease, stability, and maneuverability. Its interior was organized with the same thoroughness Napoleon gave every other personal concern. There was one seat across the rear, divided by a partial partition, so as to allow two passengers to work simultaneously without interfering with each other, however rough the road. Facing the seat was a cabinet with locked drawers for dispatches and reference files, a map case, and a sliding leaf, which could be pulled out to make a convenient writing desk. Other compartments held writing materials, a traveling library, telescopes, food, liquors, toilet articles, and various other necessities and conveniences. A large silver chronometer hung from one wall. At night the whole was lighted by a large lamp, securely suspended in the back of the carriage's interior so that its light fell over the passengers' shoulders. One of the Emperor's folding field beds went under the coachman's seat; bedding, spare clothing, and a reserve of prepared torches were stowed in the boot (rear trunk). The builders took special pains to make the carriage proof against all weather; one English account even claimed-most likely erroneously-that it was also bulletproof. In such a vehicle Napoleon could work, read, eat (reportedly the lantern also could be used to heat food), or sleep. (His side of the seat could be converted into a bed; the other, which Berthier normally occupied, could not.) Day or night, whenever a courier reported, Napoleon went over the dispatches and consulted his maps. If a reply were required or further action necessary, Berthier prepared any needed orders while the great coach rumbled on its way, trailing its comet's tail of aides-de-camp, officiers d'ordonnace, staff officers, guards, led horses, and domestics. A word to one of the officers riding beside it-one of the Emperor's equerries on the right, a senior officer of Guard cavalry on the left-brought officers forward to deliver them. His journey to the battle done, an emperor must mount his charger and ride into action like a soldier. As a boy Napoleon had learned to ride after a fashion on Corsican hill ponies; he received some formal training in equitation during the year he spent at the Royal Military School in Paris, but the riding master there insisted that it took three years to produce a good horseman. In truth, Napoleon was too short-legged to get a proper grip of his mount; he frequently rode slumped down in his saddle and deep in thought, sometimes even holding the reins in his right hand. His balance was poor. Yet he was an able, daring, reckless horseman who rode farther and harder than any ruler and most other men of his generation. He had many falls and spills, several of them serious, but none of them daunted him. In twenty years of his wars he had some nineteen horses shot from under him. Even on Saint Helena he at least once evaded his English escort officer by leaping his horse over a hedge and rough-riding off across country. As Emperor, Napoleon kept a personal stable of approximately one hundred horses, both carriage and saddle. For his carriage there were Norman or Limousin light draft animals, chosen for strength, speed, and stamina. For riding he used stallions or mares; his preference in colors ran to white, gray, "flea-bitten," bay, and chestnut. German horses were usually too big and heavy for his taste; he liked Arabs and Barbs and horses from the best Spanish and Russian breeds, as well as several from Murat's "haras sauvage." Some of his finest mounts were gifts from the Sultan of Turkey and the Emperor of Morocco. In addition, French consuls in the Middle East made purchases for him. (There was a minor international incident in late 1809 when Napoleon discovered that Austrian uhlans had intercepted a shipment of six horses purchased by his consul in Aleppo.) Old favorites would be "pensioned off," left to a life of green pastures and warm stables. Napoleon loved horses in much the same way he loved his soldiers-an honest affection that did not keep him from using them as hard as his situation might require. They were painstakingly schooled by Monsieur Auguste Jardin, one of his senior equerries; taught to stand steady despite blows, the noise of battle, the smell of blood, and flags flourished about their heads; trained to go instantly from a dead halt into a fast gallop, and to halt as instantly. Napoleon's habit of starting off at a gallop, whether on horseback or in his carriage, irked Caulaincourt, his Master of the Horse. As new lieutenants of the author's generation were emphatically told, such practice damages a horse's hoofs and legs: The first fifteen minutes of a ride therefore should be at the walk to warm them up. Caulaincourt held to a similar rule and would insist that the imperial coach start at an easy gait. A general may live hard or go easy, just as he chooses, but he needs must sometimes eat, drink, and sleep. General Bonaparte took little care of himself, risking death and indigestion with equal indifference. But he had carried no such responsibilities as the Emperor Napoleon shouldered and so had had no need for as complete a staff and headquarters establishment. Finally, there is the human fact that soldiers and even emperors grow older and lose some of their youthful indifference to sleeping on rock piles and going hungry, especially when there may be no real need for it. A commander will have a clearer head if he gets wholesome food and enough rest, and the whole army benefits thereby. (General George Patton once remarked that tired generals were more of a problem than tired enlisted men.) The requisite care and feeding of Napoleon in the field was the responsibility of his Maison Civile (Civilian Household), the efficient organization that staffed the various imperial residences and their satellite establishments. Select details from this service accompanied Napoleon into the field, continuing their normal functions of providing him-as best they couldwith bed, board, transportation, and personal services. Its organization was a Siamese-twin affair, under the two senior officers of Napoleon's household. Geraud Christophe Duroc and Armand Augustin Caulaincourt. Both were generals of division, honest gentlemen from the old nobility, intelligent, courageous, exact in their duties, polished yet emphatically plainspoken when necessary. They did not shout and pound the table like Lannes. They did offer considered advice; if it were rejected they quietly went out and did the best they could with their Emperor's decision. Napoleon trusted them: Caulaincourt he respected; he gave Duroc his friendship in life and his tears afterward. He made them both dukes, Duroc of Frioul, Caulaincourt of Vicenza. In the midst of his back-to-the-wall battles in 1814 he remembered suddenly to give Caulaincourt permission to marry an exiled lady love. Duroc was Grand Marshal of the Palace, responsible for the administration of the Imperial household and for Napoleon's personal safety.' Originally an artillery officer, then one of General Bonaparte's aides-de-camp, he was brave, generous, and sweet-tempered, a gifted administrator and expert penny-pincher. Blunt General Auguste Bigarre noted in passing that the greatest order and decency reigned in the imperial palaces Duroc supervised. In the field Duroc was assisted by a marechal-des-logis du palais and two (after June 1808, four) fourriers du palais.' His green-liveried staff included chamberlains, controllers, stewards, cooks, footmen, and valets. Napoleon's personal orderly, the mameluke Roustam,' also was assigned to the Maison Civile, as was a small medical detachment consisting of a doctor, a surgeon, a pharmacist, and several aidmen. Duroc was mortally wounded in action in 1813, ripped open by a Russian cannon shot that had glanced from a nearby tree. As sometimes happens, he had had a presentiment of death that morning and had given his watch and personal papers to his domestic. He left a daughter, whom Napoleon remembered in his will. Caulaincourt was Napoleon's Grand Ecuyer (Master of the Horse); as such, he organized and supervised all Imperial journeys, had charge of all couriers, was responsible for the movement and supply of the Maison, managed the imperial stud farm at St. Cloud, where Napoleon's horses were raised and trained, and pulled out the Emperor's chair at dinner. The dovetailing of his and Duroc's duties must have been an intricate business, at least at first until they could work out their equivalent of a modern SOP,' but there are no reports of friction between them. After Duroc's death, Caulaincourt handled both positions temporarily until Henri Bertrand took over the post of Grand Marshal, which he retained until Napoleon's death. Caulaincourt's father had been a general. He himself went into the cavalry as a gentleman cadet in 1787. By merit, favor, or both he was a captain in 1792. He remained loyal while most cavalry officers were emigrating but, like other "aristocrat" officers, was cast out of the army as an untrustworthy ci-devant. He then enlisted and spent two starvling, ragged years (which probably taught him a lot about foraging and improvising, as well as an impressive collection of dogface adjectives) in the ranks. Lazare Hoche gave him back 