 no discipline, many of them-as Marbot described his own domestic, Woirland-hommes de sac et de corde, meaning expert thieves. Moreover, there were strings of spare horses, authorized vehicles for personal baggage and supplies, and, inevitably, unauthorized vehicles and gaggles of equally unauthorized camp followers, male and female. Keeping such a crowd in any sort of acceptable order was a full-time job for the headquarters gendarmerie. Both Napoleon's Maison and the Etat-Major-General customarily moved in two echelons: Napoleon and Berthier with a small advance party (Petit Quartier-General) of their key personnel well up behind the advance guard, and the main headquarters farther to the rear. The advance echelon traveled light, carrying only five (later, four) smallish tents. Those were used, however, only when no buildings were available, the advance party being small enough to fit into a barn or a few sheds. Napoleon spent the night before Eylau bivouacing in the snow in the midst of his Old Guard, asking one stick of firewood and one potato from each of their messes, then roasting the potatoes in the ashes and sharing them with his staff. (Whatever the state of Napoleon's headquarters, the Old Guard called it "the palace.") The headquarters rear echelon moved as one unit under the control of a colonel of the gendarmerie. All vehicles were numbered and required to keep their places in column. Campsites were selected and prepared in advance so that the marches usually went very smoothly. In 1813 the headquarters, then operating on a very reduced scale, had fifty-seven vehicles, forty-two of which belonged to an attached supply train company, plus ten Maison vehicles. But, as Caulaincourt wrote, the Grand Quartier-General required numerous vehicles because it had to carry most of its own supplies. The Grande Armee always fairly well stripped the countryside ahead of it. Headquarters standard operating procedures were never written down but were engrained by long custom since 1796. Napoleon made all major decisions and many minor ones. Except for reports to the Bureau des Renseignements, all incoming military correspondence went first to Berthier. (In those cases where marshals or detached aides-de-camp had been ordered to report direct to Napoleon, they were required to furnish Berthier duplicate copies.) Berthier examined them, put a concise summation at the head of each paper, and sent them to the Maison. With very bulky reports on important subjects, he would prepare a brief analysis (which he did with remarkable skill) and attach the original papers for Napoleon to study, in whole or in part as he wished. All "internal" orders issued to elements of the headquarters were in written form if time permitted; if not, they were confirmed in writing as soon as possible. (Properly managed corps headquarters followed this same procedure; Augereau was very strict about it.) Napoleon usually went to bed around 7:00 P.M., after having supper with Berthier, and got up between midnight and 1:00 A.M. By that time reports from the corps would be in and processed. After studying them and his situation map, he issued his orders for the day. Almost invariably he dictated them. (His handwriting was an impatient scrawl, as his thoughts raced ahead of his pen. In October 1802 he wrote out an order transferring the 2d Cavalerie Regiment from Verona [Italy] to Rambouillet. The War Ministry staff read Vienne [France] for Verona and Pontarlier for Rambouillet, to the vast confusion of the 2d's worthy colonel.) Because Napoleon spoke very rapidly, the person who took the dictation-his secretary, Berthier, Duroc, or an aide-de-camp-usually was the only person who could decipher his own notes and write out a fair copy. That was presented to Napoleon for any necessary corrections and his approval. That done, it was turned over to "Father" Salamon and his assistants. If it were complex, they broke it down, each man dealing with his specialty. When the required number of copies had been produced, Berthier checked them and dispatched them. This was normally about 3:00 A.M., when it was becoming light enough to reduce the risk that the bearers might get lost or be ambushed. Usually two or more copies were sent, if possible by different routes. One approved copy went into the headquarters archives. Not all copies of any one order might be identical, since Napoleon occasionally added last-minute thoughts to some of them. In the case of orders dealing with supply, organization of the line of communications, personnel, and other matters not involving actual combat operations, Napoleon often merely indicated what he wanted done, leaving Berthier to draft and issue the necessary orders. (In 1805 Napoleon directed Berthier to organize a cuirassier division, giving only the time, place, and regiments involved. Berthier wrote the necessary orders to the generals who would serve with it, the regimental commanders, the depots that would provide remounts, the artillery headquarters that would furnish the divisional artillery, and the administrative headquarters that would have to see that food, forage, and quarters were available.) Also, once Napoleon's operational orders had been issued, Berthier prepared the necessary supplementary orders for the army's supply trains, reinforcements en route, detached units, and the like. As Thiebault, in an unwontedly fair-minded mood, remarked, Berthier was the man Napoleon needed, "capable of relieving him of all detailed work, to understand him instantly, and to foresee what he would need."" Back to the rear was the Grande Armee's administrative/logistical headquarters, headed by the Intendant General. His service, sometimes termed the Intendance, was responsible for all supplies except weapons and ammunition; medical treatment and evacuation; financial records and expenditures; and the collection of contributions in cash and kind levied on occupied territories. Barring a few attached officers and the medical detachments, it was a completely civilian institution, though its members wore uniforms with colored facings that identified their services. The Intendant General himself had neither military rank nor any authority over troops in the army's rear area, except for those gendarmes placed at his disposition by the Grand Prevot. His staff consisted of commissaires des guerres (equivalent to contemporary British and American "commissaries"), divided into commissaires-ordonnateurs (comptrollers), two classes of commissaires ordinaires, regisseurs (managers), and inspecteurs assisted by amazing numbers of commises (clerks), gardes-magasins (storekeepers), and miscellaneous employees (workmen). The best-known of the Intendant Generals was Pierre Daru, intelligent, courageous, and gifted with a body and mind of iron. He never asked Napoleon for personal favors, lived at his own expense in enemy country, and became famous for his translation of Horace's works. Unfortunately, he tended to protect unworthy subordinates against the accusations of military commanders. Elements of his organization were assigned to all division, corps, and army headquarters; major fortified places; and territorial commands. To encourage virtue, in 1804 Napoleon took away the commissaires des guerres' traditional function of inspecting military units' records and accounts and assigned that duty to a new organization, the Inspecteurs aux Revues. Their mission was to inspect regimental organization, administration, pay, and property accounts, muster rolls, and personal records-all of which had fallen into extreme confusion. (They did not concern themselves with the combat readiness of units they inspected, that being the responsibility of the army inspector generals.) Carefully selected from older generals and field grade officers and the pick of the commissaires ordonnateurs, they had assimilated military rank, ranging from captain to general of division, and received the same military honors. Units they inspected had to turn out in full dress uniform. Their reputation was excellent; during the first year or so of their existence they found almost 50,000 false returns, thereby damaging a number of promising careers. Some were attached to army and corps headquarters; others operated out of the Ministry of War, to turn up suddenly (as Long John Silver said in Treasure Island) "like the devil at prayers" in units where the colonel might have been confusing the regimental pay chest with his personal retirement fund, or where recruits were reported to be without the clothing their units supposedly had drawn to outfit them. For complicated frauds, Napoleon used his "Auditors of the Council of State," a group of picked young men whom he trained carefully as future high-level civil servants. They became prefects, administered occupied territory, and handled a variety of special missions. A number of them served with the armies; one managed Napoleon's Bureau des Renseignements during his later campaigns; another served as Augereau's chief of staff in 1814. But their most immediate function seems to have been investigations of high- level misdoings.14 Major headquarters needed security detachments of combat troops. Accordingly, in 1792 the French government authorized a small company of "Guides" for each of its armies. The army commanders promptly formed one or more large companies of select soldiers, each uniforming them after his own taste, which was seldom restrained. Augereau's "hussar-guides" of 1797 would have dazzled a blind man. Hulking General Jean-Charles Pichegru rather overdid things in 1793, giving his guides a bright yellow uniform that got them nicknamed "canaries" and doubtless produced bird whistles from vulgarian dogfaces. No self-respecting soldier would join the outfit. Usually those units were organized as light cavalry, but in the Armee des Alps practical old General Francois Kellermann formed a foot company out of former poachers and smugglers who were dead shots and knew all the back trails. Later, they were transferred to Napoleon's Armee d'Italie, guarded his headquarters rear echelon at Milan, and finally grew into the chasseurs a pied of his guard. Some guide organizations, notably Massena's and Napoleon's, came to include a detachment of horse artillery. The guides' duties included the personal security of the commanding general, his headquarters, and baggage; straggler and traffic control; shortrange reconnaissance; and courier service. They also were a small force of picked shock troops that could be put in instantly at moments of crisis. They drew "high pay"; even Massena's lived reasonably well. When guide units were slackly disciplined, things were apt to go sour. The mounted guides Napoleon took over with Italie in 1796 may have been brave, but their indiscipline and carelessness almost let some wandering Neapolitan cavalry capture him. A few days later he had a larger and different set of guides, "a Company of two hundred dare-devils, well mounted, brave, picked men and horses"" under a Captain Jean Bessieres, famous for courage, leadership, and discipline. This was the beginning of the Chasseurs A Cheval of the Imperial Guard. Similarly, in 1799 Macdonald's guides failed to cover him against a dash by Austrian cavalry. Macdonald caught a saber cut to the head and another on his right thumb; he and his horse together were knocked down and ridden over. Thereafter, too crippled to ride and barely able to stand alone, he blundered into a battle against Suvorov's Russians and Austrians at the Trebbia. Macdonald lost. On becoming First Consul, Napoleon promptly abolished all existing guide organizations. Their loyalty might be more to their generals than to his government, and some of his generals were restless and envious. In their place each army was to form a strong company of dragoons (166 officers and men) under the title of "Guards of the Commanding General." Soldiers fro