hon Fain headed this office. The last two left valuable memoirs. The Bureau de Renseignments (intelligence) was largely military. It gathered and collated information from its own spies and agents and from French ambassadors (each of whom had his own intelligence net), translations of foreign newspapers, other French armies, fortress commanders, and the various Paris ministries, including the Cabinet Noir. Most of this was strategic intelligence, more applicable to long-range planning than the immediate tactical situation, but it was passed on to Berthier's "cabinet." Finally there was the Topographic Bureau with its extensive collection of maps, fortress plans, and notes on the "resources" of the area, headed by Chef d'Escadron Louis Bacler d'Albe, who maintained Napoleon's situation map. (D'Albe had painted mountain landscapes in his youth but found making maps of them more interesting.)' Besides his military maison, elements of Napoleon's maison civile accompanied him into the field to see to his housing, feeding, and transportation. Its members, however, frequently found themselves drafted for military duties. Also accompanying the army with his small personal staff was Napoleon's Secretary of State, Hugues-Bernard Maret, who was the pivot of his civilian rule, just as Berthier was of his military command. Genial and fond of witty conversation and clever women, Maret was an outstanding executive, tough under stress, brave under fire. He received the reports of the nonmilitary Paris ministries, studied their contents, and briefed them for Napoleon, attaching his own recommendations where pertinent. Subsequently he sent back Napoleon's decisions over his own signature. Later, after Talleyrand's thefts and betrayals became too unendurable, Maret was promoted to Foreign Minister. In that capacity, he shifted his office forward to Warsaw and then to Vilna in 1812; his energy in collecting supplies and reinforcements was a generally overlooked salvation for the retreating Grande Armee. The Grand Etat-Major General was Berthier's domain. Its core was his cabinet (or Etat-Major Particular), a small knot of experienced men mostly officers retired because of wounds or civilians-hard workers and devoted to Berthier, who looked after them. They were expected to show initiative and be ready at all times. Its most important divisions were those responsible for troop movements, intelligence, and personnel. The first, headed by retired Captain Salamon-"Father" Salamon during later campaigns-who still carried a musket ball embedded in his thigh, had the responsibility for the copying and distribution of orders prepared (meaning dictated, checked, and approved) by Napoleon, Berthier, and occasionally other senior officers. Salamon was noted for being almost as enduring as Berthier and another walking encyclopedia on army organization. He was addressed politely as "monsieur." (During this period, while Berthier was both Major General and Minister of War, his cabinet also included a "Bureau of Troop Movements in the Interior" to handle orders for troops not with the Grande Armee.) Intelligence was under Colonel Blein of the Engineers. It dealt with operational intelligence received from the corps headquarters, including reports of their own spies, patrols, and reconnaissances, and information obtained from deserters, prisoners, and inhabitants. Blein had a special section for more exhaustive interrogation of any individuals who might appear to possess valuable information. In those cases when Napoleon had ordered some units-especially advance guards or cavalry screens-to report directly to him, Blein was supposed to receive duplicate messages. The personnel section kept up the army's muster rolls, based on the corps daily strength reports, and data on the strength and location of troops en route to the army. Berthier also had two private secretaries, one of whom, a Monsieur Le Duc, also served as the treasurer/cashier for funds put at Berthier's disposition for such headquarters expenses as espionage, local civilian labor, and food. When orders were to be prepared, the cabinet worked in silence and strict seclusion. All other personnel were barred until they were finished, a rule that even Napoleon himself normally observed.' Besides his cabinet, Berthier's personal staff included his aides-de-camp and a number of attached officers. The aides, young men of good family, were famous as the headquarters enfants terribles: hard drinkers, gamblers, duelists, rakes, great turners-up of petticoats, daredevils and heart breakers, always in debt, insufferable, but who arrived always where they intended to arrive, never got lost, knew how to speak proudly and firmly, even to marshals. A message entrusted to them was always delivered, neither obstacles nor man stopped them.10 In 1807 Berthier put them into an appropriate uniform: white-plumed scarlet shako, black pelisse, white dolman, and scarlet trousers, all plentifully bedecked with gold lace. For parades, at least, they favored dapple-gray horses and leopard-skin schabraques. One of Berthier's few affectations was his insistence that his aides alone might wear scarlet trousers. Consequently, there was a painful incident in Spain when one of Ney's aides-decamp turned up in scarlet pants and had to find a replacement pair at once in a poor village where an extra pair of trousers without holes rated as sinful luxury. (Berthier's insistence was not simply eyewash: Napoleon liked to be able to pick out the various groups of aides-de-camp at a distance or in a crowd.) Berthier found tasks to keep his young hellions busy. One of them, Louis-Francois Lejeune, later a famous military artist, was set to "marking with pins on our maps the positions of all our troops ... and the reinforcements on their way . . . the stores of provisions, forage, shoes, etc, the parks of artillery and transport wagons, and even those movements of the enemy we had been able to ascertain. [They] looked very much like chessmen."" Other attached officers would include a number of Polish interrogators, interpreters, and translators; liaison officers from the states of the Confederation of the Rhine; sometimes a naval officer to handle river supply craft; one or more inspecteurs aux revues; a director of the telegraph system; a colonel of the gendarmerie; and the commander of headquarters guides. Polish officers had the reputation for unusual skill at languages and the ability to make themselves understood anywhere. Also, most of them were fine horsemen, capable of making a deep reconnaissance behind the enemy's lines, passing themselves off as Prussians, Austrians, or Russians. The Etat-Major General proper was a highly flexible organization. In 1805 it was directed by Premier Aide-Major General (assistant chief of staff) Antoine Andreossy, assisted by a Colonel Vallongue, who functioned as charge des details (approximately, "office manager"), dividing up the work and supervising its completion for submission to Berthier. At that time there were three "divisions." The first handled troop movements, orders of the day, countersigns, officer assignments, and general correspondence; the second, supply, headquarters administration, police, and hospitals; the third, prisoners of war, deserters, recruiting, and military justice. As new problems arose or old ones required more attention, a new division or subdivision would be set up with an adjutant-commandant and one or more adjoints to handle the extra work. Thus in 1806 a fourth division was activated to supervise the Grande Armee's lengthening line of communications; in 1807 others were added for correspondence with fortress commandants, reconnaissance, headquarters troops, and the Vaguemestre (wagonmaster) general. Parallel with this organization, Mathieu Dumas functioned as "Deputy Assistant Chief of Staff" and marechal general des logic, in charge of marches, camps, and stations. Apparently this double barreled organization hit occasional snags, probably because of overlapping responsibilities. Around 1809 Berthier simplified matters, employing only one assistant chief of staff, General Joseph Bailly de Monthion. All responsibilities for the preparation and dispatch of orders, intelligence, and personnel records were concentrated in the cabinet. Monthion functioned as headquarters commandant, controlling its movements and housekeeping, and the movements of minor units not attached to any of the corps. His staff of adjutant-commandants handled such minor records and reports as did not go to the cabinet, line-of-communications matters, and prisoner of war escorts and guards. The Etat-Major General also included a Service Topographique, responsible for the army's map supply and for topographical reconnaissance, terrain studies, and map-making. It was accompanied by a mobile printing shop and a small copper-plate press, the first used to publish orders of the day and bulletins, the second for the preparation of rough maps, based on both existing maps and recent surveys. (This work was done by the tiny Service de I'Imprimerie, a director and eight men, which moved with the headquarters and could produce hundreds of such maps in just a few hours.) If necessary, the presses could be carried by three pack horses and accompany the troops anywhere." One last part of the Etat-Major-General was its pool of officiers a la suite (awaiting assignment). Those officers were used to fill vacancies caused by casualties or promotions, to serve as commanders and staff officers for the new fortified bases established along the line of communications as the army advanced, or for special commands or missions. A certain number of such officers always accompanied the army; others were recovering from wounds or sickness or were called forward from France as the campaign developed. Normally this pool was established at some major forward base, and individual officers were summoned as needed. The Grand Quartier-General Imperial was accompanied by the satellite headquarters of the artillery, engineers, Cavalry Reserve, and Grand Prevot (Provost Marshal General), as well as the Grand Bureau of the Service Militaire de la Poste (Military Postal Service) and the Payeur General of the Service de la Tresorerie. The first two managed their respective pares; the artillery also was responsible for the pontoon bridge trains and ammunition supply; the engineers for the supply of tools. Compared to our modern staff system, the Grand Quartier-General Imperial seems haphazardly organized, lacking the definite division of staff responsibilities into our familiar G-1 (Personnel and Administration); G2 (Intelligence and Counterintelligence); G-3 (Plans and Operations); G-4 (Supply and Logistics); and G-5 (Military Government). However, the Grand Quartier-General was designed to fit Napoleon's method of making war, and Napoleon was his own G-3. Except in Russia in 1812, where the distances proved too great for contemporary means of communication, the Grand Quartier-General worked, and worked very efficiently. Napoleon's and Berthier's comments on our swarming, deeply echeloned, subdivided, and specialized staffs, electronified and computerized to a point somewhere north of their scalplocks, would be interesting. In one way, however, the modern staff is more efficient. The modern general rides in a government-issue vehicle with a soldier driver or pilot; his meals are prepared by soldier cooks in the headquarters company mess. A Napoleonic general provided his own horses and vehicles, the "domestics" to look after them, his own cook, and sometimes food and drink for himself and his staff. Each general officer had his aides, and those aides had their horses and their domestics, as did the attached foreign officers. Horses and men had to be fed and doctored. The unavoidable result was that any large headquarters was cluttered with swarms of civilian employees, under little or