troops awaiting shipment to Haiti but took care to be in Paris when the shooting was scheduled to start. The plot was detected; Bernadotte protested that he knew nothing of it and so wiggled free. He served well enough in 1805, but in 1806 he deliberately disobeyed orders, waiting between Napoleon's battle at Jena and Davout's at Auerstadt, hoping one or the other would meet disaster. His services in 1807 were unexceptional; in 1809 Napoleon gave him command of the Saxon contingent, but Bernadotte was in a carping mood, which passed into open insubordination. The Emperor sent him back to France. Fate then suddenly blessed Bernadotte. The dwindling Swedish royal family required a replacement for their recently deceased crown prince. Back in 1806 Bernadotte had been kind to captured Swedish officers. Now-thinking him a relative and loyal supporter of Napoleon-the innocent Swedes offered him that position. He quickly became the nation's actual ruler, the Swedish King being prematurely senile. Bernadotte quietly managed a reorientation of Sweden's international policies. Russia was Sweden's traditional enemy; in return for promises of Russian support, Bernadotte made it a Russian client state. After Napoleon's retreat from Russia, he joined the Allied powers against the Emperor but did not take part in their 1814 invasion of France, having hopes that Tsar Alexander might help him gain the French throne. His new allies did not trust him; Frenchmen considered his pretensions a joke." He was given Norway as his reward. The Norwegians tried to fight, but a British blockade of their harbors crippled their attempt to meet Bernadotte's invasion. Tall and dashing, with alert button eyes and a fine beak of a nose, Bernadotte showed remarkable bravery in action and was a competent tactician. He could outbrag Augereau or be convincingly charming to people who might be useful to him. He had fine moments, as in 1790, when he faced down a Marseilles mob to save his colonel. But he trusted no one and was himself untrustworthy-able, but always the enemy of his superiors. Of all the marshals, the most caricatured has been Louis-Alexandre Berthier (1753-1815), oldest of the active marshals, Napoleon's chief of staff (major-general) from 1796 into 1814, and the only man always able to read Napoleon's convulsive handwriting. Short, stocky, a skilled horseman, amazingly strong in mind and body, he remained clearheaded after as many as eight days without sleep. 14 One staff officer put it wryly: After a hardriding day, Berthier rested by getting out Napoleon's orders for the next day's actions. Berthier's father was of the "high middle class," a senior officer of the Topographical Engineers (Ingenieurs-Geographes) and head of the War Ministry's Depot of Maps and Plans. He trained young Berthier carefully; at sixteen, the boy was on active duty as a "topo" and soon in demand as an instructor, serving with infantry, dragoon, and light cavalry regiments, as well on staff duty. A volunteer with General Rochambeau's expeditionary force in America during 1780-83, he was promoted for bravery and efficiency. Back in France, he was taken into the new Staff Corps (corps d'etatmajor), where his duties included a study of Frederick the Great's military system and the testing of new tactics and organizations. When the Revolution began in 1789 he was thirty-six, a lieutenant colonel with the Order of St. Louis and an established reputation. He supported the Revolution, at considerable risk, for the Order of Saint Louis (which his father also had received) had made him a quasi-noble. Louis XVI praised his conduct as commander of the Versailles national guard, and Lafayette made him a colonel-both potentially dangerous honors. His services, however, were sought by several commanders; he served as chief of staff with L'Armee du Nord, was promoted to marechal de camp, and then charged with incivisme and placed on inactive status. Next year, he went to La Vendee as a volunteer and promptly was drafted as L'Armee de la Rochelle's chief of staff. His skill could not compensate for the cowardice and incompetence of that unfortunate army's sans-culotte generals. Wounded and disgusted, he came to Paris to ask for better troops. Criticizing sans-culottes was dangerous; Berthier was lucky that he was merely again put on inactive status. Possibly he was saved by the fact that even those sans-culottes praised him. He was recalled in 1795 as chief of staff to Kellermann, with the armies of Italy and the Alps. By 1796 he was a general de division and urging an offensive into northern Italy, much like the one Napoleon would loose after taking command of Italie. (Consequently, a good many officers, both friend and foe, at first suspected that Berthier was Napoleon's military mentor.) In fact, Napoleon took Berthier as his chief of staff only after his first choice-a General Duvigneau, now forgotten-refused the assignment. Their relationship quickly became one of mutual dependence; soldiers referred to Berthier as Napoleon's "wife." In addition to his duties as Chief of Staff, he also served as Minister of War during 1800-1807. All the problems connected with the needs of the army and their transport .. . were thrown on him The armies were scattered from Bayonne to the Bug, from Calabria to the Helder, and as far as Stralsund; they were shifting their positions incessantly, had to be supplied and directed, and the whole of it passed through [Berthier's] handsHe always was the clearing house through which all business was transacted......the infallible day book to which Napoleon was referring every minute of the day to make sure how his balance stood. For this reason he had to be in attendance on him on every battlefield, on reconnaissance, at every review . . . without fail on every study of terrain." Because he worked in his Emperor's shadow, Berthier's accomplishments seemed matters of routine. In 1800 he organized the Army of the Reserve and moved it across the St. Bernard Pass into Italy; in 1805 he planned the Grande Armee's march from the English Channel into Austria; in 1809 set up the assault crossing of the Danube before Wagram; and in 1812 handled the unprecedented concentration for the invasion of Russia. Napoleon rewarded his services generously: In 1806 Berthier became Prince and Sovereign Duke of Neufchatel (modern Neuchatel in western Switzerland); in 1809 he received the battle honor of Prince of Wagram. He was also Grand Huntsman and Vice Constable of France. With those honors came large donations in cash and kind. Finally, in 1808 Napoleon married Berthier (then fifty-four) to the twenty-four-year-old niece (described as not pretty, but sweet) of the King of Bavaria. There was a concealed sting in that honor. Since 1796 Berthier had been enamored of one Signora Guiseppina Visconti, a famous beauty, unfortunately married to an Italian diplomat. Guiseppina was a lively lady with expensive tastes and possibly more loves than two. Napoleon had told Berthier repeatedly that he was making an ass of himself. Shortly after the marriage, Signor Visconti died. Things, however, worked out: Berthier became the fond husband of a young wife; his wife and Guiseppina became close friends. To the army and the world at large, Berthier was a mixture of brusqueness and courtesy, never suffering fools gladly, but never insulting, and careful of his subordinates' self-respect. Always ready, properly uniformed, orderly in all things, he was a quiet example to a new, restless army of thoroughgoing individualists. His courage was beyond doubt, whether in rallying a broken column and ramming it home through keening Austrian musketry across Lodi bridge or, in 1812-just turned sixty, exhausted, and very sick-pulling the command of the retreating Grande Armee together after Murat had deserted it. His position made him the handy butt of both Napoleon's temper and the other marshals' anger, but neither of those affected the even tenor of his work. His health finally failed toward the end of the 1812 campaign; he was ill during much of 1813 and 1814, but his work still was well done, his orders clearly written, his insistence on proper staff procedure unrelenting. Behind his methodical exterior was a private man-generous, cleanhanded, merciful, and merry when time and place permitted, but only with those "over whom he had no authority."" Napoleon, after Waterloo, uttered the fitting epitaph for the man he had once named his "companion in arms": "If Berthier had been there, I would not have met this misfortune.' )17 Jean-Baptiste Bessieres (1766-1813) was something of a man apart. Tall and straight, impeccably uniformed, rigorous in discipline, cold and dry in his speech, he nevertheless was "the Good Marshal," a brother to every soldier. He alone kept the old-fashioned military style of both powdering his hair and wearing it in a long queue, with "dog's ears" on either side of his head. It became him and seemed entirely natural with his ever youthful face. Like Murat, Bessieres was from the south-central department of Lot. Son of a well-to-do surgeon, he received a good education, but something cut short his own medical studies.18 He joined the National Guard, then was selected as a member of Louis XVI's new Garde Constitutionelle. According to family tradition, Bessieres was a Royalist; after the Garde was disbanded, he remained in Paris, possibly in the King's pay. Though he himself would claim to have been a red-hot Jacobin, it appears that he was seen on the wrong side at the Tuileries when the Marseilles volunteers and Paris mob stormed that palace. Heading south, he enlisted in a cavalry regiment and was elected second lieutenant in early 1793. Cavalrymen had little chance of distinction in the Pyrenees and coastal Italy, where Bessieres' regiment was transferred in 1795, but he won promotion to captain and was noted as both intrepid and calm. That combination attracted Napoleon: When he reorganized his mounted guides in 1796, he made Bessieres their commander. Thereafter, Bessieres was one of Napoleon's shadows, commanding the cavalry of his guard. In 1806 Napoleon tested him as commander of a cavalry corps and found that he lacked the experience and self-confidence to handle such a large force on semi-independent missions. In 1808 in Spain, as the first French occupation unraveled, Bessieres saved the French communications by routing a larger Spanish army at Rio Seco. Recalled to command the Cavalry Reserve in 1809, he did probably his finest fighting at Aspern-Essling, holding Napoleon's center through the bloody day, then leading rallied light infantrymen forward to snipe down Austrian gunners. He was in Spain again in 1811: Massena accused him-possibly justly-of failure to support him at Fuentes d'Onoro. A chance cannon shot killed him at the beginning of the 1813 campaign. Bessieres was a thorough soldier and all soldier-frank, honest, loyal, exact, even-tempered, possessing a cold courage that never flinched. In rare crises, like Aspern-Essling, a sudden berserk fury (inelegantly compared to the frenzy of a wounded horse) possessed him. Many considered him a better cavalry commander than Murat: He was more intelligent, had better judgment, and took better care of men and horses. His other strengths were an iron integrity and an innate kindness. Napoleon entrusted him with odd jobs, like checking on the thieving architect in charge of building Eugene's Paris house. He asked for nothing except his pay, would give his supper to burned-out- refugees in Moscow, and took special care of his hospitals. The Old Guard wept when he was mistakenly reported killed at Wagram; priests in Leon and Old Castile said masses for his soul in 1813. Bessieres married his childhood sweetheart, a very devout cousin, described as having all the virtues of an angel. Possibly she was too angelicafter Bessieres's death his desk was found filled with love l