d expect promotion and a good troop duty assignment. The adjutants-commandants and adjoints of the staff proper tended more toward specialization and frequently made a career of staff work. (As in other armies, it was noted that the lowest staff levels tended to fill up with officers of low energy and little talent, who, having found a home, thereafter tried to evade troublesome chores and hardship.) Lower headquarters, having few aides-de-camp and small staffs, of necessity made use of enlisted men-termed ordonnances (orderlies) or chevaliers d'ordonnance-to carry reports and orders. They were detailed from light cavalry regiments, two to each brigade, four to each division, to be rotated every twenty-four hours.12 Apparently they were supposed to be returned to their regiments when a battle was imminent-at least Berthier so ordered Ney as the Grande Armee pushed for Jena in 1806. Light cavalry details also were required to set up estafettes (also called postes de correspondence) some 8 miles apart to connect army headquarters with various subordinate units. The ideal post had nine men, three of them always ready to ride (plus, one suspects, a good NCO to keep the troopers out of nearby cellars, kitchens, and bedrooms when not in the saddle). Cavalry colonels and generals hated such details, which weakened their regiments, used up their horses, and left men scattered all over the landscape. Generally the cavalrymen hated them, too; occasionally they would simply vanish and rejoin their regiments. Mounted messengers could travel at approximately 7 miles per hour at the trot, 10 at the gallop. For long distances Napoleon was content with the five miles per hour achieved by alternately walking and trotting; on the battlefield he wanted speed. Typically, icy Laurent St. Cyr told his aides never to be excited-it upset the troops to see an aide go by headlong, especially if he sprayed them with mud and dust while passing. The better a staff officer's horses and the more of them (within reason) he had, the better his chances of successfully completing his missions and, eventually, of promotion. The "consumption" of horses was therefore high: foundered, wounded, sick, killed in battle or by accident, stolen, neglected or sold by dishonest domestics. Sometimes, as on Lobau Island in 1809, officers' horses were eaten by hungry soldiers. Officers might pick up replacements by requisition, buy them from soldiers who had captured them, or-rarely-capture one themselves. Coignet thus acquired a pretty white Arab that carried its tail like a plume from a Bavarian in 1813, and a fine horse from an English cavalryman in 1815. It was normal to send two copies of all messages of any importance, their bearers taking different routes, but that was something of an essential minimum. In 1813, before the battle of Bautzen, Berthier had to pass orders to Ney's detached wing of the Grande Armee, which was supposed to strike into the Allies' right rear. (Ney, assisted by Jomini, would completely fumble that mission.) Berthier's own French staff officers were mostly young and ignorant of the country; he therefore sent off three messages in cipher: one by a Saxon officer on his staff at 10:00 A.M., one by a spy an hour later, and the third by a Saxon forest ranger at 3:00 P.M. All three were picked for their knowledge of the woodland trails. An even more ambitious effort was required in Poland during January-February 1807. Levin Bennigsen, the Hanoverian mercenary who had lied his way into command of the Russian army," launched a midwinter campaign across Poland, hitting little but air and ending in a position ideally suited for his destruction by converging French columns. The countryside between Napoleon's headquarters and Bernadotte's corps being acrawl with roving Cossacks, Berthier sent eight officers off with copies of his orders. Unfortunately, most of Berthier's experienced staff officers were sick or wounded, forcing him to use several newly commissioned cavalry sous-lieutenants Napoleon had assigned him. The first seven officers were intercepted by Cossacks; one of the new shavetails, traveling by sleigh, was asleep when caught, and so failed to destroy his copy of the orders. Thus forewarned, Bennigsen barely struggled out of Napoleon's trap. The eighth officer got through, but Bernadotte's 18,000 men came into the field two days late. (De Brack suggested that the two safest methods of carrying a dispatch were in your glove, so you could readily get it into your mouth and swallow it if about to be captured, or in the barrel of your pistol, the discharge of which would destroy it.) Berthier normally encoded important messages but had not in this case, either because it would have taken too long or because so many messages had been intercepted that he considered his current code compromised. The Grande Armee used two types of code: a "Grand Cipher" for communications between Napoleon and his marshals and a "Little Cipher" used between the various French armies and the War Ministry. The first consisted of three- or four-numeral groups, representing words or parts of words (in November 1813 "117 814 763" meant "the last letter."). The "Little Cipher" was of the same type but had a smaller number of oneto three-numeral groups: "48" was "infantry," "78" was "garrison." (Some of these messages cannot now be deciphered.) Apparently no substitute ciphers were kept in reserve; if the one in use was considered compromised, messages were sent "in the clear" until a new one could be developed." "Personel" ciphers often were set up for direct communication between Napoleon and his commanders in other theaters, mostly of the simple "substitution" type in which one letter replaces another. These were easy to use but also easy to crack. Another easily improvised cipher described by De Brack was harder to break: the two officers in correspondence each had copies of the same book, subject or language immaterial. The first numeral in the coded message indicated the page used, the second the line at which enciphering commenced, and all others the positions of the letters used to make up the message. The message was written in one continuous line with no indication of the spaces between words. If intercepted, such a message was impossible to decipher unless the enemy understood the type of cipher used, and had a copy of the same book. Maps are an absolute necessity to a commander for both the planning and conduct of operations. At this period, however, the scientific mapping of Europe had barely begun; few large-scale maps were available, and none had an accurate relief system to show variations in elevation. Consequently, the Grande Armee had to use foreign maps, which were frequently unsatisfactory and always in short supply, or make its own. Map-making was the task of the Topographical Engineers, who were probably the world's best. During late 1805 and early 1806, for example, they completed a general map of the whole area between Strasbourg and Vienna, accompanied by notes on its resources, and detailed maps of the principal battlefields and movements of French, enemy, and allied troops during the 1805 Ulm/Austerlitz campaign-as well as sketches of "curious sites." Napoleon wanted quick, accurate mapping as the army advanced; maps of battlefields already won could wait until the campaign was over. Beginning the 1806 Jena campaign with an unsatisfactory Prussian map, which did not show the names of the smaller villages, he ordered the country remapped on a one-to-100,000 scale (one inch on the map representing 100,000 inches on the ground). When the continuing advance into East Prussia and Poland took the Grande Armee off the edge of its existing maps, Berthier and Sanson put all the topographical engineers with the army to work on that one problem. One "topo" moved with the advance guard of each corps, every day sending back his surveys to the GrandeQuartier General, where Sanson combined them into a general map. After the victory at Friedland in 1807 these maps of Prussia and western Poland were combined, completed, and extended. For 1812, Napoleon used this new map, which reached to the Dvina River. From there on to Moscow he made do with a copy of a Russian one-to-500,000 map, which Lauriston had secured during his recent service as ambassador to Russia, undoubtedly by greasing certain tender Muscovite palms. Russia's rulers have always objected to having such information taken out of their country. This Russian map was a rather crude affair, which showed little topography beyond streams, lakes, and rivers. (Using it, half of the Russian army lost itself while withdrawing from Smolensk and spent the night marching in circles.) It had to be supplemented and filled out with sketch maps made as the French advanced. Production of the new map began slowly, since all place names had to be roughly translated into French. The Grande Armee still had an insufficient supply of them when it moved off. Davout protested that his big corps had only seven copies, yet Clarke was happily suggesting that he be allowed to put the map on the French public market. In time, these maps became plentiful enough to issue down to colonels of light cavalry. (Marbot has a wondrous-and incorrect-tale to tell about it.) Between campaigns the topographical engineers extended and improved their coverage of Europe, Spain included. Their efforts were supplemented by their skillful counterparts in the Army of Italy. Many generals built up private collections; that forthright beau sabreur General Antoine Lasalle had a splendid collection, probably part legal booty, part just picked up. The gaps in the "topos"' initial maps could be at least partially filled by the reports and sketches provided by officers on reconnaissance. Before a campaign opened, Napoleon might send senior officers off in civilian dress or on ostensibly innocent errands to look at the Grande Armee's probable line of march. Thus, despite the rapidity with which he had to launch his 1805 campaign, Murat, Savary, and Bertrand went incognito across friendly Bavaria, Savary to pick up what he could of the threatening Austrian invasion, while Bertrand, being an engineer, was to study the roads, bridges, and fords; the characteristics of the various towns and the distances between them; the width and flow of the Inn River and its tributaries; and the height of its banks, and which bank dominated the other-all of which Napoleon called the "ensemble du pays" (lay of the land). Reconnaissances during actual operations were vital, enabling the commander to maintain contact with the enemy. Most of the marshals-Lefeb- vre, who required careful briefing, was the only notable exception-understood this business. De Brack, however, considered that the average French light cavalrymen handled such missions poorly, being too likely to follow the same routes at the same time day after day, thereby giving the enemy the opportunity to set traps for them. They also, he felt, were too ready to pick a fight when quiet sneak-and-peep scouting would get more results with far less risk. (There were officers who, weary from heat and hard riding, would pause at a tempting tavern and demand refreshments. That usually was safe enough among the unenterprising Austrians, but never in Spain or along the Empire's eastern marches.) Napoleon favored large reconnaissance detachments, fearing that weak ones would be too easily caught; he was much distressed at first by Davout's expert employment of small parties. Once a cavalryman, out of a family of cavalrymen, Davout trained his light horsemen-Amiel conspicious among them-to probe quietly and deep. The night of June 8-9, 1807, a German-speaking brigadier was sent with seven chasseurs A cheval and a spare horse to bring in the parish priest of a village in the debatable area between the two armies for interrogation. Leaving his men concealed on its outskirts,