 he rode in alone, to find the village jammed with Cossacks, with twenty of them quartered in the parish house itself. Passing himself off as a Prussian, he plucked the priest from their midst. (Probably the priest was a Pole and so came will ingly.) Another brigadier, sent to pick up the mayor of another small town, had a rougher time. The mayor pretended willingness, then gave him the slip and alerted some nearby Prussian hussars. Evading the hussars, the brigadier picked up the mayor of the next village. The next night he came back and extracted the original quarry from his bed. Military intelligence operations during these wars were, naturally, vaguely recorded, as tenuous as fog and sometimes as difficult to describe. Napoleon drew his information from many agencies, by many means, and paid well for it. Much of it came from his diplomatic service, every French ambassador and consul (like those of other European nations) having his own spy net and staff of bright-eyed junior diplomats, who made friends with loose-tongued officials and occasionally did romance their plump wives. All French legations kept records of troop movements observed and details of regimental uniforms and equipment, which went into Napoleon's order of battle files on foreign armies. One of Maret's duties while with the Grande Armee was to manage this diplomatic spy net and to utilize those of France's allies. Special requirements might be levied on occasion: In January 1812 the French resident minister in Warsaw was asked for detailed information on Russia's western provinces, to include roads through the Pripet marshes. The diplomatic service also was a source of foreign newspapers, which Napoleon found most informative. Editors, then as now, were more interested in printing sensational stories than in worrying about national security. In Paris the famous/infamous semisecret Cabinet Noir (Black Cabinet), a mostly civilian organization dating from the reign of Louis XIV, specialized in the interception, translation, and copying of mail, in particular that of foreign diplomats and visitors. Apparently Napoleon used it on occasion to check on the extracurricular activities of his Foreign Minister, Talleyrand, and Fouche, his Minister of Police, that precious pair habitually being engaged in some form of treasonous, illegal/immoral activity for their private profit. Joseph Fouche had begun as a churchman in minor orders and a teacher. During the Revolution he was the bloodiest-minded of Jacobins, rejoicing in his butcheries of helpless civilians at Nantes, Lyons, and Toulon. He also was wonderfully skilled in police, intelligence, and counterintelligence work and, gifted with a bone-marrow-deep instinct for intrigue and survival, had aided Napoleon's 1799 coup d'etat. He served Napoleon skillfully but not honestly. Often pardoned for his intrigues, he was caught in 1810 in private negotiations with the English. Once more remembering 1799, Napoleon unfortunately did not carry out his threat to hang him but did replace him with Savary. Furious, Fouche wrecked his files and scattered his staff. Savary methodically rebuilt both into a more efficient organization. He was an honest, strong-minded man who spoke frankly to Napoleon whenever he thought him unjust, but he was loyal and so came to be feared and hated. While the Ministry of Police's main responsibilities were internal security and counterintelligence (it cracked the Russian spy system that had penetrated the French War Ministry in 1811-12), it also controlled spies operating in foreign territory. In 1809 Napoleon ordered Fouche to dispatch plenty of good spies into Germany. Military intelligence proper was a rather uncoordinated affair. Desaix was the first of the Revolutionary generals to appreciate its full importance and to act on that knowledge, keeping himself well informed concerning the enemy and also the other French armies in the field. If he did not consciously train Davout and Savary, they certainly learned from his example. However, there was no overall, centrally controlled army intelligence system. Napoleon's headquarters had a number of chosen secret agents, among them the famous Schulmeister, who penetrated the Austrian staff in 1805. A preacher's son, a smuggler much of his life, a friend of Lasalle, his loyalty to Napoleon left him poor but apparently happy after the wars, running a tobacco store in Strasbourg (which may have been a front for more smuggling). He sometimes controlled considerable numbers of spies but was essentially a lone wolf. Napoleon paid him well but would not award him the Legion of Honor. Each corps commander was responsible for organizing his own spy system, Napoleon allowing adequate funds for that purpose. Some of them employed experienced professional agents, like the two Jewish brothers who worked for Massena, "very intelligent men, who, to get exact information and receive more money, had the audacity to glide among the Austrian columns under the pretext of peddling fruits and wine," afterward slipping away to meet the advancing French.15 A great many spies, however, were picked up locally and sometimes forced into the business. Thiebault advised recruiting them from among local dissidents; even in Spain the hunted Freemasons (whom the average Spaniard considered the devil's willing minions) often sided with the French. In western Russia, Lithuanians, Poles, Letts, Estonians, and other subjected nations might help the French, even during the retreat from Moscow, as Coignet and Sergeant Adrien Bourgogne testified. Even in old Russia something could be done through the Jewish communities, so long as you were clearly victorious. Jewish merchants and peddlers, noted for intelligence and cunning, went everywhere and attracted little attention. In 1812 Poniatowski arranged with the Mogilev synagogue to send out a chosen member as a spy. Colonel Thomas Bugeaud thought well-to-do peasants made the best "forced" spies; they were hardier and more intelligent than the average, created less suspicion, and were more concerned for the safety of their families and possessions than for patriotism. In Spain, if you had trouble finding a suitable spy, you rounded up all the cattle in your area: The owners would show up to protest, and then you could do business! Other forced spies were obtained by requiring the authorities of newly occupied towns to send out "intelligent men" to collect information on the enemy-who might be their own countrymen-with the implication that his family and property were hostages for his obedience. Spies, Thiebault wrote, should be given a small retainer while not producing anything useful, but be well rewarded when they brought important news, and again when it was verified. They must always be paid whatever fee was promised them. Ambitious men can be brought into your service by promises and flattery, timid men by threats, greedy ones by money. The officer in charge of this partie secrete should take care of his spies' families and belongings while they were on mission and study their personal weaknesses and peculiarities, which might give him a firmer hold on them. Above all, he must take care that none of his spies get to know each other. Men who had had military service were useful, but intelligence and a knowledge of the area in which the spy was to operate were more important. Postilions, traveling merchants, and other individuals whose honest business took them back and forth were likely recruits. De Brack cautioned that no spy should be given written instructions, unless you had reason to think he was betraying you-in that case you gave him false information in writing and sent him off as if you still trusted him. The interrogation of prisoners of war might or might not produce useful information. In 1809 Napoleon wanted as many Austrian officers as possible captured and sent to his headquarters; he also ordered prisoners captured by Eugene at Raab escorted by Polish lancers, picked for their intelligence, who were to chat casually with them and obtain all possible information concerning their regiments. Russian enlisted prisoners, however, were usually too ignorant to be helpful. Immediately after getting the battered Grande Armee across the Beresina River, Napoleon wanted information concerning the Russian forces on its east bank. A French colonel swam his horse across the ice-choked river in the dark, stalked and caught a Russian sentry, and brought him back across his saddle-and the only information the captive could provide was the position of his own company. By contrast, earlier in this 1812 campaign the Russians attempted a counteroffensive. In one of the first cavalry clashes, a Prussian uhlan major fought a man-to-man duel with a Cossack officer between their two regiments and captured him; the humiliated Cossack promptly revealed the Russian plans." The French seldom managed the equivalent of Wellington's famous, splendidly mounted "scouting officers," who shadowed French columns and could be caught only by luck or ruse. But they did have men like Captain la Fontaine, born and brought up in Moscow, who rode through the Russian army in 1812 disguised as a Russian officer, requisitioning fresh horses when he needed them in the name of the Tsar. And in 1815 an officer who spoke Flemish wandered through the English and Prussian camps dressed as a peasant. Such men were better than most civilian spies. Being soldiers, they knew what to look for and understood what they saw. The full achievement of French intelligence during 1812 presents a tantalizing mystery. General Michael Barclay, the original Russian commander, felt that French intelligence had learned his plans because of public disputes among the Russian generals. Indeed, up to Moscow Napoleon usually seemed aware of the general situation of the Russian armies. The frontier between Austria and the Kingdom of Italy was a hot spot of intelligence activity, even in peacetime, because of the Austrian's inbred conviction that northern Italy was theirs by divine right. Napoleon arranged matters there by direct coded communication with Eugene. (Correspondence through Clarke apparently was equivalent to putting your head out the window and telling the world.) Intelligent German-speaking staff officers set up stations on all of the main passes into Austrian territory, quizzing travelers, interrogating Austrian deserters, and intercepting Austrian agents. In 1809 Eugene was told to activate an espionage system under some adroit person who would accompany him into the field, keep information up to date, and recruit spies wherever they might be needed. In 1813, with Austria preparing to rupture its alliance with France, Eugene began pushing spies into Austrian territory. For 10,000 francs, one agent promised to get the Austrian order of battle through his contacts with the contractors supplying the Austrian Army. During 1809 French intelligence (probably from diplomatic sources) indicated that exaggerated reports of Spanish victories were reviving the war spirit in Austria. By early July Berthier (then at Bayonne) wrote Davout, who commanded the forces left in Germany, to infiltrate agents into Bohemia to check on this reported growth of prowar feeling. Davout had already extended his intelligence net into Austria; its reports were so alarming that he began slipping small cavalry patrols across the frontier for sneakand-peek checks on the Austrian forces. Anxious to avoid war, Napoleon told him to keep his cavalry several miles west of the border. Davout may have obeyed, but his cavalry were on top of the surprise Austrian advance as soon as it began. In all this were the problems that still dog the modern intelligence officer. The 2d Italian Chasseurs A Cheval caught a courier from the Russian War Ministry on the road to Smolensk and went through his effects looking for items, edible, potable, or monetary-scattering his dispa