 their hire. In the case of important orders, Napoleon favored officer couriers, who would travel by post vehicles, often going day and night, sleeping in their vehicles, snatching hasty meals while the horses were changed. It was exhausting service and sometimes risky, but the travel allowance was generous, and some hard-up young officers (Marbot was one) welcomed the assignment. Others did not: Canouville, one of Berthier's aides and quite a dashing beau, had been a playmate of Napoleon's widowed younger sister, the lively, lovely Pauline. Years before, Napoleon had given her a beautifully furred pelisse with buttons set with diamonds; Pauline gave it to Canouville, who made the mistake of wearing it during a review of the Imperial Guard. Napoleon's daemonic eye spotted it amid the thousands of uniforms there. An hour later Canouville had dispatches to deliver to Massena, then off somewhere amid the rocks and hungry wastes of the Portuguese frontier-and orders to remain there at Massena's disposition. Marbot's book states his simple epitaph: "He was a man of good wit and of courage and got himself killed bravely."' For priority mail there was a government courier service, created in 1792. Though smartly uniformed and tightly disciplined, it was an essentially civilian agency. After 1809 it seems to have become a branch of the Postal Service, but its true history is still unwritten. The agents of this Service d'Estafettes de 1'Empereur et Roi linked the Grande Armee to Paris, carrying the Empire's dispatches from Lisbon to Moscow by highway or obscure hill path, finding fresh horses where a veteran hussar sergeant would give up and walk, dodging or outriding Cossacks and guerrillas. They traveled by horse, coach, or ship as the situation required; for an especially critical message a courier extraordinaire-a picked man, able to ride day and night-would be designated, but usually they operated in relays, passing the dispatch case from rider to rider. Their points of honor were to travel at top speed-between Paris and Berlin in six days or less-and to somehow complete their mission. On occasion a special relay system might be set up during peacetime. In November 1810, with Russian pressure on Poland increasing, one was opened between Paris and Hamburg, with couriers leaving every midnight. Messages from the various ministries, army headquarters, and the customs service had priority. (The route was reconnoitered and organized very quietly to avoid "alarming" Germany.) This service performed with high efficiency. Even in 1813, with Germany turning hostile and enemy irregulars raiding the Grande Armee's communications, only five of all the daily couriers who left Paris between April 16 and October 23 en route to Napoleon's headquarters failed to arrive safely. Of those five, three were trapped in Magdeburg, one was captured with his dispatches, and the other was caught but managed to hide the papers he carried. During that same period all but two of the couriers sent from the army to Paris got through. After Napoleon's defeat at Leipzig there was high confusion while Napoleon retreated by forced marches from Erfurt to the Rhine and Wrede's Bavarians attempted to head him off. Old Marshall Kellermann, who commanded the Rhine frontier, had had no direct orders from Napoleon from October 5 until October 27, when a courier arrived "who leaving Gotha on the 25th, had managed by a miracle of audacity and skill to cover 240 kilometers [150 miles] in two days along a route infested by Cossacks and partisans, where every inhabitant was a spy and on occasion an assassin."' Such men had to be intelligent, hardy, and completely courageous. Even more select were the Emperor's personal couriers-Courriers du Cabinet de I'Empereur-famous in every post house in Western Europe for their exploits,' men to whose spirit, horse-mastery, trigger-fingers, and instinct for survival the fate of an army could be entrusted. Berthier had several riders of the same quality, conspicious in scarlet and sky blue. These men were addressed in speech and writing as "Monsieur." They were well paid; those who had the luck to bring news of a victory to Paris received the traditional reward of 3,000 livres. (An officer bringing the same news was supposed to receive a gift of diamonds.) Another service, the Courriers du Relations Exterieures, carried dispatches for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Because such messages frequently contained military intelligence, their service had a left-handed relationship with the Grande Armee, and they were not completely unknown at its headquarters. Among the auxiliary courier systems occasionally used by the French, the oddest was the semisecret, half-illegal network maintained by the Jewish communities in old Russia beyond the Dnieper River. It worked swiftly and efficiently, but the Jews had no outside loyalties, being concerned only with their own profit and survival; they served the French, when suitably paid, so long as Napoleon appeared victorious. Once the retreat from Moscow began, they could no longer be trusted. On the battlefield the basic methods of communication were the human voice (occasionally the human foot, applied to a laggard's rump, a method used on occasion by the Emperor himself), and the trumpets and drums. On a slightly higher level, pyrotechnics such as rockets, fire pots, or flares were used for night signaling, though there are comparatively few references to them. A common substitute was the ordinary bonfire: At night, the addition of dry straw produced a very bright flame; during the day, wetted straw thrown onto the flames gave a dense white smoke. (In 1806 the French used this technique on a large scale to produce a smoke screen for their assault crossing of the Wkra River.) Lacking time or material for a bonfire, troops might set fire to a house or haystack. In more settled situations, officers might improvise "field telegraphs" or a "little telegraph of signals." Lieutenant Edmund Wheatley of the King's German Legion described an English version set up on their outpost line in early 1814. It consisted of two upright posts supporting a crossbar, three flags (nature undescribed), and a barrel of pitch: My written orders were if a disturbance appeared among the enemy to lift one flag; if the French piquets retired, two flags; if they fired at me, three flags. At night if they began to be clamorous or retreat to hoist the tub of pitch and set fire to it. If they endeavored to advance, to fire my tent and a bonfire near it and to retreat as well as I could.10 Cannon were used as signaling devices, but they seldom were satisfactory during land operations. The noise of infantry skirmishers close at hand could drown out the sound of distant cannon, and it was seldom possible to distinguish between friendly and hostile artillery fire. Also, sound is a tricky commodity, as several battles during our own Civil War demonstrated. It sometimes fails to carry any great distance or may be damped by fog or rain. On rare occasions "message shells" might be employed. The message was placed inside an empty mortar or howitzer shell and the fuze hole tightly corked. The shell was then fired into a friendly position at a prearranged time and place. During the British siege of Flushing in 1809, the town's garrison reportedly used message shells to communicate with French troops on the other side of the Scheldt channel. For all such methods, the man on horseback remained the principal and most reliable means of communication within an army in the field. The typical eighteenth-century battle had been a tight affair, which a general could direct from a handy hilltop. Napoleon's battles tended to be sprawling, brawls, fought by larger armies over wider stretches of terrain. Napoleon could direct what he considered the vital portion of it, but elsewhere his marshals were on their own. (They had been told what to do and when to do it, but how to do it was almost always up to them.) The marshals, in turn, frequently had to put a like reliance on their division commanders. In such conditions, a commander needed trustworthy officers to act as extensions of his eyes, ears, and will, and sometimes in unexpected crises in a far corner of the battlefield, to think for him and give orders in his name. A large part of a Napoleonic staff therefore would be in the saddle, day and night, carrying orders, observing their execution, reporting the results, conducting reconnaissance, and meanwhile keeping an observant eye on things in general. Losses among aides and staff officers were heavy. The service could be exhausting, and the risks from accident, weather, and enemy action severe. Lists of casualties include many "on reconnaissance," "ambushed," "engorged" (trapped), "assassinated," and "disappeared."" Riding with orders or reports in Spain was the worst. Postmasters and postilions were often in league with guerrillas, local guides could not be trusted unless their families were held hostage for their good behavior. It was best to move quickly and by night-the darker, the better. If you ran into Spaniards, you must act instantly, regardless of odds. If you were captured, death-with torture before death-was likely. Those unpleasant odds were lengthened by Napoleon's insistence that his marshals' reports to him be carried by their aides-de-camp or headquarters staff officers rather than by enlisted men. No matter how complete the dispatches such an officer brought him, Napoleon's knack for interrogation and cross-examination usually amplified its contents several times over. By contrast, the most intelligent enlisted man or professional courier was unlikely to have a wide knowledge of the military situation, and marshals seldom shared their thoughts with them. To somewhat equalize the risks, corps headquarters personnel had an informal arrangement for days of battle, forming up in single file near their commander until needed. The first one took the first mission; on returning, he fell in at the rear of the file, thereafter moving up as the men ahead of him left in their turn. Napoleon himself observed this custom in Italy in 1796, when his younger brother Louis was then one of his aides-de-camp. But Massena at Wagram in 1809-like many a roughneck father who wants his boy educated otherwise than by hard knocks-could not bring himself to send his son into the rout of a French infantry division with orders to rally under the guns of Lobau Island, so sent Marbot instead. Furious at this favoritism, young Prosper Massena-all in nonregulation white, gold, and sable fur-spurred after Marbot, who appreciated his courage but could have done without his presence. Austrian uhlans jumped them. Prosper being no swordsman, Marbot had to cut and thrust for both of them. Off the battlefield, missions were assigned in turn according to duty rosters. Berthier seems to have kept two of these, one for his aides-de-camp, another for officers of the etat-major general chosen for messenger service. In October 1806 the latter group included seven chefs de bataillon, seven captains, and four Polish officers. Two of each category were always on duty, one to receive dispatches, the other to ride. The aides were used for "missions of confidence," usually between army headquarters and major subordinate commands; the staff officers were simply to carry messages, though it was essential that they be able to observe and report intelligently. (The division between these two types of staff officers was fairly definite; generally aides-de-camp were officers of greater dash and forcefulness and often had more influential friends. Quick wit and a cool head were as necessary as courage, for an aide might find himself batted like a ping-pong ball between two angry superiors, treated as a "headquarter's spy," or unexpectedly required to snub up an out-of-hand general. It was an educational job; if he survived, an aide coul