

CHAPTER VI Tall in the Saddle and Under the Rose [T]o get information, it is necessary to seize the letters in the postal system, to question travelers. In one word, you have to look for it. Intelligence never comes by itself. Napoleon, cited by Chuquet' General Omar N. Bradley is credited with the remark that Congress could make a general, but it took an effective communications system to make him a commander. A commander, be he warrior-emperor or wet-behind-the-ears shavetail, needs information as badly as he needs rations, water, and ammunition. In fact, on many occasions he needs information-information concerning the enemy, the terrain, friendly units to his flanks and rear-more than anything else. You can keep going on an empty belly, but lack of information can kill you very suddenly. Every commander therefore has the problem of collecting information from all possible sources and of putting it through that process of collation, comparison, and evaluation that converts raw information into military intelligence. Intelligence concerning the enemy and knowledge of his own forces enables a commander to reach a decision, shape his plans, and issue his orders. But he requires an effective communications system both to receive intelligence and to transmit his orders to his subordinates. Napoleon and the Grande Armee were served by the first really effective long-distance communications system. The French Revolution had done more than take a King's head and spill noble blood; there was an overflow of new ideas as well as violence. Add that lapatrie was in danger, the Revolutionary government having managed to pick a fight with practically everybody, including the far-off United States. France's new rulers therefore were willing to try almost any new tool. Most of the inventions that fervent patriots thrust upon them were impractical at best and rank swindles at worst. But one was neither: Citizen Claude Chappe had a new semaphore telegraph and enough persistence to get authorities to test it thoroughlyeven though one or two of his demonstration models were wrecked by his overexcited fellow patriots, who concluded that he somehow was treacherously communicating with the Austrians. Official endorsement came in 1793, but it took considerable trial-and-error experimentation to learn how to site the various stations for efficient operation, and a year to build the first line from Paris to Lille on the endangered northern frontier. It proved so useful that new lines soon reached out from Paris, eastward to Strasbourg and Huningue and westward to Brest via St. Malo. Napoleon went on with this construction, planning a communications web that would cover his expanding empire. The Lille line, which had been extended to Dunkirk in 1798, was built on to Brussels, with a branch line to Boulogne; in 1809 it was continued to Antwerp and Flushing. The next year a Brussels- Amsterdam line was completed, and in 1813 a spur line was rushed to completion from Metz to Mainz-135 miles in two months. To the south, from Paris through Lyon, telegraph lines spanned Alps and Apennines alike, stretching across northern Italy through Milan to Venice, with a branch line to the fortress of Mantua. An Imperial order uttered in Paris late one evening would have drums booming across Venice barrack yards six hours later, with the garrison under arms and ready to march.' Italian stations were also highly useful to the Viceroy Eugene for internal communications within the Kingdom of Italy. The construction of Chappe's telegraph was simplicity itself: A modest tower, from which rose a thirty-foot mast with a movable wooden crosspiece (the "regulator," approximately a foot wide and 14 feet long) pivoted at its top; at each end of the regulator was hinged a 6-foot "indicator." At rest, with the indicators extended horizontally, the telegraph looked like a large T. The whole was painted black for maximum visibility. The regulator had four positions: horizontal, vertical, and a 45-degree tilt to either right or left. Indicators had seven possible positions, each 45 degrees apart, making a total of 196 different combinations, or "signs." All parts were thoroughly braced, and the indicators were counterweighted to make their movement easy. Regulator and indicators were shifted by a system of cables and pulleys, controlled by levers at the base of the mast in the tower below. Chappe's ingenious design provided that each lever was always in the same relative position as the regulator or indicator it controlled, making supervision easy. Half of the 196 signs were used for messages, half for administrative signals. Messages were sent one letter at a time, at an average speed-depending on such factors as weather, visibility, and operator skill-of one to three signs a minute. In favorable weather, one sign could be sent from Paris to Lille (150 miles) in five minutes. The time required for sending a complete message could be considerably reduced by encoding it so that each sign represented an entire word or phrase. One of the more appreciated features of the Chappe system was the security with which it could transmit information. Only the originator and addressee of an encoded message needed to know the code employed; the telegraph personnel in between them merely transmitted what was put before them. It would be futile for a spy to attempt to copy the signs passed between stations, since he would not know what message or code system they might be handling at that time. Drawbacks, of course, existed. Though lanterns were mounted on the regulator and indicators, night signaling was always difficult. In fog or heavy storms, the telegraph might not "march" at all' and messages so delayed might arrive in the midst of a changing situation, to the confusion of the recipient, as with Berthier in 1809. Siting the stations required skill, practice, and a thorough study of local terrain and weather. A good many of the earlier stations, set up in a hurry, had to be shifted later. At best, a station was required every 10 or 12 miles; the average distance between them seems to have been closer to 7 miles. Even so, Chappe's telegraph revolutionized long-distance communication. After Waterloo, the Bourbons built new lines to Toulon and Bayonne. It had no successful challenger until the electric telegraph was perfected sufficiently to become cheaper as well as swifter. Sweden and the British admiralty had built a few stations during the 1790s, employing a systemslower but still acceptable-based on one advanced by the Greco-Roman historian Polybius (ca. 205-125 B.C.).4 Local telegraph installations were built at several naval bases and isolated fortresses. (One French admiral frustrated himself for a considerable period by trying to devise a method of using the Chappe telegraph for ship-to-ship and ship-to-shore signaling.) There is one account of their use in combat. In 1800, as First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte mustered his grab-bag Army of the Reserve for a try at reconquering northern Italy, and Massena held on desperately in besieged Genoa, a swelling Austrian offensive attempted to break into France by the coastal route through Nice. It was supported by a British fleet under Admiral Horatio Nelson, and General Louis Suchet had his hands full trying to defend the line of the Var River. On an isolated peak, however, several miles behind the Austrian lines, a French garrison still held Fort Montalban, which for some reason had been equipped with a telegraph station. Its garrison could see every move the Anglo-Austrian forces made, and thus repeatedly thwarted attempted surprise attacks. During 1794-99 the telegraph service was controlled by the Engineer Branch of the Ministry of War. Thereafter it passed to the Ministry of the Interior. Its personnel were furnished with powerful telescopes and were docked for every minute of tardiness or inattention. The Chappe telegraph's success as a long-range, strategic system inspired considerable experimentation to develop a mobile version that could move with the French armies and link them with the terminals of the established Chappe lines. There was some research during 1795-99, but lack of funds prevented any appreciable progress. Semaphore flag systems seemed an obvious possibility, and something of this nature, employing three flagsblack, white, and red-was developed by 1809. However, the sudden 1809 Austrian offensive, loosed without benefit of a declaration of war, forced Napoleon into a scrambling campaign with an improvised army. There was neither time nor trained men to set up a line of flag stations from Strasbourg eastward, nor was there any lull in the operations until Napoleon had seized Vienna. By then it would have required an extra division or so to man a communications system of such length. As usual with new ideas, the flag system finally went into operation in a bobtailed way as the war ended, the line running from Strasbourg via Munich and Passau and on toward Vienna. Berthier (who remained at Vienna) and Napoleon (who was pausing in Munich until the Austrians ratified the peace treaty) used it for quick communication; Napoleon also employed it to rush orders for the Strasbourg and Metz garrisons to move by wagon to Antwerp to meet a British landing in Holland. Berthier rolled it up as he shepherded the French out of Austria. Apparently it had been useful enough for Napoleon to consider organizing a mobile system for his 1812 invasion of Russia. Abraham Chappe, Inspector General of the Telegraphic Administration, was added to the army staff for this purpose.' One proposal was to employ small Chappe- type stations, mounted on wagons, but a second look at the map was enough to demonstrate the impossible size of the problem. Moreover, the flat, heavily forested character of the country along the Warsaw-SmolenskMoscow route would have made it extremely difficult to find commanding sites for signal stations. Messages too long or not important enough to send by telegraph-for example, routine reports from the civilian ministries-traveled by "post." At this time European postal systems maintained "post houses" (relay stations) at intervals along the principal highways, where the regular mail coaches could obtain fresh horses and postilions (drivers). In addition, they maintained extra horses that could be rented by officers traveling on official business. Originally the mail was carried by professional couriers, either on horseback or in light vehicles, but Napoleon's Postmaster General Antoine Lavalette worked out an express system in which locked dispatch cases were passed (along with a little book in which the local postmasters entered the times of arrival and departure) from postilion to postilion at each post house along the road. Only Lavalette and Napoleon had keys to the cases. It took some time and considerable pounding to train postal service employees to this task, but it eventually worked smoothly. "The express departed and arrived every day from and to Paris, Naples, Milan, the mouths of the Cataro (modern Kotor), Madrid . . . and Amsterdam The Emperor received on the eighth day the answers to letters he addressed to Milan, and on the fifteenth to those of Naples."' Beyond the Empire's borders the postal systems of occupied or conquered countries had to be kept in order. French advance guards and enemy rear guards usually stole their horses and vehicles; there was always a scramble to recover or replace them. In 1806 Murat was ordering his generals to station safeguards at all post houses as they advanced; all post horses were to be reserved for imperial staff officers and couriers. Later, Napoleon took all the German post systems under his special protection. The gendarmerie would watch over them, and no soldiers would be billeted on postmasters. Each postmaster was to have twenty-five horses always ready for military couriers and would be paid the standard rate for