tches to the winds in the process. Observation posts had to be set up in church steeples or on commanding hills to keep watch on enemy activities. (The higher headquarters had powerful telescopes mounted on tripods for such work.) Enemy order of battle cards must be kept up to date-a card for each regiment, with details as to its estimated strength, last reported location, and officers, and a schema showing the colors of its uniform and facings. There usually was a shortage of maps, and battles seemed to take place at the junction of four map sheets, the most important one of which was missing. French intelligence and counterintelligence had worthy enemies, particularly that of "la perfide Albion" (treacherous England). Probably much of England's efficiency came from the fact that it could concentrate on the French, whereas Napoleon had to watch England and all the rest of Europe. Also, the English spent lavishly to hire and bribe. "English gold" became something of a universal French explanation for anything that went awry. During 1800-1805 British diplomatic agents in the small Rhineland German states ran lively intelligence centers. (Their Mr. Drake in Munich never knew that his Number One spy was a double agent Napoleon used to cram him with false information.) Eventually forced out of Continental Europe, the British operated from Sicily and the British home islands; in 1807 they seized Helgoland Island, off the mouth of the Elbe River, from Denmark and converted it into an espionage and smuggling base. English men-of-war planted spies in the crews of neutral ships inbound to French ports. Both sides used French emigres, actual, converted, or pretended; the French had Irish sympathizers. (Napoleon kept a number of potentially useful Irish exiles, such as James Napper Tandy of the Wearin' o' the Green, on small pensions.) The Austrian secret police were considered dangerous, at least in the Vienna area. Hager, its chief, reported directly to the Emperor Francis I of Austria. Whatever he achieved against the French he probably bettered in his operations against Austria's allies during the 1814-15 Congress of Vienna, by the simple expedient of obtaining and piecing together the contents of their wastebaskets every night after work had ended. (The British thwarted him, in modern fashion, by burning their trash.) Russian intelligence operated in traditional style. One of Tsar Alexander's favorite aidesde-camp, posing as a visiting man about town in Paris, corrupted two War Ministry clerks who worked on the strength reports furnished to the Emperor by, they said, heaping gold in front of them until they no longer could endure the temptation. (The aide achieved a hairsbreadth escape; the clerks were shot.) Also, even then the Russians had their program of collecting renegade foreign experts. Moreau and Jomini were their two biggest catches. It was generally agreed, however, that the most efficient intelligence organization in all Europe was the Rothschilds' private service. The British-French intelligence duel across the English Channel was thoroughly complicated by the centuries-old smuggling trade between the two nations, a business that sometimes seemed to take on a nationality of its own. As a further complication, this trade sometimes had unofficial official blessing: The Grande Armee liked English wool for its uniforms, and England doted on French luxury goods. The smugglers did well in such trade, whether tacitly allowed or forbidden, and also from tight-mouthed gentlemen in a hurry who needed a lift across the Channel. Five and twenty ponies Trotting through the darkBrandy for the Parson, Baccy for the Clerk; Laces for a lady, letters for a spy, And watch the wall, my darling, while the Gentlemen go by!" In hopes of getting a handle on this trade, Napoleon even ordered a fortified base set up outside Gravelines, where smugglers could anchor in safety and also be kept from unsupervised contact with the local population. The opposite of intelligence is counterintelligence, the thwarting, misleading, and destruction of the enemy's intelligence system. Napoleon was a mighty practitioner of that art. His internal police system, especially after its reorganization by Savary, could cover France in a fashion hardly seen again until the twentieth century. Once a campaign opened, he could order his frontiers sealed: No ship might sail, no departing traveler cross the frontier. Postmasters would reserve all their horses for military personnel. Newspaper censorship would be tightened and misleading stories printed. Rumors and false reports, often containing just the necessary minimum of truth, were put into circulation or leaked to known double spies, who would attempt to relay them promptly to the enemy. Troops along the frontier would remain in place, going through their routine activities while screening the concentrations behind them. Knowing that his own whereabouts and activities were of supreme interest to enemy agents, Napoleon habitually remained in Paris until the last instant, then slipped away in a breakneck dash for his field headquarters. Since the location of the Imperial Guard also was closely watched, it too might be kept in Paris until he left, its infantry thereafter being brought forward by relays of farm wagons. Highly as Napoleon rated it as a combat force, he did not hold up his campaigns until the Imperial Guard reached the front. By such methods, especially in 1805, 1806, 1813, and 1815, he completely surprised experienced opponents. However the wars came about, except for 1814 the Grande Armee got in the first solid punch. Well before the shooting started, an unseen undercurrent of spies- peddlers, travelers, horse dealers, wandering fiddlers, or dancing masters-would have fanned out across enemy territory, seeking out French sympathizers or old professional acquaintances who might appreciate the chance to pick up some extra money. Then the French frontier suddenly brimmed over with swarms of light cavalry as the Napoleonic cavalry screen moved forward, smothering all enemy attempts at reconnaissance. The spies would be waiting for it as it came. Patrols probed into villages, questioning the best-informed men of each community: officials, clergymen, teachers, and postmasters; quizzing enemy deserters, stragglers, and prisoners. Behind its cavalry screen came the Grande Armee, the advance echelon of the Imperial Headquarters close behind the leading corps, the whole kept in constant mutual contact by hard-riding aides-de-camp. Back to the rear, Berthier's staff officers organized the lengthening line of communications, restoring the post system and establishing rear area security. Engineer units improved roads and bridges. Galloping couriers came and went with the Empire's affairs in their saddlebags. And westward from the frontier the gaunt arms of the telegraph jerked and bobbed as messages "marched" across the hills to Paris. The Grande Armee moved like a battalion in the hands of a skilled commander, ready for anything. Out of the dust of the marching columns, voices rose in patriotic song: Marshal of the Empire, 1812