

CHAPTER VII Much High Brass and Some Low Brows The names ring through the annals as brazen trumpets: Lannes, Augereau, Massena, Oudinot, iron Davout, of whose family they say, in their native province: When a Davout is born, a sword comes out of its scabbard! And Lefebvre, and the odd St. Cyr.... they swanked across an astonished Europe, oppressive in the splendors of their goldencrusted coats, their silken sashes and their great plumed hats, and their spurs that scarred the polished floors of Kings' palaces. Thomason, Adventures of Marbot' At Mondovi in 1796, during a clash with the Piedmontese rearguard cavalry, Napoleon lost his own cavalry commander, General Henri Stengel, a veteran German, "adroit, intelligent, alert."' Stengel's replacement was Irish-born Charles Edward Jennings Kilmaine, since pictured to us by English and American writers as a dashing lad, undoubtedly a future marshal had he not died in 1799. It is something of a jolt, therefore, to find Kilmaine's contemporaries describing him as a big, blond man, racked by chronic dysentery, cold and somewhat sluggish. He was personally brave, understood Austrian tactics, and could be trusted with minor independent missions requiring caution. As Massena put it, with unexpected irony, he never took chances. And he remains described in Napoleon's bitter letter to Carnot, "since Stengel's death, I no longer have a cavalry commander who fights."' Add that Kilmaine was a large-scale looter, angerly insubordinate when caught, and had dubious taste in staff officers.' Like Kilmaine, many of Napoleon's senior officers have become characters of folklore, if not downright fiction. His marshals, especially, have been so bedaubed by careless writers' ink that the true personalities of some of them remain almost unknown.' They were all unusual men, survivors of the brutal Revolutionary wars, inured to every hardship and danger, andin the Empire's beginnings at least-eager for glory, adventure, and reward. We have few American equivalents for them: Winfield Scott, Jeb Stuart, and George S. Patton probably would have fitted in. To add pomp, pride, and circumstance to his new-built empire, in May 1804 Napoleon revived the Royal Army designation "marshal" under the full title Marechal de !'Empire. This was not a superior military grade but a personal title of honor to be granted distinguished generals of division, along with higher pay and privileges. One of the privileges was the right to cumular (accumulate), which meant to hold and draw pay for additional offices, such as colonel-general, Grand Huntsman, Grand Admiral, or Vice-Constable. In war they served as corps commanders, occasionally as army commanders. Thus distinguished as great officers of the crown, they tended to be a difficult lot. There was no effective hierarchy of rank among them: Each considered himself as good as the next, and only the Emperor's firm order could make one marshal obey another. The marshal's formal symbol of his office was his baton, a truncheon, roughly 18 inches long and just under 2 inches in diameter, gold-capped at both ends and covered with royal blue velvet embroidered with golden eagles.' Their buttons, their epaulettes, and the tassels on their sashes and sword knots carried the insignia of two crossed batons. (Some seem to have added a cluster of five stars, to clearly distinguish themselves in undress uniform from the generals en chef, who wore four.) In all, Napoleon made twenty-six marshals. Of these, fourteen of the original creation (Augereau, Bernadotte, Berthier, Bessieres, Brune, Davout, Jourdan, Lannes, Massena, Moncey, Mortier, Murat, Ney, and Soult) were "active" and four (Kellermann, Lefebvre, Perignon, and Serurier) "senatorial." The latter grade was intended as an honor for distinguished soldiers grown too old for campaigning but capable of serving as members of the Senate. As the wars went on, however, Kellermann and Lefebvre proved far more active and useful than Jourdan and Moncey. Victor was given his baton in 1807; Macdonald, Marmont, and Oudinot received theirs in 1809. (Lannes had died of wounds received in the battle of AspernEssling. The army grumbled that Napoleon- unable to find another Lannes-was trying to get his equivalent value in small change.) Suchet was made marshal in 1811, St. Cyr in 1812, Poniatowski in 1813, and Grouchy in 1815. Murat was dropped from the list of marshals in 1808 on becoming King of Naples. Napoleon obviously did not pick his first marshals for their military abilities alone, or even for their personal loyalty to him. At least half of his appointments were based on the need to include representatives of all the famous armies of Revolutionary France. Some, especially Bernadotte, must have been selected in the hope that gratitude would bind them to the Emperor's fortunes. (Always grateful for favors done him on his way up, Napoleon was repeatedly surprised by the rarity of that virtue in other men!) Berthier was essential to his method of making war and a proven comrade. Murat, Lannes, and Bessieres also had been with him in the Armee d'Italie and in Egypt. Davout, originally from the Armee de Rhin-et- Moselle, was another "Egyptian." Those five were good and useful soldiers yet-Berthier excepted-little known. Probably Napoleon had sensed the latent talent coiling within Davout and Lannes. Massena was famous, especially for his victory over Austrians and Russians in Switzerland in 1799; in his own mind he was the only one out of the fourteen truly worthy of the honor. Brune had defeated an Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland that same year; moreover he represented a Jacobin/republican element that must be conciliated. Bernadotte and Augereau also were of that persuasion, and Augereau had Napoleon's gratitude for stout fighting in Italy. In addition, Bernadotte had married Desiree Clary, sister to the wife of Napoleon's older brother Joseph, thereby becoming a member-by Corsican standards-of the Bonaparte clan.' Ney, Soult, and Mortier were products of the famous Armee de Sambre-et-Meuse; Jourdan had commanded L'Armee du Nord in the dark days of 1793-94; Moncey had led the Armee des Pyrenees Occidentals in northern Spain. The senatorial marshals also represented different armies: Kellermann the orphan Armee des Alpes; Lefebvre the Sambre-et-Meuse; Serurier Italie; and Perignon the Pyrendes Orientales. Taken individually, they are an amazing assortment. Accepted references frequently differ as to details of their early lives, but their differing contributions to the Grande Armee are clear enough. Encountering Pierre-Francois Charles Augereau in 1797, Desaix put down one of his thumbnail characterizations: A "fine big man-handsome-large nose-has served in all countries, few equals as a soldier, is always bragging."8 A member of the Directory dubbed him a "proud brigand." Both were right. Augereau (1757-1816) came from Paris. His father had been a domestic servant or grocer, his mother a German girl who taught him her native language. Whatever their actual station, they gave him an education. In 1774 he joined the army and vanished from verifiable accounting for eighteen years, a soldier of misfortune who followed the wars across Europe or scraped a living as a fencing master. He would swear to service across the hills and as far away as Russia, but probabilities take him no farther than Prussia and Naples. He definitely learned Prussian drill and discipline. In Naples he eloped with the daughter of a Greek merchant. In 1792 he came back into history9 as adjutant of the "light cuirassiers" of the hapless German Legion. After the Legion dissolved in Vendee he transferred to Army of the Eastern Pyrenees. Praised by General Charles Marbot for hard work and zeal, he became a firm friend of the Marbot family. Young Marcellin Marbot remembered his powdered hair, long queue, and gleaming boots-so different from his sloven fellow officers. His men called him "the Big Prussian" because of the thoroughness with which he trained, disciplined, and looked after them. In Spain and Italy he proved a fine infantry tactician, with a swaggering courage equal to any danger. Napoleon was always grateful for the fight he waged at Castiglione in 1796, halting one Austrian column, like a bulldog clinging to a bull's nose, while Napoleon crushed another. (Augereau promptly invented the story that Napoleon had wanted to retreat and that he alone had saved the army.) He was an energetic but unskilled looter, having a weakness for the large and gaudy; his baggage wagon was famous as a mobile treasury. Napoleon loaned him to the Directory for their coup of 18 Fructidor (September 4, 1797), which purged the government of conservatives. That done, Augereau felt himself a power in France. The politicians sent him with flourishes to command on the Rhine- and shortly thereafter switched him to a minor command on the Spanish frontier! As a marshal, he no longer looted. He served well through 1805-7, though his health was failing. At Eylau, sick and worn out, he strapped himself to his saddle and went forward into choking snow squalls, artillery crossfires, and surges of Russian cavalry. His corps was wrecked, and Augereau himself was badly hurt. After that he had mostly rear area assignments until 1813, when he seemed renewed, fighting like the "Augereau of Castiglione" at Leipzig. Impressed, in 1814 Napoleon gave him command of the Army of the Rhone, based on Lyons, with the mission of striking the enemy's communications. Instead Augereau dithered, then retreated. When Napoleon abdicated, Augereau issued a proclamation abusing him. On Napoleon's return, Augereau tried to turn his coat again, but the Emperor struck him from the list of marshals. After Waterloo, Louis XVIII stripped him of offices and emoluments. Naturally Augereau has been caricatured by many writers. He was a bundle of contradictions-heroic in combat but sometimes a moral coward; an ingrate to Napoleon but kindness itself to others; greedy but openhanded. He was a good comrade and sought to be a gentleman. But there was something of the ancient Gaul about him-more than a man at the battle's onset, less than a woman at its ending. Jean-Baptiste Jules Bernadotte's (1763-1844) parents had intended him to be a lawyer. Undoubtedly he would have made an excellent one, especially (as was said of a certain American general) "if the case were a bad one, and required dexterous tinkering with the witnesses."" His father died when Bernadotte was seventeen; with no money for further schooling, he enlisted in Regiment Royal-Marine. Well built (his nickname was "Pretty Leg") and better educated than most recruits, he made first sergeant by 1788. The Revolution made him a lieutenant in late 1791. Three years later he was a general of division. In 1797 he commanded the force sent from Sambre-et-Meuse to reinforce Napoleon in Italy. He impressed Desaix: "Young, plenty of fire, vigorous, of fine passions, very estimable; he is not loved for he is considered a fanatic" (Jacobin extremist)." He also was furiously ambitious, apt at intrigue, and gifted with an overwhelming talent for obfuscating eloquence. In 1799 he was first ambassador to Austria (the Viennese mobbed him out of town), then somehow Minister of War (his unrealistic strategic inspirations soon caused the Directory to accept "the resignation I have not given")." Bernadotte's position during Napoleon's coup d'etat is obscure. Later he would picture himself as ready to oppose Napoleon if summoned to do so or as having been offered-but nobly refusing-a supreme dictatorship. Actually, he was a minor offstage noise, a general on inactive status, without significant experience in independent command or any following among the troops. Also, his extreme caution always played against his oversized ambitions. That caution served him well in 1802. Placed in command in western France, Bernadotte cooked up a mutiny among 