etters from an Opera danseuse who had been his mistress. He had squandered vast sums (all his own money) on her and was shockingly in debt. Napoleon paid the debts and gave Madame Bessieres a pension. Twenty-five of the marshals were soldiers, professional or volunteer. Guillaume-Marie-Anne Brune (1763-1815) came among them from the murk of Paris politics. His father, a lawyer in the central France town of Brive-la-Gaillarde, sent him to Paris to study law. Paris proved unsettling for a country boy. Brune sowed wild oats and harvested debts. To live, he worked as a printer, and eventually became cofounder and editor of a radical newspaper. He was a friend of such revolutionary leaders as Danton, who nicknamed him the "Patagonian" because of his great height. Much involved in the early riots, he was given a commission in the Volunteers and had a shifting, obscure career with the "Army of the Interior," which was employed against counterrevolutionary movements and anyone suspected of incivisme. That involved him in some of the Revolution's bloodiest police actions, but apparently he was fanatic enough to think such dubious work was his patriotic duty. This back-alley service made him a general of brigade by 1793. In 1797 he secured assignment to Napoleon's Army of Italy; there, surprisingly, he showed courage, drive, and tactical skill and won promotion to general of division. In 1798 he occupied and plundered Switzerland for the Directory, not forgetting himself. Sent to Holland in 1799, he showed judgment, energy, and bravery in defeating an Anglo-Russian invasion, much helped by the incapacity of his opponent, "the Noble Duke of York."19 Informed of Napoleon's coup d'etat, he proposed to march on Paris, but his troops refused. Making his submission to Napoleon, he put down troubles in Vendee in 1800. Next year Napoleon gave him command of the Army of Italy, some 95,000 men. Brune's struggles to handle that force (while also looting and tinkering in Italian politics) inspired a new French Army term for hopeless confusion: "a la Brune." In 1807, detached to cover the Grande Armee's left rear, he defeated the Swedes, became involved in muddled negotiations with their mad King Gustav IV, and refused to explain his actions to Napoleon. Also, he had plundered northern Germany. Napoleon put him on inactive status. Recalled in 1815, Brune saw no combat before his murder. He was capable of handling a small force, especially in difficult terrain. Brave to the last, he also was something of a disciplinarian. He stole but looked with disfavor on others stealing. He also wrote sentimental poetry. The true lone wolf among these marshals was Louis-Nicolas Davout (1770-1823), his special combat eyeglasses fastened at the back of his bald head, his pretty wife's miniature inside the cover of his watch. His family was old Burgundian military nobility, poor country gentlefolk with little except pride, traditions, and old swords on the wall. His father-" excellent calvary officer, but without fortune"20-was a younger son with no home of his own. Davout was born in a rented farmhouse; when he was eight, his father was mortally wounded in a hunting accident. His mother and maternal grandmother saw to his education; the grandmother's library was the beginning of his love of study. In 1780 Davout was admitted to the provincial Royal Military School of Auxerre. In 1785 he qualified for two years' advanced instruction at the Military School of Paris, passing from that to Cavalry Regiment RoyalChampagne. Royal-Champagne, like the French Army in general, was beginning to ferment, as its officers divided into "aristocrats" and "patriots." Davout stood with the latter and was expelled from the army, but soon reappeared commanding a battalion of Volunteers and served with increasing effectiveness through the first fumbled battles. When the French commander, General Charles Dumouriez, tried to turn his army against the French government, it was Davout who rapped out the order to fire and drove Dumouriez into profitless exile. His services in the north and in Vendee brought him promise of promotion to general of division in 1793, but political extremists in Paris were demanding the dismissal of all ex-noble officers. He accordingly offered his resignation and went home, where first his mother and then Davout himself were imprisoned as "suspects." In 1794 he was recalled to duty as general of brigade and sent to the Rhine, where he especially distinguished himself in some ranger-type operations around Luxembourg City. Desaix thought him a promising officer and persuaded him to join Napoleon's Egyptian expedition. He returned a convinced henchman of Napoleon, who made him a general of division in 1800, gave him command of the grenadiers a pied of the Consular Guard, and married him to Aimee Leclerc, sister to General Victor Leclerc, who had married Napoleon's sister Pauline." Davout's appointment as a marshal astonished many other generals and irked not a few. But it soon was evident that his troops were the best trained, disciplined, and cared for in the Grande Armee. He was strict with his subordinates, stricter with himself, incorruptible, and merciless toward looters of any grade. If necessary, he would strip a province to feed his men; otherwise his soldiers dared not touch a stray chicken. Ordinarily cool and methodical, he was capable of furious outbursts that were considered superior to Vesuvius in eruption. He was respected, feared, and obeyedeven by Vandamme-but he lacked the magnetism of Murat and Ney. Napoleon said Davout had the two finest qualities of a soldier: courage and firmness of character. He was also deeply intelligent, an analytical student of the art of war, influenced by Chevalier Jean-Charles de Folard, Gustavus Adolphus, and Charles XII.22 One of his special strengths was his skill in military intelligence and counterintelligence, whether in detecting the secretly prepared Austrian offensive of 1809 or identifying the faithless servants who stole the King of Saxony's best wax candles. From Austerlitz to Borodino, he had a decisive part in Napoleon's campaigns. He won his battle honors-Duke of Auerstadt, Prince of Eck- muhl-in battles he fought alone. His defense of Hamburg during 1813-14 was a recognized masterpiece. Soldiers called him "the Just." He was never defeated. Last-made of the marshals, Emmanuel de Grouchy (1766-1847), was of the "ancient chivalry" of France, his family acknowledged aristocracy from at least the fourteenth century. A man of such quality could look on mere nobles with condescension, be invited to accompany the King in his carriage, and expect prompt promotion if he chose a military career. Grouchy began at fourteen at the Strasbourg artillery school but soon changed to the cavalry; in 1786 he was a second lieutenant in the Compagnie ecossaise, the senior unit of the King's Garde du Corps," the equivalent of a lieutenant colonel in a line cavalry regiment. However, Grouchy, whether at Strasbourg or in his Norman home, had become a convert to the reform movement then building throughout France. In 1787 he retired-quite possibly by request. He volunteered for service in 1791; a year later he was a general of brigade. From the first it was clear that he was "a horseman by nature and a cavalry soldier by instinct."' Better, he knew how to handle forces of all arms and took good care of his men. When he was suspended in 1793 because he was an aristocrat, his troopers came close to mutiny. His patriotism was too well attested for further persecution, however, and he was restored to duty the next year and promoted to general of division in 1795. After successful service in Vendee, he was transferred to Italy, where, attempting to cover the French retreat after Novi, he took nine wounds and was captured. Exchanged in 1800, he transferred, possibly for physical reasons, to the infantry, distinguishing himself at Hohenlinden in late 1800. The next year he went back to the cavalry and had an important part in the pursuit after Jena, and at Eylau, Friedland, Wagram, and Borodino and a dozen cavalry engagements between those great battles. He took twentythree wounds in all. At Eylau his horse fell with him and broke his leg; one of his aides-de-camp, Lieutenant George Washington Lafayette, rescued him.25 He was too crippled to serve during 1813 but was Napoleon's chief of cavalry for the 1814 campaign, performing expertly until disabled by another wound. He joined Napoleon promptly during the Hundred Days and at last received his baton after suppressing the final wiggles of the Duke of Angouleme's farcial campaign. Grouchy's correspondence shows a thin-skinned man, reluctant to assume responsibility yet conscientious in discharging it. Actually, he was abler than he realized. He failed to show the necessary initiative during Waterloo but, left isolated after that battle, managed a masterful retreat. As a cavalryman, he was far superior to Murat in tactical skill, administrative ability, and common sense. Clean-handed and very courageous, he was unquestioningly loyal to France and to his Emperor. Several generations of furious Frenchmen made him the scapegoat for Waterloo, and his writhings in that role were not always dignified. But he served long, valorously, and well, and due honor should not be denied him. Jean-Baptiste Jourdan (1762-1833) could truthfully claim to have saved the Republic by his victories at Wattignies (1793) and Fleurus (1794). Being a modest, basically unambitious man, he did not boast of it. The son of a surgeon of Limoges, in central France, Jourdan enlisted when only sixteen years old. His regiment served in America during our Revolution, but there is no indication that he learned much about warfare thereby. After six years' service he went back to Limoges, married a dressmaker, and set up as a small-scale linen merchant. In 1790 his neighbors elected him captain in the local national guards. A year later he was a lieutenant colonel of Volunteers; in 1793 he was pitchforked into command of the Armee du Nord in place of General Jean Houchard, who had been arrested and soon executed for having won a battle but not pursuing as energetically as the "Representatives of the People" with Nord thought he should. Houchard's predecessor, General Adam de Custine, had been "chopped" for reasons logical only to frightened politicians, so Jourdan knew that he himself stood in the shadow of the guillotine. Squat, fat, and cheerful, Jourdan did not look the hero. But he was brave, energetic, and self-confident, something of an organizer and also obstinate. Beaten one day, he was ready to try again, early the next morning. Moreover, he was a sincere patriot, somewhat of the Jacobin persuasion, and therefore close in spirit-at first-to France's political rulers of the moment. His battles tended to be sprawling, help-yourself affairs, but he had superior numbers and usually managed to make them count. Yet he soon developed enough political enemies-for example, by insisting that soldiers must have shoes for winter campaigning-to be relieved in early 1794. He reopened his Limoges shop and put his general's uniform on display. He was recalled for further service during 1794-96 and 1799. Initially successful, he then met defeat at the expert hands of the Archduke Charles. His self-confidence ebbed; he could not control obstreperous subordinates. Between campaigns, however, he sat in the Council of the Five Hundred and had a large part in designing the sensible 1798 conscription law. Jourdan did not oppose Napoleon's 1799 coup. Thereafter, aside from the command of Besancon fortress during the Hundred Days, he had no active duties, but Napoleon made him military adviser to Joseph in Naples and then in Spain. It was a frustrating assignment, Joseph being disinterested in matters military and a coward to boot. Jourdan gave good advice on occasion, but nobody listen