ed. Louis XVIII made him a count in 1818. Eventually he faded away. Francois-Christophe Kellermann (1735-1820), oldest of all the marshals, active and senatorial, carried the proud battle honor "Duke of Valmy." Valmy was not much of a fight, yet is considered one of history's decisive battles. For there, on September 20, 1792, amid that chill French autumn rain and mud later campaigners will remember, a ragtag French army turned back the Allied advance on Paris. Probably that mud and rain deserved much of the credit, but it was Kellermann-calmly sitting his horse under the Allied artillery fire-who somehow gave his jittery volunteers and dubious regulars the heart to face down the Prussian attack that threatened but never quite developed. Kellermann, like Lefebvre and Ney, was one of the many Germans (so they were then considered) who came out of Alsace-Lorraine into the French service. His parents were from the high bourgeoisie of Strasbourg. At seventeen he was a gentleman cadet in a German mercenary regiment; subsequently he worked his way up through the various enlisted and commissioned grades to that of marechal de camp in 1788. He was brave, winning the Order of Saint Louis during the Seven Years' War; more important, he was an expert organizer, administrator, and trainer, of great help to noblemen generals with no time for such trifles. After Valmy, his career was modest, his most important services being with the starveling Armee des Alpes. After defeating a Piedmontese offensive in September 1793, he was charged with betraying the Republic and spent a year in prison, never knowing when he might be summoned to "sneeze in the basket." (This was during Robespierre's Terror; one Jacobin politician suggested that Kellermann had won victories only to better conceal his evil plottings.) In early 1795 he was acquitted and sent back to Alpes. Kellermann at least acquiesced in Napoleon's seizure of power. Napoleon made full use of his special skills and industry, putting him in command of the army's rear area along the Rhine during 1806-7, 1809, and 1812-13. Kellermann handled those complex assignments with skill and devotion but did not accept any military assignment during the Hundred Days. Later he had a brief political career, siding with the liberal opposition. The only marshal from the vanished royal province of Gascony was Jean Lannes (1769-1809). He came out of obscurity, the son of a farmer too poor to educate him. His elder brother, a priest, taught him to read, write, and cipher. Apparently he was apprenticed to a dyer, but there are indications that he may have served in the Royal Army. When his home district formed a Volunteer battalion in 1792, it elected Lannes a second lieutenant. Marbot, then twelve and visiting his father, remembered Lannes as active, witty, and vain-without education but anxious to acquire it, and glad to teach a small boy how to fire his pistols. Lannes served with Augereau in the eastern Pyrenees, then in Italy. He made colonel in 1795; two years later Napoleon made him general of brigade. Desaix (who had seen Ney in action) described him then: ... bravest of the brave, young, fine appearance, well-built, face not very pleasing, riddled with wounds, elegant, has fine horses and carriages, the finest in Italy, married, has been in Rome. The pope put out his hands for him to kiss, Lannes took them and squeezed them vigorously." Following Napoleon to Egypt, he took another wound at St. Jean d'Acre, one of ten in sixty battles, that left him permanently wry-necked. He returned to France a general of division in 1799 and divorced his wife, who had not awaited his return to begin her family. Napoleon made him commander of his new Consular Guard in 1800; unversed in the innate criminality of clothing contractors, he went some 300,000 francs into debt uniforming it. As a matter of discipline Napoleon demanded that he make the debt good. At that crisis, Augereau came to his old comrade's rescue, paying down the required sum. Napoleon sent Lannes as Ambassador to Portugal, where the financial perogatives of that office made him wealthy. As a soldier, Lannes's short history is one of growth. Beginning as a daring advance guard commander, he won his first battle-and title of honor-at Montebello in 1800 and fought mightily at Marengo, Austerlitz, and Jena. At Friedland he proved a master of defensive fighting against heavy odds. In Spain he showed an unexpected talent in siege warfare, using mines and artillery instead of infantry assaults to capture Saragossa. His service in 1809 was full of promise, but he took his death wound at AspernEssling. To thus master his profession he had studied several hours each day and had beaten down his flaming battle temper, which could raise blisters on granite. (He developed such self-control that he was able to look at a quivering sentry who had narrowly missed him with an accidental shot and remark that he was certain the man was sorry.) This evolution was much aided by his second wife, Louise Guehueneuc, beautiful as a Virgin by Raphael, outwardly cool, silent, and abrupt, who lovingly polished her rough diamond. They had five children, preferred their home to court life, and were the tightest of families. Lannes gave Napoleon loyalty but also unabashed advice, as when he declared all Poland not worth one French grenadier. (It seems he also told Tallyrand to his face that he was a silk stocking full of human manure.) He was merciful; lived simply; gave up his camp bed to a wounded aidede-camp; taught his staff that true courage was doing their assigned duty without unnecessary heroics, and never forgot a favor or a deserving soldier. Napoleon wept for his loss: "He was a swordsman when I found him, and a paladin when I lost him.s27 Francois-Joseph Lefebvre (1755-1820) was the son of a miller in the Colmar area of the Rhineland. He was educated by his uncle, a village priest, who taught him to write a good hand, a smattering of Latin, and enough piety always to make his "act of grace" before going into action. He enlisted in the French Guard when eighteen, gradually working his way up to regimental sergeant major and marrying a happy-souled laundress. On the side he taught his comrades German; under "profession" on his marriage license he entered "Master of Languages." He may have taken his discharge around 1788 and worked as a notary's clerk. The Revolution made him an instructor of the Paris National Guard, then a general of brigade in 1793, of division in 1794. By 1797 he was handling the equivalent of a corps. The Directory, fearful of a counterrevolution and considering Lefebvre utterly trustworthy, put him in command of the Paris garrison in 1799. It missed the fact that Lefebvre had had a bellyful of the Directory's neglect of its armies. When Napoleon launched his coup d'etat, Lefebvre joined him to "throw the lawyers into the river."" Most of Lefebvre's subsequent service was with the infantry of the Old Guard. He always had a German accent, a loud voice, and a sergeant's vocabulary, but he looked after his men as if they were his own children. He exhibited a simple, amazed pride in his late good fortune; when a friend admired his dress uniform, Lefebvre replied that it should be handsomehe had been working on it for thirty-five years! Lefebvre was an outstanding "general of execution," an excellent tactician and leader of men, but when given a semi-independent mission he was apt to go looking for a head to hit, regardless of orders. "There is such imbecility in [Lefebvre's] correspondence," Napoleon wrote in 1809, "that I can't comprehend it; I hope [General] Merlin will rejoin him and teach him how to read."29 Lefebvre's dukedom was from Danzig and a put-up job. The Emperor wanted to introduce a new nobility of service: Lefebvre, the old sergeantcommoner, seemed a safe first example. He therefore was sent to besiege Danzig, which he did with many protests, knowing nothing of that type of warfare. Finally the Russo-Prussian garrison made a sortie in force. Lefeb vre went flailing happily into the middle of the uproar, pushing aside the grenadiers who tried to shield him: "Come on my children! This I understand! "30 Coming out of Russia, Lefebvre kept his head and heart as far as Vilna. There, he had to leave his dying son, and his courage snapped. Summoned back to command the Old Guard in January 1813, Lefebvre answered: " ... all is lost for me. I go to hide myself ... I take with me my wife who has totally lost her wits ... I don't want to see another soldier... .Pardon my scribble. 1131 Lefebvre had no command in 1813; in 1814 he was attached to imperial headquarters and joined the marshals' mutiny: "Did he believe that when we have titles, honours and lands, we will kill ourselves for his sake?"32 Yet after Waterloo he called for one battle more. Amid Ney's hysterics and Fouche's murmurings, nobody heard him. Of the three Wagram marshals, Jacques Etienne Joseph Alexandre Macdonald (1765-1840) is the greatest curiosity. For generations his true character has been obscured by the sympathy English writers felt for him because of his ancestry. Macdonald was a son of the Wild Geese, his father being a Scots Jacobite refugee who had followed Bonnie Prince Charlie in "the `45," and later obtained a French commission. Macdonald seems to have received some training in a private military school; his first service was with a semimer- cenary legion in the Dutch Army. He later gained a French commission through service as a gentleman cadet. A lieutenant in 1792, he was a colonel a year later, general of brigade in 1794, general of division in 1796. Very brave, energetic, tall and strongly built, with a commanding voice and a natural air of authority, he could make himself obeyed, even by revolutionary levies. Also, he was an expert scrambler, able to dodge the officerhunting Jacobin extremists who considered "Mac" a title of nobility and to put his own interests above loyalty to commanders who might be in political disfavor. In early 1799 he got command of the Army of Naples through murky intrigue, but it did him little good: Called north to meet an AustroRussian army under the famous Suvorov, he was badly wounded in a minor skirmish and then defeated at the Trebbia River. Sore in mind and body, he supported Napoleon's coup d'etat. In December 1800 he led a column across the Splugen pass out of Switzerland into Italy, working across almost trackless mountains to outflank Austrian positions. After that he seems to have been in disfavor, though Napoleon twice unsuccessfully recommended him to Joseph (then King of Naples) as a replacement for Jourdan as Joseph's military adviser. In 1809, on Clarke's suggestion, Napoleon ordered Macdonald to northern Italy to serve under Eugene, noting that he could be used as a "wing" (corps) commander if Eugene so desired. (Macdonald's version does not mention Clarke. He pictures himself as sent to be Eugene's military mentor and claims all credit for Eugene's subsequent victories.) He did serve usefully and capped this at Wagram by leading the assault that cracked the Austrian left center. In 1812 he commanded the X Corps (Poles, Prussians, and various Germans) on Napoleon's extreme left flank during the invasion of Russia. Though faced by nothing more than small Russian forces and long distances, he moved timidly; worse, he gave no help to Oudinot and St. Cyr on his right flank. (Later he would have the gall to label St. Cyr a "bad bedfellow.") Doubtless his Prussian officers noted his behavior; once they were enemies again in 1813-14, they exploited his hesitations and flinchings. Under the Emperor's direct command he still could hit hard; left to himself, he was always a day late-when he did not retreat unnecessarily. At Fontainebleau he was prominent in the marshals' mutiny, though he did his best to secure the French throne for Napoleon's son. Thereafter he followed Lo