uis XVIII. Napoleon considered Macdonald brave but unlucky-meaning, in Napoleon's vocabulary, that he lacked the quickness of mind to meet unexpected developments. He could be audacious, but too often unthinkingly so: At the Trebbia and again at the Katzbach in 1813 he deliberately crossed a difficult stream on a broad front against a superior enemy, at the Katzbach despite Napoleon's express orders. Macdonald suffered from a tendency to free and sarcastic speech, never missing a chance for a jest-preferably barbed. On reexamination, his Souvenirs are unreliable history; he blandly claims credit for actions where he was not present and blames his failures on his subordinates. By making him a marshal, Napoleon hung a millstone around his own neck. With Oudinot and Marmont, that made three millstones. Youngest of the marshals, Auguste-Frederic-Louis Viesse Marmont (1774-1852) was a tall, rangy gallant with a thrusting jaw, out of the petty nobility of northern France. Carefully educated, well brought-up, he was a new-hatched second lieutenant in 1791. Graduating from the Metz artillery school in 1793, he was ordered to Toulon, where a rising young artillery officer named Napoleon Bonaparte picked him one of his aides-de-camp. During Napoleon's later period of disgrace in Paris, Marmont (unlike Junot) left him for service on the Rhine frontier, but was recalled when Napoleon took command of the Army of Italy. He served excellently as a staff and artillery officer there and in Egypt but proved a prima donna, always clamoring that nobody sufficiently appreciated his work. Promoted to general of division in 1800, he rendered effective service for two years as inspector-general of artillery but suffered a severe contusion of the ego when he was not made one of the 1804 marshals. After competent service as a corps commander in 1805, he became the civil and military governor of France's new Dalmatian provinces. There he built the first roads and public works that back country had seen since Roman times; ruined years of painstaking Russian infiltration and one Russian expeditionary force; brought Turkish raiding under control; kept his troops healthy; and dealt justly with half-savage hill clans. (A suggestion of financial irregularities sometimes tinged those accomplishments, bringing Imperial warnings.) Summoned north in 1809, Marmont made a remarkable 300-mile march through frequently roadless country, scattering two Austrian forces, but clinging to his independent status and ignoring Eugene's orders. His baton was accompanied by a scathing Napoleonic critique of his sins of omission and commission. Napoleon transferred him to Spain after Massena's failure there in 1810. He arrived with 300 horses, 100 red-liveried domestics, and a long train of vehicles-an entourage which used up as much food and forage as a calvary regiment. He accomplished wonders rebuilding the broken-down French forces and for more than a year always outmarched and frequently outmaneuvered Wellington. But a moment's overeagerness at Salamanca (1812) left an opening for the Englishman's sudden counterstroke. As it came on, Marmont took a crippling wound, and all his work went with the wind. Thereafter he fought through 1813 and 1814 in Germany and France, often with success-until, in a fit of discouragement, he listened to Tallyrand's wheedling and went over to the Allies. One of the most intelligent and best educated of the marshals, Marmont also surpassed most of them as an administrator and organizer. As a tactician he was courageous, imaginative, quick, and deadly. His vanity rendered him ungrateful to superiors and subordinates alike, but he was not meanly selfish: In 1815 he risked the Bourbons' anger in an attempt to save Antoine Lavalette from execution. With all his abilities, there was an unsteadiness about him; periodically he was seized-sometimes at most unfortunate moments-by spasms of depression or carelessness. After Waterloo, cherished by the Bourbons, he lived extravagantly, losing large sums in attempts at scientific farming. He also diddled with the War Ministry's files to improve the history of his 1813 operations. In streets and barracks, his Napoleonic title Duke of Ragusa inspired the new verb raguser-to cheat, sneak, betray. In 1830, when France rose against its Bourbon King, he failed to quell the Paris mob and so fled into exile. He had little money left and, wherever he passed, children whispered that there went the man who betrayed Napoleon. Preeminent among the marshals of 1804 was Andre Massena (17581817). Born near Nice, then a part of the Kingdom of Sardinia, he knew a harsh childhood. His father dead, abandoned by his mother, he worked in an uncle's soap factory until he ran away to sea as a cabin boy when he was thirteen. In 1775 he enlisted in the French Army's Royal Italian Regiment, rising to regimental sergeant major in 1784. Denied further promotion because of his plebeian birth, he left the service in 1789, married, and became a local grocer. (Tradition, possibly true, makes that modest business the front for a successful smuggling enterprise.) In 1791 he enlisted in a Volunteer battalion; in 1793 he was a general of division. He had a major part in the Italian campaigns through 1797: A rough-and-ready commander, scrambling on his hands and knees across sharp ridgelines, showing his men how to slide down snowfields, lending a hand at carrying knocked-down cannon over a difficult pass, he was "hard on his men, but equally hard on himself; sober ... great strength of character, indefatigable, on horseback day and night along the steepest and most dreadful roads, however vile the weather; decided, brave, full of self-pride and ambition, obstinate to excess, never discouraged. s33 His carelessness in administrative matters produced a soldiers' strike in Rome in 1798, but his 1799 campaign in Switzerland against Austrians and Russians was a true masterpiece of calculating patience and sudden aggressiveness. Uninterested in politics, he unenthusiastically accepted Napoleon's coup d'etat, then won further fame by his defense of Genoa in 1800. His 1805 campaign against he Archduke Charles in northern Italy was no credit to either of them. In 1809 he was a marvel of tactical skill and determination, covering the French withdrawal after Aspern-Essling, holding the weak French left flank at Wagram. Too injured to ride after his horse fell with him, he led his troops from his carriage. Napoleon could not guess that this energy was the last flare of a dying fire. He sent Massena-the marshal most experienced in independent command and mountain warfare-off to Spain to dispose of the Duke of Wellington. But Massena suddenly was war- weary in soul and body. He left even the most vital reconnaissances to his subordinates, moved slowly and indecisively, did not discipline his insubordinate corps commanders. His campaign was a failure, and the Emperor replaced him with Marmont. Wellington, however, remembered him with respect: "Massena is an old fox, and as cautious as I am.' IN Prematurely aged and half sick, Massena then went on the shelf. In 1814 the returned Bourbons were virtuously shocked to discover that he was not a Frenchman and made him undergo official naturalization to keep his commission. Massena was a small man with an expressive Italian face. He carried his head high and cocked a little to the left, and there was something of an eagle in his glance. His physical courage was absolute; his moral courage almost matched it. He hated to read and therefore never improved his education. Besides soldiering, he had two interests: money and women. He was always a looter. Napoleon rewarded his services handsomely and repeatedly but never could sate his appetite for a quick franc, however it might be gained. Napoleon balanced the books by ordering large chunks of Massena's "little savings" transferred to the army paymaster. With women as with looting, Massena usually was discreet, but openly took a "Madam X" with him into Spain in 1810. By way of compensation, he was an overprotective father. He was a general by instinct, but his ability needed the stimulation of actual combat. When necessary, as at Genoa, he shared his men's hardships. The titles Napoleon gave him-Duke of Rivoli, Prince of Essling- were battle honors. Napoleon also christened him "Victory's beloved child." After Berthier, the oldest of the active marshals was Bon Adrien Jeannot Moncey (1754-1842). (His name originally was "Jeannot" (variously spelled), but in 1789 he purchased the old Moncey estate and so added "de Moncey" to it, then dropped the "de" when the Revolution made such suggestions of nobility unhealthy.) His family was country gentry from the neighborhood of the eastern frontier city of Besancon. Originally a law student, Moncey twice enlisted in the army, apparently seeking a commission as a gentleman-cadet and buying his discharge when unsuccessful. In 1774 he secured an appointment to the "English Company" of the scarletuniformed Gendarmerie, then part of the King's household troops35 but was dismissed two years later for misconduct and frivolity. He finally obtained a commission in 1779 in an odd-lot mercenary outfit, which was converted to light infantry in 1788. He was a captain in 1791, a general of brigade in 1793. A year later, as general of division commanding the Army of the Western Pyrenees, he won a series of actions that did much to bring Spain to sue for peace. In 1800-1801 he had a minor part in the Italian operations. Napoleon chose him for the extremely important post of Inspector-General of the National Gendarmerie. He commanded a corps in Spain in 1808, once more showing great skill in mountain fighting. An excellent commander for raw troops, he kept them under tight discipline, husbanding their strength and never attacking any position he could outflank, but he was too deliberate for the Emperor's style of war. In 1814, as commander of the Paris National Guard, he showed great courage in defending the city, but later joined Ney, Oudinot, Lefebvre, and Macdonald in refusing to fight again. During the Hundred Days he remained loyal to the Bourbons. In 1834 he became Governor of the Invalides, where, six years later, he received the body of Napoleon, brought home at last. Napoleon's best-known reaction to Moncey was simply that he was an honest man, and that opinion seems to have been universal among his contemporaries. Personally impressive-tall with noble features, dignified bearing, and grave and stately manners-he conducted himself with a decency and sensitivity that impressed comrades and enemies alike. He was much troubled by the disapproval of others, yet even fleering Macdonald and harsh Davout respected him. His Spanish opponents in 1808, repeatedly turned out of seemingly impregnable positions, declared him a just and honorable foe. And when Louis XVIII ordered Moncey placed under arrest for refusing to preside over Ney's court-martial, a Prussian army band played a concert outside his house every night. "Mortier" is French for "mortar." Captious people were known to de scribe Edouard-Adolphe-Casimer-Joseph Mortier (1768-1835), "That big mortar has a short range.' 116 It may be doubted, however, that any of them said it in his hearing. Mortier was a very big man, at 6 feet, 6 inches the tallest of the marshals. His father was a wealthy landowner and linen manufacturer in French Flanders who had commercial ties with England. Mortier received a betterthan-average education at the English College of Douai (his mother reputedly was English) and turned his hand to the family business until the wars began. Offered a commission in the prestigious carabiniers a cheval in 1791, he preferred to enlist in the local Volunteer unit. His comrades elected him captain; he was a colonel in 1795 and a general of division in 1799. That same year he distinguished himself in Switzerland and marrie