wn necks and everyone else's, with a belief in their own invincibility that for years actually made them invincible-persistent, audacious, always ready to try again. On the other hand, many lacked experience in the care of men and animals and offered more courage than professional competence. The demand for new officers was endless. Besides his own French units, Napoleon had to find competent men to cadre, train, and stiffen Italian, Neapolitan, Croatian, and Westphalian troops. Good officers who spoke German were always in demand. The increase in the army's strength during 1808 and 1809 necessitated milking the army schools and recalling large numbers of retired officers. Most of those retreads proved unsatisfactory, lacking the energy and self-respect to train and discipline young conscripts. (Also, the old sans-culottes among them were careless of Spanish religious feelings, let their men loot churches, and insulted churchmen, often making unnecessary enemies.)" By 1813 there was an acute shortage of officers, and the replacements available from the National Guard and other rear area units were often lacking in combat experience. For that reason Napoleon, as one veteran put it, "threw epaulettes out the windows," commissioning large numbers of enlisted men and gendarmes. Some were barely literate, a few not even that. (These men later would make up a large part of the "half-pays," who would be such a distinct, unruly element for another generation-hardcase, roughneck, aging rankers who were a society of their own, cherishing their old tricolor cockades and the "cross" so many of them had won.) Young officers fresh from the schools were sent to the most solid regiments. But a good many more retired officers had to be recalled: The 14th Legere, back to the great wars after long service on Corfu, found several newly raised battalions of their regiment staffed with officers they had gotten rid of as unsatisfactory. And there also was a minor problem of where to assign capable officers like General Pierre Duclaux, who had lost much of his nose from frostbite in Russia. In general the senior officers were war-weary. Marmont complained that he had not spent three months in Paris during the past ten years. Many had turned fatalistic; some, like General Etienne Bordessoule, even discouraged their own men. But it was noted that the regimental officers were still ready for another battle when their Emperor abdicated in 1814. An officer's distinctions were his epee (a light, straight sword), his hausse-col (gorget), and his epaulettes. To "trade your briquet for an epee" was to be commissioned out of the ranks or a military school, but most officers wore it only for ceremonies or in time of peace; in combat, some sort of saber was a lot more effective. The gorget was worn only on duty, and officers seem to have gradually abandoned wearing it in the field; it could be a nuisance bouncing under your chin, and its bright metal gave enemy jaegers a good bull's-eye. Up to and including chef de battaillon/ escadron, they wore a full epaulette on the left shoulder and a contra (fringeless) epaulette on the right. Majors and above had two full epaulettes. (The epaulette straps and fringe varied in design according to the officer's grade.) Hussar officers did not wear epaulettes; their grades were indicated by galons on their sleeves above their cuffs and the front of their breeches. Some units (as well as some infantry regiments) used chevronshaped galons on the side of their shakos. One thing they did not wear was any type of spectacles. Fezansac called it incredible that only Davout wore his without apology. Officers did have a tendency to fight duels, which Napoleon regarded as a waste of useful manpower. He especially disliked the professional duelist, whom he compared to a cannibal. There were enough of that touchy sort in the Grande Armee, but the outstanding specimen was Reseda Fournier24 from the Saar, a onetime choir boy, then a wild Jacobin, and probably psychopathic. An excellent light cavalryman, he took a sadistic pleasure in forcing duels on civilians (sometimes by insulting their wives) and then killing them leisurely, but always within the forms of the dueling code. Known as the "Demon of the Grande Armee," he became part of its legends through the series of duels he fought with another officer known only as "Dupont" from 1794 to 1813.25 In 1813 Fournier's nerve broke, and he turned openly insubordinate. Napoleon stripped him of his commission. Many officers-Napoleon included-were Freemasons. That movement, which had spread rapidly across Europe during the past century, had a particular appeal for military men. Some regiments in various armies had their own lodges, where officers and enlisted men sat down together as brothers and the ritual was impressively exact. Soldiers of most nations still felt themselves fellow professionals. Freemasonry reinforced that bond; a Masonic "sign of distress" made in time of need could bring help in the most unlikely places, even in the snow along a Russian road in 1812. Thus wounded officers of the 33d Legere, the Dutch regiment that formed Davout's rear guard at Krasny, captured when enemy artillery finally breached their square, were aided by the Russian commander as a fellow Mason. (Today the Russian government regards Masons as public enemies.) A mortally wounded British Mason, stripped and plundered by marauders, would be cared for by a French brother until he died and then buried with Masonic honors. After Leipzig a Saxon civilian sheltered a wounded French fellow Mason at considerable personal risk. Captured British regimental Masonic chests were sent back with a guard of honor by both French and Americans during these wars. In Spain Masons were considered in league with the devil, warlocks in life, possibly vampires after death. Colonel Castillon of the 76th Ligne had marched to levy a contribution on the rich and famous Abby of Guada- loupe. When the monk detailed by the abbot to handle the necessary business with the infidels asked the colonel to join him in a preliminary cup of wine, Castillon braced himself for anything unpleasant, arsenic includedthen went loose-jawed when the monk gave him a Freemason signal. Afterward the necessary foraging was carried out in gentlemanly fashion, the monks being left a comfortable plenty and the 76th carrying away more food than it had hoped for. Probably the oddest story is that of Colonel Louis Dembowski, a Polish officer released on parole by the English after the capitulation of the French forces on Haiti. With his wife and small children, he finally arrived at Charleston, South Carolina, after a rough passage in an ill-found little ship with a drunken captain. His money was almost gone, and the French consul was totally uninterested in his plight. At this crisis a Jewish merchant gently offered help as a brother Mason and a brother Pole. Dembowski, a Polish gentleman brought up to regard Jews as useful but basically subhuman, was knocked into a state of mental readjustment. His account fairly creaks with bewilderment-the more so when the merchant understandingly brought another Mason, this one a German and a Christian, into the case. The two brethren cared handsomely for the Dembowski family during their stay and sent them safely home on a clean American ship. Dembowski concluded that there was more to Masonry than he had thought. Food could be a problem for officers in wartime. When there was a shortage of rations, a chronic condition in the French Army on campaign, many of them went hungry. This was especially true when their pay was also in arrears, leaving them unable to buy anything from local merchants or the sutlers who followed the troops. Regimental officers might share in whatever eatables their men's foraging produced. General officers and their staffs usually came late for such pickings. Caulaincourt remembered seeing them happy to gnaw at a crust of sour black bread as the Grande Armee closed on Moscow, while the troops around them lived literally high off the hog, frying eggs by the hundred. (The Russian scorched-earth policy hadn't worked.) And there was a February day in 1807 when one of Murat's aides came to beg a mouthful of some smoked salmon, found by the Guard chasseurs-a-pied for that marshal's supper, and was rebuffed. Consequently, officers tried to carry along a reserve of food, especially in Spain and Poland. And food, for the Frenchman, has always included liquid components. Jean Noel, who went into Russia with the reserve artil lery, laid out more than 400 francs in Koenigsburg for wine, rice, coffee, sugar, bouillon tablets, and the like; it saved his life and also the lives of several comrades. A forehanded, somewhat stuffy Colonel Prelet had a good wagonload of personal stores when the retreat from Moscow began. (Some officers took more interest in such stocks than in providing for their men; the soldiers got even by stealing from them, to the serious hurt of discipline.) On November 9, finding his regiment forced to camp, emptybellied, in a forest where the trees were too big to cut for firewood, Prelet shared out his remaining food among his officers and men, feeling his sacrifice keenly but consoling himself with the thought that he had done a truly noble deed. Most officers had civilian servants, termed "domestics," to fend for them. Sometimes one domestic might be joint servitor for several lieutenants, an arrangement that sooner or later would put a definite strain on the ties of friendship. A good man had to combine the duties of valet, cook, bodyguard, and tailor. One of Marbot's, a former Black Legionary named Woirland, feared nothing and was accomplished and useful as both a horsebreaker and horse thief. His eventual replacement, Lorenz Schilkowski, "had been an Austrian uhlan and was not lacking in wits, but was a drunkard like all Poles and, unlike the soldiers of that nation, cowardly as a hare.726 However, he spoke French, German, and Russian and could be very useful as an interpreter, though he tended to vanish as soon as the shooting started. During the retreat, Marbot was therefore much relieved when Jean Dupont, the domestic of Marbot's brother Adolphe (captured early in the campaign), joined him. Dupont had managed to save Adolphe's three horses and all his kit intact, except for a pair of boots he had taken when his own wore out. His "absolute zeal, courage, and fidelitys27 were of great service to Marbot, especially after he was wounded again during the worst days of the retreat. Many accounts of the period tell of domestics decamping with their masters' possessions, yet most of them seem to have been in the class of Woir- land and Dupont, loyal if not always models of probity when it came to foraging and like activities. General Louis Coehorn's old Alsatian servant stayed by his dying master in an enemy hospital till the last, saw him buried, and then brought his personal effects back through a sticky-fingered Russian army to his family. When Captain Grivel and his 3d Company of the Sailors of the Guard held a fraternal banquet to celebrate their return from Spain, the sailors asked that Grivel's Polish domestic join them as an equal: He had fought valiantly beside them and so should share their pleasures. There was also the testimony of an enemy: Cornet Edward Fitzgerald of the British 10th Hussars had found his English servant cowardly and unhandy and so hired a Frenchman who had been the domestic of a mortally wounded French officer prisoner, being pleased with the man's care of his dying master. For thirty guineas a year the new servant was "a valet, a cook, a shoemaker, a capital taylor-and a sad bit out of my ration beef he makes as good a dish as I wish to eat even in England ... keeps all my clothes in good repair . . . talks German and Spanish."" Mounted officers necessarily had to provide their domestics with a horse of 