the care with which he trained his men, drilling and maneuvering them three times a week, often for twelve hours a day, converting his IV Corps into the formidable machine that smashed the Austro-Russian center at Austerlitz, rolled up the Prussians at Jena, and held against heavy odds at Eylau. After his whirlwind Spanish campaign of 1808-9 Napoleon sent Soult to occupy Portugal, where he promptly involved himself in opaque intrigues to become that country's King. Wellington forced him out, but Soult saved his army by a daring retreat along mountain trails. He then occupied and effectively ruled the south Spanish province of Andulusia. Recalled to the Grande Armee in 1813 to understudy the ailing Berthier, he soon was sent back to oppose Wellington. He fought gallantly, taking reverse after reverse in Spain and southern France. Defeated yet never beaten he always rallied his ragamuffin army to fight again, firing the last shot for his Emperor, who could give him nothing but his confidence. Minister of War to Louis XVIII during 1814-16, Soult was involved in more intrigue. Napoleon made him his chief of staff for the Hundred Days, during which he probably made more errors than Berthier had in eighteen years. In exile from then until 1819, he ended in glory: After Charles X fled in 1830, he rebuilt the disorganized French Army and received the rare title "Marshal-General of France." "Imperturbable in good or evil fortune," Ameil remembered, "observing, seeing all, comprehending all; silent, but hard....He was attached to no one.s46 In his own way he was fair, never forgetting a deserving soldier but disliking to be reminded of past promises or past services. When so reminded, he considered himself relieved from any obligation. He was an excellent administrator and disciplinarian, took good care of his troops, and when necessary shared their hardships. He also was a quiet and skillful looter (Napoleon classed him with Talleyrand in his ability to "make money out of everything"),47 building a wonderful collection of religious pictures from Spanish churches. He had no strategic sense; as a tactician he was able, but-especially when operating independently-often too cautious, consequently missing opportunities. His nickname was "Hand of Iron"; his soldiers swore it fitted him exactly. The one Frenchman to win his baton in Spain was Louis-Gabriel Suchet (1772-1826). A tall, handsome, cheerful boy, son of a wealthy Lyons silk merchant, he volunteered in 1793. Three years later he was a lieutenant colonel under Napoleon in Italy. Apparently they were not entirely compat ible, but Napoleon did promote him to colonel. He made general of division in 1799, shared in the great campaigns of the Consulate and early Empire, and won a solid reputation as staff officer and division commander who could think for himself in a pinch. In 1809 in Spain he was given command of the run-down III Corps, which had been badly mishandled by Junot. By way of welcoming him, these troops-grandly renamed "The Army of Aragon"-promptly ran away from a smaller Spanish force. That was their last defeat. Suchet rebuilt his army from rear-rank yardbirds on up; restored discipline and morale; and saw that it was properly paid, clothed, and fed, largely from local resources. Suchet had quickly realized that defeating Spanish armies was somewhat less important than gaining the good will of the Spanish people-and also that Spain was not so much a unified nation as a collection of differing, sometimes mutually hostile provinces. Aragon had been an ancient kingdom; its citizens still resented the domineering ways of neighboring Castile. Suchet exploited that separatist sentiment: Aragon's local governments continued to function under a central junta, which managed its budget, taxes, and internal police, enabling Suchet to rule as a temporary legal governor rather than a military conqueror. His abolition of medieval restrictions on trade and industry so increased local prosperity that the higher taxes needed to support his troops went almost unnoticed. The clergy were treated with respect, schools and public works were opened, graft at all levels was rooted out. His base thus secured, Suchet pushed east and south. Brilliant battles and methodical sieges added Catalonia and Valencia to his realm. Napoleon sent him his baton in 1811. In just three years, with an army that never numbered more than 50,000, he had occupied three fortress-studded provinces and had bagged some 77,000 prisoners and 1,400 guns. Napoleon later declared that with two Suchets he could have conquered all of Spain and kept it. During 1813-14, because of French defeats elsewhere, Suchet extricated his troops from Spain, still undefeated. In 1815 he routed the Piedmontese and Austrians. When word came of Suchet's death, Spanish priests in the cathedral of Saragossa, the historic capital of Aragon, said mass in his remembrance. Spanish peasants told travelers that he had been a good man. Suchet defeated two British amphibious expeditions launched from Sicily against Spain's east coast, but he never met Wellington in battle-to the unchristian regret of connoisseurs of history's might-have-beens. It should have been a lively and most instructive brawl! The first marshal made after the original 1804 list, Claude- Victor Perrin (1764-1841), commonly known as "Victor," was always something of a problem child. His father, a well-to-do farmer in southern Lorraine, had hoped to make a magistrate of him, but Victor got away from home at fifteen to be a soldier. He was too young to enlist, but Artillerie Regiment La Fere signed him up as a musician because of his skill with the clarinet. He never was a drummer, as sloppy writers would have it, but does seem to have risen to trompette d'harmonie (first trumpet). His mother persuaded him to buy his discharge in 1791. He married and became a municipal employee in Valence, but, with Volunteer battalions mustering to defend la Patrie, nine months of civilian existence was all he could take. He reenlisted and was a sergeant immediately; he became a battalion commander in 1792 and general of brigade in 1793. Like Augereau and Lannes, he served on the Spanish frontier, then in Italy. Napoleon made him a general of division in 1797. He got his baton particularly for excellent service at Friedland in 1807, where his prompt advance in the French center renewed an attack compromised by Ney's showy bungling. He was in Spain from 1808 to 1812. In that latter year he functioned as a rear-area commander in Russia, protecting the Grande Armee's communications. He served competently in 1813, but 1814 saw him lagging. During the Hundred Days he fled with Louis XVIII; after Waterloo the Bourbons slathered him with honors and used him to purge the army of officers who might be hostile to them. He showed every indication of enjoying that assignment. Victor was never particularly friendly toward Napoleon and had the general reputation of an unruly subordinate and unreliable comrade. His intelligence was only moderate, and Augereau remarked on his lack of education. Undoubtedly there was a mean streak in him; he frequently blamed his subordinates for his mistakes, and-so long as his troops showed discipline in action-allowed them to pillage and abuse civilians, even in France. His temper was hot and hair-triggered. At the same time he was an excellent organizer, instructor, and tactician. In action he was audacious, quick to see and strike the decisive point; in Spain at Ucles (1808) and Medellin (1809) he brought off literal battles of annihilation, enveloping and destroying Spanish armies. His splendid rearguard stand to cover the Grande Armee's retreat across the Beresina River in 1812 suggests that he had studied Wellington's tactics in Spain. He taught his men to shoot straight and drilled them in full field equipment to accustom them to its weight and to get it fitted properly. He made Lannes an efficient chief of staff in 1806. Soldiers called him "Beau Soleil," which translates as "beautiful sun," but possibly had a military implication. (A soleil was a large firework that shot flames in all directions.) British tourists visiting Paris in 1814 thought he had a gentlemanly appearance. A competent officer and gentleman, Ferdinand von Funck, aide-de-camp to King Frederick Augustus I of Saxony, served both against and with Napoleon. He knew the marshals, and his opinions of them were blunt but impartial. Berthier was an officer of "incredible talent ... hard and irasci ble," yet not unkindly and "amenable to reasonable representations." Davout, the "only one who always maintained strict and exemplary discipline," was "above self-seeking" and strictly honest but was hated for his suspiciousness and "his blind devotion to Napoleon whose orders he carried out with relentless severity." ... Murat was perhaps the kindliest of them; whenever he could he tempered the oppression of the countries out of sheer humanity; but he overlooked the excesses of his men when the privations they were undergoing amounted in his view to suffering. Soult, Suchet ... stood for discipline; Ney and Bernadotte least of all. Victor attempted to emulate Davout's severity, but was not qualified to enforce discipline as strictly.... Mortier was well behaved but weak in intelligence and character......and lacked the personal prestige among his troops... . Massena was the victim of an avarice that adopted any methods conducive to his own enrichment. This weakness impelled him, against his better judgement to lenience.... Marmont, too, stood for discipline where his own interests were not affected, but he had small sympathy for human suffering. Augereau at times held the reins slackly, but never as slackly as Ney; Macdonald was more humane but never strict enough. Bessieres, a man of fine character, did not always succeed in keeping the Guards, whom Napoleon himself spoiled, in hand; but he set his face against looting and missed no opportunity of tempering public distress. Lefebvre was not a bad man, but coarse and underbred, and it usually depended on his mood whether he punished or approved the depredations of his troops. Gouvion St. Cyr stood for discipline; only ill-health and his many wounds prevented Oudinot from being as [strict] as Davout.48 These gros bonnets49 had little in common beyond the accepted facts of physical bravery and fighting instinct. Even those varied with the man: St. Cyr at Polotsk, painfully wounded but grimly calculating the converging progress of two superior Russian armies, to whip them both in turn; Mortier, trapped with his leading division by a Russian army in the Durrenstein defile, refusing to escape in the one available boat, and leading a breakout charge with bloody saber; Massena, at Wagram, damning a wavering column back into the attack from his carriage drawn by four white horses, a shining target, somehow untouched: "Scoundrels! You get five sous a day, and I am worth 600,000 francs a year-yet you make me go ahead of you! ''50 They were hard men, toughened to wounds, cold winds, and hunger. Some, like Lefebvre, took their sons, grown tall enough, on their road to the muttering guns. Whatever their background, most were honorable, and the worst were not without some decencies. Massena might be a swindler, Augereau an adventurer, Soult sometimes dubious. But Davout, Bessieres, and Serurier rode past riches to be had for only a little reaching; Mortier would wave aside costly gifts offered him in a conquered city. War and the years wrought harshly with them. Lannes, Bessieres, and Poniatowski dead on the field of honor; Massena, Lefebvre, and Serurier aged and impotent; Ney grown bald and irresponsible; Soult fat, grumpy, and mistrusted. Massena, Davout, and Suchet were the masters, capable of independent missions. So, to a lesser degree, were St. Cyr, Soult, and-for a whileMacdonald. Lannes, had he lived, might have ranke