sorts. (Sous-Lieutenant Castellane of the 24th Dragoons paid fifty louis for his personal mount and would have to pay fifteen to twenty for one for his domestic.) Also, they usually had a soldier orderly who actually took care of their horses, that being beyond the competence of many domestics. Those troopers-called "philistines" for some reason-were not supposed to carry any of the officers' supplies or equipment, which might overload their horses. Their officers paid them an established fee; Castellane's cost him nine francs a month. To keep domestics under better control, some regiments required them to wear a distinctive semi-uniform. The 2d Conscripts-Chasseurs of the Guard, for example, specified gray trimmed with sky-blue and braided with crimson. Some generals put theirs into a personal livery, which could result in their being confused with aides- decamp. They were not to wear military-style headgear or carry swords except when actually in the field. Occasionally there was a dustup when soldiers of a headquarters escort were drafted to act as orderlies or even domestics for its officers. It made a noncombattant commissaire des guerres feel very much the conquering hero to have a hussar or two at his beck and call. Generals were also apt to get a soldier cook detailed to service with them. The conscription brought in promising young chefs as well as farmhands, and few of them-unlike the hussars-objected to a headquarters assignment. To move these officers' servants and supplies, an 1813 regulation allowed each marshal thirty-six horses and two vehicles; a division commander eighteen horses and one vehicle; and a brigade commander thirteen horses and one vehicle. In actual fact many marshals and generals exceeded those figures, and colonels and chefs de bataillon might have their own supply wagons. Even well-off junior officers might manage a light cart. Napoleon was always launching orders against this ever increasing tail of domestics and private vehicles, but he usually tolerated the practice, because it gave him an unofficial reserve of horses and vehicles which he could impress in emergencies. It was a very individualistic, improvised system, very much the same in every army, including the American.29 It functioned with fair efficiency, but it also encumbered the army with a draggle of ever-hungry noncombatants. Also it would seem, from letters and diaries, that some officers worried as much over their personal baggage and domestics as they did over their companies, regiments, or divisions. Many of them had cause enough to worry. One Du Ponget wrote that he had lost two complete outfits during 1812, one to Spanish guerrillas and one to Cossacks, and that the last loss had been the fourth time he had been left without a spare shirt since 1806. He had just about reached the conclusion that the army was not the place where an honest man would become rich. Dragoon Colonel MarieAntoine de Reiset, covering King Joseph's 1812 flight from Madrid, beat the pursuing English cavalry off at Las Rosas in a smart little affair, after losing two good horses and taking three wounds, one of which knocked out three teeth. When the fighting was over, he discovered that his baggage mule had bolted with all his personal possessions, leaving him only four articles besides the bloody uniform he wore: a superb English telescope and the three displaced teeth. The Emperor rewarded his officers in many ways besides promotions. In 1806 he began a system of "donations et dotations" (gifts and endowments) that was much like the old British custom of prize money, pensions, and sinecure appointments. A year later he initiated a new system of hereditary nobility: knights (chevaliers), barons, counts, dukes, and princes. These titles were awarded to civilians and soldiers alike; any capable colonel could become a baron, any useful general a count-even Vandamme as "Count of Unebourg." The marshals were dukes, and the most distinguished of them princes. But all awards were based on service or, in the case of Bernadotte, family connections. The titles were backed by estates in France, Germany, Italy, and Poland or by pensions, which might be based on estates, fisheries, or river or canal tolls. Undoubtedly with his impoverished youth in mind, Napoleon always felt that a little cash in hand would be an appreciated gift. A general could expect a donation of 20,000 francs or more when he became a count; a colonel newly made a baron at least 4,000. All the marshals who served in the 1809 campaign received 1,000,000 francs. There were individual gifts to officers who had done well at some particular task or had suffered unexpected personal losses in line of duty. Widows and orphans were pensioned. Part of this generosity was policy: Napoleon hoped to keep his generals satisfied, out of politics, loyal to the Empire, and free from any need or excuse for theft or embezzlement. Part was natural generosity: A man who lived simply and saved his money, Napoleon could be imperially munificent. His particular touch was to make his enemies pay for many of his generosities. Sadly, this policy was a complete failure. Most of the marshals and too many of the generals could not stand the combination of personal prosperity and military adversity that confronted them in 1813-14, "their bones were chilled ... they feared the remaining ten years of life,s30 so they forsook their Emperor. Punishments for officers had many forms. De Brack listed those possible within a regiment: a private warning; a public reprimand before its other officers; and "simple" arrestation (arrest), where an officer was temporarily relieved of his command and had to ride behind his squadron. Next came "enforced" arrest: the officer was kept under guard, could not wear his saber or give orders; when the regiment marched, he must ride weaponless behind the trumpeters. If such treatment did not produce reform, his misdeeds might be published in the regimental orders, or he might be sent to the rear or turned over to the divisional court-martial for trial. The supreme punishment was a trial by his fellow officers: If found guilty he would be "cast out of the regiment" as unfit to be a soldier. Higher authority apparently always supported such punishments. Higher authority had its own arsenal, which was mixed with the normal treatment of officers leaving the service honorably because of age or physical disability. Reforme meant compulsory retirement, whether for cause or as a temporary status for a worthy officer until his retired pay could be determined. (This last could be complicated: One Captain Plaideux, retired in that grade under the Directory, had somehow jiggled his records to receive the retired pay of a general of brigade; the War Ministry didn't catch on until 1811 !) Once you were put on retraite you were struck from the rolls of the active army and lived on your pension. "Suspension" was a definite punishment: you lost all military authority and pay and had to wait until charges against you were investigated. Sometimes you were directed to remain in some small village, a hundred miles or so from Paris. Retrogradation meant being "busted"-reduced to a lower grade or even to enlisted status; officers of the Guard might be sent back to the Line. Destitution was the complete works: You were expelled from the service without a pension; your decorations were "retired"; you could not wear your old uniforms; any title of nobility previously awarded you was canceled. (Such was the fate of Pierre Dupont and his division commanders after their capitulation at Baylen.) In extreme cases, you might be sent to a state prison for an indefinite period. From sous-lieutenant to marshal, Napoleon's officers were brave men: Out of the 2,248 general officers who served France during the Revolution and Empire, only a dozen were accused of cowardice, and some of those cases were the result of momentary weakness. (One officer in Blaze's regiment never saw action in thirty years' service. The sound of gunfire would put him into a prodigious panic that no barrier could halt, and-even in those days-was recognized as uncontrollable. But he was a good man, cheerful and helpful, and very useful at the regimental depot training conscripts.) Some were drunkards, but most of these were weeded out by 1804. A good many were gamblers, that being the only recreation they really understood. Some ran badly into debt; in early 1805 Napoleon gave them two months to straighten out their affairs or be suspended. Only a few got into serious woman trouble, at least in France. Most generals were excellent husbands-possibly, one cynic suggested, because they were so seldom at home. Undoubtedly the greatest weakness of the whole officer corps was the frequent greed for money, beyond all reason, honesty, or loyalty. One Grande Armee joke was the general who customarily put all the colonels and chefs de bataillon in his brigade under arrest on New Year's Eve to avoid the expense of having them to the traditional dinner the next day. Colonels continued the Royal Army practice of fiddling with regimental funds, and generals levied unauthorized contributions, but they did it with their chins on their shoulders, fearful of the Emperor's inspectors and auditors. Many Frenchmen disliked prolonged foreign service. The Imperial correspondence is full of letters from senior officers who needed-oh, so badlyto return to France to reestablish their health, preferably in the salubrious environment of Paris. Napoleon's reply might recommend the hospitals and spas in the area where they were stationed. Others were always being tripped up by their lack of education. One tough old colonel commanding a frontier fortress received a warning to be on the alert because the equinox was approaching." The good colonel checked his garrison and fortifications, and replied: "Let that bastard of a General Equinox show up here and we'll [censored] him."32 These officers wrote many letters, with a drum or a knee for a desk in the field, or perhaps in the palaces of conquered kings. The young ones' letters were often about money; older men were concerned about their savings and investments and their families. There were letters from Spain, Egypt, and Russia about the lack of letters, which perhaps were intercepted in their turn. Commanding officers had their spells of unwanted correspondence-young ladies of good, tight-fisted Norman families kept demanding to know what had happened to the horses and equipment of a brother dead in Russia or at Leipzig, intimating that choice property such as that simply couldn't vanish, no matter how disastrous the retreat. Another young lady told her captain sweetheart that papa would let them get married, just as soon as he won promotion to chef de bataillon. Lieutenant Marbotin wrote his mother, who had suffered under the Revolution and so had no desire to see him in Imperial uniform (the father, a naval officer, had emigrated and disappeared), asking her to forgive the brevity of his note: "We are now like the bird on the bough, ready to instantly depart."33 Even peacetime brought its troubles. Officers would have to attend "Schools of Intonation" to improve their voices of command. There were periodic drives to reduce the waistlines of officers who had grown plump on unaccustomed good living. ("Devil take it, Lieutenant Foret's platoon can't see past his big belly to dress their line!") Schools, reviews, and inspections multiplied mightily. Expensive dress uniforms became obligatory, to the depletion of junior officers' purses. Certain aspects of military life change very little. These men were individuals. Thiebault's little character sketches, written with devoted malice and a poisoned' pen (as when he described one general as combining the ignorance of a scullion with the brutality of a clodhopper), are not as realistic as those that turn up in everyday letters and memoirs