ert thereupon would promptly pocket it with lavish thanks, while its owners stood openmouthed. In modest retaliation, Italians invited to his receptions would fill their pockets with various goodies before leaving. Chabert put up with this, but when his guests began slipping whole bottles of wine under their coattails his aides were alert to tiptoe up and deal the betraying bulge a sharp blow. One prize eight-ball was Jacques F. Menou, small, fat, very talkative, and at the same time intelligent and impractical. In Egypt in 1799 he was a worn veteran, brave enough, irritably vain, with some shreds of his gentlemanly upbringing still visible. He was an excellent administrator, doing most of the work in getting the army clothed, paid, and fed that is usually credited to Napoleon and Kleber. However, he frankly admitted no tactical skill, warning Napoleon to count on him as a loyal henchman but not as a general. (His reasons for that loyalty might have startled Napoleon. Menou once told a subordinate never to take the side of the honest men during a Revolution-they were always its first victims!) Left in command in Egypt after Kleber's murder, he turned Mohammedan and married a native wife but begged out of the customary ceremonial circumcision. He was clearsighted enough to oppose all proposals to evacuate Egypt, then lost it in one thudding display of tactical incompetence. Appreciating his loyalty, Napoleon gave him various comfortable administrative jobs in northern Italy, where he happily established a harem of ballerinas. By 1810, however, his debts and "multiple amours" had made him a public nuisance. Napoleon broke him from the service; he was dead of a stroke in less than a month. Like every army in all ages, the Grande Armee had its strange officers who somehow clung to a place on the payroll. In 1799 Macdonald loosed his furious sarcasm on a General Joseph Montrichard, who never moved out when ordered and forgot to see that his men had full cartridge pouches when he finally did. Three years later Montrichard was in trouble because his troops were running a large-scale smuggling operation in Switzerland; in 1806 he was put on nonactive status for having levied an illegal contribution in Italy. Recalled in 1812 because of the shortage of general officers, he promptly had Marmont livid. Then there was Charles Dulauloy, a goodlooking personality boy and snow-job expert, who flourished like the biblical green bay tree, though a source of endless confusion. Ameil charged him with both dishonesty and cowardice, ending with: "He had no children: Our country lost nothing thereby, because they might have resembled their father."' The cavalrymen were an even more varigated lot. Etienne-Marie Nan- souty was of the Bordeaux aristocracy. He went with the Revolution but did not put himself forward, undoubtedly to avoid a Republican operation on his neck. The Revolution over, he was very much the nobleman and allowed no one to ignore it. A man of tradition, intelligence, education, and great exactitude, he served well; his men were always carefully trained and cared for. Yet there was no elan in his character, no readiness for an unexpected, all-out blow to save a desperate day. His disposition was mordant; searingly sarcastic to his hapless subordinates, he also spoke bluntly to Napoleon on occasion. D'Hautpoul, the poor Gascon squireen whose chasseurs had saved him from the guillotine, had aged into a fussy general of division, so pretentious that he was accused of rating a regiment's efficiency by the style of its colonel's cravat. He showed little skill but complete self-satisfaction, and died gallantly enough in the snow at Eylau. Two very different men and soldiers were Marie-Victor de Fay, Marquis de Latour-Maubourg, and Louis-Pierre Montbrun. Latour-Maubourg was of the old nobility and had been a lieutenant of Louis XVI's guards. Already a colonel in 1792 (at twenty-four) he fled France with Lafayette and shared his Austrian imprisonment. Freed by Napoleon, he fought his way up to general of division by 1808. He was calm, efficient, always ready, quietly courageous, and very careful of his men. Germans who served under him in 1812 wrote of his nobility of spirit and called him the Bayard of the Grande Armee and a man and a soldier in the highest sense of both words. He had a leg shot off at Leipzig, just as he was breaking up the Allied center. Seeing his domestic weeping, he jested: "What are you crying about, imbecile? You now have one less boot to polish."8 Montbrun was a worthy comrade. Very tall, scarred, and soldierly, with an eye that compelled obedience, active and tireless, he had risen from private to colonel of the Ist Chasseurs a Cheval. Davout got him promoted to general of brigade. He was at once prudent and reckless, careful of the lives of his men yet a driving, aggressive leader. In August 1812 he was suffering an attack of gout when the Russians attempted a counteroffensive; unable to pull on his boots, he rode to the rescue in his stocking feet. A month later at Borodino a chance cannon shot killed him. Of the light horsemen, Claude-Pierre Pajol entered his military career as a grenadier and was a cavalry corps commander in 1815. Always alert, he had rare audacity and skill, could sense an enemy's weakest point and lift his troopers at and through it. Francois Kellermann, son of the old marshal, had charged with Desaix at Marengo. For that, Napoleon forgave a long string of his scandals and extortions; in return Kellermann gave good and loyal service, even in 1815 after his father had joined the Bourbons. Auguste de Colbert (properly Colbert-Chabanais) was a hard, ambitious young man from the ancient military nobility; he served with zeal and ability, to die in Spain in 1809, picked off by a British rifleman, but regretted by his enemies, who admired his "fine martial figure, his voice, his gestures and his great valor."9 Antoine Charles Lasalle was the jingling, carefree idol of most light cavalrymen, the man for high adventure and reckless deeds. In 1806 after Jena, with only nine hundred hussars at his back and no weapon heavier than their popgun carbines, he bluffed the great fortress of Stettin, with two hundred guns and a garrison of five thousand men, into surrender. He was usually in debt; also, he gaily misbehaved with Leopold Berthier's wifebut then married her after the resulting divorce, and became a model husband and father whose only extramarital pleasures were war and collecting maps and pipes. He had no enemies (Marbot, to whom he once sold a horse, did dislike him) and rode with open heart and open hand. Utterly brave, loving danger, laughing at his own hardships, frequently charging with a long pipe instead of a saber in his hand, he had too much heart and too little head to handle masses of cavalry, and so got himself uselessly killed at the end of day at Wagram, charging into some Austrian landwehr whom he easily could have surrounded and taken. His trick of the trade was to charge at the trot, holding his men solidly in hand to meet an enemy exhausted from galloping. Andoche Junot, Colonel-General of Hussars, was a light horseman of sorts. A law student from Dijon who volunteered in 1792, his courage (and his neat handwriting) the next year at Toulon pleased Napoleon, who took him as his aide-de-camp. He gave Napoleon absolute loyalty and was absolutely trusted-much to Junot's disgust, Napoleon would leave him to govern Paris while the Grande Armee went to war. On one of those occasions, he was cleaned out in a Paris gambling den, went into one of his famous furies, tore up the cards, smashed the furniture, and beat the dealers, causing the Emperor to ask if he had taken an oath to live and die a fool. His whirlwind bravery earned him the nickname "the Tempest." His staff service, however, did not teach him how to command an army: He carried out a difficult occupation of Portugal in 1807 but completely snafued an excellent opportunity to cut Wellington's career short at Vimiero. By 1810 he was becoming erratic, the result of several head wounds, thwarted ambi tion, a disloyal wife, and too many careless amours. Napoleon regretfully sent him into a quiet seclusion as governor of the Illyrian provinces. There, after giving a ball-so says legend-in a costume consisting of his plumed hat and sword belt, he killed himself." Yet there was another Junot, a man who loved rare books and had fine tastes in food and wines. (A monastic cookbook he picked up in Portugal made a sensation; master chef Georges Escoffier declared it the only valuable thing the French brought out of Spain.) Also, for all his terrible angers, he was intelligent, just, and fair. Sent in 1806 with orders to put down a revolt in Parma with blood and fire, he reported back that justice would be better served by shooting a few Italian officials, and talked Napoleon into burning just one empty village as a sufficient symbol of Imperial wrath. General Baptiste-Pierre Bisson was something of a kindred spirit. A competent soldier and as much of a gourmet as was possible during a revolution, he would order his demi-brigade to give the marching salute when they passed his favorite vineyard, the Clos Vougeot. In time he became too unwieldy for field service and was relegated to territorial commands. Undoubtedly he had some glandular affliction; his "normal" appetite was such that Napoleon gave him a special ration allowance. Anthelme Brillat- Savarin, the famous French epicure, said that Bisson would drink eight bottles of wine with his dinner and not show the slightest effect. A near-opposite to such men was Louis, Count of Narbonne-Lara. Of the high nobility (gossip said he was a bastard son of Louis XV), he had been a general in the Royal Army and Minister of War to Louis XVI. An exile for some years, he came back to France, where Napoleon gave him diplomatic and military assignments. Narbonne was a man of intellect, honor, and excellent wit. He made the 1812 Russian campaign at the age of fifty-seven, displaying the activity of an officer half his age; even during the miseries of the retreat he had his hair dressed and powdered every morning, meanwhile keeping the freezing scarecrows around him laughing with his jests. He died from a fall in 1813 and was much missed. To the quiet staff officer Jean-Gabriel Marchand, Napoleon paid a succinct tribute: "General Marchand is not a marshal of the Empire, but he is worth four marshals."" Napoleon made him Jerome's chief of staff in 1812; Jerome, hating any restraint on what he was pleased to consider his youthful genius, kept Marchand in complete ignorance of Napoleon's orders. After Waterloo, General Amiel tallied up his services: 78 pitched battles, 126 minor engagements, more than 800 skirmishes, 4 sieges, 25 wounds, and 33 horses killed under him. In 1804 most of the Grande Armee's generals were men who had achieved that grade by rapid promotion between 1792 and 1800. A few of them had become marshals; the rest could hope for that honor or for transfer into the Imperial Guard. Meanwhile, the Emperor sprinkled them judiciously with favors, and they led their brigades and divisions, took new wounds, and grew older. Under them was the mass of officers, in 1804 still largely men pushed forward by the Revolution: NCOs from the late Royal Army or Volunteers. Their lot had been hardship, wounds, and dangers, with periods of semistarvation and the sour knowledge that they had been callously misused by the Paris gros-ventres. War was the only trade most of them could remember. They had seen eight years of changing French governments, and each change had been for the worse until Napoleon's coup d'etat. It had been an existence to kill off a man's scruples and abrade whatever social graces he might have brought into the army-and many of them had been thoroughly uncombed to begin with. They seldom shone in polite society, being rough-spok