

CHAPTER VIII They Also Served In the career of glory one gains many things; the gout and medals, a pension and rheumatism And also frozen feet, an arm or leg the less, a bullet lodged between two bones which the surgeon cannot extract....All of those bivouacs in the rain and snow, all the privations, all those fatigues experienced in your youth, you pay for when you grow old. Because one has suffered in years gone by, it is necessary to suffer more, which does not seem exactly fair. Elz@ar Blaze, La Vie Militaire' Other men-so many of them dead, worn out, shunted aside, or exiledhad shaped the French armies as much as those new marshals of 1804. There were the might-have-beens, the men who should have been marshals had they survived-high-hearted Desaix, whom Napoleon thought the bestbalanced of his lieutenants, and gallant young Marceau. Whether the sharpminded Hoche and resentful Kleber would have accepted a baton is an unanswered question, but there were other first-rate generals who certainly would have. Barthelemy Catherine Joubert left school in 1791 when he was twenty-two to be a corporal of Volunteers; in 1796 he was a general of division. Handsome, inspiring, honest, and courageous, he kept his men well drilled and disciplined through personal example and leadership. Decisive as a semi- independent wing commander in 1797, he was overwhelmed by the responsibility of commanding the French forces in Italy against Suvorov two years later. Unable, despite Saint-Cyr's urgings, to plan coherently, he threw himself away in the first skirmishing before Novi. Macdonald married his widow. And there was the tall Swiss Armandee Emmanuel de La Harpe, one-time mercenary in the Dutch service, expelled from Switzerland for his republican sentiments, and an excellent, intelligent officer. Merciless toward pillagers and cheating administrative personnel, he kept his men under severe discipline yet easily won their affection by his efficiency and personal heroism. A stray shot in a night outpost squabble took him off before the 1796 campaign was more than well begun. A similar officer was Jean Etienne dit Championnet (son of an unidenti fied father, he picked his own last name), friend and companion-in-arms to Hoche and Saint- Cyr and conqueror of Naples, where Macdonald knifed him in the back. He had learned somewhere to speak Italian fluently and had a rare understanding of the south Italian temperament. Moreover he was honest and clean-handed, trying vainly to at least slow the Directory's looting. He died in late 1799 of a "putrid fever," so poor that his staff had to pay for his funeral. No-nonsense Massena, arriving to replace him, paused to put a wreath on his grave. In naming his first marshals Napoleon had passed over a good many of the senior generals of division, including Saint-Cyr, Macdonald, Victor, Bourcier, Reynier, Baraguey d'Hilliers, and Vandamme.Z Of the four senior generals who had dabbled in treason to some degree, Dumouriez and Moreau ate bitter bread in exile, and Pichegru was dead; Napoleon had retrieved Lafayette from an Austrian prison in 1797 and later gave him a generous pension but got no gratitude from that odd fish. The senior generals of the Army of the Rhine, mostly still more or less attached to Moreau, needed careful handling. Antoine Richpance, the true hero and architect of Moreau's victory at Hohenlinden in 1800, was made governor of Guadeloupe, where he died of yellow fever; Charles Decaen became governor of Ile-de-France. The most illustrous of the lot, excorporal of the Royal Army Claude Jacques Lecourbe, whose soldiers called him the "kindly crosspatch," sided openly with Moreau during the latter's trial in 1804. Napoleon sent him back to his native village on halfpay, with the gendarmerie keeping an eye on his activities. A good many of these passed-over generals had commanded divisions when Napoleon still was a captain of artillery, and not all of their best are the best remembered. Louis Charles Saint-Hilaire, for whom Bayard's epithet "without fear and without reproach" was revived, died of wounds in 1809. We know merely that he was of noble family, entered the army at eleven as a gentleman cadet, and was universally admired as a man and a soldier. Napoleon, who first met him during the siege of Toulon in 1793, praised his chivalrous character and considered him both a personal friend and a hero. When Soult's corps broke the Austro-Russian center at Austerlitz, Saint-Hilaire commanded its right-flank division. Dominique Vandamme, who went forward on his left, was a knock-down, drag-out, whoop-it-up roughneck and so left much more personal history (much of it, unfortunately, probably apocryphal) behind him. A Fleming with reddish hair and gray eyes, he came from a lower-middle-class family but had attended a private military school and so was readier than most when the Revolution came. His temper was instantaneous, his vocabulary sulphurous, his talent for insubordination stupendous. No marshal would willingly have him as a subordinate; only Davout could manage him. (Probably there was method in the Fleming's seeming madness: Napoleon often gave Van damme semi-independent commands of Confederation of the Rhine troops.) For all the uproar he created, he was intelligent and an energetic, conscientious, very capable general, always ready to march and fight. Whatever German civilians thought of his tendency to violence and looting, German troops liked serving under him; he treated his subordinates with iron rigor but took the best possible care of them.' Naturally stories swirled around him. Napoleon supposedly once said that Vandamme would be ideal to lead an invasion of hell since he obviously had no fear of God or the devil, and that if he had two Vandammes the only solution would be to set one to hang the other. In 1813 he also did tell Davout to take care of Vandamme, because good fighting men were growing scarce. For his own part, Vandamme gave Napoleon total devotion. The true man was tempestuous and often a bad bedfellow, but capable of second thoughts, amends, and true generosity-mauvaise tete, mais bon coeur. He longed to be a marshal and almost had his baton in 1813, but his own aggressiveness (and SaintCyr's failure to support him) got him trapped at Kulm. His philosophy of war was very simple: It was impossible to make a good omelet without. breaking a good many eggs! As a contrast, Jean-Dominique Compans was so rigid in his protection of the Italian peasantry during 1796-1800 that he could get lost while hunting, stumble into a Barbet camp, be stood a drink, and then be respectfully guided back to a French outpost. In 1799, when his barefoot soldiers refused to move, Compans threw away his own worn boots and got them marching by sheer personal example. Napoleon ranked him as a first-class combat general, and Davout later prized him as his corps chief of staff, but he would not serve Napoleon in 1815. Some, like Victoire Leclerc and Jean-Louis-Ebenezer Reynier, were sons of frustration. Leclerc, called "the blond Bonaparte" for his energy and daring, always had his chance for fame chopped short by wounds, sickness, or an armistice. Napoleon trusted him, married him to his beautiful youngest sister Pauline, and sent him off in 1802 to reestablish French rule in Haiti. The blacks there were less trouble than his own naval commanders, but Haiti's fevers killed him before the year ended. Americans did not approve of his mission, and that popular disapproval undoubtedly has obscured his real merit. Reynier was described by Funck as an admirable soldier but a difficult individual. Of Swiss origin, a devout Protestant of legendary honesty, taciturn and partial to silence and solitude, he had gone up from private in 1792 to general of division and chief of staff of the Army of the Rhine in 1796. Gifted with an icy courage, a knack for quick, cold-blooded calculation, and an excellent sense of the terrain, he lacked the ability-so important in commanding Frenchmen-to inspire and animate his soldiers. He was as insubordinate as Saint-Cyr and Vandamme, holding many of the marshals in contempt. Also, he was a deadly duelist. A friend of Desaix, he went with him on Napoleon's Egyptian expedition; Napoleon thought his successful night attack on a Turkish army at El Arish an outstanding feat. He got into Napoleon's black book later by proposing that the dwindling French forces evacuate Egypt. In 1806 he had the bad luck to be defeated by an English force at Maida4 in southern Italy. He was successful in Russia in 1812; trapped in Leipzig in 1813, he spurned the offer of a Russian commission. (Because Reynier was Swiss, Alexander apparently expected him to be as mercenary as Jomini.) He came back to France to die, broken utterly by exhaustion. In the midst of the desperate 1814 campaign, Napoleon wrote Clarke from Soissons: "I am surprised that nothing has yet been done to honor the memory of General Reynier ... a man who served well, who was an honest man, and whose death was a loss for France and for me.s5 General Henri Delaborde had been educated for the church but somehow backslid into the Royal Army's Conde Infantry Regiment, achieving a corporal's galons before the Revolution. He retained learning enough to converse in Latin with Polish priests in 1812. A leanly big man with a strong, brusque voice, he said little, but what he said was very definite. He suffered intensely from rheumatism, sometimes having to travel in a litter, but the smell of gunpowder always worked a temporary cure. His unusual skill at defensive fighting gave Wellington's far superior army a very rough time at Rolica in Portugal in 1807. At Krasny in 1812, after breaking up a Russian attempt to trap Eugene, he took his inexperienced Young Guard division off the field marching at route step: "My children, when you smell powder for the first time, it is stylish to stick up your nose! "6 Antoine Delmas had been a lieutenant in the Royal Army and had served in America but seems to have been cast out for indiscipline. He became a convinced Jacobin, noted for his courage and also for his unusually violent character. In 1797 Napoleon rebuked him for beating on soldiers with his cane; in 1801 his troops mutinied and ran him out of Turin. He opposed Napoleon's becoming Emperor and objected so loudly to the Concordat with the Pope that Napoleon rusticated him. In 1813 he asked for service and was accepted. Ney thought he had lost the "habit of war" during his years of forced retirement, but he took his death wound gallantly at Leipzig. Pale, scarred Sextius-Alexandre Miollis was an odd egg, possibly somewhat addled. Of a noble family, he had been badly wounded at Yorktown. With the Revolution he became the most austere of extremists, noted for an unusual bravery and exact service, and admiringly compared to an assortment of the more disagreeable Spartans and early Romans. His clothing hung ragged between its patches, any one of his soldiers being better dressed. His food was issue bread, ration beef, and potatoes; he never spent more than fifteen minutes at a meal, and it was wise to eat heartily beforehand when invited to dine with him. With all that, he was honest, gentle, simple, and a foe to all abuses. Literature was his passion; while stationed at Mantua he erected a statue of Virgil. Napoleon sent him into retirement because of his unreconstructed republicanism but recalled him in 1811 to discipline a slippery Pope and the bandit-plagued Papal States. Alongside such an original served General Theodore Chabert, whom his own officers considered something of a chevalier d'industrie because of the dirty advantage he took of formal Italian etiquette. As a guest in an Italian home he was sure to praise highly any little bijou he fancied. His hosts would murmur the traditional words of appreciation, pronouncing it a mere trifle and entirely at the general's disposition. Chab