d a German girl from Coblenz. She was described as sweet, pretty, and reserved-and also as occasionally wearing the family pants. There is no explanation why the Emperor made Mortier a marshal in 1804, but-aside from rumors that he milked the public funds of Hanover and other north German states he was sent to occupy in 1803-he never disgraced his baton. Cheerful and unassuming, headlong and somewhat careless, he was easily influenced by his subordinates and colleagues, until the shooting started. Then he was suddenly very calm, saw everything, gave precise orders, and set an example of unbreakable courage. A reliable subordinate and a good comrade, he was competent enough to handle minor independent commands, always ready to do his best at whatever mission his Emperor assigned him, and a dangerous man in a tight corner. In 1814, while other marshals bugged out, Mortier remained loyal. His death was unexpectedly violent-killed by the explosion of an assassin's "infernal machine" while escorting King Louis Philippe. Senior among the marshals because he was Napoleon's brother-in-law and frequently his designated lieutenant, Joachim Murat (1767-1815) was probably the most complex character of the lot. His father was a prospering farmer-innkeeper in south-central France near Cahors, his mother a pious woman set on making a priest of him. She got him into a seminary, but his own ambitions-plus certain results of his extracurricular activities-soon had him enlisting in a passing cavalry regiment. He transferred to the Garde Constitutionnelle in 1792 but was discharged a month later because-he claimed-the purity of his revolutionary zeal displeased his officers. Back in his regiment he rose to chef d'escadron by late 1793. He was brave but carnivorously ambitious, denouncing his colonel for incivisme in the hope (unsuccessful, it proved) of gaining his place. Sheer luck brought his regiment to Paris in 1795; on the night of October 4-5, he escorted in the guns with which General of Brigade Napoleon Bonaparte applied that "whiff of grapeshot" that finally cowed Paris. When Napoleon received command of the Army of Italy, Murat, more or less promoting himself to colonel, became his aide-de-camp. Colonel Murat was a handful. He rallied the French cavalry after Stengel's death and was always the man for a desperate mission. He also was woman-crazy; Napoleon complained that he needed them like he needed food. He followed Napoleon to Egypt, and-by then a general of division-took a strong part in Napoleon's 1799 coup d'estat. One of his rewards was marriage to Caroline Bonaparte, Napoleon's youngest sister, a charming beauty with a cool intelligence, ambition, and skill at intrigue that impressed even Tallyrand and Fouche. At first avid for Murat (athletic, graceful, tall, blue-eyed, his handsome face framed by dark curls, Murat was a splendid figure), Caroline soon decided he had all his goods in his shop window. She accordingly took charge of their quest for a kingdom and riches, horning him repeatedly with men who might contribute, but retaining a semimaternal affection for him." Murat rode proud from 1800 through 1807 as Napoleon's cavalry commander. He had a wonderful eye for terrain and cheerful courage, a frank and unpretentious comradeship with colonel and private alike. That he had no military education bothered him not at all; he boasted that he made his plans only in the presence of the enemy. (Napoleon complained that Murat tried to make war without maps.) As a combat leader Murat was unequaled, storming ahead of his howling troopers, riding whip in hand, white plumes streaming high. Tactics, except the simplest, he scorned: Put in your spurs and ride at, over, and through anything that gets in your way! Some inexplicable quality- other cavalrymen used adjectives like "fantastic" and "extravagant"-in him could lift masses of horsemen and slam them headlong forward. To soldiers he was "the golden eagle"; one Saxon officer attested that "he threw himself into the midst of the enemy in the strongest sense of that word. 1138 His weakness was his lack of self-control and judgment. In action he might go completely out of his head in the excitement of leading charges, forgetting his larger responsibility as army cavalry commander-a tendency that worsened during 1812-13. If his cavalry were checked, he would seize command of the nearest infantry and pitch it in headlong-thereby getting into brawls with Soult, Ney, and Davout. He had had too little regimental service to learn how to care for men and horses. Practical little Captain Coignet noted in Russia: [O]ne could reproach him for destroying our cavalry. He kept its divisions all firmly to the roads, but all of that cavalry was dying of need, and in the evening these unfortunate troopers were not able to collect forage to feed their horses. For himself [Murat] had twenty to thirty spare horses, and every morning he started out on a fresh animal; he was the finest cavalier in Europe, but without foresight .31 In 1808, having promoted older brother Joseph from King of Naples to King of Spain, Napoleon gave Naples to Murat. Murat celebrated his arrival with a sudden amphibious operation that took Capri from the British. Building on Joseph's work, he gave his fleabitten realm its first large-scale experience of law, order, and honest government, innovations that affronted the basic instincts of many of his subjects. Otherwise, his rule was operetta: show, glitter, fanciful uniforms (designing exotic uniforms was Murat's hobby), festivals, and hunting parties. Murat did not come back to the Grande Armee until 1812. Russia eroded something in him. During the retreat he increasingly looked only to his own safety and finally abandoned the army. He came back in 1813, but-pushed to it by Caroline-he already was dickering with Napoleon's enemies. After Leipzig, he joined them, albeit half-heartedly. Seemingly Caroline's coldblooded treachery repelled him, but he lacked the wit and moral courage to pick his own way out of his difficulties. So he died before a Neapolitan firing squad, telling the soldiers to spare his face and himself giving the command to fire. Inside this long-legged swaggerer was always a simple country boy, a dutiful son, a generous uncle, a loving father. That wandering English marplot Sir Robert Wilson dined with him in 1814 and thereafter shocked London by comparing his courtesy and savoir-faire to Lord Chesterfield's. Murat's generosity was free and artless; in the Empire's first years, along with Josephine, he had been a major help to those under the Emperor's wrath. Napoleon once called him a Don Quixote. Michel Ney (1769-1815) began as a hussar; as a marshal he remained one at heart. Red-haired, ruddy-faced, tall, broad-shouldered, and powerful, a German from the Saar frontier, he thought death in battle man's natural lot and had a pronounced fondness for a four-letter word meaning "to copulate." His father was a cooper who hoped to make Ney something better. Ney worked as a lawyer's clerk and later as superintendent of a small iron works, but he found no pleasure in either. In 1788 he enlisted in the French cavalry; four years later he was a sergeant major. Audacity and personal hardihood brought him quicker promotion as the wars began: colonel in 1794, general of division 1799. His seniors praised his gallantry but often found him a "hurluberlu" (harum-scarum), excellent for leading an advance guard or a raid, but flash-tempered and unruly. Under Napoleon, Ney began excellently, carrying out a successful diplomatic errand to Switzerland in 1803, drilling his VI Corps carefully in the Boulogne camp. His service in 1805 around Ulm won him the battle title Duke of Elchingen; at Jena the next year his sudden appearance may have surprised Napoleon as much as it did the Prussians. The following winter he began offensive operations against Napoleon's orders, halting only after a series of blistering rebukes. In Spain in 1808-11 he was increasingly bullheaded; Massena finally relieved him. Russia saw him perform handsomely (if not always wisely) both in the advance to Moscow and in the retreat. His second honor, "Prince de la Moskova," was won at Borodino, where he led his corps into action like a captain of grenadiers. In 1813 Napoleon gave him command of one wing of his army-five corps with some 84,000 men. That was beyond Ney's capacity; his fumblings at Bautzen ruined one of Napoleon's best-planned battles. Ney fought well again during the first weeks of 1814, then led the marshals' "strike" against Napoleon. (By way of preparation he reportedly had begged 40,000 francs from Napoleon a few days previously.) His conduct in 1815 was completely erratic. After Waterloo, Louis XVIII had him shot. Ney was a man of extremes, equally likely to cling to the letter of outdated orders or act erratically on a whim, but always greedy for glory, honors, and hard cash. His intelligence was limited; he was careless of discipline and gave little thought to his wounded. Rather too late, Napoleon concluded that Ney was incapable of handling more than 10,000 men, since he tended to forget those units of his command that were not directly under his eye. Yet Ney had a unique panache, an epic heroism that hid his blunders, a shining battle fury that caught men's minds. No marshal could give more weight to a desperate charge or hold a battered rearguard longer in the face of all despair. Somehow he eclipsed abler, equally valiant commanders. Soldiers called him "red Michael," "the red lion," and "bravest of the brave." Nicolas-Charles Oudinot (1767-1847) came from the northeastern frontier town of Bar-le-Duc in the old province of Lorraine. A slim man of aristocratic bearing and gentle features, he was actually the poorly educated son of a brewer, gifted with a high-order temper that left a trail of wrecked cafes along his line of march. Before the Revolution he had served a hitch in the Royal Army, thereafter returning to Bar-le-Duc. When the Revolution came, he joined the National Guard, swiftly proving himself an aggressive, daring infantry officer who could inspire his men with his own fighting ardor. He took care of them as best he could but disciplined them sternly. Different as they were, he and Davout became friends. He was a general of brigade in 1794, a general of division five years later. During 1799-1800 he was Massena's chief of staff in Switzerland and Italy, and won that saturnine Italian's praise. Oudinot was an inextricable mix of fury and gentleness. When his horse balked during a review, he ran his sword through its neck. When Massena was prepared, after his victory at Zurich, to follow the Directory's orders that all captured French emigres be shot, Oudinot dissuaded him. He was fault-finding and sometimes unjust with his staff, quarrelsome and overbearing with other generals. Yet the old English huntsman's credo, "Don't ride over seeds," was his also. Napoleon gave him command of the elite Grenadiers Reunis in 1803, but there is no explanation why he made Oudinot a marshal after Wagram. As such, Oudinot was generally a liability, incapable of handling a detached corps. He never learned how to use his artillery and cavalry; Berthier had to give him a crash course on how to manage his trains. Also, he lacked the knack of handling foreign troops. Out of his long cascade of blunders during the 1812 campaign, however, his conduct at the Beresina River during the crisis of the French retreat did him honor. In 1813 and 1814 his service was increasingly limp and confused. He was willing to serve during the Hundred Days, but Napoleon would not have him. One reason for Oudinot's weakening zeal was family problems. He was much burdened with needy aunts, nephews, and nieces, not to mention his own eleven children. His first wife, a Bar-le-Duc girl he never brought to Paris, died in 1810; two years later he married a young aristo