d to bring him some extra cash. Coignet was commissioned at Vilna in 1812. His comrades "shot his pack" (an old Royal Army custom, indicating that he was through carrying one). He was left wearing his bonnet de police and his old coat, now stripped of his sergeant's chevrons, and felt and looked more like a "busted" NCO than a new sous- lieutenant. However, the Grande Armee looked after its own. The detachment of train troops he had been commanding produced a good horse, fully equipped, from some illegal source. His former adjutant-major found him a cocked hat and an old saber. General Monthion, to whom he was assigned, gave him a pair of epaulettesand a column of seven hundred stragglers to herd back to the III Corps. On the whole, promotions went with remarkable regularity and fairness. There were certain out-of-channels promotions for members of the Imperial family, but that was to be expected, even if brother Joseph did look unnatural in a general's uniform. (The author can remember when two of Franklin D. Roosevelt's sons were commissioned out of the blue.) There were other cases where officers of the Guard or from Clarke's and Berthier's staffs (or Lefebvre's worthless son, Augereau's useless half- brother, or Victor's relatives) received promotions, but these usually could be justified by the recipients' length of service. Some men moved up rapidly. Fezansac was a soldier in the 59th Ligne in 1804, a general of brigade in 1813. (The story is that Narbonne nominated him with the jest that one more unqualified general wouldn't make that much difference.) However, he had the favor of Ney and Berthier and Napoleon's approval; also, he was really an outstanding officer, who did not let his rapid rise go to his head. Other young officers had a rougher time. Louis Dulong de Rosnay accompanied a French diplomat into Italy in 1799. Caught in Ancona by the RussoAustrian offensive, he joined a volunteer company of hussars; seven months later (and not yet twenty) he was its captain and could count five wounds. In 1800, with fifteen French and a few Italians, he held Pesaro against five thousand Austrians and an English squadron until starved out. He took his eighth wound-a shattered right arm-at Austerlitz. In 1809 he led the forlorn hope that cleared the Portuguese passes for Soult's re treat. In early 1813 he was promoted to general of brigade in the Young Guard. It was too late: Crippled by eleven wounds, his right arm atrophied, a musket ball lodged under his right eye, he had to report himself unfit for further combat service. Whenever possible, officers' promotions were given great eclat, the formal oath being administered in the Imperial throne room before Napoleon and the great officers of the Empire. Monsieur Gardel, superintendent of the Opera's ballets, coached the new officers on the ceremonial salute they were to make. The results were sometimes more comic than impressive. To speed up the supply of trained officers, Napoleon opened a purely military school at Fontainebleau in early 1803. Cadets were charged 1,200 francs a year, yet competition for admittance was intense. Discipline and drill were strict; no "romances" were allowed for reading matter, and the tactical officers confiscated any book not on the school textbook list-even logarithmic tables, which they suspected of being romances in cipher. Smoking was prohibited-and widely practiced as having a very military air. (The school drummers ran a black market in tobacco and chocolate.) Food was the cadets' chief preoccupation. They were fed sufficiently, but on plain soldier fare, and ate from gamelles like enlisted men. Also, they still were growing boys. On one occasion they stole the supper the superintendent had had prepared for a group of visiting generals. As a cadet there, Blaze invented the pate de giberne, a pie baked to fit into a cadet's cartridge box, which could be purchased from peddlers while the cadets were undergoing field training in the nearby woods. The contemporary mania for dueling led cadets to have secret encounters using bayonets (which were taken from them after one cadet was killed) and thereafter compasses tied to light sticks. If no serious damage resulted, the culprits might be let off with a week or so in the brig, but some were expelled. One of those expelled, Jacques Manuel, was promptly gathered in by the conscription; and finally got his commission for bravery in Russia in 1812. At first, some of the Fontainebleau graduates were thrust into the cavalry. In De Brack's memory, "we began as sad cavaliers. Our education progressed under saber strokes which decimated our ignorant and clumsy ranks.i19 Accordingly, the Ecole Speciale de Cavalerie was organized at Saint-Germain in 1809. Like Fontainebleau, its cadets were considered soldiers as soon as they were enrolled and were organized into a battalion under cadet NCOs. The Emperor inspected the school in early 1812 and thereafter verbally eviscerated Clarke and the school staff-the bread was so bad that hungry soldiers in the field would complain about it, the kitchen staff was stealing food, there was no mess hall, the latrines needed attention, the curriculum was too narrow, and the wine was on par with the bread. He wanted a school that would attract the sons of France's leading families; therefore serve white bread and more meat and vegetables, open a mess hall, add history, geography, and literature to the course of instruction-but spend the necessary money carefully. Earlier, First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte had inspected the Saint-Cyr branch of the Prytanee20 and found it a mess. Food was poor, students ragged, discipline lacking, and instruction superficial. He ordered everything corrected sooner than right away; a veteran drill sergeant and drummer would be added to give a little military training. Possibly the Prytanee's other branches pleased him even less; in 1803 he consolidated them all at Saint-Cyr, which was to become a school for the sons of soldiers killed in action. Two years later, the Emperor Napoleon descended once more on Saint-Cyr and made his first visitation seem the dear memory of a friendly social call. The students still were a ragged lot; there was neither hospital nor effective drill and discipline; the course of studies was unsatisfactory; and the professors were a seedy lot. He ordered the instructors put into some sort of official costume at once; he didn't care if they appeared in society in a "bad" coat, but they should look presentable before their classes. While he was at it, he put the school into the army as the Prytanee Militaire. Students could range from seven to eighteen; soldiers' sons who wished to follow a military career were to have free tuition. The best students went on to Fontainebleau, middling ones to the Artillery-Engineer School of Application at Metz, the unenlightened remainder to troop duty as fourriers. Finally, in 1808 the school was moved to La Fleche, where it came to specialize in students from the Empire's new outlying provinces: Croats, Dutch, North Germans, Italians, and Rhinelanders. Also in 1808 the Fontainebleau school was shifted to Saint-Cyr and became primarily an infantry officers school. Theoretically the course of instruction lasted two years, but the constant need for officer replacements might bobtail that to as little as twelve months. In 1811, when the Ecole Polytechnique was unable to meet the need for artillery officers, the top 10 percent in mathematics among the Saint-Cyr cadets were earmarked for that arm. These fortunate ones were given a full two-year course, then sent to the old artillery training center at La Fere for several months of practical work. Napoleon drummed on the need to get back to old-fashioned training: The cadets must graduate knowing what every old sergeant was supposed to know. They must learn marksmanship and also how to train recruits to shoot straight and to make up cartridges. In 1809 he ordered the construction of field fortifications and the essentials of artillery service added to the curriculum; also the cadets must be taught how to handle administrative work in the field and be exposed to a little equitation. In the meantime, in 1804 Napoleon had put the Ecole Polytechnique on a semimilitary footing, as a source of artillery and engineer officers. The curriculum included rational fractions, differential calculus, differential equations, descriptive geometry, mechanics, construction and attack of fortifications, chemistry, determination of latitude and longitude, and military science. Life was strict: Up at 6:00 A.M., shoes shined, beds made, room cleaned, uniforms and persons neat. Students were introduced to hard manual labor in the construction of model fortifications. This professional regimen troubled the aesthetic sensibilities of Paris litterateurs, who demanded that poetry and literature replace the mathematics. In 1810 a column accusing the Polytechnique of thrusting France back into the Dark Ages was published anonymously in a leading newspaper. Within three hours the students had the author's name and address and the time when he was certain to be home. They then launched an expert commando raid that overawed his servants while three students gave him what they termed "a little lesson in politeness"" and a warning to pass on to his collaborators. Paris thought it a wonderful joke. The Polytechnique's student body took part in most Paris ceremonies, during which they inspected the great personages with teenagers' disrespectful eyes: In early 1808 Josephine could still make herself up to look quite young; in 1810 Marie Louise was visibly taller than the Emperor, very young and white-skinned with a splendid figure, but not really pretty. Most important of the other military schools was the Ecole d'Application de l'Artillerie and du Genie at Metz, formed by combining the original engineer's school and the Chalons Artillery School in 1802. It had a variety of missions, including practical instruction for graduates of the Ecole Polytechnique and the education of artillery NCOs seeking commissions. To feed those schools Napoleon gradually established state-supported boarding schools-"lycdes," "colleges," and "pensions"-across the Empire. Their atmosphere was thoroughly military, with students in uniform, drum signals for changing classes, and infantry and artillery drill for all students over twelve. Napoleon included religious instruction, but few students appreciated it. These schools were hotbeds of pro-Napoleonic feeling, even after Waterloo. The young school-trained officers did not make much of an impression on the Grande Armee until after 1805.22 Veterans tended to regard them as precocious brats, and indeed this "Honorable Corps of Sous-Lieutenants," as Blaze named it, could be a handful. Conscious of their newness, many of them tried to cultivate the appearance of a mauvais sujet, smoking, drinking heavily, and exposing their uniforms to the rain and sun to give them an old-soldier look. They could be as full of tricks as a tribe of monkeys. When Blaze was put under house arrest in Germany for having used the carriage of a village mayor on whom he was billeted without official permission, his fellow shavetails assembled that night, took the carriage apart, and reassembled it on the ridgepole of the mayor's house, all in a heavy rain that made the stunt highly dangerous. It took the whole village three days to get the carriage down. Yet, if these sous-lieutenants showed themselves to be of the right stuff, the grumbling veterans (and vivandieres) cared for them with real affection until their postgraduate education in the vulgar details of combat was complete. Their uneducated seniors and comrades found them helpful with the company accounts. Funck thought they included a good many young hotheads who feared nothing but peace and wanted only adventure. They were great leaders of men, reckless of their o