crat who may have influenced him against Napoleon. Probably a better excuse was his physical condition. He seemed to attract bullets, taking thirty-four wounds in all. (Whether that includes one suffered in a Paris cafe brawl is uncertain.) In 1812 alone, he was wounded near Polotsk; rejoining his corps, he was seriously hit at the Beresina. Sent on ahead of the army, he was caught by Cossack raiders, but rallied a handful of wounded officers and orderlies and stood them off, and was wounded again! Dominique-Catherine de Perignon (1754-1818) remains in the shadows. A country gentleman in the pleasant valleys near Toulouse, a militia officer and justice of the peace busy with farming and legal matters, father of an increasing family, popular among his neighbors, he was elected in 1791 to the new National Assembly. There, his militia experience made him a member, with Carnot and Lacuee, of the Assembly's committee on military affairs. Possibly he was something of a Royalist at heart; when the Jacobin extremists began to seize power, he left the Assembly for the army. Most of his service was on the Spanish frontier with the Armee des Pyrenees Orientales (Eastern Pyrenees), where his steady, methodical courage and skill at mountain fighting made him a general of division in December 1793. Eleven months later the army commander was killed at the crisis of the Battle of the Black Mountain. Perignon was thrust into his place and won a splendid victory, which he followed up with the capture of two frontier fortresses. By way of reward, the Paris politicians promptly sent the secondstring General Barthelemi Scherer to replace him. Perignon took this demotion like a patriot, but once peace was made with Spain in 1795, he went back to Paris as a member of the Council of the Five Hundred (the lower house of the remodeled French national legislature). Next year he became Ambassador to Spain and helped negotiate the Treaty of San Ildefonso, which allied France and Spain against England. Again he was relieved, the now bobtailed Directory considering him too moderate. In 1799 he served as a "wing" (roughly "corps") commander in Italy but was wounded and captured at Novi, along with Grouchy. That ended his combat service. Possibly his health was unsatisfactory, or he simply had had enough of war. Napoleon made him a senator in 1801. In 1808 Perignon reappears in the semisinecure assignment of governor of the city of Naples and commander of its garrison. He remained there apparently until 1814, his family increasing, his parties reputed very poor and stingy affairs. When Murat turned his coat and moved to attack Eugene, Perignon came back to France with most of the French and Corsicans who had been in Murat's service. He welcomed the restoration of Bourbon rule wholeheartedly. During the Hundred Days he attempted to raise the Toulouse area against Napoleon, had no luck, and was sent home. Louis XVIII heaped him with honors, which he had little time to enjoy. Joseph-Anthony Poniatowski (1763-1813), nephew of the last King of Poland, embodied the history of that unhappy land. Of Italian and Lithuanian origin and princely rank, the Poniatowskis rode under a weird of loyal service to lost causes. One had served Charles XII of Sweden through all disaster. Joseph's father had long been an officer in the Austrian Army, and his mother was Austrian-born; he himself served Austria with distinction against the Turks in 1788. Recalled by his uncle, Stanilaus II, to reorganize the Polish Army as Prussia, Austria, and Russia proposed to partition Poland, he fought a gallant but forlorn war. (One of his lieutenants was Thaddeus Kosciusko.) Overwhelmed by hopeless odds, he went into exile, returning in 1794 to support Kosciusko's equally foredoomed revolt. After that he lived the life of a typical Polish nobleman in Warsaw and on his vast estates, usually in debt, always involved in patriotic intrigues. Strong, athletic, handsome, he was very much a ladies' man, yet-so gossip saiddominated by a crisply authoritative countess ten years his senior. After Napoleon's 1806 defeat of Prussia, he organized the Polish national guard and became defense minister of the Duchy of Warsaw. As a general, he combined enthusiasm and experience. In 1809, faced by a greatly superior Austrian army and betrayed by his Russian allies, he had to abandon Warsaw. (As they would again in 1944, the Russians waited vulture-like on the east bank of the Vistula while their Polish allies were defeated.) He was able to check the subsequent Austrian drive on Thorn; then, greatly daring, he infiltrated the Austrians' lines and raised Galicia in revolt behind them, forcing them to retreat. (The Russians thereupon bestirred themselves to seize as much of Galicia as possible before the Poles could occupy it.) In 1812 Poniatowski commanded a corps during Napoleon's invasion of Russia. After the retreat he gathered up all Polish troops who would follow him out of their native land and joined Napoleon in Germany. Poniatowski received his marshal's baton as the first guns opened around Leipzig in October 1813. He carried it for two days and paid for it with his body, taking three wounds in rearguard battles and drowning as he tried to swim his horse to safety across the Elster River-another gallant gentleman, dead in his saddle for the fair land of Poland which is no longer free.40 The 1812 Russian campaign brought a long-delayed baton to Laurent Gouvion St. Cyr (1764-1830), that icy intellectual whom soldiers called "the Owl.""' He was from Toul on France's northwestern frontier, his father variously recorded as a tanner, butcher, or landowner. St. Cyr's early years are hazy: He may have intended to be an engineer, either civil or military, but finally drifted to Paris, where he pinched out a living as a painter and actor. In 1792, a tall, well-built, strong-featured man of twenty-eight, solitary and abstemious with no enthusiasms, he joined an unusually wild Parisian sans- culotte battalion. Shortly thereafter his skill as a draftsman-and apparently as an engineer-brought him a staff assignment, promotion, and finally troop command. He was a general of division in 1794, much noted for his chess-player skill in hill-country fighting along the Rhine frontier. In 1799 he was in Italy, where he saved the defeated French forces after Novi and held Genoa against Austrians and starvation. Napoleon gave him independent commands in secondary theaters, but his insubordinate wayshe twice left his command without permission-landed him in the Imperial doghouse. In 1812 he went into Russia as commander of the Bavarian contingent. His victory at Polotsk won his baton. In 1813 he capitulated at Dresden after a not-too-spirited defense. Returning from captivity in 1814, he gave his loyalty to Louis XVIII, serving in various capacities but somehow giving the impression of holding his nose while he did it. Like Murat, St. Cyr had too little troop duty. He expected his subordinates to look after administrative matters, yet (as his 1812 correspondence shows) he seems to have taken reasonable care of the health and supply of his commands. A worse result was that he developed no personal link with his soldiers; they were merely the chessmen on his board. His solitary habits emphasized this lack. In 1813 young Raymond de Montesquiou-Fezensac complained that St. Cyr never showed himself: All his subordinates knew of him was his signature on the orders he sent them. He was never the man to seize a flag and rally a broken line. (Instead, he might threaten to turn his artillery on a wavering regiment if it let the enemy pass!) Some of his more extroverted contemporaries christened him "the prudent one." His leadership was cerebral-cautious calculation, then a thrust to the enemy's vitals. He was a difficult subordinate and not always the best of comrades. However, the charge that he would refuse to assist adjacent commanders seems largely based on Macdonald's and Thiebault's little slanders-until 1813, when he definitely did fail Vandamme at Kulm. He had inert periods, whether from indolence or because his bodily energy sometimes ran low. By 1812 his love of comfort was notorious. He supposedly played the violin for recreation, studied Frederick the Great and Machiavelli, was reputed honest, and was always his own man. Jean Mathieu Philbert Serurier (1742-1819), the "Virgin of Italy," was content with his pay and did not loot-characteristics glaringly conspicious when Augereau and Massena were his fellow division commanders. Serurier was the epitome of Marshal Saxe's "poor gentlemen who have nothing but their sword and their cape,s42 his family being impoverished gentry from the vicinity of Laon in northeast France. When he left home, the legend goes, his father could give him only a sword and the injunction to serve honorably. He had to begin as a militia lieutenant in 1755, passing into the regular army four years later. At the battle of Warburg in 1760, a musket ball broke his jaw, knocked out most of his teeth, and left him badly scarred. Service in Spain and Corsica followed. He could offer valor, a good education, devotion to duty, and ability as a drillmaster; the infantry inspector general noted him as promising, but not of distinguished family. It was 1788 before he made captain, with enough pay to marry. Then his colonel interceded: Something should be done to encourage officers who served wholeheartedly and well. Serurier was accordingly promoted to major in 1789; two years later the Revolution found him a lieutenant colonel; in 1794 he was a general of division in the Army of Italy, where Napoleon met him in 1796. He proved less aggressive than Augereau and Massena but more dependable. Serurier, Napoleon wrote the Directory, believed in order and discipline and disdained intrigue and intriguers. Young Marmont noted that he was tall and straight, with blue eyes, brown hair, and a sad, grave expression on his scarred face. He went into action sword in hand at the head of his men; Marmont praised his decisiveness and tactical skill.43 Desaix described him: "Big . . . honest, estimable in every respect, considered to be an aristocrat, but supported by [Napoleon] who values and admires him."44 The fevers of the Po Valley having ruined his health, he retired in 1802. In 1804 Napoleon made him Governor of the Invalides, where-as old soldiers do-he slowly faded away. By 1814 he was in a semidotage. But, as Allied armies entered Paris, he ordered- or allowed subordinates to order-the burning of more than 1,400 captured enemy flags stored in the Invalides. And he offered asylum to the wives and children, Marbot's among them, of officers who had to leave Paris with the departing French troops. Modest and simple, a good husband and fond uncle, he adopted the daughter of an invalided NCO, gave most of his estate away quietly and carefully, and died poor. Unsmiling Nicolas-Jean de Dieu Soult (1769-1851) was Ney's antithesis: self-contained, intelligent, and calm. A powerful, square-built man, he suffered the embarrassment of being bowlegged. (An American traveler observed that "nothing but petticoats can ever prevent the lower extremities of the Marshal from presenting the appearance of a parenthesis.")45 A severe leg wound, received at Genoa in 1800, left him with a limp that accentuated this misfortune. Son of a notary in a small town in southern France, Soult received a good basic education but had to join the army in 1785 "to live" after his father died. He was a sergeant by 1791; passing to the Volunteers as an instructor, he made lieutenant a year later. Fearless and ambitious, he sought promotion even in those first years, when other officers tried to avoid it lest it bring them to the attention of the politicians and their guillotine. Trained by Lefebvre and Massena, he was a general of brigade in 1794, general of division in 1799. During 1801-5 he was noted for 