en and apt to be rude to mere civilians. But they had organized the Revolution's raw levies and made soldiers of them, had preserved France's old military traditions, and had given La Patrie far more than they had received. Napoleon would give them understanding, praise, and rewards, and they would remain ready to go into the fire for him long after most of the pampered marshals had fallen away. We can judge them only by their own standards. No American soldiers, except the Continental Line of our Revolution, have undergone such testing. One officer stood out from the mass as a proud memory. Th6ophile Malo Corret, son of a lawyer descended from a bastard half-brother of the great Marshal Turenne, had been a Mousquetaire Noir and had received the right to use the ancient Turenne title "La Tour d'Auvergne."'Z In 1792, after twenty-five years' service, he was a captain of grenadiers and a student of languages and numismatics, with at least two books to his credit. He was no flaming Republican, but he would not emigrate; neither would he accept further promotion. His extraordinary courage and personal magnetism quickly made him a living legend." Forced to retire in 1795 because of the loss of his teeth (his health broke down when he attempted to campaign on a liquid diet), he spent two years in English captivity when his transport was captured. In 1799 he went back into the army to replace the son of a friend, a promising young scholar who was the only survivor of four brothers. He was killed at Oberhausen in June 1800. Carnot had officially named him the "First Grenadier of France," and his memory did not fade. French and allied troops marched at attention when passing the monument that marked his grave. For some years d'Auvergne's embalmed heart was carried in a small urn attached to the crossbelts of a grenadier sergeant of the 46th Ligne.14 As First Consul, Napoleon decreed that the name of La Tour d'Auvergne would be kept on the payroll and roster of his company. It would be called at all reviews, and a sergeant would answer: "Mort au champ d'honneur." Trained officer replacements had been in short supply throughout the Revolution. The Royal military schools had been closed in 1793 as dens of aristocratic reaction, leaving France almost without any system of officer training. The College of Louis le Grand, hastily renamed the "Prytanee," survived, but it was only vaguely military; some private schools, like the College of Soreze which Marbot attended in his early teens, gave some military training, but that produced no commission on graduation. Officers' epaulettes were only for those promoted from the ranks, elected by their comrades, or chosen by Representatives of the People. Infantry officers might master their new profession by surviving on-thejob training, but engineers and artillerymen needed technical instruction. Somewhat aware of that, the government opened an Ecole de Mars in Paris in 1794. Students were to come from the poorer classes, the sons of dead or wounded Volunteers receiving preference. The Ecole had a rudimentary camp, an immense amphitheater, regulations by Robespierre, an internal organization vaguely based on the Roman legion, and uniforms designed by David that resembled a taxidermist's nightmares. Most of the students, it turned out, had merely wanted a refuge from real army life. After six months of continual indiscipline, the school closed down. A better start was made with the Ecole Polytechnique (at first the "Central School of Public Works") that same year. It was given a staff of outstanding savants and officers from the Mezieres Engineer School; the students were carefully chosen, and the course of studies was severe.t5 However, its graduates could choose, in order of merit, whether to go to the artillery, the engineers, the Bridges and Highways Service, or the mining, topographical, or naval engineers for further training and service-and many of their best and brightest chose the civilian professions. The artillery, finding itself seriously short of officers in 1797, held a nationwide examination for young men desiring to qualify as sous-lieutenants. Meanwhile the French Army got along, but trouble was in the wind. The old Regulars and Volunteers certainly had been invaluable, but many were half-educated or even illiterate, and generally unconcerned about it. They made good lieutenants and captains, but that was too often their limit. Elzear Blaze's merry little book is full of such worthy officers, brave as their own swords, but with scant knowledge or interest concerning anything beyond their immediate duties-men like Sous-Lieutenant Hemere, a stocky little veteran of Sambre-et-Meuse, whose greatest pleasure was to drink while he smoked, though for variety he sometimes smoked while he drank. In 1802 Grouchy inspected the 1st Hussars, found a chef d'escadron thirtyseven years old, brave, honest, poorly educated and lacking in firmness. There was a lieutenant thirty-six years old and a sous-lieutenant of forty, both good fighting officers but barely literate and apparently content to remain so. The regimental quartermaster was a lieutenant forty-three years old who knew his paper work but nothing much else. The colonel was guilty of favoritism; many officers had married in haste and were in distress thereby. The colonel was relieved, and the chef d'escadron received a politely pointed letter from Berthier inviting him to get on with his education. But there still would be that block of overage captains and lieutenants, mostly unqualified for promotion and becoming rather stiff for light cavalry work. After all, even the most dashing hussar officer must be able to comprehend a map, write a legible report, and read a written order without having to spell out each word of more than two syllables. The same situation existed in many cavalry, infantry, and foot artillery regiments. In 1803 the foot artillery had eighteen captains who had once outranked Napoleon, and one of them, then and later, was very bitter about Napoleon having been promoted over him. Not even Austerlitz, he felt, could justify such a disregard of his seniority." The horse artillery, being a new arm, had mostly young officers, and the engineers were not too cluttered with older ones, though they did have the senior captain of the entire army, who had been stuck in that grade for twenty years! The peculiar result was that the average age of the company-grade officers was about the same as that of the colonels and generals of brigade-not to mention most of the marshals." During 1800-1803 Napoleon gradually cleaned out the deadwood from among his officers, a task complicated by the general confusion in which the Directory had left the War Ministry's records. Approximately 170 general officers were retired; some were good men, but too old or too disabled to continue on active duty. Later they might regain their health sufficiently to serve again, at least with rear area commands. Many, however, were incompetents-sans-culottes or other political hacks, or officers promoted far beyond their abilities. And there were men like Delmas and Miollis, whose devotion to Moreau or to republican convictions made them a possible threat to a newly established government. In 1805 Napoleon wanted only 120 generals of division and 240 of brigade. Promotion was, whenever possible, within each regiment, this being considered a means of maintaining unit cohesion. (It had the drawback that a poorly led or hard-luck outfit would offer much quicker promotion than an efficiently handled one.) It was almost always within the same "arm"; hardly ever was a dragoon officer, say, promoted to a vacancy in a hussar regiment. There were three principal roads to a commission: by service as an enlisted man, through the military schools, and by service as a velite in the Imperial Guard. Young men of gentle upbringing found the first disagreeable, more because of the hardships than the dangers; also, unless you were a better soldier than all your comrades, you might remain an enlisted man for years. There were occasional direct appointments from civilian life as sous-lieutenants, but soldiers were inclined to dislike officers so thrust upon them-they had to be nursemaided, and they might consider themselves privileged characters. Some sous-lieutenants still were promoted out of the ranks by election, but now only with the permission of the War Ministry. The sergeants would select three candidates from among themselves for each vacancy; the souslieutenants would select their fellow shavetails-to-be from among these. Napoleon increasingly controlled, directly or indirectly, most officer promotions. Being a soldier himself, he knew that promotion was a subject vital to the morale of the army and the individual officer alike: Except in the case of emergency promotions (such as Carnot's in 1814) and promotions for unusual bravery, he was careful to follow the established rules of seniority and length of service. As of 1805, these required four years' service in each grade before promotion to the next higher one; an enlisted man must serve for six (later eight) years, four of them as an NCO, to become a souslieutenant; staff officers had to serve two years in their existing grade with troops before being qualified. Napoleon frequently awarded promotions in the field, which both stimulated troop morale and cut down on War Ministry delays. Usually they went only to soldiers present for duty (which inhibited any tendency to linger in hospitals or along the line of communications), but Caulaincourt and others exaggerated when they claimed that those who served efficiently in the rear areas were overlooked. Promotion for men serving on distant frontiers such as Spain might seem slow, but Napoleon usually accepted the recommendations of the marshals serving there and sometimes directed Clarke to determine if he had missed any deserving cases. Many officers recalled from Spain during 1810-12 were promoted one grade in acknowledgement of their service there. Lejeune recorded one field promotion at Ratisbon in 1809: The colonel of the 52d Ligne presented his most deserving sergeants. Napoleon chose a "handsome young fellow with fine but stern-looking eyes" who had thirty wounds and the Legion of Honor. The candidate accepted his sous-lieutenant commission with earnest approval: "That's right, Emperor You couldn't have done better!"" On occasion Napoleon practiced promotion "by acclamation": The regiment's officers formed a circle, the colonel called in the men he recommended for promotion one by one, and Napoleon asked each officer in turn if the candidate merited promotion. If they disagreed, Napoleon decided. In his opinion this did much to prevent favoritism, since the colonel had to justify his choice openly. Soldiers promoted out of the ranks were entitled to a "gratification" to purchase their new uniforms, weapons, insignia, and-if cavalrymenhorses and saddlery. The sum naturally fluctuated with the state of the Imperial treasury. Pierre Auvray of the 23d Dragoons described it as 950 francs on the occasion of the promotion, 450 francs more at the start of the new officer's first campaign, and his choice of a horse from among the available remounts. On Auvray's own commissioning in 1813, however, all he got was the horse; his regiment loaned him 200 francs from its unit funds so that he could buy his insignia and other essentials. Another sad tale concerning this gratification bobs up in a 'letter from a newly "passed" voltigeur officer in the 2d Swiss Regiment to his family. There had been some red-tape confusion over his payment; he needed financial support, hadn't heard from his family recentiy, and feared he had been forgotten. He attached a list of his "necessary" purchases, including an expensive bearskin cap, which voltigeur officers of the 2d Swiss did not wear-and so undoubtedly was a bit of "padding" designe