 The chasseurs a cheval were able to form five Young Guard squadrons, with the Mamelukes as their 10th Squadron. The 2d Lancers did as well. The 1st Lancers had three Old Guard squadrons and nine Young Guard companies," which frequently served detached, with the Berg Lancers, to hunt down enemy irregulars behind the Grande Armee. The grenadiers a cheval and dragoons gained a strong (three-hundred-man) Young Guard 6th Squadron. Termed "cavaliers seconds," those men drew line pay and were not permitted aiguillettes. With those new squadrons also came four big (2,500) regiments of Gardes d'Honneur, uniformed hussar-style in dark green and scarlet. Technically they were volunteers, as a good many of them honestly were. But they were the sons of the old noblesse, the high legal-official caste, and new-rich families, all of which held themselves aloof from the Empire's fortunes, bought substitutes for their conscripted sons, and kept them from the wars. Army humor promptly labeled the gardes "the Hostages." In Napoleon's view, it was time for all Frenchmen to serve-and also high time to bind the fortunes of such influential families more tightly to his. Every department throughout the Empire had to meet its quota of volunteers; if not enough stepped forward, the prefects were authorized to designate individuals. Furthermore, the gardes must arm, uniform, equip, and mount themselves. Poverty was no excuse; the prefects also were to raise money among those of the wealthier classes who could not contribute sons to provide horses and equipment for volunteers of high blood and thin purses. Their history was that of any raw volunteer cavalry.26 Young gentlemen didn't know how to care for their horses or cook their rations. (A proposal that each of them have a domestic collapsed for lack of manpower.) They went AWOL to see Paris and caught the usual depressing variety of camp sicknesses. These regiments had extra medical officers and special capitaines-instructeurs, but too many of their officers were too battered or too old. Old General of Division Charles-Joseph Randon de Pully, acting colonel to the 1st Regiment, nursed his crippled knee and did his best. His complaints had both variety and emphasis. The prefects did not organize their work properly, sending horses and equipment before the men, and letting the men dribble in singly or in small groups. Some departments sent mere boys, unfit for service. His officers seldom really pleased him. There were language difficulties, and some desertions from the Dutch-Belgian departments. Clothing, horses, and equipment were of all sizes, sorts, and qualities despite the carefully detailed regulations, provincial tailors having done strange things to official patterns. The contingent from Rome took two and a half months to reach Paris, reporting in with exhausted horses, and twenty-five out of twenty-nine gardes sporting very pronounced venereal maladies. He would rather fight a thousand and one battles than run another such semimilitary madhouse! But Pully assembled squadron after squadron and sent them off to the wars. Into Germany they went, hot-tempered youngsters bickering among themselves and enjoying life. In the 2d Regiment a fourrier had to close each company column to roust his comrades out of the wayside inns. Jean Lambry remembered it was a rough detail: You had to have at least one drink with each gentleman-straggler before he could be persuaded to move on; after a few days you had a built-in hangover. Everyone appreciated the good looks and ready kindnesses of German women. At Gotha, in the mornings the woods around the town were full of gardes under arms going through their exercises, and in the evenings the woods were again full of them, engaged in exercises of a very different sort. Even their formal drills might explode into rabbit hunts or-their horses also being young-general stampedes. Napoleon reviewed them at Dresden in August, saw them flub simple maneuvers, and noted that they weren't troubling officers (especially Confederation of the Rhine officers) with displays of military courtesy. Accordingly, he loosed NCOs from the Old Guard upon them. Lambry admired those teachers, big, quiet men who dealt gently and politely even with peasants and knew how to keep themselves clean and comfortable amid the greatest hardships. They taught the helpless young gentlemen what they could in the time available. Lambry learned to carry his own knife, fork, and spoon in his sabretache instead of trying to borrow locally and to equip his squad with a scythe and a small hatchet or two. Napoleon kept them out of combat until they were seasoned. They therefore were spectators at Leipzig and received their first large-scale blooding at the desperate Hanau breakthrough. (Lambry, having lost his horse, went in on foot with the chasseurs A pied and was commended.) By 1814 many of the foreigners in their ranks had deserted. The wastage in their numbers appears terrible, but it was mostly due to the lack of remounts. The remaining young gentlemen served with increasing skill. At Reims a squadron of their 3d Regiment wrought so mightily among Muscovite cavalry and guns that the Old Guard voluntarily gave it the honor of heading the Grande Armee's column for the entry into that liberated city. The Guard's last foreign unit, the Bataillon Polonais de la Garde Impdriale, was formed in October 1813, just before the battle of Leipzig, undoubtedly to acknowledge the services (and boost the morale) of the Polish infantry with the Grande Armee. Its commanding officer, Lieutenant Colonel S. Kurciusz, however, was an unfortunate choice: He refused to accompany the retreating French across the Rhine, and the battalion broke up. Ninety-nine officers and men, out of its original 827, did stay with the Grande Armee and were reassigned to the 3d Regiment d'Eclaireurs de la Garde Impgriale as 1813 ran into 1814. These eclaireurs (scouts) were the result of years of Imperial cogitation. Napoleon had repeatedly considered forming units of very light cavalry. Now three regiments-eclaireurs-grenadiers, eclaireurs-dragoons, and eclaireurs-lanciers-were hastily scraped together. Their horses were small, hardy beasts from the Pyrenees, the Ardennes, and the Rhone delta; their equipment was very light. The 1st Regiment got some men (not their best) from the Guards of Honor; the 2d was supposed to be recruited from the postillions of the Imperial mail service. Actually, both regiments were mostly new conscripts, sprinkled with a few Old Guard and line officers and NCOs and a few odd individuals like a sous-lieutenant from the Neapolitan chevau-legers, some of Joseph's former guard cavalry, and trumpeters from the Pupilles. The Poles had a high percentage of veteran lancers, apparently including the forty-odd remaining Tartars. All three regiments were put into action hastily, short of weapons and equipment, but were never completely organized. The Guard of 1814 was larger than ever,' almost an army in itself. It was Napoleon's main striking force, though much of its strength had to be dribbled out to reinforce various garrisons and columns. It had a number of attached units-the Velites of Turin and Florence; two battalions of foot gendarmerie from the former "Little Gendarmerie," two regiments of Polish lancers, and the Polish "cracus." In the enormous silence after his first abdication, Napoleon made his farewell to his Guard and went down the road to Elba. Behind him, the Bourbons abolished the Young and Middle Guards and shelved the Old Guard, disbanding its artillery, sailors, engineers, and train troops. Meanwhile, to give him some prestige and security, Napoleon had been allowed a "Guard of Elba," made up of volunteers from the Old Guard. (Many more wanted to go than could be allowed.) There was a battalion of grenadiers; a squadron of Polish lancers; a small company of artillery, another of sailors, and a few Mamelukes, gendarmes, and chasseurs. Probably it was dull duty, but restful. At any rate, it didn't last long. When the Emperor returned and the Guard rose up again, the Guard of Elba was embodied in it, each element taking precedence within its respective organization. Once again Imperial eagles lifted above masses of Old Guard bearskins, the Red Lancers trotted in their pennon-clouded forest of lances. But it was a hasty mustering, never completed. The Old Guard infantry comprised four regiments each of grenadiers and chasseurs;28 the cavalry of a regiment each of grenadiers, chasseurs, dragoons, and lancers. There were three companies of horse artillery, thirteen of foot artillery (including several rated as Young Guard), and a company each of gendarmerie d'elite, engineers, and sailors. The Young Guard was authorized six regiments each of Voltigeurs and Tirailleurs, but their organization went slowly, and only the first three regiments were ready in time for the last campaign. Some 21,000 of the Guard marched to Ligny and Waterloo; 2,000 more were in Vendee. Along with the tirailleur and voltigeur regiments still forming was a Young Guard cavalry regiment, originally the "Hussars of the Guard," then renamed the 2d Regiment of Chasseurs a Cheval. It was strikingly uniformed in red, green, and orange, with tall red shakos, but it was ready for the field only in time to join Davout's evacuation of Paris. There also had been projects for a Young Guard lancer regiment and apparently a Regiment de Tirailleurs a Cheval. Napoleon had favored a large Imperial Guard for several reasons. It was a hedge of swords about his new-built throne, the grim, unanswerable authority for his rule. It also was a hard military fact-a strong reserve of elite troops that could be committed at the decisive point and moment. Its mere appearance, as at Aspern-Essling and Krasny, could set overwhelming masses of enemy troops back on their heels, while enemy commanders sought inspiration and found only indecision. The Guard developed a feeling of emulation throughout the French Army. With its higher pay, better rations, special privileges, and pride, the Guard was a natural magnet to pull young men into the Grande Armee. The odd fact is that the Old Guard infantry had plenty of hard marching but seldom actually fought. It was engaged at Marengo in 1800, at AspernEssling in 1809, and saw some minor fighting during the retreat from Russia. The men weren't happy about being spectators: When they had a chance to go in with the bayonet at Hanau, they made up for years of frustration. The Old Guard cavalry saw considerably more action; the Young Guard was raised to fight. For all its pride and proven courage, however, the Imperial Guard lacked one soldier's virtue: It was not a good comrade. The Guard enjoyed its privileges immensely, especially its priority for all supplies. If the Guard had rations for four days (so went a favorite Grande Armee grumble), the whole army was considered well fed. In fact, Napoleon sometimes babied it beyond all reason. When 50,000 rations of eaude-vie were found in a Russian depot during the advance on Moscow, he ordered it saved for the Guard. Thus spoiled, the Guard grew greedy and demanding. After Eylau, Percy accused its grenadiers of "requisitioning" the little food he had found to give his wounded and even the straw from under them. In Moscow the Guard looted exuberantly and stole wine from the hospitals. The grenadiers were drunk on guard duty and the chasseurs kept pillaging despite repeated orders to cease and desist. Lefebvre therefore spoke to their officers like a sergeant major to a collection of yardbirds; the chasseurs were confined to their quarters. Reformation, unfortunately, was only temporary. During the retreat the Guard cleaned out the supply depots that Teste had organized with great pains at Vyazma, leaving nothing for the convoy of wounded following them. The Grande Armee could endure such treatment from the Old Guard; it was a sm