all organization, and its men were combat veterans. But the largely wet-behind-the-ears Young Guard claimed the same privileges. During 1812 at Beshenkovichi there were "continual quarrels between the Young Guard and the other units of the garrison. The Guard takes for itself the greater part of everything which can be issued regularly; the post commander has authority in name only.' 12' At Vitebsk, Caulaincourt found the 2d Division of the Young Guard seizing all the cattle that entered the town, including oxen from Ney's artillery park. After halting overnight at Preva Slobado, the Flanker Grenadiers robbed the garrison there of its horses, beef cattle, and eight days' rations. Napoleon put the Flanker officers under arrest. The Old Guard normally was well behaved, though Napoleon had to give it fight talks in Spain and again in Russia when its morale sagged under hardship. One Spanish guerrilla chief did come out of its ranks, a grenadier with three long-service chevrons and the Legion of Honor, who deserted to the enemy because of what he considered unjust treatment. Most of his band were deserters from the garrison of Burgos; he treated captured enlisted men humanely but hanged officers immediately. While in Dresden in 1812 the grenadiers had to be reminded to salute Saxon officers and (once again) to refrain from smoking their pipes while taking a stroll. (That "indecent" offense got you fifteen days in the brig on bread and water.) Those out in the countryside around Glogau were told to deal justly with the unfortunate inhabitants, especially not to pasture their horses on the growing grain. In July 1813 Napoleon was asked what he wanted done with 320 apprehended deserters from the Imperial Guard; he ordered the 20 most culpable to be brought to trial, and the rest were sent to a depot des refractaires for reprocessing. The internal administration of the Guard got off on the wrong foot when Lannes overspent heavily in its original clothing and equipping. Its senior regiments' uniforms were of better quality than those of the line regiments; also they were renewed more frequently, since Napoleon insisted that the Guard always make an impeccable appearance. Also, because of the Guard's peculiar organization, the regimental quartermasters and capitaines d'habillement of the grenadiers and chasseurs a pied had to look after the Middle and Young Guard regiments in their respective `corps." In 1810 the War Ministry's accountants pointed out that these different regiments had "vastly different" organizations, rates of pay, and allowances. Their funds had become intermixed, records were not up to date, and the "accounting system of the infantry of the Guard has become a labyrinth in which no inspector can find the thread." The one certain fact was that the quartermasters and capitaines d'habillement were guilty of "much confusion and inaccuracy, much indifference" in their dealings with the junior regiments.30 Moreover, there were increasing indications that those officers (and also the quartermasters of the Guard's cavalry and artillery regiments) had adhesive fingers. Complaints were bitter enough by late 1813 for Napoleon (who then was digging into his personal treasure to support the Guard) to decide to replace them as of January 1, 1814. He requested Nicolas Mollien, his Minister of the Treasury, to provide eight young auditors "of known integrity ... and already having a knowledge of paper work."31 Among the Old Guard's odd duties was helping to pass the refreshments at major state dinners. Only the most reliable and immaculate got that detail, which naturally furnished barracks conversation for weeks thereafter. Coignet noted that such affairs were impressive but hardly gay; however, the detail got to do some feasting themselves on leftover delicacies and wines. Coignet added the unusual item that the more-than-strictly reared Marie Louise was an excellent billiard player, could beat most men, andif her shot required it-would stretch out across the table like a man. The Guard's bands and field music were an important part of Imperial pomp and circumstance, having a prominent role in all state functions. Its drum majors were men of consequence. Senot of the grenadiers was as famous for his courage as for being the finest-looking man in the Grande Armee. Siliakus of the Dutch Grenadiers towered 6 feet, 6 inches (French); the tip of his plume was 9 feet in the air. Old Guard drummers had one odd custom: When an officer was late for any formation they rapped out a quick counterpointed rhythm, borrowed from Prussia, called "The Cripple." Because of the constant need for additional drummers and trumpeters, Napoleon opened a musicians' school in 1811, attached to the Pupilles, so that all Guard units would use the same batteries and calls. In 1813, possibly to convert some tooters to shooters, Napoleon decreed that each "corps" of the Guard was to have only six bands: one for the Old Guard regiment, another for its fusilier and flanker regiments, and one for every three Tirailleur and Voltigeur regiments. That made a total of twelve for the Guard infantry, and should have sufficed. The Guards were very much Napoleon's children. He knew hundreds of them by name, would listen to their problems like a good lieutenant with the men of his platoon. A corporal of the Fusiliers-Grenadiers steps from the ranks at a review: His mother is sick and destitute. Will his Emperor authorize leave to visit her and an advance in pay of 300 francs? Leave granted; instead of the advance in pay, the Emperor directs that the corporal be given an order on the treasury for 1,000 francs. (Napoleon was, among many other things, a son who looked after his own mother.) The corporal was flattered but practical; what with the French genius for bureaucratic red tape, mother would be dead before he could get the draft cashed. Wouldn't his Emperor please just authorize the small advance, which could be promptly laid down out of unit funds, and witness the appropriate debit entry in his livret? Lapsing into soldier language, his Emperor produced a handful of gold pieces and told him to get going. •