ery happy for it! Each grade in the Guard was equivalent to the next higher one in the line. A Guard private was equal to a line corporal, a Guard captain to a chef de bataillon. Being the equal of a line sous-lieutenant, when off duty a Guard first sergeant could wear an officer's epee and silk stockings and carry a cane. (Coignet liked that dress but suffered from the fact that his legs were very skinny; he therefore had false calves made to wear with it.) Pay also was much higher; a line sergeant received 62 centimes a day and a Guard sergeant 222; a Guard captain drew as much pay as a line chef de bataillon. Also, there were frequent extra allowances. When in formations with line units, the Guard always took the post of honor on the right. When a Guard unit met a line unit on the march, the latter halted, presented arms, and dipped its colors, while its drums or trumpets sounded the ceremonial salute "Aux Champs" until the Guards had passed. The Guard would return the salutes but would not halt. Possibly even more important was the fact that the Guard had its own supply trains and usually received its rations regularly on campaign, while hungry linesmen must scrabble for overlooked potatoes in fields and villages along the way. In peacetime the Guard's barracks life was made as easy as possible. Even a private library with a professional librarian in charge was provided for its entertainment and enlightenment. Mounted NCOs and trumpeters, as well as the officers, were provided with civilian grooms, for whose conduct they were responsible. The grooms were issued a semi-uniform green waistcoat with a yellow collar but were not allowed to affect sabers or military cloaks while on French territory. Periodically, all grooms and officers' domestics were reviewed and inspected. Guard units could hire women cooks, pro vided that the ladies were of good morals, had a way with a stew pan, and were over forty. There were various other indications of elite status. The Guard's muskets and carbines were "mounted" (trimmed) with brass rather than the iron used in the line's weapons. The artillerie a pied, grenadiers a cheval, and engineers carried a sawed-off version of the Guard infantry musket (created in 1804 for the Velites) instead of carbines. The senior regiments wore their hair in queues and powdered. (At first they also had it in "pigeon wings" over their ears, which involved putting it up in curlers before going to bed, and then having it arranged by a hairdresser in the morning. It was a great relief when that custom was abandoned.) Staff officers and cavalrymen (except those in hussar-style dress) wore distinctive aiguillettes. As it finally evolved, the Guard's command system was unusual. It had four colonel generals: Davout, who commanded the foot grenadiers; Soult, the foot chasseurs; Bessieres, the cavalry; Mortier, the artillery and sailors. (Their aides-de-camp, however, were not considered officers of the Guard.) They served in rotation, a week at a time, constantly at Napoleon's elbow as acting commanders of the Guard troops serving as his escort or of the Guard units during large-scale reviews. That arrangement naturally had to be abandoned once the campaigns began: Davout, Soult, and Mortier had their corps to command. In practice, Bessieres usually commanded the cavalry, and Lefebvre the infantry. Napoleon never trusted the actual command of his entire Guard to any single officer. After the rest of the guides came home from Egypt in 1801, a company of veterans and a squadron of Mamelukes were added to the Guard. The first were officers and men who had had at least three years' service in the Guard or guides and were physically unfit for field duty. They were used for interior guard duty at Versailles and other Imperial palaces and took over some of the Guard's routine security duties when its active units went off to the wars. A second company was formed in 1807, and a company of canonniers-veterans in 1812. Alone of all the Guard, these veterans kept the bicorne cocked hat for full dress. The Mamelukes, with their Turkish dress and weapons, gave the Guard and Grande Armee an exotic touch of far adventure and empires in the East. While in Egypt, Napoleon and his successors had organized units of native horsemen, some 250 of which, with families and retainers, accompanied the departing French. From them, and from men picked from the Greek and Coptic legions, Rapp formed a squadron for service with Napoleon's escort. The rest were established as a "depot of Egyptian refugees" at Marsailles and received army pay. Some of the original squadron had to be sent back to the depot as too wild for service in Paris, being apt to whittle on civilians who angered them. The rest, reorganized as a company attached to the chasseurs A cheval, were taken into the Guard in 1802. They were men of all races and colors: mountaineers from Georgia and Circassia and horsemen from the Crimea, Arabia, Syria (probably including Armenians), Egypt, Abyssinia, Darfur (probably mostly blacks), Albania, the Turkish Balkan provinces, Hungary, Malta, Tunisia, and Algeria. Two of their officers were from Bethlehem. Their fourriers were French and did not wear oriental dress. The Mamelukes fought splendidly at Austerlitz and in Poland, "marvelous horsemen; able to do anything they wished with their steeds. With their curved sabers they took off heads with one blow; with their sharp-edged stirrups they cut the backs of infantrymen."9 Napoleon gave them an eagle after Austerlitz. They went on to Spain, where they put the fear of Allah into the Madrid mob. Back in France in 1809, they were recruited up to strength with men from Africa and the Levant, picked up in the Empire's Mediterranean seaports, and boys just turned sixteen from their depot, plus a few Europeans. In 1813-after Wagram, Spain again, and Russia-they were re-formed as a squadron. The original Mamelukes and some veteran French cavalrymen were Premiers Mameluks with Old Guard status; new recruits were Young Guard Seconds Mameluks, mostly French conscripts, but spiced with men from the Albanian Regiment and the Ionian Islands. By 1814 they were mostly French but still inspired by their veteran officers, men of devotion, daring, and many wounds, with the knack of whipping their polyglot command into a harum-scarum whirlwind. Eight Mamelukes went to Elba with Napoleon; the Bourbons disbanded the rest. The Mamelukes did present special problems. The burial of one of their retired officers caused a local disturbance, his Christian neighbors objecting to having the grave of an "infidel" near their sainted ancestors. There also is the sad tale of a homesick Arab rug dealer who was overjoyed to spot a Mameluke in a German town and tried to engage him in conversation. Unfortunately, he was a Second Mameluk whose command of Arabic began and ended with "Allah." After countless repetitions of that holy name, the merchant concluded that he had met a man too pious to discuss worldly matters. The general reorganization of the Gendarmerie Nationale in 1801 had included the formation of an elite squadron for duty in Paris. Its men had been army NCOs before transferring to the gendarmerie and had been noted for bravery and devotion to duty. A good many of their officers had served with the famous Dromedary Regiment of the Army of Egypt. This squadron was taken into the Guard of the Consuls in March 1802, probably because of repeated attempts by the Royalists (with British assistance) to assassinate Napoleon. Veteran grenadiers, however loyal, did not have the requisite training and experience for coping with such tenuous dangers. In 1804 the squadron was reorganized as the "Legion de Gendarmerie d'Elite" with 632 officers and men in four mounted and two foot compan- ies.10 Five years later the two foot companies were dropped. On campaign it drew "auxiliaries" from the regular gendarmerie for temporary reinforcements. In 1813 these were 640 gendarmes bis, chosen out of its pick of the current conscripts, boys who could read and write or speak German. Apparently those raw hands did not perform too efficiently. For 1814, they were partially replaced by eleves-gendarmes, replacements still in training. Their duties were many and various, but the principal one was the protection of Napoleon's person, baggage, and residence-wherever that might be-and the enforcement of his orders throughout the Grande ArmCe. Because those missions seldom involved them in pitched battles, the rest of the Guard called them the "Immortals" (a name the Grande Armee applied to the Guard as a whole). To clear their honor, Napoleon put them into action during 1807. Their charges went as deep as the best cavalry's, Guard or line, but it was too late: That nickname had been embedded in Guard tradition. In actual fact, they saw considerable small-scale combat against both draft dodgers and bandits at home and marauders and enemy irregulars along the Grande Armee's communications. Details of them trained the Italian and Neapolitan gendarmeries. High on their black horses they came and went in small detachments, silent, utterly disciplined, dangerous. Their uniform was that of the Gendarmerie Imperiale, but with a visored bearskin cap, only a little lower than the Grenadiers'. As part of his projected invasion of England, Napoleon had a battalion of sailors attached to the Guard during 1803 to handle the landing craft that would transport it across the Channel. At first they were called "matelots" (seamen) and armed with pistols and a mix of sabers, pikes, and boarding axes. In 1804, however, they were taken into the Guard as the Bataillon des Marins de la Garde, 737 officers and men in a battalion headquarters and five equipages (companies). (Marin meant "sailor," not, as usually mistranslated, "marine.") Most of these men were from Corsica and southern France and were described as dark, quiet, and vigorous. They retained navy nomenclature: Their battalion commander was a capitaine de vais- seau, and their sergeants maitres. They blackened their leather equipment instead of pipe-claying it, and their sabers-which the marins called their "anchors"-were a uniquely curved model. They had company trumpeters instead of drummers and were noted for their rousing field music. Their specified mission was to man the Emperor's launch, but they proved handy as gunners, pontonniers, sailors, or combat infantrymen. Beyond doubt, the marins had the most dislocated career of all the Guard organizations. After making themselves highly useful at the sieges of Danzig and Stralsund during 1806-7, the sailors were sent to Spain and had the ill fortune to be with Dupont at Baylen. Confined in various Spanish prisons, they distinguished themselves as escape artists; enough got away to Victor's lines outside Cadiz to reconstitute a company. Some officers, transferred to England after unsuccessful attempts to escape from Majorca, evaded their guards, stole small boats, and got back across the Channel. However, the loss of the battalion's caisse and records at Baylen made endless trouble. Decres had left their accounts in a muddle when the battalion was transferred from the navy, and moths got into the dress uniforms they had left stored in Paris. In 1809 the battalion was reduced to a single equipage, which was scattered across France and Spain in small detachments. Next year, however, the battalion was revived and increased to eight companies, only five of which seem to have Guard status. Two companies went to Russia; in 1813 one company, reinforced by the sailors of the Italian and Neapolitan guards, was in Germany. The three companies that served with the Grande Armee in 1814 were praised for their rearguard fight at Arcis- sur-Aube, which disengaged the almost overwhelmed Guard cavalry." Twenty-one of them followed Napoleon to Elba. Until 1804 the Guard had been an assembly of veterans. That year Napoleo