n added the Velites to its infantry regiments. The cavalry and artillery got them a year later. ("Velite" was another classical borrowing; in early Rome it had meant a youth, too immature to stand in legionary line of battle, who served as a light-armed skirmisher.) To Napoleon it meant a physically fit, passably educated young man who wanted to be an officer, was willing to serve with the Guard to learn how, and would help pay for that privilege. (Your parents must pay a pension of 200 francs a year into the regimental fund for you to serve in the Guard infantry, and 300 with its artillery or cavalry. If they failed to keep up those payments, you werebarring extenuating circumstances-transferred to a line regiment.) Civilian teachers would polish your reading, writing, and arithmetic. At the end of three years' service,12 you were tested-sometimes by Napoleon himselfas to your ability to maneuver a company. If your sergeants and officers vouched for your ability, you became a sous-lieutenant in the line. Alternately you might be sent to a line regiment as a fourrier or taken into the Guard as a private or corporal, or sent to one of the advanced military schools. (Elzear Blaze went into the Velites while awaiting admission to Fontainebleau.) A few of the Velites would prove entirely unsuitable. Jean Barres told how some were kept back because they had gotten crosswise with their first sergeants." All Velites were expected to be volunteers; if sufficient of those were lacking, the prefects were to provide up to six from each department. However, there proved to be volunteers enough and a good many extra. All of them were accepted. They were a cross-section of French youth: boys from the minor nobility, like Bugeaud, mixed in with the sons of well-to-do peasants and artisans. They arrived full of zeal, complained that they weren't worked hard enough, and gradually were convinced that they were. The first time they stood guard they were expected to "treat" the veterans, who usually could guess which Velites had the most pocket money and would hint and flatter them into something on the order of pork chops, good wine, coffee, and liqueurs. Coignet noted that some of the best educated among the Velites were the most negligent. As a new corporal he had seven of them in his mess. He made proper officer candidates of them, and they clubbed together to help him learn-at the age of thirty-three-to read and write. For basic instruction the Velites were formed into separate units: Each infantry regiment had a Velite battalion, each cavalry regiment a squadron. On campaign, however, the Velites were intermixed with the veterans. One Velite thought they looked like young girls among them. After 1807 Napoleon stopped accepting Velites in the Guard infantry; those remaining were gradually commissioned or passed into the Fusiliers. The Guard cavalry kept them until 1811. After that they were found only in the 2d Regiment des Chevau-legers Lanciers, which still had a number of Dutch Velites in its ranks. The Guard was considerably enlarged during 1806.14 The first new regiment was the dragoons (often termed the "Empress Dragoons," since Josephine was officially their sponsor). Each line dragoon regiment contributed ten good men with ten years' service in 1806, and again in 1807. Officers came from the Guard and line cavalry. Trumpeters proved harder to find than officers, and there was the usual shortage of horses (like the Guard's chasseurs A cheval, the dragoons rode bays or chestnuts). When the regiment joined the Grande Arm6e in late 1806, half of its men still were dismounted. Napoleon gave them the horses of the crack Prussian Gensd'armes cavalry regiment. Friedland was their first battle (they did not particularly distinguish themselves). In Spain the next year they "liberated" the silver trumpets of the Spanish Garde du Corps. Their uniform was the brass helmet and green coat of the line dragoons, but with white facings. At the same time, Napoleon was taking care of the Guard's logistical system, activating a Bataillon d'Ouvriers d'Administration to be supervised by the Guard's commissaire-ordonnateur. Its original composition (often modified) was five companies: Vivres-Pain, forage, VivresViande, medical service, and transportation.15 Its ambulances were light two-wheeled vehicles with high clearance; during 1806-7 they were able to get through Polish bogs where even pack horses mired. During the fall and winter of 1806 Napoleon also began increasing his Guard infantry. He was looking for additional manpower and less expense: the grenadiers and chasseurs were costly to pay and maintain. Also, it was increasingly difficult to find replacements with the requisite length of service, height, and perfect service records. Accordingly, he formed a regiment each of fusiliers-grenadiers and fusiliers-chasseurs16 around cadres from the corresponding senior regiments, including such Velites as had not yet been commissioned. The men were picked from line units and the Legions Departementales. Their pay was midway between the senior regiments' and the line's, but they established their own prestige in 1809 when they fought an Austrian corps into the bloody cobblestones of Aspern village and drove it off in disorder. Further keen fighting in Austria and Spain won the fusiliers-grenadiers the right to queue their hair like the grenadiers, but Napoleon swiftly suppressed their colonel's attempt to put them into bearskin grenadier caps in 1810. The Emperor had recurrent spells of wanting to imitate the former French Kings; he also was always seeking to reconcile France's "ancient nobility" to his rule. Consequently 1806 also brought in the gendarmes d'ordonnance, a title used by the gentlemen of King Henry IV's (15531610) personal bodyguard. Men between sixteen and thirty-nine who could provide their own horses and equipment and pay their own travel expenses were to report to Marshal Kellermann at Mainz to be accepted into that corps. The turnout was good: some 393 men in five companies of cavalry, which were sent to the front (then somewhere in Poland) as they were organized. (A sixth company, composed of volunteers too poor to buy a horse, did dismounted duty briefly at Mainz.) The uniform was dark green, much like that of the chasseurs a cheval of the line, but heavily trimmed with silver braid. Each volunteer was accompanied by his personal mounted domestic, young gentlemen of such high breeding having no aptitude for grooming muddy horses or starting a fire with wet wood. Two companies saw some action in 1807; a third came up in time for Friedland but was not engaged; the fourth was late for the end of the war; and the fifth was still en route. Their spick-and-span appearance impressed Tsar Alexander at Tilsit, but the Guard disliked and resented them, obviously fearing that they might become a privileged inner guard. But there also was no getting around the fact that, though brave enough, they were unhandy soldiers. They therefore were disbanded in October 1807; those who had seen combat were commissioned as cavalry sous-lieutenants; the others were offered a commission after a year's service as Velites. More than two hundred (the figures vary) chose to remain in the service; others went home feeling thoroughly insulted and resentful of the "plebians" of the Guard. As officers they were much favored by Clarke but mostly disliked by the Grande Arm6e as lacking the proper attitude toward French soldiers. The Guard's first foreign regiment was the chevau-legers Polonais, activated in March 1807 from picked volunteers, mostly small landowners or their sons, who had some education and were expert riders. They paid for their own clothing and equipment and provided their own horses. Nevertheless, the regiment was recruited up to strength in ten days." Their two majors, captain-instructor, two adjutants-majors, quartermaster-treasurer, surgeon, and all their trumpeters were French. Their farriers seem to have been Germans. Originally they were armed as light cavalrymen with saber, pistols, and carbines; their horses were the old Polish breed, small but wonderfully hardy and nimble. Beyond their zeal, courage, and horsemanship, however, these proud and individualistic gentlemen-at-arms had everything to learn. Their first drills and reviews were cases of every Pole for himself, and it took two years to get their regimental accounts set up properly. The regiment was gradually assembled in Spain in 1808, where Lasalle gave it practical outpost training. There they made their celebrated charge up the defile of Somo-Sierra, a charge in column of fours for 2,500 meters, mostly uphill, over four entrenched batteries. The 3d Squadron of the Poles did it (whether at their first or second attempt matters not), losing more than a third of their number, with every officer killed or wounded. From then on they were a legendary regiment. In 1809 they were armed with lances-taken, tradition says, from Austrian uhlans-and became the Guard's 1st Regiment de Chevau-legers Lanciers. They did well in Russia; in 1813 they mustered two provisional regiments, consolidated into one for 1814. After Napoleon's first abdication, one squadron went with him to Elba. The rest-Poland having been beaten into a theoretically independent kingdom under Alexander's personal rule-went home. Intent on strengthening his artillery, Napoleon began the reorganization of his Guard Artillery in 1808-9, reducing his artillerie a cheval to four companies and forming three companies of artillerie a pied, which could handle heavy 12-pounders, as well as three companies of "conscript artillery" for service with Guard units in Spain. That was the beginning of a long, complex process that also involved the Guard's artillery train troops. The artillerie a pied grew into a fully organized regiment during 1810-12, complete with its own band, sapeurs, and grenadier-style bearskin caps; the "conscripts" became the Young Guard artillery. During the 1813-14 campaigns the Old Guard had six companies each of horse and foot artillery, a company of ouvriers etpontonniers, and a 12-company artillery train regiment; the Young Guard had fifteen companies of foot and one of horse artillery, the company of veterans, and its own regiment of artillery train. (The horse artillery, one foot artillery, and an extra train company came from Joseph's former royal guard.) The two together were considered a "corps," with its own administration, one officer being responsible for all its uniforms. Altogether the Guard had 196 cannon, including some fortyeight 12-pounders. The Young Guard infantry also appeared in 1809 with the organization of two regiments each of tirailleurs-grenadiers and tirailleurs-chasseurs.18 Their cadres came from the Old Guard; their privates were the strongest and best-educated men from the current class of conscripts. There were also two regiments each of conscripts-grenadiers and conscripts-chasseurs, likewise taken directly from the newly summoned conscripts. (Possibly this was a move to make the army more attractive to them, with trouble in Spain and a new war with Austria plainly coming.) Their enlisted cadre was from the fusiliers; their sous-lieutenants were students from St. Cyr. The cadre, especially its senior officers, did not take kindly to being in "conscript" outfits. One regiment's vehicles were marked with "Garde Imperiale, Regiment de Grenadiers" in letters two feet high, below which, in small print, was "CTS" (the abbreviation for "conscript"). The rest of the army thought this exceedingly funny and nicknamed the regiment the "cts." The regiment was not amused, and there were several duels. Before they hit the road to Spain for on-the-job training, the conscripts received a very modern-seeming orientation, stressing the Spanish attitude toward such matters as religion and women, with special pains to explain it all to the men from 