acent French camps, a,:d cleared obstacles from their unit's line of march. Out of combat, they customarily served as headquarters guards and orderlies; on the march, they were at the head of the column with the eagle, the drums, and the band. Their outfit was distinctive-a scarlet-plumed bearskin cap (sometimes a shako), an ample apron of canvas or leather, long-cuffed gauntlets, and an axe. (Many of the axes shown by contemporary artists have such massive heads that they must have been ornamental parade pieces.) A sword (sometimes a combination sword and saw) and a mousqueton with bayonet completed their armament. Since they were a part of the tete de colonne, some regiments gave them uniforms similar to their musicians' in cut and colors. Their badge, in brass on their cartridge boxes and of cloth on their sleeves, was two crossed axes. Generally, they were tough people. One Frenchman recalled them at Medellin, swinging their axes amid the panicked Spaniards as a Mameluke would swing his scimitar. Grenadiers, carabineers, voltigeurs, and sapeurs alike fully earned their extra pay and privileges. Napoleon was insistent that only qualified men be assigned to them. Newly formed battalions and regiments could do without elite companies until they had been in enough combat to be certain which of their men were the bravest and most reliable. Appearances could be deceiving: It took more than above-average height to make a real grenadier. In February 1808 Napoleon instituted a major change in infantry regimental organization. All regiments were to consist. of four "guerre" (combat) battalions and one depot battalion. Each combat battalion would have one company of grenadiers/carabineers, four of fusiliers/chasseurs, and one of voltigeurs; the depot battalion would have only the four "center" companies. Company strength was increased to 140 officers and men." There was little change in the regimental headquarters: the colonel, a major, an adjutant-major (usually a captain) with five adjutants-sous-officers (commonly termed simply "adjutants"), a quartermaster-treasurer, a payeur (paymaster), the lieutenant porte-aigle and his two assistants, the drum major and his corporal "drum master," a sergeant wagon master, the bandmaster and seven bandsmen, four master artificers, a surgeon-major, one to three assistant surgeons, and two to five sous-aides (deputy assistant) surgeons. The major had charge of the regimental depot. (In 1811 Napoleon would order that "majors in second" be named for all regiments with four active combat battalions, so that one major could be with the regiment or-if two battalions were serving detached on another front-command them as a provisional regiment.) The quartermaster-treasurer (usually a captain) also was normally at the depot, while the paymaster (a captain or lieutenant) went with the regiment. In 1811 one of the depot company captains was given the additional duty of "capitaine d'habillement," in charge of the regiment's clothing; also, each depot company gained an extra second lieutenant for training and detail chasing. As for the wagon master, SergeantMajor J. C. Jannin defined his duties as being responsible for the regiment's vehicles and baggage and making certain that nothing was lost or left behind; also, he issued the forage for the officers' horses and distributed the mail, which struck Jannin as enough work for anybody. The master artificers were a tailor, a shoemaker, and two armorers; if no competent soldiers could be found for those duties, the colonel might hire civilian gagistes. In addition to their official duties, the artificers could make items of uniforms and equipment for officers at an established price. That was a boon to new officers; they got good workmanship and regulation style, and could pay for it on the installment plan, their payments being set according to their grades. Combat battalions were commanded by chefs de bataillon, the depot battalion by its senior company commander. Each had a lieutenant adjutantmajor, assisted by an adjutant-sous-officier.'Z (Adjutant-sous-officiers were the senior NCOs; their uniform closely resembled the adjutant-majors'. Their duties included supervision of roll calls, fatigue details, punishments, kitchens, canteens, and the guard house; they posted sentries, distributed orders, and generally set an example of activity and devotion to duty.) In addition to its official staff, a regiment would have the unofficial organization of its maitre d'armes and his prdvots. It was their duty to train such enlisted men as were interested in swordsmanship. They also represented their respective regiments in the ritual duels that were certain to take place between regiments, either over old grudges or as a professional way of getting acquainted. The position was in addition to other duties: Parquin took part in an affair where the 20th Chasseurs A Cheval and the 8th Hussars matched their maItres-the first a brigadier of its elite company, his opponent the hussar's trumpet-major. It was all fair play and good clean fun. The hussar disabled the brigadier; Parquin (then a fourrier) took up the fight and dropped the hussar. The regimental surgeon patched up the two maftres, and everyone ended the best of friends. Elzear Blaze noticed that the enlisted men respected the regiment's maitre d'armes at least as much as their colonel, but he developed a low opinion of the prdvots: Too many of them, he thought, were poor soldiers, fond of picking fights with less skilled comrades and cold-bloodedly killing them, but cowards in action. Unfortunately, the enlisted men feared them and thus seldom administered the traditional paddywhacking they gave other cowards. The big regiments formed by the 1808 reorganization were efficient when kept intact. That, however, was not always done, the Emperor being too ready to detach one or more battalions to form provisional regiments for service at the other end of his Empire, much to the hurt of regimental morale and the confusion of its administration. The greater number of elite companies bled the fusiliers/chasseurs of their best soldiers and NCO material. Also, increasing the strength of the companies had reduced the ratio of officers and NCOs to privates. Since the average regiment still contained a large proportion of experienced soldiers, the last two problems were solved satisfactorily enough during the 1809 campaign, but they became crucial in 1813 with the great influx of raw young conscripts and the general shortage of competent officers and NCOs, especially the latter. Finally, there was the fact that a battalion couldn't do much with its remaining four companies if its elite companies were detached. In early 1812 Napoleon ordered all infantry regiments to form a 6th Battalion. It would be a combat unit, and the 5th Battalion would continue to function as a depot battalion. Except for those in Davout's corps, few regiments managed it before the campaign began. On through 1813 Napoleon attempted to increase the number of battalions per regiment, in his view a far more efficient measure than forming new regiments. (A regiment would do its best to find an adequate cadre for a new battalion of its own; if ordered to provide a cadre for a new regiment, it would-in obedience to immemorial army custom-unload its Jonahs and problem children.) But only a few regiments could provide for more than five combat battalions." Napoleon found that the big 1813 regiments tended to go limp and soft around the edges after some weeks of campaigning. His raw boy infantrymen were willing enough: Captain J. B. Barres remembered their "renunciation": "[N]ot one left the ranks; ... some that we had left behind sick, came to take their places These poor children, when they were wounded....used to come to me to ask to leave the company to get their wounds bandaged."14 But they did not know how to look after themselves in the field, and there were not enough competent and conscientious officers and NCOs to teach them in the little time available. Applying those lessons in 1814, Napoleon ordered two fusilier companies added to each battalion and cut the number of privates per company-sixty, he thought, would be enough. How many regiments got themselves so reorganized is obscure; this new organization did become standard in 1820. Prior to the 1808 regimental reorganization, it had been customary for one battalion from each regiment to serve as a depot battalion. Those units had a surprising variety of missions in addition to the routine reception, processing, and basic instruction of recruits and conscripts. To begin with, most depots were located in fortress towns and seaports; the depot battalions and the men they were training constituted an important element of the local garrisons. During 1803-8 most of their elite companies were on detached service with the Grenadiers d'Oudinot. Fusilier companies from several depot battalions were often grouped together during times of war in temporary provisional regiments to guard advance bases along the Grande Armee's line of communication, and to establish intermediate echelons between their depots and their regiments in the field. (Regiments moving into Spain during 1808-9 left one battalion at Bayonne to form an advance depot.) Other fusilier companies were used to cadre regiments de marche, which "carried" trained replacements forward to the regiments in the field. After the reorganization of 1808, the depot battalion's four companies were assigned specific duties: The 1st and 3d companies were de marche units (which could involve some instruction en route to the front); the 2d Company carried out local guard and security missions; the 4th was responsible for the processing and training of conscripts. Probably personnel was shifted as necessary among them, according to depot's current necessities. Another change in regimental organization came in June 1809, when Napoleon revived the regimental cannon companies that had been abolished in 1798 as too expensive, Barras and colleagues having had more interesting things to do with any available cash. It was remembered, however, that those light guns were more mobile than the foot artillery and that-if well handled-they had a stiffening effect on green troops. Preparing for his final blow against the Austrian Army, Napoleon had a good many new conscripts in his ranks, and also hundreds of guns of all calibers captured with the Vienna arsenal. Accordingly, he ordered Songis to issue Davout's, Oudinot's, and Massena's corps two light guns and two caissons, with 150 to 200 rounds per gun, per infantry regiment. The regiments were to provide the necessary cannoneers and drivers; the artillery would train them in their duties. Each regiment would form an artillery company of two officers and sixty-eight enlisted men, which would also take over responsibility for the regimental trains. 1I Girault saw them exercising while the final preparations for the great assault crossing from Lobau Island went on. These newly formed cannon companies had no noticeable part in the subsequent battle of Wagram and the pursuit of the defeated Austrians; probably most of them still were half- organized. In April 1810 all regiments were told to turn in their new toys. (The Young Guard division sent into Spain in 1809 had been provided with two light guns per regiment, but these were manned by Guard artillerymen.) Eleven months later, however, Napoleon reinstituted the compagnies d'artillerie regimentaire on a slightly enlarged scale: four 4-pounder guns, two officers, and ninety-five enlisted men per regiment. 16 His purpose probably was the same as in 1809, to provide some stiffening for infantry that would include a considerable proportion of troops with no combat experience. However, though nowhere specifically stated, it was also a fact that infantry regiments with four and even five combat battalions were big organizati