

 • Line Infantry: Fusilier, 1805

CHAPTER X Poor Bloody Infantry The better the infantry, the more it should be used carefully and supported with good batteries. Good infantry is, without doubt, the sinew of an army. Napoleon, cited by Phillips' The cavalry swaggered, the martial clanging of its scabbards singing bass to the tenor chiming of its spurs. Artillerymen strode with aloof pridewas not 1'Empereur himself also a gunner? But it was the sweaty soldats d'infanterie, the gravel-agitating, beetle-crushing infantry who truly carried the Empire on their burdened shoulders and bayonets. Though its demi-brigades were again officially decreed "regiments" in 1803 (naturally, War Ministry clerks didn't notice: The 1813 reissue of the infantry drill regulations still termed them "demi-brigades"), the infantry of the Consulate and the early Empire kept its Revolutionary organization: nine companies to a battalion, an average of three battalions to a regiment. This infantry came in two major (and several minor) classifications. Roughly one regiment out of every five was Legere (light), the rest line (ligne). By transferring battalions from one regiment to another and combining weak demi-brigades, Napoleon had consolidated the Directory's 110 ligne and 30 Legere demi-brigades into 90 ligne and 27 legere.2 Their numbers did not run consecutively: The ligne regiments went from the 1st to the 112th; the Legere from the 1st to the 31st. The "vacant" numbers (twenty-two ligne and four legere) represented demi-brigades authorized during the Revolution but never formed or organizations formed but later suppressed or destroyed in combat. Also, the mere retention of those numbers on the French Army lists could confuse enemy intelligence as to that army's actual strength. Though line and light infantry had the same organization, weapons, equipment, and drill regulations, there was a difference between them, as definite as it was intangible. Infanterie Legere had acquired a tradition of dash and aggressiveness, of advance guard and flank guard service, of rapid deployment and expert skirmishing. It asserted the right to lead all attacks-Massena, a commander seldom sensitive to fine points of military honor, overlooked this in his initial plans at Zurich in 1799, and was bluntly corrected. Napoleon seldom overlooked any such morale-building quirks. He maintained the light infantry-complete in pride, blue trousers, and daringboth as a handy source of service emulation and a formidable combat organization. He steadily increased its strength; in 1814 he had thirty-six regiments, formed from various sources. The 32d Legere had been organized during 1806-8 from Genoese and Tuscan troops; the 33d in 1810 from Dutch light infantry; the 34th the next year from provisional battalions in Spain; the 35th and 36th in 1812 from disciplinary regiments; the 37th in 1813 from the Departemental Compagnies de Reserve. Vacant regimental numbers were partially filled up: In 1811 the 11th Legere was recreated out of the Bataillon de Tirailleurs Corses, the Tlrailleurs du Po, the Legion du Midi, and the Bataillon Valisan; the 29th from survivors of the garrison of the Ile de France. Finally, the 19th Legere appeared in 1814, barely in time to get shot at. One Iegere regiment normally was assigned to each infantry division for its traditional missions. Light infantry had an all-blue uniform, officially enlivened only by narrow white braid and red collars. Its buttons were white metal instead of the ligne's brass, and its officers' lace silver instead of gold. Unofficially, it tended to dress after its own taste, sometimes substituting yellow or red braid for the proper white, frequently flaunting red cuffs or cuff flaps. Officers liked busbies and sported green leather sword belts. In many regiments even the chasseurs of the center companies had smart epaulettes and clung to the ddmi-espadron sword long worn by light infantrymen; the elite carabinier companies had bearskin caps as imposing as any grenadier's, with scarlet plumes and epaulettes.' When the 14th Legere was sent to campaign in southern Italy and garrison the very warm island of Corfu, its carabineers did leave their bonnets au poll (bearskins) at their depot. In compensation they affixed scarlet flammes to their shakos; the whole regiment had briquets and epaulettes and wore 16-inch plumes (scarlet for carabineers, green for chasseurs, yellow for voltigeurs) on the left side of their shakos, instead of in front.4 Line infantry might be equally showy, if the colonel's tastes and the regiment's finances allowed, but its great virtues were a solid toughness, the often passive bravery to stand and take enemy fire without flinching. Their exemplar was DorsBnne, who could turn his back to the enemy under the heaviest fire and give his orders cooly and clearly, without concern for what went on behind him. They were the Grande Armee's muscle and sinew, its basic arm. As the Empire grew, the number of ligne regiments increased: In 1808 Tuscan troops became the 113th Ligne; seven more regiments were formed from provisional regiments in Spain. Next year the survivors of the Legions de Rdserve provided the 121st and 122d ligne; in 1810 former Dutch regiments became the 123d through the 126th; in 1811 the soldiers of the Hanseatic states and the Hanoverian Legion infantry were transformed into the 127th, 128th, and 129th; and the 130th was organized from auxiliary battalions in Spain. Disciplinary regiments were converted into four more during 1812; the disgraced infantry of the Garde de Paris became the 134th Ligne in 1813, and the National Guard provided twenty-one additional regiments.' Three other regiments were organized in 1813-14 from what laconic records term "divers sources."6 Not all of these survived to the end in 1814: The Dutch 125th and 126th were used up in Russia; their survivors became filler replacements and garrison detachments; parts of the Hanseatic 127th and 128th mutinied in 1813. The first substantial change in French military organization came in March 1804, when Napoleon authorized the formation of a "voltigeur" ("vaulter") company in each light infantry battalion, and extended the innovation to the line infantry in September 1805. In a way, it was merely a confirmation of the existing practice in some regiments, which had formed "light companies," like the Royal Army's regimental chasseur companies for scouting and skirmishing. Coignet, Teste, and Thiebault mention the existence of such companies-usually called "dclaireurs" (scouts)-be- tween 1796 and 1801.' The French Army was full of good soldiers who were too short to gain elite status as grenadiers, however much they might deserve it. It is quite possible that in his youth their Emperor had experienced some of the routine railleries tossed at short soldiers. His specifications for voltigeurs called for strong, active men, able to march at the trot and to vault up behind a cavalryman. No enlisted man was to be taller than 4 feet, I1 inches (French); officers could have an inch more. They were to be especially trained to shoot rapidly and very accurately, and their companies were to be kept constantly at war strength. Their distinction was a chamois-colored collar, and they would rank next after the grenadiers. Their officers and NCOs were issued special rifled carbines. After some dithering, it was decided that the 3d Company of each infantry battalion would become its voltigeur company.' This organization went on while the Grande Armee was engaged in its campaigns of 1805 and 1806. There were quite a few loose ends: It was 1808 before the voltigeurs were officially assigned the left of the line (the second post of honor) in all ceremonies, and a year or two before they definitely were granted haute-paye. All that naturally did not inhibit a collection of runts, especially runts who had been picked for aggressiveness (what now would be called a "runt's complex"). Their modest chamois collars speedily became bright jonquille, and they annexed to themselves such testimonials of importance as epau lettes, mustaches, and incidental plumage and braiding, usually in combinations of the illegal jonquille and the green traditional to light troops, with a little red for contrast. Carabineers and grenadiers reacted violently to those pushy little men. Mustaches were sacrilege enough, but when the short ones began ornamenting their coattails with the "flaming grenade" insignia sacred to the big men's elite companies, there was a rumpus that ended with the voltigeurs taking a hunting horn insigne instead. The center companies, now forced to endure the swagger of two sets of privileged characters, waxed somewhat profane. When one of their companies had to deploy and reinforce the voltigeurs' skirmish line, there were loud and pointed remarks to the effect that it took more than a yellow collar to make a fighting man. But the "kleine manner" were efficient-swarming skirmishers in the attack; sharpshooting rearguards in a retreat; useful people for any detail involving hurry, dodging, scrambling, and danger, such as the first wave in the assault crossing of the Beresina River, where they were "ferried" across by Polish lancers. Voltigeur companies might be grouped temporarily into special battalions to support the advance guard cavalry in close country. They do not seem to have done much "vaulting," though there was a case at Austerlitz where a voltigeur sergeant rose up behind a large Russian cavalry colonel and collected him. The Emperor is said to have taken a deplorable small-boy delight in describing that feat whenever Russian ambassadors turned difficult. The pick of each battalion-men at least 5 feet, 5 inches (French) in height with a minimum of two years' excellent service-went into its elite grenadier/carabineer company. Looming tall in their bearskin caps, plumed and epauletted in flaming scarlet, briquet at side, tugging at their impressive mustaches (which their Emperor forbade them to wax, deeming that practice unhealthy), they were the epitome of martial dignity, with more than a century of proud tradition to uphold. Their insignia was the "flaming grenade" (very much like the present U.S. Ordnance Corps branch insignia), and their haute-paye was, in soldier slang, the "sou of the grenade." They were excused from fatigue details, supply train escort duty, and ordinary outpost service, though they might guard key gateways and bridges. They took the right of the line, the head of the column, and any post that was dangerous and therefore honorable: "la grenade obligeait.s9 Grenadier/carabineer companies might be detached from their battalions to form provisional Sunday-punch battalions. Napoleon organized four of those in Italy in 1796, Lannes making a great reputation for valor with them. The practice continued through the Napoleonic wars in one form or another, as with the original Grenadiers Oudinot, but there seems to have been a growing tendency to leave the elite companies with their parent units during campaigns. Possibly some generals remembered Marshal Saxe's complaint that "whenever there are four cats to chase, the grenadiers are summoned and, most of the time, they get killed for no good purpose.s10 Another elite soldier was the sapeur d'infanterie, a large, strong, courageous soldier picked from the grenadier/carabineer companies. Sapeurs were of some antiquity, a number of Royal Army regiments having had small detachments of "soldier carpenters" (called ouvriers in the Swiss and French Guards), but their actual formation and equipment does not seem to have been settled throughout the Grande Armee before 1805-6. Each battalion had four sapeurs, one of them a corporal. Their wartime mission was much like that of modern combat engineers: They broke in gates and chopped gaps in abatis and palisades to let their comrades through, roughed out or improved roadways between adj