Holland, Italy, and Germany, who didn't yet understand French. Also, they had plenty of musketry drill, an outbreak of the itch, and orders to keep their hair cut. The enlisted cadremen did not always set a proper example; a regimental orderly book shows them up for punishment almost as frequently as the conscripts. In 1810 the tirailleurs-grenadiers had their title amputated to "tirailleurs"; the tirailleurs-chasseurs were rebaptized "voltigeurs." The conscripts became the 3d and 4th regiments of tirailleurs and voltigeurs. The organization of these regiments continued steadily: By 1814 there were nineteen of each, in action or organizing. They drew men from the Pupilles, the grenadiers and voltigeurs of Joseph's guard, picked conscripts, and (in 1814) volunteers. The last included boys as young as sixteen, if they were at least 5 feet tall and strong enough. Napoleon never clearly stated his purpose in building up the Young Guard, but it was undoubtedly true that he could draw better cadres from the Guard than from most line regiments. Guard infantry was now organized into two "corps": the first made up of the grenadiers, fusiliergrenadiers, and tirailleurs; the second of the chasseurs, fusilier-chasseurs, and voltigeurs. Each corps was headed by the general commanding its senior regiment;'9 each had a single council of administration. Since Young Guard regiments were small-two battalions of four companies each-they were commanded by majors. Their uniforms were simple and the pay was the same as the line infantry's, but they wore the Guard's insignia and buttons, used the Guard's drum beats, were exempt from fatigue details, and ate fairly regularly.20 The Guard also acquired more foreign elements. The Velites of Florence received Guard status in 1809, those of Turin in 1810. In 1809 Napoleon annexed the Grand Duchy of Berg, thereby acquiring a regiment of chevau legers originally half- organized by Murat. The officers and men were almost all Germans; the French officers included some ex-emigres. Napoleon assigned it to a Guard division in northern Spain and ordered it armed and trained as lancers. It developed into a first-rate regiment; as recognition of its conduct against English cavalry at Villadrigo it was permitted the distinction of using silk lance pennons, previously restricted to the Polish lancers. During 1812 it cadred a 2d Regiment, which served with Victor in Russia; the remains of both regiments were combined in 1813 and served well until the French withdrawal from Germany. One squadron helped defend Mainz until the war ended in 1814. The rest were dismounted in November 1813 and transferred to a Berg infantry regiment, which was later disarmed and treated as prisoners of war. The National Guard of the northern departments had been called out in 1809 against the British Antwerp expedition. Some of them decided that they liked soldiering as a profession, and their Emperor was happy to accommodate them. The result was the rhythmically named "Regiment of the National Guard of the Guard." Its field officers, adjutants, and fourriers came from the line; all other officers volunteered from the National Guard. Its first organization was that of a two-battalion line infantry regiment with the usual grenadier and voltigeur companies; in 1813 it was converted to the 7th Voltigeur Regiment. A bad fire in the Austrian Embassy in Paris inspired Napoleon to activate a company of Sapeurs du Genie de la Garde for duty as firemen at the Imperial palaces. They were to be trained in firefighting and rescue operations: In war they would be attached to the Grand Quartier-General. In 1814 a Young Guard company was added, and the two were designated a battalion with an ornate drum major and a small band. The substantial increase in the Guard's strength during 1810 came from the incorporation of the Dutch Royal Guard. By way of welcome, Napoleon reviewed them in the Bois de Boulogne. Afterward, open barrels of wine were set out for the perspiring Dutchmen. They found it a delicious change from their habitual beer and quaffed mightily-but couldn't carry the unaccustomed tipple. Roaring drunk they whacked one another, slugged Parisians, chased squealing Parisiennes into the dusky groves. It took a lot of twilight patrolling, drumming, and trumpeting to recall them to discipline and hangovers. Thereafter the red-clad Dutch cavalrymen found themselves with lances and Polish drill sergeants. Sweating out both, they became the famous "Red Lancers," officially the 2d Regiment de Chevau-legers Lanciers (causing the unexplained displacement of the Berg Regiment). They suffered heavily in Russia but were reestablished with the dragoons of the Garde de Paris, volunteers from various cities, and cavalrymen from Joseph's former guard, becoming a French regiment in the process. The Dutch grenadiers-big, blond men in spotless white uniforms faced with crimson-became the 2d Regiment de Grenadiers a Pied but were demoted to being the 3d Regiment when the 1st Regiment was again "doubled " in 1811. They served faithfully in Russia but somehow lacked the toughness of their French comrades. Their few survivors went into the 1st and 2d regiments in 1813.21 However it was the "little Dutchmen," the Pupilles, who really caught the French fancy. Napoleon first thought of sending them to the navy, but their drill and discipline impressed him. France had an oversupply of war orphans and half-orphans; Napoleon added them-French, Germans, Croats, Italians-to form Les Pupilles de la Garde Imperiale, some eight thousand boys in nine battalions. These were used for various easy garrisons while they were educated and trained. In the desperate days of 1813 they formed the 7th Tirailleurs and cadres for other Young Guard regiments. Their 1st Battalion, with the oldest and biggest boys, served with the Guard in Germany. It fought well but had to be disbanded in 1814 when its Dutch pupils mutinied and were joined by Italians and Piedmontese. Only their depot battalion with the youngest Pupilles, thirteen to sixteen years old, was in Paris when the Allies attacked in 1814. Moncey, who was finding it impossible to get the grown men of Paris to fight, found these youngsters unwilling to stop even when ordered to withdraw. With the Guard so enlarged, the need for more transportation led to the conversion of the 5th Company of the ouvriers battalion into a Bataillon du Train des Equipages de la Garde. It took over all the Guard vehicles, mustering 817 officers and men; 1,200 horses; and some 260 vehicles. The other four ouvrier companies were consolidated into three. An experimental unit, the Regiment de Flanquers-Grenadiers, appeared in late 1811. Its men were to be drawn exclusively from the sons of forestry employees, gamekeepers, and the like. They were lightly equipped and apparently intended as skirmishers and sharpshooters (Napoleon seems to have been experimenting with rifles at the time). However, the regiment was largely used up in Russia; when re-formed in 1813, it was just another collection of conscripts, as was the matching regiment of flanquers- chasseurs organized then. In early 1812, confronted by a tangle of differing schedules of pay and allowances for various regiments, Napoleon classified the elements of his Guard. The Old Guard consisted of the 1st regiments of grenadiers and chasseurs; the NCOs of their 2d regiments and of the fusiliers; the grenadiers a cheval, chasseurs a cheval, dragoons, Polish lancers, Mamelukes, gendarmerie d'elite, artillery, engineers, veterans, and the NCOs of the Young Guard artillery. The Middle Guard was the 3d (Dutch) Grenadiers; the corporals and privates of the 2d regiments of grenadiers and chasseurs; the 2d Lancer Regiment; the fusiliers; the artillery train battalions; the Vel ites of Florence and Turin; the ouvriers; and the Dutch veterans. The Young Guard had the tirailleurs, voltigeurs, flanquers-grenadiers, the Regiment of the National Guard, the bataillon des equipages, and the corporals and privates of the Young Guard artillery. Old or Middle Guard officers assigned to the Young Guard kept their original pay and status as well as their uniforms, which made those serving with the green-clad flanquer regiments rather conspicious. This hierarchy functioned purposely as a military school. The Young Guard was formed from select conscripts; Young Guard soldiers with two years' service and some education could pass up into the fusiliers or other Middle Guard regiments. The Middle Guard got its cadres from the Old Guard and provided it with replacements. Old Guard NCOs passed out into the line as sous-lieutenants. (In addition, qualified line soldiers could be taken into either the Middle Guard or Old Guard.) In 1811 this system was supplemented by the activation of a Guard "Battalion of Instruction" (or "Battalion of Fontainebleau"). It was actually three battalions, one to train fusiliers as sergeants, and two to train picked soldiers of the Young Guard as corporals.22 Graduates were to serve as cadremen for new line regiments Napoleon was forming, thus correcting the weakening effect of drawing off the best of the line soldiers into the Guard. This school was administered by the Old Guard; instructors were the pick of the Guard regiments and St. Cyr. The course included infantry and artillery drill, fencing, writing, grammar, arithmetic, fortification, and garrison and field duty. The best "scribes" among the students were instructed in army administration by a commissare des guerres. Discipline was severe, the course heavy. One student corporal groused that it was a "second St. Cyr. They want to make engineer officers out of us! "23 Two new Guard units were formed in Russia in 1812. One was the Squadron of Lithuanian Tartars, descendents of Genghis Khan's Mongols who had settled in Lithuania and White Russia. Mohammedans and petty nobles, they rode proud in semi-Oriental dress behind officers with names like Achmatowicz, Ulan, Jorahim, and Assan-Alny. The other was the 3d Regiment de Chevau-Legers Lanciers, formed mostly from Lithuanian nobility and noted for the richness of its uniforms and the beauty of its horses. The Russians seem to have made special efforts to destroy those symbols of Lithuanian resurgence: Two squadrons of the 3d Lancers were surprised while still in training and largely rubbed out. The Tartars were swamped by bands of their traditional Cossack enemies but mostly got away by hard slashing and spurring. The surviving 3d Lancers were put into the 1st Regiment in early 1813; the Tartars were attached to the 1st Regiment but kept their separate identity. The Russian campaign used up the Guard. The 2d Grenadier Regiment left Paris in March with 34 officers and 1,295 men; left Moscow in October with 35 and 1,177 respectively; and regrouped in Prussia with 273 officers and men for duty. It reported 23 killed, 82 wounded and left in hospitals, 209 frozen or dead of "misery," one officer and 538 men missing, some of whom would straggle in, frostbitten, starving, and sick. Some men had been too hard to break. "Pere" Francois Roguet marched out on foot with his fusiliers, too tough even to catch cold, looking after his men like a father indeed. Drouot set the supreme example every morning of a cold water shave before a mirror hung on a gun wheel. Once all the sick, wounded, and crippled and the surplus officers and NCOs had been sent off to the rear, the Guard mustered 1,065 infantry, 663 cavalry, 265 artillerymen and train troops with nine guns, and 26 engineers-the valid remnants of over 30,000 Guardsmen who had begun the campaign.24 Napoleon drew veterans from line units in Spain and France to reestablish the Old Guard, formed more regiments of tirailleurs and voltigeurs, and drew on the navy for artillerymen. Various cities and departments offered men and horses. He wanted to give each of the Guard cavalry regiments a Young Guard equivalent.