ons-as strong as any of the brigades and even some of the divisions that General Bonaparte had commanded in Italy in 1796. Given a few guns, they should be capable of semi-independent missions. Organization of those companies began with the regiments in Davout's "Army of Observation of the Elbe," which guarded the Empire's uneasy eastern frontier. The procedure was typical of Napoleon: He wanted a rather complex problem solved somewhat earlier than yesterday. Most of the necessary mass of materiel-cannon, caissons, field forges, and harness-had to be manufactured or scraped out of forgotten arsenal corners all over the Empire; it probably looked like the inventory for several artillery museums. Many of the guns had been captured at one time or another and varied from fine Austrian weapons to dubious Piedmontese relics of 1796. Many were in poor repair; the methodical Davout was unhappy over the lack of uniformity and the need for numerous modifications. A lot more horses would be needed, and there was a small logistic snarl in providing their drivers with leather breeches and boots. At the same time, at least three regiments in the Westphalian Army were forming two-gun companies, and Italian regiments were completing their organization. (In late October 1810 Napoleon had ordered Eugene to give each Italian regiment two guns.) Once formed and outfitted, those companies had to be trained, and there were colonels who hadn't the foggiest notion of how to use them. Some regiments had no officers with any knowledge of artillery; Regiment Joseph Napoleon, for example, had to ask for a French officer to drill its artillery company. By early 1812 it was obvious that it would be impossible to give each infantry regiment a four-gun company; Napoleon therefore ordered a return to the 1809 organization. The regimental guns saw some hard service in Russia. Usually they were put into action in the intervals between battalions and fought at musket range. Oudinot, however, felt that the materiel of his regimental artillery was "worse than could be imagined" and its cannoneers "of an extreme ignorance." Oudinot never had been any hand at employing weapons more complex than the infantry musket and bayonet, but he may have had reason for his complaints. Merle, who commanded a division of Oudinot's II Corps, was emphatic: "That [regimental] artillery has poor drivers and poor horses. It daily blocks the roads, impedes the march of the regular artillery, and deprives the ranks of seventy to eighty bayonets which would do the enemy much more damage than these poorly served cannons which cannot march."" Most of the regimental guns were abandoned in Russia, though a few artillery companies were still in existence in early 1813. Thereafter, because of the need to put all available resources into the rebuilding of the regular artillery, the scheme was abandoned. Also in 1813, wanting to reform twenty-eight infantry regiments in the shattered I, II, and III Corps, Napoleon adopted a somewhat curious system. Their 2d battalions were to be formed first, then their 4th, and next their 1st battalions. Their 3d and 5th battalions would come later. As soon as those battalions were organized and somewhat trained, they were combined into provisional regiments. Thus the 2d battalions of two regiments would be combined to constitute, say, the 1st Provisional Regiment; the 4th battalions of those same two regiments would be the 1st Provisional Regiment (bis); their 1st battalions the 1st Provisional Regiment (ter)." Those temporary units proved surprisingly solid, fighting as creditably as veterans to win major battles at Lutzen and Bautzen. Later, during an armistice, the various battalions were re-sorted into their proper regiments. The infantryman's immediate supplies and personal possessions-spare shoes, linen, clothing, housewife, and reserve food and cartridges, plus souvenirs picked up along the way-went into his field pack (sac). Made of cowhide with the hair on the outside, it was weatherproof if properly manufactured. The better ones had an inside pouch for carrying bulk flour. Men were seldom permitted to take them off in action, because it was hard at best, and sometimes impossible, to recover them afterward. Each company was supposed to have eight marmites (camp kettles), four hatchets, four picks, and four spades, which were to be carried by its men so as to be always available. Normally the men carried those turn and turn about. (Coignet had the experience of packing a marmite, top up, in a heavy rain, and splashing everyone around him when he bent over.) The French soldier, however, took a completely nonchalant view of this responsibility; rather than bother with its extra weight, he would sell this "camp equipment" or throw it away early in the campaign, and then try to borrow or steal what he might need at each stop along the way. Moving out on short notice in 1806, even Davout found that most of his regiments had mislaid their camp equipment; he could not buy sufficient replacements locally but finally reequipped his corps from the Prussian arsenals in Berlin. That being too expensive to do repeatedly, some colonels took hard measures. When the carabiniers of the 26th Legere "lost" their equipment, their colonel made them march with their coats turned inside out and their muskets buttend up-by contemporary standards, a mark of utter ignominy! By 1811 even Napoleon was willing to concede that the French soldier had an incor rigible phobia against carrying spades and picks: They were too heavy, their handles were too long, and the soldier would sooner or later get rid of them. He ordered all such tools turned over to the engineers. The supply of infantry equipment held up fairly well through 1813. By 1814 there was a shortage of sacs; substitutes were made of sheepskin, and captured knapsacks were issued. There was an even more serious shortage of gibernes (cartridge boxes): Until they could take one from a dead comrade or an enemy, a good many Frenchmen had to carry their cartridges in their pockets. Undoubtedly the best-equipped infantry the Grande Armee ever saw was Davout's I Corps at the beginning of the 1812 campaign: [E]ach of their knapsacks, limited to what was strictly necessary in the articles of clothing, contained two shirts, two pairs of shoes, with nails and soles to repair them, a pair of canvas pantaloons and also of gaiters, some utensils for cleaning, a strip of linen for dressing wounds, some lint, and [extra] cartridges. In the two sides [of the knapsack] were placed 4 biscuits'9 weighing sixteen ounces each; beneath and at the bottom, a long and narrow canvas bag was filled with ten pounds of flour. The whole knapsack thus constituted and filled, together with the straps ... weighed thirty-three pounds, twelve ounces. Each soldier carried besides, attached to a belt, a canvas bag20 containing two loaves weighing three pounds each. Thus with his [briquet], his loaded cartridge box, three flints, [screwdriver], belts and musket, he carried fiftyeight pounds weight, and had bread for four days, biscuit for four days, flour for seven days, and sixty musket charges. [To this should be added the soldier's overcoat and, possibly, a canteen, which would bring the total load to approximately sixty-five pounds.] In his rear there were carriages containing provisions for six days; but little dependence could be placed on these vehicles.21 The infantry regiments' trains had long been another improvised affair, made up of locally acquired vehicles and horses, often with impressed civilian drivers. In 1806 Napoleon set an official standard: Each regiment should have two 4-horse caissons for bread, one for shoes, and one for the officers' baggage, with several 2-horse carts for the vivandieres. A 4-horse caisson for medical supplies and equipment was added subsequently. (Though cumbersome, caissons probably were preferred because of their rainproof construction.) In 1809 Napoleon specified one infantry ammunition caisson and one ration wagon per battalion. Not all infantry regiments were equipped up to this standard, but quite a bit was accomplished. The 3d Swiss Infantry Regiment, reorganizing at Berg-op-Zoom in 1811 after its return from Spain, formed its cannon company and received three caissons for artillery ammunition, two for infantry ammunition, two for bread, and one for medical supplies-plus two 3-pounder guns and a field forgewhich was close to regulation for a regiment that was having difficulty mus tering two full-strength combat battalions. With those army vehicles would be a varying number of semiofficial ones belonging to the vivandieres and officers. Few of those regimental vehicles came back from Russia, and none of the ones lost there were replaced, the artillery and the bataillons d'equipages needing every caisson the arsenals could produce. Regimental trains plummeted to a minimum of two pack horses per battalion-one for records and funds, the other for medical supplies. Besides the regular regiments, both Legere and ligne, and their foreign counterparts in the French service, the Grande Armee had a variety of temporary, miscellaneous, and irregular infantry units. Of the first, the most common were the regiments de marche and the provisional regiments. The latter took various forms but were usually made up of men, companies, or battalions detached from regular regiments for more or less temporary service. Thus in 1806-7, as the Grande Armee was preparing to push eastward across the Oder River, the 3d battalions of most of its regiments still were being organized in France. Napoleon ordered that a company of 140 men be drawn from each of them, to be formed into eight provisional battalions, which would then be grouped into four provisional regiments. Three regiments were to be assigned to the garrison of Magdeburg, one to that of Kassel. The conscripts put into those companies would need no more than ten days of basic instruction, since they could complete their training while performing garrison duty. They were to be armed and issued a waistcoat, trousers, gaiters, hat, and overcoat: Their uniform coats would be made up later. Every battalion was to have a chef de bataillon and an adjutant-major; majors would be detailed to command the regiments. This, Napoleon thought, would give the Grande Armee trustworthy garrisons for its line of communications and advance depots and would save France the cost of supporting these troops. Similarly, in 1809 the 3d and 4th battalions of various regiments were formed into temporary "demibrigades" for service against Austria. In the Armee d'Italie at least, such formations were designated by the name of the major commanding them. Similar provisional demi-brigades, made up of the 4th battalions of different regiments, formed a large part of Augereau's Reserve Corps in Germany in 1812. The fates of such provisional regiments were seldom predictable. Usually they returned to their parent units, but they might be used to form new regular regiments or might be transferred to another one. In the latter cases their original regiment had to form new battalions to replace them. Another type of temporary organization was the five legions de reserve de 1'interieur, organized in 1807 and 1808 from the surplus of conscripts brought in by the "anticipated" levies of 1808 and 1809. Each legion had four 8-company infantry battalions and one company of artillery. Origi nally intended as coast defense troops, they were sent into Spain in 1808, losing eleven battalions at Baylen. The remaining nine became two regiments of line infantry. The seven bataillons auxiliares d'infanterie formed in early 1810 may have been intended as "carrier" units to get warm bodies into Spain for subsequent employment as the situation might require. They were organized at Versailles out of men drawn from the depots of regiments that were not serving in Spain.22 Napole