

CHAPTER IX Garde Im peria le Don't you know that the Guard's donkeys have the rank of mules? Blaze, La Vie Militaire' Seeing them at Fontainebleau in 1814, the British artist Benjamin Haydon found them "tall and bony." They must really have shocked his aesthetic sensibilities: More dreadful-looking fellows than Napoleon's Guard I had never seen. They had the look of thoroughbred, veteran, disciplined banditti. Depravity, recklessness, and bloodthirstiness were burned into their faces....Black mustachios, gigantic bearskins, and a ferocious expression were their characteristics.' Somewhere, however, there is an elusive old tale that when Haydon came to paint them in later years his brush showed them gallant, high-hearted, and imposing. The Guard's origin was double. One ancestor was the guard of the National Convention. That was rough duty: "Deputations" from various disorderly sections of Paris had the habit of swarming in, brandishing their sundry blunt and edged weapons, to acquaint the Convention with their conflicting versions of the people's voice. Anyone choosing to stand in the way of such intrusions might suddenly find his head ornamenting the point of a patriot's pike. The resultant attrition on the "grenadier- gendarmes" who had that duty prompted the Convention to augment them with selected infantrymen and artillerymen and to form the whole into a seven-company guard.' Between the Paris mobs and the Paris politicians, those veterans found themselves in bad company. Though repeatedly purged, reorganized, and renamed, this Garde du Corps Legislatif remained unruly and sullenly contemptuous of its civilian masters. A parallel unit appeared in 1796, when the newly installed Directory created a Maison for itself of 120 infantry grenadiers (grenadiers a pied) and an equal number of mounted ones (grenadiers a cheval), plus a twenty-fivepiece band drawn from the Paris Conservatory of Music. For his November 1799 coup d'etat, Napoleon used the Garde du Corps Legislatif to chase its former employers out of the windows. He then combined it with the equally cooperative Guard of the Directory into a Garde des Consuls and added the guides he had brought back from Egypt. Napoleon's guides were the Guard's other ancestor. They had been considerably strengthened for his Egyptian expedition (1798-99), becoming a small elite force of all arms; he had left some of them, particularly their infantry, in Egypt to strengthen Kleber's hand. It was a small Guard-some 2,089 soldiers in a company of light infantry, two battalions of grenadiers, a company of chasseurs a cheval (ex-guides), two squadrons of grenadiers a cheval, and a company of artillery, part foot, part mounted." Infantry and cavalry each had a twenty-five-piece band. This was the Guard that fought so well at Marengo, selling itself hard and high, buying bloody time for Desaix to arrive. It fought well, but it was far from solid, and its morale and loyalty were still uncertain things. There was much restlessness throughout the entire French Army, with envious generals muttering in corners and Bernadotte fiddling with mutiny. The soldiers of the Consular Guard felt loyalties to their former armies and former commanders; veterans of Napoleon's Army of Italy and Moreau's Army of the Rhine did not agree as to who had won the last war; Napoleon's former guides favored their new comrades with infinite condescension; and men from the Garde du Corps Legislatif included a number of uncombed Revolutionary zealots. There were brawls and duels among the guardsmen, and their conduct in public suggested that some of them considered Paris an occupied city. They were veterans, select marchers and killers who had made at least three campaigns; many had survived ten years of war. Their habits were the free and easy ways of old campaigners who had heard the owl and seen the elephant. Making them into a showy, iron-disciplined palace guard was going to take time. It was done. The chasseurs a cheval were chewed out for smoking while on escort duty, and the grenadiers a cheval for consorting in public with "women of the wicked life." All of them learned to salute all officers, Guard or line. They could not leave their barracks unless perfectly uniformed. "When we passed the barracks gate an orderly inspected us, and, if there were the least trace of dust on our shoes, or a particle of [hair] powder on our coat collar, we were turned back. We were magnificent, but abominably harassed."5 Lannes expressed the "greatest" unhappiness (which the Guard soon shared) over quarrels between the Guard and the 9th Legere, which-Napoleon having dubbed it "The Incomparable" in Italy-was not about to be impressed by any "Praetorians." (Mortier spoke to the 9th Legere about their sins.) Dueling was checked by a simple punishment: When Antoine Bargot, called Fleur-de-Rose, fought Pierre Vaslet, both were sent back to the line-a public disgrace, and a reduction in both pay and grade. When hot weather made the Seine too inviting, the Guard was reminded to respect Parisian sensibilities: "[M]any grenadiers and chasseurs have been bathing in public view in a manner most indecent, especially so in a soldier who should have decency out of respect for himself. It is ordered that all ... doing so will wear a shirt or drawers.s' The suicide of "the grenadier Gobain" for reasons of love (the second ascribed to that cause in one month) brought an order from Napoleon that a good soldier should be able to overcome the melancholy of his passions; to kill oneself was to abandon the field of battle without having been defeated. Later, when a Corporal Gourand wrote his colonel to make known his intention to commit suicide, Napoleon told Marie-Auguste Caffarelli, the Guard's adjutant general, to have a few words with him. Thoroughly aware of his Guard's inner turmoil, Napoleon made a surprise inspection one early morning, catching the grenadiers in bed. At least one of them was too long for his cot, so all the Guard got new ones, 7 feet long. He tasted their bread and announced that it wasn't the white bread he was paying for. Then he put them through a full-dress review, talked with every soldier who had a petition to make, and sent them back to their barracks to a special distribution of a liter of good wine apiece. His changes went deeper. The Guard's first commander, Lannes, had been too impulsive and too concerned with outward show. He badly overspent the Guard's uniform allowance but neglected the Guard's interior discipline. (Coignet remembered how they would turn out for morning roll call in their shoes, drawers, and smocks-and then scoot back to bed.) Bessieres took over the Guard and gave it a careful, efficient administration. The grenadiers got a handsome, perfectly groomed colonel named Dorsenne, a soldier of high valor and many wounds, fair, honest, and so hard that the toughest veterans jumped to please him. In a year's time he made them a model for the whole army. "He raised our waistcoats to see if our shorts were fresh; looked to see if our feet were clean, if our nails were trimmed, and even inspected our ears. He checked our foot lockers to make certain they didn't contain dirty linen; he looked under our mattresses."' If there were any dust in a squad room, its corporal got four days in the guardhouse. In 1804 the Guard of the Consuls became the Imperial Guard and took on the shape and character it would keep for the rest of its career. It was Napoleon's own idea and creation. He personally passed on every buck private accepted into its ranks and ruled on all assignments, promotions, and uniform designs. To be admitted to the Guard a soldier must have had ten years' service, made several campaigns, and maintained a clean record. If a colonel wanted to sample the Imperial wrath, all he need do was to send an unqualified soldier to the Guard as a replacement. The grenadiers and chasseurs A pied each formed a regiment (two battal ions of eight companies each). During 1806-8 and 1811-14, both grenadiers and chasseurs were expanded into two regiments, and men with only eight years' service were accepted for the second regiments! The grenadiers, nicknamed "Gaiter-straps" or "Grumblers," were the Guard's senior infantry regiment. They had to be at least five and a half (French) feet tall. (Coignet was a half-inch below that standard but, because he had won a "fusil of honor" for singlehandedly capturing an Austrian cannon, both Minister of War Berthier and Colonel-General of Grenadiers Davout accepted him. In fact, Davout told Coignet to slip some playing cards inside his stockings before he was measured. Coignet's new captain gave him the tallest man in the company, who stood 6 feet 4 inches, as his bedfellow.) A new grenadier's first purchase was his own soupipre (mess dish), since the grenadiers did not eat together out of a common gamelle while in barracks. His second was a pair of gold earrings. A comrade would pierce his ears and insert a loop of lead wire, to be replaced with gold as soon as possible. The chasseurs it pied also were known as "Grumblers." They included the guides a pied from the Army of Italy and the Army of Egypt, filled out with picked men from the line. Their uniforms were not quite as impressive, though showy enough; their required height was only 5 feet 3 inches. Observers thought them a somewhat livelier lot. The Guard cavalry, the regiments of grenadiers a cheval and chasseurs a cheval, showed the same characteristics. The first were big men-5 feet, 6 inches or taller-on big black horses, their natural height magnified by their high bearskin caps. Precise in their drill and maneuvers, they cultivated a silent, aloof attitude toward the rest of creation, which earned them the nickname "The Gods." Some soldiers, less impressed, called them "Big Heels" because of their tall boots. They kept their efficiency and their hauteur to the last. Friend and foe remembered them at Waterloo's ending, looming gigantic through the dusk and smoke, unshaken and unshakable, as they covered the retreat. The chasseurs a cheval were organized around Napoleon's original guides of Italy and Egypt-all dash, swagger, and reckless devotion. Their nicknames were "The Invincibles" and, from Napoleon's fondness for them, "The Pet Children" (probably at times used in the sense of "Spoiled Brats"). They were the epitome of the French light cavalry and Napoleon's customary escort. His favorite costume was their simple green undress uniform coat with scarlet cuffs, collar, and braiding. He was buried in it at St. Helena. The Guard's artillery and its train troops were of minor importance, there being only two companies of each in 1804. Only in 1806 did it become a regiment of horse artillery and a battalion of train troops, each of six companies. Many of its original officers had served with the artillery company of Napoleon's guides; the artillery uniform closely resembled that of the chasseurs A cheval, except that its basic color was blue instead of green. The Guard also had its own hospital at Gros-Caillou near Paris. It was a model institution, with Larrey as its chief surgeon and a staff that had been picked as carefully as the Guard's combat troops. Patients had white bread, fat chicken, fish, baked potatoes, and Burgundy and Malaga wines-but when they became convalescent they were hustled outside to take care of the hospital gardens. Eventually, as the Guard's strength increased, Gros-Caillou was outgrown and branch infirmaries and hospitals were required. They seem to have been better than average of their era, but not as comfortable as Gros-Caillou. During the same period the Guard's privileges and honors also took their established shape. These were extensive. Between campaigns its senior regiments were usually stationed in and around Paris, which no doubt made line regiments "on observation" along the Polish frontier or hiking the barren hills of Spain v