

CHAPTER XI The High Horsemen With all [Amiel'sJ faults, the Emperor appreciated in him one quality which he possessed in the highest degree; he was undoubtedly the best light cavalry officer in any European army. A finer instinct or equal judgment in exploring a country with a glance was never seen. Before riding through a district, he divined the obstacles which the maps did not show, foresaw the points where streams, roads, or the smallest paths must emerge, and could draw from the enemy's movements inferences which nearly always proved correct. Both in irregular warfare and in major operations he was a most remarkable officer. Marbot, Memoires' The French cavalry, on the whole, had been damnably misused through the Revolutionary Wars, parceled out by regiment and squadron through the infantry divisions, and there too often used up in galloping after generals as escorts and orderlies. Its best men and horses had been drawn off into the numerous units of guides.' New light cavalry units with amazing uniforms and astounding names-Hussars of Death, the Light Cuirassiers and Mounted Pikemen of the German Legion, American Hussars, Hussars of Liberty, Hussars of Equality and Fraternity, Revolutionary Chasseurs, and Eclaireurs de Fabrefond3-got most of the Volunteers. Unfortunately, few of those eager patriots, officers included, had even vague notions of equitation and hippology or had ever dreamed that being a dashing cavalryman should involve a lot of hard work with curry combs and stable brooms. (Their subsequent on-the-job education is beautifully summarized by three of JOB's little sketches.)' One sour-minded veteran noted that such greenhorn heroes might drop their sabers to hold onto their hats. The command of a mounted unit was far more complex and demanding than that of a comparable infantry outfit. Today the knowledge of those essential skills has largely vanished with the snows of older years, along with any real appreciation of how varied they had to be. The horse is a remarkable animal, capable of carrying heavy loads across vast distances at an average speed of 3-6 miles an hour. But one swallow of water too many when it has been worked hard-or sometimes one swal low too few-can put it on the sick list. Variations in food, weather, and water may affect it, sometimes seriously; like its master, it is subject to many peculiar ailments and unexpected epidemics. It cannot endure the hardships a man can and is slower to recover from exhaustion and starvation. In a mounted organization the veterinarian was as important as the surgeon, as were the farriers (blacksmiths). Care of horses' hoofs was especially important-cleaning, trimming, and correct shoeing. Though horses' hoofs vary greatly in size and shape, competent farriers could fit them all, adjusting the weight and shape of their shoes to correct a horse's gait ("rocker-toed" shoes made a stumbling horse pick up his forefeet smartly) or protect an injured hoof. Every trooper was supposed to have four properly fitted shoes and the necessary nails for them with him at all times for emergencies. Winter and ice-slicked roads required special "sharp-shoeing" with calkins, sometimes called frost nails. Saddles and harness had to be properly fitted, kept in good repair, and periodically adjusted as the animals lost weight during long campaigns. The proper adjustment of the saddle and saddlecloth and the proper balancing of the horse's load (rider and weapons included) prevented sore backs. Loads had to be kept to a minimum: The trick was to take the essentials and nothing else. That epitome of the practical cavalry officer Antoine de Brack-so young, timid, and elegant that his comrades called him "Mademoiselle"; so daring and capable that his Red Lancers followed him against any odds-defined these simply as the trooper, his weapons and ammunition, his cloak, whatever rations he had been issued, two spare shirts, a sewing kit, and an extra pair of boots. On the march men must be kept from slouching in the saddle. At each halt they must check their equipment and their horses' feet, clean out the animals' eyes and nostrils if the roads were dusty. Farriers and saddlers would make emergency repairs when time permitted. File-closers, the marechats des logis (sergeants) or brigadiers (corporals) who rode at the rear of each company, were required to collect any shoes its horses might throw during the march. Most veteran cavalrymen developed a sort of symbiotic relationship with their horses, exemplified by the story of Private Melet of the Dragoons of the Imperial Guard and his horse Cadet, who served together from 1806 to 1814: Prussia, Poland, Spain, Austria, Spain again, Russia, Saxony, and France-twelve great battles and thirty minor ones. During the 1812 retreat from Russia, he would ride into the Russian lines at night to capture forage for Cadet, always bringing back a Russian prisoner as a witness. Fittingly, the tale continues, the dragoon was wounded and Cadet killed at Waterloo. Humanity being what it is, however, there were always troopers who would neglect their mounts out of natural shiftlessness and cowards who would deliberately disable them so as to be sent to the rear. (A typical dodge was to slip small stones between the folds of the saddlecloth to gall the horse's back.) Officers had to be alert to all sorts of tricks, including the tendency of their men to slip away from their bivouacs at night and wear out their horses on private plundering expeditions. Particularly they had to guard against the soldier's universal tendency to overload their horses with all sorts of junk gathered up along the line of march. De Brack's little book pounds on that responsibility. Having read it, you need no imagination whatever to picture him melting down some yardbird who had picked up a pair of silver candlesticks! Marbot, at the Beresina River in 1812, told his 23d Regiment of Chasseurs iA Cheval, as it prepared to go through a captured Russian supply train (with many lavishly stocked officers' private wagons), that they were about to face a long retreat with no regular issue of food. "I advised them to give first priority to food, and added that they should also think of protecting themselves against the cold and not forget that overloaded horses would not last long . . . that I would stage a shakedown inspection and everything that was not food, footwear, or clothing would be ruthlessly thrown out."5 On being confirmed as First Consul, Napoleon Bonaparte inherited eighty-five cavalry regiments: twenty-five of chasseurs a cheval, thirteen of hussars, twenty of dragoons, two of carabiniers a cheval, and twenty-five of cavalerie de bataille. Of those, the light cavalry-the chasseurs and hussars-were in the best condition. As previously noted, they had attracted the pick of the recruits, and they could be mounted on the small, active horses bred in the Tarbes, Auvergne, and Ardennes areas of France. The cavalerie, originally big men on strong, big horses meant for massed charges, had dwindled into understrength collections of whatever men and mounts they could get, much battered by the ponderous Austrian cuirassiers. The carabiniers and the dragoons were in little better shape. De Brack would complain that Napoleon was no cavalryman, that he expected horses to carry excessive weights, live on short rations, and keep going without rest. But Napoleon did know how to organize and use cavalry effectively. Beginning in Italy in 1796 with his first independent command, he extricated his mounted units from his infantry divisions to concentrate them under his personal control. As First Consul and Emperor he did likewise with the whole French Army, accumulating the famous "Cavalry Reserve" that Murat would lead in glory. To restore the efficiency of his heavy cavalry, Napoleon abolished seven of the cavalerie regiments, putting their men and horses into the remaining eighteen to bring those up to strength. The first twelve got the biggest troopers and all the tall horses; the other six were converted to dragoon regiments, which, according to regulations, had smaller horses and lighter men than the cavalerie. At the same time Napoleon also made dragoons out of the three newest hussar regiments. Their officers were thoroughly unhappy: They had to provide themselves with bigger horses and replace their sabers with straight-bladed thrusting swords; moreover, dragoon uniforms not only were an unexpected expense but totally lacked the glamour of a hussar outfit! The cavalerie regiments promptly developed growing pains. Each of the original twenty-five had had its own customs and habitual way of doing things, evolved through decades of past service. Officers and men alike were reluctant to change; when transferred to another regiment, they tended to form resentful cliques, to the detriment of the service. Since the cavalerie regiments had to be capable of meeting the Austrian cuirassiers, it seemed logical to give them every possible advantage. Ney and Kellermann had been urging the adoption of steel helmets and epaulettes of chain mail, but Napoleon chose to armor them-not with just a breastplate, such as the Austrian heavy cavalry wore, but with the complete cuirass, breastplate and back plate together. To that he subsequently added a steel helmet with a brass crest, bearskin turban, and flowing horsetail plume in place of their heavy cocked hats. It was all quite a project. Pre-Revolutionary armor and armorers were unearthed, and there was much official correspondence-not a little of it caused by various colonels mounting up and galloping off in all directions when it came to necessary changes in uniforms and equipment. The extreme case was Col. Merlin of the 8th Cavalerie, formerly the Cuirassiers du Roi, which had retained its cuirasses since its activation in 1666.6 (It almost lost them in 1800 when some War Ministry bureaucrat unilaterally decided that they caused diseases of the chest.) Merlin put the 8th into helmets of his own design in 1801, then-declaring that his regiment obviously was senior to the newly cuirassed regiments-had its saddlecloths and portmanteaus marked with a "1." As for the existing 1st Regiment, Merlin denounced it as a "vile usurper." His claims, however, brought him nothing more than a rebuke, plus the expense of changing his "1's to "8"s. Fabrication of suitable armor took time. At first the breastplates were "proved" by three musket shots at thirty paces, but the number of rejects under that system brought howls of protest from the patriotic businessmen who were manufacturing them and from their friends in the War Ministry. Eventually one shot "at long range" was substituted. By late 1804 all twelve regiments were fully equipped, though there was still a shortage of suitable horses. The term "cavalerie" was dropped; they became "cuirassiers," classed as "elite" troops and so given all the usual indicators: scarlet plumes and epaulettes, flaming grenade insignia on their coattails and saddlecloths. They might wear mustaches from December to March (to be kept as uniform as possible, with a slight separation under the nose, and never so long as to reach the collar) and also short queues. They also received the "high pay" of elite troops, an extra five centimes a day commonly called the "sou of the grenade." Another cavalry innovation during the Consulate was the creation in 1801 of an elite company of picked men in every regiment of hussars, chasseurs, and dragoons, to be the equivalent of the infantry's grenadiers. Their NCOs and men got the "sou of the grenade," bearskin caps, and scarlet plumes and epaulettes.' The caps varied in style from regiment to regiment; in 1811, for economy's sake, they were ordered replaced by special shakos, but many regiments were slow to give them up. The 5th Dragoon Regiment scorned scarlet; its elite company flaunted white plumes and epaulettes, in continuation of ba