ttle honors it had won before the Revolution.' Some cuirassier colonels decided to form such companies too but were reminded that all cuirassiers were elite troops and that none should be honored above the others.' Elite companies were specially charged with guard of their regiment's eagle. On campaign they frequently were detached as escorts for corps commanders, much to their colonels' disgust. The standard cavalry regiment of the Consulate and early Empire had four squadrons, each of two companies, which in turn were subdivided into two platoons. The companies varied in strength according to their "arm"approximately three officers and eighty-six men in the cuirassiers and carabiniers, three officers and 116 men in the dragoons, four officers and 140 men for hussars and chasseurs. There was a small regimental headquarters with the usual administrative, medical, and service personnel.10 Most regiments added a small detachment-six to eight select men-trained and equipped as sapeurs. Like infantry sapeurs, they wore beards, bearskin caps, and heavy aprons; had elite status and pay; and carried pioneer tools. (In the 12th Chasseurs the four senior sapeurs had axes; the next two, shovels; the two youngest, pickaxes. Each carried a billhook in his right holster instead of a pistol.) In the field they opened roads, improved campsites, and demolished obstacles; otherwise they served as regimental headquarters guards and orderlies. Though usually needing additional cavalry, especially after his occupation of Spain in 1808, Napoleon considered it more practical and economical to increase the number of squadrons in his existing regiments rather than create new ones. In 1806 all regiments received a 5th Squadron, intended for service at the regimental depot, where it would train recruits and remounts and serve as replacement depot under the regiment's major but also would be available if needed. The cuirassiers and carabiniers soon lost their 5th squadrons, but some light cavalry regiments were gradually increased to six, seven, or even eight squadrons. The Ulm and Austerlitz campaigns of 1805 were the first test of the new Napoleonic cavalry system and the first of its triumphs. Except for the nec essary minimum of light cavalry assigned to each of the Grande Armee's six army corps, all mounted units were concentrated in the Cavalry Reserve, which included all the heavy cavalry and dragoons and the remaining light cavalry." The light cavalry formed a screen behind which the Grande Armee maneuvered, hunting down the enemy and driving in the enemy cavalry's scouts and patrols. Dragoon divisions might be employed to stiffen this screen (especially during pauses in the campaign) or to cover the army's flanks as it drove deeper into hostile territory. The heavy cavalry was held intact for the day of battle, then launched as massed projectiles to smash and shatter the enemy's line. It was a thoroughly flexible system: In 1806, during the opening advance northward through the mountainous Thuringian Forest, where masses of cavalry could be easily checked, the light cavalry of the leading corps alone formed the screen, sifting rapidly forward by every possible route, with detachments of light infantry in close support. Once the Grande Armee was out into open country, the Cavalry Reserve's light cavalry and dragoons moved to its front to thicken and expand the screen. Later that year and into 1807, dragoon divisions might be attached to the army corps during operations in the woods and marshes of East Prussia and Poland. In 1812, faced with the problem of controlling larger-than-ever masses of cavalry across Russia's vastness, Napoleon grouped his Cavalry Reserve into four cavalry corps, capable of considerable independent operation, as in Grouchy's remarkable 100-mile raid in July, seizing towns and supply depots and forcing a crossing of the Dnieper River while maintaining contact between Davout's and Eugene's columns." Though Napoleon's concept of cavalry organization and operations had proved itself by 1807, several weaknesses were apparent. The Emperor would labor to correct them for the rest of his reign. More light cavalry was necessary as Russia brought its endless swarms of mounted men into the wars, and especially more lancers. The cuirassiers gripped the European imagination. Any small party of French cavalry was likely to be reported as squadrons of those armored riders, much the same as some Americans in World War II would see "every gun an '88' and every tank a Tiger." In hard fact, a properly handled cuirassier onslaught was almost irresistible; their mere appearance in mass was a splendor and terror. (Both Napoleon and Berthier had showy helmets and cuirasses made for themselves, but there is no record that they ever wore them in public; probably one look in a mirror suggested that their special creations were too overpowering.) There was an imitative creation of cuirassier regiments all across Europe (though the British didn't get around to it until after Waterloo); in 1810 Napoleon was discouraging the raising of more armored regiments by his German allies; they were expensive to mount and maintain, and lancers would be more useful if the growing Russian pressure on Poland ended in war. Nevertheless, Westphalia and Saxony each mustered two regiments, and various guard units in the minor German states were put into cuirasses. Holland had two regiments, and the Duchy of Warsaw a bobtailed one, but of picked men and excellent horses. There is even an elusive report of one being formed in Naples. With such fame, the French cuirassiers waxed proud. One of their regiments developed a unique test for newly assigned officers. You were given three horses, three bottles of champagne, and three willing wenches-and three hours to kill the champagne, cover the girls, and ride a rough 20-mile course. (You could draw up your own schedule of events.) At the same time, the more competent cuirassier officers were grim about the need for better saddles to keep their heavy troopers from riding their horses sore-backed." They found fault with their over-heavy swords and their steel scabbards, which bent too easily and dulled the sword blades. Especially cursed was the low quality of the first model of helmet, which tended to split under a heavy blow. As for the enlisted men, they considered their queues less a distinction than a nuisance. By 1809, except for Nansouty's division, the cuirassiers had short hair, and Nansouty's were petitioning for permission to dock themselves. Nansouty, as became a preRevolutionary Mousquetaire Gris (Gray Musketeer), loved his Ancien Regime pigtail and wore it proudly. However, the petition was drawn up while he was on leave; his more modern-minded colonels consented, and great was Nansouty's wrath to return to a shorn division at the beginning of a campaign. He slapped the colonels under arrest, but that regrew no queues, then or later. Both cuirass and helmet were steadily improved up to the models of 1812. The "full" French cuirass proved its worth in 1809 against the Austrian half-shell, breastplate-only pattern when the heavy cavalry of both armies clashed outside Ratisbon. Thrusting at the Austrians' sides and backs, the French broke their desperate rearguard stand and then slaughtered them. as they fled.14 Marbot claimed that the proportion of Austrian killed and wounded amounted to eight and thirteen, respectively, for one Frenchman. At its best, however, the cuirass was not an effective defense against shortrange musket fire. It was better protection against pistol balls and secure against lance, saber, and bayonet, but it took a strong man to wear such armor and considerable experience to feel at home in it. Even in the great year of 1809 certain recruits, and even some officers, were caught discarding their cuirasses. That was seeking trouble and finding sorrow: Napoleon put the officers into enlisted men's cuirasses and made them pay for them. (Officers provided their own armor, of superior quality and finish.) Besides better armor, Napoleon supplemented the cuirassiers' original armamenta long, straight thrusting sword and two pistols-with a mousqueton so that they could deal with small bodies of enemy infantry in villages or defiles. The cuirassiers were not properly appreciative. Following 1809 there was a general letdown in the cuirassiers' efficiency as they settled into comfortable cantonments in the various allied German states. Many veterans were taken into the Guard or the Gendarmerie; others retired. The colonels relaxed and neglected their regiments' clothing and equipment. Napoleon did form two new regiments: the 13th, from provisional regiments in Spain during 18089, and the 14th from the Dutch 2d Cuirassier Regiment when Holland was annexed to France in 1810. Oddly, considering the cuirassiers' prestige, he never added a cuirassier regiment to the Imperial Guard (though one does appear in the books and memoirs of some imaginative Englishmen). According to one contemporary yarn, the Emperor did consider doing so and turned the job of designing its uniform over to the famous artist JacquesLouis David. Having duly pondered the matter, David paraded several grenadiers a cheval dressed in his new creation, which combined the worst aspects of the Middle Ages and ancient Greece and Rome. Even Murat was shocked, and the project was dropped. Although they were not armored until 1809-10, the carabiniers a cheval were always classed with the cuirassiers as "grosse" (heavy) cavalry. For something over a century they had been acknowledged a select and privileged force, ranking next to the cavalry of the King's household, always taking the post of honor on the right flank or at the head of the column when serving with other regular cavalry regiments. They were generally royal pets, permanently excused from guard duty and never subjected to any form of corporal punishment. They had begun in 1679 as two picked snipers in every company of cavalry; eleven years later, they were consolidated into one company, armed with rifled carbines, in each regiment for dismounted and outpost service. In 1693 Louis XIV grouped those companies into the "Royal Regiment of Carabiniers" and gave them their distinctive sunburst insignia. A second regiment was formed in 1788 and-despite the ferment of those last years before France exploded into Revolutionpromptly became a twin of the toplofty original. The two regiments were always brigaded together. During the Revolution they handed their carbines over to some infantry they met moving up without weapons, thereafter serving with only sword and pistol until they found some lend-lease English musketoons in a captured Austrian arsenal. Much to their disgust, in 1793 the Paris ideologues decided that "carabinier" smacked too much of royalty and incivisme. Accordingly, they were rebaptized "grenadiers a cheval" and had their familiar cocked hats replaced with towering grenadier-style bearskin caps. (Amid this spasm of patriotic zeal, somebody forgot to provide chin straps for the new headgear.) The new name soon vanished, but the bearskins remained. The Consulate reaffirmed the carabiniers' elite status, and they took a remarkably stiff attitude toward sharing it with all those Johnny-come-lately cuiras siers. The carabiniers grouped with cuirassiers in the provisional heavy cavalry regiments sent into Spain in 1808 considered their assignment almost an insult; they protested so fervently against incorporation into the 13th Cuirassiers that its colonel considered setting them apart in an elite company. Napoleon, however, decreed that they would be cuirassiers, like it or lump it. With their hauteur, however, went a hard-working efficiency. Carabiniers might regard the rest of the Grande Armee as something definitely honored by their presence, but they set an example of smart appearance, horsemanship, horse mastery, and coura