on stated that they formed a separate organization and would serve as definite units, but would have only a short existence. They were to be issued an extra shirt and pair of shoes, and be marched into Spain (being young soldiers) by easy stages. (Typically, Clarke confused these auxiliary battalions with regiments de marche and began filling them with men from depots of regiments that were serving in Spain. Typically, the Emperor caught him at it!) For a while these auxiliary battalions seem to have formed a division at Burgos, but in 1811 they were converted to the 34th Legere and the 130th Ligne. The shortest-lived of the various temporary organizations probably were the regiments d'hommes isoles, put together in 1812 from convalescent sick and wounded soldiers, lost stragglers, and strayed replacements at Konigs- berg, Vitebsk, and other advance bases behind the advancing Grande Armee. When Victor took over command of its rear area, Napoleon warned him not to risk employing such regiments as escorts for supply trains, although they could be used for garrisons. The Grenadiers d'Oudinot (also called "Grenadiers de la Reserve" and "Grenadiers Reunis"; in 1809 properly "Divisions Oudinot) was the most famous of the provisional organizations. Originally formed for the projected invasion of England, as a junior version of the Guard, it went through three transformations. During 1803-06 it was made up of the grenadier/carabineer and voltigeur companies of regiments that still were in the process of organizing and training or on garrison duty. It was at Austerlitz but saw little actual combat, and was thereafter disbanded. In November 1806 it was revived, its new composition being the elite companies of the 3d battalions of those regiments not taking part in the campaign in Poland and East Prussia. They were organized as five regiments, which were brought up to strength with conscripts and grouped into three brigades.23 Oudinot led it at Lefebvre's capture of Danzig, Savary's victory at Ostro- lenka, and Lanne's splendid advance guard fight at Friedland-led it with courage, spitting out a Russian bullet and the teeth it had knocked loose with the jest that Russian surgeons were rotten at extractions. With Napoleon's activation of the Young Guard, however, the Grande Armee no longer needed such an elite unit. Accordingly, in December 1808 the companies belonging to regiments assigned to Davout's new Army of the Rhine were returned to their parent units and used to cadre the 4th battalions that those units were forming. The remaining companies (which belonged to regiments serving in Spain or on garrison duty in France) also cadred their respective regiments' 4th battalions, but these were to be formed into a three-division provisional corps, which would retain the title of "Grenadiers Oudinot" as a matter of tradition." Personnel for their elite companies supposedly would be select conscripts trained in the Guard's depots; those for their fusilier/chasseur companies would come from their regimental depots. However, the Austrians struck sooner than expected, cutting the preparation short. Oudinot had to continue his organization on the run and never did get finished. To give him some veteran elements, Napoleon added the Tirailleurs Corses and the Tirailleurs du Po. This 1809 command was in no way an elite unit-a point overlooked by some fairly competent historians. It fought well enough at Wagram but was disbanded for good in 1810. Except for musicians and bandsmen, who were given distinctive outfits in 1809, the component companies of all three formations seem to have retained their original uniforms. They all did wear short haircuts, a la Titus. Probably the rear guard of the Revolution's abundance of oddly uniformed battalions with odder titles were three of light infantry raised in 1800 to attract young "elegants." (Faced with Austrian offensives in Italy and Germany, Napoleon was scraping splinters out of the bottom of his manpower barrel to rebuild the almost-used- up French Army.) One-the Volontaires Bonaparte a Pied-was part of the bright yellow and sky-blue Legion de la Reserve du Premier Consul." The other two, composed of young men who wanted to be cavalrymen but couldn't provide themselves with horses, were put into 9-company battalions of "hussards a pied" (foot hussars) with a sort of promise that they would be mounted as soon as the War Ministry could find the necessary mounts. For their morale's sake they were supplied with smart semi-hussar gray uniforms, the first battalion's trimmed with crimson, the second's with sky blue. Then they were dubbed the "Demi-Brigade of Dismounted Hussars" and sent to Macdonald's "Army of the Grisons" to wallow through the winter snows amid high peaks where even a mule would have troubles. All three battalions were broken up in early 1801, their men going into regular regiments. The Tirailleurs Corses were a grimmer lot, nurtured amid the cherished bloody-mindedness of Corsican mountain clan feuding, plus the occasional dessert-type joy of shooting the French version of a revenuer. General Joseph Morand, who commanded the French forces in Corsica from 1801 into 1811, found it a lively service and frequently expressed his hope that the Emperor would transfer him to an ordinary war somewhere. However, Corsicans had a certain military reputation; many Italian states had recruited them as mercenaries. To lure some of them into making their marksmanship useful in 1803, Napoleon ordered Berthier to form an all-Corsican light infantry battalion, promotion to be entirely within that unit so as to maintain its Corsican character.26 Its uniform was brown, faced originally with red, later with green; its leather equipment was usually buff-colored. It suffered at first from considerable desertion, its back-country boys hating to leave their familiar hills. (The "Free Company of Golo," one of two small Corsican units brought to France in 1804 to be embodied in the Tirailleurs, lost fifty out of the eighty-two men it started with. The other, the "Free Company of Liamone," was reported good and loyal, but mostly untrained and suffering badly from the itch.) Service with the Grande Armee, however, steadied them into an excellent outfit of skirmishers and sharpshooters. Normally teamed with the Tirailleurs du Po, it distinguished itself in Davout's defensive battling to hold the French right flank at Austerlitz and in many another fight. Soult got bearskin caps for their carabineer company in 1805. In 1811 it became, for reasons unclear, part of the reactivated 11th Legere. Back in Corsica, Morand had organized five more battalions, known variously as infanterie legere corse and chasseurs corses, during 1803.27 Assembled as the "Corsican Legion" those units were moved to Leghorn in 1804. They were to be uniformed in deep sky blue faced with yellow, like the preRevolutionary Regiment Royal Corse, but that was only partly accomplished when hostilities began in 1805. The legion was hastily put into whatever articles of uniform could be collected and was hustled off to reinforce Massena in northern Italy. In 1806 it was transferred to the Neapolitan Army to give that ornamental assemblage some combat capability. At first designated Real Corso (Royal Corsica), it became the 1st Light Infantry Regiment in 1813. When Murat turned against Napoleon the next year, most of the regiment mutinied and rejoined the French Army. To replace the legion, Morand formed three home-guard-type battalions (Bataillon du Liamone and 1st and 2d Bataillons du Golo) in 1805. Those were gradually disbanded in 1810 as the Regiment de la Mediterranee was activated on Corsica, some of their enlisted men being accepted into that regiment. A 4th Corsican Light Infantry Battalion was enlisted in 1809 from volunteers not subject to conscription, to be assigned to the garrison of Leghorn. It was raised rapidly but got along so badly with the Leghorn citizens that the Grand Duchess Elsa wanted it elsewhere. Napoleon accordingly sent it to Murat in Naples to be embodied in the Real Corso. (Murat had been blandly sending recruiting parties to Corsica, which earned him an Imperial chewing-out. Napoleon finally agreed to allow this, on condition that enlisted no one liable for conscription.) Shortly after taking power in 1814, Louis XVIII's government organized two battalions of chasseurs corses for internal security-possibly out of fear of pro-Napoleonic local sentiment. On his return from Elba the next year, Napoleon withdrew all French troops except for some artillerymen from Corsica to reinforce his field armies. In their place he organized two more chasseur battalions and entrusted the four of them with the defense of the island. To deal with Spanish irregulars, bandits, and gangs of deserters (often indistinguishable) along the Pyrenees frontier, a number of battalions made up of men from the National Guard of the border departments were put on active duty status in late 1808. Originally those battalions were known by the name of their home departments: Hautes Pyrenees, Haute-Garonne, Ariege, Basses-Pyrenees, and the like. In 1811 they were combined into three regular light infantry battalions of chasseurs des montagnes, uniformed in dark brown with sky blue facings. They earned a generally excellent reputation as guerrilla hunters and eradicators, specializing in swift cross-country movements. Oddly, many of their own replacements were apprehended refractaires from the Pyrenees departments, who returned to duty under the pledge that they would serve only on the Spanish frontier. In 1814, as Wellington drove into France, the three battalions were dissolved, and their men transferred to line and light infantry regiments. Napoleon ordered nine battalions formed during the Hundred Days, under the title chasseurs des pyrenees, as their replacement. Seven had been mustered in, and an eighth was forming at the time of his second abdication. Possibly his promise that they would have plunder rights stimulated recruiting. A more irregular force on the Pyrenees frontier was the miquelets franpais. ("Miquelet" was a Spanish word of many meanings, ranging from a soldier of a captain-general's bodyguard to "bandit." In fact those in the French service were sometimes known as "contra-miquelets.") It was an old French custom to recruit independent companies of Basques and smugglers-usually one and the same thing-for partisan mountain warfare. Such units were again formed during 1792-94 and 1808- 9. There is little information concerning them: One available old print shows a character in red cap, short blue vest, ample brown overcoat, espadrilles, and bare shins; he has a sash packed with pistols and snickersnees and a very long-barreled musket with a set-trigger. His features suggest either extreme ferocity or acute indigestion. It is worth noting that two of the starchiest of the marshals, Moncey and Perignon, commanded such units early in the Revolution. A more civilized-looking miquelet unit (a 4-company battalion of light infantry and a company of cavalry, all uniformed in very dark brown with red facings) was organized in the Pyrenees-Orientales Department in 1814. The infantry, however, retained the traditional red caps. A similar situation on a smaller scale existed in southeastern France during the Revolution. To deal with the Piedmontese Barbets, the French formed provisional units of former smugglers, poachers, gamekeepers, and ordinary mountaineers. In 1813, in preparation for an Austrian offensive there, a battalion (possibly a regiment) of chasseurs des alpes was activated. It was disbanded by the Bourbons in 1814; Napoleon ordered two battalions formed in 1815, but only one seems to have been fully organized. It reportedly took part in the successful defense of Briancon. Units of free blacks were formed in the French West Indies during the Revolution, and individual blacks were recr