" during campaigns. Maitre-Ourvrier Jean Kistmer left two proud self-portraits, now in the Strasbourg Museum. One shows him in rough campaign uniform, singlehandedly working a gun (with a tangle of terrified mules in the background) to rout attacking guerrillas; the other portrays him parading in full dress, displaying the cross of the Legion of Honor that feat had won him. There were fifteen ouvrier companies in 1801. By 1810 there were eighteen; in 1812 a 19th Company of volunteers from among the Spanish prisoners of war was activated. The armuriers d'artillerie repaired weapons, serving in the arsenals and with the artillery "parks." Beginning with one company in 1803, their number increased to six in 1813. The 5th Company, added in 1810, was Dutch. All of these branches wore the artillery's basic dark blue uniform with red trimming. As branch distinctions-unfortunately, not always honored-horse and foot artillery had red cuffs and red braiding on collars, shoulder straps, and lapels; pontonniers had the same, with the addition of red cuff flaps; ouvriers had red cuffs and red lapels; and armuriers red collars, cuffs, and cuff flaps. The cannoniers veterans were somber in dark blue, touched only by red braid on collar, lapels, and cuffs. One special type of artillery, mountain artillery, was improvised when required, no permanent units being organized. During the fighting in the Tyrol in 1809-10, General Broussier got excellent service from captured Austrian 12-pounder howitzers mounted on locally constructed "sled carriages," which could be pulled by three men anywhere a single infantryman could go. Their shells, looping high into the air, came down behind boulders and into ravines where the Tyrolese lay in ambush. In Spain, 3 - and 4pounder guns and 12-pounder howitzers were modified so that they could be disassembled into several mule loads, and then rapidly reassembled for firing. Other mules carried ammunition. Though the efficiency of these weapons was limited by a shortage of suitable mules and the difficulty of constructing gun carriages strong enough to stand the force of the gun's recoil, yet light enough to pack handily, they frequently proved effective, especially against guerrillas. One unusual feature of Napoleon's artillery was that the drivers and horses that moved it belonged to an entirely different organization, the train d'artillerie. (Even the train's uniforms, iron gray with dark blue facings, differed conspicuously.) However, the simple fact that they were soldiers was considered an amazing improvement. The Royal Army and the Revolutionary armies after it had employed civilian contract drivers, remarkable for their violent aversion to hard work and the possibility of a glorious death. "In combat one saw the horses and drivers advance with a discreet slowness."' In fact, at the first shot they frequently unlimbered and went elsewhere, leaving the cannoneers to haul the guns into position, and from position to position, with their drag ropes. In withdrawals such conduct could be disastrous, as at Novi in 1799, where panicked drivers abandoned a column of guns and caissons in a defile, blocking the French rear guard's escape. Moreover, the contractors too often pocketed their fees and then neglected their employees and animals, failing to feed, clothe, or pay the men and to keep the horses properly fed, shod, and harnessed. For such excellent reasons, another of Napoleon's first military reforms (in January 1800) was the creation of a military train d'artillerie.10 In its first formation each train battalion had five companies: One "elite" company, with the pick of the battalion's horses and men, assigned to the horse artillery; three for duty with foot artillery and "parks"; and one depot company for training recruits and remounts. Each company was commended by a sergeant-major. Experience during the 1800 campaigns caused a reorganization: eight battalions, each of six companies, were authorized; a battalion was commanded by a captain with a small staff, including an artiste vetgrinaire, a master saddler, and a master armorer; a company by a lieutenant assisted by a sous-lieutenant. All companies had two blacksmiths and two harness-makers. In time of war each battalion was to "double" itself by providing the cadre for another battalion." All of the artillery train battalions with an army were under the supervision of a general of brigade with the title "Inspector General of the Artillery Train." Napoleon estimated that the creation of the train d'artillerie saved him 2 million francs a year. There can be no doubt that it was a highly efficient organization. Men and horses were picked and trained with care; the Grande Armee might go hungry, but it never quite ran out of ammunition, even in the depths of Russia. As Napoleon built up his artillery, he added additional train battalions. In 1808 he had thirteen of them, and a fourteenth was added in 1810. The first thirteen battalions were "doubled" in 1809, 1812, and 1813. After 1809 some battalions formed extra companies to handle the infantry regimental cannon companies; their commanders accordingly were promoted to chef d'escadron. In spite of the increased efficiency these soldier-drivers gave the artillery, St. Cyr disapproved of the train d'artillerie and wanted to go back to civil ian help, making the jolting claims that civilians took better care of their animals, were more obedient, and weren't loaded down with useless weapons. (Train troops had a briquet, a carbine and a pistol.) In fact, St. Cyr concluded, the only virtue of soldier-drivers was that they looked nicer on parade! But nobody agreed with St. Cyr. Not all the train's personnel were French. In 1807 Junot wrote Napoleon that some artillery train troops he had inspected were Prussian prisoners of war-fine-looking, strong, healthy men who loved their horses but were unhappy that they might have to serve against their countrymen. The 14th Battalion was from the former Dutch Army. In June 1813 heavy casualties and few replacements caused an order that all men wounded in the hand and adjudged incapable of further service with the cavalry or infantry were to be transferred to train duty-threefourths to the train d'artillerie, the rest to the equipages militaires (supply trains). Depots for their processing were established in Dresden and Magdeburg, but those maimed hands must have found the heavy harness a grim toil in frost or rain. The train d'artillerie had all the cavalry's problems with horses, and then some. Draft horses had to be carefully matched in teams, gradually toughened, and trained to heavy hauling. Harness had to be exactly fitted and maintained to avoid chafing and sore shoulders, and readjusted as the campaign went on and the horses grew gaunt. It was no job for lightweights; runaway gun horses-"the crazy team not God nor man can `olds12-were a fearsome thing. And drivers, waiting under fire with their horses, needed a stoic bravery, frequently taking the same risks as the cannoneers without the stimulation of fighting back. Behind the combat troops the train d'artillerie also hauled the conglomeration of materiel that made up the artillery "parks." A corps park would have its artillery's spare caissons, field forges, and supply wagons, and spare cannon to replace those destroyed or disabled in action. (One ratio mentioned was one spare to every ten guns in the companies.) An artillery officer with a small staff directed the park. Security was furnished by a squad of cannoneers detailed from each company. The army artillery park (Grand Parc) was normally divided into two parts: a "mobile park," which kept just at the rear of the army with a resupply of ammunition and spare parts in wagons, and, farther to the rear, the "fixed park," which set up temporary arsenals and maintenance shops in one or more fortified depots along the army's line of communications. Ammunition was shuttled forward through this system, with the object of keeping the artillery's caissons and the infantrymen's cartridge boxes continuously filled and refilled. If the campaign was likely to involve sieges of enemy fortresses, a "siege train" of heavy guns and mortars with all the special devices-sling carts, gyns, and "devil carriages"-for moving and emplacing them, and supplies of their special ammunition, would also follow the army. These were slowmoving, awkward organizations; whenever possible, water transportation would be used. The cannoniers garde-cotes of the Royal Army had been little more than a special species of local militia, with a sprinkling of old naval master gunners. In the Revolution's topsy-turvydom, they were abolished in 1792 and reactivated in 1795 as Volunteer artillery companies in important seacoast localities. All were disbanded with the peace of 1802, but they reappeared with the resumption of hostilities with England. Napoleon put one hundred companies under the direction of the artillery; twenty-eight other companies were established as "sedentary coast guards" (apparently a part-time National Guard service), mostly on minor offshore islands. The system was extended as France annexed Holland and portions of northern Italy; the total of Regular companies was variously set at 145 or 147 (plus thirty-three sedentary companies) at its top strength." Communities furnishing the sedentary coast guard companies enjoyed a degree of relief from the conscription. The Emperor was a mighty builder of coastal defenses; his official correspondence is full of orders for the construction of new fortifications and the improvement of old ones. The major ports, held by regular garrisons of all arms, were well maintained but the cannoniers garde-cotes, stationed at minor seacoast towns and forts, tended to become homesteaders. Inspection after inspection showed them careless and slipshod. They neither took proper care of their guns and munitions nor shot straight when British raiding parties did appear. Napoleon blamed that on the fact that during the Revolution the coast defenses had been a dumping ground for incompetent infantry officers. Moreover, those companies had become entangled in local interests; they were sometimes hand in glove with smuggling rings and quite incurious when their illegal friends brought odd strangers ashore. In 1811 he planned a complete reorganization of the system, but Russia was monopolizing most of his attention. Coast artillery officers did get sent to school to learn how to handle mortars and hot shot and store ammunition, and surprise inspections woke up the enlisted men. During 1814 some companies were summoned to join the field army. Cannoniers veterans were used as fortress artillery. Usually crabby and difficult, they still could furnish a hard core for shaky garrisons of national guardsmen and raw troops. By 1814 there were nineteen companies of them. The Bourbons retained thirteen and-to the confusion of historyretitled them "Cannoniers sedentaires." The actual cannoniers sddentaires of the first Empire were an ill-recorded organization. A "sedentary" unit being a fixed one, formed for local service only, they undoubtedly were home-guard, part-time soldiers. A decree of 1813 ordered such companies established in fifteen cities in northeastern France, but some certainly had been in existence before that year. For example, Lille had had such a unit since 1483. Originally a religious brotherhood, it had passed through various reorganizations before becoming the officially recognized, 2-company "Cannoniers Sedentaires de Lille" in 1803. Possibly some of the companies in other towns had similar lineages. They manned their towns' defenses in 1814 but saw little action. French artillery materiel-its guns, vehicles, and equipment-was another product of the change in French military theory that followed Rossbach and other humiliations of the Seven Years' War. During 1732-65 (and 1772-74) French cannon had be