ts too wet for firing. Even in such a fix, determined infantry in squares might keep other cavalry off with their bayonets but were helpless against lancers. In 1813, early in the battle of the Katzbach, Marbot's 23d Chasseurs came up against a brigade of Prussian infantry. The ground was too boggy for the French to work up a charge so that "Our situation and that of the enemy infantry before us was truly ridiculous, for we were eyeball to eyeball without being able to do each other the least harm, our sabers being too short to reach [the Prussians] whose muskets would not go off." This stalemate was broken by the appearance of Colonel Perquit and his 6th Lancers, "whose long weapons, outreaching the enemy's bayonets, at once killed many Prussians" and breached the square for the chasseurs. "During that terrible combat you could hear the ringing voice of the brave Colonel Perquit, crying with a strong Alsatian accent: `Thrust, lancers! Thrust""' While lancers were not made for dismounted work-there was always the problem of what to do with their long weapons-there were several cases of it in Spain. In 1808, fed up with Spanish sniping, the Lancers of the Vistula climbed down from their saddles and stormed an entrenched Spanish camp near Saragossa. Napoleon's occupation of Spain probably put a greater strain on his cavalry than on the French Army as a whole. Spain furnished few good horses to replace casualties; forage was frequently in short supply; but the main problem was simply that operations there required more cavalry than he had available. At first he attempted to meet the problem by detaching squadrons from regiments stationed in France, Germany, and Italy for temporary duty in Spain. Those, however, proved too weak for sustained operations. Napoleon therefore grouped squadrons detached from different regiments into "provisional regiments"-for example, in 1810 the 4th squadrons of the 5th Hussars and 11th, 12th, 13th, and 24th chasseurs h cheval were ordered brought up to their full strength and reorganized as two "provisional regiments of light cavalry." The "parent" regiments would then customarily form new squadrons to replace those taken for the provisional regiments. Some of the provisional regiments had a fairly long existence, but they usually lacked the morale and solidarity of regular regiments. They began as collections of strangers, their men unhappy over their transfer from an established unit, their regimental staffs improvised from whatever officers might be available. Their administrative and logistical support was weak. Eventually, most of them were converted into regular units or dissolved and their men either sent back to their original units or used locally as replacements. Their history is a confused affair; even the number of provisional cavalry regiments formed from 1800 through 1815 is obscure. Among them were the three "Provisional Regiments of Heavy Cavalry" activated in 1807-8 from the 5th squadrons of the cuirassiers and carabiniers. The 1st Regiment, and apparently such of the 2d as escaped Dupont's capitulation at Baylen in 1808, became the famous 13th Cuirassier Regiment, named "The Intrepid," the only cuirassier regiment to retain the fivesquadron organization, and the steel spearhead of Suchet's victorious campaigns in eastern Spain. Napoleon ordered the 3d Regiment disbanded in 1809-10, but Clarke's chairbound War Ministry bureaucrats seldom hurried. In early 1811 Napoleon found it still around-nine hundred men and three hundred horses peacefully vegetating at Toulouse and Avignon-and made his Imperial displeasure evident. While most provisional regiments went into Spain, Napoleon increasingly found himself compelled to rob Peter to pay Paul. In 1809, confronted by both an imminent, long-prepared Austrian offensive and a shortage of dragoons and light cavalry in France and Germany, he ordered the twentyfour dragoon regiments in Spain to send back the cadres of their 3d and 4th squadrons.30 Those were hurriedly fleshed out with the men and horses available in their regimental depots, organized into twelve provisional dragoon regiments, and ordered into Germany. Though too raw for immediate combat, they sufficed for rear-area security duties and concurrently completed their organization and training. At the same time, Napoleon formed a provisional regiment of chasseurs a cheval for service with his army headquarters. The Russian campaign of 1812 seriously wounded the French cavalry, especially its heavy regiments, whose big horses were much more vulnerable to hunger and bad weather than the smaller animals of the light cavalry. Murat somehow ran wild, failing to care for horses and men, wearing them out by stupidly conducted marches, wasting them in excited, impulsive attacks. The 6th Cuirassiers rode into Russia nine hundred strong; something less than two hundred men came back, most of them walking or astride Russian ponies, incredibly tough but slow and so small that their riders' feet could touch the ground. Some dismounted cuirassiers picked up discarded lances, using them as pikes to keep off attacking cossacks and irregulars. The 23d and 24th chasseurs harnessed their remaining horses to commandeered sleighs and moved like the wagon trains of the American Far West, forming defensive laagers at night. Marbot would boast that he brought back 693 out of 1,048 men. If true, it was an unusual feat. The 11th Hus sars, for example, reported only ten officers and seventy-nine enlisted men surviving out of its original 1,133 effectives. Before leaving Moscow Napoleon organized those cavalrymen who had lost their horses into battalions and ordered officers and NCOs of the Young Guard to give them basic infantry drill. More were gathered up during the retreat from "little depots," where they were awaiting remounts, but they were proved undisciplined and general nuisances. The French cavalry entered the campaign of 1813 badly short-handed and full of greenhorn officers and men. Their German allies were becoming increasingly unreliable; Dutchmen of the 11th Hussars repeatedly balked when ordered to charge. The heavy cavalry had required almost complete rebuilding and did not become effective until late in the year. Some of the conscripts funneled into it proved too immature and slight to carry their armor. Cuirasses, helmets, and weapons in general were in short supply. The remounts, most of them heavy-boned Norman horses only somewhat broken to riding, were too often hard to manage. Squadron and regimental drills might explode into mass runaways (God help anything caught in front of them) that could do life, limb, and morale as much harm as an unsuccessful engagement. There were never enough light horsemen for reconnaissance, let alone to keep the army's rear purged of the roving bands of Russian and Prussian irregulars. There were still high deeds, such as the carabiniers' and cuirassiers' rescue of blundering Macdonald's beaten army after the Katzbach battle, but the odds were too long and Murat's handling of the Cavalry Reserve was even more harebrained and irresponsible than it had been in Russia. Before the year was out he would ride home to his Kingdom of Naples and turn traitor. The year 1814 was a time of desperate expedients that never quite succeeded. There were still tough cavalrymen to meet the Allied invasion of France-the dragoons from Spain and the now-veteran survivors of the 1813 campaign-but there were also raw boys, mounted on whatever horses could be found for them and gathered up into provisional regiments and brigades as their depots got them more or less uniformed and equipped. Among the troopers who rode with Pajol in his howling chevauchee at Montereau-downslope, across the Seine bridge, through Montereau, and over the Yonne River bridge beyond-"many men and horses had not been with the army more than fifteen days. Not only were the riders incapable of handling their horses and weapons properly, but even of holding the reins in one hand and their saber in the other; some even needed both hands to turn their horses right or left.s31 Pajol himself charged with one arm in a sling, so racked by earlier wounds that he could barely keep his saddle. Yet this onslaught swept away a Wurttemberg/Austrian army corps that was attempting to hold Montereau long enough to destroy those vital bridges-at the cost of two men killed and a few wounded. (Pajol's aide de-camp thought the excited young troopers, trying to stay on top of their horses, had instinctively gripped them as tightly as possible with their legswhich brought their spurs against the horses' bellies, causing a general stampede forward. Wryly, he decided that veteran cavalrymen on well-trained horses could never had done so well.) Other officers noted that their recruits, clumsy horsemen though most were, had the knack for swordplay and could hold their own in a hand-to-hand hack-cut-and-thrust against seasoned opponents. French cavalrymen had dozens of bitter little triumphs before the end came at Fontainebleau. In northern Italy the redoubtable 1st Hussars, now also mostly green conscripts on untrained horses, had only bitterness. In February, at the Minco River, Austrian horsemen finally rode them down. It was little consolation that the Italian Dragoni Regina (Queen's Dragoon Regiment) rescued them. Meanwhile, eastward beyond the Rhine, bypassed French garrisons had clung to key fortresses and communications centers. Most had at least a handful of cavalrymen-stragglers, depot troops of Polish or Lithuanian regiments, men awaiting remounts, or small detachments on escort or security missions that had taken refuge there-usually a thorough assortment of the different arms. Commanders would organize these troopers into provisional units, which could be useful on foraging expeditions into the surrounding countryside. In Hamburg the "Iron Marshal," Davout, even built up a 15th Cuirassier Regiment around a cadre of officers and men from the 1st Regiment of that arm. Most of the men were new to the service, the horses generally good but still unbroken, the officers newly promoted out of the gendarmerie or raw shavetails. All three regarded each other with considerable trepidation, but Davout nevertheless ordered that a squadron would move out for duty on a certain not-too-distant morning. One did not argue with Davout. Move out on time the squadron did, the officers and NCOs having spent most of the preceding night getting the horses saddled and bridled and their men accoutered and mounted. As it clattered through the city gate, the main guard there turned out and saluted with a blare of trumpets, a crash of drums. Restive horses and innocent riders went instantly in all directions. However, one did not argue with Davout. When the French evacuated Hamburg after having held it until informed of Napoleon's abdication, the 15th Cuirassiers were a first-class, combat-tested regiment. In summation, the Napoleonic cavalry undoubtedly was at its best during 1805-7. Most of its personnel then was French; the cavalry of the Imperial Guard were few in number but highly select. Practically every corps had a good division of light cavalry, and the Cavalry Reserve comprised more than 10 percent of the total strength of the Grande Armee. The division of that army between Spain and the Empire's eastern fron tier after 1808 hobbled the cavalry; the bulk of its dragoons and too many of its light horsemen would be tied up in the Iberian Peninsula from then on. The lack of sufficient light cavalry during the 1809 campaign was serious, though Wurttemberg, Saxon, and Bavarian cavalry partially filled the gap. By 1812 the Guard cavalry was considerably stronger, but the need to assign sufficient cavalry to the increased number of corps left the Cavalry Reserve proportionally weaker and required a heavier reliance on allied horsemen, including Poles, Lithuanians, Prussians, and Austrians. A