as the 29th Regiment; the next year the Hamburg Dragoons, part of the cavalry of the Legion Hannovrienne, and odds and ends were combined into a 30th Regiment, which was armed with the lance from its beginnings and soon reconverted into the 9th Chevau-legers Lanciers. The 31st Regiment also was formed in 1811, from two provisional regiments of light cavalry in Spain; since part if not all of its men were armed with the lance, it sometimes was termed the "31st Chasseurs-Lanciers." Light cavalry's weapons were a heavy, decidedly curved saber, carbine, and pistols. However, as late as 1809 the 2d Chasseurs A Cheval still carried the long, straight, slender swords, which produced "murderous wounds," their regiment had picked up during the "ancient wars in Italy." Also, during the last years of the Empire some chasseur regiments, especially the 31st, made increasing use of lances. Although light cavalry normally engaged mounted with their sabers, they frequently used their carbines mounted, especially when acting as skirmishers, and were capable of dismounted action in emergencies. In 1813, confronted by Austrian cavalry and light infantry holding a vital bottleneck around the walled hill town of Gelnhausen, Sebastiani cleared the pass by dismounting Marbot's 23d Chasseurs and some unidentified heavy cavalrymen and sending them up and across the vineyards in skirmish formation to pinch out the position.,' Possibly the chasseurs' most unusual dismounted action was in 1796. Coming up to the Po River, a Captain Quittet of their 10th Regiment saw six large riverboats floating past, loaded with 550 Austrian infantry and hospital equipment. Locating a few skiffs, he and his fifty chasseurs rowed out and carried them by boarding. Their hard-worked regiments (often brigaded with hussars) furnished most of the corps cavalry and the light cavalry element of the Cavalry Reserve. During the Consulate and Empire, their average strength increased from three to five or more squadrons. Some had more: The 13th Chasseurs were increased from five to eight squadrons in 1811, and a 9th Squadron was authorized in 1813 but not activated for lack of competent noncommissioned officers to cadre it. That year the 13th's first two squadrons were in Spain; the 3d and 4th at the regimental depot in Compiegne awaiting remounts; and the rest in Germany, where the 7th and 8th were marooned at Frankfort for lack of horses. The 7th finally got them, but the 8th had to hike back to Compiegne. The 4th Squadron rejoined in early 1814, but only it and the 6th (thirteen officers, ninety-eight men) were with Napoleon's main army at the time of his first abdication (April 11). The first three squadrons (twenty officers, 197 men) were on the Spanish frontier. Normal regimental strength would have been close to 1,500 officers and men. Hussars differed from chasseurs A cheval in little except their dress and hairdos. Amazing elaborations of the original Hungarian fighting rig, their swinging pelisse, tight dolman and breeches, plumed shako or busby, light boots, dangling sabretache, and jingling spurs-all braid, bright buttons, fur trimmings, and lace-could make the most downy-lipped hobbledehoy into the likeness of a hero and a confirmed breaker of female hearts.20 (Consequently, the style was much favored by young aides-de-camp.) With that uniform came an advanced state of elegant masculine hairiness: long mustaches, queues, and braided love locks (called cadenettes) worn dangling in front of each ear and weighted at their ends with bits of lead to make them hang straight. (Veterans might substitute gold coins as a ready savings account against days of need.) Young recruits, Marbot recalled, were fitted with false pigtails and cadenettes of horsehair and mustaches made by liberally applied boot polish until they could raise their own. (Some, probably most, hussar regiments would abandon queues and cadenettes during the latter half of the Empire's existence, but the mustaches flourished.) Each regiment had its especially showy elite company, and hussar trumpeters, musicians, and sappers were a glory seen afar, even on cloudy days. At their beginnings, hussars had been an irregular sort of Hungarian light horse, specializing in "small war" operations rather than pitched battles. The first French hussars, authorized by Louis XIV in 1692, were refugees from an unsuccessful Hungarian revolt against Austrian rule. By the beginning of the French Revolution in 1789, the six existing hussar regiments were strongly Germanic in character, made up of "Germans" from Alsace, Lorraine, and the Rhineland. (In 1788, one Michel Ney was such a recruit.) In the 1st Regiment (ex-Hussards de Bercheny) the "word of command" (orders) was in German until 1793, and in frequently fractured French thereafter. Replacements, however, were increasingly French. Between 1792 and 1801 the 1st Hussars claimed a record of thirty-seven battles, 168 lesser engagements; and 1,040 skirmishes, with 26,300 enemy soldiers, forty flags, and 303 cannon captured. In that same period, the regiment had been used up and rebuilt some five times, absorbing men from assorted Volunteer units." In 1796 Napoleon's chief of cavalry, the somewhat dubious Irishman General Charles Edward Kilmaine, wrote the worse-than-dubious Colonel Jean Landrieux of the 13th Hussars that the 1st Regiment was part German and part French, and was carrying on a private civil war between battles. When Marbot joined as a volunteer in 1799, practically all the sergeants and corporals were still "Alsatians" who spoke a jargon of their own and could not read French. Some of those tough old sweats, including the "bad" Sergeant Pertelay, Marbot's mentor when he joined the regiment, were still following the wars into Prussia, Poland, and Spain nine years later. Troopers of the two oldest regiments, which continued to draw their recruits from France's eastern frontier, still called them by their former Royal Army titles, "Bercheny" and "Chamborant," rather than by their numbers. In 1810 Napoleon acquired an 11th Regiment with the absorption of the Dutch Army into the French service. The next year he put together several detached hussar squadrons in Spain to form a 9th (bis) Regiment, redesignated the 12th Hussars in 1813. Also in 1813 he raised a 13th and a 14th regiment in northern Italy; those, however, were soon destroyed or captured in Germany. To replace them, he lumped their recruits, cadres, and escapees into a new 14th Hussars in 1814 and took back into French service as the 13th Regiment the "French Hussars of Jerome Bonaparte,"" who had been briefly part of that feckless play-King's guard. Though hussars formed a comparatively minor part of the French cavalry, they were constantly in the public eye. Something of the old irregulars' swagger and dash went with them, "in every land, dearly beloved by the wife, hated by the husband!"" Most of them lived up to the reputation of their arm-or literally died trying. "Noblesse oblige, Chamborant autant," the 2d Hussars ancient motto proclaimed. One compliment among many came from the able British soldier-historian William Napier, who wrote of the silver-gray uniformed 3d Hussars he faced in Spain: "Colonel Ferriere never failed to break in upon our skirmishers in the most critical moments ... and was continually proving how much may be done, even in the most rugged mountains, by a small body of good cavalry."" Lancers (properly "Chevau-legers Lanciers") had figured only briefly in eighteenth-century French armies, the best-known unit being the uhlans of the famous Marshal Saxe, who were Polish volunteers and adventurers of all races and colors. Poles were acknowledged to be the finest lancers in Europe; Russia, Prussia, and Austria recruited their lancer regiments from among the Polish subjects their partitionings of that unhappy kingdom had given them. When Revolutionary France marched against all Europe, Polish volunteers swarmed into its ranks. From those eventually evolved that famous regiment best known as the "Lancers of the Vistula," which, after many wanderings, was definitely embodied in the French service in 1808. The next year Napoleon rearmed the Polish chevau-legers of his Guard and the "Regiment of Chasseurs a Cheval of the Grand Duchy of Berg" as lancers, as he did the next year with the Dutch Garde a Cheval, which became the famous "Red Lancers" of the Imperial Guard. And in 1811, as Russian forces massed on the Polish frontier, he drastically strengthened his line regiments of lancers. Six regiments of dragoons-the 1st, 3d, 8th, 9th, 10th, and 29th- were converted into the 1st through the 6th Chevauldgers Lanciers. The Vistula Regiment-retitled the 7th Regiment, which didn't help its morale-and the Polish Lancers of the Guard furnished the cadre for an 8th Regiment, which was filled up with Polish volunteers and drafts from the Duchy of Warsaw's cavalry regiments-"fine men, good characters ... having more than one year's service ... and true Poles."" Finally, the newly formed 30th Chasseurs A Cheval became the 9th Lancer Regiment. The first six regiments (called "the French lancers") had brass helmets and green uniforms, faced according to their regiment with scarlet, golden orange, rose, crimson, sky blue, or garnet; the other three (termed "Polish lancers," though the 9th was full of Germans and men of all nations) wore blue and the traditional square-topped Polish schapska. Their elite companies had white epaulettes instead of the scarlet of the French. Organization of the French lancers went slowly. To begin with, five of the six dragoon regiments to be converted were in Spain. Instead of recalling the entire regiments, Napoleon took only the regimental headquarters and the cadres (officers, NCOs, trumpeters, and ten picked men per company) of two squadrons per regiment, the rest of their men and horses being distributed among the dragoon units remaining in Spain. Those partial skeletons were then filled up with recruits and new officers. As usual, there was difficulty in obtaining horses, and the War Ministry was still dithering about their uniforms and equipment in January 1812. Moreover, the lance was an unfamiliar weapon to Frenchmen, requiring careful training. The French lancers were only partially organized when the invasion of Russia began, but they seem to have served efficiently. The Emperor did give them a tough lot of officers, such as Perquit of the 6th Lancers, who didn't "recognize any danger," and Sourd of the 1st, who had an arm amputated after a clash with English cavalry at Genappe in 1815 and was back in his saddle an hour later, refusing promotion to general in order to stay with his regiment. Originally, these regiments were to be armed with lances," light cavalry sabers, and pistols. Sergeants and ten men per company were issued carbines instead of lances; corporals were to carry a hatchet in their right holster instead of a pistol. Napoleon, however, saw fit to give all enlisted men both lance and carbine, adding a bayonet as the final straw. The weight of that arsenal and the ammunition for carbine and pistols overloaded the horses, producing sore backs and wrung withers. De Brack saw how his lancers, "weary of marching almost all the time on foot to spare their horses, gave in all the more readily to their own good sense ... and got rid of half of that [load]. The officers closed their eyes, endeavoring to keep as many lances as possible."" Eventually most if not all regiments went back to the traditional Polish system, the front rank armed with lances, the second with carbines.28 Against other cavalry, lancers were highly effective so long as they could keep closed up so that swordsmen could not break into their formationthe lance, unless handled by an expert, was an awkward weapon in a handto-hand melee. Against infantry, their long weapons gave them an advantage, especially when bad weather made muske