uited into the understrength French regiments there. Another all-black formation was the Chasseurs de la Reunion, organized as part of the garrison of the Isle de France (Mauritius). Unlike the West Indian blacks, however, they proved worthless as combat troops. One very little-known infantry unit was the force of native cipayes (sepoys) maintained by the French in their minor holdings in India. (They first appear in the colonial budgets in 1823, but they actually had been in an offand-on existence for almost a century previously.) These small colonies, however, were lost to the English in 1803. "Free companies" still appeared in the French service as late as 1814. The term, however, now had even more possible meanings. It might indicate a separate company, enlisted for local defense and police purposes, like those of Golo and Liamone in Corsica during c. 1798-1804, or an old-style collection of odds-and-sods formed for irregular operations. The latter were increasingly rare, but Steininger mentions several operating in the Stettin- Colberg area in 1807. (He was not clear as to their mission but was emphatic that they were composed of deserters and rascals-an opinion based, it must be granted, on much personal experience.) One of them deserted, casually murdered a French colonel he met on the road in order to rob his body, was caught with the unlucky officer's epaulettes in his possession, and was therefore shot-along with three French artillerymen from Steininger's regiment who had raped a girl and then murdered her. Another type of free company was a sort of commando or ranger unit, formed by drawing select volunteers from regular regiments for special missions. One famous unit was the "Infernal Company" of a Captain de Chambure, organized during the 1813 siege of Danzig. Armed with dragoon muskets, briquets, and a pair of pistols, they made night raids out of the besieged city, spiking Allied batteries, scattering working parties, and even turning up in the rear of the Allied forces to raid their convoys and destroy their ammunition dumps. Other free companies and free corps, both infantry and cavalry, and sometimes legionary formations containing both, were formed in eastern France during 1814 and 1815 for irregular operations in the enemy's rear area. Those of 1814 were hastily conceived and somewhat slow to form until the exactions and accompanying atrocities of the Allied armies touched off popular resistance. Thereafter it flared, especially in the eastern provinces, and was just beginning to hurt when Ney, Marmont, Macdonald, and other marshals went on strike. A real history of the operations of those irregular units-some of them highly impromptu-is still to be written. A few names have survived: The 1st Corps Franc de la Seine, Volontaires de la Meurthe, and Volontaires Partisans. Hoping to improve on the 1814 performance, early in the Hundred Days Napoleon ordered free corps-units of 1,000 infantry or 300 cavalry-organized in all frontier departments. They were to arm and equip themselves at their own expense but could draw rations while on active service. They were to operate as irregulars and could keep all the booty they captured. The French government would pay them threefourths of the value of all captured weapons and special bounties for captured staff officers and couriers. The Hundred Days campaign was so short that only a few of these groups got into action. In sum, the French infantry was at its height during 1805-6, while most of its officers and men were products of the Revolutionary Wars and/or of the long, severe training at the Camp of Boulogne. Its quality remained very high through 1807 and, in most veteran regiments, even through 1812, the replacements it received being well-trained and toughened. In 1808 came the unnecessary flood of "anticipated" conscripts, called up too early and too often poorly officered. Spain was a canker that steadily ate away the veterans; age was probably a greater one, as the years and hard service took the older company officers and NCOs from the ranks. The steady drain of select veterans into the Old Guard was not too harmful until 1813, when large numbers of them were needed to replace its losses in Russia, but the creation and expansion of the Young Guard from 1809 on hurt the line infantry by drawing off the pick of the conscripts each year, men who would have been its NCO and even officer material. The infantry of 1813 was too overwhelmingly new conscripts for even excellent cadres to whip into shape, and many cadres were far from excellent. Yet the material remained good and willing; had the French supply system been more efficient, and had more generals and marshals kept their courage about them, it probably would have sufficed. The oddest unit of French infantry came before the Grande Armee. In Egypt, between 1798 and 1801 the French were short of cavalry and were usually surrounded by fleeting squalls of Arab and Turkish light horse. Napoleon and various detached French commanders met the problem by mounting adventurous infantrymen on dromedaries, desert creatures that offered great speed and endurance, no morals, and no comfort. In 1799 most of those units were consolidated into the Regiment des Dromadaires made up of picked men with at least four years' service. They moved and sometimes skirmished mounted, but dismounted to fight as infantry in serious engagements. On occasion they utilized their kneeling mounts for breastworks. Eventually they developed their own system of tactics. Able to move swiftly across all sorts of terrain, they were used for important escorts, long-range reconnaissance, courier duty, and keeping the Arab tribes on their good behavior. Their weapons were the dragoon musket and bayonet, a saber, and at least one pair of pistols. (An attempt to arm them with a 15 -to-20-foot lance proved unsuccessful.) It was an elite, show-horse outfit, with high pay and a native groom to every six dromedaries. Because their duty gave them frequent chances for prize money from the capture of valuable camel herds and caravans, they had cash to lay out on exotic uniforms (which looked as if Murat had put his whole heart and at least a week into designing them) and regimental stationery with an extra-fancy letterhead.21 After the regiment came home to France, it was put into the gendarmerie, where its members had to put up with remarks from fuzz-cheeked conscripts about the respect owed fighting men by mere constabulary. 3rd Cuirassier Regiment: Field Uniform, 1812