

CHAPTER XII "It Is with Artillery That One Makes War" In a battle like in a siege, skill consists in converging a mass of fire on a single point: once the combat is opened, the commander who is adroit will suddenly and unexpectedly open fire with a surprising mass of artillery on one of these points, and is sure to seize it." Napoleon, cited in Phillips' Napoleon was a born gunner; his cannon were truly his "Ultimo Ratio Regum. "Z A special compartment in his astounding memory was devoted to them, and he could remember the caliber and location of any number of guns throughout the reaches of his empire. He used them with a calm, sure skill, improving his techniques from campaign to campaign. As expert a lot of artillerists as ever rode together under the same banner grew up under him. There was Marmont, the imaginative, energetic young would-be aristocrat, who laid the guns that helped win Castiglione and Marengo but listened too much to his own ego and to Talleyrand. Another was awkward, honest Drouot, son of a baker, the admired and utterly trusted "sage of the Grande Armee," who studied his Bible every day and often disapproved of his Emperor's actions but was always faithful. Eble, son of a sergeant, a soldier when he was nine, taciturn and brusque, called his cannoneers "my children" and knocked them kicking when they misbehaved. He built the Beresina bridges out of a will colder than the river's ice, saved the Grande Armee, and died thereby. Lauriston, born in India of a Scots refugee family, a polished gentleman and the artillery expert among Napoleon's aides-de-camp, commanded the great batteries at Landshut and Wagram. And there was Senarmont, the mauvais tete whose swiftly served guns ate up the Russian Imperial Guard and Spanish guerrillas alike. French soldiers of the other arms complained that artillerymen gave themselves airs because their Emperor himself had been a gunner. But the French artillery had an ancient pride in its profession and its scientific standing. By 1790 it could challenge the previously acknowledged supremacy of the Austrian service. Its schools were excellent, and it even had formed its own museum in 1685. (The museum was wrecked in 1789 by a mob seeking arms for the attack on the Bastille but was restored in 1795.) It always had been an arm requiring study and a knowledge of mathematics; also, it possessed little of the pomp and show of the cavalry or even the infantry. Consequently it attracted officers willing to work and possessing some intellectual curiosity, often from the poor nobility and the middle class, whose opportunities for commissions and promotions would be limited in the other arms. While many of its officers did leave the service during the Revolution, the proportion of those staying was markedly higher. Also, the artillery's skill and firmness was a significant factor in checking the first Allied invasion of France at Valmy in 1792-in fact, that action frequently was termed "the cannonade of Valmy." It therefore stood very much on its prestige; its section in the War Ministry tended to be toplofty with mere generals in the field. In 1796 Napoleon exploded in a letter to the Directory: The Corps of Engineers and the Artillery are full of the most ridiculous fiddle- faddle. They never consider the good of the Service....The junior officers in the ministry sprinkle holy water [make empty promises] and our country suffers....I have received only forty horse artillerymen, who have not seen combat and are without horses. Send me therefore six companies, and do not trust the execution of that measure to the officers of the [artillery section], since it takes them ten days to expedite an order, and they probably would be stupid enough to draw them from Holland, with the result that they would not arrive until October.' One of Napoleon's first changes in artillery organization after he became First Consul was to establish a large army artillery staff under his own direct control. Its officers supervised the production of weapons and munitions, the armament of fortresses, the operation of the artillery schools, and the administration of the artillery "directions,"4 or served in the artillery staffs of the field armies and their corps and the staffs of major fortresses. There were five subdivisions of artillery troops: Artillerie a cheval (horse artillery), artillerie a pied (foot artillery), pontonniers (pontoon bridge troops), ouvriers (artificers), and armuriers (armorers). In addition there were the following associated organizations: the train d'artillerie, which handled the horses that hauled the artillery's vehicles; the cannoniers garde-cotes (Coast Defense Artillery); cannoniers veterans; and local units of cannoniers sedentaires.' Though Frederick the Great had introduced horse artillery in the late 1750s, it was 1792 before the French adopted it. In this new arm every cannoneer had his own horse, so that its light guns could keep up with cavalry on the move and maneuver across most types of ground. A large part of the original personnel were volunteers, including, of course, numbers of habitual disciplinary cases whom their colonels reported as joyfully volunteering, just to get rid of them. Those who couldn't ride or for whom no horses could be found were carried on wursts (light wagons with narrow, padded bodies resembling giant sausages, which the passengers straddled). The horse artillery quickly lived up to its mission-dashing, reckless, efficient, always ready for battle or a beer parlor brawl. Their personal weapons were a saber and two pistols. Napoleon kept his original six regiments, giving them depot companies in 1807 and increasing their total strength to an average of eight companies by 1814. The wursts vanished, but the esprit de corps and efficiency remained and grew.' Because of its mobility, horse artillery could react faster than foot artillery to changing situations on the battlefield. Whenever possible, Napoleon therefore assigned one or more companies to each of the Grande Armee's corps. Foot artillery furnished the mass of artillery support. Beginning with eight regiments, each of twenty companies, Napoleon gradually increased its strength to nine regiments of twenty-seven or twenty-eight companies. Frequently a regiment's component companies were widely scattered: In 1812, for example, the 3d Regiment d'Artillerie a Pied had nine companies in Spain (divided among the armies of Andalusia, "the Center," and Portugal); three at Toulouse; two at Figueras; and one each at Madrid, Barcelona, Leon, La Pointe de Grave, the Isle de Re, Flushing, Antwerp, and Breda. Whatever its assigned weapons, a company must be able to handle other types, whether mountain artillery or heavy siege and fortress guns, as the situation might require. Foot artillery was really expected to walk. Theoretically all company officers were supposed to march with their men, just as in the infantry. In the field, however, company commanders and all lieutenants over fifty years of age were entitled to horses. Foot artillerymen were armed with muskets (preferably of the light "dragoon" model, bayonets, and briquets (short infantry sabers). If their gun position were overrun by enemy infantry, their rammer staffs and handspikes made excellent skull crackers; if the attackers were cavalry, tough cannoneers clumped up behind or under their guns and caissons, mostly out of the reach of the horsemen's sabers. (Lancers, of course, were another, more dangerous proposition.) The pontonniers developed from an improvised collection of Rhine River boatmen, formed in 1792 at Strasbourg but not formally mustered in for some two years. They were described as undisciplined and without military spirit, but that was before Eble became their commander. A second battalion was gotten together on the Rhine in 1797-99, and a third in Italy in 1800. Napoleon consolidated the second and third battalions in 1801; thereafter their strength fluctuated between six and fourteen companies, the 1st Battalion being larger than the second. The engineers constantly insisted that the pontonniers should be assigned to their arm, since bridge-building was one of the engineers' responsibilities, but Napoleon chose to leave them as another branch of the artillery because of its greater resources in trained personnel, horses, arsenals, and workshops. The 1st Battalion lost heavily in Russia, especially from its labors in the Beresina River. The 2d Battalion brought back 462 men, but many of them were cut off in Danzig in early 1813. Both battalions were rebuilt from sailors and naval artificers, and a new 3d Battalion was activated. Unfortunately, much of the Grande Armee's bridging equipment had been lost during the retreat from Russia; most of the rest was trapped in Torgau with the army trains after the battle of Leipzig. Napoleon began his 1814 campaign without a bridge train and consequently repeatedly missed opportunities to destroy Allied columns. Order after order to Clarke to get one ready-"It is a portable bridge of at least twenty pontoons on haquets that I want, and not a bridge across the Seine"'-brought no results until mid-March, when Napoleon was almost at the end of his rope. Then a small train did appear, "horrible and immobile" and practically useless. A few days later Pajol's cavalry captured a fine Allied bridge train, but peasants (who probably had been plundered by both sides) flocked in from all directions, pillaged the wagons, and stole most of the horses. Pajol set fire to what was left. Napoleon usually assigned one pontonnier company apiece to his Guard, the Cavalry Reserve, the army park, and each corps with the Grande Armee. One company could put in a bridge of from sixty to eighty pontoons (very roughly, 350 to 500 feet long) in seven hours. Its pontoons-flatbottomed, almost rectangular wooden boats, sheathed with copper-were carried on haquets, long two-wheeled carts, the front ends of which (like caissons) were attached to and supported by limbers! Other wagons carried the beams used to connect the pontoons; planks for the bridge flooring; rope and anchors for holding the bridge in place; small boats used in its construction; tools, clamps, and spikes; and charcoal for the company field forge. When there were not enough pontoons, bridges could be improvised-as in Napoleon's first crossing of the Danube in 1809-out of any available boats, barges, and rafts or even empty wine casks; boxes or bags of cannonballs made substitute anchors. Pontonniers also could build trestle bridges, though these were more the engineers' specialty. That had to be done at the Beresina River, since Napoleon, counting on the river's being frozen over or on using an existing highway bridge, had optimistically burned his pontoon bridge train to free more horses for his artillery. Eble had quietly saved six caissons of tools, two field forges, and two wagons of charcoal. Each of his pontonniers still had his musket, a tool, and several large spikes. Aided by some engineer troops and sailors, they tore down the village of Studenka for building materials and forged the needed ironwork on the spot to build a footbridge for infantry and a stronger bridge for vehicles. Only the pontonniers worked in the water, setting the trestles or repairing breaks. (It proved humanly impossible to keep some anxious drivers from trotting their horses on the bridge, thereby setting up wracking vibrations.) Eble set the example, going into the river with every shift of his men. He died of exposure and exhaustion in Prussia at the end of the retreat. French Army tradition holds that Napoleon granted him, for his high valor, the right to wear golden spurs, a privilege claimed by pontonnier officers ever after. The ouvriers d'artillerie were responsible for the construction and repair of artillery vehicles. They normally worked in the arsenals, but detachments of them accompanied the "parks