ge. Their 2d Regiment went through the campaigns of 1806-7 and 1809 without losing a single man as a prisoner. It was 1809 before Napoleon had a close association with them. That year they served temporarily as his escort, the Guard cavalry being still on the road from Spain. The Emperor's eye for detail quickly noted that their bearskins gave little protection against a hard saber cut and were easily dislodged. He also was struck by both their value and the heavy losses they took at Aspern-Essling and Wagram. His first reaction was the commonsense move of ordering chin straps; his next was to order both regiments put into cuirass and helmet. Having regard for the carabiniers' prickly pride, Napoleon wanted them to have a really distinctive new uniform. Their cuirass and helmet (the design of which produced much high-level squabbling) were coated with brass to differentiate their armor from that of the cuirassiers. The helmet finally selected had a classical-style red crest. Napoleon had favored red coats for them, but the Ministry of Military Administration put them into white, apparently for reasons of economy. (Certainly not as a compliment to the young Austrian princess Napoleon married in 1810.) They remained a "black-horse" outfit, kept their traditional white-bordered, ocher-colored belts, and were most displeased over the whole business, choosing to consider the issue of armor an insult to their collective and individual courage! Also, the cuirass was heavy, and they regretted their traditional blue-andred uniforms though not the bearskins. But, slowly, it dawned on them that they were now as splendid-looking a brigade as ever put foot to stirrup. The 1st Carabiniers had one unique souvenir. During 1800 they had been billeted in the poor German town of Eichstedt, which had just been "struck" with so heavy a contribution that its citizens would have to sell their church's sacred vessels to raise the money to meet it. The carabinier officers tried to get the contribution reduced; failing in that, they dug into their own pockets to help pay the levy. For years afterward, as wars came and went, Eichstedt celebrated an annual mass for the ler Regiment de Carabiniers a Cheval. It was the green-coated, brass-helmeted dragoons who had the unhappiest beginnings of all the cavalry arms during the Consulate and early Em pire. Back in their seventeenth-century origin they had been a separate arm, a sort of mounted infantry with a touch of combat engineer, mounted on small nags and used for pioneer, outpost, and escort duties." That conception of their functions endured for perhaps a century, but-probably because they were at a disadvantage in clashes with cavalry-there was a natural tendency among dragoon officers in all nations to get them better horses and to stress mounted combat. By 1800 French dragoons were simply another breed of cavalryman, expected to handle any sort of mounted mission. Throughout 1800-1806 Napoleon could mount only part of his dragoons. That fact, combined with his very modern ideas of combining fire power and mobility, led him to the conclusion that his dragoons should be made capable of effective dismounted action. Mounted or not, he set a General Baraguay d'Hilliers to so training them. This Baraguay was a cavalryman of enthusiasm, courage, and presence, decent enough but lacking in common sense. Army gossip was that when he put the dragoons through dismounted drill, he assured them that no cavalry could break them; when he drilled them mounted, he proclaimed that no infantry could withstand them. Both veterans and recruits were somewhat confused. For his planned cross-Channel invasion of England, Napoleon organized two divisions of dismounted dragoons, putting them into infantry-style shoes, gaiters, overcoats, and packs, and giving them drums to supplement their trumpets. They were to carry their boots, saddles, and bridles; once in England they would be mounted on captured horses. When England in 1805 hired Russia and Austria to attack France from the east, those divisions were abolished. Napoleon could mount three squadrons out of every four in his dragoon regiments. The mounted squadrons went off to war as bobtailed regiments; the dismounted squadrons were combined into a division of four provisional regiments, totaling upwards of six thousand effectives, under Baraguay d'Hilliers. Their mission was to guard the Grande Armee's artillery park and baggage trains during Napoleon's sudden counteroffensive against Austria. This time, boots, leather breeches, sabers, and horse equipment were left behind. The division marched with only their light muskets for weapons.16 The assignment was sensible, but troopers caught up in the shuffle remembered that veteran dragoons, who hadn't walked farther in years than the distance from their barracks to the nearest bar, ended up in the dismounted units, while their mounts were assigned to raw recruits. The results were rough on everybody: Hospitals filled up with spavined veterans (some of them probably "riding the sick book"); recruits got saddle sores. Also, Jean-Auguste Oyon wrote gleefully, matters turned ugly when mounted and dismounted elements of several regiments bivouaced together. The limping veterans crowded over to check on their old horses and found them ne glected, sore- backed, and lame. Blood flowed freely, if only from rookies' noses. The dismounted division-"wooden swords" was one of the army's kinder names for them-nevertheless proved useful. Until recently they had stood accused of giving way before Austrian cavalry and failing to defend the trains. In fact, the one French outfit pushed around was the supposedly first-rate infantry division of General Pierre A. Dupont (a good man in a tight corner, but no hand for a sustained crisis), and Baraguay came up with his small mounted escort to help chop Dupont loose! Later, slogging on across Bohemia, Oyon's unit met an Austrian force of all arms outside the town of Klattau. One flank being threatened by Austrian cavalry, all the dragoon officers (even the lieutenants had retained their personal mounts) formed up as an improvised squadron, while the sergeants took command of the companies on the firing line. Most likely the officers were completely browned off with the campaign so far; Oyon said their charge was about the roughest he saw in a dozen years of soldiering, splattering Austrians in all directions. Since not enough suitable horses were captured from the Austrians to mount all the dragoons, in 1806 Napoleon put the remaining "walkers" into two regiments, which moved behind the Imperial Guard. As horses were taken from the Prussians and Saxons, those men were sent to a depot at Wittemberg for hasty reorganization. Boots, cloaks, leather breeches, sabers, and saddlery were taken from Prussian, Saxon, and Hessian depots or even from prisoners. Although some of the veteran dragoon regiments served with success and honor through 1806-7 (Grouchy's division made itself notable in the pursuit after Jena, at Eylau, and at Friedland), their general performance did not please the Emperor. Their horsemanship was wobbly, and some regiments proved unhandy against the Cossacks' swarm tactics. There were several unfortunate stampedes to the rear. Cavalry generals took to sandwiching dragoon squadrons among the cuirassiers to give them confidence. (Both dragoons and cuirassiers wore white cloaks; overconfident Cossacks got some sudden lessons.) The rest of the army jeered their performance and their varigated appearance. Doubtless considering that they needed more on-the-job experience, Napoleon sent twenty-four dragoon regiments into Spain, beginning in 1808. The six remaining regiments were generally stationed in Italy; they took part in the 1809 campaign and went into Russia in 1812. Pierre Auvray, fourrier in the 23d Dragoons, recorded that his regiment was ordered to begin growing mustaches when they crossed the Polish frontier. Against the swarms of Cossacks, Kalmucks, and Bashkirs that boiled around them, they might (as other dragoons had done earlier in Egypt against Mamelukes and Arabs) use their muskets from their saddles, firing on command, like infantry. Meanwhile, the dragoon regiments in Spain learned their business in the hardest of schools, and learned it thoroughly. Of necessity, they were the heavy cavalry of the French armies in Portugal and Spain (the 13th Cuirassiers served only along Spain's eastern coast) and so were pitted against the heavier, better-mounted English horsemen-hard to match in charge and countercharge, but often awkward hands at quick maneuver and minor tactics. On occasion, they used dismounted action effectively in rushing or defending bridges, covering withdrawals, or flanking guerrilla ambushes. Withdrawn through 1813 and 1814, they were the most effective French cavalry during the campaign of France that latter year. Napoleon wrote a dithering Augereau, who quibbled over his orders to advance against the south flank of the armies invading France, that he had won the fight at Nangis with a brigade of dragoons from Spain who had not yet unbridled their horses. Their regiments were small, hammered into tight, hard professional outfits, sometimes flaunting both mustaches and beards, or ample brown trousers, braided with their regimental facing colors, in place of regulation breeches. (They also were sometimes written down as "dragoons of Spain" or "Spanish Dragoons," to the confusion of later researchers.) A dragoon's weapons were a long, straight sword, pistols, and his "dragoon musket," shorter and lighter than the standard model carried by the infantry. Napoleon also prescribed a bayonet, which was carried in a scabbard attached to the dragoon's waist belt. Auvray complained that it was a jiggling nuisance, especially to fourriers like himself, who normally rode at the trot when about their billeting duties. The temptation to stow it in their portmanteaux was great and ever present-and paid off at eight days salle de police when they yielded, and were caught. As noted, Napoleon increased the number of his dragoon regiments from twenty to thirty. In 1800 he adopted a Piedmontese dragoon regiment into the French service as his 21st Regiment; during 1803-4 he converted the 22d through the 27th Cavalerie and the 7th (bis) and 11th and 12th Hussars into dragoons. After that he formed no new regular dragoon regiments, though he repeatedly improvised provisional formations as he thought necessary. In 1811, considering war with Russia inevitable, he converted six dragoon regiments to chevau-ldgers lanciers and did not replace them. Chasseurs a cheval were a relatively new arm in the French service. During the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-48) and the Seven Years' War (1756-63) the name was applied to the light cavalry of various "legions" and "free corps," but organization of the first six regular regiments did not begin until 1779." Six other regiments were created in 1788, and thirteen more during 1791-95, from volunteer light cavalry regiments, such as the Hussards de la Morte, and mounted elements of various legions. Those chasseurs, together with the peacock hussars, were the French armies' eyes and ears, employed indifferently for scouting, screening, pursuit, escorts, raiding, or knee-to-knee charges on the battlefield. (They also possessed the incidental virtue of being much cheaper to uniform and equip than hussars.) As part of the process of annexing Piedmont to France, Napoleon converted the Piedmontese hussar regiment to the 26th Chasseurs A Cheval in 1801, making a total of twenty-four active regiments.1e In 1807 the Chevaulegers d'Aremberg (mostly Belgians and Germans) became the 27th Regiment; in 1808 the 28th was formed from the Tuscan Dragoons. (It was a sad-sack outfit, fit four years later only for rear-area escort duty.) In 1810 a provisional regiment of chasseurs A cheval was regularized 