en constructed according to the "system" of Grand Master of the Artillery Jean de Vallerie, who got the artillery organized on a sensible basis. He designed beautiful guns: ornate, long, strongly built, and powerful; excellent for battering enemy fortresses or defensive warfare, but heavy and difficult to handle in the field.14 His system was replaced, after much professional debate, by that of Jean-Baptiste Gribeauval, who had made his reputation as an exchange officer with the Austrian artillery, then acknowledged as the world's best. Gribeauval stressed mobility, hitting power, and accuracy. His guns were lighter and designed for more rapid movement, on and off the roads. For field artillery he provided 4-, 8-, and 12-pounder guns and 6-inch howitzers." Probably his most important innovation was the "elevating screw," used to adjust the range of the gun by raising or lowering its breech.16 He also introduced the prolonge, a heavy rope approximately 30 feet long, used to connect the gun and its avant-train (limber) when it was necessary to fire while retiring or to unlimber the gun while crossing a ditch or some other difficult obstacle." For sieges and fortresses, he provided 16- and 24-pounder guns and a variety of mortars, but coastal defenses still had to use many old 36-pounder iron guns, described as being more dangerous to their crews than to enemy vessels. Lean, lank-haired Lieutenant Napoleon Bonaparte cut his professional eyeteeth on Gribeauval's guns, mastering every aspect of an artilleryman's required skills, which included the manufacture of cannon and their ammunition. Their use, however, revealed their defects. Gribeauval had managed some standardization of equipment so that certain parts would be interchangeable, but his system still required twenty-five different sizes of wheels and a different size of caisson for each caliber of gun. Also, his caissons were front-heavy, awkward vehicles. Putting his 8- and 12-pounders into action was slowed by the necessity for "encastrement"-shifting the gun forward from its traveling position on its carriage into its firing position. Finally, unlike the British artillery, Gribeauval's limbers and caissons had no seats for their gun crews. In emergencies, cannoneers could cling haphazardly to guns and caissons for short movements at the gallop over fairly even ground, but that was a risky business. During 1802-3, therefore, Napoleon appointed a committee of experienced artillery officers, including Eble and Marmont, to review his artillery's armament and equipment, with the idea of reducing the variety of calibers employed and simplifying their construction. They recommended that the 4- and 8-pounder guns be replaced by a 6-pounder, and the 6-inch howitzer by a 5i inch model." Special weapons-a 3-pounder gun, a short 6-pounder, and a light 52 inch howitzer, all capable of being broken down into suitable loads for pack mules-were to be developed for mountain campaigns. They also urged that a new 24-pounder siege gun, light enough to accompany the Grande Armee into the field, should replace the older 16and 24-pounders and that a bronze 48-pounder was needed for coast defense. All these new guns would have improved carriages, limbers, and caissons, requiring only six or eight different sizes of wheels. Tooling up for the new weapons took time and was only well begun by 1805. The 6-pounder gun and 52 inch howitzer were produced in increasing numbers; as they were issued, the Gribeauval models they replaced went into the arsenals. The other proposed new weapons apparently never went much beyond the experimental stage. One reason for the delay probably was the multitude of captured guns of all types and calibers accumulated during the next five years. Many of them were excellent weapons.19 At the same time, the program to replace the Gribeauval artillery vehicles made little headway; the constant wars forced their continued use, and mixing them with new models merely increased the spare parts problem. Though the artillery was organized into regiments for administrative purposes, its tactical unit was always the company, consisting of four officers and approximately one hundred enlisted men, with their weapons and vehicles. Each artillery company was paired with a train company, which moved it. Accustomed to serving independently, the teamed companies grew into tight, self-disciplined families: Lieutenant Octave Levavasseur wrote that his horse artillerymen "loved their guns like their sweethearts" and permitted no shirking; any coward was "chased ignominiously" from the com- pany.20 Struggling to get his guns across the mountains from Salamanca to Lisbon in 1807 through the autumn rains along mountain trails "that would frighten even a man on foot," Captain Hulot was urged to abandon his heavier guns. "We replied that [they] were our flag." Thiebault, watching the labors of Hulot and his cannoneers and drivers, was moved for once to uncharacteristic words of respect and praise, saluting them as "superhuman."" The regulation company of foot artillery had six guns, either 6- or 12pounders, and two howitzers; a horse artillery company had six 6-pounders or sometimes four of those and two howitzers. Ammunition (except for a few rounds for emergencies kept in the small "coffer" attached to each gun's trail) was carried in the caissons. Napoleon habitually wanted a dou ble "approvisionnement" (standard load) of ammunition-300 to 350 rounds-with each gun. That required two caissons for each 4-pounder, three for a 6- or 8-pounder, and five for a 12-pounder. Each company also had a field (mobile) forge for blacksmith work and three wagons for supplies, forage, and spare parts. In addition, those companies assigned to infantry divisions were responsible for some four extra caissons loaded with musket cartridges. On extended campaigns, the foot artillery companies frequently would be reduced to six, or even four, weapons, because casualties left them with too few men to serve eight. Guns, caissons, and wagons had four horses each, except for the 12pounders and field forges, which required six. (Some accounts state that one caisson for each 12-pounder gun also had six horses.) Allowing roughly 12 yards for each gun or vehicle, an artillery company on the march would take up a lot of road space. When on campaign, therefore, an artillery company operated in two sections: one (in modern terms, the "firing battery"), consisting of its guns and one caisson apiece, moved with the combat troops; the rest of the vehicles accompanied the artillery park. The artilleryman lived as dangerously as any grenadier or hussar, and his risks grew as the wars went on and the numbers of guns in all armies increased. He often went into action in advance of the infantry, muscling his guns farther forward as the battle "ripened." At Friedland, half of Senarmont's cannoneers were down before the battle ended. Coignet saw the fate of six French guns dueling against fifty Austrian cannon at Aspern-Essling: With "no cannoneers left to serve them, General Dorsenne replaced them with twelve grenadiers....But all these brave men died at their pieces. No more horses, no more drivers, no more wheels! Carriages in fragments, the guns on the ground like logs!"" Casualties in the great 102-gun battery at Wagram were so heavy that Napoleon called for twenty corporals and privates from each company of the Old Guard infantry regiments to fill up the gun crews. Coignet said everyone wanted to go. Enemy action, however, could be only a minor part of an artilleryman's hardships and dangers, which were inherent in his trade. "Artillery mat8- riel, at the same time heavy, cumbersome, fragile and easily damaged, sometimes demanded prodigies of endurance and ingenuity from artillerymen to move it across all sorts of terrain in all sorts of weather. 112' Even in years of peace, few marches were entirely along good roads on pleasant days. Too often the cannoneer had to tug and shove, knee-deep in mud and water under driving rain, to help the straining horses drag guns and caissons through bog holes. (In Poland every road seemed to be one continuous slough). Or else there were mountain passes where you alternately hauled and shoved to get your vehicles up steep slopes; then threw your weight against them to keep them from sliding out of control downhill or off the crumbling edge of a crooked, narrow road. Broken-down vehicles had to be hastily repaired, snapped harness patched, and disabled horses replaced. On a day of battle, if the gun teams had been crippled or if the firing was too heavy to risk them (the horses and their drivers made big targets), the cannoneers must drag their guns forward or off the field by their own main strength and awkwardness. (A cannoneer wore, in addition to his crossbelts for cartridge box and briquet, a bricole ["man-harness"]-a shoulder belt of heavy leather with an attached drag rope some five feet long. The drag rope ended in a hook; when it was necessary for the crew to convert itself into a "man-team," they inserted the hooks into rings at the ends of the gun's axles and along the sides of the carriage, and put their backs into the hauling.) When the fighting was done, there were the guns, fouled by hours of heavy firing, to clean; vehicles, equipment, and harness to get back into first-class condition; horses to doctor and reshoe; and ammunition loads to be replenished. Manning a gun, whether in action or peacetime drill, was plain hard work. To change the direction in which the gun was firing required shifting its trail. Every time it was fired, its recoil pushed it to the rear so that the gun crew would have to shove it back again to re-lay it. The whole operation was continuous, quick teamwork, more intricate than any ballet: Fire, sponge out the smoking gun tube, reload, aim, and fire again-and each of these actions required the cooperation of the whole gun crew, who must simultaneously fetch another round of ammunition, "thumb" the vent (cover it, to prevent a premature discharge), insert the new round into the gun's muzzle, ram it home, shift the trail to get back on target, prime the vent, step clear of the wheels, aim, and fire again. It needed men with physical strength, dexterity, and definite intelligence. Cannon of this era had one very convenient characteristic: They were interchangeable. French artillerymen could easily utilize captured guns, whether Spanish, Austrian, Russian, or Prussian, without having to learn any new drill, since the design was practically identical with their own. Ammunition for guns of the same caliber usually was also interchangeable, wherever manufactured. Also, up to the introduction of effective breech-loading artillery, no wellmade cannon really became obsolete. The many Vallerie cannon in French arsenals might be too cumbersome for use with the Grande Armee, but they made excellent fortress artillery, long-range and powerful. When a British fleet unsuccessfully attempted to force Turkey out of its alliance with Napoleon in 1807, some of the cannon that battered the Royal Navy out of the Dardanelles were ponderous "great guns," reputedly dating from the fifteenth century and throwing 600-pound stone balls. A French infantry brigade that occupied the free city of Ragusa (modern Dubrovnik) in 1806 to block the Russian drive up the Adriatic from Corfu had quickly found itself between the devil and the deep blue sea. A Russian battle fleet put the city under blockade, and Russian agents persuaded the wild Montenegrin clans to attack it from the land, promising them the loot of the city. Ragusa had strong old-style fortifications, but the French were amazed to find no cannon on its ramparts. They had brought only a few light field guns, which could do nothing to a ship of the line. But with the brigade had come one Colonel Triquenot of the Engineers, charged with strengthening Ragusa's defenses. By interr