ogating local citizens and checking city archives, he located some old cannon, loaned to Ragusa by the Pope more than a century earlier to resist a Turkish attack, and thereafter stored away and forgotten in a back room of the city arsenal. Working day and night, the French mounted forty-three still-serviceable guns (some of them quite heavy) on improvised carriages and unearthed some 10,000 cannonballs of all calibers. When the Russian fleet next put in for what it expected to be another milk-run bombardment, the air suddenly churned with uproar, splinters, torn canvas, and damaged Muscovites; Marmont arrived with reinforcements to find the situation well in hand. During the Grande Armee's first campaign of 1805, its artillery was severely handicapped by the general shortage of horses. Davout had to leave part of his guns and caissons at Mannheim. Most of the reserve companies had 8-pounders instead of 12s, and a large number of 4-pounders remained in use. The shortage was partially made up by the Bavarian artillery, but the average infantry division had only one attached company of artillery, and that company seldom had more than six guns and howitzers. In 1806 Napoleon began sorting out his guns. His intent (which took some years to achieve) was to give every infantry division in the Grande Armee two companies of artillery; if possible, one of them was to be horse artillery. Light cavalry divisions were to have one company of horse artillery; heavy cavalry divisions two. All those companies were to be armed with 6-pounder guns and 52 inch howitzers. In addition, each corps would have its own reserve artillery, consisting of two companies of foot artillery (at least one of them armed with 12-pounders) and a company of horse artillery, as well as its own artillery park. The Army of Italy would have to make do for a while longer with odd calibers. Marmont in Dalmatia was given captured Austrian 3-pounders for mountain guns. Meanwhile, Napoleon was careful to hold out a central reserve of horse and foot artillery to be committed-as he outlined in this chapter's beginning-at the decisive point and moment. By 1809 the greatly strengthened artillery of his Imperial Guard could take over most of that mission. During the winter of 1806-7 Napoleon increased the number of guns in his theater of operations in East Prussia and Poland by bringing in captured Prussian cannon to arm the fortified bridgeheads and depots he had estab lished along his line of communications and detailing a few artillerymen to train scratch gun crews for them. (Jomini enlarged this event into a yarn about how Napoleon, much impressed by the effects of the massed Russian artillery fire at Eylau, had doubled the number of guns and artillerymen with the Grande Armee in just three months!) It was in 1807 at Friedland that General of Brigade Alexandre de Senarmont, Chief of Artillery of Victor's I Corps, introduced a new artillery tactic combining massed fire power and maneuver. Competent generals had massed guns into large stationary batteries for close to a century, but here Senarmont pushed thirty guns forward to within 120 yards of the Russian infantry and, ignoring heavy Russian fire, smashed at them with canister for twenty-five minutes, killing and wounding some four thousand and gutting the Russian center. Possibly the most spectacular example of this maneuver was Drouot's advance with seventy guns at Lutzen in 1813. Spain from 1808 through 1813 was a special problem-poor roads, a frequent lack of forage and water, and few suitable horses. Accordingly, the standard 6 - and 12-pounders were replaced by the lighter 4s and 8s. (As a bonus, the latter calibers were common in Spain and Portugal, making it possible to use captured ammunition.) In some commands the number of guns in each company was reduced to five. The long columns of artillery on the march should have been profitable targets for guerrilla bands in the mountain passes, but the one attack on Senarmont's guns was a disaster. His cannoneers went swiftly "Action front, flank, and rear!" and blasted the guerrillas off the landscape. The Austrian campaign of 1809 was marked by a vastly increased use of artillery. In mounting his assault crossing of the Danube on the night of 45 July, Napoleon massed 550 cannon (many of them heavy siege guns and mortars taken from the Vienna arsenal), served by 12,000 artillerymen, on Lobau and small neighboring islands for his artillery preparation. During the following two-day battle of Wagram, Prince Charles brought 446 guns onto the field, Napoleon 488; some heavy guns left behind on Lobau covered the French left flank. At the crisis of the action, Napoleon covered the reorganization of his attack with a battery of 102 guns from the Imperial Guard, Wrede's Bavarian division, and Macdonald's corps. Through 1809-10 Napoleon again reshuffled his artillery. The 4pounders went to the infantry regimental cannon companies or into storage. The 8 -pounders seem to have been grouped in one or more corps to simplify ammunition supply.24 In preparing for his 1812 Russian campaign, he took special pains to perfect his artillery organization. All companies serving with a division had to be from the same artillery regiment; their train companies were to be from the same train battalion. Horse artillery companies assigned to the cuirassier divisions were to have served with cuirassiers before; no company that had been "ruined" in Spain and then filled up with new conscripts would be taken. Fourteen general officers were assigned to the artillery, including generals of division Baston Lariboisiere as commanding officer; Gabriel Niegre as "Director General" of the army artillery park; and Jean-Baptiste Eble as commander of the bridge trains. Two siege trains were organized, one at Danzig, one at Magdeburg. Except at Borodino, where an estimated total of 587 French guns fought down 640 Russian, there were no major artillery battles in 1812. During the retreat the French teams, weakened by overwork and poor feeding, were increasingly unable to haul their guns across country. Even so, French artillery was an important factor in Napoleon's victory at the Beresina River. (There is the story of an old, peg-legged captain having his wooden leg shot out from under him there, and only pausing in his firing orders to tell a cannoneer to get a spare from the company supply wagon.) Amazingly enough, except for four or five guns trapped in the traffic jam at the head of the vehicular bridge over the Beresina, the army's artillery was saved. Few guns came out of Russia, however. Poniatowski brought back thirty and the doughty Baden troops most-if not all-of theirs, but many of the French had to be abandoned just beyond Vilna. Between 1,000 and 1,200 guns, along with their accompanying caissons, field forges, and wagons, supposedly were lost. That figure undoubtedly includes regimental guns, captured Russian guns taken into service, and weapons from allied states, but Napoleon's artillery service did suffer a large-scale dislocation. At once, he put his major effort into rebuilding it. New artillery companies sprouted throughout his Empire, shook themselves into march order, and moved to the front, conscripts and national guardsmen learning their trade as they marched. The artillery had priority even over the cavalry for horses. Aides and ordonnance officers spurred back and forth, inspecting new units, ransacking minor arsenals, hectoring artificers and armorers into greater speed. There was a shortage of gunpowder, so new powder mills were set up in Venlo, Maastricht, and Julich. (Some hurriedly produced ammunition proved unreliable, approximately a third of the shells fired at Lutzen failing to explode.) This artillery-raw though much of it wasserved mightily in the first victories at Lutzen and Bautzen. During the summer armistice that followed, Napoleon "completed" it in guns and vehicles and had all its damaged equipment repaired. At Hamburg Davout was able to issue guns to his poorly armed Danish allies. When hostilities resumed in August, Napoleon had 1,300 cannon (almost all French) with 365,000 rounds of ammunition in its trains and a reserve of 18,000,000 musket cartridges. Moreover there was a considerable reserve of artillery not yet organized for field service in various German fortresses. The French artillery, especially the horse artillery, had a decisive part at Dresden. Later, at Leipzig, it had only 690 guns against 916 Allied, but most of them were gotten away; at Hanau, where Wrede tried to block Napoleon's retreat, the Guard's massed artillery smashed his amateurish hopes for fame and glory. There were guns enough in 1814; the shortages were in men and horses. After Napoleon's first abdication, the Bourbons cut back the horse artillery (always an expensive arm) to four regiments, the foot artillery to eight, and the ouvrier companies to twelve. They abolished the armorers, the cannoniers garde-cotes, and the cannoniers sddentaires but did retain one pontonnier battalion, four small "squadrons" of the train d'artillerie, and thirteen companies of cannoniers veterans. Returning in 1815, Napoleon once more began a hasty rebuilding; a month before Waterloo he was trying to increase the armament of his artillery companies from four guns to six guns, in addition to the two howitzers most of them had. He did secure some additional fire power by replacing the 6-pounders in some of his foot artillery companies with 8-pounders. At Waterloo he had 246 guns (somewhat below his usual proportion of guns to infantry) to Wellington's 156. The day before, those guns had knocked loose Blucher's center at Ligny; they were prepared to do the same to Wellington, but a night of heavy rain had left the ground waterlogged. Napoleon had planned to attack at 9:00 A.M., but it was after 11:00 before his artillery could maneuver off the roads without bogging down. And even then the still-wet soil damped the effect of his artillery fire: Roundshot buried itself in the ground instead of rolling and ricocheting, the fragmentation effect of explosive shells was much reduced. As the ground dried, the French artillery's execution increased, but by then it was too late: Blucher's rallied Prussians were piling up against the French right flank. The French cannoneers finished in courage and honor: At the end of everything, with the Old Guard's last two squares withdrawing in superb order, a company of Guard artillery fired its last round into the mass of the pursuers, then stoically stood by its guns as if ready to fire again, bluffing with their lives to gain their comrades a few minutes more. At heart, Napoleon was a gunner. There had been kings who had made artillery their hobby; Napoleon was an artilleryman who made a hobby of breaking and making kings. At Montereau in 1814 he personally laid his guns-and, it would seem, personally booted frightened boy cannoneers back to their posts-becoming once again the ardent young artillery lieutenant of thirty-odd years before. Probably he never was, in his inner life, far from that at any time. There was that moment the night before Jena: Lannes's corps and the infantry of the Guard waiting behind the crest of the Landgrafenberg hill mass-some 25,000 men eyeing the campfires of the main Prussian Army, estimated (accurately) as about 100,000 strong. Lannes's artillery had not yet come up; Napoleon, going back to check on it for himself, found that in the gloom the drivers of its lead gun had mistaken a ravine for the rough trail leading up the ridge. The gun had jammed between two rocks; those behind it could neither bypass it nor turn around. Men were weary and confused, horses worn, the responsible officers off looking for supper. Swallowing his instant fury, the Emperor took a lantern in hand, looked the situation over, gave a few quiet orders, got the column moving again-and then went back to the duties of a