

## ,yen/e, pirde 0£' ,rf cfoise,

 Engineers: Warrant Officer, 1812

CHAPTER XIII Genie: "The Jesuits of the Army" A general of Engineers who must conceive, propose, and direct all the fortifications of an army, needs good judgement and a practical mind above all. Napoleon, cited in Phillips' General Maximilien Caffarelli of the engineers was a learned, cheerful soul with a wooden leg, which he managed to mislay every week or so. It almost drowned him by floating him out of his saddle when he was caught in the Red Sea's tide, and it got him killed some months later as he was awkwardly clambering through the French siege works around Acre. But until that moment even sun-blasted, fly-bitten Egypt could not trouble his good humor. His soldiers had an answer for his attempts to josh them out of their homesickness. Why shouldn't Caffarelli be happy? Wherever he goes he always has one foot in France! Engineer Francois Chasseloup-Laubat was sent to serve with Napoleon in Italy in 1796. He would go on to be the Grande Armee's chief engineer and direct its major sieges: Stralsund, Colberg, and Danzig. At the Beresina he showed a heroism second only to Eble's. His outward timidity sheathed an astounding temper, expressed in a matching vocabulary, when sloppy workmanship or general stupidity hampered his work. The offense removed, he carried no grudge. So intelligent that he was credited with the ability to do trigonometry in his head, he also was (to those who came to know the real man) an excellent comrade. Napoleon liked the clarity and impartiality of his advice; in 1811 he appointed him to his Council of State. Colonel Montfort was another engineer officer, expert and trusted. Unfortunately, he was also a coward. The Royal Army's Corps of Engineers had been world-famous for its skill. The American Continental Congress made special efforts to borrow some of them during 1776-77; the small group, headed by Louis Lebeque Duportail, whom the French government made available, were invaluable to the Continental Army, although Thaddeus Koscuisko now gets the credit for much of their labors! At the same time, the engineers were a comparatively new formation, which had not managed a definite divorce from the artillery until 1758, when they were officially designated the "Royal Corps of Engineers" and given facings of black velvet in place of the artillery's red. This new prestige was joyful, but the black velvet did not show up clearly at any distance against their dark blue coats. Sentries were always mistaking them for civilians, naval construction engineers, or even-the shame of it-the Paris fire department! By royal decree, they therefore received a distinctive red passepoil (piping) around the edges of their black velvet collars, cuffs, and lapels to proclaim their true identity to lesser mortals. The Royal Corps of Engineers was a small, exclusive organization, drawn mostly from the minor nobility and upper middle class and consisting entirely of officers, who were assigned to various headquarters as required. Its duties required an extensive knowledge of mathematics and an aptitude for plain hard work. To enter the corps, you must be a graduate of the famous engineering Ecole de Mezieres (established 1749). Promotion within the corps was based as much on demonstrated merit as seniority. The intellectual preparation the engineers' profession required, their knowledge of esoteric subjects that very few cavalry or infantry officers comprehended, and their great influence on military operations (despite their scanty numbers and the fact that their senior officers were only colonels) earned them the nickname "the Jesuits of the Army." The actual physical labor of engineer work was done by details of infantrymen (usually paid a little extra while so engaged), and/or hired civilians. In time of war small units of skilled workmen were enlisted "for the duration." Control of some existing companies of mineurs (miners) had been disputed between the engineers and the artillery for at least a century; so far, the artillery had always won. (There was a good deal of professional jealousy between those two "intellectual" services; the resulting friction might actually hinder operations during a siege-in which case, as usual in military history, the "poor, bloody infantry" who had to storm the place would pay for it.) The corps was little troubled by emigration at the beginning of the Revolution. (One engineer who did go, La Picard de Phelippeaux, an idealistic aristocrat and former fellow student of Napoleon, was a major reason why Napoleon did not take Acre and why Caffarelli died before its walls. Phelippeaux himself died there of sunstroke.)' Even so, the corps was too smallin May 1792 it had only 258 officers-to handle its increasing responsibilities. It was therefore strengthened by engineers detailed from the Service des Ponts et Chausses (Bridges and Roads Service) and officers from other arms with the title "adjoints du genie." Young Lejeune was one of the latter. He had been serving as some sort of a supernumerary on the staff of General Philippe Jacob, who had been master-shoemaker in an infantry regiment before the Revolution-very brave and patriotic, but useless. A river had blocked the French advance, but Lejeune found a ford through it, and a committee of three Representatives of the People made him a souslieutenant of engineers as a reward. Taking the appointment seriously, he studied up to fifteen hours a day in the quiet times between campaigns. Otherwise, there were reorganizations and more reorganizations. Mezieres was denounced as a vile den of aristocracy, and the Paris politicians finally shut it down in early 1794. Its remains were moved to Metz, where instruction was allowed to continue after a solemn investigation concluded that its cadets were really not guilty of incivisme.3 Once things had shaken down somewhat, the course of instruction was set at two years. Instruction covered military art in general, with emphasis on construction, engineer service, fortification, military mines, and engineer administrative procedures. There was much practical work to demonstrate classroom lessons. Undoubtedly the fact that Lazare Carnot was a captain of engineers as well as the military expert on the Committee of Public Safety' helped to save the engineer school. Also, Carnot's influence no doubt was responsible for the decree of October 23, 1793, that converted the engineers from a corps of staff officers to a combat arm. That act transferred the companies of military miners from the artillery to the engineers and ordered the formation of twelve battalions of sapeurs du genie, the equivalent of our American "combat engineers." (These sapeurs absorbed various provisional units of pionniers [labor troops] and ouvriers [artificers] that the field armies had improvised.) In 1794 two companies of aerostatiers (balloon troops) were added. The number and composition of the engineer troops fluctuated during the next few years. There was a shakedown of engineer officers to get rid of incompetents taken in during the recent period of hasty expansion. All officers who had not graduated from the engineer school were required to take a professional examination (which Lejeune remembered as extremely difficult) and subsequently either received a permanent commission, were sent to school for further instruction, or were retired. Lejeune passed handsomely, earning a captain's commission; later he became a member of Berthier's staff. Between 1800 and 1804 the engineers took on the organization they would keep until 1814. The Corps Imperial du Genie had a headquarters echelon of 384 officers in 1804, including three generals of division (one of whom functioned as the Engineer Inspector General) and six generals of brigade. There were five battalions of sapeurs and nine independent companies of miners.' There were also 340 quasi-military "employees" or "gardes," responsible for the supervision and maintenance of fortifications; they had assimilated rank as corporals, fourriers, sergeants, and adjutants and functioned as caretakers, storekeepers, repairmen, and clerks. Engineer officers had a wide variety of duties, beginning with the construction, maintenance, and improvement of the Empire's system of fortresses. Some of them were constantly on reconnaissance along its frontiers; some on strategic reconnaissances that reflected Napoleon's dreams of further conquest. In 1808 Berjaud Boutin thoroughly explored the vicinity of Algiers. His report was invaluable in 1830, when the French finally attacked that city. (Boutin was killed in 1815 in Syria on another such mission.) Other engineer officers administered the "directions" and "sousdirections" (much like our American U.S. Army Engineer divisions and districts) into which France and its remaining colonies were divided, supervising all engineer activities within these areas. Like the artillery, the engineers had depended on hired or requisitioned civilian teams and vehicles to haul their tools and supplies. Like the artillery, they found that increasingly unsatisfactory. In 1806, while in Berlin, Napoleon formed a provisional Train du Genie, modeled on the Artillery train troops.6 It proved useful but too weak. After some experimentation, in 1811 it was given six "war" companies and a depot company. Its officers and men wore the same iron-gray uniform as the other train troops, but with black facings in contrast to the artillery train's dark blue and the supply train's brown. The miners were highly trained specialists in the elaborate duels of mining and countermining that were a usual feature of sieges. It was dangerous, deadly underground work against both the enemy and the natural hazards of cave-ins, flooding, and asphyxiation. At reviews and other formations, therefore, the miners always took the right of the line-the post of honorover other engineer troops. And because their duty was unhealthy, Napoleon set a time limit to it. Between campaigns they were much employed at demolishing captured or obsolete fortifications. For greater administrative efficiency the independent companies of miners were formed into two 5company battalions in 1808. Next year they were given depot companies, and by 1813 an additional company in each battalion. A company of "veteran-miners," unfit for full duty, also was formed in 1813. Except for the differing insignia shown on their buttons, sapeurs and miners wore the same basic uniform, being distinguishable at a distance only by the color of their epaulettes: One had red, the other a deep yellow or orange-yellow. Unfortunately, even the most persistent "uniformolo- gists" are still not quite certain which wore which color! (Current guesses favor red for the miners.) The final type of engineer soldier-a company of sapeurs-ouvriers (engineer-artificers) was raised in 1811 for the new engineer arsenal at Metz. Its job was the manufacture and repair of engineer materiel and, since this was a rear-area, noncombatant assignment, their black facings were made of plush instead of velvet.' Also during 1811 two more sapeur battalions were added to the Grande Armee-the Bataillon de Walcheren (6th or "Dutch") and the Bataillon de l'Ile d'Elbe (7th or "Italian"), each of four companies! A similar 8th Battalion, of sapeurs Espagnols, was added in 1812. The losses of the 1812 and 1813 campaigns, which included appreciable numbers of engineer officers and enlisted men cut off in fortresses in Poland, Germany, and Spain, left an aching shortage of trained men for the defense of France. Engineers from the Bridges and Roads Service and the Corps Imperial des Mines took up some of the slack. (In Hamburg Davout praised M. Jousselin of Bridges and Roads as an engineer of the greatest merit.) Even civilian surveyors were utilized. Qualified civilians were drafted to fill up the miners' ranks. The little conscripts did what they could, t