e of medical officers, employees, vehicles, and equipment organized into "divisions d'ambulance. At army headquarters were the chief physicians, surgeons, and pharmacists, and a reserve of personnel and medical supplies. Officers of the three medical services were distributed, sometimes thinly, through the chain of hospitals behind the Grande Armee. In action, the regimental surgeon and his staff' would park their medical caisson in a sheltered spot close behind their regiment and open their ambulance aid station. Their colonel would detail several soldiers-never his best and brightest-to collect the wounded for them. Meanwhile, corps headquarters would have released one of its divisions d'ambulance10 to each of its component infantry/cavalry divisions, where it would set up a hospital de premier secours (field hospital). Whenever possible this was placed in a large building-an abby, church, or chateau. (Since the Administration was supposed to select the site and direct the move, there might be delays.) The first problem was to get the wounded away from the firing line. It was a basic rule that unhurt soldiers must not be allowed to drop out of the ranks to carry them back to the aid station. Otherwise, every wounded man would suddenly have three or four devoted comrades who would feel compelled to get him to safety; once away from the firing line they would be strangely unable to find their way back. That rapidly bled the regiment and subjected the really brave men who stayed and fought to an unfair risk. At Lutzen in 1813 hundreds of conscripts, even in units of the Young Guard, began drifting back to the aid stations with the wounded, but met unsympathetic gendarmes. At Bautzen, nineteen days later, they kept to their ranks like veterans. Once the assigned details had moved them back to the aid station, the wounded were properly bandaged. Moving them to the division hospitals and on to the rear was the responsibility of the Administration and therefore one of the weak links in the system. Normally this was entrusted to a rdgie, which contracted to collect the wounded, move them from hospital to hospital as directed by the medical officers, and meanwhile feed and otherwise care for them. In 1806 the chief contractor had an excellent plan and organization, with representatives at every division headquarters. Hospitals and wagon trains were provided and adequately staffed. Unfortunately, as previously noted, the contractor's employees could not be gotten into the combat zone. Consequently, evacuation was too often a series of improvisations, sometimes requiring three or four days. Somebody would assemble all available vehicles-impressed local carts, carriages, and farm wagons; empty artillery caissons and supply wagons-pack the wounded into them, and start them off to the division hospitals. Sometimes cavalry regiments would dismount and load wounded men onto their horses. Even wheelbarrows might be used. After the battle of Lutzen, some seven thousand French and Confederation of the Rhine wounded were brought back to the city of Naumburg. No hospitals were ready, possibly because Cossacks had raided the French trains nearby. (Fortunately, some Baden chevau-legers and the 10th Hussars had caught the Cossacks on the bounce and routed them before they could do too much damage.) In this uproar, Naumburg's citizens took over and had all the wounded treated and fed by sundown. Other wounded were picked up by young men and women from the nearby small town of Lutzen. "[T]hose boys merited laurels, and the girls deserved crowns," wrote Coignet, who would remember their deed." Most operations were performed in the division hospitals. Even the senior surgeons like Larrey and Percy would come forward from army headquarters to take an active part in the work, often taking the occasion to train less experienced assistants. From the division the wounded passed to army hospitals, where they were treated until they were cured or died. The Service de Santd's vehicles received little notice in their time. The regimental surgeon's caisson d'ambulance was a light, sturdy four-horse vehicle that could follow the troops almost anywhere.'Z There were some ambulances (using the word in the American sense), including both twoand four-wheeled types, in various corps and armies for the transportation of the seriously wounded. In Spain little Biscayen carts, which could get through the narrowest defiles, were used for that purpose; in the roughest country, mule trains equipped with cacolets (a special type of pack saddle that could support two wounded men, either sitting or lying down) were substituted. The wurst, sometimes fitted with a hood, was employed until around 1810 to move personnel and supplies but was gradually discarded as uncomfortable and undignified. Water transport was used where possible, being easier on the wounded; also, barges were roomy enough to permit some care of them while in motion. Barges might be specially fitted for medical service with covered decks and stoves for cold weather. Hospitals, both temporary and permanent, varied greatly in comfort and efficiency, the principal determining factor being the character of the responsible commissaire des guerres. By 1814 there were eleven major and seventeen minor permanent military hospitals, and new ones on order for Flushing and Trier. Also, from at least 1805 Napoleon granted funds to civilian hospitals on condition that they make a specified number of beds available for soldiers. The Emperor subjected his hospitals to periodic inspections by Percy and other competent medical officers. As a double check, the priests assigned to the hospitals in Poland during 1806-7 were to keep a fatherly eye on the treatment the patients received and report cases of neglect directly to the Emperor. Napoleon himself would appear on surprise inspections, an early example being his visit to the plague hospital in Jaffa in 1798. He was particularly active during the 1813 armistice at what General George Patton later would call "ass-kicking." One letter of that period to Marshal Kellermann specified that the windows of the Mainz military hospital were to be left open during the day. (Some of them opened on the garden of an influ ential citizen who wanted them kept closed to spare his sensibilities.) Napoleon's correspondence is full of letters regarding hospital equipment and functioning, proper clothing for men leaving the hospitals, and the movement of the sick and wounded. One important concern was that every hospital should have a salle des armes (armory) where the patients' weapons could be kept in good order; that not only saved the weapons but also enabled the staff and patients to defend themselves against enemy raiders. Another constant anxiety was the treatment of men just released from the hospital: Napoleon wanted them put into a convalescent camp for a week or two and well fed until they had regained their strength. Then they were to be properly clothed and equipped, formed into detachments under an officer, and sent forward. "If you leave them to the commissaires de guerre, half will die along the way."" Colonels were periodically told to check up on the number of men carried on their "slates" as being in the hospitaltheir reports and the hospital records showed a wide variance. The temporary hospitals set up outside the Empire produced much bitter language. In Spain there were few hospitals, and the average Spanish surgeon or infirmier was extremely dirty; much surgical work still was done by barbers. The Madrid hospital had three thousand beds on four floors, but neither latrines nor water conduits. Percy cleaned it up, installed latrines on each floor with reservoirs of water to keep them flushed, and found Spanish agents who provided excellent cinchona bark and good wine. During 1806-7, to supplement its hospitals in Prussia, the Grande Armee opened six hospitals in and around Warsaw-two for wounded soldiers, two for the sick (Napoleon preferred to keep them separate), and two for VD cases. There was also a convalescent depot. Percy's inspection notes dripped acid: The Marienburg hospital had a director who should be hanged or drowned and a commissaire who stole with as much impudence as audacity; at Kustrin they let ten or twelve men die in succession on the same mattress without bothering to clean it; the Bavarian hospital at Bamberg was splendid, but keep the French Administration from meddling with it! In Warsaw, the commissaires stole half the patients' meat ration, and the civilian infirmiers drank their wine. Polish infirmiers were willing but frequently lousy. In 1809 the hospital at Ratisbon, managed by a German doctor, was much praised: The food was healthful and abundant, each patient had his own bed, and the sheets were changed every eight days. In 1812 there was a well-planned chain of hospitals, eventually stretching from Moscow back into France. Again, their quality varied. In the main hospital at Vilna, the sick and wounded were poorly fed, while the Administration staff sold surgical supplies to Jewish merchants and used hospital blankets to cover their horses in bad weather. Prior to his evacuation of Moscow, Napoleon had ordered a westward roll-up of patients, medical personnel, and supplies. He also tried to carry the wounded left in a hospital near Borodino with him, using all available vehicles for that purpose, but few of them survived the trip. Pierre Auvray, however, found the hospital in the grim fortress city of Glogau a true haven, though it was crammed with casualties from the long retreat. Its infirmiers took good care of him even when he was entirely helpless. The 1814 campaign made new hospital space within France an urgent necessity. Paris received wounded Frenchmen with very poor grace: One general, brought into a well-to-do neighborhood by two sapeurs, was ignored by all until a grocer gave him a glass of water. Then the old Revolutionary spirit stirred: Passing working men broke in the door of one mansion and had the general suitably accommodated therein. Napoleon wrote Marie-Louise to have all surplus bedding from the palaces at Fontainebleau, Compiegne, and Rambouillet collected and turned over to the military hospitals. The city fathers of Alencon, more than 100 miles west of Paris, were informed that they must provide space for five hundred wounded being evacuated from hospitals nearer the front; if their existing hospitals would not suffice, some of the wounded would be lodged in private homes at the expense of the owners. The requirements were 250 wooden beds (with bedsacks filled with 15 kilograms of straw), a mattress, a bolster, and a coverlet. Also needed were 1,000 sheets; 1,200 nightshirts; 1,000 nightcaps; 1,200 napkins; 400 kilograms of linen bandages; and 200 kilograms of lint. That hospital was organized promptly enough, apparently in a local convent. The Alencon authorities bluntly informed reluctant leading citizens like Monsieur Louis Demees that they wouldn't like what was going to happen to them if they didn't contribute their fair share of its furnishings. Napoleon computed that approximately one man out of every eight of his troops would be sick at any one time, and wanted his hospitals to be able to handle slightly more than that number. That did not suffice in Spain, with its harsh climate, poor food, constant strain and fatigue of guerrilla warfare, strong wines, and general filth. "'Ware the fleas and lice! They churn the barracks straw and promenade themselves down the street like ants.s14 In late 1808 the average French corps there had one man out of four sick; the foreign units averaged slightly more than one out of three. Germans were weakened by la nostalgie (homesickness), which was recognized as a definite medical problem. In Russia the wet, chill weather at the start of the campaign caused a large number of respiratory infections. The problem was exacerba