he drivers of the 4th Engineer Train Company giving an example of courage at Chalons. The Bourbon reorganization of 1814 rebuilt the Sapeurs du Genie as three regiments, each of two battalions. Each battalion had five companies of sapeurs and one of miners. The train troops were cut down to one company with twenty-eight horses. The artificier company was left intact. Except for desperate efforts to increase the train troops, Napoleon let that organization stand in 1815. Harness and tools had vanished and had to be replaced, horses were hard to find, and much was still left to do when his last campaign moved out. There was always difficulty in getting enough graduates of the engineer school to fill all the officer slots in the sapeur and miner battalions. At one time (apparently 1803) one-third of their captains were nongraduates. To give such officers some advanced education and to improve the overall training of his engineer troops, Napoleon opened a unit school for miners and sapeurs at Metz in 1803 and another in 1809 at Alexandria (Alessandria), Italy. Each sapeur battalion and miner company was supposed to rotate through them. Engineer troops normally served by company: Each corps usually had at least a company of miners and one or more of sapeurs, but when possible Napoleon would attach a company of sapeurs directly to every infantry division. In his hurriedly assembled army of 1809, Napoleon could give each corps only one company of miners and two of sapeurs. However, the engineer "park" had a reserve of three companies of miners and nine of sapeurs, as well as a battalion of ouvriers de la marine, a battalion of sailors, four companies of pontonniers, two of artillery, and four of pion- niers-a total of close to five thousand men. It was commanded by hardworking General of Brigade Etienne d'Hastrel, assisted by an adjoint and a commissaire des guerres, and had its own medical detachment. Foreseeing that the Spaniards would defend their cities with fanatical zeal, Napoleon took a strong force of sapeurs and miners into Spain with his veteran troops in late 1808, remarking that mines would be almost as necessary as artillery. In fact, as shown during Lannes's siege and capture of Saragossa, they could be more effective against the massively built Spanish towns than the heaviest artillery bombardment. On campaign, sapeurs marched (often together with units of pontonniers) immediately behind the light infantry of the advance guard. Each company had its caisson of engineer tools-billhooks, axes, shovels, and pickaxesand the equipment for erecting trestle bridges.' On the march it made quick repairs and improvements to the roads and bridges and removed obstructions left by the enemy. Sapeurs were not to be committed casually as combat troops, but sometimes it became unavoidable. Retreating out of Portugal through the mountains in 1809, Soult found himself blocked at the Tamega River, roaring at full flood down its deep-cut, rocky course. Portuguese troops held the only bridge: They had built three barricades across it and had mined it into the bargain, so that it could be blown up if the French did succeed in storming it. A 10-gun battery on high ground behind the bridge commanded the approach to it. Soult had been unable to bring his artillery across the hills; Wellington was struggling in pursuit somewhere behind him. An attempt to rush the bridge wrecked the first barricade, but failed with heavy casualties. Somehow the second barricade was set afire and burned down, but the French had no luck with the third. The river proved too swift to build a trestle bridge farther downstream. Captain Brochard of the engineers had an idea. The night was bright with moonlight, but a sapeur dressed in dark gray crawled out on the cluttered bridge, pushing a keg of gunpowder wrapped in gray cloth before him with his head. French snipers, who had found a convenient knob downstream, from which they could put an enfilade fire on some of the Portuguese trenches, opened up to distract the defenders. A strong column of grenadiers was formed up under the cover of some houses. Keeping carefully to the side of the bridge darkened by the shadow of its parapet, the sapeur nestled his keg against the barricade and crawled carefully back. Two more sapeurs did the same; a fourth man placed his keg but-his nerve snapping on his crawl back-rose to run and was immediately wounded. After a long, tense wait to see if the Portuguese suspected anything, a fifth sapeur went out with a "saucisson" (sausage-a long cloth tube filled with gunpowder) and attached it to one keg. At 3:00 A.M., with morning fog rising to blind the Portuguese artillerymen, Brochard touched off his "sausage." The blast wrecked the barricade and adjacent Portuguese defenses, and blew away the fuze to the mine. At once Brochard's sapeurs rushed the bridge, pouring water into the mine chamber and clearing away debris. Through them charged the grenadiers, seizing the hill beyond and the Portuguese guns. Much the same happened at the opening of the Waterloo campaign. Soult's muddled staff work and Vandamme's mulishness resulted in the leading infantry moving out almost four hours behind schedule. Consequently advancing unsupported, Pajol's light cavalry was halted by Prussian infantry holding a barricaded bridge outside the walled town of Charleroi. Then Napoleon came up, having ridden ahead of his leading corps. The only foot troops he had with him were the engineers and sailors of his Guard, with a detachment of pontonniers, all intended for bridge and road repair. He sent them in: They cleared the bridge with one rush, blew in the town gate with petards, and cleared the streets. Pajol spurred through, and the campaign was moving again. Engineer troops could handle rearguard missions too. After Waterloo, Grouchy's withdrawal through Namur was covered by sapeurs firing from loopholed houses. And at Waterloo the 1st Battalion of the 1st Engineer Regiment was one of the last French units to leave the field. The engineers' usual lot, however, was to shed far more sweat than blood. Bridges along the army's line of march had to be repaired, strengthened, maintained, and, if necessary, rebuilt. Where the army crossed on pontoon bridges, trestle bridges had to be run up as quickly as possible so that the pontonniers could get their boats out of water, load up, and move forward with the advancing army. Bridging materials would be chopped out of nearby forests, requisitioned from towns in the vicinity, or sometimes secured by the informal process of tearing down a few houses near the site. Heavy planks for the bridge flooring were the hardest items to come by. In possibly hostile territory, all important bridges had to be protected against hostile raiders by fortified bridgeheads; Napoleon wanted them to be "double" so that both ends of the bridge could be defended. Towns and halting places along the line of communications had to be at least lightly fortified. If the campaign involved a siege, both sapeurs and miners would be fully occupied. During retreats sapeurs moved with the rear guard, destroying bridges and obstructing roads behind it. Some of the bridging work was very elaborate. Probably the outstanding example is that constructed in 1809 across the Danube in the six weeks between the battle of Aspern-Essling and the battle of Wagram. Converting the Island of Lobau into a strong entrenched camp, Napoleon next seized small adjacent islands and connected them to Lobau with short trestle bridges. Pontoon and pile bridges were built from the south bank to Lobau, and a line of pilings was planted upstream from them to stop fireboats and floating debris, such as the Austrians had used so effectively against the French pontoon bridge during Aspern-Essling.10 The average soldier might have a certain fellow-feeling for the sapeurs and miners, but he did not respect an engineer staff officer. To him, the engineer was a Monsieur Probleme, who was very fussy about your labors while you were digging entrenchments under his direction but never around to lend a hand when it came to point-blank volleys, bayonets, and butts. It was hard to conceive how a grown man could be of any service to the Grande Armee with only a compass, a pencil, and a plotting board. The amount of engineering work to be done was far beyond the best capacity of the Grande Armee's engineer troops, especially in the construction and improvement of the Empire's fortresses. (For all their massive solidarity, fortresses were rather fragile things, constantly needing repair from the mere effects of wind and weather.) Much of the necessary pick-and shovel work was done by pionnier (labor) units." This was a very inclusive term, covering all sorts of odd formations. Some were punishment units of one degree or another-the colonial battalions, the colonial pioneers, the depots de conscrits rdfractaires, the pionniers franpais, and those of soldiers condemned to hard labor. Others were formed from prisoners of war or foreign units disarmed in 1813. (In February 1811 there were thirty-eight battalions of prisoner-of-war pioneers, most of them Spanish-fifteen working on fortifications, fifteen on roads and bridges, and eight around naval bases. Eight more seem to have been added that April, one of them Portuguese. Napoleon wanted fifteen more-again mostly Spanishformed the following August for work along the Channel coast. Clarke argued that the coast was unhealthy, that winter was almost at hand, and that something could be done in 1812. Napoleon insisted: The prisoners could work during September and October and might even get some useful work done during the winter. At worst, they could complete their organization and be ready to go in the early spring. The Bridges and Roads Service was pretty well swamped with all that extra help.12 Few such organizations, however willingly they might work, could be used with French armies in the field. The pionniers Francais did have one or more companies in Spain, and one battalion of pionniers Espagnols served with the Grande Armee in 1813-14, but that apparently was all. Two other organizations, the pionniers noirs and the pionniers blancs, did do such duty. The pionniers noirs were Haitian blacks, shipped from that island to France. Most were prisoners of war taken when General Victoire Emman- ual Leclerc (Pauline's first husband) easily overran the island in 1802 before the yellow fever gutted his army. There is a story that some of them were from Negro bands that had joined the French. (Haitian politics has always been a bloody-minded business.) Doubtful of their lasting loyalty, the French offered them a pleasant sea voyage from one Haitian port to another to save them a hot march overland. The voyage proved unexpectedly long; when the hatches finally were taken off, Haiti was half the world away.13 From various French ports the blacks were hustled southward in company-size lots under gendarmerie or cavalry escort into Italy. There they were organized into two battalions, one at Mantua, another at Leg- nago, under white officers, some of them detailed from the artillerie de la marine.14 Napoleon referred to them as a "corps" but directed that the two battalions never serve together, and that their muskets be of inferior quality. It would appear, nevertheless, that the two soon were consolidated, since all correspondence seems to indicate a single battalion. That battalion served at the siege of Gaeta in 1806, where de Segur noted: "These negroes would follow through the air with greedy looks the enemy's bombshells for which they were paid a [few sous]; reaching them as they fell, they would dash upon them and pull out the burning fuze unless its premature explo sion happened to kill them during this dangerous and not too lucrative sport.s15 For a commander, Napoleon selected chef d'Escadron Joseph Damingue, then an officier "a la suite" of th