er, any such work-which could not have been concealed from the enemy-would have revealed Napoleon's plan.) The withdrawal was carefully planned. Oudinot was assigned the mission of protecting the causeway and the bridges; the Elster bridge was mined, and a Colonel Montfort of the engineers was left in charge with orders to blow it up as soon as the French rear guard had crossed. By 11:00 A.M. on October 18 Napoleon began sending his trains, artillery park, and some cavalry across the Elster to coil up in Leipzig's west bank suburbs. (Coignet tells how he took the Maison's seventeen wagons with the Emperor's maps and war chest to safety.) After dark, the guns and infantry began moving back. March discipline never was a French specialty, but the movement went on successfully until almost noon the next day. Driven back into the old city, the French rear guard-the hardused corps of Poniatowski, Macdonald, Lauriston, and Reynier-still held its crumbling wall, but long-range artillery fire occasionally struck the causeway. Then some Saxon troops in the old city turned their coats and began sniping at the retreating French, making the actual fighting sound much nearer.22 Afflicted with what American Civil War veterans called "cannon fever," Montfort suddenly decided he must find out who was commanding the rear guard-and rode off westward, ostensibly in search of that information, instead of going back into Leipzig to check with the corps commanders there. He left a sapeur corporal in charge of the mine. In such a situation, brave men may panic. The corporal touched off the mine while the bridge was crowded with retreating Frenchmen and in no danger. Almost 20,000 French and Poles were cut off. Macdonald swam to safety, the wounded Poniatowski drowned in the attempt. Lauriston, Reynier, and some 15,000 officers and men were captured. Some of the rear guard, the Neufchatel Battalion among them, made their own way to safety across the Elster by boat, raft, or improvised footbridge. From the west bank, their comrades took whatever action they could. Lieutenant Radeport was sent with a detachment of sapeurs to check for a ford or any other means of passage. He found a lumber raft tied up along the bank and hurriedly converted it into a footbridge that would support men moving slowly and carefully. Posting a detail of his sapeurs at its east-bank end to regulate the rate of crossing, he brought over (by his count) some 1,500 soldiers. Then, as enemy pressure increased, the waiting crowd broke out of control, pushed the sapeurs aside, and jammed out onto the bridge until it came apart under them. A number of other officers also improvised bridges but left scant personal accounts of it. Altogether, approximately five thousand French got to safety, however momentary. ,,,. I