e Guard. Damingue-"dit Hercule" for his size and strength-was a mulatto of great bravery who had distinguished himself as a junior officer of Napoleon's guides in Italy. He had been promoted beyond his competence, remaining illiterate and lacking, it would seem, certain basic social graces. Napoleon had been planning to send him to Haiti; now he promoted him to colonel and gave him the Pionniers Noirs. Hercule asked for an eagle for his dubious battalion, and Napoleon, always mindful of past services, approved that request, much to the annoyance of his mineurs, who weren't allowed one. Hercule was a limp commanding officer; when he retired in 1805 (by special favor at full active-duty pay), Napoleon specified that the battalion's next commander must be a very firm officer, capable of straightening it out.16 In August 1806 the pionniers noirs were given to the Kingdom of Naples, becoming its 7th Regiment of Line Infantry with the clanging title, "Royal Africa." As Neapolitan regiments went, it was a good one. Murat gave it white uniforms faced with bright yellow. It was in Germany in late 1812 and early 1813, much to the delight of local artists. Sergeant Burgogne, who saw it at Ebling in January, remembered that its regimental sapeurs had white bearskins and that its officers were Negroes-and also that it looked decidedly odd to see a regiment of black men standing there in the snow. The most important combat pioneer unit was the Regiment de Pionniers Blancs, organized in February 1806 from Austrian prisoners of war who volunteered for such service rather than return to Austria." Originally they were assigned to the Ministry of the Interior for work on projects recommended by the Ministry of War, but they soon were employed by companies all over the Empire, especially in Spain. (Their listed officer casualties were at Baylen and the siege of Gerona.) That scattered employment made their regimental and battalion organization superfluous, so the regiment was abolished in 1810, and its personnel were put into five compagnies de pionniers volontaires etrangers. Three more companies were added during 1811. In 1814 the Bourbons incorporated the remaining men into a "Foreign Colonial" Regiment.18 While stationed at Alexandria, Girault saw that all the troops in the garrison were working on the fortifications. (Being a gagiste musician, Girault could sit in the shade with a cool drink and admire their activity.) However, the hardest tasks were given to French soldiers "condemned to the bullet" and to Neapolitan galley slaves. Naples had an oversupply of such criminals; in 1806, over and above the thousand of them at Alexandria, there were 300 at Mantua, 300 at Porto Legnago, 600 building roads and draining swamps in Corsica, and 1,200 at Rochefort for similar work. In 1813, 600 were sent to Hamburg, both to get them out of France and to push Napoleon's intent to build that city into a major base. Sapeurs and mineurs were armed like infantry with musket (usually the lighter "dragoon" model) and bayonet; most contemporary sketches show them also carrying briquets. During sieges, those sapeurs working in the entrenchments closest to the enemy's position would wear heavy cuirasses and pots en tete (a helmet resembling the "lobster-tailed pot" worn by Cromwell's Ironsides), both painted black. An emergency version of this equipment was devised in 1799 at a small fort on the French line of communication in Naples. Surrounded by hostile peasants, the French commander decided to spike twelve old cannon, too heavy to bring into the fort, that were lying just outside the fort's ditch. Among odds and ends found in the fort when the French occupied it were twelve suits of medieval armor. Donning them, a French detail went out and spiked the guns under long-range musket fire. The scene had "something of the picturesque [and] of the diabolical, and seemed out of fairyland.s19 The military Aerostatier companies, unique as they were, had a short, unhappy history. They were considered engineer troops, but there is no evidence the rest of the engineers felt any deep kinship with them. Even before the Revolution there had been much discussion of possible military uses of balloons, Benjamin Franklin considering them a means of airborne invasion. Carnot, too, was much interested in them. A provisional balloon company with the Armee du Nord at Fleurus in 1794 achieved some success, largely through its effect on French and Austrian morale. The Committee of Public Safety therefore activated two regular companies and opened a balloon school. These were hydrogen balloons; their crews had to go through the somewhat tricky process of "decomposing" water to inflate them, and that took time. A battle might be over before they were ready to ascend. Also, it was almost impossible to move an inflated balloon any great distance if a wind were blowing. Most generals had no use for them. One company, with its balloon, was captured by the Austrians.20 Freed in 1797, it went to Egypt with Napoleon. Its balloon was still aboard ship when Nelson destroyed the French fleet at the battle of the Nile. However, the aerostatiers were all educated men with a variety of skills and proved very useful at setting up a woolen mill and other industrial establishments. The Directory had deactivated the company in France in 1799 and closed the school. The company in Egypt also was dissolved in 1802 when it came home, its men going into other engineer units. Balloons continued to tickle some military imaginations. In 1808 Major L'Homond, one of the original aerostatiers, proposed an invasion of England using one hundred montgolfiers (hot air balloons), each 100 meters in diameter and capable of lifting a thousand men with rations for fifteen days, two cannon with their caissons, twenty-five horses, and sufficient wood to keep the balloon's fire-pots going. Napoleon turned the proposal over to Gespard Monge, his scientific adviser, to determine if it was worthy of a large-scale test. It wasn't. The year before, the Danes had experimented with a dirgible balloon to be propelled by man-powered "oars," from which they hoped to bombard the British fleet off Copenhagen. Its motive power proved insufficient, but the Danes did use free balloons in 1808 to carry propaganda leaflets urging revolt across the straits into southern Sweden, giving the Swedish authorities quite a police-up-the-area job. In 1812 Tsar Alexander I hired a German engineer to build him a huge fish-shaped balloon, to be propelled by "fins," capable of carrying several men. (Contemporary gossip was that it would be used to bomb Napoleon's headquarters.) Its big bag took five days to inflate, and its propelling apparatus wouldn't work; the only damage it did was to the Russian treasury. Yet the aerostatiers had one last fling. In 1814, la Patrie being threatened, one-time engineer officer Lazare Carnot left his retirement to offer Napoleon his "sexagenarian arm [and] the example of an old soldier." Napoleon entrusted him with the command of Antwerp, "one of the keys to the empire," which was dangerously exposed to the Allied advance. (At the last moment, somebody noticed that Carnot's highest military grade had been chef de bataillon; his immediate elevation to general of division probably set a record for quick promotion.) Carnot defended Antwerp successfully with skill and energy; wanting more information on the activities of the besiegers, he had a balloon manufactured-much like the one used at Fleu- rus-to look down upon their lines." The engineers' poor city cousins were the sapeurs-pompiers (firemen) found in Paris and other large towns. (There were other names for them, including gardes-pompiers, sapeurs-grenadiers-pompiers, and cannoniers- sapeurs-pompiers.) Prior to 1801 the Paris compagnie de garde-pompes had been a basically civilian force-some 380 men for the whole city-though they had their own flag and doctor. It was not a free service: you had to pay to have your burning home sprinkled. Theaters had to furnish their own firemen, and various neighborhoods had their own "mutual companies." That year Napoleon began increasing and militarizing it, both for greater efficiency and to make it less of a draft-dodger's haven. The results were not satisfactory, the Paris city fathers failing to secure good recruits and to maintain discipline. When a big fire ravaged the Austrian Embassy, where Schwarzenberg was giving a reception to celebrate Napoleon's marriage to Marie-Louise, there were only six sapeurs-pompiers on call, some of them were drunk, and the fire chief was out of town. After a thorough study, Napoleon (who had helped rescue the injured) ordered Paris provided with pump boats on the Seine and reorganized the sapeurs-pompiers as a 4-company battalion of almost six hundred officers and men. Not exactly soldiers, they were under military discipline and armed as infantry, with the definite secondary mission of supporting the Paris police. Their uniform resembled that of the sapeurs, but with a brass helmet instead of a shako. They had drummers and, apparently, a band. When they paraded with other troops they had to take the left of the line and the tail of the column, but they fought as well as anyone in the defense of Paris in 1814. Thiebault mentions the sapeurs-pompiers of Hamburg taking part in the defense of that city during 1813-14. Organizations associated with the engineers included the previously mentioned Service des Ponts et Chaussees, the Corps Imperial des Mines or "Ingenieurs des Mines" (mining engineers), and the ingenieurs geographes (topographical engineers). The first two were civil service organizations with their own preparatory schools, though the first had worn a uniform since 1772 and the second was given a uniform button in 1810. Both served as reserve engineer officers in times of crisis. The ingenieurs gdographes were first established in 1771 as the French Army's surveyors and map-makers. Berthier was one of the products of their training. In spite of their international reputation, the National Assembly suppressed them in 1791, ordering their duties turned over to the engineers. Army commanders objected to that piece of unnecessary ignorance, and the gdographes were allowed to continue on a more or less informal basis. During the first years of the Empire, they were under the control of the Depot of Military Archives, but in January 1809 Napoleon gave them definite status as the Corps Impdriale des Ingdnieurs Gdographes. It was a force of ninety officers, ranging from student sous-lieutenants to colonels; casualties were replaced by students from the Ecole Polytechnique. Their work was hard, requiring young, healthy, active men. Frequently it was dangerous, their small survey parties being natural targets for enemy irregulars. Topographical engineers drew the same pay as the engineers proper, plus an allowance for hiring chainmen and other helpers and for keeping their surveying instruments in repair. Their distinctive color was aurore (yellowish orange). The battle of Leipzig was a major test for some French engineers. After three days of bitter fighting, outnumbered and outgunned two-to-one, and almost out of ammunition, Napoleon decided to withdraw. Since his original line of communications- leading north from Leipzig to his fortified base complex of Magdeburg, Torgau, and Wittenberg-had been cut, he would retire eastward through Erfurt. Getting out of Leipzig involved moving his whole army through the crooked streets of the old city and then along a built-up causeway, a mile and a half long, which carried the highway across the swampy area west of the city. The causeway was cut by several bridges, including a large one over the Elster River. (Contrary to various stories, Marbot's included, the construction of any parallel bridges would have been a large-scale project for which the French had neither time nor material. Moreov