ted by the fact that the 1811 crops had been poor; the resulting shortage of straw for bivouacs forced soldiers to sleep on the damp ground. The troops picked up lice in Poland and picked up more in Russia. Typhus appeared early in the campaign, as did dysentery from bad water and coarse food. Sickness and the physical and mental fatigue of the long campaign made soldiers more susceptible to the cold. The cold made it impossible to keep yourself free from lice-in fact, during the worst cold it was dangerous to take down your trousers to defecate! The Grande Armee's medical officers did have an empirical understand ing of their problems, gained through years of practice and observation. They knew, for example, that it was essential to give soldiers salt or salt meat occasionally during the summer and to "mellow" their drinking water with vinegar. Sometimes they got right answers from the wrong assumptions. Troops camped on pleasant green fields near a swamp frequently came down with "fevers," which medical officers concluded were caused by the "miasmatic vapors" given off by decaying vegetable matter in the swamp. If you moved the camp to higher, drier ground, the fevers ceased. The fact that you had also moved the camp beyond the flying range of the malaria-carrying Anopheles mosquitoes that bred in the swamp would not be recognized until 1897, but you had gotten the desired results all the same! We have difficulty today appreciating their work. The medicines they used have largely vanished from our pharmacopoeia; the names they gave the diseases they tended usually puzzle us. They wrote of "nervous fever," "inflammatory fever," "putrid fever," "malign fever," "congealing fever," and "tertian" and "quartan" fevers. The last two were types of malaria, and "putrid fever" possibly was peritonitis or pleurisy, but the rest might have been typhoid, typhus, a bad cold, diphtheria, or any one of a half-dozen other afflictions. The maladie de langeur that appears occasionally seems to have been a severe anemia. Pourriture d'hopital was the dreaded, swift-spreading hospital gangrene. Gout was more of an officers' disease, but it cannot always have been caused by high living: Berthier suffered an attack during the last days of 1812. Scurvy was another recognized disease, though there was no certainty about its cause; however, it was known that it would appear during sieges or whenever fresh food was lacking. There is no positive identification at all for such feared sicknesses as the "Madrid colic," a lethal bowel inflammation, or the "canicule (Dog Star) fever" that ravaged unacclimated soldiers in the Rochefort garrison during July and August. As might be expected, Napoleon's medical officers tended to regard diseases with the same symptoms as variants of the same disease. Because quinine checked malarial fevers, they fed it to anyone with a fever. (It still shows up in some modern cold "remedies.") Most of them understood the need for cleanliness without comprehending the degree of sanitation essential during surgery. They used wine, brandy, or vinegar-sometimes diluted or sugared-as antiseptics in treating wounds. Some, like Larrey, considered those too strong and preferred to use an "emollient," such as those introduced by Ambrose Pare. 15 Many medical officers had their own formulas and techniques. One used salt water for a minor wound; another treated saber cuts with camphorated brandy mixed with spring water and salt. They knew the disinfectant quality of whitewash and might use quicklime on latrines or hospital waste, but they never guessed that the barns where they so often established their aid stations and field hospitals were thoroughly contaminated places. If water dissolved soap readily and did not have an unpleasant taste, they considered it safe to drink, unaware that the clearest stream might be contaminated with typhoid germs. If forced to use water of dubious quality, they mixed it with wine, brandy, or vinegar; rarely is there any mention of boiling it. In Davout's corps questionable water was filtered through a "pipe" of flannel cloth filled with charcoal. In some areas there was the additional problem of sangsues (leeches) in ponds; small ones might be swallowed while drinking and attach themselves inside the mouth, nose, and gullet. If you suspected their presence you strained the water through a cloth; if they got themselves attached, you had to gargle and snuff up salt water or vinegar. Aware that their knowledge was imperfect, the Grande Armee's medical officers tended, when time and conditions permitted, to use elaborate treatments with many different types of medications, apparently hoping that one or more of them would be effective. After drinking some poisoned coffee, Coignet was purged, bathed, had his stomach massaged for hours by two infirmiers working turn-and-turn about, was cupped, bled, and blistered. Finally he was able to keep down two big goblets of iced lemonade and began to recover-so thin, he remembered, that he was practically transparent. In October 1808 Lannes's horse fell with him on an icy mountain road; struggling to regain its feet, the horse slipped again and fell back on the half-stunned marshal. Examination showed him covered with bruises, his stomach swollen and taut, his extremities very cold. He could not move, had difficulty breathing, and was suffering great intestinal pain. A huge sheep was stunned and skinned alive; Lannes was smeared with an "embrocation" (lotion) of strongly camphorated camomile oil and sewed into the steaming, bloody skin. Hot flannels were applied to his arms and legs, and he was fed a little weak tea spiked with sugar and lemon juice. After two hours' sleep he was taken out of the sheepskin, rubbed down with a mixture of camphorated brandy and milk of almonds, and put through a regimen of massages and hot baths. Five days later Lannes mounted his horse and went on with the war. A thirteen-year-old English drummer, captured during Moore's retreat in 1808, had gone blind because of his sufferings, Larrey saw that he had warm baths and massages with warm camphorated wine, then burned small bits of moxa on his temples as a counterirritant. On the seventh application the drummer's vision returned completely. When a patient's jaws locked in a bad case of tetanus, the surgeon sometimes took out one or two teeth and fed him through a straw. If the case was desperate, the surgeon would cauterize the wound by applying white-hot irons. Brutal as that seems, it was often successful: The jaws relaxed within hours, and the wounds healed readily. Usually the only anesthetic available in the field was a slug of brandy; enough of it does detach you from the pain. Hospitals made considerable use of opium, ordinarily in the form of opiate beverages. Because of the danger of gangrene developing, amputation was the sur geon's normal choice in the cases of severe wounds of the arms and legs, especially when joints were injured. The stump usually healed quickly and required comparatively little attention. Most surgeons were quick, deft, and efficient at it, getting the limb off with the least possible shock to the patient. (Three minutes was considered time enough.) Probably they were too ready on occasion: There were derisive comments that they had no other cure for frostbite and that they'd amputate your head to cure your dandruff. If a patient objected strongly, however-as Oyon and Lauthonnye did-the surgeons seem to have respected his wishes. When it was necessary to amputate both of a soldier's legs, the approved technique was to leave their stumps the same length so that he would have less trouble managing his wooden legs. Competent surgeons stressed that amputations should be done as soon as possible, before infection could set in. (Apparently the French learned that practice from American surgeons during our Revolutionary War.) Some suppuration was expected from a wound; a white, creamy "laudable pus" was watched for as evidence that deep wounds were beginning to heal from the bottom up. Larrey's credo was that the most seriously wounded should be treated first, though that irked the colonels, who wanted their slightly wounded men patched up immediately and sent back to duty. Both English and French doctors noted that the wounded recovered more rapidly and with fewer complications in winter than in summer and that cold weather would end dysentery and the fevers. In Syria it often proved impossible to keep "blue" flies from laying their eggs in undressed wounds-yet the maggots that hatched from them actually speeded up the healing period by eating only gangrenous tissue. As soon as possible, the wounded were fed warm broth. After Jena, some of the Imperial Guard were detailed for that "pious duty." On Lobau Island after Aspern-Essling, Larrey made broth from horsemeat, using cuirassiers' breastplates for improvised pots. That and wine or brandy would keep startled soul and damaged body together until hospitals could get into operation. Soldiers had their own cures. Augereau took milk baths for rheumatism; General d'Anthouard relied on his "pills de Frank" (one third each rhubarb, aloes, and medical soap) to keep his bowels functioning with regularity. Deathly sick with typhus in the Metz hospital, Fourrier Perrot took the advice of the old grognard whose pallet he shared and tried a medication called "double or quits," guaranteed to kill or cure. He had "picked up" a woman's purse decorated with pearls, which he traded to an infirmier for that unofficial potion-a strong dose of white pepper in a big glass of good brandy. He was out for three days, but the grognard's nursing, his own youth, and the "permission of God" pulled him back to health. One of Blaze's soldiers cured him of a nagging sickness with a mixture of coffee, rum, sugar, lemon juice, pepper, salt, cloves, and cinnamon bark. As a final touch, the soldier emptied a cartridge into the concoction, army opinion being that gunpowder was good for anything that ailed you. Soldiers who had been hospitalized for long periods frequently came back to their units full of alleged medical knowledge, which they were happy to inflict on their comrades. The same could be expected from recruits who might have occasionally swept out a civilian doctor's office before being conscripted. Others brought along their old family remedies. Vivandipres often had their own pet cures for their customers' ailments. For variety, soldiers might consult local wise women or herb doctors. And every so often those unscientific treatments proved much more effective than the army doctor's potions. Local civilian doctors and surgeons also had a part, sometimes an important one, in the Grande Armee's medical care. During 1807 some thirtyfour Prussian doctors were serving in French hospitals, though France and Prussia were at war. In Italy French troops had a good, well-staffed hospital in Rome, but its death rate was too high: 50 out of 600 patients in one day. General Miollis called in the best-reputed Italian doctors for consultation; their changes in medicines and treatments cured most of the sick in short order. Portuguese doctors saved Sergeant Oyon's hand-largely by letting the healthy young man alone-when French surgeons wanted to amputate it. Especially in the light cavalry, which often operated in small units far from hospitals or even their regimental surgeon, every officer needed to be able to recognize and treat common sicknesses of men and horses and administer first aid. (De Brack's book includes what to do when the mushrooms some would-be gourmet collected prove to be poisonous.) The regimental surgeon was supposed to teach officers and men how to apply bandages, and every detachment was to carry a supply of bandages and basic medicines. In some commands (like Davout's corps in 1812) each soldier had a bandage in his pack. The dangerous epidemic diseases-bubonic plague and ty