

 otel. 16th Regiment of Light Infantry: Surgeon, Field Uniform, +sio

CHAPTER XIV Wherever a Comrade May Need My Help Infections, contagions, marsh miasmata ... baffle human skill, and in a few hours pull down the strongest men. The ague, the yellow fever, and the plague will appear; and all that human ingenuity has hitherto suggested in prevention or mitigation of these dreadful maladies amounts but to very little. Charles James, Military Dictionary' The officers of the Grande Armee's Service de Sante needed to be men of courage and good heart. The best of them knew little about the interior of the human body aside from its bones, muscles, principal nerves, and the most obvious functions of its major organs. The idea that the diseases they tried to treat were actually caused by microscopic organisms, and that those organisms could be carried from man to man by biting insects, was beyond the comprehension of their times. Consequently they attributed diseases to noxious vapors or sudden changes in temperature and weather. Dominique Larrey, one of their ablest and most zealous, thought the fevers his patients often developed might be the result of forced inactivity after days of hard marching. They had enough comprehension of the dangers of contagion and infection to require hospital patients suffering from diarrhea, dysentery, and "fluxes" to use separate privies. Appreciating the limits of their skills, they would not risk surgery that would require the opening of the chest or abdominal cavities. Most preferred not to "enter" the larger joints; Larrey was one of the first to amputate a leg successfully at the hip joint. They were men who battled constantly with invisible, unknown enemies. They did the best they could with the knowledge, instruments, and medicines the early nineteenth century furnished them. And they took what skills they had "into the fire" wherever a wounded comrade might have need of them. Confronted by the risks, hardships, and professional problems the Grande Armee's medical officers endured, their modern counterparts might go screaming off over the nearest hill. The Revolution placed all French physicians, surgeons, and apothecaries at the disposal of the Minister of War. It also wrecked French medical instruction in 1792, abolishing medical schools and societies. Two years later, suddenly recognizing the damage it had done, the Convention hastily set up military medical schools. The Service de Sante underwent a sensible organization as an autonomous service under a "central council" of medical officers. The Directory, however, abolished that arrangement by separating medical service from medical administration. Hospitals, medical supplies, the evacuation of the wounded, and even the establishment of divisional hospitals were placed under the army Administration's commissairesordonnateurs. All the medical officers had to do, in theory, was care for the wounded. That broken-backed "organization" left the medical services without any clear chain of command and vastly increased the opportunity for graft. Even allowing for indifferent honesty and good intentions on the part of some commissaires, it led to situations like that in July and August 1812, when the supply of bandages ran short, forcing Larrey and his subordinates to use all sorts of makeshifts, including their own shirts. Larrey complained to Napoleon, who queried Intendent General Mathieu-Dumas. Dumas replied with great indignation that the fault was entirely Larrey's: "[B]y a presumptious pretense of independence, he deprived himself of the aid of the Administration, by going as far forward as he did."' Napoleon's reorganization of the Service de Sante during 1800-1804 was a combination of good intentions and too much optimism. After the Peace of Amiens he discharged a number of medical officers and closed the army's medical schools. At the same time he revived the civilian medical schools and restored a degree of order and honesty. The technical supervision of the service was assigned to an Inspector General's office staffed by six senior medical officers.' The Service de Sante had three main divisions: medecins (physicians), chirurgiens (surgeons), and pharmaciens (pharmacists). By regulation, their uniforms were a distinctive bleu barbeau (a clear medium blue), faced respectively with black, crimson, or green velvet.' The division of duties among them was somewhat unusual: Pharmacists not only prepared medicines but also administered them; surgeons took care of "external diseases" as well as wounds. Personnel was divided into three classes, based on seniority and skill: The first class were medicins/chirurgiens/pharmaciens- major; the second were aides-majors; the third sous-aides-majors. In addition, there were eleve-chirurgiens and eleve pharmaciens, who were receiving on-the-job training. The first two classes had the courtesy status of officers but no definite military grades; they were allowed swords but not epaulettes. They might be abruptly released at the end of a campaign-and as abruptly recalled at the beginning of the next one. Associated with the Service de Sante was the Administration des Hopi- tauxMilitaires, which supervised internal functioning of the permanent military hospitals. After 1806 each hospital was to have an inspector (a retired officier superieur who had received the Legion of Honor), assisted by an accountant. His authority, however, might be challenged by the contractor who managed the hospital and could definitely be overridden by the commissaires des guerres, seldom to the benefit of the patients! Medical officers, particularly the surgeons, needed courage, firm nerves, a quick and certain hand, an observant eye, and a logical mind. The senior officers were generally competent. Many had been well-trained; others had enough experience to make up for any lack of training. But there were never enough of them. Regimental surgeons went into action with their regiments, sometimes getting into the firing line. Surgeons being scarce, regimental officers would try to shoo them back. (That was in stark contrast to the Royal Army's surgeons, who usually had waited well to the rear for the wounded to be brought back to them.) Generally, they were a pugnacious lot. A surgeon named Pons of the 14th Ligne twice rallied the walking wounded in his aid station and led them in decisive counterattacks. A good many of them won the Legion of Honor. Not the least courageous were those like Monsieur Bordenave, Marbot's chirurgien sous-aide at Leipzig, who volunteered to stay with the soldiers too seriously wounded to move when the Grande Armee had to retreat. The sous-aides were originally organized during 1803 at the Camp of Boulogne from medical students picked up by the conscription and qualified NCOs. A good many of them continued their training at the schools Larrey and other senior officers set up between campaigns, finally becoming aides-majors. Ney and Mortier promptly armed theirs with carbines, a practice that became standard in the Grande Armee and earned the aides the long-lasting service nickname of "carabines" or "carabines rouges." As the armies grew larger, and many senior medical officers were killed or disabled, the problem of replacements grew acute, especially in the cavalry, where surgeons had to be able to ride at something more than a jog trot. (The 24th Chasseurs a Cheval were without a surgeon for two years.) The new sous-aides were frequently youngsters who wanted to escape conscription; they received three months of crash training, then were loosed upon the troops. Larrey called them "chirurgiens de pacotille" (another practically untranslatable French insult, meaning something like "cheapjack"), and Napoleon complained in 1812 that his ignorant surgeons did the Grande Armee more harm than the Russian artillery. But some of those boys learned fast, did their best, and served fearlessly. Probably the outstanding surgeon was Dominique Jean Larrey (17661842), who was also an organizer, teacher, and inventor. He became surgeon-in-chief to the Imperial Guard, a baron, Commandant of the Legion of Honor, and Knight of the Order of the Iron Crown. Napoleon considered him the most virtuous man he had ever known. Practically his equal was Pierre Francois Percy, inspector general of military hospitals and surgeon-in-chief to the Army. Both men hoped to make the Service de Sante an independent, self-sufficient organization with its own trains and full control over its hospitals.' Sadly, some soldiers did not appreciate even their most devoted services. While Percy and his surgeons worked in the freezing cold at Eylau, stragglers stole their horses, swords, and baggage. The problem of assistants for medical officers took some time to solve. In the hospitals such "infirmiers" originally were the contractors' civilian employees. These proved to be mostly "adventurers," who intended to run no risks, from either combat or hard work, and plundered both civilians and their patients. They were accused of every sort of brutality. Having no real authority over them, medical officers could only curse their entire breed. In Spain in 1808 Percy finally got authority to organize a battalion of soldier-infirmiers from limited-service personnel for duty at the great hospital he was organizing in Madrid, clothing them in captured Spanish uniforms. Possibly because that experiment was highly successful, in April 1809 Napoleon authorized ten compagnies d'infirmiers d'hopitaux (also called soldats d'ambulance).6 Their uniforms were brown faced with red, and they were armed and equipped like infantrymen. Five companies were formed with the Grande Armee, three in Spain, and two in Italy. In 1811 they were given a general depot in Paris and an 11th Company. Their duty was to collect the wounded after a battle and to assist in the hospitals. One company was considered sufficient support for a corps. Those companies did not perform according to expectations. They have been described as scrapings from the bottom of the Empire's manpower barrel: rdfractaires, limited-service personnel, and former contractors' employees without any pride of service. In Russia, they were accused of halting at the rearmost hospitals and living as well as possible at the expense of the patients. It is known that soldiers had to be detailed from Eugene's Italian troops and Poniatowski's corps for service at the advanced hospitals. Napoleon stormed: "The activation of the companies of infirmiers has ... completely miscarried. Because we have given them muskets and uniforms, they no longer wish to serve in hospitals."' The companies not in Russia were to be issued civilian-style dress and to have only a briquet for a weapon. As reformed in 1813 the companies still had their brown uniforms but no muskets. Percy tried to reorganize the companies to include "brancar- diers" or "despotats" (stretcher bearers), equipped with knockdown stretchers, who were to collect the wounded during battle. How much was really accomplished is uncertain; a good part of the Grande Armee's medical troops were driven into Torgau after the battle of Leipzig and certainly neglected the sick and wounded there in a most damnable fashion. In December 1813 Napoleon told Daru to organize a "Hospital Battalion" on the model of the Guard's medical service. It was to have ten companies of infirmiers, a detachment of pharmaciens, and 640 vehicles (160 caissons for medical supplies, 480 two-wheel cabriolets for collecting and evacuating wounded). Its personnel was to be entirely military, with surgeons as officers. It would be able to form and support forty field hospitals and would require no more horses than a train d'equipages battalion. It also was another excellent idea conceived several years too late. All division, corps, and army headquarters staff included officers from the Service de Sante. Each corps also had its "ambulance" '-a reserv