

CHAPTER XVI Remounts and Replacements Horses have no patriotism; soldiers fight without bread, but horses insist on oats. Nansouty, cited by Robert Wilson' Somehow it seems fitting to consider the animals first, if only to salute that legendary Old Army sergeant who, having brought a detachment through several hundred miles of Sioux territory, reported: "Not a bad trip, sir. We lost a couple of recruits, but none of the mules." Horses-for his cavalry, artillery, engineers, supply trains, and headquarters-were one of Napoleon's chief problems, even more so than securing the men to ride or drive them. It was one he never really solved, and which definitely contributed to his final defeat. Aside from some excellent breeds of draft animals in Brittany, Normandy, and the Limousin and Jura areas (lacking the splendid canal system Napoleon would introduce, eighteenthcentury France depended greatly on horse-drawn wagons for moving freight), France had never been noted for its horses. Beginning with Louis XIV, the Bourbon Kings had attempted to correct this, establishing stud farms and importing stallions from Holland, Denmark, and North Africa. Improvement, however, was very slow. In 1790 France still imported horses from a dozen countries, from Norway to North Africa and Arabia; its cavalry relied heavily on German-bred mounts.' The politicians of the French Revolution capsized any sensible remount system for their own incomprehensible reasons: In 1789 the purchase of French-bred remounts was forbidden in the name of economy; in 1790 the stud farms were closed and their stallions sold. After attempts at buying horses on the open market, an exercise at which veteran horse traders easily outswindled their amateur customers, the government began requisitioning horses: first those of "emigres" and "nobles," then "luxury horses," then (in 1793) six saddle horses and two draft horses from every canton in France. That produced sufficient remounts but also much wastage; valuable stallions and brood mares were killed in combat or through neglect. In 1795 the Directory made a pretense of reopening several stud farms, but its general corruption reduced the measure to mere eyewash. In 1800, according to the War Ministry's records, the cavalry's regimental depots had their full quotas of remounts, but inspection showed a complete absence of any actual animals! Napoleon began by making colonels responsible for the procurement of horses for their regiments, giving them each a remount fund for that purpose. The results were mostly unfavorable: Colonels who knew too little about horses got themselves swindled; others swindled the government, buying nags and pocketing their "savings"; some ran their regiments into debt to buy especially choice horses. Napoleon therefore returned to centralized purchasing, which he entrusted to General Francois-Antoine Bourcier, Inspector General of the Cavalry. Bourcier was a veteran cavalryman, energetic, efficient, and tireless, famous for his detailed knowledge of cavalry in general, and justifiably dreaded for his cold manner and caustic speech. He also was a perfectionist, which sometimes slowed his purchasing, but his perfectionism worked out very well for Marbot's 23d Chasseurs A Cheval in 1812: Noting the above-average heights and physiques of its troopers, Bourcier gave them taller and stronger horses than those customarily issued to the light cavalry. His work required a gimlet eye and an edged tongue. Horse traders were a predatory lot. Men otherwise good Christians and kind to their aged mothers had no bowels in dealing with trusting customers. Their tricks were endless: A vicious horse could be drugged into temporary docility; a coarsebred crowbait transformed into a spirited charger by slipping a small live eel down its throat just before inspection. After the Peace of Amiens gave Europe a momentary respite, Napoleon had ordered a thorough study of the remount situation. As the problem of mounting the dragoon regiments demonstrated, France was practically stripped of suitable saddle horses. Possibly because of disputes between the Ministry of War and the Ministry of the Interior, this study was not completed until early 1806, but after that action was swift. A remount service was established under the direct control of the Minister of the Interior. Turkish, Syrian, and Mecklemberg stallions were purchased. Unfortunately, horses do not breed like rabbits; there had been no great improvement when the Empire ended in 1815, but this was the beginning of a significant revival. Meanwhile, the Revolution had left a shortage of skilled horse breeders; records of prior breeding had been scrambled; established blood lines had been broken; and haphazard breeding had produced inferior animals. Napoleon had to reduce previous standards and accept smaller horses for each arm of the cavalry. From 1805 into 1813 Napoleon depended greatly on foreign purchase and capture for remounts. German horse breeders and traders profited greatly. Some of them were rugged characters, like the Bavarian horse dealer who delivered a herd of remounts in Moscow just after the Grande Armee's arrival there, bringing it up roads infested with guerrillas, Cossacks, illconditioned line-of-communications troops, and miscellaneous marauders. Italy furnished few horses. (A Russian-English expeditionary force that landed in Naples in 1805 could not find enough for its planned advance up the "boot" of Italy and had to scuttle when news came of Austerlitz.) Spain also had few horses, and most of what it had were too small for cavalry or artillery remounts. In all his purchases, Napoleon insisted on horses at least five years old, mature enough to endure sustained service. He also did not want horses with docked tails, though he accepted them during the crisis purchases of 1815. He would not buy horses for a newly created unit until he was certain that it had enough men present to care for them. In 1809, horse procurement was further regularized by establishing large remount depots at Versailles, Tours, Angouleme, and Mont-de-Marsan (with an alternate one at Libourne). Each was to be headed by a cavalry general, too old or disabled for combat duty but efficient and honest. All were responsible to Bourcier, who was put directly under the Minister of War. Very large captures were made from the Austrian Army in 1805 and 1809 and from the Prussian, Hessian, and Saxon armies in 1806. In the case of the Saxons, who promptly joined the Confederation of the Rhine and so allied themselves to France, the capture backfired. Saxon cavalry had been famous throughout Europe; its horses were excellent-strong, fast, and well-trained. The French cavalrymen to whom they were issued, however, didn't like them and tended to sell them or trade them for quieter animals. (The new Duchy of Warsaw's new cavalry regiments somehow acquired a lot of them.) The Saxons believed that had happened because the French troopers were not horsemen enough to handle such powerful chargers, which may have been true in part. But it was also true that horses trained to respond to orders in German and the Saxon trumpet signals would have proved balky when addressed in French amid a lot of-to them-meaningless tootling. When Napoleon requested some Saxon cavalry for his 1807 campaign, the Saxons sent what men they could mount properly, explaining that the rest of their cavalry was still on foot. In his more impatient moments the Emperor was apt to feel that any raw recruit plus a new-bought remount and some sort of saddle added up to a functioning cavalryman. Berthier therefore suggested that the Saxons buy some more horses at once, but accepted the explanation of the Saxon liaison officer, Lieutenant General Ferdinand von Funck, that trained troopers on half-trained horses could not maintain the reputation of Saxon cavalry. Ruefully, Berthier concluded that dismounting the Saxons in the first place had been "cutting down the tree to get at the fruit."3 Captured horses seemed to vanish in large numbers as individuals and units helped themselves to them without bothering the remount service, sometimes to replace their own used-up horses, but often to sell them to civilians or horse traders. Senior officers might become engaged in such black marketing, which often involved open theft from civilians as well as misappropriation of government property. Augereau was guilty of it in Italy in 1796; in 1806, moving forward against the main Prussian army around Auerstadt, Davout could not find most of his corps cavalry, including its commander. The cavalry arrived very late; its general, it transpired, had gone in for some large-scale horse stealing and resale for the benefit of his own retirement fund. That effort apparently had left him so fatigued that he had felt the need of a nap. His career ended abruptly. To further complicate the matter of captured horses, it was an ancient military custom that any soldier who took one in individual combat owned it and could sell it. A custom equally honored set the maximum price at five louis (100 francs), so that a poor officer who had lost his only horse might be able to replace it. That gave enterprising troopers an extra source of income but also led to a lot of straggling as they sought buyers. In wellconducted regiments all captured horses were brought to the colonel first; if no officers needed remounts, the colonel might buy them for the regiment to replace its dead or disabled mounts. There were many disappointments in 1814 after the frequent little French victories when it became apparent that many officers and regiments were broke. Oddly enough, a deserter's horse was considered his own to dispose of, for the deserter had placed himself under, in de Brack's words "the safeguard of his dishonor and our contempt.' 14 Another source occasionally provided remounts for the combat units. Infantry outfits had the habit of "picking up" horses for their company officers and even their senior NCOs; the vivandieres, sutlers, and other camp followers did the same; and there were always stragglers and marauders stealing horses. (Some horse thieves were artists: You might drop off to sleep alongside your horse with the reins looped around your arm, but a skilled practitioner would leave you only the reins.) Periodically the gendarmerie would stage roundups. Thus in 1813 Lieutenant Coignet, the army headquarters wagon master, with a detail of elite gendarmes and the picquers of Napoleon's Maison Civile, established a roadblock at a bridge outside Dresden to seize all unauthorized vehicles following the army and to dismount all personnel not entitled to horses. The artillery got first pick of the horses he gathered in, the rest going to the cavalry. Confiscated oxen went to the army "park." "Messieurs the Jews offered me gold for them, but I smacked them across the back with the flat of my saber: `Go take that to the kitchen'."5 (Coignet did spare two wagoners from Lutzen in gratitude for the care that town's young people had given French wounded.) The army lost three or four horses for every cavalryman killed, wounded, or captured. Napoleon tried to keep up a remount pool, especially for his heavy cavalry, but it was frequently exhausted before the climax of the campaign. On the whole, the average French cavalryman was not a good horseman or horsemaster. Even when long service had taught him how to handle his mount, he tended to remain the sort of rough rider who had, in the parlance of my Montana boyhood, "teeth in his ass." The best cavalry recruits came from the north or the Germanic eastern frontiers, "men from Normandy, Alsace, Lorraine, and the Franche-Comte, provinces known for their military spirit and love of horses ... a warlike race ... from the district around Mons . . . loving and taking excellent care of their horses," as Marbot described his cherished 23d Chasseurs A Cheval.b The ideal mount 