lyria, Napoleon dispatched two frigates and several corvettes and brigs to patrol the upper Adriatic in the Venice-Ancona-Ragusa area and a detachment of naval artillerymen to stiffen the defenses of Venice. He also continued the heartbreaking task of trying to develop a combat-worthy Italian Navy. To return to the 44th Bataillon de Flottille, its luck ran out. Massena took it and the 43d Bataillon to Spain in 1810 and left the 44th to guard his overcrowded hospital when he moved to envelop Wellington's ridgeline position at Bussaco. Trant's Portuguese militia and irregulars swooped down, ammunition ran out, and there was nothing to do but surrender. Despite Marbot's accusations, Trant seems to have restrained his amateurs' baser impulses, but if few French throats were cut, many French pockets undoubtedly were. The 43d Bataillon did well at all sorts of odd jobs, including infantry combat. In February 1811 the navy found itself suddenly short of sailors. An "extraordinary" levy took four hundred from Corsica and two hundred from the Ionian Islands. The admiral commanding at Toulon was permitted to select two hundred apprehended refractaires who had been born near the sea. The shortage may very well have been due to the increasing diversion of navy personnel to the land armies. One battalion of naval artificers, named Bataillon Espagne, also went to Spain in 1810, serving there until early 1813. Two battalions, Danube and the 1st Bataillon de I'Escaut (Scheldt), were assigned to the Grande Armee's engineer part in 1812.21 They totaled close to 1,800 men, supposedly the pick of their service. Some of them were with Eble at the Beresina bridges; those that got out of Russia ended with the beleaguered garrison of Danzig, where they doubtless manned Rapp's improvised squadron of gunboats. Meanwhile Baste with the 4th and 17th equipages de flottille had been laboring on the Grande Armee's line of communications, moving supplies along streams, canals, rivers, and the sheltered waters of the Baltic coast. A few of those sailors also were at the Beresina. Eighteen-thirteen was a year of Navy woe and lamentation. To build his new army, Napoleon ruthlessly converted sailors into soldiers. Before Russia, the naval artificers had totaled some seven thousand officers and men; approximately five thousand remained. One thousand of their biggest and best were plucked for replacements for the sapeur and pontonnier battalions. Espagne was recalled for service in Germany; it ended at Torgau with another battalion, apparently the 2d Escaut.22 Serving equally as infantry or gunners as the situation might require, they proved the most reliable element of the garrison of that disease-ravaged fortress. Napoleon hoped to get another battalion of them for the Grande Armee, but Decres reported only some three thousand ouvriers left. None had more than two years of service, and most were weakly apprentices. The artillerie de la marine went the same hard road. With the exception of a battalion sent to Portugal with Junot, it had seen little combat service since 1801-02 and had some eight thousand well-trained men averaging twenty-three years of age. Napoleon transferred them to the army and reformed them-with some conscript padding-into four infantry regiments (often called "naval infantry"), the number of battalions in each regiment being doubled.23 The necessary officers were provided by promotions within the regiments, recent St. Cyr graduates, and Velites out of the Imperial Guard. Five hundred of the best (probably the oldest) gun captains were left with the navy, their regiments carrying them on special rosters as on detached service. Once formed, those regiments were milked for cadres for eight companies of foot artillery and four hundred more men for the artillery of the Guard. The army issued them overcoats and three pairs of good shoes; the overcoats happened to be blue, like those of the Old Guard. Most of this naval infantry was assigned Marmont's VI Corps. He found them splendid material, though their senior officers-elderly, sedentary "homesteaders" with "bourgeois" interests that did not include being shot at-rather frightened him. Once shaken down under competent army generals of brigade, however, the naval gunners made excellent infantrymen. Their steadiness under heavy fire at Lutzen, plus those blue overcoats, fooled the Allies into thinking they were part of the Guard. They served capably through the campaigns of 1813 and 1814 despite heavy losses at Lutzen and Leipzig. In 1814 the Bourbons gave them back to the navy as a three-regiment Corps Royal des Canonniers de la Marine. During 1813 and 1814 the navy as a whole had been further screened for able-bodied men, to be used as filler replacements for the infantry, artillery, and engineers or as poorly recorded independent units. There is bare mention of a 1st Bataillon de Marins (Battalion of Sailors), mostly men from the ports of the Somme River, which broke up a Russian rear guard in a night bayonet attack at Etoges in 1814. The Bourbons had little time for the navy during their 1814-15 period of confusion before the Hundred Days. On his return, Napoleon formed most of the available navy personnel into regiments for the defense of the naval bases so that army units in garrison there could be withdrawn for duty with the armies in the field. Fourteen had formed or were forming by the day of his second abdication; at least some of them had army-style elite companies. Two battalions of the artillerie de la marine were summoned to Paris, and one was sent to Lyon, to assist in emplacing fortress artillery; the speed and skill of their work were judged remarkable. Other battalions served efficiently with punitive columns in Vendee. The 14th Regiment de Marins, stationed on the Ile d`Aix near Rochefort, were the last French troops to cheer their Emperor before he trustingly asked asylum from the British government. By odd chance, in his threadbare cadet boyhood he had been thought good material for a naval officer and had taken some time deciding to be an artilleryman on land rather than a cannoneer afloat. Though Napoleon's navy may seem to have been a largely useless service, it did seriously worry England until late 1813. While the figures are much disputed, England could muster something over a hundred ships of the line; Napoleon had almost that many, and could build nineteen excellent ships every year in Antwerp alone. England was running short of good ship timber; some of its newer frigates were built of fir instead of oak. England also was running short of men for the ships it had, and its solution of seizing sailors from neutral ships to fill their crews helped to embroil the British in a war with a small but qualitatively superior American Navy-and then in a distant land war in Canada, which frequently strained England's logistical system. (English historians express a dignified grief over this American ingratitude for the burdens England bore for humanity's sake through all those years.) Should Napoleon beat down Russia and Prussia and cow Austria, as he seemed close to doing by June 1813, England would face the long-term prospect of having to battle a far stronger French Navy. (Napoleon's admirals seem to have wanted five-to-four odds in any major showdown.) Even bobbing sluggishly at anchor within their fortified bases, Napoleon's squadrons thus bled England's strength. After Waterloo, the navy was shoved aside and largely forgotten. What attention the Bourbons did give it was of a piece with their dismemberment of the army. Some four hundred officers, most of them the navy's best, were put on half pay or driven into exile. As replacements the navy got rentrants a la bouillotte:24 emigre naval officers who had served the enemy and others who had gone into retirement during the Revolution and now demanded reinstatement.25 (One of these, Captain Duroys de Chaumareix, wrecked his frigate, the Medusa, by sheer incompetence; then headed for safety in his gig, leaving the rest of his crew and his passengers to try to save themselves.) The result was an officers' corps riddled by feuds and ill will. Napoleon's school ships were abolished, to be replaced by an inland academy; only the sons of ultra-royalist families were accepted as students and there was a shortage of competent instructors. The disciplined equipages and the prefets maritimes were abolished, leaving the naval bases once again in their pre-Revolutionary confusion. There was no money, no new ships; the Navy existed on the Empire's leavings. A slow regeneration would begin in the 1820s. Meanwhile, Louis XVIII made Angouleme his Grand Admiral. Somehow, that didn't seem to help. • 23rd Regiment of Chasseurs a Coeval, 1812