

## Cap,'to/ne <>e .:Tre,.'<7ute , 1812.

 Imperial Navy, Frigate Captain, 1812

CHAPTER XV Matters Nautical: La Marine In the [Navy] there was a technology that blocked all my ideas....No man capable of breaking away from its routine and doing creative work ever appeared....I never could find an intermediary between me [and my sailors] who could get them moving. Napoleon; cited by Ronciere and Clerc-Rampal' Louis XIV had given France a mighty navy but had lost interest in it once the Dutch and English beat its tall ships down. Louis XV suffered from occupational fatigue. Preoccupied with his successive mistresses and other soft pleasures, he gave the shattered navy he inherited nothing but neglect. France lost its colonial empire (some minister huffed that he couldn't be expected to worry about the barn when the house was on fire) and ended with a British representative stationed in Dunkirk to see that its port facilities were dismantled and kept that way-and France paid him! Fortunately for the United States, ships-like hunting and locksmithing-were something that stirred young Louis XVI's pleasant torpor. The French Navy was reborn; cities and provinces gave it fine new ships. With them, in the world war sparked by the American Revolution, such admirals as Francois-Joseph Paul de Grasse-Tilly and Pierre Andre de Suffren met the English in a fashion seldom seen since 1700. Even with Admiral George Rodney's saving victory over de Grasse at the Saintes in 1782, the French Navy could claim to have taken a decisive part in a successful war. It was a navy with the best-designed ships of all maritime nations and certain officers with scientific interests. But, like the French Army of that same period, its organization made it an anachronism. The officers of the Grand Corps de la Marine-termed "officiers rouges"-who monopolized the better assignments were all aristocrats. To even be considered as a candidate for a commission in their "Corps," you must be able to show at least "four quarterings of nobility." Most of those officers were from Brittany or Provence, districts that still lingered in the twilight of the Middle Ages. Highly conservative in matters of naval doctrine, they were personally brave yet cautious to the level of timidity in battle. They fought defensively, maneuvering so as to be able to avoid close action; firing to wreck the enemy's sails and rigging rather than to smash his hulls, guns, and crews; seeking to preserve their own ships rather than to win. Also, they were arrogant and insubordinate, ignoring directives from the Naval Ministry that displeased them; too often they deliberately failed to support commanders who offended them. Suffren was a fighter who emulated that terrible Dutchman, Michael de Ruyter, the man who burned a British fleet in the Thames. But when Suffren drove in against superior British forces, hardly one of his captains out of four would follow. And at the Saintes, de Grasse's subordinates abandoned him rather than risk their ships against Rodney's stronger force. In an attempt to loosen this rigid hierarchy, in 1782 the Naval Ministry commissioned successful privateer captains or selected merchant marine officers. Those "officiers bleus" found themselves scorned, insulted, and relegated to the meanest assignments. Few of them stayed on. As a final failing, the great majority of the Grand Corps were poor shipmasters. Once back from a voyage, they were quickly ashore and about their pleasures instead of seeing to it that their vessels and equipment were properly cared for. Few-Suffren was one-took care of their men's health and morale. Also those splendid French ships had a serious flaw of their own: Their great stern windows, which made their captains' quarters light and airy, as required by elegant noblemen commanders, were no barrier to the raking fire of inelegant British gunners. The Revolution changed all that, and in one messy hurry. Few of the Grand Corps, from the eleves de la marine (officer candidates) to the admirals, had any sympathy for social reform; many of them had made themselves heartily detested by both their crews and the citizens of the seaport towns. By late 1791 discipline had vanished among ships' crews and dockyard personnel; officers were mobbed, driven away, sometimes killed. Few lingered to see what might happen next; in January 1792, out of 640 officers assigned to the base and ships at Brest, nineteen were in prison, twentyeight anxiously were trying to get someone to accept their resignations, and 361 were absent without leave-meaning that they had emigrated without bothering to resign. The Paris politicians were yammering about "aristocrats" and incivisme; a guillotine had been erected and, the technical expert responsible for its operation ate at the admiral's table. Out in the distant colonies, the navy's colonial regiments of jailbirds, luckless foreigners, and misfortune's draggletails were falling apart.2 Thereafter came total confusion. The departed officers were replaced by just about anyone available: dockyard functionaries, junior officers, pilots, officers of merchant ships, even former seamen and some thoroughgoing landsmen. Not a few of those substitute sea dogs were at a loss in the face of the printed word and were doing well if they could print out a signature. The trained cannoniers matelots (naval gunners), who were the only real military element of the warships' crews and had their own small privileges, were decreed petty aristocrats and hustled off to Vendee and the ambush butcherings of that hedgerow war. Impressed peasants who had never seen salt water were hustled aboard ship to take their places. Soon there were unhappy incidents of French ships caught with their crews too seasick to do anything but surrender. Competent merchant marine officers and sailors observed such goings-on and hastened to join the army. The same confusion ran riot in the dockyards and naval arsenals, where former clerks were trying to manage things. The navy's supply system and central administration collapsed; Paris produced nothing but illogical orders and inedible harangues concerning the navy's failure to realize that "Glory" was far more nourishing than sea biscuit. The ships could be floating madhouses; each crew formed its "club," which could overrule the ship's officers. Led on by those radicals, French crews might compel a return to port because some sea lawyer felt they had been cruising long enough, or might refuse to accept battle. One officer was killed when he seized his ship's helm in defiance of its club and steered toward the enemy.' The loyal members of the Grand Corps, like their fellow aristocrats in the army, took their lives in their hands to serve France. Morard de Galle could not get his men to fight and was imprisoned. There were the usual denunciations and purges of "aristocrats" and "traitors," which killed useful men or broke their spirit. Young General Lazare Hoch, who had attempted an invasion of Ireland, delivered himself of a considered definition of the French Navy: "God save me from ever having anything to do with it ... contradictions of all sorts; organized indiscipline ... arrogant ignorance and stupid vanity.s4 Navies are compounded of experience, training, courage, and tradition. The average Revolutionary naval captain and his crew came up short in at least three of those categories, and sometimes in all four. Their basic lack was simple competence. An expert privateer or merchant captain might be able to handle a sloop-of-war, but what could such men do with a ship of the line-a lumbering monster with 74 to 120 guns, displacing 2,200 to 2,500 tons, 190 feet in length and 50 feet in beam, with more than 3,000 square meters of sail surface and a crew of 750 to 1,000 officers and men? Such intricate fighting machines demanded expert ship-handling and the utmost teamwork. Moreover, they must be sailed, maneuvered, and fought in tight formation. Amateur captains and green crews could not do it: They collided with other ships, ran aground, or piled up at harbor entrances. It was noticed that many French ships no longer set their lofty topgallant and sky sails: The new sailors were afraid to go so far aloft. Many of the frigates were in an equally melancholy state. Not only the English but the yearling United States Navy beat them regularly.' Frenchmen who for one reason or another went aboard ships of the Royal Navy were troubled by the contrast between those vessels and their own. One of them was Larrey, the famous surgeon, who admired the British order, pro priety, and precision and was correspondingly disgusted by a French squadron he inspected in Venice in 1797. Its ships were filthy, with human excrement in every corner; all hatches and doors were kept closed so that the air below decks was foul. The sailors and soldiers were dirty and lousy, their food scant and unhealthy. Ignored by their officers, who were living comfortably enough, they were not exercised, grew passive amid their own filth, and sickened and died. Larrey got the men ashore and back into condition. Meanwhile the ships were cleaned, whitewashed inside, and fumigated. The navy medics also received a professional overhauling. (As a final comment, some Americans found British warships long on brutality and short on decent food.) As First Consul, Napoleon wanted a navy and-having had one fleet shot out from under him at the battle of the Nile-insisted on a first-class navy. Practically the whole thing had to be built up again from scratch; the Revolution had closed the naval schools in favor of on-the-job training for young aspirants (candidates) who spent three years aboard ship earning an ensign's commission.' Few new ships had been built; many had been lost to battle, storm, or accident. The naval arsenals were empty, and naval morale utterly low. It would take time, able men, and much money. Men could be found to begin the work, to get the naval administration and naval bases functioning efficiently. There were gifted ship designers, especially Jacques Sane, Inspector General of Naval Engineers, who produced some of the world's finest sailing warships, fast, sweet-handling, and strongly built. His 40-gun frigates and 80-gun ships of the line were especially prized. There was much experimentation in hull forms, producing agile, swift light craft, especially suitable for privateering. Money was found, in part through the work of the free-wheeling professional ancestor of our modern mob of "gimme" fundraisers. One Goldschmidt, originally a Portuguese Jew (who reportedly died an English citizen) worked up a campaign that had even army contractors (a breed usually without compassion, scruple, or conscience) digging deep into their coffers. Many regiments threw a day's pay on their drumheads; Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish clergy preached and solicited. Artists auctioned off blank canvases on which they would paint the highest bidder's portrait. It all seems very modern. Naval administration was tightened. France's coastal areas were divided into five arrondissements maritimes (naval districts), each headed by a preJet maritime, who had authority over all his arrondissement's shipping, both national and privately owned.' The arrondissements were centered on France's five great "military" ports in 1804: Le Havre, Brest, Lorient, Rochefort, and Toulon, each the site of a major naval arsenal with its complex of shipyards, dry docks, ropewalks, sail lofts, magazines, storehouses, ateliers de sculpture (where figureheads were carved), and lumber yards-the whole heavily fortified and strongly garrisoned. Antwerp, described as a pistol pointing at England's heart, developed into a sixth arrondissement. In 1805 Genoa became one, as did Amsterdam in 1809.8 Through his staff, the prefect controlled harbor ship movements and naval construction, armament, and supply. His administrative assistants maintained "l'