nose. Some accommodated themselves to it, content merely to collect the required number of warm bodies. Others made formal complaints, and occasionally the hard Imperial hand suddenly came down upon some local official's shoulder. Conscription operated under the immediate supervision of General Jean Lacuee, a chairborne warrior of much experience and the military representative on the Council of State. Apparently he was something of a twin to Bourcier, a man of force and presence, cold, dry in his speech, and certainly not loved. Various people referred to him as Napoleon's ideal henchman, a pedant who obeyed without pity, indifferent to the unhappiness he caused in his level enforcement of the law. Though conscription was the principal source of replacements, voluntary enlistment still was a factor. The foreign regiments and battalions, as well as odd-lot organizations like the Legion du Midi and the Hanovarian Legion, were recruited in pre-Revolutionary style a prix d'argent, which meant the men caught by their recruiting sergeants received a cash bonus for enlisting. Moreover, the number of voluntary enlistments in regular French regiments could be surprisingly high. In 1811, 256 men signed up with the 9th Hussar Regiment alone. And even in 1812 some voluntary enlistments were recorded in Paris. (1811 and 1812 were years with poor harvests. As the Old Army used to say, "A hard winter is the best recruiting sergeant.") In 1814 and 1815 large numbers of veterans voluntarily returned to the colors. The French army in Egypt during 1798-1801, cut off from all reinforcements except a dribble slipped through the English blockade by swift frigates, finally found a local source of replacements. General Jean-Baptiste Kleber contacted some Abysinian slave dealers, who, being reliable businessmen, produced several hundred prime young blacks, apparently "Fuzzy-wuzzies" from the Sudan.13 Kleber used them to rebuild the usedup 21st Light Infantry. Received as free men, they soon made good soldiers. Some of them, no doubt, eventually would peer across the gray ribbon of the English Channel, hike the bare Spanish hills, and even see the bulbous spires of Moscow bulk against an autumn sky. Did any of them ever see the Nile again? In 1799, as France's new First Consul, Napoleon learned that, amid all the other internal disorder, enforcement of conscription had become hit-ormiss. With Anglo-Austrian forces preparing to close in on a staggering France, he called for 33,000 conscripts. He got approximately 10,000, not all of them serviceable. Some departments sent physically unfit men, even cripples. Especially in southern France, mayors issued false certificates of marriage or physical disability to men called up; armed gangs might overwhelm the small details of gendarmes escorting parties of conscripts. Coming to Dijon in April 1800 to organize the soon-to-be-famous Army of the Reserve, Berthier found a huddle of neglected conscripts, a general shortage of everything necessary, and an overload of "women and baggage." (Out of carelessness or local dirty politics, numbers of married men were sent to the armies during 1800-1803.) Time was in shorter supply than anything else, but Berthier insisted that all the conscripts should "fire a few rounds so that they would know which eye to use in aiming, and how to load their muskets. s 1' Once Austria was again defeated, Napoleon began a general comb-out of the French armed forces. Annual conscription quotas were 60,000 (less than one-fourth of the men available) for each of the next four years, half actually going to their regiments, the rest remaining at home on "reserve" status. A surprising number of the conscripts on active duty deserted.15 It was, especially after the treaty with England in March 1802, a time of peace with a corresponding loss of interest in military service. Also, most regiments were suffering from the usual "war's over" letdown, such as we have seen in our own Army in our own time! Most officers were competent, but content to avoid any avoidable exertion; the NCOs too often were equally lazy, and loud-mouthed know-it- alls besides. Both might regard gawking, lubberly conscripts as unnecessary nuisances. Veteran privates might swindle and bully the new fish with little interference from their superiors. All units had their brimade (rite of initiation) for newcomers, which frequently took the form of a la couverte (tossing in a blanket). That was relatively painless in itself, but certain malicious old soldiers often put pistols or other heavy and jagged items into the blanket with them, causing serious injuries. Many conscripts therefore took French leave and went home, generally unregretted. Napoleon began putting things to rights. Any regiment he came across was likely to be thoroughly inspected and put through a series of maneuvers, while the officers had to answer sharp questions as to their men, weapons, and equipment. Most of the deserters came back under gendarme escort-there was a 12-franc bounty for capturing or turning in a deserterbut there was debate over how to punish them appropriately in times of peace, the colonial battalions being no place for first offenders. Finally in 1804 deserters were graciously allowed to pay an amende (fine), after which they would be restored to normal duty status. Meanwhile the administration and enforcement of conscription were tightened. In 1803, special "Depots for Refractory Conscripts" were activated to serve as reform schools for apprehended draft dodgers. Regiments were given general areas from which they would draw conscripts and recruits, the light infantry being assigned the more mountainous departments and Corsica. Local selection of the men to be sent to the army was replaced by a system of drawing lots, which reduced the wheeling and dealing of hometown politicians. Another blow was an act requiring men who were called up but proved unfit for service to pay a fine of 50 to 100 francs. The list of exemptions from conscription was gradually extended to include all family breadwinners: married men with children; men having a brother already in the service; the only son of a widow; the oldest of three orphans; or a man with a father aged seventy-one or older. Conscientious objectors apparently were not recognized, but priests and ministers, as well as some governmental employees and some categories of students, were exempted or had their inductions postponed. The annual drawings took place in each commune under the direction of the mayor, with an officer of the gendarmerie and an army officer as witnesses. A numbered ballot for each man of that commune who had reached the required age was placed in an urn. Each of the prospective conscripts drew a ballot; if one were absent, the mayor drew for him. Low-numbered men were taken first; higher-numbered ones might be caught in a later callup that year or left at home. There was a quick physical inspection, mostly to make certain the conscript was at least 5 feet, 1 inch (French) tall. Those who claimed exemption or requested a delay because of their health or for family reasons went before a review board (conseil de recrutement) consisting of the prefect and two senior army officers; it might be sympathetic or might not. The men accepted-minus the refractaires who took to the bushes to avoid service, the desperate souls who resorted to self-mutilation (such as cutting off thumbs), the sons of wealthier families who chose to hire a substitute, and slick types who might bribe the local doctor to certify them suddenly afflicted with some impressive-sounding disease-were soon gathered into detachments under the fatherly eyes of a few gendarmes and marched to their regimental depot. Here, they literally joined the army. The depots took them in; processed, clothed, and equipped them; gave them basic training; and organized them into units, which might be either temporary or permanent, depending on whether their regiment wanted filler replacements for its units in the field or was forming new battalions and squadrons. Most of the majors who commanded the regimental depots were men of care and method. Under normal conditions they would start new conscripts off on just enough light duty to keep them busy, then gradually increase their work until they were toughened to normal military life. Each newcomer was expected to pay a bienvenue (welcome), which meant buying the drinks for his mess. Otherwise, older soldiers might give him a rough time. (The same was expected if he was put into the guardhouse.) Remember that most of these new soldiers, even apprehended refractaires, however much they may have dreaded the prospect of army life, quickly found it interesting. Many of them were from small, forgotten, dirty villages and bleak city slums, illiterate and completely ignorant of the world. They had been poor, ill-clothed, poorly fed on little but bread and potatoes, and overworked at monotonous, sometimes dangerous jobs. Even those from better-off families might have known little but the boredom of back-country life. From that "larval existence" they passed into the army's world of change and color and comradeship. Their past had taught them to be content with little; now-at least for much of the time-they had regular rations and warm uniforms. The world was before them, and a good soldier could expect high pay, NCO's stripes, the "cross" of the Legion of Honor, and possibly more. And there was also the pride of serving their Emperor, the greatest soldier in the world. In peacetime, Napoleon allowed conscripts who had served for one year to "buy out" of the service for from 300 to 900 francs, if they could be replaced by a veteran eligible for discharge who was willing to reenlist for five years. The veteran got one- fifth of the buy out sum (the rest went into the regimental chest) and would receive "high pay." As early as 1800 a called-up conscript was allowed to exchange with another man in his same class and department, making whatever financial arrangements between them they saw fit-the first appearance of the paid substitute so common in the American Civil War. That privilege was soon enlarged, allowing an exchange with a man of a different class or area. Initially most of the substitutes so secured were former soldiers who had found civilian life unattractive and were ready to return to the army. Napoleon was happy to get such men back into the ranks; the bourgeoisie were happy to continue with business as usual. Inevitably, however, the quality of the substitutes fell off; other soldiers looked down on them as "bargains," and they rarely made corporal. Hiring a substitute had its risks. If he was killed, you had to find another to replace him within fifteen days or go yourself. Also, his death would not release you from any debt you still owed him-you must pay his heirs. There were odd angles to the business of substitutes and replacements. Grateful to Napoleon for his recognition of its spiritual authority, the Sanhedrin of France had released all Jews in the French armed forces from all religious and dietary observances that might conflict with the good of the service. The question of whether conscripted Jews could obtain substitutes, however, was not settled until 1812, when it was agreed that it was permissible so long as the substitute was another Jew. When it came to sending replacements to his sickening army in Haiti during 1802-03, Napoleon made arrows of any sort of wood: battalions of Austrian and German deserters, military criminals, French deserters, a hundred captive English sailors, and any individual who landed in the colonies without definite orders to be there or who appeared to lack the means of earning a living. Opposition to conscription continued, especially in the south, with communities refusing to take any action, encouraging desertion, falsifying records, and occasionally openly resisting the gendarmerie