was a mature horse, so well trained that it recognized the different trumpet calls and could be managed by its rider's legs and voice, leaving both of his hands free for combat. It was essential to familiarize remounts as much as possible to the sounds of war. Few horses liked fighting; those that did might be hard to control amid the rush and clamor of a cavalry fight. Equally important were sound health and the ability to endure extremes of weather and to adjust to changes in feeds and water. In that, the big mounts of the heavy cavalry, mostly coarse-bred animals, were distinctly inferior to the smaller horses of the light cavalry. After long marches they frequently could not gallop and so had to charge at the trot, as at Eggmuhl in 1809.' After reaching Vienna, they had a period of rest but were fed barley for lack of oats. Barley disagreed with them; in the subsequent battle of Aspern-Essling it was still hard to get them to gallop. Army custom, probably impossible to maintain except in peacetime, assigned black horses to a regiment's 1st Squadron, bays to the 2d, chestnuts to the 3d, grays to the 4th. White or light gray mounts were for trumpeters and bandsmen, piebald or skewbald horses for kettledrummers. Officers provided their own horses along with the necessary "domestics" to care for them. An aide-de-camp, who spent much of his time galloping with messages, needed a string of good ones, as did senior cavalry officers, who had to ride farther, faster, and more constantly than their men. As a lieutenant aide-de-camp in 1805, Marbot had three horses; as a regimental commander in 1807 he thought seven necessary. His fellow colonel Ameil had ten. Horses bred in the north German state of Mecklemberg and the offshore island of Rugen were highly prized for speed, toughness, and spirit; a famous example was Marbot's "incomparable" mankilling mare, Lisette, which-so he always maintained-carried him (stunned by the "wind" of a cannon ball) out of the battered square of the 14th Ligne Infantry at Eylau, biting the face off one Russian and the bowels out of another. Those who could get them favored Arabs, which were not as big, fast, and strong as some European breeds, but sure-footed, intelligent, gentle, and incredibly tough. Such was Marbot's "Turkish horse" that twice saved his life in 1813, "moving along the edge of the precipices like a cat on a housetop."8 English thoroughbreds had size, style, and speed but were less enduring under hardship. (How they were brought into France would make quite a story, but a number of senior officers, Ameil included, owned one or more.) General d'Anthouard, the Viceroy Eugene's senior aide-de-camp, had two of them (and a "very fine" Spanish horse) during the retreat from Russia. Too badly wounded to ride and lacking domestics to care for them, he gave all three (worth 15,000 francs) to a Lithuanian gentleman for a night's hospitality and an old pair of wolf-skin boots. He kept four "Swiss horses" to pull his carriage; those survived the retreat.' When the fighting ended in 1814, a General Louis Chastel drew up a statement of his luck with horses. Perusal shows the gallant soldier's arithmetic was weak, or possibly he was drowning his sorrows while doing his sums. From 1805 through 1812 he seems to have bought forty animals: eighteen saddle horses, five mules, and seventeen draft or pack horses. Those animals had cost him approximately 26,000 francs; he had resold twelve of them for 5,600 francs, losing 960 francs in the process. Three more had been killed in action; twenty-two had died of sickness, accident, or "misery"; he still had two horses and a mule. During 1813-14 he apparently had twenty- two horses and a mule, had sold thirteen of those, and had had three stolen and two captured. The five remaining included "my pretty English horse." In the field, units were regularly inspected for sick, wounded, or injured horses. Those and dismounted troopers were sent back to a "little" (advance) depot along the army's line of communications until the horses were cured or remounts became available. These "little depots" were a yardbird's paradise: little danger, light duty, and a chance to get in some quiet looting in the surrounding area. A cowardly trooper might neglect or deliberately cripple his mount to be sent to one or might exchange his good horse for the sick one of a braver comrade. Much energy was needed to get such men back into the ranks, but the system limped along until 1812, when the distances and numbers of troops grew too great for easy supervision. De Brack was of the opinion that any sick or disabled horse that could be cured should be kept with the regiment, and his rider made responsible for curing it on the march. Moving those advanced depots could be a lunatics' parade, as in 1813, when the depots around Leipzig were ordered westward toward the Rhine. Originally some eight thousand men and six thousand more or less injured horses, with a long train of wagons loaded with clothing and equipment, the convoy attracted stragglers, noncombatants, deserters, and raiding parties of enemy irregulars. Its commander, General Jean Noirot, panicked and led a stampede to the Rhine, allowing his troops to pillage and abuse the inhabitants along their route and completely disorganizing the army's communications. The 1812 Russian campaign cost the Grande Armee at least 130,000, possibly 175,000 horses. The Emperor had timed his invasion for the season of good forage, but spring was late and very dry. Too many French were careless horsemasters, turning their animals loose at night into fields of green grain or clover without supervision. Thousands overate and died of the colic. Germans and Poles were more careful; as in the 2d Regiment of Berg Lancers, colonels had their men cut forage and feed their animals regularly. Somebody noticed that the horses of the Portuguese Legion's cavalry held up very well, being used to hunger and neglect. Murat insisted on keeping his cavalry in masses along the main road with little chance to forage or find water. In the retreat, the streams were still low and thickly frozen over. Weary troopers, straggling into freezing camps, seldom had the energy to find them, chop holes in the ice, and draw water for their animals. As dissimilar characters as Ameil and Caulaincourt agreed that thirst consequently killed more horses than the cold, but Ameil's chasseurs obviously chopped lustily. Finally, there was the failure in many regiments to "sharp shoe" their horses once the snow came and the shuffling columns trampled it down into ice along the roads. Smooth-shod horses could not keep their footing; if they fell near an infantry column, hungry soldiers at once cut them up, even while still alive. The Poles' greater horse sense showed in comparing the two regiments of Guard lancers: The Polish 1st Regiment saved two hundred out of a thousand horses; the French/Dutch 2d Regiment only a few officers' mounts. Any horse that came through that campaign handily was afterward much prized. For all the cold and hunger, much of the army's artillery, trains, and treasure were gotten across the endless plains of Old Russia, past the Lithuanian city of Vilna to within hope of safety. But some 5 miles west of Vilna rose a small line of hills. Smooth- shod teams could not haul their loads up the rising roadway. Most of the wheeled vehicles and guns-brought so far, God alone knows how, by courage, frozen hands, and whip-driven horseflesh-had to be abandoned there in one mad junkyard in the snow. For 1813, the French still could buy sufficient horses in Germany, but their green troopers lost many of them by failing to care for them properly-more out of fatigue than cruelty, but the result was the same. The next year saw France thrown back on its own resources. There seem to have been sufficient draft animals, and saddle horses enough for the cavalry were found somehow, though mostly small animals. By the campaign's end, France had few remounts left. The usual substitute for the horse is the mule. France was well provided with them, especially in its southern provinces and along its frontiers with Switzerland, Italy, and Spain, where pack mules were a principal means of moving merchandise. They also were relatively plentiful in Spain, though French troops swore those beasts were as hostile as their masters. Tough, hard-working, ornery, and able to live where a horse would starve, they served the French armies in Spain as both draft and pack animals, even being used for gun teams. Oxen were another substitute-powerful, needing only the simplest of harness, but very slow. Their most extensive use was in 1812, when they had to be issued to several train battalions, including the 2d Italian. Early losses of horses from bad weather and muddy roads also forced the use of oxen (some apparently locally procured) to haul the heavy equipment of the artillery and engineer "parks." (Napoleon warned the officers concerned that the popular belief that oxen never got tired was incorrect.) Davout had organized his I Corps trains to include light wagons drawn by oxen. When the wagons had been emptied, the oxen were eaten. Care of those army animals was divided among their riders and drivers, the unit commanders, and the Veterinary Service. Pre-Revolutionary France had two internationally famous Royal veterinary schools, one in Lyons and the other at Alfort, near Paris. Both continued to be active during the Revolution. Napoleon hooked them into the remount service as "Imperial Veterinary Schools." Since 1769 each mounted or horse-drawn regiment had been ordered to send a man to them for a four-year course; after completing it he was required to serve for at least eight more years. Originally there was only one veterinarian (artiste-veterinaire) per regiment, but a second was added in 1807. Originally they ranked and were paid as sergeants, plus a small allowance for each horse under their care. In 1811 they were elevated to a sort of unofficial warrant officer status, placing them between the senior NCOs and the officers, with whom they lived and messed. A decree of 1813 set up a five-year course for medecins- veterinaires, added four veterinary inspectors, and changed the title of artistes veterinaires to marchaux veterinaires en premier. Contemporary accounts make it plain that the average regimental veterinarian had several assistants: aides artistes veterinaires and sous-aides. 10 In addition, each cavalry regiment sent one officer and one NCO each year to the school at Versailles, where the instruction included hippology and practical veterinary science, as did the curriculum of the artillery school. As a wry bit of history, the staff and students of the Alfort school were called to aid in the defense of Paris in 1814. They fought very well, but the students of the Ecole Polytechnique got all the credit! Apparently nobody thought horse doctors qualified as heroes. [Conscription] is an ineluctable consequence of political equality. If you demand equality, then accept the consequences. Daru, cited by Nanteull As for men to fill up battalions and squadrons, both the Consulate and the Empire continued to use General Jourdan's 1798 conscription act. Annually, men between the ages of twenty and twenty-five were registered in five classes. That registration was the responsibility of the prefects, aided by their assistant prefects and mayors. 12 The procedure naturally furnished endless opportunities for petty local graft and tyranny. (One favorite type of high-level draft-dodging was to get into departmental "civil service" jobs; the "dodger" would even work for nothing, to the great profit of the responsible prefect or assistant prefect, who pocketed his pay.) The army officers involved considered it a lousy, finagling occasion. There were endless pressures, pleas, and excuses; and another flagon of wine was always being thrust under your 