e thought to an invasion of Ireland but found the flotilla's remaining vessels in poor condition. Also, he could not risk such an operation with a hostile Russia mobilizing in the east. However, Villeneuve's defeat at Trafalgar in 1805 only intensified Napoleon's determination to build a strong French Navy.14 He rebuilt his Toulon fleet, which had been lost at Trafalgar; strengthened his fleets at Brest and Cherbourg; and built a new fleet at Antwerp. In 1809, the hope of destroying the Antwerp fleet pulled the English into their disastrous Walcheren expedition. Napoleon strengthened the fortifications of his naval bases and improved their port facilities. Moreover, he kept track of foreign naval developments and therefore was frequently banging on Decres's mental inertia: Replace the light guns on French ships with carronades15 and mount heavy pivot guns on our light warships in place of those little popguns you string along their sides. In 1807, following Andreossy's tests of the effects of shell fire against ships' hulls, Napoleon told Decres to develop an 8-inch naval gun that could fire explosive shells. After reading English newspapers in 1813 he had another directive for Decres: The British were building ships to match those terrible American 44-gun frigates; Decres must build American-style frigates at Toulon, Rochefort, and Cherbourg and test them thoroughly. To develop naval officers capable of handling ships of the line in storms and battle, Napoleon was willing to risk the loss of such vessels on commerce-raiding cruises. That, however, proved a losing game; finally those big ships remained in and around their bases, while the frigates and lighter vessels ventured out. Among the captains of these roving warships a new, tougher school of sea fighters was evolving, men who looked for trouble and shot straight and hard at the Englishmen's hulls. The greatest of their exploits were in the Indian Ocean; they found-as American frigate captains would in 1812-that many British ships were slackly commanded, their crews poorly trained, their gunnery ineffective. Most of those captains courageous were overwhelmed by 1810, but more of them trickled out of French ports. In 1813 Wellington was complaining that the supply ships that fed his army in northern Spain were being intercepted. (American privateers probably deserve part of the credit.) Even in 1814, Napoleon insisted that his frigates cruise as aggressively as possible; he wanted two of them active in American waters to show the French flag there and, if possible, to work with American frigates. (That was wisdom come late; had he cooperated actively with American privateers from 1812 on, England undoubtedly would have been hurt far worse in its home waters.) Through this period French privateers were constantly active. Though most of their exploits were only a minor nibbling at English commerce, compared with the havoc American privateers would deal out broadcast through 1813-14, they hurt it. Some Frenchmen raided through the English Channel, the Irish Sea, the North Sea, and the Baltic. One snatched a ship out of Cork harbor after it had taken on a pilot. Others sailed the "long course" into the East Indies, where fat British "Indiamen" made rich prizes. One captain, Pierre Bouvet, after checkered fortunes, noticed that British warships paid no attention to small native craft in the Indian Ocean. He therefore used "Hindu" vessels as privateers and raiders with great success until the British finally swamped the French base at Isle de France (Mauritius) in 1810. Most notable of the sea rovers was Robert Surcouf of Saint-Malo, who refused a naval commission so as to remain free to go to sea or stay home as he pleased. Napoleon gave him the Legion of Honor and made him a baron; the British, it is claimed, put a price of 250,000 francs on his head. His riches did not soften him: Another legend has him quarreling with a group of Prussian officers in 1817 and dueling down eleven of them in rapid succession. More important was the fact that he was a highly skilled seaman and navigator; also, he had his own intelligence net in that queer crossChannel world of smugglers and spies. Whatever the French Navy did or failed to do on the high seas, elements of it served usefully with the French Army. In 1796 in Italy, Napoleon improvised gunboat flotillas on Lake Mantua and Lake Garda, using local boats armed with captured cannon and bedecked with showy flags. A young naval officer named Pierre Baste, who would later command the sailors of the Imperial Guard and die in action as a general at Brienne in 1814, helped to organize them. There was another squadron of gunboats operating along the west coast of Italy; Desaix mentioned meeting a Capitaine de Frigate La Sybille,16 who commanded all three squadrons when he visited Napoleon in 1797. These small craft were always handy for scouting and shifting small bodies of troops. Thus, during the touch-and-go battle of Rivoli in January 1797 Murat used them to bring a demi-brigade across Lake Garda in time to help cut off the Austrians' retreat. (Later Murat would jingle the odd-seeming title of Grand Admiral of France among his horseman's honors, but at least he had this one small claim to it, which was more than many of its princely holders, before and after, could match.) In Egypt Napoleon used a fleet of river craft on the Nile and its connecting lakes and canals, both as gunboats and as supply vessels. They were manned by his Greek Legion and men of the Legion Nautique, formed from the crews of ships sunk during the battle of the Nile." As the French occupation settled in, additional boats were built, but a Red Sea squadron proved to have been poorly constructed: One boat caught fire from the first shot it fired and blew up. Massena attempted to patch together a gunboat squadron to support his defense of Genoa in 1800. It was little help; the sailors were Genoese and saw no reason to die for France. Gunboat commanders profanely reported that every time an enemy bullet whistled past, their crews dropped everything, cowered against the boat's bulwarks, and prayed loudly to the Santa Madona. After Marengo that same year, as the war went eastward, more small naval units were organized on north Italian lakes and the Po River. Most of the sailors were Italians of one nationality or another; officers were frequently refugee pro-French noblemen from Naples and other hostile states. One of them, a Venetian, was entrusted with a fine bronze cannon for the Po flotilla. He sold it and vanished. Except for a few officers detailed to organize a supply system on the Danube with requisitioned cargo boats, the navy had no part in Napoleon's 1805 campaign. Some of the first boats were handled by French sapeurs or pontonniers, but later native boatmen were employed, with a few French soldiers-lamed infantrymen or cavalrymen who had lost their horses"riding shotgun." In spite of the haste with which it was organized, this system worked remarkably well. In 1806, hearing that there were sailors and workmen unemployed at Brest because of the English blockade, Napoleon ordered them formed into two regiments of infanterie de marine (naval infantry) to be used as garrison troops there. Their officers and NCOs would retain their navy titles, with contre-amirals commanding the regiments (the close English blockade had left a number of those august personages underemployed) and maftres d'equipage as sergeants. Army officers would be detailed as regimental and battalion adjutants-majors to take care of the changes in paperwork; the artillerie de la marine provided the necessary drillmasters. Their organization would free Regular infantry regiments for the wars in Prussia and Poland. `$ That same year Napoleon ordered Decres to send a naval detachmenta capitaine de frigate, two ensigns, and forty good French sailors-to Hamburg, where they were to "arm" four small boats with light howitzers and patrol the mouth of the Elbe against smugglers. One or two boats were to be on duty at all times; the officers must be active and incorruptible. Possibly those were the sailors whom Christoph Suhr, the Bourgeois d'Ham- bourg, sketched as they passed in their simple dark blue uniforms, some of the enlisted seamen with short clay pipes thrust through the bands of their round hats. Such offshore patrols to prevent the import of English merchandise went on wherever the Napoleonic Empire bordered on salt water. French bateaux canonniers (gunboats) also dealt with English "cutting-out" parties that might dash into an anchorage to snatch a merchant ship or with raids on the coastal fisheries. Their crews often included soldiers detailed for such service; apparently considering them less weatherproof than sailors-or possibly remembering how little care many navy officers had for their men's health-the Emperor directed that awnings be put up in wet weather while the gunboats were in port. He also wanted no more than 120 men per regiment detailed for such garnison duty, whether with the coastal patrol or aboard larger vessels heading out on the high seas. Dutch soldiers usually were good at such duty, but the Swiss had strong prejudices against "embarking themselves" and were often excused. With Austria about to start another war and many of his engineer battalions committed in Spain, in 1809 Napoleon began organizing battalions of ouvriers militaires de la marine (military naval artificers, sometimes carried as ouvriers militaires du genie maritime) out of the companies of ouvriers militaires working at the larger naval bases.19 Officers were supposed to be taken from the naval construction engineers: As not enough of these were available, the rest were detailed from the artillerie de la marine. The uniform was similar to that of the sapeurs; ouvriers first class had red epaulettes and briquets; the second class had red contre-epaulettes; the third only red trim on ordinary shoulder straps. One battalion of navy artificers (soon designated the "Battalion of the Danube") and the 44th Bataillon de Flottille followed the Grande Arme e into Austria as part of the engineer parc. Baste, now a capitaine de vaisseau, commanded them both. The campaign started awkwardly with their train troops managing (by accident, let us trust) to drop the officers' baggage wagons off the Freysing pontoon bridge for a five-hour soaking. Thereafter, and possibly therefore, things started clicking. The amount of work done by the two battalions is amazing. Each company of naval artificers had brought a tool wagon; each of the flottille sailors carried (or was supposed to carry) a tool, each squad in each company lugging a different type. They built bridges, boats, landing craft,20 and a floating battery, and organized a water transport system on the Danube to speed up supply. Baste led them on small-scale reconnaissances and raids, one of which located and destroyed an Austrian fire boat. At the same time they blocked Austrian attempts to reconnoiter Napoleon's activities, giving Napoleon complete control of the Danube in the Passau-Vienna area. During the night crossing before Wagram, they ferried the first French assault units across and helped to "throw" the pontoon bridges between Lobau Island and the north bank of the Danube, while their gunboats ran in to provide shortrange gunfire support and smother the remaining Austrian outposts along the north bank. They took one Austrian-held island by boarding it, just as if it had been an enemy warship. All that was done, and thoroughly, by men mostly new to combat. Yet, unfortunately, popular opinion somehow attributed it all to the sailors of the Guard, who arrived a couple of weeks after Wagram had been fought and won! Another problem in 1809 could be handled in more routine navy fashion. Concerned over the threat of English light warships to the sea communications between Eugene in Italy and Marmont in Il