inscription maritime, " a register of all men in their arrondissement employed in some type of maritime activity: fishermen, merchant seamen, and the like.' (When joining the crew of an oceangoing ship, sailors had to sign out and get clearance, but coastal voyages required no official permission.) The manpower problem was more difficult. To provide officer replacements, two floating naval academies were opened aboard specially equipped ships, one at Brest, the other at Toulon, with stiff three-year courses. Men were secured primarily through the inscription maritime, all seafaring citizens being held liable to naval service when required. Should they fail to report when summoned, they were considered inscrits maritimes desobeis- sants, fuyards, et deserteurs-a wordy way of saying AWOL-and put under the same system of punishments as rdfractaires. In 1814 Napoleon ordered that the billeting of garnisaires on their families would cease, unless specially ordered by the Minister of the Navy. (He undoubtedly had more urgent uses for his soldiers.) The inscription was supplemented by the application of a conscription maritime levied on the coastal districts, conscripts from the interior departments, and the enlistment of foreign seamen and even of prisoners of war. (The professional sailor of that period frequently was a bird of passage, with no strong national feelings.) In 1813 a report on navy personnel at Antwerp showed 3,413 "old" French and 4,771 from the recently annexed departements reunis; almost 3,800 of the latter were Dutch or Germans and near-Germans from the former Hanseatic states. There were also four hundred conscripted Dutch artificers. Napoleon ordered all Germans and the conscripts transferred to Toulon, where they would be out of temptation's way. Even among Frenchmen there were great variations. Normans were good sailors and daring, savage fighters but easily discouraged and irritated. Bretons were orderly, stoically courageous, and very fond of getting drunk. Gascons were talkative but intelligent and industrious and made excellent bosuns. The southerners were hard-working but apt to drop everything to wave their arms and gabble over nothing; they frightened easily, but a spellbinding officer sometimes could talk them into putting up a first-rate fight. Napoleon completely capsized naval custom by insisting on permanent ships' crews (instead of enlisting men for a single cruise only, as has been the immemorial custom). In 1804 he also put his sailors into uniform and had them learn infantry drill and musketry. Such ideas shocked common seaman and admiral alike: It went against their traditional disorder and was getting a bit too military. Nevertheless, in March 1808 the word came down: There would be fifty bataillons de marine, each to form the permanent equipage (crew) of a ship of the line; two years later twenty-four equipages de flotille were added for coastal defense and to train young sailors. The bataillons de marine were redesignated equipages de haut bord.10 The shipyards were a hive of specialists: naval constructors, carpenters of many degrees, rope makers, sailmakers, riggers, caulkers, and skilled wood carvers. All were excessively proud of their professions and seldom to be hurried. The caulkers, whose alleged cretinism was a rich source of dockyard humor, nevertheless thought highly of themselves. A clumsy apprentice would be told to quit trying to qualify as a caulker and take up surgery. Rigging a ship always meant squabbles: The captain who would command the ship had his own ideas; the dockyard director had regulations (sometimes hazy) to follow; the gabiers deport (riggers) might try to make a quick and dirty job of it, alleging "captain's orders" to the director and "director's orders" to the captain." But that happened in all navies and, once afloat, the captain would happily reassemble the ship to his own satisfaction anyway. Practical sailors trusted to the skill and honesty of the dockyard's master carpenters, believing that they had the greatest actual responsibility for a ship's proper construction. The hardest work around some of the ports was done by forcats (galley slaves), who were housed in special bagnes (prison hulks or buildings). They were chained in pairs (known charitably as "companions") and were usually careful to do the least work and the most damage possible without being in open rebellion. Those sentenced for life wore green caps; those for a long term, green caps with a red band; short-timers, all-red ones. They were directly under the charge of the Service de Surveillance des Bagnes with its argousins (wardens) and watched over by the quasi-military gardes chiourmes (chain-gang guards, sometimes termed gardes des chalnes). There was one guard to every five couples; usually they lived in considerable fear of their charges (some of whom were experts at arranging "accidents") and seldom urged them to work harder. If the forcats got too far out of hand, however, troops from the local garrison would quickly bang them into temporary industry. With splendid ships, good crews, and efficient naval bases, Napoleon needed only time to train his navy and capable officers to command his fleets and ships. He got neither. Ironically, navies are best trained in time of peace; Napoleon needed five to ten years, and the short truce-March 1802 to May 1803-following the Treaty of Amiens was totally insufficient. Thereafter, French seaports were blockaded; any sortie in force meant a fight with the Royal Navy, hardened to war and victory, sometimes in superior force. Only limited training in ship-handling was possible within the narrow waters protected by French coastal fortifications. As for officers, the stars in their courses were against Napoleon. Of his admirals, Louis de Latouche-Treville, the inspiring fighter who had bested Nelson in three out of three minor clashes, died in 1804; Etienne Bruix, an excellent organizer, followed in 1805; Magon de Medine went down fighting at Trafalgar. Charles Durand de Linois, the tough Breton who beat six English ships with three French in 1801 at Algeciras, went out to the eastern seas and was captured in 1806 after a stubborn fight with a stronger British squadron. None of the other admirals were exactly men of blood; one played the coward at Trafalgar. They were all possessed by the bygone Grand Corps philosophy of war: Avoid combat; if you are forced to fight, fire high to cripple the enemy's rigging, and then get away! That was fatal against English admirals, who were more concerned as to where the French were than how many ships they might have. Napoleon's first Naval Minister was Pierre Forfait, an outstanding naval engineer but something of a pedant. He soon got in Napoleon's hair by being unable to account for various naval expenditures and failing to press to construction of new ships; worse, Napoleon learned that Forfait had interests in civilian companies engaged in shipbuilding. His replacement was Denis Decres, who was very much a French version of Clarke: rough with subordinates, limber-backed to Napoleon, financially honest, and a competent administrator of routine business, but without initiative, conviction, or spirit. The French Navy differed from the English and American navies in two particulars. First, it had no marines; their duties aboard ship were discharged by garnisons (garrisons) of regular infantry. Second, the naval gunners belonged to a separate organization, the Corps Imperial d'Artillerie de la Marine (Imperial Corps of Naval Artillery), a revival of the preRevolutionary canonniers-matelots. Aboard ship they functioned as gun captains and gun pointers; ashore, they manned the batteries protecting the naval bases. Their officers supervised the manufacture of naval guns and gun carriages. Through all their various reorganizations the naval gunners maintained a reputation for discipline and skill. A brigade of them served as infantry during the Italian campaigns of 1800-1801; their high morale and general efficiency won them the nickname "Grenadiers of the Navy" and (at least for some) grenadier bearskin caps. In 1805 the naval artillery had four regiments in France, with six companies of "apprentice cannoneers" and six of ouvriers; in addition, there were two separate battalions on Martinique and Guadeloupe." The French Navy had its own signal system (developed by the appropriately named Chevalier du Pavillon), consisting of ten flags and three flames (long pennants). By using multiple signal hoists, a total of 1,600 phrases could be encoded. John Paul Jones considered this far superior to the British system of flag signals. The navy also had its own administrative system of commissaires and inspecteurs aux Revues, and a medical set-up paralleling that of the army. In place of ingenieurs geographes, it had its equally skilled ingenieurs hy- drographes, who made its navigational charts. In late 1801 Napoleon had them taking soundings around the coasts of Corsica. Possibly their reports had something to do with his order a year later for the Navy to move more light warships into the Mediterranean and clean up the pirates infesting the shores of Corsica and Elba. In 1801 and again in 1803-05 Napoleon planned an invasion of England and built special shipping for that amphibious operation in every port and navigable river from Ostend to Bordeaux. Properly the Flottille Nationale, it became better known as the "Boulogne Flotilla" from its principal base. Forfait designed a variety of shallow-draft, flat-bottomed sailing craft, most of them with auxiliary sweeps (large oars) so that they could move during periods of light airs or dead calms that would immobilize British warships. Intending that the flotilla be able to shoot its way through the British Channel fleet, Forfait gave his vessels heavy guns. The biggest, called prames (prams), had twenty 36-pounders and one 12-inch mortar. All told the flotilla totaled approximately two thousand vessels, including more than 900 prames and gunboats, 765 armed transports, and a swarm of converted fishing boats and other small craft, all designed to use any small harbor or to be easily beached. They were to "lift" an army of some 149,000 men and 8,611 horses, with artillery, ammunition, and essential supplies. Originally, Napoleon hoped-being no sailor-to make a surprise crossing in a matter of six hours. But experimentation and training soon showed that it would take several days of good weather merely to get the invasion flotilla out of its various bases and formed up. Also, his admirals totally disagreed with Forfait's opinion that the flotilla, if need be, could fight its way across the Channel. It gradually became apparent that the French Navy would have to gain temporary control of the Channel by either outmaneuvering or outfighting the Royal Navy. The French Navy failed at that mission in 1805, in some part because Admiral Pierre Charles Villeneuve saw only dangers where the late Latouche Treville had seen opportunities, and because Villeneuve felt-instinctively-that the preservation of his ships was far more important than his assigned mission. Another factor was the French naval medical service's general ignorance concerning the proper prevention and treatment of scurvy and tropical fevers. But the preparation for the invasion had allowed Napoleon time to concentrate and train the Grande Armee. Some of his soldiers had received special training aboard ship, sleeping in hammocks and eating out of wooden "kids." Coignet, recently made a grenadier of the Imperial Guard, enjoyed everything but the navy's beans, "which dated from the creation of the world."" Any idea of invading England had to be dropped when that nation persuaded Austria and Russia to attack France from the east. Even so, Napoleon kept portions of the Boulogne flotilla on standby for years as a reserve threat. As late as 1811 and 1812 he was giving som