. Bordeaux, with its long history of profitable trade with England, was one center of resistance, and Marseilles another. None of this was exactly new: Before the Revolution the annual draft to decide which peasants would serve their King in the militia was certain to produce large-scale disorders. (It is not just old, either; in World War I American soldiers training in southern France were shocked to find "village fathers there wanting peace at almost any price that would leave each his little business.")16 In 1803 Bordeaux was brought to heel by the threat of martial law; small troop units casually moving through troublesome departments "aided the conscription singularly." National military spirit rose through 1805 and 1806, the years of the great victories, though the conscription for 1806 totaled 160,000 men, including 60,000 for the reserve." There still were draft-dodging refractaires. On December 1, 1806, Napoleon wrote Fouche that a band of fifty of them were reported in the Valley of Zeri; gendarmes must be sent to round them up. The Polish campaign, with its hunger, mud, and bloody Eylau, took some of the glamour out of a military career. The always turbulent 8th Military District around Marseilles became more turbulent still. His equally hot Corsican blood thereby stirred, its commander, General Jean Cervoni, declared that any citizen possessing even an ancient fowling piece was liable to trial. This created a fine pot-au- feu of south-of-France indignation, and Napoleon rebuked the general: Any property- owning citizen had the right to keep weapons. Cervoni would confine his efforts to those loyal citizens who appeared unable to distinguish between a gendarme and a rabbit. So far the system had worked as successfully as could be expected. In 1807, though, things went wrong. In March, gripped by one of his impatient, bull-headed moods, Napoleon "anticipated" the conscription, ordering up 80,000 men (20,000 for the reserve) of the "class" of 1808. Lacuee objected that those boys would average only eighteen years of age and so would not be as fit for active duty as the men still available from the "class" of 1807. An "anticipation" on that scale would cause public discontent. Besides, it would foul up the replacement system. Napoleon did reduce the levy slightly, but his call-ups between August 1806 and April 1807 had brought more than 200,000 Frenchmen into active service, and he followed them with another levy of 80,000 (20,000 for the reserve) in February 1808 from the "class" of 1809. The regimental depots were swamped; stocks of clothing and equipment were exhausted; numbers of retired officers of the "metalman" `$ type had to be recalled to active duty, and the age of the average conscript dropped to eighteen and a half. Large numbers of those innocents went through Spain in 1807 to occupy Portugal, "puny conscripts, barely able to carry their packs and their weapons ... looking more like the evacuation of a hospital than an army marching to the conquest of a Kingdom."" More came in 1808 as part of the first French army of occupation in Spain. They were barely trained; orders were to give them plenty of target practice, but to do it in some place where the Spaniards could not see how badly they needed it. Most of them were brave enough, but they wilted under the Spanish sun at Baylen. The year 1809 brought renewed war with Austria and a levy of 60,000 men. This time the Emperor reached back over his shoulder and took men of the "classes" of 1806, 1807, and 1808, who had thought themselves safe. Then 75,550 more were levied before the year was out, 10,000 of them specifically for units of the newly created "Young Guard." Napoleon's "little conscripts" marched and fought with courage and style to the renewed defeat of Austria. Meanwhile the going price for a substitute increased from 1,800 to 4,000 francs. (The 66th Ligne, isolated on Guadaloupe, solved its replacement problems by drafting 1,500 local blacks into its center companies.) Then there was an almost-peace, except for the slow attrition in Spain. In 1810 the levy was small; in 1811 the total was approximately 167,000, but 90,000 of them were left on reserve status, and the rest were largely from Holland and the new Italian and German departments. Napoleon had time to consider the twin problems of refractaires and deserters. Some areas had bands of such "citoyens errants" hiding out in the woods and troubling farmers' henhouses and daughters. Catching them sometimes entailed considerable risk; at various times Napoleon granted pensions to widows of gardes champetres and douaniers killed while apprehending them. In August 1810 there were reportedly 32,686 refractaires and 30,975 deserters loose in France, possibly as many more in the Kingdom of Italy. Napoleon began by offering a pardon to those citoyens errants who would return to duty. In place of the earlier "depots of refractory conscripts," he established special disciplinary regiments to make soldiers out of those who had to be caught (the criminal element among them was sent to the colonial battalions instead). The bounty for apprehending a deserter was raised to 25 francs. Men found guilty of self-mutilation to avoid conscription (almost unknown before 1807) were sent to the pionniers franpais for five years. In addition, the parents of refractaires or deserters were fined 1,500 francs and-after an old French custom-might have troops (garnisaires) quartered on them until junior turned himself in.20 Meanwhile the parents would have to feed the soldiers and their horses and pay each man 5 francs a day. Imperial wrath rattled the bones of certain prefects and mayors. Mobile columns, including detachments of the austere gendarmerie d'elite of the Imperial Guard, moved into the most unruly departments. Their instructions were not to bully or frighten, but to "oblige" erring citizens to repent. However they did it, they were highly successful, bringing in some 66,000 future soldiers. And the Emperor was looking into a certain divinity school in Bayonne, which had space for ninety-two students: Several times that number of young men were requesting exemption in order to attend it. (That, too, we have experienced in this century.) The disciplinary regiments worked well; by late 1811 line regiments were sending battalion cadres to their depots to pick up sufficient ex-refractaires to bring those battalions up to war strength. Men had to be found. In Spain the war ground on, with an English general named Wellington proving surprisingly resilient; from the Duchy of Warsaw came reports of swelling Russian troop concentrations just beyond the frontier. The Emperor began reading books on Russia. In December 1811 he ordered a levy of 120,000 men; only 7,751 would be "reserve." Times being hard in 1812, most conscripts came willingly "for bread." Even so, quite a few aging, homely girls found themselves rushed into marriage. Of the two levies of 1812, totaling some 245,000 men, half were for the cohorts of the National Guard that would take over the defense of France while their Emperor marched on Moscow-and the Russian winter.21 With his great army wrecked in Russia, Napoleon had only the first months of 1813 to create a new one. Fortunately, well before the retreat from Moscow began, he had sent back cadres from the regiments there and had also ordered cadres sent back from his armies in Spain. In Germany the survivors of the great retreat were rallying. Pitifully few though they were, they were men whom nothing-cold, hunger, exhaustion, or all the might of Russia-could break. They would be the iron skeleton of a new army; now they needed only some rest, a few square meals, and replacements. The replacements came. Approximately 120,000 conscripts from the September 1812 levy were training in the depots; Napoleon summoned some 350,000 more and called up the first-line units of the National Guard for active duty. The Garde de Paris and gardes departementals were transferred to the field army; the navy was drawn on for infantry, artillerymen, and artificers; the gendarmerie and the postal, customs, and forestry services were screened. Communities all over the Empire found, equipped, and mounted cavalry replacements-even the half-isolated Ionian Islands sent a few adventurers to join the Mamelukes. Ten thousand young men were drafted from the Empire's leading families to form the Guards of Honor. They were mostly good soldiers; Napoleon managed quite a feat in getting them trained on the run into battle. Had his riz-pain-sel services done half as well getting bread and brandy into them, the eagles might have once again swept Europe. Much use was made of regiments de marche, temporary organizations composed of newly reorganized battalions (sometimes companies) from different regiments under their own officers, which served as "carrier units" between the depots and the field armies. En route, they could escort supply trains or lend an amateurish hand to line-of-communications garrisons against raiding irregulars. Their marches were planned so as to gradually toughen young troops, and part of each day was set aside for drill. On arrival they broke up, each battalion reporting to its parent regiment. (Poor Clarke never did master the difference between a regiment de marche and a provisional regiment, and no amount of Imperial explanation could enlighten him.) Regiments de marche were not supposed to be combat units, but, at Fere-Champenoise in March 1814, the 9th Regiment de Marche de Grosse Cavalerie saved the routed corps of Mortier and Marmont, successfully charging the whole Allied cavalry again and again until dark. As always, some outfits decided to solve their replacement problems themselves. Involved in the 1813 reorganization, several artillery train battalions re-forming around Metz found themselves short of NCOs and artificers. They therefore sent out recruiting parties, which wandered quietly through nearby depots of cavalry and infantry regiments to spot promising individuals, then pulled strings in the Ministry of War Administration to have those soldiers transferred to them. Eventually the cavalry and infantry colonels caught on. There were still conscripts in 1814. The Emperor hoped for 300,000 of them from all the "classes" between 1805 and 1815, but there was not time for such a mustering. The wealthier classes were stewing in resentment: Even if they hired a substitute for a son tapped by the conscription (some had hired two or three), the son now had to go. Self-mutilation became senselessly violent-all teeth knocked out, caustic agents applied to the "organs of generation," deliberate maiming. The woods again filled up with refractaires; a good many prefects lost their heads and stampeded westward at the first report of a cossack patrol. But battered veterans did what they could. Lieutenant Bouvier-Destouches of the Guard, retired after losing six fingers in Russia, rode to the wars again, the stump of one hand fitted with a hook to hold his reins, the other with a strap to help hold his sword; he was wounded twice more. Because it was a time of harried tribulation, the records are uncertain. But it is evident that most of the young conscripts who actually received their "greetings" obeyed. Of the 50,000 who passed, cold and hungry, through the main depot of Courbevoie in the three months of the 1814 campaign, only one in a hundred deserted. Dubbed the "Marie-Louises" after their equally young Empress, these recruits went out to the battle.22 Campaigning was foul, the spring late, freezing, and snowy-brutal to men and horses alike; to boys of seventeen new-caught from home; to sedentary fathers of families turned national guardsmen in blue blouses and sabots; to the grumbling, scarred, gray zealots of twenty years of war. They followed their eagles and fought. They lost, and they won and won again. They died unattended in the lousy hospital 