straw; in the lost squares along the road by Fere-Champenoise, stabbing out, sobbing, with broken, bloody bayonets against the colossi of Alexander's Chevalier Guards; in the desperate little columns where gendarmes, douaniers, and forest guards were grenadiers among peasant boys uncertain how to load their muskets. A drooping-plumed Marmont would trick them into surrender; an Augereau grown mean with age (and a young aristocratic wife) would hold them back from the Emperor's long-planned flanking maneuver that might have swept the battle eastward across the Rhine. The odds and their stars were against them. Few Frenchmen of 1940 did as well. From 1800 into 1815, Napoleon levied a total of 2,646,957 men.23 Of those, approximately 1,350,000 actually were called up for active duty. The others, who had drawn the higher numbers, had not been needed or had been left at home on "reserve" status. When the heavy levies began in late 1811, many of those men were overage or exempt because of family responsibilities. Out of all the reluctant conscripts of the Empire's later years, there is a complete story of one, Auguste Demees of the "class" of 1812, only son to Louis-Pierre-Henri-Auguste Demees, President of the Civil Tribunal of Alencon.24 The family was of the commercial-legal bourgeoise; their district (in northwest France) was somewhat Royalist in sentiment yet kept in good order by Colonel Cavalier, once of the Dromedary Regiment in Egypt and now commander of the gendarmerie in the Department of the Orne. Besides Auguste, considered somewhat "delicate," Demees had two daughters, the elder married to a Captain Bellanger of the gendarmerie. Their wedding had upset the family, since Daddy had no use for uniforms or glory. (In 1775 trouble with his mother had moved Demees to enlist in the Regiment d'Orleans, but twenty months there was enough to convince him that his mother was right. He still shuddered at the memory of it.) He had finally consented only because gendarmes technically were not combat troops. Now the captain was in Russia, and his daughter was pregnant. Auguste had had vague aspirations toward the Ecole Polytechnique in 1809, but Demees Pere sent him to law school instead, to prepare to carry on the family's legal tradition. When the 1812 drawing (to be held on 28 January) approached, fearing that Auguste might be taken, father began trying to line up a substitute. Through the good offices of a friend, he contacted Monsieur Anquetin, concierge of the prison at Sees, for an available felon whose sins were minor enough to qualify him as cannon fodder. All such, however, wanted 7,000 francs (of which the concierge certainly would have taken a sizable cut), so father-without definitely saying no-continued looking. A friend in Paris thought he might find a surrogate through an agent for 5,100 francs, 500 down, 1,500 when the substitute was accepted, 3,000 when he reported to his regiment for duty, 100 for incidentals. Demees's parental affection being tempered with true French thrift, he continued shopping, using his legal contacts for all they were worth. But all prospects wanted 5,700 to 8,000 francs; the taller the man, the higher his price. There was a year's respite when Auguste drew a high number and could wait at home. His "greetings" came on January 20, 1813; he was to report on February 15 to the captain of the recruiting service in Alencon. Things were rough now, with substitutes very rare and asking 10,000 to 12,000 francs. Two veterans of past campaigns, one discharged because of the loss of two fingers, the other because of a leg wound, were considered. However, such men were not perfectly safe investments; though the depot might accept them, the regiment in the field might reject them as unsound. (For the same reason, Demees refused possible substitutes over thirty, though the depots might take men as old as thirty-five.) Rejection at any point would mean the loss of the down payment; also, those two wanted the chilling equivalent of a life annuity of 500 francs. With the drill sergeant's breath hot on his neck, Auguste was rapidly going broke from wining and dining various prospects. His father's composure was badly ruffled when he almost engaged a criminal posing as an unemployed actor. He escaped with the loss of only 300 francs, paid to the racoleurs (crimps) who had found the fellow, but had to watch substitutes' prices go up to as much as 20,000 francs. Some substitutes were taking advantage of the bull market (like the "bounty jumpers" of our Civil War) to pocket the initial payments, desert while en route from the depot to the regiment, and then find another sucker. Finally Demees did locate a suitable man-who was promptly called to active duty, leaving Demees 1,500 francs poorer for initial expenses. Then suddenly, like a blessing from above, a legal colleague produced Gaspard-Joseph Morel, twenty-eight, single, of the "class" of An XIII (roughly 1804). Gaspard was the only son of a widow but had a married sister who would care for her. His price was amazingly low: 6,600 francs, the 600 to be cash in hand on his departure, the balance to be paid within six months after Morel was accepted for duty and to draw 5 percent interest until then. Finally, Demees was to pay all legal fees, travel expenses to the depot, and the cost of Morel's initial issue of clothing and equipment." Those incidentals added up to 233 francs; that made the total 6,833. Morel laid down a series of documents: a statement from his prefect that he had "satisfied" (drawn his lot without being called up) the conscription for An XIII and was not currently under call; a medical certificate that he was in good physical and mental health; and a certificate from his local "judge of the peace" that there had been no complaint against him since 1808, when he got three days' hard labor for exhibiting "lack of respect" for the gendarmerie. (Demees had this rewritten to omit that unfortunate incident.) Morel further bound himself to furnish, within six months, a certificate that he was duly enrolled in whatever regiment he might be assigned to. Morel is a curiosity. Obviously he was no fool in legal matters. His letters are coherent and to the point. Avid as the conscription now was, his status as the only son of a widow left him safer than most. Yet he sold himself, and cheaply too. Possibly, in his own way, he was a patriot. The army liked his looks: When he wrote from Paris, it was to report that he had been assigned to the Young Guard's 1st Regiment of Tirailleurs-Grenadiers. (He used a regimental letterhead, ornamented with portraits of the Emperor and Empress and the figure of a tirailleur.) After that came a period of silence. Another call-up would come in April. Lacking Morel's certificate, Auguste would have to go. Another substitute, could one be found, would cost at least 10,000 francs. The only easy refuges were the National Guard and the newly activated Guards of Honor. Auguste preferred the latter, though he hardly knew one end of a horse from the other. Demees moaned that the equipment, horse, and weapons would cost at least 2,000 francs. Until the day of decision, however, Auguste continued his schooling. He graduated with honors, and his father frantically tried to place him as a temporary juge- auditeur,26 finally succeeding just as Auguste was about to be summoned for local national guard duty. And father had other troubles: a contribution of 500 francs to help equip and mount local Guards of Honor who were unable to outfit themselves; another toward the purchase of some horses Alencon was donating to the army; and yet another for a stockade for a batch of Spanish prisoners. In May Morel wrote from Dresden. His company fourrier would soon have his certificate ready. He regretted the delay, but they had been marching and fighting constantly. He was happy to be in the Guard, which got a bread ration, while the line troops had to "pillage the peasants." He wrote again in June from "the camp at Polkvytz" to ask for 50 francs from the money still owed him to reequip himself, his pack having been stolen while he was in the hospital. His captain countersigned his request. Demees ignored Morel's letter. That precious certificate had not yet arrived; Private Morel could go to blazes. That juge-auditeur appointment should keep Auguste safe. More men were called up from Alencon, but Demees waxed happy. Then came an unexpected blow: All juges-auditeurs not actively employed were liable for service! The resulting squeak-and-scuttle as France's "gentry of the robe" covered one anothers' evasive actions was a masterpiece of chicanery. Few replacements were squeezed out of their interlocking rats' nests. The war went on in Germany. Morel's sister had no news of him since he had been transferred into the Velites of Turin in July. Auguste's sister picked up the cudgels for her brother, slushing her gendarme husband with appeals to find Auguste a safe job as a headquarters secretary or anything that would give him "tranquility." He must do this to save the life of her "best of fathers" who was visibly wasting away from worry. The husband by now had been made Chef d'Escadron Bellanger for stout service in Russia. He could offer no help. Headquarters secretaries were few, their lives far from tranquil. However, Auguste could enlist as one of the recently authorized dleves-gendarmes2' and get himself assigned to Bellanger's unit. He closed with a not-too-subtle hint that some active duty just might be good for Auguste. Father and sister scorned his suggestion as unworthy of their pet lamb. Then it was 1814, with invasion rolling in across the Rhine and la patrie very much in danger. Most of Auguste's friends had ridden off in the greenand-scarlet of the Guards of Honor; several were already casualties. The Demees family was delighted: Auguste had at last wangled an active juge- auditeur's assignment at the Argentan court. Still, sister worried, he might be summoned for temporary home-guard duty with the "urban guards," which would cost "poor father" more money to equip him. Meanwhile, a badly needed military hospital was being set up in Alencon. Demees pere attempted to duck contributing to its furnishings and was told to do so or else! Napoleon abdicated on April 11, 1814. Demees was overjoyed: His pet lamb, his Absalom, was safe at last! The Hundred Days nearly cracked his nerves. On the news of Napoleon's return, the Royal government expressed the certainty that Auguste would be delighted to serve King Louis XVIII as a National Guard cavalryman. Then, on the same day as the battle of Waterloo, the Emperor designated him a grenadier in the Alencon cohort of National Guard infantry. Auguste made himself small, and the storm passed. As for Morel, it finally was determined that he had been reported missing after the battle of Leipzig. He had not been among the released prisoners coming home after Napoleon's abdication, so he was presumed dead. On November 23, 1815, after some pressure, Demees finally paid Morel's sister the long overdue debt, somehow beating her down to 6,200 francs, principal and interest. It was his last sacrifice. Auguste died in 1821. No doubt he had an impressive funeral. 81st Regiment of Line Infantry: Drum Major, 1810