phus were the most feared-had to be met by preventive medicine alone, there being no effective medical treatment. That meant early detection and the prompt application of strict quarantine measures. In Alexandria in 1798 French naval officers and medics knew that there were new cases of some "malign" fever in the city but did not trouble themselves to investigate. The result was a major outbreak of bubonic plague. By contrast, when typhus broke out in the military hospitals after Austerlitz, it was traced to the Russians being treated there, possibly by deduction from the fact that the Imperial Guard's isolated hospital had few losses. The French wounded were shifted into good hospitals in Vienna, and their clothing was sanitized; the Russians were isolated. That proved somewhat difficult, for even apparently healthy Russian prisoners carried the disease (actually the infected lice) with them and so also had to be segregated. One deadly epidemic disease Napoleon himself put down. Constantly interested in new medical developments, he had learned of Dr. Edward Jenner's discovery of smallpox vaccination. In 1805 he therefore ordered all recruits (except those who had had that disease) vaccinated. Probably that did not always take place during the hastier musterings, as in 1814, but smallpox ceased to trouble the Grande Armee. (The Bourbons discontinued vaccination in 1815.) What a real epidemic could do is illustrated by French losses in Haiti during 1802-3. Approximately 25,000 officers and men died of disease, as against some 2,000 killed in action. Yellow fever was the main killer. Equal ravages took place in the fortress town of Torgeau during 1813-14. Out of an original garrison of 24,650, almost 20,000 died during the siege and more than 900 while being held prisoner after the town surrendered; typhus was responsible for one-third of those deaths, diarrhea and dysentery for the rest. Malaria, which to medical men who knew nothing of microbiology seemed the result of "bad air" given off by swampy areas at night, could also be handled by preventive measures. (Treatment with quinine-usually in a crude form known as "Jesuits'," cinchona, or "Peruvian" barkcould relieve sufferers, but the only real cure was transfer to a colder climate.) The trick was to prevent exposure to night air (actually, night-flying mosquitoes) in malarial regions and to avoid swampy areas as much as possible. Napoleon's letters to Eugene are full of such advice: troops were to be stationed as far as possible from the Po River; the garrisons of Venice, Mantua, and Peschiera were to be kept to a minimum. Campsites were to be selected with great care; Eugene should make certain that there were no marshes or seasonally flooded meadows in the area; such places could cripple a whole army in one spring month. Eugene should consult the local people to determine if an area was healthful and not place too much dependence on his doctors and especially not on his generals: The insouciance of generals in that regard is unbelievable; they are capable of leaving their men in the middle of the Mantua swamps for a year without batting an eye.... It is because I have always taken the greatest care of these details that my army has not the proportion of sick that others do. The only loss one cannot replace is the dead.16 Because the "morning air in Italy is deadly,"" recruits should be left in bed until an hour after sunrise, and it would be better to drill them in town market places than out in the countryside. Even in 1812, while deep in Russia, Napoleon wrote Clarke that the "states" of troops left in Italy showed many young conscripts stationed in Mantua, Peschiera, and Legnano. Clarke was to move them at once to higher localities. Otherwise, they were so many lost men. Rice-growing was increasing in Italy during this period, and more and more areas were used for it. It soon was obvious, however, that this also extended the territory afflicted by malaria. By 1809 Eugene was decreeing that no rice paddies be opened near towns and cities. All those preventive medical measures had one glaring weakness: the av erage French soldat! Napoleon complained that it was in the French national character to ridicule and neglect sensible precautions. This was especially troublesome in the prevention of diarrhea and dysentery. Eating too much fruit, particularly grapes, was recognized as a principal cause and so was forbidden whenever there was an outbreak of such sickness. A general whom Blaze identified only as "D.." had a culprit caught eating grapes shot as an example to his comrades-a somewhat drastic form of preventive medicine, but effective. It halted the sickness, and so won the army's approval. The fevers of the French and Dutch coastal areas were a more complex lot, undoubtedly a mixture of dysentery, typhoid, and malaria, sometimes lumped together as "yellow fever." Coastal garrisons were kept as small as possible during the summer and frequently rotated. (Colonial or foreign battalions pulled much of this duty.) Especially sickly units were sent well inland to convalescent camps. Eating unripe fruit, uncooked food, or milk was forbidden. These wars spread venereal disease into every corner of Europe. Much of it seems to have originated in Italy, where, as one forgotten campaigner explained it, the women were pretty, dressed with much elegance, and were not cruel, but were likely to give you a gift that would stay with you a long time. Some contacts came in Egypt, where syphilis was endemic in all classes. The problem became so serious in Cairo that General Belliard had all suspected prostitutes rounded up and examined; those who were infected were hospitalized. At the same time all soldiers there were given a "shortarm" inspection; those who did not pass it were confined in a special hospital. The next bad outbreak of syphilis came after the occupation of Berlin in 1806, the disease being endemic there also. Separate hospitals for venereal cases were standard medical practice. Patients in them usually had their own hierarchy, based on the seriousness of their respective cases and the length of their confinement. Medical treatment consisted of various compounds of mercury, which might have rough side effects. Preventive measures included attempts to keep loose women away from the troops and periodic inspections of the men and their bedding. Every fifteen days, Dorsenne and the surgeon-major of the grenadiers of the Imperial Guard "visited us in our beds. We had to stand inspection in our shirts, and it was forbidden to be absent under pain of prison."18 Soldiers referred to brothels as "lotteries of Venus" or "lotteries of love." There you could get the "gros lot" (big prize), meaning syphilis, or the "petit lot," which was gonorrhea. As in the no-nonsense days of the U.S. "Old Army," catching a venereal disease was not considered "in line of duty." If you did, you would be docked five-sixths of your pay and all your allowances for as long as you were in the hospital. A similar medical problem was the gale (known to Americans in World War I as the "French itch"). This was caused by the female of the itchmite, which burrowed under your skin to lay her eggs, in much the same fashion as the American chigger. That raised watery pustules and caused intense itching. The condition was highly infectious so that men suffering from it had to be segregated, normally by camping apart from their regiment until they could be cured. The usual treatment was a sulphur lotion or ointment; normally the condition cleared up rapidly, but all of the soldiers' clothing and equipment had to be carefully disinfected. One of the medical officers' critical duties was the detection of malingerers, who would fake sickness or injury to escape danger and hardship. Their tricks were many: pretended lameness, paralysis, or epileptic seizures; ulcers or rashes developed by applying acids to the skin; fragments of rotten cheese shoved up the nostrils to simulate an infection. During the Revolutionary Wars this problem could approach mutiny. Able-bodied malingerers would take over the sheltered places in the hospital barges, and seize the best beds in the hospitals, and rob those who were really sick and wounded. Experienced medical officers had little trouble recognizing these heroes. Their standard treatment was bed rest on a very light diet, with alternating doses of emetics and cathartics. There was a definite international aspect to the military medicine of this period. Physicians and surgeons of all nationalities worked together, whether as allies or enemies. French doctors much admired the Prussian Surgeon General Johannes Goercke, Percy persuading Napoleon to provide funds for a medical school Goercke was conducting in 1805. And in 1815, lingering to care for the wounded after Waterloo, Larrey was cut down, beaten, robbed, and stripped by Prussian uhlans, who dragged him- almost naked and with his hands bound-before a Prussian general. The general ordered him shot, and the firing squad was forming up when a passing Prussian surgeon recognized Larrey and threw himself in front of the poised muskets. 19 Handicapped though it was by the lack of a definite chain of command, the shortage of trained medical officers, and the low quality of its enlisted personnel, the Service de Santd performed as well as any other medical service of its day. Whenever lulls in the campaigns gave it sufficient time, it got itself reasonably well organized. It often achieved a surprisingly high level of cures. Later, historians and semihistorians would dwell on its failures, and God knows there was hardship and agony to spare. But the Grande ArmBe's enemies were often impressed. Sir John Fox Burgoyne, one of Wellington's senior engineer officers, recorded in his memoirs: After the battle of Talavera ... our wounded were put up as well as we thought they could be, in some large buildings in the town, and laid on the ground in their blankets. They were necessarily left to the mercy of the enemy....When the French entered, a general officer visited the hospital and said the accommodation was not at all sufficient for de braves soldats; and, before evening, the town was ransacked for mattresses, and the condition of these poor patients was greatly ameliorated in every respect.20 -no I :S-