Being originally of Irish volunteers, it marched to ghostly drums of the Royal Army's famed Brigade Irlandais, the echoing fifes of Dillon, Lally, and Walsh, of Berwick, Bul- kely, and Clare. Formed in 1803 as a single battalion-a trifle overwhelmed by its resounding title "La Legion Irlandaise-it was led by officers who had little in common, except Irish patriotism, with the aristocratic Catholic Jacobites of those vanished regiments.' They were mostly members of Theobald Wolfe Tone's "Society of United Irishmen" from all parts of Ireland-Catholics, Episcopalians, and Presbyterians together. Few had any military training or had heard a shot fired in anger. Once it was evident that no immediate invasion of Ireland was possible, they concentrated on the usual Irish pastime of politics, with resulting resignations, insubordination, quarrels, and duels. Napoleon, applying Wellington's alleged "white officer" principle,10 turned them over to a Colonel Pettrezzolli, an Italian veteran of competence and strong character who had no interest in any of their cliques. He also gave them green uniforms faced with yellow and a green battle flag. After 1805 few volunteers found their way over from Ireland. During the 1806 campaign, however, the regiment picked up several hundred more Irish who had been sold to Prussia by the British government after the troubles of 1798; stories vary as to whether they had been used as soldiers or coal miners." The rest of the approximately 1,800 recruits enlisted at that time seem to have been Poles and various sorts of Germans. The Legion also recruited energetically among British prisoners of war. Peter Bussell's diary has a good many entries on this subject, making it plain that quite a few prisoners did volunteer but that the Legion's method of recruiting could be rough. (In 1807 he described the Legion as consisting of Irish and Prussians, and very much in want of clothing.) The prisoners of war included numbers of Englishmen and Scots who might fake an Irish brogue, enlist, get sent to Spain, and there try to desert to Wellington. Even some Irish did that. In 1809 it was thrown open to recruits of all nations, its name changed to the "Irish Regiment," which fitted it as honestly as the nickname "Fighting Irish" does the Notre Dame football team. Two years later it was rechristened the 3d Regiment Etranger, much to Clarke's unhappiness. (Despite Clarke's attempts to maintain the Legion's racial purity, its Irish officers disliked him, accusing him of putting French and German aristocrats into it instead of promoting deserving Irishmen.) Most of its service was in Holland, Portugal, and Spain. In 1813 it was with the Grande Armee in Germany and came out of the rout at the Katzbach with more honor than many French regiments. Thereafter however desertion increased; Napoleon finally sent it back to garrison duty in the Low Countries. Part of it helped Carnot hold Antwerp. It lost its Germans and Russians in 1813 and took in men from the 4th Etranger (and, according to some sources, the Swiss, Poles, French, and Italians from the batail- tons strangers) in their place. It was clearly the best of the foreign regiments. Though its composition after 1809 might cause Napoleon to growl about "this Irish regiment we recruit in German,"" it retained a tough Irish core that would and could fight. At the end of 1814 it either hid or destroyed its eagle in secret rather than turn it in to the Bourbons.13 The Regiment de Prusse (Prussian Regiment) was part of the loot from the 1806 Jena campaign, being formed from Prussian prisoners and deserters. Until 1810 most of its clothing and equipment was Prussian too. (The Emperor was thoroughly angered when some French newspapers referred to it as the "Regiment Napoleon.") It led a split existence from 1810 on, two battalions being assigned to the Dutch coastal defenses and two to Spain, where they made themselves notable by the number of their men who deserted to the guerrillas. `d Service in Holland was little better: In October 1811 its 2d Battalion on the Isle of Goeree (south of Rotterdam) had 495 men fit for duty and 330 in the hospital with the coastal fevers. That year Prusse became the 4th Regiment Etranger; because of its general worthlessness in Spain, Napoleon ordered it reduced to two battalions, one there and one in Holland. (Since its troops in the latter station are subsequently referred to as a "regiment," it is doubtful that the two battalions there actually were consolidated.) In November 1813 the remaining battalion in Spain was disarmed and converted to a pioneer unit. The previous January, wanting serviceable troops for the Grande Arm6e, Napoleon had sent Molitor to check out the foreign regiments in Holland. Molitor reported the 4th well officered; its enlisted men made an excellent appearance, and most had seen combat, but they were largely Prussians. Napoleon would not trust them in a campaign against Prussia; while the 3d Etranger went eastward to the wars across the Rhine, the 4th stayed in Holland and slapped at mosquitoes. In July Napoleon wrote Clarke to check up on the 4th and take all necessary corrective action: Its colonel did not appear to have "made war," his wife's conduct was equivocal, and she was meddling in regimental affairs. "It's a good outfit, it should have a good colonel."" From that point the record grows dim; the regiment seems to have been disbanded sometime during late 1813 or early 1814, but elements of it were still active, apparently under the command of Colonel Falba of the artillerie de la marine, in the capture and subsequent defense of the fortified Dutch town of Woorden in November 1813. To Germans and Danes during 1807-8 the appearance of General Pedro Caro y Sureda, Marquis de la Romana's, Spanish corps was the equivalent of several circuses. The men were small but well-built for their size, their deeply browned faces lighted by brilliant black eyes and flashing smiles. They moved lightly, with much talk, laughter, and gesticulation, followed by a long gaggle of women (described as scarcely seductive)
