ne borrowed "Lili Marlene" during World War II. There seems to have been no standard price for a gagiste's services; what he got depended on how good he was and how badly his services were needed. Generally they seem to have been a toplofty bunch. As gagiste Philippe Girault explained when it was suggested that he might qualify as a combat NCO and then win his officer's "epaulette": "I am nearly independent. If one regiment does not please me, I can change to another ... my pay is high. Musician I am and musician I remain."' Senior musicians, especially gagistes, would refuse to give up their seats in a cafe to officers (which might get them fired). They had courtesy rank as NCOs and so, in the cavalry, the right to have soldier orderlies to take care of their horses. Black musicians were popular in most armies, especially as performers with cymbals, kettledrums, tambourines, and chapeaux chinois, for their showmanship and exaggerated style. Rarely, a gagiste might be hired to perform a soldier's normal duties. In 1808 the officers of the newly organizing 27th Chasseurs a Cheval could not enlist a qualified trompette-major or brigadier trompette. They therefore hired the two of them for seventy-five francs a month, with the pledge that the trumpet-major would be allowed to wear a sergeant's stripes to make himself respected. On the whole, bandsmen had no overwhelming reputation for valor. Their habit of drifting to the rear when action was imminent produced a common army joke: "The war must be over-here comes the band!" But a good many colonels insisted that their bands play their regiments into battle, and there were bands that made it a point of honor that, whoever dropped, the survivors never missed a note. The Gagiste Sebastian Pintelin of the 43d Ligne was recommended for the Legion of Honor for outstanding bravery at Jena and Eylau. A band's wind instruments of this period were poorly constructed by modern standards, lacking exact tone and pitch. But what was wanted was instruments with high, shrill notes, capable of piercing the racket of gunfire. The types used are now mostly forgotten: hautbois (hautboy), a primitive oboe in different sizes; flageolets; bassoons; trombones (often with their bells shaped like a dragon's head); the odd "serpent," a crooked, leather-covered wood instrument with a rudimentary key system; and the short "serpentcleide," which would be the ancestor of the bass horn. With those were various horns, clarinets, and flutes. It is probable that some regiments whose recruits came from northwestern France had cornemuses (or binious), a simple type of bagpipe. Percussion instruments included several types of drums: tenor; snare (caisse roulante)8; the big grosse caisse (the ancestor of our bass drum, but then of greater depth than diameter), played with a padded stick in one hand and several birch twigs, or equivalent, in the other; and the tambourine or "Basque drum." During the Revolution brass drum shells began to replace the painted wooden ones used previously. They were heavier but had a fine sonorous quality that wooden drums could not equal. There were also cymbals, triangles, and that odd contraption known as the chapeau chinois ("Chinese hat" or, to the British, "jingling Johnnie"), a long staff topped by a decorative frame garnished with many small bells. A typical infantry band would have one small clarinet in B-flat (probably for the chef de musique), six to eight "big" clarinets or hautboys, one flute, two horns, two bassoons, a trumpet, two or three trombones, one or two serpents, a grosse caisse, a snare drum, cymbals, and a chapeau chinois. Some regiments favored "Turkish music": cymbals, triangles, tambourines, gross caisses, and chapeaux chinois, with few or no wind instruments. A cavalry band might have sixteen trumpets, six horns, and three trombones, all played by the regimental trumpeters, to which might be added gagistes with instruments similar to those found in an infantry band. Dragoons seem to have had exotic tastes; contemporary artists show their 4th Regiment with cymbals, a chapeau chinois, and a grosse caisse (their horses must have been gentle, well-trained beasts to put up with all that racket!). Field musicians and bandsmen were supposedly armed, respectively, with the infantry briquet and a light, straight sword; in the field, both were supposed to carry carbines and bayonets. How many actually did would be guesswork. Drum majors had their swords and usually a brace of pistols, but their best weapon was often their long baton with its loaded head. Drum major Andre Forest of the 24th Legere, cut down by two Russian cavalry men, came up swinging and beat them both out of their saddles. At Dresden in 1813 the first rush of a Young Guard battalion to recapture a lost redoubt outside the city walls collapsed as all the officers in the leading companies went down. Out of the ruck, a veteran drum major led fifty boys through the ditch, over the rampart, and into the stronghold-as well as into the midst of several hundred Austrians. A flourish of his baton dropped the Austrian commander, and the following wedge of bayonets cleared a gate to let their comrades in. And, fittingly, in the last sunset hours of Waterloo, as two battalions of the Old Guard bayoneted fourteen Prussian battalions away from the French right flank, men remembered their tambour-major flailing a war lane through the Prussian ranks. (One confused English writer somehow converted him into a drummer-boy, beating on Prussians with his drumsticks!) It was general European custom to give trumpeters and drummers distinctive uniforms. In pre-Revolutionary France, drummers were commonly in the "royal livery": blue coats with red facings, heavily trimmed with crimson-and-white lace. Afterward colonels dressed them as they chose, and their tastes were seldom quiet. In the cavalry the dress was generally a coat the color of the regimental facings. The 9th Cuirassiers, for example, had blue coats with yellow facings; their trumpeters wore yellow coats, faced blue, with tall bearskin caps in place of helmets for further emphasis. (As a final assertion of regimental esprit de corps, their colonel's special trumpeter had a striking old-rose coat with much white lace and a helmet with white "horsetail" and plume.) In the infantry practically any contrasting colors would do for drummers' coats.9 There was genuine reason in such gaudiness: The trumpeter and the drummer were their officer's "radio," supposedly available at all times; their distinctive uniforms made them easier to locate in darkness or disorder. (A similarly practical custom mounted trumpeters on white or light gray horses.) Bandsmen's uniforming had been even more uninhibited, with much lace and braiding, and it so continued. Sometimes a band's dress might recall a point of regimental history. The 9th Ligne had its band in red coats such as it had worn in Egypt, earning the unofficial title "Bonaparte's Red Bastards." Since each regiment procured its own musicians' uniforms, bandsmen might be well clothed when the rest of the troops went ragged. That unrestrained state of affairs lasted until 1811, not without protest. As early as 1802, an inspector reviewing troops of the allied Republic of Italy registered his outrage at the appearance of their bands: "[T]hey are dressed like Persians . . . there are bandsmen clad in purple [some regiments] march behind asiatic orchestras."10 The fuss began in France in 1808 when grenadiers officially expressed their irritation over the freedom with which those feisty little runts of voltigeurs were usurping their distinctive "flaming grenade" insignia. The Ministry of War addressed itself to various marshals on that subject and apparently found Soult in a grumpy mood. His reply suggested that, if people must fuss about uniform details, there were a couple of other items more worthy of attention. Officers' plumes were too tall and fanciful, and the average musician's outfit had passed, through the whims of successive colonels, from the merely bizarre to the plainly ridiculous. That last comment from Soult seems to have accumulated much agreement. (There is also the story of some general making a scene on discovering that his full-dress hat was positively insignificant among those of his drum majors!) After thinking over the matter for a year or so, in May 1811 Napoleon ordered all musicians, except the Guard's, put into dark green uniforms, heavily garnished with yellow-black-and-red "Imperial livery" lace. He confirmed the decision in the 1812 uniform regulations. It was a handsome uniform but did nothing for unit tradition and morale. What with the difficulty of uniforming troops after 1812 and passive resistance in many regiments, we may doubt that it ever came into general use throughout the French armies. As for the music those showily clad soldiers and gagistes produced, modern ears would find it lacking in depth and color, largely because of the deficiencies of their wind instruments. Marching tunes, especially those of the grenadiers of the Old Guard, tended to be more stately than sprightly. Drumming, however, was at its pitch of effectiveness, and there were drumand-trumpet and fife-and-drum "fanfares," "salutes," and "batteries" that can still lift the listener's chin. (Napoleon loved the rumble and roar of drums; to him, they had the sound of the guns.) The Grande Armee had inherited all the Revolutionary marches: Ah ca Ira, La Carmagnole, the Marseillaise, the Chant du Depart, and Veillons au Salut de 1'Empire (Let us Watch o'er the Safety of the Empire). The lyrics of the last-named, though often taken for one of Napoleon's substitutes for Revolutionary songs, actually dated from 1791, "empire" being used in its commonly accepted meaning of "nation." During the Empire the Marseillaise was somewhat in disfavor, yet Davout's bands played it as they marched into Berlin in 1806, and it was revived during 1813-15 as a possible stimulus to patriotic feeling. Though Napoleon generally disliked reminders of the Revolution, he was fond of both Chant du Depart and Veillons ... and, like many Frenchmen, of the ancient tune (supposedly dating from the crusades) Marlbrouck (Marlborough). Soldiers put their own words to popular songs: Dans la Rue Chiffonniere (In Chiffonniere Street) became On Va Lui Percer le Flanc, which translated militarily into something like "We Are Going to Jab Their Ass." There were sentimental ditties such as "Where Could One Better Be Than on the Bosom of His Family?" homely ones such as "I Love Onions Fried in Oil," and proud chants like "The Victory Is Ours." Those were mixed with works by leading French and Italian composers. In 1803 something inspired Paesiello, precentor to the King of the Two Sici lies, to compose the "March of the First Consul."" Luigi Cherubini wrote La Favorite, the march of the Pubilles. Etienne Mehul put the Song of Roland to music. Sergeant Bourgogue remembered a gray-haired captain singing it at the end of the retreat from Moscow: Ferdinando Paer wrote four stately marches for Napoleon's marriage to Marie-Louise in 1810, and David Buhl's fanfares and batteries were famous. Many regiments developed their own unique "refrains"-short marches or flourishes that served for identification or as a rallying call. The two most famous were La Grenadiere and La Carabiniere of the grenadiers and chasseurs a pied of the Old Guard. Officers and men from Old Guard battalions broken in Ney's mismanaged assault at Waterloo, from squares finally shattered in covering the beginnings of the retreat, heard La Grenadiere thundering from the drums of the 1st Regiment of Grenadiers a Pied, which held the rear at La Belle Alliance, and rallied toward them through the dark and rout.12 If its drums or trumpets were the voice of a regiment, its flag was its visible honor.13 The number of captured flags was the measure of a victory; a 