

## 3e .fif,i111ent ..,v,[Link], Ollicier ZlN JG'l%jeuns

 -180') 3rd Swiss Regiment: Voltigeur Officer, 1809

CHAPTER XVIII Regiments Etrangers To maintain the existence of this Irish regiment, I have carefully brought together the United Irish and the ancient partisans of the Stuarts. This regiment is a sort of bugbear to England, which is always worried about it. Clarke, cited by Chuquet' The French, being a thrifty and practical people, have always been eager to let any available foreigners assist them in any necessary bleeding and dying for la Patrie. From the Scots who rode with Joan of Arc to the Foreign Legion at Dien Bien Phu, the foreign soldier, idealistic volunteer or hard-case mercenary, is an integral portion of French military tradition. The Bourbon kings had considered their foreign regiments more dependable than their French troops. Mercenaries, however, must be paid and led. Louis XVI was slack concerning that first condition, incapable of the second. The Revolutionary government at first virtuously disdained the thought of employing foreign mercenaries in defense of French liberties. Being Frenchmen, however, they did not send trained mercenaries home. All Irish, German, and Liegeois regiments were declared to be legally French. Their names were replaced by numbers; the "deep sky blue" coats of the Germans and Liegeois and the madder-red ones of the Irish were replaced by the French white. Thereafter the winds of many wars blew through the ranks of those suddenly converted foreigners, yet some endured. The Regiment d'Infanterie Irlandais de Walsh eventually became the 47th Ligne; even in 1809 it still had several officers who had served with it in its bygone redcoat days. Before long, swallowing their fine sentiments, the successive governments of revolutionary France were thriftily gathering all possible species of foreign troops into their service, offering promotions, civil rights, cash bonuses, and pensions. They enlisted Belgians who wanted freedom from Austria; miscellaneous thugs who hoped for some quick looting; idealists who anticipated a Revolution-born brotherhood of man. The Protestant Wal denses rallied to a Revolution that pried Piedmontese troops and priests from their throats, forming a tough light infantry unit that kept faith through the worst of 1799-1800. These new foreign units frequently were baptized "legions," an appelation fitting the classical tastes of that era. (Usually it was purely rhetorical, covering as it did everything from an understrength battalion to a division-size force of all arms.) As General Bonaparte, commanding the Armee d'Italie in 1796-97, Napoleon had formed Italian and Polish auxiliary organizations. Cut off in Egypt, he raised foreign troops, beginning with the Maltese Legion, formed from prisoners taken when he seized Malta on the way to Egypt. The Legion Cophte was recruited from native Egyptian Copts, mixed with Arabs, Turks, and Negroes; the Legion Grecque from Greeks native to Egypt for boat work along the Nile. There were companies of "Janissaries" for police duty and units of Syrian, Mameluke, and Moghrebin cavalry.' A surprising number of those men chose to accompany the French Armee de !'Orient when it finally came home. In 1800 Napoleon found France wormy with the castoffs of twenty armies. One solution was the formation of two battalions of foreign deserters, one of Germans in plain iron-gray, the other of Austrians in dark green (actually, any unemployed foreigner the gendarmes caught running loose who shoved into either outfit). All the officers and half the sergeants were French, but no Frenchman was to be enlisted. Pay and rations were the same as in French units. Most prospective recruits, however, had already gone over the hill at least once to avoid military duty. Napoleon was informed that large numbers of such strays, mostly "lost" with the itch and dragging after them a long tail of draggled women and children, had accumulated at the depots but seemed willing to do little but consume their rations. Napoleon thought otherwise; he ordered the lot sent to Le Havre for medical attention, then shipped to Haiti. After 1805 the number of foreign troops with the Grande Armee increased rapidly.; Most of them were in the contingents from allied or vassal states, such as the kingdoms of Italy, Holland, and Naples; the Confederation of the Rhine; and the Duchy of Warsaw. Others were men of foreign birth serving in officially French regiments, especially after 1810, when Holland, the north German Hanseatic States, and much of Italy were annexed to France. In addition, there were also special battalions and regiments of foreign troops, recruited for service as part of the French Army. Usually, they got the sort of duties and stations my generation would define as the "dirty end of the stick": coastal defenses, guerrilla-chasing details, and unhealthy places like Haiti and Naples. The Emperor was careful to mix the various nationalities, usually by battalions, in making up the garrisons of his coastal strongholds so that no particular one predominated. He also kept a sharp eye on their conduct. But he paid them as he did his French soldiers, and equally rewarded good service. The dissolution of many foreign units in November 1813 was sparked by the desertion of the Saxon infantry during the battle of Leipzig, followed by the defection of the Bavarians and by mutiny of smaller German units in Spain and southern France. It was planned carefully and carried out without the least hitch. But the Swiss, the Poles, the three oldest regiments etrangers, and others still served, and veterans of all nations rallied again to the eagles in 1815. Napoleon's handy receptacle for deserters from foreign armies was his bataillons etrangers (foreign battalions).' Two such units were formed in 1802, a third in 1809 to handle the overflow from the 2d Battalion. Their normal assignment was seacoast defense; their casualties came mostly from British amphibious raids or bandit actions. The 1st Battalion seems to have spent most of its existence in Holland; in November 1813 Napoleon observed that it looked like a better outfit than the foreign regiments and could be left there. The 2d and 3d battalions served in Corsica, Italy, and Elba; in 1811 the 2d Battalion was on garrison duty in Rome. Besides deserters, such as the batch of Prussians, Danes, and Swedes that Davout had collected in 1811, those battalions occasionally received miscellaneous mauvais sujets. Also, some of the deserters they absorbed were naturally choice scoundrels. Consequently they were purged, along with the colonial battalions, in 1811, their culls going into the newly formed "colonial pioneers". Some accounts have those battalions disbanded with other foreign troops in late 1813, but that seems unlikely. That December the 3d Battalion, especially its voltigeur company, was praised for service against an attempted British landing at Leghorn.' The regiments etrangers, officially considered light infantry (if seldom so employed), were a more ambitious creation. They were designed to pick up deserters, prisoners of war, and any footloose individuals whose greatest possible contribution to the Empire's security would be to get themselves shot. They were true foreign legions: At one time the 1st Regiment included Hungarians, Bohemians, Prussians, Swedes, Austrians, Poles, Hanoverians, Saxons, Swiss, Bavarians, Belgians, and a few Frenchmen. Later it acquired Spaniards and Italians. Recruitment was voluntary in theory and, fairly often, in fact. Officers were a mixed lot. Some were sons of noble or rich families who might wish to serve but were unwilling to begin as enlisted man. Napoleon commissioned them directly from civilian life, removing them, in Marbot's phrase, from the indolence and corruption of Paris. Other officers were returned emigres or soldiers of fortune who transferred from foreign armies or even officer prisoners of war who volunteered their services. (In the latter case, by special arrangement with the Ministry of War, they were not obliged to serve against their native country.) Officer promotion was entirely within the regiments; to transfer from one of them to a French unit required Napoleon's special permission. The Regiment de la Tour d'Auvergne, formed in 1805, was especially intended to absorb former Royalists and Chouans who still cankered the northwestern departements. (Apparently it did not attract many of them.) Its first colonel, from whom it took its melodious name, was the nephew and namesake of the late First Grenadier of France; by using that title the Emperor both honored and exploited a famous name. Since the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was traditionally responsible for the procurement of foreign troops, a young diplomat with military tastes named Charles Descorches de Sainte-Croix was detailed to conduct research on the foreign regiments of the Royal Army. Sainte-Croix did such a sensible job that Napoleon made him, sight unseen, major of Auvergne. Scandal clouded the regiment's formation: One account held that Colonel d'Auvergne, being hard up, shook down prospective candidates for commissions, then threw the blame on Sainte-Croix if they were not forthcoming. One disappointed would-be officer called Sainte-Croix out; Sainte-Croix shot him dead, and there was a considerable stink. Colonel Auvergne eventually vanished, to be replaced by a Drummond de Melfort, who was relieved for financial irregularities. (Sainte-Croix later showed such courage, intelligence, and sure instinct for war that Napoleon marked him for rapid promotion and sent him to Portugal with a brigade of dragoons to round off his military education. While reconnoitering the Lines of Torres Verdes, he was cut in two by a lucky shot from a Portuguese gunboat.)' The 2d Foreign Regiment was organized a few months after Auvergne as the Regiment d'Isembourg. Isembourg, who had the title of "Prince" from his minor German state, was one of those nobleman condottiere so common in Germany. He had served both Austria and Prussia; now he sold himself to France. He may have had some ability, since Napoleon soon promoted him to general of brigade (a Colonel O'Meara took over the regiment), but he also suffered from gout. That required frequent long periods of leave for treatment, and its attacks became more frequent and agonizing as the Imperial fortunes declined. After Leipzig Isembourg really felt compelled to resign his commission because of acute ill health. Initially recruited in western Germany, then from prisoners of war (Russians included), his regiment showed a number of peculiarities. Where Auvergne went in dark green uniforms, Isembourg flashed in sky blue and yellow. It had a number of "cadets" (officer candidates) who blazed with silver lace,' a "Greek" chaplain,' and a drum major who looked like a fire in a Chinese paint factory at sunset. Even in 1813, instead of the regulation regimental artillery company, Isembourg had two of them. Those two regiments were employed, often as separate battalions, in Italy, Naples, Spain, and back in Naples and Italy again. Part of Isembourg did garrison duty in Corfu. They gradually were increased in strength by the addition of new battalions, but neither had any really brilliant fighting to its credit. They bled deserters in Spain. In 1811 they became officially the 1st and 2d Regiments Etrangers; the 2d was reuniformed in dark green faced with sky blue. In 1813 all their Germans were transferred to pioneer battalions. One officer complained that the Germans had been at least as reliable as the remaining soldiers, and certainly men of both regiments continued to desert to both the Austrians and Murat. Eugene finally formed their elite companies into two battalions, which he kept carefully under his own hand, and put their center companies into rear-area garrisons. The future 3d Regiment Etranger was different. 