

CHAPTER XVII Trumpets and Drums and Cuckoos [TJhe crash of the Imperial drums, beating with the harsh unity that stamped them as the voices of veterans in war, woke me from my reverie and made my heart throb with their stony rattle. Never did I hear such drums and never shall again: there were years of battle and blood in every sound. Benjamin R. Haydon, cited by Bryant' There was a momentary semitruce around the Swiss city of Zurich in 1799. East of the Lake of Zurich and its northern tributary, the Limmat River, an Austro-Russian army was readying for an attack to be launched as soon as the victorious Suvorov's army came up out of Italy through St. Gotthard Pass into the French rear. To the west was Massena, coiling to strike first.' Meanwhile, Austrian and Russian officers tried to amuse themselves with parties and balls, but such affairs went limpingly for lack of proper musical accompaniment. Austrian bandsmen somehow lacked the necessary gentle touch; as for their Russian colleagues, it is my uncharitable guess (founded on personal observation two and a half centuries later) that it had proved impossible to keep them out of the punchbowl. From behind the French lines came the sounds of several fine bands, tootling with skill and zest. In the lightest spirit of eighteenth-century warfare, the Allies requested the occasional loan of some of those French musicians, if General Massena would be so obliging. Dour Andre Massena was a man who would have Opportunity into his bedroom before the average general began to wonder if there were an unusual noise at his front door. He obliged. If some of the French bandsmen he graciously provided occasionally peered around the corners of their sheet music, the Allies assumed they were only ogling the fair ladies swirling past them and not noting what regimental uniforms their partners wore. Massena's sudden attack at the second battle of Zurich was hailed as a masterpiece of surprise and prior planning.' Those were the years when warfare moved to the throb of the drums and the trumpets' silver snarl. There were two principal classes of French military music: the "field music" (grande batterie) and the band (la musique). The first were definitely combat soldiers who accompanied their regiments at all times and under all conditions; the second might have a more ceremonial role. The field music consisted of the regimental drum major (tambourmajor), his assistant, the drum corporal (tambour-maitre), and all the regiment's drummers, two in each company. The drum major was a man of weight and consequence, a member of the regimental staff, ranking in lonely state somewhere among the senior NCOs and junior officers, yet in himself unique. Traditionally tall, elegant, and fearless, he was expected to set a personal example of military bearing and exemplary conduct. Assisted by his drum corporal, he trained the regiment's drummers-no small responsibility, since it took approximately five years to produce a drummer capable of beating all the different signals (batteries) correctly, day or night, under the stress of combat, and some ten years to produce a real expert. Replacements had to be constantly under instruction to replace casualties. Training was largely oral, mouth-to-ear, most tambour-majors and tambour-maftres having little tricks of the trade they liked to keep secret. Occasionally, with a slow learner, the technique could be hand-to-ear. Steininger, when an enfant de troupe of a Swiss regiment in the Piedmontese service, was trained as a drummer by an elderly Italian who had a very long queue; every time Steininger missed a beat, his instructor whipped him across the fingers with it. Drums were more than musical instruments: They were the voice of the regiment, beating the signals that regulated its daily life, tightening its ranks on weary marches, pounding out the colonel's orders across the crash of battle. They were its communications system: Relayed drum signals could carry the length and front of a division faster than a horse could gallop. Just as the modern company commander relies on his radio operator, his Napoleonic counterpart depended on his drummers. (For that reason, the "brave little drummer boy" of tradition was not much use on a nineteenthcentury battlefield. Drums were heavy, unhandy instruments; it took a sturdy soldier to carry his pack and a drum and still keep at the heels of a more lightly accoutered officer.) The daily drum beats (or trumpet calls) were much like those some American veterans can recall. La Diane was reveille; La Corvee fatigue call; A la Paille ("Hit the straw") was "fall out." La Generale was the long drum roll that meant "Fall in under arms"; for the cavalry, the trumpets pealed the Boute-selle, meaning "Saddle up," which was Americanized as "Boots and Saddles." There were many more (sadly, no two lists are in complete agreement as to all names and meanings), and every drummer and trumpeter had to have them in his fingers or his lips. Veteran field musicians were apt to be difficult characters, quick to take offense. There was something about the drum and trumpet that made their masters swagger. Even in 1813, when the shortage of trained drummers forced the employment of gamins of fourteen or fifteen (grown men, compared to our teenagers), trained by gimpy old veterans at the Invalides, Marmont saluted them as true little demons of the old breed, who did their best and never straggled. The elite company of the 20th Chasseurs a Cheval had a black trumpeter famous for his skill with horse and saber. His horse was an Arab of great speed and beauty, won in single combat from a Russian officer (allegedly a general). In 1812 they went to Moscow. The horse came back. In combat, the drums established the tempo and regularity of the regiment's maneuvers. Napoleonic tactical maneuvers were much like modern large-scale close-order drill. Except for skirmishers, it was essential that men kept step and moved together, deploying quickly and smoothly from column to line, forming a square, or ploying from line back into column without leaving an opening for an enemy thrust. For an attack, the drummers might be massed for greater effect, marching into the fire behind the drum major's high plumes and swinging baton. At Durrenstein in 1805, his drums ruined by Russian bullets, Mortier had his drummers beat the "Charge" on camp kettles. Because the drum was an unhandy instrument for troops fighting as skirmishers, during 1804-5 first the light infantry regiments and then the voltigeur companies of the line infantry had them replaced by cornets. Those were not the modern cornet (then in the process of development and known as the cornet a piston because of its valves) but a "hand" or "hunting" horn with circular tubing and a flaring bell. The cornets were immediately and immensely unpopular; their tone proved false, weak, and squeakyfar more productive of laughter than martial fury. Also, it turned out that (after the usual happy fashion of war departments everywhere) cornets had been issued before any complete set of calls had been devised for them. The very competent General Gabriel Molitor snapped that the first time he used them in battle was the last time; he ordered drummers from the line infantry to temporary duty with his light infantry until the latter could get their drums back. Nothing seems to have been done officially, but all light outfits gradually recovered their drums. The cornets remained, at least for show; possibly an improved model appeared. They did score one success: In 1805, at the second battle of Caldiero, an Austrian regiment heard them through the smoke, mistook them for distant cavalry trumpets, began to form a square, and was overrun and bagged by the 14th Legere's sudden rush. To supplement their drums, many colonels added fifes to their field music. This was unofficial; fifers were not listed on the infantry tables of organization, but one per company was a strong stimulus during marches, and fifes and drums go naturally and splendidly together. The fifer could be an enfant de troupe or a conscript with musical tastes but too weedy to carry a drum. Good captains also tried to develop two or three company singers to help the march along, the singer carrying the verse, the whole company, battalion, or regiment picking up the refrain.' A good fife and drum and a guardhouse basso with a repertoire of jaunty tunes could somehow keep numb legs moving and exhausted men awake. Their favorite songs would have excellent rhythm but, sadly, were often bawdy, soldiers preferring such ditties to patriotic ones. Rarely, the field music would include bugles (clairons), though they were not officially recognized (to replace voltigeur companies' cornets) until 1822. A Suhr drawing shows the 57th Ligne using them around 1812, and the sailors of the Imperial Guard certainly had them even earlier as part of the famous branle-bas ("Clear for Action") they used for reveille. In the cavalry, the trumpet (trompette) took the place of the drum, and the trompette-major and brigadier-trompette those of the tambour-major and tambour- maitre. (The dragoons had used drums even when mounted until late in the eighteenth century and still retained them for dismounted duty.) As an ornamental appendage, seemingly neither quite field musician nor bandsman, many regiments had a kettledrummer (timbalier), usually spectacularly clad in Oriental or Polish style, who rode at their head on ceremonial occasions. Veteran troopers might describe his musical contribution as "boiling the kettle. 116 For their bands regiments were allowed a bandmaster (chef de musique) and seven bandsmen (musiciens). The Revolution had used up or scattered the Royal Army's bands: Revolutionary generals were apt to offer their bandsmen "5-foot clarinets" (muskets), to the detriment of the army's cultural life. In 1795 General Jean-Baptiste Kleber found the only band available for a divisional review consisted of one clarinet, one bassoon, and a pair of cymbals. Napoleon valued bands as a mighty aid to morale. Newly formed infantry regiments, he thought, could delay organizing their elite companies until they had shaken down, but they had to form their bands at once. He did abolish the cavalry regimental bands in 1801, apparently because of a shortage of horses. The decision was much welcomed by cavalry officers, especially the hussars, most of whom had been promoted out of the ranks and so had no income but their pay. Later, some regiments reestablished them. A German observer in Luneburg in 1808 recorded that the 5th Cuirassier Regiment had trained its trumpeters to play horns and trombones so that they could literally "double in brass" as a band. The average infantry colonel was not content with his official 8 -man band and so set out to build it up to between twenty and thirty musicians. If he were independently wealthy he might foot the extra cost himself, but usually the money came from a more or less traditional levy of one day's pay per month on all the officers. Some luckless captain would be designated officier de musique to handle the band's administrative affairs in addition to his normal duties. The eight regulation bandsmen were known as "high" musicians; the remaining "little" bandsmen came from several sourcesenfants de troupe, detailed conscripts, or contract civilians known as mus- ciens d'etat-major or gagistes. The latter were picked up here and there and were not always French: Marooned in Spain and needing a chef de musique, the 13th Cuirassiers hired a qualified Spaniard whom they had just captured at Valencia. German bandsmen were common in most European armies; English regiments hired anyone, including French deserters. The result was a fine cross-fertilization of military music, with British bands playing "Napoleon's March" and American bands shrilling English pieces like "The Girl I Left Behind Me"- just as everyo