s are too odd for fiction, a good many have doubtless been improved, but practically all of them are true enough. No more thorough strippers and thieves than the Russian and the Spaniard ever mishandled prisoners of war, yet Chef de Bataillon JeanJacques Tremanger of the 125th Ligne, captured with the debris of his regiment at the Beresina in 1812, somehow concealed his regiment's eagle (minus its staff), cravate, and flag through two years of Russian captivity and brought them back to France in 1814. (Dupont promptly ordered all three items destroyed.) Chef de Bataillon Lanusse, captured at Baylen in 1808, concealed his battalion fanion for two years in the utter misery of the Spanish hulks and escaped with it in 1810. The Irish Legion saved their green standard from capture in the doomed island fortress of Walcheren in 1809 when a Major Lawless and a Captain Terence O'Reilly slipped through the British fleet with it in a small boat. They saved the regulation eagle issued them after they became the 3d Rdgiment Etranger at the Katzbach, where Macdonald's irresponsible blundering trapped them with their backs to the flooded river. As Blucher's Prussians ground them to destruction, some thirty-odd smashed out with bayonet and butt to swim the cresting torrent under fire and bring their eagle and their honor safely off. At that same lost battle a grenadier of the 134th Ligne rescued the eagle of the 147th from under its bearer's body; not much of a swimmer, he clung with it to a rock in the stream until the flood subsided and he could wade to safety. In 1805 a battalion of the 67th Ligne was doing duty aboard the French fleet at the naval disaster of Trafalgar. The warship that had the battalion headquarters aboard was dismasted, and the battalion commander badly wounded. Detaching the battalion's eagle and flag from their staff, he tied the flag around his body and gave the eagle to his grenadier first sergeant, who went overboard and swam to a French ship still under sail. Later released on parole because of his wound, the officer returned to France, se cured a new staff, and reassembled his eagle. A cavalry regiment's eagle vanished during the battle of Borodino in 1812. As the retreat from Moscow began, its officers scouted one last time across that ghastly field, raven- and Cossack haunted, and found it within a horse's half-bared skeleton-the dying porte-aigle had used his last strength, under the hoofs of cavalry charges and countercharges, to thrust it up the anus of a dead horse. A regiment sent into captivity at Dresden after the Austrians violated the terms of the surrender hid its eagle, cravate, and flag under the skirts of two vivandieres-which either speaks well for their guards' morals or, more likely, sadly concerning the ladies' attractiveness. There was also the celebrated case of the "broken eagle" at Eylau. A Russian round shot wounded the porte-aigle of the 14th Ligne and knocked the eagle from its staff, sending it spinning off into the snow. In the deadly uproar, with Russian cavalry and infantry coming down on Augereau's shattered corps, some uncowed grenadier of the 105th Ligne scooped it up and later turned it in.22 After that it was claimed by both the 14th and the 44th Ligne, which had lost an eagle in the melee. The endorsements were voluminous and bitter, but the 44th's claim was finally proved false. Its colonel probably could sympathize with the commander of the British 69th Regiment of Foot, which had lost a color at Bergen-op-Zoom in 181423 and then lost another at Quatre-Bras the next year when Kellermann's cuirassiers caught it in line and rode it under. The 69th at once ordered its regimental tailors to make up a new flag, and denied any loss. Unfortunately, Napoleon had already announced the capture. Two regiments had special distinctions. The 84th Ligne, in tribute to the victory of its 1st and 2d battalions over 10,000 Austrians at Graz in 1809, had a silver plaque attached to the staff of its eagle with the inscription "Un Contra Dix" ("One Against Ten"). When its eagle and flag were destroyed, by order of Eugene in Russia, its colonel saved the plaque. The 132d Ligne was similarly granted the honorary inscription "One Against Eight" for a successful counterattack, led by Marmont, at Rosnay in 1814. Sad to relate, the regiment was disbanded shortly afterward on Napoleon's abdication, not to reappear until 1872. Eight years later, it finally received its battle honor. The eagle was always the soul and symbol of its regiment, the inspiration of that hard core that never surrendered. Even at Waterloo, only two were captured-early in the battle by the "Union Brigade" of British cavalryand none by the much-touted Prussian pursuit afterward. Coming out of Russia, one of the survivors of the 7th Legere saw his handful of comrades close up around "our Eagle, the staff of which had only a rag of cloth [attached], and despite having had one of its wings carried off by a bullet at Eylau, soared above these disasters like a holy rallying sign."' (The 7th, be it noted, being light infantry, was supposed to have left its eagles at its depot.) Also, after Waterloo the officers of the 2d Foreign Regiment, Swiss who had given Napoleon their loyalty, ceremoniously shared out their flag, strip by strip, among themselves for remembrance of great days forever gone. Then their colonel took up their eagle and dropped it into the deep waters of the Garonne River. •