regiment that had allowed its colors to be taken while its men could stand and fight was disgraced before all mankind. Here again, there was proven wisdom along with pride and fine sentiments. Battlefields were crowded, swirling places, fogged with dust and billows of powder smoke, perhaps by rain, snow, or mist. Uniforms were no certain guide at any distance: Dutch, Saxons, Italians, and Austrians alike wore white; Swiss, Danes, and Hanoverians had coats as red as any English "lobsterback's"; Wellington's Portuguese, French, and Prussians all had dark blue. For cavalry it was even worse, what with every hussar regiment trying to look different from the rest and Wellington complaining that the shakos of the new uniform given his light dragoons during 1812-13 were entirely too much like those of the French chasseurs a cheval. A regiment caught straggling and gawking was a sure and easy target. Its flag therefore was an essential rallying point and guide; win, lose, or draw, the soldier who stuck with it had a better chance of coming out alive with his self-respect intact. In the Royal Army, as in many other European states, the idea of a national flag had been practically nonexistent. The traditional white banner with golden fleurs-de-lis seems never to have been officially designated as such or to have been carried by French troops. Each infantry regiment had two types of flags: the "colonel's color" carried by its 1st Battalion and the drapeau d'ordonnance (regulation flag) carried by its 2d. Their basic design was a large centered white cross, the arms of which divided the flag into four corner cantons. (A few had the St. Andrew's cross of old Burgundy, and some mercenary regiments recruited from German Protestants had no cross at all.) In the colonel's colors the corner cantons were white, producing a white (or nearly so) flag. The ordonnance flags had colored cantonsall of one color for the oldest regiments, but of increasingly complex subdivisions and color combinations for the younger ones. The usual result was a blob of color, impossible to identify at any distance. The only sure sign that a regiment was French was the white cravate, a scarf tied in a bowknot around the top of the flagstaff. In 1791 the National Convention ordered that all cravates and all first battalion flags were to be tricolored. (The red, white, and blue tricolor really was quite old in French history. King Charles V ["The Wise," 133780] had used it as the insignia of his Royal household, and Henry IV had a tricolor personal standard in 1596.) The Revolutionary flags were to show the regiment's newly bestowed number and such optimistic mottoes as "Discipline" and "Obedience to the Law." There were also many field expedients, as demi-brigades simply modified their Royal Army flags by stitching on some red and blue strips. Most of them tried to maintain the Royal Army tradition of a different flag for every regiment, and most succeeded, producing flag patterns described as large puzzles in three colors. The decreed "three colors" were usually present, one way or another, though you might have to look hard to find them. The 9th Legere's colors were largely the traditional green of light troops, plentifully sprinkled with golden hunting horns; the 26th Ligne's remained almost entirely white, with four tiny tricolor lozenges. The 15th Cavalerie ignored the tricolor altogether, riding proud behind a standard of green damask ornamented with red Phrygian caps and golden leaves. The navy and naval troops used a modern-looking tricolor, but with red next to the staff and blue "on the fly." Modern researchers and museum curators find surviving flags of that period thoroughly frustrating. During his command of the Army of Italy, 1796-97, Napoleon added to the variety by giving various demi-brigades proud slogans for their colors: To the 9th Legere, "The Incomparable"; to the 18th Ligne, "Brave 18th, I know you: No enemy can resist you"; "I am confident, the 32d is there" and "The Terrible 75th which nothing can stop." The Directory considered that exceeding his authority as an army commander and ordered such inscriptions removed, thereby proving once more that they knew nothing about soldiers. By 1800 the French Army had an amazing variety of flags; the next four years were full of studies and trial models, Napoleon's intention clearly being to introduce one standard model for the entire army. With the establishment of the Empire in 1804, he made a major decision: The actual national emblem would be the figure of an "Aigle, eployee" (spread eagle) forming the terminal of the flag.'" The flag proper would be tricolor but would be of no special significance, being renewed whenever badly worn. At the same time, its size, which had been large and cumbersome, would be reduced, making it easier to handle in action. That decision imposed a single type of flag upon the French armed forces-army, navy, gendarmerie, and National Guard. The 1804 flag was made of oiled silk, 81 centimeters square. (Dragoons, chasseurs a cheval, and the gendarmerie had swallow-tailed guidons with rounded ends.) It had a central white lozenge, on one side of which was painted "L'EMPEREUR DES FRANgAIS AU [such-and-such] REGIMENT," and on the other "VALEUR ET DISCIPLINE," plus the number of the battalion or squadron. The triangles at the corners of the flags were alternately red and blue, beginning with a blue triangle at the top of the flag next to the staff; in each of the triangles was the number of the regiment surrounded by a laurel wreath, both in gold. No longer needed, the cravate was abolished. The eagle, modeled on the ancient Roman legionary ensign, was of gilded bronze, 20 centimeters high, and something of a work of art. All this-especially the introduction of the eagle-was entirely new in the French service. In both the Royal and Revolutionary armies the regimental flags had been little more than rallying points. Napoleon made them all that and also both the national emblem of France and his own symbol. However, Napoleon continued to follow established tradition in allotting one "eagle" (a term that rapidly replaced "flag") to each battalion and squadron, and to each company of gendarmerie. This was the flag of Napoleon's greatest victories. An expert rule-of-thumb psychologist, Napoleon exploited his soldiers' instinctive reverence for their regimental ensign. The eagles were hedged about with ceremony: The original presentation, at which deputations from every regiment exchanged their Revolutionary flags for their new eagles, swearing to die in their defense if necessary, was an affair of state and splendor. Unhappily, it was anticlimaxed by a cold rain and somebody's failure to arrange for the respectful collection and disposition of those old battle flags, now mostly little more than a battered staff and fragments of faded cloth, the eagles had replaced. Also, some regiments got the wrong eagles, and there was some subsequent shuffling. (David's once-famous painting of the ceremony may be considered a piece of Imperial propaganda.) Thereafter new units were expected to earn their eagles, the presentation customarily following their first successful engagement. As might be expected, there was a continuing series of problems over what other organizations were to have eagles. Even company-size units, such as the Guides-Interpretes, demanded one. Certain battalions were included: those of the sapeurs du genie, the Pionniers Noirs,15 the Valaisan Battalion, lirailleurs du Po, as well as the Legion du Midi. The Corps of Miners, however, did not receive one, since it was composed of independent companies, and was most unhappy. The Ecole Polytechnique and the Imperial Military School (later Saint-Cyr) also had eagles, as did the infantry and cavalry of the Hanoverian Legion and the four Swiss regiments taken into the French service in 1805. For the National Guard, each department had one eagle, which was to remain with the prefect; its legions and cohorts would march with a plain drapeau (the national flag without the eagle terminal). The 1804 presentation of the eagles did include one completely nonregulation flag, that of La Legion Irlandaise (Irish Legion), which was green with golden harps in each corner, and a central oval, red on one side with "Liberty of Conscience/Independence of Ireland," and tricolor on the other with "First Consul to United Ireland." It was not, however, an eagle, having only a simple spearhead as a terminal for its staff.16 Veterans regarded their new eagle somewhat dubiously at first, nicknaming it the "coucou" (cuckoo). However, the 1805 campaign, with its victories of Ulm and Austerlitz, achieved a welding of soldiers and standard. And the city of Paris was permitted to present (and pay for, naturally) a wreath of gold laurel leaves to encircle the eagles of those regiments that had stood in the sunburst of Austerlitz. Despite its triumph, the 1805 campaign proved that four eagles were too many for the average cavalry regiment to guard in combat, especially the poorly mounted dragoons and the light cavalry, which often operated in small detachments on reconnaissance missions. In 1806 Napoleon ordered that all chasseur and hussar regiments deposit their eagles at army headquarters. The dragoons would keep one eagle per regiment and send their others back to their depots. Cuirassiers and carabiniers could retain three per regiment. The next year he ordered the light infantry regiments to return their eagles to their depots; fighting in open order as skirmishers as they frequently did, their eagles were vulnerable to a sudden concentrated enemy attack." Obedience was not universal. After some hesitation, in 1808 Napoleon decided to allow the army of his Kingdom of Italy to use an eagle terminal. (Initially he had favored a crowned lion "rampant" holding a sword, but those proved heavy and cumbersome; also, the Italian troops had proved themselves in combat.) Their flag resembled the French 1804 model, with green substituted for blue. Brother Joseph, then King of Naples, also wanted eagles, but was told to use some native Neapolitan emblem. Murat, who replaced him, chose a rearing horse and flags completely unlike the French. Regiments of the Duchy of Warsaw used silver eagles of several different patterns. The increase in the number of foreign units in the Grande Armee led Napoleon to restrict still further the issue of eagles. The regiments of La Tour d'Auvergne and Isembourg (later the 1st and 2d Etranger) received them, as did (apparently in 1812) the Irish Legion, redesignated the 3d Etranger. But the formation of a Regiment de Prusse (Prussian Regiment) checked his generosity; it and the newly organized Westphalian Regiment and the 1st and 2d Regiments of Hesse-Cassel received only flags with spearhead terminals, as did the French "Legions of the Reserve" formed in 1807. The 1808 reorganization of the infantry led to another series of studies, proposals, and trials. That February, Napoleon took in hand the problem of the security of the eagles in combat. Until then, following earlier custom, the eagle was carried by the battalion sergeant major and guarded by the company fourriers, who took up that position as the battle opened. That custom was increasingly unpopular: Good sergeant majors and fourriers didn't exactly grow on bushes along the road; the eagles drew fire, and heavy casualties among the color guard played hell with the battalion's paperwork. Also, even in the Grande Armee company clerks were seldom outstanding close-combat specialists and were not specifically armed for the sort of eye-gouging, throat-slitting brawls that often surged around an eagle. (At Austerlitz, one sergeant major had ended up swinging his eagle like a club; even Russian grenadiers were deeply impressed.) Napoleon's solution increased both the eagles' safety and their prestige. Each regiment would have a lieu