tenant porte-aigle (eagle-bearer), an officer of approved valor and at least ten years' service (or the four campaigns of Ulm, Austerlitz, Jena, and Friedland). The Emperor retained to himself the right of appointment to this position and of relief from it. It was a post of deadly honor, excellent for a brave officer too stupid for further promotion. Flanking the porte-aigle were the "second" and "third" porte-aigles, veteran soldiers of outstanding bravery, but illiterate and therefore barred from further promotion. They ranked as sergeants and drew a sergeant major's high pay. After the 1809 campaign, Imperial detail chasing prescribed helmets and "defensive" epaulettes (made of chain mail or heavy brass scales) for these three soldiers, with the second eagle-bearer to have a red crest to his helmet, the third a white one. Weapons were swords and pistols; the sergeants were to have halberds with long streamers, the colors of which were to match their helmet crests.18 In 1811 another decree ordered four extra gold galons on the right sleeves of the eagle-bearers as an additional distinction. As usual, the infantry colonels used the regulations more as an inspiration than as a guide. Contemporary pictures show a great variety of headgear-possibly more bearskins and shakos than helmets. But the Emperor kept his eye on the essentials. An 1811 order stated that instead of serviceable hack-and-thrust halberds, most of the regiments had pretty little toys, useful only for show. They would correct that immediately, and should any colonel be too ignorant to understand what a halberd was, he would be wise to take himself to the nearest museum and examine medieval specimens. By 1811 regulations concerning the eagles, and flags in general, were in near chaos. Always pressed for time, Napoleon had made too many, sometimes contradictory, spur-of-the-moment decisions. Regiments in Spain still had an eagle for each of their battalions or squadrons; regiments in Germany had been ordered to turn in all but one of their eagles. Regiments being formed after 1808 normally were provided with only one eagle, but the reactivated 11th Legere somehow got three.'9 Some separate battalions and even departemental companies had provided themselves with eagles without any form of official approval. That October, Napoleon decided it was time to straighten things out. The straightening out began badly, with both Berthier and Clarke misunderstanding Napoleon's wishes, and Clarke happily designing green flags to replace the 1804 tricolored ones. So, on December 24, 1811, the Emperor sat down and, as he practically never did, wrote out his decision in his own hand. (As usual when he did that, one word was illegible to everyone but Berthier.) There would be only one eagle for every regiment of infantry, cavalry, and artillery; all in excess of that number had to be turned in at once.20 All unauthorized eagles had to be surrendered. Separate battalions would have the simple national flag, without eagle. The artillery train troops, the pontoon train troops and artillery artificers, and the engineer sappers and miners would each have one eagle, to be deposited with the senior inspector of their respective arms. Similarly, the gendarmerie would turn in its company eagles and have a single one in the headquarters of its senior inspector general. The supply train troops' eagle would be kept by the Minister of Military Administration. One important innovation was the addition of battle honors to the flag: Each regiment could list thereon the great battles (out of the official list of Ulm, Austerlitz, Jena, Eylau, Friedland, Eckmuhl, Essling, and Wagram) in which it had participated. The regimental eagle was to remain with the 1st Battalion; the other battalions were to have fanions (distinguishing flags) of distinctive colorswhite for the 2d Battalion, red for the 3d, blue for the 4th, green for the 5th, and yellow for the 6th. Violet was authorized later for 7th Battalions, and possibly sky blue for an 8th, but there were few infantry regiments that large. The fanions measured approximately 1 meter square; they were to be perfectly plain, to be carried by a sergeant, and to receive no honors of any sort. As might have been expected, the battalions, especially detached battalions, wanted something more decorative at the head of their column than a colored tablecloth. Nonregulation modifications as to size, shape, and decoration sprouted immediately. Many became quite ornate; the 2d Ligne, for example, had all of its fanions in differing combinations of red and blue and clearly labeled to identify both regiment and battalion. Napoleon's intent that the fanions were to be only guides and markers, with nothing to indicate which regiment they belonged to and therefore of no value as a trophy if captured, was thereby thwarted. The distribution of the eagles thus settled, Clarke precipitated another row by proposing that each arm be given a flag of a different color: white for infantry, green for light cavalry, orange for veterans, and so forth. Recovering from an unusual outburst of Imperial exasperation, he did manage to express the sensible point that the 1804 flag was not well designed for adding battle honors. A Monsieur Barnier of the War Ministry's Bureau of Inspection then solved the problem by proposing that the 1804 flag be redesigned to have three vertical bands of equal width, with the blue next to the staff-the modern French tricolor. His inspiration seems to have been the tricolor flag flown over the Tuileries Palace while Napoleon was in resi- dence.21 The manufacture of the new flags was pushed, with little regard for cost. Some regiments got theirs in Germany as the Grande Armee moved toward the Russian frontier, and most seem to have had them by the time the 1812 campaign was well begun. It was an impressive and showy flag, approximately 80 centimeters square, plus a gold fringe some 2 inches deep. A bordering of gold embroideries ran clear around the flag- imperial crowns in the upper angles, imperial eagles in the lower ones, an "N" encircled by a wreath in the center of each side. All those were connected across the top and bottom by a triple row of golden bees and along the sides by a row of conventionalized foliage. One side of the flag had the imperial dedication and the regiment's number, the other the list of battle honors. To add to its impressiveness, it had a tricolor cravate, also gold- fringed and embroidered, and gold cords and tassels. All that also added to its weight; on the march the porte-aigles had to spell one another in carrying it. This was the flag of the eagles that entered Moscow (amazingly, most of them came back). It saw great victories and great defeats, and it was the flag of Waterloo. Somehow, probably because it was an emblem of valor against all odds and of a mighty, desperately fought defeat, it became a national flag in the sense that the 1804 model never quite achieved. It was the flag that France raised once again in 1830. In 1814, after most of the regiments had been purged of obviously proNapoleonic colonels, Louis XVIII ordered all tricolor flags burned and the eagles themselves collected and melted down. In their place, white Bourbon banners would be distributed, after being piously blessed in public religious ceremonies. A good many officers concealed their eagles, at considerable personal risk, and some of those reappeared during the Hundred Days. The Hundred Days was a time of improvision-of flags as much as of everything else. Napoleon's little "Battalion of Elba," with which he landed in southern France, had neither eagle nor tricolor flag; the citizens of Lyons quickly made up both during Napoleon's stay there. It went with the Old Guard thereafter. Some surviving flags were unearthed, possibly one or two of the 1804 model. Marbot had saved one of those from his former regiment and now used it, slightly modified, for his new command, the 7th Hussars; the 40th Ligne borrowed a ship-of-the-line's eagle from the navy. However, Napoleon saw to the manufacture of new eagles and new flags. The flags were larger-some 120 centimeters square-and the embroidery was lighter than in 1812 for reasons of both economy and speed. The eagles, hastily made, were more massive than the originals of 1804, and prouder. The National Guard's eagles were to resemble those of the line, but their flags were to have silver embroidery, cords, and tassels; since the war did not wait on their delivery, a number of improvised flags appeared on the more distant frontiers. After Waterloo, the restored Bourbon government bent to the destruction of eagles and tricolors. Largely it succeeded, but a good many of both slipped through its fingers. In some regiments the flag was burned, its ashes mixed into wine and drunk down, probably to the accompaniment of much bad language. Some officers took flag or eagle home and hid them. The eagles of the Imperial Guard are a difficult study. Few records or examples remain, only enough to indicate that they differed in some respects from those of the line. Napoleon's 1812 decisions allowed only two eagles to the infantry of the Guard: one to the "corps" of the grenadiers, the other to that of the chasseurs. Those were to be carried by their 1st (Old Guard) regiments. The other components of those two arms were to have plain fanion (which usually were quite ornate): red for the voltigeurs, white for the tirailleurs, and apparently blue for the fusilier regiments and yellow for the flankers. The grenadiers A cheval, chasseurs A cheval, dragoons, and mamelukes had eagles, as did the lancer regiments after 1811, and the sailors, gendarmerie d'elite, and horse artillery. For some reason, the foot artillery did not receive an eagle until 1815. Some of the cavalry units did not take their eagles into the field; the Mamelukes seem to have used a small, richly embroidered crimson fanion instead. (On occasions of ceremony their eagle- bearer had an escort of four porte-queues, carrying Oriental horsetail standards-two black, one white, and one red.) There are puzzles: Contemporary paintings by competent observers show the sailors with a violet flag ornamented with golden bees and anchors, and the dragoons in Russia with a green fanion. In the cavalry things were less formal. There were no squadron fanions and apparently no regulation color guards. The eagle, if present, was carried by a sergeant or junior officer (in the Guard, always the latter). One final type of flag commonly employed was the company fanion, a small flag on a short soft-wood stick that would fit smoothly into the barrel of a musket. They served the purpose of the American company guidon for marking company areas, aligning troops in formation, and generally dressing up an occasion. Their design and colors were as varied as human imagi nation could make them, but grenadier companies usually had at least one flaming grenade on theirs, the voltigeurs a hunting horn, and the center companies anything else that took their colonel's fancy. Perfection being apparently beyond human attainment, there always were a few odd situations. When Clarke surveyed the number of eagles and types of flags in each regiment in 1811, the 1st Regiment of the Legion of the Vistula replied that it had only a staff and a few rags of the flag given it by First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte in 1800. The 1st Regiment of the Berg Lancers apparently had no standard; the 2d Regiment seems to have had a nonregulation green fanion, which it lost in Russia. The consolidated regiment re-formed in 1813 had none. Despite devoted research, there are still many gaps in our knowledge. The devotion given to those eagles was astounding, almost the equal of the divine honors Rome's legions rendered theirs. The historian finds example after example of hair's-breadth rescues and desperate fights, until they seem almost commonplace. Some storie