

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Departure  of  the  Emperor  for  the  Island  of  Elba — Attempts  to 
poison  and  murder  him — Entrance  of  Louis  XVIII.  into  Paris 
— Spirit  of  the  populace — Various  impressions — Sittings  of  the 
Senate — Reflections  on  the  state  of  the  nation      .  .  .     269 


X  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

PAGE 

My  singular  and  perilous  situation — The  Empress  Josephine  at 
Malmaison — The  Emperor  Alexander — His  opinion  of  the 
Bourbons — Death  of  the  Empress  Josephine — Errors  of  the 
Government — Discontent  of  the  Army — Anger  of  Marshal  Ney     281 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

Conspiracy — Affair  of  General  Excelmans — General  Lallemant, 
Marshal  Davoust,  the  Dukes  of  Otranto  and  Bassano  are  at  the 
head  of  the  Conspiracy — Prudent  conduct  of  Marshal  Davoust — 
News  of  the  Emperor's  landing — Various  sensations  produced  by 
it — I  seek  refuge  at  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu's — Departure  of  the 
King^My  visit  to  the  Post-office  ....     290 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

Aspect  of  the  Tuileries — Arrival  of  the  Emperor — Fouche  at  the 
Police — Carnot  at  the  Home  Department — I  again  resume  the 
service  of  the  Post-office  on  the  21st — Proclamation  of  the 
Congress  of  Vienna — Situation  of  the  Emperor  ;  its  danger  and 
novelty — Champ  de  Mai— Declaration  of  the  Council  of  State — 
General  Bourmont — Singular  and  painful  discovery — Fouche       .     305 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Assembling  of  the  Champ  de  Mai  on  the  ist  of  June — Mass — 
Aff'ecting  speech  of  the  Emperor — His  departure — Battle  of 
Waterloo — Return  of  the  two  Chambers — My  conversation  with 
Napoleon  at  the  Elysee — He  retires  to  Malmaison — Last  con- 
versation— His  departure .  .  .  .  .  .321 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

I  am  arrested — General  Labedoyere — My  confinement  at  the  Pre- 
fecture of  Police — My  examination — ^Anecdote  of  one  of  the 
Accomplices  of  Georges — I  am  transferred  to  the  Conciergerie — 
Marshal  Ney — His  delusion         .  .  .  .  "SSI 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

My  thoughts  and  occupations — The  female  prisoners — Apartment  of 
Queen  Marie  Antoinette — My  examination  before  M.  Dupuis, 
Supernumerary  Justice — His  generous  impartiality — Animosity  of 
the  Royalists  against  me — Visits  and  comfortings  of  my  friends, 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


Messrs.  Alexander  de  la  Rochefoucault,  Vandeuil,  Briqueville, 
Tascher  de  St.  Roses — I  see  my  daughter  again  for  the  first 
time — M.  Tripier  ......     34" 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

Letter  of  the  Duke  de  Richelieu  against  Marshal  Ney — My  anxiety 
respecting  Madame  Lavalette — Opening  of  the  debates — The 
list  of  the  jury  communicated  to  me — M.  Heron  de  Villefosse — 
My  sentence  of  death  is  passed — The  fatal  news  announced  to 
Madame  Lavalette  —  She  solicits  and  obtains  an  audience  of 
the  King— Words  of  Louis  XVHL  .  .  .  -352 