

XIX.   Instructions  for  Citizen  Lavalette,  from  M.  Talleyrand       .     451 
XX.  The  Minister  of  the  Foreign  Department  to  Citizen  Lava- 
lette, Paris,  12  Nivose,  Year  IX.  ....     454 


LIST  OF  PLATES. 


Napoleon.     From  an  Engraving  by  Bromley  and  Murray,  after 
Gerard.  {Frontispiece.) 

Carnot.     After  RafFet.  Face  page   128 

Kleber.      After  Raffet.  Face  page   184. 

Lavalette.      From  an  Engraving.  Face  page  300 

Lavalette,   Countess.      From  an  Engraving.  Face  page   ^6z 


BIOGRAPHICAL     SKETCH      OF     COUNT 
LAVALETTE.i 


A  FEW  days  before  the  loth  of  August,  King  Louis  XVI. 
was  reviewing  the  National  Guards  of  Paris,  assembled  on 
the  Rue  du  Carrousel ;  the  monarch  walked  from  the  right 
of  the  front  of  the  line,  with  a  slow  and  measured  step, 
distributing  encouragements  and  praises,  when,  from  the 
opposite  end  of  the  line,  a  young  soldier  rushed  forward 
into  the  rank  facing  the  King,  and  cried  with  enthusiasm, 
"  Long  live  the  King  !  Long  live  Louis  XVI.  !  We  are  all 
for  the  King  until  death  !  "  Louis  XVI.  stopped  surprised, 
thanked  the  young  man  by  a  sign  with  his  head  and  hand, 
and  asked  his  name — it  was  Lavalette. 

Soon  after,  the  events  of  the  loth  of  August  gave  his 
impatient  courage  an  opportunity  of  showing  itself.  La- 
valette got  the  command  of  a  post  at  the  Tuileries.  He 
defended  it  for  a  long  while  against  the  fury  of  the  rebels, 
who  seemed  to  multiply  under  the  fire  of  the  palace.  But 
he  was  at  last  forced  to  yield.  When  the  news  came  that 
Louis  XVI.  had  retired  to  the  Assembly,  the  massacre  began. 
Lavalette,  covered  with  dust  and  blood,  was  dragged  away 
by  some  friends,  and  thus  by  a  miracle  escaped  a  glorious 
death  ;  but  his  fate  was  not  to  end  there. 

Five  years  later,  on  the  19th  Fructidor,  a  young  officer  in 

'  This  was  jjublished  a  few  days  after  the  decease  of  Count  Lavalette, 
in  the  "  Revue  de  Paris,"  vol.  xii..  No.  I,  7th  March,  1830. 


xvi  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

a  brilliant  uniform,  wearing  round  his  arm  the  tricoloured 
sash,  quickly  jumped  into  a  cabriolet  near  the  gate  of  the 
Petit  Luxembourg  ;  one  of  his  former  school-fellows,  passing 
by,  recognised  him,  and  after  the  usual  congratulations 
said  : — 

"  Where  are  you  going  ?  " 

"  I  intend  to  return  to  Italy  as  quickly  as  possible." 

"Why  in  such  a  hurry  ?  " 

"(Barras  threatens  to  have  me  shot  within  four-and-twenty 
hours." 

"Then  I  advdse  you  to  get  away,  for  he's  in  the  humour 
to  do  it." 

"  Who  knows  that  better  than  I  ?  I  wanted  to  make  some 
opposition  to  the  barbarous  follies  of  last  night,  and  so  they 
send  me  away  this  morning  ;  but  my  conscience  is  clear,  and 
Bonaparte  protects  me.  Adieu,  I  go  ;  if  it  please  Heaven, 
we  shall  see  each  other  again." 