

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

Madame  de  Lavalette  comes  to  see  me — Count  Carvoisin — Some 
particulars  concerning  Emilie  Beauharnais — My  marriage  with 
her — I  leave  her  to  go  to  Egypt — My  Mission  to  Saxony — My 
journey  to  Berlin .  .  .  .  .  .  •     S^i 

CHAPTER  XXXVIH. 

Conduct  of  General  Clarke  towards  me — M.  Pasquier — The  Duke  of 
Ragusa — His  friendship  for  me — My  prepossession — I  grow 
familiar  with  the  idea  of  a  violent  death,  and  its  horrible 
details— The  Princess  de  Vaudemont  takes  measures  in  my 
favour — Trial  of  Marshal  Ney — Disguised  Life-guards — The 
Marshal's  execution — My  sentence  confirmed  by  the  Court  of 
Cassation — The  Duke  of  Ragusa  accompanies  Madame  de 
Lavalette  to  the  Tuileries  —  His  courage  —  Answer  of  Louis 
XYHI. — Harsh  conduct  of  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme    .  .     369 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

Consternation  of  the  Turnkeys — Affecting  trait  of  one  of  the  female 
turnkeys — -Madame  de  Lavalette  makes  me  acquainted  with  her 
plan  of  escape — My  objections — Its  execution  is  put  off  to  the 
following  day— Last  attempt  of  Madame  de  Lavalette  with  M. 
de  Richelieu — Visit  of  M.  de  Carvoisin — My  daughter  comes  to 
see  me — I  send  her  away — Madame  de  Lavalette  brings  her 
back — She  gives  me  my  instructions — Last  visit  of  M.  de  St. 
Roses  and  Colonel  Briqueville — Old  Madame  Dutoit — Our 
supper — My  disguise — I  go  away — I  meet  the  sedan  chair — The 
chairmen  not  at  their  post — My  perplexity,  and  the  resolution  I 
take — Count  Chassenon — New  disguise — I  follow  M.  Baudus  on 
foot — We  meet  gendarmes — We  arrive  at  the  Foreign-office — 
Delicate  attention  of  my  hosts      .....     377 


xii  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XL. 

PAGS 

Particulars  related  by  M.  Baudus — M.  and  Madame  Bresson — Their 
vow — They  both  come  to  pay  me  a  visit — Sensations  produced 
by  my  escape — Various  reports — Precautions  I  was  forced  to 
take — Fresh  anxiety — I  hear  cried  under  my  window  the  Police 
Ordinance  against  those  who  might  give  me  a  refuge — ^Joineau 
and  his  wife — Visit  of  Madame  Bresson   ....     390 

CHAPTER  XLI. 

Account  of  what  happened  attheConciergerie — Rage  of  the  Turnkeys — 
Their  brutal  conduct  to  Madame  Lavalette — M.  Bellart  examines 
her  with  excessive  severity — Chief  cause  of  her  illness — Her 
terrors — She  is  placed  in  solitary  confinement — My  daughter 
returns  to  her  boarding-school — Conduct  of  the  Superior  towards 
her — The  police  pursue  their  investigation — Various  plans  to  get 
me  out  of  France — Mr.  Bruce — Sir  Robert  Wilson — Preparations 
for  my  disguise — I  leave  the  Hotel  of  Foreign  Affairs — M.  de 
Chassenon  brings  me  to  the  Rue  de  Helder — House  of  my 
Reporting  Judge — Mr.  Hutchinson — I  set  off      .  .  .     398 