

CHAPTER    XXI. 

The  General-in-chief  resolves  to  return  to  Egypt — The  wounded 
are  sent  away — Passion  of  General  Bonaparte — Pretended 
poisoning  of  the  wounded — Return  to  Jaffa — The  infected — 
Instance  of  humanity  in  the  General — Return  to  the  capital  of 
Lower  Egypt — Judgment  on  the  Syrian  Campaign — Landing  of 
the  Turks — Battle  of  Aboukir — Departure  for  Europe — Arrival 
in  Corsica  .  .  .  .  .  .  .     188 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

General  Bonaparte  re-establishes  some  order  at  Ajaccio — He  lands  at 
Frejus — Enthusiasm  of  the  population — His  arrival  at  Lyons  and 
Paris — State  of  public  affairs — The  Directory  give  General 
Bonaparte  a  dinner  in  the  Church  of  St.  Sulpice — Conspiracy 
to  overthrow  the  Directory — The  General  presents  himself  before 
the  Council  of  the  Elders — Both  the  Councils  are  transferred  to 
St.  Cloud — The  Council  of  Five  Hundred  assemble  in  the 
Conservatory — General  Bonaparte  and  Sieyes — Resolutions  of 
the  former — General  tumult — He  gives  an  order  to  drive  the 
members  out  of  the  House — The  Constitution  of  the  Third  Year 
is  abolished — Three  Consuls :  Bonaparte,  Cambacer^s,  and  Lebrun     1 98 

CHAPTER  XXIIL 

Sensation  produced  by  the  Revolution  of  the  1 8th  Brumaire — The 
First  Consul  sends  me  on  a  mission  to  Dresden — My  journey  to 
Berlin  in  1801 — The  First  Consul  recalls  me  to  Paris — The 
Infernal  Machine  —  Conspiracy  of  Georges  and  Pichegru — 
Sentence  on  the  Duke  d'Enghien  ,  .  .  .     209 


CONTENTS.  ix 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

PAGE 

Reflections  on  the  death  of  the  Duke  d'Enghien — Suicide  of  Pichegru 
— Georges  is  executed  with  nine  of  his  accomplices — The  Emperor 
Paul  assassinated — Consternation — The  Continental  War  breaks 
out  again — Campaign  of  Austerlitz — Organisation  of  the  General 
Express  service — Interior  Administration — Prodigious  memory  of 
the  Emperor         .......     220 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Campaign  of  1809 — Marriage  and  Divorce  plans — Singular  conver- 
sation with  Marshal  *  *  * — Despair  of  the  Empress — Unfeigned 
grief  of  the  Emperor — Courage  of  Josephine — She  is  abandoned 
by  almost  every  one — Marriage — Birth  of  the  King  of  Rome       .     230 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Breach    between    France    and    Russia — Campaign    of    18 12 — Fatal 

system  of  the  King  of  Naples — Conspiracy  of  Mallet        .  .     240 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Intelligence  of  the  disasters  of  the  Russian  Campaign — Firmness  and 
intrepidity  of  the  Emperor — Campaign  of  18 13 — The  Emperor 
returns  to  Paris — My  evening  conversations  with  him — His 
prodigious  application  to  business — Formation  and  composition 
of  the  National  Guards     ......     250 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Campaign  of  18 14 — Intrigues  of  the  Royalists  conducted  by  M.  de 
Talleyrand — Perplexity  of  the  Council  of  Regency — Energetic 
advice  of  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe  to  the  Empress — Departure  of 
the  Government  for  Blois — Battle  under  the  walls  of  Paris — 
Capitulation — Arrival  of  the  Emperor  at  the  stage  called  Le 
Cour  de  France — His  dejection — Entrance  of  the  Allies — Aspect 
of  the  Metropolis — Napoleon  at  Fontainebleau — Weariness  and 
falling  off  of  the  Chiefs — Abdication         ....     257 