

One  day,  as  he  was  walking  arm-in-arm  with  two  friends 
in  the  Rue  Mazarin,  the  conversation  happened  to  fall  on 
futurity.  That  subject  is  a  common  one  among  young 
men. 

"  As  for  me,"  said  Lavalette,  "  you  think  me  very 
quiet,  quite  buried  in  my  books  ;  well,  I  can  tell  you  that  I 

'  Lavalette  was  born  in  Paris  in  1769,  in  the  same  year  with  his  pro- 
tector and  friend  the  Emperor  Napoleon. 

la 


viii  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

wish  to  make   my    fortune.      This   Revolution  encourages 
me." 

"  You,  my  friend  !  you  will  always  be  walking  close  to 
the  houses  as  you  do  now,  for  fear  of  being  run  over." 

"  Leave  that  to  time  ;  we  can  answer  for  nothing.  I  shall 
perhaps  have  the  best  part  of  the  pavement  in  my  turn,  and 
then,  my  friends,  take  care  I  don't  bespatter  you.  Will  you 
bet  that,  in  the  highway  they  are  opening  for  us,  I  do  not  get 
on  quicker  than  you  ?  " 

The  bets  were  agreed  to.  The  two  companions  followed 
honourably  their  several  careers,  but  Lav  alette  advanced 
with  giant's  strides,  and  at  thirty  years  of  age  he  had  won 
his  wager. 

The  events  of  1789  are  known.  Young  Lavalette  did 
not  follow  the  Church.  A  musket  on  his  shoulder,  he 
entered  the  National  Militia  which  Lafayette  was  organising 
for  the  defence  of  King  and  country.  In  1792  he  signed  the 
Royalist  petition  of  the  ten  thousand  ;  but  his  conduct  on 
the  loth  of  August  appearing  suspicious,  he  enlisted  as  a 
volunteer  in  the  Legion  of  the  Alps,  and  was  one  of  the 
soldiers  of  that  army  of  peasants  and  citizens  which  formed 
the  coalition,  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  between  their 
mercenary  bands  and  France.  He  served  with  great  dis- 
tinction during  the  whole  campaign.  At  first  named 
adjutant  of  engineers,  he  was  afterwards  chosen  as  aide-de- 
camp by  General  Baraguay  d'Hilliers.  But  when  that 
General  came  to  Paris  to  defend  Custines,  whom  all  his 
exertions  could  not  save,  he  was  persecuted  himself,  and 
deprived  of  his  hberty  until  the  9th  Thermidor,  so  that  he 
could  do  nothing  for  Lavalette. 

After  the  9th  Thermidor,  the  Revolution,  tired  of  pro- 
scription, stopped.  The  inviolability  of  the  territory  had 
been  secured,  and  the  principles  of  reform  were  beyond 
all  danger  :  a  second  period  was  beginning,  in  which  the 
Revolution  wished  to  get  her  rights  acknowledged.  She 
was  mistress  of  France,  and  her  fate  urged  her  on  towards 


COUNT  LAVALETTE.  xix 

the  conquest  or  Europe ;  with  those  old  and  obstinate 
monarchies  she  could  only  treat  sword  in  hand,  and  reply 
to  sophistry  by  victories. 

The  Constitution  of  the  Third  Year  opened  this  second 
and  exclusively  military  period.  France  passed  from  the 
government  of  Terror  to  that  of  Glory  :  it  was  then  that 
Bonaparte  appeared. 