

The  very  evening  after  that  conversation  Lavalette  left 
Paris. 

We  shall  leave  him  galloping  on  the  road  to  Italy,  and 
going  some  years  back,  we  will  follow  his  steps  from  the 
loth  of  August  to  the  i8th  Fructidor  ;  from  a  Royalist 
volunteer  to  a  captain  in  the  Republican  army. 

There  is  no  doubt  but  the  Revolution  of  1789  was  wished 
for  by  the  great  majority  of  the  French.  Nevertheless  the 
cruelties  that  marked  its  commencement  disgusted  all  honest 
minds.  Neither  the  plunderers  of  Reveillon's  stores,  the 
murderers  of  Foulon  and  Berthier,  nor  the  brawling  rebels 
of  the  20th  of  June,  represented  the  wishes  and  feelings  of 
France,  and  the  party  of  Louis  XVI.  seemed  at  first  to  enlist 
all  the  patriots,  irritated  by  such  criminal  acts. 

While  the  public  mind  was  thus  disposed,  the  foreign  war 
broke  out,  preceded  by  insolent  threats :  it  proved  a  power- 
ful diversion  to  the  difficulties  in  which  the  Republican 
party,  then  masters  of  the  Legislative  Assembly,  were 
involved.     They  turned  it  to  advantage  in  a  skilful  manner  ; 


CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  xvii 

and  while  the  emigration  of  the  nobles  deprived  the  King 
of  all  his  natural  support  at  home,  those  whom  generous 
feeling  had  rallied  in  his  defence  now  flew  to  the  frontiers, 
and  triumphed  in  the  victories  of  Valmy,  Jemmapes,  and 
Savoy,  with  Kellermann,  Chartres,  and  Montesquiou  ;  they 
heard  no  longer,  in  the  rumour  of  camps  and  the  intoxication 
of  glory,  the  cries  of  royalty  in  distress. 

It  was  then  that  the  throne  fell  for  want  of  support. 
Lavalette  followed,  under  the  standard  of  the  Republic, 
the  crowd  of  young  men  who,  like  himself,  without  fortune, 
name,  or  expectation,  did  not  wish  to  speculate  either  upon 
emigration  or  terror.  From  the  armies  which  remained 
neutral  between  the  two  opposite  excesses,  were  destined  at 
a  future  period  to  rise  those  new  fortunes,  those  reputations 
so  pure,  so  dear  to  France,  among  which  Lavalette  was  to 
shine.' 

His  father,  who  was  a  respectable  tradesman  in  Paris, 
gave  him  at  Harcourt  College  an  education  which  at  first 
sight  appeared  above  his  station  in  society.  In  consequence, 
when  his  parents  began  to  think  of  his  establishment,  they 
found  nothing  better  than  to  devote  him  to  the  Church  ;  for 
he  had  no  taste  for  entering  into  trade,  and  he  had  too  much 
merit  to  pass  his  days  in  the  idleness  of  a  garrison.  He 
therefore  took  holy  orders,  obtained  the  situation  of  under- 
librarian  at  Ste.  Genevieve,  and  buried  himself  in  books. 

But  the  Revolution  was  soon  announced  by  symptoms 
that  could  not  escape  Lavalette.  His  ambition  was  roused 
at  the  thoughts  of  the  events  that  were  preparing. 