

The  curtain  that  protected  a  great  part  of  the  town  and 
the  palace  of  Djezzar  had  been  opened.  The  grenadiers  of 
Kleber,  brought  back  to  the  trenches  by  a  strong  fire  of 
musketry,  openly  demanded  a  fresh  assault.  Bonaparte 
hesitated  ;  however,  pressed  by  these  brave  men,  he  gave 
the  signal.  The  scene  was  grand  and  terrible  !  The 
grenadiers  rushed  forward  under  a  shower  of  bullets  ; 
Kleber,  with  his  giant-like  stature  and  his  thick  head  of 
hair,  had  taken  his  post,  sword  in  hand,  on  the  reverse 
of   the   ditch,   from   whence    he   animated    the    assailants. 

'  See  in  the  Appendix  the  narrative  of  a  journey  to  Pelusium. 

^  Bonaparte  was  not  fond  of  novels.  One  evening,  however,  he  said 
to  Lavalette,  "  Come,  Mr.  Enthusiast,  read  me  that  famous  letter  from 
La  Meillerie  !  "  It  was  at  Cairo,  and  the  heat  was  suffocating.  La- 
valette, to  shelter  himself  from  the  insects,  had  taken  his  seat  behind  the 
muslin  curtains  of  the  General,  who  was  in  bed,  and  showed,  as  the 
reading  advanced,  the  greatest  signs  of  impatience  ;  at  last  he  stopped 
him,  and  Ijade  him  good  night  in  the  following  words  :  "  That's  enough, 
Lavalette  ;  this  passion  is  too  talkative  for  me." 

3  Bonaparte  had  brought  eight  aides-de-camp  with  him  to  Egypt  ;  four 
perished  there.  Julian  and  Sulkowsky  were  murdered  by  the  Arabs ; 
Croisier  was  killed  at  St.  John  of  Acre,  and  Guibert  at  Aboukir  ;  Duroc 
and  Eugene  Bt-auharnais  were  severely  wounded  ;  Lavalette  assisted  in  ail 
the  hottest  encounters  and  escaped. 


xxiv  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

The  sound  of  the  cannon,  the  cries  of  rage  and  enthu- 
siasm of  our  soldiers,  and  the  roaring  of  the  Turks,  were 
mixed  with  the  thundering  accents  of  his  voice.  In  the 
meanwhile  General  Bonaparte,  standing  in  the  breach 
batteries,  followed  the  movement  Avith  a  spying-glass 
resting  on  the  fascines.  A  cannon-ball  passed  over  his 
head,  and  the  shock  threw  him  down.  In  vain  Berthier 
pressed  him  to  leave  his  perilous  post  ;  he  received  no 
answer.  At  the  same  instant  a  bullet  mortally  wounded 
the  young  and  unfortunate  Arrighi,  who  stood  between 
the  General-in-chief  and  Lavalette,  others  were  killed  by 
his  side,  and  still  he  did  not  make  the  slightest  motion  to 
retire.  All  of  a  sudden  the  column  of  the  besiegers  stopped. 
Bonaparte  rushed  forward  and  saw  the  ditch  emitting 
flames  ;  thick  grape-shot  came  from  under  the  ground  and 
beat  down  whoever  dared  to  approach  ;  the  troops,  how- 
ever, persisted  with  incredible  ardour.  Kleber,  enraged, 
was  striking  his  thigh  with  his  sword,  but  the  General-in- 
chief,  convinced  that  the  obstacle  was  not  to  be  surmounted, 
gave,  by  a  sign  with  his  hand,  the  order  for  the  retreat. 