

"I  saw  our  five  kings,  dressed  in  the  robes  of  Francis  I., 
his  hat,  his  pantaloons,  and  his  lace  :  the  face  of  La  Reveil- 
Ibre  looked  like  a  cork  upon  two  pins,  with  the  black  and 
greasy  hair  of  Clodion.  M.  de  Talleyrand,  in  pantaloons  of 
the  colour  of  wine  dregs,  sat  in  a  folding-chair  at  the  feet  of 
the  Director  Barras,  in  the  Court  of  the  Petit  Luxembourg  ; 
and  gravely  presented  to  his  sovereigns  an  Ambassador  from 
the  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany,  while  the  French  were  eating 
his  master's  dinner,  from  the  soup  to  the  cheese.  At  the 
right  hand  there  were  fifty  musicians  and  singers  of  the 
Opera,  Laine,  Lays,  Regnault,  and  the  actresses,  now  all 
dead  of  old  age,  roaring  a  patriotic  cantata  to  the  music  of 
Mehul.  Facing  them,  on  another  elevation,  there  were  two 
hundred  young  and  beautiful  women,  with  their  arms  and 
'  The  author  of  this  sketch. 


CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  xxi 

bosoms  bare,  all  in  ecstasy  at  the  majesty  of  our  Pentarchy 
and  the  happiness  of  the  Republic.  They  also  wore  tight 
flesh-colour  pantaloons,  with  rings  on  their  toes.  That  was 
a  sight  that  will  never  be  seen  again.  A  fortnight  after 
this  magnificent  fete^  thousands  of  families  wept  over  their 
banished  fathers,  forty-eight  Departments  were  deprived 
of  their  representatives,  and  forty  editors  of  newspapers 
were  forced  to  go  and  drink  the  waters  of  the  Elbe,  the 
Synamary,  or  the  Ohio  !  It  would  be  a  curious  disquisi- 
tion to  seek  to  discover  what  really  were  at  that  time  the 
Republic  and  Liberty." 

Lavalette  had  no  power  to  oppose  such  violent  acts. 
He  entered,  however,  a  sort  of  protest  against  them  by 
refusing  to  Barras  the  money  Bonaparte  had  promised  him 
out  of  the  cash  of  the  Army  of  Italy.  This  raised  against 
him  the  fury  of  the  Directory  and  the  brutal  anger  of 
Augereau.  But,  if  he  did  not  prevent  the  i8th  Fructidor, 
he  contributed,  at  least,  to  fix  the  General's  opinion  in 
regard  to  that  coup  d'etat^  struck  by  a  power  at  once 
violent  and  weak,  oppressive  and  despised,  and  who  had  not 
courage  enough  to  be  equitable.  From  that  moment  the 
Directory  was  condemned  in  the  eyes  of  Bonaparte.  He 
saw  that  no  futurity  existed  for  the  feeble  Constitution  of 
the  Year  III.,  and  from  that  day,  even  before  the  peace  of 
Campo  Formio  was  signed,  his  long-sighted  genius  formed 
the  plan  of  the  Egyptian  campaign. 

Having  escaped  from  the  threats  of  the  Directory,  La- 
valette rejoined  the  General-in-chief  at  the  Castle  of  Pas- 
seriano.  Bonaparte  did  not  leave  his  zeal  time  to  cool.  A 
few  days  afterwards  Lavalette,  his  sash  round  his  arm 
and  his  sword  in  his  hand,  entered  the  walls  of  Genoa, 
which  had  insulted  the  French.  The  gates  of  the  Senate- 
house  were  opened  for  him,  and  there,  in  the  midst  of  the 
patricians,  trembling  at  once  with  fear  and  rage,  he,  with  a 
high  hand  and  a  loud  voice,  demanded  satisfaction,  and 
forced  the  Doge  to  abandon  and  disown  all  English  influence. 