

'  Words  spoken  by  General  Sebastiani  over  the  tomb  of  Lavalette. 


xxvi  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

We  need  not  recall,  then,  the  many  famous  events  which 
filled  up  the  period  of  the  Empire,  but  which  have  no 
connection  with  the  present  sketch.  We  may  pass  over 
the  golden  dreams  of  a  man  too  strongly  intoxicated  with 
his  fortune  ; — we  may  leave  M.  Lavalette,  governing  during 
twelve  years  the  Post  Office  with  a  firm  and  discreet  hand  ; 
carrying  to  the  discussions  of  the  Council  of  State  his  know- 
ledge, clear  judgment,  and  the  inspirations  of  his  upright 
conscience  ;  shining  in  the  circles  of  an  elegant  and  polished 
Court  ;  and  towards  the  decline  of  so  much  grandeur,  when 
the  soil  began  to  tremble  beneath  the  throne,  giving  to  the 
Emperor  the  bold  advice  of  a  friend,  which  was  proudly 
rejected.     The  world  knows  the  rest. 

The  events  of  1814  restored  Count  Lavalette  to  private 
life,  from  which  he  did  not  stir  until  after  the  return  of 
Bonaparte  to  the  capital  on  the  20th  March  of  the  following 
year.  Attempts  have  been  made  to  place  in  a  false  light 
the  motives  that  rallied  him  to  the  Imperial  throne  after 
the  whole  army  had  acknowledged  the  Emperor,  and  in  the 
midst  of  such  exciting  circumstances.  These  motives,  how- 
ever, he  drew  from  his  conscience.  "  He  was  accused  of 
having  been  prejudiced  ;  he  was  convinced  he  had  been 
faithful."  ^ 

His  return  to  public  affairs  was  marked  by  an  act  of 
moderation,  of  which  he  in  vain  set  the  example  to  his 
enemies.  One  of  the  chief  clerks  of  his  department  came 
in  a  busy  manner  and  presented  him  with  a  list  of  suspected 
persons  ;  M.  Lavalette  let  him  speak  out,  and  when  the 
informer  had  finished,  he  said  to  him :  "  Pray,  Sir,  have 
you  ever  looked  an  honest  man  in  the  face  ?  "  The  clerk, 
abashed,  faltered  out  a  few  confused  words.  "Well,  Sir, 
now  you  may  learn  who  I  am,"  and  taking  the  list  h^ 
threw  it  into  the  fire. 

M.    Lavalette    was    frequently   called    to    the   Emperor 
during  the  Hundred  Days.     He  saw  him  in  his  councils 
'  Words  of  Count  Montlosier. 


CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  xxvii 

and  in  his  privacy.  The  Emperor  was  resolved  not  to 
continue  at  war  unless  it  were  to  defend  the  soil.  The 
spirit  of  liberty  had  made  its  way  to  him  ;  his  table  re- 
echoed with  liberal  professions  that  perplexed  him.  He 
said  at  one  time  to  M.  Lavalette,  in  the  secret  bitterness 
of  a  confidential  conversation  :  "  But  what  do  they  want  ? 
the  liberty  of  the  press  ?  I  shall  give  them  more  of  it 
perhaps  than  they  wish.  Let  them  only  suffer  me  to  save 
France."  France  was  again  invaded  ;  and  the  fortune  of 
the  Emperor  expired  on  the  field  of  Waterloo. 