

"  One  night,  while  I  was  asleep,  the  clock  of  the  Palais  de  Justice 
struck  twelve,  and  awoke  me.  I  heard  the  gate  open  to  relieve  the  sentry  ; 
but  I  fell  asleep  again  immediately.  In  this  sleep,  I  dreamed  that  I  was 
standing  in  the  Rue  St.  Honore,  at  the  corner  of  the  Rue  de  I'Echelle.  A 
melancholy  darkness  spread  around  me ;  all  was  still,  nevertheless  a  low 
and  uncertain  sound  soon  arose.  All  of  a  sudden,  I  perceived  at  the 
bottom  of  the  street,  and  advancing  towards  me,  a  troop  of  cavalry,  the 
men  and  horses,  however,  all  flayed.  The  men  held  torches  in  their  hands, 
the  red  flames  of  which  illuminated  skinless  faces  and  bloody  muscles. 
Their  hollow  eyes  rolled  fearfully  in  their  vast  sockets  ;  their  mouths  opened 
from  ear  to  ear,  and  helmets  of  hanging  flesh  covered  their  hideous  heads. 
The  horses  dragged  along  their  owti  skins  in  the  kennels,  which  over- 
flowed with  blood  on  both  sides.  Pale  and  dishevelled  women  appeared 
and  disappeared  alternately  at  the  windows,  in  dismal  silence ;  low, 
inarticulate  groans  filled  the  air ;  and  I  remained  in  the  street  alone, 
petrified  with  horror,  and  deprived  of  strength  sufficient  to  seek  my  safety 
by  flight.  This  horrible  troop  continued  passing  in  a  rapid  gallop,  and 
casting  frightful  looks  on  me.  Their  march,  I  thought,  continued  for  five 
hours  ;  and  they  were  followed  by  an  immense  number  of  artillery-waggons, 
full  of  bleeding  corpses,  whose  limbs  still  quivered ;  a  disgusting  smell  of 
blood  and  bitumen  almost  choked  me.  At  length,  the  iron  gate  of  the 
prison  shutting  with  great  force,  awoke  me  again.  I  made  my  repeater 
strike  ;  it  was  no  more  than  midnight,  so  that  the  horrible  phantasmagoria 
had  lasted  no  more  than  two  or  three  minutes — that  is  to  say,  the  time 
necessary  for  relieving  the  sentry  and  shutting  the  gate.     The  cold  was 


CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  xxix 

felt  himself  capable  of  tranquilly  awaiting  death  ;  and  all  his 
thoughts  were  then  directed  to  the  comforting  of  his  family 
and  friends.  "  Why  do  you  deplore  me  ?  "  he  said  to  them  ; 
*'an  honest  man  may  die  murdered,  but  his  conscience 
follows  him  to  the  scaffold." 

Days,  however,  passed  on.  The  Court  of  Cassation  had 
rejected  hi?  writ  of  error  :  a  petition  for  pardon,  presented 
by  Madame  Lavalette,  and  vainly  supported  by  the  cou- 
rageous zeal  of  the  Duke  of  Ragusa,  had  also  been  refused. 
The  day  of  execution  approached.  The  unfortunate  man 
had  no  hope  left  :  the  turnkeys  themselves  trembled,  as 
they  came  near  him,  with  pity  and  emotion.  On  the  eve 
of  that  last  day,  the  Countess  Lavalette  entered  his  prison. 
She  had  put  on  a  pelisse  of  merino,  richly  lined  with  fur, 
which  she  was  accustomed  to  wear  when  she  left  a  ball- 
room :  in  her  reticule  she  had  a  black  silk  gown.  Coming 
up  to  her  husband,  she  assured  him  with  a  firm  voice  that 
all  was  lost,  and  that  he  had  nothing  more  to  hope  than  in 
a  well-combined  escape.  She  showed  him  the  woman's 
attire,  and  proposed  to  him  to  disguise  himself.  Every 
precaution  had  been  taken  to  secure  his  escape.  A  sedan- 
chair  would  receive  him  on  his  coming  out  of  prison  ;  a 
cabriolet  waited  for  him  on  the  Quai  des  Orfe\Tes  ;  a 
devoted  friend,  a  safe  retreat,  would  answer  any  further 
objections.  M.  Lavalette  listened  to  her  without  ap- 
proving of  so  hazardous  a  plan  :  he  was  resigned  to  his 
fate,  and  refused  to  fly  from  it.  "  I  know  how  to  act  my 
part  in  a  tragedy,"  he  said,  "but  spare  me  the  burlesque 
farce.  I  shall  be  apprehended  in  this  ridiculous  disguise, 
and  they  will,  perhaps,  expose  me  to  the  mockery  of  the 
mob  !     On  the  other  hand,  if  I  escape,  you  will  remain  a 