

At  the  sight  of  this  hero  of  twenty-six,  with  his  pale  and 
melancholy  countenance,  his  proud  and  calm  deportment,  his 
eagle  glance,  his  short  sentences,  his  rapid  gestures  which 
commanded  obedience,  his  gravity  which,  notwithstanding 
his  youth,  made  him  respected  by  the  oldest  generals  of  the 
Republic — at  sight  also  of  that  firm  and  devoted  army  that 
was  about  to  fight  under  his  orders,  of  those  young  enthusi- 
astic lieutenants  who  thronged  around  him,  of  that  Italian 
soil  which  presented  itself  as  a  rich  prey,  it  might,  perhaps, 
'not  have  been  difficult  to  foretell,  that  the  first  act  of  this 
military  drama,  which  began  at  Montenotte  and  terminated 
at  Waterloo,  would  be  the  most  poetical  and  most  brilliant 
of  all. 

Lavalette  was  at  first  but  coolly  received  among  the  staff- 
officers  of  the  General-in-chief,  and  was  forced  to  conquer  at 
the  point  of  his  sword  the  esteem  of  Bonaparte.  It  was 
on  the  field  of  battle  at  Areola  that  he  received  from  the 
General  the  title  of  aide-de-camp  and  the  rank  of  captain. 
Being  wounded  in  his  perilous  mission  to  Tyrol,  he  was 
complimented  by  Bonaparte,  who  said  to  him  in  presence  of 
the  army,  "  Lavalette,  you  have  behaved  like  a  brave  man. 
When  I  write  the  history  of  this  campaign,  I  shall  not 
forget  you  !  "  He  kept  his  word.  In  the  meanwhile,  our 
young  officer  gained  the  friendship  of  his  General  by  other 
qualities  as  well  as  personal  valour  :  he  possessed  solid  infor- 
mation, a  scrutinising  mind,  wonderful  sagacity,  prudence, 
and  perfect  good  breeding.  This  latter  quality  Bonaparte 
liked  above  all  things,  and  he  distinguished  Lavalette. 

A  few  months   afterwards  he  chose  him  for  a  difficult 


XX  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

mission.  The  General  of  the  Italian  army,  surrounded  by 
his  glory,  nevertheless  watched  with  anxiety  the  movements 
and  struggles  of  the  parties  which  at  that  time  agitated 
France.  In  the  conflict  of  so  many  passions,  he  could  with 
difficulty  distinguish  the  truth.  He  therefore  sent  to  Paris 
his  aide-de-camp  Lavalette,  to  learn,  through  his  reports, 
the  real  state  of  afTairs.  A  cipher,  invented  by  Bourrienne, 
served  for  their  correspondence. 

Lavalette,  young  and  unknown,  cast  thus  in  the  midst  of 
the  dangers,  intrigues,  and  seductions  of  political  life,  dis- 
played nevertheless  remarkable  prudence  and  firmness.  He 
frequented  all  the  societies  of  the  period,  but  he  connected 
himself  with  none.  At  the  Luxembourg,  at  Carnot's,  in 
Madame  de  Stael's  drawing-room,  at  the  circles  of  Augereau, 
everywhere  his  ingenuity  discovered  the  real  aim  of  each 
party,  through  the  veil  of  vulgarity  or  refinement  which 
covered  them.  He  saw  the  Directory  in  all  the  ridiculous* 
glory  of  its  magnificence,  and  never  could  forget  the  farces 
performed  by  those  tyrants,  in  whose  government  ridicule 
seemed  to  vie  with  cruelty.  In  1829  he  wrote  the  following 
to  one  of  his  friends  :  ^ 