


xxii  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

After  the  peace  of  Campo  Formio,  Bonaparte  crossed 
Switzerland  on  his  way  to  Rastadt.  Lavalette  accom- 
panied him  in  this  triumphant  journey,  during  which  the 
people  everywhere  flocked  to  meet  the  conqueror  of  Italy. 
The  General  did  not  remain  long  at  Rastadt.  Disgusted 
at  the  protracted  delays  of  German  diplomacy,  he  left  the 
place,  where  Lavalette  remained,  entrusted  with  secret 
powers,  and  placed  in  the  most  difficult  position  between 
the  mistrustful  plenipotentiaries  of  the  Directory,  who 
detested  him,  and  the  ceremonious  German  Ministers,  who 
caressed  in  his  person  the  name  and  influence  of  Bonaparte. 

He  was  recalled  a  few  months  afterwards.  It  was  then 
that  Bonaparte,  not  daring  to  solicit  from  Barras  a  reward 
for  Lavalette,  married  him  to  a  young  lady  of  the  House 
of  Beauharnais,  a  niece  of  his  wife,  and  whose  father  had 
emigrated.  Thus  his  kindness  prepared  the  future  welfare 
of  his  friend,  and  allied  a  plebeian  name  to  the  lustre  of  his 
dynasty. 

Lavalette  was  no  sooner  married  than  he  was  forced  to 
depart.  Bonaparte  resolved  to  send  him  to  Egypt,  that  he 
might  not  be  compromised  in  the  trivial  intrigues  which 
were  going  on  in  France.  Near  him,  high  in  his  confi- 
dence, we  still  find  Lavalette,  with  his  soldierlike  devotion, 
his  open  cheerfulness,  his  taste  for  solitary  studies  in  the 
camp,  his  poetic  enthusiasm  for  the  distant  and  perilous 
enterprise.  After  the  capitulation  of  Malta,  he  was  com- 
manded to  accompany  to  the  end  of  the  Adriatic  the  Grand 
Master  and  his  staff.  On  his  return  he  visited  the  for- 
tresses of  Corfu.  He  was  also  to  have  carried  assurances 
of  peace  to  the  Pacha  of  Janina,  but  the  latter  was  then 
fighting  on  the  banks  of  the  Danube.  On  arriving  before 
Aboukir,  Lavalette  had  a  conversation  with  the  unfortunate 
Brueys,  whom  he  found  moored  in  the  roads,  preparing  for 
a  battle  and  inflated  with  the  hope  of  a  certain  victory. 
He  departed  the  day  before  the  disaster,  and  after  having 
suffered  a  violent  storm  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nile  he  went 


COUNT  LAVALETTE.  xxiii 

to  Cairo,  and  from  that  time  he  only  twice  left  the  General — 
first  to  accompany  to  Alexandria  Citizen  Beauchamp,  at  a 
moment  when  the  plague  raged  with  the  greatest  violence 
in  that  city,  and  the  second  to  assist  Andreossy  when  he 
went  to  reconnoitre  Pelusium.^ 

Lavalette  was  admitted  to  the  intimacy,  the  conversa- 
tions and  the  amusements  of  Bonaparte  ;  he  was  his  table 
companion  and  his  reader,^  and  he  also  shared  his  dangers.3 
He  fought  next  to  him  at  the  Pyramids  and  Mount  Thabor  ; 
he  crossed  the  desert  by  his  side,  and  followed  him  to 
the  murderous  siege  of  St.  John  of  Acre.  This  was  a 
memorable  period  of  Lavalette's  life,  and  he  was  fond  of 
recalling  it  to  his  recollection.  His  friends  will  never  forget 
his  narrative  of  the  fourteenth  assault  commanded  by  Kleber, 
which  he  used  to  take  so  much  pleasure  in  repeating.  It 
seemed  like  a  page  taken  from  an  epic  poem. 