

It  was  thus  that  the  siege  of  St.  John  of  Acre  concluded. 
Bonaparte  having  left  Syria  and  added  to  his  immortal 
campaign  the  bulletin  of  Aboukir,  delivered  the  command 
of  his  army  into  the  hands  of  Kleber  ;  and  after  stopping  at 
Corsica  on  his  way,  he  was  received  on  the  shores  of  France 
by  the  enthusiasm  of  the  citizens,  carried  in  triumph  to 
Paris,  where  he  overthrew,  as  it  were  with  a  breath,  the 
worm-eaten  throne  of  the  Directors.  France  applauded 
when  the  young  hero,  borne  upon  the  consular  shield  by 
his  lieutenants,  appeared  in  her  eyes  as  an  umpire  and  a 
saviour.  Lavalette  had  followed  Bonaparte  on  his  return,  and 
was  useful  to  him  in  the  coup  dc  main  of  the  i8th  Brumaire. 

War,  however,  continued  with  Austria.  The  French 
Government  wished  to  have  near  the  eventful  scene  a 
man  capable  of  judging  which  moment  would  be  most 
favourable    for    a    negotiation.      Lavalette     was    sent    to 


COUNT  LAVALETTE.  xxv 

Dresden,  with  all  the  necessary  powers  to  treat  of  peace 
with  Austria  ;  but  General  Moreau  was  at  Hohenlinden 
as  the  real  negotiator  for  France.  Peace  was  concluded, 
and  Lavalette  returned  to  Paris. 

Here  ended  his  military  and  diplomatic  career.  The 
First  Consul,  whose  chief  care  was  directed  towards  his 
reign,  which  had  already  begun,  though  under  a  republican 
form,  wished  to  associate  with  himself,  in  the  government 
of  France,  all  those  among  his  companions  in  arms  of 
whose  fidelity,  zeal,  and  talent  he  had  received  proofs.  La- 
valette was  chosen  among  the  first.  Appointed  in  the 
beginning  Commissioner-General  of  the  Post  Office,  he 
obtained  at  the  establishment  of  the  Empire  the  title  of 
Postmaster-General,  to  which  Bonaparte,  at  a  later  period, 
added  those  of  Count,  Councillor  of  State,  and  Grand 
Officer  of  the  Legion  of  Honour. 

M.  Lavalette  gave  himself  wholly  up  to  the  duties  of 
his  situation.  His  ambition  was  satisfied.  So  that  when, 
in  1815,  Napoleon  offered  him  the  Ministry  of  the  Home 
Department,  he  preferred  resuming  the  ftmctions  he  had 
already  fulfilled,  in  difficult  times,  with  equal  zeal  and 
success.  It  must,  in  fact,  not  be  forgotten  that  he  had  to 
organise  the  service  of  the  Post  Office  at  a  time  when 
France,  bounded  on  one  side  by  the  Rhine,  extended  on 
the  other  to  both  the  Peninsulas,  and  kept  up  armies 
over  all  Europe.  He  was,  in  some  measure,  the  centre 
from  whence  motion  and  life  was  to  depart  and  circulate 
over  that  vast  empire.  He  constantly  maintained,  with 
a  laudable  ardour,  the  sacred  connections  of  the  soldiers 
with  their  mother  country  ;  the  exchange  of  glory  and 
enthusiasm  between  the  army  and  the  citizen.  His  elevated 
Ration  put  him  in  possession  of  many  family  secrets. 
Never  could  policy  oblige  him  to  reveal  them.  *'  With  him 
candour  and  effusion  of  heart  never  carried  any  danger 
with  them." ' 