

severe  and  the  watchwOTd  short.  The  next  day,  the  turnkey  confirmed 
my  calculations.  I  nevertheless  do  not  remember  one  single  event  in  my 
Ufa,  the  duration  of  which  I  have  been  able  more  exactly  to  calculate,  of 
which  the  details  are  deeper  engraven  in  my  memory,  and  of  which  I 
preserve  a  more  perfect  consciousness." 


XXX  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

prey  to  the  insolence  of  prison  valets,  and  to  the  persecution 
of  my  enemies  !  " 

"  If  you  die,  I  die  ;  save  your  life  to  save  mine  !  " 

The  prisoner  yielded  to  her  urgent  entreaties. 

"Now  put  on  the  disguise,"  she  added;  "it  is  time  to 
go  ;  no  farewell — no  tears — your  hours  are  counted  1  " 

And  when  the  toilet  was  finished, 

"  Adieu !  "  she  said  ;  "do  not  forget  to  stoop  when  you 
pass  under  the  wickets,  for  fear  the  feathers  of  your  bonnet 
should  stick  fast  !  " 

She  then  pulled  the  bell,  and  rushed  behind  a  screen. 
The  door  opened  ;  he  passed,  followed  by  an  old  servant  of 
his  wife,  and  leaning  on  his  daughter's  arm.  When  they 
arrived  at  the  sedan-chair,  the  chairmen  were  not  there. 
The  soldiers  of  the  guard-house  had  assembled  to  see 
Madame  Lavalette,  and  looked  on  without  moving  !  This 
was  a  fearful  moment.  The  men  arrived  at  last  ;  the  chair 
went  off.  A  few  minutes  later,  a  cabriolet,  drawn  by  a 
swift  horse,  rolled  over  the  stones  of  the  Pont  Michel. 

This  took  place  on  the  23rd  of  December.  M.  Lavalette 
remained  concealed  in  Paris  until  the  loth  of  January.  A 
singular  favour  of  fortune  gave  him  as  a  retreat  the  very 
roof  under  which  lived  one  of  his  political  enemies,'  equally 
powerful  by  his  name,  his  station,  and  his  wealth.  From 
the  garret  floor  which  Lavalette  inhabited,  he  heard  persons 
crying  in  the  streets  the  police  ordinance  which  prescribed 
search  after  his  person.  The  barriers  were  shut ;  the  delivery 
of  passports  suspended  ;  expresses,  bearing  the  description 
of  his  person,  were  flying  about  on  every  side.  In  the 
Chambers,  in  the  Court  circles,  the  utmost  consternation 
prevailed  among  those  who  were  convinced  that  all  was  lost 
if  M.  Lavalette  was  not  retaken.  Paris,  however,  rejoiced, 
while  the  police,  falsely  accused  of  connivance,  burned  with 
impatience  to  damp  the  public  joy,  and  answer,  by  a  feat 

'  This  was  a  secret  which  he  kept  until  his  death,  but  which  his  Memoirs 
will  now  explain  to  the  public. 


CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  xxxi 

worthy  of  its  zeal,  the  complaints  of  the  gilded  drawing- 
rooms,  and  the  reproaches  that  re-echoed  from  the  tribune. 

In  the  midst  of  all  these  dangers  Count  Lavalette  lived, 
protected  by  a  family  to  whom  he  was  personally  unknown, 
but  whose  courageous  friendship  helped  him  to  bear  the 
agonies  of  his  concealment.  His  days  passed  on  between 
agreeable  conversation  and  diversified  reading  :  a  double- 
barrelled  pistol,  hid  under  his  pillow,  like  a  talisman,  secured 
to  him  some  nightly  rest.  This  lasted  seventeen  days. 
Finally,  on  the  9th  of  January,  181 6,  at  eight  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  he  went  on  foot  with  a  friend  to  Captain 
Hutchinson's  lodgings,  and  next  day,  at  the  very  hour  when 
a  gibbet  was  being  put  up  on  the  Place  de  Gr^ve  for  his 
execution  in  effigy,  he  set  off,  dressed  in  English  regimentals, 
with  Sir  Robert  Wilson,  crossed  the  barriers  in  an  open 
cabriolet,  and  proceeded  to  Mons.  During  this  journey,  M. 
Lavalette,  who  did  not  know  one  word  of  English,  was 
forced  to  keep  a  handkerchief  to  his  face,  as  if  he  had  been 
suffering  from  a  violent  toothache,  that  he  might  not  be 
under  the  necessity  of  speaking  to  the  numerous  English 
officers  that  stopped  his  guide  on  the  road.  Once,  at 
Compiegne,  having  entered  a  public  room  in  an  inn,  a 
travelling  clerk  of  a  trading  house  told  him  the  whole 
history  of  his  escape  from  prison,  accompanied  by  the  most 
ridiculous  circumstances,  and  adding  between  every  sentence 
the  words,  "  You  may  believe  me,  for  I  was  in  Paris  at  the 
time.''  Another  time,  near  the  frontiers,  a  captain  of 
gendarmerie  asked  for  their  passports,  and  took  them  with 
him.  M.  Lavalette  travelled  under  the  name  of  Colonel 
Losack.'  The  captain  came  back  a  long  while  afterwards, 
saying  that  there  was  no  colonel  of  that  name  in  the  English 
army.  Sir  Robert  replied  that  he  was  talking  nonsense 
— that  they  were  fools  for  staying  so  long  ;  and,  making  a 
sign  to  the  postilHons,  they  set  off  at  full  speed.  At  Mons 
his  generous  guide  was  to  leave  him.      M.  Lavalette,  deeply 