

That  event  was  for  Count  Lavalette  the  beginning  of  a 
series  of  unheard-of  sufferings.  Secure  in  the  persuasion  of 
his  innocence,  he  remained  in  Paris  ;  but  he  was  appre- 
hended on  the  1 8th  of  July,  while  at  table  with  his  friends. 
He  was  placed  in  solitary  confinement.  His  trial  began  : 
the  preparations  were  tedious  and  threatening.  The  fate 
of  Labedoyere,  then  of  Marshal  Ney,  were  bad  omens  for 
his  own.  On  the  19th  of  November  he  appeared  before 
the  jury  accused  of  having  been  an  accomplice  in  the 
conspiracy  which  brought  on  the  events  of  the  preceding 
loth  of  March  ;  he  defended  himself  in  the  most  noble 
manner  ;  ^  but  after  two  days'  discussion,  overwhelmed  by 
the  force  of  the  insatiable  passions  which  had  been  excited 
by  the  reaction,  and  were  daring  enough  to  seek  vengeance 
through  the  medium  of  the  law,  he  was  sentenced  to  death. 
He  heard  his  sentence  read  with  great  calmness,  and  said 
with  a  firm  voice  to  his  sorrowing  friends,  "  My  friends,  this 
is  a  cannon-ball."  Then  turning  to  the  numerous  clerks  of 
the  Post  Office  who  had  borne  witness  against  him,  he  made 
them  a  salute  with  his  hand,  and  said  :  "  Gentlemen  of  the 
Post  Office,  receive  my  farewell  greetings." 

,  His  voice,  which  resounded  mildly,  yet  firmly,  through 
the  court,  amidst  the  general  consternation,  might  have 
made    people    suppose   he   was    resigned  :   but,   when    he 

'  The  celebrated  Tripier  helped  him  with  his  advice,  and  gave  him 
proofs  of  the  most  generous  friendship. 


xxviii  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

returned  to  his  solitary  dungeon,  the  old  soldier  felt  his 
heart  quail  at  the  thoughts  of  the  death  that  awaited  him. 
He  wrote  to  one  of  his  old  companions  in  arms,  who  at  that 
time  enjoyed  great  influence  at  court,  to  beg  he  would 
solicit  for  him  the  favour  of  being  shot.  A  cruel  refusal 
was  the  only  answer  he  received  from  his  friend.  From 
that  moment  the  consciousness  of  the  injustice  under  which 
he  suffered  stimulated  his  courage.  He  endeavoured  to 
reconcile  his  mind  to  the  idea  of  that  death  at  which  he  was 
so  dismayed  :  he  listened  to  the  description  the  turnkeys 
made  of  the  humiliating  preparations  by  which  it  was 
preceded,  and  of  the  horrible  details  of  the  execution.  He 
made  them  repeat  their  story  several  times,  and  insisted  on 
knowing  all.  At  last,  after  having  struggled  for  some  time 
with  the  horror  of  these  gloomy  thoughts,  which  filled  his 
days  and  agitated  his  sleep  with  frightful  dreams,'  he  at  last 

'  One  dream  in  particular  left  very  deep  impressions  on  the  mind  of 
Lavalette,  which  time  itself  was  not  able  entirely  to  efface.  This  is  the 
manner  in  which  he  related  it  : 