

'  M.  Lavalette  took  the  name  of  Cossar  when  he  arrived  in  Bavaria. 


xxxii  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH  OF 

affected,  pressed  his  hands  while  expressing  his  gratitude  ; 
but  Sir  Robert,  still  maintaining  his  wonted  gravity,  smiled 
without  replying.  At  last,  after  half  an  hour's  silence,  he 
turned  to  M.  Lavalette,  and  said,  in  the  most  serious 
manner  possible,  "  Now  pray,  my  dear  friend,  why  did  you 
not  like  to  be  guillotined  ?  "  M.  Lavalette  stared  at  him, 
surprised  at  such  a  question.  "  Yes,"  added  Sir  Robert,  "  I 
have  been  told  you  solicited  as  a  favour  to  be  shot." 

"  Because  the  condemned  person  is  placed  in  a  cart,  his 
hands  tied  behind  his  back  ;  then  he  is  bound  to  a  plank 
which  is  slipped  under  the  axe." 

"  Ah  !  I  understand  ;  you  did  not  wish  to  have  your 
throat  cut  like  a  calf." 

M.  Lavalette  crossed  a  part  of  Germany,  and  soon  entered 
upon  the  hospitable  soil  of  Bavaria.  The  King  received 
him  with  great  zeal,  and  protected  him  against  the  French 
Ministry,  who  insisted  on  his  being  delivered  up  to  them. 
The  Duchess  of  St.  Leu  offered  him  her  house  ;  and  Prince 
Eugene  lavished  on  him  all  the  consolations  of  friendship. 

In  1822,  letters  of  pardon,  granted  by  Louis  XVIIl., 
restored  him  to  his  native  country.  M.  Lavalette  thus 
hoped  to  enjoy  still  some  happy  days  ;  but,  when  he  arrived 
in  Paris,  in  the  midst  of  the  congratulations  that  poured  on 
him  from  all  sides,  one  voice  remained  silent,  and  that  was 
his  wife's  !  From  that  decisive  hour  when,  with  such  over- 
powering energy,  she  had  arranged  his  escape,  and  remained 
a  hostage  in  his  place,  she  had  not  seen  him.  And  now 
she  looked  upon  him  without  emotion  and  without  tears. 
She  knew  him  not  !  The  unfortunate  lady  had  spent  all  her 
reason  in  saving  him  ! 

This  last  trial  surpassed  all  the  rest.  M.  Lavalette  was 
overwhelmed  by  it.  He  wrote  to  the  King  : — "  Your 
Majesty  has  restored  to  me  possessions  I  prized  more  than 
life  ;  but  all  your  royal  favour  can  never  counterbalance  my 
misfortune." 

His  unfortunate  situation  traced  to  him  the  path  he  ought 


COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  xxxiii 

to  follow.  He  gave  up  the  world,  where  he  had  left  such 
brilliant  recollections  and  so  many  faithful  friends,  and 
devoted  himself  to  complete  solitude,  which  he  only  once 
left  to  go  to  London  in  1826,  and  support  Sir  Robert 
Wilson's  election.  His  life  was  one  continued  scene  of 
devotion.  He  repaid  his  wife  by  daily  care,  and  by  pious 
and  delicate  attentions,  almost  as  great  as  he  had  received 
from  her  ;  and  when  death  overtook  him,  he  expired  tran- 
quilly, for  he  left  no  debt  behind  him. 