

Manes  of  victims,  of  whatever  party,  who  have  been  con- 
demned for  political  crimes,  and  on  whom  the  thunderbolt 
has  fallen  in  the  fury  of  the  storm,  let  the  fate  of  Lavalette 
comfort  you  : — you  have  all  been  restored  to  your  rights  in 
his  person  !  Cuvillier  Fleury. 


TO  THE  READER. 


I  NEVER  should  have  determined  to  record,  in  writing,  the 
events  which  have  passed  before  my  eyes,  nor  even  those  in 
which  I  have  acted  a  part  during  eight-and-twenty  years, 
had  I  not  been  involved  in  so  conspicuous  a  manner  in  the 
catastrophe  that  put  an  end  to  the  Imperial  Government  ; 
but  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  leave,  both  to  my  family  and 
my  friends,  an  indisputable  testimony  of  my  innocence  and 
general  conduct.  It  would,  moreover,  be  but  ill  requiting 
the  interest  with  which  so  many  honourable  persons  have 
favoured  me,  to  maintain  a  silence  which  my  enemies  might 
misuse  to  justify  their  persecutions. 

My  first  intention  was  to  describe  only  late  events  ;  but, 
having  been  for  above  twenty  years  attached  to  the  Emperor 
Napoleon,  it  appeared  to  me  that  I  ought  not  to  pass  over  in 
silence  one  part,  at  least,  of  his  glorious  history.  Could  I 
look  upon  myself  as  at  liberty  to  deprive  posterity  of  any  cir- 
cumstances connected  with  a  hero  who  will  never  cease  to 
engross  attention  ?  He  has  been  exposed  to  the  insults  of 
his  ungrateful  contemporaries,  and  it  is  my  duty  to  oppose 
truth  to  those  insults.  No  exertion  has  been  wanting  on 
my  side  to  avoid  being  led  away  by  the  deep  affection  I  shall 
cherish  to  the  end  of  my  life  for  a  man  who  has  been  my 
general,  my  sovereign,  and  my  benefactor.  It  is  not,  how- 
ever, his  public  actions,  and  still  less  the  wars  which  have 
shed  a  lustre  over  his  life,  that  I  pretend  to  describe.     He 


xxxvi  TO  THE  READER. 

has  still  friends  left  among  the  generals  who  shared  his  toil 
and  his  glory  :  to  them  the  noble  task  belongs.  I  shall  paint 
the  private  man.  Few  persons  have  known  him  as  well  as 
I  have  ;  and  historians,  gathering  materials,  may  place  full 
confidence  in  my  recital.  I  shall  mention  no  other  facts- 
than  those  of  which  I  have  been  an  eye-witness  ;  and  I  am 
much  mistaken  if  my  character  will  not  prove  a  sufficient 
voucher  for  their  truth. 

Still,  I  require  much  indulgence.  I  write  far  from  my 
country,^  in  deep  solitude,  often  depressed  by  misfortune, 
and  deprived  of  the  materials  requisite  for  recalling  facts, 
dates,  and  names.  The  impressions  are,  however,  still  vivid 
in  my  memory  and  in  my  heart. 

Many  persons,  seeing  my  name  on  the  title-page  of  these 
Memoirs,  will  perhaps  expect  to  find  in  them  an  abundant 
feast  of  anecdote  and  scandal :  they  will  be  mistaken.  During 
thirteen  years  I  filled  a  delicate  situation,  thanks  to  which  I 
have  discovered  some  painful  secrets  of  the  human  heart ; 
but  I  will  not  disgrace  my  character  by  publishing  them.  It 
is  not  with  rubbish  that  durable  monuments  can  be  raised. 