

Study  was  the  only  comfort  he  had  in  his  retirement  ; 
during  all  his  lifetime  he  had  cultivated  literature  with 
assiduity  and  enthusiasm.  In  the  camp  before  Mentz,  at 
the  table  of  General  Bonaparte,  in  the  drawing-room  of  the 
Tuileries,  he  always  passed  for  a  remarkably  witty  man  and 
a  most  agreeable  narrator.  His  misfortunes  multiplied  for 
him  opportunities  for  study  and  reflection,  so  that,  when  he 
returned  from  exile,  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  follow  the 
movement  and  progress  of  New  France.  Though  far  from 
his  country,  he  had  advanced  with  her  ;  he  had  her  manners, 
her  enduring  patience,  her  confident  hope  in  future  events,^ 
her  ardour  for  useful  reform,  her  freedom  from  all  ridiculous 
delusions.  His  mind  possessed  all  the  freshness  of  youth, 
and  he  viewed  with  enthusiasm  the  efforts  making  in  favour 
of  glory  and  liberty.  The  consequence  was,  that  he  was 
respected  by  men  of  all  ages,  but  that  he  was  more  particu- 
larly pleasing  to  the  young.  They  loved  to  hear  him  speak  ; 
all  the  past  lived  in  his  recollection,  with  its  real  colours, 
adulterated  neither  by  enthusiasms  nor  by  regret  for  the 
high  station  he  had  lost.  Numberless  witty  sayings,  inte- 
resting and  unexpected,  flowed  without  effort  in  his  rich  and 
easy  conversation.  His  imagination  gave  a  colouring  to 
objects  ;  but  fiction  was  repugnant  to  his  just  and  accurate 
mind.     His  lively  discourse,  like  an  amusing  book,  kept  his 

'  M.  Lavalettc  should  have  lived  a  few  months  longer.  The  Revolu- 
tion of  July  has  realised  his  hopes,  it  would  have  fulfdled  all  his  wishes. — 
Note  of  the  French  Editor. 

\b 


xxxiv  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH. 

friends  by  his  side  till  night  was  far  advanced,  and  cheated 
time  in  its  rapid  flight. 

Death,  however,  unexpectedly  aimed  his  shaft  at  his 
victim  amidst  his  books  and  his  unfinished  labours.  Even 
the  day  preceding  his  decease  was  devoted  to  study  and 
friendship.  Under  the  hoary  frost  of  age,  his  mind  preserved 
all  its  vigour;  his  heart  was  young  by  the  warmth  of  his  virtues. 

This  reflection  comforts  us. 

Though  he  fell  beneath  an  unexpected  blow,  Count  La- 
valette  died  in  the  sixty-first  year  of  his  age,  surrounded  by 
his  family,  and  regretted  by  his  friends. 

If  he  had  died  in  1815,  by  the  political  sword  which  struck 
so  many  other  victims,  fifteen  years  of  his  existence  would 
have  been  suddenly  cut  off  (not  the  happiest  surely)  ;  but 
what  a  cruel  death  awaited  him,  what  a  funeral  !  a  scaffold 
on  a  public  thoroughfare,  a  cart  transporting  his  mutilated 
remains,  and  after  the  cries  of  the  Greve,  the  solitude  of 
Clamart. 

But  the  victim  escaped.  Banishment  defended  him 
against  death  ;  by  degrees  passions  are  calmed  ;  rage  and 
resentment  appeased.  Thus,  at  one  breath  the  whole 
edifice  of  a  sanguinary  trial  falls  to  the  dust  ;  the  justice 
of  the  Sovereign  tears  out  the  fatal  page  ;  an  honest  man 
resumes  his  place  and  rank  under  the  same  heaven  that 
serves  as  a  canopy  to  his  accusers  and  his  judges  ;  and  when 
his  last  hour  arrives,  his  soul  leaves  the  earth  among  the 
endearments  and  blessings  of  his  children  ;  religion  receives 
him  ;  his  country  honours  his  remains  ;  his  companions  of 
all  times,  his  friends  of  all  parties,  throng  around  him  ;  the 
salute  of  the  brave  resounds  over  his  grave,  and  Fame  repeats 
to  France  the  farewell  of  friendship. 