

It  is  my  resolution  that  this  work  do  not  appear  during 
my  life.  Not  that  I  wish  to  escape  criticism  ;  but  because 
a  feeling  which  honourable  minds  alone  can  appreciate 
makes  it  a  duty  to  me  to  occupy  the  public  attention  no 
longer  with  myself.  My  unfortunate  celebrity  has  been 
dearly  bought,  and  I  now  want  rest  rather  than  pity. 

'  A  great  part  of  these  Memoirs  was  written  in  Bavaria,  during  M. 
Lavalette's  banishment,  in  his  various  retreats  on  the  borders  of  Lake 
Starenberg,  at  Eichstadt,  and  at  Augsburg.  It  will,  however,  be  observed 
in  reading  the  conclusion,  that  they  were  revised  and  finished  at  Paris,  or 
rather  in  the  country  near  Sevres. — Note  of  the  Editor. 


MEMOIRS 

OF 

COUNT    LAVALETTE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

I  WAS  born  in  Paris  in  1769.  My  father  having  enjoyed 
a  liberal  education,  and  being  sensible  of  its  advantages, 
watched  over  mine  with  constant  application.  I  went  late 
to  school,  because  my  health  was  indifferent,  and  left  it  in 
1788  ;  after  having,  for  eight  years,  filled  my  head  with 
Latin,  in  which  I  never  was  a  proficient — and  with  Greek, 
which  I  have  completely  forgotten.  My  confessor  was  a 
most  excellent  man,  but  he  heated  my  imagination  to  pre- 
serve my  morals.  He  put  into  my  hands  a  great  many 
religious  books,  and  took  a  particular  pleasure  in  making  me 
learn  the  sacred  orators  by  heart.  I  was  so  pleased  with  the 
sermons  of  Massillon,  and  the  funeral  orations  of  Bossuet, 
that  I  had  no  doubt  but  the  church  was  my  real  calling.  I 
tormented  my  family  until  I  got  permission  to  follow  a 
course  of  lectures  on  theology  ;  but  the  very  first  year  was 
sufficient  to  disgust  me.  The  method  of  disputing  in  bad 
Latin,  the  everlasting  passion  for  proving  both  sides  of  the 
question,  without  presenting  fixed  ideas  upon  any  subject 
whatever,  inspired  me.  with  an  aversion  for  that  study.  I 
could  not  conceive  why  so  much  trash  should  be  deemed  a 

2  ' 


2  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

necessary  introduction  to  the  eloquence  of  the  pulpit.  I  re- 
solved, therefore,  in  preference,  to  follow  the  bar.  My  father 
observed  with  satisfaction  the  turn  my  taste  had  taken,  and 
it  was  decided  that  I  should  be  placed,  first  in  a  notary's,  and 
then  in  an  attorney's  office.  The  notary's  business  appeared 
to  me  still  more  irksome  than  theology.  I  remained,  how- 
ever, nearly  a  year  with  him,  after  which  I  went  to  the  legal 
practitioner,  and  was  fortunate  enough  to  find  him  a  sensible 
man.  His  name  was  Dommanget,  and  his  love  of  his  pro- 
fession was  confined  to  the  profits  he  drew  from  it.  He  pos- 
sessed a  large  and  well-chosen  library  ;  and  as  I  cost  him  no 
salary,  he  suffered  me  to  pass  my  time  among  his  books. 
There  I  read  many  excellent  works,  and  gained  a  taste  for 
literature  that  has  never  diminished.  I  studied,  in  particular, 
the  history  of  France,  of  which  I  had  not  previously  the  least 
idea.  A  strange  system  of  instruction  prevailed  at  that  time. 
Thousands  of  young  men  every  year  left  the  university,  after 
having  finished  their  studies,  their  heads  being  filled  with 
republican  maxims,  their  minds  inflamed  with  admiration  of 
the  virtue  of  the  ancient  commonwealths,  most  cordially 
despising  all  monarchical  governments,  and  at  the  same  time 
shamefully  ignorant  of  the  history  of  their  mother  country. 
Not  once  during  my  eight  years'  studies  did  I  hear  the  name 
of  Henry  the  Fourth  pronounced  ;  and  I  must  own  that  at 
the  age  of  seventeen  I  was  acquainted  neither  with  the  time 
nor  the  manner  in  which  the  House  of  Bourbon  mounted 
the  throne. 