

My  company  grew  dissatisfied,  and  received  so  ill  those 
who  came  amongst  us,  that  no  one  would  venture  to  approach 
us.  Our  march  lasted  eight  hours,  and  night  had  closed  in 
when  we  arrived  at  the  avenue  of  Versailles.  If  the  Court 
could  have  resolved  to  take  violent  measures,  they  must  un- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  13 

doubtedly  have  succeeded.  The  National  Guards  did  not 
amount  to  above  six  thousand  men.  The  ruffians  that 
preceded  and  surrounded  them  were  in  number  about  eight 
or  ten  thousand,  but  kept  such  bad  order  that  one  charge 
of  a  few  squadrons  of  horse  would  have  been  sufficient  to 
disperse  them,  whilst  a  voile}-  or  two  of  cannon-ball  would 
have  effectually  prevented  their  return  ;  but  the  Court 
lacked  courage,  and  the  King  thought  his  family  safer  in  a 
badly  guarded  palace  than  on  a  high-road  surrounded  by 
faithful  troops.  The  arrival  of  the  rabble  dismayed  the 
palace,  made  the  regular  soldiers  stagger,  and  satisfied  the 
Assembly.  Those  members  who  influenced  its  decisions 
were  not  unacquainted  with  the  insults  lavished  on  them  at 
Court,  nor  with  the  fate  they  had  to  expect  if  the  King 
succeeded  in  escaping.  The  courtiers  openly  acknowledged 
that  the  most  disgraceful  death  awaited  the  members  who 
had  begun  to  distinguish  themselves  in  the  contest.  It  was 
therefore  resolved  that  the  King  should  come  to  Paris  and 
remain  there  ;  but  in  all  probability  no  one  knew  by  whom 
he  was  to  be  escorted,  and  what  outrages  were  about  to  be 
committed.  We  halted  in  the  great  square  facing  the  palace. 
The  Flanders  regiment  was  drawn  up  before  us.  The  mob 
surrounded  the  military.  Women,  holding  glasses  of  liquor 
in  their  hands,  entertained  the  soldiers  with  vulgar  tales  and 
low  jests.  This  was  too  strong  a  seduction  for  men  indif- 
ferent to  all  political  discussions.  The  want  of  discipline 
was  too  general  for  them  to  be  able  to  resist  such  tempta- 
tions, and  all  the  exertions  of  their  officers  to  maintain  order 
were  useless.  The  colonel  either  knew  not  what  to  do,  or 
dared  not  come  to  a  resolution,  for  he  had  no  positive  orders. 
M.  de  Lusignan,  who  commanded  the  regiment,  and  whom 
I  knew  at  a  later  period,  was  an  honourable  man  ;  but  how 
could  he  extricate  himself  from  so  difficult  a  position,  when, 
at  fifty  steps  from  him,  the  King  was  in  as  great  a  perplexity 
as  he  ?  The  regiment  being  seduced,  the  Monarch  had  no 
other  defence  left  than  the  Life  Guards,  the  Cent  Suisses, 


14  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

and  his  unserviceable  Court.  The  National  Guards  remained 
under  arms  until  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when  they  got 
permission  to  retire  to  rest,  but  with  orders  to  be  ready  at  the 
first  beat  of  drum.  M.  de  Lafayette  went  up  to  the  palace, 
where  he  strove  to  comfort  the  Royal  Family,  but  was  received 
with  an  appearance  of  distrust  and  coolness,  at  which,  in 
fact,  he  could  scarcely  be  surprised  ;  for,  having  arrived  at 
the  head  of  a  troop  of  enraged  ruffians,  he  was  in  some  way 
to  be  looked  upon  as  their  commander.  He  could  not  dis- 
semble that  the  population  of  Paris,  and  even  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly,  wished  the  King  to  fix  his  abode  in  the 
metropolis.  The  Court  had  therefore  to  decide  whether 
they  would  consent  to  go  there,  or  set  out  in  search  of  some 
distant  refuge.  I  cannot  say  whether  or  not  these  points 
were  ever  discussed.  It  seems  that  the  King  expected  either 
military  assistance,  or  a  strong  resolution  of  the  Assembly, 
that  might  impress  the  multitude  with  awe.  The  proffered 
assistance  of  M.  de  Lafayette  was  rejected.  The  King 
declared  that  his  guards  were  sufficient  for  his  protection, 
and  that,  far  from  accepting  the  service  of  the  National 
Guards  of  Paris,  who  were  extremely  devoted  to  his  person, 
he  did  not  even  require  those  of  the  Versailles  Guards,  over 
whom  Alexander  Berthier  (afterwards  Marshal  Prince  of 
Neufchatel)  was  second  in  command.  From  him  I  heard 
that  he  was  very  ill-treated  by  the  Court  party  ;  and,  though 
sincerely  attached  to  the  King,  no  one  would  hear  his  name 
mentioned  from  the  day  he  had  accepted  a  command  in  the 
National  Guard. 