


8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

strove  to  keep  up  a  bold  appearance,  but  dismay  and  agony- 
were  painted  in  his  countenance.  A  few  minutes  afterwards 
we  heard  the  report  of  some  fire-arms.  A  pistol  shot  had 
put  an  end  to  his  sufferings.  That  terrible  spectacle  inspired 
me  with  a  horror  and  disgust  for  the  licentiousness  of  the 
mob  that  nothing  ever  could  allay  ;  and  the  scenes  I  have 
yet  to  describe  were  but  too  strongly  calculated  to  augment 
those  sentiments. 

I  could,  however,  in  some  way  comprehend  that  foreigners 
who  had  killed  Frenchmen  might,  in  the  first  heat  of  battle, 
be  slaughtered  by  ferocious  conquerors  who  had  no  idea  of 
the  laws  usually  observed  in  war  ;  but  I  never  could  explain 
the  murder  of  Messieurs  Foulon  and  Berthier  de  Sauvigny. 
The  former  had  been,  I  believe,  Intendant  of  Paris,  and  the 
latter  was  his  son-in-law,  and  successor  in  that  employ.  In 
the  province,  an  Intendant  was,  through  his  functions  and 
influence,  a  considerable  personage.  His  character  or  abilities 
might  create  esteem,  or,  as  it  more  frequently  happened,  his 
incapacity  might  excite  dislike.  In  Paris,  on  the  contrary, 
the  Intendant  was  in  a  manner  lost  in  the  immensity  of  the 
city.  In  times  of  scarcity,  the  people  blamed  the  Prevot 
des  Marchands,  the  Lieutenant  of  Police,  and  sometimes  the 
Parliament.  The  Intendant,  not  being  a  magistrate,  was 
unknown  to  the  multitude  ;  and  I  dare  assert,  without  fear 
of  being  contradicted,  that  among  the  middling,  and  still 
less  among  the  lower  classes,  no  one  was  acquainted  either 
with  his  person  or  his  name.  They  knew  at  best  the  way 
to  his  office,  where  the  taxes  used  to  be  paid.  All  of  a 
sudden,  however,  a  rumour  was  spread  about  that  the  Inten- 
dant had  said,  and  repeated  aloud,  that  "  hay  was  good 
enough  to  feed  the  Parisian  rabble."  Messieurs  Foulon  and 
Berthier  had  fled.  Some  zealous  patriots  pursued  and  over- 
took them  at  about  twenty  leagues  from  Paris.  They 
brought  them  back,  and  some  hundred  wretches  butchered 
them,  under  circumstances  of  atrocious  barbarity.  I  crossed 
the  Place  de  Greve  to  go  to  the  Comedie  Francaise  ;  it  rained, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  9 

and  there  was  no  tumult  anywhere  but  facing  the  Hotel  de 
Ville.  I  was  standing  on  the  parapet,  when  I  saw  raised 
above  the  crowd  the  figure  of  an  old  man  with  grey  hair  ; 
it  was  the  unfortunate  Foulon  being  hanged  at  the  lamp- 
post. I  returned  home  to  study  my  beloved  Montesquieu  ; 
and  from  that  moment  I  began  to  hate  a  revolution  in 
which  people  were  murdered  without  being  heard  in  their 
defence. 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  tumult,  which  on  the  14th  had  been  only  a  riot,  next 
day  became  a  decided  revolution,  the  consequences  of  which 
were  not  to  be  calculated.  The  taking  of  the  Bastille  had 
elated  the  minds  of  the  people  :  three  thousand  disciplined 
troops  (the  Gardes  Francaises)  formed  the  vanguard  of  an 
army  above  one  hundred  thousand  strong,  of  which  at  least 
thirty  thousand  were  armed  with  muskets.  It  would  have 
been  impossible  either  to  attack  or  disband  that  army.  The 
Government,  taken  unawares,  was  forced  to  consent  to  its 
organisation,  and  to  the  choice  of  M.  de  Lafayette  as  com- 
mander-in-chief. The  Prevot  des  Marchands  and  city 
magistrates  had  fled.  In  their  place  were  put  a  mayor  and 
common  council,  titles  already  in  use  in  several  French 
towns.  M.  Bailly  was  elected.  He  was  a  celebrated  astro- 
nomer and  a  clever  writer.  The  States-General  had  chosen 
him  for  their  president.  The  whole  organisation  was  com- 
plete in  three  days  ;  and  on  the  1 7th  the  King  came  to 
Paris,  where  he  legitimatised  by  his  presence  and  his  speeches 
all  the  outrages  that  had  been  committed.  This  step  taught 
his  friends  what  they  had  to  expect  of  him,  and  the  partisans 
of  the  Revolution  all  they  might  dare  to  undertake.  Re- 
bellion had  reached  its  highest  pitch  :  soldiers  and  official 
persons  had  been  killed  in  the  exercise  of  their  duty,  and 
still  the  Sovereign  spoke  hesitatingly  on  the  subject  of  these 
crimes.  The  provinces,  encouraged  bj-  the  example  of  Paris, 
hastened  to  follow  it.    The  same  couriers  that  brought  down 