


4  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

magistrates  would  no  longer  consent  to  administer  justice  ; 
the  counsel  and  attorneys  would  no  longer  follow  their  suits  ,' 
all  the  clerks  of  the  bar  assembled  tumultuously,  and  sided 
openly  with  the  Parliament.  These  young  men  formed  at 
that  time  a  corporation  called  "  La  Basoche."  They  had 
their  own  chiefs,  observed  a  sort  of  discipline,  and  wore  a 
peculiar  dress.  Though  I  was  not  enlisted  in  their  body, 
one  of  my  fellow  clerks  proposed  that  I  should  join  them, 
and  I  consented.  We  found  them  in  the  garden  of  the 
Luxembourg,  several  hundred  in  number,  highly  excited, 
and  disposed  to  procure  arms.  I  took  it  in  my  head  to  pro- 
pose to  several  among  them  to  attack  the  guard  of  the 
Theatre  Francais,  seize  their  muskets,  and  march  against  the 
battalion  of  the  guards  stationed  in  the  Place  Dauphine.  My 
proposal  was  received  with  enthusiasm,  and  communicated 
to  all  the  groups.  Some  young  men,  more  reasonable  than 
the  rest,  and  who  probably  had  come  there  with  the  sole 
view  of  dissuading  and  restraining  the  others,  expressed  a 
wish  to  see  the  author  of  so  wise  a  plan.  One  of  them  ex- 
amined me  from  head  to  foot.  The  shortness  of  my  stature 
made  him  smile,  and  he  found  but  little  difficult}-  in  proving 
the  extravagance  of  a  resolution,  the  consequences  of  which 
must  inevitably  be  fatal  to  us.  The  most  violent  among  us 
left  the  garden  to  proceed  towards  the  Place  Dauphine.  The 
soldiers  stood  dispersed  with  their  arms  piled  beside  them. 
We  looked  at  one  another  ;  and  I  know  not  what  would 
have  been  the  result,  if  the  drum  had  not  suddenly  beat  to 
rally  the  troops. 

These  tumultuous  scenes  had  already  lasted  eighteen 
months,  and,  by  the  ridiculous  success  obtained  in  the  Fau- 
bourg St.  Antoine,  Government  seemed  persuaded  that  the 
armed  force  would  be  sufficient  to  answer  all  ends.  The 
States-General  had  assembled  at  Versailles,  having  been  sum- 
moned at  once  by  the  Parliament,  who  wished  to  embarrass 
the  Court  and  revenge  itself, — by  the  Ministers,  who  knew 
not  which  way  to  act, — and  by  the  majority  of  the  nation,. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  5 

justly  discontented  with  an  incapable  Government,  and  per- 
h'aps  also  tired  of  too  uniform  a  tranquillity.  The  States- 
General  soon  felt  that  the  system  and  prejudices  of  the  Court 
"would  be  insuperable  obstacles  to  the  redress  of  the  evil. 
They  wished  for  a  plan  of  government  in  which  the  rights 
•of  the  nation  at  large,  rather  than  those  of  the  privileged 
-classes,  might  be  considered.  M.  Necker,  who  was  a  clever 
financier,  a  philosopher,  and  by  birth  the  citizen  of  a 
republic,  encouraged  them.  But  the  King,  yielding  to  the 
representation  of  his  courtiers,  and  to  a  secret  aversion  he 
•entertained  for  M.  Necker,  dismissed  him  from  his  councils. 
The  news  of  this  event  reached  Paris  abruptly  on  the  12th 
of  July,  at  a  moment  when  the  inhabitants  were  dispersed  in 
the  several  public  walks.  It  spread  confusion  and  grief  on 
all  sides  ;  whilst  the  busts  of  M.  Necker  and  the  Duke  of 
Orleans  were  carried  in  triumph  through  the  streets.  Orators, 
mounted  on  chairs  in  the  Palais  Royal,  drew  crowds  around 
them.  "  All  is  lost,"  they  said  :  "  the  States-General  are  to 
be  dissolved.  Already  your  most  zealous  defenders  are  obliged 
to  fly,  and  soon  you  will  groan  under  an  insufferable  load  of 
taxes,  and  the  sanguinary  caprice  of  a  horrible  despotism." 
The  agitation  occasioned  by  speeches  of  this  kind  was  con- 
siderably augmented  by  the  presence  of  the  Swiss  soldiers. 
Government  wanted  to  make  use  of  the  regiment  of  the 
Guards  to  disperse  those  whom  they  called  rebels  ;  but  the 
soldiers  pushed  their  officers  back,  and  took  the  part  of  the 
people.  A  detachment  of  the  regiment  of  Royal  German 
cavalry  presented  itself,  and  was  hooted.  They  tried  to 
charge  the  crowd,  but  they  were  fired  at,  and  the  Swiss 
encamped  in  the  Champ  de  Mars  were  sent  away.  The 
mob,  grown  furious  through  exasperation,  then  fell  upon 
their  natural  enemies,  the  persons  employed  by  the  Ferme 
Generale  for  the  collection  of  the  excise  duties.  These  per- 
sons were  forced  to  conceal  themselves,  and  the  barriers 
were  set  on  fire.  In  the  midst  of  this  disorder  a  rumour 
suddenly  spread,  fearful  even  in  its  uncertainty,  that  robbers 