


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  ii 

to  the  country  intelligence  of  the  revolution  of  the  metro- 
polis carried  back  accounts  of  similar  occurrences  in  the 
several  places  they  had  passed  through.  The  States-General, 
which  had  given  the  impulse,  received  it  in  their  turn.  The 
two  first  estates  were  obliged  to  unite  to  the  third.  The 
States  took  the  title  of  a  Constituent  Assembly,  and  from 
that  moment  set  themselves  to  work  to  raise  a  monarchy 
where  the  nation  was  to  be  represented  by  its  deputies. 
Then  began  the  long  struggle  between  new  interests  and 
uncurbed  passions.  The  King  was  a  stranger  to  all  the 
ideas  that  had  circulated  for  thirty  years  among  his  subjects. 
Bred  in  the  maxims  and  customs  of  an  absolute  monarchy, 
he  could  not  but  observe  with  dismay  the  conduct  of  the 
Assembly  ;  and,  if  he  rejected  the  violent  measures  he  was 
pressed  on  to  adopt,  it  was  owing  to  the  weakness  of  his 
character  rather  than  his  wish  to  spare  blood,  and  also  to 
the  hope  that  some  more  favourable  chance  might  replace 
in  his  hands  the  authority  that  rebels  had  wrested  from 
him.  The  only  reasonable  step  would  have  been  to  awe 
the  Assembly  he  no  longer  possessed  the  power  of  dissolving, 
by  going  still  farther  than  they  did  ;  and  to  give  of  his  own 
accord  a  constitution  which  would  have  maintained  some  of 
the  privileges  of  the  nobility,  and  determined  the  rights  of 
the  people.  Such  was,  in  fact,  M.  Necker's  proposal :  the 
King  rejected  it,  and  all  was  lost.' 

The  plan  of  quitting  Versailles,  and  establishing  himself 
in  some  stronghold,  appeared  to  the  King  the  most  advan- 
tageous one  ;  but  it  was  soon  discovered,  and  the  patriots 

'  The  translator  cannot  help  remarking  that  M.  de  Lavalette  has  l)een 
lietrayed  Ijy  his  memory  in  several  parts  of  this  passage,  i.  The  Prevot 
des  Marchands  (M.  de  Flesselles)  had  net  fled  ;  he  was  murdered  at  the 
Hotel  de  Ville,  on  the  14th  of  July,  whilst  presiding  over  the  electors  of 
Paris.  2.  The  .Stales  did  not  take  the  name  of  Constituent  Assembly, 
that  name  having  lieen  used  for  the  first  time  two  years  later.  3.  .So  far 
from  rejecting  any  plan  of  M.  Necker,  the  King,  of  his  own  accord,  three 
weeks  jjcfore  these  riots  (on  the  23rd  of  June),  proposed  to  the  Assembly  a 
complete  constitutional  charter,  in  thirty-five  articles,  which  the  Assembly 
rejected  without  even  vouchsafing  to  discuss  it. 


12  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

felt  alarmed.  The  inhabitants  of  Paris  had  not  only  organ- 
ised their  military  force,  but  also  their  political  institutions. 
The  sixty  headquarters  of  the  several  battalions  were  at  the 
same  time  so  many  centres  of  districts,  each  of  them  having 
a  president,  secretaries,  and  officers.  There  all  the  idlers  of 
the  middle  and  lower  orders  went  to  listen  to  the  popular 
orators,  who  practised  themselves  in  that  flow  of  hollow 
words  that  afterwards  proved  so  fatal.  Three  months  later 
a  rumour  was  suddenly  spread  in  the  districts  that  the  King 
was  preparing  to  fly.  The  population  of  the  Faubourg  St. 
Antoine  was  soon  set  in  motion.  An  immense  number  of 
people  assembled  before  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  declaring  they 
would  march  to  Versailles  and  bring  back  the  King.  M.  de 
Lafayette  for  a  long  while  refused  to  put  himself  at  their 
head  ;  but  at  last,  intimidated  by  their  threats,  and  foresee- 
ing that  they  would  otherwise  do  without  him,  he  sent  word 
to  the  principal  officers  of  the  National  Guards,  inviting  them 
to  lead  to  Versailles  all  the  reasonable  citizens  they  could 
collect,  to  prevent  if  possible  the  fatal  consequence  he  but 
too  clearly  anticipated  from  these  disturbances.  A  great 
many  National  Guards,  among  whom  were  some  incomplete 
companies  of  my  battalion,  went  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  where 
I  hastened  to  join  them.  There  we  found  an  enraged  multi- 
tude exclaiming  that  they  were  betrayed,  and  stirring  one 
another  up  to  murder  and  all  manner  of  outrage.  At  last 
the  torrent  began  to  move,  thickening  as  it  advanced.  The 
commander-in-chief  marched  foremost,  followed  by  cannon 
and  caissons,  driven  by  inebriated  women,  the  refuse  of 
human  kind.  Then  came  the  National  Guards,  the  pelo- 
tons  of  which  were  continually  broken  through  by  those 
furious  wretches. 