


6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

were  approaching  to  ransack  the  capital.  This  was  at  best 
but  a  ridiculous  joke,  the  inv^entors  of  which,  however, 
seemed  well  acquainted  with  the  character  of  the  Parisians.. 
The  citizens,  after  remaining  peaceful  spectators  of  this  great 
tumult,  showed  at  last  some  signs  of  spirit,  and  on  the  13th 
of  July  above  two  hundred  thousand  men  had  armed  them- 
selves with  whatever  weapons  they  could  find.  The  news  of 
this  general  insurrection  terrified  the  Court,  and  all  the 
regular  troops  disappeared  from  the  environs  of  the  capital. 

At  length  arrived  the  14th  of  July,  a  day  for  ever  famous, 
an  era  for  ever  memorable,  in  the  annals  of  France,  and 
almost  equally  so  in  the  history  of  every  other  nation  ;  for 
there  exists  no  people  whose  political  and  civil  existence  has 
not  been  considerably  modified  by  the  French  Revolution. 

For  the  mob  to  pursue  police  officers,  collectors,  and  spies, 
is  a  natural  thing  ;  but  how  did  an  immense  population  first 
conceive  the  idea  that  their  fate  was  connected  with  the 
taking  of  the  Bastille,  and  persuade  themselves  that  their 
,  victory  was  complete  when  they  were  masters  of  it  ? 

The  fortress  of  the  Bastille  was  built  in  the  reign  of 
Charles  the  Fifth,  at  a  time  when  fire-arms  were  scarcely 
known.  Situated  without  the  precincts  of  the  city,  beyond 
the  Porte  St.  Antoine,  it  was  evidently  never  intended  as  a 
check  upon  the  metropolis.  It  was  said  the  King  meant  to 
keep  his  treasures  there  ;  but  the  interior  distribution  clearly 
evinced  that  it  was  destined  to  serve  as  a  state  prison.  This 
pretended  fortress  consisted  of  five  towers,  about  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  feet  high,  joined  together  by  strong  high 
walls,  and  surrounded  by  broad  deep  ditches.  Its  entrance 
was  protected  by  drawbridges,  and  on  the  14th  01  July  it 
was  commanded  by  a  gov'ernor,  and  defended  by  about  sixty 
Swiss  veterans  ;  a  few  old  guns,  of  small  size,  were  placed 
on  the  terraces  of  the  towers.  There  was  nothing  very 
formidable  in  its  appearance  ;  but  something  like  a  super- 
stitious terror  pervaded  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  most 
marvellous  stories  were  told  respecting  the  Bastille.     For 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  7 

many  ages,  the  most  noble  victims  of  despotism  had  groaned 
within  its  mysterious  \\^lls.  Some  prisoners,  who  had  been 
fortunate  enough  to  escape  from  it,  had  pubhshed  most 
terrifying  accounts.  Those  formidable  towers,  those  vigilant 
sentinels,  who  suffered  no  one,  even  by  stealth,  to  cast  a 
look  towards  them  ;  —  these  numerous  ferocious-looking 
guards,  frightful  by  their  appearance,  and  more  frightful 
still  by  their  deep  silence, — all  united  to  excite  terror  and 
anxious  curiosity.  Nevertheless,  this  state  prison  was  not 
dangerous  for  the  people  :  it  was  designed  for  persons  of 
high  birth,  or  for  literary  people  who  ventured  to  displease 
the  ministry.  But  to  the  wish  of  satisfying  curiosity  was 
added  a  noble  feeling  of  pity  for  the  numerous  victims  sup- 
posed to  be  shut  up  in  the  fortress,  and  the  whole  population 
of  Paris  resolved  to  make  themselves  masters  of  the  Bastille. 
A  considerable  number  of  muskets  and  some  cannon  were 
deposited  at  the  Invalides.  The  mob  repaired  to  that  place, 
seized  them,  and  rushed  against  the  Bastille,  headed  by  the 
Gardes  Francaises.  A  few  cannon  were  fired,  but  did  not 
much  injure  the  walls.  The  governor  answered  by  some 
balls  that  were  lost  in  the  Rue  St.  Antoine.  Terror  and 
rage  soon  rose  to  the  highest  pitch.  The  governor  had 
neither  troops  nor  ammunition  sufficient  to  defend  himself. 
He  had  not  even  received  any  positive  orders  to  that  effect. 
It  is  said  that  he  lowered  the  drawbridge  to  receive  a  depu- 
tation of  patriots  summoning  him  to  surrender.  Hulin, 
afterwards  a  general,  who  was  one  of  the  deputation, 
assured  me  that,  on  entering  the  governor's  court,  he  and 
his  companions  were  fired  on.  The  governor  was  arrested 
first,  the  Swiss  major  afterwards,  and  the  Bastille  was  taken. 
These  two  officers  were  dragged  to  the  Place  de  Greve,  and 
loaded  with  blows  and  imprecations.  I  was  there  with  the 
unformed  battalion  of  my  district.  The  unfortunate  major 
passed  before  our  ranks  ;  his  stature  was  tall,  and  his  aspect 
venerable.  Two  men  held  him  by  the  throat,  and  cried 
with  furious  gestures,  "  Here  is  the  villain  !  "     The  major 