

The  events  that  preceded  the  grand  drama  of  1789  took 
me  by  surprise  in  the  midst  of  my  books  and  my  love  of 
study.  I  was  then  reading  "  L'Esprit  des  Lois,"  a  work  that 
charmed  me  by  its  gravity,  depth,  and  sublimity.  I  wished 
also  to  become  acquainted  with  the  code  of  our  own  laws  ; 
but  Dommanget,  to  whom  I  mentioned  my  desire,  laughed, 
and  pointed  to  the  Justinian  Code,  the  common  law  code  of 
the  kingdom,  the  parliamentary  decrees,  and  the  statutes  of 
our   kings,  accompanied  by  an  immense  number  of  inter- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  3 

preters  and  commentators.  So  monstrous  a  heap  of  folio 
volumes  made  me  shudder,  and  I  concluded  somewhat 
rashly,  but  like  many  other  people,  that  it  was  better  to  re- 
model the  whole  than  to  load  my  memory  with  such  obscure 
lore.  To  my  graver  studies  I  added  the  perusal  of  political 
pamphlets,  \vhich  then  began  to  be  numerous.  Thus  my 
imagination  was  excited,  and,  wiseacre  of  twenty  as  I  was,  I 
thought  I  should  do  well  to  unite  with  the  meditations  of 
my  closet  the  observation  of  those  scenes  of  disorder  that 
were  the  harbinger  of  the  Revolution. 

There  lived  at  that  time,  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Antoine,  a 
wealthy  paper-hanging  manufacturer  called  Reveillon.  This 
man  employed  several  hundred  -workpeople,  who,  being  dis- 
satisfied with  his  refusal  to  raise  their  wages,  and  probably 
instigated  by  the  enemies  of  their  master,  resolved  to  murder 
him  and  ransack  the  establishment  by  which  they  got  their 
livelihood.  The  disturbance  soon  rose  to  a  great  height,  and 
the  gnet,  or  guard  of  the  town,  not  being  strong  enough  to 
suppress  it,  a  detachment  of  the  regiment  of  the  Gardes 
Francaises  was  ordered  out  against  the  rioters.  Wishing  to 
be  a  witness  of  the  scene,  I  went  to  the  spot,  and  was  stand- 
ing between  the  plunderers  and  the  troops,  when  the  latter 
arrived  by  divisions  and  fired.  Many  persons  were  killed, 
several  were  sent  to  prison,  and  one  man  was,  I  believe, 
hanged  a  few  days  afterwards.  So  brutal  a  manner  of  restor- 
ing public  order  exasperated  me,  and  I  soon  understood  that 
such  is  the  custom  of  governments  that  wish,  as  the  phrase 
is,  to  show  energy  and  inspire  respect  ;  in  one  word,  that  it 
is  easier  to  repress  crimes  by  force  than  to  prevent  them  by 
Avisdom  and  resolution.  The  inhabitants  of  the  suburb  never 
forgot  this  military  expedition  ;  and  I  have  good  reason  to 
believe  that  it  contributed  greatly  to  keep  alive  the  spirit  of 
revenge  and  sedition  that  prevailed  so  long  among  the  popu- 
lation of  that  part  of  Paris. 

The  resistance  of  the  Parliament  to  the  orders  of  Govern- 
ment  caused   great   agitation    in    the   public    mind.      The 