

At  one  o'clock  we  received  permission  to  go  to  bed.  I 
sheltered  myself  under  the  roof  of  a  citizen,  who  granted  me 
a  chamber  for  my  money.  The  man  was  attached  to  the 
King's  household — I  cannot  recollect  in  what  quality  :  he 
pretended  to  be  a  warm  patriot  ;  and  if  I  had  lent  an  ear 
to  all  he  had  to  say  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  palace,  and  of 
the  Queen  herself,  I  might  have  thought  myself  fully  justi- 
fied in  mixing  with  the  rebels.     I  inquired  very  coolly  from 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  15 

whence  he  had  collected  all  those  infamous  stories.  My 
question  at  first  disconcerted  him,  but  he  soon  answered  in 
an  angry  tone  :  "What  I  have  been  telling  you  is  the  talk 
of  all  Versailles  :  and  yet  if  the  Parisians  take  the  Royal 
Family  from  us,  they'll  beggar  the  whole  town."  I  turned 
my  back  on  the  man,  and  went  to  sleep  till  six  o'clock,  when 
the  drum  beating  the  alarm  summoned  me  to  the  square. 
The  crime  had  already  been  committed  in  the  shades  of 
.night.  The  report  was,  that  the  wretches  had  entered  the 
palace  by  a  secret  and  feebly  guarded  door  ;  they  had 
murdered  the  guards  that  defended  it,  and  pursued  the 
Queen  to  her  bedchamber,  from  whence  she  had  but  just 
time  to  escape  to  the  King's  apartments.  I  must  own,  that 
so  great  was  my  surprise  and  indignation  that  I  joined  in 
the  hue-and-cry  of  some  of  my  comrades  against  the  Marquis 
de  Lafayette.  We  had  been  summoned  by  him  to  come 
and  protect  the  Royal  Family  and  secure  public  tranquillity. 
Why  then  were  we  left  to  be  witnesses  of  such  horrible 
crimes  ?  Why  had  we  not  been  employed  ?  Could  there 
have  been  any  doubt  entertained  of  our  fidelity  ?  Surely 
one-half  of  the  six  thousand  men  we  mustered  would  have 
been  suflScient  to  defend  the  palace,  and  would  not  have 
been  overawed  by  an  ill-armed  rabble,  exhausted  at  once  by 
fatigue  and  intoxication.  But  it  was  too  late  ;  the  victims 
had  fallen,  and  those  who  were  doomed  to  perish  next  were 
as  yet  beyond  their  reach.  The  Life  Guards  had  barricaded 
themselves  round  the  King's  apartments  ;  their  resistance 
had  dismayed  the  assassins,  and  given  General  Lafayette 
time  to  come  up.  He  took  all  the  military  he  fell  in  with, 
and  the  rabble  filled  the  marble  court,  rending  the  air  with 
their  savage  cries.  I  remained  long  in  suspense  concerning 
the  general's  conduct  during  that  fatal  night.  The  details 
of  the  proceedings  instituted  a  short  time  afterwards  against 
many  persons  who  perhaps  were  not  guilty  appeared  to  me 
far  from  satisfactory.  I  learned  the  truth  at  a  later  period, 
and  ^Madame  de  Stael  has  published   it  in    her   Memoirs. 