

'  The  reader  must  here  not  lose  sight  of  the  peculiar  situation  in  which 
Count  Lavalette  was  placed,  as  a  devoted  friend  of  the  Emperor  and  a 
personal  enemy  of  Louis  XVIII.  A  very  different  account  of  the  affair  of 
M.  de  Favras  may  be  found  in  Bertrand  de  Moleville,  Histcire  de  la  Revo- 
lution, vol.  ii.  page  341. — Note  of  the  Translator. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  27 

of  the  Guards  was  more  particularly  the  object  of  their 
bitter  satires.  This  soured  our  temper,  and  I  observed  with 
rregret  that  many  honest  men  who  would  have  laid  down 
their  lives  for  the  King  took  the  fatal  resolution  of 
abandoning  him.  I  must  say,  however,  that  the  Royal 
Family  were  far  from  approving  the  conduct  of  their  pre- 
tended friends.  The  King  and  Queen  always  showed  the 
greatest  affability  to  the  National  Guards  ;  but  their  example 
was  not  followed,  nor  were  even  their  remonstrances  listened 
to.  I  may  quote  one  instance,  of  which  the  consequences 
were  fatal.  The  Duke  of  Orleans  had  for  some  time  felt 
that  he  stood  in  an  equivocal  light,  and  that  his  position  at 
Court  was  unworthy  of  his  name  and  character.  He  wished 
to  come  to  a  reconciliation  with  the  King  and  Queen.  A 
negotiation,  prudently  managed,  succeeded  completely.  It 
was  agreed  that  the  first  Prince  of  the  Blood  should  come 
publicly  to  pay  his  respects — I  think  it  was  on  Easter 
Sunday.  The  apartments  were  crowded.  The  Prince 
appeared  at  the  moment  dinner  was  being  served  up  to 
the  Royal  Family.  Immediately  some  silly  yovmg  men, 
thinking  themselves  very  clever,  cried  out — "Take  care  of 
the  dishes  !  Here  comes  the  Duke  of  Orleans !  "  Another 
imagined  he  was  doing  some  wonderful  achievement  in 
brushing  by  the  Prince,  and  saying  insolently — "  That  was 
a  kick.''  The  Prince,  seeing  himself  thus  insulted  in  the 
King's  presence,  left  the  palace  abruptly,  convinced  that  the 
Queen  had  drawn  him  into  an  odious  snare.  From  that 
moment  he  joined  the  most  violent  of  the  factions,  and  the 
fatal  and  shameful  consequences  of  that  step  are  but  too  well 
known. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

The  members  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  were  still  chiefly- 
occupied  in  preparing  an  ill-combined  Constitution  ;  by  it, 
however,  they  laid  the  foundation  of  the  Representative 
System,  which  cost  us  so  dear,  but  by  which  alone  France 
can  be  saved.  All  the  powers  of  the  state  became  vested  in 
that  Assembly,  from  the  time  that  the  King  was  unable 
to  wield  them.  Public  Opinion,  a  jealous  and  capricious 
sovereign,  had  commenced  her  stormy  reign  :  Louis,  whom 
she  was  driving  from  his  throne,  aware  that  her  strength 
no  longer  reigned,  imagined  that  he  should  recover  his 
sceptre  and  his  crown,  where  his  brother,  and  the  small 
troop  of  emigrants  that  surrounded  him,  were  under  foreign 
control  assuming  a  threatening  attitude.  As  he  could  not 
hope  to  find  any  Frenchman  that  would  aid  his  flight,  the 
King  confided  his  design  to  a  foreigner,  the  Swedish. 
Ambassador.  The  plan  was  executed  with  an  address  and 
a  zeal  deserving  of  better  success  than  it  obtained.  The  21st 
of  June,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  city  learned 
with  the  greatest  astonishment  that  the  whole  Royal  Family 
had  disappeared  ;  but  the  first  feeling  of  surprise  was 
immediately  succeeded  by  an  indifference  so  general,  and 
by  so  decided  a  resolution  to  dispense  with  the  King  and 
with  the  royal  authority  of  King,  that  the  grand  question 
of   a   republic    seemed   decided.     However,  some   persons  ^ 