


i6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

The  whole  misfortune  was  owing  to  the  aversion  of  the 
Court  to  the  Marquis  de  Lafayette, — to  the  stupid  opinion 
still  entertained  that  the  Royal  Family  was  sacred  in  the 
eyes  of  the  multitude,  who  would  not  dare  to  look  them  in 
the  face  ;  and,  above  all,  to  the  foolish  presumption  of  the 
nobility,  who  wished  to  preserve  their  exclusive  privilege  of 
defending  their  Sovereign.  M.  de  Lafayette  had  insisted  on 
guarding  the  palace  with  his  faithful  troops,  and  I  venture 
to  assert  that  he  had  brought  with  him  all  the  members  of 
the  National  Guards  who  were  most  distinguished  for  their 
honourable  feeling,  courage,  and  loyalty  ;  but  his  offers  were 
coolly  and  sarcastically  rejected.  However,  notwithstanding 
that  refusal  and  the  insults  that  accompanied  it,  the  general 
did  not  give  way  to  culpable  confidence.  He  visited  the 
posts,  and  showed  himself  everywhere,  until  midnight. 
Tranquillity  then  prevailed  on  all  sides.  The  rabble  lay 
dispersed  and  asleep.  At  two  in  the  morning  the  deepest 
silence  reigned  in  the  courts,  the  great  square,  and  the 
streets  of  the  capital  ;  nothing  seemed  to  forbode  the 
approaching  outrages.  The  palace  was  attacked  a  little 
before  daybreak.  All  eye-witnesses  have  declared  that  the 
mob  entered  by  one  of  the  communication  doors  which  had 
been  left  open  ;  the  unfortunate  Life  Guards  who  defended 
it  did  their  duty,  for  they  were  killed  at  their  posts.  But 
why  was  that  door  open,  so  near  to  the  Queen's  apartments  ? 
The  palace  being  of  a  vast  extent,  the  Life  Guards  were  not 
sufficiently  numerous  to  protect  it  effectually  ;  but  then  why 
not  close  all  the  outlets  ?  or,  rather,  why  not  augment  the 
guard  with  all  the  loyal  persons  that  could  be  found  ?  Why, 
at  the  moment  of  attack,  were  not  ten  thousand  swords 
drawn  by  that  nobility,  so  clamorous  in  their  speeches,  but 
who  never  knew  how  to  defend  the  King  they  so  bitterly 
regret  ?  Emigration  had  at  that  time  not  yet  commenced. 
There  were  in  Paris,  Versailles,  and  the  environs,  more  than 
twenty  thousand  noblemen,  devoted  by  feelings  of  honour 
and  interest  to  the  defence  of  the  throne  and  the  life  of  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  17 

monarch  ;  notwithstanding  which,  Louis  XVI.  was  forsaken 
by  them  on  that  fatal  day,  the  plans  of  which  had  been 
openly  arranged  and  proclaimed  by  those  whose  real  aim 
was  undoubtedly  the  murder  of  the  Royal  Family.  I  have 
not  yet  done  with  the  nobility  :  their  conduct  on  other 
occasions  was  more  disgraceful  than  on  this. 

The  mob  crowded  in  the  marble  court,  and  wandering  on 
the  outside  of  the  palace,  began  to  express  again  their  designs 
with  frightful  bowlings.  "  To  Paris !  to  Paris  !  "  were  the 
first  cries.  Their  prey  was  promised  them,  and  then  fresh 
cries  ordered  the  unfortunate  family  to  appear  on  the 
balcony.  The  Queen  showed  herself,  accompanied  by  her 
children  ;  she  was  forced  by  threats  to  send  them  away.  I 
mixed  in  the  crowd,  and  beheld  for  the  first  time  that 
unfortunate  Princess  :  she  was  dressed  in  white  ;  her  head 
was  bare,  and  adorned  with  beautiful  fair  locks.  Motionless, 
and  in  a  modest  and  noble  attitude,  she  appeared  to  me  like 
a  victim  on  the  block.  The  enraged  populace  were  not 
moved  at  the  sight  of  woe  in  all  its  majesty.  Imprecations 
increased,  and  the  unfortunate  Princess  could  not  even  find 
a  support  in  the  King,  for  his  presence  did  but  augment  the 
fury  of  the  multitude.  At  last  preparations  for  departure 
did  more  towards  appeasing  them  than  promises  could  have 
done,  and  by  twelve  o'clock  the  frightful  procession  set  off. 
I  hope  such  a  scene  will  never  be  witnessed  again,  I  have 
often  asked  myself  how  the  metropolis  of  a  nation  so  cele- 
brated for  urbanity  and  elegance  of  manners, —  how  the 
brilliant  city  of  Paris  could  contain  the  savage  hordes  I  that 
day  beheld,  and  who  so  long  reigned  over  it !  In  walking 
through  the  streets  of  Paris,  it  seems  to  me,  the  features 
even  of  the  lowest  and  most  miserable  class  of  people  do  not 
present  to  the  eye  anything  like  ferociousness,  or  the  meanest 
passions  in  all  their  hideous  energy.  Can  those  passions 
alter  the  features  so  as  to  deprive  them  of  all  likeness  to 
humanity  ?  or  does  the  terror  inspired  by  the  sight  of  a 
guilty  wretch    give    him  the  semblance  of  a  wild  beast  ? 