

I  must  acknowledge  that  my  disgust  for  the  idle  pratthng 
of  the  Revolution  not  a  little  contributed  to  make  me  a 
Royalist.  I  am  far  from  refusing  a  just  tribute  of  esteem 
to  the  eminent  talents  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  and 
only  mean  to  speak  of  the  assemblies  of  my  section  that 
were  held  every  day,  and  where  I  was  forced  to  assist  as  a 
national  guard.  The  citizens  of  Paris  are  unquestionably  very 
honourable  men  ;  but  it  must  have  been  impossible  for  any 
person  of  good  sense  and  some  little  instruction  not  to  feel 
disgusted  at  their  foolish  and  extravagant  speeches.  Their 
mania  for  political  assemblies  and  long  orations  were  encou- 
raged by  the  immense  number  of  gentlemen  of  the  Bar,  who 
made  themselves  quite  ridiculous  by  misusing  perpetually 
their  excessive  facility  of  elocution.     In  my  neighbourhood 


22  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

there  lived  a  lawyer  of  some  repute  called  B ,  whose 

exuberance  of  speech  was  truly  marvellous.  The  objects  of 
the  deliberations  were  necessarily  very  circumscribed  ;  but 
when  that  man  opened  his  mouth,  we  were  sure  to  be  over- 
whelmed with  a  deluge  of  quotations  and  moral  sentences, 
all  frequently  about  a  lantern  or  the  stall  of  an  apple-woman. 
His  stentorian  voice  made  the  roofs  ring  ;  and,  after  speaking 
for  two  hours,  he  was  sure  to  be  rewarded  by  thunders  of 
applause.  The  orator  then  seemed  to  think  himself  a  Mira- 
beau,  and  his  auditors  the  Constituent  Assembly  deciding 
over  the  fate  of  France.  These  people  setting  the  example, 
others,  who  at  first  listened  to  them  patiently,  wished  to 
speak  in  their  turn  ;  and  three  years  afterwards  they  cut  the 
throats  of  their  instructors,  and  of  those  whom  the  latter 
had  taught  them  to  regard  as  hostile  to  their  views. 

In  1790,  I  frequently  mounted  guard  in  the  palace.  I 
expected  to  find  in  the  countenance  of  the  King  some  marks 
of  grief  and  pride  ;  but,  I  must  own,  I  saw  nothing  but 
listlessness.  His  enormous  embonpoint — his  eyes  without 
expression — his  gait  deprived  of  all  manner  of  dignity,  dis- 
concerted a  little  my  enthusiasm  ; — but  it  rekindled  at 
sight  of  the  Queen  and  her  children.  She  was  a  woman 
and  a  mother.  Born  in  a  foreign  countr}-,  she  had  been 
entrusted  to  the  honour  of  France.  How  strong  were  her 
claims  on  our  profound  devotion  !  The  errors  of  which  she 
had  been  accused,  even  supposing  the  truth  of  the  accusa- 
tions, were  surely  deserving  of  pardon  among  a  nation 
frivolous  enough  to  be  vain  of  its  corruptness.  For  that 
unfortunate  Queen,  therefore,  and  for  her  children,  my  heart 
was  moved  by  the  most  tender  and  respectful  admiration. 
Madame  Roy  ale  was  then  about  thirteen  years  old  :  the 
dignity  of  her  countenance — the  melancholy  expression 
spread  over  her  features  at  so  tender  an  age — the  sincere 
piety  that  seemed  to  fortify  her  in  her  misfortunes,  drew 
tears  from  my  eyes.  I  followed  the  Princesses  to  the  chapel, 
and  returned  quickly  to  the  saloon  of  the  guards  to  behold 