


20  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

in  the  triumphs  of  the  university  ;  and  that  my  utmost 
exertions  in  Greek  had  not  gone  beyond  the  explanation  of 
some  fragments  of  Demosthenes.  He  smiled  at  my  candour, 
and  began  to  read  fluently  the  Greek  in  French,  requesting 
me  to  follow  him  in  the  Latin  translation.  During  the 
time,  he  placed  his  hands  between  the  two  columns,  so  that 
I  might  see  he  made  no  use  of  the  Latin.  I  could  scarcely 
follow  him.  I  had  never  met  with  so  learned  a  Greek 
scholar,  and  I  expressed  openly  my  admiration.  He  appeared 
satisfied  with  me — partly,  perhaps,  because  he  was  so  with 
himself,  and  he  promised  to  provide  for  me.  I  felt  com- 
pletely happy.  A  part  of  the  day  was  spent  among  dusty 
old  books,  but  I  passed  every  morning  a  few  hours  with  M. 
d'Ormesson.  All  I  had  to  expect  through  his  influence  was 
merely  an  inferior  employment  in  the  King's  library  ;  but 
I  looked  upon  that  as  the  highest  pitch  of  good  fortune  ; 
and  often  since,  when  in  the  most  brilliant  situations,  I  have 
sighed  in  thinking  of  the  sweet  obscurity  I  had  been  pro- 
mised. We  were  then  far  from  entertaining  an  idea  that 
the  same  scaffold  was  designed  for  both  of  us,  and,  in  con- 
science I  must  own,  for  having  both  done  our  duty.  The 
painful  gratitude  with  which  I  remember  the  kindness  of 
that  respectable  gentleman  will  last  as  long  as  I  live.  I 
never  hear  the  name  of  Ormesson  without  emotion  ;  and 
whenever  chance  brought  me  in  presence  of  some  person  of 
his  family,  I  have  felt  an  involuntary  wish  to  address  him, 
to  speak  of  his  unfortunate  relation,  and  to  solicit  his 
friendship. 

The  generous  kindness  of  M.  d'Ormesson  extended  not 
only  to  my  pecuniary  welfare  ;  he  also  gave  me  some  excel- 
lent advice  on  the  conduct  I  was  to  observe  in  the  world — 
pointed  out  to  me,  with  truly  paternal  solicitude,  the 
different  quicksands  I  might  encounter.  In  speaking  of  the 
King,  he  showed  himself  a  subject  whose  loyalty  was  carried 
to  the  highest  pitch  of  enthusiasm,  though  he  deplored  the 
fatal  weakness  that  hurled  the  Monarch  down  the  precipice 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  21 

through  torrents  of  blood.  "  The  King,"  he  said,  "  shudders 
at  the  thought  of  spiUing  one  drop  of  blood  ;  and  all  his 
most  faithful  friends  will  die  without  being  able  to  save  him. 
He  has  been  warned  of  his  mistake,  but  nothing  can  make 
him  open  his  eyes  ;  we  have  therefore  no  choice  but  resig- 
nation and  death."  All  our  conversation  was  upon  the 
same  subject  ;  and  M.  d'Ormesson  communicated  to  me  the 
ardour  of  his  own  sentiments.  Notwithstanding  the  horror 
I  felt  at  the  scenes  of  tumult  that  we  witnessed  every  day,  I 
still  comprehended  well  enough  that,  the  Revolution  being 
a  struggle  between  the  privileged  classes  and  the  nation,  the 
latter  would,  if  successful,  reap  advantages  which  it  had  a 
right  to  claim.  I  also  felt,  that  as  I  did  not  myself  belong 
to  the  privileged  classes,  I  was  at  liberty  to  remain  indif- 
ferent to  their  interests  and  their  contest.  But  M.  d'Ormes- 
son fixed  all  my  thoughts  on  the  deplorable  situation  of  the 
King  and  his  family.  My  imagination  took  fire,  and  all 
I  then  perceived  was  a  virtuous  Prince  in  durance — his 
noble  consort  and  her  children  exposed  to  the  most  bar- 
barous treatment  ;  and  I  vowed  from  that  moment  to  take 
a  share  in  all  the  plans  that  should  be  attempted  for  their 
deliverance. 