


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  31 

Palace  of  the  Tuileries  ;  induced  the  Guards  to  follow  them 
to  the  Military  School,  where  they  peaceably  laid  down  their 
arms  ;  the  next  morning  not  a  trace  of  them  was  remaining. 
By  a  chain  of  those  extraordinary  circumstances  which  belong 
to  the  history  of  our  age,  there  arose  from  the  ranks  of  these 
obscure  soldiers,  who  thus  passed  under  the  most  igno- 
minious yoke,  a  Marshal  of  France  (Bessieres),  a  man  equally 
distinguished  by  his  gallantry  and  by  his  faithful  devotion  to 
his  master,  when  acknowledged  as  King  by  all  the  Sovereigns 
of  Europe.  The  life  of  Bessieres  was  distinguished  by 
brilliant  feats  of  valour,  and  would  have  occupied  many 
bright  pages  in  history,  had  he  not  in  his  latter  days  dis- 
graced his  crown  of  glory  by  odious  ingratitude  towards 
his  benefactor. 

The  Constituent  Assembly,  fatigued  by  long  struggles, 
had  resolved,  as  much  perhaps  out  of  disinterestedness  as 
discouragement,  to  abandon  the  field  of  battle.  It  was 
succeeded  by  the  Legislative  Assembly,  who  found  itself 
surrounded  by  hatred  of  royalty  among  the  people,  hatred 
of  the  Constitution  on  the  part  of  the  King,  discouragement 
in  the  hearts  of  all  honest  men,  and  a  faction  full  of  energy 
in  favour  of  a  republic.  The  Assembly  divided  under  two 
banners.  The  most  numerous  party,  and,  what  is  more 
singular,  the  most  talented  one,  set  to  work  at  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  monarchy,  with  an  ardour  and  a  blindness  so 
inexplicable  that  the  members  of  that  party  who  still 
survive  have  never  been  able  to  assign  any  reasonable 
motives  to  justify  so  much  fury.  The  Legislative  Assembly, 
on  opening,  received  the  King  in  a  very  decorous  manner, 
and  the  Book  of  the  Constitution  with  a  ridiculous  solemnity. 
It  is  sufficient  to  point  out  to  a  people  the  road  to  ruin  and 
degradation,  and  they  will  stride  in  it  with  giant's  steps. 
In  the  present  circumstance  they  did  not  mistake  the  mark. 
They  began  by  loading  the  King  with  obloquy,  and  then 
they  ridiculed  the  Constitution  itself.  But  the  King  was  a 
defenceless  victim  held  in  reserve,  whom  they  were  sure  of 


32  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

■finding  whenev^er  they  might  be  disposed  to  sacrifice  him. 
First  of  all,  it  was  necessary  to  overthrow  the  fundamental 
laws.  The  Constitution  was  therefore  attacked  in  its  essence 
— in  the  Ministers  and  the  King  that  were  to  put  it  in 
execution  and  protect  it.  During  the  last  three  years,  a 
boundless  profusion  of  laws  had  been  enacted, — a  circum- 
stance which  deprived  them  of  solemnity,  their  most  neces- 
sary appendage.  It  was  consequently  not  very  diflScult  to 
bring  them  into  contempt.  After  them  nothing  remained 
but  the  Sovereign,  despoiled  and  insulted,  a  true  Ecce  homo^ 
who  had  borne  the  greatest  outrages,  and  had  not  resolution 
to  look  in  the  face  a  people  whose  first  and  constant  idol 
had  always  been  courage.  They  were  to  overthrow  that 
King,  and  never  was  design  wrought  with  more  open 
audacity.  The  numerous  insults,  their  regular  progress, 
their  variety  until  the  terrible  day  of  the  fall, — all  was 
calculated  with  a  coolness  and  a  depth  of  combination  of 
which  there  is  no  other  example  in  history.  If  the  hour  of 
destruction  were  protracted,  no  merit  is  due  to  the  exertions 
of  the  Court.  The  abettors  of  the  Revolution  wanted  to 
dispose  all  things  according  to  their  plan,  and  one  of  their 
chief  points  was  to  degrade  their  victim  before  they 
slaughtered  him. 