


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  23 

them  again.  I  would  willingly  have  given  my  life  for  them. 
So  much  grandeur  in  such  abasement,  so  much  innocence 
and  beauty  threatened  with  such  a  fate,  might  well  have 
ensured  to  them  the  protection  of  every  Frenchman.  Wher- 
ever I  went,  I  spoke  of  them  with  a  warmth  of  which, 
however,  I  could  not  succeed  in  making  other  young  men 
of  my  age  partake. 

I  could  not  imagine  that  there  was  not  in  the  Constituent 
Assembly  a  strong  and  active  party  to  save  the  Royal 
Family.  I  knew  that  M.  de  Clermont-Tonnerre  was  very 
much  attached  to  the  Queen.  I  wrote  several  letters  to  him 
to  express  my  grief,  and  to  beg  he  would  employ  my 
youthful  courage.  I  suppose  he  looked  upon  me  as  a 
young  enthusiast  who  might  bring  him  into  some 
trouble  : — he  never  answered  me,  and  I  believe  he  acted 
wisely. 

I  soon  observed  that  M.  d'Ormesson  became  less  unre- 
served than  usual  in  his  conversation.  I  suppose  he  was 
himself  terrified  with  the  success  of  his  plan  for  making  me 
a  Royalist  ;  for,  having  tried  in  vain  to  moderate  the  warmth 
of  my  zeal,  he  probably  feared  I  should  ruin  both  him  and 
myself  at  the  same  time.  When  I  asked  him  whether  any 
measures  had  been  taken  to  place  the  Royal  Family  in 
safety,  he  observed  that  the  time  for  that  would  come  ;  and 
then  entered  into  general  remarks,  of  which  I  could  not 
comprehend  the  drift.  One  day,  I  had  just  left  him  when 
I  learned  the  imprisonment  of  the  Marquis  de  Favras.  It 
was  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  :  the  particulars  of  the  crime 
of  which  the  Marquis  was  accused  were  not  yet  known  ;  and 
already  the  speech  delivered  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville  by  Mon- 
sieur, brother  to  the  King,  had  been  published.  The  Prince 
had  demanded  during  the  night  that  the  Council  should 
assemble  at  eight  o'clock  ;  and  there  he  betrayed  M.  de 
Favras,  his  former  servant,'  who  had  received  his  instruction 

'  M.  de  Favras  had  been  attached  to  Monsieur  as  Captain  of  the  Cent 
Suisses,  or  guards  of  the  door. — A'ote  of  the  Author. 


24  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

and  acted  by  his  orders,  with  whom  he  had  arranged  the 
flight  of  the  King,  of  the  Royal  Family  and  himself.     He 
made  many  protestations  of  his  attachment  to  the  new  order 
of  things  and  to  the  Constitution,  and  declared  himself  the 
first  citizen  of  the  kingdom.     By  that  means  he  delivered 
over  his  confidant  to  the  rigour  of  the  laws  and  to  an  infamous 
death  on  the  gallows.  The  Royalists  were  overwhelmed  with 
dismay  and  indignation.     The  most  sensible  amongst  them 
felt  convinced  that  the  royal  cause  was  irretrievably  lost,  and 
that   no  hopes  were  left  for  the  King.      Such  treachery, 
which  could  not  but  be  the  consequence  of  the  most  shameful 
cowardice,  discouraged  all  the  friends  of  the  King.     "  What 
is  to  be  done,"  said  they,  "for  a  Prince  who  suffers  those 
who  take  up  his  defence  to  be  sent  to  the  scaffold, — who, 
far  from  trying  to  protect  them,  finds  informers  against  them 
among  his  own  family  ?  "    Of  all  the  faults  committed  by  the 
Court,  this  was  the  most  unpardonable.     Excuses  may  be 
found  for  want  of  experience,  resolution,  and  strength  of 
mind  ;    but  to  deliver   up   one's   friends   out   of    fear, — to 
abandon  them  without  once  raising  a  hand  to  save  them 
from  the  scaffold,  is  unpardonable  baseness  !     M.  de  Favras 
was  sentenced  to  death.  I  was  on  duty  on  the  Quai  Pelletier 
when  the  unfortunate  man  passed  it  in  a  cart,  with  a  halter 
round  his  neck,  and  his  hands  tied  before  his  breast.     His 
confessor  seemed  as  dejected  as  though  he  himself  had  been 
doomed  to  die.    Favras,  on  the  contrary,  by  his  noble  attitude, 
his  proud  and  animated  look,  reminded  me  of  Samblangay, 
on  whose  death  Marot  made  those  celebrated  lines,  "  Lorsque 
Maillard,"  &c.     He  walked  up  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  uttered 
a  few  noble  sentences,  took  great  care  not  to  expose  the  man 
who  had  so  cruelly  betrayed  him,  and  courageously  submitted 
to  his  fate.     Some  wretches  were  base  enough  to  applaud. 
A  few  days  before  his  death,  he  expressed  a  wish  to  see  M. 
Talon,  the  Advocate-General.   To  him  he  told  in  confidence 
all  the  particulars  of  his  plan,  and  the  orders  he  received 
from  the  Count  de  Provence.     "  Have  you  these  orders  in 