

3 


i8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

These  madmen,  dancing  in  the  mire  and  covered  with  mud^ 
surrounded  the  King's  coach.  The  groups  that  marched 
foremost  carried  on  long  pikes  the  bloody  and  dishevelled 
heads  of  the  Life  Guards  butchered  in  the  morning.  Surely 
Satan  himself  first  invented  the  placing  of  a  human  head  at 
the  end  of  a  lance.  The  disfigured  and  pale  features,  the 
gory  locks,  the  half-open  mouth,  the  closed  eyes,  images  of 
death,  added  to  the  gestures  and  salutations  the  executioners 
made  them  perform,  in  horrible  mockery  of  life,  presented 
the  most  frightful  spectacle  rage  could  have  imagined.  A 
troop  of  women,  ugly  as  crime  itself,  swarming  like  insects,, 
and  wearing  grenadiers'  hairy  caps,  went  continually  to  and 
fro,  howling  barbarous  songs,  embracing  and  insulting  the 
Life  Guards.  This  scene  lasted  eight  hours  before  the 
Royal  Family  arrived  at  the  Place  de  Greve  and  alighted 
at  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  their  first  resting-place  during  pro- 
tracted misery  that  terminated  some  years  afterwards  in  a 
horrible  death. 

Thus  terminated  the  memorable  6th  of  October, — a  day 
during  which  it  is  difficult  to  decide  what  is  most  to  be 
regretted — the  imprudent  weakness  of  the  King,  or  the 
terrible  necessity  that  forced  the  representatives  of  a  noble 
nation  to  trample  on  the  sacred  rights  of  humanity,  and  the 
majesty  of  the  throne,  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  grand 
design. 


CHAPTER  III. 

The  impression  that  frightful  spectacle  made  on  me  taught 
me  that  nature  had  not  designed  me  to  play  a  part  in  the 
Revolution,  and  that  I  ought  to  keep  carefully  aloof  from.  it. 
But  the  sight  of  the  Queen  so  shamefully  insulted,  and  the 
fate  that  was  preparing  for  her  august  children,  inspired  in 
me  feelings  of  loyalty  which  grew  stronger  every  day.  I 
could  not  bear  to  think  of  the  situation  of  the  Royal  Family, 
and  the  success  of  the  patriots  had  caused  them  to  show 
a  presumptuous  exultation  which  made  me  hate  them.  At 
that  period  a  lucky  circumstance  allowed  me  to  resume  my 
studies.  The  convents  were  suppressed,  and  a  friend  of  my 
father  got  me  admitted  among  some  persons  chosen  to  make 
out  the  catalogue  of  the  monks'  library.  Some  time  after- 
wards, M.  d'Ormesson  de  Moiseau,  one  of  the  presidents 
of  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  who  had  been  appointed  King's 
librarian,  wished  to  employ  a  well-informed  and  laborious 
3'oung  man.  I  was  introduced  to  him.  He  received  me 
with  a  kindness  that  delighted  me.  He  had  been  told  that 
I  knew  a  little  Greek  ;  he  was  himself  deeply  versed  in  that 
language,  and,  to  try  my  knowledge,  he  laid  before  me  a 
Xenophon  in  two  columns,  Latin  and  Greek.  I  blushed  at 
the  sight  of  the  formidable  book.  The  hero  himself,  during 
his  celebrated  Retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand,  never  was  more 
perplexed  than  I.  However,  my  courage  revived  when  I 
looked  at  the  president,  whose  amiable  features  inspired  me 
with  confidence.  I  owned  that  I  had  made  but  superficial 
studies  in  an  obscure  college  ;  that  I  never  had  any  share 