

However,  the  Sovereigns  of  Europe  now  began  to  imagine 
that  they  ought  not  to  remain  idle  spectators  of  our  conten- 
tions. The  French  Revolution  had  not  alarmed  them,  for 
they  hoped  that  our  troubles  would  weaken  us.  The  power 
of  our  brilliant  nation  had  made  others  pay  dearly  for  our 
glory  ;  and  our  civilisation,  which  they  were  forced  to  admit 
amongst  themselves,  wounded  their  pride.  But  when  at 
last  they  saw  that  the  great  question  of  social  organisation 
assailed  their  thrones,  they  resolved  to  stop  the  torrent  that 
threatened  them.  Two  of  the  Sovereigns  had  a  conference 
together,  and  with  the  Elector  of  Saxony  at  Pilnitz,  who, 
although  too  wise  to  approve  of  their  plans,  was  still,  as  a 
monarch,  too  weak  to  reject  them.     Thus,  in  conjunction 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  33 

with  an  Emperor  of  Austria  and  a  successor  of  Frederick  the 
Great,  a  French  prince  was  planning  the  dismemberment 
of  France,  without  uttering  a  word  in  the  defence  of  his 
country.  The  news  of  this  act,  so  like  the  partition  of 
Poland,  fell  on  Paris  like  a  thunderbolt.  The  great  ques- 
tion of  war  was  discussed  in  the  Legislative  Assembly.  The 
debates  that  took  place  there  had  less  influence  on  public 
opinion  than  those  of  the  Jacobin  Club,  where  Robespierre 
began  to  rule.  This  man  voted  against  the  war.  Was  it  a 
forewarning  that  military  glory  would  one  day  be  fatal  to 
him  ?  Did  he  fear  that  the  French  would  be  beaten  ? — 
that  foreigners  would  overthrow  the  Republic  he  wanted  to 
raise  up,  and  punish  him  for  the  crimes  he  was  about  to 
commit  ?  However,  in  spite  of  his  faction,  war  was  resolved 
on.  It  was  undoubtedly  the  wisest  measure  ;  for  the  enemy 
was  resolved  to  begin,  and  France,  ill  prepared,  would  have 
lost  all  the  advantages  of  the  attack.  The  King  gave 
the  command  of  the  army  to  generals  who  had  taken  part 
in  the  Revolution,  such  as  Messieurs  Lafayette,  Luckner, 
Montesquiou,  Biron,  De  Broglie,  Custines,  Kellerman, 
Beauharnais,  &c. 

But  the  Jacobins,  who  already  possessed  a  formidable 
power,  had  by  far  outrun  the  patriots  of  1789.  Their 
cherished  government  was  the  Republic,  whilst  the  latter 
remained  true  to  the  constitutional  Monarchy.  The  first 
action  of  the  war  was  disgraceful.  Our  troops  attempted  an 
attack  on  the  enemy  at  Mons,  but  were  repulsed  in  such 
confusion  that,  if  the  uprightness  of  our  generals  had  not 
been  so  well  known,  the  affair  might  have  seemed  concerted 
either  with  the  Court  or  with  the  Jacobins.  M.  de  Dillon, 
one  of  the  commanders,  was  on  his  return  assassinated  by 
his  soldiers,  exasperated  at  the  disgrace  they  had  suffered. 
But  in  Paris  the  Jacobins  threw  all  the  blame  on  the  King, 
and  persuaded  the  people  that  it  was  impossible  for  the 
troops  to  gain  a  victory  when  commanded  by  generals 
appointed  by  him.     In  fact,  the  Monarch,  having  no  more 