


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  25 

writing  ?  "  asked  the  magistrate.  "  No." — "  In  that  case 
you  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  recommend  to  the  King's 
generosity  your  wife  and  children,  for  you  are  a  lost  man." 
I  heard  twenty  years  ago,  at  Dresden,  that  the  family  of  the 
unfortunate  Favras  lived  in  Bohemia  in  the  greatest  misery. 
My  indignity  at  the  strange  and  odious  conduct  of  the  Court 
in  this  affair  was  so  strong  that  I  made  no  secret  of  it  to 
M.  d'Ormesson.  "You  are  too  young,"  he  said,  "and  at 
too  great  a  distance  from  the  Court,  to  be  able  to  judge 
of  its  motives.  Supposing  even  M.  de  Favras  had  re- 
ceived orders,  could  the  Royal  Family  acknowledge  them  ? 
That  man's  death  is  undoubtedly  a  very  unfortunate  cir- 
cumstance, but  it  was  a  necessary  sacrifice  to  the  King's 
safety.  He  has  perished,  the  victim  of  his  loyalty.  He 
has  suffered  an  ignominious  death  ;  but  God  will  receive 
him  in  grace,  and  his  sentence  will  be  rectified  by  pos- 
terity." I  had  too  much  respect  for  M.  d'Ormesson  to 
make  any  reply  ;  but  he  must  certainly  have  perceived 
that  he  had  not  convinced  me. 

Twenty-eight  years  have  now  elapsed  since  the  death  of 
M.  de  Favras.  I  have  read  more  than  twenty  times  over 
all  the  particulars  of  his  trial.  Neither  age,  knowledge  of 
mankind,  experience,  nor  the  various  events  I  have  witnessed, 
have  had  power  to  weaken  or  modify  the  first  impression  I 
received.  I  am  still  convinced  that  those  who  sacrificed 
him  were  guilty  of  a  total  want  of  honesty  and  good  policy, 
and  acted  with  the  utmost  baseness.  By  his  conduct  in  this 
affair  the  King  was  irretrievably  lost  ;  and  a  part  of  his 
family  inspired  sentiments  of  hatred  and  contempt  that  still 
subsist  to  this  day.  Those  sentiments  were  not  felt  alone 
by  those  who  were  by  birth  and  rank  connected  with 
royalty  ;  they  were  shared  by  every  honest  citizen.  Many 
years  afterwards  I  discovered  in  all  classes  the  same  energetic 
indignation  ;  and  when  Louis  XVni.  re-entered  the  metro- 
polis, all  those  who  were  not  led  away  by  the  enthusiasm  of 
novelty,  and  the  number  was  great,  had  at  the  bottom  of 


26  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

their  heart  and  on  their  lips  the  name  of  the  unfortunate 
Favras.^ 

This  enterprise,  which  so  fatally  terminated,  augmented 
the  distrust  of  the  people,  and  was  of  wonderful  service  to 
the  revolutionary  party.  Those  who  still  believed  that  the 
King  really  intended  to  give  the  people  their  promised 
advantages  were  undeceived,  and  his  enemies  turned  it  to 
account  to  envenom  their  accusations.  Libels  were  spread 
about  with  so  much  profusion  and  such  rapidity,  that  it  became 
impossible  for  the  Court  to  offer  any  defence.  It  was  about 
that  time  that  the  rage  of  emigration  began.  It  appeared 
an  easier  task  to  go  to  Coblentz  to  threaten  than  to  remain 
in  Paris  to  assist  the  King,  or  to  commence  in  the  provinces 
a  civil  war,  the  chances  of  which  would  at  that  time  have 
been  doubtful,  especially  when  waged  by  men  who  were 
unable  to  cast  off  their  luxurious  habits,  and  who,  unknown 
to  themselves,  carried  in  their  breasts  some  of  the  seeds  of 
the  revolution,  that  is  to  say,  want  of  discipline  and  sub- 
ordination, discontent  and  a  taste  for  innovation.  The 
Royal  Family  remained,  therefore,  surrounded  by  a  few 
hundred  noblemen,  whom  duty,  or  the  most  noble  and 
courageous  fidelity,  still  retained  in  France  ;  but  this  fidelity 
was  accompanied  with  so  much  hatred  of  the  patriots,  and 
so  much  foolish  presumption,  that  it  proved  more  dangerous 
than  useful  to  their  master.  They  were  jealous  of  the 
National  Guards  who  did  duty  in  the  palace  ;  their  ever- 
lasting derision  and  threats  disgusted  all  the  citizens  honestly 
attached  to  the  King.  As  soldiers,  the  National  Guard  un- 
doubtedly were  not  undeserving  of  some  little  ridicule  ;  but 
ought  they  to  have  been  thus  irritated  whilst  they  were  giving 
such  disinterested  proofs  of  fidelity,  and  when  they  might 
have  been  so  extremely  useful  ?     The  commander-in-chief 