

28 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  29 

ashamed  of  having  been  deceived,  wished  to  stop  the 
fugitives  :  the  particulars  of  the  King's  arrest  at  Varennes 
are  well  known.  The  postmaster  Drouet,  with  whom  I 
became  acquainted  a  long  time  afterwards,  told  me  that  the 
King  might  have  passed  without  hindrance,  if  he  had  not 
mounted  on  horseback  the  moment  he  was  stopped.  Drouet 
was  then  too  agitated  to  have  acted  in  such  a  case  with 
decision.  Besides,  the  escort  was  more  than  sufficient  to 
overawe  the  few  persons  whom  curiosity  had  drawn 
round  the  carriage  ;  and  even  when  the  tocsin  had  col- 
lected a  greater  number,  a  few  firm  words  from  the 
King  would  have  dispersed  them  or  checked  them  ;  but 
the  King  would  not,  or  rather  dared  not  speak.  How 
severely  would  history  have  judged  this  prince,  had  he 
been  less  unfortunate  ! 

His  return  to  Paris  was  at  the  same  time  a  most  dismal 
and  most  imposing  scene.  An  immense  population  crowded 
around  him  as  he  passed  ;  a  hundred  thousand  armed  men 
lined  the  road  and  the  Champs  Elysees,  to  the  Tuileries  ;  a 
feeling  of  delicacy,  as  well  as  pride,  dictated  to  this  multi- 
tude the  deepest  silence.  A  man  deprived  of  the  faculty  of 
hearing  might  have  fancied  he  saw  the  triumphant  entrance 
of  a  conqueror,  whilst,  in  truth,  the  solemn  scene  was  only 
an  escort  of  prisoners.  This  was  the  second  time  they 
passed  in  agony  the  square  embellished  with  the  statue  of 
Louis  XV.  ;  they  were  destined  to  visit  it  once  more,  and 
there  to  suffer  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner.  The  sight 
of  that  family  was  heartrending.  Their  incomprehensible 
fate  excited  horror  in  some,  whilst  the  timid  recoiled  from 
them  as  from  beings  bearing  a  mark  of  inevitable  doom, 
and  whose  approach  brought  with  it  the  contagion  of  mis- 
fortune. 

The  National  Assembly  adopted  the  only  reasonable 
course  left  to  that  body,  namely,  to  suspend  the  royal 
functions.  Louis,  on  the  contrary,  chose  the  worst  possible 
course — that  of  wishing  to  remain  a  king,  after  his  flight 


30  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

had  proved  his  resolution  not  to  execute  sincerely  the  new 
laws,  and  his  antipathy  for  all  that  had  taken  place  since 
the  Revolution.  His  forced  return,  and  all  the  circum- 
stances with  which  it  was  accompanied,  had  degraded  the 
majesty  of  the  throne,  and  dissipated  those  illusions  with- 
out which  royalty  cannot  exist  in  France.  A  short  time 
afterwards,  the  Constitution  was  completed  and  presented 
to  him  for  his  acceptance.  He  signed  it,  and  here  begins 
that  long  series  of  acts  with  which  he  was  reproached  in  his 
trial.  All  things  are  difficult  to  a  weak  mind.  A  thousand 
dangers  presented  themselves  to  the  King's  imagination,  and 
it  must  be  owned  that  he  was  still  more  unfortunate  in  the 
people  that  surrounded  him  than  in  his  own  disposition. 
A  crowd  of  ambitious  men  besieged  the  gate  of  his  palace. 
The  King,  who  himself  had  no  faith  in  the  Constitution, 
chose  ministers  who  wished  to  make  it  serve  their  private 
ends,  and  who  sometimes  indeed  struggled  with  the  public 
folly,  but  who  frequently  caressed  it.  At  first  the  King  was 
suffered  to  try  quietly  enough  the  scanty  prerogatives  of  a 
constitutional  royalty.  He  was  allowed  to  form  a  guard  for 
the  protection  of  his  person,  but  he  entrusted  the  command 
of  it  to  friends  of  his  own,  who  were  enemies  of  the  Revolu- 
tion. The  law  completed  this  guard  with  non-commissioned 
officers  and  privates  influenced  by  the  revolutionary  spirit,, 
and  a  few  sons  of  citizens  were  admitted  into  it  as  a  proof  of 
the  King's  sincerity.  The  division  between  these  different 
elements  surpassed  the  most  sanguine  hopes  of  the  Re- 
publicans, besides  which  the  King  took  no  pains  to  attach 
his  new  guards  to  his  person  :  attentions,  kind  words,  and 
all  that  amiability  of  manner  by  which  men  are  won,  had 
been  since  Henry  IV.  unknown  to  his  posterity  ;  a  con- 
temptuous etiquette  scorned  the  use  of  such  means,  and. 
regarded  them  as  vulgar  intrigue.  The  consequence  was 
that  the  Assembly,  under  I  know  not  what  pretence,  dis- 
banded this  troop,  which  already  amounted  to  fifteen 
hundred  men.     Two  obscure  municipal  officers  came  to  the 