

Two  hours  sufficed  to  exterminate  twelve  hundred  warlike 
and  well-disciplined  soldiers  commanded  by  brave  and 
devoted  officers.  Three  or  four  hundred  noblemen  stationed 
in  the  apartments  that  join  the  Pavilion  de  Flore,  and  who 
were  undoubtedly  designed  to  attack  the  enemy's  left  flank, 
had  the  good  luck  to  escape  through  the  gallery  of  the 
Louvre.  They  had  been  hoping  for  a  triumph  in  the  result 
of  the  battle. 

A  battle  it  really  was,  and  ability  as  well  as  courage 
ensured  the  success  of  the  revolution  party.  The  manner  in 
which  the  royal  troops  were  disposed,  was,  as  I  mentioned 
above,  quite  contrary  to  common  sense.  The  throne  and  the 
existence  of  the  Royal  Family  were  at  stake,  and  they  were 
trusted  to  an  old  Courlander  in  the  service  of  France,  and  to 
Swiss  soldiers.  In  such  a  populous  metropolis,  where  so 
many  brave  men  might  have  come  to  assist  the  Monarch,  he 
was  left  with  only  four  hundred  defenders.  The  King  might 
at  least  have  stimulated  his  troops  by  his  presence  and  his 
courage  ;  instead  of  which,  he  left  them  in  the  decisive 
moment  to  seek  refuge  among  his  most  inveterate  enemies. 
On  the  part  of  the  conspirators  the  plan  for  the  attack  had 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  49 

been  well  combined  ;  the  vanguard  was  composed  of  Mar- 
sellais  and  enthusiasts,  who  feared  no  danger  and  looked  upon 
death  as  a  glorious  martyrdom.  The  army  was  protected 
by  fifty  cannons,  well  served,  and  had  determined  chiefs. 
Among  these  were  principally  distinguished  an  Alsatian 
named  Westermann,  who  acquired  a  great  name  in  the  war 
of  the  Vendee  afterwards,  and  Ragowski,  a  Polish  refugee,  a 
well-informed  man,  and  tutor  to  the  son  of  one  of  the  first 
noblemen  in  France.  Forced  to  leave  his  country,  after 
having  fought  for  his  liberty,  he  had  carried  to  his  new 
home  all  the  hatred  he  entertained  for  the  treachery  of  his 
Sovereign.  Louis  XVI.  appeared  to  him  as  guilty  as  Ponia- 
towski,  and  he  seemed  on  the  loth  of  August  inspired  with 
a  wish  to  avenge  the  indifference  which  the  cabinet  of  Ver- 
sailles had  shown  to  Poland  at  the  time  of  her  first  mis- 
fortunes. He  was  killed  at  the  head  of  the  column  he 
commanded. 

Cannon-balls  fell  on  all  sides  in  the  garden  of  the  Tuileries. 
I  sought  refuge  in  the  Legislative  Body.  What  a  scene  did 
I  witness  there  !  The  King  and  his  family  were  crowded 
into  a  reporter's  box  near  the  President.  The  King  remained 
motionless,  and  affected  the  air  of  an  indifferent  spectator  ; 
the  Queen  softly  pressed  her  children  to  her  bosom,  and 
seemed  from  time  to  time  to  wipe  away  her  tears  with  her 
handkerchief.  In  the  hall  some  persons  showed  marks  of 
fear,  while  others  took  pains  to  disguise  their  fury  and  their 
satisfaction  ;  all  betrayed  an  agitation,  an  anxiety  that  did 
not  allow  them  to  remain  in  their  places.  The  debates  con- 
tinued, however,  with  an  appearance  of  order,  on  subjects 
foreign  to  the  terrible  tragedy  that  was  acting.  Victory  was 
at  last  announced  by  the  conquerors  themselves  bearing  into 
the  hall  the  spoil  of  the  palace,  and  proclaiming  the  massacre 
of  the  vanquished  amidst  furious  cries  of  "  The  Nation  for 
ever  !  Death  to  all  traitors  !  "  The  King  had  been  obliged, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  contest,  to  sign  an  order  forbidding 
the  advance  of  the  Swiss  battalion  at  Courbevoye  ;  and  it  is 