

4 


34  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

power,  was  unable  to  transmit  energy  and  discipline  to  the 
army.  The  generals  themselves,  placed  in  a  most  false 
position,  and  foreseeing  political  changes,  no  longer  knew 
for  whom  they  fought.  The  soil  of  France  was  undoubtedly 
to  be  protected  ;  but  it  was  necessary  to  know  in  favour  of 
what  government.  All  the  generals  were  noblemen  ;  they 
had  wished  for  freedom,  but  with  a  Monarchy  ;  and  the 
principles  of  the  Jacobins  could  not  be  very  pleasing  to 
them.  The  latter  resolved  to  put  an  end  to  all  uncertainty, 
by  hastening  the  fall  of  the  throne  and  the  establishment  of 
a  republic. 

I  have  already  described  how  the  National  Guards,  who 
were  the  King's  real  defenders,  had  been  discouraged  by  the 
Court  ;  the}'  were  afterwards  intimidated  by  the  faction  of 
the  Jacobins.  The  destruction  of  the  throne,  and  the 
establishment  of  a  republic,  determined  and  proclaimed  by 
furious  men,  whom  torrents  of  blood  were  incapable  of  with- 
holding, spread  dismay  among  the  respectable  citizens  of  the 
metropolis.  Had  they  been  gifted  with  but  a  small  portion 
of  energy,  had  unity  reigned  among  them,  and  had  they 
themselves  known  how  numerous  they  were,  the  throne 
would  have  been  preserved.  But  could  obscure  citizens  be 
required  to  show  that  foresight  in  which  men  of  the  highest 
rank  had  been  wanting  ?  Could  they  be  expected  to  die  for 
a  Sovereign  who  did  not  choose  to  defend  himself?  They 
in  consequence  kept  aloof,  and  the  disaffected,  delivered  of 
that  obstacle,  had  only  the  regiment  of  Swiss  Guards  to 
conquer.  The  King  had  preferred  being  protected  by  them, 
because  he  thought  it  easier  to  pay  foreign  troops  than  to 
gain  the  good- will  of  the  French.  The  Jacobins  found  but 
little  difficulty  in  exciting  the  people  against  the  Swiss  ;  and, 
thanks  to  their  speeches  and  writings,  the  fury  of  the  citizens 
equalled  that  of  Spanish  bulls  at  the  sight  of  a  red  flag. 
"  Why,"  said  they,  "  do  Swiss  peasants  act  as  guards  to  the 
King  of  the  French  ?  Why  do  those  men,  so  foreign  to  our 
customs,  our  manners,  and  our  language,  place  themselves 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  35 

between  the  people  and  their  constitutional  King  ?  Are 
there  no  more  French  soldiers  ?  The  National  Guards  have 
lost  the  confidence  of  the  Court,  who  seek  the  protection 
of  foreigners,  and  a  time  will  come  when  foreigners  will 
triumph  over  them.  The  Royal  Family,  the  generals,  the 
foreign  powers,  are  bound  by  a  secret  compact,  the  execu- 
tion of  which  grows  every  day  more  visible.  There  is 
treason  everywhere,  and,  if  adequate  measures  are  not 
soon  taken,  all  France,  but  particularly  Paris,  will  be 
delivered  up  to  fire  and  sword.  Not  a  moment  must  be 
lost." 