

42 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  43 

would  be  insufficient  to  repulse  the  aggressors,  who  were  the 
whole  populace  of  Paris  ;  that  the  Swiss  Guards  were  objects 
of  horror,  and  would  be  overpowered  by  the  irritated  people  ; 
that  it  would  therefore  be  wiser  to  make  use  of  the  protec- 
tion of  these  troops,  for  the  purpose  of  leaving  Paris,  and 
retiring  towards  Normandy,  where  a  numerous  body  of 
cavalry  might  join  the  Court.  I  insisted  chiefly  on  the 
necessity  of  leaving  the  Tuileries  in  the  night.  The  Swiss 
being  masters  of  the  post  at  the  turning  bridge  that  com- 
municated with  the  Place  Louis  XV.,  the  first  hours  of  the 
retreat  would  pass  off  tranquilly.  But  it  was  impossible  to 
make  Verdiere  listen  to  reason.  He  continually  referred  to 
the  marks  of  courage  and  loyalty  exhibited  in  petitions 
signed  by  two  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  citizens,  who 
every  day,  and  on  every  occasion,  openly  declared  their  love 
for  their  King  and  their  implacable  hatred  of  the  rebels. 
"These  are  only  signs  manual,"  I  said  ;  "the  citizens  will 
fly  on  the  firing  of  the  first  cannon.  You  do  not  know  what 
it  is  to  hear  women  lament  and  children  cry.  The  good 
people  will  retire  to  their  beds  and  weep."  I  was  unable  to 
convince  him,  and  he  was  a  faithful  echo  of  all  those  who 
surrounded  the  Royal  Family.  However,  this  noble  old  man 
behaved  very  gallantly ;  he  escaped  by  a  miracle  the 
massacre  at  the  palace,  went  to  Coblentz,  and  having  re- 
turned to  Paris  a  short  time  afterwards,  he  perished  on  the 
scafi"old. 

The  loth  of  August  was  at  last  decidedly  fixed  upon  by 
the  conspirators.  The  battalion  of  St.  Antoine,  in  which  I 
served,  was  not  decided  to  take  any  share  in  the  day,  although 
it  was  commanded  by  a  staunch  Royalist  ;  but  my  company 
of  chasseurs  was  under  the  orders  of  a  young  architect  named 
Bleve,  a  man  of  determined  spirit,  and  one  in  whom  we 
placed  entire  confidence.  He  sent  us  word  at  two  o'clock  in 
the  morning.  The  greatest  part  of  the  company  joined  him, 
and  at  four  we  set  off  for  the  Tuileries.  A  dismal  sight  pre- 
sented itself  to  us  in  the  way.    Numerous  groups  of  common 


44  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

people,  armed  with  sabres,  pikes,  and  pistols,  crossed  the  Rue 
St.  Antoine,  going  towards  the  suburb,  and  casting  threaten- 
ing looks,  as  if  they  were  surprised  to  see  us  march  another 
way.  Some  of  them  abused  us,  others  called  their  neigh- 
bours. The  women  were  at  the  windows,  or  in  the  streets^ 
embracing  with  tears  their  husbands  and  sons.  The  gloomy 
energy  of  these  men  was  depicted  in  their  countenances  and 
motions.  As  we  advanced,  the  deepest  silence  reigned  on 
the  quays  ;  daylight  seemed  to  recoil  before  the  sacrilegious 
spectacle  of  a  city  abandoned  to  all  the  horrors  of  civil  war 
and  crime. 