

We  arrived  in  the  court  of  the  Tuileries  a  little  before  five 
o'clock.  At  that  time  the  palace  had  not  the  imposing  aspect 
which  now  renders  it  one  of  the  most  noble  royal  residences. 
The  large  court,  separated  in  all  its  length  from  the  square 
by  an  iron  railing,  was  divided  in  three  parts,  each  encum- 
bered by  houses  and  walls.  Instead  of  the  railing  there  were 
old  decayed  buildings,  occupied  by  tradespeople,  and  the 
grand  entrance  closed  with  a  folding  door.  A  short  while 
after  we  had  arrived  in  the  middle  court,  a  company  of 
artillery  of  the  sections  of  the  Blancs  Monteaux  entered  with 
two  field-pieces,  crying  Vive  le  Roi  !  The  battalions  of  the 
Petits  Peres  and  the  Filles  St.  Thomas  had  preceded  us,  and 
were  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  in  the  court.  We  soon  joined 
together,  interchanging  the  most  touching  tokens  of  friend- 
ship for  one  another,  attachment  to  the  King,  and  hatred  of 
the  rebels. 

At  five  o'clock  we  learned  that  the  King  was  going  to 
review  us.  He  soon  appeared,  accompanied  by  a  few  oflBcers 
of  his  household  and  about  twenty  persons  in  plain  dresses, 
armed  with  pistols  and  muskets.  His  cold  tranquillity  and 
apathy  under  such  terrible  circumstances  produced  a  painful 
impression.  He  addressed  to  us,  as  he  was  passing  by,  a  few 
words  we  did  not  hear,  and  returned  to  the  palace.  This 
scene  made  a  dismal  impression  upon  us,  but  it  was  quickly 
dissipated  when  the  grenadiers  of  the  battalion  of  the  Filles 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  45 

St.  Thomas  proposed  to  us  to  sign  a  proclamation  in  favour 
of  the  King,  written  by  one  of  their  officers.  We  went  into 
a  room  on  the  ground-floor,  which  has  since  served  as  ante- 
chamber for  the  home  department  of  the  Council  of  State. 
The  gallant  author  of  the  proclamation  had  been  wounded  a 
few  days  before  by  the  Marseillais  in  the  Champs  Elysees, 
and  had  been  carried  to  the  Tuileries  in  a  handbarrow.  We 
had  the  pleasure  of  embracing  him.  I  suspect  he  must  have 
perished  a  few  hours  afterwards,  and  I  am  sorry  I  do  not 
recollect  his  nam.e. 

The  emissaries  we  sent  to  the  Faubourg  St.  Antoine  came 
every  now  and  then  to  tell  us  that  the  enemy  was  setting 
out  and  would  soon  arrive.  We  were  fully  determined  to 
repulse  him.  Nevertheless  our  unbounded  devotedness  to 
the  royal  cause  could  alone  make  us  blind  to  the  smallness 
of  our  numbers  and  our  desperate  situation.  I  can  affirm 
that  there  were  no  more  than  three  hundred  men  in  the 
chief  court,  and  none  at  all  either  in  the  Pavilion  de  Flore 
or  in  the  Pavilion  Marsan.  The  Swiss  occupied  all  the 
apartments  of  the  palace,  and,  to  crown  the  whole,  the  gene- 
ral in  chief  of  our  well-disposed  army  was  AI.  de  Wittinghoff, 
an  old  man  above  sixty,  who  spoke  barbarous  French,  knew 
nothing  either  of  France  or  Paris,  was  rather  lame,  and  cer- 
tainly had  not  the  least  idea  of  the  enemies  he  had  to  oppose 
or  the  position  he  had  to  defend.  In  fact,  if  the  Jacobins 
themselves  had  arranged  the  order  of  our  defence,  and  chosen 
our  general,  they  could  not  have  done  better  for  their  own 
interest. 