

Sedition  of  this  sort  was  circulated  in  a  thousand  pam- 
phlets, and  repeated  in  all  the  assemblies  of  the  mob  with  that 
vulgar  energ}-  so  powerful  over  them.  It  afforded  increased 
excitement  to  minds  in  which  all  ideas  of  order  or  submis- 
sion were  long  since  obliterated.  The  Jacobins  began  their 
operations  ;  but  they  wished  to  begin  by  a  trial,  in  the  hope 
of  gaining  amidst  the  fury  of  a  new  riot  what  might  perhaps 
not  succeed  in  a  regular  attack.  On  the  20th  of  June,  the 
whole  faubourgs  set  themselves  in  motion,  and  came  down 
to  the  Palace  of  the  Tuileries,  under  the  pretence  of  claiming 
from  the  King  his  assent  to  several  decrees  he  had  rejected. 
General  Lafayette  was  no  longer  in  Paris ;  the  heads  of  the 
divisions  commanded  by  turns  the  National  Guards  ;  but 
none  of  them  had  any  influence.  The  orders  that  were 
given  to  the  citizens  to  assemble  at  the  palace  were  not 
executed,  and  the  Royal  Family  had  only  to  depend  on  its 
own  influence  and  that  of  the  courtiers  who  did  not  show 
themselves.  The  rebels  entered  the  palace,  broke  open  the 
doors,  and  advanced  to  the  apartments  of  the  King,  who 
came  to  meet  them  with  noble  spirit.  The  sight  of  the 
Monarch,  and  the  calmness  of  his  manner,  disconcerted 
those  who  marched  foremost,  and  who  were  probably  the 
most  desperate  of  the  gang.  That  first  moment  saved  the 
King  and  his  family.  The  shouts  and  imprecations  of  the 
mob  that  followed  were  without  effect.     The  opportunity 


36  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

was  lost  for  slaughter,  and  the  rebels  attempted  in  vain  to 
regain  their  advantage.  A  sort  of  strange  dialogue  took 
place  between  the  King  and  the  leaders  of  the  mob.  The 
vanity  of  the  latter  was  flattered,  but  the  Monarch  could 
not  avoid  the  humiliation  of  putting  on  the  red  cap.  The 
roof  rang  with  horrible  cries  and  frightful  abuse.  The 
Queen,  in  particular,  was  the  object  of  most  terrible  threats, 
and  she  was  present  all  the  while.  This  time  the  King's 
condescension  was  not  an  act  of  weakness.  His  fate  must 
be  deplored,  and  the  barbarous  insult  of  the  red  cap  must 
be  considered  in  the  same  light  as  the  crown  of  thorns 
placed  on  the  head  of  the  Christian  lawgiver.^  That 
despicable  triumph  satisfied  the  Jacobins.  They  let  the 
mob  depart,  firmly  resolved,  however,  to  take  more  decided 
measures. 

The  20th  of  June  was  a  signal  victory  for  the  rebels  ;  but 
did  it  cause  the  Court  and  the  Royalists,  who  prided  them- 
selves in  being  so  courageous  and  powerful,  to  open  their 
eyes  ?  If  the  King  still  entertained  hopes,  they  could  only 
be  founded  on  the  enemies  of  France.  A  pitiful  resource  ! 
Ought  he  not  to  have  felt  that  their  triumph  would  be  a 
sentence  of  death  for  him  ?  When  a  great  body  of  men, 
led  by  bold  and  able  chiefs,  have  once  placed  outrage  between 
themselves  and  reconciliation,  their  success  can  only  be 
ensured  by  crimes.  One  step  alone,  and  the  noblest,  re- 
mained to  be  taken  by  the  King  ; — that  was,  abdication  :  he 
should  have  laid  down  all  the  ensigns  of  royalty,  have  left 
the  Tuileries  in  broad  daylight,  on  foot,  surrounded  by  his 
family,  and,  having  disbanded  his  guards,  put  his  life  in  the 
hands  of  the  magistrates.  That  would  have  been  a  bold 
act  ;  but  the  King  had  no  comprehension  of  such  a 
step. 