

The  inhabitants  of  Paris  were  at  that  time  infatuated  with 
a  deputy  of  the  Legislative  Assembly,  called  Petion.  He 
was  a  member  for  one  of  the  departments  of  the  late  province 
of  Picardy.  I  have  in  vain  consulted  my  memory  to  dis- 
cover in  what  manner  he  became  mayor  of  Paris.  The 
publications  of  the  time  have  recorded  of  him  not  one 
action,  not  one  speech,  capable  of  explaining  his  celebrity. 
It  is,  however,  probable  that  his  party  found  him  possessed 
of  some  talent,  or  they  would  not  have  conferred  on  him 
the  highest  magistracy  of  the  metropolis,  at  a  period  when 
that  office  gave  so  much  influence  over  the  Assembly  to  the 
man  who  enjoyed  it.  Petion  was  in  the  meridian  of  life  ; 
he  was  a  man  of  tall  stature  and  dignified  appearance  ;  his 
manners  were  polite,  and  his  character  bold,  which  latter 
quality  was,  I  suppose,  the  circumstance  that  determined 
the  choice  of  his  party.  Perhaps,  however,  that  boldness 
was  nothing  more  than  ambition  in  a  shallow  mind  ;  for 
nothing  resembles  courage  more  than  ignorance  of  danger. 
Petion  was  then  the  idol  of  the  people.  He  succeeded  M. 
Bailly,  who,   a  little  while  beforehand,   had  exercised  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  39 

■greatest  rigour  of  the  law  against  the  rebels  who  assembled 
in  the  Champ  de  Mars  to  proclaim  the  Republic.  On  their 
refusal  to  disperse,  he  hoisted  the  red  flag  as  a  signal  that 
martial  law  was  to  be  executed,  and  gave  orders  to  fire  upon 
them.  A  mayor  who,  on  the  contrary,  caressed  the  caprice 
of  the  mob,  and  who  had  devoted  himself  entirely  to  the 
Republicans,  could  not  fail  to  excite  considerable  enthusiasm. 
On  the  14th  of  July,  Petion  appeared  at  the  head  of  all  the 
most  vulgar  and  turbulent  part  of  the  populace  of  Paris. 
Above  one  hundred  thousand  men  wore  on  their  hats,  in 
large  characters^  the  inscription  :  Petion  or  death.  This 
was  the  watchword  of  the  day,  and  appeared  like  a  funda- 
mental maxim  of  the  horrible  anarchy  that  was  about  to 
exercise  its  fury. 

The  King  was  dragged  to  the  ceremony  with  his  family. 
There  he  heard  once  more,  and  not  for  the  last  time, 
expressions  of  hatred  and  rage.  He  took  his  station  in  the 
same  palace,  and  at  the  same  window,  where  two  years 
before  the  better  portion  of  the  nation  had  assembled  in  his 
presence,  to  render  him  the  homage  of  veneration  and 
gratitude,  which  was  then  sincere.  Undoubtedly  at  that 
time  the  illusion  which  a  faithful  people  had  impressed 
on  the  King's  mind  was  removed,  and  this  new  and  gloomy 
representation  must  have  appeared  to  him  as  the  conse- 
quence of  the  first,  but  how  different  in  the  eyes  of  those 
who  observed  with  attention  the  succession  of  events !  In 
1790,  a  great  people,  inflamed  by  liberty,  powerful  by  the 
consciousness  of  their  strength  and  their  rights,  demanded 
sincerely  a  monarchy  founded  on  law  :  the  most  affectionate 
concord  seemed  to  reign  between  the  people  and  the  Sove- 
reign. The  storms  of  July  and  October,  1789,  the  agitations 
which  had  taken  place  in  some  of  the  provinces,  had  grieved 
all  honest  men,  who  detested  them  from  the  bottom  of  their 
hearts:  love  for  the  Monarch,  and  an  abhorrence  of  anarchy, 
seemed  a  sacred  pledge  that  France  would  be  no  more 
troubled  by  it.     In  the  month  of  July,  1792,  on  the  con- 