

begged  me  to  accompany  him  to  the  garden,  where  his  com- 
pany was  stationed.  My  regimentals  were  a  sort  of  protec- 
tion. We  went  down  together  to  the  first  landing-place, 
facing  the  door  that  leads  to  the  old  chamber  of  the  Council 
of  State.  There  we  found  the  great  staircase  barred  by  a  beam, 
and  defended  by  several  Swiss  officers,  who  were  politely 
disputing  the  way  with  about  fifty  men,  whose  dress  made 
them  look  like  robbers  in  a  melodrama.  They  were  intoxi- 
cated, and  their  coarse  accent  betrayed  their  origin  :  they 
came  from  Marseilles.  The  officer  repeatedly  told  them  that 
the  Royal  Family  were  gone  to  the  Assembly,  that  there  was 
nobody  in  the  palace,  and  that  the  Swiss  had  received  a 
positive  order  to  defend  its  entrance.  But  reason  was  of  no 
avail  with  them.  "  We  will  enter  !  we  will  examine  all  the 
apartments  !  "  was  their  only  answer,  mingled  with  cries  of 
"  Vive  la  Nation  !  "  The  soldiers,  by  command  of  the 
officers,  returned  in  bad  French  the  same  cries,  and  raised 
their  hats  on  their  bayonets.  At  last  the  conspirators  suc- 
ceeded. The  barrier  gave  way  to  their  efforts ;  they  forced 
their  passage,  and  we  seized  the  opportunity  to  go  down. 
We  were  still  in  the  vestibule,  when  a  well-directed  fire  began 
from  the  apartments  and  almost  at  the  same  moment  the 
cannon  were  heard.  I  am  convinced  that  the  Swiss  fired 
first  ;  my  memory  has  never  for  a  moment  deceived  me  in 
respect  to  that  circumstance.  It  is,  however,  useless  to  dis- 
cuss the  point  ;  for  it  is  certain  that  the  conspirators  came 
with  a  view  to  attack  the  King  :  if  the  Swiss  began  to  fire, 
it  must  have  been  because  the  Court  had  hopes  of  gaining 
the  victory.  But  in  that  case  the  Swiss  ought  to  have  gone 
down,  or  rather  to  have  marched  against  the  enemy,  and 
have  attacked  him  in  the  streets  before  he  had  time  to  draw 
up  in  the  square.  It  seems  that  the  plan  was  to  attack  the 
enemy's  flank,  as  some  Swiss,  posted  in  the  court  of  Marsan, 
made  a  sortie,  and  even  took  two  field-pieces  ;  but  they  were 
repulsed.  The  first  discharges  from  the  palace  had  killed  or 
wounded  a  great  many,  and  the  principal  court  had  been 


48  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

quickly  evacuated  :  but  the  cannonade  brought  disorder  and 
consternation  into  the  ranks  of  the  Swiss.  They  abandoned 
the  windows  ;  the  enemy  advanced  with  renewed  courage, 
crossed  the  court,  and  rushed  into  the  apartments.  The 
unfortunate  Swiss  were  unable  to  defend  themselves  any 
longer.  The  most  horrible  massacre  began,  and  terminated 
only  when  the  last  of  them  fell.  They  were  pursued  from 
chamber  to  chamber  ;  the  most  obscure  corner,  the  most 
solitary  cabinets,  even  the  chimneys  into  which  some  had 
crept,  could  not  save  them.  They  were  thrown  out  of  the 
windows,  and  their  bodies  were  stripped  and  exposed  to  the 
barbarous  derision  of  women  of  the  lowest  class,  as  those 
of  the  murdered  Protestants  after  St.  Bartholomew  were 
subjected  to  the  indecent  railleries  of  the  ladies  of  the 
Court. 