

On  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  the  King  resolved  to  seek 
refuge  in  the  Legislative  Assembly.  A  grenadier  of  the 
National  Guards  informed  us  that  he  had  carried  the  Prince 
Royal  in  his  arms  on  the  terrace  of  the  Feuillants,  and 
described  all  the  insults  the  Royal  Family  had  endured  from 
the  populace,  who  already  filled  that  part  of  the  garden.  A 
little  while  afterwards,  M.  Roederer,  syndic  or  president  of 
the  directory  of  the  department  of  the  Seine,  came  to  us, 


46  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

and  desired  us,  in  the  name  of  the  law,  not  to  attack,  but  to 
repel  force  by  force.  This  was,  no  doubt,  very  prudent  on 
his  part ;  but  what  were  we  to  defend  ?  Was  it  the  palace 
and  its  furniture  ?  or  did  not  the  King,  by  leaving  his  resi- 
dence and  going  to  the  Assembly,  seem  to  declare  that  he 
surrendered  himself  up  to  that  Assembly  which  was  now  the 
sovereign  authority,  and  whence  we  were  to  receive  our 
orders  ?  The  King's  retreat,  and  the  speech  of  M.  Roederer, 
spread  discouragement  and  confusion  among  the  National 
Guards  ;  the  cannoneers  of  the  battalion  of  Blancs  Monteaux 
threw  down  their  matches,  stamped  upon  them,  and  said 
there  was  nothing  more  to  be  done,  there  being  no  king  to 
defend. 

During  this  scene,  I  was  on  duty  at  the  gate  of  the  court, 
facing  a  Swiss,  an  absolute  machine,  with  whom  it  was  im- 
possible to  exchange  a  word.  But  an  aide-de-camp  of  General 
Wittinghoff  passing  near  me,  I  asked  him  what  his  general 
intended  doing.  He  shrugged  up  his  shoulders  and  said,  "  I 
do  not  think  he  knows  himself  ;  but  I  believe  we  are  in  an 
awkward  situation.  We  have  to  fight  the  Marseillais  ;  I 
know  the  people  of  Provence  ;  and  if  the  plan  is  to  spare 
them,  we  are  lost."  He  had  scarcely  spoken,  when  bowlings 
gave  us  notice  of  the  enemy's  approach,  and  the  doors  soon 
gave  way  to  the  repeated  blows  of  the  thick  beams  with 
which  they  struck  them.  All  the  guards  that  \vere  in  the 
court  dispersed,  and  I  followed  gravely  my  Swiss  companion, 
who,  according  to  the  orders  he  had  received,  returned  at  a 
slow  pace  to  the  palace,  and  we  entered  together  the  saloon 
of  the  guards. 

The  Swiss  were  ranged  on  the  two  sides  of  the  great  stair- 
case, and  in  all  the  apartments  facing  the  windows,  three  in 
depth.  The  officers  were  trying  to  stimulate  them,  but  their 
faltering  voices  betrayed  their  consternation.  I  had  expected 
to  find  National  Guards  in  the  palace.  Surprised  to  see 
nothing  but  foreigners,  I  was  uncertain  as  to  the  manner  I 
should  act,  when  a  Swiss  officer,  taking  me  by  the  arm^ 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  47 