

I  know  that  it  is  easy  to  reason  on  events  after  they  are 
passed  ;  but  in  this  case  the  Monarch's  conduct  was  traced 

'  Le  Legislateur  des  Chretiens.  The  translator  begs  his  readers*  pardon 
for  M.  Lavalette's  impiety. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  yj 

out  by  circumstances.  He  had  no  more  hope  left — no  more 
friends  whose  devotion  am.ounted  to  the  sacrifice  of  their 
hves — no  more  power,  for  his  enemies  turned  it  against  him. 
When  disgraced  on  the  throne,  it  was  high  time  to  become 
a  private  citizen.  Such  a  noble  step  would  have  struck,  awe 
in  the  minds  of  every  one.  In  the  eyes  of  the  people,  he 
had  been  till  then  an  every-day  King  ;  but  that  King,  divest- 
ing himself  of  his  purple  robes,  stepping  down  from  the 
throne,  and  saying  to  the  nation,  "  I  have  governed  you 
during  eighteen  years  with  moderation  ;  you  deprive  me  of 
the  necessary  power  to  hold  the  reins  of  the  state  ;  you  wish 
for  a  republic  ;  establish  one  ;  I  submit  to  your  will.  In 
giving  up  the  throne,  I  only  ask  for  the  lives  of  my  wife 
and  children.  As  for  myself,  I  remain  in  your  hands.  You 
may  subject  me  to  insult  and  bodily  suffering  ;  but  my  soul 
belongs  to  God — you  can  neither  enfeeble  nor  debase  it."  I 
am  much  mistaken  if  such  words  addressed  to  the  French 
people  would  not  have  deeply  touched  and  perhaps  reclaimed 
them.  Instead  of  that,  the  unfortunate  Monarch  wished  to 
retain  a  sceptre  already  broken  in  his  hands :  the  result  is 
but  too  well  known. 

Among  the  persons  whom  I  met  in  society,  my  attach- 
ment to  the  royal  cause  particularly  attracted  the  attention 
of  the  Marquis  de  Verdiere.  He  was  an  old  man,  of  an 
ardent  and  chivalrous  mind.  His  long  services  in  India  had 
raised  him  to  the  rank  of  a  major-general.  He  was  not  rich, 
and  at  the  age  of  sixty-five  he  came  to  court  dangers  in 
defence  of  his  King,  with  as  much  spirit  as  he  formerly  had 
sought  them  in  battle  for  the  sake  of  glory.  That  amiable 
old  gentleman  had  conceived  a  particular  friendship  for  me. 
I  used  to  see  him  every  day,  especially  in  the  interval 
between  the  20th  of  June  and  the  loth  of  August.  It  v/as 
through  him  that  I  was  enabled  to  form  some  idea  of  all  the 
childish  delusions  with  which  the  poor  defenders  of  the  King 
fed  their  fantastic  hopes.  They  had  suffered  during  three 
years  all  the  insults  of  their  enemies,  and  instead  of  fixing 


38  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

their  eyes  on  the  inevitable  future,  they  triumphed  when 
perchance  some  biting  pamphlet,  well  seasoned  with  witty 
sarcasms,  was  published  with  success.  I  frequently  left  the 
Alarquis  in  the  evening  hopeless  and  dejected,  and  the  next 
morning  he  appeared  full  of  the  most  extravagant  hopes. 
Letters  had  been  received  from  Coblentz,  announcing  the 
advance  of  three  formidable  armies,  or  one  of  the  provinces 
had  risen  up  in  arms,  or  some  secret  plot  was  to  burst  like 
thunder  and  level  the  Jacobins  with  the  dust.  Even  after 
the  20th  of  June  he  still  dreamed  of  the  most  decided 
successes  :  an  immense  party  was  forming  among  the 
National  Guards,  under  the  protection  of  the  Ministry, 
and  the  Federation  of  the  14th  of  July  was  to  give  the 
signal  of  the  King's  triumph  over  his  enemies.  The  long 
wished-for  day  came  at  last,  and  brought  with  it  only  fresh 
insults  to  the  unfortunate  Monarch. 