


40  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

trary,  that  nation,  so  generous,  so  united,  had  in  a  manner 
disappeared  before  a  horde  of  barbarians.  Feelings  of 
hatred  and  revenge  had  succeeded  nobler  sentiments.  The 
Monarch,  but  lately  so  beloved  by  the  country,  and  his 
family,  her  most  cherished  hope,  were  disgraced  by  cruel 
insults,  and  dragged  to  the  public  squares  like  as  to  the 
place  of  execution.  At  the  ceremony  of  the  Federation,  the 
King  was  forced  to  pass  between  two  files  of  ruffians  utter- 
ing insults  and  threats  of  rage,  on  his  way  to  the  Champ  de 
Mars  to  swear  once  more  that  he  would  maintain  a  Consti- 
tution he  had  signed  in  spite  of  himself,  and  that  had  already 
disappeared  under  the  rebels'  feet. 

M.  de  Lafayette,  having  received  the  account  of  the 
criminal  attempt  of  the  20th  of  June,  wanted  to  lead  his 
army  to  Paris  to  protect  the  King  against  the  Republicans  ; 
but  he  soon  discovered  that  all  feeling  of  love,  and  even  of 
interest  for  the  fate  of  the  Monarch,  was  extinguished  in  the 
hearts  of  his  soldiers.  A  king  seemed  now  to  be  a  thing 
superfluous,  or  out  of  place,  in  the  Constitution.  The  army 
was  in  the  enemy's  presence  ;  its  chief  desire  was  to  wash  off 
the  disgrace  of  its  first  defeats,  and  to  lay  by  victory  the 
foundation  of  national  independence.  M.  de.  Lafayette  had 
the  noble  courage  to  attempt  alone  what  he  could  not  obtain 
of  his  army.  He  came  to  Paris,  appeared  at  the  bar  of  the 
Assembly,  complained  with  energy  of  the  insults  the  King 
had  suffered,  of  the  acknowledged  plan  of  destroying  the 
Constitution,  and  of  the  anarchy  with  which  France  was 
threatened.  This  noble  step,  although  supported  by  the 
minority  of  the  Assembly,  did  not  succeed,  and  Lafayette 
was  on  the  point  of  being  impeached.  From  thence  he 
went  to  the  Palace  of  the  Tuileries,  where  he  was  received 
with  coolness.  Instead  of  appearing  grateful  for  this  act  of 
fidelity,  the  prejudices  of  the  Royal  Family  were  so  strong, 
that  it  is  said  the  Queen  declared  she  would  prefer  dying  to 
being  served  by  such  an  enemy.  The  general  left  Paris, 
sorely  grieved  for  the  fate  of  his  King  and  country.    He  was 


I     I 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  \\ 

soon  followed  by  the  emissaries  of  the  municipality  ;  and  a 
few  days  after  his  return  to  the  camp,  he  was  obliged  to  fly 
to  a  foreign  country  for  refuge  ;  but,  instead  of  finding  that 
refuge,  he  was,  in  violation  of  all  the  laws  of  nations,  made 
a  prisoner  in  the  dungeons  of  Austria. 


CHAPTER  V. 

The  enterprise  of  M.  de  Lafayette,  notwithstanding  its  ill 
success,  made  the  Jacobins  sensible  that  they  had  not  a 
moment  to  lose  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  plans. 
The  Court  was  upon  its  guard  :  it  was  no  longer  possible 
to  attempt  assassination  ;  an  attack  by  open  force  was  in 
consequence  resolved  and  fixed  on  for  the  4th  of  August. 
But  whether  the  conspirators  were  not  yet  ready,  or  whether 
that  day  had  only  been  named  to  deceive  the  Court,  the 
attack  did  not  take  place  then.  M.  de  Verdiere  passed  all 
day  at  the  palace,  and  on  returning  in  the  evening  he  used 
to  make  me  share  his  fears  without  being  able  to  inspire  me 
with  his  hopes.  He  told  me  that  emissaries  were  dispersed 
through  all  the  suburbs,  and  even  in  the  club  of  the  Jacobins 
itself  ;  that  all  their  designs  were  known  ;  that  the  National 
Guards  were  commanded  by  M.  Mandar,  a  late  officer  of  the 
Gardes  Francaises  ;  that  on  the  first  order  he  might  give, 
twenty  thousand  citizens  would  rise  in  arms  ;  that  all  the 
loyal  nobility  and  citizens  of  Paris  would  go  to  the  palace  ; 
that  the  King  would  mount  his  horse  ;  and  that  the  day 
intended  for  his  ruin  would  be  his  triumph.  I  did  all  I 
could  to  convince  him  that  the  National  Guards  would  not 
march  ;  that  they  had  lost  all  confidence  in  their  own  power  ; 
that  they  were  divided  in  their  opinions,  and,  above  all,  dis- 
couraged ;  in  one  word,  that  they  were  afraid  of  the  Jacobins. 
I  observed  that  M.  Mandar  was  scarcely  known,  and  inspired 
no  confidence  ;  that  three  or  four  battalions  of  gallant  men 