

5 


50  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

a  circumstance  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  Court,  being 
resolved  to  defend  itself,  did  not  call  in  that  battalion  during 
the  night. 

I  left  the  melancholy  scene  and  went  to  the  Marquis  de 
Verdiere.  The  unfortunate  old  man  was  not  yet  come 
home,  but  he  soon  arrived,  half  dead  with  despair  and 
fatigue.  He  had  passed  the  night  in  the  palace,  and  had 
escaped  by  a  sort  of  miracle  through  one  of  the  doors  of  the 
gallery  of  the  Louvre.  We  embraced  one  another,  and 
both  of  us  shed  tears.  He  was  at  last  convinced  that  no 
hope  remained,  and  I  pressed  him  to  leave  the  country  as 
quickly  as  possible.  He  wanted  to  take  me  with  him,  but 
I  told  him  I  was  going  to  join  the  defenders  of  my  country. 
"Your  cause  is  no  more  mine,"  I  said  ;  "I  am  not  born  a 
nobleman  ;  I  have  paid  my  debt  to  my  Sovereign,  and  now 
my  country  claims  me.  I  must  defend  her  against  foreigners 
who  wish  to  divide  her  for  their  spoil,  and  I  shall  remain 
faithful  to  her."  He  had  no  more  illusions  to  offer  me  ;  he 
yielded,  and  we  separated  never  to  meet  again.  I  learned 
since  that,  after  having  made  a  pilgrimage  to  the  Royalist 
army,  where  he  was  badly  received,  because  he  came  too 
late,  he  returned  to  Paris,  was  denounced  as  a  returned 
emigrant,  and  died  on  the  scaffold. 

The  day  after  the  loth  of  August,  the  fate  of  the  Royal 
Family  was  at  last  decided.  They  had  passed  the  night  in 
the  cells  of  the  convent  of  the  Feuillants,  near  the  hall  of 
the  Assembly.  They  stepped  into  a  large  coach,  and  were 
led  in  triumph  to  the  tower  of  the  Temple,  along  the  Boule- 
vard, and  across  the  Place  Vendome,  where  the  equestrian 
statue  of  Louis  XIV.  had  already  been  thrown  down.  I 
wished  to  cast  a  last  look  on  the  unfortunate  family  before 
their  imprisonment,  and  I  forced  my  way  into  the  mob  while 
they  were  getting  out  of  the  coach.  Among  the  number  of 
persons  that  surrounded  the  carriage,  I  observed  a  horrible- 
looking  man.  Half  his  face  was  covered  with  a  long  and 
thick  beard  ;  he  was  dressed  in  a  sort  of  smock  frock,  which 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  51 

soon  after  became  the  uniform  of  the  Jacobins.  Though 
his  look  was  haggard  and  furious,  he  seemed  embarrassed 
on  observing  the  anxious  curiosity  of  those  that  stood  around 
him.  I  asked  who  he  was.  "It's  Jourdan  of  Avignon," 
was  the  answer  ;  "  Jourdan,  Coupe-Tete."  In  fact  it  must 
have  been  either  the  wretch  who  distinguished  himself  by 
the  massacres  of  the  Glaciere  d'Avignon,  or  some  one 
resembling  him,  placed  there  with  a  view  to  augment  the 
terror  of  the  Royal  Family. 