


62  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  troop  and  we  entered  the  city,  marching  Hke  experienced 
soldiers,  but  ashamed  of  being  seen  in  such  bad  company 
by  the  fair  ladies  of  Villefranche,  who  looked  at  us  as  we 
passed,  and  did  not  seem  greatly  to  admire  our  appearance. 

This  still  incomplete  legion,  whose  existence,  by  the  bye, 
was  neither  long  nor  brilliant,  consisted  of  the  remainder  of 
the  regiment  of  Royal  Liegeois  that  had  been  disbanded  for 
some  wild  freaks,  and  of  young  men  who  had  enlisted  for 
ten  crowns  each.  They  were  all  of  them  averse  to  discipline, 
and  wished  to  fight  for  diversion  ;  but  the  major,  M.  Ross, 
was  a  grave  man.  I  have  never  since  met  with  a  person  who 
carried  to  so  great  a  degree  as  he  did  his  enthusiasm  for  the 
military  catechism,  and  for  all  the  minutiae  of  the  service. 
He  knew  just  French  enough  to  command  his  troop,  which 
consisted  almost  wholly  of  Flemings  and  Alsatians.  After 
five-and-twenty  years'  service  he  had  attained  the  rank  of 
major  ;  but  still  M.  Ross  was  not  satisfied.  Since  he  could 
no  longer  maintain  discipline  by  flogging,  he  complained 
that  command  fatigued  him.  I  had  become  his  fi-iend 
because  he  had  found  me  exact,  attentive,  and  serious  at  my 
exercise.  "My  friend,"  he  used  to  say  to  me,  "war  is 
always  fatal  to  an  army  ;  there  is  no  more  discipline,  no 
more  order,  no  more  subordination  ;  woe  to  the  regiment 
that  leaves  its  garrison  for  the  field  of  battle !  Oh  !  if  you 
had  seen  the  camp  at  Verberie  or  St.  Omer  ;  what  a  beauti- 
ful sight  that  was  !  The  tents  all  in  straight  lines  ;  the 
troops  under  arms  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  their 
dresses  clean,  admirable  manoeuvres,  and  in  the  evening  at 
the  calling  over,  nobody  missing,  everybody  ready  !  Now 
I  have  to  command  nothing  but  tattered  wretches  !  What 
am  I  to  do  with  these  young  men,  whom  it  is  impossible  to 
keep  in  order  ?  This  will  be  a  war  indeed  !  Things  will 
go  as  bad  as  they  can.  But  I  am  resolved  to  retire  from  the 
service."  Poor  man,  he  did,  in  fact,  retire  the  following 
year,  and  I  hope  he  lived  long  enough  both  to  wonder  and 
rejoice  at  our  victories. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  63 

I  suffered  a  great  deal  in  the  beginning.  I  had  Hved  in 
affluence  in  Paris  in  the  midst  of  my  family,  by  whom  I 
was  beloved,  and  in  the  society  of  agreeable  friends.  Now 
I  was  forced  to  live  with  soldiers  :  the  sergeants  vouchsafed 
to  protect  me,  but  the  officers  never  cast  a  look  on  me.  I 
began  to  feel  some  disgust  ;  but  luckily,  before  it  was  too 
late,  I  made  deep  reflections  on  my  situation,  and  I  conceived 
it  might  be  possible  to  raise  myself  out  of  it  by  giving 
myself  up  entirely  to  the  duties  I  had  to  fulfil.  Till  then 
I  had  passed  my  time  in  coflfee-houses,  or  in  reading  novels. 
I  left  oif  that  idle  life  :  I  studied  the  military  law,  and 
rigidly  obeyed  it  in  all  its  details  ;  so  that  within  six  weeks 
I  was  made  a  corporal.  My  situation  was  growing  better. 
I  still  obeyed  everybody,  but  I  commanded  a  few. 