


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  57 

M.  d'Hilliers  received  us  very  well  ;  he  gave  us  orders  for 
our  route,  and  next  morning,  the  7th  of  September,  at  five 
o'clock,  we  were  on  the  road  to  Fontainebleau,  our  knap- 
sacks on  our  backs,  military  caps  on  our  heads,  and  perfectly 
well  disguised  by  a  sort  of  sailor's  dress  called  a  carmagnole. 
I  must  beg  leave  to  stop  for  a  few  moments  before  I  enter 
the  army.  I  feel  a  wish  to  cast  a  look  behind  me  on  my 
conduct  during  the  latter  years.  My  education  had  been 
rigid.  The  principles  on  which  it  was  formed  were  ex- 
cellent in  all  respects.  Until  I  was  twenty  years  old,  all 
scenes  of  corruption  had  been  carefully  kept  out  of  my  sight. 
My  parents,  my  tutors,  all  the  persons  who  surrounded  me, 
had  shown  me  no  examples  but  those  of  the  purest  morality. 
At  a  period  when  the  most  important  political  questions 
were  discussed,  my  educators  preserved  me  from  sharing 
the  errors  that  were  most  generally  adopted.  The  ridiculous 
harangues  of  the  section  orators  saved  me  from  the  wish  of 
imitating  them.  To  the  study  of  the  works  of  Montesquieu 
I  added  those  of  Fenelon,  Voltaire,  Rousseau,  Mably,  &c.  ;. 
but  the  authority  of  the  first  awed  me.  I  should  have 
imagined  I  had  committed  a  bad  action  if,  even  in  language, 
I  had  swerved  from  the  discretion  a  young  man  must  be 
inspired  with  by  reading  such  works.  I  was  therefore  wise 
enough  to  await  a  maturer  age  before  I  manifested  political 
opinions  of  any  sort,  and  to  consult  for  my  conduct  my 
conscience  and  my  heart.  These  two  guides  kept  me 
within  the  bounds  of  reason  and  modesty.  The  Revolution 
took  me  by  surprise  when  I  was  twenty  years  old.  I  was 
born  in  too  obscure  a  class  to  be  acquainted  with  all  the 
abuses  which  that  Revolution  was  meant  to  correct.  I 
think,  however,  I  did  my  duty  in  embracing  the  Royal 
cause ;  and  still,  at  this  present  moment,  I  recur  with 
pleasure  to  the  feelings  I  experienced.  Nevertheless,  since 
I  grew  acquainted  with  the  emigrants,  I  have  frequently 
asked  myself  what  I  had  to  do  among  those  privileged 
persons  who  reckoned  the  commoners  for  nothing — I  who 


58  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

was  born  a  commoner  ?  Whether,  after  victory,  they 
would  have  shown  me  any  gratitude  for  having  fought 
with  them  ?  and  also,  whether,  in  case  a  civil  war  had 
broken  out,  I  should  have  done  a  good  action  in  destroying 
the  sacred  cause  of  Liberty,  and  marching  against  my 
countrymen,  and  perhaps  against  my  family  ?  I  did  not 
wish  for  the  new  revolution  which  took  place  four  years 
ago,  to  answer  some  of  those  questions  against  myself.  But 
at  that  time  I  did  not  yet  know  all  I  have  since  learned  by 
experience. 