

M.  d'Hilliers  arrived.  Our  troop  was  soon  completely 
equipped  ;  and  as  that  officer  had  served  in  the  regiment  of 
Alsace,  he  subjected  us  to  such  severe  and  rigid  discipline 
that  in  less  than  two  months  our  legions  could  vie  with  the 
finest  corps  of  the  Northern  army. 

The  duties  prescribed  for  each  moment,  instead  of  dis- 
couraging me,  made  me  fond  of  them.  The  manoeuvres  of 
a  battalion  gave  me  a  desire  to  learn  the  elements  of  the  art 
of  war,  and  I  read  with  eagerness  several  new  works  that 
had  lately  appeared,  such  as  "  La  Guerre  de  Poste,"  by 
Cossac  ;  "  Les  Fortifications  de  Campagne,"  by  De  Belair, 
and  others.  My  colonel,  who  had  taken  a  liking  to  me,  gave 
me  lessons  in  strategy  and  castrametation,  and  taught  me  to 
understand  military  maps.  I  was  soon  raised  to  the  rank  of 
sergeant,  and  my  hopes  knew  no  more  bounds  when,  all  on  a 
sudden.  General  Custines  summoned  Colonel  d'Hilliers  to 
the  Rhine  army,  instead  of  General  Houchard,  his  first  aide- 
de-camp,  who  had  been  appointed  to  the  command  of  the 
Moselle  army. 

The  departure  of  M.  d'Hilliers  was  a  thunderstroke  for 
me.  But  he  promised  to  transfer  my  companions  and  myself 
to  the  Rhine  army,  and  he  kept  his  word.     A  short  time 


64  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

after  his  arrival  at  Mentz,  we  received  commissions  of 
second-lieutenants  in  the  93rd  regiment  of  infantry  of  the 
line. 

It  was  at  Bourg  I  received  the  order  to  go  to  the  Rhine, 
and  just  then  arrived  the  news  of  the  sentence  and  death  of 
the   King.     Although    the   Jacobins   were   masters   of  the 
town,  and  added,  by  their  vociferations,  consternation  to  the 
terror  their  threats  and  conduct  had  already  inspired,  still 
the  fatal  account  caused  a  deep  impression  on  the  minds  of 
the  public.     To  form  a  just  idea  of  that  terrible  sentence, 
we  must  consult  a  pamphlet  published  by  M.  de  Chateau- 
briand in  the  beginning  of  181 5,  wherein  he  explains  with 
great   sagacity  the   secret   motive   that   induced   so   many 
deputies  to  vote  for  the  death  of  Louis  XVI.     The  munici- 
pality  of  Paris  ruled  with  all  the  energy  of   savage    and 
desperate  tyranny.     That  body  insisted  at  any  rate  on  the 
death  of  the  King,  and  threatened  openly  to  murder  the 
whole  Royal  Family,  who  were  then  in  their  sole  power. 
Many  deputies  imagined  that  the  only  way  to  save  the  heir 
to  the  throne  and  his  family  was  to  offer  up  the  unfortunate 
King  as  a  victim  to  popular  fury.     They  were  mistaken,  but 
still  deserving  of  pardon.     On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  true 
that  Louis  XVI.  signed  the  treaty  of  Pilnitz  ;  that  he  per- 
suaded the  privileged   classes  to  leave   France   and  enlist 
under  foreign  banners  ;  that  he  had  agreed  with  his  brothers 
and   their  party  that  they  should  try   to  deliver  him    by 
means  of  a  war  that  was  to  expose  his  country  to  all  the 
horrors  of  invasion,  though  he  had  sworn  to  maintain  and 
execute   the   Constitution  : — if   all  this   be  true,  I  do    not 
hesitate   to   say  that   he   was  guilty  ;    he   could   reign    no 
longer.     But  the  Convention  had  no'  right  to  try  him,  and 
by  putting  him  to  death  they  committed  a  most  impolitic 
fault.     Did  they  not  see  that  by  taking  the  life  of  Louis 
XVI.  they  gave  the  crown   to  Louis  XVIII.  ?   that   they 
ought  to  have  kept  the  King  prisoner,  lest  they  should  place 
a  King  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  ?  that  the  life  of  a  Monarch 