

We  arrived  at  Auxerre  on  the  third  day  after  our 
departure,  delighted  with  having  quitted  Paris,  but  full 
of  anxiety  for  the  dear  friends  we  had  left  there.  The 
Revolution  had  also  passed  through  that  town,  and  had 
left  bloody  traces  behind  it.  The  inhabitants  were  full  of 
consternation,  and  deploring  several  young  clergymen,  sons 
of  the  most  honourable  citizens,  that  had  been  slaughtered. 
We  lodged  with  the  uncle  of  one  of  these  victims,  the  corpse 
of  whom  had  been  left  for  three  days  ion  a  dunghill,  his 
parents  not  being  suffered  to  bury  him.  We  thought  that 
we  ought  not  to  remain  long  in  that  city.  We  set  off  in 
consequence  for  Autun,  and  we  arrived  next  day  at  a  village, 
not  far  from  Vermanton,  situated  amidst  woods,  and  the 
inhabitants  of  which  got  their  livelihood  by  making  wooden 
shoes.  Two  days  before,  a  bishop  and  two  of  his  grand 
vicars,  who  were  escaping  in  a  post-coach,  had  been  arrested 
by  them.  The  coach  was  searched,  and  some  hundred 
louis-d'or  having  been  found  in  it,  the  peasants  thought 
the  best  Avay  to  gain  the  property  would  be  to  kill  the  real 
owners.  Their  new  profession  being  more  lucrative  than 
their  former  one,  they  resolved  to  continue  it,  and  in  con- 
sequence set  themselves  on  the  look-out  after  all  travellers. 
Our  sailors'  dresses  were  not  very  promising,  but  we  carried 
our  heads  high, — our  manners  seemed  haughty  ;  and  so 
a  little  hunchbacked  man,  an  attorney  of  the  village, 
guessed  we  might  perhaps  contribute  to  enrich  them.     The 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  59 

inhabitants  being  resolved  not  to  make  any  more  wooden 
shoes,  applauded  the  hunchback's  advice.   We  were  brought 
to   the   municipality,   where   the  mob   followed   us.      The 
attorney  placed  himself  on  a  large  table,  and  began  reading 
with  emphasis  and  in  a  loud  voice  all  our  passports  :  Louis 
Amedee  Auguste  d'Aubonne,  Andre  Louis  Leclerc  de  la 
Ronde,   Marie  Chamans  de   La  Valette.     Here  the  rascal 
added  the  de^  that  was  not  in  my  passport.     On  hearing 
these  aristocratical  names,    a  rumour  began  :  all  the  eyes 
directed  towards  us  were  hostile,  and  the  hunchback  cried 
out  that  our  knapsacks  ought  to  be  examined.    The  harvest 
would  have  been  rich.     I  was  the  poorest  of  the  set,  and  I 
had  five-and-twenty  louis  in  gold.     We  looked  upon  our- 
selves  as   lost,  when  D'Aubonne,  whose  stature   was  tall, 
jumped  on  the  table  and  began  to  harangue  the  assembly. 
He  was  clever  at  making  verses,  arid  knew  besides  at  his 
fingers'  ends  the  whole  slang  dictionary.     He  began  with  a 
volley  of  abuse  and  imprecations  that  surprised  the  audience  ; 
but  he  soon  raised  his  style,  and  repeated  the  words  country 
— liberty — sovereignty  of  the  people, — with  so  much  vehe- 
mence and   such  a  thundering  voice   that   the  effect  was 
prodigious.     He  was  interrupted  by  unanimous  applause. 
The  giddy-headed   young   man   did  not   stop   there.      He 
imperiously  ordered  Leclerc  de  la  Ronde  to  get  upon  the 
table.     La  Ronde  was  the  cleverest  mimic  I  ever  saw.     He 
was  thirty-five  years  old,  of  a  grotesque  shape,  and  as  dark 
as  a  Moor.     His  eyes  were  sunk  in  his  head  and  covered 
with   thick   black   eyebrows,   and   his   nose   and   chin    im- 
measurably   long.      D'Aubonne   said    to    the    Assembly  : 
*'  You'll  soon    be    able   to  judge   whether   or  not   we   are 
Republicans   coming   from    Paris."      And   turning   to    his 
companion,  he  said  to  him  :  "  Answer  to  the  Republican 
catechism.     What  is  God  ?     What  are  the  people  ?     What 
is  a  King  ?  "     The  other,  with  a  contrite  air,  a  nasal  voice, 
and    winding   himself    about   like   a   harlequin,    answered, 
''  God  is  nature  ;  the  people  are  the  poor  ;  a  King  is  a  lion, 