


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  65 

so  celebrated  for  weakness,  and  for  false  and  contracted  ideas, 
ought  to  have  been  carefully  protected,  as  he  would  soon  or 
late  be  succeeded  by  his  brother,  the  qualities  of  whose  mind 
were  so  superior  to  those  of  the  King,  and  whose  character, 
already  known,  would  have  so  deplorable  an  influence  over 
the  destiny  of  France  ?  But  the  Convention  was  pressed 
"by  passing  events,  inflamed  by  resentment,  and  by  the  con- 
test of  the  loth  of  August.  It  consisted  in  a  great  part  of 
men  without  experience,  who,  seized  with  a  fatal  mania  for 
celebrity,  wished  to  impress  the  minds  of  the  people  with  a 
sort  of  horror  mixed  with  admiration,  by  a  great  act  of 
injustice,  which  they  called  an  act  of  national  justice.  They 
succeeded  ;  but  the  revenge  of  Europe  fell  heavily  on  France, 
and  France,  mighty  through  the  fury  of  her  government, 
subdued  the  armies  of  Europe. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

None  but  young  men  can  well  feel  the  happiness  of  wearing 
an  epaulette,  and  particularly  those  who  rise  from  the  ranks. 
It  is  a  feeling  of  vanity,  I  own  ;  but  that  vanity  makes  heroes. 
I  was  not  destined  to  be  one  ;  but  it  is  not  my  fault,  for  I 
never  felt  a  greater  degree  of  incitement.  During  the  journey, 
I  constantly  reflected  on  the  duties  I  should  have  to  fulfil. 
My  heart  beat  at  the  thoughts  of  my  country  ;  I  was  proud 
at  the  idea  of  shedding  my  blood  for  her.  War  then  raged 
in  all  its  force.  At  every  place  where  we  stopped  to  rest,  I 
read  the  newspapers  ;  I  questioned  my  landlords  ;  and  when- 
ever I  learned  that  the  Rhine  army  had  fought,  I  burned  with 
impatience.  It  seemed  to  me  as  if  I  ran  the  risk  of  arriving 
too  late.  All  the  ideas  that  had  tormented  me  in  Paris  were 
forgotten  ;  the  happiness  of  fighting  for  my  country  had 
absorbed  them  all.  If  I  speak  of  these  deep  impressions, 
that  every  Frenchman  shared,  it  is  because  at  present  they 
are  considered  as  criminal. 

In  the  Holy  Week  of  the  year  1793  I  arrived  at  Worms, 
where  the  second  battalion  of  my  regiment  was  in  garrison. 
I  went  to  see  my  colonel,  M.  de  Loriol.  He  was  an  old  man, 
who  bore  in  his  countenance  all  the  austerity  of  a  former 
major,  and  all  his  vexation  at  being  obliged  to  command 
plebeian  officers.  He  received  me  very  ill,  assigned  me  a 
company,  and  sent  me  away.  I  then  went  to  my  new 
captain.  If  the  colonel's  reception  was  haughty,  that  of  the 
captain  was  impertinent.    He  had  served  as  sergeant  in  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  67 

King's  regiment,  the  non-commissioned  officers  of  which 
used  to  learn  a  Httle  mathematics,  to  distinguish  them  from 
their  comrades  of  other  corps.  This  poor  man  consequently 
looked  upon  himself  as  an  officer  of  old  standing.  He  spoke 
ill  of  his  comrades  and  superiors  ;  said  a  number  of  absur- 
dities about  war,  which  he  did  not  understand  ;  and  would 
perhaps  have  succeeded  in  making  me  very  unhappy  in  my 
situation,  if  I  had  not  found  a  protector  in  M.  de  la  Poterie, 
my  lieutenant-colonel.  This  respectable  gentleman  invited 
me  to  come  and  see  him  frequently,  and  promised  to  advance 
me  if  I  behaved  well.  He  was  killed  a  short  time  after,  at 
the  head  of  his  battalion.  His  memory  has  always  been 
dear  to  me,  and  I  shall  never  forget  the  kindness  he  showed 
me. 