


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  5  5 

prison.  Before  the  wicket  that  leads  to  the  Rue  des  Ballets, 
I  found  about  fifty  men  at  most.  These  were  the  butchers  ; 
the  rest  had  been  drawn  there  by  curiosity,  and  were  perhaps 
more  execrable  than  the  executioners  ;  for,  though  they  dared 
neither  go  away  nor  take  part  in  the  horrid  deed,  still  they 
applauded.  I  looked  forward,  and  at  sight  of  a  heap  of 
bodies  still  palpitating  with  life,  I  uttered  a  cry  of  horror. 
Two  men  turned  round,  and,  taking  me  abruptly  by  the 
collar,  dragged  me  violently  to  the  street,  where  they 
reproached  me  with  imprudence,  and  then,  running  away, 
left  me  alone  in  the  dark.  The  horrible  spectacle  I  had 
witnessed  deprived  me  of  all  courage  :  I  went  home,  over- 
whelmed with  shame  and  despair  for  humanity  so  execrably 
injured,  and  the  French  character  so  deplorably  disgraced. 

The  particulars  of  the  massacre  having  all  been  recorded 
in  the  memoirs  of  the  time,  I  need  not  repeat  them  here.  I 
was  moreover  no  spectator  of  them.  They  lasted  three  days, 
and,  I  blush  while  I  write  it,  at  half  a  mile  from  the  different 
prisons  nobody  would  have  imagined  that  their  countrymen 
were  at  that  moment  butchered  by  hundreds.  The  shops 
were  open,  pleasure  was  going  on  in  all  its  animation,  and 
sloth  rejoiced  in  its  vacuity.  All  the  vanities  and  seductions 
of  luxury,  voluptuousness,  and  dissipation,  peaceably  swayed 
their  sceptre.  They  feigned  an  ignorance  of  cruelties  which 
they  wanted  the  courage  to  oppose.  And  still  there  existed 
an  Asserabl}',  the  organ  and  supreme  protectress  of  the  laws, 
ministers  entrusted  with  the  executive  power,  a  paid  guard 
and  magistrates.  The  unfortunate  prisoners  that  were 
slaughtered  had  friends  and  relations,  on  whom  they  could 
not  bestow  a  last  look.  They  perished,  after  horrible  agony, 
in  the  midst  of  the  most  cruel  torments.  Twelve  hundred 
persons  were  killed  in  those  three  days. 

Still,  so  much  bloodshed  did  not  satisfy  the  rage  of  the 
September  murderers !  They  were  sensible  that  the 
slaughtering  of  twelve  hundred  persons  would  spread  dis- 
may and  indignation   over  France  and  Europe.      Victory 


56  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

was  therefore  become  doubly  necessary.  National  pride 
and  the  bad  policy  of  the  enemy  were  of  wonderful  service 
to  them.  In  less  than  a  fortnight,  more  than  sixty  thousand 
men  left  Paris  for  the  army.  The  youths  of  the  depart- 
ments, animated  by  the  most  generous  patriotism,  did  not 
wait  for  the  example  of  the  metropolis,  and  in  a  short  time 
the  armies  were  augmented  threefold.  I  did  not  dare  to 
enlist  in  a  battalion  of  volunteers,  being  noted  as  an  enemy 
of  the  country, — that  is  to  say,  of  the  Jacobins.  The  more 
indulgent  blamed  me  :  they  said  I  was  hot-headed,  heedless, 
and  had  thrown  myself  through  vanity  into  a  party  I  ought 
to  have  detested.  I  had  moreover  signed  all  the  petitions 
in  favour  of  the  Court,  and  had  been  at  the  palace  on  the 
loth  of  August  :  that  was  more  than  sufficient  for  a  sentence 
of  death.  Not  knowing  how  to  get  away,  I  went  and  con- 
sulted one  of  my  best  friends,  Bertrand,  the  same  who  has 
since  made  himself  so  honourably  known  by  his  talent  and 
his  devotion  to  the  Emperor,  and  who  is  at  present  at  St. 
Helena.  I  had  made  his  acquaintance  at  the  office  of  the 
attorney  Dommanget,  where  he  studied  for  the  bar.  His 
family  had  designed  him  to  fill  a  judicial  post  in  his  pro- 
vinces ;  but  since  the  suppression  of  the  parliaments  his 
studies  were  without  aim.  He  acted  more  wisely  than  I 
had  done.  Instead  of  meddling  in  political  quarrels,  he 
applied  himself  during  eighteen  months  in  perfect  retire- 
ment to  the  study  of  mathematics.  Gifted  with  judgment 
and  a  tenacious  character,  he  could  not  but  succeed.  He 
had  just  passed  his  examination,  and,  having  been  received, 
he  was  going  to  Chalons  to  study  engineering.  To  take  me 
with  him  was  not  to  be  thought  of  ;  but  he  advised  me  to 
enlist  in  a  free  corps,  and  gave  me  the  address  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  d'Hilliers,  who  was  then  organising  the  Legion  of 
the  Alps.  Some  of  my  friends  were  in  the  same  situation 
as  myself ;  we  went  therefore  together  to  that  officer. 
There  were  five  of  us — young,  well  educated,  possessing 
some  fortune,  desirous  to  fight,  but,  above  all,  to  leave  Paris. 