


6o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

— a  tiger, — an  elephant — who  tears  to  pieces,  devours  and 
crushes  the  poor  people  to  death."  It  was  not  possible  to 
resist  this.  Astonishment,  shouts,  enthusiasm,  were  carried 
to  the  highest  pitch.  The  orators  were  embraced, — hugged, 
— carried  in  triumph.  The  honour  of  lodging  us  grew  a 
subject  of  dispute.  We  were  forced  to  drink,  and  we  were 
soon  as  much  at  a  loss  how  to  get  away  from  these  brutal 
wretches,  now  our  friends,  as  we  had  been  to  escape  out 
of  their  hands  while  they  were  our  enemies.  Luckily, 
D'Aubonne  again  found  means  to  draw  us  out  of  this  scrape. 
He  gravely  observed,  that  we  had  no  time  to  stop,  and  that 
our  country  claimed  the  tribute  of  our  courage.  They  let 
us  go  at  last.  On  the  road  my  companions  blamed  me  for 
having  taken  no  share  in  the  scene,  and  having  maintained 
an  air  of  gravity  that  might  have  become  suspicious  in  the 
eyes  of  people  who  only  sought  a  pretext  to  murder  us.  I 
had  nothing  to  answer  to  their  observations.  I  had  admired 
their  presence  of  mind  and  their  gaiety  ;  but  my  humour 
did  not  accord  with  such  tricks.  Nature  cannot  be  forced. 
During  the  farce  they  had  acted,  I  recollected  a  fact  I  had 
read,  I  think  in  a  work  of  M.  Leboeuf,  on  the  History  of 
France  during  the  thirteenth  century.  A  monk  of  Auxerre, 
or  Dijon,  intimated  to  the  abbot  of  the  Benedictines  of  Paris, 
who  had  expressed  a  wish  to  see  him,  that  at  his  age  he 
could  not  leave  his  country  and  undertake  so  distant  and  so 
perilous  a  journey.  Alas  !  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth 
century,  the  journey  was   more  perilous  still  ! 

From  this  haunt  of  robbers  we  went  to  Autun.  One  of 
us  had  letters  of  introduction  to  a  member  of  the  Legislative 
Assembly,  who  had  not  been  distinguished  in  the  Con- 
vention, and  was  afraid  of  showing  himself  at  his  usual 
abode.  His  family  consisted  of  a  respectable  and  clever 
wife  and  three  charming  daughters.  Our  stay  with  them 
might  have  endangered  them  ;  we  therefore  continued  our 
journey.  There,  as  well  as  everywhere  else,  terror  was 
carried  to  a  great  height.     Not  a  motion,  not  an  attempt 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  6i 

had  been  made  to  counteract  the  enterprises  of  the  factious. 
People  remained  silent,  or  left  the  place,  for  fear  of  exposing 
themselves.  The  most  honest  were  denounced,  the  lower 
classes  made  everybody  tremble  with  their  clamour,  and 
became  everywhere  masters,  through  the  misunderstanding 
and  want  of  courage  of  those  who,  having  property  to  save, 
did  not  blush  to  fall  back  before  those  who  had  nothing 
to  lose. 

We  arrived  at  last,  on  the   I2th  of  September,  at  Ville- 
franche,  near  Lyons,  where  the  legion  of  Montesquiou  was 
in  garrison.     M.  d'Hilliers  had  shown  us  a  pattern  of  the 
regimentals,  and  had  boasted  to  us  of  the  discipline  and  good 
appearance  of  the  regiment.     We  were  to  be  received  in  the 
most  flattering  manner  by  the  officers,  all  of  them  well-bred 
young  men,  and  who  would  undoubtedly  live  as  brothers 
with  us.     We  formed  to  ourselves  most  delightful  ideas  of 
our  new  manner  of  living.    As  we  got  nearer  to  Villefranche, 
our  excited  imagination   made   us   hasten    our   pace.     We 
came  to  the  side  of  a  very  extensive  field,  at  the  other  end 
of  which  we  saw  some  troops  manoeuvring.   My  companions, 
either  through  some  illusion,  or  indistinctness  of  vision,  fell 
into  rapture  at  the  wonderful  good  order  of  the  troops.     In 
fact,  their  muskets  glittered  in  the  rays  of  the  sun,  and  their 
lines  seemed  to  present  admirable  regularity.     As  for  me, 
I  saw  nothing  but  strange  dresses,  or  rather  the  rags  of 
misery ;  and  the  reader  may  judge  of  our  consternation,  when, 
on  approaching,  we  found  four  or  five  hundred  wretches  in 
tattered  garments,  and  none  but  the  officers  dressed  in  the 
elegant  regimentals  we  had  so  much  admired.     We  were 
going  away,  and  should  perhaps  have  taken  the  dangerous 
resolution  of  deserting,  when  an  officer  came  up  to  us,  and 
asked  us,  in  a  strong  German  accent,  whether  we  had  not 
the  honour  to  belong  to  the  corps.     Without  waiting  for 
the  answer  of  my  companions,  I  showed  my  fctn'lle  de  route. 
They  were  all  obliged  to  do  the  same  ;  and,  as  soon  as  the 
manoeuvres  were  finished,  the  officer  placed  us  in  the  rear  of 