

A  few  days  after  the  loth  of  August,  the  Legislative 
Assembly  closed  its  session,  and  decreed  that  another 
Assembly  should  sit  in  its  stead.  The  members  of  the 
Gironde  party,  who  had  contributed  most  to  the  fall  of  the 
throne,  hastened  to  get  themselves  re-elected. 

Among  the  members  of  that  party,  some  have  so  many 
surviving  friends  that  they  ought  not  to  be  condemned 
rashly.  Great  praise  is  still  bestowed  on  the  uprightness  of 
their  intentions,  their  rigid  honesty,  their  eminent  talents, 
and  their  invincible  courage.  I  am  far  from  disputing  these 
two  last  qualities  ;  but  what  was  the  situation  of  France 
when  they  entered  the  Legislative  Assembly,  and  what  did 
they  do  to  maintain  the  Constitution  which  that  Assembly 
was  appointed  to  protect  ?  Had  it  become  utterly  impossible 
to  support  it  ?  Was  the  King  an  invincible  obstacle,  or  the 
republican  faction  an  enemy  whose  progress  could  no  longer 
be  stopped  ?  Was  not  a  courageous  struggle  in  favour  of 
constitutional  monarchy  a  sacred  duty  ?  Was  not  unani- 
mous, firm,  and  heroic  resistance  preferable  to  the  miserable 
presumption  of  wishing  to  reign  on  the  ruins  of  the  throne 
and  the  Constitution  ?  I  fear  history  will  accuse  the  Gironde 
party  of  having  been  led  away  by  the  desire  of  shining  as 
orators  ;  and  it  will  probably  be  said  that  the  greater  part 
of  them  were  more  intent  on  keeping  up  a  successful  contest 
with  the  heroes  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  than  impelled 
by  the  noble  ambition  of  saving  their  country  by  following 
a  steady  line  of  conduct. 


52  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

The  last  twenty  days  of  the  month  of  August  were  not 
lost  for  the  revolutionary  party.  They  knew  the  maxim, 
that  a  victorious  general  must  not  leave  a  moment's  rest  to 
his  vanquished  enemy.  As  soon  as  they  had  shut  up  the 
Royal  Family  in  the  Temple,  and  butchered  all  the  Swiss 
soldiers  that  remained  in  Paris  and  its  environs,  they 
hastened  to  imprison  all  persons  suspected  of  being  attached 
to  the  King.  Noblemen,  clergymen,  servants  of  the  palace, 
women,  and  even  children,  who  had  had  the  least  connec- 
tion with  the  Court,  were  seized  without  any  exception,  and 
prisons  were  soon  more  numerous  than  playhouses.  A 
new  misfortune  roused  to  the  highest  pitch  the  rage  of  the 
Jacobins,  and  filled  the  public  with  consternation  :  a  foreign 
enemy  obtained  alarming  successes,  whilst  the  ridiculous 
manifesto  of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  announced  to  the  city 
of  Paris  the  terrible  punishment  that  threatened  her.  The 
frontier  towns  of  Longwy  and  Verdun  had  surrendered  ; 
and,  by  a  shameful  and  criminal  policy,  the  Sovereigns  who 
came  to  assist  the  unfortunate  Louis  XVI.  placed  their 
banners  on  the  conquered  cities,  as  a  proof  that  they  would 
never  restore  them.  The  French  nation,  insulted  in  its 
independence,  united  its  exertions  to  the  fury  of  the 
Jacobins,  and  France  was  saved  amidst  torrents  of  blood. 