


CHAPTER  VI. 

The  news  of  the  surrender  of  Verdun,  and  the  impossi- 
biHty  of  stopping  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  reached  Paris 
on  the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  September  ;  and  by  five 
o'clock  some  members  of  the  municipahty  began  to  ride 
about  the  streets  on  horseback  with  flags  in  their  hands,  and 
crying,  "To  arms  ! — The  enemy,"  they  added,  "approaches 
— you  are  all  lost !  The  city  will  be  a  prey  to  fire  and 
pillage  !  Take  up  your  swords,  join  the  armies,  and  the 
infamous  foreigners  will  be  repulsed  !  You  have  nothing 
to  fear  from  the  traitors  and  conspirators  you  leave  behind  ; 
they  are  in  the  hands  of  the  patriots,  and  national  justice 
will  strike  them  with  its  thunderbolts."  These  terrible 
words,  repeated  on  all  sides,  spread  general  dismay.  What 
was  the  meaning  of  the  thunderbolt  of  justice  ?  Alas  !  that 
expression  was  but  too  soon  explained  :  about  two  hours 
after,  it  was  reported  that  the  prisoners  were  to  be  executed  ! 
I  ran  to  the  hall  of  my  section,  where  I  found  M.  Dutillet. 
He  took  me  aside,  and  said,  "  Within  an  hour  the  prisoners 
at  the  Hotel  de  la  Force  will  be  butchered.  I  have  an  order 
from  Tallien  for  the  release  ot  Madame  de  Tourzel  and  her 
daughter.  Bleve,  captain  of  the  Chasseurs,  accompanies 
me.  We  want  a  third  person  :  will  you  go  with  me  ?  "  I 
accepted  most  readily  his  proposal.  It  was  agreed  that 
Dutillet  should  enter  the  prison  ;  that  Bleve  and  he  should 
take  charge  of  the  two  ladies  ;  and  that  I  should  accompany 

S3 


54  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

them,  for  the  twofold  purpose  of  engaging  the  attention  of 
such  as  might  stop  them  in  a  part  of  the  town  where  they 
were  so  well  known,  and  to  help  to  defend  them  in  case  they 
should  be  attacked.  We  encountered  no  difficulty  in  getting 
the  ladies  out  of  prison  ;  we  passed  along  the  Rue  du  Roi  de 
Siecle,  and  boldly  crossed  the  church  of  the  Petit  St.  Antoine, 
where  the  Assembly  was  held.  By  good  luck,  night  was 
beginning  to  protect  us  ;  we  were  in  no  manner  disturbed, 
and  Madame  de  Tourzel  found  in  the  Rue  St.  Antoine  her 
friends,  who  placed  her  in  safety.  When  we  returned  to 
Dutillet's,  we  deliberated  on  the  means  of  preventing  the 
massacre  of  the  prisoners  of  La  Force.  The  consciousness 
of  doing  a  good  action  augments  one's  courage.  It  was 
impossible  to  think  of  beating  the  g'encralc  without  an  order 
from  the  commander-in-chief ;  time  pressed,  and,  besides, 
the  commander  was  Santerre,  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
Jacobins.  We  had  no  alternative  but  to  run  to  some  of  the 
National  Guards  whom  we  looked  upon  as  the  most  steady. 
I  spoke  to  a  great  many  of  them  in  the  space  of  an  hour  and 
a  half,  and,  notwithstanding  my  most  pressing  entreaties,  I 
could  make  no  impression  on  them.  Men  in  the  prime  of 
life  and  health,  in  whom  I  thought  I  had  discovered  a  strong 
love  of  liberty,  feelings  of  humanity,  and  respect  for  the  laws, 
remained  unmoved,  while  I  pictured  to  them  the  slaughter 
they  were  going  to  witness.  "  What  can  we  do  ?  "  was  the 
answer  of  all  those  I  saw.  I  could  not  excite  them  to  a  noble 
effort.  Some  did  not  believe  the  massacre  ;  others  said  they 
could  not  march  without  an  order  from  their  chiefs.  Some 
even  said  to  me — "  The  prisoners  are  conspirators  who  deserve 
no  pity  ;  our  sons  are  going  to  the  army  ;  civil  war  will  break 
out  ;  we  shall  perish  the  victims  of  our  humanity  ;  it  is  said, 
besides,  that  there  will  be  judges,  and  that  the  innocent  will 
be  spared."  The  exertions  of  my  two  companions  were  not 
crowned  with  more  success  than  my  own  ;  we  separated  at 
nine  o'clock.  The  massacre  was  already  raging  in  all  its 
force.     Being  less  known  than   my  friends,  I  flew  to  the 