

General  Beauharnais  was  deeply  grieved  at  leaving  the 
army :  his  noble  spirit  could  not  brook  the  thought  of 
departing  from  the  scene  of  the  glorious  contest  to  which  the 
voice  of  the  country  called  all  Frenchmen.  In  returning  to 
the  interior  of  the  Republic,  he  moreover  was  exposed  to 


74  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

innumerable  dangers.  He  had  constantly  supported  the 
system  of  representative  government  ;  and  although  he  felt 
the  necessity  of  defending  a  Republic  born  amidst  storms,  yet 
the  system  of  the  Jacobins  and  their  cruelty  inspired  him 
with  horror.  All  the  members  of  the  Constituent  Assembly 
were  persecuted,  and  even  the  purest  and  most  prudent  con- 
duct was  far  from  ensuring  him  tranquillity  in  an  obscure 
retreat.  I  was  in  his  closet  at  the  moment  that  he  was  con- 
fiding his  grief  and  regret  to  the  bosom  of  his  faithful  friend 
Lahorie,  who  had  been  his  secretary,  and  who  was  then  one 
of  the  officers  of  his  staff.  This  gentleman  advised  him  to 
attack  the  enemy  and  seek  an  honourable  death,  rather  than 
expose  himself  to  all  the  outrages  of  his  foes  in  the  interior 
of  France.  The  advice  was  more  courageous  than  wise. 
The  general  answered  :  "I  must  first  of  all  consider  the 
interest  of  the  army  and  my  country.  I  do  not  flatter  myself 
as  to  my  future  fate  ;  but  the  death  of  so  many  brave  men 
must  not  rest  on  my  head,  nor  all  the  fatal  consequences  of 
a  defeat.  The  army  will  perhaps  be  commanded  by  a  more 
fortunate  chief  ;  besides,  the  decree  that  supersedes  me  is 
positive  :  even  victory  would  be  looked  upon  as  a  crime,  and 
I  see  no  possibility  of  gaining  one  at  present  :  we  have 
scarcely  thirty-five  thousand  men,  in  bad  order  ;  and  the 
enemy  have  eighty  thousand  ;  my  death  would  be  of  no  use  ; 
I  must  go.''  The  day  after,  he  resigned  his  command  and 
left  the  army,  which  remained  without  a  commander  in  the 
presence  of  a  formidable  enemy,  and  the  organisation  went 
on  but  slowly.  Little  attention  was  paid  to  that  state  of 
disorder.  Forty  thousand  farmers  arrived  without  arms  or 
regimentals  :  they  were  undoubtedly  well  disposed  ;  but 
they  had  no  experience,  having  never  faced  the  enemy.  The 
choice  of  a  general-in-chief  was  a  difficult  one  :  the  post  was 
first  offered  to  General  Laudremont,  who  commanded  the 
vanguard  ;  but  he  was  a  nobleman,  and,  though  he  had 
great  merit,  he  was  recalled  a  few  days  after  his  appointment. 
Thus   it  was   necessary   to   seek   somebody   else,   and   one 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  75 

Colonel  Corbin  did  not  fear  to  take  the  burden  on  his 
shoulders.  Two  days  after  his  appointment,  the  commis- 
sioners of  the  Convention,  to  put  him  entirely  at  his  ease, 
dismissed  abruptly  from  the  army  thirteen  generals,  the 
chief  of  the  staff,  the  commander  of  the  vanguard,  generals 
of  division  ;  no  one  was  spared.  This  foolish  measure  was 
adopted  on  the  12th  of  October,  1793,  and  on  the  13th,  at 
four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  enemy  attacked  us  on  the 
whole  length  of  our  line,  broke  through  our  ranks,  put  us 
to  the  rout,  and  at  eight  o'clock  we  had  lost  the  lines  and 
were  in  full  retreat  towards  Brompt  in  the  greatest  disorder. 
By  good  luck,  our  forty  thousand  peasants  were  so  active 
in  their  flight  they  did  not  long  embarrass  our  retreat  ; 
they  had  their  houses  and  families  to  defend.  The  second 
day  there  was  not  one  of  them  remained  behind  : 
nevertheless  they  afterwards  became  very  excellent  soldiers 
when  they  were  recalled  ;  but  they  had  been  ren- 
dered able  to  fight  before  they  were  placed  in  front  of  the 
enemy.  The  rear-guard  was  well  enough  commanded  to 
cover  our  retreat  :  it  fought  courageously  on  the  heights  of 
Brompt  during  a  whole  day,  so  that  the  army  had  time  to 
arrive  at  Haguenau  ;  there  the  commissaries  and  the  general- 
in-chief  deliberated  whether  it  would  not  be  best  to  retire  to 
Saverne  and  leave  Strasburg  to  defend  itself  ;  happily,  before 
they  came  to  a  resolution,  they  thought  it  necessary  to  con- 
sult M.  da  Villemanzy,  commissary-general  of  the  army.  He 
declared  that  Strasburg  having  constantly  furnished  the 
army  with  provisions  and  stores,  its  magazines  were  com- 
pletely exhausted,  and  that  some  time  would  necessarily 
elapse  before  the  town  could  be  put  in  a  state  to  support  a 
siege  ;  so  that,  if  left  to  itself,  it  was  to  be  feared  it  would  be 
obliged  to  capitulate.  M.  de  Villemanzy  was  taken  prisoner 
at  Haguenau,  where  he  had  remained  to  keep  an  eye  on  the 
evacuation  of  the  magazines  :  the  general  opinion  at  the 
time  was  that  he  had  delivered  himself  up.  If  that  be  true, 
I  think  he  acted  wisely  ;  he  would  undoubtedly  have  been 