


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  83 

in  the  midst  of  their  perils  by  quaint  sayings,  which  were 
rendered  more  piquant  by  the  harsh  accent  of  his  mother 
tongue. 

Desaix,  who  was  born  in  Auvergne,  had  served  for  several 
years  as  an  officer  in  the  regiment  of  Brittany.  His  stature 
was  tall,  and  his  figure  singular.  He  had  fine  black  fiery 
eyes,  and  a  nose  that  seemed  to  descend  from  the  top  of  the 
forehead  ;  his  thick  and  usually  separated  lips  showed  a  set 
of  teeth  of  sparkling  whiteness  ;  his  hair,  flat  and  black  as 
jet,  shaded  his  dark  face.  His  gait  was  embarrassed,  but 
still  without  awkwardness,  and  betrayed  bashfulness  and 
want  of  knowledge  of  the  world.  Altogether,  he  resembled 
a  savage  of  the  banks  of  the  Oroonoko  dressed  in  French 
clothes.  But  one  soon  got  accustomed  to  him.  His  voice 
was  soft,  and,  when  once  drawn  out  of  his  usual  reserve,  he 
delighted  by  the  variety  of  his  information  and  the  sim- 
plicity of  his  manners.  He  had  none  of  the  faults  of  men 
accustomed  to  camp  life  :  I  never  heard  him  utter  a  vulgar 
expression — an  indecent  word  made  him  blush.  As  he  was 
constantly  easv  and  kind,  his  staflf  led  a  merry  life,  and  the 
pretty  girls  of  the  Palatinate  used  frequently  to  visit  his 
headquarters.  He  smiled  at  our  pleasures  without  sharing 
them,  but  with  the  indulgence  of  a  father  who  shuts  his  eyes 
on  his  children's  wild  tricks.  I  do  not  think  I  ever  saw  him 
dressed  in  the  uniform  of  his  rank  :  he  usually  wore  a  blue 
coat  without  any  lace,  and  the  sleeves  of  which  were  so 
short  that  we  used  to  say  in  jest  he  had  certainl}'  worn  it 
when  he  first  took  the  sacrament.  He  frequently  mounted 
his  horse  without  a  sword  when  he  went  to  visit  the  posts. 
One  night,  having  ordered  an  attack  on  the  convent  of 
Marienborn,  near  Mentz,  which  the  enemy  occupied  in  force, 
he  suddenly  found  himself  without  arms  in  the  midst  of  a 
surprised  body  of  infantry  which  was  defending  itself  with 
the  bayonet  amongst  the  vines.  Desaix,  perceiving  he  had 
forgot  his  sword,  pulled  a  vine-prop  out  of  the  ground,  and 
continued  fighting  as  if  he  had  had  Orlando's  sword  in  his 


84  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

hand.  Savary,  who  was  then  his  aide-de-camp,  threw  him- 
self before  him,  just  in  time  to  save  his  hfe,  and  killed  a  Hun- 
garian grenadier  that  was  about  to  pierce  him  with  his  bayonet. 
I  must  not  forget  General  St,  Cyr,  though  still  alive  and 
in  the  enjoyment  of  power  ; — but  this  work  is  not  meant  to 
appear  till  after  my  death.  He  entered  the  army  as  captain 
of  a  free  corps  raised  in  Paris  during  the  terrible  month  of 
September,  1792.  This  troop,  which  consisted  of  Parisian 
vagabonds  (I  need  not  say  any  more),  boasted  on  the  road 
that  they  were  going  to  teach  the  army  the  right  step, 
meaning  that  they  would  make  it  Republican  ;  for,  to  say 
the  truth,  we  were  neither  robbers  nor  braggers.  However, 
they  committed  such  terrible  outrages  that  General  Custines 
ordered  his  cavalry  to  surround  and  disarm  them,  after 
which  they  were  disbanded.  St.  Cyr  remained  in  conse- 
quence unemployed.  He  had  in  his  early  youth  visited 
as  an  artist  Italy  and  Greece,  and  he  had  a  great  facility  for 
drawing.  One  day  he  was  busy  near  Mentz  sketching  the 
positions  of  Oekheim,  when  General  Custines,  whose 
glance  was  piercing,  observing  him  at  a  distance,  darted 
towards  him  with  all  the  swiftness  his  horse  was  capable  of. 
Seeing  him  dressed  in  a  uniform  he  detested,  he  asked  him 
angrily  what  he  was  doing,  and  tore  the  paper  out  of  his 
hands.  Finding,  however,  that  the  positions  were  taken 
accurately,  he  asked  him  some  questions,  appeared  satisfied 
with  his  answers,  and  appointed  him  officer  of  the  staff.  A 
few  months  afterwards,  and  shortly  before  our  disaster  at 
Weissemburg,  chance  was  still  more  serviceable  to  him. 
We  had  been  repulsed  in  the  pass  of  Annweiller  ;  the  com- 
missioners of  the  Convention,  seeing  treason  everywhere, 
knew  not  to  whom  they  ought  to  entrust  the  command  of 
the  troops  :  St.  Cyr  was  crossing  the  street  under  the  win- 
dows of  the  headquarters  ;  an  officer  pointed  to  him  as  a 
man  in  whom  the  greatest  confidence  might  be  placed.  He 
was  called  upstairs,  and,  after  a  few  questions,  the  commis- 
sioners proposed  to  him  to  march   off  with  two  thousand 