


76  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

arrested  on  his  arrival  at  Strasburg,  and  probably  have  died 
on  the  scaffold.  He  passed  for  an  enemy  of  the  Republic. 
I  can  say  nothing  as  to  that  :  all  I  know  is  that  he  was  a 
well-bred,  agreeable  man,  and  that  his  situation  was  an 
object  of  envy.  Villemanzy's  observations  made  the  council 
resolve  to  cover  the  town  ;  the  headquarters  were  estab- 
lished at  Schiltikeim,  a  village  a  league  from  Strasburg. 
The  army  extended  in  a  line  of  more  than  ten  leagues,  from 
the  banks  of  the  Rhine  to  Saverne,  and  until  orders  from 
the  Government  could  be  received,  the  chief  command  was 
entrusted  to  General  Michaud.  This  temporary  choice  was 
a  wise  one.  General  Michaud  was  a  prudent  man,  who  felt 
the  danger  of  his  situation,  and  did  his  utmost  to  make  the 
best  of  it,  presenting  to  the  enemy  an  appearance  of  strength 
that  forced  them  to  be  cautious. 

It  was  Wurmser  who  commanded  the  combined  armies 
opposed  to  us.  With  a  little  more  resolution  he  might  have 
beaten  us  once  again,  and  perhaps  made  himself  master  of 
Strasburg.  But  he  reckoned  on  the  friends  he  flattered 
himself  he  possessed  in  Alsatia.  He  was  persuaded  that  the 
bad  government  of  the  Jacobins,  and  his  own  intrigues, 
would  make  the  whole  population  of  the  province  fly  to  him. 
He  was  mistaken.  The  Austrians  were  still  more  detested 
than  even  the  Jacobins,  for  the  Alsatians  were  Frenchmen. 
While  he  was  contriving  low  intrigues,  the  army  had  time 
to  recover,  and  the  eastern  frontiers  were  saved. 

At  last  the  arrival  of  a  general-in-chief  was  announced  j 
but  our  astonishment  was  great  when  we  heard  the  name  of 
Pichegru  :  he  was  completely  unknown  to  the  army.  After 
many  inquiries,  we  learned  that  he  had  had  an  obscure 
command  in  the  department  of  the  Upper  Rhine  ;  that  he 
had  served  in  the  artillery  as  a  non-commissioned  officer  ; 
and  that  he  had  a  little  while  before  been  chief  clerk  in  the 
War  Office.  The  name  of  Pichegru,  which  a  short  time 
after  became  famous  in  France  and  all  over  Europe,  was 
mentioned  with  contempt  by  all  the  giddy-headed  youths  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  77 

the  army.  A  few  days  were,  however,  sufficient  to  gain  him 
the  esteem  of  every  one.  I  was  still  on  the  staff,  and  was 
one  of  the  first  persons  who  saw  him.  He  was  about  thirty- 
five,  and  of  middling  size.  His  eyes  were  fine,  full  of  fire 
and  intelligence  ;  his  air  was  martial,  and  his  deportment 
calm  and  dignified  in  the  highest  degree.  He  began  by 
restoring  order  in  the  army,  and  by  rectifying  as  much 
as  possible  all  that  was  faulty  in  its  positions.  He  again 
inspired  the  troops  with  a  consciousness  of  their  strength, 
spoke  to  them  of  their  duty  without  harshness,  and  promised 
them  success  without  exaggeration.  The  winter  was  then 
in  all  its  rigour  ;  many  were  the  obstacles  to  be  surmounted, 
but  they  were  the  same  for  both  armies.  The  Prussians 
and  Austrians  did  not  agree  well  together  ;  their  generals 
hated  one  another  ;  and  M.  de  Wurmser  appeared  timid 
and  irresolute.  Our  part  was  therefore  to  make  use  of  the 
favourable  chances  those  circumstances  presented  us,  to 
attack  and  raise  the  blockade  of  Landau.  We  soon  received 
reinforcements,  and  St.  Just,  a  member  of  the  Committee 
of  Public  Safety,  arrived  unexpectedly  at  the  army.  The 
conduct  of  that  young  man  made  me  acquainted  with  the 
existence  of  a  government  most  terrible  from  its  energy, 
while  we  imagined  we  were  swayed  by  a  turbulent  and 
stupid  Assembly.  St.  Just  severely  reprimanded  his  col- 
leagues, and  sent  several  of  them  away.  He  asked  also 
an  account  of  the  causes  that  had  led  to  the  loss  of  the  lines 
of  Weissemburg  ;  he  arrested  several  generals,  and  eight  or 
ten  superior  ofl&cers.  Among  them  were  the  poor  noblemen 
who  had  not  yet  left  the  army.  A  sanguinary  tribunal 
sentenced  them,  and  they  were  shot  in  front  of  the  ranks. 
This  was  a  useless  act  of  cruelty  ;  for  no  treason  had  been 
committed,  and  the  loss  of  the  lines  was  much  less  owing  to 
the  generals  than  to  the  bad  measures  of  the  commissioners 
of  the  Convention  ;  but  St.  Just  had  read  that  the  Romans 
sometimes  made  use  of  cruel  severity  to  re-establish  discipline 
among  their  troops ;  and  that  man,  who  imagined  he  pos- 