


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  69 

answer  he  gave  his  general  was,  to  discharge  one  of  the 
pistols  off  in  his  own  face.  He  fell  :  his  jawbone  was 
broken  ;  but  he  did  not  die  of  his  wound.  At  the  trial  of 
General  Custines,  Coquebert  was  called  as  a  witness,  in  the 
hope  that  he  would  renew  his  charge  ;  but  he  behaved  like 
an  honourable  man,  completely  justifying  his  general,  and 
accusing  himself  of  a  fit  of  madness.  He  was  subsequently 
taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Hondschoote.  I  saw  him 
afterwards  in  Paris  ;  but  probably  the  sufferings  he  ex- 
perienced during  his  captivity  deranged  his  intellects,  for  he 
completely  lost  his  senses,  and  died  in  a  madhouse,  notwith- 
standing the  pains  that  were  taken  for  several  years  to  cure 
him. 

The  departure  of  General  Houchard  left  the  post  of  chief 
of  the  general  staff  of  the  army  vacant.  Custines  bestowed 
it  on  Colonel  d'Hilliers,  who  was  made  a  major-general,  and 
who  chose  me  for  his  aide-de-camp.  I  occupied  that  post 
with  a  great  deal  of  pleasure,  because  it  was  an  advancement, 
and  procured  me  means  of  instruction.  The  army  was  at 
that  time  not  above  forty  thousand  strong.  The  generals 
were  well  chosen  ;  most  of  them  belonged  to  that  part  of 
the  nobility  which  had  given  proofs  of  fidelity  to  their 
country,  in  defending  it  against  foreigners,  but  for  which 
they  were  cruelly  punished.  Distrust  of  the  nobility  was 
growing  stronger  every  day  in  the  new  Government.  Near 
the  armies  were  placed  commissioners  of  the  Convention, 
who  shared  the  same  sentiments.  The  extent  of  power 
with  which  they  were  invested  prompted  them  to  misuse  it. 
The  general-in-chief  was  forced  to  communicate  and  discuss 
with  them,  not  only  his  plans,  but  even  the  particulars  of 
the  service.  They  were  the  fountains  of  favour,  and  their 
influence  soon  became  dangerous  and  fatal  to  the  respect 
due  to  the  general-in-chief.  Several  commanders  bore 
impatiently  the  contumely  with  which  these  pro-consuls 
affected  to  treat  things,  and  they  frequently  uttered  offensive 
railleries  against  their  persons. 


JO  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VA  LE  TTE. 

The  violent  temper  of  General  Custines  made  him  repel 
with  anger  contradictions  that  were  rendered  unbearable  by 
a  total  absence  of  propriety  and  military  knowledge.  His 
situation  grew  more  difficult  from  day  to  day.  It  became, 
however,  necessary  to  act.  The  communication  with  Landau 
had  ceased  to  be  militarily  established.  The  siege  of  Mentz 
was  urged  with  vigour.  Custines  was  at  this  time  made 
commander-in-chief  of  the  Northern  army,  in  the  place  of 
General  Dam.pierre,  who  had  been  killed.  He  would  not, 
however,  leave  the  army  of  the  Rhine  without  having  drawn 
it  out  of  the  unfortunate  position  in  which  it  then  was  ; 
he  attacked  the  enemy  along  his  whole  line,  but  without 
success.  It  was  reported  that  his  intention  was  to  get  his 
army  beaten  by  the  corps  of  emigrants — an  absurd  calumny  ; 
we  scarcely  saw  that  body  on  the  17th  of  May.  The  fact  is, 
that  the  general  who  commanded  the  right  of  the  army  at 
Lauterbourg  did  not  obey  the  orders  he  had  received,  or 
executed  them  ill.  The  enemy,  who,  according  to  the  plan 
of  the  general-in-chief,  was  to  have  had  his  left  wing  turned, 
not  being  attacked  on  that  side,  found  himself  in  full  force 
before  the  centre  of  the  army  commanded  by  Custines  ;  a 
charge  of  cavalry  was  repulsed  by  a  masked  battery  of  two 
field-pieces,  and  in  their  flight  the  cavalry  hurried  along 
with  them  some  battalions.  I  only  mention  this  battle  be- 
cause it  became  one  of  the  charges  against  the  unfortunate 
Custines.  He  left  us  on  the  following  day  for  the  Northern 
army,  where  the  same  prejudice  and  calumny  awaited 
him.  He  was  soon  after  deprived  of  his  command,  and 
summoned  to  Paris,  where  he  died  on  the  scaffold.  His 
condemnation  was  one  of  the  first  crimes  of  the  sanguinary 
tribunal  which  afterwards  committed  so  many.  Custines 
was  a  lover  of  liberty,  and  never  did  a  thought  of  treason 
enter  his  mind.  The  consolation  of  religion  soothed  his 
last  moments  ;  and  such  was  the  fanaticism  of  his  time, 
that  a  man  who  had  always  shown  himself  full  of  intre- 
pidity under  the  greatest  trials  was  accused  of  cowardice 