


78  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

sessed  the  genius  of  Sylla  because  he  had  his  cruelty,  thus 
made  a  prelude  to  the  scenes  of  murder  which  a  few  months 
after  he  extended  all  over  France.  He  probably  thought 
he  had  made  a  just  compensation  by  threatening  the  presi- 
dent of  the  atrocious  tribunal  he  had  employed.  This  man 
was  a  wretched  foreign  priest,  called  Schneider,  who  gloried 
in  his  assumed  title  of  the  Marat  of  the  Rhine.  For  several 
months  he  had  acted  as  president  of  the  tribunal  and  general 
of  the  revolutionary  army,  and  terrified  Alsatia  with  his 
cruelty  and  debauchery.  He  used  to  travel  through  the 
province,  followed  by  judges  who  were  no  better  than 
robbers,  and  by  soldiers  who  were  his  executioners.  A 
guillotine  drawn  by  horses,  like  a  field-piece,  accompanied 
him  everywhere  ;  and  when  he  arrived  in  any  town,  not 
one  of  the  inhabitants  could  count  on  escaping.  Sex,  age, 
beauty,  respectability,  fortune — nothing  was  sacred  in  the 
eyes  of  this  wretch.  Of  all  the  ferocious  men  that  made 
themselves  famous  during  that  period,  Schneider  perhaps 
bore  the  greatest  resemblance  to  Nero.  The  sight  of  death 
and  blood  gave  him  a  sensation  of  unspeakable  delight. 
The  examples  of  this  monster  of  cruelty  have  in  them 
a  sort  of  originality  that  makes  one  shudder  ;  and  one 
would  wish  to  doubt  their  truth,  if  the  testimony  of  one 
hundred  thousand  inhabitants  and  the  evidence  of  facts 
were  not  certain  proofs  of  their  existence.  St.  Just  had 
the  monster  arrested  and  sent  to  Paris.  There  he  was 
condemned,  not  for  the  crimes  he  had  really  committed,, 
but  for  prior  conspiracies  that  never  existed  ;  so  far  was 
justice  reviled  in  those  deplorable  times. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  campaign  opened  in  the  month  of  December.  The 
right  wing  of  the  array  was  commanded  by  General  St. 
Cyr,  and  the  left  by  General  Desaix.  General  Hoche,  who 
was  at  the  head  of  the  Army  of  the  Moselle,  seconded  our 
movements  by  vigorous  and  perpetually  renewed  attacks. 
Brilliant  though  dearly-bought  successes  brought  us  to  the 
heights  of  Brompt ;  they  caused  us  both  to  love  and  respect 
our  new  general-in-chief. 

It  was  near  Brompt  that  we  had  a  cavalry  engagement 
with  the  corps  of  Conde,  in  which  we  were  on  the  point 
of  taking  prisoners  a  part  of  that  corps,  with  the  three 
Princes  who  commanded  it.  The  Duke  of  Bourbon  was 
wounded,  but  he  escaped  by  the  devotion  of  the  brave  men 
that  surrounded  him,  and  b}^  one  of  those  chances  the 
influence  of  which  so  strongly  modifies  events.  An  officer 
of  the  39th  regiment  of  dragoons,  called  Dieudonne,  had 
distinguished  himself  by  valour  on  those  same  heights  of 
Brompt  during  our  retreat.  The  commissioners  of  the 
Convention  sent  him  to  Paris  to  present  two  standards  he 
had  taken.  He  was  received  with  marked  distinction  by 
the  Assembly,  and  he  returned  to  the  army  a  month  after- 
wards with  the  rank  of  general  of  brigade.  In  the  battle 
which  might  have  been  so  fatal  to  the  Bourbon  Princes, 
Dieudonne  commanded  two  regiments.  That  was  too  much 
for  his  experience.  He  did  not  know  how  to  develop  them 
in  due  time,  and  the   Princes  were  saved.     His  error  was 