

The  success  of  our  armies  began,  however,  to  diminish. 
Our  conquests  had  been  rapid,  but  we  were  in  danger  of 
losing  them  again.  Dumouriez,  after  having  deceived  both 
the  Court  and  the  Jacobins,  wanted  to  draw  the  King  out  of 
the  abyss,  and  crush  his  enemies.  His  presumption  led  him 
to  hope  that  he  should  be  luckier  than  ]\I.  Lafayette.  But 
the  army  took  no  interest  in  the  King,  being  bound  by  no 
tie  to  his  person  ;  and,  though  the  troops  had  no  affection 
for  a  Provisional  Government  scarcely  established,  they  still 
remained  nobly  faithful  to  their  high  duty  of  defending  the 
territory,  and  insuring  the  independence  of  the  country. 
Dumouriez  lost  Belgium,  and  was  obliged  to  seek  refuge  in 
foreign  countries,  after  having  committed  two  disgraceful 
acts  ; — namely,  treating  with  the  enemy  of  his  country,  and 
delivering  over  the  commissioners  of  the  Convention,  among 
whom  was  one  of  his  own  old  comrades,  General  Bournon- 
ville.  The  army  of  the  Rhine  also  was  attacked  by  the 
enemy  with  renewed  force.  Frankfort  was  evacuated,  and 
we  retired  to  Mentz,  and  from  thence  farther  back.  General 
Custines  left  there,  as  commander-in-chief.  General  Doire  ; 
as  commander  of  the  engineers.  Colonel  Meguier  ;  as 
commander  of  the  fortified  camp,  Major-General  Kleber  ; 


68  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

and  as  commander  of  the  fortress,  M.  Aubert  Dubayet. 
General  Blou  was  ordered  to  leave  the  town  at  the  head  of  a 
body  of  some  thousand  men,  and  the  garrison  of  Worms  was 
to  cover  his  retreat.  The  command  of  the  four  battalions 
of  that  garrison  was  given  to  a  young  officer  of  the  staff : 
this  was  Desaix,  who  subsequently  distinguished  himself  by 
so  man}^  noble  feats,  and  by  his  heroic  character.  General 
Blou,  embarrassed  in  his  retreat  by  an  enormous  quantity  of 
equipages  belonging  to  persons  unconnected  with  the  army, 
that  had  been  sent  out  of  the  town,  was  unable  to  resist  the 
imposing  force  of  the  enemy,  and  was  obliged  to  re-enter 
the  city.  He  and  his  troops  contributed  largely  to  the  loss 
the  enemy  suffered  during  the  siege. 

General  Custines  might  have  taken  a  fine  position  behind 
the  Queich,  but  he  preferred  retiring  behind  the  lines  of  the 
Lutter,  resting  on  the  mountains  of  the  Vosges,  and  on  the 
Rhine  at  Lauterbourg.  The  intention  of  the  general  in 
choosing  a  position  so  far  from  Mentz,  a  place  that  could 
not  long  be  left  to  itself,  was  undoubtedly  to  take  leisure  to 
instruct  and  discipline  a  young  and  inexperienced  army. 
But  he  was  blamed  by  many  generals,  and  particularly  by 
Coquebert,  one  of  his  aides-de-camp,  an  officer  of  distin- 
guished merit,  and  much  esteemed  by  his  commander,  not 
only  for  his  extended  information  in  different  branches  of 
military  science,  but  also  for  a  frankness  of  character  which 
was  perhaps  not  devoid  of  some  asperity.  Two  days  after 
the  arrival  of  the  headquarters  at  Weissemburg,  Coquebert 
came  to  the  general,  and  after  having  again  brought  to  his 
mind  the  weighty  reasons  that  ought  to  have  led  him  to 
prefer  the  position  of  the  Queich,  he  said  somewhat  harshly 
that  evil  reports  had  been  the  result  of  his  contrary  resolu- 
tion, and  that  even  the  word  treason  had  been  pronounced. 
Custines  immediately  seized  his  pistols,  and,  throwing  them 
on  the  table,  cried,  "  If  I  am  a  traitor,  blow  my  brains  out !  " 
Coquebert,  struck  with  the  noble  indignation  of  a  man  so 
unjustly  aspersed,  was  himself  confounded,  and   the   only 