


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  71 

"because  he  walked  to  the  scaffold  accompanied  by  a  clergy- 
man. 

General  Custines  had  his  son  with  him  at  the  army  of  the 
Rhine.  All  who  have  known  that  young  man  loved  him  for 
the  noble  qualities  with  which  he  was  gifted.  He  accom- 
panied his  father  to  the  Northern  army,  and  afterwards  to 
Paris,  and  he  soon  followed  him  to  the  scaffold.  It  is  of 
Tittle  importance  to  know  what  pretence  was  employed  to 
condemn  this  amiable  youth  ;  the  judges  had  already  begun 
to  trample  on  the  most  sacred  forms.  His  age,  his  pro- 
fession, his  manner  of  living,  made  him  equally  a  stranger 
to  all  factions.  He  left  an  only  son,  who  will,  I  hope,  not 
betray  the  noble  quahties  of  his  father  and  the  glory  of  his 
grandfather. 

General  Alexander  de  Beauharnais,  who  took  the  place 
of  Custines,  had  also  been  a  member  of  that  Constituent 
Assembly  so  replete  with  honourable  men.  He  had  neither 
the  faults  of  his  predecessor,  nor  his  habit  of  command.  The 
former  was  violent  to  an  excess,  and  sometimes  incapable  of 
listening  to  the  voice  of  reason  ;  still,  he  was  beloved  by  the 
soldiers  for  his  frankness  and  popularity.  M.  de  Beau- 
harnais, on  the  contrary,  had  a  cultivated  mind  and  a  calm 
temper  ;  he  was  fond  of  order  and  discipline  ;  his  activity 
was  boundless  ;  his  perception  was  quick  and  accurate  ;  his 
valour  cool  and  brilliant.  The  army  soon  became  fond  of 
him.  Modest,  and  even  a  little  circumspect,  he  showed 
reserve  in  the  presence  of  the  troops  ;  and  as  he  did  not  say 
much  to  them,  he  did  not  inspire  them  with  the  same 
enthusiasm  as  General  Custines,  who  liked  to  make  speeches, 
knew  the  name  of  every  private  soldier,  visited  the  men  in 
the  camp  and  hospitals,  and  whose  blunt  good-humour  and 
repartees  were  quoted  everywhere. 

General  d'Hilliers  was  also  superseded  and  summoned  to 
Paris,  where  he  was  thrown  into  prison.  His  successor  as 
chief  of  the  staff  was  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clarke,  of  Irish  ex- 
traction, who  some  years  before  had  been  attached  to  the  Duke 


72  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

of  Orleans.  At  the  battle  of  the  17th  of  May  he  commanded 
a  troop  of  the  2nd  regiment  of  cavalry.  His  horse  having 
been  killed  in  a  charge,  and  being  unable  to  procure  another, 
he  took  up  a  musket  and  placed  himself  in  the  ranks  of  a 
company  of  grenadiers.  That  action  was  then  considered  as 
very  courageous,  and  he  was  made  a  colonel.  M.  de  Beau- 
harnais  took  him  for  chief  of  his  staff,  and  procured  him  the 
rank  of  major-general.  M.  Clarke  added  to  a  taste  for  his 
profession  all  the  suppleness  of  a  man  who  wishes  to  advance, 
and  that  sort  of  spirit  of  intrigue  for  which  his  countrymen 
are  reputed.  He  left  the  army  on  the  12th  of  October, 
having  been  superseded  and  sent  to  Paris.  That  campaign 
was  the  only  one  in  which  he  ever  served.  He  died  a 
marshal  of  France.  I  shall  have  more  than  one  occasion  to 
mention  him  ;  and,  although  I  have  cause  to  be  dissatisfied 
with  him,  I  hope  to  do  him  justice. 