

79 


So  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

considered  a  crime  :  he  was  arrested  and  sent  to  Paris  as 
a  traitor  ;  he  died  on  the  scaffold. 

The  battle  of  Brompt  gave  us  a  superiority  over  the 
enemy  which  we  did  not  afterwards  lose.  General  Hoche 
continued  advancing  on  the  right  of  the  enemy.  He 
succeeded  in  turning  his  position  near  Pirmasens  ;  and  a 
few  days  after,  while  debouching  from  behind  the  moun- 
tains, the  two  French  armies  met  near  Weissemburg.  The 
enemy,  discouraged,  began  to  retreat,  and  Landau  was 
delivered.  Pichegru's  fame  was  from  that  moment  firmly 
established.  He  also  displayed  his  character  in  a  trait  I 
must  not  omit.  General  Desaix  was  of  noble  extraction  ; 
but  the  decree  that  excluded  all  noblemen  had  not  yet  been 
applied  to  him.  The  commissioners  of  the  Convention 
hesitated  to  deprive  the  army  of  an  able,  valiant,  and 
beloved  officer.  The  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  never- 
theless, sent  three  times  to  Pichegru  orders  to  dismiss  him  ; 
but  he  did  not  obey  them,  and  even  took  care  not  to 
mention  the  fact  to  any  one.  It  was  not  till  the  campaign 
was  over  that  Desaix  learned  it.  Thus,  by  his  generous 
disobedience,  he  saved  a  general  who,  during  ten  years,  shed 
lustre  on  the  armies  of  France,  and  whose  noble  character 
may  be  offered  as  a  model  to  all  soldiers. 

The  junction  of  the  two  armies,  after  such  great  successes, 
was  a  beautiful  scene.  The  generals  congratulated  one 
another  on  their  mutual  exertions ;  but  discord  soon 
created  between  them  dissensions  more  dangerous  than 
even  the  enemy  had  proved.  Each  pretended  to  the 
greatest  share  of  the  glory,  and  wounded  vanity  would 
perhaps  have  soiled  the  field  with  blood,  had  not  Govern- 
ment checked  the  misunderstanding  by  separating  the 
commanders.  Pichegru  was  sent  to  the  Northern  army, 
and  Hoche  to  that  which  was  assembled  near  Nice.  He 
had  scarcely  arrived  there  when  he  was  arrested,  and  shut 
up  in  the  dungeon  of  the  Conciergerie,  where  he  remained 
until  after  the  9th  of  Thermidor.     Thus  the  Committee  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  8 1 

Public  Safety  made  him  expiate  his  glory,  and  humbled  his 
proud  character. 

The  Army  of  the  Rhine  pursued  its  successes  during  the 
remainder  of  the  year  1794.  Our  position  on  the  Queich 
was  secure  :  the  Austrians  had  repassed  the  Rhine.  We 
had  some  other  brilliant  actions  with  the  Prussians  ;  and 
I  remember  that  at  the  close  of  one  of  them  that  had  proved 
entirely  to  our  advantage,  in  the  environs  of  Germersheim, 
we  saw  the  words  chalked  on  the  doors  of  a  village  we  had 
taken — "  Adieu  !  brave  Frenchmen  !  "  X  short  time  after, 
the  treaty  of  Basil  was  signed,  and  established  friendship 
between  two  nations  which  already  esteemed  one  another. 
The  common  hatred  awoke  again  at  a  more  recent  period, 
and  a  long  time  will  now  be  required  to  suppress  it. 