

In  the  month  of  October  the  army  established  itself 
before  Mentz,  to  keep  the  enemy  in  awe,  and  prevent  him 
from  advancing  on  that  point.  The  soldiers  constructed 
huts  underground  in  a  very  ingenious  manner.  Protected 
by  field  fortifications  that  covered  this  new  sort  of  camp, 
they  passed  there  one  of  the  longest  and  severest  winters 
ever  recorded.  The  result  aimed  at  in  taking  that  position 
was  obtained,  at  least,  during  six  months  ;  but  it  was  too 
dearly  bought.  In  the  month  of  January,  one-half  of  the 
army  lay  sick  in  the  hospitals.  In  June  the  enemy  again 
began  his  operations,  and,  as  we  might  have  foreseen,  he 
crossed  the  Rhine  behind  us,  turned  our  position,  and 
obliged  us  to  fall  back  on  the  Lutter.  General  Moreau 
came  to  take  command  of  the  Army  of  the  Rhine.  The 
history  of  that  campaign  is  known  ;  I  shall  therefore  enter 
into  no  particulars  concerning  it.  I  left  the  army  a  little 
while  before  its  retreat.  General  d'Hilliers  had  just  got  out 
of  prison,  and  had  been  appointed  chief  of  the  staff  of  the 
first  military  division  in  Paris.  He  proposed  to  me  to 
return  and  resume  my  duty  as  his  aide-de-camp.  I  was 
happy  in  the  army,  but  I  wished  to  see  my  family  once 
more  ;  so  I  set  off. 

7 


82  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

Before  I  leave  the  Army  of  the  Rhine,  to  which  I  shall 
not  again  allude,  I  must  beg  permission  to  take  leave  of 
it  with  a  few  lines.  That  army  was  by  no  means  the  first, 
either  b}^  its  consequence  or  its  exploits.  Its  duty  was  to 
protect  Alsatia  and  defend  that  part  of  the  Palatinate  it  had 
conquered.  It  succeeded  by  battles  strongly  disputed,  but 
in  the  issue  always  favourable  ;  and  it  was  of  great  service 
to  France,  for  the  enemy  coveted  that  part  of  our  frontiers 
that  he  would  perhaps  never  have  restored.  Lorraine  is 
the  cradle  of  the  Imperial  house,  and  the  Germans  look 
upon  Alsatia  as  a  part  of  the  empire,  which  it  is  as  much 
their  advantage  as  their  honour  to  unite  again  to  the 
mother  country  ; — there  prevail  the  same  language,  the 
same  customs,  the  same  religion,  and,  above  all,  the  strong 
wish  of  weakening  France,  and  enabling  themselves  to 
attack  her  in  the  very  heart.    The  plan  is  not  yet  given  up. 

The  Army  of  the  Rhine  shared  at  that  period  with 
our  other  armies  the  advantage  of  being  commanded  by 
generals  and  officers,  almost  all  of  whom  had  risen  from  its 
own  ranks  and  been  instructed  among  them.  At  the  head 
of  the  most  able  must  be  placed  Kleber,  Desaix,  and  St. 
Cyr.  Kleber  was  born  at  Strasburg  :  he  had  served  before 
the  Revolution  in  the  Austrian  army,  and  he  came  to  ours 
as  commander  of  a  battalion  of  volunteers  of  the  Upper 
Rhine.  His  stature  was  strong  and  gigantic,  and  called  to 
mind  the  heroes  of  Homer  :  his  voice  was  sonorous  and 
imperious  ;  his  spirit  rose  and  warmed  at  the  sight  of 
danger  ;  though  learned  in  all  the  branches  of  military 
science,  he  was  not  gifted  with  that  boldness  of  execution 
that  distinguished  other  generals  :  but  he  possessed  the 
prudence  which  long  experience  gives,  joined  to  the 
resources  derived  from  an  imperturbable  coolness  and  rapid 
perception.  Of  all  our  generals,  Kleber  is  perhaps  the  one 
of  whom  the  soldiers  retain  the  most  flattering  recollection, 
for  he  loved  them  as  if  they  had  been  his  children,  was 
continuall}'  thinking  of  their  comforts,  and  diverted  them 