

M.  de  Beauharnais  hastened  his  march  to  Mentz  ;  and, 
though  the  resistance  of  the  enemy  grew  stronger  from  day 
to  day,  he  succeeded  in  repelling  him.  After  having  fought 
for  five  days,  we  made  ourselves  masters  of  Spire  and 
Frankenthal.  Two  days  more  and  we  should  have  arrived 
under  the  walls  of  Mentz,  when  accounts  of  the  town  having 
capitulated  were  received  at  our  headquarters.  We  were 
forced  to  return  behind  the  Lutter. 

Courage  and  good  intention  were  the  only  qualities  of 
the  garrison  of  Mentz  at  the  beginning  of  the  siege.  The 
generals  were  intelligent  and  bold  ;  but  the  attacks  of  the 
besiegers  were  so  vigorous  and  repeated  that  the  besieged, 
soldiers  as  well  as  officers,  acquired  both  experience  and 
valour  in  so  remarkable  a  degree  that  they  might  afterwards 
be  looked  upon  as  the  most  formidable  body  the  Republic 
was  able  to  oppose  to  its  enemies. 

The  Prussians,  eager  to  make  themselves  masters  of  that 
barrier  of  the  Rhine,  and  not  caring  what  use  the  French 
Government  might  make  of  these  troops,  were  satisfied  with 
stipulating  that  they  should  retire  into  the  interior  of  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  73 

country,  and  not  serve  against  the  Allies  for  the  space  of  a 
year.  This  article  of  the  capitulation  saved  the  Republic, 
and  cost  the  enemy  dear.  The  garrison  of  Mentz,  com- 
manded by  the  intrepid  general  Kleber,  flew  to  the  western 
departments,  defeated  the  Vendeans,  and  when  the  year  was 
expired  reappeared  under  the  walls  of  Mentz. 

Having  returned  to  Weissemburg,  we  were  soon  obliged 
to  prepare  for  the  attacks  of  an  enemy  that  had  become 
formidable  by  his  junction  with  the  Prussian  army,  and  was 
besides  free  in  all  his  movements.  But  the  commissioners 
of  the  Convention  wanted  first  of  all  to  abolish  the  distinction 
that  still  subsisted  between  the  troops  of  the  line  and  the 
battalions  of  national  volunteers.  The  amalgamation  was  a 
difficult  and  dangerous  operation  at  the  moment  of  a  decisive 
action.  The  generals  explained  their  fears  ;  but  instead  of 
being  listened  to,  they  became  objects  of  suspicion  ;  and, 
just  at  that  instant,  a  decree  of  the  Convention  having 
ordered  the  dismissal  of  all  the  officers  who  belonged  to  the 
nobility,  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  was  thrown  all  of  a  sudden 
into  a  state  of  confusion,  of  which  the  enemy  did  not  fail  to 
make  use.  The  decree  also  concerned  M.  de  Beauharnais  : 
by  disobeying,  he  would  have  placed  himself  in  open  defiance 
to  Government.  The  commissioners,  however,  proposed 
that  he  should  wait  for  an  individual  order  and  the  appoint- 
ment of  his  successor  ;  but  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety 
had  already  named  the  officer  that  was  to  command  in  his 
place.  The  choice  had  fallen  on  General  Delmas,  a  young 
man  of  great  merit,  but  as  yet  too  inexperienced  for  so  im- 
portant a  command  in  such  difficult  circumstances  :  he  was,, 
besides,  at  Landau,  and  that  town  being  blockaded,  his  return 
to  the  army  was  impossible. 