

Two  days  after  the  13th  of  Vendemiaire,  Barras  introduced 
to  the  Convention  all  the  generals  and  officers  of  the  staff 
who  had  contributed  to  save  that  Assembly.  General  Bona- 
parte was  there,  but  he  mingled  with  the  crowd.  When 
Barras,  in  his  speech,  pronounced  his  name  with  compli- 
ment, those  who  surrounded  him  wanted  to  make  him 
advance  to  the  first  rank.  He  pushed  them  aside  with  a 
look  of  ill-humour  and  diffidence  which  pleased  me.  There 
was  in  his  actions  less  of  pride  than  a  delicate  feeling  of  pro- 
priety. He  was  ashamed  to  be  praised  for  such  a  victory. 
Besides,  it  is  certain  he  felt  no  great  esteem  for  those  in 
whose  favour  he  had  fought,  and  who  were  thus  lavishing 
their  applause  on  him. 


CHAPTER  X. 

The  Convention  hastened  to  put  an  end  to  its  stormy 
session,  so  fatal  to  humanity,  but  still  so  memorable  from 
the  incredible  vigour  with  ^yhich  it  saved  France  from  a 
foreign  yoke.  The  reins  of  government  were  delivered  into 
the  hands  of  the  Directory,  General  Bonaparte  was  made 
commander-in-chief  of  the  first  military  division  and  of  the 
city  of  Paris.  One  of  the  first  measures  that  were  taken  by 
the  new  Government  was  the  disarming  of  all  the  citizens  of 
the  metropolis.  They  delivered  up  their  arms  without  much 
regret :  the  trial  they  had  just  made  of  their  strength  was 
not  of  a  nature  to  inspire  them  with  great  confidence  in 
themselves.  This  measure  was  executed  with  great  rigour. 
Swords  and  sabres  were  comprehended  in  the  general  con- 
fiscation. The  widow  of  General  Beauharnais  was  going  to 
deliv^er  up  to  one  of  the  commissioners  entrusted  with  these 
orders  the  sabre  of  her  late  husband,  when  her  son  Eugene, 
then  scarcely  thirteen  years  old,  seized  the  weapon,  and 
declared  that  they  who  wished  to  have  it  must  first  take  his 
life.  The  commissioner  consented  to  leave  it  him,  provided 
he  got  a  permission  from  the  general-in-chief.  Eugene  flew 
to  his  house  :  the  deep  emotion  the  child  evinced,  his  name, 
his  interesting  appearance,  the  ardour  and  simplicity  with 
which  he  expressed  his  wishes,  touched  the  general.  He 
embraced  him,  allowed  him  to  keep  the  dearly-beloved 
sword,  and  visited  Madame  de  Beauharnais.  She  was 
young,   amiable,  and  more  than   pretty.     He  fell    in   love 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  loi 

-with  her,  and  soon  after  married  her  ;  so  that  their  union, 
which  was  so  long  a  happy  one,  had  its  origin  in  an  amiable 
trait  of  filial  piety. 

When  General  Beauharnais  left  the  Army  of  the  Rhine, 
he  had  retired  to  one  of  his  estates,  situated  a  few  leagues 
from  Blois.  There  he  lived  in  profound  retirement,  lament- 
ing the  deplorable  outrages  that  disgraced  liberty,  and 
bitterly  regretting  the  glory  he  could  no  longer  share. 
But  his  name  had  been  too  celebrated  for  him  to  enter- 
tain a  reasonable  hope  of  escaping  the  persecutions  to  which 
the  members  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  were  exposed. 
He  was  arrested,  and  thrown  into  the  prisons  of  Paris, 
shortly  before  the  9th  of  Thermidor,  and  at  a  time  when 
the  people  were  at  last  returning  to  right  feeling  and  begin- 
ning to  shudder  at  the  sight  of  the  blood  with  which  they 
had  long  feasted  their  eyes.  The  Jacobins  invented  the 
prison  conspiracies,  as  a  pretence  for  prolonging  their 
measures.  They  had  mixed  with  the  prisoners  some  spies, 
who  found  men  vile  enough  to  purchase  their  lives  by 
atrocious  calumny.  One  of  these  wTetches,  enraged  at 
having  been  discovered  by  M.  de  Beauharnais  in  the  midst 
of  his  infamous  intrigues,  and  at  hearing  him  speak  openly 
of  the  fact  with  all  the  honourable  pride  of  an  upright  man, 
denounced  him.  He  was  sent  to  the  scaffold,  and  suffered 
on  the  7th  of  Thermidor,  two  days  before  the  fall  of  Robes- 
pierre. 