

It  must,  however,  be  acknowledged  that  several  of  those 
men  felt  themselves  justified,  and  perhaps  encouraged,  by 
the  praises  which  historians  of  all  ages  have  lavished  on  the 
scourges  of  humanity.  The  pulpit  itself  has  not  been  able 
to  avoid  so  fatal  a  folly.  Every  schoolboy  has  learned  by 
heart  the  beautiful  picture  of  Cromwell  drawn  by  Bossuet  : 
"  A  man  was  found,"  &c.  What  ambitious  mind  can  hesi- 
tate on  the  road  to  crime,  when  he  reads  such  praises  written 
by  the  first  of  sacred  orators  ?  The  Cardinal  de  Richelieu 
found  a  defender  in  the  grave  and  wise  author  of  "  L'Esprit 
des  Lois  ;  "  his  cruelty,  his  thirst  of  blood  and  revenge,  are 
considered  by  most  historians  as  the  workings  of  a  superior 
mind,  or  at  least  as  a  proud  contempt  for  humanity.  The 
memory  of  that  man  has  perhaps  done  more  harm  to  France 
than  his  genius  did  her  good.  The  execrable  maxim,  "  The 
dead  never  rise  again,"  is  written  in  letters  of  blood  through- 
out his  history  ;  and  I  have  many  reasons  to  believe  that 
the  rulers  of  the  Convention  had  chosen  him  for  their  model. 
The  horrible  system  of  killing  one's  enemies  instead  of  sub- 
duing them,  and  of  reigning  by  the  aid  of  terror,  is  convenient 
to  cowardly  and  narrow  minds  ;  but  men  of  elevated  genius 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  93 

follow  other  maxims.  They  know  that  scaffolds  are  but 
indifferent  means  of  government.  Henry  the  Fourth  was 
the  most  indulgent  of  sovereigns,  and  he  made  himself 
popular  by  gaining  the  affections  of  every  one.  Once  he 
gave  way  to  a  fatal  and  sanguinary  policy.  It  is  but  too 
sure  that  the  death  of  Biron  was  of  no  use,  either  to  his 
own  authority,  or  to  the  happiness  of  the  following  genera- 
tions. 

The  rage  of  the  Convention  necessarily  drew  to  an  end. 
The  government  they  had  established  exercised  their  tyranny 
on  themselves  :  fear  gave  birth  to  despair  ;  thousands  of 
victims  had  been  butchered  under  the  eyes  of  the  Assembly, 
which  remained  insensible,  and  at  last  sacrificed  the  govern- 
ment to  its  own  safety.  But  it  did  not  foresee  that  general 
contempt  would  succeed  to  terror.  In  vain  did  the  Conven- 
tion expel  and  punish  such  of  its  members  as  had  bathed 
themselves  in  blood — in  vain  did  it  recall  those  who  had 
made  themselves  respected  by  their  courage  and  humanity. 
Hatred  and  indignation  assailed  it  on  all  sides  ;  and  such 
was  its  situation,  that  even  when  adopting  an  amended 
course  it  was  surrounded  by  the  distrust  of  all  honourable 
men,  and  the  clamour  and  threats  of  a  populace  whose 
perverseness  it  had  itself  completed  by  encouraging  outrage. 
In  the  month  of  Prairial,  the  Faubourg  St.  Antoine  be- 
sieged the  Assembly,  and  came  to  seek  for  victims  in  its 
bosom  ;  and  if  the  Convention  was  not  forced  to  submit,  it 
was  owing  to  the  heroic  resistance  of  Boissy  d'Anglas,  whose 
admirable  courage  subdued  the  mob.  The  Assembly  resolved 
at  last  on  a  desperate  measure,  the  only  one  that  could  suc- 
ceed :  regular  troops  were  called  in,  and  Pichegru  led  them 
to  the  suburb.  The  rebels  were  disarmed  and  humbled. 
This  victory,  which  did  not  cost  a  drop  of  blood,  has 
delivered  us  for  a  long  while,  I  hope,  from  the  fury  of  the 
rabble. 