


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA   VALETTE.  91 

Between  the  two  extremes  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Fau- 
iDOurg  St.  Alarceau  and  the  Chaussee  d'Antin  were  still  to  be 
met  with  the  estimable  citizens,  and  those  numerous  well- 
informed  men,  friends  to  their  country  and  to  freedom, 
whose  indignation,  hitherto  suppressed  by  terror,  blazed  up 
with  an  energy  that  at  last  brought  on  the  catastrophe  of 
the  13th  of  Vendemiaire.  To  unfold  the  causes  of  that 
catastrophe,  it  is  necessary  to  cast  a  look  on  the  government 
of  the  Conventional  Assembly. 

That  Assembly  had  been  loaded  with  an  enormous  burthen. 
The  King  had  been  precipitated  from  his  throne,  and  the 
monarchy  existed  no  longer.  The  Republic  had  been 
established  without  consulting  the  people  ;  and  the  King 
Jaad  been  put  to  death  because  his  existence  was  trouble- 
some to  the  Assembly.  The  members  soon  became  few, 
and  they  were  composed  of  elements  too  hostile  to  one 
another  to  be  able  to  direct  affairs  securely  and  rapidly  ; 
they  enacted  therefore  among  themselves  a  government 
called  the  Committee  of  Public  Safety,  that  was  to  superin- 
tend the  general  administration  of  the  country,  and  to  direct 
the  exertions  of  France  against  her  foreign  enemies.  They 
instituted  also  a  Committee  of  General  Safety,  that  was  to 
suppress  the  attacks  of  interior  foes.  The  successes  of  the 
Vendeans  and  of  the  allied  armies  carried  these  two  com- 
mittees beyond  all  reasonable  ideas,  and  made  the  Conven- 
tion feel  that  it  must  conquer  or  die.  Defence  was  main- 
tained with  all  the  force  and  energy  that  personal  safety  and 
Tevenge  can  inspire.  The  excellent  direction  given  to  the 
armies,  which  they  followed  with  admirable  courage,  pre- 
served France  from  a  foreign  yoke  ;  but  the  progress  of  civil 
war,  and  the  secret  exertions  of  the  royalists,  could  scarcely 
justify  the  massacres  and  the  horrible  tyranny  under  which 
the  country  groaned  for  so  long  a  period.  The  rulers  of  the 
Assembly  will  remain  for  ever  loaded  with  the  odium  which 
their  barbarous  government  (of  which  history  does  not 
present  another  instance)  will  excite  among  future  genera- 


92  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

tions.  Of  all  the  lessons  given  by  the  history  of  human 
passions,  there  is  one  especially  on  which  the  moralist  must 
insist  with  force — I  mean,  the  impossibility,  which  the  most 
honourable  men  will  ever  experience,  of  stopping,  if  once 
their  passions  draw  them  into  the  path  of  error.  Surely,  if 
a  few  )-ears  before  so  many  crimes  were  committed,  they 
could  have  been  pictured  before  the  eyes  of  the  most  bar- 
barous among  their  perpetrators,  I  fear  not  to  say  that  all, 
even  Robespierre  himself,  would  have  recoiled  with  horror. 
Men  begin  by  caressing  theories  ;  heated  imagination  presents 
them  as  useful  and  easy  of  execution  ;  they  toil,  they  advance 
unconsciously  from  errors  to  faults,  and  from  faults  to 
crimes,  till  the  contaminated  mind  corrupts  sensibility, 
and  adorns  by  the  name  of  state  policy  the  most  horrible 
outrages. 