

8 


98  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

sixty  paces  distant,  and  that  the  battahon  of  the  Rue  St. 
Honore  filled  the  whole  space  to  a  great  depth.  The  com- 
mand of  the  Parisian  army  was  entrusted  to  General  Dani- 
can,  a  man  almost  unknown,  even  in  the  ranks,  where  he  had 
served  for  some  time,  and  whom  the  Restoration  did  not 
bring  into  distinction. 

Government  felt  that  a  too  severe  inquiry  on  this  affair 
would  only  contribute  to  exasperate  the  minds  of  the  public, 
and  that  they  ought  to  enjoy  with  moderation  a  victory 
which  had  been  bought  at  the  price  of  so  much  blood.  A 
court-martial  was  nevertheless  instituted,  with  a  view  to 
frighten  the  leaders  ;  but  they  were  all  acquitted,  with  the 
exception  of  one  unfortunate  emigrant,  named  Lafont,  who 
had  got  secretly  into  Paris  in  order  to  intrigue  in  favour  of 
his  employers,  and  who  had  made  himself  conspicuous  by  a 
very  violent  behaviour.  He  was  sentenced  to  death  ;  but 
even  he  would  have  been  saved,  if  his  intense  devotion  to 
the  cause  of  the  Bourbons  had  not  made  him  reject  all  the 
means  he  might  have  used  to  avoid  his  condemnation. 

The  Royalists  have  pretended  of  late  years  that  this  insur- 
rection of  the  Parisians  was  a  generous  effort  attempted  in 
favour  of  the  Bourbons.  I  declare  that  this  is  not  the  fact. 
I  was  placed  in  the  most  favourable  position  for  observing 
the  passions  and  intrigues  which  brought  about  the  un- 
fortunate catastrophe  of  the  13th  of  Vendemiaire.  I  was 
acquainted  with  several  honourable  men  who  had  taken  part 
with  the  sections,  and  I  saw  neither  in  the  people  nor  in 
their  leaders  any  wish  for  the  return  of  the  Bourbons,  much 
less  a  plan  for  recalling  them.  The  death  of  the  King  was 
deplored  by  all  sensible  m^en  ;  but  liberty  was  beloved. 
Hatred  of  the  Convention  was  carried  to  the  highest  pitch, 
on  account  of  the  horrors  with  which  that  Assembly  had 
visited  the  country.  I  questioned  the  most  violent  as  to 
what  they  wished  to  establish  in  the  place  of  the  expiring 
government.  Their  answer  was,  "  We  will  have  nothing 
more  to  do  with  them.     It  is  the  Republic  we  wish  for,  with 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  99 

honest  men  to  govern  us."  No  one  went  farther  than  this. 
It  is  true,  that  some  insinuations  were  made  in  the  sections, 
in  favour  of  the  Royal  Family  ;  but  so  feeble,  so  ambiguous, 
that  very  little  attention  was  paid  to  them.  No  one  thought 
of  pronouncing  the  name  of  that  family.  I  have  no  doubt 
that,  if  the  sections  had  triumphed,  the  attempt  would  have 
been  more  direct  and  more  bold  ;  perhaps  even  it  would  have 
succeeded,  but  then  civil  war  would  have  broken  out  on 
all  sides.  And  if,  eighteen  years  after,  with  the  aid  of  all 
Europe,  the  Bourbons  were  unable  to  maintain  themselves 
on  the  throne,  what  would  have  been  their  fate  at  a  period 
when  France,  not  yet  accustomed  to  the  yoke,  was  animated 
by  republican  habits  and  ideas,  and  uncurbed  energy  ? 