

Madame  de  Beauharnais  had  been  locked  up,  during 
eighteen  months,  in  one  of  the  prisons  of  Paris,  where 
she  had  fallen  seriously  ill,  when  her  indictment,  which 
was  no  better  than  a  sentence  of  death,  was  transmitted 
to  her.  Fortunately  a  Polish  physician,  an  honest  and 
courageous  man,  whose  name  I  am  sorry  I  do  not  know, 
attended  her.  He  declared  that  she  would  not  survive  eight 
days  longer,  and  by  that  means  saved  her  life.  When  she 
came  out  of  prison,  she  exerted  with  resolute  benevolence  all 
the  advantages  which  her  name,  her  misfortune,  and  the 


I02  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

gifts  of  her  amiable  mind  conferred  on  her,  to  obtain  the 
liberty  of  the  greatest  part  of  her  former  companions  in 
captivity.  She  was  beloved  and  esteemed  by  the  most 
respectable  members  of  society.  The  excellent  qualities 
of  her  heart  made  her  fully  worthy  of  her  exalted  station. 
I  shall  more  than  once  recur  with  pleasure  to  her  in  the 
course  of  these  memoirs. 

The  functions  of  commander-in-chief  of  the  city  of  Paris 
gave  considerable  influence  to  General  Bonaparte,  and  his 
conduct  on  the  13th  Vendemiaire  ensured  him  a  just  title  to 
the  confidence  of  the  Directory  ;  but  Government  soon  felt 
itself  troubled  and  even  humbled  by  the  authority  of  the 
young  general.  To  say  the  truth,  he  continually  acted 
after  his  own  way,  meddled  with  everything,  decided  on 
everything,  and  never  acted  but  upon  his  own  ideas.  The 
activity  and  extent  of  his  mind,  and  the  pride  of  his  nature, 
rendered  him  unable  to  obey  in  any  circumstances.  The 
Directory  wished  still  to  spare  the  Jacobins  ;  the  General 
locked  up  their  assembly-room,  and  Gov^ernment  learnt  the 
step  he  had  taken  just  when  they  were  going  to  deliberate 
upon  it.  Some  members  of  the  old  nobility  seemed 
dangerous  in  Paris.  The  Directory  resolved  to  send  them 
away  ;  the  General  extended  to  them  his  protection,  and 
Government  was  forced  to  yield.  He  prescribed  measures, 
recalled  disgraced  generals,  repelled  with  pride  all  prepos- 
session, wounded  the  vanity  of  everybody,  laughed  at  pre- 
judices, braved  hatred,  and  condemned  the  slow  and  em- 
barrassed pace  of  Government.  If  the  Directory  happened 
to  remonstrate  with  him,  instead  of  appearing  offended,  he 
developed  his  ideas  and  plans  with  so  much  clearness,  care, 
and  eloquence,  that  no  objection  was  possible,  and  two  hours 
afterwards  all  he  proposed  was  executed.  But,  if  the  Directory 
was  tired  of  Bonaparte,  the  General  was  no  less  so  of  Paris 
life,  which  afforded  no  career  to  his  ambition,  no  field  for  his 
genius.  He  had,  a  long  time  before,  formed  a  plan  for  the 
conquest  of  Italy.     Long  service  in  the  Army  of  Nice  had 