

When  I  arrived  in  Paris,  these  events  had  already  taken 
.place.     The  Convention  was  at  that  time  completing  a  Con- 


94  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

stitution  which  was  not  good,  but  which  at  least  gave  force 
and  independence  to  the  executive  power,  while  it  preserved 
the  representative  system.  But  the  nation  would  accept 
nothing  from  that  polluted  Assembly  ;  and,  notwithstanding 
all  its  exertions,  the  Constitution  was  but  little  approved  of. 
The  Convention,  not  wishing  to  renew  the  fault  committed 
by  the  Constituent  Assembly,  who  had  abandoned  the  fruit 
of  their  labours  to  jealous  and  hostile  hands,  had  passed  a 
law  declaring  that  two-thirds  of  its  members  were  necessarily 
to  belong  to  the  new  councils  established  by  the  Constitu- 
tion. Public  opinion,  however,  was  against  them  all  ;  so 
that,  when  the  citizens  came  together  in  the  primary 
assemblies,  to  vote  on  the  Constitution  and  on  the  Law  of 
the  Two-thirds,  they  were  exasperated  publicly  by  orators 
whom  misfortune  and  resentment  had  soured,  and  secretly 
by  crafty  royalists.  "  Must  we,"  they  said,  *'  continue  to  see 
for  several  years  sitting  among  our  legislators  and  deciding 
over  our  fate,  men  who  have  favoured  and  practised  the 
most  horrible  tyranny  ?  We  will  have  nothing  more  to  do 
with  them  ;  let  them  go.  It  is  sufficient  that  we  accept 
their  labour  and  insure  their  safety  by  a  generous  oblivion 
of  their  crimes."  Such  violent  speeches,  repeated  with 
emphasis  in  all  the  assemblies,  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  the 
citizens,  who,  after  having  in  vain  attempted  to  reject  the 
Constitutional  Act  and  the  Law  of  the  Two-thirds,  resolved 
to  repel  by  force  of  arms  those  whom  they  had  not  been 
able  to  remove  by  their  votes.  General  Menou  was  com- 
mander-in-chief of  the  military  division.  General  d'Hilliers 
made  me  acquainted  with  all  the  details  of  his  staff.  The 
regular  troops  at  the  disposal  of  Government  did  not  amount 
to  above  five  thousand  men.  They  were  sufficient  to  main- 
tain tranquillity,  but  not  to  oppose  thirty  thousand  hostile 
and  well-armed  national  guards.  It  was  not  possible  to 
draw  any  troops  from  the  armies.  The  war  was  going  on 
actively  ;  the  disturbances  in  the  Vendee  were  not  sup- 
pressed ;  and  strong  forces  were  required  against  the  rob- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  95 

beries  of  the  Chouans.     It  was  therefore  resolved  to  deceive 
the  people  in  regard  to  the  weakness  of  the  garrison  by 
multiplying  its  movements,  so  that  it  continually  marched 
out  of  one  gate  and  into  the  other.     This  little  stratagem 
was  soon  discovered  :    it  augmented  the   assurance  of  the 
leaders  of  the  sections,  and  the  day  for  the  attack  was  fixed. 
On  the  evening  of  the  12th  of  Vendemiaire  (2nd  October), 
several  battalions  of  national  guards  had  taken  up  arms. 
Those  of  the  Petits  Peres  and  Filles  St.  Thomas  assembled 
in  the  Rue  Vivienne.      General  Menou  surrounded  them 
with  regular  troops,  and  summoned  them  to  disperse.     He 
might  have  forced  them  to  do   so  without  engaging  in  a 
battle  ;  but  an  orator  stepped  out  of  the  ranks  and  began  to 
harangue  the  general  with  a  warmth  which  he  communi- 
cated to  his  comrades.     Menou  had  the  weakness  to  listen 
to  him,  and  even  to  answer  him.     From  that  account  all 
was  lost ;  the  battalion  remained,  and  the  general  retired, 
giving  them  a  proof  of  his  irresolution,  and  leaving  Govern- 
ment in  doubt  concerning   his  fidelity.     The   Convention 
felt  that  such  a  man  might  ruin  its  cause  :  the  command 
was  taken  from  him  during  the  night,  and    given  to  the 
deputy  Barras.     A  Commission  of  Public  Safety  was  also 
appointed,   to   whom   very   extensive   powers   were   given. 
Barras  was  a  man  of  resolution,  and  had  greatly  contributed 
to  the  fall  of  Robespierre  on  the  9th  of  Thermidor.     Having 
been  a  commissioner  of  the  Convention  with  the  Southern 
army  in  1793,  he  had  remarked  a  young  officer  of  artillery, 
whose  courage  and    advice  had   a  great  influence   on    the 
retaking  of  Toulon.     This  young  man,  who,  after  the  9th  of 
Thermidor,  had  been  dismissed  by  one  of  his  former  com- 
rades called  Aubry,  a  member  of  the  Convention,  had  come 
to  Paris  a  few  months  before,  where  he  was  soliciting  with- 
out success  his  restoration  to  his  rank  of  general  of  brigade. 
Vexation  and  disgust  had,  it  was  said,  made  him  at  last  seek 
permission  to  go  at  the  head  of  a  troop  of  cannoniers,  to 
serve  among  the  Turks,  to  teach  thtm  the  manoeuvres  of 