


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  85 

men  and  attack  the  enemy.  His  surname  Gouvion,  how- 
ever, made  them  frown  ;  the  same  had  been  that  of  a  friend 
of  M.  de  Lafayette,  a  former  major-general  of  the  National 
Guards  of  Paris.  Though  the  latter  had  been  killed  in  the 
army,  his  relations  were  not  the  less  persecuted  for  that, 
St.  Cyr  beat  the  enemy,  made  some  hundred  prisoners,  and 
retook  the  positions.  Three  months  later  he  was  a  general 
of  division.  He  constantly  commanded  the  centre  of  the 
army,  and  was  called  its  shield.  Next  to  these  celebrated 
generals  shone  a  great  number  of  young  men,  who  have  all 
acquired  lasting  glory — Sainte  Suzenne,  Guyot,  Boursier, 
Bellavesne,  Ferino,  Haxo,  Dode,  Nempde,  Clemencel, 
Fririon,  D'Astrel,  and  the  unfortunate  Lahorie  !  so  praise- 
worthy for  his  constancy  of  spirit,  which  ten  years'  adversity 
was  unable  to  shake,  and  who  received  death  with  a  smile. 
And  you  also,  my  old  chiefs,  ray  dear  friends  !  why  cannot 
I  surround  your  names  with  all  the  splendour  of  your  noble 
deeds  ?  You  greatly  contributed  to  save  France  !  Could 
you  expect  that  your  services  would  one  day  be  rewarded 
by  forgetfulness  and  persecution  ? 

With  such  chiefs,  and  friends  of  the  soldiers,  most  of 
whom  had  commanded  as  private  officers,  discipline  was 
exact  but  gentle.  They  all  loved  their  profession,  and 
were  well  acquainted  with  it.  Mean  jealousy,  hatred,  and 
backbiting  were  unknown.  The  oldest  of  these  generals 
was  scarcely  thirty,  and  the  Revolution  having  found  them 
in  a  middling  condition,  and  at  a  time  of  life  when  luxury 
and  corruption  have  not  yet  gained  an  empire  over  the  mind, 
they  had  no  wish  but  for  glory,  and  glory  itself  pleased  them 
only  when  surrounded  by  perils.  I  have  frequently  heard 
doubts  raised  as  to  the  skill  of  our  generals,  notwithstanding 
the  constant  successes  by  which  their  fame  has  been  estab- 
lished. It  has  been  declared  impossible  to  learn  so  quickly 
and  so  well  the  most  difficult  of  all  sciences,  and  that  which 
more  than  any  other  requires  a  number  of  different  branches 
of  knowledge,  which  can  only  be  acquired  by  a  great  deal 


86  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

of  time,  particularly  where  the  peculiar  education  is  wanting, 
as  was  the  case  with  most  of  the  Republican  generals.  It  is 
not  sufficiently  known  that  the  first  quality  necessary  to 
attain  distinction  in  the  military  career  is  strength  of  mind. 
That  gift  of  nature,  which  is  so  little  esteemed,  and  of  so 
little  use  in  ordinar}'  life,  is  however  so  important  that  it 
might  have  saved  France  a  few  years  ago,  if  those  who  at 
that  time  influenced  her  fate  had  been  possessed  of  it.  It  is 
quite  indispensable  in  the  military  profession.  Nature  alone 
can  give  it  ;  and  she  did  give  it  to  all  our  celebrated  generals. 
In  the  second  place,  it  is  not  true  that  their  education  had 
been  neglected  ;  for,  to  speak  only  of  those  of  the  first 
period  of  the  war,  Pichegru,  Bernadotte,  Jourdan,  Moreau, 
Kleber,  Desaix,  St.  Cyr,  and  Hoche  (the  latter  was  bred  at 
the  school  of  the  sons  of  the  gardes  Fraufatscs),  had  all 
studied  the  military  art.  The  education  of  most  of  them 
had  been  as  well  attended  to  as  that  of  the  nobility.  It 
must  also  be  considered  that  in  other  professions  the  most 
ambitious  student  can  scarcely  devote  more  than  twelve 
hours  a  day  to  his  studies,  and  is  frequently  interrupted  ; 
whereas,  in  the  army,  every  instant  is  given  up  to  military 
knowledge.  A  passion  for  glory,  ambition,  the  pleasure  of 
command,  freedom  from  the  duties  of  the  world — all  induce 
soldiers  to  talk  and  think  unceasingly  of  their  profession. 
The  variety  of  events,  their  rapidity,  their  number,  hourly 
correct  the  wrong  judgment  of  young  officers,  enrich  their 
memory,  multiply  the  examples  they  may  want,  and  com- 
plete their  improvement.  Their  mistakes  appear  in  open 
daylight  ;  they  are  quickly  punished  ;  and  as  the  blow 
strikes  not  only  the  guilty,  but  also  those  who  are  placed 
below  or  around  him,  each  individual  is  in  some  respect 
answerable  for  his  neighbour,  and  all  have  the  greatest 
interest  in  acting  well. 