

The  composition  of  the  troops,  as  well  as  their  valour, 
contributed  also  to  our  successes.  The  love  of  their  country 
and  the  hatred  of  a  foreign  yoke  had  animated  them  even 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  87 

under  the  paternal  roof  since  the  year  1789.  At  the  first 
call,  the  citizens  flew  to  the  frontiers  ;  a  great  number  of 
well-educated  young  men,  whom  the  passion  for  glory  and 
ambition  had  assembled  under  the  banners  of  the  army, 
were  like  a  nursery  of  excellent  officers.  The  warlike 
Marseillaise  hymn  filled  every  breast  with  such  deep 
emotion  and  enthusiasm  that  its  first  notes  were  sufficient 
to  make  the  troops  rush  on  the  enemy  with  irresistible 
impetuosity.  At  Gaisberg,  near  Weissemburg,  the  enemy 
had  crowned  the  plateau  with  thirty  cannons,  which  dealt 
death  and  devastation  into  our  ranks.  The  troops  advanced 
nevertheless  with  a  slow  step  :  when  they  arrived  at  the 
foot  of  the  frontier,  the  warlike  song  was  heard,  and  at  the 
same  instant  the  soldiers,  as  if  they  had  been  borne  up  by  a 
whirlwind,  overcame  every  difficulty.  The  position  was  taken, 
the  cannon  were  in  our  power,  and  the  enemy  put  to  flight. 
The  perils  and  sufferings  our  troops  endured  at  that 
period  were  the  more  deserving  of  admiration,  because  they 
had  no  other  compensation  than  the  love  of  their  country 
and  their  ambition.  The  most  simple  enjoyments  were 
unknown  to  us.  We  were  all  of  us  poor.  The  soldier 
received  no  more  than  an  ecu  per  month  in  money  ;  and 
the  officers,  of  all  ranks,  only  eight  francs.  Our  salaries 
were  paid  us  in  assignats,  which  were  already  depreciated  in 
France,  and  were  of  no  value  at  all  in  foreign  countries. 
During  the  severe  winter  of  1794,  I  shared  with  some  of  my 
comrades  a  peasant's  room  in  the  village  of  Fintheim  near 
Mentz  :  we  had  only  one  bed  amongst  us,  and  every  week 
we  drew  lots  who  was  to  sleep  in  it  ;  the  rest  lay  upon 
straw.  Our  assignats  were  barely  sufficient  to  procure  us  a 
little  bad  wine  three  times  a  month  :  we  knew  that  our 
landlord  possessed  a  considerable  quantity,  but  not  one  of 
us  ever  cherished  the  idea  of  forcing  him  to  give  it  us  for 
nothing.  My  companions  were  all  young  officers  of  engineers. 
Three  of  them,  Haxo,  Dode,  and  Nempde,  became  celebrated 
generals  in  that  corps — the  rest  were  killed. 


88  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

I  beg  pardon  for  having  dwelt  so  long  on  this  subject. 
To  the  Army  of  the  Rhine  I  owe  those  qualities  that  have 
embellished  my  life,  and  the  strength  of  mind  that  decided 
my  fate.  When  I  entered  it,  I  was  full  of  enthusiasm,  but 
my  ideas  on  military  subjects  were  confused,  and  I  wanted 
experience.  I  had  not  yet  seen  the  enemy,  and  I  was  very 
anxious  to  know  what  figure  I  should  cut  in  the  first  battle. 
My  ardent  courage  did  not  leave  me  at  full  liberty  for  reflec- 
tion ;  but  I  was  lucky  enough  to  be  attached  to  the  division 
of  General  Desaix.  The  easy  and  immovable  calmness, 
the  soft  cheerfulness  of  that  excellent  man  in  the  midst  of 
the  most  murderous  fire,  made  me  sensible  that  there  exists 
no  real  valour  without  those  qualities.  I  reflected  seriously, 
and  was  discontented  with  myself.  I  did  not  know  how  to 
manage  my  horse  when  in  the  direction  of  the  balls  ;  I 
crossed  too  rapidly  the  field  of  action  ;  and  I  frequently  went 
a  round-about  way,  when  I  could  have  rode  straight  before 
me.  I  blushed  at  such  foolish  conduct,  and  schooled  myself 
so  well  that  case  shot  soon  lost  all  power  of  embarrassing 
me.  It  required  time  before  I  arrived  at  that  degree  of  self- 
possession.  How  often  did  I  not  go  back  and  place  myself 
purposely  in  the  middle  of  the  fire  !  How  satisfied  I  was 
when  I  had  remained  long  in  such  a  situation  !  That  moral 
strength  did  not  contribute  considerably  to  my  advancement, 
but  it  made  me  worthy  of  being  the  aide-de-camp  of  the 
Conqueror  of  Italy,  and  gained  me  his  esteem  :  it  also  made 
me  bear  prosperity  with  moderation,  and  was  a  strong 
support  to  me  in  the  days  of  misfortune. 