


CHAPTER   IX. 

I  ARRIVED  in  Paris  towards  the  middle  of  August.  When 
I  left  that  city  in  1792,  the  people,  freed  from  the  whole- 
some restraint  of  the  laws,  intoxicated  with  fury,  and  elated 
with  their  abominable  triumphs,  were  madly  enjoying  a 
savage  licentiousness,  and,  ever  threatening,  ever  oppressive, 
set  no  bounds  to  their  tyranny.  What  a  change  did  I  not  find 
after  the  short  space  of  three  years !  Scarcity  was  terrible, 
misery  at  the  highest  pitch,  and  the  dethroned  Sovereign 
scarcely  dared  to  complain.  The  people  were  no  better  than 
a  vile  rabble,  devoid  of  energy,  shrinking  under  the  rod  that 
chastised  them,  but  having  not  even  the  thought  of  resist- 
ance. In  the  morning,  the  city  presented  a  deplorable 
spectacle  :  thousands  of  women  and  children  were  sitting  on 
the  stones  before  the  doors  of  the  bakers'  shops,  waiting 
their  turn  for  receiving  a  dearly-bought  bit  of  bread.  More 
than  one-half  of  Paris  lived  on  potatoes.  Paper  money  was 
without  value,  and  bullion  without  circulation  :  this  lasted 
nearly  a  year.  A  still  stranger  sight  struck  the  observer's 
eyes.  The  unfortunate  prisoners  had  recovered  their  liberty, 
and,  having  escaped  almost  certain  death,  they  enjoyed  their 
good  luck  with  a  sort  of  ecstasy.  The  dangers  to  which 
they  had  been  so  long  exposed  excited  a  lively  interest  in 
their  favour  ;  but  vanity,  so  ingenious  in  France,  discovered 
the  means  of  turning  their  situation  to  advantage.  Each 
person  pretended  to  have  suffered  more  than  his  neighbour  ; 
and,  as  it  was  the  fashion  to  have  been  persecuted,  a  great 

89 


-90  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

many  people  who  had  remained  safe  in  their  hiding-places, 
or  had  bought  their  security  by  base  concessions,  boasted  of 
having  languished  in  prison.  An  immense  number  of  inno- 
cent persons  had,  in  fact,  perished  on  the  scaffold  ;  but,  if 
credit  could  have  been  given  to  the  accounts  propagated  by 
hatred  and  vanity,  one  might  have  thought  that  one-half  of 
Paris  had  imprisoned  or  butchered  the  other  half.  Confu- 
sion was  at  this  period  at  its  highest  pitch  in  society  :  all 
distinctions  of  rank  had  disappeared  ;  wealth  had  changed 
possessors  ;  and  as  it  was  still  dangerous  to  boast  of  birth, 
and  to  recall  the  memory  of  former  gentility,  the  possessors 
of  newly-acquired  wealth  led  the  ton,  and  added  the  ab- 
surdities of  a  bad  education  to  those  of  patronage  devoid 
of  dignity.  The  class  of  artists,  more  commendable,  acquired 
consideration  through  the  general  thirst  for  amusement,  and 
through  the  necessity  many  persons  were  in  of  seeking  a 
livelihood  in  the  arts  of  imagination.  This  same  taste  for 
the  fine  arts,  so  universally  diffused,  caused  in  the  fashions 
and  even  in  the  morals  of  the  metropolis  a  most  inconceiv- 
able licentiousness  :  the  young  men  dressed  their  hair  en 
victime — that  is  to  say,  raised  up  at  the  back  of  the  neck  as 
if  they  were  going  to  suffer  on  the  scaffold.  The  w^omen, 
on  the  contrary,  imitated  in  their  dresses  the  costume  ot 
ancient  Greece.  It  is  scarcely  credible  to  those  who  have 
not  seen  it,  that  young  females,  well-bred,  and  distinguished 
"by  their  birth,  should  have  worn  tight  skin-coloured  panta- 
loons, sandals  on  their  feet,  and  transparent  gauze  dresses, 
while  their  bosoms  were  exposed,  and  their  arms  bare  up  to 
their  shoulders  ;  and  that  when  they  appeared  thus  in  the 
public  places,  instead  of  making  modesty  blush,  they  became 
objects  of  universal  admiration  and  applause.  The  palaces 
and  private  gardens  were  changed  into  scenes  of  riotous 
pleasure,  called  Elysium,  Paphos,  Tivoli,  Idalia,  &c.,  where 
crowds  of  people,  boisterous  diversions,  bad  manners,  and 
an  utter  contempt  for  decency,  created  both  shame  and 
disgust. 