


96  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

artillery.  He  was  ready  to  set  off  when  Barras  sent  for  him, 
and  presented  him  to  the  Committee,  who  consulted  him  on 
the  difficulty,  which  they  were  resolved  to  get  out  of  at  any 
price.  The  members  of  the  Committee  agreed  with  one 
another  on  one  point  only  ;  that  is  to  say,  that  all  was  lost 
if  the  sections  gained  the  victory.  Civil  war  would  then 
extend  its  ravages  all  over  France,  and  nobody  could  calcu- 
late its  consequences.  On  the  other  hand,  they  could  not 
bring  themselves  to  fire  upon  the  people.  Some  wanted  to 
make  concessions  which  would  have  destroyed  all  hopes  of 
redress  ;  others  spoke  of  stoically  awaiting  death  in  their 
chairs  like  true  Romans.  The  artillery  officer  laughed  both 
at  their  scruples  and  ridiculous  resolution  :  he  demonstrated 
to  them  that  the  Parisians  were  nothing  but  fools,  led  on  by 
cunning  rogues  ;  that  Government  had  in  its  favour  power 
and  right  ;  that  nothing  was  easier  than  to  disperse,  without 
spilling  much  blood,  inexperienced  battalions,  which  had 
neither  clever  leaders  nor  artillery.  His  firmness,  his  elo- 
quence, his  consciousness  of  great  superiority,  which  his 
countenance  itself  betrayed,  inspired  confidence  and  carried 
persuasion  into  the  minds  of  every  one.  This  young  man's 
name  was  Bonaparte.  The  command  of  the  artillery  was 
given  to  him,  and  he  was  left  master  of  all  the  arrangements 
for  the  defence.  He  immediately  assembled  the  officers,  and 
made  himself  sure  of  their  obedience.  He  then  placed  two 
cannons  at  the  entrance  of  the  Rue  St.  Nicaise,  another 
facing  the  church  of  St.  Roche  at  the  bottom  of  the  Petite 
Rue  du  Dauphin,  two  more  in  the  Rue  St.  Honore,  near  the 
Place  Vendome,  and  two  facing  the  Pont  Royal  on  the  Quai 
Voltaire.  Reserves  of  infantry  were  stationed  behind  the 
cannon,  in  order  to  protect  them,  and  on  the  Place  du  Car- 
rousel. The  cavalry  was  posted  in  the  Place  Louis  XV. 
He  afterwards  acquainted  the  battalions  that  they  were  at 
liberty  to  remain  where  they  were  as  long  as  they  chose  ;  but 
that  if  they  went  one  step  beyond  the  prescribed  limits,  or 
if  they  fired  a  single  musket,  he  would  repel  them  with  his 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  97 

artillery.  His  firmness,  instead  of  inspiring  awe,  convinced 
the  enemy  that  he  was  afraid,  and  would  not  dare  to  fire. 
After  a  good  deal  of  hesitation,  the  enemy's  troops  put 
themselves  in  motion,  those  who  were  behind  pushing  on 
those  who  were  in  front,  and  a  discharge  of  musketry  was 
the  signal  of  the  attack.  At  the  same  instant  the  grape  shot 
of  the  three  field-pieces  carried  death  and  terror  into  their 
ranks.  Their  flight  was  so  rapid,  so  abrupt,  and  so  com- 
plete, that  a  bullet  shot  off  along  the  Rue  St.  Honore  did 
not  touch  a  single  person.  General  Carteaux  had  been 
placed  on  the  Pont  Neuf  with  a  battalion  of  infantry  of  the 
line,  in  order  to  cut  off  the  communication  between  the  two 
banks  of  the  Seine.  I  was  sent  to  carr>^  him  an  order  to 
stand  firm  ;  but  he  had  already  retired  under  the  garden  of 
the  Infante,  and  the  columns  of  the  sections  appeared  already 
on  the  Quai  de  la  Monnaye,  with  a  view  to  make  themselves 
masters  of  the  Pont  Royal,  and  attack  the  Tuileries  from 
that  side.  The  general  who  commanded  at  the  foot  of  the 
bridge  sent  them  word  not  to  advance  any  farther.  They 
took  no  heed  of  it,  and  received  the  discharge  of  the  two 
cannons,  after  which  they  dispersed.  That  was  enough  to 
make  the  citizens  tired  of  fighting  ;  but  the  most  determined 
among  them,  whose  fear  had  subsided  when  they  imagined 
the  danger  distant,  wanted  to  resume  the  attack.  They  had 
made  themselves  masters  of  the  Palais  Royal,  and,  like  mad- 
men, fancied  they  should  be  able  to  defend  themselves  there. 
Luckily  night  brings  counsel  :  in  the  morning  the  leaders 
put  themselves  in  safety,  and  the  rest  went  home.  Peace 
was  signed  next  day,  and  order  was  re-established.  I  do  not 
think  that  the  regular  troops  lost  more  than  four  or  five 
men.  On  the  part  of  the  sections  the  loss  was  more  con- 
siderable. By  the  most  exact  calculation,  it  seems  to  have 
amounted  to  forty  killed,  and  about  two  hundred  wounded. 
This  will  not  appear  exaggerated  if  we  consider  that  the 
steps  of  the  church  of  St.  Roch  were  covered  with  people  ; 
that  the  cannon  fired  in  that  direction  was  at  no  more  than 