


no  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNI  LAV  ALETTE. 

France.  The  General-in-chicf  was  much  attached  to  him. 
Duroc  was  grateful,  and  I  believe  his  fidelity  would  have 
nobly  borne  the  dangerous  ordeal  of  the  revolution  of  1814. 
The  fourth  aide-de-camp  was  Le  Marrois,  a  young  man 
scarcely  seventeen  years  old,  and  already  covered  with 
wounds.  After  him  came  Sulkowski,  a  true  Pole,  of 
chivalrous  valour,  passionately  fond  of  adventures,  with  a 
romantic  and  restless  mind,  well  informed,  and  speaking 
fluently  all  the  languages  of  Europe.  When  almost  a 
child  he  had  fought  for  the  liberty  of  his  country.  Wounded 
at  the  siege  of  Warsaw,  and  compelled  to  fly,  he  came  to 
France.  He  was  soon  after  sent  to  Constantinople  with 
M.  Descorches,  our  ambassador.  The  Committee  of  Public 
Safety  wishing  to  have  an  agent  in  India,  Sulkowski  under- 
took that  mission.  He  had  already  passed  Aleppo,  where 
the  English  discovered  him,  and  got  some  Arabs  to  rob 
him  of  his  papers.  Having  escaped  out  of  their  hands,  he 
returned  to  Paris,  and  obtained  an  appointment  in  the 
Army  of  Italy.  He  was  engaged  at  the  siege  of  Alantua, 
when  a  report  that  he  had  addressed  to  the  chief  of  the  staff 
fell  under  the  eyes  of  the  general-in-chief,  and  the  following 
day  he  was  made  his  aide-de-camp.  We  had  also  among  us 
Louis  Bonaparte,  then  scarcely  sixteen  years  of  age,  and 
whom  his  brother  spared  no  more  than  the  rest  of  us  on 
the  most  perilous  missions.  Louis  fulfilled  them  with  a 
satisfaction  which  proved  him  worthy  of  his  name.  Elliott 
having  been  killed,  as  I  mentioned  above,  the  General-in- 
chief  took  in  his  place  Crossier,  a  brave  and  clever  oflficer  of 
cavalry. 

Such  were  my  new  comrades,  whose  acquaintance  I  made 
while  waiting  for  the  General-in-chief.  He  arrived  at  seven 
o'clock,  and  we  sat  down  to  converse.  He  placed  me  next 
to  himself.  All  the  guests  were  as  much  surprised  as  I  was 
at  this  extraordinary  favour  ;  but  I  did  not  remain  long  in 
suspense  as  to  the  cause  to  which  it  was  owing.  The 
General  wished  to  know  what  he  had  to  expect  of  the  new 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  V ALETTE.  1 1 1 

acquaintance  he  had  rather  rashly  made.  His  questions 
began  with  the  very  first  course,  and  lasted  till  we  rose  from 
the  table  ;  that  is  to  say,  during  three-quarters  of  an  hour. 
"  Where  have  you  served  ?  In  what  army  ?  At  what  time 
did  you  enter  on  service  ?  Under  what  generals  have  you 
fought  ?  What  was  the  strength  of  the  Rhine  army  ? 
What  position  did  it  occupy  before  Mentz  ?  Why  did  they 
not  go  to  the  assistance  of  that  city  ?  How  were  the  lines 
of  the  Lauter  lost  ?  How  was  Landau  delivered  ?  What 
generals  had  the  highest  reputation  in  the  Rhine  army  ? 
What  were  the  forces  of  the  enemy  on  the  13th  of  October, 
and  when  the  lines  were  retaken  ? ''  He  listened  attentively 
to  all  my  answers,  and  shortened  them  when  they  were  too 
diffuse.  I  perceived,  by  his  pithy  observations,  that  he  was 
perfectly  well  acquainted  with  the  history  of  the  Rhine 
army.  The  distance  and  position  of  the  different  places, 
the  abilities  of  the  generals,  their  systems  and  faults — all 
were  familiar  to  him.  When  dinner  was  over  he  ceased  to 
speak  to  me.  I  was  afraid  he  was  dissatisfied  with  my 
answers.  I  was  comforted,  however,  by  the  thought  that 
the  ordeal  of  the  field  of  battle  would  be  more  favourable 
to  me. 