

When  I  went  back  to  the  palace  at  the  appointed  hour, 
the  officer  on  duty  introduced  me  into  the  saloon  of  the 
aides-de-camp.  This  was  a  new  subject  of  perplexity.  I 
was  not  acquainted  with  any  of  them.  They  could  see  by 
ray  sash  that  I  was  a  new  comrade,  but  not  one  came  up  to 
me.  They  communicated  their  observations  to  one  another, 
directing  towards  my  person  looks  that  did  not  seem  to  me 
very  favourable,  until  Marmont  came  in,  and  perceiving  me, 
took  me  by  the  hand,  and  said,  "  Here  is  a  new  comrade, 
who  will  soon  be  a  friend."  "  In  the  field  of  battle,"  I 
answered  with  a  blush,  "  I  shall  be  less  embarrassed  than  I 
am  here."  A  few  days  were  sufficient  to  establish  between 
us  a  degree  of  friendship  that  has  never  diminished.  The 
aides-de-camp  of  the  General-in-chief  were  at  that  time  eight 
in  number.  Murat,  who  had  been  named  general  of  brigade, 
was  no  longer  one  of  them.  The  first  was  Colonel  Junot, 
afterwards  Due  d'Abrantes.  He  was  born  in  Burgundy, 
and  enlisted  as  a  private  soldier  in  a  company  of  volunteer 
■cannoniers  of  his  department.     At  the  siege  of  Toulon  he 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  109 

was  admired  for  an  instance  of  intrepidity  that  has  seldom 
occurred  since.  The  famous  redoubt  called  Les  Sans- 
C!//oites,  defended  by  the  English,  had  been  attacked  for 
several  hours,  but  its  fire  was  still  very  troublesome  to  us. 
General  Bonaparte  ordered  a  battalion  to  take  it  by  storm. 
Although  Junot  did  not  belong  to  that  battalion,  he  rushed 
first  of  all  into  the  ditch,  climbed  up  the  scarp,  jumped  into 
the  redoubt  through  a  battlement,  killed  two  cannoniers  at 
their  posts,  and  by  that  means  gave  his  companions  time  to 
join  him.  The  redoubt  was  taken  amidst  cries  of  "  The 
Republic  for  ever !  "  General  Bonaparte  made  him 
sergeant  ;  and  his  handwriting  being  clear  and  neat,  he 
made  use  of  him  as  his  secretary  during  the  remainder  of 
the  campaign.  When  I  met  him  for  the  first  time  he  was  a 
colonel,  and  had  been  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Castiglione. 
Junot  added  to  great  courage  much  natural  shrewdness. 
After  having  served  during  twenty  years,  and  passed  through 
all  military  ranks,  he  ended  his  life  in  a  deplorable  manner. 
The  cold  he  suffered  in  the  Russian  campaign  disordered 
his  mental  faculties.  The  unhappy  man  died  under  his 
paternal  roof.  His  reason  returned  a  short  time  before  he 
breathed  his  last,  and  seeing  himself  again  in  the  humble 
chamber  in  which  he  had  passed  his  youth,  he  was  enabled 
justly  to  appreciate  his  glittering  dream  of  fortune  and 
glory. 

Marmoat,  a  colonel  of  artillery,  was  also  born  in  Burgundy, 
of  an  ancient  and  respectable  family  in  that  province.  His 
education  had  been  particularly  well  attended  to,  and  he 
had  entered  very  young  into  the  army.  The  principal 
features  of  his  character  were  at  that  time  an  unbounded 
passion  for  glory  and  ambition,  and  an  attachment  to  his 
general  that  amounted  to  enthusiasm.  Duroc  was  the  third 
aide-de-camp.  Though  less  brilliant  than  the  two  former, 
he  possessed  greater  solidity  of  judgment,  and  a  remarkable 
tenaciousness  of  character.  In  1789  he  was  an  officer  of 
artillery  ;  he  had  emigrated,  but  had  speedily  returned  to 