

The  first  attacks  of  the  French  army  were  made  with  so 
much  impetuosity  that  the  enemy  felt  himself  unable  to 
resist,  and  compelled  to  choose  another  ground.  He  retired 
to  the  Tagliaraonte,  the  passage  of  Avhich  he  resolved  at  last 
to  defend.  General  Bonaparte  settled  everything  so  that 
the  honour  of  the  day  might  belong  to  Bernadotte  :  a  corps 
of  six  thousand  grenadiers  was  placed  under  his  orders,  and 
he  received  the  command  of  the  centre,  where  the  enemy 
had  the  strongest  forces  to  oppose  to  ours.  Bernadotte 
passed  the  numerous  branches  of  the  rivers,  at  the  head  of 
his  soldiers,  crying,  "  The  Republic  for  ever  !  "  and  under 
the  most  murderous  fire  ;  but  Massena,  who  commanded  the 


1 16  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE. 

left  wing,  had  attacked  with  so  much  vigour,  that  the  enemy 
before  us  only  fought  to  get  to  the  end  of  the  day,  and  not 
to  be  too  much  harassed  in  their  retreat. 

The  result  of  this  battle  made  the  General-in-chief 
sensible  that  the  Archduke  retreated  to  await  him  beyond 
the  plains  of  Styria,  and  that  the  nearer  he  might  approach 
to  Vienna,  the  more  equal  the  forces  and  the  more  stubborn 
the  defence  would  become.  Bonaparte  resolved,  therefore, 
to  recall  the  division  of  Joubert  that  was  at  Brixen.  He  left, 
it  is  true,  Lombardy  open  to  the  enemy,  who  would  not  fail 
to  attack  it  ;  but  he  was  very  sure  that  if  once  the  Austrians 
were  vanquished  and  forced  to  make  peace,  it  would  not 
prove  very  difficult  for  him  to  recover  his  conquests  and 
re-establish  order  everywhere. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

With  two  companies  of  grenadiers  of  the  69th,  and  some 
cavalry,  I  was  sent  to  fetch  General  Joubert.  General 
Zayonjeck,  a  Pole,  newly  arrived  at  the  army,  received  an 
order  to  support  me  with  some  squadrons  of  dragoons.  I 
arrived  at  Lienz  without  any  impediment  ;  but  there  I  got 
certain  information  that  I  could  not,  without  losing  all  my 
men  to  the  very  last,  penetrate  to  the  place  where  our  first 
troops  stood  under  the  command  of  General  Belliard.  I 
wished,  however,  to  carry  my  undertaking  into  execution, 
and  what  I  could  not  do  with  my  soldiers  I  resolved  to 
attempt  alone.  I  therefore  left  my  troop  at  Lienz  under  the 
command  of  a  good  captain,  and  taking  with  me  a  lieutenant 
named  Acyorte,  a  brave  and  resolute  man,  I  threw  myself 
with  him  into  a  caleche,  both  of  us  well  wrapped  up  in  our 
cloaks,  hoping  we  might  be  able  to  cross  that  part  of  Tyrol 
in  the  character  of  Italian  merchants.  We  advanced,  in 
fact,  some  stages  without  meeting  with  any  obstacle.  We 
had  already  reached  the  first  houses  of  Miihlbach  at  nightfall, 
when  our  carriage  was  stopped  by  the  clergyman  of  the 
place,  who  said  to  me  in  Latin  :  "  Do  not  enter  ;  fly  to  the 
mountains,  or  you  are  lost.  You  are  expected,  and  nobody 
will  be  able  to  save  you."  Since  I  had  left  college,  I  had 
entirely  neglected  the  Latin  language.  I  scarcely  under- 
stood it,  and  I  was  making  the  clergyman  repeat  his  speech, 
when  his  sudden  flight,  added  to  furious  cries,  warned  us 