


CHAPTER   XT. 

When  I  arrived  at  Milan  the  victory  of  Castiglione  had  just 
been  gained.  General  Wurmser,  beaten,  was  flying  in  the 
direction  of  Mantua  ;  and  after  having  come  to  force  us  to 
raise  the  siege  of  that  city,  he  was  himself  obliged  to  seek 
a  refuge  within  its  walls.  I  was  convinced  that  General 
d'Hilliers  was  to  be  employed  in  military  service,  and  during 
the  journey  I  indulged  in  glittering  dreams  of  glory  and 
advancement.  How  great  was  now  mj''  consternation  when 
I  found  him  governor  of  Lombardy  !  I  was  going  to  be 
buried  again  in  the  paper  business  of  a  staff,  sentenced  to 
distribute  the  bulletins  of  our  victories — to  be  busy  about 
the  thousand  minutiae  of  an  office,  so  tiresome  to  a  soldier — 
and  at  last  not  even  dare  to  acknowledge  that  I  had  been  in 
the  Army  of  Italy,  of  which  I  should  share  neither  the  perils 
nor  the  triumphs.  Besides,  m}^  sword  was  my  only  fortune, 
and  could  I  hope  for  advancement  when  I  had  not  deserved 
any  ?  These  thoughts  grieved  me  sorely,  and  made  me 
adopt  the  resolution  of  soliciting  the  command  of  a  troop 
of  infantry  in  a  brigade  of  the  vanguard.  General  d'Hilliers 
attempted  in  vain  to  make  me  alter  my  mind.  Forced  at 
last  to  yield  to  my  entreaties,  he  was  about  to  give  me  my 
orders,  when  the  intelligence  of  the  victory  of  Areola  arrived 
at  Milan.  Two  aides-de-camp  of  the  General-in-chief  had 
been  killed — Muiron,  an  officer  of  artillery,  for  whom  he 
entertained  a  great  regard,  of  which  his  good  qualities 
made  him  worthy — and  young  Elliott,  a  nephew  of  General 
Clarke.     M.  d'Hilliers  spoke  of  me  to  General   Bonaparte 


lo8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

with  great  warmth,  and  got  me  appointed  to  succeed  Muiron. 
My  first  sensation  was  joy  at  this  unexpected  favour  of 
fortune,  but  it  was  soon  troubled  by  the  fear  of  being 
severely  judged  by  one  so  well  able  to  scan  my  merits. 
My  uneasiness  was  such  as  to  make  me  regret  the  success 
General  d'Hilliers  had  obtained.  I  went  to  the  General-in- 
chief,  who  lodged  in  the  Palazzo  Serbelloni.  He  was  giving 
audience.  His  saloon  was  filled  with  military  men  of  all 
ranks,  and  high  civil  officers.  His  air  was  affable,  but  his 
look  so  firm  and  fixed  that  I  turned  pale  when  he  addressed 
himself  to  me.  I  faltered  out  my  name,  and  afterwards  my 
thanks,  to  which  he  listened  in  silence,  his  eyes  fastening 
on  me  with  an  expression  of  severity  that  quite  disconcerted 
me.  At  last  he  said, "  Come  back  at  six  o'clock,  and  put  on 
the  sash."  That  sash,  which  distinguished  the  aides-de- 
camp of  the  General-in-chief,  was  of  white  and  red  silk,  and 
was  worn  round  the  left  arm. 