


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  105 

was  unreserved.  Several  among  them  were  obliged  to  leave 
the  scene  of  their  achievements,  others  joined  the  armies  of 
the  Republic.  When  the  treaty  was  signed,  we  all  stepped 
into  a  room,  where  a  splendid  breakfast  was  prepared. 
There  were  twenty  of  us  standing  round  the  table  and 
looking  at  one  another  in  silence.  General  Montigny 
invited  them  to  sit  down.  An  unequivocal  motion  of  the 
head  was  all  the  answer  they  gave.  Cold  ceremonies  were 
exchanged  ;  after  which,  we  all  mounted  our  horses  and 
separated. 

One  of  the  conditions  of  the  treaty  was  that  the  leaders 
of  the  troops  should  recover  the  unsold  part  of  their  property, 
as  those  of  the  Vendean  army  had  already  done.  This 
favour  was  justly  due,  not  only  to  their  valour  and  exertions, 
but  also  to  their  patriotic  sentiments,  which  had  made  them 
prefer  the  dangers  of  civil  war  to  the  disgrace  of  serving 
under  foreign  banners.  Now  that  the  emigrants  are  happy 
in  the  enjoyment  of  the  rank  and  confidence  the  Sovereign 
allows  them,  one  may  speak  freely  on  their  conduct.  The 
first  impulse  which  urged  them  to  fly  cannot  be  blamed  ; 
but  how  can  one  justify  the  disgraceful  resolution  of  placing 
themselves  in  the  pay  of  the  enemies  of  their  country  ?  The 
Revolution  was  a  family  quarrel,  from  which  foreign  nations 
ought  by  all  means  to  have  been  excluded.  What  was  to 
be  expected  of  the  Austrians,  the  Prussians,  or  the  English, 
but  the  subjection  of  France,  her  dismemberment,  and  dis- 
grace? The  Vendeans  also  fought  to  maintain  their  religion 
and  the  monarchy  ;  but,  far  from  giving  themselves  up  to  a 
foreign  enemy,  they  never  would  suffer  English  troops  to  come 
to  their  support.  They  had  not  forgotten  that  Henry  IV. 
was  obliged  to  take  German  troopers  into  his  pay,  but  that 
his  magnanimous  soul  would  have  recoiled  at  the  thought 
of  receiving  pay  of  the  Germans.  The  cause  of  the  Vendeans, 
thus  defended,  was  respectable.  They  certainly  could  not 
hope  to  get  the  better  of  the  determined  will  of  a  whole 
nation  resolved  to  be  free,  and  who  could  not  be  so  under 


io6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  government  of  the  Bourbons  ;  but  at  least  they  were 
Frenchmen,  and  the  troops  who  fought  against  them  expe- 
rienced a  feehng  of  pride  at  the  sight  of  French  peasants 
opposing  them  with  more  courage  and  firmness  than  all  the 
kings  of  Europe  united  together. 

This  war  against  the  Chouans  was  not  more  pleasing  to 
General  d'Hilliers  than  to  myself.  He  did  not  wait  for  the 
pacification  to  solicit  of  General  Bonaparte  the  honour  of 
serving  under  his  orders.  The  letters  of  appointment  soon 
arrived.  M.  d'Hilliers  set  off  post  for  Italy.  I  was  obliged 
to  travel  on  horseback.  The  name  of  Bonaparte  greeted  my 
ears  in  every  place  through  which  I  passed.  Each  day 
brought  in  the  account  of  some  new  victor}-.  His  letters  to 
Government — his  proclamations,  so  elevated  in  style  and  so 
wonderfully  eloquent,  roused  all  minds.  All  France  shared 
the  enthusiasm  of  the  arm}^  for  so  much  glor}' — for  such 
brilliant  and  numerous  triumphs.  The  words  Montenotte, 
Millesimo,  Lodi,  Milan,  Castiglione,  were  repeated  with  a 
noble  pride  next  to  those  of  Jemmapes,  Fleurus,  and  Valmy. 