

We  remained  a  fortnight  at  Milan,  waiting  for  the  enemy 
to  come  once  more  down  from  Tyrol,  and  make  a  fresh 
attempt  on  Mantua.  The  General-in-chief  was  at  that  time 
just  married.  Madame  Bonaparte  was  a  charming  woman  ; 
and  all  the  anxiety  of  the  command — all  the  trouble  of  the 
government  of  Italy,  could  not  prevent  her  husband  from 
giving  himself  wholly  up  to  the  happiness  he  enjoyed  at 
home.  It  was  during  that  short  residence  at  Milan  that  the 
young  painter  Gros,  afterwards  so  celebrated,  painted  the 
picture  of  the  General.  He  represented  him  on  the  bridge 
of  Lodi,  at  the  moment  when,  with  the  colours  in  his  hand, 
he  rushed  forward,  to  induce  the  troops  to  follow  him.  The 
painter  could  never  obtain  a  long  sitting.  Madame  Bona- 
parte used  to  take  her  husband  upon  her  lap  after  breakfast, 


112  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

and  hold  him  fast  for  a  few  minutes.  I  was  present  at  three 
of  these  sittings.  The  age  of  the  newly-married  couple,  and 
the  painter's  enthusiasm  for  the  hero,  were  sufficient  excuses 
for  such  familiarit}'.  The  portrait  was  at  the  time  a  striking 
resemblance.  Some  copies  have  been  taken  of  it ;  but  the 
original  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Queen  of  Holland, 
Duchess  of  St.  Leu. 

We  set  off  for  Verona.  The  day  after  our  arrival  I 
received  an  order  to  reconnoitre  the  enemy  posted  on  the 
banks  of  the  Adige,  facing  Roveredo.  My  instructions  were 
to  force  him  to  make  some  demonstrations,  but  not  to  come 
to  an  action.  I  was  to  bring  back  an  exact  account  of  all 
points  the  enemy  occupied  in  the  valley,  with  particulars 
— which,  by  the  bye,  the  General  was  very  fond  of — on  the 
respective  positions  of  the  two  vanguards.  Some  troops 
were  put  at  my  disposal,  and  I  learned  some  da3's  after  that 
a  secret  order  had  been  given  to  one  of  the  generals  of  the 
vanguard  to  follow  me  in  all  my  movements,  and  rectif}^  my 
blunders.  This  commission  was  not  very  important.  The 
manner  in  which  I  acquitted  myself  of  it  was  not  very  bad  ; 
and  if  the  General  bestowed  no  praises  either  on  my  beha- 
viour or  on  my  report,  at  least  I  received  no  reproaches. 

The  enemy  soon  returned  in  force.  General  Bonaparte 
had  foreseen  on  which  side  he  w^as  to  be  attacked,  the  chief 
aim  of  the  Austrians  being  naturally  the  deliverance  of 
Mantua.  He  had  in  consequence  placed  the  mass  of  his 
army  along  the  Adige,  at  Rivoli  and  La  Corona.  He  knew 
that  the  Archduke  Charles  was  intent  on  taking  Kehl,  and 
that  that  small  fortress,  less  formidable  still  by  the  strength 
of  its  walls  than  by  the  determination  of  General  Desaix, 
who  defended  it,  would  cost  the  Prince  a  great  many  men 
and  much  time.  The  diversion  the  enemy  made  on  Porto 
Legnago  and  St.  Georgo  was  of  no  use  ;  they  were  beaten 
at  Rivoli  by  the  division  of  Massena,  under  the  command^of 
General  Bonaparte.  The  consequences  of  this  battle  were 
beyond  all  calculation  for  the  Army  of  Italy.     Tyrol  was 