


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  V ALETTE.  1 1 3 

open  to  us  ;  Mantua  surrendered,  and  the  General-in-chief 
found  time  to  explain  himself  with  the  Pope  at  Tolentino. 
A  short  time  before  the  battle  of  Rivoli,  General  Brune  had 
arrived  at  the  army.  He  was  sent  by  the  Directory.  He 
experienced  such  a  flattering  reception  as  surprised  us.  His 
name  was  utterly  unknown.  Report  stated  that  he  had 
come  to  make  his  first  campaign,  and  we  were  curious  to 
judge  in  how  far  he  would  deserve  the  distinction  General 
Bonaparte  had  shown  him,  who  was  not  often  prodigal  of  his 
praises,  and  who  knew  so  perfectly  well  how  to  appreciate 
real  merit  :  however,  General  Brune  justified  them.  I  was 
not  at  Rivoli,  having  been  sent  to  St.  Georgo  ;  but  I  learned 
the  next  day,  through  Sulkowski,  that  Brune  had  fought  at 
La  Corona  with  great  skill  and  singular  valour.  He  had 
acquired  an  extraordinary  reputation  as  a  Republican.  In 
1 79 1,  when  the  expiring  monarchy  was  struggling  against 
an  enemy  who  crushed  it  at  the  end,  Brune  was  one  of  the 
leaders  of  the  club  of  the  Cordeliers,  and  led  the  riot  of  the 
Champ  de  Mars,  which  the  mayor,  Bailly,  dispersed  by  pro- 
claiming martial  law.  He  was  imprisoned,  and  a  report  was 
spread  that  his  Court  friends  had  attempted  to  get  rid  of 
him  by  odious  means.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war,  Brune 
was  employed  in  some  obscure  posts  ;  but  afterwards, 
whether  the  Directory  was  afraid  of  a  man  of  such  unusual 
spirit,  or  whether  he  felt  himself  that  his  courage  would  be 
better  employed  in  the  army,  he  obtained  leave  to  serve  in 
Italy.  General  Bonaparte,  foreseeing  that  he  should  one 
day  have  great  contests  with  the  Jacobin  party,  resigned  to 
General  Brune  a  part  of  the  honour  of  the  victory  of  Rivoli, 
and  made  him  a  general  of  division.  Some  years  after,  he 
was  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  same  army,  of 
which  he  had  been  one  of  the  least  distinguished  generals. 
These  distinctions  were  owing  either  to  some  talents  he 
really  possessed,  or  to  General  Bonaparte's  wish  of  attaching 
to  his  person  one  of  the  leaders  of  a  party  among  which 
several  men  of  merit  were  to  be  found.     The  pursuit  of  the 

9 


1 14  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

enemy  and  the  conquest  of  Tyrol  were  entrusted  to  General 
Joubert,  a  young  man,  who  had  begun  his  military  career  in 
the  Army  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  whom  the  General-in-chief 
raised  in  a  short  time  from  the  rank  of  colonel  to  that  of 
general  of  division.  His  merit  was  so  conspicuous  that  his 
comrades,  though  older  than  he,  did  not  complain  of  a 
preference  he  deserved  by  his  courage,  talents,  and  prudence, 
which  Massena  himself  openly  acknowledged.  I  was  ordered 
to  accompany  Joubert  to  Trente,  of  which  he  made  himself 
master  five  days  after  he  had  begun  the  attack. 