


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  105 

procured  him  the  necessary  leisure  to  mature  his  designs,  to 
calculate  all  their  difficulties,  and  guess  all  their  chances. 
He  solicited  of  Government  the  command  of  that  army  with 
money  and  troops.  He  was  made  general-in-chief  :  he  got 
troops,  but  only  the  small  sum  of  one  hundred  thousand 
crowns.  With  those  scanty  means  he  was  to  conquer  Italy 
at  the  head  of  troops  who  had  received  no  pay  for  the  last 
six  months,  and  who  had  not  even  shoes  to  their  feet.  But 
Bonaparte  felt  the  consciousness  of  his  strength  ;  and,  look- 
ing forward  with  delight  to  the  future,  he  took  leave  of  the 
Directory,  who  saw  his  departure  with  secret  pleasure,  happy 
to  be  rid  of  a  man  whose  character  awed  them,  and  whose 
projects  were,  in  the  eyes  of  the  majority  of  its  members, 
nothing  more  than  the  wild  fancies  of  a  youth  full  of  pride 
and  presumption. 

General  d'Hilliers  had  been  dismissed  on  the  13th  Vende- 
miaire,  for  having  expressed  himself  in  strong  terms  against 
that  expedition.  He  went  to  General  Bonaparte,  who  pro- 
cured him  a  fresh  appointment,  and  he  was  sent  as  chief  of 
the  staff  to  the  right  division  of  the  Western  army,  whose 
headquarters  were  at  Alencon.  The  war  in  the  Vendee  was 
brought  to  an  end  through  fatigue  and  want  of  food.  The 
consequences  of  the  passage  of  the  Loire  had  been  too  fatal 
to  the  Vendeans  to  leave  them  in  a  situation  to  prolong  the 
contest.  Their  most  able  leaders  were  killed.  "  The  grand- 
children of  Henry  IV."  had  disdained  to  appear  among  those 
gallant  soldiers,  who  fought  without  regimentals,  without 
order,  and  whose  appearance  had  not  the  sometimes  useless 
brilliancy  of  regular  troops.  Charette,  the  only  man  who 
still  might  have  supported  his  part,  had  been  shot  at  Nantz 
by  order  of  Government,  who  would  have  acted  more 
honourably  in  granting  him  his  pardon  ;  and  the  un- 
fortunate attempt  at  Quiberon  had  struck  the  last  blow 
to  the  enthusiasm  and  hopes  of  the  rebels.  Scattered 
bands,  acting  without  any  decided  aim,  still  ravaged  some 
parts  of  the  country.     General  Hoche,  to  whom  the  com- 


I04  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

mand  of  the  western  departments  was  entrusted,  succeeded 
in  a  short  time,  by  his  wisdom,  moderation,  and  reso- 
lution, in  destroying  the  last  remains  of  civil  war.  He 
established  a  system  of  movable  columns,  whose  motions 
were  calculated  with  so  much  precision  that,  while  they  were 
continually  crossing  the  country  in  all  directions,  they 
frequently  met  and  were  enabled  to  support  one  another 
in  case  they  should  be  attacked  by  superior  forces.  The 
enemy,  thus  chased,  unable  to  enjoy  one  moment's  rest  or 
safety,  got  discouraged,  and  at  last  preferred  to  exertions 
without  aim  a  peace  which  ensured  him  the  free  exercise  of 
those  religious  duties  for  which  he  had  taken  up  arms,  and 
the  hope  of  better  times.  In  Normandy,  where  I  was,  war 
was  raging  without  glory,  but  not  without  peril.  The 
Chouans,  secured  against  surprise  behind  their  high  hedges, 
aimed  close  upon  us,  and  cost  us  a  great  number  of  men. 
When  they  wanted  to  replenish  their  military  chest,  they 
stopped  the  stage-coaches,  stripped  the  travellers,  and 
frequently  killed  them.  These  gentlemen  fancied  that 
their  title  of  Royalists  ennobled  even  their  profession  of 
robbers.  A  little  while  before  our  arrival,  a  general  and 
well-directed  bush-beating  had  taken  place  against  them, 
and  had  disgusted  them  at  a  profession  which  left  them  no 
other  prospect  than  the  punishment  due  to  highway  robbers. 
Count  Frotte,  who  commanded  those  noble  troops,  gave  his 
companions  leave  to  make  their  peace,  and  went  over  to 
England,  after  having,  as  it  was  reported,  broken  his  sword. 
The  principal  leaders  then  wrote  to  General  Montigny,  who 
commanded  the  division,  to  solicit  an  interview,  which  took 
place  at  the  castle  of  Louvet,  near  Alencon.  I  went  to  meet 
these  gentlemen  into  a  wood  near  the  castle.  I  was  conducted 
there  blindfolded  ;  and  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  walk,  I 
found  in  a  thicket  a  dozen  tattered  wretches  lying  on  the 
grass,  exhausted  from  fatigue  and  want.  Some  of  them  were 
remarkable  for  a  haughty  expression  of  countenance  which 
they  did  not  belie  during  the  conference.     Their  submission 