

that  we  had  not  a  moment  to  lose.     In  an  instant  we  jumped 

117 


1 18  MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  VALETTE. 

out  of  the  carriage  and  ran  to  the  hills.  We  hid  ourselves 
in  a  ditch  :  when  up  to  our  necks  in  the  snow,  we  heard  the 
Tyroleans  pass  and  fire  their  muskets.  The  pursuit  was 
long,  and  not  without  uneasiness  to  us.  At  last  we  ventured 
to  change  our  position.  We  penetrated  farther  into  the 
mountains,  and  the  garret  of  a  hovel  was  our  retreat  for  the 
remainder  of  the  night.  At  daybreak  we  were  obliged  to 
adopt  some  resolution.  To  advance  was  impossible  :  we 
decided,  therefore,  to  return  on  foot  to  Lienz,  avoiding  the 
inhabited  places.  We  succeeded  for  some  leagues  ;  but 
after  having  in  vain  attempted  to  turn  a  village,  we  were 
forced  to  pass  through  it.  The  peasants  were  at  church,  the 
doors  of  which  were  open.  Some  old  women  called  after  us, 
and  a  dozen  of  the  most  alert  among  the  men  soon  reached 
us.  We  were  forced  to  yield  to  numbers.  We  did  not 
know  German  enough  to  make  ourselves  understood  by 
people  who  besides  spoke  that  language  very  ill,  and  they 
resolved  to  lead  us  back  to  Miihlbach.  The  whole  popula- 
tion of  the  town  and  environs  were  assembled  together. 
We  were  introduced  into  the  townhall,  situated  in  the 
great  square.  The  people  were  highly  excited,  and  I  could 
see,  by  the  fear  depicted  on  the  faces  of  the  municipal 
officers,  that  our  situation  was  becoming  dangerous.  Several 
of  those  brutes  were  dragging  us  along,  when,  after  having 
suddenly  disengaged  myself  from  their  hands,  I  peremptorily 
insisted  on  being  heard.  But  then  came  again  the  difficulty 
of  making  myself  understood.  I  sat  down,  took  up  a  pen 
and  wrote  in  Italian,  that  I  was  an  aide-de-camp  of  the 
General-in-chief  Bonaparte  ;  that  I  was  carrying  to  General 
Joubert  the  news  that  a  truce  had  been  signed  with  the 
Archduke  Charles  ;  that  they  were  at  liberty  to  murder 
us, — but  in  that  case,  my  mission  not  being  executed, 
hostilities  would  continue  in  Tyrol,  and  my  death  be  re- 
venged on  the  inhabitants.  This  account  being  proclaimed 
from  the  top  of  the  balcony,  and  repeated  among  the  crowd, 
succeeded  in  calming  them.     I  then  asked  leave  to  continue 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  119 

my  journey,  but  the  cries  began  anew.  The  only  permission 
I  obtained  was  to  return  to  Lienz.  We  were  escorted  there 
by  a  gentleman  and  a  clergyman  respected  by  the  peasants. 
On  our  arrival  I  gave  them  a  written  acknowledgment  of 
their  generous  conduct,  and  hope  one  day  to  be  able  to 
record  their  names,  and  recommend  them  to  the  esteem  of 
all  friends  of  humanity. 