

While  the  Austrians  were  making  so  unlucky  an  effort  to 
deliver  Mantua  and  drive  the  French  out  of  Italy,  the  Pope, 
excited  by  them,  and  discontented  with  the  loss  of  the  three 
Legations,  hastily  raised  some  troops  and  resolved  to  take  a 
part  in  the  formidable  contest.  The  time  when  the  pontiffs 
used  to  influence  so  powerfully  the  doctrines  of  Italy  was 
long  past  :  Pius  the  Sixth,  a  stately  pontiff,  possessed  none 
of  the  dangerous  qualities  of  Julius  the  Second.  The 
General-in-chief  marched  against  him  with  a  single  division. 
His  aide-de-camp,  Junot,  was  ordered  to  oppose  this  new 
enemy.  He  fell  in  with  him  near  Faenza.  A  few  cannon 
shots  were  exchanged  ;  but  all  the  troops  he  found  laid  down 
their  arms  with  so  much  docility,  that  the  Pope  sent  in 
haste  three  cardinals  to  sign  a  treaty,  \vhich  caused  him 
long  to  repent  his  imprudent  attack. 

By  this  treaty  the  cession  of  the  three  Legations  was 
confirmed,  while  the  Pope  was  obliged  to  pay  fifteen 
millions  for  his  perilous  enterprise,  and  deliver  up  the 
most  precious  masterpieces  of  antiquity  which  adorned  his 
capital  and  provinces.  This  episode  of  the  war  was  very 
short.  The  Archduke  Charles,  having  at  last  made  himself 
master  of  Kehl,  was  marching  to  us  in  great  haste  to  help 

General  to  deliver  Mantua  and  the  Holy  Father.     He 

arrived  too  late :  the  town  had  opened  its  gates,  and  the 
Pope  delivered  up  his  treasures.  A  certain  number  of 
emigrants  were  found  in  the  fortress.     The  laws  that  had 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  1 1 5 

been  passed  against  them  were  far  from  being  repealed  ;  the 
General-in-chief  nevertheless  ordered  General  Serrurier  to 
let  them  pass  unmolested.  I  do  not  know  whether  they 
showed  themselves  grateful  for  that  act  of  generosity. 

The  General-in-chief,  foreseeing  that  his  new  campaign 
would  require  great  exertions,  applied  to  Government  for  a 
fresh  supply  of  troops.  He  could  not  continue  fighting  in 
exhausted  Lombardy  ;  but  having  his  line  of  operations 
strongly  supported  on  Mantua,  he  wanted  to  go  in  his  turn 
to  seek  the  enemy,  and,  uniting  his  operations  with  those  of 
the  armies  of  the  Rhine,  disgust  the  Republicans  of  a  war 
which  had  no  longer  a  reasonable  aim,  and  was  kept  alive  by 
malicious  passions.  In  France,  everybody  was  desirous  of 
serving  under  General  Bonaparte.  Bernadotte  obtained  the 
preference,  and  his  army  arrived  on  the  banks  of  the  Piave, 
the  day  before  the  passage  of  that  river.  I  was  ordered  to 
go  and  compliment  him,  and  to  seek  a  ford  where  he  might 
pass  the  river.  The  most  elegant  politeness  of  manner 
distinguished  the  general  and  his  staff ;  they  appeared 
delighted  at  forming  a  part  of  the  army,  and  especially  at 
serving  under  the  command  of  the  hero  of  Italy.  The 
interview  took  place  next  day,  and  it  was  marked  by  a 
degree  of  cordiality  and  candour  which  produced  a  good 
impression  among  the  troops  present  at  the  scene. 