


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  127 

united  their  exertions  and  wishes  for  the  establishment  of  a 
representative  monarchy.  The  greatest  part  among  them 
were  men  of  merit.  All  had  been  persecuted  by  the  Com- 
mittee of  Public  Safety.  The  members  of  the  Directory 
had  been  all  chosen  out  of  the  Convention,  and  the  majority 
of  them  had  voted  for  the  death  of  the  King.  These  were 
no  titles  to  recommend  them  to  the  confidence  of  the 
people,  and  much  less  so  that  of  the  Constitutionalists. 
This  difference  between  the  conduct  and  the  opinions  of 
Government,  and  a  part  of  the  Chambers,  soon  created  an 
animosity  which  betrayed  itself  in  all  their  mutual  concerns. 
Perhaps,  however,  it  would  not  have  brought  on  a  cata- 
strophe, if  one  of  our  most  celebrated  generals  had  not 
entered  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  already  resolved 
to  carry  into  execution  a  conspiracy  in  favour  of  the 
Bourbons. 

Pichegru  it  was  who  conceived  that  fatal  design  a  long 
time  before.  I  was  told  by  General  Lahorie,  who  accom- 
panied him  to  Paris  when  the  Convention  summoned  the 
conqueror  of  Holland  to  her  aid  to  crush  the  Jacobins,  that 
when  he  left  the  metropolis  after  the  affair  of  the  12th 
Germinal,  Pichegru  lost  no  opportunity  of  showing  his 
contempt  for  the  Assembly, — contempt  so  great,  that  he 
grew  angry  at  the  thought  of  the  praises  and  honours 
that  had  been  lavished  on  him.  Such  were  his  ideas  when 
he  took  the  command  of  the  Rhine  army,  and  soon  after 
began  his  correspondence  with  the  Prince  of  Conde.  It 
could  not  remam  long  a  secret  :  the  Prince  wavered,  asked 
advice,  and  solicited  orders  of  the  Count  de  Lille.  This 
hesitation,  these  numerous  letters,  let  so  many  people  into 
the  secret  that  authentic  papers  were  alone  wanted  to 
establish  complete  evidence  of  the  plot.  Those  papers  were 
soon  found.  Count  d'Entraigues,  a  fiery  and  active-minded 
emigrant,  though  not  very  prudent,  was  one  of  the  agents 
of  the  correspondence.  He  was  attached  to  the  Russian 
legation   which    had    been    sent    to   the    former    govern- 


128  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

ment  of  Venice,  and  he  remained  in  that  city,  thinking 
himself  safe  in  his  foreign  regimentals.  The  General- 
in-chief  had  him  arrested.  A  great  part  of  the  corres- 
pondence was  seized  among  his  papers,  and  sent  to  the 
Directory. 

A  government  that  felt  itself  strong  enough  to  be  just 
would  have  had  the  traitor  arrested,  and  the  laws  would 
have  decided.  But  the  Directory  considered  that  Pichegru 
was  protected  by  eminent  services,  by  his  great  reputation, 
his  title  of  Deputy,  and  the  support  of  a  whole  party.  The 
examination  of  the  plot  proved,  besides,  that  if  General 
Moreau  had  not  taken  a  direct  part  in  it,  he  had  at  least 
known  of  it.  When  he  learned  that  Government  was 
acquainted  with  it,  he  hastened  to  disclose  it  ;  but  this 
tardy  disclosure,  instead  of  destroying  suspicion,  confirmed 
it.  Besides  that,  other  respectable  names  might  be  exposed. 
All  these  considerations  made  Government  fear  legal  pro- 
ceedings, the  publicity  and  final  result  of  which  might  too 
probably  prove  fatal  to  its  members  ;  so  that  it  was  deemed 
preferable  to  involve  in  one  common  destruction,  by  a  coup 
d  'etat,  the  private  foes  of  Government  and  those  who  had 
betrayed  the  Republic. 