

General  Bonaparte  followed  attentively  the  progress  of 
these  sad  dissensions.  In  the  heat  of  the  debates  of  the 
Council  of  Five  Hundred,  some  aspersions  had  been  directed 
against  his  lieutenants,  and  even  against  himself.  He  at 
first  proudly  repelled  them  ;  but  on  maturer  thought,  he 
resolved  to  send  to  Paris  some  one  who  could  obtain  exact 
information  on  the  situation  of  aflfairs,  and  I  was  chosen  for 
that  mission.  ''Mix  with  everybody,"  he  said;  "do  not 
let  yourself  be  led  away  by  party  spirit  ;  tell  me  the  truth, 
and  tell  it  me  free  from  all  passion." 

I  arrived  in  Paris  in  the  month  of  May.  The  five 
members  of  Government  were,  at  that  time,  Barras,  B.QVf- 
bell,  Carnot,  La  Reveilliere  Lepaux,  and  Barthelemy.  The 
first   four   had   been   members   of    the    Convention  ;    and 


^ABi^T. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE  129 

although  none  of  them  had  been  famous  during  the  Reign 
of  Terror  for  any  atrocious  act,  still  the  three  first  had  voted 
the  death  of  the  King, — a  vote  which,  notwithstanding  the 
fatal  though  powerful  Consideration  that  may  be  presented 
in  alleviation,  placed  them  among  the  most  furious  Jacobins, 
and  was  prejudicial  to  the  respect  with  which  they  ought  to 
have  been  invested.  The  people  bore  impatiently  the  yoke 
of  men  who  recalled  to  their  minds  such  fatal  events  ;  and 
they  were  especially  disliked  by  the  Constitutionalists  of 
1 79 1,  who  reproached  them  at  once  with  the  destruction 
of  their  edifice,  and  the  persecutions  which  had  so  long 
weighed  upon   them. 

When  I  arrived,  the  contest  was  violent,  and  the  antago- 
nists of  Government  made  no  secret  of  their  wish  to  over- 
throw the  majority.  My  first  visit  was  to  Barras,  who 
seemed  to  have  preserved  favourable  sentiments  for  General 
Bonaparte,  and  who  expressed  to  me  a  wish  to  maintain  the 
friendship  which  had  so  long  united  them.  After  him  I  saw 
Carnot,  who  spoke  to  me  with  a  reserve  commanded  by  the 
intimate  connection  of  General  Bonaparte  with  Barras.  A 
diflference  of  systems  and  views  on  some  points  of  govern- 
ment had  created  between  these  two  Directors  an  animosity 
which  betrayed  itself  in  invectives  and  threats,  that  left  no 
opening  for  reconciliation.  Carnot,  however,  expressed  him- 
self with  candour.  "  It  is  impossible,"  he  said,  "  to  go  on 
any  longer  on  the  revolutionary  road.  If  a  lasting  system 
of  moderation  be  not  adopted,  all  is  lost.  France  feels 
horror  for  whatever  brings  to  mind  the  deplorable 
measures  to  which  the  necessity  of  saving  her  has  carried 
the  country.  The  public  mind  is  irritated,  and  unless  great 
care  be  taken,  the  effect  will  be  to  involve  us  again  in  a 
confusion,  out  of  which  we  shall  be  extricated  only  to  bend 
under  the  yoke  of  the  Bourbons.  The  faction  against  which 
I  am  struggling  does  not  blush  to  charge  me  with  being  a 
Royalist  ;  and  nevertheless,  nobody  is  more  convinced  than 
I  am  of  Pichegru's  treason,  and  the  necessity  of  punishing 