

10 


I30  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

but  him  ;  they  want  to  govern  France  as  they  would  a  club. 
Narrow  views,  passionate  factious  spirit,  the  prejudices  of 
ignorance  and  fear,  ever  suspicious  and  blind,  preside  over 
all  our  acts  :  they  prefer  the  violence  that  irritates,  while 
moderation  and  firmness  would  be  sufficient  to  smooth 
everything.  My  situation  is  painful  ;  for  I  am  forced  to 
move  with  a  party  in  which,  exclusive  of  Pichegru,  there 
are  men  to  whom  I  am  obnoxious,  who  perhaps  conspire 
with  him,  and  who  will  ruin  the  Republic,  without  obtaining 
the  secret  aim  of  their  endeavours.  I  have  tried,"  he  added, 
"  to  reclaim  Pichegru  ;  I  was  not  personally  acquainted  with 
him  ;  but  the  conversation  I  had  with  him  convinced  me 
that  he  is  cleverer  than  I  thought,  and  that  he  has  taken 
his  final  resolutions.  I  do  not  know  what  are  his  means  of 
execution,  now  that  he  is  no  longer  with  the  army  ;  but, 
whatever  they  may  be,  they  will  miscarry  when  opposed  by 
the  firm  vigilance  of  Government,  and  by  public  opinion, 
which  is  strongl}^  declared  against  the  Bourbons." 

This  conversation,  of  which  I  have  only  recorded  the  most 
remarkable  parts,  was  the  only  one  I  had  with  Carnot.  The 
house  of  Barras  was  open  to  me,  and  I  went  there  so  often 
that  Carnot  could  not  but  look  upon  me  as  a  man  entirely 
devoted  to  the  party  of  that  Director  :  it  was,  however,  not 
so.  All  his  speeches  breathed  hatred  and  vengeance.  A 
month  before  the  catastrophe  took  place,  it  was  secretly 
resolved  to  make  it  terrible,  and  the  victims  were  marked 
out.  My  position  and  my  duty  forbade  me  taking  any  part 
in  the  contest,  but  I  wrote  the  truth  to  General  Bonaparte. 
I  observed  that  he  would  tarnish  his  glory  if  he  gave  any 
support  to  acts  of  violence,  which  the  situation  of  Govern- 
ment did  not  justify  ;  that  nobody  would  pardon  him  if  he 
joined  the  Directory  in  their  plan  to  overthrow  the  Constitu- 
tion and  liberty  ;  that  proscriptions  were  about  to  take  place 
against  the  national  representation,  and  against  citizens 
whose  virtues  made  them  worthy  of  respect  ;  that  punish- 
ments would  be  inflicted  without  trial,  and  that  the  hatred 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE.  1 3 1 

resulting  from  such  measures,  would  extend  not  only  to  the 
Directory,  but  to  the  whole  system  of  republican  govern- 
ment. Besides,  it  was  not  certain  that  the  party  they  were 
going  to  proscribe  really  wished  the  return  of  the  Bourbons  ; 
and  in  any  case  the  legal  punishment  and  banishment  of 
Pichegru  would  be  sufficient  to  destroy  any  plans  of  that 
sort.  These  considerations  made  so  much  impression  on 
the  mind  of  General  Bonaparte  that  he  soon  avoided,  in  his 
correspondence  with  the  Directory,  all  allusion  to  the  interior 
situation  of  France,  and  at  last  left  off  writing  to  them  alto- 
gether. His  long  silence  appeared  strange  to  Barras,  who, 
however,  easily  guessed  the  cause  of  it.  He  continued  seeing 
me  ;  but  I  perceived  by  his  gravity,  and  the  insidious  ques- 
tions of  his  favourites,  that  he  suspected  me  of  not  being  his 
friend.  I  never  loved  equivocal  situations,  and  I  hastened 
to  get  out  of  the  one  I  was  in  by  candidly  declaring  my 
sentiments  to  one  of  his  confidants.  "  I  know  enough,"  I 
said,  ''of  the  plans  of  Government  to  hurt  them  if  I  were  to 
acquaint  their  enemies  with  what  I  do  know  :  it  would,  how- 
ever, be  an  act  of  treason,  of  which  you  know  I  am  incapable. 
But,  as  a  citizen  and  an  honest  man,  I  cannot  dissemble  that 
I  do  not  approve  of  the  coup  cTetat  that  is  meditating  :  you 
are  going  to  trample  on  laws  and  liberty.  Such  a  system  or 
violence  will  sooner  or  later  recoil  on  your  own  heads.  After 
having  toiled  and  suffered  ten  years  to  obtain  a  representa- 
tive government,  it  is  distressing  to  reap  nothing  but  tyranny, 
or  the  convulsions  of  anarchy."  He  answered  me  by  some 
commonplace  observations  on  the  necessity  of  striking  a 
great  blow  at  a  faction  that  wanted  to  overthrow  the 
Republic.  Barras,  to  whom  this  conversation  was  reported, 
according  to  my  intention,  thought  it  requisite  to  dissemble  : 
he  did  not  treat  me  ill,  but  he  had  me  watched  with  a  vigi- 
lance that  extended  even  to  my  correspondence  with  General 
Bonaparte.  My  letters  to  him  were  written  in  cipher  ;  and 
that  proof  of  mystery  and  mistrust,  by  augmenting  their 
suspicions,  contributed  perhaps  to  hasten  the  catastrophe 