

Rewbell,  the  second  Director,  was  a  lawyer  from  iVlsatia  : 
his  name  will  hold  but  a  trivial  place  in  history.  He  was  at 
that  time  accused  of  amassing  his  fortune  with  an  avidity 
that  might  have  procured  him  immense  wealth  ;  however, 
that  charge  has  since  been  disproved  in  the  clearest  manner. 
After  living  fifteen  years  in  obscurity,  Rewbell  died  a  short 
time  ago,  leaving  a  very  middling  fortune. 

The  third  Director  was  named  La  Reveillere  Lepaux  :  he 
also  was  a  lawyer.  A  reputation  for  unsullied  integrity  and 
talent,  proclaimed  by  four  committees,  had  caused  him  to  be 
regarded  as  a  man  capable  of  governing  the  state.  Carnot 
has  used  him  very  ill  in  one  of  his  works.  I  believe  there 
is  a  great  deal  of  exaggeration  in  that  picture,  which  is 
traced  by  resentment  ;  several  features  of  it,  however^ 
approach  very  near  to  the  truth.  His  friends  and  his 
valets  used  to  call  him  the  good  soul  {le  bon  hovime)^  and  he 
wept  for  joy  when  on  the  i8th  Fructidor  he  heard  that 
thirty  legislators  were  to  be  transported  to  the  burning 
sands  of  Cayenne.  As  a  philosopher,  he  was  at  the  head  of 
a  sect,  and  the  Theophilanthropy  which  he  sought  to  propa- 
gate was  nothing  more  than  pure  Deism.  He  used  to  lay 
offerings  of  flowers  on  his  altars,  while  poor  Christian  priests 
under  his  government  expiated  the  crime  of  teaching  their 
religion  in  dark  and  solitary  dungeons. 

The    only  man    in  the  council  who  deserved   his   high 


134  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

station,  and  who  enjoyed  undisputed  respect,  was  Carnot. 
At  that  period  he  had  not  yet  completely  displayed  the 
inflexibility  of  conscience  and  the  wonderful  disinterested- 
ness that  have  made  him  hitherto  inaccessible  both  to  the 
seduction  and  to  the  threats  and  severity  of  power  ;  but 
those  who  approached  him  admired  in  him  a  dignity  of 
character  combined  with  virtue  and  vast  information, 
entirely  devoted  to  support  the  liberty  and  independence 
of  his  country.  The  turn  of  his  mind,  and  the  unshaken 
firmness  of  his  soul,  inspired  him  with  a  predilection  for  a 
Republican  government,  which  experience  does  not  seem  to 
have  weakened.  Being  himself  a  stranger  to  all  the  mean 
passions  that  animate  and  maintain  society,  he  did  not  calcu- 
late on  the  corruption  and  the  vanity  of  his  countrymen. 
A  republic  being  in  his  eyes  the  best  of  all  governments,  he 
thought  nothing  appeared  too  difficult  for  its  preservation, 
nor  perhaps  nothing  too  severe  to  insure  its  triumph.  This 
austere  Republican  was,  however,  a  good  and  amiable  man  : 
in  the  bosom  of  his  family,  he  was  indulgent  to  weakness  and 
error.  His  enemies  themselves  did  not  confound  him  with 
his  cruel  colleagues  of  the  Convention.  At  the  period  I  am 
speaking  of,  he  struggled  to  alleviate  the  situation  of  the 
emigrants  and  insure  the  tranquillity  of  their  families  :  he 
resisted  all  oppressive  measures,  and  wanted  to  establish  the 
prosperity  of  the  state  on  good  laws  and  the  benefits  of 
peace. 