

The  close  of  hostilities  and  the  expectation  of  a  speedy 
and  lasting  peace  were  hailed  by  the  belligerent  nations 
with  the  greater  enthusiasm,  because  during  the  latter 
years  the  war  had  no  longer  for  its  object  either  the  safety 
of  the  people  or  the  dignity  of  the  Sovereign.  The  Govern- 
ment of  the  French  Republic  was  acknowledged  by  a  part 
of  Europe,  and  the  conquest  of  the  Austrian  states  was 
commemorated  by  twenty  victories.  However  great  might 
be  the  talents  the  Archduke  Charles  had  displayed  in  his 
German  campaigns,  the  Emperor  could  not  expect  to  be  able 
to  beat  the  Army  of  Italy  with  troops  discouraged  by  so 
many  defeats,  and  by  a  system  of  retreat  in  which  they  only 
saw  a  proof  of  their  inferiority,  without  guessing  at  the  real 
plan  of  their  leader,  which  was  to  draw  his  adversary  out  of 
Italy,  from  whence  he  got  all  his  supplies. 

The  march  of  Bonaparte  through  the  hereditary  states, 
where  he  seemed  obstinately  pursuing  an  enemy  continually 
retiring  before  him,  was  strongly  criticised  at  that  time 
when  the  lustre  of  his  glory  had  surrounded  him  with  envy. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  1 2 1 

It  has  been  said  that,  if  the  Archduke  Charles  had  refused 
the  truce,  Bonaparte  would  have  been  obliged  to  follow  him 
to  the  banks  of  the  Danube,  and  that  there  all  the  chances 
of  success  would  have  been  in  favour  of  the  Austrians  ;  that 
a  first  check  in  that  position  would  have  been  the  certain 
prelude  of  a  defeat,  after  which  he  would  have  had  no  means 
of  retreating  and  avoiding  total  ruin.  No  one  doubted  but 
Italy  would  have  been  lost,  General  Laudon  having  pene- 
trated into  Lombardy  through  Tyrol,  while  the  insurrection 
of  the  Venetian  states  had  spread  disorder  among  our  troops, 
and  consternation  among  all  the  friends  of  France.  If  all 
those  assertions  had  been  founded  in  truth,  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  Bonaparte  not  only  wanted  prudence  in 
his  campaign,  but  also  that,  by  a  degree  of  vanity  contrary  to 
all  common  sense,  he  resolved  to  expose  to  the  most  perilous 
chances  his  army,  his  glory,  and  Italy,  to  satisfy  the  frivolous 
ambition  of  vanquishing  Prince  Charles,  and  making  himself 
master  of  the  metropolis  of  the  Austrian  empire.  But  it 
was  not  so.  In  the  first  place,  the  necessity  of  repulsing 
the  Archduke  was  urgent,  the  Prince  having  come  to  seek 
Bonaparte  on  the  banks  of  the  Piava.  In  pursuing  him 
beyond  the  Julian  Alps,  the  French  general  took  all  the 
precautions  that  the  art  of  war  and  the  most  consummate 
prudence  required.  The  left  of  his  army  had  made  itself 
master  of  the  valleys  of  the  Adige  and  the  Drave,  in  those 
parts  of  Tyrol  of  which  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  have 
possession  in  order  to  ensure  his  operations.  When  he  saw 
that  by  the  retreat  of  the  Archduke  he  should  be  obliged, 
if  he  wished  to  pursue  him,  to  penetrate  into  the  interior 
of  Styria,  he  recalled  General  Joubert,  and  reinforced  his 
army  by  twenty-two  thousand  men.  This  augmentation  of 
his  troops  gave  him  a  superiority  in  numbers  which  the 
Austrians  would  not  have  been  able  to  equal  even  under 
the  walls  of  Vienna  ;  for  all  the  forces  of  the  monarchy  were 
already  exhausted, — and  the  campaigns  of  Austerlitz  and 
AVagram  have  sufficiently  proved    that  the  inhabitants  of 