

After  the  signature  of  the  Treaty  of  Leoben,  the  army 
took  up  its  position  beyond  the  Tagliamento,  and  the 
General-in-chief  came  to  Milan  ;  but  in  his  way  he  thought 
fit  to  punish  the  cruelties  committed  during  the  insurrection. 
He  knew  well  that  the  insurrection  had  been  prepared  and 
directed  by  the  Government  of  Venice  ;  and  he  had  acquired 
proofs  that  it  had  been  concerted  with  the  enemy,  and  in 
his  interest.  But  Bonaparte's  revenge  was  one  of  an  able 
politician.  Austria  had  a  great  wish  to  get  Venice  into  her 
possession.  Bonaparte  destroyed  its  government,  and  was 
enabled,  by  that  means,  to  offer  that  rich  prey  as  a  com- 
pensation in  the  negotiation.  It  was  accepted,  without 
blushing,  by  a  government  which  never  hesitated  in  making 
its  friends  pay  for  faults  caused  by  its  own  misconduct. 

In  the  meanwhile  a  circumstance  happened  at  Genoa  that 
strongly  fixed  the  General's  attention.  The  government  of 
that  small  republic  had  refused  to  admit  one  of  our  squadrons 
into  its  ports.  The  English  party,  that  was  uppermost  in 
the  Senate  of  Genoa,  had  stirred  up  a  riot  among  the  rabble ; 
a  Frenchman  had  been  killed,  and  the  frigate  La  Modeste 
had  been  burned.  Such  acts  of  violence  required  a  speedy 
and  energetic  repression  ;  but  General  Bonaparte  wished 
that  such  punishment  might  be  inflicted  by  the  French 
Government.  Secret  emissaries,  sent  from  Paris,  had  been 
instructed  to  obtain,  by  all  possible  means,  the  union  of 
Genoa  with  France.  This  was,  however,  not  the  opinion 
of  General    Bonaparte.      It  would   have  caused  a  renewal 


124  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

of  painful  discussions  with  the  Austrians,  at  the  very 
moment  when  the  treaty  was  being  put  into  execution. 
Besides,  the  ItaHan  army  derived  considerable  advantages 
from  the  Genoese  republic.  In  consequence,  General  Bona- 
parte thought  fit  to  send  me  to  Genoa,  with  precise 
instructions,  and  an  order  to  deliver  to  the  Doge,  in  full 
Senate,  the  letter  he  addressed  to  him,  giving  him  no  more 
than  four-and-twenty  hours  to  execute  the  measures  of  which 
I  was  the  bearer.  My  entrance  into  the  city  caused  great 
anxiety,  and  the  approach  of  a  terrible  though  unknown 
danger  made  the  magistrate,  in  whose  hands  the  care  of  the 
public  reposed,  feel  that  the  republic  was  irretrievably  lost, 
if  any  fresh  outrages  were  committed  in  the  presence  of  an 
aide-de-camp  of  General  Bonaparte.  The  people  became 
calm,  as  if  by  enchantment.  M.  Faypoult,  the  French 
ambassador,  was  greatly  dispirited  ;  and,  when  I  declared  to 
him  that  the  orders  of  the  General-in-chief  were  that  I 
should  deliver  my  letter  to  the  Doge  in  full  Senate,  he 
recoiled  with  alarm,  and  said  there  was  no  instance  of  a 
stranger  ever  having  entered  the  Petty  Council  presided  by 
the  Doge.  I  replied,  that  there  was  no  instance  either  of 
an  order  of  General  Bonaparte  not  being  executed,  and  that 
he  was  immediately  to  acquaint  the  Doge  of  my  arrival  ; 
that  in  an  hour's  time  I  would  go  to  the  palace  of  the 
Senate  ;  that  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  forms  of  the 
republic,  nor  to  care  for  the  peril  I  might  run  in  executing 
the  orders  of  my  chief.  Half  an  hour  afterwards  I  was 
informed  that  I  might  go  to  the  palace.  When  I  entered 
the  hall,  anger  and  consternation  were  visible  on  the  features 
of  all  the  members  of  the  Council.  After  having  delivered 
my  letter,  and  required  the  execution  of  the  orders  it  con- 
tained within  four-and-twenty  hours,  I  retired  ;  and  the 
agitation  was  so  strong  in  the  Assembly  that  I  heard  a 
powerful  voice  repeating  the  words,  "  Ci  batteremo"  (We 
will  fight).  However,  they  did  not  fight.  Three  senators 
were  arrested. 