


132  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

through  the  fear  that  Bonaparte  might  take  some  resolution 
that  would  perplex  the  Directory. 

I  may  here  briefly  describe  the  different  members  of  the 
Directorial  government,  whose  existence  was  so  short,  though 
its  operations  had  so  much  influence  on  the  destinies  of 
France  and  the  affairs  of  Europe. 

Barras,  who  then  discharged  the  functions  of  president, 
was  descended  from  one  of  the  most  ancient  families  of 
Provence.  A  restless  disposition,  and  the  wish  to  advance 
rapidly  in  the  military  career,  had  induced  him  to  go  to 
India,  where  he  served  in  a  colonial  regiment.  Having 
returned  to  France  in  lySq,  he  declared  himself  in  favour  of 
the  Revolution,  in  which,  however,  he  obtained  no  celebrity. 
Nature  had  refused  him  those  qualifications  which  ensure 
success  to  an  orator,  but  he  had  a  great  deal  of  resolution  ; 
and  his  conduct  at  the  fall  of  Robespierre,  by  bringing  upon 
him  the  hatred  of  the  Jacobins,  gave  him  a  share  in  the 
gratitude  all  France  felt  for  those  who  had  contributed  to 
the  destruction  of  their  horrible  tyranny. 

At  the  period  I  am  now  speaking  of,  Barras  was  the  most 
violent  of  the  three  members  of  the  Directory  who  wished 
for  an  alteration  in  the  councils.  His  hatred  of  Carnot  was 
so  strong  that,  a  few  days  before  the  i8th  Fructidor,  one  of 
his  confidants,  to  whom  I  made  the  observation  that  Carnot 
would  undoubtedly  find  means  of  escaping  from  persecution, 
answered,  "  Wc  will  kill  Mm.^''  He  had  continually  in  his 
mouth  the  most  insulting  expressions  against  those  whom 
he  suspected  of  being  Royalists.  On  the  other  hand,  how  is 
it  possible  to  reconcile  that  hatred  of  the  Bourbons  and  their 
friends  with  the  revelations  published  by  Fauche  Borel 
since  the  Restoration,  and  which  Barras  never  denied.  The 
above-mentioned  agent  of  Louis  XVIII.  has  asserted  that 
the  Director  had  consented  to  the  plan  of  the  Count  of  Lille 
to  bring  about  a  Royalist  revolution  ;  that  a  formal  pardon 
had  been  sent  to  him,  and  an  amnesty  for  his  vote  in  the 
trial  of  the  late  King  ;  finally,  that  several  millions  had  been 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  1 33 

promised  him  to  make  up  for  the  loss  of  his  rank  as  Director. 
If  the  assertion  of  Fauche  Borel  be  true,  the  animosity  of 
Barras  against  the  RoyaHst  party  can  only  be  explained  by 
the  impossibility  in  which  he  found  himself  of  accomplish- 
ing his  promises,  or  by  his  grief  at  being  obliged  to  share 
glory  and  the  profit  of  a  Restoration  with  persons  whom  he 
detested,  and  whose  reputation  and  talents  would  offer  the 
King  better  pledges  than  he  could  present.  The  conduct  of 
Napoleon  in  regard  to  Barras,  during  his  reign,  may  also 
be  explained  by  the  knowledge  he  had  acquired  of  his 
treason. 