

I  had  scarcely  arrived  at  Lienz,  when  I  learned  that  I  was 
about  to  be  attacked  by  the  Tyroleans  who  had  assembled 
in  the  mountains.  The  inhabitants  of  the  place  were  not 
very  peaceably  disposed  ;  but  I  hoped  to  awe  them  by  my 
firmness.  I  could  not  entertain  the  intention  of  engaging  in 
a  useless  action.  I  wished,  however,  to  carry  along  with 
me  about  fifty  wounded  Frenchmen  whom  I  found  in  the 
hospital,  and  whom  the  Austrians  had  abandoned  in  their 
retreat.  While  I  was  taking  the  necessary  measures  for 
their  transfer,  I  was  told  that  one  of  the  posts  placed  at  the 
entrance  of  the  town  had  been  killed  by  the  Tyroleans,  who 
were  advancing  against  us.  I  returned  to  the  inn  to  get  on 
horseback  ;  but,  just  as  I  was  coming  out  of  the  door,  a 
dozen  of  these  rebels,  placed  in  ambush  at  thirty  steps 
distance,  fired  at  us  and  killed  my  horse,  and  also  those 
my  servant  was  holding  by  the  bridle,  and  gave  me 
a  severe  bruise  in  the  belly.  I  had  just  time  to  extri- 
cate myself  and  rejoin  the  troops.  To  attempt  resistance 
in  the  interior  of  the  town  would  have  been  madness  :  we 
left  it  amidst  a  shower  of  bullets,  shot  from  the  windows. 
The  Tyroleans  were  waiting  for  us  at  the  gate.  We  were 
obliged  to  repulse  them  with  the  bayonet,  and  continued 
fighting  till  we  arrived  at  Spital,  several  leagues  off.  There 
I  found  General  Zayonjeck,  who  had  at  last  succeeded  in 
getting  forward,  and  was  coming  to  join  me.  This  affair 
cost  us  five-and-twenty  men  killed  and  wounded,  and  three 
distinguished  officers.  This  loss  grieved  me  sorely,  and 
though  I  had  done  all  that  prudence  required,  I  was  never- 
theless anxious  to  know  what  impression  it  would  make  on 


1 20  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VA  L  E  TTE. 

the  General-in-chief.  My  report  had  preceded  me  :  I  was 
well  received,  though  he  blamed  me  for  having  ventured 
alone,  and  without  the  hope  of  being  assisted.  The  order  I 
had  been  the  bearer  of  had  also  been  entrusted  to  an  officer 
who  went  from  Trente,  and  who  was  more  fortunate  than  I. 
General  Joubert  hastened  to  join  the  General-in-chief  with 
his  whole  army  corps  ;  but  the  truce  was  already  signed. 

After  the  victory  of  Neumarck,  General  Bonaparte  had 
written  to  the  Archduke  to  propose  peace.  The  Cabinet  of 
Vienna,  tired  of  the  long  and  unfortunate  contest,  and  fear- 
ing that  the  loss  of  a  battle  might  bring  the  enemy  to  the 
gates  of  their  metropolis,  eagerly  seized  the  only  means  of 
stopping  the  French  in  their  victorious  career.  The  truce 
was  signed  at  Judenburg  on  the  7th,  and  the  preliminaries 
at  Leoben  on  the  1 8th  of  April,  by  Messieurs  de  Gullo  and 
Meerfield  on  the  part  of  the  Austrians,  and  General  Bona- 
parte and  M.  Clarke  on  the  part  of  the  French. 