


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  125 

Despatches  were  sent  to  the  General-in-chief.  A  pro- 
visional government  was  instituted,  and  a  commission 
chosen  to  modify  the  Genoese  constitution.  Anxiety,  agita- 
tion, and  fear  were  carried  to  the  highest  pitch.  I  thought 
I  should  be  able  to  set  oflF  the  next  day,  when  a  vessel  that 
entered  the  port  gave  me  fresh  cause  of  uneasiness.  She 
had  on  board  Madame  Bonaparte  (the  General's  mother), 
with  two  of  her  daughters — afterwards  known  as  Queen  of 
Naples  and  Grand  Duchess  of  Tuscany — and  M.  Bacciochi, 
newly  married.  These  ladies  had  not  seen  the  General-in- 
chief  for  several  years.  They  had  come  from  Marseilles, 
fancying  that  Italy  was  tranquil.  General  Bonaparte  had  not 
received  the  letter  in  which  they  acquainted  him  with  their 
arrival.  No  measures  had  been  taken — no  orders  given  ; 
the  riots  might  perhaps  begin  anew,  and  they  might  fall 
victims  to  popular  fury.  My  first  thought  was,  to  remain 
with  them,  and  to  collect  some  means  of  defence,  in  case 
they  should  be  attacked.  But  Madame  Bonaparte  was  a 
woman  of  great  sense  and  courage.  "  I  have  nothing  to 
fear  in  this  place,"  she  said  ;  "since  my  son  holds  as  hostages 
the  most  considerable  persons  of  the  republic.  Go  quickly 
and  acquaint  him  with  my  arrival.  To-morrow  I  shall 
continue  my  journey."  I  followed  her  advice,  merely  taking 
the  precaution  of  ordering  some  detachments  of  cavalry  I 
found  in  my  way  to  go  to  meet  them.  They  arrived 
without  accident  the  next  day  at  Milan. 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

While  France  and  her  armies  were  at  last  enjoying  the 
repose  bought  by  such  heroic  exertions,  Government  be- 
trayed, by  its  internal  dissensions,  the  fatal  secret  of  its 
weakness  and  incapacity.  The  enlightened  part  of  the 
country  had  soon  become  sensible  that  the  Directory 
would  never  obtain  any  but  a  temporary  and  stormy 
existence.  Besides  the  impossibility  of  preserving  perfect 
harmony  between  five  persons,  possessing  power  in  common, 
while  they  were  swayed  by  different  passions,  prejudices, 
and  characters,  it  was  easy  to  be  convinced  that  even  the 
concentration  of  power  in  so  few  hands,  being  an  homage 
paid  to  monarchy,  would  recall  too  many  recollections,  and 
too  much  regret  for  the  old  form  of  government,  not  to 
tempt  its  adherents  to  make  efforts  in  its  favour.  In  the 
eyes  of  the  Royalists,  the  Directory  was  then  only  a  passage 
to  monarchy.  They  hoped  that  it  would  be  short  ;  and 
their  wishes,  inflamed  by  the  expectation  of  success,  made 
them  bold.  For  the  first  time,  they  combined  a  reasonable 
plan  by  addressing  themselves  to  the  passions  of  their  foes, 
and  to  ambition  so  ardent  in  its  calculation.  The  Con- 
stitution of  the  Year  III.  had  created  two  councils — one 
called  the  "  Council  of  Five  Hundred,"  and  the  other  the 
"  Council  of  Ancients."  Among  the  persons  composing 
them  were  still  many  members  of  the  Convention,  who 
could  not  bear  the  idea  of  the  return  of  the  Bourbons  ;  but 
among  them  also  sat  some  old  Constitutionalists,  who  had 