


122  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

Vienna,  and  even  those  of  the  hereditary  states,  except  the 
Tyroleans,  do  not  readily  take  up  arms.  They  would 
probably  have  remained  peaceable  spectators  of  the  contest^ 
of  which  the  object  was  of  no  advantage  to  them.  As 
to  the  loss  of  Italy,  there  was  no  likelihood  of  such  an 
event.  The  small  corps  commanded  by  M.  de  Laudon 
might  certainly  have  caused  some  confusion  at  first ;  but 
that  general  was  without  support — without  any  real  line 
of  operations.  We  possessed  well-furnished  fortresses, 
numerous  garrisons,  a  body  of  excellent  and  well-com- 
manded troops.  The  insurrection  of  the  Venetian  states, 
on  which  the  enemy  reckoned,  had  been  much  exaggerated. 
Some  hundred  wretches,  urged  b}'  the  Venetian  Govern- 
ment, had  massacred  the  sick  at  Verona,  and  some  solitary 
Frenchmen  on  the  highway  ;  but  there  was  a  great  difference 
between  these  outrages  and  a  general  strongly  organised 
insurrection,  gathering  force  from  hatred  and  the  thirst  for 
revenge.  The  Venetian  people  were  but  little  attached  to 
their  government.  The  creation  of  a  powerful  republic  in 
the  midst  of  them  inspired  them  with  a  desire  of  making  a 
part  of  it  ;  while  a  taste  for  novelty  made  them  shut  their 
eyes  on  the  sacrifices  which  revolutions  require,  and  their 
vivid  imagination  had  exaggerated  the  advantages  they 
expected  to  reap  from  it.  The  friends  of  government  were 
undoubtedly  numerous,  especially  among  persons  in  office 
and  the  priesthood,  who  cannot  but  lose  in  modern  revolu- 
tions ;  but  the  mass  of  the  people  were  strangers  to  their 
designs  and  their  ambition.  I  have  rather  enlarged  on  the 
subject  of  this  campaign,  because  I  found  in  Paris,  some 
time  after,  people  who  blamed  it  openly,  notwithstanding 
its  brilliant  and  solid  result  ;  but  I  was  soon  convinced 
that  those  reflections  originated  with  the  members  of  the 
Directory,  who  had  been  much  less  uneasy  about  the  result 
of  the  conquest  than  dissatisfied  with  the  haughty  in- 
dependence of  General  Bonaparte,  who  did  not  choose  to 
submit  to  the  plan  traced  out  by  Government.   The  passage 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  123 

of  the  Rhine  by  Hoche  and  Moreau  was  a  powerful  diversion 
which  the  conqueror  of  Italy  had  himself  wished  for  ;  but 
that  operation,  to  have  been  really  advantageous,  ought,  in 
his  opinion,  to  have  been  put  into  execution  much  earlier. 
A  last  consideration,  and  which  is  in  itself  an  answer  to  all 
objections,  is  the  intimate  and  convincing  knowledge  the 
General-in-chief  had  acquired  of  the  dispositions  of  the 
ministers  and  persons  who  enjoyed  decisive  influence  over 
the  mind  of  the  Emperor. 