

All  these  reflections  determined  him  to  make  peace,  not- 
withstanding the  contrary  orders  of  the  Directory.  Mis- 
understanding and  dissatisfaction  showed  themselves  in  all 
the  letters  he  addressed  to  the  Government.  His  unpub- 
lished correspondence  contains  three  of  those  letters,  in  which 
his  ill-humour  is  displayed  with  a  degree  of  energy  and  pride 
that  made  the  Directory  tremble,  and  was  the  source  of  the 
hatred  which  in  course  of  time  brought  on  the  1 8th  Brumaire. 
The  Directory  did  not  wish  to  sacrifice  Venice  to  Austria  : 
General  Bonaparte  wanted  to  retain  Mantua  ;  and  as  his 
instructions  did  not  prescribe  absolutely  that  he  should  not 
abandon  Venice,  he  took  upon  himself  to  sign,  on  the  4th 
Vendemiaire   (25th  September),  the  treaty  of   Passeriano, 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE .  145 

well  convinced  that  Government  would  not  dare  to  express 
discontent  openly  ;  and  that  France,  rejoiced  at  peace,  would 
overrule  with  her  applause  the  rumours  of  the  General's 
enemies.  According  to  our  calculations,  the  courier  of  the 
Directory  was  to  arrive  at  Passeriano  on  the  very  day  fixed  for 
the  signature.  Bonaparte  was  reckoning  with  me  the  dis- 
tance the  courier  had  to  go,  and  the  hour  he  might  arrive  ; 
and  he  candidly  acknowledged  the  perplexity  he  would  be  in, 
if  he  received  from  Government  an  order  not  to  go  any 
farther.  Recollecting  afterwards  with  disgust  the  slow  march 
of  Moreau  in  Germany,  a  few  months  before,  while  he  was 
at  Leoben,  and  the  appointment  of  Augereau  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  Rhine  army,  instead  of  Desaix,  whom  he  had 
recommended  in  the  most  pressing  manner,  he  added,  in  a 
tone  of  much  ill-humour,  "  I  see  very  well  that  they  are  pre- 
paring defeats  for  me.  That  man  (meaning  Augereau)  is 
incapable  of  conceiving  an  extensive  plan.  He  will  get  beaten, 
or  will  not  advance  at  all ;  all  the  Austrian  forces  will  then 
fall  upon  me,  and  my  beloved  Italy  will  be  the  grave  of  the 
French  army."  He  then  questioned  me  as  to  the  disposition 
of  that  part  of  France  through  which  I  had  travelled,  and  I 
assured  him  that  peace  would  be  received  with  enthusiasm  ; 
that  the  people  would  bestow  blessings  on  him,  and  that 
public  happiness  would  be  his  work. 

At  last,  on  the  27th  of  Vendemiaire,  the  ministers  of 
Austria  were  called  to  Passeriano,  and  the  secretaries  of  the 
tJivo  Legations  made  copies  of  the  treaty.  That  business 
lasted  the  whole  day.  The  General  was  delightfully  merry. 
No  more  discussions  !  He  remained  a  part  of  the  day  in  hir. 
saloon,  and  would  not  even  have  the  candles  lighted  when  it 
grew  dark.  We  sat  talking  and  telling  one  another  ghost 
stories,  like  a  family  living  in  an  old  castle.  At  last,  at  about 
ten  o'clock  at  night,  he  was  told  that  all  was  ready.  He  ran 
to  his  closet,  cheerfully  signed  the  document,  and  at  mid- 
night General  Berthier,  the  bearer  of  the  treaty,  was  on  the 
road  to  Paris.     Twelve  hours  afterwards,  the  courier  of  the 