

The  ministers  who  formed  the  cabinet  under  this  Pent- 
archy  have  not  been  able  to  escape  oblivion,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  one  whose  name  will  be  recorded  in  history  on 
account  of  the  variety  of  parts  he  has  acted.  M.  de  Talley- 
rand left  France  in  1792,  as  bishop  of  Autun  ;  he  returned 
in  1796  a  Republican,  and  with  all  the  docile  modesty  of  a 
disgraced  man  who  wishes  to  return  to  favour.  He  possessed 
a  remarkable  degree  of  talent,  which  Avas  much  praised  by 
his  friends.  He  had,  however,  not  yet  attained  the  fame  he 
afterwards  enjoyed,  as  one  of  the  most  clever  diplomatists 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  135 

of  Europe.  In  that  respect  the  Directory  were  not  in  want 
of  his  services.  Numerous  and  important  treaties  had  been 
sighed  by  obscure  persons,  and  were  not  the  worse  for  that. 
But  the  vanity  of  the  Directors  was  flattered  at  having 
under  their  orders  a  man  who  had  formerly  been  a  grand 
seigneur.^  who  had  given  more  than  one  pledge  to  the 
Revolution,  had  lost  the  right  of  complaining  of  its  excesses, 
having  himself  professed  all  its  principles,  and  whose  supple- 
ness of  character  insured  his  obedience.  He  possessed, 
besides,  considerable  advantages  over  his  predecessor,  and 
even  over  his  new  masters — I  mean  his  connection  with 
influential  men  in  foreign  countries,  a  strong  taste  for 
politics,  and  the  most  perfect  polish  of  manner.  Notwith- 
standing their  rude  republican  pride,  the  Directors  were 
sensible  that,  in  their  negotiations  with  foreign  courts,  a 
man  of  birth  belonging  to  the  old  monarchy  might  be  of 
use  to  them. 

When  M.  de  Talleyrand  entered  the  ministry,  dissension 
was  at  its  greatest  violence.  He  gently  discarded  his  old 
friends  who  were  struggling  in  the  councils  against  the 
majority  of  the  Directory,  by  feigning  to  believe  that  they 
all  wished  for  the  return  of  the  Bourbons,  and  he  remained 
a  cool  spectator  of  their  disasters.  The  chief  point  he  had 
in  view  was  to  keep  his  place  and  re-establish  his  fortune, 
which  had  been  destroyed  by  former  disorders  and  public 
events.  He  quickly  obtained  his  aim,  from  which  nothing 
could  divert  him,  neither  the  clamour  raised  by  his  enemies, 
nor  the  reproaches  of  his  masters,  to  which  he  constantly 
opposed  a  calm,  patient,  and,  I  may  almost  say,  a  careless 
resignation.  I  have  witnessed  some  instances  of  it,  and  I 
felt  that  ambition  cannot  fail  to  create  disgust  when  bought 
at  such  a  price.  He  lived  on  a  footing  of  intimacy  with 
Madame  de  Stael,  already  celebrated  for  her  superior  mind, 
and  a  passion  for  fame,  united  to  kindness  of  heart  that  has 
not  been  sufficiently  appreciated.  To  say  the  truth,  it  was 
a  little  her  own  fault.     I  am  convinced  that  she  did   not 