

By  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio  it  was  agreed  that  a 
congress  should  assemble  at  Rastadt  to  treat  of  peace 
between  the  Empire  and  the  French  Republic.  The  choice 
of  the  place  recalled  to  memory  the  celebrated  period  of 
1707,  when  the  Castle  of  Rastadt  united  on  its  walls  the 
Duke  de  Villars  and  Prince  Eugene  of  Savoy.  This  time 
the  Emperor  did  not  think  fit  to  be  represented  by  one  of 
his  warriors.     They  had  all   of  them  been  beaten  by  the 


1 50  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE. 

French.  Count  Metternich  represented  the  Roman  Em- 
peror, and  Count  Latorbach  the  King  of  Bohemia  and 
Hungary.  Count  Cobentzel  came  there  with  other  nego- 
tiators, who  had  signed  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio.  On 
the  side  of  France  there  was  M.  Treilhard,  late  member  of 
the  Convention,  who  not  only  had  voted  for  the  death  of 
the  King,  but  who  had  even  boasted  at  the  time  that  it  was 
he  who  had  persuaded  the  Duke  of  Orleans  to  give  the  same 
vote.  He  was  a  very  learned  lawyer,  and  a  man  of  rigid 
character.  The  criminal  code  was  composed  by  him.  He 
was  far  from  being  eloquent,  and  had  not  even  an  easy  style 
of  elocution.  He  was  accompanied  by  M.  Bonnier  d'Arco, 
a  harsh  man,  of  a  violent,  and  frequently  untractable 
humour.  These  two  plenipotentiaries  were  all  but  pleasing 
to  the  diplomatists  covered  with  stars,  and  whose  ancient 
names  were  preceded  by  their  high-sounding  titles.  The 
contrast  was  singular  ;  for  the  two  ambassadors  of  the 
Republic  never  wore  any  but  round  hats,  and  their  shoes 
were  fastened  with  strings  ;  but  the  other  nations  were 
obliged  to  submit  to  the  French  Republic,  and  the  railleries 
to  which  these  two  gentlemen  were  exposed  were  never 
expressed  in  their  presence.  The  General-in-chief  had  no 
desire  to  remain  at  Rastadt.  The  obscure  discussions  of 
the  negotiation,  and  the  artful  finesse  of  the  German 
chancery,  would  have  been  a  sad  recompense  for  the  fatigue 
he  had  suffered  in  the  army,  and  a  still  sadder  one  for  his 
victories.  Nothing  therefore  took  place  but  mere  form. 
Only  one  remarkable  circumstance  happened  during  his 
short  stay.  The  King  of  Sweden,  in  his  qualit}'  of  the 
Grand  Duke  of  Pomerania,  had  sent  to  the  Congress  or 
Rastadt  Count  Fersen,  formerly  celebrated  at  the  Court  ot 
France,  and  who  had  acted  so  conspicuous  a  part  in  the 
famous  journey  to  Varennes.  The  hatred  of  his  Sovereign 
for  France  was  a  well-known  fact,  and  the  Count  could  not 
be  agreeable.  He  happened  to  express  the  fatal  wish  of  his 
being   presented  to   the    General.      When    he  was   in    his 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  151 

presence,  the  latter  said  to  him,  "  How  could  you  expect, 
sir,  you  could  be  able  to  serve  the  interests  of  Sweden — 
you  who  are  only  known  by  your  affection  for  a  government 
iustly  proscribed  in  France,  and  by  your  useless  exertions 
for  its  re-establishment  ?  "  M.  de  Fersen  replied  by  a  few 
words  which  we  did  not  hear.  General  Berthier,  who  was 
present,  wishing  to  relieve  him,  recalled  to  his  memory  that 
they  had  fought  together  in  America.  By  that  means  the 
ambassador  retired  a  little  less  perplexed,  and  the  next  day 
he  left  Rastadt,  whither  he  did  not  return  until  some  time 
after. 