

Government,  being  once  certain  of  the  support  of  the 
General,  marked  out  their  victims  ;  and  in  the  night  of  the 
17th  Fructidor,  orders  to  arrest  them  were  delivered.  As 
they  might  have  escaped  in  the  night  it  was  resolved  to 
wait  till  daybreak,  and  by  a  wretched  contrivance,  worthy 
of  a  melodrama,  this  outrage  was  immediately  announced 
by  the  discharge  of  a  four-and-twenty  pounder  on  the  plat- 
form of  the  Pont  Neuf.  The  explosion  broke  all  the 
windows  in  the  neighbourhood  and  spread  dismay  through 
the  city.  At  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  Director 
Barthelemy,  thirty  members  of  the  two  councils,  and  several 
writers,  were  sent  to  prison.  A  few  days  afterwards  a  part 
of  France  witnessed  their  representatives  dragged  along,  in 
trellised  carts,  like  wild  beasts.  They  were  taken  to  Roche- 
fort,  and  from  thence  to  Guyenne,  where  the  unwholesome 
climate  proved  fatal  to  some  of  these  unhappy  men.  Several 
of  the  victims  succeeded  in  escaping.    Carnot  found  a  refuge 

in  the  house  of  M.  ,  one  of  the  warmest  advocates  of 

the  arrest.  But  he  was  the  countryman  and  friend  of  the 
Director,  and  his  generous  soul  found  means  to  conciliate 
the  duties  of  friendship  with  the  passion  of  party  spirit. 

I  had  passed  the  evening  of  the  17th  with  Barras.  The 
ill-disguised  agitation  of  his  courtiers,  and  some  words 
which  I  caught  en  passant^  taught  me  the  secret  of  the 
night.  I  retired  early,  resolved  not  to  show  myself  the  next 
day,  as  I  did  not  wish  to  lead  any  one  to  suppose  by  my 
presence  that  General  Bonaparte  approved  of  such  unheard- 
of  violence.     I  went,  however,  to  Barras  on  the  day  after. 


138  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

As  soon  as  he  perceived  me  he  called  me  to  his  closet,  and 
then,  assuming  a  threatening  look  and  tone  of  voice,  he 
said  :  "  You  have  betrayed  the  Republic  and  your  General. 
For  the  last  six  weeks  Government  has  received  no  private 
letters  from  him.  Your  opinions  on  what  is  going  forward 
are  known  to  us,  and  you  have  undoubtedly  painted  our 
conduct  under  the  most  odious  colours.  I  declare  to  you 
that  last  night  the  Directory  deliberated  whether  you  ought 
not  to  share  the  fate  of  the  conspirators  that  are  on  the  road 
to  Guyenne.  Out  of  consideration  for  General  Bonaparte 
you  shall  remain  free,  but  I  have  just  sent  off  my  secretary 
to  explain  to  him  what  has  happened,  and  your  conduct." 
I  answered  very  coolly  :  "  You  have  been  deceived.  I  never 
betrayed  any  person  !  The  events  of  the  i8th  are  calami- 
tous. Nobody  shall  ever  persuade  me  that  Government 
has  a  right  to  punish  representatives  of  the  people  without 
trial,  and  in  contempt  of  the  laws.  I  have  not  written 
anything  else  for  the  last  six  weeks,  and  if  you  wish  to 
ascertain  the  fact  here  is  the  key  of  my  bureau  :  have  my 
papers  seized  ;  their  examination  will  cover  my  false  ac- 
cusers with  confusion."  This  moderate  and  firm  reply, 
but  especially  my  proposal,  pacified  him.  He  tried  to 
begin  an  explanation,  but  I  retired.  When  I  returned 
home  I  burned  my  correspondence  :  it  might  have  exposed 
my  general,  and  consequently  I  could  not  hesitate.  When 
that  was  done  I  sent  off,  as  an  express,  an  officer  of  the  staff 
who  was  at  Paris  to  acquaint  the  General  with  all  that 
had  happened  ;  and  not  wishing  that  my  sudden  departure 
should  be  attributed  to  fear,  I  remained  eight  days  longer 
in  town.  I  went,  however,  to  General  Augereau  to  inquire 
whether  he  had  any  commission  to  give  me.  Since  he  had 
been  in  Paris  he  was  like  a  man  beside  himself.  He  spoke 
to  me  of  the  General-in-chief  with  a  great  deal  of  flippancy, 
and  of  the  i8th  Fructidor  with  more  enthusiasm  than  he 
would  have  done  of  the  battle  of  Areola.  "  Do  you  know," 
he  said,  "  that  you  deserve  to  be  shot  for  your  behaviour  ? 