

II 


146  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

Directory  arrived.  The  orders  were  positive  ;  and,  if  they 
had  come  to  hand  the  day  before,  the  treaty  would  not  have 
been  signed.  The  next  day  the  General-in-chief  wrote  to 
the  Directory,  expressing  his  wish  to  leave  Italy,  and  to  come 
to  France  to  enjoy  a  little  repose  ;  but  it  was  absolutely 
necessary  first  to  organise  the  Cisalpine  Republic  ;  to  take 
prudential  measures  against  the  Pope  and  the  King  of 
Naples,  who  showed  the  most  hostile  intentions.  A  squad- 
ron, with  troops,  had  been  sent  to  Corfu,  Zante,  and  Cepha- 
lonia,  to  take  possession  of  these  Venetian  islands,  which 
had  been  given  to  France  by  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio, 
and  the  General  did  not  think  fit  to  leave  Italy  before  he 
received  accounts  of  their  organisations. 

In  the  meanwhile,  M.  Pousseilgues  was  beginning  to  give 
the  required  information  respecting  the  disposition  of  the 
public  mind  at  Malta.     He  had  succeeded  in  sending  to  the 

General  M.  N ,  his  former  schoolfellow  at  the  Military 

School,  and  who  had  been  for  several  years  a  Knight  in  the 
island.  From  his  report,  and  the  letters  of  M.  Pousseilgues, 
it  appeared  that  the  Knights  of  the  French  tongue,  receiving 
neither  money  nor  reward  from  their  relations,  and  reduced 
to  the  most  miserable  shifts  to  live,  would  not  stand  much 
upon  their  fidelity  to  the  Order  ;  and  that  they  would  have 
no  objection  to  leave  the  island,  provided  they  got  leave  to 
return  to  France  ;  that  the  Grand  Master  Hompesch,  a  man 
devoid  of  strength  of  mind,  would  probably  make  no  use  of 
the  means  of  defence  he  possessed  in  his  military  position, 
and  the  land  and  sea  forces  he  had  at  his  disposal.  The  per- 
sons who  surrounded  him  had  an  influence  over  him,  so 
much  the  more  pernicious  on  account  of  the  desire  of  both 
the  English  and  the  Russians  to  gain  possession  of  the  island. 
The  Russian  consul  was  a  bold  and  active  man,  who 
frightened  the  Government  by  his  threats,  and  spread  dis- 
order and  terror  in  the  minds  of  every  one.  It  was  therefore 
of  great  consequence  to  General  Bonaparte  to  take  a  resolu- 
tion and  show  himself  before  the  island  with  an  imposing 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  147 

force,  that  might  decide  the  Grand  Master  in  favour  of 
France.  He  resolved  at  last  to  leave  Italy.  He  addressed  a 
proclamation  to  the  army,  and  left  it  under  the  command  of 
General  Kilmaine. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Bonaparte  crossed  Switzerland,  and  went  to  Rastadt :  his 
travelling  companions  were  Generals  Marmont,  Duroc,  my- 
self, his  secretary  Bourrienne,  and  Ivan  his  physician.  The 
only  place  at  which  he  stopped  was  Geneva,  where  the 
Directory  was  already  beginning,  by  underhand  manoeuvres, 
to  augment  the  number  of  its  adherents,  who  were  one  day 
to  effect  the  union  of  that  Republic  with  France.  Carnot 
had  sought  refuge  in  that  city,  and  General  Bonaparte  pri- 
vately sent  him  advice  to  leave  it  as  soon  as  possible,  so  as 
to  prevent  a  persecution  he  was  not  able  to  prevent. 