


136  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

foresee  the  cruel  proscriptions  that  oppressed  the  vanquished 
party  ;  but  I  certainly  never  witnessed  so  much  warmth  of 
persecution.  She  undoubtedly  saw  nothing  more  in  the 
struggle  than  the  triumph  of  her  political  opinions, — I 
should  rather  say  feelings  ;  but  still  it  must  be  acknowledged 
that  an  absence  of  all  reflection  could  alone  have  led  her  to 
embrace  so  openly  the  part  of  men  who  trampled  on  liberty 
and  national  representation,  the  two  most  cherished  objects 
of  her  worship.  All  that  time  she  carried  to  enthusiasm 
her  admiration  of  General  Bonaparte.  I  saw  her  for  the 
first  time  at  M.  de  Talleyrand's.  During  dinner,  the  praises 
she  lavished  on  the  Conqueror  of  Italy  had  all  the  wildness, 
romance,  and  exaggeration  of  poetry.  When  we  left  the 
table,  the  company  withdrew  to  a  small  room  to  look  at  the 
portrait  of  the  hero  ;  and  as  I  stepped  back  to  let  her  walk 
in,  she  said  :  "  How  shall  I  dare  to  pass  before  an  aide-de- 
camp of  Bonaparte  ?  "  My  confusion  was  so  great,  that  she 
also  felt  a  little  of  it,  and  our  host  himself  laughed  at  us.  I 
went  to  see  her  next  morning.  Her  reception  was  kind 
enough  to  make  me  return  often  to  her  house  ;  and  I  do 
affirm  that  her  lively  imagination  and  her  incredible  activity 
continued  unceasingly  the  same  up  to  the  catastrophe.  She 
had  nothing  before  her  eyes  but  the  counter-revolution,  the 
return  of  the  Bourbons,  the  revenge  of  the  emigrants,  and 
the  loss  of  liberty. 

The  denojieinent  grew  at  last  inevitable.  The  rage  of  the 
several  parties  had  reached  its  greatest  height.  The  jour- 
nals, pamphlets,  and  posted  bills  contained  the  most  violent 
provocations.  The  Constitution  not  having  left  the  Direc- 
tory space  enough  for  defence,  it  resolved  to  overthrow  all 
barriers.  Still,  there  was  wanted  a  celebrated  general  to 
put  the  plan  into  execution.  Augereau  came  to  their 
assistance.  The  day  before  he  arrived  from  Italy  I  received 
a  letter  from  General  Bonaparte,  in  which  he  said  :  "  Auge- 
reau is  going  to  Paris.  Place  no  confidence  in  him.  He 
has   brought  confusion    into  the  army  :  he  has  a  factious 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  1 37 

spirit."  When  I  returned  to  Italy,  I  learned  that  the  mis- 
understanding between  the  generals  and  the  officers  of  the 
two  divisions  of  Augereau  and  Bernadotte  had  extended  to  the 
private  soldiers,  and  that  they  taxed  one  another  mutually 
with  being  Jacobins  and  Royalists.  General  Augereau  had 
openly  declared  for  the  majority  of  the  Directory  :  Barras, 
who  reckoned  upon  him,  called  him  to  Paris  and  gave  him 
the  military  command. 