


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  139 

— but  you  need  not  be  uneasy,  and  you  may  rely  on  me." 
I  thanked  him  with  a  smile  ;  but  I  felt  it  would  be  useless 
to  put  his  kindness  to  the  proof,  and  the  next  day  I  set  off 
for  Italy. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

I  LEFT  Paris  on  the  ist  Vendemiaire,  just  as  the  Directory, 
the  Ministers,  and  all  the  constituted  authorities,  were 
going  to  the  Champ  de  Mars  to  celebrate  the  new  year, 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  time.  The  President  of 
the  Government  walked  up  to  the  altar  of  the  country  and 
made  a  speech,  in  which,  among  great  praise  bestowed  on 
the  armies,  were  frequently  introduced  threatening  insinua- 
tions against  the  enemies  of  Government,  and  abuse  against 
the  Sovereigns  at  war  with  the  Republic.  It  was  under 
the  canopy  of  heaven,  and  in  presence  of  the  Supreme 
Being  (to  use  the  then  fashionable  expression),  that  those 
sermons  were  preached  before  the  multitude,  which  never 
failed  to  be  very  numerous  if  the  weather  happened  to 
be  fine. 

1  was  very  anxious  to  be  on  the  other  side  of  the  Alps, 
that  I  might  know  what  the  General-in-chief  thought  of  my 
conduct.  At  the  passage  of  Mont  Cenis  I  met  an  aide-de- 
camp of  General  Augereau,  called  Deverine,  who  was  re- 
turning dismayed  with  the  harsh  reception  he  had  met  with 
from  General  Bonaparte,  and  who  acquainted  me  with  his 
misfortune.  He  had  been  sent  to  Italy  by  his  general  a 
few  days  after  the  i8th  Fructidor,  to  claim  from  the  pay- 
master of  the  army  600,000  francs  which  were  not  owing 
to  him,  and  which  he  thought  no  one  would  dare  to  refuse 
him.      The  same  officer  was  also  the  bearer  of  copies  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  141 

Clarke's  secret  correspondence  with  Carnot,  from  the  time 
of  his  entrance  into  Italy,  The  generals  of  the  army  to 
whom  Augereau  sent  copies  of  those  letters  were  very 
much  abused  in  them  by  the  military  diplomatist,  and  the 
General-in-chief  was  even  attacked  in  his  private  cha- 
racter. Enraged  against  Clarke,  they  thought  fit  to  deliver 
into  the  hands  of  their  chief  these  abusive  letters,  without 
dissembling  their  contempt  for  a  man  they  had  never  seen 
in  their  ranks.  General  Bonaparte,  having  heard  of  the 
demand  for  money  made  on  the  paymaster  of  the  army, 
ordered  him  not  to  pay  it  ;  and,  having  sent  for  the  poor 
aide-de-camp,  he  gave  him  a  severe  reprimand,  and  sent 
him  back  to  Paris  as  quickly  as  he  could.  The  young  man 
was  extremely  grieved  at  his  adventure,  and  bestowed  many 
imprecations  on  Augereau  for  having  exposed  him  by  such 
a  ridiculous  message. 

This  little  accident  gave  me  some  insight  into  General 
Bonaparte's  disposition,  and  I  hurried  the  more  to  rejoin 
him. 