

M.  Necker  was  then  living  on  his  estate  at  Coppet,  near 
Geneva.  He  still  looked  upon  himself  as  a  great  man,  and 
flattered  himself  that  the  Conqueror  of  Italy  would  pay  him 
a  visit.  I  do  not  know  what  was  at  that  time  General  Bona- 
parte's opinion  of  the  financial  talents  of  the  late  minister 
of  Louis  XVI.  ;  but  I  am  sure  he  had  but  little  esteem  for 
his  personal  character,  and  had  positively  declared  his  dis- 
approbation of  the  Sovereign's  choice  of  a  minister  for 
France.  We  had  a  great  desire  to  go  with  him  and  see  the 
seat  that  Voltaire  had  celebrated  in  the  latter  part  of  his 
life  ;  but  the  General-in-chief  had  also  a  grudge  against 
Voltaire.  He  therefore  thought  fit  not  to  make  either  of 
the  two  pilgrimages.  We  crossed  Switzerland  without  stop- 
ping anywhere.  However,  his  carriage  having  broken 
down  a  league  from  Morat,  we  travelled  that  part  of  the 
way  on  foot.  Though  it  was  no  more  than  seven  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  the   road  was   covered   with    people,    and 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  149 

especially  women,  who  had  passed  the  night  there,  to  get 
a  peep  at  the  Conqueror  of  Italy.  When  we  arrived  near 
the  bone-house,  where  lie  deposited  the  remains  of  the 
Burgundian  soldiers  killed  in  the  famous  battle  of  Morat, 
we  found  a  General  d'Erlac,  of  the  celebrated  family  of  that 
name,  who  was  waiting  for  the  General-in-chief,  in  the 
expectation  that  he  would  stop  to  see  the  monument. 
General  Bonaparte  not  being  in  military  uniform,  the 
stranger,  without  knowing  him,  gave  him  all  the  par- 
ticulars he  could  wish  respecting  the  victory  of  the  Swiss. 
After  he  had  examined  the  military  position,  he  only  said, 
"  Charles  the  Bold  must  have  been  a  great  madman  !  " 
This  reflection,  uttered  in  a  firm  tone,  apprised  M.  d'Erlac 
that  he  was  in  the  presence  of  the  hero  he  had  so  much 
wished  to  see.  A  respectful  bow,  and  a  compliment  ex- 
pressed with  emotion,  were  the  only  homage  he  was  enabled 
to  pay  him,  for  the  General  proceeded  on  his  journey. 

Two  days  afterwards  we  passed  through  Offenbach,  the 
headquarters  of  Augereau,  the  general-in-chief  of  the 
Rhine  army.  General  Bonaparte  stopped  before  his  door, 
and  sending  him  word  that  he  was  there,  but  in  too  great  a 
hurry  to  get  out  of  his  carriage,  he  added  that  he  wished  to 
see  him  for  one  moment.  The  lieutenant  of  the  general- 
in-chief  had,  however,  already  begun  to  forget  him,  and  his 
only  answer  was  that  he  was  dressing.  This  unpoliteness 
was  but  ill  repaired  the  next  day,  when  he  sent  his  aide-de- 
camp. Augereau's  hatred  of  General  Bonaparte  augmented 
in  proportion  with  his  wrongs,  and  only  ended  with  his  life. 