

I  was  entering  the  long  avenue  leading  to  the  castle 
of  Passeriano,  when  I  perceived  Clarke,  who  stopped  my 
carriage.  The  Directory  had  deprived  him  of  his  diplo- 
matic mission,  and  dismissed  him  as  a  general  on  half-pay. 
*'  I  am  in  the  most  wretched  condition,"  he  said  to  me, 
"  but  you  may  still  be  of  service  to  me.  Do  not  speak  of 
the  Directory's  being  incensed  against  me,  and  mention  my 
dismissal  as  a  natural  consequence  of  the  fall  of  Carnot. 
By  that  means  General  Bonaparte  will  keep  me  with  him. 
He  knows  the  secret  of  what  I  wrote  against  the  generals  ; 
he'll  silence  them."  Clarke  was  unfortunate.  I  had  been 
long  acquainted  with  him,  so  I  gave  him  my  word  that  I 
would  serve  him.  The  thing  was  not  altogether  very 
difficult :  the  General-in-chief  had  a  liking  for  him  ;  the 
Directory  forgot  him,  and  did  not  insist  on  his  leaving  the 
army. 

I  had  scarcely  arrived  at  the  castle  when  General  Bona- 


142  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNI  LAVALETTE. 

parte  sent  for  me  into  the  garden,  and  there  continued 
questioning  me  during  four  hours.  My  correspondence  had 
acquainted  him  with  all  the  particulars  of  the  event ;  but  I 
was  still  obliged  to  describe  the  hesitations,  fits  of  passion, 
and  almost  every  gesture  of  the  principal  actors.  His 
opinion  had  been  long  fixed  respecting  the  different  mem- 
bers of  the  Directory,  and  even  the  nature  of  the  Govern- 
ment itself.  "But,"  said  he,  "with  such  rude  forms,  why 
so  much  weakness  ?  Why,  then,  so  much  temerity  when 
firmness  would  have  been  sufficient.  There  was  cowardice 
in  not  daring  to  put  Pichegru  on  his  trial.  His  treason  was 
obvious,  and  the  witnesses  more  than  sufficient  to  convict 
him.  At  best,  if  the  High  Court  had  acquitted  him,  he 
would  nevertheless  have  been  dishonoured  in  the  face  of 
the  army  and  all  France.  Force  is  good  when  one  cannot 
do  otherwise  ;  but  when  one  is  free  to  choose,  justice  is 
better."  Then,  according  to  custom,  he  continued  for  a 
long  while  walking  about  in  silence.  At  last  he  added,  on 
taking  leave  of  me,  "  All  things  well  considered,  this  revo- 
lution will  prove  a  vigorous  stroke  to  the  nation."  When 
he  returned  to  the  castle  he  sent  for  Botteau,  the  secretary 
to  Barras  ;  had  a  long  conversation  with  him,  and  sent  him 
back  in  the  course  of  the  night. 

A  few  days  afterwards  Bernadotte  returned  from  Paris. 
I  soon  perceived  that  he  had  represented  events  under  a 
more  favourable  light  for  Government  than  I  had ;  but 
through  all  the  particulars  he  mentioned,  his  numerous 
animadversions  on  the  War  Department,  and  his  conjec- 
tures on  the  renewal  of  hostilities.  General  Bonaparte  had 
no  difficulty  in  penetrating  his  ambition  and  his  designs. 
The  Directory  had  loaded  him  with  praises  ;  the  Ministry  of 
the  War  Department  had  been  promised  him  ;  and  when,  a 
short  time  after,  the  General-in-chief  learned  the  nomina- 
tion of  General  Augereau  to  the  command  of  the  Army  of 
the  Rhine,  he  felt  that  with  so  weak  a  companion,  and  so 
ambitious   a  minister,  it  would  be  impossible  for   him  to 