


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  143 

advance  freely  and  to  obtain  glorious  results.  Peace  was 
consequently  resolved  on  in  his  mind.  I  am  far  from 
doubting  that  considerations  of  a  more  elevated  nature, 
and  especially  the  wish  to  give  peace  to  France,  then  sink- 
ing under  the  burthen  of  her  sacrifices,  swayed  his  resolu- 
tion ;  but  most  certainly  the  choice  of  those  two  men 
contributed  greatly  to  fix  it. 

During  the  long  unoccupied  days  that  the  diplomatic 
debates  aff'orded  him,  the  General-in-chief  used  to  pass  a 
part  of  his  evenings  with  the  learned  Monge,  whom  he  had 
summoned  near  his  person.  Among  the  varied  and  instruc- 
tive conversations  which  delighted  the  General-in-chief,  the 
plan  of  conquering  Egypt  so  often  presented  to  the  ministry 
in  the  reigns  of  Louis  XV.  and  Louis  XVI.  was  discussed. 
The  General,  who  always  went  to  the  bottom  of  everything, 
wished  to  read  all  that  had  been  written  on  the  subject. 
Monge,  having  held  for  some  time  the  portfolio  of  the 
Marine  Department,  was  enabled  to  procure  him  quickly  all 
the  most  interesting  papers.  The  measures  that  had  been 
proposed  appeared  faulty  to  the  General-in-chief ;  but  the 
fertility  of  his  mind  made  him  discover  the  advantages  he 
might  derive  from  his  position,  to  lay  down  a  plan  easier  of 
execution  and  better  in  its  result.  It  is  probable  that  the 
idea  was  at  that  very  moment  communicated  to  the  Direc- 
tory ;  for,  soon  after,  the  first  germs  of  its  execution  began 
secretly  to  develop  themselves.  M.  Pousseilgues,  late  Chief 
Clerk  of  the  Treasury,  was  at  that  time  Secretary  of  the 
French  Legation  at  Genoa.  This  gentleman  had  several 
relations,  merchants,  at  Malta.  He  was  called  to  the  head- 
quarters, and  from  thence  he  went  to  Malta.  His  mission 
was  to  sound  the  disposition  of  the  Government,  and  of  the 
French  Knights,  to  get  well  acquainted  with  the  spirit  of  the 
people,  and  to  ascertain  what  were  the  means  of  subsistence, 
or  the  obstacles  to  be  expected.  Finally,  he  was  to  do  his 
utmost  to  send  to  the  headquarters  some  of  the  Knights  of 
Malta  whom  Bonaparte  might  have  known  at  the  Military 


144  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

School.  This  mission  was  executed  with  great  secrecy  and 
intelhgence  ;  and  during  Pousseilgues'  absence,  secret  efforts 
in  furtherance  of  the  object  advanced  rapidly.  To  lead  curi- 
osity astray,  the  General  spoke  of  a  journey  he  proposed  to 
make  after  the  peace  was  concluded.  He  said  he  intended 
to  go  to  Germany  and  the  North  of  Europe  with  his  wife, 
Mongc,  Generals  Berthier  and  Marmont.  I  was  destined  to 
accompany  Eugene  Beauharnais,  who  at  that  time  was  no 
more  than  seventeen  years  of  age.  General  Bonaparte 
diverted  himself  with  setting  up  a  plan  of  studies  and  obser- 
vations, of  which  we  were  to  give  an  account  at  the  different 
places  where  we  were  to  meet.  That  plan  was  the  more 
reasonable,  as  General  Bonaparte  could  scarcely  live  at 
rest  in  France,  if  peace  lasted  any  time.  He  would  not 
have  been  able  to  avoid  the  clashing  of  the  different 
factions,  and  would  perhaps  have  been  forced  to  take 
part  in  the  measures  they  would  have  attempted,  with  a 
view  to  triumph.  The  Directory  was  afraid  of  him  ;  his 
glory  was  annoying ;  his  influence  over  the  enemy  could 
not  fail  to  be  immense.  On  the  other  hand,  he  was  too 
young  to  have  a  place  in  the  Directory,  and  the  idea  of 
being  the  minister  of  Barras  and  La  Reveillere  Lepaux  was 
not  to  be  borne. 