


CHAPTER  XVII. 

At  a  few  leagues  from  Aboukir,  whither  I  had  received 
orders  to  go,  the  frigate  I  was  on  board  of  was  chased  by  an 
English  vessel  that  came  to  reconnoitre  the  fleet.  This  hap- 
pened on  the  2ist  of  July.  I  went  on  board  the  Orient  to 
see  Admiral  Brueys,  the  commander  of  the  fleet.  I  had  not 
expected  to  find  the  fleet  moored  in  the  roads  of  Aboukir. 
The  following  is  word  for  word  what  the  Admiral  said  to  me. 
"  When  General  Bonaparte  left  Alexandria  to  penetrate  into 
the  Desert,  he  gave  me  the  choice  either  to  enter  the  old 
port  of  Alexandria,  or  to  go  with  the  fleet  to  Corfu,  after 
having  landed  all  the  goods  and  provisions  of  the  army. 
Since  that  moment  I  have  received  no  account  whatever 
from  the  army,  nor  its  leader.  I  have  sounded  the  passes  of 
the  old  port  ;  but  it  can  only  be  entered  with  a  north-west 
wind,  and  by  boats  :  this  has  taken  up  much  time,  and  the 

is  the  only  ship  that  has  as  yet  been  able  to  get  into 

the  port.  It  is  quite  impossible  for  n,  to  leave  the  coast  of 
Egypt  before  I  receive  accounts  from  the  army.  Can  I  set 
off  and  enter  a  port  of  Europe,  without  having  any  satis- 
factory news  to  give  France  and  her  Government  ?  If,  what 
I  scarcely  think  possible.  General  Bonaparte  were  to  find  in 
the  country  insurmountable  obstacles,  and  if  he  were  obliged 
to  re-embark,  would  it  not  be  a  criminal  act  on  my  part  to 
deprive  him  of  the  only  means  of  retreat  he  has  left  at  my 
disposal  ?  I  have  seen  to-day  an  English  vessel  for  the  first 
time  since  I  have  been   here.     Most  probably  I   shall   be 

158 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  1 59 

attacked  to-morrow  or  the  day  after.  I  shall  send  for  the 
vessel  that  is  in  the  old  port.  If  you  follow  my  advice,  you 
will  remain  with  us.  We  have  sanguine  hopes  of  success, 
and  you  will  enjoy  the  satisfaction  of  carrying  to  your  Gene- 
ral the  intelligence  of  a  glorious  victory.  As  I  could  neither 
enter  the  old  port  of  Alexandria,  nor  go  away,  I  have  taken 
up  a  sort  of  military  position  here.  I  have  been  forced  to 
moor  the  ships  ;  because,  having  left  Toulon  with  half-crews, 
I  have  not  men  enough  to  fight  sailing."  To  this  Admiral 
Gantheaume  added :  "  We  are  at  some  distance  from  the 
island  you  see  yonder,  because  the  ground  there  will  not 
hold  our  anchors,  and  it  would  be  dangerous  to  run  nearer 
to  the  shore  ;  but  we  are  defended  from  that  side  by  a  for- 
midable battery." 

After  my  conversation  with  the  Admiral,  I  went  during 
the  night,  alone,  over  that  immense  ship,  which  carried  130 
guns.  I  did  not  meet  a  single  person  upon  deck  ;  it 
appeared  to  me  as  if  I  were  in  the  Church  of  Notre  Dame. 
A  circumstance  that  made  the  solitude  still  more  singular 
was  that,  before  our  landing,  there  had  been  2,145  persons 
on  board,  and  at  that  moment  there  were  not  above  six  hun- 
dred. The  more  I  examined  that  vast  floating  citadel,  the 
less  inclined  I  felt  to  take  part  in  the  battle.  In  fact,  I  was 
not  a  sea  officer,  and  my  duty  was  to  join  my  general.  There 
would  be  no  want  of  messengers  to  bring  him  intelligence  of 
a  victory,  whilst  I  should  reap  much  blame  and  very  little 
pity,  if  by  some  disaster  or  other  I  were  to  be  taken  prisoner 
or  killed.  I  went  therefore  to  the  Admiral  and  said  to  him  : 
"  After  mature  consideration,  I  am  resolved  to  continue  my 
journey.  I  must  give  an  account  of  my  mission,  and  the 
position  wherein  I  found  you."  He  gave  me  a  boat  to  carry 
me  to  Rosetta  ;  but  I  soon  repented  the  step  I  had  taken. 
The  swell  occasioned  by  the  meeting  of  the  Nile  with  the 
sea  was  then  very  strong,  and  a  violent  tempest  added  to  the 
danger  that  threatened  us.  A  vessel  laden  with  provisions 
had  just  been  totally  lost  ;  another   much  larger,  which  was 