

It  had  been  supposed  that  in  so  fruitful  a  country  all  the 
wealth  of  the  East  would  be  accumulated.  Instead  of  that, 
we  found  misery  everywhere.  The  government  of  the 
Mamelukes  was  devoid  of  either  common  sense  or  modera- 
tion. Besides  the  miri  and  another  tax  which  the  people  of 
Egypt  were  obliged  to  pay  to  the  Grand  Seigneur,  they  were 
loaded  with  imposts,  which  the  caprice  and  tyranny  of  the 
subordinate  officers  were  perpetually  inventing.     The  Beys, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  163 

who  were  the  chiefs  of  the  Mamelukes,  the  officers  quartered 
in  the  different  provinces,  and  even  the  private  horsemen 
who  were  sent  to  maintain  order  in  the  villages,  thought 
themselves  entitled  to  impose  and  levy  taxes  more  or  less 
heavy.  The  fcUah^  or  peasant,  groaned  under  the  load  of 
these  numerous  exactions  ;  and  if  he  was  unfortunate 
enough  to  have  children  of  either  sex  that  drew  the  at- 
tention of  the  leaders,  they  were  taken  away  from  him  to 
satisfy  their  brutal  lust. 

One  of  the  first  measures  of  the  General-in-chief  was  to 
set  the  people  secure  in  regard  to  their  property,  to  make 
them  comprehend  the  plain  and  judicious  system  of  taxation 
about  to  be  established,  and  to  acquaint  them  that  for  the 
arbitrary  laws  to  which  they  were  subject  under  the  Mame- 
lukes would  be  substituted,  in  each  province,  divans  com- 
posed of  the  most  reputable  men,  to  judge  their  disputes. 
These  various  declarations  soon  dissipated  alarm  ;  and  we 
had,  in  fact,  no  cause  to  complain  of  the  people  during  the 
first  six  months  of  our  stay  in  the  country. 

The  Arab  tribes  were  still,  however,  very  dangerous. 
We  had  succeeded  in  making  peace  with  some  of  them  ; 
but  several  others,  more  numerous  and  better  armed,  con- 
tinued frequently  to  interrupt  our  communications  and 
plunder  our  convoys,  by  land  as  well  as  on  the  Nile.  We 
were  in  consequence  obliged  to  organise  a  system  of  pursuit, 
which  was  followed  up  with  so  much  energy  that  the  tribes 
felt  at  last  convinced  that  they  must  either  submit  or  retire 
to  other  deserts. 

Mourad  Bey,  who  was  now  in  Upper  Egypt,  gave  us  no 
more  cause  of  uneasiness  ;  but  Ibrahim  Bey,  next  to  Mourad 
the  most  powerful  leader  of  the  Mamelukes,  had  gone  for- 
ward to  meet  the  caravan  returning  from  Mecca  ;  and, 
under  the  pretence  of  defending  it  against  the  French 
army,  he  stopped  it  in  its  way,  and  plundered  it.  He 
afterwards  returned  to  Egypt  by  the  way  of  Salahieh,  and 
proclaimed  his  intention  of  attacking  the  French  army  from 


i64  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

that  side.  General  Regnier,  whom  I  accompanied  on  that 
short  expedition,  had  not  much  trouble  with  the  Arabs  and 
Mamelukes  of  the  vanguard  ;  but  he  was  conscious  that  his 
small  division  would  soon  be  destroyed  if  no  one  came  to 
his  assistance.  I  went  to  acquaint  the  General-in-chief  with 
this  circumstance,  who  immediately  flew  to  help  him,  at 
the  head  of  some  regiments  of  cavalry  which  he  had 
succeeded  in  mounting  with  the  horses  he  found  in  Lower 
Egypt.  The  Mamelukes  were  beaten  at  Salahieh,  from 
which  place  the  battle  took  its  name.  It  was  then  that  the 
General-in-chief  learned  the  disaster  of  our  fleet  at  Aboukir. 
The  news  was  brought  to  him  by  an  aide-de-camp  of 
General  Kleber.  The  officer's  horse  being  unable  to  go 
any  further,  he  had  written  some  particulars  in  an  open 
letter,  which  I  found  in  the  hands  of  a  peasant  to  whom  he 
had  entrusted  it.  I  read  the  letter,  and  advancing  towards 
the  General-in-chief,  I  begged  him  to  withdraw  for  a  moment 
from  the  group  of  staff  officers  which  surrounded  him.  I 
then  gave  him  the  note.  When  he  had  read  it  he  said  to 
me,  "  You  know  its  contents  ;  keep  the  secret."  We  re- 
turned to  Belbeys,  where  we  found  breakfast  on  the  table. 
Everybody  was  in  good  spirits,  and  particularly  the  troops, 
who  had  retaken  from  the  Mamelukes  the  spoil  of  the 
caravan.  They  were  going  to  sell  the  goods  for  almost 
nothing  ;  but  the  General-in-chief  forbade  the  officers  to 
buy  any  of  them  there,  and  ordered  the  soldiers  to  dispose 
of  them  on  their  return  to  Cairo.  All  of  a  sudden,  while 
breakfasting,  the  General-in-chief  said  to  his  guests  :  "  It 
seems,  you  like  this  country  :  that  is  very  lucky,  for  we 
have  now  no  fleet  to  carry  us  back  to  Europe."  He  then 
acquainted  them  with  the  particulars  of  the  battle  of 
Aboukir,  and  they  were  listened  to  with  as  much  earnest- 
ness as  the  General  had  related  them.  Every  one  soon 
appeared  reconciled  to  the  event,  and  nobody  talked  any 
more  of  it. 