


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Ibrahim  Bey  had  retired  to  Syria,  and  there  was  no  doubt 
but  he  would  organise  in  that  country  considerable  bodies 
of  irregular  troops  which  would  disturb  our  frontiers.  The 
General-in-chief  had  also  learned  that  the  news  of  the 
invasion  of  Egypt  had  been  received  with  great  displeasure 
at  Constantinople. 

The  English,  enraged  at  the  conquest  of  Malta,  and 
sensible  of  the  important  consequences  of  the  occupation 
of  Egypt  to  their  establishments  in  India,  pressed  the  Turks 
to  go  to  war.  The  General-in-chief  had  therefore  reason  to 
expect  that  he  would  not  only  be  continually  harassed  by 
Ibrahim  Bey,  but  also  that  the  English  would  make  them- 
selves masters  of  the  ports  of  Syria.  He  took  a  resolution 
to  be  beforehand  with  them  ;  but  it  was  first  of  all  necessary 
to  know  what  might  be  the  dispositions  of  the  Pacha  who 
commanded  all  Syria.  The  name  of  the  Pacha  for  the  time 
being  was  Djezzar,  a  man  of  a  very  energetic  character,  who 
had  maintained  himself  for  several  years  in  his  post,  in  spite 
of  the  Sultan  himself,  and  who  enforced  obedience  by  the 
terror  his  cruelties  inspired.  The  General-in-chief  sent  to 
him  a  young  Frenchman,  just  come  home  from  Mascata 
with  the  Consul  Beauchamp,  and  who  was  very  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  Arabic  language.  Djezzar  sent  an 
ambiguous    answer,   which    served    to    convince    General 

Bonaparte  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  support  his  de- 

.65 


l66  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

clarations  with  an  army.  But  a  fatal  incident  occurred^ 
which  threatened  the  expedition  with  an  indefinite  delay. 
While  perfect  tranquillity  seemed  to  prevail  in  Cairo  and 
its  outskirts,  a  rebellion,  without  any  apparent  cause,  sud- 
denly broke  out  at  one  of  the  gates  of  the  city. 

A  number  of  wounded,  who  had  been  at  the  battle  of 
Salahieh,  and  some  invalids  of  the  division  of  Regnier, 
filling  about  twenty  transports,  were  murdered,  and  the 
rebellion  quickly  spread  through  the  city  like  wildfire. 
General  Dupuis,  commander  of  the  fortress,  immediately 
mounted  his  horse,  with  all  the  men  he  could  bring  together  ; 
but  he  was  assassinated,  with  several  of  his  companions.  To 
oppose  the  rebels  any  longer  in  the  streets  was  not  to  be 
thought  of.  Means  were,  however,  found  to  restrain  them, 
though  they  had  made  themselves  masters  of  one  of  the 
largest  mosques  in  the  town.  It  was  then  resolved  to  fire 
on  them  from  the  citadel.  The  bombs  and  howitzers  made 
great  havoc  among  them  ;  after  which,  some  battalions  of 
infantry  attacked  the  mosque,  where  all  the  rest  were  killed 
or  taken  prisoners.  This  rebellion  lasted  three  days,  and 
did  not  occasion  any  great  loss  to  the  army  ;  but  the 
General-in-chief  lost  one  of  his  best  aides-de-camp.  Colonel 
Sulkowski  had  already  been  wounded  at  Alexandria,  and 
also  at  the  battle  of  Salahieh,  and  was  not  yet  completely 
recovered,  when,  the  General-in-chief  wishing  to  send  some 
officer  to  reconnoitre  out  of  the  city,  he  offered  himself, 
pretending  that  it  was  his  turn  to  march,  and  that  his 
wound  was  entirely  healed.  Accompanied  by  fifteen  guides, 
he  was  crossing  that  part  of  the  Desert  that  separates  the 
town  of  Cairo  from  the  citadel,  when  a  troop  of  Arabs,  that 
had  concealed  themselves  behind  a  number  of  small  hillocks, 
suddenl}^  rushed  upon  him.  He  was  killed,  with  the  greatest 
part  of  his  escort ;  for  only  two  men  returned  to  Cairo, 
where  they  brought  the  fatal  tidings.  I  was  not  then  in 
Cairo."  By  order  of  the  General-in-chief,  I  was  accom- 
'  See  Appendix. 