


156  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

there  were  people  in  the  place  to  open  the  gates  for  us  ;  for 
if  it  had  been  deserted,  the  army  would  never  have  got 
in,  notwithstanding  all  our  exertions."  Next  day  the  Grand 
Master  and  all  his  officers  went  on  board  of  a  brig,  and  I 
received  orders  to  conduct  them,  with  the  frigate  Artcmisa, 
to  the  extremity  of  the  Adriatic  Gulf,  that  they  might  not 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Barbary  corsairs,  who  would  have 
considered  them  glorious  trophies.  Two  days  after  our  de- 
parture we  met  a  Ragusan  vessel,  from  whom  we  learned 
that  she  had  seen  in  the  morning  an  English  fleet  steering 
towards  Malta.  Fortunately  the  army  and  its  chief  were 
already  gone  off.  Our  great  fleet,  with  our  four  hundred 
transports,  sailed  during  the  night  along  the  north  coast 
of  Candia,  while  Nelson  was  waiting  for  it  on  the  south. 

It  was  long  discussed  in  the  fleet  what  would  have  been 
the  result  if  Nelson  had  met  us.  The  military  officers,  and 
especially  those  who  were  on  board  the  ships  of  the  line, 
were  convinced  that  we  should  have  beaten  the  English 
fleet :  General  Bonaparte  supported  that  opinion  by  all  the 
authority  his  name  could  add  to  it.  I  must,  however, 
acknowledge  that  I  never  shared  it.  Four  hundred  trans- 
ports, the  captains  of  which  were  but  in  a  small  part 
Frenchmen,  and  which  extended  along  all  points  of  the 
horizon,  would  quickly  have  been  dispersed  by  the  English 
frigates.  In  spite  of  all  our  exertions,  we  should  have 
experienced  great  losses.  The  Egyptian  expedition  would 
no  more  have  been  practicable  ;  but  the  army  might  have 
thrown  itself  on  the  coast  of  Sicily,  and  have  made  itself 
master  of  that  island.  The  cowardice  of  the  Grand  Master, 
and  the  wretched  defence  of  the  Knights  of  Malta,  were  a 
stroke  of  fortune  that  seemed  to  protect  the  destiny  of  the 
General-in-chief. 

I  had  received  an  order  to  inspect  the   fortifications  ot 
Corfu,  and   the   magazines  with  which  that  city  was   pro- 
vided.'     From  thence  I  was  to  go  and  acquaint  Ali,  the 
'  See  Appendix,  No.  I. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  157 

Pacha  of  Janina,  with  the  conquest  of  Egypt,  and  try  to 
persuade  him,  that  as  we  remained  friends  with  the  Grand 
Seigneur,  it  was  his  interest  not  to  break  with  France.  My 
mission  was  difficult  and  dangerous.  We  knew  Ah  Pacha 
for  a  man  incapable  of  keeping  faith.  He  Avas  then  on  a 
good  understanding  with  the  troops  dispersed  through  the 
Ionian  Islands,  and  the  coast  of  that  part  of  Greece  over 
which  he  had  command  ;  but  it  was  certain  he  would 
abandon  us  and  become  our  enemy  as  soon  as  his  policy 
might  show  him  any  advantage  on  the  other  side.  When  I 
arrived  at  Corfu  I  met  General  Chabot,  who  asked  me 
whether  I  was  the  bearer  of  rich  presents  for  Ali  Pacha,  and 
of  a  great  deal  of  money  to  pave  my  way  ;  for  he  added, 
"  These  are  the  best  arguments  you  can  make  use  of  with 
him.''  These  were  precisely  the  things  General  Bona- 
parte had  forgot.  "  But,"  said  he,  "you  need  not  be  uneasy  : 
the  Pacha  is  on  the  Danube,  fighting,  much  against  his  will, 
at  Udin,  with  Paswan  Ogla."  This  account  took  a  great 
burden  off  my  mind.  I  hastened  to  execute  the  other  part 
of  my  mission,  and  got  to  Egypt. 