

Besides  the  fleet  of  Toulon,  troops  who  were  embarked  at 
Genoa,  Ajaccio,  and  Civita  Vecchia  had  received  orders  to 
join  the  fleet  before  its  arrival  at  Malta.  I  embarked  on 
board  the  frigate  Arternisa^  which  was  a  sort  of  aide-de-camp 
to  the  admiral.  The  flotilla  of  General  Desaix  not  having 
come  to  the  rendezvous,  the  Artemisa  was  sent  on  discovery. 
General  Murat  joined  us  ;  and  when  we  were  not  far  from 
Malta,  he  obliged  the  captain  to  give  him  a  boat,  that  he 
might  go  down  to  the  outward  defences  of  Valetta.  This 
was  an  act  of  imprudence  :  he  was  also  guilty  of  another, 
which  I  shall  mention,  because  it  gives  an  idea  of  the 
character  of  that  general.  While  cruising  before  Malta^ 
the  only  man-of-war  the  Order  possessed  came  up  to  us, 
wanting  to  get  into   the  port.      Murat  made  a   signal  for 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  155 

her  to  steer  leeward  of  our  frigate.  This  was  contrary  to 
custom  :  but  the  captain  of  the  Maltese  ship  being  taken 
unawares,  and  intimidated  at  sight  of  the  tricoloured  flag, 
obeyed  the  signal  without  hesitation  ;  on  his  arrival  he 
spread  the  alarm  ;  and  the  city,  which  we  might  have  taken 
by  surprise,  was  in  a  state  of  defence  when  we  landed. 

On  the  loth  of  June  the  fleet  at  last  appeared  in  sight  of 
Malta.  The  aspect  of  so  large  a  fleet,  with  four  hundred 
transports  and  a  formidable  army,  threw  the  Grand  Master 
and  his  council  into  the  greatest  dismay,  and  spread  confu- 
sion among  the  Knights  and  inhabitants  of  the  island.  The 
disorder  augmented,  and  a  French  Knight  had  already  been 
murdered  by  the  populace  of  the  city,  when  the  General-in- 
chief  sent  his  aide-de-camp,  Junot,  to  summon  the  Grand 
Master  to  open  the  gates.  The  answer  being  that  the 
Government  was  resolved  to  defend  the  place,  a  part  of  the 
army  landed,  attacked  all  the  small  forts  which  defended  the 
shore,  took  possession  of  them,  and  soon  after  invested  the 
town.  The  fortifications  of  Valetta  consist  of  a  ditch  dug 
in  the  rock,  the  dimensions  of  which  make  an  attack 
extremely  difficult.  It  was  quite  impossible  to  open  the 
trenches,  as  all  the  island  together  could  not  have  procured 
us  wood  nor  even  earth  enough  to  establish  our  batteries 
and  shelter  us  from  the  fire  of  the  fortress.  Fortunately, 
the  Grand  Master  was  seized  with  fear.  The  Russian 
Consul  had  already  required  that  the  island  should  be 
delivered  over  to  some  Russian  troops  who  were  expected. 
The  Grand  Master,  fancying  that  the  Order  of  Malta  was 
irretrievably  lost,  and  forgetting  that  from  one  moment  to 
another  an  English  fleet  might  arrive  and  deliver  him, 
resolved  to  sign  a  capitulation  with  General  Bonaparte. 
The  treaty  was  soon  concluded  ;  and,  two  days  after  our 
arrival,  the  army  was  master  of  the  city  and  forts,  and  the 
fleet  at  anchor  in  the  fine  harbour  of  Valetta.  General 
Caff"arelli,  on  examining  more  minutely  the  fortifications, 
said  to  the  General-in-chicf — *'  It  is  very  lucky  for  us  that 