

These  ministers  had  eagerly  taken  advantage  of  the  secret 
proceedings  of  the  ministers  of  the  second  and  third  rank 
and  several  members  of  the  nobility  of  Germany.  In  hopes 
of  being  spared  if  the  war  broke  out  again,  they  promised  to 
side  with  France.  These  secret  dealings  could  not  escape 
me,  as,  by  the  situation  of  my  apartments  in  the  castle, 
I  frequently  met  the  Secretaries  of  Legation  of  the  small 
Princes  of  Germany  sneaking  in  at  Messieurs  Treilhard  and 
Bonnier's  lodgings,  which  were  not  very  distant  from  mine. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  153 

When  M.  Roberjot  came  instead  of  M.  Treilhard,  those 
manoeuvres  grew  still  more  frequent.  He  had  filled  several 
diplomatic  missions  ;  and  his  manners  were  more  polite  and 
attractive  than  those  of  his  colleagues.  Count  Lehrbach,  a 
man  of  determined  character,  full  of  energy,  and  a  sworn 
enemy  of  France,  was  undoubtedly  soon  acquainted  with 
the  disposition  of  the  hidden  foes  of  Austria.  The  more  the 
negotiations  advanced,  the  more  evident  it  appeared  that 
the  peace  would  not  be  of  long  standing  ;  and  the  war  was 
already  secretly  resolved,  when  the  news  came  that  General 
Bonaparte  had  embarked  for  the  East,  with  some  of  the 
most  able  French  generals,  and  thirty  thousand  of  the  best 
troops  of  the  Republic.  Count  Lehrbach  left  Rastadt  a 
short  time  before  the  commencement  of  hostilities,  and  it 
can  scarcely  be  doubted  but  that  it  was  he  who  induced 
the  Austrian  Cabinet  to  resolve  to  arrest  the  ministers  of 
France. 

A  regiment  of  hussars  of  Szeckler,  a  sort  of  pandiers, 
recruited  on  the  frontiers  of  Turkey,  already  surrounded 
Rastadt,  when  the  French  ministers  received  an  order  to 
leave  the  place.  The  Baden  commander  of  the  town  had  in 
vain  advised  them  to  set  off  in  the  morning,  that  they  might 
cross  the  Rhine  before  nightfall.  Their  preparations  caused 
delay  :  they  were  encumbered  with  papers  they  wished  to 
keep,  and  they  were  besides  convinced  that  their  sacred 
character  of  ambassadors  would  shelter  them  from  insult. 
The  day  was  far  advanced  when  they  departed.  At  a  few 
leagues  from  Rastadt  they  were  stopped  and  murdered.  I 
am  persuaded  that  the  Austrian  Government  did  not  give 
an  order  for  murdering  them,  but  only  for  seizing  their 
papers  ;  while  the  soldiers,  finding  a  great  deal  of  money 
about  them,  urged  by  avarice,  and  probably  intoxicated, 
thought  the  best  way  would  be  to  stifle  their  complaints  by 
murdering  them. 

I  arrived  at  Paris  about  a  month  before  our  departure  for 
Toulon. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

I  SHALL  speak  hereafter  of  my  marriage  with  Mademoiselle 
Emilia  Beauharnais.  The  preparations  of  the  Eastern 
expedition  had  been  made  very  secretly.  The  Directory 
had  not  even  entrusted  to  their  clerks  the  task  of  copying 
the  various  orders  that  were  to  be  transcribed,  and  the  secret 
had  been  so  well  kept  that  England  in  no  way  suspected  our 
design,  nor  could  take  any  means  to  prevent  it.  Fourteen 
ships  of  the  line  were  assembled  at  Toulon.  Each  ship  took 
only  half  the  necessary  number  of  seamen,  the  rest  of  the 
crews  was  composed  of  all  the  regiments  of  the  army. 
Admiral  Brueys  commanded  the  fleet  ;  and  the  officers  who 
served  under  his  orders,  all  full  of  ardour,  had  most  of  them 
already  acquired  reputation  as  clever  men. 