


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  167 

panying  General  Andreossi  on  an  expedition  to  the  lake 
Mensale  and  Peluse.  We  were  completely  ignorant  of  what 
was  going  forward  in  the  capital  ;  and  I  was  sailing  leisurely 
up  the  Nile,  when  I  learned  that  at  Mansoura,  or  Laman- 
sour,  the  hospital  containing  our  sick  and  wounded,  with  a 
detachment  of  soldiers,  had  been  surprised,  and  all  the  men 
butchered  without  mercy.  The  rebellion  of  Cairo  had 
reached  the  two  banks  of  the  river,  and  more  particularly 
the  branch  of  the  Damietta.  Some  revolted  villages  were 
burned  to  make  an  example.  The  General-in-chief  was 
very  desirous  to  know  whether  the  inhabitants  of  Mansoura 
had  retained  any  remembrance  of  their  victorious  resistance, 
when,  under  the  reign  of  St.  Louis,  they  had  been  so  im- 
prudently attacked  by  the  Count  d'Artois.  But  it  appeared, 
from  all  inquiries,  that  these  Egyptians  were  acquainted 
neither  with  the  name  of  St.  Louis,  nor  with  the  gallant 
actions  that  had  illustrated  their  ancestors. 

In  the  month  of  December,  1798,  the  General-in-chief 
had  not  yet  received  any  accounts  from  the  Directory.  The 
political  object  of  the  expedition  had  experienced  great 
impediments  by  the  loss  of  the  fleet.  It  was  no  longer  to 
be  hoped  we  should  ever  be  able  to  lead  the  army  to  India, 
the  superiority  of  the  English  being  now  concentrated  on 
the  sea.  All  that  remained  therefore  to  be  done  was  to 
profit  by  our  situation,  to  bring  back  the  Turks  to  their  old 
sentiments  of  friendship  for  the  French,  and  detach  them 
from  the  English,  or  at  least  to  prevent  the  two  Emperors 
of  Austria  and  Russia  from  concerting  with  each  other  the 
total  dismembering  of  the  Ottoman  empire.  The  General- 
in-chief  thought  himself  authorised  to  suppose  that  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  who  had  been  appointed  French  Ambassador  in 
Constantinople,  had  really  departed  for  that  metropolis,  and 
had  succeeded  in  maintaining  his  post  there.  In  those 
circumstances  it  was  important  to  correspond  with  him,  and 
the  best  way  appeared  to  be,  to  send  M.  Beauchamp  to 
Constantinople  ;  but  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  escape  the 


1 68  MEMOIRS  OF  COUA'T  LA  V ALETTE. 

watchful  eyes  of  the  English  cruisers.  General  Bonaparte 
contrived,  for  that  purpose,  the  following  plan.  The 
Turkish  caravella  which  had  come  over  to  bring  the  Sultan 
the  yearly  tribute  from  Egypt  was  then  riding  at  anchor  in 
the  port  of  Alexandria.  The  captain  of  that  vessel  was  a 
man  respected  in  his  own  country,  and  he  had  with  him  his 
two  sons.  He  received  an  order  to  carry  M.  Beauchamp  to 
Constantinople,  and  to  leave  one  of  his  sons  in  Alexandria 
as  a  hostage  for  the  safe  return  of  that  gentleman  to  Eg3'pt. 
The  ostensible  commission  of  the  Consul  was  to  require  the 
release  of  all  the  Frenchmen  who  were  detained  in  Syria, 
whether  merchants  or  consular  agents,  and  also  of  such 
military  as  had  been  made  prisoners  either  in  coming  to 
Egypt  or  in  returning  to  France.  He  was,  in  the  course  of 
his  negotiation  with  the  Grand  Vizier,  to  insinuate  that 
France  would  abandon  Egypt,  and  make  a  treaty  of  friend- 
ship with  Turkey,  if  the  latter  consented  to  give  up  all  her 
connections  with  England  ;  in  which  case,  the  French 
troops  would  join  those  of  the  Sultan,  either  to  put  an  end 
to  the  war  with  the  two  Emperors  by  one  common  treaty, 
or  to  give  him  support,  if  peace  should  not  take  place. 