

The  English  were  above  a  fortnight  without  showing 
themselves  ;  and  Arrighi  found  the  Admiral,  who  was 
convinced  that  they  had  counted  the  number  of  his  ships, 
and  did  not  dare  to  engage.  It  was  not  until  the  first  of 
August  that  Nelson  appeared  off  Alexandria  with  fourteen 
ships  of  the  line  and  several  frigates.  The  particulars  of 
the  battle,  at  which,  however,  I  was  not  present,  are  too 
well  known  to  require  my  repeating  them  here. 

Although  but  a  few  days  had  elapsed  since  the  arrival  of 
the  General-in-chief  in  Cairo,  he  had  been  preceded,  as  he 
was  everywhere  else,  by  such  strict  orders  and  excellent  ad- 
ministration, that  the  soldiers,  and  in  general  all  the  French, 
were  accustomed  to  walk  through  the  metropolis  and  its 
environs  without  feeling  the  slightest  uneasiness.  The  city 
of  Cairo  presented  a  curious  spectacle  to  the  Europeans 
who  saw  it  for  the  first  time.  I  had  landed  at  Boulack  on 
the  Nile,  at  a  great  distance  from  the  square  of  El  Bekir, 
where  General  Bonaparte  lived.  The  narrow  streets  of  the 
city  were  filled  with  camels  fastened  to  one  another  in  long 
rows,  carrying  all  sorts  of  goods  on  their  backs,  and  led  by 
a  single  man.  The  inhabitants  passed  through  the  small 
vacant  spaces  with  slow  gravity  and  with  their  pipes  in 
their  mouths  ;  while  our  soldiers,  mounted  on  donkeys, 
galloped  chet-rfully,  sliding  between  the  camels  and  bursting 
into  roars  of  laughter.  A  shocking  dust  and  an  offensive 
smell  of  mummies  suffocated  us.  Here  and  there  a  few 
grave  Mussulmans,  seated  on   their   mules,   opened   them- 

12 


i62  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

selves  a  passage  by  the  aid  of  their  stick-bearers,  who  struck 
all  that  opposed  them,  and  even  the  men  who  did  not  rise 
at  their  approach.  Beggars,  carefully  hiding  their  faces, 
and  little  inclined  to  discover  what  ours  show,  pestered  the 
passers-by  with  their  singular  cries,  and  seemed  to  be 
soliciting  alms  with  angry  imprecations. 

Mourad  Bey,  after  the  battle  of  the  Pyramids,  had  sought 
refuge  in  Upper  Egypt.  He  had  still  with  him  several 
thousand  Mamelukes.  His  influence  over  people  was  con- 
siderable ;  and,  as  it  might  prove  dangerous,  the  General- 
in-chief,  while  he  was  preparing  against  him  the  expedition 
entrusted  to  Desaix,  tried  to  gain  him  over  by  secret  negotia- 
tions. His  legitimate  wife  and  his  whole  harem  remained 
at  Cairo.  Bonaparte  sent  Eugene  Beauharnais  to  the  wife 
Avith  his  compliments,  and  the  assurance  that  she  had 
nothing  to  fear.  She  received  Eugene  politely,  and,  in 
return  for  the  presents  the  General  in-chief  had  sent  her, 
she  gave  him  her  husband's  beautiful  shawl  and  some  of  his 
arms.  But  the  respect  shown  to  the  wife  of  Mourad  Bey 
had  no  effect  on  that  chief.  The  vigour  and  talent  of 
General  Desaix,  and  the  courage  of  our  troops,  who  more 
than  once  forced  him  to  retire  to  the  Oasis,  and  reduced  his 
followers  to  a  few  faithful  friends,  could  not  persuade  that 
intrepid  leader  to  lend  an  ear  to  any  arrangement  whatever  ; 
and  it  was  not  until  after  two  years'  conflict  and  adversity 
that  he  had  at  last  consented  to  come  to  an  understanding 
with  the  head  of  the  French  army  ;  but  at  that  time  General 
Bonaparte  had  already  left  Egypt. 