

Two  days  after  this  scene  General  Bonaparte  set  off  for 
Paris,  leaving  me  at  the  Congress  with  M.  Ferret,  Secretary 
of  the  Legation  at  Campo  Formio.  "  I  cannot  take  you 
with  me  to  Paris,"  he  said  ;  "  the  Directory  has  not  yet 
forgot  your  conduct  on  the  i8th  Fructidor,  and  this  is  not 
the  fit  moment  for  justifying  yourself.  I  shall  make  you 
amends  for  this  hereafter.  Remain  here.  Write  me  all 
you  hear  of  the  diplomatic  gossip.  You  will  not  easily 
find  again  the  same  opportunity  of  gaining  instruction.  I 
leave  Avith  you  some  of  my  servants,  for  I  want  people  to 
think  I  shall  soon  come  back." 

His  intention  was  not,  however,  to  return  to  Rastadt. 
The  diflSculties  brought  in  by  the  insinuations  of  M.  de 
Thougeat  every  moment  impeded  the  negotiations.  After 
three  months'  debates,  nothing  was  agreed  on  as  to  the 
manner  of  concluding.  The  deputies  of  the  powers  of  the 
second  order  in  Germany,  a  great  many  members  of  the 
"  immediate  "  nobility,  and  the  numerous  and  rich  holders  of 
livings,  sought  support  from  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  had 
neither  the  will  nor  the  power  to  protect  them.  Convinced 
of  the  hatred  of  the  Emperor,  and  of  his  resolution  to 
sacrifice  them,  the  greater  number  amongst  them  sought 
another  support  by  secret  negotiations  with  the  minister  of 
France. 

My  position  had  become  very  difficult.     I  was  detested  by 


152  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  members  of  the  Directory,  and  consequently  mistrusted 
by  the  plenipotentiaries  of  the  Republic.  I  could  not 
mention  the  real  motive  that  kept  me  at  Rastadt.  My 
presence  at  the  Congress  was  displeasing  to  Messrs.  Treil- 
hard  and  Bonnier  ;  and  the  ministers  of  Germany,  obliged 
by  their  position  to  offer  a  kind  reception  to  the  French  who 
resided  with  them,  looked  upon  me  as  their  representative  ; 
and,  finding  it  less  painful  to  have  a  connection  with  an 
officer  who  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  General  Bonaparte, 
they  bestowed  on  me  alone  the  attention  they  ought  to  have 
divided  amongst  us,  and  left  nothing  but  cold  ceremony  for 
the  others.  Consequently,  I  was  continually  in  company 
with  Count  Cobentzel  and  the  family  of  Metternich.  But 
I  took  care  to  acquaint  General  Bonaparte  with  my  new 
position.  He  approved  of  it,  recommending  me,  however, 
to  act  with  due  discretion.  I  shall  not  repeat  the  particulars 
of  what  took  place  during  five  months  in  this  small  German 
town.  Diplomatic  prattle,  debates,  generally  without  result, 
grand  dinners,  and  ennui,  would  by  no  means  interest  the 
reader.  However,  he  may  possibly  be  glad  to  know  what  I 
have  since  learned  respecting  the  murder  of  the  plenipoten- 
tiaries of  the  Republic.  These  particulars  were  communi- 
cated to  me  by  the  Prince  of  Leiningen  and  the  Count  of 
Solms  Laubach,  with  whom  I  was  very  intimate.  They 
were  at  Rastadt  on  their  own  business,  and  showed  in  that 
catastrophe  much  courage  and  devotion  for  our  unfortunate 
ministers. 