


i6o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

still  struggling,  was  kind  enough  to  throw  us  a  rope,  that 
we  might  fasten  the  boat  to  her,  and  avoid  running  out  to 
sea,  where  we  might  go  to  the  bottom,  or  split  upon  the 
breakers.  We  remained  seventeen  hours  in  that  situation, 
when  at  last,  the  sea  growing  a  little  less  boisterous,  I  pro- 
posed getting  forward  at  a  quick  rate,  so  as  to  gain  the 
mouth  of  the  Nile.  The  sailors  were  not  much  pleased  at 
my  plan  ;  but  I  was  seconded  by  the  ensign  who  commanded 
the  boat,  and  who  was  a  young  man  full  of  energy  and 
intrepidity.  The  first  billow  nearly  submerged  us.  One 
more  effort  was  necessary  ;  and  while  the  sailors,  pale  as 
death,  continued  rowing  with  vigour,  one  of  my  travelling 
companions,  an  officer  in  the  Guides,  fell  on  his  knees  and 
began  the  Lord's  Prayer,  of  which  he  did  not  omit  a  single 
word.  When  the  danger  was  over,  his  courage  returned, 
and,  ashamed  of  an  act  he  could  not  himself  comprehend,  he 
whispered  to  me  :  "I  am  now  thirty-eight  years  old,  and 
from  my  sixth  year  I  never  said  a  prayer  in  my  life.  I  can- 
not conceive  how  I  recollected  that  one  ;  and  I  do  declare 
that  at  the  present  moment  I  should  not  be  able  to  repeat  a 
single  word  of  it."  This  officer  was  nevertheless  one  of  the 
bravest  of  the  Egyptian  army.  I  think  he  died  a  general  of 
brigade  in  Spain. 

At  Rosetta  I  found  that  the  commander,  Bidon  Julien, 
knew  no  more  about  the  army  than  Admiral  Brueys  did. 
"  I  am,  however,  easy,"  he  said  to  me.  "  The  inhabitants  are 
perplexed,  and  that  is  a  sure  sign  that  we  are  victorious. 
You  have  nothing  to  fear  on  the  Nile  :  I  shall  give  you  an 
armed  vessel  to  carry  you  to  Cairo,  of  which  place  the  army 
must  by  this  time  have  taken  possession."  The  day  after  I 
embarked  on  the  Nile,  I  met  Arrighi  (now  Duke  of  Paduaj, 
who  had  come  from  Cairo,  and  was  conveying  to  the 
Admiral  an  account  of  our  victories,  with  the  reiterated 
order  to  go  to  Corfu.  When  I  told  the  General-in-chief  that 
the  fleet  was  still  at  Aboukir,  he  showed  signs  of  great  ill- 
humour  ;  and  fearing  that  Arrighi  might  encounter  diffi- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  i6r 

culties  in  his  way,  and  not  join  the  Admiral  quick  enough, 
he  sent  off  that  very  night  his  aide-de-camp,  JuHen,  with 
fresh  orders.  The  unfortunate  youth  went  down  the  Nile 
in  a  djerme,  escorted  by  a  dozen  soldiers.  His  want  of  ex- 
perience was  the  cause  of  his  death.  Having  entered  the 
branch  of  Alexandria,  he  thought  he  might  rest  for  the 
night  ;  but  the  Arabs  murdered  him  and  his  escort.  In  him 
General  Bonaparte  lost  one  of  the  best  officers  of  his  staff, 
and  I  a  most  excellent  friend. 