

'  I  think  I  have  mentioned,  that  among  the  persons  sent  to  St.  John  of 
Acre  to  carry  proposals  of  peace  to  Djezzar  Pacha,  was  a  young  man, 
named  Mailly  de  Chateau-Renaud,  who  had  returned  from  Mascate  with  M. 
Beauchamp.  This  unfortunate  young  man  was  locked  up  in  the  lighthouse 
at  Acre,  with  about  four  hundred  Christians  he  had  collected  on  the  coast 
of  Syria.  The  day  after  the  failure  of  the  first  storm,  some  soldiers  who 
were  in  the  trenches  mentioned  to  General  Vial,  then  upon  service,  that 
in  the  seaside  might  be  seen  a  great  many  dead  bodies  rolled  up  like  bales 
of  rice  or  coffee.  He  went  to  look  after  them,  and  recognised  poor  young 
Chateau-Renaud,  who  had  been  strangled  during  the  night.  Thus  the  two 
brothers,  who,  after  a  six  years'  absence,  had  met  for  a  few  hours  at  Cairo, 
w  ere  both  killed  at  the  same  instant  near  St.  John  of  Acre. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  179 

More  than  once  we  entertained  the  hope  of  gaining  a  footing 
in  it  and  destroying  it  ;  but  it  was  in  vain  that  our  grenadiers 
and  sappers  endeavoured  several  times  to  take  possession  of 
it.  The  part  that  looked  towards  the  town  continued  to  be 
occupied  by  the  besieged,  who  never  ceased  throwing  on  our 
troops  howitzers,  grenades,  and  even  bombs,  which  made 
the  post  exceedingly  dangerous.  Notwithstanding  all  our 
efforts,  the  two  redoubts  constructed  by  the  enemy  covered 
us  with  their  fire  every  time  our  troops  crossed  the  ditch  to 
storm  the  tower.  The  officer  of  engineers,  Philippeaux, 
soon  guessed  we  were  making  mines,  and  applied  himself  to 
destroy  those  we  were  laying  under  the  ditch.  In  con- 
sequence, on  the  1 8th  Germinal,  the  enemy  made  a  sortie 
with  so  much  abruptness  and  violence  that  a  part  of  our 
trenches  was  destroyed.  The  enemy's  columns  were  com- 
manded by  intelligent  English  officers,  one  of  whom  reached 
the  entrance  of  the  mine,  where  he  was  killed.  The  papers 
on  him  informed  us  that  he  was  Captain  Hatfield,  and  that 
he  had  been  the  first  at  the  attack  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
His  fall  caused  some  confusion  among  the  troops  he  com- 
manded, who  soon  after,  being  attacked  with  energy,  hastily 
returned  to  the  city,  leaving  a  great  many  killed  behind 
them. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

While  we  were  fighting  under  the  walls  of  St.  John  of 
Acre,  like  the  Crusaders  beyond  the  Jordan,  Ibrahim  Bey, 
the  bearer  of  the  orders  of  Djezzar  Pacha,  assembled  all  the 
Arabs  of  the  mountains  of  Naplouse,  and  even  of  the 
environs  of  Damascus.  The  General-in-chief  had  taken  the 
precaution  to  make  himself  master  of  the  bridge  of  Jacoub 
and  the  port  of  Japhet.  The  banks  of  the  lake  of  Tabarieh 
were  constantly  overrun  by  the  cavalry  of  General  Murat. 
General  Junot  had  posted  himself  at  Loubi,  near  Nazareth. 
He  was  soon  attacked  at  a  short  distance  from  Gafarkala  ; 
and  though  he  had  only  with  him  a  part  of  the  2nd 
regiment  of  light  infantry,  three  companies  of  the  19th, 
and  one  hundred  and  fifty  dragoons,  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
dare  the  charge  of  above  three  thousand  horsemen.  Not- 
withstanding all  the  eflForts  of  the  enemy,  he  succeeded  in 
reaching  the  heights  of  Nazareth  without  having  been 
routed  ;  and  after  eight  hours  of  the  most  desperate  fighting, 
he  forced  the  enemy  to  a  temporary  retreat.  This  glorious 
defence  made  the  General-in-chief  feel  the  necessity  of 
terminating,  once  for  all,  the  annoyance  of  these  dangerous 
enemies,  whose  plan  was  no  less  than  to  come  and  attack 
him  under  the  walls  of  St.  John  of  Acre.  He  sent  General 
Kleber  against  them,  and  a  few  days  afterwards  he  marched 
himself  to  the  support  of  Junot  and  Kleber  with  the  rest  of 
his  cavalry,  the  division  of  General  Bon,  and  eight  pieces  of 