


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  1 83 

years  1775  ^"^  1780),  seemed  capable  of  recalling  to  their 
memory  the  sentiments  and  recollection  of  their  youth. 

At  Nazareth  we  lost  a  man  who  had  been  most  useful  to 
General  Bonaparte  and  the  army  ;  namely,  M.  Venture, 
first  interpreter  to  the  General-in-chief.  This  old  man  had 
passed  all  his  life  in  the  East,  and  his  wandering  life  had 
produced  a  strange  mixture  of  nations  in  his  family  ;  his 
wife  being  a  Greek,  his  daughter  an  Egyptian,  and  his 
son-in-law  a  Pole.'  He  was  very  much  regretted,  but  his 
place  was  adequately  filled  up  by  M.  Jaubert,  his  pupil, 
who,  notwithstanding  his  numerous  and  perilous  voyages, 
still  lives  for  his  friends  and  the  sciences. 

We  returned  to  St.  John  of  Acre,  and  on  our  arrival  before 
the  town  the  General-in-chief  finally  learned  that  Rear- 
Admiral  Duperrie  had  put  on  shore  three  four-and-twenty 
and  six  eighteen  pounders,  and  the  necessary  ammunition. 
The  works  of  the  mine  were  continued,  and  on  the  5th 
Floreal  it  was  decided  to  spring  it.  All  the  batteries  began 
to  play  upon  the  enemy,  in  order  to  deceive  him,  and  fire 
was  set  to  the  mine  ;  but  a  vault  that  existed  in  the  tower 
presented  a  line  of  slight  resistance.  One  side  only  was 
destroyed  :  it  remained,  however,  in  a  state  of  breach.  This 
breach  was  as  difficult  to  reach  as  it  had  been  before.  We 
were  therefore  obliged  to  begin  battering  afresh  the  curtain 
and  the  tower.  The  attack  of  the  6th  was  more  murderous 
than  the  former,  and  still  without  success.  Four  hundred 
men  remained  during  six  hours  in  the  breach  that  looked 
towards  the  ditch  ;  the  enemy,  posted  on  the  reverse,  con- 
tinued throwing  incessantly  burning  projectiles  into  the  midst 

'  I  was  present  at  Venture's  departure  from  Paris.  He  travelled  in  the 
same  coach  with  Colonel  Sulkowsky.  His  wife  and  daughter  were  bathed 
in  tears,  convinced  hy  I  know  not  what  omen  that  neither  of  them  would 
come  back.  After  an  hour's  grief  they  began  to  be  comforted,  when  the 
two  travellers  suddenly  reappeared.  Their  coach  had  broken  down  near 
the  barrier.  I  expected  fresh  lamentations  ;  l)ul,  to  my  great  astonish- 
ment, they  felt  the  greatest  joy  at  the  accident  that  had  occurred  ;  and  for 
the  same  reason  their  grief  was  so  much  stronger  when  they  heard  of  their 
death. 


1 84  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

of  that  mass  of  men,  who  were  unable  to  advance,  and  still 
would  not  consent  to  go  down.  At  last  the  break  of  day 
rendered  visible  the  most  horrible  disorder,  and  a  position 
which  could  not  possibly  be  maintained  ;  we  were  again 
obliged  to  abandon  the  tower.  We  had  lost  an  enormous 
number  of  officers,  especially  among  the  engineers  ;  General 
Caffarelli,  who  had  command  of  the  engineers,  showed  some 
gigns  of  recovery  ;  but  he  every  day  asked  why  his  comrades 
came  no  longer  to  see  him.  Though  the  utmost  care  was 
taken  to  conceal  from  him  the  fatal  news  of  their  death, 
grief  and  anxiety  augmented  his  sufferings.  He  sometimes 
said  to  me,  "  It  was  I  who  seduced — I  who  led  on  all  those 
hopeful  young  men.  Alas  !  that  they  should  have  fallen 
before  such  a  wretched  fortress  }  "  Finally,  the  death  of 
young  Say,  the  chief  of  his  staff,  which  could  not  be  kept 
a  secret  from  him,  threw  him  into  a  deep  melancholy,  and 
he  died  soon  after. 