


176  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

were  masters  of  Jaffa,  on  the  walls  of  which  place  we  had 
left  the  Turkish  flag  flying,  to  draw  in  the  enemy's  ships, 
which  might  bring  us  provisions,  and  news  from  sea. 
Standley,  persuaded  we  were  not  at  Jaffa,  went  in  to  St. 
John  of  Acre  ;  but  Commodore  Sir  Sidne}-  Smith,  who  was 
cruising  before  the  port  with  a  ship  and  a  frigate,  gave  him 
the  chase  and  took  a  part  of  his  vessels.  This  was  the  cause 
of  the  cannonading  we  heard  ;  and  General  Bonaparte  was 
convinced,  as  well  as  myself,  that  the  army  had  lost  all  its 
siege  ammunition.  The  next  day  the  army  encamped  to  the 
north  of  St.  John  of  Acre,  and  the  General-in-chief  stood 
during  several  hours  on  a  height  that  commands  St.  John  of 
Acre,  at  about  half  a  league  distant.  The  enemy,  perceiving 
the  staff,  made  trial  of  the  skill  of  their  gunners.  The 
bombs  fired  with  so  much  nicety  that  one  of  them  was 
buried  in  the  ground  three  paces  from  the  General,  between 
his  two  aides-de-camp.  Merlin  and  Beauharnais.  Another 
fell  and  burst  at  two  feet  from  the  soil,  in  the  midst  of  a 
group  of  soldiers  who  were  lying  down  and  preparing  their 
breakfast.  There  were  eleven  of  them,  and  not  one  survived 
an  instant. 

The  town  of  St.  John  of  Acre  is  situated  on  the  point  of 
a  narrow  slip  of  land,  fortified  towards  the  sea  by  batteries 
and  a  small  lighthouse,  and  also  protected  by  some  pieces  of 
cannon.  On  the  land  side  it  was  enclosed  by  a  high  wall, 
divided  by  a  tower  on  which  some  pieces  of  ordnance  had 
been  placed.  The  city  was  surrounded  at  a  considerable 
distance  by  gardens,  which  being  all  enclosed  with  hedges  of 
cactus,  we  had  much  trouble  in  repelling  the  riflemen  who 
harassed  us  from  behind  them. 

The  traveller  Volney,  whom  we  had  found  so  accurate  in 
his  description  of  Egypt,  asserts  that  St.  John  of  Acre  is  not 
surrounded  with  ditches.  This  assurance  proved  fatal  to  us 
in  the  beginning  of  the  siege.  Several  officers  of  engineers 
confirmed  us  in  our  prepossession,  and  particularly  Colonel 
Sampson,  who  was  wounded  in  his  hand  while  fighting  in  a 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  177 

muddy  rivulet  he  supposed  to  have  been  the  fosse  of  the 
town. 

After  we  had  fired  ten  days  on  the  tower  I  have  men- 
tioned, it  was  pierced,  and  the  breach  appeared  large  enough 
to  lodge  some  miners  with  an  officer  of  the  staff.  The 
troops  made  a  movement  to  rush  to  the  foot  of  the  town  ; 
but  they  were  suddenly  stopped  by  a  ditch  fifteen  feet  broad 
by  ten  or  twelve  deep,  and  lined  with  a  good  counterscarp. 
We  were,  in  consequence,  forced  to  establish  a  globe  of 
compression  to  blow  it  up.  The  concussion  took  place, 
and  young  Mailly-Chateau-Renaud,  an  officer  of  the  staff, 
received  orders  to  enter  the  tower  with  four  miners,  to 
remain  there  during  the  night,  and  to  pierce  it,  while  the 
infantry  endeavoured  to  make  themselves  masters  of  the 
ditch.  The  intrepid  young  officer  and  his  men  executed 
their  orders  ;  but  the  enemy  opened  so  strong  a  fire  on  our 
troops  that  they  were  forced  to  abandon  the  fosse.  Mailly 
and  his  gunners  were  killed  in  the  breach. 