


172  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

•answered  he  coolly,  "  that  fellow  had  a  share  in  the  rebellion 
of  Cairo,  and  escaped  my  vengeance.''  I  insisted  on  his 
putting  the  whole  affair  regularly  down  in  writing,  to  be 
communicated  to  the  General-in-chief.  In  all  probability 
the  unfortunate  man  was  guilty  ;  but  I  am  convinced,  that 
my  presence,  and  the  wish  to  give  an  example  of  severe 
justice,  were  the  real  causes  of  his  death.  For  the  rest, 
executions  of  this  sort  were  not  rare.  The  Cadi  never  went 
out  but  accompanied  by  the  hangman.  The  smallest  in- 
fraction of  the  police  laws  was  punished  by  blows  on  the 
soles  of  the  feet — a  punishment  from  which  the  women 
themselves  were  not  exempted. 


CHAPTER    XIX. 

Before  we  enter  Syria,  I  think  it  will  be  well  to  give  an 
account  of  the  General's  motives  for  that  expedition. 

It  was  absolutely  necessary  to  ensure  the  conquest  of 
Egypt  by  that  of  Syria,  and  especially  by  the  possession  of 
the  maritime  places. 

The  two  countries  are  dependent  on  each  other,  as  well  in 
regard  to  natural  productions  as  political  connection. 

Egypt  has  no  wood,  and  a  part  of  Syria  is  covered  with 
forests.  The  mutual  exchanges  extend  even  to  many  other 
productions.  The  Desert  alone  separates  the  two  countries, 
and  the  necessity  of  establishing  one  or  two  forts  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Desert  is  indispensable  for  the  possession  of 
Egypt. 

To  these  general  considerations,  at  all  times  equally  in 
force,  must  be  added  some  particular  circumstances  which 
had  just  been  created  by  policy. 

In  declaring  war  against  France  the  Sultan  would  launch 
out  against  us  the  whole  armed  population  of  Syria.  The 
Pacha  who  commanded  in  that  province  had  a  personal 
interest  in  showing  himself  our  foe  :  he  would  effect  his 
reconciliation  with  the  Porte  by  the  services  he  might 
render  her  ;  he  would  draw  a  great  deal  of  money  out  of  the 
English,  and  find  war  the  means  of  subduing,  or  at  least 
removing,  Ibrahim  Bey,  whose  presence  in  Syria  was  dis- 
agreeable to  him,  and  caused  him  even  some  anxiety. 

»73 


174  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

On  the  other  hand,  General  Bonaparte  wished  to  deprive 
the  English  of  the  means  of  communicating  with  and  dis- 
embarking on  an  extent  of  coast  eighty  leagues  in  length. 
His  intention  was  to  make  himself  master  of  the  maritime 
places,  and  fortify  them.  He  had  hopes  of  drawing  over  to 
his  party  a  considerable  portion  of  the  inhabitants  of  Syria, 
especially  the  Druses  and  Maronists,  schismatic  Mussulmans,' 
whose  manners  are  at  variance  with  those  of  the  Turks,  and 
who  have  no  other  connection  with  them  but  through  the 
enormous  taxes  they  are  forced  to  pay,  and  the  multifarious 
oppression  under  which  they  labour.  Finally,  he  expected 
by  that  means  to  force  the  Porte  to  explain  herself  openly  ; 
for  he  was  not  yet  acquainted  with  the  declaration  of  war 
made  by  the  Turks  against  France.  He  placed  at  the  head 
of  the  expedition  General  Regnier  as  commander  of  the 
vanguard,  and  Generals  Kleber,  Bon,  and  Lannes,  and 
Murat  for  the  cavalry. 