

He  left  in  Egypt  General  Desaix  vigorously  pursuing 
Mourad  Bey,  and  keeping  in  awe  all  the  provinces  of  the 
Upper  Nile  as  far  as  the  Cataracts.  General  Dugua  in  Cairo 
commanded  the  Delta  from  Rosetta  and  Damietta.  He 
had  under  his  orders  General  Lanusse,  whose  courage  and 
activity  were  sufficient  to  maintain  peace  in  all  those  exten- 
sive provinces.  The  season  was  favourable  for  the  expedition 
to  Syria,  which  began  in  January,  1799- 

The  Desert,  which  divides  Egypt  from  Syria,  is  eighty 
leagues  in  breadth.  In  that  space  of  land  are  found  the  wells 
of  Katisch,  which  were  enclosed  in  a  fort,  that  the  army 
might  not  be  without  water.  At  two  days'  march  beyond 
the  wells  is  the  fort  of  El  Arisch,  which  contains  better 
water  than  Katisch,  but  of  which  the  enemy  had  already 
made  himself  master.  We  were  forced  to  besiege  it,  and  it 
was  bravely  defended  by  2000  Arnauts.  They  were,  how- 
ever, constrained  to  capitulate,  after  a  vigorous  attack  of 

'  Here  Count  Lavalette  has  made  a  little  mistake.  The  Maronists  are 
Christians,  and  not  Mussulmans. — Note  of  the  Translator. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  1 7  5 

three  days.  In  the  treaty  it  was  stipulated  that  they  should 
go  to  Damascus  ;  but  the  greater  number  among  them  threw 
themselves  into  Jaffa,  of  which  place  they  augmented  the 
garrison.  We  were  obliged  in  consequence  to  besiege  the 
town.'  Jaffa  was  taken  by  storm  a  few  days  after  the  first 
attack,  and  the  Arnauts  who  had  capitulated  at  El  Arisch 
being  found  within  its  walls,  were,  according  to  the  European 
custom,  shot  for  having  violated  the  treaty.  I  was  not  at 
that  time  with  the  General-in-chief,  having  joined  him  only 
the  day  after  the  taking  of  Jaffa. 

From  Jaffa  the  army  marched  to  Caiffa  ;  but  the  enemy 
had  abandoned  that  place,  though  it  possessed  a  fort  and 
strong  walls.  We  left  there  a  small  post,  and  continued  our 
way  to  St.  John  of  Acre,  near  which  city  we  arrived  on  the 
evening  of  the  27th  of  March.  While  the  tents  were  being 
pitched,  the  General-in-chief  was  surprised  to  hear  at  sea  a 
tolerably  brisk  cannonading.  I  went  by  his  orders  to  the 
shore,  and  soon  perceived  that  the  sound  was  becoming 
more  distant,  so  that  I  feared  it  might  be  the  announcement 
of  some  fatal  event. 

On  entering  Syria,  General  Bonaparte  had  given  orders 
to  Marmont  to  send  him  by  some  brig  the  ammunition  he 
should  want  for  the  sieges  of  the  Syrian  towns.  Captain 
Standley,  who  commanded  the  frigate  which  was  at  the 
head  of  the  expedition,   neglected   to  inquire  whether  we 

'  VVTien  General  Kleber  left  El-Arisch,  to  proceed  to  Kanjonnes,  he  was 
led  astray  by  his  guides,  who  threw  him  much  too  far  to  the  right  in  the 
Desert.  The  General-in-chief  followed  him,  not  doubting  that  General 
Kleber  had  crossed  the  village;  and  he  was  going  to  enter  it,  escorted  only 
by  his  staff  and  fifty  guides,  when  two  horsemen,  who  formed  the  vanguard, 
came  back  in  full  gallop,  after  having  fired  two  pistols  ;  and  we  discovered 
on  the  other  side  of  the  village  the  camp  and  cavalry  of  Abdallah  Pasha, 
who  appeared  disposed  to  charge  them.  The  army  was  two  leagues  behind. 
There  was  no  possibility  of  standing  against  six  hundred  well-armed  enemies, 
or  of  escaping  if  they  had  been  pursued.  Fortunately,  the  General,  on 
this  occasion,  showed  an  instance  of  the  admirable  presence  of  mind  he 
possessed.  He  ordered  the  commander  of  the  detachment  to  draw  up  his 
men  in  a  single  line  ;  the  enemy  thought  them  more  numerous  than  they 
really  were  ;  and  after  some  moments'  deliberation  he  came  to  a  resolution 
<jf  raising  his  camp  and  retreating. 