

The  aide-de-camp  Duroc  had  been  sent  an  hour  before 
into  the  ditch,  to  discover  the  progress  of  the  breach  :  a 
howitzer  that  burst  wounded  him  deeply  in  the  thigh,  and 
lamed  him.  The  night  falling  in,  we  were  constrained  to 
give  up  the  attack,  and  to  wait  until  the  arrival  of  a  larger 
supply  of  artillery  should  furnish  us  with  the  means  of 
making  breaches  on  all  sides  ;  but  just  at  that  moment  the 
General-in-chief  heard  that  all  his  ammunition,  all  his 
artillery,  sent  from  Alexandria,  had  been  captured  by  Sir 
Sidney  Smith  ;  while  at  the  same  time  we  learned  the  secret 
cause  of  the  astonishing  skill  of  the  Turkish  gunners. 

When,  a  few  years  before  the  period  I  am  speaking  of, 
General  Aubert  Dubayet  was  sent  by  the  French  Govern- 
ment to  Constantinople  as  ambassador,  he  obtained  leave  to 
take  with  him  a  company  of  light  artillery,  to  teach  the 
Turks  those  parts  of  gunnery  they  were  still  unacquainted 
with,  and  especially  all  that  concerned  the  letting  off  of 
bombs.     This  company  had  since  returned  to  France,  and 

13 


178  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

part  of  them  were  in  the  besieging  army,  but  their  pupils 
were  in  the  fortress  ;  so  that  Turkish  bombardiers,  instructed 
by  French  troops,  were  sending  us  our  own  projectiles,  of  which 
they  possessed  about  eighteen  hundred,  with  four  mortars. 

The  trenches  had  not  been  regularly  made,  and  the 
consequence  of  that  neglect  was,  that  the  soldiers,  not 
being  sufficiently  covered,  fell  victims  to  our  precipitation. 
General  Caffarelli,  commander  of  the  engineers  of  the  army, 
was  himself  struck  by  a  bullet  on  his  left  elbow,  and  he  lost 
his  arm.  He  had  already  suffered  the  loss  of  a  leg  several 
years  before,  during  the  retreat  of  Jourdan. 

The  Turks  are  wonderfully  good  soldiers  behind  a  wall  : 
we  had  more  than  one  instance  of  that  during  the  whole 
siege  of  St.  John  of  Acre.  It  was  almost  impossible  for  a 
Frenchman  to  show  himself  uncovered  without  being  struck. 
The  terrible  fire  of  the  besieged  was  supported  by  the 
batteries  of  Sir  Sidney's  ship  Theseus^  and  his  frigate. 

The  labours  of  the  siege  soon  grew  more  complicated. 
Sir  Sidney  Smith  had  with  him  a  Frenchman  named 
Philippeaux,  an  emigrant,  formerly  a  schoolfellow  of 
General  Bonaparte,  and  an  officer  of  engineers.  He  raised 
two  redoubts  beyond  the  fosse,  the  batteries  of  which  soon 
Tanged  along  the  branches  of  our  trenches,  and  forced  us  to 
begin  new  works  to  change  their  direction.^ 

The  field-pieces  being  too  weak  to  destroy  the  tower,  we 
had  recourse  to  mining  ;  but  while  we  were  working  with 
great  activity  and  secrecy,  we  continued  firing  on  the  town. 