

i3o 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  i8i 

artillery.  He  directed  his  way  towards  Fouli.  At  nine 
o'clock  in  the  morning  he  had  reached  the  last  heights, 
whence  the  prospect  extends  three  leagues  over  the  plain 
bounded  by  Mount  Thabor.  From  thence  we  perceived 
the  squares  of  General  Kleber,  presenting  a  black  line,  sur- 
rounded and  pressed  by  an  enormous  mass  of  cavalry  and 
infantry,  which,  at  three  leagues'  distance,  had  all  the 
appearance  of  an  ant-hill.  Sometimes  the  French  line 
disappeared,  and  we  thought  it  destroyed  ;  then  it  showed 
itself  again,  covered  by  its  own  fire,  during  some  minutes. 
The  General-in-chief  began  by  throwing  his  cavalry  on  the 
heights  to  his  right,  where  the  camp  of  the  Mamelukes 
had  been  established,  and  which  we  found  deserted.  He 
thus  formed  two  squares  of  infantry,  and  made  his  arrange- 
ments so  as  to  turn  the  enemy  at  a  great  distance.  When 
he  arrived  at  within  half  a  league  of  General  Kleber,  he  sent 
to  him  General  Rampon,  at  the  head  of  the  32nd  half 
brigade  ;  and  as  soon  as  that  troop  had  begun  to  march,  he 
made  known  his  presence  by  firing  a  twelve-pounder.  The 
effect  was  theatrical.  At  the  same  instant  we  saw  General 
Kleber,  quitting  his  defensive  attitude,  advancing  upon  the 
village  of  Fouli,  of  which  he  made  himself  master,  and  the 
enemy  flying  in  all  directions.  But  on  one  side  the  enemy 
found  before  him  General  Rampon,  while  General  Vial  had 
cut  off  his  retreat  to  the  mountains  of  Naplouse,  and  General 
Murat  was  waiting  for  him  at  the  bridge  of  Jacoub.  The 
guides  on  foot  attacked  him  near  Jenin  ;  so  that  his  only 
resource  was  to  fly  behind  Mount  Thabor,  from  whence, 
during  the  night,  he  reached  Elmekanieh,  and  further  up 
the  Jordan,  where  a  great  number  were  drowned  in 
attempting   to   cross   the   river. 

After  the  battle  the  General-in-chief  went  to  sleep  at 
Nazareth.  This  small  place  is  situated  a  good  way  within 
the  mountains,  in  a  very  picturesque  situation,  between  two 
groves,  one  of  sycamore  and  the  other  of  date-trees  :  the 
chief  part  of  the  inhabitants  are  Christians.     Before  Bona- 


1 82  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE. 

parte  entered  the  village,  he  stopped  near  an  ancient  fountain, 
where  a  considerable  number  of  cattle  were  drinking.  The 
elders  of  the  village  stood  there  waiting  for  the  General-in- 
chief :  the  whole  scene  recalled  to  memory  the  patriarchal 
times  so  beautifully  described  in  the  Bible.  The  French 
were  received  with  great  demonstrations  of  joy,  and  General 
Bonaparte  went  with  his  staff  to  pass  the  night  at  the  con- 
vent of  Nazareth. 

This  convent  was  evidently  built  in  the  time  of  the 
Crusades  :  the  edifice  is  not  very  large.  Next  morning  the 
General-in-chief  asked  the  superior  to  conduct  him  to  the 
church,  which  resembles  our  village  churches,  and  contains 
nothing  remarkable  but  the  chapel,  which  was  once,  they 
say,  the  bed-chamber  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  It  is  below  the 
chief  altar,  and  a  few  very  broad  steps  descend  to  it.  An 
altar  fills  the  place  of  the  bed  ;  and  being  cut  out  of  the 
rock,  it  is  no  more  than  seven  feet  in  height.  The  superior, 
who  was  a  Spaniard,  but  spoke  very  good  Italian,  made  us 
observe  on  the  left  side  of  the  altar  a  pillar  of  black  marble, 
the  shaft  of  which  touched  the  ceiling,  while  its  basement 
was  broken  off  some  feet  from  the  ground,  which  made  it 
appear  suspended.  The  prior  told  us,  in  the  gravest  manner 
possible,  that  when  the  Angel  Gabriel  came  to  announce  to 
the  Virgin  her  glorious  and  holy  destination,  he  touched  the 
pillar  with  his  heel  and  broke  it  in  two.  We  burst  out 
a-laughing  ;  but  General  Bonaparte,  looking  severely  at  us, 
made  us  resume  our  gravity.  Along  the  cloisters  were  lying 
about  thirty  men  who  had  been  wounded  on  the  preceding 
day  ;  several  of  them  had  just  expired,  and  these  latter  had 
nearly  all  received  from  the  monks  the  last  comforts  of 
religion.  This  was  probably  done  at  the  instigation  of  these 
pious  cenobites  ;  for,  at  that  period,  the  French  troops  were 
very  foreign  to  any  religious  feeling.  Neither  the  aspect  of 
the  country  wherein  they  fought,  nor  the  names  of  most 
of  those  places  which  had  been  familiar  to  them  during 
their  infancy  (nearly  all  of  them  being  born  between  the 