

Unfortunately,  AI.  Beauchamp  was  discovered  by  the 
English,  and  sent  to  the  Seven  Towers  at  Constantinople. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  the  plague  began  its  ravages 
at  Alexandria.  I  was  ordered  to  accompany  M.  Beauchamp 
to  that  place,  that  I  might  superintend  the  preparations  for 
his  departure,^  and  make  a  report  to  the  General-in-chief  on 
the  state  of  the  fortifications  there.  When  I  arrived,  I 
found  General  Marmont  commanding  the  province  and  the 
whole  seashore  as  far  as  Rosetta.  "  You  arrive  at  an  unfor- 
tunate moment,"  he  said:  "the  plague  has  broken  out 
yesterday  among  our  troops.  It  appears  that  the  order 
given  on  our  arrival  at  Alexandria,  to  burn  the  clothes  of 
the  persons  who  had  died  of  the  contagion,  has  been 
negligently  executed.  Some  of  the  inhabitants  have  worn 
'  See  Appendix. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  169 

them  again  ;  and,  our  troops  being  in  close  connection  with 
them,  the  contact  has  spread  the  plague  among  the  French, 
and  I  have  been  assured  that  it  cannot  fail  soon  to  break  out 
also  among  the  Turks.  Yesterday  four  Frenchmen  died  ; 
there  are  eight  sick  to-day,  who  will  probably  be  numbered 
with  the  dead  to-morrow." 

All  possible  precautions  had  already  been  taken  by 
General  Marmont :  the  troops  were  lodged  under  tents, 
and  all  communication  betwixt  them  and  the  inhabitants 
was  prohibited.  The  most  rigorous  orders  had  also  been 
issued,  forbidding  the  battalions  to  which  the  sick  belonged 
to  hold  any  connection  with  the  others  ;  but  the  careless- 
ness of  the  soldiers  destroyed  all  the  good  effects  of  these 
measures.  They  looked  upon  the  plague  as  an  enemy  it 
was  their  duty  to  challenge  ;  and  the  communication  of  the 
soldiers  with  each  other  continued,  notwithstanding  the 
severest  discipline.  My  orders  were  to  order  Commissary 
Michaud  from  Rosetta  to  Alexandria  ;  he  came  with  a 
suite  of  ten  persons,  and  lodged  with  us  at  General  Mar- 
mont's.  In  the  space  of  two  days  he  was  the  only  survivor 
of  all  those  he  had  brought  with  him.  One  of  his 
secretaries,  named  Renaud,  left  the  hotel  to  go  and  sign 
some  orders  at  the  lodgings  his  master  had  taken  in  the 
■city.  The  paper  on  which  he  wrote  sufficed  to  communicate 
the  disease  to  his  blood.  The  next  morning  he  sent  word 
that  he  was  not  very  well,  and  could  not  breakfast  at  the 
General's  table.  We  went  immediately  to  see  him.  He 
was  still  up  ;  but  his  features  already  bore  all  the  marks 
of  the  fatal  malady  :  his  eye  glared,  his  tongue  faltered, 
he  had  a  profuse  cold  perspiration,  and  pains  in  his  limbs. 
The  physician  who  was  called  to  visit  him  just  appeared  at 
the  door  of  his  room,  with  a  thick  long  stick  in  his  hand. 
After  having  looked  at  him  for  a  moment,  he  ordered  hot 
water  to  be  placed  before  him,  and  retired  without  adminis- 
tering any  other  remedy.  The  unfortunate  young  man 
begged  us  to  get  him  ink  and  paper,  that  he  might  write  to 