


I70  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

his  family.     In  the  afternoon  he  expired  in  great  agony  ;  so 
that  his  iUness  did  not  last  above  fifteen  hours. 

The  contagion  soon  assumed  a  most  terrible  aspect.  All 
the  physicians  died  successively  ;  the  overseers  of  the  in- 
firmaries went  away,  and  it  was  no  longer  possible  to  enter 
the  hospitals  with  impunity.  We  were  obliged  to  take 
Turks  to  nurse  the  sick,  and  to  pay  a  very  great  price  for 
their  services  ;  while  the  superintendence  over  them  was  so 
relaxed,  on  account  of  the  danger  with  which  it  was  accom- 
panied, that  the  most  flagrant  misconduct  was  not  to  be 
prevented.  At  General  Marmont's  lodgings  we  had  been 
obliged  to  do  without  tablecloths  or  sheets  ;  all  our  clothes 
were  fumigated  ;  the  out-door  servants  had  no  connection 
with  those  of  the  interior.  The  carriage  gateway  was  nailed- 
up  ;  while  everything  that  was  brought  to  the  house  from 
out  of  doors,  and  even  the  meat,  was  thrown  through  a 
wicket  into  a  tub  of  water.  With  a  view  to  avoid  the 
infection  among  us,  we  divided  ourselves  into  two  brigades  ; 
and  during  the  night  we  pursued  each  other  from  room  to 
room,  throwing  water  in  our  faces,  which  was  the  only 
ammunition  we  possessed.  Among  the  few  soldiers  who 
consented  to  nurse  the  sick,  there  was  a  gunner  who  had 
been  in  Constantinople,  where  he  pretended  that  he  had 
escaped  the  plague.  According  to  his  assertion,  he  pos- 
sessed an  infallible  preservative  against  the  infection,  which 
was,  to  keep  his  face  and  hands  perpetually  moistened 
with  water.  But  it  was  discovered  that  he  washed  his- 
hands  in  oil.  Indeed,  it  had  been  observed  in  Cairo,  that 
the  lamplighters  never  caught  the  plague.  After  remaining 
six  weeks  in  the  unfortunate  city  of  Alexandria,  I  received 
from  the  General-in-chief  an  order  to  return  to  Cairo,  that 
I  might  accompany  him  in  his  campaign  to  Syria.^ 

The  Arabs  of  the  province  of  Damanhour,  being  well 
acquainted  with  the  situation  of  our  troops  at  Alexandria, 
took  advantage  of  it  to  renew  their  depredations.     I  set  off" 
'  See  Appendix. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  171 

with  an  escort  of  thirty  men,  and  two  small  cannons  we  had 
taken  at  Malta,  and  which  General  Marmont  was  kind 
enough  to  entrust  to  me,  to  increase  my  slender  means  of 
defence  ;  but  I  was  obliged,  according  to  custom,  to  take 
under  my  protection  a  numerous  caravan  of  peasants, 
women,  and  children,  who  profited  by  my  departure  to 
return  to  Damanhour  and  Ramanieh.  We  had  scarcely 
advanced  two  leagues  when  the  Arabs  began  to  hover  about 
our  flanks.  The  French  infantry,  which  a  few  months 
before  had  not  even  courage  enough  to  fly  before  the  Arabs, 
so  soon  accustomed  themselves  to  dare  them,  that  I  had  the 
greatest  trouble  to  prevent  them  from  strolling  about  the 
plain  for  the  purpose  of  firing  at  these  enemies.  Two  or 
three  Arabs  were  dismounted,  and  then,  to  put  them  com- 
pletely to  the  rout,  I  had  only  to  fire  my  two  cannons  at 
them.  On  my  arrival  in  Cairo,  the  General-in-chief  had 
already  gone  off.  He  had  left  the  place  two  da3's  before, 
leaving  me  an  order  to  traverse  the  city  in  all  directions 
with  the  Police  Aga,  to  know  whether  all  was  quiet.  The 
Aga  was  at  that  time  a  Greek,  called  Barthelemi.  He  was 
accompanied  by  his  guards,  the  executioner  and  his  servants. 
We  walked  with  a  solemn  pace,  and  at  the  sight  of  the  Aga 
all  the  pedlars  in  the  streets,  and  those  whose  conscience 
was  not  quite  clear,  immediately  disappeared.  In  the  Rue 
du  Petit  Thouars,  he  stopped  facing  a  coffee-house  ;  and  his 
stick-bearer,  who  walked  before  him,  dragged  along  by  force 
a  man,  to  whom  he  addressed  some  questions.  The  poor 
fellow  answered  in  great  confusion.  After  reflecting  for  a 
moment,  the  Cadi  slowly  made  a  horizontal  motion  with 
his  right  hand,  and  we  gravely  continued  our  walk.  The 
gesture  of  the  Cadi  appeared  singular  to  me.  When  we 
had  got  thirty  steps  farther,  I  turned  round,  and  seeing  a 
group  of  persons  assembled  before  the  coffee-house,  I  spurred 
my  horse,  and  perceived  with  horror  a  mutilated  corpse,  and 
the  executioner  calmly  putting  a  human  head  into  his  bag. 
"  What's  the  meaning  of  this  ?  "  said  I  to  the  Cadi.     "  Oh," 