

He  was  not  regretted  by  the  army  alone.  To  extensive 
information,  Caffarelli  added  great  feeling  and  a  mildness  of 
disposition  that  will  make  his  memory  dear  to  all  those  who 
knew  him.  He  would  certainly  have  acted  a  very  important 
part  under  the  Empire  ;  for  General  Bonaparte  had  great 
esteem  and  consideration  for  him. 

The  army  had  already  stormed  the  city  twelve  times,  and 
withstood  twenty-six  sorties,  when  General  Kleber  and  his 
division  were  recalled  to  the  camp.  A  new  mine  had  been 
opened,  and  we  were  already  on  the  point  of  charging  it, 
when  the  enemy  once  more  gave  vent  to  it  :  notwithstanding 
all  our  efforts,  he  reached  the  branch  ;  so  that  we  were 
obliged  to  make  our  miners  retire  precipitately  out  of  the 
mine,  and  stop  it  up  by  explosion.  This  circumstance  was 
the  more  fatal,  as  by  it  we  lost  all  hopes  of  making  ourselves 
masters  of  the  town  by  that  means.  We  had  to  return  to 
cannonading,  which  also  speedily  relaxed,  the  gunpowder 
we  expected  from  Gaza  not  having  arrived.  On  the  next 
■day,  however,  we  received  a  sufficient  quantity  :  the  courage 


]{L1B1'B. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  185 

of  the  soldiers  increased  ;  and  when  they  heard  that  the 
division  of  Kleber  was  coming,  the  whole  camp  went  to 
meet  it,  with  congratulations  and  prophecies  that  the  honour 
of  taking  the  town  would  belong  to  the  new-comers.  The 
batteries  had  destroyed  a  great  part  of  the  curtain,  which 
presented  a  space  wide  enough  to  mount  for  an  assault. 
The  grenadiers  of  Kleber's  division  received  that  honour- 
able though  perilous  commission  ;  but  just  as  they  were 
descending  into  the  ditch  in  order  to  cross  it,  the  enemy 
opened  on  their  flank  a  tremendous  fire  from  the  two  sides. 
The  grenadiers,  however,  penetrated  into  the  town  ;  but 
when  there  they  were  fired  upon  from  all  sides  of  a  large 
square,  and  from  the  Palace  of  Djezzar.  The  difficulty  of 
climbing  up  the  breach  prevented  our  soldiers  from  rushing 
easily  into  this  new  circle  :  the  bravest  among  them  were 
killed  ;  the  rest  hesitated.  It  became  necessary  to  lead  the 
troops  back  into  the  trenches. 

The  General-in-chief  could  not  resolve  to  order  the  four- 
teenth assault  ;  but  the  grenadiers  and  most  of  the  officers 
who  had  already  been  in  the  town  insisted  in  so  pressing  a 
manner  for  leave  to  go  up  once  more,  that  the  General-in- 
chief,  after  having  got  the  breach  widened,  let  them  advance 
again.  General  Kleber  placed  himself  on  the  reverse  of  the 
fosse,  where,  sword  in  hand,  he  animated  his  troops  with 
his  stentorian  voice,  amidst  the  dead  and  the  dying.  On 
looking  on  that  gigantic  figure,  a  whole  head  taller  than  the 
rest  of  the  soldiers,  one  might  have  taken  him  for  one  of 
the  heroes  of  Homer.  The  noise  and  smoke  of  the  cannon, 
the  cries  of  the  soldiers,  the  roaring  of  the  Turks — our  troops 
rushing  on  the  enemy,  made  our  hearts  beat  with  enthusiasm. 
Nobody  doubted  but  the  town  would  be  taken  ;  when  sud- 
denly the  column  stopped.  General  Bonaparte  had  placed 
himself  in  the  breach  battery,  to  examine  once  more  the 
movements  of  the  army.  He  had  fixed  his  glass  between 
the  fascines  of  the  battery,  when  a  ball  from  the  town  struck 
the  superior  fascine  ;  and  the  General-in-chief  fell  into  the 