


1 86  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

arms  of  General  Berthier.  We  thought  him  killed  ;  but 
fortunately  he  had  not  been  touched  ;  his  fall  was  only 
an  effect  of  the  commotion  lof  the  air.  In  vain  General 
Berthier  pressed  him  to  retire  :  he  received  one  of  those 
harsh  and  dry  replies,  after  which  no  one  dare  insist.  While 
we  were  examining  the  singular  absence  of  all  motion  on 
the  part  of  the  troops,  a  bullet  entered  the  head  of  young 
Arrighi,  who  was  standing  between  the  General-in-chief 
and  me.  Some  others  were  killed  afterwards,  General 
Bonaparte  still  refusing  to  retire.  At  last  we  learned  what 
was  the  obstacle  that  prevented  the  troops  from  advancing. 
In  the  interval  between  the  two  assaults,  the  enemy  had 
filled  up  a  wide  ditch  with  all  sorts  of  inflammable  matter, 
so  that  repeated  and  terrible  explosions  killed  all  those  that 
came  near  it.  It  was  too  broad  to  be  crossed  ;  there  were  no 
means  of  turning  it ;  and  our  soldiers  stood  before  that  in- 
surmountable obstacle,  enraged  at  not  being  able  to  advance, 
and  still  resolved  not  to  go  back.  Several  generals  were 
wounded,  and  a  great  number  of  officers  and  soldiers  killed. 
We  lost  the  General  of  division  Bon,  the  Adjutant-general 
Fouler,  and  Croisier,  aide-de-camp  to  the  General-in-chief. 

To  continue  the  siege  would  have  been  paying  too  dearly 
for  the  conquest  of  a  city  already  ravaged  by  the  plague. 
The  disease  had  been  brought  to  the  camp  by  the  second 
light  demi-brigade  that  had  caught  it  at  Damietta.  The 
army  had  also  found  it  at  Jaffa  ;  and  though  it  was  not 
marked  here  by  those  terrible  symptoms  it  had  shown  at 
Alexandria,  and  went  under  the  name  of  a  benign  plague,  it 
still  swept  away  many  victims,  and  would  undoubtedly  have 
cost  us  more  men  still  if  we  had  taken  St.  John  of  Acre. 

General  Bonaparte  felt  convinced  that  that  fever  was 
really  the  plague  ;  the  Physician-in-chief,  Desgenettes, 
alleged,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  was  nothing  more  than  a 
common  fever.  His  opinion  and  arguments  served  to  tran- 
quillise  the  soldiers  ;  but  they  had  one  bad  effect — that  of 
disposing  them  to  neglect  the  caution  necessary  in  all  con- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  187 

tagious  diseases.  He  wished,  however,  to  add  practical 
demonstration  to  his  arguments  by  inoculating  himself 
with  the  plague.  In  the  middle  of  the  hospital,  and  in 
the  presence  of  all  the  sick,  he  plunged  a  lancet  into  the 
bubo  of  one  of  the  patients,  and  pricked  himself  with  it  in 
his  left  side.  This  act,  which  was  the  more  courageous  as 
he  afterwards  acknowledged  that  the  disease  had  really  all 
the  characteristics  of  the  plague,  excited  the  admiration  of 
the  whole  army,  and  insured  to  the  physician  lasting  glory 
with  posterity. 