


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  197 

The  General-in-chief  learned  here,  though  in  a  confused 
manner,  what  had  happened  in  France  during  his  absence. 
Italy  was  lost,  and  Massena  continued  fighting  like  a  lion  in 
Switzerland.  In  the  interior  the  confusion  had  been  very 
great.  Treilhard  and  Merlin  were  no  longer  members  of  the 
Directory  ;  their  places  were  occupied  by  the  lawyer  Gohier 
and  General  Moulin.  On  hearing  the  latter  name,  the 
General-in-chief  turned  to  Berthier  and  said,  "  Who  is  this 
General  Moulin  ? "  "I  never  heard  his  name  mentioned 
before,"  answered  Berthier.  General  Bonaparte  put  the 
same  question  to  all  of  us,  and  received  the  same  answer. 
That  man's  nomination  caused  him  to  reflect  deeply. 
Astonished  not  to  see  any  of  the  authorities  from  the 
land,  he  soon  learned  that  the  members  of  the  munici- 
pality, and  those  of  the  departmental  directory,  had  sent 
each  other  to  prison.  The  commissary  of  the  Government, 
a  stranger  to  the  country,  was  sole  master  in  that  state  of 
confusion.  The  cabinet  revolution  had  soon  become  known 
at  Ajaccio,  and  the  different  parties  found  it  the  most 
natural  thing  in  the  world  to  persecute  one  another. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

It  was  necessary  to  re-establish  some  order  in  the  midst 
of  so  much  anarchy.  In  consequence,  the  General-in -chief 
went  to  his  own  house,  sent  for  the  magistrates,  whom  he 
delivered  out  of  prison,  exhorted  them  to  peace  and  concord, 
and  the  next  morning  the  two  frigates  left  the  port,  sailing 
in  the  direction  of  the  Isles  of  Hyeres.  The  whole  of  the 
first  day  our  navigation  was  very  favourable.  We  perceived 
already  the  hills  of  Provence,  and  our  joy  at  returning  to 
our  dear  country  was  carried  to  its  highest  pitch,  when  the 
sailor  who  was  on  the  look-out  said  he  espied  two  large  ships 
in  the  west.  They  could  be  no  other  than  enemy's  ships, 
and  soon  several  discharges  of  cannon  seemed  to  indicate 
that  they  had  discovered  us.  The  General-in-chief  called 
a  council,  and  the  universal  opinion, — even  that  of  the 
admiral, — was  that  General  Bonaparte  had  nothing  else  to 
do  than  to  throw  himself  into  the  post-boat  that  accompanied 
us  and  return  to  Ajaccio.  He  was  indignant  at  such  advice. 
"  Do  you  think,"  said  he,  "  that  I  can  consent  to  run  away 
like  a  coward,  when  fortune  has  never  ceased  to  favour  me  ? 
Let  us  continue  our  course.  My  destiny  is  not  to  be  taken 
and  die  here."  So  we  went  on  ;  but  instead  of  steering, 
as  we  had  done  till  then,  in  the  direction  of  the  Isles  of 
Hyeres,  we  resolved  to  go  to  Frejus.  The  General-in-chief 
had  judged  rightly.  The  enemy,  whom  we  distinguished 
with  facility,  because  they  were  under  the  setting  sun,  could 
not   perceive   us,   because   we  were   in  the_  shade.      After 