

It  became,  therefore,  necessary  to  do  without  him,  and, 
moreover,  to  take  a  speedy  resolution.  France  was  op- 
pressed by  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and  disgusted  with  a 
violent  government  which,  perceiving  that  its  enemies 
were  augmented  from  day  to  day,  and  wishing  to  place  in 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  201 

the  same  predicament  the  disaffected  that  its  administration 
created,  with  its  inveterate  enemies  of  the  aristocratic  classes 
and  the  families  of  the  emigrants,  loaded  all  indiscriminately 
with  the  same  rigour.  The  fear  of  the  influence  of  the 
emigrants,  and  of  a  return  to  a  monarchical  system,  made 
the  Directors  lean  towards  those  rigorous  measures  that  had 
caused  the  success  of  the  Committee  of  Public  Welfare,  and 
most  of  their  acts  bore  the  marks  of  these  measures.  Their 
partisans,  that  were  no  longer  to  be  found  anywhere  else 
than  among  a  part  of  the  public  officers,  were  perpetually 
exciting  their  anxiety  on  the  spirit  of  the  army  ;  and 
General  Bonaparte,  in  particular,  inspired  them  with  alarms 
that  could  not  fail  soon  to  produce  a  violent  attack  against 
him.  These  partisans  of  the  Directory  formed,  nevertheless, 
everywhere  a  minority,  and  especially  in  the  two  councils  ; 
but  their  activity  and  their  audacious  spirit  compensated 
for  the  smallness  of  their  numbers.  The  General-in-chief 
arrived  on  the  26th  of  Vendemiaire  ;  the  conspiracy  that 
was  to  overturn  the  Directory  was  arranged  and  decided  in 
the  first  days  of  Brumaire,  and  several  members  of  the  two 
Councils  had  been  entrusted  with  the  secret.  Government 
wishing,  however,  to  show  General  Bonaparte  a  public 
testimony  of  satisfaction,  resolved  to  give  him  a  splendid 
dinner.  It  was  decided  that  the  board  should  be  spread 
in  the  nave  of  the  Church  of  St.  Sulpice.  Arrangements 
were  made  to  bring  together  the  two  Councils  and  all  the 
high  officers  of  the  State.  The  General-in-chief  went  there 
with  a  few  generals  and  with  his  staff.  An  immense  table 
in  the  form  of  a  horseshoe  filled  the  whole  church.  The 
General-in-chief  sat  next  to  the  President  of  the  Directory. 
He  trusted  so  little  to  the  good  faith  of  the  Government  that 
he  ordered  a  loaf  of  bread  and  half  a  bottle  of  wine  to  be 
brought  there  for  his  private  use.  I  had  not  been  previously 
informed  of  that  circumstance,  and  I  only  learned  it  when 
Duroc  asked  me  in  the  church  for  those  two  articles  of 
provision  which  were  fetched  from  the  General's  coach.     I 


202  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

never  witnessed  a  more  silent  assembly,  nor  one  where  the 
guests  showed  less  confidence  and  cheerfulness.  Scarcely 
any  one  addressed  his  neighbour,  and  those  who  were  in  the 
secret  of  the  plot  preferred  not  to  speak  rather  than  to  risk 
dangerous  conversation  with  neighbours  who  might  differ 
in  opinion  with  them.  The  toasts  that  were  given  were 
received  without  enthusiasm,  even  the  one  meant  for 
General  Bonaparte,  so  deeply  were  the  minds  of  every 
one  prepossessed  with  their  own  private  thoughts.  After 
having  sat  for  about  half  an  hour,  the  General  got  up, 
walked  slowly  round  the  tables,  addressed  a  few  words  to 
the  guests,  escaped  by  a  side  door,  and  was  back  in  his 
own  lodgings  before  any  one  had  observed  his  absence. 