

This  Syrian  campaign  has  been  judged  with  great  severity 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  191 

by  ofiir  enemies  ;  and  during  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  it 
was  not  allowed  to  speak  impartially  of  its  result.  It  was 
undoubtedly  indispensable  to  enter  into  Syria  to  repel 
Ibrahim  Bey  and  the  troops  which  Djezzar  Pacha  was 
preparing  to  launch  against  Eg3'pt.  The  operations  were 
conducted  with  great  skill.  The  failure  of  St.  John  of  Acre 
must  only  be  attributed  to  some  fatal  circumstances  in- 
dependent of  the  General-in-chief  ;  but  we  must  not  there- 
fore conclude  with  General  Berthier,  that  the  French  army 
really  gained  all  the  advantages  it  expected  to  reap  in  Syria. 
We  lost  in  that  province  three  thousand  men,  several  skilful 
generals  and  hopeful  officers ;  and  we  were  obliged  to  abandon 
the  towns  we  had  taken.  In  quitting  Syria,  we  left  the 
country  just  as  it  was  before  we  entered  it.  Barren  victories 
must  not  be  looked  upon  as  real  advantages  ;  and  if  General 
Bonaparte  had  remained  in  Egypt,  he  would  undoubtedly 
have  beaten  the  Grand  Vizier  when  he  came  the  following 
year  to  drive  us  out  of  Egypt,  and  repulsed  the  English,  who 
had  taken  Aboukir.  But  most  certainly  he  could  not  have 
begun  the  campaign  of  Syria  over  again,  having  no  means 
of  receiving  supplies  from  France  ;  so  that  he  would  with 
difficulty  have  been  able  to  maintain  himself  some  years 
longer  in  Egypt. 

During  the  campaign  of  Syria,  General  Desaix  had  suc- 
ceeded in  keeping  quiet  possession  of  Upper  Egypt,  and 
reducing  Mourad  Bey  to  the  condition  of  a  fugitive.  Lower 
Egypt  had  been  the  scene  of  many  troubles,  occasioned  by  a 
sort  of  fanatic  who  styled  himself  the  Angel  El  Mahade  ; 
but  General  Lanusse  pursued  him  with  so  much  vigour, 
that  he  soon  destroyed  the  troops  he  had  collected. 

The  landing  season  was  fast  approaching.  The  General- 
in-chief  did  not  wish  to  leave  Cairo.  He  therefore  resumed 
the  administration  of  the  country  :  he  busied  himself  with 
filling  up  the  vacant  places  in  the  army  and  completing  the 
corps.  He  had  posted  himself  with  a  part  of  his  cavalry 
near  the  Pyramids,  waiting  for  the  accounts  General  Desaix 


192  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

would  transmit  him  respecting  Mourad  Bey,  whom  that 
general  was  pursuing  in  his  last  entrenchment,  and  who  it 
was  supposed  would  throw  himself  into  the  Oases  that  are 
situated  at  a  short  distance  from  the  Pyramids. 

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  great  Pyramid  had  been 
opened  several  centuries  ago  by  the  Arabs.  General  Bona- 
parte had  resolved  to  visit  the  interior  of  that  structure  with 
Messieurs  Monge,  Berthollet,  and  Duroc.  I  only  mention  this 
circumstance  because  his  name  has  been  written  in  the  great 
gallery  leading  to  the  chamber  called  the  King's  Chamber. 
He  had  scarcely  come  out  of  the  Pyramid,  when  an  express 
sent  off  by  General  Marmont,  who  commanded  at  Alexan- 
dria, brought  him  tidings  of  the  landing  of  a  Turkish  army 
at  Aboukir,  where  they  had  made  themselves  masters  of  the 
great  redoubt  and  of  the  fort,  after  having  massacred  our 
soldiers  that  defended  them.  The  attack  was  quite  un- 
expected, and  the  Turkish  army  was  so  numerous  that 
General  Marmont  had  not  thought  fit  to  march  against 
them  at  the  head  of  his  garrison,  for  fear  he  might  not 
be  able  to  prevent  their  disembarking,  and  might,  moreover, 
endanger  the  city  of  Alexandria,  the  fortifications  of  which 
were  not  yet  completed,  and  which  besides  contained  all  the 
resources  we  possessed  in  artillery  and  ammunition. 