

When,  in  our  return  from  St.  John  of  Acre,  we  stopped 
at  Jaffa,  where  the  plague  had  ceased  its  ravages,  I  received 
from  the  General-in-chief  an  order  to  go  through  the 
numerous  gardens  that  surround  the  town,  and  where  a  sort 
of  lazaretto  had  been  established  for  the  sick,  that  we  might 
take  along  with  us  all  that  were  not  too  ill  to  follow  the 
army.  I  found  five  or  six  poor  soldiers  lying  beneath  the 
trees  :  when  they  saw  me,  they  cried  out,  "  Pray,  Com- 
mander, take  us  with  you  !  We  are  still  able  to  bear  the 
march."  I  replied,  "Try  to  get  up;  endeavour  to  walk." 
But  all  the  symptoms  of  the  plague  were  already  evident. 
Not  one  of  them  could  rise,  and  I  was  obliged  to  leave  them, 
for  no  soldier  would  have  lent  them  his  aid.  I  went  and 
made  my  report  to  General  Bonaparte,  who  was  walking  on 
the  seashore.  He  listened  to  me  without  stopping,  and  we 
came  up  to  a  young  horseman,  who  asked  also  to  be  taken 
with  us,  and  who  succeeded  in  rising  from  the  ground.  The 
General,  touched  with  compassion,  ordered  one  of  his  guides 
'  See  the  Memoirs  of  Bourrienne. — Note  0/ the  Translator. 


I90  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

to  give  his  horse  to  the  poor  sick  man.  Neither  the  authority 
of  the  General,  nor  the  fear  of  punishment,  was  sufficient 
to  enforce  obedience.  The  Colonel  of  the  Guides  was 
obliged  to  go  up  to  him,  and  promise  him  in  a  whisper  a 
great  deal  of  money,  which  motive  was  the  only  one  by 
which  he  was  brought  to  a  decision  ;  and  even  then  the 
Colonel  was  forced  to  use  the  greatest  vigilance  lest  the 
sick  man  should  be  thrown  from  his  horse.  I  believe  he 
remained  at  El  Arisch,  and  I  do  not  know  what  became  of 
him.  As  for  the  poor  soldiers  I  mentioned,  it  is  to  be  hoped 
they  died  in  the  course  of  the  night,  or  at  least  the  following 
day,  so  as  to  have  escaped  from  the  cruel  death  the  Arabs 
prepared  for  all  those  who  fell  into  their  hands.  I  feel  no 
remorse  for  my  conduct  on  that  occasion.  All  I  had  seen 
of  the  plague  at  Alexandria  had  convinced  me  that  it  is  a 
fatal  humanity  that  induces  people  to  come  in  contact  with 
the  infected,  when  they  are  once  arrived  at  the  last  stage  of 
the  disease.  Nevertheless,  I  cannot  think  of  those  unfortu- 
nate men  without  pain  ;  and  if  it  had  been  possible  to  save 
them,  I  would  have  done  it. 

The  army  carried  with  it  eighteen  hundred  wounded  men. 
We  had  succeeded  in  constructing  about  twenty  litters  for 
the  general  officers,  such  as  Lannes  and  Veaux,  Duroc  and 
Croisier  :  the  two  latter  were  aides-de-camp  of  the  General- 
in-chief.  Croisier  died  in  the  Desert.  The  infected  that 
could  not  bear  a  long  journey  were  deposited  at  El  Arisch, 
but  placed  without  the  fort,  under  the  protection  of  a  detach- 
ment of  infantry  that  was  to  defend  them  against  the  attacks 
of  the  Arabs.  Several  of  them  recovered,  and  in  particular 
I  may  name  young  Captain  Digeon,  who  commanded  the 
breach  battery  during  the  whole  siege  :  he  was  a  most 
intrepid  officer,  and  fortune  spared  him.  He  is  now  a 
lieutenant-general.  We  lost  very  few  of  our  wounded 
while  crossing  the  Desert,  and  the  army  made  with  great 
eclat  its  entrance  into  the  capital  of  Egypt. 