

After  the  victory  was  gained,  the  fort  of  Aboukir,  still 

14 


194  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

remained  to  be  taken.  General  Lannes,  who  was  not  yet 
recovered  from  the  wounds  he  had  received  at  St.  John  of 
Acre,  got  the  command  of  the  troops  that  were  to  invest  the 
place.  I  was  with  him.  The  day  after  the  departure  of  the 
General-in-chief,  I  accompanied  General  Lannes  on  a  visit 
to  the  posts,  when  a  furious  sortie  of  Turkish  troops  sur- 
prised our  advanced  posts,  and  the  unfortunate  General 
received  a  bullet  in  his  leg.  It  was  the  eighth  wound  he 
got  from  fire-arms. 

Fortunately  the  enemy  had  no  water  in  the  fort  ot 
Aboukir,  so  that  he  surrendered  four  days  after  the  battle. 

During  the  short  stay  of  the  General-in-chief  at  Aboukir, 
he  had  some  communications  with  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  by  the 
medium  of  his  secretary.  We  had  not  received  for  a  long 
time  any  news  from  Europe,  and  the  English  Commodore 
took  a  malicious  pleasure  in  acquainting  us,  by  the  news- 
papers, of  the  situation  of  the  Republic.  We  learned  that 
the  whole  south  of  Italy  was  evacuated,  that  war  was  waging 
on  the  frontiers  of  Piedmont,  and  that  France  was  in  the 
most  desperate  condition.  General  Bonaparte  took  great 
care  not  to  let  the  army  know  these  dismal  accounts  ;  but, 
fi-om  that  moment,  he  resolved  to  return  to  Europe,  con- 
vinced that  he  alone  was  capable  of  repairing  the  evils  the 
bad  government  of  the  Directory  had  accumulated  on  the 
country. 

After  the  surrender  of  the  fort  of  Aboukir,  the  defence  of 
which  had  only  lasted  four  days.  General  Bonaparte  went 
back  to  Cairo  ;  but  not  before  he  had  given  secret  orders 
to  General  Gantheaume,  who  commanded  the  marines  at 
Alexandria,  to  arm  and  provision  the  two  frigates  Miiiron 
and  Carrere.  He  then  spread  the  report  that  he  was  going 
to  travel  to  Upper  Egypt,  but  that  he  would  perhaps  first 
take  a  trip  in  the  Delta.  The  news  of  his  intended  journey 
put  everybody  on  the  alert,  in  the  expectation  of  receiving 
his  praises.  He  spent  a  fortnight  in  regulating  once  more 
the  administration  of  Egypt,  provisioning  its  strong  places, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  195 

and  writing  to  the  Grand  Vizier  ;  and  when  all  his  measures 
were  duly  taken,  he  went  down  the  Nile  again,  after  having 
appointed  General  Kleber  to  meet  him  near  Alexandria, 
that  he  might  deliver  over  the  command  into  his  hands  ; 
but  that  general  not  having  arrived  in  time,  his  despatches 
were  sent  to  him  ;  and,  at  ten  o'clock  at  night,  the  General- 
in-chief,  accompanied  by  his  staff,  and  leaving  his  horses  on 
the  shore,  embarked  on  board  of  the  Miuron.  He  took  with 
him  Generals  Berthier  and  Gantheaume,  Messieurs  Monge 
and  Berthollet,  his  aides-de-camp,  Eugene  Beauharnais, 
Duroc,  Merlin,  and  his  private  secretary.  In  the  frigate 
Carrere  went  Generals  Lannes  and  Murat,  both  wounded, 
Marmont,  Messieurs  Denon,  Castas,  and  Parseval-Grand- 
maison.  The  scientific  commission  had  been  for  some 
months  in  Upper  Egypt. 