


CHAPTER  XXI. 

The  General-in -chief  formed  the  resolution  of  returning  to 
Egypt.  The  favourable  season  for  landing  approached,  and 
he  had  received  advice  that  the  English,  united  with  the 
Turks,  were  to  attempt  one  in  Lower  Egypt.  Measures 
were  immediately  taken  for  sending  away  the  sick,  and 
provisioning  El  Arisch  and  Katisch.  All  the  posts  were 
drawn  back,  and  in  the  night  of  our  departure  the  brigade 
that  was  on  service  in  the  trenches  gradually  evacuated  the 
artillery,  and  only  set  off  themselves  the  next  day,  protecting 
all  they  had  before  them,  and  protected  in  their  turn  by 
the  cavalry.  The  invalids,  who  were  eighteen  hundred  in 
number,  and  who  had  all  been  wounded  by  fire-arms,  were 
placed  in  the  centre  of  the  divisions  to  which  they  belonged  ; 
and,  as  there  were  no  means  of  transport,  all  the  saddle 
horses,  and  even  all  the  asses,  which  the  soldiers  had  in  use 
when  they  came  to  Syria,  to  carry  water  and  provisions, 
served,  on  our  return,  to  bear  the  wounded.  But  when  they 
arrived  at  Jaffa,  the  soldiers,  seeing  before  them  the  terrible 
Desert,  and  aware  of  what  they  must  suffer  in  crossing  it 
without  water,  began  first  to  complain,  and  then  broke  out 
into  mutiny.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  General  Bonaparte 
gave  up  all  his  horses,  without  even  keeping  one  for  his 
private  use.  The  master  of  his  stables  having  had  the 
imprudence  to  supplicate  in  favour  of  the  beloved  mare  of 
the  General,  he  put  himself  in  such  a  passion  that  for  the 
first  time  in  my  life  I  saw  him  strike  a  man.  In  his  rage  he 
went  up  to  him,  and  whipped  him  across  the  body. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  189 

I  must  here  say  a  few  words  on  an  odious  imputation  made 
long  since  against  General  Bonaparte — I  mean  the  pretended 
poisoning  of  the  soldiers  sick  of  the  plague. 

It  is  so  contrary  to  truth  that  General  Bonaparte  proposed 
to  poison  the  unfortunate  men,  that  M.  Larry,  first  surgeon 
to  the  army,  never  ceased  to  pronounce  it  an  atrocious 
calumny  ;  and  he  several  times,  in  the  last  fifteen  years, 
pressed  M.  Desgenettes  to  declare  publicly  with  him  the  fact 
through  the  medium  of  the  press.  The  latter,  having  been 
ill-used  by  the  King's  government,  recoiled  probably  at  the 
thought  of  a  declaration  which  might  make  his  situation 
still  more  painful.  It  is,  besides,  impossible  to  name  any 
person  to  whom  the  proposal  should  have  been  made. 
Finally,  the  calumny  was  spread  by  the  English  while  they 
were  in  Egypt,  and  propagated  by  a  writing  of  Sir  Robert 
Wilson,  who  was  then  extremely  young,  and  who  in  maturer 
age  has  openly  declared  that  he  had  been  mistaken.' 