


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  199 

standing  on  the  whole  night,  the  two  frigates  reached  the 
roads  of  Frejus.  The  Sanitary  establishment  was  situated 
at  about  a  quarter  of  a  league  from  the  town.  An  officer 
of  the  frigate  went  towards  the  shore  in  a  boat.  We  dis- 
tinguished him  perfectly  well.  Some  men  came  to  meet 
him  ;  but  after  a  few  minutes  we  perceived  a  great  confusion : 
some  people  ran  towards  the  town,  and  soon  after  the  strand 
was  covered  with  an  immense  multitude  of  persons.  The 
boats  were  filled,  and,  as  at  Ajaccio,  a  number  of  men  rushed 
on  board  of  the  ship  through  the  portholes.  The  cries  of 
"  Long  live  Bonaparte  !  "  resounded  all  over  the  country. 
A  white  horse  was  brought  for  him,  and  he  went  to  the 
house  of  a  brother  of  the  Abbe  Sieyes,  who  lived  at  Frejus. 
The  sentiments  that  animated  the  whole  population  were 
expressed  in  a  manner  that  did  not  leave  even  the  shadow  of 
a  doubt.  "  You  alone  can  save  France,"  was  the  universal 
cry.  "  She'll  perish  but  for  you  :  it  is  Heaven  that  sent  you  ; 
seize  the  reins  of  government  !  "  His  journey  to  Lyons 
was  a  triumphal  march.  We  arrived  in  that  city  at  seven 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  His  having  landed  was  already 
known,  and  his  arrival  wished  for  with  an  ardour  impossible 
to  describe.  Lyons  was  still  famous  for  its  antipathy  to  the 
Republican  government,  and  we  imagined  that  the  General 
would  not  stop  ;  but  to  our  great  astonishment  he  declared 
that  he  intended  to  spend  the  remainder  of  the  day  there. 
He  received  all  the  authorities  and  most  distinguished 
citizens  ;  without  explaining  himself,  however,  on  the  direct 
insinuations  that  were  made  to  him  to  place  himself  at 
the  head  of  the  government,  but  receiving  with  a  cold 
severity  the  Republicans  that  had  organised  a  constitutional 
club,  and  who  came  to  congratulate  him.  He  had  been 
invited  to  go  to  the  theatre  of  the  Cclestins,  where  a  piece 
and  a  song  had  been  prepared  for  the  occasion.  He  chose 
one  of  the  boxes  on  a  level  with  the  pit ;  and  Duroc  having, 
by  his  order,  placed  himself  in  the  front  of  the  box,  the  call 
for  Bonaparte  grew  so  violent  and  so  unanimous,  that  the 


200  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

General-in-chief  was  obliged  to  change  places  with  him 
during  the  whole  representation. 

Towards  midnight  he  set  off,  and  passed  through  theBour- 
bonnais,  wishing  to  avoid  Macon,  where  the  Republican  club 
had  exasperated  the  aristocratic  classes.  From  the  very  first 
day  of  his  arrival  at  Paris,  the  General-in-chief  applied  him- 
self to  avoid  the  eyes  of  the  multitude,  who  were  so  desirous 
of  seeing  him  and  expressing  their  enthusiasm.  His  inter- 
view with  the  Directory  was  cold  and  unceremonious.  The 
members  that  composed  it  at  that  time  were  Barras,  General 
Moulin,  and  Gohier,  who  shared  the  same  sentiments  ; 
Sieyes  and  Roger  Ducos  were  in  the  opposition.  It  was 
said  at  that  time  that  the  two  latter,  despairing  of  being 
able  to  maintain  the  Republican  system,  and  wishing  to 
prevent  at  any  rate  the  re-establishment  of  the  Bourbons 
in  France,  had  cast  their  eyes  on  a  prince  of  the  House  of 
Spain,  whose  power  would  have  been  circumscribed  in  such 
narrow  limits  that  Liberty  and  all  the  principles  of  the 
Revolution  would  have  been  in  safety.  Whatever  may  be 
the  truth  of  that  anecdote,  it  is,  however,  certain  that  these 
two  Directors,  when  they  explained  to  General  Bonaparte 
the  disposition  of  the  people's  minds,  and  the  impossibility 
of  continuing  any  longer  under  the  directorial  form  of 
government,  entreated  him  to  put  himself  at  the  head  of 
an  insurrection  that  might  overthrow  it.  A  feeling  of 
affection  that  the  General  had  preserved  for  Barras  per- 
suaded him  to  make  some  indirect  overtures  to  that  Director 
to  draw  him  into  his  party.  Barras  refused,  either  because 
he  had  entered  into  secret  engagements  with  the  House  or 
Bourbon,  or  rather  by  a  want  of  enlightened  views,  and  by 
the  Republican  sentiments  he  could  not  decide  to  give  up. 