

Our  passage  presented  many  difficulties.  The  secretary  of 
Sir  Sidney  Smith,  in  a  conversation  with  me,  had  allowed 
the  observation  to  escape  that  there  was  a  great  advantage 
in  blockading  out  of  sight.  We  were  therefore  to  expect 
that  we  should  find  the  English  Commodore  in  our  way. 
In  that  case  the  frigate  Carrere  had  received  orders  to 
engage,  so  as  to  give  the  Miiiron  time  to  escape.  But  both 
the  frigates  were  Venetian-built  ships,  and  very  bad  sailers  ; 
it  became  therefore  necessary  to  make  use  of  some  stratagem 
to  avoid  being  seen.  Admiral  Gantheaume  thought  the  best 
way  would  be  to  run,  for  thirty  days,  along  the  flat  shores  of 
Africa,  where  no  ships  reconnoitre,  and  to  make  short  tacks 
of  half  a  league,  without  ever  standing  far  out  to  sea.  The 
time  appeared  very  long  to  us  all  ;  for  it  would  have  been 
imprudent  to  keep  a  light  at  night,  so  that  we  were  obliged 
to  go  to  bed  with  the  sun.  Our  days  were  spent  in  reading, 
or  discussing  various  topics  ;  the  inexhaustible  information 
of  our  two  learned  travelling  companions  filled  up  our  time 
in  a  very  agreeable  manner.  Plutarch  frequently  came  to 
our  assistance  ;  and  sometimes,  during  our  long  evenings, 
the  General-in-chief  would  tell  us  ghost  stories,  in  which  he 


196  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

was  very  clever.  The  situation  of  France,  and  the  future 
state  of  the  country,  were  often  the  subjects  of  his  reflections. 
He  never  mentioned  the  government  of  the  Directory  but 
with  a  degree  of  severity  that  savoured  of  contempt.  In  the 
meanwhile  his  conversation  never  betrayed  what  he  intended 
to  do  ;  though  some  words  that  escaped  him,  some  musings, 
and  some  indirect  insinuations,  gave  a  wide  scope  to  our 
surmises.  His  administration  in  Egypt  had  been  pure,  his 
operations  full  of  genius  ;  but  was  that  enough  to  clear  him 
in  the  eyes  of  a  government  that  feared  him,  and  was  far 
from  wishing  well  to  him  ?  He  would  be  obliged  to  make 
war  ;  but  could  he  submit  to  the  plans  of  a  government 
deprived  of  military  knowledge,  that  might  place  him  in  an 
awkward  situation,  and  give  his  rivals  means  of  success  which 
they  would  refuse  to  allow  him  ?  These  different  ideas  made 
him  very  thoughtful. 

At  last  the  east  wind  began  to  blow  in  a  constant  manner. 
We  passed  Cape  Bone  during  the  night,  and  we  arrived 
speedily  at  Ajaccio.  This  little  town  is  the  birthplace  of  the 
General-in-chief :  he  had  left  it  eight  years  before,  when  he 
was  only  a  captain  of  artillery.  At  the  sight  of  this  place 
his  heart  was  deeply  affected.  Coming  from  Egypt,  where 
the  plague  still  prevailed,  it  was  impossible  for  us  to  enter 
the  port.  The  inhabitants,  surprised  to  see  the  Admiral's 
flag  hoisted  on  the  mainmast,  rushed  towards  the  shore  ;  but 
when  they  learned  that  their  illustrious  countryman  was  on 
board  his  old  friends  and  relations  threw  themselves  into  a 
number  of  boats,  came  on  board  the  frigate,  and  broke 
through  the  quarantine.  There  was,  however,  no  great 
danger,  for  after  forty-four  days'  navigation  we  had  not  one 
sick  person  on  board.  Among  the  crowd  that  was  bustling 
round  the  state  cabin  there  was  an  old  woman  dressed  in 
black,  who  continually  held  up  her  hands  to  the  General, 
saying,  "  Caro  figlio  !  "  without  being  able  to  attract  his 
attention.  At  last  he  perceived  her,  and  cried  out  '■'•  Madre  !  " 
It  was  his  nurse,  who  is  still  living  at  the  moment  I  write  this. 