

It  was  to  be  expected  that  after  the  enemy  had  taken  the 
fort  he  would  spread  about  the  country  and  attack  either 
Alexandria  or  Rosetta.  Instead  of  that,  he  fortified  himself 
in  the  peninsula  of  Aboukir,  evidently  waiting  for  Mourad 
Bey,  with  whose  desperate  condition  he  was  not  yet 
acquainted. 

General  Bonaparte  resolved,  therefore,  to  march  rapidly 
against  him.  The  distance  from  the  Pyramid  to  Aboukir  is 
more  than  eighty  leagues.  On  the  fourth  day  the  army 
arrived  at  Alexandria  ;  on  the  7th  of  Thermidor  it  was 
assembled  within  a  league  of  Aboukir,  under  the  orders  of 
the  Division-Generals  Lannes  and  Lanusse,  and  Murat  for 
the  cavalry.    The  enemy  was  retrenched  in  front  of  Aboukir, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  193 

on  the  sandy  hillocks  of  which  he  had  made  redoubts,  and 
under  the  protection  of  the  English  gunboats.  His  force 
consisted  of  about  seventeen  thousand  men,  with  twelve 
pieces  of  cannon.  The  General  quickly  made  his  disposi- 
tions, and  ordered  General  Dastaneg  to  attack  the  enemy's 
left,  which  he  put  to  flight  after  a  long  resistance.  The 
Turks  fled  towards  the  village  of  Aboukir  ;  but  a  part  of  the 
cavalry,  that  was  in  the  centre,  pursued  them,  sabred  and 
drove  them  into  the  sea.  The  right  of  the  enemy  was 
attacked  with  equal  vigour.  The  division  of  Lannes  made 
themselves  masters  of  the  redoubt,  which  being  turned  by  a 
squadron  of  cavalry,  the  Turks  had  no  other  resource  left 
but  to  throw  themselves  into  the  sea.  It  was  a  horrible 
sight  to  contemplate  nearly  ten  thousand  men  of  whom 
nothing  was  to  be  seen  but  their  heads  covered  with 
turbans,  and  who  were  seeking  in  vain  to  reach  the 
English  fleet  anchored  at  more  than  half  a  league  from 
the  shore.  Two  thousand  men  had  sought  a  refuge  on 
the  strand,  at  the  foot  of  a  rock  that  covered  them.  It 
was  impossible  to  make  them  comprehend  that  they  might . 
surrender  by  laying  down  their  arms.  We  were  obliged  to 
kill  them  all  to  a  man,  but  they  sold  dearly  their  lives. 
General  Murat  was  wounded  by  a  bullet  in  his  head  ; 
Guibert,  aide-de-camp  to  the  General-in-chief,  was  killed, 
and  the  corps  of  engineers,  that  had  already  suffered  so 
severely,  lost  Colonel  Cretin,  who  had  succeeded  to  the  post 
of  General  Caffarelli.  Wounded  by  two  bullets,  the  Colonel 
was  lying  before  the  door  of  a  house  in  the  village  occupied 
by  the  Turks.  Eight  persons  had  already  been  killed  or 
wounded  in  seeking  to  get  him  away.  Bertrand,  who  was 
at  that  time  a  major  of  engineers,  devoted  himself  to  save 
his  commander  :  he  rushed  into  the  house,  followed  by 
twenty  sappers,  and  succeeded  in  killing  every  one  of  the 
Turks  ;  but  he  was  severely  wounded,  and  Colonel  Cretin 
did  not  survive  the  injuries  he  had  suffered. 