

The  most  celebrated  general  officers  of  the  army  were 
at  the  time  nearly  all  at  Paris.  Moreau,  Macdonald, 
Bournonville,  generals-in-chief,  had  entered  into  the  plot. 
Augereau,  member  of  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  had 
not  been  made  acquainted  with  it,  nor  Bernadotte.  The 
opinions  of  the  latter  were  rather  violent ;  and  a  feeling 
of  jealousy,  the  cause  of  which  was  not  extremely  honourable 
to  them,  had  rendered  them  both  enemies  of  General  Bona- 
parte. His  having  formerly  commanded  in  Paris  insured 
him  the  friendship  of  all  the  officers  of  the  staff  ;  whilst  the 
colonels  of  the  regiments  that  held  garrison  in  the  metropolis 
were  all  equally  devoted  to  his  person. 

Notwithstanding  the  precautions  that  had  been  taken 
to  keep  the  whole  affair  a  secret,  it  had,  however,  spread 
among  the  higher  classes,  and  almost  all  the  military 
residing  in  Paris.  The  three  members  of  the  Directory 
learned  it  also  ;  and  then  for  the  first  time  the  force  of 
public  opinion  made  them  start  back  before  the  measures 
they  might  so  easily  have  taken  to  annihilate  the  conspiracy. 
It  would  undoubtedly  have  been  sufficient  to  have  appre- 
hended the  General  during  the  night  ;  but  then  what  would 
they  have  done  with  him  ?  How  would  they  have  made 
out  any  charge  against  him  ?     Where  would   they   have 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  203 

found  judges  ?  The  General-in-chief  was  so  sensible  of  his 
real  situation,  that  he  took  no  precaution  whatever  for  his 
personal  security.  He  was  surrounded  by  nobody  but  his 
aides-de-camp  :  he  seldom  went  out,  and  worked  principally 
with  Roedeur,  in  whom  he  placed  his  chief  confidence. 

On  the  1 6th  of  Brumaire  there  was  so  little  appearance 
of  the  plot  bursting  the  following  day,  that  Eugene  and  I 
passed  the  evening  at  a  ball,  where  he  remained  a  part  of  the 
night,  and  I  left  at  midnight  because  that  was  the  hour 
when  my  duty  began.  The  next  morning  at  six  o'clock  the 
sixty  officers  on  duty  in  the  quarter  were  assembled  in  the 
courtyard  of  the  General's  house  in  the  Rue  de  la  Victoire. 
The  General  explained  to  them  in  a  forcible  manner  the 
desperate  situation  of  the  Republic,  and  asked  of  them 
a  testimony  of  devotion  to  his  person,  with  an  oath  of 
allegiance  to  the  two  Chambers.  He  then  mounted  his 
horse  and  flew  to  the  Carrousel,  where  he  found  Sebastiani 
at  the  head  of  his  regiment,  the  fifth  dragoons.  On  entering 
the  Tuileries,  he  also  found  the  guards  of  the  Directory, 
whom  their  colonel  had  brought  to  remain  at  the  disposal 
of  the  Council  of  the  Elders.  The  Minister  of  the  War 
Department  had,  nevertheless,  two  days  beforehand  strictly 
prohibited  the  chiefs  of  the  different  corps  from  making  the 
slightest  movement  without  his  orders,  under  pain  of  death. 
But  besides  the  little  esteem  and  confidence  which  that 
minister  (Dubois  de  Crance)  inspired,  the  troops  were 
delighted  on  finding  themselves  placed  under  the  command 
of  General  Bonaparte.  Their  enthusiasm  was  so  great  that 
they  would  not  have  hesitated  a  moment  to  fire  on  the 
Directory  if  they  had  received  an  order  to  that  effect. 