

I  retired  to  the  adjoining  apartment,  where  I  found  about 
thirty  officers  of  the  staff,  and  General  Berthier  in  the  midst 
of  them.  All  their  faces  were  lengthened  ;  and  they  looked 
gloomy.  When  I  told  General  Berthier  what  was  going 
forward  at  the  Five  Hundred,  he  grew  pale  and  heaved 
a  sigh.  But  all  of  a  sudden  the  folding-door  opened,  and 
General  Bonaparte  appeared,  beating  the  floor  with  his  whip 
and  exclaiming:  "This  must  have  an  end!"  They  all 
rushed  out,  and  we  soon  found  ourselves  at  the  entrance  of 
the  courtyard,  where  a  regiment  of  infantry,  just  arrived 
from  Paris,  were  ranged  in  line  of  battle.  He  assembled  the 
officers,  harangued  them  for  a  few  minutes  ;  and  then,  turn- 
ing his  horse's  head,  he  galloped  back  to  the  foot  of  the 
great  staircase,  which  he  rapidly  ascended,  and  presented 
himself  at  the  bar  of  the  Council  of  the  Elders.  The  speech 
he  made  there  was  faithfully  reported  in  the  papers  of  the 
time  ;  but  his  agitation  of  mind  was  carried  to  such  a  pitch, 
that  he  hesitated,  and  his  words  were  uttered  with  the 
utmost  disorder.  When  he  arrived  at  that  part  of  his 
speech  where  he  mentioned  that  a  great  plot  had  been 
formed  against  Liberty,  one  of  the  members  of  the  Council 
said  coolly  to  him  :  "  General,  you  must  reveal  that  plot." 
Instead  of  answering  him,  the  General  continued  still  in 
a  little  confusion  ;  but  at  last  recovering  his  presence 
of  mind,  he  went  on  with  a  firmer  voice,  and  finished  his 
speech.  One  part  of  the  Council  had  shared  his  emotion  ; 
the  other,  on  the  contrary,  enjoyed  his  confusion  ;  and  as 
the  Council  was  to  deliberate  on  what  he  had  said,  he  with- 
drew. But,  instead  of  returning  to  the  place  he  had  come 
from,  he  went  to  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred.  In  the 
vestibule  he  found  the  grenadiers,  who  took  up  arms.  The 
noise  they  made  alarmed  the  Assembly  ;  and  when  Bona- 
parte presented  himself,  a  great  number  of  members  rushed 


2o6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

forward  to  meet  him  with  angry  cries,  among  which  one 
might  have  distinguished  the  word  dictator.  He  was  so 
pressed  between  the  deputies,  his  staff,  and  the  grenadiers, 
who  had  rushed  to  the  door  of  the  apartment,  that  I 
thought  for  a  moment  he  would  be  smothered.  He  could 
neither  advance  nor  go  back.  At  last  those  who  had 
accompanied  him  felt  that  it  was  necessary  to  open  a 
passage  for  him,  and  they  succeeded,  though  not  without 
violent  efforts.  He  then  went  down  again  to  the  court- 
yard, mounted  his  horse,  and  remaining  at  the  foot  of  the 
staircase,  he  sent  an  order  for  the  President  to  come  to  him, 
which  the  latter  did  as  soon  as  he  could  escape.  In  the 
meanwhile  the  confusion  in  the  Assembly  was  carried  to  the 
highest  pitch  :  several  members  rushing  towards  the  win- 
dows which  opened  into  the  courtyard,  pointed  to  him  and 
cried  out :  "  Down  with  the  Dictator  ! — let  him  be  out- 
lawed !  "  At  that  moment,  M.  de  Talleyrand,  Arnaud  the 
poet,  and  some  other  persons  with  whom  I  was  talking, 
suddenly  turned  as  pale  as  death  :  they  all  fled  except  those 
I  have  named.  The  terrible  word  of  outlaw  {liors  la  hi) 
still  possessed  all  its  magic  force  ;  and  if  a  general  of  some 
reputation  had  put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  troops  of  the 
interior,  it  would  be  difficult  to  guess  what  might  have 
happened.  But  the  General  took  a  resolution,  and  gave 
Murat  orders  to  clear  the  hall.  Murat  placed  Colonel 
Dujardin  at  the  head  of  a  detachment  of  grenadiers,  who 
crossed  the  hall  at  a  quick  pace.  When  the  colonel  was  at 
the  end  of  the  hall,  he  turned  round  towards  the  members 
who  filled  the  benches  ;  but  these,  getting  out  by  the 
windows,  disappeared,  and  laid  down  their  costume,  which 
consisted  of  a  sort  of  Roman  toga  with  a  square  cap. 