


212  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

them  the  softest  caresses  with  the  most  touching  tenderness, 
and  without  the  least  affectation,  she  received  the  French 
with  a  grace  and  a  feeling  of  preference  dictated  by  policy  ; 
and  it  was  easy  to  perceive  that  her  attentions  were  owing 
to  the  title  of  Frenchman  more  than  to  any  particular  merit 
in  the  person  to  whom  she  addressed  them. 

She  had  then  with  her  the  Princess  of  Mecklenburg,  a 
sister  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  whose  beauty  was  dazzling, 
but  whose  noble  features  already  bore  traces  of  the  com- 
plaint of  which  she  died  a  short  time  after  :  the  whole 
expression  of  her  countenance  presented  something  so  pro- 
foundly melancholy  that  whenever  she  spoke  she  seemed 
to  bid  you  a  last  adieu. 

The  most  singular  man  of  the  Court  of  Berlin  was  Prince 
Henry  of  Prussia.  Posterity,  which  has  now  begun  for  him, 
fully  justifies  all  the  praises  of  fame,  and  I  owe  respect  to  its 
sentence  ;  still  I  must  say  that  that  sentence  has  not  been 
ratified  by  the  city  of  Berlin.  He  was  become  a  general 
object  of  raillery  and  disregard.  His  manner  of  living,  the 
eccentricity  of  his  tastes,  the  singularity  of  his  dress,  cer- 
tainly contributed  a  great  deal  to  the  feeling  of  the  public 
towards  him  ;  but  it  was  chiefly  owing  to  his  hatred  for 
Frederick  the  Great,  to  which  he  frequently  gave  vent  in 
the  most  bitter  sarcasms.  Louis  Bonaparte,  having  passed 
through  Berlin,  went  for  a  few  days  to  Rheinsberg,  the 
usual  residence  of  the  Prince.  On  his  return  to  town  he 
repeated  to  me  with  indignation  the  following  words  the 
Prince  had  uttered  at  table  :  "  You  have  a  great  idea  in 
France  of  my  brother  Frederick  ;  but  how  greatly  mistaken 
you  Frenchmen  are  !  You  do  not  know  the  secret  of  his 
victories.  He  ought  to  have  written  as  long  as  he  lived — 
it  was  for  that  alone  nature  destined  him."  A  thousand 
traits  of  this  kind  have  been  related  to  me  at  Berlin  by 
persons  of  rank.  The  most  strange  eccentricities  may  be 
united  with  the  greatest  merit ;  but  so  much  hatred,  such  a 
constant  wish  to  lower  in  public  estimation  so  great  a  man, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  213 

and  particularly  to  attack  him  in  his  most  justly  acquired 
glory,  is  conduct  unworthy  of  a  patriot,  a  prince,  and  a  man 
of  good  sense. 

The  truce  with  Austria  was  signed  on  the  4th  of  Nivose, 
and,  according  to  the  promise  of  the  First  Consul,  I  was 
soon  after  recalled.  When  I  arrived  in  Paris,  I  found  the 
public  still  in  the  first  excitement  occasioned  by  the  shock- 
ing event  of  the  Infernal  Machine.  The  execrable  attempt 
showed  how  much  hatred  the  House  of  Bourbon  had  con- 
ceived against  Bonaparte.  It  must  be  entirely  attributed  to 
the  Princes  ;  for  in  18 14  the  emigrants,  then  masters  of  the 
field,  openly  boasted  of  it,  and  made  no  secret  of  the  means 
they  had  employed.  Limoelan,  Carton,  and  St.  Rejant 
were  all  three  Vendeans,  who  had  come  from  England 
expressly  for  this  noble  enterprise.  Limoelan  escaped,  and 
nothing  further  has  been  heard  of  him  ;  St.  Rejant  also 
escaped  at  first,  but  was  retaken  afterwards  with  Georges. 
I  shall  here  mention  in  what  manner  he  was  discovered. 