

Government,  however,  met  with  the  approbation  of  all 
France.      The   new   system   of   administration   was   better 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  V ALETTE.  2 1 5 

appropriated  to  the  spirit  of  the  nation.  The  magistrates 
had  been  chosen  from  among  the  enlightened  classes  of 
society.  All  the  public  officers  felt  a  wish  to  please,  and 
the  necessity  of  being  friends.  Politeness,  and  the  good 
manners  customary  in  civilised  states,  had  taken  place  of 
the  vulgar  forms  of  the  Republic.  Order  reappeared  on 
all  sides.  The  First  Consul  had  promised  peace  :  he  gave 
it  with  every  appearance  of  durability. 

France  was  proud  of  her  First  Magistrate,  and  her  glory 
was  carried  to  the  highest  pitch.  Northern  Italy  had  been 
added  to  the  several  conquests  of  the  Revolution — a  brilliant 
acquisition  that  delighted  the  nation,  which  always  was 
destined  to  pay  dearly  for  it.  Peace  with  England  gave  the 
finishing  stroke  to  the  national  glory.  Imagination  itself 
could  set  no  bounds  to  the  expected  prosperity  of  France  ; 
and  all  those  golden  dreams  seemed  on  the  point  of  being 
realised.  The  expedition  to  St.  Domingo,  entrusted  in  too 
feeble  hands,  and  which  ought  perhaps  not  to  have  been, 
undertaken  at  all,  was  a  disappointment  ;  and  the  renewal 
of  the  war  with  England  a  misfortune.  But  France  was 
full  of  energy,  and  shared  the  boldness  and  good  fortune  of 
her  chief.  She  had  no  other  fear  but  that  of  losing  him  ; 
and  what  fate  could  not  effect  amidst  the  perils  of  war,  the 
Princes  of  the  House  of  Bourbon  attempted  once  more,  and 
nearly  succeeded.  Experienced  casuists  may  perhaps  find 
the  means  of  conciliating  the  maxims  of  the  Gospel,  and  the 
inspirations  of  piety,  with  a  resolution  to  commit  the  greatest 
of  all  crimes,  murder.  Certain  at  least  it  is,  that  the  Princes 
commanded  that  murder,  entered  into  all  the  details  of  its 
execution,  and  marked  out  the  victim  ;  whilst  one  of  them 
sent  over  with  that  purpose  his  most  faithful  servants  and 
most  devoted  friends. 

It  was  in  1804  that  this  event  took  place.  For  some  time 
previously,  the  First  Consul,  who  had  the  English  news- 
papers carefully  translated  for  his  perusal,  was  surprised 
not  to  find  in  them  the  usual  abuse  or  threats  against  his 


2i6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

person.  Their  silence  appeared  suspicious  :  and  one  night, 
being  unable  to  sleep,  he  arose,  and  looking  over  the  reports 
of  the  police  he  had  received  several  months  before,  he  found 
that  a  person  called  Ouerelle  had  been  arrested  on  the 
coast  of  Normandy,  with  two  other  individuals  ;  that  they 
had  been  kept  in  prison  since  that  time,  as  they  were 
strongly  suspected  of  being  Chouans,  and  of  having  come 
over  from  England  with  some  black  design.  He  immediately 
sent  an  order  to  put  these  young  men  on  their  trial.  They 
were  probably  found  guilty,  for  they  were  sentenced  to  die. 
The  commander  of  the  division  delivered  the  sentence  to  the 
chief  of  the  staff  for  execution.  That  gentleman  was  at  a 
ball  :  he  conned  the  letter  on  his  return  home,  and  went  to 
bed.  If  the  order  had  been  given  immediately,  and  executed 
next  morning  at  seven  o'clock,  it  is  probable  that  the  secret 
of  those  unfortunate  men  would  have  been  for  ever  buried 
in  their  graves  :  but  when  daylight  appeared  the  horror  of 
approaching  death  dismayed  the  mind  of  Querelle.  He  fell 
into  such  violent  convulsions,  that  he  was  supposed  to  have 
Deen  poisoned.  The  doctor  who  was  called  to  his  assistance 
tried  to  comfort  him  ;  and  some  broken  sentences  which 
escaped  him  led  the  doctor  to  the  idea  of  sending  him  a. 
person  who  might  draw  from  him  important  disclosures  by 
promising  him  his  pardon.  The  promise  was  made.  When 
his  companions  were  ready  to  go  to  the  fatal  spot,  they 
exhorted  him  to  remain  firm.  One  of  them  said  to  him, 
"  Thou'lt  say  more  than  thou  knowest.  Death  is  so  near, 
and  the  pang  so  short ;  a  little  more  courage,  and  all  will  be 
over  !  "  He  resisted  :  his  two  accomplices  left  him,  with  a 
shrug  of  the  shoulders,  and  went  calmly  to  be  shot.  How- 
ever, Querelle  acknowledged  that  several  emigrants  were 
to  have  left  England  to  assassinate  the  First  Consul  ;  that 
Georges  and  some  of  his  companions  had  a  share  in  the  plot. 
He  did  not  mention  General  Pichegru.  This  slight  indica- 
tion gave  a  clue  to  the  police.  Fouche  was  then  no  longer 
Minister  of  that  department  ; — it  had  been  joined  to  the 