

I  expected,  on  returning  to  the  First  Consul,  to  resume 
the  functions  of  aide-de-camp  :  I  was  mistaken.  After 
passing  a  few  days  at  Malmaison,  the  First  Consul  sent 
me  word  by  Duroc  that  his  intention  was  I  should  fill  an 
official  post,  and  next  morning  I  read  in  The  Monitcitr 
that  I  was  appointed  one  of  the  directors  of  the  Sinking 
Fund.  This  appointment,  which  had  been  made  without 
consulting  me,  and  of  which  I  received  the  first  account 
through  a  newspaper,  vexed  me.  I  felt  for  that  sort  of 
employment,  and  for  Paris  life  in  general,  an  aversion 
which  the  catastrophe  of  181 5  has  but  too  well  justified. 
I  went  to  M.  Maret,  Secretary  of  State,  and  declared  that 
I  would  not  accept  the  situation  ;  and  that  I  preferred 
living  in  obscurity  to  accepting  a  post  to  which  I  felt 
aversion.  At  five  o'clock  I  went  to  dine  at  the  Tuileries, 
as  usual.  General  Lannes,  who  was  on  duty,  had  heard  of 
my  refusal  :  he  came  up  to  me,  approved  of  it,  and  en- 
couraged  me.     "  This  man   wants  to  send   away  his  most 


214  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

faithful  friends :  we  shall  see  what  he'll  gain  by  it."  The 
approbation  of  the  general  did  not  add  in  the  least  to  my 
resolution,  which  was  firmly  taken.  The  First  Consul 
passed  by  in  going  to  dine,  and  perceiving  me,  he  took  me 
to  the  window  and  said,  "  You  do  not  wish,  then,  to  enter 
into  official  employment  ?  "  I  answered  rather  drily,  "  No." 
"  Well,"  he  replied,  *'  you  shall  do  as  you  please  ;  I'll 
have  nothing  more  to  do  with  you."  Saying  that,  he  left 
me.  Those  were  the  only  harsh  words  I  had  ever  heard 
from  him  ;  but  they  went  to  my  heart.     I  retired  in  a  rage, 

and  sending  all  to  the  d 1.     Three  days  after,  observing 

my  absence,  Bonaparte  sent  Clarke  and  Eugene  to  order  me 
to  go  to  speak  to  him.  I  went  ;  and  he  spoke  so  persua- 
sively that  I  accepted  the  office.  He  then  told  me  that  his 
intention  was  to  make  me  Postmaster-General,  in  the  room 
of  a  man  who  was  wholly  devoted  to  M.  de  Talleyrand ;  but 
that,  his  secret  having  been  discovered,  he  had  encountered 
an  opposition  which  he  wished  to  defeat  by  side  measures. 
At  that  time  he  was  not  yet  absolute  master.  In  fact,  a 
few  months  afterwards  I  received  an  order  to  take  possession 
of  the  Post  Office.  I  entered  it  against  my  will.  I  never- 
theless did  my  duty  there  during  thirteen  years,  with  a 
devotedness  and  a  zeal  which  were  not  sufficient  to  ensure 
my  welfare,  and  for  which  I  have  been  cruelly  punished  in 

1815. 

When  I  took  the  management  of  the  Post  Office,  I  found 
the  fatal  custom  established  of  delivering  up  to  the  police  of 
every  corner  of  France  all  the  letters  claimed  as  suspicious. 
I  immediately  put  an  end  to  this  practice  by  sending  out  of 
office  those  directors  that  had  been  guilty  of  it.  From  that 
time,  at  least,  the  secrets  of  families  were  no  longer  pried 
into  by  the  worst  set  of  men.  I  soon  resolved  to  cut  off  all 
communication  with  Fouche — a  measure  which  he  never 
forgave  me. 