

Although  I  had  not  kept  up  my  connections  with  the 
family  of  Metternich,  the  First  Consul,  hoping  to  press  the 
Austrians  so  closely  that  peace  would  be  the  consequence 
of  the  first  campaign,  sent  me  to  Saxony  with  secret  powers 
to  sign  an  armistice,  in  case  the  events  of  the  Avar  should 
incline  the  Austrians  that  way. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

The  expulsion  of  the  late  Government  caused  no  manner  of 
regret  to  the  public,  though  the  terms  of  that  expulsion  created 
some  anxiety.  Notwithstanding  the  violence  of  the  preced- 
ing Governments,  the  nation  was  not  yet  accustomed  to  them. 
She  had  not  forgotten  the  aim  towards  which  all  her  exer- 
tions had  been  directed  for  the  last  twelve  years — the  estab- 
lishment of  liberty  founded  on  solid  and  respected  laws. 
She  found,  however,  in  the  new  Constitution  none  of  those 
securities  she  was  entitled  to  expect.  Although  the  First 
Consul  crowned  the  country  with  his  own  glory,  and  though 
his  genius  left  him  no  fears  for  its  independence,  France 
wished  to  find  in  the  result  of  victory  all  the  advantages  of 
peace,  and  all  the  wealth  of  industry  and  trade.  Therefore, 
when  the  periodical  press  was  consulted  on  the  question  of 
the  Consulate  for  life,  an  immense  majority  of  citizens  ex- 
pressed their  approbation  in  the  most  striking  manner,  con- 
vinced that  a  lasting  magistracy  offered  to  their  interests  a 
greater  security. 

One  of  the  earliest  measures  of  the  First  Consul  was  to 
send  new  diplomatic  agents  to  foreign  countries.  To  me  he 
entrusted  a  mission  to  Dresden,'  ordering  me,  immediately 
after  my  arrival,  to  write  to  Vienna  that  I  had  powers  to 
treat  for  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  in  case  the  Cabinet  of 
Vienna  should  prefer  addressing  itself  to  me.  The  condi- 
tions were  in  the  form  of  preliminaries  of  peace.  The 
circumstances  of  the  war  on  the  Rhine  hastened  its  con- 
'  See  Appendix,  Nos.  XVII.— XX. 

15  '°^ 


210  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

elusion,  and  it  was  signed  after  the  battle  of  Hohenlinden 
by  the  Under-Chief  of  the  Staff  of  Moreau. 

The  apparent  object  of  my  mission  to  Dresden  was  to 
maintain  good  friendship  between  Saxony  and  France.  I 
had  superseded  a  man  of  considerable  merit ;  but  his  having 
been  an  agent  of  the  Directory  was  suflficient  to  make  his 
situation  perplexing  and  unpleasant.  Mine  was  nearly  the 
same.  The  Elector  was  still  officially  at  war  with  France, 
as  a  member  of  the  Empire,  though  he  had  recalled  his 
troops  a  long  while  before.  I  should  have  been  obliged, 
in  a  manner,  to  force  the  posts,  and  thus  give  displeasure. 
My  instructions  gave  me  full  authority  to  act  in  that 
manner  ;  but  such  proceedings  were  not  to  my  taste  ;  and 
I  entertained  so  great  a  regard  for  a  prince  who  had 
rendered  his  throne  venerable  by  his  virtues,  that  I  should 
certainly  never  have  been  able  to  surmount  the  aversion 
I  felt  to  give  him  the  least  uneasiness.  I  never  even  saw 
him.  I  lived  at  Dresden  in  the  greatest  retirement.  The 
climate  did  not  agree  with  my  wife's  health,  and  my  want 
of  activity  was  disagreeable  to  me.  When  I  received  the 
news  of  the  battle  of  Marengo,  my  mind  was  filled  with 
grief  at  the  thought  that  a  military  career  was  for  ever 
closed  against  me,  and  that  I  should  soon  be  prohibited 
from  wishing  for  either  glory  or  advancement.  I  was,  how- 
ever, somewhat  comforted  by  the  permission  I  received  to 
pass  the  Carnival  of  1801  at  Berlin. 