

General  Bonaparte  presented  himself  at  the  bar  of  the 
Elders,  where  M.  Le  Mercier  was  in  the  chair.  He  there 
received  the  decree  by  which  he  was  appointed  Gcneral-in- 
chief  of  the  troops  of  the  first  division,  and  an  order  to 
march  next  day  to  St.  Cloud,  where  the  two  Councils  were 
to  hold  their  sitting.     In  fact,  the  following  day  the  majority 


204  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

of  the  two  Councils  assembled  in  the  Palace  of  St.  Cloud. 
The  General  had  required  M.  Gohier,  President  of  the 
Directory,  to  tender  his  resignation  ;  but  he  refused  ;  and, 
as  a  lawyer,  the  reason  he  gave  was  that  the  order  was  con- 
trary to  the  Constitution.  His  wife  remained  with  Madame 
Bonaparte,  and  they  were  obliged  to  work  upon  her  alarm 
to  obtain  her  husband's  submission. 

The  Council  of  Elders,  not  being  very  numerous,  had 
been  easily  accommodated  in  one  of  the  large  apartments  ; 
but  the  Council  of  Five  Hundred,  which  was  to  sit  in  the 
Conserv^atory,  had  not  yet  been  able  to  assemble,  because 
the  preparations  were  not  completed.  In  consequence,  the 
sitting  did  not  open  till  three  o'clock.  Lucien  Bonaparte 
was  in  the  chair.  Great  excitement  prevailed  ;  the  friends 
of  the  Directory  seemed  to  be  more  numerous  than  the  day 
before.  They  all  showed  themselves  indignant  at  a  measure 
which,  bearing  all  the  characteristics  of  a  coup  d^etat,  pre- 
sented besides  what  they  called  liherticide  violence^  and  an 
odious  violation  of  the  Constitution.  Scarcely  had  the 
debates  begun,  when  one  of  the  members  proposed  that  each 
individually  should  mount  the  tribune,  and  swear  allegiance 
to  the  Constitution  of  the  Year  III.  The  General  had  given 
me  orders  to  remain  in  the  hall,  and  bring  him  every  five 
minutes  a  report  of  what  was  going  forward.  The  cere- 
mony of  the  oath  was  undoubtedly  meant  to  gain  time  and 
prolong  the  sitting  until  night  should  fall  in.  In  the  space 
of  five  minutes,  no  more  than  three  oaths  were  taken  ;  so 
that  it  was  evident  more  than  five  hours  would  elapse  before 
the  ceremony  was  terminated.  I  acquainted  General  Bona- 
parte with  the  circumstance,  and  found  him  walking  with 
much  agitation  in  an  apartment  that  had  no  other  furniture 
than  two  armchairs.  Sieyes  was  alone  with  him,  sitting 
next  to  the  chimney,  before  a  burning  faggot  which  he  was 
poking  with  a  stick,  for  there  was  not  even  a  pair  of  tongs. 
After  having  listened  to  what  I  had  to  say.  General  Bona- 
parte turned  abruptly  to  Sieyes  and  observed  :  "  Now  you 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  205 

see  what  they  are  doing." — "  Oh  !  oh  !  "  answered  the  other 
coolly,  "  to  swear  to  a  part  of  the  Constitution  may  be 
right  ;  but  to  the  whole  Constitution — that  is  too  much  !  " 