

A  great  many  emigrants  lived  at  Leipsic  and  Dresden 
who  owed  their  retreat  and  maintenance  to  the  generous 
bounty  of  the  Elector.  My  arrival  at  first  spread  alarm 
among  these  small  colonies.  My  predecessor  had  been  un- 
able to  afford  them  much  protection,  but  he  had  at  least 
removed  persecution.  They  imagined  that  an  aide-de-camp 
of  General  Bonaparte  would  not  fail  to  drive  them  out  of 
the  only  retreat  they  had  left.  Instead  of  that  I  endeavoured 
to  remove  their  fears.  I  had  no  great  merit  in  showing 
them  marks  of  humanity.     I  felt  naturally  inclined  to  con- 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  2 1 1 

sider  them  in  the  Hght  of  unfortunate  countrymen,  who  had 
ceased  to  be  dangerous  from  the  time  they  had  laid  down 
their  arms.  Besides  which,  I  had  received  from  the  First 
Consul  a  positive  order  to  facilitate  the  return  to  France  of 
all  such  as  appeared  willing  to  carry  back  to  their  country 
feelings  of  peace.  I  made  no  distinction,  and,  during  twelve 
years,  I  had  no  cause  to  repent.  I  now  seek  to  forget  that, 
in  1814,  some  of  them  repelled  the  gratitude  they  owed  me 
as  an  insult.  During  these  twelve  years,  at  least,  the  Im- 
perial government  was  not  displeasing  to  them.  The 
greatest  part  of  them  had  solicited  and  obtained  official 
situations. 

At  Berlin  we  lodged  with  the  French  Ambassador, 
General  Burnonville.  His  polite  attention  and  delicate 
friendship  enhanced  the  pleasure  that  reigned  that  year 
in  the  metropolis  of  the  Prussian  dominions.  It  was 
during  my  stay  there  that  peace  was  signed  with  Russia  ; 
and  I  could  not  help  remarking,  as  a  curious  circumstance, 
the  sudden  eagerness  with  which  the  Russians  sought  us, 
when  a  few  days  before  a  member  of  the  diplomatic  body 
would  not  have  dared  to  dance  in  the  same  quadrille  with  a 
French  lady.  I  had  the  honour  to  see  and  approach  fre- 
quently the  Queen,  who  was  still  more  to  be  respected  for 
her  virtues  than  admired  for  her  beauty.  It  is  impossible 
to  imagine  a  more  charming  person  united  with  a  more 
dignified  and  majestic  demeanour. 

The  simplicity  of  her  manners  added  a  still  more  sacred 
character  to  the  feelings  of  veneration  she  inspired.  She 
had  no  splendour,  no  retinue.  She  went  out  every  day  in 
the  plainest  carriage,  and  frequently  on  foot,  when  the 
weather  permitted.  The  inhabitants  of  Berlin,  or  at  least 
many  persons  attached  to  the  Court,  used  at  that  time  to 
express  themselves  with  perhaps  too  great  a  freedom  re- 
specting their  Sovereign  and  his  family  ;  but  never  was  the 
slightest  blame  mixed  with  the  praises  bestowed  on  the 
Queen.     Surrounded  by  her  lovely  children,  lavishing  on 