


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  217 

•department  of  Justice ;  an  odd  adjunction,  universally 
blamed,  and  which  gave  Government  an  appearance  of 
odious  despotism  :  Justice  raised  her  veil  to  seize,  and 
lowered  it  to  judge.  Still  the  whole  structure  of  Fouche 
remained  ;  and  although  the  Grand  Judge,  Regnier,  did  not 
know  how  to  make  use  of  it,  perhaps  because  he  used  it 
against  his  will,  the  heads  of  the  police  set  on  this  occasion 
all  their  skill  to  work.  It  was  soon  known  that  M.  de 
Riviere  and  the  son  of  the  Duke  of  Polignac  had  arrived  in 
Paris.  They  were  arrested,  and  with  them  a  dozen  wretched 
bravoes,  who  had  gained  no  reputation  even  in  the  Vendee 
— robbers  of  diligences,  polluted  by  the  vilest  and  most 
odious  crimes.  Some  of  these  wretches  declared  that 
Georges  was  at  the  head  of  the  conspiracy.  One  of  the 
.accomplices  said  that  he  had  seen  in  Georges'  lodgings  a 
man  for  whom  that  chief  showed  the  greatest  consideration, 
and  whom  he  treated  with  evident  respect.  This  person 
was  supposed  to  be  the  Duke  d'Enghien  ;  and  Bonaparte 
sent  an-  aide-de-camp  to  Ettenheim,  to  inquire  what  the 
Duke  d'Enghien  was  doing  there,  and  whether  he  frequently 
left  that  residence.  The  aide-de-camp  came  back,  saying 
that  the  Duke  was  often  absent  from  ten  to  twelve  days,  and 
that  nobody  knew  where  he  went.  From  that  circumstance 
it  was  concluded  that  he  came  to  Paris  incognito,  and  that 
it  was  he  whom  Georges  treated  with  so  much  respect.  His 
arrest  was  decided.  A  few  days  after  his  death,  Pichegru  was 
also  arrested  ;  and  then  Picot,  who  had  made  the  declaration 
about  Georges,  being  confronted  with  the  prisoner,  said  it 
was  he  whom  he  had  meant  when  speaking  of  the  superior 
chief.  When  the  First  Consul  heard  this,  he  trembled  with 
despair,  and  cried,  "  Cursed  report !  fatal  aide-de-camp  !  " 
Pichegru  being  arrested,  Bonaparte  resolved  also  to  make 
sure  of  Moreau.  The  enmity  between  these  two  men  ought 
to  have  concluded  in  no  other  way  but  by  a  desperate  duel. 
The  former  had  been  betrayed  by  the  latter  before  the  i8th 
of  Fructidor.     Bonaparte  had,  nevertheless,  obtained  certain 


2l8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

proofs  that  their  quarrel  had  been  made  up  by  the  interposi- 
tion of  an  Abbe  David.  He  did  not,  however,  produce  these 
proofs,  and  he  acted  wisely.  In  the  hearing  of  the  cause,  no 
doubt  was  left  but  Georges  and  his  friends  had  come  to  Paris 
to  murder  the  individual  at  the  head  of  the  Government ; 
that  M.  de  Riviere,  first  aide-de-camp  to  Monsieur,  Comte 
d'Artois,  was  in  the  plot ;  that  he  had  been  sent  over  to 
take  a  leading  part  in  it  ;  that  Messieurs  de  Polignac,  attached 
by  affection  and  birth  to  the  House  of  Bourbon,  had  come 
with  the  same  intentions  ;  and  that  Pichegru  and  Moreau 
were  to  profit  by  the  attempt  to  recall  the  Bourbons  and 
replace  them  on  the  throne.  I  say,  to  profit  by  ;  because  it 
appears,  by  an  observation  that  escaped  Pichegru,  that  he 
had  refused  to  take  a  direct  share  in  the  murder  of  a  warrior 
to  whom,  at  least,  he  owed  considerations.  On  his  arrival 
in  Paris  he  saw  Georges  ;  and,  hearing  from  him  that  the 
act  was  not  yet  committed,  he  said  with  a  haughty  air, 
"  What  mean  all  these  delays  and  precautions  ?  In  London 
you  never  thought  of  calculating  anything.  Speedily  fulfil 
your  promise.  I  do  not  wish  to  see  you  until  all  is  ready." 
In  fact,  notwithstanding  his  intrepidity,  Georges,  on  his 
arrival,  had  not  calculated  everything.  He  remained  five 
months  and  a  half  concealed  in  Paris  :  during  so  long  a 
space  of  time,  fortune  presented  him  with  only  two  oppor- 
tunities of  committing  the  crime  he  meditated,  with  a  due 
regard  for  the  chances  of  success  and  his  own  safety.  The 
First  Consul  was  not  to  be  attacked  in  the  Tuileries,  and  it 
was  very  difficult  to  surprise  him  in  his  walks,  for  which  he 
had  no  regular  hours.  To  assassinate  him  in  a  playhouse 
was  become  impossible,  since  the  attempt  of  the  Infernal 
Machine  had  miscarried.  The  design  of  Georges  could 
therefore  only  be  put  in  execution  during  one  of  his 
journeys  ;  and  still  it  was  not  possible  at  the  moment  of 
his  starting.  The  army  was  then  assembled  at  Boulogne. 
The  First  Consul  went  twice  thither.  The  first  time  he 
started  from  Paris  ;  and  I  only  learned  his  departure  at  a 