

When  General  Bonaparte  entered  the  hall  of  the  Council 
of  Five  Hundred,  one  of  the  grenadiers  who  had  followed 
him  received  a  thrust  from  a  dagger,  which  penetrated  his 
coat,  and  which  in  all  probability  had  been  meant  for  the 
General.     The  grenadier  was  rewarded,  and  I  think  died 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  207 

a  captain.  The  deputy  marked  out  as  the  assassin  was 
a  Corsican,  called  Arena  :  he  perished  a  short  time  after, 
being  implicated  in  the  conspiracy  of  which  Coracchi  and 
Topineau  Lebrun  were  at  the  head,  and  the  object  of  which 
was  to  assassinate  the  First  Consul  at  the  Opera,  in  the 
midst  of  the  confusion  they  intended  to  create  by  letting 
oflf  squibs.  Having  left  France  a  few  days  after  the  i8th 
Brumaire,  I  could  obtain  no  particulars  of  the  affair. 

Immediately  after  the  expulsion  of  the  deputies,  the 
members  of  the  two  Councils  who  had  been  appointed  to 
consult  on  the  measures  that  were  to  be  taken  met  ;  and  on 
the  19th  the  city  of  Paris,  and  soon  after  all  the  rest  of 
France,  learned  that  General  Bonaparte  had  been  created 
First  Consul,  and  that  Messrs.  Cambaceres  and  Lebrun  were 
to  be  Second  and  Third  Consuls  with  him.^  The  former 
had  been  a  magistrate  in  the  Parliament  of  Aix.  He  was 
celebrated  for  his  thorough  information  and  his  conciliating 
temper.  He  had  sat  in  the  Convention,  and  his  mitigated 
vote  in  the  King's  trial  gave  the  true  measure  of  the  weak- 
ness of  his  disposition.  The  Third  Consul,  M.  Lebrun,  was 
said  to  have  written  the  beautiful  ordinances  of  Chancellor 
Maupeon,  whose  Secretary  he  had  been.  He  was  a  very 
well-informed  man,  and  published  two  remarkable  transla- 
tions, one  of  the  "  Iliad,"  and  the  other  of  Tasso's  "  Jeru- 
salem Delivered."  He  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  great 
financier.  The  discernment  of  the  First  Consul  in  appoint- 
ing him  was  universally  applauded. 

The  Minister  of  Police  at  that  period  was  M.  Fouche, 

subsequently  Duke  of  Otranto.     On  the  17th  Brumaire  he 

had  pledged  his  word  to  General  Bonaparte  to  serve  him 

unreservedly  ;   but  on  the  i8th,  as  I  was  walking  up  and 

down  the  apartments  of  St.  Cloud,  I  met  one  of  my  old 

schoolfellows   named  Thurot,  whom  I  had  not  seen  since 

'  Count  Lavalette's  memory  has  again  betrayed  him  in  this  instance : — 
the  first  three  Consuls  were  Bonaparte,  Sieyes,  and  Roger  Ducos.  Cam- 
baceres and  Leljrun  succeeded  to  the  two  latter  a  short  time  afterwards. — 
Note  of  the  Translator. 


2o8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

I  left  college.  He  told  me  that  he  was  secretary-general 
of  the  police  ;  and  as  I  questioned  him  rather  in  a  pressing 
manner,  he  confessed  that  his  master  had  sent  him  to  St. 
Cloud  to  witness  the  event,  and  that  we  must  succeed  at  any- 
cost,  as  he  was  well  enough  acquainted  with  his  patron 
to  know  that  he  would  make  us  pay  our  failure  dearly.  In 
truth,  we  learned  since  that  the  Minister  had  taken 
measures  to  have  us  apprehended,  and  perhaps  shot,  if  the 
undertaking  at  St.  Cloud  had  not  completely  succeeded. 
The  Emperor  learned  that  circumstance  ;  and,  knowing  his 
own  strength,  he  used  sometimes  to  joke  with  his  minister 
about  it. 