


CHAPTER  XXV. 

I  NOW  proceed  to  the  campaign  of  1809.  The  success  of  the 
Wagram  campaign  had  a  considerable  influence  over  the 
destinies  of  France  :  not  so  much,  however,  because  peace 
was  once  more  ensured  to  the  Continent,  as  on  account  of 
the  alhance  between  the  two  crowns.  The  first  proposals  of 
the  marriage  of  the  Emperor  with  the  Archduchess  Maria 
Louisa  were  made  at  Vienna  with  Prince  Metternich,  not- 
withstanding the  exertions  of  a  considerable  party  that 
would  not  listen  to  such  an  alliance.  I  first  suspected  what 
was  going  forward  through  a  singular  circumstance.  The 
Emperor  did  not  well  know  how  to  divorce  a  woman  who 
was  so  deserving  of  his  love,  and  whose  adorable  qualities 
had  made  her  an  object  almost  of  worship  in  the  eyes  of  the 
French.  He  would  not  have  been  sorry  to  have  seen  others 
set  an  example  which  might  make  some  impression  on  the 
public,  and  render  the  matter  less  difficult  to  him  :  at  least^ 

I  have  always  thought  so.     Marshal  came  to  see  me 

the  day  after  his  arrival.  We  were  friends  of  long  standing  : 
he  placed  in  me  an  unbounded  confidence,  and  he  spoke  to 
me  of  his  wife  with  great  discontent.  I  had  always  thought 
him  jealous,  and  I  believe  he  did  not  do  his  wife  justice.  In 
our  conversations  he  even  went  so  far  as  to  say  he  could  not 
live  any  longer  with  her,  and  he  repeated  to  me  what  the 
Emperor  had  said  to  him  at  Vienna.  Napoleon  affected  to 
pity  the  Marshal's  domestic  vexations,  and  observed  that  the 
best  thing  he  could  do  would  be  to  end  them  by  a  divorce. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  2 3 1 

"  You  will  never  have  any  children  by  her,"  he  added,  "  and 
still  you  ought  to  wish  that  a  name  like  the  one  you  bear 
be  not  lost.  Divorce  her,  and  then  you  may  choose  among 
the  most  illustrious  families  of  France  a  consort  who  will 
give  you  successors  to  your  rank  and  titles."  The  Marshal, 
when  he  mentioned  the  fact  to  me  and  asked  my  advice , 
was  as  far  as  myself  from  suspecting  the  secret  motive  of  the 
Emperor's  words.  I  had  not  the  least  doubt  of  his  wife's 
virtue :  she  possessed  many  amiable  qualities,  and  had 
brought  him  a  considerable  fortune.  I  advised  him  not  to 
take  a  step  he  might  perhaps  long  regret.  He  followed  my 
advice,  and  I  believe  he  acted  wisely. 

A  few  days  after  the  Emperor  returned  from  the  army, 
and  at  the  end  of  two  months  he  went  to  Fontainebleau. 
I  followed  him  thither  almost  immediately.  As  soon  as  I 
arrived,  the  Empress  sent  me  word  to  come  to  her  apart- 
ment by  a  back  staircase.  I  found  her  melancholy,  and 
her  countenance  betrayed  the  effect  of  strong  agitation. 
''  Fouche  has  just  left  me,"  she  said,  "  and  what  do  you 
think  he  said  to  me  ?  '  Madame,  your  Majesty  must  give 
France  and  the  Emperor  a  great  proof  of  devotion.  It  is 
necessary'  for  the  Emperor  to  leave  behind  hira  children  who 
may  perpetuate  his  name,  and  give  to  France  a  family  that 
may  deprive  the  Bourbons  of  all  hopes  of  return.  Ten 
years'  marriage  leaves  the  nation  and  the  Emperor  no 
expectations  of  his  having  any  children  by  your  Majesty. 
You  are  therefore,  in  this  respect,  the  only  obstacle  to  the 
solid  happiness  of  France.  Vouchsafe  to  follow  the  advice 
of  a  man  \<ho  is  wholly  devoted  to  you.  The  peculiar 
situation  in  which  you  are  placed  obliges  you  to  make  a 
great  sacrifice  to  your  own  glory  and  the  interest  of  all.  I 
know  how  hard  it  will  fall  upon  you  ;  but  your  noble  mind 
will  easily  learn  resignation.  The  Emperor  will  never  dare 
to  propose  it.  I  know  his  attachment  for  you.  Be  greater 
than  he  is  great,  and  give  this  last  token  of  devotion  to  your 
country  and  your  sovereign.     History  will  repay  you  for  it^ 