


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  219 

ball  the  Second  Consul  gave.  Bonaparte  came  there.  It 
was  ten  o'clock  :  he  perceived  me,  as  he  was  walking  in  the 
saloon  ;  and,  having  made  me  a  sign,  I  stepped  into  an 
apartment  where  there  were  but  few  people.  He  said  to  me, 
en  passant^  "  I  intend  to  set  off  in  two  hours  for  Boulogne  : 
two  coaches,  six  horses,  eight  ponies,  and  General  Duroc." 
I  was  prepared.  The  usual  express  went  off  an  hour  before 
him,  and  he  arrived  before  any  one  knew  in  Paris  where 
he  was  gone.  But  his  return  was  easier  to  be  known.  It 
was  natural  to  imagine  that  he  would  not  remain  long  at 
Boulogne.  The  plan  of  Georges,  according  to  his  own  con- 
fession, was  to  waylay  him  on  his  return,  dressed  with  some 
of  his  accomplices  as  guides,  who,  mounted  on  ponies, 
fatigued  by  the  express  service,  generally  followed  the  coach 
at  a  considerable  distance.  They  were  to  stop  the  First 
Consul,  put  him  in  a  cabriolet  escorted  by  them,  drive 
rapidly  to  Normandy,  and  embark  him  for  England.  The 
latter  part  of  the  plan  was  evidently  too  absurd  for  a  man 
of  Georges'  sense  to  have  ever  thought  it  feasible.  He 
only  invented  that  fable,  because  he  was  ashamed  of 
acknowledging  that  he  intended  to  murder  the  First  Consul  ; 
and,  in  fact,  nothing  would  have  been  easier  for  him,  while 
accompanying  the  coach  as  a  guide,  than  to  let  off  a  tromblon^ 
the  shot  of  which  Bonaparte  could  not  have  survived.  At 
Bonaparte's  first  return,  Georges  had  not  yet  got  together 
all  his  people  :  he  wished,  besides,  to  strike  the  blow  in 
Paris.  The  second  journey  took  place  with  the  same  pre- 
cautions, only  that  Bonaparte  travelled  under  the  name  of 
General  Bessieres.  I  do  not  know  what  circumstance  pre- 
vented Georges  from  executing  his  plan  that  time. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

The  death  of  the  Duke  d'Enghien  was  partly  occasioned  by 
the  mistake  into  which  the  report  of  the  aide-de-camp  led 
the  First  Consul  ;  but  I  must  say  that  that  was  not  the  only 
cause  of  it.  Proofs  had  been  obtained  that  the  Prince  really 
did  come  from  time  to  time  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine, 

where  he  held   conferences  with  the  Mayor  of  ,  and 

stopped  at  the  village  of .  It  was  but  natural  to  con- 
clude from  that  circumstance  that  he  was  not  a  stranger  to 
the  plots  of  Pichegru.  In  truth,  what  was  the  plan  of  the 
conspirators,  according  to  their  own  confession  and  those  of 
their  friends  who  now  boast  of  it  ?  Pichegru  was  to  throw 
himself  into  Alsatia,  to  proclaim  the  King,  and  make  that 
province  declare  itself  in  favour  of  the  Bourbons  ;  while 
Moreau  was  to  do  the  same  with  the  army  of  the  coasts. 
Why  then  should  not  Pichegru  have  called  in  a  Prince  of 
the  House  of  Bourbon,  who  lived  at  seven  short  leagues 
distance  :  a  Prince,  the  only  one  of  his  family  who  had 
acquired  military  reputation  in  these  very  departments  of 
the  Rhine,  and  whose  presence  would  have  warmed  the 
hearts  and  moved  the  courage  of  every  one. 