

Fortune,  which  till  then  had  seconded  his  genius,  bestowed 
unreservedly  this  new  favour  upon  him.  The  young 
Empress  was  tall,  well  made,  and  in  excellent  health.  She 
appeared  adorned  with  all  the  grace  and  beauty  that  usually 
accompany  youth.  Her  face,  which  displayed  the  family 
features  of  the  Imperial  House  of  Austria,  was  remarkable 
for  an  air  of  kindness  ;  and,  unlike  the  rest  of  her  family, 
her  smile  was  amiable  and  sweet.  The  lustre  that  sur- 
rounded   her,   the    splendour   of    the   first    throne    in    the 


236  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

universe,  all  the  arts  vying  with  each  other  to  please  her  ; 
a  young,  brilliant,  and  warlike  court  at  her  feet,  the  atten- 
tions paid  her  by  the  Emperor,  whose  fame  had  for  several 
years  already  struck  her  imagination,  made  her  abode  in 
Paris  delightful  to  her.  She  frequently  expressed  her 
satisfaction  with  a  warmth  and  a  naivete  that  made  her 
generally  beloved.  The  marriage  ceremony  took  place  with 
great  pomp.  Many  persons,  however,  recalled  to  their 
memory  the  arrival  of  the  Archduchess  Marie  Antoinette, 
and  the  fatal  fireworks  let  off  in  the  Place  Louis  XV.  where 
so  many  lives  were  lost.  The  public  took  some  pleasure  in 
comparing  the  two  periods,  especially  on  the  occasion  of  the 
fete  given  at  the  Champ  de  Mars  by  the  Imperial  guard, 
where  the  most  admirable  order  had  prevailed  among  six 
thousand  people  assembled  in  a  temporary  wooden  room, 
surrounded  by  eighty  thousand  others  who  had  come  to 
enjoy  the  sight  of  the  fireworks.  All  these  rejoicings  were 
over,  when  the  Emperor  thought  he  could  not  refuse 
attending  a  soiree  given  by  the  Austrian  Ambassador, 
Prince  Schwartzenberg,  in  his  hotel.  Rue  de  Mont  Blanc. 
There  were  at  least  six  hundred  persons  present ;  and  the 
house  not  being  large  enough  for  so  numerous  a  company, 
the  Ambassador  had  ordered  a  round  temporary  saloon  of 
woodwork  to  be  erected  in  the  garden  communicating  with 
his  apartments.  The  architect  had  completed  all  the 
preparations  in  four  days.  Unfortunately  he  fixed  the  floor 
of  the  saloon  on  one  side  to  the  steps  that  went  down  to  the 
garden,  and  on  the  other  to  the  rock  of  a  grotto,  where 
there  never  entered  a  drop  of  water.  A  gallery  also  of 
wood  had  been  erected,  leading  to  the  Rue  de  Provence. 
It  was  in  the  beginning  of  summer,  and  the  heat  was 
excessive.  Gauze  and  muslin  draperies,  with  a  great  pro- 
fusion of  garlands,  lined  the  saloon  and  all  its  avenues.  An 
immense  quantity  of  wax  candles  added  to  the  heat  of  the 
atmosphere,  and  gave  to  all  the  ornaments  a  most  inflam- 
mable dryness.     A  candle  fell  against  one  of  the  curtains  of 