

Another  motive,  perhaps  the  most  peremptory,  must  be 
sought  for  in  Bonaparte's  character — impetuosity  and  love 
of  revenge,  which  might  be  called  vendetta  Corsica.  That 
feeling  was,  besides,  at  the  period  I  am  describing,  raised  to 
the  highest  degree  by  his  enemies.  I  heard  him  say  a  few 
days   afterwards,    *'  Let   them    throw   all    Europe    on    my 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  221 

shoulders  ;  my  part  will  then  be  to  defend  myself  :  their 
attack  is  a  legal  one.  But  to  blow  up  whole  streets,  to  kill 
or  maim  more  than  one  hundred  persons  in  the  hope  of 
coming  at  me  ;  to  send,  as  they  now  have  done,  forty 
bravoes  to  murder  me — that  is  too  much.  I  will  make 
them  shed  tears  of  blood.  They  shall  learn  at  their 
expense  what  it  is  to  make  murder  legal." 

Revenge  is  but  a  vulgar  passion,  and  still  it  is  the 
commonest  amongst  kings.  The  First  Consul  was  worthy 
of  setting  himself  above  it.  I  should  have  wished  him  to 
have  had  the  Duke  d'Enghien  arrested  and  condemned  ; 
but  after  the  judgment  to  have  sent  for  him,  have  given 
him  the  proofs  that  were  obtained  of  his  having  conspired 
against  him,  and  then  to  have  immediately  sent  him  over  to 
England.  I  am  sure  the  Prince's  heart  was  too  noble  not 
to  be  moved  by  such  an  act  of  magnanimity  ;  and  if  his 
family  were  destined  one  day  to  reign  again,  Bonaparte 
would  not  have  found  in  him  an  enemy,  nor  in  his  own 
heart  a  reproach  which  he  was  never  able  to  silence.  For 
the  rest,  their  actions  served  as  a  foundation  to  the  fabric 
of  horror  raised  against  him  all  over  France  and  Europe. 
But  without  naming  all  the  Princes  who,  after  having 
committed  the  same  fault,  have  nevertheless  retained  the 
respect  of  mankind,  does  not  the  greatest  and  wisest  of  our 
writers,  Montesquieu,  when  speaking  of  Alexander,  say, 
"  He  burned  Persepolis  and  killed  Clitus,  but  &c."  ?  I 
went  to  St.  Cloud  a  few  days  after  the  trial.  I  was  ac- 
customed, while  waiting  for  the  order  to  enter  the  closet 
of  the  First  Consul,  to  stop  in  the  library  with  a  young 
man  named  Ripaule,  who  took  care  of  his  books,  and  who 
told  me  that  the  day  before,  while  going  out  of  that  room, 
Bonaparte  perceived  a  bust  of  the  Great  Conde  placed  in 
a  passage  leading  to  his  closet  :  he  immediately  said  to 
Ripaule,  with  an  abrupt  tone  and  an  agitated  voice  :  ''  Let 
that  bust  be  placed  somewhere  else." 

The  arrival  of  the  Prince  and  his  death  were  known  at 


222  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  same  moment  at  the  palace.  Madame  Bonaparte  burst 
into  tears  and  threw  herself  at  her  husband's  feet,  to  ob- 
tain the  Prince's  pardon  ;  it  was  too  late.  His  sister-in-law, 
Madame  Elisa,  wrote  him  a  letter  composed  by  Fontanes : 
he  remonstrated  with  her  for  having  sent  it,  but  without 
any  appearance  of  resentment.  Caulaincourt,  on  his  arrival 
from  Strasburg,  learned  the  fatal  news  from  Madame 
Bonaparte.  His  grief  was  so  great  that  he  fainted.  I 
have  no  doubt  of  his  having  been  a  perfect  stranger  to 
the  arrest  of  the  Duke  d'Enghien,  and  my  proof  is  his 
having  accepted  the  place  of  chief  equerry.  Caulaincourt 
would  never  have  deigned  to  receive  the  wages  of  blood. 
His  elevation  was  only  owing  to  his  merit  and  attachment 
to  the  First  Consul. 