

England  soon  felt  that  the  peace  with  the  whole 
Continent,  and  with  herself,  would  be  fatal  to  her.  The 
expedition  to  St.  Domingo  had  begun  successfully.  It  was 
altogether  a  bad  enterprise  that  ought  not  to  have  entered 

16 


226  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  I  ALETTE. 

into  the  plans  of  the  Emperor  ;  but  the  remembrance  of  the 
prosperity  of  St.  Domingo,  the  numerous  colonists  who  had 
fied  to  France  and  sighed  over  the  wreck  of  their  fortune, 
called  loudly  for  the  conquest  of  the  island.  The  Emperor 
yielded  to  the  general  delusion,  and  to  a  desire  of  employing 
his  navy,  which  was  eager  to  share  the  national  glory.' 
The  Directory  had  made  a  bad  choice  and  taken  half- 
measures  :  this  was  more  than  sufficient  to  produce  failure. 
The  general  to  whom  they  had  given  the  command  of  the 
expedition  was  a  man  of  little  capacity,  though  of  great 
personal  integrity.  He  failed,  and  fell  a  victim  to  the  skill 
of  the  blacks.  He  was  shipped  off  and  sent  away  with  the 
reputation  of  a  dupe,  and  the  disgrace  he  had  cast  on  the 
name  of  the  French.  The  general  to  whom  the  Emperor 
entrusted  the  second  expedition  had  more  sense  and  talent 
than  his  predecessor,  but,  like  him,  he  had  to  contend  with 
a  destructive  climate,  and  a  power  augmented  by  first 
success.  It  must  also  be  acknowledged  that  liberty,  with 
all  its  advantages,  its  energy,  and  its  hopes,  had  given  to  the 
negroes,  already  organised,  and  proud  of  their  former 
victory,  a  degree  of  strength  and  skill  over  which  it  was 
no  longer  possible  to  triumph.  The  General-in-chief  died 
a  victim  to  the  climate  ;  and,  although  he  had  sent  to 
France  Toussaint  Louverture,  the  chief  man  in  the  country, 
he  sunk  under  the  national  energy  and  advantageous 
positions  of  his  enemies. 

England  seized  the  moment  when  the  success  of  the 
expedition  was  doubtful,  to  break  the  peace.  Mr.  Pitt, 
accustomed  to  trample  on  the  most  sacred  rights  and 
conventions,  began  the  war  without  declaration,  captured 
trading  vessels,  ruined  merchants,  and  set  the  Continent 
again  on  fire.      Russia  and  Austria  united  took   up  arms 

'  It  is  easy  to  discover  that  the  writer  has  here  made  a  slight  mistake,  or 
rather  has  transposed  events.  The  expedition  to  St.  Domingo  took  place 
in  1802,  before  the  First  Consul  had  mounted  the  Imperial  throne,  and 
Toussaint  Louverture  died  at  Fort  Joux  on  the  14th  of  April,  1803. — Note 
/)/  the  French  Editor. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  227 

again.  The  Emperor  left  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic  for 
Austria,  and  made  the  admirable  campaign  which  termi- 
nated with  the  battle  of  Austerlitz.  It  was  then  that  I 
adopted  for  the  first  time,  on  a  large  scale,  the  system  of 
-expresses  the  Emperor  had  commanded  me  to  organise, 
and  the  invention  of  which  was  his.  He  had  felt  the 
inconvenience  of  letting  a  single  man  cross  such  a  vast 
extent  of  country.  More  than  once,  the  couriers,  oppressed 
with  fatigue  or  badly  mounted,  did  not  by  their  speed 
satisfy  his  impatience.  He  did  not  like  either  to  put  in 
the  hands  of  a  single  man  papers,  the  speedy  reception  of 
which  might  have  a  serious  and  sometimes  decisive  influ- 
ence over  the  most  important  events.  Consequently,  by 
his  orders  I  organised  the  express  service,  which  consisted 
in  sending  by  the  postillions  of  each  stage  the  cabinet  des- 
patches shut  up  in  a  portfolio,  of  which  he  and  I  had  each 
a  key.  When  a  postillion  arrived  at  a  stage,  he  delivered  to 
the  next  one  a  little  book,  on  which  the  name  of  all  the 
stages  was  inscribed,  and  in  which  the  hour  of  the  arrival 
and  departure  of  the  despatches  was  to  be  mentioned. 
Fines  and  severe  punishment  were  inflicted  for  the  loss 
of  the  little  book,  or  for  any  negligence  of  the  postmaster 
in  setting  down  the  hour  of  the  arrival  and  departure  of 
the  despatches.  I  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble  in  obtaining 
a  due  execution  of  those  forms  ;  but  by  means  of  an  active 
and  constant  superintendence  I  succeeded  at  last,  and  the 
service  continued  during  eleven  years  with  most  wonderful 
success.  I  was  enabled  to  account  exactly  for  a  day's  delay 
on  a  space  of  four  hundred  leagues.  The  express  departed 
and  arrived  every  day  from  and  to  Paris,  Naples,  Milan,  the 
mouths  of  the  Cataro,  Madrid,  Lisbon,  and,  at  a  later  period, 
also  Tilsit,  Vienna,  Petersburg,  and  Amsterdam.  This  plan 
besides  ensured  considerable  economy  :  the  couriers  used 
to  cost  seven  francs  and  a  half  per  post,  whereas  the  ex- 
presses were  no  more  than  three  francs.  The  Emperor 
received  on  the  eighth  day  the   answers  to  the  letters  he 