


234  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

to  support  her  at  great  cost  in  her  awkward  and  frequently 
dishonest  poHcy,  and  in  the  wars  she  so  badly  manages  ;  and 
when  in  our  turn  we  shall  want  her  as  an  ally,  we  shall  find 
in  her  neither  energy  nor  fidelity.  An  alliance  with  Russia 
has  none  of  those  dangers  for  us." 

These  were  very  sensible  observations,  but  could  have  no 
efTect  against  a  fixed  resolution.  I  have  been  told  that  some 
proposals  of  a  marriage  with  a  Grand-duchess  had  really 
been  made,  and  the  person  who  entrusted  me  with  that 
secret  enjoyed  such  a  high  character  for  honesty,  and  was  in 
so  favourable  a  situation  to  get  acquainted  with  the  most 
important  affairs,  that  I  can  have  no  doubt  upon  the  subject. 
However,  the  Emperor  was  at  that  time  so  strongly  deter- 
mined, that  the  debate  of  which  I  have  been  speaking 
could  have  had  no  other  foundation  than  a  feeling  of  vanity,, 
to  which  he  was  perhaps  not  altogether  a  stranger,  and  some 
political  object  which  I  never  could  discover. 

A  few  days  before  he  had  sent  for  me.  He  had  been 
looking  out  for  some  friend  of  the  Empress  who  might  help 
to  sweeten  the  bitter  about  to  be  presented  to  her.  His 
choice  fell  on  me.  "  The  nation,"  he  said,  "  has  done  so 
much  for  me,  that  I  owe  her  the  sacrifice  of  my  dearest 
affections.  Eugene  is  not  young  enough  for  me  to  keep 
him  for  my  successor  ;  nor  am  I  old  enough  to  give  up  all 
hopes  of  having  children,  and  yet  by  Josephine  I  can  have 
none.  The  tranquillity  of  France  requires  my  choosing  a 
new  consort.  The  Empress  has  lived  already  for  several 
months  in  all  the  torment  of  uncertainty.  Everything  is 
settled  for  my  new  union.  You  are  the  husband  of  her 
niece  ;  she  honours  you  with  her  esteem  ;  will  you  not  take 
upon  you  to  acquaint  her  with  the  fatal  news,  and  prepare 
her  for  her  new  situation  ?  " 

I  answered  that  m}^  relationship  to  the  Empress  did  not 
permit  me  to  undertake  that  commission  ;  that  the  attach- 
ment I  had  at  all  times  professed  for  her  left  me  no  plausible 
reason  wherewith  to  justify  such  a  misfortune,  and  that  it. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  23s 

appeared  to  me  more  proper  that  his  Majesty  should  select 
some  person  for  whom  the  commission  might  be  of  a  less 
delicate  nature.     He  did  not  seem  at  all  offended  at  my 

refusal,  and  he  gave  the  charge  to  M.  N ,  who  acquitted 

himself  with  propriety  and  success.  The  arrival  of  Prince 
Eugene  was  a  great  comfort  to  Josephine.  When  in  the 
council,  before  the  Emperor,  and  in  the  presence  of  the 
grand  officers  of  the  empire,  she  was  obliged  to  declare  that 
she  consented  to  the  divorce,  she  displayed  so  much  courage 
and  firmness  of  mind  that  all  the  spectators  were  deeply 
moved.  The  next  day  she  left  the  Tuileries,  never  to 
return  more.  The  Emperor  had  during  the  preceding  day 
passed  some  hours  with  her  ;  his  grief  was  sincere  ;  and  the 
man  whom  the  most  important  events  could  not  even  shake 
for  an  instant  bent  his  knee  before  that  excellent  woman,, 
and  shed  abundant  tears.  I  went  to  see  her  the  morning 
before  her  departure.  Some  persons  of  the  Court  came 
coolly  to  take  leave  of  her,  and  express,  in  an  embarrassed 
way,  a  few  insincere  wishes  ;  and  when  she  got  into  her 
coach  with  the  Countess  d'Alberg,  her  lady  of  honour,  and 
with  her  chevalier  d'honneur,  not  one  single  person  remained 
to  show  her  a  grateful  face.  Every  wish,  every  pretension 
was  already  directed  towards  the  new  court.  The  Emperor 
retired  for  a  fortnight  to  Trianon.  His  grief  was  deep 
and  sincere  ;  but  the  Archduchess  arrived,  and  from  that 
moment  he  gave  himself  entirely  up  to  the  joy  his  new 
bride  promised  him. 