

This  fatal  coup  d^etat  had  not  yet  ceased  harassing  Bona- 
parte's mind,  when  it  received  another  violent  shock  by  the 
death  of  Pichegru.  He  had  been  arrested,  examined,  and 
confronted.  The  worthless  behaviour  of  the  subalterns 
towards  him,  and  the  total  ruin  of  his  hopes,  made  him 
resolve  to  avert  the  horrors  he  had  still  to  encounter,  by 
ridding  himself  of  a  life  he  had  no  more  means  of  pro- 
longing. Perhaps  also  he  was  urged  to  the  act  by  the 
shame  of  having  associated  with  such  accomplices  for  the 
performance  of  such  a  crime.  He  was  found  dead  in  prison. 
It  would  be  insulting  both  Bonaparte  and  Pichegru  to 
imagine  that  one  of  the  two  could  have  taken  the  other's 
life  in  that  manner.  One  must  not  seek  to  rob  that 
energetic  soul  of  the  glory  of  having  nobly  escaped  from 
the  hands  of  his  enemies.  His  retreat  was  that  of  a  gallant 
warrior ;  and  if  all  the  particulars  that  have  been  published 
were  not  sufficient  to  exonerate  Bonaparte  from  the  suspicion 
of  having  murdered  him,  the  character  of  Pichegru,  well 
known  to  those  who  approached  him,  had  left  not  the  least 
doubt  in  their  minds. 

The  condemnations  of  the  other  prisoners  created  a 
general  feeling  of  pity,  particularly   among   the   family  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  223 

the  First  Consul,  and  those  who  were  devoted  to  his  person. 
Too  much  blood  had  already  been  spilled,  and  every  person 
sought  to  obtain  from  the  Sovereign  the  pardon  of  some 
victim  or  other,  Madame  Bonaparte  took  upon  her  to 
save  M.  de  Riviere  and  the  Polignacs.  I  accompanied  to 
St.  Cloud  Madame  Louis  Bonaparte,  having  by  her  side  the 
daughter  of  Lajolais.  The  mother  of  the  First  Consul,  and 
Madame  Joseph,  the  wife  of  General  Murat,  and  her  two 
sisters,  undertook  to  solicit  the  pardon  of  the  others.  When 
I  arrived  at  St.  Cloud,  the  First  Consul,  on  perceiving  me, 
«aid  :  "  What  are  they  doing  in  my  wife's  apartments  ? 
They  are  weeping,  and  she  the  most  of  all.  It  is  a  heart- 
breaking sight." 

I  had  found  him  agitated  ;  his  emotion  grew  more  and 
more  visible.  He  walked  two  or  three  times  up  and  down 
the  closet,  and  said  :  "The  wretches  wanted  to  murder  me  ! 
What  a  base  act  !  " 

He  then  went  out  of  the  room.  A  little  while  afterwards, 
the  sister  of  M.  de  Riviere  and  the  female  relations  of  the 
Polignacs  came  in,  led  by  Madame  Bonaparte,  and  fell  at 
his  feet.  He  did  not  hesitate  a  moment,  but  immediately 
signed  the  pardon  of  Alessieurs  de  Polignac  and  de  Riviere. 
Georges  had  written  to  Murat  a  very  noble  letter,  in  which 
he  solicited,  not  his  own  pardon,  but  those  of  his  com- 
panions. The  General  read  it  to  me  with  emotion.  He 
offered,  however,  to  be  the  first  to  throw  himself  on  the 
English  coast  if  life  was  granted  to  him.  It  was,  he  said, 
only  changing  the  manner  of  his  death  ;  but  in  that  way  at 
least  it  would  be  useful  to  his  country.  His  letter  was  read 
in  a  secret  council.  Bonaparte  himself  appeared  disposed  to 
pardon,  but  it  was  represented  to  him  that  those  men  had 
killed  public  functionaries  in  the  streets  ;  that  no  favour 
■could  be  allowed  to  a  double  murder  ;  that  it  would  be 
showing  a  sort  of  favour  to  murderers,  and  discourage  those 
whose  duty  it  was  to  defend  him  ;  that  Georges,  an  obscure 
inan  in  his  own  party,  was,  after  all,  nothing  but  a  leader  of 