


228  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

addressed  to  Milan,  and  on  the  fifteenth  to  those  of  Naples, 
This  service  was  very  useful  to  him,  and  I  may  say  without 
vanity  that  it  proved  one  of  the  elements  of  his  success. 

The  campaign  began  by  the  affair  of  Ulm,  which  came 
like  a  thunderbolt :  Russia  was  dismayed,  and  hastened  to 
hide  her  hostile  projects.  Austerlitz  forced  Austria  to  bend 
the  knee,  and  the  astonished  Russians  to  fall  back.  The 
following  year,  Prussia  was  defeated  in  the  battle  of  Jena,, 
and  added  a  fresh  proof  to  a  thousand  others,  that  an  abso- 
lute monarchy  is  nothing  if  its  leader  be  not  the  most 
skilful  man  in  the  nation.  This  event  was  also  a  proof  that 
Prussia  is  not  a  strong  nation.  Its  sov^ereign,  dismayed  by 
the  loss  of  one  battle,  sought  an  auxiliary  in  the  most 
distant  north  ;  while  its  army,  which  still  contained  pupils 
of  Frederick  the  Great,  had  lost  all  its  old  energy,  and  even 
the  enthusiasm  of  its  former  glory.  One  day  it  fought,  and 
the  next  it  was  nothing  more  than  a  mass  of  men  without 
discipline  or  energy.  One  only  saved  the  honour  of  the 
monarchy,  and  preserved  some  sparks  of  the  same  fire  that 
influences  all  hearts.  This  was  not  done  by  a  prince  of  the 
House  of  Prussia,  but  by  Bliicher,  and  his  march  towards 
Lubeck,  with  his  noble  defence,  gave  the  Prussians  a  great 
lesson  of  courage  in  adversity,  the  most  important  and  most 
useful  lesson  men  and  nations  can  receive. 

These  two  years'  triumph  did  not  inspire  the  Emperor 
with  an  idea  of  conquering  Europe  to  become  her  master  or 
her  president  ;  it  was  his  genius  and  his  character  that 
developed  the  idea  :  for  those  great  conquerors  of  the  world 
are  all  cast  in  the  same  mould — everywhere  they  mtist  he  the 
first,  or  perish  /  He  had  spent  four  years  of  his  consulate 
in  discussing  the  Civil  Code,  an  edifice  Avhich  has  already 
been  shaken  in  one  of  its  most  important  parts,  but  which 
will  never  be  destroyed  as  long  as  the  love  of  our  country 
and  a  taste  for  civilisation  shall  preside  over  our  destinies. 
In  the  interval  from  his  second  war  to  his  last,  he  busied 
himself  with   the  interior  administration.     Some  disorder^ 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  229 

occasioned  more  by  want  of  experience  than  by  dishonesty, 
had  arisen  during  his  absence.  On  his  return,  he  displaced 
some  persons,  rectified  some  of  his  choices,  and  gave  to  the 
general  administration  a  lively  though  steady  impulse.  His 
astonishing  memory  made  him  master  of  all  things,  not  only 
in  their  ensemble^  but  also  in  their  most  minute  details. 
The  consequence  of  this  was,  that  his  conversation  was 
extremely  perplexing  for  men  who  were  not  perfectly 
acquainted  with  the  subjects  they  were  to  demonstrate.  It 
was  his  constant  application  to  all  sorts  of  affairs,  and  his 
excellent  method  of  classing  them  in  his  mind,  that  enabled 
him  to  carry  his  success  so  far.  It  has  frequently  happened 
to  me  to  be  less  sure  than  he  was  of  the  distances  of  places, 
and  of  a  number  of  particulars  in  my  department  which  he 
knew  well  enough  to  correct.  M.  de  Talleyrand  told  me, 
that  as  he  was  one  day  travelling  with  him  from  Boulogne 
to  Paris,  a  short  time  after  the  army  had  left  the  court  for 
the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  the  Emperor  met  a  detachment  of 
soldiers  going  to  join  their  corps,  which  they  did  not  know 
where  to  find.  Having  inquired  the  number  of  their 
regiment,  he  immediately  calculated  the  day  of  their 
departure,  and  the  road  they  had  taken,  and  said  to  them — 
^'  You  will  find  your  battalion  at  such  a  place."  The  army 
was  at  that  time  two  hundred  thousand  men  strong.  The 
admirable  order  in  which  he  arranged  his  ideas,  and  his 
prodigious  memory,  made  him  as  much  beloved  by  the 
soldiers  as  respected  by  the  officers  of  the  army.  Every 
one  knew  that  he  never  forgot  the  name  of  a  brave  man, 
and  that  it  was  always  sufficient  to  recall  to  his  memory 
some  brave  action  to  ensure  its  recompense  ;  and  whenever 
he  promised  anything,  he  always  kept  his  word. 