


224  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

banditti,  famous  only  for  atrocious  acts  ;  and,  in  one  word^ 
that  if  he  were  spared  nobody  could  with  justice  be 
punished.  He  was  executed  with  nine  of  his  accomplices  ; 
and  the  mob,  according  to  their  custom,  went  to  see  the 
tragedy  performed,  and  to  seek  emotions  at  the  sight  of  the 
violent  death  of  individuals  who  |had  attempted  to  recall 
the  Bourbons. 

This  conspiracy  made  the  First  Consul  sensible  that  he 
ought  to  hasten  his  ascent  to  the  throne.  It  was  the  secret 
wish  of  all  those  whose  ambition  looked  for  favours  which  a 
Republic  was  unable  to  bestow.  To  Bonaparte  it  offered 
not  alone  protection,  but  also  an  extent  of  power,  of  which 
he  felt  the  want  for  the  execution  of  his  great  design. 
Besides  that,  it  was  the  only  means  of  reconciling  to  his 
government  the  Sovereigns  of  Europe,  who  trembled  at  the 
thought  of  a  Republic.  England  alone  excepted,  being 
scarcely  a  monarchy  in  its  foreign  concerns,  all  the  other 
powers  were  convinced  that  the  presence  of  a  monarch  in 
France  would  stem  the  torrent  of  Republican  ideas,  and  the 
discontent  that  prevailed  among  all  nations.  Peace  had 
already  been  concluded  with  all,  and  confirmed  during  the 
Consulate.  The  Emperor  Paul  had  gone  farther  still.  In 
his  hatred  of  the  English,  he  found  a  powerful  auxiliary  in 
the  First  Consul.  Both  these  monarchs  sought  to  mark 
their  reign  by  illustrious  actions,  and  their  common  hatred 
of  the  English  had  brought  them  a  great  deal  nearer  to  one 
another.  There  had  been  some  questions  of  an  expedition 
to  India  by  their  joint  forces.  The  Emperor  Paul  im- 
prudently betrayed  his  secret,  and  perished.  His  death  was 
probably  as  much  owing  to  that  circumstance  as  to  the 
despotism  with  which  he  swayed  his  family  and  his  court. 

The  return  so  skilfully  prepared  from  republic  to  mon- 
archy was  marked  by  the  most  solemn  ceremony  the 
Christian  world  had  witnessed  for  the  last  thousand  years. 
All  Christendom  most  ardently  wished  that  the  kingdom  of 
France,  after  having  presented  to  the  world  a  deplorable 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  225 

example  of  scandalous  impiety,  might  also  offer  a  majestic 
instance  of  a  nearer  return  to  the  Christian  religion.  The 
Pope,  rising  above  all  mean  passions,  hatred,  and  prejudice 
— convinced,  besides,  that  the  leader  of  France  was  directed 
by  Providence — concluded  a  treaty  dictated  by  wisdom, 
policy,  and  the  sanctity  of  his  high  calling.  He  could  not 
have  resisted  the  wish  that  was  expressed  to  him,  to  conse- 
crate the  union  of  Church  and  State  by  the  authority  of  his 
presence,  and  the  pompous  ceremonies  of  that  worship, 
which  acknowledged  in  him  its  sovereign  pontiff.  He  left 
Rome,  and  came  to  France.  The  First  Consul  received 
him  at  Fontainebleau,  and  the  most  majestic  gravity  pre- 
sided over  their  mutual  relations  during  the  whole  of  his 
stay  in  France.  The  ceremony  of  the  coronation  was  the 
most  solemn  that  ever  had  bestowed  a  sacred  character  on 
the  legitimacy  of  a  sovereign.  The  Pope,  a  venerable  old 
man,  surrounded  by  all  his  prelates,  and  by  more  than  one 
hundred  French  bishops  ordained  with  his  consent,  the 
chief  functionaries  of  the  state,  the  whole  diplomatic  body 
of  Europe,  and  the  universal  assent  of  France  and  the  army, 
have  given  to  that  act  a  degree  of  legitimacy  which  the 
House  of  Bourbon  will  never  be  able  to  weaken.  These 
united  claims  to  all  that  is  legitimate  among  men  were 
perhaps  not  sufficiently  felt  by  the  Emperor,  when  he 
abdicated  at  Fontainebleau.  His  resistance  would  un- 
doubtedly have  cast  him  into  captivity  ;  but  what  ought 
his  own  fate  to  have  been  in  his  eyes  ?  He  was  persecuted 
as  a  sov'ereign.  But  his  son  never  could  forfeit  his  right  ; 
and  although  he  abdicated  in  his  favour,  that  modified  act 
was  void,  because  not  expressed  by  his  own  sacrifice.  I 
shall  have  an  opportunity  of  recalling  these  reflections  to 
mind. 