


232  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

and  your  place  will  be  marked  above  the  most  illustrious 
women  that  have  sat  upon  the  throne  of  France.'  I  was 
utterly  disconcerted  at  that  speech,"  added  Josephine  ;  "the 
only  reply  I  could  give  to  so  strange  a  proposal  was  that  I 
would  consider  of  it,  and  give  him  an  answer  in  a  few  days. 
Lend  me,  therefore,  your  advice — you  who  are  at  once  a 
relation  and  a  friend  to  me.  Does  it  not  appear  past  all 
doubt  that  Fouche  has  been  sent  by  the  Emperor,  and  that 
my  fate  is  already  decided  ?  Alas  !  to  descend  from  a 
throne  is  no  sacrifice  to  me.  No  one  knows  how  many 
tears  I  have  shed  over  it !  But  to  lose  also  the  man  on 
whom  I  have  bestowed  all  my  affection — that  is  an  act  of 
self-denial  to  which  my  resolution  is  not  adequate." 

I  shared  the  Empress's  surmise,  that  Fouche  had  been 
sent  by  the  Emperor  ;  but  that  strange  news  surprised  me 
as  much  as  it  did  her,  and  I  asked  for  some  hours  to  reflect 
before  I  gave  her  an  answer.  It  required,  however,  but 
short  meditation  to  be  convinced,  that  whether  the  proposal 
had  really  been  made  by  order  of  the  Emperor,  or  that 
Fouche  wished  to  keep  to  himself  the  glory  of  such  a 
change,  it  was  altogether  too  advantageous  to  be  abandoned, 
and  that  the  sacrifice  was  therefore  unavoidable.  On  the 
other  hand,  I  was  too  well  acquainted  with  the  attachment 
of  the  Empress  to  her  husband  not  to  be  convinced  that  she 
never  would  of  her  own  accord  make  the  sacrifice.  I  had 
been  for  a  long  time  devoted  to  her  :  I  was  her  son's  friend, 
and  her  niece's  husband.  It  was  therefore  by  no  means 
proper  that  I  should  encourage  a  plan  which  had  perhaps 
no  other  source  than  Fouche's  ambition,  and  break  all  the 
ties  which  united  me  to  that  family  :  I  do  not  mean  only 
the  ties  that  might  be  of  service  to  me,  but  chiefly  those  of 
friendship.  I  have,  besides,  never  placed  much  confidence 
in  that  human  wisdom  which  pretends  to  control  events 
by  foretelling  them.  None  but  the  most  enlightened  and 
strongest  minds  are  able  to  see  the  future,  and  even  they  are 
often   mistaken.     I  advised  the  Empress   to  remain   silent 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  233 

on  the  subject,  to  let  the  Emperor  begin,  and  to  declare  to 
Fouche,  that  as  her  first  duty  was  attachment  to  the 
Emperor,  her  second  was  obedience,  and  that  in  consequence 
she  did  not  wish  to  hear  any  more  upon  the  subject  from 
any  other  person  than  the  man  who  held  her  fate  in  his 
hands.  She  approved  of  my  advice,  and  followed  it.  But 
the  storm  was  not  long  before  it  burst.  All  was  undoubtedly 
already  concluded  with  Austria,  when  the  Emperor  sent  for 
Eugene  from  Italy,  that  he  might  comfort  his  mother  at  the 
fatal  moment  of  the  divorce  ;  and  a  few  days  after  he  held  a 
secret  council,  where  he  admitted,  besides  the  grand  officers 
and  ministers,  the  members  of  the  family.  He  explained  in 
that  council  the  motives  which  had  swayed  his  decision,  by 
seeking,  for  the  advantage  of  the  state,  in  another  marriage, 
his  long-lost  hope  of  begetting  direct  issue.  He  gave  them 
afterwards  to  understand  that  he  was  at  liberty  to  choose  his 
new  consort  either  in  the  House  of  Austria,  or  in  that  of 
Russia,  or  in  some  of  the  sovereign  Houses  of  Germany. 
The  grand  officers  of  the  empire,  who  were  probably  already 
acquainted  with  his  secret  determination,  gave  their  votes 
for  an  Austrian  princess.  Prince  Eugene  was  of  the  same 
opinion,  and  adduced  as  his  principal  motive  the  Roman 
Catholic  religion,  in  which  the  Archduchess  was  bred.  The 
King  of  Naples  gave  his  vote  for  a  Russian  princess,  on 
account  of  the  advantage  that  would  accrue  from  a  union 
with  the  most  powerful  sovereign  of  Europe,  and  the  most 
distant  from  France  :  he  opposed  the  alliance  with  Austria, 
by  recalling  the  fatal  experience  we  had  already  reaped  from 
it.  "A  family  alliance,"  he  added,  "never  gave  to  France 
any  real  advantage.  France  will  be  obliged  to  support  all 
the  wrong  steps  of  the  foreign  government,  and  to  share  its 
heavy  and  dangerous  burthens.  Nothing  but  the  situation 
of  Austria  can  force  her  to  a  connection  which  in  her  proud 
heart  she  certainly  detests.  It  is  Austria  who  more  than 
any  other  power  has  given  the  force  of  a  maxim  to  the  idea 
that  sovereigns  have  no  relations.     France  will  be  obliged 