

He  was  then  busy  with  the  organisation  of  the  National 
Guards  of  Paris.  The  choice  of  the  commanders  was  a  very 
important  point.  He  spoke  frequently  with  me  about  that 
organisation.  I  wished  it  to  be  as  military  as  possible. 
It  appeared  to  me  of  very  great  consequence  to  compose 


254  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

it  of  ancient  warriors,  who,  having  their  homes  and  the 
national  glory  to  defend,  would  electrify  the  citizens,  and 
easily  find  in  the  ardent  youth  of  the  metropolis  an  army  of 
brave  men  sufficient  at  least  to  repel  the  enemy  from  their 
walls.  I  could  not  draw  from  him  a  single  observation  on 
the  point,  notwithstanding  the  warmth  with  which  I  spoke. 
The  list  of  the  superior  officers  was  at  last  presented,  I  do 
not   now   recollect   by  whom  ;    but,   the   very  day  of  the 

presentation,   the  Prefect  came   to   pay   me   a   visit, 

to  acquaint  me  that  I  stood  on  the  list  as  commander  of 
a  division.  In  the  evening  I  went  to  the  Emperor,  accord- 
ing to  custom.  Marshal  Berthier  came  there,  and  the 
Emperor  said  to  him  in  my  presence  :  "  Do  you  know 
whom  I  have  appointed  as  Colonel  of  the  National 
Guards  ? "  He  then  read  over  his  list,  and  instead  of 
my  name,  I  heard  that  of  Jaubert,  Governor  of  the  Bank 
of  France.  Berthier  thought  the  choice  very  good  ;  and 
I  was  not  surprised  at  it.  As  for  me,  I  was  angry  at  the 
circumstance  (though  there  was  nothing  but  blows  to  be 
gained),  and  I  left  the  room.  The  following  day,  after 
mass,  I  stood  at  the  audience  next  to  Jaubert.  He  was 
a  councillor  of  State,  formerly  a  barrister  at  Bordeaux,  an 
honourable  and  clever  man,  but  who  never  had  had  any- 
thing to  do  with  the  army,  and  who  was  besides  rather 
a  little  ridiculous  as  a  military  man  on  account  of  his  figure 
and  his  habits  of  life.  The  Emperor  went  up  to  him,  and 
he  thanked  him  respectfully  for  the  new  dignity  with  which 
he  had  been  invested.  The  Emperor  smiled,  and  said  with 
that  joking  air  so  severe  in  a  sovereign  :  "  You  never  rode 
on  horseback,  I  believe?"  "I  beg  your  pardon,  Sire!'' 
"  Oh  yes,  I  suppose  you  rode  on  a  pony  from  Bordeaux 
to  Tonnelle  ;  "  and  then  he  passed  on  to  another.  Poor 
Jaubert  nevertheless  loaded  his  two  shoulders  with  the 
marks  of  his  rank  ;  but  he  never  showed  himself  more 
worthy  of  the  lawyer's  cloak  than  the  day  the  enemy 
attacked  the  capital. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  255 

This  singular  composition  of  the  staff  of  the  National 
Guards  was  explained  by  the  still  more  singular  form  of  the 
Parisian  fortifications.  Plain  palisadoes  surrounded,  ridicu- 
lously enough,  the  barriers  of  the  city  ;  they  were  barely 
sufficient  to  stop  a  few  straggling  Cossacks  who  might 
intrude  so  far.  He  did  not  wish  to  frighten  the  Parisians, 
and  draw  them  from  their  amusements,  by  an  appearance 
of'formidable  fortifications,  and  by  a  warlike  composition  of 
the  National  Guards.  He  undoubtedly  thought  that  if  he 
proved  unable  to  beat  the  enemy,  it  would  be  useless  to  try 
to  defend  a  city  that  presented  so  few  means  of  resistance 
and  so  many  resources  for  rebellion.  Before  he  set  off,  he 
assembled  at  the  Tuileries  all  the  officers  of  the  National 
Guards,  and  taking  his  son  in  his  arms,  he  presented  him 
to  the  assembly,  and  made  a  speech  that  electrified  every 
heart.  The  cries  of  "  Long  live  the  Emperor  !  "  were  so 
energetic  and  so  unanimous,  that  I  was  persuaded  for  some 
time  that  a  feeling  expressed  with  so  much  enthusiasm 
might  perhaps  produce  some  fine  result.  A  little  reflection, 
however,  recalled  the  dismal  truth  that  penetrated  my  soul. 
I  saw  the  Emperor  again  in  the  evening  :  he  spoke  to  me 
of  what  had  happened  in  the  morning.  I  told  him  freely 
that  the  disposition  of  the  public  mind  would  remain  good 
as  long  as  the  enemy  should  not  come  near  Paris ;  but  that 
it  ought  not  to  be  put  to  the  test  if  the  enemy  approached. 
He  smiled,  and,  pulling  me  by  the  ear  according  to  his 
custom,  he  said  :  "  You  old  Roman  !  you  have  no  illusions." 
"  No,  Sire,"  I  replied;  "but  I  rest  great  hopes  on  this 
campaign,  and  a  fine  victory  will  do  more  good  than  all 
this  morning's  enthusiasm."  "  Ah  !  "  said  he,  getting  into 
bed,  "  it  must  be  gained  !  " 