


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  2 5 1 

of  Moscow  had  brought  Russia  and  Austria  to  an  under- 
standing, and  alarmed  the  powers  of  the  second  class. 
Peace  was,  however,  proposed  to  the  Emperor,  but  they 
had  no  longer  to  treat  with  the  sovereign  of  the  world. 
He  began  to  feel  that,  after  having  been  conquered  by  the 
elements,  he  would  be  so  by  man.  Though  his  last  battles 
.  had  turned  out  in  his  favour,  he  now  saw  that  he  might 
have  rivals.  Pretensions  were  brought  forward,  the  most 
important  of  which  was  that  he  should  give  up  his  influence 
over  Germany,  and  abandon  that  part  of  the  continent  to 
the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine.  If  he  had  consented  he  would 
have  abandoned  the  Confederation,  the  House  of  Saxony, 
and  the  kingdom  of  Westphalia — that  is  to  say,  he  would 
have  dethroned  his  brother.  He  would  perhaps  have  done 
so  one  day  of  his  own  accord,  but  he  could  not  bear  to  be 
commanded.  The  Emperor  felt  that  a  power  contested  in 
that  way  is  a  fallen  power.  His  proud  mind,  which  never 
knew  how  to  stop,  recoiled  at  the  proposals.  The  negotia- 
tions broke  off,  and  he  began  the  war  again  without  con- 
sidering the  youth  and  inexperience  of  his  soldiers,  or  the 
discontent  of  his  generals-in-chief.  He  fought  like  a  lion, 
but  like  a  lion  forced  into  its  den.  I  must,  however, 
acknowledge  that  he  was  badly  seconded.  A  short  time 
after  that  period  some  particulars  were  told  me  in  confi- 
dence, but  with  so  much  appearance  of  truth  that  I  cannot 
omit  mentioning  them  here.  The  Cossacks  were  a  new 
engine  which  made  the  war  perilous,  especially  to  the 
officers  who  went  out  to  reconnoitre.  Several  of  them,  and 
particularly  those  of  the  general  staff,  who  were  chosen 
indiscriminately  by  the  major-general,  preferred  giving  us 
reports  taken  from  peasants,  to  exposing  themselves  at  a 
distance  to  the  attacks  of  the  Cossacks.  By  this  means  the 
Emperor  could  no  longer  ascertain  the  truth.  The  reports 
he  received  were  all  satisfactory,  because  they  were  not  true. 
He  thought  himself  able  to  resist,  because  he  entertained  a 
false  idea  of  the  strength  of  the  enemy.     He  commenced 


252  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

the  battle  of  Leipsic  in  the  full  persuasion  that  the  enemy's- 
forces  were  but  half  as  numerous  as  they  really  were.  He 
lost  the  battle,  and  that  defeat  completely  disorganised  his 
army.  His  new  retreat  was  more  disastrous  still  than  when 
he  came  from  Russia.  The  army  still,  however,  made  one 
effort  at  Hanau.  A  German  who  owed  the  first  foundation 
of  his  fortune  to  the  Emperor,  whose  praises  constitute  all 
his  glory,  dared  to  resist  him  at  Hanau,  after  having  abused 
the  confidence  of  his  sovereign,  and  forced  him  to  abandon 
his  allies  ;  but  the  troops  he  commanded  were  destroyed. 
This  was  the  last  struggle  of  Antaeus  in  the  arms  of  Her- 
cules. A  month  later,  when  he  had  again  set  his  foot  on 
the  land  of  his  birth,  his  strength  returned  ;  and  if  he  was 
finally  levelled  to  the  ground,  it  was  only  when  treason 
joined  its  efforts  to  those  of  violence. 