

seven  Venetian  Islands,  situated  so  near  Greece,  made  him 

240 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  241 

fear  a  watchful  and  terrible  enemy,  if  ever  he  wished  to 
resume  Catharine's  old  plans  in  regard  to  the  Ottoman 
empire  :  he  therefore  began  by  degrees  to  seek  a  recon- 
ciliation with  England. 

His  conduct  greatly  displeased  the  Emperor,  who  strongly 
felt  the  consequences  of  it.  All  the  powers  of  the  Continent 
had  suffered  severely  ;  Russia  alone  still  preserved  all  the 
energy  of  her  immense  strength.  The  Emperor  resolved 
to  attack  her.  He  did  not,  however,  carry  his  resolution 
into  effect  without  having  first  exhausted  all  means  of 
conciliation  ;  but  when  he  saw  how  stubborn  the  enemy 
remained,  he  opened  the  campaign.  The  Emperor  Alex- 
ander imagined  he  had  disposed  all  things  favourably  ;  but 
the  first  attacks  were  so  vigorous,  that  he  soon  grew  sensible 
he  should  be  obliged  to  make  one  of  his  last  resources  and 
sacrifice  everything  if  he  wished  to  get  the  advantage  in  this 
giants'  strife.  He  began  by  making  peace  with  the  Turks. 
Unfortunately  for  France,  the  Emperor  Napoleon  thought 
the  Divan  would  be  too  well  aware  of  its  true  interests,  to 
conclude  a  peace  with  its  mortal  enemy  at  a  moment  when 
that  enemy  was  going  to  be  so  powerfully  attacked.  He 
thought  that  the  Divan,  according  to  its  old  maxims,  leaving 
the  Christians  to  weaken  one  another  by  their  wars,  would 
profit  by  their  exhausted  state,  either  to  attack  them,  or 
at  least  to  obtain  that  degree  of  rest  which  would  ensure 
safety.      The   Emperor   sent   off  his   ambassador,   General 

,  too  late,  and  when  he  arrived  at  the  Turkish  frontiers 

he  learned  that  peace  had  been  concluded  between  the 
Ottoman  Porte  and  Russia.  Napoleon  had  another  enemy 
in  Bernadotte,  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden,  whom  he  had 
thought  attached  to  his  interests.  I  never  could  conceive 
why  he  remained  so  unconcerned  at  that  general's  exalta- 
tion. He  was  perhaps  not  sorry  to  get  him  out  of  France  ; 
and,  accustomed  to  obtain  everything  by  force  and  despise 
old  diplomatic  manoeuvres,  he  certainly  had  no  idea  that 
Bernadotte  would  be  in  a  situation  to  injure  him.    However, 

17 


242  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden  laid  down  a  plan  of  resistance, 
such  as  the  most  inveterate  enemy  of  France  could  scarcely 
have  imagined.  To  his  natural  policy,  as  Prince  of  Sweden, 
he  added  his  hatred  of  Napoleon,  which  made  him  give 
able  and  fatal  advice  to  Russia  ;  and  General  Moreau  was 
recalled,  with  a  view  of  being  placed  at  the  head  of  a  Russian 
army,  and  invading  France  as  the  head  of  a  party.  The 
campaign,  which  had  begun  in  so  brilliant  a  manner,  and 
which  with  a  little  more  prudence  the  Emperor  would  have 
concluded  in  good  time,  owed  a  part  of  its  disasters  to  the 
fatal  conviction  of  Napoleon  that  his  enemies  would  always 
yield,  and  that  accumulated  humiliation  would  never  pro- 
duce anything  but  ineffectual  fury.  I  have  often  heard  it 
repeated  that  the  King  of  Naples  greatly  contributed  to  our 
misfortunes,  by  keeping  the  Emperor  in  a  fatal  security. 
The  Russians  caressed  that  King  ;  they  intoxicated  him 
with  perfidious  praises,  which  unfortunately  had  too  much 
power  over  his  mind.  He  was,  they  said,  the  hero  of  the 
French  ;  the  Du  Guesclin,  the  Bayard  of  his  age  ;  he  was 
the  prop  of  the  throne,  and  the  support  of  national  glory  ; 
it  was  with  him  alone  that  they  would  consent  to  treat  ; 
every  concession  that  could  be  made  without  danger,  they 
would  offer  to  him,  happy  if  he  deigned  to  accept  their 
terms.  The  return  of  a  courier  sent  to  the  Emperor 
Alexander  was  looked  for  with  impatience,  and  then  peace 
was  to  be  immediately  signed.  The  King  of  Naples,  who 
had  already  entered  into  private  engagements  with  Russia 
for  the  preservation  of  his  Neapolitan  throne,  was  delighted 
by  finding  in  the  Russians  a  fresh  security.  He  therefore 
kept  the  Emperor  in  an  illusion,  which,  to  say  the  truth,  he 
shared  himself,  though  the  still  burning  ruins  of  Moscow 
ought  to  have  taught  them  that  a  sovereign  capable  of 
taking  such  a  step  would  never  sign  a  disgraceful  peace. 
In  fact,  the  Russians  were  already  preparing  to  harass,  by 
all  possible  means,  the  French  army  in  its  retreat.  The 
disasters   of  that  campaign  are  known.     While  they  were 