


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  243 

going  on,  the  city  of  Paris  witnessed  a  prodigy  such  as  is 
often  seen  on  the  eve  of  the  great  convulsions  of  nature. 
What  all  Europe  in  arms  had  not  dared  to  plan  for  the  last 
twenty  years,  namely,  the  conquest  of  Paris,  a  single  man, 
in  prison,  without  friends,  money,  or  reputation,  was  bold 
enough  to  attempt,  and  almost  succeeded.  I  had  served 
with  Mallet  as  staff  officer  in  1793.  He  was  a  man  of  an 
extraordinary  turn  of  mind  :  his  manners  were  eccentric, 
and  he  was  tormented  with  a  deep  melancholy  that  made 
him  morose  and  disagreeable  to  his  comrades.  The  acces- 
sion of  Bonaparte  to  the  throne  had  displeased  him,  and  he 
had  not  attempted  to  hide  his  feelings.  The  loss  of  his 
liberty,  added  to  the  grief  of  seeing  his  career  stopped 
when  so  many  officers  of  younger  standing  than  himself 
rose  to  the  highest  rank  and  acquired  great  reputation, 
made  him  take  a  part  in  an  ill-conceived  conspiracy  con- 
sisting of  those  old  remains  of  brawling  Jacobins,  who  take 
no  counsel  but  their  rage,  and  have  no  means  of  realising 
their  wretched  projects.  Mallet  was  discovered,  and  the 
particulars  of  the  plot  having  been  laid  before  the  eyes  of 
the  Emperor,  he  shrugged  up  his  shoulders  through  con- 
tempt. After  some  years'  imprisonment.  Mallet  obtained 
leave  to  remove  to  one  of  those  private  hospitals  [maisons 
de  saute)  which  surround  Paris,  and  which  were  for  the 
police  a  sort  of  seminaries,  where  they  kept,  subject  to  a 
severe  supervision,  all  such  persons  who  could  not  be 
convicted,  but  whom,  however,  it  would  have  been  danger- 
ous to  set  entirely  free.  We  had  remained  during  twenty- 
six  days  without  any  accounts  from  the  army  ;  sinister 
reports  were  beginning  to  circulate  ;  when  Mallet,  after 
having  combined  his  plan  with  the  Abbe  Constant,  a  com- 
panion of  his  captivity,  found  means  to  get  out  of  prison, 
dressed  in  a  field-marshal's  uniform,  and  went  at  four 
o'clock  in  the  morning  to  the  barracks  of  the  Municipal 
Legion.  Having  called  up  the  colonel,  who  was  still  asleep, 
he  told  him  with  an  air  of  dismay  that  the  Emperor  was 


244  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

dead  ;  that  the  Senate  was  assembled  to  restore  the 
republican  government  in  France  ;  and  that  he,  Mallet, 
who  had  been  appointed  commander  of  Paris,  wanted  six 
hundred  men  of  the  regiment  to  go  to  the  Hotel  de  Ville 
and  protect  the  Senate,  that  was  assembling  there.  At 
this  fatal  news  the  colonel  was  at  first  seized  with  alarm, 
and  his  grief  for  the  death  of  the  Emperor  made  him  shed 
tears.  The  disorder  of  his  mind  did  not  permit  him  to 
reflect  on  the  news  he  had  heard,  nor  cast  his  eyes  on  the 
suspicious  person  that  stood  before  him.  He  ordered  the 
guard  to  assemble,  and,  overwhelmed  with  consternation, 
left  Mallet  master  of  his  forces.  The  name  of  a  Republic, 
which  recalled  to  mind  licentiousness,  was  a  counterpoise 
to  the  death  of  the  Emperor.  The  most  brilliant  promises 
and  temptations  were  held  out ;  the  oflScers  all  believed 
what  Mallet  chose  to  tell  them.  Each  soldier  was  to  be 
rewarded  by  advancement  and  double  pay  ;  the  officers 
were  to  get  draughts  on  the  treasury  of  twenty  and  even 
fifty  thousand  francs  :  for  Mallet  had  provided  against  every 
difficulty.  He  soon  got  together  four  hundred  men,  at 
whose  head  he  went  to  seek  his  accomplices,  and  the  future 
ministers  of  France,  in  the  prison  of  La  Force.  In  that 
prison  there  had  been  in  confinement,  for  some  time,  an 
adjutant-general,  named  Guidal,  and  General  Lahorie,  of 
whom  I  have  already  spoken.  Both  had  served  with 
Mallet,  but  had  heard  nothing  more  of  him,  and  were  totally 
ignorant  of  his  plans.  Mallet  entered  the  prison,  claimed 
his  two  old  comrades,  and  told  the  great  news.  The  jailer 
refusing  to  deliver  his  prisoners,  he  signed  their  liberation, 
introduced  two  hundred  men,  and  went  to  Lahorie's 
chamber.  The  first  words  Mallet  said  to  him  were,  "You 
are  the  minister  of  police.  Rise,  dress  yourself,  and  follow 
me."  Poor  Lahorie,  who  now  saw,  for  the  first  time  during 
the  lapse  of  twelve  years,  a  man  whom  he  had  never  looked 
upon  as  quite  compos  mentis^  imagined  all  he  heard  was  but 
a  dream,  and  rubbed  his  eyes  while  looking  at  him.     At  last 