

The  fatal  forewarnings  of  the  people  were,  however,  not 
immediately  confirmed.  The  Empress  was  delivered  of  a 
son  on  the  twentieth  of  March.  Her  pregnancy  had  given 
great  hopes  ;  and  the  people,  who  had  frequently  enjoyed 
the  sight  of  her,  showed  her  all  the  interest  she  could  wish 
to  inspire.  Government  had  announced,  that  if  she  were 
delivered  of  a  son  the  salute  would  consist  of  a  hundred 
and  one  guns,  but  only  of  twenty-five  if  it  were  a  princess. 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VA  LE  TTE.  2  39 

At  the  twenty-sixth  gun  the  joy  of  the  people  was  carried 
to  a  fit  of  dehrium,  not  only  in  Paris,  but  all  over  France. 
I  call  the  whole  generation  to  witness  that  all  our  wishes 
were  fulfilled.  The  prosperity  of  the  state  seemed  assured, 
and  France  delivered  from  all  fear  of  revolution.  It  was 
then,  I  have  often  since  repeated  with  many  other  people — 
it  was  then  that  the  Emperor  ought  to  have  hung  up  against 
the  wall  his  conqueror's  sword,  and  sought  rest  in  the 
administration  of  his  extensive  empire.  France  would 
have  been  happy,  and  the  memory  of  the  Bourbons  for  ever 
buried  in  oblivion. 

The  Empress's  delivery  had  been  tedious.  She  suffered 
severely  for  several  hours.  I  arrived  at  the  palace  a  short 
time  before  it  was  over,  although  I  was  not  called  there  by 
my  rank  ;  but  I  had  free  access  at  all  hours.  The  Emperor 
was  much  agitated,  and  went  continually  from  the  saloons 
to  the  bedchamber  and  back  again.  At  last  the  medical 
gentlemen  appearing  in  some  doubt  as  to  the  mode  of 
delivering  the  Princess,  the  Emperor  said  to  them  in  a 
loud  voice  and  much  moved  :  "  Do  as  you  would  with  a 
citizen's  wife.  Save  the  mother,  by  all  means.''  The  child 
came,  however,  safe  into  the  world,  and  the  Emperor 
immediately  presented  it  to  us.  The  wishes  for  his  welfare 
and  the  general  emotions  were  sincere.  May  he  one  day 
realise  all  the  wishes  that  accompanied  his  birth  ! — and  if  it 
be  not  for  the  happiness  of  France,  may  she  still  one  day  be 
proud  that  he  was  born  among  her  children  ! 


CHAPTER    XXVI. 

Notwithstanding  the  glorious  resistance  of  the  Spaniards, 
and  the  varied  success  of  our  armies  in  Spain,  the  Emperor 
had  kept  a  part  of  Prussia  in  his  hands,  and  established  the 
centre  of  his  military  position  in  the  North  at  Hamburg^ 
which  was  intrusted  to  the  care  of  Marshal  Davoust.  The 
Marshal  deserved  the  Emperor's  confidence  by  his  noble 
conduct  at  Jena,  and  by  an  unbounded  devotion.  The 
conditions  of  the  Treaty  of  Tilsit,  in  regard  to  England, 
were  only  to  remain  in  force  for  three  years.  The  Emperor 
Alexander  was  perplexed  by  the  state  of  his  trade.  The 
produce  of  his  empire  remained  on  hand,  the  English 
refusing  to  receive  it ;  and  the  great  landowners  of  the 
country,  who  were  noblemen,  complained.  In  a  govern- 
ment where  the  life  of  the  sovereign  is  frequently  exposed 
to  the  effect  of  conspiracies,  it  is  perhaps  more  dangerous 
than  in  other  places  to  wound  the  passions  and  interests  of 
the  great,  as  it  is  not  necessary  there  to  stir  up  the  people, 
while  three  or  four  ferocious  rebels  and  a  handful  of  soldiers 
may  decide  the  fate  of  the  sovereign  and  the  empire.  This 
consideration  had  certainly  a  due  influence  on  the  new 
determination  of  the  Emperor  Alexander.  He  was  besides 
but  little  satisfied  with  his  ally  Napoleon.  The  rigour  with 
which  Prussia  had  been  used  displeased  him,  and  the 
sovereignty  of  Italy  vexed  him.  The  dominion  of  the 
French    in    the    latter   country,    and    the  possession  of  the 