


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  245 

the  assurance  of  the  death  of  the  Emperor,  of  the  assembhng 
of  the  Senate,  of  the  re-establishment  of  the  RepubHc,  con- 
vinced him  that  he  once  more  witnessed  another  of  those 
revolutions  so  common  in  modern  history.  He  rose,  dressed 
himself,  and  found  six  hundred  men  at  the  gate.  With 
Guidal  by  his  side,  he  immediately  went  to  the  Minister  of 
Police,  who  was  still  in  bed.  The  soldiers  entered  quietly, 
and  without  any  obstacle  ;  when,  finding  the  door  of  the 
Minister's  chamber  locked,  they  broke  it  open  with  the  butt 
ends  of  their  muskets.  The  Minister,  waking  at  the  noise, 
jumped  out  of  bed,  and,  without  waiting  to  dress  himself, 
rushed  upon  the  murderers.  He  was  seized,  and  treated 
in  the  most  brutal  manner  ;  but  at  last,  at  sight  of  the 
prisoner  Lahorie,  and  the  intelligence  of  the  death  of  the 
Emperor,  he  began  to  comprehend  that  he  was  the  victim 
and  the  dupe  of  a  revolution.  He  obtained,  not  without 
some  trouble,  leave  to  dress  ;  and  Guidal  led  him,  escorted 
by  a  detachment,  to  the  prison  of  La  Force.  On  the  Pont 
Neuf  he  jumped  from  the  cabriolet,  but  was  retaken.  When 
he  arrived  at  the  prison  the  jailer  burst  into  tears.  Savary 
whispered  to  him — "Place  me  in  your  darkest  dungeon 
and  hide  the  key  of  it.  God  knows  what  is  the  meaning 
of  this,  but  it  will  all  clear  up."  A  few  minutes  later  the 
Prefect  of  Police  was  also  brought  to  the  prison  ;  a  detach- 
ment had  gone  to  fetch  him,  and  had  dragged  him  along. 
Whilst  the  heads  of  the  police  were  thus  treated.  Mallet 
went  to  General  Hullin,  commander  of  the  military 
division  and  of  the  city  of  Paris.  The  general  was  just 
getting  up  to  receive  an  order  from  the  Minister  of  the 
War  Department,  which  could  be  delivered  into  no  hands 
but  his  own.  Mallet  was  accompanied  by  some  ofllcers  of 
his  troop.  On  seeing  the  general,  he  said  to  him  with  the 
greatest  coolness,  and  with  an  air  of  gravity,  "  I  am  very 
mortified.  General,  to  have  so  painful  a  commission  to  execute ; 
but  my  orders  are  to  arrest  you."  Hullin  remonstrated,  and 
looking  at  Mallet,   whose  face   he   knew,  he  said,  "  How  ! 


246  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

Mallet,  is  it  you  ?  You  arrest  me — a  prisoner  ?  How  did 
you  come  here  ?  What  is  your  business  doing  here  ?  " — 
"  The  Emperor  is  dead."  These  words  struck  Hullin  dumb, 
and  Mallet  repeated  the  fable  he  had  invented.  However, 
the  arrest  and  the  order  to  go  to  prison  appeared  wondrous 
strange  to  the  general.  He  continually  spoke  ;of  the  death 
of  the  Emperor  and  his  own  imprisonment  : — at  length 
asked  Mallet  to  show  him  his  order.  "  Very  willingly," 
replied  the  other,  "  will  you  step  with  me  into  your  closet  ?  " 
Hullin  turned  round,  and  as  he  was  entering  the  closet  he 
fell,  struck  by  a  bullet  that  touched  his  head.  While  lying 
on  the  ground,  he  saw  his  murderer  looking  coolly  at  him, 
and  preparing  to  fire  once  more,  but,  thinking  him  dead,  he 
left  the  place.  He  crossed  the  Place  Vendome,  and  went 
to    the   staflF,    whither   he   had    sent   before   him    a    letter, 