

The  army  returned  in  the  most  grievous  disorder.  The 
sick  and  wounded  Avere  innumerable.  There  were  neither 
hospitals  nor  private  houses  sufficient  to  contain  them 
all,  and  the  most  destructive  of  all  diseases,  the  typhus, 
attacked  not  only  the  army,  but  all  the  towns  and  villages 
through  which  the  troops  passed. 

The  Emperor  returned  for  the  second  time  to  Paris  on 
the  loth  or  nth  of  November.  The  attachment  of  the 
French  for  him  was  so  great  that  on  all  sides  nothing  was 
heard  but  cries  of  grief ;  and  if  here  and  there  some  insults 
were  uttered,  they  must  be  laid  to  the  account  of  the  emi- 
grants, who  began  to  foresee  his  fall  and  the  return  of  the 
Bourbons.  He  remained  about  six  weeks  in  Paris.  I  think 
I  have  already  said  in  these  Memoirs,  that  whenever  he  was 
unfortunate  he  turned  to  me.  I  must  not  be  proud  of  that 
circumstance.  My  attachment  to  his  person  was  a  duty, — 
my  antipathy  to  ambition  and  intrigue  was  natural  to  me. 
A  habit  of  reflection  made  me  in  general  consider  affairs  in 
their  true  light  ;  and  as  I  was  very  conveniently  placed  for 
observing  them  in  their  ensemble^  I  gave  him  my  opinion 
with  a  frankness  and  sincerity  to  which  the  ear  of  sovereigns 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  253 

is  but  little  accustomed.  At  my  arrival  he  commanded  me 
to  come  every  evening  into  the  bath-room  next  to  his  bed- 
chamber. He  then  had  me  called  in  to  him,  while  he 
warmed  himself,  undressed  before  the  fire.  'We  talked 
familiarly  together  for  an  hour  before  he  went  to  bed. 
The  first  evening  I  found  him  so  cast  down,  so  over- 
whelmed, that  I  was  frightened.  I  went  to  see  his  secre- 
tary, who  was  my  friend.  I  communicated  to  him  my 
fears  that  his  mind,  formerly  so  strong,  had  begun  to  sink. 
■"  You  need  not  fear,"  he  replied  ;  "he  has  lost  nothing  of 
his  energy  ;  but  in  the  evening  you  see  him  quite  bent 
down  with  fatigue.  He  goes  to  bed  at  eleven  o'cleck,  but 
he  is  up  at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  till  night 
every  moment  is  devoted  to  business.  It  is  time  to  put  an 
end  to  this,  for  he  must  sink  under  it,  and  I  shall  fall  before 
him." 

The  principal  subject  of  our  conversation  was  the  situa- 
tion of  France.  I  used  to  tell  him  with  a  degree  of  frankness, 
the  truth  of  which  could  alone  make  him  pardon  its  rude- 
ness, that  France  was  fatigued  to  an  excess  ;  that  it  was 
quite  impossible  for  her  to  bear  much  longer  the  burthen 
with  which  she  was  loaded,  and  that  she  would  undoubtedly 
throw  off  the  yoke,  and  according  to  custom  seek  an  allevia- 
tion to  her  sufferings  in  novelty,  her  favourite  divinity. 
I  said  in  particular  a  great  deal  of  the  Bourbons,  who, 
I  observed,  would  finally  inherit  his  royal  spoil,  if  ever 
fortune  laid  him  low.  The  mention  of  the  Bourbons  made 
him  thoughtful,  and  he  threw  himself  on  his  bed  without 
uttering  a  word  ;  but  after  a  few  minutes,  having  ap- 
proached to  know  whether  I  might  retire,  I  saw  that  he  had 
fallen  into  a  profound  sleep. 