


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  237 

the  gallery  and  set  fire  to  it.  One  of  the  chamberlains,  a 
man  of  very  tall  stature,  perceived  it  and  tore  it  down  ;  but 
the  flames  extended  with  so  much  rapidity,  that  in  a  few 
seconds  they  reached  the  saloon,  and  quickly  spread  all 
round  the  room.  Everybody  ran  toward  the  garden  ;  but, 
as  there  was  only  one  door,  the  company  was  all  crowded 
to  the  same  point  ;  the  floor  gave  way,  and  many  persons 
fell  into  a  hollow  of  more  than  five  feet  deep.  The  con- 
fusion then  grew  excessive.  The  cries  of  despair  and  fright, 
the  dismay  and  the  wish  to  escape  from  the  danger,  that 
spared  neither  sex  nor  rank,  made  the  scene  horrible  to 
witness.  The  flames  having  soon  reached  and  consumed 
the  roof  of  the  saloon,  the  ceiling  fell  in,  and  the  whole 
presented  the  appearance  of  a  vast  furnace.  In  three 
minutes'  time  the  flames  had  spread  in  every  direction. 
The  company  escaped  to  the  gardens  and  the  streets,  half 
covered  with  the  remainder  of  their  burning  clothes.  The 
Emperor  had  retired  just  as  the  fire  began  to  communicate 
with  the  saloon  ;  but  after  having  placed  the  Empress  in 
safety,  he  quickly  returned  in  a  plain  dress  with  Prince 
Eugene,  who  had  saved  the  Princess  Augusta  with  great 
presence  of  mind.  At  that  mom.ent  the  sight  was  appalling. 
Some  unfortunate  women  who  had  fallen  under  the  floor 
had  attempted  to  get  out  through  the  beams  that  supported 
it  ;  but,  already  half  burnt,  they  vainly  extended  their 
wounded  arms  through  the  bars,  and  when  assistance  came 
it  was  too  late.  Those  who  were  saved  died  a  short  time 
after  in  excruciating  pain.  The  Princess  de  la  Dijon,  a 
woman  as  remarkable  for  her  beauty  as  she  was  respectable 
for  her  virtue,  was  carried,  nearly  half  burnt,  to  the  lodge 
of  a  poor  portress  of  a  neighbouring  hotel.  She  was  speech- 
less. The  old  woman  covered  her  with  her  own  clothes  ; 
and  a  Swedish  officer,  who  had  saved  her,  without  knowing 
who  she  was,  brought  her  in  a  hackney  coach  to  Passy, 
where  he  supposed  she  lodged,  as  that  had  been  the  only 
word  she  had  been  able  to  utter.     He  went  with  her  from 


238  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

door  to  door,  until  at  last  her  servants  recognised  her  voice. 
The  unfortunate  lady  died  four  days  afterwards,  in  the 
prime  of  her  age,  after  having  given  with  tears  her  blessing 
to  her  daughter,  who  was  married  at  her  bedside. 

The  fate  of  the  Princess  Schwartzenberg,  sister-in-law  to 
the  Ambassador,  was  no  less  tragical.  She  was  at  the  ball 
with  her  children  :  radiant  in  beauty,  splendidly  dressed, 
and  glittering  in  diamonds.  She  saved  herself  in  the 
garden,  where,  not  seeing  her  eldest  daughter  by  her  side, 
and  having  sought  for  her  in  vain,  the  courageous  mother 
flew  back  to  the  saloon.  The  floor  sunk  under  her  feet,  and 
she  was  engulfed  in  the  flames.  A  few  hours  later,  when 
the  fire  was  at  last  extinguished,  she  was  found  a  shapeless 
■corpse,  burnt  to  the  bones,  blackened,  and  shrunk  to  half 
her  size.  She  was  only  known  by  the  rings  she  wore  on 
her  fingers.  Some  business  had  kept  me  at  home  ;  the 
blaze  of  the  fire  and  the  public  alarm  made  me  fly  to  the 
fatal  scene.  It  was  no  longer  possible  to  come  near  it. 
The  mob  filled  all  the  avenues.  Their  unpitiful  memory 
recalled  the  misfortunes  of  the  Place  Louis  XV.  at  the 
marriage  of  Marie  Antoinette.  The  most  dismal  com- 
parisons, the  most  sinister  predictions  accompanied  the 
name  of  Maria  Louisa  ;  and  I  went  back,  my  heart  deeply 
grieved  at  the  behaviour  of  the  crowd,  who  showed  so  little 
sensibility  for  the  victims,  and  who,  by  the  cruel  malice  of 
their  observations,  gave  but  too  sure  a  proof  that  they  felt 
no  pity  for  the  unfortunate  persons,  whose  pleasures  and 
high  rank  wounded  their  vanity. 