

acquainting    the    adjutant-general,    N ,    that    he    was 

advanced  to  the  rank  of  major-general.  The  latter,  when 
he  saw  Mallet,  could  not  disguise  his  doubts.  Struggling 
between  his  duty  and  his  ambition,  he  was  perhaps  at  the 
point  of  yielding,  and  entering  into  arrangements,  when 
one  of  the  heads  of  the  military  police,  the  old  Colonel 
Laborde,  came  into  the  apartment.  The  appearance  of  that 
man  showed  sufficiently  that  he  could  be  neither  deceived 
nor  seduced.  Mallet  was  therefore  going  to  blow  out  his 
brains,  when  Laborde  seized  him  abruptly  by  the  arm, 
called  for  assistance,  and  had  him  arrested.  This  Laborde 
was  an  old  soldier,  who,  having  long  retired  from  active 
service,  had  chosen  Paris  for  his  camp  and  the  scene  of  his 
observations.  Attached  to  the  police  under  all  possible 
governments,  no  one  could  impose  upon  him  by  illusions. 
His  youth  had  been  passed  in  vice,  and  he  now  felt  pleasure 
in  pursuing  it  in  its  last  holds.  He  made  use  of  his  privilege 
with  all  the  despotism  which  subalterns  of  that  class  love  to 
exercise  upon  the  rabble.  Rank,  titles,  glory,  virtue,  crime 
itself,  is  sacred  to  them  as  long  as  it  remains  prosperous  ; 
but,  as  soon  as  the  day  of  misfortune  arrives,  they  trample 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  247 

upon  everything,  and  neither  respect  nor  pity  must  be 
expected  from  them.  Laborde  had  seen  Mallet  in  prison. 
At  the  first  report  of  the  Minister  of  Police  being  arrested, 
he  set  himself  at  the  head  of  a  platoon  of  infantry,  went  to 
the  office,  and  found  Lahorie  calmly  seated  at  his  desk, 
writing  orders,  after  those  he  had  given  at  the  Hotel  de 
Ville.  He  had  him  immediately  seized  and  tied  to  his  arm- 
chair, while  he  addressed  to  him  reproaches  that  opened  the 
unfortunate  Lahorie's  eyes  to  the  madness  of  Mallet.  He 
then  went  to  the  staff,  where  he  arrested  the  latter,  and, 
flying  to  the  prison,  he  delivered  the  Minister  and  Prefect 
of  Police.  The  Prefect  went  home  ;  but  his  hotel  being  still 
full  of  the  soldiers  who  had  arrested  him,  they  pursued  him, 
and  he  was  glad  to  find  a  refuge  in  a  neighbouring  house. 
All  these  scenes,  well  deserving  of  a  place  in  the  Arabian 
Nights'  Entertainments,  happened  between  five  and  eight 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  By  nine  all  was  over  ;  and  the 
happy  inhabitants  of  Paris,  when  they  awoke,  learned  the 
singular  event,  and  made  some  tolerably  good  jokes  upon  it. 
The  attempt  of  Mallet  was  nothing  more  than  the 
extravagance  of  a  madman  whose  imagination  had  been 
excited.  It  made,  however,  a  deep  impression  on  the 
public,  and  became  a  subject  of  dismal  reflection.  In  the 
following  year  the  Royalists  did  not  fail  to  place  Mallet 
among  the  number  of  their  martyrs,  and  honoured  with 
the  name  of  a  Bourbonian  attempt  the  mad  freak  of  a 
man  who,  far  from  ever  having  belonged  to  that  party,  had 
always  been  worked  upon  by  Republican  ideas.  His  plan 
was  a  sufficient  demonstration  of  that.  He  had  planned  the 
assembling  of  the  Senate  ;  he  had  spoken  of  nothing  else  to 
the  soldiers  than  the  re-establishment  of  Liberty  and  the 
Republic  ;  and  he  could  only  hope  to  succeed  by  stirring 
up  the  lowest  classes  of  the  people.  Would  the  confusion 
have  been  considerable,  and  long  enough  for  him  to  have 
succeeded,  in  case  the  Emperor  had  really  been  killed  ?  I 
do  not  believe  it  ;  but  at  least  I  must  suppose,  from  the 