


248  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

knowledge  I  had  of  his  character,  that  he  would  not  have 
fled,  but  would  have  committed  suicide.  The  noble  firm- 
ness he  showed  until  the  moment  of  his  death  is  a  proof  of 
that.  A  few  days  after  he  had  been  arrested  news  was 
received  from  the  Emperor.  He  was  by  no  means  discon- 
certed, and  expressed  no  other  feeling  than  that  of  regret 
for  the  loss  of  liberty  and  the  prolongation  of  the  Emperor's 
despotism.  The  most  incredible  thing  was  that  in  the 
midst  of  the  confusion,  during  three  hours,  nobody  thought 
of  the  Empress  or  her  son.  The  Prefect  of  the  department 
had  quietly  slept  at  his  country  seat  in  the  Forest  of  Vin- 
cennes.  He  was  coming  home  on  horseback,  when  an  express 
met  him  and  delivered  to  him  a  note,  wherein  he  found, 
written  with  pencil,  these  two  words,  "  Fuit  Imperator." 
At  first  they  appeared  inexplicable.  The  express  had  not 
waited  for  an  answer,  and  it  was  only  after  a  good  deal  of 
reflection,  and  after  having  read  the  note  four  times,  that 
he  at  last  understood  it.  He  hastened  to  the  Hotel  de 
Ville,  where  he  found  everything  in  confusion,  and  General 
Lahorie  already  giving  orders  for  the  Assembly.  He  then 
burst  into  tears,  and  found  no  other  resource  but  submis- 
sion. The  Colonel,  who  first  had  been  surprised  by  Mallet, 
did  not  show  either  more  firmness  or  more  presence  of  mind 
than  the  Prefect.  All  those  who  had  been  surprised  by  the 
news  carried  their  reflection  no  farther.  It  seemed  as  if 
everything  was  over  by  the  death  of  the  Emperor,  and  that 
he  had  taken  along  with  him  not  only  the  secret  of  the 
government,  but  all  the  foresight  and  energy  of  those  who 
were  devoted  to  him.  There  is  not  the  least  doubt  but  two 
hours  later  every  one  would  have  come  to  their  senses  ; 
but  then,  perhaps,  it  would  have  been  too  late.  I  did  not 
conceal  this  observation  from  the  Emperor,  who  looked 
very  grave  when  he  heard  it.  Generals  Mallet,  Lahorie, 
and  Guidal,  who  was  arrested  a  few  hours  after  the  rest, 
and  about  fifteen  poor  officers,  who  had  committed  no  other 
fault  than  obeying   generals  whom  they  looked   upon   as 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  249 

their  leaders,  were  condemned  to  death.  In  going  to  the 
fatal  spot  these  officers  cried,  "  Long  live  the  Emperor  !  " 
They  all  died  with  a  courage  bordering  on  indifference  : 
several  of  them  were  not  killed  at  the  first  discharge,  and 
they  reproached  the  soldiers  for  their  awkwardness. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

The  first  account  from  the  Emperor,  dated  from  the 
Beresina,  brought  the  distressing  particulars  of  the  retreat. 
Those  that  were  given  in  the  bulletins,  and  especially  in  the 
29th,  could  not  be  read  without  horror.  It  was  not  sur- 
prising that  many  persons  should  have  been  deluded  by  the 
austere  energy  that  had  presided  over  their  composition, 
and  should  even  feel  some  indignation  at  it.  Accustomed 
for  so  long  a  period  to  nothing  but  triumph,  the  particulars 
of  our  first  defeat,  accompanied  by  so  much  calamity,  spread 
consternation  all  over  France.  The  enemies  of  the  Em- 
peror grew  more  numerous,  and  skilfully  made  use  of  the 
circumstance  to  raise  an  outcry  against  his  tyranny.  Just 
as  the  agitation  of  the  public  mind  was  at  the  strongest,  his 
arrival  at  the  Tuileries  was  suddenly  published.  He  ad- 
mitted everybody  ;  showed  severity  towards  some — intre- 
pidity in  presence  of  all.  He  explained  the  cause  of  the 
misfortune  of  the  campaign,  and  without  seeking  to  dis- 
semble the  fault  that  had  been  committed,  he  boldly  claimed 
the  support  he  wanted,  to  begin  the  war  anew,  repel  the 
enemy,  and  conclude  a  peace,  of  which  he  more  than  any 
one  felt  the  absolute  necessity.  His  noble  courage  in 
wrestling  with  misfortune  electrified  the  whole  country. 
Three  hundred  thousand  men  were  granted  ;  the  young 
came  forward  with  courage,  the  old  with  firmness.  Within 
a  few  months  an  army  was  raised,  admirably  brave,  though 
still  uninstructed,  and  the  fields  of  Lutzen  and  Bautzen 
witnessed  fresh  triumphs.     The  disasters  of  the  campaign 