

The  following  day  I  returned  to  M.  Pasquier's  :  he  had 
just  come  back  from  the  camp,  whither  he  had  been 
summoned  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia.  "  You  took  your 
resolution  last  night,"  he  said  to  me  ;  "  I  adopted  mine 
this  morning.  I  have  received  an  order  to  continue  my 
functions.  Napoleon's  reign  is  over,  and  I  have  written  to 
Fontainebleau  to  acquaint  them  that  they  must  no  longer 
reckon  upon  me.     My  family  has  always  been  attached  to 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  265 

the  House  of  Bourbon.  I  have  served  the  Emperor  faith- 
fully. I  have  taken  no  share  in  the  events  which  have  cast 
him  from  the  throne,  and  I  return  to  the  ancient  dynasty." 
"  I  do  not  pretend  to  discuss  your  motives,"  was  my  reply  ; 
"  but  for  me,  I  owe  everything  to  the  Emperor  :  I  shall  not 
go  near  his  successor.  My  public  career  is  at  an  end,  and  I 
return  to  my  obscurity.  I  have  only  one  favour  to  claim  of 
you  :  protect  me  in  that  retreat  where  I  intend  to  go  and 
live  with  my  family,  and  let  not  malevolence  disturb  the 
peace  I  wish  to  enjoy." 

With  these  words  we  separated.  I  was  already  convinced 
that,  with  the  men  Louis  XVIII.  was  obliged  to  make  use 
of,  his  difficulties  would  multiply  at  every  step  ;  and  without 
foreseeing  as  yet  the  events  that  broke  out  eleven  months 
later,  I  was  glad  to  remain  a  stranger  to  duties  for  which  I 
felt  so  strong  an  aversion,  that  neither  the  sanctity  of  an 
oath,  nor  the  most  rigid  integrity,  could  have  bound  me  to 
them  on  the  20th  of  March  following,  without  the  greatest 
struggle  and  grief  on  my  part. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  entered  the  city  at  the  head  of 
several  beautiful  divisions  of  infantry,  appointed  as  if  for  a 
parade.  He  was  preceded  by  a  numerous  and  brilliant  staff. 
As  the  procession  advanced  along  the  boulevards,  it  was  soon 
augmented  by  numbers  of  Frenchmen  whom  our  armies  had 
never  seen  in  their  ranks.  The  Montmorencys,  the  Don- 
deauvilles,  the  Noailles,  who  then  faced  the  enemy  for  the 
first  time,  were  eager  to  welcome  him  to  the  metropolis,  and 
to  lay  at  his  feet  the  homage  and  joy  of  the  French  people. 
One  might  have  thought  for  twenty  years  France  had  been 
wishing  for  their  presence.  A  little  farther,  all  the  genteel 
company  of  the  Paris  drawing-rooms  joined  the  retinue. 
Women  dressed  out  as  for  difete^  and  almost  frantic  with  joy, 
waved  their  pockethandkerchiefs  and  cried,  "  Long  live  the 
Emperor  Alexander  !  "  The  windows  of  the  houses  and  the 
open  windows  were  filled  with  people.  I  was  not  so  far  off 
but  that  I   distinguished   among  them   many  ladies  whose 


266  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 