

I  8  .57 


258  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

he  might  not  be  crushed  by  the  violent  measures  of  the 
boisterous  Minister  of  Police,  his  ingenuity  and  skill  were 
exercised  to  throw  trouble  and  perplexity  in  the  way  of  the 
Duke  de  Rovigo.  It  was  he  who,  according  to  public 
report,  had  presided  at  the  execution  of  the  Duke 
d'Enghien  :  he  had  not  striven  to  hide  the  particulars  of 
it,  which  had  been  exaggerated  ;  and  nothing  could  equal 
the  hatred  the  royalists  bore  him.  He  had  a  numerous 
family,  and  his  fortune  was  not  sufficient  for  him  to  do 
without  the  salary  he  drew  from  Government. 

How  could  he,  besides,  preserve  his  rank,  or  even  his 
tranquillity,  under  the  reign  of  the  Bourbons  ?  M.  de 
Talleyrand,  after  having  presented  him  with  a  faithful 
picture  of  what  his  situation  would  be  in  case  the 
Emperor  should  fall,  an  event  which  appeared  scarcely 
to  be  avoided,  applauded  his  fidelity  and  devotion  ;  but 
advised  him  not  to  shut  out  from  himself  all  possibility 
of  pardon,  or  even  favour,  at  the  hands  of  Louis  XVIII. 
by  taking  measures  of  rigour  and  violence  against  the 
royalists,  the  consequences  of  which  might  be  fatal  even 
to  the  Emperor  himself,  as  they  might  occasion  disturbance 
in  the  capital  which  the  police  would  not  be  able  to 
suppress.  The  Minister  was  most  certainly  shaken.  The 
Messieurs  Polignac,  who  had  been  confined  since  the  affair 
of  Georges,  first  in  a  state  prison,  and  then  in  a  maison 
de  sante^  escaped  about  that  time,  after  having  given  a 
thorough  beating  to  the  police  inspector,  who  was  to  have 
transferred  them  to  a  prison  a  considerable  distance  from 
Paris.  The  Duchess  of  Rovigo  was  their  relative  ;  and 
a  few  days  after  the  entrance  of  the  Count  d'Artois,  the 
Duke  told  me  that  the  Messieurs  Polignac  had  just  been  with 
him,  and  had  requested  him  to  publish  in  print  that  it  was 
to  him  they  owed  their  liberty.  He  waived  the  proposal  ; 
but  it  was  easy  to  judge  that  he  was  not  sorry  the  Count 
should  believe  the  truth  of  the  anecdote. 

After  the  battle  of  Montereau,  the  Emperor  had  given 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  259 

the  Duke  de  Rovigo  an  order  to  send  M.  de  Talleyrand 
from  Paris,  with  a  positive  injunction  to  cut  off  all  .com- 
munications between  him  and  his  friends  in  the  metropolis. 
I  was  in  the  Duke's  closet  when  he  opened  the  despatch, 
which  grieved  him  extremely.  "What  is  the  Emperor 
thinking  of  ?  "  he  said.  *'  Have  not  I  enough  to  do  to  keep 
.  in  awe  all  the  royalists  in  France  ?  Does  he  want  to  throw 
another  Faubourg  St.  Germain  on  my  shoulders  ?  Talley- 
rand alone  is  able  to  keep  them  at  peace,  and  prevent  them 
from  taking  some  foolish  step.  I  shall  not  execute  that 
order,  and  by  and  by  the  Emperor  will  thank  me  for  it." 