

I  remained  that  night  at  the  Tuileries.  He  started  at 
four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  He  appeared  cheerful,  firm, 
and  in  perfect  good  health.  I  had  always  seen  him  so  when 
departing,  and  the  state  of  his  mind  inspired  me  with  fresh 
confidence. 


256  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

General  Sebastian!  returned  from  the  army  and  remained 
two  days  at  Paris.  He  gave  me  sad  particulars  of  the 
campaign.  The  enemies  were  so  numerous,  the  disasters 
so  great,  the  country  so  horribly  ravaged,  that  it  appeared 
difficult  for  the  Emperor  to  hold  out  much  longer.  He 
soon  felt,  after  the  observations  I  made,  how  dangerous  it 
would  be  to  make  known  his  alarms,  which  he  had  already 
in  some  way  propagated  ;  and  wishing  to  neutralise  their 
effect,  he  mentioned  the  necessity  of  defending  Paris  as  the 
only  means  of  saving  France.  Furious  complaints  and 
sarcasms  arose  against  him  in  Talleyrand's  circle,  and 
among  all  the  high  nobility,  who  already  were  in  cor- 
respondence with  the  Count  d'Artois.  He  left  the  capital, 
hooted  by  the  emigrants  ;  and  if  he  told  the  Emperor  all 
he  really  thought,  I  cannot  but  think  that  it  was  upon  his 
report  that  the  Emperor  commanded  the  Minister  of  Police 
to  arrest  Prince  Talleyrand,  and  send  him  far  from  the 
metropolis. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

While  the  Emperor,  opposed  by  all  the  armies  of  Europe, 
was  struggling  like  a  lion,  running  from  one  to  another, 
thwarting  all  the  manoeuvres  of  the  enemy  by  the  rapidity 
of  his  movements,  deceiving  them  in  all  their  calculations, 
and  exhausting  them  with  fatigue,  other  foes,  much  more 
dangerous  than  they,  were  in  Paris  entering  into  a  secret 
league  with  foreigners  to  hasten  his  fall.  M.  de  Talleyrand, 
whom  they  had  chosen  for  their  leader,  did  not,  however, 
second  their  hostile  measures  as  much  as  their  impatience 
required.  The  great  name  of  Napoleon — fifteen  years  of 
brilliant  victories — the  inexhaustible  resources  of  his  genius 
— his  unconquerable  vigour  of  mind — the  still  existing 
possibility  of  a  peace  in  the  midst  of  battle — finally,  the 
sentiments  of  France,  who  still  wished  well  to  the  Emperor 
— all  these  circumstances  rendered  the  greatest  prudence 
necessary.  Besides,  what  had  he  to  expect  from  the 
Bourbons  ?  Could  they  have  forgotten  that  his  conduct 
had  been  ever  hostile  towards  them  for  the  last  five-and- 
twenty  years  ? — Director  of  the  Constituent  Assembly — 
Minister  of  the  Directory,  and  Napoleon — a  married  priest, 
how  could  he  find  grace  in  their  eyes  ?  On  the  other  hand, 
if  France  finally  triumphed  over  so  many  enemies,  what 
would  he  not  have  to  fear  from  an  irritated  conqueror,  who 
could  not  but  be  acquainted  with  his  treasonable  conduct  ? 
Was  he  destined  to  end,  far  from  his  country  and  in  exile, 
the  last  days  of  an  infirm  and  disgraced  old  age  ?  He  there- 
fore did  his  utmost  to  keep  his  friends  in  bounds  ;  and,  that 