

'  When  the  Duke  de  Ragusa  arrived  at  Meaux,  he  sent  his  aide-de- 
camp, Fabvier,  to  apprise  Government  of  his  perilous  position.  I  met 
that  officer  at  the  hotel  of  the  minister,  Clarke.  He  complained  bitterly 
that  Prince  Joseph  had  left  him  three  hours  waiting  in  the  Luxembourg, 
before  he  could  gain  admittance.  "  He  is  not  yet  up,"  was  all  the  answer 
he  received.  "Why  should  we  d'isturb  him?  You  will  not  be  better 
satisfied  with  this  one  than  with  the  other,"  said  I.  In  fact,  when  Fabvier 
came  out  of  the  closet  of  the  minister,  he  said  to  me — "  What  will  become 
of  us,  good  God?  We  have  nothing  else  to  do  than  to  get  ourselves 
killed." 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  261 

This  energetic  advice  appeared  to  the  weakness  of  the 
others  no  better  than  revolutionary  boasting.  Cambaceres 
read  a  letter  from  the  Emperor,  but  of  old  date,  which  con- 
tained the  order  never  to  expose  the  Empress  and  her  son 
to  the  risk  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  This  put 
an  end  to  all  debate,  and  a  resolution  was  taken  to  send  the 
Court  to  Blois,  with  the  members  of  Government. 

Among  the  considerations  that  determined  the  Council 
not  to  follow  the  advice  of  keeping  the  Empress  in  Paris, 
one  of  the  most  important,  and  which  had  a  great  influence 
over  the  deliberations,  was  the  fate  of  the  Emperor. 

In  fact,  what  would  have  become  of  him,  if  the  Allies  had 
acknowledged  the  King  of  Rome  and  the  Regency  ?  Paris 
would  have  shut  its  gates  upon  him.  The  people,  reduced 
to  the  utmost  extremity,  would  have  submitted  to  the  new 
Government.  The  army  would  undoubtedly  have  recoiled 
at  the  idea  of  a  civil  war,  or  the  enemy  would  quietly  have 
destroyed  it.  Besides,  could  the  Empress  sign  the  destruc- 
tion of  her  husband  ?  For  it  was  not  possible  to  keep  him 
at  liberty  near  France  ;  and  his  situation  would  have  become 
so  very  peculiar,  that  there  would  perhaps  not  have  been 
one  corner  in  all  Europe  where  the  Conqueror  of  the 
World  could  have  rested  his  head  in  peace  ;  whilst  his  wife 
and  his  best  friends  would  have  been  forced,  for  the  interests 
of  their  country,  to  wish  for  his  everlasting  proscription. 

When  the  Empress  was  leaving  Paris  with  all  the 
Ministers,  the  two  corps  of  Marshals  Marmont  and  Mortier 
hastily  retreated  to  the  heights  round  the  capital,  pursued 
by  the  Russians  and  Prussians,  who  had  at  last  resolved,  by 
the  pressing  solicitation  of  M.  de  Talleyrand,  to  advance  and 
make  themselves  masters  of  the  city.  The  two  corps  did 
not  muster  above  fourteen  thousand  men.  Some  thousand 
troops,  drawn  from  the  depots  at  Versailles  and  Rambouillct, 
were  sent  to  join  them.  The  brave  young  men  of  the 
Polytechnical  Institution  flew  to  their  aid  on  the  hills  of 
Chaumont,  and   a  few  battalions  of  National  Guards  went 