

King  Louis  the  Eighteenth  made  his  solemn  entrance 
into  Paris  on  the  3rd  of  May.  The  wealthy  portion  of  the 
population  now  took  upon  them  to  show  that  enthusiasm 
which  the  mob  is  accustomed  to  lavish  on  the  men  who 
dazzle  their  inconstant  and  unreflecting  imaginations.  The 
sun  shone  with  all  the  brightness  of  spring,  and  added  to 

the  magnificence  of  the   novel   scene.     Gendarmes  opened 

369 


270  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  procession  ;  then  came  a  great  number  of  officers  on 
horseback  :  some  who  the  day  before  had  been  our  foes  on 
the  field  of  battle  came  to  solicit  a  share  of  the  Royal 
largesse  ;  others,  old  servants  of  the  monarchy,  had  long 
held  out  their  hands  for  Imperial  favours.  By  a  singular 
distinction,  or  a  cruel  mockery,  two  companies  of  the  Im- 
perial Guards  preceded  the  golden  troop.  The  aspect  of 
those  old  warriors,  covered  with  scars — their  eyes  fixed  on 
the  ground,  their  countenances  dejected,  the  rage  of  their 
hearts  depicted  on  their  sun-burned  faces — inspired  compas- 
sion. At  last  the  King  appeared  in  an  open  caleche,  accom- 
panied by  the  Duchess  d'Angouleme  and  the  two  Princes  of 
the  House  of  Conde.  The  enormous  bulk  of  the  Monarch, 
his  harsh  look  and  severe  features,  disconcerted  the  enthu- 
siasm of  those  who  had  a  close  view  of  him  ;  and  after  the 
space  of  a  few  hours,  there  remained  nothing,  even  in  the 
mass  of  the  population,  but  cold  indifference  for  the  for- 
tunate brother  of  Louis  XVI. 

One  of  the  four  royal  personages  ought,  however,  to  have 
excited  very  deep  interest.  The  sight  of  the  King  recalled 
no  recollections  :  the  two  old  warriors,  leaders  of  a  legion 
that  had  shone  with  so  little  lustre,  represented  nothing  but 
an  illustrious  name  and  a  cruel  loss.  The  daughter  of 
Louis  XVI.  and  Marie  Antoinette,  on  the  contrary,  delivered 
up  in  her  tender  years  to  all  the  violence  of  revolutionary 
tyranny — deprived  of  her  parents,  who  died  on  the  scaffold — 
abandoned  in  the  dungeon  of  an  old  tower,  was  now  passing 
slowly  before  that  same  Palais  de  Justice  out  of  which  her 
mother  had  gone  in  a  cart  to  the  scaffold.  In  passing  that 
same  palace  she  was  about  to  inhabit,  what  cruel  recollec- 
tions, what  feelings  of  compassion  and  love  might  naturally 
have  been  excited  ! — and  still  the  marks  of  joy,  the  enthu- 
siasm were  lavished  alone  on  the  old  Monarch  !  Was  it  that 
policy  got  the  better  of  the  more  refined  feelings  of  humanity  ? 
or  that  the  women,  who  were  the  most  numerous  among  the 
crowd,  are  expected,  even  when  moved  by  the  most  noble 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  271 

feelings  of  the  heart,  to  show  always  the  smallest  part  to 
persons  of  their  own  sex  ? ' 