

Alas  !  at  no  period  was  it  more  requisite  that  a  deep 
feeling  of  patriotism  should  have  animated  their  hearts  ! 
Twenty-two  years  before  (I  was  then  twenty-three),  when 
the  Prussians  spread  over  the  plains  of  Champaigne,  Paris 
and  all  France  rushed  out  against  the  enemy.  French 
youths,  devoid  of  experience  and  instruction,  but  conspicuous 
for  love  of  their  country,  exasperated  by  generous  fury, 
trampled  on  the  old  bands  instructed  by  Frederick  the 
Great.     Now  the  barbarians  of  Russia,  and  all  the  European 


268  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

armies  we  had  vanquished,  paraded  in  our  squares,  sat 
insolently  round  our  hearths  ;  and  the  French,  who  were 
again  grown  polite,  whom  prosperity  and  the  luxury  of  a 
Court  had  refined  and  enervated,  looked  on  the  strange 
scene  with  eyes  of  indifference.  We  deserved  but  too  well 
our  fate. 

The  fire  that  animated  our  soldiers  was  extinguished 
when  they  learned  that  the  Emperor  recoiled  before  ill 
fortune,  and  acknowledged  himself  vanquished.  It  was 
then  that  the  army,  in  despair,  felt  obliged  to  submit. 

However,  the  Allied  Sovereigns  had  not  expected  that  sub- 
mission, and  they  showed  their  satisfaction  by  the  treaty  of 
the  nth  of  April.  The  title  of  Emperor  was  left  to  Napo- 
leon ;  the  Island  of  Elba  was  given  to  him  in  full  sove- 
reignty ;  a  competent  income  was  allowed,  not  only  for 
him,  but  also  for  his  family,  and  gratuities  were  granted  to 
almost  all  the  members  of  his  military  household.  These 
various  arrangements  were  made  in  presence  of  the  Bour- 
bons. The  King  refused  to  sign  them,  under  the  pretence 
that  he  could  not  acknowledge  Napoleon  as  an  Emperor  ; 
but  it  was  agreed,  and  he  engaged  his  word,  that  the  treaty 
should  be  executed  in  all  its  stipulations. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Meanwhile  the  Emperor  departed  for  the  Island  of  Elba, 
and  the  rage  of  his  enemies  augmented  with  that  circum- 
stance. Neither  his  fall  nor  his  banishment  was  able  to 
satisfy  them  ;  they  sought  his  death  alone  ;  and  war  having 
spared  him,  they  resolved  to  get  rid  of  him  by  assassination. 
This  was  the  last  homage  paid  to  the  genius  of  the  Em- 
peror. A  sort  of  superstitious  awe  had  seized  the  minds  of 
all  those  who  had  contributed  to  his  overthrow.  "  As  long 
as  that  man  lives,"  they  said  at  the  Tuileries,  "  there  will  be 
no  repose,  no  security  for  France."  Maubreuil's  perverse- 
ness  and  desperate  character  give  a  great  deal  of  probability 
to  all  he  has  said  of  the  proposals  made  to  him  by  AI.  de 
Talleyrand.  But  that  was  not  the  only  attempt  made 
against  him  before  his  return  from  the  Island  of  Elba  :  he 
was  nearly  poisoned  at  Fontainebleau.  Generals  Drouet  and 
Bertrand  will  undoubtedly  publish  one  day  what  the  latter 
told  me  of  the  horrible  scenes  that  took  place  during  the 
Emperor's  journey  through  the  South  of  France,  and  all  the 
efforts  made  by  murderers  sent  to  the  Island  of  Elba  by  the 
Governor  of  Corsica,  M.  Brulard. 