

The  Duke  had  no  news  from  the  Emperor  ;  and  although 
he  was  given  to  understand  that,  notwithstanding  the  threats 
of  the  enemy,  there  could  be  no  danger  in  waiting  till  next 
day, — that  it  was  possible  Napoleon  might  arrive  in  the 
night, — that  Alexander  would  certainly  not  rush  madly 
with  his  army  in  the  midst  of  so  populous  a  capital,  the 
inhabitants  of  which  were  highly  incensed  ; — yet  Marmont, 
confused,  and  not  wishing  perhaps  to  leave  to  another  the 
honour  of  saving  Paris,  resolved  to  sign  the  capitulation, 
without  having  received  any  direct  order  to  that  effect  from 
his  General  and  Sovereign. 

I  went  to  his  house  on  the  evening  of  the  30th  of  March. 
He  was  still  at  table,  and  next  to  him  sat  Count  Orloff,  and 
several  other  Russian  officers.  He  came  to  meet  me,  led  me 
to  a  private  room,  and  there  did  his  best  to  prove  that  he 
could  not  have  acted  otherwise  than  he  had  done  ;  that 
with  less  than  twenty-eight  thousand  men,  any  farther 
defence  would  be  but  useless  spilling  of  blood.  That,  I 
acknowledged  ;  but  could  he  not  wait  until  the  next  day  to 
sign  ?  Twelve  hours'  delay  might  be  of  an  immense  benefit 
to  the  Emperor.  I  could  not  suppose  it  possible  that  he 
should  not  be  met  by  at  least  one  of  the  great  numbers  of 
couriers  I  had  despatched.  I  was  convinced  that  his  presence 
would  re-establish  affairs.  The  Marshal  was  inflexible  :  he 
was  too  far  engaged  to  be  able  to  draw  back.  The  chief 
heights  round  the  capital  were  already  occupied  by  the 
enemy.  Our  situation  was  terrible,  it  is  true  ;  but  the 
presence  of  the  Emperor  was  alone  worth  an  army.     The 


264  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

people,  already  well  disposed,  and  full  of  ardour  at  the  sight 
of  their  Sovereign,  would  have  done  wonders. 

I  had  received  no  orders  to  go  to  Blois.  I  therefore 
thought  I  would  set  off  with  the  Duke  de  Ragusa,  who  had 
acquainted  me  with  his  plan  of  going  to  Fontainebleau.  I 
left  him  with  an  intention  of  coming  back,  when,  on  going 
out  of  the  apartment,  I  met  Prince  Talleyrand  and  his 
emissary  Bourrienne,  who  were  slipping  up  to  the  second 
floor.  The  sight  of  them  was  enough  for  me.  These  two 
men,  who  were  in  open  treason,  had  undoubtedly  come 
to  involve  the  Marshal  in  their  toils.  M.  Pasquier  had 
accompanied  me  in  my  carriage.  I  communicated  my 
suspicions  to  him.  "  What  shall  I  say  to  you  ? "  he 
answered  :  "all  seems  to  be  over  ;  there  is  nothing  more 
to  be  done."  I  set  him  down  at  the  Prefecture  of  Police, 
and  retired  to  my  lodgings  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain, 
determined  never  to  re-enter  the  Post-office.  A  little 
before  daybreak  I  received  an  express  with  letters  from  the 
Emperor  to  the  Empress.  The  courier  informed  me  that 
Napoleon  had  arrived  during  the  night  at  the  stage  called 
La  Cour  de  France,  and  that  there  he  had  heard  the  fatal 
news  of  the  capitulation.  The  unfortunate  Prince  had  been 
flying  with  all  his  speed  to  save  his  capital.  The  blow  was 
terrible  for  him  :  he  sat  down  on  the  parapet  of  the  foun- 
tains of  Juvisy,  and  remained  above  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
with  his  head  resting  on  his  two  hands,  lost  in  the  most 
painful  reflections  ;  after  which  he  set  off  again  for 
Fontainebleau. 