


262  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

also  out  of  the  barriers.  All  these  troops  fought  bravely  ; 
but  the  forces  of  the  enemy,  augmenting  from  hour  to  hour, 
were  by  no  means  in  proportion  with  those  of  the  besieged. 
Prince  Joseph,  having  no  precise  instruction  for  so  unforeseen 
a  circumstance,  did  not  dare  to  take  upon  himself  to  prolong 
the  defence,  without  any  appearance  of  success.  The  people, 
and  especially  the  inhabitants  of  the  suburbs,  would  not  have 
refused  to  fight.  Some  already  prepared  to  unpave  the 
streets,  to  raise  battlements  on  the  houses  that  were  nearest 
to  the  barriers,  and  to  take  all  possible  precaution  against 
cavalry,  and  to  fire  in  case  the  enemy  were  to  carry  things 
to  such  an  extremity.  The  people,  as  I  have  said,  were  well 
disposed  ;  but  towards  the  evening  of  the  29th  of  March 
there  were  no  public  authorities  in  the  city  but  Marshal 
Moncey,  Commander  of  the  National  Guards,  the  two  Pre- 
fects of  the  Department,  and  the  police.  In  leaving  Paris, 
the  Ministers  had  enjoined  them  to  do  all  in  their  power  to 
preserve  the  peace,  and  provide  for  the  subsistence  of  the 
inhabitants.  Five  days  had  elapsed  since  any  certain  news 
had  arrived  from  the  Emperor,  and  all  means  of  communica- 
tion were  intercepted.  In  vain  I  sent  off  intrepid  couriers, 
and,  during  the  last  two  days,  several  fleet  and  clever 
messengers.  They  were  bearers  of  letters  written  in  cypher, 
wherein  I  begged  the  Emperor  to  return  at  any  price.  I 
told  him  that  the  police  was  no  longer  strong  enough  to 
repress  the  royalists  ;  that  his  presence  alone  could  put  a 
stop  to  the  evil,  and  that  he  was  lost  beyond  resource  if  the 
enemy  got  possession  of  the  capital.  It  is  unfortunately 
true  that  the  agents  of  Government,  attached  for  a  long 
time  to  a  system  of  absolute  authority,  and  accustomed 
never  to  take  the  smallest  responsibility  upon  themselves, 
trembled  at  the  idea  of  adopting  any  measure  without  the 
special  order  of  the  Emperor  :  some,  because  he  was  master 
of  all  ;  others,  because  the  passing  events  appeared  above 
all  human  power.  Prince  Joseph  was  the  first  who  yielded 
to  the  general  dejection.     After  casting  a  look  of  dismay  on 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  263 

the  plain  of  St.  Denis,  covered  with  foreign  soldiers  and 
smoking  villages,  he  fled  to  Blois,  authorising  the  two 
marshals  to  sign  a  capitulation  that  might  save  the  capital. 

Officers,  sent  on  parley  by  Prince  Schwartzenburg,  came 
to  the  Duke  de  Ragusa,  and  declared,  that  if  the  gates  of 
Paris  were  not  opened  to  them  before  night,  the  next  day 
it  would  be  too  late,  and  that  the  capital  would  be  delivered 
over  to  all  the  rigour  of  military  execution. 