

husbands  had  long  filled  elevated  stations  in  the  fallen  Court, 
and  who  themselves,  loaded  with  honour  and  riches,  had 
been  attached  to  the  service  of  the  two  Empresses.  I  might 
name  them, — but  wherefore  disgrace  their  memory  ?  Many 
of  them  will  have  descended  into  the  grave  before  this  work 
appears,  and  their  children  ought  not  to  be  punished  for  the 
shameful  conduct  of  their  parents. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  had  nowhere  on  his  march 
witnessed  this  boasted  enthusiasm  of  the  French  for  the 
King  and  his  family.  He  was  candid  enough  to  acknow- 
ledge this  at  a  council  held  at  M.  de  Talleyrand's.  It  was 
therefore  through  motives  of  policy,  and  the  necessity  of 
circumstances,  that  the  latter  persuaded  him  not  to  establish 
a  regency.  The  absence  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  the 
unpopularity  of  his  minister,  Metternich,  who  was  present, 
the  force  of  old  recollections,  and  perhaps  also  the  falling 
off  of  the  Duke  de  Ragusa,  swayed  his  resolution. 

While  these  discussions  were  going  on  in  Paris,  Napoleon, 
at  Fontainebleau,  had  already  recovered  from  the  blow  he 
had  experienced.  He  sounded  the  danger  of  his  position, 
and  calculated  his  resources.  He  every  day  reviewed  his 
troops,  animated  them  by  his  presence,  and  looked  as  if  he 
wished  to  familiarise  them  with  the  idea  of  marching  back 
to  Paris,  and  driving  the  enemy  from  the  capital.  Such  an 
act  of  despair,  in  a  man  like  him,  might  have  had  terrible 
consequences.  Notwithstanding  the  severe  discipline  to 
which  the  foreign  troops  were  subjected,  the  troops  being 
too  numerous  for  the  barracks  to  contain  them,  were 
encamped  at  considerable  distances  from  each  other.  Many 
officers  lodged  in  hotels,  far  from  their  troops.  The  play- 
houses, coffee-houses,  ale-houses,  and  bagnios,  were  filled 
with  them  until  a  late  hour  of  the  night.  Attacked  on  all 
sides,  finding  at  every  step  some  new  obstacle  to  their 
assembling,  with  enemies  in  every  street,  confusion  might 
soon  have  spread  among  the  troops,  and  the  terrible  cry  of 
"  Long  live  the  Emperor  !  "  resounding  on  a  sudden,  would 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  267 

have  augmented  the  disorder,  and  exasperated  the  people. 
If  driven  out  of  the  capital,  and  a  battle  lost  in  the  plain, 
what  would  have  been  the  fate  of  all  these  triumphant 
troops  ?  This  plan  appeared  feasible  during  forty-eight 
hours,  and  was  secretly  whispered  among  the  people.  Not 
only  the  soldiers,  but  even  three-fourths  of  the  officers,  were 
by  no  means  afraid  to  undertake  it.  But  it  was  discovered 
by  the  Marshals,  and  they  opposed  it  through  apparent 
motives  of  prudence,  but  in  fact  through  weariness  and  a 
secret  wish  to  abandon  the  Emperor.  The  correspondence 
with  Paris  grew  every  moment  more  frequent,  and  the 
defections  more  numerous.  Military  commanders  were  all 
rich  ;  their  families  were  in  the  enemy's  power.  To  the 
anxiety  with  which  they  were  tormented,  they  added  the 
hope  of  remaining  great  men  under  the  Bourbons.  The 
promises  made  by  the  conspirators  were  unbounded.  The 
Allies  and  the  King  would  open  their  arms  to  them.  They 
were  already  in  idea  marshals  of  France,  of  the  old  monarchy. 
The  Cross  of  St.  Louis,  the  Order  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  govern- 
ments. Court  favours,  their  uncontested  pre-eminence  over 
the  most  ancient  families,  their  names  placed  next  to  those 
of  Turenne  and  Villars,  seemed  in  their  eyes  to  give  them  a 
lustre  that  would  fear  no  comparison,  even  in  future  times. 
These  childish  illusions,  this  sordid  egotism,  made  them 
forget  natural  honour  and  the  faith  they  owed  to  their 
real  sovereign.  A  few  days  were  sufficient  to  deceive  most 
of  them. 