

The  measure  would  nevertheless  have  been  very  wise. 
The  royalists  would  have  been  without  leaders,  and  the 
enemy  without  directors  or  encouragement.  They  would 
perhaps  not  have  dared  to  venture  their  march  upon 
Paris,  which  proved  so  fatal  to  the  Emperor.  Marmont 
would  not  have  signed  the  truce  of  the  30th  of  March, 
and  Napoleon  would  have  gained  the  twelve  hours  he 
wanted  to  enable  him  to  reach  the  capital. 

That  deplorable  prepossession  of  the  Duke  de  Rovigo, 
who  nevertheless  remained  faithful,  was  not  the  only  cause 
of  our  misfortunes.  All  persons  attached  to  Government 
soon  shared  the  same  feeling — all  had  fallen  into  dismay 
and  discouragement ;  and  with  the  exception  of  Boulay 
de  la  Meurthe,  Thibaudeau,  and  some  other  retainers  of 
the  Revolution,  familiar  with  political  disturbances,  who 
had  nothing  to  expect  and  everything  to  fear  from  the 
Bourbons,  all  the  others  were  only  intent  on  saving  some 
part  of  the  wreck  for  themselves.  The  Emperor  had 
appointed  his  brother  Joseph  Lieutenant-General  of  Paris. 
That  Prince,  though  a  man  of  amiable  mind  and  extended 
information,  wanted  energy  :  he  could  neither  persuade  the 
Council  nor  excite  the  people,  who  were  only  waiting  for 
a  leader.  To  say  the  truth,  he  was  distinguished  by 
nothing  but  his  obsolete  title  of  King  of  Spain  ;  and  the 
Peninsular  war  had  cost  too  much  blood  for  any  gratitude 


26o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

or  confidence  to  attach  to  the  person  for  whose  profit  it  was 
undertaken.'  The  Archchancellor  Cambaceres,  a  learned 
lawyer,  but  a  stranger,  more  by  character  than  even  by  the 
habits  of  his  life,  to  those  energetic  resolutions  which 
great  dangers  require,  could  do  nothing  but  submit  to  the 
common  fate.  The  Duke  de  Feltre,  Minister  of  the  War 
Department,  a  good  secretary,  but  a  man  of  a  narrow  mind, 
and  the  slave  of  his  vanity,  which  stuck  to  everything, 
served  the  Emperor  with  suspicious  carelessness,  and 
dreamed  already  of  the  prodigious  honour  he  would 
acquire  by  being  a  minister  of  the  Bourbons.  A  council, 
at  which  the  Empress  presided,  was  held  at  the  moment  the 
enemy  entered  Nancy,  while  pursuing  Marshals  Ragusa  and 
Treviso.  The  Empress  requested  that  a  resolution  might 
be  taken  in  regard  to  herself  and  her  son,  for  she  relied  no 
longer  on  her  father,  and  no  accounts  had  arrived  for 
several  days  from  the  Emperor.  None  but  generous  advice 
ought  to  have  been  given  to  her.  Boulay  de  la  Meurthe 
took  the  task  upon  himself,  and  recalling  to  her  memory 
the  conduct  of  her  grandmother,  Maria  Theresa,  in  pre- 
sence of  the  Hungarians,  he  said,  "  Madam,  go  to  the  Hotel 
de  Ville  ;  cross  the  streets  of  Paris  with  your  son  in  your 
arms.  The  whole  capital  will  accompany  you  to  the  ad- 
vanced posts.  Acquaint  the  Allied  Sovereigns  with  your 
resolution  to  remain  in  Paris,  surrounded  by  your  faithful 
subjects,  to  share  their  dangers,  and  to  descend  only  by 
force  from  the  throne,  on  which  you  seated  yourself  amidst 
the  applause  of  those  very  nations  and  kings  who  now 
besiege  you." 