

The  restoration  of  the  Royal  Family  had  been  prepared  with 
much  skill  by  M.  de  Talleyrand.  It  was,  however,  necessary 
to  give  it  a  legal  character ;  and  as  the  Legislative  Body  was 
not  at  that  time  sitting,  they  had  recourse  to  the  Senate, 
which  closed  its  political  existence  by  one  of  the  most  dis- 
graceful acts  recorded  in  history.  In  despite  of  all  laws,  the 
Senate  removed  from  the  throne,  and  delivered  over  to 
foreigners,  their  lawful  Sovereign,  whom  France  had  elected, 
and  to  whom  they  owed  their  existence.  They  had,  more- 
over, the  baseness  to  insult  the  Prince  they  disowned.  I  am 
far  from  refusing  to  acknowledge  the  noble  qualities,  the 
eminent  services,  and  even  the  conspicuous  virtues,  by  which 
many  members  of  the  Senate  were  recommended  to  public 
esteem  ;  but  the  stain  will  nevertheless  remain  for  ever  fixed 
on  that  Assembly,  since  no  effort  was  tried,  no  resignations 
offered,  no  protest  uttered  by  any  one  against  that  fatal 
sitting  over  which  M.  de  Talleyrand  presided. 

The  first  measure  of  the  new  Government  was  to  establish 
the  administration,  and  to  punish  or  stifle  the  disturbances 
which  disordered  passions  might  occasion  in  the  provinces 
at  the  news  of  the  installation. 

But  before  we  follow  that  Government  in  its  measures,  it 
is  necessary  to  cast  a  look  upon  the  nation  over  which  it  was 
about  to  rule.  France  had  been  subjected  to  the  forms  of  a 
Republic,  to  which  had  succeeded  the  Imperial  monarchy.  In 
1 8 14  but  few  influential  leaders  of  the  Republican  Govern- 
ment survived.  With  the  exception  of  Carnot  and  Barras, 
who  had  not  bowed  to  Napoleon,  the  rest  had  been  mowed 

'  The  translator  is  convinced  that  Count  Lavalette  was  completely  mis- 
taken in  Ixjth  his  surmises.  The  fact  is,  that  men  never  forgive  the  wrongs 
that  they  have  themselves  inflicted.  The  French  nation  had  behaved  like 
savage  cannibals  towards  the  virtuous  Duchess  of  Ang<julenie  an<l  her  inno- 
cent parents,  and  the  sight  of  her  was  an  everlasting  reproach  upon  their 
cruelty.  To  this  sentiment  must  also  be  attrijjuted  the  filthy  caricatures 
and  scandalous  libels  on  that  spotless  Princess  that  have  since  disgraced 
the  French  press. 


272  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

by  the  scythe  of  Time  or  seduced  by  the  head  of  the  empire. 
Merlin,  Treilhard,  Sieyes,  Fouche,  and  many  others,  had 
donned  the  robes  of  ministers  and  senators  ;  the  Brutuses  of 
1793  were  now  designated  by  the  titles  of  duke,  count,  and 
even  monseigneur.  In  the  army  I  find  none  but  Jourdan 
who  did  not  enlist  among  the  titled  generals.  Kleber, 
Hoche,  Desaix,  and  Moreau  were,  it  is  true,  no  more  ;  but 
would  it  be  too  much  to  suppose  that  these  illustrious 
warriors,  who  fell  in  defending  the  independence  of  their 
country,  would  have  also  bent  under  the  Imperial  yoke  ? 
The  whole  nation  had,  on  the  i8th  Brumaire,  preceded  the 
conversion  of  the  army.  The  First  Consul  found  every- 
where among  the  people  an  equal  disgust  for  Republican 
forms  and  government.  He  took  advantage  of  this  to  estab- 
lish the  Consulate — and  misused  it  to  place  the  crown  on  his 
head.  Vanity,  so  powerful  over  the  French,  and  hatred  of 
a  yoke  sprung  from  under  their  feet,  rendered  insupportable 
to  them  an  authority  brutal  in  its  forms  and  an  offensive 
equality.  The  persecutions  and  violent  deaths  which,  dur- 
ing more  than  two  years,  had  spread  mourning  and  dismay, 
left  such  a  deep  impression  on  the  people's  minds  that  they 
were  resolved,  cost  what  it  might,  never  to  go  back  to  them. 
The  defeats  the  French  armies  suffered  in  1799,  the  violent 
and  unskilful  measures  of  the  Directory,  their  coups  d^etat, 
and  especially  that  of  the  i8th  Fructidor,  added  to  the 
general  impatience  and  to  the  disrepute  in  which  they  had 
fallen  ;  so  that  when  General  Bonaparte  returned  from 
Egypt,  all  classes  of  citizens  opened  their  arms  to  him, 
and  begged  him  to  save  France.  The  i8th  Brumaire  took 
place.  But  the  Conqueror  of  Italy  was  accustomed  to  en- 
force obedience  :  he  therefore  organised  the  country,  and 
commanded  over  it  as  he  would  over  an  army.  The  won- 
derful success  at  Marengo,  order  re-established  in  the  finances 
as  if  by  enchantment,  everywhere  excited  enthusiasm.  The 
odious  attempts  of  the  infernal  machine,  and  of  the  Chouans, 
commanded  by  Georges  and  Pichegru,  excited  indignation 