

The  army  was  a  still  greater  cause  of  uneasiness.  Though 
exhausted  and  mutilated  by  the  last  campaign,  still  a  feeling 
for  glory  and  the  name  of  the  Emperor  remained  alive  in 
the  hearts  of  the  troops.  The  marshals,  and  many  of  the 
guards,  had  yielded  to  necessity  ;  but  the  greatest  part  of 
the  officers  remained  faithful  to  these  noble  sentiments. 
Discipline  and  the  military  virtues  were  nevertheless  pre- 
served, and  shone  with  a  new  lustre.  The  King  could  not 
review  the  troops  himself,  on  account  of  the  bad  state  of  his 
health  ;  and  the  Princes  affected,  every  time  they  saw  them, 
a  degree  of  distrust  and  neglect  which  seemed  augmented 
by  the  jealousy  they  felt  for  their  glorious  deeds. 

The  following  circumstance  has  been  related  to  me  by 
Count  d'Erlon.  The  Duke  de  Berri  was  one  day  reviewing 
some  regiments  garrisoned  in  the  province  of  which  Marshal 
Duke  de  Treviso  was  governor  and  Count  d'Erlon  com- 
■mander.     An  officer  came  out  of  the  ranks  and  asked  the 


278  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

Prince  for  the  cross  of  St.  Louis.  "  What  have  you  done  to- 
(leserve  it  ?  "  "I  have  served  thirty  years  in  the  French 
army."  "Thirty  years'  robbery!  "  repHed  the  Prince,  turn- 
ing his  back  on  him.  It  is  true  that,  the  Marshal  having 
remonstrated,  the  officer  obtained  the  next  day  what  he  had 
solicited  ;  but  the  words  were  reported  about,  and  I  leave 
the  reader  to  judge  of  the  eiTect  they  had  among  the  troops. 

The  corps  dispersed  on  the  surface  of  the  empire  were 
soon  deprived  of  a  part  of  their  officers,  whom  disgust  and 
forced  resignation  banished  from  the  army.  The  staff,  and 
that  crowd  of  military  agents  now  become  useless,  returned 
to  their  homes,  whither  they  carried  the  discontent  and 
hatred  that  filled  their  breasts.  The  two  last  campaigns 
had  been  ruinous  to  them.  They  had  almost  all  lost 
their  baggages.  Exasperated  by  the  presence  of  an  enemy, 
recently  victorious,  now  masters  of  the  country,  but  who 
had  been  beaten  during  twenty  years,  the  necessity  of  sub- 
mitting to  the  yoke  of  the  Bourbons,  whom  that  enemy  had 
brought  with  them,  soon  grew  unbearable.  Without  fortune 
or  possessions,  rejected  by  Government,  accustomed  to  the 
adventurous  life  of  a  camp,  they  saw  nothing  before  them 
but  misery  and  disgrace  if  the  Bourbons  remained  on  the 
throne.  They  wished  at  any  price  to  alter  their  situation,, 
and  their  thoughts  were  directed  with  dissatisfaction  towards 
the  Island  of  Elba. 

So  many  causes  of  confusion  were  still  not  sufficient  to 
open  the  eyes  of  the  Bourbons.  The  three  first  months 
passed  away  in  apparent  tranquillity.  Government  thought 
nothing  was  easier  than  to  subdue  the  dispersed  disaffected  ; 
and  the  Allied  Sovereigns,  who  began  to  fear  the  effect  which 
might  be  produced  on  their  troops  by  the  example  of  our 
easy  manners,  and  especially  our  opinions,  consented  to 
retire,  after  having  settled  their  accounts.  France  had 
immense  sums  of  money  to  pay  ;  the  terms  and  conditions 
of  payment  were  settled,  not  without  a  good  deal  of  difficulty. 
The  Allies  probably  carried  away  with  them  doubts  on  the 