

The  foreign  Sovereigns,  in  the  midst  of  the  intoxication  of 
their  triumph,  were,  however,  wise  enough  not  to  misuse  it ; 
and  far  from  treating  France  with  the  violence  of  a  con- 
queror who  thinks  he  may  dare  whatever  he  wishes,  they 
seconded  the  patriot  party  in  their  efforts  to  prevent  France, 
in  her  misfortune,  from  being  deprived  of  the  laws  by  which 
she  had  been  governed  for  the  last  thirty  years.  The 
pledges  required  by  a  civilised  age  were  therefore  laid  down 
in  a  charter  granted  by  the  King,  under  the  wretched  title 
of  Ordinance  of  Reformation.  The  forms  of  the  adminis- 
tration were  preserved,  and  the  agents  of  public  authority 
provisionally  maintained  in  their  posts.  Extraordinary 
commissaries  were  sent  into  all  the  departments,  to  en- 
lighten and  calm  the  public  mind.  These  commissaries, 
chosen   for   the   most   part   among   the   disinterested,    and 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  275 

•among  the  enemies  of  the  Emperor,  obtained  but  little 
success.  Private  interest,  however,  weariness,  and  neces- 
sity, produced  a  surer  effect.  The  people  showed  them- 
selves everywhere  distrustful  ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  if 
Government  had  advanced  with  firmness  and  good  faith  in 
the  principles  laid  down  by  the  charter,  it  would  soon  have 
gained,  if  not  affection,  at  least  confidence,  and  oblivion  of 
the  principles  with  which  it  was  surrounded. 

But  the  intoxication  of  a  triumph  so  easily  obtained 
turned  the  heads  of  the  royalists.  The  bragging  of  the 
emigrants  knew  no  bounds.  When  they  saw  the  Bourbons 
seated  on  the  throne,  they  imagined  themselves  masters  of 
their  sovereign  and  all  France.  They  asked,  or  rather 
demanded,  employments,  favours,  and  money.  All  was 
lavished  on  them.  Most  of  them  were  old  officers,  who  at 
the  time  of  their  emigration  enjoyed  but  an  inferior  rank 
in  the  army.  Five-and-twenty  years'  service  was  reckoned 
for  them.  Senior  lieutenants  became  colonels,  and  colonels 
majors  or  lieutenant-generals.  The  pretensions  of  these 
old  men  to  glory,  their  warlike  disposition,  now  so  out  of 
season,  cast  on  them  a  ridicule  that  was  eagerly  seized  by 
the  numerous  idle  young  oflficers  whom  peace  had  brought 
together  in  the  metropolis,  and  they  became  the  subjects  of 
biting  pleasantry  and  bitter  irony.  Songs  and  caricatures 
were  directed  against  these  people,  and  contributed  to  bring 
them  into  disrepute. 

An  unimportant  circumstance  gave  Government  an  idea  of 
the  exasperation  that  began  to  spread  among  the  people. 
An  actress  of  the  Theatre  Francais  died  about  that  time  in 
the  Chaussee  d'Antin.  Her  funeral  was  accompanied  by 
most  of  the  theatrical  characters  in  the  metropolis.  As  she 
had  enjoyed  a  good  deal  of  celebrity,  the  procession  was 
soon  augmented  by  a  great  number  of  those  persons  who 
had  applauded  her  talent.  When  they  arrived  in  front  of 
the  Church  of  St.  Roch,  they  found  the  doors  shut  by  order 
of  the  vicar,  according  to  the  ancient  custom,  by  which  in 