


284  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

for  ever  lost,  and  still  she  never  ceased  to  implore  the 
generosity  of  the  Emperor,  that  he  might  soften  the  fate  of 
her  former  husband.  The  promises  he  made,  and  which 
she  repeated  to  me  with  sincerity,  were  speedily  forgotten 
at  Vienna,  if  it  be  true  that  even  at  that  time  Alexander 
consented  to  let  Napoleon  be  taken  from  the  Island  of  Elba 
and  sent  to  St.  Helena.  Prince  Eugene  came  to  Paris, 
about  the  time  I  am  speaking  of.  The  Emperor  Alexander 
took  a  liking  to  him,  made  him  many  professions  of  friend- 
ship, and  promised  to  give  him  in  Germany  a  principality, 
the  population  of  which  should  not  be  less  than  sixty 
thousand  inhabitants.  These  arrangements  were  afterwards 
altered  :  the  Prince  obtained  the  principality  of  Eichstadt, 
which  contains  scarcely  seven  thousand  inhabitants.  The 
day  before  his  departure,  the  Emperor  Alexander,  in  a 
moment  of  effusion,  said  to  Prince  Eugene,  "  I  do  not  know 
whether  I  shall  not  one  day  repent  having  placed  the 
Bourbons  on  the  throne.  Believe  me,  my  dear  Eugene, 
they  are  not  good  people.^  We  have  seen  them  in  Russia, 
and  I  know  from  experience  what  to  think  of  them." 

In  the  midst  of  these  splendid  comfortings,  surrounded  by 
the  homage  of  the  most  powerful  sovereigns  of  the  Con- 
tinent, death  overtook  the  Empress  Josephine.  She  was 
subject  to  catarrhal  colds,  which  a  little  care  and  repose 
usually  cured  in  a  short  time.  One  day,  as  she  felt  an 
attack  of  one  of  these  complaints,  she  walked  round  the 
Park  of  Malmaison  with  the  King  of  Prussia.  She  grew  in 
consequence  worse.     Three  days  afterwards  she  was  so  ill 

that  Dr.  N ,  having  been  called  in  on  consultation,  gave 

me  the  painful  commission  to  acquaint  Prince  Eugene  and 
the  Queen  of  Holland  that  within  a  few  days  they  would  be 
motherless.  The  Emperor  Alexander  brought  her,  the  next 
day,  his  own  physician,  and  remained  the  whole  day  with 

'  If  the  Emperor  Alexander  really  used  these  expressions,  he  was  not  of 
the  same  opinion  as  our  Yorick — "The  Bourbons  are  a  gentle  race" 
■{"  Sentimental  Journey"). — Note  of  Translator. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  285 

her  ;  but  on  the  Sunday  she  softly  expired  in  the  arms  of 
the  Countess  d'Arberg,  her  lady  of  honour,  and  her  friend. 
The  Empress  was  fifty-two  years  of  age.  She  was  an 
excellent  woman  in  all  respects  :  she  embellished  the  throne 
by  the  most  amiable  qualities.  Her  benevolence  and  her 
kindness  may  serve  as  models  to  all  those  whom  birth  or 
fortune  sentences  to  wear  a  crown. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  also  wished  to  make  a  provision 
for  the  Queen  of  Holland.  Her  husband  had  left  her. 
Alexander  procured  for  her  the  title  of  Duchess  of  St.  Leu. 
Louis  XVIII.  did  not  dare  to  refuse  openly,  but  his 
Minister  Blacas  made  so  many  difficulties,  that  Alexander 
sent  his  aide-de-camp  to  the  Tuileries  with  an  order  not 
to  leave  the  palace  until  the  patent  was  delivered  to  him,  if 
even  he  should  be  obliged  to  sleep  there. 