


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  279 

long  continuance  of  a  government  that  began  so  ill ;  but 
they  were  satisfied  at  seeing  France  weakened  for  a  long 
while,  and  fallen  from  the  high  station  to  which  glory  and 
civilisation  had  raised  her. 

The  charter  had  instituted  two  chambers.  The  Chamber 
of  Peers,  which  was  the  former  Senate,  had  lost  all  considera- 
tion. The  honourable  men  it  contained  added  no  lustre  to 
it.  They  had,  besides,  all  risen  by  the  Revolution.  The 
King  introduced  into  it  all  the  old  peers  of  the  monarchy, 
and  some  of  these  who  had  of  late  served  with  distinction. 
The  new-comers  gave  to  that  body,  and  received  at  the  same 
time  from  it,  habits,  and  a  love  for  subservience  ;  and  if  the 
nation  took  but  little  interest  in  the  elevation  of  men  who 
numbered  in  their  ranks  the  Count  de  Bourmont  and  the 
Mayor  of  Bordeaux,  the  King  might  at  least  be  assured  that 
this  assembly  would  for  a  long  time  still  maintain  the 
traditional  obedience  of  the  Imperial  Senate. 

Things  were,  however,  not  quite  the  same  in  regard  to 
the  members  of  the  Legislative  Body :  they  had  been  chosen 
at  a  time  when  war  had  become  for  France  an  insufferable 
burthen.  Several  of  them  had  energetically  opposed  the 
demands  of  Government  in  1813.  But  the  number  of 
royalists  was  not  yet  very  considerable  ;  and  if  they  had 
consented  to  abandon  the  Imperial  Government,  it  was  not 
with  a  view  to  submit  to  arbitrary  law  under  the  authority 
of  a  king.  Government  found,  therefore,  if  not  obstacles, 
at  least  serious  warnings,  when  the  counsellors  of  the  crown 
submitted  to  the  Chamber  projects  which  but  ill  agreed  with 
the  principles  of  the  fundamental  law,  and  that  wounded  the 
feelings  and  prejudices  of  the  true  friends  of  Liberty.  One 
of  them.  Count  Ferrand,  disgusted  the  Assembly  when  he 
came,  in  the  King's  name,  and  established  distinctions  in  the 
conduct  of  the  French  at  the  different  periods  of  the  Revo- 
lution, distributing  praises  to  some  and  reproaches  to  others. 
His  comparison  of  the  straight  line  and  the  curved  line 
applied  even  to  those  who  had  rallied  round  Government, 


28o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

spread  alarm  and  indignation  in  every  one's  mind,  and  the 
Emperor  perfectly  well  appreciated  how  serious  that  im- 
prudence was,  when  he  said  :  "  I  came  with  M.  Ferrand's 
speech  in  my  hand,  convinced  that  the  whole  nation  would 
rally  round  me." 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

I  OBSERVED  all  these  seeds  of  confusion.  I  felt  that  the  storm 
was  not  far  distant,  and  I  separated  every  day  more  and  more 
from  the  persons  who  might  take  a  share  in  it.  I  must  here 
explain  the  singular  and  perilous  situation  in  which  I  was 
placed. 