

The  day  before  the  Emperor  left  Paris  for  the  fatal  cam- 
paign of  Russia,  he  kept  me  with  him  at  the  close  of  the 
evening  ;  and  after  giving  me  all  the  necessary  orders  for 
his  journey,  he  said  to  me  :  "  Go  to  the  Grand  Marshal ;  he 
will  give  you  drafts  on  the  Treasury  for  1,600,000  fr.  You 
will  convert  them  secretly  into  gold,  which  the  Minister  of 
the  Treasury  will  procure  you  the  means  of  doing  ;  and  you 
will  wait  my  orders  to  send  it  me."  So  much  gold  was 
difficult  to  hide.  I  addressed  myself  to  the  keeper  of  the 
Ordnance  Depot  (M.  Regnier),  who  was  a  very  ingenious 
mechanic,  and  who  made  for  me,  in  a  very  clever  manner, 
several  boxes  which  looked  exactly  like  as  many  quarto 
volumes.  Each  of  them  contained  30,000  fr.,  and  I  placed 
them  in  my  library.  When  the  Emperor  came  back  from 
the  Russian  campaign,  he  seemed  to  have  entirely  forgotten 
the  money,  and  he  returned  to  Germany  for  the  campaign 
of  Leipsic  without  giving  me  any  particular  orders  on  the 
subject.  The  only  reply  he  made  to  my  question  respecting 
it  was,  *'  We  shall  speak  of  that  when  I  come  home."  At 
last,  when,  a  few  months  afterwards,  he  was  going  to  leave 
Paris  for  the  campaign  of  France,  1  insisted  on  his  relieving 
me  from  the  charge  of  a  treasure  for  which  I  might  perhaps 


282  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

not  be  able  to  answer  in  the  midst  of  the  important  events 
that  might  threaten  Paris.  *'  Well,  then,"  he  said,  "  hide  it 
at  your  country  seat."  It  was  in  vain  that  I  remonstrated, 
observing  that  the  castle  of  La  Verriere,  situated  on  the  road 
leading  from  Versailles  to  Rambouillet,  might  be  plundered 
by  stragglers  of  the  enemy  ;  that  my  occupation  in  Paris 
never  permitted  me  to  remain  long  in  the  country,  and  that 
chance  and  the  slightest  imprudence  might  make  me  lose 
the  money.  He  would  listen  to  nothing,  and  I  was  forced 
to  obey.  My  steward  was  an  honest  and  intelligent  man. 
He  made,  in  my  presence,  during  several  nights,  a  hole  under 
the  floor  of  a  closet  on  the  ground  floor.  There  we  deposited 
the  fifty-four  volumes  of  Ancient  and  Modern  History. 
Never  would  any  work  have  been  read  with  more  eager- 
ness, nor  appreciated  nearer  to  its  real  value.  The  inlaid 
floor  was  carefully  replaced,  and  nothing  was  suspected. 
The  taking  of  Paris  threw  the  Emperor  into  Fontainebleau. 
I  most  ardently  wished  to  share  his  fate,  or  at  least  to  receive 
probably  his  last  orders.  But  he  sent  me  word  by  the  Duke 
de  Vicenza  that  it  would  be  dangerous  if  I  were  to  come  to 
see  him  ;  that  he  wished  me  to  remain  in  Paris,  where  I 
might  act  as  I  pleased  ;  and  that  he  would  let  me  know  at 
some  later  period  how  I  was  to  dispose  of  his  money. 