


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  273 

against  the  English  and  the  Bourbons  to  the  highest  pitch. 
Then  it  was  that  Napoleon,  convinced  that  he  might  dare 
all  he  wished,  again  raised  up  the  throne  of  France  with  a 
view  to  master  Europe.  Fifteen  years'  glory  and  an  arbi- 
trary government  had  made  the  French  more  supple  ;  and 
the  Bourbons  never  doubted  but  their  government,  which 
they  called  paternal,  would  be  received  with  transports  of 
joy,  especially  as  it  appeared  a  sure  pledge  of  sincere  recon- 
ciliation with  the  rest  of  Europe. 

But  Louis  XVin.,  dazzled  by  the  easy  obedience  of  the 
nation  to  his  predecessor,  was  far  from  suspecting  what  had 
been  hidden  under  the  Imperial  purple.  He  did  not  know 
what  troubles,  what  cares,  what  increasing  obstacles,  per- 
petually arose  against  the  former  Government.  He  did  not 
suspect  that  the  passion  for  Liberty  had  only  been  sup- 
pressed, and  that  the  contempt  the  nation  felt  for  the  last 
kings  of  his  race  extended  to  him.  The  hatred  of  the  old 
Court  and  the  nobility,  indifference  in  regard  to  religion 
and  contempt  for  the  clergy,  had  acquired  new  energy  under 
the  Imperial  reign.  The  King  did  not  know  that  the  Em- 
peror had  lost  many  adherents  in  all  classes.  Finally,  since 
the  departure  of  the  present  King,  in  1791,  a  new  genera- 
tion had  arisen  and  taken  its  rank  in  the  social  state.  They 
were  a  grave  population,  full  of  energy,  nursed  in  deep 
study,  free  from  superstitious  mummery,  leaving  college  to 
fly  to  the  field  of  battle.  To  them  every  career  of  science 
and  ambition  was  open,  and  to  their  success  incapacity  was 
the  only  obstacle. 

Nobody  had  told  the  King  that  all  illusion  in  regard  to 
the  majesty  of  the  throne  had  vanished.  The  Emperor  had, 
in  fact,  never  been  a  monarch,  or  at  least  the  people  had 
never  experienced  for  him  the  superstitious  awe  with 
which  they  had  been  wont  to  look  upon  Louis  XIV.  and 
Louis  XV. 

He  was  admired  only  as  a  great  man.  The  people  beheld 
in  him  the  gainer  of  so  many  battles,  the  conqueror  of  so 

19 


274  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

many  kingdoms,  the  invincible,  the  man  of  fate  ;  but  still 
he  was  always  Bonaparte  —  a  glorious  name,  which  his 
enemies  have  not  been  able  to  tarnish,  nor  he  himself  to  deface. 

Louis  XVIII.  therefore,  on  his  return,  no  longer  found 
the  halo  of  his  House.  In  the  eyes  of  sensible  and  cool- 
thinking  persons,  he  was  nothing  more  than  an  old  gentle- 
man of  Versailles,  whom  circumstances  again  raised  to  a 
throne.  His  family  and  himself  returned,  however,  with 
the  old  prejudices  of  five-and-twenty  years  before.  They 
thought  that  the  Revolution  had  been  made  by  men,  and 
not  by  the  force  of  things — a  fatal  mistake  which  had 
already  ruined  Louis  XVI.  They  began,  therefore,  to 
inquire  of  all  they  saw  who  they  were,  and  what  they  had 
done  at  various  periods.  An  old  rancour  against  the  Con- 
stituents, an  affected  contempt  for  the  nobles  who  had 
declared  themselves  in  favour  of  the  Revolution,  a  haughty 
indifference  towards  all  the  members  of  the  preceding 
Government,  a  disdainful  and  humiliating  politeness  to- 
wards the  leaders  of  the  army  because  they  had  still  their 
arms  in  their  hands — such  were  the  features  that  marked 
the  conduct  of  the  Court. 