


276  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

France  actors  were  considered  as  excommunicated.  The 
friends  of  the  deceased  were  unable  to  soften  the  obstinacy 
of  the  old  priest.  The  mob,  full  of  indignation,  broke  open 
the  doors  of  the  church,  lighted  the  wax  tapers,  and  began 
to  sing  the  prayers  consecrated  to  the  dead.  At  last  one  of 
the  King's  chaplains  came,  as  it  was  said,  to  fill  the  sacer- 
dotal functions,  and  the  ceremony  concluded  peaceably. 
For  this  unforeseen  disturbance  public  authority  was  un- 
prepared ;  and  if  the  King  had  followed  his  first  impulse, 
which  was  to  repel  the  people  by  his  guards,  a  riot  would 
in  all  probability  have  ensued,  the  consequences  of  which 
would  have  been  incalculable. 

This  state  of  the  public  mind  in  regard  to  Government, 
this  propensity  towards  resistance,  spread  rapidly  from 
Paris  to  the  departments.  The  awkward  position  of  the 
Imperial  magistrates  and  other  persons  who  had  been  kept 
in  office,  and  who  were  all  of  a  sudden  obliged  to  preach 
other  duties,  other  affections,  and  contrary  opinions,  cast  on 
them  a  sort  of  obloquy  ;  and  the  necessity  of  making  the 
Bourbons  forget  their  former  devotion  to  the  enemy  com- 
municated to  the  exercise  of  their  authority  a  sort  of 
violence  that  wounded  and  irritated  every  one. 

The  purchasers  of  national  property,  who  were  extremely 
numerous,  ten  millions  of  persons  being  supposed  to  be 
interested  in  those  sales,  were  soon  tormented  by  the  former 
proprietors,  who,  far  from  accepting  the  offers  that  had  been 
made  to  them  through  fear,  rejected  all  manner  of  arrange- 
ment. They  declared  openly  that  their  lands  would  be 
restored  to  them  by  the  King's  authority,  and  that  they 
ought  to  resume  the  possession  of  their  property  by  the  same 
title  by  which  he  had  recovered  his  crown  ;  that  the  loss  of 
the  subjects  and  the  monarch  having  been  the  same,  the 
restitution  ought  to  be  made  at  the  same  time  ;  finally,  that 
the  charter,  which  was  only  a  temporary  convention — a  plain 
ordinance  of  reformation — was  to  be  modified  on  that  pointy 
even  if  it  were  not  abolished  altogether. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  277 

The  King  had  returned  with  a  very  small  number  of  nobles 
who  remained  faithful  to  his  person  ;  but  all  the  emigrants 
-who  had  come  back  in  1801,  at  the  time  of  the  amnesty 
granted  by  the  First  Consul,  hastened  to  invade  the  Tuileries, 
and  added  to  the  joy  they  felt  at  the  return  of  the  Bourbons, 
complaints  on  their  former  sufferings  during  their  emigra- 
tion. They  appeared  every  day,  by  swarms,  at  the  chapel 
of  the  Tuileries,  most  of  them  dressed  in  plain  clothes, 
ornamented  with  shoulder  knots,  and  having  by  their  sides 
the  swords  of  their  deceased  regiments.  The  accounts  of 
their  ancient  prowess  at  Coblentz,  and  in  the  legion  of  Conde, 
appeared  pitiful  to  those  who  had  beaten  them  with  so  much 
facility.  They  seemed  as  if  they  had  returned  but  the  day 
before  ;  and  their  boastings,  supported  by  the  favours  of  the 
Court,  gave  great  offence  to  the  warriors  who  had  recently 
fallen  with  so  much  glory.  Finally,  after  a  space  of  twenty 
years,  the  whole  troop  of  Coblentz  and  the  banks  of  the 
Rhine  insolently  triumphed  in  18 14,  as  if  they  had  succeeded 
twenty  years  sooner. 