

The  Empress  Josephine  was  buried  in  the  Church  of  Ruel. 
The  funeral  ceremony  was  celebrated  with  great  splendour, 
by  special  order  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  who  wished  to 
give  a  last  token  of  regard  to  the  memory  of  Josephine,  by 
sending  as  chief  mourner  Field  Marshal  Sacken,  of  all  his 
generals  the  one  for  whom  he  had  the  greatest  esteem,  and 
to  whom  he  had  entrusted  the  government  of  Paris. 

The  death  of  the  Empress  Josephine  was  the  last  blessing 
fortune  conferred  on  her.  Accustomed  to  all  the  enjoyment 
of  luxury,  and  not  knowing  how  to  set  bounds  either  to  her 
expenses  or  to  her  charity,  whilst  the  new  Government 
refused  to  pay  the  pension  that  had  been  granted  her  by 
the  treaty  of  the  nth  of  April,  she  was  on  the  point  of 
feeling  all  that  trouble  that  accompanies  want  of  order  and 
imprudence.  The  return  of  the  Emperor  on  the  20th  of 
March  would,  besides,  have  undoubtedly  compromised  her. 
Her  affection  for  him,  and  the  enthusiasm  his  presence 
would  have  created,  would  have  led  her  into  measures  for 
which  she  could  not  have  expected  pardon  from  the  Bour- 
bons. She  would  therefore  have  been  obliged  to  end  her 
unfortunate  days  far  from  France  and  her  friends. 


286  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

Prince  Eugene  was  going  to  return  to  Germany.  Not 
receiving  any  accounts  from  the  Island  of  Elba,  I  resolved 
to  acquaint  him  with  my  situation.  He  was  devoted  to  the 
Emperor,  and  he  was  my  friend.  I  proposed  to  him  to  take 
charge  of  800,000  francs,  and  send  them  to  the  Island  of 
Elba. 

Feeling  myself  a  little  easier  from  the  thought  of  having 
«aved  half  the  sum,  I  exerted  my  utmost  prudence  to  keep  the 
eyes  of  the  police  off  me.  M.  Pasquier  was  no  longer  there  ; 
and  his  successor,  prepossessed  by  the  idea  of  the  general 
excitement  which  was  daily  augmented  by  newspapers  and 
pamphlets  written  by  men  who  observed  no  moderation, 
naturally  forgot  a  person  like  myself,  whom  his  investigators 
never  met  with,  and  whose  name  was  never  uttered  in  his 
presence. 

What  I  had  foreseen  happened  at  last.  The  charter  was 
infringed  by  underhand  practices,  and  the  press  complained 
openly  of  them.  The  abuse  with  which  the  Emperor  was 
overwhelmed  by  the  Royalist  papers  exasperated  all  the 
adherents  and  friends  of  the  hero.  Recriminations  took  a 
violent  character,  and  some  writers  searched  the  old  Moni- 
tettrs,  and  published  the  odious  imputation  with  which  the 
King  had  formerly  been  charged  at  the  time  of  the  trial  of 
the  Marquis  de  Favras. 

M.  Rey,  a  lawyer  from  Grenoble,  described  in  a  work 
which  was  eagerly  read  all  the  infringements  made  on  the 
charter  from  the  day  it  had  been  granted.  Two  young 
men,  Messrs.  Comte  and  Dunoyer,  published  a  periodical 
work,  called  Le  Censetcr,  whence  the  principles  of  Liberty 
Avere  developed  with  an  energy  and  a  strength  of  argument 
that  gained  universal  applause.  The  writings  of  the  royalists 
contained  abuse  on  the  Revolution,  and  on  all,  without  dis- 
tinction, who  had  taken  a  share  in  it  ;  to  which  they  added 
such  provoking  threats,  that  it  was  impossible  not  to  perceive 
that  their  aim  was  to  punish  all. 