

That  circumstance  was  one  of  the  motives  that  made 
me  keep  so  carefully  at  a  distance  from  Government.  My 
attachment  to  the  person  of  the  Emperor,  the  oaths  of 
allegiance  I  had  made  to  him,  my  gratitude  for  his  kind- 
ness and  generosity,  made  me  shudder  at  the  idea  of  not 
devoting  to  him  the  remainder  of  my  life  ;  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  honour  forbade  me  to  embrace  the  party  of  the  Bour- 
bons, when  I  was  placed  in  the  necessity  of  maintaining  a 
correspondence  with  him.  What  punishment  would  I  not 
have  suffered  and  deserved,  if  the  King's  government,  after 
having  received  my  oath,  had  discovered  that  I  had  in  my 
possession  a  part  of  Napoleon's  fortune,  and  that  I  disposed 
of  it  according  to  his  orders  ?     At  the  time  I  was  making 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  283 

those  painful  reflections,  three  hundred  Prussians  occupied 
the  castle  of  Verriere.  Fifteen  slept  in  the  very  room  where 
the  treasure  was  hid.  These  soldiers  were  far  from  suspect- 
ing that  they  would  have  had  only  to  raise  with  the  points 
of  their  swords  two  boards  of  the  floor,  to  fall  upon  heaps  of 
gold.  They  remained  there  nearly  two  months.  During 
all  that  time  I  was  in  continued  agony.  I  expected  every 
day  to  learn  that  all  had  been  discovered.  Fortunately  the 
Prussians  went  away  at  last,  and  I  was  easy,  at  least,  in  that 
respect. 

The  late  Empress  Josephine  had,  however,  returned  to 
Malmaison.  After  a  short  absence,  during  the  month  of 
April,  the  Emperor  of  Russia  invited  her  to  return  home. 
He  added  such  flattering  assurances,  that  she  soon  resumed, 
without  uneasiness,  her  usual  mode  of  living.  At  first  few 
persons  went  to  see  her  ;  but  the  Emperor  Alexander  and 
the  King  of  Prussia  having  visited  her,  a  great  number  of 
foreigners  appeared  in  their  train,  and  were  soon  followed 
by  many  Frenchmen,  who  still  felt  gratitude  and  attachment 
to  Josephine,  and  who  feared  no  longer  to  express  their 
feelings.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  went  frequently,  and  paid 
her  long  visits  :  their  conversations  on  Napoleon  were  in- 
exhaustible. The  Empress  Josephine's  mind  was  neither 
extensive  nor  cultivated  ;  but  she  possessed  a  sound  judg- 
ment, ingenuity,  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  good  society, 
and  inimitable  grace  ;  whilst  her  accent,  which  was  rather 
that  of  a  Creole,  added  a  great  charm  to  her  conversation. 
Alexander  appeared  delighted  with  her.  One  day  he  pre- 
sented his  brother  Constantine  to  her,  and  said,  "  Do  you 
not  think  that  the  whole  person  of  her  Majesty,  and  even 
the  sound  of  her  voice,  have  a  great  resemblance  to  the 
Empress  Catharine  ? " 

Notwithstanding  some  indiscreet  observations  that  escaped 
her  in  the  freedom  of  those  numerous  conversations,  Jose- 
phine never  belied  the  tender  afi"ection  she  still  felt  for 
Napoleon.     The  revolution  was  complete,  and  the   throne 