

One  of  the  leaders  was  General  Lallemant,  whom  I  had 
known  in  Italy  and  in  Egypt,  when  he  was  an  officer  of 
the  Guards,  and  afterwards  aide-de-camp  of  General  Junot. 
He  wished  me  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  conspiracy,  and 
especially  to  undertake  the  commission  of  acquainting  the 
Emperor  with  it.  He  observed  that  I  had  undoubtedly 
kept  secure  means  of  corresponding  with  him.  He  opened 
to  me  his  plans,  which  were  to  seize  the  persons  of  the 
Bourbons,  proclaiming  the  Emperor,  and  replace  him  on 
the  throne.  Marshal  Davoust,  the  Dukes  of  Otranto  and 
Bassano,  and  several  others,  whose  names  I  forget,  were  the 
heads  of  the  enterprise.  The  more  he  advanced  in  his 
explanation,  the  more  my  alarm  and  uneasiness  deprived 
me  of  all  power  of  replying.  In  listening  to  him,  it  was 
not,  I  acknowledge,  the  fate  of  the  King  that  caused  my 
anxiety,  but  that  of  the  Emperor.  I,  however,  answered, 
"  The  persons  whom  you  have  named  are  very  able,  and 
their  co-operation  undoubtedly  makes  your  success  very 
probable  ;  but  still,  it  seems  to  me,  you  dispose  very  freely 
of  the  Emperor,  simply  to  acquaint  him  with  an  under- 
taking, in  regard  to  which  he  has  not  been  previously 
consulted  :  to  dispose  of  his  fate  without  his  permission 
appears  to  me  a  very  bold  act.  First,  I  positively  declare 
I  have  no  sure  means  of  sending  him  a  letter.  I  even 
entreat  his  friends  not  to  address  him  any,  as  I  am  sure 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  293 

they  will  be  stopped  by  the  posts  of  France  and  Italy,  and 
sent  to  Vienna,  where  M.  de  Talleyrand  strongly  solicits 
a  more  distant  exile  for  the  Emperor.  The  motives  on 
which  he  grounds  his  demand  have  not  as  yet  appeared 
sufficient  to  determine  the  Allied  Powers  to  such  a  measure  ; 
but  I  leave  you  to  judge  what  effect  would  be  produced 
upon  them  by  a  correspondence  such  as  you  wish  to  under- 
take. I  am  convinced  the  Emperor  would  be  sent  to  the 
world's  end,  and  perhaps  even  murdered.  Who  knows 
whether  he  may  not  have  plans  of  his  own  which  yours 
may  counteract  and  destroy  ?  Do  you  think  his  mind  is 
weakened  ?  Has  he  no  friends  left  in  Italy  ?  Can  he 
not  easily  be  informed  of  what  happens  here  ?  Finally, 
has  he  left  his  orders  with  anybody  ?  Has  he  sent  any 
over  since  he  has  been  in  the  Island  of  Elba  ?  "  "As  you 
think  it  dangerous  to  write,"  replied  the  general,  "  we  shall 
strive  to  send  somebody  of  great  trust.  As  for  our  plan, 
it  is  too  far  advanced  for  us  to  delay  the  execution  of  it  any 
longer.  If  we  put  it  off  till  some  other  time,  the  Emperor 
will  be  one  day  unexpectedly  removed  from  the  Island  of 
Elba,  in  spite  of  the  brave  men  who  guard  him,  and  then 
all  will  be  lost  beyond  resource.  For  the  rest,  speak  to  the 
Duke  de  Bassano  ;  communicate  to  him  your  anxiety  ;  but 
be  sure  we  will  not.  This  government  is  not  to  be  borne  ; 
we  will  break  it  with  our  swords  ;  our  resolution  is  taken." 