

The  ill-humour  of  the  Duke  de  Vicenza  and  his  fatal 
forebodings  were  irksome  to  me.  I  left  him,  to  indulge 
at  liberty  the  joy  I  experienced.  At  home  I  found  no  one 
who  would  share  it.  Madame  Lavalette  was  dismayed  at 
the  news,  and  drew  sad  omens  from  it.  I  ran  to  the  Duchess 
of  St.  Leu,  and  found  her  bathed  in  tears  of  joy  and  emotion. 
After  a  lapse  of  a  few  moments,  we  began  to  calculate  the 
immense  distance  between  Cannes  and  Paris.  "  What  will 
the  generals  do  that  command  on  that  road  ?  What  the 
public  authorities  ?  What  the  troops  ?  What  effect  will 
the  arrival  of  the  Count  d'Artois  produce  ?  "  It  appeared 
to  us  as  if  nothing  could  resist  the  Emperor  ;  and  we  con- 
cluded that,  when  once  he  should  arrive  at  Lyons,  all 
opposition  would  become  impossible.  From  that  moment 
the  Duchess  closed  her  door.  All  the  suspicions  of  the 
royalists,  all  the  eyes  of  the  police,  centred  upon  her. 
During  the  eleven  months  that  had  elapsed,  her  house  had 
not  been  much  frequented.  Some  generals,  a  few  ladies  and 
young  men  of  the  new  Court,  visited  her  often  ;  but  the 
conversation  never  turned  upon  the  Emperor.  A  small 
number  of  faithful  friends  alone  now  and  then  inquired 
what  was  his  manner  of  living, — what  would  be  his  future 
situation. 

An  undefined  feeling  convinced  us  that  he  would  return  ; 
that  a  life  of  miracles  would  not  be  terminated  on  a  rock 
between  Italy  and  France  ;  but  how,  and  by  what  means, 
that  was  to  happen,  our  imagination,  active  as  it  was,  could 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  297 

not  conceive.  Every  day  we  counted  the  errors  Government 
committed,  those  they  were  supposed  to  commit,  and  the 
mass  of  prepossessions,  complaints,  violent  or  satirical 
writings,  in  which  the  ridicule  of  the  royalists  and  the 
absurdity  of  their  plans  were  exposed  to  light  with  so  much 
bitter  irony.  But,  notwithstanding  all  that,  the  people 
were  satisfied  with  laughing  and  shrugging  their  shoulders  : 
the  soldiers  obeyed,  and  the  mob  appeared  to  remain  quiet. 
How  could  the  Emperor,  therefore,  think  of  showing  him- 
self to  a  Government  that  appeared  strong,  and  to  a  people 
that  seemed  to  have  forgotten  him  ?  And  lo  !  all  of  a 
sudden  he  lands  in  France  ;  he  agitates  the  minds  of  every 
one  ;  his  formidable  name  spreads  dismay  and  discourage- 
ment among  those  who  command,  and  those  who  detest 
him.  The  days,  hours,  and  minutes  were  counted.  Every 
morning  the  newspapers  published  the  most  sinister  reports  : 
he  had  either  been  taken  or  had  fled  to  the  mountains.  No 
certain  accounts  were  received.  Our  consternation  augmented 
from  day  to  day.  I  took  long  walks  in  the  suburbs,  and  found 
everywhere  the  appearance  of  complete  indifference.  The 
labours  and  habits  of  the  people  remained  the  same.  But  the 
police,  who  carefully  gathered  the  movements  of  the  evening, 
in  the  cabarets  and  other  places  of  resort  of  the  lower  classes, 
were  struck  with  awe  at  the  energetic  speeches  and  terrible 
plans  that  were  secretly  circulated.  They  dare  not,  however, 
imprison  any  individual  of  those  classes,  for  fear  of  causing 
riots,  the  consequence  of  which  might  have  been  frightful.' 