


COUNT         LAVALETTE 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  301 

Emperor  ;  but  I  wished  to  see  my  wife  before  I  went.     To 
reconcile  these  two  feelings,  I  resolved  to  write  to  Fontaine- 
bleau.    An  express  was  given  me,  who  went  off  immediately. 
I  acquainted  the  Emperor  with  the  departure  of  the  King, 
and  solicited  his  orders  for  the  Post-office,  which  M.  Ferrand 
had  left  vacant.     As  soon  as  the  express  was  gone,  I  went 
home  and  remained  there  an  hour.    I  was  far  from  thinking 
that  the  short  and  natural  step  I  had  taken  would  be  charged 
upon  me  as  a  crime.  I  had  so  little  desire  to  take  possession  of 
the  Post-office,  that  I  went  to  Prince  Cambaceres  to  consult 
him  on  what  I  was  to  do.     T  found  him,  according  to  the 
custom    of  his   whole    life,  complaining   of  ill-health,  and 
struggling  against  the  sufferings  caused  by  his  daily  medi- 
cines.   I  communicated  to  him  riy  visit  to  the  Post-office.    I 
pointed  out  to  him  the  situation  of  Paris — deprived  of  magis- 
trates, and  perhaps  at  the  point  of  an  explosion  of  the  most 
dangerous  character.     I  had  forgotten  to  mention,  that  after 
the  departure  of  Count  Ferrand,  my  fear  that  the  cash  might 
be  plundered  made  me  go  to  General  Dessolles,  the  com- 
mander of  the  National  Guards,  and  beg  he  would  send  a 
detachment  of  soldiers  to  protect  the  money.     The  officer 
who  commanded  them  did  not  even  consult  me  in  placing 
the  sentries.     One  of  the  clerks  took  that  task  upon  himself. 
When  the  Prince  learned  these  particulars,  he  replied  with 
his  usual  coolness  and  gravity  :    '*  You  have  undoubtedly 
acted  very  wisely  :  I  foresee  all  the  confusion  that  will  pre- 
vail in  Paris  ;  but  I  shall  take  great  heed  not  to  say  a  word 
or  make  a  sign  by  which  the  Emperor  may  suspect  that  I 
have  anticipated  his  resolutions.     I  have  not  forgotten  that 
he  reprimanded  me  on  his  return  from  the  Russian  campaign. 
I  will  tell  you  the  circumstance  for  your  information.     You 
know  that,  during  his  absence,  it  was  I  who  presided  at  the 
Council.      The  affair  of  Mallet  took  us  by  surprise.     You 
know  he  was  sentenced  with  some  of  his  accomplices.    They 
were  executed.  When  the  Emperor  arrived  at  the  Tuileries, 
he  sent  for  me,  and  as  soon  as  he  perceived  mc,  he  came  up 


302  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

to  me  with  looks  that  seemed  to  pierce  me  through  and 
through.  '  Who  allowed  you,'  he  said,  trembling  with 
anger,  '  to  shed  the  blood  of  my  subjects  without  my  order  ? 
They  were  brave  soldiers,  who  had  a  hundred  times  exposed 
their  lives  for  me  and  the  glory  of  their  country.  Have  you 
forgotten  that  the  most  precious  jewel  in  my  crown  is  to 
pardon  ?  I  know  not  what  prevents  me  from  punishing 
you  severely  for  it.'  It  is  not  necessary,  I  think,"  added 
Prince  Cambaceres,  "  for  me  to  say  any  more  in  the  matter, 
and  you  may  easily  suppose  that  I  have  not  the  least  wish 
to  expose  myself  once  more  to  his  resentment."  "As  for 
me,  Monseigneur,"  I  answered,  "  I  act  for  his  interest,  and 
have  despatched  to  him  an  express.  I  shall  undoubtedly 
receive  an  answer,  for  which  I  am  going  to  wait  at  the  Post- 
office." 