

This  hostile  disposition  had  extended  all  over  France,  by 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  287 

the  very  measures  that  Government  took  to  alter  or  weaken 
it.  Fearing,  not  without  some  reason,  the  troops  assembled 
under  the  colours,  they  had  come  to  the  resolution  of  dis- 
"banding  more  than  half  of  them.  The  sufferings  of  want 
soon  took  the  place  of  the  happiness  they  had  enjoyed  on 
finding  themselves  returned  in  peace  to  their  homes.  The 
fatigues,  the  dangers,  and  even  the  disasters  of  the  last 
campaign  were  soon  obliterated  from  their  memory  ;  and 
they  only  retained  the  enthusiasm  with  which  the  recol- 
lection of  the  Emperor  inspired  them  in  their  idle  hours, 
mingled  with  pity  for  his  fall,  and  indignation  at  the  dis- 
graceful treatment  he  suflFered  from  enemies  he  had  so 
often  vanquished.  The  glory  they  had  been  promised,  the 
military  rewards  that  could  not  have  escaped  them,  the 
illustrious  title  of  soldiers  of  the  Grand  Army,  and  the 
universal  veneration  that  was  to  embellish  the  remainder  of 
their  days,  had  all  disappeared.  They  returned  to  their 
homes  poor  and  humbled,  and  had  moreover  to  suffer  from 
the  mistrust  of  the  agents  of  the  new  authorities,  and  from 
the  contempt  of  that  crowd  of  nobles,  most  of  them  old 
emigrants,  who  ranked  among  their  rights  and  privileges 
the  pleasure  of  detracting  from  the  military  glory,  and 
branding  with  the  name  of  revolt  the  heroic  exertions  of 
the  French  to  save  their  country  from  a  foreign  yoke. 

Most  of  the  generals  who  had  been  retained,  and  even 
those  who  commanded  military  divisions,  soon  perceived, 
by  the  reception  they  met  with  at  Court,  that  the  day  was 
not  far  off  when  they  would  be  set  aside  to  make  place  for 
the  royalists,  whose  long  idleness  was  repaid  by  an  accumu- 
lation of  rank. 

I  saw  none  of  my  old  companions  in  arms  ;  but  a  con- 
versation I  had  with  one  of  my  friends  opened  my  eyes, 
and  made  me  more  attentive  to  what  was  passing  around 
me.  My  lodgings,  which  were  situated  in  the  Faubourg 
St.  Germain,  placed  me  under  the  necessity  of  frequently 
crossing  the  garden  of  the  Tuileries.     I  met  there  one  day 


288  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

a  former  aide-de-camp  of  the  Emperor.  We  talked  about 
public  affairs,  and  he  said  to  me  :  "  I  have  just  met  Marshal 
Ney  ;  I  have  never  yet  seen  a  man  more  exasperated  than 
he  against  Government.  His  lady  was  yesterday  so  cruelly 
insulted  at  the  Tuileries  that  she  went  home  in  tears.  The 
old  duchesses  taxed  her  with  being  the  daughter  of  a 
chambermaid.'  Her  aunt,  Madame  Campan,  has  just  lost 
the  situation  of  superintending  lady  of  the  establishment  at 
Ecouen,  notwithstanding  the  Marshal's  solicitations.  The 
harsh  and  insolent  manner  of  Count  de  Blacas,  to  whom  the 
King  referred  him,  added  to  his  exasperation." 