


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  295 

to  him,  and  he  had  approved  of  them  ;  it  was  therefore 
fear  that  made  him  recede,  for  repentance  could  scarcely 
find  a  place  in  the  heart  of  such  a  man.  Finally,  he  stopped 
rather  late,  the  motion  having  already  begun,  the  dike  being 
broken,  and  the  torrent  ready  to  overflow  on  all  sides. 
The  initiated  were  expecting  with  great  anxiety  the  news 
of  the  rising.  Only  three  days  more  were  wanted  for  us 
to  receive  it,  when  we  learned  that  Lallemant  and  Lefebvre 
Desnouettes  had  been  discovered  at  La  Feren,  through  the 
vigilance  of  General  Daboville  and  Colonel  Lyon  ;  that  Lalle- 
mant was  taken  with  his  brother,  and  that  a  court-martial 
was  already  convoked  to  try  them.  The  cause  seemed  lost 
beyond  resource.  Anxiety  and  despair  seized  all  the  friends 
of  the  Emperor.  Without  uneasiness  with  regard  to  myself, 
I  sighed  over  the  fate  of  so  many  brave  men,  who  were 
going  to  expiate  on  the  scaffold  their  fidelity  for  him  whom 
they  still  looked  upon  as  their  Sovereign,  when  suddenly 
an  extraordinary  event,  an  absolute  miracle,  began  to  be 
reported  about,  secretly  at  first,  but  soon  with  undoubted 
certainty.  It  was  on  Monday  the  7th  of  March.  I  was 
crossing  the  Tuileries  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning,  when 
I  perceived  on  the  steps  of  the  gate  leading  to  the  Rue  de 
Rivoli,  M.  Paul  Lagarde,  late  Commissary-general  of  the 
Police  in  Italy.  I  saluted  him  with  my  hand  in  passing  by, 
and  continued  my  way  under  the  trees,  towards  the  terrace 
on  the  water-side.  Hearing  some  person  near  me,  I  was 
going  to  turn  round,  when  the  following  words  were  whis- 
pered in  my  ear  :  "  Make  no  gestures  ;  show  no  surprise  ; 
do  not  stop  ;  the  Emperor  landed  at  Cannes  on  the  ist  of 
March  ;  the  Count  d'Artois  set  off  last  night  to  oppose 
him."  It  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  express  the  con- 
fusion into  which  these  words  threw  me.  I  could  scarcely 
breathe  from  emotion  :  I  continued  walking  like  an  inebriated 
man,  and  repeating  to  myself — "  Is  it  possible  ?  Is  it  not 
a  dream,  or  the  most  cruel  mockery  ?  "  When  I  arrived 
on    the    terrace   on    the    water-side,    I    met   the    Duke   de 


296  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

Vicenza,  went  up  to  him,  and  I  repeated  to  him  the  news 
word  for  word,  and  in  the  same  tone  of  voice  in  which  I 
had  just  received  it.  He  being  of  a  hasty  temper,  and 
accustomed  to  view  things  on  the  worst  side,  exclaimed  : 
"  What  an  extravagance  !  How  !  to  land  without  troops ! 
He  will  be  taken  ;  he  will  not  advance  two  leagues  into 
France  ;  he  is  a  lost  man.  But  it  is  impossible  !  However,'' 
he  added,  "it  is  but  too  true  that  the  Count  d'Artois  set 
off  hastily  last  night." 