

I  went  the  day  after  to  the  Duke  de  Bassano,  whom  I 
had  not  seen  since  the  Restoration.  After  having  related 
the  conversation  I  had  had  with  Lallemant,  I  expressed  my 
fears,  not  only  in  regard  to  a  correspondence  with  the 
Island  of  Elba,  but  also  to  the  strange  trust  they  reposed 
in  the  Duke  of  Otranto.  Murat  spoke  openly  to  me — 
"  This  is  quite  a  military  operation,"  he  said  ;  "  we  have 
nothing  to  say  in  it  :  all  that  concerns  us  is  the  return  of 
the  Emperor.  I  know  not  how  to  acquaint  him  of  it,  if 
you  have  no  means,  and  if  you  think  them  all  dangerous.  I 
am,  moreover,  as  much  convinced  as  you  are  that  it  would 


394  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

be  his  certain  ruin  to  commit  even  a  single  word  to  paper  ,- 
and,  in  fact,  I  gave  no  letter  to  M.  Fleury  de  Chaboulon, 
who,  you  know,  set  off  more  than  a  fortnight  ago.  To  be 
sure,  when  he  left  us,  the  military  conspiracy  was  not  yet 
hatched  ;  or,  at  least,  I  had  no  knowledge  of  it.  As  to  the 
Duke  of  Otranto,  I  do  not  share  your  mistrust  :  he  has 
entered  on  the  business  with  so  much  ardour,  and  he  is  on 
such  bad  terms  with  the  Bourbons,  that  I  am  sure  he  will 
not  betray  us."  "  Very  well  ;  but  suppose  he  be  sincere  in 
this,  who  knows  whether  he  has  not  some  after-thought, 
and  whether  he  does  not  intend  to  work  for  another?" 
"I  do  not  know  for  whom  it  should  be:  he  can  have  no 
thoughts  on  the  Duke  of  Orleans.  Of  that  I  have  indis- 
putable proofs.  Neither  he  nor  any  other  would  dare  to 
touch  that  question  with  the  Prince.  Come  and  see  me 
often,  and  I  shall  make  you  acquainted  with  everything." 

My  conversation  with  the  Duke  de  Bassano  had  aug- 
mented my  fears  for  the  Emperor.  The  name  of  the  Duke 
of  Otranto  appeared  fatal  to  me,  and  I  returned  a  few 
days  afterwards  to  the  Duke's  house,  to  speak  again  with 
him  on  the  subject.  He  was  closeted  with  the  Prince  of 
Eckmiihl ;  but  I  found  Count  Thibaudeau,  who  was  very 
well  informed  of  the  whole  business,  and  knew  the  plot  in 
its  most  minute  particulars.  I  communicated  to  him  my 
anxiety  concerning  Fouche.  His  answer  was — "  It  is  not 
yet  very  clear  in  my  eyes  that  he  really  wishes  for  the 
return  of  the  Emperor,  but  he  will  remain  faithful  to  us 
on  the  occasion." 

While  we  were  talking  together,  the  Prince  of  Eckmiihl 
came  out  of  the  Duke's  cabinet,  and  the  latter  taking  us 
aside,  acquainted  us  that  the  Prince  had  just  declared  he 
gave  up  all  co-operation  in  the  undertaking.  The  reason 
he  gave  was,  the  levity  of  the  leaders,  and  the  certainty 
that  the  Court  had  already  some  suspicion  on  the  subject. 
His  resolution  came  rather  late  ;  his  name  had  encouraged 
all  the  others.     The  means  of  execution  had  been  submitted 