


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  299 

had  met  with,  all  the  troops  he  had  assembled  at  Lyons, 
had  refused  to  obey  his  orders.  Marshal  Macdonald,  so 
beloved  by  the  army,  could  not  even  obtain  a  hearing.  The 
great  name  of  Napoleon  had  intoxicated  and  turned  the 
minds  of  every  one.  An  immense  number  of  peasants  had 
joined  the  army.  A  word,  a  sign,  would  have  been  suffi- 
cient to  make  them  murder  all  the  nobles  and  priests. 
Fortunately,  some  moderate  men  undertook  to  lead  the 
insurrection,  and  found  means  to  direct  it  solely  towards 
Bonaparte.  "  Do  not  tarnish  the  Emperor's  name  !  "  they 
cried  on  all  sides  ;  "  he  will  not  suffer  a  drop  of  blood  to  be 
spilt." 

Days  passed  away,  and  each  hour  made  the  danger  more 

imminent.     M.  D ,  the  Prefect  of  Police,  was  succeeded 

by  M.  Bourrienne.  The  friends  of  the  Emperor  knew  what 
they  had  to  fear  from  that  man,  who  was  a  former  school- 
fellow of  Napoleon,  at  the  military  college,  and  afterwards 
his  secretary.  He  had  been  dismissed  for  some  shabby  tricks,, 
and  at  the  Restoration  he  had  delivered  himself  up,  body  and 
soul,  to  the  royalist  party.  The  choice  of  this  person  had 
been  undoubtedly  fixed  upon  because  he  was  perfectly  well 
acquainted  with  all  the  friends  of  the  Emperor  and  their 
habits.  I  knew  that  he  was  capable  of  any  act,  and  I  was 
particularly  anxious  about  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu  and  her 
two  children,  whom  it  was  resolved  to  take  as  hostages,  in 
case  the  Court  should  be  obliged  to  fly  to  foreign  parts.  She 
went  however,  betimes,  to  seek  a  refuge  with  an  old  Creole 
woman  from  Martinique,  who  was  entirely  devoted  to  her. 

Not  wishing  to  compromise  any  of  my  friends,  I  concealed 
myself  in  the  hotel  of  the  Duchess,  but  in  that  part  of  the 
house  kept  apart  for  the  servants.  It  was  the  14th  of  March  : 
I  had  no  news  from  the  provinces  ;  but,  notwithstanding  the 
false  accounts  with  which  the  papers  were  filled,  I  could  see 
that  the  Emperor  advanced  rapidly,  and  that  it  was  no 
longer  possible  to  oppose  any  obstacle  to  his  march.  The 
Duke  de  Berry  had  just  received  the  command  of  a  camp 


30O  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

near  Paris.  The  officers,  who  had  begun  by  immeasurable 
professions  of  fidelity,  soon  grew  colder  and  more  reserved. 
As  for  the  soldiers,  the  wind  itself  seemed  to  waft  to  them 
the  name  of  the  Emperor  ;  every  bird  they  saw  was  to  them 
the  Imperial  eagle.  The  rigour  of  military  discipline,  exhor- 
tations, entreaties,  were  not  capable  of  keeping  them  within 
bounds  ;  and  during  the  three  last  days  that  preceded  the 
arrival  of  the  Emperor,  woe  to  those  among  the  troops  who 
would  have  dared  to  abuse  him,  or  designed  to  attack  him  ! 
At  last,  on  the  20th  of  March,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing, I  learned  that  the  King  and  the  whole  Court  had  left 
Paris  during  the  night,  and  that  the  city  was  without 
magistrates  or  military  leaders.  I  left  my  retreat,  intendi  ng 
to  return  home  ;  for  I  was  anxious  about  my  wife,  whom  I 
had  left  indisposed,  and  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  eight  days. 
As  I  came  out  of  the  Rue  d'Artois,  to  cross  the  Boulevards, 
I  met  General  Sebastiani  in  a  cabriolet.  He  told  me  the 
news  of  the  King's  departure  ;  but  he  knew  nothing  of  the 
Emperor.  "  I  have  a  mind,"  I  said,  "to  go  and  inquire  at 
the  Post-office."  I  seated  myself  next  to  him.  When  I 
entered  the  audience-room  that  precedes  the  closet  of  the 
Postmaster-general,  I  found  a  young  man  sitting  before  a 
table,  and  asked  him  whether  Count  Ferrandwas  still  in  the 
house.  He  answered  that  he  was,  and  I  gave  my  name, 
begging  him  to  ask  for  me  a  few  moments'  conversation  with 
Count  Ferrand.  I  had  never  seen  him  before,  but  had  heard 
that  he  was  an  infirm  old  man,  and  the  father  of  a  family.  I 
was  surprised  at  his  delay  in  setting  off ;  and,  through  a  feel- 
ing of  generosity,  I  wished  to  protect  his  escape,  and  ensure 
his  safety.  M.  Ferrand  came  ;  but,  without  stopping  or 
listening  to  me,  he  opened  his  closet  :  I  did  not  follow  him 
there  ;  but  I  went  to  another  room,  where  I  found  the  chief 
clerks  delighted  to  see  me  again,  and  disposed  to  do  any 
thing  to  oblige  me.  M.  Ferrand,  after  having  put  up  his 
papers,  went  away,  and  left  his  closet  at  my  disposal.  I  had 
a  great  desire   to   fly  to  Fontainebleau   and   embrace   the 