

This  account  appeared  so  singular  to  me,  from  the  dispo- 
sition in  which  I  supposed  the  Marshal  to  be,  that  I  could 
not  help  expressing  some  idea  that  it  might  be  exaggerated. 
"If  you  think  me  mistaken,"  returned  the  aide-de-camp, 
"  let  us  continue  our  walk.  He  will  soon  pass  through 
here  again  to  return  home,  for  I  know  he  is  gone  to  the 
Rue  du  Mont  Blanc,  and  you  may  hear  him  yourself." 

In  fact,  the  Marshal  appeared  in  about  an  hour.  We 
stood  at  the  entrance  of  the  terrace,  by  the  water-side. 
When  he  saw  me,  he  immediately  came  up  to  me,  and  we 
walked  all  three  together.  "  Well,"  said  he,  "  so  you  have 
kept  yourself  aloof  ;  you  are  at  peace,  far  from  this  puddle. 
How  happy  you  are,  that  have  no  insult  or  injustice  to 
suffer  !  These  people  are  so  ignorant,  they  know  not  what 
a  Marshal  Ney  is.     Shall  I  be  obliged  to  teach  it  them  ?  " 

He  continued  there  for  half  an  hour,  to  vent  his  passion  ; 
and,  notwithstanding  some  reflections  we  made  with  a  view 
to  calm  him,  he  left  us  abruptly.  This  fact  will  undoubtedly 
appear    a   considerable    charge    against    him  ;    and   many 

'  The  lady  of  Marshal  Ney  was  a  daughter  of  Madame  Anguie,  chamber- 
maid to  the  Queen.  Her  unfortunate  mother,  who  was  persecuted  in  1793 
by  the  revolutionarj-  committees,  threw  herself  into  a  well,  to  escape  from 
the  scaffold,  and  to  a%'oid  by  a  voluntary  death  the  confiscation  of  her  pro- 
perty. She  had  three  daughters,  all  of  them  remarkable  for  their  beauty 
and  the  most  amiable  qualities  :  Madame  Gamot  (afterwards  Madame 
Delaville),  the  lady  of  Marshal  Ney,  and  Madame  de  Broc,  who  met  with 
her  death  by  falling  into  a  torrent  near  Aix  in  Savoy. — Note  of  the  Author. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  289 

persons  will  be  tempted  to  connect  that  speech  with  his 
conduct  in  the  month  of  March  following.  This  would, 
however,  be  a  mistake.  The  Marshal  was  a  man  who  always 
acted  upon  the  first  impulse  :  he  did  not  love  the  new 
Government ;  but  (it  must,  alas  !  be  acknowledged)  he 
loved  the  Emperor  still  less.  A  few  days  after  the  con- 
versation I  mentioned,  he  went  to  his  seat  of  Coudreaux, 
and  remained  a  complete  stranger  to  all  that  follows. 


20 


CHAPTER   XXXI. 

The  youngest  and  most  ambitious  among  the  general 
officers  were  naturally  the  most  discontented.  Stopped  all 
of  a  sudden  in  the  midst  of  their  career,  forced  to  mix  again 
with  the  crowd,  fortune  and  honours  escaped  from  their 
hands,  when  they  seemed  to  have  only  one  step  more  to 
take  to  gain  them.  Accustomed  to  a  showy  life,  their  large 
salaries  were  suddenly  cut  off,  and  they  experienced  great 
disappointment  in  not  being  able  to  keep  up  the  brilliant 
rank  that  had  been  assigned  to  them  in  the  army  and  in  the 
world,  the  enjoyment  of  which  would  perhaps  have  com- 
forted them.  I  do  not  say  that  their  love  of  their  country 
and  their  devotion  to  the  Emperor  had  not  a  great  share  in 
their  resentment  ;  and  all  those  causes  added  together  made 
their  situation  insufferable.  The  universal  contempt  for 
the  new  Government,  and  the  clamour  that  was  raised  on 
all  sides,  persuaded  them  that  the  favourable  moment  for 
an  insurrection  had  arrived  ;  and  some  of  them  did  not 
hesitate  to  employ  for  that  end  the  troops  with  which 
Government  had  entrusted  them  for  its  defence,  in  full 
reliance  on  the  oath  of  allegiance  they  had  taken.     I  had 