

not  the  least  knowledge  of  the  plot.     It  was  M.  de  P 

who  first  spoke  to  me  about  it,  and  who,  with  the  confidence 
and  levity  of  youth,  acquainted  me  with  all  its  particulars. 
He  did  not  even  seek  to  hide  the  names  of  any  of  its  leaders. 
By  all  I  had  heard,  I  soon  discovered  that  everybody  knew 
the  secret  except  Government.  It  was  Marshal  Soult  who 
held  the  portfolio  of  the  War  Department  ;  but  having  at 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  291 

that  time  no  other  wish  than  to  efface  by  his  new  zeal  the 
remembrance  of  his  old  affection  for  the  Republic  and  the 
Emperor,  he  consecrated  all  his  time  to  the  Vendeans  and 
their  history,  making  the  King  sign  an  ordinance  for  the 
monument  at  Quiberon,  and  placing  them  in  the  army. 
Far  from  enlightening  the  Sovereign  on  the  spirit  of  the 
army  and  the  people,  he  knew  so  little  about  it  himself, 
that  he  thought  it  quite  natural  to  assemble  with  great  eclat^ 
in  the  city  of  Nantes,  all  the  remains  of  the  old  rebels  of  the 
Vendee,  for  a  solemn  distribution  of  pensions  and  orders. 
The  Nantese,  at  the  sight  of  their  old  foes,  who  had  so 
frequently  shown  marks  of  cruelty,  were  at  the  point  of 
insurrection.  The  agent  of  the  Minister  was  obliged  to  run 
away,  leaving  behind  him  an  incensed  population,  ready  to 
take  up  arms  to  repel  this  counter-revolutionary  attempt. 

This  awkward  act  was  soon  after  followed  by  an  unjust 
and  brutal  measure,  which  augmented  the  exasperation 
of  the  military.  General  Excelmans,  one  of  the  most 
brilliant  leaders  of  the  army,  had  been  first  aide-de-camp 
to  the  King  of  Naples.  One  of  the  physicians  of  that 
Prince  setting  off  to  join  him,  Excelmans  gave  him  a  letter, 
wherein  he  feelingly  expressed  his  attachment  to  his  former 
general.  Some  loose  words  on  the  energy  of  the  army, 
which  still  subsisted  notwithstanding  the  peace,  and  offers 
of  service,  concluded  his  letter.  The  person  who  had  taken 
charge  of  it  was  arrested  ;  the  letter  was  then  delivered  to 
the  Minister  of  War  (then  General  Dupont),  who  repri- 
manded General  Excelmans  for  the  very  slight  impropriety 
he  h^d  committed.  But  the  letter  remained  in  the  office  of 
the  Minister.  One  of  the  first  measures  of  Marshal  Soult, 
when  he  took  the  portfolio,  was  to  decide  that  General 
Excelmans  should  leave  Paris,  and  go  and  reside,  until 
further  orders,  in  the  department  where  he  was  born.  The 
general  resisted,  alleging,  with  reason,  that  his  natural  home 
was  in  the  metropolis,  having  no  property  in  the  depart- 
ment, where   he  had  not   even    been  for    the  last    twenty 


292  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

years.  Finally,  he  only  solicited  a  respite.  Madame  Excel- 
mans  had  been  for  three  days  in  the  pains  of  child-birth. 
All  the  friends  of  her  husband  surrounded  him,  and 
encouraged  him  to  resist  an  order  which  had  all  the 
appearance  of  a  leitre  de  cachet.  The  Minister  was  going 
to  use  violence,  when  one  of  the  General's  companions 
in  arms,  General  Flahaut,  helped  him  to  escape.  A  court- 
martial  assembled  at  Lille  to  try  him  :  he  went  there  and 
was  acquitted.  This  acquittal  was  a  fresh  triumph  to  the 
friends  of  the  Emperor,  and  a  powerful  encouragement  to 
those  who  were  at  the  head  of  the  plot. 