

'  I  occupied  at  that  time  a  part  of  the  old  Hotel  de  Lamoignon,  which 
l>elonged  to  M.  de  Lamoignon's  son-in-law,  M.  de  Caumont.  Madame  de 
Stael  lived  on  the  ground  floor  of  the  same  hotel.  The  day  after  the  news 
of  the  Emperor's  landing  had  arrived,  she  sent  to  beg  I  would  come  down 
to  her.  When  I  entered  her  drawing-room  she  came  to  meet  me, 
her  arms  crossed  before  her  breast,  and  said  with  a  faltering  but  still 
sonorous  voice:  "Well,  sir,  so  he  is  come  back!"  "He  is  not  yet 
arrived;  the  journey  is  long  and  I  fear  that  many  obstacles  .  .  ."  "He 
will  arrive  ;  he'll  be  here  in  a  few  days,  I  have  no  delusion  !  Oh  !  my 
God  !  Liberty  is  then  lost  for  ever  !  Poor  F'rance  !  After  so  many 
sufferings  ;  notwithstanding  such  ardent,  such  unanimous  wishes.  .  .  .  His 
despotism  will  prevail,  and  I  must  leave  the  country, — leave  it  undouljtodly 


298  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

It  must,  however,  be  acknowledged  that  the  tradespeople,, 
moneyed  men,  and  lawyers,  did  not  share  these  sentiments. 
The  position  of  the  Court  inspired  no  interest ;  the  jests 
to  which  it  was  exposed  gained  rapid  applause  ;  but  still, 
the  too  recent  presence  of  the  enemy  caused  great  anxiety 
and  a  sort  of  stupefaction  at  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor. 
Nevertheless,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  young  men  who 
enlisted  at  Vincennes  as  royalists,  nobody  appeared  willing 
to  fight.  The  Count  d'Artois  returned  in  despair,  unable 
to  place  any  confidence  in  the  army.     All  the  regiments  he 

for  ever  !  One  month  more,  and  I  should  have  united  those  two  poor 
children.  I  should  have  been  happy."  (She  pointed  to  the  room  in  which 
her  daughter  and  M.  de  Broglie  had  retired.)  "But,  Madame,  why 
should  you  take  so  desperate  a  resolution  ?  You  have  nothing  to  fear 
from  the  Emperor ;  misfortune  and  public  opinion,  which  is  so  powerful, 
will  have  great  influence  over  him."  "No,  I  will  go.  What  can  I  do 
here  ?  I  should  have  too  much  to  suffer.  Alas  !  when  I  saw  these 
Princes  in  England,  they  listened  to  truth.  I  depicted  to  them  the 
situation  of  France,  what  she  wished  to  have,  what  it  was  so  easy  to  give 
her.  I  thought  I  had  convinced  them  ;  and  here,  during  eleven  months, 
will  you  believe  that  I  have  not  been  able  once  to  speak  to  them  ?  I  saw 
them  advancing  towards  the  abyss,  and  my  warnings  have  been  rejected. 
I  love  them,  I  regard  them,  because  they  alone  can  give  me  liberty,  and 
because  they  are  honest  men.  I  do  believe  that  Bonaparte  will  not  dare 
to  oppress  me  at  present :  but,  to  live  under  his  eyes !  never  ! "  Then 
looking  full  in  my  face,  she  added  :  "  I  do  not  wish  to  discover  your 
secrets,  nor  to  know  what  share  you  have  had  in  this  foolish  expedition  ; 
but  I  reckon  upon  you  to  help  me  to  escape  from  the  ill-treatment  and 
persecution  that  may  begin  even  before  his  arrival  ;  for  all  this  appears  to 
me  so  well  prepared."  "For  my  part,  you  may  rely  on  me.  If  I  hear 
that  they  have  any  intention  of  using  you  ill,  you  will  find  my  doors  open 
at  any  hour  of  the  day,  and  means  of  escaping  through  my  garden  shall  be 
provided  for  you."  I  left  her,  deeply  touched  with  what  she  had  said,  and  with 
her  noble  spirit.  A  few  days  afterwards  she  gave  a  rout  to  eight  hundred 
persons  of  the  Court  and  the  city.  There  was  a  concert  and  a  supper.  One 
of  my  friends  who  had  been  there  came  up  to  me,  and  told  me  what  he  had 
witnessed.  The  scene  was  animated  with  the  greatest  apparent  freedom 
and  gaiety.  The  news  that  the  Emperor  had  landed  and  was  approaching 
Lyons  seemed  not  to  create  the  least  uneasiness.  If  his  name  was  pro- 
nounced, it  was  only  to  abuse  him.  Nobody  seemed  to  doubt  but  that  he 
would  be  obliged  to  fly,  and  would  perhaps  be  taken  ;  and  still  a  secret 
feeling  of  fear  disturbed  the  minds  of  every  one  ;  they  seemed  to  feel  the 
necessity  of  seeking  forgetfulness  in  noisy  diversions,  to  avoid  consternation 
and  terror.  I  saw  Madame  de  Stael  no  more.  She  left  Paris  a  few  days 
before  the  20th  of  March  ;  and  the  Emperor,  to  whom  I  spoke  of  her 
departure,  appeared  vexed  at  the  step  she  had  taken.  It  was  even  reported 
to  me  at  that  time  that  he  made  some  proposals  for  her  to  come  back. 