

uncertainty.       "  How   is    it    possible,"    I    said,    "  that  

should  have  been  imprudent  enough  to  write  such  things 
to  me,  who  am  not  his  friend,  and  who  have  had  so  little 
connection  with  him  ?  How  can  one  suppose  that  the 
Empress  should  forget  herself  in  such  circumstances,  so  far 
as  to  manifest  hatred  to  you,  and,  still  more,  to  cast  herself 
away  upon  a  man  who  undoubtedly  still  possesses  some 
power  to  please,  but  who  is  no  longer  young — whose  face 
is  disfigured,   and   whose  person,    altogether,    has    nothing 

agreeable  in  it?"     "But,"  answered  the  Emperor,   " 

is  attached  to  me  ;  and,  though  he  is  not  your  friend,  the 
postscript  sufficiently  explains  the  motive  of  the  confidence 
he  places  in  you."  The  following  words  were,  in  fact, 
written  at  the  bottom  of  the  letter  :  "  I  do  not  think  you 
ought  to  mention  the  truth  to  the  Emperor  ;  but  make 
whatever  use  of  it  you  think  proper."  I  persisted,  however, 
in  maintaining  that  the  letter  was  a  counterfeit  ;  and  the 


3i8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

Emperor  then  said  to  me  :  "  Go  to  Caulaincourt.  He  pos- 
sesses a  great  many  others  of  the  same  handwriting.  Let 
the  comparison  decide  between  your  opinion  and  mine." 

I  went  to  Caulaincourt,  who  said  eagerly  to  me  :  "  I  am 

sure  the  letter  is  from ;  and  I  have  not  the  least  doubt 

of  the  truth  of  the  particulars  it  contains.  The  best  thing 
the  Emperor  can  do  is  to  be  comforted  :  there  is  nothing 
to  be  expected  from  that  side." 

So  sad  a  discovery  was  very  painful  to  the  Emperor,  for 
he  was  sincerely  attached  to  the  Empress,  and  still  hoped 
again  to  see  his  son,  whom  he  loved  most  tenderly. 

Fouche  had  been  far  from  wishing  the  return  of  the 
Emperor.  He  was  long  tired  of  obeying,  and  had  besides 
undertaken  another  plan,  which  Napoleon's  arrival  had 
broken  off.  I  shall  perhaps  resume  this  part  of  his  history 
another  time.  I  suppress  it  at  present  without  any  scruple, 
because  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  mine.  The  Emperor, 
however,  put  him  again  at  the  head  of  the  police,  because 
Savary  was  worn  out  in  that  employment,  and  a  skilful 
man  was  wanted  there.  Fouche  accepted  the  office,  but 
without  giving  up  his  plan  of  deposing  the  Emperor,  to  put 
in  his  place  either  his  son,  or  a  sort  of  a  republic  with  a 
president.  He  had  never  ceased  to  correspond  with  Prince 
Metternich  ;  and,  if  he  is  to  be  believed,  he  had  tried  to 
persuade  the  Emperor  to  abdicate  in  favour  of  his  son. 
That  was  also  my  opinion ;  but,  coming  from  such  a 
quarter,  the  advice  was  not  without  danger  for  the  person 
to  whom  it  was  given.  Besides,  that  advice  having  been 
rejected,  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Minister  either  to  think  no 
more  of  his  plan,  or  to  resign  his  office.  Fouche,  however, 
remained  in  the  cabinet,  and  continued  his  correspondence. 
The  Emperor,  who  placed  but  little  confidence  in  him,  kept 
a  careful  eye  upon  him.  One  evening  the  Emperor  had  a 
great  deal  of  company  at  the  Elysee  ;  he  told  me  not  to  go 
home,  because  he  wished  to  speak  to  me.  When  everybody 
was  gone,  the  Emperor  stopped  with  Fouche  in  the  apart- 