


3 1 6  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE. 

*'  I  wish  it  may  be  so,"  was  all  the  reply  I  made  ;  and  when 
I  saw  Labedoyere  again,  after  he  had  returned  from  the 
campaign,  I  spoke  to  him  of  his  protege.  "  What  could  he 
do  ?  "  he  observed  :  "  his  father  had  been  arrested  in  the 
Vendee."  A  fine  excuse,  indeed !  Could  he  not  have 
solicited  the  Emperor  to  set  him  at  liberty,  who  would 
certainly  not  have  refused  him  ?  And  besides,  was  that  a 
suflBcient  motive  to  betray  his  country  and  the  Sovereign 
he  had  acknowledged  ? 

Napoleon  had  undoubtedly  expected  that  the  Empress 
and  his  son  would  be  restored  to  him  :  he  had,  at  least, 
published  his  wishes  as  a  certainty  ;  and  it  was,  in  fact,  the 
worst  thing  the  Emperor  of  Austria  could  have  done.  His 
hope  was,  however,  soon  destroyed.  About  a  month  after 
his  arrival,  the  Duke  de  Vicenza  called  upon  me,  and 
presented  to  me  a  letter  without  address,  which  a  courier, 
just  arrived  from  Vienna,  had  delivered  to  him  among 
several  others,  saying  that  it  had  been  sent  to  him  by  M.  de 

,  who  had  not  dared  to  put  the  direction  on  it.     I  was 

not  dntimate  enough  with  M.  de to  suppose  he  could 

have  written  to  me,  so  I  refused  to  take  the  letter.  Caulain- 
court  said :  "  Be  not  too  hasty  ;  I  am  convinced  it  is  for 
you.  You  would  perhaps  do  well  to  open  it  ;  for  if  you 
persist  I  shall  give  it  to  the  Emperor."  "  You  may  do  so," 
I  replied  ;  "  I  have  no  interests  in  Vienna,  and  I  wish  the 
Emperor  may  read  it." 

In  the  evening  I  was  summoned  to  the  palace.  I  found 
the  Emperor  in  a  dimly  lighted  closet,  warming  himself  in 
a  corner  of  the  fireplace,  and  appearing  to  suffer  already 
from  the  complaint  which  never  afterwards  left  him. 
"  Here  is  a  letter,"  he  said,  "  which  the  courier  from  Vienna 
says  is  meant  for  you  ;  read  it."     On  first  casting  my  eyes 

on  the  letter,  I  thought  I  knew  the  handwriting  of ; 

but  as  it  was  long,  I  read  it  slowly,  and  came  at  last  to  the 
principal  object.  The  writer  said  that  we  ought  not  to 
reckon  upon  the  Empress,  as  she  did  not  even  attempt  to 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  317 

conceal  her  hatred  of  the  Emperor,  and  was  disposed  to 
approve  of  all  the  measures  that  could  be  taken  against 
him  ;  that  her  return  was  not  to  be  thought  of,  as  she 
herself  would  raise  the  greatest  obstacles  in  the  way  of  it, 
in  case  it  should  be  proposed  ;  finally,  that  it  was  not 
possible   for   him   to   dissemble   his   indignation ;   that  the 

Empress,  wholly  enamoured  of  ,   did  not   even   take 

pains  to  hide  her  ridiculous  partiality  for  that  man,  who 
had  made  himself  master  of  her  mind  as  well  as  of  her 
person.  The  handwriting  of  the  letter  was  disguised,  yet 
not  so  much  but  that  I  was  able  to  discover  whose  it  was. 
I  found,  however,  in  the  manner  in  which  the  secret  was 
expressed,  a  warmth' of  zeal  and  a  picturesque  style  that 
did  not  belong  to  the  author  of  the  letter.  While  reading 
it,  I  all  of  a  sudden  suspected  it  was  a  counterfeit,  and 
intended  to  mislead  the  Emperor.  I  communicated  my 
idea  to  him,  and  the  danger  I  perceived  in  this  fraud. 
As  I  grew  more  and  more  animated,  I  found  plausible 
reasons  enough  to  throw  the  Emperor  himself  into  some 