

master,  who  was  asleep.     M.  M ,  vexed  at  not  being  able 

to  obtain  an  audience,  even  of  the  porter,  made  a  great  noise, 
saying  that  he  came  by  order  of  the  King,  and  at  last  they 
were  obliged  to  let  him  in  and  walk  upstairs.  There  he  had 
a  fresh  ceremony  to  go  through  before  he  could  penetrate  to 


304  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

his  Excellency.  The  valet  de  chambre  was  to  be  awakened 
and  dressed,  and  afterwards  the  master  himself  roused  from 

the  arms  of  Morpheus.     At  last  M found  himself  in  the 

presence  of  the  head  of  the  law,  whom  he  asked  for  an  order 
of  insertion  in  the  Moniteiir.  "  Oh  yes,  to  be  sure,  the  pro- 
clamation !  Have  you  seen  it  ?  "  Then,  without  waiting 
for  an  answer,  my  Lord  took  it  from  under  his  pillow,  and 
began  to  read  it  slowly,  complacently,  and  with  pauses  and 
inflexions  of  his  voice,  which  showed  all  his  paternal  affec- 
tion for  that  masterpiece  of  composition.  "  This  is,"  said  he, 
"  one  of  the  things  I  have  written  most  correctly,  and  I  fear 
not  to  say  that  it  is  one  that  will  make  the  greatest  sensation. 
Yes,  you  may  print  it."  So  saying,  he  laid  himself  down 
again  on  his  pillow  and  closed  his  eyes. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

My  thoughts  were  solely  occupied  with  the  fearful  burthen 
I  should  have  upon  my  shoulders  in  a  few  hours  later  (for  I 
was  resolved  not  to  accept  of  any  other  employment  than 
that  of  the  Post-office),  and  I  found  myself  by  degrees  en- 
gaged in  fulfilling  the  duties  of  Postmaster-general.  I  was 
encouraged  and  seconded  by  the  commissioners,  and  by  all 
the  clerks,  who  were  delighted  at  seeing  the  Bourbons  put 
to  flight,  and  convinced,  as  well  as  myself,  that  we  should 
never  look  upon  them  again.  Indeed,  they  were  already  so 
completely  forgotten,  that  their  reign  of  eleven  months  ap- 
peared to  us  nothing  more  than  an  uneasy  dream  of  a  few 
hours.  After  having  arranged  the  business  of  the  Post-office 
in  the  best  way  I  could  for  the  interest  of  the  Emperor,  T 
went  to  the  Tuileries.  Five  or  six  hundred  officers  on  half- 
pay  were  walking  in  the  extensive  court-yard,  wishing  each 
other  joy  at  the  return  of  Napoleon.  In  the  apartments  the 
two  sisters-in-law  of  the  Emperor,  the  Queens  of  Spain  and 
of  Holland,  were  waiting  for  him,  deeply  affected.  Soon 
after,  the  ladies  of  the  Household  and  those  of  the  Empress 
came  to  join  them.  The  fleurs-de-lis  had  everywhere  super- 
seded the  bees.  However,  on  examining  the  large  carpet 
spread  over  the  floor  of  the  audience-chamber  where  they 
sat,  one  of  the  ladies  perceived  that  a  flower  was  loose  :  she 
took  it  off,  and  the  bee  soon  reappeared.  Immediately  all 
the  ladies  set  to  work,  and  in  less  than  half  an  hour,  to 
the  great  mirth  of  the  company,  the  carpet  again  became 
Imperial. 