

There  was  in  the  tone  with  which  he  uttered  these  words 
something  satirical,  and  even  a  little  bitter,  that  made  me 
feel  he  was  hurt  at  my  conduct.  In  fact,  I  officiated  during 
the  three  months  at  the  Post-office  without  having  obtained 
any  letters  patent.  This  strange  count  might  therefore  have 
been  added  to  my  indictment,  and  they  might  have  put  in — 
"  Accused  of  having,  during  the  reign  of  the  Emperor,  filled 
the  situation  of  Postmaster-general  without  any  written 
authorisation  from  him." 

This  was  the  second  time  Napoleon  had  taken  possession 
of  France.  The  first  was  on  the  i8th  of  Brumaire,  in  1799, 
when  he  came  back  from  Egypt.  France  was  then  a  Repub- 
lic, governed  by  the  Directory, — a  machine  worn  out,  as  well 
by  the  powerful  attacks  of  foreigners,  as  by  its  own  bad 
administration.  Detested,  and  fallen  into  disrepute,  civil  war 
was  rising  up  before  its  eyes.     Rebellion  triumphed  over  its 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  309 

power,  and  the  people  seemed  only  waiting  for  a  man  who 
might  help  them  to  cast  off  the  hateful  yoke.  Nevertheless, 
how  much  solicitude,  how  many  manoeuvres  were  required 
to  arrive  at  the  Revolution  of  the  i8th  Brumaire  !  On  his 
way  from  Frejus  to  Paris,  and  particularly  at  Lyons,  all 
Tanks  of  men,  aristocrats,  emigrants,  citizens,  peasants, — all 
whispered  in  his  ear — "  Overturn  the  Directory  ;  take  the 
power  into  your  hands  !  "  But  on  all  sides  also  he  must  have 
heard  the  firm  voice  of  the  republicans,  who  said  aloud  to 
him — "  Take  the  power  into  your  hands  !  Conquer,  but  let 
us  be  free  !  "  To  succeed,  he  wanted  the  consent  of  Sieyes, 
a  grave  and  theoretical  organiser  of  Republics,  and  of  Roger 
Ducos,  his  colleague.  If  the  majority  of  the  Directory  had 
possessed  energy,  they  might  have  had  him  arrested  ;  and 
then,  even  if  the  sword  of  justice  had  not  dared  to  strike 
him,  he  would  have  expiated  his  glory  and  his  temerity  by 
banishment,  and  perhaps  transportation. 

How  wide  was  the  difference  in  March,  1815  !  Fallen  from 
the  throne,  erased  from  the  list  of  sovereigns,  banished  to  the 
rock  of  the  Island  of  Elba,  he  returned  almost  alone  :  scarcely 
did  he  set  his  foot  on  the  French  shore,  when  the  people 
everywhere  rose  up.  All  France  repeated  with  enthusiasm 
— "  Napoleon  !  no  more  Royalty  !  no  more  Bourbons  !  It 
is  Napoleon  alone  that  France  wishes  to  have  ;  it  is  his  glory, 
his  genius  she  stands  in  need  of.  Woe  to  those  who  shall 
dare  to  raise  a  finger  against  him  !  or  rather,  woe  to  those 
who  shall  not  declare  in  his  favour  !  "  And  in  fact,  peasants, 
soldiers,  citizens — all  hastened  to  meet  him  ;  all  hailed  him 
with  their  wishes  and  their  gratitude,  like  a  good  genius,  like 
a  Providence.  The  royalty  of  the  Bourbons  was  no  longer 
anything  more  than  a  dream  :  it  appeared  as  if  royalists, 
nobles,  emigrants,  had  never  existed.  It  was  not  the  conse- 
quence of  a  conspiracy  ;  it  was  a  great  national  movement, 
like  that  of  1789  for  Liberty,  of  the  9th  Thermidor  against 
tyranny,  of  the  i8th  Brumaire  against  incapacity.  At  what 
period  did  man  witness  defections  so  abrupt,  so  remarkable. 