


314  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

had  played  at  the  Restoration,  and  despised  by  the  soldiers — 
finally,  in  the  presence  of  their  old  master,  detesting  the 
Bourbons,  and  fearing  their  return,  but  still  more  fearful  of 
a  new  war,  which  they  were  sensible  they  could  no  longer 
wage  with  the  former  advantages,  which  had  procured  them 
so  much  glory  and  fortune. 

The  Emperor  had  resumed  all  his  titles,  and  even  the 
offensive  form  of  "  Napoleon,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  the 
Constitution  of  the  Empire.''  The  Council  of  State  took  a 
fancy  to  proclaim  the  Sovereignty  of  the  People.  This 
declaration  was  not  very  agreeable  to  him,  but  he  let  it 
pass  :  he  could  no  longer  dictate  laws,  I  recollect  that  the 
day  it  was  signed  at  the  Council,  I  was  not  at  the  sitting. 
When  I  crossed  the  Section  of  the  Interior,  the  Secretary 
proposed  to  me  to  sign  it.  I  did  so  without  even  reading 
it  ;  and  meeting  Regnaud  de  St.  Jean  d'Angely,  I  asked 
him  what  it  was.  "  It  is,"  replied  he,  laughing,  "  an  act 
that  compromises  you  strongly."    I  was  not  much  perplexed 

at  what  he  said.     But  M ,  to  whom  I  mentioned  the 

circumstance  the  next  morning,  told  me  he  had  thought 
proper  to  sign  it  also.  I  appeared  surprised  that  he  should 
have  done  it ;  but  he  told  me  in  confidence,  "  The  Emperor 
has  not  taken  it  amiss."  I  then  read  the  paper  with 
attention,  and  I  found,  in  fact,  that  it  could  not  have  been 

very  pleasing  to  the  Sovereign  ;  so  that  M ,  instead  of 

doing  an  act  of  courage,  made  only  the  calculation  of  a 
courtier. 

The  fatal  division  of  opinions  put  in  part  a  stop  to  the 
national  enthusiasm,  and  extended  its  influence  over  all  the 
details  of  the  administration.  Many  prefects  were  changed. 
That  was  an  indispensable  measure  ;  but  among  some 
excellent  choices,  favour  also  produced  many  bad  ones. 
Several  young  men,  full  of  ardour,  were  selected,  but  who 
could  not  inspire  much  confidence.  The  reign  of  the  laws 
was  preached  everywhere,  whilst  the  commissaries  extra- 
ordinary of  the  Emperor,  sent  into  the  Departments,  every- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  315 

where  dismissed  the  persons  in  employment,  to  put  in  their 
places  either  those  who  had  held  the  situations  before  them^ 
or  some  who  had  in  former  times  given  proofs  of  patriotism. 
These  measures  not  only  impeded  public  business,  which  so 
greatly  required  expedition,  but  added  also  greatly  to  the 
number  of  the  disaffected.  Such  changes  were  undoubtedly 
necessary,  in  as  far  as  the  chiefs  were  concerned,  who  cor- 
responded directly  with  the  Ministers  ;  but  it  was  easy  to 
have  an  eye  on  the  subalterns,  and  their  treasonable  practices 
could  not  be  very  dangerous  in  the  beginning.  I  struggled 
as  long  as  I  could  against  that  fatal  system,  but  without 
success.  To  my  remonstrances  they  always  opposed  the 
situation  of  affairs,  and  the  success  that  had  formerly  been 
obtained,  chiefly  by  keeping  the  friends  of  the  Bourbons  out 
of  all  public  employments.  But  they  did  not  sufficiently 
consider  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  persons  employed  by 
Government  were  not  traitors  ;  but  weak  men,  whose  chief 
aim  was  to  keep  their  situations,  who  wished  in  some  degree 
well  to  the  Emperor,  prayed  for  his  success,  but  feared  above 
all  things  a  defeat.  I  spoke  to  the  Emperor  of  the  harm  his 
emissaries  did.  He  answered,  "  I  want  a  victory  ;  I  can  do 
nothing  before  that.  I  am  perhaps  the  only  man  in  the 
empire  who  is  cool  ;  and  still  I  cannot  give  the  impulse 
everywhere,  and  direct  all  motions.''  He  could  not  even 
repulse  his  enemies,  so  far  was  his  position  changed.  A  few 
days  after  his  arrival.  General  Bourmont  presented  himself 
at  his  levee  ;  he  was  in  full  regimentals  ;  and  although  he 
had  placed  himself  in  the  first  rank,  the  Emperor  went  by 
without  stopping,  and  without  looking  at  him.  He  was 
not  disheartened,  and  came  back  three  days  successively. 
I  soon  learned  that  he  had  obtained  the  command  of  a 
division  in  the  Grand  Army.  I  expressed  my  surprise,  and 
asked,  with  indignation,  who  had  achieved  such  a  master- 
piece. "  I,"  answered  Labcdoycre,  turning  round  ;  "  I 
pledged  myself  for  him.  He  is  a  good  officer,  who  loves 
only  his  country.     He  will  fight  well,  and  serve  faithfully." 