

On  my  return  there,  I  was  really  surprised  to  learn  that 
Count  Ferrand  was  not  yet  gone.  The  post-horses  had  been 
waiting  with  the  carriage  from  six  o'clock  in  the  morning. 
The  old  man  appeared  quite  beside  himself,  and  all  the  exer- 
tions of  his  family  were  unable  to  persuade  him  to  leave  the 
place.  He  wanted  to  go  to  Ghent,  and  sent  to  me  for  a 
permit  for  post-horses.  I  repeatedly  refused  to  give  him  one, 
declaring  that  I  had  nothing  to  say  there  ;  that  he  was  the 
sole  master  at  the  Post-office,  and  might  protect  himself 
by  his  own  signature.  But  M.  Ferrand,  prepossessed  with 
the  idea  that  the  return  of  the  Emperor  was  owing  to  some 
great  conspiracy,  of  which  I  was  one  of  the  heads,  insisted 
on  having  some  paper  in  which  my  handwriting  should 
stand,  convinced  that  that  alone  would  protect  him  in  his 
journey,  and  especially  in  the  streets  of  Paris.  His  wife  said 
to  me  :  "  It  is  for  his  safety  that  we  ask  you  that  permit." 
At  these  words  I  hesitated  no  longer,  and  I  enclosed  the 
paper,  of  which  he  made  no  use,  not  having  been  once  obliged 
to  draw  it  out  of  his  pocket-book,  until  he  arrived  at  Orleans, 
where  he  remained  more  than  six  weeks. 

The  conduct   of  the   ministry   in   those   last   days,   and 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  303 

especially  that  of  M.  Ferrand,  was  inexplicable.     The  King, 
before  he  went  away,  had  issued  a  proclamation,  wherein  he 
exhorted  the  Parisians,  and  consequently  all  France,  to  sub- 
mission.    This  proclamation  was  inserted  in  the  Moniteiir  of 
the  20th.     Its  aim  was  to  make  all  the  royalists  lay  down 
their  arms,  and  still  one  of  my  crimes  was   stopping  the 
departure  of  the  Moniteur  and  other  journals.     But  if  such 
great  importance  was  attached  to  the  publication  of  that  last 
will  of  the  King's,  why  did  not  M.  Ferrand  despatch  it  the 
day  before  by  expresses  ?      It  might  have   travelled    sixty 
leagues  in  twenty-four  hours,  in  all  directions,  except  on  the 
road  to  Lyons,  and  the  Prefects  would  at  least  have  known 
how  to  act.     I  always  suspected  that  the  reason  why  M. 
Ferrand  did  not  send  it  off  was  because  it  did  not  please  him. 
The  man  has  so  publicly  acknowledged  his  wishes  and  his 
opinions,  that  I  do  not  think  I  speak  ill  of  him  in  saying 
that  he  wanted  a  civil  war  to  break  out,  which  the  procla- 
mation might  prevent.     As  for  the  rest,  I  own  I  did  wrong 
in  stopping  the  journals  ;  they  could  do  no  harm.     Besides, 
the  proclamation  was  stuck  up  in  all  the  streets  ;  and  who- 
ever wished  to  read  it  might  do  so.     Though  I  wish  to  be 
sparing  in  anecdotes,  I  cannot,  however,  omit  one  that  paints 
admirably  well  the  men  who  at  that  time  had  so  fatal  an 
influence  over  our  affairs.     The  proclamation  I  mentioned 
had  been  digested  by  the  Chancellor  d'Ambray  ;  but  the 
order  for  its  insertion  in  the  Moniteur  had  not  been  delivered. 
The  editor  of  that  journal  went  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening 
to  M.  de  Vitrolles,  Secretary  of  the  Council,  to  ask  for  the 
order.     M.  de  Vitrolles  sent  him  to  the  Chancellor.     After 
having  repeatedly  rung  the  bell,  the  porter  appeared  at  a 
small   window,  and  said  that  no   one   could    then   see  his 