

Towards  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I  received  an 
order  to  go  to  the  Tuileries  ;  I  found  in  the  saloon  the  old 
ministers,  and,  in  the  midst  of  them,  the  Emperor,  talking 
about  the  affairs  of  Government  with  as  much  ease  as  if  we 
had  gone  ten  years  back.  He  had  just  come  out  of  his  bath, 
and  had  put  on  his  undress  regimentals.  The  subject  of  the 
conversation,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  was  carried  on, 
the  presence  of  the  persons  who  had  so  long  been  employed 
under  him,  contributed  to  efface  completely  from  my 
memory  the  family  of  the  Bourbons  and  their  reign  of  nearly 
a  year.  However,  on  one  of  the  tables  there  stood,  in  con- 
fusion, marble  busts  of  Louis  XVI.,  the  Dauphin,  father  of 
the  present  Prince,  and  some  of  the  Princesses.  These  busts 
recalled  to  our  memory  the  recollection  of  the  day  before. 
On  the  following  day  they  all  disappeared. 

When  the  Emperor  perceived  me,  he  advanced  a  few 
steps,  drew  me  into  another  chamber,  or  rather  pushed  me 
gently  before  him.  Then  pulling  me  by  the  ear,  he  said  : 
"  Ah  !  are  you  here,  Mr.  Conspirator  ?  "  "  No,  indeed,  Sire  ; 
and  you  know,  if  the  truth  has  been  told  to  you,  that  I  would 

have  nothing  to  do  with  a  business  in  which  M. "     "  It 

is  well,  it  is  well !  " 

Fouche  was  already  Minister  of  the  Police.  Our  conver- 
sation, or  rather  the  Emperor's  everlasting  questions,  began. 
He  concluded  by  off"ering  me  the  Ministry  of  the  Home 
Department.     "  No,  Sire  !  your  Majesty  will   want  a  man 


3o8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

accustomed  to  general  business,  and  who  ought  to  bear  a 
name  celebrated  in  the  Revolution.  I  entreat  you  to  give 
me  again  the  Post-office,  where  I  may  be  of  service  to  you." 
"Well  then,"  said  he,  "I  shall  name  Carnot  for  the  Home 
Department." 

This  was  a  good  choice.  Not  but  that  the  manners  of 
Carnot,  which  were  rather  dry,  and  his  want  of  experience, 
gave  rise  to  some  complaints  ;  but  he  was  a  sincere  man,  who 
ardently  wished  the  good  of  France.  Two  months  afterwards, 
the  Emperor  still  congratulated  himself  with  his  choice,  and 
said  to  me,  "  Carnot  is  a  very  honest  man  !  " 

My  audience  had  been  preceded  by  one  given  to  M.  Mole, 
who  had  refused  the  appointment  of  Minister  of  Justice  and 
of  Foreign  Affairs,  to  return  to  the  Roads  and  Bridges,  which 
had  been  entrusted  to  him  before  the  last  reign.  These 
several  audiences  continued  till  very  late.  At  last,  at  about 
three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  Emperor  returned  to  the 
saloon,  and  said,  "  Make  out  the  patents  for  all  these  gentle- 
men. As  for  Lavalette,  he  does  not  want  any  ;  he  has 
conquered  the  Post-office." 