

He  was  soon  convinced  of  the  fact  himself,  and  he  more 
than  once  acknowledged  it.     I  have  even  no  doubt,  that  if 


312  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

he  had  vanquished  the  enemy  and  restored  peace,  his  power 
would  have  been  exposed  to  great  danger  among  the  civil 
broils.  The  Allies  made  a  great  mistake  in  not  letting  him 
alone.  I  do  not  know  what  concessions  he  would  have 
made,  but  I  am  well  acquainted  with  all  those  the  nation 
would  have  demanded,  and  I  sincerely  think  he  would  have 
been  disgusted  with  reigning,  when  he  must  have  found 
himself  a  constitutional  king  after  the  manner  of  the 
patriots.  Nevertheless,  he  submitted  admirably  well  to  his 
situation — at  least,  in  appearance.  At  no  period  of  his  life 
had  I  seen  him  enjoy  more  unruffled  tranquillity.  Not  a 
harsh  word  to  any  one  ;  no  impatience  ;  he  listened  to 
everything,  and  discussed  with  that  wonderful  sagacity  and 
devoted  reason  that  were  so  conspicuous  in  him.  He  ac- 
knowledged his  faults  with  most  touching  ingenuousness,  or 
examined  his  own  position  with  a  penetration  to  which  his 
enemies  themselves  were  strangers. 

The  enthusiasm  of  the  nation  soon  cooled.  It  has  often 
been  said  that  the  change  was  caused  by  the  Additional 
Acts.  That  measure,  no  doubt,  contributed  greatly  to  it  ; 
but  there  was  another  reason  still,  which  was  that  the 
people  felt  less  love  for  the  Emperor  than  hatred  for  the 
Bourbons.  The  latter  being  once  repulsed,  the  nation  was 
satisfied  ;  and  when  they  received  the  Emperor  with  so 
much  warmth,  the  French,  according  to  their  custom,  did 
not  think  of  the  morrow.  Contented  to  see  the  royalists, 
who  had  made  themselves  the  enemies  of  everybody, 
humbled  and  restrained,  they  were  soon  shocked  at  dis- 
covering that  their  victory  would  cost  them  peace,  the 
advantages  of  trade,  and  all  the  sacrifices  that  an  obstinate 
war  draws  after  it  ;  and  nevertheless,  such  a  revolution 
could  not  be  made  without  running  some  risk,  the  foreign 
sovereigns  considering  it  a  point  of  honour  to  maintain  the 
House  of  Bourbon  on  the  throne.  In  the  meanwhile,  all 
those  who  had  already  fought  nobly  answered  to  the  call  of 
honour  and  necessity  ;  but  as  it  was  no  longer  possible  to 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  3 1 3 

think  of  conscription,  instead  of  400,000  men  whom  Govern- 
ment declared  to  be  under  arms,  there  were  scarcely  250,000, 
and  with  those  we  were  forced  to  begin  the  war.  The 
Bourbons  had  been  strongly  shaken  in  public  opinion  ;  the 
Emperor  was  still  more  so.  The  royalists,  who  had  not 
shown  themselves,  because  they  had  been  taken  unawares, 
began  to  feel  more  easy  under  the  shelter  of  a  Liberty  they 
were  soon  going  to  crush  ;  and  all  the  patriots,  who  must 
be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  friends  of  the  country, 
found  themselves  face  to  face,  covered  with  the  colours 
under  which  they  fought.  Old  quarrels  sprang  up  again, 
and  the  new  camp  soon  presented  the  image  of  anarchy. 
The  election  was  made  in  the  same  spirit,  and  the  same 
divisions  appeared  in  the  Chamber  of  Representatives. 
The  Emperor  had  thought  of  the  Champ  de  Mai  with  a 
view  of  making  an  impression  on  the  public  mind  ;  but  the 
electors  who  were  sent  there  were  shocked  at  the  sight  of 
the  throne,  at  the  splendour  of  the  Court,  and  even  at  the 
mass  that  was  celebrated  ;  for  their  prejudiced  eyes  saw 
nothing  but  the  Emperor  and  his  arbitrary  law,  without 
thinking  of  the  enemies  that  were  assembling.  A  great 
many  were  thinking  of  the  miracles  of  1792,  without  re- 
flecting on  the  difference  of  the  periods.  In  1792  France 
possessed  an  almost  inexhaustible  treasure  in  her  paper 
money.  She  was  not  embarrassed  by  a  government  she 
had  recently  destroyed  ;  nor  by  her  interior  foes,  whom  the 
people  had  all  murdered  or  put  to  flight  ;  nor  by  preten- 
sions, everybody  being  reduced  to  the  same  level — now  the 
ignorance  of  war  appeared  complete.  Still,  enthusiasm  was 
raised  to  its  highest  pitch,  and  the  French  wished  for  inde- 
pendence at  any  price.  The  people  were  enraged,  barbarous, 
but  not  corrupt  ;  the  army  was  brave,  ambitious  of  glory, 
but  indifferent  to  wealth  and  favour.  Now  all  was  changed. 
The  men  who  had  employments  wished  to  keep  them,  and 
were  in  consequence  wavering  and  without  resolution  ;  the 
army  had  its  marshals,  ashamed  of  the  wretched  part  they 