

21  30s 


3o6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

In  the  meanwhile  time  passed  on  :  Paris  was  calm.  Those 
persons  who  lived  far  from  the  Tuileries  did  not  come  near 
it  ;  everybody  remained  at  home.  The  departure  of  the 
King  and  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor  were  such  singular 
events,  that  the  fourteen  centuries  the  monarchy  had  existed 
did  not  in  their  course  present  one  as  extraordinary.  And 
nevertheless  indifference  seemed  to  pervade  the  minds  of  all. 
Were  these  events  above  the  capacity  of  common  men  ?  or, 
rather,  did  not  the  good  sense  of  the  people  make  them  feel 
that  it  was  not  for  their  happiness  the  two  monarchs  were 
wrestling  for  the  throne,  and  that  they  would  reap  from  it 
nothing  but  sufferings  and  sacrifices  ? 

But  it  was  not  the  same  in  the  country.  Officers  who 
arrived  at  Fontainebleau,  preceding  the  Emperor,  told  us  it 
was  extremely  difficult  to  advance  on  the  road.  Deep  columns 
of  peasants  lined  it  on  both  sides,  or  rather  had  made  them- 
selves masters  of  it.  Their  enthusiasm  had  risen  to  the 
highest  pitch.  It  was  impossible  to  say  at  what  hour  he 
would  arrive.  Indeed  it  was  desirable  that  he  should  not  be 
recognised  ;  for,  in  the  midst  of  their  delirium  and  confusion, 
the  arm  of  a  murderer  might  have  reached  him.  He  there- 
fore resolved  to  travel  with  the  Duke  de  Vicenza  in  a  common 
cabriolet,  which,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  stopped 
before  the  first  entrance  near  the  iron  gate  of  the  quay  of 
the  Louvre.  Scarcely  had  he  alighted,  when  the  shout  of 
"  Long  live  the  Emperor  !  "  was  heard  ;  a  shout  so  loud 
that  it  seemed  capable  of  splitting  the  arched  roofs.  It  came 
from  the  officers  on  half-pay,  pressed,  almost  stifled  in  the 
vestibule,  and  who  filled  the  staircase  up  to  the  top.  The 
Emperor  was  dressed  in  his  famous  grey  frock-coat.  I  went 
up  to  him,  and  the  Duke  de  Vicenza  cried  to  me,  "  For  God's 
sake  !  place  yourself  before  him,  that  he  may  get  on  !  "  He 
then  began  to  walk  upstairs.  I  went  before,  walking  back- 
wards, at  the  distance  of  one  pace,  looking  at  him,  deeply 
affected,  my  eyes  bathed  in  tears,  and  repeating,  in  the'excess  of 
my  joy  :  "  What !    It  is  you  !    It  is  you  !    It  is  you,  at  last !  " 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  307 

As  for  him,  he  walked  up  slowly,  with  his  eyes  half  closed, 
his  hands  extended  before  him,  like  a  blind  man,  and  express- 
ing his  joy  only  by  a  smile.  When  he  arrived  on  the  land- 
ing-place of  the  first  floor,  the  ladies  wished  to  come  to  meet 
him  ;  but  a  crowd  of  officers  from  the  higher  floor  leaped 
before  them,  and  they  would  have  been  crushed  to  death  if 
they  had  shown  less  agility.  At  last  the  Emperor  succeeded 
in  entering  his  apartments  :  the  doors  were  shut,  not  with- 
out difficulty,  and  the  crowd  dispersed,  satisfied  at  having 
seen  him. 