


3 1  o  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VA  LE  TTE. 

and  in  some  respects  so  sincere  ?  What  were  the  sentiments 
which  at  that  time  filled  all  hearts  ?  Patriotism,  love  of 
glory,  and  an  enlightened  conviction  that  the  newly  accepted 
dynasty  was  unable  to  do  anything  for  the  happiness  and 
independence  of  the  kingdom  ;  .  .  .  and  three  months  after- 
wards, this  second  dream  also  vanished  ! !  ! 

In  the  meanwhile  I  had  taken  again  upon  me  the  busi- 
ness of  the  Post-office,  whither  I  returned  on  the  morning 
of  the  2 1  St.  Nothing  had  been  wanting  in  the  material  part 
of  that  service,  for  that  would  have  been  impossible  ;  but  the 
late  Postmaster-general  had  thrown  the  persons  employed 
into  the  most  deplorable  confusion.  He  had  not  only  urged 
and  favourably  received  the  most  absurd  informations,  but 
he  had  even  rewarded  them.  In  consequence,  hatred  and 
distrust  had  made  the  greater  part  of  the  clerks  enemies  to 
one  another.  They  were  all  either  Jacobins  or  noblemen. 
I  learned,  for  the  first  time,  that  in  a  department  I  had 
governed  during^thirteen  years,  there  were  priests,  regicides, 
knights  of  St.  Louis,  and  emigrants.  The  latter  especially^ 
so  supple  and  incapable,  had  persecuted  their  superiors  with 
incredible  fury,  in  hopes  to  get  into  their  places.  I  put  an 
end  to  such  scandalous  practices,  by  refusing  to  take  any 
interest  in  them  ;  and  these  gentlemen  were  the  foremost 
to  sign  the  Additional  Act  to  the  Constitution,  and  take  the 
oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Emperor. 

Within  eight  days'  time  I  was  perfectly  aware  of  the  deep 
gulf  that  was  opening  beneath  us.  The  too  famous  pro- 
clamation of  the  Congress  of  Vienna  had  reached  France 
before  that  of  the  Emperor.  It  was  impossible  to  entertain 
a  doubt  of  its  authenticity  ;  and  the  Emperor,  although  he 
did  not  acknowledge  it,  was  as  sensible  as  any  one  that  the 
storm  could  not  be  averted.  I  had  wished  that,  renouncing 
the  past,  he  had  taken  no  other  title  than  Lord  Lieutenant 
of  the  Kingdom,  governing  in  the  name  of  his  son.  I 
was,  however,  soon  convinced  that  such  a  measure  would 
have  been  impossible.     Nothing,  therefore,  remained  but  to 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE.  3 1 1 

advance  boldly  with  the  Imperial  crown  upon  his  head. 
Was  he  to  maintain  the  Constitution  ?  I  know  that  that 
question  was  debated  very  warmly,  and  that  it  found  able 
antagonists.  In  putting  it  aside,  it  was  said,  nothing 
remained.  The  great  fault  of  Napoleon's  reign  was  then 
paid  for — I  mean,  the  want  of  ensemble^  the  absence  of  all 
those  laws,  so  strongly  claimed  by  the  old  friends  of  Liberty, 
which  before  had  ruined  all,  and  which  still  poisoned  our 
present  situation.  What  a  deplorable  idea  it  was,  to  wish 
to  maintain  those  numerous  contradictory  decrees,  a  hundred 
times  more  dangerous  than  the  ordinances  of  the  King ! 
It  was  in  the  name  of  Independence  that  he  ought  to  have 
spoken  ;  in  the  name  of  his  son  that  he  ought  to  have 
commanded.  The  enemy  once  beaten,  it  was  time  to  think 
of  settling  the  internal  contest.  But  I  must  acknowledge 
that  the  Emperor  was  awed  by  the  energy  of  all  that 
surrounded  him.  The  eleven  months  of  the  King's  reign 
had  thrown  us  back  to  1792,  and  the  Emperor  soon  per- 
ceived it  J  for  he  no  longer  found  the  submission,  the  deep 
respect,  and  the  Imperial  etiquette  he  was  accustomed  to. 
He  used  to  send  for  me  two  or  three  times  a  day,  to  talk 
with  me  for  hours  together.  It  happened  sometimes  that 
the  conversation  languished.  One  day,  after  we  had  walked 
up  and  down  the  room  in  silence,  tired  of  that  fancy,  and 
my  business  pressing  me,  I  made  my  obeisance  and  was 
going  to  retire.  "  How  !  "  said  he,  surprised,  but  with  a 
smile  ;  "  do  you  thus  leave  me  so  ?  "  I  should  certainly  not 
have  done  so  a  year  before  ;  but  I  had  forgotten  my  old 
pace,  and  I  felt  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  get  into  it 
again.  In  one  of  those  conversations,  the  subject  of  which 
was  the  spirit  of  Liberty  that  showed  itself  on  all  sides  with 
so  much  energy,  he  said  to  me,  in  a  tone  of  interrogation, 
"  All  this  will  last  two  or  three  years  ?  "  "  That  your 
Majesty  must  not  believe.     It  will  last  for  ever." 