

I  looked  at  him.  At  every  fresh  epithet  of  the  minister, 
the  Abbe  bowed  his  head  on  his  plate  with  a  smile  of  cheer- 
fulness and  self-complacency,  and  with  a  sort  of  leer.  I 
never  saw  a  more  ignoble  countenance.  Fouche  explained 
to  me,  on  leaving  the  breakfast-table,  in  what  manner  all 
those  valets  of  literature  were  men  of  his  ;  and  while  I 
acknowledged  to  myself  that  the  thing  might  be  necessary, 
I  scarcely  knew  who  were  really  more  despicable — the 
wretches  who  thus  sold  themselves  to  the  highest  bidder, 
or  the  minister  who  boasted  of  having  bought  them,  as  if 
their  acquisition  were  a  glorious  conquest.  Judging  that 
the  Emperor  had  spoken  to  me  of  the  scene  I  described 
above,  Fouche  said  to  me  :  "  The  Emperor's  temper  is 
soured  by  the  resistance  he  finds,  and  he  thinks  it  is 
my  fault.  He  does  not  know  that  I  have  no  power  but 
by  public  opinion.  To-morrow  I  might  hang  before  my 
door  twenty  persons  who  have  that  opinion  against  them, 
though  I  should  not  be  able  to  imprison  for  four-and -twenty 
hours  any  individual  favoured  by  it."  As  I  am  never  in  a 
hurry  to  speak,  I  remained  silent ;  but,  reflecting  on  what 
the  Emperor  had  said  concerning  Fouche,  I  found  the 
comparison  of  their  two  speeches  remarkable.  The  master 
could  have  his  minister  hanged  with  public  applause,  and 
the  minister  could  hang — whom  ?  Perhaps  the  master 
himself,  and  with  the  same  approbation.  What  a  singular 
situation  ! — and  I  believe  they  were  both  in  the  right  ;  so 
far  public  opinion,  equitable  in  regard  to  Fouche,  had 
swerved  concerning  the  Emperor. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

The  ceremony  of  the  Champ  de  Mai  took  place  at  last  ; 
it  was  on  the  ist  of  June.  Nothing  could  be  more  singular 
than  that  assemblage  in  the  open  air.  It  had  but  little 
success,  because  it  had  been  badly  announced.  The 
Emperor  wanted  time  :  the  minds  of  the  people  were  not 
prepared  ;  the  influence  of  the  patriots  had  not  had 
sufficient  opportunity  to  exercise  its  power,  or  rather  no 
one  yet  knew  where  to  find  them.  Those  who  had  begun 
the  Revolution  were  old,  retired  from  public  life,  and  few 
in  number  ;  those  of  1793  were  fallen  into  contempt.  The 
Imperialists,  or  Bonapartists,  were  not  much  regarded  : 
they  had  perpetually  received  and  frequently  misused 
popularity.  There  were  no  persons  truly  respectable  but 
the  military  :  though  discontented  and  humbled,  they  alone 
still  knew  how  to  express  themselves  with  dignity  concern- 
ing their  country  and  Liberty.  But  they  were  no  longer 
mixed  with  the  people,  having  already  joined  their  corps. 
The  majority  of  the  electors,  and  many  deputies,  brought 
with  them  a  good  spirit  ;  but  the  French,  whose  imagina- 
tion is  so  lively,  never  know  how  to  enter  into  the  reality 
of  things  until  their  first  fire  is  extinguished  :  when  pre- 
possessed by  a  first  impression,  it  is  not  till  after  much 
extravagance  that  they  re-enter  the  path  of  common  sense. 
In  the  beginning  they  only  think  of  advancing,  without 
caring  which  way.  Now,  the  way  they  had  taken  was  bad. 
At  first  they  saw  only  a  despot  in  the  Emperor,  and  forgot 
entirely  the  enemy  :  they  never  could  feel  that  it  was  first 