


324  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

hatred,  former  opinions,  the  hope  of  the  return  of  the 
Bourbons,  and  great  anxiety  in  many  respecting  the  conduct 
the  Emperor  would  pursue  if  he  returned  victorious,  threw 
confusion  on  the  labours  of  the  Assembly.  It  had  been 
said  to  them  that  the  first  point  was  to  save  the  Country  ; — 
but  they  answered  :  "  Let  us  save  Liberty  !  "  as  if  Liberty 
could  be  saved  when  the  soil  was  invaded  ! 

At  last  I  learned  the  fatal  news  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo^ 
and  the  next  morning  the  Emperor  arrived.  I  flew  to  the 
Elysee  to  see  him  :  he  ordered  me  into  his  closet,  and  as 
soon  as  he  saw  me,  he  came  to  meet  me  with  a  frightful 
epileptic  laugh.  "  Oh  !  my  God  !  "  he  said,  raising  his  eyes 
to  heaven,  and  walking  two  or  three  times  up  and  down  the 
room.  This  appearance  of  despair  was,  however,  very  short. 
He  soon  recovered  his  coolness,  and  asked  me  what  was 
going  forward  at  the  Chamber  of  Representatives.  I  could 
not  attempt  to  hide  that  exasperation  was  there  carried  to  a 
high  degree,  and  that  the  majority  seemed  determined  to 
require  his  abdication,  and  to  pronounce  it  themselves  if  he 
did  not  send  it  willingly.  "  How  is  that  ?  "  he  said.  "  If 
proper  measures  are  not  taken,  the  enemy  will  be  before  the 
gates  in  eight  days.  Alas  !  "  he  added,  "  I  have  accustomed 
them  to  such  great  victories,  that  they  know  not  how  to 
bear  one  day's  misfortune  !  What  will  become  of  poor 
France  ?  I  have  done  all  I  could  for  her."  Then  he 
heaved  a  deep  sigh.  Somebody  asked  to  speak  to  him  ;  and 
I  left  him,  with  an  order  to  come  back  at  some  later  hour. 
I  passed  the  day  in  seeking  information  among  all  my 
friends  and  acquaintances.  I  found  in  all  of  them  either 
the  greatest  dejection  or  an  extravagant  joy,  which  they 
disguised  by  feigned  alarm,  and  pity  for  myself,  which  I 
repulsed  with  great  indignation.  No  hope  could  rest  on  the 
Chamber  of  Representatives.  They  all  said,  they  wished 
for  Liberty  ;  but,  between  two  enemies  who  appeared  ready 
to  destroy  it,  they  preferred  the  foreigners,  the  friends  of 
the  Bourbons,  to  Napoleon,  who  might  still  have  prolonged 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  325 

the  struggle,  because  they  were  silly  enough  to  despise 
the  former  and  fear  the  latter.  Besides,  each  person  took 
counsel  only  from  his  resentment  or  egotism.  Some  hoped 
to  escape  in  the  confusion,  because  they  were  unknown  ; 
others  thought  they  might  draw  advantage  from  circum- 
stances ;  and  the  majority,  foolishly  trusting  to  the  promises 
of  the  foreign  Powers,  were  still  persuaded  that  the  Bour- 
bons would  not  return  to  Paris,  or,  at  least,  that  the  King, 
convinced  of  his  weakness  and  incapacity  for  government, 
would  be  so  strongly  bridled  and  fettered,  that  he  would 
neither  be  able  to  revenge  himself  nor  to  violate  the  Con- 
stitution. Those  who  held  the  latter  opinion  were  the 
friends  of  Fouche,  who  had  given  them  to  understand  that 
nothing  remained  for  them  but  to  submit,  but  that  he  alone 
would  find  means  to  save  them,  and  erect  the  edifice  of 
Liberty.  The  Chamber  of  Peers  presented  a  much  sadder 
spectacle.  Except  the  intrepid  Thibaudeau,  who  till  the 
last  moment  expressed  himself  with  admirable  energy 
against  the  reign  of  the  Bourbons,  almost  all  the  others 
thought  of  nothing  else  but  of  getting  out  of  the  scrape 
with  the  least  loss  they  could.  Some  took  no  pains  to  hide 
their  wish  of  bending  again  under  the  yoke  ;  and  looked 
upon  themselves  as  being  paid  in  advance,  either  by  their 
remaining  in  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  or  the  necessity  of 
■disarming  revenge.  The  majority,  however,  wished  to  fall 
with  dignity  ;  but  there  existed  no  firm  will.  The  Chamber 
waited  for  the  resolutions  of  the  Representatives,  and  in- 
trenched itself  behind  them,  as  if  that  shield  could  have 
•saved  it.  I  sued  in  vain  to  those  who  consented  to  listen  to 
me  :  *'  We  have  no  means  of  escaping  :  you  must  give  up 
all  hopes.  The  other  Chamber  has  been  named  by  the 
people  with  the  forms  consecrated  by  the  Constitution  ;  we, 
on  the  contrary,  are  nothing  but  the  Ex-Emperor's  friends  ; 
we  have  not  been  forced  to  accept.  Each  of  us,  in  setting 
our  foot  here,  has  received  a  sentence  of  proscription  from 
the    Bourbons.      It   is   we  who  are  the  rebels  :    we  have 