

The  next  day  these  two  officers  were  set  at  liberty  ;  and  I 
afterwards  learned  the  following  particulars.  The  unfortu- 
nate Labedoyere,  after  the  Army  of  the  Loire  had  been  dis- 
banded, had  retired  to  the  outskirts  of  Riorn,  with  several  of 
his  friends,  among  whom  was  General  Flahaut,  his  near 
relation.     The  latter,  who  possesses  a  cool  head  and  unites 


334  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

prudence  to  much  courage,  immediately  perceived  the 
danger  of  their  position.  He  was  convinced  that  nothing 
remained  for  them  to  do  but  to  pass  the  frontiers  as  quickly 
as  they  could.  Labedoyere  was  of  the  same  opinion  ;  but 
no  persuasion  could  make  him  alter  his  plan.  He  wanted 
to  go  to  the  United  States,  but  on  his  way  to  pass  through 
Paris,  where  he  wished  to  take  leave  of  his  family  and  raise 
some  money.  All  the  exertions  of  friendship  had  no  power 
over  him.  He  stepped  into  the  diligence  under  a  false  name, 
and  found  among  his  travelling  companions  two  wretches  in 
regimentals,  who  pretended  they  came  from  the  Army  of  the 
Loire,  and  who  were  scarcely  arrived  in  Paris  when  they 
informed  against  him.  These  were  the  two  prisoners  who 
were  merrily  feasting  on  a  part  of  the  money  they  had 
received  as  the  reward  of  their  treachery. 

By  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  jailer  came  to  call  me 
down  to  the  chief  clerk,  who  was  to  examine  me.  In  my 
situation,  this  might  be  looked  upon  as  some  amusement :  I 
was  therefore  far  from  wishing  to  decline  it,  and  I  was  con- 
ducted, through  a  labyrinth  of  passages,  to  a  room  on  the 

ground  floor,  where  I  found  M.  V ,  who  was  dismissed  a 

little  while  after.  This  inquisitor,  who  was  a  short,  fat  man, 
was  seated  in  his  armchair,  where  for  the  space  of  twenty- 
nine  years  he  had  been  asking  questions  at  all  hours  of  the 
day  and  night,  under  all  possible  governments.  After  having 
taken  down  in  writing  three  or  four  pages  of  questions  and 
answers,  he  stopped,  and  as  we  had  neither  of  us  much 
inclination  for  sleep,  he  eagerly  took  advantage  of  some 
inquiries  I  made  about  his  occupations  to  relate  to  me  all 
the  prowess  of  the  prefects  of  police,  the  manner  the  prisoners 
made  their  defence,  and  the  confessions  he  extorted  from 
them  ;  his  skill  in  troubling  their  conscience,  in  disconcerting 
their  firmness,  in  surprising  their  tenets,  in  pursuing  their 
confessions,  and  finally  in  sounding  the  bottom  of  their 
hearts.  I  cannot  help  recording  here  one  of  these  anecdotes, 
which  I  thought  remarkable,  in  the  words  he  gave  it  to  me. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  335 

"  Among  the  conspirators  of  the  Infernal  Machine  was 