


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  329 

•events.  The  day  he  arrived  in  that  retreat,  he  proposed  to 
me  to  accompany  him  abroad.  "  Drouet,"  he  said,  "  remains 
in  France.  I  see,  the  War  Minister  wishes  him  not  to  be 
lost  to  his  country.  I  dare  not  complain  ;  but  it  is  a  great 
loss  for  me  ;  I  never  met  with  a  better  head,  or  a  more 
upright  heart.  That  man  was  formed  to  be  a  prime  minister 
anywhere."  I  refused  to  accompany  him,  in  the  following 
words  :  "  I  have  a  daughter  of  thirteen  years  of  age  :  my 
wife  is  four  months  advanced  in  pregnancy  ;  I  cannot 
resolve  to  leave  her.  Allow  me  some  time,  and  I  will 
join  you  wherever  you  may  be.  I  have  remained  faithful 
to  your  Majesty  in  better  times,  and  you  may  reckon 
upon  me.  Nevertheless,  if  my  wife  had  not  a  claim  on  me, 
I  should  do  better  to  go  with  you,  for  I  have  sad  forebodings 
respecting  my  fate." 

The  Emperor  made  me  no  answer  ;  but  I  saw  by  the 
expression  of  his  countenance  that  he  had  no  better  augury 
of  my  fate  than  I  had.  However,  the  enemy  was  approach- 
ing, and  for  the  last  three  days  he  had  solicited  the  Provi- 
sional Government  to  place  a  frigate  at  his  disposal,  with 
which  he  might  go  to  America.  It  had  been  promised  him  ; 
he  had  even  been  pressed  to  set  off ;  but  he  wanted  to  be  the 
bearer  of  the  order  to  the  captain  to  convey  him  to  the 
United  States,  and  that  order  did  not  arrive.  We  all  felt 
that  the  delay  of  a  single  hour  might  put  his  freedom  in 
jeopardy.  After  we  had  talked  the  subject  over  among 
ourselves,  I  went  to  him,  and  strongly  painted  to  him  how 
dangerous  it  might  be  to  prolong  his  stay.  He  observed 
that  he  could  not  go  without  the  order.  "  Depart  never- 
theless," I  replied  ;  "  your  presence  on  board  the  ship  will 
still  have  a  great  power  over  Frenchmen  ;  cut  the  cables, 
promise  money  to  the  crew,  and  if  the  captain  resist,  have 
him  put  on  shore,  and  hoist  your  sails.  I  have  not  the 
least  doubt  but  Fouche  has  sold  you  to  the  Allies."  "  I 
believe  it  also  ;  but  go  and  make  the  last  effort  with  the 
Minister  of  Marine."     I  went  off  immediately  to  M.  Dccres. 


330  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

He  was  in  bed,  and  listened  to  me  with  an  indifference  that 
made  my  blood  boil.  He  said  to  me :  "  I  am  only  a 
minister.  Go  to  Fouche  ;  speak  to  Government.  As  for 
me,  I  can  do  nothing.  Good  night."  And  so  he  covered 
himself  up  in  his  blankets.  I  left  him  ;  but  I  could  not 
succeed  in  speaking  either  to  Fouche  or  to  any  of  the 
others.  It  was  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  when  I  returned 
to  Malmaison  ;  the  Emperor  was  in  bed.  I  was  let  into  his 
chamber,  where  I  gave  him  an  account  of  the  result  of  my 
mission,  and  renewed  my  entreaties.  He  listened  to  me,  but 
made  no  answer.  He  got  up,  however,  and  spent  a  part  of 
the  night  in  walking  up  and  down.  The  following  day  was 
the  last  of  that  sad  drama.  The  Emperor  had  gone  to  bed 
again,  and  slept  a  few  hours.  I  entered  his  closet  at  about 
twelve  o'clock.  "  If  I  had  known  you  were  here,"  he  said, 
"  I  would  have  had  you  called  in."  He  then  gave  me,  on 
a  subject  that  interested  him  personally,  some  instructions 
which  it  is  needless  for  me  to  repeat.  Soon  after  I  left  him,, 
full  of  anxiety  respecting  his  fate,  my  heart  oppressed  with 
grief,  but  still  far  from  suspecting  the  extent  to  which  both 
the  rigour  of  fortune  and  the  cruelty  of  his  enemies  would 
be  carried. 