


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE  TTE.  3 1 9 

ment  next  to  the  one  I  was  in.  The  door  remained  half 
open.  They  walked  up  and  down  together,  talking  ver}' 
calmly.  I  was  therefore  greatly  astonished  when,  after  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  I  heard  the  Emperor  say  to  him  gravely  : 
"  You  are  a  traitor  !  Why  do  you  remain  Minister  of  the 
police,  if  you  wish  to  betray  me  ?  It  depends  on  me  to 
have  you  hanged,  and  everybody  would  rejoice  at  your 
death  !  "  I  did  not  hear  Fouche's  reply,  but  the  conversa- 
tion lasted  above  half  an  hour  longer,  always  walking  up 
and  down.  When  Fouche  went  away,  he  bade  me  cheer- 
fully good-night,  and  said  that  the  Emperor  had  gone  back 
to  his  apartments.  In  truth,  when  I  Avent  in  he  was  gone  ; 
l3ut  the  day  after  he  spoke  to  me  of  that  conversation.  "  I 
suspected,"  he  said,  *'  that  the  wretch  was  in  correspondence 
with  Vienna.  I  have  had  a  banker's  clerk  arrested  on  his 
return  from  that  city.  He  has  acknowledged  that  he 
brought  a  letter  for  Fouche  from  Metternich,  and  that  the 
answer  was  to  be  sent  at  a  fixed  time  to  Bale,  where  a  man 
was  to  wait  for  the  bearer  on  the  bridge.  I  sent  for  Fouche 
a  few  days  ago,  and  kept  him  three  hours  long  in  my 
garden,  hoping  that  in  the  course  of  a  friendly  conversation 
he  would  mention  that  letter  to  me  ;  but  he  said  nothing. 
At  last,  yesterday  evening,  I  myself  opened  the  subject." 
(Here  the  Emperor  repeated  to  me  the  words  I  had  heard 
the  night  before,  "  You  are  a  traitor,"  &c.)  "  He  acknow- 
ledged, in  fact,"  continued  the  Emperor,  "  that  he  had 
received  such  a  letter  ;  but  that  it  was  not  signed,  and 
that  he  had  looked  upon  it  as  a  mystification.  He  showed 
it  me.  Now  that  letter  was  evidently  an  answer,  in  which 
the  writer  declared  over  again,  that  he  would  listen  to 
nothing  more  concerning  the  Emperor,  but  that,  his  person 
excepted,  it  would  be  easy  to  agree  to  all  the  rest." 

I  expected  that  the  Emperor  would  conclude  his  narrative 
by  expressing  his  anger  against  Fouche  ;  but  our  conversa- 
tion turned  on  some  other  subject,  and  he  talked  no  more 
of  him.     Two  days  afterwards  I  went  to  Fouche  to  solicit 


320  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

the  return  to  Paris  of  an  ofiicer  of  musketeers,  who  had 
been  banished  far  from  his  family.  I  found  him  at  break- 
fast, and  sat  down  next  to  him.  Facing  him  sat  a  stranger. 
"  Do  you  see  this  man  ?  "  he  said  to  me,  pointing  with  his 
spoon  to  the  stranger  :  "  he  is  an  Aristocrat,  a  Bourbonite, 

a  Chouan  :  it  is  the  Abbe  M ,  one  of  the  editors  of  the 

Joxtrnnl  dcs  Debats — a  sworn  enemy  to  Napoleon,  a  fanatic 
partisan  of  the  Bourbons  ; — he  is  one  of  our  men." 