


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

A  FEW  days  after  the  departure  of  the  Emperor,  I  was  told 
that  a  list  of  proscriptions,  which  was  said  to  contain  the 
names  of  two  thousand  persons,  was  making  up  under  the 
inspection  of  Messieurs  de  Talleyrand  and  Fouche,  by  order  of 
the  Princes  ;  and  that  Madame  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme 
vouchsafed  to  take  an  active  part  in  the  measure.  Many 
persons  had  already  fled  from  France.  The  intrepid  Thi- 
baudeau,  who,  a  few  days  after  the  return  of  the  King,  had 
openly  protested  against  his  reign  at  the  Chamber  of  Peers, 
took  some  pains  to  make  me  comprehend  the  danger  I  stood 
in.  The  Duke  de  Bassano,  at  his  departure,  wished  to  per- 
suade me  to  follow  him  quickly  ;  but  I,  prepossessed  by  the 
idea  that  my  conduct  was  above  all  reproach,  rejected  the 
cautions  of  friendship.  The  Princess  de  Vaudemont  entreated 
me  at  least  to  seek  some  retreat  for  a  short  time.  She  told 
me  that  it  was  Fouche's  wish  that  I  should  ;  but  he  never 
thought  of  offering  me  the  passport  I  might  stand  in  need 
of.  The  situation  of  my  wife,  who  was  far  advanced  in 
pregnancy  and  very  unwell,  made  the  idea  of  my  flight 
impossible  for  me  to  bear.  From  within  the  walls  of  a 
prison,  said  I  to  myself,  I  may  still  protect  her.  Prejudice 
will  diminish,  and  the  Royal  resentment  will  undoubtedly 
vent  itself  on  those  who  are  absent.  The  more  I  examined 
my  conduct,  the  more  I  was  convinced  that  my  cause  could 
only  be  brought  before  the  Correctional  Police,  and  the 
result  would  be  no  more  than  an  imprisonment  for  two  or 
five  years,  for  having  taken  upon  me  the  superintendence  of 

33> 


332  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  Post-office  a  few  hours  before  the  Emperor  arrived. 
Having  made  up  my  mind  to  this,  I  was  the  more  obstinate 
in  my  refusal  to  fly  ;  and  I  proposed  to  the  Princess  de 
Vaudemont  to  give  her  a  letter  addressed  to  M.  de  Talley- 
rand, in  which  I  should  explain  my  conduct.  She  consented 
to  lay  it  before  him.  In  that  letter  I  unfolded  to  the 
Ministry  my  whole  conduct  since  the  Restoration  ;  all  the 
steps  I  had  taken  on  the  20th  of  March  ;  and  I  concluded 
by  soliciting  my  trial.  My  wishes  in  that  respect  were  soon 
complied  with.' 

On  the  1 8th  of  July  I  was  sitting  at  dinner  with  Madame 
Lavalette  and  M.  de  Meneval,  when  an  inspector  of  the 
police  came  to  tell  me  that  the  Prefect,  M.  Decazes,  wished 
to  speak  to  me.  When  I  stepped  into  the  hackney-coach,  I 
saw  that  I  was  surrounded  by  three  or  four  spies,  who  were 
good  enough  to  act  the  part  of  footmen,  and  stepped  up 
behind  the  carriage.  In  less  than  half  an  hour  I  was  in  the 
registering  room  of  the  prison  of  the  Prefecture.  I  was 
introduced  to  the  jailer,  who  paid  little  attention  to  me, 