

On  the  23rd  I  returned  to  the  Elysee.  The  Emperor  had 
been  for  two  hours  in  his  bath.  He  himself  turned  the 
discourse  on  the  retreat  he  ought  to  choose,  and  spoke  of 
the  United  States.  I  rejected  the  idea  without  reflection, 
and  with  a  degree  of  vehemence  that  surprised  him.  "  Why 
not  America  ?  "  he  asked.  I  answered,  "  Because  Moreau  is 
retired  there."  The  observation  was  harsh,  and  I  should 
never  have  forgiven  myself  for  having  expressed  it,  if  I  had 
not  altered  my  opinion  a  few  days  afterwards.  He  heard  it 
without  any  apparent  ill-humour  ;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that 


328  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

it  must  have  made  an  unfavourable  impression  on  his  mind. 
I  insisted  on  his  choosing  England,  and  the  reason  I  gave 
appeared  plausible  ;  but  after  I  had  left  him,  I  met  General 

F in  the  saloon,  and  communicated  our  conversation  to 

him.  His  answer  was :  "  You  are  mistaken  in  respect  to 
the  English  Government.  In  that  country,  all  the  institu- 
tions are  excellent  for  the  nation  itself ;  but  foreigners  are 
not  admitted  to  enjoy  their  benefits.  The  Emperor  will 
never  find  anything  in  that  •  country  but  oppression  and 
injustice.  The  nation  will  not  be  consulted  on  the  treat- 
ment he  will  undergo  ;  and,  believe  my  words,  far  from 
finding  protection  there,  all  possible  outrages  will  be 
invented  for  revenge." 

These  reflections  struck  me,  and  I  begged  F to  com- 
municate them  to  the  Emperor.  I  could  not,  however, 
admit  them  without  some  restriction.  I  covUd  conceive 
that  the  English  Government  might  think  it  necessary  to 
the  safety  of  Europe,  to  prevent  all  connection  between  the 
Emperor  and  his  numerous  adherents  ;  but  to  sentence  him 
to  the  slowest  and  most  horrible  death, — to  exercise  on  his 
person  all  manner  of  cruelty, — to  invent  for  him  sufferings 
unknown  to  the  most  cruel  tyrants — (for  in  what  other 
light  can  be  viewed  the  insufferable  separation  from  all 
connection  with  civilisation  and  human  kind  ; — from  his 
wife  and  child,  from  whom  he  could  not  even  receive  letters 
to  comfort  him  in  his  banishment)  : — these  are  things  an 
honourable  mind  could  never  have  expected.  After  such 
conduct,  we  may  be  allowed  to  suspect,  that  in  England, 
a  nation  so  estimable  in  other  respects,  there  exists  a 
coldness  of  heart,  with  a  total  absence  of  humanity  and 
generosity,  from  the  moment  her  pride  is  wounded. 

The  Emperor  went  to  inhabit  Malmaison.  He  was 
accompanied  thither  by  the  Duchess  de  St.  Leu,  Bertrand 
and  his  family,  and  the  Duke  de  Bassano.  I  went  there 
several  times  a  day  ;  for  I  could  not  leave  Madame  de  St. 
Leu,    who   had   suffered   much  in   her  health  by  the  late 