

'  Far  from  having  any  uneasiness  on  my  own  account,  my  whole  anxiety 
was  for  the  fate  of  my  friends.  The  Countess  de  .Souza,  the  aunt  of  Labe- 
doyere,  knowing  that  he  was  still  in  Paris,  entreated  me  to  go  and  see  him, 
to  thrust  him,  if  necessary,  by  the  shoulders  out  of  the  barriers,  and  to  per- 
suade him  to  seek  refuge  with  the  Army  of  the  Loire,  from  whence  he  might 
go  abroad.  I  went,  therefore,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  Labedoyere. 
He  was  still  in  bed,  playing  with  his  child,  and  his  lovely  wife  next  to  him. 
When  we  were  alone,  I  warmly  pressed  him  to  depart,  and,  by  a  singular 
prepossession,  I  gave  him  the  same  reasons,  made  him  the  same  entreaties, 
placed  before  his  eyes  the  same  dangers  with  which  my  friends  harassed  me 
on  my  own  account.  He  listened  to  me  with  a  smile  and  a  yawn,  and 
turned  himself  round  in  his  bed.  I  was  obliged  to  put  an  end  to  that  dis- 
course, and  talk  of  the  fate  of  the  Emperor  and  France,  which  interested 
him  more  than  his  own.  We  had  already  lost  more  than  three  hours  in  useless 
conversation,  when  his  valet-de-chambre  came  to  tell  him  that  two  Prussian 
officers,  who  were  billeted  in  his  house,  refused  the  apartment  that  had  been 
offered  to  them,  and  insisted  on  taking  possession  of  his  wife's.  At  these 
words  Labedoyere  flew  out  of  bed  like  a  madman,  and  taking  scarcely  time 
to  slip  on  his  clothes,  he  wanted  to  go  immediately  and  cut  off  the  ears  of 
these  two  insolent  fellows.  It  required  considerable  exertions  on  my  side 
to  make  him  keep  quiet  and  wait  the  result  of  his  wife's  mother's  remon- 
strances. He  did  not  set  off  till  the  evening.  He  gained  the  banks  of  the 
Loire.     I  shall  mention  hereafter  how  he  returned  from  thence. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  333 

being  busy  with  distributing  lodgings  to  several  new-comers, 

among  whom  I  discovered  M.  de  P ,  who  had  been  long 

secretary  to  the  Duke  de  Rovigo,  and  appeared  to  be  the 
person  in  whom  he  placed  the  greatest  confidence.  He 
seemed  so  grieved  and  mortified  to  be  where  he  was,  that  I 
went  up  to  him,  and  had  already  begun  to  express  my  pity 
for  his  misfortune,  when  all  of  a  sudden  he  turned  aside,  and, 
pointing  to  me,  said  to  the  turnkey,  "  Conduct  this  gentle- 
man to  No.  17";  after  which  he  disappeared.  This  man, 
thought  I,  has  very  cleverly  turned  his  coat  ;  and  I  followed 
my  guide,  blushing  at  the  mistake  I  had  made.  He  intro- 
duced me  into  a  dirty  garret  with  a  window  that  opened  in 
the  roof  at  twelve  feet  from  the  floor.  I  was  permitted,  if  I 
could,  to  open  it  by  means  of  an  iron  bar  with  notches,  but 
so  heavy  that  it  was  not  possible  for  me  to  raise  it.  When 
one  enters  into  prison,  anger  always  follows  the  first  surprise. 
I  began  by  throwing  out  some  energetic  exclamations  against 
the  Prefect,  who  had  not  deigned  to  receive  me  in  his  apart- 
ments, though  he  had  sent  for  me  to  come  and  speak  to  him. 
I  was  not  yet  acquainted  with  the  code  of  politeness  of  the 
Prefects  of  Police  ;  but  I  soon  made  great  improvement  in 
that  branch  of  knowledge.  As  there  was  no  bell,  I  was 
obliged  to  wait  three  hours  before  I  received  a  visit  from  the 
turnkey,  who  brought  me  for  dinner  some  disgusting  prison 
ragout.  I  made  some  inquiries  respecting  the  prisoners  who 
lodged  on  the  floor  above  me.  I  had  seen,  through  a  key- 
hole, men  carrying  bottles  and  all  the  preparations  for  a 
feast.  "They  seem  to  be  very  merry,"  I  added.  "They 
are  two  aides-de-camp  of  General  Labedoyere."  "How  !  is 
he  then  arrested  ?  "     "I  believe  so." 