


326  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

nothing  more  to  do  than  to  signahse  our  last  moments 
by  a  noble  energy,  and  to  fall  with  a  good  grace." 

But  I  talked  to  men  too  old  to  give  up  the  sweets  of  life,, 
and  who  had  nothing  left  in  their  hearts  but  the  wish  to 
preserve  them,  and  the  fear  of  adversity.  I  must,  however, 
make  some  few  exceptions,  among  which  I  shall  name  old 
Sieyes,  who  maintained  fully  the  opinion  I  had  formed  of 
him.  He  wanted  the  habit,  and  perhaps  the  courage,  to 
speak  in  public  ;  but  I  never  heard  any  one  express  with 
greater  energy  a  hatred  of  slavery,  and  more  forcible  and 
generous  ideas  on  the  necessity  of  fighting  to  the  end 
against  it. 

The  next  day  I  returned  to  the  Emperor.  He  had 
received  the  most  positive  accounts  of  the  state  of  feeling 
in  the  Chamber  of  Representatives.  The  reports  had,  how- 
ever, been  given  to  him  with  some  little  reserve  ;  for  he  did 
not  seem  to  me  convinced  that  the  resolution  was  really 
formed  to  pronounce  his  abdication.  I  was  better  instructed 
on  the  matter  ;  and  I  came  to  him,  without  having  the  least 
doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  only  thing  he  could  do  was  to 
descend  once  more  from  the  throne.  I  communicated  to 
him  all  the  particulars  I  had  just  received  myself ;  and  I  did 
not  hesitate  to  advise  him  to  follow  the  only  course  worthy 
of  him.  He  listened  to  me  with  a  sombre  air  ;  and,  though 
he  was  in  some  measure  master  of  himself,  the  agitation 
of  his  mind  and  the  horrors  of  his  position  betrayed  them- 
selves in  his  face  and  in  all  his  motions.  "  I  know,"  said  I,. 
"  that  your  Majesty  may  still  keep  the  sword  drawn  ;  but 
with  whom,  and  against  whom  ?  Dejection  has  chilled  the 
courage  of  every  one  ;  the  army  is  still  in  the  greatest  con- 
fusion. Nothing  is  to  be  expected  from  Paris,  and  the  cottp 
d^etat  oi  the  i8th  Brumaire  cannot  be  renewed."  "That 
thought,"  he  replied,  stopping,  "  is  far  from  my  mind.  I 
will  hear  nothing  more  about  myself.     But  poor  France  !  " 

At  that  moment,  S and  C entered,  and  having 

drawn  a  faithful  picture  of  the  exasperation  of  the  Deputies^ 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  327 

they  persuaded  him  to  send  in  his  abdication.  Some  words 
he  uttered  proved  to  us  that  he  would  have  considered  death 
preferable  to  that  step  ;  but  still  he  took  it. 

This  great  act  being  performed,  he  remained  calm  during 
the  whole  day,  giving  his  advice  on  the  position  the  army 
was  to  take,  and  on  the  manner  the  negotiations  with  the 
enemy  were  to  be  conducted.  He  insisted  especially  on  the 
necessity  of  proclaiming  his  son  Emperor,  not  so  much  for 
the  advantage  of  the  child,  as  with  a  view  to  unite  on  one 
head  all  the  power  of  sentiments  and  affections.  Unfortu- 
nately, nobody  would  listen  to  him.  Some  men  of  sense  and 
courage  rallied  round  that  proposition  in  the  two  Chambers ; 
but  fear  swayed  the  majority  ;  and  among  those  who  re- 
mained free  from  it,  many  thought  that  a  public  declaration 
of  Liberty,  and  the  resolution  to  defend  it  at  any  price, 
would  make  the  enemy  and  the  Bourbons  turn  back. 
Strange  delusion  of  weakness  and  want  of  experience  !  It 
must,  however,  be  respected,  for  it  had  its  source  in  love  of 
their  country  :  but  while  we  excuse  it,  can  it  be  justified  ? 
The  population  of  the  metropolis  had  resumed  their  usual 
appearance,  which  was  that  of  complete  indifference,  with 
a  resolution  to  cry  "  Long  live  the  King  !  "  provided  the 
King  arrived  well  escorted  ;  for  one  must  not  judge  of  the 
whole  capital  by  about  one-thirtieth  part  of  the  inhabitants, 
who  called  for  arms,  and  declared  themselves  warmly  against 
the  return  of  the  abandoned  family. 