

22  3" 


322  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

of  all  necessary  to  beat  their  foreign  foes.  I  never  could 
bring  that  idea  into  the  head  of  people  who  nevertheless 
were  full  of  merit  and  long  experience.  "  We  will  have 
no  more  scnaUis-constdtiim^  no  double  legislative  body, 
no  arbitrary  practices, — finally,  no  master.  We  want  a 
moderator,  and  nothing  else.  We  are  numerous  enough 
to  beat  the  enemy,  if  he  attack  us.  If  he  triumph,  each 
department  will  become  a  Vendee.  France  will  never 
hesitate  between  slavery  and  civil  war."  The  imprudent 
men  did  not  observe  that  by  such  speeches  they  stopped 
the  enthusiasm  of  the  people,  who  preferred  to  live  in 
expectation  of  what  was  to  happen,  rather  than  throw 
themselves  into  the  fatigues  and  dangers  of  a  struggle 
which  appeared  distant  and  uncertain,  notwithstanding  the 
evident  approach  of  the  enemy.  The  ceremony  of  the 
Champ  de  Mai  was,  however,  a  noble  one  ;  but  all  France 
was  not  there,  and  even  there  the  feeling  for  the  Emperor 
was  sincere  among  the  crowd.  The  magistracy  were  opposed 
to  him.  All  the  judges  preferred  Louis  XVIII.  to  the 
Emperor  :  the  pretension  they  put  forward  of  succeeding 
to  the  parliaments,  of  which  they  were  the  dross,  flattered 
their  vanity.  Under  a  weak  prince  they  enjoyed  real 
authority,  and  the  love  of  the  Bourbons  for  old  institu- 
tions gave  them  a  degree  of  power  they  greatly  hoped  to 
augment.  Under  the  Emperor,  on  the  contrary,  they  were 
forced  to  obey.  All  the  heads  and  clerks  in  the  public 
offices  were  in  a  false  position  :  they  had  everything  to 
fear,  and  nothing  to  hope  :  for  they  could  not  help  seeing 
that  we  were  beginning  a  new  era  of  revolutions,  in  which 
all  things  would  become  uncertain.  Finally,  the  impression 
of  the  horrors  that  had  accompanied  the  first  invasion  was 
far  from  being  blotted  out,  and  the  public  mind  shuddered 
at  the  idea  of  a  second  one  ! 

The  speech  delivered  to  the  Emperor  by  M.  Dubois 
d' Angers  was  full  of  energy.  It  contained  a  summary  of  all 
the  wishes,  and  expressed  clearly  the  national  will.     But 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  323 

could  a  power  that  had  nothing  left  give  all  that  was 
expected  ?  The  answer  of  the  Emperor,  which  was  not 
directed  to  that  speech,  was  above  all  sincere.  He  promised 
a  great  deal ;  but  still  he  was  obliged  to  explain  what  he 
wished,  in  his  turn,  as  the  executive  power.  He  displeased 
his  auditors  by  that.  I  soon  perceived  it  in  talking  with 
some  deputies  who  had  heard  him.  After  the  celebration 
of  mass,  to  which,  by  the  bye,  everybody  turned  their 
backs,  the  Emperor  went  down  and  took  his  place  on  an 
amphitheatre  in  the  middle  of  the  Champ  de  Mars,  from 
whence  he  was  to  distribute  the  eagles  to  all  the  cohorts  of 
the  departments.  This  was  a  beautiful  scene,  for  it  was  a 
national  one.  The  situation  besides  was  true.  The  Emperor 
took  care  tO  address  a  word  to  each  of  the  corps  that  re- 
ceived these  colours,  and  that  word  was  flattering  and  full 
of  enthusiasm.  To  the  departments  of  the  Vosges  he  said  : 
"You  are  my  old  companions."  To  those  of  the  Rhine  : 
"You  have  been  the  first,  the  most  courageous,  and  the 
most  unfortunate  in  our  disasters."  To  the  departments  of 
the  Rhone  :  "  I  have  been  bred  amongst  you."  To  others  : 
*'  Your  bands  were  at  Rivoli,  at  Areola,  at  Marengo,  at 
Tilsit,  at  Austerlitz,  at  the  Pyramids."  These  magic  names 
filled  with  deep  emotion  the  hearts  of  those  old  warriors, 
the  venerable  wrecks  of  so  many  victories.  But,  as  I  have 
already  said,  all  France  was  not  present  at  that  ceremony, 
and  the  enthusiasm  of  the  spectators  was  not  communicated 
to  the  people  in  the  departments.  A  few  days  afterwards 
the  Emperor  set  off.  I  left  him  at  midnight.  He  suffered 
a  great  deal  from  a  pain  in  his  breast.  He  stepped,  how- 
ever, into  his  coach  with  a  cheerfulness  that  seemed  to 
show  he  was  conscious  of  victory.  The  particulars  of  that 
campaign  are  too  well  known  for  me  to  repeat  them  here  ; 
but  I  saw  with  grief  too  many  unworthy  Frenchmen  form 
wishes  for  his  defeat.  The  Assembly  of  Representatives 
did  not  adopt  the  attitude  or  speak  the  language  its 
influence    over   the  public  mind   rendered   necessary.     Old 