

23 


338  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

never  spoke,  all  added  to  my  anxiety.  I  soon  felt  also  the 
inconveniences  of  my  prison.  Next  to  my  room  was  an 
enormous  iron  door,  that  was  opened  at  every  hour  of  the 
day  and  the  night  to  relieve  the  sentry  :  its  violent  motion 
shook  my  bed  and  interrupted  my  sleep,  while  the  cold  and 
damp  of  the  air  obliged  me  to  have  fire  night  and  day. 

Such  torments,  every  instant  renewed,  were,  however,  far 
from  discouraging  me,  and  I  had  no  need  to  seek  moral 
force  in  meditation,  or  in  delusions  that  vanished  every  day 
more  and  more  before  the  sad  truth  :  I  found  it  in  my 
attachment  for  the  Emperor.  I  suffered,  but  it  was  for 
him  :  my  misfortune  was  heightened  by  the  consideration 
of  the  cause  that  had  given  it  birth.  My  name  and  fate 
were  united  to  his  immortal  name  ;  and  besides,  were  not 
his  sufferings  worse  than  mine  ?  The  perfidy  of  the  English 
Government  was  leading  him  to  St.  Helena.  How  many 
torments  were  preparing  for  him  in  his  banishment  at  the 
world's  end  !  I  should  have  blushed  to  complain  in  presence 
of  such  a  disaster.  The  vengeance  of  kings  fell  heavy  on  us 
both,  and  I  found  at  once  honour  and  glory  in  sharing  it 
with  him.  It  was  that  thought  that  constantly  bore  me  up, 
and  saved  me  from  all  weakness.  The  idea  that  he  would 
read  my  trial,  and  that  my  death  would  cause  him  some 
emotion  ;  that  I  showed  myself  worthy  of  his  attachment 
and  his  trust,  elevated  me  in  my  own  eyes.  I  shall  explain 
hereafter  how  that  feeling  of  energy  against  misfortune 
received  a  powerful  support  from  another  cause. 

A  few  weeks  after  my  imprisonment,  as  I  was  one  day 
walking  in  the  yard,  I  saw  Marshal  Ney  at  the  bottom  of 
the  staircase  which  led  to  my  former  dungeon.  He  bowed 
to  me  as  he  went  quickly  up,  accompanied  by  the  jailer  and 
an  officer  of  the  gendarmes.  It  was  thus  I  learned  that  he 
was  arrested.  Like  me,  he  had  scorned  to  leave  the  king- 
dom, and  had  only  sought  refuge  in  the  country-seat  of  one 
of  his  wife's  relations  near  Cahors.  His  sabre,  which  he  had 
left  in  the  drawing-room,  betrayed  him  for  the  first  time. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  339 

He  suffered  himself  to  be  taken,  convinced  that  they  would 
not  dare  to  condemn  him.     After  he  had  remained  a  month 
in  that  dungeon,  he  was  at  last  placed  above  me  in  the 
registrar's  lodging.     There  was  a  stove  that  defended  him 
from  the  cold  ;  and  his  grated  window,  being  higher  than 
mine,  procured  him  a  less  unwholesome  air  than  what  I 
breathed.     But  his  name  and  his  rank  could  not   protect 
him  from  the  hardships  they  seemed  to  take  pleasure  in 
inflicting  on  him.     He  played  tolerably  well  on  the  flute, 
and  during  several  days  he  amused  himself  with  his  instru- 
ment.    He  was,  however,  deprived  of  this  resource,  under 
the  pretence  that  it  was  against  the  rules  of  the  prison.     He 
repeatedly  played  a  waltz,   which  I  long  recollected,  and 
frequently  hummed  in  my  evening  musings.     I  had  never 
heard  it  anyAvhere  else,  till  once  again  it  struck  my  ear  in 
Bavaria.     It  was  at  a  bal  chanipUre  on  the  borders  of  Lake 
Starnberg.      I   had   before   my   eyes   young    peasant   girls 
merrily  skipping  on  the  fresh   green  sward.     The  air  was 
■sweet  and  melancholy,  and   when  played   on  the  flute,  it 
immediately  recalled  to  my  memory  the  Conciergerie,  and 
T  retired,  unable  to  repress   my  tears,  and  repeating  with 
bitter  feelings  the  name  of  the  unfortunate  Marshal.     Dur- 
ing the  day  we  shared  the  right  of  walking  in  the  small 
yard,   without   being,  however,  allowed   to    remain    there 
together,   though   he  was  always   accompanied    by  a  gen- 
darme.    I  was  in  the  habit  of  taking  my  walk  at  six  o'clock 
in  the  morning  :  the  Marshal  wished  to  take  that  hour  for 
his  walk  ;  I  resigned  it  to  him  with  great  pleasure,  and  this 
arrangement  lasted  until   his   solitary  confinement   ended. 
From  that  time,  his  lady  and  children  came  every  day  to 
dine  with  him.     She  always  accompanied  him  in  his  walks. 
One  day  she  came  near  my  window  and  said  to  me  :  "  The 
sentry  that  guards  us  is  an  old  soldier  who  has  served  under 
the  Marshal  ;  he  wishes  very  much  to  talk  with  you."     The 
Marshal  in  consequence  came  up  :  our  conversation  could 
not  be  long.     He  said  to  me  :  "  I  am  easy  as  to  what  con- 