

I  had  not  seen  my  daughter  since  my  confinement, 
through  the  fear  of  adding  consternation  to  her  grief  at 
the  sight  of  the  horrors  of  my  prison.  Her  mother, 
nevertheless,  sent  her  to  me  to  receive  my  blessing,  the 
day  before  her  first  communion.  My  daily  correspondence 
with  my  family  was  all  my  love  for  them  required.  I 
thought  I  should  have  been  able  to  set  bounds  to  my 
expansive  affection  for  her  ;  but  when  I  saw  my  only  child, 
adorned  with  all  the  graces  of  youth,  falling  into  my  arms, 
bathed  in  tears,  and  afterwards  at  my  feet  in  a  deep  swoon, 
all  the  anguish  and  agonies  of  paternal  tenderness  lacerated 
my  heart.  For  the  first  time,  I  felt  how  great  was  my 
misfortune.  I  could  not  master  my  grief ;  silent  tears 
mixed  with  my  daughter's  sobs,  and  when  I  placed  my 
hands  on  her  head,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  utter  a 
single  word. 

This  scene  made  me  reflect  on  my  situation.  I  began 
to  consider  it  under  its  real  aspect  ;  and  my  counsel,  in 
their  conferences,  tore  off  a  part  of  the  veil  which  till  then 
had  covered  my  eyes. 

The  first,  M.  Tripier,  was  a  man  whose  mind  was  cool, 
accurate,  and  logical.  The  best  way  he  found  to  prepare 
himself  for  my  defence  was  to  attack  me  on  all  points. 
What  had  I  to  do  at  the  Post-oflfice  ?  Why  did  I  go 
there  so  early  in  the  morning?  Why  did  I  send  a  courier 
to  Fontainebleau  ?  Why  did  I  give  orders  during  the 
day  ?  Why  that  bulletin  sent  all  over  France  by  the  mail  ? 
Finally  :  Why  did  I  stop  the  newspapers,  and  especially 
the  Momteur  that  contained  the  King's  proclamation  ?     He 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  351 

had  never  done  with  his  questions.  My  answers  appeared 
to  him  to  be  sincere  and  satisfactory  ;  but  they  did  not 
clear  me  of  the  fault  I  had  committed.  He  was,  however, 
soon  convinced  that  I  had  merely  yielded  to  imprudent 
impatience.  But  that  was  not  enough  to  acquit  me  ;  and 
until  the  day  before  my  sentence  was  passed,  he  thought 
I  should  be  condemned  to  five  years'  imprisonment  for 
having  usurped  the  public  power. 


CHAPTER   XXXVI. 

The  preliminary  conferences  continued  twice  a  week  during 
nearly  a  month.  A  few  days  before  the  opening  of  the 
debates,  the  Mom'teu?'  acquainted  me  with  the  terrible 
Letter  addressed  to  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  and  signed  by 
the  Duke  de  Richelieu,  against  Marshal  Ney.  How  could 
that  man,  of  whom  public  fame  proclaimed  the  frankness, 
the  gentle  manners,  the  impartial  and  independent  character, 
— how  could  he  attack  before  the  Chamber  of  Peers,  with 
such  brutal  and  sanguinary  rage,  one  of  the  most  honour- 
able Frenchmen  of  our  time, — one  of  our  most  illustrious 
warriors, — an  unfortunate,  accused,  but  unjudged  man, 
whose  examination  was  not  yet  known,  and  whom  the 
law  ought  to  have  surrounded  with  a  generous  compassion  ? 
When  M.  de  Lacroix  Frainville,  one  of  my  counsel,  entered 
my  room,  I  showed  him  the  Moniteiir.  Deep  emotion  was 
visible  in  his  features  while  he  read  it  ;  and  when  he  had 
done,  he  said  to  me  with  an  air  of  consternation,  after  a  few 
moments'  reflection,  "  Sir,  I  see  but  too  clearly  what  they 
want  to  come  to  :  but  I  am  old  ;  I  wish  to  pass  my  last 
days  free  from  political  storms,  and  my  health  is  too  weak 
to  bear  the  persecution  that  is  about  to  spread  on  all  sides. 
Permit  me,  therefore,  to  deposit  into  other  hands  the  bur- 
dens I  have  taken  upon  me.  My  friend  Tripier  will  easily 
find  a  fellow  lawyer  that  will  help  him  with  your  defence. 
I  shall  continue  with  my  advice,  but  I  do  not  feel  strength 
enough  to  appear  before  the  court." 