


340  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

cerns  myself.  A  great  many  friends  watch  over  me  :  the 
Government  is  advancing  fast  again  towards  its  ruin.  The 
foreigners  already  take  our  part  ;  the  public  indignation  has 
communicated  itself  to  them  ;  and  if  you  wish  to  have  a 
proof  of  it,  read  these  papers  and  burn  them  when  you  have 
done."  He  then  slipped  through  the  bars  a  file  of  pamphlets 
and  some  manuscript  sheets.  I  found  in  them  violent  threats 
and  even  provocations,  that  appeared  to  me  very  ill-advised  : 
there  was  also  a  great  deal  of  absurd  news.  According  to 
their  accounts,  the  English  already  repented  having  replaced 
the  House  of  Bourbon  on  the  throne  ;  and  there  was  a  long 
protest  of  the  Empress  Maria  Louisa  against  the  resolution 
of  the  Sovereigns  who  kept  her  out  of  France.  What  the 
Marshal  had  told  me  about  his  friends  was  more  correct  ; 
but,  some  time  after,  I  learned  that  he  had  failed  in  an 
attempt  to  escape  from  the  Conciergerie,  and  that  six  thou- 
sand officers  on  half-pay  had  been  forced  to  leave  the  metro- 
polis by  order  of  the  Minister  of  War.  A  little  while  after 
that  conversation,  we  again  exchanged  the  hours  of  our 
walks.  He  then  went  down  in  the  evening,  accompanied  by 
his  wife,  his  brother-in-law,  and^  his  sister-in-law,  Madame 
Gamot.  The  prisoners  had  retired  to  their  dormitories  ; 
among  them  was  a  soldier  called  Dieu,  whose  good  voice  and 
comic  songs  diverted  the  Marshal. 

I  felt  a  very  great  wish  to  see  him  again  ;  and  one  evening 
I  ventured  to  ask  permission  to  go  up  to  the  Green.  The 
jailer  was  gone  out  :  the  turnkey  opened  the  door  and  led 
me  there,  where  I  found  Marshal  Ney  and  M.  Gamot.  I 
joined  them.  It  was  about  three  months  after  our  first  con- 
versation. At  that  period,  all  his  delusions  seemed  to  have 
vanished.  "  Labedoyere,"  said  he,  "  has  crossed  the  fatal 
passage.  Now  it  will  be  your  turn,  my  dear  Lavalette, 
and  mine  afterwards."  "  It  is  all  one,"  I  answered,  *'  who 
fall  first.  I  know  there  is  no  hope  left."  "  Oh,  oh  !  that 
we  shall  see.  However,  all  these  lawyers  annoy  me  ;  they 
do  not  understand  my  situation  ;  but  I  shall  speak  for  myself." 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

Time  passes  very  slowly  in  prison.  I  did  not  know  what  to 
do  with  myself  :  I  was  discontented  without  reason  with  my 
situation,  and  uneasy  in  respect  to  my  poor  Emilie.  Each 
day  brought  me  worse  and  worse  accounts  of  her  health.  I 
had  obtained  her  promise  that  she  would  not  come  to  see 
me  before  her  accouchement  ;  the  visit  might  have  killed 
her.  My  time,  so  ill-employed  in  seeking  to  discover  the 
future,  in  exhausting  all  conjectures,  in  cursing  the  new 
Revolution,  threw  me  into  a  fatal  dejection.  I  felt  the 
want  of  raising  my  spirits  by  the  only  diversion  I  was  per- 
mitted to  take — reading.  I  sent  for  Hume's  History  of 
England.  When  I  perused  the  narrative  of  all  the  royal 
misfortunes  with  which  it  is  filled,  I  found  my  own  more 
bearable,  and  I  reaped  both  courage  and  comfort  from  it. 
Finally,  in  recurring  to  my  own  situation,  I  rested  on  the 
idea  that  it  was  not  possible  I  could  be  sentenced  to  capital 
punishment,  and  that  I  should  certainly  come  off  with  a  few 
years'  imprisonment.  This  prospect  was  not  cheerful  ;  but, 
as  I  entertained  the  hope  of  being  confined  in  one  of  the 
prisons  of  Paris,  I  might  see  my  family,  comfort  them,  and 
put  my  affairs  in  order.  I  also  frequently  thought  of  the 
scaffold,  but  only  as  a  vague  threat  that  could  never  be 
realised.  I  was  in  the  abode  of  crime  ;  and  I  often  figured 
to  myself  the  terrors  of  a  thief,  and  especially  of  a  murderer, 
awaking  in  the  night  at  the  fancied  cries  of  his  victims,  and 
.struggling,   in  vain,  under  the  hands  of  the  executioner. 