

When  the  time  of  my  solitary  confinement  was  over, 
some  friends  came  to  visit  me.  In  the  foremost  rank  I 
must  place  Count  Alexander  de  La  Rochefoucault,  whose 
constant  friendship  never  ceased  softening  my  sufferings, 
and   who   gave    me  an  affecting  proof  of   it   by  accepting 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALET TE.  349 

the  charge  of  siibroge  tiiteur '  to  my  wife  during  her  illness, 
and  M.  de  Vandeuil,  at  present  a  member  of  the  Chamber 
of  Deputies.^  As  he  was  obhged  to  go  down  to  the  country, 
and  remain  there  all  the  autumn,  he  put  one  day  into  my 
hand  two  hundred  gold  louis,  begging  me  to  keep  them, 
saying,  "  Your  communications  with  your  family  may  become 
difficult,  and  money  can  never  do  any  harm.  It  is  better 
for  you  to  have  some  now  in  your  possession,  than  to  be 
obliged  to  ask  for  it."  And  indeed  these  two  hundred  louis 
were  of  great  service  to  me  when  I  fled  to  Bavaria  two 
months  afterwards.  His  mother  has  been  an  angel  of 
kindness  to  my  wife  :  it  was  she  who  brought  her  the  first 
consolation  in  her  prison.  Colonel  Briqueville,  who  was 
not  yet  cured  of  two  wounds  he  received  at  the  affair  of  Ver- 
sailles, frequently  left  his  bed  to  come  and  talk  with  me  for 
several  hours  together.  I  owe  also  many  thanks  to  Messieurs 
Frank  O'Hagarty  and  de  Fidieres  for  the  marks  of  attach- 
ment they  lavished  on  me.  But  the  most  active  friend  of 
all  was  one  of  our  relations,  Tascher  de  St.  Roses,  aide- 
de-camp  to  Prince  Eugene.  This  excellent  young  man, 
though  suffering  from  an  asthmatic  complaint  which,  from 
his  childhood,  never  allowed  him  to  sleep  in  a  bed,  and  the 
attacks  of  which  put  him  regularly  twice  a  month  in  the 
most  imminent  danger,  used  to  come  and  pass  whole  days 
with  me.  The  charms  of  his  conversation,  and  the  gentle 
cheerfulness  of  his  temper,  made  me  forget  at  once  my 
dungeon  and  my  future  fate.  He  continually  maintained 
that  I  would  be  sentenced  to  banishment,  and  he  pressed 
me  to  accompany  him  to  Martinique,  where  he  was  born. 
He  painted  to  me,  with  the  enthusiasm  of  a  colonist,  its 

'  Minors  and  insane  persons  have,  in  France,  liesidcs  their  common 
guardians  (tuteurs),  a  subroge  ttUeur,  who  takes  up  the  minor's  interests 
whenever  they  come  in  collision  with  those  of  their  guardian. — Note  of 
the  Translator. 

'  The  reader  must  not  forget  that  these  Memoirs  were  l)egun  in  exile, 
and  finished  in  Paris.  This  part  appears  io  have  heen  written  by  M. 
Lavalette  after  the  election  of  1827. — No/e  of  the  French  Editor. 


350  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

beautiful  climate,  its  cool  shades,  the  various  pleasures  its 
inhabitants  enjoyed,  the  singularity  of  their  manners,  and 
the  attentions  I  should  meet  with  from  a  numerous  family 
of  which  he  was  the  favourite.  He  sung  to  me  Negro  songs, 
talked  the  sweet  jargon  of  the  Negro  women,  and  thus  took 
a  pleasure  in  preparing  for  me,  my  wife  and  her  child,  a 
happy  life  in  the  New  World. 