

I  remained  a  fortnight  in  that  temporary  prison  without 
seeing  M.  Decazes,  who  might  have  been  a  little  troubled  at 
having  me  so  near  him,  if  he  had  not  entirely  forgotten  our 
former  connection.  The  bad  air  and  the  vexations  of  a 
prison  gave  me  an  inflammatory  complaint.  My  physician, 
who  was  also  the  medical  attendant  of  M.  Decazes,  prescribed 
for  me  with  great  care,  which  contributed  to  make  them 
change  my  prison,  and  send  me  speedily  on  my  trial,  for 
fear  I  should  escape  by  a  natural  death  from  the  one  they 
were  preparing  for  me.  On  Sunday,  the  24th  of  July,  I  was 
abruptly  put  into  a  hackney-coach  to  be  conveyed  to  the 
Conciergerie,  at  a  small  distance  from  where  I  was.  There 
are  many  people  in  Paris  wholly  unacquainted  with  the 
existence  of  the  dungeons  of  the  Conciergerie,  which  are 
beneath  the  magnificent  apartments  of  the  Palais  de  Justice, 
and  which,  it  is  reported,  served  in  the  time  of  St.  Louis  as 
kitchens  and  pantries  for  the  royal  household.  I  was  intro- 
duced into  the  registering  room,  where  I  found  the  jailer,, 
whose  name  was,  I  think,  Landrajein.  He  was  a  tall  man, 
disagreeably  familiar,  though  with  tolerably  polite  manners. 
He  began  to  make  out  aloud  the  description  of  my  person,, 
and  invited  me  afterwards  to  follow  him  to  the  end  of  a  dark 
passage  where  my  new  abode  was  situated.     This  was  a  long 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  in 

and  narrow  space,  terminated  by  a  window  covered  with  a 
slanting  roof,  that  just  enabled  me  to  distinguish  a  square 
foot  of  the  sky.  Bare  walls,  covered  with  names  and 
exclamations  of  despair,  traced  with  charcoal,  were  the 
only  ornaments  of  this  dungeon.  A  wretched  bed,  an  old 
table,  one  chair,  and  two  tubs  of  foul  water,  were  all  its 
furniture.  I  describe  it  thus  minutely,  because  it  was  there 
that  Marshal  Ney  passed  the  three  first  weeks  that  he 
remained  in  prison.  I  was  weaker  than  he,  for  he  did  not 
complain  of  it ;  but  when  I  saw  that  it  would  be  impossible 
for  me  to  read  during  half  an  hour,  I  burst  into  reproaches, 
and  wrote  to  the  Prefect  of  Police  that  disease  would  soon 
kill  me  if  my  lodging  were  not  changed.  In  the  evening  the 
jailer  came  to  lead  me  to  the  promenade  in  a  large  yard 
called  the  Green  ;  and  at  nine  o'clock,  instead  of  bringing 
me  up  again  to  my  dungeon,  he  introduced  me  into  a  room 
on  the  ground  floor,  where  I  found  a  fireplace,  and  a  window 
looking  into  a  small  yard,  separated  from  the  women's  yard 
by  a  high  wall.  "I  could  not  place  you  here  this  morning," 
he  said,  "  because  General  Labedoyere  was  locked  up  in  the 
next  room  ;  but  he  has  been  transferred  to  the  Abbaye." 
The  next  day  I  wished  to  see  his  chamber.  It  was  still  more 
inconvenient  and  more  dismal  than  the  one  I  had  left.  He  had 
remained  there  eight  days  in  the  most  rigorous  solitary  con- 
finement, abandoned  in  a  manner  by  the  keepers,  who  only 
visited  him  twice  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  dungeon  was 
so  narrow  that  he  could  not  even  walk  about  in  it,  though 
that  was  the  only  diversion  left  him,  as  he  was  deprived  of 
books,  newspapers,  and  even  of  all  manner  of  correspondence. 
They  began,  according  to  custom,  to  keep  me  during  six 
weeks  without  any  communication.  I  could  receive  no  letters 
unless  they  were  opened,  nor  see  a  friend  except  in  the 
presence  of  the  registrar.  The  accounts  I  received  from  my 
wife  were  painful.  Her  tremulous  handwriting,  the  suffer- 
ings she  sought  in  vain  to  dissemble  by  repeated  assurances 
of  good  health,  her  five  months'   pregnancy,  of  which  she 