

The  yard  of  the  female  prisoners  was,  as  I  have  said, 
facing  my  window,  and  separated  from  it  by  a  high  wall. 
That  circumstance  was  a  continued  source  of  annoyance  to 


344  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

me.  From  eight  in  the  morning  to  seven  in  the  evening,  I 
was  stunned  by  a  deluge  of  the  most  vulgar,  coarse,  and 
depraved  expressions  in  the  French  language.  The  turn- 
keys were  frequently  obliged  to  go  and  restore  good  order 
among  those  harpies.  It  was  on  this  yard  that  the  two 
windows  of  the  Queen's  prison  opened.  During  my  con- 
finement, that  chamber,  situated  on  my  passage  when  I 
went  to  the  Green,  served  as  a  speaking  parlour  for  those 
privileged  prisoners  who  were  allowed  to  receive  visits  from 
their  friends.  It  was  a  large  room,  divided  in  two  by  a  sort 
of  pillar  that  formed  two  arches.  The  floor  was  paved  with 
bricks  placed  on  the  thick  side,  and  must  have  been  very 
old,  as  the  figures  they  represented  are  long  since  out  of 
use.  The  entrance  was  at  the  bottom  of  a  dark  passage. 
The  Queen  had  only  a  miserable  bed,  a  table,  and  two 
chairs  :  a  large  piece  of  tapestry  that  hung  across  the  room 
separated  her  from  the  gendarme  and  the  jailer,  who,  how- 
ever, left  her  during  the  night.  How  many  times  have  I 
not  walked  up  and  down  in  that  prison,  when  grief  and  low- 
ness  of  spirits  used  to  oppress  me  !  There  I  found  strength 
and  courage  :  I  blushed  to  complain  of  the  fate  that  might 
be  preparing  for  me,  when  I  recollected  the  horrible  destiny 
of  a  Queen  of  France.  I  was  certainly  the  first  person  who 
openly  expressed  the  wish  that  this  dungeon  might  be  con- 
verted into  a  chapel.  A  short  time  after  my  escape,  the 
order  was  really  given  and  executed. 

The  jailer,  with  his  obsequious  manners,  began  to  weary 
me  ;  and  his  everlasting  questions,  his  long  narratives  of 
prison  adventures,  became  quite  insufferable.  He  used  to 
come  eight  or  ten  times  a  day,  and  interrupt  me  while  I  was 
reading  or  meditating.  I  was  imprudent  enough  to  speak 
in  his  presence  of  chess  ;  and  from  that  instant  I  was  obliged, 
every  evening,  to  let  myself  be  beaten  during  three  hours  by 
him.  A  circumstance  of  small  importance  happily  delivered 
me  of  that  bore.  He  had  been  at  a  former  period  verger  of 
the  Criminal  Court,  and  had  sold  his  oflfice  to  a  man  who 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  345 

could  not  pay  him.  Having  heard  that  I  was  particularly 
acquainted  with  M.  Pasquier,  then  Keeper  of  the  Seals,  he 
begged  me  to  write  a  few  words  to  Madame  Lavalette,  that 
she  might  solicit  for  him  permission  to  resume  his  office. 
She,  however,  being  rather  mistrustful,  was  convinced  that 
under  his  claim  might  be  some  dangerous  plot  against  me  ; 
and  she  sent  my  letter  to  the  Minister  of  Police,  Decazes  : 
communications  of  that  sort  with  the  prisoners  are  wholly 
prohibited  ;  so  the  jailer  was  sent  away.  This  was  very 
fortunate  for  us  at  the  time  of  my  escape.  Having  been 
born  and  bred  in  a  prison,  he  was  full  of  artifice,  sagacity, 
and  penetration.  He  would  undoubtedly  have  observed  my 
disguise,  and  all  would  have  been  lost. 