


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  347 

which  went  to  the  South  of  France  were  filled  with  letters 
from  me.  Head  clerks,  under-clerks,  couriers,  postmasters 
in  the  departments — all  had  been  in  the  secret,  and  had 
abetted  in  my  design.  To  tell  the  truth,  if  I  had  been  the 
chief  contriver  of  such  a  plan,  I  might  claim  credit  for  it  : 
its  conception  and  execution  would  have  ensured  me  ever- 
lasting fame  ;  I  should  have  been  the  most  profound  of  all 
conspirators,  and  I  might  pretend  to  a  great  part  of  the  glory 
which  people  too  frequently  bestow  on  men  who  have  made 
themselves  famous  by  great  enterprises,  even  when  their  aim 
is  contrary  to  morals  and  humanity  ;  but  nothing  must  go 
before  truth. 

In  1 8 14,  I  had  carefully  avoided  all  connection  with  the 
clerks  of  the  Post-office.  With  my  ardent  wish  for  seeing 
the  Emperor  again,  I  mixed  no  thought  of  ambition.  The 
love  cherished  for  him  by  France  ;  the  conviction  I  shared 
with  the  country,  that  he  alone  could  govern  her,  and  place 
her  on  a  solid  footing  in  the  first  rank  among  the  nations  of 
the  globe  ;  the  hope,  that  to  all  the  benefits  he  had  already 
bestowed  on  her  he  would  also  add  the  restitution  of  her 
liberties  ;  and  finally,  a  deep  feeling  of  gratitude, — were  the 
only  motives  of  my  conduct.  A  thousand  others,  in  my 
place,  would  have  done  as  much.  Millions  have  been  led 
on  by  the  same  impulses.  On  his  road,  at  his  arrival,  the 
people  pressed  forward  to  meet  him  :  the  greatest  in  the 
land  had  rushed  to  serve  him, — as  well  those  whom  the 
Bourbons  had  discarded,  as  those  whom  they  had  retained. 
One  lost  battle  had  decided  our  fate  ;  but  if  victory  had 
remained  faithful  to  us,  the  Empire,  re-established  on  its 
true  foundation,  would  have  repulsed  for  a  long  time,  and 
perhaps  for  ever,  the  family  of  the  Bourbons,  and  thus 
Liberty  would  have  undoubtedly  found  her  place  with  glory 
and  peace  ! 

I  was  very  much  afraid  that,  during  my  confinement, 
there  would  be  some  execution.  The  condemned  cell  was 
next  to  mine,   at  the  bottom  of  the  yard  where  I  used  to 


348  MEMOIRS  OF  C0UN2  LAVALETTE. 

walk.  Two  persons,  accused  of  murder,  were  tried,  but 
acquitted  :  one  of  them  was  a  young  man  who  had  served 
in  the  Life-guards.  He  had  murdered  his  mistress  in  cold 
blood,  after  having  passed  the  night  with  her  :  the  parti- 
culars of  his  crime  were  horrible.  He  first  fired  a  pistol  at 
her,  and  then  discharged  one  at  himself  ;  but  his  own  wound 
was  slight.  He  was  acquitted,  as  I  have  said,  and  they 
brought  him  back  to  the  vestibule  adjoining  my  dungeon, 
where  he  was  to  wait  until  the  accustomed  forms  had  been 
gone  through  to  set  him  at  liberty.  I  was  not  yet  made 
acquainted  with  the  verdict,  when  cries  and  sobs  struck 
my  ear.  I  thought  he  had  been  condemned,  and  I  must 
confess  that  my  courage  was  greatly  shaken.  It  was  not 
until  two  hours  afterwards  that  I  was  told  that  joy  had 
produced  on  him  a  violent  nervous  attack.  Fortunately, 
his  fear  of  passing  another  night  in  prison  gave  him 
strength  enough  to  go  away.  The  other  prisoner  was  a 
woman  who  was  accused  of  having  pushed  her  invalid 
sister  into  the  river,  where  she  had  been  drowned.  This 
unfortunate  person  edified  even  the  jailer  with  her  good 
behaviour  ;  so  that  he  employed  rigorous  means  to  prevent 
her  odious  companions  from  extending  their  abuse  into  real 
outrages.  The  day  she  was  tried,  she  dressed  herself  with 
particular  care.  When  she  left  the  court  she  fainted, — but 
her  joy  was  moderate  ;  and  on  leaving  the  prison,  she 
wished  to  distribute  among  her  wretched  companions  some 
marks  of  her  benevolence  ;  but  as  the  money  she  possessed 
did  not  make  a  considerable  sum,  she  sent  to  beg  ten  francs 
of  me,  to  add  to  the  present  she  made  them,  saying  that 
she  would  pray  to  God  that  I  might  find  as  equitable  a  jury 
as  hers  had  been. 