

one  M.  N ,  an  intimate  friend  of  Limoelan,  the  first 

inventor  of  the  plot.     He  had  served  among  the  Chouans, 
and  the  police  supposed,  reasonably  enough,  that  he  was  in 
Paris.     After  being  hunted  like  a  fox  for  several  days,  he 
slept  at  night  in  the  charcoal-boats  in  the  Pot  au  Bled. 
,  When  the  pursuit  had  ceased  in  that  part  of  the  town,  he 
ventured  to  seek  a  retreat  in  a  miserable  garret  in  a  public- 
house.     The  next  day,  the  police  came  back  ;  but  he  had 
escaped,  and  was  seen  no  more.     His  room  was  searched, 
and  near  the  bed  was  found  a  scrap  of  half-burned  paper, 
which  he  had  used  to  light  his  pipe.     This  paper  contained, 
however,  some  written  lines,  which  seemed  to  be  part  of  the 
rough  draft  of  a  letter  addressed  to  some  general,  who  was 
supposed  to  be  Georges.     On  the  last  line  were  the  following 
words  :  '  I  cannot  write  any  more  to-day,  as  I  have  a  great 
pain  in  my  eyes.'     This  unfortunate  man  was  afterwards 
implicated  and  taken  in  the  conspiracy  of  Georges,  and  I 
had  the  pleasure  of  examining  him.     He  was  sitting  where 
you  are,  his  face   between  two  wax  candles,   as   yours  is. 
While  I  was  talking  with  him  I  continued  writing.     He 
was  my  countryman.      I  spoke  to  him  of  his  parents,  of 
his  first  affections,  of  his  schoolfellows  ;  and  having  observed 
that  he   began   to   gain   assurance,   and   that   his   answers 
betrayed    a    little   more   cheerfulness,    I   stopped   all   of    a 
sudden,  and  said  in  the  most  natural  tone  I  could  :  '  But 
the  light  annoys  you  :  you  may  put  out  the  candles  if  you 
choose.'    '  No  ;  I  have  no  pain  in  my  eyes.'    '  I  thought  you 
had.'     '  No,  not  at  present ;  my  eyes  were  bad,  it  is  true, 
about  two  years  ago.'     We  continued  our  conversation.     At 
last  I  slowly  read  to  him  his  examination  :  he  was  surprised 
to  find  I  had  inserted  in  it  so  trivial  a  circumstance,  and 
asked  why  I  had  done  it.    *  It  is  my  custom.'    Now,  will  you 
believe  that  this  very  trivial  circumstance  convicted  him  ? 
The  half-burned  scrap  of  paper  had  been  preserved.      The 
writing  was  compared  with  his,  and  his  presence  in  Paris,  at 
the  time  of  the  Infernal  Machine,  was  proved." 


336  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

"  And  what  became  of  him  ?  "  said  I.  "  He  was  guillo- 
tined," answered  V ,  with   a   most   fiendish   look   and 

gesture.  He  said  to  mc  :  "I  am  fond  of  my  profession  :  I 
cannot  remain  one  day  out  of  this  apartment.  I  might  go 
to  the  play  and  divert  myself  with  my  friends,  my  wife,  my 
children.  But,  no,  I  must  be  here."  While  listening  to  him, 
I  observed  that  by  custom  he  constantly  leered  to  the  left 
side,  where  the  prisoners  were  placed  ;  and  I  am  convinced 
that  if  they  had  been  put  at  his  right,  he  would  have  lost 
half  his  skill.  When  he  read  my  examination  to  me,  and 
before  I  signed  it,  I  asked  why  he  had  not  inserted  his  anec- 
dote in  it.  "  Oh,  your  business  cannot  go  far,"  he  said  : 
"  you  are  not  an  important  man  for  me." 