


342  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

What  must  not  his  sufferings  be  !  As  for  me,  I  could  at 
least  return  without  remorse  to  the  20th  of  March.  The 
indignation  of  the  Sovereign,  the  anger  of  his  adherents, 
could  not  make  my  heart  beat  more  quickly.  I  felt  myself 
strong  against  their  vengeance,  and  I  escaped  from  it  in 
imagination,  by  following  the  Emperor,  in  a  solitary  bark, 
on  his  way  to  St.  Helena. 

I  also  took  a  fancy  to  know  who  were  my  new  compatriots 
in  this  strange  country  ;  for  the  Conciergerie  is  like  a  distant 
region,  separated  from  all  civilised  nations — a  sort  of  colony 
of  the  New  World,  governed  by  brutal  and  despotic  laws, 
and  whose  population  consists  only  of  the  dregs  of  society^ 
and  where  ferociousness  and  depravity  must  be  constantly 
watched  and  repressed.  To  penetrate  into  that  region, 
passports  are  with  difficulty  obtained,  and  many  humiliating 
forms  must  be  observed.  The  prisoner  can  see  his  relations, 
friends,  and  counsel,  only  across  double  bars,  which  keep 
them  at  several  feet  distance,  surrounded  by  turnkeys,  who 
are  the  privileged  spies  of  his  words  and  most  trivial  gestures^ 
and  who  trifle  with  the  most  painful  feelings,  by  enjoining 
them  a  rigorous  silence. 

I  took  great  pains  to  obtain  any  information.  The  turn- 
keys could  not  answer  any  questions  :  but,  from  my  own 
observations,  I  think  there  must  have  been,  at  the  time  of 
my  confinement,  about  fifty  prisoners.  They  slept  in  about 
twenty  rooms,  containing  each  five  or  six  beds,  for  which 
they  paid  ten  francs  a  month  :  this  was  called  being  a  la 
pistole.  Those  who  did  not  possess  the  means  of  paying, 
passed  the  night  in  a  sort  of  shed,  on  straw  very  seldom 
renewed.  The  greatest  part  of  these  wretches  were  doomed 
to  the  galleys,  and  most  of  them  had  committed  theft  or 
forgery.  Their  indifference  as  to  the  fate  that  awaited  them 
was  quite  inconceivable. 

Not  to  deprive  Madame  Lavalette  of  the  services  of  my 
man-servant,  I  had  accepted  for  myself  those  of  a  condemned 
prisoner  who  was  respited  for  a  few  months.     He  had  filled 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  343 

a  responsible  employment  in  one  of  the  Government  offices, 
and  had  embezzled  the  money  that  passed  through  his 
hands,  for  which  crime  he  was  to  go  for  six  years  to  the 
galleys.  He  was  a  spy  over  me.  His  honeyed  words  and 
affected  officiousness  inspired  me  with  a  great  disgust  ;  but, 
on  the  one  hand,  my  pity  for  his  fate,  that  seemed  to  frighten 
him,  and  on  the  other,  my  fear  of  getting,  instead  of  him, 
one  still  more  perverse,  determined  me  to  keep  him.  At 
last,  however,  a  perfidious  trick  he  played  to  some  others 
became  the  cause  of  our  separation.  He  slept  with  six  other 
prisoners,  in  a  room  situated  in  the  western  part  of  the 
edifice.  These  wretches  took  it  into  their  heads  to  get  out 
of  prison,  by  digging  a  hole  in  the  wall  twelve  feet  thick, 
and  so  to  escape  on  the  Quai  des  Lunettes.  My  honest 
servant  procured  them  one  of  those  large  iron  bars  called  by 
the  prisoners,  I  believe,  chanceliere  ;  but  he  had  begun  by 
betraying  them,  and  the  jailer  let  them  go  on  for  some  time 
in  their  work.  Every  night  they  filled  their  pockets  with 
the  rubbish,  and  in  the  morning  they  cleverly  dispersed  it 
in  the  yard.  To  arrive  at  the  outward  wall,  they  were 
obliged  to  take  out  and  replace,  every  night,  an  enormous 
stone  of  six  feet  in  length.  They  had  been  already  for 
several  months  at  work,  and  they  only  wanted  one  night 
more  to  regain  their  liberty,  when  the  jailer  came  to  pay 
them  his  visit,  and  all  was  easily  discovered.  The  traitor 
was,  in  appearance,  condemned  to  the  same  punishment 
that  was  inflicted  on  them  all.  But  his  companions  were 
not  to  be  duped  by  this  ;  and  the  jailer  told  me  that  he  ran 
the  risk  of  being  murdered  in  the  galleys.  It  would  be  even 
difficult  to  let  him  travel  thither  with  them.  The  galley- 
slaves  never  pardon,  among  one  another,  a  treachery  of  that 
sort.  Ten  years  would  not  be  sufficient  to  make  them 
forget  it. 