

They  put  in  his  place  a  man  from  Bordelais,  a  protege 
of  M.  Decazes.  This  man  was  of  a  harsh  humour  ;  his 
manners  were  severe,  and  even  rude  ;  and  he  was  very 
enthusiastic  in  his  political  opinions.  He  wanted  at  first  to 
imitate  his  predecessor  ;  to  come  into  my  room  at  all  times, 
and  enter  into  conversation  with  me  :  but  I  took  such  a 
high  tone  with  him,  that  I  silenced  him  the  very  first  day. 
Consequently,  I  only  used  to  see  him  in  the  morning  and  in 
the  evening,  when  he  came  to  examine  whether  all  was 
right. 

I  had  chosen  M.  Tripier  for  my  counsel,  whom  I  did  not 
know,  and  he  had  taken  for  his  assistant  M.  Lacroix  Frain- 
ville.  My  friends  had  a  great  desire  that  I  might  be  for- 
gotten, and  frequently  expressed  a  wish  that  I  might  fall 
sick.  Count  Alexander  de  La  Rochefoucault,  who  came 
very  often  to  see  me,  continually  reproached  me  with  my 
looking  too  well.  "  If  you  were  ill,"  he  said,  "  and  obliged 
to  keep  your  bed,  they  would  be  forced  to  put  off  your  trial  : 
time  would  by  degrees  calm  passions,  and  your  friends  would 
do  the  rest  for  you."  I  was  certainly  of  his  opinion  ;  but 
where  was  I  to  find  an  illness  ?  I  could  not  come  to  the 
resolution  of  breaking  one  of  my  legs  or  arms  ;  and  one 
•cannot  have  just  at  the  time  one  wishes  it  an  inflammation 


346  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALET7E. 

on  the  lungs  or  in  the  stomach.  I  was  therefore  under  the 
necessity  of  keeping  my  health,  and  with  it  all  the  dangers 
of  my  situation.  It  was  at  last  decided  that  I  should  be 
examined  by  one  of  the  judges  of  the  Royal  Court,  and  M. 
Dupuis  was  chosen  for  my  reporter.  I  had  several  years  before 
frequently  dined  with  him  at  the  house  of  a  mutual  friend. 
When  I  came  before  him,  we  knew  each  other  again.  The 
presence  of  the  registrar  kept  me  silent.  The  magistrate 
appeared  to  me  to  be  moved  by  generous  compassion  ;  but 
as  the  examination  went  on,  he  was  soon  convinced  that  he 
need  not  observe  any  particular  delicacy  in  regard  to  me. 
I  took  the  advance  on  the  required  explanation.  I  urged 
them  on  in  all  possible  ways,  and  the  first  examination  lasted 
five  hours,  though  he  wanted  several  times  to  stop  it,  think- 
ing I  might  be  fatigued.  But  I  felt  myself  so  completely 
innocent,  I  laid  so  much  importance  on  destroying  all  pre- 
possessions, all  superstructure  of  false  imputations  whicli 
filled  the  indictment,  that  I  should  have  continued  for  two 
hours  longer  if  he  had  wished  it.  The  next  day  we  had 
another  sitting,  which  lasted  again  four  hours.  I  have 
heard  from  my  friend,  that  M.  Dupuis  did  not  conceal  his 
surprise  at  the  importance  that  was  attached  to  my  business  ; 
and  that,  at  the  news  of  my  being  condemned,  he  expressed 
his  indignation  with  a  generous  frankness.  Two  months 
elapsed,  I  believe,  between  this  examination  and  my  trial  ;. 
but  time  did  not  alleviate  the  hatred  to  which  I  was  exposed. 
My  friends  were  discouraged  at  the  violence  of  the  Paris 
drawing-room  against  me.  The  royalists  were  enraged  at 
the  recollection  of  their  unworthy  conduct  in  the  month  of 
March,  and  sought  to  cover  their  shame  by  the  imaginary 
plot  which  they  said  had  brought  back  the  Emperor  ;  and 
they  appeared  to  have  no  doubt  but  that  I  had  been  at  the 
head  of  the  undertaking.  According  to  them,  a  very  active 
correspondence  had  taken  place  with  the  Island  of  Elba 
during  the  eleven  months  of  the  first  reign,  and  all  the  old 
clerks  of  the  Post-office  had  taken  a  part  in  it.     The  mails 