


35«  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

The  more  the  hours  adv^anced,  the  more  his  courage 
slackened  ;  and  when  at  ten  o'clock  he  was  obliged  to 
leave  me,  he  burst  into  tears  and  could  scarcely  resolve  to 
go.  I  remained  alone  during  two  whole  hours  ;  for  it  was 
not  till  after  midnight  that  I  was  called  up  to  hear  my 
sentence  pronounced.  The  verdict  had  been  read  during 
my  absence  ;  so  that  the  gendarmes  who  received  me  at  the 
top  of  the  staircase  and  accompanied  me  to  the  President's 
closet  observed  the  most  dismal  silence.  I  sat  down,  and 
looking  at  them  attentively,  I  read  my  fate  in  their  faces. 
"  Well,"  said  I  to  the  brigadier,  "  I  am  condemned  ?  How 
could  an  aide-de-camp  of  Bonaparte  expect  to  be  ac- 
quitted ?  "  Without  giving  me  any  answer,  he  led  me 
before  the  judges.  A  deep  silence,  an  absence  of  all  motion,, 
prevailed  in  the  extensive  and  dimly-lighted  hall.  The 
benches  were  still  filled  with  ladies.  My  eyes,  wandering 
around  me,  sought  in  vain  a  look  of  compassion  and  kind- 
ness. One  of  the  jurymen  had  his  face  covered  with  his- 
handkerchief :  it  was  M.  Jurien.  At  last  the  President 
ordered  the  Registrar  to  read  the  verdict  of  the  jury.  It 
was  as  I  expected  ;  but  fearing,  above  all  things,  to  see  the 
cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour  torn  from  my  breast,  I  had 
taken  care  to  lay  it  by,  as  well  as  the  great  ribbon  and  other 
insignia  of  the  Orders  of  the  Iron  Crown  and  Holland. 
The  judges  retired  pro  forma  for  a  few  minutes,  and  on 
their  return  the  President  repeated  aloud  the  article  of  the 
Criminal  Code  by  which  I  was  sentenced  to  die.  Fortunately^ 
the  ceremony  of  tearing  off  the  cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour 
was  omitted.  This  outrage  could  alone  have  destroyed  the 
tranquillity  of  my  mind.  The  minute  circumstances  re- 
corded by  the  public  papers  are  correct  :  I  shall  therefore 
not  repeat  them  here.  At  half-past  twelve  I  went  down 
again  to  my  dungeon.  In  the  passage  that  leads  to  it  I  met 
the  jailer,  who  questioned  me  with  great  indifference.  I 
answered  :  "  All  is  over  !  "  The  man  started  back  as  if  he 
had  received  a  violent  blow,  and  disappeared.     I  had  re- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  359 

strained  my  feelings  in  presence  of  the  public,  but  night 
and  solitude  recalled  to  my  memory  the  fatal  words,  "  Pain 
of  Death  I ''  The  agitation  of  mind  began  to  show  itself  by 
an  effusion  of  violent  indignation.  I  walked  backwards  and 
forwards  with  long  strides  ;  I  appealed  to  all  France  against 
the  iniquity  of  my  sentence.  However,  I  grew  calm  by 
degrees,  and  soon,  in  a  deep  sleep,  I  forgot  my  misfortune. 