

At  the  convocation  of  the  States-General,  Alexander  was 
elected  deputy  of  the  nobility  of  Blaisois.  The  eldest 
brother,  Francis,  was  named  supernumerary  member  of  the 
nobility  of  Paris,  and  only  took  his  place  in  the  Chamber 
after  the  6th  October,  1789,  in  lieu  of  M.  de  Lally  Tollendal, 
who  left  France  at  that  period.  Alexander  embraced  the 
cause  of  Liberty,  and  was  rewarded  by  the  scaffold.  Francis 
always  voted  with  the  right  side,  and  in  1792  he  rejoined 
the  Princes  at  Coblentz.  Madame  de  Beauharnais  soon 
shared  the  fate  of  all  the  nobles  who  remained  in  France. 


s^' 


VWler  L  CalU.Ph  J 


COUNTESS       UAVALETTE 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  363 

She  was  put  in  prison,  where  she  stayed  more  than  two 
years.  Young  Emihe  was  entrusted  to  the  care  of  a 
governess,  or  rather  abandoned  to  the  vulgar  caprice  of 
some  domestics  who  shared  the  movements  and  passions  of 
the  mob.  Born  of  emigrant  parents,  the  poor  child  was 
obliged  to  assist  at  the  patriotic  processions  which  took 
place  every  month  on  the  Republican  holidays.  She  often 
said  :  "  I  was  very  ill-used  on  those  occasions  by  my  com- 
panions, the  young  girls  of  the  neighbourhood.  They 
could  not  forgive  me  my  tall  stature  and  genteel  features, 
which  contrasted  with  those  of  the  greatest  part  among 
them.  The  daughter  of  an  emigrant  marquis  and  an  im- 
prisoned mother  could  scarcely  share  the  honour  of  their 
company.  As  for  me,  the  exclusion  had  nothing  disgraceful 
in  my  eyes  ;  but  my  governess,  though  she  had  none  of 
the  prejudices  of  my  companions,  took  great  care  to  con- 
duct me  to  their  assemblies  for  her  own  interest.  The  least 
reluctance  she  would  have  shown  for  it  might  have  exposed 
her  to  be  arrested." 

At  that  terrible  period  of  madness  and  fanaticism,  private 
life  was  subject  to  jealous  and  perpetual  supervision.  The 
porter  of  a  nobleman's  house  was  obliged,  for  his  individual 
safety,  to  become  a  spy  and  an  informer.  The  servants 
were  again  the  masters,  or  rather  the  tyrants,  of  those  who 
employed  them.  They  were  displeased  that  the  daughter 
of  an  emigrant  was  not  bound  in  apprenticeship,  and  that 
she  maintained  in  her  manners  and  occupations  something 
genteel  and  delicate.  The  two  cousins  of  Emilie  were  both 
apprentices — Hortense  to  her  mother's  mantua-maker  ; 
Eugene  to  a  joiner  in  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain.  The 
9th  Thermidor  having  overthrown  tyranny,  Madame  de 
Beauharnais  got  out  of  prison,  and  Emilie  was  sent  with 
her  cousin  to  a  boarding-school  which  Madame  Campan 
had  established  at  St.  Germain-en-Laye.  There  she  con- 
tinued her  education,  which  had  been  interrupted  during 
two  years. 