

The  old  man  appeared,  in  fact,  so  overcome,  that  I  made 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  353 

no  comment  on  these  observations.  At  that  instant  M. 
Tripier  entered  the  room  ;  and  his  colleague,  after  having 
put  the  newspaper  into  his  hands,  repeated  his  resolution, 
and  was  going  to  name  some  other  la^vyer  to  take  his  place, 
when  M.  Tripier  said  coolly,  "  I  want  nobody  ;  I  shall 
defend  my  client  alone.  It  is  my  duty,  and  no  considera- 
tion shall  make  me  turn  away  from  it : "  and  then  our 
conference  began. 

While  I  was  thus  debating  for  my  life,  my  new-born  child 
was  dying  in  the  arms  of  its  poor  mother.  This  misfortune 
would,  I  feared,  have  most  fatal  consequences  for  her.  I 
reckoned  upon  that  child  to  comfort  her  grief  after  I  should 
be  dead.  The  motherly  care  it  would  require,  and  which 
she  would  lavish  on  it  with  so  much  affection  and  tender- 
ness, would,  I  expected,  give  still  a  zest  to  her  life  ;  and  it 
was  abruptly  taken  away  from  her  in  the  space  of  a  few 
hours.  This  circumstance  threw  me  into  despair.  The 
following  day,  when  Lacroix  Frainville  came  in,  the  situa- 
tion in  which  he  found  me  made  him  suspect  that  the  fear 
of  a  sentence  of  death  was  the  cause  of  my  trouble  ;  and 
he  was  going  to  offer  me  some  commonplace  comfortings, 
when  I  acquainted  him  of  the  fresh  blow  that  had  shook 
me.  "  My  God  !  "  he  cried,  pressing  me  in  his  arms  ;  ''  this 
is  too  much  at  one  time.  Pray  forget  the  momentary 
weakness  that  I  showed  yesterday.  I  will  not  leave  you  ; — 
yes,  I  will  defend  you."  And  he  nobly  kept  his  word  by 
coming  into  court,  and  assisting  his  fellow  counsel  during 
all  the  debates. 

My  greatest  anxiety,  however, was  the  situation  of  Madame 
Lavalette.  That  son,  the  object  of  the  wishes  of  all  her 
life,  had  been  snatched  away  from  her.  I  had  required 
of  her  not  to  come  to  the  Conciergerie  during  her  preg- 
nancy. The  dismal  sight  of  a  prison,  and  of  the  dungeon 
in  which  I  was  confined,  might  have  had  a  fatal  effect  upon 
her.  Through  the  same  motive  I  had  forbid  them  to  bring 
my   son  to   me.      All  that  had    been   reported    to   me   of 

24 


354  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

the  passionate  love  of  the  mother  for  her  child  made  me 
tremble  for  her  health.  St.  Roses  only  spoke  to  me  of 
her  tears  and  her  grief,  but  tried  to  make  me  easy  as  to 
consequences.  Now,  what  would  be  the  result  of  the  trial  ? 
Five  years'  confinement  was  a  severe  punishment  ;  but  still 
I  might  see  her,  comfort  her,  keep  in  my  hands  the  manage- 
ment of  our  mutilated  fortune — in  one  word,  offer  her  the 
prospect  of  more  happy  times  to  come.  But  if  death 
awaited  me,  what  would  become  of  her  in  her  misfortune  ? 
Through  some  fatality,  too  common  in  our  revolution,  her 
family,  not  very  numerous  of  itself,  was  dispersed,  or  had 
disappeared.  Her  father  was  indeed  returned  from  abroad  ; 
but  he  had  brought  with  him  a  second  wife,  who  had  borne 
him  children.  Although  he  was  an  excellent  man,  new 
ties,  new  affections,  and  the  distance  at  which  he  lived  from 
Paris,  did  not  promise  that  he  would  be  a  very  effectual 
consolation  for  his  daughter.  My  only  hope  rested  on 
Count  Alexander  de  La  Rochefoucault,  who  was  related  to 
her  by  marriage,  and  who  had  given  us  for  the  last  month 
courageous  proof  of  his  affection. 