

My  intention  is  not  to  retrace  here  all  the  particulars  of 
my  trial.  I  cannot  however  pass  over  in  silence  some  facts, 
which  are  not  explained  by  the  perusal  of  the  proceedings. 


356  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

On  the  20th  of  March,  the  two  nephews  of  M.  Ferrand  were 
at  the  Post-office.  One  of  the  two  accompanied  Madame 
Ferrand  when  she  came  to  ask  me  for  a  permit  for  post- 
horses.  It  was  the  first  time  in  my  life  that  I  had  seen  this 
young  man  ;  and  it  was  not  he  that  came  up  as  a  witness 
against  me.  The  one  who  appeared  had  neither  his  stature, 
his  features,  his  eye,  nor  the  tone  of  his  voice.  I  did  not 
know  there  were  two  brothers,  and  in  my  first  astonishment 
on  finding  myself  in  the  presence  of  an  utter  stranger,  I 
made  the  observation  aloud.  The  witness,  however,  posi- 
tively affirmed  that  it  was  he  who  had  accompanied  his 
aunt.  The  President  asked  me  what  use  I  wished  to  make 
of  so  serious  a  charge,  which  might  have  involved  the 
witness  in  a  trial  for  perjury.  My  counsel,  whom  I  con- 
sulted, was  at  a  loss  what  answer  he  should  give  me  ;  and 
in  all  probability  I  should  not  have  succeeded  in  eliciting 
the  truth.  I  nevertheless  remain  convinced  that  I  was  in 
the  right.  What  could  have  been  the  motive  of  that 
change  of  individuals  ?  The  eldest,  who  really  accompanied 
his  aunt,  was  a  Master  of  Requests  :  could  it  have  been 
repugnant  to  his  feelings  to  present  himself  as  a  witness 
against  me  ?  I  have  not  seen  either  of  these  two  gentlemen, 
since  that  time  ;  and  when  I  returned  to  France,  after  five 
years'  banishment,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  throw 
any  light  on  so  strange  a  circumstance. 

The  Advocate-General  Hua  was  a  man  of  very  violent 
opinions ;  and  I  am  not  the  only  victim  of  the  unjust 
severity  which  he  showed  at  that  time,  with  several  other 
officers  on  the  Crown  side  of  the  court.  He  had  shown 
himself  my  private  enemy.  The  violence  of  his  attacks,  his 
obstinate  hatred  of  me,  made  him  reject  in  a  brutal  manner 
all  that  seemed  to  militate  in  my  favour.  The  result  of  the 
trial  was  advantageous  to  his  personal  interests  :  he  is  at 
present  a  counsellor  at  the  Court  of  Cassation. 

The  first  day  was  spent  in  examinations  ;  the  second  was 
devoted  to  the  pleadings  of  my  advocate,  and  of  the  King's- 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  357 

attorney.  I  stood  in  the  presence  of  numerous  spectators, 
none  of  whom  were  my  friends.  However,  the  great 
animosity  which  prevailed  during  the  first  day,  and  which 
expressed  itself  more  than  once  by  groans,  was  afterwards 
softened.  The  second  day  appeared  to  me  much  more 
favourable.  At  last,  towards  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the 
jury  were  going  to  retire,  when  the  manner  of  putting  the 
questions  was  discussed  between  the  King's  advocate  and 
mine.  The  latter  wanted  them  to  be  put  in  the  following 
manner  :  ist.  Is  the  prisoner  guilty  of  conspiracy  ?  2nd,  Is 
lie  guilty  of  an  usurpation  of  public  authority  ?  It  was  clear 
that  I  had  had  no  share  in  the  conspiracy,  for  that  charge 
had  been  abandoned  from  the  beginning  of  the  proceedings  ; 
and  the  jury  would  undoubtedly  have  acquitted  me  on  the 
first  question.  On  the  second  I  should  certainly  have  been 
declared  guilty.  But  by  that  means  death  was  avoided. 
By  separating  the  plot  from  the  usurpation  of  authority,  the 
jury  would  have  saved  me,  as  my  crime  was  no  longer  a 
felony,  but  a  misdemeanour.  That  was,  however,  not  the 
object  of  Government ;  death  was  the  result  they  demanded 
from  the  jury,  and  the  following  were  the  infamous  means 
made  use  of  to  gain  over  the  majority.  It  was  secretly 
observed  to  the  jury  :  "  That  after  a  great  act  of  justice  (the 
condemnation  of  Marshal  Ney),  it  is  very  important  for  the 
King  to  do  a  great  act  of  clemency.  Good  policy  and  the 
interest  of  the  monarch  will  have  it  so.  Give,  therefore,  a 
verdict  against  the  prisoner.  His  life  shall  be  spared,  while 
Justice  will  be  satisfied,  society  avenged,  and  the  King's 
bounty  will  shine  in  all  its  splendour."  Thus  the  two 
questions  were  joined  in  one,  and  delivered  over  to  the 
conscience  and  timidity  of  the  jury.  I  was  brought  back  to 
prison,  where  St.  Roses,  who  had  been  in  the  court,  came 
to  keep  me  company.  My  hopes  had  all  vanished,  but  I 
tried  to  prolong  those  of  this  excellent  young  man.  After  a 
very  sad  dinner,  I  prepared  to  play  a  game  at  chess,  and  I 
•won  it,  contrary  to  custom,  for  he  was  the  better  player. 