


CHAPTER  XXXVTI. 

The  next  iday  Madame  Lavalette  came  to  see  me  for  the 
first  time  during  four  months.  Her  pale,  emaciated,  and 
dejected  countenance  made  me  shudder.  Her  voice  was 
scarcely  audible,  and  during  half  an  hour  I  could  not  draw 
a  single  word  out  of  her.  She  recovered,  however,  by 
degrees,  and  acquainted  me  with  the  particulars  of  the 
reception  she  had  met  with  from  the  King.  She  came 
alone,  but  Count  Carvoisin  came  to  fetch  her  and  conduct 
her  home.  Gratitude  does  not  permit  me  to  forget  that 
worthy  friend.  I  had  known  M.  de  Carvoisin  eight  years 
before  at  Surene,  where  we  were  country  neighbours.  He 
had  at  that  time  with  him  a  young  niece,  who  afterwards 
married  the  Count  de  Clermont  Tonnerre.  Though  he  had 
not  yet  attained  old  age,  he  had  already  some  of  its  in- 
firmities. Subject  to  an  asthmatic  complaint  from  the  time 
of  his  infancy,  he  had  left  the  army  before  the  Revolution 
broke  out,  and  lived  at  present  the  life  of  a  Christian 
philosopher,  far  from  the  world  he  did  not  love.  He  was 
solely  occupied  with  the  education  of  his  young  ward,  and 
with  a  charitable  society  of  which  he  had  urged  the  estab- 
lishment, and  which  prospered  through  his  benevolence. 
We  were  far  from  sharing  the  same  opinions  on  several 
political  questions  ;  but  by  yielding  a  little  on  both  sides, 
the  greatest  harmony  had  never  ceased  to  reign  between  us. 
I  had  lost  sight  of  him  since  the  Restoration  ;  but  he 
returned  to  me  in  my  misfortune,  and  during  the  last  and 
most  terrible  month  of  my  confinement  he  used  to  come 

361 


362  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

every  day  to  see  me,  after  having  assisted  at  a  mass  he 
ordered  to  be  said  every  morning  for  my  liberation.  He 
was,  however,  admirably  moderate  in  his  opinions.  My 
situation  seemed  to  require  from  him  that  he  should  offer 
me  the  comforts  of  religion.  His  conversation  had  a  most 
seducing  charm  :  he  gave  to  his  words  a  devoutness,  and  an 
openness  of  heart,  that  touched  me  ;  but  I  was  too  sincere 
not  to  acknowledge  that  there  was  no  hope  of  our  agreeing. 
I  explained  to  him,  in  the  most  simple  manner,  all  that  it 
was  impossible  for  me  to  admit,  and  he  ceased  his  entreaties 
without  showing  the  least  impatience  or  the  slightest  cold- 
ness. 

Now  that  Madame  de  Lavalette  is  about  to  fill  a 
prominent  part  in  these  Memoirs,  I  think  fit  to  enter  into 
some  particulars  concerning  her  and  our  marriage. 

Louise  Emilie  de  Beauharnais  was  born  in  1780,  Her 
father,  Francis,  Marquis  de  Beauharnais,  had  married  his 
first  cousin,  the  daughter  of  the  Countess  Fanny  de  Beau- 
harnais, who  has  acquired  some  celebrity  in  literature, 
and  sister  to  the  Count  de  Beauharnais  who  died  a  Peer 
of  France,  and  whose  daughter  is  now  Grand-Duchess  of 
Baden.  M.  de  Beauharnais  was  the  head  of  his  family. 
His  brother  Alexander,  who  had  married  Mademoiselle 
Josephine  Tascher  de  la  Fagerie,  had  two  children,  Eugene 
and  Hortense.  My  father-in-law  had  only  one  surviving 
daughter. 