

The  next  day  I  received  authentic  particulars  of  what  had 
passed  the  day  before  at  the  discussion  of  the  jury.  The 
foreman  had  enforced  the  charges  with  inconceivable  obsti- 
nacy, and  M.  Jurien  had  confuted  them  with  wonderful 
strength  of  argument.  The  discussion  lasted  six  hours  with 
a  great  deal  of  animosity,  and  such  loud  speeches  that  they 
were  heard  very  far  from  the  room  where  the  jurymen  sat. 
At  last  the  foreman  got  the  better,  notwithstanding  all  the 
efforts  of  M.  Jurien  :  eight  votes  against  four  pronounced 
me  guilty. 

I  wished  to  die  without  appealing  to  the  Court  of  Cassa- 
tion. I  concluded  that  the  forms  had  been  undoubtedly  too 
well  observed  for  me  to  hope  that  the  verdict  could  be  set 
aside.  Besides,  why  should  I  languish  in  agony  during  a 
fortnight,  or  perhaps  a  month  ?  Why  let  myself  be  dragged 
to  the  scaffold  among  the  rabble  in  the  streets,  and  perhaps 
amidst  the  hootings  of  the  royalists  ?  But  then,  when  I 
thought  of  my  wife  and  child,  reason  and  coolness  recovered 
their  sway,  and  this  was  the  only  fit  of  despair  which  I 
experienced. 

The  first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  communicate  the  dread- 
ful news  to  Madame  Lavalette.  I  wrote  to  an  old  friend, 
Madame  de  Vandeuil,  and  to  the  Princess  de  Vaudemont. 
They  both  went  to  her,  and  the  mourning  they  had  put 
on  acquainted  her  immediately  with  her  misfortune.  But 
the  Princess  de  Vaudemont,  whose  firm  character  was 
capable  of  foreseeing  everything,  made  my  wife  write  a 
letter  to  the  Duke  de  Duras,  First  Gentleman  of  the  Bed- 
chamber, to  obtain  an  audience  of  the  King.     It  was  very 


36o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

doubtful  whether  it  would  be  granted.  The  ladies  of  Labe- 
doyere  and  Ney  had  been  refused.  Nevertheless,  contrary 
to  all  expectation,  an  hour  afterwards  she  received  per- 
mission to  go  to  the  palace.  "  The  King  expects  Madame 
de  Lavalette  in  his  closet."  Such  was  the  answer  sent  to 
her.  She  stepped  in  consequence  into  the  Princess's  coach 
with  my  daughter,  and  alighted  at  the  Tuileries  at  the 
apartments  of  the  First  Gentleman  of  the  Bedchamber. 
The  Duke  de  Duras  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  led  her, 
amidst  all  the  courtiers,  to  the  King's  closet.  There  she  fell 
at  the  feet  of  Louis  XVIIL,  who  said  to  her  :  "  Madame,  I 
have  received  you  immediately,  to  give  you  a  proof  of  the 
interest  I  feel  for  you."  These  were  the  only  words  he 
uttered.  She  was  raised,  and  went  out  of  the  chamber. 
But  the  words  of  the  King  had  been  heard  ;  they  circulated 
as  Madame  de  Lavalette  passed  ;  and  her  grief,  her  beauty, 
her  noble  and  graceful  demeanour,  notwithstanding  the 
evident  dejection  under  which  she  laboured,  aflFected  all  who 
saw  her.  They  recollected  that  she  was  the  daughter  of 
an  emigrant,  and  nobody  doubted  but  my  pardon  would 
be  granted,  the  King  having  once  admitted  her  into  his 
presence.     They  were  nevertheless  mistaken. 