

In  the  evening,  I  went  to  see  Madame  Bonaparte,  She 
knew  what  was  going  forward,  and  was  kind  enough  to 
show  some  satisfaction,  and  call  me  her  nephew.  "  To- 
morrow," she  said,  "  we  shall  all  go  to  St.  Germain.  I  will 
introduce  you  to  my  niece.  You  will  be  delighted  with 
her  :  she  is  a  charming  girl !  " 

Accordingly,  next  day,  the  General,  Madame  Bonaparte, 
Eugene,  and  I,  went  in  an  open  carriage  to  St.  Germain, 
and  stopped  at  Madame  Campan's.  The  visit  was  a  great 
event  at  the  boarding-school :  all  the  young  girls  were  at 
the  windows,  in  the  parlours,  or  in  the  courtyard,  for  they 
had  obtained  a  holiday.  We  soon  entered  the  gardens. 
Among  the  forty  young  ladies,  I  sought  anxiously  her  who 
was  to  be  my  wife.  Her  cousin,  Hortense,  led  her  to  us, 
that  she  might  salute  the  General,  and  embrace  her  aunt. 
She  was,  in  truth,  the  prettiest  of  them  all.  Her  stature 
was  tall,  and  most  gracefully  elegant  ;  her  features  were 
charming  ;  and  the  glow  of  her  beautiful  complexion  was 
heightened  by  her  confusion.  Her  bashfulness  was  so 
great  that  the  General  could  not  help  laughing  at  her  ; 
but  he  went  no  farther.  It  was  decided  that  we  should 
breakfast  on  the  grass  in  the  garden.     In  the  meanwhile  I 


366  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

felt  extremely  uneasy.  Would  she  like  me  ?  Would  she 
obey  without  reluctance  ?  This  abrupt  marriage,  and  this 
speedy  departure,  grieved  me.  When  we  got  up,  and  the 
circle  was  broken,  I  begged  Eugene  to  conduct  his  cousin 
into  a  solitary  walk.  I  joined  them,  and  he  left  us.  I  then 
entered  on  the  delicate  subject.  I  made  no  secret  of  my 
birth,  nor  of  my  want  of  fortune  ;  and  added  :  "  I  possess 
nothing  in  the  world  but  my  sword  and  the  good-will  of  the 
General ;  and  I  must  leave  you  in  a  fortnight.  Open  your 
heart  to  me.  I  feel  myself  disposed  to  love  you  with  all  my 
soul  ;  but  that  is  not  sufficient.  If  this  marriage  does  not 
please  you,  repose  a  full  confidence  in  me  ;  it  will  not  be 
difficult  to  find  a  pretext  to  break  it  off.  I  shall  depart ; 
you  will  not  be  tormented,  for  I  will  keep  your  secret." 

While  I  was  speaking,  she  kept  her  eyes  fixed  on  the 
ground  ;  her  only  answer  was  a  smile,  and  she  gave  me 
the  nosegay  she  held  in  her  hand.  I  embraced  her.  We 
returned  slowly  to  the  company  ;  and  eight  days  afterwards 
we  [went  to  the  municipality.  The  following  day,  a  poor 
priest  who  had  not  taken  the  oaths  married  us  in  the  small 
convent  of  the  Conception,'  in  the  Rue  St.  Honore.  This 
was  in  some  manner  forbidden,  but  Emilie  set  a  great 
importance  on  that  point :  her  piety  was  gentle  and  sincere. 