

While  my  mind  was  thus  agitated,  I  was  informed  that 
the  trial  would  open  on  the  19th  of  November.  The  list 
of  the  jury  was  laid  before  me  on  the  i8th.  Not  one  among 
the  thirty-six  names  was-  known  to  me.  I  had  to  choose 
among  them  twelve  men,  whose  conscience  might  be  firm, 
and  whose  minds  enlightened  enough  to  resist  the  corrup- 
tion of  party  spirit  and  the  threats  of  Government.  The 
list  was  composed  of  tradesmen,  lawyers,  and  two  members  of 
the  Council  of  State, — all  men,  the  independence  of  whose 
position,  except  that  of  the  former,  was  not  extremely 
certain.  I  had  several  copies  made  of  that  list,  and  my 
friends  hastened  to  make  inquiries  concerning  them,  and 
to  visit  them.  But  it  was  Sunday,  and  consequently  difficult 
to  meet  them.  The  notes  I  received  the  next  day  were  so 
contradictory  that  I  knew  not  whom  to  reject  or  admit.  I 
was,  however,  obliged  to  go  up  to  court.     Before  I  entered 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  355 

the  room  where  the  jury  was  assembled,  they  made  me  wait 
in  the  President's  closet,  where  I  found  a  verger  of  the 
Criminal  Court.  He  was  a  young  man,  whose  eyes,  fixed 
upon  me  with  an  appearance  of  great  interest,  seemed  to 
question  me  respecting  the  list  I  held  in  my  hand.  "  Read 
the  list  to  me,"  he  said,  with  emotion  ;  "  your  fate  lies  in 
that  paper.  I  can  direct  you  better  than  any  one."  I  did 
as  he  bade  me,  and  at  each  name  I  mentioned  he  cried — 
"  That  one  is  doubtful  ;  this  other  shocking  ;  quickly  erase 
the  name."  He  had  scarcely  heard  twelve  of  them  when 
I  was  called  to  assist  at  the  drawing  of  the  jury.  It  was 
an  imposing  scene.  Thirty-six  persons  assembled,  standing 
in  presence  of  the  magistrates  and  the  prisoner  :  twelve 
were  to  decide  his  fate.  My  looks  wandered  over  the 
assembly.  I  sought  for  good-will,  or  at  least  for  impar- 
tiality, and  methought  I  perceived  a  sort  of  sympathy 
for  me.  The  gravity  of  their  countenance,  their  downcast 
looks,  the  air  of  melancholy  spread  over  their  features, 
infused  a  degree  of  tranquillity  into  my  mind,  that  aug- 
mented with  each  minute.  I  challenged  the  first  names 
that  came  out  of  the  urn,  because  they  had  been  so  by 
my  kind  verger  ;  but  I  accepted  the  thirteenth,  M.  Horon 
de  Villefosse.  The  information  my  friend  had  given  me 
was  favourable  to  him.  He  was  an  engineer,  who  had  been 
employed  by  the  Emperor  in  the  mines  of  the  Hartz,  in 
Hanover.  I  had  been  assured  he  was  a  learned  and  sensible 
man  :  he  had  been  Master  of  Requests  during  my  time.  I 
congratulated  myself,  therefore,  for  having  him  for  foreman 
of  my  jury.  To  his  name  followed  that  of  M.  Jurien,  now 
Councillor  of  State,  and,  I  believe,  formerly  an  emigrant.  I 
accepted  him  with  a  secret  reluctance,  and  with  a  sort  of 
foreboding  that  he  would  prove  inimical.  The  sequel  will 
show  in  how  far  I  was  mistaken. 