

A  few  days  after  our  marriage  I  was  obliged  Ho  begin 
secretly  to  prepare  for  my  journey  to  Toulon,  where  the 
General  had  already  arrived.  It  was  agreed  that  Emilie 
should  divide  the  time  of  my  absence  between  her  aunt  and 
her  grandfather,  who  was  then  eighty-six  years  old,  but  who 
preserved  at  that  advanced  age  a  sound  understanding,  an 
amiable  and  'even  temper,  and  who  doted  on  his  grand- 
daughter. I  left  her  without  taking  leave  of  her  :  for  our 
separation  would  have  been  too  painful.  I  did  not  return 
until  eighteen  months  afterwards.  My  forebodings  were 
not  fulfilled.  Of  the  eight  aides-de-camp  of  the  General, 
four  perished.  Julien  and  Sulkowski  were  murdered 
'  This  convent  no  longer  exists. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  367 

by  the  Arabs,  Crosier  was  killed  at  the  siege  of  St.  John 
of  Acre,  and  Guibert  at  the  battle  of  Aboukir.  Duroc 
and  Eugene  Beauharnais  were  severely  wounded.  Merlin 
and  I  escaped.  Glory  and  fortune  were  dearly  bought  with 
General  Bonaparte. 

On  my  return  to  France,  and  a  short  time  after  the  i8th 
Brumaire,  I  received  an  order  to  go  to  Saxony,  with  full 
power  to  negotiate  a  peace  with  Austria,  in  case  she  might 
be  inclined  so  to  do  in  the  midst  of  the  war.  I  took 
Madame  de  Lavalette  with  me.  Since  the  year  1792  the 
people  of  the  North  of  Germany  had  not  seen  a  French- 
woman. They  were  convinced  that  they  were  all  dissolute 
persons,  without  education,  and  almost  naked.  Their  as- 
tonishment was  great  when  they  saw  a  young  woman, 
perfectly  modest,  extremely  bashful,  and  dressed  with  a 
decorum  and  good  taste  that  might  have  served  as  a  model 
to  the  most  prudish  of  her  sex. 

The  admiration  she  obtained  increased  the  more  she  was 
known.  We  passed  the  Carnival  at  Berlin.  The  whole 
Court,  and  especially  the  Queen,  loaded  her  with  kindness 
and  attention.  She  was  the  means  of  destroying  the 
extravagant  prejudices  that  were  entertained  against  the 
French  ladies,  and  of  rendering  the  Germans  very  fas- 
tidious in  respect  to  those  that  came  after  her. 

My  stay  in  Germany  was  no  longer  necessary  after  the 
victory  of  Hohenlinden.  In  consequence  the  First  Consul 
recalled  me  near  his  person  ;  and  when  he  placed  the 
Imperial  Crown  on  the  head  of  Josephine,  her  niece  was 
named  Dame  d'Atours.  Her  functions  were  not  easy  to 
fulfil.  The  Emperor,  who  wanted  to  govern  his  household 
as  he  did  his  extensive  empire,  was  far  from  obtaining  the 
same  obedience  there.  He  had  ordered  that  the  trades- 
people who  supplied  the  toilet  of  the  Empress  should  only 
be  admitted  into  her  presence  one  day  in  the  week  ;  that 
the  Dame  d'Atours  should  assist  at  all  the  bargains,  keep  an 
account  of  what  was  bought,  and   be   answerable   for   all 