


364  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

General  Bonaparte,  to  whom  I  was  at  that  time  aide-de- 
camp, had  sent  mc  in  1796  to  Paris,  that  I  might  follow 
the  motions  of  the  two  Councils  and  the  Directory.  I  had 
written  to  him  the  truth,  with  a  frankness  that  made  him 
sensible  how  dangerous  and  how  disgraceful  it  would  be  to 
confirm,  by  his  assent,  the  coup  (Tetat  of  the  i8th  Fructidor. 
The  Directory  soon  became  acquainted  with  my  opinions  ; 
and  though  they  dared  not  punish  me  for  them,  they  ex- 
pressed so  great  a  resentment,  that  General  Bonaparte  did 
not  think  fit  to  take  me  with  him  to  Paris,  when  he  re- 
turned from  the  Army  of  Italy.  He  left  me  at  the  Congress 
of  Rastadt ;  and  I  rejoined  him  only  three  weeks  before  his 
departure  for  the  Egyptian  expedition.  All  my  comrades 
had  obtained  advancement  :  the  General  wished  to  reward 
me  also  ;  but,  not  willing  to  expose  himself  to  a  refusal 
from  Government,  he  determined  to  bring  about  a  marriage 
between  me  and  Mademoiselle  Beauharnais.  One  day, 
when  I  had  accompanied  him  to  the  Treasury,  to  expedite 
the  sending  off"  of  the  sums  that  were  required  at  Toulon 
for  the  fleet,  he  ordered  his  coachman  to  drive  along  the 
new  Boulevards,  that  he  might  have  at  his  leisure  a  con- 
versation with  me.  "  I  cannot  make  a  major  of  you,"  he 
said  ;  "  I  must  therefore  give  you  a  wife  :  you  shall  marry 
Emilie  de  Beauharnais.  She  is  very  handsome,  and  very 
well  educated.  Do  you  know  her  ?  "  "I  have  seen  her 
twice.  But,  General,  I  have  no  fortune.  We  are  going  to 
Africa  :  I  may  be  killed — what  will  become,  in  that  case,  of 
my  poor  widow  ?  Besides,  I  have  no  great  liking  for 
marriage."  "  Men  must  marry  to  have  children  ;  that  is 
the  chief  aim  of  life.  Killed  you  certainly  may  be.  Well, 
in  that  case  she  will  be  the  widow  of  one  of  my  aides- 
de-camp — of  a  defender  of  his  country.  She  will  have  a 
pension,  and  may  again  marry  advantageously.  Now,  she 
is  the  daughter  of  an  emigrant  that  nobody  will  have  :  my 
wife  cannot  introduce  her  into  society.  She,  poor  girl  ! 
deserves  a  better  fate.     Come,  this  business  must  be  quickly 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  365 

settled.  Talk  this  morning  with  Madame  Bonaparte  about 
it :  the  mother  has  already  given  her  consent.  The  wedding 
shall  take  place  in  eight  days;  I  will  allow  you  a  fortnight 
for  your  honeymoon.  You  must  then  come  and  join  us  at 
Toulon  on  the  29th."  (It  was  then  the  9th.)  I  could  not 
help  laughing  all  the  while  he  spoke  : — at  last  I  said  :  "  I 
will  do  whatever  you  please.  But  will  the  girl  have  me  ? 
I  do  not  wish  to  force  her  inclinations."  "  She  is  tired  of 
her  boarding-school,  and  she  would  be  unhappy  if  she  were 
to  go  to  her  mother's.  During  your  absence,  she  shall 
live  with  her  grandfather  at  Fontainebleau.  You  will  not 
be  killed  ;  and  you  will  find  her  when  you  come  back. 
Come,  come  !  the  thing  is  settled.  Tell  the  coachman  to 
drive  home." 