

The  following  day,  while  I  was  still  absorbed  in  these 
dismal  thoughts,  she  came.  I  learned  from  her  that  on 
leaving  me  the  evening  before,  she  had  gone  to  the  Rue  du 
Bac,  and  had  stepped  out  of  her  chair  at  a  short  distance 
from  the  Hotel  of  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  ;  M. 
Baudus  having  advised  her  to  make  one  more  endeavour 
with  that  Minister.  But  ingenuity  was  required  to  come  at 
him.  She  had  asked  the  porter  which  were  the  apartments 
of  M.  Bresson,  Treasurer  of  the  Department  ;  and  as  he 
lived  in  the  first  court,  she  stopped  for  a  few  minutes  on  the 
staircase,  and  then  went  into  the  second  court  and  arrived  at 
the  Minister's  antechamber.     She  was  told  that  his  Excel- 


.38o  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

lency  was  out.  "  I  will  wait,"  was  her  reply.  The  valet- 
de-chambre,  to  whom  she  addressed  herself,  recognised  her, 
and  went  to  complain  to  the  porter,  to  whom  orders  had 
been  given,  since  the  morning,  not  to  let  her  in  ;  for  her 
presence  before  the  door  of  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  had 
put  everybody  on  the  alert.  The  porter  came,  much  out  of 
humour,  and  among  many  reproaches  he  said  to  her,  "You 
put  me  in  danger  of  losing  my  place."  "  I  deceived  you, — 
there  was  no  fault  of  yours.  I  am  resolved  to  see  the 
Minister.  If  he  is  out,  I  will  wait  for  him  ;  if  he  is  at  home 
I  will  pass  the  night  in  this  room.  Violence  alone  shall  drag 
me  out  of  it  ;  you  may  go  and  say  so  to  your  master."  What 
could  the  Minister  do  ?  He  admitted  her  :  Madame  Lava- 
lette  explained  to  him  in  a  clear  and  brief  manner  the  whole 
trial  ;  expressed  with  force  how  unjust  my  condemnation 
was,  and  concluded  with  invoking  his  intercession  with  the 
King.  The  Duke  de  Richelieu  listened  to  her  with  down- 
cast eyes.  He  seemed  to  pity  her,  but  at  last  confessed  that 
the  King  had  forbidden  him  to  say  a  word  more  about  the 
business.  "Then,  Sir,  save  him  yourself."  "Madam,"  he 
replied,  "  that  would  be  a  criminal  act."  "  Cannot  you  at 
least  present  a  fresh  memorial  in  my  name  ?  "  The  Duke, 
eagerly  seizing  the  idea,  answered  :  "  I  consent  to  that. 
Send  it  me  to-morrow  by  eight  o'clock,  and  I  give  you 
my  word  that  it  shall  be  delivered  without  delay  to  his 
Majesty."  " 

"  I  went,"  said  Emilie,  "  immediately  to  your  lawyer  for 
that  memorial.  M.  de  Richelieu  has  received  it  this  morn- 
ing, and  it  must  be  by  this  time  in  the  hands  of  the  King. 
My  plan  shall  nevertheless  be  executed  to-night.  To-morrow 
it  would  certainly  be  too  late,  as  we  have  received  no 
accounts  from  the  Palace.  I  shall  come  and  dine  with  you  : 
keep  up  your  spirits,  you  will  want  them.  As  for  me,  I  feel 
I  have  courage  for  four-and- twenty  hours,  and   not  for  a 