

377 


37S  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  Rue  des  Saints-Peres,  where  you  will  find  M.  Baudus  with 
a  cabriolet,  who  will  conduct  you  to  a  retreat  he  has  pre- 
pared for  you,  and  where  you  may  await  without  danger  a 
favourable  opportunity  of  leaving  France." 

I  listened  to  her  and  looked  at  her  in  silence.  Her  manner 
was  calm,  and  her  voice  firm.  She  appeared  so  convinced 
of  the  success  of  her  plan,  that  it  was  some  time  before  I 
dared  to  reply.  I  looked,  however,  upon  the  whole  as  a  mad 
undertaking.  I  was  at  last  obliged  to  tell  her  so  ;  but  she 
interrupted  me  at  the  first  word  by  saying  :  "  I  will  hear  of 
no  objections.  I  die  if  you  die.  Do  not  therefore  reject  my 
plan.  I  know  it  will  succeed.  I  feel  that  God  supports  me  !  " 
It  was  in  vain  that  I  reminded  her  of  the  numerous  turn- 
keys with  whom  she  was  surrounded  every  evening  when 
she  left  me  ;  the  jailer  who  handed  her  to  her  sedan-chair  ; 
the  impossibility  of  my  being  suflficiently  disguised  to  deceive 
them  ;  and  finally  my  invincible  reluctance  to  leave  her  in 
the  hands  of  the  prison  keepers.  "  What  will  they  do,"  I  said^ 
"  when  they  discover  that  I  am  gone  ?  These  brutes,  in 
their  blind  rage,  will  they  not  forget  themselves  and  perhaps, 
strike  you  ?  "  I  was  going  on,  but  I  soon  saw,  by  the  pale- 
ness of  her  countenance  and  the  movements  of  convulsive 
impatience  that  were  beginning  to  agitate  her,  that  I  ought 
to  put  an  end  to  all  objections.  I  remained  silent  for  a  few 
minutes,  at  the  end  of  which  I  continued  thus  :  "  Well,, 
then,  I  shall  do  as  you  please  ;  but  if  you  want  to  succeed^ 
permit  me  to  make  at  least  one  observation.  The  cabriolet 
is  too  far  off.  I  shall  be  scarcely  gone  when  my  flight  will 
be  discovered,  and  I  shall  most  undoubtedly  be  stopped  in 
the  chair,  for  near  an  hour  is  required  to  go  to  the  Rue  des. 
Saints-Peres.  I  cannot  escape  on  foot  with  your  clothes."  This 
reflection  seemed  to  strike  her.  "  Change,"  I  added,  "  that 
part  of  your  plan.  The  whole  of  to-morrow  is  still  at  our 
disposal  :  I  promise  to  do  to-morrow  all  you  wish."  "Well,, 
you  are  in  the  right.  I  will  have  the  cabriolet  stationed 
near.     Give  me  your  word  that  you  will  obey  me,  for  that 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  y]^ 

is  our  last  resource."  I  took  her  hand  and  answered  :  "  I 
will  do  all  you  wish,  and  in  the  manner  you  wish  it."  This 
promise  made  her  easy,  and  we  separated. 

The  more  I  reflected  on  her  plan,  the  more  impracticable 
it  appeared  to  me.  She  was  full  half  an  inch  taller  than  I 
am  ;  all  the  turnkeys  were  accustomed  to  see  her  ;  her  figure 
was  slender  and  flexible.  It  is  true  that  my  troubles  had 
made  me  much  thinner  ;  but  nevertheless  the  diff'erence 
between  us  was  striking.  On  the  other  hand,  I  was  so  well 
prepared  to  die  !  I  had  in  truth  begun  again  during  the 
last  two  days  to  deliberate  with  myself  whether  I  should  not 
use  my  hidden  means  of  self-destruction.  The  toilet  of  the 
executioner,  the  slow  march  from  the  Conciergerie  to  the 
Greve,  startled  me  ;  but  still  my  heart  remained  firm.  And 
all  of  a  sudden  I  was  obliged  to  turn  my  eyes  from  death, 
and  direct  my  thoughts  on  the  details  of  an  escape,  impos- 
sible to  be  realised,  and  which  to  me  appeared  extravagant. 
The  burlesque  was  about  to  be  mixed  with  the  tragic  part  of 
my  story  ;  for  I  should  certainly  be  retaken  in  woman's 
clothes,  and  they  would  perhaps  be  cruel  enough  to  expose 
me  to  the  public  under  that  ridiculous  disguise.  But,  on  the 
other  side,  how  could  I  refuse  ?  Emilie  appeared  so  happy 
at  her  plan,  so  sure  of  its  success  !  It  would  be  killing  her 
not  to  keep  my  word. 