

At  five  o'clock  Emilie  came,  accompanied  by  Josephine, 
whom  I  saw  again  with  as  much  surprise  as  pleasure.  "  I 
believe,"  she  said,  "  it  is  better  to  take  our  child  with  us.  I 
shall  make  her  do  with  more  docility  what  I  want."  She 
was  dressed  in  a  pelisse  of  merino  richly  lined  with  fur, 
which  she  was  accustomed  to  put  on  over  her  light  dress  on 
leaving  a  ball-room.  She  had  taken  in  her  reticule  a  black 
silk  petticoat.  "This  is  quite  sufficient,"  she  said,  "  to  dis- 
guise you  completely."  She  then  sent  my  daughter  to  the 
window,  and  added  in  a  low  voice,  "  At  seven  o'clock  pre- 
cisely you  must  be  ready  ;  all  is  well  prepared.  In  going 
out  you  will  take  hold  of  Josephine's  arm.  Take  care  to 
walk  very  slowly  ;  and  when  you  cross  the  large  registering- 
room,  you  will  put  on  my  gloves  and  cover  your  face  with 
my  handkerchief.  I  had  some  thoughts  of  putting  on  a 
veil,  but  unfortunately  I  have  not  been  accustomed  to  wear 
one  when  I  come  here ;  it  is  therefore  of  no  use  to  think  of  it. 
Take  great  care,  when  you  pass  under  the  doorways,  which 
are  very  low,  not  to  break  the  feathers  of  your  bonnet,  for 
then  all  would  be  lost.  I  always  find  the  turnkeys  in  the 
registering-room,  and  the  jailer  generally  hands  me  to  my 
chair,  which  constantly  stands  near  the  entrance  door  ;  but 
this  time  it  will  be  in  the  yard,  at  the  top  of  the  grand 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  383 

rstaircase.  There  you  will  be  met  after  a  short  time  by  M. 
Baudus,  who  will  lead  you  to  the  cabriolet,  and  will  acquaint 
you  with  the  place  where  you  are  to  remain  concealed. 
Afterwards,  let  God's  will  be  done,  my  dear.  Do  exactly  all 
I  tell  you.  Remain  calm.  Give  me  your  hand,  I  wish  to 
feel  your  pulse.  Very  well.  Now  feel  mine.  Does  it 
denote  the  slightest  emotion  ?  "  I  could  perceive  that  she 
■was  in  a  high  fever.  "  But  above  all  things,"  she  added, 
•"  let  us  not  give  way  to  our  feelings,  that  would  be  our 
ruin."  I  gave  her,  however,  my  marriage-ring,  on  the 
pretence  that  if  I  were  stopped  in  my  journey  to  the 
frontiers,  it  would  be  advisable  not  to  have  anything  about 
me  by  which  I  might  be  known.  She  then  called  my 
daughter  and  said  to  her,  "  Listen  attentively,  child,  to  what 
I  am  going  to  say  to  you,  for  I  shall  make  you  repeat  it.  I 
shall  go  away  this  evening  at  seven  o'clock  instead  of  eight ; 
you  must  walk  behind  me,  because  you  know  that  the  doors 
are  narrow  ;  but  when  we  enter  the  long  registering-room, 
take  care  to  place  yourself  on  my  left  hand.  The  jailer  is 
accustomed  to  offer  me  his  arm  on  that  side,  and  I  do  not 
choose  to  take  it.  When  we  are  out  of  the  iron  gate,  and 
ready  to  go  up  the  outside  staircase,  then  pass  to  my  right- 
hand,  that  those  impertinent  gendarmes  of  the  guard-house 
may  not  stare  in  my  face  as  they  always  do.  Have  you 
understood  me  well  ?  "  The  child  repeated  the  instructions 
with  wonderful  exactness.  She  had  scarcely  finished  when 
St.  Roses  came  to  us.  He  had  got  introduced  under  the 
pretence  of  accompanying  Madame  de  Lavalette  home  ; 
hut  his  real  aim  was  to  see  me  once  more,  for  he  was  not 
in  our  confidence.  His  presence  would  have  been  a  great 
restraint  upon  us.  I  took  him  therefore  aside,  and  said  to 
him,  "  Leave  us  now,  my  friend.  Emilie  has  as  yet  no  idea 
of  her  misfortune.  We  must  let  her  continue  in  her  igno- 
rance. Come  back  at  eight  o'clock  ;  but  do  not  come  in  if 
the  sedan-chair  is  no  longer  there.  In  that  case,  go  im- 
mediately to  her  house,  for  she  will  be  there." 