

*  The  Duke  de  Ragusa  fell  into  long  disgrace  and  was  very  ill-treated 
for  his  courageous  kindness  on  this  occasion.  I  have  l)een  told  that  a 
Prince,  who  is  now  no  more,  forgot  himself  so  far  in  his  passion  as  to  say  : 
"He  deserves  to  be  sent  to  the  galleys." — Note  of  the  Author. 


376  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

courage  augmented  in  proportion  to  my  danger,  and  she 
resolved  to  make  a  fresh  appeal  to  the  Duchess  of  Angou- 
leme.  The  Princess  lodged  on  the  ground-floor  of  the 
Tuileries,  in  the  apartments  previously  occupied  by  the 
King  of  Rome.  Madame  de  Lavalette  put  off  the  black 
dress  she  had  worn  the  day  before  at  the  Palace,  got  out  of 
her  sedan-chair  in  a  neighbouring  street,  and  presented  her- 
self at  the  Princess's  door  at  the  usual  hour  of  admittance. 
Her  pale  features,  her  swollen  eyes,  her  slow  step,  soon  told 
the  footman  who  she  was.  The  door  was  immediately  shut, 
and  an  order  given  not  to  let  any  one  in.  Finding  that 
entrance  was  prohibited  at  this  door,  she  hastened  to  seek  it 
at  the  grand  vestibule  ;  but  a  footman  ran  before  her  to  tell 
of  her  arrival,  and  she  was  also  repulsed  there.  Exhausted 
with  fatigue,  she  sat  down  on  the  stone  steps  leading  to  the 
court-yard,  and  remained  there  a  full  hour,  still  in  the 
delusive  hope  that  she  would  be  admitted.  She  attracted 
the  notice  of  all  who  passed  by,  and  especially  all  those  who 
went  into  the  Palace  ;  but  no  one  dared  to  show  her  the 
least  compassion.  At  last  she  resolved  to  leave  the  place 
and  return  to  my  dungeon,  where  she  arrived  exhausted  and 
heart-broken. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

I  FELT,  however,  that  my  hours  were  numbered  :  I  had  no 
more  than  forty-eight  left,  for  only  three  days  are  allowed 
for  convicts  to  apply  for  mercy.  The  Keeper  of  the  Seals 
chose  not  to  present  his  petition  before  the  second  day.  The 
King  had  already  silenced  the  Duke  de  Richelieu  on  the 
subject.  All  my  friends  were  in  despair.  The  turnkeys 
themselves  came  no  longer  near  me.  Eberle,  who  was  more 
especially  attached  to  my  service,  spoke  no  more  to  me.  He 
wandered  about  my  room,  apparently  without  knowing  what 
he  did.  It  was  on  a  Sunday  evening.  "They  usually  execute 
criminals  on  a  Friday  ?  "  I  said.  "  Sometimes  on  a  Saturday," 
he  answered,  stifling  a  sigh.  "  The  execution  generally  takes 
place  at  four  o'clock?"  "Sometimes  in  the  morning."  Saying 
these  words,  he  went  out  and  forgot  to  shut  the  door.  A 
female  turnkey  of  the  women's  prison  was  just  going  by  at 
the  time  :  seeing  me  alone,  she  rushed  into  the  room,  seized 
the  cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour  I  wore,  kissed  it  with 
transport,  and  ran  away  in  tears.  This  enthusiastic  action 
of  a  woman  I  had  never  seen  but  at  a  distance,  and  to  whom 
I  had  never  spoken,  told  me  at  last  my  fate.  My  wife  came 
at  six  o'clock  to  dine  with  me.  She  brought  with  her  a 
relation.  Mademoiselle  Dubourg.  When  we  were  alone,  she 
said  :  "  It  appears  but  too  certain  that  we  have  nothing  to 
hope  ;  we  must  therefore,  my  dear,  take  a  resolution,  and 
this  is  what  I  propose  to  you.  At  eight  o'clock  you  shall 
go  out  dressed  in  my  clothes,  and  accompanied  by  my  cousin. 
You  shall  step  into  my  sedan-chair,  which  will  carry  you  to 