

M.  Pasquier,  though  a  Secretary  of  State,  and  M.  de  Fre- 
ville.  Master  of  Requests,  both  told  me  to  hope  for  the  best ; 
but  I  easily  discovered,  through  their  professions,  a  secret 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  373 

discouragement,  over  which  they  could  not  triumph  in  my 
presence.  "  I  could  never  have  had  the  courage  to  come," 
said  M.  de  Freville,  "  if  I  had  not  reckoned  on  the  success 
of  your  friends." 

But  Avhile  he  was  talking,  the  tears  rolled  in  his  eyes,  and 
his  trembling  hand,  that  pressed  mine,  destroyed  the  hope 
his  words  were  meant  to  convey. 

It  was  during  this  interval  that  Marshal  Ney  was  tried. 
Even  before  the  trial  came  on,  the  number  of  his  guards  had 
been  considerably  augmented.  Day  and  night  three  sentries 
were  stationed  under  his  window,  which  was  also  mine  :  one 
gendarme,  one  National  Guard  on  horseback,  and  one 
grenadier  of  the  Old  Guard,  or  rather  a  disguised  Life- 
guard ;  for  they  could  not  place  confidence  enough  in  the 
soldiers  of  the  old  army.  I  was  soon  satisfied  in  regard  to 
that  disguise  by  one  of  our  relatives.  Mademoiselle  Du- 
bourg,  who  had  obtained  permission  to  see  me.  She  had 
seen  one  of  her  cousins  standing  sentry,  and  in  the  uniform 
of  an  old  grenadier  of  the  cavalry  of  the  Guards.  Every 
evening  the  Marshal  was  conveyed  in  a  coach  to  the  Luxem- 
bourg, and  brought  back  to  the  Conciergerie  next  morning. 
On  the  7th  of  December  he  did  not  return.  I  questioned 
the  turnkey,  who  showed  some  confusion  ;  and,  on  insisting, 
I  learned  that  the  Marshal  had  been  executed.  "  Was  it  in 
the  Place  de  Greve,  on  the  scaffold  ?  "  "  No  ;  he  has  been 
shot."  "  What  a  happy  man  he  is  !  "  I  joyfully  exclaimed  ; 
and  the  poor  turnkey,  who  did  not  understand  what  I 
meant,  thought  I  was  run  mad. 

Time,  however,  passed  on  ;  one  of  my  counsel  advised 
me  not  to  wait  for  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Cassation, 
but  to  write  to  the  King  and  invoke  his  clemency.  I  had 
an  invincible  reluctance  to  take  such  a  step.  Besides,  his 
colleague  was  not  of  the  same  opinion.  "  It  might  be  very 
•dangerous,"  he  said,  "  or  at  best  produce  no  effect  at  all.  If 
the  King  wishes  to  pardon  him,  he  will  wait  for 'the  judg- 
ment  of  the  Court.     If  he  is  decided  not  to  do  it,  he  still 


374  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

will  wait.  It  is  therefore  preferable  not  to  alter  anything^ 
in  the  present  progress  of  the  business." 

The  Duchess  of  Placencia,  a  daughter  of  the  Minister  of 
Justice,  came  one  day  to  fetch  Madame  Lavalette,  and  con- 
duct her  to  her  father.  The  two  ladies  fell  at  the  feet  of 
the  venerable  old  man.  His  daughter  was  bathed  in  tears  ; 
she  pressed  his  hands  in  hers,  and  solicited  with  a  degree 
of  vehemence  of  which  those  who  know  her  can  alone  have 
an  idea.  While  he  listened  to  her  the  tears  trickled  in 
silence  down  the  cheeks  of  the  minister,  but  she  could  not 
obtain  a  single  word  of  him.  This  was  a  bad  omen.  It  was 
evident  that  he  had  but  little  hope.  Finally,  on  the  20th  of 
December,  the  cause  came  on  before  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Judicature.  Six  motions  for  laying  the  verdict  aside  were 
alleged  in  the  writ  of  error  ;  but,  notwithstanding  the  elo- 
quent pleadings  of  M.  Darrieux,  the  sentence  was  confirmed. 
It  was  M.  Baudus,  one  of  my  friends,  who  came  to  acquaint 
me  with  the  fatal  news  ;  but  he  endeavoured  to  counteract 
the  impression  it  made  on  me  by  holding  out  hopes, 
which  in  fact  appeared  so  certain  that  I  began  to  share 
them.  An  hour  after  he  was  gone,  M.  de  Carvoisin  came 
into  my  room.  The  terrible  impression  the  judgment  had 
made  on  him  was  visible  in  his  face  :  he  still  hoped  ;  but  his 
arguments  were  those  of  a  prepossessed  mind,  who  would 
have  found  it  easier  to  talk  to  me  of  resignation. 