

Three  days  were  now  all  that  were  left  to  me  ;  and 
in  that  short  space  of  time  means  were  to  be  found  to 
approach  the  King.  The  Duke  de  Ragusa  took  that  charge 
upon  himself.  General  Foy  came  in  his  name  to  fetch 
Madame  de  Lavalette,  and  led  her  by  roundabout  passages  ta 
the  entrance  of  the  Galerie  de  Diane,  where  she  found  the 
Marshal,  who  offered  his  arm,  and  read  to  her  the  memorial 
she  was  to  present  to  the  King.  It  was  during  mass.  The 
whole  Court  was  at  the  chapel.  The  King  was  obliged  tO' 
pass  through  that  same  gallery  to  return  to  his  apartments. 
Unfortunately,  one  of  the  vergers  who  was  there  knew  my 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  375 

wife  ;  and  as  it  was  against  the  custom  for  any  one  to  stand 
in  the  gallery  without  a  special  order,  he  thought  it  neces- 
sary to  acquaint  the  Marshal  with  that  circumstance,  and 
beg  he  would  lead  Madame  de  Lavalette  away.  "This 
lady  shall  remain,"  said  the  Marshal  in  a  firm  tone.  The 
verger  went  to  acquaint  an  officer  of  the  Palace  of  what  had 
happened,  who  repeated  the  warning  in  so  positive  a  tone 
that  the  Marshal  might  look  upon  it  as  an  order  :  however, 
he  replied  :  "  This  lady,  being  here,  shall  remain  ;  I  will 
answer  for  everything."  In  the  meanwhile  the  Court  was 
advancing.  The  King,  who  had  been  informed  of  the  fact, 
felt  it  was  too  late  to  send  away  an  unfortunate  woman,  who 
might  perhaps  cause  some  tumult  by  her  resistance.  He 
therefore  advanced  ;  and  when  he  came  facing  Madame  de 
Lavalette  she  fell  at  his  feet  and  presented  her  memorial. 
The  Monarch  bowed  to  her,  took  the  paper,  and  saying, 
"  Madame,  I  can  do  nothing  but  my  duty,"  '  went  on.  My 
wife  held  in  her  hand  a  second  memorial  for  the  Duchess  of 
Angouleme.  The  Duke  de  Ragusa,  seeing  her  hesitate, 
pressed  her  to  go  after  the  Princess  and  give  it  to  her.  She 
was  already  advancing,  when  M.  d'Agoult,  Chevalier  d'Hon- 
neur,  with  his  two  arms  extended  and  his  hands  open, 
forced  her  to  stop.^ 

This  observation  of  the  King  was  very  unlike  the  one  he 
had  made  a  month  before,  when  Madame  de  Lavalette  was 
admitted  into  his  closet.  He  now  talked  of  his  duty  when 
his  clemency  was  invoked.  The  word  was  appalling.  Eniilie 
seemed  at  first  not  to  feel  its  full  force  ;  but  my  fate  was 
decided  by  it,  and  I  quickly  began  to  think  what  I  should 
do  to  deceive  and  keep  my  wife  and  child  away  during  two 
days.    In  regard  to  the  former,  that  was  no  easy  thing.    Her 

'  By  Appendix  No.  I.  which  contains  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  the  Duke 
de  Ragusa  on  the  subject,  the  reader  will  observe  that  this  answer  of  the 
King  is  here  misrepresented. — Note  of  the  Translator. 