

Among  the  Peers  who  might  interest  themselves  for  me, 
I  was  far  from  reckoning  the  Duke  de  Ragusa.  We  had 
been  for  a  long  time  united  by  the  most  cordial  friendship  ; 
but  his  conduct  towards  the  Emperor  in  1814  had  separated 
us,  and  I  broke  off  our  connection.  I,  however,  received 
a  letter  from  the  Marshal,  in  which  he  mentioned  :  "  I  used 
to  go  twice  a  week  to  the  Tuileries  ;  now  I  shall  go  twice 
a  day.  I  will  speak,  I  will  solicit  even  till  I  grow  trouble- 
some. Whoever  has  any  heart  will  join  with  me,  and  I 
hope  to  obtain  my  greatest  wish  in  the  world." 

These  comfortings  of  courageous  friendship  could  deceive 
me  no  longer.  I  saw  that  I  had  been  condemned,  as  Marshal 
Ney  was  going  to  be,  to  serve  as  an  example.  He  was, 
by  his  reputation,  the  first  on  the  military  hierarchy  ;  while 
I  was  in  the  eyes  of  the  Court  the  most  important  man  in 
the  civil  order — the  late  Aide-de-Camp  of  General  Bona- 
parte, first  cousin  of  Prince  Eugene  and  the  Queen  of 
Holland,  whom  they  detested,  Postmaster-General  during 
twelve  years,  and  by  that  circumstance  the  depositary  of  a 
great  many  secrets  it  would  be  good  to  stifle  (such  was  at 
least  their  opinion).  My  death  was  irrevocable.  I  therefore 
sought  resignation,  to  regard  with  a  firm  eye,  and  make  my- 
self familiar  with  all  the  details  of  that  death  I  was  shortly 
to  undergo.  The  turnkeys  had  frequently  described  to  me 
the  last  moments  of  most  of  the  unfortunate  men  who  had 
left  them  for  the  Place  de  Greve.  But  I  wanted  to  know  all 
that  concerned  what  they  call  the  toilet.  A  little  before  four 
o'clock  the  culprit  is  brought  into  the  registering  room  ; 
scarcely  has  he  crossed  the  low  door  that  opens  into  that 
chamber,  when  the  executioner  and  his  men  appear  ;  they 
make  him  sit  down  on  a  bench,  take  off  his  coat,  cut  off  his 
hair  and  the  collar  of  his  shirt  ;  after  which  they  tie  his 
hands  behind  his  back.   They  lead  him  thus  to  the  cart  that 


MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  VALE TTE.  yj  i 

-stands  waiting  at  the  door.  This  moment  is  terrible.  Those 
who  till  then  have  shown  the  greatest  courage  and  strength 
•of  mind,  fall  into  a  complete  dejection  and  confusion  ;  but 
the  open  air  and  the  crowd  of  people  generally  revive  them 
on  the  way.  Sometimes  also  the  exhortations  of  the  con- 
fessor have  their  effect.  I  listened  with  attention,  repeated 
my  questions,  multiplied  my  observations,  and  asked  every 
day  to  hear  the  fearful  description  over  again,  sometimes  by 
one  person  and  sometimes  by  another.  There  were  some  who 
made  it  with  reluctance  ;  but  the  oldest  among  the  jailers 
seemed  to  delight  in  it. 