

'  All  these  particulars  were  given  to  me  since  by  M.  Baudus,  to  whom 
the  Minister  communicated  them. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  381 

moment  longer,"  she  added  with  a  sigh,  "  for  I  am  exhausted 
with  fatigue.  She  was  right  to  count  the  hours.  She  was 
scarcely  gone  when  the  jailer  came  in  and  said  :  "  An  editor 
of  the  Qiiotidienne  has  been  with  me  to  inquire  whether  it 
was  true  that  you  had  asked  for  four  confessors,  that  he 
might  print  it  in  his  paper." — "  Four — that's  a  great  many  ; 
and  what  answer  did  you  give  him  ?  " — "  The  truth.  That  I 
had  not  introduced  a  single  one."  (I  guessed  that  this  was 
a  covert  warning.)  '*  Well,  wait  a  little  ;  by  and  by  I 
shall  give  you  the  address  of  a  clergyman.  This  whole  day 
is  my  own."  He  made  no  reply,  and  went  away  shaking  his 
head  ;  a  little  while  afterwards  M.  de  Carvoisin  arrived.  He 
threw  himself  into  my  arms  and  burst  into  tears  ;  I  made 
him  sit  down,  and  sought  to  soothe  him  ;  my  own  tran- 
quillity made  him  recover  a  little.  "  The  vicar  of  St. 
Sulpice,"  he  said,  "  has  just  been  at  my  home  ;  he  will  not 
refuse  to  lend  you  his  spiritual  aid  if  you  require  it,  because 
you  are  one  of  his  parishioners,  but  I  beg  you  to  spare  him. 
He  has  assisted  Marshal  Ney  in  his  last  moments,  and  he  has 
confessed  to  me  that  the  scene  affected  him  so  much,  he  does 
not  feel  the  courage  to  go  through  another.  He  is  never- 
theless ready  to  come,  if  you  insist  upon  it."  "  Thank  him, 
my  friend — I  have  another  clergyman  in  view  ;  I  shall  send 
for  him  this  evening,  but  not  before." 

The  excellent  man  wished  to  enter  into  some  particulars, 
but  he  had  not  the  power  to  do  so.  At  that  moment  my 
daughter  was  introduced  with  an  old  nun,  the  portress  of 
L'Abbaye  aux  Bois.  Josephine  wept  in  silence  ;  the  nun 
exclaimed  :  "  What  have  I  done,  that  God  dooms  me  to 
witness  such  horror  ?  "  Her  sighs,  her  sobs,  her  endless 
invocations,  annoyed  me  at  last.  I  felt  that  I  should  lose 
all  my  courage  if  I  did  not  quickly  put  an  end  to  the  scene. 
I  therefore  took  M.  de  Carvoisin  aside  and  said  to  him, 
"  Take  leave  of  me  and  go  away  softly  ;  your  grief  distresses 
me  : — adieu  !  do  not  forget  me."  I  should  have  wished  to 
retain  my  daughter  much  longer  ;  but  the  sight  rent  my 


382  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

heart  to  pieces  :  I  took  her  on  my  knee — her  head  fell  on 
my  breast.  I  attempted  to  speak  to  her,  but  it  was  im- 
possible for  me  to  utter  any  words  of  comfort.  At  last  I 
placed  her  in  a  chair,  and  began  to  walk  up  and  down  the 
room,  panting  in  vain  for  breath.  I  was  therefore  obliged 
to  take  a  resolution  with  her  also.  "Go  back  to  your 
convent,"  I  said  ;  "  I  shall  see  you  again  to-morrow,  I 
promise  it  you  :  my  affair  is  in  a  better  way  than  you 
think.  Do  not  speak  to  any  person  about  it,  but  be  sure  I 
shall  see  you  to-morrow."  She  was  scarcely  gone  when  all 
my  strength  left  me.  I  burst  into  tears  at  the  parting  of 
my  only  child,  and  I  had  a  great  deal  to  do  to  regain  my 
wonted  courage.     I  succeeded,  however,  at  last. 