

By  that  means  I  augmented  my  sufferings  without  reason. 
I  experienced  a  horror  and  a  shuddering  that  agitated  my 
inmost  frame.  I  walked  in  dismay  up  and  down  my  room, 
and  my  sleepless  nights  were  terrible.  However,  by  my 
perseverance  in  recurring  to  the  same  idea  I  obtained  at 
last  what  I  so  much  wished  for  :  a  tranquillity  at  which  the 
turnkeys  were  themselves  surprised.  At  first,  when  listen- 
ing to  them,  I  used  to  grow  pale  ;  I  now  could  hear  them 
without  emotion  or  reluctance.  I  had  some  time  before 
concealed  in  my  straw  mattress  a  table-knife  that  belonged 
to  me  ;  I  lost  all  idea  of  making  use  of  it.  I  found  a  sort 
of  glory  in  challenging  death — in  awaiting  it  as  I  would 
have  done  on  the  field  of  battle. 

The  Minister  of  Justice,  Count  Barbe  Marbise,  was 
-endeavouring  to  delay  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Cassa- 
tion as  long  as  possible,  in  hopes  that  time  would  moderate 
the  feelings  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  palace  ;  for  all  my  ene- 
mies were  there.  The  Princess  de  Vaudemont,  through  her 
name  of  Montmorency,  happened  to  be  related  to  the  most 
considerable  persons  of  the  Court.  Almost  all  of  them  owed 
to  her  their  return  to  France,  and  the  tranquillity  they  had 
enjoyed  under  the  Emperor  ;  for  though  the  Emperor  did 
not  like  her,  and  mistrusted  her,  she  had  a  great  deal  of 
influence  over  Messieurs  de  Talleyrand  and  Fouche,  and  made 
use  of  it  with  courage  and  generosity.     The  King  and  his 


372  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

family  had  inherited  the  Emperor's  disHke  of  her.  They 
could  not  forgive  her  former  connections  with  their  two 
powerful  Ministers.  However,  at  her  house  there  had  been 
held  some  of  the  meetings  which,  in  1814,  prepared  the 
downfall  of  the  Empire  :  and  though  she  only  took  in  them 
a  very  indirect  and  timid  part,  I  had  left  off  visiting  her,, 
after  confessing  openly  the  reasons  of  my  conduct.  But  in 
my  misfortune  I  found  her  animated  with  all  the  courage- 
ous devotion  of  a  real  friend.  Through  her  M.  de  Riche- 
lieu was  perpetually  assailed.  A  great  number  of  persons, 
whose  names  I  scarcely  knew,  made  it  a  point  of  honour  to 
obtain  my  pardon.  Madame  de  Vauderaont  recalled  to 
their  memory  my  behaviour  in  Saxony  towards  the  un- 
fortunate French  whom  I  had  found  there,  and  in  France 
during  fourteen  years.  I  had  facilitated  the  return  of  a 
great  many ;  and  as  I  never  regarded  them  otherwise  than 
as  unfortunate  countrymen,  I  had  frequently  employed  my 
influence  to  be  serviceable  to  them.  Some  of  these  kept  it 
in  their  memories.  But  party  spirit  ran  too  high,  and  in 
particular  the  wound  inflicted  by  the  20th  of  March  was 
still  too  painful  for  the  voice  of  generosity  to  be  heard. 
Had  my  courage  failed  during  the  thirty  days  that  elapsed 
between  the  judgment  of  the  Assize  Court  and  that  of  the 
Court  of  Cassation,  I  must  have  died  or  have  gone  mad. 
Every  morning  I  learned  the  measures  that  had  been  taken, 
and  the  obstacles  that  had  been  overcome,  and  every  even- 
ing I  received  the  most  desperate  news  : — the  stubbornness 
with  which  the  Royal  Family  rejected  all  solicitations  ;  the 
timidity  and  discouragement  of  M.  de  Richelieu  ;  and, 
finally,  the  impossibility  of  softening  the  Monarch.  From 
time  to  time  some  courageous  friends  came  to  see  me  in  my 
prison,  in  spite  of  Government,  who  might  have  punished 
them. 