


368  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

want  of  order.  These  rules  soon  displeased  the  Empress, 
The  Dame  d'Atours  remonstrated ;  she  fell  into  disgrace,, 
and  by  degrees  her  functions  were  reduced  to  those  of  a 
Dame  du  Palais.  Fortunately  for  her,  the  Emperor  was 
not  dissatisfied  with  her.  But  what  she  had  been  unable 
to  do,  the  Emperor  could  not  do  either  ;  and  the  lady  of 
honour,  Madame  de  La  Rochefoucault,  could  not  avoid  many 
petty  discussions  that  made  her  very  uncomfortable.  The 
divorce  of  the  Emperor,  and  his  marriage  with  Maria 
Louisa,  restored  Madame  de  Lavalette  to  her  liberty.  From 
that  time  she  appeared  no  more  at  the  Tuileries  ;  so  that 
the  catastrophe  of  1814  found  her  prepared,  and,  excepting 
the  pain  her  gratitude  for  the  Emperor  made  her  feel  on  his 
account,  she  accustomed  herself  without  much  trouble  to 
the  obscure  life  she  had  led  for  the  last  three  years. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

I  NOW  return  to  my  dungeon.  During  the  night  that 
followed  my  condemnation,  I  had  written  to  two  of  my 
friends,  General  Clarke  and  M.  Pasquier.  I  imagined  that 
the  former  could  not  forget  an  important  service  he  received 
from  me  when  he  was  disgraced  by  the  Directory  on  the 
1 8th  Fructidor.  "I  have  kept  no  secret  from  you  (these 
were  the  words  of  my  letter)  ;  I  have  revealed  everything 
to  my  judges.  See  what  you  can  do  for  me.  Endeavour 
at  least  to  spare  me  the  horrible  agony  of  the  scaffold.  Let 
me  be  shot  by  brave  soldiers.  In  that  manner,  at  least, 
death  will  be  almost  a  favour  to  me."  I  will  not  give  here 
literally  his  answer.  I  shall  only  mention  the  following 
phrase  :  "You  have  nothing  more  to  do  than  to  recommend 
your  wife  and  child  to  the  inexhaustible  bounty  of  the 
King."  The  sentence  of  my  death  was  less  painful  to  me 
than  the  perusal  of  that  letter.  In  my  indignation  I  was 
going  to  write  to  him  all  his  cruelty  made  me  feel.  I  how- 
ever contented  myself  with  the  agreeable  thought,  that  my 
wife  and  child  would  never  be  found  to  implore  the  pity  of 
him  who  had  deprived  them  of  a  father  and  a  husband.  I 
was  still  full  of  the  agitation  into  which  the  letter  of  the 
Minister  of  War  had  thrown  me,  when  my  door  was 
mysteriously  opened.  A  man  approached,  pressed  my 
hand,  and,  slipping  a  note  into  it,  disappeared  immediately. 
It  was  M.  Angles,  the  Prefect  of  Police.  The  note  was 
from  M.  Pasquier,  and  contained  the  following  words  : 
"  Keep    up    your   spirits  ;    all   is    not   lost.      His  Majesty 

2q  369 


370  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

is  surrounded  by  several  of  your  friends,  and  all  that  can 
be  attempted  to  soften  him  shall  be  done  with  courage. 
Hope  still." 