

M.  Baudus  then  left  me,  and  I  remained  alone  during 
two  hours,  scarcely  daring  to  make  any  motion,  or  even 
to  breathe,  buried  in  sad  reflections  on  the  situation  of  my 
poor  Emilie,  who  remained  as  a  hostage  in  my  dungeon. 
At  about  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  door  opened 
once  more,  and  I  saw  a  lady  enter  my  lodgings.  She  was 
dressed  in  the  highest  fashion,  and  her  face  was  covered 
with  a  veil  ;  she  was  accompanied  by  a  young  girl,  who 
appeared  to  be  about  fourteen  years  old.  The  lady  threw 
herself  into  my  arms,  while  the  child  remained  standing 
bashfully,  and  in  tears,  next  to  her  mother.  In  the  midst 
of  the  deep  emotions  that  agitated  us  all,  I  could  not  help 
saying — "For  Heaven's  name!  Madame,  raise  that  veil,, 
that  I  may  see  the  features  of  the  angelic  person  to  whom 
I  owe  my  life!"  "We  are  not  acquainted,"  she  replied^ 
raising  her  veil  ;  "  but  I  feel  happy  in  taking  a  part  in  the 
heroic  action  of  Madame  de  Lavalette."  In  fact,  I  never 
had  seen  Madame  Bresson.  She  was  at  that  time  forty 
years  of  age  ;  but  her  fine  complexion  and  elegant  figure 
made  her  look  at;  least  ten  years  younger.  She  placed  on 
the  stove  a  sort  of  tureen.  "  That  is  your  dinner,"  she 
said  ;  "  the  two  courses  are  in  the  same  vessel  :  you  will 
make  but  sorry  fare,  but  we  are  obliged  to  rob  ourselves  to 
feed  you.  I  do  not  choose  to  tell  our  secret  to  any  of 
our  servants  ;  they  all  sleep  in  this  corridor,  and  the  next 
room  is  occupied  by  my  nephew  Stanislaus.     So  make  no 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  393 

noise  in  the  morning,  but  make  your  bed  and  sweep  your 
room  yourself.  The  apartment  you  are  in  never  having 
been  inhabited,  the  least  sound  might  ruin  us  all," 

She  left  me  after  an  hour's  conversation.  M.  Bresson 
came  afterwards  :  I  had  wept  with  the  ladies, — his  visit 
made  me  rather  merrier.  I  was  no  better  acquainted  with 
him  than  with  his  Vv^ife.  I  had  seen  him  once,  fifteen  years 
before,  at  the  time  I  went  to  Saxony  ; — once  more  also,  I 
think,  at  my  return  ;  and  our  acquaintance  having  ended  by 
my  not  pursuing  the  diplomatic  career,  we  had  not  met 
again.  M.  Bresson  had  very  agreeable  features,  an  elegant 
and  cultivated  mind,  and  an  energetic  character,  of  which 
he  had  more  than  once  given  the  most  striking  proofs.  It 
was  not  his  attachment  to  the  Emperor  that  had  persuaded 
him  to  place  himself  in  such  a  dangerous  situation  to  serve 
me,  and  I  do  not  believe  that  he  ever  was  very  fond  either 
of  Napoleon  or  his  government  :  it  was  a  deep  feeling  of 
humanity,  and  a  courageous  protest  against  those  political 
condemnations  of  which  he  had  been  himself  a  victim.  "  I 
just  come,"  said  he,  "from  the  drawing-rooms  of  some  of 
our  grand  dignities.  You  cannot  form  an  idea  of  the  alarm 
and  consternation  that  fill  the  minds  of  every  one.  At  the 
Tuileries,  nobody  will  go  to  bed  to-night.  They  are  con- 
vinced that  your  escape  is  the  result  of  a  great  plot  that  is 
going  to  burst  over  them  ;  they  see  you  already  at  the  head 
of  the  old  army  marching  against  the  Tuileries,  and  all 
Paris  flying  to  arms.  I  should  not  be  surprised  if  they  stop 
the  march  of  the  foreign  troops  who  are  already  preparing 
for  their  departure.  They  talk  of  shutting  the  barriers. 
Think  only  of  the  terrible  consequences  of  such  a  measure  ! 
The  milk-women  will  not  be  able  to  get  into  town  to- 
morrow ! — there  will  be  no  milk  for  the  old  women's 
breakfasts  !  and  I  listening  to  all  these  lamentations, — I 
who  have  you  under  lock  and  key  !  " 