

I  was  but  too  sensible  of  the  truth  of  all  this  good  man 
said  to  me,  and  added  to  myself,  "  Suppose  I  were  to  die, 
what  would  they  do  with  my  body  ?  "  I  was  soon  diverted 
from  these  painful  reflections  by  the  voice  of  a  newsvender 
who  was  crying  something  in  the  street.  I  could  not  well 
distinguish  what  he  said,  but  I  thought  I  heard  my  own 
name.  I  ran  to  the  window,  but  the  man  was  already  too 
far  for  me  to  catch  a  word  of  what  he  uttered.  I  was 
obliged  to  wait  until  another  went  by,  and  four  hours 
elapsed  before  the  second  came.  This  time  it  was  a  woman, 
whose  shrill,  sharp  voice  brought  distinctly  to  my  ears  the 
words  ^^  Lav  alette  —  householders — landlords."  It  was 
undoubtedly  an  ordinance  proclaiming  severe  penalties  on 
those  who  would  give  me  refuge  (this  did  not  make  me 
uneasy),  but  at  the  same  time  offering  rewards  to  those  who 
might  denounce  me.  And  who  could  know  whether  among 
the  servants  of  the  house  there  might  not  be  found  one 
whom  the  love  of  lucre  might  incite  to  such  an  act  ?  I 
was  very  unjust :  for  Andre  Joineau  and  his  wife,  whom 
they  called  Montet,  were  old  domestics,  whose  fidelity  and 
devotion  were  proof  against  all  seduction.     The  woman,  in 


396  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE. 

particular,  was  a  pretty  Protestant,  remarkable  for  the  good 
education  she  had  received,  and  her  elevated  sentiments. 
At  last,  about  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  while  I  was  still 
without  light,  a  lady  came  in  and  seated  herself  at  the  foot 
of  my  bed  :  she  inquired  in  a  low  voice  how  I  was.  I 
endeavoured  to  tranquillise  her,  and  repeated  my  thanks  for 
her  kindness.  "  I  am  not  Madame  Bresson,"  she  said  ;  "  I 
am  her  lady's-maid  ;  my  mistress  will  certainly  come  home 
in  an  hour  or  two  :  but  she  has  heard  that  you  were  not 
very  well,  and  she  wished  to  have  some  account  of  your 
health."  "  Here  is  another  witness  !  "  said  I  to  myself  with 
a  sigh.  "  I  pray  to  God  that  so  many  confidants  may  not 
spoil  the  business  ;  but  I  have  great  fears."  At  last 
Madame  Bresson  came.  I  spoke  to  her  of  the  cries  I  had 
heard  in  the  street.  "  It  is  nothing,"  she  replied  ;  "  merely 
the  renewal  of  an  old  Police  Ordinance  of  the  year  1793, 
that  makes  everybody  laugh,  for  the  joy  is  incredible  in 
Paris.  Madame  de  Lavalette  is  extolled  to  the  skies. 
Nothing  can  be  more  diverting  than  the  observations  of  the 
women  among  the  lower  classes,  and  particularly  in  the 
markets.  At  the  theatres,  the  slightest  allusions  are  seized 
with  enthusiasm  ;  and  if  Government  were  to  attempt  to 
stifle  these  transports, — which,  by  the  bye,  are  something 
worse  than  disaffection, — their  agents  would  no  doubt  be 
murdered.  So  you  may  rest  easy  in  that  respect.  As  for 
the  confidants  we  have  made  around  us,  M.  Bresson  and 
myself  have  decided  that  it  would  be  much  safer  to  tell  the 
whole  business  to  the  two  servants  who  sleep  facing  you. 
Notwithstanding  the  greatest  precautions,  they  might  have 
heard  you,  been  alarmed  at  the  unusual  noise,  and  have 
mentioned  it  to  their  comrades.  It  was  much  better  to 
close  their  mouths  by  trusting  them  with  our  secret.  They 
are  married,  and  have  lived  with  us  during  the  last  twenty 
years  ;  they  are  a  very  worthy  couple,  and  would  most 
willingly  expose  their  lives  for  us.  We  have  moreover 
resolved  that  Stanislaus  should  also  be  told,  for  he  is  your 