

know   all   when   you   come   back  ;  but   first   run   to   your 

390 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  391 

friends.'  I  left  her,  and  came  hither. — Stop  ;  no  im- 
patience !  you  are  at  M.  Bresson's,  the  Treasurer  for  the 
Department  of  Foreign  Affairs.^  Let  me  go  on.  Madame 
Bresson,  since  her  husband's  proscription,  had  made  a  vow, 
in  the  excess  of  her  gratitude  towards  those  who  had  con- 
•cealed  him,  to  save  some  person  condemned  for  a  pohtical 
crime,  if  ever  Providence  favoured  her  sufficiently  for  any 
one  to  fall  in  her  way.  I  therefore  came  to  her  and  said, 
that  the  time  was  come  for  the  fulfilment  of  her  vow, 
and  I  acquainted  her  with  your  history  and  Madame  de 
Lavalette's  resolution.  '  Let  him  come  ! '  she  said,  with 
enthusiasm  :  '  my  husband  is  not  at  home  ;  but  I  need  not 
consult  him  for  the  performance  of  a  good  action.  He 
shares  all  my  sentiments,  I  shall  immediately  prepare  a 
room,  where  the  unfortunate  man  will  be  safe.  Go  and 
acquaint  Madame  de  Lavalette.'  I  went  back  to  her,  and 
then  she  explained  to  me  her  plan.  I  listened  to  her  in 
silence  :  this  was  not  a  fit  moment  for  objections.  She 
talked  with  so  much  confidence — she  seemed  so  sure  of 
success,  that  I  entered  with  ardour  into  all  the  details  of 
the  enterprise  ; — but  I  wanted  a  private  cabriolet.  With 
Madame  de  Lavalette's  permission,  I  went  to  M.  de 
Chassenon,  whom  I  knew  to  be  a  man  both  devoted  and 
resolute.  These  are  the  means  by  which  you  came  here, 
for  the  success  of  which  a  sort  of  miracle  was  required  ;  for, 
I  must  confess,  I  do  not  myself  comprehend  how  it  was 
done.  Now  you  must  be  sensible  of  how  much  importance 
it  is  to  your  generous  friends  that  nobody  may  ever  know 
they  afforded  you  this  retreat  :  the  whole  family  would  be 
ruined.     M.  Bresson  cannot  do  without  his  situation  :  he 

'  I  had  never  seen  M.  Bresson  but  twice  ;  but  I  knew  his  history. 
When  a  deputy  in  the  National  Convention,  he  spoke  very  stronf^ly  against 
the  trial  and  sentence  of  Louis  XVI.  He  voted  against  dcatli,  and  was 
soon  outlawed,  and  was  obliged  to  fly.  His  wife  and  he  found  a  retreat 
amidst  the  mountains  of  the  Vosges,  in  the  house  of  an  honest  family,  who, 
notwithstanding  they  saw  inevitable  death  before  them  if  llie  unfortunate 
couple  were  discovered,  kept  them,  nevertheless,  concealed  during  two 
years  with  admirable  fidelity. 


392  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

has  a  daughter  and  nephews  to  estabhsh.  Being  a  pubHc 
functionary,  and  lodged  under  the  King's  roof,  honoured 
with  the  trust  of  his  minister,  he  knows  full  well  all  the 
irregularity  of  his  conduct.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
is  convinced  of  your  innocence  ; — and  what  are  all  other 
considerations  when  they  are  put  in  the  scale  with  a  man's 
life  ?  We  shall  now  set  about  getting  you  away  from  hence 
and  beyond  the  frontiers,  which  will  not  be  an  easy  matter  ; 
but  the  most  important  object  is  achieved,  and  Providence 
will  not  leave  the  work  imperfect." 