

A  part  of  my  room  was  divided  off  by  a  screen,  and 
formed  a  sort  of  dressing-closet.  We  stepped  behind  the 
screen,  and,  while  she  was  dressing  me  with  charming 
presence  of  mind  and  expedition,  she  said  to  me,  "  Do  not 
forget  to  stoop  when  you  go  through  the  doors  ;  walk 
slowly  through  the  registering-room,  like  a  person  exhausted 
with  fatigue."  In  less  than  three  minutes  my  toilet  was 
complete.  We  went  back  to  the  room,  and  Emilie  said  to 
her  daughter,  "  What  do  you  think  of  your  father  ?  "  A 
smile  of  surprise  and  incredulity  escaped  the  poor  girl  :  "  I 
am  serious,  my  dear,  what  do  you  think  of  him  ?  "  I  then 
turned  round,  and  advanced  a  few  steps  :  "  He  looks  very 
well,"  she  answered  ;  and  her  head  fell  again,  oppressed,  on 
her  bosom.  We  all  advanced  in  silence  towards  the  door. 
I  said  to  Emilie,  "  The  jailer  comes  in  every  evening  after 
you  are  gone.  Place  yourself  behind  the  screen,  and  make 
a  little  noise,  as  if  you  were  moving  some  piece  of  furniture. 
He  will  think  it  is  I,  and  will  go  out  again.  By  that  means 
I  shall  gain  a  few  minutes,  which  are  absolutely  necessary 
for  me  to  get  away."  She  understood  me,  and  I  pulled  the 
bell.  "  Adieu  !  "  she  said,  raising  her  eyes  to  heaven.  I 
pressed  her  arm  with  my  trembling  hand,  and  we  exchanged 
a  look.     If  we  had  embraced,  we  had  been  ruined.     The 

26 


386  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

turnkey  was  heard  ;  Emilie  flew  behind  the  screen  ;  the 
door  opened  ;  I  passed  first,  then  my  daughter,  and  lastly 
Madame  Dutoit.     After  having  crossed  the  passage,  I  arrived 
at  the  door  of  the  registering-room.     I  was  obliged,  at  the 
same  time,  to  raise  my  foot  and  to  stoop  lest  the  feathers  of 
my  bonnet  should  catch  at  the  top  of  the  door.     I  succeeded  ;. 
but,  on   raising  myself  again,  I  found  myself  in  the  large 
apartment,  in  the  presence  of  five  turnkeys,  sitting,  standing,, 
and  coming  in  my  way.     I  put  my  handkerchief  to  my  face, 
and  was  waiting  for  my  daughter  to  place  herself  on  my 
left  hand.     The  child,  however,  took  my  right  hand  ;  and 
the  jailer,  coming  down  the  stairs  of  his  apartment,  which 
was  on  the  left  hand,  came  up  to  me  without  hindrance, 
and,  putting  his  hand  on  my  arm,  said  to  me,  "You  are 
going  away  early,  Madame."     He  appeared  much  affected,, 
and  undoubtedly  thought  my  wife  had  taken  an  everlasting 
leave  of  her  husband.     It  has  been  said,  that  my  daughter 
and  I  sobbed  aloud  :  the  fact  is,  we  scarcely  dared  to  sigh. 
I  at  last  reached  the  end  of  the  room.     A  turnkey  sits  there 
day   and   night,  in   a   large  armchair,  and   in    a  space  so 
narrow  that  he   can  keep  his  hands  on  the  keys  of  two 
doors,  one  of  iron  bars,  and  the  other  towards  the  outer 
part,  and  which  is  called  the  first  wicket.     This  man  looked 
at  me  without  opening  his  doors.     I  passed  my  right  hand 
between  the  bars,  to  show  him  I  wished  to  go  out.     There 
my  daughter  did  not  mistake  again,  but  took  my  right  arm. 
We  had  a  few  steps  to  ascend  to  come  to  the  yard  ;  but  at 
the  bottom  of  the  staircase  there  is  a  guard-house  of  gen- 
darmes.    About  twenty  soldiers,  headed  by  their  officer,  had 
placed  themselves  a  few  paces  from  me  to  see  Madame  de 
Lavalette  pass.     At  last,  I  slowly  reached  the  last  step,  and 
went  into  the  chair  that  stood  a  yard  or  two  distant.     But 
no  chairman,  no  servant  was  there.     My  daughter  and  the 
old  woman  remained  standing  next  to  the  vehicle,  with  a 
sentry  at  six  paces  from  them,   immovable,  and   his   eyes 
fixed  on  me.     A  violent  degree  of  agitation  began  to  mingle 