


384  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

I  embraced  him,  and  forced  him  out  of  the  door.  But 
there  soon  came  another  visitor  ;  it  was  Colonel  Briqueville, 
whose  wounds  had  kept  him  at  home  for  above  two  months. 
He  had  not  expected  to  see  my  wife,  and  he  soon  perceived 
that  his  presence  might  be  intrusive,  though  he  was  not  yet 
acquainted  with  the  whole  extent  of  my  horrible  situation. 
So  great  was  his  emotion,  that  I  was  afraid  it  would  become 
contagious.  "Leave  us,"  I  w^hispered  to  him:  "  this  is  the 
last  time  I  see  her.  One  moment's  weakness  may  kill  her." 
At  last  we  remained  alone.  I  looked  at  Emilie  ;  I  thought 
of  all  the  obstacles  I  should  find  in  my  way,  and  which 
would  overwhelm  us.  A  fatal  idea  crossed  my  mind  : 
"  Suppose,"  said  I,  "  you  were  to  go  to  the  jailer  and  offer 
him  one  hundred  thousand  francs  if  he  will  shut  his  eyes 
when  I  pass  :  he  will  perhaps  consent,  and  we  shall  all  be 
saved."  She  looked  at  me  for  a  moment  in  silence,  and 
then  replied,  "  Well,  I  will  go."  She  went  out,  and  came 
back  after  a  few  minutes.  I  already  repented  the  step  I 
had  made  her  take.  I  was  sensible  how  useless,  how  im- 
prudent it  was.  But  when  she  returned,  she  said  to  me 
calmly,  "It  is  of  no  use.  I  drew  from  the  jailer  but  a 
few  words,  and  these  were  sufficient  to  convince  me  of  his 
honesty,  therefore  let  us  think  no  more  of  it." 

Dinner  was  at  last  brought  up.  Just  as  we  were  going 
to  sit  down  to  table,  an  old  nurse  of  ours,  Madame  Dutoit, 
who  had  accompanied  Josephine,  came  in  very  ill.  Madame 
de  Lavalette  had  left  her  in  the  registering-room,  intending 
to  send  her  after  me  when  I  should  be  gone  ;  but  the  heat 
of  the  German  stove  and  her  emotion  had  made  her  so  ill, 
and  she  had  so  long  insisted  on  seeing  me  once  more,  that 
the  turnkey  let  her  in  without  the  permission  of  the  jailer. 
Far  from  being  useful  to  us,  the  poor  woman  only  added  to 
our  confusion.  She  might  lose  her  presence  of  mind  at  the 
sight  of  my  disguise  ;  but  what  was  to  be  done  ?  The  first 
object  was  to  make  her  cease  her  meanings,  and  Emilie  said 
to  her  in  a  low  but  firm  voice,  "  No  childishness.     Sit  down 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  385 

to  table,  but  do  not  eat  ;  hold  your  tongue,  and  keep  this 
smelling-bottle  to  your  nose.  In  less  than  an  hour  you  will 
be  in  the  open  air." 

This  meal,  which  to  all  appearance  was  to  be  the  last  of 
my  life,  was  terrible.  The  bits  stopped  in  our  throats  ;  not 
a  word  was  uttered  by  any  of  us,  and  in  that  situation  we 
were  to  pass  almost  an  hour.  Six  and  three-quarters  struck 
at  last.  "  I  only  want  live  minutes,  but  I  must  speak  to 
Bonneville,"  said  Madame  de  Lavalette.  She  pulled  the 
bell,  and  the  valet-de-chambre  came  in  ;  she  took  him  aside, 
whispered  a  few  words  to  him,  and  added  aloud,  "  Take  care 
that  the  chairmen  be  at  their  posts,  for  I  am  coming. — 
Now,"  she  said  to  me,  "  it  is  time  to  dress." 