


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  387 

with  my  astonishment.  My  looks  were  directed  towards 
the  sentry's  musket,  like  those  of  a  serpent  towards  its 
prey.  It  almost  seemed  to  me  that  I  held  that  musket  in 
my  grasp.  At  the  first  motion,  at  the  first  noise,  I  was 
resolved  to  seize  it.  I  felt  as  if  I  possessed  the  strength  of 
ten  men  ;  and  I  would  most  certainly  have  killed  whoever 
.  had  attempted  to  lay  hands  on  me.  This  terrible  situation 
lasted  about  two  minutes  ;  but  they  seemed  to  me  as  long 
as  a  whole  night.  At  last  I  heard  Bonneville's  voice  saying 
to  me,  "  One  of  the  chairmen  was  not  punctual,  but  I  have 
found  another."  At  the  same  instant,  I  felt  myself  raised. 
The  chair  passed  through  the  great  court,  and,  on  getting 
out,  turned  to  the  right.  We  proceeded  to  the  Quai  des 
Orfevres,  facing  the  Rue  de  Harlay.  There  the  chair 
stopped  ;  and  my  friend  Baudus,  offering  me  his  arm,  said 
aloud,  "You  know,  Madame,  you  have  a  visit  to  pay  to  the 
President."  I  got  out,  and  he  pointed  to  a  cabriolet  that 
stood  at  some  distance  in  that  dark  street.  I  jumped  into 
it,  and  the  driver  said  to  me,  "  Give  me  my  whip."  I 
looked  for  it  in  vain  ; — he  had  dropped  it.  "  Never  mind," 
said  my  companion.  A  motion  of  the  reins  made  the 
horse  start  off  in  a  quick  trot.  In  passing  by,  I  saw  Jose- 
phine on  the  Quai,  her  hands  clasped,  and  fervently  offering 
up  prayers  to  God.  We  crossed  the  Pont  St.  Michel,  the 
Rue  de  la  Harpe,  and  we  soon  reached  the  Rue  de  Vau- 
girard,  behind  the  Odeon  theatre.  It  was  not  till  then 
that  I  breathed  at  ease.  In  looking  at  the  driver  of  the 
cabriolet,  how  great  was  my  astonishment  to  recognise 
Count  Chassenon,  whom  I  was  very  far  from  expecting  to 
find  there.  "  What !  "  I  said,  "  is  it  you  ?  "— "  Yes  ;  and 
you  have  behind  you  four  double-barrelled  pistols,  well 
loaded  ;  I  hope  you  will  make  use  of  them."  "  No,  indeed, 
I  will  not  compromise  you."  "  Then  I  shall  set  you  the 
example,  and  woe  to  whoever  shall  attempt  to  stop  your 
flight !  " 

We  entered  the  new  Boulevard  at  the  corner  of  the  Rue 


388  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

Plumet  :  there  we  stopped.  I  placed  a  white  pocket- 
handkerchief  in  the  front  of  the  cabriolet.  This  was  the 
signal  agreed  upon  with  M.  Baudus.  During  the  way  I  had 
thrown  off  all  the  female  attire  with  which  I  was  disguised, 
and  put  on  a  dicky  great-coat  with  a  round  silver-laced  hat. 
M.  Baudus  soon  joined  us.  I  took  leave  of  M.  de  Chassenon, 
and  modestly  followed  my  new  master.  It  was  eight  o'clock 
in  the  evening  ;  it  poured  of  rain  ;  the  night  was  extremely 
dark,  and  the  solitude  complete  in  that  part  of  the  Faubourg 
St.  Germain.  I  walked  with  difficulty.  M.  Baudus  went 
on  more  rapidly,  and  it  was  not  without  trouble  that  I  could 
keep  up  with  him.  I  soon  left  one  of  my  shoes  in  the  mire, 
but  I  was,  nevertheless,  obliged  to  get  on.  We  saw  gen- 
darmes galloping  along,  who  were  undoubtedly  in  search  of 
me,  and  never  imagined  that  I  was  so  near  them.  Finally, 
after  one  hour's  walk,  fatigued  to  death,  with  one  shoe  on 
and  one  off,  we  arrived  in  the  Rue  de  Grenelle,  near  the 
Rue  de  Bac,  where  M.  Baudus  stopped  for  a  moment.  "  I 
am  going,"  he  said,  "  to  enter  a  nobleman's  hotel.  While 
I  speak  to  the  porter,  get  into  the  court.  You  will  find 
a  staircase  on  your  left  hand.  Go  up  to  the  highest  story. 
Go  through  a  dark  passage  you  will  meet  with  to  the  right, 
and  at  the  bottom  of  which  is  a  pile  of  wood.  Stop  there." 
We  then  walked  a  few  steps  up  the  Rue  du  Bac,  and  I  was 
seized  with  a  sort  of  giddiness  when  I  saw  him  knock  at 
the  door  of  the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  the  Duke  de 
Richelieu.  M.  Baudus  went  in  first  ;  and,  while  he  was 
talking  to  the  porter,  who  had  thrust  his  head  out  of  his 
lodge,  I  passed  rapidly  by.  "Where  is  that  man  going  ?  " 
cried  the  porter.  "  It  is  my  servant."  I  quickly  went  up 
to  the  third  floor,  and  reached  the  place  that  had  been 
described  to  me.  I  was  scarcely  there,  when  I  heard  the 
rustling  of  a  silk  gown.  I  felt  myself  gently  taken  by  the 
arm,  and  pushed  into  an  apartment,  the  door  of  which  was 
immediately  shut  upon  me.  I  stepped  on  towards  a  lighted 
fire,  which  cast  around  the  room  a  very  faint  glimmering. 