

He  then  examined  with  the  most  minulc  attention  all 
my  modest  furniture,  and  what  they  had  brought  me.     The 


394  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE. 

chest  of  drawers  was  filled  with  his  linen  and  clothes. 
"  Open  only  half  your  shutters,"  he  added,  "  and  let  no 
more  light  in  than  just  as  much  as  you  want  to  read  ;  if 
you  catch  a  cold,  thrust  your  head  when  you  cough  into 
this  closet."  I  had  asked  for  some  beer,  to  quench  the 
thirst  that  tormented  me  for  the  last  month.  "  You  cannot 
have  any.  We  never  drink  beer,  and  some  observation 
might  be  made  on  the  circumstance.  I  have  not  forgot  the 
history  of  M.  de  Montmorin,  who  was  discovered,  and  died 
on  the  scaffold,  through  having  eaten  a  chicken,  the  bones 
of  which  had  been  thrown  at  the  corner  of  the  door.  A 
neighbour,  who  knew  that  the  woman  who  concealed  him 
was  too  poor  to  buy  chicken,  guessed  that  she  had  in  her 
house  an  outlaw,  and  informed  against  her.  You  shall  have 
as  much  sugar  and  refreshing  syrups  as  you  may  wish,  but 
no  beer." 

I  passed  the  first  night  of  my  liberty  in  walking  up  and 
down,  and  breathing  the  fresh  air  through  the  half-opened 
window.  I  could  not  see  into  the  Rue  du  Bac,  but  I  heard 
everything  distinctly,  and  the  frequent  passing  of  men  on 
horseback  sometimes  startled  me.  At  last,  in  the  morning, 
fatigue  got  the  better  of  my  anxiety,  and  I  fell  asleep.  Two 
hours  afterwards  I  was  awakened  by  noise  near  me,  and  to 
my  great  astonishment  I  saw  in  my  room  a  little  man,  who 
was  putting  the  furniture  in  order,  sweeping  and  rubbing 
with  great  precaution.  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Mon- 
sieur's valet-de-chambre."  "  But  it  was  agreed  with  your 
master  that  nobody  should  come  in  my  room."  "  They 
have  altered  their  minds,  and  if  you  please  to  get  up,  you 
may  step  into  my  chamber  while  I  put  everything  in  order 
here." 

I  got  up,  and  he  led  me  into  another  room  facing  the  one 
where  I  slept.  When  he  was  gone,  I  began  to  examine 
the  place  I  was  in.  It  was  much  too  well  furnished  for  a 
servant's  room.  The  chimney  was  ornamented  with  a  clock, 
and  china  vases  containing  flowers  ;  the  bed  was  elegant. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  395 

I  opened  a  closet  at  the  head  of  the  bed,  and  found  several 
articles  of  female  attire.  "  What's  the  meaning  of  all  this  ? 
Could  the  man  be  married,  and  his  wife  in  the  secret  ? 
How  !  there  are  already  a  child  and  two  servants  entrusted 
with  my  fate,  and  that  in  this  house  !  Is  that  very  pru- 
dent ?  "  These  reflections  troubled  me  so  much  that  my 
heart  throbbed  within  me.  I  attempted  to  rise,  but  I  fell 
on  the  floor  in  a  deep  swoon.  The  servant  came  back  in 
about  half  an  hour,  and  finding  me  insensible,  he  dragged 
me  to  my  bed,  where  he  had  great  trouble  to  bring  me 
to  myself.  "  Do  all  you  can,"  he  said,  "  to  keep  up  your 
spirits,  for  neither  my  master  nor  my  mistress  can  come 
back  until  this  evening.  I  shall  come  if  I  can.  But,  for 
Heaven's  sake  !  do  not  fall  sick,  for  how  could  we  call  in  a 
doctor  ?  " 