


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  389 

Having  placed  my  hands  upon  the  stove  to  warm  myself, 
I  found  a  candlestick  and  a  bundle  of  matches.  I  guessed 
that  I  might  light  a  candle.  I  did  so  ;  and  I  examined  my 
new  abode.  It  was  a  middle-sized  room,  on  the  garret-floor. 
The  furniture  consisted  of  a  very  clean  bed,  a  chest  of 
drawers,  two  chairs,  and  a  small  German  stove,  of  earthen- 
ware. On  the  chest  of  drawers  I  found  a  paper,  on  which 
the  following  words  were  written: — "Make  no  noise. 
Never  open  your  window  but  in  the  night,  wear  slippers  of 
list,  and  wait  with  patience."  Next  to  this  paper  was  a 
bottle  of  excellent  claret,  several  volumes  of  Moliere  and 
Rabelais,  and  a  basket  containing  sponges,  perfumed  soap, 
almond-paste,  and  all  the  little  utensils  of  a  gentleman's 
dressing-box.  The  delicate  attentions  and  the  neat  hand- 
writing of  the  note  made  me  guess  that  my  hosts  com- 
bined with  their  most  generous  feelings  elegant  and  refined 
manners.  But  why  was  I  in  the  Hotel  of  Foreign  Affairs  ? 
I  had  never  seen  the  Duke  de  Richelieu.  M.  Baudus  was 
indeed  attached  to  that  department,  but  in  a  very  indirect 
manner.  I  could  not  have  inspired  any  interest  in  the 
King.  Besides,  in  that  case,  it  would  have  been  more 
natural  to  pardon  me.  If  I  was  there  by  the  connivance  of 
the  Minister,  what  reason  could  he  have  had  to  violate  his 
sacred  duties,  belie  the  loyalty  he  owed  to  his  Sovereign, 
associate  himself  with  the  party  of  Bonaparte,  and  protect 
a  criminal  sentenced  for  a  conspiracy  ? 


CHAPTER  XL. 

I  REMAINED  lost  in  these  reflections  when  the  door  slowly 
opened  and  I  found  myself  in  the  arms  of  M.  Baudus. 
After  the  first  transports  of  joyful  emotion  were  over,  I 
hastened  to  address  to  him  the  questions  that  perplexed 
me,  but  he  interrupted  me  by  saying  : — "  I  comprehend 
you  ;  but  keep  your  curiosity  within  bounds  :  the  truth 
is,  that  the  day  before  yesterday  Madame  de  Lavalette  sent 
for  me,  and  when  the  servants  were  gone  and  the  door 
shut,  she  said  :  '  I  am  resolved  to  save  my  husband,  as  his 
pardon  cannot  be  obtained  ;  but  I  do  not  know  where  to 
conceal  him.  My  relations  and  friends  are  unable  to  serve 
me.  I  address  myself  to  you  with  confidence.  Procure 
him  only  a  hiding-place,  and  he  shall  be  free  to-morrow.' 
This  appeal  was  abrupt,  and  disconcerted  me.  You  know 
I  mix  very  little  in  society.  To  conceal  you  in  my  lodgings 
would  have  been  impossible  :  I  live  in  a  furnished  hotel, 
where  there  are  thirty  persons  besides  myself.  I  men- 
tioned this  to  Madame  de  Lavalette.  '  Think  about  it 
immediately,'  she  replied  ;  '  you  must  find  for  me  what  I 
want.'  At  last,  after  a  great  deal  of  hesitation,  I  requested 
two  hours'  time  ;  observing  that  I  was  connected  with  a 
family  who  had  suffered  misfortune  themselves,  and  who 
entertained  most  admirable  feelings  of  courage  and  devotion. 
'  Go  quickly,  and  acquaint  them  with  my  situation.  I  shall 
owe  my  life  to  them,  if  they  conceal  my  husband.'  I 
asked  for  some  particulars.     'No,  no,'  she  said  ;  'you  shall 