

My  daughter  had  returned  to  her  convent  in  an  ecstasy  of 
joy,  and  agitated  with  so  strong  an  emotion  that  she  could 
not  explain  in  what  manner  she  had  contrived  to  save  her 
father.  But  when,  next  day,  the  whole  business  was  ex- 
plained, the  Superior,  who  had  just  succeeded  in  obtaining 


400  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

the  protection  of  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  for  her  house, 
was  seized  with  alarm  :  my  daughter  was  ordered  to  hold 
her  tongue  ;  and  the  nuns  and  some  of  the  boarders  shrunk 
away  from  her,  as  if  she  had  had  the  plague.  Will  it  be 
believed  when  I  add,  that  the  parents  of  several  of  those 
boarders  declared  to  the  Superior,  that  they  would  take 
their  children  home  if  Josephine  Lavalette  remained  in  the 
convent  ?  So  that  a  virtuous,  generous  action,  which  ought 
to  have  been  presented  as  an  example  to  be  followed  by 
young  persons,  was  through  fear,  personal  interest,  and 
perhaps  also  by  meaner  passions,  regarded  as  a  sort  of  crime 
and  a  cause  of  proscription.  Six  weeks  afterwards,  when 
Madame  de  Lavalette  was  set  at  liberty,  she  hastened  to 
take  her  daughter  from  the  convent. 

I  passed  the  first  ten  days  very  quietly  in  my  retreat, 
loaded  with  the  most  touching  marks  of  friendship.  My 
kind  protectors  sought,  above  all,  to  ease  my  mind.  As 
long  as  I  remained  with  them,  I  had,  they  said,  no  danger 
to  fear.  I  might  stay  whole  months  in  my  hiding-place, 
without  putting  them  to  the  least  inconvenience.  I  was, 
however,  not  of  the  same  opinion.  M.  Baudus,  who  came 
now  and  then  to  see  me,  could  not  dissemble  that  the 
activity  of  the  police  had  not  relaxed  in  the  least  :  they 
were  certain  that  I  had  not  crossed  the  frontiers  either  at 
Strasburg  or  at  Metz.  General  Excelmans,  who  was  an 
outlaw,  and  had  fled  to  Brussels,  wrote  to  his  wife,  as  a  great 
secret,  as  soon  as  he  had  heard  the  history  of  my  flight,  that 
he  had  just  supped  with  me.  The  anecdote  was  industriously 
circulated,  but  the  police  were  not  deceived  by  it.  It  was  in 
Paris  that  they  continued  their  searches.  My  friends  were 
watched  with  a  strictness  inspired  by  the  hope  of  a  con- 
siderable reward.  M.  Berton  de  Vaux,  then  Secretary- 
General  of  the  Police,  explained  to  M.  Baudus  the  hidden 
cause  of  so  obstinate  a  persecution.  The  Ultra  party 
accused  the  Minister  of  having  yielded  to  old  connections 
of  friendship  with  me,  and  to  the  wish  of  making  a  merit  of 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  401 

my  flight  in  the  eyes  of  Louis  Bonaparte  and  his  whole 
family,  and  thus  insuring  himself  a  title  of  gratitude  for 
some  future  contingency.  These  absurd  charges  might 
come  to  the  ears  of  the  King  ;  and  M.  Decazes,  fearing 
above  all  things  to  lose  his  credit,  and  perhaps  to  fall 
beneath  the  hatred  to  which  he  was  exposed,  augmented, 
from  day  to  day,  the  activity  of  his  inquiries.  It  was  there- 
fore necessary  for  me  to  fly  ; — but  by  what  means  ?  It  was 
proposed  that  I  should  once  more  assume  the  garb  of  the 
other  sex,  and  go  secretly  to  a  sea-port,  where  smugglers 
would  undertake  to  convey  me  to  England.  I  rejected  that 
plan  as  quite  extravagant.  Neither  did  it  please  Baudus. 
A  few  days  afterwards,  he  came  and  told  me  that  a  Russian 
general  offered  to  take  charge  of  me  ;  that  I  should  be  con- 
ducted to  his  inn  during  the  night,  and  then  concealed  in 
the  back  of  his  carriage.  Thus  I  might  pass  the  barrier 
without  any  accident.  But  for  that  I  first  was  to  lay  down 
eight  thousand  francs  to  pay  his  debts,  and  then  take  upon 
me  all  the  expenses  of  the  journey.  The  money  was  ready, 
but  the  plan  miscarried.  The  Russian  wanted  to  know  the 
name  of  the  outlaw  ;  and  when  he  heard  it,  the  fear  of  being 
sent  to  Siberia,  in  case  I  were  discovered,  made  him  draw 
back.  After  that,  it  was  proposed  that  I  should  join  a 
battalion  of  Bavarian  soldiers  that  were  going  to  leave 
France,  by  trusting  my  secret  to  the  commander,  who 
would  undoubtedly  be  very  glad  to  save  a  relation  and 
friend  of  Prince  Eugene.  This  plan  appeared  unobjection- 
able to  me.  I  too  well  knew  the  King  of  Bavaria  to  fear 
that  the  officer  would  be  punished  ;  and  that  excellent 
Prince,  to  whom  I  mentioned  the  fact  a  few  months 
afterwards,  said  to  me  with  emotion,  *'  I  would  have 
attached  him  to  my  person,  if  he  had  succeeded  in  saving 
you  !  " 