


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  397 

next-door  neighbour.  I  will  bring  him  to  you  this  even- 
ing," She  did  so.  He  was  a  young  man  of  twenty,  very 
well  informed,  and  whose  address  was  agreeable.  We  soon 
became  friends.  He  used  to  remain  with  me  from  eleven  at 
night  till  two  in  the  morning.  I  taught  him  to  play  chess  ; 
and  he  brought  me  the  journals  and  the  news  of  Paris. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

I  MUST  now  return  to  the  Conciergerie.  I  had  scarcely- 
passed  the  outer  door  when  the  jailer  entered  my  room,  and, 
as  I  had  foreseen,  retired  when  he  heard  a  noise  behind  the 
screen.  But  he  returned  about  five  minutes  afterwards  ; 
and  not  seeing  any  one,  though  the  same  noise  was  once 
more  repeated,  he  took  a  fancy  to  remove  one  side  of  the 
screen.  At  the  sight  of  Madame  Lavalette,  he  uttered  a  loud 
exclamation  and  ran  to  the  door.  She  caught  hold  of  his 
coat,  and  said  to  him,  *'  Wait  a  minute  ;  let  my  husband  get 
off!  "  "  You  will  ruin  me,  Madame,"  he  said  in  a  rage  ;  and, 
disengaging  himself  with  so  great  an  effort  that  he  left  a 
piece  of  his  coat  in  the  hands  of  my  wife,  he  went  off  calling 
aloud,  "  The  prisoner  has  escaped  !  "  With  those  words  he 
ran,  tearing  his  hair,  to  the  Prefect  of  Police.  In  an  instant,, 
all  the  turnkeys  and  gendarmes  were  sent  about  in  all 
directions.  Two  of  the  former  reached  the  sedan-chair,  that 
was  leisurely  advancing  on  the  quay.  They  opened  it,  and 
finding  no  one  in  it  but  my  daughter,  they  left  it.  Soon^ 
however,  the  pursuit  began  in  regular  order  ;  and  during 
the  whole  night,  the  houses  of  my  friends  and  acquaintances, 
and  even  of  all  the  persons  with  whom  my  late  situation  in 
the  world  could  have  given  me  the  least  connection,  were 
rigorously  examined.  The  next  day  the  barriers  were  shut, 
and  the  joy  of  the  whole  capital  in  witnessing  the  despair  of 
the  police  was  inexpressible.  Madame  Lavalette,  a  little 
easier  after  half  an  hour,  began  to  get  the  better  of  her 
agitation  ;  and  she  would  have  enjoyed  her  happiness,   if 

398 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  399 

the  brutal  turnkeys,  who  had  left  her  door  open,  had  not 
uttered  against  her  the  most  horrible  abuse,  and  assured  her 
it  was  impossible  I  should  not  be  retaken  in  a  very  short 
time. 

The  arrival  of  the  Procureur-General  Bellart  put  an  end 
to  their  abusive  language.  He  sat  himself  gravely  down  to 
examine  her,  and  addressed  reproaches  to  her  that  were 
only  ridiculous.  By  his  order,  she  was  treated  with  so  much 
severity,  that,  in  the  state  of  health  in  which  she  then  was, 
that  usage  became  the  chief  cause  of  the  disorder  under 
which  she  laboured  during  twelve  years,  but  from  which 
she  has  at  last  recovered.  They  placed  her  in  the  chamber 
of  Marshal  Ney,  where  there  was  no  chimney,  but  a  German 
stove,  the  suffocating  heat  of  which  made  her  suffer  a  great 
deal  night  and  day.  The  window  opened  into  the  women's 
yard.  To  hear  the  noisy  cries  of  those  wretches  during  the 
whole  day,  and  their  vulgar  and  obscene  language,  was 
agony  to  so  delicate  a  female.  No  person  could  come  near 
her  ;  even  her  maid  was  excluded,  and  she  was  attended  by 
one  of  the  female  turnkeys.  None  of  her  letters  could  cross 
the  threshold  of  the  prison,  nor  could  any  communication 
from  her  friends  reach  her.  She  was  for  ever  assailed  with 
a  thousand  different  terrors,  especially  in  the  night,  when 
the  sentries  were  relieved.  She  always  imagined  it  was  her 
husband  they  were  bringing  back.  During  more  than  five- 
and-twenty  days  and  nights,  she  did  not  enjoy  one  moment's 
sleep.  I  was  far  from  thinking  she  could  be  so  unhappy.  I 
had  been  told,  with  the  view  of  comforting  mc,  tliat  she  was 
lodged  in  the  apartments  of  the  lady  of  the  Prefect  of  Police, 
treated  with  the  greatest  attention  and  respect,  and  that 
she  would  soon  obtain  permission  to  return  home. 