

When  the  King  of  Bavaria  heard  of  my  escape  from  the 
Conciergerie,  he  said  to  Prince  Eugene — "  As  for  him,  he 
may  come  to  me  ;  I  will  take  care  of  him." 

I  went  in  consequence  to  Munich,  and  wrote  a  note  to 
Baron  d'Arnay,  secretary  to  the  Prince,  to  beg  he  vyould 
'  For  this  letter,  see  Appendix  No.  XII. 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE.  413 

come  to  see  me.  He  came,  but  after  having  delivered  my 
note  to  the  Prince,  who  dined  that  da}'  with  the  King. 
The  news  was  communicated  to  his  Majesty  after  dinner. 
They  reckoned  no  longer  upon  me,  thinking  me  gone  to 
America.  My  arrival  surprised  the  King,  who  did  not 
wish  to  have  disagreeable  discussions  with  France.  After 
a  moment's  reflection,  he  said,  "He  cannot  remain  here  : 
not  even  under  a  feigned  name.  That  ferret,  the  Duke 
d'Alberg,  is  at  Munich,  and  would  soon  find  him  out. 
Remain  two  days  with  him,  and  let  him  set  off  the  third 
for  Frayssingen.  He  will  be  in  safety  there."  That  small 
town  is  surrounded  with  woods,  the  cold  was  severe ;  but 
I  felt  so  happy  at  being  at  liberty,  that  I  could  not  bear  to 
remain  in  my  room,  and  went  out  ten  times  a  day  to  stroll 
about  in  the  forest,  notwithstanding  the  snow  and  ice.  My 
strange  manners  surprised  the  inhabitants  ;  and  a  French 
emigrant,  who  lived  at  Munich,  came  to  my  abode,  soon 
discovered  who  I  was,  and  carried  the  news  to  the  capital. 
I  was  in  consequence  obliged  to  leave  my  retreat,  and  the 
King  was  kind  enough  to  send  me  to  Starnberg,  a  wretched 
village,  situated  near  the  lake  of  that  name.'  I  was  uncom- 
fortable there  ;  but  spring  was  approaching.  The  forests 
in  that  part  of  the  country  are  beautiful,  and  of  immense 
extent  :  while  the  banks  of  the  lake  are  lined  with  delight- 
ful country  seats.  Prince  Eugene  used  to  come  twice  a  week 
to  the  house  of  a  gamekeeper,  two  leagues  from  Munich, 
where  I  went  to  meet  him.  He  brought  me  newspapers 
and  books,  and  acquainted  me  with  all  that  was  going 
fonvard.  I  thus  reached  the  month  of  May  ;  but  I  was 
again  obliged  to  leave  Starnberg.  I  had  been  recognised  ; 
and  the  Prince  Royal,  who  learned  that  I  resided  in  that 
remote  corner  of  the  country,  remonstrated  with  his  father 
on  my  stay  in  Bavaria,  and  the  difficulties  into  which  he 
might  get  involved  with  France,  in  case  they  should  learn 
in  Paris  that  he  had  given  me  a  retreat.  The  King  denied 
'  See  Appendix,  No.  XV. 


4 1 4  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

my  being  in  his  states  ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  sent  me  an 
order  to  retire  to  the  farther  end  of  the  lake.  By  the  advice 
of  Prince  Eugene,  I  went  and  concealed  myself  in  the  house 
of  a  gardener,  four  leagues  farther  still.  "  You  will  be  more 
comfortable  there,"  said  the  Prince  :  "  in  about  a  fortnight, 
I  shall  come  to  reside  in  the  royal  seat  that  is  no  more  than 
a  league  from  your  new  abode.  We  shall  be  able  to  see  each 
other  every  day."  He  soon  came  there  with  his  family, 
and  I  used  to  go  every  morning  to  the  castle,  and  did  not 
go  home  till  the  evening.  The  friendly  reception  I  met 
with  from  Princess  Augusta,  the  kind  attentions  bestowed 
on  me  by  all  the  persons  that  surrounded  her,  contributed 
greatly  to  alleviate  my  grief  and  restore  my  health.  The 
Prince  said  to  me  one  day — "  The  King  is  accustomed 
annually  to  spend  one  day  in  this  place.  When  I  went 
yesterday  to  take  his  orders  on  the  subject,  he  accepted  my 
invitation,  but  on  condition  that  you  would  come  and  dine 
with  him." 