


CHAPTER  XLII. 

We  entered  the  Rue  de  Clichy  which  leads  to  the  barrier 
of  the  same  name.  As  I  had  on  the  regimentals  and 
cap  of  the  Guards,  the  English  soldiers  we  met  saluted 
us  in  the  military  manner.  Two  officers  we  met  on  the 
Toad  appeared  very  much  surprised  at  seeing  with  Sir 
Robert  one  of  their  comrades  with  whom  they  were  un- 
acquainted ;  but  Mr.  Hutchinson  went  up  to  them  and 
talked  to  them  while  we  were  approaching  the  barrier.  To 
the  right  and  to  the  left  were  two  guard-houses — the  one 
English,  and  the  other  French.  The  soldiers  drew  up 
under  arms.  Fortunately  the  French  were  National 
Guards,  and  it  was  not  probable  they  could  know  me,  as 
they  did  not  belong  to  my  quarter  of  the  town.  We  crossed 
the  barrier  with  a  slow  step  ;  and  when  we  were  out,  I 
thanked  Sir  Robert  with  as  much  gratitude  as  if  we  had 
crossed  the  barriers  of  the  kingdom.  We  went  on  thus  to 
the  village  of  La  Chapelle.  There  we  were  obliged  to  take 
another  horse,  to  be  able  to  go  to  Compiegne.  This  horse 
had  been  baited  at  a  large  inn.  When  we  approached  the 
house,  we  perceived  four  gendarmes  standing  in  front  of  the 
door.  Sir  Robert  went  up  to  them  :  they  separated,  that 
we  might  pass  ;  and,  to  prevent  them  from  paying  attention 
to  us,  Mr.  Hutchinson  began  a  conversation  with  them. 
His  inquiries  were  chiefly  directed  to  the  number  of  stables 
and  the  quantity  of  forage  and  lodgings  that  were  to  be 
found  in  the  village  :  from  all  which  they  concluded  that 
English  troops  were  expected,  and  one  of  them  invited  the 

407 


4o8  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

English  captain  to  accompany  him  to  the  Mayor.  "  Not 
at  present,"  he  answered  :  "  I  am  going  forward  to  meet 
the  waggons,  and  in  two  hours  I  shall  be  back."  The 
conversation  could  not  last  very  long  with  an  Englishman 
who  knew  but  little  of  our  language.  But  the  horse  was 
quickly  changed,  and  we  had  the  satisfaction,  on  going 
away,  to  exchange  salutes  with  the  gendarmes.  I  then 
learned  that  the  man  who  had  brought  us  thus  far 
belonged  to  M.  Auguste  de  St.  Aignan.  On  the  road  we 
met  with  several  gendarmes  in  pursuit  of  malefactors,  or 
bearing  military  correspondence.  They  all  fixed  their  eyes 
on  us  without  suspecting  anything.  I  had  accustomed 
myself,  on  seeing  them,  to  shut  my  eyes,  but  with  the 
precaution  of  placing  my  hand  on  my  pistol, — fully 
resolved,  if  I  should  be  recognised  and  apprehended,  to 
blow  my  brains  out  ;  for  it  would  have  been  too  great  a 
stupidity  to  suffer  myself  to  be  brought  back  to  Paris. 

We  arrived  at  last  at  Compiegne.  At  the  entrance  of 
the  suburb  stood  a  non-commissioned  English  officer,  who, 
on  seeing  his  general,  turned  to  the  right  and  marched  with 
gravity  through  several  small  streets,  until  he  stopped  at  a 
small  house  in  a  very  lonely  part  of  the  town.  There  we 
found  an  officer  who  received  us  very  well,  and  we  waited 
for  Sir  Robert's  carriage,  which  Mr.  Wallis  was  to  bring 
from  Paris  for  him.  That  officer  had  ordered  post-horses 
for  General  Wallis,  brother-in-law  to  Sir  Robert  Wilson, 
who  travelled  under  his  name.  Mr.  Wallis  arrived  at 
about  six  o'clock  ;  after  having  been  followed  a  great  part 
of  the  way  by  the  gendarmes.  We  had  not  an  instant  to 
lose  :  the  carriage  advanced  rapidly.  We  experienced  a 
great  delay  at  Conde,  in  getting  through  the  town,  but  it 
was  during  the  night.  At  last,  next  morning,  at  seven 
o'clock,  we  arrived  at  Valenciennes,  the  last  French  city 
on  that  frontier.  I  was  beginning  to  feel  more  easy,  when 
the  postmaster  told  us  to  go  and  have  our  passports 
examined  by  the  captain  of  the  gendarmerie.     "  You  forgot, 