

On  the  9th  of  January,  181 6,  at  eight  o'clock  in  the 
evening,  I  at  last  took  leave  of  my  kind  friends.  We  were 
all  very  much  affected,  and  particularly  myself,  who  was 
leaving  them  with  so  little  hope  of  ever  seeing  them  again. 
I  did,  however,  meet  them  again.  I  write  this  at  twenty 
minutes'  walk  from  a  delightful  country  seat,  on  the  right 
bank  of  the  Seine,  which  they  inhabit  the  whole  year 
through.  I  see  them  every  day  :  they  are  happy  and 
independent.  Fedora,  their  only  daughter,  is  married  to 
M.  de  Montjoyeux,  an  amiable  young  man.  They  have 
two  pretty  children  ;  and  Fedora  is  one  of  the  cleverest, 
handsomest,  and  most  agreeable  women  I  know.  I  take 
some  pleasure  in  thinking  that  the  happiness  this  family 
enjoy  is  partly  the  reward  of  their  generous  and  courageous 
conduct  towards  me. 

After  I  had  embraced  them,  Messieurs  Bresson  and  Baudus 
brought  me  to  the  corner  of  the  Rue  de  Grenellc,  where  I 


404  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAV  ALETTE. 

found  again  the  faithful  Chassenon,  with  his  cabriolet.  In 
going  to  my  destination,  we  crossed  the  Place  du  Carrousel. 
I  could  not  help  smiling  when  I  passed  so  near  the  numerous 
sentries  stationed  along  the  railings  of  the  Tuileries,  and 
when  I  saw  the  place  lighted  up,  and  filled,  as  I  had  reason 
to  imagine,  with  people  enraged  at  not  being  able  to  seize 
me,  while  I  was  not  more  than  fifty  yards  from  them. 

We  stopped  at  a  house  in  the  Rue  du  Helder,  near  the 
Boulevard  :  there  I  took  leave  of  my  friend  Chassenon.  As 
I  walked  slowly  up  the  stairs,  I  was  surprised  at  meeting 
Mademoiselle  Dubourg.  There  would  have  been  too  much 
danger  in  our  appearing  to  know  each  other.  I  afterwards 
learned  that  she  was  going  to  M.  Dupuis,  my  Reporting 
Judge,  who  lived  on  the  second  floor  of  the  house  ;  so  that 
I  was  going  to  pass  the  night  under  the  same  roof  with  the 
magistrate  who  had  during  my  trial  examined  me  twice  at 
length,  and  with  great  severity.  This  circumstance,  however, 
by  no  means  troubled  me.  M.  Dupuis  was  an  honourable 
man,  to  whom  I  had  shown  no  reserve — who  was  convinced 
of  my  innocence,  and  did  not  fear  to  declare  it  openly,  with 
an  energy  that  might  be  hurtful  to  his  fortune. 

When  I  reached  the  first-floor,  I  saw  before  me  a  gentle- 
man of  tall  stature  and  noble  features — it  was  Sir  Robert 
Wilson.  He  introduced  me  to  two  persons  who  were 
expecting  me  in  the  parlour  ;  in  one  of  the  two  I  re- 
cognised Mr.  Bruce,  whom  I  had  met  sometimes  during 
the  preceding  winter  at  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu's.  Mr. 
Hutchinson,  to  whom  the  apartments  belonged,  was  a 
Captain  in  the  English  Guards.  He  received  me  in  a 
friendly  manner.  We  seated  ourselves  round  a  bowl  of 
punch.  Our  conversation  turned  on  public  aff"airs,  and 
we  talked  with  as  much  ease  and  freedom  as  if  we  had 
been  together  in  London.  These  gentlemen  did  not  appear 
to  entertain  the  least  uneasiness  in  respect  to  our  next  day's 
journey  ;  and  at  last,  after  sitting  for  about  an  hour.  Sir 
Robert  and  Mr.  Bruce  rose,  and  the  former,  shaking  hands 