

I  went.  His  Majesty  received  me  with  open  arms.  He 
was  accompanied  by  some  officers  of  his  household,  and 
among  others  by  Count  Charles  von  Reichberg,  who  told 
us  that  he  had  left  Paris  eight  days  after  my  escape  from 
prison.  Though  the  gendarmes  had  been  present  at  his 
departure,  and  had  examined  his  passport  with  a  great  deal 
of  care,  he  was  nevertheless  stopped  on  the  Boulevard,  and 
obliged,  as  well  as  his  two  travelling  companions,  to  get  out 
of  their  carriage,  that  the  descriptions  of  their  persons  might 
be  verified,  and  that  it  might  be  ascertained  that  I  was  not 
among  them.  The  King  was  very  merry,  and  took  a  great 
deal  of  pleasure  at  seeing  me  where  I  was,  after  having  been 
exposed  to  so  many  dangers.  During  the  five  hours  that  he 
remained  with  the  Prince,  he  never  ceased  loading  me  with 
the  most  delicate  attentions.  The  pains  he  perpetually  took 
to  bring  to  my  mind  his  former  stay  in  Paris,  when  I  had 
the  honour  of  paying  my  court  to  him  ;  the  slight  service  I 
had  rendered  to  him  in  my  quality  of  Postmaster-General, 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE.  415 

and  the  attachment  with  which  the  Emperor  had  honoured 
me,  were  meant  to  show  the  persons  who  surrounded  him 
that  I  was  under  his  especial  protection,  and  that  my  mis- 
fortunes augmented  the  interest  he  vouchsafed  to  express  for 
me.  When  he  was  ready  to  go,  he  came  up  to  me,  and, 
pressing  my  hand,  said,  '*  Remain  at  peace  in  my  country, 
hve  among  your  friends,  and  reckon  upon  my  attachment 
and  protection." 

I  soon  obtained  permission  to  settle  in  Munich  under  a 
feigned  name.  I  went  every  night  to  the  theatre ;  and  when 
the  play  was  over,  I  finished  the  evening  with  the  Prince, 
who  lived  en  famille  ;  but  it  was  quickly  known  in  Paris. 
The  Duke  de  Richelieu  took  it  amiss,  and  a  formal  demand 
was  transmitted  to  Munich,  to  send  me  away  from  Bavaria. 
Count  d'Erlon,  who  lived  in  the  outskirts  of  the  city,  was 
comprehended  in  the  sentence  of  proscription,  though  he  did 
not  live  there  under  his  own  name.  The  cabinet  of  Munich 
replied  to  that  of  Paris  that  they  knew  nobody  in  Bavaria 
who  bore  our  names  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  King  pro- 
posed to  us  to  take  refuge  in  Silesia,  where  he  possessed 
several  castles,  as  Duke  of  Deux-Ponts.  The  measure  was 
a  dangerous  one  :  could  the  King  of  Bavaria's  protection 
follow,  and  defend  me  at  so  great  a  distance,  and  in  the 
heart  of  a  Prussian  province  ?  Should  I  not  be  obliged  to 
go  from  thence  to  Russia,  whither  I  felt  they  wanted  to  drive 
me  ?  I  answered  by  begging  he  would  rather  shut  me  up 
in  some  prison  in  Bavaria.  Fortunately,  the  diplomatic 
correspondence  relaxed  by  degrees  on  that  subject  ;  Count 
d'Erlon  remained  at  his  country-seat,  and  I  escaped  by  going 
to  Eichstadt,  in  the  principality  of  Prince  Eugene,  and  after- 
wards to  Augsburg,  to  his  sister,  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu. 
I  passed  with  her  the  last  year  of  my  banishment  ;  the 
attentions  and  kindness  she  showed  me  might  liave  made 
me  perhaps  forget  France  if  my  dearest  affections  had  not 
made  life  intolerable  far  from  my  country. 