


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

I  REMAINED,  howevcr,  the  night  at  Mons.  Next  day  I  could 
not  go  any  farther  than  Namur.  I  travelled  under  the 
name  of  a  Colonel  Losack,  sent  by  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton on  a  mission  to  Munich  and  Vienna.  I  had  purchased 
at  Mons  a  bad  cabriolet  ;  I  had  no  servant ;  and  the 
weather  was  so  severe,  and  my  health  so  feeble,  that  I 
could  not  travel  above  twenty  leagues  a  day.  It  was  very 
dangerous  for  me  to  remain  so  long  on  the  road.  The 
description  of  my  person  had  been  sent  everywhere  about : 
I  might  meet  with  Englishmen,  and  my  passport,  great- 
coat, and  buttons  with  the  arms  of  England,  would  all 
betray  me,  as  I  could  not  speak  the  language.  I  arrived, 
however,  without  any  accident,  at  Worms.  I  knew  enough 
German  to  serve  my  purpose,  and  I  hastened  to  read  the 
papers.  How  great  was  my  consternation  when  I  read  in 
the  Gazette  that  Madame  de  Lavalette  remained  in  the 
Conciergerie,  and  that  Sir  Robert  Wilson  and  his  two 
friends  had  been  apprehended  ! 

The  General  had  brought  with  us  to  Mons  a  young 
servant  who  could  not  speak  French.  When  he  returned, 
the  spies  who  were  on  the  look-out  for  me,  observed  in  the 
yard  of  the  hotel  where  he  lived  his  coach  covered  with 
mud.  They  inquired  of  the  portress,  who  told  them  that 
the  General  was  just  come  home  from  a  journey,  on  which 
he  had  been  absent  only  three  days.  The  police  suspected 
him  :  the  young  servant  was  seduced  by  one  of  the  spies, 
who   questioned    him    artfully,  and   he    confessed  that  his 


4 1 2  MEMOIRS  OF  CO  UNT  LAV  ALE  TTE. 

master  had  been  to  Mons  with  an  officer  of  the  Guards 
who  could  not  speak  a  word  of  Enghsh.  The  description 
of  my  person  given  by  the  young  man  put  the  police  on 
the  track  ;  but  proofs  were  necessary.  It  was  this  ser- 
vant who  used  to  carry  the  correspondence  of  Sir  Robert 
Wilson  to  the  English  embassy.  They  promised  him 
money  if  he  would  bring  his  dispatches  to  the  Prefect 
of  Police.  He  did  not  fail  to  do  so.  The  first  letter  they 
opened  was  directed  to  the  Earl  Grey.^  The  history  of 
our  journey  was  related  in  it,  with  all  its  details.  Having 
gained  possession  of  this  document,  the  police  had  the 
three  Englishmen  apprehended. 

The  perusal  of  the  journals  grieved  me  beyond  expression. 
I  took  a  resolution  to  go  to  Russia,  to  solicit  from  the 
Emperor  Alexander  that  my  wife  and  friends  might  be  set 
at  liberty  ;  and  I  flew  to  Manheim  to  get  a  letter  from  the 
Grand-Duchess  of  Baden,  first  cousin  to  my  wife.  She  was 
out  of  town  ;  and  from  what  I  learned  from  my  landlord,. 
I  should  be  forced  to  keep  up  a  most  severe  incognito. 
The  Grand-Duke  refused  the  passage  through  his  territories 
to  the  outlaws  who  came  from  France  ;  not  so  much, 
however,  out  of  ill-will  towards  them,  as  for  fear  of  com- 
promising himself  with  the  French  Government.  When 
I  left  Manheim,  1  wrote  nevertheless  to  the  Grand-Duchess, 
and  continued  my  journey,  like  a  madman,  through  Wir- 
temberg,  where  I  was  nearly  arrested  at  Stuttgard.  The 
King  who  at  that  time  occupied  the  throne  would  not 
have  failed  to  make  me  acquainted  with  his  dungeons. 
I  succeeded  at  last  in  passing  through  Ulm,  and  found 
myself  in  safety  in  the  Bavarian  territory. 