


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  405 

with  me,  said  :  "Be  up  to-morrow  by  six  o'clock,  and  be 
very  careflil  about  your  dress.  You  will  find  here  the  coat 
of  a  Captain  in  the  Guards,  which  you  must  put  on.  At 
eight  o'clock  precisely  I  shall  expect  you  at  the  door."  "As 
for  me,"  said  Bruce,  "  I  am  going  to  spend  three  days  at  the 
country-seat  of  the  Princess  de  la  Moskowa  ;  for  you  will  not 
want  me  any  longer.  My  wishes  go  along  with  you,  and  I 
shall  receive  accounts  from  you  by  my  friends." 

When  they  were  gone,  Mr.  Hutchinson  offered  me  his 
bed  ;  but  I  had  no  desire  to  sleep,  and  I  laid  myself  down 
on  a  sofa.  While  my  host  was  lying  in  a  profound  sleep,  I 
looked  about  the  apartments  to  find  a  corner  where  I  might 
conceal  myself,  in  case  the  police  should  come  and  pay  us  a 
visit  ;  but  it  was  very  scantily  furnished,  and  consisted  only 
of  two  rooms  and  a  closet.  It  would  have  been  impossible 
to  elude,  even  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  the  most  superficial 
search.  I  opened  the  window  to  ascertain  the  distance  I  was 
from  the  street  ;  that  distance  was  too  considerable  for  me 
to  leap.  I  could  not  hope  to  save  myself  after  my  fall,  and 
still  too  near  the  ground  for  me  to  be  killed  at  once. 
Fortunately,  I  recollected  the  pistols  M.  de  Chassenon  had 
given  me.  I  took  one  of  them  in  my  hands  and  examined 
it  with  care.  I  placed  it  under  my  pillow,  and  was  as  easy 
after  that,  as  if  I  had  had  in  my  possession  the  surest 
talisman.  I  soon  fell  asleep  ;  but  about  one  o'clock  in  the 
morning  I  was  awakened  by  a  great  noise  and  a  very 
animated  conversation  that  was  taking  place  at  the  carriage- 
door  of  the  house.  By  listening,  I  discovered  that  somebody 
wanted  to  get  in.  I  immediately  awoke  my  companion,  and 
said,  "I  believe  I  am  discovered.  Some  person  wishes  to  get 
into  the  house."  Mr.  Hutchinson  went  out  of  the  apartment 
in  the  calmest  manner,  and  in  about  five  minutes,  which 
appeared  horribly  long  to  me,  he  came  back,  saying,  "  It  is 
only  a  dispute  between  the  portress  and  a  French  officer 
who  lives  on  the  third  floor.  She  is  complaining  that  he 
comes  home  too  late.  So  let  us  go  to  sleep  again  without  fear." 


4o6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

At  last,  after  having  counted  ever}-  hour  of  the  night,  I 
heard  six  o'clock  strike  :  I  immediately  set  about  my  toilet, 
and  at  eight  o'clock  precisely  I  found  Sir  Robert  Wilson  in 
the  street,  dressed  in  his  full  regimentals,  and  seated  in  a 
pretty  gig.  Mr.  Hutchinson  soon  appeared  also  on  horse- 
back, and  we  set  off.  The  weather  was  beautiful  ;  all  the 
shops  were  open,  everybody  in  the  streets,  and  by  a  singular 
coincidence  they  were  just  at  that  moment  putting  up  in  the 
Place  de  Greve  the  gibbet  which,  according  to  custom,  is 
used  to  execute  in  effigy  persons  declared  guilty  in  con- 
tumacy. 