

Madame  de  Lavalette  had  got  out  of  prison  after  six  weeks' 


4i6  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE. 

ill-usage.  Deep  melancholy  and  perpetual  alarm  inspired 
her  with  a  great  disgust  for  society,  and  threw  her  mind 
into  such  a  state  that  she  was  said  to  suffer  from  mental 
derangement.  Though  my  daughter  was  at  that  time  no 
more  than  fifteen  years  old,  her  mother  hastened  to  establish 
her,  that  she  might  enjoy  the  protection  of  a  husband,  when 
the  state  of  her  own  health  would  not  permit  her  to  keep  a 
watchful  eye  over  her.  She  wrote  to  me  :  "  I  feel  it  is  high 
time  to  shelter  my  daughter  from  our  misfortunes."  She 
fixed  her  choice  on  M.  de  Forget,  the  son  of  a  gentleman  of 
Auvergne,  whose  name  had  been  long  respected.  He  had 
been  Auditor  to  the  Council  of  State.  I  had  observed  in  him 
a  great  deal  of  talent,  and  an  excellent  heart.  I  gave  my 
consent,  and  my  daughter  is  now  happy  and  honoured  in 
her  province. 

Finally,  after  six  years  of  outlawry,  the  gates  of  France 
were  again  opened  for  me.  Before  my  departure,  I  obtained 
an  audience  of  the  King  of  Bavaria.  He  pressed  me  in  his 
arms  with  emotion,  and  said  :  "  I  embrace  M.  Cossar — (that 
was  the  name  under  which  I  went  in  Germany) — but  I 
require  of  M.  de  Lavalette  to  come  and  thank  me  within 
two  years.  I  am  growing  old  :  he  must  not  tarry  too  long." 
My  political  situation  in  France  was  very  uncomfortable, 
and  the  severity  of  the  Government  too  great  to  have  per- 
mitted me  to  fulfil  the  engagement  the  King  had  made  me 
take,  and  which  was  so  consonant  to  the  wishes  of  my  grate- 
ful heart.  Death  has  since  snatched  him  from  his  subjects, 
who  adored  him,  and  who  never  will  forget  him  whom  they 
were  wont  to  call  "  the  good  King." 

I  left  Prince  Eugene  in  the  prime  of  his  life,  enjoying 
excellent  health,  in  the  most  happy  situation,  beloved  by 
the  King  as  if  he  had  been  his  son,  surrounded  by  a 
numerous  and  charming  family,  loaded  with  all  the  gifts 
of  fortune,  of  whom  he  had  nothing  more  to  demand,  his 
name  shining  with  bright  and  unsullied  glory.  He  had 
a  fall  from  a    sledge    in    1816,  in  consequence  of  which   a 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  VALETTE.  417 

gathering  took  place,  they  say,  in  his  head.  The  pain  being 
very  shght,  he  neglected  the  necessary  remedies.  Seven  or 
eight  weeks  afterwards,  the  gathering  appeared  with  symp- 
toms which  the  physicians  did  not  comprehend  ;  and  he  died 
at  the  age  of  forty-four,  leaving  a  disconsolate  widow  and 
children,  whose  education  was  not  yet  finished,  but  also  a 
reputation  for  courage,  wisdom,  and  generosity,  that  neither 
France,  Italy,  nor  Bavaria  will  ever  forget. 