


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  409 

I  suppose,  to  read  who  we  were,"  said  Sir  Robert  calmly  : 
"  let  the  captain  come  here,  if  he  chooses  to  see  us."  The 
postmaster  felt  how  wrongly  he  had  acted  ;  and  taking  our 
passports,  he  went  himself  to  get  them  signed.  As  it  was 
very  long  before  he  came  back,  I  began  to  be  tormented 
by  a  most  horrible  anxiety.  Was  I  going  to  be  wrecked 
in  the  harbour  ?  Suppose  the  officer  of  gendarmes  were 
to  come  himself  to  verify  the  signatures  and  to  apprehend 
me  ?  Fortunately  the  weather  was  very  cold,  it  was 
scarcely  daylight,  and  the  officer  signed  the  passports 
without  rising  from  his  bed.  We  got  out  of  the  gate.  On 
the  glacis,  an  officer  of  the  Preventive  Service  wanted  to 
see  whether  we  were  in  order  ;  but  having  satisfied  his 
curiosity,  we  went  on  and  stopped  no  more.  We  flew 
along  the  beautiful  Brussels  road.  From  time  to  time  I 
looked  through  the  back  window,  to  see  whether  we  were 
not  pursued.  My  impatience  augmented  with  every  turn 
of  the  wheels.  The  postillions  showed  us  at  a  distance 
a  large  house,  that  was  the  Belgian  Custom-house  :  I  fixed 
my  eyes  on  that  edifice,  and  it  seemed  to  me  as  if  it 
remained  always  equally  far  off".  I  imagined  that  the 
postillion  did  not  get  on  :  I  was  ashamed  of  my  impatience, 
but  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  curb  it.  At  last  we  reached 
the  frontier :  we  were  on  the  Belgian  territory  : — I  was 
saved  !  I  pressed  the  hands  of  Sir  Robert,  and  expressed 
to  him,  with  a  deep  emotion,  the  extent  of  my  gratitude. 
But  he,  keeping  up  his  gravity,  only  smiled,  without 
answering  me.  About  half  an  hour  afterwards  he  turned 
to  me,  and  said  in  the  most  serious  tone  possible  :  "  Now, 
pray  tell  me,  my  dear  friend,  why  did  you  not  like  to  be 
guillotined  ?  "  1  stared  at  him  with  astonishment,  and 
made  no  reply.  "  Yes,"  he  continued  ;  "  they  say  that 
you  had  solicited,  as  a  favour,  that  you  might  be  shot  ? " 
"  It  is  very  true.  When  a  man  is  guillotined,  they  put 
him  in  a  cart,  with  his  hands  bound  behind  his  back  ; 
and    when  he  is  on  the    scaffold,  they  tie  him    fast    to   a 


4IO  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

plank,  which  they  lower  to  let  it  slip  thus  under  the 
knife."  "  Ah  !  I  understand  :  you  did  not  like  to  have 
your  throat  cut  like  a  cal/y 

We  arrived  at  Mons  at  about  three  o'clock  in  the  after- 
noon, and  we  stopped  at  the  best  inn.  While  dinner  was 
preparing,  I  wrote  a  few  letters,  of  which  Sir  Robert  was 
kind  enough  to  take  charge  ;  and  after  having  gone  with 
me  to  buy  some  things  I  wanted,  and  having  given  me  two 
letters,  one  for  the  King  of  Prussia  and  the  other  for  Mr. 
Lamb,  the  English  resident  in  Munich,  we  separated, — he 
to  return  to  Paris,  and  I  to  go  farther  into  Germany  and 
try  to  reach  Bavaria. 