

But  I  was  also  obliged  to  abandon  this  project  :  the  police, 
having  guessed  that  I  might  make  resort  to  it,  watched  the 
•troop  with  so  much  vigilance,  and  the  officers  were  so  com- 

27 


402  MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LA  V ALETTE. 

pletely  circumvented,  that  it  became  quite  impossible  to  have 
any  connection  with  them.  At  last,  on  the  eighteenth  day 
after  I  had  left  prison,  Baudus  came  to  me  with  a  jo}d"ul 
countenance  and  embraced  me,  saying,  "We  shall  at  last 
succeed.  Some  Englishmen  have  offered  to  serve  you,  and 
I  believe  they  possess  the  means  of  doing  so."  These  are 
the  particulars  of  what  had  happened.  The  Princess  de 
Vaudemont,  uneasy  at  knowing  me  to  be  still  in  Paris, 
though  she  was  not  acquainted  with  the  place  of  my  con- 
cealment, looked  about  for  persons  who  might  help  me  away. 
She  spoke  of  her  anxiety  to  Madame  de  St.  Aignan  Caulain- 
court,  one  of  the  cleverest  women  born  in  France,  whose 
kindness  is  inexhaustible,  and  whose  courage  is  unbounded  : 
she  proposed  to  the  Princess  to  sound  a  young  Englishman, 
Mr.  Bruce,  who  used  to  visit  both  their  houses.  Bruce, 
delighted  at  the  idea  of  saving  an  unfortunate  man  who 
had  escaped  the  scaffold  in  so  wonderful  a  manner,  accepted 
with  enthusiasm  the  proposal  of  the  ladies,  and  went 
immediately  to  consult  Sir  Robert  Wilson  on  the  subject. 

Sir  Robert  shared  his  young  friend's  enthusiasm.  He 
had  failed  in  his  attempt  to  save  Marshal  Ney,  but  he  hoped 
to  take  his  revenge  in  my  case.  He  made  quite  a  military 
expedition  of  the  business  ;  and  as  Bruce  was  not  in  the 
army,  it  became  necessary  to  find  one  or  two  officers, 
independent  men,  of  liberal  opinions,  who  might  be  dis- 
posed to  play  off  a  good  trick  on  the  Government  of  the 
Bourbons.  The  road  to  Belgium,  by  Valenciennes,  was 
specially  assigned  to  the  English  army,  and  it  was  there- 
fore chosen  for  my  escape.  They  asked  no  more  than  two 
days  to  finish  their  preparations.  I  received  a  very  particular 
instruction  concerning  my  dress  :  no  mustachios  ;  an  English 
wig  ;  my  beard  shaved  very  clean,  after  the  manner  of  the 
officers  of  that  nation  ;  a  great-coat  with  buttons  of  the 
English  Guards  :  the  regimentals  and  hat  were  to  be  given 
me  at  the  instant  of  our  departure. 

We  held  council,  and,  as  it  occurs  in  most  cases,  our  first 


MEMOIRS  OF  COUNT  LAVALETTE.  405 

steps  were  wrong.  It  was  looked  upon  as  very  necessary  to 
get  my  coat  made  by  the  tailor  of  an  English  regiment  ;  but 
he  would  want  my  measure  :  my  friend  Stanislaus  took  it 
with  fine  white  paper  ;  and  instead  of  the  notches  that  the 
tailors  are  accustomed  to  make,  he  wrote  on  it,  '''•Length  of 
the  forearm^  breadth  of  the  breast^^  &c.,  in  a  fine  neat  hand, 
and  carried  it  boldly  to  the  tailor  of  the  regim.ent  of  the 
Guards.  He  quickly  made  the  coat,  however — not  without 
observing  that  the  measure  had  not  been  taken  by  a  tailor. 
M.  Bresson  had  been  to  buy  me  another  great-coat  at  an  old 
clothes  shop,  and  vv^as  naturally  obliged  to  measure  it  on 
himself.  He  was,  however,  tall  and  thin  ;  so  that  in  less 
than  forty-eight  hours  I  had  two  coats,  neither  of  which 
could  be  of  any  service  to  me.  I  had  no  boots,  and  all  our 
speculations  were  useless  in  contriving  to  procure  me  a  pair. 
I  was  forced  to  put  on  a  pair  belonging  to  M.  Bresson :  they 
were  at  least  two  inches  longer  than  my  foot  ;  I  could 
scarcely  walk  in  them,  and  we  all  laughed  much  at  the 
awkward  figure  I  cut. 