

When  I  came  back  to  France,  I  was  obliged  to  have  my 
letters  of  pardon  registered.  This  ceremony,  which  might 
have  become  painful  to  my  feelings,  was  managed  by  the 
magistrates  at  Colmar  with  a  discretion  for  which  I  shall 
always  be  thankful.  The  Advocate-General,  M.  Rossec, 
only  said,  "He  had  been  sentenced  for  conduct  which,  from 
day  to  day,  appears  less  serious."  I  came  to  Paris,  where  I 
fixed  my  abode,  and  lived  in  retirement,  forgotten  by  most 
of  my  former  friends,  and  also  by  the  police,  who  might 
have  made  my  life  very  uncomfortable. 

At  last,  the  health  of  Madame  de  Lavalette  recovered 
sufficiently  to  permit  me  to  take  her  home.  A  deep 
melancholy  throws  her  frequently  into  fits  of  abstractedness  ; 
but  she  is  always  equally  mild,  amiable,  and  good.  We  pass 
the  summer  in  a  retired  country-house,  where  she  seems 
to  enjoy  herself.  I  have  preserved  my  independence,  the 
first  of  all  mortal  riches,  without  pension,  salary,  or 
gratuity  of  any  sort,  after  a  long  life,  consecrated  to  the 
service  of  my  Country,  offering  up  for  her  liberty  prayers 
that  will  perhaps  never  be  fulfilled,  and  living  with  the 
recollections  of  a  great  period  and  a  great  man. 


28 


APPENDIX. 


No.  I. 

Toulon,  28  Floreal,  Year  VI. 
The  General  of  Division,  chief  of  the  General  Staff  of  the  Army, 
orders  Citizen  Lavalette,  Captain,  Aide-de-camp  to  the  General-in 
chief,  to  go  on  board  the  frigate  Aricmisa,  and  to  sail  with  the 
expedition, 

Alex.  Berthier 

No.  II. 

TO  CITIZEN   LAVALETTE,  AIDE-DE-CAMP. 

Head-quarters  at  Malta,  29  Prairial,  Year  VI. 

The  Artemisa,  Citizen,  has  orders  to  anchor  off  the  coast  of 
Albania,  to  give  you  the  means  of  conferring  with  Ali  Pacha. 

You  are  to  deliver  to  him  the  enclosed  letter,  the  contents  of 
which  only  mention  that  he  is  to  believe  all  you  say  to  him,  and 
call  an  interpreter  whom  he  can  trust,  so  that  you  may  hold  a 
private  conversation  with  him.  You  are  to  give  the  said  letter  into 
his  own  hands,  and  you  will  take  care  that  he  reads  it  himself 

Afterwards  you  are  to  tell  him  that  having  conquered  Malta,  and 
being  at  present  in  those  seas  with  thirty  ships  and  fifty  thousand 
men,  I  shall  of  course  enter  into  communication  with  him,  and  that 
I  wish  to  know  whether  I  may  rely  upon  him. 

That  I  wish  he  would  send  to  me  by  the  frigate  a  man  of  note 
in  whom  he  places  confidence.  That  considering  the  service  he 
has  rendered  to  the  Republic,  his  personal  cjualities,  courage,  and 

4'9 


420  APPENDIX. 

gallantry,  if  he  trust  me,  and  consents  to  second  me,  1  am  able  to 
increase  considerably  his  glory  and  his  fortune. 