


APPENDIX.  427 

during  the  conversation  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  got  into  her 
apartments.  They  were  forced  to  go  away.  After  having  handed 
Madame  Lavalette  back  to  her  chair,  the  officer  re-entered  the 
court  of  the  Tuileries.  A  httle  while  afterwards,  a  Life-guard 
came  to  ask  him  whether  Madame  Lavalette  was  still  in  the 
Palace.  Louis  XVIII .  was  to  have  gone  out ;  but  he  remained, 
for  fear  of  meeting  Madame  Lavalette. 

No.  XII. 

LETTER   OF  SIR   ROBERT    WILSON   TO    THE    RIGHT    HONOURABLE 
EARL  GREV.' 

MY   DEAR    LORD,- 

I  am  just  returned  from  a  journey  of  about  three  hundred  and 
fifty  miles,  the  first  half  of  which  was  undoubtedly  the  most 
interesting  I  ever  made. 

The  question  was  one  of  immediate  life  or  death  for  my  com- 
panion, and  of  all  that  such  responsibility,  accompanied  by  the 
most  aggravating  circumstances,  might  lead  to  for  myself 

Acknowledged  as  the  victim  of  breach  of  faith  with  my  country,  he 
had  claims  to  my  personal  efforts  even  at  the  foot  of  the  scaffold  ; 
and  to  the  most  powerful  claims  on  humanity  he  added  a  character 
by  which  he  had  acquired  to  himself  the  general  esteem  of  all 
classes  of  society. 

It  was  the  fifth  of  this  month  ^  that,  already  acquainted  with  his 
perilous  position,  I  also  learned  that  his  persecutors  had  obtained 
certain  knowledge  that  he  was  still  in  Paris  ;  that  they  had  dis- 
covered the  traces  of  their  prey,  and  were  multiplying  their  efforts 
to  ensure  their  bloody  triumph  :  there  was  no  longer  any  hope  of 
pardon. 

The  virtues  of  Madame  Lavalette,  and  the  interesting  circum- 
stances of  her  husband's  first  extraordinary  escape,  had  only  the 
more  enraged  the  monsters. 

'  This  letter  was  intercepted  by  the  French  Police,  at  Paris,  and  laid  the 
first  foundation  to  the  charges  against  Sir  Robert  Wilson  and  his  numerous 
friends. — Note  of  the  French  Editor. 

^  The  reader  will  please  to  observe  that  this  letter  must  have  been  first 
written  in  English,  but  appears  here  re-traiislatcd  from  the  French  ;  so  that  it 
may  happen  that  some  expressions  are  not  in  exact  accordance  with  the 
original — Note  of  the  Translator. 

3  January,  1816. 


428  APPENDIX. 

It  was  for  me  to  decide  whether  rage  or  vengeance  should  be 
satisfied, — whether  all  the  preceding  eftorts  should  be  rendered 
useless, — whether  the  cause  of  liberty  and  humanity  attached  to 
his  fate  should  be  disgraced  by  his  catastrophe,  or  whether  criminal 
hopes  should  be  deceived, — whether  England  should  escape  from 
the  shame  of  again  participating  in  murder, — and  whether  every 
honest  and  independent  man  in  Europe  should  have,  at  least  for 
once,  an  occasion  for  rejoicing  in  these  times  of  mourning  and 
infamy. 