

From  that  moment  I  looked  upon  Lavalette  as  a  lost  man,  and 
I  said  so  plainly  to  his  wife,  telling  her  that  if  she  possessed,  as 
she  had  said,  means  of  getting  him  away,  she  would  do  well  to  try 
them.  Her  other  friends  endeavoured  to  keep  up  a  delusion  to 
which  she  seemed  but  too  well  disposed.  She  said  to  me — "  They 
want  to  pardon  him  on  the  scaffold."  ''  Do  not  believe  that,"  I 
answered;  "  if  he  gets  upon  it,  he  is  lost."  I  had,  even  in  her 
presence,  a  discussion  with  the  Duke  de  Plaisance,  who  entertained 
the  same  false  idea.  She  believed  me,  and  her  husband  escaped 
the  next  day.  This  poor  woman  has  often  repeated — at  first, 
while  she  still  possessed  her  reason,  and  afterwards,  when  she  had 
lost  it — that  I  was  the  only  person  who  had  not  deceived  her. 


426  APPENDIX. 

No.  XI. 

LETTER   OF   M.   ,   AIDE-DE-CAMP  OF  THE  DUKE   DE 

RAGUSA,  TO   M.  . 

The  day  after  the  Marshal  had  placed  Madame  de  Lavalette  in 
the  King's  passage,  he  went  early  to  the  Palace,  to  discover  what 
was  going  forward.  The  most  rigorous  measures  had  been  taken. 
The  passage  was  guarded  —  only  one  chance  remained  :  the 
antechamber  of  the  Captain  of  the  guard  upon  duty  has  a  second 
door,  leading  to  the  King's  staircase,  directly  facing  the  apartment 
of  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme.  To  pass  through  that  door  was 
the  only  manner  of  getting  Madame  Lavalette  where  she  wished  to 
be  ;  but  the  Marshal  stood  too  much  in  public  view  to  be  able  to 
accompany  her.  He  gave  the  commission  to  one  of  his  aides-de- 
camp, with  the  necessary  instructions.  Madame  Lavalette  left  her 
home  alone,  and  the  aide-de-camp  went  with  General  Foy  to  meet 
her  sedan-chair  that  she  left  at  the  bottom  of  the  Pont  Royal, 
where  General  Foy  remained  wailing  for  her  while  she  went  into 
the  Tuileries  with  the  officer.  The  hour  had  been  calculated  so 
as  to  make  her  arrive,  towards  the  end  of  the  mass,  at  the  moment 
that  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  should  leave  the  Chapel.  She 
arrived  at  the  apartments  of  the  Captain  of  the  guards,  after  whom 
the  officer  asked,  knowing  very  well  that  he  was  just  then  with  the 
King  ;  he  would  not,  as  he  was  afraid,  enter  into  the  saloon  to 
wait  for  him,  but  stopped  in  the  antechamber,  where  he  made 
Madame  Lavalette  sit  down.  The  door  of  the  antechamber  was 
open  ;  he  went  into  it  in  an  unaffected  manner  ;  and  when  he  saw 
the  Duchess  of  Angouleme  come  down,  he  called  out  to  Madame 
Lavalette,  "  Come,  cousin,  and  see  the  Duchess  pass."  Madame 
Lavalette  stood  up  ;  but  while  they  had  been  waiting,  the  officers 
of  the  Life-guards  had  crossed  the  antechamber  and  recognised 
Madame  Lavalette  ;  so  that  when  she  came  to  the  door,  the  door- 
keeper rushed  forward  and  locked  it.  The  officer  tried  to  turn 
the  key.  "  It  is  not  permitted  to  pass."  "Come,  come  ;  people 
every  day  stand  in  the  staircase  ;  and  my  cousin,  who  is  from  the 
country,  has  never  seen  the  Royal  Family  ;  so  that  I  should  be  very 
glad  if  she  could  seize  this  opportunity."'  "  It  is  impossible  :  I 
know  who  this  lady  is,  and  I  have  positive  orders  not  to  let  her 
pass."  "  Well,  then,  fifty  louis,  a  good  action,  and  the  protection 
of  the   Marshal."    The  doorkeeper  was  not  to  be  bribed  ;  and 