

I  did  not  hesitate :  if  I  had,  I  am  sure  you  would  have  blamed 
a  weakness  that  would  have  made  me  unworthy  of  the  opportunity 
I  then  had  of  becoming  the  protector  of  the  oppressed.  I  had 
only  one  thought  left — that  of  ensuring  the  success  of  the  enter- 
prise. The  secret  had  been  entrusted  first  to  young  Bruce,  who 
had  been  authorised  to  communicate  it  to  me.  His  friendly  zeal 
in  favour  of  Ney  had  rendered  him  too  suspicious  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Court  for  his  steps  not  to  have  been  watched  ;  so  that, 
although  he  was  disposed  to  dare  and  undertake  everything,  still 
he  was  sensible  that  an  active  interference  on  his  side  might  make 
our  plan  miscarry.  I  was  myself  too  fearful,  watched  as  I  knew 
I  was,  to  absent  myself  from  the  capital  ;  but  one  officer  of  the 
Guards  whom  I  consulted  not  having  been  able  to  get  leave  of 
absence,  and  another  officer  whom  I  sounded  not  judging  fit 
that  he  should  leave  his  post,  I  resolved  not  to  hazard  anything 
more  by  these  half  confidences,  and  to  take  the  execution  on 
myself. 

It  was,  however,  necessary  to  find  some  persons  of  trust  who 
might  facilitate  the  necessary  dispositions,  and  our  choice  fell  upon 
Ellister,  of  the  fifth  regiment  of  the  Guards,  and  John  Hutchinson, 
as  well  on  account  of  the  confidence  we  placed  in  their  honour,  as  . 
because  we  knew  that  they  had  been  already,  once  before,  engaged 
in  a  business  of  the  same  nature;  and,  in  fact,  Ellister  was  the 
person  who  had  first  undertaken  to  put  our  plan  into  execution  if 
he  could  have  obtained  a  temporary  leave  of  absence. 

We  decided  that  the  fugitive  should  wear  the  regimentals  of  an 
English  officer,  and  that  I  should  conduct  him  out  of  the  barriers 
in  an  English  cabriolet,  myself  being  in  a  military  costume  ;  that 
I  should  have  a  fresh  horse  ready  at  La  Chapelle,  from  whence  I 
should  go  to  Compiegne,  where  Ellister  was  to  bring  me  my  coach, 
into  which  I  should  step  with  Lavalette,  to  reach  Mons  by  way  of 


APPENDIX.  429 

Cambrai.  On  my  solicitation  and  responsibility,  I  easily  obtained 
from  Stuart  passports  for  a  General  Wallis  and  a  Colonel  Losack, 
names  we  chose  because  their  initials  corresponded  with  those  of 
the  real  names.  These  passes  were  duly  signed  by  the  Minister 
for  Foreign  Affairs  ;  only,  when  they  were  presented  for  signature, 
one  of  the  secretaries  asked  Hutchinson,  that  brought  them,  who 
was  Colonel  Losack  ;  upon  which  he  immediately  answered — "  He 
is  the  brother  of  the  Admiral."  This  important  part  of  our 
negotiation  being  finished,  Ellister  went  to  the  police  with  Colonel 
Losack's  passport,  and  asked  for  post  horses  for  my  carriage  ;  and 
at  the  same  time,  to  prevent  all  suspicion,  he  took  apartments  and 
a  coach-house  at  the  Hotel  du  Helder,  in  the  name  of  Colonel 
Losack. 