


APPENDIX. 


431 


a  drunken  French  officer,  who,  in  going  to  his  apartment,  had 
made  all  that  noise.  You  may  well  think  that  not  one  of  us  spent 
a  very  tranquil  night  ;  and,  in  fact,  I  was  not  without  anxiety  as 
long  as  Lavalette  remained  in  Paris — for  I  also  thought  of  my 
family.  I  had  barely  mentioned  to  Lady  Wilson  that  I  was 
engaged  in  a  plan  to  save  one  of  the  outlaws,  and  that  I  was 
obliged  to  conceal  his  name  and  the  arrangement  that  had  been 
taken.  I  did  not  think  fit,  in  the  first  moment,  to  enter  into  any 
further  particulars  with  her,  though  I  knew  she  would  have  been 
able  to  keep  the  secret  if  it  had  been  necessary,  and  would  more- 
over, I  am  sure,  have  given  willingly  all  the  aid  in  her  power. 
She  perhaps  suspected  the  truth  from  my  air  of  uneasiness  ;  but 
I  must  say  to  her  praise,  that  she  did  not  say  a  single  word  that 
could  make  me  suppose  she  wished  to  dissuade  me  from  the  plan, 
though  she  constantly  suffered  a  great  deal  as  the  time  drew  near 
when  I  was  going  to  deliver  myself  up  to  the  chapter  of  accidents, 
having  under  my  charge  so  precious  a  deposit. 

I  was  at  Hutchinson's  door  at  half-past  seven.  I  went  upstairs 
to  call  Lavalette,  and  within  five  minutes  we  were  together  on  the 
way  to  the  Barriere  de  Clichy.  We  met  an  officer  who  appeared 
surprised  at  seeing  a  superior  officer  he  did  not  know,  but  my 
servant  eluded  his  inquiries.  I  crossed  the  barrier  at  a  slow  pace  ; 
the  gendarmes  looked  steadfastly  at  us  ;  but  the  act  of  presenting 
arms  gave  Lavalette  an  opportunity  of  concealing  his  profile  in  the 
bow  he  made.  When  we  were  passed,  Lavalette  pressed  my  leg 
with  his  ;  and  when  we  had  no  more  fear  of  being  observed,  I  saw 
his  face  glistening  with  pleasure  at  this  first  favour  of  fortune. 

The  road  was  covered  with  all  sorts  of  people  ;  but  whenever 
we  met  any  public  conveyance,  1  began  a  very  long  conversation 
in  English  ;  and  I  remarked  that  the  hat  ornamented  with  a  white 
feather  that  Lavalette  held  in  his  hand  attracted  the  attention 
of  travellers,  and  drew  off  their  curiosity  from  our  persons. 

The  features  of  Lavalette  are  so  remarkable,  and  his  face  is  so 
well  known  to  all  the  postillions  and  postmasters,  that  it  required 
the  greatest  caution  lest  he  should  be  recognised.  At  La  Chapelle 
we  changed  our  horses,  and  we  had  a  moment's  alarm  at  the  sight 
of  four  gendarmes  hovering  around  us  ;  but  Hutchinson,  to  whom 
they  addressed  themselves,  got  rid  of  them  by  saying  that  we  had 
come  to  look  out  for  quarters  for  an  English  division.  We  were 
afterwards  obliged  to  pass  near  other  gendarmes,  who  had  in  their 