

Bruce  fortunately  learned  that  the  brigade  of  his  cousin,  General 
Brisbane,  was  at  Compiegne,  and  that  his  aide-de-camp  was  to 
leave  Paris  on  the  7th  of  the  month,  to  go  to  Compiegne  with  the 
horses  and  baggage  of  the  General,  who  was  at  that  time  in 
England.  We  saw  him  at  Bruce's,  where  we  had  appointed  to  meet 
him  ;  and  I  told  him  that  some  very  particular  circumstances 
obliged  me  to  pass  through  Compiegne  with  a  person  who  wished 
not  to  be  known,  and  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  us  to  remain 
there  an  hour  or  two  in  some  retired  part  of  the  town.  He  answered 
obligingly,  that  his  confidence  in  us  was  unreserved  ;  that  his 
existence  depended  on  his  situation  ;  but  that  he  would  not  hesi- 
tate in  satisfying  us,  knowing  that  we  took  an  interest  in  the  matter. 
I  do  confess  that  it  went  much  against  my  inclination  to  implicate 
such  a  person  in  the  business  ;  but  the  cause  was  too  important  a 
one  for  me  to  stop  at  such  a  consideration  ;  and  I  conceived  a 
hope  that  a  day  would  come  when  I  should  have  it  in  my  power 
to  acknowledge  that  service  either  by  myself  or  by  my  friends. 
Bruce  procured  Lavalette's  measure  ;  Hutchinson  gave  it  to  a  tailor, 
saying  it  was  that  of  a  quartermaster  of  his  regiment,  who  wanted 
immediately  a  great-coat,  a  waistcoat,  and  a  pair  of  pantaloons. 
The  tailor  observed  that  it  was  the  measure  of  a  lusty  man,  and 
that  it  had  not  been  taken  by  a  tailor.  His  observations  alarmed 
me  so  much,  that  I  thought  fit  to  send  Hutchinson  back  to  him  to 
say,  that  the  quartermaster  not  being  able  to  wait  for  his  clothes 
until  Saturday  evening,  they  were  to  be  carefully  folded  up  in  a 
box,  so  that  they  might  be  sent  after  him.  Hutchinson  and 
Ellister   took,   besides,  all    the   necessary   measures   to   procure 


430  APPENDIX. 

horses,   and   went   the   day  before   to   reconnoitre   the   barriers, 
posts,  &c. 

All  these  preparations  being  made,  and  all  the  precautions  taken 
it  was  finally  decided  that  Lavalette  should  go  to  Hutchinson's 
lodgings  on  Sunday  evening  the  yth,  at  half-past  nine  pre- 
cisely ;  that  I  should  be  on  Monday  morning  at  half-past  seven 
at  his  door,  in  Bruce's  cabriolet,  with  my  servant,  who  was  to 
follow  on  my  well-harnessed  mare,  as  if  I  were  going  to  pass  an 
inspection  ;  that  Hutchinson  should  ride  next  to  the  cabriolet, 
talking  with  us  ;  and  that,  in  case  any  stoppage  should  occur, 
Lavalette  should  get  upon  his  horse,  and  I  on  my  mare,  that  we 
might  be  more  at  liberty  and  get  on  with  speed. 

I  should  certainly  have  preferred  crossing  the  barriers  on  horse- 
back, but  we  thought  that  our  English  mode  of  riding  might 
attract  attention  ;  while  the  crossing  them  in  full  daylight,  and  in 
an  open  cabriolet,  would  be  showing  so  much  assurance  that  no 
suspicions  would  arise.  At  last,  the  hour  fixed  for  our  departure 
drawing  near,  Hutchinson,  Ellister,  Bruce,  and  I  came  to  Hutchin- 
son's apartments,  under  the  pretence  of  taking  a  bowl  of  punch. 
The  moment  came  when  we  were  to  fix  our  eyes  upon  a  man  whose 
fate  hung  on  the  plan  we  had  formed  to  save  him,  and  whose  days 
had  already  been  counted  by  his  enemies, — a  man  who  was  the 
object  of  all  the  hatred  and  affection  of  the  two  opposite  parties, 
and  who,  if  he  were  discovered,  would  occasion  us  all  the  sufferings 
that  enemies,  or  even  friends  deluded  in  their  hopes,  might  heap 
upon  us  under  the  form  either  of  punishment  or  of  reproach. 
Bruce  went  on  the  staircase,  and  immediately  Lavalette  took  him 
by  the  hand,  and  we  saw  before  us  that  interesting  individual.  He 
was  dressed  in  blue  regimentals,  and  so  well  disguised  that  he 
would  not  have  been  remarked  even  in  an  Englishman's  apart- 
ment. The  friend  who  had  brought  him  did  not  come  in,  but  he 
^■^ave  to  Hutchinson,  for  the  use  of  Lavalette,  a  two-barrelled 
pistol  that  I  have  kept  to  this  day.  The  latter  appeared  at  first 
much  affected,  but  we  did  not  leave  him  the  leisure  to  express  his 
•^ratitude  ;  and,  after  a  few  moments,  Ellister  and  myself  went 
away,  leaving  him  to  the  care  of  Bruce  and  Hutchinson.  At 
midnight,  Bruce  retired,  and  Lavalette  laid  himself  down  on  a 
bed  that  was  prepared  for  him.  In  about  half  an  hour,  somebody 
knocked  at  the  house-door  :  Lavalette  sprang  from  his  bed,  crying, 
"  We  are  undone  1 "     But  Hutchinson  soon  discovered  that  it  was 