


432  APPENDIX. 

possession  the  description  of  Lavalette's  person  ;  and  it  may  be  re- 
marked by  the  bye  that  it  had  been  distributed  everywhere  through- 
out France.  As  we  came  near  Compi^gne,  I  remarked  some  white 
hairs  that  showed  themselves  under  his  brown  wig  :  and  having 
fortunately  a  pair  of  scissors  about  me,  I  dressed  his  hair  by  the 
way.  At  the  entrance  of  Compitgne,  we  found  the  orderly  com- 
manded by  Captain  Fennell,  who  led  us  through  the  town  to  a 
very  well-chosen  place,  for  we  were  not  disturbed  by  the  spectators 
in  the  street. 

Nobody  saw  us  enter  except  some  English  soldiers  and  domestics 
who  served  us  while  we  were  waiting  for  the  carriage.  Mr.  Fennell 
offered  us  a  luncheon,  which  would  not  have  detained  us  like  Louis 
XVI.,  but  enabled  us  to  spend  very  agreeably  the  time  that  began 
to  hang  heavy  on  our  hands,  and  which  otherwise  would  have  been 
lost.  At  last,  towards  night,  as  it  had  been  agreed,  Ellister  came 
with  the  carriage,  which  had  been  got  out  by  the  Barriere  St.  Denis, 
and  had  been  followed  by  gendarmes  to  La  Chapelle.  Horses  were 
immediately  ordered. 

The  postillion  having  come  alone,  I  had  the  lamps  of  the  coach 
lighted,  not  only  for  safety,  but  also  to  show  that  we  were  without 
uneasiness  within.  We  left  our  friends,  and  entered  the  carriage 
that  was  to  be  for  us  either  a  hearse  or  the  chariot  of  fortune.  We 
were  well  armed,  and  prepared  to  resist  in  case  we  were  attacked. 
But  I  reckoned  more  upon  presence  of  mind  than  upon  force,  if 
any  difficulties  should  arise. 

We  were  frequently  questioned  at  the  different  post-houses  ;  but 
Colonel  Losack  '  always  kept  himself  back,  and  I  took  care  to  cover 
the  door  as  much  as  possible.  My  servant  and  the  postillion  said 
at  every  stage  that  it  was  an  English  general ;  and  my  carriage 
being  English  produced  a  good  effect.  I  must  observe,  that  we 
took  only  three  horses  and  one  postillion,  for  fear  four  horses  might 
make  it  appear  as  if  we  were  in  too  great  a  hurry  to  get  on  :  we 
besides  avoided  by  that  means  the  eyes  of  the  second  postillion  we 
should  have  been  obliged  to  take,  and  who  would  have  been  a  spy 
upon  us. 

We  experienced  no  delay  until  Cambrai,  where  we  lost  three 

hours  at  the  gate  by  the  obstinacy  of  the  English  sentry,  who,  not 

having  any  order  to  call  the  gatekeeper,  whose  duty  it  is  to  let  the 

couriers  in  during  the  night,  would  listen  neither  to  entreaties  nor 

'  That  was  the  name  Lavalette  had  taken. 


APPENDIX.  433 

to  threats — a  negligence  which  has  already  caused  considerable 
delay  in  the  communications  of  Government,  and  might  have 
proved  fatal  to  us.  In  passing  through  Valenciennes,  we  were 
three  times  severely  examined,  and  our  passports  were  carried  to 
the  commander  of  the  gendarmerie  ;  we  got  off,  however,  and, 
about  five  miles  from  thence,  we  had  finally  the  happiness  of  cross- 
ing the  last  barrier,  and  being  examined  for  the  last  time. 