

BONAPARTE,  GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO   CITIZEN   LAVALETTE. 
Head-quarters  at  Cairo,  27  Nivose,  Year  VII. 
You  will  please,  Citizen,  to  come  back  to  Cairo  as  soon  as  possible. 
I  have  received  your  report. 

Bonaparte. 


424  APPENDIX. 

No.  VIII. 

BONAPARTE,   GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO  CITIZEN   LAVALETTE. 
Head-quarters  at  Cairo,  9  Pluviose,  Year  VII. 
You  will  please,  Citizen,  to  come  to  Cairo  as  soon  as  possible. 
I  want  you  for  the  new  campaign  that  is  about  to  commence. 

BONAPARTE. 

No.   IX. 

BONAPARTE,  GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO  CITIZEN  LAVALETTE. 
Head-quarters  at  Cairo,  20  Pluviose,  Year  VII. 
You  must  set  off,  Citizen,  as  soon  as  possible,  to  join  me.  You 
need  not  wait  for  the  departure  of  the  caravella.  At  your  arrival 
at  Cairo  you  must  remain  three  days  there,  to  gain  a  perfect  know- 
ledge of  the  situation  of  affairs  ;  and  you  must  not  depart  until  a 
favourable  opportunity  offers. 

Bonaparte. 

No.  X. 

extract  of  a  letter  of  the  duke  de  ragusa  to 

M.   . 

I  had  been  intimately  acquainted  with  Lavalette,  but  political 
events  had  separated  us.  The  cruel  fate  that  threatened  him 
caused  a  renewal  of  my  friendship  for  him.  He  wrote  to  me  the 
letter  you  have  in  your  possession.  I  carried  it  to  the  King,  who 
read  it  from  beginning  to  end.  My  prayers  and  solicitations  were 
without  effect ;  I  obtained  neither  his  pardon  nor  a  commutation 
of  the  sentence;  it  was  even  in  vain  that  I  hoped  Louis  XVIII. 
would  consent  to  Lavalette's  last  wish,  and  change  the  manner  in 
which  he  was  to  die.     The  King  was  inexorable. 

I  then  went  to  Madame  Lavalette  to  concert  with  her  a  petition 
she  was  to  present.  She  told  me  she  had  means  of  procuring  her 
husband's  escape.  I  tried  to  persuade  her  not  to  make  any  use  of 
them  as  long  as  she  had  any  hopes  of  another  nature.  The  report 
was  brought  to  the  Palace  that  she  intended  to  come  there,  and 
orders  were  given  not  to  let  her  in.  I  took  upon  me  to  conduct 
her,  and  gave  her  my  arm.  I  chose  to  enter  into  the  Saloon  of 
the  Guards  at  a  moment  when  the  sentry  turned  his  head  another 
way,  and  then  I  found  myself  all  of  a  sudden,  with  her,  in  the 


APPENDIX.  425 

middle  of  the  saloon.  The  Life-guard  stopped  us,  and,  without 
failing  in  any  way  in  the  respect  he  owed  to  me,  executed  his 
orders  in  the  most  rigorous  manner.  The  officer  came  and 
delivered  his  soldier  from  the  awkward  situation  in  which  he  was, 
and  I  persuaded  M.  de  Bartillat — this  was  the  name  of  the  officer 
— that,  should  he  even  risk  a  few  days'  arrest,  he  ought  to  lend  his 
aid  to  do  a  good  action.  So  he  allowed  Madame  Lavalette  to 
remain  in  the  Saloon  of  the  Guards.  I  had  chosen  to  enter  the 
moment  the  King  was  hearing  mass.  I  knew  that  if  I  had  come 
earlier  the  King  would  rather  have  gone  that  day  without  mass 
than  run  the  risk  of  meeting  this  poor  woman;  but  once  in  the 
Chapel,  he  could  not  help  coming  back.  IM.  de  Glandeves,  major 
of  the  Life-guards,  came  and  told  me  that  orders  had  been  given 
not  to  admit  Madame  Lavelette.  "But,"  said  I,  "have  you  an 
order  to  put  her  out  of  the  apartment,  now  that  she  is  in  ?  "  He 
answered,  that  he  had  not.  "  In  that  case,"  I  continued,  "  I 
remain."  The  King  came.  Madame  Lavalette  threw  herself  at 
his  feet :  he  answered — "  Your  grief  is  very  natural,  Madame,  and 
I  appreciate  it,  and  sharp  in  it  as  I  ought  to  do  ;  but  I  have  duties 
to  fulfil  which  cannot  be  dispensed  with  ; "  and  he  continued  his 
walk.  I\Iadame  Lavalette  threw  herself  also  at  the  feet  of  the 
Duchess  of  Angouleme,  who  avoided  her,  and  went  by  without 
saying  a  word.  We  went  out.  The  ne.xt  day  was  the  Duchess  of 
Angoulcme's  birthday,  and  the  anniversary  of  her  leaving  the 
Temple.  We  prepared  ourselves  to  stand  by  when  she  should 
pass.  Measures  were  taken  to  insulate  her,  and  sentries  placed 
up  to  the  roof  of  the  Tuileries  to  prevent  our  coming  by  a  round- 
about way. 