

He  had  with  him  fifteen  barks  ;  his  troops  consisted  of  a  battalion 
of  the  25th,  and  a  detachment  of  the  2nd  light  infantry. 

On  the  29th,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  set  off  for  Peluse 
with  the  General  and  a  detachment  of  thirty  men. 

The  distance  from  the  mouth  of  Aroum  Farregge  to  El  Farameh 
is  three  leagues.  This  ruined  town  presented  nothing  remarkable. 
At  three-quarters  of  a  league  from  the  sea  we  found  an  enormous 
quantity  of  dust  and  bricks,  which  are  supposed  to  have  been  the 
fortress  of  Peluse.  There  is  yet  a  wall  standing,  and  some  arches 
that  have  been  examined.  The  ruins  of  the  town  extend  to  about 
three  thousand  paces.     In  all  that  space  we  found  nothing  but  a 


APPENDIX.  423 

few  pillars  of  granite  of  large  size,  and  a  sort  of  tower  partly  in 
ruins. 

On  our  return  we  observed,  at  eighteen  hundred  toises  from 
Peluse,  an  edifice  which  is  thought  to  be  a  ruined  mosque. 
Nothing,  however,  remains  but  the  brick  walls  and  a  part  of 
the  arched  roof.  We  saw  there  several  cannons  unfit  for  use, 
and  granite  balls. 

On  the  30th  we  left  Aroum  Farregge,  and  I  separated  from 
General  Andreossi  near  Tanis. 

I  found  on  my  arrival  at  Damietta  the  train  of  artillery  designed 
for  Salahieh.  They  were  embarking  it  on  the  lake,  and  it  was  to 
go  off  the  following  day  for  Sann. 

General  Dugua  had  arrived  the  preceding  day  at  Damietta.  He 
told  me  that  the  government  of  that  province  was  not  yet  organised, 
but  that  he  was  going  to  look  after  it. 

General  Barras  complained  of  the  difficulties  he  met  with  in  the 
discharge  of  his  duty.  The  secretary  they  have  given  him  is  a 
young  man,  who  understands  nothing  about  the  business  ;  and  the 
state  of  his  health  will  not  allow  him  to  do  all  himself.  He  was 
unable  to  give  me  a  very  exact  account  of  the  property  of  Hassan 
Toubar.  As  soon  as  he  shall  have  made  the  necessary  inquiries 
on  the  subject,  he  will  acquaint  you  with  the  result. 

General  Vial  complains  that  he  has  not  troops  enough  to  guard 
Mansoura.  He  has  not  two  thousand  able  men  under  his  com- 
mand, and  twenty  thousand  peasants  aseemble  every  week  in  the 
market-place  of  that  town. 

I  accompanied  General  Murat  on  his  expedition  to  ,  the 

inhabitants  of  which  had  the  day  before  massacred  some  dragoons 
of  the  14th,  and  stolen  their  horses.  The  village  was  surrounded 
at  ten  o'clock  at  night ;  and  next  morning  the  General  sent  into  it 
two  companies  of  grenadiers,  who  slaughtered  more  than  one 
hundred  peasants.  In  their  houses  were  found  two  sheaths  of 
dragoons'  sabres,  and  some  helmets. 

Lavalette. 

No.  VII. 