

TO  peluse. 

Cairo,  6  Brumaire. 

I  left  Boulac  on  the  evening  of  the  i8th  Vendemiaire,  on  board 
of  the  cange  La  Conyre,  bound  for  Damietta,  with  the  Cisalpine, 
and  the  canoes  the  Rhone  and  the  Seine. 

I  sent  General  Vial  before  Mit-et-Koli,  at  the  moment  that  village 
had  been  plundered  for  having  murdered  some  Frenchmen.  He 
had  with  him  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  of  the  13th  and  25th  half 
brigade.  No  inhabitants  were  found  in  that  village.  The  same 
circumstance  took  place  in  regard  to  two  others  which  had  been 
equally  guilty.  In  returning  to  Damietta  on  the  23rd,  the  General 
stopped  at  Farescout,  surrounded  the  village,  and  required  of  the 
chiefs  that  they  should  deliver  up  to  him  the  arms  of  their  in- 
habitants. He  obtained  only  eighteen  muskets,  and  took  two 
sheiks  as  hostages,  who  were  sent  off  to  Cairo.     Farescout  is  the 


422  APPENDIX. 

village  the  inhabitants  of  which  are  the  most  devoted  to  Hassan 
Toubar.  It  was  there  that  the  insurrection  of  the  24th  Fructidor 
was  decided. 

I  left  Damietta  on  the  24th,  and  passed  the  night  at  the  tower 
of  Bogaz,  the  wind  not  having  allowed  me  to  go  any  farther.  That 
tower  contains  a  garrison  of  twenty  or  thirty  men.  The  wall  that 
has  been  raised  round  it  shelters  it  against  a  surprise.  But  the 
cannons  that  defend  it  are  ill-placed,  and  the  platforms  are  not  in 
a  state  to  support  them  long. 

On  the  25th  I  went  to  Dibbe  by  land.  The  road  from  Bogaz  to 
the  mouth  of  the  lake  is  eight  leagues  in  length,  and  the  soil  a  firm 
sand  ;  the  heaviest  artillery  may  pass  over  it  without  danger. 

Dibbd  consists  of  about  thirty  fishermen's  huts.  Several  in- 
habitants came  to  meet  us,  and  brought  us  provisions. 

Having  the  advantage  of  a  fair  wind,  I  arrived  at  Menzale  in 
twelve  hours.  This  is  a  considerable  place,  containing  about  five 
thousand  inhabitants.  However,  not  more  than  one-fifth  of  them 
were  there  when  I  passed.  Hassan  Toubar  was  the  owner  of  two 
houses  there  :  he  had  taken  everything  with  him.  We  found 
nothing  in  them  but  some  cattle  and  wretched  furniture.  Though 
the  inhabitants  trade  on  the  lake,  the  boats  are  obliged  to  anchor 
at  half  a  league  distance,  the  lake  not  being  deep  enough  for  them 
to  approach  nearer  to  Menzaltf,  which,  besides,  is  not  built  on  the 
shore.  The  anchoring  place  is  unprotected,  but  possesses  sweet 
water,  which  is  brought  to  a  small  distance  from  it  by  the  emptying 
of  the  canals  of  the  Nile  in  the  season  of  the  inundation. 

On  the  27th,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  I  left  Menzale  to  join 
General  Andreossi,  to  whom  I  brought  water  and  provisions.  I 
found  him  on  the  28th  at  the  mouth  of  Aroum  Farregge. 