

You  are  to  make  general  inquiries  respecting  the  political  and 
military  situation  of  the  different  states  of  those  regions. 

You  are  to  write  down  whatever  Ali  Pacha  says  to  you,  and 
re-embark  in  the  frigate  to  return  and  make  me  a  report  on  the 
result  of  your  mission. 

When  you  pass  by  Corfu  you  must  see  General  Chabot,  and  tell 
him  to  send  us  wood,  and  issue  a  proclamation  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Corcyra  and  other  islands,  directing  them  to  send  to  the  squad- 
ron wine,  dried  raisins,  and  other  objects,  for  which  they  shall  be 
liberally  paid. 

BON.\PARTE. 

No.  III. 

BONAP.\RTE,   GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,   TO   CITIZEN    LAVALETTE. 
Head-quarters,  Cairo,  22  Frimaire,  Year  VII. 

You  must  set  off  on  board  the  djerme  La  Veniticnjic,  with  Citizen 
Beauchamp,  to  go  to  Alexandria.  You  must  inspect  the  situation 
of  the  fortifications,  magazines,  and  of  every  ship  of  our  squadron. 

You  must  deliver  the  sabre  you  receive  herewith  to  Rear-Admiral 
Perde. 

You  must  inspect  the  fort  of  Rosetta. 

You  must  endeavour  to  get  from  Ale.xandria  to  Rosetta  my 
travelling  carriage  and  the  carriage  I  brought  from  Malta.  At 
Rosetta  you  will  embark  them  on  a  djerme  for  Boulac. 

You  are  not  to  come  back  until  you  have  seen  Citizen  Beauchamp 
under  weigh. 

Bonaparte. 

No.  IV. 

BONAPARTE,   GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO   CITIZEN   LAVALETTE. 

Head-quarters,  Cairo,  18  Nivose,  Year  VII. 
I  have  received  your  letters  of  28  and  i  Nivose  :  stay  at  Alexan- 
dria until  the  caravella  be  gone,  and  set  off  immediately  after. 

General  Bonaparte. 


APPENDIX.  421 

No.  V. 

BONAPARTE,  GENERAL-IN-CHIEF,  TO  CITIZEN   LAVALETTE. 

Head-quarters,  Cairo,  18  Vendemiaire,  Year  VII. 

You  must  set  off  this  day,  Citizen,  on  board  the  little  Cisalpine, 
taking  with  you  the  cange  La  Corcyre,  and  the  canoe  the  Rlio7te. 

You  are  to  conduct  the  convoy  bound  to  Salahieh  to  Mit-Kamas, 
where  it  will  be  placed  under  the  orders  of  General  Murat,  who  is 
to  send  it  farther  up. 

You  are  then  to  continue  your  passage  with  the  armed  vessels, 
and  go  to  Mansoura  ;  there  you  will  see  General  Dugua,  and  inquire 
what  news  he  may  have  received  either  from  Damietta  or  from 
Menzale.  You  will  go  on  to  Damietta,  take  on  board  of  the  three 
vessels  all  the  troops  they  are  able  to  carry,  and  go  with  them  to 
rejoin  General  Andreossi  and  newly  man  his  flotilla.  You  will 
follow  that  General  on  his  reconnoitring  trip  to  Peluse. 

You  v;ill  write  to  me  from  Mansoura  and  from  Damietta;  and, 
if  there  be  any  newly  arrived  vessels  in  the  roads  of  Damietta,  will 
question  them  and  send  me  a  report. 

Bonaparte. 

No.  VI. 

report  addressed  TO  the  general-in-chief  on  my  journey 