

I  am  for  ever,  my  dear  Lord,  most  sincerely, 

(Signed)  R.  W. 

It  cannot  but  be  e.xtremely  agreeable  for  me  to  know  your 
opinion.  Let  me  know  as  soon  as  possible  whether  I  ought  to 
write  to  the  Duke,  or  beg  Gordon  to  speak  to  him. 

I  am  sorry  I  cannot  make  a  fair  copy  of  my  letter,  but  I  have 
no  time  ;  and  you  must  pardon  me  if  you  are  obliged  to  decipher 
my  scrawl,  having  just  received  a  letter  from  Lord  H.  that  will  take 
me  a  week  to  read. 

R.  W. 

No.  XIIL 

EXTRACT  OF  A    LETTER    FROM    COUNT    LAVALETTE    TO    M.   

London,  the . 

The  first  public  sitting  for  the  election  opened  this  morning. 
There  are  three  candidates  for  the  Borough  of  Southwark — Sir 
Robert  Wilson  and  Mr.  Calvert,  the  late  members,  and  Mr. 
Polhill,  a  candidate  to  be  elected  instead  of  one  of  them.  Each 
candidate  wears  his  colours  :  Sir  Robert  has  chosen  blue  Marie 
Louise  ;  Mr.  Calvert,  sky  blue  ;  and  Mr.  Polhill,  orange  or  yellow. 
It  was  agreed  that  I  should  be  at  Sir  Robert's  at  half-past  eight  or 
nine  o'clock.  We  stepped  into  an  elegant  landau  drawn  by  two 
beautiful  horses :  Sir  Robert  and  his  eldest  daughter,  Jemima, 
sat  on  the  back  seat  j  the  youngest  and  myself  on  the  front  one. 
They  were  elegantly  dressed,  though  with  simplicity  ;  their  father's 


APPENDIX.  435 

colours  shone  on  their  bonnets  and  sashes.  The  two  footmen,  the 
coachman,  his  whip  and  the  horses,  were  all  covered  with  those 
ribands.  All  went  well  till  we  arrived  at  the  entrance  of  the 
Borough ;  but  there  the  crowd  entirely  filled  up  the  broad  street  we 
were  going  through,  and  we  were  soon  stopped  by  an  immense 
number  of  people  bearing  the  banners  of  Wilson,  and  music 
playing.  The  horses  were  taken  from  the  carriage,  which  was 
dragged  along  by  the  people  for  nearly  half  a  league,  with  cries  of 
"  Hun-ah — Wilson  for  ever  / ''  It  was  a  tumult — a  confusion 
which  the  strongest  heads  could  with  difficulty  have  borne.  In  the 
front  of  the  people  that  dragged  us  along  were  placed  the  banners, 
with  deafening  music,  and  behind  them  the  carriages  of  several 
Frenchmen,  such  as  Messrs.  de  Stael,  Francis  and  Alexander  Deles- 
sert,  the  lady  of  the  latter,  young  Montebello,  the  son  of  Duvergier 
de  Haurranne,  Daru,  Montalevet,  and,  among  others.  Sir  Robert  was 
standing  at  the  bottom  of  the  open  landau,  bowing  to  everybody, 
offering  his  bare  hand  to  the  dirtiest  hands  I  ever  saw.  Women 
of  the  lowest  classes  stretched  out  their  children  to  him,  that  he 
might  caress  them  ;  while  the  windows,  and  even  the  roofs  of  the 
houses,  were  literally  covered  with  inhabitants,  crying  out  as  loud 
as  they  could,  and  carrying,  on  the  walls  and  before  the  shops, 
large  bills  fastened  to  long  sticks,  with  the  following  words  : — 
"  Wilson,  the  friend  of  humanity P'  "  Wilson  and  Liberty.'^'' 
"  Wilson  and  the  Abolitio7i  of  Slavery  !  "  "  Wilson  and  the 
Protestant  Constitution  .'  "  "  Wilson  for  ever!  "  We  advanced 
slowly.  Sir  Robert  said  : — "  We  shall  soon  arrive  in  the  enemy's 
country."  In  fact,  a  little  while  afterwards  we  passed  before  Mr. 
Polhill's  door.  Yellow  began  to  show  itself  on  the  windows, 
coaches,  handbills — but  the  crowd  that  accompanied  us  redoubled 
their  cries  of  "  Wilson  for  ever  /  "  Five  minutes  later,  we  saw  Mr. 
Polhill  pass  in  a  very  elegant  coach,  but  a  shut  one,  and  all 
his  followers  covered  with  yellow  ribands.  The  mixed  cries  of 
"  Wilson  !  "  "  Polhill  !  "—the  hurrahs,  the  hissings— the  thick 
crowd,  made  such  a  confusion,  that  I  certainly  thought  we  were 
going  to  be  overthrown,  and  crushed  to  death.  I  observed  the 
young  ladies  growing  pale,  but  they  felt  so  happy  at  being  near 
their  father,  that  it  renewed  their  courage  ;  and  the  emotion  that 
was  visible  in  their  handsome  faces  was  the  only  thing  that 
betrayed  the  anxiety  that  tormented  them.  They  did  not  make 
a  motion,  nor  utter   a   cry.      I    endeavoured   to    tranquillise   the 