

Do  you  recollect  Mrs.  Sullivan's  old  husband,  that  Englishman 
'  The  old  King  of  Bavaria. 


444  APPENDIX. 

who  was  so  sick  and  had  such  a  beautiful  collection  of  pictures  ? 
I  went  there  one  day  with  the  Queen  of  Naples.  We  entered  a 
saloon  where  there  were  thirteen  magnificent  portraits.  All  the 
persons  they  represented  had  perished  either  by  the  hand  of  the 
executioner  or  by  that  of  assassins,  except  Louis  XL,  who  had  so 
many  others  killed.  They  were  the  Duke  de  Montmorency,  Cinq- 
Mars,  and  De  Thou,  Henry  IIL,  Henry  IV.,  Don  Carlos  and  his^ 
unfortunate  stepmother,  who  died  poisoned  by  the  detestable 
Philip  IL,  Coligny,  and,  finally,  the  Prince  of  Conde,  assassinated 
in  so  dastardly  a  manner  on  the  field  of  battle.  When  one 
witnesses  such  horrors,  which  have  reigned  for  so  long  a  time,, 
the  heart  is  rent  by  a  sort  of  despair.  One  curses  civilisation,  and 
blushes  at  being  a  man. 

I  do,  however,  not  always  give  way  to  such  dismal  thoughts  : 
I  should  be  unworthy  of  my  misfortune  if  it  did  not  afford  me 
sweet  comforts.  I  frequently  think  myself  happy,  not  at  having 
escaped  from  the  scaffold,  but  at  having  been  saved  by  such 
generous  hands.  Wife,  child,  friends,  domestics,  and  even  those 
noble  strangers — all  have  united,  all  have  wrestled,  all  have 
suffered,  all  have  triumphed  for  me  !  I  have  no  right  to  complain 
of  men  :  never  was  an  unfortunate  one  honoured  by  so  much 
devotion,  so  much  courage  !  I  have  lost  nothing  in  the  wreck, 
and  still  my  grief  at  times  almost  becomes  despair.  Alas  !  my 
friend,  I  was  so  happy  ! — my  recollections  kill  me  :  and  when  I 
succeed  in  driving  them  away,  or  in  subjugating  them,  the  phantom 
of  my  poor  country  torn  to  atoms,  and  so  vilely  betrayed,  throws 
me  into  a  state  of  melancholy  that  makes  me  burst  into  tears. 

Can  it  be  possible,  say,  that  we  should  be  cast  into  the  whirl- 
pool of  infamy,  without  being  able  to  get  out  of  it .''  What  !  so 
many  noble  efforts,  so  bloody  a  struggle,  so  many  triumphs — all 
terminating  in  horrible  disgrace  !  No,  no,  dear  friend  !  I  will 
never  see  my  country  again  !  Never  will  I  consent  to  cast  down 
my  eyes  to  the  cowardly  outrages  that  are  heaped  on  us — never  ! 
But  enough  of  that — for  the  expression  of  my  indignation  might  be 
hurtful  to  your  feelings. 

I  am  going  to  sketch  for  you,  but  I  shall  not  send  you  anything 
for  some  time.  At  present  1  only  daub  : — you  may  ask  Louisa,' 
who  has  two  of  my  paintings.     Wait  a  little. 

You  ask  where  I  live,  and  how  ?     I  live  retired,  on  the  borders 
'  Mademoiselle  Cochelet,  who  was  at  that  time  with  Queen  Hortense. 