

I  shall  not  attempt  to  paint  the  feelings  of  Lavalette.  I  shall 
only  say  that  from  that  moment  his  mind  appeared  quite  calm. 
He  was  not  only  saved,  but  triumphant.  What  seemed  to  gratify 
him  most  was  the  idea  that  the  effort  dictated  by  his  wife's 
devoted  affection  had  been  finally  crowned  with  success. 

We  did  not  stop  till  we  arrived  at  Mons  :  there  we  dined,  and 
made  arrangements  for  the  farther  journey  of  Lavalette.  I  wrote 
several  letters  to  facilitate  to  him  the  means  of  reaching  his  desti- 
nation ;  and  having  also  provided  all  that  was  necessary  for  his 
safety  and  satisfaction,  I  took  leave  of  him,  and  returned  to  Paris, 
where  I  arrived  last  night  by  the  road  of  Maubeuge,  Soissons,  and 
the  Porte  St.  Martin. 

My  absence  having  lasted  only  sixty  hours,  my  journey  cannot 
have  been  much  remarked  ;  and  up  to  the  present  moment  I  have 
no  very  bad  consequences  to  fear  from  my  undertaking.  I  do  not 
wish  either  to  be  put  into  prison,  or  lose  my  rank  in  life,  but  I  had 
made  up  my  mind  to  both  before  I  embarked  in  this  enterprise ; 
there  is,  however,  no  appearance  that  I  shall  have  reason  to  regret 
an  attempt  that  has  so  completely  succeeded. 

I  have  had  at  times  an  idea  of  communicating  confidentially  to 
the  Duke  of  York  what  I  had  done,  to  avoid  the  suspicion  of  having 
conspired  clandestinely  ;  but  I  fear  to  compromise  those  whose 
interests  I  am  bound  to  defend,  and  therefore  I  only  for  the 
moment  acquaint  you  with  what  has  happened,  begging  you 
would  send  this  letter  to  my  brother  at  Arundel '  after  having 
perused  it,  not  having  sufficient  time  to  write  separately  to  him, 
and,  in  fact,  being  rather  fearful  of  sending  to  his  address  a  letter 
on  this  subject. 

You  may  well  imagine  that  I  have  learned  most  interesting  par- 
ticulars ;  but  I  must  wait  to  communicate  them  until  I  can  write 
to  you  again  by  some  safe  opportunity. 

I  should  be  very  glad  if  Lord  Holland  were  to  know  what  1 
■  In  the  county  of  Sussex. 
29 


434  APPENDIX. 

have  done,  for  he  is  acquainted  with  Lavalette,  and  has  taken 
interest  in  his  fate:  I  mentioned  this  to  the  latter,  who  learned 
the  fact  with  gratitude. 

Lavalette  will  send  to  him  his  protest  concerning  the  Conven- 
tion, and  will  claim  his  protection  as  soon  as  Madame  Lavalette 
gets  out  of  prison  and  is  in  safety.  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  get 
the  written  opinion  of  Fouchd  on  the  subject,  and  the  explanation 
of  his  motives  for  signing  the  list  of  the  outlawed :  it  seems  that 
he  did  it  from  a  wish  to  save  a  great  many  others. 

I  have  just  heard  that  Soult  is  to  be  placed  in  the  first  list,  and 
that  the  Princes  make  the  greatest  efforts  to  ensure  his  con- 
demnation and  his  execution  : — this  report  coming  from  a  person 
who  enjoys  the  confidence  of  Feltre,  I  shall  put  Soult  upon  his 
guard. 