

And  so  it  is  true  that  my  poor  Emilie  -  is  well  :  I  had  been  told 
so,  but  not  as  by  you.  I  congratulate  you  both  in  your  reconcilia- 
tion. You  are  worthy  of  comprehending  and  loving  her.  It  is 
what  most  people  in  the  world  cannot  do.  They  now  know  what 
noble,  devoted,  courageous  sentiments  were  concealed  beneath 
features  so  calm,  so  tranquil,  so  cold  in  appearance.  Take  all  of 
you  good  care  of  her,  I  pray  you  ;  watch  over  her  ;  do  not  let 
wretches  torment  her.  She  is  a  sacred  being,  the  honour  of  her 
sex  ;  and  it  were  an  everlasting  shame  if  they  were  to  make  her 
expiate  by  persecution  her  noble  and  generous  conduct.  As  for  me, 
dear  friend,  I  have  passed  five  months  in  the  deepest  solitude, 
with  an  energy  of  heart,  and  an  elevation  of  soul,  that  I  did  not 
know  what  to  do  with  (I  need  not  add  that  I  was  not  discouraged), 
but  at  the  same  time  with  a  grief  that  threw  me  into  convulsions. 

'  The  Duchess  of  Ragusa  was  then  at  Baden. 
~  Madame  Lavalette. 


APPENDIX.  441 

And,  nevertheless,  I  did  not  curse  humanity  ;  for  where  is  there  a 
man  who  has  less  to  complain  of  it  than  I  have  ?  Relations,  friends, 
servants,  and  even  strangers,  have  all  behaved  perfectly  well 
toward  me.  In  this  country  I  should  have  nothing  to  do  but  to 
mention  my  name  to  find  friends  ;  and  to  the  eternal  shame  of 
those  wretches,  I  might  cross  the  Continent,  their  proclamation  on 
my  breast,  without  meeting  with  an  insult.  This  is  my  comfort. 
But  my  poor  heart  is  so  pained,  so  horribly  lacerated,  that,  to  be 
able  to  support  my  situation,  I  have  need  of  courage,  which  will 
finally  be  exhausted.  I  do,  however,  all  I  can  to  divert  my  melan- 
choly. I  live  in  a  hole  in  the  mountains,  in  the  midst  of  the 
waters.  I  have,  as  a  companion,  a  good  young  man,  a  skilful 
draughtsman,  with  whom  I  sketch  a  part  of  the  day.  I  spend  the 
other  part  in  going  over  the  studies  of  my  youth,  and  in  the  com- 
pany of  the  giants  of  antiquity,  who  mocked  adversity  and  sup- 
ported misfortune  in  so  noble  and  graceful  a  manner.  I  pray  and 
weep  when  I  think  of  those  I  love,  and  of  my  poor  country,  so 
fallen,  so  degraded,  that  I  scarcely  dare  name  her.  I  learn  the 
language  of  this  country,  for  my  companion  does  not  know  a  word 
of  mine.  I  talk  with  the  peasants,  who  bear  cheerfully  their  situa- 
tion. They  are  governed  by  a  sovereign  who  is  not  praised  in  the 
newspapers,  but  whose  name  is  blessed  in  the  cottages  :  they 
know  neither  my  person  nor  my  misfortunes  ;  but  they  seem  dis- 
posed to  love  me  because  I  have  not  the  appearance  of  a  bad  man, 
and  because  I  am  charitable  to  them. 