


APPENDIX.  437 

after  three  hours'  speeches,  to  which  the  people  listened  with  an 
attention  that  proves  how  fond  they  are  of  political  discussions, 
the  High  Bailiff  said  that  the  election  was  about  to  take  place,  and 
invited  the  electors  to  hold  up  their  hands  for  the  candidate  they 
preferred  when  they  heard  his  name  uttered.  Mr.  Polhill  had 
very  few  hands  for  him,  the  greatest  part  of  the  crowd  being  for 
the  two  others.  A  great  number  of  the  electors'  tickets  were  then 
thrown  among  the  people.  The  polling  took  place  on  the  front 
of  the  hustings,  with  books  prepared  to  receive  the  votes  of  the 
electors.  Each  voter  came  with  his  ticket,  and  put  down  the 
name  of  one  of  the  candidates  :  this  operation  lasted  about  two 
hours.  At  four  o'clock,  the  number  of  voters  was  counted  and 
proclaimed  aloud,  as  also  by  means  of  a  bill  stuck  up.  The  result 
was,  175  for  Sir  Robert  Wilson,  170  for  Mr.  Calvert,  and  106  for 
Mr.  Polhill.  The  polling  will  continue  to-morrow,  and  probably 
the  day  after.  The  candidates  will  speak  the  whole  morning,  and 
from  two  till  four  o'clock  the  books  will  be  opened,  and  the  votes 
taken  down  :  nevertheless,  if  during  the  space  of  an  hour  not  one 
voter  appears,  the  book  is  definitively  closed,  and  the  majority  of 
the  voters  decides  the  nomination.  It  is  probable  that  Mr. 
Polhill  will  give  up  the  contest. 

;;<  ;;:  :;;  >;=  *  * 

No.  XIV. 

LETTER   OF   M.    BALLOUCHEY,   ADDRESSED  TO  COUNT 

LAVALETTE. 

i6th  May,  1827. 

M.    LE   COMTE, 

I  hasten  to  transmit  you  the  information  the  Duchess  of  St.  Leu 
asked  of  you  concerning  the  moneys  received  on  account  of  her 
august  mother,  the  Empress  Josephine,  during  the  time  that  I  had 
the  honour  of  being  charged  with  her  affairs, — that  is  to  say,  from 
the  1st  of  Messidor  of  the  twelfth  year  (20th  of  June,  1804)  until 
the  year  1809  inclusive  ;  and  I  add  to  that  only  the  sums  delivered 
by  M.  Dumenil  during  the  eleventh  year  and  the  first  nine  months 
of  the  twelfth. 

The  expenditure  of  the  Empress's  household,  as  well  as  that  of 
the  estate  of  Malmaison,  were  each  year  fixed  by  the  common 
budget  of  their  Majesties.     That  budget  received  the  Emperor's 


438  APPENDIX. 

approbation,  who  examined  the  accounts  at  the  end  of  each  year  ; 
and  when  any  sum  remained  disposable  out  of  those  allowed  for 
the  household  of  the  Empress,  instead  of  being  delivered  over 
into  the  hands  of  her  Majesty,  they  returned  to  the  treasury  of 
the  Crown. 

The  same  thing  took  place  in  regard  to  the  revenues  of  Mal- 
maison  :  they  were  gathered  by  the  treasurer  of  the  Crown,  and 
entered  in  compensation  of  the  sum  allowed  by  the  budget  for  the 
expenses  of  the  estate,  so  that  the  Empress  never  received  any 
portion  of  them. 