

I  shall  not  speak  of  the  pleasure  your  letter  gave  me,  dear 
friend  ;  that  would  be  ridiculous.  You  must  however  know,  that 
the  day  I  received  it,  that  is  to  say,  the  day  before  yesterday,  I 
read  it  twice  in  the  morning,  and  twice  again  in  the  evening.  It 
appeared  to  me  as  if  I  heard  you  speak,  and  almost  as  if  I  saw  you. 
In  the  morning  I  went  to  read  it  under  the  cover  of  a  thick  wood 
that  surrounds  my  hermitage,  and  threatened  by  a  storm,  that  would 
not  have  driven  me  away  if  I  had  not  feared  that  the  rain  would 

'  The  Queen  Hortense.       ^  Madame  Lallemand,  the  wife  of  the  General. 


APPENDIX.  443 

wet  your  dear  writing.  How  sweet  are  the  comforts  of  friendship 
to  the  hearts  of  the  unhappy  !  Past  sufferings  vanish  while  read- 
ing your  letter ;  futurity  smiles  on  me  ;  and  my  misfortune  itself 
gets  charms,  by  the  idea  that  in  any  other  situation  I  should  not 
have  the  same  enjoyment. 

A  few  days  before  the  arrival  of  your  letter,  I  experienced  a 
moment  of  very  great  happiness.  My  friend's  father-in-law '  whom 
you  saw  at  the  watering-place,  came  to  dine  with  his  son-in-law, 
and  brought  his  son  with  him.  He  had  made  it  a  condition  that  I 
should  be  of  the  party.  He  spoke  to  me  of  you  with  such  sincere, 
such  high  praise,  that  I  found  him  a  hundred  times  more  venerable 
than  he  was.  He  repeated  several  times  the  same  words.  His 
reception  of  me  was  perfect.  He  treated  me  with  a  degree  of  kind- 
ness and  delicacy  it  would  be  difficult  for  me  to  describe.  I  owe 
this  good  fortune  to  his  son-in-law  and  daughter,  who  are  exceed- 
ingly kind  to  me ;  but  let  me  hope  that  you  also  spoke  to  him  of 
me.     The  thought  does  me  good. 

You  ask  me  for  particulars  on  my  manner  of  living  : — here  they 
are. 

I  shall  not  speak  of  my  first  six  months.  My  wound  was  deep  ; 
but  my  mind  was  raised  to  a  very  high  pitch.  Now  all  my 
delusions  are  destroyed.  Cold  reason,  implacable  truth  says, 
"  Thou  must  die  in  a  foreign  land,  far  from  the  objects  of  thy  love  ; 
thou  must  efface  all  the  past  from  thy  memory,  or  consume  thyself 
in  grief  by  living  on  thy  recollections."  Dear  friend,  I  struggle 
against  that  terrible  sentence.  I  wear  out  my  life  with  labour,  and 
especially  with  reading.  I  have  got  only  two  works,  but  they 
charm  my  solitude  without  fatiguing  my  imagination.  These  are 
Condillac  and  Plutarch.  The  former  is  a  man  of  excellent  judg- 
ment, vast  erudition,  and  who  speaks  only  to  reason.  His  work 
is  a  complete  course  of  education.  I  find  in  him  Locke  raised  to 
perfection,  with  the  elements  of  history  and  mathematics.  On  the 
other  hand,  Plutarch  fortifies  my  mind  against  the  strokes  of  fate. 
I  learn  in  reading  him,  how  one  may  fall  into  misfortune  while  ful- 
filling all  one's  duties,  and  how,  in  that  case,  misfortune  is  prefer- 
able to  all  the  vain  happiness  of  the  world.  A  horrible  truth  ! 
Three-quarters  of  the  men  whose  history  he  wrote  died  violent 
deaths  ;  it  is  the  same  in  our  modern  and  wretched  history. 