

The  wretches  who  have  used  me  so  cruelly  never  suspected  that 
a  woman  so  weak,  so  unfortunate,  so  oppressed,  would  be  stronger 
and  more  courageous  than  all  of  them  together.  I  wish  them  no 
ill  :  I  am  revenged  by  the  contempt  I  feel  for  them  ;  but  I  cannot 
think  that  they  will  succeed  by  following  their  bloody  track. 

I  say  nothing  of  the  friend  I  have  here : '  a  brother  would  have 
been  less  good,  less  generous.  I  have  seen  him  and  his  family 
frequently  for  some  time.  They  are  angels  of  goodness.  How 
happy  he  is  !     The  sight  of  his  bliss  does  me  a  great  deal  of  good. 

And  so,  you  have  seen  my  poor  little  Josephine.  My  dod  ! 
What  will  become  of  her?  I  shudder  when  I  think  how  unfortu- 
nate she  will  perhaps  one  day  be.  Alas  !  how  agreeable  it  would 
have  been  for  me  to  complete  her  education  !  When  I  think  on 
'  Prince  Eugene. 


442  APPENDIX. 

all  that,  I  thrust  my  head  against  the  wall,  and  I  do  not  know  what 
I  might  not  be  able  to  do  to  myself.  Tell  me,  repeat  to  me  with 
a  noble  friend,'  who  has  been  so  kind  to  me, — repeat  to  me  that  I 
shall  see  you  all  again,  and  shall  enjoy  your  happiness,  for  mine 
is  gone  for  ever,  and  I  have  a  forewarning  that  a  little  corner  of 
ground  awaits  me  in  a  country  churchyard. 

Amiable  Caroline  !  ^  So  she  is  with  you.  May  God  bless  you  ! 
She  deserves  a  friend  like  you.  Tell  me  where  is  her  husband  ? 
Is  it  true  that  he  directs  his  steps  to  the  East  ?  Where  is  he  going 
to?  I  am  uneasy  on  his  account, for  he  has  one  of  the  most  noble 
hearts  I  ever  met  with.  You  will  meet  again  with  our  good  friend 
Mollein.  Tell  him  that  I  love  him,  and  that  I  think  of  him  every 
day,  and  a  great  part  of  each  day.  Remember  me  to  his  lovely 
wife  ;  I  wish  her  happiness.  She  is  the  last  person  I  saw ;  for  it 
was  in  coming  from  her  home  that  I  lost  my  liberty,  and  her  soft 
compassion  has  remained  engraved  in  my  heart.  Remember  me 
also  to  Freville  ;  he  has  given  me  a  proof  of  friendship  of  which  I 
keep  a  dear  remembrance.  Think  on  me,  all  of  you,  and  you  in 
particular,  my  dear  friend — you  of  whom  I  love  so  much  the  noble 
disposition  and  courageous  mind.  I  hope  you  love  my  dear  Eng- 
lish friends.  Why  did  so  noble  an  action  draw  on  them  so  odious 
a  persecution  ?  What  will  become  of  them  ?  The  misfortune  of 
Bruce  will  make  me  doubly  unfortunate  myself !  It  costs  dear  to 
act  nobly  ;  Vice  is  luckier  !     Adieu  I  Adieu  ! 

P.S.  If  you  are  back  at  Emilie's  yiV^,  send  her  a  flower  in  my 
name. 

No.  XVI. 

SECOND   LETTER. — FROM   THE   SAME   TO  THE  SAME. 

From  the  Banks  of  Lake  Starnberg,  14th  August,  1816. 