


436  APPENDIX. 

eldest,   who    sat    facing    me.      "  No,   no !  "    she    said,    "  I    am 
only  afraid  for  the  poor  people  that   surround  us."     Generous 
in  their  hostility,  the  two  rivals  bowed  to  one  another  as  they 
passed,  and  we  arrived  at  last  before  the  Hustings,  situated  in 
a   place  where   the   street    divides   in    two,   and   forms   a   small 
square,  scarcely  wide  enough  for  a  battalion  of  six  hundred  men 
to  mancEuvre,   and   where,   however,   more   than   four  thousand 
persons  were  assembled.     We  stepped  out  with  difficulty  before 
the  hustings,  at  the  house  of  a  wealthy  tradesman,  a  zealous  partisan 
of  Wilson's,  and  from  a  parlour  on  the  first  floor  we  distinctly  saw 
the  whole  sight  of  the  election.     What  they  call  the  Hustings  is  a 
scaffolding  large  enough  to  hold  two  hundred  people,  and  covered 
with  boards  as  a  shelter  from  the  rain, — something  like  what  we 
see  in  our  public  ceremonies  on  our  quays  and  boulevards.     Sir 
Robert  left  us  to  get  on  the  hustings.     The  High  Bailiff,  a  magis- 
trate delegated  by  the  Lord  Mayor  or  the  Sheriff,  opened  the 
meeting  in  presence  of  all  the  people,  by  declaring  that  the  election 
was  about  to  take  place.     He  read  the  writ,  proclaimed  the  names 
of  the  candidates,  and  made  known  the  forms  that  were  to  be 
observed  in  the  election.     Afterwards,   according  to   custom,   a 
friend  of  the  first  candidate  made  a  speech,  in  which  he  expatiated 
on  the  titles  of  the  candidate  to  the  suffrages  of  the  people,  his 
public  conduct,  his  opinions  in  regard  to  Parliamentary  Reform 
and  Catholic  Emancipation.     Then  came  the  friend  of  Sir  Robert. 
The  celebrity  of  his  name,  the  splendour  of  his  life,  rendering  it 
unnecessary  for  the  orator  to  enter  into  particulars,  he  bounded 
himself  with  praising  his  parliamentary  conduct,  and  explaining 
to  his  hearers  that  the  attempts  made  to  expel  him  from  the  House 
had  been  directed  by  a  party  that  might  endanger  Liberty.   After- 
wards, the    candidates,  presenting  themselves   in   person,   were 
received, — the  two  first,  Sir  Robert  and  Calvert,  with  a  great  deal 
of  favour ;  while  Mr.  Polhill  could  never  succeed  in  obtaining  a 
hearing.     The  hootings,  hissings,  and  cries  of  all  sorts  perpetually 
covered  his  voice.     Wilson,  at  last,  went  up   to  him,  took  him 
under  his  protection,  and  claimed  silence  from  the  mob.     Mr. 
Polhill  seemed  touched  by  this  generous  act  of  his  rival,  but  he 
did  not  reap  any  more  assurance  from  it.   He  looked  embarrassed  ; 
and  some  person  who  went  near  the  foot  of  the  hustings  to  listen 
to  what  he  said,  assured  me  that  the  House  of  Commons  would 
not  have  gained  an  orator  in  him  if  he  had  been  elected.     At  last, 