

But  although,  in  the  execution  of  this  class  of  duties,  the 
political  agent  may  see  with  one  glance  of  his  eye  the  road  that 
lies  open  before  him,  he  must  however  call  all  his  prudence  to 
his  aid  before  he  engages  in  it:  as  long  as  a  political  agent 
observes,  he  has  no  connection  but  with  his  own  Covernment  ; 

30 


450  APPENDIX. 

when  he  lets  his  observations  be  perceived,  he  enters,  in  some 
respect,  into  an  indirect  connection  with  the  ministers,  whom 
he  acquaints  that  they  are  the  objects  of  his  attention  ;  never- 
theless, these  ministers  as  yet  see  nothing  but  power,  and  can 
derive  no  advantage  from  the  knowledge  they  have  of  the  manner 
in  which  he  fulfils  the  obligation  of  his  situation  ;  but  when  the 
political  agent  speaks  officially,  the  ministers  see  in  him  the 
Government  of  which  he  is  the  organ,  and  that  thought  must  be 
for  him  a  perpetual  motive  of  circumspection  and  discretion. 

The  first  rule  to  be  observed  in  that  respect  is,  to  presume 
nothing  ;  never  to  act  without  interrogating  ;  to  solicit  precise 
instructions,  and  to  be  well  imbued  with  this  principle,  that 
in  a  matter  of  positive  discussion,  whether  it  be  in  declaring  or 
in  replying,  the  Government  alone  prepares  and  negotiates,  while 
the  diplomatical  agents  are  only  its  organs. 

The  diplomatical  agents  have  no  right  either  to  choose,  or  to 
allow,  or  to  refuse,  or  to  transact.  They  officially  declare  the 
determination  of  the  Government  they  represent.  But  if  they  are 
organs  without  a  will  of  their  own,  they  must  not  be  organs 
without  intelligence.  When  they  expect  the  decision  they  are  to 
interpret,  they  must  plead  justice,  and  choose  the  most  favourable 
time  and  means  to  insure  their  success.  Their  responsibility 
lies  wholly  in  the  care  with  which  they  keep  within  the  bounds 
of  their  instructions,  the  sagacity  that  teaches  them  their  real 
bounds,  and  the  exactness  with  which  they  conform  their  conduct 
to  them. 

In  every  instruction  regarding  a  discussion  of  right,  there 
are  degrees  of  demands  or  sacrifices  which,  after  these  instructions 
have  once  been  laid  down  by  the  Government  that  approved 
of  them,  seem  to  leave,  to  the  discernment  of  the  agent 
who  is  to  act,  a  great  latitude  of  power  ;  but  in  this  he  must 
not  be  mistaken.  The  responsibility  of  an  agent  is  not 
determined  by  the  maximum  of  sacrifices  or  the  minimum 
of  demands  contained  in  his  instructions.  The  duty  of  his 
mission  consists  essentially  in  acting  in  the  best  way  pos- 
sible :  he  must  have  continually  the  best  way  before  his  eyes, 
to  animate  his  zeal  and  encourage  his  endeavours ;  and  it  is  by 
these  endeavours  alone,  and  not  by  the  result  of  them,  that 
his  conduct  shall  be  judged.  For,  as  prudence,  discretion,  and 
skill,  in  their  fullest  extent,  belong  to  the  really  important  part 