

The  first  class  of  duties  political  agents  have  to  fulfil  is  entirely 
limited  to  the  exercise  of  their  vigilance.  That  vigilance  sup- 
poses that  they  have  acquired,  and  that  they  use  all  their 
endeavours  to  complete  their  exact  knowledge  of  the  interest 
and  natural  rights  of  the  country  where  they  write,  which  com- 
prises necessarily  the  whole  extent  of  our  commercial  connections, 
and  the  whole  of  our  political  connections.  This  knowledge  is 
extended  and  completed  by  the  practice  of  a  well-exercised  agency. 
For  the  obstacles  which  social  intercourse  raises  to  the  activity 
and  amelioration  of  commercial  connection,  and  the  fetters  which 
intrigue,  personal  ambition,  and  the  individual  character  of  those 
who  govern,  perpetually  lay  on  the  freedom  of  political  con- 
nections, are  essential  parts  of  political  science,  and  can  only 
be  well  known  to  those  whose  business  it  is  daily  to  wrestle  with 
them. 


APPENDIX. 


449 


In  the  first  class  of  their  duties  the  political  agents  are  kept 
back  by  no  restrictions  ;  they  are  in  the  full  and  unlimited  exercise 
of  their  zeal.  They  try  to  discover  all  that  is  susceptible  of  being 
known  :  they  transmit  to  the  Government  of  the  Republic  all 
they  have  succeeded  in  discovering. 

But  when  they  enter  into  the  second  class  of  the  duties  of 
their  situation,  prudence,  which  is  one  of  the  most  important 
qualities  that  situation  requires,  must  accompany  all  their  deter- 
minations. They  have,  as  yet,  nothing  to  do,  but  to  let  the 
ministers  of  the  Government  near  which  they  reside  see  that 
they  have  penetrated  such  or  such  indications  of  their  views  ; 
that  they  follow  them  in  their  secret  attempts ;  that  they  are 
in  the  track  of  their  projects.  However,  they  must  not  decide 
without  reflection  on  such  a  manifestation  of  their  watchfulness, 
for  the  natural  effect  must  be  to  prevent  or  stop  the  progress 
of  these  ministers  ;  and  there  are  some  cases  in  which  it  may 
be  more  useful  to  let  them  go  on  ;  to  leave  them  a  wider  scope,  so 
as  to  pronounce  themselves  more  clearly.  It  may  happen  also 
that  not  being  certain  of  repairing  the  ambition  or  the  ill-will  of 
an  enterprising  minister,  it  may  be  more  prudent  to  do  as  if  one 
did  not  perceive  views  which  national  dignity  might  wish  to  see 
retracted  as  soon  as  they  are  discovered.  The  skill  of  the  agents 
must  in  these  cases  consult  the  spirit  of  the  mission  which  is 
entrusted  to  them,  and  the  honour  of  the  Government  they  present. 
Here  their  responsibility  lies  entirely  in  the  exercise  of  their 
discernment. 

As  to  the  third  class  of  duties  of  political  agents,  it  is  easier  to 
seize  its  object  than  to  perceive  its  guarantee.  Here  the  political 
agent  puts  himself  in  an  ostensible  connection  with  the  ministers 
of  the  local  Government.  He  must  perpetually  bear  in  mind  the 
systems  of  national  rights  which  are  clearly  traced  by  the  existing 
state  of  things,  the  received  customs,  the  wording  of  treaties  ;  and, 
if  the  question  is  to  ameliorate  the  established  connection,  he 
must  seek  his  titles  in  the  spirit  of  these  treaties,  and  in  the 
general   system  of  mutual  interests  of  the  two  Governments. 