


APPENDIX.  445 

of  a  lake  that  would  be  no  disparagement  to  Switzerland,  for  it  is 
five  leagues  long  by  one  broad.  I  occupy  a  chamber  and  a  cabinet 
in  the  lodging  of  the  keeper  of  a  pretty  forsaken  country  seat.  I 
have  before  my  eyes  magnificent  waters,  beautiful  wooded  hills, 
and  high  mountains  topped  with  snow.  For  my  walks,  I  have 
fine  woods,  agreeably  cut  in  lanes,  and  full  of  deer,  which  I  leave 
in  peace.  My  hosts  are  honest  peasants,  who  know  how  to  cook 
tolerably  well  the  Spartan  black  broth  ;  and  it  is  not  without 
pleasure  that  I  eat  of  their  brown  bread.  I  have  no  servant — his 
presence  might  be  dangerous.  My  companion  is  an  honest  artist, 
without  reputation,  who  knows  not  a  word  of  my  language,  and 
smokes  the  livelong  day  ;  but  I  teach  him  French,  and  we  under- 
stand each  other  tolerably  well.  He  wakes  me  every  morning  at 
six  o'clock  :  we  sketch  till  nine.  After  the  most  frugal  breakfast, 
we  set  ourselves  to  work  again  till  twelve  o'clock  ;  and  after  dinner, 
from  two  to  five  we  work  again.  I  afterwards  devote  two  hours  to 
reading.  At  seven  we  walk  till  supper-time.  I  have  taught  him 
to  play  chess  :  we  play  till  ten  o'clock,  and  then  I  lock  myself  up  ; 
but  I  do  not  go  to  bed  until  one  in  the  morning.  These  night- 
hours  are  sacred  to  the  anguish  of  my  heart,  and  to  all  my  dismal 
recollections.  I  write  little — my  mind  is  ill-disposed  for  that  :  you 
will  observe  it  too  well  by  this  letter.  But  1  talk  much  to  myself ; 
and  I  believe  that  if  I  had  pleaded  my  cause  as  I  do  while  walking 
in  my  cell,  I  should  indeed  not  have  won  it,  but  I  should  have 
made  the  wretches  blush  that  have  used  me  so  ill.  At  last, 
fatigued  with  my  long  soliloquies,  I  read  until  sleep  forces  me  to  lie 
down  on  one  of  the  worst  beds  in  Germany,  and  to  suspend  for  a 
few  hours  the  recollection  of  my  sufferings,  and  those  occupations 
by  which  I  strive  to  divert  them. 

Adieu,  adieu  !  Why  should  your  friend  not  write  to  me "'  We 
are  both  unhappy  !  Alas  !  her  ring  has  not  destroyed  the  power 
of  the  Genius  of  Evil— but  that  was  not  her  fault.  I  love  her  much  : 
I  should  wish  to  know  she  is  happy;  for,  now  that  I  have  no  hopes 
of  happiness  for  myself,  that  of  my  friends  can  alone  do  me  good. 
But,  adieu,  dear  and  excellent  friend  !  write  often  to  me,  and  if 
any  letters  annoy  you,  you  will  be  indulgent.  When  you  return  to 
Paris,  promise  me  you  will  go  and  embrace  my  poor  child  at  her 
boarding-school;  but  do  not  show  this  letter  to  ICmilie,  it  would 
make  her  uneasy.  Tell  her  only  that  I  am  well  and  tranquil, 
.^dieu  ! — once  more  adieu  ! 