

He  shall  give  me  all  the  information  he  will  be  able  to  collect 
on  the  situation  of  Ulm,  and  the  various  towns  of  Bavaria  and 
Bohemia. 

He  shall  direct  particular  attention  to  the  Russian  army,  the 
number  of  its  regiments,  and  their  position.  He  shall  inquire 
what  is  going  forward  in  Poland. 

He  shall  address  all  his  military  information  to  General  Clarke. 

When  he  lays  out  any  money  to  get  the  required  informations, 
he  shall  send  over  an  account,  and  the  sum  shall  be  reimbursed. 

Bonaparte. 

No.   XVIII. 

ABSTRACT     OF      THE     GENERAL      INSTRUCTIONS     GIVEN     TO     M. 
LAVALETTE  ON  HIS   ABOVE-MENTIONED   MISSION   TO   SAXONY. 

2  Pluviose,  8th  Year. 

Political  agents  in  foreign  countries  represent  the  vigilance  and 
force  of  the  government  that  sends  them.  In  that  double  point  of 
view,  their  functions  are  graduated  on  a  scale  of  activity  which  it 
is  important  to  unfold  in  a  distinct  and  precise  manner. 

I.  The  political  agent  secretly  observes  and  watches  assiduously 
over  the  Government  near  which  he  resides.  The  observations  he 
makes,  the  information  he  gets,  are  by  him  transmitted  with  exact- 
ness to  his  own  Government  ;  and  it  is  by  such  means  that  that 
Government  sees  by  the  eyes  of  its  agent  all  that  is  useful  to  the 
national  interests,  or  hurtful  to  them. 

'  When  I  was  in  Illyria  and  Carinthia,  they  printed  very  fine  maps  not  only 
of  the  Hereditary  States,  but  also  of  all  Germany. 


448  APPENDIX. 

2.  The  political  agent  manifests  his  watchfulness,  and  acquaints 
the  ministers  of  the  Government  that  is  the  object  of  it,  that  such 
a  measure,  or  such  an  attempt,  that  they  meditate,  has  not  escaped 
his  sagacity;  and  that  from  the  moment  the  first  indication  of 
execution  shall  threaten  to  disturb  in  any  degree  the  existing  con- 
nection between  the  two  countries,  he  will  find  means  to  oppose 
them  with  all  the  zeal  and  energy  his  duty  may  require. 

3.  The  political  agent  enters  directly  and  ostensibly  into  con- 
nection with  the  Government  near  which  he  resides;  but  unless  he 
has  already  precise  and  especial  instructions  concerning  the  direct 
object  his  communications  have  in  view,  he  is  satisfied  with 
notifying  to  that  Government  that  he  is  disposed  to  discuss  it,  and 
is  going  to  take  the  orders  of  his  Government. 

4.  Finally,  the  political  agent  has  received  the  orders  of  his 
Government ;  in  this  case,  he  addresses  declarations  to  the  local 
Government,  and  replies  to  them.  He  debates,  discusses,  transacts 
— in  one  word,  he  negotiates. 

Such  is  the  scale  of  the  various  functions  political  agents  have 
to  fulfil  abroad.  The  Government  of  the  Republic  having  given 
their  approbation  to  the  unfolding  of  it,  recommend  its  study  to 
the  particular  attention  of  each  agent.  They  equally  approve  of 
the  following  reflections,  which,  comprising  the  general  rules  of 
conduct  they  are  to  follow,  will  acquaint  them  with  the  extent 
of  their  responsibility,  and  with  the  means  by  which  they  may 
fulfil  it. 