

The  Ministers  of  the  Neutral  Powers  must  also  be  the  objects  of 
his  watchfulness.  The  greatest  part  of  them,  departing  from  the 
principles  of  their  mission,  by  prepossessions  of  caste  and  personal 
considerations  of  patronage  and  ambition,  show  themselves  fre- 
quently the  officious  advocates  of  a  cause  inimical  to  the  interests 
of  the  Government  they  represent.  Their  mistaken  ideas,  by 
leading  them  perpetually  out  of  the  line  of  the  real  enemies  of 
their  country  with  the  one  they  reside  in,  will  make  Citizen 
Lavalette  fully  understand  (and  help  him  in  ruling  his  own 
conduct)  the  system  of  real  connections  which  ought  to  exist 
between  Saxony  and  the  Governments  that  have  not  acceded  to 
the  Coalition.  That  is  the  rule  to  which  he  will  conduct  the 
inquiries  he  will  constantly  apply  himself  to  make  on  the  plans 
and  manner  that  will  seem  to  deviate  from  them. 

There  exists  in  Saxony  no  able  agent  of  any  friendly  Power 
except  Spain.  Citizen  Lavalette  will  receive  from  his  predecessor, 
on  his  connection  with  that  Minister  as  on  his  personal  connec- 
tion with  the  foreign  agents,  and  with  those  of  the  Electors,  all 
the  information  he  will  stand  in  need  of.  Citizen  Helffiinger  is 
generally  respected  at  Dresden.  The  notice  and  advice  he  will 
be  eager  to  give  to  his  successor  cannot  but  be  extremely  useful  to 
the  success  of  the  missions  entrusted  to  him. 

M.  Talleyrand. 


454  APPENDIX. 


No.  XX. 

Paris,  12  Nivose,  of  the  9th  Year  of  the  French  Repubhc, 
One  and  Indivisible. 

the  minister  of  the  foreign  department  to  citizen 
lavalette. 
Citizen, 

I  hasten  to  acquaint  you  with  the  convention  for  a  cessation  of 
arms  that  has  been  concluded  between  General  Moreau  and  the 
Archduke  Charles.  You  will  find  the  particulars  of  it  in  this  day's 
Monitcur,  which  I  enclose-  This  new  suspension  of  hostilities, 
consented  to  before  the  gates  of  Vienna,  before  an  army  whose 
march  no  army  could  stop,  will  be  in  the  eyes  of  Europe  a  fresh 
proof  of  the  moderation  of  Government  and  its  invariable  disposi- 
tion not  to  pursue  the  war  in  any  other  view  than  to  obtain  peace. 
We  may  at  least  believe  that  Austria  will  yield  to  necessity,  and 
that  the  present  truce  will  be  converted  into  a  definite  peace. 

I  salute  you. 

M.  Talleyrand. 


INDEX. 


Abdication  of  Napoleon,  327 

Aboukir,  Turkish  defeat,  192 

Acyorte,  117 

Ajaccio,  Bonaparte  at,  196 

Alexander,  Emperor,  240,  265 

Alexandria,  plague  at,  168 

All  Pacha,  157 

Andreossi,  General,  xxiii.,  421 

Angouleme,  Duchess  of,  271,  376, 

400,  425 
Areola,  victory  of,  107 
Army,    Revolutionary,    85 ;     under 

the  Restoration,  278,  287 
Aroum  Farregge,  422 
Arrest  of  Lavalette,  332 