


APPENDIX.  451 

of  a  diplomatical  agent  ;  so  also,  justification  and  guarantee,  to 
their  fullest  extent,  enter  essentially  into  the  means  of  his 
responsibility. 

M.  Talleyrand. 


No.  XIX. 

INSTRUCTIONS    FOR   CITIZEN    LAVALETTE. 

Since  the  beginning  of  the  war  there  have  existed  no  direct 
connections  between  the  Republic  and  the  Government  of  Saxony. 
The  Elector  entered  the  Coalition,  in  consequence  of  the  general 
feeling  of  anxiety  and  hatred  which  not  one  of  the  Governments  of 
the  Empire  could  resist ;  he  quitted  it  by  the  sole  act  of  drawing 
back  his  quota,  and  by  a  declaration  he  published  containing  his 
intention  of  remaining  neutral. 

From  the  period  of  the  above-mentioned  declaration,  the 
accession  of  that  prince  to  the  neutrality  of  the  North  of  Germany 
was  acknowledged  by  the  Government  of  the  Republic  ;  but  that 
transaction  took  place  by  intermediate  means.  The  act  which 
consecrated  it  was  signed  only  by  the  Ministers  of  the  King  of 
Prussia,  as  vouchers  of  the  Conventions  of  Neutrality,  and  the 
Plenipotentiary  of  the  Republic. 

However,  towards  the  middle  of  the  sixth  year,  the  Executive 
Directory  wished  to  have  a  regular  agent  near  the  Elector  of 
Saxony.  They  named  Citizen  Helfflinger,  who,  having  no  pre- 
decessor at  Dresden,  went  himself  throu^'h  the  necessary  forms 
with  the  Saxon  Ministers.  He  was  generally  well  received,  and 
the  Elector  expressed  his  satisfaction  at  having  an  agent  of  the 
Republic  near  his  person. 

But  Citizen  Helfflinger,  though  acknowledged  by  the  Ministers, 
and  treated  by  them  with  great  consideration,  displayed  no  public 
character  at  Dresden.  His  mission  was  barely  one  of  observation, 
and  the  conversation  he  was  authorised  to  hold  with  the  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs,  giving  opportunities  rather  to  officious  than  to 
official  communications,  served  only  to  keep  up  the  mutual  good 
disposition  of  the  two  Governments,  and  to  preserve  some  trace  of 
the  ancient  friendship  that  connected  the  two  countries. 

That  is  the  point  of  view  under  which  Citizen  Lavalette  must 
consider  the  mission  that  is  entrusted  to  him.     As  an  observer, 


452  APPENDIX. 

his  part  his  susceptible  of  great  activity  ;  as  a  diplomatic  agent, 
his  mission  lies  wholly  in  expectance. 

The  policy  of  the  Court  of  Saxony  is,  under  various  aspects,  like 
the  agency  of  the  Ministers  who  reside  there,  an  observation 
policy  : — how  exterior  and  interior  circumstances  oblige  us  to 
act  with  the  greatest  reserve,  and  the  personal  sentiments  of  the 
Prince  agree  perfectly  with  those  principles  of  prudence  and 
circumspection  which  circumstances  prescribe  him  to  follow. 