


446  APPENDIX. 

15th  August. 

I  thought  this  letter  would  go  oft"  to-morrow.  The  opportunity 
is  delayed  by  which  I  was  to  send  it  to  you,  or  rather  to  Louisa, 
who  will  forward  it  into  your  hands.  I  send  you  a  few  words  for 
Emilie.  See  her  often,  comfort  her,  protect  her  if  you  can.  You 
see  a  great  many  strangers  ;  praise  her  to  them  ;  so  that,  in  case 
she  should  be  attacked,  she  may  find  some  support  in  the  good 
sentiments  of  their  sovereign.  Embrace  your  brother  for  me  : — 
let  me  know  whether  he  has  many  children.  Alas  !  dear  friend, 
you  cannot  imagine  how  the  death  of  my  child  has  afflicted  me  I 
I  should  be  so  happy  if  it  were  on  its  mother's  breast  !  Poor 
Emilie,  how  dear  I  cost  her  !  Adieu.  Try  to  write  to  me  some- 
times :  the  letters  I  receive  from  my  friends  are  my  only  comfort ; 
and  that  will  last  long,  for  I  do  not  intend  to  change  my  manner 
of  living.     The  sight  of  men  makes  me  tremble. 

When  you  go  home,  you  must  do  one  thing  on  which  I  set 
great  importance — you  must  persuade  Emilie  to  have  her  portrait 
painted  in  oil  colours  by  one  of  our  first  artists,  such  as  Gerard  or 
Girodet.  I  have  entreated  her  for  it  already  these  twelve  years  : 
I  had  mine  painted  on  purpose  to  set  her  the  example.  Her  bad 
health,  and  a  little  negligence,  have  till  now  made  her  forget  her 
promise  :  force  her  to  keep  it,  I  beseech  you.  Settle  that  business, 
and  tell  her  that  she  will  do  me  a  very  great  pleasure :  I  shall 
write  to  her  on  the  subject,  but  speak  also  to  her.  It  will  be  easy 
to  do  it  without  drawing  public  attention  :  I  should  prefer  Gerard  ; 
he  has  been  a  little  acquainted  with  me,  and  I  should  feel  very 
grateful  if  he  would  exert  all  his  talent  in  it. 


No.   XVII. 

INSTRUCTIONS    FOR    CITIZEN    LAVALETTE    ON    HIS     DEPARTURE 
ON   A   MISSION  TO   SAXONY. 

Paris,  isth  Pluviose,  8th  year  of  the  Republic. 
Citizen  Lavalette  shall  write  to  the  First  Consul  from  the  chief 
places  through  which  he  will  pass.     He  shall  give  information — 
On  the  public  spirit. 
The  coming-in  of  the  taxes. 
The  conscripts. 
The  conduct  of  the  civil  and  military  agents. 


APPENDIX.  447 

Citizen  Lavalette  shall  seek  in  Saxony  the  best  maps  of  Germany 
he  can  find.'  He  shall  get  all  those  that  may  have  appeared  since 
that  time. 

He  shall  make  inquiries  into  the  situation  of  the  Austrian  armies 
in  Italy,  in  Bavaria,  in  Suabia. 

He  shall  write  twice  in  each  decade  to  the  Minister  of  the  Foreign 
Department. 

Independently  cf  the  diplomatic  news,  Citizen  Lavalette  shall 
spare  no  expense  to  obtain  all  the  information  he  can  on  the  situa- 
tion of  the  armies,  the  generals,  the  infantry,  the  cavalry,  the  field 
artillery,  and  the  siege  artillery. 