

The  Saxon  nation  is,  of  all  the  nations  of  Germany,  that  which, 
through  its  character,  approaches  to  the  wise  and  reflecting  part 
of  the  French  nation.  A  constitution  which  in  many  points 
resembles  that  of  England,  by  classing  and  circumscribing  the 
prerogative  of  some  classes,  maintains  the  rights  of  all,  and  the 
jealousy  of  Liberty  always  struggles  with  advantage  against  the 
pretensions  and  encroachments  of  hereditary  power. 

This  persevering  struggle,  which  the  grand  impulsion  given  to 
public  opinion  by  the  French  Revolution  has  animated  with  a 
double  strength,  necessarily  obliges  the  Saxon  Government  to 
use  great  prudence  in  all  resolutions  that  might  hurry  it  on  to 
an  augmentation  of  expenses,  or  to  political  combinations  of  an 
unknown  tendency.  Thence  a  constant  attention  to  keep  exterior 
connections  in  bounds,  and  to  avoid  whatever  might  lead  to 
engagements.  The  Court  of  Saxony  has  no  other  wish  but  that 
of  remaining  insulated  in  the  midst  of  those  movements  that  tend 
to  place  all  the  states  of  Europe  in  a  situation  of  mutual  dis- 
traction and  enmity.  Wholly  occupied  with  her  domestic  adminis- 
tration, and  its  preservation,  she  has  succeeded  in  neutralising 
her  ambition  as  well  as  her  territory.  She  would  perhaps  have 
also  succeeded,  by  a  principle  of  interest  and  wisdom,  in  guarding 
herself  from  anti-revolutionary  impressions,  if  those  impressions 
were  not  attached  to  prejudices  and  passions  that  nothing  can 
cure. 

There  exist,  therefore,  many  reasons  to  believe  that  Saxony 
will  not  abandon  her  system  of  inactivity,  unless  she  be  forced  to 
do  so,  and  that  she  will  resist  with  all  her  strength  the  instigation 
of  our  enemies.  She  will  be  protected  in  this  wise  determination 
by  her  position,  the  good  state  of  her  military  force,  and  the 
personal  reputation  of  the  Elector. 

Nevertheless,  as  the  obstinacy  and  petulance  of  the  apostles 
and  ministers  of  the  Coalition  stop  before  no  obstacles,  Citizen 


APPENDIX.  453 

Lavalette  will  find  them  constantly  occupied  in  conspiring  against 
the  system  adopted  by  the  Saxon  Government.  Their  attempts 
must  everywhere  be  the  object  of  the  assiduous  observation  of 
an  agent  of  the  Republic.  They  must  be  the  principal  tint  of 
the  information  that  Citizen  Lavalette  must  unceasingly  seek  to 
acquire  and  carefully  to  transmit  to  Government. 

By  the  intrigues  that  he  will  see  going  forward,  and  of  which 
he  must  study  to  discover  the  source,  he  will  keep  his  eyes  con- 
stantly open  on  Russia  and  England.  If  he  knows  how  to  figure 
to  himself  the  real  and  just  situation  in  which  it  is  fit  that  Saxony, 
for  her  own  interest,  should  remain  in  respect  to  these  two  Powers, 
he  will  perfectly  feel  how  false  and  absurd  is  the  policy  that  may 
wish  to  place  her  in  any  other. 