This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 


Google books 


https://books.google.com 


TT ANAAT Pineal 
i ai (" a 
ih i saith 


Ut 
Ki 
Aral; Re) NG 
| 


ae. s 


i f hi i i i 
uf i ) | 
ra i a 


sil 


ae 


. a . o 
hi ; 
a 
i tae 
ay Test iy gst 4 
He i MF Wi ? Me 
i} 


* tt lin 


~ ate 

‘ 3 
if 

a Ps 
- os 


corte 
he 


if 
i a 
Coe co ys ae 


le Wei the 4 
i rt i rt ae Wt Y a oe i 


Putty 
; (5 Sah hh HK hie HI cae Ne 
vate Abyss A stil 
th 


ae in My Hin 


at bs 
Aan i 
he Ree 
a > oan 
7S = 


1 

eoune it ABEL tA ee 

es 

ae aust He ite 

a Hea ire duit HK es My 

i i Haas Y 
>4)} ; ‘ 
hs ate i ah A i j 


now be 
a opin. - -_< 
— MO ts 
5) - 
z 
os; 7 
Le ° «b-~ Y 
ed mene J 
~ oa ge * Md hl 
* . re 


a1) i 
ie ti fin 
+ } >} a” ra 
; nit ‘ 
‘i 4 
1 fit! Mery 
tee a 
+55) Leb ' if « 


raithaend te ee: 

toe * tee eh 7 

ate on 
eit ; ge 


he 
tip 
Aa 


: 


‘ 
as Me | hates ani ae a ata sree 
PA Met Hea ERNT RATT athe tebe Aah i | Haye 
i of Hc east a a : q i : ane 
MHL LGN Bs Higa ia nt uh a oie sf An it Hh: in His PAAR gt 
Sa areal ne) 


a) 
—s 


Bate 
ae 


ie le Lay hi ui it! HUN 
iA NN ei th nat 


Hb 

Mi nae 
Wy Mint ini i i a 
be oo Ns 


= 


i‘ i 
aa 


ei 


ih 
mal 


Act py 


wv 
< uae ag 


at aaHAy Mata ats 
YH Ve tt Hilt NPAT Lene be 

a : int Rey iG iN suai a 

} | iy : } 1 hia HN 


; 4 il 
halts eC ae | a nu th i i it ie mae ahd 
sik brit Hur Oi Db Serta tats atti iy itt t Hf i Ki NH eri KE Wn WE 
aI HA ‘ it i INE a iY ua it ANA NE \ Pit mh eat AV ay uy uti] ne a i ui o 
Pi TARA fis: thi Mitt q HH ah "| i 
ir Mati i i} te BK HY} ih i! i i yt i Hh Mit p j ii i it ii on ia A ii its : piel 
eae REA AI Cay ATHLETE ele Ni 
TS) Ate ARES I a ss aides re fatelea lah 
ete a ne a oe Pe aay Ln a 
. Le Mah} ah TINA A Se ae iat : i baller i} rue ; Bye ue ithe He Tlie ove 
i Sait! TTR) Miya s. ares iby ' fas Pu} } it a aH} ir its Ni) yee th He 
ih Aa Hat ! iT, } Hi Se | 14) If if f Mi) ‘| uly uh } tat ‘ yh eM is . 4 ie 
PG NTA aN Tih la att hon ae NN Hie i 
PU TaN OM MIAH Nal; Mal Ain NAT ih iach ey Hr sealife 
Urhipsttil eer aittu phe a last | Hie ik i eae ' aman aint a HNN a ‘en 
LW i HMIPTEN Caterer tet SAG bev eit eae a Bieeh Mate eee Lat 
ia i ithe i] i Hitt an int ih sy ih a i ay sis ich 
Pay tion el a: 
MLN PANS i | ok ir 
) Rout ED | tdi! , the We a \ on i ¥ it ] 
Pe ante | oe ( eae fitvat H ‘i Ts A 4 fe un 


, sa in RN }) il ite hii We i ie Hi) 4 ih 3 
Bra a, iby han NO Ai Ih i i if a ih ae iH a HiiluR ie 
PUMA Nae RN Ey : 


Aa Ns 
' HONE | Natit Hi at iN ij nyt Hela te Hh i IN Me i ii iu tah i 
| ! Ie Hui i HN IDA i i I ae I alt tee CG Hh ie i 
| i Nh 7 nt vie ! (i >| 
ae ih ba ies ati Han ‘P Hi) i i F We nih 
a ie al My i Hei NUMA Hin f ie 


‘ i : ’ Hii if i ry ii ] . a a f ng iT il |; 
! bry ‘ th i ' } * 
al Diese rh any ‘ hil ] i af aay) 4 4 " . 1 ] i 


My iN" vi A 


Hetil 


i a) \y “4 iN fe rT J 
| hire alii pals ah 
ny aan ue ea iis sy ls { 


a 
~~ s 
—_ = 
—* 
—— 


: | } 
| : i] y if 1 
Ari ee Mi j is ais Ah 
a Rae MRL ASA 
’ } ’ Past! it 


Twin Cities Campus 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


Whe Services . 
of fBe 

ssengal 
etative Rrnw 


—~* 


Digitized by Google 


* Se ee eS, od be aeaeie” 


A 


SKETCH OF THE SERVICES 


. OF THE 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Agents for the sale of Books published by the Superintendent 
of Government Printing, Indta, Calcutta. 


In ENGLAND. 


Heney S. Kina & Co., 68, Cornhill, 
and 45, Pall Mall, London. 

E. A. Arnotn, 37, Bedford Street, 
Strand, London, W. C. 

ConstTasie & Co., 3, Whitehall Gar- 
dens, London, S. W. : 


Sampson Low, Marston & Co.,, St. . 
Lane, 


Dunstan’s House, Fetter 
London, E. C. 
P. S. Kino & Son, 2& 4, Great Smith 
Street, Westminster, London, S. W. 
Luzac & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, 


London, W. C. 
Kea@an Paut, Trencn, Trisner & 


Co., Charing Cross Road, ‘London, 
W.C, - an 
GrinDLay & Co. 54, Parliament 

Street, London, S.W. 
B. Atrrep Quaritca, 15, Piccadilly, 
London, W. 
Witriams AnD Noroats, Oxford. 
Deianton Bett & Co., Cambridge. 


ON THE CONTINENT. 


R. FrimptAnper & Sonn, 11, Carl- 
strasse, Berlin, Germany. 

Otro HAarrassowitz Leipzig, Ger- 
many. 


Kart W. Hiersemann, Leipzig, Ger- 
many. 

Ernest Leroux, 28, Rue Bonaparte, 
Paris, France, 
Martinus NijHorr, The 

Holland. 


Hague, 


In INDIA, 


Twacxer, Spink & Co., Calcutta and 
Simla. 

Newman & Co., Calcutta. 

S. K. Lanter & Co., Calcutta. 

R. CamsBray & Co., Calcutta. 

HiaainBoTHAM & Co., Madras. 

V. KAcyANARAMA Iver & Co., Madras. 


'G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. | 


Tracker & Co., Lo., Bombay. 

A. J. Comsrincr & Co., Bombay. 

D. B. TaraporevALA Sons & Co. 
Rombay. 


RapHABA! ATMARAM Sacoon, Bomtiay. 


Rat Sanis M. Guras Sinax & SONS, 
Mafid-i-Am Press, Lahore. 

S. Mumtaz Att & Son, Rifah-i-Ain 
Steam Press, Lahore. (For Panjab 
Government Vernacular Publications 
only.) | 

SuPeainTENDENT, AmgRICAN BAPTIST 
Mission Press, Rangoon, 


A 
SKETCH OF THE SERVICES 


ov THE 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


TO THE YEAR 1895. 


COMPILED IN THE OFFICE OF THE ADJUTANT GENERAL IN INDIA 


BY 
ane ad % 
LiEUT. F. G: CARDEW, 


1oTW (THE DURE OF CAMBRIDGE’S OWN) BENGAL LANCERS, 


Redbiced and Edited in the 
Kilitary Bepartment of the Gobernment of Endin. 


CALCUTTA: 
. OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 
1908S. 


Seics Rupees Thess 08 44. 69, 


CALCUTTA; 
OOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PRINTING OFFICE, 
8, MASTINGS STREBT, 


_ ee ees Bt es Beem oe 


a. 


a. - 


~ 


ate a el, pees 


7 


.- 


Digitized by Google 


In compliance with current 
copyright law, the University 
of Minnesota Bindery 
produced this facsimile on 
permanent-durable paper to 
replace the irreparably 
deteriorated original volume 
owned by the University of 
Minnesota Library. 2011 


PREFACE. 


ae 


[? is hoped that these pages may form a suitable introduc- 

tion to the regimental histories of the Bengal Army, 
filling up gaps in the military history of Northern India as 
told by them, recording actions and achievements of corps 
which now no longer exist, and giving a general view of 
events common to many regiments, which, if repeated at 
length in the record of each, would extend the succeeding 
volumes to an unnecessary degree. 

Many of the periods dealt with are too much neglected in 
the histories available to the general reader; the details for 
these have been collected from contemporary magazine litera- 
ture, while the more important authorities are quoted at the 
heads of chapters. 

FG. C. 


Digitized by Google 


MEMORANDUM. 


ae 


HIS “ Sketch of the Services of the Bengal Native Army ” 
was Originally compiled by Lieutenant F. G, Cardew in 
1890-91; it was afterwards revised in the Military Depart- 
ment by Mr. G. W. deRhé-Philipe, but, owing to a variety of 
circumstances, its publication has been delayed and it has only 
now been found practicable to put it through the press. 

In the course of revision, advantage has been taken of 
the opportunity to make the work more complete by, first, 
the insertion of accounts of many little-known operations 
which had been omitted from the original compilation ; 
secondly, by the introduction of more detailed and particular 
accounts of the more important campaigns; and, finally, by 
bringing it up to the abolition of the Presidency armies in 
1895. 

‘In carrying out the revision of this compilation, a large 
number of works and periodicals of various descriptions, and 
of varying degrees of authority, have been consulted, and a 
list of these is appended, but it is to be understood that the 
revision is based egsentially on official records. 


MicitaryY DsParTMBENT, 
CaLcuTra; 
The 21st March 1903 


Digitized by Google 


Cuaprsr 
99 
99 


AePawpix 


CONTENTS. 


—— 
f.—-3599719767 . 2c ° ° ; ° 
11.—1767—1796 ° ° ° ° ° ° 
Iil.—1797-—-1814 «ts ° ° : ‘; : 
1V.—1814—1824 ‘ , ° ° ° ° 
V.—-1834—1838 . > ltl 


. V I o— 1838—1845 e ° e e e e 
VIl—1845—1857 ° e ._ @ e 2 ° 
VIII.—1857—1861 e e e e e e 


IX.—-1862——1879 ° ° ° e . . 
X.—1878—1881 ‘ ‘ ; ° ° ° 
XI —T 882— 1890 e e e e ° e 


XII.—1891—1895 ° e ° ® e e 


1.—A Chronological List of the Corps of the Bengal 
Army, showing particulars of their origin, and 
their subsequent history . ° ° ° 


Il.—Existing Corps of the Bengal Army, showing 
dates of raising and changes in their titles . 


111.—Commanders-in-Chief of the Bengal Army . 


IV.—Chronological List of the Services of the Bengal 
Native Army . ° °.  e ° ° 


e ° e é e e ) e e 


PAGE 


Digitized by Google 


LIST OF WORKS, PERIODICALS, ETC., CONSULTED IN THE 
COURSE OF THB RBVISION OF THE “SKETCH OF THB 
SERVICES OF THE BENGAL ARMY.” 


- Gentleman’s Magazine, 1731—1816. 
London Gazette, 1757—1840. 


Ps Pee, a +O ‘ 


t | Dodsley’s Annual Register, 1758—1814. 
| .  Cust’s Annals of the Wars of the 18th and roth Centuries 
| Phillippart’s Rast India Military Calendar. 


a, -Phillippart’s Royal Military Calendar. 
§ Orme’s History of the Tranasetione of the British Na ation in Indo- 
stan. 
Ives’ Historical Narrative of the Operations of the Squadron and 
f _. Army in India under the Command of VicesAdmiral Watson and 
Colonel Clive. 
Carraccioli’s Life of Lord Clive. po 
Gleig’s Life of Lord Clive. 
Malcolm’s Life of Lord Clive. 
- Williams’ History of the Bengal Native Infantry. 
Grose’s Voyage to the East Indies. 
Hamilton’s Geographical, Statistical, and Historical Description of 
Hindustan. 
Hough’s Political and Military Events in British India, 1756—1849. 
Broome’s History of the Rise and Progress of the Bengal Army. 
Entick’s History of the Seven Years’ War, 1756—63. 
Ramsay’s Military Memoirs of Great Britain. 
Beatson’s Naval and Military Memoirs. 
Cambridge's Account of the Wars in — 1750—6o. 
Transactions in India, 1756-83. 
Mill and Wilson’s History of India. 
. ane Tine ing aaa em — 
a Trotter's History of the British Empire in India, 1844—fia. 
aa . Wilson’s History of the Madras Army, 
? Buckle’s Memoir of the Rengel Artillery. 
Stubbs’ Histesy ef the Bengal Artillery. 
Innes’ History of the Rengat Kuropeas Regiment, 
Begbie’s History of the Services of the Madzas Artillery. 
Neill’s Services of the 1st Madras European Regimen 
Vipart’s Military History of the Madras Engineers. 


Forrest’s Selections from the State Papers preserved inthe Foreign 
Department ot the Government of India, 1772—85. 

Duff’s History of the Mahrattas. 

Hastings’ Narrative of the Events at Benares, 1781. 

Parliamentary Papers relating to the Carnatic War. 

Memoirs of the late War in Asia, 1780--84 (probably by Colonel 
Alexander Read, Madras Army). 

Fullarton’s View of the English Interests in India, 1782-83. 

Innes Munro’s Narrative of the Military Operations on the Coro- 
mandel Coast, 1780—84. 

Gleig’s Life of Major-General Sir Thomas Munro, Bart. 

Mackenzie's Sketch of the War with Tippoo Sultan, 1790—92. 

Dirom’s Narrative of the Campaign in India against Tippoo Sultan, 
1792. 

Baines’ History of the Wars of the French Revolution. 

East India Papers, 1798—1800. 

Beatson’s View of the Origin and Conduct of the War with Tippoo 
Sultan, 1799- 

Wood’s Review of the War in Mysore. 

Lushington’s Life of Lord Harris. 

Hook's Life of Sir David Baird. 

Asiatic Annual Register, 1799-1811. 

The Wellesley Despatches. 

The Wellington Despatches. 

Latham Browne's Life of the Duke of Wellington. 

Walsh’s Campaign in Egypt, 1801. 

Wilson’s History of the British Expedition to Egypt, 1801. 

Anderson’s Journal of the Expedition to Egypt, 1801. 

Papers relating to the Mahratta War, 1803. 

Thorn’s Memoir of the War in India, 1803-06. 

Parlby’s British Indian Military Repository. 

Fraser’s Life of Colonel James Skinner. 

Blakiston’s Twelve Years’ Military Adventure. 

The Military Chronicle, 1810—15. 

Memoirs of the Military Career of John Shipp. 

Carmichael Smyth's Rough Sketch of the Irregular Horse. 

Thorn’s Conquest of Java. 

Life and Letters of the First Earl of Minto. 

Prinsep’s History of the Political and Military Transactions ir India. 
during the Administration of the Marquess of Hastings, 1813—23: 

Papers relating to the Nepal War. 

Hunter’s Military Sketches of the Goorkha War. 

Life of Major-General Sir Robert Rollo Gillespie. 


a a isa 


aa ey pee 


111 


Blacker’s Memoirs of the Operations of the Brien Army in India 
during the Mahratta War, 1817—109. 
Papers relating to the Mahratta and Pindarry Wars, 1817—19. 


' MeNaghten’s Memoir of the Military Operations of the Nagpore 


Subsidiary Force, 1817—19. 

Lake's Sieges of the Madras Army, 1817—19. 

Creighton’s Narrative of the Siege and Capture of Bhurtpore, 1825-26. 

Memoirs and Correspondence of Field Marshal Viscount Com- 
bermere. 

Wilson's Nsrrative of the Burmese War, 1824-26. ° 

Snodgrass’ Account of the War in Burma, 1824-~26. 

Trant’s Two Years in Ava. 

Heber’s Indian Journal, 

Naval and Military Magaszine, 1827-29. 

Colburn’s United Service Journal (afterwards United Service Mags. 
zine), 1829-62. 


-. Bast India United Service Journal, 1844—39. 


Stocqueler’s Memorials.of Afghanistan, 1838—42. 
Hough’s March and Operations of the Army of the leds i in the 
Expedition into Afghanistan, 1838-39. 


_ Journal and Correspondence of Major-General Augustus Abbott, 


1838 42. 
Dennie’s Personal Narrative of the Campaign if Afghanistan, Sindh, 

and Baluchistan, 1838-39. . 
Outram’s Rough Notes on the Campaign in Scinde and Afghani- 

stan, 1838-39. 
MacKinnon’s Military Service in the Far East, 189046. 

*s Life of Sir William Nott. 

The Career of Major George Broadfoot. 
Lady Sale’s Journal of the Disasters in Afghanistan, sagicgs: 
Ryre's Military Operations at Cabool, 1841-42. 
Hough’s Review of the Military Operations. at Cabool, 1841-42. | 
Haughton’s Defence of Charikar. e 
Mackenzie's Storms and Sunshine of a Soldier's Life. 
Papers relating to the Military Operations in Afghanistan, 1842. 
Neill’s Recollections of Four Years’ Service in the East with Her 


* Majesty’s goth Regiment. 


Greenwood’s Narrative of the late Victorious Campaign in eer | 
stan under General Pollock, 1842. . / 

Low’s Life of Sir George Pollock. 

Lawrence 's Forty-three Years in India. 

Cavenagh’s Reminiscences of an Indian Official. 

Napier’s History of the Conquest of Scinde. 

Napier’s History of Sir Charles Napier’a Administration of a 
and Campaign in the Cutchee Hills. 


iV 


Lord Colchester’s History of the Indian Administration of Lord 
Ellenborough.,. 

Ochterlony’s Chinese War. 

Parliamentary Papers relating to the Hostilities on the North-West 
Frontier of India, 1845-45. 

Gough’s and Innes’ The Sikhs and the Sikh Wars, 

McGregor’s History of the Sikhs. 

Life of Lord Hardinge (Rulers of India Series). 

Parliamentary Papers relating to the Punjab, 1847—49. 

Edwardes’ A Year on the Punjab Frontier, 1848-49. 

Thackwell’s Narrative of the Second Sikh War. 

Lawrence-Archer’s Commentaries on the Punjab Campaign, 1848-49. 

Sandford’s Leaves from the Journal of a Subaltern during the Cam- 
paign in the Punjab, 1848-49. 

Shadwell’s Life of Lord Clyde. 

Paget and Mason’s Expeditions on the North-West Frontier of 
India. 

Parliamentary Papers relating to hostilities with Burma, 1852-53. 

Laurie’s Narrative of the Operations at Rangoon in 1852. 

Laurie's Narrative of the Second Burmese War, 1852—54. 

Laurie’s Our Burmese Wars and Relations with Burma. 

Fytche’ s Burma. 

Hunt’s Persian Campaign of 1856-57. 

Goldsmid’s Life of Sir James Outram. 

Parliamentary Papers relating to the Indian Mutiny. 

Kaye’s History of the Sepoy War. 

Malleson’s History of the Indian Mutiny. 

Cooper’s Crisis in the Punjab. 

Cave-Browne’s The Punjab and Delhi in 1857. 

Norman’s Narrative of the Campaign of the Delhi Army. 

Rotton’s Narrative of the Siege of Delhi. 

Greathed’s Letters written during the Siege of Delhi. 

Lord Roberts’ Forty-one Years in India. 

Knollys’ Life of Sir J. Hope Grant. 

Medley’s A Year’s Campaigning in India. 

Bourchier’s Eight Months’ Campaign against the Bengal Sepoys. 

Hodson of Hodson’s Horse. 

Shepherd’s Narrative of the Mutiny at Cawnp6re. 

Trevelyan’s Cawnpore. 

Mowbray Thomson’s Story of Cawnpore. 

Edwardes’ and Merivale's Life of Sir Henry M. Lawrence. 

Gubbins’ Mutinies in Oudh. 

Hutchinson’s Mutinies in Oudh. 

Prichard’s Mutinies in Rajpootana. 

McLeod Innes’ Lucknow and Oudh in the Mutiny. 


ce, a 


v 


McLeod Innes’ The Sepoy Revolt. 

Wilson’s Defence of Lucknow (“ The Staff Officer’s Diary ”’). 

Anderson’s Personal Journal of the Siege of Lucknow. 

Fayrer’s Recollections of My Life. 

Rees’ Personal Narrative of the Siege of Lucknow. 

Lady Inglis’ Siege of Lucknow. 

Mrs. Case’s Day by Day at Lucknow. 

Brock’s Biographical Sketch of Sir Henry Havelock. 

Groom’s With Havelock from Allahabad to Cawnpore. 

Swanston’s Journal of Havelock’s March from Allahabad to Luck- 
now. 

Alexander’s Recollections of a Highland Subaltern during the 
Campaigns of the 93rd Highlanders in India, 1857—59. 

Munro’s Record of Service and Campaigning in Many Lands. 

Mitchell’s Reminiscences of the Great Mutiny. 

Russell’s Diary in India, 1858-59. 

Adye’s Defence of Cawnpore under General Windham. 

Nash’s Volunteering in India, 1858. 

Adye’s Sittana. 

Crealock’s Chinese War, 1860. 

Swinhoe’s Narrative of the North China Campaign, 1860. 

Wolseley’s Narrative of the War with China, 1860. 

Gawler’s Sikkim. 

Selections from the Records of the Government of Bengal relating to 
the Disturbances in the Cossyah and Jynteah Hills, 1862. 

Rennie’s Story of the Bhootan War. 

Parliamentary Papers relating to the Abyssinian Expedition. 

Woodthorpe’s Lushai Expedition. 


eee. oe ee 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


I Sepoy, about 1815, 


“Reg. No. 722, Adit. G1 —June 92.—3,000. Rees oat 


8 1. 0.. Calcutta 


Litho, 


Sepoy, Seventh (Duke of Oonnaught's Own) B, I. 
ep ee | 
vt ™Digitizecby 


| Boe a 
- ’ : | ) 
~ 4 , s re ti a 
; r 3 ay | 
; | fe 
_ all | 
>” 3 ag i 
=, - = oe ¥. 
3 4 
sa ae 
r % 


ei 
ajt 


720, A 


pe 


Digitized by Google 


THE SERVICES OF THE BENGAL 
NATIVE ARMY. 


Chapter I—(1599—1767). 


Political and Military Events in India (Heugh)—History of British India (Mil)}—History of 
the Benga! Infantry (Williams)—Riee and Progress of the Benga) Army (Breeme)— Bengal 
Military Regulations, 1817, 

Although the record of British progress in India has been essen- 
tially a military history, yet nearly a century elapsed after the first 
establishment of English traders in the country before the formation 
of an armed force for their defence. 

The East India Company was formed in 1599 by an association 
of merchants, who established their first factory at Surat in 1612, 
and in 1640 erected Fort St. George. In the same year was de- 
spatched from England the first expedition to Bengal : this consisted 
of two ships, of which the crews were so well received by the Nawab 
of those provinces that the Company decided to prosecute the trade, 
and finally established a factory at Hooghly. 

The Bengal settlements, however, remained dependent on that of 
Fort St. George, while their trade was subject to the control of the 
Native government of Bengal, by whom they were forbidden to enter- 
tain any military strength, beyond “an ensign and thirty men” to do 
honour to the principal agents. 

In 1681 Bengal became independent of Madras, Mr. Hedges being 
sent from the latter place as the Company’s “Agent and Governor 
in the Bay of Bengal and the factories subordinate.” The first 
Governor took with him from Madras a party of a corporal and 
twenty soldiers, which little band was increased in 1683 by a com- 
pany of soldiers, together with arms and accoutrements sufficient for 
another company. Meanwhile the traders at Hooghly had been for 
many years subject to the jealous repression and exactions of the 
Native government, and, being unable owing to the smallness of their 
numbers to enforce their claims, their ventures had been thwarted 
and their trade impoverished to such a degree that the Company at 

8 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Pirst Military 
expedition to 
Bengal, 3686. 


length decided to equip an expedition of sufficient strength to assert 
the rights of their agents and to make definite terms with the Emperor 
Aurangzeb and Nawab Sha-istah Khan, the Governor of Bengal. This 
expedition consisted of a fleet of ten ships bearing six complete com- 
panies of infantry, which were augmented by the seamen to ten com- 
panies, or 1,000 men. It was further increased by a force of 400 men 
from Madras, and a company of Portuguese infantry (called Topasses, 
from the hats which they wore) raised by Job Charnock, the chief 
agent at Hooghly. But when the expedition arrived at the mouth of 
the Hooghly the fleet had already lost a third of its strength through 
contrary winds and bad weather. Several months were passed in 
desultory fighting and negotiations, until the British forces were 
reduced to the utmost straits by the effects of the climate, and at 
length found themselves hemmed in by overwhelming numbers and 
obliged to make their last stand on the fever-stricken island of Ingelli. 
At this crisis an offer of further negotiations was gladly accepted 
by Charnock, and in August 1687 a treaty was finally concluded 
with Nawab Sha-istah Khan, by which the English regained their 
former rights and received assurances for the future. 

A year had not passed, however, before the oppressions of the 
Nawab recommenced. Charnock again had recourse to negotiations ;__ 
but while these were in progress there arrived from England, under 
the command of Captain Heath, an armed frigate bearing 160 men, 
sent out by the Court of Directors to carry into execution the orders 
which had been given to the leaders of the former expedition. 
Heath, an impatient and hot-tempered man, immediately had recourse 
to hostilities, seized and pillaged Balasore, made a demonstration 
before Chittagong, and at length, finding that neither his violence 
nor his negotiation were of much avail, he carried off the whole of 
the Company’s troops, servants and portable property to Madras. 

In August 1690, terms having been again agreed on with the 
Emperor, and Sha-istah Khan having been succeeded by Ibrahim 
Khan as Nawab of Bengal, Mr. Charnock, with the Company’s 
servants, returned to the Hooghly and established themselves at Suta- 
nati. For some years the settlement continued to increase rapidly 
without further molestation from the Native government, until in 1695 
occurred the rebellion of Suba Singh, a Hindu zemindar of Burdwan, 
who, having attracted‘considerable numbers to his cause, threatened 
the safety of the Company’s settlements, On this the local govern- 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


ment enlisted Native soldiers for the protection of their property, and 
putting their factories into a state of defence originated the fortifica- 
tions of Chinsura, Chandernagore, and Calcutta. 

In 1699 Bengal was raised by the Court to the rank of a Presi- 
dency. Sir Charles Eyre was appointed President; and the fort at 
Calcutta, which was being rapidly pushed on, was named Fort William, 
in honour of King William III. Inthis year also was started the new 
‘English Company,’ which, after several years of rivalry with the old 
or ‘London Company,’ was finally united to the latter in 1708. The 
military force at this time amounted to some 130 men, exclusive of 
a small party of artillerymen called ‘‘ the Gunner and his Crew.” 

For many years the trade and prosperity of Calcutta continued to 
increase rapidly ; and although the military establishment appears to 
have kept pace with that of other branches of the service, yet no 
serious danger threatened the settlement until the year 1742, when the 
Mahrattas devastated the whole province and sacked the town of 
Hooghly. At this juncture the European and Armenian inhabitants 
were, for the first time, regularly embodied into a militia ; a number of 
lascars were entertained to help the gun-room crew in working the 
guns, and the so-called Mahratta Ditch was commenced round the 
settlement: however, the Mahrattas did not advance, and the latter 
work was abandoned. | 

In 1754 the first legislative enactment for the regulation of the 
Company’s military force was passed, and under it Articles of War 
were framed which, with slight modification, continued to guide the 
service for many years. The regular military establishment at this 
time appears to have consisted of five companies of infantry and one 
of artillery. 

In 1756 the Nawab Siraj-ud-Daulah succeeded to the Government 


becomes a 
Presidency. 


3742. | 


of Bengal, and with this event opened the first great epoch of British News 


progress in India, which, beginning in massacre, reverse, and almost 
extermination, finally ended in the subjugation of the whole Empire 
to British rule. 

The Nawab had only assumed the government for a few weeks 
when he allowed himself to be carried away by his deep-rooted hatred 
of the English into open hostilities against the Company’s settlements. 
Having attacked and taken the factory of Kasimbazar, with its little 
garrison of two officers (Lieutenant Elliot and Surgeon Forth) and 
forty-two regular soldiers, of whom less than half were Englishmen, 
; B2 


The capture of 
Calcutta. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Re-on tase of 
Calcutta. 


he advanced on Calcutta with his whole army, and crossed the 
Hooghly on the 15th of June. Within the capital consternation 
reigned among the inhabitants ; confusion and timidity paralysed the 
leaders ; the fort was ill-arranged and its defences decaying; the 
ammunition was scanty and inferior ; the guns dismounted and use- 
less, and the garrison amounted only to some 500 men, of whom but 
174 were Englishmen. Hostilities were commenced by a slight 


| success of the British, who seized the fort of Tannah on the oppo- 


site side of the river; but they were soon driven back and closely 
blockaded in Calcutta. At the first reverse the whole of the Native 
soldiers deserted, and in the course of the fivedays’ defence which 
ensued, their conduct was surpassed in baseness by the headlong and 
selfish flight of the Governor, the Commandant and a great number 
of the officers of militia, who, embarking in the only available boats, 
went on board a Company’s ship which was lying in the river and 
dropped down to Govindpur, leaving the unfortunate remnant of the 
garrison to their fate. 

On the 2oth of June the fort was taken, and on that night occurred 
the horrible incident of the ‘“‘ Black Hole”, the story of which is too 
well known to need repetition. 

The survivors of the British inhabitants, together with a re-inforce- 
ment of three ships from Bombay, took refuge at Palta : here they were 
joined in August by some 230 men from Madras under Major 
Kilpatrick, while a volunteer company was also formed, including a 
number of civil servants, among whom was the future Governor- 
General, Warren Hastings. Further re-inforcements were solicited 
from Madras, but, owing to delays and indecision, the whole of these, 
under Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Clive, did not reach Palta until 
December the 2oth. 

The expedition now comprised 250 of His Majesty’s 39th Regi- 
ment, 570 of the Madras European infantry, 1,200 Madras sepoys, 
some details of artillery, 230 Bengal European infantry, and 70 
volunteers, making a total of about 2,400 men. 

Clive advanced from Palta on December 27th, and, after some sharp 
fighting, took the fort of Budge-Budge on the 29th. The forts of 
Tannah and Aligarh were abandoned by. the Nawab’s troops without 
a shot being fired, and on January 2nd Fort William was again in 
the hands of the British. Hooghly was re-taken on January 17th by 
a force detached under Major Kilpatrick; and onthe r12tha large 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


body of about 5,000 of the enemy was defeated at Gongi, near Bandel, 
by 50 British soldiers and 100 sepoys under Captain Eyre Coote. 
Whilst these expeditions were in progress, Clive turned his attention 
to the means at hand of securing the footing just regained by the 
English in Bengal. He found his small army confronted on the 
one side by the forces of the Nawab, with whom all attempts at 
Negotiation proved useless, and on the other, by the French settlers 
of Chandernagore, whom the events occurring in Europe, where war 
had: lately been declared between England and France, would cer- 
tainly range amongst his enemies. He determined to supply his 
pressing need for re-inforcements by the formation of a battalion of 
sepoys. The native troops (called Buxarries, and in Madras Telingas 


Formation of a 
battalion of 


or Peons) which had hitherto been employed as occasion required, | sepoys. 


were wholly undisciplined, and were armed and equipped in Native 
style: even the more carefully trained Madras and Bombay sepoys 
adhered to Native dress and equipment. Clive, however, determined 
to try the experiment of assimilating them as nearly as possible to 
European troops. Having raised some three or four hundred picked 
men, he furnished them not only with arms but also with dress of 
European pattern, drilled and disciplined them as regular troops, and 
appointed a British officer and non-commissioned officers to command 
and instruct them. This, the earliest Bengal Native regiment, was for 
many years known as the Za/ Paltan,® on account of its equipment, 
but later it went by the name of Gillis-ks-palian, from Captain 
Primrose Galliez, who obtained command of it in 1763 and held that 
post for many years: it became the 2nd Battalion of the 12th Bengal 
Native Infantry in 1796. 

Recruits for Clive’s Native battalion were easily obtained. The 
Musalman conquest of Bengal and the general disturbances in the 
governments of Northern India brought numbers of the fighting races 
down to the lower provinces in search of service, or enrichment by 
other means, and in the corps then raised around Calcutta were to be 
found Pathans, Rohillas, Jats, Rajputs, and even Brahmans.f 


¢ Paltas is derived from the English, platoon, which is itself a corruption of the 
French pelotox.—P. 

+ The first regiments of the Bengal Native Army having been raised in Bengal, 
both Hamilton (Geographical, Statistical and Historical Description of Hindus- 
tan) and Bishop Heber (/ndian SFoxnrvnal) take it for granted that these corps 
were composed of native Bengalis,—a ridiculous error out of which the Bengali 
press has made much capital of late years.—P. 


6 THE SERVICES OF THE 


Battle of At the end of January re-inforcements arrived in Bengal of artillery 

Cossipors: and stores: and on the sth of February Clive attacked and defeated 
the Nawab’s army, which had advanced within the Company’s 
territory, near Cossipore. The British loss (Royal Navy included) was 
57 killed and 117 wounded, of whom 18 of the killed and 35 of the 
wounded were sepoys; that of the enemy was reckoned at 1,300. 
A treaty of peace with Siraj-ud-Daulah was the result of the battle. 
The total casualties in action up to this period, in the Army, appear 
to have amounted to 41 Europeans (including 6 officers) and 18 
Natives killed, and 78 Europeans (including 9 officers) and 55 Natives 
wounded,—=192 in all. 

Clive’s next object was the attack of the French settlement of 
Chandernagore. Re-inforcements reached him from Bombay early in 
March, and, notwithstanding the opposition of the Nawab, hostilities 
were begun before Chandernagore on the 14th of that month. A 

tibiae oe combined attack by the troops and fleet was made on the fort on 

Chander- the 23rd, and the place surrendered on the same day. The casual- 

cer ties amongst the troops on this occasion were about 40 killed and 
wounded : in the fleet the losses were more severe, amounting to 32 
killed and 99 wounded, including several officers. 

This success induced great numbers of Natives to apply for service 
in Clive’s army, and his newly raised battalion of sepoys was largely 
augmented. Meantime, while perfecting the drill and discipline of 
these troops, Clive was also occupied in negotiations with Mir Jafar 
Khan, the Nawab’s principal officer in Bengal, and this withso much 
success that an advantageous treaty was concluded early in June. 
By this an agreement was made for mutual support, and besides the 
advantages already ceded by Siraj-ud-Daulah in February, all the 
lands lying south of Calcutta were granted to the Company anda 
pledge was exacted that the Nawab would erect no fortifications 
below Hooghly. These negotiations did not check the advance of the 
troops, who were at length, by Mir Jafar Khan’s aid, enabled to 
make preparations for an attack on the Nawab. 

On the 16th of June the army reached Patli, and on the 18th Major 
Eyre Coote, with a force of 200 Europeans and 500 sepoys, attacked 
and captured Katwa. 

‘At this juncture suspicions began to be entertained of the sincerity 
of Mir Jafar Khan in his promises of support to the English, and 
Clive called a council of war to decide the question of immediate 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 
action or delay until after the monsoon. Though the majority of 
votes—his own amongst them—were for the latter course, Clive's 
final decision was for active measures. He advanced from his posi- 
tion on the 22nd of June and arrived at Plassey on the morning of 
the 23rd. 

The following, according to Broome, was the actual strength of the 
forces engaged: British artillery, including 50 sailors, 150 men, 
with 8 six-pounder guns and two small howitzers; British infantry 
(detachments of the 39th Foot, and of the Bengal, Madras and 
Bombay European infantry), 750; Topasses, 200; Native infantry, 
Madras and Bengal, 2,100. The Nawab’s army is said to have nusi- 
bered 50,000 foot and 18,000 horse, with a very powerful train of 

The battle was begun about 8 a.m. by artillery fire from both sides, 
the English force being drawn up in line in front of a mango grove. 
After half an hour’s firing, Clive, finding that his exposed position was 
causing a loss of valuable lives, retired into the grove, the bank round 
which served as a breastwork for his men. The British artillery kept 
up a smart and effective fire from behind this shelter, which played 
havoc amongst the masses of the Nawab’s army, while the guns of 
the latter were not only badly served, but theirammunition rendered 
useless by a heavy shower of rain. Soon after noon the Nawab was 
much disheartened by the news of the death of his most trusted gen- 
eral, Mir Madin. Once aroused, his fears continued to increase every 
moment ; he eagerly adopted the advice of those around him to return 
to his capital; orders were hastily given for the troops to retire to 
their fortified camp; the Nawab mounted a fast sowars camel, and, 
escorted by 3,000 horsemen, fled precipitately to Murshidabad. 

' Clive, seeing the turn which affairs were taking, advanced with his 
whole force and cannonaded the enemy’s entrenchments, upon which 
their troops again turned out and came into action ; but the disposi- 
tions of the English general were well made : his infantry were lodged 
close to, the enemy’s entrenchment, and their hot musketry fire, 
coupled with a heavy cannonade from the guns, quickly threw 
the troops of the Nawab into confusion. By 5 p.m. the whole enor- 
mous mob was scattered in headlong flight, and the camp, with all its 
baggage and stores, was in the hands of the English. The pursuit 


pur. 


was kept up until 8 p.m., when Clive halted for the night at Daud-|- 


8987. 
Raising of the 
and Native 
Battalion. 


Expedition to 
Patna, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Our loss in the battle was extremely small, amounting (exclusive 
of any casualties that may have occurred amongst the seamen) 
to only 5 Europeans and 13 Natives killed, and 18 Europeans 
(including three officers) and 30 Natives wounded.® Of the officers 
wounded on this memorable occasion two were of the Bengal army, 
Lieutenant Cassells of the artillery and Lieutenant De Lubers of the 
European infantry: the name of the third officer (a lieutenant of the 
Madras artillery) has unfortunately not been preserved. Among the 
wounded, too, was Midshipman Richard Shorediche, of the Kené. 
Many years after, in 1829, the surviving corps of the Bengal Army 
received authority to inscribe the word “ Piassgy ” on their colours. 

Siraj-ud-Daulah arrived at Murshidabad at midnight on the 23rd. 
Throughout the 24th, as news reached him of the advance of the 
English, his terror hourly increased, and he fled at night from the city, 
almost alone. Clive entered Murshidabad on the 29th and placed 
Mir Jafar Khan on the masnad. . On the 3rd of July Siraj-ud-Dau!ah 
was brought back a captive to Mir Jafar, and on the same night was 
ruthlessly murdered by order of Miran, the son of the new Nawab. 

For two months after the victory of Plassey, Clive was occupied in 
exacting from Mir Jafar Khan the indemnity previously agreed upon, 
and in settling the disputes which arose amongst the British officers, 
military and naval, over the partition of the same. At the same 
time he turned his attention to the increase of the military force of 
Bengal, and to this end he enlisted men for a second regular bat- 
talion of sepoys, and formed the corps on drafts from the old battalion. 

Meanwhile a small force of French under Monsieur Law, which had 
marched from Bhagalpur to the assistance of Siraj-ud-Daulah, on 
hearing of the overthrow of that prince, made towards Patna with 
the intention of joining the Rajah Ram Narayan. In order to prevent 
his junction, a detachment was despatched under Major Coote, on 
the 6th.of July, consisting of 220 British troops and 500 sepoys, with 
a detail of artillery. 

On their march occurred the first recorded instance of a Native 
court-martial in Bengal, when a sepoy was tried for conniving at the 
escape of a prisoner, and sentenced, by a court composed of Suba- 
dars and Jemadars of the detachment, to receive 500 lashes and be 
dismissed the service. 


® These figures are taken from Clive’s official returns, They differ materially 
from those given in Broome’s History and other publications.—P. 


—— & Oe 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


After many difficulties and hardships at the most unhealthy season 
of the year, Coote’s detachment reached Patna on the 26th of July, 
only to find that Law had escaped them and was now on the borders 
of Oudh, where he could take refuge atany moment. For many days 
great discontent had existed among the troops: the British soldiers 
were in a mutinous state, and the Madras sepoys declared that they 
would go no further into the interior. However, expostulations and 
persuasions prevailed on them to advance again ; and they continued 
to push on as far as Chapra (znd August), whence a despatch 
from Clive recalled the detachment to Patna, and eventually to 
Murshidabad, where it arrived on September the 13th. 

During this autumn a slight disturbance occurred amongst the 
Nawab’s troops at Kasimbazar; and a revolt took place at Dacca, 
when a company of the 1st Native Battalion was sent to assist the 
Nawab of that place. 

On the 17th of November Clive marched from Calcutta, and joined 
_ the Nawab at Murshidabad; with him was a force of 550 British, 
some details of artillery, and 1,500 sepoys; while the Nawab was 
accompanied by a force of 40,000 men. Following the route by 
which Coote had advanced in July, the combined force arrived at 
Patna on the 4th of February, 1758. Here some months were 
passed in discussing the settlement of the country ; while Clive also 
occupied himself in raising a third battalion of sepoys, composed, 
for the most part, of men enlisted in the Bhojpur district. 

On Clive’s return to Murshidabad in May, news reached him of 
the increased strength of the French on the Madras coast. He 
immediately returned to Calcutta, and pushed on the completion 
of the new fort at Govindpur, the present Fort William. In July he 
accepted the post of President of the newly re-organised local 
Government, and forthwith set about measures of considerable 
importance to the military strength of Bengal. Instead of sending 
back to their presidencies the British detachments from Madras and 
Bombay, all who volunteered for service in Bengal were formed 
into a Bengal European battalion,® into which also were received 
a number of volunteers, both officers and men, from His Majesty’s 

® Both Broome and lanes assign a much earlier date to the formation of the 
Bengal European Battalion (now the 1st Battalion of the Royal Munster Fusiliers), 


but the exact date is really a matter of conjecture, and probably they are both 
wrong. Innes’ statements on this point are, indeed, disproved by Clive’s retarns.—P. 


The grd 
Battalioa 
raised. 


expedition te 
P a 


Native 


“ Native 
attalion 


Se tember, 
3788. 


Expedition to 
Visagapatam. 


Battle of - 
Cond 


ore, 
December, 
2788. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 
39th Regiment; the artillery was re-organised and formed into two 
companies; and a fourth battalion of sepoys was raised at the same 
time. The command of this corps was soon afterwards conferred 
upon Lieutenant Hugh Grant, from whom it became known as 
Grant-ki-palian: in the re-organisation of 1796 it became the 1st 
battalion of the 2nd Regiment. 

Meanwhile, the French successes in the Carnatic were becoming 
more and more pronounced, and the Madras Government appealed 
to Bengal for assistance. On the rath of October, 1758, a strong 
detachment was sent by Clive under Lieutenant-Colonel Frarcis 
Forde, the Commandant in Bengal, with orders to proceed by sea to 
Vizagapatam, and, by creating a diversion there, to render assistance 
to the Madras Government. With this detachment were five com- 
panies of the Bengal European Battalion, the 2nd Artillery Company: 
the rst and 2nd Bengal Native Battalions, and a battalion of Madras 
sepoys who had come round to Bengal in 1756. This was the first 
occasion on which Bengal sepoys were sent by sea on active service. 

Colonel Forde met the French army of the Northern Circars, 
under the Marquis de Conflans, on the 8th of December at Condore, 
about forty miles from Rajahmundry, and inflicted on them a signal 
defeat: as his force advanced to the attack, the two Bengal Native 
battalions, which were on the flanks, were fully exposed to view, 
while the European Battalion, which formed the centre, was com- 
pletely concealed by high standing crops: the French, moving 
obliquely to their right to attack the Native battalion forming the left 
of the British line, exposed their left flank to the British centre ; thrown 
into great confusion by a deadly volley from the British battalion, 
they fell back hastily, and the volley being succeeded by a charge, 
they were, after a short but severe combat, driven from the field with 
loss. Our loss was Captain Adnet, and 15 British and 100 Native 
soldiers killed; 4 officers and 20 British and 100 Native soldiers 
wounded. The enemy lost 6 officers and 120 killed and wounded of 
the French troops, and a large number of sepoys.* No honorary 
distinction for this engagement was given until 1841, when, under 
some misapprehension, the Madras Government authorised the rst 
Madras European Regiment, of which corps not a man was present 


®@ Cambridge says—* We had 44 Europeans killed and wounded, among which 
were two captains aad three heutenants ; and the French 156, officers included.” 
—P. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


in the action, to inscribe the word “ Conporg” on its colours. The 
distinction has recently been placed on the colours of the Royal 
Munster Fusiliers, the only corps now existing which is, as represent- 
ing the 1st Bengal European Regiment, entitled to wear it. 

Colonel Forde advanced on the 9th, accompanied by the Rajah 
Anandiraj of Vizianagram ; while a detachment sent on in advance 
' under Captain Knox seized the town and fort of Rajahmundry, on the 
_ Godaveri, on the 10th. Here a delay of six weeks took place, owing 

to the failure of Anandiraj to fulfil his engagements, and it was not 
until the 6th of February that the English force occupied Ellore. 
After seizing the French factory of Narsipur, Forde advanced and 
stormed the fort of Konkale on the 3rd March, and thence continuing 
his march to Masulipatam, arrived there on the 6th. 

‘The fort of Masulipatam was a position of great natural strength. 
surrounded on three sides by a swamp of considerable extent. 
Almost at the outset of the siege the English found themselves in a 
most critical position ; their treasure chests were empty ; their retreat 
by the road by which they had come was.cut off by the recapture of 
Rajahmundry by the French under du Rocher; and, the siege of 
Madras having been raised, a powerful army under General Lally 
was marching thence to the relief of Masulipatam. At this critical 
moment the European troops broke into open mutiny, but were 
pacified and re-assured by Colonel Forde, and the preparations for 
the assault pushed on with vigour. At length at midnight on the 
7th of April the attempt was made; Captain Knox led the rst 
Bengal Battalion in a false attack, while the remainder of the force 
was formed in three divisions for the real assault. The plan was 
completely successful, and, the principal defences having been 
carried by storm, on the morning of the 8th of April, de Conflans 
surrendered. The conduct of the Bengal troops on this eccasion was 
excellent, and they emulated the Europeans in their gallantry. Our 
loss was 3 Officers, 22 British and 50 Native soldiers killed; 62 
British and 150 sepoys wounded. The enemy lost of Europeans 
alone 113 killed. 

The effect of this success was to damp the ardour of the Nizam, 
' who had previously been lending aid to the French, and he opened 
negotiations with Colonel Forde: meeting, however, with but indiffer- 
ent success, he at length in disgust withdrew his force towards Hyder- 
abad. The expected French reinforcements arrived off Masulipatam 


12 


th Native 

attalion 
raised, 
37$9- 


Revolt of 


the Shahzada, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


a week after its capture, and being apprised of that event, sailed for 
Ganjam, which place they fortified. In October Colonel Forde, 
accompanied by Captain Knox, returned to Calcutta, leaving Captain 
Fischer in command of the detachment, now reduced to some 1,100 
men, of whom 300 were Europeans. The latter was ordered to 
return by land to Calcutta: marching by the route by which they 
had advanced in the preceding year, news reached Fischer at Rajah- 
mundry that the French from Ganjam had occupied Coconada. He 
reached that place on the 28th December, and the fort was surren- 
dered on the following day without a struggle. 

Thus terminated the efforts of the French on the east coast, and by 
the success of Forde’s expedition in the face of great difficulties those 
districts were acquired for England which had formerly constituted 
the most valuable possession of France in Hindustan. 

Captain Fischer continued his march with the two Bengal battalions 
of his detachment, sending the Europeans and artillery by sea; 
and arrived at Calcutta in March, 1760. 

Meanwhile the past year had been a busy one in Bengal. To 
make up, in some degree, for the absence of such a large detach- 
ment in the Northern Circars, a fifth battalion of sepoys was raised 
at the end of 1758, the command of which was given to Lieutenant 
George Wilson, whose name it bore. In the midst of the work 
of organising recruits and strengthening the defences of Fort 
William, Clive’s attention was called to fresh danger threatening 
from the north. Since the death of Aurangzeb the power of the 
Delhi dynasty had been rapidly decreasing: internal strife and 
external reverses had sapped the strength of the once all-powerful 
empire ; and the time now under review found the reigning Emperor 
Alam Gir Sani a mere puppet in the hands of his favourite minister, 
Ghazi-u-din Khan, commonly called Umed-ul-Mulk. Early in 1759 
the Emperor’s eldest son, Shahzada Ali Gohar, who subsequently 
ascended the throne as Shah Alam, impatient of the control of 
his father’s minister, raised the standard of revolt in Rohilkhand 
and, prompted by the interested counsels of the chiefs who joined 
him, marched, in the first instance, towards Patna, with the inten- 
tion of seizing the rich provinces of Bengal and Bihar. Clive, 
who saw the motives for, and the instability of, the support 
accorded to the Shahzada, declared his intention of suppressing the 
rebellion against the emperor, and marched towards Patna with a 


- ae. 
ee - aien, ~ Lee - ~ 


y 
ee _ al = oan ~ — — 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


13 


force of 450 British and 2,500 sepoys, comprising the 3rd and 4th 
Battalions, and part of the sth. In company with Miran, the son of 
the Nawab Mir Jafar Khan, he reached Patna on April the 8th, 
where he found that the Rajah Ram Narayan had already success- 
fully repelled the attack of the Shahzada’s force, and that the latter 
had, as Clive had conjectured, fallen to pieces at the first sign 
of a reverse. The Shahzada himself took refuge with Monsieur 
Law in the French station of Chatarpur, and Clive, having spent 
some weeks in quieting the surrounding districts and strength- 
ening the defences of Patna, where he left a detachment of European 
troops and five companies of sepoys, returned to Calcutta in June, 
1759. | 

Scarcely had he arrived there when rumours of yet another enemy 
reached him. For some time past the Dutch stations in Bengal had 
viewed with apprehension and jealousy the growing influence of the 
English. Encouraged, doubtless, by the attitude of Mir Jafar Khan, 
who was faithless and ungrateful enough to side against his foreign 
allies at any moment when it seemed to his advantage to do so, the 
Dutch brought matters to a head in October, 1759, when a fleet of 
seven vessels ful! of troops arrived in the Hooghly ; while in the mean- 
time their forces at Chinsura had been strengthened by the entistment 
of sepoys and the arrival of European recruits. The English strength 
was inferior both by sea and land. Three Indiamen comprised the 
whole of their fleet, while their army was weakened by detachments 
at Patna, Midnapore, Vizagapatam and several other stations. Clive, 
however, was not shaken by the difficulties of the situation from the 
customary firmness of his attitude. Hostilities were commenced by 
the Dutch in November, when their ships seized several trading 
vessels bearing the English flag, and the factories of Palta and Raipur 
were destroyed. On this Clive ordered Captain Wilson, who acted 
as commodore of the English fleet, to engage the enemy immediate- 
ly: a hard-fought action ensued on November the 24th, which ended 
in the complete discomfiture of the Dutch and the capture of every 
one of their ships. 


On the same day the British army under Colonel Forde, who had B 


arrived opportunely from Vizagapatam and assumed command, 
engaged the Dutch force from Chinsura at Chandernagore, and drove 
them back on their base with great loss. On the following day 
he again gave them battle at Badara and, after half an hour’s sharp 


Dutch invasion 
of Bengal. 


14 


Increase of the 
Army. 


Sicoun expedt: 
tion against 
the Shahzada. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


fighting, completely defeated and dispersed them. The loss of the 
English was trifling, while that of the Dutch amounted to 320 killed, 
300 wounded, and upwards of 600 prisoners. The 3rd and 4th 
Bengal Native Battalions were engaged in this action. 

After these reverses the Dutch were only too eager to come to terms, 
and a treaty was shortly agreed on, by which they acknowledged 
themselves the aggressors, promised to pay ten lakhs indemnity, and 
disavowed the conduct of their fleet; receiving back in return the 
ships and prisoners which had been taken by the English. 

The close of the year was occupied by Clive in finding fit succes- 
sors to himself in the command of the army and in the post of Gover- 
nor of Bengal, with a view to his own departure for England: for the 
former post he chose Major Caillaud and for the latter Mr. Vansittart, 
both of the Madras service. He also gave his attention to obtaining 
recruits for the Bengal European Battalion, and to raising the 
strength of the five Native battalions to 1,000 men each; the comple- 
ment of officers allowed to each of these battalions was one Captain, 
one Lieutenant and one Ensign, with four Buropean non-commis- 
sioned officers. Finally, he organised an expedition under Major 
Caillaud against the Shahzada, who was again threatening the 
Northern Provinces, and accompanied it in person as far as Murshid- 
abad. This done, he took his departure from India on the 25th of 
February, 1760. 

Major Caillaud’s force, with the trodps of Mir Jafar Khan under 
the command of Miran, left Murshidabad on the 18th January, 1760, 
on their way to Patna. But news now reached them which consider- 
ably altered the aspect of affairs and the position of the Shahzada 
himself. The old Emperor was put to death at the end of 1759 by 
his minister Umed-ul-Mulk (Ghazi-u-din), who forthwith proclaimed 
a younger son, under the title of Shah Jahan Sani, as Emperor. On 
this news reaching the Shahzada he immediately assumed the em- 
blems of royalty, caused himself to be proclaimed emperor under the 
name of Shah Alam, and demanded acknowledgment of his title 
from all rulers of provinces. As the eldest son of the late emperor 
and the rightful heir, numbers flocked to support him, and he became 
a much more powerful enemy than when merely an outlawed and 
needy adventurer. These facts did not, however, alter the determina- 
tion of the English and Mir Jafar, who, having for years regarded the 


-_ 


ns wa eee, ol, em, | oe oe in, 


sovereignty of Delhi as an empty name, were not inclined to suffer , 


| 


4 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


its encroachments quietly. This being so, the force hastened on to | 
the support of their frontier ally. the Rajah of Patna. Asin the 

former expedition, however, Shah Alam arrived at Patna before the 

English army, but, although Ram Narayan, less successful than on | 
the previous occasion, was completely defeated.® the emperor neglected 

to follow up his victory, and was found by Major Caillaud still 

investing Patna. In the action which ensued (Sirpur, 22nd February, 

1760) the emperor’s army was completely broken and dispersed, a 

result to which the steady firing and determined bayonet charge of | 
the sepoy battalions largely contributed. 

But the obstinacy and indolence of Miran wasted the advantages 
which might have been the result of this victory: until the 29th of 
February he refused to move from Patna, and was only induced to 
some show of energy by the news that the emperor, having recovered 
from his reverse, was marching buldly on Burdwan. For a whole 
month the allied forces of Major Caillaud and the young Nawab pro- 
secuted a stern chase after the emperor through a difficult and almost 
unknown country ; and it was only by the extraordinary indecision of 
the latter that they were finally enabled to come up withhim. Mean- 
while the news of the emperor’s advance on Burdwan had thrown Mir 
Jafar and the authorities at Calcutta into the greatest alarm, which 
was not decreased by the appearance of a Mahratta force, threatening 
the capital from the direction of Midnapore. While endeavouring to 
make terms for himself with the emperor, Mir Jafar marched with bis 
whole force towards Burdwan, whither a part of his army, assisted by 
300 of the Company’s troops under Captain Speir, had already been 
sent; on the 23rd of March this force was augmented by Captain 
Fischer with 500 more men, while the two battalions of sepoys from 
the Northern Circars under Captain MacLean were advancing through 
Midnapore to effect a junction with the army. On the rst of April 
Shah Alam was within a few miles of the Nawab’s camp, but hesitated 
to attack him, and on the 4th the Nawab was joined by his son and 
Major Caillaud. Still the emperor refused to give battle, which 
Major Caillaud, being without cavalry was unable to force on him, 
and the apathy of the Nawab, only equalled by that of the enemy, 


®@ In this action, which was fought at Masimpur on the oth February, 1760, the 
British detachment which had been left at Patna by Clive was almost annihilated. 
The only officer who survived was the Surgeon, William Fullarton, who was also, 
some years later, the sole survivor of the atrocious Patna massacre.—P. 


16 THE SERVICES OF THE 


denied the British commander assistance. At length Shah Alam 
entirely abandoning the object of his march, returned by the route 
he had come and hastened against Patna. 

The garrison of that place was in a precarious condition; the 
defences were weak and the force behind them consisted of only 
Ram Narayan’s troops, with a small detachment of sepoys and no 
officer but Dr. Fullarton. The emperor’s army was joined at Bihar 
by Monsieur Law and a small force of French, whence the whole 
proceeded to invest Patna. The defence was a most gallant one, 
but the little garrison was all but at its last stand when it was 
relieved on the 28th of April by a detachment under Captain Knox, of 
which the rst Native Battalion from the Northern Circars formed 
a part. 

On the following day a sally by Knox compelled the emperor to 
retire, and drove his army back to Gaya Manpur; while a fortnight 
latera large force under the Nawab of Purnea, who was marching to 
join the emperor, was encountered and completely dispersed by the 
English—an engagement (Birpur, 16th June, 1760) in which the rst 
Native Battalion greatly distinguished itself. 


Major Caillaud joined the force at Patna within a few days, but, 
after chasing the Nawab of Purnea into the district of Bettiah, ® again 
left for Calcutta on the 31st August, having been summoned to meet 

Roseasats Mr. Vansittart, the new Governor. One of the first of his acts on 

Native Cay- return to head-quarters was to endeavour to raise some cavalry, the 

jug, aec’ | want of which he had felt so much during his past campaign. With 
this view he caused two troops of European dragoons and one of 
hussars to be raised from the European infantry ; while a short time 
previously he had succeeded in raising two rissalahs of cavalry, called 
the Moghal Horse, composed of, and officered entirely by, Natives, 
who provided their own horses, arms and accoutrements, and received 
Rs. 50 a month pay. 

The greater part of the autumn was occupied in settling the inter- 
nal affairs of Bengal which had been thrown into confusion by the 
misgovernment of Mir Jafar: to this end Mir Muhammad Kasim Ali 
Khan, his son-in-law, was appointed the Nawab’s deputy, and invested 


® It was during this expedition that Miran, the son of Mir Jafar and the com- — 
mander of his forces, was struck dead by lightning, 3rd July, 1760—thme years, to 
I the day, after he had procured the murder of Siraj-ud-Daulah.—P. 


el 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


17 


with the administration, while Mir Jafar himself was removed from 
Murshidabad to Calcutta, and retained there under British protection. 

In November, Lieutenant-Colonel Caillaud was appointed to com- 
mand the Madras Army, and Major Carnac arrived in Calcutta to 
. telieve him ; he remained, however, for some time longer in Bengal. 

The last two months of the year were occupied in settling the 
provinces of Midnapore, Burdwan, Birbhum and Monghyr, all of 
which bad been disturbed by the emperor’s invasion and the subse- 
quent changes of Government. In the attack on, and defeat of, the 
rebellious Rajah of Kharakpur, near Monghyr, a detachment of sepoys 
showed great gallantry, carrying the rajah’s positions and dispersing 
the enemy at the point of the bayonet. 

At the beginning of 1761, Major Carnac assumed command of the 
Bengal Army, and immediately resumed hostilities against the Em- 
peror Shah Alam : the latter had profited by his long rest, and had 
‘considerably increased his influence and strength; his head-quarters 
were established at Bihar, and towards that place Carnac marched in 
the first days of January. The emperor met him at Suan, about three 
kos west of Bihar, on the 15th of the month, and was defeated and his 
army dispersed. The English, following up the flying enemy, came in 
contact with Monsieur Law and his party, who were endeavouring to 
cover the retreat; these after some resistance were thrown into disorder 
and Law, with about 14 officers and 50 men, surrendered. 

The English continued a harassing pursuit of Shah Alam until the 
29th of January, when the latter, finding his followers deserting him 
and his position daily becoming more precarious, opened negotiations 
with Carnac, and all hostilities ceased. 

It had by this time become apparent that the Bengal Army was 
insufficient to meet the increasing demands on its services. Accord- 
ingly two more battalions of sepoys were raised, one at Patna by 
Captain Stibbert and one at Chittagong by Lieutenant Mathews. 


296. 


They were numbered, respectively, the 6th and 7th Battalions; the | éh and 


former became the 1st Battalion of the 8th® in 1796, and the latter, 
after most distinguished service, was disbanded for mutiny in 1784. 

The total strength in Bengal now amounted to 200 British and 200 
Native cavalry, 200 artillery, and goo British and 8,400 Native in- 
fantry, including local companies. 


® Having been stationed at Jellasore for some time this battalion acquired the 
designation of Fallasur-hi-paltan.—P. 


Cc 


Native a. 
ione raised, 


18 


Colonel Coote, 
Commander- 
in-Chief. 


376e. 


3763. 


Sth, oth, roth, 
srth, and zsth 
Native Batta- 
lions. 


3960-63, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


In April, 1761, Captain Champion, who had been left with a de- 
tachment at Gaya, attacked and defeated Kamgar Khan, Nawab of 
Tirhut, who had formerly been Shah Alam’s chief adviser. 

Two months later, the emperor determined to make an effort to 
seize the throne of Delhi, and set out for this purpose, escorted to the 
frontier in great state by a British force. 

In April Lieutenant-Colonel Coote arrived in Bengal, and assumed 


| the post of Commander-in-Chief; he shortly afterwards proceeded to 


Patna to take command of the army in the field, but such were the 


| disputes which immediately arose between him and the new Nawab, 


_ 


Mir Muhammad Kasim, that both he and Carnac were recalled to 
Calcutta by the Governor, leaving at Patna, under Captain Carstairs 
a detachment consisting of one company of artillery, four companies 
of the European Battalion, and the znd and 3rd Native Battalions. 

Nor were matters improved during the remainder of 1761 or in the 
following year: several changes occurred in the Council, and the 
party which had the ascendancy in all matters were men who at 
every turn increased the growing hostility of the Nawab to the English. 
Thus, affairs went from bad to worse, until in June, 1763 it was 
evident to all parties that a crisis was at hand. 

At this time the army of Mir Muhammad Kasim was in a state of 
efficiency and discipline very different from the disorganised rabble of 
his predecessors. The cavalry were well organised and mounted ; the 
infantry, divided into najibs and /elingas, of whom the latter were 


| modelled on the pattern of the Bengal sepoys, were excellently 


equipped and armed; and the artillery, also organised on the Euro- 
pean model, was in no way inferior to that of the English, as far at 
least as their weapons and ammunition were concerned. 

In the Bengal Army, on the other hand, various changes were intro- 
duced, as a collision with the Nawab became more and more a 
matter of the immediate future. During 1762, the independent com- 
panies at Burdwan were increased to a battalion, whose number in 
order of raising was the 8th, but which was always krfown as the 
Burdwan-hi-paltan. Early in 1763 a second Burdwan Battalion, the 
gth, was raised, commonly known as the Chota Burdwan-ki-paltan. 
These two corps were commanded, respectively, by Captains MacLean 
and Smith, and became, in 1796, the first battalions of the 1st and 
gth Regiments. The independent companies at Midnapore were also 


formed into a battalion (the 10th,—afterwards the 1st battalion of the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


19 


6th) under Lieutenant Archibald Swinton ;® a local battalion, the 11th, 
was raised at Chittagong by Lieutenant Lewis Brown; and about 
April, 1763, a 12th Battalion was raised at Calcutta, the command 
of which was at a later period given to Captain John Trevanion ; 
this in 1796 became the 2nd Battalion of the 7th Regiment.t 

These additions to the army raised the total force in Bengal to 
about 1,500 Europeans and 10,000 Natives : of these, four com panies of 
British Infantry, 220 in all, and one of artillery, 40 strong, with the 2nd, 
3rd and sth Native battalions, 2,500, were at Patna, under the com- 
mand of Captain Carstairs ; at Burdwan were two Native battalions; 
in Midnapore three companies of Europeans, some attillery, and a 
troop of Native cavalry; at Chittagong two Native battalions; and 
the remainder of the force at the Presidency. 

In accordance with the expectations of all concerned, hostilities 
between Nawab Mir Muhammad Kasim and the English began 
towards the end of June 1763. On the 24th of that month, Mr. 
Ellis, the Agent at Patna, hearing that reinforcements of the Nawab’s 
troops were coming from Monghyr to strengthen the garrison of the 
former place, determined to seize the city before their arrival. The 
plan was carried into execution in the early morning of the follow- 
ing day, but the victors did not even complete their success to the 
extent of possessing themselves of the citadel, and gave themselves 
up to unbridled license and plunder. Within a few hours the Na- 
wab’s troops arrived from Monghyr, and, after a very short resist- 
ance, completely turned the tables on the British force, which 
retreated in confusion to the factory. The loss in the taking of the 
place was as follows :—killed, four officers and 8 other Europeans : 
wounded, 5 officers, 10 European soldiers, and 100 sepoys. Finding 
himself hard-pressed, Mr. Ellis attempted to retreat into Oudh, but 
after a harassing march of two days the force was completely sur- 

rounded by the enemy and the whole either killed or taken prisoners ; 
all the Europeans who were taken prisoners were carried to Patna 
and there massacred three months later, with the exception of Dr. 
Fullarton, who was spared, and of four sergeants who escaped. 


© From a corruption of this officer’s name this battalion acquired the name of 
Soolteen-hi-paltan.—P, 

t At one time knowa in the Native Army as Teerbanis-ki-paltan; at a later 
period, however, it was called Ouffal-ki-paltan, from Captain Duffield, who com- 
manded it for some years,—P, 

Cc 2 


Battle of 
Manji. 


20 


The battle of 
Cheriah snd 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Captain Carstairs was killed at Manji, where the force made their 
last stand (1st July, 1763). 

War was declared at Calcutta against Mir Muhammad Kasim on 
the 7th of July, and Mir Jafar Khan was restored to power and pro- 
claimed Subadar of Bengal ; but before the main’ army under Major 
Adams* could move from the Presidency, the Nawab had reached 
Kasimbazar, the factory at which place he attacked and captured 
without difficulty. 

On July the 17th, a brilliant combat was fought by a detach- 
ment composed of the znd Burdwan Battalion, who were escorting 
treasure and supplies from Burdwan for the main army. Near the 
Adji river the battalion, under Lieutenant Glenn, was attacked by 
overwhelming forces of the enemy, who, encouraged by the hopes 
of rich plunder, returned again and again to the onslaught, but were 
finally driven off with enormous loss, and Glenn, with his convoy, 
reached Katwa the same evening. Here he found the fort defended by 
a weak and dispirited detachment of the enemy ; notwithstanding his 
previous hard work, he boldly attacked the place, which, after a feeble 
resistance, was evacuated. Glenn, with his little force, joined the main 
army, under Major Adams, on the following day. 

On the rgth of July, the first general engagement took place between 
Major Adams’ force and the army of the Nawab. under Muham- 
mad Takki Khan opposite Katwa and close to the field of Plassey. 
The English gained a complete victory, though with considerable 
loss, and, following up their success on the 23rd, marched to Murshid- 
abad, which was abandoned by the enemy after the loss of the outly- 
ing intrenchments at Motijhil. 

On the 25th, Jafar Khan made a triumphant entry into the city, and 
took his seat on the masnad. 

On the 2nd of August, Major Adams’ army was again in the pre- 
sence of the enemy, who were drawn up on the plains of Gheriah to 
the number of nearly 40,000 men, of whom 12,000 were cavalry : con- 
fident in their own strength, the enemy advanced to the attack, and in 
the battle which ensued the British position was several times in dan- 
ger, but the steadiness and gallantry of the English and Native in- 
fantry at length bore down all opposition, and after a hard-fought 
action Adams remained master of the field, having gained a brilliant 


® Major Thomas Adams, His Majesty’s 84th Regiment.—P. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


a 


> 3 


victory and captured the whole of the enemy’s artiliery (seventeen 


guns) and large quantities of stores. Among the killed on this occa- 
sion were Lieutenant Kaylor, of the Artillery, and the gallant Lieuten- 
ant Glenn above-mentioned. | 

On the 5th of August, Major Adams resumed his march, and on 
the r1th encamped nearly parallel to the enemy’s fortified lines at 
Udwah-nala. The latter position was a very strong one, and it was 
not until September the sth that the assault was attempted. At day- 
break on that day the place was carried with but small loss on our 
_ Side, though it included Captain John Broadbrook® who had for 
many years commanded the ist Battalion of Sepoys. The enemy 
_ fled to Monghyr, which place was invested by Major Adams and sur- 

rendered to him on the 22nd of October. 

The fall of Monghyr was the death-knell of the unfortunate persons 
whom the Nawab had captured in their retreat from Patna at the begin- 
ning of the war. Hitherto Mir Muhammad Kasim had been content 
to keep them as hostages, and near his own person; now, overcome 
with blind fury, he ordered their execution, which was carried out in 
the most brutal manner on the sth of October. 

Meanwhile Adams advanced on Patna and commenced the siege 
on the 28th of October, the Nawab having fled at his approach and 
established himself at the village of Bakrim, about twenty miles dis- 
tant. Seven days were occupied in breaching the defences, and on the 
6th of November the place was carried by assault after a stubborn 
resistance on the part of the garrison, and with considerable loss to the 
British force. Major Irving, a very gallant officer, who had recently 
been transferred to the Company’s service from the 84th Foot, was 
mortally wounded in the assault. 

Major Adams, with his victorious army, continued to pursue Mir 
Muhammad Kasim until early in December, when he took refuge with 
the Nawab of Oudh. The campaign was thus brought to a successful 


The Battle of 
Oe Cgokasbes 

m 
3763. = 


The Patna 
massacre, 


Conclusion of 
the campali 
and death o 
Major Adams. 


termination, the whole of Bengal and Bihar having been reduced in| 


the short space of four months, four strong positions captured by 
assault, and the enemy, with vastly superior numbers, defeated in two 
hard-fought battles. | j 


© There appears to have been considerable doubt as to what this officer’s name 
really was,—see Broome, 204. When he wasin the 39th he appeared in the War 
Office Army List as “ John Bradbridge.”—P, 


22 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Rais'ng of 
Native batta- 
Hons from the 
s3th to the asst. 


2764. 


The commander, Major Adams, who had thus so well performed 
the work assigned him by the Government, returned to Calcutta with 
the intention of proceeding to England. But his health, which was 
completely shattered by the fatigues and exposure of the past months, 
gave way as he was about to embark, and he died in Calcutta on the 
16th of January, 1764, deeply regretted by the army and the Govern- 
ment. 

The past year had seen a great increase in the Native army of 
Bengal. Besides the battalions, from the 8th to the 12th, raised early 
in the year, several additions had been made during the autumn cam- 
paign. In August, the 13th and 14th Battalions were raised at Kasim- 
bazar and Calcutta, respectively, by Captain Robert Campbell and 
Captain Gilbert Ironside; these became in 1796 the rst Battalions of 
the 3rd and sth, respectively.* In October was raised the 15th Batta- 
lion by Captain John White at Monghyr, which afterwards became the 
1st Battalion of the r2th, or Hofe-ki-paltan (a corruption of White). 
The 16th was formed in Midnapur in October, and the command sub- 
sequently given to Captain Hampton ; it became the 2nd Battalion of 
the rstin 1796.f About the same time, another corps, the 17th, was 
raised at Burdwan by Captain Witchcot, which afterwards became the 
1st Battalion of the 4th.~ The commencement of 1764 saw yet 
further additions to the army. In January, on the removal of the 13th 
Battalion from Murshidabad, another corps was raised there by 
Captain Goddard ; this was the 18th (afterwards the 1st Battalion of 
the 7th, or Gaurud-ki-palfan) : while the warlike rumours which 
reached Calcutta two months later, relative to the movements of the 
Nawab of Oudh and the Emperor, in support of Mir Muhammad 
Kasim, caused orders to be issued in March for the raising of two 
more corps, the 19th and 2oth Battalions, the former at Murshidabad 
by Captain Dow (afterwards the rst Battalion of the 11th,—Doo-h1- 
paltan), the other at Jellasore by Captain Scotland (afterwards the 
1st Battalion of the 1oth,—LZscotfen-ki-paltan), Finally, at the end 
of the same month, the 21st Battalion was raised at Patna by Captain 


* The Native names of these corps were Gowan-ki-paltan (derived from Captain 
Clotworthy Gowan) and Ranseet-ki-paltan (a corription of Ironside).—P. 

¢ Bailun-ki-paltan,—from Captain Robert Blane, who was appoiated to the 
command about 1773.—P., 

2 Craw/ord-ki:paltan,—from Captain James Crawford ‘senior), appointed to the 
command in 1768,—P. ; . 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


James Morgan: this corps, after a very distinguished career of service 
as Morgan-ki-palian, was incorporated with the roth Bengal Native 
Infantry in 1796. 

In the same month attention was paid to the provision of an 
efficient cavalry force for the army, The three weak and expensive 
troops of European cavalry were formed into one troop of serviceable 
strength, and, after a good deal of discussion, the irregular Moghal 
Horse was increased to 1,200 men, each rissallah under Native 
Officers, with a few Europeans attached to the whole. The Council | 
at Calcutta had been desirous of forming a body of regular Native 
cavalry on the European system, but was dissuaded by Major Carnac, 
who declared that “‘ the Moguls, who are the only good horsemen in 
the country, can never be brought to submit to the ill-treatment they 
receive from gentlemen wholly unacquainted with their language and 
customs.” 

In the following month, April, 1764, the eighteen existing battalions 
(the 2nd, 3rd and sth having been destroyed at Patna in the preced- 
ing year), which had previously taken rank according to the dates of 
their captains’ commissions, were definitely numbered according to 
the rank of their then captains. 

The following list gives the names of the commanding officers in 
their order, with the original numbers of the battalions according to 
the dates of their raising :— 


Order Order 

of raising of raising. 

: Captain Giles Stibbert . 6 10. Captain Gilbert Ironside . 14 
» Lachlan MacLean. 8 11. - ames Morgan . 31 

. » Hugh Grant . 4 12. 7 ohn White . IS 
4 » Robert Campbell . 13 13. ss Archibald Swinton10 
s. » Thomas Witcheot . 17 14 ” Samuel Hampton 16 
6.» ae Trevanion . 12 is 8 » ohn Stables . 7 
7. wis Brown a a | 16. 6 ames Scotiand . 20 
8. , William Smith . 9 17,» homas Goddard . 18 
9. » Primrose Gallies . 1 18, io Alexander Dow . 19 


At this period the establishment of a battalion consisted of three 
British officers, a Native commandant, and a Native adjutant. There 
were ten companies (two of which were grenadiers), with each of 
which was a subadar and three jemadars : each company had a stand 
of colours attached to it, of the same colour as the men’s facings, in 
the centre of which was the subadar’s device, such as a sabre, a dagger, 
or a crescent: the grenadier companies bore the British Union, in 
the upper corner, as a distinction. The dress of battalions and the 


& 


24 


i EE ee ee 


Mutiny it the 
Army. 


Battle at 
Patna, 
ard May, 1764. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


colour of their facings were at this time regulated by commanding 
officers, but when once fixed, could not be altered without permission 
from the Board : thus, the Morgan Battalion when first raised had white 
facings, white turbans with red ends, and white Aamarbands with a red 
cross ; its colours were the flag of St.George. It would seem from this 
description that the head-dress of the men resembled to some extent a 
Native pagrt. | 

The beginning of 1764 found the greater part of the army in camp 
at Sarwant on the Dargauti, near the then boundary of the dominions 
of the Nawab-Wazir of Oudh, the various provincial posts being held 
by the new battalions which were just in process of being raised. 

On his departure to Calcutta, Major Adams handed over the com- 
mand of the army to Major Knox ; but that officer was himself in such 
a bad state of health that he had in turn to resign the command to 
Captain Jennings, and followed Major Adams to the Presidency, 
where he too died soon afterwards. Captain Jennings found the 
command to which he had temporarily succeeded a task of great diffi- 
culty and danger. The late Nawab, Mir Muhammad Kasim, from the 
security of Oudh, occupied himself in tampering, by the aid of his 
emissaries, with the fidelity of the British troops, European and Native, 
especially with the French and Germans, who composed a large 
proportion of the former, Disaffection gradually spread throughout 
the army, until in February, 1764, the Europeans broke out into open 
mutiny, and 160 of them deserted and marched to Allahabad, where 
they took service in various native armies. The example of mutiny 
was followed by the Native corps on the 13th of February, and the 
danger was only avoided by the tact and coolness of Captain Jen- 
nings. However, tranquillity was shortly restored by the distribution of 
a money donation presented by the Nawab Mir Jafar Khan, and the 
commanding officer, deeming it advisable to keep the men employed, 
broke up the camp at Sarwant and marched to Sasaram, and thence 
on the 5th of March to Hariharganj. Here on the following day 
Major Carnac and Major Champion joined the army, and the former 
assumed command. : 

Meanwhile Mir Muhammad Kasim, after his expulsion from Ben- 
gal, had joined the Nawab of Oudh (Shuja-ud-Daulah) and the 
Emperor Shah Alam at Allahabad, and their allied forces were now 
marching towards Benares with the intention of reducing Bihar. 
Accordingly, on March 13th—17th, Major Carnac marched to Buxar, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


a5 


where he took up and strengthened a defensive position. Want of 
supplies, however, compelled him to retire again to Patna in April ; 
and here the English force was attacked by the whole strength of the 
enemy on the 3rd of May. »The battle was stubbornly contested, but 
the superior numbers of the enemy could make no impression on the 
steady ranks of the British and sepoys, and the assailants were com- 
pelled to retire, having suffered very heavy loss. Unfortunately Major 
Carnac stopped all pursuit, so that the victory was not as decisive as 
it might otherwise have become ; and the enemy, retiring unmolested, 
took up a position at Buxar at the end of the month. Major Carnac, 
in his despatch to the Council, reporting this battle, remarks—* I 
cannot say too much of the good behaviour of the army in general, 
and in particular of the sepoys, who sustained the brunt of the 
attack.” 

On the retreat of Shuja-ud-Daulah a detachment under Major 
Champion crossed the Ganges, wasted the; Ghaszipur district, and 
advanced as far as the banks of the Ghagra, when the approach of the 
monsoon compelled them to return. Meanwhile Major Carnac con- 
tinued to pursue an inactive and dilatory course, notwithstanding 
repeated orders from the Council that he should take more forward 
measures. At length, on the 28th of June, letters arrived from the 
Court of Directors ordering his dismissal from the service, in conse- 
quence of disagreements with Mr. Vansittart, the Governor, in the 
previous year, and he was succeeded in the command by Major 
Munro,® who arrived on the 13th of August. The long period of 
inaction had been most prejudicial to the discipline of the troops, and 
a spirit of disaffection was rife amongst the sepoys; this developed 
into open mutiny in the case of the gth Battalion ((Grllss-ks-palian) 
on the 8th of September. The whole of the mutineers were captured 
by the Marinest and Trevanion’s battalion on the 11th of that month, 
and Munro, thinking an example necessary, ordered twenty-four of 
the ring-leaders to be tried by drum-bead general court-martial. 


© Major Hector Muaro, of His Majesty’s 8oth Regiment (Gordon Highlanders). 
Afterwards General Sie Hector Munro, &.B., Commander-in-Chief: ia Madras, and 
Colonel of the 42ad Regiment (Royal Highlanders.) Died on the 26th December, 
1805.—P . 

+ Captain Maurice Wemyss’ company of the Marines, which had been landed 
from the squadron when the mutinies of March, 1764, occurred, and afterwards sent 
up the country to joia the army in the field.—P. 


Mutiny of the 
oth Battalion. 


Battle of 
Baxer, Octo- 


er 
a3rd, 3764. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


These were sentenced to death and were blown away from the guns, 
the grenadiers amongst the condemned claiming (according to 
Captain Williams) to be tied to the guns on the right, as the right 
had been their place in action. : 

Major Munro now made preparations for prosecuting the cam- 
paign against the Nawab-Wazir of Oudh and Mir Muhammad Kasim, 
and, assuming the offensive, marched from Bankipore on the gth of 
October. His force consisted of goo Europeans of all arms ® and 
eight battalions of Native infantry, selected for their efficiency; these 
were the rst, 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 8th, rith, 13th, and 15th; and in ad- 
dition 1,000 Moghal horse. Besides the above, Captain Goddard, 
with the 17th Battalion, was sent on an expedition against Rhotas- 
garh, which place he occupied without resistance. 

Major Munro’s force met the enemy ina skirmish at Kalwarghat, 
on the banks of the Son, on the roth, and again in a severe cavalry 
affair near the Bunas Nala on the 13th of October, where our loss 
was 14 Europeans and 60 of the Moghal horse killed and wounded. 
On October the 23rd a pitched battle was fought at Buzar, when the 
sepoy troops behaved with the greatest gallantry, and steadily repelled 
the furious charges of the enemy’s cavalry. Atlength Munro ordered 
a general advance of his line, when, after a faint resistance, the 
whole of the enemy’s force broke up and fied in disorder ; the Nawab 
Shuja-ud-Daulah, having retreated across the Torah Nala, destroyed 
the bridge by which he had crossed, and the remnants of his retreat- 
ing army, finding the bridge broken, threw themselves into the 
stream, where thousands were drowned or suffocated in the mud in 
their attempts to cross. The loss of the British force amounted to 
825 killed and wounded, of whom 205 sepoys were killed, 414 
wounded, and 58 missing. The Moghal horse, 1,000 strong, lost 45 
killed and 22 wounded.t The only officers who were killed were 
Lieutenant Francis Spilsbury of the 96th Foot, and Ensign Richard 
Thompson of the Bengal European Battalion. In 1829 the surviving 


© The European infantry was composed of the Bengal European Battalion, two 
weak companies of the Bombay European Battalion, and small detachments of 
Marines and of His Majesty’s 84th, 89th and 96th Regiments.—P. 

t The losses of the British Army at the battle of Buxar ace somewhat differently 
stated in Svoome’s History and other publications, The figures given in the text are 
taken from Major Munro's official return, published in the London Gasefte of the 
18th June, 1765.—P. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


37 


corps which shared in this important victory were granted authority to 
inscribe “‘ Buxar” on their colours. 

It may here be mentioned that on the day before the battle of 
Buxar Mir Muhammad Kasim, robbed and deserted by his imme- 
diate followers, was ignominiously driven from the camp of his 80- 
called ally, Shuja-ud-Daulah. He escaped into Rohilkhand, and 
eventually, after experiencing many vicissitudes of fortune, died, in 
extreme indigence, at Delhi, in 1777. 

On the 24th, Major Sir Robert Fletcher joined the army with re- 
inforcements, including the roth (Ironside’s) Battalion, and on his 
arrival Major Champion was sent to the Midnapore frontier, which 
was threatened by the Mahrattas, taking with him two recently formed 
companies of the European battalion, a detail of artillery, and two 
battalions (the 14th and 16th) of Native infantry. 

The whole army crossed the Ganges on the 27th of October, and 
on the 8th November advanced to Benares, from which place a 
ransom of four lakhs of rupees was exacted. Meanwhile the 
Emperor Shah Alam had been making overtures to the English, 
representing himself as merely a state prisoner in the hands of Shuja- 
ud-Daulah; eventually he came to the English camp, and pitched 
his own close to it for security. Authority having been received from 
the Council, measures were taken for his protection, and a treaty was 
signed. The following curious order was published on this oc- 
casion :—“‘ Such of the Officers as will be off Duty to-morrow, who 
choose to wait on the King and wish him Joy of being put in Pos- 
session of Sujah-ud-Dowlah’s Country by the English, are desired to 
meet at the Head-Quarters at 9 o'clock to-morrow Morning; it is 
necessary to acquaint them that it is customary to make him a salam 
on the occasion, and the least that should be given by a Captain is 
five gold Mohurs and three by a Subaltern.” 

Two more companies of Europeans from Patna re-inforced the 
army, and an expedition was despatched under Major Pemble to lay 
siege to the fort of Chunar: this detachment consisted of the Euro- 

pean grenadiers, three battalions of sepoys, the company of pioneers, 
a company of cadets, and Soartillery-men. Two assaults were made 
on the fortress on the and and 4th of December, but, although the 
behaviour of the troops was excellent, both attacks were repulsed with 
loss. On the sth of December, the detachment was recalled, and 
Major Munro fell back on Benares, where he took up a position 


¢ 


38 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


376s. 


covering the city. The remainder of December was passed in un- 
availing negotiations with Shuja-ud-Daulah. 

Early in January Major Munro left the army to proceed to Eng- 
land, and Major Carnac, having been re-instated in the army with the 
rank of Brigadier-General, was appointed to succeed him ; meantime 
the command temporarily devolved on Major Sir Robert Fletcher. 

In the same month the Nawab Mir Jafar Khan died, and his eldest 
surviving son, Najm-ud-Daulah, was appointed his successor by the 
Government at Calcutta, in supersession of the direct heir, who was 
a child of Miran, Mir Jafar’s eldest son. 

On the 14th January, Sir Robert Fletcher recommenced active 
operations against Shuja-ud-Daulah, and advanced towards AlJlah- 
abad, driving the enemy’s army before him. Meanwhile he sent Major 
Stibbert to command at Benares, with instructions to again attempt 
the capture of Chunar ; this fortress surrendered on the 8th of Febru- 
ary, and on the 11th Allahabad was surrendered to Sir Robert 
Fletcher after a feeble resistance. 

Brigadier-General Carnac arrived in camp at Chunar on the 13th 
of February and assumed command of the Field Force, which was 
at this time divided as follows :— 


Main force at Allahabad, under Sir Robert Fletcher. 


14 companies of European infantry (about 700). 
1 company of artillery, 

1 company of European pioneers (60 men). 

1 troop of European cavalry (60 men). 

4 Squardrons of Moghal horse (800 men). 

8 battalions of sepoys. 


Brigade at Benares and Chunar, under Major Stibbert. 


6 companies of European infantry (300 men). 

1 company of artillery (a large proportion of lascars). 
A detail of pioneers. 

2 squadrons of Moghal horse (400 men). 

6 battalions of sepoys. 

On joining the army Brigadier-General Carnac‘issued orders for the 
concentration of the whole force at Allahabad, with the exception of 
two Native battalions left to garrison Benares and Chunar. On the 
junction being effected, one Native battalion was left to garrison 
Allahabad, and a small brigade was left near that place under Sir 
Robert Fletcher, while Carnac and the main army advanced into 
Oudh, occupied the principal towns, collected revenue, and finally 


© + eee ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


pushed on with all the cavalry and one sepoy battalion to Fyzabad, 
the old capital, where he remained during the greater part of April, 
regulating the affairs of the province and receiving the submission of 
the various chiefs and zemindars. Meanwhile Shuja-ud-Daulah had 
gained the support of the Mahrattas, and was preparing for an advance 
from Rohilkhand upon the Lower Doab. General Carnac re-united 
his army at Sujapur, in the Doab, on the znd of May, and on the 3rd 
met the enemy near Korah, where a skirmish with the Mahratta horse 
took place, resulting in the flight of the latter. On the 11th of May, 
a detachment under Major Stibbert was despatched with orders to 
reduce the Khairabad district, which duty was successfully accom- 
plished, and Stibbert cantoned his force at Lucknow during the rains. 
Meanwhile the Mahrattas, who had retired across the Jumna after the 
affair at Korah, re-entered the Doab and advanced close up to the 
British camp at Jajmau: on the 16th of May the force advanced to 
attack them, and on the zoth encamped on the bank of the Jumna, 
opposite to Kalpi, in the neighbourhood of which place the enemy 
had taken upa position. On the 22nd a strong detachment, under 
Sir Robert Fletcher, crossed the river, and attacked the enemy; an 
action ensued, which after an hour resulted in the complete defeat 
and dispersion of the Mahrattas, who made the best of their way 
towards Gwalior. The Doab was thus freed from any immediate 
prospect of attack, and the army retumed to Allahabad, where it 
arrived on the 25th of June. 

General Carnac returned in advance of the army, to prosecute 
negotiations with Shuja-ud-Daulah and the Emperor. The former, 
finding the Mahrattas unreliable and the Rohillas very lukewarm in 
supporting him, had early in May sought to arrange terms with the 
English ; in this he had been so far successful that he now joined 
General Carnac, and, under the auspices of the latter, a reconciliation 
took place between him and the Emperor at the end of June, when 
all three proceeded to Allahabad, and afterwards to Benares, there to 
await the arrival of Lord Clive from Calcutta. 

Clive had been appointed Governor and Commander-in-Chief 
and had arrived in Calcutta in May: the business of the civil ad- 
ministration had, however, detained him at the Presidency, and it was 
not until August the rst that he joined General Carnac at Benares. 
Thence a few days later they proceeded to Allahabad, where the con- 
ditions of the treaties between the Company, the Emperor, and 


29 


om 
alpi, 
® rd 


Treaties with 
the Emperor 

and Shuja-ud- 
Daulah. 


30 


Raising of the 
sgth, soth and 
azst Batta 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Shuja-ud-Daulah were agreed on. These were in the main the res- 
toration of all his possessions to the Nawab-Wazir with the exception 
of Chunar, which was retained by the English, and the provinces of 
Korah and Allahabad, which were ceded to the Emperor, a British 
force being stationed at Allahabad for the protection of the Emperor ; 
while on the British side the most important item of the treaty was 
the grant to the Company, by the Emperor, of the Dewani of Bengal, 
Bihar, and Orissa. 

Lord Clive had, immediately on his arrival, turned his attention to 
the army, an extensive re-distribution and re-organisation of which 
was now arranged. 

Towards the end of the previous year another battalion of Bengal 


ons. | infantry had been raised at Calcutta under Captain Douglas Hill, so 


that there were at this time nineteen battalions in existence. Accord- 
ing to Clive’s organisation, the army was to be divided into three 
brigades of similar strength and composition, namely,—one company 
of artillery, one regiment of European infantry (for which purpose 
the Bengal European Regiment was now re-organised as three dis- 
tinct regiments or battalions), one rtssalah of Native cavalry, and seven 
battalions of sepoys. For this object, the troop of European cavalry 
was disbanded, and the men transferred to the infantry and artillery, 
only a small body-guard for the Governor being retained ; the 
Moghal horse was dismissed, with the exception of 300; and two 
more battalions of sepoys were raised. Of these, one was formed at 
Allahabad under the superintendence of Colone! Smith, and its com- 
mand given to Captain David Scott ; it was raised during the month 
of Moharram, and hence obtained the name of Hussetnt-kt-paltan ; 
it was numbered the 2oth Battalion, and posted to the second brigade. 
The 21st battalion was raised at Bankipore by Colonel Sir Robert 
Barker, whose name it bore. These two corps, in the re-organisation 
of 1796, became, respectively, the 2nd Battalion of the roth and the 
2nd Battalion of the 11th Bengal Native Infantry. 

The three brigades were now formed and stationed as follows :— 


First Brigade: Head-Quarters, Monghyr. 
Lieutenant-Colone! Sir Robert Fletcher, Commanding the Bri- 


gade. 
tst European Regiment, under Major Alexander Champion, 


1st Company of Artillery, under Major William Jennings. 
ist Rissalah of Cavalry, under Lieutenant James Skinner, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 31 


Native Infantry. 
2nd Battalion, under Captain Christian Fischer. 


grd gy ‘* oo Arthor Achmuty. 
ath a ry) »» Robert Campbell. 
sth =, “5 »» | Wm. MacPherson. 
1th =, ae »» Gilbert Ironside. 
wth si, < se Benjamin Wilding. 
17th, - » Thomas Goddard. 


Second Brigade: Head-Quarters, Allahabad. 
Colonel Richard Smith, Commanding the Brigade. 


and European Regiment, under Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Peach. 
and Company of Artillery, under Captain Ralph Winwood. 
and Rissalah of Cavalry, under Lieutenant George Bolton Eyres. 


Native Infantry. 


1st Battalion, under Captain Arthur Forbes Achmuty. 
7th 99 ry) 99 Lewis Brown. 
Sth ,, 55 » William Smith, 

Isth a 99 a0 James Nicol. 

1th Ss, 5 »» james Scotland. 

8th =, $3 »» Alexander Dow, 

aoth 99 r) 99 David Scott. 


Third Brigade: Head-Quarters, Bankipore. 


Colonel Sir Robert Barker, Commanding the Brigade. 


- grd European Regiment, under Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Chapman, 
3rd Company of Artillery, under Captain Nathaniel Kindersley. 
grd Rissalah of Cavalry, under Lieutenant John Mair. 


Native Infantry. 


6th Battalion, under Captain Vernon Duffield. : 
th ap »» Primrose Galliez. 

trth = sg, ye ‘ James Morgan. 

ith =i, *s »2 john White. 

igh si,, = ss Samuel Hampton, 

roth 99 9 99 Douglas Hill. 

21st 99 re) ry) 


The Corps of Engineers had been fixed by an order of October 
22nd, 1764, at the following establishment :— 
One Chief Engineer, to rank as Captain. 
Two Sub-Directors, to rank as Captain-Lieutenants, 
Four Sub-Engineers, to rank as Lieutenants. 
Six Practitioner Engineers, to rank as Ensigns. 


32 


Abolition of 
double batta. 


D e 
Lord Clive’s 
Fund. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


A fourth company of artillery was reserved for duties at Fort 
William and the redoubts at Palta and Budge-Budge. 

The Native cavalry rtssalahs consisted of 1 British officer, 1 
sergeant-major and 4 sergeants, 4 Native officers, 2 trumpeters, 
6 dafadars, and 100 privates. 

The Native infantry establishment was fixed at 1 Captain, 2 Lieu- 
tenants, 2 Ensigns, 3 sergeants, 3 drummers, a Native commandant, 
and 40 Native officers, a Native adjutant, 10 trumpeters, 30 tom-toms 
(drummers), 130 non-commissioned officers, and 690 privates. To 
each battalion were attached two 3-pounder field pieces. 

The close of the year saw the enforcement by Lord Clive of a 
measure which was destined within a few months to imperil the safety 
and indeed the very existence of the Company in India. This 
was the abolition of double field batta, with regard to which orders 
had previously been several times received from the Court of Direc- 
tors. In the course of the discussion on the subject, two senior 
Captains of the Presidency had, by orders of the Council, drawn 
up an estimate of such extraordinary monthly expenses as they con- 
sidered necessary on field service; the list of these is curious and 
includes the following items :-— 


R «a. 
Madeira wine, 30 bottles at R1-8 each - ; ~ 45 O 
Beer go. »  OF12 4 : : . 22 8 
Arrack 1§ ” » 1 O4 49 : , : 3 12 
7t 4 


The above monthly allowance is headed as “necessary for a 
Captain during a campaign.” 

However, notwithstanding all protests, the Court was determined, 
and, in December, 1765, orders were issued by Clive that at the 
Presidency or in its immediate neighbourhood troops in garrison 
should receive no batta; in cantonments half batta; in the field 
single batta; but that beyond the Karamnasa river troops in the 
field should receive double, and in cantonments single, batta. 

These arrangements came into force in January, 1766, without any 
apparent demur on the part of the officers; and Clive, congratulat- 
ing himself on the peaceable operation of his measures, turned his 
attention to another matter deeply concerning the officers of the 
Company’s service. This was the disposition of a legacy of five 


a 


_ «°° 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


lakhs of rupees bequeathed to him personally by the late Nawab 
Jafar Khan. Although nothing in the covenants lately framed by 
the Court of Directors prohibited the acceptance of such a legacy, 
yet. Lord Clive determined not to appropriate the money to his own 
use, but to apply it to the formation of an invalid pension fund for 
the Company’s military servants. On being informed of his inten- 
tions, the Council expressed their “lively sense of his generous 
and well-placed donation,” and, after preliminary reference to the 
Court of Directors, an indenture was eventually drawn up, by the 
terms of which Lord Clive hands over in trust to the Company the 
sum of ‘three lakhs of rupees, R50,000 in money, R50,000 in 
jewels and one lakh in gold mohurs, in all five lakhs of rupees .... 
of the value of £62,833-6-3,” the interest of which is to be paid | 
yearly for the benefit of the Company’s military servants and their 
families, 


While Lord Clive was thus occupied in promoting the interests Combination 
and welfare of the service, the officers of the Company’s army were | batta A 


busy with secret preparations for a movement which they hoped and 
expected would force the Council to rescind the obnoxious new : 
batta rules. It was agreed throughout the three brigades that all the | 
captains and subalterns in the service should resign their commis- ' 
sions on the 1st of May. This step was actually carried out by the! 
first and third brigades, the former of which was throughout the | 
movement the most violent and mutinous: indeed all discipline was | 
relaxed in this.command, and the European soldiery followed the 
disgraceful example of their officers. Clive was in complete ignor- 
ance of the storm which was brewing until the end of April, when 
the magnitude of the danger was suddenly revealed to him with a 
clearness that would have terrified a weaker man. He saw clearly 
that to yield would be to show the army its power, and so to sap the 
foundations of all discipline and order in the Company's territories. 
He determined to hold out inflexibly, unless the mutinous officers 
should cause the men to join them in obtaining their demands, in 
which case no. course seemed to be open but to yield. However, 
any organised resistance by force on the part of the troops was in no 
case attempted; and the vigorous and determined measures with 
which Clive met the difficulties of the situation soon convinced the 
malcontents of the rashness with which they had acted. By the end 
of May the disturbance in all three brigades was quelled, and 
| 2 


33 


34 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


a number of officers having been sent down to Calcutta for trial, 
the remainder hastened to tender their submission. A number of 
court-martials were held in the following months for the trial of 
the principal offenders: among these the most interesting was that 
of Sir Robert Fletcher, who, in command of the First Brigade, had 
not only encouraged the officers in their mutinous conduct, but even 
seems to have been the originator of the whole combination. He 
was found guilty of mutiny, was cashiered, and proceeded to 
England : but within a few years his commission was restored to him 
by the Court of Directors, and he was sent out as Commander-in- 
Chief to Madras. 

Meanwhile the difficulties of Lord Clive had been greatly in- 
creased by the attitude of the Mahrattas, who throughout the year 
had been threatening the frontiers of Allahabad and Korah: and the 
necessity of keeping a strong brigade in those provinces made the 
fact evident that the existing battalions were not sufficient for the 
requirements of Bengal. Orders were therefore issued for the rais- 
ing of six new corps, which were designated Parganna Battalions, 
and were employed under the Revenue Department in the districts : 
for this same purpose three battalions of sepoys (the 2nd, 7th, and 
14th) had already been told off, but they were found quite inadequate 
for the work. The six new corps were numbered from 22nd to 27th, 
and were attached two to each brigade—the 22nd and 25th to the 
First Brigade, the 23rd and 26th to the Second, and the 24th and 
27th to the Third: two more battalions (the 28th and 29th) of a 
similar nature were raised shortly after, and attached, respectively, 
to the First and Second Brigades, and in the following year another 
was raised and attached to the Third Brigade, thus bringing the 
number of Bengal battalions up to thirty. 

At the same time various internal reforms and improvements were 
introduced in the regular brigades of the army, including the fram- 
ing and publishing of a code of regulations, together with a fixed 
standard of staff, contract, and contingent allowances. 


These were the last measures of Lord Clive for the advantage of - - 


the Bengal Army. The dangers and abuses, to meet and reform 
which had been his special mission from the Court of Directors 
when he accepted the Government two years before, had all been 
' averted and restrained. Fresh and unforeseen difficulties had arisen, 
‘and these too had been successfully surmounted: peace and order 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


had been restored where the British influence had been threatened 
with blight and extinction: in the army, an efficient and well 
regulated force had been created, where all had been insubordination, 
corruption, and extravagance, At thé moment little remained to be 
done which ordinary capacity and firmness could not undertake. 
Clive found his health daily breaking, and determined to depart in 
' the beginning of the year: Mr. Verelst was nominated to succeed 
him as Governor, and Colonel Richard Smith as Commander-in- 
Chief in succession to Brigadier-General Carnac, who was also going 
home. On the 29th of January, 1767, he left India, and with his 
departure “ closes the first, and not the least eventful epoch in the 
History of the Bengal Army.” 


np 2 


ee es oo, 


35 


3 e 
a ta to 
the Northera 
Circars. 


The San yasis, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


———— ee ee 


Chapter II—(1767—1796). 

Eventsin India (Hough)—British India (A/ill)—Bengal Infantry (Williams)— 
Bengal Army (Broome)—Military Regulations, 18:7—History of the Madras 
Army ( Wilson)—G.G.O, and G.O.C.C,—Selections from Government Records, 
1772—1785 (Forvest)—Hickey’s Gazette, 1780-81. 

In the year 1767, the only occurrence of note in Bengal was the — 
despatch by sea of a detachment from the First Brigade, under 
Lieutenant-Colonel William Smith, to assist the Government of Fort 
St. George in the Northern Circars on the outbreak of the war with 
Haidar Ali. This force consisted of 350 European infantry, 50 
artillerymen (with five guns), and three Native battalions, ors., the 
3rd, 4th, and 13th. Itremained on this service for two years, during 
which Colonel Smith died and was succeeded by Lieutenant-Colonel 
Peach of the rst European Regiment. The 3rd Battalion, com- 
manded by Captain A. F. Achmuty, proceeded to Madras, and was 
actively employed under Brigadier-General Joseph Smith, during the 
operations in the Baramahal and Mysore, in 1768-69. The remain- 
der of the detachment landed at Masulipatam and marched into 
the Nizam’s Dominions, and was instrumental in bringing the 
Nizam to submission and procuring the cession to the Company of 
the Northern Circars (February, 1768). In May and June, 1768, the 
detachment was actively employed, in the districts of Chicacole and 
Kimedi, against an insurgent chief, named Narayan Deo, who was 
defeated near the fort of Jalumur on the 24th May, and that place 
itself was captured on the 3oth of the same month. In 1769, thede- - 
tachment (now completed by the junction of the 3rd Battalion) was 
actively employed in the Ganjam district, In the early part of 1770 
the whole of these troops returned to Bengal, a part by sea, but the 
greater portion by land, marching through Cuttack. Of the former, 
the two grenadier companies of the 4th (or Gowan’s) Battalion were 
lost at sea, the ship on which they were embarked never having 
been heard of again,—an unfortunate occurrence which made a fatal 
impression on the mind of the Bengal sepoys in regard to sea 
voyages, and was afterwards a fruitful source of trouble. 

About this time the Saniyasis, who are described by Williams as 
“religious plunderers,” became very troublesome in Northern 
Bengal, moving about the country in large bands, plundering, 
burning, and destroying. Some of the Parganna battalions were 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


37 


employed against them, but with small success, as they almost 
invariably misbehaved when brought into contact with the enemy. 
It thus happened that no less than three detachments were disgrace- 
fully defeated and almost destroyed by these plunderers ; one, under 
Lieutenant Keith at Rangpur, in January, 1770; a second, under 
Captain Thomas, in December, 1772; and a third, under Captain 
Edwards, in March, 1773. In consequence of their misconduct, all 
the Parganna battalions, with the exception of the 24th, were broken 
up in 1773, the three regular battalions employed on Parganna du 
being at the same time returned to their respective brigades. | 
Against these insurgents was engaged, for the first time, the new 
native Body-Guard, called ‘‘ The Governor’s troop of Moguls,” which 
brings us for the first time to a corps which survives at the present 
day. It was raised and disciplined by Captain Sweny Toone in 1773, 
to act as a Body-Guard to the Governor-General in time of peace, 
and to accompany the Commander-in-Chief on campaigns. It was 
commanded by a Captain, with a subaltern and four sergeants under 
him, and there were no Native officers. It served afterwards in the 
Rohilla campaign under Colonel Champion. | 7 
In 1772 the Bhutiahs descended from their mountains and overran 
the province of Cooch-Behar. The 6th Battalion, under the command 
of Captain John Jones, was sent up from the Presidency to expel 
them, and was engaged in some arduous operations. On the arst 
December, Captain Jones stormed the fort of Cooch-Behar, not with- 
out considerable loss, he himself and Lieutenant Dickson being 
amongst the wounded. During the following months he succeeded 
in driving the Bhutiahs out of the province, and even carried the war 
into their own country, taking Dhalimkot by storm in April, 1773. © 
About this time the number of subalterns in sepoy battalions was 
increased by two, making a total of three Lieutenants and three 
Ensigns. The company colours were also abolished, and only two 
stand allowed to each battalion, as in the Company’s European 
regiments, and all the tom-toms and trumpeters were dismissed, and 
fifes and drums substituted. | 
Meanwhile, in 1771, the Emperor Shah Alam, notwithstanding the 
failure of his efforts to gain English aid, determined to march to 
Delhi, there to regain bis father’s throne: he left Allahabad in 
December and placed himself under the protection of the Mahrattas, 
thereby, as the Court of Directors declared, forfeiting his right to the 


38 


Rohilla Was, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


provinces of Allahabad and Korah, which had been ceded to him by 


the English. Having entered Delhi in state, he found that his turbu- 
lent supporters were eager only for fresh lands to plunder : the Rohilla 
country was their first object of attack, and having forced their way 
in, they overran a great part of Rohilkhand, and threatened the terri- 
tory of the Nawab-Wazir of Oudh. 

Fearing an invasion of his own territories, the Nawab-Wazir 
advanced to the frontiers of Oudh, with some British troops under 
the command of Sir Robert Barker, then Commander-in-Chief. 
Here he was visited by Hafiz Rahmat Khan, Chief of the Rohillas, 
and in June, 1773, a treaty was agreed upon between the Nawab- 
Wazir and Hafiz Rahmat Khan, in which the former undertook to 
drive the Mahrattas out of Rohilkhand, and to do so again if they 
invaded the country after the rainy season, in return for which the 
Rohillas promised to pay the Nawab-Wazir farty lakhs of rupees. 
The Mahrattas had in the meantime retired from Rohilkhand, but 
in November, 1773, they attempted a fresh invasion, which was 
defeated by the Oudh troops, aided by a British detachment. Hafiz 
Rahmat Khan, who, in order to avoid paying the subsidy of forty lakhs 
had entered into treacherous correspondence with the Mahrattas, 
now that their expulsion from Rohilkhand was accomplished, shuffled 
and hesitated in making payment of the sum due under the treaty, 
until at length the Nawab-Wazir determined to take possession of 
the province as a recompense for the Rohilla breach of faith. To 
effect this he asked for British support and assistance, which, after 
some hesitation on the part of Warren Hastings, who had come out 
in 1772 as the first Governor-General, was conceded by the Select 
Committee. | 

In January, 1774, therefore, the Second Brigade, under Colonel 
Champion, received orders to join the Nawab-Wazir, and marched 
accordingly from Dinapore. The force was composed of the and 
Company of Artillery the ‘Select Picket,"* the 2nd European 
Regiment, a battalion of Sepoy Grenadiers (probably formed from 


® During the period from 1772 to 1775 there was a great dearth of vacancies 
in the commissioned ranks of the Bengal Army. Accordingly the gentlemen cadets 
arriving from Europe were formed into a separate company, aod carried arms 
until vacancies occurred, This company was called ‘‘ The Select Picket,” and 
was posted on the right of the advanced guard of the Army inthe field. Sir Henry 
White, Sir Gabriel Martindell, and other distinguished officers carried arms, as 
cadets, ia “ The Select Picket.”"—P. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


the Bank companies of the Native battalions of the brigade), and 
the rst, 8th, roth, 15th, 16th, 18th and 2oth Battalions of Bengal 
Native Infantry. With these troops Colonel Champion, on the 24th 
February, joined the Nawab-Wazir, and on the 17th April the united 
armies entered the Rohilla country. On the 23rd April the rival 
forces met in a pitched battle on the Baighul river, between Miranpur- 
Katra and Tissua, twenty-three miles to the south-east of Bareilly,— 
an engagement, from the day on which it was fought, long known 
as ‘the battle of St. George.” In this the Rohillas were defeated, 
though they fought with great gallantry, and their brave leader Hafiz 
Rahmat Khan himself fell. No sooner was the fighting over than 
the Nawab’s cavalry proceeded to plunder the Rohilla camp, in which 
they found much booty, and it was this that led our own troops to 
observe—-“ We have the honour of the day, and these banditti the 
profit.” The British losses were 39 killed and (including two 
Officers) 93 wounded. The losses of the Nawab’s troops amounted 
to 80 killed and 174 wounded. 


In 1775, the then Commander-in-Chief, Sir John Clavering, ordered 
a complete re-numbering of the sepoy battalions. There existed at this 
time twenty-one regular battalions and one Parganna Battalion 
(the 24th), and it was directed that all the regular battalions should 
be numbered consecutively by brigades, beginning with the First 
Brigade, which was to have the first seven numbers, down to the 
Third Brigade, which was to have the last seven: the 7th Battalion 
was made independent and localised at Chittagong, while its place in 
the line was taken by the 24th, which then became the 14th. By 
this scheme the number of every battalion, except the 21st, was altered. 

On the roth June, 1776, was fought the brilliant action of Korah. 
In the preceding month Lieutenant-Colonel Parker had been detached 
from Belgram, in Oudh territory, with part of the znd Company 
of Artillery and the 15th and 16th Battalions of Native Infantry, to 
watch the motions of one Mahbub Khan, a disaffected officer in the 
service of the Nawab-Wazir, who was posted at Korah, about twenty- 
five miles below Cawnpore, with a force of seven battalions and nine- 
teen guns. It being an object to gain possession of these guns, 
Colonel Parker marched on Korah, and demanded their surrender. 
Mahbub Khan himself was not present, but the demand was resisted 
by the next in command, upon which Colonel Parker moved forward 
to enforce it: a sharp conflict ensued, resulting in the complete, 


Re-auabering 
f battalions. 


Battle of 
rah 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


defeat and dispersion of Mahbub Khan’s troops and the capture 
of the whole of his guns. The loss sustained by Colonel Parker’s 
detachment is not recorded, but it appears to have been considerable : 

Captain Gravely, commanding the rsth Battalion, was dangerously 
wounded and subsequently died of his wounds ; Lieutenant Erskine, 
of the 16th, was killed. In 1829, the two corps engaged (which 
had then become the late 1st and roth Regiments of Bengal Native 
Infantry) received permission to inscribe ‘‘ Koray ” on their colours. 

The latter half of 1777 saw another important addition to ‘the 
Native army. 

In 1776, the Nawab-Wazir of Oudh agreed to keep up a mixed 
force of all arms, which should be disciplined by British officers: in 
the following year, however, when the numbers agreed upon were not 
yet completed, and the troops were only partially disciplined and 
organised, a Minute of Council, dated 4th August, 1777, ordered the 
transfer of the whole to the Company’s service. The force at this 
time consisted of two regiments of cavalry, three companies of 
golandés or native artillery (their first employment by the British) 
and nine battalions of infantry. 

The infantry battalions were brought down to the strength of 
those in the Company’s service, were numbered from the 2and to the 
30th, and three posted to each brigade. Of these only the 23rd, 26th, 
27th and 30th survived the re-organisation of 1796, becoming then 
respectively the and Battalion of the 6th, the 2nd of the 3rd, the and of 
the 5th and the and of the gth; the last-mentioned battalion still sur- 
vives as the 1st Bengal Infantry.® 

The two cavalry regiments were reduced to a strength of 400 men 
each, and with a third regiment, which was now raised, a brigade was 
formed under Colonel Stibbert. The new regiment was raised, as far 
as possible, on the s:?/adar system, the men furnishing their own horses. 

Early in 1778, at the request of the Bombay Government, who were 
hard-pressed by the Mahrattas, six battalions of sepoys from the First 
Brigade (numbering 5,400 men), a regiment of Native cavalry (600 
strong), a company of Native artillery, and a body(s500) of so-called 
| “‘ Kandahar Horse” were assembled at Cawnpore under Lieutenant- 
Colonel Matthew Leslie, and subsequently marched across India to the 


: » The Native names of these corps: were, in order, Rajek- hi-paltan, Ung: ki 

paltes (from Captain George Young), Baillie-ki-paltan (from Captain, afterwards 
Lieutenant-General Sir Ewen Baillie), and Neel war-ki-paltan (from Captain Thomas 
Naylor). —P. 


a 
= eee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 4i 


Bombay Presidency, where they served with distinction against the | 
Mahrattas until 1784. The battalions of infantry sent on this expe- 
dition were the 1st, and, 4th, sth, 6th and 7th. 

The “ Kandahar Horse ” was a body of cavalry in the service of the 
Nawab-Wazir of Oudh, by whom they were lent to the Company for 
this service. They were entirely Pathans, and distinguished them- 
selves greatly during their service in the Bombay Presidency. 

To make up for this loss of strength in Bengal, nine more battalions | wine sdaitional 
of infantry were raised during 1778; of these, the first three were ahr Was 
raised at Cawnpore in July, and were numbered from the 31st to 
33rd; the next six, numbered from the 34th to the 39th, were also 
raised in July, mostly about Benares. These latter were ordered to 
be raised at the expense of Chet Singh, Rajah of Benares. (G.O.C.C., 
15th, 26th and 3oth July, 1778). Of these nine battalions only the 
33nd and the 34th survived the re-organization of 1796, when they 
became respectively the 2nd of the 2nd and the and of the 8th.® 

The force under Colonel Leslie commenced its march in the Proceedings | 

hottest month of the year, an urgent message having been received | detachment. 
from Bombay desiring its immediate despatch. It crossed the Jumna 
at Kalpi on the 19th of May, not without opposition, and advanced 
as far as Chatarpur, in Bundelkhand. Here Colonel Leslie re- 
mained for a month carrying on fruitless and unauthorised negoti- 
ations with the neighbouring rajahs ; he subsequently moved on to 
Rajgarh, on the K4n River, and again halted; so much, indeed, 
did he delay that, after one or two warnings, orders were at 
length despatched by the Council directing his supersession and 
appointing Colonel Goddard to command the expedition. However, 
on the 3rd October, before the arrival of this order, Colonel Leslie 
died.t During this detention, Colonel Goddard took the town of 
Mau by storm, with a loss on our side of 6 killed and 20 wounded, 
and frequent skirmishes took place with the Mahratta horsemen. 

On the 8th October, Goddard moved forward from the K4n, and 
after a trying march, during which the detachment was continually 
were derived (rom Captain Charles Bowles aod Captain William Davis.—P. 

¢ Lieutenant-Colonel Matthew Leslie had been for many years an officer of the 
48th Foot, with which he served in North America during the Seven Years’ War, 

He was Aesistant Quarter Master General of Braddock’s force in the disastrous 
expedition to Fort du Quesne, and was wounded in the battle of the Monongahela 
River (oth July, 1785), in which Braddock himself fell. He was afterwards Assist- 


ant Quarter Master General of the forte which, under the Earl of Albemarle. 
besieged and captured the Havannah, in 1762.—P. 


43 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


eee oe eee ee eee SE 


harassed and annoyed by the enemy’s cavalry and rocketteers, reached 
' Hoshangabad, on the Nerbudda, on the 1st December. Here he 
halted, awaiting orders from Calcutta, until the 16th January, 1779, 
when he again moved forward, and reached Burhanpur on the 
30th. At this place he was detained fora week by contradictory 
orders from the Government of Bombay, whose forces had during 
that month made an advance on Poona, been worsted, and compelled 
to agree to the disgraceful convention of Wargaum, one of the terms 
of which was that the force under Goddard should be sent back 
to Bengal. Having received accurate information regarding these 
events, Goddard, disregarding the convention, left Burhanpur on 
the sth February, and directed his course for Surat, where he arrived 
on the 25th. At this place the force remained for the remainder of 
the year, while various negotiations with the Mahratta powers were 
being carried on, and during this period Goddard was granted the 
rank of Brigadier-Genera], and invested by the Supreme Council with 
certain political powers that rendered him, to a considerable extent, 
independent of the Government of Bombay. 


The negotiations with the Mahratta powers produced no result, 
and, on the 1st January, 1780, Goddard once more took the field. 
Crossing the Tapti, he proceeded to the northward, and on the 19th 
captured Dabhoi after a trifling resistance. He next marched against 
Ahmedabad, which was, after a siege of five days, taken by storm on 
the 15th February, with a loss on our side of 106 killed and wounded, 
including amongst the former Captain Gough, commanding the sth 
Battalion, who fell in the breach. About the end of the month 
Goddard marched to the southward in pursuit of Sindhia and Holkar, 
the two principal Mahratta chiefs, who were ravaging the country 
near Baroda, and some fighting took place at Pawangarh on the 17th, 
18th, and 19th March, but the enemy declined a decisive engagement, 
though they kept hovering round the British force. However, finding 
a favourable opportunity, Goddard succeeded in surprising Sindhia 
and Holkar before daylight on the morning of the 3rd April, captured 
their camp, and for the time dispersed their troops. About the 
middle of May he was reinforced by a detachment from Madras, con- 
sisting of a company of artillery, with’six guns, a battalion of sepoys, 
and a battalion of the Madras European Regiment, and shortly after 
the advent of the rainy season necessitated the suspension of further 


| operations. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 

In the meantime reinforcements for Goddard’s army (a company 

of artillery and 2,400 Native infantry drafts, organised in four batta- 
lions) had been prepared in Bengal and placed under the command 
of Captain Popham, but at the last moment it was decided to employ 
them in creating a diversion on the Northern Mahratta borders. The 
energy of Captain Popham effected more than the most sanguine 
could have expected from so small a force ; for, having driven back a 
plundering horde of Mahrattas from Gohad, he besieged and carried 
by assanit the fortress of Lahar on the 2oth of April 1780.% But the 
most brilliant and unlooked-for success of this little army was that of 
the 3rd of August, when he stormed and captured, almost without a 


shot being fired, the celebrated fortress of Gwalior, which had always | 24° 
2760, 


been regarded as impregnable. 

On the termination of the rainy season, Goddard, who had been 
appointed Commander-in-Chief of the Bombay Army, once more 
took the field, but the campaign in the west of India opened under 
circumstances of great difficulty. Bombay was quite unable to sup- 
port the expense of the war, and even Bengal, whose efforts had been 
more limited, was at a loss for money; while the troops of Goddard’s 
army were clamouring for the payment of their arrears. Madras, too, 
was in great straits by reason of the hostilities which had just com- 
menced with Haidar Ali. However, the first military event of the 
campaign was an important success,—namely, the surrender, on the 
11th December, after a month’s siege, of the strong fortress of Bassein. 

About this time, Goddard, under the authority of the Council, pro- 
posed terms of peace to the Mahrattas, but the latter knew very well 
the straits to which the English were reduced, and looked for more 
advantage from a prosecution of hostilities than from any treaty which 
should terminate them ; they therefore treated all Goddard’s overtures 
with silence and contempt. 

About the middle of January, 1781, Goddard captured the fort of 
Arnalla, and this was followed, in February, by his forcing the Bhor 
Ghaut and advancing on Poona, a measure which he conceived 
would prove more effectual in bringing the war to a conclusion than 
the reduction of the numerous forts scattered over the country. But 
in this he committed a mistake: the force under his command 

® The Joss of Popham’s detachment, at the storming of Lahar, was two British 
officers (Lieutenant Logan and Ensign Gardiner), one Native officer and 19 men 


killed, and 3 British and 7 Native officers and 9; men wounded, making a total of 
125.—P,. 


43 


Popham’s 
detach ment. 


Goddards 
operations. 


673%. 


44 


Peace 


concluded. 


| 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


(about 6,000, of whom only 640 were Europeans) was not strong 
enough for the purpose, and in April he was forced back and com- 
pelled to retreat down the Ghaut with heavy loss, not the least item 
of which was the fall of the gallant Lieutenant-Colonel Parker, who 
had commanded at the battle of Korah in 1776. He eventually retired 
to Kalyan, where he took up quarters for the monsoon. 

Towards the end of 1780, Major Popham was relieved in his 
command by Lieutenant-Colonel Camac, who brought considerable 
reinforcements with him. The force under Camac amounted to about 
5,000 men, and being intended for operations against Sindhia, it 
marched to the southward, took the fort of Sipri, and reached Sironj 
in February, 1781. 

Here he was greatly harassed by the enemy, and his supplies 
being cut off, he was reduced to great distress and compelled to call 
for reinforcements. These were despatched under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colone] Muir, but before they could arrive Camac found 
himself under the necessity of retreating. Halting at Mahatpur he was 
followed by Sindhia, of whom he finally relieved himself by a daring 
night attack (24th March), resulting in the total defeat of the enemy 
and the capture of all his guns, camp equipage, elephants, and stores. 

For some months longer the war languished, but Sindhia was 
beginning to desire an end of the contest ; he received with favour over- 
tures which were made to him in August by Colonel Muir, who was 
now in command, and at length in October a treaty was concluded. 
The news of this event decided, if it did not hasten, the Poona 
Government to come to an arrangement with the English; and a 
cessation of hostilities was effected early in March, 1782. A treaty 
was concluded on the 17th of May, but it was not ratified until Febru- 
ary, 1783. The Bengal troops in the west of India returned to their 
own presidency by the route taken by them when proceeding towards 
Bombay in 1778, and reached Cawnpore in April 1784, reduced in 
numbers to about half their original strength. Their services were 
warmly acknowledged in General Orders by the Governor-General, 
medals and other rewards were conferred upon the officers and men, 
and in 1829 the corps engaged in these operations, from 1778 to 1784, 
were authorised to inscribe the word “ Guzerat ” on their colours.® 


# By some extraordinary mistake the Bengal European Regiment, which had 
absolutely no part in General Goddard’s operations in the west of India, was 
included in the grant of this honour, and it is still borne on the colours of the 
Royal Munster Fusiliers.—P. ) 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 48 


Before detailing the other operations of the Bengal army during the Re-organisa- 
years 1781 and 1783, it will be necessary to notice the great changes Bengal Army. 
which, in the former year, took place in its constitution and numbers. 
In November, 1780, the four battalions of sepoy drafts which had 
been under the command of Major Popham, and which had, later 
on, been re-organised in three battalions, were constituted regular 
battalions and numbered the goth, 41st, and 42nd, and the command 
conferred, respectively, on Captains Clode, M’Clary, and Bruce. Of 
the forty-two battalions of Bengal infantry now existing, the six in 
Bombay were regarded as not on the Bengal establishment, and the 
period of their return being quite indefinite, they were left outside 
of the new organisation now introduced. At the same time the 2oth 
Battalion, which had exhibited a mutinous spirit in connection with the 
distribution of the prize taken on the occupation of Chandernagore, 
when war with France broke out in 1778, was broken up. This left 
thirty-five battalions on the Benga] establishment, and these by 
Minutes of Council dated 26th December, 1780, and G.O.C.C., dated 
10th January, 1781, were augmented to 1,000 rank and file each, and 
formed into thirty-five regiments of two battalions of §00 men each. 
The regiments so formed were each commanded by a Major Com- 
mandant, and each battalion by a Captain. Another regiment (the 
36th) was raised soon after at Berhampore, and the command given 
to Major John Fullarton. 

At the same time the Bengal European infantry, which had, in 
1779, been formed into three double battalion regiments,.was once 
more re-organised in three regiments of a single battalion each. 

Shortly before these changes (G.O.C.C., 3oth October, 1780) a 
detachment, the command of which was conferred upon Colonel T. D. 
Pearse, of the Bengal Artillery, was ordered to assemble at Midnapore 
to proceed by land to Madras to the assistance of the army of that 
Presidency, which was hard-pressed by Haidar Ali, the ruler of My- 
sore; at the same time, the Commander-in-Chief, Sir Eyre Coote, 
proceeded to Madras by sea, taking with him two companies of artil- 
lery, with 630 lascars and 350 men of the 2nd Battalion of the rst 
Bengal European Regiment. The force under Colonel Pearse con- 
sisted of one company of artillery, six companies of lascars, and five 
regiments of Bengal Native infantry completed to the new establish- 
ment, ofs., the 12th, 13th, 24th, 25th, and 26th: the 2oth had also; 
been detailed for this service, but, as already stated, this corps was 


Expedition to 
Madras, 3761. | 


46 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Battles of 


Pollilur and 
Sh 


3763, 


disbanded before the detachment marched. The detachment left 
Midnapore early in the year, but was much delayed onthe march, 
especially at Ganjam, where it arrived towards the end of March and 
was detained by the violence of an infectious disease; this, together 
with numerous desertions, considerably thinned the ranks of the 
battalions before a junction was effected with Sir Eyre Coote and the 
Madras army, which was not accomplished until the 3rd of August, 
1781, at Pulicat. At this place the detachment was broken up, and 
the several regime:.ts distributed amongst the brigades of Coote’s 
army, the orders with regard to which had been published as early 
as January, 1781. By this arrangement the 13th and asth were 
posted to the 2nd Brigade, commanded by Colone] Ross Lang; 
the 13th was in the 3rd Brigade, under Colonel Pearse; the 24th 
was in the 4th Brigade, commanded by Lieutenant-Colone] Owen ; 
and the 26th in the 5th Brigade, of which the brigadier was Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel George Brown. This mixture of Bengal and Madras 
troope does not, however, seem to have answered well, judging 
from the following General Order, dated the 22nd September, 
1781 :— 

‘‘ The General is much concerned to have so many reports daily of 
disputes between the Bengal and Coast sepoys. The appellation 
‘Bengalee’ made use of by the Coast sepoys should be particularly 
explained to their men by the Officers Commanding the Bengal 
Native corps, as the general designation by which the sepoys of this 
country know those of ‘the other establishment, and without attaching 
to it the same meaning as it has in Bengal.” 

Yet throughout the campaigns in the Carnatic, the Bengal troops 
acquitted themselves honourably. Prior to the arrival of Pearse’s de- 
tachment, the Bengal troops which had accompanied Sir Eyre Coote to 
the coast had been engaged at the capture of Karanguli, the relief of 
Wandiwash, the attack on Chilambram, and the great battle of Porto 
Novo. The first action in which they were engaged after the junc- 
tion of Pearse’s force was that fought on the 27th August at Pollilur, 
on the very ground on which Haidar Ali had, in the preceding year, 
cut off and destroyed Colonel Baillie’s detachment. The position 
taken up by Haidar was a strong one, the advance against him being 
rendered peculiarly difficult by the number of water-courses which cut 
up the ground ; the British force was indifferently handled, but even- 
tually the enemy was forced out of his position, and during the night 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Haidar retreated to Conjeveram, leaving the English masters of the 
field. On the 27th of the following month, Coote came up with 
Haidar at Sholingarh, and inflicted on him a severe defeat, the Bengal 
troops (especially the 13th Regiment) taking a prominent share in 
the victory. On the 23rd October, the grenadier company of the 
ist Bengal European Regiment and the 24th Bengal Native Infantry, 
forming part of a detachment under Lieutenant-Colonel Owen, took 
part in an action near Virakandalur. On this occasion the grenadiers 
greatly distinguished themselves, re-capturing a gun which had fallen 
_ into the enemy’s hands. In November, the army retired in the 
direction of Madras, and was cantoned at Poonamallee. 


In January, 1782, an advance was again made towards Vellore, 
which was in need of provisions, and that place was relieved on the 
11th. Subsequently the Bengal troops took part in many important 
operations. In September of this year, Sir Eyre Coote went to Bengal 
on account of his failing health ; he returned in the spring of 1783, 
but died at Madras (27th April 1783) before he could resume com- 
mand of the army, which was now held by Major-General Stuart.® 


Early in the summer of 1783, preparations were made for the 
recovery of Cuddalore, which had been taken in April, 1782, by the 
French, who had for some time been actively assisting Haidar Ali: 
an attack was made on the 13th June, 1783, on the entrenched posi- 
tion held by ‘the French outside the fort; from various causes it was 
only partially successful, but it ended in the enemy abandoning their 
position and withdrawing into the fort. They made a vigorous sortie 
‘on the 24th, but were repulsed. The conduct on this occasion of the 
24th Bengal Native Infantry, under Captain Williamson, was very 
distinguished : they met the French with the bayonet, defeated them, 
and drove them out of the trenches, taking several prisoners, including 
the Chevalier de Damas, who led the attack, and Bernadotte, after- 
wards king of Sweden, then a sergeant in the French army.t Among 


© Major-General James Stuart of Torrance. This officer, when Lieutenant. 
Colonel of the old goth Regiment, commanded the storming party at the capture 
of Fort Moro, Havannah, in 1762.—P. 

t In some places this exploit is ridiculously attributed to the late 7th Bengal 
Native Infantry, a regiment which was at that time serving in the west of India 
under General Goddard. The error probably originated in the fact that the 24th 
Regiment was, under the re-organization of 1796, incorporated with the old double- 
battalion 7th Native Infantry, which afterwards, in 1824, became the late 10th aad 
isth Native lafantry.—P. 


276e. 


2763. 
eee 


47 


48 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


z 
Return ot the 
detachment. 


Revolt of he 
Rajah of 
Benares. 


ae i a a 
the Bengal officers who were killed during the operations at Cuddalore 
were Captain Durey, 25th, and Lieutenant Grueber, 24th Regiment. 

The position of the English was at this time very critical, dimi- 
nished as their forces were by casualties and disease. Fortunately 
at this juncture news was received of peace having been concluded 
between France and England, and hostilities ceased. A treaty with 
Tippoo (Haidar having died in December, 1782) followed in March 
1784. 

Throughout this campaign the hardships of the army were great 
from the scarcity of money and supplies. The consequence was that 
desertions were constant, and in this respect the Bengal troops, who 
were in a foreign country and therefore doubtless suffered more than 
the Madras sepoys, unfortunately set a prominently bad example. 

On the rgth of April, 1784, the Bengal troops received orders to 
march for their own Presidency, where they arrived in January, 1785. 
reduced in numbers from over 5,000 to less than 2,000 men. The 
force was visited at Ghiretti by the Governor-General, and thanked 
‘1 General Orders; honorary standards were granted to each batta- 
lion; subadars and jemadars received gold and silver medals, re- 
spectively, and non-commissioned officers and sepoys similar medals 
of inferior value. In 1829, the surviving corps were authorised to 
inscribe ‘“ Carnatic” on their colours. 

In Bengal itself the three years during which Colonel Pearse’s de- 
tachment was fighting in Madras had been comparatively uneventful 
ones from a military point of view. The only important event near 
the Presidency was the revolt of Chet Singh, the Rajah of Benares, 
and its subsequent suppression by a force under Major Popham. As 
has too often been the case in Indian history, the outbreak of the 
revolt was marked by circumstances of great barbarity. In conse- 
quence of continued signs of disaffection, orders were issued for the 
arrest of the Rajah in his palace at Benares : this was effected on the 
morning of August 16th, 1781, and he was left in the charge of 
Lieutenant Stalker, 27th Native Infantry, under a guard. consisting 
of two companies of grenadiers of Major Popham’s regiment (the 
35th Native Infantry), commanded by Lieutenants Scott and Symes. 
Unfortunately, through some mistake, the party had left camp in the 
morning without any ammunition. As soon as the omission was dis- 
covered, reinforcements were sent by Major Popham, but before these 
could arrive, the two defenceless companies at the palace were attacked 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


-_ et ee 


ee ee po er ee oe + ee | ee ee 


by a multitude of the Rajah’s followers and massacred, almost to a man, 
among the slain being Lieutenants Stalker, Scott, and Symes. The 
Rajah immediately fled to Latifpur, a strong fort belonging to him 
abont ten milés south-east from Chunar. On the 19th a consider- 
able body of his forces occupied Ramnagar, on the right bank of the 
Ganges opposite Benares, and on the following day a rash and ill- 
judged attack was made on this place by some detachments under 
Captain Mayaffre, of the Artillery, who paid for his foolhardiness with. 
his life, Captain Doxat, commanding the company of “ Foreign 
Rangers,” and a number of men being also killed. This defeat 
further inflamed the rebellion, and the Governor-General, who was 
at Benares at the time, was obliged to retreat to Chunar. Reinforce- 
ments, however, soon appeared on the scene and further operations 
followed, the regiments employed being the 1st Battalion of the 6th, 
and the 7th, 19th, 30th and 3sth. On September 4th, Captain Blair, 
‘with a detachment of 550 men and two guns, attacked the enemy at 
Patita, seven miles from Chunar: the Rajah’s troops (4,500 men with 
‘six guns) fought with great steadiness, but an opportune and gallant 
attack madeon their guns by the grenadier companies of the 35th 
compelled them to retire with considerable loss, leaving four guns in 
the hands of the victors. Shortly after a combined attack on Patita 
and Latifpur, by two columns, was organised. Major Popham com- 
manded the first of these columns and seized the fort of Patita after 
‘a faint resistance. Major Crabb, who commanded the other column, 
experienced more opposition. A powerful body of the Rajah’s troops 
met him at Lora on the 2oth September, but they were defeated after 
a sharp action and driven with loss through the pass of Sukrut to 
Latifpur. On hearing of this double disaster, the Rajah fled to Bijai- 
garh, in the Kaimur Hills, which was his last resource, and the whole 
of his army dispersed. Major Popham advanced rapidly on Bijai- 
garh, when the Rajah again fled, and the place was taken (1oth Nov-: 
ember), and found to contain treasure to the amount of twenty-five: 
lakhs of rupees, which was immediately distributed to the troops. ; 

We have now reached a period of several years’ peace, during 
which the Bengal Army was reduced as much as possible, and every. 
effort made to lessen the drain on the impoverished exchequer. 7 
. Ag early'as the middle’ of 1783, reductions had been made in 
the army which remained in Bengal. In accordance with the Minutes: 
of Council of the 28th August, 1783, a general reduction of the army: 

g 


sie 


reeecues of 
the army 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


50 

Mutiny and 
reduction of 
the 3gth. 
Renumbering 
of 2784. 


to peace establishment took place. Regiments of infantry were re- 


duced from 1,000 to 700 men, battalions being divided into five 
companies of 70 men each. 

The first point to be noticed in the changes which now took 
place is the further re-numbering of the infantry regiments. 

In 1782, the regiments of the line, exclusive of the six corps in 
Bombay, were reduced to thirty-five in number by the mutiny of the 
35th (Major Popham’s) Regiment at Berhampore. This corps was 
ordered on service to the Northern Circars early in 1782; but a 
rumour getting abroad that they would be sent by sea, the men 
refused to go, and declared that they would prevent the advanced 
party from marching. This was one of the results of the unhappy 
loss at sea, in 1770, of the grenadier companies of the then 4th 
Battalion, already mentioned. The 4th, r5th and 17th Regiments 
at Barrack pore, which had also been ordered on this service, shared 
in a lesser degree in the insubordinate conduct of the 35th. For 
this offence two subadars and two sepoys were executed by being 
blown away from guns, in accordance with the sentence of a court- 
martial, and the 35th Regiment was disbanded and “ dismissed the 
service in a public and ignominious manner ” (G. O. C. C. zoth March, 
1782). The number of the disgraced regiment was given to the 36th. 

On the return of the Bombay detachment it became necessary to 
give the six infantry battalions included in it places amongst the 
brigade regiments. ‘“ In order to effect this without increase of the 
establishment, six of the present brigade regiments are to be re- 
duced, ozs., the 33rd, 34th, and 35th (being the youngest regiments), 
and the 4th,® rsth, and 17th on account of their unsoldierlike conduct 
when ordered on service in March, 1782,"—(Minutes of Council, roth 
January, 1784). The returned regiments were brought on to the estab- 
lishment with their original numbers, and the thirty-five regiments 
were accordingly numbered as follows :— 

Previ- , 
ous to; 1781. | 1784. 


«| 3784. RRMARKS, 


sth |In the detachment 
Bombay. 


6th Ditto. 
7th Ditto. 


_ . © This was the celebrated Matthews-hi-paltan, one of the most distinguished 

corps of the Bengal Native Army. It was raised in 1761, and had served with much 

peace under Adams and Munro, especially at the battles of Gheriah and 
uzar.—T. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


Previ 
A to 1784. RaMARKS, REMARKS. 
1781. 
ah | ... 4th | Ia the detachment 
to Bombay. 
s3xth | sth | soth | 
rath | 6th | ith In the detachment 
18th | sath | rath | In the detachment to to Madras. 
. Madras. Ditto, os 
toth | 13th | 13th Ditto. Ditto. 
13th h | 14th |. ‘ 
rath h | 1sth 
ssth | oth | 1 Now the 1st Ben- 
gal Infantry. 
s6th | roth | 17th 
s7th | 11th | 28th 
arst | rath | 19th 
23rd | 16th 
asth | :8th | ast 
19th | 2and 


The history of the native cavalry during the preceding twenty years 
had been a rather varied one, and requires some special notice. The 
three risalaks of Clive’s organisation of 1765 were not, as might 
have been expected, a very efficient force ; and they were criticised as 
follows, about 1770, by General Smith, the Commander-in-Chief, 
previous to his resigning his command :— 

“The black cavalry are at present of no further use than to attend the 
Commander-in-Chief and Colonels of Brigades, and are too inconsiderable 
to be of service in time of war ; for I know by experience it is impossible, 
from the viciousness of the horses, to discipline cavalry here to any toler- 
able degree of perfection, and castrating the horses ruins their Spirit .0.. 
On the commencement of a war, the best cavalry in Indostan may be 
procured within six weeks, either Durannees, Tartars, Persians, or Mahrat- 
tas. ...,..Subalterns at present command the three troops and enjoy the 
emoluments of them, which, together with the clothing, is said to amount to 
little less than R20,000 a year. ° 

In consequence, apparently, of these strictures, the whole body of 
cavalry was disbanded in 1772, and not a single mounted man re- 
mained in the service of the Company in Bengal. However, in the 
following year, 1773, the Body-Guard was raised, and in 1776 
the Nawab-Wazir agreed to keep up a contingent of six cavalry 
regiments, officered by Englishmen, and did actually raise two, 
which were transferred to the Company in the following year; and 
these, with a third, raised at that time, were formed into a brigade 
under Colonel Stibbert, One of these regiments has been mentioned 

B? 


sé 


Native 
Sa one 


52 
Re-organisa- 
tion of 3786, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


—-— wm Oe ee ee - 


as forming part of Colonel Goddard’s detachment, employed against 
the Mahrattas inthe westof India. The other two were now (Minute 
of Council, sth May, 1783) entirely reduced, the horses sold, and the 
‘men discharged, except such as might be selected for infantry service. 

On the return of the Bombay detachment, we find the order re- 
corded (Minute of Ccuncil, rgth January, 1784) that “the two risa- 
lahs” of cavalry included in that force are to be retained in the 
‘Company’s service for the present. This, apparently, refers to the 
regiment of Bengal native cavalry and the Kandahar Horse. 
‘Inthe course of the following year, a considerable further reduction 
was made in the infantry, the 31st, 32nd, 33rd, 34th and 35th Regi- 
‘ments being reduced and also several of the then existing independ- 
ent (1.¢., local) corps.—(Minutes of Council, dated the 27th Janu- 
ary and 15th February, 1785). 

This was followed, in 1786, by the disbanding of the Chittagong 
Independent Regiment (Minutes of Council, dated the 22nd 
March, 1786). The disbandment of the Ramgarh Light Infantry was 
also ordered, but before it could be carried into execution, a letter 
arrived from Europe which led to the retention of the regiment. 
By the same Minutes of Council the double battalion organisation 
was abandoned, and the Native infantry was re-organised in thirty 
single battalion regiments of ten companies each, styled “ batta- 
lions.” These arrangements had not yet been completely carried 
into effect when the letter mentioned above (dated 21st September, 
1785) arrived from the Court of Directors ordering the adoption 
of a somewhat similar measure and directing in addition that the 
existing Native infantry was to be re-organised in 36 battalions, each 
of a strength of 640 natives of all ranks, with 10 European officers 
and 8 European Sergeants,—(Minutes of Council, 22nd May, 1786). 
This was done; the Ramgarh Light Infantry was brought into the 
line as the 31st Battalion,® the 32nd Battalion was formed of drafts 
from four battalions at Fatehgarh, the 33rd and 34th by drafts 
from seven battalions at Cawnpore and Fatehgarh, the 35th by drafts 
from four battalions at Chunar, and the 36th by drafts from seven 
nattalions at Barrackpore, Dacca, and Midnapore, and from the 
Ramgarh Light Infantry, —(G. O. C. C., 18th May, 1786). The five 
regiments formed from drafts were popularly known as the “ Chari 


* In 1796 this battalion became the and of the 4th. Its native designation 
(Chota Crawford-ki-paltan) was derived from Captain Tamas Crawford, junior.—P. . 


ee ee bal 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 53 
Yari,” or “Four Friends,” in allusion, it is said, to the supposition 
that they had each been formed from drafts of four regiments: 

The strength of the single battalion regiments now formed was | 
eight companies of 80 all ranks, and the peace establishment for 
Bengal was fixed (Minutes of Council, 22nd May, 1786) as follows :— 

3 battalions of European artillery. 
6 Ditto ditto infantry. 
2 troops of Native cavalry. 
36 battalions of Native infantry. 
go companies of lascars. | 
| corps of engineers (consisting of 22 officers only). ' 

The army was divided into six brigades of sepoy regiments, with 
’ one European battalion in each. 

The, two existing risalaks of cavalry were reduced to troops of 80 
each of all ranks, and stationed one at Cawnpore, the other at Fateb- 
garh. This order, however, only remained in force for one year, 
when each troop was augmented by one native officer and 53 men,— 
(Minutes of Council, and July and G. O. C. C., ast October, 1787). 
Towards the end of the year a further augmentation was made, 
each corps being formed into a regiment of three troops, each troop 
consisting of one British and two native officersand 55 men. These 
corps were now designated ‘‘ the rst and and Regiments of Cavalry,” 
and a captain was appointed to the command of each.— (Minutes 
of Council, 7th December, and G. O. C. C., 14th December, 1787.) 

Some short notice is here necessary also of the artillery, in which | Native Arta. 
the changes since 1777 had been frequent. In that year, it will be bony, s377— 1704. 
remembered, the first companies of Golandaz were received into the 
Company’s service from that of the Nawab-Wasir of Oudh. Their 
strength was three British and four Native officers, three British and 
sixteen Native non-commissioned officers and 80 men tq each com- 
pany, while the whole three were commanded by a major ( Patrick 
Duff), with a staff of an adjutant, a quarter-master and ‘a sergeant-major. 
Six companies of lascars' were attached to each Golandaz company. 
In 1778, on the advice of Colonel Pearse, three battalions of Golandaz 
were raised, the men for them, besides two of the existing companies, 
being selected fromthe companies of lascars. The third original 
Golandaz company had meanwhile accompanied Brigadier General 
Goddard’s expedition to the west of India. The artillery was now 
formed into a separate brigade of one European and three Native 
battalions....Notwithstanding the success of this experiment and 


34 


Interior eco- 
nomy of 
Bengal Army. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


the efficiency of the native artillery so fermed, the Golandaz batta- 
lions were reduced in 1779, and the old system of lascars revived : 


‘land, though a company was raised from the old material to 


accompany Colenel Pearse to Madras in 1780, yet, in 1784-85, 
both this company and the one which had rendered such excel- 
lent service with Brigadier-General Goddard in the west of India 
were reduced. | 

In 1787, Lord Cornwallis (who came out as Governor-General 
and Commander-in-Chief in September, 1786) inspected all the 
corps of the army, and placed on record that he ‘viewed with no 
less admiration than astonishment the very high military condition 
and proficiency of the Native corps in Bengal.” 

Of the interior economy, etc., of corps, the following details are 
gleaned from General Orders and other sources. The recruiting 
ground for the infantry at this time, and for many subsequent years, 
was principally about the Ganges in Bihar and Oudh. A general 
officer, writing in 1809,*® says :-— 

“ During thelast forty years the Native army has been almost entirely 
recruited from the countries extending on both sides of the Ganges, from 
Patna or Dinapore up to Anoopsheher and Rohilcund. The tract 
which has furnished the greatest number of recruits for the Native infan- 
try in that period is included between the Ganges and the Gogra, from 
the junction of these rivers near Manjee to Shahjehanpore, on the 
eastern confines of Rohilcund. The zemindars throughout this tract 
are almost entirely Bramins and Rajpoots, and are a brave, manly race 
of people.” 

The establishment of a Native infantry battalion by the organisa- 
tion of 1786 was as follows :— 


Staff. Commandant. Two companies of grenadiers and six 
Adjutant. battalion companies of the following 
$ Surgeon, Assistant. strength :— ~ 
Black doctor. t Subaltern. 
Sergeant-Major. 1 Sergeant. 
Quarter-master Sergeant. 1 Subadar. 
Non- = ¢ Drill Havildar. 1 Jemadar. 
effective. / Drill Naik. 4 Havildars. 
Drum and Fife Major. 4 Naiks. 
, 1 Drum. 
1 Fife. 
68 Privates. 


- The old appointment of Native Commandant was abolished in 
1781, and the pay of battalions was drawn in one abstract by the 
(creer ereccnerenercte eg 


® East India U. S. Journal, July 3834, p. 15- 


-_™ 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 55 
commanding officer, and ordered to be issued to the men in the 
presence of company commanders. 

In a General Order dated 18th July, 1778, we find, with reference 
to the training of the men, that ten rounds of ammunition are to 
be allowed per man yearly for musketry practice: “the targets 
are to be made of painted canvas, and a butt of earth erected 
behind them to preserve the balls.” 

In the cavalry, at the same time, the staff allowance for field officers, 
for horses and regimental furniture, is fixed at R150, and for captains 
and for subalterns atRroo. Andalittle later (G. O.C. C., gth Novem- 
ber, 1780), commanding officers of the native cavalry regiments are 
directed to send to the Presidency one dafadar and twelve troopers 
to be instructed in military riding, training, and breaking horses. 

In 1787, a scale of camp equipage was, laid down, that for a sepoy 
battalion being as follows :—7 marquees for the officers and surgeons, 

3 private tents for the sergeants and quarter guard, 11 bell tents 
(probably for the sepoys’ arms, who at this time had no shelter for 
themselves), and 3 necessary tents. 

The Bengal army continued on a peace establishment until the out- 1786. 
break of the Mysore War in 1790, the only important event in the 
meantime being the despatch in 1789 of a detachment of Native 
infantry to re-inforce the Company’s settlement at Fort Marlborough, Detechment to 
Bencoolen, on the north-west coast of Sumatra, where disturbances ; 
were threatened. One object held in view by Lord Cornwallis in de- 
spatching these troops was to overcome the aversion of the Bengal 
sepoys to service beyond sea, against which the disaster of 1770, 
already related, had deeply prejudiced them. Volunteers were called 
for from the 1st, 30th, and 32nd Battalions, and a bounty of Rro per 
man was Offered. The detachment (of the strength of four com- 
panies) was completed in a few days, notwithstanding that two suba- 
dars of the 32nd tried to deter the men from volunteering, for which 
offence they were publicly discharged from the service with ignominy. 

The promised bounty was paid to the volunteers before they started, 
and not & single desertion occurred. On the voyage every care was 
taken of the men, but during their stay at Bencoolen they suffered 
much from sickness, and many deaths occurred. The detachment 
returned to Calcutta in December. 
In order that the narrative of the war in Mysore may not be in- Specstomcr 


terrupted, it is convenient to mention in this place that in January, | Malacca. 


56 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


War 
Despatch of a 


- force, 3790. 


+ ee 


1791 two companies of the 3oth Battalion were detached on service 
to Prince of Wales’ Island (Penang). In the following April these 
companies were employed in some operations in Quedah territory, 
on the coast of Malacca, opposite Penang, and Lieutenant Thomas 
Williamson, who commanded them, was wounded in action at Point 
Pria Fort on the 12th of that month. 

The outbreak of war with Tippoo Sultan in the beginning of 1790, 
and the necessity of affording aid to the Madras Presidency, led to 
the augmentation of Bengal infantry battalions to ten companies and 
the addition of a dafadar and 20 troopers to each troop of cavalry,— 
(Minutes of Council, rst February, 1790). Lord Cornwallis, who was 
determined to prosecute the war in the most vigorous manner, gave 
orders on the same date for the formation of a detachment for ser- 
vice in the Carnatic : this consisted of the 76th Foot and six battalions 
of Bengal native infantry, wzs., the 3rd, 7th, 13th, 14th, 26th, and 
28th (completed to ten companies each by drafts from the 8th, gth, 
2oth, 23rd, 33rd, and 35th Battalions), with the 2nd Battalion of 
Artillery and twelve companies of lascars, the whole under the com- 
mand of Lieutenant-Colonel Cockerell, Quarter-master General of the 
Army in Bengal. The detachment (except the 76th Foot and part of 
the artillery, which went by sea) marched to Midnapore, and thence 
to the southern bank of the Subanrika River, in three divisions, and 
proceeding onwards on the 22nd March, 1790, arrived at Conje- 
veram on the ist August, where it joined a force called “the Centre 
Army” under the command of Colonel Kelly of the Madras Army. 
It was inspected by that officer on the 4th of August, and compli- 
mented on its appearance and on the small diminution in its num- 
bers which had occurred during the long march from Bengal. It is 
certain, however, that numerous desertions did take place, for special 
General Orders on the subject were published on the 12th April and 
the 29th June; in the latter we find the following:—‘‘ The Com- 
mander-in-Chief has observed that by far the greatest number of 
men who have deserted from Lieutenant-Colonel Cockerell’s de- 
tachment are natives of Oudh and the countries beyond Benares, 
An experience so unquestionable must satisfy every person that 
whatever advantages such men may possess in point of height and 
appearance, they are by no means so fit for soldiers in the Company’s 
service as the natives of our own provinces. It is therefore directed 
that commanding officers of battalions of sepoys do receive as few 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


men as possible from the countries to the west of Benares, but fill 
up all vacancies in these battalions, as far as may be practicable, with 
natives of the Company’s provinces; and that battalion which is 
composed of the greatest number of men of the latter description 
will, in the estimation of the Commander-in-Chief, be the most us¢- 
ful corps and the most to be relied on.” 

On this expedition the authorities, mindful of the disturbances 
which had occurred eight years before, brigaded the Bengal troops 
separately from the Madras sepoys. The 3rd, 13th, and 26th Batta- 
lions formed, with the 74th (Highland) Regiment, the rst Brigade 
of the Centre Army, under Lieutenant-Colone! Maxwell, 74th; the 
ath, 14th, and 25th Battalions, with the 76th Foot, formed the 2nd 
Brigade, under Lieutenant-Colonel Cockerell. 
-. Little was effected during the remainder of 1790, and the Centre 
Army was not engaged with the enemy, except in a few trifling skir- 
mishes. 

At the end of the year Lord Cornwallis, being dissatisfied with the 
result of the campaign, determined to take the field in person, and 
at the same time re-inforce the army in the field in the Carnatic 
with additional troops from Bengal. In G. O. C. C., dated 8th 
November, 1790, the 1st Regiment of Bengal Cavalry was ordered to 
be made up to six troops of regulation strength by drafts from the 
and Regiment, and to go by sea to Madras; and, at the same time, 
a volunteer force of 1,400 sepoys was called for, who were also to 
accompany the Commander-in-Chief to Madras by sea. More than 
the required number volunteered, and proceeded to Madras, where 
on arrival they were formed (G. O. by Earl Cornwallis, dated 3rd 
February, 1791) into two battalions, the rst and 2nd Battalions of 
Bengal Volunteers, the command of which was conferred upon 
Captains Thomas Welsh and Henry Hyndman. A reinforcement 
of so artillerymen also proceeded to Madras. It does not appear 
how the Bengal cavalry were employed, but they were probably used 
merely as a Body-Guard by Lord Cornwallis. They returned to 
Bengal in the autumn of 1795. 

On the.agth of January Lord Cornwallis assumed command of the" 
troops in the field, at Vellout, and having determined to carry the: 
war into the enemy’s country and assail Seringapatam, he moved. 
forward on the sth February. Ascending the. Mugli Pass without | 
opposition, and capturing the forts of Kolar and Uskata, he! 


279%. 


57 


$8 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Taking of 
Bangalore. 


advanced on Bangalore, before which fortress he arrived on the sth of 
March. On the following day a cavalry action took place, in which 
the British, who were at first successful, pushed their pursuit too far, 
and, becoming entangled in a country intersected with ravines, were 
driven back in confusion with a loss of 20 killed, 48 wounded, 
and 3 missing, Lieutenant-Colonel Floyd, commanding the cavalry, 
being amongst the badly wounded. 

On the 7th the pes/ah (or walled town) of Bangalore was carried by 
assault by a detachment under Lieutenant-Colone] Cockerell, con- 
sisting of His Majesty’s 36th, the 26th Bengal Battalion, a detachment 
of artillery, and some pioneers, supported by the 76th Foot, the 3rd 
Bengal Battalion and the 1st Bengal Volunteers. Later on the same 
day an attempt was made by Tippoo to recover the place, but this 
was perceived in time by Cornwallis, who re-inforced the troops 
in the town with the 76th, which had been withdrawn in the course 
of the morning, and the enemy were driven back after severe fighting. 
The British loss on this occasion was 131 killed and wounded, out 
of which the Bengal battalions had 3 killed and 18 wounded ; the 
loss of the enemy was about 2,000. 

The siege of Bangalore fort was now prosecuted with as much 
vigour as possible, but under great difficulties, as the besiegers were 
constantly threatened by the whole of the enemy’s very superior force. 
The assault was delivered on the night of the 21st of March, the 7th and 
26th Bengal Battalions forming part of the storming party: it proved 
completely successful, though this fortunate result would have been 
less assured but for the hesitation and timidity of Tippoo. Hundreds 
of the enemy were killed, while our loss amounted to only 17 killed 
and 86 wounded, of which the share of the Bengal battalions was 3 
killed and 15 wounded. The total British loss before Bangalore was 
120 killed, 305 wounded, and 8 missing,—433 in all. 

Having effected a junction with the Nizam’s cavalry, amounting to 
10,000 men, in April, Lord Cornwallis made preparations for the 
siege of Seringapatam, and marched towards that place on the 3rd 
of May. On the 13th he received information that Tippoo, with his 
whole army, was encamped in a formidable position at Arikera, 
eight miles from Seringapatam ; and determined, by making a night 
march, to surprise him, if possible, turn his left flank, and cut him off 
from his capital. This plan was frustrated by aviolent storm during 
the night, which impeded the march of the troops; but Lord Corn- 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


wallis persevered, and at daybreak attacked Tippoo, who had now 
changed his front and assumed a fresh position. A severe engage- 
ment ensued, ending in the complete defeat of the enemy, who were 
driven under the walls of Seringapatam. The Bengal troops engaged 
in this action were the and Battalion of artillery, the 7th, 13th, 14th, 
26th and 28th Battalions of Native Infantry, the rst Volunteer Bat- 
talion, and Lord Cornwallis’ guard, which was probably a detach- 
ment from the rst Regiment of Bengal Cavalry. Their casualties, 
out of a total of 426, amounted to 36 killed (including Ensign Ross 
and Subadar Tahir Muhammad, 13th Battalion, and Jemadar Dharu 
Singh, 26th Battalion), 141 wounded (including five British officers, 
of whom one, Lieutenant Duncan Macpherson, of the Artillery, died), 
and 3 missing,—making 180 in all. 

On the 18th Lord Cornwallis moved to Kaniyambadi, eight miles to 
. the west of Seringapatam, in order to facilitate a junction with Major- 
General Abercromby® and a force from Bombay, which had advanced 
over the Ghats from Malabar and was now at Periapatam, about forty 
miles to the west of Seringapatam. Owing, however, tothe mortality 
amongst the draught cattle, the complete failure of supplies, and the 
incessant bad weather, combined with the non-arrival of a Mahratta 
army which was to have co-operated with him, Lord Cornwallis 
found it impossible to prosecute the siege of Seringapatam at this 
juncture, and determined to retire, He accordingly directed Major- 
General Abercromby to retrace his steps to the Malabar coast, and 
after halting a few days to cover that officer’s retrograde move- 
ment, he burst all his heavy guns, destroyed the stores for which 
carriage could not be found, and, on the 26th May, began his retreat 
towards Bangalore. The same day he was joined by the long-ex- 
pected Mahratta army, 40,000 strong, accompanied by two Bombay 
battalions under Captain Little, which had been engaged at the siege 
of Dharwar. The earlier arrival of this force would have completely 
changed the course of events, but the activity of the enemy’s horse had 
prevented all intelligence of its approach reaching Lord Cornwallis, 
and thus rendered nugatory his successes up to this period. The 
destruction of the siege train and stores made an immediate return 
to Seringapatam impossible ; the retirement was therefore continued, 
and Bangalore was reached on the 11th July. 

While the preparation of a fresh siege train and other arrangements 
for a renewed attack on Seringapatam were in progress, a part of the 


® This was Major-General Robert Abercromby, a nger brother of the cele- 
brated Sir Ralph A by, who fell ia Egypt ia ieor.. fle died in 1837.—P. 


Retreat to 
Bangalore. 


Redaction of 
hill forts. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


army was employed in reducing Tippoo’s hill forts. Of these, the 
first to offer any considerable resistance, was Nandidrug, built on 
the summit of a hill about 1,700 feet high, with precipitous and, 
except in one place, inaccessible sides, which rises sheer from the 
plain, about twenty-eight miles north of Bangalore. The village at the 
foot of the hill was taken on the 2and of September, and the fort itself 


was carried with but small loss on the 17th of October. The 13th . 


Bengal Battalion took part in the siege, and its fank companies were 
engaged in the assault. 

On the 31st of October the 7th Bengal Battalion was present at 
the storming of Penagra, in the Baramahal, with a detached force 
under Lieutenant-Colone] Maxwell; and on the 8th November it 
took part in the unsuccessful assault of Kistnagheri, when Lieu- 
tenant Edward Bird was severely wounded. The 3rd, 13th, 14th, 


26th, and 28th Battalions took part in the operations before Savan- ° 


drug in December, but not in the assault. Ramgiri and Shivanagiri 
surrendered to a detachment under Captain Welsh, which included 
the 28th Bengal Battalion. On the 24th of December the strong fort 
of Utradrug was stormed by a party consisting of the light infantry 
companies of the 52nd and 72nd Foot, and the 26th Bengal Battalion. 
In the autumn of this year the battalions stationed at Barrackpore, 
Berhampore and Dinapore were called upon (G,O.C.C. gth August, 
1791) to furnish another body of 850 volunteers for service in the 
Carnatic. These were quickly forthcoming : they were despatched 
by séa to Madras in September, 1791, and on arrival in Mysore 
the men were distributed to fill vacancies in the eight Bengal battalions 
then with Lord Cornwallis. Atthe same time twenty subaltern officers 
were sent from Bengal for service with these battalions, and a large 
number of lascars were also despatched. 
’ Towards the end of January, 1793, the confederated armies were 
assembled near Huliadrug, about forty miles south-west of Bangalore, 
and thence. on the 1st of February, they marched for Seringapatam. 


The strength of the British forces was— 
Artillery (1,145 Faropeans and 3,077 Natives) oe hy222 


Engineers (including 21 Natives) . . . 4! 
Pioneers ° . ry ° . e 5,049 
Briti#b cavalry (one regiment) ; ‘* 404 
Native cavalry (two regiments and two body-guards) . 702 
British infantry (seven battalions) : ; 2 4482 
Native infantry (seventeen battalions) . ‘ oe «=: 13833 


TOTAL « 32,033 

The ordnance (including the siege train) amounted to 86 pieces. The_Nizam’s 

_ the Mahratta armies (18,000 and 12,000 strong, respectively) consisted entirely 
; OL HOTSE. , 


. 
eee re te 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Of the Bengal troops, the 3rd, 13th and 26th Battalions and the 2nd | 
Battalion of Volunteers formed the 3rd Brigade under Lieutenant- 
Colonel Cockerell, while the 7th, 14th and 28th Battalions composed | 
the 4th Brigade under Major George Russell of the Bengal Infantry. 

On the sth of February the army arrived within six miles of Serin- | 
wapatam and encamped under cover of the Kapilair Hills. The 
whole of Tippoo’s army was posted in an enclosed and strongly 
fortified camp on the north bank of the Kaveri. The enclosure 
was an irregular triangle in shape, about three miles in length and 
about 3,000 yards broad at the base, which was towards the west. 
The whole was surrounded by a strong hedge of prickly pear, except 
towards the river; a large redoubt called the Idgah stood at the 
north-west angle ; the apex of the triangle was flanked and protected 
by the defences of a rocky eminence known as Karighat hill, while 
the centre of the camp was strengthened by a double line of re- 
doubts, Immediately behind the camp was the island in the Kaveri 
on which stood the fort and town of Seringapatam. 

After carefully reconnoitring the enemy’s position Lord Corn- 
wallis decided on making an immediate attempt on Tippoo’s camp 
without waiting for the arrival of the Bombay force, which had again 
ascended the Western GhAts, and was once more moving on Seringa- 
patam. The attack was made in three columns onthe night of the 6th 
of February, the 3rd Brigade forming part of the Right Column under 
Major-General Medows, and the 4th being included in the Centre 
Column under Lord Cornwallis himself. As is not unusual in night 
assaults, much confusion prevailed, and at one period the attacking 
forces were perilously near to repulse, but in the end the operations 
were completely successful, and our forces were firmly established in 
the position from which they had expelled the enemy. To enter a 
little into detail, the Right Column carried the Idgah redoubt, and 
then moved down to the extreme left and reached Karighat hill. Part 
of the Centre Column, after forcing their way through the enemy’s 
camp, crossed the river and made good their position in the island, 
capturing several batteries which lined the bank; another portion, with 
which was the 14th Bengal Battalion, seized one of the large redoubts 
in the camp, while the remainder, with which was Lord Cornwallis 
_himself, was hotly engaged with a large force of the enemy, and on 
the repulse of the latter withdrew towards Karighat hill, and even- 
tually joined the Right Column, which had wandered off in that 


62 


THE SERVICES OF THE 
ee ee Re ee ee ae ee Re ee 
direction in the dark, after the capture of the Idgah Redoubt. The 
Left Column, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Maxwell, 
74th Highlanders, carried the defences of the Karighat hill without 
much opposition, forced its way into the entrenched camp, and 
eventually followed the lead of the Centre Column across the river. 


Throughout the 7th the enemy, who were still in possession of 


several redoubts within the camp, made strenuous efforts to dislodge 
the British from the positions they had gained, butin vain; and during 
the night they abandoned the camp, and retired across the river into 
the fortress of Seringapatam. 

The loss of the British in the twenty-four hours’ fighting was 108 
killed, 383 wounded, and 44 missing, making a total of 535 ; of this 
number, 28 of the killed, 101 of the wounded, and 11 of the missing, 
140 in all, belonged to the Bengal troops. Lord Cornwallis was 
slightly wounded, and Captain John Archdeacon, commanding the 
14th Bengal Battalion, Lieutenant-Fireworker Alexander Buchan, 
Bengal Artillery, and Lieutenant Patrick Stewart, Bengal Engineers, 
were amongst the killed. The loss of the enemy was enormous : the 
killed alone were estimated at 4,000, and with wounded, prisoners and 
deserters the total loss was probably not less than 20,000. Seventy- 
six pieces of cannon were taken in the camp and on the island.® 

On the 16th of February, Major-General Abercromby arrived with 
the Bombay force (about 6,000 strong, consisting of four British and 
seven Native battalions, with a proportion of artillery), and on the 
19th he crossed the river and took up a position south-west of 
the fort with three British and six Native battalions. 

After several unsuccessful attempts to dislodge the detachments on 
the island, and a sharp attack on the Bombay troops on the 22nd 
February, in which the latter sustained casualties to the extent of 
104 killed and wounded, Tippoo expressed a desire to treat. Hostili- 


, | ties ceased on the 24th of February, and peace was concluded on 
-|the 18th of March. By this treaty the Company acquired a great 


accession of territory, while large portions were ceded to the Nizam 
and Mahrattas: an indemnity of three crores and thirty lakhs was 
paid by Tippoo, and a grant from this, added to the prize-money of 


the campaign, together with a gratuity from the Court of Directors, 


e Thee peares - aien rm Lord Cocowelis despatch, eeu - the 
Londen Gasette e 2nd July 1793. They differ somewhat from the figures 
given by Dirom and other writers —-P, e . 


_ i, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


63 


produced a substantial sum for al] ranks. The following were the 
amounts received by the Native ranks :—Subadar £27 12s., Jemadar 
£13 16s, Havildar £11 16s. 2d., other ranks £5 18s. 1d. 

The Army marched from Seringapatam on the 26th March, and in 
July the Bengal detachment under Lieutenant-Colonel Cockerell en- 
camped at Nellore. It marched for its own presidency about the end 
of September, having received the thanks of the Madras Government 
for its services. Its orderly conduct on the march through the 
Northern Circars was brought to the special notice of the Governor- 
General, by whom the men were thanked on their arrival at Calcutta. 
(G. O.C.C., 3rd January, 1793). Honorary standards were granted 
to each battalion, and medals conferred on the Native portion of the 
troops who had served in Mysore, andin 1829 the service was further 
commemorated by the grant of permission to the surviving corps to 
inscribe “ Mysore” on their colours. The men of the two volunteer 
battalions returned to their respective regiments. 

The close of the war was marked by the reduction of the strength 
of Bengal infantry battalions to the peace establishment of eight 
companies of 68 men each. The rst Regiment of Native Cavalry 
had previously (G. O. C. C., 13th January, 1792) been reduced to its 
former strength of three troops. 


Early in 1793, at the request of the reigning Rajah, a detachment,| Expedition to 
Assam, 1793, 


consisting of fifteen companies of infantry, amongst which were the 
16th Battalion and a detachment of the 27th, was despatched under 
Captain Thomas Welsh to Assam, where it was engaged in the 
suppression of disturbances raised by a powerful body of rebels, 
who had all but overturned the Rajah’s authority and had actually 
captured his capital, Gauhati. The rebels were routed and Gauhati 
recovered without difficulty, but the disturbances did not cease until 
the following year, and in a skirmish with some of the insurgents, 
in April, 1794, Lieutenant W. Cresswell, of the 27th Battalion, was 
killed. The troops were withdrawn from Assam in July, 1794, and 
the country soon relapsed into a state of anarchy. 

Early in 1794, a threatened incursion by the Burmese from 
Arakan, into the British province of Chittagong, necessitated the 
assembly of a small force to protect the frontier. The 3rd Euro- 
pean Battalion, the 34th Native Battalion, and a detachment of 
artillery, the whole under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel 
' Erskine, were on the frontier for sometime, but no hostilities took 


Threatened 


incursion in 
Chittagong. 


to 


64 THE SERVICES OF THE 


place, and the troops were withdrawn in June. This was the first 
occasion on which we came into contact with Burma. 

Disturbances Sir Robert Abercromby succeeded Lord Cornwallis as Command- 

in Rampars | er-in-Chief in October, 1793; and during his tour of inspection in 

the following year disturbances broke out in the State of Rampur, in 

Rohilkhand, caused by disputes regarding the succession. The 

Commander-in-Chief took the field in person at the head of an army 

composed of two weak regiments of cavalry, a proportion of artillery, 

the and European Battalion, and ten battalions of sepoys, the 1st, 

6th, roth, rath, 13th, 14th, 18th, 2oth, arst and 32nd. The infantry 

was divided into two brigades and a reserve, commanded, respec- 

tively, by Lieutenant-Colonel C. Ware, Lieutenant-Colonel J. Mac 

Gowan, and Colonel G. Burrington. Marching towards Rampur, 

Sir Robert met the Rohilla chiefs on the 26th of October at the 

Battle ot village of Bitaurah, nine miles to the north-west of Bareilly. The 

enemy were strongly posted and concealed by jungle in front and on 

both flanks, and as they occupied a very extended front, the reserve 

was brought up to prolong our line to the right, the cavalry being 

also brought into line on the right of the whole. The enemy 

advanced to the attack, and our troops were fast closing with them, 

when, owing to some misapprehension of orders, the cavalry made a 

faulty movement, got into disorder, and exposed themselves to be 

charged in flank by the Rohilla horse ; completely routed, the two 

regiments fled in confusion, breaking through and disordering the 

13th Battalion in their flight. The enemy's infantry followed up the 

charge of their cavalry, and in the hand-to-hand conflict that ensued, 

the right of the British line suffered most severely, every Officer in 

the 13th being killed or wounded; however, the centre and left 

stood firm, and eventually the Rohillas were repulsed and put ta 

flight. The loss sustained by the British Army on this occasion was 

very severe, being 352 killed (including 13 officers), 282 wounded 

(including 13 officers, one mortally), and 6 missing, making a total 

of 640. The officers killed were Colonel Burrington, commanding 

the Reserve ; Captain Mordaunt, Lieutenant Baker and Lieutenant- 

Fireworker Tilfer, of the Artillery; Captain Mawbey and Lieuten- 

ant Birch, of the 2nd European Battalion ; Captain Macleod, 

* It is generally supposed that the battle of Bitaurah and the battle of St, 

George (see p. 39) were fought on the same or nearly the same ground. This, how: 


ever, is anerror. The two battle-fields are thirty-two miles apart, one lying to th 
south-east and the other to the north-west of the city of Bareilly.—P. -- 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 65 


Lieutenants Hincksman, Odell, Plumer and Richardson, of the 13th 
Battalion ; and Major Bolton and Lieutenant Cumming, of the 18th 
Battalion. Lieutenant Wells, Brigade-Major, died of his wounds. 
After the battle the Rohillas retired towards the hills, whither Sir 
Robert Abercromby followed them, and eventually prevailed on them 
to lay down their arms. 

A court of inquiry was afterwards held to investigate the conduct 
of the cavalry, and from the evidence recorded, Sir Robert Aber- 
cromby arrived at the conclusion that the two regiments had not been 
guilty of any misconduct. The trial of the officer who commanded 
the cavalry on this occasion (Captain Richard Ramsay) was ordered 
in January, 1795, but he absconded rather than stand the ordeal.® 

In 1795, to provide for the requirements of provincial garrison 
work, orders were given (Minutes of Council, roth July, 1795) for 
the raising of two new corps. Of these, the first was the Marine 
Battalion, which was formed by Captain R. Hamilton for duty at 
Bencoolen in Sumatra, Penang, and the Andaman Islands; it con- 
sisted of twelve companies of 100 privates each, and was officered 
by a captain and eight subalterns. The second new corps was the 
Ramgarh Provincial Battalion, raised by Captain Richard Macan for 
duty on the Ramgarh frontier, and intended to replace the old 
Ramgarh Light Infantry, which had been brought into the line in 1786 : 
it was formed on the same establishment as the regular battalions. 

At the same time (Minutes of Council, roth July, 1795) a corps 
of militia was raised at the Presidency for local guard and detach- 
ment duties. It was placed under the orders of the Town Major, 
and consisted at first of eight companies of 90 men; later it was 
increased to sixteen companies of 100 men each, and was found most 
useful in relieving the regular troops of garrison duties in time of 
war. This corps was brought into the line in 1861, and is now the 
18th Bengal Infantry, 

A few months later an unfortunate affair occurred which resulted 
in the disbandment of the 15th Battalion, a corps raised nearly thirty 
years before by Sir Robert Barker, and which had served with 
credit against the Mahrattas under Lieutenant-Colonel Camac. At 
the end of 1795 the Government contemplated sending a detachment 


Changes in the 
Army. 


The Marine 
Battalion, 


The R th 
Battalion. 


Calcutta Mili. 
tia raised. 


Mu 
brea of the 
tgth Battalion 


© Captain Ramsay afterwards entered the French service, and served under 
Napoleon as a commissariat officer.—P, 


 f 


66 


~ 


“7. THE SERVICES OF THE 


Raising of the 
37th. 


Detachment to 
the Northern 
Circars. 


Re-orgen ae: 
tion o on 
army, 

Mas, 1996. 


Native 
ca e 


to Malacca, and called for volunteers for that service ; the 15th (then 
stationed at Midnapore) immediately requested that they might be 
sent, and were consequently complimented by Government for their 
zeal. At the last moment, however, apparently repenting of their 
determination, they refused to go, and broke into open mutiny in 
their lines. The 29th Battalion, then at the same station, was sent 
with its field pieces to restore order, and, after first being fired on by 
the mutineers, dispersed them with a few shots. For this serious 
offence the battalion was ordered (Minutes of Council, 26th October, 
1795) to be disbanded with ignominy and its colours burned; while 
Captain Ludovic Grant, the commanding officer, to whom no blame 
was imputed, was directed to raise a new corps immediately, which 
was numbered the 37th. 

Towards the end of 1795, in consequence of disturbances in the 
Nizam’s dominions, a detachment of four battalions (the 4th, 11th, 
31st and 34th) was placed under orders, under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Erskine, for service in the Northern Circars, but 
was countermanded early in 1796, after some of the troops had 
reached Midnapore on their way to the southward. The gth and 
34th Battalions were afterwards for some months on service at Tomar. 

On the 2nd of June, 1796, a G. O.C. C. was issued publishing 
Minutes of Council, dated the 30th May, 1796, which introduced a 
complete re-organisation of the Bengal Army, by which one-third of 
the battalions of Native infantry disappeared entirely, while another 
third lost their independent existence and became second battalions 
of the remainder. The establishment was fixed, by this order, as 
follows :— 


European artillery  . . 3 battalions of 5 companies each. 
European infantry  . . 3 tegiments of 10 companies each. 
Regular Native cavalry « 4 regiments of 6 troops each. 
Native infantry . » 12 regiments of 2 battalions each. 


Although the establishment of cavalry ordered was four regiments, 
yet as the two existing regiments, which were to be converted from 
irregular to regular corps, were at present of only half the requisite 
strength, it was directed that these should first be raised to six troops, 
and that the two new regiments should not be formed until further 
orders. Eventually the 3rd Regiment was raised at Dinapore under 
the direction of Lieutenant-Colonel S. Black (G. O. C. C., 3rd Novem- 
ber, 1796), and the 4th at Moneah by Captain J. P. Pigot (Minutes of 
Council, zoth February, 1797; G,O.C.C., 15th March, 1797). The 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


67 


whole four regiments, when completed, were commanded by a 
Colonel Commandant ; each regiment was commanded by a field 
officer and consisted of—~ 


2 Captains, Staff. 

1 Captain-Lieutenant. 1 Adjutant. 

6 Lieutenants. 1 Quarter-master, 

3 Cornets. t Pay-master. 

2 Sergeants. 1 Surgeon’s Mate. 

6 Subadars. 1 Sergeant Major. 

6 Jemadars, 1 aor diet ries Sergeant. 
18 Havildars. 1 Drill Havildar. : 
18 Naiks. 1 Drill Naik. 

6 Trumpeters. 1 Trumpet Major. 

420 Troopers. 1 Native Doctor. 


On the completion of the cavalry brigade the command of the 
whole was given to Major-General E. Rawstorne, and then for the 
first time the Native cavalry was separated from the infantry and 
declared a distinct service, its officers being promoted on a general 
cavalry list,—(Minutes of Council, 29th May, 1797; G.O.C.C., and 
June, 1797). 

As regards the Native infantry, the following table will show how | Native 
the thirty-six battalions were disposed of in forming twelve double 
battalion regiments according to the new organisation :— 


Regiment. Formed from the 


1st Battn. and the Right Wing of the 32nd Battn. 


13 ry) ” ftw » ry) Py 


tst Regiment { aa : 


rst e and ry a ry) Ri ht 99 99 28th re Y 

and ” and .| 25th ,, Pe Left 5» » 9 99 
3rd ist . 3rd ry) >. Right ye a7th 9 
9 = ° er 5 » = se ry) mth ry) 

ist. | 4 9 99 I ry ey 3 3 

4th + Ay ° 31st ry) 99 Left 90 99 sth 99 
Is 5 9 9. 3 sd 

a m7 and .| 23rd, ry) elt oe 09 »” 
6th ist 6th ,, »» ight 5». »» 36th s, 
e ny pits o» 99 o t ‘ =o th 3 

8 7 93 rT) i 99 99 34 ” 

7th a and 16th 9 ry) ke ” 9 9 
Sth 1st Sth ” 99 Ri ht 99 39 33rd 38 
uf and goth 9? ry) Le t 9 29 9. td 

Oth ist oth ) Y) Right 9 99 34th 38 
cd and 29th 99 ” t ” ry) r) f 

toth ist e toth 99 99 Ri t 93 99 3 39 
i and./r14th_ ,, ry Le ry ee ry re 

ith tt. 13th 99 ry) Right a9 38 26th ” 
” 2nd ej ry) ry) : t ry) 99 .y) 99d 

i sist 5 


¥ 2 


infantry. 


68 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


In carrying out these arrangements, the authorities appear to 
have been guided in some degree by considerations of convenience, 
retaining or breaking up battalions according to the accidents of their 
position or stations atthe moment. Thus it happened that several fine 
old corps were broken up and ceased to exist as distinct bodies; and 
this was especially to be deplored in the cases of such battalions 
as the 18th, Morgan-ki-palfan, a corps which had long been one of 
the most distinguished in the service, the 24th, whose splendid con. 
duct at Cuddalore had conferred lasting honour on the Bengal Native 
infantry, and the 26th and 28th, which had rendered distinguished 
service in the last campaignin Mysore. By a strange coincidence, too, 
the oldest battalion in the Bengal Army, the old “Lal Paltan”’ 
(Gillis-ki-Palian), raised by Clive in 1757, became, by this organi- 
sation, the 2nd Battalion of the 12th, the junior battalion of the line. 

Each of the new regiments was of the following strength :— 


Stef. 
2 Colonel Commandant. 1 Adjutant and Quarter-master 
2 Lieutenant-Colonels, (ior the Regiment). 
2 Majors. 2 a cli (one for each batta- 
7 Captains. lion). 
1 Captain-Lieutenant. 1 Pay-master. 
22 Lieutenants. 1 Sergeant Major. 
to Ensigns. 1 Quarter-master Sergeant. 
2 Sergeants. : Drum Major. 
20 Subadars. t Fife Major. 
20 Jemadars. 2 Drill Havildars. 
100 Havildars. 2 Drill Naiks. 
100 Naiks. - y Surgeon. 
40 Drummers and Fifers. s Surgeon’s Mate. 
1,600 Sepoys. 2 Native Doctors. 


The above were sub-divided into two battalions, each consisting of 
two grenadier and eight battalion companies. 

Promotions of British officers were made regimentally up to, and 
including, the rank of Major. The office of Native Adjutant was 
abolished. The promotions in Native ranks were ordered to be 
published in Regimental Orders, recommendations for non-commis- 
sioned ranks being sent to the commandant by officers command- 
ing companies; those for commissioned ranks by officers command- 
ing battalions. The payment of the men was entrusted to company 
commanders, and monthly muster-rolls, pay-abstracts, and acquittance 
rolls were introduced for the first time. The enlistment of recruits 
(Minutes of Council, 8th August, 1796) was vested in commanding 
officers of battalions, subject to the approval of the command 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


69 


ant of the regiment ; the standard of height for infantry was fixed as 
over 5’ 6", and that of age between sixteen and thirty years, and, a8 
far as possible, only natives of the Company’s provinces were to be 
entertained. The term of enlistment was three years, after which 
period soldiers could claim their discharge on two months’ notice, 
except in time of war. Recruits were ordered to be sworn in after 
hearing certain of the articles of war, and an order was about the 
same time issued (G. O. C. C., and June, 1796) that the articles should 
be read monthly on regimental parades : a revised translation of the 
same was prepared for that purpose. By G.O.C.C., roth June, 1796, 
the dress of British officers and non-commissioned officers was 
ordered to be jackets, with round black hats, and the facings of the 
twelve regiments of the line were also laid down,—those of the rst, 
3rd, 5th and 6th to be yellow, of the and, 7th, 8th and goth white, and 
of the 4th, 10th, 11th and 12th buff. 

These important changes form a notable epoch in the interior 
history of the Bengal Army. The preceding forty years had seen 
the fise of the force from a small handful of men employed in emer- 
gency as a tentative measure to a large, well-equipped, and well- 
disciplined army, constituting the greater portion of the British strength 
in Bengal. But the history of those years is only indirectly the history 
of the present Bengal army ; only three of the corps which existed in 
1796 (the 1st and 18th Bengal Infantry and the Body-Guard) survive 
to the present time. With the struggles for existence of the old 
powers of India which opened with the new century commences also 
another chapter of Bengal Military History, and one in which the 
army of to-day is more directly concerned. 


Jo 


az 


. a@ 
pee 


ent 
am and 
ad, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Chapter III.—(1797—1814.) 


Hvents in India (Heugh)—British India (Mill and Wilsen)—Bengal Infantry (Williams)—Mili- 
tary Regulations, s817—Madras Army (Wilson) —East India United Service Jouroal— 
Memoirs of the War in India (Yhorn)—Political History of India (Malcolm) —G. G. O, 


and G. 0. C. C. | 

The closing years of the eighteenth century were peaceful ones in 
Bengal, but the rapidly increasing influence of the British in the 
North-West, and the responsibilities which it involved, together with 
indications that yet another struggle was at hand in Southern India, 
soon afforded proof that the strength of the Army, as fixed by the 
re-organization arrangements of 1796, was insufficient, and that 
further additions must be made. 

Early in 1797 a detachment, consisting of the 3rd Company of the 
1st Battalion of Artillery and the 4th and roth Regiments of Native 
infantry (each augmented to a strength of 1,800 privates), the whole 
under the command of Major-General Erskine, was despatched to 
the southward to relieve the Madras troops in Ganjam and at Hyder- 
abad, which were urgently required elsewhere. The roth Regiment 
and the artillery, under Major Hyndman, proceeded to Hyderabad 
while Major-General Erskine with the 4th marched to Chicacole 
whence this regiment was re-called to Bengal early in the following 
year. The detachment at Hyderabad, having been joined in October 
1798 by a force of 4,350 men from the Madras army, under Colonel 
George Roberts, shared, on the 32nd of the month, in the important 
service of disarming and reducing a force of about 14,000 men 
(officered and disciplined by Frenchmen) which had been formed 
for the Nizam’s service by the well-known M. Raymond, and which 
would, it was feared, be tampered with by their countrymen in the 
service of Tippoo Sultan in case of renewed hostilities with the latter. 
The work of disarming was effected by Colonel Roberts with much 
judgment and without bloodshed. 

About the time that Major-General] Erskine’s detachment marched 
for the Madras Presidency, the authorities in Bengal were startled 
with the intelligence that Shah Zaman of Kabul had entered the 
Punjab, and that an invasion of our North-Western Provinces was 
imminent. All native corps were in consequence augmented, and 


‘such troops as could be collected immediately took the field under 
the command of Major-General Charles Morgan. Shah Zaman, - 


et aie gt e 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


ee es ee oe I A ST A LY ES NS 
gee 


however, did not push his advance beyond Lahore, and soon after re- 
tired across the Indus, when the British troops returned to their stations. 

This event and the necessity of providing for the security of our 
northern frontier led to the addition of two regiments of native 
infantry to the strength of the Bengal Army in 1797. In G.O.C.C., 
dated the 14th November, orders for the immediate raising of these 
corps were issued, the 13th Regiment to be formed at Benares and the 
14th at Dinapore and Buxar. In the following year, on Shah Zaman 
renewing his invasion (when a large force was assembled at Anup- 
shahr, under Major-General Craig, for the protection of the British 
provinces), further additions were made. In G.O.C. C. 15th Sep- 
tember, 1798, was published the Government Order (dated the 31st 
August, 1798) directing the formation of an additional regiment of 
Native Infantry to be numbered the 15th. The rst Battalion was 
formed at Buxar, and the 2ndat Sasaram. The and Battalion of this 
corps is now the and (Queen’s Own) Bengal (Light) Infantry. Rather 
less than three months later orders were issued (Minutes of Council, 
1ath November, 1798; G. O. C. C., 30th November, and sth Decem- 
ber, 1798) for the formation of two more regiments. Of these, the 
16th was raised (1st Battalion) at Jaunpur, and (2nd Battalion) at 
Baragaon: both these battalions have survived to the present day, 
_and are now the 3rd and 4th Bengal Infantry. The 17th Regiment 
was raised at Gaya (1st Battalion) and Dinapore (and Battalion). 
The 13th, 14th and 17th were ordered to wear yellow facings, the 
sth buff, and the 16th white.® 


— ————— 


© The Native names of these ten battallons were as follow :— 
rst Battalion 13th, - Poel-ki-Paltan, —From Lieatenant-Colonel (afterwards Lieutenant- 

General) Peregrine Powell, who was appointed to the command in 1799. 

and Bettalion 1 3th,—Martdesi-ki-Paltan.—From Major (afterwards Lieutevant-General) 
Sir Gabriel Martindell, who was appointed to the corps In November 1798. 

138 Batsalion rgth,—Stupper-ki-Paltan,—From Major (afterwards Licutenant-General) 
Hugh , who was appointed to the regiment on its formation. 

aud Satialien rgth,—Cullenjun-ki-Paltan.—From Major (afterwards Major-General) 
Daniel Conyngham, who was appointed to the regiment on its formation. 

1st Battalion sth, Mekdeon-ki- Paltan,—From Colonel (afterwards Lieutenant-Geeeral) 
Sir John Macdonald, who was appointed to the command of the regiment on its 
formation. 

and Battalion 15th,— Broon-kb Paltan.— From Major (afterwards Licatenant-General) Sir 

Ss. Browne: who was appointed to the battalion in 1798. ) 

rst Battalion r6th,— Guthrie-ki-Paltan,.—From Major (afterwards Lieutenant-Colone!) 
John Guthrie, who was a to the battalion on its formation, and was mortally 
wounded before the fort of Thattiah in September, 1803, the first fight in which the 
battalion was engaged. 

and Battalion 16th, — Hilliard-ki-Paltan.— From Licutenant-Colonel John Hilliard, who 
was appointed to the battalion on its formation. — | 

rst Battalion 17th, ~ Bradshaw-ki-Palten.—From Major (afterwards General) Samuel 
Bradshaw, who was posted to the battalion on its formation, 

ynd Battalien r7th,—Noke-ki- Palten.—From Lieutenant-Colonel (afterwards Colonel) | 
James Noke, who was posted to the battalion in January, 1799—P, - 


qt 


Raising of the 
Hen aaa ith 
Regiments. 


72 


War with 
Mysore, 3999. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Shortly after these additions had been made to the Bengal Army, 
the Government of India found themselves once more involved in 
hostilities with the Ruler of Mysore. Since the termination of the war 
in 1792, Tippoo Sultan's ruling idea had been to avenge his defeat 
and recover the territory he had lost, and with this object in view he 
had for some time been engaged in intrigues with the French 
Government at the Mauritius, hoping with the aid of that nation, 
who were then at war with England, to regain his position and expel 
the English from Southern India. These intrigues had early 
attracted the attention of the Earl of Mornington (afterwards the 
Marquis Wellesley), who had come out as Governor-General in 1798, 
and who fully recognized the danger to which they exposed British 
interests. A peaceful solution of the difficulty failed, owing to the 
obstinacy and duplicity of Tippoo, and early in 1799 it became 
necessary to take up arms. On war being declared, the roth Bengal 
Infantry and the detachment of Bengal Artillery marched from 
Hyderabad with the rest of the troops there, and at Ambur, on the 
14th of February, joined the force there assembled for the invasion 
of Mysore under the command of Lieutenant-General George Harris. 
The Army was also joined by three more companies of Bengal 
Artillery, and by a body of 3,000 Bengal sepoys, volunteers from 
every regiment of Bengal Native Infantry then existing, except the . 
10th, who had been formed (Minutes of Council, 39th October, 1798) 
into three battalions, the command of which, respectively, was cone 
ferred upon Captains John Malcolm, James Tetley, and Littellus 
Burrell; these troops had proceeded to Madras by sea under the 
command of Major-General Popham, who in the subsequent opera- 
tions commanded the left wing of the Army. 

These Bengal troops took an active part in the operations result- 
ing in the conquest of Mysore. The two battalions of the roth 
Native Infantry were engaged in the skirmish at Malavelli, 27th 
March 1799, and had three men wounded. Inthe siege and capture 
of Seringapatam all five battalions of Bengal Native Infantry were 
actively employed, and sustained a loss of 19 men killed, one officer 
(Lieutenant G. H. Fagan, 3rd Volunteer Battalion) and 49 men 
wounded, and 26 men missing. The Bengal Artillery had 6 killed 
and 22 wounded, including Lieutenant-Colonel E. Montagu, who 
died of his wounds. In the storming of the place on the 4th 
of May, 1799, the ten flank companies of these battalions formed 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


73 


part of the left column of attack under Lieutenant-Colonel Dunlop, 
77th Foot, and sustained a loss of 4 men killed, ro wounded, and one 
missing. The Native infantry corps were subsequently accorded 
permission to inscribe the word “ SgrincaPaTam” on their colours. 

After the fall of Seringapatam, the Bengal detachment was employed 
under Colonel the Hon’ble A. Wellesley (afterwards the celebrated 
Doke of Wellington) in subduing refractory chiefs in the country on 
the northern frontier of Mysore. The whole returned to Bengal by 
land at the end of the year, arriving at the Presidency in May, 1800. 
Here they were complimented by the Governor-General, and: all 
ranks received medals and prize money. The three Volunteer Bat- 
talions were formed (Minutes of Council, 29th May, 1800, and G. O. 
C.C., 3rd and 4th June, 1800) into two regiments of the line, which 
were numbered the 18th and 19th. These corps were ordered to 
wear yellow facings, and in order that their honourable origin might be 
lastingly commemorated, they were directed to bear in the upper 
canton of their regimental colours an embroidered radiant star, 
encircled by the words “Bengal Volunteers.” In the supplement to 
Williams’ History of the Bengal Native Infantry it is stated that the 
1gth wore “a feather in their caps (turbans) as a badge of their 
honorable origin as Volunteers,” and that “ the 18th declined the 
option of doing so likewise.”® 

The same General Orders directed the foratinn of two additional 
regiments of cavalry, to be numbered the sth and 6th. Both were 
raised at Ghazipur. Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Wharton was 
appointed to the command of the sth, and Lieutenant-Colonel J. P. 
Pigot, to that of the 6th. These regiments were directed to wear, 
respectively, buff and orange facings. 

In Northern India, during these years, nothing of much importance 
occurred, with the exception of the advance of Shah Zaman (already 
mentioned) and the disturbances caused by Wazir Ali, Ex-Nawab 
of Oudh. This miscreant, after his deposition, had been detained 

* The native names of these corpe were as follo 

tt Baling nk Merde A ren From Conte (eterwards Majo) Jobn We 
and Battalion 18th,— Burval-ki-Palien.—From Captain (afterwards Major-General) 
Littellus Burrell, who commanded the 3rd Volunteer Battalion, from the right wing 

of which thie corps was formed. 
ii he teal a cl Voigt booties, GOS tals dee 
up 8 Corps was 


and Batielion 1 ada — Burral-ki-Palten.—From Captain Burrell named above, Thie 
corps was tora from the left wing of the 3rd Volunteer Battalion,—P, 


formed, 
2800, 


74 

First Egyptian 
Bx pedition, 
1803, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


for some time at Benares, at which place, on arrangements being 
made for his removal to Calcutta, he broke out into open revolt 
(14th January, 1799), murdered Mr. Cherry, the British Resident, 
and others, killed Captain Conway, 1-and Native Infantry, and 
made off to Bhutwal, where he was joined by numbers of dis- 
affected persons. Subsequently, finding himself at the head of several 
thousand men, he made his way into Gorakhpur and the eastern 
districts of-Oudh, and it became necessary to send troops against 
him. Several skirmishes occurred, and being invariably worsted, his 
followers soon deserted him. He then took refuge with one of the 
Mabhratta chiefs, who eventually delivered him up, on the condition of 
his life being spared. He was removed to Calcutta in 1800, and kept 
in close confinement until his death, which occurred in March, 1817. 

In February 1801, an expeditionary force was despatched by Lord 
Wellesley to Egypt to co-operate with the British army sent there 
under Sir Ralph Abercromby, for the expulsion of the French. 
This expedition had originally been organized for the conquest of 
Java and the Mauritius, but under orders from England it was diverted 
to Egypt. The event is specially remarkable as being the first 
instance of Indian troops being employed out of Asia. The 
force despatched was upwards of 5,000 strong, and included an 
experimental troop of horse artillery commanded by Captain 
Clements Brown, a detachment of foot artillery under Captain- 
Lieutenant William Fleming, and a battalion of native infantry. 
volunteers commanded by Major E. S. Broughton, and European 
Regiment; the force was commanded by Major-General David Baird. 
Under the original project, the Bengal detachment sailed from Cal- 
cutta in November, 1800, for Trincomalee, in Ceylon, whence, on 
the direction of the expedition being changed, they proceeded to 
Bombay, where they joined the main expeditionary force. Many 
difficulties were met with ; two transports were lost in the Red Sea, 
and others were damaged : eventually, it was found impossible, owing 
to adverse winds, to proceed up to Suez, as had been intended, and 
the force landed at Kosseir in detachments at various periods in 
May and June. From this place a long and toilsome march was 
performed across the desert to Keneh; thence the force marched 
down the left bank of the Nile to Girgeh, from which place the men 
were conveyed down the river in boats to Cairo, arriving there on the 
7th August. On the 28th they again embarked, and, as Walsh 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


records, “‘aided by the extreme rapidity of the current,’ reached 
Rosetta on the 31st. Alexandria, however, the last stronghold of the 
French in Egypt, had already capitulated ; the Indian detachment 
thus lost the chance of taking a part in the fighting, and could only 
join the British army of occupation. During their stay in Egypt the 


smartness and high state of discipline of the Indian contingent ex- | 


cited general admiration and astonishment. The troops returned to 
India in July and August, 1802. Medals were given to all ranks 
employed on the expedition, in recognition of their services and of 
the hardships they had undergone, although they had seen no actual 
fighting. 

Early in 1801, Lieutenant-General Gerard Lake succeeded Sir 
Alured Clarke as Commander-in-Chief. He arrived at Fort William 
and assumed the command on the 13th March. 

In this year a small expedition, which included a detachment of the 
Bengal Marine Battalion, was despatched against Ternate, one of the 
Dutch Spice Islands. The fort and island surrendered on the arst of 
June, after considerable resistance. In the same year both battalions 
of the 6th Regiment were employed under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Marley in suppressing disturbances in Gumsur, in the vicinity of 
Ganjam. 

In 1801, a regular system of light infantry training was intro- 
duced for the first time in the Bengal Army. This excellent change 
was due to Major-General the Hon'ble F. St. John, who caused ten 
men to be selected from each company of all corps under his 
command, and trained as light infantry. The men so selected 
remained on the strength of their several companies, unless required 
to act separately as light infantry, when they formed an independent 
company. 

In July of the same year orders were issued that two six-pounder 
field pieces called ‘‘galloper guns” were to be attached to each 
regiment of cavalry. On the formation of a native horse artillery, in 
1817, the men who had worked these guns were drafted into that 
corps. 

Six months later (G.O.C.C., rath February, 1802) all recruiting 
was stopped, and the strength of battalions of native infantry re- 
duced to 800 privates. On the return of the Egyptian detachment, 
a still further reduction of ten men per company, #.¢., to 700 privates 
per battalion, was ordered (G.O.C.C. 8th July, 1802). 


Interior 
changes, 
2802-3808, 


75 


76 THE SERVICES OF THE 
pi ce ae Ay Si 
Some changes were made in 1802 in the dress and equipment 
of havildars of native infantry who were directed (G.O.C.C., 20th 
September, 1802) to carry pikes and swords in future, instead of 
muskets. They were also ordered to wear pantaloons and sashes 
and were assimilated as much as possible to European sergeants, 
instead of being, as hitherto, included in the rank and file, 
In May, 1802, an important change was made in the constitution 
| of the Marine Battalion, which was now (G.G.0., 6th May; G.O. 
C.C., 20th .May, 1803) formed into a regiment of two battalions, 
each consisting of 10 companies of go privates. The officers of the 
lately reduced 2nd European Regiment were appointed es bloc 
to the Marine Regiment, the head-quarters of which were fixed at 
Barrackpore. 7 
About the same period (G.G.O., ast April; G.O.C.C., rst 
May, 1802) it was ordered that the Governor-General’s Body-Guard 
should in future be composed, on a peace establishment, of a detail 
of men and horses borne in equal proportions on the establishments 
of the several regiments of native cavalry of the Bengal and Madras 
Presidencies, and to make room for the Body-Guard men on those 
establishments, 20 troopers were discharged from each regiment. 
The strength of the Body-Guard was laid down at 4 subadars, 12 
jemadars, 16 havildars, 16 naicks, and 240 troopers. 
Benes! In the same year, 1802, the Bengal Cavalry assembled for the 
first time at a camp-of-exercise; this was held by orders of the 
Commander-in-Chief at Kanauj, and all the British and Native cavalry, 
except the 3rd Native Regiment, were ordered to attend there, 
(G.O.C.C., 30th September, 1802), The camp was under Colonel St. 
Leger, 27th Light Dragoons, and was visited early in 1803 by the 
Commander-in-Chief, who subsequently issued an order compli- 
menting the native regiments on their appearance and on the im- 
provement which was observable in their efficiency. | 
Disturbances ' Towards the end of 1802 began what was called the “Mud War,” 
ecy | by which term the operations attending the reduction of certain mud 
forts in the Jumna Doab were longknown. Some of the zemindars 
of this part ofthe country, which had recently been ceded to the 
Company by the Nawab-Wazir, reluctant to pay their assessments of 
revenue, had for some time been in a state of semi-rebellion, and 
one of them, Rajah Bhagwant Singh, who owned the two mud forts 
of Sasni and Bijaigarh, became so defiant that it became necessary 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


to coerce him. Accordingly, on the 12th of December, a consider- 
able force, under Lieutenant-Colonel Blair, took up a position before 
Sasni. This force consisted of four troops of the 3rd Native Cavalry, 
four battalions of Native Infantry (the 1st of the and, rst of the 8th, 
_ and of the rath, and rst of the 15th Regiment), and some artillery. 
To this the 6th Native Cavalry was shortly after added. After nearly 
three : weeks’ siege operations, during which the garrison made two 
ineffectual sorties, an assault was attempted on the 14th of January, 
1803, but owing to the depth of the fort ditch having been inaccu- 
rately calculated, and the scaling ladders proving too short, it failed, | 
and the storming party was withdrawn after sustaining a loss of 10 
killed (including Captain Morrison, 2-12th Native Infantry) and 29 
wounded. On the 16th, the 4th Native Cavalry joined the force be-. 
fore Sasni, which was further strengthened a few days later by the 
arrival of the 27th Light Dragoons, five companies of the 76th Foot, 
the and Battalion of the 15th Native Infantry, and two companies of 
the 2-8th Native Infantry; and at the same time Major-General the 
Hon'ble F. St. John arrived and took command of the force. On the 
31st, the Commander-in-Chief himself joined the force with the 
1st Native Cavalry. On the 8th of February the town adjoining the 
fort was taken without any loss. Later in the day the garrison made a 
vigorous effort to recover their position in the town, but were repulsed 
with heavy loss, and on the night of the rith they evacuated Sasni 
and fied. They were, however, overtaken by our cavalry and 
dispersed, Bhagwant Singh himself barely escaping across the frontier 
into Mahratta territory. The force next marched against the fort of 
Bijaigath, which place was besieged for some days: but when a 
practicable breach had been made and an assault was about to be 
attempted (27th February), it was found that the garrison were, as at 
Sasni, attempting to escape: a number were cut off and killed, but 
all the principal leaders got clear off.. In the following month 
the force proceeded to reduce the fort of Kachaura, belonging to 
another refractory zemindar, and here again the garrison, finding 
themselves hard-pressed, attempted to cut their way through the 
investing lines. They were pursued for several miles, and a large 
number cut up, but not without loss on our side. Major Nairne, 6th 
Native Cavalry, a very accomplished cavalry officer. being among 
the slain. This brought the operations to a close for the time, but 
the country continued disaffected, and in the autumn of 1803, after 


77 


978 


The azst 

Regiment and 
orpe of 
ioneers 

raised, 

1803. 


Irregular 
Horse raiscd, 
1803, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


the commencement of the Mahratta War, it was found necessary 
to send a detachment against Thattiah, a fort belonging to Rajah 
Chattar Sal, another rebellious zemindar. An attack made on the 
place, on the 30th September, by the 1-16th Native Infantry, under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Guthrie, was unsuccessful, the battalion losing 
the Lieutenant-Colonel, three other officers, and 95 men killed and 
wounded. Lieutenant-Colonel Guthrie died of his wounds in the 
following month. A complete settlement of the ceded territory was 
not effected until the close of the Mahratta War. 

In the summer of 1803, the disturbed nature of our relations with 
the Mahratta powers and the probability of a general war led to a con- 
siderable increase in the strength of the Native Army of Bengal. In 


~_ 
rete On ee ee 


G.G.O., rath July, 1803, orders were issued for the augmentation of — 
regiments of infantry by twenty privates per company, thus bringing . 
battalions up to a strength of goo privates, and this was followed up — 
(G.G.O., 13th July, 1803) by an order for the addition to the army © 


of another regiment of native infantry of two battalions, to be num- 
bered the 21st, the Marine Regiment being brought into the line and 
numbered the 20th. The 1st Battalion of the a1st was raised at 
Fatehgarh by Lieutenant J. Vaughan, 1-and Native Infantry, and the 
and at Cawnpore by Captain J. M. Johnson, 2-15th Native Infantry ; 
the regiment was ordered to wear yellow facings.* The and Batta- 
lion is now the 5th Bengal (Light) Infantry. Inthe same month 
orders were issued (G.O.C.C., 28th July, 1803) for the raising 
at Cawnpore of a corps of Pioneers, of a strength of three com- 
panies of 75 men each ; the command of which was given to Captain 
Thomas Wood, of the Engineers. 

On the 31st of July, 1803, orders were issued for the raising by 
Major Frith of a corps of irregular cavalry, to be called the ‘ Hin- 


doostany Independent Regiment.” It is probable that in this regi- , 


ment were embodied several risa/ahs and bodies of irregular horse 


which had been during the last few years employed by the Gove 


® The native names of these battalions were derived thus— 

rst Battalion s0¢h,—M uvvriam-ki-Paltan, From a corruptios of the word ‘* Marine,” 

and Battalien 20th, — Hamalteen-ki-Paltan, From Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Hamil- 
ton, by whom it was raised, 

13t Battalion arst,—Doobye-kt-Palten, From Major (afterwards Lieutenant-Colonel) 
Simpson Dubols, who was posted to the battalion on its formation, and served 
with it for some years. 

and Battalion 213t,—Jansin-ki-Palten, From Captain (afterwards Colonel) Jeremiah 
Martin Johnson, whe raised the battalion. =P, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


ernment for work on the frontier, and of which the history is in 
several instances very curious. Besides the ‘“ Kandahar Horse” 
and the irregular cavalry received from Oudh in 1777, of which the 
remnants were for the most part included in the new regular corps 
of 1796, a considerable addition to the strength of this branch had 
also been made in February of the latter year (G.O.C. C., oth Feb- 
ruary, 1796). Inthat month the celebrated General de Boigne, who 
for many years had been the principal leader of Sindhia’s army, 
arrived in British territory on his way to Europe. With him he 
brought his Body-Guard “acorps of 600 chosen cavaliers, of Persian 
nationality, superbly armed, equipped, and mounted, and attended by 
100 camel-riders and four light field-pieces.” This fine body of men 
had been offered by de Boigne to Sindhia, who however refused to 
pay the price demanded, and it was ultimately acquired for the East 
India Company by Lord Cornwallis, who paid the General the sum of 
three and ahalf lakhs of rupees, and gave liberal terms of engagement 
to the men. This corps became afterwards Lieutenant-Colonel 
Bruce’s “ Independent Regiment of Cavalry,” which is men- 
tioned in some accounts of the suppression of the disturbances 
created by Wazir Ali, and it seems pretty certain that it was now 
incorporated in the Hindustani Independent Regiment. The latter 
consisted of 10 troops or risalaks, the composition of each being 
1 risaldar, 2 jemadars, 10 dafadars, 1 trumpeter, and go privates. 
Their uniform was a light blue or grey angarkha edged with red, 
a crimson turban worn in the Moghal fashion, acrimson famarbdand, 
white pantaloons, and boots. They were armed with “a good Hin- 
dustani cutting sword” and either a carbine, or a lance eight or nine 
feet long, the proportion of those carrying carbines being 10 per 
troop. 

Cait in the same year a letter was received from the Court of 
Directors, dated zoth April, 1803, in which was expressed a determina- 
tion to assimilate the organisation of the regular native cavalry as 
much as possible to that of the infantry. For this purpose orders 
were issued that two regiments should constitute a brigade com- 
manded by a Colonel; at the same time a considerable addition 
was made to the strength of the regular regiments, which were now 
composed as follow :— 


1 Lieutenant-Colonel. 2 Captaias. 6 Lieutenants. 
t Major. 1 Captain-Lieutenant. | 6 Cornets. 


79 


So THE SERVICES OF THE 


AS 


6 Subadars. 492 Privates. ' 1 Quarter-master Sergeant. 
12 Jemadars. 6 Farriers. 1 Assistant Surgeon. 

24 Havildars. 6 Pakhalis. 1 Native Doctor. 

24 Naiks. : Surgeon. 1 Sergeant-Major. 

6 Trumpeters. 1 Riding Master. 


One syce to each horse belonging to a sergeant, native Officer, or 
native non-commissioned officer; one to each three horses of 
privates ; a grass-Cutter to every horse. 
eee We now come to a very important epoch in the history of the 
Bengal Army—the Mahratta War, which began in 1803 and lasted 
until the end of 1805. The rapid advance of British influence in 
India had for some years rendered a conflict with the great 
Mahratta powers inevitable. Threatened as they were on all sides, 
their jealousy of the common foe could only partially allay the 
ceaseless strife between the five great Mahratta chiefs : these were 
the Peshwa at Poona, Bhonsla in Berar, Sindhia at Gwalior, Holkar 
at Indore, and the Gaikwar of Baroda: the first named was the 
nominal head of the Mahratta nation, but at this moment he was 
only of importance as forming a centre of attraction for the violence 
of the feudatory chiefs. At length matters reached a climax in 
July, 1803; a powerful combination was effected between Sindhia 
and the Rajah of Berar, with the object of an immediate attack on 
the territories of the Company and of their ally the Nizam, and 
war was declared. The British Government, though they had 
striven hard to preserve peace, had for months been preparing for 
this contingency, and the dispositions of the various armies had 
already been made. They were as follows:—in the Deccan and 
on the western side of India about 25,000 men, with a reserve of 
4,000 near Hyderabad; on the Bengal side 5,000 Bengal and 
Madras troops under Colonel Harcourt were detailed for the con- 
quest of Cuttack, belonging to the Rajah of Berar; 1,300 men were 
placed at Midnapore, as a support to the troops engaged in the invasion 
of Cuttack, and 2,000 at Mirzapur for the protection of Benares ; 
another force was assembled under Lieutenant-Colonel Broughton 
on the south bank of the Son; 3,500 men, under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Powell, were assembled near Allahabad, for the purpose of occupy- 
ing Bundelkhand, which had been ceded to the Company under the 
treaty of Bassein; while the Grand Army, 10,500 strong, under the 
immediate direction of the Commander-in-Chief, Lieutenant-General 
| Lake, was directed to rendezvous at Sikandra. The total of the British 


Se ee 


= 


ie o 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


forces was about 50,000 men; those of the Mahrattas were esti- 
mated at 250,000, of whom 40,000 were organised and drilled by 
French officers under M. Perron. The latter was now acting as 
Sindhia’s regent in the district belonging to the Mabhratta chief 


between the Ganges and the Jumna, which included Delhi and| 


Agra, and had personal charge of the old Emperor Shah Alam, who 
for the last five years had been a prisoner in Sindhia’s power. The 
conquest of the above district and the destruction of the force 
organised by Perron for its protection was pointed out by the Governor- 
General as the main object of the war in the north, points of lesser 
importance being the reduction of Bundelkhand and Cuttack. 

The Grand Army was ordered to rendezvous at Sikandra in August, 
and when all the corps composing it had assembled (which was not 
until] some time after the commencement of the campaign) it con- 
sisted of seven companies of artillery, the 8th, 37th, and 29th Light 
Dragoons, the 76th Foot, the 1st, and, 3rd, 4th, and 6th Bengal 
Native Cavalry, and the following Bengal Native Infantry,—both 
battalions of the and and 4th, the 3nd Battalion of the 8th, the and 
Battalion of the oth, both battalions of the 13th, the rst Battalion 
of the 14th, both battalions of the rsth, six companies of the and 
Battalion of the 16th, and four of the 2nd Battalion of the 17th. 
The newly formed Corps of Pioneers also accompanied. 

General Lake left Cawnpore on the 7th of August, and on the 29th 
entered Mahratta territory, for the purpose of attacking a large force 
of the enemy drawn up at Coel, near Aligarh; the latter, however, 
after a brief cannonade, in which the 3rd Brigade of Cavalry (the 
agth Light Dragoons and the 4th Native Cavalry) sustained a loss 
of one man killed and four wounded, retired without an engagement, 
and the General turned his attention to the capture of the fort of 
Aligarh. This was effected by assault on the 4th of September, 
when one of the gates was blown open with a twelve-pounder, and 
the place carried by storm after a desperate contest, and in the face 
of a murderous fire. The British loss, which amounted to 59 killed, 
(including six officers,—one of whom was Lieutenant John Turton, 
1-4th Native Infantry®) and 213 wounded (including eleven officers), 
occurred almost entirely in effecting an entrance into the fort, for 


© Among the killed also was Subadar Mir Karas Ali, a distinguished old sative 
officer of the 1-4th Native Infaatry.—P. . 


Regiments 
Lake's Grand 
Army, 


Battle of Delhi, 
Seprembers 
22 3 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


| once the gate was forced, little opposition was made, and the garrison 
| thought only of escape. The loss of the enemy was enormous—not 
‘| less than 2,000 being killed. 

, The Bengal troops engaged in this achievement (which the great 
| Duke of Wellington afterwards declared to be ‘‘one of the most 
extraordinary feats” he had heard of in India) were the rst and and 
| Battalions of the 4th and four companies of the 2-17th Native 
Infantry. These corps (the late 7th, 23rd and 35th Native Infantry) 
were, in recognition of their conduct on this occasion, each granted 
an honorary colour and an extra jemadar to carry it; and they were 
subsequently (in 1829) authorized to inscribe the word “ ALIGARH - 
on their colours. 

Meantime, on the 2nd of September, a body of cavalry, part of the 
army which had retired before General Lake on the 29th of August, 
attacked a detachment left to garrison Shikohabad, consisting only 
of five companies of the rst Battalion, r1th Native Infantry, with one 
gun, under Lieutenant-Colonel Conyngham. The enemy, though 
greatly superior in numbers, were repulsed in their first attack, but the 
British, having expended all their ammunition, were, on a renewal of 
the contest, on the 4th, obliged to capitulate, having sustained a loss 
nf 5 officers and 63 men killed and wounded. 

Before leaving Aligarh, General Lake received a letter from M. 
Perron, stating that he was dissatisfied with his treatment by Sindhia, 
-and was leaving that Prince’s service, and requesting a safe conduct 
for himself, his family, and goods through the Company's territory ; 
this the General promptly granted. By this defection the command 
of Sindhia’s forces in the Doab devolved upon M. Louis Bourquien. 

On the same day that he received Perron’s letter, General Lake 
commenced his march on Delhi, leaving the 1-4th Native Infantry 
to garrison Aligarh. On the 11th of September, at Surajpur, he 
heard that the enemy had crossed the Jumna to meet him, and after 
a march of eighteen miles he found himself (with only 4,500 men) 
opposed to Bourquien’s whole force (19,000 men, with nearly 100 
guns), drawn up in order of battle near the village of Patparganj, 
about eight miles to the seuth-east of Delhi. ‘The position of the 
Mabrattas was on a rising ground and only assailable in front, each 
flank being protected by swamps. Lake advanced with his cavalry 
to reconnoitre, and when he had made bimself sufficiently acquainted 
with the position of the enemy, which he found to be entrenched 


! 
} 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


he sent orders for the artillery and infantry to move forward and join 
him ; and while these were coming up, he resolved upon the feint of 
a pretended retreat to draw the enemy from the formidable position 
he occupied and allure him into the plain. Accordingly, as the 
infantry approached, the cavalry retired slowly, and the enemy, falling 
into the trap, left their position and advanced to pursue. As soon as 
the infantry had completed a junction with the cavalry, the latter 
_ Opened out from the centre and allowed the infantry to pass through 
them to the front and, the latter having deployed, the enemy found 
themselves suddenly confronted by the whole of the British line. A 
tremendous fire was opened by the Mahrattas, but the British advanced 
unshaken to within a hundred paces, when they fired one volley and 
charged. The enemy broke and fied, on which the British infantry, 
breaking into columns of companies, allowed the cavalry to pass 
through and complete the victory, pursuing the Mahrattas to the 
Jumna, where large numbers of them perished in attempting to 
escape across the river. The loss of the latter was not less than 3,000, 
and 68 of their guns were captured on the field. The British loss 
amouuted to 109 killed (including six officers,—among whom were 
Major Middleton, 3rd Native Cavalry, Captain McGregor, Persian 
Interpreter to the Commander-in-Chief, Lieutenant Hill, 3-zath, and 
Lieutenant Preston, 2-15th Native Infantry), 368 wounded (includ- 
ing Major-General Ware and ten other officers), and g missing ; 
total 486. 

The Bengal corps engaged on this memorable occasion were the 
and and 3rd Native Cavalry,and of the infantry both battalions of the 
and, the 3-4th, the 2-12th, the 1-14th, both battalions of the rsth, and 
four companies of the 2nd Battalion of the 17th. Honorary standards 
were granted to all these corps,—the late 2nd and 3rd Light Cavalry, 
and rst, sth, and, 23rd, 28th, 3oth, 31st, and 35th Native Infantry, 
and they were all afterwards (in 1829) authorized to bear the word 
“Dern” on their standards and colours. Of all these, only the 
a-15th now survives as the 2nd Bengal (Light) Infantry. 

In consequence of this defeat, the enemy evacuated the city and 


fort of Delhi, and on the 14th September, when General Lake | 


crossed the Jumna, the French Commander Bourquien and four 
other French officers surrendered themselves prisoners. Thus, within 
a fortnight of his crossing the frontier, Lake had extinguished the 


French power in Northern India. On the 16th, the Commander-in- 


83 


84 - 


are before, 
Sarread 
SL Ages er 


THE SERVICES OF THE 
Chief entered Delhi and visited the Emperor, who placed himself 
under British protection. 

' Having appointed Lieutenant-Colonel Ochterlony Resident : at the 
Court of the Emperor, and left the 2-4th and four companies of the 
2-17th Native Infantry, with a newly raised corps of irregular infantry, 
to form the garrison of Delhi, Lake marched from that place on the 
24th of September, and on the 4th October arrived before Agra, 
having been joined at Muttra on the 2nd by a strong detachment 
under the command of Colonel T. P. Vandeleur, consisting of the 
8th and 29th Light Dragoons, the rst and 4th Native Cavalry, and the 
2-8th, 2-gth, and 1-r2th, and six companies of the 3-16th Native 
Infantry, The enemy were found to be occupying the town and 
the ravines near the fort. Simultaneous attacks were made on both 
these points on the roth, and were in both places successful, although 
the loss in the ravines was considerable. The 2nd of the oth, the 
1st of the 12th, and six companies of the 2-16th Native Infantry were 
engaged in the attack on the town,—the corps employed in the 
ravines being the rst of the 14th, and the two battalions of the rsth 
Native Infantry. The British loss was one officer (Lieutenant Grant, 
a-gth Native Infantry) and 34 men killed, 7 officers (one of wnom 

| —Lieutenant Whitaker, 2-9th Native Infantry—died the same day) 
and 173 men wounded, and 15 men missing. 

An important result of this success was that a large number of the 
enemy's troops outside of the fort, amounting to 2,500 men, sur- 
‘rendered and marched into the British camp on the 13th of October. 

' Siege operations were now commenced against the fort, but before 
a breach could be made, the garrison capitulated, and the place with 
all its treasure, amounting to twenty-two lakhs, fell into the hands of 
the English on the 17th October. 

| Leaving the 1-and Native Infantry to garrison Agra, Lake marched 
(from that place, on the 27th October, in quest of a large force (fifteen 

disciplined battalions) which had been detached by Sindhia from 
the Deccan, with the object of recovering Delhi. Having left his 
heavy guns and baggage at Fatehpur-Sikri, under the protection of 
the 2-2nd and 1-14th Native Infantry, the General executed a series 
of forced marches in pursuit of this force, and on the 31st arrived at 
| Katumba within twenty-five miles of the enemy. Directing his 
infantry to follow three hours later, he pushed on at midnight with 
his cavalry, and at seven o'clock on the morning of the rst of 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


85 


November overtook the Mahrattas (14,000 strong, with 72 guns) in | Battle of Las- 


position near the village of Laswari. Believing that they were intent ber ret, 180g. 


only on retreating, Lake made an immediate attack with his cavalry 
alone, and after a severe contest, in which Colonel Vandeleur was 
killed, succeeded in breaking through their line, but he was met by 
such a heavy fire of artillery that he was forced to discontinue the 
‘action until his infantry should have arrived. These did not reach the 
scene of action until mid-day, and in the meantime the enemy 
had taken up a new position, in two lines, in front and rear of the 
village of Mahalpur, with their artillery disposed along the front, 
and their cavalry on the right, resting on a small but deep stream 
called the Mahnus Nai. With the design of turning their right, Lake, 
when it was time to resume the action, directed his attack on this 
point, but the enemy perceived his intention, and immediately threw 
back the right of both lines, opening a hot fire of artillery on the 
foremost column, which was the right wing of the British Army, 
under Major-General Ware, headed by the 76th Foot. Finding that 
the column was suffering heavily, the General ordered the 76th, 
supported by the 2-12th and six companies of the 2-16th Native 
Infantry, to close with the enemy, and, led by Major-General Ware 
and by the Commander-in-Chief in person, these troops pressed 
forward to the attack in the face of a furious fire of canister shot; ata 
critical moment they were charged by the enemy’s cavalry, but 
repulsed them with their fire, and a countercharge of the 29th Light 
Dragoons having pierced both the enemy’s lines, the infantry attack 
was pushed home, and the enemy driven behind the village: here 
they were charged by the rest of the British cavalry and utterly 
broken and routed; 7,000 were killed and above 3,000 taken 
prisoners, and Sindhia’ s disciplined battalions, styled ‘the Deccan 
Invincibles,” ceased to exist. 

Nor was this all. The whole of the enemy’s guns, 72 in number, 
were taken; all their baggage and stores, together with 5,000 stand 
of arms, fell into the hands of the victors; and Sindbia no longer 
possessed an army in Hindustan. 

On the other hand the loss of the British Army in this great battle 
was not inconsiderable : the number killed amounted to 173, includ- 
ing Major-General Ware, Colonel Vandeleur, Major Griffith, Major 
Campbell, Deputy Quarter Master General, Cornet Coxwell, 1st 
Native Cavalry, Lieutenant Lambert, 1-15th Native Infantry, and 


86 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


pocepteee of 
Buadelkhand. 


seven other officers, while 653 (including 30 officers) were 
wounded. 

The native regiments which were engaged on this occasion were 
the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 6th Native Cavalry, and the 2-8th, 2-oth, 
1-s2th, 3-12th, 1-15th and 2-15th Native Infantry, and six companies 
of the 2-16th. The 2-12th and 2-16th were especially thanked by 
the Commander-in-Chief for the support they afforded the 76th Foot. 
In the year 1829, the whole of these corps (then the late rst, and, 
3rd, 4th, and 6th Light Cavalry, and the 1st, rath, 21st, 24th, 30th, 
31st, and 33rd Native Infantry) were authorized to bear the word 
‘‘Laswari” on their standards and colours. Of these, only the 21st, 
31st and 33rd survive to the present time as the rst, 2nd, and 4th 
Regiments of Bengal Infantry. 

On the 8th November, the army marched from Laswari towards 
Agra, and in the neighbourhood of that placeand of Bhurtpore it 
continued for nearly three months. At the end of November, the 
flank companies of the Bengal European Regiment joined the army 
in the field. 

While these great events were in progress, the forces detailed for 
service in other parts of the country had also been actively engaged. 
The detachment assembled at Allahabad under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Powell (which was composed of two companies of artillery, a 
squadron of the sth Native Cavalry, and the 2-11th, 1-13th, 1-18th, 
and 2-18th Native Infantry) crossed the Jumna and entered Bundel- 
khand on the 6th of September. This province had, under the Treaty 
of Bassein, been ceded to the Company by the Peshwa, who had 
instructed his officers there to surrender it to the British Government. 
One of these, Rajah Himmat Bahadur, readily complied, and entered 
into an arrangement with the British Political Agent, but another of 
them, Rajah Shamsher Bahadur, resisted the mandate, and pre- 
pared to hold a portion of the province by force of arms—a circum- 
stance which rendered hostilities inevitable. As soon as Colonel 
Powell entered Bundelkhand, he was joined by Himmat Bahadur at 
the head of about 14,000 men. The combined forces crossed the 
Kn river on the toth October, and on the r2th engaged Shamsher 
Bahadur at Kapsa, and easily defeated him. Shamsher now 
entered into negotiations, but he was not sincere, and in December 
Powell resumed offensive operations and took Kalpi alter a feeble 
resistance. This and other successes brought Shamsher to his 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


87° 


senses, and in January, 1804, he came into Colonel Powell's camp | 
and made his submission. 


The Bengal troops employed in reducing the province of Cuttack ‘Reduction of 
consisted of a company of artillery and detachments of both |: 


battalions of the 20th Native Infantry, which proceeded to Ganjam, |' 


and there joined a force consisting of the Bank companies of the 


2and Foot, and some Madras troops, the whole under the command |' 
of Lieutenant-Colonel G. W R. Harcourt, 13th Foot. At the same |’ 


time the 3-7th Native Infantry, a battalion of Sepoy Volunteers, and 
@ troop of the Body-Guard proceeded to Jellasore and Balasore, to 
co-operate with Colonel Harcourt’s force. The latter marched 
from Ganjam on the 8th of September and seized Manikpatam ; 
skirmishes afterwards took place at Ahmadpur and Birpur-Shatam- 
pur, but the advance on the town of Cuttack was delayed by the 
rains; that place was, however, reached on October the roth, and 
surrendered without resistance. The adjoining fort of Barabati was 
a place of considerable strength: it was, however, ill-defended, and 


we ee —s owes ee ——e © eee we ee ee ee ee ~ —_ 


was carried by assault on the morning of October the 14th, with aj 
loss on our side of 5 killed and 29 wounded; its fall delivered the} 


whole of the province of Cuttack into the hands of the English. 
To the south-west of Delhi the 1-8th Native Infantry and two 


employed, under Lieutenant-Colonel George Ball, in reducing the |. 
forts of Narnaul, Kanund, etc., and establishing the authority of the | 


British in that part of the country. 

The Ramgarh Battalion was employed on the frontier toward Nag- 
pur and took possession of Sambalpur. 

' Lieutenant-Colonel W. Burn, with the and of the 14th and some 
auxiliary troops, was engaged at the head of the Doab about the 
Karna] district. 

In November, the 2-6th and two companies of the 2-13th were 
employed in the reduction of the fort of Chaukandi, in the Baghel- 
khand district, south of the Jumna, which was evacuated by the 
enemy after the failure of an assault in which the 2-6th lost nearly 
100 men killed and wounded, including Captain Graham, who fell 
in the breach pierced by no less than nine bullets. 

At this point it is necessary to notice that the strain of the war 
had rendered it necessary to make further additions to the. strength 


‘Minor operas 
battalions, formed from the corps lately in Sindhia’s service, were 7 


88 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


of the army. Accordingly orders were issued (G. G. O., 30th Sept- 
ember, 1803; G. O.C. C., 4th and oth November, 1803) to raise two 
more regiments of Native Infantry, to be numbered the 22nd and 
the 23rd.© The former was raised at Fatehgarh by Captain John 
Malcolm and Lieutenant William Ball, and the latter at Cawnpore by 
Captains H. Cheape and William Scott; and both regiments were 
directed to wear yellow facings. The 1st Battalion of the 22nd 
still survives as the 6th Bengal (Light) Infantry. 

In December, Lieutenant-Colonel Henry White, of the 3-16th, 
was despatched from the main army, with the detachment of his own 
battalion, and the 1st of the 14th, to receive possession of the fort- 
ress of Gwalior, which Ambaji Inglia, Sindhia’s representative in 
that part of the country, had agreed to surrender, The Atladar, 
however, refused to give up the place, and Lake immediately re- 
inforced Colonel White with the flank companies of the Bengal 
European Regiment, the 2-gth Native Infantry, and a proportion 
of artillery, in view to enforcing the surrender of the place. Later 
on Colonel White was joined by the 2-11th and 3-18th Native In- 
fantry from Bundelkhand. The siege of Gwalior was commenced 
in January, 1804, and the place surrendered on the 4th of February. | 


These successes, combined with those obtained in the Deccan by 


Major-General the Hon’ble A. Wellesley and in Guzerat by Colonel 
Woodington, broke up the Mahratta Confederacy, and compelled 
both Sindhia and the Rajah of Berar to sue for peace. Treaties 
with both were concluded early in 1804, but this was scarcely ac- 
complished when the undisguised hostility of Jaswant Rao Holkar, 
the Mabratta Rajah of Indore, and the invasion by him of Raj- 
putana, which he knew to be now under the protection of the 
British Government, provoked a renewal of the war, 

To watch the movements of Holkar and to protect the territory 


‘| of the Rajah of Jeypore, which was threatened by that Chief, Lake, 


on the gth February, marched from Biana (where he had been en- 
camped since the end of December, 1803), and after various halts 
reached Dausa on the 17th April. In the interval he had been 


© The native names of these corps were derived thus :— 
ist and and Battalions aand Regiment,—Kyne-ki-Paltan. From Colonel 
Francis Kyan, who commanded them both at different times. 
ist and and Battalions 25rd Regiment,—Murreeroe-ki-Paltan. Acorrap- 
tion of the name of Captain (afterwards Lieutenant-Colonel) John Muaro, 
who served with both battalions.—P. 


, 


a 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


joined by the flank companies of the 22nd Foot and by the troops 
that he had sent against Gwalior. From Dausa, on the 18th he 
de ached Lieutenant-Colonel the Hon’ble William Monson, 76th 
Foot, with the 2-2nd, 1-1ath, and 2-13th Native Infantry. to protect 
the city of Jeypore. Continuing his movements with the main army, 
the Commander-in-Chief reached Narwai on the 8th May, and thence 
sent Lieutenant-Colonel Don, with the 3rd Native Cavalry, the 2-8th 
and 2-21st Native Infantry, and a proportion of artillery, against 
Rampura, a town belonging to Holkar, situated about sixty miles 
south of Jeypore. This place was taken by storm on the 15th 
May after a smart resistance, and the season being now too far 
advanced for further operations and the troops suffering severely 
from the intense heat of the weather, Lake withdrew his army to Agra 
and Cawnpore, leaving Don with his two battalions and a company 
of artillery to occupy Rampufa, and Monson (reinforced by two 
corps of irregular horse under the command, respectively, of 
Lieutenant Lucan® and a chief named Bapuji Sindhia) to guard 
the Jeypore frontier and watch the proceedings of Holkar. 

On the advance of Monson to Jeypore, Holkar had immediately 
fallen back, and on the capture of Rampura, he hastily crossed the 
Chambal and retreated to a considerable distance, followed by 
Monson, who, towards the end of May 1804, was encamped at 
Kotah, at which place he was joined, in June, by Lieutenant-Colonel 
Don’s detachment from Rampura. 

Leaving Monson in this situation for the present, | it is necessary 


| 


Operations in 
Bendelkhand, 


here to refer to the progress of affairs in Bundelkhand, where Lieute- | ree. 


nant-Colonel Fawcett now commanded, Colonel Powell having left 
on account of severe illness, which shortly afterwards proved fatal. In 
May. 1854, the province was invaded by Amir Khan, a soldier of for- 
tune, at that time in the service of. Holkar, who succeeded in cutting 
off and destroying a party of fifty artillery and two companies of the 
1-18th Native Infantry then engaged in besieging the fort of Bela, near 
Kunch, who had unwisely been left without support. In conse- 
quence of this affair, and the general want of capacity exhibited by him, 
Colonel Fawcett was removed from the command in Bundelkhand, 
and Lieutenant-Colonel Martindell appointed in his place. This 

ee bad been in the service of one of sad Mabratta chiefs, 


but had resigned at the commencement of the war. Lake had gazetted him a 
Lieutenant in the 7¢th (Highlana) Kegiment.—P. 


er fe age Se ee ee a ey 


99 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Retreat of 
Monson’s dee 
tachment, July 
— August, 1804. 


officer soon drove Amir Khan and his Pindaris out of the province ; 
on the and of July (with two squadrons of the sth Native Cavalry, the 
1-13th, 1 18th, and 2-18th Native Infantry, and two so-called “ bri- 
gades” of irregular auxiliaries) he totally defeated Rajah Ram Singh, 
a Bundela chief, and dispersed his forces, though not without loss, 
the regular troops having 7 killed and 19 wounded, while there 
were 121 casualties amongst the auxiliaries; and on the 2&th of 
the same month he took Jaitpur by storm after a severe con- 
flict. Bundelkhand, however, continued in a very disturbed state for 
some time. 

Towards the end of June, Colonel Monson moved forward from 
Kotah ; passing through the Mokandra Pass he arrived at Sunara 
on the 1st July, and on the following day a detachment under the 
command of Major Sinclair, consisting of the 3-and Native Infantry 
and some artillery, took the fort of Hinglasgarh by escalade. 

On the 7th of July, Colonel (now Brigadier-General) Monson 
received intelligence that Holkar, who for some time past had been 
encamped in Malwa, had re-crossed the Chambal river, and was advanc- 
ing towards him with his whole army: at the same time he received 
accounts from Colonel Murray, who commanded a force advancing 
from Guzerat to Ujjain to co-cperate with him, of his intention to fall 
back on the Maihi river. These circumstances placed Monson in a 
very Critical position, for he now, in the middle of the rainy season, and 
in a country flooded to an extent that rendered all movements difficuit 
and precarious, and while he was greatly straitened for supplies, found 
himself alone with a small army in the face of a vastly superior hostile 
force. He therefore determined to fall back on the Mokandra Pass, 
and commenced his retirement on the 8th of July, leaving his two 


| corps of irregular cavalry behind as a rear-guard; but during the 


very first day’s march these were attacked and defeated by Holkar’s 
cavalry, and Lieutenant Lucan taken prisoner. The detachment con- 
tinued its march to the Mokandra Pass, near the entrance to which 
some desultory fighting took place on the 1oth. Monsen, ar prehen- 
sive lest the enemy should get into his rear, now determined to con- 
tinue his retreat to Kotah, but when he reached that place on the 12th 
in torrents of rain, the Rajah refused to admit the troops or to 
furnish supplies. The march had theretore to be continued through 
a country flooded by the continuous downpour, in which the streams 
were unfordable, and food could only be procured with the greatest 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


gi 


difficulty. On the 16th the guns had to be spiked and abandoned, 
having sunk so deep in the mud as to be inextricable. At length, 
after a march of great difficulty and suffering, which was increased 
by the harassing attacks of the Mahratta horse and of the hill people 
and banditti of the country, the detachment arrived at Rampura 
on the 27th of July. Here Monson was joined by a detachment, 
under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel M’Culloch, consisting of 
the 2-9th and the 1-14th Native Infantry, a body of irregular horse 
under Major Frith, and six guns, together with a small supply of grain 
which had been despatched from Agra by the Commander-in-Chief as 
soon as he heard of the distressed situation of the force. As the coun- 
try, however, was destitute of provisions, and Holkar was advancing in 
considerable force, it was decided to leave the 2-8th Native Infantry 
and four companies of the 2-a1st, with a proportion of artillery, the 
whole under the command of Captain Hutchinson, Bengal Artillery, 
to garrison Rampura, and with the rest of the force to push on at least 
to Khushalgarh, from the Rajah of which place Monson expected 
to receive assistance. But the last days of this disastrous retreat 
proved even more trying than the earlier portion, for the attacks of 
the enemy became more vigorous and incessant, and food became 
daily more scarce. On the 22nd August, the detachment reached the 
Banas river, but the river had risen so much that it was found im- 
possible to cross it immediately. On the 24th it became fordable, and 
the passage was effected in the midst of incessant attacks from the 
enemy, which occasioned heavy loss to the detachment—no less than 
twelve officers being killed, and the 2-and Native Infantry, com- 
manded by Major Sinclair, who was himself amongst the slain, 
being almost annihilated. This battalion (the late aand Native 
Infantry), which Monson himself led in one of its charges, behaved 
with splendid gallantry in repelling the attacks of the enemy 
and covering the passage of the remainder of the troops. Monson 
now found himself under the necessity of abandoning his baggage, 
and thus lightened he reached Khushalgarh on the 2sth, after 
defeating repeated attacks of Holkar’s cavalry. Here, to add to 
his embarrassments, he found that Holkar’s agents had tampered 
with the fidelity of some of the troops, of whom two companies 
of the t-14th and a large portion ot Major Frith’s irregular horse 
deserted to the enemy. On the 26th he quitted Khushalgarh, and, 
still followed and incessantly attacked by the Mahratta horse, pushed 


92 THE SERVICES OF THE 
a er ee etree reer Us One eT 
on towards Agra. On the 28th the enemy’s cavalry made a last 
attempt to overwhelm the detachment on the plains near Hindaun, 
but again, as throughout the retreat, their efforts were unavailing 
against the steady valour of the sepoys, who reserved their fire 
until their assailants were within a few yards of their bayonets, and 
‘repulsed them with heavy loss. That night, however, owing to the 
' extreme darkness, and to flying followers and such of the baggage 
| as still remained getting intermixed with the line, the troops were 
: thrown into a state of confusion from which it was found impossible 
' to recover them, and in this state of disorder the straggling remnants 
Arrival at | of the ill-fated force reached Agra on the 31st, having marched 350 
pe ag August, | miles in the constant presence of an overwhelming enemy, in the 
' midst of the greatest difficulties and hardships, through a hostile and 
| almost impassable country, and almost without a halt. 

During the march every effort was made by Holkar to shake the 
fidelity of the sepoys, and the greatest cruelty was shown towards any 
prisoners who refused to enter his service. Notwithstanding these 
circumstances, disaffection and desertion were far from being as 
extensive as might have been expected, and many of those who 
entered Holkar’s service sent word to their officers that they 
had done so on compulsion, and only awaited an opportunity to 
escape.* Where so much discipline and gallantry was displayed under 
most trying circumstances, it is not surprising that many noticeable 
acts of devotion should have occurred. Not the least of these was that 
of a Native officer of the 2-2nd Native Infantry at the battle of the 
Banas. When that gallant corps, after the most heroic exertions in 
covering the passage of the river, was eventually broken by the over- 
whelming numbers of the enemy, this officer was seen, with the 
regimental colour in one hand and defending himself with the other, 
retiring until he reached the river bank, when he turned and plunged 
into the stream, and was swept away by the furious current. ~ 
| As goon as he received intelligence of the disaster which had be- 
‘ fallen Monson, Lake tock measures to re-assemble his army without 
delay. He marched from Cawnpore, on the 3rd September, with 
all the disposable troops at that station, and when joined at Sikandra, 
at the end of the month, by the troops at Agra and those which had 


ee 


* So, at least, it was reported at the time, though it is not easily conceivable 
how these men contrived, under the circumstances in which they were placed, to 
“send word "’ to their officers. —P. ; 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


93 


been at Muttra (which place Holkar had advanced to and occupied), 
he had with him the 8th, 27th and agth Light Dragoons, the rst, 
and, 3rd, 4th and 6th Native Cavalry, the flank companies of the 
22nd Foot, the 76th Foot, and the 1-and, 1-4th, 1-8th, 1-12th, 3-13th, 
1-1sth, 3-15th, 1-21st, 2-21st, and 2-22nd Native Infantry, with a pro- 
portion of artillery. 

At the same time orders were issued for the immediate formation 
of four additional regiments of Native Infantry of two battalions each, 
to be numbered the 24th, asth, 26th and 27th. The 24th and 26th 
were formed at Cawnpore and the 2sth and 27th at Fatehgarh, 
principally from levies which had previously been organised at those 
places (G.O.C.C., 24th September and 26th October, 1804). Of 
these regiments none now exist, though the present 7th Bengal 
Infantry is considered to be in some sense the representative of the 
1-24th, afterwards the 47th, to the Native designation of which it suc- 
ceeded on its taking the place of that corps in the line in 1829.® 
~ Qn the rst of October General Lake advanced towards Muttra. 
Holkar in the meantime had sent off his infantry and guns to attack 
Delhi, to the possession of which place, and of the person of the 
Emperor, he attached great importance ; he himself remaining back 
with his cavalry, for the purpose of engaging the attention of the British 
force and of harassing it in its march. Delhi at this time, where 
Lieutenant-Colone]l Ochterlony still held the position of Resident, 
was defended by a very inadequate force, but it was commanded 


® The native designations of these eight battalions are thus der:ved— 

1st Battalion 24th,—Craum-hi-Paltan. From Captain P. Crump, 2-9th 
Native Infantry. 

and Battalion 2gth,—Muttees-hi-Paltan. From Lieutenant W. J. Mat- 
thews, -oth Native lofantry. 

1st Battalion 25th,—Rayle-ki-Paltan, From Captain H. W. Royle, 1-10th 
Native Infantry. 

and Ba. talion 25th,—Cristeen-ki-Paltan. From Captain C. Christie, -and 
Native Infantry. 

The four officers named above raised the levies from which these battalions 

were respectively formed. 

1st Battalion 26th,—Duberne-hi-Palian. From  Lieutenant-Colonel 
P. D’Auvergne, who commanded the corps for several years. 

and Battalion 26th,— Hindree-ki-Paltan, From Captain R. Henry, whe was 
appointed to the battalion in 1805, and was for some time in command of it. 

ist Battalion 27th,—Castor-ki-Paltan, From Colonel (afterwards Lieute- 

' pant-Gene-al) H. DeCastro, who was Colonel of the corps for several years. 

and Battalion 27th.—Mapert-ki-Paltan.—From  Lieutenant-Colonel 
R. Mabert, who was appointed to the commaad in 1805.—P. 


Augmentation, 
3004. 


94 THE SERVICES OF THE 
— 
| by an officer of great energy and experience, Lieutenant-Colonel 
W. Burn, 2-14th Native Infantry, whom, on the approach of the 
Mahrattas, Colonel Ochterlony had promptly called in, with his 
battalion, from Saharanpur. The troops composing the garrison were 
the 2-4th, the 2-14th, four companies of the 3-17th, and about 1,300 
irregular infantry ; but the walls of the city were in a ruinous state 
and unfit to bear a siege, even had it been practicable to defend 
a place ten miles round for any length of time with rather less than 
3,500 men. However, all that was possible for rendering the place 
secure was done on the receipt of news of Holkar’s approach. The 
enemy’s army arrived before the walls on the morning of the 8th of 
October, and at once begana heavy cannonade. On the next day, it 
being evident that a breach would soon be completed, a sortie was 
made by about 350 of the garrison under Lieutenant Rose, the party 
being made up of two companies of the 2-14th and some irregulars, 
with one six-pounder gun: so vigorous was their attack that in a few 
minutes they got possession of the batteries, spiked the guns, and 
threw the enemy into great confusion. On the 14th, the guns 
of the enemy opened a general cannonade, under cover of which 
an assault was made on the Lahore gate; but it was received with 
so much steadiness that the Storming party was repulsed with consi- 
derable loss. Disheartened by these failures and hearing that General 
Lake was approaching, the Mahrattas raised the siege on the night 
of the r4th, and decamped before the next morning. Colonel 
Ochterlony, in his report of the siege, says that the “ fatigue suffered 
by both officers and men could be exceeded by nothing but the cheer- 
fulness with which it was endured.” The small number of the garrison 
did not admit of regular reliefs or make it safe for the men to undress 3 
to sustain them therefore in their fatigues, provisions and sweetmeats 
were issued daily, “‘ which,” says Colonel Ochterlony, “had the best 
effect upon their spirits.” 

General Lake, harassed all the way from Muttra by Holkar and 
his cavalry, whom, however, he could not bring to action, arrived at 
Delhi on the 18th of October. Holkar, having sent off his infantry 
and guns to Deig (Deeg or Dig), now moved northwards, with his 
cavalry, into the Doab, which he proceeded to lay waste, and on the 
30th of October, at Shamli, he surrounded and attacked Colonel 
Burn, who, on the Commandersin-Chief’s arrival at Delhi, had 
marched from that place towards Saharanpur with the 2-14th Native 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


95 


a 


Infantry, a few irregulars, and six guns. This force was hard pressed 
by Holkar for some days, unti] the approach of the British Army 
compelled him to retire. No sooner had Lake received intelligence 
of Holkar’s movements, than he determined on a vigorous pursuit. 
Leaving Major-General Fraser ® with all the infantry. except the reserve 
brigade, and two regiments of Native cavalrv, to look after Holkar’s 
infantry and guns, he crossed the Jumna near Delhi (31st October) 
with his three regiments of light dragoons, the 1st. 4th and 6th Native 
Cavalry, a trocp of horse artillery, and the Reserve Brigade (composed 
of the flank companies of the 22nd Foot and the 1-12th, 3-12th, 
and 1-318t Native Infantry), and proceeded in search of Holkar. 
Proceeding by forced marches, Lake relieved Colonel Burn at 
Shamli on the 3rd November, and reached Meerut onthe 8th. Leav- 
ing Colonel Burn here, reinforced by the 1-3:18t Native Infantry, 


be resumed the pursuit of Holkar, and proceeded by Hapur, 


Bulandshahr, Khasganj and Aliganj (where he left his infantry), 
to Furruckabad, under the walls of which place he found the 
Mahrattas encamped on the morning of the 17th of November. The 
enemy were completely surprised, and had no time to defend them- 
selves, as the British troops dashed into their camp without warming, 
cut numbers of them to pieces and pursued the remainder for ten 
miles. Their loss was enormous—not less than three thousand in 
killed alone, while ours was uuly 3 killed and 25 wounded. 
Meanwhile General Fraser marched down the right bank of the 
Jumna to near Muttra, and thence to Deig, in the Bhuripore Rajah's 
- territory, having been joined en rouse by the Bengal European Regi- 
ment from Muttra. At Deig he found the enemy encamped 
in a very strong position, their right resting on a large tank and covered 
by a fortified village, their front and left protected by an extensive 
jAli, with a chain of batteries in rear extending up to the walls of 
the fort. On the morning of the 13th of November, leaving two 
_ battalions to protect his camp, General Fraser advanced to the attack, 
himself leading the first line, which was the rst (Monson’s) Brigade, 
composed of His Majesty's 76th and the 1-and ard 1-4th Native In- 
fantry, which, having passed round the tank, carried the village on the 
enemy’s right, and then, running down the hill beyond. charged the 


first line of guns. In this advance General Fraser's leg was shot off, | 
and Colonel Monson succeeded tothe command. The rst Brigade, | 


® Major-General Joha Henry Fraser, His Majesty’s Service.—P. 


Furruckabad, 


oe 


Battle of Deig, 
November, 
zgth, 2804. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


having carried the guns, continued to advance, charging the whole 
succession of batteries for a distance of two miles. Meanwhile the 
second line, which was the and (Browne’s) Brigade, composed of the 
Bengal European Regiment and the 1-15th and 2-15th Native Infantry 
moving towards the enemy’s left, under cover of some rising ground, 
kept the infantry and batteries on that side in check until the arrival 
of reinforcements, when the enemy were obliged to retire in haste 
and were driven into the morass, where numbers of them perished. 
At the same time a body of the enemy’s cavalry came up and re-took 
the guns lately seized by the first line'and began to work them against 
the British: they were, however, charged and compelled to retire by 
Captain Norford, with a party of only 28 men of the 76th Foot, but 
in the performance of this exploit, that gallant officer was unfortunately 
killed. 

In this action the Mahrattas lost heavily, the killed alone being not 
less than 2,000: 87 of their guns were captured (including six that 
had been presented to them by Lord Cornwallis at Seringapatam in 
1792, and 14 that had been lost in Monson’s disastrous retreat), and 
his army was almost entirely dispersed, the shattered remains of it 
being forced to take shelter in the fortress of Deig. 

The British loss was also severe, amounting to 148 killed (includ- 
ing five officers), and 479 wounded (including 18 officers), and 37 
missing,—in all 654. Among the killed were Lieutenant Forbes, 
1-2nd, Lieutenants Faithful and Burges, 1-4th, and Assistant-Surgeon 
Lyons, 2-15th Native Infantry. Lieutenants Hales and Boyd, 2-15th, 
died of their wounds within a few days after the battle, and Major- 
General Fraser succumbed to his injuries on the 25th, at Muttra. 

Of the Bengal native regiments present at the battle of Deig (the 
and and 3rd Light Cavalry, and the sth, 7th, oth, 30th, 31st, and 
44th Native Infantry), all of which bore the name on their standards 
and colours, the and (the Queen’s Own) Bengal (Light) Infantry 
(formerly the 2-15th and the 31st), is the only one which survives. 

After the action at Furruckabad General Lake, having continued 
his pursuit cf Hulkar, who fled towards Deig, re-joined the force, 
now under Colonel Monson, at Muttra on the 28th November, to 
which place it had fallen back after the battle of the 13th. Advanc- 
ing from that place on the 1st December, Lake took up a position 
before Deig on the 13th and prosecuted the siege of that fortress 
with all possible vigour. A practicable breach having been made, the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


assault was delivered at midnight on the 23rd— 24th, the force detailed 
for this purpose having been divided into three columns. The right 
and left columns stormed and captured the enemy’s trenches and 
batteries, while the centre column entered the breach: the resistance 
of the garrison was desperate, but by 2 o’clock in the morning of the 
24th the whole fortress, except the citadel, was in our possession : this 
last post was evacuated by the enemy during the following night. 
The loss of the British was 43 killed and 184 wounded, two of the 
former (Captain Young, 1-8th, and Lieutenant Bowyer, 1-13th, Native 
Infantry) and thirteen of the latter being British officers. The Corps 
of Pioneers and the 1-8th and 1-12th Native Infantry were promi- 
nently engaged in the storming of the fortress. 

The shelter afforded to Holkar’s troops in the fortress of Deig was 
sufficient evidence of the treachery towards the English of its master, 
Ranjit Singh, Rajah of Bhurtpore, who had hitherto been professedly 
on friendly terms with the British Government. The fall of Deig was 
a great blow, both to Holkar and the Rajah, but in order to complete 
the work it seemed necessary to the Commander-in-Chief that Bhurt- 
pore should also be reduced. The latter was a place of exceptional 
strength: the town, eight miles in circumference, was thoroughly 
fortified and fully garrisoned, while the fort at its eastern extremity 
was deemed impregnable. Thearmy marched from Deig on the 28th 
December, and, having been joined by Major-General Dowdeswell 
with the 75th (Highland) Regiment and a supply of stores arrived 
before Bhurtpore on January 2nd, 1805. Batteries were at once 


erected and the siege commenced, and after six days the breach |. 


was reported practicable; that this information was far from being 
founded on fact was proved by the disastrous result of the first assault, 
which (9th January) was repulsed with a loss of 85 killed (including 
6 officers) and 371 (including 23 officers) wounded, being nearly 
double that experienced at the capture of Deig. Contemporary 
non-official accounts seem to show that the attack was a8 ill-conducted 
as the information which led to it was inaccurate; in fact, the 
secret of the failure seems to have been overweening and careless 
confidence, the proof of which is given in the words of an eyewitness, 
who records the general impression of the army : “that our failure had 
been merely the effect of accident, and that nothing was required 
but a fresh breach to enable us to enter the place in triumph.” No 
more precautions were taken to secure the success of the second 
B 


97 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


assault, which took place on the 21st of January; the position of the 
batteries prevented any accurate view being obtained of the breach 
or ditch, and to remedy this, the expedient was hit upon of sending 
three troopers of the 3rd Native Cavalry, in the guise of deserters, who 
were to gallop towards the ditch, and, having taken a good look at it 
and the breach, were to return with their report to head-quarters. 
This plan succeeded so far that the garrison was deceived and 
allowed the troopers to approach unmolested ; but the latter had not 
the presence of mind to profit by this circumstance, and having taken 
a hurried glance at the breach and ditch, they galloped back to the 
camp, where they pronounced the latter fordable and the breach prac- 
ticable. Acting upon this very inadequate reconnaissance, an assault 
was ordered for the following day. The storming party advanced to 
the edge of the ditch under a heavy fire, when they were confronted by 
a sheet of water beyond the depth of a man and upwards of thirty feet 
wide: after being kept for nearly an hour exposed to the full violence 
of the enemy’s fire, the column had to retire without attempting the 
breach, and with a loss of 74 killed and 514 wounded, making a total 
of 588, including 19 British officers, of whom 3 were killed and 16 
wounded. 

On the oth February, Lake was reinforced by a division of 
the Bombay Army (which included H. M.’s 6sth and 86th Regi- 
ments) under the command of Major-General Richard Jones, and 
on the 2oth and 21st a third and a fourth attempt were made to 
carry the town, but on each occasion the same want of judgment and 
the same disregard of necessary precautions were displayed, and the 
same disastrous results followed. The fact was that the material of 
which the walls were built, and which led the British officers to des- 
pise the place as “a mud fort,’ was the cause of the failure of their 
attacks, even when the ditch had been crossed and the breach 
attempted ; the effect of artillery fire was merely to cause the walls 
to crumble, and not to fall in blocks; what remained was even more 
precipitous than before, and what fell afforded no foot-hold to the 
assailing parties. 

At the same time it is to be observed that Lake undertook the siege 
with totally inadequate means, not only as regards the strength of his 
force generally, but also with respect to siege equipment, and the 
numbers of artillery men and pioneers athis disposal. 

The loss in the third assault amounted to 162 killed (including 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


one officer) and 732 wounded (including 26 officers). In the fourth 
assault we had 125 killed (including 6 officers) and 862 wounded 
(including 28 officers). Our total loss before Bhurtpore thus amounted 
to 446 killed and 2,479 wounded, or 2,935 in all, including 16 
- Officers killed and 93 wounded. Among the former were Lieutenants | 
Gowing and Percival, of the Bengal Artillery, Ensign Waterhouse of 
the a-1ath, and Lieutenants Hartley and M’Gregor of the a-1sth 
Native Infantry. Lieutenant Moore and Ensign Chance of the 
Bengal European Regiment, Lieutenant-Colonel Hammond of the 
1-and, Lieutenant Kerr of the 1-8th, and Major Radeliffe of the 
1-12th Native Infantry, died of their wounds. 

Several small engagements took place in the surrounding country 
during the siege, in one of which near Kombhir, an attack was made 
by the enemy on a convoy escorted by the rst Native Cavalry and the 
1-1S5th Native Infantry ; the escort was hard pressed and obliged to 
abandon part of the convoy, but the 27th Light Dragoons and the and 
Native Cavalry arriving opportunely, the tables were turned, the convoy 
saved, and a great number of the enemy killed. 

Skinner's Horse, afterwards so famous, distinguished them- 
selves in several actions during the progress of the siege. They were 
despatched with the whole of the British Cavalry force under Major- 
General Smith® against Amir Khan, a Pindari chief, in alliance with 
Holkar and the Rajah of Bhurtpore, who had collected an army and 
made an incursion into the Company’s territory in the Doab and 
Rohilkhand. The British force, after a hot pursuit, overtook the 
enemy at Afzalgarh on the and of March, routed them completely, and 
annihilated their infantry, sustaining a loss of 9 killed and 44 (includ- 
ing four dragoon officers) wounded. 

After the failure of the fourth attempt to storm Bhurtpore, the siege 
was converted into a blockade, and Ranjit Singh, finding himself 
deprived of any efficacious support from his allies, Holkar and Amir 
Khan, took the opportunity of endeavouring to come to terms. 
Meanwhile the cavalry, having returned from the Doab, continued to 
harass the camp of Holkar, who remained in the neighbourhood 
of Bhurtpore, and, after inflicting on him one tolerably severe defeat, 
finally compelled him to retire beyond the Chambal river. 

aa a 
for nag Deigicoben ep prog of thane Host Geanhe’, mith which is aig, 


served during the campaign of | in the Netherlands. He died at Muttra o 
the 6th August, 1806.—P. nee " : 


Skinner’ s 
Horse. 


100 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


About the same time a force under Captain H. W. Royle, 
1-10th Native Infantry, consisting of the 1-2sth Native Infantry, 
six companies of the 2-24th, a battalion of irregular infantry and 
a body of horse (formerly in the service of Sindhia) commanded by 
Colonel Pohlman, marched from Agra on the 26th of March, against 
the remnant of Holkar’s infantry under the Rajah Khushal Rao, 
which, after defeating some hostile cavalry on the 31st, it met on 
the 7th of April under the fortified town of Adalatnagar. The enemy 
were defeated with loss and all their baggage and some guns fell 
into the hands of the British. The casualties on our side were 14 
killed and 37 wounded,—including Lieutenant W. H. Carrington, 
1-a5th, who lost a leg and afterwards died of his wounds. 

The Rajah of Bhurtpore had for some time been negociating with 
Lake; though he had thus far been successful in defending his 
fortress, the active preparations that he had observed to be going on for 
a renewal of the siege struck him with dismay, and he thought it best 
to come to an accommodation with his persevering foe. Accord- 
ingly, on the 1oth of April, the terms of a treaty were agreed on, and 
on the 21st the camp was broken up and the army marched south- 
wards across the Chambal to watch the movements of Sindhia, 
who, in consequence of our ill-success at Bhurtpore, was again col- 
lecting his forces and threatening the British frontier. The army 
was for some time encamped at Jittor, beyond the Chambal, where 
it was joined by the Bundelkhand detachment under Colonel 
Martindell. However, no collision with Sindhia occurred, and at 
the end of May the encampment broke up, Martindell proceeding to 
Gwalior, and the Bombay Division to Rajputana, while Lake and his 
army marched to Agra and Muttra. 

Some minor operations now claim attention, It has already been 
related that when Monson was retreating before Holkar he left 
Captain Hutchinson in Rampura with a small force. This detach- 
ment was not molested by Holkar, and remained quietly in Ram- 
pura until the cold weather set in, when Captain Hutchinson set to 
work vigorously to clear the surrounding country, and open the way 
for the Bombay Division, which was then, under Major-General 
Jones, on its way to join General Lake. He took Kataoli and 
Ramangaon, and captured Zamina, Karawal and Dhalra by storm, 
and by the end of March had in a great measure reduced the sur- 
rounding country to order. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


101 


During this period Colonel Burn had been actively employed in 
the districts to the north of Delhi, where the Sikhs were giving 
much trouble, ravaging the country about Saharanpur, Deoband, 
and Thanesar, and making incursions even as far as Shamli. He 
had several skirmishes with parties of these people, and on the 23rd 
November 1804, after a tolerably severe conflict, in which the British 
detachment had 124 killed and wounded, he succeeded in defeating 
them at Deoband and killing their leader, Sher Singh, when they re- 
tired beyond the Jumna. They returned again in March 1805, but 
were again driven off by this energetic officer. 

In October, 1804, it became necessary to undertake operations in 
Cuttack, in consequence of the Rajah of Khurda, a man of consi- 
derable local influence, having thrown in his lot with the Mahrattas, 
and, at their instigation, cut up several small detachments which 
had been left in his country by Colonel Harcourt. The force em- 
ployed against the Rajah included a detachment of the Bengal 
Artillery, and two companies of the 1-sth and four of the 3-7th 
Bengal Native Infantry. On the 19th October, Captain Hickland, 
with the two companies of the 1-5th and one six-pounder, met a 
portion of the Rajah’s forces, upwards of a thousand strong, at Dillori, 
near Khurda, and routed them with great slaughter, Khurda was 
taken by storm on the 7th December, not without considerable loss 
on our side. The Rajah took refuge in the jungles, but was cap- 
tured shortly afterwards, and placed in confinement at Midnapore. 

In the spring of 1805, before the termination of the operations 
directed against Bhurtpore, and when the prospects of peace were at 
the least precarious, an important addition was made to the strength 
of the army by order of the Governor-General. This was the form- 
ation of two additional regiments of regular cavalry, the 7th and 8th, 
the orders for which were promulgated (G. O.C.C., sth April 
1805) when Lord Lake was still before Bhurtpore. It was directed 


Changes in 
the army. 


that these regiments were to be raised forthwith at Ghazipur, the | 


7th by Captain W. H. D. Knox and Lieutenant James Mockler, and 
the 8th by Lieutenants R. Pepper and S. Reid, a nucleus being 
afforded by the existing regiments, and the recruiting for both corps 
being under the superintendence of Lieutenant-Colone! T. S. 
Bateman. 

In this place it might be mentioned that, since the commencement 
of the war, large bodies of irregular horse which had served under 


Horn 


102 


THE SERVICES OF THE 
Perron in Sindhia’s armies had, on their volunteering, been taken 
into the British service, and shared in the later operations. Amongst 
these were the corps under Lucan which formed part of Monson’s 
detachment, and that under Colonel Pohlman which fought under 
Captain Royle at Adalatnagar in April 1805. But of all the irregu- 
lar cavalry employed at this time, none attained such renown as 
the corps commanded by Captain James Skinner, which originally 
consisted of eight risalaks, but which was considerably increased 
during the war. Captain Skinner, who was elected commandant 
by the men themselves, had been serving Sindhia in Perron’s 
army, where he had already gained considerable distinction, and 
on joining the British Army he stipulated that he should not be 
employed against his old master. “Skinner’s Horse” was the 

origin of the present rst and 3rd Bengal Cavalry. 
In the autumn of 1805, Holkar collected a numerous force and 
marching rapidly to the north entered the Punjab, where he hoped 
to induce the Sikhs to join him against the English. Lake went 


promptly in pursuit and chased him to the banks of the Beas, where he 


finally gave in and entered into a treaty, which brought this long war 
to an end. In this last expedition Lake had with him the Bengal 
Horse Artillery, the 8th, 24th (late 37th) and 25th (late 29th) Light 


‘| Dragoons, the 3rd and 6th Native Cavalry, the 2and Foot, the Bengal 


European Regiment, the 1-gth, r-11th, 2-14th, 2-17th and 1-218t 


| Native Infantry, and Skinner’s and Murray’s Irregular Cavalry. 


The army moved back to British territory in January 1806, and 
was broken up at Delhi in the following month. 

The conclusion of peace was immediately followed by extensive 
reductions and retrenchments. The Body-Guard, which at the begin- 
ning of the war had been raised to a strength of 200 men, was 
again seduced to 100, who were moreover to be borne on the rolls of 
the several regular regiments. Captain Skinner’s corps was entirely 
reduced, with the exception of his Khas Risalahk, which was detailed 
for police duty in the Delhi district. Companies of regular infantry 
were reduced to 80 privates each, and all the provincial battalions 
were disbanded, much to the disgust of the regulars, who found 
themselves detailed for the local duties for which the former corps 
had been raised. 

Shortly after the return of Lord Lake from the Punjab, affairs at 
Gohad claimed attention. One of the articles of the treaty with 


oon 
enn an arrearage oe 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 103 


Sindhia was that this fort should be assigned to him, on his provid- 
ing the Rana of Gohad with an equivalent elsewhere. The kiladar, 
however, instigated by the Rani, refused to surrender the fort, and it 
became necessary to coerce him. A force under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Bowie (2-11th, 2-16th, 2-24th, 1-a5th, and 2-2 sth 
Native Infantry) was accordingly despatched for this purpose in 
February 1806, and after a sharp conflict, in which the detachment 
lost five officers and about 100 men killed and wounded, the place 
was captured. Lieutenant W. B. Macvitie, a-11th, and Lieutenant 
J. Gill, 2-25th, were killed. 

In October, 1806, it was found’ necessary to send a detachment | Badebh. 1006. 
from Cawnpore to reduce Badekh, a small but strong fort belong- 
ing to a refractory zemindar named Apparbal Singh, and situated 
beyond the Jumna, about eighteen miles to the north-west of Kalpi. 
The detachment consisted of part of the a-8th Native Infantry and 
two six-pounder guns, and was under the command of Captain 
Owen of the a-8th; it reached Badekh on the 21st October, and 
the guns having failed to effect’a breach, an attempt was made the 
game evening to carry the place by escalade, which, however, proved 
a failure owing to the ladders not being of sufficient length, and the 
storming party had to be withdrawn, having sustained a loss of 
twelve wounded, amongst whom was Lieutenant Payne of the Artil- 
lery.* On receipt of intelligence of this repulse a reinforcement was 
sent out consisting of a troop of the 3rd Native Cavalry, two com- 
panies of the 17th Foot and two of the 1-16th Native Infantry, with 
two 12-pounder and two 18-pounder guns. Before, however, this 
reinforcement could reach Captain Owen’s camp, Apparbal Singh 
surrendered, and the troops returned to Cawnpore. 

In January, 1807, a force (the 17th Foot, a-rst and r-r6th| 807. 
Native Infantry) commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Hawkins, took 
the fort of Chamir, near Kunch, in Bundelkhand, by storm, after a 
desperate resistance which occasioned considerable loss. Lieutenant 
_P. M’Gregor, 17th Foot, and Lieutenant A. M'Queen, 3-18t Native 
Infantry, fell in the conflict. 


© Lieutenant Payne was carried into Cawnpore, where he died of his wound on 
the asth October. In Stubbs’ History of the Bengal Artillery (Vol. I11., p. 538) 
it ig erroneously stated that he received his mortal wound in an attack on a foct in 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


In February, 1807, Lord Lake vacated the appointment of Com- 
mander-in-Chief, and returned to England. He was succeeded by 
Lieutenant-General George Hewett. 

On the 13th November, 1807, the force under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Hawkins, who was commanding in Bundelkhand, was employed 
in the reduction of the fort of Sehlehuganj, near Kaitah, After 
some resistance, the enemy were driven out of the place. The 
British force (which, besides artillery, consisted of the 2-1st, 1-16th, 
1-19th, 1-26th, and 2-26th Native Infantry) sustained a loss of 2 men 
killed, and Captain-Lieutenant T. Wilson, 2-26th, and 9 men 
wounded. . 

In the autumn of 1807, 2 large force was assembled at Aligarh, 
under the command of Major-General Dickens,¢ to reduce the 
forts of Komona and Ganauri, the strongholds of a refractory chieftain, 
named Dhundia Khan. The force consisted of two troops of 
the 24th Light Dragoons, four troops of the 3rd and five of the 
6th Native Cavalry, the Corps of Pioneers, the 17th Foot, the 1-gth 
1-13th, 1-23rd, 1-27th and 2-27th Native Infantry, and a battalion 
formed of the grenadier companies of various other native corps. 
Komona was invested on October 12th, 1807, and after a siege of 
three weeks, an assault was attempted on November 18th; the 
assailants were, however, driven back with great loss, but not before 
they had inflicted such slaughter on the enemy that the latter evacu- 
ated the fort the following night. The British casualties in the assault 
were 105 killed and 436 wounded, among the former being 
Lieutenant-Colonel William Duff, of the 1-gth Native Infantry, 
who commanded a brigade, Captains J. Radcliffe and W. Kirk, 17th 
Foot, S. Brown, 1-9th Native Infantry, and J. Robertson, 2-218t 
Native Infantry (Grenadiers), and Lieutenants J. M’Leod, 2-27th 
Native Infantry, and J. Du Feu (1-23rd),.ofthe Pioneers ; Lieute- 
nants G. Rolland, 1-9th, and D. C. Livingstone, of the grenadiers 


© Lord Lake was born on the 27th Joly, 1744, and entered the service on the oth May, 1758, 
as an Ensign in the rst Foot Guards, He served with some distinction inthe American War 
of Independence, and in the Netherlands in 8793-94, and commanded the brigade of Guards in 
the brilliant action of Lincelles, 18th August, 1793. He was afterwards employed in the 
sappression of the rebellion of 1798 in Ireland. Hie career in India is briefly shown in the pre- 
ceding pages. He did not long survive his retorn to England. Having caught cold while 
serving as a member of the Court-Martial on General Whitelocke (of Buenos Ayres notoriety), 
he died on the 20th February, 1808.—P. 

t Major-General Richard Mark Dickens (Lieutenant-Colonel of Her Majesty’s 4th F oot) 
died at Mattra on the apth April, 1808.—P, 


. 
eT —_ 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


105 


of the 2-21st Native Infantry, died of their wounds. Lieutenant 
J. H. Jones, of the Engineers, was killed, and Lieutenant T. K. 
Ramsay (2-11th), of the Pioneers, mortally wounded during the siege. 

The force afterwards marched against Ganauri, distant some seven- 
teen miles from Komona ; the place was invested on: the 23rd Nov- 
ember, and surrendered as soon as a breach was effected on the 11th 
December. No loss was sustained on our side. 

In 1807-8, it was found necessary to send detachments against 
various refractory zemindars in Oudh. Akbarpore was taken by 
storm in March, 1807, by Major O’Donnell, 2-12th Native Infantry. 
The forts of Baddri, Samanpur and Gurha were subdued without 
loss by Lieutenant-Colonel Gregory, 1-12th Native Infantry, in 
April and May, 1808; and Major O’Donnell, 2-12th, took that of 
Pathar-serai by storm after a smart resistance, in October, 1808. 

In 1808, a volunteer battalion of sepoys was formed to take part in 
an expedition, under Captain Weguelin, to the island of Macao, the 
object of which was to occupy that place in order to prevent its falling 
into the hands of the French. The Chinese, however, did not at all 
understand this action, and immediately broke off all connection with 
the island, thus completely stopping its trade. The troops were there- 
fore withdrawn and returned to India in February, 1809. 

In 1808, an important change was introduced into the organisa- 
tion of the Native Infantry, vis., the formation of light companies. 
In a circular dated the 12th April the Commander-in-Chief directed 
the organisation of a light company in each battalion, and later on 
(G. G. O., 29th August, 1808) it was ordered that this company was 
in future to be considered a fixed part of each battalion, and that 
each battalion was thereafter to be composed of two grenadier, one 
light and seven battalion companies. In the following October orders 
‘were issued to assemble the several light companies (except those 
of the 2zoth Regiment) at certain stations to practise light infantry 
field movements, and on assembly they were organised into six 
battalions, which were placed under the command of selected officers. 
These light battalions were broken up in February, 1809, except the 
4th, which, being on field service in Bundelkhand, was not broken up 
until May, 1811. 

In 1808 Ranjit Singh, the Sikh Chief of Lahore, having extended 
his power over the greater part of the Punjab as well as over some 
of the hill states, carried his arms across the Sutlej and attacked the 


Ondh, 1897-8. 


Expedition to 
Macao, 2808, 


Sikh invasion 
of the Cis- 
Suatlej States, 
38e9. 


106 


Attack on Mr, 
Metcalfe’s 
Escort at 
Amritsar. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Sikh Chiefs under British protection. This led, early in 1809, to the 
assembly of a force in the vicinity of Ludhiana, for the purpose of 
preventing further inroads, while a mission, of which Mr. Charles 
Metcalfe was the head, proceeded to Amritsar to meet Ranjit Singh 
and endeavour to effect a peaceable settlement with him. The force 
concentrated on the frontier was under the command of Major- 
General St. Leger, and was composed, besides artillery, of the 
follawing corps :—The 8th and 24th Light Dragoons, the 4th, sth, 
6th and 8th Native Cavalry, the 17th Foot, the 2-zoth, 1-23rd and 
1-27th Native Infantry, and the and and 3rd Light Infantry Batta- 
lions.* . The negociations with Ranjit Singh proved successful and 
a treaty of amity and alliance was entered into, under which it was 
agreed that the Sikh chief would not commit or suffer any encroachment 
on the rights or possessions of chiefs on the left bank of the Sutlej,—a 
treaty to which Ranjit Singh steadfastly adhered until his death thirty 
years later. The force under the command of General St. Leger was 
broken up and returned to cantonments in April and May, 1809. 

It was during the negociations at Amritsar that an incident occour- 
red which produced a remarkable effect on the mind of Ranjit Singh. 
While Mr. Metcalfe was encamped near that place with his escort 
(two companies of sepoys taken from the 1-23rd and 2-231rd Native 
Infantry, under the command of Captain Popham) the festival of the 
Moharram occurred (16th February, 1809), which thé Mahomedan 
sepoys of the detachment celebrated in the usual way according to 
their annual custom. The sight of the /asiahs, however, inflamed the 
Akhalis (the most fanatical of the Sikh sects) to madness, and a 
body of two or three thousand of them assembled and made a furious 
attack on the escort. Fortunately Mr. Metcalfe and Captain Popham 


had had some warning, and when the Akhalis approached they found | 


the detachment drawn up in readiness to receive them. After some 
firing had taken place, Captain, Popham, seeing that several of his 


men had fallen, ordered an advance, a volley, and a charge with the — 


bayonet. The Akhalis stood the volley without flinching, but the 


sight of the levelled steel was too much for them, and they turned 


and fied into the city, pursued by the sepoys, leaving thirty of their 
number lying killed or wounded on the field. Of the escort, Captain 
Ferguson, 2-23rd, and 16 men were wounded. Ranjit Singh 


appeared on the scene just as the aftair ended, and was deeply im- 
Ne 


® The light companies of the 2-16th, 2-210t and 1-23nd Native Infantry were 
included in one or other of these battalions.—P. 


~ 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 107 


pressed with the facility with which a couple of hundred Brith | 
sepoys had discomfited and put to flight several thousands of his 


fiercest soldiers. He determined thenceforth to adopt European 
arms.and discipline in his army, and thus the insignificant affray at 
Amritsar may be said to have been the foundation of the disciplined 
Sikh Army which we met in so many bloody conflicts thirty-six 
years later, 

In January, 1809, it became necessary to send a force against | Operations in 
Lachman Dawah, the refractory chief of Ajigarh in Bundelkhand. on. 
The detachment employed was under the command of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Martindell, and consisted (besides artillery) of— 

The 3rd Native Cavalry (3 squadrons). 

» a-tst Native Infantry (4 companies). 
» I-grd ” (5 ” )- 
” Irgth ” (3 | ” )- 


» 1°28th 
» 226th " (s companies). 
4th Light Infantry Battalion.® 


Pioneers (detachment). 

The fortified outpost of Rajaoli was stormed on January 22nd, with 
alossof 28 men killed, and three officers (one, Lieutenant Jamieson, 
1-19th, serving with the Light Battalion, mortally) and 112 men 
wounded. The detachment, reinforced by three companies of the 53rd 
Foot, and five of the 1-26th Native Infantry, then advanced against 
Ajigarh, and having carried the hill of Bahauta, which commands 
that place, proceeded to bombard the fort, and obliged the garrison 
to surrender on February 13th. 

In the autumn of the same year, the settlement of the province of 
Hariana, lying to the west of Delhi, which had for years been in a | Settlement 
disturbed state, necessitated the employment of military force against | :8s. 
the turbulent Jat inhabitants. A strong detachment, under Lieute- 
nant-Colonel George Ball, consisting of the rst Battalions of the gth 
and 22nd and the 2nd Battalions of the 18th and 33rd, with some 
companies of the rst of the roth and 2nd of the 24th, the 6th Bengal 
Native Cavalry, Skinner’s Horse, and a strong artillery train, was 
accordingly sent thither. It met with no active opposition, except 
at the town of Bhawani, which was promptly attacked and carried by 
assault on the 2gth of August. The garrison fought with courage, and 
our loss was not inconsiderable, amounting to one officer (Lieutenant 


® The 4th Lignt Infantty Battalion was composed of the light companies of 
the a-1st, 1-7th, 1-1ath ,2esath, rz6th, 1-19th, 1-26th, and -26th Native lafantry.—P. 


108 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Operations in 
Ouadh, 3809-20. 


Operations In 
Bundelkhand, 


2830-33. 


| O’Brien, 1-22nd) killed, and 6 wounded; 18 men killed and 114 


wounded. The loss of the insurgents was more than a thousand. 

Later in the year a force, composed of detachments of the 2-«th. 
1-gth, 2-16th, and 1-z1st, was ordered against the fort of Nanpara, 
in Oudh, which place was occupied without opposition. 

During the winter of 1809-10 the 1-9th Native Infantry, under 
the command of Lieutenant-Colonel] McGrath, was employed in the 
coercion of some refractory zemindars in the Bahraich district, 
Oudh. In the assault of the fort of Pragpur, on the 4th January, 
1810, the battalion had 50 men shot down, and two of its officers, 
Lieutenants Woolley and Dixon, were killed. The gallantry of the 
battalion was specially commended by the Commander-in-Chief 
(G. O. C. C., 17th January 1810). 

Towards the end of 1809, in consequence of Amir Khan having 
attacked the Rajah of Berar, whereby many British interests were 
imperilled, it became necessary to move forces into Malwa. The 
principal force was sent from the Madras side, but a smaller one, 
under Colonel Martindell,—com posed of the rst, 5th, and 6th Native 
Cavalry, the 53rd Foot, the 1-17th, t-19th, 1-32nd and 1-26th Native 
Infantry, and the 4th Light Infantry Battalion, with a proportion of 
Artillery and Pioneers,— was moved from Bundelkhand to co-operate 
with the Madras troops, and proceeded (January 1810) to the vicinity 
of Sironj. Amir Khan withdrew on these movements being made; 
no collision took place, and in the course of the following months the 
troops returned to their stations. 

About this time it became necessary to undertake operations in 
Bundelkhand against Gopal Singh. This was an adventurer who 
had some years before usurped the district of Kotra, but being now 
dispossessed of it, he took to the hills and jungles with his followers 
and thence began making irruptions into the various districts of 
Bundelkhand, carrying fire and sword wherever he appeared. Having 
defeated the forces of the Rajahs of Panna and Kotra, he grew so 
bold that it became necessary to send British troops against him. 
Captain E. P. Wilson, with seven companies of the 1-16th and 
three of the 1-7th Native Infantry, attacked him at Parari, near 
Kakarati, on the 18th February, 1810, but though he inflicted heavy 
loss on the enemy (his own being 6 killed and 40 wounded, includ- 
ing four officers), the general result was indecisive, and Gopal Singh 
soon after descended the hills and burnt the cantonment of Tirowa. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


109 


It became necessary, therefore, to adopt more vigorous measures, 
and reinforcements were quickly sent to the disturbed districts. 
On the roth March, Lieutenant-Colonel Brown, with the rst Native 
Cavalry and a squadron of the 8th, totally routed Gopal Singh at 
Bichaund ; and soon after Captain Wilson, with his detachment 
above named, reinforced by a squadron of the rst Native Cavalry 
and a company of pioneers, surprised and seized Gopal Singh’s 
fortified camp at Jhargarh. The leader escaped to the jungles, but 
it was not long before he reappeared, and several other actions 
were fought. On the rgth November, Captain Watson, with a 
part of the rst Native Cavalry, defeated and cut up a large body 
of his adherents at Bhamori. Soon after he was again defeated by 
Colonel Brown at Killeri, and on the 26th June and the 7th Sep. 
tember, 1811, he sustained two more overthrows at the Dawani Pass 
and at Chirgaon. However, he continued the struggle until early in 
1812, when convinced of the hopelessness of the contest, he proffered 
his submission and was pardoned by the British Government. 

In August 1810, two volunteer battalions of Bengal sepoys were 
despatched with an expedition against the Isle of France or Mauritius. 
These volunteers were furnished by the 8th and 25th Regiments, the 1st 
of the 15th and 2nd of the 13th and 19th. The expeditionary force 
arrived and disembarked in Grande Baye (near the north-east 
extremity of the island, about fifteen miles from Port Lonis, the 
capital) on the 29th November, 18:0, and advanced on Port Louis 
at once. The resistance met with was feeble, and after a couple of 
smart skirmishes on the 30th November and the 1st December, 
General Decaen, the French Governor, surrendered. Itis said that the 
feebleness of the resistance was due to the refusal of the militia 
(who constituted about one-third of the force at Decaen’s disposal) to 
fight, and that these gentry, moreover, were very indignant at the 
employment against them of sepoys, declaring that ‘‘to have the 
black fellows of India sent against them was an indignity which no 
subject of His Majesty the Emperor and King could endure with 
any patience.” The total loss amounted to 29 killed, 99 wounded, 
and 45 missing, of which the share of the two volunteer battalions 
was one native officer and 32 men missing.* A gold medal was 
bestowed on all commissioned officers, and a silver one on the men 
who served in this expedition: 


© Lendon Gasette Extraordinary, dated the 13th February, 1811.—P. 


110 THE SERVICES OF THE 


In December 1810, in view of an expedition for the reduction of 
Java, five more battalions of volunteers were formed and designated 
the 3rd, ath, sth, 6th, and 7th (or the Light Infantry) Battalions of 
‘| Bengal Volunteers. The troops detailed for this expedition were 
taken from the Bengal and Madras Presidencies, principally from the 
former. ‘The Bengal Division, which was under the command of 
Colonel George Wood, consisted (besides the 14th and 59th Foot) of 
the following troops :— 


Governor-General’s Body-Guard, under Captain oe 
Two companies of Bengal artillery 

tst and 2nd Battalions, 20th (Marine) Bengal N. I. 
Four battalions of volunteers . ‘ 
One light infantry battalion of volunteers 
Pioneers e e e e e e ® e 


e e e e e e 
Yu 
~A 
° 
as 


The troops from Bengal embarked in March 1811, and on the 
1st June the whole expedition had assembled at Malacca, under 
Lieutenant-General Sir Samuel Auchmuty, Here considerable delay 
occurred, and it was not until the and of August that the expedi- 
tionary force, amounting to 10,800 men, arrived off the north 
coast of Java. The troops landed at Chilling-Ching without oppo- 
sition on the 4th and advanced to Batavia, which place was entered 
on the 8th. Two days later the army, having advanced, attacked 
and defeated a division of the enemy near Weltervreden, about two 
miles from the main position of the Dutch in their entrenched 
camp at Cornelis. The whole army did not arrive before that place 
until the 14th, when the enemy’s forces opposed to them were esti- 
mated at 17,000 men, with about 380 guns. A fortnight was passed 
in making regular approaches, but, though considerable effect was 
produced, it soon became evident that a regular siege would be too 
long an undertaking, and it was resolved accordingly to make an 
effort to force the Dutch position by a coup de main. The attempt 
was completely successful, and on the 26th of August the place was 
carried by storm; the enemy made a gallant resistance, but were 
forced from their entrenchments, and, being driven into the open 
country, were pursued for several miles by the cavalry. More than 
3,000 are said to have been killed, and 3,000 prisoners were taken, 
amongst them being three Generals, 34 field officers, 70 captains 


and iso subalterns. The loss of the British force during the whole of | 


-_ eo 


aw Oe 


_—._ 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


these operations, from the date of landing, amounted to 735 British 
and 152 Natives killed, wounded, and missing, of which the Bengal 
troops lost one British officer (Lieutenant-Fireworker Farnaby, Benzal 
Artillery) and two Native officers killed, and 13 British officers 
(of whom Captain Shaw, 9-13th, and Lieutenant Murrall, 3-24th, 
both attached to the 6th Volunteer Battalion, died of their wounds) 
and 5 Native officers wounded; 36 non-commissioned officers and 
men (including two European eergeants) killed, and 108 wounded. 
After.making one more effort at Jati Ali on the 16th September, 
and again sustaining defeat, General Janssens, the Dutch commander, 


capitulated, and the island-of Java was surrendered to the English on 


the 17th of September.¢ :On the conclusion of hostilities the Bengal 


troops, with the emception of some of the volunteer battalions, re- 


turned to India and received the thanks of Government in General 
Orders; medals were conferred on all ‘ranks and in 1829 the Body- 
Guard and the two ‘attalions of the soth Native Infantry (the late 
asth and 40th) were granted permission to wear the word “ Java” 
_ on their standards, colours, and appointments. The 3rd and ath 
Battalions and the Light Infantry Battalion continued serving in Java 
until the island was restored to the Dutch in 1816. In the interval 
they were not idle: in June 1813, the 4th and Light Infantry 
Battalions served at the storming of Yodhyakarta (usually called 
Jocjocarta), the palace-fort of a rebellious Sultan in the interior of 
Java, and in June, 1813, the 3rd Battalion shared in the reduction of 
Sambas, a piratical state on the western coast of Borneo. In 181s, 
however, the Light Infantry Battalion tarnished the fine reputation it 
had acquired : having ‘been detained in the Eastern islands longer 
than ‘the period for which they had volunteered, the men became 
discontented and insubordinate, and finally broke into open mutiny, for 
which crime several of the ringleaders were condemned to suffer death. 
Towards the end of 3811, the 2-218t Native Infantry, under the 
command-of Lieutenant-Colonel Tetley, was despatched from Mirza- 
pur to ecerce the Rajah of Bardhi, in Rewah, whose people had been 
making incursions into and plundering the Mirzapur district. The 
battalion was repulsed with some loss in an imprudent attempt, 
without guns, on the fort of Bhapawi, Colonel Tetley himself being 
among the wounded, but eventually the Bardhi chief’s forces were 
dispersed, all his forts destroyed, and the country restored to order. 


@ London Gaseite Baivacrdinary, t7th December, 1811.—P, 
‘¢ Hiden, 010t January, i1812.—P. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Reduction of 
Kalinjar, r8za. 


2823, 


Internal 
history, 
1806-184. 
Cavalry. 


In January, 1812, the contumacy of the A/adar of Kalinjar, a 
strong fortress which stood twenty miles south-east of Banda in 
Bundelkhand, rendered it necessary to despatch a force against him. 
This force, which was under the command of Colonel Martindell, 
included both battalions of the 11th Native Infantry, the rst Batta- 
lions of the 7th and 22nd, the 2nd Battalions of the and, sth, and 
16th, and part of the Corps of Pioneers. On the and of February, 
1812, an attempt was made to storm the fort, but the assault was 
repulsed with heavy loss, two officers being killed, 1: wounded, and 
210 men killed and wounded. This loss fell almost entirely on the 
53rd Foot, that of the Native troops being only 2 men killed and 
one officer (Lieutenant Faithful, 3-1oth, attached to the Pioneers) 
and 76 men wounded, The attempt, however, was so nearly success- 
ful that the k:Jadar, fearing that the next attack might be still more 
vigorous, surrendered on the following day. 

One more small affair remains to be noted before the com- 
mencement of another general war. This was the attack and storm. 


ing, at the close of 1813, of a fort named,Entauri, in Baghelkhand, by | 


a detachment under Lieutenant-Colonel J. W. Adams, consisting of 
details from the rst Battalions of the sth, gth, and 11th Regiments, and 
the 2nd Battalions of the and and roth. The place was reached 
after a trying march, assaulted on the same day (4th December), 
and carried in the face of a desperate resistance by the garrison. The 
commander, Sarnaid Singh, a petty Rajah who had gratuitously 
attacked a detachment of the Company’s troops, with almost all the 
garrison, fell in the assault. The loss on our side was 5 killed and 
68 (including three British officers) wounded. 

Between the close of the Mahratta war and the year 1814 but few 
changes of strength or constitution were made in the Bengal Army. 
By G. O., 29th November, 1805, orders had been issued that the 
Governor-General’s Body-Guard should be furnished by details 
included in the strength of regiments of Native cavalry, but in 1808 
(G. G. O., 26th February) this loss of strength was counterbalanced 
by an increase of twelve men per troop. The uniform of the regular 
Native cavalry at this time (G. O. C. C., 7th December, 1809) was 
ordered to be French grey, with red facings and white buttons and 
lace. In the following year, however, the facings were again changed 
to yellow. In this year, too, we learn that no French grey cloth 
arrived from England, so the uniforms had to be made of red cloth, 


© London Gasette, 13th August, 1814.—Bast India United. Service $ournal, 
June, 1837, pages 418-27.—P. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


113 


and it was not unti] 1811 that the new regulation uniforms were 
issued complete. By G.O.C.C., 4th May, 1810, the arming of 
Native cavalry was modified; two pistols were in future to be carried 
instead of one, as heretofore, and the proportion of carbines was 
fixed at fifteen per troop. Remountsat this time were obtained through 
the Government stud at Pusa, and G. O.C.C., 1gth May, 1807, author- 
ises each cavalry officer to select one horse from those sent from the 
Pusa stud to their regiment, the price for such chargers being R800, a 
tolerably large figure even in these days. 

In February, 1809 (G. O. C. C., 1st February), orders were issued 
for the rendezvous at Sonpat and Panipat of all the irregular horse 
in the employ of Government; the whole to be commanded by 
Major James Skinner. At the sametime a further enlistment for that 
officer's regiment was ordered. Three months later (Proclamation, 
G. G., 29th May, 1809) Skinner’s Horse was augmented toa strength 
of eight resalaks, with galloper gunsattached. The strength and rates 
of pay of a risalah are given as follows in the same order :— 

Risaldar 2. 2. wt 
Naib-Rissldar . 2. lw 


SRRRRES FR 


wm = Fe ee et eS 

2 Bhistis, @ . 7 4 we 4 oe 5 

The uniform of the corps at this time included a yellow jacket, with 
red turbans and kamarbands. 

In 1815 (G. O. C. C., agth July) the establishment of Skinner’s 

Horse was augmented to three corps of 1,000 sowars each, with the 


following staff and officers :— 
1 Captain. 
: Conn = Havilda 
5 5 vildar, ° 
10 Risaldars t Naik, ; aril 
to Naib-Risaldars. 41 Sepoys, 
10 Jemadars. 


10 Kot-Dafadars. 
80 Dafadars. 


114 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Artillery. 


Infantry. 


a 


Of these corps the second is now the 3rd Bengal Cavalry. 

Three corps of Rohilla cavalry, commanded by Lieutenant Roberts, 
Captain Cunningham and Captain Baddeley, were also placed on the 
above strength, with the exception of the galloper guns, while in 1809 
(G.O.C.C., rath May) another corps of irregular cavalry had been 
raised for provincial work in the ceded and conquered provinces, and 
was known as Gardner’s Horse. This last is now the 2nd Bengal 
Lancers. 

Native artillery, of which a corps had again been raised in 1797 
(Minutes of Council, dated 15th October), were employed throughout 
the wars of these years, but instead of being formed into a separate 
corps, they were at first split up into small parties and attached to the 
British companies, of which they formed a component part,—an 
arrangement as faulty as it was unsuccessful. At length in 1805 they 
were collected into a Golandaz corps of five companies, while in the 
same year an irregular corps of Golandaz was formed at Delhi of men 
who had come over from the Mahratta service, and was gradually 
absorbed into the regular companies. These latter were raised to 
eight in number in 1808. In 1811, a troop of native horse artillery 
was formed for service in Java, but this was reduced on its return. 

To the Bengal infantry but few additions were made up to 1814. 
The Pioneer corps, which had done excellent service in the sieges of 
the Mahratta war, was in 1808 augmented to eight companies of go 
men each, with two British sergeants per company and a detail of 
miners. It was placed onthe same footing as other infantry corps, and 
denominated “the Corps of Pioneers or Sappers.” By G.O.C.C., 
26th February, 1808, the establishment of infantry regiments was in- 
creased by ten sepoys per company. In 1809 (G.O.C.C., oth 
September) the strength of the companies of the Marine Regiment(the 
2oth) was increased to 16 non-commissioned officers and 130 privates 
each. G.O.C.C., 23rd September, 1814, orders a further increase 
of infantry regiments by ten men per company, in consequence of 
the imminence of war with Nepal, and on the 11th of January follow- 
ing orders were issued for the raising of three new infantry regi- 
ments, numbered from the 28th to the 30th. The first of these 


® The native names of these corps were as follow :— 

ist and and Battalions 28th— Uchterlony-ki-Pultan.—So called from Sir 
David Ochterlony, the first Colonel of the regiment. The name is so entered in the 
Army Lists, but it is worth noting that the officer referred to was not known to the 


sepoys as ‘‘Ochterlony,” but as ‘‘ Lony Aktar.’’? The2 ad Battalion was also known 


ew - 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


was raised at Cawnpore, the two battalions of the 29th at Fatehgarh 


and Benares, respectively, and those of the 3oth at Dinapore and 
Buxar. The 1st of the 3oth, raised by Captain F. Andrée, is now 
the 8th Bengal Infantry. In the same year, 1815, nine provincial 
corps of infantry were raised, and alsoa “ Dromedary Corps,” com- 
manded by Ensign J. W. Patton. This was found so useful that two 
years later its establishment of officers was increased to two Lieu- 
tenants and two Cornets. 

In G. O.C.C., roth November 1808, havildars of light infantry are 
ordered to carry muskets, instead of pikes; and, on the 22nd April, 
1809, the issue is sanctioned to light companies of ‘‘ two bugle-horns 
and five whistles.” In the same year (oth January, 1809) the standard 
of height for light infantry was fixed at 5 feet 5 inches. 

The uniform for the whole of the Bengal infantry, except the Marine 
Regiment and the Pioneers, was, by G.O.C.C., 8th December, 
1809, ordered to be red, with yellow facings and white buttons, and lace 
striped red, white, and blue. These universal facings were, however, 
soon altered and commanding officers were allowed to select a colour 
for their regiments ; thus we find the facings of the 38th, 29th and 3oth, 
when they were raised, were, respectively, white, light buff, and Saxon 
green. The uniform of the Pioneers was green, with green facings, 
black buttons, and yellow lace. In the line regiments kamardands of 
blue linen, six inches broad, were worn by all native ranks: native 
officers wore tight white pantaloons and half boots, and non-commis- 
sioned ranks janghias or short drawers; pantaloons were, however, 
worn in the cold weather by all ranks in some corps, and in 1813 
(G.O.C.C., and June) permission was given for them to be worn 
all the year round by such corps as might elect to doso. The head- 
dress of the period was a wonderful structure, called by courtesy a 


iS SS PS, 
as Lembroon-ki-Pultan, from Lieut.-Col. C. W. Lamborne, who was appointed 


to command it on its being raised. 

rst Battalion 29th.— Moira-ki-Pultan.—So named after Lord Moira, afterwards 
Marquis of Hastings, in commemoration of His Lordship having presented the 
battalion with its first colours, and ordered the corps to be dressed and equipped like 
his own regiment in the King’s service—the 27th Foot. 

and Battalion 29th.— Bisheshwar-ki-Pultan.—The origin of this name has not 
been ascertained. 

rst Battalion goth—Latter-ki-Pultan.—From Major R. J. Latter, who was 
posted to the corps on its being raised, and commanded it for some years. 

and Battalion 30th—Carter-ki-Pultan.—So named after Major H. Carter, who 
was appointed to the corps on its being raised.—P, 

32 


116 THE SERVICES OF THE 
Be Se Se ec a 


turban, which up to 1805 was built on an iron frame-work ; but by 
G. O., 26th July of that year, rattan was substituted for iron, when 
procurable. Accoutrements up to 1810 were of black leather. On 
the 20th March a G.O.C.C. ordered the gradual substitution of buff 
leather, as the black accoutrements wore out. At the end of the 
Mahratta War the Bengal Army appears to have reached a higher 
state of efficiency than it had ever previously attained, and contem- 
porary writers speak in the highest terms of its capabilities. The 
Duke of Wellington, who had gained most of his Indian experience 
in Madras and Bombay, and therefore judged the Bengal sepoys 
by what he had seen of detachments, writes—“ Supposing all the con- 
sequences to be equally convenient, I acknowledge that I should wish 
to see the Bengal troops composing all the subsidiary forces. The 
men are of a better size and description, of a higher caste, and the 
natives have more respect for them than they have for the Coast or 
Bombay troops. They have proved in this campaign (Lord Lake’s) 
that they yicld to none in bravery, and I believe are tolerably disci- 
plined, and they have long been notorious for their contempt of their 
enemies on horseback.” 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 117 


Chapter IV.—(1814—1824.) 
Events in India (Heugh)—British India (#ilsen)—Military Regulations, 18:7—Madras Army 

(W/tsen) —United Service Journal—Political History of India (Malcolm)—Nepal (iles)— 

Operations during the Mahratta War (Biscker)—Nepal papers—Political and Military 

Transactions in India (Prinsep)—Regi mental records—G. G. O. and G. 0. C. C. 

For many years past the northern frontier of the Company’s terri- | The Nepa! 
tories had been threatened by the constantly increasing encroach- | “#* "+ 
ments of the Nepalese. Regardless of repeated remonstrances from 
the British Government, and finding that the latter, occupied with 
military proceedings elsewhere, were reluctant to have recourse to 
arms, they considered this as a sign of weakness, and increased their 
aggressions to such an extent that in May, 1814, war became inevitable, 
and an army was ordered to take the field in the autumn of that year. 

This force, which, including irregulars, amounted to over thirty 
thousand men, was divided into four divisions, commanded and com- 
posed as follows :— 


tst Division, under Major-General David Ochterlony— 

Artillery, British and Native . * 950 men. 
Native Infantry— 

2nd Battalion, 1st Regiment. 

and 99 3rd ” 

ands, 6th 9 

1st 99 i ” 

and ry) , 19th .y ) (6 cos.) 


Pioneers, 3rd and 4th companies . 65 
and Regiment of Native Cavalry 
One rvisalak of Skinner's Horse. 
and Division, under Major-General Robert an Gillespie— 
Artillery ° 


H, M.'s "sg Sth Light Dragoons (acca. 
7th Native Cavalry. 
One risalah of Skinner’s aan 
H. M.'s 53rd Foot . - 785 
Native Infantry— 

ist Battalion, 6th Regiment. 

ist ry) 7th ry) 

1st 9 17th a9 

and =6,, «= 19th »»  (4.C08.) 
Light Infantry Battalion (8 cos. )* 
Pioneers, sth and 6th companies . 133 


* These were the light companies of the 1-1st, 1-5th, 1-6th, 1-7th, 2-16th, 1-17th 
2-26th, and 1-27th Native Infaatry. The battalion was under the command of 
Major E. P. Wilson.—P. 


118 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


eee 


grd Division, under Major-General iid Sullivan Wood— 
Artillery e . 814 
6th Native Cavalry, one troop. 
H. M. "5 17th Foot e e e 958 
Native Infantry— 
2nd Battalion, he Regiment (2 cos.). 
and ” Py) (2 cos.). 
rst PY) or ry (left wing). 
ond 99 rath 9 (left wing). 
3 


and o 
Pioneers, Sth. company ° 
ath Division, under Major-General Bennet en 
Artillery ° ° 


Gardner’s Horse (two risalahs). 
H. M.'s 24th Regiment . ° © 907 
Native Infantry— 
1st Battalion, 8th Regiment. 
and ry) 15th ry 
and »  2and » (left wing). 
and 99 sth 90 
Ramgarh Battalion. 
Champaran Light Infantry. 
ist, and, 7th companies of Pioneers. 

Besides the above, irregular troops and native contingents joined 
the army to the extent of above 13,000 men, and considerable additions 
of regular troops were afterwards made to the 1st and and Divisions. 

According to the general plan of operations, the 1st Division was to 
attack the western extremity of the Nepal frontier; the second was 
to occupy Dehra Dun and besiege Jaithak ; the third was to march 
from Gorukhpur through Bhutwal and Sheoraj to Palpa; and the 
fourth and strongest was to march through Makwanpur to the 
Gurkha capital of Khatmandu. 

The history of the first compaign of this war includes a greater 
number of disastrous failures and of ill-arranged and worse-carried-out 
enterprises, due generally to an entire want of appreciation of the 
necessities of hill warfare than had ever before, or have ever since 
befallen the arms of the British in India. 

Major-General Gillespie, who was the first to penetrate the enemy's 
frontier, entered the Dun on October the 2and, 1814, and occupied 
Dehra. The Gurkha governor of the western districts was Amar 
Sing Thapa, who had detached a force of 600 men under Balbhadra 
Sing for the defence of the Dun; this leader had taken up his posi- 
tion in the fort of Nalapani or Kalangzs, five miles from Dehra. Gene- 
ral Gillespie resolved to carry the place by assault, and formed the 


TS Ta, pegs 


vee eee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


119 


i 


attacking force into four parties, which were to advance simultaneously 
from different directions on the morning of the 3ret October. The 
signal for the attack was to be the firing of a gun, but this having been 
done before two of the parties had reached their destinations, the 
assault was delivered by the other two detachments only, and the 
result was a failure; the attack was repelled by the garrison with 
considerable loss, General Gillespie himself being killed, with four 
other officers and 37 men; while 17 officers and 213 men were 
wounded. The officers killed were Lieutenant and Adjutant B. R. 
O’Hara, 1-6th Native Infantry, Lieutenant and ,Adjutant R. H. 
Gosling, 1st of the 37th (attached to the Light Battalion), Ensign 
F. Fothergill, rst of the 17th, and Ensign R. Ellis of the Pioneers. 
Colonel Mawby, of His Majesty’s 53rd, now took command of the 
Division and retired to Dehra until the arrival of a battering train from 
Delhi. On the asth of November, the 1-13th Native Infantry having 
joined in the interval, operations were renewed, and an assault deli- 
vered on the 27th, but with no better result; the attack was com- 
pletely repulsed, and with still heavier loss to us than that sustained in 
the first attack, 4 officers, 15 British soldiers, and 18 sepoys being 
killed, and 8 officers and 436 men wounded. The officers of the 
Bengal Army killed were Captain J. Campbell, rst of the 6th, and 
Lieutenant J. Cuninghame, rst of the 13th; Lieutenant J. B. B. 
Luxford, Horse Artillery, died of his wounds. It was now determined 
to bombard the place, and measures were taken to cut off its water- 
supply ; the result was that it was evacuated in three days, Balbhadra 
Sing and go survivors effecting their escape and joining a party of 300 
men which had been sent to their relief. This party was followed and 
dispersed by a force under Major Ludlow, consisting of 150 men of 
the Light Battalion and 300 of the 1-6th Regiment. 

On the 20th of December, Major-General Martindell joined the 
Division and assumed command. After occupying Nahan, the capi- 
tal of Sirmoor, he made an attempt against Jaithak, a fort situated on 
the top of a lofty hill to the north of the town, and held by a body 
of upwards of 2,000 Gurkhas, commanded by Ranjur Sing Thapa, 
the son of the Gurkha Commander-in-Chief. The attack on the 
enemy’s position was made on the 27th December by two detach- 
ments of, respectively, about 1,050 and 700 men, commanded by 
Major J. Ludlow, 1-6th and Major W. Richards, 1-13th Native In- 
fantry. Major Ludlow’s column came first in contact with the enemy 


Failure before 
Jaithak, 


220 


ng 


28t Division. 
Operations 
easiest Amar 
Sing. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


near the village of Jampta, and there met with momentary success, 
but in following this up with an attack on one of the enemy’s stock- 
ades, a severe repulse was experienced, ending in the complete 
defeat of the detachment, who retreated in confusion to Martindell’s 
camp, having sustained a loss of one officer (Lieutenant G. M. 
Munt of the 1-r1st, serving with the Light Battalion) killed and three 
wounded, and 152 men killed and wounded. Major Richards’ column 
had in the meantime succeeded in taking up a position which cut 
off the water-supply of the garrison, and which, if held, must have 
compelled the Gurkhas to surrender. Here Richards was fiercely 
attacked by the enemy, and for six hours maintained his ground 
against all the efforts of the Gurkhas ; but towards evening his ammu- 
nition began to fail, and at the same time orders to retire were re- 
ceived from General Martindell; a retreat was accordingly begun, 
but the rugged nature of the ground and the exhaustion of the men 
brought about confusion and ended in a defeat, in which the column 
sustained a loss of three officers (Lieutenant T. Thackeray and 
Ensign W. McM. Wilson, 2-26th, and Ensign G. Stalkart, 1-13th) 
and 70 men killed, and five officers and 238 men wounded, besides 
whom a large number of sepoys were taken prisoners. The losses of 
this detachment up to the commencement of its retreat had been 
very small, and had it not been for the failure of ammunition and 
the order to retire, it would have easily maintained its position. 
The result of these defeats was that the further advance of the 
Division was completely checked, and though afterwards reinforced 
with’ both battalions of the 27th Native Infantry, General Martindell 
contented himself with simply blockading Jaithak until the spring 
of 1815, when the evacuation of the place was brought about by 
the successes of Major-General Ochterlony and the surrender of Amar 
Sing. 

General Ochterlony, with the 1st Division, began his operations 
against the Gurkha General Amar Sing early in November,"1814. 
The principal positions occupied by the enemy were Nalagarh, Ram- 
garh, and Malaun. General Ochterlony, advancing with great caution, 
brought up his heavy guns and bombarded the first of these forts, 
which capitulated, together with the outpost of Taragarh, on the sth 
of November. He next moved against Ramgarh, and here (26th 
November) a misfortune befell a detachment of his force: in a re- 
connaissance of the fort a small party under Lieutenant Lawtie, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Bengal Engineers, was attacked and compelled to retreat by the 
failure of its ammunition; a reinforcement from the 2-3rd Native 
Infantry was involved in its flight, and Lieutenant G. T. Williams of 
that regiment was killed ; the other losses this day amounted to 42 men 
killed, and 34 wounded. General Ochterlony now awaited the ar- 
rival of reinforcements, which reached him on the 26th of December, 
and consisted of the 2nd Battalion, 7th Native Infantry, and a 
Sikhlevy. On the following day Lieutenant-Colonel Thompson was 
detached with fourteen companies to cut off the communications of 
Amar Sing with Arki and Bilaspur, from which all his supplies were 
drawn. This object was effected with small loss, and Amar Sing was 
compelled to throw back his left, still keeping his right at Ram- 


garh: but General Ochterlony, having threatened to cut him off from | 
his last stronghold by turning the Malaun ridge and then marching | 


on Bilaspur, the Gurkha general found himself obliged to fall back 
on the strong Malaun position, leaving smal! garrisons at Ramgarh and 
several other posts, all of which were reduced by a detachment under 


Lieutenant-Colonel Cooper, in February and March 1815. Meanwhile, | 


Colonel Arnold, who had been left to watch Ramgarh during General 
Ochterlony’s turning movement, moved round the extremity of the 
Malaun ridge, to co-operate with the General on its northern side. 
Colonel Cooper’s detachment having joined the main army, on the 
14th of April, all was prepared for a combined movement against the 
enemy's position. This consisted of a connected chain of peaks, all 
except two being crowned by stockades. The possession of these 
two points was the object of General Ochterlony’s attack, and four 
separate columns were told off to effect that purpose, while two 
smaller parties were to make a diversion against the principal posi- 
tion of the Gurkhas at Malaun: these dispositions were made and 
carried out with the greatest care and skill, and with complete success ; 
one of the heights was seized without opposition; the other, Deothal, 
was carried after some resistance, and the British troops, having 
hastily entrenched themselves, were able to repulse a furious attempt 
of the enemy to re-take the position on the morning of the 16th of 
April. The enemy in this engagement lost about 500 men, while the 
loss of the British on the 15th and 16th was one officer (Captain 
Showers, 1-19th) and 63 men killed, and 298 wounded, including five 
officers, of whom Lieutenant H. Bagot, attached to the Pioneers, died. 
General Ochterlony immediately made preparations for attacking 


T2t 


522 THE SERVICES OF THE 

a 

rete aad the main position of Malaun, but, on the 11th of May, after three 

sth of May, | days’ bombardment, Amar Sing capitulated and made terms for 

ee himself and his son, Ranjur Sing, at Jaithak, by which all the 
provinces from Kumaon westwards were resigned to the British. 
Many of the Gurkhas took service with the British, and three batta- 
lions of them were at once formed. 


The energetic and skilful defence by Amar Sing of his mountain 
positions during a space of six months, and with a force considerably 
less than half that of his opponents, is one of the most remarkable 
features of the Nepal War. 


ard Division. Meanwhile the 3rd Division assembled at Gorakhpur in Novem- 
ber, 1814, but, owing to deficiency of transport and supplies, it was 
not until January that Major-General Wood entered the enemy’s 
country. On the 3rd of that month an attack was made on the 
Gurkha post of Jitpur, which, notwithstanding extraordinary mis- 
management and neglect of reconnaissance, was already an accom- 
plished success when the general, declaring the position untenable, 
commanded a retreat; the British loss amounted to 24 men killed 
and five officers (of whom Lieutenant Morrieson, Bengal En- 
gineers, died) and 104 men wounded. General Wood now declared 
his force to be inadequate to the task assigned to it, and confined 
his measures to the defence of the frontier, concentrating his force 
at Lautan, covering the road to Gorakhpur. Subsequently, under 
orders from the Commander-in-Chief, he made a demonstration 
against Bhutwal, but effected nothing, and early in May the troope 
were withdrawn into cantonments at Gorakhpur. 


ath Division, Major-General Marley’s division was no more successful in carrying 
out the plan laid downforhim. Arriving on the frontier, on December 
the 12th, he found that Major Bradshaw, the officer commanding 
on the Saran border, had already been successful in clearing the 
frontier posts of the Terai, having captured Barharwa, on the 25th 
of November, with a loss to the enemy of 50 killed, and to the 
British of two killed (including Subadar Gauhar Khan, 3-35th) and 
one officer and 30 men wounded of Gardner’s Horse and the 3-15th 
Native Infantry. The defensive posts of Baragarhi, Samanpur, and 
Parsa were held, respectively, by Captain Hay with the head-quarters 
of the Champaran Light Infantry, Captain Blackney with a wing 
of the 2nd-33nd, and Captain Sibley with three companies of the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


123 


and-1sth, a detachment of the Champaran Light Infantry, and a | Disasters at 


ee 


risalakh of Gardner’s Horse. December was passed in collecting | Samanpar. 


information and arranging the plan of advance on Khatmandu, during 
which time no precautions were taken for the permanent defence of the 
frontier posts. Seeing this, the Gurkhas planned simultaneous attacks 
on Passa and Samanpur on the st of January, 1815: both were com- 
pletely successful ; Captain Blackney was taken entirely by surprise ; 
himself and Lieutenant James Duncan were killed, and the detachment 
dispersed, with the exception of a small party kept together by Lieute- 
nant Strettell, and led back to Gorasahan: the losses in killed, 
wounded, and missing amounted to 125. Captain Sibley expected 
. an attack and asked for reinforcements, which however arrived 
Only in time to cover the retreat of the fugitives; the detachment 
had made a good resistance, but was surrounded and overpowered ; 
Captain Sibley, Subadar Siu Singh and Jemadar Shamsher Khan 
were killed and the detachment systained a loss of 121 killed, 134 
wounded, and 3 missing. These disasters had a most depressing 
effect on General Marley; considering his force insufficient, he 
hesitated to advance into the hills, and remained entirely in- 
active throughout January, notwithstanding the arrival of reinforce- 
ments comprising His Majesty's 14th and 17th Foot. At length, 
on the roth of February, without giving notice or making any arrange- 
ments for the conduct of hjs duties, he departed suddenly from the 
camp; Colonel G. Dick assumed temporary charge of the Division, 
and shortly after Major-General George Wood was sent up from 
Calcutta to take command. On the day before the arrival of that 
Officer (19th February) a small but brilliant success was gained 
through the energy of Lieutenant Pickersgill, who, having lured a 
body of 500 Gurkhas from the cover of the forest, charged them with 
a troop of Gardner’s Horse under Lieutenant Hearsey, and entirely dis- 
persed them with a loss of over 100 killed. General Wood followed 
the same course of procrastination as his predecessor, and declaring 


that the fever season was too near for operations to be possible in|. 


March, he contented himself with making a demonstration on the 
frontier and the season closed without his seeing an enemy. | 

Thus, of the four operations included in the plan of the campaign, 
three had proved lamentable failures, which not only frustrated the 
intentions of the Government, but also to a considerable extent 
lowered the English name and prestige throughout India. 


124 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Conquest 
Kumaon. 


Negociations. 


8:6. 


Meanwhile an expedition into the province of Kumaon, which had 
been planned by the Governor-General, Lord Moira, as a diversion, had 
been attended with great success, This expedition was divided into 
two columns, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Gardner and Major 
Hearsey,—the troops with both being irregular Rohilla levies. 
Operations were commenced in February, 1815, and were at first 
successful on both sides of the province, Colonel Gardner penetrat- 
ing as far as Almora, and Major Hearsey to Champawat. Here, how- 
ever, the latter was defeated and himself wounded and taken prisoner ; 
but the arrival, under Colonel Jasper Nicolls, of a reinforcement of 
2,500 men, amongst which were the rst-4th and the and-sth Native 
Infantry and a battalion of Light Infantry, soon effected a favourable 
change, The Gurkhas were defeated at Sitauli, and Almora in- 
vested. Some further fighting followed, ending in the capitulation 
of the Gurkha commandant. The place surrendered, and a con- 
vention was signed on the 37th of April, which delivered up the 
whole province with its fortified places tothe British. The total 
loss of the regular troops during the operations round Almora 
amounted to one officer (Lieutenant Tapley, 1-27th Native Infantry 
serving with the Light Battalion), and 31 men killed, and 3 officers 
and 133 men wounded. Colonel Gardner’s irregulars lost 81 men 
killed and wounded. 


The fall of Almora and of Malaun induced the Nepalese Govern- 
ment to seek to re-establish friendly relations with the British. 
Negociations were begun, and a treaty was drafted, but many months 
were spent in the discussion of its terms, and at length, in Decem- 
ber, 1815, it was ascertained that the government at Khatmandu 
refused to ratify it. 

General Ochterlony, who had been gazetted a Knight Comman- 
der of the Order of the Bath and created a Baronet for his successes 
against Malaun, was ordered to take the field once more, and a 
force of nearly 17,000 men was placed at his disposal for the pur- 
pose of bringing the war to a favourable conclusion. This was 
arranged in three columns, as follow :— , 

Riaunt Cotumn :<— First Brigade, under Colonel W. Kelly, H. M.’s 24th Foot, 

ordered to enter Nepal by Hariharpur— 

Troops:—His Majesty's 24th Foot; 1st Battalion, 18th Native lafantry ; 
right wing, 1st Battalion, and left wing, 2nd Battalion, 21st Native Infan- 
try ; the Champaran Light Infantry. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


125 


Lart Cotumn :—Second Brigade, under Lieutenant-Colonel C. Nicol, H. M.’s 
66th Foot, ordered to penetrate by Ramnagar— 


Troops :— His Majesty’s 66th Foot; the sth and 8th Grenadier Battalions; the 
st Battalion 8th and the 2nd Battalion :8th Native Infantry. 
Centre Cotumn :—Under Sir David Ochterieny, to advance by the main 
entrance to Nepal through the Bichukoh or Chiriaghati Pass,— 
grad Brigade,—under Lieutenant-Colonel F. M. Miller, 87th Foot,— 
Troops :—His Majesty’s 87th Foot; and the 2nd Battalions of the 12th, 
22nd and 2sth Native Infantry. 


gth Brigade,—under Lieutenant-Colone! J. Burnett, 8th Native Infantry,— 
Troops :—The 2nd Battalions of the qth, 8th, 9th, and «sth, and part of 
the 1st-goth Native Infantry. 
Details of artillery, pioneers and irregular horse with each brigade. 

Sir David Ochterlony took the field early in February, 1816. To 
oppose the main advance over the Chiriaghati pass the Gurkhas had 
erected three stockades in the hills, the last of which was deemed 
impregnable, and had left the route through the forests of the Terai 
unprotected. The first of the stockades having been reconnoitred and 
found quite unassailable, an advance was attempted, on the 14th of 
February, by Ochterlony and the 3rd Brigade, through an intricate 
and difficult pass over the hills discovered by Lieutenant Pickersgill of 
the Quarter-master General’s Department, by which it was hoped that 
the main position of the Chiriaghati pass would be turned. The 
experiment, which was an extremely dangerous one and in which 
any contrelemps would have occasioned a serious disaster, was for- 
tunately quite successful; and the 4th Brigade, advancing on 
the 17th, found that the enemy had been obliged to retire owing 
to their rear being threatened, and the pass was occupied without 
opposition. On the 27th, General Ochterlony moved against Mak- 


Action at 


wanpur, and encamped about two miles from the fortified heights of | Makwanper. 


that place. On the following day the post of Sekhar Khatri, which 
covered the left of the camp, was attacked in force by the Gurkhas: 
the place was gallantly defended by the small detachment there, con- 
sisting of forty men of the 87th Foot and three companies of the 2- 
25th Native Infantry, until reinforcements arrived, when the Gurkhas 
were repulsed with a loss, according to their own subsequent 
account, of over 800 men. Besides the 2-asth, the 2-1ath was 
prominently engaged on this occasion, and the 2-8th, under Major 
Nation, distinguished itself by a bayonet charge at the close of the 
action. The British casualties were one officer. (Lieutenant Tirrell, 


1-20th Native Infantry, attached to the 3-25th), one ‘native officer! . 


126 


Submission of 
the Gurkhas, 


Formation of 
Gurkha 
battalions. | 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


(Subadar Shaikh Danish, 2-25th), and 45 men killed, one officer and 
176 men wounded, and 2 men missing. 

Meanwhile Colonel Nicol, with the 2nd Brigade, advanced into 
Nepal over the Bikna Thori pass, without experiencing any opposi- 
tion, and joined the head-quarters of the army at Makwanpur on the 
1st of March. 

The 1st Brigade, under Colonel Kelly, succeeded in ascending the 
mountains south of the fort of Hariharpur by an undefended route, 
and on the 1st of March seized an important point about eight 
hundred yards from that fort, which the Gurkhas had neglected to 
occupy. The enemy, seeing the advantage which they had allowed 
their opponents to gain, immediately made a desperate attempt to 
re-take the position, but after five hours’ incessant musketry firing, 
during which the nature of the ground prevented the contending forces 
from coming to close quarters, they were driven back with consider- 
able loss, our own amounting to 8 killed and 51 (including 5 officers) 
wounded. So disheartened were the Gurkhas at this repulse that 
they evacuated Hariharpur three days afterwards. 

The intelligence of these reverses strengthened the hands of those 
at Khatmandu who desired peace; hostilities were immediately 
suspended, negotiations were resumed, and, a treaty having been 
concluded by which Nepal was compelled to make still greater 
cession of territory than had been originally demanded, the British 
forces were withdrawn before the end of March. 

For these campaigns a silver medal was bestowed on all officers, 
British and Native, who had served within the hills of Nepal, and on 
such non-commissioned officers and sepoys as were recommended 
by their commanding officers for conspicuous zeal or gallantry. 

The Nepal War, noticeable as it was for the experience which it | 
furnished to the Bengal Army of severe mountain fighting, and for its 
bitter lessons of caution, which had never been required against the 
semi-disciplined hordes of the Mahrattas or Mysore, was also re- 
markable as having given to the army the first three of those batta- 
lions of Gurkhas which have since come to be regarded as the flower 
of the Indian infantry. It has already been noticed that on the fall 
of Malaun in 1815 numbers of Gurkhas entered the British service 
and were formed into three battalions. These were the rst and and 


| Nasseri Battalions, formed at Subathu by Lieutenants Ross and 


MacHarg, respectively (G. G. O., 24th April, 1815), and the Sirmoor 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


127 


Battalion, formed at Nahan by Lieutenant Young. A fourth corps 
was at the same time formed in Kumaon under the same General 
Order, and was called the Kumaon Battalion. Of the above corps 
the rst Nasseri, Sirmoor and Kumaon Battalions are now the 1st Bat- 
talions of the 1st, and, and 3rd Gurkha Regiments. The and Nasseri 
Battalion was disbanded in 1829. 

The speedy conclusion of the second Nepal campaign gave the 
Indian Government an opportunity of lightening the strain on their 
reduced exchequer by some much-needed economies. By G.O.C.C., 
toth April, 1816, considerable reductions were made in the strength of 
the Bengal Army, and almost all the local corps were disbanded. 
Nor did anything occur in this year demanding the services of the 
army, except a riot at Benares, which was promptly quelled by the 
2-13th and some irregular cavalry, and a disturbance in the 
Aligarh district, headed by one Dyaram, the Taluqdar of Hathras. 
This man, whose aggressions in the district had been long continued, 
had acquired sufficient influence to be able to collect a considerable 
force, while his fort and town were thoroughly prepared for defence. 
A strong division was therefore sent against him, in February, 1817, 
under Major-General Marshall, comprising His Majesty's 8th and 24th 
Light Dragoons, the 3rd and 7th Native Cavalry, the 1st (Roberts’), 
and 2nd Rohilla Horse, His Majesty’s 14th and 87th Foot, the rst 
Battalions of the 25th and 29th, and the and Battalions of the rst, 
11th, rath, and rsth Native Infantry, the 2nd Grenadier Battalion, 
and a train of some 100 pieces of artillery, with which was a rocket- 
troop. Hathras was invested on the 12th of February ; the town was 
evacuated on the 23rd, but the fort held out until the and of March, 
when a shell exploded the magazine. Dyaram, now finding further 
resistance impossible, cut his way through the British lines at mid- 
night with a small party of followers clad in chain mail, and 
escaped. The fort was taken and dismantled. 

Shortly after this (April, 1816) a serious outbreak took place at 
Bareilly. Beginning with a tumult about the imposition of a police tax, 
it soon swelled into an insurrection of a semi-religious character, and 
culminated in an attack by several thousand armed fanatics on the 
British troops stationed at the place,—the and Rohilla Horse and 
detachments of the 2-27th Native Infantry and the Bareilly Provincial 
Battalion ; and it was only after a severe contest (in which the troops 


sustained a loss of 2s killed and 62 wounded) that the insurgents were | 


atures 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


aa ee 


The Mabratts 
War. 


beaten off and defeated. The arrival of the 1-13th Native Infantry 
(which had made forced marches from Moradabad) put an entire end 
to the outbreak. 

About the same time a rising took place in the province of Cuttack, 
which at one time assumed serious proportions. It was headed by a 
bold and active leader in the district of Khurda, named Jagbandhu, 
who repulsed the detachment sent against him (Ganjpura, and April, 
1816) and killed its commanding officer, Lieutenant Thomas Faris, 
1-18th Native Infantry. Emboldened by this success, Jagbandhu ad- 
vanced, seized the town of Jagarnath, and compelled the small garri- 
son to retreat with the Collector of the district to Cuttack. Captain 
LeFevre now marched against the insurgents with the greater part of 
the 1-18th Native Infantry, but Sir Gabrie! Martindell had to be sent 
into the province with a considerable force before tranquillity was 
completely restored. 

In this place it might also be mentioned that, in 1818, the Bhattis 
of Hariana broke out into insurrection, seized the town of Fatehabad, 
and defeated a small detachment sent to recover the place. It 
became necessary to send a considerable force against them, and 
accordingly, in September 1818, Colonel Arnold entered their 
country, and in the course of a few weeks restored order. The force 
employed on this service included a troop of horse artillery, the 
rocket-troop, the 1st Native Cavalry, a detachment of the 1st Local 
Horse, the 3rd Local Horse, Casement’s Horse, the Dromedary 
Corps, the 2-!3th, 1-17th, 2-26th, and 2-2gth Native Infantry, and 
two battalions of Begum Samru’s troops. 

Meanwhile the intrigues and disturbances amongst the Mehratta 
princes and the consequent disorganisation of Central India, which 
was increased by the unrestrained violence of the bands of marau- 
ders known as Pindaris, had induced the Marquis of Hastings (to 
which rank and title the Earl of Moira had been raised) at the close 
of 1816 to make effective military arrangements, by which he intended, 
after the rainy season of the following year, not only to finally sup- 
press the predatory raids of these freebooters, but also to enforce 
British authority over the Mahratta powers, and even, if need be, to 
enter on a final struggle with them for the possession of Central India. 
The war thus begun effected one of the greatest revolutions that 
modern India has witnessed; not only was the supremacy of the 


‘Mahrattas crippled, but an irretrievable blow was struck at their: con- 


a 


Sy ch ck ee cant, sagem a 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


i 
-_ 


federacy, which was reduced to such a state of weakness that it could 
regain no vigour from reunion, and with the deposition of its titular 
chief it lost the one link which had held it eer and became 
disunited for ever. 

The British forces, which were prepared for war during the first 
half of 1817, amounted to 87,951, and including native irregulars and 
contingents, formed the largest British army which had ever been 
put into the fieldin India. The forces of the Mahrattas and Pindaris 
were estimated at two hundred and seventeen thousand. The Grand 
Army of Bengal, under the Marquis of Hastings, was in four prin- 
cipal divisions :—~ 

The Centve Division assembled at Cawnpore, and was joined 
there by Lord Hastings in September. It was commanded by Major. 
General Brown, and consisted of His Majesty’s a4th Light Dragoons, 
the 3rd and 7th Native Cavalry and the Body-Guard, His Majesty’s 
87th Foot, and of Native Infantry, the 1st Battalions of the 8th, 24th, 
and 29th, and the and Battalions of the rst, rith, 13th, and asth, 
and a flank battalion; also detachments of horse arid foot artillery, 
and 54 guns, 

The Right Division, formed at Agra under Major-General R. S. 
Donkin, included His Majesty’s 8th Light Dragoons, the rst Native 
Cavalry, Gardner’s Horse, and some native contingents, His Maj- 
esty’s 14th Foot, the 1st Battalions of the 35th and 27th and the and 
of the 12th Native Infantry, with 18 guns. 

The Left Division, commanded by Major-General D. Marshall, at 
Kalinjar in Bundelkhand, consisted of the 4th Native Cavalry, the 
and and 3rd Rohilla Horse, and the rst Battalions of the 1st, 7th, 14th 
and 26th, and the and of the 28th, with 24 guns. 

The Reserve Division, under Sir David Ochterlony, was composed 
of the and Native Cavalry, two corps of Skinner’s Horse, His 
Majesty’s 67th Foot, the rst Battalions of the 6th and 28th and and 
Battalions of the sth, 7th and roth, and 22 guns; besides consider- 
able numbers of contingent horse, and a detachment of the Sirmoor 
Battalion. 

There were besides two smaller forces at Mireapur and on the 
frontiers of South Bihar, for the protection of the British frontier in 
the south-west. 

The strength of these forces amounted to about 43,000 men, 
K 


129 


130 


Operations 
oon 
Pindaris, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


The Army of the Deccan was under the command of Lieutenant- 
General Sir Thomas Hislop, Commander-in-Chief of Madras, and 
was formed in seven divisions. 

Hostilities with the Mahrattas commenced at Poona early in Nov- 
ember, 1817, at which time Lord Hastiags, with his Right and Centre 
Divisions in positions to threaten the safety of Gwalior, was engaged in 
imposing on Sindhiaa treaty by which the latter bound himself to assist 
the British against the Pindaris and all other bodies of freebooters. 
This treaty was concluded on November the 6th. Immediately after- 
wards the army of the Commander-in-Chief was attacked and rendered 
for the momentincapable of active measures by a violent outbreak of 
cholera: this is supposed to have been the first occasion on which the 
disease had been encountered in an epidemic form, and it spread 
terror amongst all ranks of the army. At length after the camp had 
been moved several short marches on to higher and more healthy 
ground, the disease disappeared, having in one week destroyed 764 
fighting men and 8,000 followers. 

Meanwhile the movements of the Army of the Deccan had driven 
the Pindaris from their haunts on the Nerbadda : two of their principal 
leaders, Karim Khan and Wasil Muhammad, flying from the British 
columns, marched towards Gwalior in the expectation of finding 
there shelter and aid. Buta forward movement of a detachment of 
the Centre Division intercepted their communications with Gwalior 
and compelled them to turn off towards the north-west. Thither 
they were closely followed by Major-General Marshall with the Left 
Division of the Grand Army, who came up with their rear-guard at 
Bichi-tal, in Kotah, west of the Nimghat, on December the 14th. The 
cavalry under Colonel Newberry (24th Light Dragoons) charged the 
enemy, who broke immediately, and the pursuit was continued 
as far as the Parbati river. 

At the same time Major-General] Donkin, with the Right Division 
of the army, having advanced from the Chambal, heard that the 
Pindaris, flying from the Left Division in a north-westerly direction, 
were within a few miles of him. Taking a light division with him, he 
came up with Karim Khan at Kalana on the Western Sindh River, 
and the enemy on his appearance immediately fled in all directions, 
leaving a quantity of property in his hands. A large party was 
attacked and defeated by Gardner’s Horse, but the main body, finding 
their advance towards the north-west frustrated, made good’their retreat 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 

between the Parbati and the Sindh to Shergarh. Here, however, they 
came across a division of the Army of the Deccan, which circumstance 
again obliged them to hasten their retreat and change their course 
towards the south-west. Their nuthbers were reduced to little more 
than 2,000, while several smaller parties were scattered about the 
country, one of which was met and annihilated by Captain Roberts, 
with the rst Rohilla Cavalry, at Taraghat. Meanwhile the Pindari 
leader, Chitu, who had taken refuge some twenty-five miles west of 
Kotah, was driven thence by Major-General Donkin and forced to fly 
to the thickets near Komalner, in Meywar. 

While the Grand Army had thus been occupied in pursuing the 
bands of Pindaris, affairs had for a moment takena serious turn for 


Affairs at 
Nagpur. 


the British in Nagpur. Here the treachery or weakness of the Rajah, | 


Apa Sahib, allowed an attack to be made on the British Residency on 
the 26th of November by a force of 3,000 Arab mercenaries in his 
employ. The British troops then at Nagpur consisted of two battalions 
of Madras sepoys, a few troopers of the Madras Body-Guard, three 
troops of the 6th Bengal Native Cavalry, and two companies of Bengal 
sepoys composing the Resident's Escort. These took up a position 
on the Sitabaldi hill, standing close to the Residency, and for nearly 
eighteen hours sustained, with varying fortune, the desperate attacks 
of the Arabs: at last about noon on the 27th, at a most critical mo- 
ment, the fortunes of the day were saved by a gallant charge of the 
cavalry under Captain Fitzgerald. As a reward for their services on 
this occasion, the 6th Bengal Native Cavalry received permission (20th 
February, 1819) to bear on their standards the words ‘ SzxtTaBuLprg, 
27th November, 1817,” in commemoration of “‘ the brilliant and deci- 
sive charge made on that day by three troops of the regiment, headed 
by Captain Fitzgerald”; and Subadar Bhagwan Singh received, as a 
reward for conspicuous zallantry,a gold medal, 300 dighas of land, 
and a pension of Riooa month, The casualties of the Bengal cav- 
alry were 23 killed, and 35 (including three British officers) wounded. 
On the agth reinforcements arrived, consisting of three more troops of 
the 6th Bengal Native Cavalry and the 1-2and Bengal Native Infantry, 
while a fortnight later the whole of Brigadier-General Doveton’s 
division of the Army of the Deccan reached Nagpur. When intelli- 
gence of the state of affairs at Nagpor reached Lord Hastings, the divi- 
‘Sion at Mirzapur under Brigadier-General Hardyman, consisting of 
the 8th Bengal Native Cavalry, His Majesty's 17th Foot, and the 2-8th 


131 


132 


ne eee eee 


Renewed 
movements 
against the 
Pindaris, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Bengal Native Infantry, was ordered to make a forward movement to 


,the Nerbadda. This force, having advanced as far as Jubbulpore, was 


opposed by the Subahdar of that place at the head of 3,000 
troops. The enemy were, however, quickly dispersed (19th Decem- 
ber, 1817) and suffered severely in their flight, while the town surren- 
dered on the same day, and Hardyman established his head-quarters 
there, having lost in the action no more than two men killed, and 
three British officers, one native afficer, and six men wounded. 

In the meantime, negotiations with Apa Sahib had led to no definite 
result, and arrangements were accordingly made by Brigadier-General 
Doveton for commencing hostilities against Nagpur. The Mahratta 
army was attacked at noon on the 16th of December, and by half 
past 1 the enemy were dispersed, and their camp and a great 
quantity of artillery captured.* The Arabs in the service of the Rajah 
now threw themselves into the citadel of Nagpur, and defended them- 
selves there for five days, until, having repulsed a general assault of 
the British, in which the latter lost 301 killed and wounded, they 
secured for themselves favourable terms and capitulated. 

The defeat of the Rajah of Nagpur and the success of the subse- 
quent operations of the army of the Deccan against Holkar left the 
British Government free to prosecute the pursuit of the scattered 
Pindaris and to complete their annihilation, which had been the prin- 
cipal object of the campaign. At this time Major-General Donkin 
was at Ghaintaghat on the Chambal, and Major-General Brown was 
detached from the Grand Army with a detachment consisting of the 
grd and 4th Bengal Native Cavalry, the Dromedary Corps, some 
irregular horse, and the 1-18th Bengal Native Infantry. This force 
advanced to Suner, arriving there on the sth of January, 1818. The 
Pindaris meanwhile, under Karim Khan and Wasi] Muhammad, who 
had fought at the battle of Mahidpur, had been compelled after that 
defeat to retire westward towards Jawad. That place was accordingly 
the centre towards which the several British detachments moved, 
Chitu now joined the other Pindari leaders, and throughout the month 
of January their forces were perpetually hunted backwards and for- 
wards until the main body was finally defeated and destroyed at Kotri 
by a detachment from the force of Colonel J. W. Adams of the 
Bengal Army. Chita escaped and afterwards joined the Peshwa’s 
routed army in the Deccan; the other leaders surrendered to the 


® This engagement wascalled the battle of Sukandarra by the Bengal sepoys,—P. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


133 


British. Before this event Jaswant Rao Bhao, the Jagirdar of Jawad, 
had been attacked by Major-General Brown on account of his con- 
duct in aiding the Pindaris ; Jawad was carried by storm (agth Jan- 
uary), the British force losing in the attack one officer and 37 men 
killed and wounded. The neighbouring fortress of Komalner sur- 
rendered soon afterwards. 

This attainment of the great objects of the policy of Lord Hastings 
was followed soon after by the overthrow at Ashta of the Peshwa 
Baji Rao, the once formidable head of the Mahratta confederacy. 
The Governor-General, therefore, deemed a longer maintenance in 
the field of his great army unnecessary, and in February, 1818, orders 
were issued for the return to cantonments of the larger portion of 


the Bengal forces. One brigade of the Right Division remained some | #8 


time longer to assist in restoring order in the territories of Holkar, 
after which it joined the Reserve Division under Sir David Ochterlony 
in Rajputana, while Brigadier-General Hardyman® had not yet left 
the Nerbadda country. From the Left Division a strong force, aug- 
mented by several corps from the centre, remained in the field under 
Major-General Marshall for operations in Nagpur and the upper 
Nerbadda, and generally for the settlement of districts relinquished 
by the Rajah of Nagpur. This consisted of the 7th Bengal Native 
Cavalry, the 1st Battalions of the 14th and 26th, and 3nd Battalions of 
the 1st, 13th, and 28th Native Infantry, 3,000 of Sindhia’s Contingent, 
400 of Baddeley’s Rohilla Cavalry, and a heavy train of artillery. 
These troops were concentrated at Kimlasa, in Bundelkhand, on the 
sth of March, and were first employed against the Ailadars of Dha- 
moni and Mandala, who, inspired secretly to resistance by the Rajah 
of Nagpur, refused to surrender those fortresses. Dhamoni sur- 
rendered to the troops without a struggle, but at Mandala, the town 
had to be carried by assault (26th April) before the garrison of 
the fort would come to terms: the loss on our side was three killed 
and fourteen wounded. Major-General Marshallt being now recalled 
to Cawnpore, Brigadier-General Watson} succeeded to the com- 
ana Ee ee eee 


e ca Frederick Hardyman, c.8., died on the 28th November, 

| VermEe 

+ Lieutenant-General Sir Dyson Marshall, X.c.5., died at Cawnpore on the 
20th July, 1823.—P. . 

| The late General Sir James Watson, &.C.8., Colonel of the 14th Foot. For 
a short time (during the poporny absence. of. Loed illiam Bentinck) he was 
acting Commander-in-Chief ia Ben He died on the 12th August, 1362, in the 
ytst year ol his age and the 81st o his service.—P. 


The Grand 
Army brokes 


up. January 
38, 


134 


Operations 
against the 
adherents of 
ree Sahib, 
1818-z9, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


mand ; and the attention of this officer had at once to be given to the 


' hostile “attitude of Apa Sahib of Nagpur, who, having been foiled in 
‘his plan of joining the army of the Peshwa, had been deposed and 
despatched under escort to Allahabad, but, having managed to escape 
from the escort of Bengal troops who had him in charge, had now 
taken refuge with the Gonds in the Mahadeo hills (May, 1818), 
whom he shortly stirred up into insurrection. 

In the meantime the Peshwa had been hotly pursued hither and 
' thither after the action at Ashta. Eventually, on the 16th April, he 
| was surprised by Colonel Adams at Seoni, in Berar, totally defeated, 
and his army competely dispersed. Hopeless of continuing the 
contest, Baji Rao made overtures to Sir John Malcolm,® and early in 
June he surrendered. He was ora as a political prisoner to 
Bithur, near Cawnpore. 

In the month of May, Brigadier- General Adams took the strong 
| fortress of Chanda by storm, with a loss of 13 killed and 55 wounded: 

! amongst the latter was Lieutenant Fell, Commanding the Pioneers. 

In the following month a detachment from Brigadier-General 
Pad force, reinforced by some details from that of Brigadier- 

General Adams, made an unsuccessful attempt on the fort of Satan- 
wari, the repulse costing us 11 killed (including Lieutenant Manson, 
Commanding the Pioneers) and 75 wounded. 

The flight of Apa Sahib, and his reception amongst the Gonds and 
rr wild tribes of the Vindhya and Sathpura mountains, led toa 
} 
| 


prolonged campaign in that part of the country. The unhealthiness 
of the season at first confined operations to desultory hostilities be- 
tween bands of the enemy and small detached outposts stationed 
in various places with the object of checking any extension of the 
rising in the Rajah’s favour. The first occurrence of importance was 
| disastrous for the British. A body of Arabs assembled at Mailgha, 
on the Tapti river, and seized the town of Maisdi; Captain Sparkes, 
with a company of the 2-10th Bengal Native Infantry, marched against 
them from Baitul; near Multai, immediately after crossing the Tapti, 
he encountered the enemy, who were in force (2oth July); his 
detachment was surrounded, but fought gallantly until their ammu- 
nition was exhausted, when the whole party was destroyed, except two 
| naicks and seventeen sepoys, of whom ten were wounded, those killed 


| iar) pineiginle Sir John Malcolm, G.c.B., Madras Army, died in London on 
the goth May, 1833.—P 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


135 


being Captain Sparkes, one subadar, one jemadar, 4 havildars, 3 
naicks, 82 sepoys and 7 followers. Reinforcements were immediately 
sent to Baitul, but even as they advanced another detachment of thirty 
‘of the 2-10th Bengal Native Infantry was surprised and destroyed, and 
Multai and several other towns were seized by the Gonds and Arabs. 
As soon as a sufficient force was assembled, active measures were 
adopted to subdue the enemy. The town of Multai was re-taken by 
Major Cumming, and the enemy, who evacuated the place, were 
pursued by Captain Newton, 2-1oth, with a squadron of the 7th Bengal 
Native Cavalry and some light infantry. They were overtaken near 
Harna on the 24th of August, and 170 of them killed. Another 
party was attacked at Burdai by Major Bowen, with a squadron of 
cavalry and 100 light infantry, and 300 of them killed, while Lieu- 
tenant Cruickshank, 1-24th, doing duty with the 2-roth Native In- 
_ fantry, with 180 infantry, 50 of the 7th Bengal Native Cavalry, and 80 
Rohilla Horse, destroyed a large band of the enemy at Junagarhi. At 
the end of September Captain Newton, with the 2-10th Bengal 
Native Infantry, one company of the 1-23rd, and a squadron of the 7th 
Bengal Native Cavalry, advanced into the hills from Baitul, and made 
reprisals on the Gonds for their participation in the attack on Captain 
Sparkes, With the commencement of 1819, a concerted plan of attack 
was commenced on the head-quarters of Apa Sahib. The ex-Rajah 
fled before the British advance, and being joined by the old Pindari 
chief, Chitu, made his way to the fortress of Asirgarh. The hsladar 
of that place gave a temporary asylum to Apa Sahib, but refused to 
admit Chitu, who, fleeing towards Malwa, was killed by a tiger in 
the jungles of the Vindhya hills. Apa Sahib only remained at Asirgarh 
a few days, when he again fled, disguised as a mendicant, and even- 
tually took refuge with Ranjit Singh in the Punjab, and later with the 
Rajah of Jodhpur, where he died. 

In July 1818, it may here be noticed, a detachment from the 
Reserve Division of the Grand Army, under the command of Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel W. A. Thompson, took the strong fort of Madhuraj- 
pura by storm, with trifling loss. The 1-27th and the 1-28th Bengal 
Native Infantry and a detachment of the Corps of Pioneers were 
employed on this service. 

Early in 1819, the reductiqn of Asirgarh was undertaken, the 
kiladar of which place had been guilty of open acts of hostility by 
his reception of Apa Sahib and by his firing on the British troope in 


Ca ot 
A 
March, 1819. 


136 


Minor 


operations. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


pursuit of the fugitive. The forces employed were under Brigadier- 
General Doveton® and Sir John Malcolm; with the former were a 
troop of horse artillery, the 6th, and a squadron of the 7th Bengal 
Native Cavalry, and two Madras Native cavalry regiments ; the rst and 
and Battalions of the 15th and the and of the 29th Bengal Native 
Infantry, five battalions of Madras Native Infantry, and some pioneers. 
Sir John Malcolm’s army was composed of Bombay and Madras 
troops, but wae joined later by the 2-1st and 2-13th Bengal Native 
Infantry, with some artillery, from Saugor. Operations began on the 
18th of March, on which day the pe/éahk was carried, and on the 30th 
the lower fort was abandoned by the garrison and occupied by the 
assailants. The bombardment of the main fort meanwhile proceeded 
with such success that the &:Jadar, despairing of the result, surren- 
dered unconditionally on the 7th of April. The loss of the besiegers 
in the three weeks’ operations amounted to one officer (Lieutenant- 
Colonel Fraser, Royal Scots) killed and ten wounded, and 46 men 
killed and 256 wounded : of these the Bengal troops lost 36 killed 
and 108 wounded, the greater part of whom belonged to the 2-15th 
and were killed or injured by the accidental blowing up of an 
expense magazine. 

The capture of Asirgarh brought to a close the operations of the 
war, the results of which were not only great territorial additions to the 
Brtitish possessions, but still greater accessions of political strength, 
and the fina] establishment of the pent influence of - British 
Government in India. 

For several years after the termination of the Mabratta-Pindari 
war, the Bengal Army enjoyed comparative rest. Nevertheless there 
occurred here and there local disturbances, which necessitated mili- 
tary action, and a few of these will now be mentioned. 

In March, 1820, a small detachment under Lieutenant Chitty, of 
the 1st Rohilla Horse, distinguished themselves in an engagement 
with a rebel leader, named Bhoja Singh, on the banks of the Chuka 
Nala, in Rohilkhand, completely dispersing the enemy with a loss on 
our side of one native officer killed and five men wounded. 

In February, 1831, Colonel Richards, with detachments of the 
Body-Guard, Cuttack Legion, and Ramgarh Battalion, was engaged for 
some weeks in suppressing an outbreak of the Larka Kols. 


td pielitmenaeh puke Sir John Doveton, G.C.8., Madras Army, died on the 


47th November, 1847.— 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


An unfortunate affair took place in 1821 in an attack on the forces 
of the rebel Maharao Kishor Singh, of Kotah, in Rajputana. In this, 
besides some native contingent troops, the 2-6th Native Infantry, two 
squadrons of the 4th Light Cavalry under the command of Major 
Ridge, and part of the sth Light Cavalry, were engaged. An attack 
on the Maharao’s forces was made at Mangrol on the rst October 
with the result that they were beaten with considerable loss, The 
success, however, was marred by the conduct of the 4th Light Cavalry, 
who, on being ordered to charge the enemy’s cavalry, suddenly reined 
up and left their officers unsupported, in consequence of which Lieu- 
tenants Reade and Clerk were killed, and Major Ridge severely 
wounded, In the course of the following year this affair was brought 
to the notice of Government, with the result that, by G. O. G. G. dated 
30th August,1822, three troops of the 4th Light Cavalry were dismissed 
the service for cowardice :® Havildar-Major Masnad Ali and Trumpet- 
Major Sheik Nadir Ali, however, are mentioned as being exempt 
from this disgrace, and were “‘ promoted for their gallantry in support 
of their commanding officer, and for their honest and fearless conduct 
before the Court of Enquiry.” , 7 

‘In February, 1822, a force under Major W. C. Faithful, consisting 
of detachments of the rst Light Cavalry, 2-4th and 2-9th Native 
Infantry, four 18-pounders, and four mortars, was engaged in Oudh 
against a refractory chief, named Kasim Ali Khan ; the fortified village 
of Bardgaon was bombarded on the oth February, and several other 
forts reduced. 

In March, 1833, it became necessary to despatch a force for the 
reduction of the, strong fort of Lamba, in Jodhpur territory. The 
force was under the command of Brigadier Knox, and consisted of 
the 3rd Light Cavalry, the 1-r8th Native Infantry, and the grena- 
diers and light infantry of the 1-25th and 3-29th Native Infantry, 
with detachments of artillery and pioneers. After some days spent 
in fruitless endeavours to induce the garrison to surrender, batteries 
were opened on the fort on the 17th March, and four hours’ firing 
produced such an effect that the enemy evacuated the place and fled. 

The preceding four years had not been productive of any very im- 


portant changes in, or additions to, the Army of Bengal. Several new 
® It is stated that the conduct of these men was dté not so much to cowardice, as. 


to dislike of their commanding officet,:- whom they wished to bring to disgrace. 
There is more than one instance on record in which this feeling has found expression 
in the same way.—P. 


137 


Changes in th 
Army, :83s, 


138 


The asad 
Gurk 
Rifles. 


The eth 
Benga! 
Infantry. 


The Sappers 
and Miners. 


Troops for 
Ceylon. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


local and irregular corps had been raised, amongst them especially the 
four Gurkha battalions already noticed : also in 1817 (G. O. G, G., 
16tb May), in consequence of the disturbances in Cuttack, an irregular 
force was raised in that province, Called the “Cuttack Legion”; this 
consisted originally of two troops of cavalry, with two small guns, 
and three companies of infantry. The cavalry was afterwards dis- 
banded, but the infantry still survives as the 42nd Bengal Infantry 
(Gurkha Rifles). A similar force was raised in Gorakhpur (gth 
February, 1818) consisting of a battalion of light infantry, with two 
troops of irregular cavalry attached, and to provide for contingencies 
throughout the Mahratta war, various levies were raised at Cawnpore, 
Fatehgarh, Muttra, and Dinapore, all of which were (oth and 1ath 
March, 1818) ordered to be completed to a strength of 1,000 men. 

These four battalions were, in 1823, brought into the regulararmy, 
and Major Fagan’s Fatehgarh levy, which then became the 1st Batta- 
lion of the 32nd, is now the oth Bengal Infantry. On the 19th 
of February, 1819, orders were issued for the raising of a corps 
of “Sappers or Miners” to be formed at Allahabad, and to be 
completed to a total of 816 (native ranks): they were commanded by 
Major Anburey, and two companies of the existing Pioneers were in- 
corporated in the corps. 

During the preparations for, and the course of, the Mahratta war, 
several bodies of cavalry previously in the services of various native 
chiefs were received into the Company's army: thus, besides the 
Rohilla Horse, raised during the Gurkha war, a corps modelled on the 
same lines was formed of horsemen formerly in the service of Dyaram, 
the Taluqdar of Hathras, and of some of the chiefs of Bundelkhand 
(25th May, 1817), and in the following year three corps of local horse 
were formed with men received from Amir Khan, whose troops also 
supplied the British with two battalions of local infantry, called the 
“Rampura Local Battalions” (G.O.C.C., 4th May, 1818). In 1819 
(G.O.C.C., 4th February) the strength of the regular cavalry was 
increased, each regiment being formed into eight troops of 92 men 
each. A month later, the great war being now practically over, all 
infantry regiments were augmented by 10 men per company, to 
enable a larger proportion of the old soldiers to visit their homes. 

In the autumn of 1818 (G.O.C.C., 14th July), a detachment 
of volunteers was called for and despatched to Ceylon to assist the 
local Government thete; it consisted of three battalions of infan- 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


139 


try and some native artillery; these troops remained in Ceylon 
some months, but do not appear to have taken part in any active 
operations; they returned to Calcutta late in 1819, when they were 
complimented in General Orders for their alacrity in volunteering, and 
for their good conduct while on service; a gratuity of one month’s 
pay and full batta was granted them, and they were allowed to 
select the corps of the line which they might wish to join. 


The period of peace which followed the Mahratta war enabled the 
Government to dispense with some of its more expensive auxiliary 
forces. Thus, in 1819 (G.O.C.C., 28th August), one regiment of 
Rohilla Horse, two of Rampura Local Cavalry, and one of Skinner’s 
Horse were disbanded, and the 3rd Rohilla Horse was transferred 
to the service of Oudh. No other changes occurred, however, until two 
years later, when (20th August, 1821) the Dromedary Corps was dis- 
banded, and the transport which had been kept up to war strength on 
the frontier was greatly reduced. 


After a further period of two years, the Government determined to 
bring to some uniform level the various and nondescript irregular 
regiments in the service of the Company: orders were issued for 
all local and provincial battalions of infantry and local horse to be 
placed on a fixed scale in as fener of their officers, non-commis- 
sioned officers, and men; while at the same time a detailed list was 
given of all these corps, showing their composition, numbers, and 
duties (G. O. C. C., 6th May, 1823). 

The local battalions of infantry, with the present names of those 
which now exist, are as follow:— 

The Ramgarh Local Battalion. 
Bhagalpur Hill Rangers. 
Dinajpur Local Battalion. 
Champaran Light Infantry. 
ist Naseeri (Gurkha) Battalion, now the :st Gurkha Rifles. 
and Nasseri (Guricha) Battalion. 
Sirmoor Battalion, now the and Gurkha Rifles. 
Rangpur Light Infantry, formerly the “Cuttack Legion,” now 
the 42nd Bengal Infantry. 
Gorakhpur Light Infantry. 
Rampura Local Battalion. 
Calcutta Native Militia, now the 18th Bengal Infantry. 
In Civil 4 


partment. 


Kumaon Battalion, now the 3rd Gurkha Rifles. 
Bencoolen Local Battalion. 
Mharwara Local Battalion. 


of frregular™ 


COrps, r8e3. 


140 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Four new 
Regiments 
raised, 2883. 


Interior 


economy, etc, 


Cavalry. 


The local horse, which, as the G.O.C.C. explains, being neither 
clothed nor armed by the State, take rank after the infantry, were :— 
ist (Skinner’s) Local Horse, now the 1st Bengal Cavalry. 


and (Gardner’s) si »» 2nd Bengal Cavalry. 

grd (Blair’s) ‘ formerly the 1st Rohilla Cavalry. 

4th (Baddeley’s) Local Horse, formerly Skinner’s 2nd Regiment, now the 3rd 
Bengal Cavalry. 

sth (Gough’s) ss (raised by G.O.C.C. of this date for service in 
Malwa). 


Besides the above, there were thirteen corps of provincial infantry, 
which were practically police levies. 

In June, 1823 (G. G. O. No. 65) orders were issued for the forma- 
tion of four new regiments of regular infantry, to be numbered 
from the 31st to the 34th. Of these the first two were formed from 
the infantry levies raised in 1817; the remainder were newly raised. 
The following detail of orders were issued on the subject :— 

1st Battalion, to be formed from Major Wood’s Benares 
gist Regimant| Levy. 
and Battalion, from Captain Watson’s Cawnpore Levy. 
tst Battalion, from the Mainpuri (originally the Fatehgarh) 
3and Regiment i Levy, Major Smith. 
2nd Battalion, from the Muttra Levy, Captain Gilman. 
33rd Regiment ae 1st Battalion, to be raised at Dinapore. 
ry) at Cawnpore. 
3ath Regiment, ae battalions to be raisedat Benares. 
Of these, the 1st of the 32nd is now the 9th Bengal Infantry ; and the 
1st of the 33rd still survives as the 10th Bengal Infantry.® 

Before proceeding to the extensive changes in the army which were 
executed in the following year, it will be well to notice the interior 
economy and equipment of the Bengal troops as they existed down 
to this date. In the cavalry the ever-recurring and difficult question 
of remounts is one which we find constantly noticed in the orders of 
the period. According to the earliest rules on the subject (Minutes of 
Council, 8th April, 1793), horses for cavalry remounts were bought 
by a commissariat agent, and passed into the ranks after approval 
by a committee of cavalry officers ; the standards at that time were, of 
age not under three years or over eight in times of peace, and in times of 
war aot under four or over nine years; of height not under fourteen 
hands and-a-half. This latter rule, however, was soon modified ; for 
in 1801 (2nd October) orders were issued that three years old of 14—1 


® The 2nd of the 32nd bore the native name of Harriat-ki-paltan, derived 
‘from the officer who first commanded it,—Lieutenant-Colonel J. S. Harriott.—v. 


! 
| 
| 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 14! 


might be received, and even horses of 14—1 and above three years old, 
if the Committee were satisfied that they were otherwise unexception- 
able. Asearly as 1794 a board was appointed for promoting the im- 
provement of country-breds ; but there is little record of the improve- 
ments effected, beyond the appointment of a secretary on R250 a 
month, with a further R250 for rent of an office for the board and a 
house for himself. Early in the century the Government Stud estab- 
lishments were started, notwithstanding which the supply of good- 
sized horses seems to have been much exceeded by the demand, so 
that in 1816 (18th September) we find the standard height of stud- 
breds and zemindars’ horses presented to the committee by officers of 
the stud reduced to fourteen hands. The purchase of remounts was 
now effected directly by a commissariat officer, who despatched the 
horses to regiments, where they were passed by a regimental com- 
mittee. From the Government Stud horses were assigned to regiments 
by lot. In September, 1816, an experiment was made in the use of 
geldings as troop horses in Bengal; orders were issued for the form- 
ation of one troop of such in each regiment, remounts for which 
were to be obtained from the Pusa stud. But after trial for three 
years and-a-half (G. O. C. C., rth March, 1820) “it having been 
proved to the satisfaction of the Commander-in-Chief that the general 
employment of geldings would tend to the great deterioration of 
the efficiency of the cavalry in India,” these troops were ordered to 
be broken up. , 

Definite orders were issued in September, 1818, regarding the 
standards of the regular Bengal Cavalry: one standard was allowed 
per squadron, the first being dark-blue, with the Royal Arms in the 
centre andthe Union in the upper corner; the second of crimson, 
with the Company’s arms; the third of the colour of the regimental 
facings, with the number of the regiment in the centre, 

In 1820 (23rd September) the system of dargérs in the irregular 
cavalry was abolished, but this order, which no doubt occasioned 
much dissatisfaction, was modified two months later, and native offi- 
cers of the first class were allowed to keep not more than three 
bargirs, those of the second class two, and inferior ranks one: a few 
years later the original system of numerous dargirs was reverted to. 

In the artillery branch an important addition was made to the 
Bengal Army by the institution, in 1817, of Native horse artillery: 
this was formed in the first place by the withdrawal from Native 


Artillery. 


142 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Infantry. 


Re-o 
tion tine 
Army, 


| cavalry regiments of their galloper guns, which, with the men of the 


various regiments whence they were detached, were formed into three 
troops of horse artillery; the arrangement thus made as a tentative 
measure was confirmed two years later, when (G. O. C. C., rst May, 
1819) the cavalry soldiers doing duty with these guns were ordered 
to return to their regiments, unless they might wish to remain 
permanently in their present service, in which case they were to take 
rank from their first employment with the horse-artillery troops in 1817. 

Some few changes are noticeable in the organisation of Bengal 
infantry during these years: of these the most important, in which 
too the cavalry was equally concerned, was the institution (28th Octo- 
ber, 1817) of the rank of Subadar-Major : definite rules for the selec- 
tion and the payment of these officers were published in March, 1818, 
and on the same date the appointment of Colour-Havildar was in- 
stituted in the non-commissioned ranks. On the re-organisation of 
the local corps, in 1823, regulations were published as to the rates of 
pay in those regiments, and also with regard to the nature of their 
equipment. From this we find that the local regiments were dressed 
like those of the line, except that they retained the old black leather 
belts and accoutrements in the place of buff. In 1818 the facings 
and lace of regiments were regulated, the colour of which seems to 
have previously varied a good deal in accordance with the taste and 
fancy of commanding officers. 

The date is now reached of the second great re-organisation of the 
Bengal Army : the system which had obtained for the last thirty years 
was swept away, and a new order brought into force which lasted un- 
changed until, after a further period of thirty years, destroyed by the 
events of the Indian Mutiny, it in tum gave place to the present 
organisation. 

On the 6th of May, 1824, a G.G.O. was issued, in accordance with 
instructions received from the Court of Directors, ordering promo- 
tions to be made to bring the strength of officers in all infantry regi- 
ments to the following scale :— 


2 Colonels. 2 Majors. | 20 Lieutenants. 
2 Lieutenant-Colonels. | to Captains. so Ensigns. 


(N.B.—The rank of Captain-Lieutenant had been abolished by G. O.C.C., dated 
oth January, 1819). 
In cavalry regiments the strength of officers was to be half the 
above. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 143 


—_—— 


This order further directed that “as soon as the above promotions 
are carried out, the infantry, European and Native, are to be divided |) ~~. 
into two regiments each, by the final separation of battalions,” and that 
officers were to be posted alternately to thetworegiments. The regi- 
ments so formed were then to be numbered in the order in which 
they were first raised. The following table shows the changes which 
were thus effected in the numbering of corps :-— 


New 


; | . Old number. suntier: 


ist Battalion and | istBattalion . -| 36th 
ist 2nd ,, ° 4th 18th { Ht i. ° -| 37th 
andj ona” wa tee © ORR 
ae ° 6th 1st ‘ ‘ -| 25th 
3rd and a » +} roth 2oth 2nd 2 goth 
Is . 7 , . . 
4th and - agrd aist snd eo b & 4s0 
1 il I ‘ «| 4gr 
Sthy ond 20th a2nd and . ate 4th 
1st 3 I ° «| 45 
6th 2nd = ° 18th agrd and z ‘ -| 46th 
of: mm faafs 2 | 
2 ” o> . ° 
1st . ‘ oth Ist ‘ : -| 49th 
8th —_ es 7 asth ane s ‘ ° oe 
1 , 1s ‘ . -| 51 
oth toed ~ 2 at 26th = -: ° ‘ or 
1st 14t 1 ’ ° -| 53 
roth 2nd a pe 27th _ ps ° ° aa 
tatoos r5t 1s . ° «| 55st 
ane ee Bile ste 
12th <! 9 a 29th as . : 7 
2nd 2nd_s,, ; -| 58th 
ant st ~ me ‘ ; — 
4th) ond” 3st} ond oT) gana 
ist | ; ist . | 63rd 
»§ tst 1st us ° -| 65 
16th) ond 33rd and - «| 66th 
17th ist» 34th ; i Ee Ee 7t 


- The re-introduction of single battalions and general re-organisation 
of 1824 closes another chapter in the history of the Bengal Army. 
Whether the past thirty years had seen as great an improvement in 
the quality as they had in the quantity of the Bengal troops, seems in 
the opinion of contemporary critics to have been doubtful. The 


144 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


—= ee ee 


double battalion system and with it regimental promotion of officers 
‘up to the rank of Major had been introduced in the hope of strength- 
ening the ties between British and Native ranks; but this object was 
defeated by the defects in the position of officers of Native corps: the 
command of one of these regiments was of less value from any point 
of view than staff appointments of a second class; it was attended 
with great anxiety and much drudgery, and carried but little influence 
or consideration ; under these circumstances it was not a post much 
sought after. A second point adverse to the efficiency of the Bengal 
Army was the small consideration paid to the Native commissioned 
ranks at this period; until the institution of the rank of Subadar- 
Major, a Native officer could not rise above the insignificant pay of 
R174 a month; when, in addition to this, it is remembered that 
the lower ranks were liable for most trivial offences to suffer corporal 
punishment, that even when a commission was gained a Native officer 
was exposed to the harshness of his British superiors, whose habits of 
gelf-restraint, as the court-martial records of the times prove, were 
but too little cultivated ; and that consideration for the position of Native 
officers as such was not much insisted on from British ranks, com- 
missioned, or non-commissioned; when all these points are considered, 
it is only to be wondered at that the Native army displayed as much 
devotion and zeal in times of emergency as it undoubtedly did. 

That the fact of the Native army being in an unsatisfactory condi- 
tion was just beginning to dawn on Anglo-Indians is proved by the 
commencement of that stream of newspaper and serial controversy 
on the subject, which twenty years later swelled into sucha torrent as 
to almost flood all the public journals of the time. Among numer- - 
ous letters and essays, some of whose arguments are proved by 
after-events to have been prejudiced and short-sighted, a carefully 
written article in the Asiatic Journal for May, 1821, contains much 
useful criticism of the sepoy army ofthat time. ‘‘ The defects of that 
army,” says the writer (a Madras officer), ‘‘are the paucity of British 
officers, the ignorance of the Native officers, and the, worthlessness 
of the material.” The latter he ascribes in Madras and Bombay to poor 
physique, in Bengal to the encumbrance of caste prejudices, which 
he declares are fostered by the British officers, who set a bad 
example of luxuriousness and often of inefficiency. The expression 
of such opinions as these was received with a torrent of abuse and 
sarcasm ; yet who will now be found to question their truth ? 


— ee ee ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


145 


| Chapter V.—(1824—1838.) 

" British India (Wlsen)—History of India (Marshman)—Madras Army (Wtlsen)—History of Bri- 
tish India (Yhernton)—Burmese War (Snodgrass)~E. 1. United Service journal—Bengsal 
Army Regulations, 1839.—G. G. O. and G, O. C. C.—Political and Military Events 
(Hough)—Burmese War (4. H. Wilson) —Political History of India—{ Malcolm), 

_ During a period of nearly thirty years, since 1794, the Eastern 
frontier of the British possessions in Bengal had been again and again 
disturbed by the incursions and aggressions of the Burmese. Seve- 
ral representations on this subject were made to Ava, but attempts to 
open negotiations served only to imbue that arrogant court with the 
idea that the unwillingness of the Indian Government to declare war 
was the result of fear ; the insolence of the Burmese increased year by 
year, until at the close of 1823 it became evident that a recourse to 
hostilities was the only remedy. The immediate cause of rupture 
was a Claim laid by the Burmese to the small island of Shahpuri at the 
mouth of the Naf river, which was occupied by a detachment of Bengal 
troops. Two Burmese armies invaded British territory with the avowed 
object of possessing themselves of Chittagong and the adjoining 
districts ; one of these advanced from Assam, the other from Manipur ; 
the former was attacked at Bikrampur on the 17th of January, 1824, 
by a small force under Major Newton, consisting of detachments of 
the 1-10th and 2-23d Bengal Native Infantry, and four companies of the 
Rangpur Light Infantry :® the enemy were driven from their stockade 
and routed, but the British force was too small to allow of a pro- 
tracted pursuit, and the Burmese soon rallied and effected a junction 
with the second army from Manipur. They now advanced along the 
right bank of the Surma river and stockaded themselves close to 
Bhadrapur, a small post held by Captain Johnston with a wing of 
the 1-10th, one company of the 2-23rd and a few of the Rangpur 
Light Infantry: from this position they were driven by Captain John- 
ston on the 13th February, and being followed by Lieutentant-Colonel 
Bowen, who commanded on the Sylhet frontier, one division retired 
into Assam and the other entrenched themselves at Dudhpatli. Here 


The first Bur~ 
mese War °) 
1604. 


Operations in 
Assam. 


they were attacked by the Bengal troops on the a1st February, but |. 


repulsed the latter with a loss of 21 killed and 135 wounded, in- 
cluding one officer (Lieutenant A. B, Armstrong, 1-10th Bengal 
Native Infantry) killed, and four others wounded, amongst whom 
were Lieutentant-Colonel Bowen and Captain Johnston. On the 


® Now the 42nd Bengal Infantry (Gurkba Rifles). 
L 


146 


oh 


Expedition to 
Rangooa. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


27th of February, Lieutenant-Colonel Innes arrived at Jatrapur with 
the 2-19th Bengal Native Infantry, and four guns, upon which the 
Burmese abandoned Dudhpatli and retired into Manipur. In June, - 
however, they again advanced into Cachar, and Colonel Innes 
attacked them at Talain ; but he was unsuccessful, and was obliged 
to retire to Jatrapur, and the setting in of the rains put a period to 
further operations for the time. Hostilities having thus commenced, 
the Indian Government turned their attention to the readiest method 
of bringing the war to a speedy and successful conclusion. The difli- 
culties presented by a march through the swamps and jungles of Mani- 
pur and Arakan were too great to allow an attack on that side to pro- 
mise favourably : it was therefore determined to send an expedition to 
Rangoon, whence it was believed that the Irrawaddy could be navi- 
gated in sailing vessels, and the capital reached speedily and without 
loss. 

The aversion of the Bengal sepoys to serve across the seas prevented 
any but a small detachment of them taking part in this expedition ; 
the force from Bengal consisted of His Majesty's 13th and 38th, two 
companies of artillery, and the 40th Bengal Native Infantry (late the 
2nd Battalion of the 2oth, or Marine Regiment). The remainder of 
the force was drawn from the Madras Presidency. Brigadier-General 
Sir Archibald Campbell, x.c.B., of the 38th Foot, was appointed to 
the command of the expedition, the troops composing which rendez- 
voused at Port Cornwallis in the Andamans in the early part of May 
1824. 

Rangoon was reached on the morning of the 11th of May, to the 
astonishment of the inhabitants, who never expected to be attacked 
in their own country; a broadside from the frigate accompanying the 
expedition silenced the feeble attempts of the few Burmese guns on 
shore, and the force, landing without opposition, found the town en- 
tirely deserted. This was the first blow to the hopes of the British, 
who were thus unable to procure boats in which to continue their 
advance up the Irrawaddy. Indeed, Sir Archibald Campbell found 
it sufficiently difficult to obtain supplies for his force where he was, 
and from this cause, and from the unfavourable season of the 
year in which these operations had been begun, the troops were sub- 
jected to great privations, and suffered greatly in health, large num- 
ber perishing from fever, dysentery, and other diseases incidental to 
the climate and locality, The Burmese to some extent confined 

, ( 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


147 


their hostilities to cutting off all supplies and to endeavouring to fire 
the British ships in the river, in which latter attempt, however, they 
were not successful; but large bodies of them not infrequently 
came and stockaded themselves within striking distance of our 
troops, and finding it impossible to advance up the river to attack 
. the capital, Sir Archibald Campbell lost no opportunity of attacking 
these bands, and many sharp engagements followed at Joazoung, 
Kemmendine, Kamarut, Dalla, Kyklu, and other places, in which 
our troops sustained congjderable losses; it is calculated that up to 
the end of November our casualities in the various engagements at 
Rangoon and in the vicinity amounted to not less than 100 killed and 
560 wounded, of whom a large proportion were officers. Small 
expeditions to more distant points were also sent, and Mergui, 
Martaban, and other places were captured. 

At length, in December, the enemy massed his troops for a 
vigorous attack on the invaders, and the British positions round the 
Shwe-Dagon Pagoda at Rangoon and at Kemmendine were completely 
hemmed in by stockades and entrenchments, held by 60,000 men, 
under Maha Bandula, the most celebrated of the Burmese generals. 
From the rst to the 4th the skirmishing was incessant. On the sth 
Sir Archibald Campbell delivered a vigorous attack on the enemy's 
left, forced their entrenchments, and drove them from the field, 
capturing the whole of their guns and military stores. But though 
thus defeated on his left, Bandula still continued the attack from 
his right, until the 7th, when Sir Archibald again attacked him and 
drove him finally from his works, and dispersed the remains of his 
vastarmy. In these operations the British loss amounted to 26 killed 
(including two officers) and 240 wounded (including eleven officers), 
On the 8th and oth the enemy were driven from Dalla with a loss 
on our side of 2 killed and 46 wounded, and on the rsth a large 
body, whom Bandula had rallied, and who had strongly entrenched 
themselves at Kokein, about five miles to the north of Rangoon, 
were vigorously attacked and driven from their position with heavy 
loss, our own being 18 killed (including three officers) and 115 
wounded (including 14 officers), Among the troops engaged at 
Rangoon and Kokein was a detachment of the Governor-General’s 
Body-Guard, which had artived from India a few days before. 


During this period but partial success attended the British arms | Operations on 


on the Eastern frontier, A force, commanded by Lieutenant- | Frontier, 


L323 


148 


Disaster at 
Rama. 


Conquest of 
Assan, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Colonel Macmorine, and consisting of seven companies of the 2-23rd 
Native Infantry, six companies of the Rangpur Light Infantry, the 
Dinajpur Local Infantry, a wing of the Champaran Light Infantry, 
six 6-pounder guns, and a small body of irregular horse, had been 
assembled at Goalpara, and moved forward from that place in March, 
1824, with the object of expelling the Burmese from Assam, but 
after defeating the enemy in several encounters, the want of supplies 
and the commencement of the rains compelled Lieutenant-Colonel 
Alfred Richards, who had succeeded to the command on Colonel 


Macmorine dying of cholera, to retire to Gauhati and defer further 


operations for a time. 

On the south-eastern frontier positive disaster was experienced. 
We had at Chittagong a force under Colonel Shapland, consisting 
of the left wing of the 2-13th (now become the 27th), five companies 
of the 2-20th (now become the 4oth), and the whole of the 1-23rd 
(now become the 45th), Bengal Native Infantry, the Chittagong 
Provincial Battalion, a newly raised Magh Levy, and some artillery, 
in all about 3,000 men; of these a detachment (three companies 
of the 40th, 100 men, and five of the 45th, 250 men, with portions 
of the Provincial Battalion and the Magh Levy, and two guns) 
was in the exposed outpost of Ramu, under the command of Captain 
Noton of the asth. Avery large Burmese force advanced from 
Arakan early in May and attacked Ramu, where the detachment 
was reduced, by the flight of the irregulars, to only 350 sepoys. 
Captain Noton held his ground until the morning of the 17th of May, 
when, his flank being turned, he was compelled to retreat. The 


result was one of those terrible disasters which have, from time 


to time, overtaken the British forces, and the cause of which has 


generally been, as in this case, too great confidence in being able to 


oppose large armies of uncivilised peoples with a mere handful of 
disciplined troops. Captains Noton, 45th, Trueman, 4oth, and 
Pringle, 18th (commanding the Magh Levy), Lieutenant Grigg, 45th, 
Ensign Bennett, 45th, Assistant-Surgeon Maysmor, Subadar Harak 
Singh, and Jemadar Shaik Manulla, goth, and Subadar Bachu Ram, 
45th Bengal Native Infantry, were killed; two more officers were 
wounded and 250 sepoys were killed, wounded, or taken prisoners. 
In Assam the retirement of the British to Gauhati during the rains 
had been the signal for a renewed advance on the part of the 
Burmans. At theend of the year, however, a force (the 46th and 57th 


ee ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Native Infantry and the Rangpur Light Infantry) moved against 
them under Lieutenant-Colonel Richards, which drove the Burmese 
before them and finally occupied Rangpur, the capital of Upper Assam, 
after a sharp encounter (29th January, 1825) in which we sustained 
a loss of two men killed and two officers and 49 men wounded. Of 
the officers wounded one was Lieutenant-Colonel Richards himself ; 
the other was Lieutenant James Brooke of the 18th Bengal Native 
Infantry, then an officer in the Bengal Commissariat Department, 
but more widely known in after years as the Rajah of Sarawak. 

The last months of 1824 witnessed the massing at Sylhet of a 
large force, of which the object was an invasion of Burma through 
Manipur, while a still larger army was prepared to march from 
Chittagong into Arakan and over the Arakan Yomas to the Bur- 
mese capital.. These expeditions, so contrary to the original plan 
of the campaign, were arranged with the concurrénce of the Com- 
mander-in-Chief, when the difficulties of the army at Rangoon made 
the success of the British force in that quarter a matter of grave 
doubt. In order to supply troops for all these expeditions, four flank 
battalions were formed in Bengal (G.G.O. No. 195 of 1824 and 
G.O.C.C., 12th July, 1824), for which twenty regiments contributed 
each a grenadier and a light company, and two light infantry and 
two grenadier battalions were thus formed of ten companies each : 
included in them were detachments from the 33rd and 43rd Bengal 
Native Infantry (now the 4th and 6th), which sent companies to the 1st 
Grenadier Battalion and the 1st Light Battalion; while in the and 
Battalions of each were companies from the sgth and 63rd (the 
present 8th and th). 

The Cachar force under Brigadier-General Shuldham was formed 
of the 7th, 14th, 39th, 44th, 45th, and 52nd Bengal Native Infantry, 
with two companies of artillery, four of pioneers, the Sylhet Local 
Battalion, the 3rd (Blair’s) Local Horse, and some native auxiliaries. 
No opposition was encountered from the enemy, but the difficulties of 
the route and the incessant rains proved more formidable than any 
human foe; after struggling on with extraordinary difficulty and by 
dint of the greatest exertions through February and March, 1835, it be- 
came evident that to reach Manipar through such a country, and with 
a fully equipped army, was an impossibility, and Brigadier-General 
Shuldham secontne relinquished the arom and retraced his 
steps. 


149 


150 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


pa 8h eg ts, ee 


Mutiny of the 
4 Beaaal 


ative 
Infantry. 


The preparations for the expedition into Arakan occasioned one 
of the most painful instances of mutiny in the records of the Bengal 
Army. Three regiments, the 26th, 47th, and 62nd, stationed at 
Barrackpore, received orders to march on active service; several 
causes were at work to make the men discontented and uneasy ; 
the recent changes in the army had sent a number of officers to 
regiments in which they were strangers to their men,® and this no 
doubt was an indirect cause of the atlitude of the sepoys on this 
occasion ; moreover, the service was a very unpopular one ; native 
superstition, ever too readily aroused, had endowed the Burmese with 
supernatural powers; while the nature of the country necessitated 
the use of bullock transport, which the sepoys had been ordered to 
procure at their own expense, at a time when the drain on Bengal for 
the supply of the Rangoon expedition had made those animals almost 
unprocarable ; finally, despite assurances to the contrary, an impres- 
sion prevailed amongst the men that they would be forced, against 
their will, to embark on shipboard. ‘ Unfortunately, there seems little 
doubt that no consideration was paid to the peculiarities of the native 
temperament; the first sign of discontent was met with harshness 


_|instead of attempts at re-assurance. The 47th Regiment was the 


rr 


first that was to march, and was ordered to parade on the rst of 
November; on this they broke into open mutiny and refused to 
fall in. On the following day the Commander-in-Chief proceeded 
to the spot, and at daybreak two British regiments, a detachment 
of horse artillery and a troop of the Body-Guard were paraded 
at right angles to the sepoy lines; the 47th formed in front of their 
lines, and were joined by about roo of the 62nd and 20 of the 


26th; they were ordered to ground their arms but refused compli-. 


ance. On this they were fired on by the artillery, and immediately 


| broke and fled; many were killed on the spot, a number more 
‘| were taken prisoners, of whom eleven were hanged and the rest 


sentenced to hard labour in chains: the number of the regiment 
was effaced from the Army List and the Native officers dismissed 


* This has generally been assigned as a prominent cause of the Barrackpore 
mutiny, and there was possibly something in it. But at the same time itis to be 
remembered that changes of officers such as those referred to were by no means 
unknown prior to the reorganisation of 1834. On the contrary, in the days of the 


double battalion regiments, the transfers of officers from one battalion to another 


in which they were strangers to the men were matters of every day occurrence. 
The reorganisation of 1824 Bractically put a stop to such transfers.—P. 


ee ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 51 


the service, although none of these openly took part with the 
mutineers (G, G. O. No. 335 of 1824). It is probable that these sen- 
tences were considered more severe than the occasion warranted |. 
both in India and at home; and the mutineers who remained in cus- 
tody were pardoned four months later (G.O.C.C., aand April, 1825). 

When finally formed, the expedition to Arakan was commanded 
by Brigadier-General Morrison,® and consisted of His Majesty’s 44th 
and 54th, the 26th, 4and, 49th and 6and Bengal Native Infantry, the 
1st and and Bengal Light Infantry Battalions, the roth and 16th 
Madras Native Infantry, a detachment of the and Local Horse 
(Gardner’s), with details of artillery and pioneers. The two 
Grenadier battalions joined the force towards the close of the service, 
and suffered terribly from sickness. The force commenced its 
march from Chittagong on the rst of January, 1825, and at the end 
of March arrived before the town of Arakan. Actions took place 
on the 26th and 27th on the Padha hills and at Mahati, and 
Arakan was attacked on the 29th, but although the troops behaved 
with perfect steadiness, they were unable to obtain a footing on 
the steep ascent on which the place stands, exposed as they were 
to a continuous fire from the enemy. On the evening of the 
31st the flank of the Burmese position was turned by the circuitous 
march of a detachment under Brigadier W. Richards, and on 
the rst of April the place was taken. Our losses in these ope- 
rations amounted to 30 killed and 213 wounded. It was now found 
to be too late in the season to make any further progress, especially 
as the passes over the Arakan mountains were quite unknown to 
the British. The whole of the monsoon season was passed at 
Arakan ; fever of a most destructive type spread to a terrible 
extent; nothing but a mere skeleton of the army remained fit for work ; 
and all thoughts of an advance against Amarapura had to be aban- 
doned. It was not until the end of 1825 that the remains of the 
army were withdrawn to Bengal. 

After remaining nine months at Rangoon, Sir Archibald Campbell 
commenced his march towards the capital of Burma on the 13th of 
February, 1835. The army was divided into three columns, of which 
the first was detached against Bassein, where it met with no resistance ; 
the second under the Commander-in-Chief advanced by land to- 


Advance from 
Rangoon, s8eg. 


-General J.W. Morrison was the officer who commanded in the 
iitant scion of Chrystier’s Point, in Canada, in November, 1813. He dicd on the 
15th February, 1826, a victim to the climate of Arakan.— P. 


152 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


wards Amarapura; the third under Brigadier-General Willoughby 
Cotton proceeded by water up the Irrawaddy, and reached Donabyu, 
the stronghold of the main Burmese army, on the 28th of February- 
This place had been fortified with all the science of which the Bur- 
mese were masters, and was of very considerable strength and extent : 
its garrison was a large one, though the common account, which 
reckons it at 12,000. is probably much exaggerated. The whole 
force with Brigadier-General Cotton did not exceed 600 men; with 
this he attempted an assault on the 7thof March, but, though suc- 
cessful against the outworks, he was repulsed with heavy loss (19 
killed and 110 wounded) in attacking the main position. On receiv- 
ing news of this reverse the Commander-in-Chief returned with his 
column and joined Brigadier-General Cotton. Donabyu was again 
attacked on the 1st of April, and was shelled throughout the day ; 
on the following morning the place was found to be evacuated, and it 
proved that this result had been brought about by the panic caused 
by the death of Maha Bandula, the Burmese General, who had 
been killed by a rocket. 

Immediately after the fall of Donabyu, Sir Archibald Campbell 
pushed forward to Prome, which place he occupied, without resist- 
ance, on the 25th April, but both sides were now desirous of peace ; 
the rains were approaching and the Indian Government saw a 
further period of costly inaction before their army, while the Burmese 
were alarmed at the defeats which had been sustained by their troops. 
Negotiations were commenced, but terms could not be arranged, 
and hostilities were renewed as soon as the rainy season had ter- 
minated. Inthe first engagement that took place (at Wah-tee-gaon on 
the 16th November) a brigade of Madras sepoys sustained a severe 
defeat, losing more than 200 officers and men. Encouraged by this 
success, the Burmese army advanced on Prome, but here they were 
defeated, with great loss, by Sir Archibald Campbell, on the rst, znd, 
and sth of December. Sir Archibald afterwards continued his 
movement towards the Burmese capital, and several engagements 
took place, until finally the whole Burmese army was totally 
defeated at Paghamyu,” on the goth of February 1826, and fled in 
confusion to Amarapura. Sir Archibald advanced rapidly towards 
the capital, and the king, finding the invaders at his gates, was 
forced to sue for peace, and a treaty was finally concluded at Yandabu 


® Now known as Pagan. a: 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 153 


on the 24th of February. The army broke up immediately and | Termination of 
returned to the coast, whence the Bengal division sailed to its own 
presidency. The flank battalions from Arakan had by this time 
returned to Dinapore, where they were broken up, and the men, after 
being allowed from six to eight months’ leave to their homes, 
rejoined their regiments (G.O.C.C., rsth November, 1825). 

Permission was given for the words ‘“‘ Ava,” “ ARRACAN,” and 
“Assam” to be borne on the colours of corps engaged, and a medal 
and six months’ batta were afterwards granted to the troops by 
G.G.O.No. 84 of 1826. 

The protracted operations and tardy success of the British forces | Disturbances 
in Burma were the cause of much disturbance in the newly subjugated a 
territories of India, where a strong belief prevailed that the rule of 
the English was approaching its fall. The first serious outbreak was 
in the Saharanpur District, where a freebooter, named Kowar Singh, 
collected a considerable force of Gujars and established himself in 
the mud fort of Kunjawa : here he was attacked by a detachment of 
350 of the Sirmoor Battalion and asmall body of horse under Captain 
Young. The Gurkhas stormed the fort and killed 153 of the enemy, 
the loss on our side being five men killed, and Captain Young 
(slightly) and the Hon’ble F. J. Shore of the Civil Service, who 
served as a volunteer, 4 Native officers, and 29 men wounded, of 
whom six died. In the Rohtak district several disturbances occurred, |: 
the most serious being headed by a marauder, named Suraj Mal. 
For the better protection of this part of the country, two new regi- 
ments of local horse were raised at Delhi and Bareilly, and a third at 
Hansi by Colonel James Skinner (G. O. Nos. 338 and 345 of 
1824). An unimportant attempt was made in Bundelkhand against 
the town and fort of Kalpi, but was frustrated by the garrison. 
In Central India serious disturbances occurred, especially in the 
Nerbadda valley, near Burhanpur; these were successfully quelled 
by a detachment of the Hyderabad Subsidiary Force and some of 
the Mandlesar Local Corps (raised in August, 1823) under Lieute- 
nant A. Lermit (12th Native Infantry). 

But the most marked defiance of British authority was at Bhurtpore, 
where Durjan Sal, a nephew of the late Rajah, usurped the throne and 
seized the person of the rightful prince, a boy about five years old. 
Sir David .Ochterlony, the Resident at Delhi, prepared to take 
prompt measures, to punish this outrage, but he was checked by the 


154 THE SERVICES OF THE fe 


Supreme Government (1 825), and the disappointment and mortifica- 
tion occasioned, not long after, the death of this distinguished 
veteran.* However, the ferment in Bhurtpore continued to increase, 
and at length (December sth, 1825) the Commander-in-Chief, Lord 
Combermere, advanced against the place with an army of 21,000 
men. This force was composed and arranged as follows :— 
ENGINEER Division,—under Brigadier T. Anburey, C.B..— 
15 Engineer officers. 
6 Companies of Sappers. 
2 Companies of Pioneers. 
ARTILLERY Division,—under Brigadier A. Macleod, C.B..— 
6 Troops of Horse Artillery. ! 
3 Light field batteries. 
8 Companies of Foot Artillery. 
(The siege ordnance consisted of 110 pieces.) 
CavaLry Division,—under Brigadier-General J. W. Sleigh, c.8.,— 
1st Brigade,—under Brigadier G. H. Murray, C.B.,— 
H. M.’s 16th Light Dragoons (Lancers). 


ee ee ee 


6th Light Cavalry. 
8th e 
goth 9 


and Brigade,—under Brigadier M. Childers— 
H. M.’s 11th Light Dragoons. 


3rd Light Cavalry. - 
4th 8 
toth ‘3 


Fiast INFANTRY DIVISION, —under Major-General T. Reynell, ¢.8.,-— 
1st Infantry Brigade, under Brigadier-General J. M’Combe,— 
H. M.’s 14th foot. 
a3rd and 63rd Native Infantry. 
ath Infantry Brigade, under Brigadier T. Whitehead,— 
32nd, 41st and 58th Native Infantry. 
5th Infantry Brigade, under Brigadier R. Patton, C.B..— 
6th, 18th, and 6oth Native Infantry. 
Seconp INFANTRY Diviston,—under Major-General J. Nicolls, ¢.B.,— 
and Infantry Brigade, under Brigadier G. M’Gregor,—afterwards under 
Brigadier-General W. T. Edwards,— 
H. M.’s soth Foot. 
11th and 31st Native Infantry. 
gra Infantry Brigade, under Brigadier-General J. W. Adams, C.B.,— 
33rd, 36th, and 37th Native Infantry. 
6th Infantry Brigade, under Brigadier-General W. T. Edwards,—after- 
wards under Brigadier C. S. Fagan,— 
sth, 21st, and 35th Native Infantry. 
In addition to the above troops, there were with the force Skin- 


ner’s Irregular Horse, (about a thousand strong) and two detach- 
® Sir David Ochterlony died at Meerut on the 14th July, 1825.—P. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 155 


ments of 200 men each from the 1st Nasseri Battalion and the 
Sirmoor Battalion. The rst Bengal European Regiment joined in 
January 1826, and was placed in the and Division. 

Operations were commenced by the despatch of a detachment to 
seize a jhil lying north-west of the town, whence in time of war water 
was carried by a canal into the ditches of the fortress, This duty was 
successfully accomplished (10th December), and the ditch continued 
dry throughout the siege. The army now encamped before the 
northern and eastern faces of the town, and batteries were constructed 
and opened fire on |the 24th of December. The fire of the guns, 
however, did not produce sufficient effect on the fortifications to make 
& practicable breach and recourse was had to mining, with such 
success, that by the 18th of January two practicable breaches had 
been made. On that day the assault was arranged to take place, and 
the attacking force was divided into four columns, with a reserve. 
The main right column was composed of eight companies of His 
Majesty's 14th Foot, five companies of the 41st Native Infantry, and 
the 6th, 23rd, and 6oth Native Infantry, with two companies of the 14th 
Foot, and the 18th and 32nd Native Infantry in reserve; in the left 
main column were His Majesty’s sgth Foot, ‘and the rsth, 21st, and 
31st Native Infantry. On the right of the first column was a division 
of two companies of the Bengal European Regiment, the 58th Native 
Infantry, and 100 Gurkhas of the 1st Nasseri Battalion ; an intermediate 
column was formed of two more companies of the Bengal European 
Regiment, the grenadier company of the 35th Native Infantry, the 
light com pany of the 37th, and 100 Gurkhas of the Sirmoor Battalion. 
The 36th and remaining companies of the 37th formed the reserve. 
The signal for the assault was the springing of a mine under the 
north-east cavalier, and as soon as the explosion took place the 
several storming parties advanced with the greatest steadiness. The 
assailants were encountered by a desperate resistance on the part 
of the garrison, but the latter were gradually forced to give way 
from point to point, until only the citadel held out, and that also 
surrendered in the afternoon. The loss of the garrison is said to have 
been 8,000. No complete return of the British loss during the oper- 
ations appears to have been prepared, but it is roughly estimated to 
have been about 180 killed, 780 wounded, and 20 missing. The 
casualties in the assault amounted to 103 killed, 466 wounded, and 
It missing ; three officers were killed, including Captain Brown of 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


the 31st Native Infantry, and 36 were wounded, including Brigadier- 
Generals M’Combe and Edwards (mortally) and Brigadier Patton. 
Lieutenant Tindall, of the Engineers, attached to the Sappers, was 
killed during the siege, and Lieutenant Candy, of the Bengal 
European Regiment, died of the wounds he received in the assault. 

During the siege the cavalry several times distinguished themselves 
in attacks on parties of the enemy's horse; one affair in particular 
is mentioned in G.O.C.C., 24th December, 1825, when Jemadar 
Sheik Ramzan Ali, of the 4th Light Cavalry, with only twenty men 
defended and saved a party of foragers from a large body of the 
enemy : for his conduct on this occasion he was promoted to the rank 
of Subadar on the spot, Here too, for the first time, the Gurkhas 
of the Nasseri and Sirmoor Battalions took a prominent part in the 
operations of a British army, and won enthusiastic praise on all sides 
for their courage, discipline, and good temper. 

The fall of Bhurtpore, so long considered impregnable, effectually 
restored tranquillity throughout the surrounding countries, and stilled 
the ferment which for some time past had disquieted India; while 
the relief which was experienced by the Government at the speedy 
and successful termination of what could not but be regarded as a 
hazardous enterprise, was plainly evinced in the highly complimentary. 
order issued to the army by the Governor-General. In this, besides 
five other corps and detachments which have ceased to exist, special 
praise is bestowed on the 3sst Native Infantry, the rst Local Horse 
(Skinner’s), and the Sirmoor Battalion: the Commander-in-Chief’s 
order, the day after the assault, refers also to the local horse, artillery, 
sappers and miners, and pioneers. All the cavalry and regular 
infantry present at the siege were authorised (G, O. 85 of 1826) to 
bear the name “ Buurtpore”’ on their colours and appointments ; 
but it was not until thirty-three years later that this honor was 
extended to the Sirmoor Battalion, and it was not sanctioned for the 
Nasseri Battalion (the 1st Gurkha Rifle Regiment) until 1874. 

Lord Combermere’s short and brilliant campaign was the last in 
which the Bengal Army was destined to engage for many years. 
Freed from the anxieties of hostility on their frontier or disaffection 
in their dependencies, the Indian Government turned their attention 
to lightening the drains on their impoverished exchequer, and the mi- 
litary operations of the next eleven years may be dismissed in a 
few words. These were, indeed, only necessitated by occasional 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


57 


demonstrations of turbulence and disaffection, none of which on this 
gide of India reached an extent of any importance. The first of these 
was a religious tumult in Lower Bengal in 1831, where a colony of 
fanatical Mahomedans of the Wahabi sect fell foul both of their Shia 
co-religionists and of the Hindu population, and having proclaimed a 
religious war marched through the country, plundering and devastat- 
ing on every side. They were pursued by the 11th and 48th Bengal 
Infantry, with a party of horse and two guns, and having been 
overtaken at Hooghly, were forced to betake themselves to the shelter 
of a stockade; thence, after an hour’s fighting, they were dislodged 
and finally dispersed, but not without the loss of seventeen or eighteen 
sepoys. In the newly acquired provinces of the Eastern Frontier dis- 
turbances were, for several years, of frequent occurrence, but were for 
the most part easily suppressed: In Upper Assam an incursion was 
made in 1830 by the Singphos from Hukong, who were quickly 
driven back over the frontier by the Political Agent with a detach- 
ment of the Assam Light Infantry (the 42nd Bengal Infantry). A more 
serious affair took place at Nanklao in the Khasiah Hills in the pre- 
ceding year. Thither two British officers, Lieutenants Bedingfield and 
Burlton, had gone for the benefit of their health, with a small guard of 
Assam Light Infantry. The place was suddenly attacked, on the 4th 
April, 1829, by some 500 Khasiahs: Bedingfield was murdered on 
the spot; Burlton, with nearly all the detachment, was killed on the 
following day retreating towards Assam. The Sylhet Light Infantry 
Battalion was sent up, under Captain F. G. Lister, who defeated the 
Khasiahs at Mamlu on the 14th April, re-took Nanklao, and stormed 
the strong position of Mogandi on the 21st May, losing there one 
sepoy killed and Assistant Surgeon Hugh Beadon (mortally) and 
five sepoys wounded. Adesultory conflict was maintained for two 
years in the difficult jungles of the frontier, until at length tranquil- 
lity was restored in 1833. 

At the further extremity of Bengal, disturbances in Chota Nagpur 
necessitated more extensive military operations: the insurrections of 
the Kols, a wild, aboriginal race of Central India, reached such a 
pitch that at length, in 1832, a force of considerable strength had to 
be sent into the country. This force consisted of a squadron of 
the 3rd Light Cavalry, the 34th and soth Native Infantry, the Ram- 
garh Battalion, and detachments of the 2nd and s4th Native Infan- 
try, together with some artillery and irregulars. Little opposition was 


158 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


sae a a ee 


Demonstration 
Jodhpur, 1834, 


met with, and that was more from ambushes than in open action, 
which indeed is hardly to be wondered at, seeing that the Kols were 
armed only with bows and arrows and battle-axes: quiet was not 
established for some months, the British loss during the campaign 
having been 16 killed and 44 wounded; amongst these was Ensign 
T. H. S. Macleod, of the 34th, who died of an arrow wound. 

Simultaneous with the Kol rising, and, like it, of an agrarian nature, 
was the insurrection of the Chuars, a lawless race in the Jungle 
Mehals, headed by one Ganga Narayan. A still larger force had to be 
assembled (under the command of Colonel J. W. Fast) to put down 
this outbreak ; it consisted of the 24th, 34th, and soth Native Infantry, 
with detachments of the asth, 31st, and 33rd, and some irregulars, 
and was styled “the Jungle Mehal Field Force.” There was 
much harassing service in the jungles, but after overcoming the 
difficulties of a trying march in an impracticable country, Bandi, the 
head-quarters of Ganga Narayan, was captured and his following 
dispersed. Lieutenant R. H. Turnbull, of the 24th, was mortally 
wounded with an arrow during these operations. A similar outbreak 
occurred at the same time on the borders of Cuttack, in consequence 
of which the 38th Native Infantry was despatched from Midnapore ; 
but the submission of the malcontents obviated the necessity for 
active measures. 

In 1836, a rising in Cuttack occasioned the employment of the 
10th, 19th and 24th Native Infantry. 

In 1837-38, further disturbances occurred in the Kol country, in 
which the 31st Native Infantry, the Ramgarh Light Infantry, the sth 
Local Horse, and a detachment of artillery, with four 6-pounders, 
were employed. The field force assembled at Seraikela on November 
30th, 1837: on the 4th December a detachment of the 31st, under 
Captain Corfield, surprised and routed a party of the enemy ; and on 
the 18th a large body of them was attacked and dispersed near 
Siringsia, with a loss on our side of one man killed and 15 wounded. 
Several villages were desttoyed as a punitive measure, and the troops 
remained in the district throughout the following spring. 

In the autumn of 1834, a very considerable force (three troops of 
horse and seven companics of foot artillery, with a siege train; two 
squadrons of the 11th Light Dragoons; the snd, 4th, 6th and 7th 
Light Cavalry ; the 3rd Local Horse ; the 26th Foot; andthe 3rd, 8th, 
22nd, 23rd, 28th, 32nd, 36th, 44th, 51st, 61st and 68th Native Infan- 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


59 


try,—with Brigadier-General Stevenson in command) was assembled 
at Ajmir with the object of marching against Jodhpur, the Rajah of 


which place had for several years been giving much trouble; its | 


movements in that direction, however, were arrested by the timely 
submission of Man Singh, the Jodhpur Rajah, and several corps re- 
turned to cantonments. A force of one cavalry and two infantry bri- 
gades was detained in the field under Brigadier-General Stevenson, 
C.B., to proceed against the Shekhawats, a predatory tribe inhabiting 
a tract lying to the north-east of Jodhpur. This force was composed 
as follows :-— 


Cavdlry Brigade,—gqth and 7th Light Cavalry and 3rd Local Horse. 
ist Infantry Brigade,—3rd, 22nd, and 61st Native Infantry. 
and Infantry Brigade,—32nd, 36th, and 51st Native Infantry. 


The force marched on the 20th of November, 1834, and proceeded 
by short stages into the heart of the Shekhawat country, without en- 
countering any opposition : the strongholds of the plundering chiefs 
were either occupied or destroyed, and at the end of December the 
force broke up and returned tocantonments. A detachment, consisting 
of the 61st Native Infantry, the 3rd Local Horse, and some artillery, 
remained under Colonel Wyatt at Patan, while a corps of irregulars, 


horse and foot, was organised for local work by Lieutenant Forster from | Regiment 


among the feudatory tribes of the district; this force, known as the 

Shekhawati Contingent, was subsequently re-organised as a regiment 

of irregular infantry, and is now the 13th Bengal Infantry. 
Contending claims to the succession and resulting misgovernment 


rendered it necessary, in 1838, for the Government of India to J 


assume the administration of the territories of the deceased Rajah of 
Jhansi. This was opposed by the mother of the late Rajah’s prede- 
cessor, who shut herself up in the fort of Jhansi, with several 
thousand armed followers, determined to resist the orders of the 
paramount power. It became necessary to despatch a force to 
reduce the fort, and in December, 1838, Major-General Sir Thomas 
Anburey appeared before the place with the 6th Light Cavalry, the 
3rd Local Horse, the 25th, 33rd, 63rd, and 73nd Native Infantry, and 
Sindhia’s Reformed Contingent (horse, foot, and artillery), together 
with a powerful battering train. While preparations were making 
for opening fire on the fort, preparatory to an assault, the contuma- 
cious Rani and her followers lost heart and, evacuating the place 
secretly during the night (sth January, 1839), made off without being 


160 
Augmentations 


gzth Ben 
Iafantry, : 


Reductions, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


The period between the general re-modelling of the Bengal Army 
in 1824 and the augmentations in consequence of the Afghan War in 
1838, although after the conclusion of the Burma and Bhurtpore cam- 
paigns it was devoid of stirring incident in the field, was nevertheless 
a memorable one for.its numerous internal changes. The campaigns 
of 1825 and 1826 necessitated further additions to the Native army, 
already larger than the resources of the Company could easily support. 
The mutiny of the 47th in 1824 was followed immediately by orders 
for the raising of a corps to take its place (G.0.C.C., roth Novem- 
ber, 1824), which was numbered the 69th and to which were sent 
all the British officers of the old 47th: in 1828 the latter number was 
given to the new corps, which now exists as the 7th (the Duke of 
Connaught’s Own) Bengal Infantry. In 1824 also (G.G.O. No. 64) 
was raised the Sylhet Local Battalion, now the 44th Bengal Infantry 
(Gurkha Rifles). A general augmentation took place in the January — 
following when all Native infantry corps were ordered to recruit 
an additional twenty sepoys. Early in 1825 a still more exten- . 
sive measure was resorted to; this was the raising of twelve 
additional regiments of regular infantry of 1,000 men each, which 
were called ‘Extra Regiments” (G.G.O. No. 149 of 1825). Of 
these the first six were fully officered immediately, but the six 
remaining were regarded rather as depSt battalions and only re- 
ceived three officers each, who were borrowed from other corps: of 
the twelve extra regiments one only exists at the present day, namely, 
the 2nd, which afterwards became the 7oth of the line regiments, and 
is now the 11th Bengal Infantry. This was the last augmentation of the 
Bengal Army which took place for many years, and from the close of 
1825 until 1836 reductions on all sides were the order of the day; the 
first of these was the breaking up of the light infantry and grenadier 


‘| flank battalions on their return from Chittagong and Arakan (G. O. 


C. C., 11th November, 1825 and 2gth April, 1826); the companies 
composing these, however, were not discharged, but returned to their 
various regiments, where they were absorbed. In 1826 (G.G. O. 
No. 43) the six unofficered extra regiments were reduced after an exist- 
ence of less than a year; while a month later (G. G. O. No. 79) the 
whole of the army was reduced to peace establishment, or a full 
strength of 10 non-commissioned officers and 82 privates per com- 
pany. At the end of the year a complete and drastic reform of the 
local forces was commenced by Lord William Bentinck ; the Dinajpur, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Champaran, Gorakhpur, and Rampurah local battalions were reduced 
(G. G. O. No. 231 of 1826) ; three years later the same course was 
pursued with regard to the whole (fifteen) of the provincial and three 
more local corps, the latter including the and Nasseri Battalion, of 
which all sepoys, natives of Nipal, of over six years’ service were 
drafted into the 1st Nasseri and Sirmoor Battalions. It does not appear 
that these provincial battalions, which were merely an expensive and 
very worthless form of police, were much regretted in the army, and 
@ contemporary writer praises Lord William Bentinck for “having 
set to and cleared away the whole of the provincial corps, root 
and branch, so effectually that, with the past experience of their 
utter uselessness, we have no prospect of ever being so bothered 
again.” 

Similar changes had been taking place in the cavalry branch. In 
1825 the irregular regiments were increased to ten troops of 100 
officers and men each, while, at the same time, their Native officers 
were so equalised that there should always be one risaldar with 
each squadron and a ressaidar under him in the other troop. In 
May of the same year two “Extra Regiments” of light cavalry of 
eight troops each were formed, and by G.G.O. No. 348 of 1825 
were permanently added to the Native cavalry as the oth and 10th 
Regiments. In 1826 reductions were commenced; regular regi- 
ments were brought down to a peace establishment of 60 privates per 
troop, while at the end of the year similar orders were published about 
the first five irregular corps: no definite directions were given about 
the remaining three regiments of local horse until 1829, when they 
were paid up and discharged in accordance with G. G. O. 

No. 124. 
: The Bengal artillery was re-organised by G. G. O. No. 192 of 18325, 
when the horse artillery was formed into three brigades of four 
troops each, the fourth troop in each brigade being composed of 
natives ; the foot artillery was formed in five battalions of four com- 
panies each. By this order four companies of foot artillery were 
reduced, and four new European troops of horse artillery raised. Two 
years later (G.O.C. C., 20th June 1827) the field artillery was reduced 
to twelve batteries—eight British and four Native—all of which were 
to be drawn by horses: such field ordnance as was in excess of this 
strength was used for independent post work and manned by golan- 
das, or native gunners, 
se 


Cavaly, 


161 


162 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


——— 


The total strength of the Bengal Army at this period was as fol- 


lows :— 
Horse artillery-—-Three brigades of four troops each— 
British - 1,086 
Native ° 330 
_ = —s-1,.416 
Foot artillery—British, five battalions of four careers 


each— 2,250 
Native, two battalions of eight companies » 2,062 
Gan lascars, twenty companies ‘ 1,224 
—— 5,536 
Engineers, six companies. : es 916 
Native Cavalry (regular), ten secinieats of six eos 


British 260 
Native » 4,980 


——— 5,240 
Native infantry (regular), 74 regiments of 8 companies— 
British - 1,776 


Native - 55,648 
—— 57424 
European Regiment, of eight companies . ; : tags 781 
Governor-General’s Body-Guard : « S: ae 183 
Local cavalry,—five corps of eight icalaks ‘ : ° ‘en 4,234 
»» infantry,—13 corps, comprising 100 companies ‘ Set 9,961 
Miscellaneous departments ; ‘ ; . fhe 691 
Granp TOTAL ‘ ee 86,382 
aaa 


As regards the strength of the military forces nothing remains to 
be noticed here except three small additions which were made towards 
the end of the period under review. The first of these was the 
“ Assam Sebundy Corps,” which was formed (G. G. O. No. 98 of 
1835) from four companies of s#Jandis and other irregular troops 
maintained in Assam, with the addition of two companies transferred 
from the Assam Light Infantry (the strength of which was reduced 
from twelve to ten companies), and of two newly raised companies, 
—the whole making a corps of eight companies, of a strength of 756 
men, with a captain in command :—this corps still survives as the 
43rd Bengal Infantry (Gurkha Rifles). The second was the ‘ Oudh 
Auxiliary Force,” formed in 1837, and composed of a company of 
artillery, a regiment of cavalry and two regiments of infantry; of 
these, the two infantry regiments, afterwards designated the 1st and 
and Oudh Local Battalions, were swept away in the mutiny of 1857; 
the mounted corps subsequently became the 6th Irregular Horse, and 


| still survives as the 4th Bengal Cavalry. The third addition was a 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 163 


corps consisting of both cavalry and infantry which was raised in ! 
1838-39 specially for service in Bundelkhand, and received the-de- 
signation of the ‘Bundelkhand Legion.” This corps will again 
come under notice further on. . 

The changes in the interior economy of the army during these years Pearl 
are of more immediate interest than the fluctuations in its strength. preva 
Foremost among these was the famous “ half batta”” measure, which  asit Batta, 
it was one of the first duties of Lord William Bentinck as Governor- | 
General to enforce, and which created almost as much discontent 
and indignation in the Bengal Army as the equally celebrated order of 
a similar nature in 1766, although on this occasion the malcontents 
did not proceed to such extreme measures as their predecessors in 
the service. Disturbed at the perilous state of their finances, the 
Company sought every means of economising; and with this object 
one of their first measures was to reduce the large military canton- 
ments of Dinapore, Barrackpore, and Berhampore from full to half 
batta stations (G.G.O, No. 224 of 1828). The proceeding may have | 
been reasonable enough, but the saving effected was comparatively 
very small, while the hardship inflicted by it, especially on junior 
officers, was great. 

Early in 18235, shortly after the raising of the 69th, and when the 
question of foreign service was one of present importance to the Bengal 
troops, the 39th and 60th Regiments of Native Infantry volunteered to 
be placed on the list of general service corps ; this produced an order 
of Government complimenting these regiments for their zeal, and, after 
stating the advantages accruing to general service corps, giving a list of | ° 
the same amounting to nine regiments, among which were the present 
7th and 1oth Bengal Infantry. | 

On the roth of March 1827, a G.O.C.C. was issued of most (Abolition of 
vital interest to the Native forces in India; it was to the following | punishment, 
effect :—“‘ The Commander-in-Chief is satisfied, from the quiet and | se7—28- 
orderly habits of the Native soldiers, that it can very seldom be 
necessary to inflict on them the punishment of flogging, while it may 
be almost entirely abolished with great advantage to their character 
and feelings;” no Native soldier, therefore, was in future to be sen- 
tenced to corporal punishment, unless for the crimes of stealing, : 
marauding, or gross insubordination, where the individuals were | 
deemed unworthy to continue in the Native Army. As may be’! 


imagined, criticism adverse to the foregoing order was not wanting, | 
® 


- 


164 


Grant of 
honora 
distinct 

to corps, 1889. 


| 


t 
, 


ai} 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


but this opposition was nothing as compared with that which greeted a 
G. G. O. eight years later (No. 50 of 1835) which directed “ the 
practice of punishing soldiers of the Native army by the cat-o’-nine- 
tails, or rattan, to be discontinued in all the presidencies ; soldiers to 
be sentenced to dismissal from the service for any offence which 
might now be punished by flogging.” Considering the question in 
the light of modern ideas and experience, it is difficult to realise 
the consternation created by this order, and which found expression 
in a flood of letters and articles addressed to every journal in the 
country; the arguments used were of course the same as those 
which were urged in more recent years with regard to a similar 
measure in the British Army, but while the violence engendered 


| apparently by many years of rather uncivilized life in a trying climate 


caused these arguments to be expressed in more immoderate terms, 
the circumstances of the case deprived them of much of the cogency 
which they possess when applied in the later instance.® , 
In G.G. O. No. 43 of 1829 it was notified that the names of 

various campaigns and actions, from Plassey to Java, were to be borne | 
by corps engaged therein on their regimental colours and appoint- 
ments ; of the honours then granted the following alone now remain 
in the Army List :— : 

“ Deru” ° » and Bengal Infantry. 

“*Laswari’’ . . Ist, 2nd, and 4th Bengal Infantry. 


“‘Deia” . . and Bengal Infantry. 
“Java” . «The Body-Guard. 


To these were subsequently added “ SeztaButpEE,” “ ARAKAN,” 
“Assam,” “ Ava,” and “ BHurTPoRE,” of which the second still survives 
on the colours and appointments of the sth Bengal Infantry, and the 
last on those of the rst Bengal Cavalry, the rst, and, 3rd, 4th, and gth 
Bengal Infantry, and the 1st and and Gurkha Regiments. 

Only one noticeable change occurred about this time in the 
equipment of the army, namely, the substitution of fuzils for the old 
pikes of infantry havildars (15th August 1831). Inthe same year 
Cee 

© At the same time the fact must not be lost sight of that the abolition of flogging did 
undoubtedly lead to a distinct increase In the crime of insubordination in the Native Army. 
There was mach force in the remark of ao old subadar, who had known the Bengal Army as 
it was lu Lord Lake’s time and saw the condition at which it had arrived only four years after 
the abolition of flogging—“ Fauj be dar hogy,” —“ The Army hasceased to fear.” Apart from 
the abstract question whether flogging, for the maintenance of discipline, was necessary or 
the reverse, the abolition of this degrading puoishment, eo far ae the native soldier was 


concerned, while it was maintained in full force for his European comrade, was an act of which 
the wisdem was widely questioned at the time, both in the service and oat of It,— P, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


165 


silver lace for infantry uniforms was abolished, and it was directed 
that the lace of every regiment should be gold (G. G.O. No. 464 
of 1831). 

In 1837 (G. G. O. No. 83, April 17th) another important inno- 


vation was introduced; this was the grant of good-conduct pay [°¢ 


and the institution of the Orders of British India and of Merit. 
The former indulgence was granted at the rate of one rupee a month 
after sixteen years’, and two rupees after twenty years’ service, and 
to obtain it a sepoy should not, within the previous two years, have 
been convicted by a court-martial for any serious offence, nor 


a 


have been twice entered in the regimental. defaulter’s book. The}. 
Order of British India was to be given to Native officers for long |’ 
and honourable service ; it was divided into two classes, each having |. 
one hundred members, of whom one-half were to belong to the |: 


Bengal Army : the first class, carrying with it an extra pay or pension 
of two rupees a day, was granted to subadars and the correspond- 
ing grade of the irregular cavalry ; the second class, with one rupee 
a day, was for all Native officers indiscriminately. The Order of 


—— 


Merit, granted for conspicuous bravery in action, was divided into |, 


three classes ; the third or lowest class carried with it an extra allow- 
ance to the extent of one-third of the holder’s full pay or pension; 
the second class gave two-thirds, and the first class entitled the 
holder to double his full pay. These grants were followed shortly 
by other measures calculated to improve the position of the Native 
soldier. By G.O.C.C. aist June 1837, commissions were for the 
first time granted to Native officers of irregular cavalry. In 1838 
(G. G. O. No. 120, August 13th) the more important grant was made 
to the Native commissioned ranks of pensions for wounds received 
in action: these, in the case of persons permanently disabled or 
' maimed, were on the following scale :— 


R 
Subadar, Risaldar, or i Nia e 3 . = 25 
Ressaidar . . ; . - = 18 
Naib Risaldar or ‘Jemadar ‘ : ; . . = 12 


Jemadar of Local Horse. . . . . = 7 


Little remains to be mentioned, except an order limiting the number 
of dargirs in the irregular horse (No. 236 of 1840); having been 
at one time entirely forbidden, and then restricted to a very small 
number, the custom of keeping dargirs had gradually crept again 
into the irregular regiments, where the orders restricting it were 


Wound 
Pensions, 
838. 


166 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


unpopular, and if possible, evaded. The numbers now fixed were, for 
risaldars and ressaidars five, for naib-risaldars and jemadars two, and 
for dafadars one. These corps, hitherto officially known as ‘Local 
Horse,” were, by G. G. O. No. 276 of 1840, ordered to be called in 
future “ Irregular Cavalry”; of which the cavalry regiment of the 
Oudh Auxiliary Force (formed in 1838 for the service of the King of 
Oudh) was named the 6th Regiment. 

That the measures mentioned above for the improvement of the 
Native soldier’s prospects were in the right direction, and urgently 
needed is amply proved by the magazine literature of the period, 
which teems with articles on the Bengal Army, its deficiencies, 
and requirements, One writer, among many others in the United 
Service Magasine, 1835, thus summarises the “points in which the 
condition of the Native army has deteriorated: (1) Decrease of 
pay (as compared with the increase of expenses), (2) increase of 
duty, (3) decrease of consideration, (4) want in general of kindness, 
favor, and notice from the governing power.” Probably the two last - 
points were of far more importance than the former two; want of 
kindness and consideration, not only from the governing power but 
from regimental officers also, seems to have been but too common at 
the period now under notice; it was the gradual growth of years, and 
had become so deep-seated in a great proportion of Anglo-Indian 
military society that nothing short of the violent convulsion of 1857 
could serve effectually to uproot it. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


167 


Chapter VI.—(1838—r&%s.) 


Political and Military Events (Hough) — History of ladia (Marshman)—British Empire in India 
(Thernten) Afghan War (Kaye)—First Afghan War (Durand)—Afghan Campaigns ( Major 
H. H. Jenes)—Journal of General Abbott (Lew)—Narrative of the Army of the Indas 
(Hough)—Official papers relating to the War in Afghanistan—Career of George Broadfoot 
(#. Breadfeet)—Expedition to China (Liestenant Bingham)—Conquest of Sindh (Sir W. 
Napier)—G. G, O. and G. O. C. C, 


After a period of twelve years of comparative tranquillity, the inva- 
sion of Afghanistan involved the Government of India in a war of 
four years’ duration, in which the success which was at first attained 
was afterwards overshadowed by one great and appalling disaster, re- 
sulting in a loss of prestige and influence in Central Asia which not 
even the most brilliant subsequent successes served completely to 
repair. The proclamation which announced the determination of the 
' Government to despatch an expedition to Afghanistan declared that 
it had been resolved to restore to the throne of that country the Shah 
Shuja-ul-Mulk, and that he would “enter Afghanistan surrounded by 
his own troops.” Meanwhile, in anticipation of this course, a force 
had, about five months before, been raised for Shah Shuja, consisting 
of two regiments of cavalry and six of infantry, officered by British 
and Native officers drawn from the Company's regiments : of this 


force the 3rd Infantry Regiment still survives as the el (Kalat-i- 


Ghilzai) Bengal Infantry. 

The “Army of the Indus,” as the expeditionary force was styled, 
was assembled at Ferozepore in November 1838, and consisted at 
first of between fifteen and sixteen thousand men. News, however, 
having been received of the withdrawal of the Persian army which 
had been besieging Herat, it was determined to reduce the force, 
and the detailed strength of the Bengal detachment of the army 
was eventually as follows :— 

In ComMAND,—Major-General Sir Willoughby Cotton, X.c.B. 
Cavalry Brigade, under Colonel Arnold, H.M.’s 16th Lancers— 
H.M.’s 16th Light Dragoons (Lancers), the and and 3rd Light Cavalry, 
the 4th Local Horse, and part of the rst Local Horse (Skinner’s). 
Artillery, under Major P. L. Pew— 
2nd Troop 2nd Brigade, 4th Company 2nd Battalion, and and Company 
6th Battalion. 
Sappers and Miners, under Captain E. Sanders, Benga! Engineera— 
The 2nd and 3rd Companies. 


The First 
Afghan War, 
1838. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


ist Infantry Brigade, under Colonel R. H. Sale, c.8., 13th Light Infantry— 
H.M.’s 13th Foot (Light Infantry), and the 16th and 48th Native Infantry. 
and Infantry Brigade, under Major-General W. Nott— 


The 31st, 42nd, and 43rd Native Infantry. 
qth Infantry Brigade, under Lieutenant-Colonel A. Roberts, European Regi- 
ment— 


The Bengal European Regiment, and the 35th and 37th Native Infantry. 


The Bombay column consisted of two and a half regiments of 
cavalry, three batteries of artillery, three regiments of infantry, and 
a company of sappers. The contingent with Shah Shuja-ul-Mulk 
amounted to about 6,000 men. A force, commanded by Lieutenant- 
Colonel Wade, which included a Sikh contingent of 6,000 men and 
4,000 under the Shahzada Timur, eldest son of Shah Shuja, was also 
detailed to assemble at Peshawar and act through the Khaibar Pass: 
with this force were two companies each of the 2oth and 21st Native 
Infantry, forming an escort to Colonel Wade. The total strength of 
the British forces employed, including reserves, amounted to about 
39,000. The command of the whole was conferred upon Lieutenant- 
General Sir John Keane, x.c.B., of H. M’s Service, then Commander- 
in-Chief in the Bombay Presidency. 

The Bengal column marched from Ferozepore on the roth Decem- 
ber 1838, Sir Willoughby Cotton being in command until the force 
should be joined by Sir John Keane, and arrived at Rohri in Sindh on 
the 24th January 1839. Thence part of the force was detached to 
meet Sif John Keane and the Bombay troops marching from 
Karachi, and to hasten the Sindh chiefs in their settlement of terms 
of friendship with the British. This object having been attained, 
it was important to advance through the Bolan Pass with as little 
delay as possible ; the Indus was crossed by a bridge of boats, and 
Shikarpur reached on the 2oth February. Sir John Keane was 
now in command of the army, while Sir Willoughby Cotton had 
that of the rst (Bengal) Division of Infantry; the cavalry division 
was under Major-General Thackwell, and the artillery under Brigadier 
Stevenson of the Bombay army. Advancing through the Bolan, 
Quetta was reached on the 26th March, and after a fortnight’s delay 
the army proceeded through the Kojak Pass to Kandahar, where it 
arrived on the 26th April. 

Up to this point no enemy had been encountered, except parties 
of marauding Afghans, who confined themselves to cutting off follow- 


oe ne ee 


oe eee oe ee ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


169 


ers and stragglers, but the privations endured through want of water 
and scarcity of provisions were far more trying and just as destructive 
as would have been the most determined opposition of the Afghan 
army. = 
At Kandahar, on May the 8th, Shah Shuja was formally installed 
on the masnad, and the army enjoyed a brief interval of comparative 
rest, but the difficulty in obtaining provisions still continued, as did 
also the annoyance of incessant robberies by the Afghans. From this 
place a detachment was despatched to the fort of Girishk under Bri- 
gadier Sale, consisting of detachments from the and and 3rd Light 
Cavalry, the 13th Light Infantry, and the 16th Native Infantry, with 
some of the Shah’s infantry and 300 of his cavalry : the chief, Kohan-dil 
Khan, did not, however, await the arrival of the detachment; he 
abandoned the fort, and fled across the Persian frontier, and Sale 
returned to Kandahar. At the same time unsuccessful overtures 
were made to the Ghilzai chiefs, who, however, showed no readiness 
to espouse the cause of Shah Shuja. 

Leaving at Kandahar the 37th Bengal Native Infantry with some 
detachments and (in belief of the current reports regarding the 
weakness of Ghazni) the whole of the battering train, Sir John 
Keane resumed his march on the 27th June, and arriving before 
Ghazni on the 21st July, reconnoitred the place under fire the same 
afternoon. The fortress, which was now found to be of considerable 
strength, was held by Haidar Khan, son of Dost Muhammad Khan, 
the reigning Amir of Afghanistan. To effect a breach in its walls 
would have required a much more powerful battering train than had 
been brought from India, and as that, such as it was, had been left 
behind at Kandahar, no resource remained but to blow open one of 
the gates and endeavour to carry the place by a coup-de-main. 
After a further reconnaissance on the 23nd, the Kabul gate was 


selected for ‘this purpose. The 22nd was passed in completing the 


necessary preparations, and was moreover enlivened by an attack on 
Shah Shuja’s camp, which was repulsed by some of the Contingent 
under Captain Outram and Lieutenant Nicoison. The dispositions 
for the storming of Ghazni were made during the evening, and before 
day-light on July the 23rd the various parties were all in position. 
These were (1) the explosion party of engineers, under Captain 
Thomson of the Bengal Engineers ; (2) the advance, under Colonel 
Dennie of Her Majesty's 13th Light Infantry, consisting of one 


170 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Arrival at 
Kabul, 


Withdrawal 
of the army. 


company of that regiment and the light companies of Her Majesty's 
and and 17th, and of the Bengal European Regiment; (3) the 
main storming party under Brigadier Sale, formed of the remaining 
companies of the and Queen’s, the 13th Light Infantry, and the 
Bengal European Regiment; (4) a false attack by three companies 
of the 35th Bengal Native Infantry, under Captain John Hay; and 
(5) the reserve under Sir Willoughby Cotton, consisting of the 16th 
and the 48th, and remainder of the 35th Bengal Native Infantry. 
The operation of blowing up the gateway was completely successful, 
and the advance under Colonel Dennie pushed on, though met bya 
desperate resistance on the part of the defenders. This gave the 
main body of the attack time to close up with the advance, while 
these were closely followed by Sir Willoughby Cotton with the reserve. 
Within a very short time the centre square was reached, and the 
enemy, finding that all was lost, abandoned the citadel and fled in all 
directions; many of them, however, continued to fire on the troops 
from the houses and behind walls, until, refusing all chance of quarter, 
they were themselves shot down. The loss of the Afghans was very 
great, but the British force did not suffer as much as might have 
been expected, and their casualties (including the loss sustained in 
the reconnaissance of the 21st) amounted to no more than 18 men 
killed, 20 officers and 153 men wounded, and 2 men missing. 

On the 3oth of July the army moved on towards Kabul, On its 
approach Dost Muhammad fied from the capital and evaded all 
pursuit, though a lightly equipped detachment under Captain Outram 
was despatched in chase of him. Shah Shuja made his public entry 
into Kabul on the 7th August. Three weeks later Colonel Wade, 
with the force of the Shahzada Timur, arrived from Peshawar, having 
forced the Khaibar and taken Ali Masjid with a loss of about 150 
killed and wounded. 

The arrival of the British force at Kabul and the installation of the 
Shah in his capital concluded the first phase of the Afghan war, and 
arrangements were soon after entered upon to withdraw a great 
part of the army to India, The Bombay Division left Kabul on the 
18th September, and marching o:¢ Ghazni and Kandahar reached 
Quetta on the 318t October. The troops which remained in Afghani- 
stan to strengthen the hands of the Shah were the whole of the Bengal 
Division of infantry, the and Light Cavalry, detachments of the rst 
and 4th Local Horse, and No. 6 Light Field Battery, the whole 


ee tga En, ost. 
eee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


191 


under the command of Sir Willoughby Cotton. The remainder of 
the Bengal troops returned to India with Sir John Keane through the 
Khaibar Pass, where they experienced hardships from want of water 
and supplies, and from the attacks of marauders, no less than in their 
march into Afghanistan in the earlier part of the year. They arrived 
at Peshawar in November, and on the rst of January 1840 at 
Ferozepore, at which place, on the day following, the Army of the 
Indus was broken up. 

In November 1839 a part of the troops which had remained in 


Afghanistan and Baluchistan, together with two of the British regi- | N 


ments which had just marched, back from Kabul, were engaged 

under Major-General Willshire against Mehrab Khan, the Baluch 

Khan of Kalat, who, during the advance through the Bolan Pass in 

March 1839, had evinced # hostile feeling towards the British, and | 
whom it was fourd necessary to chastise and render incapable of | 
future mischief. The troops employed in this undertaking were Her 
Majesty’s 2nd and 17th Foot, a squadron of the 4th Local Horse, 
and the 31st Bengal Native Infantry, with two guns of the Bombay 
Horse Artillery and four of the Artillery of Shah Shuja’s Contingent, 
The force was attacked by the enemy’s horse as it approached 
Kalat on the 13th of November, and skirmishing continued to within 
a short distance of the town, There it was discovered that the fort 
was protected from attack by three heights before its north-western 
face, and which were strongly held by the enemy ; these it was deter- 
mined to storm immediately, and one each was assigned to the 
three regiments of infantry, of which half advanced to the attack, 
while the remaining four companies formed a reserve. The enemy 
were driven from their position by artillery fire before the storming 
parties reached them, and made good their retreat into the city, but 
were closely followed by the British troops; one of the gates was 
blown open by the fire of the Shah’s artillery under Lieutenant Creed, 
and the town carried by storm. After some delay an entrance was 
also made into the citadel, where, after a brave struggle, the Khan 
and several Baluch sardars were themselves slain and the capture of 
the place completed. Our loss was one British and one Native 
officer (Subadar Ramsahai Singh, 31st Native Infantry) and 29 men 
killed, and 8 British and 2 Native officers and 97 men wounded; 

among the latter being Captain Saurin and Ensign Hopper, of the 
31st Bengal Native Infantry. 


SS 


Capture of 
Kalat, 13th 
ovember, 


172 


THE SERVICES OF THE . 


The objects of the expedition into Afghanistan having now been 
accomplished, it remained to reward the army which had been 
employed in the operations. All corps which advanced beyond the 
Bolan Pass were granted permission to bear the word “ ArGHaNis- 
TAN” on their colours and appointments, and those which were 
present at the capture of Guaznir and Katat were permitted to 
inscribe the names of those places also; while to the whole force 
beyond the Bolan was issued a gratuity of six months’ batta— 
(G.0.C.C., 2and November, 1839, and 14th January, 1840). A 
medal was afterwards given for the capture of Ghazni. 

The fall of Kalat and the commencement of the severe Afghan 
winter now produced a lull in the country, which gave reason to 
hope that quiet was permanently established. The troops retained 
in the country were divided into two commands,—the Northern 
under Sir Willoughby Cotton, including Kabul, Ghazni, Bamian, 
Jalalabad and the Khaibar, and the Southern, under Major-General 
Nott, comprising Kandahar, Girishk, Quetta, and Kalat. The distri- 
bution of the troops was as follows :— 

Kabul—H. M.’s 13th Light Infantry, the 35th Bengal Native Infantry, and 

three guns of No. 6 Light Field Battery. 

Ghasni—16th Bengal Native Infantry and one rissalah of the ist (Skinner’s) 

Local Horse. 

Bamian— «th (Gurkha) Infantry, Shah Shuja’s Contingent, and one troop of 

horse artillery. 

Falalabad—2nd Light Cavalry, one rissatak of Skinner’s Horse, three guns of 

No. 6 Light Field Battery, a detachment of Sappers and Miners, the 1st Ben- 
gal European Regiment and the 37th and 48th Bengal Native Infantry. 

Kandahar—one rissalah of the 4th Local Horse, one company of foot 

artillery, two troops of horse artillery of Shah Shuja’s Contingent, 4 eighteen- 
pounders, the 42nd and 43rd Bengal Native Infantry, and one battalion of 
infantry, Shah Shuja’s Contingent. 

Girishk—one battalion infantry, Shah Shuja’s Contingent. 

Kalat—31st Bengal Native Infantry, and a detachment of artillery, Shah 

Shuja’s Contingent. 

Q uetta—one battalion of infantry, Shah Shuja’s Contingent, and two guns. 

It was not long before the distrust of Shah Shuja and the hatred 
of the English which was smouldering in Afghanistan betrayed itself 
in small and apparently unimportant outbursts, which served to 
portend the storm which was eventually to overwhelm the ill-fated 
army of occupation at Kabul. The first of these occurred early in 
1840 when it became necessary to send a force against a refractory 
Khan named Sayyid Husain, Padshah of Kunar, who was holding 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


173 


out in the fort of Pashut, some fifty miles from Jalalabad. The force 
employed was under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Orchard, 
and consisted of a wing of the 37th Bengal Native Infantry, eighty 
of the rst Bengal European Regiment, a troop of the 2nd Bengal 
Light Cavalry, 20 sappers, the 3rd Regiment of the Shah’s Infantry 
{now the 12th Bengal Infantry), and the rst Regiment of the Shah’s 
Cavalry, with three guns. On the morning of the 18th January, in 
pouring rain, through which the troops had been marching for 
several preceding days, an attack was made on Pashut. The outer 
gate was battered down by the fire of the guns, and Lieutenant Pigou, 
of the Engineers, then endeavoured to blqw down the inner gate, 
but the only powder available was not only drenched by the rain, but 
also so bad as to be useless even if dry; and the storming party, 
who, through a mistaken bugle-call, rushed forward too soon, found 
themselves exposed toa heavy fire from the fort, and were obliged to 
retire. Another attempt was made, but with equal ill-success, and at 
length the troops had to be withdrawn with the loss of Jemadar 
Ganesh Tiwari (3rd Infantry) and 18 men killed and two officers and 
48 men wounded, many of them mortally, amongst whom was 
Lieutenant Collinson, 37th, who died soon after of his wounds. 
The attack was not, however, without result, for the fort was evacuated 
immediately after. 

In the following August Lieutenant-Colonel H. M. Wheeler had 
tO move out from Jalalabad, with detachments of the 1st Bengal 
European Regiment and the 48th Native Infantry, to punish some 
refractory chiefs in the Waziri Valley, and took the fort of Kajja by 
storm on the 19th, with a loss of one man killed and one officer 
(Lieutenant Parker) and 18 men wounded. . 

Another affair of less importance was the attack of a small fort near 
Bamian by a party under Captain Garbett, where the assailants 
met with obstinate resistance, and did not gain possession of the 
place until they had recourse to burning out the garrison. 

In April the wild clan of Ghilzais was in open revolt against the 
British and Shah Shuja, and it became necessary to take vigorous 
measures for their suppression, Major-General Nott, who com- 
manded at Kandahar, contented himself at first with sending 200 
cavalry to clear the road between that place and Kabul; but a 
stronger force being found necessary, a regiment of the Shah’s 
infantry, 300 cavalry, and four guns of the Shah’s horse artillery were 


174 THE SERVICES OF THE 


despatched from Kandahar on the 7th May, under Captain William 
Anderson, Bengal Artillery. This detachment joined the first one 
on the 14th, and on the 16th, near Tazi, on the Turnak River, the 
enemy was encountered, some 2,000 strong, when, after an action 
remarkable forthe gallantry displayed on both sides, the Ghilzais 
were driven in confusion to the refuge of their mountain fastnesses, 
and a British detachment occupied Kalat-i-Ghilzai. 

Disasters in A month later Lieutenant W. H, Clarke, and Bombay Native 

and Sindh, Infantry, who, with a party of the Sindh Irregular Horse, had escorted 
a convoy to Kahun in the Marri hills, was, on his return, reinforced 
by two companies of the,sth Bombay Infantry, cut off by the Marris 
in the Sartof Pass (16th May, 1840) and the whole detachment de- 
stroyed. A more serious misfortune was the re-capture of Kalat by 
Nasir Khan, a son of the late Khan. There was no garrison in the 
place, beyond a small party of sepoys under Lieutenant Loveday, the 
Political Agent, and when it was attacked, the assailants were aided 
by treachery within the walls. An attempt at escalade was however 
repulsed, but after the defence had been protracted for some days, 
Lieutenant Loveday, finding resistance hopeless, capitulated (August, 
1840), and was afterwards murdered by his captors. Following 
closely on this, another calamity overtook the troops in Sindh, 
when a large party of Bombay troops escorting a convoy for 
the relief of Kahun was driven back from the Nafusk Pass (31st 
August, 1840) with the loss of 179 killed (including four officers) 
and g2 wounded, together with its baggage, artillery and transport, 
and the whole of the convoy. A month later, on September 28th, 
Captain Brown, who commanded at Kahun, evacuated that place on 
honorable terms, and marched unmolested to the British post of 
Pulaji. 

Dpatstoss on While these events were proceeding in Sindh and Baluchistan, 

Frontier and the Northern force of the army of occupation was threatened by the 

Sep.—Nov. | re-appearance on the borders of Afghanistan of the ex-Amir Dost 

= Muhammad. This prince, after fleeing from Kabul in the preceding 
year, had sought an asylum with the Amir of Bokhara, but driven 
thence by the unscrupulous cruelty of his host, he finally found an ally 
in the Wali of Khulum. He succeeded in raising a force, formed 
for the most part of Usbegs, and in August 1840 attacked a small 
fort, 150 miles north of Bamian, which was held by a chief friendly © 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


175 


to the British. The outposts of Bajgah, Kamurd, and Saighan had to 
be recalled; Brigadier Dennie advanced by forced marches to Bamian, 
and with four companies of the 35th Bengal Native Infantry, four of 
the 4th (Gurkha) Infantry of Shah Shuja’s Force, 100 of the Shah’s 
2nd Cavalry, 2co “ Jan-baz” horse, and two guns, making a total of 
880 of all ranks, attacked the enemy near Bamian on the 18th Sep- 
tember, dispersed the Usbeg force, and compelled Dost Muhammad 
to fly to Nijrao. In the same month disturbances in Kohistan led 
to the despatch of Brigadier Sir Robert Sale into that country, with a 
force consisting of Her Majesty's 13th Light Infantry, two companies 
of the 27th* and two of the 37th Bengal Native Infantry, the and Bengal 
Light Cavalry, the 2nd Cavalry, Shah Shuja’s Force, and details of 
artillery. A successful action took place at the fortified village of 
Tutam-dara, near Charikar, on the 29th September, but an attempt, on 
the 3rd of October, to storm the fort of Julgah was repulsed with a loss 
of 16 killed and 31 wounded. The enemy evacuated the fort the 
samme evening. Sir Robert Sale remained in Kohistan throughout 
October, at the end of which month he was reinforced by the remain- 


ing companies of the 37th Native Infantry. Meanwhile every effort| 


was made to obtain accurate information of the whereabouts of Dost 
Muhammad, and it at length appeared that the chief was moving 
towards the Ghorband Pass and was in the neighborhood of Parwan- 

dara, Thither he was followed by the British force, which arrived at 
the place on the 2nd of November in time to see the enemy retreating 
to the hills. The two squadrons of the 2nd Bengal Light Cavalry 
were sent on from the advance guard to endeavour to cut off the 
fugitives. Seeing this, the enemy's cavalry, which amounted only to 
about 80 ill-mounted men, turned and advanced at a slow pace 
towards their pursuers. Captain Fraser, commanding the squadrons, 
gave the order to charge, and himself, with the other officers, rode on 
intothe midst of the enemy, but for some inexplicable reason, which 
has never been discovered, the troopers turned about and galloped 
back towards the advancing column, leaving their officers to their fate. 
Lieutenant and Adjutant Crispin, Lieutenant Broadfoot of the Engi- 
neers, and Assistant-Surgeon Lord, the Political Officer, were killed, 


© These two companies of the 27th Native Infantry had gone up to Kabul on 
escort duty with stores,—P. 


176 


Surreuder of 
Dost 
Muhammad, 


November 3rd. 


Affairs in 
Baluchistan. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


and Captains Fraser and Ponsonby severely wounded.® Deplor- 
able as was this affair to us, it was nevertheless Dost Muhammad’s last 
stand ; he rode into Kabul next day and gave himself up to Sir William 
Macnaghten, the British envoy to the Court of Shah Shuja. After 
remaining fora short time with the British envoy, where he charmed 
all who met him by his chivalrous and straightforward bearing, the 
ex-Amir was escorted to India by Sir Willoughby Cotton and the 1st 
Bengal European Regiment, who were relieved, respectively, by Major- 
General W.G. K. Elphinstone, c.B., and the 44th Foot. The 48th 
Native Infantry also returned to India at this time, as part of the escort 
with Dost Muhammad. With the 44th Foot there arrived from India 
the sth Light Cavalry and the 27th and 54th Native Infantry. The 
2nd Native Infantry had already arrived at Kabul and gone south- 
wards to Kandahar, which place was also reinforced later on with the 
38th Native Infantry. The sth Native Infantry likewise arrived in 
Kabul a few months later, escorting a convoy. 

While these events were happening in the north, in Baluchistan and 
Sindh Nasir Khan remained for some time master of the situation. 
Forced to move from his quarters at Mastung, he emerged from the 


| Bolan Pass on the 28th of October, and made a vigorous attack 


on the post of Dadur, the repulse of which was due mainly toa 
splendid charge of 120 of Skinner’s Horse, led by Lieutenant A. F. 
Macpherson, 43rd N. I., who penetrated right through the masses of 
the enemy and returned victorious with the loss of one risaldar (Mir 
Bahadar Ali) and two troopers killed, and Macpherson, two Native 
officers, andz5 men wounded. The Baluchis made desultory attacks on 
the place on the two subsequent days, but finally withdrew on the arrival 
of reinforcements from Sukkur. On the 3rd November, Major-General 
Nott, with the 4and and 43rd Bengal Native Infantry, four 18-pounders, 
and some cavalry and infantry of Shah Shuja’s Force, arrived at 
Kalat from Kandahar, and re-occupied the place without opposition, 
Leaving the 42nd at Kalat, and garrisons at Quetta and Mastung, the 
General, with the 43rd, returned immediately to Kandahar. Nasir 
Khan stil! remained in arms, but his camp was attacked at Kotra, on 
the rst Decemhgr, by a force of Bombay troops under Lieutenant- 


cts 


® The two offending squadrons were immediately sent back to India, and by 
G. G. O. No. 38 of 1841 the regiment was disbanded ; the squadrons which had so 
disgraced themselves were dismissed the service, and the remainder were drafted into 
other regiments of cavalry. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Colonel Marshall, and he was compelled to seek safety in flight, while 


" his army was completely dispersed with considerable loss. 


The surrender of Dost Muhammad Khan and the re-establish- 
ment of British influence in Baluchistan brought the year to a satis- 
factory termination; but it was not long before further outbreaks 
disturbed the general tranquillity. The first of these was a disturb- 
ance in the Durani country, wherea chief named Akhtar Khan took 
up arms in the Zamin-dawar, and was successful until attacked 
and dispersed by Captain Farrington, 2nd Bengal Native Infantry, 
with a detachment of Native troops, at Landi-nawa, on the 3rd January 
1841. This was followed by an unsuccessful attack on the fort of 
Kajjak, near Sibi, by a detachment of Bombay troops in which two 
officers (one of them being Lieutenant Creed, who had so distin- 
guished himself at the capture Of Kalat) and 9 men were killed, and 
Lieutenant-Colonel Wilson, who commanded the force, another 
officer, and 40 men wounded ; Colonel Wilson’s wound proved fatal. 
In February it was found necessary to undertake operations against 


the Sangu Khel Shinwaris, inhabiting the Nazian valley, one of the aI 


eastern valleys of the Safed Koh lying to the south of Peshbolak. 
On this service a column was employed under Colonel Shelton 
of the 44th Foot, composed of his own regiment, the 27th Bengal 
Native Infantry,.four horse artillery guns, and some details from 
Shab Shuja’s Force, including the 3rd Infantry, and within a few 
days the valley was reduced to order, though not without the loss 
of two officers,—Captain Douglas, Assistant-Quartermaster-General, 
and Lieutenant Pigou, of the Engineers. 

About this time General Nott, foreseeing the need of a large force 
at Kandahar, ordered up most of the troops from the neighbourhood 
of Quetta, and thus increased the force at his disposal to one regi- 
ment of cavalry, seven of infantry, two troops of horse artillery, and 
one company of foot artillery. This was not accomplished a day too 
soon, for early in April trouble again broke out with the Ghilzais, who, 
always disaffected towards Shah Shuja and foremost among the 
Afghans in their hatred of the English, were now particularly incensed 
by the re-building by the latter of the fort of Kalat-i-Ghilzai. They 
surrounded the place and attempted to obstruct the works, and 
threatened the fosce which, tnder Captain Macan, was located in the 
fort,—two regiments of infantry and part of one of cavalry (Christie’s 

" 


{77 


1848, 


The Deranis, 
January. — 


The Sangu 
xh gu 


no 


178 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


The Duranis, 
uly. 


| Horse) of Shah Shuja’s contingent, Reinforcements were sent from 


Kandahar under Lieutenant-Colonel Wymer, consisting of 400 of the © 
38th Native Infantry, two squadrons of Christie’s Horse, two horse 
artillery guns, and a few sappers. Wymer’s force was attacked on 
the 29th of May, at Ilmi, about twenty miles from Kalat-i-Ghilzai, 
by a very large body of Ghilzais. The enemy advanced against the 
detachment in a solid mass, but, being received by a steady fire from 
the guns, they separated into three columns, which still advanced with 
the object of making a simultaneous attack. They were met, 
however, by a steady and destructive musketry fire, which their 
repeated rushes were not able to break through, and after an action of 
five hours’ duration they were beaten off and dispersed. The British 
force, of which the 38th Bengal Native Infantry behaved with 
especial steadiness and courage, lost. only four menkilled and fifteen 
wounded. Scarcely was this affair brought to a successful termina- 
tion than it became necessary to despatch another detachment to 
the Zamin-dawar, where Akhtar Khan was again in rebellion ; the 
force employed was composed of the sth Infantry of Shah Shuja’s 
Force, some artillery of the same force, and two corps of Afghan 
Horse (called “Jan-baz”), the whole under Captain Woodburn of the 
44th Bengal Native Infantry, who was also commandant of the sth 
Infantry. The enemy were met with and defeated on the left bank 
of the Helmand, near Girishk, on the 3rd of July, but Woodburn 
could not follow up his success, as the “ Jan-baz’’ would not fight. 
He pushed on to Girishk, where he was reinforced by Captain Griffin 
(24th Bengal Native Infantry) with the 1st Infantry, Shah Shuja’s 
Force, two guns, and some cavalry. On the 17th of August, a more 
severe engagement took place at Sikandarabad, when Captain Griffin, 
with a detachment which included part of the and Bengal Native 
Infantry, a wing of Christie’s Horse, and the rst and sth Infantry, 
Shah Shua’s Force, totally defeated Akhtar Khan and dispersed his 
forces, his own loss being 12 killed, 1oz2 wounded and 2 missing. 
The enemy retreated to their own valleys ; to attack them there a larger 


force was necessary, and preparations were accordingly made by 


‘Major-General Nott. Early in September he took the field in person 


with a considerable force, but, contrary to expectation, no resistance 
was met with, and Nott returned to Kandahar before the end of 
October, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 179 


Meanwhile, events of some importance had been occurring else- 
where. Nasir Khan of Kalat surrendered to Lieutenant-Colonel 
Stacy, 43rd Native Infantry, in July. Inthe same month a trifling 
outbreak occurred in Kohistan, but waseasily quelled. On the sth 
August Lieutenant-Colonel Chambers, with detachments of the sth 
Light Cavalry, the 4th Irregular Cavalry, and the r6thand 43rd Native 
Infantry, gained the temporary submission of the Ghilzais bya 
decided success over that tribe at Karutu, near the Saighan Pass. 


General Nott’s short expedition against the Duranis was not con- 
cluded before the news arrived of another serious outbreak of the 
Ghilzais, of which the immediate cause was the reduction by the Gov- 
ernment of the allowances paid to the tribes who held the defiles 
between Peshawar and Kabul. The tribesmen visited Kabul and, 
receiving unsatisfactory replies to their requests from thé envoy and the 
Amir, quitted the capital, occupied the passes, and cut off all com- 
munication between Kabul and the east. Sir Robert Sale, who | Sale’s Brigade 
was about to march to India with his brigade, on relief, was ordered | to rege 
to clear the road. His force consisted of Her Majesty’s 13th Light | °° 
Infantry, a squadron of the sth Light Cavalry, a troop of the 2nd 
Cavalry, Shah Shuja’s Force, the 35th Native Infantry, two guns, and 
some sappers. The 35th, under Lieutenant-Colonel Monteath, 
marched in advance, on the 9th October, and encamped at Butkhak ; 
here on the same night the camp was attacked, but the assailants were 
repulsed. Sale, having joined the advance, attacked and forced the 
Khurd Kabul Pass, on the 12th, with a loss of six killed and 33 
wounded, he himself being athong the latter. From this point 
the 13th Light Infantry with Sale returned to Butkhak; the remain- 
der of the force, under Monteath, was again subject to a night 
attack on the 17th, which, however, was unsuccessful, though it inflicted 
on us the loss of one officer (Lieutenant Jenkins, 35th Native Infantry) 
and several sepoys. Sale now decided to push on to Tezin, which was 
reached on the 22nd, with the loss of one officer (Lieutenant E. King, 
13th) and four men killed, two officers and 17 men wounded. 
Marching thence on the 26th and evading the Ghilzais, who had 
prepared to attack his force at the Pari Dara, he forced the 
Jagdalak Pass, on the 28th, ahd reached Gandamak on the 2gth, but 
not without the heavy loss of 29 killed and 91 wounded. Among the 
former were Captain Wyndham of the 35th, who lost his life in a 


N2 


180 THE SERVICES OF THE 


gallant endeavour to save that of a wounded soldier, and Subadars 
Ranjit Singh and Hardyal Singh and Jemadar Bhawani Singh, of the 
same regiment. On November roth news reached Sale at Gandamak 
of the outbreak at Kabul. Unable from the weakness of his force 
and the want of camp equipage or supplies to return to the relief 
of the garrison there, he determined to occupy Jalalabad and marched 
into that place on November 13th. 
About the same time, towards the end of October, a fresh outbreak 
occurred in Kohistan, which eventually resulted in one of the most 
painful incidents of the war, Charikar, the chief town of the district, 
was garrisoned by the 4th (Gurkha) Infantry of Shah Shuja’s Force, 
On the 1st November, a strong insurgent force took up a position 
in the neighbourhood, cutting off the communication with Kabul. 
On the 3rd, Lieutenant Rattray, Assistant Political Agent, was 
treacherously killed at the termination of a conference with some 
of the insurgent chiefs, and from that date the fighting at and 
around Charikar was incessant. After heavy loss had been sus- 
tained (both Captain Codrington and Ensign Salusbury of the 
Gurkha battalion being among the slain), the utter failure of the 
water supply necessitated the evacuation of the place, and accord- 
ingly, on the 13th, the garrison, now reduced to 200 men, including 
Major Pottinger and Ensign Haughton, both wounded, Ensign 
Rose and Assistant-Surgeon Grant, retreated under cover of night. 
Dispersed, however, in the darkness, many fell by the hands 
of the insurgents, and many were taken prisoners and carried into 
slavery: Pottinger and Haughton, with one Gurkha, alone reached 
Kabul, though in the following year the latter officer collected 165 
Gurkhas inthe country round, who had escaped with theirlives. All 
the wounded, as well as the wivesand children of the sepoys, were 
massacred. At the same time the Kohistan Regiment mutinied and 
deserted. after killing their officers, Lieutenant Maule and Local- 
Lieutenant Wheeler. 
The Kabul out. It now remains to give a short account of the insurrection at Kabul 
aie and of the events which succeeded it, a story of defeat and disaster 
which make this one of the darkest pages in all the annals of the 

British arms in India. 
On the and November a tumult broke out in the city: the house 
of Sir Alexander Burnes (who had been nominated to succeed Sir 
William Macnaghten as Envoy) was attacked, and he, his brother 


Charikar, 
N evember, 


7 ——nctiessn- -cemepem comme eh 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 181 


(Lieutenant Charles Burnes, 17th Bombay Native Infantry), and 
Lieutenant W. Broadfoot of the rst Bengal European Regiment, were, 
after a desperate defence, overpowered and slain by the insurgents. 
At this time the troops in Kabul were — 

The 1st Troop, 1st Brigade, Bengal Horse Artillery. 

A battery of Artillery, Shah Shuja’s Force. 

A detachment of the Bengal Sappers and Miners. 

A detachment of Sappers, Shah Shuja’s Force (3 companies). 

Two squadrons of the sth Bengal Light Cavalry. i 

One risaliah of the 1st Irregular Cavalry. 

One risallak of the 4th Irregular Cavalry. 

The and Regiment of Cavalry, Shah Shuja’s Force. 

Her Majesty’s 44th Foot. 

The sth Bengal Native Infantry. 

The s4th _—_ ditto ditto. 

The Envoy’s Body-Guard. 

The 6th Regiment of Infantry, Shah Shuja’s Force. 


The whole of these troops were under the command of Major- 
Genera! W. G. K. Elphinstone, c.B., an Officer of good repute, who 
had seen much service in various parts of the world (he had com- 
manded the 33rd Foot at Waterloo), but he was at this time in ap 
extremely bad state of health, and this interfered toa great extent 
with the proper performance of the onerous duties of his command: 
to this circumstance isto be attributed in a great measure the whole 
of the misfortunes which followed. 

On the 3rd of November, the force was increased by the arrival of 
the 37th Bengal Native Infantry from Khurd Kabul. 

On the following day the first misfortune occurred in the loss of| 
the commissariat fort, with the whole of the supplies which it con- 
tained, which had to be abandoned in consequence of the delay 
which took place in reinforcing the small party which held it. On 
the 6th, Kila-i-Muhammad Sharif, which had been occupied by the 
enemy, was taken. by storm by a detachment of three companies 
(one each from the 44th Footand the sth and 37th Native Infantry) 
commanded by Major Griffiths of the 37th. On the roth the 
Rikabashi fort, of which the insurgents had taken possession, 
was. retaken with the severe loss of 200 killed and wounded, 
amongst whom was numbered Colonel Mackrell of the 44th, an old 
Waterloo officer, who died the same day of his wounds. On 
the 13th an action was fought on the Bemaru heights, which, 
after a check which very nearly proved a disaster, ended in the 


182 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


a el 


Marder of Sir 
William 
M acnaghten. 


r0q2. * 


The retreat. 


defeat of the enemy and the capture of their guns. Some days 
were now spent in fruitless discussions as to the best course to be 
pursued, for supplies were beginning to run low, while the enemy 
were increasing in numbers and boldness; but no action of any 
kind was taken. At length, on the 22nd November, Muhammad 
Akbar Khan, son of Dost Muhammad, arrived at Kabul, and on 
the following day the enemy again occupied the heights of Bemaru. 
Brigadier Shelton was sent out to dislodge them with seventeen 
companies of infantry (five of the 44th Foot, and six each of the sth 
and 37th Native Infantry), 100 sappers, three squadrons of cavalry 
and ome gun. The detachment was, however, mishargiled, for 
Shelton, like Monson, though as brave a man as ever lived, was 
no general. The result was a disastrous defeat of the British 
force, which was only saved from annihilation by a charge ofthe 
cavalry and by the fall of one of the principal Afghan chiefs. 

Little was now thought of but a retreat to India; supplies had 
failed, and cold and defeat had demoralised the remnant of the troops 
that still remained ; while the whole country was up in arms against 
us, To this end, therefore, on the rith December, negotiations 
were opened with Muhammad Akbar; in the midst of which, 
twelve days later, December the 23rd, the British Envoy, Sir William 
Macnaghten, was inveigled out of cantonments to a conference and 
treacherously murdered. Notwithstanding the evidence. this act 
afforded that little reliance could be placed in the good faith of the 
enemy negotiations were still continued, and on the 6th of January 
1842, after having sustained the humiliation of giving upto the 
enemy all the guns buf six, and although the terms, both as re- 
garded transport and escort, had not been fulfilled by the Afghans, 
the Kabul garrison, amounting to 4,500 fighting men, evacuated 
the positions they had held, and commenced their retreat to Jalala- 
bad. Then ensued what might have been anticipated from a 
knowledge of the Afghan character. Scarcely had the troops left 
their cantonments when the Afghans began to attack them; day 
after day, through the defiles of Khurd Kabul, of the Tangi 
Tariki, of Jagdalak, their numbers grew less and less before the 
bullets of the Afghan jase/s and the cold steel of the Afghan knives, 
aided by the bitter cold and the deep-lying snow. The widows, 
married people, and children weressaved by being made over to the 
care of Muhammad Akbar at Khurd Kabul; General Elphinstone, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


183 


Brigadier Shelton, and Captain Johnson, who had gone to meet 
Muhammad Akbar at a conference at Jagdalak, were there taken 
prisoners by the Afghan chief, who detained them as hostages for the 
surrender of Jalalabad. Reduced at Jagdalak to about 150 men, the 
devoted remnants of the force struggled on into that last fatal pass, 
where a terrible fate awaited them. Hemmed in on every side by 
the murderous hordes of their enemies, only some twenty officers 
and forty-five men survived to see another day at Gandamak: here 
within a few miles of Jalalabad their merciless foes fell on them 
again: the remnant which escaped fell one by one by the way or 
were cut down by the enemy, until at length one only survived,t 
grievously wounded and almost overcome with exhaustion, to reach 
a haven of safety and tell the fate of Elphinstone’s brigade to the 
garrison of Jalalabad. 

Sir Robert Sale, as we have seen, occupied Jalalabad on the 13th 
November, 1841. Aided by that excellent officer, Captain George 
Broadfoot, of the Madras Army, Commandant of the Corps of 
Sappers of Shah Shuja’s Force, he immediately set about restoring 
the fortifications of the place, which were in a most dilapidated con- 
dition, superintending the work with unceasing vigilance, although, 
in consequence of the severe wound he had received in forcing the 
Khurd Kabul Pass, he was unable to get about without assistance, 
and had to be carried from point to point in a litter, By the 
unremitting labours of the garrison, Jalalabad was soon in a re- 
spectable state of defence, but the severity of the season and the 
fury of the enemy were not all that these gallant men had to contend 
against. Even Nature herself seemed to be arrayed against them, 
for the walls had not long been restored when a violent shock of 
earthquake once more reduced them to ruins, and in some places 
even levelled them withthe ground. But the calamity was met with 
becoming fortitude; the weary work was promptly recommenced, 
and soon once more the walls were raised, and the place made 
secure against all the efforts of the enemy, who, under Muhammad 
Akbar Khan, were in great force in the neighbourhood. 


Early in the siege the question of surrendering the place, in 


@ Major-General Elphinstone died in captivity, at Badiabad, on the 23rd 
April 31843.—P, 
¢ Assistant-Surgeon W. Brydon. 


Defence of 
Jalalabad, 


184 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


swine i A 


obedience to orders received from Major-General Elphinstone, when 
he capitulated at Kabul, came under the consideration of Sale and 
a Counci] of War. It has been said proverbially that *‘a Council, 
of War never fights,” and in this instance there was no exception to 
the rule. Considering themselves abandoned, and hopeless of relief, 
Sale and the majority of the Council were for yielding, and notwith- 
standing the sterner counsels of Broadfoot, Oldfield, and Backhouse, 
who strongly urged the more worthy course of hotding onto the 
place to the last, ;proposals for the evacuation of Jalalabad, on the 
condition of a safe conduct to Peshawar, were actually addressed to 
the enemy. An implied doubt of the sincerity with which these 
proposals were made afforded an opportunity of reconsidering and 
withdrawing them; manlier counsels prevailed and Jalalabad 
remained in our hands, to be defended witha tenacity which has 
extorted universal admiration. | 

From November, 1841, to April, 1842, Sale’s Brigade continued 
straitly shut up within the walls of Jalalabad, except only when 
the occasional nearer approach of the Afghans afforded opportunity 
for asortie. In one of these sallies (24th March, 1842) the gallant 
Broadfoot received a severe wound which deprived the garrison of 
his valuable services for the remainder of the siege. 

This was now rapidly approaching its termination. A relieving 
force, under the command of Major-General Pollock, was on its 
way, but on the 7th April, a week hefore it reached Jalalabad, 
the garrison sallied forth and inflicted a crushing defeat upon 
the enemy and practically relieved themselves. The available 
force on that day was something under 1,500 men, including 
the 13th Light Infantry, the 35th Native Infantry, Broadfoot’s 
Sappers, and a squadron and a half of native cavalry; while that 
of Muhammad Akbar is described as not less than 6,000. The 
enemy were drawn up ina strong position to receive the attack, 
but they were speedily driven from it with severe loss and their army 
entirely dispersed. Sale’s loss was 11 killed and 71 wounded; 
among the former being the gallant Colonel Dennie, of the 13th 
Light Infantry, a distinguished officer who had served under Lord 
Lake in the early years of the century, had witnessed the conquest 
of the Isle of France, and gone through three arduous cam- 
paigns in Burma with much credit, and who had led the storming 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


party at the capture of Ghazni three years before. The whole of 
the Afghan camp was captured and several British guns re-taken, 
together with a quantity of provisions. Of these latter it is 
related that when the Brigadier divided amongst his troope the 
sheep taken from the enemy, the 35th Native Infantry desired 
that their share might be given to the 13th Light Infantry, who, they 
said, were in more need of animal food than themselves,—a striking 
instance of the good fellowship which has so often existed between 
British and Native corps, especially in times of hardship and trial. 

In India, in the meantime, as soon as intelligence was received of 
the outbreak at Kabul, strenuous efforts were made to push up 
reinforcements, and before the middle of January 1842 a brigade,— 
consisting of a squadron of the 3rd Irregular Cavalry, and the 3oth, 
53rd, 6oth, and 64th Native Infantry, in all about 4,300 men, with 
five guns (which had been borrowed from the Sikhs),—was at 
Peshawar under the command of Brigadier Wild. As a prepara- 
tory step to advancing to the relief of Jalalabad, Wild, on the rsth 
January, sent forward the 53rd and 64th, under Lieutenant-Colone] 
Moseley, to take possession of Ali Masjid. This was easily 
accomplished, and on the 19th the Brigadier himself moved forward 
with the remaining two regiments and four guns; but the Afridis 
had now risen and closed the pass, and were prepared to resist 
the advance of any more troops into the Khaibar; Wild 
encountered them at the mouth of the pass anda severe engage- 
ment ensued, but owing tothe worthlessness of the Sikh guns, 
which broke down at the first discharge, and to the inadequacy 
of the force, the attempt to get through to Ali Masjid proved a 
complete failures the troops were beaten back and obliged to retire 
to Jamrud with considerable loss, Brigadier Wild himself and three 
other officers being amongst the wounded. In the meantime, 
Moseley, exposed to incessant attacks, had found it impossible to 
maintain himself at Ali Masjid, and on the 24th he was compelled 
to evacuate the place and retreat to Jamrud, exposed the whole 
way to an incessant fire from the Afridis. The loss of Moseley’s 
detachment was heavy, as was that of another detachment sent to 
the entrance of the Khaibar Pass to cover his retirement. Alto- 
gether the loss amounted to 37 killed (including Captain Lock, 
sth Native Infantry—attached to the 6oth,—Captain Wilson, 64th 


Repulse in the 
Khaibar. : 


186 


General 
Pollock’s 
advance, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Native Infantry, and Subadars Ram Singh and Sukhlal Upadhia, 
53rd Native Infantry) and 232 wounded (including six British and 
eight Native officers). This check had a fatal effect on the force 
and it was not until Major-General Pollock, who had been 
appointed to command the forces moving into Afghanistan, arrived 
and assumed the command that any real progress was made in 
preparing for an advance. But, with all his energy, it was the 
sth of April before Pollock was able to march from Peshawar. The 
force under hiscommand was organised as follows :— 
ARTILLERY: Under Captain A. Abbott —One troop of horse artillery, two 
light field batteries, and Backhouse’s Mountain Train. 
Cavacey s Under Brigadier M. White— srd Light Dragoons, ist Light 
Cavalry, a detachment of the sth Light Cavalry, roth Light 


Cavalry, 3rd Irregular Cavalry, and a detachment of 
Anderson’s Horse (late 2nd Cavalry, Shah Shuja’s Force.) 


INFANTRY: Under Major-General J. M’Caskill, K.H. 


1ST BRIGADE: Major-General Sir R. H. Sale, x.c.B—13th Foot, 35th 
Native Infantry, Broadfoot’s Sappers, and the Khaibar 
Rangers. 

anp Bricane : Brigadier W. H. Dennie,c.8.:—9th Foot, 26th and 6oth Native 
Infantry, and the 5th Company of Sappers and Miners. 

grp BricabDs : Brigadier C. F. Wild—3oth, 53rd and 64th Native Infantry. 

4TH Bricave: Brigadier T. Monteath—31st Foot, 6th and 33rd Native 
Infantry. 


Of these troops, however, Backhouse’s Mountain Train, Broadfoot’s 
Sappers, the detachments of the 5th Light Cavalry and of Anderson's 
Horse, the 13th Foot and the 35th Native Infantry were then 
at Jalalabad; the 31st Foot and the 6th Native Infantry had not 
yet arrived at Peshawar, and thus Pollock made his forward move- 
ment with only the following corps and detachments :— 

The 3rd Light Dragoons, the rst and roth Light Cavalry, and a detachment 
of the grd Irregular Cavalry. 

A troop of horse artillery, two light field batteries, and some siege guns. 

A company of Bengal Sappers and Miners. 


The oth Foot, the 26th, 30th, 33rd, 53rd, 6oth, and 64th Native Infantry, and 
a corps of Afghan riflemen styled “ Ferris’s Jazelchis.” 


Genera! Pollock’s advance was planned and conducted with the 
greatest care and circumspection. On the date abovenamed, his 
force advanced in three columns, the right and left preceding the 
centre and crowning the heights on either side of the Khaibar 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 
Pass. ‘The enemy (Afridis and other Khaibaris) made a deter- 
mined and obstinate resistance, but after a succession of severe 
combats they were driven from every position they had taken up, 
and the pass was forced with a loss on our side of 14 killed, 104 
wounded, and 17 missing. Pollock, pushing forward, reached 
Jalalabad on the 16th of April, only to find that the garrison had 
already, unaided, broken up the siege of the place and effected its 
own relief. Here ia the following month he was joined by the 31st 
Foot and the 6th Native Infantry. | 


It is now necessary to describe the doings in southern Afghanistan 
during the preceding six months. In November 1841; the force at 
Major-General Nott’s disposal consisted of Her Majesty’s goth Foot, 
the and, 16th, 38th, 42nd, and 43rd Native Infantry, the rst, and, and 
5th Infantry of Shah Shuja’s Force (or portions of these corps), a 
detachment of the rst Irregular Cavalry, the rst Cavalry of Shah 
Shuja’s Force (Christie's Horse), and some details of artillery. Sum- 
moned by Sir William Macnaghten, one brigade, under the com- 
mand of Colonel McLaren, marched in November for the relief of 
our forces at Kabul, but, being unable (so, at least, it was alleged) to 
overcome the difficulties of bad weather and want of food, it returned 
to Kandahar on the 8th December, having reinforced the garrison 
of Kalat-i-Ghilzai with 300 of the 43rd Native Infantry. 


Ghazni was at this time held by the 27th Native Infantry, under 
the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Palmer. The insurgents 
appeared before the place on the 2zoth November, and on the 
7th December began closely besieging it. On the 17th the 
defenders were compelled to abandon the city and take refuge 
in the fort. Here they suffered greatly from cold and want of 
provisions and water until the 6th of March, when the place was 
surrendered. The garrison were not however suffered, as they 
had been promised, to depart in safety; a few days after the 
capitulation they were furiously attacked by ghasis; for three days 
they sustained from house to house an unequal combat with their 
foes ; at length some of the sepoys determined to cut their way out 
and try to make across country to Peshawar, which they be- 
lieved to be only fifty or sixty miles off ; on the roth they started on 
their mad attempt, only to be cut down or taken prisoners in the 
snow-covered fields. The whole of the British officers (except one,— 


187 


Events at 
Kandahar. 


188 


Operations at 
Kandahar. 


Defence of 
Kalat4-Ghilzai. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Lieutenant Lumsden,—who had fallen during the fighting) 
became prisoners, and remained in captivity for many months, 
subjected to the severest privations. 


At Kandahar, Nott easily held his own against the insurgent 
gatherings that appeared in his neighbourhood. On several occasions 
(at Kali-Shak on the 12th January; Kanji-Kak, Panjwai and Tilu- 
Khan on the 7th, 8th, gth, and roth March ; and at Baba-Wali on the 
25th March) he defeated and drove off the Duranis by whom the place 
was threatened. During his absence on one of these expeditions, the 
Afghans made a furious night attack on Kandahar (10th March), 
evidently hoping to carry the place with a rush. Every attempt was, 
however, repelled by the garrison, uncer the command of Major 
Lane, 2nd Native Infantry, and eventually the enemy drew off after 
having sustained heavy loss. On the 1oth of May Nott was joined 
by Major-Genera: England, with the 41st Foot and some Bombay 
troops from Sindh. 


The first measure now to be undertaken was the relief of the fort 
of Kalat-i-Ghilzai. This place had been garrisoned since November 
of the preceding year by the 3rd Infantry of Shah Shuja’s Force, 
under Captain J. H. Craigie, and 40 British artillerymen; in 
December, as has been noticed, it had been reinforced by 300 of 
the 43rd Native Infantry. After sustaining a close blockade for 
several weeks, which was preceded by the hardships occasioned by 
the severity of the winter and the hostility of the surrounding country, 
the little garrison successfuliy defeated with great loss a determined 
attack by the enemy on the 21st of May. A week later they were 
relieved by Colonel Wymer from Kandahar, who withdrew the 
garrison and destroyed the works, and, after visiting Girishk, 
returned to Kandahar onthe 7th June. In recognition of its gallan- 
try, the 3rd Infantry was at a subsequent period taken into the 
Company’s service, and is still, as the 12th Bengal Infantry, per- 
mitted to bear the name of ‘‘ Karat-1-Guiuzal,” with which it is 
so honorably connected. 

Taking advantage of the absence of Colonel Wymer and the 
greater part of the force, the Duranis to the number of about 
8,000 men, led by Aktar Khan, came down on Kandahar on the 2gth 
May. Nott moved out at once with a force of about 2,000 men, 
which included the 42nd and 43rd Native Infantry, and gave the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


enemy a complete overthrow, inflicting on them heavy loss, while 
the casualties in his own force amounted to no more than one killed 
and §2 wounded. 

It was not until August that General Nott received permis- 
sion to advance on Kabul, and on the roth he left Kandahar with 
the following force :— 


Two troops of horse artillery, one 9-pounder foot battery, four 18-pounders, with 
two companies of Bengal foot artillery; the 3rd Bombay Light Cavalry, 
three risalahs of the 1st Irregular Cavalry, five risalahs of the 1st 
Cavalry of Shah Shuja’s Contingent (Christie’s Horse) ; the goth and 41st 
Foot, the and, 16th, 38th, 4and, and 43rd Native Infantry,and the 3rd 
Infantry of Shah Shuja’s Contingent. 


The remainder of the force, including the Bombay troops not 
detailed to move northwards, two risalahs of Christie’s Horse, and 
three infantry regiments of Shah Shnuja’s Contingent, returned to 
India through the Bolan. 

During his march towards Kabul, Nott had several engagements 
with the enemy. An unfortunate cavalry affairtook place near 
Kila Azim and Karez Usman Khan, on the 28th August, in which 
more than seventy casualties occurred on our side, including two 
officers (both of the 3rd Bombay Light Cavalry) killed and three 
wounded. On the 30th at Karabagh, near Goaine, thirty-five miles 
from Ghazni, a very large force of Afghans was completely defeated 
and dispersed with a loss on our side of about thirty killed and 
wounded.® Ghazni was reached on September 4th and evacuated 
by the enemy on the night of the sth, after an engagement in which 
Nott’s force suffered a loss of three killed and 43 wounded : 327 
of the 27th Native Infantry were here released from captivity ; the 
walls of the citadel were demolished; and, by order of Lord 
Ellenborough, the famous gates of the temple of Somnath were 
carried off from the tomb of Sultan Mahmud. The march was 
resumed on the 10th September, and after further engagements 
with the enemy, on the 14th and 1sth, near Beni Badam and 
Maidan (in which a loss of 4 killed and 59 wounded was sustained, 
including Subadar Jham Singh, 43rd Native Infantry, mortally 
wounded), Nott reached Kabul on September the 17th. 

e Our losees in these two engagements are very inconveniently “ lumped ”’ 
together in General Nott’s casualty returns, These returns show a total of 38 
killed (including two officers) and 66 wounded (including four officers). The 


casualties at Beni Badam on the 14th aed at Maidan on the 15th Septenber are 
also *‘ lumped ’’ together in the same way.—P. 


‘189 
Nott’s 
advance oa 
Kabul, 


190 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


General Pollock, however, was there before him. Leaving Jalala- 
bad on the 2oth of August, he pushed on his advance with surprising 
rapidity though opposed daily by the Afghans. His force included 
in the rst Division the 26th and 35th Native Infantry and a company 
of Sappers and Miners, and in the 2nd Division the 33rd and 60th 
Native Infantry, as well as two troops of horse artillery, one field 
battery, the rst Bengal Light Cavalry, and 600 of the 3rd Irregular 
Cavalry. Following, whenever opposed, his tactics of crowning the 
heights on either side of the pass, Pollock,—defeating the enemy at 
Mamu Khel on the 24th (in which action he lost 7 men killed and 
4 Officers and 45 men wounded), and again at Jagdalak on the 8th 
September (when his casualties amounted to 6 killed and 58 
wounded,—Captain Nugent, of the Commissariat Department 
being amongst the former),—drove all before him until] the 12th 
September, when, in the Tezin Valley, his flanks were assailed in a 
very daring manner by the enemy, who, though repulsed and driven 
off, returned in the evening and kept up a series of harassing attacks 
throughout the night. On the morning of the 13th Pollock advanced 
to the mouth of the Tezin pass, where he left the 3rd Light Dragoons, 
part of the rst Light Cavalry, and the 3rd Irregular Cavalry, to cover 
his rear, but he had no sooner quitted the valley than the Afghan 
horse appeared and, as had been anticipated, made a movement 
to fall upon the baggage train ; the attempt was fatal to them, for 
the dragoons and the native cavalry, catching them in compara- 
tively open ground, made a brilliant charge, completely routing them, 
cutting up large numbers, and capturing a standard, which was 
taken by Captain Goad of the rst Light Cavalry. While this com- 
bat was proceeding in the valley, Pollock, with the main body of 
his force, was slowly winning his way up the Tezin pass, though 
obstinately opposed at every step by Muhammad Akbar Khan, who 
had that day brought into the field a force of 16,000 men. Infuri- 
ated by the sight of the remains of their comrades who had fallen 
in the retreat a few months before, the British soldier and the sepoy 
alike fought with irresistible spirit; the Afghans were expelled from 
every position they took up, and finally aftera severe contest the 
Haft Kotal was surmounted and the enemy driven in headlong flight 
towards Kabul, with the loss of all their guns (three in number) and 
of probably from 1,200 to 1,500 men killed and wounded. Our own 
losses amounted to 32 killed and 130 (including four British officers) 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


1g! 


LLL 


wounded, among the former being a most gallant and distinguished 
Native officer, Haidar Ali, the Native Commandant of Ferris’s Jazel- 
chis. 

This was the last effort of Muhammad Akbar. Barring a series 
of attacks on his rear-guard and baggage train, on the 9th, roth 
and rith, in which a loss of 6 killed and 59 wounded was sustained, 
Pollock’s further advance to Kabul was absolutely unopposed, and that 
place was reached on the 15th September, two days before the arrival 
of the force from Kandahar under Major-General Nott. A week later 
the whele of the British captives in the hands of the Afghans (those 
from Ghazni as wellas those taken at Kabul and in the passes), 
having practically effected their own deliverance, arrived in Pollock’s 
camp. On the asth a force was detached under Major-General 
M’Caskill, consisting of one battery of 9-pounders and two 18-poun- 
ders, seven squadrons of cavalry, Broadfoot’s Sappers, and five regi- 
ments of infantry, including the 26th, 42nd, and 43rd Native Infantry, 
This force marched against Istalif, in Kohistan, defeated the Afghan 
force which had taken refuge there (zgth September), seized the 
town, and set fire to it in several places. The casualties in this affair 
amounted to one Officer and five men killed, and four officers and 
41 men wounded. Prince Shahpur was now chosen to ascend the 
throne in the place of Shah Shuja, who had been murdered in the 
preceding April. The great bazar of Kabul was blown up as a mark 


of British vengeance; and on October the 12th the return march | 0% 


to India wascommenced, The rear-guard, formed by General Nott’s 
force, was, in the retirement, several times engaged with the enemy; 
on the r4th, rsth and 16th October in the Haft Kotal Pass, where a 
loss was sustained of 7 killed and 58 wounded; in the Jagdalak Pass 
‘on the 18th (7 killed and 37 wounded) ; at Gandamak on the roth 
(2 killed and 15 wounded), and onthe 4th and 6th November near 
Ali Masjid, where the loss sustained was 4 killed and 19 wounded ; 
amongst the latter was Lieutenant Chamberlain of Christie’s Horse 
(now General Sir Neville Bowles Chamberlain, c.c.B.), who was 
here wounded for the sixth time that year. Late in the evening of 
the 3rd, near Garhi Lala Beg, the rear-guard of Brigadier Wild's 
brigade was rushed inthe darkness by a body of Afridis and sustained 
a loss of 19 killed and 32 wounded, Lieutenant Christie, of the 
Artillery, Ensign Nicholson, 30th Native Infantry, and Subadar 
Siu-din Singh, 53rd Native Infantry, being amongst the former; 


192 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


two guns of the mountain train were also lost, but they were recovered 
next day. Peshawar was reached by the rear-guard on the 6th, and 
then the march to Ferozepore was begun. 


In the meantime, in India, the Government had found it neces- 
sary to adopt measures of precaution against a new danger which 
had begun to develop itself. This was the hostility which for many 
months past the Sikhs, as a nation, had exhibited towards us, and 
which was, in fact, the beginning of the animosity which eventu- 
ally found expression in the war of 1845-46. So marked was this 
hostility that apprehensions were entertained that the Sikhs would 
take advantage of any opportunity that might present itself of falling 
upon General Pollock’s force during its march through the Punjab. 
As a support, therefore, to Pollock, andasa menace tothe Sikh 
capital in the event of any overt act of hostility, a powerful force was 
assembled at Ferozepore in the autumn of 1842, under the Comman- 
der-in-Chief, Sir Jasper Nicolls, in person. This was styled 
“ The Army of Reserve,” and was organised as follows :— 


ARTILLERY :—Under Brigadier C. Graham, c.B,~— 
Four troops of horse artillery. 
Four companies of foot artillery. 
Three light field batteries. 
ENGIN&ERS :—Under Major E. J. Smith.— 
‘Two companies of Sappers and Miners. 
CAVALRY :—Under Major-General Sir J. Thackwell, x.c.8.— 
ist Brigade—The 16th Light Dragoons (Lancers), the 7th Light Cavalry, 
and the 4th Irregular Cavalry. 
and Brigade—The 3rd Light Cavalry and the 6th Irregular Cavalry. 
First INFANTRY Division :—Under Major-General J. Dennis.— 
1st Brigade—The 1st European Light Infantry, and the 1st and 2nd 
Light Infantry Battalions, 
and Brigade—The 3rd Foot (the Buffs), and the gth and roth Native 
Infantry. 
SECOND INFANTRY Division :—Under Major-General W. Rattine, c.B.— 
gr@ Brigade—The 39th Foot, and the 5oth and 72nd Native infantry. 
gth Brigade—The 2nd European Regiment, the 39th Native Infantry, and 
the Sirmoor Battalion. 


The ptecaution taken had the desired effect. Sikh turbulence was 
overawed forthe time, andthe army returning from Afghanistan 
was allowed to proceed unmolested. Marching across the Punjab, 
Pollock’s force reached Ferozepore in three detachments on the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


193 


re . 


17th, 19th and 23rd December, and then after a period of general 

festivity, ending ina grand review of the united forces (40,000 

men, with 100 guns) before the Governor-General, the army was dis- 

‘ei and returned to cantonments. So ended the first Afghan 
ar. 

The satisfaction of the Governor-General at the conclusion of the 
war is evinced by his complimentary orders to the army. For the 
second campaign a further donation of six months’ batta was made to 
all troops serving in and above the Khaibar or the Bolan Pass on the 8th 
September, 1842. Corps engaged in the actions around KaNnpawar, 
in the defence of JALALABAD and Karat-1-Guiizal, the re-capture 
of Guaznt and the re-occupation of Kanu, received permission to 
bear those names upon their colours, All ranks present in the 
actions at Kandahar and Ghazni and those leading to the re-Occupa- 
tion of Kabul, received a medal inscribed with the names of the same 
andthe date “1842” under-written. Additional medals were given 
to the garrisons of Jalalabad and Kalat-i-Ghilzai, and the corps 
engaged in the former received permission to wear a mural crown 
on their appointments in commemoration of the siege. The 3rd 
Regiment, of Shah Shuja’s infantry were, in consideration of 
their valour and discipline inthe defence of Kalat-i-Ghilzai, brought 
on the strength of the Bengal Army as an extra regiment, and de- 
nominated “ The Regiment of Kalat-i-Ghilzai.” The and and 16th 
Native Infantry were made grenadier regiments, and the 38th, 4and, 
and 43rd were made Light Infantry,—(G. O. G. G., 4th October, 
1843). The corps which still exist of those thus honored are the 
Sappers and Miners, the rst Irregular Cavalry (1st Bengal Cavalry), 
the 33rd (4th), 42nd (sth), and 43rd (6th) Native Infantry, and the 
Kalat-i-Ghilzai Regiment (12th). 

Embarrassed as the Indian Government was with the great and un- 
expected expenses of the Afghan campaigns, it was nevertheless 
unable to avoid taking part in another expedition at almost the oppo- 
site extremity of Asia. This was the first Chinese war, the cause of 
which was the forcible destruction of two and a half million pounds 
worth of British property by the Chinese authorities, in a violent effort 
to destroy the opium traffic. As in the Burmese war, however, 
the prejudices of the Bengal sepoys, as well as the pressing need for 
troops on the western frontier, prevented any but a very small contin- 
gent being despatched from this presidency, the greater part of the 

e 


War in China, 
s8qo—42, 


194 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


waz. 


2843. 


Native soldiery employed being from Madras. Volunteers to form 
one regiment were called for by G.O. C.C, of the zoth January, 1840, 
‘‘for service to the eastward ;” and this corps, together with the 18th, 
26th and 49th Foot, sailed from Calcutta in April of that year. The 
island of Chusan was occupied on the sth of July, and here the 
British force remained during the rest of the year, in which time all 
the regiments suffered terribly from sickness. 

Attempts at negotiation having failed, the fort of Chuenpee, situated 
on an island in the Canton river, was attacked and taken on January 
the 7th, 1841, with trifling loss. Six weeks of desultory negotiations 
then ensued, during which the island of Chusan was evacuated by 
the British, On the 19th February hostilities were resumed, and 
during the next fortnight some hard fighting took place in attacks on 
the forts at the mouth of the Canton river. Onthe 24th of May Canton 
itself was attacked, and during that and the next six days the heights 
above the place were occupied and several other advantages obtained, 
with a loss on our side of 15 killed and 122 wounded; the city itself 
was, however, not entered, negotiations having been resumed, and 
the place ransomed for six million dollars. From Canton the force 
was moved to Hong-Kong, where it again suffered terribly from 
disease. 

About this time the Bengal Volunteer Battalion (except a detach- 
ment under Major Mee, which remained in China and took part in 
subsequent operations up to August, 1841) returned to India, where, 
on their arrival they were complimented in a G. O. (No. 122 of 1841) 
for the alacrity with which they had volunteered for the service, and 
received one month’s full pay and batta asa gratuity, with special] leave 
to their homes before rejoining their severa] regiments. 


At the end of August operations were resumed, and Amoy, Chusan, 
Chinhae, and Ningpo were captured by the British. During the 
winter operations were suspended, but were re-commenced in March, 
1842, by an attack by the Chinese onthe British force at Ningpo, 
which was repulsed with very heavy loss to the enemy. 


Major Mee’s detachment was sent back to India in March, 1842, 
previous to which, in G.O. No. 291 of 1841, another battalion of volun- 
teers was called for in Bengal, and was formed of companies from 
eight different regiments,—the 3rd, 15th, 17th, 23rd, 32nd, 4tst, 
52nd, and 56th Native Infantry. This corps, however, was delayed at 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


195 


Calcutta, and did not arrive in China until June, 1842, when it joined 
the expedition then about to set out for the Yang-tse-Kiang. Chin- 
Kiang-Foo was reached on the rsth of July and taken by storm on 
the 21st, with a loss on our side of 34 killed, 107 wounded, and 3 
missing. On this occasion, as is recorded in a complimentary G. O. 
dated October 14th, three companies of the Bengal Volunteers, under 
Major Kent, had the good fortune to be the first engaged with the 
enemy. The battalion had three men wounded. The Chinese troops 
were scattered with great loss. This victory was the last engagement 
of the war, for before the British force could advance on Nankin, the 
Chinese sued for peace, and a treaty was concluded on August the 
17th. 

To the troops employed in the earlier part of the campaign, up to 
June, 1841, twelve months’ full batta was presented; for the latter 
operations six months’ batta was given, while all ranks received a 
medal, and certain honorary distinctions were granted to the British 
and Madras regiments.—(G. O. No. 54 of 1842). 

In 1840-41-42, while the wars in Afghanistan and China were still 
proceeding, disturbances of a somewhat serious character occurred 
in Bundelkhand and in the Saugor and Nerbadda territories, which 
necessitated the employment ofa considerable military force for their 
suppression. The first notable outbreak was that at Chirgaon, a 
small town lying about eighty miles south-west of Kalpi, the 
jJaghirdar of which place went into rebellion and began committing 
depredations in the surrounding country : a force of nearly 2,000 men 
(which included the Bundelkhand Legion and part of the 13th 
Native Infantry) was employed in the reduction of the place, which 
was evacuated by the insurgents (April, 1841) after two days’ 
operations and the capture by storm of one ofthe outworks. In an 
action near Malthone, in April, 1842, Captain Ralfe, of the 3rd 
Native Infantry, was mortally wounded. In June, 1843, an action 
took place at Panwari, in which a squadron of the 8th Light Cavalry 
and two companies of the 13th Native Infantry defeated a body of 
3,000 Bufdela insurgents, killing upwards of eighty, including 
their leader. In December, 1842, a smart engagement was fooght 
at Bhagaura, near Jaitpur, in which detachments of the 4oth and 
57th Native Infantry defeated a considerable body of insurgents. 
Subadar Yar Khan, stst Native Infantry, was killed ina skirmish 

02 


Disturbances 
in Bundel- 
khand, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Minah ae 
eth, 1843. 


ary 3 


with a body of rebels in February, 1843. Several other engagements 


took place in various parts of the disturbed districts, and it was not 
until the summer of 1843 that order was eventually restored. The 
troops employed from time to time in the suppression of the dis- 
turbances were the 8th Light Cavalry, the and and 8th Irregular 
Cavalry, the 3rd, rith, 13th, 24th, goth, soth, 51st, 57th and 61st 
Native Infantry, and the Bundelkhand Legion. 

Scarcely were the campaigns in Afghanistan and China concluded 
when the Indian Government found themselves involved in a war 
with the Baluch Amirs of Sindh. A long course of intrigues and 
misunderstandings came to a head ina treacherous attack on the 
Residency of Hyderabad on the rsth February, 1843. Major-Gene- 
ral Sir Charles J. Napier, commanding in Sindh and Baluchistan, who 
was then at Halla, thirty-five miles to the north-west of Hyderabad, 
immediately marched towards that place with such troops as were then 
available in that part of Sindh. His force consisted of— 

The goth Bengal Light Cavalry, a detail of the Poona Horse, the Sindh Horse, 
two companies of artillery, one company of Madras sappers, Her 
Majesty’s 22nd Foot, and the 1st, 12th, and 25th Bombay Native Infantry. 

With these troops, amounting to less than 2,800 men, with twelve 
pieces of artillery, Sir Charles met and attacked the enemy (30,000 
strong) at Miani, six miles from Hyderabad, on February the 17th. 
Rather less than 1,800 ofthe British troops were actually engaged 
in the battle which ensued, Major Outram being absent with a 
detachment of 200, while the detail of the Poona Horse and four 
companies of infantry were employed asa baggage guard. The 
enemy were strongly posted on and beyond the dry bed of the Fulaili 
nala, of which the high banks served as a rampart, while their flanks 
rested on thick jungle impassable for cavalry. Napier made a 
frontal attack, advancing in echelon of regiments across the plain, 
and our troops were met as they came to close quarters by repeated 
and determined charges of the Baluch infantry: for three hours a 
stubborn hand-to-hand fight was maintained, until at length the for- 
tunes of the day were decided by a brilliant charge of the gth 
Bengal Light Cavalry and the Sindh Horse, under Colonel Pattle, 
who, breaking through the enemy’s right, swept across the ma/a and 
fellon their rear. Slowly they began to give way, and, disputing 
every inch of ground, they were gradually driven from the field, 
leaving their camp, stores, and artillery in the hands of the victors. 


ee ee ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 197 


The loss of the enemy was reckoned at 5,000, but was probably not 
so‘great ; that) of the British was 6 British officers and 56 men killed, 
13 British officers, 3 Native officers, and 178 men wounded. ; 
Among the killed was Captain Cookson, of the 9th Bengal Light 

Cavalry. 

Sir Charles Napier entered Hyderabad on the 2oth February, and 
On the 12th of March the annexation of the whole of Sindh was 
proclaimed, and the Baluch Sardars who had tendered their submis- 
sion were deported to Bombay. 

One powerful chief, Mir Sher Muhammad, of Mirpur, still remained | Battie of 
in arms at the head of about 20,000 men, and posted himself at agi Bare 
Dabba, about four miles from Hyderabad, where Sir Charles Napier, 
who had received reinforcements (principally Bombay troops) which 
had brought the strength of his force up to 5,000 men, attacked him 
on the 24th March. Here again the enemy were strongly posted 

behind a aaa, and the resistance which they offered was, while it 

lasted, as firm and gallant as that they had made at Miani; but 
shaken by a raking cross-fire from the British artillery they began 
to give ground, and the advance: of the infantry, led by the 2and 
Foot, and the turning of both flanks by the cavalry, speedily com- 
pleted their discomfiture. They gave way in utter rout and were 
pursued for many miles with much slaughter, and the conquest of 
Sindh was complete. The British loss amounted to two officers 
and 37 men killed, and 10 officers and 221 men wounded, Captain 
Garrett, of the gth Bengal Light Cavalry, being numbered amongst 
the former. . 

For these successes the troops received the thanks of both Houses 
of Parliament; a medal was conferred on all ranks, inscribed with the 
names “ MEEZANEE” and “ HyprrabaD;” and those names, with that 
of ‘‘ Scinpg,” were authorised to be borne on the colours of all corps 
engaged in the two actions. 

In April, 1843, a sudden outbreak took place at Kaithal, in the | Kaitnal, 
Karnal District, The Kaithal territories having lapsed to the British 
Government, Mr. Greathed, a civil officer, proceeded to the town 
to settle the affairs of the State, escorted by about 150 men of the 

rd Irregular Cavalry and two companies of the 72nd Native Infantry. 
On the gth April the escort;,was suddenly attacked by the people of 
the place, and compelled to retire to Karnal after having sustained 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


The Gwalior 
campaign, 
3843. 


heavy loss, One Native officer of the 3rd Irregular Cavalry, (Ressai- 
dar Sarmast Khan) and all those of the two companies of the 72nd 
(Subadars Parsan Dichit and Hassan Khan, and Jemadars Harak 
Singh and Gangacharan Misser) were killed, and Lieutenant Farre 
of the 73nd was severely wounded in the conflict. A considerable 
force had to be sent to Kaithal before order was restored. 


The death of the Maharajah of Gwalior (Sindhia), and the 
disturbances incidental to the succession of a minor, mneces- 
sitated British intervention in the affairs of that State towards the 
close of 1843, and eventually involved the Government of India in 
the last of the wars withthe Mahratta powers. It was at first expected 
that a simple demonstration would be sufficient to put an end to 
disturbances which had already begun to affect injuriously the peace 
of British districts bordering on the Gwalior territories, and accord- 
ingly with that object, in the autumn of 1843, orders were issued for 
the assembly of forces which were for the time designated the “ Army 
of Exercise.” The mere concentration of troops did not, however, 
produce the beneficial effect which had been anticipated, and even- 
tually, in December, under the designation of the Right and Left 
wings of the Army of Gwalior, the forces which had been assembled 
at Agra and Jhansi were moved forward to attack Gwalior, respec- 
tively, from the north and the south. 


The composition of the two wings of the Army of Gwalior was 
as follows :-— 


Right Wing : -Three troops of horse artillery ; four companies of foot artil- 
lery; three companies of sappers; the 16th Light Dragoons, the Body 
Guard, the 1st, 4th and roth Light Cavalry, and detachments of the sth 
and 8th ; the 4th Irregular Cavalry; the 39th and goth Foot, the 2nd, 
14th, 16th, 31st, 39th (one company), 43rd, 56th, 6and and 7oth Native 
Infantry, and the Regiment of Kalat-i-Ghilzai. 

Left Wing :—Two troops of horse artillery; one company of foot artillery ; 
one company of sappers; the oth Light Dragoons (two squadrens), the sth 
(two squadrons), 8th and tith (two squadrons) Light Cavalry; the 8th 
Irregular Cavalry; the 3rd and Soth Foot, the 39th, Soth, 51st and 58th 
Native Infantry, and the Sipri Contingent, 


The cavalry were organised in four brigades, and the infantry in 
three divisions of two brigades each. The rst and 2nd Brigades 
of Cavalry and the rst Division (1st and and Brigades) of Infantry 
formed the Left Wing under Major-General Grey. The 3rd and 


_ “Be 


amg, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 199 

Se a A Oe re eee eee eRe 
4th Brigades of Cavalry and the 2nd and 3rd Divisions of Infantry 
constituted the Right Wing. The 2nd and 3rd Divisions were 
commanded respectively by Major-Generals Dennis and Littler. 

The Right Wing, under the Commander-in-Chief, General Sir 
Hugh Gough, and accompanied by the Governor-General, Lord 
Ellenborough, in person, crossed the Chambal river on the 22nd 
and 23rd December, and reached Hingona on the 26th. Advancing 
thence on the morning of the 29th, Sir Hugh Gough found the 
Mahrattas numbering about 18,coo men, with a powerful artillery, 
drawn up ina very strongly entrenched position in front of the villages 
of Maharajpur and Chaunda, about fifteen miles to the north-west of Battle of 
Gwalior. The sth Brigade (39th Foot and 6th Native Infantry), | Decommirakn, 
under the command of Brigadier Wright, was forthwith launched — 
against the village of Maharajpur under cover of the fire of two light 
field batteries, while the 3rd Brigade (40th Foot, and and and roth 
Native Infantry) under Major-General Valiant was directed to take the 
village in reverse, both movements being supported by the 4th 
Brigade (14th, 31st and 43rd Native Infantry) under the command of 
Brigadier Stacy. After a desperate contest, often hand-to-hand, these 
troops drove the enemy from Maharajpur; then moving on Chaunda 
the sth Brigade, after a severe conflict, carried that position too, 
while the 3rd and 4th Brigades, co-operating, drove the Mahrattas 
from the villages of Shikarpur and Dompura, The cavalry at the 
same time were fully employed, and a spirited charge of the 4th 
Irregular Cavalry, resulting in the capture of two guus and two stand- 
ards, was specially mentioned in the Commander-in-Chief’s de- 
spatch. Inthe end the enemy were driven from the field with heavy 
loss, leaving in our possession fifty-six guns and the whole of 
their ammunition wagons. In this severe engagement the 16th 
and 56th Native Infantry were greatly distinguished and suffered 
heavily. The loss on our side was great, amounting to 106 
killed, 684 wounded, and 7 missing, making a total of 797. Major- 
General Churchill, c.s., Quarter-Master-General, Queen’s troops, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Sanders, Deputy Secretary to the Government of 
India, Lieutenant Leathes, of the Artillery, Major Crommelin, 
1st Light Cavalry, Lieutenant Newton, 16th Native Infantry, 
Subadar-Major Jodha Singh, Bahadur, 4th Light Cavalry, and 
Jemadar Khushial Singh, 16th Native Infantry, were numbered 


200 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Battle of 
Paniar, 
cember seth. 


Flank Bat- 
talions, 840. 


amongst the slain, and 34 officers were wounded, including Major- 
Generals Valiant and Littler. One native officer, Jemadar Ajudhia 
Singh, 16th Native Infantry—died of his wounds. 

On the same day Major-General Grey, with the Left Wing of the 
Army of Gwalior, advancing from the south, gained a decisive 
victory over another Mahratta army. MHaving crossed the Sindh 
river at Chandpur, that officer reached Barka-ka-Sarai on the 28th 
December, and there heard that the enemy,12,000 strong, were 
in position at Antri, seven miles off. On the following day he 
made a long march to Paniar, about twelve miles from Gwalior, 
the Mahrattas at the same time quitting Antri and proceeding by 
a parallel movement until they reached the fortified village of 
Mangor, near Paniar, where they took up a strong position on the 
heights four miles to the east of the British camp, and began 
an attack on General Grey’s long line of baggage. Detaching all 
the cavalry he could spare to protect the baggage, Grey attacked 
the enemy’s centre with the 3rd Buffs, the 39th Native Infantry 
and a company of sappers, who carried every position before them, 
notwithstanding a galling fire from the enemy’s guns, while the 
soth Foot and a wing of the soth Native Infantry, supported by the 
58th Native Infantry, attacked and routed the enemy’s left, After 
a conflict of two hours the Mahrattas were driven from their position 
with heavy loss in men and also with the loss of all their guns 
(twenty-four in number) and the whole of their ammunition, The 
loss on our side amounted to 35 killed (including two officers) 
and 182 wounded (including Brigadier Yates and six other officers). 
These two victories brought the campaign to a speedy termination, 
and order was soon restored in the Gwalior territories. 

A bronze medal, made from the material of the captured guns, 
was issued to all ranks engaged in the campaign, and the several 
corps engaged in the battles of Manarajpuk and PanraR were 
permitted to inscribe those names on their colours and appointments. 
Subsequently, a memorial column to those who had fallen was 
erected at Calcutta. 


At this point it will be convenient to glance briefly at such 
interior changes and other matters of interest of the period as have 
not already been mentioned. 

In October, 1840, three battalions of Light Infantry were formed 
at Meerut and Cawnpore from the light companies of various 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


201 


corps, and during the progress of the Afghan War the rst and 2nd of 
these battalions were moved up to Ferozepore and Ludhiana. 
They were composed as follow :— 
18t Light Infantry Battalion :—the light companies of the 7th, 8th, 13th, 17th, 
ist, 29th, and 31st Native Infantry, with the rifle company of the 68th 
Native Infantry. 
and Light Infantry Battalion :—the light companies of the r4th, 22nd, 4gth, 
55th, 63rd, and 66th Native Infantry, with the rifle company of the 72nd 
Native Infantry. 
grd Light Infantry Battalion :—the light companies of the 1st, 11th, 12th, 
a4th, soth, 58th, and 67th Native Infantry, with the rifle company of the 
oth Native Infantry. 

A constant fluctuation in the strength of regiments was an inevit- 
able result of the great demand made by the Afghan war on the 
resources of India, and the reductions consequent on its termination. 
Besides these, several more or less important additions were made to 
the Bengal Army between 1840 and 1845, first of which was the form- 
ation, by G.O.G.G. No. 106 of 1841, of the 7th Irregular Cavalry. 
This corps, which still exists as the sth Bengal Cavalry, was raised 
at Bareilly, by Captain Wheler, of the late and Light Cavalry. 
By G.G. O. No. 18 of the following year the formation of a new 
regular regiment of cavalry was directed, to replace the and 
Light Cavalry, disbanded for misconduct in Afghanistan; the new 
corps was numbered the 11th, but eight years afterwards it 
received the number of the regiment whose place it was raised to 
supply. In January, 1842 (G.G.O. No. 25) the 8th Regiment of 
Irregular Cavalry was raised at Fatehgarh, under Lieutenant Ryves, 
61st Native Infantry; it is now the 6th Bengal Cavalry. The oth 
Irregular Cavalry was formed in February, 1844, of drafts partly from 
other corps of irregular cavalry and partly from Christie’s Horse, 
one of the regiments of Shah Shuja’s Force. This force had been 
disbanded by G.O.G.G., dated the 16th June, 1842, all the 
regiments, except the 3rd Infantry, which was retained as the 
‘‘ Regiment of Kalat-i-Ghilzai,” being broken up and the men distri- 
buted throughout the infantry and irregular cavalry of Bengal. In 
1844 (G.G.O. No.234) two companies were added to the “ Assam 
Sebandy Corps” formed in “1835, which was now armed, clothed, 
and equipped as light infantry and designated “the 2nd Assam 
Light Infantry.” Earlier in the same year was formed the 
Gwalior Contingent, numbering 10,000 men ofall arms, in which 


Augmentation 
2840-45. 


202 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Mutiny and 
disbanding of 


the 34th 
Infantry. 


the Sipri Contingent was incorporated. Volunteers from several 
regiments joined this force, and amongst others the 31st, 43rd, and 
voth, and the Regiment of Kalat-i-Ghilzai contributed. This 
Contingent, which in a short time came to be regarded as the model 
force of India, gained in 1857 an unenviable notoriety by the 
atrocities which accompanied its mutiny. 

The years now under review, as well as the succeeding decade, are 
full of signs of the deterioration of the Bengal Army, which, as we 
have seen in the preceding chapters, had been growing since the 
early years of the century, and which was shortly to come to a head. 
Not the least among these symptoms was the behaviour of the sepoys 
of several regiments on being ordered to Sindh. The service 
was unpopular, especially because full batta did not accompany it, 
although it was, at any rate according to the notions of Hindustani 
soldiers, as much foreign service as the campaign in Afghanistan. 
The British officers, instead of repressing unreasoning complaints 
with a firm hand, seem in many cases to have been afraid of 
their men, and to have humoured them when they should have 
enforced the strictest discipline. Thus, when several regiments were 
ordered to Sindh, as many as 190 men in the 4th and 90 in the 69th 
applied for, and—extraordinary to relate—obtained their discharge; 
the 7th Light Cavalry at first refused to march, but afterwards, having 
expressed deep contrition for their conduct, the men were pardoned; 
the matter reached a climax in the 34th Native Infantry, who obstinately 
and in the worst spirit disobeyed its orders and refused to march, 
and was for this offence disbanded and the number struck out of the 
Army List (G.O.C.C., 2oth March, 1844). The 64th at first con- 
tented themselves with writing objectionable anonymous letters to 
head-quarters, and was, as a punishment, ordered to Barrackpore, 
but, on hearing of the mutiny of the 34th, the commanding officer 
of the 64th represented that his corps begged to be pardoned, and to 
be permitted to march to Sukkur in place of the 34th; on arrival at 
that place, however, the 64th broke into open mutiny, and inquiry 
disclosed the fact that the state of the regiment had been one of utter 
disorganisation throughout, and that its condition had been entirely 
misrepresented by the commanding officer. That officer was 
cashiered, and the regiment was deprived of its colours until such 
time as it should have regained a sound state of discipline; 69 
men were immediately dismissed the service, and powers were 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


203 


vested in Sir Charles Napier to disband the corps, if necessary. 
This extreme measure, however, was not resorted to (G.O.C.C., 
2oth and 30th March 1844; G.G. O. No. 357). 


To the unsoldier-like behaviour of these regiments the conduct 
of the Bundelkhand Legion was a bright contrast. This corps, on 
hearing of the mutinous refusal of the 34th Native Infantry to march 
to Sindh, immediately volunteered for service there ; the offer was 
accepted with an expression of the satisfaction of the Government 
(G, G.O., No. 101 of 1844), and it was at the same time notified 
that the Legion was brought permanently on the strength of the 
Bengal Army : the corps immediately proceeded to Sindh, where it 
rendered good service and earned high praise for its conduct during 
a trying period of two years. The 6th Irregular Cavalry also volun- 
teered for service in Sindh, and here it may conveniently be men- 
tioned that during the years 1844-45 the 6th and oth Irregular 
Cavalry were actively employed in protecting the northern frontier 
of Sindh against the incursions of the Jakranis, Bugtis, Dumkis, and 
other predatory tribes, with whom they had frequent engagements; 
on one occasion, at Uch, onthe rsth January, 1845, Captain Salter, 
with 390 men of these two regiments, surprised and routed nearly 
double that number of Jakranis and Bugtis, killing a great 
many, including two prominent chiefs, and recapturing several 
thousand cattle and other plunder that they were carrying off. In the 
early part of 1845, the 2nd Bengal European Regiment, the Bundel- 
khand Legion, and detachments of the 4th, 64th, and 69th Native 
Infantry took an active share in the campaign against these tribes, 
and in the reduction (gth March, 1845) of their almost inaccessible 
stronghold of Trakki; their conduct earned the high commendation 
of Sir Charles Napier himself, who now, in recognition of the good 
conduct and excellent services of the regiment, directed the 
restoration to the 64th Native Infantry of the colours they had 
forfeited a year before. 


The Sindh mutinies were by no means isolated instances of 
insubordination and bad feeling; reference to the General Orders 
of the Commander-in-Chief shows that the number of courts-martial 
in the Native army had trebled in the last twenty years, and 
were steadily on the increase. It is not to be wondered at then that 
the Governor-General (Sir Henry Hardinge) arrived at the conclusion 


Sindh frontier. 


gin the 
ative army. 


204 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Changes in 
equipment. 


Formation of 
Rifle 
Companies. 


that this unsatisfactory state of things was in a great measure the 
result of Lord William Bentinck’s abolition of flogging; accordingly, 
after long deliberation, he issued (1845) a minute repealing Lord 
William Bentinck’s order. 

The most important change in the equipment of Native infantry at 
this time was the gradual introduction of muzzle-loading “ Brunswick ” 
rifles, the first to receive them being one company in each of the 
light infantry regiments (including the 42nd and 43rd), while 
two years later the whole of the Nasseri and Sirmoor Battalions were 
so armed, as well as one company each in five more regiments of the 
line (including the 31st and 65th). Less important, though far from 
trivial, changes were the substitution of canvas havresacks for the old 
unwieldy knapsack (G.O.C.C., 2and March, 1844), and the intro- 
duction (rath January, 1844) of a forage cap for general duties. 


we aim i, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


205 


Chapter VITI.—(1845—1857.) 

History of India (Marshman)—Political and Military Events (Heugh)—Coreer of Major George 
Broadfoot (W. Breadfoot)—Pistory of the Sikhs (Cunninghem)—Medals of the British 
Army (Carter)—Punjab Campaign, 1848-49 (Qficial)—Year in the Punjab (Sdwardes)— 
Decisive Battles of India (Malleson)—Second Burmese War (Laurie)—Tracts on the 
Bengal Army (Jacob)—The Sontha) Field t orce (Q#iciat)—Expeditions on the North-West 
Frontier (Paget and Mason)—G,. G.O. and G O.C. C. 

The close of the year 1845 found the Government of India in- 
volved ina sanguinary contest with the Sikhs. Ranjit Singh, the 
founder of the Sikh dominion, had been on terms of friendship 
and alliance with the Government of India since the year 1809. 
He died in June, 1839, and after the death of his son and successor 
on the 5th November, 1840, and on the same day, of his grandson, 
the competition for the vacant throne, and the struggle of successive 
candidates for power resulted, after a series of ruthless assassina- 
tions, in the Khalsa Army becoming the real master of the state, and 
in the whole of the Punjab being plunged into what has been well 
described as a condition of ‘‘ widely-spread, frantic, and sanguinary 
anarchy.” Under such circumstances the Lahore Government, 
unable to contro] the Army and dreading its power, perceived that 
their only hope lay in its destruction, and in this view secretly 
encouraged it in its desire for a contest with the English, hoping 
and expecting that the conflict would terminate in its overthrow and 
dispersion. Not much encouragement was indeed, needed, and on 
the 11th December, 1845, in defiance of existing treaties, a portion of 
the Sikh Army headed (unwillingly, it is said) by Sirdar Lal Singh 
(the Wazir) and Sirdar Tej Singh, crossed the Sutlej, and took up a 
position within a few miles of Ferozepore. 

A hostile inroad of this nature had been threatening for some 
years, and especially during the summer and autumn of 1845, and 
the event consequently did not find the Government of India’ un- 
prepared. It was, indeed, a fortunate circumstance that changes 
inthe disposition of the Army on our North-Western Frontier, 
adopted partly for sanitary reasons and partly as a reply to the 
menace from beyond the Sutlej, had resulted during the preceding 
three years ina considerable increase to the forces in the neigh- 
bourhood of the locality in which they were now most needed, and 


The first Sikh 
War. 


206 THE SERVICES OF THE 


where they now proved sufficient to stem the first torrent of 
‘nvasion. In addition to the old military post at Ludhiana, which 
had been considerably reinforced, a permanent cantonment, with 
a large garrison, had been established at Ferozepore. On the aban- 
donment of Karnal, on account of excessive unhealthiness, Umballa 
had been adopted as a military station of the first class, witha 
garrison of one regiment of British dragoons, one of Native regular 
cavalry, one of irregular cavalry, one of British infantry and three of 
Native infantry, besides artillery. Anda regiment of British infan- 
try had been stationed at Kasauli and another at Sabathu, the 
battalion of Gurkhas displaced from Sabathu being removed to 
Jutogh, near Simla.—(G.0.G.G., 17th November, 1842). 

The British forces in the upper provinces were quickly put in 
motion to resist the Sikh invasion. Those on the north-west 
frontier were first assembled, and under the designation of the 
| “ Army of the Sutlej” were arranged (G. O. C. C., 13th December, 
1845) in the manner following, the whole being under the command 
of General Sir Hugh Gough, the Commander-in-Chief, who was 
accompanied into the field by the Governor-General, Lieutenant- 
General Sir Henry Hardinge :— 


ARTILLERY :—Under Brigadier G. Brooke,- seven troops of Horse and seven 
companies of Foot Artillery. 
ENGINEERS : —The Corps of Sappers and Miners. 
Cavatry :— Under Brigadier D. Harriott— 
ist Brigade—H. M.’s 3rd Light Dragoons, the 8th Light Cavalry 
and the oth Irregular Cavalry. 
and Brigade—The Body-Guard, the sth Light Cavalry, and the 8th 
Irregular Cavalry. 
Sra i car dct) Light Cavalry, and the 2nd and 3rd Irregular 
v 


INFANTRY °— ‘i 
1st Division :—Under Major-General Sir H. G. Smith, K.c.B.— 
1st Brigade—H. M.’s 31st Foot, and the 24th and 47th Native 
Infantry. 
and Brigade—H. M.’s soth Foot, and the 42nd and 48th Native 
Infantry. 
and Division :—Under Major-General W. R. Gilbert.— 
. 3rd Brigade—H. M.’s 29th Foot, and the qist and 45th Native 
Infantry. . 
qth Brigade—ist European Light Infantry, and the and and 16th 
Native Infantry. 
grd Division :—Under Major-General Sir J. M’Caskill, &.c.B.— 
5th Brigade—H. M.’s gth Foot, and the 26th and 73rd Native 
Infantry. 
6th Brigade—H. M.’s 8oth Foot, and the rth, 27th, and 63rd 
Native Infantry. 


ee eee = 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


207 


gth Division :—Under Major-General Sir J. Littler, k.c.B.— 


7th Brigade—H. M.’s 62nd Foot, and the 12th and 14th Native 
Infantry. 


8th Brigade—The 33rd, 44th, and sath Native Infantry. 

Of these troops a small garrison was left at Ludhiana, and the 
Umballa column marched as lightly equipped as possible to relieve 
Sir John Littler’s division of 7,000 men, which was threatened at 
Ferozepore. 

The strength of the Sikh forces has been variously stated; the 
majority of the estimates made at the time are supposed now to 
have been exaggerated, and their total strength was probably not 
much above 40,000. 

The Umballa Division and the troops from Ludhiana (which 
had united at Bassian) arrived on the 18th December at Mudki, 
eighteen miles from Ferozepore, after a long and fatiguing march, but 
they were scarcely encamped when intelligence was received that 
the Sikhs were advancing. Sir Hugh Gough immediately pushed 
forward to meet the enemy, and two miles from Mudki found 
them in position, in considerable strength and with forty pieces 
of cannon. , 

The battle commenced with heavy artillery fire on both sides, 
during which the British infantry advanced in echelon of brigades 
and deployed ; the enemy’s fire told severely on them in this formas 
tion, and to effect a diversion the 3rd Light Dragoons, the Body- 
Guard, the sth Light Cavalry, and part of the 4th Light Cavalry 
(Lancers) were directed to make a movement on the enemy’s left: 
this was effected with great gallantry, and, turning the left flank of 
the Sikh army, these regiments swept along the rear of the enemy’s 
infantry and gnns, silenced the latter fora time, and put the whole of 
the hostile cavalry to flight. Atthe same time the remainder of the 
4th and the 9th Irregular Cavalry assailed the Sikh right with success, 
and our infantry, advancing in echelon of lines, drove the Sikhs, who 
resisted gallantly, from one position to another at the point of the 
bayonet, until night put an end to the conflict. The Sikhs do not 
appear to have suffered very severely in men, but they lost seventeen 
out of their forty guns, and were obliged to fall back on their main 
army in the entrenched camp which they had formed at Ferozeshahr, 
Our losses amounted to 215 killed (including 12 officers) and 657 
wounded (including 44 officers). Among the former were Major- 


General Sir John M’Caskill, Captain Trower of the Artillery, | 


208 THE SERVICES OF THE 


Lieutenant Fisher of the Body-Guard, Lieutenant Hamilton, 24th 
Native Infantry, and Lieutenant Spence, 42nd Native Light Infantry. 
Major-General Sir R. H. Sale, Brigadier Bolton, Lieutenant Munro, 
Aide-de-Camp to the Governor-General, Captain Van Homrigh, 48th 
Native Infantry, serving on the Staff, and Captain Dashwood and 
Lieutenant Pollock of the Artillery, diedfof their wounds within afew 
days of the battle. Among the Native officers Jemadar Atar Singh, 
16th Native Infantry, and Subadar Siu-din Tiwari, 48th Native 
Infantry, were killed. 

On the 19th December Sir Hugh Gough was reinforced by the 
arrival of the 29th Foot, the 1st Bengal European Light Infantry, the 
1ith and 41st Native Infantry, two companies of foot artillery, and 
some heavy guns, and on the 2ist, leaving the two native regiments 
to guard the wounded, he marched from Mudki forthe purpose of 
attacking the Sikhs at Ferozeshahr.® After a fatiguing march of six- 
teen miles he was joined, as had previously been concerted, at Misri- 
wala, about four miles from Ferozeshahr, by the Fourth Division, under 
Major-General Sir John Littler, from Ferozepore, and at 3 P.M. the 
united forces, amounting to 16,700 men, with 69'guns, moved forward 
to assail the enemy (numbering, according to their own estimate, 
47,000 men, with 88 guns) in the formidable position in which they had 
entrenched themselves. 

Battle of In the arrangements for the attack, which was delivered on the 
Ferozeshabr. | western, and to some extent on the southern face of the entrenchment, 
the Second Division (Gilbert’s) was placed on theright, the Third 

(now commanded by Brigadier Wallace) in the centre, and the Fourth 

(Littler’s) on the left,—while the First Division (Smith’s) was kept in 

reserve. The attack of the Fourth Division was entirely under the 

direction of Sir John Littler: the remaining three divisions (less the 

6th Brigade, of which only one regiment—the 80th Foot—was present 

* | in the field, temporarily attached to the 3rd Brigade in place of the 

4ist Native Infantry, left at Mudki) were divided into two wings, of 

which the Commander-in-Chief in person directed the right, while 
Lieutenant-General Sir Henry Hardinge (who had volunteered his 

services as Second-in-Command) superintended the left. The Fourth 

Division commenced the attack, and the “‘ Chance of War,” as Sir Hugh 


*This battle has been variously styled that of “ Ferozeshah,”’ “* Feroze- 
shuhur,” ‘* Firozeshahar,’”’ and “ Pheerozshuhur.”” The simple unadorned name of 
the village round which it was fought is Pheru.—P., 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


209 


Gough expressed it, “placed it in opposition to the strongest part 
of the enemy’s entrenched position” : it advanced under a terrific fire 
of grape and canister to within 150 yards of the enemy's 
batteries, and the leading brigade sustained heavy losses ; not- 
withstanding this it did not desist from its efforts to carry the 
position, until Colonel Reed, the Brigadier in command, perceiving 
that it could not get forward and “was exposed to a most 
destructive fire without any object,” directed it to retire, which it 
did in almost as good order, allowing for the losses it had sus- 
tained, as that in which it had advanced, The Division, with greatly 
reduced numbers, was thus withdrawn out of fire, and was not 
again brought into action.* In the meantime the Second and Third 
Divisions had advanced and, under a storm of shot and shell, 
“with matchless gallantry” carried the batteries opposed to them 
at the point of the bayonet, but the enemy were only driven as far 
as their camp in the immediate rear, from which they kept up a 
galling musketry fire. By this time the First Division, hitherto in 
reserve, had also come into action, and carrying the opposing guns 
it penetrated deep into the enemy’s camp and captured the village 
of Ferozeshahr, which it held for several hours, while the 3rd Light 
Dragoons made a magnificent charge, capturing some of the most 
formidable batteries, sabreing the gunners, and driving the enemy to 
the further end of the entrenchment. But night had now set in, and 
in the darkness terrible confusion arose; regiments and brigades 
became intermixed and were unable in the gloom to entirely recover 
their formation, while the enemy, still in possession of a large portion 
of the entrenchment, kept up a devastating fire. Under these cir- 
cumstances a partial retirement became necessary before midnight ; the 
hard-won ground was abandoned, and the exhausted troops, retiring 
to the south and south-west of the entrenchment, bivouacked for the 


® The repulse of the Fourth! Division on this occasion was at the time and long 


afterwards attributed to the misconduct of the troops and especially of the leading 
regiment, the 62nd Foot ; and one author (Trotter,—History of the British Empire 
iss India, Vol. 1, page 53) goes to the length of asserting that “ the 62nd Foot 
followed by the Native regiments on either flank, wavered, turned, and fied in utter 
panic towards the rear.” This assertion is apparently based on a statement which 
appeared in Sir John Littler’s report, which was made in error and afterwards 
withdrawn : it is entirely without any justification in truth. The conduct of the 
division was enquired into at the time, and Sir Hugh Gough, in a special General 
Order, showed how entirely uncalled for were the aspersions which had been cast 
upon it. (See G. O, C. C., dated Camp Nihalki, the 28th January, 1846.)—P. 
: P 


a1o 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


remainder of the night, and endeavoured to snatch a little repose, 
But there was little repose for them; for, perished with cold and 
thirst and almost starving, they were still throughout the night exposed 
to a harassing and incessant fire whenever the moonlight or their own 
fires disclosed their whereabouts to the enemy. But no hardship 
could quell the indomitable spirit of the British soldiers; exhausted 
as they were, when moming dawned they were ready to complete the 
work begun the day before, and a general advance at daybreak, on the 
2and, carried the enemy’s camp, forced them from the village of 
Ferozeshahr, and drove them from the field. The dangers of the 
day did not, however, end here: Tej Singh, with the force which had 
menaced Ferozepore, appeared on the field at noon and threatened 
to overwhelm the exhausted British Army, which, without ammunition 
and weakened by fatigue and want of food, was now in a critical 
position. However, a bold front was shown by the English General, 
and, after an unsuccessful attempt on the position of Ferozeshahr, now 
occupied by the latter, Tej Singh withdrew, and the Sikhs, defeated 
but not demoralised, retired across the Sutlej, weakened by the loss 
of seventy-three pieces of artillery. 


The conduct of the sepoy regiments in this battle has several 
times been criticised severely, but it is only fair to them to remember 
that the British Army was exhausted by fatigue and by long fasting 
and want of water; that under such circumstances the sepoy col- 
lapses much sooner than the British soldier; and that the sepoys 
fully retrieved their reputation when fighting under more favourable 
conditions at Sobraon. The loss of the Sikhs at Ferozeshahr is un- 
known, but it is probable that the killed alone amounted to two thou- 
sand : that of the British was 39 British and 17 Native officers, and 
664 men killed; 82 British officers, 19 Native officers, and 1,677 men 
wounded, and 379 men missing,—making a total of 2,877.® 

Among the officers killed were Brigadier Wallace, Captains 
Hore (officiating Deputy Secretary to the Government of India, Mili- 
tary Department) and Bumett (Brigade-Major), serving on the staff ; 
Captain Todd and Lieutenant Lambert, Bengal Artillery; Captain 
Box and Ensign Moxon, 1st European Light Infantry; Ensign 
Armstrong, 2nd Native Infantry; Major Hull, 16th Native Infantry ; 


® This is four less than the number given in the revised official return, but that 
return erroneously includes four officers who had been wounded, not at Feroze- 


| shahr, but at Mudki.—P, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


21! 


Major Griffin, 24th Native Infantry ; Lieutenants Croly and Eatwell, 
26th Native (Light) Infantry; Lieutenant Wollen, 42nd Native 
(Light) Infantry, and Captain Hunter, 73rd Native Infantry. Amongst 
the slain were also numbered two diStinguished political officers,— 
Major Broadfoot, 34th Madras Native Infantry, whose prominent 
services in the glorious defence of Jalalabad have already been men- 
tioned, and Captain Nicolson of the 28th Bengal Native Infantry, 
Captain Egerton, of the staff, Captain Kendall, rst European Light 
Infantry, Captain Bolton, and Native Infantry, and Lieutenant-Colonel 
Bruce, Captain Holmes, and Lieutenant Tulloch, rath Native Infantry, 
died of their wounds. 


The native officers killed at the battle of Ferozeshahr were Jema- 
dars Raghunath and Bihari Singh, of the Artillery ; Risaldar Mir 
Wazir Ali and Jemgdar Pir Khan, oth Irregular Cavalry; 
Subadar Shaikh Madar Bakhsh, 2nd Native Infantry; Subadar 
Bhawanilal Pande, 13th Native Infantry; Subadar-Major Umed 
Singh, 14th Native Infantry ; Subadars Ramgulam Singh and Shaikh 
Rajab and Jemadars Sukhlal Singh and Mansaram Bajpae, 24th 
Native Infantry; Subadar Ganesh Patak, 33rd Native Infantry ; 
Jemadars Rustam Patak and Din Singh, 42nd Native Infantry ; 
Subadars Fakira Khan and Siu-lal Singh, «sth Native Infantry ; 
Subadar Shaikh Khuda Bakhsh, 48th Native Infantry; and Subadar 
Shaikh Kadir Bakhsh, 73rd Native Infantry. Jemadar Ghnlam Rasul 
Khan, 3rd Irregular Cavalry; Jemadar Jurakan Sukal, and Native 
Infantry; Subadar Fateh Singh, 26th Native Infantry; Subadar 
Hanuman Tiwari, 45th Native Infantry; and Jemadar Bhawanidin 
Singh, 48th Native Infantry, died of their wounds, 


Having driven the Sikhs across the Sutlej, Sir Hugh Gough | ® 
advanced to Araf, and on the 27th December pushed a reconnais- | the 


sance to the left bank of the river, when the enemy were found to 
have established themselves in great force on the opposite bank, in 
advance of the village of Sobraon. Having placed the Fisst Division 
in a position to watch the Sikhs, with the rest of the troops at hand 
ready to support Sir Harry Smith in case of necessity, the Com- 
mander-in-Chief deferred further action until the arrival of reinforce- 
ments in men, artillery, ammunition, and stores, which were now 
on the way to join him. The arrival of some of these reinforce- 
ments and the approach of the rest necessitated a re-arrangement 
P2 


eorganisation 
of the Army of 
Sntlej. 


212 THE SERVICES OF THE 


of the forces, and on the 1st January, 1846, the Army of the Sutlej 


was re-organized a8 follows :— 
py :—Under Brigadier G. E. Gowan c.B.—Eleven troops of horse 
Ailey, aod SF coeoanien of foot artillery, with four light field batteries 
and an elephant battery. : 
ENGINEERS :—Under Lientenant-Colonel E. J.Smith, c.B.—The Corps of 
Sappers and Miners. 
CAVALRY :—Under Major-General Sir J. Thackwell, K.c.B.— 
syst Brigade—The 3rd Light Dragoons, the 4th and sth Light Cavalry, 
and the oth Irregular Cavalry. 
and Brigade—The oth Light Dragoons (Lancers), the sith Light Cavalry 
and the and and Sth Irregular Cavalry, : : 
ard Brigade—The 16th Light Dragoons (Lancers), the Governor-Gene- 
ral’s Body Guard, the 3rd Light valry, and the 4th Irregular 
Cavalry. 
gth Brigade—The 1st and 8th Light Cavalry, and the 3rd Irregular 
Cavalry. 
First INFANTRY DIVISION :—Under Major-General Sir H. G. Smith, K.c.B.— 
1st Brigade—The 31st Foot, and the 24th and 47th Native Infantry, 
and Brigade—The Soth Foot, and the 42nd and 48th Native Infantry. 


SeconD InFANTRY DIVISION :—Under Major General W. R. Gilbert— 
3rd Brigade—The 29th Foot, and the 4rst and 45th Native Infantry. 
ash Brigade—The ist European Light Infantry, and the 2nd and 16th 

Native Infantry. 

Trev Inrantay Division :—Under Major-General Sir R. H. Dick, K.c.B.— 
5th Brigade—The oth Foot, and the 26th and 73rd Native Infantry. | 
6th Brigade—The 80th Foot, and the 11th and 33rd Native Infantry, 
7th Brigade—The toth Foot, and the 43rd and soth Native Infantry. 

FourtH Inrantay Division :—Under Major-General Sir J. H. Littler, 

K.C.Be™ 
8th Brigade—The 62nd Foot, and the rath and 14th Native Infantry. 
gth Brigade.—The a7th, 44th and 54th Native Infantry. 


FirtH INFANTRY Division :—Under Major-General Sir John Grey, .C.B.— 
10th Brigade—The 53rd Foot, and the 3oth and 68th Native Infantry. 
11th Brigade=The 6th, gth and 38th Native Infantry. 
12th Brigade—The ssth and 63rd Native Infantry, the Nasseri Battalion 
and the Sirmoor Battalion. 

About the same time, as there appeared to be considerable proba- 
bility of the war being prolonged, and, in that event, of the strain 
imposed upon the force on the north-west frontier being greater 

The Sindh than it could endure, it was decided that a force should be de- 
Lr eae spatched from Sindh to advance against the Sikhs from the south, and 
either assail Mooltan or join the main army under Sir Hugh 
Gough, as might be found most expedient. For this purpose, 
accordingly, about the middle of January, the following force was 
organized under the command of Major-General Sir C. J. Napier, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 213 


with Major-General G. Hunter, of the Bengal Army, as Second-in- 
Command, and designated the “Sindh Field Force ”:— 


ARTILLERY :—Under Brigadier F. Schuler—Three troops of horse artillery 
(two of Bengal, and one of Bombay); four companies of foot artillery 
: with light field batteries attached (two of Bengal and two of Bombay). 
AVALRY :—Under Brigadier J. B. Hearsey—The 6th and 7th Bengal Light 
Cavalry, and the oon Irregular Horse. : 
INFANTRY :— 
1st Brigade—The 2nd Bengal European Regiment, andthe gthand 15th 
Bengal Native Infantry. 
ane Pecde- ne 17th Foot, andthe 7th and t2th Bombay Native In- 
a 


ntry. 
gra Brigade—The 86th Foot, and the 13th and 18th Bombay Native Infantry. 
Gth prenede Tee 4th and17th Bombay Native Infantry, and the Baluch 
ttalion. 


This force began marching northwards towards the end of 
January, 1846, but the movement, though pushed on with great 
vigour, came too late, as it had not even reached Mitankot, at the 
confluence of the Indus and the Panjnad, when the crowning victory 
of Sobraon and the occupation of Lahore put an end to the war. 

In this place may appropriately be mentioned an incident highly | stirmish at 
creditable to the 4th Native Infantry. A small detachment of this | Mitanket 
regiment (26 men) under the command of Subadar Najju Khan, 
was employed in escorting a party of invalids proceeding by boat 
from Sindh to Ferozepore. At Mitankot, on the rst January, they 
were attacked bya large body of Sikhs, but undeterred by the 
odds against them and aided to some extent by the invalids, they 
boldly met the enemy and repulsed them after a sharp engagement, 
but with the loss of the brave Subadar and two men killed and 
several wounded and taken prisoners. The gallantry of the detach- 
ment was specially eulogised in General Orders. 

On the 12th of January, Sir Hugh Gough made a slight move- 
ment in advance, and occupied a position from Hari-ki-pattan on 
the right to Ferozepore on the ieft, but, inthe meantime, while he 
was still waiting for the heavy guns then on their way to join him, 
and without which he could not undertake offensive operations, the 
Sikhs re-crossed the Sutlej in large numbers, and began construct- 
ing an entrenchment in the neighbourhood of Chota Sobraon, on the 
left bank, which was connected by the existing bridge-of-boats with 
their camp on the right bank. Beyond a slight cannonading when 
they first re-appeared on the left bank, they were not molested, the 
advantage of allowing them to take up a position with a wide river 
in their rear beng apparent ; and so their earth-works grew daily. 


i 


214 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Sir Ha 
Smith derached 


to Ludhiana; 


Affair at 
Badowal. 


About the middle of January the neighbourhood of Ludhiana, 
higher up the Sutlej, became the scene of important events. The 
Sikhs had been making several raids and excursions across the river 
in that vicinity, principally for the purpose of collecting supplies, a 
quantity of which they had stored in the fort of Dharamkot. Sir 
Harry Smith was despatched against this place with the 1st Brigade 
onthe 18th January, and easily reduced it, but while he was yet 
en route intelligence was received that Sardar Ranjur Singh Maji- 
thia had crossed the river with a large force of all arms, and was 
threatening not only Ludhiana but our line of communications at 
Bassian, and the siege train then moving up from Delhi. Her 
Majesty’s 16th Lancers, the 3rd Light Cavalry, the 4th Irregular 
Cavalry, and two troops of horse artillery were immediately sent off 
to reinforce Sir Harry Smith, and joined him at Jagraon on the 
2oth, after two forced marches ; and here, too, he was joined by the 
53rd Foot, en rouse from Delhi. Onthe morning of the aust Sir 
Harry marched from Jagraon towards Ludhiana, but es rouse he 
was attacked at Badowal by Ranjur Singh, who marched ina line 
parallel to him and furiously cannonaded the British force. Owing 
to the great numerical superiority of the enemy, and the pressing 
need for the immediate relief of Ludhiana, it was Sir Harry’s object 
toavoid an engagement at that time; he therefore continued his 
march, and conducting his retirement with skill and steadiness, suc- 
ceeded in extricating his force, though he suffered heavy loss, and 
was unable to preventa large portion of his baggage falling into 
the hands of the Sikhs. The force reached Ludhiana in the after- 
noon, having sustained a loss of 69 killed (including Captain 
Campbell, 14th Foot, acting aide-de-camp to Sir Harry Smith, and 
Lieutenant Rideout, 47th Native Infantry) and 68 wounded, be- 
sides an officer and several men taken prisoners. The extraordinary 
disproportion between the numbers killed and wounded was due 
to the fact that the Sikhs cruelly put to the sword all the wounded 
that could not be carried off by the retiring force. 


At Ludhiana Sir Harry Smith was joined by the troops at that 
place under the command of Brigadier Godby,—the 1st Light 
Cavalry, the 30th and 36th Native Infantry, and the Nasseri and 
Sirmoor Battalions. Thus reinforced, Sir Harry Smith moved out 
against Ranjur Singh on the 23rd, but the Sikh Sardar precipitately 
abandoned his position at Badowal, and moved downto Talwandi, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


on the river, thus enabling Sir Harry to effect a junction with Bri- 
gadier Wheeler, who had been despatched by Sir Hugh Gough to 
reinforce him with the 2nd Brigade (less the 42nd Native Infantry, 
left at head-quarters) and some more cavalry: these troops joined 
on the 26th, previous to which Sir Harry had been joined also by 
the Shekhawati Brigade—horse, foot, and artillery. 

On the 27th Ranjur Singh received a reinforcement of 4,000 men 
and twelve guns, which raised his army to a strength of about 
18,000 men, with sixty-seven guns. This emboldened him to ad- 
vance, and on the 28th he began a movement towards Jagraon. On 
the same day, however, Sir Harry Smith marched out to attack him, and 
early in the forenoon came upon him just as he had begun to move, 

The Sikhs immediately faced their assailants, taking up a posi- 
tion close to the left bank of the Sutlej, with the village of Bundri 
on their right, that of Aliwal on their left, and the river in their rear. 
The British, almost without checking their march, formed in order 
of battle and advanced in line,—Hick’s (the 1st) brigade on the 
right, Wheeler’s (the 2nd) inthe centre, and Wilson’s (the 53rd Foot 
and the 30th Native Infantry) on the left, with a brigade of cavalry 
on either flank, and Godby’s brigade (the 36th Native Infantry 
and the Nasseri Battalion) and the Shekhawati Infantry in direct 
echelon to the rear of the right and of the left of the line’ respec- 
tively, At ten o'clock the battle began with a furious cannonade 
from the Sikh guns, in the midst of which the Iiritish line advanced 
with steady gallantry. During a momentary halt Sir Harry Smith 
perceived that by the capture of the village of Aliwal he could 
operate with telling effect on the enemy’s left and centre : he there- 
fore brought up Godby’s brigade to the right, and these troops 
and the 1st Brigade (the 31st Foot and the 24thand 47th Native 
Infantry), covered by the fire of a light field battery, carried the 
place with arush. Almost at the same moment the cavalry on the 
right (the Body Guard, the 1st Light Cavalry, and the Shekhawati 
Cavalry) under Brigadier Cureton, charged the horse on the enemy’s 
left and drove it back on the infantry, and when, a little later, 
Godby’s brigade took the Sikh camp in reverse and drove the enemy 
through and out of it, the discomfiture of that part of the hostile 
force was complete. Simultaneously with these movements Briga- 
dier Wheeler, with the 2nd Brigade (the soth Foot, the 48th Native 
Infantry, and the Sirmoor Battalion) advanced onthe Sikh centre 


Battle of 
Aliwal. 


216 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


le 


under a murderous fire, drove it back and captured all the opposing 
guns, sustaining, however, severe loss in the conflict; and at the 
same time Brigadier Wilson with his brigade and Brigadier 
M’Dowell, with his brigade of cavalry. (the 16th Lancers and the 
3rd Light Cavalry) assailed the enemy’s right. Here were posted 
the flower ofthe Sikh army, the battalions disciplined by General 
Avitabile, and the resistance was obstinate, the Sikhs, now driven 
back on their left and centre, holding on tenaciously to Bundri, so 
asto cover the passage of the river. But soon two of these disci- 
plined battalions, formed in square, were crumpled up and almost 
destroyed by daring charges of squadrons of the 16th Lancers led 
by Captain Bere and Major Smyth; Bundri was carried at the point 
of the bayonet by the 53rd Foot, while the 30th Native Infantry 
charged and routed another body of the Avitabile troops, The 
British forces now closed in onthe Sikhright and soon the enemy, 
routed and broken and mowed down by the deadly fire of our artil- 
lery, was in headlong flight towards the river, over which he was 
driven with terrible carnage and with the loss of all his guns, of which 
eleven were sunk in the river and fifty-six remained in our possession. 
In this well-fought action the Sikhs lost by their own account over 
three thousand men. Our own losses amounted to 151 (including 
four officers) killed, 413 (including a5 officers) wounded, and 25 
missing,—589 in all. Among the killed was Lieutenant Smalpage, 
of the 4th Irregular Cavalry ; and Cornet Farquhar, 1st Light Cavalry, 
died of his wounds. Amongst the Native officers Jemadars Mehrwan 
Singh and Mustafa Khan, 3rd Light Cavalry, and Subadar Mehrwan 
Singh, 48th Native Infantry, were killed. : 


The proximate consequence of this victory was the evacuation by 
the Sikhs of all their posts on the left bank of the Sutlej except that 
which they had established and strengthened with so much care 
and labour in the vicinity of Chota Sobraon, and their expulsion 
from which was the next operation to be undertaken; but Sir Hugh 
Gough was still unable to make any movement towards the accom- 


plishment of that object until the siege train and the reserve 


ammunition had arrived from the rear, and the troops detached under 
the command of Sir Harry Smith had rejoined. Pending these 
events a further re-organization of the infantry of the Army of the Sutlej 
was carried out in the early days of February, which affected every 
brigade except the Eighth. The Tenth and Twelfth Brigades were 


eee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


317 


broken up, and a new Eleventh (properly Tenth) Brigade was formed, 
composed of the 6th, 11th and ssth Native Infantry. The 62nd 
Foot, the 2nd, 9th, rth, 24th, 30th, 38th, 45th, 48th and 73rd 
Native Infantry were removed from the brigades to which they 
respectively belonged, and of these the 2nd, 24th, 30th and 48th 
were struck off the strength of the Army of the Sutlej altogether. 
Under the arrangements now made, the First Brigade was reduced 
to two regiments only, the 31st Foot and the 47th Native Infantry ; 
in the Second Brigade the Nasseri Battalion was substituted for the 
48th Native Infantry ; in the Third, the 68th Native Infantry for the 
45th ; in the Fourth, the Sirmoor Battalion for the 2nd Native Infantry ; 
in the Fifth, the 63nd Foot forthe 73rd Native Infantry ; in the Sixth, 
the 63rd Native Infantry for the 11th; and the Seventh Brigade 
was strengthened by the addition of the 53rd Foot. 

The first portion of the siege train and the reserve ammunition for 
the field guns reached Sir Hugh Gough’s camp on the 7th and 8th 
February, and at the same time the force under the command 
of Sir Harry Smith rejoined from the upper Sutlej. Final prepara- 
tions were now made to assail the Sikhs in their entrenchments, into 
which the greater part of their forces had by this time been brought. 
The strength of these forces has been variously estimated at from 
20,0C0 to 42,000 fighting men, but as it is known that they had no 
less than thirty-two regular regiments of infantry in the entrench- 
ments, besides irregular troops and a numerous body of artillery- 
men, it is probable that their numbers did not fall far short of 
35,000 ;* besides these the enemy had a numerous cavalry in the 
neighbourhood of the entrenchments, and a considerable reserve, with 
many heavy guns in their camp on the right bank, and there were 
nearly seventy pieces of artillery mounted on various parts of their 
works. These works themselves were described by Sir Hugh Gough 
and Sir Henry Hardinge immediately after their capture as being of 
a formidable character, and formidable enough they were found to 
be by those who had the task of turning the Sikhs out of them ; 
nevertheless attempts have not been wanting to belittle the strength 
of the Sikh entrenchments, and with it the work accomplished by 
our troops that day. 

© Hough (Political and Military Events in British India) says (Vol. 11, pages 
298-99) that the Sikbs acknowledged that they had 37,000 men engaged at Sobraon, 


and that their losses amounted to between 13,000 and 14,000. But he gives no 
authority.—P. 


218 THE SERVICES OF THE 


ests of The roth of February was fixed upon as the day for the 
February roth | assault of the Sikh entrenchments, and at daybreak on the morn- 
= ing of that day, under cover of a heavy mist, our troops and batteries 
were silently moved into the positions assigned to them in the plan 
of attack. The troops engaged on this memorable occasion num- 
bered rather more than 16,000 of all arms, and consisted of ten 
troops of horse artillery, ten companies of foot artillery (with 48 
heavy guns, mortars, and howitzers), six companies of sappers 
and miners, three regiments of British and six and-a-half of Native 
cavalry (including the Body-Guard, a wing of the and Irregular 
Cavalry and the 8th Irregular Cavalry), and nine battalions of British 
and twelve of Native infantry (including the 33rd, 42nd, 43rd, 47th, 
sgth, and 63rd Native Infantry and the Nasseri and Sirmoor Battalions), 
most of them rather weak in numbers owing to losses in previous 
engagements. As the sun rose the heavy mist disappeared, revealing 
the opposing forces to each other, and in a moment the engagement 
was opened with a single shell from the and Troop, 2nd Brigade, 
Bengal Horse Artillery (now the 52nd Field Battery, Royal Artillery), 
which thus had the honour of beginning the battle of Sobraon. 
Presently the other batteries took] up the fire, and by half past six 
o'clock it was fully developed ; the Sikhs were not slow in respond- 
ing, and soon “the thunder of one hundred and twenty pieces of 
ordnance reverberated in mighty combat through the valley of the 
Sutlej.” For more than two hours a heavy and well-directed bom- 
bardment was maintained, under which the enemy, sheltered as he 
was behind earthworks, suffered most severely ; but the rapid firing 
exhausted the ammunition of the heavy guns sooner than had been 
anticipated, and before a sufficient impression had been made on 
the enemy’s defences it became necessary to plunge the infantry 
into the conflict and carry the position at the point of the bayonet. 
Accordingly, at nine o’clock the Third (Dick’s) Division, forming the 
left of the British Army, moved forward to the assault of the right of 
the entrenchment. Advancing steadily in line, the Division suffered 
severely from the enemy’s murderous fire, under which Sir Robert 
Dick himself (an old and tried veteran of the Calabrian, Egyptian, 
Peninsular, and Waterloo campaigns) fell mortally wounded ; “ but 
soon persevering gallantry triumphed,” and the leading brigade,— 
the Seventh,—comprising the roth and 53rd Foot and the 43rd and 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


219 


59th Native Infantry, and commanded by Brigadier Stacy, forced its 
way into the entrenchment without firing a shot, closely followed 
by the Sixth (Wilkinson’s) Brigade (the 80th Foot and the 33rd 
and 63rd Native Infantry), and well supported by the Fifth (Ashburn- 
ham’s) Brigade, the (gth and 62nd Foot and the 26th Native 
Infantry). But presently it became apparent that the weight of the 
whole Sikh army would be thrown upon the brigades of Stacy 
and Wilkinson if some diversion were not effected, and to relieve 
the pressure on these the Second (Gilbert’s) and the First (Smith’s) 
Divisions were ordered to advance and assail the centre and left of 
the Sikh entrenchments. After a prolonged and desperate conflict, 
involving more than one repulse, these divisions also made good 
their footing within the defences, and then for a long hour a fierce 
and sanguinary struggle raged within the entrenchments; but 
gtadually the Sikhs were forced back and out of their position to the 
river, where the bridge-of-boats giving way under the shot of our 
artillery and the pressure of the flying multitude, hundreds were 
drowned in trying to effect a passage, and hundreds more were de- 
stroyed by the fire of the horse artillery, which followed them up to 
the very margin of the stream. By noon the battle was over and the 
victory complete, the Sikh army, routed and hurled headlong over 
the Sutlej, having lost nearly one-third of their numbers in the 
conflict, while sixty-seven of their guns remained in the hands of 
the victors. Our own losses, too, were heavy, amounting to 321 
killed and 2,064 wounded, of whom 13 of the killed and 102 
of the wounded were British officers; among the former were 
Lieutenants Hay, of the soth, and Rawson of the 63rd Native Infantry, 
both serving on the staff; Lieutenant Faithfull, Horse Artillery ; 
Captain Shuttleworth and Ensign Hamilton, rst European Light 
Infantry; Lieutenant Playfair, 33rd Native Infantry; and Captain 
Fisher, Sirmoor Battalion; and Brigadier McLaren, Lieutenant Lam- 
bert and Ensign Davidson, 1st European Light Infantry, Lieutenant 
Beatson, 14th Native Infantry (attached to the rst European Light 
. Infantry), and Ensign Scatcherd, 41st Native Infantry, afterwards 
died of their wounds. Four Native officers were also killed,—Jemadar 
Pahlwan Singh, 12th Native Infantry (one company of which was in 
the field); Subadar Baijnath Pande, 33rd Native Infantry ; Jemadar 
Jorawar Khan, 47th Native Infantry; and Jemadar Imam Khan, 


220 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


68th Native Infantry. Subadars Bhawani Pande and Taji Singh, 
26th Native Infantry; Hiraman Misr, 42nd Native Infantry; Basti 
Singh, 43rd Native Infantry, and Drig Sing Rana, Nasseri Battalion, 
died of their wounds. The behaviour of all the Native corps on this 
occasion was admirable, and the Sirmoor and Nasseri Battalions 
and the 43rd and sgth Native Infantry are specially mentioned in 
terms of praise in Sir Hugh Gough’s despatch. 

No time was lost in following up the victory. The combat 
had indeed scarcely ceased when, in obedience to the orders of 
the Governor-General, the troops of the Fourth Division began to 
cross the river at Khunda Ghat, near Ferozepore, and that night 
six regiments of Native infantry and a troop of horse artillery 
were over the Sutlej under the command of Sir John Littler. On 
the rath February a bridge-of-boats was completed, and on the 
13th Sir Hugh Gough, with the whole force, except the heavy train 
and a division which had been left to collect the captured guns 
and the wounded and remove them to Ferozepore, was encamped 
at Kasur, sixteen miles from the river and thirty-two from 
Lahore. Here the Governor-General was met by envoys from the 
Lahore Darbar, and to them the terms of the British Govern- 
ment were made known. The power of the Sikhs was for the 
time completely broken; the terms imposed upon them were 
acquiesced in, and the Maharajah made his submission in person. 
On the 2oth February the British Army arrived at Lahore, and two 
days afterwards a portion of the citadel was garrisoned by English 
regiments. 

Under the terms of the treaty, the Sikhs surrendered the remainder 
of the guns that they had used against us on the Sutlej,—36 in 
number. These, added to those taken in the various engage- 
ments, made a total of 256 guns captured during the campaign, 
and in the course of the year they were all removed to Calcutta. 
Under another article of the treaty the whole of the Jullundur 
Doab was ceded to the Company. The towns in the plains sub- 
mitted without demur, but the sérladar of Kot Kangra refused 
to surrender that place, and in April, 1846, it became necessary to 
send a force toturn him out. This was commanded by Brigadier 
Wheeler and consisted of the 2nd, 11th, 41st, and 44th Native Infan- 
try, and a wing of the 63rd, with a siege train. Great difficulty was 


(experienced in dragging the guns up to the place, but once they 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


were there the enemy gave in and surrendered the fort without 
fighting. 

The news of the termination of the war was received with the 
greatest enthusiasm in England. Sir Henry Hardinge, Sir Hugh 
Gough, and the Army of the Sutlej were thanked by both Houses 
of Parliament, and both the Governor-General and the Commander- 
in-Chief were raised to the peerage. The former on his own respon- 
sibility granted twelve months’ batta to all the troops engaged; the 
inscription of “Moopxes,” “ FerozesHaur,” “ AtiwaL,” and 
“Sopraon” on the colours of all corps which had taken part in 
those battles was ordered (G.O.C.C., 12th December, 1846) ; and a 
medal] was granted for each of the four great battles of the campaign, 
those entitled to be decorated for more than one battle receiving 
the medal struck for the first of the four in which he was present and 
clasps for the subsequent engagements. 

During this and the succeeding year considerable fluctuations in 
the strength of the Bengal Army occurred, the most important of 
which it will be convenient to notice here. At a very early stage of 
the war it became abundantly apparent that the maintenance of a 
large force on the Sutlej and the provision at the same time of neces- 
sary garrisons in the rear were together productive of too great a 
strain on the existing strength of the Bengal Army, and accordingly 
in January, 1846, the formation of several new corps (cavalry, artil- 
lery and infantry) was ordered. 

Taking the cavalry first,—eight new corps of irregular horse 
were raised by G. G. O., dated 3rd, 14th, and 24th of January, 1846, 
and numbered from the roth ‘o the 17th, In the following year, how- 
ever, the cavalry of the Bundelkhand Legion was brought on to the 
military establishment under the designation of the “ roth Irregular 
Cavalry,” in consequence of which the new regiments were all moved 
on one number and became the 11th to the 18th,—(G. O. G. G., dated 
18th September, 1847). Of these nine regiments, two only (the 
17th and 18th) survived the ordeal of the mutiny, and are now 
the 7th and 8th Bengal Cavalry. As regards infantry,—ten levies of 
a thousand men each were raised (G.G.O., 24th January, 1846) as a 
reserve and to act as feeders to the regiments in the field, and at 
the same time, in order to provide for garrison duties and for the 
preservation of order while so large a portion of the Army was in the 
field, eighteen depdt battalions, of 475 men each, were formed from 


22aI 


Conclusion of 
the war. 


222 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Redactions. 


drafts of 165 Native officers and men taken from each of the existing 
corps of native infantry : besides these, six levy companies and four 
depét companies of Native artillery were called into existence. All 
these corps had, however, but an ephemeral existence. The conclusion 
of the war and the apparent settlement of the Punjab giving hopes of 
a lasting peace, reductions were immediately carried out, and the 
first to go (March, 1846) were the levies and depét battalions and 
companies referred to above, the former being disbanded and the 
constituent portions of the latter returned to the corps from which 
they had been taken. Subsequently, however, it was found neces- 
sary to provide for the needs of the newly-acquired territory and of 
our extended “sphere of influence,” and in the summer of 1846 
an important addition was made to the strength of the Bengal Army 
by the raising (G. G. O., dated the 30th July, 1846), on the left bank 
of the Sutlej, of two regiments of Sikh infantry : these corps were 
designated ** The Regiment of Ferozepore” and “ The Regiment of 
Ludhiana,” and still survive as the 14th and rs5th Regiments of 
Bengal Infantry. Later in the same year it was directed (G. G. O., 
Foreign Department, No. 2457, dated the 14th December, 1846) 
that ‘‘a frontier brigade’ (one light field battery and four regiments 
of infantry) should be raised in the Trans-Sutlej and Cis-Sutlej 
States for police and general purposes, and also that a ‘Corps of 
Guides ’’ should be formed for general service. The Corps of 
Guides and the four regiments of infantry still survive, the former 
under its original designation, and the latter as the rst, 2nd, 3rd and 
4th Regiments of Sikh Infantry of the Punjab Frontier Force. In 
the following year again extensive reductions took place; all infantry 
corps were reduced by 20 non-commissioned officers and 200 men, 
irregular cavalry regiments were brought down to a total strength 
of 500 each, and all the local police battalions (formed in 1844) 
were disbanded (G, O.G.G., 30th January, 1847). Shortly afterwards 
the artillery and cavalry of the Shekhawati Brigade were disbanded, 
the infantry alone being retained and brought upon the strength 
of the Army (it had hitherto been a “‘ civil” organisation) under the 
designation of the “ Shekhawati Battalion.” 

A notable change in the year 1846 was the restoration of the num- 
ber “‘ 34” to the Army List, the new 34th Native Infantry being the 
infantry of the Bundelkhand Legion, which, on the misbehaviour 
of the old 34th in 1844, had, as already related, volunteered to take 


— — sae 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


223 


the place of that regiment in Sindh, and had served there for two 
years—(G.0.G.G., 4th July, 1846). 

Early in 1848 the Earl (afterwards Marquess) of Dalhousie 
succeeded Lord Hardinge as Governor-General. Scarcely, how- 
ever, had he taken up the reins of government when the anticipa- 
tions of continued peace in the Punjab were rudely dispelled by 
the rebellion of the Dewan Mulraj and the Sikh troops at Mooltan, 


Second Sikh 
War, 1848. : 


Revolt at 
Mooltan, April, 


the murder there of Mr. Vans-Agnew and Lieutenant Anderson, and | segs. 


the rapid extension of the outburst throughout the whole of the Pun- 
jab. The British officers referred to were murdered on April aoth, 
1848, and by the rst July Lieutenant Edwardes and General Van 
Cortlandt (of the Sikh service), with an army of irregulars from the 
Derajat and some troops of the Nawab of Bahawalpur (joined in July 
by the cavalry of the Corpe of Guides,—then consisting of but a single 
troop under Lieutenant Lumsden) had twice (at Kineri on the 18th 
June, and again at Sadusam on the 1st July) beaten the troops of 
the rebel Mulraj, driven him to take refuge in his fortress of 
Mooltan, and recovered the whole of that important district except 
the fortress itself. After considerable delay, Lord Gough being averse 
to putting troops in the field during the hot weather, a force was 
despatched from Lahore and Ferozepore for the reduction of Mooltan— 
a task which was quite beyond the power of the irregular troops 
under the command of Lieutenant Edwardes ; this force was com- 
manded by Major-General Whish, and was composed of the 
following troops :—* 
ArtiLttery :—Under Major H. Garbett—two troops. of horse artillery, four 
companies of foot artillery, and a second class siege train. 
Enoinggrs :—Under Major R.C. Napier—three companies of sappers, and 
two of pioneers. 
Cava.ry :— Under Lieutenant-Colonel H. F. Salter—the 1:th Light Cavalry, 
and the 7th and 11th Irregular Cavalry. 


INFANTRY :—First Brigade, under Lieutenant-Colonel A. Hervey—H. M.’s 
toth Foot, and the 8th and 52nd Native Infantry. 


Second Brigade, ander Lieutenant-Colonel F. Markham—H, 
M.’s 32nd Poot, and the goth, 51st, and 7and Native 
Infantry. 

Co-operating with this force was a Sikh army, which the Lahore 
Durbar had despatched to Mooltan under Rajah Sher Singh, one of the 
most influential chiefs of the Punjab; but these troops were ill- 
affected, and ought never to have been allowed to proceed to 


224 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


First slege of 
Mooltaa, 
September, 
1848. 


Mooltan, where their presence after a while seriously augmented the 
difficulties of the British commander. 

It was not until the end of August that General Whish’s division 
arrived before Mooltan. The interval was employed by Mulraj in 
augmenting his army and strengthening his fort, and his only reply 
to the British General’s summons to surrender was to use every 
endeavour to bring about the defection of Sher Singh’s army. The 
siege was commenced by the opening of a parallel nearly a mile 
from the fortifications, whence it was intended to work through the 
intermediate ground of gardens, brick kilns, and villages. On the 
night of September 9th, an attem pt was made to dislodge the enemy from 
some houses and gardens in front of the trenches, and four companies 
of Her Majesty's roth Foot, a wing of the 49th Native Infantry and 
one company of the 72nd, were, with some irregular artillery, told off 
for this duty, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Pattoun of 
the 32nd Foot. The darkness of the night and their ignorance of the 
locality frustrated the gallant efforts of the troops, and the attack 
was repulsed with a loss of 15 killed, 4 officers ® (two mortally) and 
68 men wounded, and 4 men missing; among the killed was one 
Native officer,—Jemadar Duniah Singh, 72nd Native Infantry. On 
the morning of the 12th the villages in front of the trenches were, after 
some hard fighting, cleared of the enemy by two columns under 
Lieutenant-Colonel Pattoun, 32nd, and Lieutenant-Colonel Franks, 
10th, the whole commanded by Brigadier Hervey,—the troops engaged 
being one troop of horse artillery, one squadron from each of the three 
regiments of cavalry, five companies each of Her Majesty’s roth and 
32nd Regiments, and the 8th and 49th Native Infantry. A simulta- 
neous attack was made by some of the irregulars under General Van 
Cortlandt, who succeeded to some extent in diverting the atten- 
tion of the enemy. The attack was made with a bravery “ not surpassed 
during the war,” and was met by an equally stubborn resistance, which, 
however, was at length broken down and the enemy driven into the 
city. Our loss was 5 British officers and 19 men killed, and 9 officers 
and 136 men wounded, the officers killed being Lieutenant-Colonel 
Pattoun, 32nd Foot, Major Montizambert and Quarter-Master Taylor, 
10th Foot, Lieutenant Cubitt, 49th Native Infantry, and Ensign Lloyd, 


® Including Lieutenant Christopher, Indian Navy, who was serving as a volun- 
teer with the irregular forces under Lieutenant Edwardes, He died of his wounds 
a few weeks later.—P. 


. 
Rel 


ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


225 


8th Native Infantry. General Whish had thus secured a position 
within battering distance of the city walls, but it was now. plainly 
to be seen that the force under his command was utterly inade. 
quate for the reduction of the place: the question of continuing 
the operations was under anxious consideration when, on the 14tb 
_ September, the matter was brought to an abrupt conclusion by the 
sudden desertion of Sher Singh and his whole force to the enemy. 
In consequence of this defection General Whish at once raised the 
siege, and withdrew to a position near the village of Suraj Khund, 
where he entrenched himself and remained threatening (though unable 
to blockade) the town, until he should be in a position to resume 
active operations; this however, did not come about for some 
time. 

Rajah Sher Singh, distrusted by Mulraj, remained encamped under 
the walls of Mooltan until the gth October, when he suddenly marched 
northwards. Advancing to within twenty-five miles of Lahore, he 
continued for some time to threaten that place, but eventually moved 
westwards to unite with the troops lately forming the garrison of 
Bannu, who had mutinied and joined in the rebellion which was now 
fast over-spreading the Punjab, and before many weeks had elapsed 
he was on the Chenab at the head of a formidable force. 

The rising at Mooltan had been followed by an outbreak in 
Hazara headed by Sirdar Chattar Singh, and. the defection of Sher 
Singh and his army finally convinced the Government that it was 
necessary to embark once more on a regular campaign against the 
Sikhs. It was not, however, until October that orders were issued 
for the assembly of an army at Ferozepore, and in the meantime 
the complications on all sides had increased considerably. In the 
Jullundur Doab disturbances were incessant, and a serious rising 
took place there headed by Sirdar Ram Singh, who, in September, 
took up a strong position at the village of Bassa, on the top of a high 
hil] near Nurpur. .Here he was attacked on the roth by a force 
under the command of Major Fisher, rsth Irregular Cavalry, 
consisting of 130 of the sth and 16th Irregular Cavalry, two 
companies of the ‘29th and four of the 71st Native Infantry, and 
300 of the 1st and 130 of the and Sikh Local Infantry, and dislodged 
after a brief engagement, in which our loss amounted to only one 
sepoy killed and nine wounded. In this affair two corps of what is 
now the Punjab Frontier Force gained the first of that long series of 

Q 


226 THE SERVICES OF THE 


successes which has made them famous among the picked troops 
of the Indian Army. 

While these events were in progress, Chattar Singh had opened 
negotiations with the Amir Dost Muhammad Khan of Kabul, who 
accepted the proffered alliance with readiness, and sent a considerable 
force into the Punjab to assist the Sikhs. Late in October the Sikh 
garrison at Peshawar mutinied, and Major Lawrence and the other 
occupants of the Residency fell into the hands of Chattar Singh, by 
whom they were kept in close captivity at that p'ace. Later on 
Attock was also taken by Chattar Singh, and soon the whole of the 
northern part of the Punjab, with the exception of Hazara (to which 
Captain Abbott held on, with the assistance of local Muhammadan 
levies), was in the hands of the revolted Sikhs. 


The Army On the 13th October a General Order was published detailing 
ofthe Puajab. | the troops which were to form the “ Army of the Punjab”; these 
were as follow :-— 
ARTILLERY :—Brigadier-General J. Tennant—8 troops of horse artillery, 3 light 
held batteries, and 8 companies of foot artillery. 
ENGIneeRs:—Brigadier J. Cheape, c.8.— The Corps of Sappers and 
Pioneers ; 
Cavaury :— Under the command « f Brigadier-General C. R. Cureton, C.B.— 
1st Brigade :—Brigadier M. White, c.8.—Her spl egy fe 3rd 
Light Dragoons, and the sth and 8th Light Cavalry 
and Brigade:—Brigadier A. Pope, c.8.—Her sera oth Light 
eueoon (Lancers), and the 1st 6th Light 
avalry. 
grd Brigade :—Brigadier H. F. Salter—the 11th Light Cavalry, 
and the 7th and 11th Irregular Cavalry. 
qth Brigade :—Brigadier J. B. Hearsey—the 3rd, gth, and rath 
Irregular Cavalry. 
INFANTRY— (18¢ Brigades —Brigadier A. S. H. Mountain, c.8,—Her Majesty's 
Maton Genl toth Foot and the 8th and 72nd Native Infantry, 
° dand Brigade: - Brigadier F. Markham—Her Mayesty’s 3and 
W.S. Whish,c.B. Foot, and the 4yth and «1st Native Infantry. ai 
3rd Brigade :—Brigadier J. Eckford—Her Majesty’s 29th Foot, 


Maj ‘c nl. and the 31st and 56th Native Infantry. 

Sic W R qth Brigade :—Brigadier C, Godby, ¢.8.—the and Eur 

Gilbert, . Regiment, and the 45th and 7oth Native Infantry. 
K.C.8. 5th Brigade:—Brigadier A. Hervey—the 13th, goth and Sand 


Native Infantry. 


mM. 6th Brigade:—Brigadier J. Pennycuick, c.8.—Her Majesty’s 
er a pile 2, 24th Foot, al the 15th and asth Native iatecreye 
; at “an, )7e Brigade :—Brigadier N. Penny, c.B.—the 2oth, 22nd and 
eet » Goth Native Infantry. | 
In these arrangements, however, considerable changes took place 


almost as soon as they were announced : the 14th Light Dragoons were 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 237 


added to the 1st Brigade of Cavalry; the agth Foot were removed 
from the 3rd to the sth Brigade, their place in the former being taken 
by the 73rd Native Infantry from the garrison of Lahore; the 1sth 
and the 22nd Native Infantry interchanged brigades; and a fourth 
division, the command of which was given to Brigadier-General Colin 
Campbell,® had a brief existence of about a fortnight. This division 
comprised the Eighth Brigade (36th and 46th Native Infantry) and the 
Ninth Brigade (the 61st Foot and the 3rd Native Infantry). On its 
being broken up the 61st Foot were removed to the Eighth Brigade, 
which was then transferred to the Third Division, and the command 
given to Brigadier J. Hoggan, and the 3rd Native Infantry were 
struck off the strength of the Army of the Punjab. 

Of the troops above detailed, between 4,000 and 5,000 men 
(including most of the Sappers and Pioneers, and the sand Native 
Infantry, then belonging to the Fifth Brigade) were at Mooltan under 
Major-General Whish; the remainder, of which Lord Gough himself 
took command, numbered about 16,000. 

The campaign was opened on the 22nd of November by a move- 
ment of the Commander-in-Chief against Sher Singh, who, with an 
army of 16,000, was in position at Ramnagar, on the left bank of the 
Chenab. Deeming it necessary to drive this force over the river, 
Lord Gough ordered Brigadier-General Campbell, commanding 
the advanced corps, to carry out this object. General Campbell 
accordingly moved forward from Saharan on the morning of the 
22nd November with two troops of horse artillery, two light field 
batteries, the 1st Brigade of Cavalry and the rath Irregular Cavalry, 
and the infantry brigades of Godby (less the 45th Native Infantry) and 
Hoggan. On arrival at Ramnagar it was found that the main body 
of the enemy had already crossed to the right bank; several small 
parties were, however, observed to be sti making their way from the 
town to the ford, and the two troops of horse artillery were ordered 
to pursue and open fire on them while crossing, while a squadron of 
the 3rd Light Dragoons was directed to charge and clear the left 
bank of the river of all hostile bodies that might still remain; the 
charge of the Dragoons was brilliant and successful, but the horse 
artillery, in their eagerness to overtake the parties making for the ford, 
got into the sands of the river, and one gun became so imbedded that 


bie 


® The late Lord Clyde, who here for the first time comes into notice in Indian 
rfare,—P, 
® Q 2 


428 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


it could not be extricated. Observing the difficulty in which the gun 
was placed, the enemy redoubled the ‘artillery fire they had kept 
up from the right bank, and re-crossed over the whole of their 
cavalry.. A retirement became necessary, but in an unlucky mo- 
ment permission was given to the 14th Light Dragoons and the sth 
Light Cavalry to charge the enemy. Exposed to a heavy and con- 
stant fire from the Sikh guns on the opposite bank, and embarrassed 
by the deep sand, the two regiments, after defeating and driving 
back the Sikh cavalry, were compelled to retire, having suffered 
heavy loss, not the least of which was the death of Lieutenant-Colonel 
Havelock, of the r4th, and of Brigadier-General Cureton, the com- 
mander of the Cavalry Division. The loss in this unfortunate and 
unprofitable affair, in which the 8th Light Cavalry also shared, was 


o 


two British officers, one native officer, and 23 men killed; and 8 
British officers, one native officer, and 49 men wounded. The native 
officer killed was Subadar-Major Mir Sher Ali, Sardar Bahadur, of 
the 8th Light Cavalry—an old man of seventy-eight years, and of 
nearly sixty years’ service. 

Lord Gough remained halted at Ramnagar for several days, 
waiting for his heavy guns, then coming up from the rear, and dur- 
ing this period the Army of the Punjab was re-organised and distri- 
buted as follows (G. O. C. C., 26th November, 1848) :— 


ARTILLERY :—Brigadier-General J. Tennant—8 troops of horse artillery, 4 light 
field batteries, and 8 companies of fvot artillery. 

ENGINRERS :—Brigadier-General J. Cheape, C.B.—3 companies of sappers aad 
7 of pioneers. 

CAVALRy :—Major-General Sir J. Thackwell, K.c.B.— 
1st Brigade aa? and s4th Light Dragoons, and the sth and 8th 

ighke Cavalry. 
’ and Brigade :—oth Light Uragoons (Lancers), and the rgt and 
6th Light Cavalry. 
gra Brigade :— oF Light Cavalry, and the 7th and 1th Irregular 
valry. 
gth Brigade :—3rd, gth and 12th Irregular Cavalry, 

Finest Infantry Division :—Major-General W. S, Whish, c.B.— | 
1st Brigade :—toth Foot, and the 8th and 72nd Native Infantry. 
and Brigade :—320d Foot, and the qggth, §:st and 52nd Native 

Infantry. 

Seconp INFANTRY DIVISION :—Major-General Sir W. R. Gilbert, K.c.B.—= 
gra be pleh I Vib 56th and 731d Native Infantrv. 
gth brigade:—Vhe 2nd Eu:opcan Regiment, and the 4sth and 

7oth Native Infartry. 
sth Brigade :—2gth Fuot, andthe 13th and 30th Native Infantry. 

Tutrp IngantrRy Div. 8S0N. -Brigadier-General C., Campbell, c.B.— 
6th Brigade :—24th Foot, and the 22nd and 25th Native Infantry. 
71h Brigade :—15th, 2oth and 69th Native ean b 
8th Brigade :—618t Foot, and the 36th and 46th Native Infantry. 


| 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 229 
a a a 

This, however, was not the last of the changes made in the com- 
position of the Army, for in the middle of the following month 
(G.O.C.C., 14th December, 1845) the 3rd Brigade was broken up, 
and the five brigades junior to it renumbered as the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 
6th and 7th Brigades, respectively. Of the components of the 
defunct brigade, the 31st Native Infantry was posted to the new 
3rd Brigade, and the 56th to the new 4th, while the 73rd was relegated 
to garrison duty at Lahore. At a later period some other minor 
changes took place, such as the removal of the 13th and the aand 
Native Infantry from the 4th and 5th Brigades, and the transfer of 
the 45th from the 3rd Brigade to the sth. A Reserve Division 
was also formed in Sirhind, consisting of a light field battery, the 17th 
Irregular Cavalry, the 18th Foot, and the 17th, roth, 58th and 
61st Native Infantry, the command of which was conferred upon 
Major-General Sir D. St. L. Hill. 

On the arrival of the siege train (27th November), Lord Gough Action at 
entered on measures for effecting the passage of the Chenab and December 3rd. 
attacking the Sikh army under Sher Singh in its position on the right 
bank of the river opposite to Ramnagar. With this object, on the 3oth 
November, he detached Sir Joseph Thackwell with three troops of horse 
artillery, two light field batteries, two companies of pioneers, por- 
tions of the rst and 4th Brigades of Cavalry (the 3rd Light Dragoons, 
the sth and 8th Light Cavalry, and the 3rd and 1 ath Irregular Cavalry), 
and the 3rd, 6th and 8th Brigades of Infantry (less the 73rd Native 
Infantry and six companies of the 22nd Native Infantry), to cross 
the river at a ford about twelve miles above Ramnagar, and turn 
the left flank of the enemy on the opposite bank,—he himself, if 
successful in silencing Sher Singh’s guns and securing the passage 
of the river at Ramnagar, crossing there and assailing the enemy in 
front. The ford was found to be too difficult and dangerous to attempt 
in the face of a Sikh force assembled on the opposite bank, and 
Thackwell therefore, in accordance with his instructions, proceeded 
higher up to Wazirabad, at which place Captain Nicholson,® 
Assistant to the Resident at Lahore, had secured some boats, with the 
aid of which the force effected the passage of the river on the rst 
and 2nd of December. On the latter day Thackwell moved 
twelve miles down the river towards Sher Singh’s position opposite 
Ramnagar, and resuming his march on the 3rd reached the village 
of Sadulapur, where he halted in consequence of the receipt of an 


® Afterwards Brigadier-General Nicholson of Mutiay fame.—P. 


230 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Chilianwala, 
January 13th, 
2649. 


order from the the Commander-in-Chief desiring him not to attack 


| until the arrival of the 4th Brigade (the and European Regiment 


and the 7oth Native Infantry), which had been sent to reinforce him. 
In the afternoon, however, Sher Singh, with a large portion of his 
army and many guns, appeared in Thackwell’s front and opened a 
heavy fire on the British force. The action which ensued was one 
principally of artillery, Thackwell, in obedience to his orders, remain- 
ing strictly on the defensive : it continued until dark, and at midnight 
Sher Singh silently retired towards the Jhelum, having sustained 
considerable loss in the cannonade. Our own loss amounted to 
only 24 killed and 57 (including four British officers) wounded, 
Jemadars Thannu Ram, 25th, and Mir Amanat Ali, 36th Native 
Infantry, were killed, and Jemadar Sirdar Khan, 22nd Native 
Infantry, lost a leg. 

On the following day Thackwell’pushed on in pursuit to Jalalpur, 
and thence on the sth to the village of Helan, but did not succeed in 
coming up with the enemy. 

On the 8th the head-quarters of the army crossed the Chenab by 
a bridge-of-boats and joined Thackwell shortly afterwards at Helan, 
in the vicinity of which place the whole force remained until the 12th 
January. On the roth January Lord Gough was informed of the 
capture of Attock by Chattar Singh, who was now hastening with all 
his forces to effect a junction with Sher Singh on the Jhelum. Under 
these circumstances it became a matter of pressing necessity to attack 
and dispose of Sher Singh before this reinforcement should reach 
him,—he already having with him some 30,000 men, with 62 guns. 
Accordingly His Lordship broke up his camp and moved on the 
12th to Dingi, and on the 13th towards Rasul, on the left bank of the 
Jhelum, in the neighbourhood of which place’the Sikhs had taken up 
& position. The enemy’s line was a most extended one, reaching 
from Rasul on the left to the village of Fateh-Shah-ki-Chak on the 
right. The original plan of attack consisted in moving on Rasul, 
turning the enemy’s left flank, and doubling up his long, thin 
line in the direction of the Jhelum. But on arriving at the village 
of Cnota Umrao, Lord Gough, who had no intention of fighting that 
day, inclined to the left and moved towards the village of Chilian- 
wala, his object being to halt there and reconnoitre the country,— 
which was found to be very difficult, being intersected by ravines 

and covered with jungle,—as well as the enemy’s position, in which 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 23! 


Sher Singh, who suspected Lord Gough’s design against his left flank, 
had already made some change by throwing forward his right. 
Arrived at Chilianwala, it was found that such of the enemy as 
had been posted there had vacated the position and fallen back on 
their main line, leaving only a strong picquet, which was immediate- 
ly driven cff. It was now 2 P.M., and preparations were made to 
take up ground for encampment. Sher Singh, however, was deter- 
mined to force on a battle that afternoon. With this object he 
opened a heavy artillery fire on the British force,—at first from such 
a distance as to do no execution, but after a while from the front 
of his position at a range of about 1,500 yards. As it was prob- 
able that the enemy would advance his guns and cannonade the 
encampment during the night, Lord Gough drew up his forces 
in order of battle, and then, ordering the troops to lie down, he 
opened a heavy fire of artillery on the enemy’s centre. After about 
an hour’s cannonade the fire of the enemy appeared to be sufficiently 
subdued to justify an advance on his position, which was accordingly 
ordered. | 

The extreme length of the position occupied by the Sikhs 
caused large gaps between their centre and wings. The British line, 
when formed for attack, did little more than oppose a front to Sher 
Singh’s centre, and such of it as overlapped ow the left faced one of the 
gaps mentioned above. Our troops advanced to the attack in the 
following order :—On the right, commanded by Sir Walter Gilbert, was 
the Second Division, composed of the 3rd and 4th Brigades, the 
former of which (under Brigadier Godby ) comprised the and 
Bengal European Regiment, and the 31st and 7oth Native Infantry, 
and the latter ( under Brigadier Mountain ) Her Majesty’s 29th Foot, 
and the 30th and 56th Native Infantry. This division was flanked on 
the right by the znd (Pope’s) Brigade of Cavalry (the gth Lancers, and 
the rst and 6th Light Cavalry), strengthened by the 14th Light Dra- 
goons, with three troops of horse artillery. On the left was the Third 
Division, commanded by Brigadier-General Campbell; this was 
composed of the sth, 6th, and 7th Brigades (Her Majesty’s 24th Foot, 
and the 2sth and 45th Native Infantry under Brigadier Pennycuick ; 
the 15th and 69th Native Infantry, under Brigadier Penny; and Her 
Majesty’s 61st Foot, and the 36th and 46th Native Infantry, under 
Brigadier Hoggan) ; of these the 6th Brigade (Penny’s) was held in 
reserve. On the left flank was the rst Cavalry Brigade (the 3rd 


232 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Light Dragoons, and the sth and 8th Light Cavalry), with three troops 
of horse artillery, In the centre was massed the heavy artillery ; the 
field batteries were between the infantry brigades. The 3rd and gth 
Irregular Cavalry, with the zoth Native Infantry (from the 6th 
Brigade), were detailed, under Brigadier Hearsey, to protect the 
provision and baggage train. 

The British line now advanced to attack the enemy’s guns in front 
with the bayonet, marching for that purpose for nearly a mile, through 
thick and unknown jungle. The right (Pennycuick’s) brigade of 
Campbell’s division was the first to engage the enemy. Emerging in 
some disorder from the jungle at a distance of 300 yards from the Sikh 
line, they were received with a storm of grape, which mowed them down 
by dozens before they could reach the enemy. Nothing, however, could 
stop their charge, and, rushing impetuously on, they threw themselves 
on the gunners, bayoneted them at their posts, and fora moment were 
masters of the position; but the Sikhs, quickly rallying and realising 
how small were the numbers of those who had attacked them, 
returned to the fight, and, aided by their cavalry, recovered the battery 
and drove back the British brigade almost to the point from which it 
had advanced to the attack. This repulse seems to have been 
principally owing to the 24th Foot and the 45th Native Infantry, 
advancing rapidly, having outpaced the 25th Native Infantry, and 
arrived breathless and without adequate support before the enemy. 
The brigade, according to Lord Gough himself, behaved heroically, 
and did not give way until it had lost its Brigadier (Pennycuick) and 
its Brigade-Major (Harris), and the 24th their Colonel (Brookes), 
ten other officers, and nearly a third of the whole regiment killed. 

To fill the gap in the line caused by the repulse of Pennycuick’s 
brigade, the 6th (Penny’s) brigade, which had been held in reserve, 
was immediately pushed forward, and advanced with great gallantry ; 
but it missed its way in the jungle, and inclining too much to the 
right, eventually after some severe fighting, found itself on the 
left of Godby’s brigade. . | 

Meanwhile, the left (Hoggan’s) brigade of Campbell’s division, 
advancing steadily through the brushwood, charged the batteries 
in their front, drove the Sikhs before them with great slaughter, and 
then wheeling to the right, recovered the ground from which 
Pennycuick’s brigade had just been repulsed, and maintained it 
until the close of the engagement. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Gilbert’s division, in the meantime, had undergone no less peril- 
ous experiences, Its left brigade, under Mountain, was the first to 
come into collision with the enemy. Advancing under a desolating 
fire the brigade succeeded, though not without terrible loss, in 
carrying the batteries in its front; but broken in its advance, the 
56th Native Infantry, the left battalion of the brigade, was pierced 
by the Sikh cavalry, forced back in confusion and almost destroyed. 
The other regiments of the brigade, the 29th Foot and the 30th 
Native Infantry, succeeded in maintaining the ground they had cap- 
tured, and held it until the end of the contest. 

The right (Godby’s) brigade of Gilbert’s division had, in the 
meantime, been doing gallant service against heavy odds. Sweep- 
ing through the jungle it pressed forward under a murderous fire, 
and after a prolonged and sanguinary contest (at one period of which 
the and European Regiment was obliged to change front to the rear; 
to repel a body of the enemy who had got behind them as they ad- 
vanced), it drove the Sikhs off the fieid and captured every gun in 
its front. In this contest the brigade was conspicuously aided by 
the fire of the field battery commanded by Captain Michael Dawes,* 
the splendid gallantry of which is said to have been the salvation | 
not only of the brigade but of the whole of Gilbert’s division. 

The right flank of Gilbert’s division had in the meantime been 
exposed by the discomfiture of the 2nd Brigade of Cavalry. 
Through some error on the part of the Brigadier (Pope), the brigade 
had got in front of the horse artillery, so as entirely to mask the 
fire of the latter. While endeavouring to move the brigade to the 
right, to get clear of the guns, Brigadier Pope was cut down by a 
Sikh sowar, and at the same moment an order was heard direct- 
ing the brigade to turn about. By whom this order was given has 
never been made known, but the effect was disastrous. As the troops 
retired in obedience to the order, they were suddenly charged by a 
body of the enemy’s cavalry, and the result was one of those sudden 
panics which are liable at times to overtake even the best of troops. 
Wheeling about,.they dashed to the rear, riding over and disabling 
the horse artillery batteries, and closely followed by the Sikhs, who 
cut down many of the gunners and captured several guns. The 
disaster, however, was checked by the gallantry of two squadrons of 

© This was No. 17 Light Field Battery, manned by the 3rd Company, rst Battalion, 
Bengal Artillery. It is now the sard Field Battery, Royal Artillery.—P. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


the oth Lancers and two of the 6th Light Cavalry, who, rallying as 
soon as they could get clear of the flying body of cavalry, charged 
the advancing enemy and stopped their onward career. 

Notwithstanding this reverse, the infantry of Gilbert’s division 
held their ground. The battle was won, but though the enemy were 
driven from their position, their forces were still unbroken. Lord 
Gough, yielding to the advice of several of his commanders, after 
bringing off most of the wounded, withdrew his troops from the field 
and fell back to the village of Chilianwala, This movement brought 
back Sher Singh: with more than half of the remains of his army he 
had crossed the Jhelum in flight, when, late at night, he learnt that 
Lord Gough had withdrawn from the field of battle; he imme- 
diately re-crossed, carried off all the captured guns except twelve, 
massacred such of the British wounded as still lay on the field, and 
then returned to the heights of Rasul, 

The British loss in the battle of Chilianwala amounted to 602 killed 
(including 22 British officers), 1,651 wounded (including 67 British 
officers), and 104 missing,—making a total of 3,357. Among the killed 
were Major C. Ekins, 7th Light Cavalry, Deputy Adjutant-General 
of the Army; Lieutenant J. A. Manson, Bengal Artillery ; Lieutenant 
A. M. Shepherd and Jemadars Siu-dayal Singb and Rambakhsh Singh, 
6th Light Cavalry ; Lieutenant A. Money, Subadars Chattardhari Singh, 
Jurawan Singh and Siu-dayal Singh, and Jemadars Tulsi Pande, 
Shaikh Dukhi and Assad Ali Khan, 25th Native Infantry ; Captain 
W. H. Ross, Ensign A. C, de Morel, and Jemadar Allah-dad Khan, 
30th Native Infantry; Subidar Kasiram Singh and Jemadar Kanhai 
Tiwari, 36th Native Infantry; Lieutenant W. W. Warde, Ensign 
F. W. Robinson, Subadars Sewa Upadhia and Bahadur Khan and 
Jemadars Gaya-din and Mansa Ram, 56th Native Infantry ;' and 
Subadars Shaikh Subhani and Shaikh Niamat Ali, 7oth Native 
Infantry. 

Besides these, many afterwards died of their wounds, —including 
Brigadier A. Pope, cB., 6th Light Cavalry, commanding the and 
Cavalry Brigade; Cuptain (Brevet-Major) E. Christie, Bengal 
Horse Artillery ; Lieutenant A. N. Thompson and Jemadar Gholam 
Hossain Khan, 36th Native Infantry ; Captain R. Haldane, 45th Native 
Infantry ; and Major D. Bamfield, 56th Native Infantry. 

But heavy as was our loss, that of the Sikhs was trebly as great. 
It has been estimated that in killed and wounded the fight at 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Chilianwala reduced Sher Singh’s army by not less than 7,000 men. 


Lord Gough himself remarked that nowhere else, except perhaps at 


Sobraon, had he seen “‘so many of the enemy’s slain upon the same 
space.” 

It is necessary now to revert to the progress of the war in the other 
parts of the Punjab before relating the last struggle of the Sikhs at 
Gujerat. 

In the Jullundur Doab the force under Brigadier-General Wheeler 
was constantly engaged with parties of the enemy. At forts Rangar 
Nagal (October 14th) and Kalalwala (November 32nd and 23rd), at 
Amb (2nd December) and Budi Pind (December 28th), on the 
heights of Dalla (16th January) and at other places, successes 
. were gained by various detachments formed from portions of the 7th 
Light Cavalry, the 3rd, 4th, 28th, 29th, and 718t Native Infantry, the 
2nd, 15th, and 16th Irregular Cavalry, the rst and and Sikh Local 
Infantry, and the newly-raised Corps of Guides. In the action on the 
heights of Dalla,Cornet Christie, 7th Light Cavalry, and Jemadar Ram- 
kishan Singh, rst Sikh Local Infantry, were killed, and Lieutenant 
Peel, second-in-command of the latter corps, was mortally wounded. 
The Corps of Guides was conspicuous in many of these affairs, 
and with them now for the first time came prominently into public 
notice Lieutenants H. B. Lumsden and W. S. R. Hodson, two officers 
who, in later years, arrived at high distinction in the Indian Army. 

While these events were occurring in the northern and eastern 
parts of the Punjab, Major-General Whish, at Mooltan, lay practically 
inactive, awaiting the arrival of reinforcements then on the way from 
Bombay and Sindh. On the rst November Mulraj, assuming the 
offensive, established himself on the raised banks of a dry canal 
which intersected the British lines, and for some days kept up a 
constant fire of artillery on the camp. At length, however, on the 
7th, he was expelled by a detachment of the army under Brigadier 
Markham, his batteries destroyed, and his troops driven back into 
the town with the loss of five of their guns. The regiments engaged 
in this action, which is called that of Suraj-khund, were one troop of 
horse artillery, two squadrons each of the 11th Light Cavalry and 
the 7th and 11th Irregular Cavalry, 40 sappers, six companies each 
of Her Majesty’s roth and 32nd Foot, and eight companies each of 
the 8th, 49th, 51st and sand Native Infantry. The casualties were 3 
men killed, and 4 Native officers and 53men wounded, The Irregular 


235 


Mooltan. 


236 


Second Siege of 
Mooltan. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Force under Edwardes (to whom the local rank of Major had been 
given) and the Bahawalpur Contingent under Lieutenant Lake were 
also prominently engaged, and lost, respectively, 34 killed and 134 
wounded, and 5 killed and 38 wounded. The total losses this day, 
on our side, thus amounted to 42 killed and 229 wounded. 

On the 21st of December, General Whish was joined by the 
reinforcements for which he had been waiting : these consisted of 
one troop of horse artillery, two companies of foot artillery, and two 
light field batteries, two companies of sappers, the 1st Bombay 
Light Cavalry, the Sindh Horse, Her Majesty's 6oth Foot (Rifles), 
the 1st Bombay European Regiment (Fusiliers), and the 3rd, 4th, 
gth and 19th Bombay Native Infantry,—the whole under the com- 
mand of Brigadier-General the Hon’ble H. Dundas. The force under. 
the command of General Whish was now increased to a total of 
15,648, and preparations were pushed on for a senewal of the siege. 
On Christmas Day the former position before Mooltan was resumed, 
and on the 27th an attack was made on the enemy’s position in the 
suburbs, which proved brilliantly successful and laid the walls of 
the city and fort open to our siege guns. The action was, however, 
attended with a loss of 26 killed, 172 wounded and 18 missing, 
and Lieutenants Playfair, 52nd, and Gillon, 72nd Native Infantry, 
died of the wounds they received on this occasion. 

On the 2gth a sally was made by 2,000 of the enemy On the post of 
Sidilal-ki-Bed, which was held by Major Edwardes’ Irregulars, but 
they were repulsed after two hours’ hard fighting. Four days after- 
wards two breaches in the city wall were reported practicable, and sim- 
ultaneous assaults were made on both (and January 1849), @ column 
(32nd Foot and 49th and zand Native Infantry) from the Bengal 
Division being told off to attempt the Delhi Gate breach, and 
another from the Bombay Division to assail the breach at the Khuni 
Burj (‘‘ The Bloody Bastion ”). The former was, however, found on 
near inspection to be quite impracticable, and all that the Bengal 
troops could do was to hasten round to the assistance of the column 
engaged at the Khuni Burj. Here the Bombay troops, after a 
sharp struggle, had been successful and had forced their way into the 
town; on which Mulraj, seeing that the city wall had been carried, 
took refuge in the citadel, the gates of which he closed, leaving 
three-fourths of his army at the mercy of their enemies. Numbers 
were slain in the streets of the city, and the remainder, fleeing 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


over the walls and by the Lahori Gate, concealed themselves until 
nightfall in the suburbs, and then, under cover of the darkness 
made good their escape to their homes. The total casualties in the 


storm of the city of Mooltan were 30 killed, 317 wounded, and one 
missing. 


The citadel of Mooltan was now completely invested, and Mulraj, 
seeing the toils closing around him, made overtures for terms ; but he 
received the answer that nothing short of unconditional surrender 
would be accepted. He was not yet, however, sufficiently humbled 
to yield on such terms, and so continued to hold out, keeping up 
an undiminished fire, which occasioned many casualties amongst 
the besiegers; amongst others Second-Lieutenant Graham and 
Lieutenant Thompson, both of the Artillery, were mortally wounded 
- during the last days of the siege. On our side the operations were 
pressed with vigour; under the heavy fire of the batteries the 
breaches in the fortifications soon became practicable, and prepara- 
tions were made to storm the place. The assault was fixed for the 

21st January, but on that day Mulraj, hopeless of further resistance, 
sent messengers to notify his desire to surrender, and at 9 A.M. 
on the 22nd he came out and gave himself up to General Whish. 
The fort was occupied on the same day, and before the departure 
of the army from Mooltan, the bodies of Vans-Agnew and 
Anderson were removed from their grave at the /dgah and borne 
through the breach which had been made by the British guns to an 
honoured resting-place in the citadel. There an obelisk, visible for 
miles round, marks their grave, and the inscription thereon tells, in 
vivid and stirring words, of the treachery which compassed their 
death, and of the ample manner in which they had been avenged. 
The total casualties during the operations against Mooltan, from 
August 1848 to January 1849, amounted to 210 killed (including 
g British officers) and 982 wounded (including 55 British officers).* 
After the battle of Chilianwala, Lord Gough remained encamped 
between the village of that name and Mojianwala, and awaited 
the fall of Mooltan, That event was followed immediately by the 
departure of General Whish with the Bengal Division, strengthened by 
one Bombay brigade, to join the Commander-in-Chief. On the 
night of the 11th February, before the arrival of these troops, Sher 
Singh, who had been reinforced by the army of Chattar Singh, his 


father, and by another under one of the sons of the Amir of Kabul, 


© Londen Gasette, 3rd April, 1849. 


237 


238 


Battle of Guje- 
rat, February 


az8t, 1849. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


ce ~ 


began moving away from Rasul ; in the course of the next few days 
he had withdrawn the whole of his forces, and established himself 
in a position near the town of Gujerat. On the rath the position of 
the Sikh army was ascertained, and on the following day Lord 
Gough marched from Chilianwala, and proceeding by way of 
Lasuria, Sadulapur, and Kunjah, he arrived on the 18th at Shadiwal, 
three miles from the Sikh position. At the same time a small force 
(the 53rd Foot, the 13th Native Infantry, and the 12th and 13th 
Irregular Cavalry, with four guns) under Lieutenant- Colonel Byrne, of 
the 53rd, was sent to Wazirabad, to prevent the Sikhs crossing the 
Chenab and making for Lahore, as was reported to be their intention. 
The whole of the troops from Mooltan had joined the main army by 
the 2oth of February, and on the following day Lord Gough 
advanced to the attack. The Sikh position was about a mile south 
of Gujerat; their right was covered by the Dwara, a broad and dry 
sandy naia ; their left rested on arivulet, called the Katela ; and their 
centre was formed behind the villages of Bara Kalra and Chota 
Kalra. Their numbers, including a body of 1,500 Afghan horse, led 
by Akram Khan, a son of the Amir Dost Mahommed Khan, were 
estimated at 60,000, with 59 guns, but this was probably somewhat 
above the true figure. Lord Gough’s plan of attack was to 
assail the Sikh left and centre and drive them back on their right 
for which purpose he advanced his right and his heavy artillery, 
retaining his left wing to complete the discomfiture of the enemy, 
after the former had done their work. His troops were arranged as 
follow :—The right, protected by one troop of horse artillery and 
two brigades of cavalry—Lockwood’s (the 14th Light Dragoons, 
the rst Light Cavalry, and two risalahs each of the 11th and 
14th Irregular Cavalry) and Hearsey’s (3rd and oth Irregular 
Cavalry),—was composed of the First (Whish’s) Division, in which, 
besides a troop of horse artillery and a company of pioneers, 
were comprised two brigades,—Hervey’s (Her Majesty's roth 
Foot, and the 8th and 52nd Native Infantry) and Markham’s 
(Her Majesty’s 32nd Foot, and the 51st and 72nd Native Infantry),— 
the whole covered by two more troops of horse artillery and one 
(Dawes’) light field battery, with two additional troops of horse 
artillery in reserve. On Whish’s left was the Second (Gilbert’s) Divi- 
sion, which included the brigades of Penny (the znd Bengal 
European Regiment, and the 31st and 7oth Native Infantry) and 


= ae <i aie a, oo 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


239 


Mountain (Her Majesty's agth Foot, and the 3oth and 6th Native 
Infantry). Next to these were the heavy guns, eighteen in number, 
and then the Third (Campbell’s) Division, composed of the brigades 
of Carnegy (Her Majesty's 24th Foot, and the 25th Native Infantry) 
and M’Leod (Her Majesty’s 61st Foot, and the 36th and 46th Native 
Infantry), supported by two light field batteries, On the extreme 
left was the Bombay brigade under Brigadier-General the Hon'ble 
H. Dundas (the 6oth Rifles, the 1st Bombay European Regiment and 
the 3rd and 19th Bombay Native Infantry), covered by a battery of 
horse artillery and supported by the rst (White’s) Brigade of Cavalry 
(Her Majesty's 3rd and yth Light Dragoons, the 8th Light Cavalry, the 
Sindh Horse, and two troops of horse artillery). The reserve was 
composed of the sth and 6th Light Cavalry, the 45th and 69th 
Native Infantry, and a Bombay light field battery. The battle com- 
menced at 7-30 A.M. with a furious cannonade, which was kept 
up steadily for three hours; the Sikh guns replied as steadily, until, 
being overpowered by both number and weight of guns, the 
enemy were compelled to retire behind the line of the Kalra villages. 
The First and Second Divisions were now ordered to advance against 
the enemy’s centre, and, though met by a determined and gallant 


resistance, in which they lost nearly 600 in killed and wounded, 


stormed the two villages, carried the position, and drove the Sikhs 
back on to their second line. On the left, at the same time, Campbell 
advanced with the Third Division and the Bombay brigade, and by 
skilful management of his light field batteries, which covered the 
advance of his infantry, with very trifling loss he forced his opponents 
to retire, and occupied their position without firing a musket shot. 
The cavalry on the flanks had, in the meantime, been actively 
engaged with the enemy's horse, whom they had in every instance 
put to flight : in particular on the left the Afghan horse and a body of 
Sikh cavalry were charged and routed with great loss by the Sindh 
Horse and a portion of the 9th Lancers. 

_ Driven back along their line, and with their retreat to the Jhelum 
cut off by the British cavalry, the Sikhs made yet one more bid 
for victory. Urged on by some of the principal chiefs, a large body 
of cavalry and infantry burst forward to assail the centre of the Bom- 
bay brigade ; but the readiness of Campbell frustrated their efforts: 
with great promptitude he turned the fire of a light field battery on 
the flank of the advancing host, and with such effect that in a few 


240 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


ee ga SL 


minutes the.enemy were defeated and driven back with heavy loss. 
By one o’clock in the afternoon the Sikh position was entirely in 
the hands of Lord Gough’s army, and the enemy, overthrown and 
routed in every direction, were in full fight, hotly pressed by the 
British cavalry and horse artillery. Night alone terminated the 
pursuit at a distance of fifteen miles from the field of battle. 

Our losses in the battle of Gujerat were comparatively small, 
amounting to no more than 96 (including five British officers) 
killed, 706 (including 25 British officers) wounded, and four miss- 
ing. Among the killed were Captain J. Anderson and Lieutenant 
E. W. Day, Horse Artillery ; Lieutenant G. H. Sprot, 2nd Bengal 
European Regiment; and Lieutenant R. Cox, and Subadar Raghu- 
nath Singh, 8th Native Infantry. Lieutenant B. M. Hutchinson, 
Bengal Engineers, and Naib-Risaldar Mirza Kalli Beg, 3rd Irregu- 
lar Cavalry, died of their wounds. Of the loss of the Sikhs no 
estimate appears to have been made, but it was certainly very heavy, 
and they lost 56 out ofthe 59 guns they had in their possession at 
Gujerat; of these 42 were captured in the action; the remaining 14 
were abandoned by them in their flight and subsequently brought in. 

On the day after the victory two columns were despatched to 
follow up the flying Sikhs,—one, under Campbell, which proceeded 
towards Bhimbar, returned in a few days without results beyond 
bringing in some of the guns abandoned by the flying enemy; the 
other, under Sir Walter Gilbert (consisting of two troops of horse 
artillery, two light field batteries, four companies of foot artillery, 
four companies of sappers and pioneers, the 14th Light Dragoons, 
the 3rd, gth, rith, rath and 13th Irregular Cavalry, a detachment of 
the Sindh Horse, the 53rd, 6oth and 61st Foot, the 1st Bombay 
European Regiment, the 2nd Bengal European Regiment, the 13th, 
22nd, 30th, 31st, 56th and 7oth Bengal Native Infantry, and the 31d 


and 19th Bombay Native Infantry), following closely on the enemy, 


pursued them with so much vigour that, on the r4th March, at 
Rawal Pindi, Sher Singh, Chattar Singh, thirty-five lesser chiefs, and 
the remains of the Sikh army laid down their arms before the Gen- 
eral,—41 guns and 20,000 stand of arms being surrendered on the 
occasion. It only remained to dispose of the Afghans, and Gilbert, 
continuing his pursuit, did not halt until he had driven them in 
headlong flight through the Khaibar Pass. | 

Thus ended the second Sikh war, which, commencing with the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 24! 


treacherous revolt of Mulraj, terminated with a great victory over one 
of the bravest of the peoples of India, gave a fine kingdom to the British 
Empire, and some of the best of its soldiers to the Indian army. 

Lord Dalhousie and Lord Gough each obtained a step in the peer- 
age; the army received the thanks of Parliament ; a medal was issued 
inscribed with the word “ PunyaB,” and with clasps for Moortan, 
Caitiamwaca and Guyerat, and the same names were authorised to 
be borne on the colours of corps engaged in those actions. 

The conquest of the Punjab now brought us into contact with 
the warlike and semi-barbarous Pathan tribes on the north- west 
frontier of that province. The aggressions of these tribes led to 
repeated conflicts with, and expeditions against, them,—the first 
of these occurring in the very year of the conquest. The history of 
these “‘ little wars” will, however, be more conveniently entered upon 
further on. It is only necessary to record here, in connection with 
this matter, that a few months after the conquest a noteworthy 
addition was made (G. G. O., dated the 18th May, 1849) to the 
strength of the Bengal Army. This was a force consisting of five 
regiments of Punjab irregular cavalry and five of Punjab irregular 
infantry, which were raised in the districts beyond the Sutlej for the 
protection of our new frontier on the north-west. About the same 
time the Sindh Camel Corps was transferred from the Bombay Presi- 
dency and placed on the same frontier, and at a later period three 
light field batteries were also formed for frontier service. These 

corps, with the “Frontier Brigade” raised in 1846-47, eventually 
constituted the “ PunyjaB Frontrex Force.’ The good and gallant 
service rendered by these troops in many a fierce encounter on the 
hills of the frontier and on the plains of Hindustan shall be related 
in due course. 

The annexation of the Punjab led indirectly to a painful incident | 
‘in the history of the Bengal Army. The corps located in that | 
province had, as serving beyond the limits of the British dominions, 
been, since the year 1846, in the enjoyment of extra allowances on 
the scale formerly allowed to the troops in Sindh. With the con- 
quest and annexation, the grounds on which alone the extra allow- 
ances had been conceded, ceased to exist, and accordingly a Genera! 
Order (G. G. O., dated the 25th October, 1849) was issued notify- 
ing that as the Punjab was now a British province, the foreign 
service allowance would cease, except for the troops on the extreme 

R 


—- 3Bga. 


242 THE SERVICES OF THE 
north-west frontier, to whom, as being practically on field service, 
they would for the present be continued. 7 
This announcement created profound discontent in the ranks of 
the corps serving in the Punjab, in many of which dangerous come 
binations were formed to resist the order and refuse the lower rate 
‘| of pay. Serious acts of insubordination and mutiny occurred in 
the 13th, the 22nd, and the 32nd Native Infantry, which were visited 
with more or less severe punishment, but the worst case was that 
of the 66th Native Infantry, stationed in Fort Govindgarh, Amritsar. 
So mutinous was the conduct of this regiment that Sir Charles 
Napier felt constrained to disband the corps at once, on his own 
authority, and without waiting for the sanction of the Government 
of India. This was done by G. O. C. C., dated the 27th February, 
1850, which directed that the Native officers, non-commissioned 
officers and men of the regiment were to be marched to Umballa 
and there discharged from the Company’s service; that the colours 
of the regiment were to be delivered over to ‘‘the brave and 
loyal men of the Nasseri Gurkha Battalion,” and that the regiment 
was in future to be denominated “the 66th or Gurkha Regiment.” 
The commanding officer of the Nasseri Battalion was also directed to 
recruit that corps at once to its full strength in place of the men 
transferred to the 66th. 
In the spring of 1850, a wing of the roth Native Infantry, and one 
of the and Oudh Local Infantry, with two guns, were employed in 
putting down a rebellion in the district about twenty miles to the . 
east of Lucknow. The principal occurrence connected with this 
affair was an attempt to take the fort of Bihta by storm on the 2oth 
March, which was signally repulsed. Lieutenant E. D. Elderton 
and 10 men of the 1oth were killed on this occasion, and Jemadars 
Khakandi Singh and Dhaukal Singh and 27 men wounded; in 
addition to this the 2nd Oudh Local Infantry sustained a loss of 7 
killed and 20 wounded. The fort was evacuated by the insurgents 
the same night. 
The Second The term of peace which succeeded the conquest of the Punjab 
Burmese War, | was not destined to last long: in the spring of 1852 it was rudely 
and unexpectedly disturbed by the outbreak of a war with Burma. 
The lesson taught to the Court of Ava by the first war had soon been 
forgotten, and overweening conceit and insolence, bred of barbarian 
ignorance, betrayed itself in purposeless aggression and insults similar 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 243 


ee eee eee 


to those which had occasioned the former struggle. British mer- | 
chants in Rangoon were wantonly wronged and insulted, and a 
demand from the Indian Government for reparation was treated with 
such contumely that at length, much against his will, Lord Dalhousie 
was forced to have recourse to arms, as the Only means of obtaining 
redress. Having once committed himself to a war, the Governor- 
General took every precaution that the errors of the former campaign 
should not be repeated, and that the business should be of as short a 
duration as possible. The force detailed for the expedition was 
taken partly from Bengal and partly from Madras, the former con- 
tributing three companies of artillery and a brigade of infantry 
(under the command of Brigadier Warren) composed of the 18th 
(Royal Irish) and 80th Foot and the 4oth Native Infantry, and the 
latter three companies of artillery, two companies of sappers, and a 
brigade of infantry, consisting of the 51st Foot and three regiments 
of native infantry. The 38th Native Infantry was also detailed for 
this service, but refused to embark. The command of the expedi- 
tion was conferred upon Major-General H. Godwin, c.s., who had 
served with Her Majesty’s 41st Foot in the former war. The land 
forces amounted to 5,800, and were escorted by a fleet of nineteen 
steamships, carrying 159 guns. 

General Godwin, with the Bengal brigade, reached the mouth of 
the Rangoon river on the 2nd April, 1852, and the same day a 
steamer was sent up with a flag of truce to enquire whether any 
communication had been received from the Court of Ava in reply 
to the ultimatum of the Government of India; the flag, however, was 
fired on from the stockades on the banks, and the last hope of a 
peaceful settlement was at anend. The Madras force not having 
arrived at the place of rendezvous, the General proceeded to Moul- | 
mein in order to make arrangements for the reduction of Martaban, 
situated on the opposite bank of the Salween River, where the Burmese | Capture of 
had a considerable force. He arrived at Moulmein on the 4th, and , Marts>a™ 
on the sth, after the naval squadron had bombarded the works of | 
Martaban for two hours, the troops (a wing each of the 18th and 
8oth Foot and the 26th Madras Native Infantry, with detachments of 
Bengal artillery and Madras sappers) were landed, and, after a sharp 
but ineffectual resistance from the Burmese, carried the place by 
storm, with the trifling loss of eight men wounded. Leaving the 
26th Madras Native Infantry to hold Martaban, General Godwin, 

R 2 


44 THE SERVICES OF THE 


ie a ae ee te oe 
—— ee - 2 ee ee 


with the rest of the troops returned to the mouth of the Irrawaddy 
on the 8th April, and the troops from Madras having now arrived, 
the expedition proceeded up the river on the roth April. On the 
11th the squadron arrived off Rangoon, and having been fired 
upon by the Burmese, replied with great power, completely silencing 
the enemy’s batteries on the river, and blowing up and destroying 
most of his stockades; at the same time a detachment was landed 
at Dalla, opposite to Rangoon, which captured and destroyed the 
stockades on that side. On Monday, the rath; the troops landed 
and marched at once against the enemy’s position at the Shwe- 
dagon Pagoda; on the way, however, they were met with a heavy 
fire from a work known as the White House Stockade, in a very 
strong position and just in the way of their advance, which 
it was mecessary to capture before further progress could be 
made. A battery of four guns was immediately opened upon the 
stockade, and when due effect had been produced, the place was 
carried by storm by four companies of the 51st Foot and a detach. 
ment of the Madras Sappers, though not without considerable loss. 
By this time, however, the troops were so exhausted by fatigue and by 
the intense heat of the sun (by which many, including Brigadier 
Warren, were struck down) that it was determined to halt and defer 
afurther advance until the next day. On the following morning, 
however, it was found necessary to continue halted, and the day was 
occupied in bringing up the heavy guns and in further reconnoitring 
the enemy’s position, while the ships kept up an occasional fire on 
various stockades. On Wednesday, the 14th April, the troops were 
Taking of under arms at 5 A.M., and advanced in a north-westerly direction 
Aah cath. through thick jungle to attack the Burmese in their position in and 
-|near the Shwedagon Pagoda. The enemy had assumed that our 
forces would advance by a road leading through the town to the 
southern face of the pagoda, and here every preparation had been 
made to receive us, the defences being armed with nearly one hundred 
pieces of cannon of sorts and held by a garrison of at least 10,000 men. 
The route taken, however, by General Godwin completely turned the 
Burmese position, and brought our troops opposite to the eastern face 
of the pagoda. After some delay, occasioned by the difficulty of bring- 
ing the heavy guns through the jungle and of finding a favourable 
position for placing them in battery, our artillery opened and made 
very effective practice on the pagoda and the town, notwithstanding a 


Panel we 


a, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


245 


galling fire of guns and wall-pieces kept up by the enemy, which 
occasioned numerous casualties. At eleven o'clock, a favourable 
Opportunity presenting itself, General Godwin determined on an 
immediate assault. The storming party was composed of a wing 
of the 80th Foot, two companies of the Royal Irish, and two of the 
40th Bengal Native Infantry, the whole under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Coote, of the Royal Irish, who was accompanied by Captain Latter, 
67th Native Infantry, to show the way. The advance to the pagoda 
was overa space of about 800 yards, which the troops crossed in 
the most steady manner and in beautiful order, notwithstanding a 
deadly fire under which many officers and men went down. When 
the steps of the pagoda were reached, the storming party made a 
gallant and determined rush, and with a cheer carried the upper 
terraces, when the enemy gave way and fled in wild confusion 
through the southern and western gates, leaving the British forces in 
possession of the Shwedagon Pagoda and of all Rangoon. Our 
casualties during these operations, from the 11th to the 14th of April, 
~ amounted in all to 17 killed and 132 wounded, of whom 4 killed and 
11 wounded were of the 40th Bengal Native Infantry. 

The taking of Rangoon was the only important operation of the 
first year of the war, but several smaller engagements took place. 
In April an attempt was made by the Burmese to retake Martaban, 
but this was easily repelled. In May some reinforcements, which 
included the 67th Bengal Native Infantry, were received ; and on 
the 17th of the same month an expedition was despatched against 
Bassein, by which that port was captured on the roth, after a smart 
struggle in which we had 3 killed and 32 wounded. This was fol- 
lowed on the 26th by another Burmese attempt on Martaban, which 
was repulsed after a sharp conflict in which we sustained a loss of 
14 killed and wounded. In June an expedition (one company each 
of the 80th Foot and the 67th Native Infantry, with some Madras 
 gappers) was sent up the river, by water, against Pegu, from which 
place the enemy were driven with little loss on our side, but the place 
was not retained and the expedition returned to Rangoon. In July a 
naval expedition was sent up the Irrawaddy, as far as Prome, but no 
attack was made on that place until October, when it was captured | 
with the loss of one man killed and 12 wounded. The final military 
operation of the year was an expedition to Pegu, prior to the despatch 
of which, however, considerable reinforcements had been sent from 

India, and the forces in Burma reorganised in two divisions. 


246 


= ee cee 
no eee ee ee ee 


Pegu, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


a ee re ere rr eee ee ee 


er oe ee os re wee Ce ee 


The Bengal Division (G. G. O. No. §17 of 1852 was formed as 


follows :— 

In Command —Brigadier-General Sir John Cheape, &.c.B. 

1st Brigade—Under Brigadier Reignolds, 18th (Royal Irish) :—The 18th Foot, 
and the goth and 67th Native Infantry. 

Second Brigade—Under Brigadier Dickinson, 1oth Native Infantry :—The 
8oth Foot, the roth Native Infantry, and the 4th Sikh Local Infantry. 

- Third Brigade—Under Brigadier Huish, 37th Native Infantry:—Ihe 1st 

Bengal European Fusiliers, the 37th Native Infantry, and the Regiment of 
Ludhiana, 


Of the above regiments the 4th Sikh Infantry, the roth and 37th 
Native Infantry and the Ludhiana Regiment had all volunteered for 
service in Burma, as had also the 3rd Sikh Infantry, the Ramgarh 
Light Infantry (with the cavalry and artillery attached to it), and the ° 
33rd Native Infantry, for which display of zeal and spirit the whole 
were complimented in G. G. O. No. 333 of 1852. The Ramgarh 
Irregular Cavalry at a later period proceeded on service to Burma. 
The 37th Native Infantry and the Regiment of Ludhiana did not 
leave India. 

On the 18th November General Godwin embarked at Rangoon 
with a force of about 1,00c men, including 300 of the 1st Bengal 
Fusiliers, for the purpose of reducing Pegu, and on the a2ist the 
place was taken, with a loss on our side of 5 killed and 34 
wounded. Leaving there a garrison of 400 men, General Godwin 
returned to Rangoon, but within a few days of his departure the 
enemy re-assembled in great numbers and closely besieged the place, | 
and it became necessary to send up a force to relieve it, an attempt 
with the boats of the squadron having failed of success. The force 
(which embarked at Rangoon on the 11th December and was under 


'Godwin’s personal command) consisted of 600 of the 1st Bengal 


Fusiliers, 300 of the 4th Sikh Infantry, 200 of the roth Bengal Native 
Infantry, and 250 of the rst Madras Fusiliers ; and it was followed, by 
land, by a column consisting of some Madras artillery and sappers, 
half a troor of the Ramgarh Irregular Cavalry, and a wing of the 67th 


: Bengal Native Infantry. Godwin landed six miles below Pegu onthe 


14th, and on the same day drove off the besiegers without difficulty 
and relieved the garrison, which had been hard-pressed from the sth 
to the 14th of December and had sustained a loss of 5 killed and 
40 wounded. On the 18th General Godwin went in pursuit of 
the flying enemy in the direction of Shwe-gyeen, and twice came 
up with bodies of them, but they dispersed and disappeared as 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


soon as the troops advanced to the attack, and within a week the 
failure of supplies compelled Godwin to retrace his steps to Pegu; 
and having left a larger garrison at this place, with the remainder 
of the force he returned to Rangoon. 

During this period a good deal of skirmishing had taken place at 
Prome and in the neighbourhood of that place. In one of these 
affairs, at Akoktoung, on the 18th November, Captain Gardner and 
a havildar of the 4oth Bengal Native Infantry were killed, and six 
sepoys were badly wounded in attempting to carry off the Captain’s 
body. On the night ofthe 8th December the Burmese made a daring 
attack on Prome, which was kept up until daylight on the following 
morning, and was eventually repelled with heavy loss to the enemy, 

On the 6th January, 1853, a very creditable affair occurred at 
Naraghain, on the Arakan-Burma frontier, when Captain Nuthall, 
with 150 of the Arakan Local Battalion, surprised and captured a 
Burmese stockade which guarded the Aeng Pass, 

About the middle of the same month a column, which included a 
wing of the 1st Bengal Fusiliers, a wing of the 10th Bengal Native | °° 
Iniantry, and a detachment of the Ramgarh Irregular Cavalry, 
was despatched from Martaban, under the command of Brigadier- 
General Steele of the Madras Army, with the object of clearing the 
Sitang Valley of the enemy and penetrating to Tonghoo. On the 
18th a skirmish took place at Gongoh, in which we had one man 
killed and seven wounded. No further opposition was experienced, 
and on the 23nd February the column reached Tonghoo, having 
driven the enemy out of the whole country between that place and 
Martaban. . 

On the 4th February a very unfortunate affair occurred in the 
jungles to the west of Donabyu, when a naval expedition, accom- 
panied by 300 of the 67th Native Infantry, was repulsed with heavy 
loss (15 killed and 73 wounded), in an attempt on the stronghold of 
a dacoit chief, named Myat-Toon. Captain Loch, c.s., Royal Navy, 
the leader of the expedition, and Captain Price, commancing the 
detachment of the 67th, were both mortally wounded, and the 67th 
sustained a further loss of 5 men killed and 18 wounded. The 
steady gallunury with which the grenadiers and No. 1 Company of 
the 67th, forming the rear-guard, covered the retreat of the detach- 
ment won well-merited praise. 


EE eS 


247 


Promie. 


Aeng Pass. 


Martaban 
column, 


248 


Operations | 
against Myat- | 
00n. 


£893. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


In consequence of this repulse it became necessary to send a 
considerably larger force against Myat-Toon. It was commanded 
by Brigadier-General Sir John Cheape, x.c.B., and consisted of 200 
of the 18th, 200 of the sist, and 130 of the 80th Foot; about 370 
of the 67th Native Infantry ; 200 of the 4th Sikh Local Infantry ; 
about 70 sappers, and some guns. After making an ineffectual 
attempt to reach Myat-Toon’s stronghold from Henzada, Sir John 
Cheape brought his force down to Donabyu, whence a fresh departure 
was made on the 7th March. From that date there was continual 
jungle fighting, until finally Myat-Toon’s principal stronghold, at 
Nayoung-goun-lya, was carried by storm on the 19th, and his whole 


force beaten and dispersed. The gallantry of Lieutenant Johnson ® — 


and the detachment of the 4th Sikh Infantry in the storming of 
the enemy’s position was specially mentioned in Sir John Cheape’s 
despatch. Our loss during these operations amounted to 22 killed 
(including two British officers) and 108 wounded (including 12 
British officers), the share of the 67th being 2 killed and 9 wounded, 
and of the 4th Sikh Infantry 7 killed and 23 wounded : amongst the 
killed were Ensign Boileau of the 67th, and Jemadar Mir Muhammad 
Khan of the 4th Sikh Infantry. 

These were the last operations of any importance. In June, 1853, 
peace was concluded with the King of Burma, the province of Pegu 
having, in the previous December, been formally annexed to the 
British dominions. But notwithstanding the conclusion of peace, 
it was many months before the various bands of Burmese soldiery 
were finally driven out of the province ; many smal! skirmishes took 
place, even up to the spring of 1854, and several valuable lives were 
lost before real pacification was effectedt ; amongst others, Captain 
Barry, Commandant of the Arakan Battalion, was mortally wounded 
in an affair near Prome, in December, 1853. 

The corps engaged in the campaign, including those employed 
on the Arakan-Pegu frontier and at Moulmein, were subsequently 
(in 1855) authorised to inscribe the word ‘‘Prcu” on their colours 
and appointments, and a medal (afterwards, under the designation 
of the ‘“‘ India Medal of 1854” adopted as the decoration for opera- 


— ee ee 


© Now General Sir Allen Bayard Johnson, &.C.B.—P. 
¢ The hardship and exposure of the campaign in Burma shortly proved fatal 
to the Commander of the forces, Major-General Sir Henry Godwin, K.Cc.8., who died 
| at Simla on the 26th October, 1853.—P, 


Me an eee = 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


249 


tions in India generally) and six months’ batta were granted to all 
ranks. 

The narrative of our numerous expeditions on the North-West 
Frontier of the Punjab may now conveniently be taken up. 

After the annexation of the Punjab the people of Swat uniformly 
proved themselves bad neighbours, and it was against them that 
the first of our frontier expeditions had to be directed. This took 
place in December, 1849, when a force under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Bradshaw, c.B., moved out from Peshawar to coerce certain 
refractory Swati villages in the Sam Baizai district in Yusafzai, The 
force was composed of a troop of horse artillery, a company of 
sappers and miners, the 13th Irregular Cavalry, detachments of the 
6oth and 61st Foot, the 3rd Bombay Native Infantry, and detachments 
of the Corps of Guides and the 1st Punjab Infantry. Sharp fighting 
took place at Sanghao, Palli, Zurmandai and Sher Khana on the 
11th and 14th, ending in the complete defeat of the enemy and of 
their allies from Upper Swat. Our losses were 7 killed and 40, 
including two British officers, wounded; amongst the former was 
Ressaidar Pahlwan Khan of the Guides Cavalry. 

The next of these expeditions was directed against the Adam 
Khel Afridis, who had, on the and February, 1850, attacked and 
cut up a party of sappers employed in constructing a road in the 
Kohat Pass. The Commander-in-Chief, Sir Charles Napier, who 
was in Peshawar at the time, at once issued orders for a force, under 
the command of Brigadier-General Sir Colin Campbell, to move 
through the pass, and punish the perpetrators of this outrage, 
and accordingly on the 9th February, Sir Colin marched from Pesha- 
war with a troop of horse artillery, two 5}”mortars, two companies 
each of the 6oth, 61st, and 98th Foot, the 15th Irregular Cavalry and 
the rst Punjab Cavalry, the 23rd and 31st Native Infantry, the rst 
Punjab Infantry, and a detachment of the Corps of Guides. The 
force, which was accompanied by Sir Charles Napier in person, 
entered the pass on the 1oth, and during its progress through to the 
Kohat Kotal it met with continuous and determined opposition ; the 
enemy were, however, dislodged successively from all their positions, 
and the villages concerned in the massacre of the sappers were 
taken and destroyed. The Kohat Kotal was reached on the 11th, and 
on the morning of the 13th a severe engagement took place on the 
heights above the camp, in the course of which a company of the 


Expeditions on 
the North 


West Frontier, 


The Swatis, 
1649. 


The Kohat 
Pass Afridis, 
February, 2899. 


250 THE SERVICES OF THE 


31st Native Infantry was very roughly handled and sustained 
considerable loss, Ensign Sitwell and Jemadar Dunia Singh being 
amongst the killed. On the 13th, the two Punjab regiments having 
been sent into Kohat, the force began its return march to Peshawar, 
which it reached on the 14th, having experienced throughout the 
same determined opposition as had marked its advance. The 
casualties during the expedition amounted to 20 killed and 74 
wounded. Further fighting took place during the following month, 
in the neighbourhood of the Kohat Kotal, in which the 1st Punjab 
Infantry, under Captain Coke, distinguished themselves ; and it was 
some time before evena semblance of peace on that part of the 
frontier was restored. 

In October, 1851, a small expedition, under the command of 
Captain Coke, was sent into the Miranzai Valley, to reduce some 
refractory villages to order, which was effected after a little skir- 
mishing. 

To punish numerous raids and more or less serious attacks 
on British villages, a force, commanded by Sir Colin Camp- 
bell, was sent from Peshawar against the Mohmands in October, 
1851. It was composed of a field battery, two companies each 
of the 61st and 98th Foot, the 2nd Irregular Cavalry, a company 
of sappers and miners, the 66th (Gurkhas) and a wing of the 71st 
Native Infantry, and a detachment of the Guides Infantry. The 
operations began on the 25th October, and continued until February 
of the following year ; from time to time trifling skirmishes occurred | 
at Banda, Matta, and other places, but little opposition was met 
with, and few casualties occurred. The and Irregular Cavalry lost 
a few men, and Lieutenant Boulnois, of the Engineers, was shot dead 
(15th January, 1852) by a party of the enemy, one of whose 
towers he had incautiously approached. During this expedition the 
Michni valley was occupied and a fort erected at that place, - 
In March 1852, the Mohmands mustered in considerable force, 
and, coming out of the hilis, attempted an attack on the forts 
built on the lands from which they had been expelled. They were 
first encountered in a skirmish near Shabkadar, when the misbeha- 
viour of a half troop of the 7th Light Cavalry marred what might 
otherwise have proved a decisive success. On the rsth April the 
Mohmands again issued from the hills to the number of at least 6,000 
men; they were attacked at Panjpao by Sir Colin Campbell with 


Miranzal, 18:. 


Mohmands, 
38g1-S2, 


ee tee ee ER st 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 
two horse artillery guns and detachments of the 7th Light Cavalry, 
rsth Irregular Cavalry, and 29th and 71st Native Infantry. The 
action was, on our part, confined to artillery fire, but so effective 
was this, that the Mohmands were completely dispersed, with a 
trifling loss on our side of two killed and eight wounded. 

In March, 1852, it became necessary to send an expedition 
to coerce the Ranizais, one of the Swat clans, who had been 
guilty of an entirely unprovoked attack on a British detachment 
at Gujar-Garhi. The force employed was under the command 
of Brigadier-General Sir Colin Campbell and was composed of 
a troop of horse artillery, the 15th Irregular Cavalry, the 32nd 
‘Foot, a wing of the 29th and the whole of the 66th (Gurkha) Native 
Infantry. On this occasion no fighting occurred, and a fine having 
been imposed on the Ranizais, the force, having traversed their 
country, returned to Peshawar towards the end of the month. 
Before two months had elapsed, however, it became necessary to 
resume hostilities, the Ranizais having refused to pay the fine 
imposed upon them, Accordingly, on the 315th May Sir Colin 
Campbell again took the field with a force composed of one troop 
of horse artillery, two guns of a light field battery, the 3and 
Foot, the 2nd Irregular Cavalry, the Guides Cavalry and the rst 
Punjab Cavalry, a company of sappers, the 28th and 66th (Gurkha) 
Native Infantry, the Guides Infantry, and the rst Punjab Infantry ; 
and on the 18th he totally routed the Ranizais in a sharp action 
near the village of Skakot, which was taken and destroyed. The 
Ranizais, who brought 4,500 men into the field, suffered severely, 
while the loss on our side was only 11 killed and 29 wounded. The 
operations were continued up to the 24th May, and a number 
of other villages having been destroyed, the force was withdrawn 
to Peshawar. 

To punish a raid in which the /ahstidar of Hashtnagar was killed, 
a punitive expedition, under the command of Sir Colin Campbell, was 
sent against the Utman Khel tribe in May, 1852. It consisted of a 
troop of horse artillery, a detachment of field artillery, 300 of the 
32nd Foot, one squadron of the and Irregular Cavalry, one squadron 
of the Guides Cavalry, two squadrons of the rst Punjab Cavalry, one 
company of sappers, 300 each of the 28th and 66th (Gurkha) Native 
Infantry, the Guides Infantry, and the 1st Punjab Infantry. The first 
Operation was the destruction of the Nawadan villages, which was 


25! 


Ranizais 
(Swatis), 
183s. 


252 


The Waziris, 
mber, 28gs. 


The Hassan- 

sais of the 

Biack Mous- 
9 


THE SERVICES OF THE 
ee een eee A es ee re 
effected on May 11th, with the loss of a few men wounded, and on the 
13th the village of Prangarh was attacked and carried, after a 
gallant defence by the enemy, who stood their ground to the last 
though exposed to the fire of ten pieces of artillery. Our loss during 
the expedition amounted to 3 killed and 15 wounded. 

The Umarzai Waziris were, for several years after the annexation, 
one of the most troublesome of the border tribes. During the years 
1849-50-:1-52 they were guilty of repeated raids into the Bannu 
district, until at last it became necessary to inflict punishment. In 
December, 1852, an expedition against them was organised by Major 
John Nicholson, who, observing the utmost secrecy in all his prepara- 
tions, divided his force (40 sabres of the 2nd Punjab Cavalry, and 
50 of the mounted police, two companies of the 1st Punjab Infantry, 
the and Punjab Infantry, four companies of the 4th Punjab Infantry, 
and the 6th Punjab Police Battalion) into three columns, which 
made a simultaneous entry into the Waziricountry at three different 
points, took the tribesmen completely by surprise, and destroyed 
several villages almost without opposition. This success was, 
however, considerably discounted by 23 men of the 4th Punjab 
Infantry, who had fallen out, or remained straggling behind the 
column, being cut off by the enemy. 

The aggressions of the Hassanzais of the Black Mountain, and 
the murder by them of two officials of the Customs Department, 
rendered it necessary to send an expedition against them in 
December, 1852. The troops employed were under the command 
of Lieutenant-Colonel Mackeson, c.s., Commissioner of Peshawar, 
and included a troop of horse artillery and the Mountain Train 
Battery,® the 16th Irregular Cavalry, a company of sappers, the 3rd 
Native Infantry, the Regiment of Kalat-i-Ghilzai, the Corps of Guides, 
and the 1st Sikh Infantry, with some police and levies. On the agth 
December, the force advanced in three columns, two of which 
entered the Hassanzai country by atrying and difficult march over 
the heights of the Black Mountain. Some strong positions were 
held by the enemy on the upper spurs of the mountain, but they 
were carried without much resistance; and indeed the winter cold of 
those high altitudes was a more serious inconvenience than the 
Opposition of the tribesmen. A number of villages were destroyed, 
and the force returned across the frontier on the 2nd January, 
1853, having sustained a loss of 5 killed and 10 wounded, among 


® Now No. 4 (Hazara) Mountain Battery.—P. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 253 


the former of whom were Subadar Shukar Khan and Jemadar Jhur 
Singh, of the Corps of Guides. 

This expedition was followed by an attack on Kotla, a small 
fort in the Amb territory, on the right bank of the Indus, which had 
been seized by the Hindustani fanatics, and whose inhabitants had 
aided the Hassanzais in their aggressions. The troops employed 
included two guns of a mountain battery and the rst and 3rd Sikh 
Infantry ; they crossed the Indus on the 6th January, 1853, but the 
Hindustanis did not wait for them, having fled from the fort. without 
firing a shot on the first appearance of danger. 

In the spring of 1853 it became necessary to take measures for 
the punishment of the Shiranis, a Pathan tribe occupying the prin- 
cipal part of the Takht-i-Suliman, who had long been the terror of 
the Dera Ismail Khan border, and who had lately filled up the 
measure of their offences (raids and outrages without number) by 
attacking a reconnoitring party from the Draband out-post. On 
that occasion (14th March, 1853) they met with a total defeat from 
the troops at Draband (detachments of the 5th Punjab Cavalry and 
the Sindh Camel Corps), with a loss on our side of § killed and 17 
(including two British officers) wounded, and immediately after a 
force was assembled to move into the Shirani country and inflict 
condign punishment for the frequent violations of our territory. The 
force (which was under the command of Brigadier Hodgson and 
consisted of No. 2 Punjab Light Field Battery,® a squadron of the sth 
Punjab Cavalry, a wing each of the rst and 3rd Punjab Infantry, the 
Sindh Camel Corps, and two police battalions) entered the enemy's 
country by the Shekh Haidar Pass on the 31st March and occupled 
Drazand the same day. During the next three days the troops 
moved over various parts of the Shirani country, destroying the 
villages of the offending tribesmen without encountering any opposi- 
tion worthy of the name. and onthe 3rd April returned to British 
territory by the Draband pass, having fully accomplished the objects 
of the expedition without the loss of a man. 

On the return of the troops from the Shirani hills, Brigadier Hodg. 
son, with a small force (a detachment of the 4th Punjab Cavalry, 
the rst Punjab Infantry, and the 6th Punjab Police Battalion) 
proceeded to chastise the Kasranis, a tribe which had been distin- 
guishing itself for some years by a series of audacious raids and 
depredations on the Dera Ghazi Khan border. The force entered 


@ Now No. 1 (Kohat) Mountain Battery.—P. 


The gowekt 
Afridis, 
November, 
1843. 
Moh 
ma 

| 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


the Kasrani country on the rath April, captured and destroyed the 
stockaded village of Bati after some fighting, and returned to British 
territory the same day, having sustained a loss of one man killed and 
ten wounded. 

Repeated raids and outrages in the Peshawar District committed 
by the Jowaki Afridis of the Bori valley rendered the punishment 
of this clan necessary, and accordingly, in November, 1853, Colonel] 
S. B. Boileau, 22nd Foot, was sent into the valley with a force 
consisting of a Mountain Train Battery, a squadron of the 7th 
Irregular Cavalry, a wing of the 2and Foot, two companies of 
the zoth and a wing of the 66th (Gurkha) Native Infantry, and 
the Infantry of the Corps of Guides. Entering the valley by the 
Sargasha Pass, Colonel Boileau drove the enemy from their villages, 
which were then destroyed, while detachments of the Guides and 
Gurkhas, gallantly crowning the neighbouring heights, kept the 
Afridis at bay while the operations in the valley were completed, and 
afterwards, in the evening, covered the retirement through the 
Taruni pass. The steadiness and gallantry of both these corps, 
the former led by their intrepid Commandant, Lieutenant Hodson, 
and the latter by Captains Garstin and Ross, were the admiration of 
the whole force ; indeed, the names of Hodson and the Guides are 
foremost in the official reports of the many frontier expeditions in 
which they were at this time engaged. The loss of Colonel Boileau’s 
force was 8 killed and 31 wounded. 

In the autumn of 1854 it was found necessary to send an expedi- 
tion against the Michni Mohmands, to punish them for incursions 
into British territory, to collect the annual tribute, which was long 
over-due, and to take measures to secure the peace of the border by 
the destruction of the three lawless villages of Dabb, Sadin, and Shah 
Mansur Khel. The troops detailed for this work were under the 
command of Colonel S. J. Cotton, and included two horse artillery 
guns, the Mountain Train Battery,* a troop of the 1oth Light 
Cavalry, a squadron of the rst Irregular Cavalry, two companies 
of the 22nd Foot, a company of sappers, three companies of the 1st 
and a wing of the oth Native Infantry, and a wing of the 1st Sikh 
Infantry. At daylight, on the 31st August, the force moved up against 
Shah Mansur Khel in two columns: the Mohmands were in some 


® Manned by the znd Company, 2nd Battalion, Bengal Artillery—(ncw No. g 
Mountain Battery, Royal Artillery.) 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


255 


force, and made a considerable resistance, but after a sharp conflict 
the village was captured and destroyed and the enemy driven from 
the position they had taken up, with a loss on our side of one man 
killed and two British officers and 14 men wounded. On the 2nd 
September Dabb and Sadin were also destroyed, and the force then 
returned to Peshawar. 

Notwithstanding the destruction of these strongholds, Mohmand 
incursions still continued, and in March, 1855, a larger party than 
usual, numbering about 300, came down on a plundering expedition. 
They were encountered between Shabkadar and Abazai by a small 
force under Major Gordon, 1st Sikh Infantry, and dispersed, with a 
loss on our side of Ensign Bradford, 62nd Native Infantry, and 
four sepoys wounded. Later in the year two other slight affairs 
with Mohmand raiders took place in the same neighbourhood. 

During the early part of 1855, the Bassi Khel section of the 
Aka Khel Afridis were guilty of numerous raids into British territory. 
Many skirmishes took place between our troops and these marauders, 
until at last it was found necessary to send an expedition against 
them, to drive them entirely out of the low hills from which they 
emerged on their plundering expeditions. The force detailed for this 
service was commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel J. H. Craigie, 20th 
Native Infantry, and consisted of the Peshawar Mountain Battery, two 
troops of the 16th Irregular Cavalry, a detachment of the 4th Native 
Infantry, and the gth and 2oth Native Infantry. The movement took 
place on the 27th March, and the enemy, to the number of a thou- 
sand fighting men, strongly posted near the villages of Alam Killiand 
Mir Killi, and occupying the heights in the neighbourhood, hotly dis- 
puted the advance of the column, and inflicted some loss on the British 
force. The sepoys, however, behaved with the greatest gallantry, 
and the hostile villages having been taken and destroyed, and their 
occupants driven some distance into the hills, the troops retired, 
having lost in the engagement 9 men killed and one British officer, 
one Native officer and 23 men wounded. 

On the Kohat border the Miranzai villages were from the first 
hostile to the English, and the small expedition of October. 1851, did 
not effect much towards settling affairs. The Miranzai valley was in 
a very unsettled state for years, and at length, in April, 1855, an 
expedition had to be sent from Kohat, under Brigadier Chamberlain, 
to settle the country and to enforce the payment of the revenue. 


The Aka Khel 
March, 38g. 


Miranzal, r@sg, 


256 


Urakzais, 18g. 


Miranzal and 
Karam, 1856. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


ww ee 


It consisted of the 1st and 3rd Punjab Light Field Batteries, the 4th 
Punjab Cavalry, a detachment of sappers, a wing of the 66th (Gur- | 
kha) Native Infantry, the 1st and 3rd Punjab Infantry, and the Sindh 
Rifle Corps. The expedition was at first met by no overt acts of 
hostility, except that shots were constantly fired into the camp at night. 
However, on the 30th of April, the picquets round the camp were 
attacked by about 1,500 ghasis. The troops on picquet duty, consist- 
ing of about 130 of the 4th Punjab Cavalry and 350 of the rst 
Punjab Infantry, repulsed the attack, and, following the enemy into 
the hills, drove them from every position they took up. The con- 
duct of the troops was especially admirable, because they were fight- 
ing, so to speak, against their own religion, many of the ghaszis 
being fellow-tribesmen, and even near relations, of the soldiers. The 
loss of the enemy was considerable; that of the British force was 
only 14 wounded. The troops returned to Kohat on the 21st May. 

In August 1855, an expedition was despatched against the Rubia 
Khel Urakzais, who had taken part against us in the hostilities in the 
Miranzai country, and had since been concerned in numerous daring 
raids into the Kobat district. The force employed was composed 
of the Peshawar Mountain Battery, No. 3 Punjab Light Field Battery, 
the 4th Punjab Cavalry, and the rst, and, and 3rd Punjab Infantry, 
and was commanded by Brigadier Chamberlain. An advance was 
made from Hangu on the night of the 1st September, and early in 
the morning on the 2nd simultaneous attacks were made on Sangar, 
Nasin and Katsah, three villages on the Samana range of hills 
which had been most concerned in depredations in British territory, 
and of which the malsks were notorious freebooters : the arrangements 
were admirably carried out and the attacks perfectly successful; but 
on the troops beginning to retire, after the destruction of the villages, 
a sudden rush of the enemy cut off a party of the and Punjab In- 
fantry, of whom a native doctor and seven men were killed. The 
total losses of the day were 11 killed and 4 wounded. 

In October, 1856, it became necessary to send another expedition 
into Miranzai, to punish the Turis, who had been guilty of many 
raids into British territory, and the Zaimukhts, who had been encroach- 
ing in the Miranzai Valley and had taken possession of Torawari, 
which | ad now, under their auspices, become a place of refuge for all 
the mis ellaneous scoundrelism of the border. The force employed 
was under the command of Brigadier Chamberlain and consisted 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


(besides detachments of the Punjab Mountain Train Battery, No. 1 
Punjab Light Field Battery, and the rst Punjab Cavalry) of No. 3 
Punjab Light Field Battery, the 4th Punjab Cavalry, a company of 
sappers and miners, the 66th (Gurkha) Native Infantry, and the rst, 
and, 3rd, sth, and 6th Punjab Infantry. Chamberlain moved from 
Kohat on the 21st October, and on the morning of the 25th completely 
surprised Torawari, the people of which, after some firing, were com- 
pelled to lay down their arms and surrender a number of criminals 


whom they were harbouring. On the 4th November the force moved |' 


into the Kuram Valley, for the purpose of dealing with the Turis, 
and reached Kuram Fort on the 11th, when a settlement with the 
Turis was effected ; and after the Paiwar Pass had been visited the 
force returned to Thal, arriving there on the 28th. In December a 
detachment was employed in punishing the Miami branch of the Kabul 
Khel Waziris, who had murdered some followers of the force. The 
force returned to Kohat towards the end of December. : 
One more frontier expedition remains to be related in this chapter. 
This, which was also led by Brigadier Chamberlain, took place in 
March 1857 and was directed against the Bozdars, a tribe of the Dera 
Ghazi Khan border, who had during the preceding seven years been 
guilty of a most audacious series of forays into British territory. The 
force detailed for these operations was composed of Nos. 1, 2, and 3 
Panjab Light Field Batteries, detachments of the znd and 3rd Punjab 
Cavalry, a company of Punjab sappers, a wing each of the 1st and 
3rd Sikh Infantry, and the rst, and, and 4th Punjab Infantry, and was 
assembled at Taunsa, near Mangrotha, on the sth of that month. 
Marching thence on the morning of the 6th the troops entered the 
Bozdar country by the Sangarh Pass at daybreak, and encamped at 
Dedachi Kach. That afternoon the enemy’s position was recon- 
Noitred, and on the following morning the troops advanced to the 
attack. Within the pass at the Khan Band defile, the enemy had taken 
up an exceedingly strong position, which, in former years, they had 
successfully held against large Sikh armies, but by skilful management, 
aided by the gallant behaviour of the troops, Chamberlain succeeded 
in forcing the position after a sharp engagement, in which he lost 
five men killed, and one British officer, three native officers, and 45 
men wounded. The Bozdars fled, and thereafter made no resistance 
during the fortnight that the force remained in their country. 
During that fortnight the country was traversed in varioys directions, 
a 


357 


The Bozdars, 
March 1857. 


258 


The Santhal 
Revolt, :8sg. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


and the villages of the offending tribesmen destroyed. Eventually 
the Bozdars tendered their submission and the troops were withdrawn, 
reaching Mangrotha on the 23rd March. 

By G. G. O. No. 812 of 1869 the India medal, with a clasp in- 
scribed “ Norta-Werst Frontize,” was granted to all survivors of the 
troops engaged in the following of the above operations :— 


Expedition to Yusafzai against Expedition against the Kasranis 
the BaizaiSwatis. . . 1849 and Shiranis . 6 ~~ 3858 


| Expedition against the Kohat Expedition against the Jowaki 


Pass Afridis e ° ° 1850 Afridis of Bori e e e 1853 
Expedition against the Utmaa Expedition to Shah Ma 

Khels . 8 1852 Khel against the Mohmands. 1854 
Expedition against the Ranizai Expedition sgeinst the Bassi 

Swatis ° . - 1852 Khel Aka-Khel Afridis . - 1855 


Operation against the Mohmands 1852 | Expedition to the Miranzai 
Expedition against the Hasan- Valley . ee e . 1855 
zais of the Black Mountain . 1852-53 | Expedition to the Bogdar Hills. 1857 


In the middle of 1855. serious disturbances broke out amongst 
the wild tribes of the Santhal Parganas. For a short time the 
whole country was in the hands of the insurgents, and it became 
necessary to place a considerable force in the field to repress 
the outbreak. The troops employed on this service were under 
the command of Major-General Lloyd, c.8., and Brigadier Bird, 
end comprised the following corps :—The Governor-General’s 
Body-Guard; the and and 11th Irregular Cavalry; the Ramgarh 
Irregular Cavalry; a detachment of the and Native Infantry; the 
right wing of the 7th, the 13th, the 31st, a detachment of the 
37th, the 4oth, the 4and, the right wing of the soth, the 56th 
and the 63rd Native Infantry; the Bhagalpur Hill Rangers; and 
a detachment of the Shekhawati Battalion. Some desultory fighting 
took place, and on one occasion (at Nagor on the 27th July) the 
Santhals succeeded in surrounding and cutting off a detachment 
of the 56th Native Infantry, killing Lieutenant Toulmin, who com- 
manded, and about 20 men, and wounding 15 others. As a rule, 
however, the enemy were unable to stand their ground against 
even very small detachments, and eventually the leaders of the 
insurrection were captured, and the disturbance put down. The 
field force was broken up by G.G. O., dated and January 1856, 
except one brigade which remained in the country for another year. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 259 


The long continued mis-government of Oudh, and the hopeless 
anarchy resulting therefrom, led, in February 1856, to the deposi- 
tion of the king and the annexation of his kingdom to the British 
dominions in the East. In support of the decree of annexation a | 
amall force (three light Held batteries, the rst Light Cavalry, the 
sth and rsth Irregular Cavalry, the 52nd Foot, and the aand, 38th, 
41st, 48th, 5and and 73rd Native Infantry), under the command of 
Brigadier Wheler, was despatched from Cawnpore on the ret of 
February and marched on Lucknow, which place was reached a 
few days later. No resistance was made by the king or his ad° 
herents, and within a few months the country had settled down 
to a condition of peace and security to which it had been a stranger 

for more than half a century. 
This chapter may now be closed with a summary of such of the 
more important changes in the strength and internal economy of the 
Bengal Army, between the years 1848 and 1857, as have not already 
been noticed. | | | 

In the regular army, no augmentations or reductions took place 
in these years, except those consequent on the cessation or the 
renewal of war, and the only change was that the rith Light 
Cavalry, raised in place of the old and, which was disbanded 
for misbehaviour in Afghanistan, was, in 1850 (G. O. G. G,, a4th 
May), in recognition of the gallantry it had displayed before Mool- 
tan on the 7th November 1848, appointed to fill the vacant number, 
and was designated “the and Regiment of Light Cavalry.” : 

The foundation of the Punjab Frontier Force, in the raising, in 
1846, of the “ Frontier Brigade,” and in 1849 of five regiments of | Se," 
Punjab cavalry and five of Punjab infantry, has already been 
referred to. The force was remodelled in 1851 (G. G. O., asth 
February), when its strength was fixed at three light field batteries, 
five regiments of cavalry, and five of infantry, and it was d 
“the Punjab Irregular Force.” In 1853 (G. G. O. No, 776, dated 
37th September) the Sindh Camel Corps was. re-organised “as 
light infantry regiment, armed with rifles,” and incorporated in the 
Punjab Irregular Force as the “6th Regiment or Sindh Rifle 
Corps,” and by G. G. O. No. 1048, dated the 4th August 1856, it 
was designated the “ 6th Punjab Infantry.” : 

In 1854, the Nizam’s disciplined force, which had been in existence 
for more than half a century and at one time bore a high reputation 


Annexation 0f 
Ondh, 1896, 


260 THE SERVICES OF THE 


as “the Russell Brigade,” was re-organized and styled the “ Hyder- 
abad Contingent,” and, after forty years of honourable service, it still 
exists under this designation. | : 

Two other additions were made to the Indian forces at this period, 
and entered in the Bengal Army List, though neither was distinctly 
part of the Bengal Army ; the first of these was the formation (G.G.O. 
No. 916 of 1854) of the ‘‘ Nagpur Irregular Force,” consisting of 
one field battery, one regiment of irregular cavalry, and three regi- 
ments of infantry. The second was the raising, after the annexation 
of Oudh, of the “Oudh Irregular Force,” consisting of three light 
field batteries, three regiments of cavalry and ten regiments of 
infantry, in which last were included the existing 1st and and 
Oudh Local Infantry. Of these forces, the former survived 
the troubles of 1857, but was afterwards broken up: the latter was 
swept away in the. torrent of the mutiny and disappeared within 
eighteen months of its formation. __ | 

Finally, in 1856, a Sikh corps, destined to gain fame and glory 
in the troublous times that were at hand, was raised for civil duties. 


This was the 1st Bengal Military Police Battalion, raised by Cap- 
Rattray’s - 


Sikhs, 2896. tain Rattray for service in the Santhal districts, and now known 
as the 45th Bengal Infantry, or “ Rattray’s Sikhs.” 
Some few interior changes and reforms are worthy of notice. In 
1846 (G. O. G. G., 7th October) the remount dept was removed 
Seetees from Muttra to Karnal and its establishment remodelled ; it was now 
economy, to consist of— 


3 Superintendent. 1 Assistant Riding Master. 
: Assistant Superintendent 2 Drill Havildars. 
1 Riding Master. 2 Drill Naiks. 


50 Rough Riders. 


A General Order, dated 20th May 1847, directs a further experi- 
ment to be made in the use of geldings in native cavalry ; a similar 
trial had been made between 1817 and 1820, apparently with unsatis- 
factory results. The G.O.C. C. under notice directs that the 11th 
Light Cavalry “be mounted entirely on geldings, in order that the 
long-contested. question of their inferiority or otherwise to entire 
horses may. be set at rest.” The regiment was to be mounted, as far 
as possible, by exchanges with other carps, and to be completed by 
geldings five years old selected from the Government stud by a com- 
mittee. In 1849 it was ordered that “the experiment in the 11th 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 
Light Cavalry having proved satisfactory, the 1oth Light Cavalry is 
also to be mounted on geldings.” 

Amongst other minor orders, G. G. O. No. 498 of 1851 directs that 
Wardi-Majors of Irregular Cavalry shall rank with Ressaidara. 

In dress and equipment several small changes were introduced in 
both cavalry and infantry :—as, for instance, the substitution of cloth 
overalls in regular cavalry for the old leather breeches, which since 
the beginning of the century, had been a characteristic feature of Ben- 
gal cavalry and horse artillery (G. G. O. No. 57 of 1847); the in- 
troduction of a fur busby for light cavalry and Kilmarnock caps for 
infantry, the latter of which was a most popular head-dress amongst 
the sepoys, principally on ‘account of its durability,—to which the 
commanding officer of one regiment rather quaintly testifies in writing 
the records of his corps, when, on the abolition of the Kilmarnock 
cap, in 1861, he remarks that many were still in wear in the regi- 
ment which had been issued on their introduction in 1847. 

The irregular cavalry at this period, which seems on the whole to 
wave shared with the horse artillery the distinction of being the most 
efficient service of the native army, was not free from the abuses so 
prevalent elsewhere. For example, the zemindar class, of whom it 
was principally composed, finding R20 a month insufficient, strove to 
make money by an abuse of the Jargtr system. The asam# (literally 
“berth” or “billet ”’) in an irregular cavalry regiment was regarded 
as a man’s property, as much as his house and land, and could on his ; 
retirement from active service be farmed out by him to the highest 
bidder (subject to the approval of the commandant), until such time 
_ as he had a son-or a nephew of an age to put into the place. 

The dress of the irregular cavalry at this time consisted of a 
yellow, green, or scarlet a/kialak tight pantaloons coloured with Afool- 
tant maiit, in imitation of the leather breeches of the regulars, and 
jack boots. Two regiments—the rst and 4th—wore a polished -stee] 
tawah, or helmet, circular at the top. _ 

An order of considerable interest at the time was published on the 
14th April 1851, announcing the grant of a medal, called the “ India 
Medal,” to the surviving officers and soldiers of the Crown and the 
East India Company who were engaged in the several services 
enumerated in the following list :— 

StormofAligarh . . . 1. « 4th September 1803. 
Battleof Delhi . . «. + « #£413th = ae 
“ Assaye . ° . - 23td | ” 


ES SS 
es 


Irregular 
Cavalry. 


a62 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Siege of Asirgarh® ae aist October 1803 
Battle of Laswari - § - ist November 
Siege and storm of Gawilgar 


Defence of Delhi ° e 
Battle of Deig e e e 
Capture of Deig r e 
War in Nepal ° e e ° e 1816 
Battle of Kirki, and battleand capture of Poona, November 1817. 

» of Sitabaldi and capture of Nagpur November and December 


1817. 
», of Mahidpuc 


; » e« 2%st December 1817. 
Defence of Corigaum - - e ist January 1818. 
War in Ava. 


° e : e ° 1824-26. 
Siege and storm of Bhurtpore . 


e December r) 
e 1gth November ,, 
« 23rd December _,, 


ee 1826. 

Indian troops were declared to be ineligible for the decora- 
tion for Nepal and Ava, for which a medal had been already 
issued by the East India Company. 

In 1856 (G. G. O. No. 1012) it was notified that in future no 
recruit for the Native army would be accepted unless he consented 
to be enlisted for general service. 

In the same year (by G. G. O. No. 1324) messes were established 
in all regiments of the Bengal Army. 

The months of wild tumult and convulsion which followed the 
spring of 1857 witnessed the extinction of three-fourths of that army 
which it had taken exactly a century to form; many of the finest— 
most of the oldest—regiments succumbed to the mania of revolt, 
and the maintenance of the British Empire in India devolved in a 
great degree upon corps which were raised from amongst a 
people who eight years before had been our bitterest foes. 


This is not a suitable work in which to enter at length into the . 


question of the causes of the mutiny. One point at least is certain, 
which is often overlooked in the discussion of the question, that the 
canker was deeper seated than the rumours of the moment about 
Lord Canning’s proselytising intentions, or his caste-defiling car- 
tridges: for thirty years the soralé of the army had been steadily 
deteriorating, for thirty years the evil had been growing and deepen- 


ing; the grievances of the time were but the irritants which brought 
it to a head. 


® It is curious that the occupation of Asirgarh in 1803 should have been selected 
for the grant of the medal (the garrison having on that occasion surrendered almost 
without firing a shot), while the siege and capture of the same place in 1819 
(which cost us more than 300 officers and men) remained absolutely unnoticed.—P. 


~_ 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


263 


Chapter VIII—(1857—186r.) 

Marshman’s History (abridged continuation)—Sepoy War (Kaye)—Indian Mutiny (Mallesen) 
—Hodson of Hodson’s Horse—The Crisis in the Punjab (Cesper)—China War (Hepe 
Grent}—China War (Woelseley),—History of Madras Sappers (Viler!)—Middle Kingdom 
(Wiliems)—North-West Frontier (Paget end Mason) —Sikkiza Expedition, 1860 (Gewler)— 
G. G. O. and G, 0, CC, 

The events of the Indian Mutiny are so well known, and the his- 
tories which chronicle them so complete in detail, and so generally 
read, that nothing more than the shortest sketch of that eventful year 
is necessary in the present volume, even if space allowed a more 
detailed narrative. 

Four principal causes are mentioned as having led directly to the 
outbreak :—first, alleged disaffection in Oudh, the principal re- 
cruiting ground of the Bengal Army, resulting, it was said, from the 
annexation of that province in 1856, and the consequent loss by the 
sepoys of old and valued privileges of precedence in the civil courts ; 
secondly, alleged discontent amongst Musalmans, fostered and 
encouraged by the old royal family of Delhi, who yearned for the 
restoration of the ancient regal state and influence which they had 
long since lost ; thirdly, the opportunity afforded to disaffection by the 
extraordinary paucity of British troops in India: and, finally, a wide- 


The Indian 
Matiny, 2837. 


causes. 


spread belief which had arisen, that the Government had secret) 


designs against the caste and religion of the native soldiery. To 
such a belief many circumstances, upon which it is unnecessary to 
enter here, had combined in the early days of 1857 to lend colour, 
and at this point it came to be bruited about that the cartridges for 
the new Enfield rifles, with which the native army were to be armed, 
had been defiled with the fat of pigs and oxen. These unhappy 
rumours appealed to the most sensitive characteristics of the high-caste 
Bengal sepoy, and served as the breath which fanned the smouldering 
embers of discontent into the lurid flames of mutiny and murder. 
Early in 1857 it became evident that a crisis of an extraordinary 
character was at hand. In March the 19th Native Infantry broke 
out into open mutiny at Berhampore, and was marched down to 
Barrackpore, and there disbanded. Seven companies of the 34th at 
Barrackpore displayed disaffection scarcely less culpable, and were 
similarly treated. On the roth of May, the 7th Oudh Irregular 


Outbreak of 
the Mutiny, 
May seth, 20s7. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 

| Infantry meta similar fate at Lucknow; andon the same day the 
storm burst in earnest with the outbreak at Meerut. Here the first 
regiment to break into open violence against its officers was the 3rd 
Light Cavalry, soon followed by the 11th and zoth Native Infantry. 
On the same night the rebels marched to Delhi; there they were 
joined by the 38th, 54th, and 74th Native Infantry, and by the 
afternoon the city was completely in their hands, not however, 
without an obstinate resistance at the Magazine, the heroic defence 
and subsequent blowing up of which by Lieutenant Willoughby and 
a few of the ordnance subordinates was one of the most memorable 
incidents of the time. 

The news of the outbreak was the signal for Lord Canning at 
Calcutta to send urgent messages for reinforcements from Ceylon, 
Bombay, and Madras, and to intercept and divert to India the troops 
then proceeding on service to China. The Commander-in-Chief, 
General the Hon’ble George Anson, who was at Simla, hurried 
down to Umballa, his movements hampered by the temporary 
insubordination of the Nasseri Battalion® at Jutogh. He had hardly 
time to set the small Umballa garrison in motion towards Delhi, 
when he was struck down by cholera and died at Kamal on the 
27th May. He was succeeded in the chief command by Major- 
General Sir Henry Barnard, who pressed on southwards, and on the 
7th June was joined by a detachment from Meerut, under Brigadier 
Archdale Wilson. This latter force had been victorious in two 
actions with the rebels at Ghaziudin-nagar, on the banks of the 
Hindan river, and had been reinforced by the Sirmoor Battalion 
under Major Charles Reid. On the 8th June, at daybreak, the 
enemy was attacked in a strung position at Badli-ke-Serai, six 
miles from Delhi, defeated, and driven back in confusion to the city, 
with a loss of thirteen guns and several hundred men, but our 
own losses were heavy too, amounting to nearly 200 officers and 
men,and amongst these not the least to be deplored was the death of 
Colonel Chester, the Adjutant General, who fell by a cannon shot, to 
the great loss of the Army of Bengal. On the same day the British 
force was established on the Ridge before Delhi, that Ridge destined 
to become historic as the scene of so many deeds of valour and devo- 
tion in the famous fourteen weeks’ siege which now began. 


® This was the corps formed in 1850, when the original Nasseri Battalion was 
transferred to the line and became the 66th Native Infantry. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


— 


Dalhousie had lavished upon his favourite province was working as 
men like John Lawrence, Herbert Edwardes, Montgomery, and Nichol- 
son knew how to work to save the empire. At Meean Meer, by @ 
well planned and boldly-executed coup-deemain the 8th Light Cavalry 
and the 16th, 26th, and 49th Native Infantry, which were all known to 
be ill-affected, were disarmed on the morning of the 13th May by 
a wing of the 81st Foot and some horse artillery, At Ferozepore 
and Phillour the magazines were secured, and at the former place 
the 57th Native Infantry was disarmed by the 61st Foot; but the 45th 
Native Infantry there, as well as the 3rd Native Infantry from 
Phillour, and the 36th and 61st from Jullundur, remained in posses- 
sion of their arms and eventually made their way for the most part 
to Delhi. Their march, however, was not undisputed, and the 
attack on the banks of the Sutlej on some 1,600 mutineers from 
Jullundur by three companies of the 4th Sikh Infantry under 
Lieutenant Williams and Mr. Ricketts, the Deputy Commissioner, 
was one of the most gallant episodes of that stirring time in the 
Punjab. But it was at Peshawar that the greatest danger threatened 
British influence in the province. There, and in the neighbour- 
hood, were twelve native regiments, four of them cavalry, and 
only three of British infantry. Among the native corps were two of 
cavalry and two of infantry which throughout maintained their fidelity 
to the State: these were the 7th and 18th Irregular Cavalry, the 
21st Native Infantry and the Regiment of Kalat-i-Ghilzai (now the 
sth and 8th Bengal Cavalry, and the rst and 12th Bengal Infantry), 
Besides these, was the Corps of Guides, raised eleven years before 
under the direction of Henry Lawrence, and already famous as one 
of the finest corps in India, On the first news of the outbreak at 
Meerut, the Guides were despatched to join the army before 
Delhi; leaving Hoti-Mardan on May 13th, they were at Delhi on the 
morning of the oth of June, having completed 580 miles in twenty- 
seven days, at the hottest season of the year, and with only three 
days’ halts by the way. Those who remained in the Peshawar 
valley proceeded with the difficult work of disarming the disaffected 
sepoys, with an energy which no danger could hinder. The 24th, 
27th, and sist were disarmed at Peshawar when on the point of 
mutiny; the news reached the ssth at Mardan and they fled with their 


265 


Meanwhile, inthe Punjab, the energy of all the talent which Lord | The Punjab. 


266 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


The Northe 
West Prove 
inces. 


arms, only to meet destruction from Nicholson, with his irregular 
levies, and from the wild tribes of the frontier. The 64th was quietly 
disarmed at Abazai; the 5th Light Cavalry and roth Irregular 
Cavalry were reserved for a future day. 

In the North-West Provinces, where some at least of the immediate 
causes of the Mutiny were more keenly felt than elsewhere, the sepoy 
garrisons were not slow to follow the example of their comrades at 
Meerut and Delhi. At Lucknow, after several days of suspense, the 7th 
Light Cavalry, the 13th, 48th, and 71st Native Infantry, and most of 
the Oudh Irregulars broke into open mutiny on the 3oth May. 
The gth Native Infantry at Aligarh, the roth at Fatehgarh, the 12th 
at Jhansi and Nowgong, the 17th at Azamgarh, the 18th and 68th 
at Bareilly, the 22nd at Fyzabad, the 28th and 29th at Shahjabanpur 
and Moradabad, and the 41st at Sitapur, together with many regiments 
of regular and irregular cavalry, rapidly followed suit. At Benares, 
on the 4th June, the 37th Native Infantry and 13th Irregular Cavalry 
rose, and through the deplorable hastiness and want of judgment 
displayed by the authorities, the Sikh Regiment of Ludhiana was 
to a great extent involved in the same ruin. On the next day a 
detachment of this regiment at Jaunpur, which had hitherto 
been without taint of treason, hearing that their comrades at 
Benares had been fired on, mutinied and murdered their adjutant. 
How deplorable was the blunder which turned friends into foes at 
such a time the services of the sister Regiment of Ferozepore at 
Allahabad sufficiently testify; and but for the impartial fairness of 
the court of enquiry on the affair in the following year, the empire 
would have lost the services, and India the honour, of a regiment 
which has crowned its splendid record with the salvation of a British 
Army. The Cawnpore brigade, which included the and Light Cavalry 
and the 1st, 53rd, and 56th Native Infantry, mutinied on the sth June; 
and on the next day the 6th Native Infantry at Allahabad followed 
the same course. Here, however, the designs of the rebels were 
foiled by the fidelity of the Regiment of Ferozepore, and, although the 
mutiny was attended with peculiarly horrible details of massacre and 
violence, the fort was saved until the arrival of Colonel Neill,® 


® This was the designation by which this officer was known and probably always 
will be known, but, according to Burke, his surname was actually “Smi 
Neill."—P 


e 
ge Ol 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


267 


1st Madras Fusiliers, with a small force of British soldiers, when the 
mutinous 6th marched off to join their comrades at Cawnpore. 

Further west, in Rajputana and Malwa, the garrisons of Mhow (the 
1st Light Cavalry and the 23rd Native Infantry), Neemuch (the 
72nd Native Infantry and the 7th Gwalior Infantry) and Nusseerabad 
(the rsth and goth Native Infantry), became infected with the same 
evil spirit and plunged into rebellion. On their way to Delhi, the 
point to which all these rebels set their footsteps, the mutineers from 
Neemuch, joined by the rebels of the Mehidpar and Kotah Contin- 
gents, approached Agra, in the neighbourhood of which place, at 
Shahganj or Sassia, they were encountered (sth July) by a smal! force 
(part of the garrison) consisting of 500 of the 3rd Bengal European 
Regiment, a battery of artillery and a few volunteer horse. Though 
mishandled by the Brigadier in command, a brave but not very 
capable officer, this small force beat back the vastly superior 
numbers to which it was opposed, but the failure of its ammunition 
eventually necessitated a retirement to the fort, which was reached 
after a loss had been sustained of 49 killed and 92 wounded 
amongst the latter being Major Thomas of the 3rd European Regi- 
’ ment, and Captain D’Oyly and Lieutenant Lamb of the Artillery, 
who all succumbed to the injuries they had received. The enemy 
followed in hot pursuit, but without making any impression on the 
steadiness of the retiring force ; but remaining masters of all outside 
of the fort, they the same evening sacked and destroyed the Agra 
cantonment and murdered all who had failed to escape to a place 
of safety. 

In the Saugor District some fighting took place. There the 
Native troops consisted of the 3rd Irregular Cavalry and the 31st and 
4and Native Infantry. The 31st remained true to their colours, 
but the greater part of the other two corps broke away and joined 
the rebels: the mutineers of the 42nd made their way northwards 
and, at a later date, were reported to have crossed bayonets with the 
78th Highlanders in the action at Bithur. Towards the end of 
June a detachment, under the command of Major Gaussen, of the 
4and, took the fort of Balabet by storm, with little loss, but in 
destroying the place immediately afterwards a premature explosion 
killed Ensign Spens of the 31st and several men, and so seriously 
injured Lieutenant Willoughby of the Artillery (the brother of the 
officer who so heroically defended the Delhi magazine) that he died 


Malwa aud 
Raiputana, 


Agra. 


268 THE SERVICES OF THE 


7 (three years after) from the effects. In September a detachment 
‘under Lieutenant-Colonel Dalyell, 42nd, was repulsed in an 
| attack on Naraoli, Dalyell himself being killed in the action. 
Many other actions were fought during the succeeding months 
‘usually with disastrous results for the rebels, and Saugor fort was 


‘held until the spring of the following year, when it was relieved by 

‘the advance of part of the Central India Field Force under Sir 

Hugh Rose. 

Cawnpore. On the 30th of June a detachment under Major Renaud, Madras 
Fusiliers, started from Allahabad for the relief of Cawnpore; 
it consisted of 400 British soldiers, 300 Sikhs, 95 irregular 
cavalry, the faithful remnants of the 13th Bengal and the 3rd 
Oudh Irregular Cavalry, and two guns. Meanwhile at that city 
had been enacted one of the most horrible tragedies that even 
India had ever seen. The little garrison of 200 British officers and 
men, after three weeks of heroic resistance, capitulated on the 27th 
June, and as they embarked on country boats at Sati-chaura Ghat, 
on the Ganges, were massacred indiscriminately by the troops of the 
Nana Dundhu Pant (the adopted son and heir of Baji Rao, the last . 
of the Peshwas), ‘which were drawn up for the purpose on the 
river bank. Of the whole, only two officers (Lieutenants Delafosse 
and Thomson, 53rd Native Infantry) and two men escaped; a 
great number of the women and children were taken back to 
Cawnpore, there to be kept in miserable captivity until the near 
approach of an avenging force impelled their ruthless captor to 
complete the work of massacre before his victims could be torn from 
his grasp. . 

Havelock’s On the roth July news of the fall of Cawnpore reached Brigadier- 

RC reratoes: General Havelock, commanding the field force moving up to the 

relief of that place and of Lucknow, and, fearing for the safety 

of Renaud’s little force, he sent orders to him to halt until he could 
join him with such additional troops as he could muster. These were 
only 1,000 British infantry (detachments of the 64th, 78th, and 
84th Foot and of the rst Madras Fusiliers), 130 Sikhs of the 

Regiment of Ferozepore, 20 volunteer cavalry, and six guns. 

He overtook and joined Renaud at Fatehpur onthe 12th July, 

and with the united force, now consisting ot 1,400 British and 560 

Native troops, with eight guns, he met and defeated the rebel army 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


269 


on the same day, and marched: into Fatehpur, destined now to 
pay the penalty of its revolt five weeks before, and of the 
murder by the 6th Native Infantry of the district judge, Mr. R. T. 
Tucker. On the 15th two more victories, at Aoung and the 
Pandu Naddi, were gained over the rebels, in the former of which 
the gallant Renaud was mortally wounded; and on the 16th, at 
Ahirwa, near Cawnpore, the Nana’s forces were finally scattered, 
and Cawnpore was once more in the hands of the British. 


But though the rebels were defeated, the victory had come too late | 


to ‘save the unhappy women and children held in captivity by the 
Nana, that miscreant having caused the whole of them to be 
massacred in the most barbarous manner on the rsth. . The 
garrison of the Lucknow Residency, however, equally heroic and in 
almost equal straits, stilt remained to be succoured. But it was not 
until the 25th July that Havelock was in a position to cross the 
Ganges into Oudh. His troops numbered barely 1,400 and he had 
to: traverse a country which was wholly in the hands of the 
revolted sepoys, who were ready to dispute every inch of his 
advance. On the 29th he twice defeated the enemy at Unao 
and Bashiratganj, but with his force weakened by cholera and 
gun-stroke, he was forced to fall back. to Mangalwar. On the 
4th August he again advanced, and on the sth, for the second time, 
defeated the rebels at Bashiratganj; but difficulties were thicken- 
ing around him; several thousand sepoys threatened Colonel Neill at 
Cawnpore ; and the 7th, 8th, and goth Native Infantry at Dinapore, 
having followed the course of the rest om July 25th, were said to be 
moving on his rear; so, once more Havelock fell back to Man- 
galwar, and commenced the construction of a bridge-of-boats across 
the Ganges. Once more the enemy re-assembled, and again Havelock 
marched out and defeated and dispersed them, this time at Burbia-ki- 
Chauki, on the 12th. Next day he re-crossed the Ganges to Cawn- 
pore, but finding that the Nana had re-collected his forces at Bithur, 
he marched up to that place, and there, on the 16th, inflicted a crush- 
‘ing defeat on the rebels. Then, much against his will, he was com- 
pelled to return to Cawnpore, mere to await the arrival of reinforce- 
‘ments from Calcutta. - c 


Advance Into 
Oudh. 


For a month after the general mutiny at bacuee on the 3oth Defence = the 


‘May, Sir Henry Lawrence, with, the aid of his small British force. and | Sone 


270 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


First Relief of 
Lucknow, agth 
September. 


the native artillery, which then remained faithful, retained command of 
the city and cantonments. On the joth June he marched out against 
the mutineers at Chinhat, but was fearfully out-numbered, and, being 
deserted by the native gunners in the face of the enemy, was con- 
strained to retreat as best he could, and, weakened by losses and 
desertion, to confine his defensive position to the grounds of the Resie 
dency. Two days later, Sir Henry was mortally wounded by a frag- 
ment of a shell, and died on the 4th July, the most regretted, and 
perhaps the greatest, of the many victims of 1857. The command of 
the garrison devolved on Colonel Inglis, of the 32nd Foot, who for 
thirteen weeks sustained the unequal contest, until relieved by 
Havelock and Outram on September the 25th. 

The first reinforcements of British troops from Calcutta reached 
Cawnpore under Sir James Outram on the 16th September : the relief 
column immediately started again towards Lucknow, commanded 
not by Outram, the senior officer, but by Havelock, to whom the 
former, with noble generosity, surrendered the command in order 
that he might have the honour of finishing the work he had so well 
begun. Determined resistance was encountered at Mangalwar and 
the Alambagh on the 21st and 33rd, and in the city of Lucknow 
on the 25th and 26th, and then, after thirty-six hours of hard 
fighting and with a loss of 196 killed, among whom was the gallant 
Neill, and 339 wounded, the column entered the Residency, and the 
first relief of Lacknow was accomplished. 

It is impossible here to notice the many Indian officers whose 
names appear in Colonel Inglis’s despatch on the defence of 
Lucknow and whose gallantry aided in saving the garrison. Small 
share of the honour of the defence can be claimed by the native ranks 
of the Bengal Army; but few as were their numbers, to none is more 
honour due than to the faithful remnants of the 13th, 48th, and 71st 
Native Infantry, who vied with their British comrades in the steadfast 
ardour of their courage, and who well deserved the rewards bestowed 
on them by Government,—the Order of Merit to every man, and the 
honour of forming the nucleus of a corps which still bears the name of 
“The Lucknow Regiment.” _ 

The months of June, July, and August had been eventful ones in the 
Punjab and on the Ridge before Delhi. Two unfortunate outbreaks 
occurred,—at Jhelum and Sialkot. Atthe former place the sepoys of 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


371 


the 14th Native Infantry were manifestly disaffected, and a force of 
sufficient strength was sent down from Rawal Pindi to disarm them. 
It reached Jhelum on the 7th July, but the affair was mismanaged 
and a conflict took place; the sepoys, beaten and driven from their 
lines, took refuge in the village of Samli, but in an attack on them 
in this position the British force was repulsed with considerable loss 
(44 killed and 109 wounded), and during the night most of the 
mutineers escaped with their arms, though they left large numbers of 
dead behind them. The news of this affair was the signal for the rising 
of the oth Light Cavalry and the 46th Native Infantry at Sialkot, who 
threw open the gaol, plundered the treasury, burned the cantonments, 
and then marched off towards Delhi. But ready to intercept their 
march was John Nicholson with his moveable column. Marching 
from Amritsar on the roth July, he reached Trimu Ghit, on the Ravi, 
on the morning of the 12th, met and defeated the insurgents there, 
and completed their destruction on the 16th, so thoroughly that hardly 


& man escaped of those who had marched from Sialkot. Returning |. 


to Amritsar, Nicholson soon received orders to march with his force, 
to which the 4th Sikh Infantry from Ludhiana was added, to join the 
main army before Delhi; and on the 7th August he was in the camp 
on the Ridge, followed a week later by the moveable column. The 
force before Delhi was now under the command of Brigadier-General 
A. Wilson, Sir Henry Barnard having died of cholera on the sth 
July, and his successor, Major-General Reed, c.B., having been com- 
pelled, by broken health, to retire to the hills. 

All this time John Lawrence was hard at work at Lahore. Cut 
off from communication with Calcutta and knowing well that months 
must elapse before fresh British troops could arrive from that direc- 
tion, he turned to the splendid material which was ready to his hand, 
and, profiting by the jealousy and hatred which existed between 
Hindustani and Punjabi, he sent regiment after regiment of Sikhs, 
Pathans, and Punjabi Musalmans to swell the British forces before 
Delhi. Hodson’s Horse, the rst Sikh Irregular Cavalry (now the 11th 
Bengal Lancers), eighteen new regiments of infantry (including two of 
Masbi pioneers), were all raised in the Punjab between June and 
September 1857, and took the places there of older corps or were 
sent to join the forces in the field. About the same time an extra 
regiment of Gurkhas (now the ist Battalion of the 4th) was raised 
at Petoragarh, to aid in the protection of the Kumaon Hills against 


27:2 


Battle of 
Najafgarh, 


August, ssth. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


the rebels of Rohilkhand. The Sirmoor and Kumaon Battalions of 
Gurkhas, the Corps of Guides, the 2nd and sth Punjab Cavalry, the 
4th Sikh Infantry, and the rst, 2nd, and 4th Punjab Infantry, were 
fighting on the Ridge in August; while, of the new levies, there were 
one regiment of pioneers and Hodson’s Horse, the first of the 


Punjabi regiments of Bengal cavalry, raised in the early days of the 


Mutiny by the intrepid leader whose name it bears, and employed 
under his command in winning its first laurels in many an exciting 
combat under the walls of Delhi. 


Since the commencement of the siege, a constant succession of. 


attacks and sorties on the part of the enemy had worn out our army, 
and had placed it in the position of a besieged rather than of a besieg- 
ing force. But the arrival of Nicholson with his reinforcements altered 
the aspect of affairs. The long-expected siege train from Ferozepore 
was but a few marches distant; more reinforcements were expected ; 
and it was evident to all men that the period of waiting was approach- 
ing a termination. One more conflict was necessary before the last 
scene of the siege should begin. The rebels had sent out a strong 
force to intercept the approaching siege train, and it was imperative 
that their attempt should be frustrated. Nicholson was chosen for 
the duty. Marching out of camp with a well chosen force, including 
a squadron of the Guides Cavalry and the 1st and 3nd Punjab Infan- 
try, he encountered and utterly dispersed the rebels at Najafgarh on 
the 25th August, sustaining, however, rather severe loss, 25 killed (in- 
cluding Lieutenant Lumsden, 1st Punjab Infantry) and 67 wounded. 
The siege train arrived in safety on the 3rd September ; for a week 
the city was exposed to ‘a terrific and incessant bombardment; and 
then, on the morning of the 14th September, the long-looked for 
assault was made. 

The assaulting force was divided into four columns and a reserve, 


as follows :— 
First CoLumn, under Brigadier-General Nicholson— 
H.M.’s 75th Foot. * i - 300 men. 
1st Bengal European Fusiliers . - 250 5 
and Punjab Infantry. ‘ ‘ ° 450 455 
Orders.—To storm the breach to the left of the Kashmir Bastion, and to escalade 
the face of the bastion. 

SECOND COLuMN, under Brigadier Ww. ai C.B., 6rst Foot— 
H.M.’s8th Foot , . 250men, © 
and Bengal European Ruslien. . « 250 gs 

ath Sikh Infantry : ‘ » 35° ws 


me 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 273 
a ee 
Orders.—To storm the breach in the Water Bastion. 

Tarp Cotumn, under Colonel G. Campbell, 52nd Light Infantry— 
H. M.’s sand Light Infantr ' - 200 men, 
Kumaon Battalion . ; ‘ ° 250 9 
ist Punjab Infantry . ‘ ‘ - S500 4, 
Orders.—To assault the Kashmir Gate. 


Fourtn CoLumn, under Major Charles Reid, Sirmoor Battalion— 
H. M.’s Goth Foot (Rifles) . ° - §0 men. 


H. M.’s 61st Foot . a ¥ - 8 ,, 

ist Bengal European Fusiliers . - I6o ,, 

Sirmoor Battalion e e e « 200 ry) 780 men, 
Kumaon Battalion . . : - 65 » 

Infantry of the Corps of Guides . + 200 ,, 

ist PunjabInfantry . ae - 35 os 

Kashmir Contingent 7 - 400 ,, 

Mounted Police : : ; « 100 


Orders.—To clear the suburb of Kishanganj and enter the Kabul Gate, 


Reserve, under Brigadier J. Longfield, 8th Foot— 
H. M.’s 61st Foot : ; - 250 men, 
4th Punjab Infantry . ‘ 5 - 450 
Baluch Battalion . . . «. goo ,, 
Jhind Contingent . .« +» « 300 ,, 
H. M.’s 6oth Rifles . ‘ ° - 200 ,, after covering the 
advance of the stormers. 


The storming parties moved forward soon after daybreak on the | The storm of 
14th September. The first column, its advance covered by the rifle- | Scrtumber 
men of the 6oth, having escaladed the left face of the Kashmir 
Bastion and carried the breach in the curtain to the Jeft of it, moved 
to the right, and, in conjunction with the second column, captured 
the Mori Bastion and the Kabul Gate. In attempting a further 
advance towards the Lahore Gate, Brigadier-General Nicholson fell 
mortally wounded, and the remains of the column retired to the 
Kabul Gate. The second column, likewise covered by the fire of 
the 6oth, carried the breach in the Water Bastion, a part diverging 
to the right, making their way in by the other breach to the left of 
the Kashmir Bastion, then turning to the right, in co-operation with 
the first column, it took the Mori Bastion and the Kabul Gate, and 
occupied the houses in the neighbourhood of the latter. The third 
column, after blowing in the Kashmir Gate, one of the most daring 
exploits recorded in military annals and a deed reflecting undying 
glory on the Bengal Sappers and Miners, penetrated into the city 
to the neighbourhood of the Jumma Masjid, but being unable to 


T 


374 


C re of the 
cae and the 
inces, 


eptember 
szst and sand. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


attack that point without artillery was compelled to fall back on the 
reserve at the church. The fourth column alone met with a repulse. 
It was checked in Kishanganj by barricades strongly defended by 
the enemy; deprived of the capable leadership of Major Reid, who 
was wounded early in the day, the column, after a severe conflict, was 
compelled to fall back, and the enemy, who pressed on its rear, were 
only keptin check by the firmness of the Cavalry Brigade (the 
gth Lancers, and detachments of the rst, and, and sth Panjab Cavalry, 
Hodson’s Horse and Guides), who for two hours sat motionless 
on their horses, exposed to a heavy fire and suffering severe and 
incessant loss. 

On the whole, the first day of the attack was successful, though not 
completely so. The 15th was devoted to securing the positions we 
had won. On the 16th the fighting was resumed, and the great 
magazine seized, and, after four more days of conflict, the British were 
in complete possession of the city. 

Our loss in the assault was very heavy, amounting to 299 killed, 
877 wounded, and 10 missing. Of the Bengal Army, Lieutenant 
F. L. Tandy, of the Engineers, Captain G. G. McBarnet (55th Native 
Infantry), attached to the 1st Bengal Fusiliers, Lieutenant A, W. 
Murray, of the Guides, and Ensign J. T, Davidson, of the and Punjab 
Infantry, were killed; and Brigadier-General Nicholson, Lieutenant 
P. Salkeld, of the Engineers, Major G, O. Jacob, rst Bengal Fusiliers, 
Lieutenant E. Speke (65th Native Infantry), attached to the same regi- 
ment, Lieutenant C. H. F. Gambier (38th Native Infantry), attached 
to the 2nd Bengal Fusiliers, and Lieutenant R. P. Homfray, 4th 
Punjab Infantry, died of the wounds they received. The operations 
of the succeeding six days involved a further loss of 50 killed, 123 
wounded, and one missing. 

Thus ended the siege of Delhi. But, although the city and palace 
were in our hands, the royal family, who represented the head of 
this great rebellion, though in truth they were so only in name, had 
escaped and were in hiding in the suburbs. On the 21st September 
news was brought to Lieutenant Hodson, who was chief of the Intel- 
ligence Staff, that the king and princes of Delhi were at the tomb of 
Humayun, some four miles from the city. Taking only fifty of his 
own Punjabi troopers, he galloped out to the spot, and after a delay 
of two hours, during which Hodson stood alone facing an angry 
crowd of many hundreds of the defeated monarch’s followers, the last 


+ enema: cree 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


er eat ee rc ee ei 


' of the Moghal Emperors, preceded by his favorite wife and her son, 
came out in a palankin and surrendered himself. On the following 
day, with his second-in-command, Lieutenant McDowell, and a 
hundred troopers, Hodson again visited the tomb and demanded the 
unconditional surrender of the three shahzadahs in hiding there. 
Again his stern and unflinching courage prevailed over the timorous 
multitude before him, and he carried back his captives towards the 
city. But as they neared the gates the crowd, moved by the 
thought that the last of the monarchy of the Moghals, “ still a 
living influence ‘in India,” was being taken from them, began to 
surge with threatening murmors round the little band of horsemen 
and their charge. To both the British officers it seemed that any 
moment might bring an attempt at rescue. Ever ready to act when 
necessity demanded, Hodson determined to settle the matter at once, 
and fearing the chance of any hesitation if the work were entrusted 
to one of his troopers, he himself seized a. carbine and shot his 
captives with his own hand. Even in the midst of the thrilling 
story of the Indian Mutiny we must linger for a moment over this 
episode. Apart from the extraordinary determination and brilliant 
courage displayed by Hodson, the capture of the emperor and the 
. killing of the princes were deeds of which the effects were excep- 
tional. No individual act did so much to stem the tide of the rebellion 
and to deprive it of a national character ; nor did any other excite 
such attention at the moment or such diverse criticism afterwards. 
For a moment no dissentient voice was heard amidst the chorus of 
approval which greeted the exploit, and when we read the argu- 
ments of those who have since assailed the memory of Hodson let 
us not forget the words of one of the fairest of them :—“ Seldom, 
if ever, since war began had there been so much to exacerbate 
and infuriate an army as then inflamed the brains and fevered 
the blood of the men who found themselves in the bloodstained 
city.” 

” Thesiege and capture of Delhi cost us in all 3,537 in killed: and 
wounded—a heavy list, but productive of great results; for with the 
capture of the capital disappeared the trust of the people of India in 
the ultimate success of the revolt. But it is necessary, before 
proceeding with the story of the re-establishment of our influence, 


to glance at some of the minor details of the Mutiny in- Bengal and 


the North-West Provinces. 
$3 


275 


276 THE SERVICES OF THE 


ee 


At Calcutta, while the Governor-General was worn out with anxiety 
and work, little occurred to excite the alarm of the inhabitants, except 
the receipt of news from the North-West, disturbing enough in itself 
and often exaggerated tenfold in the transit. So excited, however, 
did the people become by these rumours, that Lord Canning was at 
length induced, contrary to his own convictions, to disarm the native 
troops at Barrackpore. Amongst these were the 43rd and the 7oth 
Native Infantry, both of which regiments had expressed their readi- 
ness to be led against the mutineers, and neither of which had ever 
shown the least signs of disaffection. They were disarmed on the 
14th June, and the business was made the occasion of an ignomini- 
ous panic on the part of both the Christian inhabitants of Calcutta 
and the sepoys themselves ; the latter imagining that the seizure of 
their arms was a preliminary to their massacre, the former expecting 
momentarily to hear that the disarmament had been resisted and that 
the sepoys were marching against the capital. 

It is useless to recapitulate the tale of mutinies and massacres of 
May, June, and July. In a volume which treats of the services of the 
Bengal Army, it would be out of place to recount the details of the 
ignominious end to which the old army brought its century of 
honourable service. Nor is it possible to relate the many brilliant 
actions of the Bengal officers, even were such relation necessary. 
Bareilly, Agra, and the North-West ; Nusseerabad, Mhow, Jhansi, and 
Central India—none of these offer much opportunity of telling of 
faithful sepoys. An exception, however, may be made of the 8th 
Irregular Cavalry at Bareilly, where, though the men mutinied, the 
native officers set a splendid example of loyalty, and left their families 
and property to aid their English officers in their flight. 

Few incidents of the Mutiny are more celebrated than the heroic 
defence of the house at Arrah, in Bihar, during the first week of 
August. The sepoys of the Dinapore brigade mutinied on July 27th, 
and on the same day approached the station of Arrah, in which were 
eleven Europeans and 50 Sikhs of Captain Rattray’s police battalion 
(now the 45th Bengal Infantry). This little party, unequal as was 
the contest, determined to defend themselves where they stood, rather 
than seek safety in flight. Having hastily put into such a state of 
defence as they could the house of one of their number, they held it 
for seven days against all attacks of the rebels, who numbered fully 
3,000 armed men, as well as a vast rabble of unarmed insurgents. 


- eee ee 


ee ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 277 


Attempts to relieve them were not wanting, but an expedition de- 
spatched from Dinapore, which included detachments of the roth and 
37th Foot and Rattray’s Sikhs, was ambuscaded during a night march, 
and had to retreat with heavy loss. At length, when the provisions of 
the little party were running short and there seemed no chance for them 
but to attempt to cut their way through the enemy under the cover of 
night, deliverance suddenly appeared in the person of Major Vincent 
Eyre, of the Bengal Artillery, who, having by great efforts collected a 
small force at Buxar, and defeated the rebels at Bibiganj, marched 
into Arrah on the 3rd August. The faithful Sikhs of the garrison re- 
ceived well-earned rewards and decorations. They, with a further 
detachment of their regiment, were attached to Major Eyre’s force; 
and no corps did more—few so much—towards restoring the authority 
of the British in the months that followed, as the gallant battalion of 
Rattray’s Sikhs. | 

General Wilson was not long in following up the final success of Movements of 
the 20th September. On the 24th a column of 2,800 men, including Delhi, — 
200 Punjab pioneers (now the 32nd Bengal Infantry), detachments of 
the 1st, and, and sth Punjab Cavalry and of Hodson’s Horse, and the 
and and 4th Punjab Infantry, marched from Delhi under Colonel 
Greathed of the 8th Foot. The enemy were met with and defeated at 
Bulandshahr, with aloss on our side of 47 killed and wounded. The 
force then proceeded by double stages to Agra, where they arrived 
on October roth, having covered sixty miles in thirty-six hours. 
Scarcely was the camp laid out, and the men about to get some food 
and rest, when they found themselves suddenly assailed by the 
mutineers from Mhow (the 1st Light Cavalry and the 23rd Native 
Infantry) reinforced by fugitives from Delhi, who were advartcing to 
the attack of Agra. The enemy, however, were not aware that any 
force greater than the Agra garrison was in front of them, and were 
as much taken by surprise as the British, and with more disastrous 
regults to themselves. They were thoroughly beaten and dispersed, 
and Greathed’s force moved on towards Cawnpore. 

Shortly after Greathed marched from Delhi, another column set 
out under Brigadier-General Showers. It included detachments 
of Hodson’s Horse and of the Guides Cavalry, the Kumaon Batta- 
lion, and the 1st Punjab Infantry. Marching westwards, as far as the 
edge of the Bikanir desert, it captured several leading rebels, but 
no organised resistance was encountered, and the column soon after- 


wards returned to Delhi. 


278 


Advance of 


r Co 
Campbell and 
final relief of 
Lucknow, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Hardly had it returned, however, when the advance of the Jodh- 
pur Legion,® which had mutinied at Erinpura and was making its 
way northwards, necessitated the despatch of a second force in the 
same direction. It included the 7th Punjab Infantry (now the 19th 
Bengal Infantry), a detachment of the Guides, and Lind’s Multani 
Horse, and was commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel J. G. Gerrard. 
The column reached Rewari on the 13th November, and two days 
later was reinforced by the 23rd Punjab Infantry (now the 31st Ben- 
gal Infantry). The enemy were found at Narnaul on the 16th, were 
vigorously attacked, and completely defeated and dispersed. Our loss 
amounted to 8 killed and 76 wounded; amongst the latter was Colo- 
nel Gerrard, who was shot through the body and died within a 
few hours. 

At Lucknow the arrival of the force under Sir James Outram and 
Sir Henry Havelock was followed by a period of difficulty almost as 
great as that experienced during the preceding part of the siege, the 
only difference being that the British position was extended, and 
that the increased number of the garrison allowed them to act to 
some extent on the offensive, instead of being confined strictly to 
the defensive. 

In the meantime reinforcements (including the remainder of the 
troops intercepted en route to China,—a part having already come 
in time to take part in the first relief of Lucknow) had been arriving 
at Calcutta, and the forethought and energy of the new Commander- 
in-Chief, Sir Colin Campbell, who had arrived on the 13th August, 
provided means of transporting this welcome aid, with the least possi- 
ble delay to the disturbed districts. On the 27th October Sir Colin 
himself started from Calcutta, and arrived at Cawnpore on the 3rd 
of November. Leaving a force to hold that place, under Major- 
General Windham, he pushed on towards Lucknow and arrived 
at the Alambagh on November 12th. Here on the 13th he made 
his final dispositions for the relief of our garrison in the Residency, 
The troops composing his force were as follow :— 

Cavacry BricaDe. 


Two squadrons of the oth Lancers. 
One squadron _,,_ 1st Punjab Cavalry. 


One ry) rT) and 99 
One Ps » Sth » 
One ry) ”? Hodson’s Horse. 


© Ihe Jodhpur Legion consisted of a detail of artillery, three risallahs of 
cavalry anda battalion (eight companies) of sepoys. It was formed in 1835, 
and mutinied at Erinpura in August 1857,—P. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


279 


|, 


ENGINEERS. 
One company of Royal Engineers. 
99 »» Madras Sappers. 
Two companies ,, Punjab Pioneers. 
INFANTRY. 
gra Brigade.—sth Foot (detachment) . 
Sth Foot. 


6ath Foot (detachment), 
, 78th Foot ry} 
and Punjab Infantry. 
dth Brigade.—53rd Foot (wing). 
84th ,, (detachment). 
goth ,, »” 
931d yy 
Ist Madras Fusiliers (detachment). 
4th Punjab Infantry. 
5th Brigade.—23rd Foot 
82nd Foot (detachment). 

There were also a heavy battery manned by the Naval Brigade of 
H.M.S. Shannon, under Captain Sir William Peel, a field battery, 
and two troops and a half of horse artillery. 

On the morning of the 14th November the Dilkusha Park and the 
Martinitre House were attacked and carried, and an attempt made by 
the enemy later in the day te recover their lost ground was repulsed. 
The 15th wag occupied in preparations for a further advance and in 
perfecting measures for the security of the baggage, which was all left 
at Dilkusha. On the 16th took place the hardest fighting in the 
attack ; a small breach, which had been made by the fire of the heavy 
guns in the east wall of the Sikandarabagh, was carried by a gallant 
rush of two companies of the 93rd Highlanders, while the remainder 
of that gallant regiment, the 53rd, the 4th Punjab Jnfantry, and a 
battalion made up of detachments of the 84th and goth and the 1st 
Madras Fusiliers, forced their way in at other points ; the post had 
been occupied by more than two thousand of the rebels, mostly sepoys 
of the 71st Native Infantry and the Oudh Irregular Force, and hardly a 
man escaped. The remainder of the day was occupied in an attack 
on a building named the Shah Najaf, which was eventually carried 
after we had suffered heavy loss. On the 17th a building called 
the ‘‘Mess House” and the Moti Mahal were carried, as well as 
Banks’ House on the left, and the garrison at last joined hands with 
their rescuers. In effecting this the relieving force had sustained a 
loss of 122 killed, 414 wounded, and § missing; among the killed 


380 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Attack oa ; 
awnpore 
Tantia Topt, 
and the 
Gwalior 
Contingent. 


were Lieutenant-Colonel Biddulph and Captain Mayne, serving on 
the staff, Captain Lumsden of the 3oth Native Infantry, attached to 
the 93rd Highlanders, and Lieutenant Frankland, 2nd Punjab Infan- 
try ; Lieutenants Halkett, Hodson’s Horse, and Pauland Oldfield, 4th 
Punjab Infantry, died of their wounds, and the Commander-in-Chief 
was himself among the wounded. The following days were spent 
in reconnaissance of the roads, and in the withdrawal, on the night 
of the 22nd, of the garrison of the Residency, under cover ofa 
heavy bombardment of the Kaisar-Bagh. By the 23rd November 
the work of withdrawal had been effected; Sir Colin Campbell fell 
back on Dilkusha, and the second relief of Lucknow was complete. 
Our further loss in the fighting at Lucknow from the rgth to the 
22nd November was only one killed and 15 wounded. The general 
satisfaction at the successful completion of the relief was, however, 
marred by the loss of Sir Henry Havelock, who died on the 24th 
November and was buried at the Alambagh. 

It was now necessary for the Commander-in-Chief, having left 
Outram with a small force at the Alambagh, to hasten back to Cawnpore 
with all possible speed. The little force left at that place had, soon 
after the departure of the army, been threatened by the advance of 
the rebel Gwalior Contingent under Tantia Topi, one of the mis- 
creants concerned inthe massacre at Cawnpore, and by far the most 
capable native leader who appeared during the mutinies. Windham, 
finding that his communications with Lucknow were severed, 
endeavoured to gain time by aggressive measures, and attacked the 
Gwalior Contingent at the Pandu Nadi on the 26th November. In 
this unequal conflict the British were successful, and then fell back on 
Cawnpore. Here they were attacked by Tantia Topi on the 
27th and 28th, and, overwhelmed by numbers, after severe and 
continuous fighting, outflanked and forced back on their entrench. 
ments, leaving the city wholly in the hands of the rebels. A worse 
disaster, the destruction of the bridge-of-boats, appeared to be 
impending, when on the agth, the arrival of Sir Colin Campbell 
and his force, from Lucknow, put a new face on the aspect of 
affairs and interposed to prevent the threatened calamity. After 
allowing some days to pass, during which the convoy of women, 
children, and wounded got well on the way to Allahabad, Sir Colin 
attacked the enemy on the 6th December, turned their right by a 
brilliant movement, in which the 4th Punjab Infantry were again 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


conspicuous, seized their camp, and on the following day completed 
the defeat of their army and entirely dispersed them. 

Whilst the Commander-in-Chief was compelled to remain for some 
lime inactive for want of transport, a force under Colonel Seaton was 
advancing from the direction of Delhi, escorting stores for the army 
at Cawnpore, This column included Hodson’s Horse, the 7th 
Punjab Infantry (now the roth Bengal Infantry), the 1st Bengal 
European Fusiliers, and 120 Punjab Pioneers. The first engagement 
between this force and the rebels took place at Gangari, between 
Aligarh and Khasganj, on the 14th December, on which occasion, as 
well as at Patiali on the 17th and at Mainpuri on the 27th, the enemy 
were defeated with little difficulty. Shortly afterwards Seaton, rein- 
forced by a party of the newly raised 1st Sikh Irregular Cavalry (now 
the 11th Bengal Lancers), effected a junction with the Commander- 
in-Chief at Fatehgarh. 

After three weeks’ detention at Cawnpore, transport having at 
length arrived, Sir Colin Campbell marched thence on the 24th 
December and met and completely defeated a rebel force at the 
Kali Nadi, near Fatehgarh, on the 2nd January. At the latter place 
he was joined by Seaton and his convoy, as already stated, and 
preparations were pushed on for the recapture of Lucknow. 
Whilst these were in progress a column, composed of the 42nd and 
53rd Foot, the 4th Punjab Infantry, one troop of horse artillery 
and a field battery, two squadrons ofthe oth Lancers, and Hodson’s 
Horse, encountered a large force of the Oudh rebels at Shamsh- 
ahad, about thirteen miles from Fatehgarh, on the 27th January, and 
defeated them with great loss. Onthe 26th February all prepara- 
tions were at last completed, and the Commander-in-Chief again 
marched from Cawnpore in the direction of Lucknow. 

In the meantime, at the Alambagh, Outram, with his force of 4,000 
men (including the Sikh Regiment of Ferozepore), was holding his 
own gallantly against the rebel army, which now numbered close on 
100,000. For some weeks after the relief of Lucknow the enemy were 
too much disheartened by their reverses to make any further hostile 
effort. But at length, towards the end of December, they began to 
take heart again, and between the 23rd of that month and the 16th of 
January they made several determined attacks on the British position ; 
their ill success, however, on every occasion, soon damped their ardour, 
and it was not until the active preparations at Cawnpore showed the 


281 


Colonel 
Seaton’s 
columa. 


Outram at the 
Alambagh. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


‘| rebels that if Outram was to be overwhelmed the blow must be 
struck at once, ere the arrival of reinforcements made it too late, 
that they mustered up courage to again assail the position at the 
Alambagh. On the rsth, 16th, and 21st of February, they advanced 
to the attack, and each time were repulsed; finally, a last desperate 
attempt was made on the 2sth, but by this time strong reinforce- 
ments had arrived at the Alambagh and the rebels were completely 
defeated. 

About the same time the Jaunpur Field Force (which included 
three British battalions and an allied force of 3,000 Gurkbas of the 
Nepal army) entered Oudh from the south-east under the com- 
mand of Brigadier-General Franks, and moving up, towards Luck- 
now, defeated the rebels in sharp actions at Chanda, Hamirpur. 
and Sultanpur, and captured the fort of Dhaurara. 

Sir Colin Campbell arrived at the Alambagh on the 1st March, 
and on the following day the operations against Lucknow were com- 
menced. The troops at his disposal were sufficiently numerous 
to allow of a carefully considered and widely extensive plan of 
operations being followed in the attack on Lucknow. The enemy's 
lines of defence were very strong except on the north side, where 
their position was bounded by the river Gumti, and no precautions 
had been taken to strengthen this natural protection. It was deter- 
mined, therefore, that while the main force turned the right of the 
rebel position, one division should cross the river and take it in 
reverse. Operations were commenced on the znd March by the 
seizure of Dilkusha Park; and three days later, the interval having 
been occupied in constructing two bridges over the river, the arrival 
of the force under Brigadier-General Franks placed Sir Colin Camp- 
bell in a position to proceed with the execution of his plans. Sir 
James Outram crossed the Gumti on the 6th, with a division 
which included the 2nd and detachments of the ist and sth 
Punjab Cavalry, and the 2nd Punjab Infantry; and advancing 
up the left bank of the river for three days he drove the enemy before 
him, and established batteries which enfiladed their first line of 
defence, and rendered it untenable. Meanwhile, the Commander- 
in-Chief had carried the Martinitre on the gth and Banks’ House 
on the roth; and on the following day the Sikandarabagh and the 
Shah Najaf were occupied without opposition, and the 93rd High- 
landers and the 4th Punjab Infantry stormed the Begum Kot. 


eet Agen tt ANA arate OM el gl cc 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 284 


Important as these operations were they were effected with compara- 
tively small loss in point of numbers, though the death of Major 
Hodson, who was mortally wounded at the Begum Koti, was a great 
loss to the army. 

Throughout the next four days the advance steadily continued, until 
on the 14th the Imambara was stormed by the roth Foot and the Regi- 
ment of Ferozepore, the second and third lines of the enemy’s 
defence were turned, and the great stronghold of the Kaisar Bagh 
captured. On the 16th Outram re-crossed the Gumti, and on 
Sunday, the 21st, after a sharp fightin the city, in which the 4th 
Punjab Infantry suffered some loss, and another on the outskirts of 
the place, in which the commander of the rst Sikh Irregular Cavalry 
was killed, the capture of Lucknow was completed and the city 
cleared of the rebels. 

The loss of the British in the twenty days’ operations was 127 
killed, 595 wounded and 13 missing, Among those who were killed 
or died of their wounds were Captain F. Wale, rst Sikh Irregular 
Cavalry ; Major C. A. Sanford, 5th Punjab Cavalry; Major W.S.R. 
Hodson, of Hodson’s Horse; Captain L. G. DaCosta, Regiment of 
Ferozepore ; Lieutenant A. J. Anderson, 2nd Punjab Infantry; and 
Lieutenants O. D. Thackwell, 15th, and: J. Cape, 30th Native 
Infantry, employed on the staff. : 

On the day after the fall of Lucknow, Sir J. Hope Grant, with a 
force in which were included portions of the 1st aod and Punjab 
Cavalry and the and Punjab Infantry, went in pursuit of a body of 
rebels who had retreated in a northerly direction, He overtook 
them at Kursi and, with a trifling loss of 13 killed and wounded, 
defeated and dispersed them and captured fourteen guns. 

The preceding months, while all the available strength of the army 
had been concentrated for operations at Lucknow, had been a time 
of some danger in other parts of India. Particularly was this the 
case in Eastern Bengal, where much disturbance was caused by 
three companies of the 34th Native Infantry, who had mutinied at 
Chittagong on the 18th November, endeavouring to make their way 
thence towards the hills of Manipur. Before they could reach those 
difficult jungles, however, they were pursued with forced marches 
by a detachment of the Sylhet Light Infantry, under Major the 
Hon’ble R. B. P. Byng, who defeated them at Latu on the 8th 
December, but himself unfortunately fell in the action. Thence 


Bengal, etc. 


284 THE SERVICES OF THE 


turning their steps northwards, they were overtaken by further dis- 
aster, and finally dispersed by three separate defeats at the hands 
of detachments of the Sylhet Light Infantry, on the 12th, 22nd, and 
26th of January 1858. 

aot a Towards the end of 1857 a force was put in the field in the 
Gorakhpur district under the command of Brigadier Rowcroft. 
It was composed at first of two battalions of the allied Gurkha 
forces, the Naval Brigade of H.M.S. Pearl, and a detachment of 
Rattray’s Sikhs, but it was joined subsequently by the 13th Light 
Infantry, the Bengal Yeomanry Cavalry, and some Madras cavalry. 
With this force Rowcroft was in frequent conflict with the rebels, 
whom he defeated at Sohanpur and Phulpur, and no less than three 

times at Amorha. : 

Pieler ly In the meantime the troubles in the districts to the south-east of 
Oudh had been on the increase, and a small force under Colonel 
Milman, 37th Foot, was hard pressed by the rebels at Azamgarh; on 
the fall of Lucknow, therefore, the Commander-in-Chief lost no time 
in despatching a column under Brigadier-General Sir Edward 
Lugard in that direction. This force was composed of three British 
infantry regiments, eighteen guns, and 700 cavalry, including the 
3rd Sikh Irregular Cavalry and the remains of the 12th Bengal Irre- 
gular Cavalry. Lugard marched from Lucknow on the 2gth March ; 
met and defeated a rebel force at Manihar, near Tigra, on the 11th 
April; drove the enemy under Kunwar Singh,® the rebel chief of 
Jagdeshpur, in Shahabad, from before Azamgarh on the 15th; and 
with a detachment of his column completely defeated him at Azimat- 
garh on the 17th, at Mannahar on the 20th April, and at Shiupur Ghat 
on the 21st. Sorely wounded in one of these engagements, Kunwar 
Singh made his way across the Ganges to Jagdeshpur, crushing on 
his way, on.the 23rd April, a small force of Sikh and British troops, 
under the command of Captain Le Grand, 35th Foot, who had moved 
out from Arrah to intercepthim. In the junglesof Jagdeshpur the 
rebels, under Kunwar Singh and (after that noted chief had suc- 
cumbed to his wound) under his brother Umar Singh, made a 
prolonged and desperate stand against the force under Sir Edward 
Lugard, who had promptly followed them across the Ganges, and 
kept it continually employed throughout the hot weather and rains; 


® Kunwasc Singh (commonly called ‘* Kooer Singh ”’) was the leader of all the 
rebels and mutineers in Shahabad and Bihar.—P, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


285 


during these months more than one sharp encounter took place in the 
recesses of the forest, and it was not until October and November, 
when Brigadier Douglas was in command (Lugard having been 
invalided), that the rebels were finally driven out of their fastnesses 
and defeated and dispersed, a consummation to which a body of 
mounted riflemen, under the command of Major Sir H. M. Havelock, 
materially contributed. In the operations of October 1858, in the 
Jagdeshpur jungles, the 2oth Punjab Infantry (now the 28th Bengal 
Infantry) were actively employed. 

Subsequent (o the fall of Lucknow three columns were set in 
motion to clear Rohilkhand of the rebels, and ultimately to converge 
on Bareilly. Of these, the first was commanged by Major-General 


Penny, who, without meeting the rebels in any decisive encounter, |- 


fell, during a night march, into an ambush at Kakrauli, and was 


killed. The second column, under Brigadier-General Walpole, was 


composed of the head-quarters of the 9th Lancers, the 2nd Punjab 


Cavalry, the Highland Brigade (42nd, 79th, and 93rd Foot) and the 


4th Punjab Infantry, with some artillery and a few sappers. Marching 
on the 7th April, little resistance was met with except at the fort of 
Ruiya, near Rhodamau, where, on the 15th, an imprudent attack, 
made without adequate reconnaissance, was the cause of a check 
. accompanied by heavy loss, of which the item most widely felt was 

_ the death of Brigadier the Hon’ble Adrian Hope. The third column, 
commanded first by Lieutenant-Colonel Coke, of the 1st Punjab In- 
fantry, and afterwards by Brigadier Jones (60th Rifles), moved from 
Roorkee, and was composed of Cureton’s Multani Cavalry, the 6oth 
Rifles, the 1st Sikh Infantry, the rst Punjab Infantry, and the 17th 
Punjab Infantry (now the asth Bengal Infantry). By this force the 
rebels were defeated on April 17th at Bhagaula, and again on the 
21st at Nagina, whence the column marched through Moradabad to 
Bareilly, arriving there on the 6th May, having on the preceding day 
defeated the rebels ina smart action on the banks of the Dojura 
River, in which a loss of 4 killed and 22 wounded was sustained. 
Here Jones’ column joined the division under the Commander-in- 
Chief, on whose advance Bareilly had, after a sharp action, been 
evacuated by the rebels. The force with Sir Colin Campbell 
included Walpole’s column, and besides artillery and engineers, was 
composed of two squadrons of the 6th Dragoon Guards, the 9th 
Lancers, the and Punjab Cavalry, Lind’s Multani Horse, and 


Operations in 
Rohilkhand. 


286 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Operations in 
Oudh. 


detachments of the Lahore Light Horse, the 1st and 5th Punjab Cavalry, 
and the 17th Irregular Cavalry; the 42nd, 64th, 78th, 79th, 82nd, and 
g3rd Foot, the 2nd and 22nd Punjab Infantry (the latter now the 
30th Bengal Infantry), and the Baluch Battalion (now the 27th 
Bombay Infantry). Brigadier Jones, having subsequently been sent 
to relieve Shahjahanpore, where a small garrison was beleaguered, was 
himself attacked (15th May) by the notorious rebel, Maulvi Ahmad- 
ulla of Fyzabad ; repulsing him with ease, Jones followed up the 
rebels and again defeated them at Mohamdi on the 25th May; 
and the rebels then retreated into Oudh. The Maulvi himself was 
shortly afterwards killed in a fight with a fellow-rebel, the Rajah of 
Pawayan, in the Shahjahanpore district. 

In Oudh numerous bodies of rebels kept the troops fully em- 
ployed. Against one of these, which had assembled near Bari, 
under the command of the Maulvi above-mentioned, Sir J. Hope 
Grant, in the month of April 1858, led a force which included a 
squadron of Hodson’s Horse, a squadron of the rst Sikh Irregular 
Cavalry, and a wing of the sth Punjab Infantry: he encountered 
them on the 13th and totally defeated them, and again overthrew 
them at Sirsi, near Nagar, on the 12th May. In the following month 
a strong column, under the same officer, moved out against the 
rebels: it was Composed of two squadrons of the znd Dragoon Guards, 
the 7th Hussars, 500 of Hodson’s Horse, 150 of the 1st Sikh Irregalar 
Cavalry, 250 mounted police, some horse artillery, the and and grd 
Battalions of the Rifle Brigade, and the sth Punjab Infantry. This 
force met and, after a sharp conflict, in which it sustained a loss of 
67 officers and men killed and wounded, inflicted a severe defeat 
on the rebels at Nawabganj on the 13th June. Onthe 22nd July, 
Grant with a detachment marched to the relief of Rajah Man Singh, 
an influential chief who, after much vacillation, had thrown in his lot 
with the British, and whom the rebels were now besieging in his 
fort of Shahganj, near Fyzabad; the enemy, however, retired with- 
out risking an action, and Fyzabad was re-occupied. A fortnight 
later another column started under Brigadier Horsford, and was 
afterwards joined by Sir J. Hope Grant and the and Battalion of 
the Rifle Brigade. It consisted, besides artillery, of the 7th Hussars, 
the goth Lancers, 300 of Hodson’s Horse, the 1st Sikh Irregular 
Cavalry, the 53rd Foot, the 1st Madras Fusiliers, and the sth Punjab 
‘Infantry. Without encountering any serious opposition the column 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


reached Sultanpore on the 2oth August, and found the enemy in 
great force on the opposite bank of the Gumti; the passage of the 
river was effected on the 27th, upon which the rebels made off. No 
further movement of importance took place in Oudh until after the 
termination of the rainy season. 

In other parts of the country, too, during this period. various 
forces were actively employed against the rebels. In the Soraon 
district a column under the command of Brigadier Berkeley, 
which included the 7th Punjab Infantry (now the roth Bengal 
Infantry) and detachments of the Lahore Light Horse and the 
Regiment of Ferozepore, was engaged in July 1858, in the 
reduction of the forts of Dhainawan (miscalled “ Dehaign” in 
the despatches) and Tiraul, from which the enemy were expelled 
with considerable loss. At the end of the following month a smal] 
force, consisting of detachments of the 2nd Punjab Cavalry and 
the 17th and 24th Punjab Infantry (now the 25th and 32nd Bengal 
Infantry), the whole under the command of Captain Browne, 
attacked a large body of rebels and mutineers at Sirpura, near 
Pilibhit, and after a severe contest, in which Browne was badly 
wounded and lost an arm, completely routed and dispersed them, 
killing upwards of 300 of them, including their leader. Some 
months later (15th January 1859), another severe action took place 
in this district, at Sissia-ghat, on the Sarda or Ghagra, in which the 
rebels were routed and driven over the river, but not before they had 
inflicted on the small British detachment opposed to them a loss of 
13 killed and 39 wounded, including an unusually large proportion 
of officers. Amongst the latter was Lieutenant Kemp, commanding 
a detachment of the Kumaon Levy, who was mortally wounded. 

Immediately on the termination of the rainy season the Com- 
mander-in-Chief (now Lord Clyde) entered on the task for which 
he had for some time been preparing, of expelling the rebels and 
mutineers from Oudh, in which province the bulk of them, flying 
from various quarters before the advance of the British troops, had 
now taken refuge. The measures by which this object was to be 
accomplished were very skilfully planned, and, briefly described, con- 
sisted of the simultaneous employment of a number of independent 
columns, the combined movements of which were to sweep the 
Baiswara district (lying between the Ganges and the Gumti) and 
drive the rebels beyond the Ghagra, and, that accomplished, by a 


287 


288 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


ec ete 


further series of movements to force them across the Rapti and into 
the Nepal hills. These plans were carried out with great thorough- 
ness and success by various columns commanded by Sir J. Hope 
Grant, Brigadiers Kelly (from Azamgarh), Wetherall (from Soraon), 
Pinckney, Evelegh, Horsford, Barker, Troup (from Rohilkhand), 
Rowcroft (from Gorakhpur), and other officers,—the whole under the 
direction of the Commander-in-Chief himself. To describe in detail 
the operations of these Several columns during the months from 
October 1858 to March 1859 would far exceed the scope of this 
work, but it may not be out of place to allude to some of the most 
notable of the many sharp encounters which took place during this 
period. On the 21st October, after having defeated a numerous 
body of rebels at Jamo, near Sandila, Brigadier Barker took the 
strong fort of Birwa by storm, after a severe conflict in which his 
force sustained losses to the extent of 15 men killed and 7 officers 
and 104 men wounded. On the 3rd November the column under 
the command of Brigadier Wetherall (which included part of the 
1st Punjab Cavalry, the goth Punjab Infantry—now the 21st Bengal- 
Infantry—and the Baluch Battalion) stormed the fort of Rampur 
Kassiah, on the Sai River, in Southern Oudh, and carried it 
after a prolonged contest and with the loss of 79 officers and men 
killed and wounded: the fort was held by 4,0oco rebels, of whom 
half were sepoys of the 17th, a8th, and 52nd Native Infantry; 300 of 
these were killed and the regimental colour of the 52nd was 
captured. On this occasion the 9th Punjab Infantry greatly dis- 
tinguished itself and sustained considerable loss, A few days later 
Brigadier Evelegh took the fort of Simri with trifling loss, and on 
the 24th of November the Commander-in-Chief, with the troops of 
two of the columns operating in Southern Oudh,completely defeated 
Beni Madho Singh, the most powerful of the Baiswara chiefs, at 
Doundiakhera and Baksar Ghat: this action was the final stroke in 
the clearance of the Baiswara district and opened the way to the 
transfer of the operations to the country lying to the north-east of the 
Ghagra, the tracts lying to the west of that river having already been 
pretty well cleared of rebel bands by the operations of Brigadiers 
Troup and Barker, the former of whom, advancing from the 
Rohilkhand side with the force under his command (which in- 
cluded Cureton’s Mooltani Horse and the 66th Gurkhas) had 
captured Mithauli on the 9th November and advanced to Biswah 


pte tem & ~ 


ee ee le a ~ 2am 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 289 


on the 1st December, at which point Brigadier Barker, who had been 
operating in the districts to the north-west of. Lucknow, also arrived 
on the 3rd. Sir J. Hope Grant crossed the Ghagra at Fyzabad on 
the 25th November, and defeated a body of the enemy on the left 
bank the same day: he subsequently advanced to Gonda and 
Sikrora and afterwards joined Brigadier Rowcroft at Tulsipur, at 
which place the force under the latter officer (which included part of | 
the 1st Punjab Cavalry and the Regiment of Ferozepore) had defeated 
Bala Rao, the brother of the Nana, on the 23rd December. A few 
days later Grant routed Bala Rao’s force at Kamda-Kot and captured 
fifteen of his guns. In the meantime Lord Clyde, who had crossed 
the Ghagra at Fyzabad on the 11th December, and moved north- 
wards by Sikrora, Bahraich and Nanpara, had defeated the rebels at 
Barjidia and captured the fort of Masjidia, and he finally on the last 
day of the year routed the enemy at Sidinhia Ghat, and drove them 
with heavy loss into and over the Rapti, thus accomplishing the task 
which he had set himself and effecting the reconquest of Oudh. 
Subsequently permission was given to the British forces to follow 
the rebels into the territory of Nepal, and in February 1859 Briga- 
dier Horsford with a force which included the 1st Punjab Cavalry 
and the sth Punjab Infantry crossed the Rapti and defeated the 
enemy at Sitka Ghat, capturing fifteen guns. In the following 
month Brigadier Kelly, whose force included Murray’s Jat Horse, 
the 3rd Sikh Infantry,and the 7th Punjab Infantry, twice defeated 
the rebels near Bhutwal, in the Nepal hills; and in May Sir J. 
Hope Grant again overthrew them in the Jarwa Pass. 

With the reconquest of Oudh the story of the War of the Indian 
Mutiny—so far as the Bengal Army is connected withit—comes practi- 
cally to an end. Not that the rebels had then entirely ceased to 
trouble the land, for up to the autumn of 1859 skirmishes still occa- 
sionally took place with parties of them emerging from the hills and 
jungles of Nepal, and in Bundelkhand and Central India a number 
of small flying columns were actively employed even up to the spring 
of 1860 in hunting down and dispersing wandering bands; but there 
was nothing in these operations to call for special notice or description 
here. Beyond the scope of this work, too, are the campaigns of | : 
1857-58 in Central India, for in the achievements of Sir Hugh Rose, 
Major-Genera] Whitlock, and other commanders, the regiments of the 
Bengal Army bore nojpart, except the unenviable one of swelling the 

U 


290 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


North-West 
Frontier 


Hindustani 


Fanatics, 1837. 


ranks of the enemy with their mutinous sepoys. One honourable 
exception, however, must be made, namely, that of the 31st Native 
Infantry,—now “the and (the Queen’s Own) Bengal (Light) Infantry,” 
whose conduct during the trying months of the hot weather of 1857 
was beyond praise—an example to other corps, which it would have 
been well for the latter had they copied. However, the regiment took 
no part in the more extensive operations which ensued, although it 
was constantly engaged against the rebels in the Saugor district 
throughout the whole of 1857 and 1858. 

The general rewards granted for the mutiny were a medal, with 
clasps for Delhi, for the defence, the relief and the capture of 
Lucknow, and for Central India; and six months’ batta, with extra 
special batta for the siege of Delhi, the defence of Lucknow, and the 
so-called ‘‘ defence of Arrah.” Every native soldier in the original 
garrison of Lucknow received the Order of Merit. ByG.G.O. No. 4 
of 1864 the regiments engaged in those operations were permitted 
to bear on their colours the words—“ Deu,” ‘‘ Lucknow,” and 
“ CENTRAL Inp1a.” 

Thus, after a struggle of more than two years, disappeared the last 
smouldering embers of this great revolt, which had at one time 
threatened to entirely overthrow British supremacy in Northern India, 
and toundo the work of a hundred years. To a great part of the 
Bengal Army of the Company the mutiny was a dishonourable and 
suicidal death ; but from its remains arose, phcenix-like, a new Army 
more efficientand more valuable, and destined to win a renown as 
glorious as that which had been gained under Adams and Munro; 
Goddard and Coote, and Cornwallis, and Lake, and Ochterlony. 


Whilst the turmoil of the mutiny was occupying all men’s minds 
both in India and at home, there was little time to consider the 
affairs of the Punjab Frontier; but any who turned their eyes in that 
direction must have been more and more impressed with the pru- 
dence of a policy which, by the employment of vigorous measures 
and capable men, had, inthe short space of seven years, not only 
secured the faithful allegiance of the Punjab, but had even succeeded 
in curbing to some extent the unruly spirits on its borders. 

During 1857 and 1858 only two small outbreaks occurred on 
the North-West Frontier, and both were occasioned by the conduct of 
some Hindustani fanatics who had settled amongst the Khudu 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


‘Khels, and who now, in the summer of 1857, raised the standard of 
religious war in the villages of Shekh Jana and Narinji, on the Yu- 
safzai border. Detachments of the Peehawar Mountain Train Battery 
and of the and Punjab Cavalry and the sth Punjab Infantry captured 
the village of Shekh Jana onthe and July, and on the 31st of the 
same month the fortified village of Narinji was taken by a force 
composed of detachments of the above-named corps and of the 4th 
Punjab Infantry, with a loss on our side of five killed and twenty-one 
wounded. On the 3rd of the following month a strong column of 
about 1,400 men, which included detachments of the Peshawar 
Mountain Train Battery and of the 2nd Punjab Cavalry, the ast 
Native Infantry, and the sth, 6th, and 16th Punjab Infantry, 
again moved against the village of Narinji, where the fanatics, aided 
by some of the Swat and Chamla tribes, had re-assembled in greater 
strength than before, and destroyed it after a little opposition, and 
with the loss of only one killed and eight wounded. In all these 
' affairs the British forces were commanded by Major Vaughan. 

In consequence of an outrage on the Assistant Commissioner of 
Yusafzai, another expedition was despatched against the Hindustani 
fanatics and the Khudu Khels in April 1858. The force was 
under the command of Major-General Sir Sydney John Cotton, 
K.c.B.,and was composed of detachments of the Peshawar Light 
Horse, the 7th and 18th Irregular Cavalry, and the Guides 
Cavalry; of the Peshawar Light Field Battery, the Peshawar 
Mountain Train Battery, and the Hazara Mountain Train Battezy ; 
of the Bengal Sappers and Miners; and of the 81at and 98th Foot; 
the 21st Native Infantry, the Regiment of Kalat-i-Ghilzai, the and 
Sikh Infantry, the 6th, 8th, 9th, 12th, and 18th Punjab Infantry, and 


the Guides Infantry ;—making up a total of 4,877 men. These. troops 


(excepting portions of the Peshawar and Hazara Mountain Train 
Batteries, the and Sikh Infantry and the 6th and 12th Punjab Infan- 
try, which moved up from Hazara) were assembled on the. left bank 
of the Kabul river, opposite Nowshera, and moving forward first 
crossed the frontier on the 26th April, Operating in several columns, 
the troops took and destroyed Panjtar, Chinglai, and Mangal Thana, 
the strongholds of the Khudu Khels and the fanatics, without ex- 
periencing any opposition. On the 3rd May an advance was made 
against Sitana, where the main colony of the fanatics was located, and 
on the following day that place was also destroyed,. after a sharp 
U 4a 


292 


Kaba! Khe) 
Wasiris 


Muhsud 
Waziris, 1860. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


_—_ 


engagement in which the 21st Native Infantry, the and Sikh Infantry, 


the Guides Infantry, and the 9th and 18th Punjab Infantry, were en- 
gaged, and in which a loss was sustained of one native officer (Subadar 
Dalu Mal, 18th Punjab Infantry) and five men killed, and one British 
officer, one native officer and twenty-seven men wounded. Three 
days later the force te-crossed the frontier, having accomplished all 
the objects of the expedition, The India medal was granted to the 
survivors of this expedition in 1869. 

In December 1859 a strong expeditionary force was despatched, 
under Brigadier-General N. B. Chamberlain, c.8., against the Kabul 
Khel Waziris, to punish them for harbouring marauders who had 
killed Captain Mecham, of the Bengal Artillery. It included detach- 
ments of Nos. 1 and 2 Punjab Light Field Batteries, of the Peshawar 
and Hazara Mountain Train Batteries, of the Guides Cavalry and 
Infantry, and of the Sappers and Miners; the and Punjab Cavalry ; 
the 4th Sikh Infantry, and the rst, 3rd, 4th, 6th, and 24th Punjab 


Infantry,—the whole amounting to nearly 4,000 men, with thirteen — 
guns. The force entered the Waziri country by the Gandiob Pass — 


on the 2and December, and on the same daya column composed of 
the Peshawar Mountain Train Battery, the Guides Infantry, and the 4th 
Sikh Infantry, encountered the Kabul Khels at Maidani; they met 
with a brave resistance ; but the enemy, being ill armed, were soon 
repulsed with but small loss on ourside. The Waziri encampments 
were destroyed, and on the succeeding days various forays were made 
into the hills, resulting in the capture of some of the flocks and herds 
of the enemy. The tribesmen eventually made submission, and the 
objects of the expedition having, as far as possible, been accom- 
plished, the force returned across the frontier, having lost one killed 
and eighteen wounded. The troops engaged in the operations 
received the India medal in 1869. 

Of all the border tribes, none was more notorious for turbulence 
than the Mahsud Waziris. For many years the list of their offences 
had been increasing, until in March, 1860, they attacked the town of 
Tank, and were only prevented from sacking the place by the vigour 
and gallantry of Risaldar Saadat Khan and a detachment of 158 
men of the sth Punjab Cavalry, which was stationed there. It was 
recognised that the punishment of the tribe could no longer be 
delayed, and the formation of an expeditionary force for that pur- 
pose was therefore directed. The following troops were accordingly 


ee re re ete 


= tt ee oat, acter 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 293 


assembled at Tank on the 16th April, under the command of Briga- 
dier-General Chamberlain :—Detachments of Nos. 2 and 3 Punjab 
Light Field Batteries, of the Peshawar and Hazara Mountain Train 
Batteries, and of the Guides Cavalry, the 3rd Punjab Cavalry and the 
Mooltani Cavalry; the rst Company of Bengal Sappers and Miners ; 
the Guides Infantry; the 4th Sikh Infantry ; the 1st, and, 3rd, 4th, 
6th, 14th, a4th (Pioneers) and 25th (Gurkha) Punjab Infantry; and 
the 6th Punjab Police Battalion,—the whole numbering over 5,000 
men, with thirteen guns. The force entered the Mahsud country by 
the Tank Zam on the 17th April, and reached Palosin on the follow- 
ing day. Leaving a portion of his force at this place, under Lieut- 
enant-Colonel Lumsden, Chamberlain advanced up the Shahur Zam 
on the 20th for the purpose of reconnoitring the route in that direc- 
tion, and reached a point within fourteen miles of Kaniguram, the 
chief town of the Mahsud Wasziris, on the 23rd; as he had no in- 
tention of attacking Kaniguram from this direction, he fell back on 
the 24th; and, retracing his steps, encamped on the 26th within a 
short distance of Palosin. The force left at that place had in the 
meantime had a sharp experience of Waziri tactics, having been sud- 
denly attacked at revetlle on the 23rd by a body of three thousand 
of the enemy, who made a desperate attempt to rush Lumsden’s camp. 
The attack was delivered with determined bravery, and was not re- 
pulsed before considerable loss had been inflicted on both sides, that 
on ours amounting to no less than 63 killed and 166 wounded. Some 
days were now passed in making preparations for an advance on 
Kaniguram by the northern route, through the Tank Zam ; during this 
period the Mahsuds made an offer of submission, but as our terms 
were unpalatable to them, the negociations were without result. On 
the and May Chamberlain advanced to Shingi Kot, and on the morn. 
ing of the 4th he reached the Barari Pass, which the enemy were 
found to be holding in great strength,—variously reported at from 
4,000 to 7,000 men. Two columns of attack were immediately 

formed to assail the heights on either side of the pass ; that on the} 
left, under Lieutenant-Colonel Lumsden, met with scarcely any re- 
sistance ; that on the right, composed of the Hazara Mountain Train 
Battery and the Ist, and, and 3rd Punjab Infantry, under Lieutenant- 
Colonel Green, which had to move over most difficult ground, was 
fiercely opposed and its first assault repulsed by the enemy, but 
eventually, after a severe contest, the breastworks were carried and 


294 


The Abor 


a 


The Second 
China War. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


the enemy put to flight, though not without severe loss on our 
side, Lieutenant Aytoun, 94th Foot, attached to the and Punjab 
Infantry, one Native Officer and twenty-eight men having been 
killed, and Lieutenant Ruxton, 3rd Punjab Infantry, five Native 
officers and eighty men wounded,—a total of 116 casualties. On 
the 5th the force continued its advance, and the same day 
reached Kaniguram, no further opposition having been offered. 
On the goth the force marched northwards and on the following 
day reached Makin, the next most important town of the 
Mahsuds, which, as the enemy still stubbornly refused to submit, 
was destroyed onthe rith. The failure of supplies now rendered a 
further stay in the hills undesirable, and continuing his course by 
the Khaisora route, Chamberlain emerged from the mountains at 
Spinwam, in the Bannu Valley, on the 18th May, his force having 
during these operations sustained a total loss of 100 killed and 361 
wounded. For his services in these operations Brigadier-General 
Chamberlain was created a Knight Commander of the Order of the 
seg all the survivors of the force received the India medal 
in 1869. 

Nor at the same time was the North-East Frontier entirely free from 
the troubles arising from turbulent and savage neighbours. A small 
expedition, numbering some 140 fighting men, with two howitzers, the 
whole under the command of Captain Lowther, 1st Assam Light 
Infantry, was despatched in 1858 against the Abors, a predatory 
tribe inhabiting a range of hills on the borders of Upper Assam, but 
it failed to effect its object and was obliged to retire. In February of 
the next year another force was despatched into the same country, 
under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Hannay, This was com- 
posed of 60 men of No. 4 Naval Brigade, Indian Navy ; 35 men of the 
Assam Local Artillery, with two howitzers and two mortars; 166 men 
of the rst Assam Light Infantry; and 150 Auxiliaries, Pashi and 


.| Rong-Kong, the principal villages of the Meyong Abors, were 


reached on the 27th February, and though strongly situated and 
defended by many stockades they were, in spite of an obstinate 
resistance, stormed on the same day, with a loss on our side of one 
man killed and one officer (Indian Navy) and forty-three men 
wounded. 

The relations between Great Britain and China, which had been 


in a more or less strained and unsatisfactory condition ever since 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 295 


the conclusion of the first war, were openly ruptured in October 
1856, in consequence of the Chinese authorities at Canton having 
seized a vessel under English colours, and refused redress for the out- 
rage. Negociations having failed to secure® reparation, hostilities 
were begun by Sir Michael Seymour, the British Admiral, who 
on the 23rd October took possession of the Canton forts, and on 
the 2gth captured a portion of the city, with a loss of two'killed and 
eleven wounded. Hostilities continued in a desultory way for some 
time, and eventually led to the despatch of an expedition from Eng- 
land, but the out-break of the Mutiny caused the troops (the 23rd, 
- 8and, goth and 93rd Foot) to be diverted to India, and thus little 
was done during 1857 to settle the Chinese difficulty, though slight 
engagements took place from time totime. At the end of December 
1857, with the assistance of a French force, Canton was stormed and 
captured, and a few months later reinforcements arrived from India in 
the shape of three faithful regiments of the old Bengal Army. The 
first of these was the 7oth Native Infantry, which had set the example 
of volunteering for foreign service, while their comrades were mutiny- 
ing in the North-West: they arrived in China in February 1858, 
and were followed in May by the 47th and the 65th Native Infantry. 
In June a treaty of peace was concluded at Tien-tsin, and the war 
was supposed to be over, but it was little regarded by the Chinese 
authorities at Canton, who continued as aggressive as ever, and there 
were consequently frequent collisions between our troops and the 
Chinese “braves.” The 7zoth were engaged in the White Cloud 
Mountain operations in June 1858, and in the expeditionto Nam- 
tow in August, losing on the latter occasion Lieutenant Danvers, who 
was mortally wounded. In an action at Shek-tsin in January 1859, a 
portion of the 65th was engaged and had two men wounded. 

The treaty of Tien-tsin did not in any way terminate our 
difficulties with China: its terms were not only disregarded by the 
authorities at Canton but ignored all over the country; the approach 
of the plenipotentiaries to Pekin was barred by the closing of the 
mouth of the Pei-ho river, and an attempt by Rear-Admiral Hope to 
force a passage was disastrously repulsed (25th June 1859) witha 
loss of 81 killed and 345 wounded, and three vessels sunk. The 
allied British and French Governments had now no choice but to 
enforce the details of the treaty, and a force more equal to the re- 
quirements of the case was despatched to China in the early part of 


296 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


the following year. Hostilities were resumed in April 1860, and the 


island of Chusan occupied. By the 33rd of April the British force, 
under Lieutenant-General Sir J. Hope Grant, was collected on the 
promontory of Kow-loon, adjoining Hong-Kong. It included 
the following Bengal troops: —The 1st Sikh Irregular Cavalry (then 
known as Probyn’s Horse), Fahe’s Horse (specially raised for this 
service), the Regiment of Ludhiana, and the 8th, 11th,1 5th (Pioneers), 
and 19th Punjab Infantry. . Of these corps, the Regiment of Ludhiana 
and the 11th Punjab Infantry were soon after sent to garrison 
Shanghai, and the 19th was detached on other duty. These corps 
consequently did not share in the operations of the allied forces in 
Northern China. 

After considerable delays the allies sailed for the Pei-ho river, 
and disembarked on the rst August near Peh-tang, which town 
was occupied without opposition. An advance was made on the 
13th of the same month, when the enemy were defeated at Sinho: 
on this occasion the Tartar horse was driven from the field in 
disorder by the two regiments of Indian cavalry and two squadrons 
of the 1st Dragoon Guards. Two days later a further advance 
secured the fort of Tang-ku. In the various skirmishes up to this 
point our losses amounted to only three killed and twenty-seven 
wounded. 

The way was now open for an attack on the Taku forts, and on 
the arst August, at 5 A.M., a vigorous cannonade was opened on both 
sides and continued for three hours; after which a combined assault 
was made by the allies on the inner North Fort. The Chinese fought 
with great bravery and determination, and it was only after a severe 
conflict that the place was eventually carried. The outer North 
Fort was then attacked and taken without opposition, and the South 
Forts were evacuated by the enemy the same day. Our losses in the 
storming of the inner North Fort amounted to 17 men killed, and 
21 officers and 163 men wounded, while the casualties in the allied 
French Force reached a total of 130. 

The town of Tien-tsin was entered on August 24th, and after a 
fortnight’s halt the march was continued, and Ho-sei-wu, half-way to 
Pekin, reached on September 13th. Leaving that place on the 18th 
September, the allied force came on the Chinese army drawn up at 
a place called Chang-tsia-wan on the Chow-Ho. In the battle 
which ensued the French force made a flank attack on the right, sup- 


wo ee ene FO agg nee wee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


297 


ported by a squadron of Fane’s Horse, which gallantly charged and 
drove back the whole of the Tartar cavalry in that quarter. On the 
left the heavy masses of the enemy wére charged ‘and thrown into 
_ Confusion by only 100 of the 1st Sikh Irregular Cavalry, led by Major 

- Probyn; the 15th Punjab Infantry, pushing on after the defeated 
enemy with great spirit and advancing beyond Chang-tsia-wan, 
captured a large Chinese camp and several guns. The allied forces 
in this battle did not exceed 4,000 men, while those of the Chinese 
were estimated at 20,000, and the enemy lost 600 in killed alone, 
while the British loss was no more than ao, and the French only 15. 

On the 21st September the march was resumed and an action with 
the enemy took place on the same day near Tang-chow, in which 
the rst Dragoon Guards and Fane’s Horse distinguished themselves. 
The enemy were at once defeated with great loss, our own casu- 
alties amounting to no more than two men killed, and three officers 
and twenty-six men wounded. Aftera delay of about two weeks the 
advance towards Pekin was resumed on the sth October, and the 
Summer Palace, outside the city, was reached and occupied without 
opposition on the 7th. On the following day some prisoners who had 
been treacherously captured by the Chinese near Tang-chow on the 
aist cf the preceding month were brought into camp, and nine more 
were given up on the 13th; the remainder (sixteenin number), 
including Lieutenant Anderson and nine sowars of Fane’s Horse, had 
died in captivity from the barbarous ill-treatment to which they 
had been subjected. 


Pekin surrendered on the 13th of October: the treaty of Tien- 
tsin was ratified in the course of the month, and on the 7th and 8th of 
November the British Army left the capital. The rst Sikh 
Irregular Cavalry and the 8th, 15th and 19th Punjab Infantry returned 
almost immediately to India; Fane’s Horse was detained at Tien- 
tsin until the following October; the Regiment of Ludhiana did not 
embark for India unti] April 1861; while the r1th Punjab Infantry 
was employed in and around Shanghai until May 1862, and was 
constantly engaged. in skirmishes with the Taiping rebels. 

The 1st Sikh Irregular Cavalry, Fane’s Horse, and the 8th and 15th 
Punjab Infantry received permission in 1362 to bear the words “ Taku 
Forts" and “ Prxin” on their colours and appointments (G.G.O. 
No. 133 of 1862), but it was not until 1882 (G. G. O. No. 188) that 
the remaining regiments which had served in China (now the 7th, 


298 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Sikkim Expe- 
dition, 1860-6z. 


Reorganization 
of the Army, 
1860-61. 


roth, 11th, rsth, 22nd and 27th Bengal Infantry) were authorised 
to bear similarly the word “ Caina,’—with the dates “ 1858-59,” or 
“ 1860-62,” according to the operations in which they had taken part. 
Medals were granted forthe operations of 1857-59 and of 1860-62, 
with clasps for the Taku Forts and Pekin, but were not allowed to 
corps employed in garrison work at Chusan, Shanghai, and Canton. 

One more small affair requires notice; this was the Sikkim 
expedition, which was necessitated by an unprovoked attack on the 
Political Agent and his escort in November 1860. The force em- 
Ployed was about 1,800 strong, and was commanded by Lieutenant- 
Colonel J. C. Gawler, of the 73rd Foot; it was composed of wings of 
the 6th Foot, the 3rd Sikh Infantry, and the 73rd Native Infantry, the 
head-quarters and a detachment of the Bengal Police Battalion (Rat- 
tray’s Sikhs), and some other details. The ex, edition concentrated at 
Darjeeling in December 1860and January 1861, and a forward move- 
ment was made onthe rst February. The enemy collected in force 
on the left bank of the Rangeet, but did not dispute the passage 
of the river; nor did they at any time during the operations risk a con- 
flict with the British troops. Colonel Gawler advanced as far ag 
the town of Tamlung, when the Sikkim rajah sued for peace, and 
a treaty was concluded on the 29th March. 

The course of events has now brought this sketch down to the 
period when the Bengal Army, remodelled and re-organised after the 
great struggle of 1857, assumed the shape in which, with but smal] 
modifications, it has existed ever since. This chapter may be closed 
by a cursory survey of the changes so produced and the re-organisa- 
tion which followed them. | 

The confusion occasioned by the outburst of the mutiny, and the 
isolation of the main army from the head-quarters of Government, 
afford sufficient explanation of the difficulty which attends any search 
after definite orders for the raising of the many regiments which were 
hastily formed to take the places of those which had mutinied, and to 
put down the rebellion. Nor in many cases were official orders pub- 
lished,—the only authority being a letter from the Commissioner, or 
even, perhaps, verbal instructions. Thus, in quick succession, sprang 
up Hodson’s, Wale’s, Murray’s, Cureton’s, and Lind’s Horse ; the 2nd, 
3rd, and 4th Sikh Irregular Cavalry; Beatson’s, Meade’s, Robarts’ 
and Alexander’s Horse; the Benares, the Rohilkhand, and the rst 
and and Mabhratta Cavalry. Of infantry there were the “Sikh 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


299 


a aa, a ary 


Volunteers” (formed from the faithful Punjabis of regiments below 
Allahabad), the Delhi Pioneers, eighteen regiments of Punjab 
Infantry and a number of levies formed at various places in the North- 
West Provinces. All through the autumn of 1857 and the spring Of 
1858, as regiment after regiment of the old army joined the stream 
of mutiny, fresh troops succeeded to the places deserted by their 
faithless predecessors. It is unnecessary here to enter into the details 
of all these corps, nor to trace the fate of the regiments whose history 
ended so disgracefully in1857. A few facts may, however, be noted, 
as marking the rapid development of the new Army. “By G.G. O. 
No. 736 of 1858 the formation of four regiments of European light 
cavalry was ordered, in substitution of eight of the regular Bengal 
Native cavalry corps, and the officers of the 1st, and, 3rd, 4th, 6th 
ath, gth and roth Light Cavalry were transferred to the new regiments. 
On the 9th September 1859, an order (G.G.O. No. 1377) was pub- 
lished by the Governor-General detailing the regiments and parts of 
regiments which had shown themselves “‘ proof against temptation, 
fanaticism, and threats,” and mentioning the special services of all 
such corps. The order concludes by enumerating the regiments 
which would thenceforward cease to exist in the Bengal Army. In 
June of the same year, as active operations against the rebels became 
by degrees confined to a few isolated districts, the reduction of the 
’ exceptional numbers of troops in Bengal was commenced ; a number 
of corps, including the Sikh and Gurkha regiments, were reduced 
to 700 sepoys, formed in ten companies of 70 men each; the 
newly-raised Hindustani levies were brought down to a strength 
of 600; and the whole of the irregular cavalry to 420 sowars per 
regiment. 

On the 5th of January 1860 orders were issued for the disband. 
ment of the 3rd Regiment of Hodson’s Horse, while on the same date 
volunteers were called for to form another irregular corps for service 
in China. There the new regiment won distinction as ‘“ Fane’s 
Horse,” and it still exists as the 19th Bengal Lancers. 

G.G.O. No. 903, dated the 11th September 1860, ordered the 
transfer from the control of the Punjab Government to that of the Com. 
mander-in-Chief of the four regiments of Sikh irregular cavalry and 
of the Punjab infantry regiments numbered from 7th to 24th: this 
order was to take effect from the rsth February 1859. 


300 THE SERVICES OF THE 


In 1861 orders were published re-organising the confused crowd 
of regiments, old and new, regular and irregular, which the storm of 
the mutiny had left to represent the army of Bengal. The cavalry 
was re-organised by G. G. O. No. 494, dated 31st May 1861. Inthe 
August of the preceding year there existed seventeen native cavalry 
regiments under the orders of the Government of India and twenty- 
nine under the Commander-in-Chief. Of the former, the regiment , 
of Nagpur Cavalry was disbanded ; Meade’s Horse was incorporated 
with the Central India Horse ; the remainder, including the Guides 
Cavalry and five Punjab regiments, remained unchanged. Of the 
other twenty-nine, ten were disbanded,—namely, the 3rd, oth, rath 
and 16th Irregular Cavalry, Alexander’s Horse, the Benares Horse, 
and the rst Mahratta Horse, the 3rd Sikh Irregular Cavalry, the | 
Ramgarh Irregular Cavalry, and Lind’s Pathan Cavalry. The 
remainder were numbered and designated as follows :— 


ist Bengal Cavalry,—formerly the 
ist Irregular Cavalry. 


and Bengal Cavalry,—formerly the 


and Irregular Cavalry. 

3rd Benga) Cavalry,—formerly the 
4th Irregular'Cavalry. 

4th sah ig Cavalry,—formerly the 

gular Cavalry. 

5th Bengal Cavalry — focuses the 
7th Irregular Cavalry. 

6th Benga! Cavalry,—formerly the 
8th Irregular Cavalry 

7th Bengal Cavalry —Aocnierly the 
17th Irregular Cavalry. 

8th Bengal Cavalry,—fcrmerly the 
18th Irregular Cavalry. 

oth Bengal Cavalry,—formerly the 
i? Regiment of Hodson’s 


orse. 
1oth Bengal Cavalry,—formerly the 
and Regiment of Hodson’s 
Horse. 


11th Bengal Cavairy,—formerly the 
sst Sikh Irregular Cavalry 
(Wale’s Horse). 

1ath Bengal Cavalry,—formerly the 
and Sikh Irregular Cavalry. 

13th Bengal Cavalry,—formerly the 
4th Sikh Irregular Cavalry. 

14th §=Bengal 
Murray’s Jat Horse. 

s5th Bengal Cavalry,—formerly 
Cureton’s Mooltani Horse. 

16th Bengal Cavalry,—formerly the 
Rohilkhand Horse. 

17th Bengal Cavalry,—formerly 
Robarts’ Horse. 

18tk Bengal Cavalry,—formerly the 
2nd Mahratta Horse. 

19th Bengal Cavalry,—formerly 
Fane’s Norse. 


Each regiment was to consist of 420 sowars, in six troops, as 


follows:— 


3 Risaldars, on R300, 250 and 200 a month, respectively 
3 Ressaidars, on R150,135 and 120. 


3 WurdrMajor, on Rigo. 


Cavalry,—formerly | 


ee ee ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


6 Jemadars, 2 each on R80, 70 and 60. 
6 Kot-Dafadars, on R47. 
48 Dafadars, R. 8 
6 Nishanbardars, }on 2 
6 Trumpeters, on R34. 
420 Sowars, on R27. 


The first reorganisation of the infantry had been notified a 
month before—(G.G.O. No. 400, dated 3rd May 1861); by it the 
_ strength of all infantry corps was fixed at 600 privates, each regiment 
being divided into eight companies of the following strength :— 


1 Subadar. 5 Naiks. 
1 Jemadar. 2 Drummers, 
5 Havildars. * 75 Privates. 


Corps in possession of honorary colours were allowed toretain the 
special Native officers already allowed for the purpose of carrying 


them. 
In August 1860 the number of infantry regiments existing was as 


follows :— 


Regular Infantry : . ie Sunder the Commander-in-Chief, 


Irregular and extra infantry . ° 
i 18 under the Commander-in-Chief, and 
PunjabInfantry . - + + 7 under the Government of India. 


Sikh and Guides Infantry . ° 5 

Hyderabad Contingent . . «© 6\, under the Government of India. 
Nagpur Irregular Force . 7. 3 

Local corps a see ee 7 ° 


The fifteen regular regiments were the 4th, 21st, 31st, 3snd, 33rd, 
4and, 43rd, 47th, 58th, sgth, 63rd, 6sth, 66th (Gurkhas), 7oth, and 
73rd. Of these the 4th, 58th, and 73rd were now disbanded. 

The 30 irregular and extra regiments were — 


The Regiment of Kalat-i-Ghilzai. The Shekhawati Battalion. 

The Regiment of Ferozepore. The Alipore Regiment. 

The Regiment of Ludhiana. The Regiment of Lucknow. 

The Nasseri Battalion. The Loyal Purbiah Regiment. . 
The Sirmoor Rifle Regiment. The Kamrup Regiment. 

The Kumaon Battalion. ist Gwalior Regiment. 

The Extra Gurkha Regiment. and ,, Regiment. 


The Bhagalpur Hill Rangers. 


302 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


The 1st Assam Light Infantry Battalion. {| The Bareilly Levy 


The 2nd_,, oe ‘i os The Meerut Levy. 

The Sylhet iw a s The Agra Levy. 

The Arakan Battalion. The Aligarh Levy. 

The Allahébad Levy. The Shabjahanpur Levy. 
The Fatehgarh Levy. The Cawnpore Levy. 
The Maiopuri Levy. The Moradabad Levy. 


The Kumaon Levy. 

Of these the Nasseri Battalion and the and Gwalior Regiment and 
the last three of the levies were broken up. 

The Kamrup and Arakan Battalions and the Bhagalpur Hill 
Rangers were transferred to the police, and either broken up or 
absorbed in the general police. 

Of the Punjab regiments, the first six and the last were under the 
Government of India. The remainder were under the Commander- 
in-Chief, and of these the roth, rath, 13th and 14th were broken up. 

The four Sikh regiments and the Corps of Guides remained un- 
changed. 

Of the local corps, the Pegu Light Infantry Battalion and one Nagpur 
regiment were broken up; the Mhair and Mhairwara Battalions were 
regarded as police. 

The remaining line regiments of the Army were now numbered 
and designated as follows := 


1st to rath Bengal Native Infantry,—formerly the a1st, 31st, 33nd, 33rd, 
4and, 43rd, 47th, soth, 63rd, 65th, 66th (Gurkhas) and 7oth Native Infantry. 

13th to 2and Bengal Native Infantry,—formerly the Regiment of Kalat-i- 
Ghilzai, the Shekhawati Battalion, the Regiment of Ferozepore, the Regiment 
of Ludhiana, the Sirmoor Rifle Regiment, the Kumaon Battalion, the Extra 
Gurkha Regiment, the Regiment of Lucknow, the Loyal Purbiah Regiment 
and the Alipore Regiment. 

23rd to 36th Bengal Native Infantry,—formerly the 7th, 8th, oth, 1th, 
1Sth, 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, aoth, 21st, 22nd, 23rd and 24th Punjab Infantry. 

37th to 45th Bengal Native Infantry,—formerly the Allahabad, Fatehyarh, 
Mainpuri, Bareilly, Meerut, Agra, Aligarh, and Shahjahanpur Levies and the 
1st Gwalior Infantry. 

Goth to th Bengal Native Infantry,—formerly the 1st and 2nd Assam 
Light Infantry Battalions, and the Sylhet Light lofantry Battalion, 


Within six months, however, under instructions from the Secretary 
of State, this arrangement was again altered; all the Gurkha corps, 
including the 66th Light Infantry (the original Nasseri Battalion) were 
withdrawn from the line, and numbered separately froin the rst to 
the 4th,—the Hazara Gurkha Battalion, attached to the Punjab 
Irregular Force, being numbered the §th. 


( 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 303 

The line regiments of Bengal Native Infantry were then (G. G. O. 
No. 990, dated October 29th, 1861) finally numbered in the follow- 
ing order :— 

cw 

Namber, 

a jal Old number or name. Old number or name. 
Infantry 

st. t Native Infantry. . | 15th Pun jab Infantry (Pioneers). 
sad ; ai Native (Light) infantry. - | 16th a ae aa 
grd_. | 3and Native Infantry. i7th ,, ss 

ath e 33rd ry) ry) 18th oD 90 

sth .| 4and Native (Light) Infantry. 19th ,, me 

6th .| 43r 99 »» 20th ,, 9s 

ath .| 47th Native Infantry. 21st 55 a 

8th .|soth ,, ” 22nd 45 ry) 

gth ° 63rd 90 cy) 23rd EP 99 . 
loth .|/6sth ,, ‘ie oe $s oo (Pioneers). 
11th ° oth 9” 39 lahabad Levy. 
12th =. | Regiment of Kalat-i-Ghilzai, Fatehgarh__,, 
13th =. | Shekhawati Battalion. Mainpuri ca 
14th =. | Regiment of Ferozepore. Bareilly ae 
15th .| Regiment of Ludhiana. Meerut me 
16th .| Regiment of Lucknow. A 
17th =. | Loyal Purbiah Regiment. Aligarh ‘ 
18th .|Alipore Regiment (Calcutta . | Shahjahanpur Levy. 

Militia oo . | 1st Gwalior Regiment. 

19th .| 7th Punjab Infantry. d ./| 1st Assam Light Infantry Batta- 
zoth ./8th ,, ~ lion. 
aist .| oth 99 9» ~|and ,, 3 Of 9 ry 
2nd .jiith ,, ‘+ 44th .| Sylhet Light Infantry Battalion. 

At the same time the Artillery and the Corps of Engineers Bengal 
whose great deeds in the past had added so much to the glory of the | Artitery and 
Bengal Army, and whose lists had given somany honourable names 
to history, were transferred to the Royal Corps, and ceased to exist as 
separate bodies. 

No notice has been made of the greatest. change of all, namely, the | transfer of the 
transfer of the Indian forces to the Crown. This event, however, | indian Army 


though of great importance politically, affected the Native Army 
in little more than name and in the conditions of service of its British 
Officers, into the details of which it is neither necessary nor con- 
venient to enter here. The announcement was made on the rst 
November 1858, that Her Majesty had assumed the Government of 
India ; and from that day the Honorable East India Company passed 
away into the pages of history. 


304 THE SERVICES OF THE 


aeeace ates As far as concerned the arming and equipment of the Native 


soldiers, but few changes were made in these years, fraught with such 
important reforms elsewhere. The attempt to introduce the new 
Enfield rifle with its novel cartridge was made one of the direct 
causes Of, or at any rate the pretext for, the mutiny; and in 
consequence the infantry remained for many years after with no better 
weapon than the old smooth-bore percussion musket. Inthe cavalry, 
however, anew weapon was introduced, called the“ Victoria carbine,” 
with which all regiments were armed (G.O.G. G. 27th April 1860). 
Other innovations were the introduction of k4aks clothing for native 
regiments; and the abolition of the leather stock, a small matter 
seemingly, but one which made a good deal of difference in the 
soldier’s comfort. 

So ends the third great division of the military history of 
Bengal. With this chapter we seem to pass altogether to another 
epoch—to turn from ancient history to modern. The great Come 
pany which raised the fabric of the British Empire in India has 
passed away; the regiments it created, which won its battles and up- 
held its power, have disappeared ; but a new Army has arisen, and we 
turn now from the ashes of the past to tell of the living deeds of the 
Bengal Army of to-day. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


305 


Chapter IX—(186a—1879). 

Marshman’s Abridgement—Bhotan War (Rennie)—~Abyssinian War (Holland and 
Hosier)—Lushai Expedition, ’71 (Woodthorpe)—Official Papers on the Lushai 
Expedition—Official Papers on Disturbances in the Khasiah Hills, ’62—Perak 
and the Malays (McNair)—Our Malay Conquests (Maxwell)}—Official Papers on 
the Naga Expeditions of '75, ’78, ’79, ’80—Frontier racecnos (Paget and 
Mason)—G.G.O., G.O.C.C., and S.O. 


In the chapter which follows we must pass in review a long period 
of comparative inactivity for the Indian Army, although the little wars 
which are inseparable from a great colonial empire afford constant 
and sufficient incident to prove that service on the Indian frontier 
offers more experience of active soldiering than is to be found in 
any position elsewhere. 

‘The first of these small expeditions was on the North-East Frontier, 
in suppression of a rebellion of the tribes in the Khasiah and Jaintiah 
Hills of Assam in December 1862, and the two following months. 
The country had been in a disturbed state for several months and 
outrages had been frequent: it was not, however, until December that 
regular operations were commenced. The force in the disturbed 
districts was composed of the Eurasian Company of Artillery, the 
21st, 28th, 33rd, and 44th Bengal Native Infantry, the Bengal 
Military Police Battalion (‘‘Rattray’s Sikhs”), and some local 
military police, and was commanded by Colonel Dunsford. The 
first. engagement was an attack on a convoy escorted by a party of 
the 21st near Jaintiapur, in which a sepoy was killed. On the 2sth 
December a detachment of the 28th and a few of the 44th, under 
Lieutenant Sadleir, surprised and captured the rebel leader Ukiang 
Nongba. During January and February 1863 several engagements 
took place with the rebels, in which the 21st and 44th took the 
principal part, and the stockaded villages of Umkai, Umkiang and 
Nongbarai were captured. The losses in the operations were small, 
notwithstanding the difficulties of the country and the strength of some 
of the positions, and amounted in all to 3 killed and 19 wounded: 
among the latter were Lieutenant-Colonel W. Richardson (at 
Umkiang, sth January) and Captain A. I. Shuldham, of the 44th, 
and Lieutenants H. Collett (Naung-floot, and February) and R.S. 
Robertson (Sartiong, 23rd February), of the 21st Native Infantry. 


x 


re] ticas in 
and 

Jaintiah Hills, 

2060-63. 


306 


THE SERVICES OF THE, 


Ambela 
Expedition, 


The active operations terminated in March 1863. 

Towards the end of the same year the conduct of the Hindustani 
fanatics necessitated the despatch of an expedition against them 
and the tribes that were harbouring them, and this eventuated 
in the most severe and sanguinary conflict that had yet taken place 
on the North-West Frontier. These pestilent fanatics, when expelled 
from Sitana in 1858, had retired to Malka, on the northern face 
of the Mahaban Mountain, but they had subsequently returned to 
Sitana and had, for a series of years, by their raids and incursions, 
kept the Hazara and Yusufzai borders in a constant state of unrest. 
Contrary to their treaty obligations, the Gaduns and Utmanzais 
refused to expel the fanatics, and the troubles on the border having 
increased during the spring and summer of 1863, a recourse to 
military operations at last became unavoidable. The force detailed 
for the purpose of expelling the fanatics from their mountain fast- 
nesses and of punishing those who had aided and abetted them in 
their depredations, was placed under the command of Brigadier- 
General Sir N. B. Chamberlain, x.c.8., and was composed of the 
following corps :—Half of ‘C’ Battery, roth Brigade, Royal Artil- 
lery,® half of No. 3 Punjab Light Field Battery; the Peshawar 
Mountain Train Battery ; the Hazara Mountain Train Battery ; detach- 
ments of the Guides Cavalry and t1th Bengal Cavalry ; the 4th and 
sth Companies of Bengal Sappers and Miners; the 71st Foot 
(Highland Light Infantry) ; the rorst Foot (Royal Bengal Fusiliers) ; 
the 14th (Sikhs), 2oth (Punjab) and 32nd (Pioneers) Bengal Native 
Infantry; the Guides Infantry; the 1st, 3rd, 5th, and 6th Punjab 
Infantry ; and the 4th and sth Gurkha Regiments. The effective 
strength of the force was about 5,500 men. 

The advanced column, under Lieutenant-Colonel Wilde of the 
Guides, entered the Ambela Pass ¢ on the 2oth October, and having 
driven back small parties of the enemy which opposed its march, 
was followed later in the same day by the main column under Sir 
Neville Chamberlain. Intelligence was at this time received that 
the Bunerwals had been persuaded by the fanatics to take part in 
the hostilities against us ; and this report was confirmed on the 22nd 
when a reconnoitring force, which advanced as far as Kuria, in the 
Chamla valley, was attacked by the Bunerwals in its retirement and 


* Now the 35th Field Battery, Royal Artillery.—P., 
7 Called also the Panj-dara and the Sarkhawai Pass=P. 


Se ne ee eet ee any 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


307 


hard pressed by their superior numbers; the retirement was covered 
with great steadiness by the 2oth Native Infantry, which formed the 
rear-guard, and the force got back to camp after dark, having sus- 
tained a loss of 3 killed and 23 wounded, amongst the former of 
whom was Lieutenant Gillies, Hazara Mountain Battery. 

The hostility of the Bunerwals necessitated considerable altera- 
tions in the plan of the campaign, as an advance on Malka through 
the Chamla valley, with this powerful and warlike tribe menacing 
our left flank, was an operation too full of risk to be undertaken: 
The force, moreover, was quite inadequate for any such operation ; 
and the only alternatives were either to abandon the expedition 
and retire, or else to take up a defensive position and allow the 
combined tribes to break their strength against it. The latter ap 
peared to Chamberlain to be the plan best calculated to uphold the 
honour of our arms, and he adopted it accordingly. He therefore 
took up a position at the head of the pass, and this was held with 
slight modifications for several weeks, until the arrival of reinforce- 
ments. : 

On the 25th October, the picquets of the right defence being 
menaced by the Mahaban tribes, Major Keyes, who commanded on 
the spot, taking the initiative, attacked and dislodged the tribesmen 
from the position they had taken up on a neighbouring ridge, and 
following up the success, drove them, with heavy loss, from a coni- 
cal hill on which they had assembled in great force. On the 
following day the Bunerwals made a vigorous assault on the left flank 
of the position, on the Guru mountain, and especially on a picquet 
stationed on a rocky knoll known as the Eagle’s Nest. Lieute- 
nant-Colonel Vaughan, who commanded on this side, made his 
arrangements with great skill, and though the fighting continued 
for several hours, the enemy did not succeed in making any impres- 
sion on the defence; the 20th Native Infantry was again conspi- 
cuous by its steadiness, and a gallant charge was made by the 6th 
Punjab Infantry, which, however, suffered severely in its retirement. 
The attack was finally repulsed, but not before two British officers 
(Lieutenant Clifford, 1st Panjab Cavalry, a volunteer with the 3rd 
Punjab Infantry, and Lieutenant Richmond, 20th Native Infantry), 
Subadar-Major Mir Ali Shah, 20th Native Infantry, and 25 men 
had been killed, and one British officer, seven Native officers, and 
84 men wounded. The enemy, too, lost heavily, not less than 250 of 

| x9 


6 


308 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


ae 


| them having been killed, and of these more than thirty were Hindustan! 


fanatics. A simultaneous attack was made on the front of the camp, 
when one man was killed and one British officer and two men 
wounded. 

On the 27th the enemy were joined by large re-inforcements 
from Swat, Bajaur, and other parts of the country, and in fact we 
were now face to face with a general combination of almost all the 
tribes from the Indus to the borders of Afghanistan, the numbers in 
arms against us being not less than 15,000 men. On the goth a 
united and determined attack was made on the camp in front and on 
the right. In the latter quarter a small but important post, known as 
the “Crag Picquet,” held by a party of the rst Punjab Infantry, was 
rushed by the enemy in force and its defenders compelled to 
retire ; a detachment of the same regiment arriving, however, to the 
support of their picquet, recovered the post at the point of the 
bayonet, led in the most gallant manner by Major Keyes, Lieutenant 
Pitcher and Lieutenant Fosbery.® 

The front attack, made by the Swat contingent, was repulsed 
without difficulty, as also was a feeble effort against the defences 
on the left. Our losses in the day’s fighting amounted to 14 killed 
and 41 wounded, Major Keyes and Lieutenant Pitcher being 
amongst the latter. 

At this period a change in the line of communications was carried 
out, the line of the Ambela defile having become untenable in 
consequence of the hostility of the Bunerwals; a new line, leading 
down to the plains from the right of the position, through the 
villages of Khanpur and Sherdara, was decided upon, and working 
parties employed in cutting a new road towards Ambela along the 
western slopes of the ridge on the right of the position, to supersede 
that by the gorge of the pass, which was commanded to a great 
extent from the Guru mountain. The next engagement with the 
enemy, which took place on the 6th November, began in an attack 
on the detachments covering the working parties on this road; the 
tribesmen advanced with great boldness while the working parties 
were being withdrawn for the day, and a sanguinary conflict ensued, 
in which severe losses were sustained by our troops, in consequence 


® The gallant conduct of Lieutenants Pitcher and Fosbery was subsequently reward 
with the grant of the Victoria Crose.—P, ry quently ed 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


309 


of some of the covering parties having stood their ground too long 
after the general retirement began, and being overwhelmed by their 
assailants as they retreated. The casualties this day amounted to 
38 killed and 40 wounded, among the former being Major Harding, 
Commandant of the 2nd Sikh Infantry, who was on the staff of the 
field force, Lieutenant Dougal, 79th Highlanders, attached to the 
71st, and Ensign Murray, of the 71st Highland Light Infantry. 

On the evening of the 11th November it was apparent that a 
general attack was imminent. The enemy advanced at 10 P.M. 
and assaulted the Crag Picquet with great fury; they were re- 
pulsed, but returned again and again to the charge; and at one 
moment were so near carrying the post that it was only saved by the 
gallantry of a small party of five men of the 20th Native Infantry. 
The attacks continued until 4 a.m. onthe 12th, when the enemy, 
having suffered severely, retired. The picquet remained constantly 
under arms until the morning of the 13th, when it was relieved by a 
detachment of the 1st Punjab Infantry. Hardly had the change 
been effected when the post was again attacked in great force; Lieu- 
tenant Davidson, who was in command, was killed, and the picquet 
of the 1st Punjab Infantry driven out in confusion, The enemy’s 
success did not, however, extend further, being checked by the 
gallantry of another party of the rst Punjab Infantry, aided by a few 
of the Guides and the 14th Native Infantry under Major Ross of the 
latter corps; re-inforcements presently arrived, and the rorst, with 
these detachments, stormed the crag and re-took the position. Our 
losses, however, were heavy, amounting to no less than 51 killed and 
107 wounded. 

On the 18th the position of the camp was changed, the left being 
withdrawn from the Guru mountain to the south of the Ambela pass. 
The enemy, supposing that this withdrawal was made asa preliminary 
to a retreat to the plains, immediately advanced in great numbers 
and furiously attacked what was now the left front of the position. 
Every attempt was, however, repulsed and at the close of the day the 
tribesmen retired, having lost nearly 400 of their numbers in killed 
and wounded. Our own loss, too, was considerable, amounting to 43 
killed and 75 wounded, among the former of whom were Captain 
Smith, 71st Foot, Lieutenant Jones, 79th, attached to the 71st, 
Lieutenant Chapman, rozst, and Lieutenant Mosley, 14th Native 
Infantry. 


310 


THE SERVICES OF THE 

On the 19th some skirmishing took place, in which Captain 
Aldridge, of the 71st, was killed. 

On the zoth the tribesmen again advanced in large numbers and 
vigorously assailed the position at various points, and in the afternoon 
they once more succeeded in capturing the Crag Picquet post; 
but it did not remain long in their possession; the 71st Highlanders 
and the sth Gurkhas were promptly pushed forward, and under cover 
of a close and accurate fire of artillery these two regiments stormed 
the position and re-took it, driving the enemy over the hills in 
the direction of Lalu. Our losses this day amounted to 27 killed, and 
110 wounded, Ensign Sanderson and Assistant-Surgeon Pile, of the 
(o1st, being amongst the former, and Sir Neville Chamberlain him- 
self amongst the latter. 

For more than three weeks after this engagement the enemy 
made no movement of importance. During this period- Sir Neville 
Chamberlain was compelled, in consequence of the severity of his 
wound, to relinquishthe command of the force and retire to the 
plains; he was succeeded by Major-General Garvock, who arrived 
on the 30th November. During this interval, too, the force was 
raised to a strength of nearly 9,000 men by the arrival of consider- 
able re-inforcements, consisting of the 7th and 93rd Foot (the Royal 
Fusiliers and the Sutherland Highlanders), the 23rd Benga! Native 
Infantry (Pioneers), and the 3rd Sikh Infantry. The tribesmen 
still continued in our front in undiminished strength, for though 
deserted by several clans and sections who, dispirited by repeated 
defeats, had gone off to their homes, they too had received powerful 
re-inforcements, amounting to nearly 10,000 men, from Dir, Bajaur, 
and even Kunar. Several attempts at negotiation were made with 
the object of breaking up the hostile combination, but they came 
to nothing, and eventually General Garvock determined on making 
a forward movement and assailing the tribesmen in their position 
in his front. Accordingly on the 14th December orders were issued 
for an advance on the village of Lalu. The force was divided into 
two columns, which were placed under the command respectively 
of Colonel Turner, 97th Foot, and Lieutenant-Colonel Wilde; both 
advanced on the 1sth against the enemy’s position and stormed in 
a brilliant manner the Conical Hill on the right, driving the enemy 
down to Ambela ; the first column then advanced and seized and 
destroyed Lalu. Several desultory counter-attacks were made by 


~——_— ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


311 


the enemy on the left and on the camp, all of which were repelled ; 
and a brilliant charge by a detachment of the 1st Panjab Infantry, 


under Major Keyes, finally scattered the assailants in this quarter. |. 


The columns bivouacked on the ground, having lost in the day’s 
fighting 16 killed and 67 wounded. 


On the 16th the two columns moved forward into the valley. 
The enemy took up a strong position to resist their further advance, 
but being out-flanked by the first column they retired without firing 
a shot, and retreated slowly towards the pass leading into Buner. 
Colonel. Turner made a movement to cut them off from this point, 
which was answered by a sudden and furious attack on the part of 
the Pathans and fanatics: the brunt of the charge fell upon 23rd and 
3and Native Infantry, who were staggered for the moment by the 
violence of the onslaught, but recovering themselves they turned on 
their assailants and destroyed the whole of them, not one man 
escaping. The advance was then continued, and finally the enemy 
were driven into the mouth of the pass. In this sharp affair our 
losses amounted to Lieutenant Alexander, of the 23rd, and ‘seven 
men killed, and four officers and 76 men wounded. 


This was the last engagement of the campaign. The Bunerwal 
chiefs tendered their submission on the following day ; the Swatis 
retired hastily to their homes, and the Hindustani fanatics fled into 
the hills. A few days later Malka, the stronghold of the fanatics, 
was visited by some British officers escorted by the Buner tribes- 
men, and completely destroyed. The British force was then with- 
drawn to the plains, having sustained during the campaign a loss of 
1§ British officers, 4 Native officers and 3219 men killed, and 21 
British officers, 27 Native officers, and 622 men wounded. The 
India medal, with a special clasp, was afterwards granted to all survi- 
vors of the expedition (G. G. O. No. 812 of 1869). 

Simultaneously with the Ambela campaign occurred a descent on 
the British frontier by some of the Mohmand tribes under Sultan 
Muhammad Khan. The garrison of the fort of Shabkadar was en- 
gaged with the enemy on the 5th December 1863, when Lieutenant 
Bishop, 6th Bengal Cavalry, was killed. Two days aftetwards 
another skirmish took place, the troops engaged (detachments of the 
8th Native Infantry and the 4th Sikh Infantry) sustaining a loss of two 
sepoys killed, and one jemadar and three sepoys wounded. For 
three weeks after this various fanatical mudlas were engaged in 


mands, 1865-04. 


412 THE SERVICES OF THE 


stirring up the tribes and collecting adherents from the surrounding 
districts, until, by the rst January 1864, their numbers amounted to 
5,600. The force at Shabkadar had in the meantime been consi- 
derably increased, and now reached a total of 1,800, including half a 
battery of horse-artillery, detachments of the 7th Hussars and of the 
2nd and 6th Bengal Cavalry, the 3rd Battalion of the Rifle Brigade, 
(the and Gurkha Regiment, and a detachment of the 4th Sikh Infan- 
try, the whole under the command of Colonal Macdonell, of the 
Rifle Brigade. The enemy again came down on Shabkadar on the 
2nd January : Colonel Macdonell moved outand engaged them, and 
in the action which followed completely routed and dispersed them, 
the loss on our side amounting to only 2 men killed, and 17 
wounded. The India medal was granted for this affair by G. G. O. 
No. 116 of 1884. 

The —— The history of the year 1864 again carries us to the Northern and 
’ | North-Eastern Frontiers of Bengal where a long continued series of 
[raids and incursions into British territory, culminating inan out- 
| rageous insult to a British Mission, forced on a war with the Govern- 

| ment of Bhutan in November 1864. 
The forces detailed for the operations against Bhutan were 

divided into four columns as follow :— 

Right Column,—to move from Gauhati against Dewangiri :— 
Half of the Eurasian Company of Artillery, one squadron of the sth 
Bengal Cavalry, one company of Sibandi Sappers, and the 43rd Native 
Infantry (Assam Light Infantry). 

Right Cenire Column,—to move from Goalpara against Bissen- 
giri :—Half of the Eurasian Company of Artillery, one squadron of 
the 5th and two of the r4th Bengal Cavalry, one company of Sibandi 
Sappers, and a wing each of the rath and the 44th Native Infantry 
(Sylhet Light Infantry). 

Left Centre Column,—to move from Cooch Behar against Baksa 
and Bala :—Half of No.5 Battery, 25th Brigade (mouhtain guns) 
and half of No. 6 Battery, asth Brigade Royal Artillery (mortars) ; 
one company of sappers and miners, a wing of the 11th Native 
Infantry, ard the 3rd Gurkha Regiment. 

Left Column,—to move from Jalpaiguri against Dhalimkot and 
Chamurchi :—Half of No, 5 Battery, 2sth Brigade, (mountain guns) 
and half of No. 6 Battery, 25th Brigade, Roya) Artillery (mortars) ; 
two squadrons of the sth Bengal Cavalry, one company of sappers 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


313 


and miners, a wing each of the 11th and 18th Native Infantry, and 
the 30th Native Infantry. 

The two columns on the right were placed under the command of 
Brigadier-General Mulcaster, those on the left under Brigadier- 
General Dunsford, 

The left column, under Brigadier-General Dunsford, was the 
first to move. Marching from Jalpaiguri on the 28th November, 
it arrived before the hill fort of Dhalimkot on the sth December, 
and on the following day the place was taken aftera bombardment 
of several hours, with a loss on our side of 3 officers and 7 men 
killed, and 3 officers and 56 men wounded. A considerable portion 
of the loss was occasioned by the premature bursting of a shell, 
which resulted in the death of Captain Griffin, Lieutenant Ander- 
son, Lieutenant Waller, and several men of the artillery. No farther 
Opposition was met with, and the occupation of Dhalimkot by a 
detachment of the 17th Native Infantry from Darjeeling having been 
arranged for, the column returned to the plains and marched 
eastwards along the foot of the hills towards Chamurchi. In the 
vicinity of that place a reconnoitring party was attacked by the 
enemy onthe 29th December, and in the skirmish which ensued 
the detachment had twelve men wounded. On the 31st, the post 
of Chamurchi was attacked and carried after a slight resistance, 
in which the force suffered a loss of two men killed and three 
wounded, 

The left centre column, under Lieutenant-Colonel Watson, 
met with little opposition in its advance; the fort of Baksa was 
occupied on the 6th December, and the Bala Pass was forced, and 
Tazagong captured, on the 21st. 

The right column, under Lieutenant-Colone] R. Campbell, 43rd 
Native Infantry, and accompanied by Brigadier-General Mulcaster, left 
Gauhati on the 2nd December, and on the roth entered the Daranga 
Pass, at the top of which the fort of Dewangiri was situated. On the 
same day Dewangiri was captured by a party of Military Police 
under Captain Macdonald, who had gone up by another route, 
with a loss on our side of one man killed and five wounded, and 
on the 11th Brigadier-General Mulcaster arrived there with part 
of the column. Onthe 17th December the column was broken 
up and returned to the plains, Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell having 


been left at Dewangiri with six companies of the 43rd Native 


314 


, THE SERVICES OF THE 


5 063. 


Infantry, two guns of the Eurasian Battery, a company of sappers, 
and some police. 

The right centre column advanced from Goalpara and, on the 
8th January 1865, occupied Bissengiri unopposed. 

The objects of the expedition having apparently been accom- 
plished, orders were issued for the breaking up of the field force. 
Suddenly, however, when least expected, although warnings had not 
been wanting, almost simultaneous attacks were made on Dewangiri, 
Bissengiri, Baksa, Tazagong in the Bala Pass, and Chamurchi. 
In the attack on the first-named place (29th January) one officer and 
five men were killed, and one officer and thirty-two men wounded. 
The enemy then almost surrounded the post, cut off the water-supply 
and the communication with the plains, and pressed the garrison so 
severely that Colonel Campbell, considering his force insufficient to 
dislodge his opponents, determined to retreat, and evacuated Dewan- 
giri before daylight on the morning of the 5th February. The main 
column lost its way in the darkness and a panic set in, in which 
some of the wounded were abandoned and the guns (which were 
thrown down a ravine) and all the baggage lost. 


The attacks on Bissengiri (25th January) and Baksa (26th Janu- 
ary) were repulsed without much difficulty by the detachments of the 
44th Native Infantry and 3rd Gurkha Regiment stationed at those 
places. That on Tazagong (27th January) was not so easily disposed 
of ; the post there was hard pressed for several days, and even after 
the arrival of re-inforcements it was found impossible to dislodge 
the enemy from the position they had taken up, an attempt to do so 
proving unsuccessful, with a loss on our side of one officer 
(Lieutenant Millett, 11th Native Infantry) killed, and two officers (one 
mortally) and thirteen men wounded, The postat Chamurchi (which 
was held by a detachment of police) was also hard pressed, and 
it was not until a part of the 30th Native Infantry was sent up as a 
re-inforcement that the enemy were driven off. 


Re-inforcements (which included the 55th and 80th Foot, a com- 
pany of sappers and miners, and the roth, 29th, and 31st Native 
Infantry) were quickly sent up, and two independent brigades were 
formed. The Left Brigade, under Brigadier-General J. M. B. Fraser- 
Tytler, included, besides the troops already on the spot, No. 7 
Battery, 23nd Brigade, Royal Artillery, a wing of the 55th Foot, the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


315 


head-quarters of the 80th Foot, and the 19th and 31st Native Infantry ; 
the Right Brigade was placed under Brigadier-General Tombs,. and 
included No, 3 Battery, 25th Brigade, Royal Artillery, the Eurasian 
Battery of Artillery, a detachment of the 14th Bengal Cavalry, a 
company of sappers, the head-quarters wing of the ssth Foot, the 
12th, 29th, and 44th Native Infantry, and a detachment of the 
43rd, 


The advance of the two brigades was followed by the speedy 
conclusion of hostilities. The enemy’s stockades at Tazagong, in 
the Bala Pass, were captured on the 15th March by ‘a part of the 
Left Brigade, with a loss of only three men killed and one officer 
and nineteen men wounded; and Baksa and Chamurchi were both 
relieved by the 24th March. On the latter date a forward move- 


ment was made by the Right Brigade from Kumrikata, and the |, 


Daranga Pass was taken the same day by detachments of the 14th 
Bengal Cavalry and of the r2th, 29th, and 44th Native Infantry, the 
whole under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Stevens, after a 
smart skirmish, in which a loss was sustained of 2 men killed and 
Lieutenant Beddy, 29th Native Infantry, and 13 men wounded. On 
tbe 1st April the final advance on Dewangiri was made, and on the 
following day the place was taken by storm. The storming party 
consisted of three companies of the 29th Native Infantry, under the 
command of Lieutenant Beddy (described by Brigadier-General 
Tombs as “a most gallant young officer, who had already disting- 
uished himself more than once”), supported by detachments of the 
55th Foot and the sath Native Infantry. On the signal to assault 
being given these troops advanced with a rush and soon effected an 
entrance into the works: the enemy were in great strength, three 
thousand at least, and made a desperate but unavailing resistance; 
about 130 of them were killed, and they left about 120 wounded 
behind them. Our loss amounted to seven men killed, and four 
officers and 99 men wounded. 


This practically concluded the war, but the Bhutiahs were not yet 
subdued, and it being an object of importance, moreover, to recover 
the guns lost at Dewangiri in February, it became necessary to keepa 
considerable force on the frontier until the time should arrive for 
the renewal of operations. During this period the troops suffered 
terribly from the deadly climate of the Terai. Towards the end of 


316 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


eee 


eer 


the year, some negociations took place with the Bhutan Government, 
and the surrender of the guns was made one of the conditions of the 
re-establishment of peace. The guns were, however, in the hands of 
the Tongsoo Penlow, the leading spirit in the war against us, and as 
the surrender of them was delayed, Colonel Richardson, who was 
commanding the right column of the Bhutan Field Force, moved 
forward from Dewangiri into Bhutan early in February 1866, with a 
force consisting of a company of sappers, a wing of the 9th Native 
Infantry, two companies of the 12th, and the whole of the 26th 
Native Infantry. On the 6th February he advanced to Salika, with 
a loss of two men wounded, and on the 7th seized the bridge over 
the Monas river. Being short of transport the force had to halt 
for some time, and in the meantime, on the 23rd February, the 
Bhutiahs surrendered the guns which had fallen into their hands 
and the troops then returned to Dewangiri. Peace having been 
concluded, the field force was broken up in the spring of 1866, and 
the troops returned to quarters. By G.G.O. No. 86 of 1870 the 
India medal, with a special clasp, was granted to all troops actively 
engaged with the enemy in the Bhutan war, 

" In the autumn of 1867 insults offered to the British representative 
and the wanton imprisonment of British subjects by King Theodore 
of Abyssinia, necessitated the despatch of an expedition to that 
country. The nature of the undertaking, which involved a march of 
some hundreds of miles from the coast to the capital, through an 
unknown country deficient in supplies and water, and against a 
fortress known to be of considerable natural strength, demanded the 
exercise of great foresight in the arrangement of preliminaries. 
This received the most careful attention from the officer appointed 
to command,—Lieutenant-General Sir Robert C. Napier, then Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the Bombay Army,—and the event justified his 
selection, for seldom or never has an expedition on so large a scale 
been so thoroughly well prepared or so successfully carried through 
without a single hitch or confrefemps. 

The total force detailed for the expedition amounted to nearly 
14,000 men, and consisted of four regiments and a half of cavalry; 
seven batteries and one native company of artillery ; eight companies 
of engineers and sappers ; and four regiments of British and ten of 
native infantry. Of this force Bengal contributed two regiments of 
native cavalry and two battalions of native infantry. These were 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


the roth Bengal Cavalry (Lancers) and the 12th Bengal Cavalry, the 
21st Native Infantry and the 23rd Native Infantry (Pioneers). 

The Bengal troops embarked at Calcutta in December and Janu- 
ary, 1868, and the roth Bengal Cavalry, who were the last to arrive, 
completed their disembarkation on the 6th March. The 23rd Native 
Infantry were the first at Zula, the port of disembarkation in Annesley 
Bay, and accompanied Sir Robert Napier’s advance up the country ; 
the 21st Native Infantry was employed in garrison duty at the base 
and at various posts on the road. The 12th Bengal Cavalry overtook 
the main column at Antalo, half-way between the coast and Mag- 
dala, the Abyssinian capital,and the head-quarters advanced with 
the army to the latter place. The roth Bengal Cavalry were also 
ordered up in haste, but were too late to be present at the taking of 
Magdala. 

The army advanced from Antalo on the rath March, and arrived 
within a few miles of Magdala on the 7th April. Here a reconnais- 
sance in force was commenced by the advance guard, which resulted 
in the first and only serious conflict of the campaign. The advance 
of the British troops was met by a vigorous, though scattered, attack 
of the enemy at Arogi (roth April); the brunt of the first charge was 
borne by the 4th Foot (the King’s Own), whose quick-firing Enfield 
rifles drove the enemy back before they could get to close quarters. 
Another vigorous assault was made on the left, which was met and 
repulsed with great gallantry by the 23rd Bengal Native Infantry. 
The British loss was insignificant, amounting to no more than one 
officer and 19 men wounded; but the enemy suffered very heavily, 
so much so that, rather than face a second engagement, a great pro- 
portion of Theodore’s army deserted during the next two days. 

Some days were spent in endeavours to induce the king to sur- 
render, and were so far successful that the release of the British sub- 
jects who were prisoners in his fortress was accomplished. Nothing 
more definite, however, could be gained, and at length, after due 
preparation, a general advance against Magdala took place on the 13th 
April. As the British force advanced, the king’s troops, remembering 
the fight at Arogi, deserted by hundreds, and fled in all directions 
from the fortress, so that when the storming party reached the gates 
the band of adherents who remained by their master’s side was 
reduced to a mere handful. The place was taken with hardly any 
resistance ; such of the garrison as remained surrendered ; and Theo- 


317 


Taking of 


rath, 1666. 


April 


318 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


i 


Bisoti 
Urakzals, 
3868, 


dore, when he found that all was lost, discharged a pistol into his 
mouth and blew his brains out. Our loss in the assault amounted to 
only 15 wounded, but of these no less than four were officers. 

With the capture of Magdala the active operations of the cam- 
paign terminated. The retirement commenced within a few days, 
and by the end of May the last detachment of Bengal troops had 
sailed for India. Sir Robert Napier was rewarded for the complete 
success of the expedition with a peerage ; a medal was issued ta all 
the troops engaged, and six months’ donation batta was granted ; and 
the word “ ABysSINIA” was authorised to be borne on the colours and 
appointments of the corps employed (G. G. O. No. 1181 of 1869). 

The next twelve years of the history of the Bengal Army are 
marked by a number of expeditions, of greater or less importance, 
on the North-West Frontier of the Punjab and the Eastern, North- 
Eastern and South-Eastern Frontiers of Bengal, as well as by two 
expeditions beyond sea. These will now be noticed in due order 
of date. 

The first of these events was an affair with the Bizoti Urakzais 
in the Ublan Pass, about six miles from Kohat, on the rith 
March, 1868. In order to repel a raid by these people, Major 
Jones, commanding at Kohat, moved out from that place with 
detachments of No. 2 Punjab Light Field Battery, the 3rd Pun- 
jab Cavalry, and the 3rd and 6th Punjab Infantry. In the en- 
gagement which ensued the enemy, though at frst driven back, 
succeeded in repulsing two attacks on the position they had taken 
up, and night coming on the troops had eventually to be withdrawn, 
after sustaining considerable loss—-11 killed and 44 wounded,— 
among the former of whom were included Captain Ruxton and 
Subadar Ram Singh of the 3rd Punjab Infantry,—the latter described 
as “one of the bravest officers of the Punjab Frontier Force.” 

In the autumn of 1868 it became necessary to send an expedi- 
tion against the tribes of the Black Mountain, in Hazara. At the end 
of July in that year a police post at Ughi, in the Agror valley, was sud- 
denly attacked by a mixed band of Chagarzais, Akazais, Hassanzais, 
and Pariari Saiads, about sooin number. Though repulsed with some 
loss they still hung about the valley; presently the whole of these 
tribes were up, and, being joined by most of the Swati clans, the in- 
surrection began to assume a grave aspect. On the first news of the 
outbreak Lieutenant-Colonel Rothney promptly moved into the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


319 


Agror valley, from Abbottabad, with the Peshawar Mountain Battery 
and a wing of the sth Gurkha Regiment, but, though he was subse- 
quently joined by a wing of the 2nd Punjab Infantry, his force was 
inadequate to cope with the numerous bodies in his front, and he 
was compelled to remain almost entirely on the defensive ; nor was 
he able to prevent the burning by the insurgents of a number of 
British villages. To punish the tribes concerned in the creation of 
these disorders, it was decided to organise an expedition forthwith 
which should ascend the Black Mountain and visit the settlements 
of the offenders, and the troops detailed for this service were col- 
lected with wonderful rapidity; in particular the zoth Native Infan- 
try marched, in the hot month of August, 232 miles in ten days; the 
318t covered 422 miles in twenty-nine days, and two companies of 
the Sappers and Miners nearly 600 miles in the same time. 

The force was composed of the following troops, which were 
organised in two brigades:—‘“ D” Battery, “F” Brigade, Royal 
Horse Artillery, “E” Battery, 19th Brigade, Royal Artillery, No. 2 
Battery, 24th Brigade, Royal Artillery; the Peshawar and Hazara 
Mountain Batteries; a detachment of the 9th Bengal Cavalry; the 
16th Bengal Cavalry ; a detachment of the Guides Cavalry; two 
companies of the Sappers and Miners; the. 1-6th and the 1-19th 
Foot; the zoth and 24th Bengal Native Infantry; the 1st, and, 4th 
and sth Gurkha Regiments; the 3rd Sikh Infantry, and the and 
Punjab Infantry. 

The 1st Brigade was commanded by Colonel R. O. Bright, r9th 
Foot, and the and by Colonel J. L. Vaughan; the whole force was 
under the command of Brigadier-General A. T. Wilde, c.s. 

On the 3rd October the operations were begun by a forward move- 
ment from Ughi. The 2nd Brigade, moving on Kilagai, met with 
no opposition, while the rst Brigade experienced but faint resistance 
in their advance as far as Mana-ka-Dana. On the next day the 
position of the enemy there was carried by the rstand sth Gurkha 
Regiments, and the rst Brigade reached Chittabut, the and moving 
on to Mana-ka-Dana; and on the 5th October the heights of the 
Machai peak were carried by the 20th Native Infantry, supported by 
1st and sth Gurkha Regiments, the resistance of the enemy being still 
feeble and half-hearted. During the next eight or ten days, various 
movements were made without much opposition from the enemy, who 
now entered into negotiations and tendered their submission. Only 


320 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


the Pariari Saiads remained refractory for a while, and their villages 
having been destroyed, and a fine inflicted, the campaign was brought 
to aconclusion. The total casualties during the operations were 5 
killed and 29 wounded. By G.G. O. No. 86 of 1870 the India 
medal was granted for this expedition. 

In February 1869, wher the Bizoti Urakzais were again located in 
their winter settlements, an expedition was planned against their village 
of Gara, on the further side of the Ublan pass, to punish them for 
their raid of the previous year and for one of which they had since 
been guilty. The arrangements were made with profound secrecy, 
and the force (two guns of No. 1 Punjab Mountain Battery, and the 
1st and 4th Punjab Infantry,—the whole under the command of 
Lieutenant-Colonel Keyes), having left Kohat at 1 a.m. on the 25th, 
gained the summit of the pass without opposition; advancing into 
the valley beyond, they rushed the village of Gara, which was car- 
ried after a brief struggle and forthwith qgestroyed. The force then 
commenced its retirement, but the movement was one of consider- 
able difficulty, and was not effected without loss. The casualties 
during the expedition amounted to three killed and 33 wounded. 

The operations which come next in order of date occurred at the 
opposite extremity of the Empire, on the Eastern and South-Eastern 
Frontiers of Bengal. For a long series of years the Lushai clans 
had been guilty of predatory inroads into British territory, where they 
had committed numerous outrages on the inhabitants : latterly these 
had increased in frequency, and in the autumn of 1871 affairs had 
arrived at such a stage that the punishment of the offenders could no 
longer be delayed. For the accomplishment of this object two 
distinct columns were accordingly organised, to enter the Lushai 
country from Cachar and Chittagong, respectively. 

The Cachar column (which was placed under the command of 
Brigadier-General G. Boarchier, c.B., and was composed of half ofthe 
Peshawar Mountain Battery, a company of sappers and miners, and 
500 men each of the 22nd, 42nd, and 44th Bengal Native Infantry) 
left Cachar on the 21st November, and advanced without meeting with 
any opposition, or being hindered in any way except by the difficulties 
of the country, as far as Tipai Mukh, where it arrived on the 15th 
of December. Thence the advance was continued across the Tawi- 
bhum stream towards the Vonpilal villages, where some opposition 
was met with, and the force was annoyed by being continuully fired 


as =e _ = 


- a 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


gegen ee ee ee 


—— 


on, in consequence of which several villages were destroyed. Our loss 
between the 24th and agth of December was 6 killedand 11 wounded. 
On the oth January, 1872, a further advance was commenced through 
Pachui and Chipui to Kungnung, which place was defended, and 
was only carried with a loss of 4 killed and 11 wounded, Brigadier 
General Bourchier himself being among the latter. On the rst 
February the final advance to Sellam was commenced, and thence 
through avery mountainous and densely-wooded country, the force 
moved to Champhai, the principal village of the Chief Lalburah, situ- 
ated in latitude 23° 26’ 32” and longitude 93° 21’, which was reached on 
the 17th. Throughout this last advance but very slight resistance had 
been met with, and the people generally seemed disinclined for hos- 
tilities. The main objects, therefore, of the expedition having been 
attained, the column began its return march on the 21st February, and 
reached Cachar on the toth of March. 

The Chittagong column, under Brigadier-General C. H. Brown- 
low, c.B,, was composed of half of the Peshawar Mountain Battery, a 
company of sappers, the 27th Native Infantry, and the 2nd and 4th 
Gurkha Regiments. Leaving Chittagong early in December, it march- 
ed to Kassalong, whence it advanced through Demagiri to Vanunah, 
which village was reached on the 14th December. Onthe 18th a slight 
skirmish took place between some Lushais and a party ofthe and 
Gurkha Regiment; on the 30th Savunga was reached, and taken with 
slight opposition; and on the 4th January 1872, a detachment of the 
and Gurkha Regiment attacked and seized the village of the Chief Lal 
Gnura, losing in the affair one man killed and Captain Battye and nine 
men wounded. The advance continued throughout January, and at 
the end of the month, as a proof of their readiness to treat, the child 
of an English planter, who had been carried off in the preceding 
year, was given up by the enemy. Brigadier-General Brownlow 
continued his advance against the Northern Howlongs, until, on 
the 18th February, their chiefs tendered their submission. The 
Southern Howlongs also submitted, peace was concluded, and the 
troops returned to Chittagong in March 1872. 


The India medal, with a special clasp, was granted to the Lushai 
Expeditionary Force by G. G. O. No. 1295 of 1872. 


321 


No further disturbance occurred on the North-West Frontier | The Dawaris 


until 1872, when the misbehaviour of the men of Lower Dawar, on 
t 


322 


ne ue eee eee 7 —_ — 6 a em 


The parole 
Expedition, 
3874-73. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


—— - “a _ oe re et ee ee + ee 


the Bannu border,-necessitated punitive measures. On the 7th March 
a dash was made into their country by a force under Brigadier-General 
Keyes, composed of two guns of No. 3 Punjab Light Field Battery 
and detachments of the 1st and and Punjab Cavalry, rst and 4th Sikh 
Infantry, and rst Punjab Infantry. The Tochi pass, leading into the 
Lower Dawar valley, was traversed andthe valley entered without 
opposition ; the head-men of two villages joined the force and pro- 
fessed their eagerness to treat, but on the village of Haidar Khel 
being approached, a hot fire was opened on the troops by the in- 
habitants. The guns were quickly brought into action and at the 
same time the village was stormed with great gallantry by the rst 
Sikh Infantry. More than forty of the enemy were killed; the rest 
surrendered, and the inhabitants of all the other villages in the valley 
tendered unconditional submission. The British force returned to 
camp at the mouth of the Tochi pass the same night, having lost 
only six men wounded. 


At the end of 1874 an expedition was organised and despatched 
under Brigadier-General Stafford, c.3., against the Daphlas, a savage 
tribe inhabiting the hills on the borders of the Darrang district in 
Lower Assam, who had been guilty of plundering in British territory : 
the troops employed were half of the Hazara Mountain Battery and 
detachments of the 16th, 42nd, 43rd, and 44th Native Infantry 
The column advanced some distance into the hills, without meeting 
with any opposition ; and the chiefs having tendered their submission, 
Brigadier-General Stafford retraced his steps, and the force was 
broken up early in March 1875. 


In consequence of a treacherous attack on, and the massacre of, a 
survey party under Lieutenant Holcombe at Ninu, on the and Febru- 
ary 1875, a punitive expedition was despatched into the Naga Hills, 
Assam frontier, at the end ofthe same month. It consisted of 
detachments of the 42nd and 44th Native Infantry, numbering 308 
in all, and was commanded by Colonel J. M. Nuttall. Leaving 
Dibrugarh on the 27th February, the expedition advanced by Bor 
Matan,. across the Tesing and Desang rivers, through a thickly 
populated country, to the large village of Ninu, which was taken 
after a smart skirmish on the roth March. A week was spent in 
scouring the country with detachments, and in the destruction of 
villages which had taken part in the massacre of February. On the 


BRNGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


26th the column was re-united at Nina, when the persons most direct- 
ly implicated in the massacre having been captured, or given up, 
the troops returned to Dibrugarh, arriving there on the 11th April. 

For some months after this the Nagas maintained a comparatively 
peaceful attitude, but in December they again displayed their hostility 
in an attack on another survey party, in which Captain Batler, Politi- 
cal Officer in the Naga Hills, was mortally wounded. 


323 


At the end of 1875 an outbreak at Perak, in the Malay Peninsula, | Perak 


in which the Resident, Mr. Birch, was killed, was the cause of a force 
of some strength being asked for from India. In a very short space 
of time the troops detailed to proceed from India, which included 
the head-quarters and 400 men of the 1st Gurkha Regiment, arrived 
on the scene of action, under the command of Brigadier-General John 
Ross. By that time, however, the disturbances had been to a great 
extent suppressed, and but little remained for the force from India 
to accomplish. Detachments were, however, twice engaged with the 
Malays: first. on the 20th December, when storming the Bukit Patus 
Pasa stockades, where one man was killed and another wounded ; 
and, secondly, at the village of Kota Lama, on the 4th January, 
1876, when a detachment was surprised by a. party of Malays, one 
officer (Major Hawkins, Brigade Major of the Indian Brigade) and 
two men being killed and four men wounded. After two months 
of jungle work, the force returned to India in March 1876. 

The India medal, with a special clasp, was granted for the expedi- 
tion by G. G. O. No. 242 of 1880. 

Towards the end of 1877, the Naga tribes again became aggres- 
sive, and several outrages having been committed in British terri- 
tory, it became necessary to adopt punitive measures against the 
raiders. A force of two hundred men of the 42nd Native Infantry, 
under Captain Brydon, was despatched in December against the 
important village of Mozima, which was taken and destroyed on the 
Sth of that month, Farther than this Captain Brydon was unable to 
move owing to the smallness of his force; indeed, his position at 
Mozima was somewhat precarious until the arrival of roomen of the 
43rd Native Infantry on the gth of January, when the Nagas sued 
for peace, and tranquillity was temporarily restored. 


e 
= § i 
: xpedition, 


Naga Hills, 
1877-78. 


In the autumn of 1877 it became necessary to send an expedition | The jowst 
against the Jowaki Afridis, to inflict punishment for & long series of | Atvast rep, 


Y 


\ 


324 


The Jowaki 
Expedition, 
3077-78. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


outrages in British territory of which this tribe had been guilty. 
The troops engaged were No. 1 Mountain Battery and detachments 
of the 2nd Punjab Cavalry, 1st, 3rd, and 4th Sikh Infantry, 6th 
Punjab Infantry, and the Guides Infantry, the whole under the com- 
mand of Colonel Mocatta, Brigadier-General C. P. Keyes, who was to 
have commanded, having been suddenly taken ill. The troops ad- 
vanced into the Jowaki country (29th August) in three columns by 
different routes, destroyed several villages, and again retired by the 
same roads, having lost one man killed, and one officer and nine men 
wounded. 


Colonel Mocatta’s raid did not have the effect of modifying the 
hostile attitude of the Jowakis, who continued their forays into 
British territory as before, plundering several villages and murdering 
many of the inhabitants. As the only means of putting an end to 
| these outrages, it was decided at last to carry out a second invasion of 
| the Jowaki hills, and to occupy the country until the offending clans 

had submitted and had made due reparation. For this purpose two 
| strong columns were detailed to enter the hills,—the one from Kohat 
i and the other from the Peshawar side,—and to the command of these 
| Brigadier-General C. P, Keyes and Brigadier-General C. C. G. Ross 
' were, respectively, nominated. The former force was composed of 
‘Nos. 1 and 4 Mountain Batteries, the 29th Native Infantry, and 
! detachments of No. 2 Mountain Battery, the and Punjab Cavalry, the 
‘ Guides Infantry, the rst and 3rd Sikh Infantry, the 4th, 5th and 6th 
| Punjab Infantry, and the sth Gurkha Regiment ; while the latter (which 
| was divided into two brigades, commanded respectively by Colonels 
; Doran and Buchanan) consisted of a battery of horse artillery, a heavy 
, battery, two companies of sappers and miners, three battalions of 
' British infantry, and the 14th, 2oth, 22nd, and 27th Native Infantry. 


: The force under Brigadier-General Keyes entered the Jowaki 
‘ country on the 9th November, in three columns, of which, after some 
‘ skirmishing, the first and second occupied Paiah, and the third 
'Kahkto. On the 12th an attack was made on the latter column, but 
| was repulsed by a company of the 5th Punjab Infantry ; and on the 
following day the whole force concentrated at Paiah. For a fort- 
hight operations were hindered by excessive rain, but at length on 
‘the 1st December an advance was made into the Jamu valley; 
} some skirmishing took place during that and the next three days, and 


—_-- eo 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


325 


the column then took up a position at Bagh. On the 7th the village 
of Ghariba, which had long been notorious as the Alsatia of the 
Jowaki robbers, was captured and destroyed. 


During this time Brigadier-General Ross’s force had been prevented 
by incessant rain from starting from Peshawar, and it was not 
until the 4th December that it was able to move forward. On that 
day the two passes leading into the Bori valley were seized, the ridges 
above occupied, and the towers and villages in the valley destroyed. 

Notwithstanding this occupation of their country, the enemy 
showed as yet no signs of surrender; and it was therefore decided 
that a simultaneous advance should be made from the north and 
south on the Pastaoni valley. A preliminary reconnaissance was 
made on the 25th December by the Peshawar force, and on the 31st 
Brigadier-General Ross advanced almost unopposed, and took the 
village of Pastaoni, where he was joined by Brigadier-General Keyes. 
During the next three weeks the British columns continued to move 
through the Jowaki country. No opposition was encountered, except 
by a column under Colonel Mocatta, consisting of detachments of 
No. 1 Mountain Battery, and of the 1st and 3rd Sikh Infantry and the 
2gth Native Infantry; this column advanced from Turkai on the 
15th January, into the Nara Khula defile, which was defended in 
some strength by the Jowakis, but it was forced without much 
difficulty and with little loss. 


At length, on the 23rd and 24th January, the troops were with- 
drawn on both sides; and the movement was followed almost imme- 
diately by the complete submission of the Jowaki tribesmen. Our 
total loss during the ten weeks’ operations amounted to 11 men killed 
‘and one officer and 50 men wounded. ° 

The India medal, with a clasp inscribed “ Jowax1,” was subse. 
quently granted for the operations between the 19th November and 
the roth January. (G. G. O. Nos, 143 of 1879 and 285 of 1880.) 

In March 1878, shortly after the conclusion of the Jowaki 
campaign, an expedition was sent against the village of Skakot 
inhabited by the Swati tribe of Ranizais, who had lately been giving 
trouble on the border. The force employed was the Hazara Mountain 
Battery and the Guides Cavalry and Infantry, under Major 
R. B. P. P. Campbell. Marching from Mardan on the evening of the 
13th March, the detachment reached the village at 2 a.m. on the 14th 


Szakot, 1676. 


326 


The Utman 
Khels, 3878. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 

ee eo a aie ae 
and surrounded it before daybreak, when the inhabitants, finding 
resistance hopeless, accepted the inevitable and surrendered. The 
troops returned to Mardan the same day. 

At the same time operations were in progress against the Utman 
Khels, who had made an unprovoked attack on a body of unarmed 
labourers employed on the Swat Canal, of whom a large number 
were cruelly massacred. Against the perpetrators of this outrage 
a detachment of the Guides (280 strong), under the command of 
Captain W. Battye, was sent in February, 1878, when the village of 
Sapri was surprised and the leader of the raiders killed. As some 
of the Utman Khel villages still refused to make reparation for the 
outrage, it became necessary to take measures to coerce them, and 
for this purpose, on the 20th March, a force under Lieutenant-Colonel 
Jenkins, commanding the. Corps of Guides, marched from Mardan 
and crossed the Utman Khel border on the following morning. But 
little opposition was met with; the refractory villages submitted, and 
the force retired the same evening. 


In 1878, the result of the Russo-Turkish war and the advance of 
the Russians on Constantinople was the cause of an event of con- 
siderable interest to the Indian Army,—the employment for the first 
time of a Native force in Europe. Under instructions from the Sec- 
retary of State an expeditionary force was, on the 17th April 1878, 
detailed to proceed on service to the Mediterranean, It was com- 
posed of two field batteries of Royal Artillery, two regiments of Native 
cavalry, four companies of sappers, and six regiments of Native 
infantry. The Bengal corps detailed were the gth Bengal Cavalry with 


‘| a squadron of the roth Bengal Lancers attached, the 13th (Shekha- 


wati) and 31st (Punjab) Native Infantry, and the 2nd (the Prince ot 
Wales’ Own) Gurkha Regiment. 

By G.G. O. No. 347 of 1878 these regiments of Native infantry were 
allowed extra batta while on foreign service; while the Native cavalry 
were authorised to draw free rations or ration money. 

The force reached Malta in May, and there, in the following 
month, these troops were inspected by His Royal Highness the Duke 
of Cambridge, Commanding-in-Chief, who afterwards issued a most 
complimentary order, in which he referred to the Indian Forces in 
the following terms :—“ His Royal Highness cannot speak too highly 


of their soldierly qualities. Their uniform good conduct and smartness 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 327 
reflects the greatest credit onall ranks, Their steadiness under arms 

and drill and the excellent state of their camps leave nothing to be 
desired.” The Indian troops left Malta in July and proceeded to 
Cyprus, where they occupied various posts until towards the end of 
August, when they embarked on their re.urn to India. 

An attack, in the autumn of 1879, on Mr. Damant, the Political SES 
Agent, in which that gentleman, Jemadar Prem Singh, and ten sepoys 17980, 
of the 43rd Native Infantry were killed and five sepoys wounded, there 
being besides many casualties among the police, compelled the Gov- 
ernment once more to despatch an expedition against the Naga tribes. 


The force detailed for this service, which was placed under the 
command of Brigadier-General Nation, was composed of a small 
party of the 34th, a detachment (300 men) of the 43rd, and the 
whole of the 44th Native Infantry, with two mountain guns. It was 
concentrated at Piphima on the 21st November, previous to which 
(15th November) a detachment of the 43rd, under Major Evans, 
aitacked and took the village of Sephima, with a loss of two men 
killed and one officer and two sepoys wounded, while, on the 14th, 
& detachment of the 44th occupied the important position of Sa- 
chima. Thence, on the 22nd November, an attack was made on the 
Naga stronghold of Konoma. In the belief that but slight resis- 
tance would be made, the attacking force was split up into several 
parties, with the unfortunate result that aftera whole day’s fighting 
the artillery ammunition was found to be exhausted and the storming 
parties had lost a fourth of their numbers, while only a small portion 
of the enemy's works had been carried. Fortunately the place was 
evacuated during the night, and the enemy retired to an entrenched 
position a mile higher up the mountain, In the day’s fighting one 
Native officer (Subadar-Major Narbir Sahi, 44th Native Intantry) and 
seventeen men were killed, while the wounded amounted to four 
British officers (two mortally), two native officers, and 27 men 
(three mortally). Lieutenant R. K. Ridgeway, who was severely 
wounded, was awarded the Victoria Cross for distinguished gallantry 
in the assault, 


Leaving a detachment to garrison Konoma, Brigadier-General 
Nation retired toSachima. On the 27th November the village of Jot- 
soma was destroyed without opposition, The remainder of the month 


and the whole of December were passed in inaction, awaiting the arriva) 


338 


The Delhi 
Assemblage, 
2876-77. 


Internal 
history. 


th B 
tetancse tose 


Composition of 
Bengal 
regiments, 
September, 
1864. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 

of supplies, transport, and re-inforcements. A wing of the 42nd 
Native Infantry having arrived towards the end of December, active 
operations were immediately resumed, the village of Cheswejuma 
being destroyed, and Poplongmai surprised and taken, with a loss 
of one killed and four wounded. Further re-inforcements, consisting 
of a wing of the 18th Native Infantry, arrived on the 13th March 1880, 
and the operations were prosecuted with vigour until the 28th, when 
the enemy sued for peace and terms were arranged. In the course of 
these operations our losses (including those sustained in the attack 
on Mr, Damant’s escort) amounted to two native officersand forty- 
four men killed,and five British officers, two native officers and 
fifty-eight men wounded. Major C. R. Cock, Assistant Adjutant- 
General, Lieutenant H. H. Forbes, 44th Native Infantry, and twelve 
men died of their wounds. 

The India medal, with a special clasp, was granted for the Naga 
Hills Expedition by G. G. O. No. 344 of 1881. | 

During the period under review a noteworthy event occurred in 
India, which may not inappropriately be mentioned in this place. 
This was the Imperial Assemblage at Delhi, at which, on January 
1st, 1877, Her Majesty the Queen was proclaimed Empress of 
India, and which was attended by about 17,000 troops, consisting 
of 8 batteries of artillery, 3 regiments of British cavalry, 7 regi- 
ments of British infantry, 6 regiments of Native cavalry, 4 companies 
of sappers, and 13 regiments of Native infantry, besides a a 
tive body of the Volunteer Forces of India. 

This chapter may now be brought to a close with a cursory survey 
of such internal changes in the Bengal Army during the eighteen 
years of which it treats as may seem to be of interest. 

The numbering and constitution of the army remained unaltered, 
with the exception of the addition of one regiment to the infantry 
list: this was the rst Bengal Police Battalion, which, as “ Rattray’s 
Sikhs,” had rendered such excellent service in Bihar in 1857-58. 
In 1864, by G. G. O. No. 326, the corps was added to the Bengal 
Army as the “ 45th Bengal Native Infantry (Rattray’s Sikhs).” 

In other respects the period under review was remarkable for many 
changesin the interior economy of corps. This is readily accounted 
for by the fact that the re-organisation of the army was but just com- 
pleted, and it was inevitable that many measures, which were but 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY 329 


tentative, should require modification. Foremost among the changes 
was the new scheme for the composition of Bengal Native regi- 
ments, as notified in 1864.* The tabulated order was as follows :— 


Cavalry. 


we Liat ' = 
= [58/8 & or F 
= [SEs fe = 3 
REGIMENTS. § $ 8/8 sts A “ a i | REMARKS. 
q elesiesiea| 2 G13] 4 | 3 
a= = 
= iz “5 EeE*| #IS*) 2 (3 | 2 


ist Bengal Cavalry .| The composition of the corps to remain as previously, vis., 
entirely Hindustani Musalmans. 

2nd ma -| To be composed gradually, but eventually, of Musalmans, 
Dogras, Sikhs, Jats, Rajputs, Brahmans, and Mahrattas, in 
equal numbers, and mixed together in the several troops. 


3rd a . | The same as 2nd Bengal Cavalry. 

4th - ‘ Ditto ditto. 

5th 1” ° Ditto ditto. 

6th ~ a) er I fees oe 2 ne ee 1 | 6 | Thatis, class 
th Sy, .| The same as 2nd Bengal Cavalry. las 
Sth + ; 1 1 ris I a 

gth 9» 2] 2 2| 1 6 

1oth ns o| coe! woof BE] tio] 2] Flu] Bl] 6 

1ith is v |e | vr I I 3 I 6 

12th 99 Wilnéa) ae 3b & = a1 41 2) Ft 6 

13th 9 of oe | BY] 2 ie ae ern bre 6 

14th $0 . | To remain as formerly a class regiment of Jats only. 

15th - . | Toremain as ‘formerly a class regiment of Mocltanis, Duranis, 
6th =, eet ota el Wie ee 

17th » Naser s L-gis ! at | Pl wee | 1 6 

18th ” ° 1 oe ee 6 

19th Po st eee | in fe | oh ae i ae 


* Adjutant-General’s Circular No. 117 N. , dated the oth September, 1864, 


WIQIIZEQ DY 


33° 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


a er 


REGIMENTS. 


Infantry. 

OOOO 
Zia| ge (zal | 

0 3 x EE = lals|8 

> =] ‘S oT |. bet ro 

a |= g S[513 jolShlg 

: : 3 s eee gee 

14 t ele a SERBS EGE 

a) & = [n/a l- SlOle 


ist Native Infantry . 


and 


. | As formerly, chiefly Hindustani Musalm 


. | As formerly ; much 


o be recruited as formerly ; a predominance of maple with 
large numbers of Brahmans and Hindustani usalmans, 
some Sikhs and low caste men. 


.| As formerly, chiefly of Hindustani Musalmans, Brahmans 


and Rajputs, a few low caste men. 


.| The same as the 3nd. 


Do. 


a Miweeerit 


Brahmans and 
Rajputs, with an admixture of Cis-Sutlej Sikhs and low 


as formerly, much the same as the 2nd. 


Berry 


As formerly, princi 
ture of ange lamas and ig ith Sikhs 
As the 14th. 


of Hindustani Musalmans, Brahmans and Raj- 
grr ralgank a few Ahirs, Sikhs and low castes. . 


HHH 


000 | eee | eee | | | eee j 


Tee 


EH 


TT 


Miao, Oe eet 
— —a 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 33! 
| 3 £] \s | 
3 | FE: cde ga] |z 
21% Slclg Basis 
Raciments, a/= ig <3|= {2 
‘5 flS 3 3/2/25 
S\=/o . 2\o 
FI 4 's = . hake é 
gl3 sleek wels|s 
e ;.8 Site SElaic 
a |x lel" Ae lol< 
soth Native Infantry 
zoth - -|( To be composed of Punjabi Musalmans and Trans-Sutlej 
rb + ° Sikhs in nearly equal proportions, with a few Dogras. 
32n , e 
a «| A class regiment of Maszbi Sikhs. 
2 ° 
25th ° 
26th 55 ‘5 
27th ss -| p The same as the 19th Native Infantry. 
28th »» ° 
mf: 
stat “es . | The same as the roth Native Infantry but Cis-Sutlej Sikhs 
Psd be entertained. 
g2nd ” -| A class regiment of Maszbi Sikhs. 
g3rd re . Bs esacfowed cas 3] 11... 1 
BU Sees eee: escles 1 1] 2]...).. 2 Low caste 
a - Levies. 
35th - igo: Aiaen fae lessees 2]...] 2] Elec.fece] 2] Beccles ee 
36th Py | 2 eee ee 2|...[...foce] 2 1 
37th » riorftoudp.. Hela 1 
38th ry 3 Z [eccfoce Zi. T]acsfocstess|s I 
‘ —~ 
39t > | I] Bfel 3 : | gf » Joowfeeed BL 2 
4oth 2 eos | eee Jecafees 3 eccleecheccclocelecciecsclees | eoot e008 Jose | eee) 2 
4ist 9 2 I ZL Ulecclicclcscjecsleactecst 2 fe vislvvel) ‘eas. | Ulessleestene 
42nd es p oe Gurkhas and Hillmen (Assamese), with a proportion, 
‘| mot exceeding one-fourth of its strength, of Hindustanis. 
43rd 2 The same as the 42nd. 
45th + .| As formerly, to be composed entirely of Punjabis and Sikhs. 
tet Gurkha Regiment 
pier » : } regiments, entirely of Gurkhas and Hillmen. 
a ° . 
a ‘ ; lige St Hindustanis. 
Sappers and Miners. {Troe hths Punjabis and Reig 


th Trane-lndus tri 


ee eee ae ne ern ee ee ee ne ee ee ee 


One-ci; 


332 


THE SERVICES OF THE 
At the same time the organisation, pay, promotion, &c., of British 
officers under their new conditions of service formed the subject of 
much correspondence and of many orders during the early years of 
this period, into the particulars of which it is impossible to enter here, 
At length, on the 2gth October 1863, a G. G.O. (No. 161-A) 
was published, which fixed the establishments of British - officers 
with Native regiments under the new “Irregular” system, and 
laid down the scale of staff salary attaching to each appointment. 
According to this, the British officers with a native cavalry regiment 
were to be a commandant, a second-in-command, two squadron 
Officers, an adjutant and a doing-duty officer. In infantry corps there 
was no second-in-command ; the establishment authorised included a 
commandant, two wing cOmmanders, an adjutant, a quarter-master, 
and a doing-duty officer. On the 2oth January 1864, further parti- 
culars regarding the various duties of the above-named officers were 
published by the Commander-in-Chief, and on the same date the regi- 
ments of the Bengal Army were completed with officers of all grades. 

Other orders of interest to the army generally were(1)the grant by 
G.G.O. No. 812 of 1869 of the India medal to the survivors of the troops 
engaged in a number of frontier expeditions since the annexation of 
the Punjab; (2) the alteration of the rules for good-conduct pay in 
1877 (G. G. O. No. 1),—one, two, and three rupees being given 
to the cavalry after three, nine, and fifteen years’ service, instead of, as 
formerly, after six, ten and fifteen years ; (3) the introduction by G. O. 
No. 101 of 1870 of a weekly holiday on Thursday, on which no field 
days or parades, except musketry, should take place, nor general, 
district, or regimental court-martials should sit, unless the exi- 
gencies of the public service absolutely required it. 

The following orders apply particularly to cavalry :— 

At the re-organisation in 1861 the system of Chanda Funds, in- 
volving monthly subscriptions from all ranks, was abolished; casual- 
ties were provided for by general subscriptions from the troops in 
which they occurred. It is obvious that such a system would place 
a premium on keeping horses as long as possible, however old and 
unfit for the service; and in 1868 the old Chanda Fund system was 
reverted to in most regiments, and in the course of a short time 
again became universal. 

In 1864 it was determined that standards should be abolished in 
the native cavalry : regiments in possession of standards were allowed 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


to retain them, but they were not in future to be carried on parade or 
in the field; nor were any to be issued to regiments not possessing 
them. The appointment of nishanbardar consequently ceased; and 
all existing ones were gradually absorbed, pending which they were 
regarded as lance-dafadars. 

In the same year (G. G. O. No. 278) good-conduct pay was first 
granted to the Bengal cavalry, the scale being, as mentioned above, 
one, two and three rupees after six, ten, and fifteen years’ service. ° 

In 1865, the rank of naib-risaldar was abolished, and those exist- 
ing were absorbed, one promotion to jemadar being given for 
every two vacancies in the rank of naib-risaldar. 

InG.O. C. C., 3rd May 1864, it was notified that the roth, 11th, 
13th, and 14th Regiments of Bengal Cavalry were to be designated 
“Lancers, and to these the 19th was added some five months later. 
Dafadars and sowars of these regiments were to be armed with lance, 
sword, and pistol. At the same time orders were issued that corps 
armed only partially with, or with various descriptions of carbine, 
should receive the regulation “cavalry carbine,” which would be 
issued free to all who gave fire-arms in exchange, and at half-price to 
others. Carbines were to be carried slung across the back, over the 
left shoulder. Lances were to be of bamboo, bayonet-shaped head, 
not less than 10 feet long, nor more than 114 feet; and the weight 
not over four pounds. 

By G. O. No. 245 of 1866, the rank of risaldar-major was given to 
the senior risaldar of native cavalry regiments, with the same 
advantages as those enjoyed by subadar-majors. 

G. O. No. 70 of 1875 directs the formation at Saharanpur and 
Hapur of an army reserve of 1,000 horses, only such animals to be 
received as were temporarily useless from various causes, such as 
bad training, tricks, obscure forms of lameness, debility, or skin 
diseases, but which, with careful treatment, were likely to become 
serviceable in the course of a few months. 


_ Turning to orders affecting infantry corps only, we find the follow- 
os G. O. No. 280 of 1864 orders that native officers of infantry shall 
receive pay by classes, as in the cavalry, the following being the scale 
one "years, ee a — 4 Jomadary a a month 

4 Jemadars, at 30 


333 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


G.O. No. 515 of 1867 publishes a letter from the Secretary of State 
which announces that a Royal Crown shall be substituted as a device 
on the colours of Native infantry corps, for the Lion and Crown, which 
was the device of the East India Company. 

During the years following the re-organisation of 1861, the Enfield 
rifle, the introduction of which had been made the pretext for the out- 
break of 1857, was gradually issued to corps of the Native Army. Most 
regiments, however, did not receive that weapon until the beginning 
of the next decade, when yet another change was imminent; for in 
1874 the first issues of the Snider rifle were made to Native corps. 

In 1876 (G. O. No. 60) colours were granted for the first time to 
the 17th, rgth, zoth, aist, 24th, 25th, 27th, 3oth, 31st, 33rd, 34th, 
35th, 36th, 37th, 38th, 39th, goth, 41st, and 45th Native Infantry. 

In the following year (G. G. O. No. 1) some important concessions 
and changes were made in the matter of pay, &c. A grant of R30 
was authorised to every artillery, infantry, or sapper recruit towards 
the provision of his kit; and a further annual allowance of R4 
towards its up-keep to every non-commissioned officer and private. 
By the same order the pay of the commissioned ranks was raised to 


the following scale :— 
4 Subadars, at R100 4 Jemadars, at Rso 
4 9 » 80 4 ry) x = 
The matter of dress is a very prominent one in the standing orders 
of this period, and the following notes from the Dress Regulations 


for the Native Cavalry, published in 1863, will be found of some 


interest :— 
British Officers : 
In the first eight regiments, an alkhalak. 
In the last eleven regiments, a tunic. 
Shoulder cords of curb-chain or chain-mail. 
eecimnet of grey felt, with bronze bars, binding, spike and 
chain. 
Pantaloons of blue or n cloth, as the case be, with 
a double stripe, the’ color of the facings. se 
Hessian boots. 
Forage cap the colour of the facings. 
Native Officers : 
Alhkhalah, or loose frock. 
Pyjamas the same as the British officers’ pantaloons. 
A native sword, . 
The men wore in summer a white drill e/khalak or frock, instead of 


serge, and used a native saddle. 


—_ 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


ee ene ee ee ee ee 


Cd 
_ + oom ew ee - —_—_ = —— — 


The above Roweren@ were seieublect to constant change. In 1868 gilt 


was substituted for bronze in the helmet ornaments, white Melton 
pantaloons replaced the blue or green cloth for British officers, and 
Mullant-matti dasuti was ordered for the pyjamas of Native officers 
and men: jack-boots even with the top of the knee, took the place of 
Hessians; and the non-commissioned ranks received what was called 
the “ Nolan saddle.” In 1874 other changes were made, blue panta- 
loons being ordered for officers of lancer regiments and Napoleons 
being substituted for jack-boots. 

In the Native infantry, too, several changes in the matter of dress 
took place during the period. G. O. No. 199 of 1869 introduced 
zouave tunics, with slashed cuffs, and serge pyjamas ; No. 3t of 1871 
orders Native regiments dressed in green to wear helmets of that 
colour; and No. 188 of 1877 substituted pussies or aj trousers for 
white gaiters. 

The chapter which we here conclude is one of no common interest 
to the Bengal Army; it opened on a number of raw, untrained corps, 
the majority of them not half-a-dozen years old, raised in an emer- 
gency, fostered under circumstances of exceptional excitement and 
by men of exceptional calibre. It closes on a well-trained, well-tried 
and well-equipped army; matured in many campaigns and improved 
by the careful work of many years of peace. 


ee oe ee. ee ee ee ee ee 


335 


336 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Chapter X—(1878— 188r). 


The Afghan War (Hensman)—Afghan War ( Shadbolt)—Afghan War (Sir C. M. 
MacGregor, oficial)—Frontier Expeditions (Paget and Mason)—G. G. O. and 
G. O. C. C. 


The course of events takes us back once more to the North- 
Western Frontier, where the close of the year 1878 found us involved 
| in a war with the Government of Afghanistan: and here it may be 
| observed that as this sketch advances, the materials at hand naturally 
| become more voluminous, and the information derived from them 
| more complete, and that in proportion the difficulty of keeping 
within the requisite bounds of a narrative like this becomes greater. 
| The remark, however, which we made with reference to the Indian 
| 


EE AS ES EE oe So 


Mutiny is equally applicable to the Second Afghan War,— namely, 
that a subject which has been already so completely dealt with 
requires here nothing but a sketch of its principal outlines, and that 
a minute examination and criticism of its details would be both un- 
necessary and out of place. 


| The relations between the Indian Government and Sher Ali, Amir 
| of Afghanistan and son of Dost Muhammad, had, in 1878, been for 
| some years in a strained and unsatisfactory condition. This was due 
| entireiy to the causeless hostility and the ingratitude ofthe Amir him- 
‘self, Sher Ali had been able to secure himself on the throne of Kabul 
| mainly by the assistance given to him by the British Government in 
'arms and money; by the influence of the British Government his 
| sovereignty over Wakhan and Badakshan, till then disputed by the 
Government of Russia, had been admitted and made sare; and his 
‘ subjects nad been allowed to pass freely through the Indian Empire 
| for purzoses of trade, enjoying full protection in doingso. For these 
'extepsive favours the Amir made absolutely no return. On the 
‘ ccatrary he requited them with active ill-will and open discourtesy, 
‘closing his territories against British subjects, maltreating British 
| subjects who ventured within his jurisdiction, cruelly mutilating and 
| putting to death subjects of his own on the mere suspicion that they 
| were in communication with the British Government, and openly by 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


word and deed, endeavouring to stir up religious hatred against the 
English and to incite to war against the Indian Empire. Finally he 
filled up the measure of his offences by receiving formally and enter- 
taining publicly an embassy from Russia, a country with which we 
were then on the verge of war in connection with the affairs of 
Turkey, and by ignominiously repulsing at Ali Masjid, while the 
Russian embassy was still at his capital, an English envoy of high 
rank (General Sir Neville B. Chamberlain) of whose coming he had 
formal and timely notice from the Viceroy. The repulse of the British 
embassy brought matters to a crisis, and an ultimatum was addressed 
to the Amir, setting forth that unless reparation was made by the 
oth of November, war would be declared and the British troops 
would cross the frontier. To this ultimatum no reply was given: 
war was accordingly declared and promptly begun. 

The interval between the despatch of the ultimatum and the 2oth 
of November was actively employed in organising forces for service 
in the field, and when the declaration of war came the preparations 
were practically complete. The troops detailed for the invasion of 
Afghanistan were formed into three distinct forces,—the Peshawar 
Valley Field Force, to operate on the line of the Khaibar; the Kuram 
Column to advance up the valley of that name; and the Kandahar 
Column to assail the southern part of the Amir’s dominions, The 
operations in which these forces were severally engaged will now be 
noticed in order. 


The Peshawar Valley Field Force was placed under the command 
of Lieutenant-General Sir Samuel J. Browne, x.c.8., and was 


337 


Tho Peshawar 


composed of two Divisions, the First of which, under the immediate | Foree. 


command of Sir Samuel himself, comprised the following troops :— 


Cavalry, 
toth Hussars (two squadrons). 11th Bengal Lancers. 
Guides Cavalry. 
Artillery. 

4 batteries of Royal Artillery. No. 4 Mountain Battery, Punjab Frontier Force. 
Head-quarters and 4 companies of the Bengal Sappers and Miners. 
Infantry. 

4th Battalion, Rifle Brigade. 


set Brigade. 20th (Pun jab) Native Infantry, 
: {ie Gurkha Regiment, z 


- ry 


338 THE SERVICES OF THE 

1-17th Foot. 

and Brigade. {Gufs Infantry. 
ist Sikh Infantry. 

Brigade. § igth Native Infantry (Sikhs) 
d Bri a ative Infan ikhs). 

" ja (Punjab) Native Infantry. 
51st King’s Own Light Infantry. 

4th Brigade. } 6th Native (gh Infantry. 
45th Native Infantry (Sikhs). 

The Second Division, which was in reserve of the first, was assem- 
bled in the first instance at Rawal Pindi under the command of 
Lieutenant-General F. F. Maude, c.8., v.c.,and included the follow- 
ing troops :— 

; = Cavalry. 
(The Queen’s Royal) Lancers. 
ooh Bona Caacere: 
13th Bengal Lancers. 
Artillery. 
Two batteries of horse and one of field artillery. 
Infantry. — 
1-25th Foot. 
ist Brigade. 124 (Punjab) Native lofaotry. 
Bhopal Battalion. 
1-sth Foot, 
and Brigade. Be Gurkha Regiment. 
Mhairwara Battalion. 
Capture of The forward movement into the Khaibar Pass and against the 
Ail Masjid. stronghold of Ali Masjid was begun on the evening of the zoth Nov- 


ember. The 1st Brigade, under Brigadier-General H.T. Macpherson, 
marched from Jamrud at 2 a.m. on the 21st, with orders to occupy 
a position on the Rhotas heights which would command the fort. 
Eight hours earlier the and Brigade, under Brigadier-General J. A. 
Tytler, had marched with orders to take post at Katakushtia, in the 
rear of Ali Masjid, by which the enemy’s position would be 
turned and from which the Afghans could be cut off if they retreated. 
The remaining two brigades moved forward into the Khaibar Pass at 
7 A.M., to make a direct attack on Ali Masjid. 

These arrangements, however, were destined to attain only partial 
success; unforeseen difficulties of ground appeared which the neces- 
sarily imperfect reconnaissance of the country had not disclosed. The 
consequence was that the rst and and Brigades had not reached 
their positions when the general attack in front was begun by Sir 
Samuel Browne at mid-day on the 21st. The General, however, seeing 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 339 


how matters stood, wisely did not press the attack, but withdrew his 
troops to wait for a more favourable opportunity, after having lost two 
officers—Major Birch and Lieutenant FitzGerald, 27th Native 
Infantry—and 14 men killed, one officer and 33 men wounded, and 
two men missing. On the following morning it was found that the 
Afghans, becoming aware of Brigadier-General Tytler’s turning move- 
ment, had evacuated the fort, which was occupied without further 
Opposition. Brigadier-General Tytler’s brigade reached the enemy’s 
line of retreat in time to take a considerable number of prisoners. 

Leaving the 4th Brigade, under Brigadier-General W. B. Browne, 
to hold Ali Masjid, Sir Samuel Browne, with the rest of the force, ad- 
vanced to Dakka, which was occupied on the 23rd. Early in Decem- 
ber the Second Division moved up to Jamrud, in support of the First, 
and on the 17th of that month Sir Samuel Browne, leaving the and 
Brigade at Dakka, moved forward to Jalalabad with the 1st and 3rd, 
and the cavalry and horse artillery, and occupied that place without 
opposition on the zoth, Lieutenant-General Maude taking charge 
of the Khaibar and the communications. 

About the same time an expedition was undertaken against the | rirst Basar 
Zaka Khel Afridis of the Bazar and Bara valleys, who had been | Sxpedition, 
' giving trouble on the line of communications in the Khaibar; it was 
commanded by Lieutenant-General Maude, and was composed of 
two columns, which moved from Ali Masjid and Dakka respectively, 
The first of these consisted of three guns, a troop each of the 11th 
and 13th Bengal Lancers, detachments of the sth and srst Foot, |’ 
the and Gurkha Regiment and the Mhairwara Battalion; and the 
second, under Brigadier-General Tytler, of two guns, one company 
of sappers, and detachments of the 17th Foot and the 27th and 4sth 
Native Infantry. Operating on their respective lines the two 
columns came into communication near the village of Walai on the 
zoth December, up to which time no opposition had been experi- 
enced by either. Subsequently, however, some skirmishing occurred 
while the troops were engaged in destroying the defensive towers of 
the Zaka Khel villages, and during the return march to Dakka the 
rear-guard of Brigadier-General Tytler’s columns was hotly assailed 
by the Afridis. On the 2and the two columns returned to Ali Masjid 
and Dakka, having accomplished the task of punishing the Zaka 
Khels, with a loss of only one killed, nine wounded, and one missing. 


Za 


240 THE SERVICES OF THE 

Sho Se Ses 

2879. Some of the principal Afghan chiefs now declared in favor of the 
British, and attended a durbar held by Sir Samuel Browne at Jalala- 
bad on the rst of January, 1879: the year thus opened propitiously. 
The military operations which were undertaken in its early months 
were mostly of a minor character and were all thoroughly successful. 
On the 11th January, a small expedition, under Brigadier-General 
Jenkins, was despatched against the Mohmands in Kama, north 
of the Kabul river, which met with complete success. On the 23rd 
the villages of Nikoti Miani and Raja Miani, near Peshbolak, which 
had been concerned in the murder of a dA:s/z of the 17th Foot, were 
visited and destroyed. 


ee As the Zaka Khel Afridis of Bazar and Bara still continued to 

Expedition, give trouble in the Khaibar Pass, it was decided, towards the end of 

ue January, 1879, to send a second expedition into the Bazar valley, 
with a view to punishing the marauders and putting a final stop to their 
incursions. The troops detailed for the expedition, which was under 
the command of Lieutenant-General Maude, were organised in three 
columns, which moved forward almost simultaneously from Jamrud, 
Ali Masjid, and Basawal, respectively. The first column included 
detachments of the 13th Bengal Lancers and the 24th Native Infan- 
try ; the second, portions of the 6th: Native Infantry, the 2nd Gurkha‘ 
Regiment, and the Mhairwara Battalion ; and the third, detachments 
of the Guides Cavalry, Bengal Sappers, 27th and 4sth Native Infantry, 
and 4th Gurkha Regiment. The three columns marched into Bazar 
on the 25th and 26th of January and, co-operating with one another, 
visited various parts of the valley during the next few days, blowing 
up the towers and destroying the fortified villages of the recalcitrant 
tribesmen, with whom a good deal of skirmishing took place. It 
was proposed to wind up the operations with the invasion of the 
Bara valley, but this, it was found, would have involved the Govern- 
ment in a war with the whole of the Afridi clans, which at that 
juncture would have been in the last degree inconvenient. That 
project was therefore abandoned, and the Afridis having tendered 
their submission, with promises of good behaviour for the future, 
the several columns were withdrawn from the Bazar valley on the 
3rd February. The casualties on‘our side, during these operations, 
amounted to five killed and thirteen wounded, Lieutenant Holmes, 
45th Native Infantry, being among the latter. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


34! 


Early in February Jalalabad was threatened by the Mohmand 
who, on the 7th of that month, actually entered the Kama district. 


Affairs on the 


A force (which included the Hazara Mountain Battery and detach- Khalbar line 


ments of the 11th Bengal Lancers, the 20th Native Infantry, the 4th 

Gurkha Regiment and the 1st Sikh Infantry) was immediately sent 
across the Kabul river, under Brigadier-General Macpherson, to 
drive the Mohmands out. Some distant firing took place, but the 
enemy declined a conflict, and, retiring hastily to the hills, they 
dispersed. 


On the 28th of February, a survey party was attacked above 
Michni by a gathering of Mohmands, and in the conflict two men of 
the 24th Native Infantry were killed and three wounded. A similar 
Outrage was committed by Shinwaris on the 17th March at Maidanak, 
on which occasion a havildar of the 45th Native Infantry was killed 
and Lieutenant F, M. Barclay, of the same regiment, mortally 
wounded. A punitive expedition was accordingly despatched against 
them, but the offenders made submission without attempting any 
resistance. Another branch of the same clan, the Shinwaris of Deh 
Sarak, brought punishment on themselves by an unprovoked attack 
(18th March) on an escort ofthe 27th Native Infantry. Brigadier- 
General Tytler was sent against them with a force consisting of two 
guns and detachments of the 11th and 13th Bengal Lancers, sth and 
17th Foot, 27th Native Infantry, and 2nd Gurkha Regiment, and 
marched from Basawal accordingly on the 24th. The enemy stood 
their ground near the village of Mausam, but were charged with great 
effect by the cavalry, who cut up large numbers of them and dispersed 
the rest. Mausam and other villages having been destroyed, the troops 
were directed to retire ; in this movement they were assailed by the 
eneny, but, owing to the skilful manner in which they were handled, 
without effect, and the withdrawal was effected without difficulty. 
The casualties amounted to only two killed and twelve wounded. 

On the 31st March intelligence was received that the Ghilzai Chief 
Asimatullah Khan had moved into the Lughman Valley, for the 
purpose of raising the people against us and of inciting the Khugianis 
to threaten Fatehabad, on the road to Kabul. Two columns, com- 
manded by Brigadier-General H. T. Macpherson and Brigadier- 
General C. J. S, Gough, were in consequence put in motion at once, 
and at the same time a squadron of the roth Hussars and another 


342 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


of the 11th Bengal Lancers were detached across the Kabul river to 
intercept Azimatullah Khan, should he attempt to move in that 
direction ; this detachment, however, met with a singular misfortune ; 
starting at 10 P.M. from Jalalabad and attempting to cross the 
river, the squadron of the roth Hussars missed the ford in the 
darkness, and one officer and forty-five men were drowned. | 

The column under the command of Brigadier-General Macpher- 
son (which included the Hazara Mountain Battery, a company of 
sappers, and detachments of the 2zoth Native Infantry and 4th Gurkha 
Regiment) returned to Jalalabad onthe 2nd April without having 
encountered the enemy. The force under Brigadier-General Gough, 
which was intended for the protection of. Fatehabad, included a 
battery of Royal Horse Artillery, three troops of the roth Hussars, 
three of the Guides Cavalry, and detachments of the 1-17th Foot and 
the 27th and 45th Native Infantry, and marched from Jalalabad on 
the 1st April. At Fatehabad, on the 2nd, this force came into con- 
flict with about five thousand of the enemy, who after a smart engage- 
ment were defeated and driven from the field, with a loss of about 
400 men. Our own loss amounted tosix killed and forty wounded, 
among the former being Major Wigram Battye, a well known and 
most gallant officer of the Guides, Ressaidar Muhammad Khan, of 
the Guides Cavalry, and Lieutenant Wiseman of the 17th Foot. 

Brigadier-General Tytler, with the 2nd Brigade, joined Brigadier- 
General Gough on the 4th April, when the combined forces marched 
to the village of Khugiani, nine miles beyond Fatehabad, and there 
took up a position. On the 12th Sir Samuel Browne, having left a 
suitable garrison in Jalalabad, marched thence with the remainder 
of the troops at the head-quarters of the First Division, and on the 
14th encamped at Safed Sang, within three miles of Gandamak. 

On the 21st April, the Mohmands having crossed the Kabul 
river for the purpose of attacking the posts in the Khaibar, two 
companies of the Mhairwara Battalion, under the command of 
Captain Creagh, were detached from Dakka for the protection of 
the viilage of Kam Dakka, the inhabitants of which had called for 
assistance, At this place Captain Creagh was attacked on the 
following morning by a large body of Mohmands, and being 
completely surrounded, and the ammunition running low after a 
long day’s fighting, the detachment was in serious danger of being 


— ee ae cy OO, csepeemanmpmaatatieraaneteeme 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


cut off: it was, however, relieved by the opportune arrival of 
a troop of the 10th Bengal Lancers and detachments of the sth 
and 12th Foot, with two guns, and a gallant charge made by the 
troop of the roth Bengal Lancers having driven back the enemy, 
the Mbhairs, covered by the reat of the detachment, were brought 
off in safety. The casualties amounted to five killed and twenty-four 
wounded. Captain Creagh received the Victoria Cross for his 
gallantry in this affair. 

The force detailed for service in the Kuram Valley. was placed 
under the command of Major-General F.S. Roberts, ¢.B., v.c., and 
was composed of the following corps and detachments :— 

Cavalry. 
EE ee omg atetme) } Under Colonel H. H. Gough. 
Artillery 


A battery and a half of Royal Artillery. 
Nos. 1 and 2 Mountain Batteries, Punjab Frontier Force. 
Engineers. 
One company of sappers and miners, 
Infantry. 


sein (RAMS tay. 

ist Bri é 2 ative lofan 

— sth Punjab Infantry. 
72nd Highlanders. 


: aist Native Infan 
and Brigade. 4 on4 Punjab Infantry. 
sth Gurkha Regiment. 
23rd Native Infantry (Pioneers). 


To these troops the sth Punjab Cavalry and the 28th Native 
Infantry were subsequently added. 

Crossing the frontier on the 21st November, the force advanced 
towards the formidable position held by the Afghan troops on the 
Paiwar Kotal. A reconnaissance was made on the 28th, which 
though conducted as thoroughly as possible (ata cost of about a 
dozen casualties) was necessarily very imperfect in the information 
gained with regard to the interior of tht enemy’s position. The attack 
on the Afghan position was arranged for the and December. Major- 
General Roberts’ plan of operations was that the main force, under 
his personal command, should, by a night march, surprise and turn 
the enemy's left on the Spin Gawai Kotal, while the 8th Foot and 
the sth Punjab Infantry, with the 12th Bengal Cavalry and five guns, 
were to remain in camp under Brigadier-General Cobbe, and assail the 
enemy’s front as soon as the attack on the left flank had developed. 


343 


oO tloas in 
Karam, 2870-70 


344 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


ii eG Pe te 


The main force started at 10 P.M. on the rst December and attacked 
the Spin Gawai Kotal at 6 a.m. next morning, when the enemy’s posi- 
tion was carried by a brilliant rush of the 72nd Highlanders and 
the sth Gurkha Regiment. Advancing towards the centre of the 
position, they were checked by a precipitous ravine, the opposite side 
of which was held in force by the Afghan troops. It soon 
appeared that further movement in this direction was impossible, and 
General Roberts therefore decided to threaten the line of the enemy’s 
retreat by a further turning movement towards Zabardast Kila, and 
thus to take the Afghan position in reverse. A vigorous attack was 
now made in front by the force left in camp, and the Afghans, 
finding themselves threatened in rear and subjected to a galling fire 
from the front and the left flank, retreated precipitately, abandoning 
their camp and a great quantity of stores and ammunition, all of 
which, with several guns, fell into our hands. The loss on our side 
was twenty-one killed, including Major A. D. Anderson, 23rd Native 
Infantry, and Captain J. A. Kelso, commanding No. 1 Mountain 
Battery, and seventy-two wounded, including Brigadier-General 
Cobbe. ry 

On the 6th December General Roberts advanced to Ali Khel and 
on the 8th reached the Shutargardan Pass, which was reconnoitred on 
the following morning. In the return march towards Kuram, Gene- 
ral Roberts determined on exploring the southern route through the 
Sapari or Mangiar defile, and accordingly moved in that direction 
from Ali Khel on the 12th, taking with him No. 1 Mountain Battery, 
a wing of the 72nd, the 23rd Native Infantry, and the sth Gurkha 
Regiment. The main body got through the defile unmolested on the 
following day, but the rear-guard and baggage were attacked in force 
by the Mangal Pathans; the steadiness and gallantry of the sth 
Gurkha Regiment on this occasion were most conspicuous: they 
repelled every attack made by a bold and numerous enemy during a 
space of five hours, and brought the baggage into camp without having 
lost a single load. Our loss amounted to five killed and seven- 
teen wounded, amongst the latter being Captain F. T. Goad, Assis- 
tant Superintendent of Transport, and Captain C.F. Powell, of the 
sth Gurkha Regiment, both of whom subsequently died of their 
wounds. 

The head.quarters of the column reached Fort Kuram on the 
14th December, and thence, early in the following month, a flying 


Pre 
- a OO ee 


EE ee rc A ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 345 


column started under General Roberts for the reduction and occu- 
pation of the Khost district. It included a squadron of the 1oth 
Hussars, three troops of the 5th Punjab Cavalry, Nos. 1 and 2 Moun- 
tain Batteries, a wing of the 72nd Highlanders, and the 21st and 
28th Native Infantry. The fort of Matun was given up without resis- 
tance on the 6th January 1879, but on the same day the camp was 
threatened by a hostile gathering of several thousand Mangals. 
These were attacked by General Roberts on the 7th January, and 
were entirely dispersed by Colonel Gough witm the cavalry, No. 2 
Mountain Battery and the 28th Native Infantry, on the north-west of 
the camp ; while on the south and east Colonel Drew was equally 
successful with No. 1 Mountain Battery, a troop of the 5th Punjab 
Cavalry, the 72nd Highlanders, and the 21st Native Infantry. Three 
weeks were passed in exploring and surveying the district, and the 
column returned to Fort Kuram on the 31st January. 

The remainder of the winter and early spring passed without any 
striking incident in the Kuram Valley. 

The Kandahar Column (afterwards designated the Southern 
Afghanistan Field Force) was composed of two divisions, of which 
the First was assembled at Mooltan under Lieutenant-General D, 
M. Stewart, and the Second at Quetta under Major-General M. A. 
S. Biddulph. These two divisions included the following corps: — 


1879. 


The Southern 
Afghanistan 
F Force 
1878-79, 


1st (Mooltan) Division :— 2nd (Quetta) Division :— 
Cavalry— Cavalry— ; 
15th Hussars. 1st and 2nd Punjab Cavalry, 
8th Bengal Cavalry. Po) ima ala 
roth Bengal Lancers, 1 field and 2 mountain batteries—One 
Artillery— of which was No. 3 (Peshawar) 
to batteries of Royal Artillery, _ Mountain Battery, 
with a siege-train. Engineers— 
1 company of sappers and miners. 
Engineers— Infantry— 
3 companies of sappers and mi- 7oth Foot. 
ners. ist Brigade ot (Punjab) Native 
Infantry— : 
2-6oth Rifles. 30th Bombay Native 
1sth (Sikh) Native In- Infantry. 
ist Brigade . { fantry. ist irae Native 
2 Punjab) Native , ee 
: > "Sand Brigade< 1st Punjab Infantry. 


Infantry. 
sgth Foot. | 
Infantr 


and Brigade. Ee Gurkha Regiment. : t : at r 
‘ 32nd (Punjab) Native Infantry (Pioneers). 
rd Gurkha Regiment, 32n8 Sikhie ay y ) 


29th Bombay Native 


346 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


The Second Division, marching from Quetta, entered the Pishin 
Valley on the 22nd November, reached Haikalzai on the 27th, and 
was concentrated in the vicinity of the Kojak Pass on the rath 
December. The leading troops of the First Division reached Dadar 
on the sth December, and the head-quarters of the Division arrived 
at Quetta on the 8th, from which date Lieutenant-General Stewart 
assumed command of all the troops detailed for operations in 
Southern Afghanistan. Moving forward from these points the Second 
Division advanced towards Kandahar by the Kojak Pass, while the 
First Division moved by the Ghwaja Pass over the Khoja Amran 
range, both converging towards Takht-i-pul. On the 4th January 
the advanced guard of the field force encountered some regiments of 
Afghan cavalry between Saif-u-din and the Ghlo Pass, and in the 
skirmish which ensued eleven officers and men of the rsth Hussars 
and the rst Punjab Cavalry were wounded. The united divisions 
then moved forward on Kandahar, which was abandoned by its 
garrison, and occupied without opposition on the 8th January, 

From this place part of the First Division, under General Stewart, 
marched to Kalat-i-Ghilzai, and occupied the fort there on the 21st 
January ; leaving a garrison there temporarily, the head-quarters, with 
the cavalry and the 1st Infantry Brigade, returned to Kandahar on 
the 11th February, and the garrison was withdrawn afew weeks 
later. Meanwhile part of the Second Division, under General Bid- 
dulph, marched to the river Helmand and Girishk; on the 2oth 
January camps were formed on both sides of the river, and during the 
succeeding days the country beyond the river as well as that on the 
left bank was explored and surveyed. This position was maintained 
until the 23rd February, when the return march to Kandahar was 
commenced. The retirement was the signal for hostilities on the 
part of the Alizais, who on the 26th attacked the rear-guard of 
Bombay troops at Kbushk-i-Nakhud, but were routed with heavy loss 
after a sharp conflict in which the casualties on our sidejamounted 
to 5 killed and 24 wounded. 

The Second Division reached Kandaher on the 28th February, 
and was immediately afterwards broken up, a large number of the 
troops returning to India under General Biddulph, o#¢ Thal-Chotiali. 
During this movement one of the returning columns, composed 
of a squadron each of the 8th Bengal Cavalry and and Sindh Horse, 
two guns each of the Jacobabad and Peshawar Mountain Batteries, and 


eee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


347 


EE aE 


the 1st Punjab Infantry, the whole under the command of Major 
Keen, 1st Punjab Infantry, was twice attacked by local tribesmen. 
In the first attack (March 21st) one sepoy of the 1st Punjab Infantry 
was killed; in the second, at Baghao on the 24th March, which was 
repulsed by the 8th Bengal Cavalry and the rst Punjab Infantry, our 
loss was two killed and five wounded, that of the enemy being 150 in 
killed alone. 

About the same time (27th March) a detachment under the com- 
mand of Major Humfrey, 30th Bombay Native Infantry, which in- 
cluded half a troop of the :st Punjab Cavalry, was attacked at Saiad- 
Bud, in Shorawak, by a body of 1,600 Barechi insurgents, who were 
completely routed with the loss of nearly one hundred of their num- 
ber, including several of their chiefs. 

Nothing of much importance occurred in Southern Afghanistan 
during the remaining period of the first phase of the war. 

Amir Sher Ali Khan having died at Mazar-i-Sharif on the 21st 


February, his son Yakub Khan succeeded to the throne of Kabul. | oe 


Yakub Khan, having expressed his readiness to treat, was received 
by the British authorities at Gandamak, where a treaty was concluded 
on the 26th May. The withdrawal of the Northern Force was at once 
commenced, but the hot weather was then at its height and the result 
was most unfortunate, for cholera having broken out in the Khaibar 
the troops passing down the line suffered terribly, and many regi- 
ments sustained heavy losses from this cause. The Kandahar Force 
was fortunately kept stationary in order to avoid the unhealthiness of 
a march in the hot weather. | 


The thanks of both Houses of Parliament were voted to the 
Viceroy, to the Commander-in-Chief in India, and to all engaged in 
the campaign (G.G,O. No. 1085 of 1879); a special medal was 
granted to all troops employed in Afghanistan between the atst 
November 1878 and the 26th May 1879, with clasps for the 
actions of Ali Masjid and Paiwar Kotal, which names were afterwards 
authorised to be borne on the colours and appointments of the corps 
engaged. Six months’ batta was granted to all ranks by G. G. O. 
No. 804 of 1879. 

The conclusion of peace was followed by the instalment of a 
British Resident, Major Sir P.L. N. Cavagnari, x.c.s.1., at Kabul, 
together withan escort of twenty-five sowars and fifty sepoys of the 


348 


Outbreak at 
Kabul, 3rd 
Septem 


2879. 


The Second 
Campaign, 
879-60, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Queen’s Own Corps of Guides, under Lieutenant W. R. P. Hamilton. 
For two months affairs seemed settled and likely to remain so, but 
in August it became evident that a strong feeling of hostility existed 
towards the British Residency on the part of a powerful section of 
the Afghan people. A chance emeufe on September 3rd _ excited 
this hostile feeling into open outrage, and the consequence was an 
attack on the Residency, in which, after a gallant resistance, Cavag- 
nari, his suite and escort were massacred almost to a man. 

The receipt of these terrible tidings in India was the signal for 
the adoption of prompt and energetic measures for the re-establish- 
ment of British influence in Afghanistan, and the punishment of the 
treacherous Kabulis. The first order issued was that the Shutargar- 
dan Pass, leading from the Kuram valley to Kabul, should be 
secured ; this was followed by directions for the immediate advance, 
by this route, of a strong force under Major-General Sir F. S. 
Roberts. The first object was secured by No. 2 Mountain Battery, 
the 23rd Native Infantry (Pioneers), and the sth Gurkha Regiment; 
while the following troops, making a total of about 6,500 of all 


| ranks, were detailed to form a field force for an advance on Kabul 


from the Kuram valley :— 
Artillery— 
‘““F” Battery, “A” Brigade, Royal Horse Artillery. 
LT 4 ry 3rd Royal Artillery. 


No. 2 Mountain Battery, Punjab Frontier Force. 
Two Gatling guns. 
Cavalry—(uander Brigadier-General W. G. D. Massy) — 

gth Queen’s Royal Lancers (one squadron). 
12th Bengal Cavalry. 
14th Bengal Lancers, 

sth Panjab Cavalry. 

Bngineers— 
gth Company, Bengal Sappers and Miners. 


Infantry— 
1st pan A — 67th Foot. ; 
Brigadier-General H. T.4 92nd Foot (Gordoo Highlanders). 


Macpherson. 28th (Punjab) Native Infantry. 
and Brigade :— {sth Foot (Highlanders). 


Brigadier-General T. D.¥ sth Ponjab Infantry. 
Baker. sth Gurkha Regiment. 


23rd (Punjab) Native Infantry (Pioneers). 
The remainder of the troops in the Kuram valley were organised 
in two brigades, to the command of which Brigadier-Generals T. E. 
Gordon and J. A. Tytler were appointed. 


a er ce cee mee eg en 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


At the same time the small force left at Ali Masjid and Landi 
Kotal at the termination of the first phase of the war was rapidly 
augmented, and, with some changes of corps, formed into a Division 
under the command of Major-General R. O. Bright, to advance 
towards Kabul on the line of the Khaibar. This Division was organ- 
ised in three brigades, commanded respectively by Brigadier- 
Generals C, J. S. Gough, C.G. Arbuthnot and J. Doran, and, when 
completed, comprised the following corps :—Four companies of 
sappers and miners, three batteries of Royal Artillery, No. 4 (the 
Hazara) Mountain Battery, the 6th Dragoon Guards, the 3rd, roth and 
17th Bengal Cavalry, the Guides Cavalry, the 2-9th, 1-1ath and 51st 
Foot, the 8th, 24th, 27th, 30th, 31st and 45th Bengal Native Infantry, 
the and and 4th Gurkha Regiments, the Guides Infantry, and the 4th 
Madras Native Infantry. The troops moving on the Kuram and 
Khaibar lines were designated respectively the First and Second 
Divisions of the Kabui Field Force, and it was decided that as soon as 
they came into communication, after the occupation of Kabul, the 
command of the whole should be vested in Sir Frederick Roberts. 


Concurrently with these arrangements the Kandahar force, under 
Sir Donald Stewart, who was at the time actually on the move to 
return to India, was directed to stand fast. This force comprised six 
batteries of artillery, two companies of sappers and miners, the roth 
Bengal Lancers, the 1stand 2nd Punjab Cavalry, the 59th and 3-6oth 
Foot, the 15th, roth, and 25th Bengal Native Infantry, the 3rd Gurkha 
Regiment, the and Sikh Infantry, and the 29th Bombay Native 
Infantry. Of these the 19th Bengal Native Infantry and the and Sikh 
Infantry were in the Quetta District. 

On the 24th September the advance from the Shutargardan was 
begun by Brigadier-General Baker, No. 1 Mountain Battery, the 21st 
(Punjab) Native Infantry and the 3rd Sikh Infantry having now been 
detailed to hold that position, under the command of Lieutenant- 
Colonel Money. On the 27th Sir Frederick Roberts marched from 
Alikhel to the Shutargardan with the head-quarters of the cavalry 
brigade, a squadron of the gth Lancers, the sth Punjab Cavalry, the 
28th Native Infantry, and a detachment of the 5th Punjab Infantry ; 
during this movement the troops were annoyed by an incessant 
and irritating fire from parties of Mangals and Ghilzais, which 
accasioned several casualties. On the same day the Amir Yakub 


349 


Advance from 


350 


Battle of 
Charasiah, 
6th October. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Khan came into General Baker’s camp at Kushi, in the Logar valley» 
professing his regret for the tragedy of the 3rd and his powerlessness 
to have averted it. Sir Frederick Roberts himself arrived at Kushi 
on the 28th, and on the rst of October the whole of the field force 
was assembled there. The advance from that point was continued 
with as much expedition as possible, though it was delayed by 
insufficiency of transport, the want of which was keenly felt, and on 
the 5th the whole force (excepting two mountain guns, a squadron of 
the sth Punjab Cavalry, a wing of the 67th Foot, and the 28th Native 
Infantry, which were still one march in the rear, under Brigadier- 
General Macpherson, escorting reserve ammunition and commis- 
sariat stores), reached the village of Charasia, on the heights in 
advance of which, on both sides of the Sang-i-Nawishta Pass, the 
Afghans had taken up a formidable. position. 

On the following morning dispositions were made for forcing the 
Afghan position. The main attack, under Brigadier-General Baker, 
was designed to turn the enemy’s right and dislodge him from his 
position on the heights, while a feint was made at the pass by a 
detachment under Major White, of the 92nd Highlanders. As soon 
as the real nature of Brigadier-General Baker’s attack was realised by 
the enemy, every effort was made by them to strengthen their right 
and a vigourous resistance was Offered to the British advance. But all 
opposition was borne down by the gallantry of the 72nd Highlanders, 
the 23rd Pioneers, the 5th Punjab Infantry, and the sth Gurkhas, 
and by 3-45 P.M. the position was carried. At the same time the feint 
on the British right was changed into a real attack, and mainly owing 
to the personal gallantry of Major White, supported as it was by the 
bravery and dash of the Highlanders of his own regiment, the Sang-i- 
Nawishta was also carried, and soon the Afghans were flying in 
confusion towards Chardeh, with the loss of twenty guns and many 
hundred men. 

The British casualties in the battle amounted to Jemadar Khani- 
mulla, 5th Punjab Infantry, and nineteen men killed, and three 
British officers and sixty-four men wounded, of whom seven after- 
wards died. 

On the 7th October the force encamped at Bini Hisar, and on the 
8th the cavalry brigade advanced to Kabul. The enemy, who were in 
force on the Asmai heights, to the north-west of the city, were to have 
been attacked on the morning of the gth, but they dispersed during 


. > etnies _-,_, meee eee SC; 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


35! 


the night, leaving behind their stores and artillery; on the oth the British 
force encamped at Siah Sang, and on the 1ath Sir Frederick Roberts 
formally took possession of the Bala Hisar. Vast stores of powder 
and ammunition of all kinds were found in the arsenal, and, not- 
withstanding all precautions, a considerable explosion took place on 
the 16th October, in which several lives were lost. Partly as a 
punishment of the city, partly as a precaution, orders were issued for 
the demolition of the fortifications of the Bala Hisar, which work 
was at once commenced. About this time Yakub Khan expressed 
his determination of abdicating, and the Government was vested 
temporarily in Sir Frederick Roberts, who was soon after raised to 
the local rank of Lieutenant-General in Afghanistan. Yakub Khan 
was deported to India on the rst December. 


While these events had been happening’at Kabul, the little garrison 
at the Shutargardan had been hard pressed by the Ghilzais. The 
first attack was made on the and October, and the second on the 14th; 
in both the enemy were beaten off with considerable loss, the casual- 
ties on our side being only seven wounded on the former, and two 
killed and eight wounded on the latter occasion. Simultaneously with 
the attack on the 14th an effort was made by the tribesmen against 
Alikhel, which was garrisoned by three guns of C-4th Brigade, Royal 
Artillery, and detachments of the sath and 13th Bengal Cavalry and 
sth Punjab Cavalry, and of the 8th Foot andthe 11th and 2oth 
Native Infantry: the attack was easily repulsed, with heavy loss 
to the enemy, our own amounting to no more than seven men 
wounded. During the following days considerable additions joined the 
enemy’s forces; the Shutargardan position was completely surrounded 
on the 16th, and a determined attack was commenced on the 18th Octo- 
ber. On the following day, however, re-inforcements under Brigadier- 
General H. H, Gough, consisting of four guns, the sth Punjab Cavalry 
and the 5th PunjabjInfantry, arrived at Kushi from Kabul. Colonel 
Money, with the Shutargardan garrison, at once assumed the offen- 
sive ; the enemy were quickly defeated, and dispersed in all direc- 
tions, the loss on our side amounting to no more than seven men 
wounded. 


The Khaibar route having now been opened, the Shutargardan 
was abandoned for the winter and the garrison withdrawn. The 
21st Native Infantry retired to Alikhel, while No. 1 Mountain 


F ¢ 
Hb sn Se 

gardan and 
Alikhel. 


352 


Ri of tribes 
round Kabul, 
December. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Battery and the 3rd Sikh Infantry, together with two squadrons of the 
gth Lancers which had just arrived from Sialkot, accompanied 
Brigadier-General Gough on his return to Kabul. 

Early in November the camp at Siah Sang was abandoned, and 
the troops moved into and occupied the fortified cantonment of 
Sherpur, north of the city of Kabul. 

On the rst November a mixed force under Brigadier-General Mac- 
pherson, which was afterwards joined by Sir Frederick Roberts, was 
despatched to establish communication with the troops moving up 
from the Khaibar. This having been effected (Macpherson met 
General Bright at Kata Sang on the 6th), several reconnaissances 
were undertaken in the Lughman valley, etc., after which the force 
returned to Sherpur. During this expedition an engagement took 
place at Doaba, on the roth November, in which we had six men 
killed (including a sepoy of the 28th Native Infantry) and an 
officer and four men wounded. Later on, another force, under Briga- 
dier-General Baker, marched into the Maidan district, where a slight 
collision occurred with the Ghilzais. 

During the preceding two months the feeling of hostility towards 
the British, inflamed by their continued occupation of the country, 
by the destruction of the Bala Hisar, and by the deportation of the 
Amir to India, had been assuming more and more threatening 
dimensions. Aroused by their mu//as, who everywhere were preaching 
a jehad against the foreign Invaders, crowds of tribesmen were join- 
ing the standards of revolt. Mir Muhammad, an aged mulia of 
great reputed sanctity and commonly known asthe Mushk-i-Alam, 
Muhammad Jan, a Wardak leader of some note, and Mir Bucha, a 
prominent Kohistani chief, headed the insurgents; and early in 
December it was reported that a plan had been matured for surround- 
ng Kabul and overwhelming the British force in Sherpur. 

Measures were immediately taken to defeat this intention ; 
the Corps of Guides was called up from the Khaibar line, and on 
the 8th and 9th December two columns were sent out by Sir Frederick 
Roberts to meet and disperse the Afghan forces advancing from 
the north and from the west, before they could unite in the vicinity 
of Kabul. The first, under Brigadier-General Macpherson, was 
composed of four guns of the Royal Horse Artillery, four guns of 
No. s Mountain’ Battery, a squadron of the oth Lancers, two of the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


14th Bengal Lancers, and detachments of the 67th Foot (six com- 
panies), 3rd Sikh Infantry (sog men) and sth Gurkha Regiment (393 
men). The second column, under Brigadier-General Baker, con- 
sisted of four guns of No. 2 Mountain Battery, five troops of the 
sth Punjab Cavalry, and 450 each of the 93nd Highlanders and the 
sth Punjab Infantry. 

Macpherson, having left his cavalry (except one troop of the 14th 
Bengal Lancers) and horse artillery at Aushar, marched to the Surkh 
Kotal, near Karez-i-Mir, eight miles north of Kabul, and on the roth 
December attacked a large body of Kohistanis who were advancing 
to join Muhammad Jan, drove them down the hill with heavy loss, 
carried their breastworks at Karez-i-Mir, and dispersed them, losing 
himself only seven wounded in the day’s work. 

During the same day Brigadier-General Baker marched round 
the Korogh range, south and west of the capital, and then, turning 
northward, advanced towards the Paghman valley, and encamped a 
short distance to the west of Maidan. 

On the 11th Macpherson moved in a south-westerly direction from 
Karez-i-Mir, through the Surkh Kotal, towards Arghandeh, with the 
object of driving Muhammad Jan towards General Baker and of 
cutting off his retreat, and at the same time Brigadier-General W. G. 
Dunham Massy, with four horse artillery guns, two squadrons of the 
gth Lancers, and one of the 14th Benga] Lancers, was ordered to move 
from Aushar towards Arghandeh, and bring himself into communica- 
tion with Macpherson, with whom he was to co-operate. The com- 
bination, however, failed. Owing to an unfortunate misunderstanding, 
Massy moved by a shorter route than was intended, and in conse- 
quence, near the village of Kila Kazi, where Muhammad Jan had 
taken up a position the night before, he came face to face with an 
overwhelming force of Afghans (nearly 10,000 in number) while Mac- 
pherson was yet far away near the Surkh Kotal. -The dense hordes 
of Afghans advanced unchecked by the fire of the four guns; the 
cavalry charged gallantly, but ina country cut up by watercourses 
and canals it was impossible that so small a body could drive a 
charge home with sufficient force to have any perceptible effect on 
the immensely superior masses opposed to them. Sir Frederick 
Roberts, who had arrived on the scene, and who had ordered 
asecond charge of cavalry in the hope of saving the guns, 

24 


353 


354 


tor ordered a retreat to the village of Deh-i-Mozang, while he 


round Rabu, 


December 
sath—z4th, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


em ee ee, 6 ee > eee 


omc em 


sent for immediate reinforcements of infantry from Sherpur. 
The enemy pressed hard on the retiring force ; the four guns stuck in 
a deep ditch and had to be spiked and abandoned, and the advance 
of the Afghans was only checked by the timely arrival of 200 of the 
vyand Highlanders, whose fire barred their passage through the Deh- 
i-Mozang gorge. Muhammad Jan then turned aside and occupied 


the Takht-i-Shah, where he was ina position to threaten the Bala 
Hisar. 


While these events were in progress, Macpherson had continued 
his movement towards Arghandeh, but hearing the booming of guns 
he swung round his right and moved towards the point whence the 
sounds came, and about an hour after Massy’s force had begun 


retiring he arrived on the ground where the action had been fought. 
Here he came on the rear of the enemy, whom he speedily dispersed 
and drove off the field. He pursued them to Kila Kazi, whence he 
was ordered to fall back on Deh-i-Mozang, where he arrived late in 
the evening. The ground where the guns had been abandoned having 
by these movements been partially cleared, Colonel MacGregor, 
the Chief of the Staff, with the assistance of Major Badcock, Cap- 
tains Deane and Martin and other officers, anda few men, was 
able to extricate them and bring them in. 

On the same day Brigadier-General Baker, moving northwards, 
found the road into the Chardeh valley occupied, and was obliged 
late in the afternoon to force a passage for his brigade. He encamped 
that night at Arghandeh: next morning he was informed of the 
enemy's movements, and was recalled to Sherpur. 

Our losses on the 11th December in the two brigades of infantry 
were three killed and nineteen wounded. In the cavalry and 
artillery they amounted to twenty-seven killed and twenty-five 
wounded. Four officers were killed, among whom was Lieutenant 
Forbes, 14th Bengal Lancers. 

During the night following these events, the Corps of Guides, 
cavalry and infantry, which had been called up from Jagdalak on 


| the Khaibar line, arrived at Kabul, and formed a very welcome 
re-inforcement. 


On the 12th December Brigadier-General Baker marched into 
Sherpur, his rear-guard annoyed on the way by a running attack 


meee Ones we 
e 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 355 
Bh he cc eee a 


from the enemy, who, however, were kept well at bay by the sth 
Punjab Cavalry, and the sth Punjab Infantry. His losses were one 
killed and two wounded. | 
The position taken up by the enemy on the Takht-i-Shah was 
a very formidable one, and they had further increased their security 
by breastworks. General Macpherson received orders to dislodge 
them and accordingly attacked them on the morning of the tath | 
with detachments of the 67th and 73nd Foot, 3rd Sikh Infantry and 
sth Gurkha Regiment, supported by two guns of ‘No. 1 Mountain 
Battery, the assaulting force being commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel 
Money, of the 3rd Sikh Infantry. Notwithstanding the vigour and 
gallantry displayed by the force, the strength of the position rendered ' 
the attempt unsuccessful ; and it was determined to wait until the | 
co-operation of Baker's force could be obtained for a concurrent 


attack from the direction of Bini Hisar. Macpherson’s loss in this 
attempt amounted to four killed and twelve wounded, one of the 
latter being Major Cook, v.c., of the sth Gurkha Regiment, who 
afterwards died of his wounds. 

On the following day, as previously arranged, simultaneous attacks 
were made on the Takht-i-Shah, from the north under Macpherson 
and from the south-east under Baker. The force under the latter 
included four guns of G-3rd Brigade, Royal Artillery, and four of 
No. 2 Mountain Battery, one squadron of the gth Lancers, the 5th 
Punjab Cavalry, six companies of the 92nd Highlanders, seven of the 
Guides Infantry, 300 of the 3rd Sikh Infantry, and 100 of the 5th 
PunjabInfantry. In the course of his movement to the attack Baker 
found it necessary to seize the Bini Hisar ridge, which, though held 
by the enemy in great strength, was carried by the g2nd, but not 
without a fierce struggle in which that gallant regiment sustained con- 
siderable loss. Advancing thence, the gand and the Guides Infan- 
try, after a stubborn resistance on the part of the enemy, stormed 
and carried the Takht-i-Shah position, portions of the 72nd High- 
landers, the 3rd Sikh Infantry and the sth Gurkhas, of Macpherson’s 
force, reaching the summit at the same time from the northern side. 

While these operations were proceeding on the heights, the people 
of the city rose and in great numbers joined the insurgent tribes- 
men, part of them assembling at Siah Sang and the rest seizing 
and occupying two strongly fortified villages situated between Siah 

242 


356 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Sang and the Bala Hisar. Leaving a detachment to hold the Takht-i- 
Shah, Baker, under instructions from Sir Frederick Roberts, proceeded 
to deal with these bodies of the enemy, The two villages were 
stormed and captured with little difficulty, and the cavalry under 
Brigadier-General Massy (one squadron of the gth Lancers and two 
of the 14th Bengal Lancers) as well as the Guides Cavalry having 
been sent to his assistance, the enemy at Siah Sang were, after a 
stubborn contest, in which the gth Lancers and the Guides Cavalry 
made some splendid charges, routed and driven from the field with 
heavy logs. This concluded the operations of the day, during which 
our losses amounted to two officers and 12 men killed, and two 
officers and 44 men wounded. 


Feeling the necessity of having more troops to face the combi- 
nation against him, Sir Frederick Roberts now telegraphed to Major- 
General Bright to direct Brigadier-General C. J. S. Gough, with the 
ist Brigade of the Second Division of the Kabul Field Force (then 
at Gandamak, Pezwan, and Jagdalak) to move upto Kabul as quickly 
as might be possible. | 

Foiled in their attacks from the west and south of Kabul, the 
enemy now made an attempt from the north of the city, and early on 
the morning ofthe 14th seized and occupied the Asmai heights in 
great numbers. Sir Frederick Roberts determined to dislodge them 
at once, and to accomplish this object despatched Brigadier-General 
Baker at 9 a.M., with a force consisting of four guns of G-3rd 
Brigade, Royal Artillery, four of No. 2 Mountain Battery, the 14th © 
Bengal Lancers, 190 of the 72nd and 100 of the gand Highlanders, 
460 of the Guides Infantry, and 470 of the 5th Punjab Infantry. 

Baker began his operations by seizing a small conical hill forming 
the northern shoulder of the Aliabad Kotal. Leaving a small 
detachment to hold this point, he proceeded with the remainder of 
his force to expel the enemy from their position on the Asmai heights, 
Colonel Jenkins of the Guides heading the attack. The Afghans, 
favoured by the rugged nature of the ground, made a prolonged and 
obstinate resistance, but the forward gallantry of the Highlanders 
and the Guides overcame all obstacles, and by 12-30 P.M. the 
enemy were driven headlong from the heights, and the entire posi- 
tion was in our possession. Reinforced, however, by large numbers 
of insurgents moving upfrom the south-west, the Afghans rallied and 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


returned to the encounter, and assailing the small detachment hold- 
ing the conical hill they succeeded, by sheer weight of numbers, in 
carrying that post and capturing two mountain guns, Captain Spens 
of the 72nd falling covered with wounds in a heroic attempt to 
stem the overwhelming rush of the enemy. The lost guns were 
afterwards recovered. 


While these events were in progress on the Asmai heights, large | 
bodies of the enemy were found to have assembled at Siah Sang, 
whence they were endeavouring to make their way round the eastern . 
flank of the Sherpur cantonment. Some cavalry and horse artillery | 
were sent out under Brigadier-General H. H. Gough to disperse : 
them, but they got away to the hills before they could be intercepted, | 
except a body of about 400 who came into collision with a troop of 
the sth Punjab Cavalry under Captain Vousden, who charged them 
with great gallantry, routed them with heavy loss, and drove them 
from the field. 


It was now evident that the numbers combined against us were 
too overwhelming to admit of our holding on to isolated positions, and 
that concentration was becoming absolutely necessary. Roberts 
therefore recalled all the troops into Sherpur, and at night-fall the 
enemy were in possession of Kabul and the Bala Hisar. 


Our losses during the operations of the 14th amounted to two 


357 


British officers, two native officers and 30 men killed, and three | 


British officers, 6 native officers and 99 men wounded. The native 
officers who were killed were Subadar Rap Singh of the Guides, and 
Subadar Raghubir Nagarkoti of the 5th Gurkha Regiment. Subadar 
Jawala Singh of the Guides, Jemadar Gopal Singh of the r4th 
Bengal Lancers, and Jemadar Jhanda Singh of the sth Punjab 
Cavalry, afterwards died of the wounds they received this day. 


The British force was now besieged in the Sherpur cantonment, 
arectangular enclosure, a mile and a half long and rather more 
than two-thirds of a mile broad, the northern side of which was 
formed by the Bemaru ridge, and the other three sides by massive 
mud walls. 

For a week no actual attack upon the cantonment was made by 
the enemy, though they kept up a desultory fire, which occasioned : 
several casualties. On the 16th a body of about a thousand made 
an attempt on the post of Lataband, which formed a connecting 


Sherpar, 
December 
z 


358 


THE SERVICES OF THE | 


0 a re oS 


{ink with the forces on the Khaibar line and was held by the 28th 
Native Infantry and a wing of the 23rd Pioneers, but they were 
repulsed with considerable loss. On the morning of the 22nd the 
12th Bengal Cavalry were sent out to join the troops at Lataband 
and return with Gough’s force, which was short of cavalry : the junc- 
tion was accomplished with a, loss of only three killed and three 
wounded. On the evening of the 22nd reliable information was 
received in Sherpur that a determined attempt would be made on 
the following day to carry the position by assault, and at daybreak 
on the 23rd the attack began. For some hours strenuous and con- 
tinued efforts were made by the Afghans to effect an entrance into 
the position; but enormous as were their numbers, amounting to 
not less than 60,000, and determined as were their assaults, they 
were unable to stand before the steady and continuous fire of the 
garrison. At length, when their attacks began to flag, they suddenly 
found themselves taken in flank by a detachment consisting of 
four guns and the sth Punjab Cavalry, which had issued from the 
north side of the cantonment. Disheartened as they were by their 
ill-success, the sudden alarm rapidly became a panic, and the vast 
hordes broke and fied in all directions, pursued by the British cavalry. 
By 1 p.m. the firing had nearly ceased, and on the following morning 
not an enemy was to be seen. 

From the rsth to the 23rd inclusive, the British losses amounted 
to two British officers and 16 men ‘killed, and five British officers, 
two native officers and 61 men wounded; of these five were killed 
and 33 wounded in the final action of the 23rd December. Lieu- 
tenant Montanaro of No. 2 Mountain Battery, and Jemadar Jag 
Bahadur, of the Corps of Guides, died of their wounds. During 
the whole of the operations, from the roth to the 23rd December, 
our casualties amounted to 10 British officers, 2 native officers, and 
gi men killed, and 15 British officers, 9 native officers, and 239 
men wounded, a total of 366. The losses of the enemy during the 
same period were not less there 3,000 in killed and wounded. 

On the 24th Brigadier-General C, J. 5. Gough arrived at Kabul 
with his brigade, consisting of four guns of the Hazara Mountain 
Battery, a company of sappers and miners, the 2-gth Foot, a detach- 
ment of the 72nd Highlanders, and the and and 4th Gurkha Regi- 
ments: these regiments were, however, all weak, and the total strength 
of the brigade scarcely reached 1,400 men. The 12th Bengal 


nee a et 
og fp Re IN PCP SS SSS 


ee emer  commennmane OO te 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Cavalry, the 28th Native Infantry, and the wing of the 33rd Pioneers 
marched into Kabul with Gough. 

The enemy having fled, the city and the Bala Hisar were speedily 
re-occupied. Comparative tranquillity was soon restored in the 
neighbourhood, and on the 27th December Brigadier-General Baker 
was detached into Kohistan with a small force (four guns of No. 4 
Mountain Battery, the Corps of Guides, the 67th Foot, the and Gurkha 
Regiment, and the 5th Panjab Infantry) to mete out punishment to 
Mir Bucha for his share in the late disorders. This Chief's stronghold 
was reached on the 29th and found deserted: having destroyed it, 
Baker returned to Kabul on the 318t. 


The operations on the Khaibar line now claim attention. 
While the principal interest of the war was naturally centred in the 
operations at Kabul, the troops at Peshawar and in posts on the 
Khaibar line had been constantly employed in arduous and harassing 
duties. Major-General Bright took command of the force at Pesha- 
war on the 13th September ; and as troops began to arrive Brigadier- 
General Gough advanced with all possible speed to Dakka, and 
thence to Jalalabad. More trying and more destructive than a hard- 
fought action was the terrible sickness which now set in on the 
Khaibar route, several regiments being rendered unfit for even the 
lightest duties of garrisoning the posts on the road. The forward 
movement, of the division, however, continued. General Bright 
reached Gandamak on the and November; thence he and Gough 
advanced and met General Macpherson at Kata Sang, as already 
related, after which they again returned to Gandamak. Advancing 
once more to Jagdalak, Gough, on the rsth December, received 
orders from Sir Frederick Roberts to push on to Kabul with all 
possible speed. For some days, however, until the arrival of further 
reinforcements, Gough was unable to comply with these orders, and 
in the meantime there were constant skirmishes with the Ghilzais on 
the road between Gandamak and Jagdalak, the corps principally 
engaged being detachments of the Hazara Mountain Battery, the 
10th Bengal Lancers, the 2-gth Foot, the 24th Native Infantry, and 
the and Gurkha Regiment. At length, having been reinforced by 
Colonel Norman with detachments of the 24th and the 2nd Gurkha 
Regiment, Gough advanced on the 21st and reached Sherpur, as we 
have seen, on the 24th. During these operations the force under his 


359 


F 
rae, 
Hine in 


December. 


360 


The Kuram 
Valley. 


Zaimukht 
Expedition. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


command sustained a loss of one man killed and eighteen wounded 


—two mortally. 

The garrisons leftat Jagdalak and Jagdalak Kotal, under the com- 
mand of Colonel Norman, were not allowed much peace by the hostile 
tribesmen, who, after several vigorous attacks, made a final effort 
against those places on the 29th of December, under the leadership 
of Azimatullah Khan of Lughman; and it was only after some severe 
fighting that he was defeated and his following dispersed. Our 
casualties in these affairs amounted to four killed and eight wounded ; 
amongst the former was Lieutenant Wright, Royal Artillery, and 
amongst the latter Major Thackeray, Royal Engineers. The force 
under the command of Colonel Norman consisted of detachments 
of the Hazara Mountain Battery, the roth Bengal Lancers, the 51st 
Foot, and the 24th Native Infantry. 

In the meantime the force on the south side of the Paiwar Kotal 
had passed the autumn without important incident, except a punitive 
expedition against the Zaimukhts, who had been guilty of many 
dastardly outrages on the line of communications in the Kuram valley. 
The force employed on this service was under the command of 
Brigadier-General Tytler, and was composed of No. 1 Battery, 
8th Brigade, Royal Artillery (four screw guns), No. 1 (Kohat) Moun- 
tain Battery (two guns), a company of sappers and miners, detach- 
ments of the rst, 13th, and 15th Bengal Cavalry, a small detachment 
of the 2-8th Foot, the 85th Foot, the 13th, 20th, and 29th Native 
Infantry, and the 4th Punjab Infantry, Marching from Balesh 
Khel on the 8th December, Brigadier-General Tytler entered the 
Zaimukht country the same day, and having destroyed a number of 
towers and villages en rouse, the force arrived on the 12th within a 
short distance of the strong fastness of Zawo. At daybreak on the 
13th, General Tytler advanced to attack this place. Under cover 
of the fire of the two guns of No. 1 Mountain Battery, four com- 
panies of the 85th and four of the 29th Native Infantry moved 
forward on the right, and quickly carried several of the lower 
positions, while, as this attack developed, General Tytler advanced 
with his main column of infantry and guns up the defile leading 
to Zawo. The village of Bagh was reached without much resistance, 
but the column on the right did not succeed in occupying the 
ridge to the east of that place without some hand-to-hand fighting. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


The troops bivouacked for the night in the positions they had 
occupied, and on the following morning, the advance being continued, 
the crest of the pass was gained after considerable resistance and 
the village of Zawo taken. Subsequent- to this the force traversed 
various parts of the Zaimukht country, and having destroyed the 
villages concerned in the outrages in the Kuram valley and levied 
heavy fines in punishment, General Tytler withdrew, reaching Thal on 
the 23rd December. The casualties in the expedition were one man 
killed, and Lieutenant Renny, 4th Punjab Infantry (mortally), 
Jemadar Faz] Ahmad, 29th Native Infantry, and one man wounded. 

Whilst these events were proceeding in the north, the force in 
Southern Afghanistan had not been altogether idle. Having recalled 
the troops which had already left for India and assembled the force 
under his command at Kandahar, Sir Donald Stewart, in accord- 
ance with his orders, proceeded to make a demonstration towards 
Ghazni. The force detailed for this purpose was placed under 


the command of Brigadier-General Hughes, and consisted of six 


gans of the Royal Artillery, the 2nd Punjab Cavalry, a wing each of 
the 59th Foot and the 3rd Gurkha Regiment, and the agth Bombay 
Native Infantry. Marching from Kandahar on the 23rd September, 
Hughes oecupied Kalat-i-Ghilzai without opposition, and having left 
a small force there, he advanced to Tazi, three marches further on 
the Ghazni road, where he remained for some weeks. Shortly after 
the middle of October reports began to be prevalent that the Taraki 
Ghilzais, incited by that fire-brand the Mushk-i-Alam, were gathering 
at Shahjui, under their chief, Sahib Jan, for an attack on the British 
camp at Tazi, and a detachment was accordingly sent forward, 
under the command of Colonel Kennedy, to surprise them. This 
small force, which consisted of three guns of the Royal Artillery, two 
squadrons of the 2nd Punjab Cavalry, and two companies each of the 
59th Foot and the 29th Bombay Native Infantry, reached Shahjui 
as day broke on the 24th, drove in the picquets of the enemy, and 
after asharp hand-to-hand encounter with their main body, broke 
and dispersed them entirely, Sahib Jan and 41 of his men being leit 
dead on the ground. Our own loss amounted to two men killed, 
and two British officers, two native officers and 24 men wounded. 
By the end of October, Brigadier-General Hughes returned to 
Kalat-i-Ghilzai, and leaving a garrison there, on the 2nd November 


461 


The Kandahat 
Field Force. 


362 


Kabul, 1880. 


Operations on 


the Khaibar 
lines, 2880. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 
withdrew the main body of his column to Kandahar. For the rest 
of the winter almost complete tranquillity prevailed in the districts 
around that city. In, the tracts, however, to the north-west of 
Kandahar much excitement and confusion prevailed, and reports 
were rife that Ayub Khan, the brother of Yakub Khan, was advanc- 


ing on that place from Herat. 

The new year opened quietly in and around Kabul, where the 
principal interest of the moment was centred in the political ques- 
tion of the government of Afghanistan. In March the Kabul Field 
Force was reorganised. The existing Second (or Khaibar) Division 
was broken up, and the troops, excepting those sent on to Kabul, 
were absorbed on the line of communications, of which Major-General 
Bright was now appointed Inspector-General. The force at Kabul, 
having been strengthened and some of the worn-out corps replaced 
by fresher troops from the late Khaibar Division, was now formed into 
two divisions, the command of the Second of which was conferred 
upon Major-General John Ross, Sir Frederick Roberts continuing in 
command of the First and of the whole force. The Kabul Field 


rce now consisted of the following troops :— 
rae Artillery.—Four batteries of Royal Artillery, No. 2 Mountain Battery, and 
No. 4 Mountain Battery. 


nd Miners.—Four companies. 
Cola The oth cooley Sa ard and 17th Bengal Cavalry, and the 3rd 


Punjab Cavalry. 
bs ical ag gand Foot. 


ist Brigade sath Native Infantry, 
4sth Native Infantry. 
720d Foot. 
: grd Sikh Infantry. 
and Brigade +") sth Punjab Infantry (six compapies.) 
5th Gurkha Regiment. 
67th Foot. 
. { 27th Native Infantry. 
aed Gurkha Regiment. 


2-9th Foot. 
jaa Native Infantry. 


| 4th Gurkha Regiment. 
U , §23rd Native Infantry (Pioneers). 
attached + VThe Corps of Guides. 
| On the Khaibar line the Ghilzais continued to give trouble, and 
it was decided in consequence to send an expedition into Lughman as 
soon as the re-inforcements then coming up from India should have 


atrived. Before this could be undertaken, however, operations had 


3rd Brigade 


ath Brigade 


ee ee ee 


- as ek 


—- NN eee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 363 


to be entered upon against the Mohmands, who had gathered on the | 
northern bank of the Kabul river and begun crossing over. A party 
of them who attacked the post at Ali Boghan on the 12th January | 
were repulsed, and a larger body was dispersed on the following day | 
by artillery fire alone. The main body, about 1,500 strong, crossed | 
the river near Dakka, and took up a position on the Gara heights ; : 
here they were attacked on the 15th by Colonel Boisragon (in com- 
mand of a small force consisting of detachments of the 6th Dragoon 
Guards, 17th Bengal Cavalry, and 8th and 30th Native Infantry, with 
four guns) and, after a brief contest, routed and driven back over the 
river with considerable loss. The casualties on our side amounted to 
Jemadar Bahadur Khan, 8th Native Infantry, killed, and seven men 
wounded. , 

Towards the end of January the arrival of reinforcements at the 
base enabled General Bright to despatch a force into the Lughman 
valley. This force was under the command of Colonel Walker, of 
the 12th Foot, but was accompanied by General Bright himself ; it con- 
sisted of four guns of the Royal Artillery, two guns of No. 4 Mountain 
Battery, two companies of Madras sappers, a squadron each of the 
6th Dragoon Guards and the 17th Bengal Cavalry, a wing each of the 
1-1ath Foot, 1-a5th Foot, and 27th Native Infantry, and six companies 
of the 3oth Native Infantry. During three weeks Lughman, of both 
sides of the Kabul river, was traversed and explored in every direc- 
tion, without any opposition from the enemy. On the a1st February 
the force was broken up, and the troops returned to their several posts 
on the line of communications. 

The altered organisation of the forces holding the Khaibar line of 
communications has already been mentioned. Extensive changes 
amongst the troops employed on the line also took place at this time, 
many regiments and batteries having been moved on to Kabul and 
several sent back to India, the places of all these being taken by 
other corps. At the end of March the troops employed on the line 
were five batteries of Royal Artillery, No. 1 Mountain Battery, one 
company of Bengal and three of Madras sappers, the 6th Dragoon 
Guards, the 8th Hussars, the 4th and 5th Bengal Cavalry, a wing each 
of the rst and and Central India Horse, the 1-sth, 1-1ath, 2-14th, 
t-18th, 1-25th and srst Foot, the 8th, 9th, 16th, 2and, 3oth, 31st, 

3and (Pioneers), and 41st Bengal Native Infantry, the rst Gurkha 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Regiment, and the 1st, 4th and 15th Madras Native Infantry : Major- 
General Bright was in command of the whole as Inspector-General 
of the line of communications, Brigadier-Generals Gib, Doran and 
Hill being in command respectively of the three sections into which 
the line was divided, and Brigadier-General Arbuthnot in command 
of a moveable column to operate on any part of the line in which its 
services might be required. 

The month of March in the Khaibar was marked by several 
attacks on small parties and on posts on the line of communications. 
On the 22nd Lieutenant Thurlow, 51st Foot, was shot dead, between 
Jagdalak and Jagdalak Kotal, by a band of Ghilzais from Hisarak, 
and on the 26th a most determined attack was made on the post of 
Fort Battye, near Fatehabad, by a body of Shinwaris and Khugianis. 
This post was held by detachments of the 4th Bengal Cavalry and the 
4th Madras Native Infantry, but the garrison had fortunately been 
increased that evening by a detachment of the 31st Bengal Native 
Infantry, which had halted there for the night while in progress to 
a post higher up the line. The attack was pressed home with great 
energy, but was repulsed with_heavy loss to the assailants, that of the 
garrison being Lieutenant Angelo, 31st Native Infantry, and six men 
killed, and 19 men wounded. In consequence of these affairs two 
columas were sent into the Khugiani country early in April, but the 
enemy offered no opposition, and after some of their towers had been 
destroyed, they submitted and paid the fines imposed upon them. 
This expedition was followed a few days later by the despatch of a 
force into the Hisarak valley, for the punishment of a Ghilzai chief 
named Muizzullah Khan, who was concerned in the attack in which 
Lieutenant Thurlow was killed. The force, which was under the com- 
mand of Brigadier-General Arbuthnot, was composed of two horse 
artillery and two mountain guns of the Royal Artillery, two guns of 
No. 1 Mountain Battery, detachments of the 6th Dragoon Guards and 
4th Bengal Cavalry, two companies of sappers, one Madras and one 
Bengal, the 51st Foot, the 8th and 31st Native Infantry, and the rst 
Gurkha Regiment. Muizzullah Khan’s fort was destroyed on the 
12th April; subsequently, though there was some skirmishing, and 
a good deal of firing into our camp at night, little opposition 
was encountered, except at the Auzangani defile on the 14th, where 
the Ghilzais made a determined stand and caused some casualties. 
Our losses during the expedition amounted to Lieutenant Palmer 


-., 


om ae 


—_ 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 365 


(Commissariat Department) and one man killed, and four officers and | 
fifteen men wounded. 

During the early months of 1880 nothing of importance er Kuram Valley. 
in the Kuram valley, where Major-General Watson had succeeded | 
Brigadier-General Gordon in the command. In February Brigadier- | 
General Newdigate was appointed to the command of a brigade, in | 
succession to Brigadier-General Tytler, who died of pneumonia on 
the 14th of that month. 

. In January 1880, as part of a plan for the pacification of Afghan- Aiehaatae: 
istan and our eventual withdrawal from the country, the Bengal | :80. 
troops under Sir Donald Stewart were ordered to move up from 

Kandahar to Ghuzni, and thence open communication with Kabul, 

their place at Kandahar being taken by Bombay troops, to be moved 

up from Pishin and Sind. The Ghazni Field Force, as Sir Donald’s | Ofvenr4oe_, 
command was now designated, accordingly left Kandahar on the 29th | 

of March, and for three weeks advanced northward without meeting 

any opposition, although after passing Kalat-i-Ghilzai all the villages 

were found deserted, and it was only with much difficulty that supplies 

could be procured. 

At length on the morning of the 19th April, about two hours after | Battie oxhel, 
beginning the march from Mushaki, the Afghans were discovered in | April sgth. 
great force in advance of the head of the column and on a range of 
hills to the left of the road at Ahmad Khel, twenty-three miles south 
of Ghazni. Dispositions were at once made to attack the enemy | 
and the force was arranged as follows:—In the centre were one | 
battery of horse and one of field artillery, with a squadron of the 
19th Bengal Lancers and a company of the roth Native Infantry as 
escort; on the right was the greater portion of the cavalry, ois. a 
squadron of the 19th Bengal Lancers, the and Punjab Cavalry, and 
two squadrons of the rst Punjab Cavalry; on the left of the guns 
was Brigadier-General Hughes’ brigade (the s9th Foot, the 3rd 
Gurkha Regiment, and‘the 2nd Sikh Infantry) with a troop of the 
19th Bengal Lancers, and on the extreme left, and slightly in rear, a 
heavy battery of artillery. In reserve were the rgth Native Infantry, ' 
two companies of sappers, and the head-quarters escort, consisting 
of a troop of the 19th Bengal Lancers and a company each of the 
2-60th Rifles and the 25th Native Infantry. On the road behind were 
the hospitals, field parks, and baggage, and in rear of all Brigadier- ! 


3606 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


| General Barter’s brigade,—a mountain battery, the 2-6oth Rifles, the 


15th and 25th Native Infantry, and one squadron of the rst Punjab 
Cavalry. Before the action commenced, half of Barter’s brigade was 
moved up to the front of the baggage, and arrived in time to rein- 
force the right centre before the close of the fighting. 

At 9 A.M. the guns took up positions, but scarcely had they opened 
fire, when masses of ghasi-led Afghans rushed furiously down the 
slopes from their position against the line of British infantry, while 
a large body of horsemen, turning the left of the British line, now 
reinforced by a squadron of the roth Bengal Lancers, poured down 
two ravines, and, uniting at the foot of the hill, struck the Lancers 
before they could get up sufficient speed to meet the shock, and 
forced them back on the knoll occupied by Sir Donald Stewart and 


| his staff; nor could they be rallied until they had passed to the rear 
| of the right of the line of infantry, which was itself hard pressed and 


beginning to give way. The 3rd Gurkhas formed rallying squares and, 
throwing in a withering fire, checked for a time the reckless rush of the 
enemy, but the fanatic horde pressed on, enveloping both flanks, and 
it became necessary to bring forward every man of the reserve, 
the two sapper companies and a half battalion of the 19th Native 
Infantry reinforcing the left, while the remaining half battalion and 
the two companies of infantry of Sir Donald’s escort supported the 
guns on their left. 


In the centre and on the right, at this time, so impetuous was the 
rush of the Afghan swordsmen, that even case-shot from the guns at 
a distance of fifty yards was insufficient to check them; and at last, 
all their ammunition having been expended, the two batteries were 
compelled to fall back about two hundred yards. 

The situation for the moment was critical; both flanks had been 
forced back, and all the reserves were in the front line: but the 
enemy’s advance on the left was now effectually checked and turned 
back by the deadly fire of the 3rd Gurkha Regiment; the and Sikh 
Infantry, in the centre, still maintained their position with unwaver- 
ing steadiness ; and on the right the enemy were charged and pushed 
back by the 19th Bengal Lancers and the and Punjab Cavalry. All 
along the line the attack began to slacken; in a few minutes it 
ceased, and as part of Barter’s brigade came up the Afghans began 
to fall back; soon the retirement became a rout, and the masses of 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


367 


the enemy, flying in all directions, were dispersed over the country. 
Of the 15,000 they brought into action, upwards of a thousand were 
left dead on the field, and the total loss could not have been less 
than three times that number. Our own losses amounted to seventeen 
killed, and one hundred and twenty-four (including nine British 
officers) wounded. 

After a rest of two hours, the march was resumed, and Ghazni was 
reached on the 21st April. On the 23rd, before day-break, a strong 
' force was despatched under Brigadier-General Palliser, against a 

large body of the enemy who had taken post in the villages of Shalez 
and Arzu, about seven miles to the south-east of Ghazni. The posi- 
tion was, however, found to be so strong that General Palliser consi- 
dered it imprudent to attempt an assault until he was reinforced. 
The remainder of the troops (excepting those left to guard the camp 
and to hold Ghazni) arrived at 11 a.m. under Sir Donald Stewart, who 
immediately made dispositions to attack. In less than an hour the 
affair was over; the Afghans, making little or no stand, were easily 
expelled from the villages, and fled in confusion with a loss of 400 
of their number, our own losses being no more than two killed and 
eight wounded. 

On the 25th, at Shashgao, Sir Donald Stewsrt came into commu- 
nication with Major-General Ross’s division of Sir Frederick Roberts’ 
force, then at Saiadabad, and on the 28th, handing over the com- 
mand of the Ghazni Field Force to Brigadier-General Hughes at 
Haidar Khel, he left for Kabul to assume supreme command of the 
forces in Northern Afghanistan. The Ghazni Field Force now be- 
came the Third Division of the Kabul Field Force, and moved into 
the Logar valley, where, on the 16th May, the command was taken 
over by Major-General Hills. 

During the early days of April nothing of importance from a 
military point of view occurred at Kabul, though there were rumours 
of hostile gatherings in various parts of the country. The first move- 
ment of importance was the despatch to the southward of Major- 
General Ross with a force which was intended to meet and escort 
supplies to the troops moving up from Kandahar under Sir Donald 
Stewart. This force was composed of four guns of the Royal 
Artillery, No. 4 Mountain Battery, a company of sappers, a squadron 
of the 9th Lancers, the 3rd Bengal Cavalry, two squadrons of the 
3rd Punjab Cavalry, the 2-9th Foot, the 23rd (Pioneers) and 24th 


——- ee eee omune” ant 


Attack oa 


will of 
Chales and 
Arsu, 


April agrd. 


The Kabul 
Field Force. 


368 


Action at 
ildaktar 


April asth. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


nner setae 
Native Infantry, and the 4th Gurkha Regiment; it marched from 
Kabul on the r7th April, and six days later reached Saiadabad without 
experiencing any opposition worthy of notice. Two days after the 
despatch of General Ross’s force, intelligence was received that an 
attack was to be made on it from the Logar valley, and in order to 
obviate any such movement a small force (two horse artillery guns, 
the Corps of Guides and a wing of the g2nd Highlanders) was sent 
to Charasia on the z2oth under the command of Colonel Jenkins. 
On the 21st Colonel Jenkins encamped at Chihildakhtaran, near 
Charasia, and here he was vigorously attacked on the 25th by a body 
of three thousand Logaris: though hard pressed he was able to keep 
the enemy in check until 1-20 ».m., when Brigadier-General Mac- 
pherson arrived with reinforcements consisting of two guns of the 
Royal Artillery, four guns of No. 2 Mountain Battery, a troop of the 
3rd Punjab Cavalry, the remaining wing of the 92nd Highlanders, 
six companies of the 45th Native Infantry, and two of the znd Gurkha 
Regiment. Macpherson at once assumed the offensive against the 
enemy’s left, and having turned that flank with the Gurkhas, High- 
landers and Sikhs, forced the Afghans to retire, and eventually put 


|them to flight with heavy loss. The casualties on Our side were 


four killed and thirty-four wounded. 

On the same day (25th April) General Ross with a part of his force 
encountered a body of Afghans at Shekabad, near Saiadabad, and 
drove them from the ground with considerable loss, himself having 
only one man killed and four wounded in the engagement. Having 
established communication with the Ghazni Field Force, Ross’s 
column (now joined by Sir Donald Stewart) moved back to Kabul, | 
where it arrived on the and May. 

Nothing of much importance connected with the Kabul Field Force 
occurred during the months of May and June. Portions of the force 
moved into various parts of the surrounding country with a view to 
keeping open the roads and to ease the pressure on the supplies at 
the capital, but in no case was any opposition encountered, though 
Muhammad Jan, Mir Bucha, and other chiefs had ‘in no measure 
relaxed their efforts to create fresh disturbances. During this period 
a mission was sent to Turkistan, to communicate with Abdur 
Rahman Khan, one of the candidates for the throne of Afghanistan, 
and was well received. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Towards the end of June the Third Division (late the Ghazni Field 
Force), under the command of Major-General Hills, after making 
various movements in the Logar valley, marched to Zargunshahr, 
where it arrived on the 30th of the month. Thence on the rst of 
July, a force (under the command of Brigadier-General Palliser, and 
consisting of detachments of the 19th Bengal Lancers and of the 
1st and znd Punjab Cavalry, amounting altogether to about 560 
men) was detached against a gathering of 1,500 Zurmattis at the 
village of Patkao Shana. The enemy were overtaken while in retreat 
and were completely dispersed, with a loss of 200 of their number, 
our own loss being three killed and twenty-nine (including one 
officer) wounded. 

All through the spring and summer negotiations had been in pro- 
gress with the Kabuli sardars and Abdur Rahman Khan, with a view 
to establishing the latter as Amir. At last, after much intriguing, the 
Negotiations were brought to a successful issue and the new Amir was 
formally proclaimed in Durbar on the 2and of July. 

During these months (April to August, 1880) affairs on the 
Khaibar line continued in a very unsettled state: raids and dis- 
turbances were frequent, and more than one punitive expedition 
had to be undertaken. During the third week in May a force 
under Brigadier-General Doran (two guns of No. 1 Mountain Battery, 
and detachments of the Central India Horse, 1-5th and 1-13th Foot, 
and rst and 4th Madras Native Infantry) moved from Jalalabad into 
the Besud district, north of the Kabul river, and at Beninga, on the 
19th, defeated and dispersed a body of Safis from Kunar, with a 
Joss on our side of only one British officer, one native officer, and 
five men wounded. At the same time a column under Brigadier- 
General Gib (four guns of the Royal Artillery, and detachments of the 
8th Hussars, sth Bengal Cavalry, 214th Foot, and 33nd Native 
Infantry (Pioneers) encountered and defeated a large gathering of 
Shinwaris at Mazina (20th May), our loss being four men killed 
and two officers and five men wounded. Early in june a force, 
which was under the command of Brigadier-General Doran and 
included detachments of the Central India Horse and of the oth and 
32nd Native Infantry, moved into Kama, and destroyed the 
forts and towers of the hostile clans. In the middle of the 
same month an expedition was led by Brigadier-General Arbuthnot 


369 


Proclamation 
of Abdur 


Rahman, 
July send, 


The Khaibar 
Line. 


370 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Kuram 
April-August, 
3880. 


News of Mai- 
wand, July, 
288o, 


into the Lughman valley; and early in July another under Colonel 
Ball-Acton, which included detachments of the 4th Bengal Cavalry 
and the 31st Native Infantry, captured and destroyed the village of 
Nargashai, with a loss of only five men wounded. 

In the Kuram district during these months but little of military 
importance occurred, though raids by the Waziris and Khostwals 
were frequent ; in one of these the post of Chapri was rushed (rst 
May) by a band of Waziris and Dawaris, who succeeded in getting 
into the enclosure, where they killed Lieutenant Wood, of the 
Transport Department, and eight men, and wounded thirteen others. 
As the summer advanced, however, the country quieted down to 
some extent, and the troops were principally occupied with prepara- 
tions for the return to India, which was to be commenced in October. 

At the end of July, when the principal subject of consideration 
was the withdrawal to India of the British troops in Northern 
Afghanistan, news was received of the long-threatened advance of 
Ayub Khan from Herat, of the terrible disaster which had befallen 
the Bombay force at Maiwand, and of the investment of Kandahar 
by the troops of Ayub Khan and the mutinous regiments of the 
Wali Sher Ali Khan of Kandahar. Measures for the restoration of 
British prestige in Southern Afghanistan and for the relief of the 
beleaguered garrison were promptly adopted, and on the 3rd of 
August orders were given forthe immediate despatch from Kabul 
to Kandahar of a strong force under the command of Sir Frederick 
Roberts. At the same time instructions were issued for the forma- 
tion of another strong force at Quetta (for which the 3rd, 4th, and 
17th Bengal Native Infantry were detailed) to move on Kandahar 
from the southward under the command of Major-General Phayre. 
The force under the command of Sir Frederick Roberts was desig- 
nated “The Kabul-Kandahar Field Force,” and was composed of 
the following corps :— 

Cavalry Brigade :— 


oth Lancers. 
Brigadier-General 3rd Bengal Cavalry. 
H. H. Gough. \ Punjab Cavalry. 
Central India Horse. 
Artillery :— 


No. 6 Battery, 8th Brigade, Royal Artiller 
Colonel A. C. Johnson ° op (UT » 9th ” 
+» 2 Mountain Battery. 


oo 99 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


37! 


Infantry,—Major-General J. Ross, c.8., Commanding. 
Ist Brigade :— 


Brigadier-General 23rd (Punjab) Native Infantry (Pioneers). 
H, T. Macpherson. ) 24th mr 


7 
and Gurkha Regiment. 


and Brigade :— 
qand Highlanders. 
Brigadier-General and Sikh Infantry. 
T. D. Baker, ard gg 
sth Gurkha Regiment. 
grad Brigade :— 


2-Goth Rifles. 
Brigadier-General {3 (Sikh) Native Infantry. 
C. M. MacGregor. ) asth (Punjab) Native Infantry. 
ath Gurkha Regiment. 
By the end of the first week of August al] arrangements at Kabul 
were complete, and on the 8th the Kabul-Kandahar Field Force was 


assembled at Bini Hisar; thence on the following morning it began 


that memorable march which has since become one of the most |. 


famous achievements of the British arms in India.® 

The story of “ Roberts’ march” is interesting and instructive as an 
example of what can be effected by energy and careful organization. 
Starting with a force of picked troops, and with transport as com- 
plete as could be procured under the circumstances, the under- 
taking was aided by the influence of the new Amir during the first 
part of the march, and it was not at any time impeded by open 
hostilities: notwithstanding these advantages the fact yet remains 
that to march over three hundred and twenty miles in twenty-two 
days with an army of 10,000 fighting men and 8,000 followers, 
two-thirds of the distance being through an enemy’s country, was a feat 
which required not only energy and forethought of the first order 
at the head, but the most careful and competent supervision of all 
details, however small, and the most thorough and conscientious 
work in all ranks from the general commanding to the junior officer 
of transport. 

Marching through the Logar valley, in order to gain the benefit 
of its fertile crops, the force reached Ghazni on the 15th August,— 
98 miles in seven days. Thence without a halt the march was 


® In the opinion of Sir Frederick Roberts himself the advance on Kabol from 
Kuram, in the autumn of 1879, was in every particular a more difficult and dan- 
gerous operation. —/, 
2B3 


372 


Battle of 
Kandahar, 
September 
yet. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


continued through a rough and treeless country, under a scorching 
sun, with all the trying accompaniments of rear guard and baggage 
guard duties, the difficulties of which no one who has not had experi- 
ence of the Indian camp-follower can fully realise ; or with the almost 
equally wearying nights on guard, after the labours of the march and 
the toils of fatigue duty. Day after day the force pushed on, until on 
the 23rd August Kalat-i-Ghilzai was reached, 232 miles having been 
covered in fifteen days. Here one day was allowed for well-earned 
rest; and on the 25th, when the march was resumed, the force was 
augmented by the garrison of Bombay troops, which Sir Frederick 
Roberts deemed it expedient to withdraw. At length on the 27th 
August, at Robat, heliographic communication was established with 
the Kandahar garrison by the cavalry brigade, and in the evening the 
camp of that brigade was joined by several officers from the lately be- 
leaguered city. It being now ascertained that the siege had been 
raised, and that the Afghan army was entrenching itself in a position 
north-west of the town, Sir Frederick Roberts determined to give his 
force a day’s rest at Robat, and thence to march the remaining 
eighteen miles to Kandahar by two easy stages, in order that his men 
might arrive there as fresh as possible for the work before them. | 
The forced marches of the division therefore ended at Robat, where 
the main body arrived on the 28th August, and when 303 miles 
had been covered in twenty days. . 

On the 31st Kandahar was reached, and after a halt outside the 
Shikarpur gate, the troops encamped on the plain to the west of the 
city and cantonments, the and and 3rd Brigades occupying Picquet 
Hill, Karez Hill, and a spur of the hill above old Kandahar. Onthe 
Same afternoon a reconnaissance in force (the 3rd Bengal Cavalry 
and the 15th Native Infantry with two guns, under Brigadier-General 
Gough) demonstrated that Ayub Khan was holding the village of 
Pir Paimal and the Baba Wali Kotal, north-west of the camp, in 
considerable strength ; and that his encampment was behind (north 
of) these, at Mazra, but whether the latter was entrenched or not was 
not ascertained. Our loss in this reconnaissance amounted to three 
killed, and an officer and eleven men wounded. 

Having thus obtained all the information he required, Sir 
Frederick Roberts decided on attacking Ayub Khan on the 
following morning, his plan of operations being briefly to threaten 
the enemy’s left at the Baba Wali Kotal and to assail his right in 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


373 


SS SSeS SSS SS SSS SSUES, 


force by the village of Pir Paimal, carry that point, and take the 
Baba Wali Kotal in reverse. For the former purpose part of the 
Bombay force was detailed, for the latter the whole of the infantry 
of the Kabul-Kandahar Force,—the 1st and 2nd Brigades to deliver 
the attack, while the 3rd remained in reserve, the cavalry of the 
Kabul-Kandahar Force meanwhile operating by the left, by the 
village of Gandigan, and working towards the Argandab river, so as 
to threaten the rear of Ayub Khan’s camp and his line of retreat 
towards Girishk and Kakrez. To carry out these operations the 
troops were in position at an early hour on the morning of the rst 
September, but it then became apparent that the enemy were them- 
selves contemplating offensive measures, they having during the night 
occupied the villages of Gandi MullaSahibdad and Gandigan, at the 
foot of the Baba Wali range, as well as the gardens and orchards con- 
necting these villages,—positions from which it would be necessary to 
expel them before any advance could be made on Pir Paimal. To 
secure this object Brigadier-General Macpherson was instructed to 
advance direct on Gandi Mulla with the 1st Brigade, take the village, 
and then drive the enemy from the enclosures lying between it and 
the low spur of the hill short of Pir Paimal, Brigadier-General Baker, 
with the and Brigade, being ordered to advance at the same time on 
Macpherson’s left, and clear the gardens and orchards in his imme- 
diate front. To Major-General Ross was entrusted the direction of 
these attacks. 

Shortly after 9-30 a.m. the operations of the day were begun by a 
heavy battery of Royal Artillery with the Bombay force opening fire 
on the Baba Wali Kotal, and the attention of the enemy having been 
attracted to this point, General Ross was directed to begin the real 
attack, on the right of the Afghan position. Covered by the fire of 
two batteries, Macpherson advanced on Gandi Mulla, and after a 
sharp contest the village was carried by the gand Highlanders and 
the and Gurkha Regiment. Baker, moving forward at the same time, 
encountered an obstinate resistance from the Afghans posted in the 
walled gardens and orchards on the left, and the 72nd Highlanders 
and the and Sikh Infantry sustained considerable loss. At length, 
however, all opposition was overcome and the enemy were driven 
back to Pir Paimal, and the two brigades, uniting at that point and 
wheeling to the right, swept all before them until they reached an 
entrenched position on the further side of the Baba Wali Kotal, 


374 


Evacuation of 
Afghanis 


tan, 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


where the Afghans made a last desperate stand: it was, however 
only for a moment; a gallant rush of the g2nd, headed by Major 
White, broke through the opposing force, and soon the whole Afghan 
army was In full fight. Owing, however, to the nature of the ground, 
General Ross was unable to realise the extent of the victory, and 
expecting the enemy to take up a fresh position further on he halted 
to re-form his brigades. When, however, the advance was resumed 
a few minutes disclosed the-fact that the victory was complete, and 
that Ayub’s camp was standing deserted. The pursuit was taken 
up by the cavalry as effectually as possible, but owing to the 
extended position occupied by the enemy on the morning of the Ist 
Brigadier-General Gough was obliged to make such a wide detour that 
he did not arrive on the Afghan line of retreat in sufficient time to do 
as much execution as might otherwise have been effected. 

Our loss on the rst September was 3 British officers, one native 
officer and 33 men killed, and 10 British officers, 4 native officers 
and 202 men wounded,—making a total loss on the two days of 40 
killed and 228 wounded,—of the latter of whom more than twenty 
afterwards succumbed to the injuries they had received. 

Thus was brought to a worthy conclusion an undertaking which 
at the time was watched with breathless interest by the whole military 
world, and which will always rank as one of the most brilliant achieve- 
ments of the British arms in India. 

The battle of Kandahar not only relieved the garrison of that 
place, but brought the war to a speedy conclusion. The with- 
drawal of the remaining troops from Kabul had commenced almost 
immediately after the departure thence of Sir Frederick Roberts 
force, and the frontier, as arranged by the peace of Gandamak, was 
resumed. In Southern Afghanistan the field force was withdrawn, as 
quickly as possible, with the exception of a moderate garrison which 
was retained at Kandahar. Early in the following year Kandahar 
also was given up and the frontier, as it existed before the war, was 
re-established both in the north and in the south. 

For the second campaign in Afghanistan the thanks of Parliament 
were voted to the army and the generals engaged; a medal was 
granted to all who were not already in possession of the first, with clasp, 
for the actions of CHamasia, Kasur, AHMAD Kuz, anp KANDAHAR, 
anda special bronze star was given to the troops who took part in 
Roberts’ march to Kandahar (G. G. O. Nos. 673 of 1880 and 473 of 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


375 


1881), Regimentsengaged were authorised to bear all the above 
names on their colours and appointments (G. G. O. No. 418 of 1881) ; 
_and a second grant of six months’ batta was made to all ranks 
(G.G, O. No. 459 of 1880). | 

In October 1880, during the withdrawal of the troops from Afghan- 
istan, a punitive expedition under Brigadier-General MacGregor was 
despatched from the Harnai line against the Marri tribes, who, since 
the disaster at Maiwand, had been conspicuous for the boldness of their 
outrages. The force employed consisted of a mountain battery of 
the Royal Artillery, the 3rd Punjab Cavalry, the 2-6oth Rifles, the 4th 
and sth Gurkha Regiments, and the andand 3rd Sikh Infantry. Very 
little opposition was met with, but the exceedingly difficult nature 
of the country rendered the expedition one of great hardship to the 
troops. Having traversed the country in various directions and 
visited Kahun, the chief town of the tribes, and the terms dictated 
bythe British Government having been accepted, and due submis- 
sion and reparation made by the tribesmen, the force withdrew in 
November. 

The termination of hostilities in Afghanistan left the Government 


of India at leisure to turn their attention to the Mahsud Waziris, who, | 4, 


incited thereto from Kabul, had, during the continuance of the war, 
been guilty of numerous raids and outrages on our borders and on the 
line of communications in the Kuram valley, and in the spring of 
1881 an expeditionary force, under the command of Brigadier-Gene- 
ral Kennedy, was prepared at Tank to visit them with the punish- 
ment due to their misdeeds. The force consisted of the Peshawar 
Mountain Battery, three guns of the Hazara and two of the Derajat 
Mountain Batteries, detachments of the rst and 4th Punjab Cavalry, 
the 8th Company of Sappers and Miners, and a wing each of the 
32nd Native Infantry (Pioneers), 1st and 4th Sikh Infantry, and rst, 
and, 3rd, 4th, and 6th Punjab Infantry. A reserve column was also 
assembled at Bannu under the command of Brigadier-General 
J. J. H. Gordon, comprising No. 1 Battery, 8th Brigade, Royal 
Artillery, No, 1 Mountain Battery (two guns), the 18th Bengal 
Cavalry, the 6th Company of Sappers and Miners, the 14th, 2oth, 
21st, and 3oth Native Infantry, and the 5th Punjab Infantry. Before 
General Kennedy's advance, which took place on the aist of April, 
the submission of most of the tribe had already been received; 
but the Nana Khel section still held out, and it was against them 


Expedition 
eSet the 


ahsud 
Wasiris, May 
388z, 


376 


Internal 
history. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


principally that the operations were directed. Passing up the Shuhur 
valley, the force visited various settlements of the recusant clan 
without experiencing much opposition until the 3rd of May, when the. 
advance was furiously attacked, near Shah Alam Ragza, by a large 
force of the enemy. The charge, however, was easily repulsed by 
the rst Sikh Infantry, and the enemy were driven back completely 
beaten; on the sth Kaniguram was occupied, and on the rth 
Makin. In the meantime, under instructions from General Kennedy, 
the Bannu column, under Brigadier-General Gordon, had moved 
into the hills, and, proceeding up the Khaisora valley, had, after 
some skirmishing, reached Razmak on the gth May, when it came 
into communication with the Tank column. Some more skirmishing 
took place, but no further serious opposition was encountered, and 
the Nana Khels having submitted, the troops returned to British 
territory, —General Kennedy by the Tank-Zam and General Gordon 
by the Shaktu valley. The total casualties during the expedition 
amounted to eight killed and twenty-four wounded. 


But few internal changes or points of interest are to be noted 
in the three years covered by this chapter; not only is the period 
a very short one, but it was too fully occupied by-the business and 
excitement of active operations to leave much time for organisation or 
reform of details. The outbreak of the war in Afghanistan occasioned 
a temporary increase of regiments to a strength of 480 sowars in the 
cavalry and 800 sepoys (912 of all ranks) in the infantry (G.O.C.C. 
dated the 19th December 1878), and an attempt was made to re- 
enrol pensioners for garrison duty, but this proved a complete 
failure. On the conclusion of the first phase of the hostilities, 
preparations were made for a reduction by the cessation of recruiting, 
but the rising at Kabul soon necessitated a retum to the augmented 
strength. An advance of Rs. 15,000 was sanctioned to all silladar 
regiments of cavalry thus augmented, in order to meet the expense 
of equipping the new men, 96 in number—the money to be repaid 
within two years. 

The drain of the protracted operations in Afghanistan, where the 
great amount of sickness, rather than the severity of the fighting, 
occasioned a continual demand for recruits, led to the grant, in 1880, 
of a bounty of Rsoto all recruits, Ras being paid on enlistment, 
and the other half on the conclusion of three years’ service. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


377 


No other changes remain to be noticed, nor do any of the small 
alterations in the equipment of native regiments call for remark; 
except that contained in G. O. No. 10 of 1879, by which brown 
leather accoutrements took the place of buff in all infantry regiments 
of the line. 


378 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


nn 


Expedition 
to Egypt, 
3188e, 


Chapter XI—(1882—1890). 

History of the Sudan Campaigns (Colonel Colville)—Battle of Tofrek (Gallomay)— 
Official Accounts of the Akha, Expedition Egyptian Expedition, 1882,—Suakin 
Operations, 1885,—Third Burmese War,—Zhob Valley Expedition, — Black 
Mountain Expedition, 1888,—and Sikkim Expedition—G. 0. C.C.,G. G. O., 
I. A. C., etc. 

The year 1882 witnessed the commencement of a series of cam- 
paigns in Egypt, which afforded to Indian troops an Opportunity of 
fighting and working side by side with certain British corps with 
which they are never brought into contact in their duties in Asia ; 
and a special interest, therefore, attaches to the expeditions of 1882 
and subsequent years such as had not existed since the force under 
Sir David Baird had excited the curiosity and admiration of the 
European troops in the same country in 1801. 

The outbreak of hostilities in Egypt in July 1882 was soon fol- 
lowed by a call for a contingent from India. The force which, in 
accordance with this requisition, was despatched to take part in the 
operations in that country, was composed of the and and 6th 
Bengal Cavalry, the 13th Bengal Lancers, the 7th, and aoth Bengal 
Native Infantry, and the 29th Bombay Native Infantry (the and 
Baluch Battalion), the whole under the command of Major-General 
Sir H.T. Macpherson. The first of these regiments to disembark 
was the 2nd Bengal Cavalry, which landed on the 24th August 
and by the second week in September the whole force was collected 
at Ismailia, on the Suez Canal, A part of the 13th Bengal Lancers 
was sent on to Kassassin at the end of August and took part ina re- 
connaissance towards Salahieh on the 1st September, in which, how- 
ever, nothing was seen of the enemy. On the gth September, about 
an hour after day-break, a general advance was made by the Egyptian 
army against the British position at Kassassin. The infantry under 
Major-General Graham moved out to meet the attack, with their left 
resting on the Freshwater Canal, and the right supported by the 
cavalry, which, threatening the enemy’s left, fell in with and defeated 
a separate portion of his force advancing from Salahieh, The enemy’s 
repulse was general all along the line, the British losses being three 
killed and seventy-five wounded, of whom one killed and one 
wounded belonged to the 13th Bengal Lancers. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


On the 11th September the Indian Contingent, under Sir Herbert 
Macpherson, arrived at Kassassin, and the infantry was then at- 
tached to the and Division under Lieutenant-Genera! Hamley, while 
the cavalry became the Second Brigade of the Cavalry Division. On 
the same day arrangements were made for an attack on the enemy’s 
fortified position of Tel-el-Kebir on the following night, according to 
which the 1st Battalion of the Seaforth Highlanders (72nd Foot) and 
No. 9 (Mountain) Battery, 1st Brigade, Northern Division, Royal 
Artillery, were attached to the Indian force. 

After dark on the 12th September camp was struck, and the troops 
moved on to their respective rendezvous, At 1-30 a.M.on the 13th the 
march of the main body and of the Cavalry Division, which was slightly | 
in rear of the right, commenced. Just as day was breaking the 
infantry became engaged and after a short but sharp contest carried 
the enemy’s entrenchments, and the and Cavalry Brigade moving 
round the extreme left of the enemy’s position, harassed the retreat 
of the Egyptians and rapidly converted it into a headlong rout. 
Pushing on to the railway station, the brigade succeeded in capturing 
a train full of fugitives which was just leaving Tel-el-Kebir for Zag-a- 
zig; thence without a halt the pursuit was continued to Belbeis, 
which was reached soon after noon. The Indian Infantry Brigade, 
marching from Kassassin at 3-30 a.M., moved along the south side 
of the Freshwater Canal : about day-break the batteries on the enemy’s 
right were engaged, and in a few minutes the whole of the position 
south of the canal was captured. The main body of the infantry 
halted at Tel-el-Kebir; but the Indian Brigade, pushing on 
through the day, reached Zag-a-zig at 6 p.m. Sir Herbert Macpher. 
son had meanwhile ridden on in advance, and, arriving at Zag-a-zig 
two hours earlier, captured ten engines and a hundred, carriages, 
some of which were on the point of leaving the station. 

The casualties of the Indian Contingent during the day were e only 
one killed and three wounded. 

On the rqth, at 3 a.m., Major-General Drury-Lowe, comandne 
the cavalry, taking the 2nd Brigade, with the 4th Dragoon Guards and 
the mounted infantry, left Belbeis; and by 4-15 p.m. arrived at 
Abbassieh, outside Cairo. Here he found a large portion of the 
Egyptian army drawn up ready to surrender; and on the same even- 
ing Cairo was entered, the citadel occupied, and Arabi Pasha a 

prisoner. 


379 


poe met Tek 
Se Septaaber 


380 


The Akha 
Expedition, 
2883-84. 


hob Valley 
Expedition, 
2884. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


By the victory of Tel-el-Kebir and the rapid pursuit to the capital 
all resistance was completely broken, and active military operations 
were brought to a close. Through the remainder of September the 
Indian Contingent remained in garrison at Zag-a-zig and Abbassieh, 
and early in October the withdrawal of the troops from Egypt 
commenced. By the end of that month all the Indian regiments 
had reached Bombay. . 

For services in Egypt a medal was granted to all ranks, and a 
bronze star was presented by the Khedive; andthe words ‘‘ Eeypt, 
1882,” and “ Tex-gL-Kesir ” were authorised to be borne on the 
colours and appointments of the corps engaged in the operations 
(G.G.O. Nos. 578 and 665 of 1882 and 335 and 341 of 1883). 

In the winter of 1883-84 it was found necessary to despatch a 
small expedition against the Akhas, a savage tribe inhabiting the hills 
to the north of the Darrang district in Upper Assam, to punish them 
for repeated raids into British territory and to enforce the release of 
some captives they had carried off. The troops employed consisted 
of a detachment of No. 1 (Kohat) Mountain Battery, No. 2 Company, 
Sappers and Miners, and 200 men of the 12th and a wing of the 43rd 
Bengal Native Infantry, the whole under the command of Brigadier- 
General R. S. Hill. Diju Mukh, on the frontier, was the rendezvous ; 
but before the arrival ofall the troops an advance column of the 
43rd Native Infantry and police marched (17th December) into the 
hills. A night attack was made on this detachment on the 23rd, with 
the result that two men were killed and seven wounded. Three days 
later, on arrival at the Tenga river, the passage was found to be 
opposed by the enemy in considerable force, and it was decided 
to concentrate the whole column before pushing on. Accordingly it 
was not until the 8th January that the passage of the river was effected, 
in the face of considerable opposition from strong stockades on the 
opposite bank, but as the only weapons of the enemy were bows 
and arrows, the casualties were not many. The Akhas, finding their 
position forced, fled into the hills in all directions and offered no 
further resistance, and the objects of the expedition having been 
attained, the column returned to British territory by the 23rd January. 
Our losses during the expedition were four killed and nine wounded. 

In the autumn of 1884 a small affair disturbed the tranquillity 
of the North-West Frontier. During the preceding eighteen months 


the tribes inhabiting the Zhob and Bori valleys had been guilty of © 


So pat —_— ne 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


repeated outrages in the neighbourhood of the Harnai pass, and it at 
last became necessary to send a punitive expedition against them. 
The expeditionary force, which moved forward from Thal-Chotiali 
in October, and was under the command of Major-General Sir O. V- 
Tanner, x.c.B., was composed of two mountain battezies, one squadron 
each of the toth Bengal Lancers, the 5th Punjab Cavalry, and the 1st 
Bombay Lancers ; a wing of the 1st Battalion, Worcestershire Regi- 
ment (29th Foot); a wing of the rst Battalion, North Lancashire 
Regiment (47th Foot) ; the 2nd Battalion, North Staffordshire Regi- 
ment (98th Foot) ; two companies of the Bengal Sappers and Miners; 
the rst and 45th Bengal Native Infantry ; the 4th Punjab Infantry; the 
and Bombay Infantry (Grenadiers), and a detachment of the tst Madras 
Infantry (Pioneers). Advanced detachments were sent on into the 
Bori valley early in October, and on the 13th of that month the Political 
Agent, Sir Robert Sandeman, held a durbar of chiefs at the entrance 
to the valley, at which the submission of all except the Mena Khel, 
Kilzai, and Zhob tribes, was received. A standing camp having been 
formed at Dulai, a forward movement was made on the 18th against 
the fort of the chief Shah Jahan, which was occupied on the arst. A 
gathering of the tribesmen was shortly after discovered at Daulatzai, 
on the hills north of Shah Jahan’s fort, and Sir Oriel Tanner moved 
up to attack them on the 24th; the enemy, who were badly armed, 
being almost entirely without fire-arms, were quickly driven from their 
position with a loss of about fifty killed and several prisoners, the 
casualties on our side being only five wounded, including two native 
officers,—all of the 4th Punjab Infantry. During the next few days 
several villages were destroyed ; but the recalcitrant tribes having 
now tendered their submission hostilities ceased, and about the last 
week in November the force was withdrawn. 

Early in 1885 it became necessary to despatch another expedition 


The Suakin 
on, 


to Egypt, to co-operate with the British force at Suakin. Orders on | Bzpedit 


the subject were issued in G. G. O. dated the 14th February 188s, 
by which Major-General J. Hudson was appointed to command the 
Indian troops. A special scale of pay was laid down for native 
ranks whilst in receipt of Government rations, and the supply of 
grain and forage for horses was also undertaken by Government. 
The corpe detailed were the goth Bengal Cavalry (equipped as 
lancers), the 15th and the 17th Bengal Infantry,® and the 28th 


ee en 

® By an order of Government in the Military Department the designations 
of all regiments of Native Infantry were altered from the ist January, 1885, by the 
elimination of the word ‘‘ Native.”” These regiments became, therefore, from that 
date, “ Bengal Infantry,’’ “ Madras Infantry ” and ‘‘ Bombay lafaatry.”"—P, 


382 THE SERVICES OF THE 


Bombay Infantry. The first detachment embarked at Bombay on 
the 22nd February, and by the 14th of March the whole contingent 
was landed at Suakin, 


For the first few days but little active work was done outside the 
camp, but the force was subject to the annoyance of continual night 
attacks, in which several sentries were killed or wounded. On the 
rgth a reconnaissance was made by the Cavalry Brigade, supported 
by the Indian Contingent, thrcugh dense bush and difficult country, 
in the direction of Hashin ; the enemy were not seen in any strength, 
though a few shots were exchanged at long ranges. On the follow- 
ing day a strong force moved out of Suakin with the object of estab- 
lishing a sartda at Hashin; it consisted of the Guards, the 2nd 
Brigade, the Cavalry Brigade, the Indian Contingent, three batteries 
of artillery, and some engineers. Asthe force advanced a continuous 
skirmishing fire was kept up by Arabs concealed in the bush, and 
the hill on which it was proposed to construct the look-out post was 
not carried without considerable opposition and loss,—the gth Bengal 
Cavalry, in a conflict inthe bush, having hadtwelve (including Res- 
saidar Shibdeo Singh) killed and fifteen (including Major Robertson) 
wounded. At length the saritde having been established, the force 
retired, reaching Suakin the same evening. 


The fight at On Sunday, the 22nd March, at 7 a.m., the Indian Contingent 
March snd. | infantry, with the rst Battalion of the Berkshire Regiment (49th 


Foot), some sappers, two squadrons of the sth (Royal Irish) Lancers 
and one of the 9th Bengal Cavalry, the whole under the command 
of Major-General Sir J. C. M’Neill, marched from Suakin to form 
a sariba eight miles south-west of the town. At114.M. only six miles 
had been covered, but it was determined to halt and commence the 
sariba ata placecalled Tofrek. At 2-40 p.m., when the sappers and 
the Berkshire Regiment were cutting down the thick bush round the 
sariba, the cavalry scouts and working parties were suddenly driven 
in by a furious rush of a large force of Arabs. The unfinished 
sariba was defended on the west by the rs5th Bengal Infantry, on 
the south by. the 17th Bengal Infantry, and on the north by the 28th 
Bombay Infantry; the main attack came from the south-west, and 
so impetuous was the charge that the southern face of the square, 
which had been thrown into disorder by the cavalry picquets gallop- 
ing in on the front, was broken through, and the enemy rushed into 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


383 


the centre in great numbers, causing great confusion amongst the 
baggage animals, and inflicting considerable loss on the 17th Bengal 
Infantry and the followers. On the first alarm the Berkshire Regi- 
ment hastened to stand to their arms and open fire, and in the mean- 
time the 15th Bengal Infantry sustained the brunt of the attack 
on the west face without flinching, and by their steadiness and 
gallantry did much towards preserving the whole force from disaster. 
The enemy was at length driven off at 3-30 P.m., after having suffered 
terrible loss, and the sarija having been completed and garrisoned 
by the 15th and 17th Bengal Infantry, the remainder of the force 
returned to Suakin. The casualties amounted to seventy killed, 
one hundred and thirty-three wounded and thirty missing, the loss 
of the Bengal troops being Major Von Beverhoudt, 17th Bengal Infan- 
try, and twenty-nine men killed, and forty-five (including Lieutenant 
Drury, 17th Bengal Infantry) wounded. 


Throughout the rest of March the troops at Suakin were con- 
stantly employed on escort or convoy duty between that place and the 
various sarsdas in the surrounding country, but no fighting took place 
beyond occasional long range firing in the bush; in fact, it appeared 
that the enemy's power was broken by his losses on the 22nd March. 
On the 31st of March a cavalry reconnaissance reported Tamai to be 


held in strength by the Arabs ; and accordingly two days later a force | . 


marched in that direction, 7,200 strong, and including 1,585 men of 
the Indian Contingent. Passing through Tofrek, Tesselah. hill was 
reached in the afternoon without any opposition being met with, and 
the force bivouacked there that night. On the 3rd April the column 
advanced to Tamai, and having burned all the huts there, whilst the 
enemy kept up a skirmishing fire from the bush, the return march to 


Tofrek was effected without incident. The next day the column 
return to Suakin. 


Uneventful convoy duties were performed by the whole gar- 
rison through the month of April. On the 2nd May Lord Wolseley 
arrived at Suakin, and four days later a combined attack from Suakin 
and Otao was made on the enemy’s position at Thakul, eighteen miles 
west of the former place, and ten miles south of Otao. The Suakin 
column consisted of the 9th Bengal Cavalry, some mounted infantry, 
and the Camel Corpe ; that from Otao included a company of mounted 
infantry, the 15th Bengal Infantry, and some native scouts. The enemy 


384 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


The Third 
Burmese War, 
288g-1889. 


were taken completely by surprise, and were driven with considerable 
loss from their camp, which was destroyed. The casualties on our 
side were only three wounded. 

The active operations of the campaign soon after came to a con- 
clusion, but the «5th and 17th Bengal Infantry and one squadron 
of the gth Bengal Cavalry were retained in garrison at Suakin, and 
did not return to India until November. 

The Egyptian medal of 1882, with clasp inscribed ‘“Suaxin, 
1885,” was granted to all troops who took part in the operations in 
Egypt between the 26th March 1884, and the 14th May 1885, together 
with a special clasp for the battle of Tofrek (G. G. O. No. 655 of 
1885), and by G. O. No. 849 of 1887, the Khedive’s bronze star was 
also granted to the troops employed at Suakin. Authority was after- 
wards given to the corps engaged to inscribe the words ‘‘ SuAKIN, 
1885,” and “ Torrex,” on their colours and appointments (G. G. O. 
No. 478 of 1886). 

We come now to the Third Burmese War, 1885, which, .with the 
subsequent operations of 1886-89, is remarkable not so much for 
the breadth or brilliancy of the military operations, as for the import- 
ance of its consequences, the number of troops employed, and the 
harassing and arduous nature of the duties entailed. 

The relations of the British Government with that of Mandalay had, 
ever since the accession of King Thebaw in 1879, been in a strained and 
unsatisfactory condition, owing to the violation of treaties by the King, 
to acts of aggression on the British frontier, to outrages upon British 
subjects and injustice to British traders, and to the intrigues ofthe . 
King with a foreign European power with objects hostile to British 
interests. Remonstrances in connection with these matters were re- 
ceived with indifference and evoked nothing but insolence, the for- 
bearance exhibited by the British Government serving only to inflate 
the arrogance of which two disastrous wars and the loss of large tracts 
of territory had failed to cure the Burmese people. Misconstruing this 
forbearance, King Thebaw, in 1885, filled up the measure of his 
offences by arbitrarily imposing on a British trading company a fine 
of ruinous amount, and insolently refusing to submit the matter to 
impartial enquiry. Under these circumstances an ultimatum was 
addressed to the Court of Mandalay, and this being met with an 
evasive reply and by the simultaneous issue of an openly hostile pro- 
clamation, war became inevitable, was declared accordingly, and 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


385 


orders issued (30th October, 1885) for the despatch of a field force to 
Burma with all speed. 

The for cedetailed for this service was placed under the command 
of Major-General H.N. D. Prendergast, C.B., V.c., and was composed 
of six batteries of artillery, six companies of sappers and miners, three 
regiments of British and seven of native infantry, and a naval brigade,— 
out of which the Bengal Army contributed No. 4 (Hazara) Mountain 
Battery, two companies of sappers and miners, and the and and 11th 
Bengal Infantry. 

The whole force arrived at Rangoon between the sth and the 11th 
of November, and proceeded in a fleet of the Irrawaddy Flotilla Com- 
pany’s steamers to Thyetmyo; thence an advance was made on the 
14th of November, and on the following day the frontier was crossed. 
The small towns which were first reached, such as Sinbaungwe, etc., 
were occupied without any opposition, the whole strength of the 
Burman forces in the neighbourhood of the frontier being concentrated 
at the forts of Gwe-gyaung-Kamyo and Minhla, which face each 
other on opposite sides of the river. A simultaneous attack was 
made on these: places on the morning of the 17th November. It was 
expected that Gwe-gyaung-Kamyo, on the left bank, which was 
much the stronger position of the two, would be resolutely? held; but 
on the approach of our troops the garrison ran off after a “faint 
resistance, and the position was captured with a loss on our side of 
only two men wounded. 

The brigade employed on the opposite side of the river, consisting 
of the and and 11th Bengal Infantry and the 12th Madras Infantry, 
had a more arduous task to perform, and encountered considerable 
opposition in the attack on the village and fort of Minhla. The 
former was a place of some size, stretching along the river bank south 
of the fort, and surrounded by a bamboo stockade; the latter was a 
square stone structure, its walls about twenty-five feet in height, 
entered on the side facing the river by a narrow arch, and having 
on the west a double ramp, which approached the ramparts with a 
slope of about 25°. The troops for the attack were landed at Malun, a 
large village four miles down the river, and on approaching the village 
of Minhla the advance was received by a smart fire from the enemy, 
who were concealed in thick jungle. The 11th Bengal Infantry, how- 
ever, pushed on rapidly, and, supported by the and, quickly carried 

he stockade and entered the village, The attack was now directed 
2¢ 


386 


THE SERVICES OF THE 

eS a meee eke eee ee eee oe ee ea 
against the house of the Woon, which was within a further stockaded 
enclosure, and, in spite of a vigorous resistance, the Burmans were 
driven from point to point and the position carried. The fort alone 
remained, and it was approached by an encircling movement, the rith 
Bengal Infantry making for the left or north side of the ramp, while 
the 2nd, extending to the right, cut off the line of retreat to the river, 
and at the same time advanced to the southern approach of the ramp. 
During the whole advance the troops were subjected to a heavy fire 
from the jungle round and from the fort, but, advancing steadily, the 
ramp was carried by a final rush from both sides, and the garrison, 
flying into the casemates of the fort or out of the east gate, offered 
no further resistance. The first to reach the terre-plein at the top of 
ramp was Lieutenant Wilkinson, of the 12th Madras Infantry, who 
had joined the 11th Bengal Infantry, and was closely followed by a 
large number of the latter regiment; as he reached the terre-plein he 
stumbled, and, falling forward, was at once set upon by the enemy and 
severely wounded ; his life was only saved by the advance of the men 
of the r1th. In the day’s fighting the casualties amongst the officers 
were heavy, Lieutenant Dury, 11th Bengal Infantry, being killed, and 
four officers of the 12th Madras Infantry wounded; of the rank and 
file three wtre killed and twenty-three wounded. 

With the fall of Minhla the opposition of the Burman army to the 
British advance was almost atanend. Two Italians, who had led and 
trained the enemy’s forces on the frontier, surrendered on the following 
day, and our further advance up the river met with no serious resist- 
ance. Pagan was evacuated after a few rounds had been fired: 
Myingyan, where alone anything like a stand was made, was taken 
without loss on our side: Ava and Sagain surrendered on the 
27th November without a shot being fired : and on the 28th Mandalay 
was reached, the palace occupied, and the king a prisoner. On the 
29th Thebaw was sent down the river under escort, and later on he 
was deported to India. 

Intelligence having been received that the Chinese were massing 
troops on the frontier with a view to seizing Bhamo, Major-General 
Prendergast left Mandalay on the 18th December witha force of about 
a thousand men (which included the Hazara Mountain Battery and a 
company of Bengal sappers), and, proceeding up the Irrawaddy, 
occupied Bhamo on the 28th, without having encountered any 
opposition. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


387 


Thus ended the third war against the Alompra dynasty. The 
deportation of King Thebaw from Mandalay was followed by the 
annexation of Upper Burma; and throughout the remaining months 
of the cold weather of 1885-86, though there were repeated skirmishes 
with bands of insurgents, no military operations of any consequence 
took place, and it appeared that the country was likely in time to 
settle down quietly under its new rulers. But the seeds of future 
troubles had been sown when hundreds of Burmese soldiery, unused 
to any but an idle and self-indulgent life, had been allowed, on the 
disbandment of the king’s army, to disperse armed over the country. 

As the spring drew on, dacoities and outrages became more and 
more frequent ; pretenders to the throne and local leaders arose in 
every quarter, whose influence and boldness increased proportionately 
as they perceived the inadequacy of the British force then in Burma 
to cope with the difficulties of the situation. To deal with these 
increasing disorders considerable reinforcements were sent to Burma 
during the winter and the succeeding spring, and amongst other corps 
the 7th Bengal Cavalry and the 26th, 27th, and 43rd Bengal Infantry 
were despatched thither on service. 

General Prendergast vacated the command on the 1st April 1886, 
and was succeeded by Brigadier-General G. S. White, v.c., with the 
local rank of Major-General. Throughout the summer actions of 
various degrees of importance with bands of insurgents and dacoits 
were frequent in every district. In the neighbourhood of Pagan, 
Myingyan, and Meiktila, the r1th Bengal Infantry and detachments 
of the Sappers were continually engaged around the many posts 
which were established in the districts,—one officer, Lieutenant 
Forbes, of the former corps, being killed while on convoy duty 
between Meiktila and Hlaingdet on the 21st April, on which occasion 
also seven sepoys were wounded. 

Inthe Bhamo district. at the same time, an expedition was de- 
spatched against Katran, close to the Chinese frontier, the stronghold 
of the Phonkan Tsawbwa, in which the 26th Bengal Infantry and the 
Hazara Mountain Battery took part. Katran, a position of consider- 
able strength, was captured after some resistance with a loss of nine 
wounded, but the force was obliged to retire immediately owing to 
the deficiency of supplies. Another expedition marched to Katran 
in the following month, on which occasion no resistance was met 


with. 
2c2 


Annezation of 
Upper Burma. 


Operations in 
the summer of 
38086, 


388 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


During the summer a small force, which included detachments of 
the 4th, 42nd, and 44th Bengal Infantry, advanced from Manipur, and, 
after some fighting, occupied Tammn, in.the Kubo Valley. Several 
skirmishes took place in that neighbourhood during the summer and 
autumn, and eventually the enemy were driven completely out of the 
Kubo Valley. 


But the most important operations of this period were in the Minbu 
district, where the 2nd Bengal Infantry were stationed. Salin, a 
large walled town, six miles from the right bank of the Irrawaddy and 
about forty miles north of Minbu, was the centre of much distur- 
bance ; the place was threatened by a large force of dacoits early in 
June, and'in an engagement outside the walls on the rath of that 
month Captain Dunsford was killed. Six weeks later the dacoits, 
having gathered in still greater numbers, commenced a regular siege 
of the town, of which the walls were with difficulty manned by the 
small garrison stationed there. All the ammunition was exhausted 
and the defenders in serious straits, when the place was relieved on 
the last day of July,’ In the western part of the district, the Deputy 
Commissioner, Mr. R. Phayre, was killed at Padaing, near’ Magwe, 
on the 8th of June. This was followed by the advance of a mixed 
column under Major Gordon, 2nd Bengal Infantry, from Minbu, 
which, on the roth June, attacked and captured Ngape, a large 
village at the foot of the Aeng Pass over the Arakan Yomas, thirty- 
seven miles west of Minbu; our loss in the affair was six killed and 
twenty-five wounded. The climate of Ngape, however, was found 
to be so terribly unhealthy at that season of the year that it became 
necessary to abandon the place, and the garrison retired on the 
1st August. 


Towards the end of, the summer further reinforcements were 


despatched to Burma: the field force was divided into six brigades 
and one independent command; and early in the autumn Sir 
Herbert Macpherson, Commander-in-Chief of Madras, assumed 
command of the whole. On the 1st October 1886 the following 
were the Bengal troops serving in Burma :-— 


In the 1st Brigade— 
7th Bengal Cavalry. 
Sappers and Miners. 
43rd Bengal Infantry (Gurkhas.) 


aa, —_—_ a 


ne ed 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


389 


ds the and Brigade— 
No. 4 (Hazara) Mountain Battery. 
Sappers and Miners. 
26th Rengal Infantry. 
In the 3rd Brigade— 
27th Benga! Infantry. 
In the qth Brigade— 
stth Bengal Infantry. 
In the 6th Brigade— 
and Bengal (Light) Infantry. 
In the Chindwin Command— 
28th Bengal Infantry. 

These were supplemented shortly after by the 3rd Gurkha Regi- 
ment and the sth Bengal Infantry in the 1st Brigade, and by the 
tst and later by the rath Bengal Infantry in the 2nd Brigade. 

The plan of operations for the winter was to traverse the districts 
apportioned to these brigades with a succession of strong columns, 
supplemented by flying columns of cavalry and mounted infantry ; 
the end in every case being the capture or destruction of the local 
chiefs who everywhere headed the dacoit bands. Before the opera- 
tions commenced, the field force and the whole Indian army suffered 
a sudden and severe loss in the death of Sir Herbert Macpherson, 
who died of fever on the 26th October 1886, near Prome. In con- 
sequence of this misfortune, Sir Frederick Roberts, then Commander- 
in-Chief in India, at the special request of the Government of India, 
transferred his head-quarters to Burma, and assumed the command of 
the troops there. | 

The following is a brief summary of the principal events of the 
next twelve months in which Bengal troops were engaged :— 

A column composed of the 3rd Gurkha Regiment, a detachment 
of Bengal sappers, and some Madras infantry, under Colonel 
Stedman of the first-mentioned corps, marched for the hills east of 
Mandalay at the end of October, and on the 26th of that month 


some slight skirmishing took place, in which one man was killed. 


andthree wounded. Thecolumn continued its movements in the 
’ bills for some time, during which a few unimportant skirmishes 
occurred. On the 2oth November Captain Pulley, with a detachment 
of the 3rd Gurkha Regiment, marched from Lamaing, and on the 
asth attacked and captured a strong position at Zibyubin, where 
he himself and six men were wounded. Throughout December the 


First Brigade. 


390 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Second 
Brigade, 


Third Brigade, 


Fourth 
Brigade, 


Fifth Brigade. 


Sisth Brigade, 


pursuit of the dacoit leader Hla-u was prosecuted with vigour by 
the 7th Bengal Cavalry. In March a mixed column, including 
some of the 27th Bengal Infantry, attacked and carried the stockaded 
position of Hmawaing. 

In the Second Brigade a mixed force, under Brigadier-General 
Cox, consisting ofdetachments of the 7th Bengal Cavalry, he Hazara 
Mountain Battery, Bengal Sappers, Royal Welsh Fusiliers (23rd 
Foot), and 26th Bengal Infantry, marched to Wuntho, where a column 
from Shwebo co-operated ; the latter was composed of detachments of 
artillery, of British infantry, and ofthe rst and 12th Bengal Infantry. 
No resistance was met with, and the inhabitants of Wuntho were dis- 


armed. 
Considerable activity was exhibited in the districts of the Third 


Brigade during this winter, most of the operations being prosecuted 
by Bombay troops. In January a column assembled at Hlaingdet, 
under Colonel Stedman, consisting of artillery, some of the Hamp- 
shire Regiment (67th Foot), and the 3rd Gurkha Regiment from the 
First Brigade ; this force marched into the Shan States, where little 
opposition was experienced and no fighting took place. 

In the Fourth Brigade Captain Rose commanded a mixed column 
which included a detachment of the 27th Bengal Infantry. This 
marched in December 1886 from Wundwin against Hmawaing: 
several days of jungle fighting took place before the objective 
was reached ; Hmawaing was destroyed and the column then retired, 
its operations having made an excelent impression in the district. 

The chief operation in the Fifth Brigade was the Ruby Mines ex- 
pedition, which was organised in December and marched on the 
goth of that month from Sagadaung under Brigadier-General Stewart. 
It consisted of four guns, 110 Bengal sappers, 96 of the King’s Own 
South Yorkshire Light Infantry (51st Foot), and 293 of the 43rd 
Bengal Infantry. Occasional slight skirmishes took place, but on 
the whole but little resistance was experienced. 

The operations of the Sixth Brigade were directed entirely against 
the two dacoit leaders, Boh Shwe and Oktama. A strong column 
advanced from Minbu under Brigadier-General Low early in Decem- 
ber, composed of detachments of artillery and Madras cavalry, the 
1st Battalion of the Rifle Brigade, the znd Bengal Infantry, the 3rd 
Hyderabad Infantry, and some mounted infantry. Little was seen of 
the enemy until Paeng, at the foot of the Arakan range, was reached, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


when a skirmish took place, in which one man was killed and seven 
wounded. Moveable columns were now formed, which patrolled the 
country, without, however, meeting many of the enemy. At the 
same time a column, which included some of the 11th Bengal 
Infantry, marched from Mitchi into the Pauk country, where a 
skirmish took place on the 5th January, in which one man was killed 
and five wounded. 

On the Chindwin river the dacoit gangs were very active during 
the winter. On the roth October some of the 18th Bengal Infantry 
had a smart skirmish on Taung-talon hill, in which three men were 
wounded. On the 19th of the same month Captain Sage, with a detach- 
ment of the 18th Bengal Infantry, some Bombay infantry, and Military 
Police, attacked and carried a dacoit position at Chauktat, with a loss 
of one killed and one wounded. On the 28th October the Assistant 
Commissioner of the district, Mr. Gleeson, was killed at Yu, and his 
escort of twenty men of the 18th Bengal Infantry were hard pressed ; 
their defence, however, was so steady that they succeeded in beating 
off their assailants and carrying away Mr. Gleeson’s body to Tandwin, 
Their loss was one killed and five wounded, On the 7th November a 
column, under Lieutenant L. C. Fryer, of the 18th Bengal Infantry, 
and some Madras infantry, attacked an entrenched position at 
Myogyi, from which they expelled the enemy with considerable loss. 
The casualties were three killed, and Lieutenant Fryer and two 
men wounded. 

In the spring of 1887 Major-General White succeeded Sir Frederick 
Roberts in the command of the field force, which, on the rst April 
was reorganised,—the Fifth Brigade being amalgamated with the 
Second, and the Sixth with the Fourth. Several corps were relieved 
and returned to India, while the force which remained continued the 
work of settling the country by the operation of numerous small and 
rapidly moving columns. 

Many engagements of more or less importance took place during 
the summer and autumn, in the course of which most of the dacoit 
leaders were either killed or captured. Of the skirmishes in which 
the Bengal troops were engaged, and with which alone we are now 
concerned, only three were of much consequence. In one, on the 5th 
June, detachments of mounted infantry and of the sth Bengal Light 
Infantry, under Lieutenant Cuppage, attacked a strong position at 
Taungma, near Pyumbwin, and lost Lieutenant Darrah, Assistant 


391 


The Chingwia 
Com mand, 


3807, 


393 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Commissioner, and one man killed, and four men wounded. Four 
days later another detachment of the sth had a smart skirmish in the 
capture of the stockaded position of Mangon, in the Second Brigade 
district; and on the 11th July detachments of the Royal Munster 
Fusiliers (104th Foot) and sth and 1oth Bengal Infantry attacked 
and carried Mezadaung hill, in the First Brigade district, with a loss 
of one killed and four wounded. 

During the autumn of 1887 and the spring of 1888 detachments of 
the 7th Bengal Cavalry and of the rst, sth, roth, and 33rd Bengal In- 
fantry were frequently engaged in skirmishes with,bands of dacoits in 
various parts of the country, while portions of No. 1 Bengal Mountain 
Battery and of the 13th Bengal Infantry were employed in operations 
against the Kachins in the Mogoung district, but though these ser- 
vices were harassing and some losses were sustained, no action took 
place deserving of special mention. 

The operations carried out and the defeat and dispersion of dacoit 
bands wherever met with had the effect by the spring of 1888 of 
restoring order to a very great extent throughout the newly acquired 
territory, and it was found practicable then to make a considerable re- 
duction in the forces in the country and to redistribute those that 
were retained. On the rst of May the troops in Burma (the whole 
under the command of Major-General Sir George S. White) were 
re-arranged in three brigades (with head-quarters at Mandalay 
Myingyan, and Meiktila respectively) and four commands (designated 
respectively the Bhamo, Ruby Mines, Chindwin, and Shwebo com- 
mands), the Bengal troops remaining in the country being distributed 
as follows :— 

st Bose nes oe Mountain Battery, and half of the 42ad Bengal 

and Brigade.—Half of the 1oth and the whole of the 33rd Bengal Infantry. 


Bhamo Command.—No.2 Benga! Mountain Battery and the 12th Bengal 
Infantry. 


Ruby Mines Command,.—Half of the 42ad Bengal Infantry. 

Chindwin Command.—Half of the soth Bengal Infantry. 

Later on in the year the Bengal troops in Burma were increased 
by the despatch thither of the 17th and 44th Bengal Infantry. 

By G. G. O. No. 434 of 1887 the India medal, with a special clasp 
inscribed “‘ Burma, 1885-87,” was granted toall the troops employed 
between the declaration of war and the 3oth April 1887, and in 1891 
G. G. O. No. 64 authorised the words “ Burma, 1885-87,” being 
borne on the colours of all regiments so employed. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


, Though the summer of 1888 brought with it no absolute cessation | 


of military movements in Burma and on its frontiers, it will be con- 
venient at this point to leave that part of the country for a while, and 
turn to some events of importance which were in progress elsewhere. 

At the end of 1887 the infringement of the treaty of 1861 by the 
Sikkim Rajah, and the establishment of a force of Tibetans at the 
fort of Lingtu, rendered military measures in that quarter necessary, 
and early in 1888 a small force was concentrated on the Sikkim 
frontier for that purpose. It consisted of four guns of No. 9 Battery, 
1st Brigade, Northern Division, Royal Artillery, 200 of the and Bat- 
talion, Derbyshire Regiment (95th Foot), a wing of the 13th Bengal 
Infantry, and the 32nd Bengal Infantry (Pioneers), the whole under 
the command of Colonel T. Graham, Royal Artillery. Half the 
force remained at Padong, while the remainder advanced on the 16th 
March, and on the 2oth, having attacked and carried a stockaded 
position at Jelaktso, near Lingtu, and a stone breastwork above, 
advanced towards the main position of the Tibetans. On the arst the 
fort of Lingtu was occupied without resistance. The casualties in the 
two days were one officer and four men slightly wounded. 

Early in April an entrenched camp was established at Gnathong, 
and here, on the 22nd of May, the garrison was attacked by the 
Tibetans in considerable force. The enemy were by no means 

anting in courage, but the worthlessness of their weapons rendered 

eir assault comparatively harmless, and they were beaten off with 
considerable loss ; the casualties on our side were three killed and 
eight wounded. 


In the middle of June the artillery and the detachment of the 
Derbyshire Regiment were withdrawn from Gnathong to Jalapahar ; 
but hardly a month had elapsed before the increasing numbers of 
Tibetans in the Jalep pass compelled Colonel Graham to ask for re- 
inforcements ; and by the end of August his force at Gnathong 
amounted to 1,700 men, composed of four guns, 386 of the Derby. 
shire Regiment, the 32nd Bengal Infantry, and 514 of the and Bat- 
talion of the 1st Gurkha Regiment. 

Three weeks passed in comparative inaction, during which the 
Tibetans were adding to their numbers and strengthening their 
position in the Jalep pass. At length Graham assumed the offensive, 
and on the 24th of September attacked and captured the Tibetan 
advanced position, drove the enemy over the Nimla pass, advanced 


393 


The Sikkia 


394 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


against and captured the Jalep pass after a feeble resistance, and, 
having crossed the pass on the 25th, advanced as far as Chambi, 
which place he reached on the 26th. The enemy being completely 
beaten and disorganised, the force returned to Gnathong, where it 
arrived on the 28th. The casualties inthese operations were only two 
officers and three men wounded. 

Concurrently with Graham’s advance against the Tibetan position 
in the Jalep pass a detachment of 150 of the 13th Bengal Infantry was 
sent from Padong to occupy Gantok, and on the 3oth a part of this 
detachment advanced as far as Tumlong, the capital of Sikkim; both 
there and on the road these troops were met with cordiality by the in- 
habitants. The detachment returned to Gantok on the 5th October. 

Active military operations were now at an end, and, while political 
alrangements were in progress of settlement the troops were em- 
ployed in opening out and improving the roads on both sides of the 
Tibet frontier. The Derbyshire Regiment and the artillery were sent 
back to India before the winter set in, but it was not until October in 
the following year that the remaining corps were withdrawn from 
Sikkim. 

The India medal, witha special clasp inscribed “ Srxxns, 1888,” 
was granted by G.G.O. No. 431 of 1889 to the troops employed in 
these operations. 

The increasing unruliness of the tribes of the Black ear 
Hazara, culminating (18th June, 1888) in an attack on a party of th 
sth Gurkha Regiment, in which Major Battye of that regiment and 
Captain Urmston, 6th Punjab Infantry, were killed, resulted in the 
despatch against them, in the autumn of 1888, of a punitive expedition 
of considerable strength, under the command of Brigadier-General 
J. W. McQueen. The force detailed for this service was organised in 
two brigades, commanded, respectively, by Brigadier-Generals Chan- 
ner and Galbraith, and each brigade was formed into two columns, 
of which the composition was as follows :— 


First Column. _ Second Column. 
Colonel J. M. Sym, Commanding. Colonel R. H.O’G. a Commanding. 
No. 4 (Hazara) Mountain Battery. No. 3 Battery, 1st Brigade, South Irish 
Two Gatlin Division, Royal Arti ie (four guns). 


Half of the 318 Ce Company of Sappers es Suffolk Regiment (12th 
and 
ar Battalion, Northumberland Fusiliers | A wing of the 34th Bengal Infantry 
Foot). 


(Pioneers). 
grd th wie te Benen Infantry. 


sst Battalion, sth Gurkha Regiment. th Bengal Infantry (Sikhs). 


— me ee 


ee ee ee” 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


395 


Third Column. Fourth Column. 
Lieutenant-Colonel M.S. J. Sunderland, | Colonel A. C. W. Crookshank, c.8., — 
Commanding. Commanding. 


No. 3 Battery, 1st Brigade, South Irish | No. 2 Battery, 1st Brigade, Scottish 
Division, Royal Artillery (two guns). Division, Royal Artillery, and some 
Half of the 3rd Company of Sappers and Gatling guns. 


_ Miners. and Battalion, Royal Irish Regiment 
2nd Battalion, Royal Sussex Regiment (18th Foot), 

(107th Foot). 2gth Bengal Infantry. 
14th Bengal Infantry (Sikhs). A wing of the 34th Bengal Iafantry 
agth Bengal [nfantry. Pioneers). 


4th Punjab Infantry. 


A field reserve, composed of the rsth Bengal Cavalry, the 2nd 
Battalion of the Seaforth Highlanders (78th Foot), and the and Sikh 
Infantry, was also formed at Abbottabad, and a contingent of the 
troops of the Maharajah of Kashmir was afterwards added to it. 
The Khaibar Rifles subsequently joined the field force, and were 
attached to the Third Column. The First, Second and Third 
Columns assembled at Ughi, in the Agror valley, on the rst October ; 
the Fourth concentrated at Darband on the Indus. 


The Fourth Column, under the command of Colonel Crookshank 
and accompanied by Brigadier-General Galbraith, advanced from 
Darband to Chamb on the and October, and thence on the morning 
of the 4th towards Kotkai; they were met by parties of the enemy 
at Shingri, and in the firing which ensued Subadar-Major Chattar 
Singh, 34th Bengal Infantry, was mortally wounded. The column 


proceeding on to Kotkai found the tribesmen assembled in force near. 
that place. The 34th Bengal Infantry and the 4th Punjab Infantry, 


who had covered the advance, having cleared the flanks, the guns 


came into action, and their fire was followed by a charge of the: 
Royal Irish Regiment. At this moment one flank was exposed to: 
an attack bya large party of ghasis, mostly Hindustanis, who had 
concealed themselves in a ravine ; these fanatics (about two hundred in. 
number) made a desperate attempt to break our line, but their on-: 


slaught was met and ina moment repulsed by the Royal Irish and 
portions of the 29th and 34th Bengal Infantry, who promptly shot 
down or otherwise destroyed the whole gang, not a single man escap- 


ing. By 3-30 p.m. the enemy were in full flight towards Kunhar, and 
an hour later Colonel Crookshank seized and occupied Kotkai. The. 


British loss amounted to 4 killed and 12 wounded: amongst the 


396 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


latter were three British officers, one of whom, Captain Beley, p.s.0., 
Assistant Quarter-Master-General, died next morning of his wounds. 
On the following day a reconnaissance was made from Kotkai to- 
wards Kunhar, in which Colonel Crookshank, commanding the 
column, received a severe wound, which afterwards necessitated am- 
putation of the leg, and, eventually, on the 24th of the month, caused 
his death, The command of the column devolved upon Colonel 
Beddy, who held it until the arrival of Colonel Pratt ten days later. 
Several days were now spent in reconnaissances, during which some 
skirmishing took place, resulting in several casualties, and on the 13th 
General Galbraith crossed to the right bank of the Indus, and des- 
troyed the Hindustani fort and settlement at Maidan. The Fourth 
Column afterwards came into communication with the Third, but 
nothing of any importance occurred, and not a shot was fired after the 
destruction of Maidan. . 

The other three columns, moving up the Black Mountain from the 
Agror valley, also began their operations on the 4th October. The 
First Column, advancing to Mana-ka-dana and Chittabat, met with 
little opposition beyond afewstray shots, mostly directed against 
working parties ; the Second advanced up the Barchar spur without 
meeting any opposition, whilst the Third moved up the Sambalbat 
and Chatta spurs. On the sth the summit of the Black Mountain was 
reached. The advance was then continued towards Seri, skirmishing 
occurring each day with scattered parties of tribesmen, Seri was 
taken and destroyed on the gth, and other villages of the hostile tribes- 
men suffered the same fate on subsequent days. On the 13th Octo- 
ber the Third Column reached Kunhar,and came into communi- 
cation with the Fourth. 

The result of these operations, and of the punitive measures 
adopted, was that on the roth October the Akazais tendered their 
submission, their example being followed on the 30th by the Has- 
sanzais. | 

The efforts of General McQueen were now turned to coercing into 
submission the Pariari Saiads and Tikariwals, coupled with a demon- 
stration against Thakot and the Allaicountry. In these operations the 
First Column was employed, reinforced by a wing of the 34th Bengal 
Infantry and assisted by a Fifth Column composed of two guns, two 
Gatlings, a wing each of the Seaforth Highlanders and 4oth Bengal 
Infantry, and the Khaibar Rifles, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 307 


The Pariari Saiad country was entered on the 24th October without 
much opposition having been experienced. On the 28th a lightly 
equipped force, selected from the First and Fifth Columns, was 
pushed on to the village of Thakot; only a few shots were fired 
from a distance at the troops and the detachment soon afterwards 
retumed to the head-quarters of the force. On the rst November 
another detachment advanced into the Allai country by the Ghoraphor 
pass, and, after a feeble resistance, a strong position on the Chaila 
ridge was captured with a.loss of one killed and one wounded ; 
part of the force penetrated to Pokal on the 3rd, with a loss of one 
killed ‘and four wounded. 

All the tribes now tendered their submission and acceptance in 
full of the terms imposed upon them by Government. The objects of 
the expedition having thus been attained, the troops withdrew into 
British territory, and the field force was broken up. 

The loss of the force during the operations amounted to 20 killed 
and 57 wounded, among the latter being five British officers, two af 
whom died of their wounds. 

The India medal, with a clasp inscribed “ Hazara, 1888,” was, 
by G.G. O. No. 413 of 1889, granted to all troops engaged. 

The cold season of 1888-89 witnessed a renewal of field operations | Operations ia 
in the newly-acquired province of Upper Burma. The country | Barms 1000p. 
was, indeed, internally quiet, and the results of the three years’ 
occupation were satisfactory beyond the hopes of the most 
sanguine, but the wild tribes of the frontiers, unsettled by the 
change of government and by the temporary prevalence of lawless. 
ness amongst their Burmese neighbours, began to encroach on 
our now comparatively peaceful subjects, and necessitated a recourse 
to hostilities. At the commencement of the cold weather accordingly 
a plan was drawn up for operations in the Chin country, and in the 
Mogoung, Eastern Karenni, Ruby Mines, and Bhamo districts. 

The most important operations were those in the Chin country. | The Chin Bz- 
The tribes of the Chin hills had been incessant in their depredations | “= 
throughout the summer of 1888, and in September two columns 
moved up to the outskirts of their country, one by way of Pauk, 
the other by Kalewa, and occupied Thilin, Gangaw, Kan, Sihaung, 

Kanbale and Indin. The raids, however, continued; in Decem- 
ber attacks were made on a working party of the 42nd Bengal In- 
fantry near Kanbale, and on the ,posts of the same regiment at 


398 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Sihaung and Kangyi, and in January 1889 the posts at Kan and 
Gangaw (where detachments of the roth, 33rd, and 44th Bengal In- 
fantry were engaged) were also assailed. At length a force under 
Brigadier-General Faunce, which included two guns of No. 1 Bengal 
Mountain Battery and 250 of the 42nd Bengal Infantry, moved into 
the Chin country, and on the sth February, after a good deal of 
desultory skirmishing, occupied Tokhlaing (afterwards named Fort 
White), where head-quarters were established. Thence General 


| Faunce detached a column, which included 75 of the 42nd and 100 
lof the 44th Bengal Infantry (which had also joined the force), with 


two guns, to operate against the Kanhau Chins, upon whom, between 
the 8th and the 2oth March, severe punishment was inflicted, almost 
all their villages having, after considerable skirmishing, been destroyed. 
Later, on the 4th May, a detachment, including 60 of the 42nd, 
was sent against the Siyin Chin village of Tartan. Here the enemy 
were strongly posted behind stockades, and offered such a determined 
resistance that the attacking force was compelled to retire with a loss 
of one officer and three men killed, and two officers and eight men 
wounded. This however was the only contrefemps of the operations, 
which were on the whole eminently successful. Our losses from 
first to last amounted to two officers and 24 men killed, and six officers 
and 49 men wounded, of which the Bengal share was nine men 
killed and twenty-seven wounded. 


In January 1889, an expedition was despatched from Mogoung for 
the punishment of the Lepei Kachins. This was practically a police 
expedition, but two guns of No. 2 Bengal Mountain Battery and 
a small detachment of the rst Battalion, Hampshire Regiment (37th 
Foot) were attached to the police levy during the operations. Thama, 
the chief village of the Lepeis, was taken after a smart skirmish 
on the roth February, and Wawang on the 2tst, and early in 
March the force returned to Mogoung. On the 13th March a column 
was despatched against the Ithi tribe, and’on the 1st April against 
the Sana Kachins, and a detachment was also employed against the 
Hlegyoman dacoits; in all these operations No. 2 Bengal Mountain 
Battery took part. The losses sustained during these operations 
were only one killed and twenty-four wounded, but of the latter no 
less than six were British officers, one of whom (Lieutenant Hawker, 
Hampshire Regiment) died of his wounds. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


399 


Two guns of No, 1 Bengal Mountain Battery took part in the 
operations of the Northern Column, under Brigadier-General H. 
Collett, which marched from Fort Stedman against the Eastern 
Karenni on the 29th December, 1888; and which, after some smart 
fighting near Lwekaw (costing us five killed and eleven wounded), 
occupied Sawlon on the 8th January, 1889. 

In the Ruby Mines district a rising took place in January 18809, 
a body of eight hundred rebels threatening the town of Momeit. 
Several skirmishes took place, in one of which an officer of the Hamp- 
shire Regiment (37th Foot) was-killed. On the 24th March a column 
under the command of Major Garfit, Hampshire Regiment, in which two 
guns of No. : Bengal Mountain Battery were included, was de- 
spatched from Momeit to visit the insurgent stronghold at Binbaung, 
which was taken on the 3oth after some resistance. The column 
returned to Momeit on the roth April. In February 1889, a small 
force, under the command of Captain E. A. Smith, Royal Artillery, 
composed of a detachment of the Hampshire Regiment (37th Foot), 
two guns of No.2 Bengal Mountain Battery, and 150 of the 17th Bengal 
Infantry, was despatched from Bhamo against a body of rebels who 
had taken up a position at Malin in the Sinkan valley, where they had 
repulsed a party of police. The enemy were encountered at that 
place on the 7th and their stronghold captured, but not without a 
sharp engagement, in which a loss of five killed and eighteen wounded 
was sustained, including Second-Lieutenant Stoddart and two men 
of the 17th Bengal Infantry killed, and ten men of the same regiment 
wounded. In the following month a detachment under the command 
of Major Spencer, 17th Bengal Infantry, twice defeated bodies of 
rebels in the neighbourhood of Mansi. 

In April, 1889, a force, under the command of Brigadier-General 
Wolseley, was despatched from Bhamo to operate against the Paukan 
Kachins. The force operated in two columns, of which the northem 
column was under the command of Captain E. A. Smith, Royal 
Artillery, and the southern under that of Major St. Paul of the Rifle 
Brigade. In these columns were included four guns of No. 2 Benga] 
Mountain Battery, and 150 of the 17th and 100 of the 4and 


Bengal Infantry. Little opposition was encountered by either column, | 


and only the northern column sustained any loss,—Captain Smith 


and six men having been wounded, of the latter of whom two | 


died, 


Karenni 
Expedition. 


Rab 
dis 


Mines 


400 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Lushai 


On the 1st April 1889 the commands in Burma were redistributed 
and the force further reduced, Major-General B. L. Gordon suc- 


| ceeding Sir George White in the chief command. Upper Burma was 


now divided into two districts,—that of Mandalay, including the 
Bhamo, Ruby Mines and Shwebo commands, in which were Nos. 1 
and 2 Bengal Mountain Batteries and the 17th Bengal Infantry ; and 
that of Myingyan, including the Chin Field Force, with which were 
employed the roth, 33rd, and 42nd Bengal Infantry. 

The grant of the India medal, with a clasp for Burma, originally 
limited to operations up to the 30th April 1887, was by G.G. O. 
No. 31 of 1890 extended to all who had served in the country up to 
the 31st March, 1889, and an additional clasp was granted to those 
who were already in possession of the previous one. 

In the cold weather of 1888-89 it was decided to despatch, from 
the Chittagong side, an expeditionary force into the Lushai country, 
with the combined object of inflicting punishment for past raids, in 
one of which a British officer employed in surveying had been 
murdered, and of opening out the country and establishing frontier 
posts. The command was given to Colonel V. W. Tregear, and the 
troops employed were, besides Madras and Bombay detachments, 
250 men each of the and and oth Bengal Infantry and a wing of 
the 2-2nd Gurkha Regiment. These troops were all assembled at 
Demagiri by the middle of February, 1889, and in the following 
month the Shendu country was visited, and the village of Howsata, 
the chief concerned in the murder of the British officer, taken and 
destroyed. The operations lasted until the middle of April, when the 
Objects of the expedition having been fully attained, the troops 
were withdrawn, The only obstacles encountered were those arising 
from the nature of the country. 

Notwithstanding the lessons taught to the wild tribes of the Chin 
hills during the winter of 1888-89, their depredations by no means 
ceased throughout the following year. This fact, coupled with the 
advisability of thoroughly exploring and opening out the narrow 
strip of country which now alone divided British Burma from 
India, led to the undertaking, in the cold weather of 1889-90, of 
military operations from Burma and Chittagong into the country of 
the Chins and Lushais. The Burma force was commanded by 
Brigadier-General W. P. Symons, South Wales Borderers, and was 
divided into three portions :—first, the Northern Column, which 


@ 


+ 7 To io aegieeeneee mee PO ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


included a wing of the roth, a detachment of the 38th, and a wing 
of the 42nd Bengal Infantry, to operate from Fort White under the 
command of Colonel Skene; secondly, the Southern Column, with 
which were a detachment of No. 1 Bengal Mountain Battery and a 
wing of the 2-4th Gurkha Regiment, to advance from Kan into the 
Baungshe Chin ‘country under the command of Brigadier-General 
Symons himself ; and thirdly, the garrisons on the lines of communi- 
cations. 

The Northern Column advanced at the end of November, and by 
the close of the year had succeeded in establishing several posts 
for the protection of the Burma frontier from Chin raids. During 
its operations it encountered considerable opposition from the 
Kanhau and Siyin Chins, and several casualties occurred. 


The Southern Column, delayed by the extraordinary difficulties of 
the country which it had to traverse, took sixty-six days, instead of 
twelve, as had been estimated, to reach Haka, Throughout the opera- 
tions the opposition of the Chins was of a very faint character; the 
malarial fever of the thickly wooded valleys through which the troops 
moved was the most dangerous enemy met with, and from it all the 
regiments engaged suffered very severely. 

In March 1890 a simultaneous advance of detachments was _ 
from Fort White and from Haka into the Tashon Chin country, 
which, though elaborate preparations for resistance had been 
made by the tribes, succeeded in reaching the Tashon Ywama, and 
establishing British influence without any actual fighting. The 
remainder of the season was occupied by the Northern Column 
in operations against the Siyins, and by the Southern in numerous 
reconnaissances and explorations. 

The losses of the two columns during these operations amounted 
to two British officers and seven men killed, and nine men wounded. 

The force from Chittagong, under Brigadier-General V.W.Tregear, 
consisted of a company of sappers, the 3rd Bengal Infantry, a 
detachment of the 9th Bengal Infantry, the 2-and Garkha Regiment, 
and a half battalion of the 3-4th, and a Bombay corps, and was 
destined to operate against the Chins, Lushais, Shendus, and other 
tribes occupying the hill tracts lying between the Chittagong district 
and the Chindwin and Kale valleys in Burma. It was divided into 
two columns, the Northern and the Haka. The former advanced 

ad - 2D 


402 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Zhob Valley 
Expedition, 


38g0, 


Iaternal 
history. 


Reductions, 


into the Lushai country, enforced the surrender of prisoners, exacted 
satisfaction for raids in past years, and opened the country by the 
construction of roads, etc. The Haka Column was hindered beyond 
expectation by the same difficulties of country which so impeded the 
advance of the Southern Burma Column, and was unable to complete 
the western section of the mule road to Haka until the 13th April. 
Immediately afterwards, the season being far advanced, the troops 
were withdrawn, and the field force broken up. 

The India medal, with a special clasp inscribed “ Curn-Lusual, 
1889-90,” was, by G.G.O. No, 275 of 1891, granted to all troops em- 
ployed in these operations between the rsth November, 1889, and the 
30th April, 1890. 

During the winter of 1889-90, two columns were despatched 
(from Bhamo and Momeik) to coerce the Tonhén Kachins, who had 
been giving a good deal of trouble. In the Bhamo Column was 
included a part of the 17th Bengal Infantry, but having been left on 
the line of communications, this detachment was not prominently 
engaged in the operations, during which a good deal of fighting 
occurred, our losses during the expedition amounting to five killed 
and twenty (including two British officers) wounded. 

The year 1890 closed with an expedition on the North-West Fron- 
tier, undertaken with the double object of exploring the Zhob Valley 
and of operating against the unruly sections of the Kidarzai Sherani 
tribe. The only Bengal troops comprised in the Zhob Valley force, 
which was commanded by Major-General Sir George White, were 
the 18th Bengal Lancers; but a force which moved from the 
Derajat under Colonel A. G. Ross, and co-operated from the east, 
included detachments of No. 1 (Kohat) and No. 7 (Bengal) Moun- 
tain Batteries, and of the 1st and 3rd Punjab Cavalry, half batta- 
lions of the 1st and 2nd Sikh Infantry, and the whole of the 2nd 
Punjab Infantry. The operations entailed exertions and exposure 
of an exceptional kind, but little opposition was encountered from 
the tribesmen, and the work of the force terminated on the 3rd 
December, 1890. 


The years under review are remarkable for many changes, as . 


well in the strength as in the interior economy and conditions of 
service of the Indian Army. The period opens with considerable 
reductions. In 1882 (G.G, O. No. 210) the strengthofthe Bengal 
Army was reduced by three regiments of cavalry and six of infantry, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 403 
ere ee eT 
the strength of corps retained being at the same time fixed at three 
squadrons, with a total strength of 550 of all ranks, for cavalry, and 
at eight companies, with a total strength of 832 of all ranks, for 
infantry. The three Assam regiments,—the 42nd, 43rd, and 44th 
Bengal Infantry,—and subsequently the five Gurkha regiments, were, 
however, specially allowed to retain a total strength of g12 of all 
ranks. The number of British officers with every corps was at the 
same time increased by one, making a total of eight. The regiments 
selected for disbandment were the 16th and 17th Bengal Cavalry and 
the 4th Punjab Cavalry, the 34th, 35th, 36th, 37th, and 4rst Bengal 
Infantry, and the 3rd Punjab Infantry. 

Before many years had elapsed, however, these reductions were 
not only made good, but the strength of the Army was raised to a 
higher point than that to which it had attained priorto the reduc- 
tions, In the autumn of 1885 the 16th and 17th Bengal Cavalry 
were resuscitated, and the strength of regiments of Bengal Cavalry 
was increased by the addition of a fourth squadron. In the following 
year second battalions were added to the Ist, 2nd, 4th, and 5th 
Gurkha regiments, and two Bengal mountain batteries were 
raised. In 1887, five new battalions of Bengal infantry were raised : 
four (one of Mazbi Pioneers, two of Sikhs, and one of Dogras) to 
take the places of the disbanded 34th, 35th, 36th, and 37th Benzal 
Infantry, and the fifth (formed of Garhwalis) to be the second battalion 
of the 3rd Gurkha Regiment; at the same time the addition of a 
squadron to the cavalry of the Corps of Guides was ordered. In 1890 
& complete re-organisation of certain regiments of Bengal infantry 
took place, resulting in the disappearance of the last of the old 
“low-caste levies” raised during the Mutiny; the old material 
having been mustered ont, the 33rd Bengal Infantry was re-organised as 
a class regiment of Panjabi Musal mans, the 38th as one of Dogras, and 
the 40th as one of trans-frontier Muhammadans, including Baluchis ; 
at the same time the second battalion of the 3td Gurkha Regiment, 
raised three years before, became the 39th (Garhwal) Regiment of 
Bengal Infantry, and a new 2nd battalion of the 3rd Gurkha Regi- 
ment was formed in its place. 

In addition to the above, a temporary increase of 200 men was 
(clause 45 of India Army Circulars, 1887) sanctioned for all corps 
ordered on service in Upper Burma; and (clause 44 of the Circulars 
of the same year) the normal strength of all infantry corps was 
increased to 912 of all ranks, 

a 


Increase, 


404 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Interna! 


changes. 


Nor were the changes and reforms in the interior economy of regi- 
ments less noticeable during this period. Closely affecting the British 
ranks were the orders concerning the tenure of regimental com- 
mands published in G.G.O. No, 209 of 1882, by which it was provided 
that the then holders of regimental commands should continue in 
that office up to the completion of aterm of seven years or until 
fifty-five years of age, whichever should happen first, but in no case 
for less than five years; that their immediate successors should 
retain command for seven years or up to fifty-five years of age; and 
that thereafter the limits should invariably be seven years’ command 
or fifty-two years of age. 

Worthy of note too is the sanction given by Her Majesty, 
publisked in G. G. O. No. 592 of 1882, to the inscription of 
‘ Nagevur ” on the colours of the 6th Bengal Infantry, of “ Cxrna, 
1858-59 ” on those of the 7th, roth, and rith Bengal Infantry, and of 
‘*¢Cuina, 1860-62” on those of the rsth, 32nd, and 27th Bengal 
Infantry,—honours somewhat belated, perhaps, but none the ne 
eminently merited by these corps.® 

By G.G. O, No. 210 of 1882 good conduct pay was granted to non- 
commissioned officers as follows :—one, two, three, and four rupees 
after two, four, six, and eight years in the grade; but in the case of 
naicks one and two rupees only after two and four years in that grade, 

In the same year orders were published restricting the enlistment 
of Afridis, and naming the following corps as being alone permitted to 
entertain recruits of that tribe :—the 7th Bengal Cavalry, the 11th 
and roth Bengal Lancers, and the 2oth, 21st, 24th, 26th, and 27th 
Bengal Infantry. In 1885 the 17th Bengal Cavalry was added, 
and the 7th Bengal Cavalry and the a4th and 27th Bengal 
Infantry expunged from this list, nor was any more extended 
enlistment of Afridis encouraged until 1890 when (India Army 
Circulars, clauses 81, 151 and 201) the formation of extra companies of 


Afridis was ordered in the 21st, 24th, 26th, 27th, and 28th Bengal | 


Infantry, and the rst, 4th, and sth Punjab Infantry, o*s., one company 


in each, except the 36th, in which two companies were to be formed. « 


These extra companies were only to be a temporary increase of the 
established strength, and previously existing companies were in each 
case to be gradually reduced, in order to bring the regiment to its 
normal establishment. 


© Vide pages 131-32 and 297-98, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 405 


On the 2oth January, 1883, a General Order was published laying 
down rules as to the classes whose enlistment in the Bengal Army was 
permitted or otherwise, and adding a statement, such as had not 
been published since 1864, of the caste constitution of every corps. 
Of this statement the following is a résumé :— 


HINDUS, 
MuHAM- , 
ane PUNJABI. ere 


REMARKS, 


Corps, 


ist Bengal Cavalry| C. 

and 9 - ay 
rds i C.T. 
4th ,, pa C.T. 
sth ,, oa Cid» 
6th ,, Pr C.T. 
7th yy és CE: 


2(d) |(@) » 

1(e) | (e) 5, 

2(f)| (/) greta troop of Jet Jats 
° 


and one 
mans, 
8th ,, Pe C.T,. 1 
gth ,, = COR. his 
roth »” Lancers oy eee 
11th 4, a CoB eles (g) One-fourth of the 


ee 4 — consist 
6(h) | (A) Jats. 


and one troop of in- 
dependent _trans- 
border tribes. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


“po7q 
youd syats fepng-e15 (2 
geek’ ) e (ej | (ye}s ve ve aa «qe 
~youd SYRIS fapng-s1z5 (¥) eee ee eee eee fee eee (y¥)¥ I I FA eco ie ue) e e¢ e¢ 4961 
eee 1 A 1 eee ese eee e eee A se ee | r “e ee Le ed | 
coe se ¢ g eos oo e eee ¢ se 6) e Cs eé uqZt 
ee Zz ¢ 1 ec} cee eco e oe eve g "79 e 66 e¢ q391 
"0731G eee eee coe fF see lese eee ( Z£ I eve Se) e ee e¢é yiSs 
“kyoiqo Sq4!S SAP yew Wh ee coe eee e e eece Qe ee I cee 4 | e e¢ e¢ q7v1 
jo omy (9) ee (9)¥ ¥ | cee fees] coe eee 7 eve g “9 e ee ee qe 
eco zg zg I e eee ovo eee ¢ te 0 e ee e¢ q321 
ee 1 ¢ Z_ ieee] cee e . eee g "9 e 6 ee a3 12 
*szef jo onde A oe (p)t A 1 coo] ce ° . cee g *=>°*) e ee CT 3 q 201 
“Qe 9) eo (2)e ; zg I feee| coe e ae see r ro se) e e¢ és 436 
eee g 5 ¢ 1 oe oe ee ese ooe g se ye) e 6¢ ee ug 
eee Zz ¢ I |eee] eee coo eoe coe A “7 e ee ee q37Z 
ong (9) owe (9)¥ zg eee see eoe Soe eee g re se) e «e ee 429 
[ “se jo Om] (7) eee (v)e A 1 oe e eee coe eee g se 0) e e¢ Cd q3S 
eee I ¢ GT [eet wee ee eee ose g Ze pe) e «ee ee yy 
eee I g ¢ ee eee eee eee g er~e e ee 6¢ ¢ 
ee oye) Pp 
a 1 ¢ GT feee| coe ooo eee eee A 2 6 ° os Cs pug 
I ¢ zg coe . eee eee eee g we 0) e Axjuvjuy [esuog 3S1 
Comet oo oO Coed Ld Lae] 
: PRISE) F les c8/ 2) El ee 
2 5 [a] & im & Ly -|&1 38 
.. -&/]8 e 2.) @ &| 8 e Bile =) 
= TS |e (2) FF) gs joe eS |S) a) Bs 
9. s |" | 8 (a3) 1 8 | es. 
e af o = a5 = bs | 
SWAVNTY ; | le 3 *sduor 
8 | -ssiinowy | ‘ievisnaniy “SHS S 
isvq ravinng “SNVOVARVHAW = 
eHLEON 7 
“SNGNIH | 


407 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


*sje{ jo z (yy) 
"232 eel (#) 
*s I 

fopng-suezy pue sy (4) 
"0731 (x) 

"ong (a 

‘ong (" 

‘ond (7 

*sIplayy (4) 0331q] (s 
"071 (5 

‘ORIG (¢) 

ong (0) 


“ “pagquy 
-o1d = syxIG = fayyng-sia (uw) 
"SIPLyy (wm) 


“12 A 
z z 
ae | 4 z 
I z 
ad) | Zz 
1 ef 
eee z ¢ 
* ove eee le A 
. . ooo Is (0)? eee - ¢ 
: ric | (@)O] x | (mer ie 


GIGI ELP O 


15) 


OU 
ged 


JS00 


S) 
SISIS) 


SOG 


s) . . 


SU 
Shc 


GG Oo 
ous) 


RRReRRRRR ER 


a 


Digitized by Google 


408 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


The addition of a squadron to every cavalry regiment, the raising 
of four new infantry regiments of the line, and various minor changes, 
necessitated the publication in 1889 (and January) of a corrected 
table, of which the following gives the Cavalry constitution :— 


HINDUS. 


PUNJABI.| HINDUSTANI. 


Corres. REMARKS. 
ist Bengal Cavalry pate oooh ceo eee eee 
and ,; » «|C. 4. 2 2 
3rd yy 99 ~|C. T.] 3h...) ... 2 2 
4th ry) ry) C) C. Te occ] eee 2 eee 2 
sth 99 ry) e C. T. earl see | I 4 
6th y) 99 ° C. T. co] ces 3 | | | 
gth 5; mee re Wl er) 1 (ee 1{ 1] 2s] 2 |1(a)| (2) Brahmans. 
Sth ,, sar. eee es 1 ee 
gth 99 Lancers ° C. T. . 3 1 eee x) 
sar 29 39 . ts . 3 2 eee (b) } AE ‘dis 
a3 e ) Ad 4 2 . | 
yo allowed. 
tath =6,, Cavalry .|C.T.|.. 4|1 
13th =, Lancers ./C. T.].. 3| 2 
| 99 9 e @ —froosfoerl coo eee eee 
wth ,, Cavalry as 


> 
568, 
we 


we [ Such as 


a uchis, 
ghans, 
Afridis, 
{C. T.). a 3 
| C.F. ais(d)) 1} 3] 1 (a) Afridis al- 
lowed. 
C. T. I 2 | 3 ° eee eee aoe 
C. T.| 21... a | 2 [2(e)| oe | vee | oe ) May include 
C. T.| tg yee: a eee (area We unjabi 
C. T.| 2] 1 r| 3\t(e)| .. |. |... | Hi 
Cia ai 1 | 31 as as 


The constitution of the infantry corps was, except in a few 
cases, almost identical with that ordered in 1883, the only difference 
being that the companies of ‘“‘ other Hindus” (exclusive of Jat com- 
panies) were entirely eliminated, and extra companies of Rajputs sub- 
stituted in their place ; the Assam Gurkha regiments exchanged their 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 409 


Jarwah companies for an eighth company of Gurkhas, while the 
Jarwahs were distributed throughout the regiment, fifteen to each com- 
pany ; the 45th became a class regiment of Sikhs only, recruit- 
ing from Cis and Trans-Sutlej ; ; the 38th Bengal Infantry, retaining 
its two Rajput companies, became otherwise a class regiment, having 
six companies of Jats. The constitution of the new corps and of the | 
Punjab Frontier Force was as follows :— 


=_— ——- 


SS 


rans-Indus and 
Border Tribes. 


i REMARKs. 
Oo 
2|2|2 


webs 
-|-|- + | (a) Trans-Sutlej. 


2/.. | ¥ |2(b)| (6) One mixed com- 
peasy 5 9 Nita ated 
urk 


Guides| antry ; 


ist Sikh Infantry .| C. C. 4 I 

and ,, = 1G @ 1| 2 3 

ard ,, ss Gi a 2,4 1 

4th ,, 9 jC. Cj 2 1| 4 I 

ist Punjab Infantry;}C.C.} 2| 1| 1| 2 2 

and ,, me (eh oe 3 ae he I 

aa x ae? a oe i oe 2 

Sun “Ze aes A ie 2 ie cee hee a ee os 

6th ,, a ool 3 3); 2]... | # |1€e)| (c) Hindustanis, 


Two important changes marked the year 1886. By G.G.O. 485 
of that yearthe Punjab Frontier Force, which had since its formation 
been under the control of the Government of the Punjab, was brought 


4to 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


directly under the Commander-in-Chief in India. In notifying this 
transfer it was said that ‘‘ His Excellency in Council is authorised to 
express the high sense entertained by Her Majesty the Queen-Em- 
press of the loyal and brilliant services which, under the Government 
of the province, the Punjab Frontier Force has invariably rendered 
to the State from the earliest period of its creation. .....4... 
The Force will . . . continue as a separate unit and, as far as may be 
found practicable, its local and distinctive character will be preserved, 
its institutions maintained, and its existing privileges continued.” 

The following is extracted from the order of His Excellency the 
Commander-in-Chief, Sir Frederick Roberts, announcing this change 
(G. O. No. 58 of 1886) :— 

‘* For upwards of thirty-five years the Punjab Frontier Force has been steadily 
adding to its laurels. Its list of casualties during that time bears testimony to the 
gallantry and devotion of all ranks in many a hard-fought action, while the admirable 
manner in which discipline has at all times been maintained has contributed mate- 
rially to the high reputation for soldier-like qualities which the Brigade now so 
deservedly enjoys. 

*‘ The addition of so distinguished a Force to the Bengal Army would, under all 
circumstances, be a matter of congratulation to the Commander-in-Chief in India; 
but, as a former Commandant of the Punjab Frontier Force, it is especially gratifying 
to Sir Frederick Roberts that this measure has come into operation during his tenure 


of office. 
“ His Excellency takes this opportunity of assuring the officers, aon-commis- 


sioned officers and men of the Brigade, that it will be his special privilege, not 
only to watch over their interests in the future, but also to take care that the many 
customs and traditions which have so largely contributed to make the force what 
it is are interfered with as little as possible. In offering ‘a soldier’s welcome to 
all ranks of the Punjab Frontier Force, Sir Frederick Roberts is sure that he is 
only giving expression to what is the unanimous feeling throughout the Army of 
Bengal.’’ 

On the 13th October, 1886, an Army Circular (clause 170) 
was issued which closely affected the soldiers and regiments of the 
Bengal Army. It ordered that all native infantry regiments should 
be linked together in regiments of three battalions each; that 
enlistment should be for any one of the linked battalions; that 
at present the numbers of corps would remain unaltered ; and that 
liability to transfer from one battalion to another would come into 
force only in the case of one or more battalions being ordered on 
service. At the same time a system of reserves was notified as sance 
tioned for the Bengal infantry, 92%., an active and a garrison reserve, 
the former composed of men transferred after not less than five or more 
than ten years’ service with the colours; the latter of men pensioned 


_ BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


ait 


after twenty-one years’ service, or who have completed a total of 
colour and reserve service of twenty-one years. The active reserve was 
limited to 100 men per battalion ; the garrison reserve was unlimited. 

Further, the same circular granted pay to recruits, wherever enlist- 
ed, from date of enlistment, as well as marching batta, or free carriage 
for their baggage; the rates of good-conduct pay were sanctioned after 
three, six, and ten years’ service, instead of after three, nine, and fifteen ; 
the annual allowance for half mounting was raised from R4 to Rs ; 
and the pension rules were altered by the abolition of invalid pension 
after fifteen years’ service, the grant of ordinary pension to all soldiers 
after twenty-one years’ service, and of a gratuity of twelve months’ 
pay of rank to all men discharged as unfit for further service between 
fifteen and twenty-one years’ service. 

Finally, on the 13th October, 1888, an India Army Circular 
(clause 163) authorised fixed regimental centres for the groups of 
linked battalions under a territorial distribution of Native Infantry. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Chapter XII—(1891—1895). 
The punishment inflicted on the Chins, the Lushais, and other 


aw. | tribes on the frontier of Burma, during the period from 1888 to 


1890, did not prove wholly effectual in putting a stop to their 
incursions into British territory, and during the years from 1890 to 
1893 a number of expeditions took place against one or another of 
these savage tribes. 

As early as the autumn of 1890, a sudden outbreak occurred in 
the Lushai Hills culminating in determined attacks on the forts of 
Changzsil and Aijal, which were then held by bodies of military police. 
Reinforcements, which included a detachment of the 40th Bengal 
Infantry, were hurried up from Silchar; the village of Thanruma, the 
leading insurgent chief, was taken and destroyed on the 4th October, 
and Changsil and Aijal were relieved on the following day ; the village 
of the Chief Khaikum was destroyed on the 17th. © 

Of greater importance than these were the operations which it 
was found necessary to carry out in the Chin Hills during the winter 
of 1890-91, the immediate causes of which were the general restless- 
ness of the Chin tribes and the perpetration of numerous outrages 
by the people uf Thetta, a village in the Baungshe Chin country. On 
the 1st of January a small force (130 of the 2-4th Gurkhas, anda 
few Madras sappers) was despatched against Thetta, under the 
command of Captain Carnegy; an attack was made on the place on 
the following day, but the enemy’s stockades were found to be too 
strong to be forced, and the detachment had to be withdrawn after 
Lieutenant James, of the Royal Engineers, and two men of the 
a-4th Gurkhas had beenkilled. Notwithstanding the ill-success of 
this attack, the Thetta people almost immediately afterwards made 
their submission, and entered into an agreement to pay a fine and to 
desist for the future from molesting our lines of communication in 
the Chin Hills. Subsequently, the countries of the Baungshe and 
Kanhow Chins were visited by columns detailed for the purpose, 
and of which detachments of the newly-formed 39th Bengal Infantry 
(composed of Garhwalis) and of the 2-4th Gurkhas formed part; 
these columns met with little opposition, and indeed there was no 
fighting, except a skirmish with the Kanhows at Tenzaung on the 
a1st February. Later on (2nd April) a small column under the 
command of Lieutenant Mocatta, 39th Bengal Infantry, was engaged 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 413 


in a smart action with the Chins of Tlantlang, near the Sao-var 
stream; in this engagement a detachment of the 39th greatly distin- 
guished iteelf by its steadiness and bravery under circumstances ex- 
tremely trying to young soldiers, and sustained considerable loss. 
These operations did not, however, finally settle matters with the 
Chins, and the general restlessness of the tribes led, during the 
winter of 1891-92, to the despatch of several columns into the Operations 
Southern Chin Hills. These columns, in which No. 8 (Bengal) Chine, t89e-9s. 
Mountain Battery, a small detachment of the 7th Bengal Infantry, 
and 310 men of the 39th Bengal Infantry were included, traversed 
the country in various directions without meeting with much opposi- 
tion, though they experienced great hardships, and they were 
eventually broken up at Haka and Fort White in the spring of 1892. 
A fresh outbreak amongst the Lushais in the early part of the | Lushai 
same year necessitated the despatch of reinforcements, including 
a portion of the 18th Bengal Infantry, to Fort Aijal, in the neigh- 
bourhood of which place they were engaged in numerous skirmishes 
with the insurgents. At the same time a column under the com- 
mand of Captain Loch, of the Military Police, in which a detachment 
of the 18th was included, operated in the Eastern Sonai country and 
captured and destroyed numerous Lushai villages. Besides these, 
a column under the command of Captain Rose, which included two 
guns of No. 8 (Bengal) Mountain Battery and 150 of the 39th Bengal 
Infantry, was despatched from Fort White to Dao-khama’s village, the 
centre of the rising, to effect a diversion in favour of Captain Shakes- 
pear, who was hemmed in at Vansanga’s, and losing men daily. After 
a good deal of desultory fighting, the men of most of the insurgent vil- 
lages took refuge in the Lieukhan and Howlong countries; the rest sub- 
mitted,and in July 1893 the operations were brought to a conclusion. 
In October 1893 disturbances broke out afresh in the Northern 
Chin Hills. Troops (including a detachment of the 39th Bengal 
Infantry from the Southern Chin Hills) were promptly moved into 
the disturbed area, and punitive operations immediately undertaken 
against the enemy, who were defeated in numerous skirmishes and 
many of their villages destroyed, but it was not until the end of March 
1893 that the Chins finally gave in their submission and surrendered 
their fire-arms. Our losses during these operations amounted to 13 
men killed, and one British officer, one Native officer and 33 men 


wounded. 


4I4 THE SERVICES OF THE 


| By Army Order No. 154 of 1893 (republished in G. O. C. C. 
| No, 969, dated the 1oth November 1893) the India medal with 
‘clasps inscribed “ Burma, 1889-92,” and “‘ Luswat, 1839-92,” accord- 
| ing to the locality of the service, was granted to the troops employed 
_on various expeditions in Burma and on its frontiers during the years 
named. 
While these affairs were proceeding on the frontiers of Burma, 
‘ events of importance were occurring in other parts of the country, and 
‘especially on the Eastern and North-Western frontiers, to which 
‘attention must now be given. Though they were not actually first in 
order of time, it will be convenient to give precedence to affairs on 
the Eastern frontier, where an unfortunate and unexpected reverse 

was experienced. 
Outbreak at A revolution having occurred in Manipur in September 1890, 
Marck sti: | resulting in the abdication of the Maharaja, in March 1891, 
‘Mr. Quinton, the Chief Commissioner of Assam, with an escort of 
400 Gurkhas of the 42nd and 44th Bengal Infantry, under the 
command of Colonel Skene, proceeded to Imphal, the chief town 
(at which place there was already present a company of the 43rd 
Bengal Infantry), for the purpose of settling the affairs of the State, 
and of arresting and deporting Tikandrajit Bir Singh, a brother of 
the late Maharaja, who had been one of the leading spirits of the 
revolution, and now held the post of Senapati, or Commander-in- 
| Chief of the Manipur Army. The attempt to arrest the Senapati, 
which was made on the 24th March, proved a lamentable failure; it 
was violently and successfully resisted, and open hostilities followed, 
desultory fighting being continued until the evening when the British 
force was withdrawn within the grounds of the Residency, having 
sustained a loss of about 40 officers and men, killed and wounded, 
amongst the former of whom was included Subadar Rajbir Newar 
Of the 43rd, and amongst the latter Lieutenant Brackenbury and 
Subadar Hima Chand Thakur, both of the 44th, who succumbed 
to their injuries in the course of the night. The retirement was 
followed by an act of sanguinary treachery on the part of the enemy. 
Late in the evening Mr. Quinton, Colonel Skene, and Lieutenant 
Simpson, 43rd Bengal Infantry, were induced to proceed to the 
Maharaja's palace on pretence of a conference, and there they were 
seized and barbarously put to death under the orders of the Sena- 
pati and other leaders of the insurgents, who followed up this 


Se ae, 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Ais 


infamous proceeding by opening a heavy fire on the troops in 
the Residency. These, being almost without ammunition, and the 
place being untenable, evacuated the position during the night and, 
retreating in some disorder, made their way in small parties to 
Kohima, Cachar and Tammu. 

A detachment (33 rifles) of the 43rd Bengal Infantry stationed at 
Langthobal, four miles from Imphal, under the command of Jemadar 
Birbal Nagarkoti, held & to their post with considerable determination 
until the following day, and then retired in good order to Tammu, 
where (27th March) they joined Lieutenant Grant, commanding.a 
detachment (50 rifles) of the newly reconstituted 12th Madras In- 
fantry (the snd Burma Battaiion). On the following day Lieutenant 
Grant pushed up to Thobal in Manipur with both detachments, in the 
hope of saving Mr. Quinton and the other officers, the fact of whose 
murder wag not then known, and who were believed to be prisoners 
in the palace at Imphal. At Thobal Lieutenant Grant and his 
detachment were confronted by a rabble of several thousand Mani- 
puris, who kept up a heavy and almost ceaseless fire for several days 
on hisentrenchment. He, nevertheless, maintained his ground without 
difficulty antil ordered to retire to Tammu on the gth April. The 
insurgents followed him in his retreat, but were met and routed by 
a small detachment under the command of Captain Presgrave. For 
_ his conduct in this affair Lieutenant Grant was awarded the Victoria 
Cross and promoted to the rank of Major, while the native officers 
of the detachments of the 43rd Bengal and 12th Madras Infantry 
were admitted to the Order of British India, and every non-com- 
missioned officer and man was decorated with the Order of Merit. 

In the meantime arrangements had been made to push forward 
troops on Imphal with all possible despatch from Kohima, Cachar 
and Tammu, and towards the end of April, after overcoming consi- 
derable difficulties with regard to the provision of transport, a column 
moved forward from each of those pare These columns were 
composed as follow :— 

Kekima Column.—Brigadier-General H. Collett, CB, :—Three guns of No. 8 

(Bengal) Mountain Battery, and detachments of the 13th (100), 4nd 
(200), 43rd (400), and 44th (300) Bengal Infantry, and Assam Military 
Police (300). 

Silchar (Cackar) Colussss.—Lieutenant-Colonel R. H. F. Rennick :—Two guns 

of No.8 (Bengal) Mountain Battery, and detachments of the 18th (370), 
gand (103), 43rd (282), and g4th (1184) Beogal Infantry ; the 1-3nd Gurkha 


416 


First Miransai 
Expedition, 
Janoary 186@:. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Regiment; so of the Pioneer Company of the Calcutta Volunteer Rifles , 
and 207 of the Surma Valley Military Police. 

Tammu Column.—Brigadier-General T. Graham, C.8. :—Four guns of No. 3 

Mountain Battery, Royal Artillery; a wing of the 4th Battalion of the 
King’s Royal Rifle Corps; the 2-4th Gurkha Regiment; and the 12th 
Madras Infantry. - 

These columns reached Imphal! almost simultaneously on the 27th 
of April, the enemy having offered little or no opposition except to the 
Tammu force, an advanced detachment of which, composed of parties 
of the 2-4th Gurkhas and the 1ath Madras Infantry, had a sharp 
fight with a considerable body of them on the asth April in an en- 
trenchment at Bapam, six miles north of Palel. The Manipuris, being 
hemmed in, fought until nearly all were killed, the loss on our side 
being Jemadar Kiruram Gurung, 2-4th Gurkhas, and one man killed, 
and four British officers (including Captains Drury and Carnegy, 2-4th 
Gurkhas), two native officers and seven men wounded. With the 
occupation of Imphal the Manipur outbreak came to an end. The 
Senapati and other prominent persons fled before the arrival of our 
troops, but all were subsequently apprehended, and the Senapati, an 
official styled. “the Tongal General” (said to have been an ex- 
mutineer of the 34th Native Infantry), and others concerned in the 
murder of Mr. Quinton and his companions, were executed in due 
course. | 

By G. G. O. No. 652 of 1892 the India medal, with a clasp 
inscribed “ NortH-East Frontizr, 1891,” was granted to the troops 
of the three columns engaged in the re-occupation of Manipur. 

The North-West Frontier at this period was in a rather disturbed 
state, and the early months of 1891 witnessed the despatch of no 
less than three expeditions against recalcitrant tribes,—two against the 
Oraksais and one against the tribes of the Black Mountain in Hazara. 
The conduct of the Orakzai clans had for some time been so un- 
satisfactory, especially with regard to their repeated incursions into 
the Miranzai valley, that towards the end of 1890 it became apparent 
that a punitive expedition against them could no longer be delayed. 

Accordingly in January 1891, the following force was con- 
centrated at Kohat under the command of Brigadier-General Sir 
W. S. A. Lockhart, x.c.B, :— 

No. 3 (Peshawar) and 4 (Hazara) Mountain Batteries ; two squadronsof the 5th 
Punjab Cavalry; the sth Company of Bengal Sappers and Minerss the 


a2nd, 23rd (Pioneers) and 29th Bengal Infantry; the grd Sikh Infantry ; 
and the ist, 4th and sth Punjab Infantry. 


ee ee 


_— 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


417 


This force, organised in three columns, advanced into the country 
of the hostile clans on the 26th January, traversed it in various 
directions, blowing up forts and towers, and having, in order to put 
a stop to further raids into the Miranzai valley, established posts at 
various points on the Samana Range, returned to Kohat about the 
middle of February, without having met with any opposition from 
the enemy, though the troops had experienced great hardships from 
the severity of the climate in winter. 

But the results obtained were not of a lasting nature, ani an 
attack on the troops on the Samana, which took place on the 4th 
April, necessitated the despatch of a second expedition, for which pur- 
pose the following troops were concentrated at Hangu and Darband 
on the 16th April, under the command of Sir William Lockhart :— 

No. 3 Mountain Battery, Royal Artillery ; three guns of No. 2 (Derajat) Moun- 

tain Battery; No. 3 (Peshawar) Mountain Battery; three guns of the 
Punjab Garrison Battery ; the toth Bengal Lancers ; two squadrons of the 
sth Punjab Cavalry ; the sth Company of the Bengal Sappers and Miners ; 
the 1st Battalion of the King’s Royal Rifle Corps ; the 15th, roth, 27th and 
2oth Bengal Infantry; the srd Sikh Infantry; the 1st, and and 6th Punjab 
lafantry ; and the 1-sth Gurkha Regiment. 

A half battalion of the 2nd Manchester Regiment (96th Foot) was subsequently 

added to the force, 

The force advanced in three columns from Hangu and Darband 
on the 17th April, and during that and the following day, after 
a series of smart conflicts, drove the enemy off the Samana Range. 
Much fighting, some of it of a severe character, took place during 
the operations of the succeeding days, in the course of which the 
enemy’s country was traversed in every direction, until the 16th of May, 
when the work entrusted to the force was finished, the offending 
clans having all been visited and punished and brought into complete 
submission. The losses sustained during these operations, from the 
4th of April, amounted to 28 (including Jemadar Hashim Ali, 19th 
Bengal Infantry) killed, and 73 wounded, including Major Egerton, 
Assistant-Adjutant-General of the Punjab Frontier Force, Captains 
Maisey and MacLeod, 39th Bengal Infantry, Jemadar Tilok Sing, 
15th Bengal Infantry, and Subadar Mawaz Khan, 6th Punjab 
Infantry. ‘ | 

By G.G. O. No. 61 of 1893 the- India medal with a clasp in- 
scribed ‘‘SAMANA, 1891,” was granted to the troops employed in the 
operations on the Samana Range in April and May 1891. 

* 223 


418 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Black 
Mountain 
Expedition, 
3891, 


Operations n 
Hungza and 
Nagar, 2891. 


Shortly before. the outbreak which brought about the second 
Miranzai operations, it had become necessary to despatch a punitive 
expedition against some of the tribes of the Black Mountain, in 
Hazara, in consequence of their having, contrary to the agreement 
entered into in 1888, violently opposed (October 1890) the march 
of a British detachment over the crest of the mountain. To carry 
out the punishment of the offending tribes, the following troops 
were concentrated at Darband and Oghi by the ist March 1891, 
with Major-General W. K. Elles, c.B., in command :— 

Left (or River) Coluss.—Brigadier-General R. F. Williamson :—No, 1 Moun- 
tain Battery, Royal Artillery; three guns of No. 2 (Derajat) Mountain 
Battery ; the 2nd Battalion, Seaforth Highlanders (78th Foot); a wing of 
the 32nd Bengal Infantry (Pioneers); the 37th (Dogra) Bengal Infantry ; 
the Infantry of the Corps of Guides; and the 4th Sikh Infantry. 

Right (or Tilli) Colums.—Brigadier-General A. G. Hammond, V.C., D.8.0.: — 
No. g Mountain Battery, Royal Artillery; 1st Battalion, Royal Welsh 
Fusiliers (23rd Foot); the r1th Bengal Infantry; a wing of the 33nd Bengal 
Infantry (Pioneers); the 2-5th Gurkha Regiment; and the Khaibar Rifles. 

Divisional Troops.—One squadron of the 11th Bengal Lancers, and the 4th 
Company of the Bengal Sappers and Miners. 

The advance of the two columns was begun on the 12th March, 
but until the 19th little opposition was experienced. Before day- 
break on that day, however, a sudden and most determined attack 
was made on our advanced post at Ghazikot by a body composed 
partly of Hindustani fanatics and partly of tribesmen of the Black 
Mountain. The post was held by the Dogra company of the 4th Sikh 
Infantry, who behaved with the greatest gallantry, and after a sharp 
conflict repulsed the attack, though not without the loss of Jemadar 
Darshanu and three men killed, and Lieutenant Maconchy, Subadar 
Dheru, and seventeen men wounded. Slight engagements subse- 
quently occurred at Kanhar, Diliari, Darbanai and other places, 
and various movements followed, but in the end the enemy made 
complete submission, and with the exception of a small force left to 
hold the Black Mountain temporarily, the troops were withdrawn to 


their cantonments. Our total losses during the operationsamounted . 


to 6 killed and 47 wounded. 

By G. G. O. No. 358 of 1892 the India medal with a clasp in- 
scribed “ Hazara, 1891,’ was granted to the troops engaged in the 
operations on the Black Mountain. 

Towards the close of the same year disturbances broke out on 
quite a different part of the frontier, in the remote khanates of Hunza 


a 
Pee aes = = 


- ae 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


and Nagar. With the object of restoring order, the Gilgit Agency guard 
(consisting of thirty men of the zoth Bengal Infantry) was reinforced 
by two guns of No. 4 (Hazara) Mountain Battery, and two hundred 
men of the 1-5th Gurkha Regiment. With this small force, together 
with a small party of Bengal Sappers and Miners, two battalions of 
the Kashmir Imperial Service Infantry, and some local levies, the 
whole amounting to little more than a thousand men, the British 
Agent, Colonel Durand, took the field on the 1st of December, 
effected the passage of the Hunza river into Nagar the same day, and 
On the and, after a sharp conflict, carried the fort of Nilt by storm, 
with a loss of three men killed, and himself, Captain Aylmer, 
Bengal Sappers and Miners, Lieutenant Badcock, 1-s5sth Gurkha 
Regiment, and 27 men wounded. Some further ineffective fighting 
occurred on the following day, in which Lieutenant Gorton, No. 4 
Mountain Battery, was wounded, and on the 2oth of the month, 
under the orders of Captain Mackenzie, Seaforth Highlanders, who 
was in temporary command, the almost inaccessible position of 
the enemy on the Hunza river, beyond Nilt, was stormed and taken 
with a loss of only two men wounded. The enemy were completely 
defeated and dispersed ; on the 21st the Rajah of Nagar surrendered, 
and Hunza was occupied on the following day, thus bringing the 
operations to a conclusion. 

By G. G. O: No. 986 of 1892 the India medal with a clasp in- 
scribed “ Hunza, 1891,” was granted to the troops employed in these 
operations. 

The three Isazai clans of the Black Mountain—the Hasanzai, 
the Akazai, and the Madda Khel—having, in 1892, in breach of 
engagements entered into by them after the Black Mountain cam- 
paign of 1891, received and harboured in Baio, on the right 
bank of the Indas, one Hashim Ali Khan, a banished chief of the 
Khan Khel] Hasanzais, who had been a prime mover of the Black 
Mountain disturbances, and refused to surrender or expel hin, it 
became necessary in the autumn of 1892 to use coercive measures, 
and accordingly, on the rst October, the following force was concen- 
trated at Darband under the command of Major-General Sir W. S. A. 
Lockhart :— 


Nos. 3, 8 and 9 Mountain Batteries, Royal Artillery; No. 1 (Kohat) Mountain 
Battery; the 4th and 6th Companies of Bengal Sappers and Miners; two 
® 32832 


419 


Ieazai 


ber r8ge. 


420 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


E 
sre 
1893. 


Aber 
Expedition, 
2894. 


Boundary 
Delimitation, 
3804. 


squadrons of the 11th Bengal Lancers; the ist Battalion, Bedfordshire 
Regiment (16th Foot); the 1st Battalion, King’s Royal Rifle Corps (6oth 
Foot); the 25th and 30th Bengal Infantry; the 4th Sikh Infantry ; and 
the two battalions of the sth Gurkha Regiment. 


The force advanced on Baio on the 6th October, but the place 
was found to be deserted, and no opposition of any sort was 
experienced ; and all towers and defences having been blown up and 
destroyed, the troops were withdrawn. 

In March 1893 Chilas, on the Gilgit frontier, was the scene of a 
sharpengagement. The fort at that place was garrisoned at the time 
hy 300 men of the Kashmir Imperial Service Infantry under the 
command of Major Daniell, 1st Punjab Infantry, and on these, on 
the morning of the sth March, there came down a body of 1,200 
Chilasis and Kohistanis. Some severe fighting ensued, in the course 
of which Major Daniell fell in a daring attempt to expel the enemy 
from a village from which they were keeping up a heavy fire on the 
fort. The tribesmen were eventually repulsed with a heavy loss of 
350 men in killed alone, that on our side amounting to only 20 killed 
and 32 wounded. 

The course of events now takes us back to the Eastern Frontier, 
where, in May 1893, a small expedition (a hundred men of the 43rd 
Bengal Infantry) was despatched from Manipur for the purpose of 
punishing the people of the Kuki village of Mongham (twenty 
miles east of Imphal), who had made an unprovoked raid on the 
Naga village of Swemi and massacred nearly three hundred of the 
inhabitants. Mongham was reached on the 2and May, the leaders 
of the raid arrested, and the village destroyed. Other villages 
implicated in the raid were also punished, and the detachment 
returned to Manipur about the middle of June. 

In January 1894 an expedition was undertaken against the Abors. 
The force employed was composed for the most part of police, the 
only regular troops consisting of :oo men of the 44th Bengal Infantry. 
Some desultory fighting took place, and the total losses of the force 
amounted, including followers, to 41 killed and 45 wounded. 

Towards the end of 1894 a serious outbreak took place on the 
North-West Frontier. In accordance with the terms of a treaty 
entered into with the Amir of Kabul in November 1893, measures 
were adopied during the autumn of 1894 for the delimitation of the 
Waziri-Afghan Boundary from Domandi, on the Gomal river, to the 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Laram peak, on the borders of Khost. The attitude of the Mahsud 
Waziris necessitated the boundary commission being accompanied 
by a strong escort, and for this purpose the following troops 
were detailed, under the command of Brigadier-General A. H. 
Turner :— 

No. 3 (Peshawar) Mountain Battery; No. 2 Company, Bengal Sappers and 


Miners; a squadron of the 1st Punjab Cavalry; the 2oth Bengal Infantry; 
the 1-1st Gurkha Rifles; and the 3rd Sikh Infantry. 


The escort was assembled at Dera Ismail Khan on the 1st 
October, and moving forward 914 Kajuri Kach (where it was joined 
by the members of the Commission on the 18th), it was concentrated 
in a position near the Inzar Kotal, in Wana, on the 27th. There had 
during this march been many indications of Mahsud hostility, but, 
though no attack in force was anticipated, all needful precautions 
were taken to secure the camp in the event of its being suddenly 
assailed. It was as well that these precautions were adopted, for 
before daylight on the morning of the 3rd November a Mahsud 
Waziri laskkar, said to have been three thousand strong, taking 
advantage of the darkness and of the broken nature of the ground 
in the vicinity, made a sudden and desperate attempt to rush the 
camp, and were successful in penetrating it at several points. A 
severe hand-to-hand conflict ensued, ending in the enemy being driven 


out of the camp at the point of the bayonet, though not before they | ° 


had done much damage and inflicted considerable loss. As day 
broke they began to retreat towards the hills; the cavalry were 
immediately launched in pursuit, and cut up large numbers of them 
before they could win their way to a place of safety. Our losses 
amounted to Lieutenant Macaulay, Royal Engineers, Subadar Padam 
Sing Rana and Jemadar Khark Sing Nagarkoti, both of the 1-r:st 
Gurkhas, 18 non-commissioned officers and men, and 24 followers 
killed, and 6 British officers, 47 non-commissioned officers and 
men, and 22 followers wounded, of whom Lieutenant Angelo, 
1-1s8t Gurkhas, afterwards died of the injuries he had received, 
The losses of the enemy were much more severe, amounting to 
above 600, of whom 350 were killed or died afterwards of their 
wounds. 

This unprovoked outrage necessitated the despatch of a punitive 
expedition, and for that purpose the following troops, to the 


421 


422 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Outbreak in 
Chitra), 38980 


command of which Lieutenant-General Sir W. S. A. Lockhart, x.c.B., 
was Dominated, were detailed :— 

Nos. 3 (Kohat), 3 (Peshawar), and 8 (Bengal) Mountain Batteries; a Maxim 
gun manned by a party from the Devonshire Regiment; Nos. 2 and § 
Companies of the Bengal Sappers and Miners; two squadrons of the 1st 
and one of the 2nd Punjab Cavalry; the 3rd Punjab Cavalry; the and 
Battalion of the Border Regiment (the ssth Foot) ; the 20th, 33rd, and 38th 
Bengal Infantry; the 1-rst and the 1-sth Gurkha Rifles; the ‘1st and 3rd 
Sikh Infantry ; and the 2nd, 4th and 6th Punjab Infantry. 

These troops were organised in three brigades, which were concen- 
trated at Wana, Jandola and Mirian, respectively, on the 17th 
December, and the Mahsuds having failed to comply with the 
demands made upon them, the force moved forward on the same day, 
marching respectively on Kaniguram, Makin and Razmak, which 
points were reached on the 21st without much opposition having 
been experienced. In the course of the succeeding four weeks the 
troops, broken up into smaller and more easily handled columns, 
visited every part of the Mahsud Waziri country without meeting 
with any opposition, except from small detached bands of the enemy, 
whose guerilla tactics caused a few casualties. The Mahsuds them- 
selves, on the other hand, suffered substantial losses in men and 
property, most of their fortified towers having been blown up and 
destroyed, and almost all their sheep, goats and cattle captured and 
driven off; they eventually made their submission on the arst of 
January, and shortly afterwards complied in full with the terms 
imposed upon them. The losses sustained by our troops amounted 
to no more than two killed and twenty-two wounded. 

By G. G. O. No. 1082 of 1895 the India medal, with a clasp 
inscribed “ Waziristan, 1894-95," was granted to all the troops 
employed in these operations from October 1894 to March 
1895. 

In January 1895, while the operations against the Mahsud Waziris 
were still in progress, events were occurring in Chitral, which eventu- 
ally led to the movement of a large force upon that place. through 
Bajaur and Swat, and of a smaller separate force from Gilgit direct. 
On the rst of that month Nizam-ul-Mulk, Mehtar of Chitral, was 
murdered, and his brother Amir-ul-Mulk placed upon the throne. 
The local disturbances which ensued reached their climax when 
the British Agent, Surgeon-Major Robertson, was besieged in 


\ 


{ 
i 


{ 


| Chitral fort with a smaljl force consisting of no more than gg men of | 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


the 14th Sikhs and 300 of the 4th Kashmir Rifles, the whole of which 
were under the command of Captain Campbell. The leaders of 
the hostile tribesmen were Umra Khan, Chief of Jandol, and Sher 
Afzal, uncle of the Mehtar. 

Sher Afzal and his following arrived in the neighbourhood of Chitral 
fort on the 3rd of March. In the course of the same afternoon a 
detachment composed of 200 men of the Kashmir Rifles was sent 
out to observe the movements of the enemy and, if possible, to drive 
him back; these were not long in coming into collision with the 
hostile force, hut the action which ensued was not successful, and 
the detachment was compelled to retreat into the fort with a loss of 
23 killed and 33 wounded, Captains Campbell and Baird being 
included amongst the latter. Captain Baird, who was mortally 
wounded, was carried into the fort by Surgeon-Captain Whitchurch, 
of the Indian Medical Service, who afterwards received the Victoria 
Cross for the gallantry he displayed upon this occasion. 

Immediately on intelligence of these events being received by the 
Government of India, arrangements were set on foot for the despatch 
of a force through Swat, Bajaur and Dir for the purpose of relieving 
the Chitral fort. ‘The following troops were detailed for this service 
under the command of Major-General Sir R. C. Low, x.c.B. :— 

The tsth Field Battery, Royal Artillery; Nos. 3 and 8 Mountain Batteries, 
Royal Artillery; No. 4 (Hazara) Mountain Battery; a Maxim gun manned 
by a party from the Devonshire Regiment; Nos. 1, 4 and 6 Compasies, 
Bengal Sappers and Miners; the 11th Bengal Lancers; the Cavalry of the 
Corps of Guides; the ist Battalion, East Kent Regiment (3rd Foot); the 
ist Battalion, Bedfordshire Regiment (16th Foot) ; the sad Battalion, King’s 
Own Scottish Borderers (25th Foot); the 1st Battalion, King’s Royal Rifle 
Corps (6oth Foot); the 1st Battalion, Gordon Highlanders (75th Foot) ; 
the 2nd Battalion, Seaforth Highlanders (78th Foot); the 13th, 15th, a3rd, 
25th and 37th Bengal Infantry; the 2-4th Gurkha Rifles; the Infantry of 
the Corps of Guides ; and the 4th Sikh Infantry. 


Besides these, No. 2 (Derajat) Mountain Battery, the 1st Battalion 
of the East Lancashire Regiment (30th Foot) and the 29th and 30th 
Bengal Infantry were detailed for service on the line of communica- 
tion, and a Reserve Brigade was formed at Rawal Pindi. At the 
same time Colonel Kelly, who, with his regiment (the 32nd 
Pioneers), was engaged in road-making in the Gilgit Agency, was 
directed to assume command there and make such arrangements ag 


seemed to him to be possible to effect the relief of Chitral though 
/ ‘ 


itral 
109s- 


423 


tion, 


424 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Defence of 


Chitral fort, 


2695. 


he was prohibited from undertaking any operations which did not 
afford a reasonable prospect of success. 

While these arrangements were in progress, collisions between 
detachments of our troops and bodies of the enemy had occurred in 
several places. At Reshun, a detachment (Bengal Sappers and 
Kashmir Rifles) under Lieutenants Edwardes and Fowler, proceeding 
from Mastuj to Chitral with a supply of ammunition, was vigorously 
attacked during several days, and eventually, by a gross act of trea- 
chery, captured by the enemy during an armistice. Ina defile beyond 
Koragh a detachment of the 14th Bengal Infantry, under the com- 
mand of Captain Ross, which was hastening from Mastuj to the assist- 
ance of Lieutenants Edwardes and Fowler, was surrounded by the 
enemy on the 7th March, and after three days’ fighting had to cut its 
way back to Koraghand Buni, which it effected, though not without 
heavy loss, Captain Ross and 46 men (besides a hospital-assistant and 
six followers) being killed, and Lieutenant Jones and nine men 
wounded. Finally, at Mastuj a detachment (48 men of the 14th 
Bengal Infantry, 228 of the 4th and 6th Kashmir Rifles, and so 
Paniyali levy sepoys) under the command of Lieutenant Moberly 
sustained for more than a fortnight a series of desultory attacks 
from a body of the enemy nearly three thousand in number, on 
whom it inflicted considerable losses. 

Of the remaining operations of this campaign the first that claims 
notice is the defence of the fort at Chitral. After the action of the 
3rd March the place was closely invested by Sher Afzal and his 
following, who, during the ensuing forty-six days, kept up a heavy 
fire,and made repeated attempts to storm the defences. In these 
attempts they were invariably repulsed with loss, though on one 
occasion (7th April) they succeeded in setting fire to one of the 
defensive towers, and killed and wounded several of the garrison, 
Surgeon-Major Robertson being amongst the latter. Finding that 
there was small probability of their capturing the place in this way, 
the enemy endeavoured to breach the wall by means of a mine, and 
actually succeeded in pushing a gallery up to one of the towers 
before they were detected. On their intentions being discovered, 
their plans were promptly frustrated by a daring and brilliant sortie 
made by a detachment composed of 40 men of the 14th Sikhs and 
60 of the 4th Kashmir Rifles, led by Lieutenant Harley. The enemy 
were taken by surprise and driven off, and the shaft of the mine 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


blown up and entirely destroyed, with a loss on our side of 21 men 
killed and wounded. Forty-eight hours later, having heard of the 
approach of the force under the command of Colonel Kelly from the 
north and of the Khan of Dir from the south, Sher Afzal hastily 
raised the siege and fled. During this gallant defence of the fort 
from the 4th of March to the 18th of April, the losses of the garrison 
amounted to 48 killed and wounded. 

Colonel Kelly, whose approach was a principal factor in the 
raising of the siege of Chitral, marched from Gilgit on the 23rd 
March with two guns of No. 1 Kashmir Mountain Battery and 
nearly four hundred men of the 32nd Bengal Infantry (Pioneers) ; 
he was afterwards reinforced by forty Kashmir Sappers and a hun- 
dred and fifty levy men from Cherkila, Hunza, Nagar, and Sai, and 
having passed Ghizr on the 318t, he succeeded during the first days of 
April in getting over the Shandur Pass (12,230 feet above the level of 
the sea),—-a truly formidable operation owing to the severity of the 
weather and the depth of the snow, It was not, however, until the 9th 
of April that he came into collision with the tribesmen. On that day 
they attempted to bar his advance in a formidable position at Chakalwat, 
but he forced his way through with a loss of only four men wounded, 
and relieved Lieutenant Moberly at Mastuj the same day. Reinforced 
by a hundred men of the 4th Kashmir Rifles, Kelly advanced from 
Mastuj on the 13th, and in the course of the same day drove the 
enemy from a formidable position at Nisa Gol, inflicting on them a 
loss of 160 killed and wounded, while our own casualties did not 
exceed twenty. Continuing his advance, he reached Chitral on the 
zoth April, from before which place Sher Afzal and the besieging 
tribesmen had already fled, and Colonel Kelly thus had the good 
fortune, after brief though exceedingly arduous operations, to accom- 
plish the object for which a force had been placed in the field. 

It now only remains to describe the operations of that force under 
the command of Sir Robert Low. Sir Robert advanced from 
Jalala on the and April, having previously by proclamation made 
known to the people of Swat and Bajaur, in the most distinct terms, 
the objects of the expedition, informing them that we had no hostile 
design against them, and that if they refrained from attacking our 
troops and from impeding in any way our march to the relief of 
Chitral, no hostilities would be directed against them on our part, and 
no part of their territory permanently occupied by us. Notwithstanding 


425 


Colone! Kelly's 
operations, 


Swat peor ee 
Bajaur, 189s. 


426 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


these assurances, however, the Malakand was strongly held, and Sir 
Robert’s advance opposed with great determination when he moved 
up on the 3rd of April. The pass was found to be precipitous 
and difficalt, and the enemy who held it numbered over 12,000, though 
some of these were badly armed. After an engagement of over five 
hours’ duration, the position was carried by storm with a loss on our 
side of eleven men killed and eight British officers (including 
Major Tonnochy and Lieutenant Harman of the 4th Sikhs, and 
Lieutenant Ommanney of the Guides Infantry), two native officers 
and fifty men wounded, that of the enemy being over five hundred. 
On the following day an advance was made into the Swat valley and 
the enemy defeated at Khar, with a further loss of nearly five hundred 
men, Our own casualties amounting to no more than twenty, amongst 
whom were Lieutenant Baldwin, of the Guides Cavalry, and Lieu- 
tenant Wynch, of the 37th Bengal Infantry. This was followed 
on the 7th by the passage of the Swat river, after an action in 
which the 11th Bengal Lancers made a gallant charge against an 
immensely superior number of the enemy, killing more than a 
hundred of them. On the 13th and 14th an action took place on the 
banks of the Panjkora, in which Lieutenant-Colonel Battye, of the 
Guides Infantry, was killed, and Captain Peebles, commanding the 
Maxim detachment of the Devonshire Regiment, mortally wounded. 
The last engagement took place at Mamuzai on the 17th, and on the 
20th a detachment of five hundred men was pushed on from Barwa 
towards Chitral to rescue the garrison, which was believed to bein 
great straits, but reassuring intelligence of its safety having been re- 
ceived, the detachment was halted at Ashreth on the 27th, on which 
day Sher Afsal was brought in a prisoner by the Khan of Dir, who 


had been actively co-operating with our forces, with the object of re-. 


covering his territory, of which he had been deprived by Umra Khan. 
Umra Khan himself effected his escape and took refuge in Afghan- 
istan. Colonel Kelly, having already effected the relief of the Chitral 
fort, the further advance of the force under the command of Sir 
Robert Low became unnecessary, but at a later period that officer 
with a small portion of one of his brigades moved up to Chitral. The 
total losses of the force during these operations amounted to 127 
officers and men killed and wounded. 

By G. G. O. No. 509 of 1896 the new India Medal, recently in- 
stituted, with clasps inscribed “‘RerigF oF CHiTRAL, 1895,” and 


es Ur el aE 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


427 


“ Devencr or Currrat, 1895,” was granted to the troops employed 
in the defence of Chitral fort and in the operations carried out for its 
relief, and subsequently the several corps engaged in the operations 
were permitted to inscribe the word “ Cuirrat” on their colours, the 
14th Bengal Infantry being allowed at the same time’ to emblazon 
“ Drrence oF CuirraL” upon their’s. 

The period from 1891 to 1895 was noteworthy for the great num- 
ber of reforms that were introduced, not only in the organisation and 
system of administration of the army (in which some remarkable 
changes took place), but in matters of interior economy and in those 
affecting the improvement of the soldiers’ position as well. The 
Principal of these changes shall now be briefly adverted to. 


Amongst the first of these reforms was the amalgamation of the | 4 


Staff Corps of the three Presidencies under the general designation 
of “the Indian Staff Corps,” which was sanctioned and notified in a 
Royal Warrant, dated the 28th January 1891, and announced in India 
in G. G. O. No. 208 of 1891. This measure, however, was one the 
effect of which—so far as the Bengal Army was concerned— 
would be felt by the British officers alone, and that only in the 
future ; it left the Bengal Army itself unchanged. 

Another important reform which was announced about the same 
time was the grant of an increased rate of pay to the silladar cavalry 
(G. G. O. No. 224 of 1891). By this grant the pay of non-commis- 
sioned officers and sowars was raised by R4 per mensem, that of 
sowars thus becoming R31 instead of R27. 

Four years later the pay of all non-commissioned ranks in the 
native artillery (including drivers of British batteries), the three corps 
of sappers and miners, and the native infantry, was also increased by 
R2 per mensem, and the grant of the annual half-mounting allowance 
of R5 was allowed from date of enlistment. This increase of pay 
(which was extended to the Viceroy’s Body-Guard and the local 
corps under the Government of India) was notified in G. G. O. 
No. 670 of 1895. | . 

As a step towards removing a difficulty that was said to exist in 
attracting recruits of good quality to the service and to facilitate 
recruiting for the native army generally, recruiting depots were estab- 
lished in 1892 at the following stations, each to form the centre of a 
recruiting district for the classes specified :— 

Peshawar. «2 2» SwsSté‘“ *é«S:SCW or Pathans 


1891—2895. 


Recruiting 
centres. 


428 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Arms. 


Re-organisation 
of Hindustani 
regiments. 


Indian soldiers 
in Africa, 189: 
—3696. 


: 
| 
, 
| 
\ 


For Punjabi Mahomeidans, 
9 «Silehs. 


Rawal Pindi . ° ° 
» yg Kashmir Dogras, 


Amritsar e e r) 
Sialkot (in winter) . ° 
. » Kangra Dogras. 
° » Jats and Hindustani 
Mahomedans. 
Lucknow ‘ : ° ° ° - o Hindustani Hindus. 


Gorakhpur . ° : . ° - » Gurkhas. ° 
Each centre was placed under the direct control of an officer 


Dhar=msala (in summer) 
Delhi e ° e 


| (atyled the “ District Recruiting Officer”) specially selected for his 


knowledge of the classes with whom he would have to deal. 

In 1892-93, on the introduction of the Lee-Metford magazine 
rifle for the British infantry, the Native infantry was re-armed with the 
Martini-Henry rifle. 

With a view to increasing their fighting value, it was proposed in 
June 1892 to re-organise the sixteen Hindustani regiments nf Native 
infantry as class regiments. Experience had shown that not only 
were recruits of a better stamp attracted to class regiments, but 
that all ranks were more happy and contented when serving with 
men of their own race and caste; the regimental system was found 
to work more harmoniously in such corps, while esprit de corps was 
fostered and a healthy spirit of rivalry between regiment and regi- 
ment engendered. This re-organisation was carried out early in 
1893, the regiments in question being divided into five classes, as 
follow :— 

Brahmins.—(Two regiments, —the rst and 3rd.) 

Rajputs.—(Seven regiments,—the 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, sth, 13th, and 16th.) 

Musalmans.—(Four regiments,—the sth, 12th, 17th, and 18th.) 

$Fats.—(Two regiments,—the 6th and roth.) 

Hillmen (Khas Gurkhas).—(One regiment,—the 9th.) 

During this period a new and a somewhat unique departure was 
made in the grant of permission to volunteers from the Indian Army 
to take temporary service under the local authorities in British East 
and Central Africa. The first of these bodies of volunteers was 
given in 1891, when, at the request of the British Central Africa 
Company and with the sanction of Her Majesty's Government, a party 
of sixty native soldiers (principally Mazbi Sikhs and men of the Hyder- 
abad Contingent) were permitted to proceed to Central Africa with 
Captain Maguire, Commandant of Police there. These men did 
excellent service in Central Africa, many being killed or wounded in 
encounters with the Arab slave hunters. Captain Maguire himself 


ta SS cet St te Yk 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


429 


fell in one of these conflicts, Early in 1892, Captain Johnson, 36th 
Bengal Infantry, proceeded to Central Africa as successor to Captain 
Maguire, taking with him ten more men (Sikhs) to replace casualties 
in the Central Africa Police, and in 1893 a further reinforcement of 
100 men under Lieutenant Edwards, 35th Bengal Infantry, was fur- 
nished. In the early part of 1895, two hundred Sikh volunteers 
from the native army were despatched to British Central Africa to 
relieve detachments already serving there, and in October of the 
Same year a body of three hundred Punjabi Mahomedans was des- 
patched to Mombassa, for service in the British East Africa Protec- 
torate. 

In this connection it may here be mentioned that in 1892 the 
Government of India raised and despatched to China, for service at 
Hong-Kong, a battalion of infantry, composed of Mahomedans of 
Upper India, as well as detachments of artillery for service at Hong- 
Kong, Singapore, Ceylon and Mauritius. 

In 1895, a new medal was instituted to commemorate wars in 
India and on the frontier, in substitution of the India Medal of 
1854, which had been introduced, on the suggestion of Lord Dalhousie, 
to avoid the multiplication of medals, and which was first issued to 
commemorate the Burmese War of 1852-53. With the exception of 
the Mutiny and the Afghan War of 1878-80, for which special 
medals were issued, this medal had been granted for every Indian 
campaign during a period of forty years, and it had, in 1895, no less 
than twenty-one clasps,—some officers and native soldiers possessing 
as many as nine andten. There was a wide-spread feeling among 
those who had eamed clasp after clasp that the time had come for 
some better recognition of their services than the addition of more 
Clasps to the medal already possessed by them. It was therefore 
determined, in connection with the grant of a medal for the defence 
and the relief of Chitral in 1895, that the opportunity should be 
taken to inaugurate a new India Medal, with a distinctive ribbon, and 
to grant it first to the troops who took part in those operations, which 
would thus be placed at the head of a new series of minor wars and 
expeditions for which an India Medal is granted. 

Finally, in the year 1895, there came into operation the most im- 
portant and far-reaching reform that had been instituted in the Armies 
of India since their formation during the early days of the rise of the 
British power in this country,—97s., the abolition of the Presidential 


The Hong: 
Kong Regi- 
ment. 


New India 
Medal, 


Abolition of 
Presidency 
Armies. 


430 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Army System, under which the Madras and Bombay Armies had been 
maintained on a separate footing under the control of the Govern- 
ments of those Presidencies and independent of the authority of the 
Commander-in-Chief in India. This reform had been advocated by 
many eminent officers who had devoted their attention to matters of 
military administration, as well as by the Army Organisation Com- 
mission assembled in 1879. The recommendations of the Army Com- 
mission on the subject were laid before Her Majesty's Government in 
1881, but it was not considered expedient at that time to ask Parlia- 
ment to legislate on the subject, and the matter was for the time 
dropped. It was not, however, forgotten, and in 1885, in 1888, and 
again in 1892, this important matter was brought under the notice 
of Her Majesty's Government. On the last occasion, the proposals 
of the Government of India, somewhat modified, found acceptance, 
and a Bill (“Madras and Bombay Armies Act, 18y93—56 & 57 
Vict., Cap. 62”) was passed through Parliament to give effect to them. 
By this Act the offices of Commander.in-Chief of the Armies of 
Madras and Bombay were abolished, and the Governors in Council of 
those Presidencies ceased to exercise all military control and 
authority. 


At the same time the Bengal Army was for administrative pur- 
poses divided into two portions which were styled respectively the 
Punjab and the Bengal Commands. 

The changes in the administration and organisation of the Army 
of India arising out of this Act were brought into effect on the rst 
April 1895 (G. G. O. No. 980 of 1894) and were briefly as follow :— 

' The Bengal Army was organised as the Bengal and Punjab Com- 
mands,—the Army of India consisting of the Punjab, Bengal, Madras 
and Bombay Commands, each under a Lieutenant-General styled 
the Lieutenant-General Commanding the Forces, Punjab, Bengal, 
Madras and Bombay, respectively, and all under the direct com- 
mand of the Commander-in-Chief in India and the control of the 
Government of India. 


Details as to the powers of the Lieutenant-Generals Command- 
ing, the conduct of business till then transacted by the Military 
Department of the Governments of Madras and Bombay, the dis- 
tribution of the district commands, and the composition of the several 

es in each command, etc., etc,, were published in G. G. O. 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


431 


No. 981, dated 26th October 1894, Clause No. 143 of India Army 
Circulars of 1894, and G. O. C. C. No. 1061, dated 26th October 
1894. | 

The details of most of these several matters need not be entered 

upon here: it will suffice to mention that the forces lately com- 

posing the Bengal Army were divided between the two Commands 
in the manner following :— 

Punjad Command.—The'oth, 1oth and 11th Bengal Lancers; the 12th Bengal 

, Cavalry ; the rsth and 15th Bengal Lancers; the 16th and 17th Beagal 

Cavalry; the 18th and 19th Bengal Lancers ; the t4th, rsth,1oth, aoth, 

arst, 2and, 23rd, 24th, agth, 26th, 27th, 28th, 2oth, goth, 31st, sand, 33rd, 


sath, g5th, 36th, 37th, 38th, goth and 45th Bengal Infantry ; the 1st and 
4th Gurkha Rifles aud the whole of the Punjab Frontier Force, consisting 


of the ist, and, 3rd and sth Punjab Cavalry; the Corps of Guides ; Nos. 1, 
2,3 and 4 Mountain Batteries aad the Punjab Garrison Battery ; the rst, 
aad, 3rd and 4th Sikh Infantry; the ist, 2nd, 4th, sth aod 6th Punjab 
Infantry; and the sth Gurkha Rifles. 

Bengal Command.—ist Bengal Cavalry; and Bengal Lancers 3 Srd, 4th, sth, 
6th, 7th aad Sth Bengal Cavalry; 14th Bengal Lancers; Nos. 7 aad 8 
Mountain Batteries; the Corps of Bengal Sappers and Miners 3 the 1st, 

and, Srd, 4th, sth, Gth, 7th, 8th, oth, roth, r1th, rath, rgth, 16th, 17th, 18th, 
39th, 4and, 43rd and 44th Bengal Infantry; and the and and 3rd Gurkha 
Rifles. 

The introduction of this great change in the administration and 
organisation of the Indian Army presents a point at which this brief 
sketch of the rise and progress of the Bengal Army may fittingly be 
brought to a conclusion. It marks the disappearance of that Army 
as a separate and homogeneous entity, and brings to an end the 
glorious record of its achievements, a record which begins with 
Plassey and closes only with the consolidation of the British Indian 
Empire. The unhappy episode of the Mutiny darkens its history, 
but the long roll of its victories and conquests effaces that sad 
chapter, and we can never forget how great a part the old Bengal 
Army has played in the extension of the British Empire, and in the 
fame of its arms. For nearly a century and a half it has borne 
an honourable part in all our campaigns from the Nile to the Great 
Wall of China, and has helped to carry our victorious standards to 
Kabul and Mandalay, to Cairo and Pekin. The story of the Bengal 
Army is ended ; but it leaves to its successors a great tradition and an 
inspiring example. 


Digitized by Google 


433 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


‘9641 ut juounsey 47g VOITeE}eG 
3S1 04} “Ogdt ul GoTEeg 43g 947 
1a gg eu} = gp ul juoWw 
“ZSgr us YW puc oq} ‘S221 aug 243 "UD3IV J-1y-4ns 
Wey 7 porurny | ‘boct ut GoreyEG ysI 94} BUIeI0Eg |-777£—Uo!TEHeG Y39 | 129qqNS SeTIZ “IED | - 
“fot ut “0410 q-44-U0s 
Buzeq 38 peAo.jsoq rey “12M —"vorpe;zeg 43S | * wosptpy 034005) *F] 


“begi ut ueusey 
y3S eq} ‘9621 ut jusunsey puz 
woreyeg 3S! 94} “Ogé1 ut oY 
| -eHeg pur 943 “bgZ1 U1 juem3ey 
"ZSgi ul eyyeq wey gl tere ee 24) |“ Y7)Mg-49-puvsy 
“wy, «3k Lpowann ‘'oL1 ul uoITeyeg pst a4} oUeIeg |— uoNez7eg yw | * quest ysny “ydeD | ° 


“pst | 
uolleyeg puz | eeeeee 


‘und | 
“1Y-S11]1 — ssprem 


“QUWIBU SAIREU 


40 uIeU jU9SI1g “SHUVNAY pur soquinu feusup) WUEPUPUUCD 3s4y | “peste o19q 4 


*7UIWpPUBGsIp JO 3}Ep | 
| 
{ 


ete aoe 


‘AULNVANI—'V 
"hA0jsty guanbasgns 4104) puv ® 
‘urd140 41043 fo savjnzizavd Surmoys ‘huap posuag ayy fo sd4op ayy 4o yst7 pvTojoucay) p 


ee ee ee oe ees 


"S221 uw ee sd109 [e20| 
@ opew sem f [ur UvoLlEeREg 


‘ogi ul popueqsig | 432 943 SUleIeq fsdiod jed0] y | * wOorfeyjeg QIIt | * UuMOIg “yy “yNary | * ZuosezIy> 
*begi ul Juowide») pul | 
24} pue “9621 ur quauZ2y) 4X9 UOT 
-b}}]%g 38! Oy} ‘ogZI UI UOleYHEg 
yw ayy ‘Pgli im yoouroy yes 
wag 439 94) ‘Igéi UI UoLe}}Eg 
Aequog y39 943 ‘S221 ut YO 
*ZSgr ur | 943 *¥oZ1 Ut UuOoTERIEg pl 24} "uUDII0T 
snoytyg ye psunyny | eweseq fsdiod jeso] & rewr40 ~#9-U.997]00S—YOI |* UOWIMNG *y “Wary |’ sodeupiyy S 
I 
2 . i quowiZayy 4WWg ey} pure ‘968 1 | 
x Ut JWauNTey 476 UOTE ys1 Oy} | 
ag *ogér ut uorpeyzeg 436 94) “Hgdt ur 
fx, qaewmisay 436 943 ‘igéi or quam "uD 
ro) “248g ut | tage pal oy “S221 ur 476 ay} -[0J-19-uvapang 
on | wodeurq ye pany | FoZ1 ut vorepeg yg 643 aurEOg |vzoy7—uoYENeEG YI6|- * yRWC 3Wde>|- “| Seger 
ee) *PZgI Ul JUsUNZay puz ou} | 
rs) pue ‘9621 ut juaunday ysi uote} 
> “Jeg yt Oy} ‘OgZ: UI VOlERRE 
am | “éSgiuruonsogesip iqig ayy “gi ur yuountoy | | 
tz) payqiyxo Survey | -veg 3st 94) ‘igé1 Ul UOITe}ZEg 
n JOj ‘cor urasodyoes | Aequiog 4st 943 ‘S221 a 4st ayy ‘u0j]0J-1y-uv@ | 
mo | “ed 38 pepueqsiq | “Pocr ur UoleHeg puZ 43 suIeIEg |-pang—uoleeg YIg| * URE IEW “| “WED uemping , Zoli 
7 *1gZI Ul JUoWIZay 
f= "bgli ut y 943 pue “S221 ut yz0r 943 | *D97Dq-49-smay} 
Aurjnuw 40) popuegsiq | ‘7921 ut uoreyeg 43S! 94} SureDeg | “Py —uoyepneg 2 )* smoyRey [37 |* SZuoseWyWD /* 1921 30g 
*yuow Sip jo ayep : "OWBU CAIZEU : 4 *Sursres 
10 ae car eee pue soquinu peursig | *EPEBUMIOD S4ly | “PETEIOUM | ae ” 
"798U17"0I — KUINVAN] —"V 
‘panunu0s—Auojs1y guanbasgns 413943 pun 
2 ‘usds40 42043 fo Savjnzij40g Surmoys ‘Kusy poduag 243 fo s¢407 ay3 fo 3587 vdSojouoLy) 


435 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


*£Sg1 ut 
sodeuig 78 parunnyy 


*Iog! UI popurqsiq 


*ZSe1 ur | « 


tsueyf pue Zu0d 
“MON 78 porugny 


*Z£g1 wt 
INIVIW J powynny 


"ZSgt ut peqe 


“UBIIY IB poruRnyy | ¢ 


*ZSgr ur yaed 


WY Ie poraynyy 


1 | ‘“Dy7Dg-ty-JaaSuD 


Datahd ek br 4. | 
~panfavs) vsang 
—uolfeyeg ugt 


i 


‘uDjIVd-ty-uD pg 
—uoyeyeg == 91 


| 


‘4310 q-44-9j0f7 ' 
—uoyeneg = 4381!" 


—uoyeyieg = ythr 


‘MD{Dq-HY-usmon 
—voreqeg 


ial bd be, 
“1efng spremiaye 
funjyog-ty-stung | 
498 J —UOleReg IZ | 


* OUI “1 “dB | 


* uojdwiezy *S “dB | * 


any ‘[ "WdeD /° 


episuoly “5 *3deD | 


skysuopw 


gate | *yoqdurey *y ydep | Pequprysiny 


ce "Bay 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


436 


eee g eee . 


ian 
quounSey 4701 9q3 | Wer ot 4Igt 9q) 1gZ1 Ul Juow 
jo suolezzeq Om2 | -139q YE! 943 *S$ZZ1 wi yyZi 943 
ey} wi peqeodscouy [Pol Ul UOTTEREG 4311 04] BUTI 


*vzgi ul youjZoy Th1 94) pur 
"9611 01 JuauIZoy YO! VOEQeEg 
3S1 942 Og! Ui GOITEIIEG YIO! 943 
‘vg/1 Ul OL 943 ‘1g/1 Ut yaow 
-LSg: as | -180y qyS oq ‘S221 Ur qqEt 94) 
wnjeyf 3B peonny [‘Voct a aolpeHeG 419! 04} DWEDOg 


*¥vegl ul JuoWNZoy 47S: O42 pus 

‘9621 Ul uowIZdy 4311 GOlTEeYg 

3S1 9g) ‘OgL1 By BOTTEHRY GI! O43 

“yglt Os GQEt | *1gZ1 G1 Quou 

“Sgi us peqe | -130y 479 oq) “S221 UL qIe1 ON) 
-J000SDN 7® prunnyy | O21 UI “OITEReG TIS! 94) SUTEVG 


"D9? -ty-uvT 10 py 
— SOleyyeg ywiel° aedsow '{ *3e> | - ° wuqtg « 


"6910 -84-U9j JOIST] 
— Oley qwoe|° puepyosg {dep i° suoseyof 


"uDI1Dg-y 
oog—voneyeg (61|* = wog*yadegi- Poli “sey 


*Prgi ul Juowisey 4If!1 34} pus 

‘9621 ul juowISey YRZ UoTTe}eEg 

JS1 94} ‘ogdI ul voITeNeg 4z/ 94) 

‘'gZ1 ul quounseay [edueg 43Z e43 

‘19/1 ul uoreyeg Aequog 43 

{Sgt ar mou | o43 ‘S421 ur 432 ony ‘10h oures 
-qowr] Je parenay | oy} vole eg yiZt 9y} swRIeg 


ee eae 


6D9ID J -ty-PNANDLD) 
—coreneg = §—4Igi|* PrBppor “L WED | pequprsuny Pol1 


‘ouryE DANnEU -Sureres jo 


*JUSUIPUBGSIp JO 3zEP ‘SNAVN ZY pus soquina jeu “‘JUBPUBUTUIO?) 71,5 | ‘posts 9200, 44 ana 


JO DWIVU 30960 


‘panutz40I—RALNVAN] —"V 


‘panuiju0a—Azojssy guanbasgns 41ay3 pun 
‘25140 atays fo savjnrijand durnoys ‘huap joduag ays fo s¢40p ays fo 3887 Jv2do0jouosy) y 


437 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


“UIA0Ig 40 mi. - 
*ZZ1 ul popurqsig sseeee -s84) wore egq q3Se oeeces see 
"ogLt ui uoEHeg 
y3St 243 pues gli ut y3S1 943 *(jerutaoig 40 
*S6L1 m | ‘1gZt ut yuounToy yg oy} ‘S421 | qeuuEsieg £ yies 
Aayjnw 30; pspuegsig| a! uoleyeg 471 94; oUrEIeg |-mey) UONEHEG IKE ie ics 
*( 
-ulAosg 410 scacal 
“0771 eeeree -18q) uoreyjeg pstz ree 
“(reo 
“UIAOJg 10 yeuued 
“£221 ui pepurgsig sovece -J8q) uoyeyeg pucz nae 
“Pzgi ul yusuTay) y3Z1 
ey} pur ‘9641 a yeounons ait 
uoreyeg Be 243 ‘Ogéi ut vol 
*ZSgt ut ysed | -8)3eg 4361 O43 ‘PgZ1 UI 461 ey} | *UDZIDG-19-4Dy40g “194g 


“Wezy ye pounny | ‘1gZi Ul jusuNsey YURI 94} eUleIEg | —UOI|E};eg Wie | Weqoy JIG jouojoD|* sodiyueg 


“PzZgI ul yuouNsey 
4791 943 pue ‘9621 ul yuoudoay 
qqOL UoITeyeg pu oy; ‘ogc: ut 
uoreyeg yyhi 94) “bgt a yyhI 
"UOIPeResip Joy | 943 ‘1gli ul JUaUdoy YIL CYR [*MDI707-17-1uULVSH TT 
Sgt ut pepuegsiq | ‘S221 ur uoyeyeg 43! 04} eureseg) —uoyeHeg = yIOe)* Hoog’q 3dey/* peqeyeyy 


JO ysow pue fog/1 ut 
Aunnw 30) pspueqsigq |" = *—s SZZ1 wt Yor ay} auredeg |° woreyzegq 4761 | * tH G3deQ]*  — -BHNIeD 


— meas - ee 


SO NT 1 EE Qe 


| Lage oe 
"ogLi ay VONENEY 
! sO euomened om} Ie 9G} pos Pols ar ysie om} | ‘unyeg-ty-qomig | ere ; 
| 943 ut pezes0dscogy | *1g/1 ur oouSoy Ig! 947 PME | —a0leIeT yaSz yenig ade 
wi 
| Aagnw Pi sears 1gZi or quouSoy 321 OY} DWEDE | « uotreazeq WIZ 
| “Pegi Ul JUOUILSI2y 
| yagt oq) paw 69641 a ssounZoy 


uorTeneg pus ot) ‘9g/! Ul GOST 
“LSgi us sayeA qoe x ‘vgZt ul yor 31} "Dj10g-14-plEY 


= Ayroseg, ye pormnanyy | '1g£1 Br quompSoy qigt Oy) OuTEIeg | —uoNTHEG — pte es 
1 Ut . 
r} faygni ‘seer erewe | 1gZt ws quoumTogy 4ISs DQ =e uo ByVg pucz olla 
”n l 
o | “(Te 
= | -ulaoig Jo yeuues 
soueee . ; 
z | "ORG seq) voyepeg qv 
- 
"(182 
= -uiaosg 30 yeuues a 
E ‘cLL wr popueqsiqg|; = -3¥q) UOITEBER WOLF 
= kis — ee 
*Rursies 10 
poeqsp | ‘QWIBU JAIQEU . . rsyes j 
baste omen eae SMEYRAY jPue Joquine [BUSH JUBPUBUIUO) ISILY | “PSSIEs S49 AA | a38C) 
eatin rete oe ti Ne ae wz “ 


ere wee ee ee, 
Tr 2 = = ee a 
eo ay 5 - mee ee 
, : es See soe % i = 2 
Fee me me ee _ ee ee = ee + — 
— —_— 


‘p9nusjuoI—ABLNVAN[—"V 


‘panuiju0o—A4ojssy yuanbasgus 4199} pus 
‘urfs40 utayy fo savynonjand Furmoys ‘Amay podusg 243 fo sGsoz yj fo ys¥7 pv2%dojoucsy y 


438 


439 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


“2£Sg1 ut peq 
“ezhq ye pawn 


"9621 
Ur ywoundsy 3Z 
9U} JO SUITE} EG OM 
243 Ut! pazesodsoouy 


*Axjuejuy 
educg (urmmyesg) 381 


"9621 


Ur jusuNZ2y «paz 


94] JO SUOITe}} eq OM] 
24} Ul pezyesodsoduy] 


"9621 
Ur yoounsay pal 
24} JO SuOoITe}}eq OM} 
94} Ul pazesodsozu] 


"£Sgi 
Usa Ie paunyny 


*Aunnw oj 
éSgi ul pepuegsiq 


—_— EEE TEE TN eee aes eee oC _— 
aaa eeSEeEeEeeeeeee—eeEeelTle—eeeeeeeE eee ee 
: 


*vegi ul 
juoun3ayy puzz 34} pue ‘9641 ut 
juouIs2y pur UOlTeIIeg pus 943 
‘ogdi ur uoeneg yISz 043 ‘1g/1 *U0910 J-$4-9]9g 


Ur jUsuNZoy «YySe 94, swWeI0g | —UoNeWeg puzt|- 


‘9gZt Ul uoITe}7eg YyIbe 94) pue | “MH77D7-17-yIt470G 


igdi Ut ueUNsey Ghz 9Y4} HAUeI0g |-72y—Uole}eg ysIf | * yoRSFEW *> ade5' : 


“TOMI Ut 3s) 94} pus ‘bzgr UI juM 
-1Bey 48'Z 94} ‘9641 Ul quoUNdey 
476 uorlyeqZeg puz 243 ‘ogd1 ur uo "ung 
-B37%q YI6z 949 “HglI UI yI6e 943 | -7MG - 19 -4DMZIaNT 


‘1gZ1 Ut JUeULS2y psfzo4} aueIeg |—uoyeHeg = yjoft |- 


"9gZt ur voreyzeg 
yige 943 puegdr um yIgz ayy | ‘MDZI0Q-19-FepuvT 


‘igZ1 ui uemI3ay pucz 94} aUeIeg | —uOle37eg y36e | * 


‘ogdt Ur uorEs7eq 

yrZe oy pue “bedi ur yyéz ayy | = *MDI/Vq-19-H77Y 

‘1gZi ul zuouNdoy ysIz dy} euredeg | —uole})eg y39z 
“Pzgi Ul JUoUILZOy 

y7Oe 94} pue ‘9641 ut quswiZ0y 

43S BorTe}eg pus 94) “Ogi Ur UOT 

-ey7eq pstz ee putz ayy | ‘ung nD 7-1y-01NJ1Dg 

*1gZ1 ut juoum 


“PEgi Ul JWourdoy 4761 
ay} pue ‘9641 ui juouiZay «pul 
uoreyeg puz 94} ‘ogZ: ur uo] 
-B}}@q puzz oy3 “bgZi ul puze oy} * e077 J-19-FuUf 
‘1gZ1 Ulquounsoy 4}61 94} OW EIeg | —uOI[e}Weg q10¢ 


Y 4IOZ 94} euredeg | —uoyeHeg yilz\* 


sa}mog *D "3de_ | * 


soyfen + “3de> | 
| 
| 


Peper] “[ 0) | 
| 
| 


j 


* aypeg ‘ide5 | 


* FunoK "yey 


asodume’) | * 


aiodumesy | * glli Aynj 


*LiL1 uw 


uPA jo 
qemeN ou) 


JO DAIS 


yole 
J Q l € 
©O 


Ww 
BG 
OC 


C 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


440 


“Pg ul yyS ayy pas ‘igés | 


WAGE | *  Boying *y ‘388- | ° 


ond Ui jeourSey post 34) suEeg ee + 
ley atone 
“on *1gZ1 ur yuoustAey YSIt 943 SUTEDOg | ° «st | * HOWPIN “LL “9d¥D | ° a “« 
“og/1 wi pat 043 pus 
ond *i1gZ1 ur ueanSey qt oq) SuTEDOg | ° yrZ |* sweqoy “AA “3085 |° ad ‘s 
i, ur puct oq) pus 
onid ‘igdt ur quounday qy6z oq) DmEDeg | ° <¢ ge | Semone “[ “3D |° : “ 
“ygés ur wil O43 pur ‘1gZt 
-Cgfx wi pepueqng | Ul wouSay Gge O43 smeIg | ° = UONEIT YASE | * projmeEss “Wy “IdED |° 7 « 
“Pegi G1 WousS2y YIWe 24) 
poe ‘96/1 ar yuourdoy 42g Bot 
e¥RUY pur og) ‘OgLI UI uOlTEHEG 
*£Sgi ui voRIege | qf 943 “¥g/1 UI qyo€ 943 ‘Ig: *460}10 J-44-190Q 
-p Joy popueqsiq | ur yuoudoy qilz 043 rhs —voymieg  qve | sae wey 3deDi* saswuaq |: 6221 
GI yuomisoy pste oy} pue ‘ol t "ung 
| wi quounSoy yyy sourepeg puc | -7>q-ty-ps2/mr4] 
Lg: | aq) eureseq fog: at ysif 3g] SB vjoy7—As, UB} *(soiunf) 
ar MOU 3¥ PHBNAP | SUOywIEq aut] 943 Suoure payosug | -Uy gsr] yresurey | Proje © 3deQ|° petuey « 
-96Lt | 1629} 
pe apne QBZt ul BoleII¥g 4We 24) pus Bit Rah a 
3 JO SUOTTSIZE OM} : 1 wot “! 
on wr pazesodsosuy | ‘19/1 ut yomitey (age 243 Sureseg —uoentg pst,  wkg*{[-9d¥D|° aodumey/> g//t Ainf 
‘ *UIBE OAI]EU ° 
Basted sake # ei SNAVANAY pus saquinu feui3uQ JUEPUBWUIO- 38.11] |" poses wma Surszes je 
‘panttju0o—AAXLNVAIN]—"V 


*‘ponand0s—-4403524 guanbasqns 4194} pun 


‘415140 £394} fo savjnasjand Fusmoys ‘Ausy joduag ay} fo sg4o7 ay} fo 38!7 {vFojouosy 9 y 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


y 


! 3 
96L1 wy | aejdex 0} uowtSes soyj0Ue osres 


yuoun3ey YW 943 | 03 Jo Sem ey Sdsoo 3243 

jO sUolTezzeq om} | JO Aurjnu 94} UO puE “y3zS1 943 

ou} ur gear, JO JUSPULUIWOD sem JUBIT UIE}de-D | * uoreyeg 43ZE | yes WA0pn’y] *3dB> = * S6L1 -aon 
*AS{SB} *"uDjI0T 

“uy fesuog (uew “#7-403509—enY] 

“BSB Q) YISt Oy) MON)! * : * —* gy xtpuaddy 995 |-1q eaneN e79NIeD | YRIICD “y *H 3eD | * “ “ 


1 Ut Juuso Sz 
243 sitting teen ut peel sc 
qoe $= VoyeRe 31 Sy} SB sul] 
"£Sg1 G1 UoRIeyesIp | 64} OJU1 ZYyZNOIq { Spurs] Oy) UI “U4 
Pozqiqxe Suiaey soy | pue pesuog jo Avg 943 jo yseOD | -7Uq-fy-wvIssnyy 
‘6Sgi ut popueqsiq | Uss}seq 24} UO 921AI0S JO} pasiEy | —UOTEyegG suey | * UOYIWeEE "yy WdeDQ)* = eyqnayetD | «S61 Ajnf 


243 j0 Ajparpeds «SPUTtiy 4NOY,, JO (| ° «wo 
“91 suoIfe}}eq OM} | ,, UEA-LBYD,, 943 se Ajsejndod }| * “wast 
243 YI pozyesod | UmMOUy aJom Q2U0q puUF ‘sjuSm : “« yy 
-s09u1 o39m sdioo | -1301 Sunstxo snojz wo s}yesp jo || * <« pte 
aay 9594} 9641 UY |PeUulio} Q10M SuOl|EHeEq Ay ase4] \| * wuoyeyeg puct i) “te =e * gli Atw 


24} JO UINjaJ 9yR UO = |*zgZI UI SAOgE OY} JO JUBUIpURsIp 
‘ygfi ur papueqsiq | 64; Uo yuouySoy WAS 94} ueI0g | * = gueundoy yyof | * uopeyny ‘[ ydeD | * ssodureysog |* g/t “uel 


zglt wl popurgsig |*1g21 wi wounSoy YySE oy; omeEDeg | * “«  puzh|* = somig “yy “adea “ s 
*yuow 
pep  Aequiog 
oy} JO wINjas O43 
uo “gli at poonpey |-1gZ1 ul quounZey WIPE 943 oe , aa 3s1v | Asejpoey ‘mM “34eD 
"1QgZt 


ar qwoundoy psff oy} owWeEIeg 

“HIPS JO Wom 3G} Gl WWomYIE) 

‘yUow | -9p s.paep [eseuer) s2,0;u102 

“prep = Avquiog | 0} popusjzu: Ajeuidiio aiam pue 

243 JO usnzes o43 | ‘syyesp Aodes jo powsoj 30m Sut 
uo “¥gZi ur poompay | -MO]]0} OM} 94} pue UoNEIIeq SIG] |* = WONTEWV YIOR | * >poj) “AA “3D ” * ogli “aon 


*Azy 
euvjay pesueg (3nd. 
eley) (MY put (ures 
-ytig) pst 243 moqy 

CI 
xipuaddy 9aG) *A13 
-uBjuy jesuag (3nd 
-[eyy) puz oy} Mou 
st yst& ayy £ ZSg1 
ul peqesaorsn yy 


“peg 
“Upwsoy 38 4762 943 
paw ‘andueyelyeqs 
3 qige 943—'2Sg1 


*2004 oues 
oT  ““worDsyzEsip 
40} “popueqsip sem 
wwe oq) puw ‘*2S¢r 
Ul JI0y UBOIW je 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


peregnm gigs ony | yIe Pu Toe 943 Pegi UI CUTEDEg 


"yUemIpuRgsip jo SIEp 
40 QUIBU 3095034 


2 ee ee 
ed 


© 
~~ 
a> 


“Y mipuaddy 90G ‘*#zgs ui sQUoW 
1Zay putt pus puct ay) sueseg 


*squoUNdoy 


ye paturjnu yjof oy | wil pwe yl 94) Pegs a! oWIBIDG 


*syosutey 


uw «pacgom Tog | 4262 pee que oq) Hegs UI oMEDOG 


‘uoun3oy 


‘SNUVAZY 


. 9m) — uolye;jIeg 


"02 

19d ~!4 - P4317! 
—uoyeyeg pug 
£40410 q-19-3044 


Jst ‘yuauudey Y391 | ° svIN’] °> oof! pre " g621 aON 


40310 -14-u00497 
—uole;eq  pue 
{uvjjUd - 1¥-uoop 
Wy — uolle}zeVg 


3st ‘yuaui39y y9S1 UW BIIESEG 


sexng f| 8641 “dos 


preuopoey *f “104 
*unjj0 J-ty-uvl 
“MOTTO —OONEy 
puc ““jj0qG-14-40 
“On — udlejeg 
ys1 uoWLsay 4h 


HOWDJIN “J, "19D ]° ssodeuiq - 


"UD }qO4-14-128p 
$40 py — voleayeg 
puz = / ungvg-t7 
- 100g — voreneg 


yi ‘quoUNsay YzEI * L6L1 *aon 


-  aesny "op |* =—_-seseueg 
— -_ _—o =—ae, ” NS 


“QWBU DAI}EU 
pue Joquinu feuLsiig¢) 


syowpumunmos 36114 | -posres ogy | 7TE 


EE A CS 


*‘panuizu0I—AALNVAN[— VW 


‘ponuru0o—A4os1y guanbasqns 4894) pup 


'usSt40 41043 fo savjnosand Furnoys ‘husp josuag ayz fo s$40p ay3 fo 3817 pvrsdozouosy) Y 


443 


ee ee ee 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


a 


*LSgr wi 

Bisy je pounnwa 
yivh ayy { Asjaesuy 
resueg (3e{) 499 
aq} mou si pslh oyy 
"819 


-uiyy pue sioddeg 


243 4M pazyesods03uy | * 


*]] xtipueddy 29S) 
‘Asjuejuy = jesueg 
(uewyesnw) 43S 
rf: MOU SI puch 9} 
££Sgi at andeys 
ye poraiyznus ysiy OY] 


*£Sg1 ut os0d 


Bug ye pauyny 


-svak owes 94} ‘UOr} 
-dayesip 103 “pepueqg 
“sip stm YOO Uy 
£ZSgi ur 1yjaq pue 
soivusg “anpunyn 
ye pounnw Yq 
pue ‘yyt ‘yi9f Oy] 


*UMIPESIP 105 
*£Sgi wu! pepaeqsip 
sem 43S om { vPgI 
Ut powwgnas Wyve 24 7 


*syusui 304 “unio g-1y-audy 


yyvb pue pulh oy) bzgi UI suIeIeg | —jueuNsay «= puzz ake * yseSyozey | ~ fogt "aon 


* J] xipueddy ag | * sisouorg | poo seuoyy “Wdey/* peqeyeiy dg 


*UD}]O J-14-U19s | 
-un { —uole}jeg 
3 | ad : uaa | 
*‘s}ususoy «= - aA goocg — UOT BY ? 
puzy pue 4sih oy} Pegi ul oUTeIOg last Suewi3ey 3s1zZ onenee { | cama t * fogr Ajnf 
¢ *u“0}10d 
*begi ut quounsoy -29-4999]DULD fF] 
yjov ay} pue ‘Cogl ui quomisey | —juoUNZey oul *u0) 
yjOe UOTE ySt 9G} BwLOe | -eW “uoITEHReG puz | [Huet] “Y"OD-"nery  * ByNIeD ]* ogi Aezy 
"MONTY ! 
~[D44N—OOYRHCT | 
*syuou pug /unjj0q-8¥-38] | 
Joy yx6e pue “yigt “ysZE ‘y0F ~9?Hft. —uoipeneg 
ay} bzgi ul oueIeq pue ‘uIN} yi ‘qusundey yr, 806° : eve ‘ 
-31 1194} BO aut] 9Y} OFUL Wy 'U04]D I-14 -Jv440g 
fqs0shj] Ul BOLAJIS JO} S}JUIUIL —uoleyjeg puz 
Suysixe wosy s}Fep jo pou0J £ upjqDg-14-meny | 
40 — uoleyeg ' 
ys! queusey yIgI oneeee eee . 6621 uf 
*UD310q-14-819N 
—voreyeg pug 
£uvj]DgJ-ty-avys 
‘swuowmisoy «=| -pusg — Uolje}eg . asodeug ” 


y Sf pue yt oy] PZgI Ul eUulBINg | 3S! ‘quoun33y y3Zt)* = s9wyeg ‘Ss 109 4 A 


* eker) 


— 


C\ 4 
al 


= J 
my 


At) 
SU 
ge 


‘o) 


: - ~~ a 
a os — wes _ =e ~~ ~~, 


‘u0410q-14-3494 


“1419 3® YRS -D—voreneg 
94} pu ajodumey) pug /uvjjvy-s7 
ye pats ayy ‘ZSgr “SyuouLsey | -407S07 —uUOTTe};eg 
ur =paugna 8 Yyjog | 4yyvS pue psfS 94) Hzgr UI QuUIeDEg | jst “QuouNdey y3Zz ae * ysesyajey $ 
. “uD 
Td = - 904Pus TT 
‘g10djnqqnf{ ze puzs —uoleyieg puz 
oq} Due ‘IeMeYySog f unjjog-ty-uvs 
ye ysiS ay} ‘2Sg1 ‘sjuawmIsa9y «| -p900g—uolleeg 
Ul =paunnu YyjJog | puzS pus 4s1S 943 PzgI UI sWIEDeg | ISI “QuaUNseay YI9z ane aee * gsodumey a 
| ‘1vah ames on} 
ox) eposey)  3e pau *U0}1D J-1¥-U9 94 
jo -1]nwW yj0S 9u3 f uO! “$147 —uoleyeg 
ad -dayesip 103 ‘ZSg1 ul puz /ungivg-t7 
fr, Joye] ye pepurq *‘sjususoy =| -a740yy—uo1eqjyeg 
ve) “sip sem y36% ayy | IOS pue 46h 243 Pzgi Ul aWeIOg | 381 “uguIday 4yySz) 2020“ ’ * yresyojzey = 
*U03)D J-1¥-S39} 
bd */Sg1 ut MOURN] Fe -7" fy —uoyeyeg 
rs) yIgh 243 pure *bzg1 puz ‘/unjzj07-47 
= ul dody ree ‘sJUsWIZOy «| -me 47) —UOITR}} 
re ye patunnw 4372p ogy | YIgh pue qyZP 943 Pzgi Us SWedeg | 4S: ‘JusUNdey 4} peeeee . ee * Hogi 430 
tx 
0 "JOHIEIS 3B YIOP 
&) | 249 pure ‘os0dezo194 "uD 
r ye yh 9y3 ‘ZSg1 “SJUDUITIQ «| -79.J-8Y-0049944n Jy 
fone ur =pelunnu §=y}0g | q79F pue 4zSP 943 PzgI Ul oMeIVgG | —jUouNZayq «= pafz jt ‘ 
‘yuow SIP Jo 3} : ‘ame 9AI}eu - 
30 a wietlg inet pue soquinu jeurdii¢d PRP) Ml 
a, 
“pan&tj“0I—RALNVAN] —"W 
+ ~ponuiju0I—Auozssy guanbasqns 41943 puv 
+ | ‘utdsco 41943 fo ssvjnoijsog Furmoys ‘Ausy joduag ays fo s¢403 943 f0 3887 [vI0;01u04YD VW 


445 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


Se 


—__—s> 


*gSgr uw 


URYOOW 3e paunny | Puc oy} se sul 943 OF 7yINOIg 


~~ “brgi ut ywoumtoy Puzo 943 


———  -- — ——_——— 


oureseq {fzgi ut ysif uoyeyeg 


“Pegi ui quoundoy 3819 943 


“L$g1 uranp | euredeq {fegr ur ysif uoleEyReg 


-unjjnf ye paruynyy | IS! 943 Se ouN O43 OJUI ZYSNOIg 


soyty B4yNH 


“Sophy 
Byyny pat ‘vor 
-8}78q 381 94} MON 
“sopty 
eyysnc) puz “or 
-8}}8g 3S! 94} MON 


*6zgi ui pepueqsi(y 
‘sop 
ByyNT) 7st “wor 


pucy 


-B}}%gq 381 343 MON | © 


“£Sgi ut 4eI0qy 


oul (‘| _x1puod 
-dy 205) ‘Asjuvju] 
jesueg (yndivy) yg 


kav] Anuezuy 


worse] YIeWND | * 


I] xipueddy seg / | * volfeAeg voruny 


* wolezeg snuLIs | * 


puz 


"uD410 J -24 
40440 YJ — uoIlfeyeg 
pac { unjqvg-ty 

‘syusmisoy = |-40740'7 — “uotjeyeg 


am mou st 476S oy] | YOO pu 46S Oy) HzgI UF guredeg | 381 ‘yueu3eyy yIof 


"19g! ul pepueq 
“sip sem yigS 91} 
¢ /$g1 ui a10d92030, 
7B poturynu qy/S oy] 


-a10d 


‘U0J]DJ-$4-4vaLysa 
~4Stq —uol[eyzeg 
puc ‘{ unzjpg-ty 
‘syueuiZoy =| -P 4107 —Uole}} EY 
yygS pue y3Z$ ey} Hzgi Ul oUBDG | ISI “jUOWIZIY 462 


(*un710q-t4 
-U00sqUUT pro 
OS[e SeM UOIle}}Eg 
) “Mojjxg 

~14-4u014374I9— 
“sjusuiZey | Suole};eq puz pue 
yq9S pue YASS oy} Fegt U1 sureIeg /4S1 “yuoUTL yIgz 


* [] xipueddy vag | UolTe;jeg Lesseyy 3S: | * 


WOSIEM *D “1 “3d¥D | ° 


POOM *H *M Joey | ° 
Jaseig °S yde75 | ° 


‘unoynbjo 
‘ais 


* opipuy ‘y iden { : 


"pny | ° 


Zunog *y “er7 | * 
Sseppoeyy = ff “mory |- 


SOY “yy “INSET | ° 


asodumey 


* gigi “J 
* Ligt Aeyw 


* Sigt tady 


Sigt ‘wef 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


446 


Aayrezay 


| [eduog (yndfegy qq! «+ = yp xipueddyeos]>  “ “  pug|: uosduig soleg |* aiodumes) “ 
*gSgi ur ‘gzgi ysndny "uesey 

UE} Copy 1 Patan Ur 3UauNSey Yy769 sy. aWeD0g | oUNToY BIIXG 381} °S “DQ “JoD-" mer] |° yreBqazyey|°> Segs hegy 
Bry BY rl 

int) rida F ] “ao o 32 7 ° uoes eye d e ° k e¢ 

“Asqoeypy peBaeg (3 I] mpuaddy sogq|°FPA 7 ais pad 6 too va 

fea) 12 oy) mon : «¢ yn69 | -yeig “f 10Q-"9nIFT | ° “ | * begt aon 
"Apiaseg 38 | 

4ig9 9g] pus way | 

7E Glo aqy f éS¢t ‘sjuaunZoy | 

a Petayaw §=y30g | Igo put y/o aI Weg Ut oureaog | ° quaundoy yg | tee : soueueg |° feg: ‘aef 

*oSg1 ; : 


“Poysory ye Auiynw | 

10} papurgsip sea 

M99 Bq “Asjuejzny | 

9 U7 mous! W389 ayy (4894 yI99 pue WASo 243 oUeDag |- —-uduntay puff wee ATT Stodeuray |* SeBt ema 
“sJ9UIWW pue | 

ssaddeg jo sdio>) 94) ° ‘ y * Jp xipueddy aag | seul pue suoddes |* Ainquy *] soley |° peqeqeyy | ° 6igt °qo,4 

“Pegi ur JuewIS2y; UIQ 2943 

*£Sgt G1 sem | sureaq ffrgr ui puzt voYRyIeg °UDIIO I~ 84-4704 


“Byse4 3B = prlunny | puz 24} se: our 243 o7UI 3ySNOIg -snzy— KAay Asquejay | UBUD “ *g ‘3dBD{° BWW se 
“Anjueyzoy je3usg 

(eMND) WOaqMon!s = =* > + AT xtpuaddy 90g | ° Kaay Anuejay | *° qums -g°y soley)’ ysesyoyeg | ° grgs “28 
*;Cowpuvqstp jo “sWEU OAQEU "Suysres 


meme - = 


SEP JO JwWeD yUIEA1g hkl | Pee Joquinu jeusueO “VORP TSO) UA | POSTED YH AA jo 338q 


ee | am ee ee ee 8 ee ee © eee ~~: 2 —S oe eee —-: bd 3 ooo 
re eT Ey RS OT aE ESI LT eS eS 


“pant 374U0I=m—KALNVAN]— VY 


QNUIUOO—Asosssy suanbasqns 41394} PUD 
ery 


447 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


| 


—_——— -- = 


+ £1,020] | 


qefung 381 943 Mon Axjueyuy qefung 381 |* saxo uYyof ydeD/* semeqseg 6rgt 
*‘sepinr) jo sdio+y 
943 pue ‘Aijuesuy 
WIS wv pue pit br eggs 
“‘puc ‘3si 943 MON senuosg quicag Ly 2826 * ofgt *20q 
i * I] xipuaddy ag ‘eur 
“SUIS WISE 943 MON “Srl ais a ‘d Jolew;-"3g |* = eaerypny m 
“SYAIS YIWI 943 MON ~oz0s9,J joyuouisey)* = sqqiy, "9g 3deQ|* ssodezorsy | * orgs Apa 
| 6rgi ut Auuy 
*Asjueyuy Aequog wos 
qefung 479 943 MON *sdioy jourey ypurg | * = preseszrzy “idea pessojsuesy| * &hgr 
“UO1q99 9 VSIP 
Joy seok gues 943 
quodyseeg je pe 
-purqsip ss1uedwos 
uaaes : £Sg1 ui Juod pei det kama eines ‘ 
“BzYG) 3S peunna "O7St AO 
sore woo a sas y | ye O43 Se OUI] 943 074! 74Sn0Jg | uoLda7] pueyyjepung) =“ = " 
*Asjuejuy fesueg (uew *quasuiju05s,elnys “uos 
“fesn W) WET OW MON yeys ‘Ayjueza] i yeeg “aM “de )*  BuEYypAy x gtgr ‘PO 
x u *}U9e. 
Gndfey) 1p 1 oq} MON ; ; [1 xipueddy 29g) | -unuoD algae 205 * 2998304 °F “30ST | © FSMETASGS Stgi 
“sop! "SGI0°.) 
int) pity che pe Apunqog wessy) * spuouics "py 3de>5 | - wessy |* Sfgi “ady 
"183A Juimoyjo} Oy} Ut 
peonpas aiom pue paiadqjo Aj[ny J249U 919M Jn ‘ously QUIES 943 Je postes si9Mm AijUezUI jo syUaUIIZ91 B1]X9 J94}0 xIG—*ALON 
"uDII0J | 
*ZSg1 ut -1y-sapuvxajip | 
YIP «=e patunny]| scgr a! yaouNsoy uzh/ 04} suTED0g - G19 [sepuexajy *joD-"yNer"])* ssodeuiq A 
"19gt ur popuegsiq] | gzgi Ui yuouTdoy pull oy} ouIeDeg | * =“ “S| * poys *Jop-"yner] | * = =—_- sauvueg “44 
*ZSgr Ul 
YoOnwsen] 7e paunny|gzgi ui puUsULBey puc 94} oueDeg | * =“ « wh | sezem yy cq soley * = peqeyeyy ° 
*Z£Sgi ut ‘ 


MOUNT 3B pauyny | gegt us jusuBoy yst/ oy} eurereg |* =“ «pat ] -doysig *q*ssofey * undurey, 


*Asquejuy [es 


-uag yybz 243 MON] : - ® é e¢ ee ° « 4yq91 . aaey 'N **) "dey oe a 
*(sussu 
01g) Asyuejuy [es ‘(4900 
“u9g piste 94} MON] | * ? “4 II xtpueddy aag ~O1d) se y3S1 ++ 08 ose “ 
ce qyrr seneee ee «a 
“1981 ua pepurqsig oot eee 4): . “cc yjt1 ee eee «e 
. “e yjz1 soeeer oe «e 
*Asquvjuy yes 
-U9g purz 94} MON | * ‘ ° I] xtpueddy aec | - “ qyrt cocese ooo “« 
"19g! ul pepurgsig ese ose . “e y}01 oveeer eee ce 
os “Asqueyjuy 
ole jesuog JSIZ 9y} MON | * . . Il xipuoddy 29S | - e 476 esecee eee « 
- *Asqueyuy 
he [esueg yy0z oq} MOR] . ce uig sevees oe “ 
©) *Arquejuy 
n jedueg 7 161 24} MO Axuejuy qetungyyd- | eee £Sgt 
te) | *(SyptIS)Asjuejuy je ‘uorTEReg 
DO | -veq 4S th MON | /° . * 1 xipueddy 20g | aoy0q jesueg ys |* Aeiyey yy yde5p]- asoyey |* oSgit ‘uel 
> ajueyuy 
at | qelung 4S i | a ty yas)" pyeaysexy *g [37 | ° * Gee] ei 
| ae 
wn qefung qyy 943 MON | « yap lrreqssey ‘9 “He eos . 
fc “tQSi Ul pepaueqsiq |, = “rt “ “ pat | 3JOIJ00Py “YY “MONT ee 
ao “AQuejuy —_— 
| qefung puzeqyMon |" * + * yy xtpuaddy eeg |Aquejuy qefung puz | uoysuyof -a-[*ynery|uepeq pug]  6rgr 
*yUSuIpURQsip jo ‘9uIeU SATZEU : P *Surstres jo 
; 10 mie esp a pue equine = JUPUSWIMOL Wy | “POstes Sus a1%q 
*“PanusjuogI~mAULNVAN[—VY 
«© *‘ponunuw0s—hsossry suanbasqns 41943 pup 


‘u25t40 48ay3 fo savjnoszand Fuimoys ‘Away posuag ays fo sd405 ay] fo 3837 jwnTosomoay IV 


449 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


aS 


(*Zggt ur quounZes 
YARIS B SB poaraey) 
“eggr 46Ul | 6peonpey 


(*Zggi ut Wwoundos 
YAIS BSE poatasy) 
"eget §=6Gy ~peonpey 


*(ss90u01g qui 
“ung jo jusUIISa1 & 
se /ggr ut poataey) 
“eggt Gt peonpey 


eyyinry yy ‘uo 
“Beg «|S 94} MON 
*(suepowioy ew 
iqefung) Asjueyuy 
jesueg pitt oy} MON 
“Anuejuy pesucg 
(indfey) y3a1 943 MON 
* (sizouotg) 
Aszuejyuy jes 
-u9g puzt oy} Mo 
*Asju vyoy |e 
-usg 3sIf ey} MO 
*Asjuejuy | 
-u9g YyIOf 94} MON 
*Anuejuy pes 
-Usg y}6e 34} MO 
*Asquejuy je 
-U9q 438z 94} MON 
*Asqavyuy [Ps 
-usg 4342 94} MON 
*Arjqueyuy [es 
“u2gq 4I9z 94} MON 
*Arquejuy (es 
“eg 4ySz 94}; MON 


*19gt ut 
Asyaeyuy eajenN qIOf 947} BWEDAg | * 


"19g Ut 
Asjuevjuy earjyeny yzSl 94} euEIeq | * Aaa’y undurep 


*19gr ul 
Axueyuy oagen yye ay} uedeg |* = Aaa] yredyoje 


11 *ipueddy 20S 


Aaa] Alpeseg 


*qusUl32yy 
ByyIny) esjyxyq 3s! 


* Kaa] peqeyzyy 


“mou 
-yon7y jo juoundoy 


* suzou0rg qelung 


“ pstz 
- puzz 
ys1z 
: = y}0z 
° a 4361 
“ ygt 
“ qyZi 


aAquiseyy “qq *}99ry 


*aJOW 


-3ur'] ‘H a *ynary . 


° «SUE *H *1°D 
*J9Al] 
1°D “M ‘'H 7 


Ajpraseg e¢ 


unduieyy = 
ysesyoze J gSgt 
yse3EI07;0g ” 


peqeyeyy | ° , 
giodumes) | * 2Sg1 *90q 


andoypeyy |* 2Sg1 ounf 


. “ 
, “ 
oe “ 
eee “ 
“ 

‘ éSgt 


_ (| 
Digitized by NIN 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


450 


“sopiy ByyIND 
yy ‘uoleeg puc 
*soply BYAINSH) 
puz ‘voyeneg = puc 
‘sopra BYAINH 
ys ‘aoyeeg puc 


*ZQQi Ul peonpey 
*(sueyzeg) Asquejuy 
jesusg yor 943 Mon 

("seis 
-0q) Axnuepy yes 
-u9q igt 243 MON 
*Aajuejuy pesueg(uem 
-[esnyy) 4321 943 MON] 

“Sopa 


*Asjuejuy 


jesueg 436E 943 Mon | ul Axjuejuy sanjenNy YyzOt suMBeg 


("ésgt 
ut yuounse: wis 
-O(] ®& SB peatsay) 
*“cggt out 


*jusuIpuRgsIp jo 
a}ep 10 aueU jUISeIg 


paonpoy | Asjueyuy aareny yzZf 94} eulLI0g 


eee oe ee 


*yuauisey eyyiNt 
yi “uolTeeq pue 
*‘quowIsoy ey HIN 


I] xipueddy 905 


puz ‘uoljeyeg puc|° 


*quOWIZey BYyAINT) 


*“URUIIeL 


s9y9g "FS “19D 


jst ‘uoyeWeg pUZ | siad0y ‘MA “5 ole; 


*19g1 ut Asjuey 
-U] DANEN [Bdueg JsIF 94} GUIEIEg |jUDUILTIQy JOITEAT) 4SI 


Aaa] sndueyelyeys 


: - faery] eisy 
*yuew 


I] xipueddy 22g 


*uossoyd 
JEW J. “H Jew 


espupurg “gy "de 


*soSely “yT “*X) “ney 


Sey wiqing [efoy|* sauuy ‘2D “[ sole 


*uose1 


Axjuvjuy qefung 43Sz |-siog "WW *y “H “348d 


"I xipued 
-dy 99G ‘O6gI ul juamIsaQ ITEM 
-ysbr) B SB poyN}Nsuosay + “1981 


*1QgI ut 
Kaa] yns224K 


‘oureu oartjeu 


‘SHaVKAY pue saquinu peusug 


* avy ysesyy | pid ‘dd “1 20few 


*JUBPULUIWIO-) jsIIJ 


* —- SOITRANE) 
sndueyelyeys 


wSy 
*  anoqrttd 


* peqenoddy 


" qesity 


78199 W 


“pastes o194 4 


* Oggr idy 


ee 


. gsst ‘Gog 


* gSgr ‘des 


* gSgr *sny 


* gSgi ounf 


* gSgt "Gog 


gSgi 


“Buses 
jo 938q 


‘papnjju0o—AALNVAN]|—Y 


*‘panuiyuoo—Auogsty guanbasgns 4194} pun 
(ut5t40 41943 fo savpnotijavg Suinoys ‘Kusp zoduag ay; fo sd40p ays fo 3587 pvrdojouosy) Y 


451 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


a ooo —————$—$—$—$——————— 


*Aayeaey) 3431 U9q SI 94} 
qurssaq pes" H dL Late i edos 


eS) 
J2[NZ21 B OWUL pajzseauoD fogd1 *(epesiug fas) 
a; uem gf jo doo e 0} po Aspeae) 2 2a0ge 
“2Sgt ut | -onpos sem £Aequiog 03 uorjtpad | au3 Yaa paar, Sed 
MOHW 3® PaUHNY | -X2 s,preppor [wsaueT ut paasag |-stey) “qu Pare, tes “cet 
‘upn 
"Eglt *“£ZZ1 wt | jo qemMen an be 
Aew ut pepueqsiq Auedwoy 043 0} PaLojsues | |pasres syuaui3e1 om 7 west " * gpng 921 
“Ty xt 
“prensyy | -ueddy 905) ‘omy ywenaud os 
“Apog  syesauary | 03 A|snonuguos P23}sIx9 yng ‘ou “psenr Apog 
“JOUIBAOT) 943 AON | 0} 9uN1} WoL YyZuaI35 Ut POLBA SEH | S.[eiIUer) JOWIVAOD | - eUo0oT *S soley | ° eByn ey elZt 
*SgZ1 
ysn3ny ur yee usw oor jO syre 
“SH 9914} 0} poonpoy “roi ut ‘Bog se] ueyy 
USUI O00‘! 03 paseaszuUy “SoAlzeu pue ueyy 8 zeq 
"£21 ut popuegqsiq | Aq A[asjua pesadqjo sdoosy omy |* eSJ0H peysow |-yeys PZ11 SIBpIES | * euyed | * og: Apne 
“AUTVAVI—'g 
*Soyty eyyan *‘wWounsoy eyyN *uosut 
pat cannes ll pat ‘sorenes cae “G230H “qd ‘YH Joleyw | ° ouAlopsuey | * 0681 ‘20g 
“(Sopra pemysery) ‘juowmidoy eyyIne “Suirem ure 
Axnueyuy yesueg 476¢ pat bes hy ‘d ‘A ‘19D 3NerT]* —* Biowy | - . 
*(sv130q) ( d 
Aajuejuy pesuag y3/¢ nuvjuy pedueg yiZE/* reany “A "09-37 | « * JOmTEIS | ° 
(sq4is) |\*  * * I, xtpueddy eag *(Sy4!S) e 
Aajuryjuy re et Aajuezu] ee *  400D *[ *10D-"77]* — anpunyne | 
ASYAIS ASUS 
Anueyuy resu94 mst Sealed GSE | SySUy “AA “q *10D-"F]|* esodezorng [> eS # 
*(sus9u01g *(suseu01g *4ueYysHO017-) 
mae = [e3usgq uzrt A1yu eyu sap a). "eh: DO "Vv "RD * J00y Deoowy | * Zegz “ady 
Bra Bqyinsy “JWIMLSIY ByyIN4 
aS ‘uoeyeq pu WS “woyeyeG puc!>  fopjjow -q “fey | > Peqenogqqy!- “ 306 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


452 


ee oe 
a TT DIT 


“uoroogesip 4} “Kieatc) 


‘gSgt ul pepueqsic] oper DAREN [esueq HS acs sane “ 
*ZSgi at “ksyeaes) 
mouxoer] 78 porman W — SAHEN [esueg 494 rete = Sogr 
*As]Vae 
jesucg 3s! =a MON | ° : os * 1] xipueddy 20g |° s8s0f] S.JOUTIS * 120UIAS “Sef °7d¥2 see ée 


°IEM 3} sO pad 94} 1B 
peonpes ssam yorum jo [Te ‘Cogi—fogr sveA oy} UsaMjeq YSHUG 24} JO opis 943 uO poseSua o1am Sdioy Jen Sou] [BseAsG 
-fued 
-wi07) 943 jo Aojdwia ay} Ul syeTe 
+s quapusdeput Jayjo Wor} pue 


*Cogr “IBAA BqIP 


eye 24} jo UorIsn}s pienr)-Apog s,eusiog oq [e4euet) *yuowl33yy UEP 
-u03 oy} UO psonpey | Wooly PIUtO; sdiod sejnseuu uy |-vedepuyweysnpuipy | * A ‘y soley ‘ns fog! 
*£Sg1 ut snp sne ; ‘303 | 
eunynf ye poruin covecs SAIveN [esua 39\-tq ‘a ‘[ “l99o-FT). 
ef ye pawn } IeN | or Wei d se Ls sie | indizeyx)| —oogt 
"ond | =_ aayjen yesueqg WS) “SOUL “19D*FT 
*UOI}IBESIP JOJ *Asyeaesd 
‘gfgt ur pepuegsiq ae sane yesueg whl’ 331g ‘d [de )* Yeouow L6L1 
*Z£Sg1 ul *Asyeata 
yuusoyy FEPMUNMWE | eaneN yesueg pst)" AIG "S190" F7T * gsodeuig 06/1 


pureseg "9621 count ut sdsoo sejn des 
B ojUI payieauod ‘gg/1 ul ‘Bu0.3s gl 
‘unjsiueysjy | ‘doo1} 8 03 psonpes { eipuy jo isom ' 
ut JONpuoosiw 30f¥ | 943 OF uonipedxa s,preppor) [es 
dg ur pepurgsid —— Ul p2AJas pus YsALIg 94} 0} UIT) ASJIOH seyepury ed 
————— 
| 
‘JusuIpURgsIp jo 7, ‘gureu SAIjEU 
a}ep 10 swWeU JUaSe4 | euayasy pue soquinu ;euLsiiC) 
—— nnn an 
‘panuijuoI—ABIWAVI— 2 
‘panulyu0o—A40gsty guanbasqns 4194} puv 


‘usdts0 4194} f0 savjngizavg Surmoys ‘huey posuag ays fo sd40D 243 f0 ist] 109150;0u0LY 


*qemen 
BY} JO VIAJES 9Yj Uy | * * yupno gllt 


‘yUBpURUIO) }SIty | “pestes D194 AA 


453 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


a 


——_—SSOOO™OQOWEOae—_—c—eeESE 
"1981 Ul 
popuegsiq “/Sgi ‘ , 
ur Ayjerped paiunny | * L¥gi ul yyZI 943 pags . : qq 
*Legi ul 


“6Sgi wt popuegsiq | Asyeaes sepnBow2y y311 243 werd Ayearsy sejn Fe] yQ01 
“ways 
“IORI |GBYS JO SDIAJOS 3Y} U! SSOP] $21) 
Aeyw ut papuegsigy | -suyd,, Jo sdiod 943 woly pauoy |AspeawD sejn3ars] 476 
*£Sgi ur as0d “oSgi *Aspeaes) 
“UME Je porunny | ut Aspeaes 34Sr] puz 94} ewEseg | YS] pesueg yyI! 


| 
| 
| 
! 
| *Aapeaes 
esucgq (801844 50 Asjeaes sepnFa3] Wg 
- + + 4] xpuaddy aag 


* sake HM IT] Wesqeey 
920114) 4I9 24} MO 
ve ‘Aajent) Asyeaes sejn3auy yl} * 39944 “A “ID Aypeseg 
yesuag yj}S 943 Mon 
*£Sgr ul *Aapeaed 1e[NZa13] yjor ‘uolse"] pueyy|ep 
JEM LYseg 7B paiuynyy | 24} se Zegi ul eur] ay} OFU! WYSNoIJg |-UNg 94} jo AfeAe | = 
“Aspeae) “Arpeaesy 
reSuag wh oyymoy |" * °° = * I] xIpuaddy 2ag jeos0y Aserpxny qpng | * Arequen “2D “3deD 4PnO 
*910daZ019 J 
7@ yor 9y} pue *Aspeaey) 
| JOHLEIS 3B 176 247 *ozgt ur Aspeaey 3ySr7] [34 3ry] jo syuaunsoy Fe = 
| —ZSgi ui paiuryny | esueg yjo1 pue 476 a4) OWROeg | BXY pus pue 4st ate 
*ZSgu ul pounny eeceee . osJO}] [e207] 43S . ysnory i *ydey 
6ig1 *asJOP S,j9u 
ysngny uy ay tole 3 | “UNS JUewidoy pit | * 
*Alpearsy *@SJO}j S19 
[esucg psf 24} MON | * 4 * |] xipueddy 20g | -u1yS yuousoy puz|* souuryS ‘sel “fey | Isue}] 
bad dhedct satalit y . «< -~ d “« 
o}Oigrurpessjsuesp) pat |Aajappeg “9°M “34eD i 
‘Oigi poepueqsig | as . puz |‘ weysuiuuns ‘jyde5 
"19g *o 
ul ueqsiq ‘ZSgr | ur Asypeaes sen sau] p3t ay} pue . 
ul poonom cpensed ‘fzgi A nor yeoo] pat ey} euredeg | *Aspeaed eypyoy 3st | sweqoy LH 37 |* PeeYyAGoN 


*$J29U PB] 


je3uegq puz 24} MON | *° + jp xipueddy 2eG }* ass0H] S,Joupsery 


onsuyy “[ “1°D-3T 


Joupsery"] "Ay soley | ° 


'q19q 


Digitized by © 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


454 


*sia2ury jes 
-U9g yjrI 94} MON AsuBwoo, asiopy jel | Aeuiny *y *{ ureydea “=e as 
*Aspeary pes *Aayeary 
Oe SF) Oe See sppndassy YxIS put jump yd “ : ” - 
«¢ PSIOH 
*si9Due] [es * 5 * JL xipuaddy eag ( sare ,—*Aspeara 
-U9g YJII 943 MON Je[NSal4, YHIS YSI | * Be “A Ureqdes | * as0yey " 
*sug0uR’y] pesusg “uospofy 
4701 pue 43694) MON * 9810} S,uospoyy |'Y "S “MM 
*Asypeaesy 
qefung 43S 943 MON “ “ ms ooee 
“zggiurpepucqsiq |, oo ° “6 “6 uy) 
*Aajea se “e pat soeeee 
“89 gefung pit ; * . . Il xipueddy 92S ‘é “ ai 0s onc 
pur puz “jst a4} Mon’ Ayeaej qeiung jst | ; 
*Aspeaey aé te qii eereee 
[eSucg 43g 943 Mon jl. ° * ‘| xipuaeddy aac 
"Aspeaey : ‘ “ 7 
jesueg yzZ oy} MON 9 
*19gI UI pepueqsig | ° ’ Z¥gi UI YIO! 94} UIeIEg es | ome coneee 
*LSg1 
ue «= ‘upng = s ‘und 
“URNS ye potunny | * : Logi ur YIS1 943 eUrEdeg = ri yi _ 
‘L891 ut Suodmony 
put isuey[jze powijn | * ° L¥gi ul yyh1 9y} aweleg ? ah UC OS 
*£Sgi ut 
Saseueg 7e peuyny | ° 4 Logi ut yjf1 oy3 owedeg |AsjeaesejnJeusyqyzy) 0 


munis | °c ; 
aqep 40 caren Joong paar 40 soquinu yeursug, | “WBPEPUWOD 3414 |"Postes a394 4 


*PapnjIu0I—RATVAVI— 


*ponuijzwoo—Asozsty guanbasqns 41943 puy 
‘us5340 41247 fo Savjnriz4and Surmoys ‘huap joduag ay} fo sdaoD ay; fo 3st7 jv2dojouosy py 


455 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


-u9g yzfr 247) Mon 


. "IL X1pueddy 308 sas9yjeg U]E}UNOW Joy 

*speSjsg 381 04} 09 poppe sem doosz WI3y © pue "Qovd sa}weduIOD TS Jo SUOT|eI3eq 3214} 0} posessDU| SpIEMJO}ZE SUA 19918] 

243 {q2ed somEdmCd Ing 30 SUO}TEIIEQ OA} Aq 0} BIDM 319Y} 3003 JO JTIYM ‘Aza[I1}7e 28104 jo 89 q 4N0J 3y3 JO YIES YR OU ‘sdool) INO; OFT 
po2ws0; sem Agoq}}918 28104 DAWJEN 243 (261 ‘ON ‘O'H’S) Sst uy “LSSI [UN UoOWeEdg]poul sulOs Gy pouyeurss pouI0; O8 AzII}JIE BANVEN 24] 

‘ *(ys1 AtQw “OD “DO 5) 6tgt uy yusweuted 

SPeul seM JusuteBueue s1y3 ¢ Asaqywe s8104 D;JeENY JO sdood 3214} OFT] UIDy) Bayurs0y pul syusuBe: Area? sayEeN ates... cued APNOD in 
243 Ju; aespyyA ‘poonponus SEM aiNseouI 3A1}e}U9} E Joye] srEDd OMT ‘sHUEdUIOD OF JO JQMINU 34} 0} posesNuy s19M ZEpuelON) 943 SIgi Ul 
‘Q0}AJ98 Jey} JO UOISN[IUOD 943 UO psoNpel SEA BNG *eae[ 03 uopypodxe oj 303 posits sem Azoiiij7e 8104 2a37eQJ JO doon & IIgi UB] 

“poqsosqe Avenpes sem put 919d 

38 pouoneys sea } f seqesye |W 94} WoOZ 132A0 SUID pey OYA asUIADDTTTIE DAFZEN JO pours; SEA ,, SEpULjOrpse[NFo17] ,, oF Jo sdioOd e JuTI} DUTES oy 
IV ‘pew0y se sayuedui0d 34G jo sdiod e usym ‘Sogi [}}UD SayaeduIOD syerEd2s OZU] pd}99][09 JOU 319M yng *Z6L1 uy ty sal eo 212M ZEPUEIOS 

“Sgli uy poonpol — qauLIOJ qua 2303 

‘28043 ynq ‘cgZi uy poster 210M soyUEdUIOD DJOUl sey, “6L/I uy psonper ‘fueducoD suo yd20xe ‘mADMOY so oets ayer z 

DuUIEI0q puE ‘sUOITE}JEq 214} 03 posBodU] asa gll1 UL BSIyT, “BNG eq sofew Aq popueUWo? 919M pure ‘s]408 5 GIOD 3Y} 0} pousjsueH 

aia seo Suimoyoy 243 uy pue ‘92/1 uy ypno jo qemeN 243 Aq posyer os2M usWIATTTIPE B4)3eNY JO zEpuEOr) jo sajueduIOD — sai 
JO SUN 243 2277e popuegs|p sea YoTyM Jo soy 943 ‘ule peBusgq 943 jo AxoTTIZ7e DATFEN FY) JO WOyyEULIO; 9y3 JO YD}OyS & 8} Bapmorox Dy 


“e ce q31 ae se q3Z1 ezjuney “A H's “ec 130 use «e 
Asyeaey yeSueg yor} e*  * * xtpueddy eag4 |Asyeaed yesueg qj91 | ‘ssoy "DD Puojod)* eequiq|  Sggr 
Sjaoue’y] jesueg 4361 , ‘ ossOy] Seueq | * weg ery!’ sodumey oggt 

*so2ueqs0 sp 


243 yo udlssoiddns 943 J2)3e pepueqsip saom yoy ‘gS-2Sg1 ul pesjer Sdz0>2 Jo saq~@nu IBse] E 239M 319} 389} 0} VON ppEe Uj—"s¥LON 


*s190u 
reduog 43g! on AON . 7 1] xipueddy s0g) “ “pu jugs +H “y ureqde| | ° ~ 2 
"19g! ul popueqsig sevece esi0H Bese 3s! tence 7 JOB) Cid 
(11 xtP 
a uae pune es10H BHWNW | speqoy ‘[ “> soley | * BAW ’ 
qnq ‘cgge ur pooepou 
‘IL *!P “uew 
eee ee As en fe * 9810} PUBYALYOY | -ss03) “x “ysoley |‘ weap] —2Sg1 
nq ‘zggi UI peonpoy ila *A[BAeD) 
“$1990 [23 1UENW s,UOJIIND | * uoyIND “a Ure}dey | * JeMEYseg = 
-Ueg ISI 94} MON) *Alpeaey 
-s190UT] [83 sejnSei3] YAIS yw | * uoszeny “f *yne]] 


*Aupeaesy 
"iggt Ul pepueqsig pave sejasouy YyxIS pst | essvag ‘5 “x *yner] ‘a gsgi 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


456 


~~ eee 
-_—_- 


‘o6g1 oun |* ° : . Ul SIGOUB] pure ‘19g1 
Aey ut Aspeaes yesueg puz ey} ‘ orgi ur 
Asyeaes) repnZe11y puc oy} ffzgi Avy ut 
Qsi0}4 [eo07y (s,3J2Upseg) puz ey} ouIeI0g | * * —- gSJOH] S,Joupsey | Gog: | sus9uey “ “ pug 


"198! Aew . . . . . . . . ut 
Aapeavs) yedueg si 94} eWEIeg ‘ohgI Ul 
(asi0py § s9uu14S) Asyeae7) sB[NBes1y 4sI 
poweu ffzgi Avy ur asi0Fy [BI07 (S,1900 
-ULYS) ISI 94} pezyeusisap f6ogr ur peurio; 
. -ai :tyjaq 3e Aynp ao1jod uo pedojdwa 
SEM YIYM “YETESIA OVO 0} GOS UW; paoNpay |* = *—-BSIOH] SFOUUIAS | ogi | Arjeav_ [esueg jo quousey ys! 


“pli . : : * gut} jussaid 94} QUN 
Ajsnonurju0d peysixe sey ji 3ynq “poles 
uazjO Sey Y}SuII3s S}! .,: STVSOWY JO doosy 
SJOUIAAOL) CY},, P2[[B2 BUI] 9WOSs 105 sem 
pseng-Apog yaseaid oyy ‘“Auy [esueg 
ey} Ul PeUleWas UBM peyUNoW eSuIS B jou 
pue z/Z1 ut popueqgsip sem siq} fzgdéi ut "S| SW “paensy 
powioy sem psens-Apog uvadoing [Jews yw} yo doozy s,souseAor ayy | C241 | -Apog §,]BJIUST)-JOUIBAOT) BY] 


“gn jussad *posres 
UIAIDI—I ‘SHUVNAY ‘JoquiInu 10 dileU jeUsi . . 
“ e410 | vod sauot 


“AUIVAVD 


"$a74ty 4304} ut Saduvys puv dusssva fo Sajvp Susmoys ‘hury joousg ay; fo sd4oy dusysixg 


‘II Xipueddy 


457 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


ee ee 


‘o6g1 ounf |°* Ul SIZIURT "230 


jo JUOWISey WEN S,uojeIND,, pewwus: | poureu ‘ssiopy UBYIeG 
£6Sg1 sequisseq UI ,, ki AB) JO JUIUIZIY «=| JO) }8=—SYRTBSII «= J9zUNIOA *s190UR’] [BSuegq jo Juow 
1UB}JOOW] ,, 94} SB JWowLSe1 9uO O}U! poulog | jO JequINU B jo pauli0y gSgt |e, (1ueyooW s,uoying) 4iSt 


Asyeae) yeSueg y3h1 ey} aures0q £ 6Sgi 39q ‘ 
-1999(] U ,, @S10H zef s Aen ,, poyeusiseg | * Asuewo0e, oss0fy ef | Sgt | sisouey] yedueg jo jueundey 4392 


fggt 0) ° shies Ur ¢,Sqysneuuoy jo 949q,, 
pue 1 Avy ul sisouey spew * 1ogr : *sig0ue] [esueg jo quow 
key ut Aspeaea yesueg yjf1 oy} ourEsog 65 ” yy] gSgr | Bey (saysneuu0D jo eynq) 43Er 
19gt Avy |° - ” ul uogeuSisep yuosazd s}! poareoay | A1yeaeD sejndeisy yxIG puz | 4Sgr Auyeaes) ypedueg 5 Peatte, oe 
9fgt "qq , Y “UL, UMO ,S2TEM 


jo coun ,, pue ‘bogi Ae ul sssoue’y] opeur <q PSIOP ,SPTBMA 55 *s1g0U’] [e3ueg jo JuounSey 
frogt ur Aspeae) [eSueg Y3II 943 ouIeAg | “AsyeaeD sejndoiay yAIS 3st | ZSgr | (GMO STM JO UNG) YT 
« ‘ 


ul sugouey opeu frog Ae ut Asyeaea | “8190 

jBsusgq yjor 94} fgSgr ysn3ny a! ssi07] [eSuegq jo JuouNZayy (UMG 

S$,uospoyj jo jUouNdoy Puc o4} Suludeg |" = * ce a LSgt | s8,e3piuquiey jo 994nq ey ]) 401 
oggt °qeq | * : * wl sigouey pus ‘1ogi Ay ut 

Asyeaes) yeSueg 476 04} ‘ gSgi ysn3ny ur 

QSJOF] S,UOSpoP] JO JUDUILZIY 3S1 ouBseg | ° . esi0pj S,uospoyy | Sg: | (SssouRy) “ os 436° 
nogt Aewj  ** | * oar Asqeaee yeduag Wag 

ey} pure ‘Lrgr sequiaqzdeg ut yWgI 94} QUIEN | * P “ — ylt | obgt v6 7 = 
rogt hew . . . . . . . . ul 


Aayeae) yeSueg yyZ oy) pur ‘Lhgt sequia; 
-dag ul Asean) sejnay 4761 94} oulED—g | ° - « yor | gbgt | Aspeaea tet jo yuounBay 4y/ 
"Eggi °39O ul ,, S24 JO VOULIg 94},, Spe pure “1981 : jedueg jo juow 


Kew ut Asyea u 19 943 oWweIeg | - «  « 3g | chgt | -130q (Saye Joooun 
*1ogt Avy | ° sic nage maces oeenat pearsdey |* Aspeaes 3ejnZe1] we Ivgi a ( mm) ‘ doa) pas 
*rogt Aewi* . ui Asyea ueg 4i¥ 94} pue ; . 
Otgt m1 Kasay sabes] BO eel eeeea | * Ayes Areyixny ypng | stgt | . “ . «< wir 
19g1 Ae |* ut Aayeaes ye3ueg pat oq} pue ‘obgr ut 


Asyeaes 12] yyy oy ffzgr Ae ut *9810}] 
ws10}{ [890] (s,bojsppra) yyy 24} oulEIeg | s,soUUIYS Jo JUOUNZey puc | Sigi AsjVaey) [eZueg jo JuowJey pst 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


458 


*Sggt *deg . Us BoIzBUssop Jussesd 871 spun 
peamignee ‘29g! ul pepuwgsip ‘19g 
BW ut Asyeaes pesueg yigr 24) oMBeg |° = —*° =: S820F4 PURyATIYOU 


"6ggi °AON ° *K203;8g : 
Layeg areanoyy (1e300g) 8 ‘on ouneg UrejunoW jesueg © ‘ON | oBst . “« 8 ON 
*6gg! “AON *hseqzeg 
| ened aineka (edueg) L ‘oid sued uUrgjunow [esuog 1 ‘ON! Ogg: | 4reReg UrejUNOW (jesueg) Z "ON 
cs 
*vogt “dag |° Ul S190UT] pus ‘19081 
a us eies jesueq 4761 043 ourEoeg * as201] S,008, | ogg: | Aapeau) [eSuag jo quauBey 4761 
*OSgi “3B Ul S550UB’] "1992 
- aoe ur Kaeae) yeSueg uygI ree UOT] BHBIYBy pur; gSgr | suscouwyz 8 “ * qIgt 
*Sggt dag |° : * Ul UONVUsISp UES 
-oid ait sepan poysyquiso-o1 pue /rggi ul 
eqaip £19g1 dey uy Lsyeaes pe30og 
yds ouy {6Sgr at ,,aBs0F] ,8j2qQ0y,, 
: a ur faz] soyog Arypxny parqypyqoy 
£25g1 at soyog enn 943 oWweg|* ° *° sB0Ry BNW) LSg1 “ s “ yy 
Wee 


LSgt | Asean. petueg jo wourSey ings 


Zurasases ‘SNUVANIY esaquinu Jo owed jeulSuGC) are 


*919U0I—KYIVAV) 
"pyu0o—sazjt7 42949 ut Saduvy? puv Sursiva fo sajup Susmoys ‘husp joduag ay} fo sd4oD Fusyssx7 


459 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


€6g1 |! 


*f6g1 


°1Sg1 


Indy 


“se 


ut Axjueyuy yi aq3 f 1ogt Avy ut 

Axyueyjuy canons petoeg yyy oy} f Pegi at *yuow 

Anuvjuy syeny asap: Ai oy} oureseg | -139yy qI91 ‘uoeHeg pur] g6/t 
. * wt AxjQuezuy pesuag jo quounJoy 


(oxnyesg) ) pt 943 pue {Sggi Axvenuel ut 
u 
Axquejuy oaney pedueg psf eq) { bzgt ut *yuow 961 


“81 (34347) SAVN yesueg puz 943 cures 

oq fgSgr ur Asjuwjuy quarry epew fpzgr *quou! 

ur AxjuBjsUy OAZeN [eSuog ys1f A ar “Hoy iS ‘uoreyeg puz | gOZt 
. . . . . . ur UBjpUy 


£Sggt ty qurjuy yes SI 93 
£ 19g! Aey ur Axquejuy oAneN oq 3s! 


: on 
Pogct ul y36z eu, {1gZi Ul quouNsey pstz *uol] 
oy} ourEDeq f 407104 -34-400190N pojres) | -8eg eaneN jesueg yf | ofss 


. * gsiseu0ig jo sdioz| fog 
“AYLNVAN] 


*Axqueyuy jeZueg jo woursoy 7 
(UMO 8J0}91A PoqTy 90Ng) Ww 


Aszuryuy pedueg jo yuomisey pst 


+(Aayuvyay 34311) je3u9g 70 
quou3ey (UM_ $,u90N() 94] ) pus 


Asquvyuy peducg jo yuounTZoy 481 


“SJOULW 
pue suaddes jeSuag jo sdsod oy] 


———w | ee ee we - 


ewe - = -* 
~ 


*€681 judy ° ° * ut Asjuesuy peSuog jo yuew 
-180y (jndfey) yg eq} pue ‘Sggi Srenuef 
ur Asjuejuy yesueg yig 243 £ 1ogt Avy : 
ur AsjuRjuy sAjeN jesueg yg eg} fezgi *yuaw 
oes ur Asjuejuy CajeN [esueg 476S ay3 ouEIeg | Say YyxOf ‘uoyeyeG ys1} Sigi | As3uURJU] [eSUEg Jo quoUNZey 47g 
. I 2 . . . . . . . . ul 
_ Axjuvyjuy yesueg jo yuew3ey (jndley ump 
S,j43neuuoy jo 39nGg 94],) YZ oy) pue 
‘Sggi Asenuef a: Anuejuy jesueg (uagm 
$34 3neuuo jo 999G 94]) 472 243 aUIeDEq 
‘€ggt 4990399 ul ,,UMO sjysneuUO) 
jO 949Q,, 94} opem sem fiogr Avy ut *Auey 
Asquejuy GAQeNY esuag yz ayy f gzgi ul -u] b secaos jO WUouLsay (UMG 
Asyuvjuy eArjey pedusg rps 24} auIBdeg | ° Asjuvjuy yesucg 4369} eg: | SqySneuu0y jo oynG 241) 4IZ 
"S6g1 qudy;*  * 8 * ut Adguesuy (34317) 
|[esueg jo Juauisay (3e{) YyI9 Oy} pue 
*Sggi Asenuef ut Asjuejuy (}y31]) pesueg 
439 94; f rogt Aew ut Asjuejzuy (34317) 
@AIJeNY [e@sueq q4I9 94} oureseq { fhg1 
ur Axjueyuy 343] epew sem {Pzgi ur *quau *Axquejuy 
Axjuvjuy @AljeNY jesueg plh oy} oureseg | -13097 pucz ‘uo1eyeg ys1| Cog: | (345177) pesueg jo Juoudey 4I9 
: . ° : or Asjuejuy (34314) 
[eSueg jo Juawi32y Seis steal y3S 943 
pue ‘Sggqr Asenuef ut Asjyuezuy (34417) 
peducg y3S eyy f19g1 Ae; ut Ayueyuy 
Guar) PANVEN [BSusg 4} oq} euredeq f fhgr 
ur Asjuejuy 3ySry opem sem fbzgi ut *yuow *Asqueyuy 
Asjuejul eaAyeny [esuag puch oy} owedeg |-130y ysIz ‘uoljeyzeg puz| fog: | (34Srr]) pesueg jo quounday 4S 


"6g dy 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


‘a]713 Juased *postes 
Sulataoal “SHUVARY | “saquinu Jo oureu yeulsug udu "Sduod 


jo 33eq | 


*p140I—=KALNVAN] 


60 


+ | “pyuoo—sajjt) 42047 ut Saduvy? pun Fussiva fo sajup Surmoys ‘huap posuag aut fo s¢407 Jurjswxg 


461 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


*C6g1 


"6g! 


*£6g1 


*f6g1 


‘uel 


judy 


judy 


Judy | * 


IHdy 


[udy 


A oe il i 
94} SUIBIeq pue f I9gI J9q0}9H UI 4zFI 343 
pasequinues f19g1 Avy ul Arjueyuy oanjeN 
jesueq 4381 943 se oUT 943 OjU! wanoig 
° e + . . . . ul 4j 
-u quowrSsy (yndfeyy) q3f1 
aes Soest Enaant ul p Sines [esueg 
YI OY} OMIBIEG £ 1OgI 19qOWH Ut YETI CYR 
pesequinues £ 19g1 Ae ur Aueyuy oAneN 
jedu0g yy 943 se eur; 94} CFU! 3Y3N0Iq 
Logi UL uoNeWeEg HeMeYyHAOYS 94) GUIBIOg 


* ar Arjuey 


anst ow £ toss Q0RO Ht Was! oat f19GE 


£ Aaquejuy oaeN yesueq put ‘uore;eg 


st 24} se fcgi ur sul 24} Ozu! jYSNOIg | * 


*aiod 
-9Z039,J JO JuouNZey ey] 


* spesug Hemeqyeys ogy 


*yuaZurjU0-) 
sefnys qeys ‘Arjueyuy pat 


jueUsey wIIxXy puz 


*yuoul 
“Boy putt ‘uoreyjeg 381 


Aagy ysesyozey 


Stg1 


gtgi 


Szgt 


fzgr 


Ligt 


' *fajyueyu usg jo Juem 
sodden eat) 


*£ajuvyuy fesueg jo 
jueurisey (qemeyyous ony) Witt 


*Axuuejuy pesueg jo Juew 
Boy (1ez[Gx)-1-7eTey YL) 4IeI 


«¢ “ Li) yy L 
ee “e i qj01 
ec “ «“ 436 


: : ° ot Anavjza] pesue quota 

4 (uvaryesNW) Ig! 243 pus? gg! Are 

one uy Aajueso] peSuegq 4yj9gi 94) ouE20q 

£1981 29q0390 U! Tg! 94) pazequinuas £ 1981 

Aew ot syuejuy saney [e4ueg puze ou) 

Poe “OSgr ay yuounsoy ssodyy 243 mM! > way oANEN EQNOTED | SOL: Anuvyuy peSuog jo juoun Fey wags 


° e e e ° e ° us Axjuey 
a eaneg JO JUIMI 709 (URMEsNW) WII 
om pase {Sggr Aenuel a: Asjueyuy pesusg 
4aZt ayy amBdaq £1981 3040990 UI 4321 23 
3 pesoquinuas ¢ 19gt Ay ur Arqueyzoy oatgeny *yuou *Anuvyuy peZaog jo juaw 
ea TeSoog yste oy] se oay oyy oyu! yydnadg |-1y YRqing fefo] oyy| LSgr |-oy (YRqung eho ou) 4321 
= x Guest 139 , ( df yi 
- Udq jo wouK qad{ 391 
= Pte Bly é Seat benvef UI Fiseyiy seSecg 
W) 1 343 ow £1981 Ul G39! 943 
Oo pasoquanaas £1981 dey v1 Anyceyay oatzen *<nuvyay jeZu0g 
= TeBusgq qe ayy se ou oy] Ou! WysNOIg | MouyoM] so yuounZoy o4| ZSg1 Jo uouSoqy (Mouyony] 047) qiot 
re : . : * oF Asqueyay pe3aeg y3h1 
77) 34) SWIBI0q poe £1981 10q039O ui 4}S1 909 
‘5 pessquinues § 19g Aew 1 Asjueyay oanen *Ajuvyo] pezueg jo quow 
" TeSuog Mot 943 se omy 9g) o3u! {ySnoIg | eUeYpH’] Jo quomIFoy ONL) OFer | -Boy (YNIS BaRIypN] O47) WSs 
bn 
*9At} Juosaud “peste. 
WIAIZIOI *SUUVN AY *soquine Jo suleE peULsUuG esa, Sd4072) 
*P740I—AWLNVAN] 
SI] 
S| "PjWOI— 597737 42947 ut Saduvys puv Susssvs fo sayvp Susmoys ‘huap yoduag ay3 fo sd40> Susjsix7 


463 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


*Sgsi 


*Sggt 


*Sgai 


*Sgsi 


*Ssg! 


*Sgsgi 


*Ssgi 


*Sgg! 


-uef |° 


‘uel 


‘uel 


euef | ° 


*uef 


‘uel 


‘auf 


‘uel 


°° a Anueyuy edusg y392 94; 
pue £ 19g! 39qQ0}9C UI YI9Oz 943 f 19g1 AE 
at Asjuezuy aanjen fesueg yA0f 943 owe0g | 


* ur Anueyuy pesusg y3Se 94} poe / Sumo; 
“OJ 3990390 243 ui YZSze 947 £ 19g Ae; 
ar Asjquejuy PAQeN yesueg yz6e oy} £ ZSgi 
ysndgny ur Arjueyuy qefung 4321 ey} oweseg 


Aajuejuy qefung 43g! 


* uoreneg qeiang soyey 


; * ur Arjqurjuy [eduegq yibz 943 
pue S19gt 29qQ0}9Q) UI YWHz ay { 1Og1 Ae 
ur Anjuejuy cayjen pesueg yyge ay} aweseg | - 


ur (si9quU0Ig) AjUesU] peSueg pstz oy} 
pue ‘ 19gt 19907329 ul putz ay}! 19g1 Ae 
ut AQUejuy aAQeN [edueg yyZz ey} oue20g 


“Axyueyuy qefang jo 
yuounSoy (100083) yy 
: * ut Aajuejuy [edueq puze 943 


ut AQuejuy OAneN [e3ueg yIgz 943 eUrEDEg | ° es “« qi 
: ° : * ur Aquejuy jeZueg ysic 
243 pus £1981 100390 UI YsIe 943 f19g1 ABW 
uy AsqURzU] DAREN [eSU9g UySz 24} omed~g | - = 


°°  * — * ur hsjgurzuy pedueg (umo 
$,23puqwey jo syn 241) 4I0z 943 ouED 
-0q pus { £ggi 1290720 U! ,, UMC S,03piq 
WED JO 94NG CY] ,, BpeuUsem £ 3290;90 
Buumaojjoy Oy} us yVOz ayy pue £ 19g Lew 
a: Anuejuy Caen [esueg wyve O43 oUIEDOg | ° ad - 


, ° ¥ * ur Arqueyzuy pesueg 4361 
94} pues f19g1 JaqozIGH UI 761 OY] S19g1 Ae 
ar AXQUBzU] BAIVEAY [eSuag psec ayy oweIeq | ° 


476 


8 


Aquos qefung 43Z 


éSgt 


LSgt 


LSgr 


LSg1 


LSgr 


LSg1 


L£Sgr 


LSgr 


“Anueyu 
[educg jo yuounZey (qefung) Woe 


[83uog jo wounJ2y (qefung) wise 


Leen 
[eBuog yo qwounSoy (quiung) que 


*(sss9u01g) Anueyay 
[eSueg jo JuounSey (qe{ung) pate 


jesuag jo yuounsay (qvienay pass 


*Asquejuy 
[edueg jo juounsoy (qefung) ys1¢ 


*£xju u 
jo | uounsoy (quien ong 
SeSpuquiey jo oxNG M1) YIOE 


*Asquejuy 
[eduag jo yueunSoy (qefung) 436s 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


= 
YO 
~~ 


pate ay} omeeq put pesiuesio-o1 £Sggr 
Asenue{ ur Asquejyuy pesueg pstf oy} eured 
-9q £1981 49qQ0}90 Ul pall oy} posoquinu 
-a1 f19g1 Aep ut Asjueyoy aaney pesucg 
jO JUOUNLZey (peqeyerTy) 4IZE 943 eUBdIqG | ° . Kav] peqeytiry 
. ur (sss0uo1g) Arjuejuy [esueg puct 
243 pue {1981 J9q0}9Q UI puct ay} * 19081 
Avy ut (ssgau0ig) Asquvjuy eAneN [esueg 
yIOf 9y3fgSgr youey ur Axqueyuy qefung 
jO yuoursay (s90eu0Ig) YRFZ 94} rele : si298O1g quunyg Wn] 
; ‘ . ; ° ; ut A33UR; 
-uy jesueg ys1f oy} pue f19gr 19qQ0}20 UI 
AxjuRjU] CAEN [eSusgq ys1f oy} f 1og1 ABW 


*“Lyuvyo u u 
“1324 (aepomcontyg iqefang) pact 
*Sggt ‘uel 


°( iq) Anueyuy 
fesuagq jo ua ou (qeiang) pact 
*Sggi cul 


ut Axjueyuy aaneA yesusg yzSl a4} ‘ LSg1 “Anueyuy 

ysnZny i Leueie) etwas pit oy} sweEag | ° Aaa’] 8 ,3pue]zJ07) UEA jBSuog jo quounSoy (qufung) wif 
*Sggt cus | - ; - ul sueyey eaeen ey? ou} i 

uv £ 1981 39qQ0}2QG Ul YIOL 94} f Og! Ae ‘ANueyuy 

cn Aajyueyuy sation velena yirf oy} suBIeg | ° = ¢ = puge [eSueg jo yuawS0y (qufung) 420% 
“Sggt ‘uel | - . - ut Aaqueyuy pesaog 4762 94} 

pur £ 19gr 49q0}9G Ut Yy}6z 9y} £ 19g1 Ae “AuezO] 

ur ArqUej UT aAIVeN) [eSUsg pstf oyz;eureI0g | ° 58 ha: } ¢ 4 [BSueg jo quounSey (qeu{ung) qy6e 
*Sggr cuef | - ; * ur Aaxjuejuy yedueg 43gz 943 

pur f 19g1 39qo0}9Q Ut YIgz 24} f 19g! ABW “Axuezu] 

ur Axquejuy oaeEN [esueg puzf vyyaweweg;*’ ° *¢ qo peSueg jo yuaunSey (qefung) yige 
*Sggr -ue{ | - : * ut Asquejuy pesueg yjZz 943 

pue £ 1ogr s9qoj}9Q Ur 47Ze 243 f 19g1 ABW Aru Bu] 


ut Asjuejuy PAQeN [esuag ysif oy} ouEDeg | ° Asyuvjuy qelang 4361 pesuog jo yoomisey (qefung) q3Zz 


‘aptly yuasoid . 
Seaias “Ss UVNBY *soquing Jo omeU eULS_G Ga "$4407) 
jo 338 


: *PI#0Im—AALNVAN] 


*pyuol—Sa7 717 41943 ut Sadunys puv Sursiva fo sajup surmoys ‘huey posuag ayy fos¢4s0 Surjsix 7 


465 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


*z6g1 


"Logi 


‘Zegi 


“uel 


‘aidy 


“ady 


‘ady 


"29g 


. . . . . - ur as Axjuey 
“Uy jesuegq jo yusunSey (ary emyser) 
YrOf ,, 94} payeusisop { o6g1 s9quia0dq 
Ul QuowIsos BYyxINF) F sn ey 24} a 
Jey} JO Vow Jo soiuedmoo xIs 19A0 Bury} 
quou3o1 I;PMyIer) & se pestUeSI0-01 {Sggt 
Asenuef ur Asjuejuy peSuog 436¢ 94} owes 
“Oq f TORT 49qQ0}9Q Uy 476E 943 Lee ‘as 
~91f 1ogt Avy ot Axjuejuy aanen pesueg 


jO quoundoy (yey) psth oy} owes0g 


U1 Uoneusisep jussaid 
Sj} Japun juowlZes ty Be se 1u 
-e310-01 {Sger Asenuef ur Aqueyuy pesuag 
4agf 943 suredeq £ 19g1 19q079G UI YRgt 94} 
pesequinuas f1og1 Aew ut s33ueyu] eAneN 


[eSuog jo yuounZoy (eisy) puch oy} ewrg 


* U1 UoIzeUSIsep jueseid sz! Japun paaracs 
* Z§gi Ut psonpad f rogi 49qQ0390 ul yIZF 94) 
pesequnues f19gi Ae ur Asquejuy eae 


10 JuOUNZay (JNJoD,)) 3S81h 94} oWRD0g 


Ul UOIZeUZIsep 
yueseid st se9pun poataes {zggi ut peonp 
“31 £1981 19qQ0} Ul 4IO£ 94} posequinu 
915 10g1 Aew ur Anuejuy aaney pesueg 


JO qwowrSoy (Ajporeg) yjoh 943 amesag | * 


Ul UoIZeUsIsop 
juasesd S$} Jepun peaiads pue fzggi ut poonp 
“31 51081 4940390 UI 43SE 943 posoquinu 
“91S 10g1 Avy ur Arjquezyuy aaneny pesueg 
JO quowdoy (undurey) 

. . . ‘ ’ Ul UOIZEUZISOp 
jU9seid $}1 J9puNn pearass pu f Zggi ul peonp 
“OJ 5 TOT J0q0390 UI YRHE 943 winu 
-34 S 1ogt Avy ut Asuejuy oven pesueg 


Jo quousoy (ysesyoyey) yIgl 24) owed0g 


ur Asjuesuy 
[esusg jo jusmFoy (uepowoyey iqefung) 


y}6F 34} owRd0g 


* faa] ysesipy 


° fav] wisy 


* Aaa] 7nJ90 


* aay & [}e2eg 


fav] undurey 


Aaa] ysedyozey 


gSgi 


gsgi 


*Asju u 
JO juowisay (oyry reaueD) Hoe 


*AsjuBjuy 
[e3ueg jo Juewisey (2330q) yigt 


*Asquejuy 
[eduog jo yuourSoy (e1Z0q) yt 


*Asquejay 
[eSuegq jo juauiZay (yx!) qiof 


*Asjueyjuy 
[eSucgq Jo juounSoy (y%IG) 43SE 


*(sas0u01g) Asjuejuy 
[edueg jo zuausoy (qefung) yzve 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


466 


——_——_—— a 


"16g ‘Je 


‘uel 


*Z6gt 


*a]q1) quasaid 
ULAIQI0I 


jo 23eq 


4st] BYAIND ,, payeusisop 


£Sggi Asenue{ 
ui Anueyuy pedueg path ay) aueoeq £ 19g! 
49q0}9G U! path ay} pasequinuas £1991 Ae 
ur Asquejuy (74Sr]) P4HEN jesusg jo quew 
-18ay (wessy) 43Zh 943 f Prgt Ur BoIeeY 
a 431] wessy puc oy} fOtgr ut 
sdi07y 
: E "UL ¢¢ SOBLA »» 
yO 91313 juesoid S}i peaisoes pu * ogg! aunt 
ur, AsqUByu] WYS] VyxIND ,, pozeusisap 
‘Sogr Asenuef ul Asjueyuy [esueq puch ay} 
auieoaq £ 192q0}2Q Surmoyjo} ay} Ut puck oy} 
posoquinues /19g1 ey Ut Asjueyuy (14 S1rq) 
DAIQEN [WSuUdg Jo JUSUNT 2 (wessy) 4i9r 
oy} euvoeg ffzgr ur woe ned Asquejuy 


ys] wessy }sI 0} pesueyo uoljzeUusisap 
fyjuow Surmopjoy oy} Ut sdiod Aajyuejuy 
jysr] e epew sem pus “uoreyjeq [E20] 


Asenigay ul oweeg 
. * ut Aajuejuy pesucg 
jo quoundey (ueqied) job ay} poyEusisap 
$o6gt sequiadeg Ut SdJod Je1};U01j-SUBI} 
pue yonjeg ese pasiuesio-a1 ‘Sggr Asien 
euvf ur Asjueyuy pedueg yzor ay) aulwoeq 
£ Zurmoyjoj 49Q0FOH U! yjoF 94) pesequinus: 
frogr Ae ul AsjuRjuy 2AneN jesueg jo 
juowiZoy (andueyelyeys) yr ey} eMeIIG 


sndguey 243 ‘fzgi 


Se 


"SHUVANBY 


punges wessy Jomo] a4} WIIG 


sdio7y Apunqes wessy 


* —— woudar] 49BIND 


* fag] andueyelyeys 


‘saquinu 10 aweU [eULsUGO 


‘PJ#0I—KYLNVAN] 


a ee 


*Asquejuy pesaogy 


Sfgt | jo quowrdey (ayia eyxsnD) path 


*Axquejuy [esuag 
Ligt | 30 woulsey (op! eyA4ND) pucr 


‘Asjueyuy 
gSst leSuog jo Juowidey (ueYy}eg) YyIOF 


‘pastes 
ua4M 


*pyuoo— $7937 41949 3 saduvys pup Surstvs fo sajop Furmoys ‘Kuap joduag ays fo sao) dursix” 


467 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


rr 


*16g1 


"16g1 


*Sgst 


*16g1 


*16g1 


“12W . . . . . . . . 
«U!Y,, Peyeusisap £ ogg Asenuef us, ume 


“JB 


‘uel 


"se 


“Ie W 


SIEM JO SOUISq DY],, P2BeI2 t 19g! 49q 
7OHPO UI USUI Z9y BYyxIND puz oy} sUIeDaq 
f1ogt Aew ut Asquejuy oaj3ey [eJueg jo 
jusuid2y 4y341 ay} peyeusisap pue oul] 243 
O7U! WYSNosg fgSgi ysn3ny ur ,, uowisay 


PBI Joon ,, a4} 03 pesueyo uoijyeuSisag | * 


. . . . ut 
« SHIA ., payeusisap £ jusunZay eyysney 
3St 94} sWeDeq pue eUul] 943 WoL peaow 
“Ot SEM J9qQ0PQ Suimoyjoy ay} ut £ 19gt 
Aew ut Anueyuy aaen pesueg jo quow 
“1397 IIE ay) aWEdEq £ QSer JoqWIaAON 
UT sdiod § Asjuezuy 7yS e& peznyrysuos 
*OSgi Asemiqay ut ,, yuounTay eyxanF) 
4° 4399 MY] ,, SB ul] 24} oF0! ZYSn0Iq 


* Ozgt Ul ,, UO} Vessey oy] ., awiweg | ‘ uole}}eg LasseNy 81 ay] 


* ut Asquejuy pedueg jo yueurtoy (yxIS 
s,Avs3}ey) YyISh oy} euedaq £ bog! ce ul 
(syx's 8,AvsQey) Asjuejuy aaQeN pedueg 


jo quswidoy yjzSt ayz"se Awe ay3 03 Peppy | ° 


UF ¢, SOHTA ,, JO 
woneusisap juasaid $}1 peareoes pur £ oger 
ounf ur ,, Aqueyuy qySI] eyxINF,, poyeu 
-Bisop ‘Sggi Asenuef ur Asjuejuy pesueg 
Yh OY) Culedeq £ 1981 12q0}9H UI YIhF Oy} 
pasequinuas figgt Avy ur Asqueyuy (343177) 
PANEN [eSuaq jo uauiZay (joy]4c) yIgr 
24) SB sul] 04) OFU! WYSNOIG «= *Zzgi Judy UI 


voreyjeg Asjuesuy 3431] JaYAG ay} owWeDdaq | - 


Ul ,, SOYA ,, JY 919149 Juosad 
Sj) pealsoes pue foggi ounf us ,, Asqueju] 


UOITEe s00uINs ayy 


UOLTEeY Pog pesueg 


worTezzeq |[eI07] Jay 


988t 
figs 


gSg§i 


trol 


s 8 — * (uorTeVeq pac) 

%  ° © (woye7eg 381) 
*(Sayiy soowsig 

OY L) juaunsoy (ay!) ByxsNs 

(UNO PTE JO aug) puz 


° * (uoreeg 381) 
—jUeunsoay (OYIy) BYxANS ys1 


*Asquejuy jesuagy 
jo uoundoy (WS §,feay7Qey) YIsP 


*Asquejyuy [esueg 
jo yuounday (Opry BYyxIND) YIbr 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


468 


‘olet ‘dec,* ul voreuStsop quosoid pearasa = 291 *K10 
= Axenue{ ot Asayeg uiequnop 1 ‘ON sWED0g Pee 144r] qu{urg oN 


*glgt “sew |’ * Gt ,, UMO 8,0I0NG BT ,, poyea S1s2q] | * : sopinry jo sdio_ 
*60g1 eoccee e e Ct 66 y3S 
*6¥gI . eoecce e e 6é 6eé pst 
“67g! evecce ° e ee 66 puz 

"0681 *sBIN e e e e e e e ° at 


«UE 8.403914 POqIy UUg,, payeusisag | = * Aapeawc qufung yr 
‘s0uOg UAILNOYY avinng 


"16g1 ‘SB!’ «OL ., SBI,» Poeusisap pus ‘1ogr 409 
0790) UI yuowSo] ByyAINL) YW ay} owwIIq 
figgt Avy ur Asjuejoy aaizey jesaog jo 
quau Jey qo 243 SB out] O43 O7U! AYSNOIg | * yUEW BE YANG) B1yxq 

"1661 “JB |” : : * Ul, SONTY ,, peyeusisep 
/ £1981 Jaqo}IQ Ul JUIWIsay BYAINL) pat 
| ay} oweseq £ 1ogi Avy Ut Asquejuy aAneN 

jesusg jo JUaWIsey YIgl 94} SE SuUl| 

ay} our 3qSnoiq {£6fgr Aseniqay U1 uol 

-B}}Bq [eso] uOowUINy 94752 Suowyedsg 

Arey 243 0} PAID. 94} Woy paitojsues 


uot] 
-8y3¥gq [¥OUACIY BORMNy 


‘apiy ywasold 
Buratesas | 


‘SNUVASY 


*"papnjIuoo—AALNVAN] 


Sgt 


obgt 
6¥g1 
6vg1 
6vgi 


6vgi 


pastes 


~~ Pewee Nee Ome we 


* Asayeg urequnoy (JeYOH}) 1 ‘on 


———————— aime 


*(uUM_C 


8,020NG) 241) sepins) jo sdso9 
° e 66 yy 


be ° es ee 
e oe 


Aspeaey qefung 3st 


: (uores;eq puz) 
*  — *  (uorpe;7eq 381) 
quaunisey (ayig) By xine) Gar 


(uo1jey3eg puz) 
* (gorre3;eq 3s1) 
quaunsoy (ay!y) eyxsnd pat 


‘pjouor—S9]j27 42947 U1 soSuvya puv suistoa fo sajup Susmoys ‘Aus y posuag yi fo $40 Jusjssxg 


469 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


° ° ° ° $d300 
a en opeus Tibe precsnn ul somnreg fo ‘uolTe}WAeg Vy’ esezepy ogsi |° : (uorez3eq puz) 
VIVZBEY JO ‘yueUNSIy ByyING yy oureseg | so ‘Asjueyzuy quleng qySe} gSgt " seebelicn Gas a feds wis 


*9Sg1 “Sny | °* . ur coe ag 


Ul JUSWYSIQEISe [eSueg 24} 0} pazaysuesy | ° * sdioy owes ypuig} fh: : Asjyuejyuy qefung yi9 


aot) oy, ‘Aaqueyzuy qei . *ksquey 
. $ : . ° . . ° -ung y}S pue yy ‘puz ‘ys1/} 6hgr -uy qefung yyS pue yyy “puz ‘js: 


*LSg1 *q24 ° = ° ul paonp ' 
-O37]UI edie inet pue ‘penuruos fe | , 
-Sip ’ 243 Jo asn ey} f1Sgi ur JjuUBjUy [B07] *AsjuB ju) 
pang Lape 


Oggi “Aon * ut 
e139 ne aia iota: 10qua99( ul "39104 1e[nZo1 
ats SON 0} peSueys ogi | qelung ‘Areqy1y jo Aue 


ul A19z}¥g UOSLLIE JO ¥ ‘ON DUIBOg | -WO> UosIeT 10 b ‘ON | «1SgI As0}7eg uosiuey qelung oy 7 


‘9fg1 20g |- * * UL 9791 JUaSIId poatadoy |* urery UIejUNOW BeZe | ght «  (eseze}H{) ON 
‘gigi aq |* ° uw | wor eusisop quosesd $}! poaisoay |‘ ureiy urejunoW semeyseg | 1Sg1 7 “ (s8muqseg) © “ON 
*6/g1 ‘dag |° : " oF 


LLL Ct ll te ts 
. . . 


eed , joo oy) pontsoas pur “g/g! 49q *Asayeg 
-w320q ul! A13;37eg UTeEUNOW z ‘ON 2meI9g | Play 3441] qelung fon!) Ogi Kaayeg urejunoy (jelesaq) z ‘ON 


~. 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


we ee ee ee 


470 


“purus 4} UI pazeIryo WEqqNS | 
jesoues) ‘JossaIIns siq jo [BALE 9u} jjun | 
yyeap Sty 493ye pure ‘aouasqe siy Surinp * gir | 
fady uw pap ay fay sty Jo sreak om; yseq | 
94} Suisnp Sespe jy] Ul JUISGE SBA 6J00°) ashy IG | * 

("yetouraosg) | ° 

*19q03 

0 [Nun puewWWwo ann ay} jo SaljNp ey} uO 

poised yoy } emp B SPA\ psvog gh de 
e puv ‘Z/Z1 ysnsny Ut pelp Zuysar]yD uyo ve 
r4 


(*yeroutaozg) | * #221 Asenue 
CLL1 sequiaseq] pucz | * 


(*ye19uLA403q)| ° 


€gli pady y3z | ° 
5221 yosey yiSz 


ug |* L221 ysnBny yzof 


ofZ1 your 
* gol a 


6£21 yoseyy yISe 


waaon puz |* 221 Arenue{ yg! 
+ uygi | £221 saquisvag pure 

olZ1 youep yire 
gg/1 Asenuef yigi 
Loli Asenue| y36z 


L£LL1 1290799 4391 | 


£Z1 saquisaony puz | 


*a*u £93007) 914g JIG [eI9UEL)-"jNaI"| 
HEqqHs Selig [BsUeD-saIpesuE 


‘an Busearyy uyof sg pesous)~"yne| 


uoidwiey’) Japuexayy [euojo> 

* uewdey~) sapey-) [euojo+ 
* JIYIVG }9qGOY JIG [es9Uer-JaIPEsug 
$ ° * uvuidey’) Sapseys) jeU0[O") 
°  — Gnwg pseqory [PUo}o) 


(-sousaaory puy) |* 2941 Asenuef 4367 Sol Judy * BAI] Plo] “uaqoy peseuss-soley 
* ~ Soli judy Cgf1 Asenuef + © ‘Qeuey uyof Jeseuer-saIpesig 
“ua 3a 
“Colt Asenur[ : boly Ayn 6g SN *H “osunpy 303994; Jolew 
"boli Ayof * boli Asenue ee ae ae seuse’y uyof soley 
*JUQUILS O97 
‘voli Lienuel fgl1 wits SW *H ‘swepy sewoy), soley 
*quouisey 
*19Z1 judy uihg S,"W HH £93009 a14q *[OD-"Ner] 
19/1 pudy ogZ1 saquisdeq] ysif | * : ‘ * Qeue) aol sin 


og sequiasag ysif | *ogZ1 Aseniqay y3Sz 
(*s0u39A005) puy) | * 0921 Asensgay 43Sz | 921 saquiacaq 


———  — 


‘Amay posuag 


OL wos, 


“ANVWWO’) AO GONAd 


ay} fo fary) 


‘III xtpueddy 


-U8-S4dpPuUvUuLmo? 


*pnejpie) uyof soley 
DAD Haqoy [PU0}OD 


*aWYN 


471 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


LIQ! Jequiaceq] 4301 


‘oni §-)|* 4ogi s2qopO Wpdr | ° 


( 
( *0731q * Logi ysn3ny 4yP 
(° AOJq) | * 

*Logr yore pst 


*|BW9U94)-30UJ2A0F puy | * Sogt 39q0}9Q WIS 
“aoqyo soadns 043 pomnses 94%] P07] 
40m130} 943 JO YFeIP 943 UD “axe] psoy Aq 
PI?4 Saisq [uo jo 7eyy ‘sijyemuso-) 
Psoy Aq poy sem eipuy ur puewuiod jsary> 
247 Sogi 1990399 BS 03 Sogi Atnf{ yRof aiorg|*  Sogr Ajnf yl 


(‘jeputaosg) |* — togt qosew wer 


*rogr Areniqa,y afr | ° 


(*petsuraosg) | * = 2621 yosey 439) 

*L6Z1 Axvenuef p3fz 
(*persusaosg) | * £621 saqQ0}90 Y4Ig2 
(‘pe1sutaoig) | * £621 39qQ079G9 4AS 


(*yersutaosg) | * = 861 YsNBny ys! 
*BIPU] WO1y SI]TEMUJO7) ps0] 30 
21njedep 243 se purwWo. poy 0} penuy 
-uo2 osfe oyas 6 


Logi ounf 4761 | ° 


* Logit 3990399 4241 |* 


Logi ysu3ny qir 


Logi yore pat 
* Sogi 319q0}99 WIS 


Sogi Atnf mot 


10gi yey yt! | * 


*1og1 Asensqoy 43Se 
2621 yore WO! 


* L6L1 Asenuef pstz 
* €6L1 19q07;9KQ YSZ 


* £621 19q0390 43S 


* €6Z1 ysnZny yyS1 
* 0641 saquis[0q 439 


I J9quiace(] WI01,]  *fesoUer)-J0UI2A0F puy |* £61 39q0;90 YIge | Ogl1 saquIe;des YIEI 


9gZ1 sequie}dac yjz1 | * 
(oyersasaoig) | ° © Sai Ajnf ysiz |* 


SgZ1 Aynf{ ystz | ° 
gli judy yalzl° 


* JoMez] B9300r) [B19U9‘)-"ynOI"] 
Ja3a7J “IG Wey AA [eJ9U2E4-Jole| 


Logi oun{ 4361 | ‘749g ‘oujreg wom JIG [eI9U9")-J0l ey 


* [[9Msepmog wer MA [es2U25-s0leW 


9387] pso7] “pawsory [esouary 
‘o's 


‘siyea. uo ssonbiey ‘sojseysD yeseuer) 


"* + (a4e] ps0] spsem 


>| 
*Brexd) Asusypy sourel sg pes9uer)-sol ey 
oT eee ae ae es ae 
ey] P2MNy JIG [eseusr)-JueUajNI] 


uUBsIOW S2]JeY7) [es9U96)-JOleW 
‘au 


‘AquiosJ9q y }49q0y] JIG [B290U96)-Jol ep 
° ° . . 7 ‘a°s 
‘Aquios319q y WaIqoY JIG TesaUI)-s0l By 


: * Aynwydy sngzy jeuojo7y 
*#408 


‘aAzUayIe «JapuRKXeTy sIG jouOjOD 


. 
€ 
ba 


o * ~ © & ‘oO’; 
[FEM WO) PEA ‘SEY [esouer-"ynar"7] 
sedojs Woqoy feseUdE-yUEUS}NAIT 
HWEqqNS SI! [eseueD-soipesug 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


472 


(*SuryeinyO) | * ZSgi ysn3ny yzf1 | * 


(*yetoutaolg) | * £Sg1 ounf 4321 


£Sgi aunf y3Z1 


% £Sg1 aunf y3S 


*£Sg1 Avy yyZz)}° oSgs Arenuel piftz 


*9Sgi Asenuef piftz 


oOSgi sequiessq 439 
*6bg1 Avy; 432 


"Ehgi ysnsny gig 
6fgr s9quieseg y3Z 
(*yetoutaosg) | Sfgi saquiajdes 43S 


. OUIOA uy)|*  S€gi yosey yjoz 
(‘yes9U9:)-s0NI9A0D Puy) | * ct ion sp 


*z€gi Arenuef yj01 


‘ofgi Asenuef 3s1 
*"Szgit 19490390 432 


(*‘ye1suer)-10WI2A0F) puy) | * fzgi Asenuef q3f1 
ee 7 Are} 94) Ld ites. 
OpeuU SEM JUITNY] 991084) JIG puE jor \- 
a B20q 10°] L1gt 49qoP~O_ u £1gi 1990}909 Wr 
ose Boia  Praseaa) * zigt Asenuef yjh1 


| 


oL 
"SUUVN AY 


oSgi Jaquiacxeg 439 


; 6rgi AB y3Z 
fhgi ysnsny yg 


6fgi sequiasaq y3Z 
S€gi soquiajzdag 43S 
* $€gi yore yjo1 


ELgt 19q039H YS! 
zfgi Asenue{ yjo1 


* ofg1 Azenuef js1 


Szgi 19q0}90 432 
fzgr Asenuef yzfr 


CIgl 19q0}9Q0 YyyP 


* erg Asenuef yzhi 
IIgt saquiszeg yor 


wolJ 


“GNVANO)D 40 GOlNad 


. . ° ° . “a'O°s 

eee pet SEMOUL [e2UID soley 

UosUYy 20109) 9/9,U0H 24} [esouer 
“a'O"m 

‘wmor preukew UeLITI AA 41S pes2Uer 
*“a"oro 

“seideny seule, sapieqy JIS [esouer) 
it ie (Y8nor) ps0] Spsemsayye) 

‘aO"D “pang “ySn0D YSnqy 4G [eseuay 
e . . . . . as: are > | 

*sJOIIN Jodsef sig pesuer)-jueuazna] 

: ~ . "a°0"9 ‘ouey Asuepy 

NS 94, WORT 94} [BsoUI")-jueUIzNII7 

* *a'o “uosjeqy soul pelouar)-solejy 
“a’o"D 

‘younued °D *H Welt ps0] [es9uary 

* "a'9"'D “SoWeg psempy 41g fesauer 
*a'o"o 

‘aisnoyeg jo jieq ‘a3i0anr [esaue5 
“a'O"D 

*g1@UJeqWIOD p07] ‘uojza]de}G [e4sauary 
es 3 "d°O'9 ‘jase prem 

“PA AIS 919, UOH 94} eJ9U9--WueUa;Na@r7 
* + (s3unseyy jo ssanbieyw spiem’ 

19}j2) BOW jo prey ‘stoues, [Pi2uer 
‘}40g 

‘quasnyy e31085) 11g [e19U95)-"ynaI7] 

* gusedwey seqiog [R1@U95)-"3naI7y 


Se 


"—aNVN 


eee 
—_—_ ee ne 
*‘papnjsu0cI—husp poduag 2y7 fo faryp-ur-saspuvumo7 


473 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


"f6g1 judy 43g 


“S6gt judy y32 | Sggt soquisaon, yagz 
*Sggi JoquIeAo yn] 4I8z | ° Iggt judy q3Z 


“1g! dy WZ [° = odgt judy yjor | * 


tyudy y36 |* oZgr judy 436 
‘oLgi pudy 4376 |° Sogt yosep pafc |° 


*Sogt yosey putz |* ogg ounf qj 
noogs Sent yyy j° “Sgr ysn3ny y3f1 


. . . . “oa f *d we > | 
‘YM EMI 033095) NG [esouor) 
*_ SHIqoy ps07y mou “9°A **1°S°2'D 
us he _ 9° Eau ‘sHeqod "SAAS horsnta 
*a'o"o 
“g40gq “3BMS*W “C JIG jesauen 
"a°O"H | “Soule ‘dd 1S [eseua5y 
* *1°s"o°a “u°o"o 
‘orepSeyy jo sqydeyy psoy] [esauern 
a‘o°s 
‘ploysuew “Y Wer 3S rerouen 
"a'o"o fas0y "Ey YANBy 4G pesouer 
: (ap | pior] Spsemsoqye) 


"YRAIEY Joong =| « my6e “nf 


°9s1 
foe poe wus ye Sungsy wnf—ure cual 
—poSusg (0 JOU A YFG 404 "Eg: 
"GENS Jo oI | ° ° aS: -aef 
°1921 
eindsig 30 91948g . qwr cunt 


*RUIE 10 Jooy Yige caddy 
"INdNG JO 31N%g ° puce -q24 
cand mise Jo 911)8q — *q24 


cs —MDIV YOUS YI!S 40M I 
. *(q230q 
& | 243 YM) BeoVg jo 917"g | ° qSe “aon 
euej}ed ine 1120} ~ °ad 
= | ase jo S os hy Vv 
> | ‘wopucn jong = |° ° mg ‘eq 
o —"s409 
a | 48D MAdYILONY BY) 07 UOLIIPIGxT “eSét 
tz] “asset jo lt at: : pate a 
om "dua jo ainqde : 72g1 °an 
= ‘aisseuepues; jo Suryey y pate sew 
*B7]NIe> 3ve0 9IegG : yf ‘qe,7 
—YDoINv(T-pn-[0445 Yim 40M *LSLt 
*SNUVN EY | °WSIx@ [1198 Yor poseBuo 9d30-) *HOLABES "978Q 
"husp aaijvry jusuag ay} £0 sartasas ay} fo 4st7 1 vI%doj0u0LyD 
<_ od 
™ e 
v AI xipueddy 


475 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


NE —— 


*psenr)-Apog oy] 


*psens)-Apog oy) | * 


"YesOy JO Oe 
quod] ay} us su01;042g0 

B32 anduwst W 39 918g 
0M P11tYOY 


, a0 44 isvatuvs 
+soqunTeq 30 ainjdesy 
*sBY2q-YyI00) jo Furws104¢ 


—40 i vinY | 

“SOENMP Tpoaat yy pat et ! 

‘eyBweseg ey} ul suojesadg 
—ADM as0shy 4S4ty 


“(sey esqem 
ay} yurese) idjey jo o33eg 


| 

| : 

“peqeyeity jo aunydey | * 

*ysesieuny,) jo ainydez | , 
| 


*yieZseuny) JO e321 
*sexng jo ce 
"Buje jo akg 


—Ypng puv josusag fo 
SQUM@DAY ayy ysusvS0 uTZivgusoy 
*euzeg JO UWLIO}ZS | ° 
"sAySuoyy jo a1njzdes | * 
"eeu 
-YeMpf} JO saul] oy} Jo Buiws0js | * 
“YeLaYD JO aHeg | 


4701 ‘unf 
*gllt 
patz *idy 
“vLLt 
*EL-zLL1 


SIZ *30q 
"Cl-cLL1 


*69-/9Z1 


puzz Aew 
Wirt “qo, 


"volt 


* 439 “AON 
* puc “390 


yy *3dag 
* puz ‘doy 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


476 


SuUVN ZY 


‘panurywoI—hua py aasyoyy poduag ay} fo santasas ays fo 3817 1091Fojouosy) 


*WOJ Bg WWiog 1 uoIpY 
—Yyopen 0 03 uossspedxy 


"qedrelig jo osnydey 

“S58g 
WAIYNG Of) pus Woy] IW uUdipy 
*ENIE_ jo anyde> 

*BIQ8, d “¢ “se 
*seseauey 38 uolpy 
*SQIBUIG BE YVIIQING 

—Sasvueg 
fe vilvoy sy] zsusydo udstvgunsy 


° ANpepusyess, €¢ 
"q383u11/04S i 
“JOTI JO aPIeg 
—4B 94054 yy PUOIIS 


*wIpuy 
yenuey ‘mdyeqey yw voy 
“IBYD J0Ng 0g) UMOp yeaIzZIy 
“384d 4oug &4) Jo Zuri0g 


*Urasseg jo sinqde) 
“s0rems) Jo eingde-y 
“JBYe] jo anjdey 
*"qaesuemoy 18 Sud y 
“p¥qepeaiyy jo Sura1074¢ 
*1oyqeq jo sinjde-) 


“SIpul 0493S9,4 9) YEW 
—“4Uf Uijvsyusy 18489 


*FAXS NS gorye paseZua sdsoy *EDIAUES 


yw judy 


*1641 


qyve EW 
Iudy 


477 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


*(6zg1 
jO £¥ °C *5) °4H( SUNO]OD UO , LeMSET,, | * 


*(6zgt jo fF “QO °D “D) 
SjUouljuIodde uo ,, 14J2q ,, Pom 243 
siveq {(fog1 192q0}9G 38! “5° ‘'O'D) 
JOJOD.—s py} ouoy UO Ppe2AlII0Q] | * 
“Siaq jo 3nydeo pue Jag 
JO 3138q “YPC JO soUajep “LEM 
“Sey “typed “ysesyy ye suoyoIe 243 
JO SJOAIAINS 9y} 0} ‘1Sgi Judy yyhr 
P3ep “OD “D Aq pajuess pepe; 


*pajuels pepo 
*(zzgi pudy yjt1 pazep *5) “5 °C *D) 
S1NO[OD UO BU10q aq 03 ,,wRyEdesULIIG,, 
“SHULL [Je 0} poyuEls srepey 


‘as0shyw ut paaies pey oyai syues 
[[@ 03 sjepow { suoiyezzeq 4199j}uUNj0A 
24} 0} pojueis sprepues Aivsouoyz) 


*Asjuejuy jesuog yyy pure 3s! 


Asjuejuy [esuegq yyb pue puz ‘js: | - . 
*Asjuejuy [esuog yy pue ‘puz ‘381 | ° . 


Aajueyuy (34 31]) jedueg puc | - 


*Asjuejuy yeduag put | - 


*Asqueyuy (34317) [eSuag puz | - 


JOST) JO Zuryey 


* URMSET Jo 91772 
Bady o10Jaq uolzDy 


* | 141°C J° 9f3zeg 
*"ysesiTy jo Su1w103¢ 


. _ aD DYDsyn py | 


yeyjey uo yey 
*eineyoey 

pue yiedrelig “uses jo Sue 

qP°d #y# ME suorsv4adQ 


* 7¢h3q 0; uortpadxy 


* weyedeZuuiag jo Surw1035 
ae: HIPAPeW JO ap7eq 
—40Y a40shp yj4noy 


"BINEZG JO 977"g 
—40 DIjtyON puoras 
"“MDSSY U1 su01;049gQ 


“weyedeSuisag jo Suryey 


*SYO} [[14 JO Burws03¢ 
F “Bay jo eeg 
; *@10] 


—éDY asoshp partys 


"fog: 
"10g! 
av Kew 
4322 youe 
O6L1 . " 
Y39z °}9, 
*v6L1 
“£641 
* u3Z @ y9 “Goa 
sO wale 9° 
: *"20q—"das 
. yy Ae; 
* SIZ—u}9 Jv 
or) la 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


‘ ‘11g! 
4249}9Q WISZ PRIVP “DN “DN ‘OQ “HD Aq | 
SYULI [[e 0} pues syepeyw = “pueny | — 

Apog ey} 0) (6zg1 jo f ‘GO *y*yD) *Asqueyuy (eBuegq | 

sjuowjuiodde put sanojoo uo ,eae{,,| yyy jo yuowyoejep {pieny-Apog ’ ° ° eaef oj conipodrg 
‘ual 94} UO [epeuw! J9AIIS B puL = 

‘sJaJO pouoIssimmod uo Aurduio’) 


PIpUy ySeqy 24} Aq pomojsaq [epoui pjory | pee °  snguney yurese uonipedxy 


*Asqawyuy (3437) 
[e3u0g q79 pue Asjeaey peSuog yr |* (BaepEp]) tcemeng jo Suryey 


“Asyuezuy eduog yyS pus qyy |° = puDyyjepung us Su0tzD42d0 


*Arquey 
2G] (34317) [eZueg puz jo wowYrEeq/° = ° ovovy OF uorsipadxy 


-Asqueja] pesuog pst | -ung a1 szJ0; jsurede Lala lia 98 
ae) pesuog yr | qefang a4) 0) 1emOF] JO BINSING 
“Aaquezuy pes 
-uag pue pus ys1 £ Aspeaes [es0og 381 / ° * asodynyg jo 431g 


*B1aq_j0 ounqde) 

*(6zg1 ey pesucg ys1 | ° ¢ pequyqyeey jo ae 

jo £¥ °Q°D'D) sunojoo ao ,,Fiaq,, {°° = Asyuejuy (99317]) 1e4ug paz | ° : "  Baq Jo a"g 

*tqf9q JO 9909}2q 

eAszuejuy resueg 43S pus 381 | ° . 3Ba1j2y S,UOsUO Ry 

*Asquejuy pedusg 43S | ° °  gsndwey jo Juiyey 
‘unuey put 

[NVusEN—‘suotjeiedo soul! 


‘SwavNay *9S1X9 []19S Goiqa pasedsue sdso7) *HIIAUES 


‘pyuos— 40M DHDAYO 


“O1gt 


~panurjaoo—Miusp sayy poduag ay? fo santasag ays fo 3517 pvrssojouosy 7 


479 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


*AsquBjul [esueg puz | * 


"(egg yo 26S 


ON ‘O'D"D) Sunojo2 uo ,, ndZeN ,, | * *  Asqueyuy (74417]) pedusg 439 | ° 


*S120UR] [esueg puZ 
‘Aspeaey yesueg 4ysi { psens-Apog 
‘ind3eyy jo 
unjde> pueIpjeqeyis jo 27eq 2 
JO SIOAIAINS |e 0} jepeul e pe} 
*1Sg1 ‘yyhi judy peep v8) "ry ‘'y eeeees 


*(3uim) ry WYysry] pesueg 43S | ° 


ayurjuy jesueg 4g 


pue ‘puz ‘jst { suaui pue ssoddes | ° 


*Anquejuy pesueg puz ‘dutA4 | ° 
*si22ue"] [eSueg pus ‘jUYWYIe}Iq | * 


‘Axques 


-uy yesueqg yh ‘Auedwoy  y4r7] | ° 


*Asyueyuy (94317) 
@AQeN [esusg puz 943 jo quouiqoe}eq 
“S190U 8] 


jefueg 9 puz ayy jo jwewYIe}0q | * 


*0}3'P o71'q 


‘Aaquejuy pesueg yyy ‘Auedwo- 34317 | * 


*pepuowwoses Ajje1eds 
QJ9M SB SYUVI POUOISs!WIWOI-UOU 34} 
jo yons uo pue ‘aanjenN pue Yysijug 
*s120qjO [[@ UO pamojseq [EPeus JaAjis y 


* ysedssy jo ainjdey 
qiqes edy ysurede sunjyesadO 
‘pemef jo Bure y 

“SUepuld 
ysuiese suonjessdo pamausy 
* andZey jo 31}7%q 
“IPIEGEUS JO SH" 


* SUBpUIY ysUIEsE SuoIyes9dQ 


SOM Dfs04Y° 
* andsreyquezy 38 uoly 
* sndueayey jo 9% 
‘Bsomy jo vinjde>y 
‘uneey jo Sure y 
*suojwedo uoewny 
. BSN Je s97SesIC] 


yeyyel uo yey 


7 9 9 40M 124eN 


"61gt 
"gigi 


Jaqui290q 
Wig! “99q 
Lt-gz “AON 
*20C1 R ‘AON 
*Ligt 
*61—Ligt 
* 4SI ‘sey 
* YIge “qe 
“gtgt 
yySe *aidy 


4wi— whi sady 
° ‘idy 0} *q24 


, y3Sz "aon 


‘9i1—Pigt 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


480 


_— eee 


“303 
"Asjueyuy [eSaeq Try pus puzy |-u01,) 01938eq 943 UO S20URQqINITIG 1fg1—6zg1 


*vZgr 
Jo ogS *G °D°d Aq “syusmZoy eqyxJNFy 
SOyty BYRNE ys1 OF | Puc pues ysr jo szusawmysejaG 
emSgr pudy *6Sg1 saquiaao | 


ws =paep | qSz°9°9'O'D Aq ; 
PF 2 ( PBR RPRED puzol) acer abesgrne peut | * qagi ‘uel ‘org 
“ans 0} *zSgi yo gS | “pat ‘pue ‘ys1 e0un isnls sioddeg ||" sodjingg jo yNnesse pue aB2I¢ 
pe7a TPP] “O'D'D Aq suourp 
e 1 10 Sg ° e ° 
ka i 2a 
pues Aseaws 03 sino; 
09 uo ,,os0dynug ,, | ° : ° —s-s Aapeaws pesusg 481 


* psuns)-fpog jo qeamqeed *nfqeuuog uo y9ENYy : yy. ‘JE 
*Anjaejuy peBaag q3VF | ° sndwwey oj uopadxg = f°“ BY “GO, 
*Aaqueyay (34Hr77) pesu9g 4S pue “Anjowyol [es0sg ji y 
SL ei | 


werd 
pure °C°D’D) snojod uo ,, ueYyBIY,, | ;esueg qyS ‘sI2DUe] yedsueg puz | jo Jurys, pue oj nonipedag ; tev—osl 


"GESSY Ul SUCI}TIIdGD . 29q1399q] 
*(9zgt noosury 
Iudy puze °C°5)’5) sNoOjoD uO , way, | ° * prens)-Apog jo Juau1q3¥70q | punose pue ye su0NeIDdCG * 0c] 07 “ABW 
*NWEY JB J2}SesIGj : qqZs Ae 
*sByIe) 


* Jaquiadeg ‘Szgr - 


“Aayuvzuy yesueg puc?| = poe yoqAG uisuoyendg § |* gay g-uef 
"(9281 Jo ¥g '0'9'9) potoid ‘tegi 
swe sdooz, 24) 0} peju SIEP2Ww weeses ° ° —404 VSN 18417 *9r—rzgl 
“SNUVA SY *4SIx9 [119s YOty Posesua sd107) *SD1A8TS "238g 


‘ponuiju0I—Ams py saijyny jusuag ay fo sannsas ay} fo 4517 Jv2dojouosy7 


481 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


OO 
eg dy qpoE 


*(ssoul © 
emer. = 
DONPIGHON “5 *4)) uaosd yesnu & jo | pue siaddesg ey} yyIm pezesodioo O 
*SPeq Pur epaw jeuomppe jepads | -u1 spremsajye) suoddes sjoospeorg|- + peqereref jo sousyeq | - wdy—uel © eo 
*  *  nqey wo yeojayq sd * a enury J 
. 1 ro 
"[oqey 32 BanyS14 "29qQ—"AON 3 
"pequyeiel 8 
jO 9IUSJep puB jo uoijedNI90 . 29q—" AON D 
“sosstg yejepsef pue Q 
Inqey Panyy 94} UI suolpy “ 50q 
*siuBing “ . Ayn 
‘Ssoul pur sioddesg | ‘srezjiyy =“ ra aS Iudy 
*Aajuejuy [esuog yyzi | werzeN 943 UL sancanto . Aseniqa 4 
"t¥gt jo vS °G *y aD —(svyg pue) avy unydt/y js417 *1¥gt 
—SyUBI [je 03 jepow fsuoreisdo *OOj-SUBIY-UIY) JO BuIwI0}S F ysiz Apne 
feuy ay} soy syjuow xis fusred "evgl 
“WED BJOYM JO} BI}ZVq SYJUOU OAFoMy | wt : . uojUR. jo ainjde>y ’ ‘ Ae 
*1hg1 
° ° ‘ —404y vuryy) js4tg|* chgi—-orgi 
skeesny jwOeeg MM VuIYD iS4ty 
yi9 pue yyS ‘AajeaeD [edueg jst |* uBysIyonjeg ut $s : ovIg 
“URSIYOY ul suojesedG * "PO ®R ‘idasg 
* “OBIWIEg JO UOnIY ° yIgt "das 
*SIBZIIYD) ysulese suoijeisdG, : Aew 
Bagel ‘org 
jesueq yjz1 ‘sisulW pure siaddes yhyseg uo yey : yigt *uel 
*obgi “yjS1 Aueniqey *Asqueyuy ‘orgt 
30° "DO °D Aq Sunojoo uo ,, 3eY,, | [eSuaq puz ‘Ayeaeg [eSusg pul |* " yBey joemjdey = WIFI “AON 
*(6fg1 sequisaoy 4361 *SIOUIW 
‘"D°D'O'D) sanojoo uo ,,1uzeyy,, | pue sueddeg ‘Asjeae> peSuag pil] ° * fUZeYS JO W110} cag Ain 
*(6%g1 *6fg1 
JaquUaAON] pUZZ *3°D'O'D) Beq *Aajuejuy (343171) pedueg 


Syjuom xis {(6£g1 sequeaoy 4361 | 439 pue yIS ‘puc ‘susur pue 
*D'D'O'D) Ssnojod uo ,, uRysiueYdyy ,, | siaddes ‘Aspeaes pesueg pat pue 4st | —(ssyy 357) 404 uvydf{y jsaty ‘ob—gfgi e 
*Asjuvjuy yesueg pif | * : uontpodx IFBMeYyRAIYS | * * o€gi 
*Auuejuy resusd a eae Lo *272 ‘sjOy 943 Saree snorgusade : Lfgi—etgr 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


Queene & 0 1 ee oe - ee ae re TS 


482 


ee ee ee + ow -~ 


*syues [Te 0} 
ponssi 383s ozu0sg °(Prgi Arvouel 437 
70 °9°D) on uo ,aodl[eieyey , 

-(fhgr yo Sor -G “5 “D) 
Syues [fe 0} jepew ‘siNoj|OD uO 
<PequspAy , poe soursay , .“Ypuis, 


*(2¥gt 3090390 WP “O °F) *D) syne 
[fe 03 jepew :usredwed puoses 10} 
BYNeq SyWWoU xis jo UotzeuOp J94}INY 

“(zbgi JaQUeAON 4IS PUB 19qG0}9O 

4 °C °)°5)) S4NOjOd BO ,zHgEI ‘jngey , 


(‘ebg1 1990320 YI" 
‘0 °D °D) Sinopoo uo , ztgi “uzeYD), 


*(chgi saquiaceq 43£1 put 30q0}90 YF 
°C") Sanojoo uo ,zhgi ‘rByepuey, 
*(16g1 jo #Z1 “ON “C'DN'D) A23URsUY 
jesueg Y}ZI 94} 07 UMOID [BINUI B jo 
aSpeg *(zrgr ‘yz 199090 °C "D *D) 
jepem jyeuoijippe jeVeds *(c¥gi 
42990}90) UF "E*)*D) AsjURsUY [BSuIg 
YIZI JO SNQ}OO UO , FeZ[IY-1-7eTey, 


7 ——~ 


“SAVANNA 


*kQuvjuy jesuesg yywr 
pue 439 ‘puz {sioul pue susddeg | 
£ Aipeaes [eSu0g pst { psens)-Apog °° 


£ 


° asndlereqey jo 9173eq 


1weLA JO oRTeA 


—ypuis us usiwduny 


| 
; " pequephy jo 
| 


: > Asquvjuy yesusg yy puw yy | : ° 
*Asquvjuy yesueg | 

439 pue 43S ‘yy fsioutyy pue sioddes | ° °  nqey jo uonrdnd39 

*£ajyueBj "12305 

-U] [eSueg yyy { ssoul pue siaddes | yep pues aizay ye sUuni}pYy 

"si0UIPY pue saaddes | ° . yxBVpse{ jo uoioy 

*Asjuvjyuy pesuog ; 

yj9 pue yy ‘Asjeaesd jesu 3s! 


yi9 pue 43S ‘Asjeaes jesuay 3s! > QUuIeOr) Jo anjeg 


-u] [esuag yjb { soul pus ssoddeg | *sseq Jeqieyy 243 jo 3u10I10,7 


fiyeys] jo sangdesy 


e e 


tuzeyr) jo einydeooy 


*Aijueyuy jesueg 
y79 pue 43S £ Aspeaea 


*Aaquejuy [esueg 4321 
pue Asjuejuy jesusg 439 yuewYysEIEq | lez[IYO-!-j}e[ey JO GUC] 
‘1UZBYS) JO JopueNs 


*pyu0o— 


*7S1X9 ]]S YY pasesua sd10ody *HOIANBS 


eS 


a — 


—uSsvdsuev) 201jvay ay 


(esvyq puc) soy unyd fy 3414] 


: ye *99q 
"erst 

yyre “sey 

; 421 °qey 
"thsi 


‘ 4362 das 
« *ydeg 


yqyi—yjz1 “ 
; ws “ 


- y3S *3das 


yj0f ‘sny 
. yjee "any 


; yas judy 
: Aew— se 


: 439 “12 


‘panuljUoI— Ams py aarMAy [VSUI_ ay} JO SaIML4dg IY} fo 4st] jvsidojouosy _ 


483 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


a 


*ArjURjUT YAIS | 
puz pue 4st fsapins) yo sdio>) 04} 
JO WaUYIBjap fsigdueT jesuagq puz 
*“Asquejuy jesuag | 
/4itl pue puz fsisurw puesiaddec - 
“Aijuejuy jesueg 
| Wytl pue puz { sieurw pue siaddes : * * -ByeMueipys jo anzeg 
| 


qrog snpunynf 
. yesalnry jo ce 


*yesa[n 


: pueepemuemyy | | laa a? 
GBOOW Joy sdse> ym ‘tepeu | JO Sdso7) 943 jo yuawy>ejap { sJ9UIW 
ose £ (€$g1 49qQ0399) WZ “CO *t)"5) | pue suaddeg { Aijear> jesuag y3S UBOOW Jo ainjde>) pur a3eig 


S3n0[09 wo ,,JBIa[N«) ,, PUE ,,YEIEM 


‘sapins) Jo sdioz ayy | 
“Uerty) ,, eg UEPOOW 99 46 rUnd,, 


| JO JUSWIYIEIp fsusuipy pue siaddec | ° 


indgnpes jo uonsy 

‘seseuwmey je seyy 

*sapinry yo sdsoy 

243 JO WomYreyep { AsjURjU] YHIC 

puz pue ysr {Aspeaesy ypeBuag pur | ° 
“SOpinry jo sdsoy ay} | 

JO JUSWIGQIVjep fsisuI pue siod eS \° 
| 


* qeog inpunyof 
UE}OOW JO 231g 


— *squauZay eyyINy puz pus yst | 
‘ Aajueyuy yesuag 36 pue yg “y3Z | 
Yao “aS “yIh f Aspeaey jeBuag yI9 | 
‘Si90UeT [esuag puc ‘ pienr-Apog | * 

*sjusuZ9y eYyyIND puz pue | 
¥st f Aaqueyuy pesueg yjt1 pue yl | 
ee one” a 4f f paenr-Apog * : . 
cay fe ETE [eSa0g GZ pur WIS 
_ “Gay f sou pue sioddes § Aajeary) 


uovigos jo 
“(oF 81 ysn3ny WWZ1 "OE “FD “*D) 
SINOJOD UO ,, UOBIGOS ,, pue «Tem 


“HV 99 «c“1UBYSz0I97 ,, ,,“2a4poow ,, TeMITY JO aHeg 


|[esueq yi9g pue pil f paens)-Xpog . * sqyeyszoiyjo 
*Aajqueyuy pesuag y3Z ~ yy £ As 
“BD [eeueg 439 pue pat £ piensy-Apog | * 4 * PIPAW jo apjeg 
*(ovgr ysn3ny yyz1 
‘OD *2) woesqog pur yemny ‘yeys 
“20391 “PIPNW 403 sdsejo yyim 1.2 «3 cals —40M YIIS IS4ty OYT 
: 4 
T® 03 IBIS ezu01g *(tHg1 kreowef *SIOUIPW | — 
ww ‘Oo “8%  * seIueg JO onze 


"D "D) sinojoo uo ,seueq, | pue siaddeg { Axeaey peSuag ‘499 


—49M YUIS puors 


~ A. SS 


rs) 

‘wef 5 
WIZ "Gay 
rt ai 


401 “Gog 


Yige ‘uel 
‘orgi 


* pucz-jsic ** 


* 4981 °99q 
* Ser 


*ob-S¥gi 
* 


q¥6e *90q 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


484 


OP on!ig 


*(69g1 Jo Z1g °O'D'D) [epaw eipuy 


6ggI 30 TIE 
0°) “5 Aq payuesd jepow eipuy 
‘peyueis ,jepaw eipuy, 24} *e}eq 
syjuow xis $(SSgt ABW Y3St ‘OD “D) 
AsjuRjuy YAIS YIP 07 SNojOD UO , NS2q, 
"ESQ “eq pucz po}ep 
0 '°D ‘5 Aq paquess , “Tepe PIPU, 
Q4} pel[ed spseMmieze “[epow , nseg, 


0}3)p 07710 
"0771p ond 
"6981 JO ZI§ 


"O°D ‘5 Aq pajuesd yepew eipol 


‘SuUVN AY 


*sepinry jo sd30*) 
fquounZoy eyyINT) 4S1 f Siu pue 
sseddeg ‘fAsjeaeyy jesuag yzS jo 
quswysejop {As9j}3eg Ure}UNOW f ‘oN 
‘Aijuejuy yHIS ISI f sepinry) yo sdsoy 

S$ Asjurjuy jesusg yjzr £ sudUIw 
puv sioddes { Aia}jeg urejunop + ‘ON 
“Asyuvjuy qe{ung yj9 pue 
yyh ‘puz ‘*ys1 fAsjeaesy qefung puz 
‘sopins) jo sdi0*+ 
f juewLSe Byyinyy Si fsisuryw 
pue siaddes ‘fsisouey] jesueg puz 


. 
e e e ) 


Aryawyzay qAIS WI 


*Asqueyo, qe{ung ys1 £ yuaungoy 
ByAINe 3S1 {siaui pue sisddec 


‘sapinrzy §=jo2— sdiory sf Aspeaey 
qelung yr ‘sueouRy pedusg puz 

*JOIUF9yy SYN) 
yr fsepinr, jo sdioy ‘sua 


pue sioddes {szyadue] jesu0g puz 


eASUEU] 
qefung 3s! pug A1jueju] jesueg puz 
£ sepinr) jo sd3oz) £ Aspeas) qelung ys1 


°9SIX9 11S qoIyM psseZua sdJoy 


— 
tyeMof 94] ysuIEse Goripodxg | 
: vonIipedxy Urequnow yIe1g 
"8  &  woRrpedxg Wize Ay 


"S19 
UVWI7) 343 JsuUIEde soar 3 


* wooy IVA ywulEse suogeedeC 


voosuey jo Zuiqey 
—40/4 UMLANG punrs 


+ SoqMy ItMS jourede suoneisdO 


SpuBMIqoW Oy} ysurese UoNIpodxg 
"YPNK ur “HIG JO 3103 UO ASE 


SSB IPYOS] 


*aD1A88S 


W3Aa0 
sey ON 


43q WIa50G 


* —— & _ -48q033Q 
*1Sg1 


° —- 6s yuew 


. Asensqo 3 
*oSgi 


278q 


=_~—- — 


‘PONUUOI——Ausp aay puduag ay, fo sar1asagy ayy fo 3817 yvrisojouosyD 


485 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


ts LLL LLL LLL LLL 


ee eee ee 


*OSg1 jo 


£¢Z pue 
gSgt jo *(FogI Job "GQ “5 *5) 
fof "Oy sinojod uO Se MOUNT, 
“D— Mou 7 *(2Sg1 jo HHS “CG “5 ‘D) 
“PNT JO} b3eq = peiseds = syjuow 
sUajaq , | xIs f(Pogt job *G "FD “D) 
Joy dsep> }sunojoo uo, MOUxNIN’ , 
[eiveds 


*(bZgi jo 1zz ‘GO 
"D9 °D) Sanojoo uo , yessy jo aouajaq, 


“ORIp 071g 
"0}}Ip 0731 
‘oWIp ' 0731g 


"(6987 $9 Z1g ‘ON ‘C"H)*4) jepew eIpuy 


— 


Asqueyuy [eZueg yyb1 


Asjuryuy pesueg 4391 


*Aaquvyuy qefung 3s1 £ sepinsy jo sdio> 


* Asjuejuy peSueg yzSb yuowyoejzag 


*AsUBUY peBueg yyhI 

*Aajueyuy qeiung 

yy pue puz ‘3s1 feces J YAIS 
yy fsapinsy jo sdioy £ Aspeaey 
qefung y3S pue puz 4s1 £ syuow 
“1S0y eyyYINT, pal pue puz f{4 
-UBju] [esusg put f sieul~ puesiod 
“deg ‘sis0uv] peduog yjo1 pue 436 


*Asjuejuy 
qvlung qy’ pue puz 4ys1 £ Axqueyu 
YA'IS pst pue ysi { ss9ulp pure si 
-deg { Aspeaey qefung pif pue puz 


‘ soueyeg ulelunoy z pue I “sON |° 


*Asjuvyuy qefung y39 pue 
3st fjuoUNSey eyysns ysI fsidUlW 
puesuaddes ‘ Asazjzeg urequnoy z ‘on 


* A19z7eg urequnop £ ‘on 
*Axueyjuy 

qefung 439 pue pal 981 943 ‘Aspeaesy 

qelung 43S 943 {A39}3eq urejunow Y 


MOUNT] 50 JPY J ’ 


3844) MOURN] iy aon = 
Mmouy 
: * yuesyelen jo o}eg é, 


*yelly Je WsNoy yO auajeq 
Vasey Py eed pes ues 
-yeuyseg ‘ovuy ‘aiodumey 
‘IipeN npueg ‘Zunoy ‘ind 
-Yaze,J JO suotoe fmouyx In] 
JO jJolpes 94} 0} peqeyreiiy 
wos, B2UBApE Ss, 4I0/aAR TY 


* tyJ9q jo ainjzded pue aZaIg 
—susdivguvy Auryny uvipus 


‘ + uorrpedxy sepzog | * 


* uoljipedxy rezuesyy | * 
PUM EY 243 surede uoizpedxg | - 


‘sluvisey pue | - 
| 


49qui23deg 


*dag—ounf 
qiee ‘apy 
‘Bny—Ajnf 


*dag—ounf 
*£Sg1 
*gS-2Sg1 


yoitw 
“S91 


. Judy 
your 
“SSI 


[ludy 
*€Sgi 


Digitized by Google 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


486 


ee ee ees 


. 6S¢1 : 


Jo £E2 °G °4) ‘5) dsejo yepads £ (vog1 


jo ¥ °O °D) *5)) 2200]09 Uo ,, MOUAINT ,, 
*(6Sgt jo €€2 °G °*) °5)) deep yetsods 


{(vogt Jo °O “°F 'D)knuejay peduag 


pug 02 s3nojod uo spa yesqusy, 


‘ ysr £ ArQuRsuy [esusg qVot puw q7Sz 

“q96r ‘ugh: fAsqeaez qefung 4S 

“pues puz ‘ys: Ssioouey] jesueg 43S: | ° ustedwue.) pueyypyoy 

| Aagueyal qe 

and qq pue puz f Anueyuy jedusg 

puct pus yor { sJour puvsioddes 

'€ Aspeaey) qu{ung ws pue puz “ys: 

$ s320ue7] jeSueg y3Ir poe 4701 “16 *  * ~~ mouyon] jo einjdes 
“Anuejo] yesueg qyvi | °° ysequIETy jo souejeq 


©  ¢  Axyowyuy pe8aog qiS pue puz | * Bpay pezqua_ a1 « 


“(vlgt jo ize *O°D Auo s23u8y 
“Uj | y 3S? 03 ssnojO2 UO , seYyeg, |°Asju RU] [esueg 4ISP pue yygz *yrS: | ° : J" ai suoI}zeI2dG 
"squeal [esaagq qh seqIeD paw yqIAS U1 SuCIze1edC) 
*AsjuBjul pesusg ‘undue put 
puet { sss0ue] petueg qo! po 436 | TeReg “Uesu¥D fo suoioy 
"Anus 


"SUBVNZY 


ay aefand my poe pug ¢ Az)ce;u] 
[edgaogq puzt ‘{siourw pus sioddts 
$Muyeaez) qefung 43S pue pue 
sr {suzdue] pesueg 4391 pus 4y6)° MOURN] JO sorTop] puocsas 
*(aseyd 
*Asquejuy jesueg uot poe 43h | paoses) MouyoN’] e saciod 
*Arjzueyuy jes 
uog qsit pue 4761 £ Asyeaes sopinry | ° 
*Anquejyuy qe{un 
qv pov pug { Asjuusu; jesuog pus 
SAaqeaezy «quiung yyS pue pug ‘ 
‘yr {sic0uNy] relaog 4701 pus 436 | puke syeyspuRNg ye suon Dy 


*pjuo 


JQEWEN jo uol}Iy 


*7S1X2 ]1NS yo1ys pasesua sdi0> “S91ANES 


‘ponuiju0I—Auap aatjoay juduag ay} fo sartasas ays fo 3817 jvrtdojouosyD 


—suiioguny Auyngy uvypus 


°  ‘any—judy 


* 381Z—pur * 
° "qo yy "ue 
“388 


*gS-2Sg1 
"20q — "AON 


° 19qW920Qq 


yIgi—qyrs “AON 
W38I “AON—"dag 
UIST “AON 
"401 *39 
pee yige “das 
*£Sg1 


23eq 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


I 
ee - -. en -_- —_|_——  ——_—_——_ 


| ‘quaundoy eyxsne YS § £13 
| -ueyuy qefung 439 pue yjb ‘pug ‘ysr 
££} 08j0] YAIG yy f sapinsy jo sdso04) 
fAaquejuy yesueg puct‘ sisuipy pue 
ssaddeg ‘ Asjwara qefang pit fssa9 


"(6981 Jo 21g °C °D ‘D) [pew wtp] td he Bs soc liony nose ye pied uolj!pedxy zB pnsyew;’ °* judy 


sjuesuy qefang 419 pue 43h 4st "09g! 
fAsquezul yyIS yay ¢ sepind Jo sds0¢ 
H cape | {@3uaq puzt {susuipy 
pue sisadeg fAyeaey qefung puz "SUIZBAA PUM 
*(69g1 Jo €1g °C ‘5 *D) jepow eipuy | ‘ sa1s9qQeq UIe,UNOW » pue Ee ‘st “SON | [nqey oy} ysuIEZE uolj!pedxsy | ° 32qm19990q 
Ri “Sepms) "6Sgt 


jO sdiog ‘Aquejuy pe3aeg ye 
Due ySIzZ *y}O7 “YZ “YS1 SSssoUIGY pus 
sioddeg ‘{Aspeaea jesueg 43g poe 


"(6981 Jo £18 °Q'D *D) [epam eipay / 43S ‘sav27}eq WIe}UNOW F pueL‘soN|* *° © eURYS OR UONIpedxg]* AEW—judy 


*gSgi 
*(aAoge sy) |° UIy9y JO JepusuiNng si 
*(2OgI 30 Of1 °C “5 *5)) 
sdsej> jetseds {(zogt jo z£1 °C *s *5)) ‘Aajuejuy yedueg p3fz pue 
SINOJOD UO ,UIADg ,, PUL,, (nat nae | » | 4302 fsa90uey jesuag y}61 pue yjr! | $}J0,] nye] JO ainjde> 
“(28st jo 
0°) °*D) Aue | 
*(zogi jo of1 \-uy pesueg y3Zz pur *Arquejuy 


“O **) ‘'S)) a3ep )pucz‘qySi 03 ssnojoo | ye3uegq yjZz pue pife ‘pucz ‘yjoz 

0} Zuipsoooe Uo ,29-09g1 ‘eury-) , | 4}St / Ss9DUe] peSueg 4x61 puke yqII 

‘GSe]9 YpLm [BPO "(zggt yo 26S | 
‘oO 2 *)) sunojoo 
uo ,6$ 


P : usiedwe> puoseas 


-gSgi ‘Buys , | Asjuejuy yedueg yjz11 pue yzor ‘qyZ | - ° * uZimduiesy ysity “*gSgr 
—404, VuLYD punrag *09-LSgt 
*Asjaejoy jeduog pst | © : ° uonipedxy soqy *og-6Sg1 
*Asquejuy gefun g yy —— 
fsis2uUe7] jesu0g ae pue yjor ‘476 | - : uZiedwe,y ypno saquisceg —Ae yw 
*Asjuesuy qelung | 


yyr pue paz ‘ys1 f Asquejuy YAS 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


488 


*(0£g1 Jo og 
0 °D °D) dsvjo peads qyia pepow espuy 


((Oogt Jo 1gtt‘CQ'y'5) jepow pas eq3eq 
SYWOu XS !sind{I0d uO , BiUSs{qy , 
*(oZgt 30 9g 


"O'D °D) dsejo juve is ysm pepaw wipuy 


*(FSBI Jo 988 °Q °S °+) [epam eipuy 


*“69g1 30 z1g 
°O °D)'d) dseja peisads yyta pevow wipu; 


——— e+ aS Sees 


*SMAVANSY 


*Asjaejoy qeiang =| 
poz § dnuvzuy yas put ! syaewiSey 
wqyzay) qyS pus qywy ‘pil ‘pug 
“WI {saping jo sdioy £ kyuyuy 
jBSuagq Il puw yzhe ‘qI0e £ sudUIW 
pue suaddtg !s3200 [e3u0g 


496 { sazaqjeg usejano » pu € "SON |° vowpadsy wejanow 42 Ig 


"Anuaejoy 
je3ueqg pate poe wis { Arjta¥7 
[eZueg yer f suadeEy] pesueq yyjor | « 


qwauga ysne pal f AQueyzuy 
(e3uagq ee pas paty ysif ‘uf 
*q362 ‘yyOr “yI61 “yIg? ‘YyIZE *qyLt 
“476 ¢ ssompy pus siaddes ‘ ssd20e7 
[e3aog uh f Asean) {e3uagq gS 
"“MQUBIUT WAS 

ay f yoounsoyq eqyins por * Aiea 


“8D [eS0ag yyg f radu] [e3aaq pus | -qoxq 943 


Squaw 
“$Bay eyxnD  yyS pus yyy Oy} put 
‘ Anueyay quiung 479 pue 43S ‘381 
hs J7GBFUT GAS pat aq} £ sapin 
jo edi 943  Aqueyuy jeduag puz 
pue pate ‘qyoz ‘yyhI ay] £ ss90uIy 
pue suaddug ‘ ssa2uv] peZuag qjzI1 
* SOUdYB UiejuoOW Y puRt ‘c ‘son 


*Anavya] 


[e3aoq qaS? pas qyby ‘pate “yige “ye1z | uel pus quiseqy oF Su0iZ2dGQ 


ORIOL GALS pul {LQUEzU] ;eBu0g qySI| - 


“FS1X9 [INS ydIYa paseZua sdio+y 


| 
. 


i 


ee wiurssi{qy ul usiedwes ° feyy—url 
po 


IBAA ONnNGg 9981 = fog! 
*spu eu 
ywulese sudijzeisdg i> « Aseoorl 
%9g81 


| 
| 
| 


—Uogipadx 7 eae ° "300 =O 


*Sogr 
“SITH Qe 
£9-Z981 
*  — *  Gonspedxg wags °19-09g1 
ee 
*SD1ANaS "298g 


SSS 


‘PONUIWOIehwes py sasivny yoTuagr ays fo $921R495 ay} fo 3537 JvIS0;0u0LY he) 


489 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY, 


*(6Zg1 yo bog 
70 *9°D) BHeq syyuow xis £ (PES 
'O'°D *D) tepew £(iggi jo git 'E"D'D) 
Sanojod UO , Oggi-g/gl ‘uLzsiURYysy , 


"(Oggi jo Sgz puev 6Zg1 jo fh1 

‘O'D *D) dseja jeeds yjzim pepaw eipuy 
*(1ggt jo ree 

‘OD ‘D) dsejo jeisods yy pepaw vipuy 
*(Oggi jo ehz 

0 'D ‘D) dsejo jeisads yjim pepow eipuy 


* elgi jo S6z1 


‘ysl £ Axquejuy yesueg y Sb pue 
*yyOE Spuce “yy6e “yige ‘yylz ‘yy92 
‘yySz “Yee ‘pats “Ysiz ‘yjo~ 4361 
“qj ‘yyhi ‘yjyz1 *yy9 £ SudUl pue 
ssoddes £ Asjeaet) qeiung yjS pur 
‘puz ys1 { Asjeat) [e3uegq y361 pue 
YISs “yer *yzla ‘Yaz YALE ‘yZOr ‘yg 
$s9119}} 8g UlejuNOW PF pue € ‘z ‘1 “SON 


"Sapinsy yo sduoy 
“sepia 
jo sdioy £ As0}}eg ulejunOW FON 


‘qwauiZey BYyyINs YyWS 

f Asquvyoy qefung 439 pue 4S ‘yyw 
‘puc : Asjquejuy Wid psf pue 4s1 
‘ sepingy jo sdsoy ¢ Asjeavd qelung 
puz * Seua}jeg UlejUNOWW Zc puel ‘sON 
*Asjuvjuy [eZ00gq 


yr pue pith ‘puch ‘qjFf ‘yjg1 


° ° * *yuauZagy eqyinr ys1 
*Aajuejuy jesueg yj}hb pue pucr 


*Aaquejuy jeduog yb pue path 
puch *yj91 £ Atajzjeg ulejUnoW; + ‘ON 
“£squejuy qefung ysi § Asjuejuy ymis 
yy? pue ysit fAseaes qefung puz 
pue ji! Asayeg uiejyunow z ‘on 


*squsWIZ9 yy BUY 
-int) yyh pue puz ! Asjuejuy jesueg 
wey pue pucy ‘y3Zz2 ‘pucz ¢ siauip 


(0'°D‘D) dseyo jeisads yzim jepaw eipuy | pue ssaddeg { A1a},eg usejunop € ‘on 


*Aajuejuy qelung yjb pue ys 


*usiedwes jst 
—vy uvytf{y puras 
8194) UEdIA) yulese uorjtpadx gy | ° 


e 


; JOBYS ySulese woripadxy | * 


* *  * woRnIpedxg iyemof 
*  *% —*  suotpedxy eden 
‘  *  worntpadxy yes9q | 
; ° . uoljipadxy eseq | * 
*  *% —* woxrpadxg eiqdeg 
. * wonipedxy seaeq | * 


voripadxg reysny | ° 
* uoryipadxg rezyeiq yozg ayy | - 


Digitized by Google 


gl-ZZgt 
og-9/gt 
SZgr 
ager Bi 
“Sgt 
Gl-bZg1 


-  youey 
*clgi 


zl-1Zgt 
Asenigay 
69g! 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


490 


6s¥ "0'9'9) B77Uq ,SuJUOU xis £ BAOgE 
SB [epoat 
| @INOjOD BO ,Ogg!-6/g1 ‘uLsUEQdy , 


gg atten aU wy mm 


iqefung pit ! ssaduey ,eaua | 

gigi ° Aspeaes [edSuag 43S pue a 

"pal “ysi—: sooippe Suimoyo; ogy 

que pare ‘Ajsjueju; qefung puz pus 

3Ss1 ayy pues ‘Aaquejuy YAIS 381 3q3 

*Asquejuy }e3aag qy9e 243 3u1331WO0 

0g-gg! ,Bulpeay oy] Japun ‘aaoqe sy |° ° usredwe) puoses 
—s044 syd fy puors 


*(oggt jo | 
(1ggt jo giv °Q "5 °5) 


*s}UIUNTIy BYHIND YR pue puZ 
Ssaping jo sdio-) : Asjuvyuy pesueg 
yySr pue yzlz ‘yybz ‘yW9 f Susu 
pue sieddes ‘sieouey [e3u eg yift | woupedxg AayeA sezeg pu0sIG 
*qUIWIZay BYyHINT) puz 
fAsjuvyuy pesueg yb pue yylz fsiad |° Z : : ° Aeyea 
“deg ‘ si90Ue7] [Bsueg YILI pue yII! |sezeg 3y} 02 UWOINpEdxy ysly 


Ee ee 


*JUIUIIZ9yy BYHRIN YAS § Ary esa] 
*(0gg1 jo | qefung 43S pue pug ! Anuvyuy 


£L9 °C °D) ‘5)) dsuja yeroods !(1ggi jo | pedueg qy6z pue pte ¢ Asean, 
81¥ °C *5) °5)) SUNOIOD UO, [vIOY JeMIEY, | [BZuIg qI2! § L297;8g UIEQJUNOW 1 ‘oN | ° [B70y] UWAIET 343 JO 3a1910,3 


jo git 


*ANuvyay 

qmis 31 f Aygavjuy pesca qasy pus 

*(oggt yo fg | ‘qiZe *yQoe ‘qjhI ‘yr f ssaUIWy pus 

°c) dsv> jeisads pue (iggi | suaddes ‘ sapinsy yo sdso*) £ si0duT] 
‘O'S *5)) sanojo9 vo ,piiseyy yy, ) pesaog yqII f 422;338g UIEJUNOW PF *oV | ° pisew yy ao yoeHYy 


*Anyovzyo, qe{ung 7S poe 
pac 381 £ Asquejuy YyXIG pug pur 
381 £ Sapins) jo sd3o‘Z) § »QuomIsey 
wqyins) 43S pue ‘yyw ‘pul ‘pue *p1u0o—404y4 uoyd/p puorss 


*SNUVAWY | *IStX9 [[QS YoIym pasedua sds0z "SOIABES 


a 5 
Se ET ES A SASS 


‘panunuoo—fmusp aerjonr puduag ay? fo sarsasas ay} fo 3887 199350] 0u044 


* pug 20g 


° Wie ‘AON 


4gt 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


. *squvjuy RAIS pue *“nely pus zoeys je suo y | * pate “ 
£ yoowrZoy eyysn:) pst f Asquejuy 
*(0gg! |jedueq yyse pue y361 ‘y3S1 £ ss00 
jo £L9 "CG *4) *5)) dseyo perseds f(iggt jo | -1yy pae sieddes £ eg qefung 
gib'C *5 5) S4nojO2 Uo , [94H] Peagy. | puz pue 3s! { ss90uey] jesueg 4761) ( - * jeyy pewy y jo 977eq| * wos ‘ady 


“‘sjusuSey eYyyIN yy pue pue vee 
24} Jo sjusmYsezep { AsjuBsuy jesusg 
ae fsso0ur] [eSueqg yOl pue 
Ja}Jegq ureyunop "oN Jo sywaw gor} . ‘ . Sef 10 90u9 «“ 
q areqanowy ”< pie ates tt yRepsel j Faq | 4761—y Zt 
yy { Asquesay jesueag 4762 pue 4307 
*y7€1 { ssouspy pure Ssoddes £ sig20e] 
oe wg! pue yer £ Aspeaey 
[eSueg 3s1 { Asayeg urejunow 1 ‘ON nuwie7 2 138 uO xq|° . “ 
| | poet b ie “SyyNUET Oy} ySU! ipedx 
ep yy pue puz corre 
*eaoge sy | siod f AsayVeg urejUNO "ONT |[nqe wwpuEsy wWolj oDuBA tz— 6 
ps er 5 Fhe ais knaea ee [nqey 0} YeuMpuvs wos PY | Wre—yeE 
YAS pat fyueuidoy eyying 4 
{sapinr) jo sdioy £ Asjuesuy jesus 
yjgz pue pute ‘ suauIy pue 84 
"(oggi jo | -deg £ Asean) qelung 43S ‘ ssa90e7 
0 32) Soe ra eee maton? fee Te sh 
°0°D °9 ‘ qey , | f seueyyegq ureyuno~ ¢ pure | ‘on | [NQey punole 78 suo —ujo1 “20 
Eueues yxIS pats yeep She said ip “*sse siti a 
jesusg ysiz £ AsaqVeg UreyuNOW I ‘ON uepsesseyNyS 24} uo 3u1jy iy} ° °  « 
‘quounday eyyIne) 4S f Any 
-uvjuy qefung 43S § Asjuejuy peduag 
"(ogg | qigz =pue pitz fAajeae) qelung 
| 70 £/9 °C") 5) Asejo jeeds {(rggi jo | yyS f sssoue] yesuag YyhI ‘ ArjeaeD 
giv *G *)°5)) sunojo> uO , BiseseYs, | [e3uag YIZI * A19;38gq UIeJUNOW z “ON | ° ° * BisBseys Joo eg | ° * 19°?O 
*6L 
-Asxyuejuy qefung yi pue fAsj0es07 " 
NaS put { Asjuvjay [esueg ysif paw 
‘yjot puze “yal “YyqIOI ‘qyET *yzII 
"436 “yg “qr ‘qa “pat ‘pug ¢ Aspeaey 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


492 


, 


‘O 
‘O 
xe) @ 


*(Zggi jo 
) °D)) dswjo jwisods £ (Eggs yo 
D °D) SINOJOD Ud , IGdy-[9-[9] , 

*(ZBEt jo 
"S) °5)) 4898 azuolq { (zggi jo 
¥ 82S °C ‘Dd 'D) fepaw : (fgg! jo 
*K)°D) sanojoo uo , 2ggi 4dhk3q , 


*(oggt yo tS 


"SD °D) 3838 asuosq £ (oggi yo flo 
‘9 
9 


ty) dsejo eisads { (1991 jo gI¥ 
*E)) SNO]OD UO , Ogg! “eYRpuTy , 


"SHUVNSY 


*Asqueyuy qef{ung 
qq ‘{ Asquejuy je3uag 43S pug 
wis sont pus sioddec { Aiea 
qefung qjS ésse.ue] jesueg yjor 

*ArQaBzUy 
[e3u0g pil puae yyz! ¢ sudutW pus 


sseddes ¢ AJayvg uleyunOo; 1 ‘oN 


*Anuuejuy [eduag yor pur 
qiZ § ssoouwy yedsueg wili* Aseaesy 
|e3u0g yO $ su2Z0UN] |e3u0qg pug 


eAsjuvzuy qefung 439 pue 
yIS ‘yyw ‘pst ‘hae Tt : kuaesn} 
UNIS 4 pue ys1 f ArQUBjU] jeBUOg 
(sssouo1g) pazt pu y30f siz ‘y70Z 
yw § ss9atW pues ssaddeg 30 Auvd 
-wo07) Wg f AseaBy qefeng 4Wv put 
31 S GlsoUe] pesusg yg! * 6a112}}8g 
arezanow v pur ¢ ‘z ‘1 ‘SON 


*Arquejuy YyxIS pst pue pus 
‘squsungeoy eyyunr, y3S put qv 


‘pug £ Axuuejay jeSuag yySz pus qyrz 


“q3S1 f sayeaes qefung pst £ As; eae) 
jeduag pst § 41933eg ureyunop z “ON 


‘soping) JO $d10-) £ quawt3oy) vyysne) 


pug : Asjz0Rs0 weg q3SF * 4a; ea 
qefung pst d Jes a ges 


"FIXI []178 Yq posedus sds0oy 


1. 


Jeg UlEIUNOW Z “ON | 947 Ur UBIIIAEPL YY) 3B UO!DY | ° 


Gontpadxy Aa1;8A GouZ |° 


vouipedzgy eyyy sq] | ° 


41g? ¥-f>-12L Jo ae | * 


99437 03 uorgspaguy| ° 


° GONIpaday Wize AA pusyey | ° 
© © sBqBpURY jo 21338 | ° 


| a ti’ 


¢ * seqepaey 03 yoseW | ° 


*Kal[ta 1edo-7 


wer 


° ¥g—Eggs 
° q7f1 ‘das 


‘dag—'sny 
*Zggl 


: Lew 
"19ST 
* 481 ‘dag 


° ysnJany 


° qiSe dy 
‘Oggi 


*ADIAYSS 


"238q 


“‘panuiyaoo—Awaapy saszvay puduag ay} fo sariasag ayy fo 4817 yu21Fojouosys 


493 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


eee a 
LS CSCO _______ EE a ae 


*Asquejuyl yesuog 
puzt pue piff “yizi ‘Yy,O8 * soltay 
-j8gq urejuno, jesueg g pueZ “son | * . , * gstyug puz 


| wn dDh vuang p4ryl 
(O6gi Jor | *quauNFoy eyxIND 3S! “voyeneg | 
0°) 'D) dseyp pesads yza jepawt erpuy | puz + Asqu¥ju] yesueg puzt pue yjifI , 
*uounsoy 
eyyanry yIS £ Arjuesey qelung yi 
{Ksquejuy YA pal pue puz ‘Ajueyzuy 
jeSuog yiSh pue ‘yIe “yy *yyhz 
‘(6ggi jo 1fF | ‘yzhr $ Ssoutyy puv ssaddes ! Asyeary 
'O *D *5) dejo peiseds yz [epow eipa) yesueg yiS1 : Asayeg urejunoW FON | * 


* vor pads WIAAIS 


—s 


wonipedxg ulejuno; 4I"Ig | * 


*Asyuvyoy pesusg yi! pue poz nm BYU jo Suryey 
‘quamisey = eyxIND | 
pac { Asjueyuy pesucg yib = pue 
pitt ‘puch ‘y3/z ‘yq9z "43gt “yI0T 
fujz1 ‘yqrt ‘qjor ‘yyS “qyv “paz 
qSI {ssauip Pursiaddes ‘see eq 


*(LZ9g1 Jo F&F °C “5 *D) dsey> 


feisods ysim fepaw wpul f (16g! jo Fo | 
°E.°D°D)).Sunojod uo ,Ag—Sggi “sewing ,| ureyuno; (jesueg) g pue £°SsON | ° ° ° estyg S81 
—4ny vwang paryy|* 
*(Sggi jo 

S$9 "OE °D *D) dsepo pereds £ ( ogg! jo | yosjoy, JO apjzeg | * 

glb ‘ON ‘O° *D) S4nojor uo , 424j0] 5 | | 
*Asyuvyuy pesulg - ° UIYSBpy 0} DUPSSIBUUOIA y | * 

ug 4} 


yjZr pues g7zSr ‘susouRy | 
*(Zggi jo 6tg 
‘0° 5) 383s szuosq £ (Sggi Jo SSo 
‘O°D'D) [epaw uwydk3y ‘(ogg! jo sh 
°C "3 ‘5)) Sunojod uo (Sggt *WIHBNS, © . , 


unpipadxy usyong 


6sg!—sget 


sss 


* 3999330 
‘egg 


qiZI ‘Aon 
*Sggr 


Lggi—Sggr 


puge “sep 
+ YOe IEW 


“AON—JEW 
*Sggi 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


494 


"2 "D) Aso 


e 


Pe a JO 289 ‘ON ‘CO 


S qua jepew Bipuy 


*(o6g1 yo Sle 


“SNUVNDY 


ae eee ee 


"PINUIJUOI— Aseee Y aaszuyy poTuag ay} fo sootasas ays fo 


nee 
a TT 
e 


— Ot Senge ee 


pact on cae and is Boe 
: Ie 
pty “puch ous! tuaeien veseoe 
7 t pow yf: 949 Jo syuamysej2p 
* AJOHCY UeWuNoW (jesu9g) g “oN | ° * —s andruey ut suonwedg | - [Udy—qosreyy 
*Asqueyuy qefung yy | °16g1 
pue 43% Ysr 943 pue ‘Asjuejuy yxIS ° 
pst oy} * Asjuejyuy eduag y36c pue ; 
pitz ‘pucz ay fssauip pue sisddeg | 
jesusgq 243 Jo Aueduioyy y3S 943 
* Asyeavy qefung 43S ay3jOsuospenbs | 
Om] {S9119}}8q UrEJUNOW + pus £ *soN |° - “ SOnpadxy rezuwsyy yugi> —° Praaa 
*16g1 
“Sopty 
€97205 GW-e 04) fAnuyjay pesueg | 
20H 349 qowysrzep ¢ Ajuejuy | 
ip pe uaspt og fom 2 
$ As9q3eg uruncyy (re3uog) oR ‘sury) 943 ysurede suonipedxg | *f6g1— o6gt 
{s3uvj0; qefang pus  Anueyuy qRIS 
poe pues 4s1 ‘ sooueg uIEjano; 
£ pee: son ! hsyea qelung 
pit pues yin t scoue] je#uog qIg1 | ° * Gonipedxy Aaze4 qoyz a! 
1 
sm IZ9y BIN wy ‘uoreNeY pus 
‘hayaezuy [eSuag pucy pus ‘yi ef *qI01 


f AeReG BreQUOoy jeSoog LON |* * contpodag reysa-umy|- ob g1—6gg1 


"Wwamisoy yr) pur ‘corEyeg 
°0°D 9) ase peods qua pepow erpuy | pu 


| © fAaqueyuy [eSuag 436 pus poc|: -° = - uonipeds” ieysn'] 


| 


| “FSIXO WQS YIyH prTeZuo edio+y *ZOIAMaS 


6ggi— see! 


_——_——— — - - O ~ 


S87 1vI1dofoNosy7 


495 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


“wey suop jo aFeyTIIA O 


‘soyiy eyysn *f6g1 \) 
y3S-e pue y3S-1 oy1 pes linaea ? ~S 
YAS yy oq) fAjuEyuy pesuag yRof 
pue y3Sz oy} fsisouey] jeSuog yyit . 
243 jo suospenbs om} ‘{sueul pur 
siad od etyed 243 JO Sa1ued W07) 499 c 
pue yyy oy) fAsayeg UIeUMOW TON |* = * * UoIpadxgrezesy|* * 1990399 


| ‘SOBtY ByyIND yzS-1 pue Arquezuy 
| {e3ueg 4.07 943 Jo syuawYoeep puke 
1) jOO86"ON DO | ss0U1W pure sioddeg jeSueg jo Aused 
‘ty 5D) dseyo jeisods ym jepow erpay | f(sund omy) A1aj}jegq urejuno + ‘on | *.e3eN pue ezunzy ut suoIesede | ° Joqweseq 


“Sopra Bynes) 
y3S-1 943 pue fAynuezuy qeiung 
4yiQ pue pur 4s1 943 ! As3}Uej;0] 
Y4IS pal oy} f Asquejuy jesueg y36z 
pue uzlz ‘yj61 “y3S1 oy}! susuipy pue 
sioddes re 24} jo Aueduioy 
43S 94} fAsjeaey qeiung 43S 943 jo 
suoupenbs om} { ssaoue’] eSueg 4761 
94} £(sun3 914) A10}}eq UOSTIIeT 

*(c6gt jo 19°ON CS | qelung 043 ! A103;eg urejunow f*oN 
"D *D) dsejo perseds yyim yepam erpuy | ‘(sund 90143) Asaj7eg UieuNOW CON |* = OLyIpadag rezUeNW puodag/* AeWw—fudy 


“Soplal JBqrey y 94} pus 
fsagny eyyins 45 ay} f Asjueyuy 
1 7 ou} £ AsjuPyu sepin 

-— iin redoed Wace hae 

puct *yz11 oy} pte pue ssoddes 

jesuog 943 jo suedwoy yy 343 

*(z6gi jo gSz ‘on ‘CO sep Quo) SJaDue’y] [eSueg YL! 

"D"D) dszjo pepeds yim jepow eipuy | ‘(sung o01y}) Asayjeg urejunow con !* = uoRrpadxg urequnoy youg |* [ady—youey 


THE SERVICES OF THE 


496 


*(S6gr Jo egos "ON ‘O 
"D9 °D) dsepo perads yy pepow eipuy 


_—_—_—_— eee 


‘SMUVNAY 


*199 

SSIN PUE JemlexENy 38 suoNre 

*Aajuvjuy jeSueg puce Sura ‘TBszIG) 09 IZ) 04, yore 
"Aaquejuy jeSueg y3ti JUIWMYIEJIQq] | ° : * — {nysey yo souapQq 
*Aayaejuy jeSueg yjr1 quam yore zA() | ° ° * Yy8Boy 3820 uoOIpDYy 


*Ssoulyy 
pus siaides jesusg jUamyse~Q |° ° é URYysOY 38 CONDY 
*AljuB}u) je3ueq yh JUSWYIE}Oq, | ° ° 


"8U013D49d0 [043849 


"Aljuezuy qefang 49 pue yyw ‘pug 
243 poe fAsjuejuy YMG psf pue 
I 3q3 fsogiy wYyyINs) yyS-1 pus 
Wier yz fArj3UBUY [eZuIg UIgl pov 
| paté ‘gioz ayy fAsjeaesy qefung pt 
pus (uoupenbs suo) pug ‘(suoupenbs 
OM) 351 24) {si0ul; pue ssoddes 
[eSuoq ‘sarauedwoy S put ¢ “son 
| *seulaHeg ulejunoy g pue Ergon (* © 


"AxqUezOy YAS 
pat 94) poe fsogiy baearay  Rppoe 
‘AQuBjU] feSuag yOz ay; ! JJeAB) 
| qefung 381 943 jo uospenbs 9uo 
| SIU pue susddeg jesusg ‘ued ‘u0y 


| “HOD f “ON f Kroyeg areynow £ ‘on | -equ9q Asepunog urysuizey, | ° 


“ANuvjO] [eZa9g 43hh yuowys"30q | - ° . 


a 
“BOIAUBS 


Copedxg oeywiire yd | ° 


HOT TENYD JO Bouajaq | ° judy—yoeyw 


S691 


“uel —99q 
*$6-%6g1 


‘sON—~PO 


vonipedxy soqy |. qoueyy—Asenuel 


"681 


*9SIX9 [198 Y1Iym paseZua sdso+y ‘a78qQ 


"PEPR|IU0I— huey saszoyy yoSuag ays fo sarsazas ayg fo aSt7 1028d0j0U04y7 


497 


BENGAL NATIVE ARMY. 


*AsjUejU] YAIS YIP 943 pur £ Asquejuy 
sopin om “SOBIY ByxINS) yih-s 


24} JUBU] |esueq YZ pue 
YIOL *yIe ‘YyWSe ‘pale ‘yySa *yIzE1 
| 943 SAspeaea sepincy ay3 fss90ue7 
| [23uog 431194) f susuip puesioddes -‘resnweyp pur ‘s2aly Bioylueg 
| [esu0g ‘souedwoy g pur ‘# ‘1 ‘son “2A JBM “JVYH Jo suonIe 
. se2eg ulejUNOW & puke © ‘soN fss¥eg pueHErey 243 j0 3u1310,3 


Digitized by Google 


A PAGE 
BAZAI . e e e e e ° e ° e e ° 255. 266 
Abbassieh . : : . ; F . ‘ ‘ é ° « 37% 380 
Abbott, Augustus, Captain . Ss ‘ - 2 ; ~ ee  « 3186 
9 James, cues e ° e e e ° e e e e 226 
Abbottabad , , : ; : : ‘ ‘: ° - 319,395 
Abdur Rahman, Arie , : : ‘ ‘ . 368, 369 
Abercromby, Sir Ralph, Lieutenant-General ; . 8 ee S05 74 
”» Sir pe sae r) , ‘ ‘ « 59, 62, 63, 64, 65 
Abors é ‘ ; ° ; - 294. 420 


Abor expeditions . : ‘ ‘ : ; ‘ : ‘ ~ 294, 420 


Abyssinian war ‘ ‘ : 2 @3 ‘ : i ; « «-43t6—18 
Achmuty, A., Captain : ‘ : ‘ ; ‘ ; ; : ° 31 
‘ A. F., Captain. ‘ : : ; . ° ° ‘ 2 31, 96 
Active Reserve ‘ : 5 ‘ F ° ° . ‘ - «= 410—11 
Adam Khel (Afridis) . . * ee © ©6249--S0 
Adams, John Wittington, Lieut. Colonel, i, Brigadier General » 112, 132, 134, 354 
» Thomas, Major 3 ; < 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 48, 250 
Adalatnagar, action of ‘ : , : ‘ : . «100, 102 
Adji River, action near ; F : . ‘ ‘ ; ‘ . - 29 
Adnet, Joseph, Captam ; : ‘ : . oo ‘ ‘ - to 
Aeng pass . 5 ‘ : » 247, 38 


Afghanistan ; F , iGzs 169, 170, 171, 172, na: 186, 187, 192» 19S. 
259, di 346, 347, Cea es 365, aa 3745 375» 376 


Afghan war, First é : " : 167—92 

- ‘ . , ‘ ‘ : : ‘ ‘ . 336-75 
Afghans in the Punjab ‘ ‘ ; ; » 239, 240 
Africa, Indian soldiers in East aad Central : é ‘ ; 428 -39 
Afridis : ° ° ‘ ° ; - 18s, 186, 189, 250; 339) 349, 402 


Afridis, Adam Khel 7 : ° ; ‘ : ¢ ‘ ; . 2497750 
» Aka Khel ‘ 5 ‘ ‘ . ‘ ; . 285, 258 
» enlistment of . 408 
»»  Jjowaki . ‘ ; . : ‘ 
» Kohat Pass 


254, 258, 324—25 
e e e e e e 258 
Zaka Khel. , a 


: ; 249» 
° e e ° 339 MO 


Afshar (Aushar) . . ° ° e ° e ° e ° e e 353 
Afzalgarh, battle of . ‘ : 3 : , 99 
Agra . . 81,84, 96, as gl; $2100, 129, 198, 267, 276, 277 
Agra Levy (38th Bengal Infants ” ‘ : : é 299, $02, 303 
Agrorvalley -  - ee 
Abirwa, action at ; ; ‘ 3 ‘ - ' F ‘ ‘ - 269 
Ahmad Khel, battle of : ‘ . . ‘ ‘ ‘ : 365-67, 374 
Ahmadpur . ; . ; , : ‘ . ° o 87 


Abmadulla, Maulvi of Fyzabad 5 ; : ; : : ; ° - 286 


590 INDEX. 


PAGE 

Ahmedabad ° e ° ® e * ® e . ° Fs ° 42 
Aijal . ° . ’ ° ° . . . 412, 413 
Ajigarh ° ° ® ° e e ° ° e e ° . e 107 
Ajmir ° . ° ° ° ‘ : ‘ F , ° - 159 
Akazais ° e ° . ® ° e e ° ° e 318, 306, 419 
Akbarpur . ° . . ° ° . ° ° ‘ . . - 10§ 
Akhas e e e ° e e e ° ° e e ° e 380 
Akha expedition ‘ ;. : F : P ‘ - ‘ P - 380 
Akha-Khel Afridis r ° e PY e ° e ° ° e ® 255 
Akhalis ® . . . ® ° e e r “ o ° 106 
Akhtar Khan a ee ee eee 1 178, 188 
Akoktoung e ° ° ‘ ‘: P : ‘ , ° 247 
Akram Khan ° ° ® . e * ° e e 238 
Alambagh . . . . ‘ F ; . : 290, 378; 280, 281—82 
Alam Gie Sani. é ‘ i ; : ‘ ‘ e : 12 
Alam Killi . ‘ : ° ‘ ; ‘ : ‘ . 255 
Aldridge, Robert Barttelot, Captain 3 : ‘ j : ; . 310 
Alexander, George, Lieutenant . . ° ; ; : ; . 31 
Alexander’s Horse e e e ° e e e ‘ ° Py 298, joo 
Alexandria .° . ° . ° . ° e e e e ° ° 75 
Aliabad Kotal . ° ° ‘ : ‘ , r : : - 356 
Ali Boghan e e e e Py e e e e e e e 3€3 
Aliganj ® ) ° e ° e ° ° e ° ° . 95 
Aligarh (Bengal) « e e e e ° ° ° x ° ° 4 
» (North-Western Provinces) . . 81, 82, 103, 104, 107, 127, 261, 266, 281 

a ie Levy (goth i Infantry) . . . : : ; 299 302, 303 

i ; ; ‘ 2 ‘ . ; 

Ali Khel. : ; ° : ; . : : : 344, 349, ase 
Ali Masjid : ° 170, 185, rot, 337, 338, 339s 340 347» 349 


Alipore Regiment,—vide 18th Bengal Infantry. 

Aliwal, battle of . a ° ° e * P . . ‘ e 215—16, 223 
Alizais . : ° . .' & ‘ . ou t : . 346 
Allahabad . . - 24, 28,29, 30, 34, 37, 38, 80, 86, 134, 138, 266, 268, 280, 299 
Levy (33rd Bengal Infantry) © —-« 299, 301, 302, 303, see 33rd B. I. 


Allai country . ° e e ° : ; ‘ ‘ F » 396, 397 
Almora captured ° . . . ° ° F . e . 124 
Alompra ° ° ° ° e e ° e e ° ° e e 387 
Amarapura . . ‘ ° - ° : ‘. . , » 151, 1§2 
Amar Singh Thapa_ . i ° ° é ; P ‘ 0118, 120, 121, 1223 
Amb (Jullunder Doab) ° a ° ; P ‘ ‘ ‘ » 235 
” (on the Indus ) e ) ° e e ° e ° e . e 252 
Ambaji Inglia e ° e . ° e P e e ° * e 88 
Ambela e e e e e ° e e e ° e 306, 308, gil 
» expedition ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ‘; ; : . + jo6—t1 

» Pass ‘ . . . . . . : ‘ 96, 308, 309, 311 
Ambur e e e e Py e Py é . a e 72 
Amir Khan ; - F g 3 89, 99 108, 138 


Amir of Kabul,—Dos# Muhammad ° 1669, 170, 174, 1755 176, 177, 182, 
226, 238, 3363 Shah Shuja, 167, 168, 169, 170—73, 176, 177) 198; Sher 


Se ete et ce ee ee - 


INDEX. 501 
TE eS SPS ee hn Sa analh Aoeg Moe! ae ee 


PAGE 

Ali Khan, 336, 347; Yakub Khan, 347, 35°, 351; Abdur Rahman . 368, 369 
Amirs of Sind. ; ‘ . % ‘ ; ‘ ‘ e «196 
Amir-ul-Mulk, Mehtar of Chitral ‘ ‘ , ; 7 ; ° © 22 
Amorha. ‘é . : ‘ ° ‘ ‘ ; ; ; , » 284 
Amoy e . e ° ° e ° ° ° ° e e 594 
Amritsar... : : ‘ ° ; ‘ - 106, 107, 242, 271, 428 
Anandiraj, Rajah . ‘ 11 


Anburey, Sir Thomas, Major, Brigadier, Major-General 


Andaman Islands e e e . ° ° ° ° e 65, 146 
Anderson, Alexander Dunlop, Major ‘ : . , : ‘ - 344 
“5 Alexander John, Lieutenant ‘ j Z ‘ ; ; 283 

”» Edward Albert, Lieutenant : ; : . ‘ , - 33 

ry) John, Captain e * ° e e e e e 240 

i William, Captain, Benga! Artillery ; ‘ ; ; . 374 

i William, Captain, s9th Native waeee ° ; ; « 186 

as William Andrew, Lieutenant ; ex é © 223, 237 
Robert Burn, Lieutenant . ‘ ‘ ; ; , ‘ « 297 

Acdece, Frederick, Captain : ; : ° . © WIS 
Angelo, Frederick Canning Cortlandt, Lieatensat P . . ° - 364 
» Raymond Digby, Lieutenant . : ; , 4 : ‘ © «6423 
Annesley bay, Abyssinia. : ; ‘ : ° . ° : - 317 
Anson, Hon’ble George, General , , ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ - 264 
Antalo, Abyssinia ‘ P , ; ; , : ' ; . © 317 
Antri rs e e e ° ° * Py . e e e e 200 
Anupshahr ‘ ; ° : ‘ P ; . ° oe « S4y 71 
Aoung, action at ‘ i ; ‘ : ‘ ; ‘ ; - 269 
Apa Sabib of Nagpur . : ° , ; j ‘ ; 531—39, 133, 134. 135 
Apparbal Sing . : : ° : : ‘ ‘ , ° : - 103 
Arabi Pasha e ° e ° e ° e e e » e 379 
Atrabs at Nagpur, etc.. , : : ; ‘ : ‘ 132, 334, 135 
Araf ‘ . 8 ° ‘ - . 3tt 
Arakan A " - 63, 1 149, 350, 153, 83 160, 164, 247, 388, 390 
Arakan Local Battalion ‘ : : ‘ ‘ ° ‘ : 247, 248 
Arbuthnot, C. G., Brigadier-General . ; ‘ : j ‘ 349, 364, 369 
Archdeacon, John, en : ‘ ; : ° : . ° - 62 
Argandab. ‘ : . ‘ . e ‘ . ° ¢ 373 
Arghandeh e e e ° ° e e ° e e e 353; 354 
Arikera, battle of ° e ° e e ° e e ° e e 58 
Arki ° ° e e ° e e e r ° 121 


Armament,—vide Equipment. 

Armstrong, Andrew Bigoe, Lieutenant : ‘ ‘  “S é » «145 
”» George Andrew, Ensign. . ‘ : F ; . . .e 3210 

Army, Bengal,—vide Bengal. 


Army of Exercise ‘ , ° ; . . . ° . ° » 198 
ry) Gwalior . e ° ° ° e ° ° e ° ® 198—-99 
@ the Incdlus r e e @ e ° e ® e ° 167—68 
» thePunjab.. : - P . ‘: ‘ ‘ ; 226—27 
» Reserve ° ° r ° e ° ° ° e ° e 192 
» the Sutle) e e ry e ® ° e ° 0206, 312, 316—17 


PAGE 

Army Organisation Commission: . ‘ ‘ Ss : . 430 
Arnalla ° ° e ° e ° e ° r ‘o . . 43 
Arnold, J., Colonel ; ‘ ; ; : : 122, 128 
» RR. Colonel. ; ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ; ; " © 167 
Arogi j ; ‘ e ‘ ‘ , 5 ‘ 317, 318 
Arrah. : A F : . 5 . ‘ . 276, 277, 284 
» house, defence of . , ° . : i ‘ ; 276—77, 290 


Articles of War . ; ‘ ° , . é : ‘ « 3, 69 
Artillery in Calcutta, 3, 4; Organized in two Companies, 103; Its strength, 17; 
Attached to brigades, 30, 31 ; Native, 40, 53, 75, 114, 141; Experimental 
troop of horse artillery, 74; Native Horse formed, 141—42; Organised, 
161—62; United with Royal Regiment, 3031; Mountain Batteries,—vide 


Punjab Frontier Force; Of Bengal. . j ‘ ; : ' . 403 

Artillery, Companies of, for service at Hong-Kong, Singapore, Ceylon, and 
Mauritius. ; , . : ° . . ; , : - 429 
Arzu e e ° e e ° e e e : 7 e ° 367 
Asamis in Irregular Cavalry : ; ‘ d , F , F - 261 
Ashburnham, Hon’ble T., Brigadier. ‘ ‘ ; ; P : - 219 
Ashreth ° ° ° . ° . ° . é ° A ° © 426 
Ashta : F : , ‘: : : ‘ P ; - 133) 134 
: : . . ‘ ; , 135, 136 261 


Asirgarh F : 
Asmai Heights, Kabul . oe . ‘ : * 350, 356, 357 
Assam, expedition to, 63; operations in 145, 148, 149, 153, 164 ; disturbances in, 157, 

294) 3053 322-—23, 324 


»  vregiments ; . ° . ; ; 157, 408, 408—09 

» Light Infantry,—vide 42nd and 43rd Bengal Infantry. 

» Local Artillery ° ° ° e . ° e e e e 290 
Attock P i ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ° : ‘ é - 226, 230 
Assaye, medal [or battle of : ; 3 : ; . . . 6 26! 
Auchmuty, Sir Samuel, Licutenant-General , ; ‘ : 3 » Po 
Aurangzeb ‘ : : : ; ‘ ‘ : : ‘ : . 2,12 
Aushar (Afshar) . ‘ : ; ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ‘ : é - 353 
Auzangani defile : : : é : ‘ ; : . ‘ ° 364 
Ava . : ; ‘ ; . ; ; - 145, 153, 164, 242, 243, 262, 386 
Avitabile, General ‘ - : ; , , ; ‘* : - 216 
Aylmer, F. j. Captain ; . : a. 8 ‘ : . . ° 419 
Aytoun, John Marriott, Lieutenan és ; ‘ : » ° 294 
Ayub Khan ‘ ; F ; : ‘ ; 362, 370, 372, 373. 374 
Azamgarh . ; : ; ; ‘ : , : ‘ 266, 284, 288 

284 


Azimatgarh ; ‘ ‘ ‘ : : : 2 ‘ ‘ : 2 
Azimatullah Khan. ‘ oe . i % 4 : 3415 342, 360 


Basa-wali ‘ ; . : ‘ : ‘ . : . 188, 372, $73 
Backhouse, Julius B., Captain . . ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ 184, 186 
Badakshan . i ° : : : ; ‘ é ° 336 
Baddeley, W.C., Captain . : . Z ‘ : . . «11 4y 138 
Baddeley’s Horse,—vice Rohilla Cavalry and 3rd Bengal Cavalry. 

Badara, battle of e ° ° e ° ' a e ° e 13 


eee 


ae 


INDEX. 503 


PAGE 

Badcock, A. R,, Major e e e e ® ° @ e e e 354 
»  F.F., Lieutenant. ° : ° ‘ ° ; . ° 419 
Baddri . ° e e e ° e e ° e ° e e 105 
Radekh e ° e e e e e ° e e e ° 103 
Badiabad : rt ee ee ee Ce 183 
Badli-ki-Serai, battleof .  - © © © © *& * * 8 264—65 
Badhowal, action at ‘ ° ‘ ‘ ; > 314 
Bagh, (Jowaki Country), 3953 ; ‘(Zaimukht Country) .o & G 4s 360 
Baghao e e ra e ° e ° ° ° ° ° ° 347 
Baghelkhand (Rewah) . ‘ ; eo ty : ‘ ; - 87,113, 112 
Bagot, Humphrey, Lieutenant. ‘ ee ee ee i 122 
Bahauta ‘ . ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘: ‘ ; 107 
Bahawalpur e e e e ° ° ® ° . r . 223 235 
Bahraich e e e e e ° ° e e ‘ 108, 286 
Baighul River, battle of the ‘ ° : ° . ee 39 
Baillie, Sir Ewen, Captain, Lieutenant-General . ee a ee 40 
» William, Colonel . ‘ ° : ; ‘ ‘ F 46 
Baillie-ki-palian e e e e e ry e ° e e 40 
Bailun-ki-paltan e e ) e . r) e ® e 323 
Baio e ° e r e ° ® e e e 419 
Baird, Sir David, General . : ee ee ee CY (1 
»» John McDonald,Captain) » + + + > : ma « 423 
Raiswara ° ° e ° e ° Ad e e ° e ° 287, 288 
Baitul : . e ° Py e e e ° @ ° o @ « 194,135 
Baisai e ° ° e ° : ° . ® ° » 248-49 
Bajaur 6s st 308, 310, 422, 423, 425 
Bajgah Z . > e e e e e e ® e e e 175 
Baji Rao . : ‘ ° ° ° . . ° ° ¢ 133, 134, 268 
Baker, Edward, " Lieutenant ° . . ° ° 64 


~ Thomas Darand, Brigadier-General 348,349» 350» 32, ana 354) 355» 356, 
. 359) 3715 373 
Bakrim ry e e ° e ° e © e e e a1 
Baksa (Bhutan) - ° . ° . . ; 312, 313) 384, $15 
Baksar Ghat e ry ° r e e 288 
Balabet e e ° ° ° e e e ° r ° ° ° 267 


Bala Hisar. ‘ é 351, 352, 354, 356, 357, 359 


Bala e e e e ° e e ° ° e ° e 312 
-, Fass (Bhutan) . : . ‘ ° : ° © 313) 384, 315 
Bala Rao e e ry e e ° e ry e ° ° e 289 
Balasore ° ° e ° e ° e e e ° e e 3, 87 
Balbhadra Singh , . ° . , ° . : . 118, 119 
Baldwin, G. M., Lieutenant - ; : ° , ‘ ‘ ‘ 426 
Balesh Khel ° e e e e e e e e ° 360 
Ball, G., Lieutenant-Colonel _. i . . . . ° . 87,10 
” Ww. Lieutenant ° . ° e e ° e 87, 88 
Ball-Acton, Colonel e ° ° e ° ° e e 370 
Baluch battalions. . 5 ‘ : ‘ 273, 286, 288, 378, 403 
Baluchis . - = ‘ Z ° . «171, 876, 196-—97» 208 
Baluchistan. ° ‘ ° . ° . 193, 174) 176, 177, 196 


a Le TEES: EE eee emma sere 


504 INDEX. 


PAGE 
Bamangaon -. me ; ° ‘ ; . . m ; 100 
Bamfield, Daniel, Major ; ; ; ; . , : 234 
Bamian . 7 . : ‘ ‘ . ‘ ; 5 73, 1739 174, 175 
Banas River e e e e e e e e e e ° g! 
Banda, N.-W.F. . e : ° ‘ e . . . ° : 250 
Banda, N.-W. P, . : é A ‘ i 2 ‘ . ‘ 112 
Bandel e ° ° e e ° e e ° e e e 5 
Bandi . ° ‘ : ; ; ‘ ‘ ° 158 
Bandula, Maha, Biicinéss ‘General ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ A : ‘ 147, 152 
Bangalore. ‘ <. e % : . 57s 58, 59 
Bankipore ‘ ° , . ° ‘ ‘ e ; , . 26, 30, 33 
Banks’ House, Lucknow . ' ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ; 279, 2&2 
Bannouw . ‘ ° ° : ° ‘ . F ° 225, 252, 294, 323, 376 
Bapam . ‘ ; : ‘ . ; ; ; ° . ° 416 
Bapuji Scindia ' : ‘ ° ; ‘ ; ‘: ° ‘ 89 
Bara, valley . : ° ° e ‘ ‘j ‘ é : » 339, 340 
Barabati — ° ° ° e r) e e ° ° ° ° ° 87 
Baragaon ° ° . ° ° ° e e . ° ‘ ; 71 
Baragarhi ° ° ‘ . . ‘ , ° . . 122 
Barari Pass e e e e e ° Ps ® e e 293 
Baramahal e Py ° e e ° e ° e e e 36, 60 
Barchar . F - ; : : ‘ ; 396 
Barclay, Fak Miles, Licuetact ® ° ° e e , e ry 341 
Bardgaon ° e e e Py e e e e ry ° 137 
Bardhi , . ° . , ‘ . . ‘ ; ° . . ait 
Barechis . r ° e ° : e ° e ° e 347 
Bareilly . e ‘ °  % so 64, 127, 153; 201, 266, 276, 285 
Bargirs . ° ° . ‘ ° am 3 3 « 341, 165, 26) 
Barharwa r e ry e e e e e r . ° . 122 
Bari, action at ° . ; é‘ ° ‘ ;: . : . ° 286 
Barjidia e . e e ° e e e e w ° ° 289 
Barka-ki-Serai ° ‘ . . ° : ° . ‘ 200 
Barkar-ki-paltan ; . ° ° ° . ° ° ‘ 30 
Barker, George R., Brigadier . ‘ , ° ‘ . ° ° . 288, 289 
» «Sir Robert, Colonel ; . ‘ ; « 30, 31, 38, 65 
Barnard, Sir Henry William, Major-General ‘ ; : . - 264, 271 
Baroda . . . ° ‘ ; ‘ 2 ° ° ° - 42, 80 
Barrackpore . . ‘ ; ‘ A - 52, 60, 163, 202, 263, 276 
‘i Mutiny at, in n 1824 ° ° ° . ; . e » 150—51 
Disarming of the oe at . ° ° . ° ° ° 276 
Barry, Henry,Captain . $e es ee. 248 
Barter, Richard, Brigadier-General . : . ° 6 ° ‘ 366 
Barwa. : . : . ° . . ‘ . . ° ° 420 
Basawal ‘ : ; ‘ ; : : ° ‘ ‘ « 340,41 
Bashiratgan), fights at , : ‘ ° ° ° . ° 269 
Bassa e ° e e e ° Py e ° e ° 225 
Bassein (Bombay) ‘ : ; : é ‘ ‘ ; ; . 43, 80, 86 
» (Burma). ‘ ° ° ‘ ‘ : : ‘ ° 151, 245 
Bassian . e ° . ® e e ° ° e ° ° 207, 214 


~~ weet ee ee ne 


INDEX. 505 


a SR SEP PEE 


Paea 

Bassik hel (Afridis) e e ° ° ° e ° e e ° 255, 258 
Batavia. ‘ ; ; ‘ ‘ ; : 110° 
Bateman, T. S., Lieutenant-Colonel ; : ; : ; . . 101 
Bati : ° ° e ° . . e e . e e 253 
Batta Mutiny. s x a" ; : . . 33—4 
Batta, reduction of : , . . ‘ ‘ . 32-—3, 163 
Battine, W., Major-General a . ° : - 192 
Battye, A., Captain . . ° . ° . ° © 3231 
“5 Frederick Drummond, Lieutenant-Colonel ‘ ‘ ; - 426 

»» Leigh Richmond, Major j ‘ , . ; , i © 6304 

»  Wigram, Captain, Major ‘ se <% . . + $26) 342, 364 
Baungshe Chins : é ‘ ; P ‘ F . é © «= 401, 412 
Bazar valley . ; , . ‘ ° ° ° 339, 340 
Beadon, Hugh, Assistant-Surgeon o> 
Beas River ° . ; : ° : . °  e to2 
Beatson, Douglas C. T, Lieutenant ° “ . ° . ° , ° 219 
Beatson’s Horse ‘ ° : : : ; : - 208 
Beddy, Edwin, Lieutenant, Colonel ‘ ‘ ; ‘ ‘ - 315, 396 
Bedingfield, Richard G., Lieutenant. : ‘ ; . ‘ . - 157 
Begum Koti, Lucknow . ; . . : ° , ; ; - 282 
Begum Samru . ‘ . * . . ee ° oe é - 128 
Bela . . ° : 3 . . . d . ‘ ° . . 8&8 
Belbeis ig. ‘ ‘ ° ; : ‘ - 379 
Beley, Charles Harold Hepworth, i a : ‘ ; . : > 396 
Belgram ‘ ‘ ‘ ; . . ° . - 36 
Bemaru Heights é P ‘ ‘ «115, 127, 140, 266 
Benares . ‘ : , ar a7, 28, 40: 4i, 48, 54,71, 181, 182, 266, 357 
» Horse . : ‘ : : ; . : ‘ . ¢ 298, 300 
Bencoolesa e e e e e e e ° ° e 55) 65 
Bencoolen, expedition to  , 
Bengal, disturbancesin . ete ‘ - © «6 557 


»» European battalions and regiments . 4s 9» 26, 30, 445 45, 46, 47, 


96, 99) 155—56, 162 
” Military Police Battalion e e e e ° ° e ) 260 


‘ a ma (vide * 45th Bengal Infantry.’’) 
99 Mutiny i ia s e e e e e e ® e 6 283—84 
ry) Nawab of e e e ° r 02 et, séq., 7 e. S#q. 33 
9” Settlement of British i 1p e e e ° e e e I, 2, 3 
»»  Sepoys, first sentonservicebysea . . » + « « 10,36,55 
9 lost at sea. e e e e e ad : ° 36, 50, 55 
Yeomanry Cavalry e r e e ° e 284 
Bengal Army . : 5, 13, 14 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, 33 


ye " Augmentations of 16, 17; 18, a1—2, 30, 34—5, 39—41, 44—45, 
St, 5253, 56, 65, 70, 71, 73, 78—79, 87—— 
88, 101, 114, 137, 138, 140, 153, 160—163, 
193, 201—02, 321=22, 241, 298-99, 328— 


29, 403, 408 
- Batteries and Regiments of the— » 403, 


Ne, 7 (Bengal) Mountain Battery .392, 898, 399, 400, 403, 402, 403, 43! 


506 


Bengal Army, Batteries and Regiments of the—condd. 


INDEX. 


. 
OE Oe —— wee 


PAGE 


No. 8 (Bengal) Mountain Battery 392, 398, 399, 400, 403, 413, 


418, 422, 43! 


The Governor-General’s Body Guard,—see Body Guard. 
1st Bengal Cavalry 99, 101-02, 102, 107, 113, 337, 128, 139) 


2nd 


3rd 


ath 
Sth 
6th 
7th 
Sth 
otk 
toth 
rith 
rath 
13th 
14th 
15th 
16th 


17th 
18th 


toth 


»” 


a9 


3 


99 
be 


139, 154, 156, 164, 167, 170, 172, 176, 181, 
187, 189, 193, 254, 261, 300, 329, 360, 405, 408, 43! 
(Lancers) . 114, 118, 122, 123, 129, 130, 139, 
151, 196, 206, 212, 218, 235, 250, 
253, 258, 300, 312, 320, 378, 405, 408, 43! 
e © 103, 133, 124, 129, 130, 167, 170, 
| 171, 172, 179, 181, 192, 198, 199, 
212, 214, 216, 261, 300, $29, 349, 
362, 367, 370, 372, 40S, 408, 43! 
162, 166, 192, 206, 300, 329, 363, 364, 370, 
405, 408, 43: 
201, 223, 226, 228, 235, 254, 265, 291, $00, 
322, 313, 329, 363, 369, 405, 408, 43! 
(Lancers) . 196, 198, 201, 212, 218, 276, 300, 
311, 322, 329, 378, 405, 408, 431 
221, 229, 286, 300, 329, 387, 388, 390, 392, 404, 
405, 408, 43% 
+ 321, 265, 291, 300, 320, 345, 346, 3471 40S, 408, 431 
(Lancers) 271, 272, 274, 275, 277, 278, 280, 
281, 283, 286, 298, 300, 319, 326, 
329, 381, 382, 383, 384, 405, 408, 431 
( os) 298, 300, 317, 326, 329, 333, 338, 
343, 349, 359, 360, 381, 405, 408, 431 
( » ) 271, 281, 283, 286, 296,297, 298, 
299, 300, 306, 329, 333, 337, 339, 
341, 404, 405, 408, 418, 420, 423, 426, 431 
298, 299, 300, 317, 329, 343» $48, 35!, 358, 408, 408, 431 
(Lancers) 268, 299, 300, 329, 333, 338, 33% 
340, 341, 351, 360, 378, 405, 408, 435 
( 4, ) 289, 298, 300, 312, 31§, 329, 333, 
348, 352—3, 353, 354, 356, 357, 405, 408, 431 
( ry) ) 285, 288, 293, 298, 300, 320, 395» 
405, 408, 435 
‘ e e 298, 300, 319, 329, 403, 408, 431 
2 298, 300, 320, 349) 362, 363, 403, 404, 408, 431 
(Lancers) 298, 300, 329, 360, 375, 402, 405, 408, 431 
( w ) 296, 297, 299, 300, 329, 33% 345, 
349) 365. 366, 369, 404, 405, 408, 417, 431 


Corps of Sappers and Miners,—see Sappers and Miners. 
ist Bengal Infantry . 40, 51, 66, 67, 69, 81, 84, 86, 88, 1, 125, 


137, 143) 154, 155, 164, 168, 201, 265, 
291, 292, 301, $02, 303, 330, $81, 389, 390, 
392, 406, 428, 431 


INDEX, 507 


PAGE 
Bengal Army, Batteries and Regiments of the—con#d. 


2nd Bengal Infantry . 71,77,81, 83, 84, 86, 93, 96, 9% 118, 122, 
123, 12§, 127, 136, 343, 154. 155, 156, 
158, 164, 168, 171, 172, 198, 199, 201, 
202, 204, 226, 228, 229, 231, 238, 240, 
249, 258, 267, 290, 301, 302, 303, 330, 

385, 386, 388, 389, 390, 400, 406, 428, 43! 
3rd ” ” « 71, 78, 103, 104, 107, 108, 143, 154, 155, 
198, 159, 164, 194, 242, 301, $02, 303, 

330, 370, 401, 406, 428, 431 
4th Pe " - 73,81, 84, 85, 86, 88, 103, 106, 108, 
212, 137) 143, 149, 154, 158, 159, 164, 
186, 190, 193, 203, 207, 231, 212, 218, 
219, 246, 302, 302, 303,330, 370, 388, 

406, 428, 41 
Sth ” 9 - 78, 89, 91, 93. 104, 105, 106, 118, 124, 
143, 151, 164, 168, 172, 176, 187, 188, 
189, 191, 193, 204, 206, 208, 211, 212, 

215, 218, 258, 267, 268, 301, 302, 303, | 
330, $89, 391, 392, 406, 428, 431 

6th pe - 88,106, 107, 108, 112, 133, 143 149, 
168, 172, 176, 179, 187, 188, 189, 198, 
193, 198, 199, 202, 204, 212, 218, 219, 
320, 276, 301, 303, 303, $30, 338, 340, 

404, 406, 428, 431 
7th Y» ” - 93» 143, 1§0—$1, 160, 163, 206, 212, 214, 
235, 217, 218, 219, 295, 297—8, 301, 

302, 303, 330, 378, 404, 406, 413, 428, 431 
Sth » ” . 1415, 125, 043, 149, 192, 212, 9:8, 
219, 220, 301, 302, 303, 312, 330, 349, 

368, 364, 406, 428, 431 
oth ” ” e 138, 140, 143, 149, 1549 159) 164, ol, 
206, 212,217, 218, 219, 258, 301, 302, 

203, 316, 330, 363, 369, 400, 401, 406, 428, 431 


toth ” n + 140, 143, 16% 204, 274, 295, 298, 308, 
302, 303, 330, $92, 398, 400, gol, 404, 

406, 428, 431 
rtth rm m - 160, 198, 202, 226, 228, 230, 231, 234, 


238, 240, 276, 295, 298, 301, 302, 303, 
312, 313, 384, 330, 351, 385, 386, 387, 
380, 3915 404, 406, 418, 428, 431 
12th » »  (Kalat-i-Ghilzai Regiment) 167, 173, 177, 188, 
189, 193, 198, 201, 202, 252, 265, 291, 
301, 302, 303, 312, $15» 316, 330, 380, 
389, 390, 392, 406, 428, 4315 
13th * »  (Shelhawati Battalion) 159, 215, 222, 258, 
301, 3025 303, 326, 330, 360, 393, 304, 406, 
41S, 423, 428, 438 


508 INDEX. 


Bengal Army, Batteries and Regiments of the—centd, 


14th Bengal Infantry (Ferozepore Sikhs) 222, 266, 268, 281, 283, 
287, 289, 301, 302, 303, 306, 300, 310, 
324, 330, 338, 375, 395, 406, 423, 424, 431 
1Sth ” » (Ludhiana Sikhs) 222, 246, 266, 296, 297, 
298, 301, 302, 303, 33 345) 349, 366, 
371, 3732, 381, 382, 383, 384, 404, 406, 
417, 423, 431 
16th 9 i | 270s 301, 302, 303, 322, 330, 363, 406, 428, 431 
17th » ” + 301, 302, 303, 313, 330, 334, 370, 381, 382, 
383, 384, 392, 399, 400, 402, 406, 428, 431 
1&th a» » ° ° e 65, 69, 139, 301, 302, 303, 3135 
328, 330, 389, 391, 406, 413, 435, 428, 431 
1oth ” » (Punjab) . 271,278, 281, 287, 289, 299, 
302, 303, 315, 331, 334, 345; 
349, 365, 366, 400, 417, 432 
zoth ” ” » * 271, 291, 296, 297, 299, 302, 303, 
306, 307, 309, 319, 320, 324, 
33! 334, 3375 341, 342, 360, 
375, 378, 404, 406, 419, 421, 423, 431 
2ist » 29 r) e 271, 288, 29!I, 292, 299, 302, 303; 
395» 317) 331, 334. 343. 345, 
349% 3515 375) 404, 406, 431 
32nd ” ” ” « 271, 296, 297, 298, 299, 302, 303, 
3215 324, 331, 363, 404, 406, 416, 431 
asrd Ps » (Punjab Pioneers) . 271, 296, 297, 299, 303, 
303, 310, 313, 387, 331, 343, 3444 
348; 350, 358, 359, 362, 367, 371, 
407, 416, 423, 431 
24th ve 2 (Punjab)  . 271, 291, 299, 302, 303, 319, 331; 
33-4) 338, 340, 341, 349 359, 360, 
362, 367—8, 371, 395s 404, 497, 431 
25th ” ” ” - 271, 285, 287, 299, 302, 303, 331, 
334s 345» 349, 365, 366, 371, 407, 
420, 423, 431 


26th os » 5 - 273, 291, 292, 290, 302, 303, 316, 
3315 345, 387, 389, 390, 404, 407, 433 
37th Py ry ” + 271, 296, 297, 298, 299, 302, 303, 


3215 3245 331, 33-45 338, 339, 340, 
341, 342, 349, 362, 363, 387, 380, 

3905 404, 407, 417, 431 
28th P) ” ” » 271, 285, 290, 302, 303, 305, 331, 
343; 345, 343, 349, 350, 352, 358, 

359» 302, 404, 407, 431 
29th ” » ” "« 271, 299, 302, 303, 315, 3245 325, 
331, 343, 351, 360, 361, 395, 407, 

416, 417, 423, 431 


INDEX. 5099 


See Air ee RE 
PAGF 
Bengal Army, Batteries and Regiments of the—confd. 
seth Bengal Infantry (Punjab) . 371, 286, 29, 302, 303, 313, 314, 
3315 3345 349, 363, 375, 407, 420, 
423; 43! 


3ist » ” ) e 2715278) 299, 302, 303, 315, 319, 
326, 331, 334, 349, 363, 364, 370, 407, 438 

32nd ~ » (Punjab Pioneers) 271, 272, 277, 279, 281, 287, 

292, 293, 299, 302, 303, 306, 

311, 331, 345, 363, 360, 375, 
. 393» 407, 418, 423, 425, 431 

33rd * » (Punjabi Mahomedan) . 299, 302, 303, 305, 
3315 3342 392, 398, 400, 403, 407, 422, 431 


34th » (Punjab Pioneers) + 394, 395, 396, 403, 409, 431 
35th » (Sikhs) . ;: ; ; ‘ 403, 409, 429, 431 
36th ‘fs » (Sikhs) . ‘ P , ¢ 403, 409, 42829, 431 
37th » (Dogras) . - 403, 409, 418, 423, 426, 431 
38th ”» » ( »w ). 299, 302, 303, 331, 334, 

401, 403, 407, 409, 422, 435 


39th 6 » (Garhwal Rifles). . 209, 302, 303, 331, 334, 
403, 407, 412, 413, 433 
goth " » (Pathans) » 299, 302, 303, 331, 334, 304, 
396, 403, 407, 412, 431 
42nd » (Gurkha Rifles) 136, 137—38, 139, 145, 148, 
149, 157, 162, 294, 302, 303, 
321, 332, 333, 328, 331, 388, 
392, 397, 398, 399, 400, 401, 
4°30 407, 408—9, 414, 415, 431 
43rd %0 » ( ” ) 162, 201—2, 302, 303, 312, 
313, 314, 315, 322, 324, 
337, 331, 380, 387, 388, 390, 
403) 407, 408—0, 414, 415, 420, 431 
44th » oo  { 0 ) 149) 357, }60, 283, 284, 302, 
303, 305, 312, 3134, 315, 321, 
322, 333, 327, 328, 331, 388, 
392, 398, 403, 407, 408—9, 
414. 415, 420, 431 
45th ° »(Rattray’s Sikhs) 260, 276, 277, 284, 298, 305, 329, 
3335 334. 338, 33% 340, 341, 342, 
349, 362, 368, 381, 394, 407, 409, 431 
ist Gurkha (Rifle) Regiment . 122, 126—27, 1379 139) 15S) 156. 
161, 1645 504, 332, 214, 21§, 317, 
218, 220, 242, 250, 251, 354, 2555 
256, 264, 288, 301, 302) 319, 320, 
32353315 345» 363-4, 364, 303, 
403, 407, 421, 422, 431 


510 


INDEX. 


FTES ree: ae ae eS 


PAGE 


Bengal Army, Batteries and Regiments of the—concld. 
and Gurkha (Rifle) Regiment . 122, 126—27, 129, 137, 1395 153» 


155, 156, 161, 164, 192, 204, 212, 
214, 215, 217, 218, 219, 220, 264, 
272, 273, 301, 302, 312, 319, 321, 
326, 331, 338) 339s 340, 343, 349, 
358, 359, 362, 368, 371, 373 
400, 401, 403, 407, 415 —16, 438 


3rd » v . 122, 126—27, 137, 139, 272, 273; 

277» 3Ol, 302, 312, 314, 33%. 345s 

+ 349s 361, 365, 366, 389, 390, 403, 

407, 43! 

4th ” ” ” * 271, 301, 302, 306, 319, 321, 331, 

337s 340, 341, 342, 349% 358, 362, 

368, 371, 375, 403, 403, 407, 412, 
416, 423, 433 

Sth ” ” ” (Punjab Frontier Force)—See Panjab 

Frontier Force. 

Bengal Army—Class composition of ae eM . 329-31, 405—09 
‘4 Deterioration of . ; : .  202—03, 262 
A Division of, into two portions : ; “ ‘ : : 430 
“ Establishment of officers in 1863—64 : . , 332 

es Increases of (See Bengal Army—Augmentations) . 160—63, 
20I—02, 221,'259—60, 403, 408 
e insubordination in . ‘ « 202—03 
Interior economy of . - 54-55, ers 5cg2 6a: 328—~—35, 404—12 

" Internal history of 112—16, 126—27, 163-66, 259—62, 
328—35, 376—77, 402—12 
Ra Linking of battalions in . : ‘ ; ‘ ‘ 5 410 
Light companies formed in , ; ‘ . - 105 
“ Local corps of ‘ ‘ ‘ ° , F - 139—40 
s Mutiny of — in 1857 . : ° é j ‘ » 262—Qo 
- Mountain batteries of ° ° 392, 398, 399, 400, 401, 402, 403 
et Numbering of corps . . 23, 39» 45» 50, 67, 143, 300, 302, 303 
” Pay of ® ° ° e ® ° s e ° ° 3337-34 
‘e Reductions of . ° 102, 127, 222, 25Q, 299) 300-03 

= Re-organisations and eiseae of . 30, 35: 37> 44-45» 49-55» 
63) 65, 69, 93. 139-40, 142—44, 160—66, 

298-304, 402—12, 4$0 
1” Strength of . ; a ve ? »  « 162, 376, 402—04 
is Transfer to the Crown ° ; ‘ ° ; - ‘ 303 
Bengal Command, institution of ® e e ° ° e e @ 430 
Beni-Badam ° s e Py e e e e e ° e e 189 
Beni Madho Singh e e - e ° e ° e ° ° 288 
Beninga e e e e e e e ° e e ° 369 
Bennett, Frederick, acien . , i ‘ ‘ 5 ; F ; 148 
Bentinck, Lord William . . . «© © «© «  « 160, 161, 163, 203 


ee ee ape te 


INDEX. 


Berar, Rajahof . : 
Bere, Edward Baker, Ca ptain 
Berhampore . 

Berkeley, Chas, A. FitsH., Brigadier 


Bernadotte, Marshal (afterwards nee of Sweden) 


Besud district . ; . 
Bettiah . ° ; ; . 
Bhadrapur_. ‘ : ° 
Bhagalpur : : . . 
Bhagaula ' ; 
Bhagaura ‘ ; ° 


Bhagwan Singh 

adel ae 

Bhamo 

Bha mori 

Bhapawi 

Bhattis . 

Bhawani, storming of 

Bhimbar . ‘ ‘ 

Bhoja Singh . ; 

Bhojpur ; 

Bhonsla ; , , ; 
Bhopal Battalion : : 
Bhor Ghat. . ‘ 
Bhurtpore. 


Bhutan War . ; m 
Bhutiahs, and their i jacutsions 
Bhatwal ‘ 
Biana ‘ . 

Bibiganj ‘ ° : 5 
Bichaund é ° . : 
Bichukob Pass : A : 
Bichi-tal] ‘ é 


Biddulph, George, Lieutenant-Colonel 


» M.A.S., Major-General 
Bihar. : d . 
Bihta e 
Bijaigarh (Kaimur Hills) 
Bijaigarh (Jumna Doab) : 
Bikanir .  . tlw : 
Bikna Thori Pass 
Bikrampur a 
Bilaspur. . . . . 
Binbaung ; ave 
Bini Hisar p : . 
Birbhum 3 : 
Birch, Henry Holwell, Major : 
so j- 2%. Mill, Lieutenant . 


git 


PAGE 


80, 88, 108, 134 
e 210 


° 45, 48,60 ee 


. ye 
e e e 369 
. ‘ 7 16 
e e e e e 145 
td es e e e e 8 
e e e e e 285 
e ° e ° 195 
e e e e e e 131 
° ° ° ° © 76,77 
. sii 3873 392, 3975 ne 400, 402 
109 

- ; : : 11 

‘ ‘ 128 

e e e e e 107 

‘ 4 j ‘ ‘ 240 

e e ° e 136 

° e ° e e 9 
e e ° e 80 
. e e e e r 338 
r e ° e e 43 
86, 96, 97) 99, 100, 101, 153—$6, 164, 262 
e e ° e e 312—16 
: ° ° « 37, $12—16 
° ° ° © 74, 118, 122, 289 
e bd ® 6 e e 88 
e e e ° e 277 
e ry e ° e 109 

 ] e e e 125 
° . r ° ° e 130 
‘ é ° ° ‘ ° 280 
. . . « 345, 346 
- 175 21, 24, 30) St 129, 276, 284, 328 
; ‘ ° ge 

e e ° ® e 76, 7 
e e e e e e 277 
e e es e e e 126 
e ° e e ° e 345 
e @ ° s e 6 12! 
° ° e e ° 399 
e e e e 350, 355, 37! 
e e 6 e e e 17 
e e e e ® e 339 
®  ] ® e e e 64 


312 INDEX. 


ee ee 


PAGE 
Birch, Mr. . . p ° ° ° ° ° e ‘ ° 323 
Bird, Edward, Liedtepant ° 5 : ‘ e ; ‘ . 60 
» Louis S., Brigadior ° . oe ° e© «© 28 258 
Birpur, battle of . ° e e e , e e ° e ‘ 16 
Birpur-Shatam pur . ; ° : ° ° ° oe % 87 
Birwah . e ° ° ° e e e e e e ° ® 288 
Bisheshwar-ki-paltan . : ° ‘ . ; : : a 115 
Bishop, St. George dibapsaas Leatenaat ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ; ; 311 
Bissengiri . . ° ° ° . ° . . ° . 314 
Biswah e ° ° e e ° ° e e . ° e 288 
Bitaura, battle of . ‘ é e . ‘ ‘< ‘ , ‘. ° 64 
Bithur e e ® e e e e e ° ° - 134 267, 269 
Bizoti Urakzais . . ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ‘ - 318, 320 
Black Hole of Calcutta é ° ; ‘ : . A ‘ ; 4 
Black, S., Lieutenant-Colonel : ‘ ‘ ‘ " 5 66 . 
Black Mountain Expeditions . ; ; ek as 318—20, 91-07 416, 418, 419 
Blackney, John Francis, Captain. ae ‘ ; ; ; 123 
Blair, R., Lieutenant-Colonel . : ; . ; : ‘ i . 77 
» Thomas, Captain . ‘ ° ; ; ; , : : : 49 
Blane, Robert, Captain . 5 ‘ ‘ ; Fe ‘: 22 


Body Guard, The Governor-General’s « 30, 37, 51, 60, 76, 87, 302, 110, 
131, 112, 129, 136, 147, 150, 162, 164, 198, 
206, 207, pi 212, 215, 218, 258, 427 


' Boh Shwe : ‘ P ‘ ‘ ; 390 
Boileau, Lestock Alexander, Ensign. ‘ ; ‘ ; ° ‘ ‘ « 248 
Boileau, S. B., Colonel. j ‘ : ‘ é ; p ; 254 
Boisragon, T. V. R., Colonel . . ; ; ° . ‘ ; ‘ 363 
Bokhara, Amir of . ‘ . ° . ° ° . ° 174 
Bolan Pass’. ‘ : ; . ‘ é 168, aN 172, 176, 189, 193 
Bole-ki-paltan . . ° ° . ° ° ° ° 4! 
Bolton, Samuel, Brigadier A ‘ ° ° - ‘ ‘ ; ‘ 208 

» Thomas, Major . ' ° ‘ ° . ° . ° . 65 
Thomas William, Captain ° e e ° ® e 8 213 


” 


Bombay, troops from, 4, 5, 6, 7» 9 263 Expedition to, 40—44, 50--513 at 
Bhurtpore, 97— 100 ; Troops in Afghanistan, 168, 170, 1715 174, 176—775 
188, 189; In Sindh, 196—98, 212—13 ; In the Punjab, 212, 213, 235—37 3 
In Bengal, 264; In Afghanistan, 345—47, aaa 365—66; Disaster 
at Maiwand, 370; In Egypt, . * ‘ ° ‘ ‘ « 378—79 


Bombay Command, institutionof . 2 2. + «© . ° 430 
Bori Valley. ; : ‘i . ‘ ‘ : : ; ai. 258, 325, 380 
eR 8 (S. Afghanistan) ‘ ° : ‘ ‘ - » 380, 381 
Bor Matan__. ‘ : : ° - ‘ ° : ‘. ‘. ; 323 
Borneo . ‘ ° . ° ° ° ° ° ° Vit 
Boulnois, Arthur, Lieutenant ° ‘ ° ° ° : ° ‘ 250 
Bourchier, George, Brigadier-General . .  e ‘ ‘ : ; 331 
Bourquien, Louis. ° . ° ‘ ; . . 82 
Bowen, H., Major, Lieutenant-Colonel . ‘ ° ° ; ‘ 135, 145 
Bowie, R., “Lieutenant-Colonel ; : F ‘ ‘ ° * ° 103 


INDEX, 513 


PAGE 

Bowles, Charles, Captain ° e e . e @ e e e r 48 
Bowyer, James, Lieutenant e e e e e ° e e ® 97 
Box, Thomas, Cap tain ° e e e e ° ° ° ° e Zio 
Boyd, William, fiutenant e e e e ° . e e e 96 
Bozdars, expedition against . «© +. «© © «© «© « 357,258 
Bozdar Hills . e e ° e e ry e r) e @ 258 
Brackenbury, Lionel \Vilhelm, Lisatenaiit ‘ A 5 ° e ; 414 
Bradbridge, John, Captain. : ° . , ° ee ° 20 
Bradford, George S., Ensign . . ‘ ° ee ° ° . 255 
Bradshaw, Josepb, Lieutenant-Colonel j ° 4 oe ° 249 
¥6 P., Major . -° ° : < . ° ° ‘ ° 122 

ms S., Major . ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ° ° . A ° jl 
Bradshaw-ki-paltan e e e e e e e ° e e 71 
Brahmans ; ° ° ° ° : ° : ° ‘ ° - 5:54 
Brahman regiments e e e e e e e e e e 428 
Brigade organisation ° ° ° ° ° ° ° e jo~-32 
Bright, R. O., Colonel, Major-General, : 319, 349, 352, 356, 7s 362, 363, 364 
British troops, Paucity of ‘ ‘ ° e e ° e ° P 263 
Broadbrook, John,Captain _.. ‘ . ° . a1 
Broadfoot, George, Captain, Major | ‘ “eh ‘ 183, 184, 186, 191%, 211 
yr James S., Lieutenant . «© . .« | - oe 17§ 

PS Wm., Lieutenant . . . . 7 ee © «© «6 181 
Brooke, George, Brigadier. ‘ ; F : é ‘ . ; 206 
” James, Lieutenant ° ° e e e e ° ° e 149 
Brookes, Robert, Lieutenant-Colonel r e r) e e @ ° 332 
Broome’ 8 History ° ° e e e ° ° e ° e ° 7 
Broon-ki-paltan ° ‘° e ° ° e ° 71 
Broughton, E. S., Major, Lieutenant-Colonel ee  / 
Brown, Clements, Captain ° ‘ ‘ : ‘ ° ° - ° 74 
», George, Lieutenant-Colonel . © © © © 8 -» 46 

ey John, Captain ° e ° ° ° e ° ° ° e 155 

» Lewis, Lieutenant, Captain : : : ‘ ° ° 19, 23, $3 

” Lewis, Captain e ° e . e e e r e e e 174 

»» Simeon, Captain. .  . o © «© 8 + 104 
Thomas, Lieutenant-Colonel, Major-General. + + $09, 129, 132, 133 
Brown: George S., Major, Brigadier-General . ‘ . © 71,96 
» Sit Samuel J., Major, Lieutenant-General . 287, 337 338, 339) 340, 342 

»»  W.B., Brigadier-General . 3 ; ° : ° ‘ s 339 
Brownlow, C. H., Brigadier-General ‘ ; ; - : 4 e $21, 322 
Bruce, Louis, Lieutenant-Colonel . ; ° . : ° ‘ 211 
»» William, Captain ‘ ; ‘* : ° ° ° ° ° 45 
Bruce’s Corps of Independent Cavalry . . 2 Ce : . 79 
Brydon, William, Assistant-Surgeon - &@ ws we ws @ 183 
Brydon, William, Captain . e ° e ° ° ® ° © 333, 324 
Buchaa, Alexander, Lieutenant e e ° e e e ° ° 62 
Buchanan, H. J+ Colonel ° ° e e ° ° Py e ° 324 
Budge-Budge ° ° .° .° e ° e e ° ° ° bad 4, 32 
Budi-Pind ° e ° e ® e e ) . . 235 


514 INDEX. 


PAGE 
Bugtis . ° . . ‘ . : ir ce : , : ‘ 203 
Bukit Patus Pass e e ® e e e ° e ° e ° 323 
Bulandshahr . e e e ° e ° e e ° ° « 95, 377 
Bunas Nala . . ° ° ‘ ; ° ; ° . . 26 
Bundelas ry ° ° ° ry ° e e 195 
Bundelkhand . 80, 81, 86, 88, 80, QO, 100, 103, 104, sas: 107, 108, 312, 

; 129, 133, 138, 153, 163, 195, 289 

‘s Legion. .« ° . ‘ : . 163, 195» 196, 203, 221, 222 
Bundri ° @ e ry e ° ° ° ° e ° e 215, 216 
Buner ° ° ° e oe ° e e ° ° e ° e git 

9 Pass ° ° e e ° ° e e e e A > S| 
Bunerwals . ‘ - ° ; - ; . ‘ i a6: 307, 308, 311 
Buni e e e e ° e e e ° ° e ° ° 424 
Burbia-ki-chauki, Action at. : é ‘ ‘ ° : ‘ : 269 
Burdai . ° e ry ° e ° e ° . e ° 135 
Burdwan ° ° ° ° ° ; ' a 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22 
Burdwan-ki-paltan : ° ° ° ; , ‘ : 7 18 
Burges, Benjamin, Lieutenant e ° . . ‘ . . : 96 
Burhanpur. . ° ° e . e » «41, 42, 153 
Burlton, Philip Bowles, Lieutenant . ° ° , ° . ; . 148 
Burma, First contact with . . + + , %  “« 63 

” ist war e ° ° ® ° ° ® e ° e « 14553 

9 and war e ° e e e ° e e ° ° 242—48, 429 

» gtdwar . . ° . . ‘ ‘ . « 384—93, 397-460 
Burmese incursions . " ; ° : ‘ é . . : 63 
Burn, W., Lieutenant-Colonel ; ; A ; » 87, 93» 94) 95» 100 
Burnes, Sir Alexander. ‘ e ; ‘ j ; ° , ‘ 180 
»» Charles, Lieutenant . . : ° ° : : ; 183 
Burnet, John, Lieutenant-Colonel . , ‘ ; : ‘ , ‘ 125 
Burnett, John Hamilton, Captain . ‘ . . ‘ ° ° ; 210 
Burral-ki-paltan . ‘ ‘ ; ’ é ° ; 73 
Burrell, Littellus, Captain ‘ é P ‘ ‘ . ‘ © 72,73 
Burrington, George, Colonel. ; . ‘ , ; . . ° 64 
Butkhak ° e ° ‘ ° ‘ , ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ A 179 
Butler, John, Captain © - eet 323 
Raa kc: 4 aC CC CU ~ 6 Shy 71 TES, 277 

av battle of ° ° e e e ° e ° ° e 25, 26, 27, 50 
Buxarries, a description of native troops . s . : ° ‘ , 5 
Byng, Hon’ble Robert Barlow Palmer, meer ‘ ; és ° ° ; 238 
Byrne, John, Lieutenant-Colonel : ‘ . : 283 


Cacnar ° ° ‘ ° ° ° P ° « 146, 349, 320, 331, 415 

Cadet company. ° ‘ P ‘ 38 

Caillaud, Joha, ee Lieutenant-Coloneh Commander-in-Chief . 14, 15, 16, 17 

Cairo. : ‘ ; ‘ - ‘ ° © 749 379 

Calcutta, 3,4, 18, 21 " eepeared: 43 panic at . e e -« © ~— e. 275-76 
» Native Militia, (vide 18th Bengal Infantry.) 


INDEX, 515 


Camac, Jacob, Lieutenant-Colonel) - ws www gn hy OS 
Cambridge, H. R. H. the Duke of . ° e ry ry e e ry 337 
Camp Equipage. a ae a Se ae a SS 
Camp of Exercise of Cavalry : . ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ‘ : 76 
Campbell, Sir Archibald, Brigadier-General : ee - 147, 1§1, 1§2 

o Arthur W., Cap tain ‘ é ‘ ‘ 214 


so Sir Colin, Ganatal (Lord Clyde) 227, 228, aa aad, 238, Pare 240, 
ae 250, 251, 278, 280, 281, 282, 285, 287, 289 


ss Colin Powys, Captain. ‘ ‘ ‘ ;. 5 . 423 
‘s George, Colonel . ; : ‘ ° é : ; : 273 
+ John, Captain ‘< ‘ ‘ . : ° ‘ F , 119 
Pe Robert, Captain . : ‘ ; ; ° ‘ 22, 23, 3! 
i Robert, Lieutenant-Colonel ‘ i , : F © 313, 314 
= Robert, B. P. P., Major . : ‘ ‘ : ° . 326 
William, Major .. . : : ; : ; 85 
Candy, Heury, Lieutenant : : ; er . 156 
Canning, Lord ‘ ‘ ‘ : ' ; ‘ . . ‘ » 264, 376 
Canton . ° ° ° e ° ° e e e e « 194, 295, 298 
Canton River . ‘ ; : : ‘ : 194 
Cape, Jonathan, Lisatenant ‘ é ; ; ‘ ‘ ‘ é 283 
Captain-Lieutenant, rank of, abolished . ‘ : . , 142 
Carnac, John, oe Brigadier-General , ‘ . 8 2. 18, 23, ye 25, 28, 29, 35 
ic . e e ° ° ° 10, 46, 48, 50, 57, 60 
Carnegy, Alexander, Brigadier e e ° e ry ry e e 238 
» -P.M.,, Captain : ; ; , ‘ : 412, 416 
Carrington, William Henry, Lieutenant : F ; : . ‘ ° 100 
Carstairs, Peter, Captain 2 ; ° ‘ ° ‘ 18, 19, 20 
Carter, H., Major e ° ° ° ° e e ° e . 11§ 
Carter-ki-paltan : ‘ : . . ° . ‘ ° . . 11§ 
Cartridges, defiled . : , ‘ ‘ ‘ ; . ‘ « 262, 263 
Casement’s Horse . i . ‘: : ‘ ; ‘ 128 
Cassells, Lieutenant (wounded at Plassey) ‘ ; ; : ° 8 
Caste composition of the Army,—vide “‘ class composition ” 
Castor-hi-paltan ° e ° e e e ° 93 
Cavagnari, Sir Pierre Louis Napoleon, Major ct © 347, 348 
Cavalry, Bengal, raised, 16, 17 ; Re-organised, 23, 30, 31, 32, 40, st, 53; Mis- 


behaviour of 64-65 3 Strength and organisation 55, 63, 66, 73, 78-80 ; 
Camp of Exercise, 76; Internal history, 112-14; At Nagpur, 131; Mis- 
behaviour, 136-37; Internal history, 139-41, 260; At Bhurtpore, 154-56 ; 
Increase and reduction, 161 ; Strength, 162; Misbehaviour at Parwan- 
dara, 175, 201; Increase, 201, 221, 259; Re-organisation of, 1861, 298- 
301 ; Changes in, 329-333; Dress, 334-35; Strength, 402-053 Pay in- 
creased, 411, 01 @** cregular Cavalry.” 
Cavalry, Tartar Ss @ %..% e.. #8 ne ee ° 296-97 
Cawnpore ° ‘We 40> 41, 442 53, 78, 81, 88, 89, 92, 93, 103, 115, 129s 
133, 134, 138, 140, 201, 259, 266, 268, 269, 270, 


a ' 377, 278, 280, oe 
wapore mutiny at; 266-67, i dees ° é . i ° ° 
Ceatre Army, the e e é . . ‘ ‘ e e e 56, 57 


3.3 


516 INDEX. 


A ce ce OST TE Ge a eT em eg Pe Ne ee es 

PAGE 
Centres, regimental o 8 © 8 © 8 . «4a 
Central India . ° ° e ° ° : : 128, fees 157, 276, 289, 290 
Central India Horse . . : « 300, 363, 369, 370 


Ceylon, volunteers to, 138; troops wa minoned fraie 964; 3 Indian Artillery for 429 


Chagarzais e e e e ° e e ° e e e e 319 
Chaila ridge . . ° : : : ‘ : : ° . 397 
Chakalwat e e e e e ry ° e ° e ° ° 425 
Chamb. e ° ° e e ° ° ° * ° e 395 
Chambal river . . é ; e SQ, 90, 99, 100, 130, 132, 199 
Chamberlain, Sir Neville Bowles, Lieutenant, Brigadier, Brigadier-General, 

General . e » 191, 255, 256, 257, 292, 293, 204, 300, 307, 319, 337 
Chambers, Robt. Ewbank, Lientenant-Colonel ; ‘ ‘ . ‘ 179 
Chambi e © ° ° ° e e e e ° e r e 304 
Chamir, fort of - ‘i ° . ° ° ° ‘ ; ; 103 
Chamla Valley ° ° ° ° ° ° 2 - + 291, 306, 307 
Champaran Light Infantry ° ° ° ° ° 118, 123, 124, 139) 148, 161 
Champawat e ° © e e e e ° e e ° ® 124 
Champhai .  - e ° ° : ° ° 321 
Champion, Alexander, Captain, Major, Colonel 185 245 25, 26, 27) 30. 375 38, 39 
Chamurchi_ . e,. . eS = =. te © 313, 314, 315 
Chance, Thomas, Ensign ° . ° ‘ . ; = ‘ 99 
Chanda, Capture of ° : . «© e s 134 

9” (Ou dh), action of e e ° e e ° e e : 282 
Chanda Funds e e e e e e e e e e e 332 
Chandernagore ‘ . ° . ° ° . ° . + 3. 5, 6) 13, 45 
Chandpur e e e e e. ° e e ® e ° e 200 
Changsil ° e e e e e e e ° r) e ° 412 
Chang-tsia-wan . ° ° ‘. ° ° ‘ ° « 296, 297 
Channer, G. N., Brigadier-General . ° : ; ° ° ° 304 
Chapman, Charles, Lieutenant-Colonel » 2 - + ett 31 

» Henry Howard, Lieutenant ° oe a a ° 310 
Chapra e e e e e e ry e ° Py e 7 9 
Chapri e e ® ° e ° e e e e ° ° ° 3790 
Charasia. e ° e e e e ° e e e 6 e 368 
Charasia, battle of . ‘ < => " . ; ; ; . 350, 374 
Chardeh Valley e e ® e e ° e ° ° e « 350, 354 
Charikar e e ° e e ° e e a e e e 1755 180 
Chari Yaris e e r e e ° ° ° ° ° e . 52 
Charnock, Job e ° e e . e s e e e 2 
Chatarpur 2. ee 
Chatta ° ° e ° e ° ° e ° 396 
Chattar Sal, Rajah of Thattiah ; ° ‘ ° : ‘ ; : 78 
Chattar Singh, Sardar. . . : ° . « 225, 226, 230, 237, 240 
Chaukandi r) ° ° e e e e e e e e ° 87 
Chauktat ° ° e e e e e ° ° Py ry e 39! 
Chaunda ° r ° ° ° e e e e e e ° 199 
Cheape, H. , Captain e ry e ° e ° ° e 88 

“ Sir John, Brigadier, Brigadier-General ° 0 226, 228, 245, 247, 248 


Chenab River ° ° ° ° ‘ ° : » 225, 227, 229, 230, 238 


INDEX. §17 
PAGE 
Cherkila ® ® e e e e e e e e e e 425 
Cherry, Mr. e e e e e ® e ° e e ° e 74 
Cheswejuma . ‘ ; ‘ ; ; ‘ 328 
Chester, Charles, Colonel, Adjutant-General, killed ; a ee ; 264 
Chet Singh, Rajah of Benares., ‘. -% ;. ‘ ;: . - « 441,48 
Chicacole ° e r ° e e e e e e e e 36, 7° 
Chihildakhtaran ° e ° e e e e ? ° o- e 368 
Chilambram e e e ° e e ° e e e ° e 46 
Chilas e e e e e e e e e e e e e 420 
Chilasis « e e ° e ® e ° e e ° e e 420 
Childers, M., Brigadier ° e e e e ° e e e @ 154 
Chilianwala, battle of ry e ry ° e e ° « 230-34, 2375 241 
Chilling-Ching ° e ° e e ° ° e ° e ° I10 
Chin country - ‘ : ‘ ‘ ‘ ; : © 397-402, 412, 413 
» tribes . ‘ e ° . : : ° é © 307-402, 412, 413 
Chin-Lushai operations . ; ; ° e ° « 400—402, 412—14 
China, 105 ; 1st war with, 193-95 ; sad war : ‘ ° ° 294—98, 299, 402 
»» troops proceeding thither intercepted ‘ e ‘ « 264, 278, 205 
»» battalion of native infantry for servicein . .« «.« « « 429 
Chindwin ® @ ° e e e e e e ° » 391, 3902, 40! 
Chinese e ° e e e e ° e e ° ° « 105, 386 
Chinglai. e e e * e ° ° e ° e ® ° 2gr 
Chinhae . ° ° e ° . ° 5 ° ° ° . e 194 
Chin-Kiang-Foo ° e ® ° ° ® e ° e e e 195 
Chinhat, battle of . ° ° e e ° e ° ® e e 270 
Chinsura ° . ° ° e e e ° e e e e de 13 
Chipui e ° e ° ® @ ° e e e e ° ° 321 
Chirgaon ° ° ° e . ° . . ° ; e e 109, 195 
Chiriaghatti Pass. . ° . a ee ee 125 
Chitral, Outbreak and operations | in . . ° ° ° © 422—97 
a Fort . ° . ° ° ° . 422, 423, 42425, 425, 426, 429 
Chittabat e e ° e e e e e ° e e 320, 396 
Chittagong. ° 25 17, 18, 30, 52, 63, 145, 148, 140 151, 1€0, 320, 321, 400, 401 
Mutineers in : . ‘ ° ° ; ° ° » 283—84 
Chitty, ‘A, Lieutenant . . ° . ° . . ° . 136 
Chitu, Pindari e ° ° ° ° ° ° . ° e I3I, 132, 135 
Cholera, first epidemic of P > ‘ ‘ é ‘ e ‘ ° 130 
Chota Burdwan-ki-Paltan . e ° ° ; ‘ . e 1819 
Chota Craaf ord-ki-paltars e r e ° ° e ° ° e §2 
Chota Nagpur e ° ° ° ° ° ® ° ry ° e 1§7 
Chota Umrao . ° r) e e e e e e e e e 230 
Chota Sobraon e e e e e e e e ® e e 213, 216 
Chow-Ho e e ° e e e e ° ° e e 296 
Christie, Alexander, Lieutenant . . ° é ° ‘ ° ‘ 191 
ry} Chartes, Captain ° e ° ry 9 e e e e 93 
9” Daniel, Cornet . ° e e e e ° e e e 235 
»» Edward, Major. . . . .«  « «© © 234 
Christie’s Horse. . e 197, 178, 187, 189, 191, 20% 


Christopher, Willmott, Lieutenant, Indian Navy ‘ 


e 224 


518 INDEX. 


Chuars . ;: 
Chuenpee ‘ 
Chuka Nala . 
Chunar . ‘ 
Chusan, island of 


136 


27, 28, 30, 48, 49, 52 
« 194, 296, 298 


Churchill, Chatham Horace, Major-General ; ; . ‘ 199 
Cis-Sutlej States ; ‘ , . ; P ‘ - 105-6 
Clarke, Sir Alured, General . ; ‘ , ‘ ; ° . . 75 

oo Walpole H., Lieutenant. ; ‘ . ‘ . ‘. : 174 
Class Composition of the Bengal Army . ‘ F © 329-31, 40509 
Clavering, Sir John, Lieutenant-Genera! ; : ; . ° ‘ 39 
Clerk, John, Lieutenant . ‘ ? , é , : e ; ‘é 137 
Clifford, Robert, Lieutenant . ‘ ; : . < ‘ ° 307 
Clive, Robert, Lord ; © —- HD, 10, 125 13s Thy 20, 30, 325 33> 349 35, 68 
Clode, William, Captain : ‘ ‘ . : ; ; . : 45 
Clyde, Lord (Sir Colin Campbell) eos - £ 5 4s - 287, 289 
Cobbe, A. H., Brigade General . ; 5 ; : J » 3433 344 
Cock, Charles Richard, Major. F : ‘ ‘ ; : . 328 
Cockerell, John, Lieutenant-Colonel ‘ ; ; F 6, 57» 58, 61, 63 
Coconada ‘ : , . ° ° . 12 
Codrington, Christopher, ‘Captain , ‘ ‘ : ‘ - ‘ P 180 
Coel . : r . ‘ ’ 81 
Coke, John, Captain: Major, Colonel ; , , i é « 250, 285 
Collett, Heary, Lieutenant, Brigadier-General ‘ ‘ « 305. 39% 415 
Collinson, William Clinton Peter, Lieutenant . ‘ ‘ : 173 
Colour-Havildars instituted . . s , a ne 142 


Colours and Standards . : : ‘ : 
Colours and Standards, honorary. ; 


23> 37s 141, 334 
48, 63, 73, 82-83, 301 


Combermere, Lord ° e e e e e ° e ° e 1540 156 


Commands, Armies of India organised i in four . ° ‘ ‘ 
Commissariat fort (Kabul) ‘ : , ‘ ‘ : ‘ . ‘ 
Commissions . . s . 
Company, East India, 1, 2, as Medals awarted by, 261-633 Cranes to 
exist, 303; Its device abolished . ; : ° ‘ 
Company English . : 
Command of regiments, tenure ‘of 
Condore, battle of . ‘ ° 
Conflans, Marquisde ° 
Conical Hill, Ambela ; . 
Conjeveram . 
Conway, Edward S., Captain . ‘ 
Conynghan, D., Licutenant-Colonel 
CoocheBehar . ° ° ° . 
Cook, John, Major ° ° : 
Cookson, William, Captain . ; 
Cooper, William Henry, Lieutenant-Colonel ‘ : . . 
Coote, Sir Eyre, Captain, Major, Lieutenant-Colonel, Lieutenant-General 


430 
381 
165 


71, 83 
37, 312 
355 
197 

121 


5» 6, 8, 9 18, 45, 46, 47, 290 


»» Charles James, Lieutenant-Coloncl Se e : ° . 


244 


INDEX. 519 
a ae ie 


PAGE 
Corfield, W.R.,Captain,. . . . 2. «© 2. 6 «@ 6 158 
Corigaum, medal for . : ; ‘ é ‘ 4 ; ‘ ‘ 262 
Cornelis, storming of .  . ° 110 
Cornwallis, Marquis. , Sas 55, 56, ‘57s 58, 59; 60, 61, 62, 64, - 96, 290 
Corporal punishment abolished, 163-64 ; Re-introduced ; ; 3— 04 
Cossipore, Battle of ‘ ; ° ee §—6 


Cotton, Sir Willougby, Brigadier-General, Major-General . 152, 167, 168 
170, 172, 176 


Cotton, Sir Sydney Jo2n, Colonel, aR acl : P ; ‘ 234, 291 
Court Martial, earliest Native . ‘ ‘ ° ; ° ‘ - 8 
Cox, A. T., Brigadier-General : <4 ‘ ; ‘ ; ; ° 390 

ss Robert, Lieutenant : . é ‘ ° ‘ ° a ‘ 240 
Coxwell, William, Cornet 7 ‘ : - ‘ P ° 85 
Crabb, Joseph W., Major ‘ . . ° 49 
Crag Picquet, Ambela ‘ x : - 308, 309, 310 
Craig, James Henry, Major-General f : ; 71 
Craigie, J. H., Captain, Lieutenant-Colonel 188, 255 


Craum-ki-palian . . . 
Crawford James, Captain : 


é 93 
»» junior, Captain . 


e 3232 
° §2 
° 22 
e 342, 343 
e878, 177 


Cree Sord-ki-paltan ° . 
Creagh, O’M., Captain . : 
Creed, Richard, Lieutenant 
Cresswell, William, Lieutenant ° 
Crispin, George Charles, Lieutenant and Adjutant 
Cristeen-ki-palian . : ° : 
Croly, George Alfred, Lieutenant ‘ ; ‘ 
Crommelio, George Russell, Major . : ° 


e 
° >. © & @© @ @ e e 


175 


93 
211 
200 


Crookshank, Arthur Chichester William, Colonel . : ‘ ; 398, 396 
Cruickshank, John, Lieutenant ° ° ° . . ° ° ° 135 
Crump, PF ” Captain ° ° e ° e e e ° ° ° 93 
Cubitt, Thomas, Lieutenant . ° ° ‘ ; . F e e 324 
Cuddalore r ° ° r) ° r) ° ° ° ° e e 47; 68 
Cullenjun-hi-palian . SS we : ° ° 7 71 
Cumming, Alexander, Major ° ® ° ° e e e e ° 135 
2 Andrew, Lieutenant r e e e e ° ° ® 65 
Cuninghame, George, Captain ; a . . 8 114 
- John, Lieutenant ° : - ° ° ° ° 119 
Cunningham, Captain—See Cuninghame, eens 
Cuppage, W. A., Lieutenant . ‘ ; . . . ° 391 
Cureton, Charles Robert, Brigadier. . ee 215, 226, 228 
Cureton’s Multani Cavalry,—vide rsth Bengal Lancers. 
Cuttack . é ° - $5, 80, 81, 87, 10%, 128, 137, 158 


Cuttack Legion,—-vide gand Bengal i ofaotry. 
Cyprus, Indian troops in e e ° e e ° r e 326—27 


‘Dass oe Se os & a Sar ee 254, 258 
Dabba (Hyderabad) Battle of ° e e ° ° e e e 197 


520 INDEX. 


_ 


PAGE 
Dabhoi .. ; : : . . . ; ; ; ‘ ; ° 42 
Dabie-ki-paltan ;. ‘ ; ‘ A é ‘ ; ; 7 41 
Dacca. . . ° . . ° ° © 69» 52 
DaCosta, Lionel Gomez; Captain ° ; ; . : . . : 283 
Dadar . ° ° . . . . : 7 176, 346 
Dakka (Afghanistan) 2 ‘ : . ‘ ‘ ‘ ; aaa: 342, 359, 363 
Dalhousie, Lord F ‘ ‘ - : é ; « 223, 240, 242, 265, 429 
Dalla (Rangoon) . ° ‘ ° A ‘ ‘ ‘ 7 ° 147, 235 
” (Punjab) ° _¢ e e e e e e e e e 235 
Dalyell, Thomas, Lieutenant-Colonel ° ‘ ° : ° i e 268 
Damant, Mr. , ‘ ° ; ‘ ; : ; , ‘ ‘ © 327, 328 
Damas, Chevalier de : ‘ ‘: ° ° ° : ‘ ‘ P 47, 
Daniell, Averell, Major . . : ‘ : ‘ ‘ : a 420 
Danvers, Robert William, Lieutenant ° ‘ . ; ° ‘ ° 295 
Dao-Khama’s village . : : ° : . , . ° ° 413 
Daphlas ° ° ° . ° . ° . : ‘ . ° 322 
Daphla Expedition . ° . : . . ° . ° ° 322 
Daranga Pass é . : . . ‘< . , F ° 313, 315 
Darbanai ° ° e ° e e e ° ° e ° e 418 
Darband (Hazara) . . : ° . : , : ‘ © £95, 418, 419 
Darband e e Py ° ® ° e e e e e ° 417 
Dargauti . ° ; ‘ ° ° F ; ° , . ° 24 
Darjeeling . ‘ : : . : ‘ ‘ ‘ 298, 313 
Darrah, Maurice Zouch, Lieutenant ‘ ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ° ° 391 
Darrang. ; ‘ e . ‘ : . ‘ ‘ : « 322, 380 
Dashwood, Francis, Ceiain ‘ ‘ P ‘ ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ‘. 208 
Daudpur . : , ‘ : ; F : : : : ° 7 
Daulatzai .. ;: ' ‘ ‘ ; ‘5 , . ‘ ° 381 
Dausa e .e ° e e ° e e Ps e 88 
D’Auvergne, P., L: eutenant-Colonel ; : . . ° ° ° 93 
Davidson, Gordon Hugh, Ensign... ; s . ‘ 5 ‘ 219 
» + John Paton, Lieutenant : , ‘ ; . . 309 
Py John Tierney, Ensiga e e . e e e e ° 274 
Davis, William, Captain ‘ ° é . ‘ ; : . : 4! 
Dawani Pass _e e e e ° ° e ° e ° ° 106 
Dawaris.. . . . ‘ : ; . ‘ ‘ ; 370 
Dawar Valley expedition: ‘ ‘ é ; : . ‘ . ° 322 
Dawes, Michael, Captain ‘ ; : , . : ; . 233, 238 
Day, Edward William, Lieutenant . 3 . . . 3. 2 «6 ee 240 
Deane, T., Captain ‘ ‘ . , ‘ ; ; ; ‘ : 354 
De Boigne, General 3 : : . : . : A . . 79 
Decaen, General. : . ° : ‘ . : ° ° ° 109 
Deccan. oe ° ° ‘ So, 34, 88, 130, 133, 132 
** Deccan Invincibles” a e ° ° ;: ° é ° ° ° 85 
De Castro, H., Colonel . °o 8 ye ; ° ‘. ‘ ° 93 
Dedachi Kach ° e & * ® e ° e e e @ 257 
de Damas, Chevalier ° . ° ° = ° ° 4 ‘é : 47 
Dehaign "¢ e e e ° e e e ° ° ® e 287 
Dch-i-Mozang e ® e e e e e e ° e e 354 


INDEX, 521 


o-oo ao 


. PAGE 
Dehra Dun tg. ‘ ° : P : . . : : ° » 118, 119 
Deh Sarak .- : : ‘ ° : F ‘ 341 
Deig, Battle and Siege of. F ‘ ° ° ; ‘ o4, 95> 6, 97. 164, 26% 
Delafosse, Henry George, Lieutenant . ‘ P 268 


Delhi 81, 82, 83, 84,87, 93, 94» 95» 100, 102, 107, 114, 119, 153, 164, 214, 264, 
266, 267, 271, 272, 277, 281, 290, 428 


ry) Assemblage e e e e e e e 328 


» Battle of (Patparganj) . ° 2 . ° ‘ - 82, 83, 261 
» King of, captured . . ° ° ° ° . . © 274-75 
” Mutiny at P e e e ° e ° ° e ° e 264 
x» Magazine, defence of  . ° . . ° ° ° ° « 264, 267 
ry Pioneers e e e e ° ° e 299 
» Princes, captured and killed by Hodson : . ; ° © 274-75 
»  Siegeof (by Holkar) . . ° ° ° ° ° ° 93—94, 262 
» Siege of, 1857 ° ° ° »  264—65, 270—75, 290 
De Lubers, Lieutenant (wounded at Plassey) 5 ‘ ° ‘ .  e 8 
Demagiri ‘ . . ‘ ° . ° . ° « 321, 400 
deMorel, Alphonse Charles, Ensign. ° ° . ° . . : 234 
Dennie, William Henry, Colonel, Brigadier . - 169, 170, 175, 184, 186 
Dennis, James, Major-General . er er oe © «192, 199 
Depdt Battalion . ° ‘ : : ‘ : ; ° ° ° 221 
Deoband ° : . ° . . . ° ° ° ° 101% 
Deothal, capture of ° : . . ; ; . ° . ‘ 21 
Dera Ghazi Khan . ;: : : ° ; : ° : 253, 257 
Dera Ismail Khan . ° e e ° e e ° e e oe 253, 42! 
Derajat. . e ° . ° ° © 223, 402 


Derajat Mountain Battery,—vide Punjab Frontier Force: 


Desang river. . o 8 . - 6 @ «© $23 
Dewangiri ‘ ° ° ° ° e ° ‘ © 312, 313, 314, 315, 316 
Dhainawan ° ° ° ° Py e e e e e e 287 
Dhalimkot e e e e ° e e e ° e e e 37, 333 
Dhalra e e e e ° e ° e e e e e ° 100 
Dhamoni e e ° ° e e e ry e e e e 133 
Dharam Kot . e ° e ° e @ ° e Ps e e 314 
Dharamsala. e e e e e ° e e e ° e e 428 
Dharwar ° e ° ° ° ° e e e ° ® 59 
Dhaurara ° e e ° e e ° ° ° e @ e 282 
Dhundia Khan . ° . ° . ; ; ° ‘ . ° 104 
Dibrugarh ° * e e ° ° ° e e e ° e 323 
Dick, George, Colonel r e e ° e ° ° e e e 123 

»» Sir Robert Henry, Major-General... : * S. 28 © 212, 218 
Dickens, Richard Mark, Major-General . ° ; . ‘ s ‘ 104 
Dickinson, Thomas, Brigadier . . . . . ° . ° 245 
Dickson, J., Lieutenant Ps ‘ ‘ ‘ ° ‘ 2 F 37 
Diju Mukh e ° e ° ° 6 r) ° e e e 380 
Diliasi . ° e e e e e ° e e e e e 418 
Dilkusha ‘ ‘ ; ° ‘ ° ° : 4 ‘ « 279, 280, 282 
Dillori e . e e e e e e ° 101% 
Dinajpur Local Battalion | ° e ° e e e ® e £30, 148, 160 


522 INDEX. 
RE At ened er 


PAGE 
Dinapore ‘ e ‘ 38, 54, 60, 66, 71, 115, 138, 140, 153, 163, 269, 276, 277 
Dingi . ° . ; . ;: ° ° ‘: ‘ ;: - ‘ 230 
Dir ° e e r e Py e . e e e 310, 423 
9” Khan of . e ° ° ° e e ° e ° ° 435, 426 
District Recruiting Officers . ‘ ‘ J ‘ ; : ; 42 
Dixon, William Hardwick, Lieutenant ° ° ‘ 5 : . 108 
Doaba. ‘* . ° ‘ ° ° - ° ° . ‘ 352 
Dojura river . : ‘ : . ° : ; ‘ : 2 de 285 
Domandi . : ; ° ° . ‘ : ° . * ° 420 
Dompura ‘ ° ° é . : . . . 19) 
Don, Patrick, Lie utenant-Colonel ‘ , we; % 4 eK 89 
Donabyu. . ; : ‘ ‘ : « 1§2, 247, 248 
Donkin, Rufane Shaw, Major-General ;: ‘ é : « 129, 130, 131, 132 
Doo-ki-paltan . ‘ : a ae : ; : ‘ a2 
Doobye-ki-paltan . . ° . ° . ; . 78 


Doran, John, Colonel, Brigadier-General é ‘. ° 324, 349, 364, 369 
Dost Muhammad Khan, Amie of Kabul . 160, 170, 174, 175, 167, 177, 182, 

226, 238, 336 
° é 2 306 


Dougal, Thomas Ballard, Lieutenant 


Douglas, James Dundas, Captain . ‘ . : : . ; ; 1977 

ee John, Brigadier ° . ‘ ° . . . ‘ ° 285 
Doundiakhera ‘ ° : ‘ ° ° ‘ _ 288 
Doveton, John, Brigadier-General ‘ i ‘: é ‘. ; © 131, 132, 135 
Dow, Alexander, Captain ‘ 7 ° ‘ ; : , : 22, 23, 31 
Dowdeswell, W., Major-General ‘ . A : , ‘ ; 97 
Doxat, Lewis, Captain ‘ : F j ‘ : . ; 48 
D’Oyly, Edward Armstrong Currie, Captain . .& ; ; ° . 267 
Draband ° ° r ° e e ° e e @ e 253 

Pr Pass . . ° : ° e ° 7 ° ° ° ° 253 
Drafts, Battalions of , ° ° ° ° ° ; ° ‘ > 42,44 
Drazand ; ; : ; 253 


Dress and equipment 23, 24, 37, 55; 69, 1, 732 765 79s 11313, 115, 140—42, 
164—65, 204, 261, 263, oe 333-35» 3775 411, 428 


Drew, F. B., Colonel ‘ . ° ‘ A , A : 345 
Dromedary corps . . . ‘ . ‘ + 4315, 128, 132, 139 
Drury, F. M., Lieutenant, Captain ‘ . ; : : ; ‘ - 383, 416 
Drury-Lowe, D. C., Major-General . 5 é ; : ‘ . 379 
Duberne-ki-paltan ° ° : ° ° ° ° . 93 
Dubois, S., Major, Lieutenant-Colonel . . ac | ‘ ; 78 
Dudhpatli e ° e e ° e ° ° e e ° 145, 146 
Du Feu, John, Lieutenant e ° ; ; ‘ . . ° 104 
Duff, Patrick, Major . ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ , : ‘ 53 

» William, Lieutenant-Colonel : ‘ . ; . ° . é 104 
Duffield, V., Captain e ® ° ° e e e e a e 1g, 3! 
Duffal-ki-paltan . ‘ ° ’ ‘: ° ° ° . ° ; 19 
Dulai ° ° ° e e e Py e e ry e 38: 
Dumkis e e ° e ° r e e ° ® ° 203 
Duncan, James, Lieutenant ‘ ‘ ° ‘ ° < ‘ ; 123 
Dundas, Hon’ble H., Brigadier-General . ‘ F ‘ ; e « 236, 239 


INDEX. §23 


PAGE 

Dunlop, James, Lieutenant-Colonel . . ‘ : ‘ 73 
Dunsford, Henry Frederick, Colonel, Brigadier-General ; j ° + 305, 313 
9 William George, Captain - ‘. é ‘ ° . ° 388 
Durand, A. G. A., Lieutenant-Colonel e+. GA w8: (8 w 419 
Duranis ; . ‘ ‘ ° ; P ; P » 177, 179, 188 
Durbar, orders for a . ° . . ° . oe . 37 
Durey, Robert, Captain . . ° ° . ‘ ° . ° : 47 
Durjan SaJ, of Bhartpur. .  . rr er o 8 6 6 153 
du Rocher. F ° ; ; ‘ ;: A iz 
Dury, Robert Ashton Theodore, Licutenant ‘ ‘ ° : 386 
Dutch invade Bengal . . ° . . ° . ° 1314 
” Spice Islands ee a ee es 75 
Dwara Nala . e ry e ° ° ° ° e e e 238 
Dyaram, of Hathras : . ‘ : ° : ‘ ‘ : 127, 138 


Eacte’s Nest Picquet, Ambela_. ° ° . ° ° ‘ 307 
Eastern Frontier . : ; . . : - 157, 414-16, 420 
East India Company,—vide Cosipany: 

Eatwell, Augustus Coverdale, Lieutenant. : . 


° ° e @ 251 
Eckford, James, Brigadier ; ° . oe 8 ; 226 
Edwardes, Sir Herbert Benjamin, Major, Colonel ° . © 223, 235, 236, 265 
es S.M., Lieutenant . . «© «© «© © «© «© «6 424 
Edwards, C. A., Lieutenant . . - 6 oe . 429 
i Timothy, Captain . : ; a F 37 
» Wilbraham Tollemache, Brigadier-General ee - 154. 156 
Egerton, oe C., Major ° ° e ° ° e ° ° .  e 417 
» Jjoha ‘Francis, Captain. . © ° ° ° ; a1! 
Egypt, 1st expedition to . : ; ° ° ° ° é ; ° 74-75 
. and ry) ry ee e ° e ° e ° ry r e 378—80 
3rd 9 5 es ® ° e e e ° e ° e 381— 84 
Ekins, Charles, Major . ° ‘ : F ; ° ° ‘ 234 
Elderton, Ernest Dundas, Lieutenant ° ° . . ° : P 242 
Ellenborough, Lord ‘ . . ° . ° : ° . 189, 199 
Elles, W. K., Major-General . ‘ ° ° ° ° ‘ : 418 
Elliot, John, Lieutenant . ° . ; . : . ° . ‘ 3 
Ellis, Mr. William, Agent at Patna 2 2 eo ee 19 
»  Robert,Ensign . . +» © «© © © «© © «6 9 
Ellore . ; : : ° 
Elphinstone, Wn, G. Keith, Major-General Sr 2 , 181, 183, 183, - 
Embassy, British, repulsed at Ali Masjid . . a 3 337 
” Russia, at Kabul . ° ° e ry : e e e 337 
Emperor Aurangzeb P ‘ 7 ‘ : ° : ° © 212 
” Alam Gir Sani . ° e e e e e e ° ° 1§ 
2” Bahadur Shah e ° e e e Py e @ e 374-95 
» Shah Alam 2 8 =e 38, 4, 15, 26, 17) 24s 27 2% 30) 37, 81, 83, 93 
Empress of India, Proclamation of . ‘ . ‘ ‘ ‘ 5 ; 328 


Engineers, Corps of ° ® e ° o 32, 362 
Bengal, avalgemated with the Royal Corps ‘ ° ° ° 303 


524 


INDEX. 


England, Richard, Major-General . é A . ; ‘ 


English Company . ° . ° . ° . . . 
Entauri . ‘ ° ° ° 3 
Equipment—See Dress ona équipimeat: 
Erinpurah 2 ° ° e ° ° 
Erskine, John, Licatswadt-Colonel: Major-General ‘ ‘ ° 
» John, Lieutenant : . ° ° ° ° ‘ 
Escotten-ki-paltan . . . ° ° . e . 
Eurasian Artillery . ° . . , : : 
European Light Cavalry . ° . ° ° ° e ° 
Evans, H. M., Major e e e e e e ° e 
Evelegh, Fred. C,, Brigadier e ° ° r e ® e 
Exercise, Army of . ° . . : . ° ° ° 
Exercise, Camp of . . ‘ ° . ° ° e ° 
Extra Regiments . ° ° ° ° . ° ° . 
Eyre, Sir Charles. ° ‘ . . ; ; ‘ . 
»» Vincent, Major ‘ é é ; : : . ‘i 
Eyres, George B., Lieutenant . af ‘ eo 1% . 
Facan, C. S; Brigadier ° e e ° . ° ® 
» George H., Lieutenant, Major. ‘ . ° ‘ 
Faithful, Charles Camplin, Lieutenant. é ° : ‘ 
Faithfull, Richard Coventry, Lieutenant . ‘ 3 P ° 
- Wm. Conrad, Major . ‘ . ; ° . 
Pm Henry Jacob Young, Lisutedant : ; ; 
Fane’s Horse,—vide 19th Bengal Lancers. 
Faris, Thomas, Lieutenant ‘ , ‘ é ‘ ‘ 3 
Farnaby, Leonard, Lieutenant < ‘ ‘“ : 
Farquhar, Trevor Graham, Cornet ‘ : _ : ‘ 
Farre, Richard J., Lieutenant . P ‘ é é ‘ 
Farrington, Henry W., C aptain, : ‘ ; ; , 
Fast, ). W., Colonel ° ‘ : : ; - < 
Fatehabad (Afghanistan) ° ‘ ; A ° 
» (Hissar). ° ° : . 


Fatehpur, action at . 
Fateh pu r-Sikri e e 
Fateh-Shah-ki-C hak ‘ ° 
Faunce, E., Brigadier-General 
Fawcett, W. D., Lieutenant-Colonel 


Fatehgarh ‘ e ° 


Kell, Thomas R., Lieutenant . “ 


Ferguson, James, Captain : 


52, 78, 88, 93, 155, 138, 140, 201, 266, 281 


Ferorepore . 167, 168, 171, 192, aos: 206, 207, 208, iG: 313, 220, 222, 223, 


Ferozepore, Regiment of ~See r4th Bengal Infantry  . : 
Ferozshahr . ° . ° ° : . ° . ‘ 
Ferozshahr, battle of : : ° ° ee a8 ‘ 
Ferris, Joseph, Captain . ‘ ° - . ° : ; 
Fischer, C., Captain ‘ : ‘ : : ° , ‘ 


PAGE 

é ; 188 
eo e 3 
e ° 132 
° ° 278 
‘ - 66,70 
‘ e 40 
° i) 22 
305, 312, 324, 315 
e ° 299 
‘ ° 327 
e e 288 
° e 198 
° ° 76 
e e 160, 163 
) e 3 
e ° 277 
e ° 3! 
‘ : 154 
e e 72, 138 
e e 96 
e e 112 
a ‘ 137 
P ‘ 219 
e e 828 
s e Be 
7 4 216 
° ° 198 
° . 177 
e e 58 
e 341, 342, 364 
F ° 128 
e e 268, 68 
° e 84 
e e 230 
° ° 398 
e ‘ 89 
° e 134 
e ° 106 
225, 265, 272 

° e 222 
‘ » 207, 208 
e 208—11, 231 
. « 186, 190 


5 12, 15, 3! 


ee ee 


INDEX. 525 


PAGE 

Fisher, John, Captain. ‘ js ° ‘ ‘ ; ‘i : ‘ 219 
»» Samuel, Major . ° : . ; . . . . ° 225 

ie William, Lieutenant . cS we “er oe 208 
Fitzgerald, Charles, Captain, at the battle of Sitabaldi . ; e ; 131 
Fitz Gerald, Thomas Otho, Lieutenant. : - : 5 339 


Flank Battalions . « 104-05, Ifo, 119—18, 124, 149, 153, 192, 202 

Fleming, William, Captain-Lieutenant . ; ‘ ; ‘ 14 
Fletcher, Sir Robert, Lieutenant-Colonel . ‘ e 27, 28, 29, 30, 34 
Flogging in the Native Army . . . F « 163—64, 203 —04 
Floyd, John, Lieutenant-Colonel . . ‘ i ; 58 


Forbes, Henry Hodges, Lieutenant . . . . ; . 328 
rm John, Lieutenant ‘ : ‘ . P . 96 
» Oswald Eric Stuart, Lieutenant * . ‘ ‘ ‘ “ 354 
”» William Greenlaw, Lieutenant : ; . : ° 387 

Forde, Francis, Lieutenant-Colonel . : ‘. . ‘ ‘ « 10, Il, 12, 33 

Foreign Rangers. ° e« «© e ° . : o 8 49 

Forster, H., Lieutenant . A e ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ‘ 2 s 159 

Fort Battye .  . © oe ° . : . . oe ‘ 364 

Fort Marlborough . . . ‘ ° . ° . ° : ° 55 

Fort St. George e e e e . . ° ° ° ° I, 36 

- Fort Shabkadar : : . . . ; ‘. é ‘ ; ‘ 255 

Fort Stedman, «© «© + «© «© © «© © © «6 399 

‘Fort White. . 2 oe . . . « 398, 401, 413 

Fort William . ° : ° . . ° ° . © = 3a 4G 12 

Forth, William, Surgeon . ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘“ : ° : é 3 

Fosbery, George Vincent, Lieutenant ‘ : a a er” 308 

Fothergill, Francis, Ensign . . . : r 119 

Four Commands System, institution of : . : * ‘ ‘ 430 

Fowler, J. S., Lieutenant ° . : : , . 2 . ‘ 424 

Frankland, Thomas, Lieutenant . é ‘ Z 280 

Franks, Thomas Harte, Lieutenant-Colonel, Brigadior-General ° ° 224, 282 

Fraser, James, Captain . ° ° ‘ ‘ : ‘ ‘. ° 175, 176 

», John Henry, Major-General ‘: ; ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ © 95, 96 
o> Thomas, Lieutenant-Colonel . ° : ° ° . . 136 

Fraser-Tytler, James M. B., Brigadier-General rs j P 315 

French, in Bengal and Behar, 5, 8, 16; on east coast, 9 ef ae sin S, India, 

47-—~48 ; In service of Nizam, 70; In service of Mahratta powers, 81— 

83; At Macao, 105; In Mauritius, 109; In China sy . ‘ » 295—98 
Frith, R., Major, Irregular Horse . . ; ° . ° ° - 78,93 
Frontier Brigade. é : ¥ 3 ‘ 5 ‘ © 222, 241, 259 

‘ Expeditions é ‘ ; : e 4 ; ‘ ° 248—58 

Fryer, L. C., Lieutenant . i P ; - ‘ ‘ : ‘ ‘ 391 

Fulaili Nala . e e ° e e ° e ° e ° e 196 

F ullarton, Joha, Major e ° e e e e ® e ° e 45 

‘ William, Surgeon . ° ¢ ; J ‘ . : 15, 16, 19 
Fund, Lord Clive’s . ‘ ° ° é ‘ ° : ° ‘ ° 32-33 
Furruckabad, Battle of . ° ® e e e ° ° e ° 95> 96 
Fyzabad ‘ ° ° ‘ ‘ F ‘ ‘ ‘ . ° 29, 266, 289 

ry) Maulvi of e ° e e e e r ° e ° e 286 


* 


526 INDEX, 


Gaouns a. a 


Gara heights (Afghanistan) ‘ 
Garbett, Hubert, Captain, Major 
Gardiner, William, Ensign ‘ 
Gardaer, Edward Cornwall, Captain ‘ 
i William L., Lieutenant-Colonel . 
Gardner’s Horse,—vide and neces reece 
Garfit, F. B., Major . 
Garhi Lala Beg ° 


Gaikwar of Baroda . ° . ; 
Galbraith, W., Brigadier-General - ‘ 
Gall, G. H., Captain ‘ ‘ ; é 
Galliez, Primrose, Captain ‘ ‘ ‘ 
Galloper guns . ‘ . . 
Gambier, Chas. H. Fitz Roy, Licktenuat é 
Ganauri . 7 ‘ : P ° ° 
Gandamak . . ° ‘ e ° 
ry) Treaty of ° e e ° 
Gandigan ° ° ° ‘ 
Gandi Mulla Sahibdad, village ‘ é‘ 
Gandiob pass . . . ° ° . 
Ganga Narayao.. : ; ; . 
Gangari, action at . é ‘ $ . 
Gangaw ° ° ° ° ° ° 
Ganjam e . ° ° e e ° 
Ganjpura . ° ° ° ° . 
Gaatok . ; . ‘ ‘ : ; 
Gara. P ; ; 


a 
2 


Garhwali Ragimeat. wide 39th Bengal Infantry 


Garrett, Charles, Captain Z ; ; 
Garrison Reserve. : ° . . 
Garstin, J. F., Captain. . ‘ ; 
Garvock, Joha, Si lal . , 
Gauhar Khan . ‘ ‘ : 
Gauhati . . : ;. j ;: 
Gaurud-ki-paltan . : . : 
Gaussen, David, Major . . : 
Gawilgarh, medal for ‘ ‘6 
Gawler, John C., Lieutenant-Colonel 
Gaya e ° ° e ° ° 
Gaya Manpur . ° . 
General service, compulsory . ‘ 
General Service Corps. : . 
Gerrard, John Grant, Lieutenant-Colonel 
Ghagra river ; : ‘ . 
Ghainta Ghat rs ® e e ° 
Ghariba . ‘ ‘ P ‘ : 
Ghazikot . ° : 


80, 


oe @ e@ * @® e@© ee @ @ @ 


PAGE 

- 306 

e So 
394, 395, 396 
e 110 
°5» 23, 31 
75, 113, 141 
2% 

. 104, 105 


183, 191, 342, 347, 356, 359 


e . ¢ 347, 374 
e ° ° 373 
° . ° 373 
. é ; 292 
3 ‘ ° 158 
‘ ; ° 281 
- + 3973 398 

13, 36, 45s 70, 7S» 87 
‘ A ; 128 
‘ : . 394 
: ‘ ° 363 
; ‘ 173, 223 
F : ; 43 
‘ ° : 247 
‘ Z ‘ 124 
: 3 ° 399 
‘ : ° 19! 
; ; ; 197 
‘ ° « 410—13 
‘ ° ; 254 
‘ ; ‘ 310 
é Z 122 
. - 148, 312, 313 
; ° 22 
;: ‘ ‘ 267 
: ‘ 261 
, ° a 298 
‘ ‘ . 18, 7% 
: ° ° 16 
: ‘ 262 

‘ : ° 163 
° 278 

25, 55, 287, 288, 289 

: ‘ : 132 
° ° 335 


INDEX. 327 


PAGE 

Ghazipor © 6 8 eel 854 735 108 
Ghazi-u-din Khan e e ° ° ® e e e e e e 32, 34 
Ghaziudin-nagar e e e ° ° ° e e Py Py ° 264 
Ghazni . gw ww Sw: 16970, 172, 187, 189, 191, 193, 361, 365, 367, 371 
» Field Force . e ° ° e ° ° ° ° ore 368, 369 
Gheriah, battle of . . . e© e© 20, 50 
Ghilzais . =. = 169, 173s 174s 177s 178) 179 341, 349, 351, 352, 359, 461, 362, 364 
Ghiretti e e e e ° ° Ld e e e e e e 48 
Ghizr ® ° e ° ° ° ° e ° ° e ° e 425 
Ghlo Pass e e e e e e ° ° ° ° e e 346 
Ghoraphor Pass ° rs e r ry e ° e ° e e 307 
Ghorband Pass e e e e e e e e e e ey 1975 
Ghwaja Pass . ° e ° e e e ® ° e ° ° 346 
Gib, W. A., Brigadier-General : ° o 8 ee 86 ty 369 


Gilbert, Sir Walter Raleigh, Major-General 206, 208, 212, 219, 228, 231, 


232, 233, 238, 240 
Gilgit e ° e e e e e ° e e © 420, 422, 423, 425 
Gill, Joseph, Lieutenant ° ° ° e ° e e e e e 103 
Gillespie, Robert Rollo, Major-General. ‘ e ; ‘ o 137, 118, 119 
Gillies, William Adam Beaver, Lieutenant ° ° ; ‘ 5 F 307, 
Gillis-hi-paltan —t o 8 6 © © ee «© «© -« 5, 25, 68 
Gillon, William, Lieutenant ° ° ry e ° e e e ° 236 
Gilman, P, CS Captain e e ° e e e e e e ° 
Girgeh (Egypt) ° e ° e ° e e e e 
Girishk .  . a 173, 178, 188, 346, 873 
Gleeson, E. J. H. O., "Mr. ‘ e ° ° e * . é ‘ 391 
Glenn, William, Lieutenant ° ° ° e e e ® ry e 20, 21 
Gnathong e e e r) e e ° e © 303. 304 
Goad, Frederick Theophilus, Captain e ° e e e ° e 344 
Py Samuel Boileag, Captain ° ® e e ° e ° e 890 
Goaine, action at. e e e e e ry e e e ° 189 
Goalpara 7 e e e e r e e ° e e ° 148, 314 
Godaveri. ry e ° ° ° e e e 13 
Godby, Christopher, "Brigadier _ é ° 214, 215, 226, 227, 231, 232, 333 


Goddard, Vhomas, Captain, Colone’, ‘Brigadier-General 22, 23, 26, $1, 
4%, 42, 48: 449 47, 52, 53s 84, 290 


Godwin, Sir Heary Thomas, Major-General © 243, 244, 246, 248 


Gohad e ° e e ) e e e e e e e ° 423, 102 
Golamiaz ; : ° ° : ° e ° ° e 40, 53, 114, 161 
Gomal River e e e e ° e e * e e ° e 420 
Gooda . ‘ ° e ° e e e e e e e . 289 
Gonds e e e e ° e e e ° e e e 134 135 
Gongi ° e e e ° ° e ® e e ° ° ° § 
Gongoh e ° ° ry e ° r) e e e e e 247 
Good Conduct Pay e e e ry e e * e 165, 333) 404, 411 
Gopal Singh e ° e ° e e e e ° - 108, 109 
Gorakhpur . .  . eo ce tel | de «The 118, 123, 138, 284, 288, 428 

” Local Battalion ° ° e e e ° e ° e 330, 163 
Gorasahan e e e e e e e e e e e e 323 


528 INDEX. 


PAGE 

Gordon, B. L., Major-General . ; eo 18 6 -e se 400 
Pr George, Major e e ° e ry e e ° rs e 25$ 

9 J. A, D., Major e ° e e e e e ° 388 

ee. papacy, Brigadier-General . ‘ ° : ;: . . : 375 

Pres We ee Brigadier-General ‘ ° . ; ‘ - 348, 365 
Gorton, R. St. G., Lieutenant . ‘ ° ‘ ‘ ° . ‘ ° 419 
Gosling, Robert Hamlet, Lieutenant : ° ° . e 119 
Gough, Charles J. S., Brigadier-General . ; 341, 342, ae 356, 358. 359 


‘* Sir Hugh (Lord), General. 199, 206, any; 208, 209, 211, 212, 
213, 215, 236, 237, 220, 221, 223, 227, 228, 
229, 230, 231, 232, 234, 237, 238, 239) 240 
»  H.H., Colonel, Brigadier-General © 843s 345s 3515 353. 357» 37% 374 
e e e ° ° 42 


» Thomas, Captain ° ‘ ‘ . 
Govindgarh ° ° e ° . e ° e ° e 242 
Govindpur : ‘ : e ‘ < ‘ ° e 49 
Gowan, Clotworthy, Captain a ‘ . ° ° ‘ ‘. : 22 
» George E., Brigadier . ° ° ne ; . . 212 
Gowan-ki-paltan . ° j e P ° é ‘ é . - 22,36 
Gowing, Rayner, Lieutenant . ° ‘ . ; ‘ ° ° 99 
Graham, C., Brigadier . ° ‘ ; . A ; 3 192 
“s Charles Thomas, 2nd Liedtensat ‘ ‘ ; ‘ P ‘ 237 
3 G., Major-General . e ‘ 3 . : . é ‘ 378 
re Robert Stair, Captain i ; ; ‘ A ‘ ‘ : 87. 
T., Colonel, Brigadier-General . .  . - «$93, 416 
Grand Army, 1817 . ° ‘ ° 3 j . 80, 81, 36; 130, 131, 132, 135 
Grand-hi-paltas . : ° ° ‘ . ° ° ° ‘ 4 10 
Grand Baye . ° . ° : ‘ . ° ‘ . 109 
Grant, C. J. W., Lieutenant ee ‘ 415 
», G. Morison, Assistant-Surgeon . . . ; ‘ : ° 180 


Hugh, Captain . . . ° - 10,233 
Sir James Hope, Brigadier, Major-General, lieutenant-General 
283, 286, 288, 289, 296 


20 Ludovic, Captain e ® ry e e e * ° e 66 
99 Robert, Lieutenant e ° ° ry e ° ° e e 84 
Gravely Thomas, Captain ° e ° e e e e e e 40 
Greathed, E. H., Colonel : : ‘ ° . : ; ‘ F 2977 
9s H.H.Mr.  . , . . ° oe , 197 
Green, G. W. G, Lieutenant-Colonel ‘é ° ‘ : ‘ : , 293 
Gregory, R., Lieutenant-Colonel . . . ‘ . 105 
Grenadier Battalions ; . ‘ ° 104—05, ig 349) er 353, 192, 202 


Grey, Sir John, Major-General ‘ ‘ : : ° 199, 200, 312 


Griffin, Frederick Cockburn, Major . 3 . é ‘ é P 333 

- John, Captain, Major . i ‘ ‘ ° ° é ° o 178, 211 
Griffith, Watkin, Major e ° e e e e e e ry e 85 
Griffiths, Charlies, Major . ‘ ° ° e ° ° e e ° 181 
Grigg, Mark, Lieutenant e e Py e e e ° e e 148 
Grueber, Nicholas, Lieutenant . ;: ° ° ° ° ° ° e 47 
Gujars. o 48 : , ° ° . ° ° ° 153 


Guides, The Corps shavies Punjab F outiee Force. 


INDFX, 5209 


PAGE 
Gujar Garhi. ee. oe ‘: ; ie | at : 251 
. 234, 237-40, 241 


Gumesur, revolt in. é 78 
° ° « 282, 283, 287 


Gumtiriver . ; ‘ 


Gurkha War, and its results : 117——27 
»  Alliesin 1857 ° ‘ ° P é , ° ‘ 282, 284 
» Battalions, first formed o 8 ee 188, 126— 27, 343 
- a numbering of . + 301=—-02 


»» Regiments, ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and sth. —See « Bengal Army Sd ‘and « Punjab 
Frontier Force.” 

Guru mountain 7 : Z . : : , ‘ ; - 307, 308, 306 

Guthrie-ki-paltan . : , . ° ‘ . ° 71 

Guthrie, John, ia Lieutenant-Colonel sca * a . « 71, 78 

Guzerat . , . ‘ ‘ « 44, 88, 90 

Gwalior e e e e e 


7 29, 43; Bo, 88, 100, 130, 198, 199 
ry) Army of ° e ° e e e e ° ° e 198—200 
99 Campaign e e e e ° e e ° e -198—200 
» Contingent 159, 202 ; mutiny of . ‘ ‘ , ‘ - 202, 280 
Gwe-gyaung-Kamyo . ; . ° . ° . ° . 385 
Hertz Rahmat Khan, Chiet ofthe Robillas ©. ssp 
Haft Kotal . ‘ ; ° ‘ . 190, 191 
Haidar Ali of Mysore, wars with ; . < : ° ‘6s 43, 45—6, 47, 48 
Haidar Ali, Commandant of nae ; j ae er - 89! 
Haidar Khan ° e ° e ° e e e ° ° e 869 
Haidar Khel . ; ‘ ; ; ; F ° . j ‘ 322 
Haidar Khel (Afghanistan ) : ; ‘ ‘ ‘ : ‘ . 367 
Haikalzai ° ° e ° ° e e e e ° 346 
Haka . : ‘ ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ‘ « 401, 402, 423 
Haldane, Rattray, Captain : . ; ; : , ‘ 4 < 234 
Hales, Robert Unitt, Liestenant . ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ; é 96 
Halla. . . ¢ ‘ A e ‘ ° 196 
Half-mounting grant ; ° : ° . © $34) 413 
Halkett, Robert Davidson Crigies | Lieutenant . : 4 ‘: ° ‘ 280 
Haly, R. H. O'G., Colond ° ° e e ° e ry ry 304 
H. amalt. en-hi-paltan ° ° e ° e 78 
Hamilton, Frederick William Avgustus, Ensign ew ie % . 219 
» George Thomas, Lieutenant. ‘ Z ; , ° : 208 
x __ Robert, Captain, Lieutenant-Colonel : ‘ . ° - 65,78 
o>» Walter Richard Pollock, Lieutenant . ‘ ‘ ‘ ° . 348 
Hamirper . : ‘ s é ° ° 282 
Hamley, Edward B., Lieutenant-General ‘ ‘ : ° ‘ ° 379 
Hammond, A. G. , Brigadier-General ° ° © e@ e ° ° 412 
56 janes; Lieutenant-Colonel e e e e ° e 99 
Hampton, Samuel, cee ; ; é ‘ ° e e ‘ 22, 23, 32 
Hangu . ° e ° ° ° ° « 256, 487 
Hannay, S. F., Lieutenant-Colonel . e ° ° e e a . 294 


530 INDEX 


cn a ee rs ee ee a ee = = 


Hansi_. , ° . P ° e 
Hapur . i . . 
Harcourt, G. W. R, Colonel : : ° 
Harding, George Whittall, Major : 
Hardinge, Sir Henry (Lord), Licutecant-Geaeal 
Hardyman, *%., Brigadier-General . ° 


Hari-ki-patan e e e ° e ° 
Hariana ° ° ° . . ‘ e 
Hariharganj . ° . ° . . ° 
Hariharpur ° e e e e e 
Harley, H. K., Lieutenant ° . ° ° 
Harman, R., Lieutenant ° . : e e 
Harna e Py ° e e e e e 
Har nai e e > ° e e ry e 
Harriat-ki-paltan . ; ee : F 
Harriott, David, Brigadier r e e e 
29 Joha S., Lieutenant-Colonel e e 
Harris, George, Lieutenant-General ; . 
» Charles Robinson, Captain a 


Hartley, George Eusebius, Lieutenant .  . 
Hashim Ali Khan, Hassanzai Chief . , . 
Hashin e e e ® e e 


Hashtnagar . : ° ° ‘ ° ‘ 
Hassanzais . ‘ ; ° e . 5 
Hastings, Warren . : . 

is Marquis of (Earl of Moira) . é 
Hathras Z j ° ‘ 


Haughton, John Colpoye, Ensign ° 
Havelock, Sir Henry, Colonel, Brigadier-General 
ce Sir Henry Marshman, Major . 
+s William, Lieutenant-Colonel . 
Hawker, William Carmichael, Lieutenant 
Hawkins, Heary Lumsdea, Major . 
ee Thomas, Lieutenant-Colonel 
Hay, Charles P., Captain .  . 
» john, Captain e e ‘ 
Pe eiea Lieutenant : ‘ 


4 ising ii 2353 Expeditions i in . 
» Gurkha Battalion ‘ 


PAGE 


e 1§3 
- 95s 333 
So, 87, 101 
° 409 


sci 206, Sas 217, 221, 223 


e 
e 
e 
e 
e 
e 
e 
e 
e 


131, 132, 133 


° 213 
107, 128 
° 24 
124, 126 


135 
375, 381 
140 

206 


° 351 


252—53, 58, 319, 396, 419 


° 4 38 


115, 128, ee 130, 132, 133 


Mountain Battery, —vide Punjab Frontier Fo: orce. 


Hearsey, H. Y., Major . . 
os J. B., Lieutenant, Brigadier 
Heath, Captain ‘ P 
Hedges, Mr., Agent and Govccact 
Helan . ° ‘ ‘ ‘ 
Helmand River ee é 
Henry, R., Captain e ‘ 
Henzada e e e e 


268, 29, 270, 278, 280 


e 127, 138 
180 


285 


& 


225, 226, 253, 258, 391, 406, 304, 416, er 
° oe 258, 318—20, 394—97, 418 


123, 213, 226, 232, 298 


® 302 

ry 124 

2 

if 

: 230 

e 78, 346 
_ 93 


e 248 


a tee ee ee ee ee 


 —— «co 


- Smee ee 


INDEX. 53! 


° 1 Oo ato 
PAGE 


- « 167, 368, 370 
" + 223, 226, 238 


Herat ® e e 
Hervey, Andrew, Lieutenant-Colonel, Reigadier 


Hewett, George, Lieutenant-General . ‘ R : te 104 
Hickland, j., Captain ® e ° r e ° e e Py e t01_.C 
Hicks, George, Brigadier . r ‘ ° e ‘ . ‘ é ‘ 215 
Hill, Douglas, Captain . re rar. | 
» Sir Dudley St. L., Major-General o ©. %~ & we Swe 239 
) R. S,, Brigadier -General ° ° ® e e ° e 364, 380 
9 Thomas, Lieutenant e ° ° e e e ° e ° 83 
Hill forts of Mysore ‘ se a er ‘ . 59—60 
Hilliard-ki-paltan ; a a a a qu 
Hilliard, John, Lieutenant-Colonel ; ‘ . : ‘ : 78 
Hills, James, Major-General . : ° . ‘ « 367, 369 
Himmat Bahadur ‘ ‘ ‘ 4 ° 86 
Hiocksman, William, tisutenaat : ; ‘ ‘ 65 
Hindan river . , ‘ : ; ‘ ‘ ‘ 5 ‘ 264 
Hindaun ‘ é é ‘ : i - 35 : A : 91 
Hindree-ki-paltan . ‘ ° . ‘ : j . ; J ; 93 
Hinglasgarh e e e e e e e ° ° go 
Hindustani fanatics ° . ° 253, 290-92, 506 11, 395, 396, 418 
Hindustani Independent Ragineat : ° : ‘ ‘ « 78,79 
- levies. : Fy ‘ ‘ ° ° 93, 299 
‘i regiments, reorganisation ‘of ‘ : ‘ ‘ ; ° 428 
Hingona e e ° e e e e e e . ° ° 199 
Hisarak valley e e e e e « e ° ° 34 
Hislop, Sir Thomas, Lieutenant-General ‘ » , ‘ - ‘ A 130 
Hlaingdet ew . e. -e: ne ee : - 387, 30v 
Hla-u ° e e e e e e ° ° ° ° ° e 3Qv 
Hlegyoman . . ‘ a ee 2 . . 398 
Hmawaing Py e e e e ° ° 390 
Hodgson, Joha ‘Studholme, Brigadier ‘: . . ° 253 


Hodson, William Stephen Raikes, Lieutenant, Captain, Major . ; 235, 254, 274, 283 
Hodson’s Horse : « 371, 273, 274, 275, 277, 280, 281, 283, 286, 298, 299, 300 


Hoggan, John, Brigadier . ‘ s 2 ; » 227, 235, 232 
Holcombe, William Alerander, Lindtenane : ‘; ; ‘ ‘ ‘ 323 
Holiday, weekly  . : 332 
Holkar . . 42, So, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93; 04, 95, mee oo 160, 102, 132, 133 
Holmes, Henry R. L., Lieutenant . ‘ ; ; ‘ 340 


Holmes, William Burvill, Captain . * ° * J ° ° ° ait 
Homfray, Robert Popkin, Lieutenant ‘ : ‘ ‘ 2 : 274 
Hong-kong e ° e ° ° e e ° e « - 104s 296, 429 
Hong-Kong Regiment ° ° e e e e e ° ° e 429 
Honorary Distinctions . 8, 10,37, 40, 44, 48, 63, 73, 82, S3, 86, 96, B13, 

E31, 133, 156, 164, 172, 193, 195, 197, 200, 221, 

240-41, 248, 290, 297—08, 318, 347, 374-75, 


380, 392, 404, 427 
Hooghly 8 e e ° ° e e e e - 1,2, % 4 6, t3, 157 
99 River e ° e e e e e e e ° ° 4, I$ 


532 INDEX. 


ee ee ee - ee ee See se = — 


Hope, Hon’ble Adrian, Brigadier - , ‘ : ; ‘ ‘ , 285 
» james, Rear-Admiral . : ‘ : 


e s es 395 
Hopper, Harman Baillie, Ensign. : ° ‘ : ; ‘ 171 
Hore, William, Captain . ; ; : . ‘ : 210 
Horse Artillery, Experimental troop of ‘ , . ‘ . ‘ 74 


2 (Native) (See Artillery), 
Horsford, Alfred H., as Raa ; ‘ Z ; : . 286, 288, 289 
Hoshangabad e e e ° e ° ° 


° ° ° e 4! 
Ho-sei-wu ° . : ‘ ° , ‘. . . ‘ 2 : 296 
Hote-ki-paltan , : ‘ : : : : ‘ ‘ 5 ‘ 22 
Hoti-Mardan ° e ry ° ° e ° e ° e ° 265, 266 
Howlongs : : : - , : ; : : . : » 372, 413 
Howsata. : F Z . ‘ i 3 ; ; ° 400 
Hudson, J., Major-General . , ‘ : ‘ ; : : ; 381 


Hughes, R. J., Brigadier-General . ‘ ; : F ‘ . 361, 365, 367 
Huish, George, Brigadier Swe a & @ @ « « a 246 
Hukong e e e ° ® ° ‘ e e ° e e . 157 
Huliadrug ° ° a 5 7 : ° 60 
Hull, Lawrence Nilson, Major . é : i ; ‘ : ; 210 
Humayun’stomb . ‘ : ‘ 3 ' : 5 ; ° ‘ 274 
Humfrey, F. T, Major . ‘ : : ‘ F ‘ s : ; 347 
Hunter, George, Major-General ; ‘ : : : : , ‘ 212 


» Robert Mackellar, Captain . ‘ : ; ; ‘ ‘ : 211 
Hunza . e ° ° ‘ ° : ‘ ‘ ; ~ 41819, 419, 425 
Hunza-Nagar Operations : ‘ ; ‘ , « 41S—19 
Hunsza river. ‘ , : . ; ; < ° 419 
Hussent-ki-palian . . ‘ ° . ; < ; 30 
Hussars, toth, disaster to the . ‘ é ? 342 
Hutchinson, Benjamin Martin, Lieutenant ‘ 240 


- Char les, Captain . ; é 
Hyderabad Contingent . . 
Hyderabad (Deccan) F 

n (Sindh) ° e ° 

- a Battle of . : 


; - gl, 100 
- «259, 301, 390 
2 «Ay 70, 72, 80, 153 
. . ° - 196, 197 


eo e @ * e@ ¢ 
eo 
e 
e 


;. . ‘ 1 

ip Subsidiary Force . : ; : ; : : : ae 
Hyndman, Henry, Captain, Major . ‘ ; : : : - 57,70 
[sranin Khan. . : : ° P : ; ° ° 2 
Idgah . : P ‘ ° : ‘ ‘ . . ; . ° 61 
{imi ° ° ° ° ° e . . ° ° . 1977 
lImambara, Lucknow : : . . ‘ , . . ‘ 283 
Imperial Assemblage r e e e ° ° e e ° r 328 
Imphal (Manipur) . . . ‘ ° ° ° . © 414, 415, 416, 420 
India Medal, 51, e e e ° e e ° e - 261—62 


»n oo» 854 248, 257 —58, 292, 294, 351, 312, 316, 320, 322, 323, 
325, 328, 332, 392, 394, 397-400, 403, 429 
99 99 1895 ’ ® e e e e e e e e e 429 


PAGE 

_ Iadian contingents ; to Egypt, 1801, 74-753 to Malta, a 3 to Egypt, 
1882, 378 So; to Suakin. - « -« .« - « 81—84 
39 Staff Corps e e e e e e e ® e e e 332 
lndin e e - e e ° e ° ry e ° e 397 
Indore e e e e e e e e e e e e e So, 88 
Indus river . : ‘: ; i ° ° ‘ - 168, 213, 252, 253. 396 
Indus, Army of the ; ‘ ° « 167—68 


Infantry, Bengal, for raising,—vide  Sepoy Battalions” ; Numbering and 
Organisation, 23, 30—32, 44—45, 49~5$; Establishment, 37, 53; 
Numbering, 39, 44-45) 49-55; Strength, 17, 18, 50-53, 65—69; 
Organised, 65—69, 75, 93, 114-16, 126—27, 137—40; Increase of, 
138, §59—61, 193, 201 —03 ; Strength, 150, 160 3 Criticised in Sikh war, 
210; Reduced, 222; From the Panjab, 371-72; Re-organisation, 204, 
3031—03 3 Levies, 200, 301—02; Numbering, 303; Internal history, 
332—35 ; Abolition of the word “Native” in designation of —, 381 ; 
class composition, 329—31, 406—og ; Strength, 402, ¢t iad etc. Linked 


Ironside, Gilbert, Captain : ; A ‘ © 22, 23, 275 33 
Irrawaddy Flotilla Company . ; : ; 
River. ° ° ‘ 246, 244, 245» 386, 388 
itiexalar Cavalry ; raised, 16, asi tehiced. 30; establishment, organisation, 
etc., of, 30—2, 40, 5I—53, SS, 64—65, 752 76, 86, 8% 91, 9% 
3OI—O2, 152— 34, 138, 139) 140—-41, 148, 140, 153, 156, 157, 161, 
162, 166, 201-02, 221—22, 259—61, 265, 266, 332 3 of the Punjab, 
271; at Delhi, eran in China, 296—98, Reorganized . 298—301 


battalions and reserve 5 . , ‘5 : . . 410—11 
Ingelli, islandof  . ‘ : . ‘ ° ‘ 32 
Inglis, John E. W.,, Colonel, Brigadier 7 ‘ ‘ ° ; 270 
Janes, W., Lieutenant-Colonel . 7 2 : ; é ‘ 146 
lnzar Kotal . : ‘ ‘ ;: 421 


Irregular Corps organized ; : ; : ° . . ° 139-40 
» _ system introduced . js é : ; : ; ° 332 
Irving, John, Major ° ; ; 3 * ss 3 ° . 23 
Isazais e e e e e e e e ® ® e bd e 419 
Isazai Expedition e e e ° Py ° r e e ° e 419——20 
Isle of France, expedition to. ° ‘ « ; ° ° ° ° 109 
Ismailia ° ° e e e e e e e e e 378 
Istalif e e e e e ° e e e @ e e e 198 
Ithi Kachins . e e e é e e e a ° e e 398 
J acos, George Ugie, Major . e ; ‘ ° ° ° ° ° 274 
Jacobabad Mountain Battery . . «© © © © +e © 346 
Jafar Khan, Nawab : ° . . ° ° ° ° 33 
Jagarnath e ° e e e e e ° e ° e e 3138 
Jagbhandhu . ‘ ‘ ‘ : ‘ . 828 
Jagdalak and Jagdalak Pass ; « 179 182, 183, 005 198, $54 356, 35% 360, 964 
Jagdeshpur. : ; , ° ‘ ° . ‘ ° o 284, 285 
Jagr aon. ° e e e e e e e e e o 214 33§ 
e e e ® e e e ° 30S 


jainthia Hills . o 8 


534 


Jainthiapur ° e ° 
Jaithak . . ‘ ‘ 
Jaitpur_ . < . ; 
Jajmau. ‘ 
Jakranis . ; ‘ . 
Jalala 


Jalalabad 173, 173; ‘180, 182, 133, 184, 185, 186, 187, 1yo, 311, 330, 340—4!, 


Jalalpur : . 
Jalapahar . : : 
Jalep Pass e ° e 
Fallasur-hi-palian . 
Jalpaiguri ‘ : : 


Jalumur . ° 
James, Bertram Alfred, Lieutenant 
Jamieson, William, rice 
Jamo r e e 
jampta . . Q ° ° 
Jamrod . . A ; 
Jamu ss. . . ° . 
Jan-baz Horse . ese 
Jandol rs e e e ° 
Jandola . ‘ . . 
Jonsin-hi-paltan . ‘ ‘ ‘. 
Janssens, General : ‘ 
Jarwa Pass. . . 
Jarwahs . . . ° 
Jaswant Rav Bhao . ‘ . 
9 99 Holkar e ® 
Jat regiments. .  . . 
jati Ali ry ° e e 
Jatrapur e ° e e ® 
Jats . ° ° 
Jaunpur . . . , 
- Field Force ‘ ° 
Java e e. e e 
Pr Congiese of . . ‘ 
Jawad . .. oe 
Jelaktso ‘ : . i 


Jenkins, Charles Howard, Lieutenant. 
»  €.H., Lieutenant-Colorel, Brigadier-General 
Jennings, William, Captain, pasa : : oe 


Jeypore ° ° ° 

Jhansi . ww . ° 

Jhargarh. . 

Jhelum, Mutiny and fight at 
» River. . 

Jhind auxiliaries, at Delhi 


INDEX. 


PAGE 
‘. te ‘ ° A 305 


‘ ‘ Z . . . 588, 319,120, 222 
e ° e e e e e 895 
e e e e e e e e 29 
s e e ® e e ° 203 

e e 425 


342, 359, 369 
e e e . ® e 230 


e e ° e ° ° ° ® 393 


° ° ° ° ° ° + 393, 394 
° e e . e e 17 
e . e e e e e 333 
e ° e e r) e 30 
e e e e ° e ° 412 

e e ° ° e ° 107 
e e e e 288 
e ° e e ° e e 120 
° ° ° . ‘ . 185, 338, 339, 340 
e e e e ® e e 325 
° ° e e : e 375» 178 
e e e e e e e e 423 
e e ° e ry e e 4223 
° ° ° ¢ ° ° . 78 
® e ° ° e ° e e ra1 
e e ° e ® e e ° 289 
° ° ° ° ° ° e 409 
e ° e e e e -@ 133 
e e e e ° e e 88 
° e e e ° e ° e 428 
e ® e ® e ° e ° 113 
e é ° ® e e e 146 
e e ° ° ° e e 5, 107, 408 
° e ° ° ° ° « Fi; 266, 282 
e e e e ° e e ° 282 
r e ° e ® e e e 74 
° ° : . ° o B8O—-32, 114, 164 
e ° ° ° ° ° « 132, 133 
° ° ° ° e e ° 393 
e . e ° ° ° e 17, 22, 87 
° e e ° 379 

° « $26, 340, 356, 368 

° . ° 23» 24, 30 

e e 6 ® e e 89 

; : ° ° ; + 359, 198, 266, 276 
° ° e e ° e e e 809 
° e e ° ° « 270-71! 

° e e ° e « 230) 234, 239 

° e ° ; ° e ° e 373 


INDEX. 535 


PAGE 

Jitpur, failure at e e ’ e e e ry e ° e e 122 
Jittor . : : . 5 , . pe ; 100 
Joazoung e e A é és e ry e e e e ° 147 
Jocjocarta . «.« .« « e© + © © e« ; a18 
Jodhpur . ¥ ‘ - ‘ ‘ ‘ : v- Ja ; 135, 137, 1§8=—-59 
'. . e ° ° ° . e e 278 

Papen Allen Bayard, Liciténant e ° ® e e ° ¢ 248 
» Alured C., Colonel ) e ° ° ° e r e ° 370 

38 C. E. e e e e e ° e e ® e ° 428 

be] Hugh, Captain e e e ° e e ° e e 183 

99 j. M. Captain, Colonel e ry ° ° e e e ° 73 
Johnston, Joseph, Captain. - - 3 we ee A : 145 
Jones, H. j., Lieutenant . : . ° ° ‘ ° ‘ é ° 424 
ry) John, Brigadier e ° ° ° e e ° e e ° 285, 286 

oo John, Captain. : : ° ° ° ;. ° 37 

» Johan Hemming, Lieutenant . ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ 105 

» Lestock Boileau, Major ® ° e ° e e ° 8 318 

oy Richard, Major-General e e ° ° e e « Ds joo 

» Thomas Sheridan Gore, Lieutenant ; ° ° ° . . 309 

99 eee Brigadier » e Py e e ° e e ° 372 
Jotsoma ; - ‘ ‘ ; s : ° ° ° ° 328 
Jowaki Afridis. ‘ ‘ ; ‘ ° ° ° s o 254, 258, 334-25 
Jubbulpore . : ‘ 3 é ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ . ‘ 133 
Julgah ° e e e e e e ry ° e ° ° 17S 
Juliundur e e ° e e e e e . ° ° 265 
Jullundur Doab sit. ‘: . * 6 ° . ° © 220, 225, 235 
Jumma Masjid, Delhi. e . , ; : e ; . 273 
Jumna Doab . ° < e e ‘ e « 29 76, B18, 975 95,99 
Junagarhi . ; . . . . . ° : ° ° 135 
Jungle Mehals. ° oe . oe ee ee 7 ee 158 
Jutogh e e e é e ° e ® e e ° e « 206, 264 


Kasur © 675 169) 170, 171, 172, 1735 174, 175, 176, 177 179, 180, 181, 
182, 184, 185, 137, 189, 190, 191, 193, 336, 343, 347; 348) 349, 
35% 351, 352, 384, 356, 357» 358, a ere ai = 3715 374 37S» 376 


KabulGate, Delhi. . . . amen 
Kabul Field Force . . «© «~~ ; 8, 349s 356, 350 36, 365» 367, 368 
Kabul-Kandahar Field Force . e e . e e ° e 370-74 
Kabul Khel Wasiris ; ° : . ‘ ‘ ‘ . ° 257, 292 

89 Residency, attack on ° e e e e e e e e 348 

2 River . ° e ° e e ° ° 291, 340, 341, 342, 363, 369 
Kachaura e e ° e e ° ° ° ° e * ® 77 
Kachins . ‘ ° Fs F ‘. ° ; e © 392, 308=-99, 402 
Kahun . ° “ ° ‘ ‘ , ° : ° : ° © 174,375 
Kaimur Hills . ° e e ° e . ° e e ° ° 4&8 
Kaisar Bagh, Lucknow e e e ° ° e e @ e 280, 283 
Kaitah e e ° ° e e e e e e Py ° e 804 
Kaithal . e @ . e e e ° e ° e ° » 197, 898 


530 INDEX. 


Kajja ® e e e e e e e e ° ° e e 173 
Kajjak e. hee Ae OE. me CO. 877 
KajuriKach . . , : : “ : Ss ‘ . 42! 
Kakarati , : : : , F ° ° ‘ ° , ° 108 
Kakhto . : . : ‘ . ‘ . ‘ ‘ ‘ 325 
Kakrauli ‘ 2 : j ‘ . ‘ 285 
Kakrez . ; é ‘ : ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ° 373 

Kalalwala ‘ ‘ ‘ < ‘ ‘ ‘ é ‘ 1 235 
Kalana . - : ‘ ‘ r s é j , ‘ 130 
Kalanga, Repalee at : , ‘ : : ‘ : » 118—19 
Kalat , - : . , 171, 172, 174, 176, 179 
Kalat-i-Ghilzai- ; j cre 177; 178, 187, 188, 193, 346, 361, 365, 372 

PY »» ace vide 12th one Infantry. 
Kale ‘ ° ; : ° ; ‘ ; qo! 
Kalewa . ‘ ‘. . . ‘ : ‘ ‘ ° ‘ ; 397 
Kali Nadi ; ; ; , ‘. ; ‘ . . 285 
Kalinjar . ; : é ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ; : . 112, 129 
Kali-Shak . ° ° ° e e e e 188 
Kalpi F - ‘ ‘ : . ‘ ° 29; a 56, 103, 153, 195 
Kalra (Bara and Chota) ‘ é P P : ‘ ‘ . ‘ ° 238, 239 
Kalwarghat * ° . e ° ° e ° e ° e 26 
Kalyan . 3 ; - ; : ° , < ° ; : 43 
Kama. : ; ‘ P é ‘ ; ‘ © 340) 341, 369 
Kamarut ° e e e ° a e 147 
Kam Dakka . ° e e e ° ° e « 3432-43 
Kamda-kot _.. F : ‘ : : “ ‘ " 289 
Kamgar Khan ° . ° : « ‘ ; ° ° 18 
Kamurd ‘ é ° ° ‘ P ° 175 
Kan . e e e . e e e e e ° « 3975 gol 
Kan River ‘ : ‘. * - * ‘ ° o 4!, 86 
Kanayj e ° e ° . é ‘ ° . e ° e e 76 
Kanbale F ° ° ° 397 


Kandahar , 168, 160, 170, 172, 173, 56. 177, 178, 187, 188, 189, 190, 
193, 3375 345, sai a 3492 361, 362, 365, 367, 370, 373) 374 
» battle of . ; P : : ‘ 7 © 372—74 
ry) column . e ° ° e ° ® ° ° © 3372 345) 347 
- Horse. * - ‘ , ‘ ; ‘ F « 40, 415 52, 79 
Kangra . : ‘ ‘ , é . : ‘ ; . . ° 220 
Kangyi e e e e e ° ° e ° ° e ° 398 
K anhar ° e . . ® ° ° . ° e e e Py 418 
Kanhau Chins . , ; ‘: P P A ; : e 308; 401, 412 
Kaniguram sj. ; : : ; ; ; ; : © 293, 294, 379, 422 
56 


Kaniyam bodi : ; P ; : ; 7 ° ‘ ° 

Kanji Kak : ‘ a ‘ < ; ‘ ‘ : ‘ 188 
Kanund . ; ‘ ‘ : i ‘ : , . 87 
Kapilair Hills . . e e . ° e e Py ° ° 61 
Kapea,actionat . ‘ ; : ‘ F ‘ . : 86 
Karabagh ° F e ® e ° ° . e e e 189 
Karachi ; . e ° e e e ° ° ° e ° 168 


Se ee 0 oe 


+ Se ee ee 


i e e e e e ® e e e e e 46 
Karawal ° ‘ . ; ; ‘ ° ° ° 200 
Karenai, Eastern ° ‘ : © + © 897s 398 
Karens . i, oe. ae. ee ee er 39S 
Karezs Hill. . : , ° . . ° 5 372 
Karez-i-Mir . : ° a le? ah we. Je 353 
Karez-Usman Khas ‘ . ‘ F 3 ° ° ‘ 189 
Karighat Hill . e ° e ‘ ° e ° « 63,62 
Karim Khan, Pindari ; ee é ‘ ‘ ‘ © 6 ~~ 180) 232 
Karnal... ° F ‘ ‘ d ; - 87, 197, 206, 260, 264 
Karutu, action at , ‘ = we, « | Oe .. 1979 
Kasauli . . : ° rn 206 
Kashmir Bastion, Delhi . F ‘ ; ‘. e © 272, 273 
»  Contingeat os ‘ ; . e@ 273. 305 
» Gate,Delhi . . .. a ee ee ee 273 
» Imperial Service meee . ; ‘ ; < © 4°Q» 420, 423, 424 
Kasim Ali Khan ; ° ; ; : ‘ ° 137 
Kasimbazar . : , © 3. % 20, 22 
Kasipur,—see Cossipore. 
Kasranis . - ; : . ‘ ‘é * ° 253, 258 
Kassalong ; . . . ‘ . ° $28 
Kassassin ; ; i . ° « 378 370 
Kasur ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ; : ° A ‘ e ‘ 220 
Kata Kushtia e e e e e . e e ° ° e ry 338 
Kataoli . ‘ ‘ é : ‘ . , ° ° . ° ° 200 
Kata-sang ° ° ° e . . e e e « 353, 359 
Katra, Battle of e ° e e e e ° 39 
Katran e e ° e ° ° e e ° e ° 387 
Katsah . e e e * e e ° e e e 256 
Katumbah ° ° e e e ° e e ° e e- 8&4 
Katwah . . ‘ , ‘ ‘ ° ° ° ; » 6,20 
Kaveririver . , ‘ é ° , ‘ . ° ° ° 61 
Kaylor, G, F., Lieutenant . ° ® ° e ° e ° ° 23 
Keane, Sir John, Licutenant-General ; ‘ ‘ ° ° ° « 168, 170 
Keen, F. J., Major . ‘ ; ; ‘ ‘ . . o. 347 
Keith, Robert, Lieutenant e ° ° ° e e e e 37 
Kelly, J. G., Lieutenaat-Colonel : ; Ye . ‘ © 423, 425. 426 

» Richard Denis, Brigadier. é ; : : ° » 288, 289 

»» Robert, Colonel . ‘ . : ; : , ‘ ‘ : 

» W., Colonel ‘ i . : ‘ é ° ; ‘ » 124, 326 
Kelso, John Andrew, Captain . . a ee ee ee 344 
Kemmendine . ‘ ‘ P ; Z ‘ ;: ‘ 147 
Kemp, Edward Thomas, Lieutenant . ‘i ‘ é ; 3 ‘ 387 
Keadall, Bernard, Captain. ‘ , : ‘ ‘ : _ 3 
Keneh (Egypt) : ; ; . ; ‘ 

Kennedy, T. G., Colonel, Beigndier-Genera F ‘ ‘. , ; a6 375; se 
Kent, Robert, Major e ° e e e ° ° ° 195 


538 INDEX. 


PAGE 
Kerr, John, Lieutenant . ‘ . . 99 

Keyes, C. P., Major, Lieutenant-Colonel, BiigadieeGeaeral - 307, 308, 3118, 
320, 322, 324, 325 

Khaibar Pass . 168,170, 171, 172, 185, 186, 193, 240, 337, 338, 339, 340, 

342; 347, ae 3515 352, 354, 355, 359 362, 363, 364, 369 
» Rifles ‘ ‘ : - : 2 : » 395, 306, 418 
Khaibaris é : ‘ P ; ; ° . 185, 186 


Khairabad : ° F ° ‘ ° . ‘ ‘ 29 
Khaisora valley ‘ : . F é ° . . « 294, 376 
Khalkum : ° : J 5 ‘ ‘ 5 ‘. 412 
Khalsa . ‘ : é . ‘ : . : . ° 205 
Khan Bund defile. ; . . ° : . . ° 257 
Khan Khel Hassanzais_. . : a : ‘ 419 
Khanpur . ; ‘ ‘ . é : ° ° e ° 308 
Khar ; é ‘ * : ‘ . ; ; ‘ 426 
Kharakpur . ° ° : ‘ . ‘ 17 
Khas Gurkha regiment e e e ° ° e e ° ‘ ° 428 
Khasganj . . , . ‘ : ‘ F . ; - 95, 281 
Khasiah Flills . . ° ° 7 : ° : ‘ ; - 157, 305 
Khasiahs ; e ° é ; . ; ‘ ° é 157 
Khatmandu. : . ; ‘ : ‘ j . 118, 123, 124, 126 
Khedive’s Star . : - : ‘ ; ‘ ; - 380, 384 
Khoja Amran . ‘ ; . ° : . ‘ , : : ‘ 346 
Khost district . ‘ < 3 ‘ . , ; ; : © 34S» 421 
Khostwals ° e ® e ° . e ° e e e 370 
Khudu Khels . ° é . ‘ ° 7 ° ; ‘ ‘ » 290-~—91 
Khugiani . eS e 4 : ie . ‘ 342 
Khugianis . S° . ‘ . . ; ° . Se 341! 
Khulum . ° ° : ° . ° ° ° ° ° ° ° 174 
Khunda Ghat . e : ° ; ‘ ‘ ° ° : . ; 220 
Khuni Burj. ‘ ‘ ‘ 7 ; ‘ ° 7 ° . ‘ 236 
Khurda . : . ; . 2 ‘ ; , : . ; « Iol, 128 
Khurd Kabul pass . ‘ : ; P : ‘ : . 179, 181, 182, 188 
Khushalgarh . ‘ ‘ ‘ , ‘ . ° ; ‘ : ; 91 
Khushhal Rau ; : : : ‘ ° ‘ j : ‘ 100 
Khushk-i-Nakhud . . ‘ , : . ; ; A : ; 346 
K adatzai Sheranis ° r) e e ° e e e e e ° 402 
Kila Azim : ‘ : 7 ° : ° : ‘ ‘ ° : 189 
Kilagai . : . : : 7 : > ° $19 
Kila-i-Muhammad Sharif ° ° ; e . ;: : ‘ 181 
Kila Kazt ° ° e e ° e ° ° e ° e 353, 354 
Killeri e e e ° e ® e e e e e e r 109 
Kilzais Py ° e ° e e ° ° e ° 381 
Kilpatrick, James, Major F ‘ ; . . . . 4 5 
Kimedi ° e e e e e e e e e . e e 36 
Kimlasa . ° . ° ° ° . ° ° ° 133 
Kindersley, Nathaniel, Captain e ; . ‘ ° ‘ ° ; 31 
Kineri e e e e x) ° e e e ° 223 
King, Edward, Lieutenant ° ° ° ° ° e ° ° . 179 


Fenech ese tn a 
ee ee le 


INDEX. 539 


PAGE 

Kirk, William, Captain e ° e e e ° e e 104 
Kirki, medal for . : ‘ ; : P se 3 ; : 262 
Kishangaaj ( Delhi) e e e e e ° e e ° ° « 3739 3274 
KishorSingh 2. 2. wwe el a ar a ee 136 
Kistnagheri ° ° e e e e ° e e e 60 
Knox, Alexander, Brigadier e r ° e ° e e r e 337 
Knox, R., Captain, Major . . ° , . , ‘ « Il, 12, 16, 23 
a w. H. D., Captain ‘ : . : ; ° . ; 102 
Kohan-dil Khan e ° ° e e ° e ° e 169 
Kohat 2. 2. wwe 349s 255, 256, 257, 318, 320, 234, 416, 417 
» Kotal ... . ; ° ° : . ° ° © 249, 250 

» Pass ‘ : ° ° ° ° 249, 258 


*” Mountain Battery,~vide Punjab Frontier Force. 


Kohima . ° ; ‘ ; F ° ° ‘ ‘: ‘ ; 415 
Kohistan | . ° . & ‘ s ° : ‘ 175 179, 180, 191, 359 
Kohistanis ° e e ° e ° ° e e e 352, 353, 420 
Kojak Pass od e e e ® @ e e e e e 168, 346 
Kokein . e ° ° e e e ° e e ° e e 3147 
Kolar ° ° ° - e e e r e e e ° 57 
Kols ; ; : << - 8 we ww 88D 157, 258 
Komalner ‘ ° e ‘ e e ° . : ° ‘ o 132, 333 
Kombhir e e e e a e e . e e e e ° 09 
Komona . e e e ® N e e . e ® e e 804, 105 
Konkale . e e e e e e e ° ® e ° e a1 
Konoma . e e e e e e e e e « 3375 328 
Kooer Singh—see “ Kunwar Singh.” . 
Koragh e e . e e e e e ° e e e e 424 
Korah e e r e "ee e e e e ° e ° 30 34 38 
” battle of ° e e e e e ° . e ° 39 40, 42 
Korogh range . ° ° ° e e e e e ° ° e 353 
Kosseir (Egypt) ° e e e e e e e r e e 74 
Kotah  . ° . ° ° F ° ° ° « 89, 90, 130, 131, 136 
® Contingent ° r e ° e e e ° ° e e 267 
Kota Lama (Perak) ° e e ° e e e e e e e 323 
Kotkai . e ° ° ° ° e e e ° e e 395, 396 
Kot Kangra. e e e e @ e e ° ° e e 220 
Kotla e 6 ° r r) e e e e . ° 2§2 
Kotra (Bundelkhand) r e . e e ® e e ° . 108 
~ (Baluchistan) e e ° ° . e e e ° e 376 
Kotri e e ° ° e e ° e e e ry ° e 332 
Kowar Singh e ° e ° S e 8 ° ° r ° 153 
Kowloon . ° e e e ry e e e ° e ° e 296 
Kubo valley ° e ° e ° ° e e ° e e e 388 
Kukis ° e e e ° ° e e b ° ° 420 
Kumaon . ° ° e ° 123, 124—325, 137, 271, 364 
Kumaon Battalion vide “ged Gurkba Rifles.” 


) e e e ° ° e Ps e ° 287 


Levy 
Kumrikata e ° e e e . ® e e e « ° 315 
Kunar e e e e e e ° ° e e ° e 378, 310, 369 


540 INDEX. 


PAGE 
Kunch . : ; ‘ : : ° . : ° : - 89, 103 
Kungnung . . ° e . . ° ° ° . 321 
Kuohar e ° . e e e e e e e e ° . 395, 396 
Kunjah_ . ‘ 4 ‘ : ‘ e ‘ Fs e - ‘. 237 
Kunjawa . . . ° . . . . ° 153 
Kunwar Singh (Kooer Singh), 0 of Jagd eshpur ; ‘ ; Z ‘ ‘ 284 
Kuram Column ‘ < : 7 ‘: . ‘ ‘ ‘ ° 337» 343 
» Fort. ‘ é ° . ° : © 257) 344» 345 
» valley - + 257 3375 343, 3449 345» 343, 349 360, 3515 365, 370) 375 
Kuria e . e ° e ° ° e e ‘ e 3 
Kursi ° e e e - e e e e e e r) e 283 
Kushi ° e ° ° e e e e ° e ° e 350 35! 
Kyan, F., Colonel . : e e e e ° ry ° ° ° 8&8 
Kykilu . ‘ ‘ . . ° ° ° ° . ° 147 
Kyne-ki-palian e e r e e e e e e e 88 


Locum AN Dawah ° e e ° e ° ° ry e ° 107 


Lahar ° ® e ° ° e e ° ° e ° ° e 42 
Lahore. ° ° ° d « Jy 10S, 383, 220, 223, 225, 227, 239, 238, 273 

” Light Horse e e e ° e e ° e e 286, 287 
Lake, Edward John, Lieutenant 235 


» Gerard, General (afterwards Lord Lake) 75, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 88, 


89. 92s 93» 942 95, 95, 97, 100, Tol, 102, 104, 116, 290 
“Tal Paltan,”’ (raised by Clive) e ° ° ° ° e ° ; Ss 68 


Lal Singh, Sir dar e e e e Py ° r PS e ° e 205 
Lalburah. , , ; ‘ ‘ ; ‘ ; ; ‘ ; ‘ 321 
Lal Gnura ‘ , : . ° é ‘ ° ‘ ‘ ‘ e 321 
Lally, General e ° e e e e e e e ° e 3 
Lalu, village of ‘ : ‘ ‘ . ° ; ‘ ; ‘ 310, 311 
Lamaing - @ e e e ° e e e ° e 329 
Lamb, John Henderson, Licutenaat ° ° ° ° ° ° ° . 267 
Lamba . ° e e e e e e e e e 3137 
Lambert, Anthony, Uiewlcaaik . : ‘ ° . . ° . 85 

» John, Lieutenant. ° . . ° ‘ , : 219 

2” Peter Colnett, Lieutenant ° e e ° e e ° °  D (0) 
Lamborne, C. W., Lieutenant-Colonel . 3 : ° ; e ‘ W355 
Lambroon-ki-p lian : : F ‘ 7 . . ; . 115 
Lancer regiments ; , ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ : 333 
Landi Kotal e ° e ry e ° ° ry e e e 349 
Landi-nawa. . : ° : . ° s . ° 197 
Lane, Charles R. W,, Major ; ; . ‘ . ‘ . . ° 188 
Lang, Ross, Colonel e e e e e 6 e ry r) e 40 
Langthobal e ° e ° e e e e e Py e 415 
Laram peak ° . e * ° ° e r e ° e ° 421 
Larka Kols.. ° ‘ : ° . . . : ° . 136 
Lascars . ‘ < ‘ ; ° e ° ° ° . ° ° 3 
Lasuria . . ‘ ° ° ° . . ‘ 237 
Laswari, battle of e e ° e ° ry e e e 84, 8s, 86, 164, 261 


ate ee ee rn ee 


INDEX. 541 


PAGE 


Lataband . : : ° ° ° : . , ° ‘ 357, 358 
Latifpur e ° e . e e e e e ° e e ° 48, 49 
Latu, fight atl. e ° ° ® e e ° e e e ° 283 


Latter, R. J., Major . é ‘ ; : F 115 
» Thomas, Captain . : ‘ ‘ ; , ; 244 
Latter-ki-paltan . ; ‘. ‘ ‘ E : ; 11§ 
Lautan . ° ° ry ° e e ° ° ® e e ° 122 
Law, Monsieur ; . ° ‘ ° ‘ é 8, 9, 13, 16, 17 
Lawrence, George St, Patrick, Major ° ee ee ee” ae 226 
s Sir Heary Montgomery, Brigadier-General ‘ . « 26§, 269, 270 

99 John L. M, ° ° ° ° Py Fi e e is 271 
Lawtie, Peter, Lieutenant . ; ‘ - 3 - “ ‘ 131 
Leathes, Henry Stanger, Lieutenant. e . gue . 200 
Le Fevre, P., Captain. ° > : : ‘ ‘ ; a 128 
Le Grand, Artkur J., Captain . ° : ‘ ‘ : 284 
Lepei Kachins e ° ° e e e e e . 308 
Lermit, A, Lieutenant. 3 ‘ ; ‘ ‘ 153 
Leslie, Matthew, Lieu tenant-Colonel ‘ ‘ : ° ‘ » 4%, 42 
Levies . . ° ° ° . F ° ° ° ‘ QS, 228 
» in N.-W. Provinces. ; ‘ : ; ; ‘ . ; 299 

» vowcaste. . ? ; ; ; : ; ; ; : 403 
Lieukhan ; . ‘ : : ; ‘ 413 


Light infantry, me Battalions « 10405, I10, 117—38, 12, 149) 
353, 192, 193, 202 
Lind’s Multani Horse _. ‘ ‘ ‘ : : é » 278, 285, 298, 300 


Lingtu . ‘ : : . . . ‘ ‘ : 393 
Linked battalions ; . ‘ ; ; : , ‘ : 40 
Lister, Frederick George, ‘Captain ; ‘ ; ; ‘ ‘ i ‘ 187 
Little, John, Captain ; ‘ ; - : 59 
Littler, Sir John H. , Major-General ‘ 19M, noe. 207, 208, 209, 212, 220 


Livingstone, David Charles, Lieutenant . ; ° . . 104 
Lloyd, Charles Owen, Ensign . ° . . ; 2 . ° : 224 
» G.W.A., Major-General . ‘ : r 258 
Local corps. ‘ : - %26—27, jak 142, tot, 221—22, 301—~02 
- Increase of pay to ° ; - : ° : 427 


Local Horse,—vide Irregular Cavalry. 
Loch, G. G., Captain, R. Navy ‘ ‘ ; : ° . ° . 247 
,Y) G. H., Captaia e e e e e . ° e ad Ad 413 


Lock, John Bascombe, Captain . 185 
Lockhart, Sir William S. A., Brigadier-General, Major-General, Lieuten- 

ant-General e e ° e e ° = 417, 419 422 
Lockwood, George Henry, Brigadier ‘ ; , . 238 
Logan, James, Lieutenant ° ; 


‘ : ; 43 
Logar Valley e ° ° e a ° ° ° e 450, 387, 368, 360, 37! 
London Company . : ‘ . , : : : . . $ 
Longfield, John, Brigadier F ie. rag . : ~*~ s . 273 
Lora (Benares) ‘ ‘ : 
Lord, Percival B., Assistant-Surgeon , ‘ 7 : 3 ; 175 


Loveday, William, Lieutenant . ‘ ; ‘ : ; ; “ e 574 


e . e e ° ° 49 


PAGE 
Low, Sir R. C., Brigadier-General, Major-General] . ‘ « 390, 423, 425, 426 
Lowther, W. H., Captain é ; ; é ‘ 294 
Loyal Purbia Regiment, elds 17th Bengal Infantry. 
Lucan, James ae Lieutenant . « 89, 90, 102 
Lucknow . . , : oan. 259, 266, 268, 278, 281, 284, 285, 289, 428 
» Mutiny at. ; : ‘ . . . ° ° » 264, 266 
a Defence and Relief of ‘ ;: ° ‘ - 268—7o, 278-83, 290 
»  Reliefof . : ‘ ‘ 2 ‘ . - - - 282—83 
» Siege and capture of : . . : + 282—83, 284, 290 
» Regiment of,—see “ 16th Bengal Infantry. me 
Ludhiana i « 105, 206, 307, 314, 222, 271 
» Regiment ‘of, <seides sth Bengal Infantry ‘ ; . . . 222 
Ludlow, ]., Major . ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ P A 119, 120 
Lugard, Sir Edward, Brigadier-Genora - : ; p - 284, 285 
Lughman valley. : P : : : sii 352, 360, 362, 363, 370 
I.umsden, David, Lieutenant . : ‘ ; ‘ 887 


>»  Haery Burnett, Lieutenant, Lieutenant-Colonel , - 223, 235, 298 
» John Tower, Captain ° : ° : . . , 280 


- William Henry, Lieutenant  . : ; é 3972 
Lushais and expeditions against them. ; : 320-22, 400 —4o2, 413, 413 
Luxford, John Bellamy Bowes, ee ;: F : ‘ 119 
Lwekaw . é : ‘ ‘ : . ‘ e 399 
Lyons, Thomas, Assistant-Surgeon . ; : ‘: P ; ‘5 , 96 
M.aserr, R., Lieutenant-Colonel . ‘ e ‘ ° ° 93 
M’Caskill, Sir John, Major-General . ; j ° ° : 186, 91, 206, 207 
M’Clary, Willlam, Captain .  . + 45 
M’Combe, John, Brigadier-General . ° 154, 156 
M’Culloch, W., Lieutenant-Colonel . ‘ gt 
M’Dowell, George J., Brigadier 216 


M’Grath, John, Lieutenant-Colone!l . 
M’Gregor, Peter, Lieutenant . 
a Thomas, Lieutenant ‘ 
Pe George, Brigadier . ° 
M’Leod, Alexander, Brigadier . : 
» john, Lieutenant ‘ 
M’ Neill, Sir John Carstairs, Major-General! 
M’Queen, Alexander, Lieutenant. : 


-— 26©«© ee © e@ e@ 2 * 

oe es @ e e 8@ @ © @© wo ® 

e . e e e e e Ci] e e 

e e e © e e e e e °e e e 
® e e e e e @ e e e e 


o 


McBarnett, George Gordon, Captain ‘ . : eo 274 
McDowell, Charles Theophilus Metcalfe, Lie utenant ‘ _ : . 275 
McGregor, Robert, Captain . ‘ < 3 ‘ ° ‘ 83 
McLaren, James, Lieutenant-Colonel, Brigadier . ~« ° ‘ - 187, 219 


McQueen, John Withers, Brigadier-General . ‘ : ‘ ° © 304, 396 


sin i i, la a igi = is 


INDEX, 843 


LL NM Le OF EE nS OE etn ne ee ee ee © EE ED GEO * 


MacGowan, J., Lieutenant-Colonel . —« a ee 64 
MacGregor, Charles Mitcalfe, Colonel, Brigadier-Genera!. ; © 354, 373» 375 
MacHarg, J.,Lieutenant. . «© + « « «© « e« |. 126 
MacLean, Lachiaa, Captain . . « ; ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ 15, 18, 23 
MacLeod, A. Brigadier ° e e ° ° ° ® e ° e 354 

i R. W., Captain ‘ ; ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ° , 417 
MacPherson, William, Captain a a -. i eo 31 


Macan, Clements G., Captain ° . a ee . ° : 197 
r) Richard, Captain ° e e ° e ° e e ° 65 
Macao, expedition to ° . . . ‘ . 105 
Macaulay, Percy John Frederick, Licutenant : oo ee 421 
Macdonald, Sir John, Colonel . © 6 © 6 «© 71 
. William, Captain . a & © ‘ a 313 
Macdonell, Alexander, Colonel . Se ee ee ee ee ee 312 
Machai Peak . ° . ° ° e ° e ° ; F 320 
Mackenzie, C. }., Captain ° e e ° e e ° 419 
Mackeson, Frederick, Lieutenant-Colonel 3 - j “ 5 252 
Mackrell, Thomas, Colonel , : ; ; ; : : 281 
Macleod, Norman “e e ° ® e ° ° e 64 
» Thomas Harrison Scott, Ensiga . o 6 © © «© 26 158 
Macmorine, G., Lieutenant-Colonel . e ° ;. . ; ‘ e 148 
Macnaghten, Sir William Hay. : . ; ° : é - 876, 180, 182 
Maconchy, E. W. S. K., Lieutenant © 8 © © «© « 6 4:8 
Macpherson, Archibald Fraser, Lieutenant . . . . =. = . 196 
” Duncan ° ry ° e e 56 


Pa Herbert Taylor , ‘ Brigadier-General, Major-General, t inttenant 
General . e 338, 341, 342, 348, 350, 352, 353: 354, 355, 


35% 368, 371, 373, $78, 379, 388, 389 
Macvitie, William Bushby, Lieutenant. e : e ° ‘ ‘ 103 


Madda Khels . ° ° e 


° . . : e . : 419 

Madhurajpura . : . ¢ ke . ; . ‘ 835 
Madras Command, institution of a a ee , 430 
»»  Expeditionsto . ‘ ° ° ° . iia, 36, 4s—48, 56—63 

» Fusiliers é ‘ ‘ ‘ P 42, - 267, 268, 279, 286 

é Sappers . ° ° ° ° - 279, 482 


» troops, in Bengal, 2, Zz 70, 72, et seq.; in Western India, 40—443 

in Burma, 146 et seq., 243 et S¢q., 385. et seg. 
Magdala A ° . . ° ; , ‘ , ; © 317, 318 
Magh Levy . oe ‘ ‘ . ‘ . 148 
Magurie, Cecil Montgomery, Captain . ‘ : 4 ‘ , ‘ 428 
Mahaban ; : ‘ ; i ‘ : ; : ; ‘ 306, 307 
Maha Bandula e ° ° ° e . ° e e ° 347, 152 


& 
© 


544 


Mahadceo hills 
Mahbib Khan 
Maharajpur, battle of 
Mahalpu: , 
Mahati . 

Mahatpur : 
Mahi, river. 
Mahidpur 

Mahaous Nai 
Mahrattas . 


Mahratta Ditch 5 


INDEX, 


Se Se ea A A 


PAGE 

e e e 134 

° ° e e e * 39 40 

. , . : 199 —200 

. ° e e e 85 

e e e e e e e 1§2 

° e e ° ° e e ° e 44 

: : ) ° e ° e e go 

e ° ° e e e ° e 132, 262 

r) Rs 
bd 3» 15, 27, 29, 38 39 a 4!, ae me 590 et 86g... 
chia lids ie tones sey: 

3 


Mah-atta Horse 298, 300 (and Mahratta Horse,—vide e 8th Bengal 


9 War, 1778-84 . 


” » 803° 


»  (Pindari) War, 1817-10 


eo War, 1843 
Mahsud Waziris_. 
Maidan, Afghanistan 


» Indus ; 
Maidanak , 
Maidan: ‘ F 
Maihi River . ‘ 
Mailghat 3 é 
Maiopuri 

Mair, John, Lieutenant 
Maisdi _ . 
Maisey, F. C., Captain 
Maiwand ‘ 
Makdoon-tipaltan 
Makin. é 
Makwanpur.. 
Malabar . . ° 
Malacca . ° 


» expedition to 
Malakand Pass ‘ 
Malaun . : é 
Malavelli ; . 
Malay Peninsula 
Malays . . 
Malcolm, John, Ca otain 


» Sie John, Major-General 


Malin. ‘ ‘ 


Malka. ; 
Malta, expedition to 
Malthon . 
Malun . 


Malwa . ° 


Lancers.’’) 
: : + 40—44 
be e e 80—102 
° e e 128—_36 
‘ 198—200 
. 292-94, 375—76, 431, 422 
s 8 ie 352, 353 


e ® e ° e 
e . e 
e e e e e 


* e e ° ° ° . 396 
® e e ° e ° ° ° MI 
° ° ° e ° ° ° e e 292 
e e ® ° ° . ® ‘ go 

e e e e e e é * a 134 
e ° e ° . ° ° « 140, 28: 

e ° ° e ° ° Pe 41 

° . e ° . ° ° 134 

e e e e e e e 417 

a a - + 370; 375 

. e e . é ‘ - ‘ 7 
sf te 8 80s 376, 422 
° 5 : ° ‘ A - 188, 125, 126 

e e * e e e ry e e 59 
as . 2 . ns : ° 55, 66, 110 
e e ° e ° e e . . 56 
° ° e e e e ® > 426 
e ‘ . ° e ° a0; t2t, £22, 124, 126 
° ° ° ° ° ° e 7 : 72 
e ° ° ° ° e . 323 

e @ e e ° e e e ° 323 
® e e ° e ° ° 72; 73; 88 

e ° ° ° ° e e 134, 135, 136 

° e e ° e e ° ° e 399 
° ° ° . e . ° . 306, 307, 311 
e ° ° ° e ° ° $26—27 
: . e ° ° e 1905 

. e ° ° ° e e . 385 
$ . : ° « 90, 108, 135, 267 


INDEX. 545 


" TO a 


PAGE 
Manlu ° ry ° e e e e r e e e ° 17 
Mamu Khel . , . ey. ae > -- = ~% 190 
Mamuzai e e : ry e ° ° e ° ° 426 
Man Singh, Rajah of Jodhpur ° ; . . ‘ * <% : ‘ 159 
Man Singh, Rajah . ; i , . ; . ‘ 5 . 286 
Mana-ke-Dana , «. % . ‘ : >. % « 319, 320, 396 
Mandala . e e e e e ° ® e e 1338 
Mandalay ‘ ‘é ; ; ° e 384, 386, 387, 389, 392, 400 
Mandlessr Local Battalion e e e ® ° ° e ° ° 1§3 
Mangal Pathans . ‘ ‘ ° ; ‘ ‘ ;: ; o 344s 345» 349 
Mangal Thana ; ‘ é F ‘ ° . ‘ ; : 291 
Mangalwar ‘ : P ‘ : ‘ : ° ‘ ; « 269, 270 
Mangiar pass . ° ° ° ° e r ° ° ° ° ° 344 
Mangon ‘ ; é : ‘ . ‘ ; : ° ‘ ‘ 391 
Mangor e e ° ° . e e r ° ° e e 200 
Mangrol . . ‘ ; : . . . ; ; j 139 
Mangrotha z ‘ j ‘ ‘* ; F ; ‘ : 257 
Manihar ‘ . ; . ‘ Fi ; : ‘ . ‘ F 284 
Manikpatam . ; . ' ; 7 ; 87 
Manipur : a ae 145, 146, 140, 283, 388, 414, 41S, 416, 420 
» Expeditiunto . . : ‘ e ° ‘ ° ‘ 2 415—16 
» Outbreak at ce is - % ; : oe © 414——-16 
Manji, Battleof  . ‘ ; ° : : ‘ . 7" «© 619) 54 
Mannahar é ji ‘ . ‘ 3 ‘ ‘ ° : ‘ ‘ 284 
Mansi e e ‘é ° e e e e ° e ® 399 
Manson, James Risxandér. Lieutenant ; ‘ ‘ ° ° ‘ ‘ 234 
Manson, Jobn, Lieutenant ° e ° ° ° ° : 134 
Mapert-ki-paltan . F é‘ . ‘ . : ° . 93 
Mardan (Hoti) : é . e ° ° ° ° 265, 266, 326 
Marine Battalions raised and copavised ‘ ° ° " - 65, 7s 78, V84, 115 
Marines . : é ‘ , ° 25 
Markham, Frederick, Lieutenant-Colonel, Brigadier é , . 223, 226, 235, 238 
Markum-ki-paltan ‘ = 2 ‘ . ° ° 73 
Marley, B., eee Major-Genoral ° , 3 - 75, 118, 12a, 123 
Marni Hills =. . . . ° ° ° ° ° ° 174 
» tribes. ° ° e ° ° ° ° ° e 174, 375 
Marshall, D., Major-General ‘ ‘ . e ‘ . me 129, 130, 133 
T., Lieutenant-Colonel . ¢ ‘ ° ;: ‘ ‘ 197 
Martaban e F ° . e ° . ° ° e 1475 243» 245» 247 
Martdeel-ki-pultan . ‘ ; ; : ‘ : ; ‘ , 71 
Martin, G. H., Captain . ‘ : 354 


Martindell, Sir Gabriel, Lieutenant-Colonel, Colonel, Major-General . - 38, 


71, 89, 100, 107, 108, 112, 119, 120, 128 
Martini-Henry rifles, issue of, to the native army ° ° , . 428 


Martiniére, La, Lucknow . ee a? an ae +  « 279, 282 
Masimpor, battle of . - P ‘ ‘ ‘ F j F ‘ 1§ 
Masjidia e e e e e e e e ® e 289 
Massacre at Benares é é : ‘ . ‘ ° : 48 


546 INDEX. 
PAGE 

Massacre at Cawnpore : F . Ss ° 268 
” at Kabul e ° r) . ° ° e 348 

» at Manipur : ‘ ‘ . ° . ° ° ° 4l4 

» at Patna. ; ‘ ; ; . ° e 19, 20 
Massy, W. G. D., Brigadier<Genes al a 3 348, 353 354s 356 
Mastuj ° ° . ° ° e . ° ° ° o 424, 425 
Mastung ee ae , ; : : ; : ae . 176 
Masulipatam . eee eee By 36 
Mathews, John, Lidetenact ; ; : ‘ ; ‘ é ‘ ° 17 
is W. J., Lieutenant . : ; ; ; ‘ ‘ x. “Se 9 
Mathews-ti-paltan ‘ ‘ : P . ; ° ° « 17,50 
Matta e e . ° ° e 7 e ° e r 250 
Matun . , ‘ : ‘ ‘ F : ; ‘ . ye 345 
Mau e e e e e ° e e 41 
Maude, F. F., Diddtenaat- General . - « + $38, 339s 340 
Maule, Richard, Lieutenant ; : : . e 180 
Maulvi Ahmadulla, of Fyzabad a - 280 
Mauritius ‘ : ‘ ; P : : ; ; © 72,74 429 
‘ expedition to . : ; ‘ : ; : ‘ 109 
Mausam . . ‘ ‘ , ‘ ‘ ; ; ° 34! 
Mawbey, John, Captain : . ‘ : ° ° ‘ ; 64 
Mawby, Sebright, Colonel * ‘ ‘ P . ; . 119 
Maxwell, Hamilton, Lieutenant-Colonel ; ee 57, 60, 62 
Mayaffre, James, Captain a ‘ ‘ ‘ . 49 
Mayne, Augustus Otway, Lisdtenant . . ave 
Maysmor, Humphrey, Assistant-Surgeon . : . : : 148 
Mazar-i-Sharif . ; : : q : - : E ‘ 347 
Mazina a a ne a 2 eS ee a a 369 
Marra. ‘ A : : ‘ ; ° 372 
Meade’s Horse : é : : ‘ : : ; 298, 300 
Mecham, Richard, Captain 2 : ° 292 


Medal,—vide ‘‘India” ; for various npeimenne in athe beeing of the century 261 


» anew India, instituted, 1895 
Medal for West of India . ; ; 


» wm Isle of France . : 
” ” Java * 

» 9 Southern India (Carnatic) 
» » Mysore,1790-92  . tis) 
» » Ne . . 
»  w First Burma War . 
oo om» First Afghan War . ° 
» oo» China . . , : 
» ww Sindh, ° . ° 
»  « Gwalior Campaign ° 
» . w» Sutlej Campaign. ° 
» » Punjab Campaign . A 
r) ) Pegu . ° 
) » North-West Frontier e 


a a ee 429 

: ° . . ° ° 44 
a a ee ee ee 
e . ° * ° ° 1m2 
- 2. 2 - 48 
a a ar er 63 
e ® e e ° . 126 
o e e ® e 153 
: . : e « 172, 193 
e e e td e 195 298 
e ry ° e e 197 
° e e e Ad 200 

° . ° ° . 321 
e e e e e 240-—41 
e e ° e 248, 429 


257—s8, 292, 204, 311, 312, 320, 325, 388 


Medal for India, 1851 ° 


” » India, 1854—See India Medal. 


» 
” Bhutan Py e 
» Abyssinia ° 
oo Hazara, 1868 . 
ry Lushai . e 
» Perak . ° 
» NagaHills . 
‘ » Afghanistan 
ry) » Egypt, 1882 
» Suakin . ‘ 


%® 

” » Burma, 1885-89 
‘ » Sikkim . ‘ 
‘“ Hazara, 1888 . 
A Chin-Lushai . 


9 
” 
» Manipur 
» ow Miranzai (Samana) 
o Hazara, 1893 . 
» Hunza . ;: 
+ » Waziristan. 
» Chitral . ; 


Mediterranean, expedition to the 
Medows, William, veces 


Mee, G. A., Major . ° 
Meeanee (Miani) 


Meean Meer 
Meerut . 

” outbreak of muting at 
Mehals, Jungle 
Mehid pore Contingent 
Mehrab Khan of Kalat 
Meiktila : ° ° 
Mena Khel . ‘ : 
Mergui . ° ; 


Mese-house, Ducknew: 
Messes established . ; 


Metcalfe, Charles, Mr. vey 
Meyong A bors 
Meywar . : ‘ , 
Mezadaung hill ' : 
Mhair Battalion ‘ 
Mhairwara Battalion : 
Mhow . « ° : 

» mutineers P ; 
Miami Wasiris : ° 
Miaai, battle of . . 


Middleton, Charles, Major 


the Indian Mutiny . 


e 


. e e r e e e 


316 
318 
320 
322 
323 
. 328 
° « 347, 37475 
° e ° 380 


3 


e 
ad 
-~ 
. -] 


o 
ee 

5 

z 


e 
ee °® e e 
e 
e 
= 
a 
~~ 


5 ; ‘ ° 100 


302, 338, 339, 340, 342, 343 
° » 267, 276, 277 
- + 967, 376-77 
et 357 
e e e 196-97 
° - 250, 354. 34! 
° ‘ 83 


548 INDEX. 


PAGE 

Midnapore. ° ° ° 13, 15, 16, 18, 23, 24. 45, $0, 63, 80, to’, 158 
Militia, European and Aewenen j e : A : ‘ 34 
Native 5 ‘i ‘ é < ‘ . is 65 

Miller, F. M., Licutenast-Colonel : ° ; ‘ . ° 125 
Millet, Cecil Gacace. Lieutenant . ° ‘ ‘ ‘ 314 
Milman, Egerton C. W. M., Colonel ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ e 284 
Minbu e . ° e e e e e ° e e e 388, 390 
Minhla . . 7 : ‘ : ; ‘ - - i « 385, 390 
MirBuchea . - - + «© » : © + -- 352» 359, 368 
Mir Jafar Khan , ° ; - 6 a $€9.5 13, 14. 15, 16, 17, 20, 24, 28, 32 
Mir Madin ° 8 ° ° ° ° e ° e 7 
Mir Msbammad, Afghan wisitle ° . . : : 352 
Mir Muhammad Kasim Ali Khan. ‘< ‘ 16, 8 19, a6; 21, 22, 24, 26, 27 
Mir Sher Muhammad e ° ° ° ° ® ° e 197 
Miran. ; . ° : ‘ P 8, 13, 1S, 16, 28 
Miranpur-Katra, battle of ; . . . . . 39 
Miranzai ;. ; é ; ;. ‘ ‘0, aa8 Soe 258, 416, 487 
Expeditions . . ; ‘ . ° ° ; » 416-17 
Mirian . r e ° ° e e e e ° e 422 
Mirkilli ° ° ° e ° e ° ° ° ° e e 255 
Mirpur e ° e e e ° e e e ° e e 197 
Mirzapur ; ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° fo, 111, £29, 132 
Misriwala e ° ° e e ° e e e e ° 208 
Mitanket ° ° ° ° ) ° e ° e e ° ° 213 
Mitchi ° e e ° . ° Py ) ° ° e Py ° 39! 
Mithauli . e e . e ° e Py ° Py 288 
Moberly, F. J-» Lieutenant : ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ . ‘ “ « 4249 425 
Mocatta, D., Colonel ‘ ° : ‘ ; ; . . » 3345 325 
6 D. E., Lieutenant. ; ‘. ‘ ; : F ‘ ‘ 4t2 
Mockler, J., Lieutenant . . , . . ; | ° 10! 
Mogandt ° e ° ® . ° ° e e ° ° e 157 
Mogoung ° ° . . ° ° ° ° « 392, 307, 398 
Mogha! Horse ° ‘ ; . ° ° ‘. » 16, 23. 26, 27, 28, 30, 37 
Mohamdi e ° ° : e e e ° ° 286 
Mohmands . ° . 250, 54, 255, 258, 311912, 340—41, 342-43, 303 
Moira, Francis, Far] of . ‘ . ° ° ; ° ° . 115, 124, 128 
Moira-ki-paltan ‘ ‘ ; ° : ‘ ° ‘ ° ‘ ° 115 
Mokandra pass < ° ° ° ; . ‘ e ; A ‘ go 
Mombassa ; r ‘ ‘ ‘ : é ‘ R é P ‘ 429 
Momeik . é ‘ ‘ ° - ‘ é ‘ ° e ° ° 402 
Momeit . ‘ ‘ . : ‘ = ° ° ° ° 399 
Monas river. ‘ ‘ ° ‘“ é ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ° 316 
Moneah . e e ° e e Py ° e ° e r 66 
Money, Aurelian, Lieutenant . é . j ° ‘ ° ‘ : 234 
» G.N,, Lieutenant-Colonel . ‘ 2 ‘ ° : © 349, 351, 355 
Mongham _. ° ‘ ° ; ° ‘ ‘ . ‘ : ° 420 
Monghyr 4 . 17, IQ, 20, 22, 30 


Monson, Hon'ble William, Lieutens nt-C olonel, Brigadier-General 89, 90, 
| 93, 95, 96, 100, 103, 182 


INDEX. 549 


PAGE 

Monson’s retreat. e Se ~ % ; « go—92 
Montagu, Edward, Lieutenant-Colonel : . ° ° : . . 72 
Montanaro, Charles Alfred, Lieutenant oe ae ee : 358 
Monteath, Thomas, Lieutenant-Colonel, Brigadier é © © ee 19, 186 
Montgomery, Mr, R obert e e e e e r e ° e 265 
Montizambert, George Sheaffe, “a ‘ 2 . : ; : 324 
Moodkee (Mudki) . < ¢ 333 
Mooltan . é ‘5 dia: Poona) 237, 235 226, 239, 238, 240, 259, 345 
Moore, George, Ligutengat ; ; ‘ . : ° . ° 90 
Moradabad ° ° ° ° ° ° e e ° e 128, 266, 285 
Mcrdaunt, John, Captaio ‘ é ‘ : ° ; ° ‘ ° 64 
Morgan, Charles, Major-General. é : ‘ ° ; ‘ . 70 
» james, Captain. . ; : , ‘ Se ae © =—-93y 24, 38 
Morgan-ki-palian . ° . ‘ ‘< . . ° ° + 23,68 
Mori Bastion, Delhi ; e & oe . , 273 
Mornington, Ear! of, (Marquis Wellesley) . . ° ‘ : ; 72 
Morrison, William Elliott, Lieutenant ° ° ° ° ‘ . ‘ 122 
Morrison John, Captain ‘ ‘ " 4 ° : ° A ‘ 7 
»» Joseph W,, Brigadier-General , : . . ° ‘ Igt 
Moseley, George W., Lieutenant-Colonel ° 8 © © «© «6 185 
Mosley, William Feilden, Lieutenant ‘ ° ° ° : ° ° 320 
M.tijhil . ° : ° ° ° ° e ° . ° ° 20 
Moti Mahal, Lucknow . : F . ° . . ° . 279 
Moulmein . . ° « 243, 248 


Mountain batteries,—See ‘valle Bengal kins ana Pun iab Froatier Force. 
Mountain, Armine Simcoe Henry, Brigadier, ee e 236, 231, 232, 238 


Mounted infantry. ° ° , ; ‘ : * .% 285 
Moveable column, Nicholson’ 8. . . ‘ . a ee 272 
Moveable columasin Burma . . : . : ; : z 308 
Moxon, Philip, Ensign e e ° e r) e ° ° ° e 210 
Mozima . Py . . e e ° ® e e ; e 324 
Mud War, The e e ° ° e e ° ° ° e e 76—78 
Mudki e e ry ° ® e ° ° e r ° 2207— 208 
M odki, Battle of —.. : ° oe ‘ ° 207—08, 210, 231 
Mugli Pass ° ° ° ° ° ° e ° e ‘ 57 
Muhammad Akbar Kban ° ‘ . ° , ° 182, 183, 184, 190, 191 
3 Jan, Wardak leader. : . ee 352, 353» 354, 368 
% Takki Khan ° ;: ° . ° . ; ; - 20 
Muir, Granger, Lieutenant-Colonel - 2. lis . : ° 44 
Muisullah Khan ° . ‘ . e ° ‘ ; 364 
Mujiaawalast F ° ‘ ° < ; 3 : 237 
Mulcaster, W. E., Brigadier-Cieneral . e . : © 333, 314 
Mulraj, Dewan of Multan ews , : 223, 224, 225, 235, 236, 237, 240 
Multai. : ° ° . « 134, 135 


Multani Horse (Cureton arr sth Bengal Cavaliy. 

Multanis, Lind’s ‘ ° ° P ° ; ° . ‘ . . 278, 285 
Munro, Hector, Major . . . ° ‘ - 25, 26,27, 28, 48, 290 
John, Major, Lioutenant-Colone! . Ps é ; ; ‘ 88 


§50 INDEX. 


eee ee CS cee ae —_—_ - ——_ -- = —— ——_—_> —— 


PAGE 
Munro, John, Lieutenant . ° . : ° . . : ° . 208 
Munt, George Mackintosh, Lieutenant . ; : ‘ : ; ; 120 
Murrall, Thomas William, Lieutenant ‘ ‘ , ‘ 111 
Murray, Alexander William, Lieutenant . ‘ ‘ ; : 274 
» Charles Balfour, Ensign . . . . . 309 
» George Home, Brigadier . : . . . 1$4 
= John, Colonel . ° e ° ° ‘ < ‘ ‘ 7 ge 
Murtay’s Irregular Cavalry . ; ‘ ‘ , . 102 
» Jat horse,—vide 14th Bengal adie. 
Murreeroo-ki-paltan ° ° ° ° ; . ; ; ‘ ; dS 
Murriam-ki-paltan r e e ° Py . ° ° e 7§ 
Murshidabad . ° ° e ° ° ° ° , : 1, 8, Qp 14 20, 22 
Musalman regiments ° : . . . ‘ ° ‘ : ; 428 
Mushaki Py e e e e ry ° e e ry Ps ° e 365 
Mushk-i-Alam a e e e ° e ° e e e e 3525 361 
Musketry practice . ° ° ° : 55 


Mutiny of troops under Sir “yre Coote, 9; In 1764, ve Of gth Battalion, fe 
26 ; On batta question, 32-4; Of 20th Battalion, 45 ; Of 4th Battalion, 
17; Of 35th battalion, 50; Of 15th Battalion, 65; Of Java Volunteers, 
111; Of 47th Regiment, 150-51, 160; Of 3yth and 64th N. 1, 202-03 ; 
Of 60th N. I., 2423 Of 19th and 34th N. 1, . j j - ; 203 


Pe Indian ° ° ° ° . ‘ ‘ ° ‘ : -202—9o 
aa ac : ° . ; ‘ ‘ ‘ “ ; a 93 
Muttra tj. ; ‘ » 845 92) 03» 941 95) 96, 100, 138, 140, 260 
Myat-toon, B races Chief ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ : ‘ ‘ ‘ 247, 248 
Myingyan ‘ ° ° ° ‘ ° F ; ; « 386, 387, 392, 400 
M yogi ° ® e ° e ° ° ° ° 30) 
Mysore wars. ° ° ° ° ° e ° 36, 45—48, s6—65, 68, 72—73 


Nar river ee ° e e ° ® 


e ° e ° ° e 145 

Nafusk pass. ° ° ° . ; 174 
Naga hills and erieditions against Nagas . ° é aie 324 324, 327-28, 420 
Nagar (Oudh) e e e e e e ) Py e e r) e 286 
» (Kunjat) ° ° ° ° . : ‘ . ° « 419, 425 
Nagarchi e ° Py ry e r) e ° ° Py e ° r 133 
Nagina . ; ° ° ° ° ° ° : , ° ° . 285 
: Nagor r) ° e e e e e e ry e ry ° ° 258 
Nagpur ° e ° e e e e e ° e 87, 131-32, 133,262, 402 
»  Ieregular Force 2. «© © «© © © « « 260, 300, 301, 302 
Nahan. ° . . : °o 6 , ee © 119, 127 
Nairne, Robert, Major ‘ ° ° ° ° ° ° , ‘ ‘i 17 
Naiberisaldar . ‘ ‘ ‘ ° ° ° ° ° ° ° - 113, 333 
Najafgarh, battle of . ee ee ee a ee ee ‘ 272 
Najm-ud-Daulah ° e e ° e ° ° e ° e e 28 
Nalagarh. ‘ ‘ ‘ . ° ‘ ‘ ‘ < ° ° F 320 
Nalapaai, or sete . . ° ° : ‘ »  @ 11839 
Nam-tow e ° ° ° ° e ° ° Py ry e 295 
Nana Khel Wazaris . e e e e e e e ° « 375-76 
Nana Dhundu Punt (Nana Sahib) : ‘ ° ‘ ° ‘ » 2068, 269, 28- 


INDEX. | 55 


PAGE 
Nandidrug e ° e e e e e Py e ° ° Py 60 
Nankin ° e ® . e e e ° ° ° e e 195 
Nanklao . ° ° ° ° e e ° ° ° ° ° e 157 
Nanpara e e e ® e e 108, 389 


Napier, Sir Charles james, Major-General, General : 196—97, 2031382, 242, 249 
» Sir Robert Cornelis, (Lord Napier of Magdala) Major, Lieutenant- 


General 3 ; : ° . ‘ 7 © 223, 316, 317, 318 

Naraghain e ° e e e ° e ° e e ° ° 247 
Nara Khula detile ° e e e e e e r e e e 335 
Naraoli e e ° ° e e ° ° e e ° e e 268 
Narayan Deo e ° e e e r) rs r) r) e ° e 36 
Nargashai ° ° ° ° e e ° ° ° ° e e 37° 
Narinji e ° ° ° e ° ° ° e e e @ ° 29! 
Narnaul . e r e e e ° e ° ° e e « &, 278 
Narsipur . ° ° ° a ee P ° ° ° . . iy 
Narwai e e ° e ° . ‘e ° e ° e Py e 89 
Nasin ° ° ° ° ° e ° e r ° r ° e 259 
Nasir Khan ° ° @ ° 7) e ° ° e 174s 176, 179 
Nasseri Battalions (vide Ist Gurkha Rifles) e e r e e 126——27, 830 
” Battali ion, new e . e e a e e e 242 
Nation, J. L,, Brigadier-General é 5 ; ‘ . ; ‘ ¢ 327, 328 
” Ss; Major e ° ° e ° e e e ° e ° 135 
Native Adjutant e e e e e e e ® e ° ° 68 
» Commandant ; A , : ‘ “ . ° . S4 

ry) troops in Europe ; ° e ° e ° e e e ° 326, $37 
Naung-floot ° e e ° ° e r ° ° e ° ry 305 
Naval brigades ° ° e e ° ° e e e 370 284, 204 
Nawabganj, action of e e ° e ° e ® ° ° e 286 
Nawadaa. e ° ° e ° e ® ry e ® e 2g! 
Naylor, ‘lhomas, Captain. e a e ° ® . e e ° 40 
Nayoung-goun-lya_ . . ° . ° ° ° ° ° e ® 248 
Nazian valley ° e e e ° e ° ° 177 

Neill, Colonel—See ‘‘ Smith-Neill”. 

Nellore e ° ° e e e e r ® e ° ry ° 63 
Neelwar-ki-paltan e e ® e ° e e 40 
Neemuch e ° ry e e ° ° ° ° ° ® 266 
Nepal ° e ° e ° e ° e e ® e e 334, 268, 289 
pe War ° ° ° ° e e e e e Jt 7—37, 262 
Nerbadda river and district © 6 6 es lly. 130, 932, 233, 353, 195 
Newberry, F., Colonel ° e e ® e e e ° 530 
Newdigate, H. R. Ls; Brigadier-General r e e ry ° e ° 365 
Newton, Charles, Lieutenant . ; é ? : * ° « ° 300 
” Thomas, Captain, Major ° ° ° ° @ ° ° r 535, 145 
Ngape e e ° ® ° e r ° 388 
‘Nicholson, Niscandes Jaffray, Ensign é ° ° 198 


- John, Captain, Major, Lieutenant-Colonel, Brigadier-General 
229, 2§2, 265, 266, 271, 272) 27% 374 
Nicol, Charles, Lientenant-Colonel . : . - ‘ ‘ © 125, 196 
-, james, Captain . ; .- ee : . ° 31 


552 INDEX. 


nee Ee 


PAGE 
Nicolls, Sie Jasper, Colonel, Major-General ‘ : ° : o 124, 154, 192 
Nicolson, Peter, Lieutenant, Captain ‘ ; ‘ . ; - 169, 238 
Nijrao. ° ‘ ° ° 7 ; 4 . . ° . ° 175 
Nikoti Mian _ ‘ : ‘ . . ‘: ‘ Z : ° 340 
Nilt, Storming of . ; ‘ : . ; é ; ‘ 419 
Nimghat ‘ ‘ ‘ F ‘ ; : é < : ‘ “ 1390 
Nimla pass. ‘ , . , : ° : ‘ 7 ° 393 
Ningpo . : ‘ . ° F ‘ ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ‘ . 194 
Ninuw ‘ ° ° : : ; ¢ ‘ : ‘ ‘ 322, 323 
Nisa Gol 5 , . : : ;: ; , ‘ ; 425 
Nishanbardar or Nishanchi i ‘“ ; . ; : : 113, 333 
Nizam. . : ; 18, 30, 58, isi 02, 66, 70, 80, 259 
Nizam-ul-M ulk, Mehtar of Chitral - ‘: . ’ : ’ : 422 
Noke, James, Lieutenant-Colcnel . ; ; ‘ : . 71. 
Noke-ki-palian i . , . , ‘ . , ‘ ‘ 71 
Noagbarai_ i. . P , ; ‘ ‘ 305 
Non-mounted branches of the Army increase of Say to . ° . ; 427 
Norfosd, Henry, Captain ‘ F ; 7 ‘ , : 3 96 
Norman, F. 13., Colonel ‘ i ‘ . ‘ ‘ _ - 359, 360 
Northern Circars ; ° ‘a . 10,12, 1s, 16, 36, 50, 60, 66 


North-East Frontier, 294, 305, 3) Paar 318, 320—2-, 323-24, 327— 28, 380, 3903—94 
North-West frontier expeditions, 245-58, 2Q0— 44, 300—-12, 318—-20, 324—36 
339—41, 375-70, aca 394-97, 402, hs 416—20, 420—37 


Noton, Thomas, Captain é ‘ ‘ 148 
Nott, William, Major-General . 108, 7s 173; 176, 1775 178, 179, 187, 188, 189, 191 
Nowgong ‘ 5 ° : . . ° : ° . : . 266 
Nowshera ° ° : ° : . . . . 291 
Nugent, George, Captain: ; 5 g 3 ‘ é ‘ . ‘ 190 
Nurpur ° ° r . e ° Py e e ° e ® 425 
Nusseerabad e rs ® ° ry e e . 20], 276 
Nuthall, William l'rost, Captain . : ° . . ° 247 
Nuttall, J.M., Colonel . . . >. > we ° p . 323 
©: ’BRIEN, Stephen, Lieutenant. . . ‘ . 108 
Ochterlony, Sir David, ‘ isutenaateColuacl; Major-General, 84s 932 Sts 114, 
117, 120, 121 122, 124, 325, 129, 133, 1535 1§4, 290 
Odell, William, Lieutenant. ° . ° . ° a : ; 65 
O'Donnell, H. A., Major a 105 
Oghi, or Ughi . ;: ; ° ; ° ‘ « 319) 345, 418 
O’Hara, Brabazon Rawdon, Licitenant ° ° ° ° ° ° . 119 
Oktama . . . ; . . . © 8 sf 300 
Ommaarey, A. H., Licatedant a ae a ee ee 426 
Oldfield, Christopher E. T., Captain . ° : . ‘ ; 184 
% Frederick Folliot, Lieutenant ‘ : . ; é ‘ 280 
Orakzais, or Lrakzais . ; . Fi ; . ;: » 256, 416 
Orchard, Joseph, Lieutenant-Colonel. ° ° ° 5 ; é ° 173 
Order of British India sy. ° ° ° : ° ° ° ° : 165 
2 Merit . ° e e e ry e ° e e e 165 


INDEX. 553 


Orissa o ® e e ry e e ° e* r) ry ) e go 
Otao st. . 383 


Oudh ° - 28, 38, 39, 51, 53s S4s 105, 108, 137, 241, 258, 263, 269, 282, 
284—85, 286, 287, 283, 289 


x» Annzeation of : j : é ‘ ; + 258—59, 260, 263 
ry) Auxiliary Force ° Py ry r e ° 162, 166, 243, 260 
” Campaign in, 1858 ° e ® ° ° e r e 286—S&9 
» Irregular Force F < F ‘ 260, 264, 266, 268, 279 
90 Local Infantry e ° ° . ® e ° ° e 242, 260 
» Mutiniesin . . ‘ ° . . ° ° « 264, 266 

Nawab Wazir of _. . o 21, 22, 23, 24, », 37, “289, 38, 39) Sls 53 

Outram, Sir James, Captain, Major-General 2 «169, 870, 196, 270, 278, 


280, 281, 283, 283 
Owen, Arthur, Lieutenant-Colonel . ; ° ° : : ‘ © 46,47 
” John, Captain e e ° e ® e ° ° ry r) 103 


Pacuu: 


e e ‘ e e e ° ° ° ® e 328 

Padaing e ® e ° e e e e J * - s 338 
Padha hills ° e ° e e e ° ° e r e e 15! 
Padong ° e ° e ° ° e ° r ° ° ° e 393) 3904 
Paeng e ° ry e e ° e ® ° ° e ° 390 
Pagan (Paghamyu ) ° e e . ° e ° - 1252, 386, 387 
Paghamyu (Pagan) ® ° ° ° e e e e ry ° 1§3 
Paghman valley .. rr 2 353 
Paiah ® ° ° ° e ® ° ® e e r ° e 325 
Paiwar Kotal ° e e e ° e ry e e e 2575 343, 3475 360 
Palei e ° e ry ry e e ° e . ° ° 416 
Palli ° ® ry e ° e e e ° 249 
Palliser, C. H., Brigadier-General * we. oe . : . » 367, 369 
Palmer, Edmund, Lieutenast . . ‘ e ‘ ¢ ‘ 364 
» Thomas, Lieutenant-Colonel : ‘ ° : ° ‘ ; 187 
Palosia, action at. ° e e ° e ° e ° 293 
P alpa e ° e ° ° ° e ) e ° e e m8 
Paita e ° e ° ° e ° ry e * e ) e 4 3, 32 
Paltan ry . ° ° . ° e ° e . ° § 
Panic at Calcutta ee re 275—76 
Pandu Naddi ° ° e ° ° ° . , e « 2363, 220 
P aniar, battle of r e ° ° ° ‘ e ° e 200="301 
Panipat e ° ° ° e ° ° e ° e ° ° e 113 
Paniyali levies ° ° e ° e e e e ° ° ° 424 
Panj-dar a e e ® ® e e e e e e e ® 300 
Panjkora river a . a a é 426 
P: anjnad Py ° e e e . ° ‘ ° ° e e 213 
Panjpao . ‘ ‘ P 3 é ‘ ‘ . : : 250 
Panjtar e e e ° . e ° ° ° e r) ay! 
Panjwai . ‘ ° ‘ : ; ° : : ° : 188 
Paana ry e e e ° Py e ° ° ° e ° 108 
Paowari e e ° ° ° e e ° e ° e 165 


554 INDEX. 


{A Te ES SE oe, 


PAGE 
Parganna battalions ‘ : : . ‘ ‘ ‘ - 34; 30, 37) 30 
Parari e e r ° e ° e ° ° e e Ps e 108 
Pariari Saiads ° ' : : . . . - 319, 320, 396, 397 
Parbati river . - ‘ i ; . ; . ° 131 
Pari Dara . ‘ . . 179 
Parker, John Neville, Lieutenant-Colone! . ‘ . . ° 39s 40s 43 

» William James, Lieutenant : ‘ ° : ‘ : 173 
Parsa . e e e e ® ® ° . e ° 122, 123 
Parwan-dara ° e e e ° e e e e e ® 175 
Pashi, Abor hills. ‘ ; ; e : ‘ : ‘ : 204 
Pashut ° ° e e e e ° Py Py e e . 197273 
Pastaoni ° : P , ‘ ‘ ; : ‘ . 335 
Patan e ® e . e e e . ° e ° e 159 
Pathans e P - if ‘ e P ° - Se GO, 241, 271, 311 
Pathar-serai e e e e ° e e e ° Fs Py ° 105 
Patiali e e e e ° ° ° e . ° . ° 281 
Patita, action at. ° . : . ; : d ; . 49 
Patkao Shana . ‘ ‘ 3 : , ; : , . 369 
Pati. : ; P ; 6 
Patna. ‘8, Pe 12, is lds as "7, :8, 19, oi: 22, 23, 25) 27» 54 
Patparganj, battle of ‘ ; . 82, 83 
Pattle, William, Lieutenant-Colonel i ee 196 
Patton, Robert, Brigadier : é ; ; ° » 184,156 

- J. W., Ensign. . : ” ; a 
Pattoun, Richard Tyrrell Robert, Lieutenant-Colonel : : ; * 324 
Pauk e . ° ° ° ° ° . © . . ¢ 391, 397 
Paukan Kachins ; : d : ‘5 : : . ° . 399 
Paul, William, Lieutenant ‘ . ‘ p : . ; : ‘ 280 
Pawangarh a ee ae S. we @ we 42 
Pawayan . : 286 


Pay, increase of, to Silladar Cavalry, the ‘Viceroy’ s Body Guard, the non- 
mounted branches of the Native Army, and the local als . ; . +27 


Payne, George, Lieutenant . - ‘ ‘ : ‘ . 103 
Peach, Joseph, Lieutenant-Colonel ' : os ¢ 31, 36 
Pearse, Thomas Deane, Colonel ‘ ‘ ; 5 . ° 4S, 46, 48, 53, 54 
Peebles, Alan Laing, Captain . . ‘ ‘; 3 i ‘ . ; 426 
Peel, Joseph, Lieutenant ‘ . ; . ‘ ° . 235 
» Sir aes Captain, R. N. : ;: ; : ; . . 279 
Pegu e ° e e e e « 245, 240, 248 
Pehtang ® e e e ° e ° e e * ° 296 
Pei-ho Forts, repulse at. ;: 3 é 3 ‘ ‘ ° ‘ 295 
» iver . : ; , : : 3 é ‘ © 295, 296 
Pekin . ~ 2 «~ 2 8: -4 295, 296, 297, 208 
Pemble, Charles, Major . : ‘ ° P ‘ : : ° . ‘ 37 
Penagra e s e es e e e 6 ® e e e 60 
Penang is eS sy le. 8 - 56,65 
Pensioners, re-encolment of So ce we ce g Se ek ae) 4g 376 
Pensions Ge, ok ae © =e 165, 418 
Penny, Nicholas, Brigadier, Major-General ‘ ¢ 226, 231, 232, 238, 285 


oy 
- ee 


Pennycuick, John, Brigadier. ; ° 
Peons, or Madras native troops 
Pepper, R., Lieutenant 


Perak Expedition . . oe 
Percival, George, Lieutenant . ‘ ‘ : . 
Periapatam ss. ‘ : : ‘ ; 
Perron, Monsieur . ; ‘ é ° ‘ 


Persians 


Peshawar ° ° 108, 170, 171, 179. 184, 185, 186, 187, 


s 
8 
® 
e 
e 
e 
e 


oo ne 


555 

PAGE 

- 226, 331, 232 
e e@ 5 
‘ - tos 
e e 333 
e ® 09 
‘ ° 59 
81, 82, 101, 103 
167 


198, 226, 240, 250, 


351, 2§2, 254, 255, 265, “ 32S. 350: 427 


99 Light Field Battery : . ° 
9 » Horse. ° 


» Mountain lrain,—vide Punjab Frontier Force. 


ry) Valley Field Force ° r * ° 


Phayre, R., Major-General : 
7 R., Me. en Commissioner) 


ry) disarming at. e e e ° 
Peshbolak j . ‘ ‘ ' ‘ ° 
Peshwa . ; j ° ° . . 
Petoragarh.. ° ° . ° . ° 
Pew, Peter Laurie, Major P : : 
Pezwan é . < 


Phillour 4 . 
Phonkan ‘Tewbaay ; é : ‘ 
Phulpur ‘ : : d ; 


Pickersgill, J., Liburenaut ; 
Picquet hill . . 
Pigot, J. P., Captain, LicutseantsCoinned: 


Pigou, Robert, Lieutenant : , ‘ 
Pile, William, Assistant Surgeon. 7 : 
Pilibhit . ° ° ‘ ° 
Pinckney, red. G. A., Brigadier ‘ e . 
Pindaris 

Pindari-Mahratta War * ‘ ‘ 


e 
’ 
e 
® 
° 


. ‘ 291 
. ° . 29! 
° ° ¢ 337, 338 
° °  265—66 
. ° ° 1775 340 
80, 86, 132, 133» 134, 268 
e ° e 271 
;. é ‘ 167 
e e e 356 
° ° e 370 
. e e 388 
e e e 265 
e r e 387 
m e ° 384 
e ° - 133, 125 
, ‘ ° 373 
° e - 66, 73 
° ° e 19730 177 
° ‘é ° gi0 
° . ° 387 
° . ° 288 
° 8y, ef seg., 125 
e ° e 128—36 


Pioneers . 27, 28, 78, 81, 47, 104, 108: 107, 109, 130, 112, 124, 115, 117, 818, 
11Q, 122, 125, 1345 135, 136, 137, 138) 140, 351, 154, 856 
» Punjab. 371, 277, 281, 299 (vide ** 32nd Bengal Infantry’’) 


Pipbima . . e e ° e e 
Pir Paimal ‘ ‘ , : ‘ ‘ A 
Pishin. ° ° 
Pitcher, Henry William, Lieutenant ° ‘ 
Plassey, battle of . : . ; 
Playfair, Hugh Arthur, Lieute awat ; ‘ 

» William Dalgleish, Lieutenant . . 
Plumer, John, Lieutenant ‘ ° . 
Poel-ki-paltan ° : , ‘ ‘ ; 
Pohlman, Colonel ° ° ° ° Py 
Point Pria Fort ‘ . : ‘ . ‘ 
Pokal e ° e ° e Py ° e 


eo ® e @® , 


e ° 327 


° - 373, 373 

7 346, 5 
° e 308 
e 7,8, 20, 164 
° ° 236 
° ° a%9 
e e 65 
e ° y A 
e « 800, fo2 
e . 5 
. 307 


556 INDEX. 


Pollilur, battle of . ‘* ‘. 
Pollock, George, MavonGercal 
» Robert Henry, Lieutenant 
Ponsonby, George re ras ‘. 
Poona. : * 
Poonamallee . : ‘ : 
Pope, Alexander, Brigadier ; 
Popham, George M., Captain . 


PAGE 


‘ ‘ < ; . 46 
a 186, 187, 190, 891, 192 

° ° 176 
40, 42, 43. 44s 80, 130, 262 
° ° ° e 47 
; ° - 226, 231, 233, 234 
é : 106 


»» William, Captain, Major, Major-General - ees 44, 48, 49, $0, 72 


Poplongmai . ° ° ° ‘ 
Port Cornwallis ‘ : ; : 
» Louis. ‘ ‘ 


Porto Novo. . 
Portuguese Infantry « or ‘Topas : 
Pottinger, Eldred, Major a : 
Powell, Charles Folliott, Captain. 

» John, Lieutenant-Colonel 

» Peregrine, Lieutenant-Colonel 
Pragpur 3 , ; ; ‘ 
Pranyarh é ‘ ; 
Pratt, H. M., Colonel 


Prendergast, Sir H. N. D., Major-General 


Presgrave, E.R. |., Captain. ° 
Presidential Army system, abolition of 
Preston, William, Lieutenant . e 
Price, Robert, Captain. ; ‘ 
Prince of Wales’ Island . ; 
Priaces of Delhi : : P ; 
Pringle, Robert, Captain . , ;. 
Probyn, D.M., Major .. ‘ 
Probyn’s Horse é 
Prome. ; ‘ 
Provincial battalions ‘Pedueed 

Pulaji e e e e e e 


e 


328 
3.46 
109 
46 
2 
180 


° 344 
So, 86, 89 
§ 7% 
: 108 
; y 251 
° P : : ° 306 
‘ : ‘ « 385, 386, 387 
e ° ° e e 415 
‘ ‘ ‘ < » 429-30 


° e ° ° $7 
e s ° e e 743 
° e ® ° e 56 
. e ° ° 274-75 
: : ‘ ° 148 
e e e e e 297 
‘: ° ° ° 296 
° » 745» 246, 247, 248, 389 


‘ ‘ : 102 ; raised 115 
e ® e e e 174 


Pulicat . : . ‘ . ° : . ; : . . 46 

Pulley, Charles, Captais 3 . ; ‘. “ ‘ é 389 

Punjab . e © 70, 102, 105, 1Y2, 205, 323, 223) 235» 234, 2415 248, 205; 270, 290 
ie Annexation of the ‘ ° e ° . e ; « 240, 241, 248 
” Army of the ° ° ° ° ° e e ° 226—27 
» Command, institution of the . . ° ° : 430 
» Campaign in, 184849 . . ° . . : ° ‘ ° 223—4! 
» Frontier 1857-60. ° ° . . ‘ . 4 3 » 290—94 
ey ‘s Force, origino the e “ ‘ « 222, 235, 241, 259 
99 99 99 ° 302, 409 
a a is ‘Fraveitved és the eoiltal of the Commandeset hief 409—10 
99 ss »» Batteries and Regiments of the— 


ne 1 (Kohat) Mountain Battery 241, 253, 257, 292, 243, 318; 
+, 325, 343, 344) 345, 349, 351—-2, 352, 355, 300, 363, 364, 360, 


375, 380, 402, 414, 422, 43! 


— et ee =~ me ee re ne we - - - ee a ae mee _: a eS 


Punjab Frontier Force, Batteries and Regiments of the —conéd, 


No. 2 (Derajat) Mountain Battery 241, 255, 256, 257, 293s 3%, 
322, 324, 343, 345, 348, 353, 355, 356, 358, 362, 368, 370, 
375, 417, 418, 423, 43! 
No. 3 (Peshawar) Mountdts Battery . 235, 256, 291, 203, 293, 
306, 319) 3215 34S, 346, 375, 416, 417, 428, 422, 433 
No. 4(Hasara) Mountain Battery . 252, 291, 292, 293, 306, 307, 
319, 332, 324, 326, 337, 341; 342, 349, 358, 359, 360, 
362, 363, 367, 375, 385, 386, 387, 389, 390, 394, 416, 
; 419, 423, 43! 
Punjab Garrison Battery . ‘ ° ; : ‘ - 417, 431 
Cerps of Guides . 222, 235, 249, 250, 251, 252, 254, 265, 
272, 273) 274, 277, 278, 291, 292, 293, 300, 302, 
306, 309, 319, 324, 326, 337, 338, 340, 342, 347; 
34% 352, 355, 356, 357, 358, $50 362, 368, 403, 
408, 409, 418, 423, 436, 431 
1st Punjab Cavalry . e 241, 249, 251, 256, 274, 277, 278, 
282, 283, 286, 288, 289, 300, 307, 322, 345, 346, 
347, 349, 365, 366, 369, 375, 402, 408, 421, 422, 431 
and Punjab Cavalry . “ 241, 252, 257, 272, 274) 277» 278) 
282, 383, 285, 287, 291, 292, 300, 3232, 
324) 345, 349 $61, 365, 366, 369, 408, 422, 431 
grd Punj.t Cavalry . 241, 257, 293, 300, $18, 362, 367, 368, 
370, 375, 402, 408, 422, 431 
ath P wnjab Cavalry ° ° ° 2415 253s 255» 256, 300, 375, 403 
sth Punjab Cavalry . 241, 253, 2725 374, 277, 278, 282, 283, 
286, 292, 300, 343, 345, 348, 349) 350, 351, 
353» 355, 357, 358, 381, 408, 416, 417, 431 
tst Sikh Infantry » 222, 225, 235, 252, 253, 254. 255» 2575 
285, 302, 322, 324, 325, 338, 341, 375, 376, 402, 
409, 422, 431 
and Sikh Infantry . 222, 225, 235, 291, 292, 302, 309, 345, 
349, 365, 366, 371, 373. 375, 395- 403, 409, 43! 
grd Sthh Infantry . 222, 246, 253, 257, 289, 298, 302, 310, 319 
324, 325, 349) 352» 353, 355» 3623, 371, 375» 
394, 409, 416, 417, 422, 432, 431 
gth Sikh Infantry . 222, 245, 246, 247, 248, 265, 271, 272, 392; 
293, 302, 312, 322, $24, 375, 409, 418, 420, 
423, 426, 431 
ist Punjab Infantry . ° 241, 249, 250, 251, 253, 253, 255» 
256, 257, 272, 273» 277s 285, 292, 393, 302, 
36, 308, 309, 311, 320, 322, 345) 347s 375, 
40-4. 409, 416, 487, 420, 431 
and Punjab Infantry . 241,252, 256, 257, 272, 274, 277» 279% 
280, 282, 283, 286, 293, 204, 302, 319) 343; 
375, 402, 409, 417, 422, 43! 
3rd Punjab Infantry  . 241, 253» 255, 256, 257, 292» 203. 204 
302, 306, 307, 318, 375, 403 


558 INDEX. 


-- eee —— ee eee me 


PAGE 
Punjab Frontier Force, Batteries and Regiments of the—coneld, 
th Punjab Infantry =. - 241, 2§2, 257, 272, 273s 274s 277» 279 
280, 280—-81, 281, 282, 283, 285, 291, 292, 293, 
302, 320, 324, 360, 361, 375, 381, 395, 404, 409, 
416, 422, 43! 
5th Punjab Infantry « 241, 257, 286, 289, 291, 302, 306, 324, 
325, 343, 348, 349, 350, 351, 353, 355, 356, 359, 
362, 375, 404, 409, 416, 431 
6th Punjab Infantry « 241, 253, 255, 257, 259, 291, 292, 293, 
302, 306, 307, 318, 324, 375, 394, 409, 417; 422, 431 
sth Gurkha(Nifie) Regtment 293, 302, 306, 310, 319, 320, 
324, 343. 34> 348, 350, 353. 355» 357s 362; 371, 
375+ 394, 403, 417, 418, 4139) 420, 422, 431 


Punjab, Infantry. ‘ ° ‘ ° ° « 271, 399) 301, 302 


“5 Irregular Force . : : ° ‘ . ‘ . ° 259 

- War in the, 1848-49 ‘ ° ‘i : ; : 223—41 

» Troops from the, in 1857-58. . ‘ : ; - 271, 298—99 

»  _Pioneers,—see “32nd Bengal Infantry.” 

» Sappers ; : . : ; : . . é : 257 
Purnea, Nawab of . ‘ ‘ ‘. ‘ < ‘ : . ' « 15, 16 
Pusa F ; 5 - . é 5 , - e o 113, 14! 
Pyumbwin e ° ° ® r e . . ° r ° ° 3938 
Qusvan ; ° : ‘ 3 : ‘ . ‘ §6 
Quetta ° . ° 168, 170, 172, 176, 177, 345, 346, 347, 370 


Quinton, Mr. lamba Wallace ; ‘ é F ‘ : : « 414, 415, 416 


Ravcuirrt, James, Major 


‘ . . , 99 
‘ James, Captain . ‘ ; : é : ; 104 
Raipur . . ; ° ‘ , . : : ° 3 
Raja Miani . . . . : : ; . ° 2 340 
Rajahmundry ‘ é ‘ ‘ ‘ é . ° 10, 81, 52 
Rajaoli . ; ° e : , . . : ° . 107 
Rajeh-ki-paitan . ° : F ‘ F ; : . 40 
Rajgarh F ‘ ° ‘ . ° ‘ : ; ‘ ° 4! 
Rajput regimeats. : : : : ; ‘ ‘ : 428 
Rajputana . ; : ° : ° ‘ . 8, 1065 133, 136, 267 
Rajput . . . ‘ : : ; ; . ° ° : - Se St 
Ralfe, Charles, C::ptain . ‘ é F ; 5 ‘ 195 
Ramgiri . . e . e . e ° e Py e ry ‘ 60 
Ram Narayan e ° ; a : ° ; : 8, 83, 15 
Ram Singh, Buss/ela . ; ‘ ‘ ° : ° 89 
» 0 OCUlUntCSHKA ° ° . . ‘ ° 225 
Ramgarh j ° ° ° © 6§, 120, 133 


” Cavalry Py 


§2, 6s, 87, 118, 196, 139) 1§7, 158, 246 
‘ e 0 « 246, 247, 258, 300 


eo © ® @e «@ 
ee ®@ e@ : 


ewe pe 


-Ramnagar (Benares) 

r) (Punjab) 

»” (Saran) 
Rampur, disturbances in 
Rampur-Kassia 
Rampura : ° ‘ 

» Local Battalions 

” ” Cavalry ° 

Ramsay, R.,Captain 


» _ Thomas Kennedy, Lieutenant 


Ramu, disaster at e 
Rangar Nagal ‘ 
Rangeet river ‘ 
Rangoon . . ° 
» River (Irrawaddy) 
Rangpori ° ; 


Rangpur Light Infantry,— vide “42nd Bengal Infantry.” 


Ranizais j 


Ranjit Singh (of Bhurtpore) 


os » (of Lahore) 
Ranjar Singh Majithia 

ry) »  Thapa . 
Ranseet-ki-paltan . 
Raptiriver . ° 
Rasul_ . 


Rattray, Charles, Lieutenant 


» Thomas, Captain 


Ravi, river ; ‘ 
Rawal Pindi . 


Rattray’s Sikhs,—vide 45th Bengal 


Infantry. 


Rawson, John Simpson, Lieutenant ‘ 


Rawstorne, E., Major-General 


Rayle-ki-paltan , 
Raymond, Monsieur 
Razmak . ‘ 


Reade, Henry Jonathan, Liedtenast ) 


Recruiting . 


INDEX, 559 
PAGE 

e e r) e ® e e 48 

* 8 «© «6 « « 2287-28, 229 

e ° e e ° e e 5325 

e e ° e ° ° ° 64 

e r ° ry ° ° ° 288 

© © «6© +6 «6 . 89,91, 100 

° ° ° ° ° ° 138, 139, 162 

; . . . ° . . 139 

; : . ° e ° ; 65 

e ° ° ° ° ° ° 305 

. ° ° ° ° ° : 148 

e e @ e e e e 235 

e e e e ° ° e 298 
146; 147 149) 180, 242, 243, 244, 245, 346, 385 
° 37, 149 


Reed, Thomas, Brigadier, Major-General 


Regimental centres e 
Regulations, C ode of 
Reid, Charles, Major 

» Sw» Lieutenant 


Reignolds, Thomas Scott, Brigadier 


Remount Depédt _.. ‘ 
Remounts 


Renaud, Sydenham G. C., Major 


Rennick, R. H. &,, lieutenant-Colonel . 


Reany, Thomas Joho O'Dwyer, Lieutenant 


. - 54, 56—87, 68—69, 261, 376, 
Recruiting Centres, Establishment of , 


° - 250—51, 258, 3296 
CY ° e 96, 97; 99 
F e -105, 106, 135, 205 
. - ; ° 314, 215 
° e ‘ e 119, 122 
e i e e 22 
; : é - 288, 289 
: e 230, 234, 237 
° ‘ ° . 18o 
- 260, 276 

° ° e ° 271 
° 240, 271, 338, 423, 427 
‘ ° - : 219 
P é ° 66 
: ; ° e 93 
e ° . 7o 
e ® 376, $22 

e e e . 137 
404, 40$—1!0, 411, 427—28 
e e e e 427—28 
‘: . 209, 271 

« 410—11 

: F 34 

° 264, 373; 374 

101 

245 

e e ° e 260 
. 112—14, 139—40, 260 
e e e ° 263, 269 
. e p ig 3 “ 435 


-. 968 


Re-organisation of the Bengal Army 
Reserve, Army o! 
Division, 1845-49 
Infantry 
of horses 


90 
a” e 
9” ® 
Reshus 
Retreat of Monson’ s force 
»» ef Elphinstonc’s brigade 
Rewah (Baghelkhand) 
Rewari 
Reynell, Thomas, Major-General 


Rhodamavu 
Rhotas heights 


Rhotasgarh 
Richards, Alfred, L ‘culenantiColouel 


Richardson, Joseph, Lieutenant 


9a 


Richmond, George Mitchell, Lieutenant 
Ricketts, George, Mr. d , 
Ridge, E. }., Major 

Rideout, Henry Fortescue, Lieutenant 
Ridgeway, R. K., Lieutenant . 
Rifle companies 
Rikabashi Fort (Kabul). ; : 
Risaldar-Major, rank introduced 
Robat . 

Robarts’s Force (17th Bengal Cavalry) 
Roberts, Abraham, Lieutenant-Colonel 
H. T., Lieutenant, Captain 
George, Colone! ; 
Sir F. S., Lord, General 


98 
99 ad 


Robertson, D. H., Mayor 
G. S., Surgeon-Major 
John, Captain 

a Robert Stanwix, Lieutenant 
Robinson, Francis Wrightson, Ensign 
Rohilkhand 


90 


356, 3575 
99 
99 


Campaigns in 
Horse . 
Robilla Cavalry 
» Wars 
Rohillas . 
Rohri 
Rohtak . ° 
Rolland, George, Lieu tenant 
RongeKong (Abor Hills) . 
Roorkee 


William, Major, Colonel, ad 


William, Lieutenant-Colonel, "Colonel ‘5 


INDEX. 


ee ee 


PAGE 
ee 66—9, 139—40, 142—43, 299 —~304 
; 3192 


ee @ @ © 6» © © & @ 


- 148, 149 
e 119, 820, 136, 1§1 
° 65 
e 305, 316 


o 134, 13! 
70 


343, 3445 345, 348, 349, 450, 351, 3555 


359, 362, aps 370, 3725 374, a 391, 410 
e e e 382 
e ° 6 ° ° 4223, 434 
‘ i 2 j 104 
° ry e 30§ 


12, 26, 28, 38, 54, 54, 99, 136, 273, 285, 288 . 


- 38-39, 64—65, 271—72, 285—86 

‘ - 298, 300 
114, 127, 129, 131, 133, 135, 136, 138, 139 
38—9, 64—S5 
5:29, 36, 37, 38, 39, 63, 64 
168 


Rose, Alexander, Ensign . 
:» Henry Metcalfe, Captain 


» Hugh, Captain 
»» Sir Hugh Henry, Major-General 
»» john, Lieutenant 


Ross, A. G., Colonel 


n Campbell C.G., Captain, Major, Brigadier-General 
w» Char'es, Ensign 


» Claye Ross, Captain 
» John, Brigadier-General, Major-General ‘ 
wo R., Lieutenant 


William Hercules, Captain 
Rosetta (Egypt) 


Rothney, Octavius Edward, Lieutenant-Colonel 


Rowcroft, Francis, Brigadier 


Royle, H. W., Captain . 


Rubia Khel Uraksais 
Ruby Mines 
Ruiya fort, repulse at 


Russell, George, Major . 
Russell Krigade, the 
Ruxton, Arthur Upton Fox, Cicsteaunt Captain 
Ryves, W. H., Lieutenant 


Sina 
Sachima 
Sadin 


Sa:leir, T. R., Lieutenant 


Saharad (Punjab) i 


Saharanpur, 


Sahibjan 
Sai ‘ 
Sai River 
Saiadabad 
Saiad Bud 
Saif-u-dia 
Saighan 


Saighan-ghat e 
St, George, battle of 


6 e e e,e e 


e e fg eee & © & © © @© & & © & © © F&F © @ ¥ @ 


323, 362, 


© eee ®@ e fF © ee & © e@ F&F ee ee © & © © © @ 


PAGE 
. 8 180 
e e ° 390 
. ° ° 413 
° e . 268, 289 
e e bd o4 
° ° 403 
« 354 400, 324, 325 
e e e 59 
‘ ° 424 
367; 368, 3735 3735 374 
- Mer ve 136 
° . . 234 
@ e e 7§ 
° e ° $19 
. 284, 288, 289 
‘ c 93s 99, 102 
2 256 

390, 392, 3972 399) 400 
° . ° 28S 
° e e oF 
. oe e889 
e ° e 204, 318 
° e ° 20% 
° : « 125, 306 
. ° 0 3275 328 
« 0 3$4e 255 
: . ° 305 
e - e 229, 237 
< P ° 233 
e ° ° 177 
‘ ° ° 342 
° e e 369 
e e e 39° 
. 8 e 386 
° ° ry 39% 
r ° ° 227 
e Q3, 102, 153, 333 
e e Ld 361 
e e ° 425 
‘ . ° 288 
° ® ® 7, 368 
° ° ° 347 
e e e 346 
Py e e 175, 179 
e e e 179 
e e e oe 63 


20 


552 


* 
eS EE ES ES A TS 


INDEX. 


St. John, Hon’ble Frederick, Major-General. 
St. Leger, Willlam, Colonel, Major-General 


St. Paul, C. H., Major ; 
Sakr ut pass e e e 
Salahieh (Egypt) . . 


Sale, Sir Robert Henry, Colonel, Brigadier, Major-General I 


Salika e r e e 
Salina yw ° ° : 
Salkeld, Philip, Lieutenant 
Salter, George, Captain . 


bo 


Henry Fisher, Lieutenant-Col 


Salusbury, Edward William, Ensign 


Salween river . ‘ ‘ 
Samana ,Range A 
Samanpur (Oudh) . 
Samanpur ‘ ; 

Sa mbalbat ° ‘ 
Sambas (Borneo) . 
Sambulpore . : 
Samli__. ‘ ‘ 
Samru, Begum Sn 
Sana Kachins ‘ : 
Sandeman, Sir Robert G. 


Sanders, Edward, Captain, Lieutenan 


Sanderson, Algernon Robert, Ensign ; 


Sandila . ; ‘ 


Sanford, Charles Ayshford, Major : ‘ 


Sangar . : . A 
Sangarh pass . ‘ 
Sanghao : ‘ 
Sang-i-Nawishta pass 
Sangu Khel Shinwaris 
Santhal District 
»» insurrection 
Sanyasis, operations against 
Sao-var . ‘ : . 
Sapari pass. ‘ ; 
Sappers or Pioneers e 


Pe ani Miners 114, 138, 156, 167, 


t-Colonel 


onel, Brigadier 


PAGE 
© 75,77 
- 76, 106 
° 399 
° 49 
. 378 


67, 169, 170, 


175, 179) 180, 183, 184, 186, 208 


+ 114, 115, 117, 122, 1 


; 316 
: 388 
‘ 274 
. 203 
» 223, 226 
" 180 
° 243 
256, 417 
: 105 
e 122, 123 
° 396 
° 111 
° 87 
° 271 
‘ 128 
. 398 
5 381 
- 167) 190 
° 310 
‘ 288 
° 283 
: 256 
° 257 
‘ 429 
. 350 
‘ 177 
« 258, 260 
“ 258 
° 36 
. 413 
° 344 


25, 2 

172, 178, 181, 186, 190, snide me 
198, 206, 211, 218, 223, 226, 227, 235, 238, 

250) 251, 252, 254, 255, 256, 257, 273, 285, 291, 

292, 293, 306, 313, 315, 317, 319, 321, 324, 326, 

328, 331, 337, 339) 340, 342, 343, 345, 348, 349, 

358, 360, 362, 364, 365, 366, 367, 375, 380, 38 I, 

382, 385, 386, 387, 388, 389,390, 394, 305, 401 


416, 417, 418, 419, 4215 422, 423, 424, 431 


196, 336 
* 312 


apes wo nar ot ee 


INDEX. 563 


Se PAGE 
pri ° e e e e e e e ® e ‘@ ry ri 326 
Saran ° e ° e e ° e e e e e 122 
Sarawak, Rajah Brooke of ° e e e e ° e e e 149 
Sar river e . ° ry e e r r e e e e 287 
Sargasha pass a a ce a ee ee ey ee 254 
Sarkhawai pass . Fs e ° e e e ° Py e ° 306 
Sarnaid Sing, of Eatauri . e ° e © e e e ° e 112 
Sarn Baizai District ° e e ° ° e ° e ® e 249 
Sartiong ° ° e ° ° e e r) r) ° e Py 305 
Sartof pass e e e e e e ® e e ® e e 174 
Sarwant e e e e e e ° ° ° ° ° © 23, 24 
Sasaram e Py e e ° e e ° Py e e e 24, 7% 
Sasni, siege of ° ° ° ry ry e e ° ° r ° 76—77 
a e e e ‘e e ° e ° e e ° e e 
Satanwari e e e e ° e e e ° ‘e e ° a 
Sathpura hills, . «© © © © © © © © « -¢ 134 
Sati-chaura Ghat. o 28 © ee 6 © © «© « -¢ 268 
Saugor . ‘ F ° ° ° ° ‘ : « 195, 267, 268, 290 
Saurin, William, Captain ‘. ‘ : ‘ ° ° 5 ; : 171 
Savandrug . * fe oe oe ne ee a ec ee 6o 
Savunga e e e e ° e ° e e Py r ° 322 
Sawlon . e e ° e e e e e e e e e 399 
Sayyid Husain e ° ° r ° e e e e ° 1972 
Scatcherd, Carroll Heseey, Ensign e e e e ° ° e e 219 
Schuler, F., Brigadier e ° r e ° ° e r e ° 213 
Scinde (Sindh) e e e e e e e ° ° ‘e e 197 
Scotland, James, Captain ® ° ‘e e ° ° e r 22, 23, 3! 
Scott, Archibald, Lieutenant . a e e e ° e e e 48 
ry) David, Captain r e e e ° ° ° e r e 3! 
ry) W,, Captain . e e e e e e ° ° ° 88 
Seaton, Thomas, Lieutenant-Colone! ° ‘ ° ° ° ° ° ° 24! 
Seetabuldee (Sitabaldi) e ry e e ° ° ° ° ° o 13%, 164 
Sehlehuganj . . . re ee ee ee ee ee 104 
Sekhar Khatri e e ° e e e’ ° e e e e 125 
Select picket e ° e ry e e e r e e ° ° 38 
Sellam . ° ° e e ° ° e ° r gat 
: Senapati, The (Commander-in-Chief) of the Manipur ied é ‘ © 414, 416 
Seoni . e e e e ° e e ° r ° ° 134 
Sephima r ° e ° ry 3327 
Sepoy battalions, a 5, 8 % a 12, 17, 18 “ eT 30, 349 40 41, 
44—5S, 52, 65, 66, 71, 73, 78, 87—8, 93, 
114—1§, 140, 160, 3223 of the Punjab, 222, 
241, 259) 271, 298—99 
Sepoys, conduct of, at Ferozeshahr and Sobraon ; ‘ : ° ° 210 
Seraikela e ° e e e e ° ° e ° e e 158 


Seri e e e e e e e e e e e e 396 
° « 57s 58» 5% 60, 61, 62, 63, 729 73, 96 
° 262 


Seringapatam . e ° ‘ 
Service, General, enlistments for . P 


Seymour, Sir Michael, Admiral 


° ° e ry a 295 
2023 


564 INDEX. 

PAGE 
Shabkadar ° ° ° ‘ ‘ - y < : « 250, 255, 311, 312 
Shadiwal. ° ° ° . ° : . ‘ . ; ;: 237 
Sh2habad ° ° A ; : ° : ° 284 
Shah Alam. ‘ ‘ ‘ : «22; a ts, 16, a 24, S. 29, 30, 81, 83, 93 
Shah Alam Ragza . ‘. ; A ‘ ‘ . ‘ ‘ ° e 376 
Shah Jahan, of Zhob e ° r e e e e ° e ° 381 
Shah Jahan Sani. ° ‘ ° ° 5 . ; ° - 14 
Shah Mansur Khel (otherwise Shah Mooseh Khel) : ; . . « 254, 258 
Shah Najaf, Lucknow . e e r ® e e « 279, 282 


Shah Shuja-ul-Mulk - 167, 168, "169, 
Shah Shuja’s Contingent . 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 


170, 171, 172, 173, 176, 177, 19% 
173, 1753 1775 178, 179s 


180, 181, 183, 186, 187, 188, 189, 193, 202 
Shah Zaman . e r e e e e e e e ° e I7o. 7! 
Shahganj e e e e e e r) e ° e r) r 267 
) (Oudh) ® e e ° 6 e e ° ° e e 286 
Shahjahacpur . . , ‘ ° ° ‘ ‘ « 54, 266, 286 
Levy (4oth Bengal Infantry) ;: ° : ; ° 299, 302, 303 
Shahjui e ® e e ® e e ° a e ° e e 361 
Shahpur, Prince . ; ‘ F ‘ A ‘ ° ° ° ; 19! 
Shah puri ° e e e e e e e e e e e ° 14§ 
Shahu rzam e ° e e ° e e Py ° e r 2903 
Shahzada Ali Gohar ; ‘ ‘ ‘ . ‘ , < ms 12, 13, 14 
Shaistah Khan ° , : ° . . ° ° ‘ : . 2 
Shakespear, J., Captain . ‘ ‘ ; ‘ ; ‘ ‘ ‘ ; 413 
Shaktu valley ® ° e e e e ® ° 8 ° ° 376 
Shalez . e ® ° e e ° ® e e ° e e 367 
Shamli . ® e e e ° e e e ° e e 04 95, 103 
Shamshabad ° ® e e e ° e e e ° ° r 281 
Shamsher Bahadur . . . ° . . 7 2 6 86 
Shan States . e e ° r e e e ° ° e e 390 
Shandur Pass . ° e ° e e e e e e e e 4325 
Shanghai e ° ° : ; - ‘ 5 ‘ ° « 296, 297, 298 
Shapland, I. Colona e e ° e e ° ° e e e 148 
Shashgao e r r e ry e e e e e 367 
Shaw, F rancis, Captain e e e e e ° e r e e @ § | 
Shekhabad e rs e ° ° e e e e ® e ° 368 
Shekh Haidar Pass - e ° ® e ° e e ° ° ° 216 
Shekh Jana e ° r e e e e ° e & e 29! 
Shekhawati expedition ‘ ° ° ° ;: ° ° ° ° ‘ 159 
és Brigade and Battalion,—vide 13th Begnal Infantry. 
Shek-tsia ° ° ° ° ° ° . 29S 
Shelton, John, Colonel, Brigadier ° ‘ , ° ‘ ° « 197, 182, 183 
Shendus e ° ° e e e e ° ° « Py » 400, 40° 
Sheoraj ° J ‘ ‘ gs Ms 118 
Shepherd, Alexander Maccaughey, Lisutensat ° . ° ‘ . 234 
Sher Ali Khan, Amir of Kabul . ‘ ‘ ° ;: : s ° 336, 347 
an ae) of Kandahar . e ° ° e e ° e e 370 
Sherdara e e ® ° e e e ° e e e e 30S 
Shergarh e ~ e ° e ° e ° e Py ° ° 13! 


INDEX. 868 


PAGE 
Sher Afzal, of Chitral e e e e e e e o 433, 434, 425, 4236 
Sher Khina e PS e e e « e ° e ° Py 249 
Sher Muhammad, of  Mirpar © e «© © 8 «« «© «2. «| Igf 
Sher Singh e ry ° e e e ° e e e 102 
Sher Singh, Rajah . ° ‘ e ° o 323, 224, 225, 937, 229, 230, 231, 237, 240 
eorpur e ° e e e e e e ° e 352, 3S 357) 388, 359 
Shikarpur Py e e e e ° e e e ° ° ® 168, 372 
99 (Gwalior) e e ° ry e e ° ° e ° 199 
ik e e e e e e e ° ° e e ° 8&2 
Shingi-kot e e e e e e e e ° e ° e 393 
Shiogri e r) ry r) e ° r) e e ° r e e 30S 
Shiowaris ° e e e ry ry e e © 177, 34%, 364, 369 
Shiranis, expedition against e e r e a e e ° ° 2530 258 
ShiuepurGhat. . . © © © © © © «© © -¢ 284 
Shivanagiri e e e e e ° ° ° ° °° e 6o 
Sholingarh, Battle of e ° ° ° e e e ° ° ° 46 
Shorawak ° ° e ° ® ° e r e ° e 347 
Shore, Hon’ble Fredenck John . eer te) far “ee. I 153 
Shorediche, Richard, Midshipman (wounded at Plassey) . : ‘ . 8 
Showers, Charles Lionel, Captain . ‘ ; ° ‘ . é ‘ 131 
ry) St. George Daniel, Brigadier ° e ° e ° e ° 377 
Shuhur valley e ° e e ° ° e ° 376 
Shuja-ud-Daulah, Nawab Wasir of Oudh » © 31, 24, 25. 26, 27, 28, 20, 30 
Shuldbam, Arthur Innis, Captain . ° ° ° ° : ° ; 305 
” Thomas, Brigadier-General e e e ° ° e 149 
Shutargardan pass eS « Se J a « sig 348, 349) 352 
Shuttleworth, Fletcher, Captain a ee ee ee ee 219 
Shwebo . ° ° ° e e e e e ° e 390, 392, 400 
Shwe-Dagon pagoda ° e 2 ° ° e e e e pi 244, 24$ 
Shw we-gycen ° Py e e ® e ° e* e e 
Siah Sang e a e r ® e ° e e $5!, 352, 355, 356, 357 
Sialkot e e e e 2 e Ld e , e e e e e 428 
Sialkot, mutiny at. ° e *e e ° e e e e e 370-71 
Sibandi cor ps ° e e e e e e ° ° e ° 162 
» Sappers e ° e ° ® e e e ® e e 312 
e e e ° ° ° e e ° ry r ° ® r 177 
Sibley, Henry, Captain ° e e e e e e e e e 123 
Sidhinia Ghat r e ° e ° e e r e e ° 289 
Sidilal-ki-Bed e e e e ° ° e e 286 


Siege of Calcutta, 3—43 Of Patna, 15; Seringapatam, s8—60; Delhi, 93; 
Bhartpur, 97-08, 153-56; Jalalabad, 18;—85; Multan, 224-25, 
235—37 3 Lucknow, 269—~70 ; Delhi, 264—65, 372-75 ; Lucknow 278—80, 28:—83 


Sihaung e ° e e e e ° e r ° e ° ° 397, 393 
Sika ndarabad . e e ) e e ° e ° e ° 178 
Sikandarabagh, buckoow: e ° e ° ° e ° e e 279, 282 
Sika ndra ° e e e e 80, 81, 92 


Sikhs, 100, 102, 105, 107, 103, 205—232 3 First wai with, abaay 3 Second 
j war with e e e ° e e e ° ° e e e 226—41 


566 INDEX. 


meme eee ee 


PAGE 

Sikh Infantry ° ° ° e 301, 302 

» Irregular Cavalry, 272; ae didi - eh Bengal Exicen™ 3 2nd, vide 

“ rath jaan Cavalry”; 4th, vide “13th Bengal Lancers.” 

* Volunteers e r e ° e e e e e ° 298 

» First conflict with the . ° ° . : ‘ ¢ 100—01, 105—06 
Sikkim expeditions . ° : ° ‘ A . . . - 298, 393-94 
Sikrora . ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ é é ‘ ; P : ‘ ‘ 289 
Silchar . e ° e e e ° e ° . ° e e 413, 435 
Silladar horse . Z ; ‘ : ° : ' ‘ ‘ ‘ . 427 
Simla. ° ° F ‘ ° ‘ ‘ ‘ : - 206, 264 
Simpson, Walter Heary, Uistenact ‘ ‘ ‘ : ; : ° 4l4 
Simri e ° e e e e e e e e e ° e 288 
Sinbaungwe . ° ° . . ° ‘: : . < “we fe 385 
Sinclair, James, Major . ‘ ‘ i ; ‘ « 90, 91 
Sindh. A ° . 168, 74, ie 196—97, 202, aig; 213, 222, 235, 236, 365 

» batta ° ° ° ° ° ° ° . ° ° 24! 

» Field Force, 1846 . ° . . ° : ‘ : . ° 213 

» Mutinies ° ° ° ‘ ‘ . ; ‘ ‘ ‘ : 202 

» River. ° : . : . 6 5 ;: ; ‘ « 131, 200 

~~ War ° e e ° e e ° e ° e 196—97 

» Horse. ° ° ° ° é 174, 196, 213, 236, 239, 240, 345, 346 

” eat Corps, wide “6th Punjab Infantry.” 
Sindhia, of Gwalior ‘ ‘ ° : ‘ « 42, 44) 79) So, 88, 100, 101, 102, 198 
Singapore e e ry e e ° e e e e e 429 
Singphos e e ° e e e e e e ° e 157 
Sinho e ° e e ° e e ° e ° ° e e 296 
Sinkau . ° e ° e e e ° ° e e e ° 399 
Sipri e ° ® r e ° e ° ° e e e e 44 

» Contingent . . . . . . ° ; ¢ e198, 202 
Siraj-ud-Daulah e e ry e e ry e e e e §$ et SEQey 16 
Sichind e e ° ° e e e e ° ° ° e e 229 
Siringsia ° e r) ° ° e ? e ° e ° e 158 
Sirmoor . ° e ° ° e ° e e e 119 
Sir moor Battalion or 7 Sicwioge Rifle Regiment, vide and Gurkha Rifles, 
Sironj r @ ° e ° e e ° ° ° e e e 44, 105 
Sirpur, Battleof . ww wwe tt, 15 
Sirpura e e ° © ° ° e ° ° r rs e e 287 
Sirsi ° e e e ° ° ° ° e r ° r ° 286 
Sissia-Ghat ° ° e ° e e e e r e e é 287 
Sitabaldi, battle of . ° : . ‘ &. ° ‘ . 132, 263 
Sitana. ° ° ° ° e ° ° ° e ° e 291—92, 306 
Sitang valley e ° e e ° ° e e e ° e e 247 
Sitapur ° ° r e e e e e e ° e e 4 266 
Sitauli ° ° ° ° e e ° » ° e r r ° 124 
Sitka Ghat ° r e e e ° ° Py e ° e e 289 
Sitwell, William Henry, Ensign ‘ j ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ; 249 
Siyin Chins and Kachins ° ° e e e e e ° 3098, 401 


INDEX. 567 


oe me ee ter 


PAGE 
Skakot . P < 2.38 ic. Sy F ¥ ‘ © 351, 263 
Skene, Charles McDowal, Célonel’- a : ‘ , A 4 ‘ ° 401, 414 
Skinner, James, Lievtenant . oo ‘ ‘ 30 
» james, Captain, Major, Lievtenant-Colonel : © §=9Qy 102, 113, 153 
Skinner’s Horse,—vide 1st Bengal Cavalry. 
Sleigh, James Wallace, 1 rigadie:-General ‘ ; ‘ ; , ; 1§3 
Smalpage, Francis James, Lieutenant ‘ ‘ i ; ; . : 216 
Smith, Charles Francis, Captain . . .- e : e ° . 309 
so [Edward Arthur, Captain. ° . , . . 399 
so Edward James, Major, Lieutenant-Colonel ; ‘ . A » 192, 212 
» Sir Harry G. W., Major-General . 206, 2.8, 211, 212, 214, 215, 216, 217, 219 
» John, Major-General : ; ; : . . ‘ ; : 99 
»» Joseph, Brigadier-General . - ‘. ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ° 36 
» Richard, Colonel, Brigadier-General  . é 2 © 30, 31, 35, 53 
o» Thomas P., Major . , oe . ‘ ‘ 140 
William, Captain, Lieutenant-Colonel ‘ ‘ : ‘ - 18, 23, 31, 36 
S mith- Neill, James George, Colonel : ‘ 2 ‘ « 266, 269, 270 
Snider rifles . . a a ee ee ee es ee ee” 334 
Smyth, John Rowland, Major ° . . : ‘ . . ; 216 
Sobraon, battle of . ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ 210, 213, 213, 217, 218—20, 221, 234 
Sohanpur . . . ‘ ‘ . ° . ° 234 
Somnath, gates of the temple of a ee ee ee ee ee 189 
Son river . e e e ° ° ° e ° ° e « 26, 80 
Sonai, Eastera e e ° ° ° . e ° ° e e 413 
Sonpat . . ° . ‘ ; . ‘ . . ‘ é 114 
Soolteen-ki-paltan . ° . : ; ° : , . ; A 19 
Soraon . e e . e e ° ° ° e e 287, 288 
Soudan, expedition to the ° . ; ° . . ° ° « 381—84 
South-Eastern Frontier . . ‘: ‘ ° ' ‘ ° « 318, 320 
Sparkes, Henry, Captain . ; ‘ . : ; , . ° 134, 135 
Speir, James, Captain ° ° . ° . ° ‘ ° ‘ 15 
Speke, Edward, Lieutenant . . ° ° : ‘ . ° 274 
Spence, John, Lieutenant a 208 
Spencer, T. E., Major . 5 ‘ F : ‘ ‘ , ji 399 
Spens, Heary George Wadham, Ensiga a ee er a, 267 
» Nathaniel James, Captain. ; ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ , 357 
Spilsbury, Francis, Lieutenant ‘. ‘ ;: - : i . , 26 
SpinGawaiKotal .  . «© «© «© + «© © «© «© 0843, 344 
Spinwam ° e e e ° r e ry e 294 
Sprot, George Hill, Lieutenant er ° er er ° 240 
Stables, John, Captain. ° : ° “ : 23 
Stacy, Lewis Robert, Lieutenant-Colonel, Brigadier ‘ ° . © 179.199, 219 
Staff Corps, Indian, Amalgamation of the three e . ‘ ‘ . 427 
Staffurd, Hugh, Major . ‘ a ee .  * 7 
» W.JF,, Brigadier-General ee ee eee ee ee 323 
Stalkart, George, fosign é . ° ° ° P : ‘ 120 
Stalker, John, Lieutenant Se we fe. fee Met Me ae , 48 
Standards and colors F ; ° . ‘ ° 23, 3, 141, JOl, 334 
re honorary . P « ° ° ° e ‘ ° 48, 63, 83, 301 


Stedman, E., Colonel ° e ° e ° e e ° ° 389, 390 


Steele, S. W., Brigadier-General . ‘ ‘ ‘ . : ‘ 4 247 
Stevens, H. B., Lieuteant-Colonel , ° ‘ ‘ : ‘ ‘ ° 315 
Stevenson, R., Biigacier-General . ° ° . . ‘ . ° 159 

T. Brigad ier ° ° 168 


Stewart, Sir Donald M. , Major-General, Lieutenant-General 345, 346, 349, 


361, 365, 366, 367, 368 


» Patrick, Lieutenant . ° ee ee 62 


»  R., Brigadier-General . ee . B . ue ° 390 
Stibbert, Giles, Captain, Major, Colonel . * © 6 wy 335 40, 28, 51 
Stoddart, George Robert Douglas, Lieutenant . . . ° . ° 399 
Strettell, Edward Francie, Lieutenant . . . : ° : 123 
Stuart, James, of Torrance, Major-General ; ‘ p ° . ; 47 
Stud department . ° ° ° . ° ° ° o 312, 140—41 
Stupper-ki-paltan e e ° ® r e ° e e ‘ 7 71 
Suakia expeditioa ° e ; ° e ‘ ‘ ‘ 4 o 381—84 
Suan e e ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° 17 
Suba Singh, revolt of ° ° ° ° . ‘ ; ° ; 2 
Subadar-Major, rank instituted . . . . . . ,. , 142 
Subanrika River r) e ° e e ° ° e ° e e 56 
Suez e . ° ® ° ® e e e r) e ry 74 
Sukandarra, Battle of ° e e 8 ° ° e ° e e 132 
Sukkur ° e e ° ° r e ° ° e e e 176, 202 
Sukrot Pass e e e e ® ° ° e ° e ° ry 49 
Sujapur . e ° e e ° ° ° ° e ° ° 29 
Sultan Muhammad Khas e ° ° e ry e ° ® ° rs 
Sultanpur ry ry e ° e r ° ° e ° ° e 283, 287 
Sumatra e e « e ° e e ° : 8 @ ° 55, 65 
Summer Palace, Pekin « ‘ ‘ : P p ; ‘ ‘ - 297 
Sunara ° ° ° ° e ® ° ° e ° go 
Sunderland, M. S. J. Lieutenant-Colonel e er "3 ° : ; - 395 
Suner e ° ° e e e e e e ° ° e ry 332 
Suraj Khund . e ° ° e r e e . e e o 225, 235 
Suraj Mal e ° ° e e e ) e e e e e 153 
Surajpur e e e e e e e e e ° e e 83 
Surat ‘ e e ° e r e e e ° e ° e I, 42 
Surkh Kotal . ° ° e ° e e ° ry ° e 7 353 
Surma River . e ® e e 4 e ° e ° ° e 145 
Sutanati ° ° ° ° e e e e ° ° . 2 


Sutlej, Army of the e r e e e e ° r) 206—~07, ail, 216—17 
w River 105, 106, 205, 310, 311, 933, 214, 215, 216, 21 7) 218, 220, 231, 

222, 241, 26§ 

x» Campaign on the’. 


e e ° e ® e e e e 205--22 

Swat . ©  ¢ ee © « 250--S1, 258, 291, 308, 422, 423, 425 
90 Canal massacré e r r e e ° e e cle e 326 

» Expedition to ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° 248—49, 258 
ry) river ° e e r) e e e e ° e 426 
Swatis ee ee ee ee ee “248-49, 258, 308, 311, 319, 326 


INDEX, 569 
PAGE 
Swemi e e e ° e ° ° e ° ° 420 
Swinton, Archibald, L iedtenast, Captain : : . < ; . © 19,23 
Sylhet .  . © =o £45, 149 
» Local Battalion, or Light Infantry,—vide “44th Bengal ciiaatzy, 
Sym, J. M., Colonel . ° ° e ° ° ° e ° e e 394 
Symes, Jeremiah, Lieutenant . : ° ° ° . . 48 
Symons, William Penn, Brigadier-Goneral . © 8 © 2 +400, 408 
T airino rebels 2. 6 etl 297 
Takht-i-Pul ry e e e ° ° e e e ° ‘ E 346 
. ny) Shah e ° ° e e ° e e e e e 3545 355, 356 
a) Soliman e e e r e e e e e e ° 253 
Taku forts e r) e ® ° ° ry ° ° e 7 296, 297, 298 
Talain e ® ° ° e e ° e e e ° e . I 46 
Talwandi ° ° e e e e e e e é e ‘ 314 
Tamai . e e ° ° r e e ° e ° . . 383 
Tamlung e ° e e ry e r e Py Py . . 298 
Tammu . e e ° e e e ° ° e ° e 388, 415, 416 
Tandwin ry e ° ° ° e e ° e . 391 
Tandy, Francis Latter, Licuteanat ‘ ° ‘ ; ° ‘ ; z 274 
Tang-chow r) e ° e e e e ry e e . ‘ 207 
Tangi Tariki . ° r ° ° ° ° ° ° e e . 182 
Tang ku ‘ e e e ° ° ° ° e e ° ° 296 
Tank ry e r ° ° ° ° ° e e ° 292—93 375, 376 
Tank Zam ° e ° ° e e ® ° e e e ° 203, 376 
Tannah fort ® e e r ° e r) e e ° ° 4 
Tanner, Sir O. V., Major-General ° ° ‘ ° ‘. é ; 381 
Tantia Topi. ° ° ° e ° . ‘ ‘ é ‘ ; 280 
Tapley, Richard, Lieutenant ° ® e e e ° ® e e 124 
Tapti River ° ° e e e ° ° & ° ° e © 42, 134 
Taragarh e e e e ° e ° ° ° e e e 130 
Taraghat e e e ° ° e r ° ° e e ° 131 
Taraki Ghilzais e ° ° ° e e ° e ° ° ‘* 361 
Tartan e e e e e ° ° ° e ° a e ‘ 398 
Tartar Horse ° e e ° e e e ° ° e e 296, 207 
Taruni Pass ry ® ° e ° e e e e ° e a 254 
Tashon Obins eo 8 © e© ee ee 8 o  ¢ 0 4o1 
Tashon Ywama ° ° . ° ° ° . ° . . ° 4ol 
Taungma ° ° . ‘ . . . ° . : ‘ ° 39! 
Taungtalon hill ° e ° ° e ry e ry ° e r 391 
Tauna . . ° 5 ° ° ° . . : ° ° ° 357 
Tawibhum e ® ° e e ° e ° e a rs 331 
Taylor, George, Quarter-Master ° . . a ee 234 
Tazagong P ° ° ° . -e . ° ° ° © 313. 314, 315 
Tazi . e e ° ° ® e e ° e r « 174 361 
Teerbanis-ki-paltan e ° ° e e e e ° e r e 19 


570 INDEX. 


Tej Sing, Sardar. P 


Tel-el-Kebir, Battle of - ; ‘ ; 
Telingas > ° ‘ - ;: ‘ 
Tenga river. . . ° . 
Tennant, james, Brigadier-General . : 
Tenzaung ° . 7 ° . ‘ 
Terai ° . . ° ° ° ° 
Ternate ° ° . ‘ ° . 
Tesing river . ‘ : ; ‘ . 


Tesselah Hill ry r) 
Tetley, James, Caplain, Lieutenant-Colosel 


Tezin ; : ‘ é ‘ 
Thackeray, E. T., Major ‘ e ; ; 
Thoms. Lieutenant P ‘ 


Thackwell, Sir Joseph, Major-General ‘ 
Thackwell, Osbert Dabitot, Lieutenant. 
Thakot . ; ‘ . 


Thakul ° ° ° ° r e ° 
Thal ° . P 5 : ° ° 
Thal-Chotiali . e ° ° ° ° 
Thama e ry e ° e e ° 
Thanesar e ° ry e e e e 
Thanruma . e ry ° ° 
Thattiah, failureat . ‘ ° ° ° 
Thebaw, King of Burma . : . . 
Theodore, King of Abyssinia. ° . 
Thetta ° e ° e ° ° 
Thilia sw ° ° ° ° ‘ ° 
Thobal . . ‘ ° ° 
Thomas, George, C aptaia: . ° ° 
eo» George Powell, Major : . 
Thompson, Augustus Nicholls, Lieutenant 
” James, Lieutenant . . ° 

»» Nichard, Ensiga . ° 


‘ W.A,, Lieutenant-Colonel . 
Thomson, George; Captain. . ‘ 
Mowbray, Lieutenant. e 


» 
Thurlow, Benjamin ib Lieutenant, 
Thyetmyo ° : : ° ° 
Tibetans and Tibet . ° . ° ° ° 
Tien-tsin ‘ . ‘ . ° ‘ 
» Treaty of . . . ° , 


Tigra, fight at ‘ 
TikandrajJit Bir Singh, Senapati of Manipur 
Tikariwals . 

Tilfer, James Thomas, Lieutenant 
Tilli e e e ° ° 
TilueKhan ° ° ° e 


e e e e e e e ° e ee ‘- 7 = 


168, ioanse 
e » 


© ® e e r e e e e es e e e e 
d e e e e ® 


| 


e 
® 
e 
e 
2, 
e 


PAGE 


e 205, 210 


37% 380 
5 
380 


07 26, 228 


412 


122,125, 316 


75 
323 
383 


729 73. TIE 


179» 190 
360 


130 


228, 229, 230 


283 


71, 78 


384, 385, 337 
$16, 317, 318 


412 


393-94 


295, 296, 297 
e 295» 297 


234 


+ 414, 416 


396 
64 


INDEX. 571 

PAGE 

Timur, Shahzada, ° ‘ : . ; : ; ; - 168, 170 
Tindall, Joseph, Lieutenant . ‘*. ~. ; : ‘ ‘ : é 156 
Tipai Mukh e ° e e ° e ° ° 321 
Tippoo Sultan. =. . 5 ok ‘ a, 56, 58, a co 61, 62, 70, 72 
SWAG ee Ce ete : 287 
Tirhut . ; ° o- te é ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ; ‘ 18 
Tirrell, James Bates, Lieutenant - & a a ee 125 
Tirowa e e e ry e ° e ° e ° e e e 108 
Tissua, battle of ° ° e ° e ° e e ° e e 39 
Titteclee-hki-paitan . F . ‘ ‘ : ‘ ; : ° 73 
Tlantlang Chins . . © ©. . a: . © 413 
Tochi pass e e ° ® ° e e e e e 322 
Todd, Elliott D'Arcy, Captain ‘ : ‘ : a 210 
Totrek e ° e e o- e ° e e ° 382—84 
Tokhlaing or Fort White. ; ° : ‘ ; P ° 398 
Tomar . ; ; ‘ ‘ ;: P A ‘ ; 66 
Tombs, Henry, Brigadier-General . : : - « - -* 315 
** Tongal General,” the . ‘ P ‘ ° ; : ‘ ‘ . 416 
Tonghoo . ° . . . . . . . ° . ° 247 
Tongsoo-Penlow . ‘ : : ;: ° ° ; : A 316 
Tonhon Kachins ... os . . ‘ . . ° 402 
Tonnochy, Valens Congreve, Major . ‘ ‘ . ; ° ° 426 
Toone, Sis Captain e e ° ° e e ° e e ° a 37 
Topasses r e r e r e ° . . ° ° e 2, 7 
Torah Nala e ° e e e ° . e ° e e 26 
Torawari ° ° ° . ° . . ° » 256, 257 
Toulmin, Tom Henry, Lieutenant é ‘ F ; é . ‘ ‘ 258 
Trakki . ° ° e e e e 203 
Treaty with the Ginpater of Delhi wud the Nawab of Oudh , ; - 29—30 
» withthe Nawabof Bengal .. . : a - its 6 

» with the Mabratta powers, 1782. Z A ; ‘ F ‘ 44 

» with Rajah of Bhurtpore, 1805 . . § ‘ 4 100 

ay with Holkar e e e ° e ° ° e e e e 102 

29 with Scindia ° e e e e e ° e ° e e 130 

» with Tippoo Sultan ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ P ; ‘ 62 

» withthe Kingof Ava . . . «© «© « -« -  « 153-53 
with Ranjit Singh of Lahore ° 6 e ‘ “a 106 
Tregear, Vv. W., Colonel, gi aneediac edie : ° ‘ ‘ 400, 401 
Trevanion, Joha, Captain ° e ° ° ° ° 19, 23, 25 
Trimu Ghat, actionsat 2. wt eo 8 3% 278 
Trincomalee . , ‘ . P “ , ‘ : ‘ ‘ 74 
Troup, Colin, Brigadier ° e ° ° ° e ° e e e 288 
Trower, Jasper, Captain i ° : ; ‘ ‘ 3 é 207 
Trueman, William Louis, Captain . . . ‘ e 4 ° ° 148 
Tucker, Robert Tudor, Mr.» wwe ll 269 
Tulloch, Charles Browne, Lieutenant . P ‘ ; . é ‘ 218 
Tulsipur ° ° ° ° @ ry ° ° e ° Py e 289 
Tumloag ‘ ° ° : . . ° e ° ° ° ° 304 
Terk i. ® ° ry ° e e ° ° e ° ° 256, 257 


572 INDEX. 


Turkai ° e ° e r e ® e e 
Turnak River . e e e 
Turnbull, Robert Harvey, Lieutenant ° ° : 
Turner, A. H., Brigadier-General . ; : . 

» ° William West, Colonel ‘ ~ s ‘ 
Turton, John, Lieutenant . ° ; ° : 
Tutam-dara, skirmish at ‘ ° ° ‘ - 


2 e e e e 


PAGE 
e $325 
- 1% 
° 158 
r 421 
« 310, 313 
. 81 
- (175 


Tytler, John Adam, Brigadier-General . © 338» 339, sai; 342, 348, 360, 361, 365 


» J) M.B.F,, - —See Fraser-Tytler. 
U BLAN pass ° e ° e ° ° e ° 
Uch e ry e e e e ° e 
Uchtarlony-ki-paltan ° ‘ ° . ° ‘ . 
Udwah-nala, Battle of . ‘ ‘ ‘5 ‘ ‘ ° 
Ughi, or Oghi e r e e ® e e e e 
Ujjain . . . . ° . . : ° ° 
Ukiang Nongba ° : ° . ‘ : ‘ 
Umar Sing, of Jagdeshpur : ; ‘ : ‘ . 
Umarzai Waziris . ° ‘ ; P ‘ Pt ° 
Umballa ‘ ‘ ° ° ‘ * 
Umed-ul-M ulk (Ghazi-din Khan) ‘ ; ‘ ; ; 
Um Kai * e e e ry e e e e 
Um Kiang ry e ° e e * e e 
Umra Khan, of Jando! ° e e e e ° e 
Unao, Action at e e e ° e ° e e 
Ung-ki-paltan e e e ° e e e 
Uniform,—vide * Dress” 

Urakzais, or Orakzais ° ° e e ry e e 

we Bizoti e e e ° e e e e 

ro) Rubia Khel e ° ° ry e e r 
Urmston, Henry Brabazon, Captain. . .  e 
Usbegs ° ° ° e e e e ° e ° 
Uskata 7. e e e e e ° r e 
Utman Khels . ° ° ° ° _ . ° ; 
Utmanzais e ° ° e e e ) e 
Utradrug e ° e e e e e e e 
V acianr, Thomas, Major-General ; ° ° . 
Van Cortlandt, Henry Charles, General . e ° ° 
Vandeleur, Thomas Pokenham, Colonel , ; eo 
Van Homrigh, Henry Davis, Captain . ° . ° 
Vans-Agnew, Patrick Alexander, Mr. . 6 ° 
Vansanga’s Village ; . . ; . . . 
Vansittart, Mr., Governor é ar ever te 
Vanunah e ° ° e e e e ° 
Vaughan, John, Lieutenant ° «© e ee 

» John L., Major, Lieutenant-Colonel, Colonel ‘ 


e 318, 320 
e e 203 
e e 14 
e ® 21 
« 319, 305, 418 
e . go 
° ° 305 
e e 284 


© eo 353-52 


206, 207, 242, 264 


° » 12,84 


- 6 305 
° e 305 
. 423, 426 
se 269 
e ° 40 
e e 256, 416 
e « 318, 320 
e e 256 
® r) 394 
° e 174, 175 
e e 57 
« 351, 258, 326 
e e 306 
° r 60 
» _ e 199, 200 
e e 223) 224 
. - 84, 85 
° ° 208 
e 0 223, 237 
e 5 413 
° 14, 16, 25 
° e ga! 
e ° 78 
» 291, 307, $19 


INDEX. 573 


PAGE 
Vellore . e ° e e e e e e e ° ® 6 47 
Vellout ° ° e e e r e ° e r) ® ° $7 
Verelst, Mr., Governor ° e ° ° ° e e ° e ° 3§ 
Victoria carbine. ° ° ° ° ° ° ; ‘ ° 304 
Victoria Cross ‘ ° ‘ 3 ‘ 7 . _ 308, 328, 343. 415, 423 
Vindhya mountains ° . ° ° ‘ . : - «134,135 
Virakandalur, actionat . ° ° ° . : . ° °.  e 47 
Vizagapatam, expedition to . ° . . 10 


Volunteers :-—Volunteer company 4; to Bencoolen, 55; to Madras, 57, 60, 61, 62, 
63, 73; to Malacca, 65; to Egypt, 74; to Orissa, 87; to Macao, 105; to 
Mauirtius, 109; to Java, r10—11; to Ceylon, 138; to China, 194—95; to 
Burma, 246; to Sindh, 259; for service in East and Central Africa . 428-29 

Von Beverhoudt, James Mandeville Wood, Major . . «.« «©. « 383 

Vonpilal villages rs ° r) e e e e e e ° 332 

Vousden, W. J., Captain ; ‘ & = ° : ae oe 357 


Waor, C. M., Lieutenant-Colonel J 


e e ° e ° 168, 170 
Woahabis e e e e ° Py % ° e e e ° 157 
Wah-tee-gaon e ° 6 ° e ° ry e ° : e §21 
Wakhan ° ® e ° r e e e e e ° 339 
Walai e e e e ° * e e i ) ° e e 339 
Wale, Frederick, Captain ‘ rn a ‘ 2. ts 383 
Wale’s Horse,—vide 11th Bengal Cancen. 
Walker, George E,, Colonel e r) ° e ° ° e ° e 363 
Wallace, Newton, Brigadier . ‘ : ° ‘ ° : 208, 210 
Waller, Edmund, Lieutenant . e e e ® r ° e e 313 
Walpole, Robert, Brigadier'General . . . «© © © 285 
Wana . r e e e e ° e e . ° ry 421, 422 
Wandiwash . e ® ° e e e ° ‘ e ° 46 
Warde, William Wilder, Lieutenant ° «© e . . ° 234 
Ware, Charles, Lieutenant-Colonel, Major-General . ‘ ° » 64, 83, 85 
Wargaum, Convention of ° e ‘ e ‘ ° . . ° 42 
Warren, George, Brigadier ° e ° e ° e e e o 243, 244 
Wasil Muhammad, Pindari . . ww & a? 6 e 130, 332 
Water Bastion, Delhi e e ° ® e e ° e e ® 273 
Waterhouse, Robert Jephson, Ensign. ae ° ‘ : : 99 
Watson, Archibald, Captain. . . . . ee se 109 
99 E. D., Lievtenant-Colonel ,. ° e e ° ° ° ° 313 
4 James, Brigadier-General . . «© © © + © «© 238, 834 
» john, Major-General . ‘ : 5 ‘ s , ‘ : 365 
20 Thomas Ce meee e e e 4 @ e e e 149 
Wawang e ° e ° a ° e e e 398 
Wazir Ali, Ex-Nawab of ‘Oudh ‘ ‘ ° ° ° e ° © 373,79 
Wazsirabad . ;: ° ° é ° ° ; ‘ » 229, 238 
Waziris © 6 © © « 3§%==§3, 357, gaia 370, 373—76, 431—22 
Waziristan e e 6 e e ° C e 420 
» Boundary Delimitation Escort e e ° ° e « 420—°21 
” Expedition e e ° e e ° e e e 421-22 


574 INDEX. 


Waziri valley (Afghanistan) . : ° ° 

Weguelin, T. M., Captain ‘: 

Wellesley, Hon'ble A., Colonel, Major-General | 
is Marquis 

Wellington, Duke of, on the storming of Aligarh 

Wellington’s (Duke of) opinion of sepoys ‘ 

Wells, Edmund, Lieutenant , 

Welsh, Thomas, Captain ‘ ‘ ‘ 

Weltervreden . ° . : 

Wemyss, Maurice, Captain ° ‘ : : 


Wetherall, Edward Robert, Brigadier 
Wharton, Thomas, Lieutenant-Colonel 
Wheeler, F., Local Lieutenant é 


» ugh Massey, Lieutenant-Colonel, Brigudier . : 173, 215, 220, 235 


Wheler, F., Captain, Brigadier : é 


Whish, William Samson, Major-General . a 224, 225, 997, 228, 235, 


Whitaker, Thomas, Lieutenant ee. 78 . 
Whitchurch, H. F., Surgeon-Captaia ‘ ‘ 
White, Sir George S,, Major, Major-General 
w» Sit Henry, Lieutenant-Colond , 
» john, Captain ° «© 
» Michael, Brigadier ° ° 
White Cloud Mountain . ° ° 
Whitehead, Thomas, Brigadier ‘ 
White House Stockade (Rangoon) . 
Whitelock, George C,, Major-General 
Wild, Charles F., Brigadier : 
Wi de, Alfred Thomas, Major, Brigadier-General 
Wilding, Benjamin, Captain . ° . ° 
Wilkinson, Christopher Dixon, Brigadier . . 
rr Henry T. D., Lieutenant . ‘ 
William II], King. ° ‘ Fi 
Williams, George Augustus, Cleats cat ; : 
* George Thomas, Lieutenant . . 


a J.. Captain (Historian of the Bengal Native Infantry) 


Williamson, James, Captain. 
‘ R. F., Brigadier-General, 
Thomas; Lieutenant ° 
Willoughby, Edward Henry, Lieutenant 
George Dobson, Lieutenant 
Willshire, Thomas, Major-General. 
Wilson, Alexander, Captain . ‘ 
» Archdale, Brigadier-General 
» Edward P., Captain. ; 
»» George, Lieutenant ‘ 
»» George, Captain (Commodore) 
»» Peter Philip, Lieutenant-Colonel . 
» Roger William, Brigadier . : . 


PAGE 

Z ‘ ‘ ‘ 178 
e e e e 10§ 
° ° ° « 73,88 
° ° ° « 72-74 
e e r) r 81 
7 3 i ° 116 
: ; ° ° 65 
® ° e 575 60, 63 
° ° e e 1fo 
; : . ° 25 
e ° bd 288 
: ° ‘ ° 73 
: 5 ‘ 180 
e ° » 201, 259 
236, 237, 238 

a ce ae 84 
e ° 423 

359 a7 387, 3 391, 392, 400, 402 
err 38, 88 

‘ e ° 32, 33, 32 
‘ . - 186, 226, 339 
: . ° ° 295 
° ° ° ° 554 
‘ ° ‘ ° 244 
; j ° . 289 
e e ° 185, 186, 19! 
. « 306, 310, 319 
e e ® e 3! 
° ° e e 219 
° ° . 386 
r) e ® ° 3 
° e e . 265 
‘ ° ° 122 

. . 26, 36, 73 

. ° ° . 47 
° ° ° 418 

° : ° . 56 
ree, 
e e e e 264 
‘ . : ‘ 172 
. é ‘ ; 185 
; ° » 264, 271, 277 
° ° e 108, 109, 317 
e ‘ ° 13 
° . ° 13 
e ° e 177 


; . 215, 216 


' Piatt. Sieeel 


+, Bor we 


PAGE 

Wilson, Thomas, Captain, Lieutenant ‘ ; ‘ : ; A ; 104 
» William McMurdo, Ensign . ‘ ‘ ; ; we. 8 ‘ 120 
Windham, Charles Ash, Major-General. ; i ; ‘ ‘ . 278, 380 
Winwood, Ralph, Captain ‘ ° ; ; . ; ° 3! 
Wiseman, Nicholas Cuthbert, Lisatsnant ; ‘ ‘ ; : : $42 
Witchcot, Thomas, Captain. ‘ ‘ : j : : . 23,23 
Wollen, James Goodlad, Lieutenant. . é ‘ ; |e a1! 
Wood, George, Colonel, Major-General. : é Z ; . 130, 122, 123 
» John Sullivan, Major-General ; ‘ . é ; F 3 118 
Wood, Oswald Bell, Leiutenant ‘ é é : ; 4 ° 370 
» Thomas, Captain . ‘ . ; ° : ; ‘ . 78 
» Wm.H., Major . . . . 2 6 8 eh ele GO 
Woodburn, John, Captain ‘ A ‘ : ‘ ; ‘ ‘ 178 
Wolseley, G. 8., Brigadier-General . ‘ ; ‘ : F : é 399 
ry) Lord ° e ° . ° ® ° ° e 383 
Woodington, H., Lieutenant-Colonel : ; : ‘ , ‘ ‘ 88 
Woolley, Samuel, Lieutenant . ‘ : ; P : , ° 108 
Wouad pensions. : ‘ ; F ‘ ‘ ° 165 
Wright, Ichabod D., Rieatenant . q : ; ‘ ‘ 360 
oo Thomas, Brigadier . .  . . % ; a 199 
Wundwin ‘ ; : 5 ‘ : , ‘ : . 390 
Wuntho . ; : ;: * : . é ; ‘ . ; ; 390 
Wurdi-Majors . P . : . . . . ; ° 260 
Wyatt, E., Colonel . ‘ ‘ 2 P ; * 159 
Wymer, George P., Lieutenant-Colone! j , ; ‘ , - 178, 188 
Wyoch, F. J). H., Lieutenant . ° 3 : : ‘ 426 
Wyndham, Charles, Captain. ° ; ‘ ‘ ‘ . 179 


Yaxvus Khan ; ‘ " 
Yandabu ‘ ‘ . ‘ ‘ ‘ 


»» George, Captain . ‘ ° 


: : ; : ‘ 152 
Yang-tee-K iang River ° : ; ° . ‘. . ‘ ‘ ° 1y5 
Yates, Walter A., Brigadier _.. P . . ; : : ‘ 200 
Yeomanry Cavalry, Bengal . 2 ‘ ; ; , : : 284 
Yodbyakarta, Java . ; ° S .% ° ° ° : ‘ . nd 
Yomas . ‘ ° : ° ; « 149 388 
Young, Frede: ick, Uicdtenant: Captain ‘ J : ‘ - 126, 153 


» Robert, Captain ° e ° ° ° e 97 
Yu ° e e ° e e e r ° ry ° ® e 39! 
Yusufzai. . «© . . : 249, 258, 291, 306 


y Sore Kila ® e e e ® e e e e 344 
Zag-a-sig ° ° ° ° ° e ¢ 379, 380 
Zaimukhts ‘ . ° ° ° . . ° ¢ - 256, 360, 361 
Zaimukht Expedition . »- - © © + © « . . 360—63 
Zaka Khels 2. «© +e - oe » 339, 340 
Zamina ° ° ° . . . . ° . : ° 100 
Zamin-dawar 6 see = een 877, 2978 


576 INDEX. 


PAGE 
Zargunshahr e e e e e r e e e e e e 369 
Zariba _e e e ° e e e e e ° e e e 382, 383 
Zawo .. ° . ° e e ° ° ° ° . « 360, 361 
Zhob valley expeditions . ° ° ° ° . ° ° - 380—81, 402 
Zibyubin e e e ° e e ° e ° e ° e e 329 
Zula e e e ° 2 e ° e ° e e e e 387 
Zurmandai ; ° . : . ‘ e 7 . : ° ° 249 
Zurmattis e e e e ‘ e e e ° ° ° ° 369 


. ~ Pa ithe 
a EE ge eo ee ere aa 


GLOSSARY OF VERNACULAR TERMS. 


a oan 


Alkhalak, a long frock reaching to the 
knees. oa 

Angarkka, a large loose coat or tunic. 

Asami, an office, place, appointment ; 
(applied particularly to an appoint- 
ment in an irregular cavalry regi- 
ment). 

Bargir, a irregular cavalry soldier 
whose horse and outfit is provided 

‘ at the expense of another. 

Bhists, a water-carrier. 

Buxaries, a class of Indian soldiers. 
Dafadar, a sergeant (irregular ca- 
valry). 

Dasuti, coarse cotton cloth. 

Doab, a tract of land between two 
rivers. 

Durbar (properly darbar), a hall of 


audience ; so, holding of an audi- 


ence, a levée. 

Ghasi, one who fights against infidels; 
so a Muhammadan fanatic warrior, 

Golandas, native artillerymen. 

Havildar, a sergeant (regular cavalry 
or infantry). 

Faghirda, the holder of a saghir or 
fief. 

Fasel, a Pathan matchlock. 

Faselchis, a corps of Pathans armed 
with jasels. 

Femadar, a native rank corresponding 
to a subaltern. 

¥hil, a marsh. 

Fikad, a religious war of Muhamma- 
dans against infidels. 

Kamarband, a waist-cloth or sash, 


Khudaspa, an irregular cavalry soldier, 
who provides his own horse and 
outfit. 

Kila (or Kala), a fort. 

Kiladar, (properly 4&al’a-dar), the 
commandant of a fort. 

Kos, a measure of distance equal to 
about two miles. 

Kotal, a saddie-back, or ridge. 

Kot-dafadar, a troop sergeant-major 
(irregular cavalry). 

Malik, a chief or headman of a section 
of a Pathan tribe. 

Masnad, throne. 

Matti, earth; Mooltani matti (lit, 
Mooltan earth), the name of a dye. 

Maulvi, a learned man. 

Mulla, a Muhammadan priest. 

Naddi, a stream or river, 

Nagarchi, a.kettle-drummer. 

Naib- Risaldar, a brevet-risaldar, 

Naik, a corporal. 

Najib, a class of Indian soldiers. 

Nala, a small ravine or. water-course. 

Nishanbardar, a standard-bearer. 

Pagrs, a turban. 

Pakhal, a pair of large leathern bags 
for holding water, usually carried 
on bullocks. 

Pakhali, the person (usually a dhistd, 
who has charge of a pakhal, 

Pargannah, a sub-division of a 
district, | 

Ressalah (risala), a body of {irregular 
horse, a troop, a regiment. 

Ressaidar, a junior ressaldar. 


il 


Ressaldar (risaldar), originally the | Sséadar, the governor of a province; 


commander of a ressalah; so equi- 
valent to a captain, the commander 
of a troop. 

Sais (syce), & groom. 

Salutrs, a farrier. 

Sangar, a breastwork constructed of 
stones. 

Sardar, a chief or headman. 

Sayyid, a descendant of Husain, the 
grandson of the Prophet. 

Siladar, one who bears arms (parti- 
cularly an irregular cavalryman). 

Sahsada, the descendent of a king. 

Shia, a follower of Ali, the son-in-law 
of the Prophet. 

Sibandis, irregular soldiers employed 
in collecting revenue, or in police 
duties. 

Sowar, a trooper in the native cavalry. 

Sowari, riding; also) equipage, suit, 
following. 


so, an officer; a rank in infantry and 
in regular cavalry equivalent to a 
captain. 

Tahsildar, a revenue collector. 

Telinga, a native of Telingana, the 
ancient name of one of the prin- 
cipal kingdoms of Southern India. 
In former times the armies of the 
independent States of Southern 
India were extensively recruited 
from Telingana, and hence the term 
Telinga came to be used as a syno- 
nym for a “ soldier.” 

Vakil, an agent, ambassador or repre- 
sentative. | 

Woon or Wun, a Burmese headman. 

Wurdi Major, a native adjutant of 
irregular cavalry. 

Yoma, a range of mountains (Bun 
mese). 

Zemindar, a small land-owner. 


ae el Ss ie 
G. 1, C. P. O.—No. 1182 M. D,—=8-6-1903, = 3,000. 


—. eee eee, ee eee 


Digitized by Google | 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Google 


7 td 


SIuSuP 


