VERS 

RARY 


OU 218301 


□0 = 

73 < 
> m 

73 





OSMANU UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 1^- ^ 
Call N0.35 .OZ(f I No. S'!, 

Author oC . a • 





THE DISPATCHES 

or* 

FIELD MARSHAL 

THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON, 

DURING HIS VARIOUS CAMPAIGNS 

IN 

INDIA, DENMARK, PORTUGAL, SPAIN, THE LOW 
COUNTRIES, AND FRANCE, 

FROM 

1799 TO 1818. 


COMPILED FROM OFFICIAL AND AUTHENTIC DOCUMENTS, 
BY 

LIEUT. COLONEL GURWOOD, 

r 

Ei-QUIKE TO HIS GRACE AS KNIOIJT OP THE BATH. 


VOLUME THE NINTH. 
A KEfV EDITION. 


LONDON: 

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET 


MIKiCCXXXTlll. 



LONDON I 

Printed by Wii.liam Clowbs and Sons, 

Stamford Street. 



MEMORANDUM. 


The driifls of many letters of 1812, as stated in the Introduction, are 
missing from the Duke of Wellington’s papers. Some addressed to 
Sir Howard Douglas are among the number, and there is one to that 
Officer dated 25lh May, 1812, the precis of which, according to the 
Index, is as follows : — Not to obey the Instructions of the 6th 
instant until he receives further orders from the Secretary of State.” 
This letter has not been transmitted by Sir H. Douglas to the Com- 
piler in time for insertion in this edition, but it will be hereafter 
published with others in an Appendix. 

It appears that Sir Howard Douglas, in his interference with the 
Spanish authorities in Galicia, to prevent the embarkation of the 
Spanish troops for South America, acted under orders from the Secre- 
tary of State, of which Lord Wellington was not aware when he 
wrote the letter of the 6th May, 1812, at p. 115. 


Vol. IX. 


h 




THE 


DISPATCHES 


OF 

FIELD MARSHAL THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON, 

IN 

THE PENINSULA, 

IN 

1812. 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

^ My Lord, ‘Camp before Badajoz, 20tli March, 1812. 

^ According to tlie intention which I announced to your 
Lordship in my dispatch of the 13th instant, L broke up the 
cantonments of the army on the 15th and IGth instant, and 
invested Badajoz, on the left of the river Guadiana, on the 
16th instant, with the 3rd, 4th, and light divisions of in- 
fantry, and with a brigade of Lieut. General Hamilton’s 
division on the right. These troops are under the command 
^f Marshal Sir William Beresford and Lieut. General Picton. 

‘ We broke ground on the following day, and have esta- 
blished a parallel within two hundred yards of the outwork- 
called the Picurina, which embraces the whole of the south- 
east angle of the fort. 

‘ The work has continued ever since with great celerity 
notwithstanding the very bad weather which we have had 
since the 17tli. 

‘ The enemy made a sortie yesterday from the gate called 
La Trinidad, on the right of our attack, with about 2000 
men. They were almost immediately driven in, without 
effecting any object, with considerable loss, by Major Gene- 
ral Bowes, who commanded the guard in the trenches. 

" We lost, upon this occasion, a very promising officer, 
Captain Cuthbert, aide de camp to Lieut. General Picton, 
killed ; and Lieut. Colonel Fletcher was slightly wounded, 

VOL. IX. n 



2 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


but I hope that he will soon be able to resume his duties. I 
have not got the returns, but I believe that our loss since the 
commencement of these operations amounts to 120 men 
killed and wounded. 

' On the same day that Badajoz was invested, Lieut. 
General Sir Thomas Graham crossed the Guadiana with the 
1st, 6th, and 7th divisions of infantry, and General Slade’s, 
and General Lc Marchant’s brigades of cavalry, and di- 
rected liis marcli upon Valverde and S^'' Marta, and thence 
towards Llerena ; while Lieut. General Sir Howland Hill, 
with the 2nd and Lieut. General Hamilton’s divisions, and 
Major General Long’s cavalry? marched from his canton- 
ments near Alburquerquc upon Merida, and thence upon 
Almendralejo. 

‘ These movements induced General Drouct to retire from 
Villa Franca upon Hornachos, in order, I conclude, to be 
in communication with General Darricau’s division, which 
was about La Serena. 

^ I have heard from Sir Thomas Graham and from Sir 
Howland Hill to the I9th instant. The former was at Los 
Santos and Zafra, with General Slade’s cavalry at Villa 
Franca, and the latter at Almendralejo. Lieut. General 
Hill took three officers and a few liussars prisoners in Merida. 

‘ 1 have reports from the neighbourhood of Ciudad Hod- 
rigo of the 17th instant, and from Salamanca of the 16th 
instant. The enemy had sent a small detachment to Bejar, 
principally with a view to plunder ; but there was no appear- 
ance of any immediate movement. 

‘ The 6th division had moved from Talavera through the 
Puerto del Pico on the 8th and 9th instant, and the 4th divi- 
sion from Toledo on the same days, through the Guadar- 
rama, and the 1st division only remained on the Tagus, near 
Talavera. The march of these divisions was directed, as I 
understand, upon V alladolid ; and I conclude either that the 
reports are founded which have been in circulation, that the 
Guards had been withdrawn from Spain, or that the enemy 
intend to endeavor to divert my attention from the attack of 
Badajoz, by making some movement upon Galicia, or upon 
the north of Portugal. 

^ The rain, however, which has annoyed us here, it may 
be expected, will have filled the rivers in the north ; and I 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


3 


made arrangements, before I left Castillo, to provide for any 
plans of that kind which the enemy might adopt. Having 
lost their train, jthey cannot attack Ciudad Rodrigo or Al- 
meida, at least till they shall have replaced it. 

I have not heard of any movements in the south. Mar- 
shal Soult was at the lines opposite Cadiz according to the 
last accounts, 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool.^ ‘ WELLINGTON. 

To the Earl of LiverpooL 

^ My dear Lord, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 20tli March, 1812. 

‘ I received this morning your letter of the 5th March, 
marked secret and confidential,’' enclosing your corre- 
syiondcncc with Lord William Bentinck. I shall write to his 
Tvordsliip, and to Sir E. Pellcw, as soon as I can get a 
little leisure ; in the mean time I think it proper to apprize 
your Lordship that the attack of Tarragona or of Barcelona 
appears to me, of all the objects on the Eastern coast, to be 
the most desirable. I think it probable, however, that nei- 
ther (most probably not the latter) will succeed. A siege 
requires time, and the French will move heaven and earth to 
save these places ; and they can bring troops from France 
as well as from Aragon and Valencia, in addition to wliat 
they have in Catalonia. Besides, 10,000 men are not quite 
suilicicnt to attack Barcelona, where there must be 5000 in 
garrison. Lord William may expect some assistance from 
General Lacy, but the foundation of his strength must be 
his British troops. 

I do not know how I can give him any assistance from 
Cadiz. Your Lordship will recollect that from Cadiz we now 
occupy Carthagena and Tarifa, and that there are included 
in the division at Cadiz and those places 1400 Portuguese 
troops, and about 2000 foreigners in the Regiment do 
Watteville and the battalion of foreign detachments. In fact 
there is no British regiment now at Cadiz to be detached, 
excepting the 1 st regiment of foot guards, which I have not 
allowed to be sent into Carthagena or Tarifa. 

‘ I would besides beg leave to draw your Lordship’s atten- 
tion to the result of the operation 1 have now in hand. If it 
should succeed and matters turn out as I wish, Ave may re- 

B 2 



4 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


lieve the Andalusias. But if I should succeed in that object 
I shall bring the whole of the enemy’s force upon me ; and 
I cannot expect that, for some time at least, I shall receive 
any assistance from the Spaniards, or that they can make 
any material diversion in my favor. Will it not therefore be 
necessary to draw to this army the division at Cadiz ? 

' If I should not relieve the Andalusias, I beg to have 
your positive orders respecting the degree to which I shall 
reduce the garrison of Cadiz, and what regiments I shall 
send to Lord William Bentinck. 1 beg once more to repeat 
tliat it is entirely a matter of indifference to me, and always 
has been so, as far as I am personally concerned, whether 
the body of troops under my command is large or small. I 
shall perform service in proportion to the means placed at 
my disposal, in comparison with those of the enemy, and 
adverting to your Lordship’s instructions. 

‘ We are getting on here, notwithstanding that the wea- 
ther is excessively bad. The constitutions of the troops have 
been so much shaken with Walcheren, &c. See., tliat I am 
always apprehensive of the consequences of exposing them 
to the weather. However, I have them in tents now, and I 
hope that the rain will not last. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool, ‘ Wellington. 

To Hu Excellency Charles Stuart, 

c * Camp before Badajoz, 21st March, 1812. 

‘ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 1 Sth, 
enclosing a complaint from Dom Miguel Forjaz, that the 
British troops consumed all the green forage at Estremoz 
and Monte Mor 6 Novo, which was the cause of the ineffi- 
ciency of the post horses on the great road from Lisbon to 
Elvas. 

I cannot but observe in this complaint the desire which 
has been manifest for some time past, to complain of the 
British troops, at the same time that the Government are 
ready enough to avail themselves of their assistance to de- 
fend the country. 

" I repeat what I have often said before, that no country 
can enjoy the advantage of a large army to defend it, with- 
out suffering some inconvenience. 



1812. 


CAMP BEFOUE BADAJOZ, 


5 


^ If I am not mistaken, the complaint of the badness of 
the post horses on the great road originated with yourself ; 
and you passed up to Elvas either before there were any 
British troops at Estremoz, or, at all events, at most a day 
after they had arrived there. It is therefore not true that 
the badness of the post horses on the road is to be attributed 
to the consumption of all the green forage by the British 
troops. It is not true that there have been any British 
troops at Monte Mor d Novo. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Ek Excellency f WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuarti 

To Lieut, General Lord William Bentinch 
‘ My dear Lord, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 24tb March, 1812. 

^ The Secretary of State has sent me a copy of your dis* 
patch to him, marked secret and confidential,” of the 25th 
January, and a copy of his dispatch to you, marked secret, 
of the 4th March, and has written me a letter on the 5th of 
March, of which I enclose a copy to your Lordship. 

^ Tlie most essential object on which the troops under 
your command could be employed on the Eastern coast of 
Spain, would be the siege of Barcelona, or, if that could not 
be undertaken, the siege of Tarragona, in order to give 
General Lacy a point of communication with the fleet. 

‘ I am not very well acquainted with the stale of affairs 
on the Eastern coast. I believe however, that Barcelona is 
a place of the first order, but very insufficiently garrisoned, 
by only 5000 men. This force, indeed, is considered only 
sufficient to keep the population of the city in order. 

‘ In forming a plan for attacking a strong ])lacc, it will 
not answer to reckon upon the exertions of the population 
within against the garrison, at the same time that the in- 
clination of such a population as there is at Barcelona must 
not be thrown aside entirely. 

" Upon the whole, however, I should doubt the sufficiency 
of your Lordship’s force, even with the assistance which 
General Lacy and Admiral Sir E. Pellcw could give, to 
undertake such an operation as the siege of Barcelona. It 
may be depended upon that the enemy will make every 
effort to relieve the place; and I doubt the possibility of 



6 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


your being able to effect your object with such a force as you 
will have against so forinidable a place, even weakly garri- 
soned, before the enemy will have time to come to its relief. 

You are certainly much more equal to the attack of 
Tarragona, which is garrisoned, I understand, by 2000 
men ; and it is not, I understand, a place of great strength. 

" In considering and deciding on this subject, I request 
you to observe, that if you should attempt and fail at Barce- 
lona, you will not be able afterwards to attack Tarragona. 
On the other hand, if you should succeed at Tarragona, 
your success will end tlicrc, as you may depend upon it 
that the enemy will immediately collect a superior force in 
Catalonia. 

^ I do not recommend any operation to you in Valencia, 
as your success in Catalonia, and possibly even your landing 
upon the coast of that principality, will occasion the evacu- 
ation of Valencia. There would be no difficulty in seizing 
the city of Valencia at any time, even if you should fail at 
Barcelona or Tarragona. I do not believe that any of the 
fortified posts on the coast of Valencia are of a nature to 
make a vigorous or protracted resistance against an attack 
by 10,000 men, well equipped with cannon. 

Tlie great object in all sieges is to gain time. The pre- 
paration and collection of materials for a siege necessarily 
take many days, which might be employed in carrying on 
the operations, if those materials were collected and pre- 
pared beforehand. 

‘ Whatever may be the point which you may determine to 
attack, it is obvious that you must reach it by sea, and there 
can be no inconvenience in transporting with you all the 
materials which you may require. 

‘ I would therefore recommend to your Lordship to send 
an officer of engineers, at an early period in the summer, to 
Minorca or Majorca, in order to prepare large quantities of 
fascines and gabions, sand bags, platforms, &c., which you 
should bring with you. Intrenching tools you will of course 
bring from Sicily or Malta; and I conclude that you will 
depend upon the fleet for ordnance and stores. 

‘ In all the sieges which I have carried on in this country, 

I have used only the fire of guns, principally from enter- 
taining an opinion that the fire of mortars and howitzers 



1812. 


CAMP IVEFORE BADAJOZ. 


7 


has an effect upon the inhabitants of a town alone, and that 
a French garrison, in a Spanish or Portuguese town, would 
be but little likely to attend to the wishes or feelings of its 
inhabitants. By this measure I have diminished consider- 
ably the expense and difficulty of these operations : and, at 
all events, whether successful or not, I have done no injury 
to the Spanish or Portuguese inhabitants. If your Lord- 
ship should be inclined to try the effect of a bombardment, 
I imagine that it will be necessary that you should bring 
the ordnance and stores for it from Sicily or Malta. 

" In regard to my own operations, I invested this place 
on the 16tli instant, and I expect to be able to open our fire 
against it on to-morrow. I hope that I shall succeed in 
taking it, notwithstanding the badness of the weather, as I 
think the enemy cannot collect in time a force sufficient to 
oblige me to raise the siege. 

' If I should succeed, much will depend upon the plan 
adopted by the enemy. Marmont appears inclined to carry 
on operations to the northward, and I may be obliged to 
remove the army again to that quarter. My wish is to 
oblige Soult to evacuate Andalusia, which I sliould cfifect if 
I could be sure of the Spaniards holding their ground in 
Galicia. 

^ Believe me, Ac. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ Wellington. 

Lord William Benti?ick,\ 

To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham^ K.B. 

* Camp before Badajoz, 24th March, 1812. 

My dear Sir, h a.m. 

‘ The river yesterday did us so much mischief, that we 
cannot commence our fire till to-morrow morning. 

‘ General D’ Urban arrived here in the night with your 
letter, and it appears to me to be very uncertain where 
Urouet is. It is obvious from the intercepted letters which 
you transmitted, that he wishes to protect the communication 
with Cordova ; and I think it probable that if he has col- 
lected a force upon Don Benito, it is with a view to protect 
the junction of Foy by the bridge of Medellin. I believe 
that Foy intended to pass the Guadiana by the Barca at 
Castil-blanco, but the swelling of the river, which has been 



8 


SPAIN. 


1812 ^ 


so troublesome to us, will probably oblige him to come by 
Medellin ; still, vMi cannot . prevent, although we may delay 
the junction, which is a very great object for several reasons. 

‘ We are not within 20^000 men so strong on the left of 
the Guadiani^ as wc ought to be; the troops are arrived and 
arriving every day, but unfortunately our bridge was carried 
away the day before yesterday. I had directed that the 
planks and bearers might be taken off every night, and we 
have saved every thing, and in two days it will be as good as 
ever; but if the river should continue in its present state, 
and tire bad- weather should continue, wc cannot be certain 
of passing by our standing bridge, and I have therefore 
ordered the troops to commence their march by Merida. 
This will take some days, and it would be desirable to 
gain a few days for this object only, as well as for others. If 
the Guadiana should fall, and I can put down the bridge, 
the troops will lose nothing by marching up the right of the 
river. 

" On this ground, therefore, I think it desirable that an 
effort should be made to remove Drouet, Darricau, &c., 
from Zalamea, Don Benito, &c. I do not think there is 
any thing to be apprehended from the high road to Seville, 
as it is obvious that every thing coming from the South' will 
pass by one of the roads from Cordova. 

^ Upon talking over roads and distances with General 
D’Urban, it appears to me that the cavalry, and your right 
divisions, ' should arrive at Zalamea and Quintana on the 
day that your left division, from Almendralejo, should 
arrive at Oliva, and General Hill at Medellin; Sir R. Hill 
should send a regiment of cavalry to General Clinton, to 
look out in his front, and enable him to communicate with 
his right and left. We shall thus force the enemy back 
from the best communication across the Guadiana, and 
from the communication with Soult, and we shall gain some 
time at all events. 

^ It must be observed, however, that we cannot long 
maintain the position which we shall thus have assumed, as 
Soult will be on the right flank certainly, and, if he chooses, 
on the rear of your troops. 

' I shall either send General Hill a copy of this letter, or 
write to hipi to the same purport; and if you should not 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


a 


hear of any movement of Soult’s, which would render it 
inexpedient to undertake this operation, 1 request you to 
let General Hill know when you move, in order that he 
ihay regulate his movements accordingly. 

‘ I am not certain whether Sir Rowland Hill could move 
upon Medellin by the left of the Guadiana ; if he could it 
would give more security to the whole operation, but I 
should doubt his being able to make the march at this 
season. 

' I have letters from of the 21st, and from Salamanca 

of the 20th, but there is nothing new ; they talk of Mar- 
mont going to Avila on the 22nd. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut, General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

' Sir T, Graham, K.B. 

‘ I have received a letter of the 2 1st from Lieut. Blanck- 
Icy, from Truxillo, who states that Foy is at Castil-blanco, 
and that the enemy had left Don Benito/ 

To Lieut, General Sir R. Hill, K,B» 

‘ Camp before Badajoz, 24lh March, 1812. 

" Mv DEAR Hill, 5 p.m. 

^ I enclose the copy of a letter which I wrote this morning 
to General Sir Thomas Graham, on a plan for obliging the 
enemy to retire upon Zalamea, Don Benito, &c. I shall be 
much obliged to you if you will be ready to march in exe- 
cution of this plan when you shall hear from Sir Tliomas 
Graham. 

‘ I should prefer your going to Medellin by the south of 
the Guadiana, if you can. If you cannot, you must go by 
the north of that river. As well as I recollect, we marched 
the distance in one march ; but I believe it is six leagues. 

" Believe me, &c. 

^ Lieut, General Sir R, Hilli K,B,\ ^ Wellington. 

To Don Carlos de Espaua, 

< SxR, ‘ Gamp before Badajoz, 24th March, 1812. 

‘ I have had the honor of receiving your Excellency’s 
letters to the 21st instant. 

^ It appears to roc to be quite impossible for the enemy to 
make any impression upon Ciudad Rodrigo without the 



10 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


assistance of a battering' train, if there should be 3000 men 
in the place determined to defend themselves. As the press- 
ing inconvenience and danger now is the want of provisions, 
I would recommend to you to withdraw 1000 of the 4000 
men you state in your letter of the 20th, to be in the place, 
leaving 3(J00 men, upon which I always calculated. 

^ If you have had as bad weather as we have had, I con- 
ceive tlie blockade to be now out of the question. 

I beg to refer you to what I had the honor of telling you 
in repeated conversations, and particularly in my letter of 
the r)th instant regarding the navigation of the Douro above 
St. JoHo’da Pesqueira. 

‘ I beg leave to recall to your Excellency’s recollection, 
that 1 requested that the 24 pound Britisli shot in Ciudad 
llodrigo might be sent to Almeida, by the empty carriages 
going to St. Joao da Pesqueira for provisions, so that the 
I'emoval of this shot ought not to have caused any delay in 
throwing provisions into the place. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Don OoiVlos (Jjpj hjspdudt f W^kIjLington. 


To the Right Hon. Henry Wellesley. 

^ My dear Henry, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 24th March, 1812. 

" I enclose my last dispatch to the Secretary of State, to 
which I have but little to add, excepting that the rain has 
been almost constant, and has done us a good deal of mis- 
chief. We shall, however, open our lire to-morrow. 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Rt.Hoti, H. Wellesley. ^ Wellington. 

To the Right Hon. Henry Wellesley. 

‘ Sir, Camp before Badajoz, 24 th March, 1812 . 

I have the honor to enclose the copies of a correspondence 
between Don Carlos de Espafia and myself, regarding the 
want of provisions in Ciudad Rodrigo'^', which I beg you will 
bring under the notice of the Spanish Government. 

‘ I imagine that the difference between Don Carlos’s ac- 
count of provisions, delivered to the garrison by the British 

♦ See Letter dated Freneda, 12th February, 1812, iu vol. viii. 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


11 


Commissariat and mine, is occasioned principally by tlic dif- 
ference between the Spanish and English pound. I observe, 
however, that some provisions have been delivered to the 
garrison (those at Guinaldo for instance), of which I was 
not aware. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right, Hon, H, Wellesley,^ ^ Wellington. 


To Majo7' General . 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Camp bcfc^e Badajoz, 26th March, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 22nd, and have one of 
the 23rd from Don Carlos do Espafui, from which 1 learn 
that every thing was still quiet on the Tonnes, &c. 

" In regard to your supplies of corn, &c., I refer your 
letter to the Commissary General. He left money for the 
supply of your regiment, and there is still some corn in the 
magazine at St. Joao da Pasqueira, and your inarch is, I 
understand, provided for. 

You have acted your part very well, and I should think 
that by this time the enemy must know what is going on 
here. Don Carlos however tells me that he expects a con- 
voy with provisions to arrive in Ciudad Kodrigo on the 
30th ; and it is desirable that, if possible, you should not 
quit your station. 

‘ We took the outwork called La Picurina last night, by 
storm, and we are established within 300 yards of the body 
of the place. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General ^ WELLINGTON. 


To Major Geneixil . 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 27th March, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of 3 p.m., 24th instant. 

" If the enemy move to reconnaitre Ciudad Kodrigo, you 
may depend upon it that they know that I am gone, and 
what we are doing ; and there is no reason why you should 
stay any longer, and you might carry into execution my in- 
structions of the 5th instant. 

^ I wish you, however, to advert to what I wrote to you 
yesterday ; and it is very desirable that you should endea- 



12 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


vor to have the provisions now on the road, and expected at 
Ciudad Rodrigo on the 30th instant, introduced into the 
place before you quit that part of the country* 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Mojor General .* < WELLINGTON. 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

* My Lord, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 27th March, 1812. 

" The operations of the siege of Badajoz have continued 
since I addressed you on the 20th instant, notwithstanding 
the badness of the weather, till the 25th instant. On that 
day wc opened our fire from 28 pieces of ordnance, in 6 bat- 
teries in the first parallel, two of winch were intended to 
fire upon the outwork called La Picurina, and the otlier 
four to enfilade or destroy the defences of the fort on the side 
attacked. 

^ I directed Major General Kempt, who commanded in 
the trenches on that afternoon, to attack La Picurina by 
storm, after it was dark that night, which service he effected 
in the most judicious and gallant manner. 

‘ The attack was made by 500 men of the 3rd division, 
formed into three detachments, the right under the com- 
mand of Major Shaw, of the 74th, the centre under Captain 
the Hon. II. Powys, of the 83rd, and the left under Major 
Rudd, of the 77th. The communication between the out- 
work and the body of the place was entered on its right and 
left by the right and left detachments, each consisting of 
200 men ; half of each which detachments protected the 
attack from sallies from the fort, wdiilo the others attacked 
the work in its gorge. 

It was first entered, however, by the centre detachment 
of 100 men, under the command of Captain the Horn H. 
Powys, of the 83rd regiment, who escaladed the work at the 
salient angle, at a point at which the palisades had been in- 
jured by our fire. The detachment which attacked the 
work by the gorge had the most serious difficulties to con- 
tend with, as it was closed by not less than three rows of 
palisades, defended by musketry, and a place of arms for the 
garrison, musket proof, and loopholcd throughout. When 
the attack upon the salient angle, however, succeeded, the 
whole got into the work. 



CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


13 


1 ^ 12 . 


* The enehiy s garrlsoh in the outwork consisted of 250 
den, with 7 pieces of artillery, under the command of Co- 
lonel Gaspartierrc, of the E^t Major of the army of the 
South. But very few if any escaped: the Colonel, 3 other 
officers, and 86 men have been taken prisoners, and tlie 
remainder were either killed by the fire of our troops or 
drowned in the inundation of the river Rivillas. The enemy 
made a sortie from the ravelin called San Roque, either 
with a view to recover La Picurina, or to protect the retreat 
of the garrison, but they were immediately driven in by the 
detachment stationed in the communication to protect the 
attack. 

^ Major General Kempt mentions in high terms in his 
report the cool and persevering gallantry of the officers and 
troops ; of which indeed the strength of the work which 
they carried affords the best proof. He particularly men- 
tions Lieut. Colonel Hardingc, of the Staff of the Portu- 
guese Aririy, who attended him on this occasion. Captain 
Biimet, his aide de camp, and Brig. Major Wilde, who was 
unfortunately killed by a cannon shot, after the work was 
in our possession. Likewise Captain Holloway, Lieuts. 
Gipps and Stanway, of the Royal Engineers, who conducted 
the several detachments to the points of attack ; and Majors 
Shaw and Rudd, and Captain the Hon. H. Powys, who 
commanded the several detachments : these three officers 
were wounded, the latter on the parapet of the work, which 
he had been the first to mount by the ladders 

I have to add to this account the high sense I entertain 
of the judicious manner and the gallantry with which Major 
General Kempt carried into execution the service which I 
had entrusted to him. 

' ‘ We thus established ourselves in La Picurina on the 
night of the 25th, and opened the second parallel within 
300 yards of the body of the place, in which batteries were 
commenced last night. 

^ It is impossible that I can do justice to the zeal, activity, 
and indefatigable labor of the officers and soldiers, witli 
whicli these operations have been carried on in the most 
unfavorable weather. The Guadiana swelled so consider- 


* He died of his wounds. 



14 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


ably that, notwithstanding all precautions, our bridge of 
pontoons was carried away on the 22nd instant, and the 
flying bridges were so much injured as almost to become 
useless. But still the operations have been carried on with- 
out interruption. 

" I cannot, however, avoid taking this opportunity of 
calling the attention of your Lordship and of His Majesty’s 
Government to the neglect of the Portuguese authorities to 
furnish the means of transport necessary for the success of 
this or any other operation. My own anxiety, and the 
detail into which I am obliged to enter in order to find 
resources to overcome difficulties which occur at every 
moment, I put out of the question, although I believe no 
officer at the head of an army was ever so hampered, and it 
is desirable that the attention of one in that situation should 
be turned to other objects. But the serious inconveniences 
to which the troops are exposed, and the difficulties and 
risks which attend the execution of all services, for want of 
means of transport, become of such a magnitude, that no 
officer can venture to be responsible for them. If there was 
any want of means of transport in the country I should not 
complain, but I know there is no want ; and I attribute the 
deficiency entirely to the defect of the Portuguese law upon 
the subject, and to the unwillingness of the magistrates to 
carry it into execution. In every country the siipjfly of 
carriages for the service of the army is an obligation upon 
the owners of carriages ; and I have repeatedly urged the 
Portuguese Government to frame a law upon the subject, 
with sufficient penalties to insure obedience to it, and that 
the army should have means of transport. Instead of 
doing that, the object of the law lately made by the Govern- 
ment, would appear to be to prevent the army from getting 
carriages, and the consequence is that every service be- 
comes a matter of difficulty and risk ; and as the carriages 
of the poor alone are forced into the service by the magis- 
trates, they suffer all the hardships which result from the 
la\v. 

‘ I had intended to commence the operations against 
Badajoz between the 6th and 8th of March, and all the 
arrangements were made accordingly ; but because the 
large and rich town of Evora, which has suffered in no man- 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


15 


ner by tlie war, would supply uo carriages, I could not com- 
mence till the 17tli, and thus the troops have been exposed 
to, and have been obliged to carry on the works of the siege 
during the rains of the Equinox, which I had intended to 
avoid. At this moment the powder for the siege, and much 
of the shot, and many of the engineers’ stores, are not 
arrived at Elvas, and we arc obliged to consume the stores 
of that garrison. I am destroying the equipments of the 
army in transporting the stores from Elvas to the ground of 
the siege, because no assistance is given by the country, or 
assistance that is quite inadequate to the demand and wants 
of the service. 

^ I hope that His Majesty’s Government will exert their 
influence with the Prince Regent of Portugal, to order the 
Local Government not only to frame a law which shall have 
for its object the equipment of the armies in such a manner 
as to enable them to defend the country, but to carry that 
law into execution, so that the people of the country shall 
understand that they must comply with its provisions. 

" Since I addressed your Lordship on the 20th, General 
Drouet has had his troops on the line between Medellin on 
the Guadiana, and Zalamea dc la Serena and Llerena, appa- 
rently with the view of keeping the communication open 
between the army of the South and the divisions of the 
army of Portugal stationed on the Tagus. Lieut. General 
Sir Thomas Graham made a movement to Llerena on the 
2.0th at night, but the enemy, consisting of three battalions 
of infantry and two regiments of cavalry, which were there, 
having heard of his march, retired into the mountains 
during the night. Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill has 
likewise sent a detachment to La Guarefia, and proposed 
to inarch himself this morning upon Medellin, in order to 
co-operate with Lieut. General Sir Thomas Graham in 
obliging the enemy to remove to a greater distance, and to 
endeavor to destroy some of their detached corps. 

‘ The divisions of the army of Portugal which were in 
Castille, and those which have lately marched thither, have 
not yet moved, and the object of their movement is still 
doubtful. It is understood to be to attempt a co 2 jp de main 
upon Ciudad Rodrigo, or to blockade the place. But I 
consider the success of the former impracticable, and that 



16 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


the latter is equally so at present, as the rain, wliich has 
been general, has filled all the rivers in that part of the 
country. 

^ I am sorry to say that the Spanish authorities have 
neglected to transport to Ciudad Rodrigo the provisions 
which I had given them from the British magazine at St. 
Joao da Pcsqucira, and a part of these provisions only will 
arrive at that place on the 30th of this month. The place 
has now, therefore, in it only one month’s provisions for the 
garrison, which I had been able to give them from the 
stores of the army before I quitted Castille. 

" I have transmitted to Mr. Wellesley, for the information 
of the Spanish Government, the copies of the correspondence 
which I have had with Don Carlos de Espaiia on this sub- 
ject, in which His Majesty's Government will see the mea- 
sures which I had adopted to secure this important place, 
and the state in which it is at present. 

" I have not heard from any authority that the troops 
have yet moved in the South, but it is reported that those 
at Seville had marched upon Cordova, to which point I 
understand that those at Granada had been brought. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Earl of Liverpool. „ ^ Wellington. 

" I enclose the return of the killed, wounded, and missing, 
from the 18th instant.’ 

To the Right Hon, Henry Welledey. 

* My dear Henry, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 23th March, 1812. 

' I enclose my dispatch of yesterday, and a paper directed 
to you from Madrid, which is well worth reading, and indeed 
ought to be sent home. It came to me open from the 
Spanish General at Plasencia, who informed me that the 
person who brought it lost his Spanish passport. 

We are going on well, and shall open our fire from 35 
pieces of artillery, eri hr 'eej^e, on the morning of the 31st. 

^ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. H, Wellesley. 


" Wellington. 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


17 


• The' than who brought the i enclosed papers having eic- 
pressed a de^ite to return to Madrid, I havie given him 150 
dollars and a receipt for them, and desired him to return. 

^ Some' of my friends in Castille have desired me to' re- 
monstrate against the — —’s appointment to bO Cap- 

tain General of that province: 1 believe he is a v^ry bad 
fellow.’ ^ t 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

^ Sir, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 28 tli March, 1812 . ' 

^ When I received your letter of the 27th September, 1811, 
in which you announced to me that the committee for the 
management of the money raised in Great Britain and Ire- 
land by subscription, for the relief of the suffering Portu- 
guese, had determined to place the sum of 15,000 dollars at 
my disposal for the relief of the people inhabiting the eoun-^ 
try on the banks of the Coa, and Pinhel rivers; I employed 
the Rev. S. Briscall, the chaplain to head (juarters, and the 
chaplains to the several divisions of the army, to make in- 
quiries regarding the state of the people in the neighbour- 
hood of the cantonments occupied by the troops, to which 
these gentlemen were attached, in order to enable me to 
form a judgment regarding the best mode of laying out the 
money with which 1 had been entrusted for the benefit' of 
the people. 

^ Mr. Briscall was unfortunately taken ill before he had 
completed his task, but not before he and the other gentle- 
men had made reports which, at the same time that they 
showed the general distress of the district, proved that no 
information could be obtained, according to which a distri- 
bution of the money could be made, which would satisfy my 
mind that I had done that which was most beneficial toUhe 
people. 

^ I am sorry to say that I could not get from the curates 
of the villages, the fair source of information regar*ding the 
distresses of the poor, any account of the number iti rdaih 
distress, or a list of the' names. All had suffered ffroni^the 
invasion, but not eqtially. The distinction of rich and poor 
still remained, and the former, although in a reduced state, 
possessed generally means of subsistence and to improve 
their situation, while the latter was really' m wWt. YetT 
am concerned to add that the rich in cvei’y village insisted 

VOL. IX. c 



18 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


upon their names being inserted in the list of distressed 
persons, in order to participate equally with the poor in the 
distribution of money or food ; and the curates of the vil- 
lages were apprehensive of the consequences of resisting 
these unreasonable pretensions ; and the list of the persons 
in absolute want furnished by the curates, were lists of the 
inhabitants of the villages. 

" It would have been impossible for me to attempt to dis~ 
tribute the money excepting through the medium of the 
curates, and it was quite clear that the sum distributed to 
the whole population in equal proportions, would have re- 
lieved the distresses of none. 

^ Under these circumstances I had at one time determined 
to return the money to the committee, to which determina- 
tion I was further induced, from observing that the people 
were likely to overcome the distress of the winter by at- 
tending the troops in their cantonments with various articles 
for sale, by which they gained a subsistence, much more 
beneficial to them than any which charity might give them. 

^ Nearly about this time (in the end of October) I had an 
interview with the Bishop of Pinhel, and having mentioned 
to him the difficulties which I met with in distributing the 
money in question, and an idea which I had of returning it 
to the committee, or of purchasing cattle with it, to be after- 
wards distributed to the people, he entirely concurred with 
me regarding the impossibility of distributing the money in 
a satisfactory manner, so as to be of use to any body ; and 
he observed that it was not then wanted, as the people 
gained much from the troops, and he earnestly recom- 
mended that I should adopt the measure which I had in con- 
templation, and that I should buy cattle to be distributed to 
the people in March. 

^ I determined accordingly to carry that plan into execu- 
tion, and I enclose the account of the purchase of 276 bul- 
locks, and the receipts for that number by the vicar-general 
of Pinhel. I likewise enclose the distribution of 200 dollars 
which I gave to General Pack, to be divided among the inha- 
bitants of Freixo and the neighbouring villages, when the 
troops commanded by him had quitted the villages, and the 
people had no longer the means of gaining a livelihood by 
supplying the troops with what they wanted. 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


19 


^ I likewise enclose a copy of the paper given to the Bishop 
of Pinhel, containing the plan according to which the bul- 
locks are to be distributed to the villages of the district. In 
adopting this plan I also acted in communication with the 
Bishop. 

I was informed that the temptation of a large price had 
induced many to whom the bullocks had been given to sell 
them, and the Bishop concurred with me in opinion that 
the plan which I proposed, and which is detailed in the en- 
closed paper would be more likely to promote the renewal 
of industry and agriculture throughout the district than any 
other ; at the same time that if those entitled to the use of 
the bullocks should not be in possession of seed corn, or 
should not be inclined to make use of them, they would ac- 
quire a profit by selling their right to the use of the bullocks 
to the more wealthy proprietors. 

^ I beg you to lay this letter and the enclosed papers be- 
fore the committee. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency < Wellington. 

Charles Stuart,^ 

To Lieut ^ General Sir T. Graham, K,B, 

^ Camp before Badajoz, 29th March, 1812. 

" My dear Sir, 9 a.m. 

^ I enclose some letters which I have just received from 
my brother, from which you will see that Soult broke up 
from before Cadiz on the 23rd and 24th, and commenced 
collecting his troops upon Seville. It is probable that the 
corps from thence will march upon Guadalcanal, in order to 
communicate with, or join Drouet. 

' It is very desirable that you should come back to Villa 
Franca, Zafra, &c., keeping your cavalry out in front; and 
that Sir K. Hill should come to Merida. I write to him 
immediately to request him to fall back. 

' The troops will commence crossing the river to-morrow 
morning. 

‘ I have received your letter of 6 p.m. of the 27th. 

Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir 2\ Graham, K.B.' 

« 2 



20 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


‘ I do not send the enclosures of these letters as I have 
not yet read them.’ 

To Lieut. General Sir i?. Hill, K.B. 

* Camp before Badajoz, 29th March, 1812. 

" My dear Hill, 9 a.m. 

^ I received this morning your letter of the 28th, 10 a.m. 

^ I have this morning received letters from Cadiz to the 
24th, at night. Soult broke up before that place on the 
23rd and 24th, and commenced collecting his force at Seville. 
He may therefore be expected shortly in Estremadura, pro- 
bably by Guadalcanal. 

^ I have written this intelligence to General Graham, and 
have requested him to fall back upon Villa Franca and 
Zafra. 1 think you had better bring the troops which you 
have at Medellin and Don Benito to Guarefia, and fall back 
thence on Merida, on the day that General Graham’s troops 
will fall back on Villa Franca and Zafra. 

^ I have not heard from Sir Thomas Graham since the 
27th in the evening. He w^as then at Valencia de las Torres, 
and his infantry at Maguilla. 

• "Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K,B: 

To the Right Hon. Henry Wellesley, 

^ My dear Henry, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 30tli March, 1812. 

" I have received your letters to the 24th, and some from 
General Cooke ; among others one of the 14th, detailing 
the proceedings of a Junta of Generals, of which General 
Cooke is one. 

" I do not at all like that arrangement. 

" First ; I do not think it proper to communicate my in- 
tentions and plans to a Junta of Spanish Generals, of whom 

the is one. If I do not communicate my plans 

to them, all their deliberations must be nugatory. 

" Secondly ; I do not think it very proper or consistent 
with the principles of military subordination, that General 
Cooke, who is under my command, should canvass, at a 
Junta of Generals, military operations directed by me. 

" I do not know of what use the Junta is, excepting to 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


21 


endeavor, by a side wind, to obtain the direction of the 
operations of this army, in which endeavor they may depend 
upon it they will not succeed. No power on earth shall 
induce me to take a step that I do not approve of ; and the 
deliberations of the Junta must only afford fresh ground 
for dispute, and involve me in fresh discussions. 

' In their deliberations of the 5th March, I see that they 
interfered with the Portuguese army in Braganza, besides 
(as all councils of this description do) throwing doubts 
upon the operations recommended and fixed for Ballesteros. 
Then they manoeuvre the army of Galicia, as usual, without 
having the slightest knowledge of local circumstances, or 
of the strength of the enemy, or of their own means and 
resources. This they have done in their meeting, reported 
on by General Cooke in his letter of the 21st March, No, 
59, besides in that of the 5111. 

^ General Castafios is the Commander in Chief of all the 
Spanish troops on this side of Spain ; and it will appear by 
the papers which I have transmitted to you that he and I 
have considered every point referred to by the Junta, and 
have provided, as well as circumstances and the means and 
resources at our disposal would permit, for every event. 
Do the Junta propose to overturn what we have settled, 
or improve upon the arrangement which we have made, 
with a full knowledge of all the circumstances ? Why then 
deliberate upon these points ? 

‘ When I required the co-operation, although distant, of 
General Ballesteros, I proposed the plan for it, through the 
King’s Ambassador, according to the instructions which 1 
have received, and the Government agreed to the plan. 
Where then is the use of the deliberations of the Junta on 
this point ? Where have they any room for deliberation ? 

" I do not wish to send General Cooke any orders not to 
attend the Junta, when you have desired him to attend; 
but I shall be obliged to you if you wdll let him discontinue 
his attendance quietly, and let matters get to their natural 
state. 

^ We arc going on well, and shall open our breaching 
batteries to-morrow. 

' Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. H. Wellesley. ' Wellington. 



22 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


^ I see by the accounts from Seville that the enemy have 
little there but Civicos ; and I hope that Ballesteros will 
take advantage of their weakness. 

^ In answer to your letter of the 15th, respecting the 
money in the Standard, it would certainly be very desirable 
to me to have some of it ; but as Government disapproved 
of your retaining any before, I cannot desire that you should 
retain any now ; but I shall write home on the subject, and 
you had better do the same.’ 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham^ K.B, 

‘ Camp before Badajoz, 1st April, 1812. 

" My dear Sir, 8 a.m. 

^ We opened our breaching batteries yesterday with great 
effect. The wall is a good one, however, and it will not be 
well breached probably till the evening of the 3rd. In the 
mean time I hope to be able to get the better of the inun- 
dation, which hitherto has been very detrimental to us. 

‘ I have letters from of the 29th, and from Salamanca 

of the 28th. The French cavalry were at Tamamcs on the 

29th, and intended to move that night. Mar- 

mont w'as at Salamanca on the 28th, but it was expected 
that he would move on the following day. They have col- 
lected about fifteen days' provisions, ladders, a bridge, &:c., 
and I am inclined to believe they will attack Ciudad Kodrigo 
or Almeida. 'I'hey have got one old 24 pounder, and some 
12 pounders; and Longa, in a letter of the 4th, mentions 
that some ti’oops had entered from Bayonne with 20 pieces 
of ordnance, of which 17 were 16 and 12 pounders, that is 
to say 18 and 14 pounders. We have no account of the 
arrival of these guns even at Valladolid; but in the letter 
from Salamanca of this morning, it is stated that they talk 
of the arrival of guns and troops from Burgos. 

If Soult should move forward when your troops shall bo 
in the stations mentioned in my letter of the 29th, I should 
wish you to collect them in the wood in front of the position 
at Albuera. I mean that Hill should remain at Merida as 
long as possible, in case Soult should prefer to endeavor 
to relieve the place by the right bank of the Guadiana. 
He would in that case retire upon Montijo if the enemy 
should be too strong for him ; and I will have the bridge 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


23 


down between this and Talavera, in order to join him with 
the remainder of the army. 

If Soult should keep his troops collected on the left of 
the Guadiana, Hill would join on the left of the army by 
Lobon and Talavera. If he should be too late, and the 
enemy should be in possession of Lobon, he will always be 
able to pass by our bridge, which I shall move to the 
neighbourhood of Talavera, as soon as I find that Soult 
collects. 

^ I have a letter from Lima without a date, in which he 
says, that, on the 20th, an aide de camp of Marmont s had 
come to Talavera de la Keyna, and had stated that Mar- 
mont was about to move his head quarters to Alfayates, 
and that Suchet was to join Soult by forced marches. In- 
deed he said that he expected that Marmont was already at 
Alfayates. 

" I believe that the rain which annoyed us so much here 
will turn out to have been our best friend, as it must have 
delayed the execution of all Marmont’s schemes. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir T, Graham^ K,B, 

" I shall send Hill a copy of this letter.’ 

To Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K.B. 

^ Camp before Badajoz, 1st April, 1812. 

" My DEAR Hill, il a.m. 

^ Sir Thomas Graham received my letter of the 29th at 
4 A.M. on the 30th, and probably commenced yesterday to 
carry into execution what I directed. He would of course 
write to you, as I sent him, with the duplicate, a copy of 
the letter I wrote to you on the 29th. 

^ I now enclose the copy of a letter which I wrote to Sir 
Thomas Graham this morning, giving an account of our 
state here and elsewhere, and making known to him my 
intentions. 

^ I think it not improbable that Soult may endeavor to 
communicate with the place by the right of the Guadiana, 
when he shall find that we are so strong on the left of the 
river. If I should find this to be his intention, I shall rein- 



24 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


force our left to the degree that may be expedient, either 
with a part or the whole of our troops, for which I shall use 
every facility by placing our bridge below Talavera. 

" If you should find that all the enemy’s troops manoeuvre 
upon Villa Franca, &c., you will march from Merida upon 
Lobon, and thence on Talavera, so as to take your place on 
the left of the army. It would be desirable that you should 
destroy the bridge at Merida, when you will leave the place, 
particularly if you should be certain of making your march 
on Lobon and Talavera. 

^ If the enemy should pass the Guadiana with the whole 
or part of his army at Medellin, or if Foy’s division, or any 
other troops should remain on the right of the Guadiana, 
while the others will manoeuvre on the left of the river, you 
will remain on the right of the Guadiana, and will fall 
back gradually, if you should find the enemy too strong for 
you, upon Montijo, taking advantage of any favorable 
ground to delay the enemy’s advance. On leaving Merida, 
you will in this case also break the bridge.) 

^ If the uncertainty of the enemy’s movements towards 
the right bank of the Guadiana should detain you at Merida 
so long as that you should entertain doubts of your being 
able to march by Lobon and Talavera to place yourself 
on the left of the army, you will in that case march by 
the right bank to the bridge of pontoons, which you will 
find fixed below Talavera. You will in this case also de- 
stroy the bridge of Merida when you shall leave that place. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' Wellington. 

-s/r i?. mu. k.b: 


To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 2nd April, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 30th of March, and I 
am much concerned that you should feel any uneasiness re- 
specting my recent report to the British Government on the 
want of means of transport for the army. I think it very 
likely that I did not trouble you upon the subject in the 
short time that I saw you at Elvas ; but you must recollect 
that you were yourself detained at Elvas from the 6th, the 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


25 


day on which I had fixed to arrive there, till the 11th, when 
I did arrive, after staying five days longer in Castille than I 
had intended, in order to wait the arrival of the equipments 
for the siege ; and when I did arrive, I could not undertake 
any thing till the 16th, five days afterwards, for the same 
reason. 

^ The delay in the arrival of the equipments for the siege 
was to be attributed to the want of means of transport at 
Evora ; and I have to add, that those equipments are not, 
to this moment, arrived for the same reason, and that I have 
been getting on in the best manner I could without them. 

‘ You seem to think that you are to blame for any defect 
of these regulations, or deficiency in their execution. I 
assure you there is nothing so far from my thoughts as a 
notion that you are in any, the most distant manner respon- 
sible for any act of the Portuguese Government. All that 
you can do is to remonstrate, and point out what ought to 
be done. It remains for them to execute what you recom- 
mend to them. 

^ In respect to the regulation for means of transport, I 
beg to refer to my letters upon the subject, and the regula- 
tion itself, and it will be seen that the object of the latter is 
to save the people of the country from the necessity of sup- 
plying the army, and that all the penalties recommended by 
me are omitted. 

^ In respect to the execution of the regulation in this pro- 
vince, I enclose two letters which the Commissary General 
put into my hands this morning, informing you at the same 
time that if I wanted 1000 carriages instead of 100, there 
ought to be no difficulty in procuring tliem. 

‘ The question is, arc we to carry on the war, or arc wo 
not? If we arc, the Government must set their shoulders to 
the wheel. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency " Wellington. 

Charles Stuart' 


To the Earl qf Liverpool, 

‘ Mv DEAR Lord, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 2nd April, 1812. 

‘ Mr. Bissett has communicated to me a letter from the 
Commissary in Chief, from the perusal of which I am con- 



26 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


cerned to observe that the Treasury are not satisfied with 
him for having lately engaged, under the authority of my 
sanction, to receive a sum of 400,000 dollars, to be brought 
from Gibraltar, at the exchange of five shillings and eight 
pence the dollar, the market rate at Lisbon being lower. 

^ As this was not the first contract of this kind which I 
have sanctioned for Mr. Bissett, as well as Mr. Kennedy and 
Mr. Murray, I am only concerned that the Lords of the 
Treasury, who have invariably been made acquainted with 
these contracts, did not make known their disapprobation 
of them at an earlier period, as, if they had, I should not 
have sanctioned those offered for my consideration subse- 
quent to the notification of the disapprobation of their 
Lordships. 

^ I can justify the measure adopted lately, and upon the 
former occasions, upon no other ground than necessity. I 
also thought tliat it was the wish of the Lords of the Trea- 
sury, and of Government in general, that I should autho- 
rize the adoption of every measure that was practicable, in 
order to procure specie for the army ; but it appears that I 
have been mistaken, and 1 hope that Government will take 
measures to supply the deficiency which must exist in our 
funds from my refusal to sanction contracts of this descrip- 
tion in future. 

‘ My brother has informed me that he expects the Stand- 
ard at Cadiz from America with specie, on account of the 
British Government, and he has desired to know whether he 
is to detain any of it for the use of the army, at the same 
time informing me that Government had disapproved of his 
detaining money at Cadiz upon a former occasion. 

" I beg to have your Lordship’s directions upon this sub- 
ject, as 1 have told my brother that I cannot interfere with 
any directions given by the Government. I at the same 
time beg to refer your Lordship to the various financial , 
statements sent home by Mr. Bissett and by me, and to in- 
form you that it is quite impossible that we can go on 
without money. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

^ Wellinqton. 


‘ The Earl of Liverpool' 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


27 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

^ My LorD:, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 3rd April, 1812. 

We opened our fire on the 31st March from 26 pieces 
of cannon in the second parallel, to breach the face of the 
bastion at the south east angle of the fort called La Trini- 
dad, and the flank of the bastion by which the face is de- 
fended, called Maria. The fire upon these has continued 
since with great effect. 

" The enemy made a sortie, on the night of the 29th, upon 
the troops of General Hamilton’s division, which invest the 
place on the right of the Guadiana, but were immediately 
driven in with loss. Wc lost no men on this occasion. 

" The movements of Lieut. General Sir Thomas Graham 
and of Lieut. General Sir Howland Hill have obliged the 
enemy to retire by the diflerent roads towards Cordova, with 
the exception of a small body of infantry and cavalry which 
remained at Zalamea de la Serena, in front of Belalcazar. 

^ Marshal Soult broke up in front of Cadiz on the 23rd 
and 24th, and has marched upon Seville with all the troops 
which were there, with the exception of 4000 men. I under- 
stand that he was to march from Seville again on the 30th 
or 31st ; and I should think that by this time he has joined 
the troops under Drouet, by Constantina. 

‘ I have not heard from Castillo since the 30th March. 
One division of the army of Portugal, which had been in 
the province of Avila, had on that day arrived at Guada- 
pero, within two leagues of Ciudad Rodrigo, and it was sup- 
posed that Marmont was on his march with other troops 
from the side of Salamanca. I have not heard from thence 
since the 28th, on which day Marshal Marmont was there ; 
but it was expected that he would march on the following 
day. The river Agueda was not fordable for troops on the 
30th. 

' The enemy will certainly reconnaitre Ciudad Rodrigo 
and Almeida when the Agueda shall fall ; and they will 
probably attack the former if they should be in possession 
of heavy cannon and other means to enable them to carry on 
their attack, which I doubt. 

^ I am very apprehensive, however, that I shall be obliged 
to return to that part of the country, in order to ensure the 



28 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


safety of those places, as soon as I shall have brought to a 
close the operations which I have now in hand. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Earl of LiverpooL' < WELLINGTON. 


To the Earl of Liverpool, 

^ My Lord, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 3rd April, 1812. 

^ I enclose the answer which I have received from Mar- 
shal Sir William Beresford, on the reference made to him 
by your Lordship’s desire, respecting the value of the sphe- 
rical case shot called Shrapnell’s shells. 

^ Since I wrote to your Lordship on that subject, I have 
heard that they have been very destructive to the enemy in 
Badajoz, when thrown from 24 pounder carronadcs ; and I 
have directed that some of them may be loaded witli musket 
balls, in order to remedy what I have reason to believe is a 
material defect in these shells, viz., that the wounds which 
they inflict do not disable the person who receives them, 
even for the action in which they arc received. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Earl of Liverpool,' ^ Wellington. 

/ 

To Lieut. General Sir R. HilU K.B, 

‘ Camp before Badajoz, 4th April, 1812. 

‘ My dear Hill, i before lo p.m, 

^ I hear from Sir Thomas Graham, and indeed the intelli- 
gence which I before received induced me to believe, that 
Soult would arrive at Llcrena this day, and all accounts 
appear to agree that all the troops which he has are col- 
lected on [that point, and that there are none moving to- 
wards Merida. 

" Although I am prepared to send my bridge to Talavera, 
it would be more convenient not to move it from the place 
at which it is ; and as the enemy have collected, and appear 
to intend to act on the southern side of the Guadiana, I am 
desirous that you should be better prepared than you are to 
place yourself on our left flank. 

^ If Soult should intend to fight a battle, he will certainly 
advance immediately, and we may expect that he will be on 
the Albucra on the 7th ; and, under those circumstances. 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


29 


I am anxious that, on to-morrow evening, you should move 
your corps to Arroyo do San Scrvan,. Calamonte, and the 
woods to the south of the Guadiana, and your cavalry look- 
ing out on the roads to Almendralejo and Zafra. By this 
measure you will be quite ready for a start whenever you 
will find that Soult passes the high road from Seville to 
Merida, and that nothing is moving on that town. 

^ I hope to be able to attack the place to-morrow night. 
As for the redoubts, destroy them if you can with con- 
venience; but the French do not seem to care much about 
them, nor do I. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 


To the Right Hon. Henry Welle dey. 

‘ My dear Henry, * Camp before Badajoz, 4th April, 1812. 

" I enclose my dispatch of yesterday. 

" I likewise send a letter for the Secretary in the War 
Department from Don Carlos de Espaha, which will inform 
the Government how things were at Ciudad Rodrigo on 
the 31st March. I have since received a letter of the 1st 
of April, from which I learn that a jiarty of dragoons had 
crossed the ford of the Agueda above Ciudad Rodrigo 
on that day, and Don Carlos de Espaha had removed to 
Gallegos. 

^ The convoy, which was expected on the 30th, only 
arrived on the 31st near Almeida. Thus, by manana^' 
the Spaniards will lose that place again, unless I should go 
with the whole army to its assistance ; and they will lose a 
great part of the benefit which they would derive from the 
success of our operations here. 

We are getting on well; and I hope that this night, or 
to-morrow, we shall be ready to attempt to take the place by 
storm. 

^ I have received your letters of the 28th. I shall be 
much obliged to you if you will tell General O’Donnell that 
I will do every thing in my power to get his brother ex- 
changed; but I enclose the copy of a letter; wliich will 



30 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


show the result of an attempt which I made to get General 
Herrasti exchanged for General Eenaud. 

^ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. H. Wellesley. ‘ Wellington. 

P.S. I find that the letter from Don Carlos de Espana 
to the Minister at War has been lost. I likewise find that 
I sent to Castanos the letter respecting the exchange of 
Herrasti ; but it will be returned, or I shall get a duplicate 
of it, which I will send to you.’ 


To the Right Hon. Henry Wellesley. 

^ Sir, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 4th April, 1812. 

" I enclose a letter which I have received from the Secre- 
tary of State, conveying to me the permission of His Royal 
Highness the Prince Regent, in the name, and on the behalf 
of His Majesty, to accept the honor recently conferred upon 
me by the Regency and Cortes of Spain*. 

" I shall be very much obliged to you if you will take an 
opportunity of informing the Spanish Government, that I 
accept the honor conferred upon me, and of again expressing 
my gratitude for it. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. H. Wellesley: ^ Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Sir R. Hilly K.B. 

* Camp before Badajoz, 5th April, 1812. 

* My dear Hill, 12 at Noon. 

" I received your letter of 2 p.m. yesterday. If Foy re- 
mains in his position at Alia, &c., that is, if you should not 
receive any positive intelligence of his moving along the 
right of the Guadiana, before you will be required to move 
to Lobon, &c., in consequence of Soult’s movements, there 
is no occasion for your leaving any body at Merida. If 
Foy should be moving along the right of the Guadiana, 
when you shall receive intelligence of Soult’s movements, 
I do not think it would be necessary for you to stay with 
your whole corps at Merida. General Howard might stay 


The title of Ducjxie de Ciudad Hodrigo, and 'a Grandee of Spain. 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


31 


with one British, and Colonel Ashworth’s brigade, and the 
Portuguese cavalry, and a brigade of Portuguese artillery. 
Of course he would not destroy the bridge till the last 
moment, and if you should determine to march upon Lobon, 
you will not destroy the bridge till the last of your troops 
shall come away. 

' Tell the Alcalde, or Corregidor, that if we destroy the 
bridge, I shall render it passable again for them ; that it is 
to answer a military purpose, and must be done if necessary. 

I have not yet heard of Soult’s arrival at Llerena, 
yesterday. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 


To Major General Cooke. 

< Sir, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 6th April, 1812. 

^ I have the honor to acquaint you, that I approve of 
your discharging five serjeants from the 87th regiment, 
according to the request of Colonel Doyle, in order that 
they may be appointed to commissions in the Spanish 
service. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General Cooke: W Ellington. 


To the Right Hon. Henry Wellesley. 

‘ My dear Henry, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 6th April, 1812. 

^ Alava delivered to me yesterday evening your letters 
of the 30th March, and of April. 

" I congratulate you upon being made a Knight of the 
Bath. You must be introduced by a Knight of some Order 
to the person who is to invest you, carrying in your hand 
the insignia of the Order. The authority to invest you is 
then read ; and the person who is to invest you must knight 
you by passing his sword over your shoulder. He then 
puts the riband over your right shoulder, and the star on 
your left breast. The ceremony here generally ends in 
eating and drinking, &c. &c. 

‘ I have no objection to the delay in sending the garrison 



32 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


to Tarifa till matters shall be settled here ; and it will be 
expedient that Ballesteros should return. 

^ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. H. Wellesley: " Wellington. 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE ATTACK OF BADAJOZ. 

{The parts in the smaller print are alterations and Explanations 
afterwards made by the Earl of Wellington,) 

‘ Camp, 6 th April, 1812. 

^ 1. The Fort of Badajoz is to be attacked at 10 o'clock 
this night *. 

‘ 2. The attack must be made on three points ; the castle, 
the face of the bastion of La Trinidad, and the flank of the 
bastion of Maria. 

‘ 3. The attack of the castle to be by escalade ; that of 
the two bastions, by the storm of the breaches. 

' 4. The troops for the storm of the castle, consisting of 
the 3rd division of infantry, should move out from the right 
of the first parallel at a little before 10 o'clock, but not to 
attack till 1 0 o’clock, 

‘ 5. They should cross the river Rivillas below the broken 
bridge over that river, and attack that part of the castle 
which is on the right, looking from the trenches and in the 
rear of the great battery constructed by the enemy to fire 
on the bastion of La Trinidad. 

" 6. Having arrived within the castle, and having secured 
the possession of it, parties must be sent to the left along 
the rampart, to fall on the rear of those defending the great 
breach, in the bastion of La Trinidad, and to communicate 
with the right of the attack on that bastion. 

^ It is recommended that the attack of the 3rd division should be kept clear 

of the bastion of San Antonio, at least till the castle which is above and 

commands that bastion shall be carried.’ 

^ 7. The troops for this attack must have all the long 

♦ The hour originalljr named was half- past seven, being immediately after 
dusk, but it was subsequently changed to ten, in consequence of the arrange- 
ments being found to require that delay. The garrison took advantage of the 
interval between the breaching batteries ceasing to batter, and the commence- 
ment of the assault, to cover the front of the breaches with harrows and crow’s- 
feet, and to fix a chevaiix-dc-frise of sword blades ou their summits. 



1812 . 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


33 


ladders in the engineers’ park, and six of the lengths of the 
engineers’ ladders. They must be attended by 12 carpenters 
with axes, and by six miners with crow-bars, &c. 

^ 8. The 4th division, with the exception of the covering 
party in the trenches, must make the attack on the face of 
the bastion of La Trinidad, and the Light division on the 
flank of the bastion of Maria. 

^ 9. These two divisions must parade in close columns of 
divisions at 9 o’clock. The Light division, with the left in 
front, the 4th division with its advanced guard, with the left 
in front ; the remainder with the right in front. The 4th 
division must be on the right of the little stream, near the 
piquet of the 4th division, and the Light division must have 
the river on their right. 

‘ This arrangement of the columns is made in order that the Light division 
may extend along the ramparts to the left ; and that the 4th division, 
with the exception of the advanced guard, which is to communicate by 
its left with the Light division, might extend along the ramparts to the 
right. It may be necessary, however, for these two divisions mutually 
to support each other, and attention must in this case be paid to the 
formations.’ 

^ 10. The Light division must throw 100 men forward into 
the quarries, close to the covered-way of the bastion of 
Maria, who, as soon as the garrison arc disturbed, must 
keep down by their fire the fire from the face of the bastion 
of Maria, and that from tlie covered- way. 

Ml. The advance of both divisions must consist of 500 
men from each, attended by 12 ladders ; and the men of the 
storming party should carry sacks filled with light materials, 
to be thrown into the ditch, to enable the troops to descend 
into it. Care must be taken that these bags are not thrown 
into the covered-way. 

‘ 12. The advance of the Light division must precede 
that of the 4th division ; and both must keep as near the 
inundation as they possibly can. 

^ 13. The advance of both divisions must be formed into 
firing parties and storming parties. The firing parties must 
be spread along the crest of the glacis, to keep down the 
fire of the enemy; while the men of the storming party, 
who carry bags, will enter the covered-way at the place 
d^armesy under the breached face of the bastion of La 
Trinidad ; those attached to the 4th division on its right, 

VOL. IX. D 



34 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


those to the Light division on its left^ looking from the 
trenches or the camp. 

< No. 13 will run thus after the words ‘‘ while the men of the storming 
party who carry bags will enter the covered-way,” insert, those of the 
Light division, at the place dlarmes on the left, looking from camp, of 
the unfinished ravelin ; those of the 4th division, on the right of that 
ravelin, at the place (Tarmes under the breached face of the bastion of 
La Trinidad.” ’ 

"14. The storming party of the advance of the Light 
division will then descend into the ditch, and turning to its 
left, storm the breach in the flank of the bastion of 8^*^ 
Maria, while the storming party of the 4th division will 
likewise descend into the ditch, and storm the breach in the 
face of the bastion of La Trinidad. 

" The firing parties are to follow immediately in the rear 
of their respective storming parties. 

* Major General Colville will observe that a part of the advance of the 
4th division must be allotted to storm the new breach in the curtain.* 

" 15. The heads of the two divisions will follow their 
advanced guards, keeping nearly together, but they will not 
advance beyond the shelter afforded by the quarries on the 
left of the road, till they shall have seen the heads of the 
advanced guards ascend the breaches : they will then move 
forward to the storm in double quick time. 

‘ The place here pointed out may be too distant. The heads of the columns 
should be brought as near as they can without being exposed to fire.* 

^ 16. If the Light division should find the bastion of 
Maria entrenched, they will turn the right of the entrench- 
ment, by moving along the parapet of the bastion. The 
4th division will do the same by an entrenchment which 
appears in the left face, looking from the trenches of the 
bastion of La Trinidad. 

" 17. The Light division, as soon as they are in posses- 
sion of the rampart of Maria, are to turn to their left, 
and to proceed along the rampart to their left, keeping 
always a reserve at the breach. 

^ 18. The advanced guard of the 4th division are to turn 
to their left, and to keep up the communication with the 
Light division. The 4tli division arc to turn to their right, 
and to communicate with the 3rd division, by the bastion of 
San Pedro, and the demi-bastion of San Antonio, taking 
care to keep a reserve at the bastion of La Trinidad. 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


35 


" 19. Each (the 4th and Light) division must leave 1000 
men in reserve in the quarries. 

* It will be necessary for the commanding officer of the Light division to 

attend to the ditch on his left as he makes his attack. He should post 
a detachment in the ditch towards the salient angle of the bastion 
of Maria, so as to be covered by the angle from the fire of the next 
bastion on its left, looking from the trenches.’ 

" 20. The 4th division must endeavour to get open the 
gate of La Trinidad ; the Light division must do the same 
by the gate called Puerto del Pilar. 

^21. The soldiers must leave their knapsacks in camp. 

^22. In order to aid these operations, the howitzers in 
No. 4 are to open a fire upon the batteries constructed by 
the enemy to fire upon the breach, as soon as the officers 
shall observe that the enemy arc aware of the attack, which 
they must continue till they see that the 3rd division arc in 
possession of the castle. 

‘ Some signal must be arranged between the commanding officer of the 
artillery and the officer who shall command the attack on the castle, for 
ceasing the fire in No. 4.’ 

" 23. The commanding officer in the trenches is to attack 
the ravelin of San Roque with 200 of the covering party, 
moving from the right of the second parallel, and round the 
right of the ravelin, looking from the trenches, and attack- 
ing the barriers and gates of communication between the 
ravelin and the bridge ; while 200 men likewise of the 
covering party will rush from the right of the sap into the 
salient angle of the covered-way of the ravelin, and keep up 
a fire on its faces. These last should not advance from the 
sap, till the party to attack the gorge of the ravelin shall 
have turned it. That which will move into the covered-way 
on the right of the ravelin looking from the trenches, ought 
not to proceed further down than the angle formed by the 
face and the flank. 

* It would be better that this attack should move from the right of the sap. 

The commanding officer in the trenches must begin it as soon as he shall 
observe that the attack of the 3rd division on the castle is perceived by 
the enemy,’ 

' 24. The remainder of the covering party to be a reserve 
in the trenches. The working parties in the trenches are to 
join their regiments at half past seven o’clock, 

' Twelve carpenters with axes, and ten miners with crow- 

D 2 



36 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


bars must be with each (the 4th and Light) division. A 
party of one officer and 20 artillerymen must be with each 
division. 

‘ 25. The 5th division must be formed, one brigade on 
the ground occupied by the 48th regiment ; one brigade on 
the Sierra del Viento ; and one brigade in the low grounds 
extending to the Guadiana, now occupied by the piquets of 
the Light division. 

^ 26. The piquets of the brigades on the Sierra del Viento, 
and that in the low grounds towards the Guadiana, should 
endeavor to alarm the enemy during the attack by firing 
at the Pardaleras, and at the men in the covered-way of the 
works towards the Guadiana. 

‘ A plan has been settled with Lieut. General Leith for an attempt to he 
made to escalade the bastion of San Vicente, or the curtain between that 
bastion and the bridge, if circumstances should permit. The command- 
ing officer of the Light division will attend to this. 

* General Power will likewise make a false attack on the tete-de*pont.’ 

" 27. The Commander of the Forces particularly requests 
the General Officers commanding divisions and brigades, 
and the Commanding Officers of regiments, and the Officers 
commanding companies, to impress upon their men the ne- 
cessity of their keeping together, and formed as a military 
body after the storm, and during the niglit. Not only the 
success of the operation, and the honor of the army, but 
their own individual safety, depend upon their being in a 
situation to repel any attack by the enemy, and to overcome 
all resistance which they may be inclined to make, till the 
garrison are completely subdued. 

^ Wellington.’ 

To the Earl of Liverpool Secretary of State. 

^ My Lord, ‘ Camp before Badajoz, 7th April, 1812, 

" My dispatch of the 3rd instant will have apprized your 
Lordship of the state of the operations against Badajoz to 
that date ; which were brought to a close on the night of the 
6th, by the capture of the place by storm. 

" The fire continued during the 4th and 5th against the 
face of the bastion of La Trinidad, and the flank of the 
bastion of Maria ; and on the 4th, in the morning, we 
opened another battery of six guns in the second parallel 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


37 


against the shoulder of the ravelin of San Koque, and the 
wall in its gorge. 

^ Practicable breaches were effected in the bastions above 
mentioned on the evening of the 5th ; but as I had observed 
that the enemy had entrenched the bastion of La Trinidad, 
and the most formidable preparations were making for the 
defence, as well of the breach in that bastion, as of that in 
the bastion of Maria, 1 determined to delay the attack 
for another day, and to turn all the guns in the batteries in 
the second parallel on the curtain of La Trinidad ; in hopes 
that by effecting a third breach, the troops would be en- 
abled to turn the enemy’s works for the defence of the other 
two ; the attack of which would besides be connected by the 
troops destined to attack the breach in the curtain. 

^ This breach was effected in the evening of the 6th, and 
the fire of the face of the bastion of Maria, and of the 
flank of the bastion of La Trinidad being overcome, I deter- 
mined to attack the place that night. 

^ I had kept in reserve in the neighborhood of this camp, 
the 5th division under Lieut. General Leith, which had left 
Castille only in the middle of March, and had but lately 
arrived in this part of the country ; and I brought them up 
on that evening. The plan for the attack was, that Lieut. 
General Picton should attack the castle of Badajoz by esca- 
lade with the 3rd division ; and a detachment from the 
guard in the trenches furnished that evening by the 4th 
division, under Major Wilson of the 48tli Regiment, should 
attack the ravelin of San Roque upon his left, while the 4th 
division under Major General the Hon. C. Colville, and the 
Light division under Lieut. Colonel Barnard, should attack 
the breaches in the bastions of La Trinidad and Maria, 
and in the curtain by which they arc connected. The 5th 
division were to occupy the ground which the 4th and Light 
divisions had occupied during the siege ; and Lieut. General 
Leith was to make a false attack upon the outwork called 
the Pardaleras ; and another on the works of the fort to- 
wards the Guadiana, with the left brigade of the division 
under Major General Walker, which he was to turn into a 
real attack, if circumstances should prove favorable; and 
Brigadier General Power, who invested the place with his 
Portuguese brigade on the right of the Guadiana, was di. 



38 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


reeled to make false attacks on the tete-de-pont, the Fort 
San Christovah and the new redoubt called Mon Coeur. 

" The attack was accordingly made at ten at night ; Lieut. 
General Picton preceding by a few minutes the attacks 
by the remainder of the troops. Major General Kempt led 
this attack, which went out from the right of the first paral- 
lel. He was unfortunately wounded in crossing the river 
Ilivillas below the inundation ; but notwithstanding this cir- 
cumstance, and the obstinate resistance of the enemy, the 
castle was carried by escalade ; and the 3rd division esta- 
blished in it at about half past eleven. 

" While this was going on. Major Wilson of the 48th car- 
ried the ravelin of San Roque by the gorge, with a detach- 
ment of 200 men of the guard in the trenches ; and with the 
assistance of Major Squire, of the Engineers, established 
himself within that work. 

^ The 4th and Light divisions moved to the attack from 
the camp along the left of the river Rivillas, and of the 
inundation. They were not perceived by the enemy, till 
they reached the covered-way ; and the advanced guards of 
the two divisions descended without difficulty into the ditch 
protected by the fire of the parties stationed on the glacis 
for that purpose ; and they advanced to the assault of the 
breaches led by their gallant officers, with the utmost intre- 
pidity. But such was the nature of the obstacles prepared 
by the enemy at the top and behind the breaches, and so 
determined their resistance, that our troops could not esta- 
blish themselves within the place. Many brave officers and 
soldiers were killed or wounded by exj)losions at the top of 
the breaches ; others who succeeded to them were obliged to 
give way, having found it impossible to penetrate the obsta- 
cles which the enemy had prepared to impede their progress. 
These attempts were repeated till after twelve at night; 
when, finding that success was not to be attained, and that 
Lieut. General Picton was established in the castle, I or- 
dered that the 4th and Light divisions might retire to the 
ground on which they had been first assembled for the 
attack. 

' In the mean time, Lieut. General Leith had pushed for- 
ward Major General Walker’s brigade on the left, supported 
by the 38th regiment under Lieut. Colonel Nugent, and the 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


39 


15th Portuguese regiment under Colonel 'Do Rego, and he 
had made a false attack upon the Pardaleras with the 8th 
caqadores under Major Hill. Major General Walker forced 
the barrier on the road of Olivenga, and entered the covered- 
way on the left of the bastion of San Vicente, close to the 
Guadiana. He there descended into the ditch, and esca- 
laded the face of the bastion of San Vicente. Lieut. Ge- 
neral Leith supported this attack by the 38th regiment, and 
1 5th Portuguese regiment ; and our troops being thus esta- 
blished in the castle, which commands all the works of the 
town, and in the town ; and the 4th and Light divisions 
being formed again for the attack of the breaches, all resist- 
ance ceased ; and at daylight in the morning, the Governor, 
General Pliilippon, who had retired to Fort San Christoval, 
surrendered, together with General Vielande, and all the 
Staff, and the whole garrison. I have not got accurate re- 
turns of the strength of the garrison, or of the number of 
prisoners. But General Philippon has informed me that it 
consisted of 5000 men at the commencement of the siege, of 
which 1200 were killed or wounded during the operations ; 
besides those lost in the assault of the place. There were 
five French battalions, besides two of the regiment of 
Hesse Darmstadt, and the artillery, engineers, &c. ; and I 
understand there arc 4000 prisoners. 

^ It is impossible that any expressions of mine can convey 
to your Lordship the sense which I entertain of the gallan- 
try of the officers and troops upon this occasion. The list 
of killed and wounded will show that the General officers, 
the Staff* attached to them, the Commanding, and other 
Officers of the regiments, put themselves at the head of the 
attacks which they severally directed, and set the example of 
gallantry which was so well followed by their men. 

^ Marshal Sir William Beresford assisted me in conduct- 
ing the details of this siege ; and I am much indebted to him 
for the cordial assistance which I received from him, as well 
during its progress, as in the last operation which brought 
it to a termination. 

^ The duties in the trenches were conducted successively 
by Major General the Hon. C. Colville, Major General 
Bowes, and Major General Kempt, under the superintend- 
ence of Lieut. General Picton. I have had occasion to men- 



40 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


tion all these officers during the course of the operations ; 
and they all distinguished themselves, and were all wounded 
in the assault. I am particularly obliged to Lieut. General 
Picton for the manner in which he arranged the attack of 
the castle ; for that in which he supported the attack, and 
established his troops in that important post. 

" Lieut. General Leith’s arrangements for the false attack 
upon the Pardaleras, and that under Major General Walker, 
were likewise most judicious ; and he availed himself of the 
circumstances of the moment, to push forward and support 
the attack under Major General Walker, in a manner highly 
creditable to him. The gallantry and conduct of Major 
General Walker, who was also wounded, and that of the 
officers and troops under his command, were conspicuous. 

^ The arrangements made by Major General the Hon. C. 
Colville for the attack by the 4th division, were very judi- 
cious ; and he led them to the attack in the most gallant 
manner. 

^ In consequence of the absence on account of sickness, of 
Major General Vandeleur, and of Colonel Beckwith, Lieut. 
Colonel Barnard commanded the Light division in the as- 
sault, and distinguished himself not less by the manner in 
which he made tlie arrangements for that operation, than by 
his personal gallantry in its execution. 

‘ I have also to mention Brig. General Harvey of the Por- 
tuguese service, commanding a brigade in the 4th division, 
and Brig. General Chainpelinond, commanding the Portu- 
guese brigade in the 3rd division, as highly distinguished. 
Brig. General Harvey was wounded in the storm. 

^ Your Lordship will sec in the list of killed and wounded 
a list of the Commanding Officers of regiments. In Lieut. 
Colonel Macleod of the 43rd regiment, who was killed in 
the breach. His Majesty has sustained the loss of an officer 
who was an ornament to his profession, and was capable of 
rendering the most important services to the country. I 
must likewise mention Lieut. Colonel Gibbs of the 52nd, 
who was wounded, and Major O’Harc of the 95th, unfor- 
tunately killed in the breach ; Lieut. Colonel Elder of the 
3rd, and Major Algeo of the 1st Ca^adores. Lieut. Colonel 
Harcourt of the 40th, likewise wounded, was highly distn- 
guished ; and Lieut. Colonels Blakeney of the Royal Eusi- 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


41 


liers, Knight of the 27th, Erskinc of the 48th, and Captain 
Leaky, who commanded the 23rd Fusiliers, Lieut. Colonel 
Ellis having been Avounded during the previous operation of 
the siege. 

^ In the 5th division I must mention Major Hill of the 8th 
Caqadores, who directed the false attack upon the fort Par- 
daleras. It was impossible for any men to behave better 
than these did. 

^ I must likewise mention Lieut. Colonel Brooke of the 
4th regiment, and Lieut. Colonel the Hon. G. Carleton of 
the 44th, and Lieut. Colonel Gray of the 30th, who was 
unfortunately killed. The 2nd batt. 38th regiment under 
Lieut. Colonel Nugent, and the 15th Portuguese regiment 
under Colonel Luiz do Rego, likewise performed their part 
in a very exemplary manner. 

‘ The officers and troops in the 3rd division have dis- 
tinguished themselves as usual in these operations. Lieut. 
General Picton has reported to me particularly the conduct 
of Lieut. Colonel Williams of the 60th, Lieut. Colonel Ridge 
of the 5th, who was unfortunately killed in the assault of the 
castle; Lieut. Colonel Forbes of the 45th, Lieut. Colonel 
Fitzgerald of the 60th, Lieut. Colonel the Hon. R. Le P. 
Trench, and Lieut. Colonel Manners of the 74th; Major 
Carr of the 83rd, and Major the Hon. H. Pakenhain, Assist- 
ant Adjutant General to the 3rd division. He has likewise 
particularly reported the good conduct of Colonel Campbell 
of the 94th, commanding Major General the Hon. Charles 
Colville’s brigade, during his absence in command of the 4th 
division, whose conduct I have so repeatedly had occasion to 
report to your Lordship. 

^The officers and men of the corps of engineers and artil- 
lery Avere equally distinguished during the operations of the 
siege and in its close. 

" Lieut. Colonel Fletcher continued to direct the works, 
(notwithstanding that he was wounded in the sortie made by 
the enemy on the 19th of March,) Avhich Avere carried on by 
Major Squire and Major Burgoyne, under his directions. 
The former established the detachments under Major Wilson, 
in the ravelin of San Roque, on the night of the storm ; the 
latter attended the attack of the 3rd division on the castle. 
I have likeAvise to report the good conduct of Major Jones, 



42 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


Captain Nicholas^ and Captain Williams, of the Royal 
Engineers. 

^ Major Dickson conducted the details of the artillery ser- 
vice during the siege, as well as upon former occasions, under 
the general superintendence of Colonel Framingham, who, 
since the absence of Major General Borthwick, has com- 
manded the artillery with the army. 

‘ I cannot sufficiently applaud the officers and soldiers of 
the Royal and Portuguese Artillery during the siege ; par- 
ticularly that of Lieut. Colonel Robe, who opened the breach- 
ing batteries; Major May, Captain Gardiner, Major Hol- 
combe, and Lieut. Bourchier of the Royal Artillery ; Captain 
de Ketberg of the German, and Major Tulloh of the Portu- 
guese Artillery. 

^ Adverting to the extent of the details of the ordnance 
department during this siege, to the difficulties of the wea- 
ther, &c., with which Major Dickson had to contend, I must 
mention him most particularly to your Lordship. 

" The officers of the Adjutant and Quarter Master Gene- 
rals’ departments rendered me every assistance on this occa- 
sion, as well as those of my personal Staff ; and I have to add 
that I have received reports from the General officers com- 
manding divisions, of the assistance they received from the 
officers of those departments attached to them, the greatest 
number of whom, and of their personal Staff, are wounded. 

" In a former dispatch I reported to your Lordship the 
difficulties with which I had to contend, in consequence of 
the failure of the civil authorities of the province of Alcntejo 
to perform their duty and supply the army with means of 
transport. These difficulties have continued to exist ; but 
I must do Major General Victoria, the Governor of Elvas, 
the justice to report that he, and the troops under his com- 
mand, have made every exertion, and have done every thing 
in their power to contribute to our success. 

^ Marshal Soult left Seville on the 1st instant, with all the 
troops which he could collect in Andalusia ; and he was in 
communication with the troops which had retired from Estre- 
madura, under General Drouet, on the 3rd, and he arrived 
at Llerena on the 4th. I had intended to collect the army 
on the Albuera rivulet, in proportion as Marshal Soult should 
advance ; and 1 had requested Lieut. General Sir Thomas 



1812. 


CAMP BEFORE BADAJOZ. 


43 


Graham to retire gradually upon Albuera, while Lieut. 
General Sir R. Hill should do the same on Talavcra, from 
Don Benito and the upper parts of the Guadiana. 

^ I do not think it certain that Marshal Soiilt has made 
any decided movement from Llerena since the 4th, although 
he has patrolled forward with small detachments of cavalry, 
and the advanced guard of his infantry have been at 
Usagre. 

" None of the army of Portugal have moved to join him. 

" According to the last reports which I have received of 
the 4th instant, from the frontier of Castille, it appears that 
Marshal Marmont had established a body of troops between 
the Agueda and the Coa, and he had reconnaitred Almeida 
on the 3rd. Brig. General Trant’s division of militia had 
arrived upon the Coa, and Brig. General Wilson’s division 
was following with the cavalry, and Lieut. General the 
Conde de Amarantc was on his march, with a part of the 
corps under his command, towards the Douro. 

" It would be very desirable that I should have it in my 
power to strike a blow against Marshal Soult before he 
could be reinforced: but the Spanish authorities having 
omitted to take the necessary steps to provision Ciudad 
Rodrigo, it is absolutely necessary that I should return to 
the frontiers of Castille within a short period of time. It 
is not very probable that Marshal Soult will risk an action 
in the province of Estremadura, which it would not be 
difficult for him to avoid, and it is very necessary that he 
should return to Andalusia, as General Ballesteros was in 
movement upon Seville on the 29th of last month, and the 
Conde de Penne Villemur moving on the same place from 
the Lower Guadiana. 

' It will be quite impossible for me to go into Andalusia 
till I shall have secured Ciudad Rodrigo. I therefore pro- 
pose to remain in the positions now occupied by the troops 
for some days ; indeed a little time is required to take care 
of our wounded ; and if Marshal Soult should remain in 
Estremadura I shall attack him ; if he should retire into 
Andalusia, I must return to Castille. 

" I have the honor to enclose returns of the killed and 
wounded from the 31st March, and in the assault of Bada- 
joz, and a return of the ordnance, small arms, and ammu- 



44 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


nition found in the place. I shall send the returns of pro- 
visions in the place by the next dispatch. This dispatch 
will be delivered to your Lordship by my aide de camp 
Captain Canning, whom I beg leave to recommend to your 
protection. 

^ He has likewise the colors of the garrison, and the 
colors of the Hesse Darmstadt's regiment, to be laid at the 
feet of His Royal Highness the Prince Regent. The French 
battalions in the garrison had no eagles. 

" I have the honor to be, &c, 

* The Earl of Liverpool: ' Wellington. 


Ihturn of the Killed, Wounded, and Missing of the Army under the Command of 
General the Earl of Wellington, KB,, at the Siege arid Capture of Badajoz, 
from the 18/A March to 1th April, 1812, inclusive. 



Officers. 

Serjeants. 

Rank and File, 

Horses. 

Total loss of Officers, 
Non-Commissioned 
Odicers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed • • 

72 

51 

912 

B 

1035 

Wounded . • 

30G 

216 

3265 

H 

3787 

Missing • . . 

— 

1 

62 

■ 

63 


The Portuguese loss is included in the above numbers. 


To His Royal Highness the Commander in Chief, 

^ Sir, ‘ Camp at Badajoz, 7th April, 1812. 

‘ I have the honor to enclose to your Royal Highness 
extracts of dispatches to the Secretary of State, containing 
accounts of the siege and capture of Badajoz by the troops 
under my command. 

" In order to give your Royal Highness a clearer idea 
and a more detailed account of the last operations, I enclose 
a memorandum, with the plan of attack, which 1 gave to 
the General Officers named in it, on the 4th, in order that 
they might thoroughly understand it, and examine the 
ground on which they were to act ; and copies of the alter- 
ations and explanations which I made of the different 
articles up to the evening of the 6th. 









1812. 


CAMP AT BADAJOZ. 


45 


^ I likewise enclose copies of the reports which I have 
received from the several General Officers commanding 
divisions, from the Chief Engineer, and from the Com- 
manding Officer of the Artillery, from which your Royal 
Highness will see in what manner the service was executed, 
and the names of the officers who distinguished themselves. 

' I have the honor to be, &c, 

‘ His Royal Highness ' W ELLINGTON. 

the Commander in Chief' 


To Colonel Torrens. 

^ My DEAR Torrens, ‘ Camp at Badajoz, 7tli April, 1812. 

^ I send by this occasion the accounts of our success before 
Badajoz ; and I have sent to His Royal Highness copies of 
my instructions for the attack, and the reports of the several 
officers commanding divisions, &c., on the execution. 

^ These name officers, and His Royal Highness will judge 
whether it is fit that they should be promoted or noticed. 
I am particularly anxious about General Picton’s aide de 
camp, Captain Stovin *, and his Assistant Adjutant General, 
Major Pakenham f, whom he has particularly mentioned to 
me ; likewise Captain Stuart, of the 95th, the Deputy As- 
sistant Quarter Master General of the Light division ; and 
Major Rowan, the Assistant Adjutant General with the 
same; and Major Broke the Assistant Quarter Master 
General with the 4th division. 

^ Our loss has been very great ; but I send you a letter 
to Lord Liverpool which accounts for itjj. The truth is, 
that, equipped as we are, the British army are not capable 
of carrying on a regular siege. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colonel Torrens: ' Wellington. 

* Colonel Sir Frederick Stovin, K.C.B. 

t Major General the Hon. H. Pakenham, C.B. 

J; Major General Sir C. Broke Vere, K.C.B. 

II A search, hitherto unsuccessful, is being made for this letter. From the 
pricis of it in the Index of 1812, as well as from documents in the Ordnance 
OfHce, it appears that this letter recommended the formation of a corps of 
Sappers and Miners ; the want of such an establishment with the army being 
the chief cause of the great loss in the sieges. 



46 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To the Earl of Liverpool 

^ My Lord, ‘Camp at Badajoz, 7th April, 1812. 

‘ I beg leave to recommend to your Lordship to have 
sent to the Tagus 4000 barrels of gunpowder. There is 
but little of that article remaining in Badajoz ; and the 
siege has expended a large proportion of what was in Elvas, 
which must be replaced from the stores at Lisbon. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ^ Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Camp at Badajoz, 8th April, 1812. 

* It gives me great pleasure to inform your Lordship that 
our numerous wounded officers and soldiers are doing well. 

" I have had great reason to be satisfied with the attention 
paid to them by Dr. M‘Grigor, the Inspector General of 
Hospitals, and the medical gentlemen under his direction, 
and I trust that the loss to the service, upon this occasion, 
will not eventually be great. 

* I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: * W ELLINGTON. 


To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B, 

^ Sir, ‘ Camp at Badajoz, 8ih April, 1812. 

‘ I enclose the copy of a dispatch to the Secretary of State, 
giving an account of the capture of Badajoz by assault. 

‘ I beg that you will communicate to the Spanish Govern- 
ment such parts of this dispatch as you may think proper. 
And I send it by Colonel Don Josef O’Lalor, who has for 
some time been employed with this army, very much to my 
satisfaction, and has been present at all the operations ; and 
can give the Government any farther details which they may 
wish to have. 

" I have requested Lieut. General the Marques de Mon- 
salud to come over here ; and I propose to give him posses- 
sion of the place, and all that it contains. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Rt, Hon. ‘ Wellington. 

Sir H, Wellesley^ K,B: 



1812. 


CAMP AT BADAJOZ. 


47 


To Colonel Torrens. 

‘ My dear Torrens, ‘Camp atBadajoz, 8th April, 1812. 

‘ I send my dispatch on the fall of Badajoz by Captain 
Canning, my aide de camp. I had thought of sending it 
by Lord FitzRoy Somerset, for whom I am very anxious to 
obtain the rank of Lieut. Colonel ; but it would really be so 
inconvenient to me, and to the public service, to be without 
him, that I prefer to trespass upon His Royal Highness’s 
kindness, and to ask him as a favor to promote him, 

" I have more than one claim for promotion for my aides 
de camp, as I have not availed myself of all the opportu- 
nities of which I might have availed myself to send them to 
England with accounts of important events. I hope, there- 
fore, that if His Royal Highness should be favorably dis- 
posed to grant me this request you will make it. 

‘ I likewise wish again to draw the notice of His Royal 
Highness to Major Dickson. I am certain that there is not 
an officer in this army who will not admit that he deserves 
any favor which can be conferred upon him. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colonel Torrens.^ ' Wellington, 


To Marquis Wellesley^ K.G. 

‘ My dear Wellesley, ‘ Camp at Badajoz, 8tli April, 1812. 

‘ I have the pleasure to tell you that we took Badajoz by 
storm on the night of the 6th. Our loss was severe, but it 
is impossible to perform services of this kind without heavy 
loss. I am in great hopes that Ballesteros will likewise get 
into Seville, and if that should be the case, and he destroys 
everything as he ought, the French will be done for in 
Andalusia. 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

* Marquis Wellesley, K.G. ' Wellington. 

‘ P.S, Captain Canning was to have taken this, but he is 
gone without it, and I send it by the post.’ 

To Colonel Austin. 

f SlR^ ‘ Camp at Badajoz, 9th April, 1812. 

‘ I write to the Conde de Penne Villemur to suggest to 
him the expediency of returning to Estremadura, and that 
he should pass by tlie left of the Guadiana. 



48 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


^ In case, however, that he should prefer to pass through 
the kingdom of Portugal, I beg that you will give him pro- 
visions to support his troops to Beja, from whence the Com- 
missary General of this army will provide for him. 

" I enclose the route for the Conde de Penne Villemur, 
and I beg you to fill up the dates and send me a copy of it. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Colonel Austin: ‘ Wellington. 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

^ Sir, ‘Camp at Badajoz, 9th April, 1812. 

‘ In answer to Dom Miguel Forjaz’s note of the 4th in- 
stant, enclosed in your letter of the 6th, I beg that you will 
inform that gentleman that I refer him to my letters on the 
subject of the regulation for means of transport, and to the 
regulation alone, in which he will see that every measure 
which I proposed is frittered away to nothing; that the 
form and words only remain, and tlic spirit of the measure 
is taken away. 

^ I must observe, that this is the mode in which tlie local 
Government of Portugal have acted by me for the last two 
years. They are apprehensive of the displeasure of their 
Prince and of the country, if they openly object to what is 
proposed ; but they carry it into execution in such a manner 
as to depriv^c it of all chance of success. 

^ I purpose not to give myself any further trouble about 
this or any other arrangement ; and the local Government 
will act as they may think proper. 

‘ I give them notice, however, first, that they will lose the 
fortress of Elvas, if they do not take measures to carry up 
to that place the stores which I had provided for the siege 
of Badajoz, which are now at Alcac^er do Sal ; as, for want 
of those stores, I have been obliged to use the stores in 
Elvas. Secondly; that they will lose Badajoz, if they do 
not take measures to provide me with the means of trans- 
port to supply that place with stores for its defence. 

‘ I beg that this warning may be recollected, and that it 
may be understood, that from this time forward, I consider 
myself in no manner responsible for the safety of either place, 
' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ‘ W E lli NGTON. 

Charles Stuart: 



1812. 


CAMP AT BADAJOZ. 


49 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

^ My Lord, ‘Camp at Badajoz, 9th April, 1812. 

‘ I have had the honor of receiving your Lordship’s letter 
of the 11th February, in regard to the relief of 2iid battalions 
of this army. 

‘ As soon as the 2nd batt. 4th regiment shall arrive, I 
shall send away two of the 2nd battalions ordered by Ilis 
Royal Highness. The 2nd batt. 52nd is already gone, 
under Ilis Royal Iligliness’s former orders ; and the 2nd 
battalions of the 5th, 38th, and 42nd regiments shall go as 
soon as the 1st battalions of those regiments shall arrive. 

‘ There will then remain three 2nd battalions in tliis 
country, which His Royal Highness is desirous should cpiit 
it, and they shall go as soon as I shall receive orders to send 
them ; and I beg your Lordship will state to wliat part of 
the world the several battalions are to be sent, when tlicy 
shall cpiit this country. 

‘ Your Lordship and His Royal Highness arc the best 
judges of what description of troops it is expedient that 
this army should be composed. I beg leave, however, to 
submit, that some of the best and most experienced soldiers 
in this army, the most healthy and capable of bearing 
fatigue, arc in the 2nd battalions. The 2nd batts. 53rd, 
31st, and GGth, for instance, arc much more cilicient, and 
have always more men for duty in proportion to their gross 
numbers, and fewer sick, than any of the 1st battalions 
recently arrived which had been in W alcheren ; and it is 
certain that this army will not be so strong by the exchange 
of new for old soldiers. 

‘ I have tliought it proper to submit this matter to your 
Lordship, assuring you at the same time that it is entirely 
indifferent to me ; and that whatever orders I shall receive 
upon the subject will be immediately obeyed. 

‘ I ordered General Cooke to occupy Tarifa as soon as I 
received your Lordship’s directions; but, as the Spanish 
Government had reinforced General Ballesteros at my re- 
quest, and had reduced for that purpose the Spanish force 
at Cadiz, referring, at the same time, to the state of the 
British force at that station, they objected to send a detach- 
ment to Tarifa at present. 

VOL. IX. 



50 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


‘ As, however, the object for which General Ballesteros 
was reinforced is accomplished, I conclude that the Spanish 
troops will be recalled to Cadiz ; and I have desired General 
Cooke to obey your Lordship’s orders. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

' The Earl of Liverpool: . ‘WELLINGTON. 


To Major General . 

SiK, ‘ Camp at Badajoz, 10th April, 1812. 

^ I beg to refer you to my instructions of the 5th ultimo 
from Frcneda, in which you will see that, in case the enemy 
followed your march (roin Ciudad Rodrigo, you were to move 
gradually, and you were not directed to proceed farther than 
Castcllo Branco without furtlicr orders. 

' I cannot consider movements to be gradual which brought 
you from Val do Lobos to Gastello Branco in two days. 

' You have now crossed the Tagus at Villa Velha with- 
out orders, and you propose to destroy the bridge at that 
place. 

' It does not appear from your letters whether you had or 
not received the orders of the Quarter Master General of 
the 8th instant, to halt at Gastello Branco, or to return 
tliither if you had left that place ; and I cannot tell whether 
you will obey that order or not. 

‘ If, upon the receipt of this letter, you have no positive 
intelligence that the enemy arc actually in Gastello Branco, 
you will march there, and act according to the orders con- 
tained in the letter from the Quarter Master General of the 
8th instant. 

' You are not to interfere in any manner with the bridge at 
Villa Velha. 1 send an officer there to take up the bridge if 
it should be necessary, and to remove the boats to a station 
below Villa Velha on this side of the Tagus, from which they 
can afterwards be moved up again, and formed into a bridge 
for tlie service of the army. 

^ The troops will move in the morning. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

Wellington. 


* Major General 



1812. 


CAMP AT BADAJOZ. 


51 


To Colonel Torrens. 

‘ My dkar Torrkns, ‘ Camp at Badajoz, lOtli April, 1812. 

‘ 111 my last letters I omitted to recommend to His Royal 
Highness’s favor Captain Nicholas of tlie Engineers, be- 
cause he is so desperately wounded that I thought it impos- 
sible he could live, but I understand that he is likely to do 
well*; and it is but justice to him to make known his merits 
to His Royal Highness. 

" Lieut, Colonel Fletcher has likewise requested me to re- 
commend Captain Ellicombe of the Engineers. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colmel Torrens. ^ Wellington. 

P.H. It would be very desirable to get back to their duty 
in this country all tlie officers absent in England for various 
causes. I have really more to do than I can manage.’ 

To Lieut. General Sir R. Hill K.B. 

‘ My DEAR Hill, ‘ Camp before Barlajoz, lltli April, 1812. 

" I heard yesterday evening that some of MarmonCs troops 
had crossed the Coa, and had appeared on this side of Sa- 
bugal on the 8th ; it is even said that they were that night 
at Penamacor. It is therefore necessary that I should re- 
turn to that side of the Tagus, and I have put some of the 
troops in motion this day. 

‘ It is desirable that General Long’s brigade should move 
forward to Villa Franca and Zafra, having posts of observa- 
tion at Idera, Usagre, and Bienvenida, in order to relievo 
General Anson’s brigade, which are following and observ- 
ing the enemy. Major General Long must take care not 
to engage himself in any affair of consequence, but must fall 
back iq)on you in case of necessity. 

" You will judge of the best place to put your corps in to 
fulfil the following objects, for the present. My own opinion 
is, that your infantry should be in Almendralejo, Azauchal, 
&c., and your light cavalry as above pointed out, and your 
Portuguese cavalry on the north side of the Guadiana ; I 
propose, besides, to attach a brigade of heavy cavalry to 

E 2 


♦ He died of his wounds. 



52 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


Sir William Erslcine’s division, which should be in the best 
situation for forage, &c. 

' My wish is to put Badajoz in a state of defence again as 
soon as possible, and Lieut. Colonel Fletcher is setting to 
work upon it, and that you should cover the place with your 
corps while the work will be going on. Either General 
Spry’s or General Power s brigade, and the 22nd Portu- 
guese regiment, will be in the place as a garrison, and to 
work upon it, till Penne Villemur and Morillo shall return 
from tlie Condado, and two companies of Portuguese and 
one of British artillery to set the ordnance, &c., to rights. 

^ Of course, if the enemy should attempt to play tricks 
with small corps, you will fall upon them : if they should 
advance in force, I recommend to you to occupy the place 
with the tlirce regiments above mentioned, and with your 
corps to occupy the position of Engracia, having your 
right protected by the redoubt Mon Cocur, or the French 
redoubt, which we re-established during the siege. You 
might have the ground looked at to see where you could 
place your left with advantage, and where it would be ex- 
pedient to throw up works to enable you to defend the 
ground more easily ; you might also have the ground opened 
to see how it would work, in order to determine wliether it 
would be necessary to construct such works beforehand ; and 
if it should not be necessary, it would always be an advan- 
tage to delay them to the last moment. 

^ As it appears that it would be impossible for the enemy 
to assemble so large a corps in this country as to distress 
you in that position, without my having previous knowledge 
of their intention ; and considering that you would be sur- 
rounded by strong places, and would have the choice of the 
use of either side of the river for your communications, I 
should wish that that position should be considered as one 
to be maintained, unless the enemy should be in such 
strength as to render the maintaining it very uncertain. 

" When Morillo and Penne Villemur shall arrive, the 
Spaniards will give the garrison of the fort ; and General 
Spry's brigade, and 22nd regiment, might remove to Elvas, 
if not wanted for work, or encamp near the fort, if required 
for work by Lieut. Colonel Fletcher. 

' I think also, that when you arc in your position at 



1812. 


BADAJOZ. 


53 


Altnendralejo, &c., it might be expedient to encamp one 
British brigade at Badajoz, on the dry ground near the 
breach, in order to assist in the work. 

‘ I leave in Badajoz camp equipage for 14,000 mcn^ of 
which you will make such use as you please. 

^ Let me have as soon as you can, returns of the number 
of masons, bricklayers, carpenters, sawyers, wheelwrights, 
miners, and smiths in each of the regiments, British and 
Portuguese, in the 2nd and General Hamilton’s divisions. 

" I am going into Badajoz this day, and I sliall set out for 
Portalegrc, cither the day after to-morrow, or the next day, 
according to tlie intelligence which 1 shall receive from Cas- 
tello Branco. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut. General " WELLINGTON. 

^ir R. HiJh ICB: 

To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley y K.B. 

^ Sir, ‘ Badajoz, lltli April, 1812. 

" On the morning that Badajoz fell, I desired General 
Alava to write to the Conde de Penne Villernur, to acquaint 
him with that event and to desire him to communicate it to 
General Ballesteros. I likewise desired that the Conde de 
Penne Villernur might be prepared to march again into this 
province ; a measure which 1 have since suggested to him 
in a letter whicli 1 wrote to him on the 8th instant ; and I 
requested that the Conde de Penne Villernur would apprize 
General Ballesteros of my opinion, that it was probable that 
the enemy would return into Andalusia immediately ; and of 
the fact that, owing to the state of affairs on the frontiers of 
Castille, it was out of my power to follow them into that 
kingdom. 

^ The enemy have since acted as I supposed. They had 
collected about 30,000 men at, and in the neighborhood of 
Villa Franca, 6n the 8th instant; and they retired on the 
9th, as soon as they heard of the fall of Badajoz. 

^You have been informed of the causes which render 
necessary my return to the frontiers of Castille. The enemy 
have not only blockaded Ciudad Rodrigo, but they have 
moved some troops into Lower Beira. A small force could 
get the better of the latter ; but I shall not be able to relieve 



54 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


Ciudad Kodrigo without taking with me such a proportion 
of the army as would leave too small a force for the expedi- 
tion into Andalusia ; to which I have to add, that I must 
collect a body of troops near this jdace to protect it till the 
breaches in its works shall be repaired, and to aid in the 
repair of the breaches. 

‘ I do not think it probable that I shall have another 
opportunity of relieving the Andalusias from the enemy, by 
the most certain mode, the movement of a superior body of 
troops into that kingdom. But I am convinced that the 
Hegency will see the impossibility of attempting it at the 
present moment, and the causes which have led to that 
impossibility. 

" If Ciudad Rodrigo had been provisioned as I had a right 
to expect, tlierc was notliing to prevent me from marcliing 
to Seville at the head of 40,000 men, the moment the siege 
of Badajoz was concluded. 

" If I were to march there under existing circumstances, 
tlie formidable position which 1 liave acquired with so many 
sacrifices would undoubtedly be lost, and, with that position, 
all the objects of the expedition into Andalusia. It remains 
then to be seen what is to be done under existing circum- 
stances. 

‘ First ; I request you to inform the Regency, that it is 
absolutely necessary that a garrison should be provided for 
Badajoz without loss of time. I understand that tlie regi- 
ments of Zamora, El Roy, Navarra, and the battalion del 
General (now called of Cadiz), belonging to the r)th army, 
taken to Cadiz last year by the Captain General Blake, are 
still at that place, and it is desirable that they, and a body 
of 300 artillerymen, should be sent round to Setuval without 
loss of time, to become the foundation of the garrison, which 
should consist of 5000 men. 

' It is quite impossible for me to furnish any part of the 
garrison ; and the place must be destroyed if the Spanish 
Government will not garrison it. 

" Secondly ; it is desirable that General Ballesteros should 
keep himself in safety, under Gibraltar, &c. ; but should be 
prepared to advance upon Seville, in case the enemy should 
move into this province in strength in order to attack Badajoz. 

^ Thirdly ; it is absolutely necessary that the Conde de 



1812. 


BADAJ 


llllllllllllllllllllll 

5244 

Penne Villemur and General murmu suuuiu lutuix* luuw 
Estremadura, as well as the garrison for Badajoz ; as other- 
wise, you will observe that there arc no troops in this pro- 
vince to re-establish the authority of the Government. 

^ But these measures will not be sufficient ; as it may be 
depended upon, that, notwithstanding all that I shall do to 
weaken the enemy as much as may be in my power, they will 
collect their forces when the harvest will be on the ground, 
and they will be certain of subsistence for their army, in 
order to remove the inconveniences which they will feel 
from our early successes ; and it must be expected that they 
will be too strong for me. 

^ Under these circumstances, it is most desirable that 
some diversion should, if possible, be made in my favor on 
the eastern coast. 

" I enclose the copy of a letter which I have lately received 
from the Secretary of State, enclosing one from Lord William 
Bentinck, of the 25th ot January ; and the answer of the 
Earl of Liverpool, and my opinion on tlie proposed plan of 
operations on the eastern coast of Spain, in a letter to Lord 
William Bentinck, of the 2 1th of March. 

^ Since I wrote that letter, Lord Frederick Bentinck has 
arrived here with other letters from Lord William Bentinck 
and Admiral Sir Edward Pellew, of which 1 enclose copies. 

^ I propose to urge Lord William Bentinck in the strong- 
est manner to undertake the expedition to the coast of Ca- 
talonia. 

" I am about to send my battering train of artillery to 
Gibraltar, to be put in order for him; and early in tlic 
month of June I will likewise send there British and Por- 
tuguese artillerymen, engineer officers, and such other assist- 
ance of every description as I can afford him. 

^ But I still fear that he will be too weak to undertake 
even the smaller object of the two recommended to his 
attention, and 1 have not the means of reinforcing him. I 
beg leave, therefore, to suggest to you the expediency of 
proposing to the Regency : 

‘ Fourthly; that 3000 men of General Roche’s division at 
Alicante, and 3000 men of General Whittingham’s division 
at Majorca, should be prepared to be embarked early in 
June, in order to join and co-operate on the Eastern coast 



56 PORTUGAL. 1812. 

with the troops under Lord William Bentinck, which will 
come from Sicily. 

' If the Spanish Government will consent to this proposal, 
I will take care that transports shall be at Alicante and in 
Majorca early in June, to take these troops to their des- 
tination. 

^ Lord Frederick Bentinck will return to Sicily in a few 
dayS;, and I will desire liim to go to Cadiz to receive from 
you the decision of the Government on this proposition, in 
order that he may carry to Lord William Bentinck the 
fullest information regarding the assistance to his opera- 
tions whicli he may expect in the Peninsula. 

If Lord William Bentinck should be made sufficiently 
strong, it, is prol)ablc that w'e shall succeed in opening a 
communication between the fleet and the ])atriots in Cata- 
lonia, and the \var will revive in that principality and tliere 
is a chance of recovering Valencia. At all events, a diver- 
sion ol* the enemy’s force must be created for my operations ; 
without which, I shall have upon me the armies of Portugal, 
the South, and Centre, and that of Suchet. 

‘ 1 have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The lh)rht Hnrf. ‘ Wkluington. 

Sir IL IVellesIcij, K,Bh 


To General Victoria, 

^ Sir, ‘ Elvas, 13ili April, 1812. ' 

It is desirable that you should take measures to have 
brought into the fort, and lodged in the stores at Elvas, the 
shot, and other military stores, now at the flying bridge. 

‘ Major Dickson will communicate with you upon this 
subject. 1 shall likewise be much obliged to you, if you will 
take measures to have taken out of the water, placed upon 
their carriages, and drawn into Elvas, the five boats now 
formed into the two flying bridges, with all the materials 
belonging to them. 

‘ There are in Badajoz fifteen pontoons, which the Go- 
vernment has given to me ; and I shall be very much obliged 
to you, if you will make arrangements to have them drawn 
into Elvas ; each pontoon will require six bullocks to draw 
it, but it will not be necessary to draw ^the whole at once. 



1812. 


NIZA. 


57 


Colonel Fletcher will communicate with you on these two 
last subjects. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ General Victoria: * Wellington. 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K,B. 

< gjR^ ‘ Portalegre, 15tli April, 1812. 

‘ This letter will be delivered to you by Prince Reus, an 
Austrian officer, who is desirous of entering the Spanish 
service ; and as his character is well known to Sir Thomas 
(iraham, who speaks of him in the highest terms, I beg 
leave to recommend him to your notice, and I trust that you 
will be good enough to forward his views as much as may be 
in your power. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H Welledey, K.B: 


To J. Bissetty Esq., Commissary General, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Niza, 15th April, 1812. 

' I enclose a letter and its enclosures from the Secretary 
of State, which I beg you to peruse and return to me, and 
to let me have your opinion on the plan proposed. 

‘ I think we shall get some money, or, at all events, pay 
some debts^ by this scheme. 

Believe me, &c. 

‘ /. Bissetty Esq: < WELLINGTON. 


To Major General . 

Sir, ‘ Niza, 15th April, 1812. 

‘ I received last night your letter of the 13th, and this day 
that of the 14th. 

^ I will hereafter reply to that part of the first which refers 
to your justification of your own conduct, confining myself 
now to telling you that it is by no means satisfactory; and 
that you have disobeyed my instructions in three instances, 
in all of which they were clear. I have also to observe, that 
if you had obeyed them, the enemy would, probably, never 
have passed the Coa. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

\Major\General / WELLINGTON. 



58 


PORTUGAL. 


1812. 


To the Earl of Liverpool* 

^ My Lord, ‘ Niza, I5th April, 1812. 

I have received your Lordship’s letter of the 18th 
March, enclosing the Order in Council of the 4th March, 
relative to the residence of the partners of British com- 
mercial houses in parts of Spain occupied by the enemy. 

^ I am much afraid that the effect of this Order in Council, 
if the British troops should ever enter into the heart of 
Spain, will be to afford the protection of the British Govern- 
ment to Spanish and British subjects who have exerted 
themselves to support the usurpation of the enemy, and 
have done more to establish the enemy’s government in 
Spain than any other description of persons. I know some 
who come under this character. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool.' ^ Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool. 

^ My Lord, ‘ Niza, I5th April, 1812. 

" I have the honor to enclose the copy of a letter from the 
Prince llegent of Portugal, by which I learn that His Royal 
Highness has been pleased to create me Marquez de Torres 
Vedras. 

" I shall be much obliged to your Lordship if you will lay 
this letter before His Royal Highness the Prince Regent, 
and request Ilis Royal Highness’s permission for me to ac- 
cept the honor conferred upon me by His Royal Highness 
the Prince Regent of Portugal. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ' Wellington. 


To Colonel Torrens. 

‘ My dear Torrens, ‘ Niza, I5th April, 1812. 

" I enclose a letter from General H. Clinton (in which he 
proposes a levy of men of inferior size and strength, to per- 
form certain duties, for which men are now necessarily taken 
from the ranks), because I think it proper that every plan of 
this description should come under the view of the Com- 
mander in Chief, particularly when it proceeds from a re- 
spectable officer ; but I acknowledge that I do not think the 
plan would have the effect expected from it. 



1812 , 


NIZA. 


59 


" First ; I do not think that the men to be formed into 
these battalions would be very trustworthy. If they should 
not be so, the medical gentlemen will not like to use them 
as orderlies in the hospitals, nor the captains of companies, 
nor others entitled to batmen, be induced to trust them in 
that capacity. It will not be easy to prevent soldiers in the 
regular regiments from being so employed. 

' Secondly ; I am afraid that, with all our care, we have at 
this moment, in every regiment, men of the description men- 
tioned by General Clinton. Sometimes they are employed 
as batmen and orderlies, but generally they are too weak 
even for these duties. Surely, if we have men 'of that de- 
scription in all the regiments, there is no use in raising 
entire battalions of them. 

" Thirdly ; we have no escorts with convalescents, nor with 
commissariat stores, and very rarely with sick going to hos- 
pitals. The convalescents coming up to the army arc the 
guards for the treasure sent at the same time. Here, there- 
fore, there would be no saving of men. The cattle guards 
require at times the strongest and most active men in the 
regiments. These men arc frequently out at night, and 
their marches are always more fatiguing than those of the 
other soldiers. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colonel Tor mis: ‘ Wellington. 


To Major General Cooke. 

( ‘ Niza, 16th April, 1812. 

" It is really necessary to attend to the orders from Eng- 
land which I have transmitted to you, for the relief of the 
garrison of Tarifa. 

' I conclude that the Spanish Government will now bring 
back to Cadiz part of General Ballesteros’s corps; but, whe- 
ther they do or not, you must send the troops to Tarifa 
according to my direction ; and I beg to have, as soon as 
possible, an account of the state of the works there, and of 
the position which you propose should be taken up and 
defended. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

^[Major General Cooke: ^ Wellington. 



60 


PORTUGAL. 


1812. 


To Major General Cooke, 

f Sir, ‘ Niza, 16th April, 1812. 

‘ Since I wrote to you this morning I have received your 
letter of the Gth instant. 

^ The Commanding Officer at Tarifa is to continue to re- 
ceive ten shillings per diem. 

" I beg that you will apply to Lieut. General Campbell, 
to kave Captain Vavasour, of the Engineers, at Tarifa. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General Cooke' ‘ Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Sir T, Graham^ K.B. 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Niza, leth April, 1812 . Half past 1 p.m. 

‘ I enclose intelligence received from the north and from 
Brito. It appears that Marmont came to Sabugal, and I 
conclude that the river and our advance will induce the 

whole to retire again. I have not heard from General 

this day. 

If Marmont retires, and I can get the convoy into Ciu- 
dad Bodrigo, I am still inclined to try my original plan, and 
in this case I shall halt the army. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ Wellington. 

Sir T. Grahaniy K.B.' 

To Lieut. General Lord William Beniinck. 

* My dear Lord, ‘ Niza, 16 th April, 1812 . 

" I received on the 7th your letter of the 23rd February, 
which you had sent by your brother; and I refer you to one 
which I wrote to you on the 24th March, for my opinion 
on the plan proposed by your Lordship to the Secretary of 
State in your letter of the 25th January, and agreed to by 
the Secretary of State in his dispatch to you of the 4th of 
March. 

^ Since I wrote to you on the 24th March, I have had 
further reason to believe that a diversion on the eastern 
coast will be highly useful during the present campaign, 
and I hope that you will have it in your power to carry your 
proposition into execution. 

‘ 1 enclose the copy of a letter which I have written to my 



1812. 


NIZA. 


61 


brother *, in which you will see the state of affairs here, and 
the measures which I have recommended should be adopted 
in order to add to the strength of your corps. 

^ I besides propose sending to Gibraltar, to join you even- 
tually, some British and Portuguese artillerymen, some 
officers of engineers, and artificers, who may be of use to you. 
I shall likewise send there a battering train on travelling 
carriages, which has lately come from England for my use, 
consisting of twelve 24 pounders; six 18 pounders; and 
twenty 12 pounders ; and thirty travelling carriages for 24 
pounders, for which I shall request General Campbell io 
have guns, &c., fitted. You will find these carriages much 
more manageable in trenches and batteries than those which 
would be furnished from the ships. I hope also to send 
some mortars and howitzers. 

" In respect to time, the period in which your operations 
would be of most use there, would be in the months of June, 
July, and August; say from the third week in June to the 
second week in September : this is the period during which 
the harvest is on the ground, and we may be certain that 
the French will collect their armies in one body. All the 
preparations, therefore, which depend upon me shall be 
made, and every thing at its place early in June. 

" I have recommended to Lord Frederick to return to you, 
and to take from Cadiz accounts of what you may expect. 

^ In consequence of my letter to my brother of the 11th 
you will of course have to send to Gibraltar, Alicante, and 
Majorca, to collect the troops and equipments destined to 
co-operate with you, and for your use. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' Wellington. 

Lord William Bentinck.^ i 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

^ My dear Lord, ‘Niza, 16 th April, 1812 . 

^ I enclose Sir Thomas Graham’s opinion on the spherical 
case shot. Since I wrote to you last upon the subject, I have 
had opportunities of hearing accounts of the effects of this 
description of shot on the garrison during the siege of Ba- 


♦ See page 53. 



62 


PORTUGAL. 


1812. 


dajoz. Several wounded in the hospital have declared that 
they were wounded by these shots ; and I learn from a per- 
son who was in the town during the siege, and had oppor- 
tunities of hearing the French officers talk, that this descrip- 
tion of shot had great effect, and that it was quite impossible 
to keep the men at their guns or at work when they were 
fired. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool » ‘ Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool. 

' My Lord, ‘ Niza, 16th April, 1812. 

" Marshal Soult collected his army at Villa Franca in Estre- 
madura on the 8th instant, and, having there heard of the 
fall of Badajoz, he retired before daylight on the 9th towards 
the frontiers of Andalusia. Lieut. General Sir Thomas 
Graham directed Lieut. General Sir Stapleton Cotton to 
follow their rear with the cavalry, and he attacked and de- 
feated the French cavalry at Villa Garcia, with Major Ge- 
neral Ixj Marchant’s and Major General Anson’s brigades, 
the latter under the command of Lieut. Colonel the Hon. 
F. Ponsonby, on the morning of the 1 1th instant. 

' I have the honor to enclose Lieut. General Sir Thomas 
Graham’s letter, enclosing Sir Stapleton Cotton’s report 

* To General the Earl of Wellington^ K.B, 

^ My Lord, * Santa Marfa, 12th April, 1812. 

‘ 1 have the honor to transmit to your Lordship the enclosed report of Lieut, 
General Sir Stapleton Cotton, giving the detail of a very brilliant and success- 
ful attack against the enemy’s rear guard. It must he unnecessary for me to 
call your Lordship's attention to the distinguished ability with which the Lieut. 
General planned and conducted this enterprise, so admirably seconded by the 
gallantry and judgment of Major General Lc Marchant and Colonel the Hon. F. 
Ponsonby, as well as by the great cxcidion of the officers and men of the two 
brigades employed on this service. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ General ‘ Thomas Graham. 

the Earl of Wellington ^ K.B.* 

To Lieut. General Sir T. Grohtxmf K, B. 

« Sir, ‘ Villa Grac-ia, 11th April, 1812. 

^ I have the honor to report to you that, having received information last night 
Of the cavalry of General Drouet’s corps (amounting to 2500) being encamped 
between Usagre and this place, I ordered Major General Anson’s (commanded 
by Lieut. Colonel the Hon, F, Ponsonby) and Major General Le Marchant’a 
brigades to move in the course of the night from Villa Franca and Los Santos, 



1812. 


NIZA. 


63 


and the return of killed and wounded on this occasion ; and 
I have only to add my commendation of the conduct of Lieut. 
General Sir Stapleton Cotton, Major General Le Marchant, 
and the officers and troops under their command. 

‘ The enemy retired on that day from Llerena, and since 
entir from the province of Estremadura. 

^ I have not yet heard whether General Ballesteros had 
entered Seville. The Conde de Penne Villemur, with a 
detachment of the army which had been sent from Estre- 
madura into the Condado de Niebla, had approached that 

so as to arrive before day-break, the fornaer at Usagre, the latter at Bienvenida^ 
determining to attack the enemy with General Anson’s brigade in front, whilst 
Major General Lc Marchant’s, by a flank movement from Bienvenida, should 
cut off his retreat upon Llerena. The advanced guard of Major General 
Anson’s brigade drove in the enemy’s piquets from near Usagre two hours 
sooner than 1 had intended, and General Le Marchant’s brigade had not time 
to get into the rear of the enemy, who fell back, upon the alarm being given, 
a sufficient distance to secure his retreat upon Llerena. 

‘ Lieut, Colonel Ponsoiiby followed the enemy soon after day-break through 
Villa Garcia, and was skirmishing with him when General Le Marchant’s 
brigade arrived on the other side of the heights between the Llerena road and 
Bienvenida : I desired Colonel Ponsonby would show only three squadrons, and 
endeavor to amuse the enemy in front, until Major General Le Marchant’s 
brigade (which 1 had sent Colonel Elley to conduct under cover of the heights) 
was prepared to attack the enemy in flank: this succeeded admirably ; and the 
enemy, being vigorously attacked, at the same moment, in front and flank^ 
retired in the greatest confusion and disorder. I pursued him with Major 
General Anson’s brigade, and one regiment of Major General Le Marchant’s 
(the 5th dragoon guards), supported by the 3rd and 4th dragoons, to near Lle- 
rena, a divStance of four miles, during which the enemy’s loss in killed was very 
considerable, and about 150 prisoners, including a Lieutenant Colonel, two Cap- 
tains and one Lieutenant, with about 130 horses, were brought off the field. 

‘ The enemy’s cavalry formed on the right, and in rear of seven guns, and 
between 8000 and 10,000 infantry, which had taken up a position on the left of 
and close to the town. The whole soon afterwards retired upon Berlanga and 
Asuaga, to the former of which places my patrols followed them. 

^ I cannot say too much in praise of the gallantry and regularity of the four 
regiments which attacked and pursued the enemy, nor could any thing have ex- 
ceeded the steadiness and good discipline displayed by the 3rd and 4th dragoons 
(commanded by Major Clowes and Colonel Lord Edward Somerset), who sup- 
ported them. 

^ I have to recommend strongly to your notice Major General Le Marchant 
and Lieut. Colonel the Hon. F. Ponsonby, who commanded the two brigades 
with so much gallantry and judgment ; and I have great pleasure in assuring 
you of the good conduct of Lieut. Colonel Hervey, commanding 14th light 
dragoons ; Major Prescott, commanding 5th dragoon guards; Captain Dickens, 
commanding 12th light dragoons; Captain Murray, commanding 16th light 
dragoons ; and Major the Hon. C. Cocks, commanding detachments of ihe 12th 
and 14th light dragoons. 



64 


PORTUGAL. 


1812. 


town by the right of the Guadalquivir, and was engaged 
with the enemy’s garrison of Seville, and of the fortified 
convent on that side of the river, on the 5th, and had obliged 
them to retire within their works. The Condc de Penne 
Villemur retired on the 10th, according to a suggestion 
made to him by me, in consequence of the fall of Badajoz, 
and the certainty that I had that Marshal Soult would 
return immediately into Andalusia, without risking an 
action, which it was not in my power to bring him to ; and I 
trust that the Conde de Penne Villemur will have commu- 
nicated to General Ballesteros the intelligence and sugges- 
tions which I desired might be conveyed to him, and that 
all is secure in that quarter. 

' I have since urged the Conde de Penne Villemur to 
return into Estremadura. 

^ Since I wrote to your Lordship on the 7th instant, I have 
received reports of transactions in the ncigliborliood of 
Ciudad Kodrigo only to the 9th. The enemy still kept tlio 

^ To Lieut, Colonel Elley, my Assistant Adjutant General, I am much in- 
debted for the very great assistance wliich I derived from him, particularly in 
conducting my right column to the point of attack. I beg also to recommend 
to your notice Captain White, my Deputy Assistant Quarter Master General, 
and Captain Baron Decken. 

‘ Herewith I send a list of the killed and wounded, which I am happy to find 
is not great, considering the very superior furce of the enemy. 

* I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ STAin.iiTON Cotton, 

* Lieut, General Lt. Gen. Commanding the Cavalry, 

Sir T, Graham, K,B: 


Return of Killed, fVounded, and Missing, of the First Cavalrg Division of the army 
under the command of General the Earl of JVellington, in an affair with 

the Enemtfs rear guard, near Llerena, on the 11 //i of April, 1812, 



Officers, 

Strjeants. 

Rank and File. 

Horses. 

Total loss of Officers, 
Non-commissioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File, 

Killed . . . 

— 

1 

13 

18 

14 

Wounded . . 

2 

4 

35 

9 

41 

Missing . • , 

— 

— 

2 

1 

2 






1812. 


NIZA. 


65 


place blockaded, but had made no attack upon it, nor had 
they repeated their visit to Almeida, having suffered some 
loss in the reconnaissance of that place on the 3rd instant. 

‘ It appears that on the 3rd instant the greatest number 
of the troops in the neighbourhood of Ciudad Rodrigo broke 
up and marched towards Sabugal, where 1 believe that 

Masrhal Marmont came himself. Major General 

whom I had kept in front of Ciudad Rodrigo with the 1st 
hussars till the end of March, in order to mask the move- 
ment of the army into Estremadura, I hope misunderstood, 
as he disobeyed my instructions in every point. He was 
followed, although at a distance, through Lower Beira, by 
Marshal Marmont’s advanced guard ; and, having quitted 
Castello Branco, contrary to orders, on the 8th instant, the 
enemy being then at Meimoa, twelve leagues distant from 
him, they moved on, and the advanced guard, consisting of 
2500 men, of which six squadrons of cavalry, entered 
Castello Branco on the evening of the 12th; Brig. General 
Le Cor, with his brigade of militia, having been obliged to 
retire upon Sarnadas, when he saw the enemy advance. In 

the mean time, having heard that had crossed the 

Tagus, I ordered him to cross that river again, which he did 
on the 12th, and the enemy retired from Castello Branco 
before daylight on the morning of the 14th, and Brig. Gene- 
ral Le Cor and Major General entered the place. 

^ The enemy have, as usual, in this expedition robbed and 
murdered the inhabitants of the country. But the injury 
which they have done, as far as I can learn, has been con- 
fined to these acts of atrocity, all the stores in our magazine 
at Castello Branco, and our hospital there, having been 
removed to this side of the Tagus. 

‘ I cannot sufficiently applaud the firmness and good con- 
duct of Brig. General Le Cor. He remained in Castello 
Branco till he saw a superior enemy advancing upon him, 
and he then retired in good order no farther than was 
necessary. If my orders had been obeyed by others as well 
as by Brig. General Le Cor, it is probable that the enemy 
would never have passed the Coa, and certainly would never 
have ventured so far as Castello Branco. 

^ As soon as I heard of Soult’s retreat from Villa Franca, 
I put the army in motion towards Castille. The advanced 

VOL. JX. F 



66 PORTUGAL. 1812. 

guard has arrived at Gastello Branco this day^ and I shall 
go there myself to-morrow. 

" Lieut. General Sir R. Hill remains with the 2nd division 
of infantry, and Lieut. General Hamilton’s Portuguese di- 
vision of infantry, and Lieut. General Sir W. Erskine’s 
division of cavalry, consisting of two brigades of British 
and one of Portuguese cavalry in Estremadura; and I 
have placed the regiments of Portuguese infantry which 
were in Elvas and Abrantes for the present in Badajoz, in 
order to repair the works and to garrison the place for a 
short time, till the Spanish Government can provide a 
garrison for it. 

' I have heard of no movement in the north. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ' Wellington. 


To Brig. General Sir N. Trant 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Gastello Branco, 17th April, 1812. 

‘ I arrived here about two hours ago. Marshal Beres- 
ford received your letter of the 13th upon the road; and 
I received that of the 12th from General Bacellar this 
morning. 

^ We shall move on as soon as the troops come up. It 
would appear tliat the French are collecting more force 
upon the Agueda and Coa. You should take care of your- 
selves on Guarda, if they should collect two divisions at or 
in the neighbourhood of Sabugal. Guarda is the most 
treacherous position in the country, although very necessary 
to hold. 

' I should prefer to see an advanced guard upon it, and 
the main body on the Mondego behind. 

' Have you used my magazine at Celorico ? I enclose a 
letter for the Commissary there, and one for Don Carlos de 
Espana. Pray forward both ; the former is to order for- 
ward fresh supplies to Celorico. 

‘ Show this letter to General Bacellar ; I do not write to 
him, as I have no Portuguese with me. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Brig. General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir N. Trafit: 



1812. 


GASTELLO BRANCO. 


67 


To Major General . 

^ Sir, ‘ Gastello Branco, 18 th April, 1812 . 

" In consequence of your letter of the 13th instant, I 
think it proper to explain to you in what way you disobeyed 
my orders. 

‘ The orders of the 5th March provided for two possible 
events, when the enemy should discover that the allied 
army had marched from the frontiers of Castille, 

" 1st, that of the enemy moving to the southward; 2 ndly 5 
that of the enemy passing the Agueda. 

In case the enemy should make the movement first 
mentioned, you were to march with the 1st hussars, by easy 
inarches, through Lower Beira; to cross the Tagus at Villa 
Velha, and to proceed to Elvas. 

^ In case the enemy should cross the Agueda, you were 
to fall back gradually through Lower Beira to Gastello 
Branco. 

" The instructions of the 5th March, besides, contain an 
injunction to you not to allow yourself to be diverted from 
what they contained by the operations of General Bacellar, 
or of Don Carlos de Espaha, but you were desired not to 
be in a hurry, and to give them your countenance as far as 
might be in your power ; and to tell them that you were 
left in the front for a particular object, and that you had 
positive instructions for your conduct in the event of the 
occurrence of the enemy’s movement to the Agueda.” 

" I afterwards wrote to you on the 26th and 27th March, 
to acquaint you that Don Carlos de Espaha had informed 
me that he expected to be able to introduce a convoy into 
Ciudad Kodrigo on the 30th, and to request you ‘‘ to en- 
deavor to have those provisions introduced into the place 
and you were afterwards to carry into execution my instruc- 
tions of the 5th of March. 

' I now request you to advert to your conduct under these 
instructions. 

' On the 29th you reported that the enemy were arrived 
in Tamames, and that it was your intention to fall back that 
evening to Ciudad Rodrigo, leaving piquets near Tenebron. 

‘ On the 30th you wrote from Ituero ; in which letter you 
acknowledged the receipt of one from me, I conclude that of 

E 2 



PORTUGAL. 


1812. 


68 


the 26th or 27th, as I had not written to you before since 
the 19th. The enemy had that day arrived at Guadapero. 

‘ On the 1st April you wrote from Nave, at 9 p.m., that 
the enemy had on the 31st a piquet of 40 cavalry at the 
ford of the Agueda, between Pastores and Zamarra; and 
that a regiment of infantry had marched to Martiago. You 
left Ituero that morning, the 1st of April, and inarched to 
Nave ; and the enemy on the same morning crossed the 
ford with two squadrons and took possession of Pastores. 

^ The convoy for Ciudad Rodrigo was expected on the I st 
April, from Aldea del Obispo. 

‘ I beg leave to observe, that if you had assembled the 
1st hussars at Pastores on the 30th of March and 1st April, 
the Agueda being then scarcely fordable for cavalry, and 
that ford being always the first that is practicable, sending 
your baggage, &c., away to Sabugal, you would have kept 
open the communication between Almeida and Ciudad Ro- 
drigo, and the convoy would, probably, have got into the 
latter place. At all events, my instructions of the 26th and 
27th March would have been obeyed. 

‘ On the 2nd of April you wrote from Sabugal that the 
1st hussars had arrived there, and that it was reported the 
enemy had recrossed the Agueda ; and on the 3rd you 
marched to Val de Lobos, where you halted the 4th ; on the 
.5th you marched to Pedroga?^, and on the 6th to Castello 
Branco. 

^ Putting the instructions of the 26th and 27th March out 
of the question, it is obvious that the case had occurred 
adverted to in my instructions of the 5th March, viz., the 
enemy had crossed the Agueda; in which case ''you were to 
fall back gradually, taking care not to commit yourself, upon 
Sabugal ; and from Sabugal in the same manner by Pe- 
namacor on Castello Branco and I would wish you to con- 
sider whether you did fall back gradually ; whether there 
was any necessity of any description for your quitting Nave 
on the 2nd, or Sabugal on the 3rd ; or whether to march 
twelve leagues in two days through Lower Beira can be 
deemed, in any sense of the word, "falling back gradually.” 

' In fact, when you wrote on the 7th from Castello Branco, 
you knew nothing about the enemy ; and, instead of receiv- 
ing from you, as I had expected under my instructions of 



1812. 


GASTELLO BRANCO. 


69 


the 5th March, a regular daily account of their operations, 
you knew nothing ; and, from the manner in which you made 
your march, all those were driven off the road who might 
have given me intelligence, and were destined to keep up 
the communication bet\veen me and Don Carlos de Espaha. 

‘ But this is not all ; you were positively ordered by your 
instructions to go to Gastello Branco, and no farther. The 
reason for this instruction is obvious. First, the militia of 
Lower Beira would have been there in the case supposed, 
and they were there. Secondly, as soon as I should be in- 
formed of the enemy ‘’s approach to the Coa, it would have 
been absolutely necessary for me to assemble a force at 
Gastello Branco, of which the foundation would have been 
the 1st hussars. Yet, notwithstanding these orders and 
the reason for them, you marched from Gastello Branco on 
the 8th, and crossed the Tagus on the 9th. 

" Till I received your letter of the 7th April, I did not 
conceive it possible that you would have so far disregarded 
your instructions, otherwise I should certainly have pre- 
vented it ; and the consequence of your conduct was, that I 
did not know that the enemy had crossed the Coa till the 
10th instant. 

^ I am willing to believe, nay, I am certain, that the omis- 
sion to obey my instructions was not intentional, and that it 
is to be attributed to that description of inattention which is 
too much the practice of the Service. If the instructions of 
the 5th March had been read with attention, and pains had 
been taken to understand them, and a plan had been con- 
sidered for the mode of executing them, in case of the occur- 
rence of the event for which they provided, it is impossible 
that the mistakes of which I complain could have occurred. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General ‘ W Ellington. 


; To Lieut, General Sir T. Graham, K.B, 

‘ My dear Sir, * Gastello Branco, 18th April, 1812. 10 a.m. 

‘ I enclose the last letters from General Bacellar and 
Don Carlos de Espaha. 

‘ The enemy were still at Pcdroga5 yesterday ; but our 
patrolc took a courier, who says they intended to retire last 
night. 



70 


PORTUGAL. 


1812. 


I had at first intended to bring the divisions across the 
Tagus two at a time. But the weather is so bad that it is 
impossible to bivouac the troops, and the cantonments on 
this side the Tagus will scarcely hold one division. I have, 
therefore, given the troops a second halt, in order to allow 
the 4th division to follow the 5th across the Tagus. 

" I am much afraid that Major Grant is taken. He was 
at Idanha a Nova, and the man taken yesterday says that 
an officer was taken there by one of the enemy’s patroles. 
I have not heard from him since the 1 5th. 

Believe me, &c. 

^ Lieut General ‘Wellington. 

Sir T, Graharuy K.B' 

ToLieut, General Sir R. Hilly K.B. 

‘ My dear Hill, * Gastello Branco, I9th April, 1812. 

‘ It is necessary that some attention should be paid to 
the mowing of hay this year, otherwise 1 think there is great 
reason to fear that the cavalry will be but ill provided with 
forage during the winter. I believe the best places in 
Alentejo are Portalcgre, Alpalha5, Gafetc, Niza, Gastello 
do Vide, Villa Vi(]osa, Estremoz, Crato, and all the villages 
along tlie Sor river. Mr. Routh should take early measures 
on this subject; some might be mowed on the left of the 
Guadiana, near where our bridges were, and betAveen 
Badajoz and Talavera Real; the former stored at Elvas, 
the latter at Badajoz. 

‘ The mode in which I propose to settle this matter in 
this part of the country is to make arrangements with the 
magistrates of the villages to mow and stack the hay, for 
which they should be paid from 40 to 50 reas a truss of 
from 12 to 15 pounds. The magistrates should then be 
held responsible to produce all the hay for cutting and 
storing which they should have been paid. 

‘ The best season for cutting is the month of May, so that 
you see Mr. Routh has no time to lose. I recommend this 
arrangement in case of accidents, as I hope and believe Ave 
shall spend the Avinter out of Portugal yet. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hilly K.B: 



1812. 


CASTELtO BRANCO. 


71 


To Lieut. General Sir T, Graham, K.B. 

^ My DEAR SiRj ‘ Gastello Branco, 20th April, 1812. 8 a.m. 

" The enemy have continued to withdraw from this part 
of the country ; and our piquets were yesterday in Pena- 
macor; and from the Alpedrinha side, in Val de Lobos; 
and I conclude that this day the whole will be across the 
Coa. 

The Light division and hussars are this day at St. 
Miguel and Pedroga5 ; the 3rd division and 11th at Alpe- 
drinha, &c. The 4th and 5th divisions will move to-morrow 
from hence ; and I shall keep the front in movement gra- 
dually towards the Coa till the rear shall come up. 

^ We had an unpleasant report yesterday morning from 
Coimbra, of the 17th, that Trant had been defeated on 
Guarda, and his militia dispersed. The report was brought 
to Coimbra by an a/feres of militia, and some non-com- 
missioned officers ; the day of the defeat not mentioned. 

" We had heard from Trant on the 13th, at night; and 
there was a possibility that the affair had happened on the 
14th. Guarda being 29 leagues from Coimbra, it appeared 
barely possible that it might have happened on the evening 
of the 15th, as the letter from Coimlbra was dated at nine 
in the morning of the 17th. 

^ There are letters in this town from Celorico of the 15th, 
which do not notice this affair ; and, therefore, it certainly 
did not happen on the 14th, and probably not on the morn- 
ing of the 15th; and yet, if it was not then, it is scarcely 
possible that the alferes and non-commissioned officers 
could have gone the distance in the time. 

We have heard from Covilha5 to the 17th, and have no 
accounts of this action ; and the ordenanza are in all parts 
of the country, and there is no report of it among them ; 
nor any among the prisoners and deserters from the enemy, 
some taken even yesterday, 

^ I sent an officer from hence on the 16th with letters to 
Guarda ; and he would certainly have returned if he had 
heard of this action; unless, indeed, he has been taken, 
which is not very probable. A non-commissioned officer 
Avent likewise with letters on the night of the 17th from 
Alpedrinha ; and we have no accounts from him. 



72 


PORTUGAL. 


1612. 


^ Upon the wholCj I believe that the alferes and non-com- 
missioned officers have taken fright, and run away; and 
have spread this report at Coimbra as a justification of their 
own conduct. 

" I am going to Escalhos de Cima this day, to be nearer 
the advanced posts. It is only two leagues from hence. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General < Wellington. 

Sir T. Graham^ K.B. 

‘ I have no accounts from Ciudad Rodrigo since the 11th. 

^ Escalhos, 4 p.M. — I enclose a letter from Colonel Wil- 
son, from which you will see that there was some affair at 
Guarda on the 14th, though not what the alferes reported. 
It is strange that the person who wrote from Celorico on the 
15th knew nothing about it. The dragoon who brought 
this letter says that two companies of militia were taken 
prisoners on the Mondego.* 

To Lieut, Colonel Fletcher, 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Gastello Branco, 20th April, 1812. 

" I received last night your letter of the 16th. 

‘ All the pontoons, and all the boats which are in Badajoz, 
with their baulks, anchors, &c., for which there are carriages, 
must be sent to Elvas. I beg you to speak to the Marques 
de Monsalud on this subject, and to communicate upon it 
with General Victoria, in order that he may find the means 
of moving these boats. 

' Any boats for which there are not carriages should be 
floated down the river to Jurumenha. 

I beg that you will tell General Campbell, that if he 
wants bill hooks, he must apply for them to the Portuguese 
head quarters. No article of any description, excepting the 
pontoons and boats, and what belongs to them, must be 
taken out of the stores at Badajoz. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ LieuU Colonel Fletcher," " Wellington. 

To Brigadier General Sir N, Trant, 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Pedrogao, 21st April, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 15th, and you will see 
by mine of the 17th, written as soon as I knew that your 



1812. 


PEDR0GA5. 


73 


division and that of General Wilson were on Guarda, that 
I expected what happened ; and that I wished you to with- 
draw from that position. 

^ In fact troops ought not to be put in a strong position 
in which they can be turned, if they have not an easy retreat 
from it ; and if you advert to that principle in war, and 
look at the position of Guarda, you will agree with me, that 
it is the most treacherous position in Portugal. 

^ I can only say that, as Marmont attacked you, I am 
delighted that you have got off so well ; which circumstance 
I attribute to your early decision not to hold the position, 
and to the good dispositions which you made for the retreat 
from it. 

^ As to your plan to surprise Marmont at Sabugal, you 
did not attempt to put it in execution, and it is useless to 
say any thing about it. I would observe, however, upon one 
of your principles, viz., that the magnitude of the object 
would justify the attempt, that in war, particularly in our 
situation, and with such troops as we, and you in particular, 
command, nothing is so bad as failure and defeat. You 
could not have succeeded in that attempt ; and you would 
have lost your division and that of General Wilson. 

^ I give you my opinion very freely upon your plans and 
operations, as you have written to me upon them ; begging 
you at the same time to believe that I feel for the difficulty 
of your situation, and that 1 am perfectly satisfied that 
both you and General Wilson did every thing that officers 
could do under such circumstances ; and that 1 attribute to 
you the safety of the two divisions. 

‘ I shall be at Sabugal to-morrow or the next day ; and 
I hope to see you before we shall again be more distant 
from each other. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Brig. General * Wellington. 

Bir N, Trant,* 


, To Lieut, General Sir T, Grahain, K.B. 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Pedrogao, 21st April, 1812. 3 p.m. 

‘ I enclose letters from Generals Bacellar and Trant, 
which will show what passed at Guarda on the 14th ; and 



74 


PORTTOAL. 


1812 , 


letters from Don Carlos de Espana to the ISth, which will 
show how matters stand at Ciudad Rodrigo. 

" You will see that the enemy have lost their bridge on 
the Agueda. They have retired from Sabugal, and I be- 
lieve are passing the bridge of El Villar. 

'The Light division and hussars are this day at Pena- 
macor and Meimoa; the 3rd division and 11th dragoons at 
Capinha and Bemquerencia. Our patroles have been, I 
believe, in Aldea da Ponte. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General " Wellington. 

/Sir r. Graham^ K.B'. 


To Lieut, Colonel Dickson y R,A, 

^ My DEAR Sir, * Penamacor, 22n(l April, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 19th. Let me know 
as soon as possible what ordnance and stores there are for 
the heavy train in the transports at Setuval, including those 
recently arrived from Oporto. 

‘ Let the 927 barrels of powder be sent to General Rosa 
at Lisbon ; and 1 will settle with Marshal Beresford to have 
1000 barrels of powder sent from thence to Oporto, for the 
service of the northern garrisons. 

^ Let the 7726 24 pounder shot be likewise sent to Lisbon, 
and be given over to General Rosa. 

" I shall hear from you, of course, when the gun carriages 
arrive at Alcacer. 

Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, Colonel Dicksouy R.A: ^ Wellington. 

To Lieut, General Sir A. Cainpbelly Kt, 

‘ My dear Campbell, * Penamacor, 22nd April, 1812. 

‘ I received by the last post your letter of the 24th March. 
1 do not exactly recollect what passed between Sir Harry 
Burrard and me on the occasion of the reference made to 
us by you and Colonel Darling, on a difference respecting 
an exchange. I believe we declined to decide upon the 
subject, and we gave no opinion. Not recollecting what 
passed, I certainly cannot recollect what opinion I formed 
upon reading the papers. 



1812. 


PENAMACOR. 


75 


^ I believe the chief command at the Isle of France is a 
better situation for your health than the staff in the East 
Indies, but I should doubt its being better for your pocket. 

^ You will see that we have been in a bustle, as Sir David 
says, here. I believe that my patroles will communicate 
with Ciudad Kodrigo this day. 

' Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General " W ELLINGTON. 

^ir A, Campbell, Kt' 


To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K.B, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Penamacor, 22n(l April, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 18 th, regarding Lieut. 
of the — th regiment. 

" There are with the - — th six subalterns less than I have 
endeavored to keep with every battalion in the army; and 
Lieut. is now the third lieutenant in the second bat- 

talion. lie has omitted to inform you, however, that there 
are three subalterns belonging to tlie first battalion, now 
doing duty in the second battalion ; and, under the King’s 
order, I must detain them till they shall be relieved. I 
should in like manner be obliged to detain liim, even after 
he should become effective in the first battalion ; and of 
course cannot allow him to go to that battalion before his 
seniors, and before he shall belong to it. 

‘ I always feel much concern in being obliged to refuse 
oflicers who wish to quit the army ; indeed it is the most 
painful duty I have to perform. But it must be performed ; 
otherwise, between those absent on account of wounds and 
sickness, and those absent on account of business or plea- 
sure, I should have no officers left. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General " WELLINGTON. 

Sir 1\ Graham, K.B.' 


To Lieut, General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘Penamacor, 22nd April, 1812. 5 p.m. , 

‘ Our patroles were yesterday in Alfayates, which town 
the enemy left at nine in the morning, taking the road of 



76 


PORTUGAL. 


1812. 


Casillas. The patroles were to go this day, if possible, to 
Ciudad llodrigo. 

‘ I shall go to-morrow to Sabugal ; and if I should find 
the enemy decidedly gone, I shall send orders for every 
body to halt. 

* I enclose letters received from Don Carlos, Ruman, and 
the Governor of Ciudad Rodrigo. 

" Ruman is come here himself. He passed by the right 
of the Coa yesterday, after twelve o'clock, as far as Mcal- 
hada Sorda. 

‘ The Light division are this day in Sabugal ; the hussars 
at Quadrascis and Soito. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' Welungton. 

Sir T. Grahamt K.B. 

" I hear that the 42nd are arrived, and I shall order them 
to join the 1st division.’ 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

* Sir, ‘Pcnamacor, 22n(l April, 1812. 

‘ 1 have delayed to answer your letter of the Kith instant, 
containing one from the house of Messrs. Alcock, Bulkcley, 
and Co., till I shall have an opportunity of looking among 
my papers for the copy of a proclamation issued by me in 
the year 1809, when 1 settled that the Commissaries should 
draw bills on the Commissary General for supplies furnished 
by the country ; but, unfortunately, I have not been able to 
find it. 

‘ When the British army first came to the Peninsula, 
nothing eould be more irregular than the mode in which 
supplies were taken from the country by Commissaries, 
corps, and even individuals, for which they were in the 
habit of giving irregular vouchers. 

" One of the consequences attending this evil was, that it 
was impossible to settle the accounts of the Commissariat, 
or to pay for those supplies, without reference to the autho- 
rity of the Commander in Chief ; and I was obliged to ex- 
amine and consider every irregular voucher left at any 
distance of time by any individual, and to inquire into all 
the circumstances attending it, before I could give authority 



1812. 


PENAMACOR. 


77 


that payment should be made for the supplies furnished. 
It frequently happened that^ owing to the lapse of time, the 
justice of the demand could not be satisfactorily proved, and 
I Avas obliged to refuse sanction to the payment of it. 

^ In order to put an end to these evils, I ordered the 
officers of the Commissariat to settle accounts for the sup- 
plies which they should receive from the country before they 
should quit the town in Avhich they should have received 
them ; and I issued a proclamation, requiring all those who 
furnished supplies to the army to demand payment for them 
Avithin one month after the period at Avhich the supplies had 
been furnished, and I promised that they should be paid, if 
possible, in ready money, or, if not possible, that the Com- 
missary Avho had received the supplies should be directed to 
giA^e a bill for their amount on tlie Commissary General. 

" This is the origin of the Commissariat bills to Avhich 
tlic letter from Messrs. Alcock and Bulkeley refers. It Avas 
never intended to promise in this proclamation that Avhicli 
Avas impossible, viz., to pay within one month for all supplies 
Avhich this army might receive. That which Avas intended 
Avas to settle accounts Avith those Avho furnished supplies, 
and to give those persons a document to prove the existence 
of a debt, Avithoiit the trouble of coining to head quarters, 
and of being parties to a long investigation to prove the 
justice of their demand. 

‘ A bill Avas preferred to every other description of acknow- 
ledgment of the debt, as being the best knoAvn to the people 
of the country, and as pointing out the person to Avhom they 
Avere to look for payment. But these bills have never speci- 
fied periods of payment. 

" Accordingly, the practice has been, from the year 1809 
to this moment, to postpone the payment of the Commis- 
sariat bills. At times, those drawn in payment of one de- 
scription of supplies are preferred to others ; at other times, 
those draAvn for smaller sums are preferred to those drawn 
for larger ; and generally, the bills have been numbered at 
the Commissary General’s office Avhen presented for pay- 
ment, and have been paid in rotation in the register of the 
numbers. 

^ But there is one rule Avhich has been invariably followed, 
both in the payment of these bills, and in the payment of 



78 PORTUGAL. 1812. 

demands for supplies furnished before those bills were in 
use, and that is, to pay those last who should have appeared 
to have purchased the bills, or the right to demand the pay- 
ment, at a depreciated rate. 

' These arrangements, and the practice oP the Commis- 
sariat under them, have been no secret. They are known 
to the world. 

' If I am not mistaken, Messrs. Alcock and Bulkelcy were 
apprized, when Mr. Kennedy paid similar demands by bills 
on the Treasury in the month of September last, that it 
would bo the last time he should consent to such an arrange- 
ment; and I know it is notorious throughout the country, 
and must be well known at Lisbon, that I had, so long ago 
as the year 1809, ordered that those who should purchase 
up the debts of the British army should be paid the last. 

' It is not necessary that I should here enter into a jus- 
tification of this order. Unfortunately, the difficulty of pro- 
curing specie renders it impossible to pay in ready money 
for all the supplies required by the army ; but, whether I 
have it or not, I have assumed an authority to decide which 
of the creditors of the army shall be paid last. 

' I do not think I have exercised that authority unjustly 
in determining that those shall be paid last who do not, 
themselves, furnish any supplies or assistance to aid our 
exertions, and to forward the just cause in which we are 
engaged ; but who, on the contrary, do us and their country 
all the mischief of which they are capable, by endeavoring 
to make money of the public difficulties, and to destroy our 
credit by purchasing our securities from the holders of them 
at a depreciated price. 

' It is impossible that this rule can be attended by half 
the injurious effects that must be the consequences of en- 
couraging the purchase of these securities ; the least of 
which must be to raise the price of all commodities through- 
out the country to more than the amount of the profit which 
these purchasers would choose to make by this traffic. 

" I request you to communicate this letter to the Consul 
General for the information of Messrs. Alcock and Bulke- 
ley, and that of the British merchants at Lisbon in general. 

' At the same time, I beg that these gentlemen may be 
informed that, as it appears that a considerable time has 



1812. 


ALFAYATES. 


79 


now elapsed since these demands have been due to them, 
I have desired the Commissary General to take an early 
opportunity of paying them. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ‘ W E LLINGTON . 

Charles Stuart" 


To the Earl qf Liverpool. 

^ My Lord, ‘ Sabugal, 23r(l April, 1812. 

" Lieut. General the Marques de Monsalud, who com- 
mands in Estremadura, in the absence of Captain General 
Castanos, has requested me to apply to Government for 
8000 suits of clothing, including shoes, shirts, caps, and 
gaiters, for the Spanish troops destined to be the garrison 
of Badajoz, of the same description with that recently sent 
to Oporto for Don Carlos dc Espaha, with the exception of 
the caps, which are to be of black felt ; and 400 suits of the 
same description for artillerymen, and 200 suits of grey for 
pioneers. 

' I request that if your Lordship should grant this clothing 
it may be sent to the Tagus at an early period. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ' Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K,B. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Alfayates, 24th April, 1812. ' 

" I did not write to you last night, as I was by no means 
certain of the enemy’s movement. It appears, however, by 
the report which I have just received, that they have all 
crossed the Agucda, and are in full retreat towards the 
Tormes. 

" I have therefore ordered every thing to halt to-morrow ; 
and I shall send orders regarding the disposition to be 
adopted, while I shall bring up supplies for Ciudad Eodrigo 
and Almeida. 

^ I am in great hopes, however, to be able to carry into 
execution our southern scheme yet. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

^ Lieut. General " WELLINGTON. 

Sir T, Graham, K.B: 



80 


PORTUGAL. 


1812. 


To Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K,B, 

^ My dear Hill, ‘ Alfayates, 24th April, 1812. 

‘ Marmont has retired^ and I shall immediately get pro- 
visions into Ciudad Rodrigo. I propose, while this opera- 
tion shall be going on, to send some of the troops back 
across the Tagus, and to distribute the whole in such a 
manner as that they can be easily subsisted. 

‘ I think that you might avail yourself of this opportunity 
to strike your blow at Alinaraz. I think that one of your 
British brigades, and two Portuguese brigades, or one and 
a half British, and one strong Portuguese brigade, would 
do your business as to the French in that neighbourhood. 

' All the iron howitzers arc now in Elvas, and you might 
employ, to draw six of them, the mules attached to one of 
General Hamilton's brigades of Portuguese artillery. If 
Dickson has not got the ammunition carriages prepared for 
the brigade of howitzers, which I proposed should be in the 
reserve of the artillery, you might then get mule carts, to 
carry tlie quantity of shot, and of howitzers and spherical 
shells, which you might think it expedient to take. Sec 
Dickson in regard to this equipment, and settle the whole 
with him. You had better take him on the expedition witli 
you. The equipment might be prepared at Elvas, and 
might join you at Truxillo or Jaraicejo by Caceres. Be- 
sides the gun equipment, you should take with you six of 
our small pontoons, to enable you to make a Hying bridge if 
you should require it. The pontoons and bullocks arc at 
S. Vicente, near Elvas ; Lieut. Piper, of the Engineers, is in 
charge of them, and will do whatever you order him ; each 
of them should march with a double proportion of bullocks. 

^'Make all your preparations in secret for this expedition. 
I shall watch from hence the course of the enemy's retreat, 
and will let you know if it should appear to me that you 
have anything to fear from any of the divisions of the army 
of Portugal going near Almaraz. Of course you will not 
march till you shall hear further from me. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General " WELLINGTON. 

Sir R, Hill, K,B. 

* You should take a regiment of British and one of Portu- 
guese cavalry on this service.’ 



1812. 


ALFAYATES. 


81 


To Dorn Miguel Pereira Forjat, 

' SlR^ * Alfayates, 24tli April, 1812. 

‘ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 6th 
April, enclosing one from the Conde de Linhares, in regard 
to the reward of Major Das Neves, as having first formed 
tlie plan of the positions which are fortified in front of 
Lisbon, and first conceived the idea of the system of defence 
which was adopted. 

" It has never been my practice to refrain from giving 
applause to those officers under my command to whom 
applause is due, or to omit to recommend them to the 
notice and generosity of their superiors and their sovereign ; 
but I solemnly protest against its being understood that 
Major Das Neves, or Colonel Caula, either formed the plan, 
or conceived the idea of the system which was carried into 
execution for the safety of Lisbon under my direction. I 
never saw Major Das Neves in my life, nor Colonel Caula, 
till I saw him at Almeida. Your Excellency gave me in 
1809 a plan of the country in question, and a memoir by 
Major Das Neves ; I am now obliged to declare, that when 
I came to examine the ground, I found both so inaccurate, 
that I could place no reliance upon them ; and it is a fact 
that having trusted in one instance to the plan and memoir, 
without rcconnaitring the ground, I was obliged to make a 
second journey to Lisbon, in February, 1810, and to destroy 
the works which had been commenced. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Dom Miguel Pereira Forjaz,^ ^ WELLINGTON. 

To His Eo'cellency Charles Stuart, 

‘ Sir, ‘ Alfayates, 24th April, 1812. 

* I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 28th 
March, regarding the importation of articles duty free for 
the British Commissariat. 

‘ It appears to me that there can be no difficulty in the 
business, by applying to these articles the first article, as 
proposed in my letter to you of the 4th November, 1810. 

‘ The Commissary General will apply to me that these 
articles may be imported duty free, giving me a list of them, 
which I will sign, and send the application to you. These 

VOL. IX. G 



82 


PORTUGAL. 


1812. 


articles will then be admitted duty free, and carried to the 
Commissariat stores, under the responsibility of the officers 
of the Commissariat. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ' WELLINGTON. 

Charles StuarC 

To His Excellency Charles StmrL 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Alfayates, 24th April, 1812. 

^ My brother-in-law has sent me a carriage from England 
in one of the transports, of which the wheels must be put 
on, and the carriage hung upon springs in Lisbon. If you 
have an English coachman I shall be very much obliged to 
you if you will allow him to put the carriage together for 
me ; if not, I shall be obliged to you if you will employ to 
do it the most intelligent coachmaker in Lisbon. 

^ I have here one of the Prince’s carriages, which I pro- 
pose to send down as soon as my own shall come up ; and I 
shall be very much obliged to you if you will ask Joaquim 
da Costa to lend me a pair of the Prince’s mules and a 
careful driver, to bring the carriage up. I shall send the 
mules and driver back by the Prince’s carriage. One of 
the police dragoons might as well come up with the carriage. 
Excuse this trouble. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellcficy ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart, 

‘ Marmont has retired, I hope to be able yet to under- 
take an expedition to the south.’ 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

^ My Lord, ‘ Alfayates, 24th April, 1812. 

" The army continued its march towards this quarter since 
I last addressed you, and the enemy retired before them. 
The last of the enemy crossed the Agueda yesterday morn- 
ing, and they are in full retreat towards the Tonnes. The 
rains which had fallen between the 13th and 19th instant, 
had carried away the bridge which they had constructed on 
the Agueda, immediately above Ciudad Kodrigo, but they 
have repaired it within these last tlifee days, and the leading 



1812. 


ALFAYATES. 


83 


divisions of the army crossed by the Puente del Villar, and 
the fords of the Upper Agueda ; the rear only by the bridge 
near Ciudad Rodrigo. 

^ When Marshal Marmont marched his troops upon 
Sabugal, Lieut. General Bacellar ordered that the Portu- 
guese militia under Brig. Generals Trant and Wilson should 
be concentrated upon Guarda, with a view to protect our 
magazines at Celorico, and to prevent the enemy’s incur- 
sions into the Serra d’Estrella. 

‘ Marshal Marmont moved upon this militia on the 14th 
instant, with a considerable force of cavalry, infantry, and 
artillery ; and Brig. General Trant, who commanded, con- 
ceiving the enemy to be too strong for him, determined 
to retire across the Mondego. I am by no means satisfied 
with the conduct of the militia upon this occasion. They 
had made great progress in their retreat which, if they had 
been steady, would have been effected without loss. But a 
battalion which was covering the retreat having been or- 
dered to fire upon the enemy’s cavalry, and the rain having 
prevented their pieces from going off, broke, and threw the 
retreating troops into disorder, and the enemy took about 
150 prisoners. 

" The troops were formed again, however, on the left of 
the Mondego, and retired upon Celorico, General Bacellar 
keeping the advanced posts, under Brig. General Wilson, at 
Lagiosa. On the following morning, the 15th, the enemy 
advanced again in considerable force, and drove in Brig. 
General Wilson’s outposts at Lagiosa, which induced Gene- 
ral Wilson to give directions that our magazines at Celorico 
might be destroyed, according to directions which I had left 
in case the magazines were likely to fall into the hands of 
the enemy. But the enemy having halted at Lagiosa, Brig. 
General Wilson countermanded the order for the destruc- 
tion of the magazines, and nearly the whole have been saved. 

" The enemy retired from Lagiosa in the course of the 
night of the 15th, and from Guarda on the 16th, which town 
was occupied on the 17th by the troops under the command 
of Brig. General Wilson. 

" I enclose a letter from General Bacellar of the 15th, con- 
taining Brig. General Trant’s report of the affair of the 14th, 
and your Lordship will be happy to learn that the officers 

g2 



84 


PORTUGAL. 


1812 . 


of the militia behaved remarkably well. It appears to me 
that Brig. General Trant and Brig. General Wilson, being 
at Guarda, did every thing they ought to have done. But 
when Marshal Marmont was in strength at Sabugal, they 
ought to have kept only an advanced guard at Guarda ; and 
as soon as I heard that they were collected at Guarda, I 
apprized them of my opinion ; but it was too late. 

" The partial success over the Portuguese militia on their 
retreat from Guarda, and the murder and plunder of the 
inhabitants of a few villages in Lower Beira, already suffer- 
ing from the enemy’s former depredations, are the only fruits 
of Marshal Marmont’s expedition within the Portuguese 
frontier, to divert our attention from the siege of Badajoz. 

^ While the troops belonging to the army of Portugal 
have been collected for this service, I learn from Captain 
General Castafios that General Abadia had ordered the 
Spanish troops in the Asturias to move into Leon, where 
Brigadier Moreno had had some partial success against a 
French detachment at Otero de las Dueiias. 

‘ Don Julian Sanchez, likewise, who has continued with 
his cavalry in Castillc, has been very successful on the 
enemy’s communications, and against their convoys. 

^ By accounts from the south 1 learn that neither tlie 
Conde de Penne Villcmur nor General Ballesteros entered 
Seville, while Marshal Soult was in Estremadura in tlie 
commencement of this month. The Conde de Penne Ville- 
mur is now on his return into Estremadura with the troops 
of the 5th army, iu consequence of a suggestion which I 
conveyed to him on the 8th instant. 

^ General Drouet is at Fuente Ovejuna, in Cordova, with 
the troops under his command, and Marshal Soult at Seville, 
according to the last accounts of the 21st instant, which I 
have received from Lieut. General Sir R. Hill. 

‘ I have ordered the militia to return to their stations, and 
I propose at present to canton the army in the stations most 
convenient for subsistence till Ciudad Rodrigo and Almeida 
be filled with provisions. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Earl of Liverpool: ‘ W Ellington. 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


85 


To the Earl of Liverpool 

^ My Lord, ‘ Alfayates, 24th April, 1812. 

" Having reported in my dispatch of the 16th instant, 

that Major General had disobeyed the orders 

which 1 had given him, I think it proper to enclose to your 
Lordship’ copies of the instructions which he received, and 
copies of the correspondence which I have had with him 
upon the subject, in which you will sec how the matter really 
stands. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool.^ • Wellington. 


To Lieut* General Sir T Graham, K.B, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 25th April, 1812* 

' De Lancy will send you the proposed distribution of the 
troops, and I say nothing about it. 

^ I send you the last reports from Madrid and Salamanca. 
You see that they differ a little in respect to the person to 
command the French armies. They would derive great ad- 
vantage from this supposed arrangement. 

^ I sec in a paper of the 10th, that the llussiaiis have de- 
clared war on the 10th of March. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut* General ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir T, Graham, K*B' 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham, K,B, 

‘Fuente Guinaldo, 25th April, 1812. 

‘ My dear Sir, Half-past ii pm, 

‘ I have just now received your letter of half-past twelve 
at noon this day, and I am much concerned to find that you 
did not receive last night the letter I wrote to you yesterday, 
at a little after twelve, and one by the Quarter Master Ge- 
ral, for the 1st division to halt this day. 

‘ It was lilvcwisc intended that the 1st division should halt 
at Pedroga5 to-morrow and next day, and should afterwards 
proceed under orders sent this day, by Gastello Branco 
across the Tagus. 

' The first thing to do is to get the men under cover ; and 



86 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


Penatnacor, and Joa5 de Pirez, and Aldea del Obispo are 
vacant, and you had better occupy those places in the morning. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ LieuU General ‘ Wellington. 

Sir T. Graham, K.B" 


To General Conde de Amaranie, 

^ Sir, ‘ Fuento Guinaldo, 26th April, 1812. 

" I have had the honor of receiving your Excellency’s 
letter of the i2th instant. I beg to observe to your Excel- 
lency, that the object in placing the troops under your com- 
mand in Tras os Montes, is principally to defend that pro- 
vince, to observe the enemy’s movements in that part of the 
country, and eventually to aid by movements of your troops, 
without risking their retreat into Portugal, those movements 
which General Abadia may make from Galicia. I recom- 
mend to you not to make the movement which you propose 
on Tabara and Carvajalcs, as being entirely inconsistent 
with all the objects in view, in placing you in Tras os 
Montes, and risking your troops witliout any object. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

* General Conde de Amur ante J ‘ WELLINGTON. 


To the Right Hon Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B. 

" My dear Henry, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 26th April, 1812. 

* I have a letter of the 1 Ith from the Bath King at Arms, 
in which he tells me that there is to be an installation of 
Knights of the Bath in the next month ; and he desires me 
to have a proxy and three esquires for the occasion. There 
will be no difficulty about the latter; but the former must 
be knighted, which is not very agreeable to many. I am 
going to write to Culling Smith by the mail, either to be 
himself my proxy *, or to get one for me, and to point out 
esquires for the occasion ; and I shall desire him to get a 
proxy and esquires for you. 

* Lieut. General Sir Alexander Campbell was the proxy for the Earl of Wel- 
lington, as Knight of the Bath, at the Installation in Westminster Abbey ; and 
Mr. Culling Smith, Lieut. Colonel G. Nupicr, and Captain Gurwood, were the 
three Escjuiies. 



1812. FUENTU GtriNALDO. 87 

' I shall desire him to apply to Lord George Seymont to 
be your proxy, who need not care about being knighted. 

' Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. ‘ WellimgXON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B.' 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley y K,B, 

‘ My DEAR Henry, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 26th April, 1812. 

‘ The same mail which brought me a letter from Lord 
Liverpool of the 10th instant, will have brought you the de- 
cision of the Treasury of the 8th, that all the specie in the 
Standard is to be applicable to the service of this country. 
Pray let me know how much there is, in order that I may 
make the appropriation according to the directions of the 
Treasury, and in the mean time, send me 500,000 or 600,000 
dollars ; as we are, as usual, much distressed for money. 

‘ Let me know also what the Spanish expenditure paid by 
Great Britain is. I did not know that Whittingham received 
any thing. 

‘ You will sec that Marmont made but a poor effort after 
all. However, we should have lost Ciudad Kodrigo if I had 
not returned here. I am making every effort to provision 
that place, and I do not yet despair between ourselves, of 
being able to undertake the expedition into Andalusia this 
year. 

" Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon, ' W Ellington. 

Sir H, Wellesley, K,B, 

" In hopes of being able to go into Andalusia, and of free- 
ing that province, I requested Government some time ago 
to have prepared 20,000 suits of clothing, &c., for a Spanish 
army of that number.’ 

'To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley^ K.B, 

< ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 26tli April, 1812. 

‘ 1 enclose the copy of my last dispatch to the Secretary of 
State. 

‘ I beg that you will inform the Spanish Government that 
I have been in Ciudad Kodrigo, and that I conceive that 
the firmness and conduct of Brig. General Vives, and of the 



$8 SPAIN. 1812. 

garrison under his command, during the late blockade by 
the enemy, are highly praiseworthy. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ To the Right Hon. ‘ W ELLINGTON. 

SirH. Wellesley, K.B: 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

* Sir, ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 26 tli April, 1812 . 

" I have received your letter of the 21st instant, enclosing 
one of the 10th from the Secretary of State, in regard to the 
removal of Principal Souza from the Local Government of 
Portugal. 

" It is not necessary that I should enter upon the natural 
defects of Principal Souza’s mind and character. My objec- 
tions to him as a member of the Government, and my re- 
commendation, in 1810, to the Prince Regent of Portugal, 
that he should be removed from this situation, were founded 
upon his being the original cause and promoter of the oppo- 
sition by the Portuguese Local Government to the measures 
which I proposed should be adopted by the Civil Govern- 
ment in aid of and co-operation with the operations of the 
army, which opposition was founded upon erroneous military 
notions entertained by this gentleman, and by his influence 
introduced and supported in the councils of this Govern- 
ment. 

‘ The Prince Regent of Portugal refused, however, to dis- 
miss Principal Souza from his situation at my recommenda- 
tion ; and although the determination was not communicated 
to me in very gracious terms, I determined not to press 
again the removal of this gentleman, as at the time I received 
it, the circumstances which had occurred must have proved 
to the most prejudiced and obstinate that I had not been 
mistaken in my views of the military operations to be car- 
ried on in the year 1810, and that those who impeded or 
failed to forward my views were not the best friends of their 
country, or of the alliance. It likewise appeared to me that 
neither Principal Souza, nor the Portuguese Government, 
acting under his influence, were likely again to interfere in 
military operations. 

‘ I subsequently, in October, 1811, received a letter from 



1812. 


FUENTE GOINALDO. 


89 


the Prince Regent of Portugal, which appeared to me to 
offer a favorable opportunity of being reconciled to the Local 
Government ; and I offered and requested that every thing 
that had passed might be buried in oblivion. 

" In the mean time His Majesty’s Government having 
been made acquainted with all that had passed, and having 
interfered with their influence that my recommendation 
should be attended to, and that Principal Souza should be 
removed. His Royal Highness has been pleased to consent 
to his removal, by his letter of the 29th of October, 1811 ; 
and the question is, whether we shall avail ourselves of that 
letter to remove Principal Souza from the Government. 

" It is obvious from all that has passed and from the letter 
itself, that the consent of the Prince has been extorted from 
him, not by conviction of the unfitness of Principal Souza 
for his office, or of the injury he has done to his service and 
to the cause of his allies, but by a desire to conform to the 
wishes of His Majesty, and of the Prince Regent, and of 
His Majesty’s servants. 

^ Under these circumstances, although Principal Souza 
should be removed from the Regency, he would retain the 
influence which he possesses over its members and their 
councils, and ministers, and all the civil branches, at least, 
of the administration. Nothing would be gained, then, by 
his removal in the manner proposed, and he would be con- 
sidered by the country at large as a martyr to English 
influence, and it is natural to suppose that his popularity 
would proportionably increase. 

^ I object to Principal Souza, generally, as a member of 
the Portuguese Regency, and to the Regency itself, and 
their measures in general, because, in my opinion, they have 
endeavored to deceive the country, if they have not them- 
selves taken an erroneous view of their situation. 

* The real nature of the war has never been fairly brought 
before the people by the Government, and instead of being 
informed that it was a war on their part for every thing that 
was valuable in life, if not for life itself ; and instead of 
being called upon and encouraged to make corresponding 
sacrifices to carry it on, the people have been flattered and 
cajoled, and the resources of the country, which consist 
essentially in the sacrifices of the people, have never been 



90 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


fairly called forth to provide for any of the emergencies of 
the war. 

^ On this same principle of deceiving the people, the sole 
reliance of the Local Government of Portugal, on every oc- 
casion, is on the resources and aid of Great Britain. With 
these views, when reforms of abuses in the customs, or any 
other branch of the revenue, or the abolition of useless esta- 
blishments and the saving of their expenses are recom- 
mended, with a view to enable the Portuguese Government 
to carry on the war, they arc objected to, or not carried into 
execution, and fresh demands of loans or subsidies are made 
upon Great Britain. And in the same view of deceiving 
the people as to the real nature of the war, all the measures 
recommended Avith the hope to enable the army to avail 
themselves of the resources of the country have been frus- 
trated. They would have been objected to and refused, if 
under the late orders of the Prince Regent, that had been 
possible ; but they have been adopted in such a manner as 
to render all their enactments nugatory. Then, on the 
same principle, the magistrates have carried these measures 
into execution according to the spirit in which they have 
been adopted by the Government. 

‘ It is possible that Principal Souza docs not believe and 
has no confidence in the representations which have been 
repeatedly made to the Government of the evil consequences 
likely to result from this conduct. He has experience of the 
army having overcome difficulties which have been repeat- 
edly represented to him as fatal ; and he thinks it better to 
rely upon their exertions and upon the resources of Great 
Britain, than to call upon his own country to exert them- 
selves to facilitate our operations, and to contribute all in 
their power for their own salvation and for the benefit of 
the cause. 

^ But I cannot admit that, to whatever cause his conduct 
may be attributed, it is otherwise than desirable that he 
should be removed from the Government. 

^ The question still remains, however, Avhether advantage 
shall be taken of the letter of the Prince Regent to remove 
him. 

" On the same principle that, on the last occasion, I Avould 
not urge the Prince Regent to remove him, I do not recom- 



1812. FUENTE OUINALDO. 91 

mend that advantage should be now taken of His Royal 
Highness’s letter. The Principal will still enjoy His Royal 
Highnesses favor, if report is to be believed that he is to bo 
raised to a higher station, and his influence over the Re- 
gency will continue ; and if it should be lost, and the Regency 
should alter its measures, all the unpopularity which will 
follow them will attach to the English, and the improve- 
ments will still be insufficient for the purposes for which 
they were recommended. 

I am therefore not desirous that you should send to the 
Brazils the letter which Lord Castlereagh has written to 
Lord Strangford. 

‘ I recommend to you at the same time to impress upon 
the King’s Government the necessity of urging the Prince 
Regent of Portugal to order his Local Government to reform 
all abuses in the collection and management of his revenue, 
particularly the customs, and to discontinue all unnecessary 
expenses, including the naval establishments. 

He should be informed of the real nature of the war, in 
relation to his own interests and those of his country ; of 
the necessity of farther exertion on the part of Portugal, 
particularly in finance ; of the ease with which such exertion 
could be made, and of the hopeless impossibility that Great 
Britain could afford him further pecuniary aid. 

" His attention should be seriously called to the complaints 
recently sent from this country, of the deficiencies in all de- 
scriptions of supplies and assistance which the country ought 
to afford ; and he should be reminded that these supplies 
and assistance are afforded by no people voluntarily ; that 
laws, with due penalties, and execution of them in an efficient 
manner, could alone compel the people of any country to 
make the exertions required from the people of Portugal to 
insure their salvation, and to enable us and themselves to 
assist the common cause. 

' If representations of this description are duly, con- 
stantly, earnestly, and sincerely urged by His Majesty’s 
Ministers at the Brazils, it is to be hoped that at last the 
Prince’s eyes will be opened to the real state of his affairs 
in Portugal ; and that if ho should make a change in his 
Local Government, those who may be removed will be so 
far disgraced as that those who remain, and their successors, 



92 


SPAIN# 


1812. 


and the ministers and their subordinates in office, will be 
convinced of the necessity of acting in the manner which 
has been so often, but hitherto so fruitlessly recommended 
to them. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency * WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart* 

To Lieut, Colonel Dickson, R,A, 

* My DEAR Sir, * Fuentc Guinaldo, 27th April, 1812. 

‘ I received your letter of the 22nd. Captain Rcttberg 
must give charge of the ordnance and stores in Badajoz to 
the Spanish Lieut. Colonel of the artillery, sending me a list 
of what he gives over. When this shall be done you will 
move the British and Portuguese artillerymen now in Ba- 
dajoz to Elvas. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, Colonel Dickson, R,A' ^ W ELLINGTON. 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 27th April, 1812. 

' I have received your letter of the 22nd respecting the 
establishment of a Bank. I am quite certain that the plan, 
however good in ordinary times, will not answer at present, 
and it is a useless waste of time to give it any consideration. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency " WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart,’* 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham, K,B, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 27th April, 1812. 5 p,m. 

^ I have received your note of five p,m. yesterday, and I 
conceive that there will be no inconvenience, and you will 
have plenty of time to make the tour you propose to Zarza, 
&c. I am afraid that the inhabitants of that place are very 
disaffected to the cause. They are, in general, smugglers. 

^ I have nothing new from the front. I have not yet 
heard that Marmont had arrived at Salamanca. 

" I was yesterday at Ciudad Rodrigo, and I am sorry to 
say that the works are but little more forward than they 



1812. 


FUENTK GUINALDO. 


93 


were when I saw them last on the 5th of March ; yet the 
Spaniards had till the 1st of April to work without any 
enemy being near them. 

^ It is difficult to know what to do with these people. I 
have this day tried to excite them to work by feelings of 
national vanity and honor, but I fear I shall not succeed. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General ' WELLINGTON . 

Sir T, Graham, 


To Viscount Castlereagh, 

^ My dear Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaklo, 27th April, 1812. 

" I liave received your letter of the 8th marked Private,’' 
and I am very much obliged to you for communicating to 
me the papers you enclosed. It is my opinion that your 
mediation will produce no effect ; and indeed the Spaniards 
have not accepted it as if they intended it should. I am 
certain that the only mode of dealing with them is to make 
them request as a favor every thing in which it is wished 
that we should interfere. 

^ I enclose to you a letter which I wrote last summer to 
my brother upon this subject *. From a perusal of this 
letter you will see that there are two essential points for 
mediation to which you have not adverted in your instruc- 
tions. One is the form of Government in the colonies ; the 
other, the disposal of the colonial revenue, or rather, the 
division of that revenue between the colony and the mother 
country. This is a very important point for Spain, as well 
as for the colonies. 

" I am glad to find that you' propose to give a million to 
Spain this year. I was not aware that my brother had till 
this time supplied the Spaniards with any money, excepting 
as advances, which had been repaid. It is my opinion that 
this money should be given to those who act in co-operation 
with this army, by which means I should hope to be able to 
guide their operations in some degree. But this must of 
course depend upon my brother. 

* See Letter to the Right Hon. Henry Wellesley, dated Quinta de St, Joao^ 
14th July, 18lI,mVol.Vni. 



94 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


^ Your brother was better when he went away, and I hope 
will be quite well when he shall arrive in England. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Viscount Castlereogh? ‘ Wellington. 

To Brigadier General Le Cor, 

‘Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 28th April, 1812. 

^ It is desirable that no time should be lost in making 
arrangements for cutting the hay in Lower Beira for the use 
of the army. The mode in which I propose that this service 
shall be performed is as follows. 

‘ I request you to send orders to the magistrates of those 
places near which the hay grows, to make immediate 
arrangements to cut it, and to have it cut and stacked at 
the proper season ; and I beg to know from you, by re- 
turn of post, what sum of money it is necessaiy to place in 
your hands, in order to defray the expense of cutting and 
stacking. 

" You will then pay each magistrate the sum which the 
hay will cost, informing me of the sum you shall have paid 
him, and for what quantity of hay. 

^ You will then inform the magistrate that he will be 
held responsible to deliver that quantity of hay to the army, 
whenever I shall think proper to call for it. 

" I request you to make these arrangements throughout 
Lower Beira. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Brig, General Le CoiC ‘ Wellington. 

To Lieut, Colonel Sir Howard Douglas^ Bart, 

‘ Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 28th April, 1812. 

" I enclose the copy of a letter of the 8th instant, which I 
have received from Lord Liverpool, in regard to the disposal 
of certain arms which his Lordship has sent to you from 
England. 

" I think they cannot be disposed of in a better manner 
than that proposed by his Lordship ; and I beg you to dis- 
pose of them according to the directions contained in the 
enclosed letter. 

" It may probably be as well to send here the arms in- 



1812 . 


FUENTK GUINALDO. 


95 


tended for Don Julian, and any of the guerrillas in this 
neighbourhood. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut. Colonel * WELLINGTON. 

Sh' H. Douglas^ Bart,' 

To the Eight Hoti, Sir Hetiry Wellesley, K,B. 

^ My dear Henry, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 28 lh April, 1812 . 

^ I enclose the postscript to a letter of the 1 3th from Sir 
Howard Douglas, which might as well be communicated pri- 
vately to the Government. If the circumstances to which 
it relates should be made public in England, there will be a 
breeze ; yet I do not sec how they can be kept secret. I 
shall write privately to Castafios upon the subject. 

^ It has been hinted to me that has not given 

satisfaction in Galicia, in consequence of his pressing the 
general armament of the people ; but dissatisfaction on any 
account should not have occasioned conduct so foolish as 
that to which he refers. 

^ I am sorry to tell you that, notwithstanding I left money 
to carry on the works at Ciudad Rodrigo, I found very little 
done since I was there last, on the 5th of March. There 
were twenty six days of valuable time from the 5th to the 
31st of March, which appear to have been entirely thrown 
away, even though it be admitted that during the blockade 
nothing could be done. Since the 23rd of this month also, 
when the enemy raised the blockade, nothing has been done. 

" I have sent Alava over to the place to point out to the 
principal officers how much their indolence, and their indul- 
gence of the indolence of their men, affected the cause ; and 
I have told them that I should give no assistance in English 
soldiers to work, unless the demand for such assistance 
should be founded on an acknowledgment that the Spanish 
officers have not authority over their men, to induce them to 
perform works for their own defence ! But the indolence 
and the apathy of their nature is terrible ; yet they boast 
of their activity and energy. 

^ I am convinced that we shall lose both Ciudad Rodrigo 
and Badajoz before the summer is over, by the prevalence 
of the habits of indolence and delay in this nation. I write 
to Castanos upon this subject 



96 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


' I beg that you will represent to the Government the 
necessity of their attending in some degree to the garrisons 
of Badajoz and Ciudad Sodrigo, and to the troops in Estre- 
madura and Castille. These arc thrown entirely now upon 
the resources of the British army. 

" I hope also that you will recollect, and, at all events, 
give a positive answer upon the claim which I have brought 
forward, that a proportion of the sum of money given by 
Great Britain to Spain should be applied to the service of 
those troops which are in co-operation with us. If I had the 
command of that sum of money really, I should have the 
efficient control over all their operations. 

^ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The RL Hon, ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K,B: 


To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

« Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 28th April, 1812. 

* I have the honor to enclose the answers of the command- 
ing officers of the I2th, 14th, and IGth light dragoons, to 
the complaints which have been made of the loss in the 
service of these regiments, of bullocks given in charity to 
the villages in the neighbourhood of Coa. 

^ You will observe that these losses have been occasioned 
entirely by the desertion of the drivers ; an evil which I had 
wished to remedy by the amendment I proposed to the law 
relative to the means of transport, but the Government 
would not adopt this amendment. 

^ I have desired that an inquiry may be made from the 
Commissary at Celorico for the bullocks stated to have been 
given over to him by the 12th light dragoons. 

' I have the ho^ior to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency * WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart.^ 


To General Don Carlos de Espana, 

* Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 29th April, 1812, 

* I have had the honor of receiving your Excellency’s 
letter of the 28th instant. 

" As soon as the communication between the magazines 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


97 


on the Douro and the army was opened, I ordered that 
provisions might be brought up to Almeida and Ciudad 
Rodrigo ; and I am happy to find that your Excellency 
yesterday sent off 184 carriages to aid in that service. 

' I propose to lodge in Ciudad Rodrigo a magazine of 

26.000 rations of biscuit or flour, 100,000 lbs. of salt meat, 
and 40,000 lbs. of rice for the use of the British army, 
which magazine will be at the service of the garrison in 
case the place should bo attacked or blockaded. 

^ On the 16th of February I gave your Excellency an 
order upon the magazine of St. Joa5 da Pesqueira for 

175.000 rations of biscuit or flour, and other provisions, 
besides the supplies already in the place. 

I do not know what your Excellency has received on 
account of this order ; but I have given directions that the 
storekeeper of St. Joa5 da Pesqueira should continue to 
issue upon it when your Excellency shall send the means of 
conveyance to carry the provisions away. 

^ The Mariscal de Campo Don Miguel Alava has com- 
municated to me the memorandum which your Excellency 
gave him for my information, in which you desire to reduce 
the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo to 1500 m.en ; to send one 
battalion into the Sierra de Gata, and one battalion into 
the Sierra do Francia, in order to feed on the villages; and 
you desire that I will supply food in Portugal for 2000 men. 

' I beg leave to observe to your Excellency, that unless 
the place of Ciudad Rodrigo sliould be put in a state of 
defence, the army under my command, instead of being 
employed in active operations against the enemy, must 
watch the enemy’s movements against tliat place. 

‘ I believe your Excellency vdll admit, that unless you 
employ the troops of the place to work at the fortifications, 
you cannot expect to complete them ; and I am appre- 
hensive that 1500 men will do but little work. 

^ 1 would likewise beg leave to observe to your Excellency, 
that the quantity of 175,000 rations of provisions having 
been calculated to last the garrison two months, and a part 
of it having now arrived, and your Excellency having it in 
your power to draw for the remainder when you think 
proper, there can be no want of provisions for the full 
garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, more particularly as, long 

VOL. IX. H 



SPAIN. 






before these provisions can be consumed, the magazine, 
which I have above stated that it is my intention to put in 
the place, will have arrived, and will be at the service of the 
garrison in case it should be attacked. Your Excellency, 
however, is the best judge of the disposition to be made of 
your troops. 

‘ I shall only repeat to your Excellency, that if Ciudad 
Rodrigo had been provisioned, as I had a right to expect 
when I quitted Castille on the 6th of March last, I should 
now have been in Andalusia at the head of an army of 
40,000 men; and that the prospect of my being able to 
carry that plan into execution in this year depends entirely 
upon the degree of security which I shall find given at an 
early period to the place of Ciudad Rodrigo, by the com- 
pletion of the works ordered by the Captain General Cas- 
tanos, for which I have given the money, and by the for- 
mation, in the place, of the magazine above mentioned. 

^In regard to the desire of your Excellency that 2000 
men, belonging to your Excellency’s division, should be 
cantoned in Portugal, in order to be fed by the British 
Commissariat, I beg leave to recall to your Excellency’s 
recollection, that since the months of August and September 
last, some of the troops under the command of your Ex- 
cellency have been subsisted in this manner upon the 
resources intended for the British and Portuguese allied 
army. 

' I consented to this arrangement in hopes that 1 should 
have seen corps regularly organized and disciplined, and 
that I should have had the benefit of the assistance of your 
Excellency, at the head of a well disciplined S])anish division, 
to co-operate with this army. 

" The wishes of your Excellency and of myself upon this 
subject have been entirely disappointed ; and I must there- 
fore decline giving any further assistance of this description. 

" It is a useless waste of money, of which, in justice to 
my own country, I cannot be guilty, to lay it out in feeding 
an undisciplined peasantry, who, although perfectly capable 
of being made soldiers, are, after a lapse of six months, 
during which the expense of feeding them has been in- 
curred, no better disciplined, as soldiers, than they ought to 
have been in the first week. 



1812. 


FITENTE GUINALDO. 


99 


' I must therefore request your Excellency to provide 
for the food of the soldiers of your division now in Portugal, 
in one week from this date. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ General ' Wellington, 

Don Carlos de Espafta: Duque de Ciudad Rodrigo *. 

To Lieut, Colonel Sir Howard Douglas, Bart. 

‘ Sir, ‘ Fiiente Guinaldo, 29tli April, 1812. 

" I have received your letters, Nos. 12 and 13, of the 2nd 
and 13th instant. 

^ I concur with you in your opinion of the advantages of 
the Island of Arosa over the Bayona Islands, as a depot on 
the coast of Galicia. I beg you therefore to obtain the 
consent of General Abadia, to have the necessary works 
erected for the security of that depot. 

^ General Castanos and General Abadia will fix upon the 
position they think best in the kingdom of Galicia; but 
whatever may be the position, or the plan of operations, or 
the result, it is desirable to have a secure depot in one of 
the islands on the coast of Galicia. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

'Lieut Colonel ‘ Wellington. 

Sir H. Douglas, 

To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

' My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 29th April, 1812. 

' I have heard nothing new of any description since I 
wrote to you last ; and I enclose the only intelligence which 
I have received. 

' Believe me, &c. 

'Lieut. General ‘ Wellington. 

Sir T. Graham, K.B.' 

To the Bight Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B. 

^ Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 29th April 1812. 

‘ I enclose the copy of a letter which I have received from 
Don Carlos de Espafia, and the copy of my answer of this 
day. 

* In writing to Spanish authorities, the Spanish title was added to the signa- 
ture, but it will not be repeated in this compilation. 

H 2 



100 


SPAIK. 


1812 . 


‘ I beg to draw your attention to that part of my letter in 
which I have refused to give food to those troops which are 
not disciplined, after they have had arms in their hands, 
and have been fed my me, in hopes that they would be disci- 
plined, since the mouths of August and September last. 

‘ I recommend to you to adopt the same principle in 
respect to the distribution of the money and other aids of 
the British Government to the Spanish army. 

‘ I know no other mode in which the officers can be pre- 
vailed upon to discipline their troops, or to keep them in 
any order. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Rt. Hon. ‘ Wellington. 

Sir H. Wellesley. K.B.' 


To the Earl of Liver'pooL 

* My Lord, ‘ Faente Guinaldo, 29th April, 1812. 

' The enemy have continued their retreat since I addressed 
your Lordsliip on the 24th instant ; and I have carried into 
execution with this army the disposition which I announced 
to your Lordship in my dispatch of the 24t]i instant. 

' I am concerned to have to inform your Lordship that 
but little progress has been made in the works of Ciudad 
Eodrigo since I left this part of the country on the 6th of 
March last, notwithstanding that I had left money to com- 
plete them. 

" I have ordered magazines of provisions into Almeida 
and Ciudad Eodrigo, which will be established in those 
places as soon as means of transport can be collected for the 
purpose. 

' No movement has been made in the south. General 
Drouet was still, by the last accounts, at Fuente Ovejuna, 
in Cordova. 

* The Conde de Penne Villemur has returned into Estre- 
madura with the troops under his command. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

' Wellington. 


‘ The Earl of Liverpool, 



1812. 


FUENTB GDINALDO. 


101 


To the Earl of Livei*poot. 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 29th April, 1812. 

^ Referring to your Lordship’s dispatch. No. 4, of the 3rd 
of January, I beg leave to remind your Lordship that you 
have not yet sent me the permission of His Royal Highness 
the Prince Regent, for Brigadier General Wilson td accept 
the Order of the Tower and Sword, conferred upon him by 
the Prince Regent of Portugal. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ' WELLINGTON. 


To the Earl of Liverpool, 

* My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 29th April, 1812. 

' I have the honor to enclose a letter from Marshal Sir 
W. Bcresford, containing a list of the officers whom he con- 
siders to be entitled to the medal which His Royal High- 
ness the Prince Regent has been pleased to grant, in com- 
memoration of the battle of Albuera. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ‘ We llington. 


To Lieut. General Sir R. HilU K.B. 

‘ My dear Hill, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 30th April, 1812. 

" Adverting to the instructions contained in my letter of 
the 24th, I think you might now put your boats and the 
heavy ecpiipment from Elvas in movement upon Caceres, 
covering the movement by the Portuguese cavalry, which 
I suppose are towards Montanches ; and I beg you to have 
the other troops prepared to move on the expedition to- 
wards Almaraz, as soon as I shall write to you. I wait 
only to hear decidedly of the movement of the 1st division. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General * WELLINGTON. 

Sir /?. Hill, K,B: 



102 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To the Earl qf Liverpool, 

^ My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 30th April, 1812. 

" I enclose a copy of a letter, and its enclosures, which I 
have received from His Majesty’s Ambassador in Spain, 
notifying to me that the Spanish Government had been 
pleased to confer upon me the Grand Cross of the Order of 
San Fernando. 

^ I beg your Lordship will lay these letters before His 
Koyal Highness the Prince Regent, and request His Royal 
Highness’s permission for me to accept the honor conferred 
upon me by the Government of Spain. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ^ W ELLINGTON. 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K,B, 

< Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 30th April, 1812. 

" I have received your letter of the 13th instant, in which 
you enclosed one from the Secretary of State to the Regency, 
to your Excellency, and to myself, infonning me that the 
Spanish Government had been pleased to confer upon me 
the Grand Cross of the Order of San Fernando. 

^ I beg that you will return my tlianks to the Govern- 
ment for this mark of their favor, and that you will inform 
them that I have applied to His Royal Highness the Prince 
Regent for permission to accept it. 

' 1 have the honor to be, &c. 

' The Rt. Hon. ' Wellington. 

Sir H. WeUesley, K.B: 


To Lieut, General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 1st May, 1812. 8 a.m. 

" I received this morning your letter of the 29th. The 
Conde de Penne Villemur has arrived in Estremadura, in 
consequence of a suggestion from me. ' He communicated 
with Ballesteros, who, as he had notice of Soult’s march into 
Andalusia after the siege of Badajoz, must have retired 
in time : but he tells me in a letter received this morning, 
that it is reported at Seville, that Ballesteros had beaten 
General Rey near Malaga. There was such a General at 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


103 


the head of a small body of troops, I suppose the garrison 
of Malaga ; and Ballesteros, when he advanced upon Seville, 
detached a column to observe his movements. He probably 
augmented that column as he retired; and thus he may 
have defeated General Rey. 

" I send you the intelligence received last night from 
Salamanca, which shows the disposition of the enemy’s 
several divisions. 

^ You will see in the paper from Valladolid, that the 
enemy have some heavy artillery already, and some on the 
march from Bayonne. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut, General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir T. Graham, K,B.^ 

To the Corregidor of the Comar ca of . 

^ Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 2nd May, 1812. 

" I am desirous of making arrangements to have the hay 
cut in the Comarca under your directions, in order that the 
army under my command may have the advantage of it, at 
the same time that the people will derive profit. I beg you, 
therefore, to give directions to the other magistrates in your 
district, to make arrangements to have the hay in their dis- 
tricts cut and stacked at the proper season. They are to 
report to you the quantity which will be cut and stacked in 
each village, and the expense of the same ; and you will 
forward this report to the Commissary General at head 
quarters, who will send you the money to be distributed for 
this service among the several magistrates of the district. 

^ The magistrate who will receive the money will be 
responsible to produce for it a corresponding quantity of 
good hay for the service of the army. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Corregidor of the ' WELLINGTON. 

Comarca of 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

‘ My Lord, * Fuente Guinaldo, 2nd May, 1812. 

' I have had the honor of receiving your Lordship’s dis- 
patches, Nos. 24 and 26, of the 25th of March and 2nd of 



1U4 


SPAIN. 




April ; and having considered with the Commissary General 
and other persons here, who have a knowledge of the facili- 
ties ill raising money in this country, the probability of suc- 
ceeding with the securities drawn and transmitted by your 
Lordship, it has appeared to those persons, as well as to me, 
that the chance of success would be greater if the certificate 
were altered, as proposed in the enclosed draft, in which the 
option is left to receive the interest at head quarters or at 
Lisbon, and to receive payment of the principal likewise at 
the same places. 

‘ There would be but little inconvenience in paying the 
interest at head quarters as well as at Lisbon; and in 
regard to the principal, I would observe that the measure is 
calculated to provide for a momentary scarcity of specie in 
England, applicable to the service of the army abroad. It 
is not probable that in three years there will be the same 
difficulty in procuring specie in England to send abroad as 
there is at present ; and if there should be, it is not im- 
probable that the regularity of the payment of the interest, 
and the advantages and security enjoyed from this descrip- 
tion of certificate, will have improved the credit of the 
British Government to such a degree, that there will be no 
difficulty in borrowing specie in the Peninsula to pay off 
these certificates. 

^ There remains for consideration another possible event, 
viz., that the British army shall have been withdrawn from the 
Peninsula before the expiration of the term of three years. 

^ It will be necessary in that case to appoint an agent for 
the holders of these certificates, to receive their interest and 
the principal when it shall become due, at the office of the 
Commissary in Chief in London, and transmit it to them in 
the Peninsula. 

^ In case your Lordship should consent to the proposed 
alterations in the certificate, I beg you will determine and let 
me know whether the alterations shall be made here in the 
certificates already transmitted, or whether your Lordship 
will have others made out according to the form enclosed. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

*The Earl of Liverpool ^ Wellington. 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


105 


‘No. 123. 
1000 Dollars. 

Don Manuel 
Velasquez. 

(his signature) 

transferred on 
the 

to Don Diego 
Lopez. 

(liis signature.’) 


oSo 






‘No. 123. 

‘ Certificate for 1000 Dollars. 

‘For 1000 dollars advanced to the British 
army, the holder of this certificate is hereby 
entitled to receive interest at the rate of 5 per 
cent, per annum, in half-yearly payments, on 
the and the 

in each year, at the office of the Commissary 
General of the British army, at head quarters 
or at Lisbon. 

‘ The said 1 000 dollars will be repaid by the 
said Cojnmissary General of the British army, 
at head quarters, or in Lisbon, at any period 
after the expiration of two years from the date 
hereof, within ten days of 'the presentation of 
this certificate for that purpose. 

‘ In case the holder of this certificate should 
choose to receive payment of the interest or 
principal in England, he will, upon giving 
notice thereof, receive payment as above spe- 
cified at the office of the Commissary in Chief 
in London, at the rate of 6 shillings sterling 
for each Spanish dollar. 

(Signed) ‘ Wellington. 

(Countersigned) 

* Com. Gen. 

^ ‘ Dep. Pay. Gen, 

‘ MEMORANDUM. 

‘ Every transfer of this certificate must be 
duly registered and certified at one of the 
offices where the interest is made payable, 
without which it will not be acknowledged.* 


To Lieut. General Sir Z Graham, K.B. 

My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd May, 1812. A.M. 

‘ I received this morning your letter of the 1st, and I now 
enclose a paper from Salamanca. The Curate of Coca is 
come over, and says that Marmont had brought hack to Sa- 
lamanca the troops which had marched through that place ; 
being under some apprehension that we should move forward. 

‘ 1 am sorry that you experienced difficulty in passing the 
road from Villa Velha to Niza. It is very bad; and I am 
afraid cannot be materially improved. 



106 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


‘ I have sent Sturgeon and Todd to endeavour to repair 
the bridge of Alcantara ; in which I hope they will succeed. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' Wellington. 

^ir T. Graham^ K.BJ 


To Brigadier General Lobo. 

‘Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd May, 1812. 

‘ Mr. Stuart, His Majesty’s Minister at Lisbon, has in- 
formed me, that he has taken the liberty of addressing to 
you a carriage which has been sent for me from England. 

^ I shall be obliged to you, if you will direct the person 
who is bringing the carriage to proceed by the route en- 
closed to head quarters. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c, 

‘ Brig. General Lobo: ' Wellington. 


To Lieut. Colonel Fletcher. 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd May, 11 p.m. 1812. 

‘ I received in due course your letter giving me an account 
of the progress of the repairs, &(*., at Badajoz ; and I am 
happy to find that you are going on so well. 

‘ There are two or three points, however, to wliicli I think 
you ought to attend, in order in some degree to improve the 
state of the works. 

‘ First ; the sluices in the dams of the bridge over the 
Ilivillas, and in the dam of the ditch of the ravelin of San 
Koque, ought to be protected in some manner or other, 
so as to prevent the enemy from effecting tlie object which 
we attempted in regard to the latter. Probably a good wall 
of stone masonry in front of, and enclosing each of the dams 
with a grating at the bottom of the wall to give a free pas- 
sage to the water, would answer the purpose. 

‘ It would likewise be desirable to have a good covered 
communication from the Picurina to the ravelin. Indeed, if 
the inundation can be depended upon, I should think that 
the Picurina might be rendered very difficult of attack by 
its gorge, approaching it by its right flank. 

‘ I do not know whether you have found the plans of the 
French engineers for bringing water into the ditch of the 



1812 . 


FUENTE 0UINALDO. 


107 


fort from the Guadiana. It is very desirable that these 
schemes should be examined, and their practicability and 
expense ascertained. 

‘ I conclude that you have discovered the communication 
between the inundation of the Rivillas and the water in the 
ditch of the fort, and have ascertained whether it is, or can 
be retained in the latter, supposing that it is let out of the 
former. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. Colonel Fletcher: ' Wellington. 

To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesleyy K.B. 

‘ My DEAR Henry, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd May, 1812. 

^ I am very sorry to tell you that affairs are going on 
very badly at Ciudad Rodrigo. I sent General Alava there 
yesterday, upon hearing that they had not yet commenced 
upon the works ; and, as far as I could understand him, the 
garrison were in a state of mutiny, because Don Carlos de 
Espana had not performed a promise which he had made to 
pay the officers of the garrison for their extra allowances of 
provisions, which had been stopped from them during the 
blockade. He gave me to understand that he should write 
to the Spanish Government this day to apprize them of his 
opinion, and that of several of the principal officers of the 
garrison, that it was absolutely necessary that a British 
officer should be appointed Governor of that garrison ; and 
as far as I could understand him, that allied troops, meaning 
British and Portuguese, should be in it. 

I am tolerably well acquainted with the sentiments of 
some of these officers, among others, of Alava himselft 
regarding the employment of British officers in any Spanish 
concern ; and I am thoroughly convinced that this proposal 
does not proceed from any desire to improve the Spanish 
military system, but that it is to be attributed solely to the 
desire to get out of the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo. They 
dislike the restraint which must prevail soon in a Spanish 
garrison; they dislike being exposed to my view in the 
occasional visits which I make to the place, and to my re- 
monstrances on their indolence, and want of discipline, 
which I have assumed a right to make, on the ground of the 
assistance which I have given them of different descriptions i 



108 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


and, above all, they dislike the prospect of, some day or 
other, being attacked in Ciudad Rodrigo. This last feeling 
is common to all Spaniards. I refer you upon this point to 
Roche, who says very truly, that when a Spanish officer or 
soldier is running away, the last place he will run to is a 
fortified town, although he should be certain of receiving 
there assistance of every description. It is very desirable 
that you, and the Spanish Government, should be clearly 
informed of my opinions and intentions on this point. 

^ First, I consider the British troops the best we have, 
and I will not put them in garrison. Secondly ; I consider 
the Portuguese troops, next to the British, the best in the 
Peninsula, and I will not put more of them in garrisons 
than I am under the necessity of employing in that manner. 
I am obliged to employ some Portuguese regular troops in 
Elvas, and one regiment in Abranles, but the Portuguese 
forts in general are occupied by the Portuguese militia, who, 
like other militia, cannot regularly be marched beyond the 
Portuguese frontier ; and if they should be sent beyond the 
frontier for any length of time, they would desert, 

^ I insist upon it, that Spanish troops are the proper gar- 
risons for Spanish forts. If the Spanish Government differ 
with me upon this point, and insist upon my placing garri- 
sons in these forts which we have taken from the enemy, 
and I have made over to them ; or if they do not adopt 
measures to place, and support, in them proper garrisons, I 
now give notice that I will destroy both Badajoz and 
Ciudad Rodrigo. It will not answer their purpose or mine, 
that I should be tied by the leg to guard these two places 
against the evils to be apprehended from the want of pro- 
per garrisons, or sufficient supplies in them. 

‘ The Spanish troops, however, will be no more fit to gar- 
rison these places, unless they should be disciplined, paid, 
and fed, than they are for other military services, and I sec 
no chance of their being the first, unless they should be the 
two last. 

" But the British Government having agreed to aid the 
Spanish Government with one million sterling this year in 
specie, besides aids in other modes, I see no reason why a 
part, at least, of this sum, should not be applied to the sup- 
port of those garrisons, and troops which are to act in con- 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


109 


cert with the British army, and to aid and support our 
operations. The distribution of this money having been 
refeiTed to you, I am anxious to have your decision, whether 
you propose to give any, and what part of it, for the sup- 
port of the garrisons of Badajoz and Ciudad Rodrigo, and 
of the troops under Don Carlos de Espaha, destined to act 
in Castille, and of the Conde de Pcnne Villcmur, destined 
to act in Estreinadura. 

' If I am to have any thing to say to the distribution of 
tliis aid, I shall employ it in giving their pa}^ or a certain 
proportion of their pay, to a certain number of oflScers and 
soldiers, regularly organized and disciplined. Those who 
shall not be disciplined in two months, shall receive no more 
of this aid, nor any assistance whatever from the British 
Government. The contributions levied from the province, 
and any money that could be sent by the Government, 
should go to make up the deficiency of the pay from the 
British subsidy. In this manner we might contrive to dis- 
cipline and maintain these Spanish garrisons, and to render 
them useful. 

‘ In regard to the employment of British officers with the 
Spanish troops, I entertain the same opinion which I have 
always held upon this subject. British officers will be worse 
than useless, if they have not the support to their exertions 
of the authority of the Commander in Chief, who must have 
the cordial support of the Government, or he will have no 
authority. British officers, besides, require an authority of 
no mean description, exercised with considerable strictness 
to keep them in order and within due bounds. The history 
of our service in Portugal will afford many instances of the 
truth of both these opinions. British officers would have 
more difficulties to contend with in Spain than they had in 
Portugal, and more temptations and opportunities of abus- 
ing their authority. 

^ I retain likewise the same opinions regarding my having 
the command of the Spanish armies. I consider troops that 
are neither paid, fed, nor disciplined, (and they cannot be 
disciplined, and there can be no subordination among them, 
unless they are paid and fed,) to be dangerous only to their 
friends when assembled in large bodies ; as guerrillas they 
might be of some use, but it would be better, probably, if 



110 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


the same men were employed under the guerrilla officer, 
who is much better acquainted with his trade, than what is 
called the officer of the regular Spanish service, knows the 
country better, Avhich is the seat of his operations, knows 
better and is better known to the inhabitants, and, above 
all, has no pretensions to military character. 

^ I never will voluntarily command troops who cannot, 
and will not obey ; and therefore I am not desirous of hav- 
ing any thing to say to the command of the Spanish troops 
till I shall see the means provided for their food and pay> 
and till I shall be certain that the regular issue of these has 
been the effect of introducing among them a regular system 
of subordination and discipline. 

^ Upon this subject of the introduction of British officers 
into the service, and of the command being given to me, I 
niay be wrong, but I entertain opinions which I have not 
heard from others. It is my opinion, that the officers of the 
Spanish army, and the cmiiloyeis' of the Government in the 
military, as well as the civil departments, are the principal 
exciters and supporters of the general sentiment which pre- 
vails among the people against the French. Excepting the 
Grandees, and a few men of large estate, who resided in the 
provinces, every person in Spain of the class of a gentleman, 
or, more properly speaking, above the class of the culti- 
vators of the soil, was in the civil, military, or naval service 
of the Government. All these consider themselves de- 
prived of their profession by the establishment of the Go- 
vernment of Buonaparte, particularly the officers of the 
army : and it is a very remarkable circumstance, and tend- 
ing strongly to support my opinion, that the officers of the 
navy, whose services are least likely to be required by their 
country, in case the Spanish nation should succeed in shak- 
ing off the Buonaparte yoke, and that the alliance with 
England should become the permanent system of Spain, 
have done least in the war, have seldom agreed cordially 
with us, and a larger proportion of them, than of the mili- 
tary, have taken the side of the usurpation. 

' The conclusion which I draw from these observations, is, 
that if we mean to encourage the continued resistance of the 
Spanish people, we ought not to disgust the officers of the 
Spanish army, and so far deprive them of their profession, as 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


Ill 


to give to British officers the effectual control over the army. 
Mini I do not say that the Spanish officers are the sole 
cause of the continued resistance of the people ; for I be- 
lieve the sentiment of hostility against the French is part of 
the nature of a Spaniard; but it must be admitted, that the 
example and instigation of the superior class of officers must 
have some effect in continuing the resistance of the lower 
orders. 

" But, althougli I conceive that there are many difficulties 
and inconveniences in introducing our officers into the 
Spanish service, and in giving the Commander in Chief of 
1 1 is Majesty’s troops the supreme command of the whole, I 
conceive that many of the advantages to be expected from 
both arrangements might be acquired in another manner. I 
tliink that I have already acquired such an influence over 
the officers of the Spanish army, that they would do any 
thing I should desire them, excepting perhaps to discipline 
their troops, establish subordination and order among them, 
and overcome their habits of indolence and procrastination. 
1 doubt that they can effect these objects till the troops 
shall be regularly paid and fed ; and if what I have above 
suggested be adopted, you will see that the remedy for these 
defects is provided. 

' It has always been my opinion that much might be done 
by the British Government to increase the authority and in- 
fluence of the Commander in Chief in this country. 

" First ; travelling military missions ought to be put an 
end to, or ought to be under the immediate direction of the 
Commander in Chief. 

^ Secondly ; no aid of any description ought to be given 
to any Spanish troops, or commander of army, or guerrillas, 
excepting under the direction of the Commander in Chief. 

‘ I have above stated the condition upon which alone I 
would issue any aid to any regular troops. The discipline 
of guerrillas might not be insisted upon ; but it might be 
possible to couple with the grant of any aid, whether of 
arms, provisions, or money, even to guerrillas, an arrange- 
ment for their following a certain system, or line of opera- 
tions, connected with those of others. 

" All propositions for increase and extension of authority 
are received in England with jealousy ; and I have there- 



112 


W SPAIN-.f 


1812. 


fore fe 3 vor*made anyi direct pcopositiotKi iwpon this subject. I 
might have: hoped that the desire which I have always e5i- 
pressed to be allowed to confine my attention to my own 
army, might have satisfied the King s Government that I 
want no ex!tension of authority, and that I deprecate it as 
throwing upon mo additional responsibility and trouble. 

^ But the state of the garrisons of Ciudad Kodrigo and 
Badajoz, and the discussions into which we are about to 
enter respecting those establishments, render it necessary 
to speak out ; and I have no hesitation in declaring my 
opinion, that the only remedy for the existing evils is for 
the British Government to increase to the utmost e^dtent 
the power and authority of the Commander in Chief, and 
to leave to his discretion the distribution of all the aids to 
the Peninsula. 

^ Ever yours most affectionately, 

* The Right Hon, f Wellington. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B: 


\ To His Excellency Clearies Stuart, ' 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd May, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 30th April, to which I 
would not trouble you with an answer, only that I see that 
Dom Miguel Forjaz, of course, deceived himself by thosd 
under him, and thus deceives you. 

^ I have as yet made no complaint of means of transport 
in Alentejo, wanting to convey provisions and stores to 
Elvas and Badajoz since the siege of the latter. What I 
complained of, was want of means of transport to convey the 
stores for the siege of Badajoz, in the months of February 
and March, and to facilitate the operations of the siege. 
These wants occurred before the complaints were made. ^ 

' I am afraid that Dom Miguel Forjaz thinks that I am 
inclined to complain without reason; In order tx> avoid dis- 
appointment and complaint, and in orden ' if « possible, to 
throw provisions into all the fortified places aiid magazinefe 
without pressing the country for moans of transport (which, 
by the by, I must observe ought to be done by others^ and 
«iot by me), I have done what I believe no other General at 
the head; of an army ever before dTeamt df.; The allied 



18 M 


FUKNTE GUTKALOO. 


113 


army are now separated, from the Doaro to the Sierra 
Morena, close to the magazines, in order that the troops 
may subsist with facility, and that all the means of transport 
belonging to the army may be employed in filling the forts 
and magazines with provisions, in order that I may have 
to call for little transport from the country, and may havd 
no complaints to make. 

" I beg, however, that Dom Miguel Forjaz may not 
boast that the want of complaint is to be attributed to the 
activity of the agents of the Government, or the efficiency 
of the law. 

^ I am much obliged to you for the trouble you have taken 
about my carriage. I shall write to General Lobo about it, 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency * WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart' 


To Major General Peacocke. 

^ Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 4th May, 1812. 

^ I beg, that as soon as convenient after the receipt of 
this letter, you will inspect the — th regiment under tlio 
General Orders of the 3rd May, 1812, and make me a report 
upon its state without loss of time, in order that I may 
judge of the expediency of again ordering that regiment 
into the field. 

^ I understand that the — th regiment have their mules, 
&c. in readiness to inarch at the shortest notice. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General Peacocke: ‘ WELLINGTON. 


To Brig, General Le Cor. 

* Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 4th May, 1812. ' 

‘ I have received your letter of the 1st instant, and I have 
given directions to the Commissary General to have a sum 
of money in the hands of the Commissary at Gastello 
Branco, for the purpose of making the advances for cutting 
hay, at an early period in this month. 

* The Commissary at Castello Branco will be directed to 
wait upon you on this subject. I beg, however, that you will 
observe, that I do not propose to make advances for straw ; 
VOL. i.x. I 



114 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


I make advances for hay, under the notion that this descrip* 
tion of forage would not be cut, under the existing circum- 
stances of the country, if these advances were not made. 
Whatever may be the state of the country, the corn will be 
cut, and the straw will be a resource, and I am willing to 
take my chance of its being one, for the army on payment on 
delivery, rather than pay for it beforehand. It will not be 
necessary, therefore, to provide so large a sum to be ad- 
vanced as you propose. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

^ Brig, General Le Cor: ‘ Wellington. 


To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

‘ Fuente Guinaklo, 4th May, 1812. 

^ My dear Sir, Half past 11 p.m. 

' I enclose papers of the 27th and 30th April, from Sala- 
manca. The former ought to have been received before. 

' Marmont ought certainly to place his left on the Tagus, 
and his right at Avila, and to hold Salamanca by a small 
corps. But the French arc so distressed for pi’ovisions, and 
in every other way, that it is difficult to guess what they 
will do. 

" Affairs are going on but ill at Ciudad Rodrigo ; and as 
far as I can understand, there has been something very like 
a mutiny there ; and all parties agree that the garrison must 
be given over to us ; that is to say, the officers do not choose 
to stay in it. I have given fair notice, however, that I will 
not take charge of the garrison, excepting on an acknow- 
ledgment under their hands, that they are incapable of 
holding it, or, as officers, of commanding their men ; and 
that sooner than garrison the place permanently, I will 
destroy it entirely. 

" I have, however, begged my brother to draw the serious 
attention of the Government to this subject. 

I think this time favorable for Hilfs operation upon 
Almaraz, and I have desired him to march upon it with a 
part of his troops. 

‘ I have sent large numbers of carts and animals to the 
magazines to bring up supplies for the places; and that 
business is going on well. Before it can be so far com- 



1812. 


FUENTB GUrNALDO. 


115 


pleted as to enable me to leave this place, I must know what 
Marmont’s dispositions are, and I shall be prepared for a 
movement on one side or the other of the Tagus before the 
harvest. In order to make this preparation, however, I have 
done what could not be attempted in any other war but this ; 
having placed the right of the army upon the Sierra Mo- 
rena, and the left at St. Joac) da Pesqueira, on the Douro. 
But I am certain that the French will not find out how weak 
we are in all points. 

Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut. General ^ WiCLTilNGTON. 

Sir T. Graham, K.B: 


To the Right Hon. Sir Hen?*y TVellesley, K.B. 

< gjj^^ ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 4th May, 1812. 

' I enclose a letter which I have received from Madrid 
from a person unknown to me, in regard to the two young 
men who will wait upon you with this letter. 

^ I beg leave to recommend them to your protection ; and 
if it should appear that there is any person in authority at 
Cadiz acquainted with the character of the writer of the 
enclosed letter, or with that of their family, I beg you will 
recommend that they may be received into the academy, and 
eventually employed in the army. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Eon. ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley. KB: 


To Lieut. Colonel Sir Howard Douglas, Bart. 

( ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 6th May, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 26th April. It does 
not appear to me to be necessary that you should issue the 
stores required by Brig. General Carroll till he shall have 
men to make use of them, and only in proportion as he shall 
have men. 

‘ I beg leave to suggest to you the expediency of abstain- 
ing from making remonstrances on the detachment of troops 
from Galicia to America, till you shall receive orders to do 
so from His Majesty’s Government. Your duty is to make 
such representations as you may be directed to make to the 



116 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


General Officer commanding in Galicia in regard to his 
operations, and to suggest the measures which may occur 
to you as likely to forward the object in the view of His 
Majesty’s Government, or of the Commander in Chief of 
the army, 

' You arc likewise to superintend the distribution of the 
stores sent to Galicia for tlic purposes of the war, according 
to the orders which you will from time to time receive. 

‘ But I beg leave to suggest to you, that you have no- 
thing to say to political measures. You have nothing to do 
with the detachment of troops or artillery to South America. 

‘ It is obvious that General Abadia, or General Castahos, 
could not make such detachments without orders from their 
Government ; and you must not endeavor to prevail upon 
them to disobey the orders which they may receive, although 
you may press the expediency of the employment of the 
troops and artillery in other quarters, without reference to 
the orders of the Government that the troops and artillery 
should be sent to America. 

" If His Majesty’s Ambassador at Cadiz should wish to 
liavo those orders recalled, he will make the request direct 
to the Government ; and at all events your interference with 
the person who is to obey the orders of the Government 
must be hopeless, while it will lead to discussions of an un- 
pleasant nature, which may as well be avoided. 

‘ In regard to the supply of arms and equipments to 
troops about to be detached to America, you have received 
the Secretary of State’s orders upon that subject, and you 
will of course obey them. 

If troops should be detached to America which you have 
supplied witli arms and equipments, yon will observe to 
General Abadia that the design in supplying these arms 
and equipments was to enable the Spanish Government to 
oppose the common enemy in the Peninsula, and not to 
€ittcmpt any thing so hopeless as the conquest of the Colo- 
nics; and you will suggest to him the expediency of using 
the arms and equipments for troops destined to serve 
against the common enemy in Europe. 

' If any of the arms and equipments issued by you should 
be detached to America with the troops notwithstanding 
these remonstrances, you will, upon every occasion on which 



1812. 


FUENTK GUIKALDO. 


117 


you shall make an issue to the troops in Galicia in future, 
stipulate that neither the arms nor the equipments issued 
by you are to be detached with any troops to America. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieift Colonel ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir H, Douglas^ Bart ' 


To Major General Cooke. 

' Sjn, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 6th May, 1812. 

^ I have had the honor of receiving your letters of the 
1 6tli, 23rd, 25th, 26tli and 29th of April, Nos. 64, 65, 66, 67, 
and 68 ; and I have perused with great attention the enclo- 
sures from Major General Eoss. 

" I entirely concur with General Ross in opinion, that it is 
expedient that he should occupy Fort Atalaya, as well as 
Fort Galcras, and that those places should be provisioned 
for the period during which it is probable that they would 
hold out if attacked by the enemy, or during which it might 
be expedient that the garrison should be kept within them 
without communication with the town. 

" In regard to the heights of San Julian, I was induced, 
upon examining the plan of Carthagena, and upon convers- 
ing with Lieut. Wells, to be of opinion that it was expedient 
not to occupy that position. According to Lieut. Wells’s 
report, the construction of a respectable field work on that 
point appeared impracticable; and any thing more solid 
appeared to require such a length of time and a sum of 
money, owing to the extreme difficulty of getting materials 
to the spot, that it could not be expected that it would bo 
completed within any reasonable period. 

" It likewise appeared from an examination of the plan, 
that although the occupation of San Julian was essentially 
necessary, with a view to any more extensive system for the 
protection of the right of the works of the town, and for the 
protection of the navigation of the harbour, it was not itself 
sulEcient for either object ; and therefore upon the whole I 
was of opinion, that it was better not to occupy San Julian, 
more particularly as it appeared that there was at all times 
a good communication with the sea from Galcras. It is, 
however, impossible to form a conclusive opinion upon a 



118 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


question of this description without seeing the ground. It 
is obvious that some of the information received from Lieut. 
Wells was erroneous; and Major General Boss on the spot, 
must be a better judge than I can be here, of the effect of 
his work upon San Julian; and upon the whole I cer- 
tainly concur in his plan to complete the old Spanish field 
work on that hill, and to build within it the tower proposed 
by Captain Roberts. 

^ Major General Ross must likewise be a better judge than 
I can be of the expediency of placing guns of a large calibre 
in Fort Atalaya, and his works on San Julian. 

" I have observed that the French have come but ill-pro- 
vided with ordnance and ammunition for the attack of 
strong places in Spain ; and, therefore, unless there should 
be reason for preferring heavy ordnance in outworks, light 
ordnance should be adopted. But if heavy ordnance should 
be necessary, and there should be any of the irregular 
calibres, it should be preferred to ordnance of the regular 
calibres. 

‘ For this same reason I recommend, that if Major Gene- 
ral Ross should think ordnance of large calibres necessary 
in these outworks, he should prefer the English ordnance, 
as the ammunition will not answer for the French and 
Spanish calibres. 

^ 1 believe, however, that the heavy English iron 12 
pounders will throw a shot as far as any other gun, and if 
the shot is not required for destroying masonry, that calibre 
would answer as well as any other for all other purposes. 
This gun, therefore, ought to be preferred for these outworks, 
and it would be useless to the enemy if it should fall into 
their hands. 

^ The same observation regarding the deficiency of am- 
munition generally felt by the enemy for his operations, 
suggests the expediency of firing as few guns as possible of 
the regular calibres ; as I know, that upon more than one 
occasion, the French have carried on a siege nearly unpro- 
vided with shot excepting that fired by the besieged, which 
is picked up by the soldiers for a reward. 

" The next subject which requires an answer in Major 
General Ross’s letters, relates to Alicante. I have received 
no orders from His Majesty’s Government to occupy that 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


119 


post with British troops, and I cannot think it expedient, in 
any view of the subject, to detach troops from Cadiz, or from 
this army, to occupy that post. 

^ In regard to the proposition from General O’Donnell, 
that Major General Ross should detach troops from Cartha^ 
gena, I might refer Major General Ross to the instructions 
which have been handed over to him by Colonel Lambert. 

^ He has the copy of the instructions which were given to 
Major General the Hon. William Stewart when he was 
detached from this army to Cadiz, in 1810, to which he is 
directed to attend, as far as they may be found applicable to 
the circumstances at Carthagena ; and he will find in those 
instructions an article relating to quitting the Isla de Leon, 

" I should be sorry to be bound myself, and I do not wish 
to bind others by positive orders, which may not be appli- 
cable to circumstances as they may arise. 

" The Spanish nation and troops, particularly the common 
soldiers, entertain an opinion that our soldiers are invincible ; 
and that it is only necessary that they should appear, in 
order to insure success; and they are so ignorant of the 
nature of a military operation, that they attribute our 
refraining from interfering upon many occasions, to dis- 
inclination to the cause, and frequently to the want of the 
requisite military qualities in the General Officer, who 
directs our operations. It may be depended upon, that 
where there are British troops, there will be no want of 
invitations for their co-operation ; but I am convinced that 
there is no officer who can believe that 500 or 600 men can 
perform any thing essential ; or that it is proper to employ 
the King’s troops, or to risk their safety in the execution 
of plans which have really no essential object in view, which 
are adopted without consideration, and relinquished without 
cause ; and for the execution of which, there do not exist, 
even in the opinion of those who propose them, any adequate 
means excepting the military virtues of the British troops. 

‘ 1 therefore beg leave to warn Major General Ross of the 
inexpediency of his attending to the invitations of General 
O’Donnell of co-operation in expeditions in the field ; as he 
may depend upon it, that they will not answer any purpose. 
1 cannot at this distance, however, take upon me to say, 
that a case will not occur, in which it may be proper that 



120 


SPAIN. 


i&m 

Major General Boss should detach some of the troops under 
his command from Carthagena ; and I beg to refer him to 
my letter to you upon the subject of detachments from Cadiz^ 
of the 15th November, 1811, which has been approved of 
by the Secretary of State. 

^ In regard to Major General Ross’s complaints of the 
inclination of the soldiers of Watte ville’s regiment to desert, 
I beg to observe : first, that it affords an additional reason 
for not detaching from Carthagena the few British troops he 
has under his command ; secondly, that all General Officers, 
who have foreign troops under their command, have the same 
cause to complain. In that part of the allied army under 
my command, called British, there are between 6000 and 
7000 of them, who desert whenever they can get an oppor- 
tunity ; and I cannot increase the number, and decrease that 
of the really British troops, in order to send another British 
regiment to Major General Boss ; neither do I think that 
you can spare another British regiment from Cadiz in ex- 
change for 500 foreign troops. I am responsible for the 
description of troops which I have sent to Carthagena ; and 
Major General Ross is responsible for making the proper 
use of them ; and if he thinks that I have not sent to Cartha- 
gena troops upon whom he can depend for the service on 
which he is employed, he has only to say so, and he shall be 
relieved. 

^ I do not think it quite clear, whether Major General 
Ross has or not a warrant from y6u to enable him to hold a 
General Court Martial, as he mentions in one letter that he 
has not a warrant, and in another that lie has ordered a 
General Court Martial to try certain deserters. I therefore 
enclose a warrant to enable him to hold a General Court 
Martial. 

^ It is necessary that you should request the Governor of 
Gibraltar to supply the ordnance and stores required as 
well for Carthagena as for Tarifa, and inform me and the 
Secretary of State the nature and amount of those requish 
lions. 

^ I concur in your paying the Spanish soldiers a real a 
day for their work at Tarifa, but I beg leave to suggest to 
you, that measures may be adopted to insure their doing a 
day’s work for the payment, either by fixing the task which 



im 


FOENTE OUIKALDO. 


121 


each man' is' to perform, or by the active st^ecintcndcncp ef 
officers, or by any other mode that may be proposed 
i ' 1 have the honor to bo, &Ck 
‘ Major General Cooke' * Weli.iN6T011. . 


To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

t Mv DEAR Sir, ‘ Faente Guinaldo, 6th May, 1818. j 

‘ Although I have neither the authority nor the means of 
applying a remedy to the various complaints which you may 
have occasion to make, I beg that you will understand that 
it is my duty to attend to them, and that it is not necessary 
that you should make any apology for sending them. 

' I beg leave to observe, however, that the papers trans- 
mitted in your letter of the 2nd instant, arc no answer to 
the complaints made by me of the civil authorities in Alentejo 
for omitting to supply the means of transport required in 
February to bring up to Elvas the stores for the siege of 
Badajoz. After the place was taken I threw upon the 
Government the responsibility of bringing up the supplies 
to replenish the magazines of Elvas, and to fill those of 
Badajoz ; and I am happy to find that that measure has had 
the effect of calling forth an exertion which, according to 
Dom Miguel Forjaz’s account, has accomplished my object. 

‘ When a complaint is made in Portugal, I observe that 
there is no want of answers. But answers written months 
after the cause of complaint arises will not carry on the 
service, and I only wish that those who write them would 
come forward and suggest resources to remedy or remove 
the inconveniences of all descriptions occasioned by the 
neglects and omissions which gave cause for the complaints. 
They will then probably think it necessary to do something 
more than give fallacious answers. 

‘ In regard to money for the Portuguese Government, I 
begged Mr. Bissett to suggest to you that if you were not 
satisfied with the sum he was enabled to supply you, you 
should make your complaint on the subject to the King’s 
Government. I am not the Minister of Finance, nor is the 
Commissary General. 

^Itis the duty of the King’s Ministers to provide supplies 
for the service, and not to undertake a service for which 



122 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


they cannot provide adequate supplies of money and every 
other requisite. They have thrown upon me a very unplea- 
sant task in leaving to me to decide what proportion of the 
money which comes into the hands of the Commissary Gene- 
ral shall be applied to the service of the British army, and 
what shall be paid to the King’s Minister, in order to enable 
liim to make good the King’s engagements to the Portu- 
guese Government ; and at the same time that they have 
laid upon me this task, and left me to find money to carry 
on the war as I could, they have, by their orders, cut off 
some of the resources which 1 had. 

" In every view of the case, therefore, it is to the King’s 
Government that you should make your complaint. I must 
say, however, that there is little cause for complaint of want 
of supplies of money from the Portuguese Government in 
the months of March and April. It appears by Mr. Bissett’s 
statement that he issued to you in those months 725,000 
dollars, besides supplies to a large amount; and besides 
provisions for the Portuguese troops serving with our divi- 
sions, for the garrison*of Almeida, and to the militia under 
Generals Trant, Wilson, and the Conde de Amarante, and 
pay and provisions to the regiment at Cadiz. I cannot be 
certain, but I believe the Portuguese Government arc not 
entitled to more in money than the sum above stated. This, 
however, is no concern of mine ; I merely suggest it for your 
consideration, before you bring the subject under the con- 
sideration of the King’s Government. 

" At all events, whether the sum is less or more than the 
King has engaged to supply to the Portuguese Government, 
I could not authorise the issue of more, with justice even 
to the Portuguese service. The British army have not 
been paid for nearly three months ; we owe nearly a year’s 
hire to the muleteers of the army ; and we are in debt for 
supplies in all parts of the country ; and we are on the point 
of failing in our payments for some supplies essentially ne- 
cessary to both armies, which cannot be procured excepting 
with ready money, 

‘ I admit that the payments made in March and April, 
although to the full amount of what the Portuguese Govern- 
ment are entitled, are not sufficient for their wants. But 
that is no concern of mine. I have frequently recommended 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


123 


measures which, if they had been adopted, would by this 
time have rendered the Portuguese Government independ- 
ent of the subsidy, and an aid instead of being a financial 
burthen on Great Britain. I repeat those measures : — a 
reform in the abuses of the customs of Lisbon and Oporto ; 
a more equal and just collection of the income tax on the 
commercial property, particularly in those large and rich 
cities. (It is really scandalous to hear of the fortunes which 
have been made by the mercantile classes in those cities by 
the war, and to reflect tliat they contribute nothing to bear 
its burthens.) A reform of the expenses of the naval esta- 
blishments of the country and tliose of the arsenal. If these 
measures were adopted, the income would be equal to the 
expenditure, and the Government would get on without 
calling upon Great Britain at every moment to find that 
which, in the existing state of the world, cannot be procured, 
viz., money. 

' I am concerned that 1 cannot agree with you in the jus- 
tice of the proposition that the King should pay the hire of 
boats detained in the service of the Portuguese Govern- 
ment, when the Commissariat do not issue from the stores 
all that is required at the moment it is required. Adverting 
to the extensive store houses there are at Lisbon unem- 
ployed, and belonging to the Government, it is not very 
friendly, nor, adverting to the scarcity of specie, very politic, 
to make the Commissary General hire his stores at a large 
rent ; and I have frequently turned over in my mind the 
expediency of demanding from the Portuguese Government 
a proportion of the rent for store houses, equal to the pro- 
portion of the stores consumed by the Portuguese army. 
Tills demand, however, has not been made. That which 
has been made for rent is for stores not taken away, when 
the orders for their issues had been given, which, consider- 
ing that when an issue is ordered, a purchase must be made 
of fresh quantities to supply its place ; and that if the stores 
of which the issue has been ordered are not carried away, 
new store rooms must be hired and additional expense in- 
curred, does not appear to me to be unreasonable. 

^ I must observe upon this discussion that it originates in 
the system of giving anstvers to complaints, instead of ap- 
plying a remedy. 



124 


SPAIN. " 


1812. 


* Marshal Beresford makes a complaint of want felt by the 
army, and Senhor Cardoso answers by what I must term a 
falsehood, viz., that he cannot get his supplies from the 
British Commissariat. When this answer comes to be ex- 
amined here, after having gone through the usual course of 
notes, &c., it turns out to be proved that the issues had 
been ordered months before ; that the stores were still lying 
in the British store houses ; and that they had been re- 
placed by fresh purchases of stores, to hold which fresh 
store houses had been hired. 

‘ Is a demand for payment for store room, under these 
circumstances, at all like a demand for payment of hire for 
boats, detained possibly by the usual course of business, but 
certainly, as appears by the above statement of facts, not by 
design ? 

‘ The man who wrote the paper which you sent to Eng- 
land, is not employed by me. I thought he had been em- 
ployed by you, but I find he is employed by my brother. I 
judge from the intelligence that he is the same person who 
sends information to Valencia de Alcantara. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellenctj ' W ELLTNGTON. 

Charles Stuart,' 


To the Earl of LiveiyooL 

^ My dear Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, Gth May, 1812 . 

‘ 1 enclose an extract of a letter which I wrote to my 
brother three days ago, in regard to the temper of the 
officers of the garrison of Ciudad Kodrigo ; since which time 
the officers have been in open mutiny. 

^ It is not necessary that I should enter upon the details 
of this event ; but it is obvious to me from the pretence for 
it, the conduct of the body of the officers in general, and the 
mode in which it was put an end to, that what they want is 
to get out of the garrison. 

‘ I cannot but admit that their situation in the garrison is 
very distressing ; they have no pay, and nothing but their 
rations to subsist upon. The inhabitants in general had 
quitted Ciudad Kodrigo previous to the late blockade, and 
they have not yet returned, and the officers enjoy none df 



1812. PUENTfi GUINALDO. 125 

the conveniences which they would have by residing in the 
houses of the inhabitants in cantonments in the villages. 
They arc, therefore, dissatisfied with their situation, and I 
am certain that unless means can be devised of paying them 
and the troops under their command regularly, it is useless 
to expect any assistance from them. If I was enabled to 
pay them, I would force them to learn and to perform their 
duty. 

' Your Lordship will observe in the enclosed letter, that it 
is my opinion that all the supplies sent to this country for 
the Spanish Government should be at the disposal of the 
Commissary in Chief of the King's troops. I have long en- 
tertained this opinion, and if I have not given utterance to 
it more clearly, it is because I was not desirous of creating 
an impression that I wished to accumulate power into my 
own hands. It might besides appear that I blamed the 
distribution of the supplies in kind, which had been made 
by His Majesty's Minister at Cadiz, as, till I read Lord 
Castlereagh’s dispatch to the Duque del Infantado, I did 
not know that the Spanish Government had received any 
but very small occasional sums of money, always upon a 
promise of repayment, which promise had frequently been 
performed. 

^ The reasons why I think tlie supplies ought to be ex- 
clusively in the hands of the Commander in Chief arc, first, 
that it will give him an influence over all the operations 
more efficient than the command under existing circum- 
stances, and probably as efficient as it could be under any 
circumstances. Secondly, it is the only mode in which the 
due distribution of the supplies, money in particular, can be 
secured for the purposes of the service. 

I beg to refer your Lordship to Sir Howard Douglas’s 
statement of the revenue and expenditure of Galicia, and to 
the monthly estimates of the military expenditure in Portu- 
gal, in whicli you will see how large a revenue can be laid 
out among military pensioners and civil establishments of 
all descriptions, and an example of how small a proportion 
of a sum of money can be applied to the support of the real 
fighting soldier. I contend for it, that if the King's Am- 
bassador at Cadiz disposes of tins money, he must dispose 
of it through the hands of the Government ; admitting tJiat 



126 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


the Government dispose of it conscientiously for the benefit 

of the army, what happens ? They send a part to , 

and the first thing will do will be to take the 

whole arrear of his own appointments, and those of his 
whole Staff, and probably a part of the appointments of 

1500 officers living at his head quarters at , who have 

dispersed ; the officers doing duty with the regiments will 
probably get but very little, and the soldiers positively 
nothing ; this is a real representation of what I know to be 
a fact. 

^ A sum of money sent to might be distributed 

rather more fairly, because he has with him more effective 
men and fewer idlers ; but still I will venture to assert, that 
the officers of his Staff are less in arrears than those of the 
regiments, and the officers of the regiments infinitely less 
than the men. 

' If this money is placed at my disposal : First, I shall 
insist that after the first two months, it shall be paid to none 
but disciplined troops. 

^ Secondly, that staff and regimental officers and the sol- 
diers shall each receive their regular proportion of their pay. 

" Thirdly, that every other sum of money, either collected 
upon the country by way of contribution, or sent by Go- 
vernment, shall be distributed among the whole on the same 
principle. 

" I do not think that the King’s Ambassador, distributing 
the money through the Government, can effect this object : 
however, in whatever way the King’s servants may decide 
this point, I beg to lay in a claim for a part of the money 
for the garrisons of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, and for 
the Spanish troops in Castille and Estremadura, otherwise 
much of the benefit to be expected from these conquests 
will be lost. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: * WELLINGTON. 

To the Earl of Liverpool. 

* My Loud, ♦Fuente Guinaldo, 6th May, 1812. 

" Having understood that some discussions of an unplea- 
sant nature had taken place between Sir Howard Douglas 
and General Abadia in Galicia, and having observed, from 



1812 . 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


127 


the postscript to a letter of the 13th ultimo from Sir Howard 
Douglas, that he was not on the terms on which he ought to 
be with General Abadia, I have thought it proper to send 
him the instructions of which I enclose a copy. 

His direct interfei’ence to prevent a detachment of 
troops from embarking from Galicia to America must be 
quite hopeless, if His Majesty’s Ambassador at Cadiz can- 
not prevail upon the Regency to refrain from that measure ; 
and it has been the cause of the discussions to which I refer, 
the existence of which has tended to weaken Sir Howard’s 
influence in Galicia, and to diminish the benefit to be 
expected from his employment in that quarter. 

" The truth is, that when the Spanish Government or 
nation are determined to adopt a measure, however injurious 
to their cause, nothing can prevent them from carrying it 
into execution. 

^ The measure of sending troops to America has been 
insisted upon by the City of Cadiz, from which alone the 
Government receive any pecuniary assistance, and which 
possesses unbounded influence over the Cortes, and it may 
be depended upon that no power which can be exerted will 
prevent its execution, 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ‘ Wellington. 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

^ My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 6th May, 1812. 

' The enemy have distributed their troops generally in 
the cantonments which they occupied previous to their late 
march to this quarter, and nothing of any importance has 
occurred since I last addressed you. 

We are collecting provisions and stores for Ciudad 
Rodrigo and Almeida, which I hope will arrive at an early 
period. No movement of importance has been made in the 
south. 

" By accounts from Galicia I learn that Espoz y Mina 
fought a very successful action with the enemy in the end of 
March, and frustrated all the endeavors of General Dor- 
senne to destroy his corps with an infinitely superior force. 
He has since been very successful against one of the enemy’s 



128 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


convoys on the 9th of April, and it is reported that he has 
taken a very large sum of money. 

^ I have the honor to he, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool ' WELLINGTON. 

To Lieut General Sir T Graham, K.B, 

‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 7th May, 1812. 

' My dear Sir, 9 p.m. 

‘ I have desired Sir Howland Hill to undertake the ser- 
vice which I have long had in contemplation for the destruc- 
tion of the enemy’s establishments at Almaraz, and I hope 
that he will have marched about this time with about 5000 
or 6000 men for that object. 

' I am not quite certain whom Sir Rowland will leave in 
command of the troops in front of Badajoz. 

^ It appears by a letter which 1 have from Hill this morn- 
ing, that some of Bonet’s troops were in motion in the 
beginning of the month towards Zalamca, &c. ; and I hear 
from Clemcnti Pereira that the 2nd division of the army of 
Portugal was likewise in motion towards the Puerto del 
Pico ; while Marmont, with a part of the army of Portugal, 
remains at Salamanca. I conclude, therefore, that the first 
measure of the King’s command has been to draw closer the 
two armies ; and that they will be in direct communication 
by Talavera, but nothing offensive can be intended with 
troops so widely extended. 

^ As some time must elapse yet before we can attempt 
anything, I shall be very much obliged to you if you will 
move your quarters to Portalegrc, and if you will have your 
eye upon what is passing in front of Badajoz, and will go 
there, if you should find that any serious movement is likely 
to be made by the enemy on that place during Hill’s 
absence. 

^ I have ordered the 6th division from Gastello de Vide to 
Portalegre, in order to be nearer Badajoz, in case you 
should think more troops there to be necessary. 

‘ I enclose the copy of the instructions which I gave Sir 
Rowland Hill when I left Estremadura, which I shall be 
obliged to you to return to me, as I have no other copy. 
Brigadier General Power’s brigade, and the 22nd regiment, 
still remain in Badajoz, and Penne Villemur’s cavalry and 



m2. 


F17ENTK <5UINALD0. 


129 


infftutry iM; t Bu^guillosi, &c* ; Spanish Goyerament 
having as yet given neither answer nor orders respecting 
the garrison for that place. 

* The communication with Almendralejo is carried on 
through Badajoz and Elvas, to Portalcgre; and as that 
road is but little about, it may probably as well be con- 
tinued by that line. The 6th division would be three days 
marching from Portalcgre to Badajoz ; of which, two to 
Campo Mayor, ortho left of the position of Engracia, 
referred to in the enclosed letter. 

^ The mutiny at Ciudad Rodrigo has taken place, and 
was settled by Don Carlos de Espana without communi- 
cating with me, in a manner of which I cannot approve. Not 
knowing of his arrival at the place, I sent a letter to the 
Governor the night before last, which would have had the 
effect of opening the eyes of the well disposed, and would 
have separated them from the bad ; and at all events, would 
have ascertained, and probably have fixed the sentiments of 
the soldiers on the right side, and would have settled the 
business as it ought to have been settled, without concession. 

^ We can never depend upon this garrison under existing 
circumstances ; and I must endeavor to prevail upon Cas- 
tanos to send one from Galicia. 

^ I write to Hill to request him to desire the officer in 
command of the troops in front of Badajoz to report to you 
at Portalcgre, as well as to me. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘WELLINGTON. 

Sir T, Graham, K.B.^ 

Lieut, General Sir T, Graham, K.B, 

* MV DEAR Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 8th May, 1812. 

‘ I enclose the only intelligence which I have received 
since yesterday. 

^ By a letter from Hill of the 5th, I find it was only 
part of Drouet’s troops that moved. 

> I enclose a declaration which I have received from Eng- 
land, front which it appears that the question of the Orders 
in Council is settled. 

t ^ I have a paper from America, from which it appears 
tJiat the Americans have laid a general embargo on all 

VOL. IX. K 



130 


SPAIN. 


1815 ^ 


tessels^ This is a ittcasure of importance^ as all this pArt 
of the Peninsula has been living this year on American 
flour. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

• UeuU General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir Ti Graham^ K.B' 


To Colonel Austin, 

« Stti, ‘ Fuente Guinatdo, 9lh May, 1812. 

* I have received this day your letter of the 2nd instant, 
informing me of the Arrival at Ayamonte of the regiment of 
Juen, which is to go to Badajoz. 

" I intended that the troops destined to garrison Badajoz 
shoiild be landed at Setuval, as being nearer Badajoz, and 
n place from which they could be more easily provisioned on 
their march. 

^ It will be necessary for you to adopt the arrangements 
for subsisting these troops on their march which I re- 
quested you to adopt for the subsistence of those under the 
Coftde de Penne Villemur. I enclose a route for them, but 
I much fear that they will be distressed for provisions on 
their march, if they should have marched before you will 
have received the route, and the Commissary can have 
had time to order that preparations might be made for 
them from Beja. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Colonel Austin: ' Wellington. 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham^ K,B, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 10th May, 1812. 10 a.m. 

^ I enclose three letters from Cadiz ; I have others from 
General Cooke which I will send you to-morrow. They con- 
tain details on which I must give an answer. 

' There is nothing new here. 

^ I find that the American embargo took place on the 7th 
of April for 90 days, and I conclude will then be renewed, 
if the harvest should be so bad in Europe that their assist- 
ance will be required to feed these countries. 

^ We have more than 200 days’ provisions for the British 
and that part of the Portuguese army fed by our Commissa- 



1813 . 


FUENTB aUTNALDO. 


131 


The demands^ however, for the Portuguese garrisons, 
and that part of the army not fed by us, will reduce the 
supply to four months. But I some time ago sent to the 
Brazils^ and to the Mediterranean, and to the British settle- 
ments in North America. 1 think, therefore, that both 
army and people, and Cadiz will continue to be well sup- 
plied, even if the American embargo should be continued. 
If it should not, corn will be excessively cheap. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General " Wellingtoi^. 

Sir T, Graham, K.B' 

To Lieut, General Campbell, Gibraltar. 

' Sir, * Fuente Guipaldo, 1 0th May, 1812. 

^ I have requested Admiral Berkeley to send to Gib- 
raltar the four transports named in the margin, which arc 
laden with ordnance and stores, according to the enclosed 
return. These transports, as well as those respecting which 
I wrote to you on the 19th April, are to wait at Gibraltar 
the orders of Lieut. General Lord William Bentinck. 

" Your Excellency will observe in the return twenty seven 
24 pounder carriages, and three 18 pounder carriages, 
which it is desirable should receive at Gibraltar the repairs 
which they will require; and it is recommended by the 
officers of the artillery that they should be fitted with strong 
iron trunnion boxes, to secure the guns from forcing their 
way back by constant firing. 

" In order to complete the heavy ordnance equipment re- 
quired by Lord William Bentinck, it is desirable that guns 
for these carriages and stores should be provided in the 
garrison of Gibraltar ; and I have therefore to request your 
Excellency that twenty seven 24 pounder iron guns, Carron 
manufacture, of 9 feet 6 inches long, and three 18 pounder 
guns of the same manufacture, 8 feet 6 inches long, should 
be prepared for these carriages, and embarked, with 1000 
rounds of ammunition for each gun ; eight 24 pounder guns, 
with their carriages and ammunition, in the Southampton, 
and eight 24 pounder guns, with their carriages and am- 
munition, in the Mary Anne. 

' I propose to send from Lisbon two more transports to 
receive the remaining fourteen guns and the ammunition, 

K 2 



SPAIN. 


1812. 


13 ^ 

^hich transports shall take to Gibraltar the three thousand 
six hundred and sixty four 24 pounder spherical case shot, 
and the seven thousand inch spherical case fuzes, stated 
in the enclosed return as forwarded in these transports. 

‘ Included in the 1000 rounds for each gun, I beg that 
there may be 100 of grape, and 100 rounds of case shot for 
each. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

* LieuU General CamphelU * Wellington. 

To J, Bissett, Esq., Commissary General. 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 10th May, 1812. 

^ I return Mr. Pipon’s letter of the 6th, and Mr. Stuart’s 
to mo, and my answer ; and I beg that the two letters may 
be sent back to me. 

^ I beg that orders may be given to Mr. Pipon to issue the 
quantities required by the Portuguese Government for the 
month of May, excepting the rice, of which, it appears by 
Mr. Dalrymplc’s return, that there is none in store. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

' *J, Bissett, Esq' ' Wellington. 

■ To the Riglit Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B, 

^ My dear Henry, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 10th May, 1812. 

" I have received your letters to the 28th of April. 

‘ I learn from the Governor of Algarve, that one of the 
regiments intended for Badajoz is arrived at Ayamonte, 
Vhich is unlucky, as I expected they would have come to 
Setuval ; and no preparations have been made to supply 
them on the road from Ayamonte. These preparations, 
however, were ordered yesterday, after I heard of their 
arrival at Ayamonte. 

* I concur with you in respect to the expediency of giving 
assistance to Whittingham’s division. It would have been 
desirable, however, to know the last expense ; and I recom- 
mend to you to call for an estimate of it without loss of time. 
It would likewise be desirable to know what part of the ex- 
pense would be borne by the revenues of the islands of Mi- 
norca atid Majorca. I mention this, because there wiH^bc 
Inuch to dti with the million allowed for Spanish services.' 



FUENTE GUXNALDO. 


1^3 


rBi± 

' I was never so much disappointed as l[)y the Standard. 
I did hot expect four or five millions, but I expected more 
than she has brought. 1 have no idea what we shall do for 
want of money. If I had a little now, I should certainly 
keep the campaign on its legs. But how are we to pay this 
Spanish million in addition to our other charges ? 

You will have heard of the American embargo for ninety 
days, from the 7th of April; that is to say, to see whether 
their corn will be absolutely necessary for our subsistence 
next yeai’. If it should not be so, they will take off the 
embargo. But I see that the new ministry have lowered 
their tone about the Orders in Council. Indeed, they have 
laid themselves on this subject at the mercy of France and 
America. ' 

‘ Since I wi'ote to you last, the officers of the garrison of 
Ciudad Rodrigo have been in a state of mutiny, the details 
of which will have been communicated to the Government 
by General Alava. Don Carlos de Espaha went there and 
settled the matter ; not, in my opinion, exactly as it should 
have been settled ; and it is impossible to have any confi- 
dence in the troops in that garrison. As soon as I shall 
know whether you will give any, and what sum of money for 
the support of that garrison, I shall write to Castahos to 
have them relieved by troops from Galicia. 

' Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Bight Hon. " WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B. 

* Would it be possible to come to any arrangement with 
the Barbaresque powers to supply Cadiz, Lisbon, &c., with 
corn? It would be capital to turn the tables upon these 
cunning Americans, and not to allow them to have any 
intercourse with those ports. I have sent to the Brazils, 
and to the Mediterranean for corn, and to the British set- 
tlements in North America; to the Western Islands, &c. 
Mexico ought to be able to supply some, 

^ I enclose the last dispatch.’ 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, lOth May, 1812 . 

^ 1 have received your letter of the 7th. It would, I 
believe, save you, and certainly me, a good deal of trouble* 



134 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


if you would be so kind as to send me the requisitions for 
supplies by the Portuguese Government on our C6mmis- 
sariat. It is impossible for me to allow Mr. Pipon or any 
body else to grant them without my consent, and it would 
save a great deal of useless correspondence if they were to 
come in the regular form to me. This becomes the more 
necessary, as there is a prospect that the supply of corn, &c., 
will not be so plentiful as it has been lately. 

' Beckoning for that part of the Portuguese army supplied 
by our Commissariat, we have in magazine for our army for 
200 days; the demands of the Portuguese Government upon 
us, supposing them to continue at the same rate at which 
they have been for the last four months, will reduce our stock 
to one for four months. I have desired that it may be in- 
creased and kept up to one for six months for both armies, 
so that you will see there is no difficulty in supplying the 
demands. But I cannot allow them to be supplied without 
my consent. 

^ I had already ordered that all the demands for depositos, 
&c., made from January to the end of April, might be com- 
plied with. I have now desired that the demand for May 
might be complied with, excepting rice. We have none of 
that article in our stores, excepting 4443 quintals, ordered 
to be issued to the Portuguese Government, being their 
demand for April, not taken away. 

‘ It would be very desirable if the demands for supplies 
were made in the last ten days of each month for the ensuing 
month, specifying where it would be most convenient for the 
Portuguese Government to receive the amount ; that is to 
say, at Lisbon, at Figueira, or at Oporto. I do not menu to 
say that we can always supply the demand at the place they 
wish to have it ; but it would frequently be more convenient 
to us to supply the demand at Oporto instead pf ^t Lisbon. 

‘ You are the best judge respecting the amount of these 
demands, and the expediency of continuing to supply them 
at the rate they are made. I hope to-morrow to be nble to 
send to Dom Miguel Forjaz a statement of their amount 
and cost, from 1st January to 30th April, from which I am 
afraid it will appear that the Portuguese Government have 
received from the Commissariat more than the subsidy, in 
the four riionths which have elapsed since the 1st of January, 
to the amount of £250,000 ! You will iudee whether vou 



1812. 


FUENTB G01NALDO. 


135 


will go on at that rate. All that I contend for is that the 
tone pf complaint of insufficient supplies from us ought to 
he laid aside, and that I, at least, ought not to be target 
pn those occasions. 

' In regard to the bills demanded for £100,000 sterling, 
you must be the best judge how far it is expedient to grant 
them in thp existing state pf our credit and of our finances. 

" Believe me, &c. 

His Excellency ' WELLINGTON. 

Charles StmrU* 

To Lieut. General Sir S. Cotton^ Bart, 

^ My dear Cotton, ‘ Fuente GuLnaldo, loth May, 1812, 

" De Lancy has communicated to me your letter to him of 
the 8th instant, and the enclosure from General Le Mar- 
chant in regard to the portable forges. 

* If General Le Marchant states that there are no horses 
in his brigade decidedly unfit for the ranks, but still capable 
pf some service, I beg you will authorise him to have purr 
chased, and kept upon the strength of troops, as pointed out 
in my letter of the 2nd, four mules for each portable forge, 
at the price stated in that letter. 

^ It is really necessary, however, that we should all avoid 
incurring an expense for the public, when it is not absolutely 
necessary, and I hope that Major General Le Marchant tho- 
roughly understands the principle on which I have con- 
sented tp the purchase of mules for this service. 

' The horses which Major General Le Marchant states to 
be unfit for service should be sent to grass. 

^ Jn regard to your proposal to have a different saddle, I 
beg that you will give your own orders to have any saddle 
made that you may think proper, and it shall be supplied, if 
you will only state the kind of saddle that it is to be. 

‘ I shall be sorry if this establishment should not answer, 
and I have no doubt it will answer, if pains be taken to have 
the men taught how to saddle the horse with a bat or pack- 
saddle* If it should not, we must only return to the old 
forge-carts. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut, General ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir Cotton^ Bart,* 



136 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To His Excellency Charles Stuart* 

‘ Mv DEAR Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 11th May, 1812. 

" I have received your letter of the 8tb, and I am happy 
to sec that the troops have their pay to so late a period. 
They are paid as far as we are. 

* 1 hope to be able to send Dom Miguel Forjaz my letter 
of this day. It is in English, and therefore I do not send 
you a copy of it. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

♦ His Excellency ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart,' 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham^ K.B* 

* Mv DEAR Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 11th May, 1812. 9 a.m. 

^ I have received your letter of the th, and I am con- 
cerned to learn that there is a fever at Portalegre. I had 
not heard of this circumstance before. 

' Hill takes with him only the 13th light dragoons, and the 
Portuguese dragoons. Colonel Ashworth’s, General Howard’s, 
and two battalions of Colonel Wilson’s brigades of infantry. 

* Order any of Sir Stapleton’s division of cavalry that you 
please to move up, in case you hear of any serious movement 
of the enemy in Estremadura. 

* The 4th dragoon guards, belonging to General Slade’s 
brigade, and Sir William Erskine’s division of cavalry, arc 
still at Ponte dc Sor, not having their number of mules; 
their mules having been taken from them when they were at 
Tondella, to attach them to the German dragoons. I ex- 
pect that the 4th dragoon guards will be completed im- 
mediately, when they shall join their brigade at all events ; 
but you will consider Sir Stapleton’s division likewise at 
yoiir disposal. 

" I am very much afraid that Hill will be late. 

‘ The — th were very bad when I sent them away from 
tlie amy, but I was in hopes they had improved at Lisbon. 
I. ’am io send away two battalions in exchange for the 2nd 
bait. 4th regiment, and I think the ~th shall be one of them, 
although we have two or three others that are very bad. 

There is nothing new here. 

1 ^ Believe me, &c. 

General ^ ‘ Wellington* ' 

^ir T* Graham^ K*B* 



1812. 


FUEKTK GUCNALDO. 


137 


To Colonel Torrens. 

^ My dear Torrens, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 1 2th May, 1812. 

* I shall be very much obliged to you if you will take 
measures to suggest to the Colonels of regiments serving 
in this country to have the clothing for their regiments at 
Lisbon before the 1st of October next. Some of the regi- 
ments have put on since Christmas last, and have now in 
wear, the clothing due to the men at Christmas, 1810 ; and 
the Colonels of those regiments can experience no difficulty 
in having their clothing out at the time above specified. 
Others of them have in wear the clothing due at Christmas, 
1811 ; and although it maybe more difficult for the Colonels 
of these regiments than it is for the others to have their 
clothing, due at Christmas, 1812, in Portugal by the 1st of 
October, 1812, I conceive it is not impossible; and it is 
really necessary, with a view to the arrangements to be 
adopted, to have the clothing brought up to the army in 
time. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Colonel Torrens: ‘ Wellington. 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

^ My dear Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 12th May, 1813. 

' Wc have received here the accounts of the American 
embargo for three months from the 7th of April; and, 
adverting to the quantity of provisions imported into the 
kingdom of Portugal, principally, I believe fi’om the Ame- 
rican States, in the last twelve months, of which I enclose 
a return, you will readily believe that these accounts have 
occasioned a good deal of anxiety. Not only Portugal, but 
the neighbouring provinces of Spain have subsisted upon 
these importations. 

^ I feel no anxiety respecting the subsistence of the army 
in consequence of this measure ; and I had already adopted 
some measures with a view to supply the deficiencies which 
might be generally felt in the markets if the embargo were 
to continue, which I think might be still farther improved. 

‘ When your Lordship informed me, in your letter of the 
21st November, that we could not expect any supplies of 
grain from England, I desired that the magazines of the 



138 


SPAIN. 


1813 . 


army might be augmented from a stock for three months’ 
consumption to one for sijf; months* consumption. We had 
accordingly in the magazines, when we received the accounts 
of the embargo, more than sufficient to last pur army 200 
days, including that part of the Portuguese a^'my serving 
in the British divisions. 

" The Portuguese demands upon us for grain instead pf 
money as subsidy will reduce that stock in some degree ; but 
I have directed additional purchases, in order to keep up 
our magazines to that quantity till the state of the next 
harvest in England shall be known, when, if it should be 
plentiful, I shall reduce them again to a supply fpy three 
months. 

" Expecting that something of the kind that has lately 
|;aken place in America would occur, I requested Mr. Stuart 
in the winter to take measures to get corn from the Brazils, 
from the North American States, and from the coast of 
Barbary ; and I have since adopted measures to get some 
from the British Colonies in North America, where I believe 
much can be got. 

‘ I believe that our expectations of a supply from the 
Brazils will not be disappointed ; and indeed I believe that 
a very large supply could be drawn from thence if ships 
were sent there. I am afraid that our demands in North 
America were too late. 

^ It is not impossible that this measure of hostility (under 
the disguise of peace) of the worst description has been 
adopted by the American Government at an earlier period 
than was intended, in consequence of their receiving intelli- 
gence of the measures taken by us to purchase supplies 
there. 

^ Our measures to procure supplies on the coast of Barbary 
have failed, principally, as I am informed, from the defi^ 
ciencies of the persons employed by the British Government 
to conduct their affairs on that coast. The affairs of that 
coast become every day more interesting. It is very desirable 
that the allies should, and that the enemy should not, eujoy 
the benefit of their resources; and I believe that both 
objects could be accomplished if persons of character and 
talents were employed to conduct the affairs of the British 
Government there, instead of those who are thereat present. 



1812. 


FUENTB aUINALDO 


139 


^ The pefsons who should be sent from England on these 
services, if any should be sent, might call at Lisbon and at 
Cadiz, in order to converse with the King’s Ministers, and 
the persons employed at those places to superintend the 
supply of the markets, and of the magazines of the army. 

The measures which I have adopted to get corn from the 
British Colonies in North America have been confined to 
the Commissary General directing the Commissary General 
there to make purchases for him, and to send them to Portu- 
gal; and Mr. Stuart has desired Mr. Foster to employ 
some money which he had sent him to make purchases in 
the American States, in making purchases in the British 
Colonies. But if the embargo should be renewed, these 
riieasures will not be sufficient to supply the demands of 
this country and Cadiz, notwithstanding the prospects of 
the plentiful harvest. 

‘Your Lordship knows best whether the British Colonics 
in North America can supply any large quantity of corn; 
if they can, I would beg leave to suggest that some measures 
should be adopted by Government, probably through the 
Board of Trade, to secure the importation of a large quantity 
into the Peninsula before the winter. 

‘ You will see in the enclosed paper the prices which the 
different kinds of grain have brought in the Lisbon market. 
Flour lias latterly been from 15 to 17 dollars the barrel of 
196 pounds. The price has increased very much since the 
accounts of the embargo have been received, but I think 
they will fall again as the harvest approaches, which pro- 
mises to be remarkably plentiful. We have already had 
an offer from America to supply us with 60,000 barrels of 
flour, at an advance of 50 per cent, beyond the price before 
the accounts of the embargo were received, to which I have 
declined to agree, as there is no want at present, and we 
could not get this supply before the harvest even in England ; 
arid if the want should be so great as that the price will rise 
to the amount demanded by about 23 dollars a barrel, the 
fembargo will prevent the Americans from bringing their 
born to the Lisbon market. If the price should no^t rise to 
that sum it will be because there will be plenty of corn, and 
If that should be the case there is no reason why we should 
engage to pay this exorbitant price. 



146 


St>AIN. 


^ However, the subject requires early attention to coun- 
teract the miscihief which the American Government efer- 
tainly intended by laying on the embargo at the time thi^y 
did ; and I am certain that by attention there will be plenty 
in Portugal, notwithstanding the failure of the supply from 
America. 

^ Your Lordship will have heard that the Standard haii 
brought no money on account of the Spanish Government, 
and only 380,000 dollars on account of the British Govern- 
ment. This failure has disappointed me much, and I am 
quite at a loss to know what to do. 

‘ The eventual success of the campaign depends upon my 
being able to move forward into Spain before the harvest, 
but I cannot venture upon that measure without having a 
sum of money in hand. Under these circumstances, the 
want of the 500,000 dollars which we might have got from 
Gibraltar but for the orders of the Treasury, may be most 
unfortunate. It would be very desirable on every account 
that the Treasury should appoint a person here in whoiri 
they would feel confidence, to conduct the financial concerns 
of this army. It would relieve the Commissary General 
and me from much business and anxiety, on a subject with 
which I at least ought to have nothing to do, and the bpsi-» 
ness would be done to the satisfaction of the Treasury. 

^ Wc are now three months in arrears of pay to the 
troops ; we owe the muleteers an immense sum ; and what 
is worse than all, there are bills outstanding for meat to tht 
amount of 800,000 dollars. 

‘ I enclose the weekly and daily states. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool* < Wellington. 

To Captain P. Malcolm^ R.N* 

‘ My dear Malcolm, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, ISth May, 1812. 

" I received your letter of the 22nd of March, and t am 
very much obliged to you for the wine which you sent me? by 
the Latona, which I conclude is the same for which Captditi 
Digby of the Theban ordered Mr. Dobree of Guernsey tO 
draw upon me. I ordered Messrs. Coutts to pay the bill. 
There are two cases, of twelve dozen, although you mentioi;i 
in your letter three cases. 



1813. 


FUENTB OUIKALDO. 


WAS very happy to h^ar of your appointment to be 
Captain of the fleet, which I conclude to be agreeable to 
yoju, although you will not have quite so much to do at an 
early period as some of your predecessors. f 
^Pray present my best respects to Lord Keith* 

' I can give you no news from hence. I hoped to^ be able 
to make a great campaign of this, and I have not yet lost 
all hopes, although I have met with some disappointments. 

^ When do you expect your brother John ? 

" Believe me, &c. 

• Captain P» Malcolm^ R.N, ^ Wellington, 

^ About Pasley : I could recommend him, and would re- 
commend him if he were under my command ; but I can 
recommend nobody excepting by permission, and the per- 
mission would not be granted for an officer not serving here. 
1 have a very high opinion of him, and 1 wish we had him ; 
although we have made such an expenditure of engineers, 
that I can hardly wish for any body, lest the same fate should 
befall him as has befaUen so many ! ! ’ 

1 ■ ■ 

To Lieut General Sir T Graham, KS. 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, ISth May, 1812. 10 a.u. 

' I enclose the only paper of intelligence which I have 
received since I wrote to you last, from which it would ap- 
pear that Marmont’s troops have not yet moved into Estre- 
raadura. If this is the case. Hill will yet be in time. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General * Wellington. 

Sir T. Graham, K.B* 

To Lieut, Colonel Sir Fletcher, Bart^, 

* Mv dear Sir, ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 13 tli May, 18^2. 

H am very anxious to send some engineer officers, and 
AQmc of your artificers to Gibraltar, in order to be , prepared 
fpir Ui service likely to be carried on on the Easterly j 
an4 i shoujd be glad to know from you how many.en^ec^ 

i - j ( 

Lieut. Coldnel Sir Richard Fletclier had been made a Baronet, in 
of Wiii^ the comitiaiidiiig engineer at the eleges of Ciudai<l Rodrigo anid 
Badajoz. ' , > ; . ' i ; ; ; , , / > 



m 




1813 . 


QfBceFs an4 artificers you could now spare for that purpose. 
All those that you can spare should inarch to Lisbon as 
soon as may be convenient : and I beg that it may not be 
known on what service they are going* If you cannot spare 
.their services immediately, it does not much 8ignify> as I 
shall find means of sending them in fast sailing vessels* 

^ I beg to draw your attention to the enclosed reports 

from Lieut. , who is employed on the Douro ; and to 

the reports from Captain Ross, made last year> which I like- 
wise enclose. It appears to me, that the great obstacle 

which Lieut. finds to the completion of the navigation 

of the Douro, is that which Captain Ross reported to have 
been overcome by the Portuguese Government at great 
expense. 

^ I doubt Lieut. being very capable of understand- 

ing the subject on which he writes : and it is really very 
desirable that we should take some decided steps in order to 
know whether we can, or not, render the Douro navigable 
to Barca d’Alva. 

^ Return the enclosed papers. 

' I am anxious to hear from you what you propose to do 
to defend the sluices of the Rivillas ; what you have dis- 
covered respecting the means of throwing water into the 
ditch of the place, and retaining it there ; and respecting 
the mines; and at what period you expect to have finished 
your work. 

" Believe me, &c. 

•Lieut. Colonel " Wellington. 

Sir R. Hetcher, Bart.* 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

• My Lord, * Fuente Guinaldo, 13th May, 1812. 

^ The only movements which the enemy have made since 
I addressed your Lordship last, have been apparently with 
a view to connect the army of the South with that of Portu- 
gal. General Drouet has moved his head quarters from 
Puente Ovejuna to Hinojosa de Cordova, apparently with a 
view to communicate with the detachments of the 1st divi- 
sion of the army of Portugal, which from Talavera do la 
Reyna are in the country between the Tagus and the Gua- 
diana. 



1819. 


FUENTB GOIHALDO. 


11U 


* It has been for rome tinie reported thdt Kmg Joseph 
had been appointed Generalissimo of the French armies in 
%)ain> with the exception, I believe, of the army of Arragon 
and Catalonia* I have not seen any official notification of 
this appointment^ but I give credit to the report ; and I 
attribute the partial movements which have lately been 
made of the army of the South to their right, and Of the 
army of Portugal to their left, to the desire of the King to 
establish a more perfect communication between these 
armies than had hitherto existed. 

‘ It is very obvious, however, from the general distress 
suffered by all the enemy’s troops for want of provisions, 
that they cannot undertake any operation till the harvest 
shall be ripe. 

' I have directed Lieut. General Sir K. Hill td endeavor 
to destroy the enemy’s establishments at Almaraz, con- 
structed with a view to give them that passage over the 
I'agus, which object I hope he will be able to effect. He 
Was to break up from his cantonments at Almendralejo with 
part of the 2nd division of infantry, and the 13th light dra- 
goons, in order to march upon this expedition on the 1 1th 
instant. 

^ I have requested Lieut. General Sir Thomas Graham 
to go to Portalegre, and have ordered the 6th division of 
infantry to Arronches, in order to be in readiness to march 
into Estremadura, in case the enemy should move upon 
hearing of Sir Rowland Hill’s march. 

^ The measures for filling the magazines of Ciudad Ro- 
drigo and Almeida are still in progress ; and till those ob- 
jects are accomplished, the allied army will continue can- 
toned, as I before reported to your Lordship. 

" Great progress has been made by our engineers in the 
repairs of the damages done to Badajoz. But I am sorry 
to have to mention to your Lordship that the Spanish en- 
gineers have continued to neglect Ciudad Rodrigo, where 
but little work has been done since I left the place on the 
5th of March to go into Estremadura. I have frequently 
remonstrated upon this neglect since my return to this part 
of the country, and I have mentioned it to His Majesty’s 
Ambassador at Cadiz. I approve highly of the conduct of 
the Governor of Ciudad Rodrigo, General Vives ; but I am 



144 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


concerned to add^ that the officers and garrison under his 
command are but little to be depended upon. 

^ The guerrillas are very active in all parts of the coun- 
try; some employed in forming and disciplining their 
troops, and others in enterprises against the enemy, in 
many of which they have lately been very successful. 

^ There has been no movement in the north. 

^ General Ballesteros surprised at Alora, and defeated, a 
column under General Rey, on the 14th of April ; and it is 
reported that the division of General Copons, one of those 
composing the corps under the command of General Balles- 
teros, had on the 17th entered Malaga. But this report has 
not been confirmed. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Earl qf Liverpool: ‘ Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

* My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guiualdo, 13th May, 1812. 

^ Major General Cooke having informed me that he had 
represented to your Lordship that the corps of Royal Mili- 
tary Artificers at Cadiz was much reduced by a detachment 
which had been sent to Portugal, I beg to acquaint you, 
that I gave orders some time ago that these men should re- 
turn forthwith, and I imagine that they must have arrived 
before this period at Cadiz. 

• I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Earl qf Liverpool: ' Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool. 

^ My Lord, * Fuente Guinaldo, 13th May, 1812. 

^ I have the honor to transmit lists of officers entitled to 
medals for the action at El Bodon *, and the assault and 
capture of Ciudad Rodrigo, under the regulations contained 
in your Lordship’s letter of the 3rd September, 1811. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: * Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Sir T. GraJiam, K.B, 

' My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 14th May, 1812. 11 p.m, 

^ I enclose letters from my brother and General Cooke, 
and some just received from Salamanca. 

* MedaU were not granted for £1 Bodon. 



1812. 


FUENTB winaldo. 


145 


^ Wo have the accounts of Copons’ entering Malaga from 
other quarters besides in the enclosed papers, and the dates 
agree. 

* I am glad to find that the fever at Portalcgre is not so 
bad as was reported. That place is very subject to infec- 
tious fevers, if great care is not taken to keep the town 
clean ; but not at this season of the year. It is situated at 
the south side of the hills, and does not enjoy the advantage 
of the northerly breezes, and is intolerably hot in the 
months of July, August, and September, at which season 
the town is very unhealthy, if great attention is not paid to 
cleanliness ; but in general it is the most healthy town in 
the province of Alentejo. 

* Believe me, &c. 

' Lieut. General " WELLINGTON. 

Sir T. Graham^ K.B.' 

To Major General Cooke. 

'Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 14th May, 1812. 

' I have received your letters of the 3rd, and I regret that 
I had not received that from Major General Ross of the 
20th April, marked confidential,” before I wrote you my 
last letter of the 10th instant, as I should have had before 
me a clearer view of Major General Ross’s intentions, and 
of those of General O’Donnell. However, there is no rea- 
son why that letter should not be sent to Major General 
Ross, with the explanation that I had not seen his of the 
20th when I wrote it. 

‘ I shall not fail to mention Captain Adam to Sir Edward 
Pellew as General Ross desires. 

‘ 1 beg that Serjeant James Johnson may be appointed 
an Assistant at Carthagena to the Deputy Provost at Cadiz. 
His pay will be ensign’s pay and allowances, under the 
General Order of tliis army of the 3rd May, 1809. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Major General Cooke.^ * WELLINGTON. 

To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley t K.B. 

^ My DEAR HenRY> ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 14th May, 1812. 

^ I have received your letters of the 6th, and I shall re- 
commend Mr. Dobson for an ensigney. 

VOL. IX. 


L 



146 


SPAIN, 


1812. 


* I do not know what sums of money have been sent into 
Estremadura; but I have been well acquainted with the 
state of affairs in Castille since August last, and I can as- 
sure you most positively, that the officers and troops here 
have not received one shilling for any purpose whatever. 
The troops in Ciudad Rodrigo have subsisted solely upon 
what I have given them ; and Don Carlos de Espana’s divi- 
sion, some of them upon our magazines, and others by plun- 
dering the country. 

^ If you wish to know what becomes of the money which 
you give to the Government, and the Government send to 
General — , I refer you to Sir Howard Douglas's reports 
of the finance of Galicia, in which you will see a sample of 
the manner in which civil and military pensioners, and large 
civil and military staff, can eat up the revenues of a king- 
dom, and leave nothing for the men who must fight for its 
defence. To which information, I shall add what I know to 

be fact, viz., that when , or any other General officer, 

receives a sum of money, he does not, as we do, pay the 
soldiers first, and the staff last ; but he first takes the ar- 
rears of his own appointments, and of those of his staff 
officers ; he then pays the officers a part of their pay, and 
the men nothmg. There are 1500 officers, and sol- 
diers at -’s head quarters at , each of whom 

has received more pay than those officers now doing duty 
with their regiments in Ciudad Rodrigo. These are the 
abuses which have sunk Spain ; and there is no Spanish 
Government equal to the task of getting the better of them; 
and 1 will add, that if the English subsidy, instead of being 
one million sterling, was ten millions sterling, and was to 
pass through the hands of the Spanish Government, it 
would be spent in the same manner, and would produce no 
benefit whatever ; excepting it can be called a benefit to 

maintain such men as General (of whom, by the bye, 

I have not a bad opinion). General , and General , 

and their numerous staff with enormous salaries. 

‘ I admit, that it is not very easy for the King’s Ambas- 
sador to give the King’s aid in any other manner than 
through the Spanish Government; though he does give 
clothing, arms, and equipments, by a direct communication 
with the Chiefs ; but the difficulty he would experience in 



1813. 


FUENTK GUINALDO. 


147 


giving the pecuniary aid direct to those who are to enjoy the 
benefit of it^ is the principal reason why I thint that the 
whole ought to be at the disposal of the Commander in Chief. 

‘ I accept of that part of the aid of which you have allowed 
me the disposal, viz., £200,000 pounds sterling in this year ; 
and I hope that you will continue to send me the mmey in 
addition to the usual supplies from Cadiz, otherwise this 
aid will be an intolerable burthen to us, and will probably 
be as fatal as the feather was to the camel’s back. As it 
is left to my disposal, I acknowledge that I shall not lay it 
out in forming a depot of recruits. A depot of recruits is 
very necessary for an army actively employed in the field ; 
and the mechanical discipline of soldiers is essential to the 
formation of an army. But, in my opinion, those take an 
erroneous view of what an army is, if they suppose that well 
drilled recruits are all that is required for it. Subordination 
and habits of obedience are more necessary than mechanical 
discipline acquired at the drill ; and these can be acquired 
by soldiers to any useful purpose only in proportion as they 
have confidence in their officers ; and they cannot have con^ 
fidence in officers who have no knowledge of their profession, 
even of that lowest part of it acquired at the drill, who have 
no subordination among themselves, and never obey an 
order. The plans for improving such an army should have 
for their first object the officers, and principally those be- 
longing to the regiments; and it may be depended upon, 
that there would be no want of drill, or of that military ex- 
pertness acquired at the drill, if habits of subordination and 
obedience, and some information, were given to the officers. 

" I will go one step farther, and express my doubts whether, 
to launch a number of w'ell drilled recruits into regiments 
such as I h ave seen in the Spanish service, can ever answer 
any practical good purpose. The object of all drill must be 
to practise and form individuals to perform that which it is 
thought expedient they should perform when part of a body 
before an enemy, under the command of their officers : and 
it is supposed that all of the body are equally, or nearly 
equally expert ; and that, at all events, the officer cannot 
only order what is to be performed, but know whether the 
body under his command performs it well or ill. Is this the 
case in one of a hundred instances in which recruits well 

L 2 



148 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


drilled might be sent from a depdt to a Spanish company or 
regiment? Certainly not. The consequence is, that the 
well drilled recruit in the day of action is no better than the 
rabble with whom he is mixed up ; and he either very soon 
forgets all that he has learnt for want of practice, or despises 
it as useless, as he finds that the boasters among whom he 
comes have none of the acquirements which he has gained 
with so much trouble ; or he despises the ignorance both of 
his officers and comrades, and has no confidence in either, 
or in himself. The money then, which I should lay out in 
a depot of recruits, I should, under present circumstances, 
consider as thrown away. 

" What I propose to do first, is to call for an account of 
the monthly pay of the several ranhs of officers and soldiers 
composing the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo ; and I shall 
desire to have from Don Carlos de Espana an account of 
the sums of money which he receives in contributions from 
the country (as there is some received in this manner) appli- 
cable to the purpose of paying the garrison. I shall then 
offer to pay what is deficient, provided the sum collected in 
contributions, and the sum which 1 shall give, shall be ap- 
propriated solely to the purpose of l)aying those who per- 
form duty, each, whether officer or soldier, his fair propor- 
tion; and provided that, at the end of two months, the 
system of discipline, subordination, and obedience, ordered 
by the Spanish regulations, is completely established in 
each of the battalions composing the garrison. 

^ If there should be any residue, after completely pro- 
viding for the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, in which we are 
most interested, I shall assist Don Carlos de Espaha’s divi- 
sion on the same system ; unless I should find the garrison 
of Badajoz is thrown upon me, in which case I must adopt 
the same system for paying the troops in that garrison. I 
entirely concur with you in the propriety of assisting Roche 
and Whittingham’s divisions with part of the British sub- 
sidy. But I earnestly recommend to you to call for esti- 
mates and accounts of the expenditure ; to make those 
officers responsible for the distribution which you shall order, 
and to see whether you could not get something out of the 
contributions of Majorca and Minorca, for the support at 
least of the latter. 



1812. 


FUENTE OUINALDO. 


149 


^ I shall send you regularly all that passes in regard to 
the distribution of the £200,000. 

' Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Eight Hon. ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H Wellesley, K.B. 

To Lieut. Colonel Sir Howard Douglas, Bart. 

^ Sjr, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 17th May, 1812. 

' I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 11th 
instant. 

" Although I have received the instructions of the Secre- 
tary of State to secure the island of Arosa, I do not think 
it proper to authorize the expenditure of so large a sum as 
more than £10,000 on that service, more particularly as there 
does not exist any reason to press the measure at present, j, 

‘ I therefore wish you would take the orders of the Secre- 
tary of State on the subject. 

^ There is no officer of engineers with this army whose 
services can be spared to go into Galicia to superintend the 
performance of these works. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Lieut. Colonel ' Wellington. 

Sir H. Douglas, BarC j 

To Lieut, General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

^ My dear Sir, ' ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 17th May, 1812. 

^ I enclose the only intelligence I have received since I 
wrote to you last, excepting letters from Colonel Austin, 
mentioning that about 2500 men had gone from Seville to- 
wards Ayamontc, and that Soult had gone towards the 
Puertos. 

^ I conclude that the movement towards Ayamonte was 
occasioned by the landing at that place of the regiments 
destined for the garrison of Badajoz. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

^ I enclose a small parcel, sent to me by Colonel Carroll, 
directed to you, containing I believe, a medallion of the 
Marques dc la Romana.’ 



150 


SPAIN* 


1812. 


To the Right Hon, Bir Henry WelUdey^ K,B, 

^ My dear Henry^ ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, I7th May, 1812. 

^ I enclose a memorial from a gentleman, by the name of 

, of this province, who was one of the members of the 

Junta before Ciudad Rodrigo fell into the hands of the 
French. He remained there afterwards by my desire, in a 
situation in which his life was at stake at every moment. 
He did not quit his post till I permitted him last autumn ; 
and in the mean time he rendered services of the utmost 
importance to the cause. 

" He is a person of very good talents, and is, I believe, the 
most fit to be at the head of the Hacienda in this province. 

^ Ever yours most affectionately, 

^ The Right Hon. ‘ Wellington. 

BirH. Wellesley, K.B: 

To the Right Ho?i, Henry Wellesley, K.B, 

< Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 17th May, 1812. 

^ Adverting to your letter of the 27th April, in regard 
to the Spanish troops eventually destined to join Lieut. 
General Lord William Bentinck, I have to inform your 
Excellency that I had arranged with Admiral Berkeley to 
send transports (for the conveyance of 3000 men) to Ali- 
cante, and (for the conveyance of 3000 men) to Majorca; 
and I requested that Lord William Bentinck would send to 
those places respectively, and to Gibraltar, to collect the 
troops from the two former, and the stores from the latter, 
which should have been prepared to join him. 

‘It is desirable that the Spanish Government should 
determine as soon as possible whether they will or not allow 
any, and what number of the troops from Alicante to pro- 
ceed on this service, and what number they will allow to 
proceed from Majorca. 

" In all cases of maritime expeditions, the effort is neces- 
sarily limited by the means of maritime transport ; and I 
have to inform you that I do not believe Admiral Berkeley 
will have it in his power to send more transports than those 
above referred to, which, for a short voyage, might be suffi- 
cient for the conveyance of 8000 men ; and I had arranged 
that these transports should go in equal proportions to 
Alicante and Majorca. 



1812. FUENTE GWNALDO. 151 

^ In this case, however, there are other points for consider- 
ation : — 

" First ; how many men is it expedient to leave in Majorca 
for the defence of the island, of the 7000 of which it is sup- 
posed General Whittingham’s division will consist ? 

^ Secondly ; General Whittingham’s division of 7000 men 
will have been newly raised, excepting 3000 men. How 
many of the 7000 men would it be expedient to leave be- 
hind, as being recruits and unfit for service ? 

" Thirdly ; these points being taken into consideration, 
for how many men are transports to be sent to Majorca ? 

" Fourthly ; supposing that the Regency should think 
proper to order a part of General Roche’s division from 
Alicante on the proposed expedition, how many men be- 
longing to the division at Alicante is it expedient to leave 
for the defence of that post ? 

" Fifthly ; for how many men shall transports be sent to 
Alicante ? 

^ It would be desirable to have answers upon all these 
points ; but as that is impossible before the period at which 
I hope that the transports will have left the Tagus, I pro- 
pose to request Admiral Berkeley that the officer in com- 
mand should have orders to send into Cadiz to receive 
directions regarding the distribution of their numbers at 
the two places, Alicante and Majorca. I request you to be 
prepared, therefore, to give the directions to the ofiicer in 
charge of the convoy when he shall send for them. 

" It will be desirable that you should apprize Admiral Sir 
Edward Pellew of what will be decided by the Spanish Go- 
vernment, for the information of Lieut. General Lord 
William Bentinck, particularly whether or not it will be 
necessary for his Lordship to send to Alicante for the 
troops. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K,B: 

To Admiral Sir Edward Pellew, Bart. 

* Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 17th May, 1812. 

^ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 17th 
April. 



152 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


* Your Excellency will have received before this time, 
that which I had the honor of addressing you on the 16th 
of April, in which I enclosed the copy of one of the same 
date, to Lieut. General Lord William Bentinck, with its 
enclosures. 

^ The enemy retired and raised the blockade of Ciudad 
Rodrigo and Almeida, in proportion as I advanced, and we 
have since been employed in throwing provisions into those 
places, and in moving forward our magazines. 

^ Your Excellency will have seen in my letter to Lieut. 
General Lord William Bentinck, of the 16th of April, the 
measures which I proposed to adopt, and which the Spanish 
Government should adopt to aid in his operations. I have 
sent to Gibraltar the ordnance and stores, and ordnance 
carriages referred to in that communication, and I have re- 
quested the Governor of Gibraltar to have the equipment 
completed with guns, and with stores for 1000 rounds for 
each gun. 

^ I likewise propose to send to Gibraltar 400 British and 
Portuguese artillerymen, a few Engineer officers and military 
artificers. 

" By a letter from Sir Henry Wellesley of the 27th April, 
I learn that the Spanish Government had not decided 
whether they would send to co-operate with Lieut. General 
Lord William Bentinck any of the troops stationed at 
Alicante, or how many of those at Majorca. 

^ But I have written to Sir Henry Wellesley this day a 
letter, (of which I enclose a copy,) in which I have suggested 
to him to bring these points to a decision, and I have re- 
quested him to inform your Excellency what should be 
settled upon them. 

^ It is desirable that your Excellency should apprize Lord 
William Bentinck of the state of the preparations, and that 
he should know from you, whether or not it will be necessary 
that he should send to Alicante to collect the troops from 
thence. 

' 1 have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Admiral ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Edward Pellewt Barl,^ 



1812. 


FUENTE GUIKALDO. 


153 


To the General Officers Commanding Divisions, 

‘ Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 18th May, 1812. 

‘ The Spanish Government having been pleased to allow 
a limited number of the natives of Spain to serve His Ma- 
jesty in the British regiments composing this army, I have 
to request that you will authorize the regiments named in 
the margin to enlist and bear on their strength 100 Spanish 
volunteers, on the following conditions : — 

^ First ; the men must not be under five feet six inches 
high, strongly made, and not under nineteen years of age, 
nor older than twenty seven. 

‘ Secondly ; they arc to be attested according to the fol- 
lowing form by the commanding officer of the regiment to 
serve during the present war; but in case the regiment 
into which they shall enlist should be ordered from the 
Peninsula, the Spanish volunteers are to be discharged, 
and each of them is to receive one month’s full pay to carry 
him to his home. 

Form of the Attestation, 

* I, A. B., do make oath that I will serve His Majesty the King of 
Great Britain and Ireland, in the — battalion of the — regiment of 
foot, during the existing war in the Peninsula, if His Majesty should so 
long require ray services, and provided that the — battalion of the — 
regiment of foot shall continue in the Peninsula during that period,’ 

* Thirdly ; they are to be allowed to attend Divine service 
according to the tenets of the Homan Catholic religion, in 
the same manner as British soldiers, His Majesty’s sub- 
jects, are. 

^ Fourthly ; they are to be fed, and clothed, and paid in 
the same manner as the other soldiers ; and they are to be 
posted to companies indiscriminately, as any other recruits 
would be. 

' Fifthly ; they are to receive pay from the date of their 
attestation, but no bounty. The captain of the company to 
which any of these volunteers shall be posted, will be allowed 
eight dollars for each to supply him with necessaries, from 
which must be purchased a knapsack, two pairs of shoes, 
and two shirts. The officer commanding the company must 
be accountable to the volunteer for the residue of the sum 
after purchasing these articles, in the same manner as for 



SPAIN. 


154 


1811 


his pay. The shoes may be received at the usual rate from 
the Commissariat. 

^ In communicating this arrangement to the several re- 
giments^ I request you to point out to the commanding 
officers of regiments how desirable it is that these volunteers 
should be treated with the utmost kindness and indulgence, 
and brought by degrees to the system of discipline of the 
army. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The General Officers " Wellington. 

Commanding Divisions.' 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 18 th May, 1812 . 

^ I have received your letter of the 15th instant, and I 
beg you to observe that the certificates sent of the transport 
of stores to Badajoz and Elvas refer to stores which left the 
sea coast between the 23rd April and the 3rd May. This 
is in answer to my complaints, which referred to the stores 
required for the siege of Badajoz, which ought to have com- 
menced the 6th March, and ended the 6th April. 

^ Whatever measures Government may order in respect 
to means of transport, shall be obeyed by me and the au- 
thorities of the British army; but if those measures are 
inefficient in themselves ; are adopted by an unwilling 
Government, and are carried into execution by the sub- 
ordinate officers of the Government in a manner conformable 
to the spirit in which their superiors adopted them, it must 
be expected that the measures, even if perfect in theory, 
will fail in practice ; and it may be depended upon, that if 
they do fail, I shall complain to my Government, be the 
cause of failure what it may. 

^ I do not know whether the Government have taken the 
pains of ascertaining the truth of any one of the returns of 
means of transport which they have received, but it appears 
to me that there is fraud on the face of those returns. 

‘ Whatever may have happened in the northern provinces 
of the kingdom, at least the southern have never been 
invaded, and the resources of the southern provinces have 
seldom been called for, and that only for short periods ; yet 
it appears, by looking at the returns of 1810 and 1812, that 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINAtDO. 


155 


the district of Evora alone contained in 1810 more bullocks, 
and nearly as many carts, as are now in the two provinces 
of Alentejo and Algarve. 

^ If the deficiency of means of transport in the country 
should be the cause of important failures, the British Govern- 
ment will have to judge and decide whether they shall con- 
tinue to expose their army to the consequences of these 
failures. 

^ I did not answer the letter of Dom Miguel Forjaz, be- 
cause it proceeds on a fallacy. I say that the alterations 
which I proposed to the regulation were not made in some 
instances, and when made, were not made in the spirit in 
which they were proposed ; my object having been to secure 
means of transport for the armies which are to defend the 
country, and the object of the Government having been 
something else for its benefit and advantage. 

‘ It is very proper that the Governors of the kingdom 
should endeavor to do that which will be advantageous and 
beneficial to the kingdom, in the proper season ; but now 
they should attend to that which will enable them to cany 
on the war vigorously, and save the country from the hands 
of the enemy. 

^ Dom Miguel Forjaz’s note, marked G, is like every other 
paper from that gentleman, very able, and looks well to the 
eye ; but it is not sound. The Governors of the Kingdom 
dare not act otherwise than profess they will act as I recom- 
mend to them ; but I, who am to carry measures into execu- 
tion with aids which depend upon their arrangements, can 
see and feel the difference between professing to perform an 
action and really performing it. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ' Wellington. 

Charles Stmrt/ 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham^ K,B, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 19th May, 1812. 10 a.m. 

" I enclose the only intelligence I have received since I 
wrote to you last. I am afraid that unless I can get Grant * 
away by force, I shall not get him at all. 

"'Major Grant, 11th foot, employed in observation between the advanced 
posts of the armies. He had been taken prisoner. He was afterwards Lieut. 
Colonel of the d4th regiment, and died in the East Indies. 



156 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


^ In regard to force also, I find by an account from Torde- 
sillas, that our principal correspondent there has been seized 
by General Boyer, in consequence of his own imprudence. 
I am apprehensive that some traces may have been found 
of my letters to the different guerrilla chiefs to urge them to 
intercept Grant, and to offer a reward to the party which 
should take him, and that Marmont will take care that he 
shall have a sufficient escort. This was the person through 
whom all the correspondence with the north was carried on. 

^ You will have seen in the last letters from my brother 
his account of the sum he is authorized to give the Spaniards 
this 3^ear. I doubt that Great Britain can realize in specie 
what is necessary even for that purpose, and to support this 
army. I am, besides, afraid that the grant of money to the 
Spanish Government would not answer our purpose. Their 
system is so overgrown by abuses, that no sum which we 
could give them would ensure to us an active military co- 
operation. I have therefore desired my brother to confine 
his issues to pay only to effective officers and troops, who 
shall not receive for more than two months unless they shall 
be reported to be in a state of discipline and subordination 
as a military body ought to be. 

^ It will be impossible, I am afraid, to effect all that I have 
in contemplation by this mode of giving our pecuniary aid, 
particularly if the aid should be given through the Govern- 
ment ; and I have therefore proposed that the aid should 
be at my disposal, to give it direct to such troops as I might 
think fit. 

^ There will still remain the difficulties of subsistence ; 
but as some contributions are collected in all parts of the 
country, I propose that they should be applied solely to the 
subsistence of the troops. We may do something in this 
manner. 

' We are getting on with our convoys. The first arrived 
yesterday at Ciudad Rodrigo. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General < WELLINGTON. 

Bir T, Graham^ 



1812 . 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


157 


To Major General Peacocke, 

^ Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 19th May, 18V2. 

‘ I enclose a letter which has been put into my hands by 
the Inspector General of Hospitals, and I beg that, accord- 
ing to the recommendation which it contains, the — th regi- 
ment may be removed to the sea side as soon as possible. 

" I beg that you will inform the commanding and other 
officers of the — th regiment that they have been sent, and 
are detained at Lisbon, because their regiment is unfit for 
serviccj a circumstance not very creditable to any regiment ; 
and that I trust that by their attention to the discipline, as 
well as the health and necessary comfort of the soldiers, by 
their obedience to orders, and by their endeavors to esta- 
blish in the regiment a system of order and subordination, 
they will render their regiment fit to belong to this army. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General Peacocked ‘ Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

‘ My dear Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 19th May, 1812. 

' I have received your Lordship’s letter of the 29th ultimo, 
allowing of our mating private bargains for bills on Eng- 
land, if we should find it necessary ; and I have desired the 
Commissary General to endeavor to procure the sum, of 
which 1 had before refused to sanction the acceptance, in 
consequence of Mr, Herries’ notification to Mr. Bissett of 
the disapprobation of the Treasury of these transactions. 
This money will be of great use to us just now, if we can get 
it, as we are very badly off indeed. 

Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ^ Wellington. 

To Major General Peacocke. 

< Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 20tli May, 1812, 

‘ The 26th regiment are to be embarked, and to proceed 
to Gibraltar to relieve the 82nd, which regiment is to be 
brought round to the Tagus. I request you to let the 
Admiral know the strength of the 26th regiment, in order 
that he may order transports accordingly. 

‘ When the 1st batt. 38th regiment and 91st shall arrive 
in the Tagus, they are to be landed, and be prepared to 
march to join the army. 



m 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


' You will be pleased to give the enclosed letter for Major 
General Campbell to the commanding officer of the 26th, 
who will deliver it on his arrival at Gibraltar. 

' I have the honor to be, &e. 

‘ Major General Peacocke' ^ Wellington. 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

‘ My dear Lord, * Fuente Gujnaldo, 20th May, 1812. 

^ As you expressed an anxiety to have an account of our 
wounded officers and soldiers, I hope to be able to send an 
official one this day; but the materials for it have not yet 
come in. I can tell you generally, however, that with the 
exception of General Walker and Colonel Elder, and one or 
two other officers of inferior rank, the officers are all doing 
well. General Walker has been better for the last three 
days ; but he is much weakened by repeated hemorrhage, 
and he is not out of danger, although the hemorrhage is 
stopped. He was badly wounded, and was very imprudent, 
both in exerting himself improperly, and in his food during 
the first day after he was wounded, which brought on 
hemorrhage. Elder was also very badly wounded, but 
had so far recovered as to be thought out of danger ; but 
he has for some days past had lock jaw. He has not 
become worse for these last four days, and hopes are en- 
tertained of his recovery ; but of course he is still in great 
danger. 

" Major General Kempt’s wound proved to be worse than 
was at first imagined ; but he and General Colville, and 
General Bowes, are getting well. 

" Many of the men have already returned to their duty ; 
others are convalescent, and nearly all are doing well. 

" The real loss has been small, and I hope, that as the 
season continues favorable, we shall save many. 

' Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ‘ Wellington. 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham, K.Bj^ 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 21st May, 1812. 6 a.m. 

" I received last night your letter of the 19tb, and those 
from Sir William Erskine of the 18th. 



1812. 


FUENTE OUINALDO, 


159 


" The enemy are evidently moving upon Hill’s rear, pro- 
bably in larger force than that which has hitherto been 
under the command of Drouet. The last I heard of Soult 
was, that he had left Seville for the Puertos on the 10th and 
Jlth; and on the same day there were about 2500 men 
near Ayamonte, it was said, under Gazan. It is not pro- 
bable, therefore, that the whole army of the South are in 
motion. 

" I apprised Hill of the probability of this movement ; 
and it is most likely that he heard of the enemy being at 
Don Benito on the 17th as soon as Sir William Erskine. 

^ If this is the case, he will have arrived at Aldea del 
Obispo, so as to open the road to Cacercs on the 19th ; and 
he will be at Caceres this day, whether successful or other- 
wise in the enterprise which was the object of the expedi- 
tion. If he should be a day later, I think he will still be in 
time, as it is probable that the troops which were at La 
Granja on the 18th are intended to pass the Guadiana at 
Medellin, which they cannot do before the 20th. I have 
therefore but little anxiety respecting Hill’s retreat. 

‘ I was apprehensive that the enemy would make this 
movement in consequence of the delays which took place ; 
and the movement of the equipment upon Merida instead 
of upon Caceres. However, I hope that the evil will be 
confined to the disappointment of my views upon Almaraz 
for this time. 

" Tlie 1st division cannot move in a better direction than 
towards Caceres; but if Hill’s retreat should have been 
effected, it would be best to get the troops back to their 
stations, as matters are getting very forward here. 

I say nothing about the measures to be adopted in case 
the movement of the enemy should be only upon Hill’s 
rear, and confined to a moderate force. If the whole army 
of the South should have entered Estremadura, it would be 
best to take the position indicated in my letter to Hill, of 
which I sent you the draft. 

' Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut* General * Wellington. 

Sir T, Grahanii KB* 


‘ There is nothing new here.’ 



160 


SPAINj 


1812. 


To Lieut General Sir T, Graham, K.B. 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 22nd May, 1812. 10 a.m. 

" I have received as yet no intelligence from Sir William 
Erskine of a later date than the 18th in the evening, or from 
you of a later date than the 19th, at three p.m. ; but the 
guide arrived yesterday evening, and I see from the Roteiro 
that the head quarters were still at Almendralejo on the 
evening of the 19th. 

‘ The enclosed letters from Cadiz show that Soult was 
expected in that quarter about the 8th, and that troops had 
arrived there. I know that 2500 men were near Ayamonte 
on the 11th ; and therefore upon the whole I feel no anxiety 
respecting aifairs in Estremadura, although I should be 
glad to hear of them. I fancy that Sir William his been 
misinformed. 

" It is very desirable that the 1st and 6th divisions and 
the cavalry should return to their stations as soon as Hill’s 
safety is beyond all question. 

" We are nearly ready with our magazines here ; and it is 
obvious that this must be our operating flank ; and I in- 
tended to put the troops in march as soon as Hill should 
return. 

" Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut, General ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir T, Graham, K,B, 

‘ I enclose papers from Salamanca.’ 

To Major General Cooke, 

^ Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 22nd May, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 9th, and its enclosures. 

" I am happy to find that you propose to inquire at Tarifa 
respecting the necessity for the staff appointments which 
have been made there. An interpreter may be necessary, 
who ought to perform all the duties of the Staff ojfBcers, if he 
is an officer. If he should not be so, there might be ano- 
ther Staff officer ; but I cannot see the necessity for two Staff 
officers, and that one of them should be the Adjutant, the 
other the Quarter Master of the 87th, neither of whom can 
have any duty to perform in his new situation which does 
not belong to him in that which he has hitherto held. 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


161 


^ It is also very desirable that you should ascertain whe- 
ther two assistant engineers are required^ and whether the 
officers appointed to those situations are the most fit to fill 
them. 

In regard to the works at Tarifa^ you have not sent me 
the plans and sections, and I cannot judge of them from 
description ; and even if I had the plans and sections, I 
should not be so well able to determine on the propriety of 
undertaking the works as those who might see the ground. 

^ The impression on my mind is, that nothing can render 
Tarifa a post likely to hold out, even for a short time, against 
the attack which may, and probably Avill be made upon the 
place. 

' The garrison will, after all, be obliged to retire to the 
island, where, it is my opinion, they can be so secured at a 
moderate expense, incurred gradually, as to render it pro- 
bable that the enemy would not be able to carry this point. 

" On the other hand, it is my opinion that the possession 
of the island, as a military would deprive the enemy 
of all the advantages which they expect to derive from the 
possession of the town of Tarifa, viz., the navigation of the 
coast to Algcziras. If instead of the town falling into their 
hands fortified, or in part fortified, as it certainly will it the 
works in contemplation should be continued, it were to fall 
into their hands with all the works demolished, it is probable 
that when they should find that they could not obtain pos- 
session of the island, they Avould abandon the place altoge- 
ther, and leave the town, as well as the island, in the hands 
of the allies, 

^ If they should, under such circumstances, pretend to 
hold the town, they must cither leave a large force in it, 
which would alone be a great advantage to the allies ; or, 
if they should leave a small one, the troops composing it 
would be exposed to ,thc constant attacks of the allies from 
the island. Whereas, if the town should be fortified, or in 
part fortified, and lost, as it certainly will, the enemy may 
with impunity leave in it in security as small a force as they 
please; and as long as they can remain in Andalusia, the 
allies will be deprived of that dehouche into the country. 

‘ I wish you to consider the works carrying on at Tarifa 
in this view of them. As long as the British Government 

• VOL. IX. ^ 



162 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


shall furnish money, there will not be wanting Spanish 
engineers to execute fancies of all kinds in the way of fortifi- 
cations ; and it is probably neither your business nor mine 
to interfere in the nature, or extent, or object of the as- 
sistance afforded to the Spanish Government by His Majesty’s 
Ambassador. But, adverting to the great expense incurred 
in the Peninsula, to its daily and necessary increase ; to tlic 
expenses now incurring for the fortifications at Cadiz, and 
those at Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz, and to the absolute 
necessity which exists for curtailing those expenses as much 
as may be possible, particularly in instances in which it may 
appear, as it does to me in this instance, that the expense 
is not only not necessary, but may prove injurious, and in 
those in which the whole expense must be incurred in money ; 
I recommend to you, if you should agree with me upon the 
view of the place in the opinions which I have formed, to 
urge His Majesty’s Ambassador to withdraw the assistance 
afforded for carrying on the ‘works for fortifying the town of 
Tarifa ; and that our exertions should be confined to making 
a secure post of the island. 

" Boards and trussels may be provided for the soldiers to 
sleep upon at Tarifa. 

I conclude that the Secretary of State will give direc- 
tions that your requisitions for supplies for Tarifa may be 
complied with. 

" I have the honor to be, See. 

* Major General Cooke: ' Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 23r(l May, 1812. 10 a.m. 

^ Major Currie arrived here yesterday with accounts of 
Sir Rowland’s success of the 19th, and he tells me that he 
wrote to you of it. 

" He likewise informs me that the enemy’s troops which 
had appeared upon the Guadiana had retired again, which 
report I hope that Hill will have heard before he will have 
received that from Sir William Erskine ; as it appears from 
Blanckley’s reports, who is on tlie spot, that the numbers 
reported to Sir William were very much exaggerated. How- 
ever, whatever they were, they are gone again. 

^ I received your letters of the 20th and 21st last night. 



]812, 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


103 


the former enclosing that of the 19th frpra Sir William 
Erskine. I have, besides, one of the 15th from Austin, who 
reports that the French troops have taken up cantonments 
in the Condado, apparently with a view to subsistence. 

^ The object now in Estremadura is to see Hill back in 
safety ; and as soon as he returns, to put the troops of the 
1st and 6th divisions and the cavalry in march for this 
country, 

I believe that the infantry can pass at Alcantara and at 
Alconcta ; and if they can, a great object will be gained in 
saving them the fatigue of the circuitous march by Villa 
Velha, at least for the troops of the 6th division. The 
artillery and cavalry must go by Villa Velha. 

^ I have desired Sturgeon to report to you immediately 
what the means are of passing the Tagus at Alcantara, and 
how long a given body would be in passing; and I send an 
officer down to see the harcas at Alconeta, and to report 
to you ; of which harcas, however, I sliould think that 
the Marques do Monsalud might be able to give you an 
account. 

^ If you should find that the infantry can pass with con- 
venience at either or both these ferries, I request you to put 
the artillery and carriages of the 6th division at least (and 
of the 1st, if you should think it expedient that they like- 
wise should cross the ferries) in march upon Villa Velha 
and Gastello Branco by the usual stages, as soon as Hill’s 
return shall be quite secure ; and afterwards put the infantry 
in march to cross the Tagus at the ferries on the day that 
the artillery shall cross the bridge of Villa Velha. 

^ I shall send orders for the cavalry to move as soon as I 
shall hear from you that you have ordered them back to 
their cantonments. 

^ In regard to supplies on the march by Alcantara, &c., 
there is a magazine at Gastello Branco, from which I shall 
have supplies forwarded to the frontiers of Portugal. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

' LieuL General ^Wellington. 

Sir T, Graham, K.B, 

^ There arc with Hill two flying bridges of our pontoons, 

of three or four boats in each flying bridge, which might go 

M 2 



164 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


to Alconeta to facilitate tlie passage there, if you should 
think proper, when Hill returns. 

‘ I am afraid they could not go to Alcantara, though 1 
am not certain. If they could, it would be the most con- 
venient point for the troops.* 

To Lieut, General Sir T. Graham^ K,B, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 24th May, 1812. 9 a.ae 

‘ I enclose papers from Salamanca, from wliich it appears 
that Marmont intended some movement, and that he had 
heard of Hill’s arrival at Liigar Nuevo. 

^ I'hcy do not know wliat to make of the disposition of 
our troops, which, without a knowledge of our circumstances, 
it is not easy to understand ; and they are very anxious to 
know where head quarters are. 

^ This was the object of Marmont's letter to me, adverted 
to in the enclosed, which contained only one from Grant of 
the 27th of April. It came by the hands of a friend, who 
is gone back well tutored. 

^ I likewise enclose a letter from Cadiz of the 10th. 
Colonel Austin informs me, on the 16th, that Soult had 
again left the Puertos in a great hurry ; I conclude upon 
hearing of Hill’s march ; and that the Spanish troops ordered 
to Tarifa had been countermanded. 

^ I have a letter from the Spanish Minister at War, 
urging strongly a movement upon Andalusia. This would 
now be a false movement. At least six divisions of Mar- 
mont’s army are free, and would follow us, or would attack 
Ciudad Rodrigo, in which operation they would now succeed, 
as you will have observed they arc bringing up heavy can- 
non by degrees. 

^ Our first object must certainly be now to get the better 
of Marmont’s army, of which we have a chance in the two 
months which will elapse between this time and the period 
of reaping the harvest in Castille. 

‘ Matters were very different two months ago. The 
French could not have collected any where ; and if Ciudad 
Rodrigo had been provisioned, we might have marched 
40,000 men into Andalusia, throwing the remainder of the 
army upon Gastello Branco to observe Marmont. But the 
harvest will be ripe in Andalusia in the beginning of June. 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO, 


165 


It was reaped last year in Estremadura in the second week 
in June; and we should not be well through the province 
before we should have Marmont after us. 

^ Since I wrote to you yesterday, I have received a letter 
from Hill of the 21st, from which I find that he was to be at 
Truxillo on that day, so that he will be on the Guadiana 
sooner than I expected when I wrote to you ; and I found 
yesterday that Mr. Bissett was not quite so forward as I 
thought he was from his report 

^ There is therefore no immediate occasion for hurry in 
the movement across the Tagus. I think the artillery, with 
the 1st and Gth divisions and the cavalry, had better be 
thrown back to the old cantonments at all events : and I 
request you to decide whether the infantry shall, upon the 
following considerations : 

"First; whether the troops can cross at Alcantara with- 
out inconvenience, with the aid of Dickson’s flying bridges. 

‘ Secondly ; whether they can be subsisted in the positions 
which they now occupy, and keep up their supplies. 

" The nearest magazine to the Gth division at Montijo is 
Badajoz ; the nearest to the 1st division is Niza. This last 
had passed Gastello dc Vide before they received your order 
to halt at that place. 

‘ I find that there is a boat at Alconcta capable of con- 
taining twelve horses, which might probably be brought 
down to Alcantara. I have desired Captain Pierrepont 
to report to you on that ferry ; but I recollect one incon- 
venience attending the use of it to come to this part of the 
country, and that is, that the Alagon must be passed like- 
wise by a ferry. The troops also which would march by Alco- 
neta would have to send far for their supplies on their inarch. 

" I would recommend the use of Alcantara alone there- 
fore, if you should send any troops across the Tagus by any 
other road than the bridge of Villa Velha. 

" According to wdiat I have above stated to you in re- 
gard to Mr. Bissett’s preparations, I request you not to 
move the infantry, excepting towards their old cantonments, 
till you shall hear further from me. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ' WELLINGTON. 

T, Graham y K,B.\ 



106 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

* My dear Sir, ‘ F^ente Guiimldo, 24th May, 1812. 

‘ I have just received your letter of the 21st. I have in- 
variably ordered that as much money as could be spared 
from the service of the army should be delivered to the 
chest of the aids/’ and I believe the subsidy has been 
much overpaid. But that is no concern of mine. I shall 
continue the same practice. 

^ I must say, however, in answer to your letter of the 21st, 
that I do not believe I shall be able in the month of June 
to order the issue of more money than was given in the 
month of May, and I cannot fix the time at which any will 
be given. 

" You had much better write to Government on the sub- 
ject. I can do no more than I am doing. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ' Wellington. 

Charles Stuart, 

* You may depend upon it that the subsidy has been in- 
finitely overpaid since the 1st January.’ 


To Lieut, General SirB. Hill, K,B, 

' My DEAR Hill, ‘Fucute GuinaUlo, 25tli May, 1812. 8 a.m. 

‘ I have received your letters of the 2()th and 21st instant, 
not yet that containing your report of your transactions on 
the Tagus. 

" I wish you would take measures to know exactly what 
passes at Mirabetc, if you have not got that garrison as pri- 
soners. It is my opinion that they will abandon the place 
as soon as they can ; and I shall be glad to hear from you 
when they shall abandon it. 

* I do not believe that Soult intended to attack Tarifa ; 
but if he did, you will have seen that your movement upon 
Almaraz has deranged all his projects, as well as those of 
Marmont. Soult’s troops are again marching towards Se- 
ville; and Marmont moved from Salamanca on the 23rd 
towards Avila and Talavera. He was to move himself, I 
believe, yesterday. 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


167 


' In consequence of Sir William Erskine’s reports, Sir 
Thomas Graham moved into Estremaditra the 1st and 6th 
divisions of infantry, and part of the 1st division of cavalry. 
These troops will either withdraw into Alcntejo again, or 
will wait in Estremadura till I shall order them across the 
Tagus at Alcantara, and will be considered applicable to 
other services as soon as you shall return to the Guadiana, 
where you will resume your old position, and revert for the 
present to my instructions of the 1 1th April. 

^ You will observe that your success has given great se- 
curity to your left, as, whatever may be said, I know that 
the roads from the Tagus to the Guadiana, leading from 
the bridge of Arzobispo and Talavera, cannot be called 
military communications for large bodies of troops. You 
might therefore adventure a little against Drouct, and keep 
him out of the province of Estremadura if you can, keeping 
me apprized of your designs. 

^ In the formation of all these plans, keep in view tlic 
support which Drouet will have from Soult, whose head 
c^uarters, 1 suspect, are about to be moved to Andujar. En- 
deavor to gain accurate information respecting Belalcazar 
and any other fortified posts which the enemy may have to- 
wards Cordova. 

' It will be necessary that the flying bridge wliicli you 
have should be moved towards Alcantara, and placed at the 
disposal of Sir Thomas Graham if he wants it ; and that 
Lieut. Colonel Dickson's reserve of howitzers should be 
placed in a situation to be in readiness to cross the Tagus 
at the same place, with that part of their equipment, consist- 
ing of inch shells, spherical case, and powder. 

' Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir It Hill, K,B: 


To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K.B, 

^ My dear Sir, * Fuentc Guinaldo, 25th May, 1812. 8 a.m. 

^ I enclose some letters from my brother, and a letter and 
its enclosure from Salamanca. 

^ You will sec from the latter tliat Hill's operation has 
induced Marmont to move. 1 do not know yet whether he 



168 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


has got ilic garrison of the tower of Mirabetc. I should 
think he would, if he had not been alarmed by Sir William's 
reports. 

^ Hill’s operation has deranged Soult’s, as well as Mar- 
mont’s plans, as I learn from Austin, on the 18th, that the 
ti’oops had been withdrawn from the Condado ; and you 
sec that they have been withdrawn from Cadiz. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' Wjollington. 

Bir T. Grahamy K.B.' 

To Lieut. Colonel Sir B. Fleichery Bart. 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaklo, 25th May, 1812. 8 a.m. 

' 1 received last night your letter of the 22nd, in regard 
to the cut from the Picurina to the inundation. 

' First ; is what you propose now better than what you 
proposed before, viz., a communication from the Pieurina to 
the ravelin ? 

^ You will observe that an enemy could not attack the re- 
doubt by its gorge without obtaining possession of the com- 
munication, the approaches to which would be better flanked 
and defended by the fire of the fort, and from the gorge of 
the redoubt, than from the proposed line. 

^ There is another advantage in the communication like- 
wise, which is, that it would afford an additional obstacle to 
an enemy attempting to turn the redoubt by its left. Unless 
the whole of the new proposed line, and the covered way on 
the left of the redoubt, should be occupied, the redoubt will 
always be liable to an attack in the night by surprise in its 
gorge. The only guard against it will be the flank fire from 
the right of the redoubt, and the fire from the body of the 
place. 

* And here the second question arises, viz., is the pro- 
posed line flanked by any, and what works of the place? 

‘ You must be the best judge, being on the spot, of the 
validity of this reasoning; and I beg you will decide which 
you will adopt, the communication as first proposed; or the 
line as proposed in your letter of the 22nd. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. Colonel « WELLINGTON. 

Sir B. Fletcher y Bart. 



1812. FUENT15 GUINALDO. 169 

* As far as I can judge from the plan, the proposed line will 
be seen only from the face of the bastion of Santa Maria. 

‘ I have omitted to write to you respecting an engineer 
to be attached to Lieut. General Hill. I rather believe 
that you had better detain [Lieut. Colonel Jones for that 
purpose.’ 


To Lieut, Colonel Sir Howard Doughv^^ Bart. 

‘ Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 25tli May, 1812. 

" I received yesterday your letter of the 18th instant, and 
I had at tlie same time one of the 20th from the Conde de 
Amarante, from wliich I learnt that the enemy, after plun- 
dering the villages on the frontier of Galicia, had retired to 
Benaventc. 

" There is no chance of their attacking Galicia as long as 
this army shall be on this frontier ; and, entertaining this 
opinion, and feeling an anxious desire that the Portuguese 
Government should be saved the expense of the militia in 
arms when not necessary to be incurred, and that the indi- 
viduals composing the militia should have tlic advantage of 
returning to their homes when their services should not be 
required, I desired that the militia should be disbanded as 
soon as I brought back the army to this quarter, with the 
exception of those corps necessary to observe the enemy’s 
movements. 

" They arc, however, ready to turn out again at a moment's 
notice. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut. Colonel ' WEI,LI^GTON, 

Sir H. DouglaSi Bart,' 


To the Bight Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B. 

< Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 25lli May, 1812. 

^ I enclose the copy of a letter, which I have received from 
the Secretary of State of the War Department, desiring that 
the troops under Lieut. General Sir Howland Hill should 
move into Andalusia, in co-operation with the 4th army to 
drive the enemy from that kingdom. 

‘ Lieut. General Sir Howland Hill has lately made an 
important movement and effected in a very brilliant manner 



170 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


a very important operation on the Tagus, near Almaraz, of 
which I propose to transmit to you the detailed accounts for 
the information of the Spanish Government, in the course of 
a day or two. 

^ It ai)pcars that Marshal Soult abandoned whatever de- 
sign he might have had immediately in view in Andalusia, as 
soon as he heard of Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill’s move- 
ment towards the Tagus ; and I have only now to add, that 
1 will take care that General Sir Rowland Hill shall annoy 
the enemy in every manner that may be in his power with 
the force which he has under his command. 

" I am apprehensive, however, that the force under his 
command, even assisted by the 4th army, is not equal to the 
undertaking of forcing the enemy from Andalusia. 

^ I liave the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ' Wellington. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B.^ 

To the Earl of Liverpool. 

* My dear Lord, ‘ Fuento Guinaldo, 26 th May, 1812 . 

' When we had taken Ciudad Rodrigo in January, and I 
intended to carry on the siege of Badajoz in March, 1 ex- 
pected to be able, if successful in that object, to invade An- 
dalusia with a superior army to that which the French had 
in that part of Spain. 

‘ These expectations were founded on the knowledge which 
I had, that even if Soult and Marmont had collected their 
armies, either to impede our operations at the siege of 
Badajoz or to stop our further progress, the want of sub- 
sistence at that season of the year would have obliged them 
to separate, which want, we, with our superior means and 
better arrangements should not have felt. 

^ It appeared to me also that nothing which Marmont 
could undertake at that season of the year could prevent me 
from carrying my plan into execution. He could not attack 
Ciudad Rodrigo or Almeida, because we had taken, in the 
former, the heavy artillery belonging to the French army, 
which could not be replaced in time. He could not venture 
at that season of the year to make a serious invasion of 
Portugal ; and if he had, two or three divisions of the army 
which could have been spared after the siege of Badajoz, 



1812. FUENTE GUINALDO. 171 

with the militia, would have ^topped him effectually ; nor 
could he at that season invade Galicia with any prospect of 
success. In either of these operations he would have felt a 
want of provisions equal to, if not greater, than that which 
he would have experienced, if he and Soult had joined to 
impede our progress south of the Tagus. 

^ I enclose a copy of the memorandum which I gave to 
General Castahos before the siege of Badajoz, in which the 
probable plans of the enemy are discussed, and measures to 
defeat them are proposed. 

‘ Your Lordship Avill see that I adverted to that wliicli at 
length obliged me to return into Castille ; I mean the block- 
ade of Ciudad Rodrigo ; and I thought I had adopted the 
most effectual measure to frustrate it, by giving to the 
Spanish authorities, before I wrote the enclosed paper, the 
provisions in our magazines which they Avere to have carried 
to the place. But unfortunately they could not find the 
means of moving these provisions, only seventeen leagues, 
in nearly seA^cn Avecks ! Other mistakes and disobedience 
of orders occurred, and I Avas obliged to bring back to 
Castille an army able to beat Marinont in the field, in cgse 
he should persevere in the blockade of Ciudad Rodrigo, and 
to abandon, for the moment, the execution of my plan upon 
the Andalusias. 

‘ The measure then to be adopted, Avas to replenish the 
magazines of Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo as soon as pos- 
sible ; and it Avas necessary to keep the army in a situation 
to be in readiness to concentrate, to protect that service, in 
case the enemy should attempt to interrupt it. If such an 
attempt had been made, and Ave had not been at hand to 
prevent its success, your Lordship Avill observe that both 
places would probably have been lost, as neither could have 
in it at the same time provisions for more than a few days, 
and could not have held out till assistance could come to 
their relief. 

‘ I did not, hoAvever, lose all hopes of being able to relieve 
Andalusia by a movement into that province, although 1 was 
obliged to detain the army for some time in Castille. Those 
hopes depended upon the period at which Ciudad Rodrigo 
and Almeida should be replenished Avith provisions, and 
upon the accounts which I should vccoi^o of the degree of 



172 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


progress made by the enemy, in providing themselves with 
artillery and stores for the siege of those places. 

‘ The magazines at Ciudad Rodrigo and Almeida have 
been replenished, but I have reason to believe that the 
train for Marmont’s army is in considerable forwardness on 
its road from Bayonne. But at all events, the season is 
now so far advanced that the reasoning in reference to the 
expedition into Andalusia, which would have rendered that 
plan advisable in April or in the beginning of May, is 
not now applicable. Tlic harvest in Andalusia will be ripe 
in the beginning of June, and that in Estremadura in the 
same state in the second week in June ; and this is the state 
in wliich it is most convenient to the French to find the 
harvest, from wliich they can take what they please where 
they want it, without any account ; and wherever they find 
ripe corn on the ground, tlicy can collect any number of 
men they please, and can keep them collected during the 
time which may be necessary to perform any operation. 

If then I were to choose this period for my expedition 
into Andalusia, Marmont would follow me march for march, 
and on my arrival in Andalusia I should find an army much 
superior to mine. 

^ It may here be necessary to advert to the state of the 
enemy's numbers at present. I reckoned that Soult had 
about 45,000 men under his command in March, of which 
5000 in the garrison of Badajoz ; and I calculated that he 
could bring »V2,00() for a few days into Estremadura to raise 
that siege. I liavc reason to believe that Marmont has 
45,000 men under his command, including the divisions of 
Souham and Bonet, received from the army of the North in 
January, which arc about 14,000 or 15,000 of the number; 
and I reckoned that he would have brought 30,000 men into 
Estremadura to raise the siege of Badajoz, leaving those 
divisions to occupy Castille and Leon. I enclose, however 
some intercepted letters in regard to the siege of Badajoz, 
which show that I was mistaken respecting the numbers 
which the enemy coidd bring into Estremadura to raise the 
siege of Badajoz, which it appears by the enclosed letters 
were 80,000 men. In these numbers, however, I conclude 
that 5000 men belonging to what is called the Centre Army, 
arc included. - 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


173 


" Of the two armies called of the South and of Portugal, 
which are opposed to us, the latter can produce the largest 
number of men in a distant operation. Soult must maintain 
the blockade of Cadiz as long as he remains in Andalusia, 
and in effecting that object he must keep garrisons in 
Seville, Granada, Malaga, and some other points ; and if he 
is to be absent from the province for any length of time, he 
must leave a body of men to observe Ballesteros, who would 
otherwise be able to effect some operation attended by per- 
manent injury to his objects in Andalusia. 

" Marinont, however, has no object, nor, as he has been 
repeatedly told in letters from Berthicr, any thing to attend 
to but the British army. By abandoning Castillo and Leon 
for a short time lie might lose some plunder and some con- 
tributions, but he can lose notliing which could permanently 
affect his situation or the operations of tlie war ; or wliich 
he could not regain as soon as he sliould again be able 
to have a superiority, jiarticularly of cavalry, in the open 
country of Castille. Marmont’s then being, what may be 
called of the two, the operating army, the movement which 
I should now make into Andalusia, wliich, as 1 have above 
pointed out, would enable the enemy to bring the largest 
body of men to act together on one point, would be a false 
movement, and this must by all means be avoided. 

^ There are otlier circumstances also wliich render a move- 
ment into Andalusia, at the present moment, inexpedient. 
First, your Lordship will have seen that the garrison of 
Ciudad Rodrigo is not in a very satisfactory state, and it is 
desirable not to carry the operations of the army to a dis- 
tance from that place, so as to leave it exjiosed under exist- 
ing circumstances. Secondly, the harvest in all the countries 
north of the Tagus, particularly in those north of the moun- 
tains, by which Castille is separated from Estremadura, is 
much later than it is to the southward. We shall retain our 
advantages for a longer period of time in these countries 
than we should do to the southward ; and we have time to 
strike some important blows, which, if successful, may have 
the effect of relieving the Andalusias, as effectually as a 
direct movement upon those provinces. 

‘ I propose, therefore, as soon as ever the magazines of 
the army arc brought forward, which work is now in pro- 



174 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


gress, (the troops continuing in dispersed cantonments for 
that purpose,) to move forward into Castille, and to en- 
deavor, if possible, to bring Marmont to a general action. 

" I tliink I can make this movement with safety, excepting 
always the risk of the general action. I am of opinion also 
that I sliall have the advantage in the action, and that this 
is the period of all others in which such a measure should be 
tried. 

‘ Your Lordship will have observed tliat General Hill’s 
recent operation gives great security to our right in any for- 
ward movement into Castille. Tlic enemy have, in truth, 
now no good military communication across the Tagus,, ex- 
cepting the bridge of Toledo. I know that the bridges of 
Arzobispo and Talavcra cannot be deemed military commu- 
nications for large corps, and scarcely for any body of troops 
marching with cannon and carriages. There are besides 
other dilficultics for a corps advancing along the valley of 
the Tagus towards the frontier of Portugal. It is not very 
probable, therefore, that we should be turned by our right ; 
and if reinforcements should be drawn from the north to 
press upon our left, we shall always have our retreat open 
either upon Ciudad llodrigo or by the valley of the Tagus. 

^ In respect to the general action, I believe there is no man 
in tliis army who entertains a doubt of its result, and that 
sentiment alone would do a great deal to obtain success. 
But we possess solid physical advantages over the enemy, 
besides those resulting from recent successes. Our infantry 
are not in bad order ; our cavalry more numerous in relation 
to the enemy, and the horses in better condition than I have 
known them since I have commanded tlie army ; and the 
horses of the artillery in the same good condition and com- 
plete in numbers, whereas the enemy are, I know, terribly 
deficient in that equipment. 

‘ Strong as the enemy are at present, there is no doubt 
that they are weaker than they have been during the war, 
or than they arc likely to be again, as they will certainly be 
in some degree reinforced after the harvest, and very largely 
so, after Buonaparte’s projects in the north shall have been 
brought to a conclusion. We have a better chance of suc- 
cess now, therefore, than we have ever had ; and success 
obtained now would produce results not to be expected from 



FUENTE OUINALDO. 


1812. 


175 


any success over any single French army in ihe Peninsula 
upon any other occasion. 

^ The certainty of the loss in every action, and the risk 
which always attends such an operation, ought not, there- 
fore, in my opinion, to prevent its being tried at present. I 
am not insensible to these losses and risks, nor am I blind to 
the disadvantages under which I shall undertake this opera- 
tion. My friends in Castillo (and I believe that no ofFiccr 
ever had better) assure me that we shall not want provisions, 
even before the harvest will be reaped ; that there exist con- 
cealed granaries which will be opened to us ; and that if we 
can pay for a part, credit will be given us for the remainder. 
They have long given me hopes that we should be able to 
borrow money in^Castillc upon British securities ; and it was 
with a view to loans from the people of the interior prin- 
cipally, that 1 applied to your Lordship for the forms of the 
securities. 

" In case we should be able to maintain ourselves in 
Castillo, the general action and its result being delayed by 
the enemy’s manoeuvres, which 1 think not improbable, I 
liave in contemplation other resources for drawing supplies 
from the country, and 1 shall at all events have our own 
magazines at Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo. 

^ But with all these pros])ccts 1 cannot reflect witliout 
shuddering upon the probability that we shall be distressed, 
nor upon the consequence whicli may result from our want- 
ing money in the interior of Spain. 

" I have thought it proper to make your Lordship ac- 
quainted with the course of my reflections, and the plan 
according to which I propose to proceed for the campaign, 
which I hope at all events vdll be a successful one. 

‘ Believe me, 6cc. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ^ WELLINGTON. 


To Major General Peacocke. 

‘ Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 27tli May, 1812. 

‘ I gave directions some days ago to the commanding 
officer of artillery that two companies of the Royal Artillery 
might be prepared to be embarked for service ; and I re- 
quested Marslial Sir William Beresford to apply to the Por- 
tuguese Government for permission to send two companies 



176 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


of Portuguese artillery with them, to which the Government 
having consented, the Marshal has directed that those might 
be prepared; and I applied to the Admiral to have trans- 
I>orts prepared to take these troops to their destination. 

‘ I request you to inquire from General Rosa and Lieut. 
Colonel Fisher when the troops shall be ready to embark, 
and that you will settle with General Soares do Noronha tlic 
period of their embarkation, after having ascertained from 
His Excellency the Admiral that the transports arc ready 
to receive them. 

" These four companies arc to proceed to Gibraltar ; and 
I enclose a letter for the Governor of Gibraltar, wdiich the 
commanding officer is to deliver to him. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General Peacocke: ‘ Wellington. 

To Lieut, General Sir T. Graham^ K.B, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 27th May, 1812. 

‘ Marmont had not quitted Salamanca on the 24th, but 
it was expected he would go on the 25th. I enclose a letter 
from Kuman, containing the accounts of the 24th. 

^ 1 have a letter from Sir William Erskine of the 24th, 
from which it appears that he then thought the enemy were 
retiring. I do not think Sir William has very good intel- 
ligence. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General " WjaLiNGTON. 

Sir T, Graham, K.B, 

‘ I do not know liow Sir William makes himself out much 
inferior to Urouct in cavalry.’ 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B, 

' Sir, ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 27th May, 1812. 

‘ The Government of Spain having signified to Mariscal 
de Campo Don Miguel Alava their consent that His Ca- 
tholic Majesty’s subjects, to the number of 5000, might be 
permitted to enlist into His Majesty’s army serving in the 
Peninsula, I enclose the copy of a circular letter which I 
have written to the General Officers commanding divisions, 



1812 . 


FUENTE GtriNAXDO. 


177 


to permit the regiments in their several divisions to enlist 
His Catholic Majesty^s subjects, and specifying the terms 
on which the enlistment is to be made. 

^ You will observe that this letter provides for enlisting 
4100 men, which is all that I have thought it proper at 
present to allow of; and I have not allowed the foreign 
regiments in the British service to enlist any Spaniards. 

^ 1 request you to lay the enclosed before the Spanish 
Government. 

^ I likewise request that you will apply for leave for Cap- 
tain Gray, of the 95th regiment, who will have the honor of 
delivering a duplicate of this letter, to go to Alicante and 
the kingdom of Valencia, with the order of the Government, 
directed to the Captains General of Valencia, Murcia, and 
Catalonia, to permit him to enlist His Catholic Majesty’s 
subjects, natives of those kingdoms, into His Majesty's 95th 
regiment. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon, ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. milesley, K.B,^ 

To Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K.B, 

* My dear Hill, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 28th May, 1812. 9 a.m. 

' Since I wrote to you on the 25th, I find that Sir Thomas 
Graham will not require the flying bridges, which you had 
better send back, with all the appurtenances, bullocks, &c., 
to San Vicente ; and I shall write to Fletcher respecting the 
disposal of the bridge of pontoons. 

^ Lieut. Colonel Dickson’s reserve brigade of howitzers 
must, however, be ready to cross the bridge of Alcantara on 
the day Sturgeon will have it prepared ; and I shall write 
to Sturgeon to let him know exactly on what day it will be 
ready. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir R, Hill, K,B: 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham^ K,B, ■ 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 28 th May, 1812 . 

‘ I received last night your three letters of the 25th. 

^ I send Major Currio to England wit]i Sir R. Hill’s dis- 

VOL. IX. 



178 


SPAIN. 


1812; 


patches, which I hope will be of service to him. I received 
three letters from Hill with his dispatch^ including the dis-* 
patch, and I believe all in their covers. 

‘ I desired Colonel Framingham to attach Major Gar- 
diner to the artillery with the 1st division, and it was neces- 
sary to move Captain Lawson’s company with him. But it 
is certainly desirable that some of the experienced artillery- 
men and drivers should remain with the 1st division, and I 
shall speak to Colonel Framingham on the subject. 

' I think it probable that I shall be able to send directions 
for the march of the troops to-morrow morning. All will 
now pass by Villa Velha, in consequence of their having 
taken up their old cantonments, as stated in your letter of 
the 25th. 

^ I shall write to Sturgeon to fix his bridge where ho can, 
and then to join the army. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ LieuL General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir T, Graham, K£. 

‘ You will have heard of Mr. Perceval having been mur- 
dered coming out of the House of Commons on the 11th.’ 

To General Don Carlos de Espana* 

^ Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 28 th May, 1812 . 

* His Majesty’s Ambassador at Cadiz having placed at 
my disposition a part of the aid supplied by Great Britain 
to the Spanish Government, I conceive that I cannot fulfil 
the wishes of His Royal Highness the Prince Regent of 
Great Britain and Ireland, nor forward the interests of the 
Spanish Government more essentially, than in making use 
of that aid to furnish the pay of the officers and troops 
composing the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, and of those 
composing the division under the command of your Excel- 
lency. 

‘ I request your Excellency, however, to understand that 
the expenses of the army under my command, and the 
other expenses incurred by His Majesty in the cause of the 
Peninsula, are very large, and that it is frequently impossible 
to procure funds to defray those of them which must be 
paid in money. Whatever may be my intentions or my 



1812 


FUENTB OUINALDO. 


179 


wishes, thewforc, regarding the regularity of the payment 
of the troops above referred to, it must depend upon tlie 
realization of specie for the other necessary expenses of the 
army. 

^ I mention this in order to guard myself against future 
reproaches on account of the irregularity of these payments, 
which I now declare I cannot expect will be regular. 

^ I likewise consider it my duty, acting on the behalf of 
His Majesty’s Government, and doing what I conscien- 
tiously consider best for the cause of Spain, to make the fol- 
lowing conditions : — 

' First. The money is invariably to be applied to the pur- 
pose for which it will be issued by me ; that is to say, to 
give their pay, or the stated proportion of their pay, to a 
certain specified number of officers and soldiers. 

^ Secondly. As the object in giving this aid is to render 
the officers and troops efficient for the service, it is desirable 
that it should be understood that as long as the contribu- 
tions which can be raised in Castillo are allowed by the 
Government to be applicable to the support of the military 
establishments employed in the country, they should be 
applied to the provision of subsistence to the troops, par- 
ticularly the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo ; to the completion 
and maintenance of the works of that fortress ; and lastly# 
to aid in the payment of the troops, so that the money sup- 
plied by Great Britain may be applied to another object for 
the service of Spain. 

< Thirdly, I beg it may be understood clearly that I em- 
ploy the aid placed at my disposition in the manner above 
stated only, because I consider the troops composing the 
garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, and those under the command 
of your Excellency, to be regular troops ; among whom 
ought to be established, and by whom ought to be observed 
and practised, the Rules and Regulations established by the 
Kings of Spain for the government of their armies; and 
these troops ought to be as good as any in the Peninsula 
engaged on either side. 

^ If I should find that 1 have been mistaken, it may be 
depended upon that I shall correct my error ; and 1 shall 
discontinue the payment of this aid to any corps which shall 
not be properly disciplined, and in which the Royal Orders 

N 2 



180 


SPAIN* 


1812 * 


and Regulations for the establishment and maintenance of 
discipline and subordination among officers and soldiers 
shall not be duly observed. 

When I make this last condition, however, I admit that 
I have no right, nor have I the intention, of criticising the 
conduct of others. But His Majesty’s Ambassador having 
confided to me the distribution of a part of His Majesty’s 
aid to the Spanish Government, it is my duty to satisfy 
myself, at least, that I shall dispose of it for the benefit of 
the cause of Spain and her allies ; and I do not conceive 
that I should perform this duty if I were to throw away 
money to pay officers and soldiers who should have no 
knowledge of their duty, and among whom there should 
exist no subordination, no discipline, or no knowledge of or 
attention to the Orders and Regulations of their Sovereign. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• General ‘ Wellington. 

Don Carlos de Espafia,' 

To General Don Carlos de Espana, 

^ Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 28th’May, 1812. 

* According to my letter No. 1 of this day’s date, I have 
now the honor to enclose a warrant upon the Commissary 
General for 12,675 dollars, 19 reals, and 32 marav., which 
is sufficient to pay the officers and soldiers according to the 
enclosed estimate for half of a month ; and I beg that this 
money may be so applied to pay the troops in the garrison 
of Ciudad Rodrigo and under the command of your Excel- 
lency, for half of the month of June. 

^ I have made the calculations in this estimate according 
to those which your Excellency first gave me as the rate of 
pay of each individual. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

• General ^ Wellington. 

Don Carlos de Espam* 

To Major General George Murray, 

* My dear Murray, * Fuente Guinaldo, 28 th May, 1812 . 

* I received this day your letter of the 2nd, and I cannot 
express to you how much concerned I am that you have re- 
linquished your situation with this army. 1 acknowledge 



1812 . 


POENTK OOTNALDO. 


181 


that when I first heard of your intention to quit us, my 
sentiments were not confined to concern and regret ; but it 
is impossible to expect that men will pass their lives in 
these countries, who have other objects to look to, and I 
cannot be surprised, that after such continued absence, you 
should be desirous of spending some time at home. 

* In answer to your letter I can only express a hope that 
you relinquish your situation with as much regret as I feel 
upon losing your assistance ; and I assure you that I shall 
always be happy to receive it again when you feel disposed 
to give it. 

‘ You will have appreciated the difficulty and import- 
ance of our late operations. The siege of Badajoz was a 
most serious undertaking, and the weather did not favor us. 
The troops were up to their middles in mud in the trenches, 
and in the midst of our difficulties the Guadiana swelled and 
carried away our bridge, and rendered useless for a time 
our flying bridge. However, we never stopped, and a fair 
day or two set all to rights. The assault was a terrible 
business, of which I foresaw the loss when I was ordering 
it. But we had brought matters to that state that we 
could do no more, and it was necessary to storm or raise the 
siege. I trust, however, that future armies will be equipped 
for sieges, with the people necessary to carry them on as 
they ought to be ; and that our engineers will learn how to 
put their batteries on the crest of the glacis, and to blow 
in the counterscarp, instead of placing them wherever the 
wall can be seen, leaving the poor officers and troops to 
get into and cross the ditch as they can. 

‘ Hill’s late operation is likewise very important, as unless 
the enemy have another bridge, they can no longer pass the 
Tagus as an army, excepting at Toledo. As you have left 
us I will not tantalize you by entering on our plans for the 
remainder of the campaign ; I think it will be ours at all 
events, and I hope it may be attended by permanent im- 
portant consequences. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General ‘ Wbixingxon. 

George Murray,' 



182 


SPAIN. 


1812 ^ 


To Colonel Torrens, 

^ My dear Torrens, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 28th May, 1812. 

" I received this day your letter of the 2nd, announcing 
General Murray’s removal from the Quarter Master General’s 
department of this army, and the intention of His Boyal 
Highness to send here Colonel Gordon, to perform the 
duties of that office. 

" I very much regret the loss of General Murray’s assist- 
ance, to wliom I liave so long been accustomed, and who 
has been of so much service to me. But I am very much 
obliged to His Royal Highness for having fixed upon 
Colonel Gordon to succeed him ; and I assure you that, as 
General Murray is to go, no arrangement can be more 
satisfactory to me. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colonel Torrens: ' Wellington. 


To the Earl of Liverpool, 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Fuento Guinaldo, 28th May, 1812. 

' I enclose a letter from Dr. M^Grigor, with a return of 
the officers who have died of their wounds, during and since 
tJic siege of Badajoz ; and another letter, giving an account 
of the soldiers who have died, and of the present state of 
the wounded, 

‘ I am sorry to say that Major General Walker is in a 
very dangerous state, as is Major Gillies, of the 40th. Lieut. 
Colonel Elder is better, and out of danger. Major General 
Bowes has rcliiriied to his duty; but Major General the 
Hon. Charles Colville and Major General Kempt arc still 
confined by their wounds. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl (f Liverpool: " Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool. 

^ My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 28tU May, 1812. 

^ When I found that the enemy had retired from this 
frontier on the 2 llh of April, and that I was enabled to make 
a disposition of the army, to give me the command of the 
means of transport attached to the troops, and to enable me 
to throw provisions into the fortresses of Ciudad Rodrigo 



1812. 


FUENTB amWALDO. 


183 


and Almeida> and to move up the magazines of the army^ 
with a view to the further operations of tlie campaign^ I 
directed Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill to carry into exe- 
cution the operations against the posts and establishments 
of the enemy at the passage of the Tagus, at Almaraz, 
which I had in contemplation before the siege of Badajoz, 
and which I had then delayed for reasons into which it is 
not now necessary to enter. 

^ Owing to the necessary preparations for this expedition, 
and to the unexpected delays of the repairs of the bridge 
over the Guadiana at Merida, which I had destroyed during 
the siege of Badajoz, Lieut. General Sir R. Hill could not 
begin his operation with part of the 2nd division till the 
12th instant; and he attained the object of his expedition 
on the 19th instant, by taking by storm Forts Napoleon 
and Ragusa, and the tetes do pont, and other works by 
which the enemy’s bridge was guarded, by destroying those 
forts and works, and the enemy’s bridge and establishments, 
and by taking their magazines, and about 259 prisoners, 
and 18 pieces of cannon. 

^ I have the honor to enclose Sir R. Hill’s report’*' of this 


* Gtneral Sir /?, Hiii, K,B,, to Qontroi th Earl of Wellington^ 

• My Lord, ‘ Truxillo, 21 it May, 1812. 

' I have the satisfaction to acquaint your Lordship, that your instructions 
relative to the capture and destruction of the enemy’s works at Almaraz have 
been most fully carried into effect by a detachment of troops under my orders, 
which marched from Almendralejo on the 12th instant. 

* The bridge was, as your Lordship knows, protected by strong works, thrown 
up by the French on both sides of the river, and farther covered on the 
southern side by the castle and redoubts of Mirabete, about a league off, com- 
manding the pass of that name, through which runs the road to Madrid, being 
the only one passable for carriages of any description, by which the bridge can 
be approached. 

^ The works on the left bank of the river were a tite de pont^ built of masonry, 
and strongly intrenched ; and on the high ground above it, a large and well 
constructed fort, called Napoleon, with an interior intrenchment and loopholed 
tower in its centre. This fort contained nine pieces of cannon, with a garrison 
of between 400 and 500 men, there being also on the opposite side of the river, 
On a height immediately above the bridge, a very complete fort, recently con* 
strutted, which flanked and added much to its defence. 

* On the morning of the 16th, the troops reached Jaraicejo, and the same 
evening marched in three columns; the left column, commanded by Lieut. 
General Chowne, (28th and 34th regiments, under Colonel Wilson, and the 
flth Portuguese Ca^adores}, towards the castle of Mirabete; the right column. 



8PAIK. 


1812 . 


184 


brilliant exploit ; and I beg to draw your LordsMp’s at- 
tention to the difficulties with which he had to contend, aa 


iind6r Major General Howard, (50th^ TIst, and 92nd regiments,) which I 
accompanied myself to a pass in the mountains, through which a most difficult 
and circuitous footpath leads by the village of Romangordo to the bridge; the 
centre column, under Major General Long^ (6th and 18th Portuguese infantry, 
under Colonel Ashworth, and the 13th light dragoons, with the artillery,) 
advanced upon the high road to the pass of Mirabete. 

‘ The two flank columns were provided with ladders, and it was intended 
that either of them should proceed to escalade the forts against which they 
were directed, had circumstances proved favorable; the difficulties, however, 
which each had to encounter on its march were such, that it was impossible for 
them to reach their respective points before daybreak ; I judged it best, there- 
fore, as there was no longer a possibility of surprise, to defer the attack until 
we should be better acquainted with the nature and position of the works ; and 
the troops bivouacked on the Sierra. 

* On further examination of the Mirabete works, I was satisfied that any 
attempt to force that pass, however successful, must be attended by so serious 
a loss, that 1 determined on endeavoring to penetrate to the bridge by the 
mountain path leading through the village of Romangordo, although, by that 
means, I should be deprived of the use of my artillery. 

‘ On the evening of the 18th, I moved with Major General Howard’s brigade 
and the 6th Portuguese regiment, for the operation, provided with scaling 
ladders, &c. Although the distance marched did not exceed five or six miles, 
the difficulties of the road were such, that, with the united exertions of officers 
and men, the column could not be formed for the attack before daylight. Con- 
fiding, however, in the valor of the troops, 1 ordered the immediate assault of 
Fort Napoleon. My confidence was fully justified by the event. 

‘ The Ist battalion of the 50th, and one wing of the 71st regiment, regard- 
less of the enemy’s artillery and musketry, escaladed the work in three places, 
nearly at the same time. The enemy seemed at first determined, and his fire 
was destructive, but the ardour of our troops was irresistible, and the garrison 
was driven at the point of the bayonet through the several intrenchments of the 
fort and tUe de pont, across the bridge, which, having been cut by those on the 
opposite side of the livej:, many leaped into the river, and thus perished. 

^ The impression made upon the enemy’s troops was such, that panic soon 
communicated itself to those on the right bank of the river, and Fort Raguta 
was instantly abandoned, the garrison Hying in the greatest confusion towards 
Navalinoral. 

< I cannot sufficiently praise the conduct of the 50th and 71st regiments, to 
whom the assault fell. The cool and steady manner in which they formed and 
advanced, and the intrepidity with which they mounted the ladders and carried 
the place, were worthy of those distinguished corps and the officers who led them. 

< Could the attack have been made before day, the 92nd regiment, under 
Lieut. Colonel Cameron, and the remainder of the 71 st, under Lieut. Colonel 
the Hon. H. Cadogan, were to have escaladed the iSte de pont^ and effected the 
destruction of the bridge at the same time that the attack was made on Fort 
Napoleon. The impossibility of advancing deprived them of this opportunity 
of distinguishiug themselves, but the share which they had in the operations^ 
and the zeal which they displayed, entitle them to my warmest commendation ; 
and I cannot avoid to mention the steadiness and good dtscipUne pi the 



1812: 


FCENTE OUJMALDO. 


189 


well from the nature of the country as from the works which 
the enemy had constructed, and to the ability and charac- 

Portuguese iofantiy, and two companies of the 60th regiment^ under Colonel 
Ashworth, which formed the reserve to this attack, 

* Our operations in this quarter were much favored by a diversion made by 
l/ieut. General Ghowne, with the troops under his orders, against the Castle 
of Mirabete^ which succeeded in inducing the enemy to believe that we should 
not attack the forts near the bridge until we had forced the pass, and thus have 
made way for our artillery. The Lieut. General conducted this operation, as 
well as his former advance> entirely to my satisfaction. 1 regret much that 
the peculiar situation of Mirabete should have prevented my allowing the 
gallant corps under his orders to follow up an operation which they had com- 
menced with much spirit, and were so anxious to complete $ but the possession 
of these forts would not have made amends for the valuable blood which must 
have been shed in taking them. 

* I cannot too strongly express how much 1 am satisfied with the conduct of 
Major General Howard through the whole of this operation, the most arduous 
part of which has fallen to his share ; and particularly with the manner in which 
he led his brigade to the assault. He was ably assisted by his staff, Brigade 
Major Wemyss, of the 50ih, and Lieut. Battersby, of the 23rd light dragoons. 

* To Major General Long 1 am also indebted for his assistance, although hie 
column was not immediately engaged. 

* Lieut, Colonel Stewart, and Major Harrison, of the 50th, and Major Cother, 
of the 71st, commanded the three attacks, and led them in a most gallant and 
spirited manner. 

^ I have received the greatest assistance from Lieut. Colonel Dickson, of the 
Royal Artillery, whom, with a brigade of 24 pounders, a company of British, and 
one of Portuguese artillery, your Lprdship was pleased to put under my orders* 
Circumstances did not permit his guns to be brought into play, but his exer- 
tions, and those of his officers and men during the attack and destruction of the 
place, were unwearied. In the latter service, Lieut. Thiele, of the Royal German 
Artillery, was blown up ; and we have to regret in him a most gallant officer. 
He had particularly distinguished himself in the assault. Lieut. Wright, of 
the Royal Engineers, has also rendered me very essential service. He is a 
most intelligent, gallant, and meritorious officer ; and 1 must not omit also to 
mention Lieut. Hillier, of the 29th regiment, whose knowledge of this part of 
the country (in which he has been for some time in observation) proved of 
great assistance. 

< Your Lordship will observe from the return of ordnance and stores which 
1 have the honor to enclose, that Almaraz has been considered by the enemy 
In the light of a most important station ; and 1 am happy to state that its 
destruction has been most complete. The towers of masonry which were in forts 
Napoleon and Ragusa have been entirely levelled, the ramparts of both in 
great measure destroyed, and the whole apparatus of the bridge, together with 
the workshops, magazines, and every piece of timber which could be found, 
entirely destroyed. , 

* A color belonging to the 4th battalion of the Corpt Etrwger was taken by the 
71at regiment ; and I shall have the honor of forwarding it to your IiOrdship. 

* Our loss has not been severe, considering the circumstances under which 
the attack was made. I enclose a list of the killed and wounded. Captain 
Ghndler, of the 50th regiment, (the onljr officer killed in the assault,) has, 1 an| 



SPAIK. 


1812. 


isa 

teri»tic qualities displayed by Lieot. Qenend Sir B. Hill, 
in persevering in the line, and confining himself to the 

sorry to say^ left a large family to deplore his loss. He was one of the first 
to mount the ladder, and fell upon the parapet after giving a distinguished 
example to his men. 

< 1 have had Irequent occasions to mention to your Lordship, In terms of 
the highest praise, the conduct of Lieut. Colonel Rooke, Assistant Adjutant 
General During the whole period I have had a separate command in this 
country, that officer has been with me, and rendered most essential service to 
my corps ; on the present expedition he has eminently distinguished himself, 
and 1 beg leave particularly to notice his conduct. Your Lordship is also 
aware of the merits of Lieut. Colonel OfFeney, my Assistant Quarter Master 
General, of whose valuable aid I have been deprived during the latter part of 
this expedition. Though labouring under severe illness, he accompanied me, to 
the serious detriment of his health, and until it was totally impracticable for 
him to proceed. Captain Thorn, Deputy Assistant Quarter Master General, 
succeeded to his duties, and I am indebted to him for his assistance, and also to 
Major Hill and my personal Staff. 

* The Marques de Almeida, Member of the Junta of Estremadura, has done 
me the honor to accompany me since I have been in the province ; 1 have 
received from him, as well as from the people, the most ready and effectual 
assistance which it was in their power to bestow. 

* Major Currie, my aide de camp, will deliver to your Lordship this dispatch, 
and the color taken from the enemy, and will be able to give you any further 
particulars. 1 beg leave to recommend him to your Lordship. 

* I have the honor to be, &c. 

^ General the Earl of Wellington j K*B, * R. Hill, Lieut. General 

* 1 enclose a Return of prisoners, in number 259, including the Governor, 
one Lieut. Colonel, and 15 officers. I also transmit a Return of provisions in 
the forts near the bridge, taken from one signed by the Chief of the French 
Commissariat, on the 13th of May. 

* Return of the Kilted^ Wounded, and Missing of the Army under the command of 
His Excellency General the Earl of Wellington, K.B,, under the mmediate 
orders of Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K,B., at the storm and capture of Fopt 
Napoleon, and the Enemy'" s other works in the neighbourhood of Almaraz^ on the 
morning of the 19/ A May, 1812. 



Officers. 

"a 

C3 

I* 

Rank and File. 

Horses, 

Total loss of Officers, 
Non-Commissioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed , . . 

2 

1 

30 

.... 

33 

Wounded • • 

13 


121 

— 

144 

Mitting • • • 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 














FUENM OUINALDO. 


1812 . 


187 


olgects chalked out by his instructions, notwithstanding the 
various obstacles opposed to his progress. 

* I have nothing to add to Lieut. General Sir R. HilFs 
report of the conduct of the officers and troops under his 
command, excepting to express my concurrence in all ho 
says in their praise. Too much cannot be said of the 
brave officers and troops who took by storm, without the 
assistance of cannon, such works as the enemy's forts on 
both banks of the Tagus, fully garrisoned, and in good 
order, and defended by 18 pieces of artillery. 

* Your Lordship is aware that the road of Almaraz affords 
the only good military communication across the Tagus, and 
from the Tagus to the Guadiana below Toledo. All the 
permanent bridges below the bridge of Arzobispo have 
been destroyed during the war by one or other of the belli- 
gerents, and the enemy have found it impossible to repair 
them. Their bridge, which Lieut. General Sir R. Hill has 
destroyed, was one of boats ; and I doubt their having the 
means of replacing it, or that they will again form sucli an 
establishment at that point, however important it is to their 
objects, as that of which he has deprived them. 

‘ The communications from the bridges of Arzobispo and 
Talavera to the Guadiana are very difficult, and cannot bo 
deemed military communications for a large army. The 
result then of Lieut. General Sir 11. Hills expedition has 
been to cut off the shortest and best communication between 
the armies of the South and of Portugal, which, under ex- 
isting circumstances, it will be difficult, if not impossible^ to 
re-establish. 

* Nearly about the same time that the enemy's troops, re- 
ported in my last dispatch to have moved into the Condado 
de Niebla, marched from Seville, it is reported that another 
considerable detachment, under Marshal Soult, went towards 
the blockade of Cadiz; and it was expected that another 
attack was to be made on Tarifa, from which it appears that 
the enemy intended to divert the attention of the allies by 
a renewal of the bombardment of Cadiz, which was actually 
carried into execution on the 16th instant. 

" It appears, however, that the enemy received early in- 
telligence of Sir H. Hill’s march. The troops under the 
command of General Drouet made a movement to thdr left/ 



L88 


SPAIN* 


1812 i 


and amTed upon the Guadiana at Medelliii on the I7th ; 
and on the 18th a detachment of the cavalry, under the 
command of the same General, drove in as far as Bibera the 
piquets of Lieut. General Sir W. Erskine’s division of ca- 
valry, which had remained in Lower Estremadura with a 
part of the 2nd division of infantry, and Lieut. General 
Hamilton’s division of infantry. Marshal Soult likewise 
moved from the blockade of Cadiz towards Cordova, and the 
troops which had marched from Seville into the Condado de 
Nicbla, returned to Seville nearly about the same time. 

« As soon as Lieut. General Sir Thomas Graham was 
apprized of the movements of the enemy in Estremadura, 
he marched the 1st and 6th divisions, and part of Lieut* 
General Sir Stapleton Cotton’s division of cavalry, into that 
province ; but Lieut. General Sir R. Hill had attained his 
object on the 19th, and had retired to Truxillo, and was 
beyond all risk of being attacked by a superior force on the 
2l8t, and he has since arrived on the Guadiana at Merida. 

* The enemy’s troops have retired into Cordova, and it is 
stated that Marshal Soult’s head quarters have been moved 
to El Carpio, between Cordova and Andujar, and Lieut. 
General Sir T. Graham’s troops have returned to their can- 
tonments. 

* Since the accounts have been received of Lieut, General 
Sir R. Hill’s expedition, the enemy’s troops have likewise 
been put in motion in Old and New Castille. The 1st di- 
vision, under General Foy, and a division of the army of the 
Centre, under General Darmagnac, crossed the Tagus by 
the bridge of Arzobispo on the 21st, and have moved by 
the road of Deleytosa, to relieve or withdraw the post which 
still remained in the tower of Mirabete. 

^ The whole of the army of Portugal have likewise made 
a movement to their left, the 2nd division being on the 
Tagus ; and Marshal Marmont’s head quarters have been 
removed from Salamanca to Fontiveros. 

' By a letter from Sir Howard Douglas of the 24th, I 
learn that the troops under General Bonet, after having 
made two plundering excursions towards the frontiers of 
Galicia, had again entered the Asturias, and were on the 
17th in possession of Oviedo, Gijon, and Grado. In the 
Viwa time the troops under General Mendizabal are in pos- 



1812 - 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


18$ 

session of the town of Burgos, the enemy still keeping the 
castle; and in all parts of the country the boldness and 
activity of the chiefs of guerrillas are increasing, and their 
operations against the enemy are becoming daily more im* 
portant. 

^ The measures for moving up the magazines of the army 
are still in progress. 

^ I forward this dispatch by Major Currie aide de camp 
to Lieut. General Sir R. Hill, whom I beg leave to recom- 
mend to your Lordship’s notice and protection. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Earl ofLiverpooV ‘ Wellington. 

To His Royal Highness the Commander in Chief, 

^ Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 28th May, 1812. 

^ I have the honor to enclose to your Royal Highness the 
copy of my dispatch of this day’s date, and of its enclosures 
to the Secretary of State ; and the copy of a letter from 
Lieut. General Sir R. Hill, in which he desires me to re- 
commend to your Royal Highness’s notice the officers who 
have distinguished themselves on the expedition to which 
his dispatch relates. I likewise enclose a sketch of the 
ground near the Tagus at Alinaraz. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• His Royal Highness ^ WELLINGTON. 

the Commander in Chief' 

To the Earl of Liverpool. 

* My dear Lord, ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 28th May, 1812. 

‘ You will be as Avell pleased as I am with General Hill’s 
success, which certainly would have been still more satisfac- 
tory if he had taken the garrison of Mirabcte, which he 
would have done if General Chowne had got on a little 
better in the night of the 16th, atid if Sir W. Erskine had 
not alarmed him, by informing him that Soult’s whole army 
were in movement, and in Estremadura. Sir Rowland, there- 
fore, according to his instructions came back on the 21st, 
whereas, if he had stayed a day or two he would have 
brought his heavy howitzers to bear on the castle, and he 

Aftsmaids killed at WsterUKK 



SPAIN. 


m 


1812 i 


could either have stormed it under their fire, or the garri- 
son would have surrendered. 

^ Your Lordship will observe that I have marked some 
paragraphs in Hill’s report not to bo published. My opinion 
is that the enemy must evacuate the tower of Mirabete ; 
and indeed it is useless to keep that post, unless they have 
another bridge, which I doubt. But if they see that we 
entertain a formidable opinion of the strength of Mirabete, 
they will keep their garrison there, which might be incon- 
venient to us hereafter, if we should wish to establish there 
our own bridge. 

‘ I enclose a Madrid Gazette, in which you will see a 
curious description of the state of King Joseph’s authority, 
and his affairs in general, from the most authentic sources. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl of LiverpooL ‘ Wellington. 

* I enclose the last morning state.’ 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

* My dear Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 29th May, 1812. 

' I have received your letter of the 25th, and with every 
desire to oblige Don E. Bardaxi, I am very sorry that I can- 
not comply with his request. 

‘ The magazines of the army in Elvas and Badajoz are 
required to enable the army not only to carry on their opera- 
tions, but to remain in Estremadura at all. If these maga- 
zines were given over to the garrison of Badajoz, the place 
would fall for want of the necessary support. 

‘ There is but one remedy for the inconvenience felt, and 
that is, for the Marques de Monsalud to oblige the towns in 
Estremadura to send their means of transport to Alcacer do 
Sal, to remove to Badajoz the provisions which Don E. Bar- 
daxi is desirous of sending to that place. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ‘ Wellington. 

Charles StuarC 


To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham, K,B, 

* My dear Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 30th May, 1812. 9 a.m. 

‘ I enclose two newspapers received yesterday from Sir 
Howard Douglas, contaming accounts of Mr. Perceval’s 





PUENTE OUIKALDO. 


191 


death, and of proceedings in Parliament on that event. 1 
beg you to send them on to my brother, when you shall 
have read them. If you send them to Senor Barcenas, at 
Badajoz, he will forward them by the Spanish post to Cadiz. 
There is nothing new here. 

" I enclose a paper from Salamanca. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ‘ WELLINGTON, 

r. Graham, K,Bl 

To Major General H, Clinton* 

* Sir, * Fuenle Guinaldo, 30th May, 1812. 

' I have perused Major General Hulse’s confidential re- 
ports of the state of the regiments of his brigade ; and I 
observe in the reports of the Courts Martial of the 61st 
regiment, it is stated that there are five men, John Poole, 
John Henry, Edward Ross, Denis Farrell, and Charles Bou- 
ton, whose punishment is remitted, to depend upon their 
future behaviour,” This appears to me to be irregular. 

* It is impossible that these soldiers can be put on duty in 
the situation of convicted criminals ; and I conclude that 
the Commanding Officer does not propose to make their 
punishment depend upon their behaviour while in confine- 
ment. 

" These men should have been cither punished or par- 
doned ; but as I should imagine they have been on duty 
since they were convicted of the crimes with which they 
were severally charged, they ought now to be pardoned ; and 
this irregular practice must be avoided in future. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Major General H* Clinton,^ * WELLINGTON. 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart* 

' My dear Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 30th May, 1612. 

^ I have received your letter of the 26th, enclosing one of 
the 4th from Lord Castlereagh, regarding the Portuguese 
account. 

' I concur with you in thinking that the Portuguese Go- 
vernment ought to have credit for the money for which Mr. 
Yilliers refused to give them credit in IW. They uar 



192 


SPAIN* 


1812 * 


doubtedly maintained many more than the stipulated nnm* 
her of troops, whether Da Costa can furnish the regular 
vouchers or not 

^ Mr. Bissett has the accounts of issues prepared, I be- 
lieve, to the end of the year, with every thing excepting 
prices, which I have desired him to calculate and add to the 
document, and I hope you will have it in a few days. 

‘ I know nothing of the receipts of the Portuguese Go- 
vernment of articles of military equipment from England, 
or their prices. There will be to be added, a demand from 
Mr. Murray for supplies delivered before 1810, when Mr. 
Kennedy took charge, which came to me, but without prices, 
and I sent it back to have the prices included. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ' W ELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuari' 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

‘ My Loud, ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 30th May, 1812. 

' In transmitting to your Lordship a duplicate of my dis- 
patch (No. 14) of the llth of February, I beg leave to 
request that you will be pleased to give directions that the 
scythes for which I then made application should be sent 
to Lisbon without loss of time, as otherwise they will arrive 
too late for the object for which they were intended. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Earl of Liverpool: ‘ Wellington, 

To Lieut. Colonel Dickson, R.A, 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 31st May, 1812. 10 a.m. 

‘ I received last night your letter of the 28th. We must 
have in this part of the country immediately the 0 howitzers, 
and as many spherical case (principally) as you can carry; 
and after the spherical case as many common shells. I shall 
have 24 pounder shot and powder ready here, and means to 
move both, which will answ'er our purpose. 

' I want this equipment here now for a particular purpose, 
and when that purpose is accomplished, we must dispose of 
it somewhere till it can be got properly in order to follow 
the army. You know best how many waggons you want, 
tmd you will give such directions as you may think necessary 



1812. 


FUKNTK GUINALDO. 


193 


to have them prepared and properly fitted for this equip- 
ment ; the nearer to tlie army the better. 

‘ In respect to the draft for your waggons. Sir W. Beres- 
ford says that if you will write to General Bosa, and point 
out to him where your waggons will be found fitted and 
prepared, he will send the mules to bring them up to you. 
Let General Rosa know tlie number of mules you will require. 

' The company of British artillery is to remain with you. 
It is absolutely necessary that you should cross the Tagus 
at Alcantara, as soon as the bridge there is ready. 

^ I shall give orders that you may find provisions on this 
side of the Tagus. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, Colonel Dickson, R.A: ‘ W ellingtox. 


To Major General Cooke, 

‘ Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 1st June, 1812. 

‘ My attention has been called in a very particular manner 
to the expenses at Cadiz, to the extravagant amount of which 
it is absolutely necessary to fix some bounds. 

' The troops at Cadiz are a part of this army, and the de- 
partments at Cadiz arc branches of the same departments 
here. They should correspond constantly with the heads 
of departments here, and keep the latter acquainted with 
the state of the demands upon them, and of their expenses ; 
but instead of that, I was concerned to learn from Mr. Bissett 
this day, that Mr. O’Meara had not obeyed an order which 
Mr. Bissett had recently transmitted to him, to send to the 
army three officers belonging to the Commissariat Depart- 
ment at Cadiz. I beg that you will see that he obeys this 
order forthwith ; and in future, he is to lay before you every 
order which he shall receive from tlie Commissary General, 
and I request you to sec that he obeys them, unless you 
should have good reason to believe that obedience would bo 
inconvenient to the service. 

^ I beg to have for the month of July, estimates of the 
expenses at Cadiz, Tarifa, and Carthagena, severally, under 
the following heads : 

Ordinaries. 

Extraordinarics. 


VOL. IX. 


o 



194 SPAIN. 1812 . 

‘ Under the latter head, I request to have distinguished 
the amount of the following expenses: 

Commissariat Salaries. 

Staff paid by the Commissariat. 

B'At and Forage. 

Provisions. 

Forage. 

Means of Transport. 

Hospitals. 

Works by the Engineers. 

Supplies purchased for the Engineers. 

Supplies purchased for the Troops. 

Expenses not classed under the foregoing 
heads, of which a general enumeration must 
be returned, including the sum furnished 
monthly to the ordnance. 

‘ I request to have likewise an estimate of the quantity of 
provisions and forage which can be purchased by lulls upon 
England at each place ; or can be procured by contracts 
entered into in Great Britain and Ireland. 

‘ I beg that these estimates may be accompanied by returns 
of the quantities of provisions, forage, and military equip- 
ments in the Commissariat stores at each place, on the 20th 
of June ; and by returns of the number of persons receiving 
rations of provisions and forage at each place. 

' I request that in future, similar returns, and similar esti- 
mates, may be made up between the 20th and 3()th of each 
month, for the following month ; and that it should be stated 
opposite each head of expense, whether it has exceeded, dur- 
ing the current month, the amount estimated for the same 
in the preceding month. 

" I beg also to know, to what period the troops and staff 
are paid. 

‘ I earnestly entreat your attention to keep down the ex- 
penses at Cadiz, Tarifa, and Carthagena, as far as may be 
in your power. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Wellington. 


‘ Major General Cooke* 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


195 


To Major General Cooke, 

^ Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 1st June, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 21st of May, upon the 
state of the works at Tarifa ; and as you appear, upon a 
view of the place, to be of opinion that the possession of the 
town is important to the possession of the island, I have no 
objection to measures, reasonable in amount of expense, 
being adopted to improve the works of the town. 

^ At the same time, it is necessary that the Spanish Go- 
vernment should employ a suflicient and a proper garrison 
to secure the place, in addition to the troops which may be 
employed by His Majesty. 

" In regard to the payment of the expenses for these 
works, as I before stated, it is no business of yours or mine, 
and you must refer it to His Majesty’s Minister. 

" If you are of opinion that the money is laid out on 
objects not deserving the expense, or that it is not laid out 
at all for the objects for whicli it is given, you must repre- 
sent your opinion to His Majesty’s Ambassador. 

‘ Not only the British Government, but the Spanish 
Government and nation, are most materially interested in 
curtailing every expenditure of money in that part of tlie 
Peninsula ; as every shilling spent there is taken from the 
military chest of this army, and diminishes so much the 
means it would have of rendering service to the cause. 

" It is my opinion, from the knowledge I have of the 
mode in which works are generally performed by Spanish 
officers and soldiers, that no money ought to be paid 
through the former to the latter ; that an English officer 
should be charged with the disbursement of the money, 
even when given to the Spanish Government as loans for 
the purpose of constructing certain works; and that the 
English officer should be directed to see that adequate Avork 
Avas performed, before he gaAC their day’s payment to any 
soldier or party of soldiers. This is the Avay in Avhich the 
soldiers of this army are Avorked ; and the Spanish officers 
and soldiers could not complain of an arrangement founded 
on a clear principle of natural justice; viz., that no man 
should be paid, excepting he should perform adequate Avork. 

o 2 



196 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


‘ If the Spanish engineers should propose to perform 
works of which you do not approve, and should require 
British assistance for the performance of those works, you 
should likewise make your representation to His Majesty’s 
Ambassador on that subject; who will, of course, decline to 
give such assistance. 

" I beg to recommend that the works of the town of Tarihi 
may be mined in different places, in order to be effectually 
destroyed in case it should be necessary for the garrison to 
retire to tlie island. 

‘ In regard to the works carrying on upon the* island, the 
only thing to which I object, is the expensive mode of exe- 
cuting them. Although I am decidedly of opinion, that 
when works arc to be executed, the largest view should be 
taken of their object ; and that every day’s work should be 
carried on on a systematic plan, having some great object in 
view ; it docs not appear to me to be necessary that all 
works should be constructed in an equally permanent and 
expensive manner. 

‘ 1 acknowledge that I do not sec the use of the casemates 
and the works revetted in masonry on the island of Tarifa. 

‘ First ; the expense of works in earth, although probably 
in the end tlie largest, is at first infinitely the smallest; and 
works in earth arc equally good, if not better for defence, 
than those revetted in masonry. They have, besides, the 
advantage of being finished at an earlier period; and I have 
to observe in respect to the works on the island of Tarifa, 
that it is to be hoped that the occasion for them will cease 
long before the expense of constructing them in earth will 
be felt by tlie British Government. 

‘ Secondly ; adverting to the means which the enemy pos- 
sess, and the probability which exists that they will make a 
formidable attack by bombardment on the island of Tarifa, I 
doubt the necessity of constructing casemates for the troops. 

‘ Troops are well protected from the effects even of the 
heaviest fire of shells, by what are called blindages ; the 
expense of which is trifling in comparison with that of case- 
mates, and these buildings have the advantage of being 
easily moved from one place to another. 

‘ 1 beg you to turn your attention to these suggestions ; 



1812. 


FUENTE GUfKALDO. 


197 


and to do every thing in your power to curtail the expenses 
at Tarifa, as far as may be consistent with the necessary 
defence of the place. 

‘ I have the honor to bo, &c. 

* Major General Cooke.' ‘ Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Sir E. Hillt K.B. 

^ My dear Hill, * Fuente Guinaldo, 1st Juno, 1812. 9 p.m. 

" I enclose the description of a spy, to which it may be 
well to pay some attention. 

^ Thinking it probable from your letter of the 28th, that 
Foy would move off again immediately, I did not send you 
any answer to it, nor to the others on the Same subject. 
The dispatches are gone, and I hope that Currie got down 
to Lisbon in good health, and that he will have taken with 
him the colors. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 

; To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

^ My dear Sia, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 1st June, 1812. 10 p.m. 

" I enclose a letter from Ruman, containing the last ac- 
count from Salamanca ; from which you will sec that Mar- 
mont has returned there. I learn from a muleteer, that he 
did so suddenly, after receiving a courier from Joseph. 

‘ I likewise enclose a letter from rny brother, and some 
enclosures. You will see that w as terribly mis- 
informed respecting Soult. » 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir T, Graham, K.B.' 

( To the Bight Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B, 

* My dear Henry, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 1st June, 1812. " 

^ I enclose my last dispatch ; and I see from the informa- 
tion in your letter of the 23rd, that I had been misinformed 
respecting the movements of Soult. Indeed, I muist say 

that ’s intelligence during the whole period 

of HilFs absence upon the expedition to the Tagus did us a 
great deal of mischief. 



198 


SPAIN* 


1812. 


‘ I intend to attack Marmont, and expect to be able to 
march next week. It is possible that the whole army of the 
South may be thrown upon Hill while I shall be so em- 
ployed, and Ballesteros should be prepared to execute the 
old project upon Seville; and the army of Murcia to move 
upon Andujar and Cordova, if not occupied by Suchet. 

" If Soult should attack Tarifa, Hill shall move upon 
Cordova, &c., and do every thing in his power to create a 
diversion in favor of General Ballesteros, unless it should be 
necessary that he should cover my hank, which docs not 
appear })robable ; and the army of Murcia should in that 
case likewise get on upon the Guadalquivir. 

‘ Ever yours most atfcctionatcly, 

‘ The Rt, Hon, ' Wkllington. 

Sir H, Wellesley y K.B" 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

‘ Mv Dl’.AR Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 1st June, 1(S12. 

‘ 1 hav(‘ long had in contemplation the means of obtaining 
intelligence from distant and various parts of the Peninsula, 
and I had settled a plan with that view with our princi])al 
corresjiondcnt at Salamanca, who is certainly the best of tlic 
wliole class. 

' In searching for correspondents at Madrid, lie has fallen 
in with tlic persons with whom you correspond in that city, 
and I enclose an extract of his letter regarding them. I 
rather believe it would be the best mode, as it certainly 
would the cheapest, to confine their correspondence to one 
channel ; and I shall be obliged to you if you will let me 
know whetlier I sliall tell them so through my Salamanca 
Iriend, and direct them to send their letters through him in 
luture. I beg of you also, to enable me to give an answer 
respecting the missing messenger adverted to, and the letter. 

‘ If you should determine that this correspondence shall 
come in future by Salamanca, there is no occasion to say any 

thing on the subject to , wlio was only a receiver of the 

letters. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ ///« Excellency i WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart' 



1812 , 


FUENTB GUINALDO. 


199 


To Hk Excellenctf Charles Stuart, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuento Guiaaldo, 1st Jui>o, 1812. 

^ I received your letter of the 28th. I have no objection 
to Mr. Burford's making a panorama of Badajoz, and I 
enclose a letter to Lieut. Colonel Sir R. Fletcher, who is 
there repairing the works, to request him to give him every 
information and assistance. He had better go there as 
soon as he can. 

" I have ordered tlie Commissary General to give the 
Portuguese Government 150,()0() dollars in June, notwith- 
standing our own distresses, and the urgency of demands 
for money ; but I hope they will pay tliis money to the 
troops with the army. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ' Wellington. 

Charles Stuart. 


' Fill up the blank in my letter to Sir 11. Fletcher, with 
the name of the gentleman ; as in your letter you call him 
Burfordy and in Mr. Hamilton’s he is called Burker.'' 


To the Earl of Liverpool, 

' My Lord, ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 1st Juno, 1812. 

" I have the honor to enclose the extract of a letter Avhich 
I have received from the Consul General, Mr. Duff, at Cadiz, 
to which I request to call your Lordship’s attention, in whicli 
you will see described the difficulties in our way in raising 
money for this army, in consequence of the extravagant rate 
of exchange in the Mediterranean and Gibraltar. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ' Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

^ My Lord, ‘ Fuento Guinaldo, Ist June, 1812. 

^ I enclose a letter from Sir William Beresford and its en- 
closure, being one from the office of Military Accounts to the 

Paymaster of the 1st batt. foot, directing that the 

pay of officers belonging to the British army, permitted to 
serve in the Portuguese army, is to be issued to them under 



200 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


a similar restriction to that which has been prescribed in the 
case of officers holding more than one military appointment 
under the British Government and as some of these officers 
receive their pay from the Treasurer of the Aids/’ under 
warrants from Marshal Sir William Beresford, I request to 
know whether it is the intention of Government that this 
regulation should be enforced, and from what period. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

* T/ie Earl of Liverpool' ‘ Wellington. 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 1st June, 1812. 

^ In consequence of a demand made by the Spanish Govern- 
ment, ill the month of January last, for assistance to enable 
them to work the foundries on the Isla dc Leon, for the 
supply of guns and shot for the works on the Isla and at 
Cadiz, I directed that certain returns should be made out, 
in order to enable His Majesty’s Government to judge of 
the expediency of defraying the expense of these foundries, 
or of supplying from England the articles expected to bo 
supplied by them ; and I now enclose the returns received, 
in which your Lordship will sec an account of the demand 
of ordnance and shot for Cadiz and the Isla only, and the 
expense to be incurred in supplying that demand from the 
foundries at Cadiz, and the time which will elapse before it 
is supplied. 

" Your Lordship will observe that the estimate docs not 
include the expense of iron, whicJi must sooner or later be 
incurred, as the sujiplies of old iron in the stores cannot be 
inexhaustible ; and no estimate is formed of the expense 
which must be incurred to supply the other demands for the 
Spanish service, besides those for the works on the Isla and 
at Cadiz. 

" Upon this paper, however, your Lordship may be able 
to form a judgment of the expediency of defraying the ex- 
pense of keeping up the foundries, or of sending the articles 
provided by them from England, as a more question of ex- 
pense. In this view, however, it may not be proper to decide 
it by referring solely to the account of sums to be expended 
in supplying the articles from, England, or in manufacturing 



1812. 


FUEKTE OUIKALDO. 


201 


them at Cadiz, as I beg leave to remind your Lordship that 
every shilling spent at Cadiz deprives the military chest of 
this army of so much, which, if it were hero, would render it 
more efficient. It may likewise be an object to encourage 
the iron manufacturers in England, by giving them the sup* 
ply of this demand. 

‘ On the other hand, it must be recollected that if the 
workmen at the Spanish foundry are not employed on the 
Isla, they wdll find their way to the French arsenals on the 
opposite coast, and at Seville. But as, from the mode of 
recruiting the French armies, they are never in want of 
workmen in any trade, or of any description, I do not believe 
we should supply them with means w^liich they do not already 
possess, if all the Avorkmen in the Spanish foundries were 
sent over to them. 

' I certainly think that some measures ought to be taken 
to supply the Spanish Government with the quantity of 
ordnance, shot, and shells, stated by Lieut. Colonel Duncan ; 
but, adverting to the nature and extent of the works at 
Cadiz and the Isla, and to the improbability that an army 
can be brought against those Avorks, under existing cir- 
cumstances, capable of carrying on an attack upon them 
Avhich can at all be deemed general, I consider his calcula- 
tion of the quantity of shot required for the Avorks to be 
extravagant. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Earl of Liverpool: ‘ WELLINGTON. 

To Lieut, Colonel Sir Howard DovglaSt Bart, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 2ndJune, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 24th, in regard to the 
letter to be Avritten to the guerrilla chiefs, Avith the SAVordi^ 
and pistols to be presented to them in my name. 

‘ I have found that the shortest and most simple mode of 
expression is the most agreeable to the Spaniards, and has 
most effect; and it appears that, particularly since the as- 
sembly of the Cortes, they have felt that they Avere to look 
for their happiness in the independence of their country, 
rather than in the internal institutions. If, therefore, the 
letter is to be Avritten to them in my name, 1 request that 
they may be informed that I obey Avith great satisfac- 



202 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


tion the commands of His Royal Highness the Prince 
Regent, in transmitting to them these presents, as a small 
mark of the estimation in which their conduct is held by His 
Royal Highness, and by His Majesty’s subjects in general ; 
in having, notwithstanding the reverses of all the regular 
armies in Spain, the misfortunes of the country, and in the 
face of difficulties of all descriptions, continued to maintain 
successfully the contest against the enemy. That I, liaving 
been employed by His Majesty in the Peninsula since the 
commencement of the contest for the independence of the 
nations inhabiting this part of the world, have been fully 
aware of the difficulties of their situation, and of the beneiit 
which the cause has derived from their constant perseverance 
and valor ; and that I trust that the applause which their 
conduct has gained, of which what is now sent them is a 
small token, tlic consciousness that they have done their 
duty, and the hopes which there are now good grounds for 
entertaining, that their labors and exertions will be crowned 
by the attainment of their object, the independence and the 
happiness of their country, will be their inducement for con- 
tinuing, and, if possible, increasing their exertions. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ LieuL Colonel ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir 11. Vouirlas, Bart.' 


To Lieut. Colonel Sir R. Fletcher, Bart. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘Fuenie Giiinaldo, 2nd June, 1812. 

‘ I received your letter of the 27th, respecting letting the 
water of the Guadiana into the ditch of Badajoz. It is ob- 
vious that we can do nothing effectual till the period at 
which the river will probably rise, and it may be as well to 
leave the work alone till other matters shall bo finished. 

‘ I should wish to know from you whether the Spaniards 
have yet placed a garrison in Badajoz, and wliethcr the 
Spanish soldiers perform any work. 

‘ 1 am anxious to have our bridge so arranged that wo 
can make use of it if I should want it ; and wishing it to 
consist of 36 pontoons, 1 have desired Mr. Bissett to have 
bullocks at Abrantes, to draw up the six pontoons which are 
there, to St. Vincente, where the others arc. 

‘ I should wish the whole then to be kept collected at 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


203 


St. Vincente, complete in all its parts, with the bullocks at- 
tached to it, and the seamen ready to start at a short notice 
to wherever it may be ordered. 

" I beg you to order up the six pontoons to St. Vincente 
as soon as the bullocks will be ready to draw them ; and 
that you will communicate with the officer in charge of the 
boats respecting their being complete in cqui])raents of all 
descriptions, and let me know whether they will recpiire any 
additional seamen. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, Colonel ' WELLINGTON. 

^ir IX, Fletcher^ Bart,'' 

To the Rl^ht Hon, Sir Henry Welledey, K.B. 

‘ Sjk, ‘ Fuente Giiiiialdo, 2iul June, 1812. 

^ In consequence of your letter informing me that you 
intended to allow me to dispose of £’200,000 sterling of the 
money ap])licablc to the service of Spain, and having taken 
into consideration the distressed situation of the troops in 
the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, and of the division under 
the command of Bon Carlos do Espaua, I determined to 
make an advance of a part of tlieir pay to those troops, out 
of the sum above mentioned ; and having called for a return 
of their eifective numbers, and of the pay of each rank, I 
gave Don Carlos dc Espafia a warrant upon the Commissary 
General for the sum of 12,1)75 dollars, 19 rcales, and 32 
maravedis. 

‘ 1 enclose copies of two letters which I wrote to Don 
Carlos de Espaua upon this occasion, containing the condi- 
tions on which I should continue to make these payments, 
and the copy of his answer. 

‘ I propose to cai-ry this sum of 12,675 dollars to account 
against the sum of 158,000 dollars which your Excellency 
has sent to Lisbon to be at my disposal for the service of 
the S])anish Government. 

No call has yet been made upon me for assistance for 
the troops in Estremadura ; and if none should be made, 
the sum which you have sent will last for those in this quar- 
ter for five months. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Righi Hon, ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B: 



204 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To Lieut, General Sir T. Graham, K,S, 

^ My dear Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, Srd Juno, 1812. 9 a.m. " 

‘ I enclose the only intelligence which I have received. 

" Foy has returned towards Arzobispo ; but I do not know 
whether he has crossed the Tagus, or what his subsequent 
movement will be ; nor have I heard yet that the 2nd divi- 
sion has returned into Castille. 

' Bonct is certainly gone into the Asturias, so that Mar- 
mont’s force is a good deal dispersed ; and I think it pro- 
bable he will not risk an action, but will fall back towards 
Burgos, by Sahagun, &c., keeping his communication with 
Bonct. This appears to be the line chalked out for him by 
his instructions from Paris. 

‘ Believe me. See. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir T. Graham, K.B* 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

^ Sir, * Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd June, 1812. 

" I have received your letter of the 29th May, enclosing 
one of the same date from Captain Gillard, of the Sabrina. 

* The sum of 158,000 dollars, which Captain Gillard 
brought from Cadiz to be disposed of by me, which Mr. 
Pipon received, is His Majesty’s money, and assigned to me 
by His Majesty’s Ambassador at Cadiz to be employed in a 
particular manner. 

^ Mr. Pipon ought to have given Captain Gillard the 
usual certificate, to enable him to receive in England the 
freight usually paid on the transport of the King’s money ; 
and I have given directions that he may rectify this error, 
and give Captain Gillard a certificate that he has received 
from on board the Sabrina the sum of 158,000 dollars. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ‘ Wellington. 

Charles Stuart.' 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

* My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd June, 1812. 

‘ The troops arc in march towards this part of the coun- 
try, and I hope to have them collected on the Agueda by 
the 8th or 9th. The magazines in Almeida and Ciudad 
Rodrigo arc tolerably well supplied. 



1812. 


FUENTE GUJNALDO. 


205 


‘ Marshal Martnont has again moved his head quarters to 
Salamanca, and the troops which had marched from thence 
when he moved his head quarters to Fontiveros, have re- 
turned. 

' The troops, which I reported in my letter of tlie 28th 
had moved from the bridge of Arzobispo, by the road of 
Deleytosa, arrived at Truxillo on the 2Gth, but they retired 
again on the 28th, by the road by which they advanced. 

‘ I have not heard of their having moved from Arzobispo, 
nor that the 2nd division had moved from Talavcra. I find 
tliat I was misinformed respecting the movements of Mar- 
shal Soult, as reported in my last dispatch. He was still at 
the blockade of Cadiz on the 25th. 

‘ The troops in the Condado do Nicbla had been moved 
to Seville, however, as therein stated. And I believe the 
officers attached to the head quarters of the army of the 
South, arc removed from Seville to El Carpio, and part of 
the Marshal’s baggage. 

‘ Lieut. General Sir R. Hill has taken the position south 
of the Guadiana, which he occupied previous to his march 
upon the bridge of Almaraz. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Earl of Liverpool ‘ WELLINGTON. 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd June, 1812. 

' In the list of officers whom I considered to be entitled 
to the medal for the assault and capture of Ciudad Rodrigo, 
which I transmitted to your Lordship on the 13th ultimo, 1 
included Captain Mitchell of the 95th regiment, under the 
supposition that he had the distinct command of the detach- 
ment of the 2nd battalion of that corps ; but as I have since 
understood that the two companies of which he had charge 
were attached to, and acting immediately under the orders 
of Major Cameron, commanding the 1st battalion, I beg to 
acquaint your Lordship that 1 do not consider Captain 
Mitcliell to be entitled to the distinction of a medal on this 
occasion, and therefore recommend that his name should be 
erased from the list. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool,' ‘Wellington. 



206 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To the Earl of Liverpool, 

f My Lohd, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd June, 1812. 

‘ I have the honor to enclose a list of officers entitled to 
the distinction of a medal for the siege and capture of 
T3adajoz ; and a return of the officers of the Adjutant and 
Quarter Master General’s department who (with the excep- 
tion of Lieut. Colonel De Lancey, the Deputy Quarter 
Master General) were serving as Assistants in those de- 
partments, and attached to divisions in the battles of lloliea 
and Vimeiro, Talavera, and Busaco. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Earl of Liverpool' ‘ Wellington. 


To the Earl of Lii^erpool, 

^ My dear Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 3rd June, 1812. 

' I am very sorry to have to inform you that Dr. 
M‘Grigor has told me that he has great reason to appre- 
hend that Sir Thomas Graham will, in a short time, be 
obliged to quit the army, lie has a disorder in his eyes, 
one of which it is most probable he will lose ; and the sight 
of the other, if he should retain it, wall be very defective. 

‘ I have not seen Sir Thomas Graham since I left Estre- 
madura in April, when he w as in very good healtli ; and lie 
has not mentioned to me the disorder in his eyes. But I 
have heard of it from othei's; and Dr. M^Grigor has his 
information from the medical gentleman who attends him. 

‘ I mention the circumstance to your Lordship, in case you 
should think it proper to make provision for the event of 
any accident happening to prevent me from continuing to 
hold the command. The officer next to me after Sir Thomas 
Graham is Sir Stapleton Cotton, and after Sir Stapleton, 
Sir Kowland Hill, and next to him, Sir William Beresford. 

" As far as I am concerned, I certainly should prefer that 
no officer should be sent out. There are few officers who 
understand the situation of the officer second in command of 
these armies. Unless he should be posted to command a 
division of cavalry or infantry, and perform that duty, he 
has really, on ordinary occasions, nothing to do; and at the 
same time that his opinion relieves me but little from re- 



1812 . 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


207 


sponsibility, and that after all I must act according to my 
own judgment in case of a difference of opinion : there are 
but few officers who should be sent from England as second 
in command/ who would not come here with opinions formed, 
probably on very bad grounds, and with very extravagant 
pretensions. To this add, that when necessary to detach a 
body of troops in any situation, but few would be satisfied to 
remain with the detachment, unless indeed it should consist 
of nearly the whole army. 

‘ If, therefore, Sir Thomas Graham should be obliged to 
go home, I am not desirous of having any body sent to fill 
his situation, as far as I am concerned. 

‘ Sir Stapleton Cotton commands the cavalry very well ; 
and I am convinced that we shall go on better if nobody is 
sent to replace Sir Thomas Graham. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* The Earl of Liverpool: ‘ Wellington. 

To Lieut. Ueneral Sir T. Graham, K.B, 

^ Mv DEAR Sir, ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 4th Juno, 1812. 

' I enclose a letter just received from Pereira, from whicli 
it appears that Foy, as well as Clauscl, are inarcliing into 
Caslille. 

‘ I have ordered a day’s halt for the troops, as Sir Stapleton 
did not receive the orders in time, and did not march till the 
day after we expected he would. 

‘ I have a letter from Colonel Dickson, of the 1st June, and 
he had received the instructions which 1 sent him the day 1 
found that you had moved the Gth division back to their old 
cantonments. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir T. Graham^ K.B: 

To Lieut, General Sir T. Graham, li.B. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 5th June, 1812. 9 a.m. 

^ I enclose a letter received last night from Pereira, con- 
firming the report of the movement of the 1st and 2nd divi- 
sions into Castille. You will see likewise that it is pro- 
bable that Mirabctc is evacuated and destroyed. 



208 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


^ I likewise enclose a letter from Salamanca, and one con- 
taining reports of the state of things on the Tormes. 

^ I likewise enclose a letter from my brother, with some 
very interesting intercepted letters. 

‘ I have a letter from the Governor of Gibraltar, stating 
what is most extraordinary, viz., that there are only eleven 
thousand 24 pound shot at Gibraltar ! So that I am much 
afraid that Lord William Bentinck will be disappointed in 
his expectations of being supplied from thence. I expected 
to have fitted him out with not less than forty 24 pounders 
from thence, for which I have sent some of the guns and all 
the carriages. 

‘ But every day’s experience convinces me that our military 
machine is very ill arranged, and that there is no depending 
upon it for any thing. Who would believe that in the great 
fortress of Gibraltar, which is besides a naval arsenal, from 
which the ships of war receive supplies of shot, there are only 
eleven thousand 24 pound sliot ^ I dare say I shall find the 
stores equally deficient in powder. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut General ‘ WlOLLlNGTON. 

7’. Graham^ K.B' 

To Major General Cooke, 

« Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 5tli June, 1812. 

‘ I beg that, on the receipt of this letter, you will apply to 
the Admiral for a vessel to take to Gibraltar 20,000 English 
24 pound shot, which you will have put on board of her. 

‘ These shot are to be placed at the disposal of the Go- 
vernor of Gibraltar, to fit out an equipment of ordnance, 
respecting which I have addressed His Excellency. 

* You will be so kind as to allow no time to be lost in the 
execution of this order ; and you will apprize the Governor 
of Gibraltar of the receipt of it, and of the progress of em- 
barking the shot by every opportunity. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

• Major General Cooke: ' Wellington. 

To Lieut, General Campbell Gibi'altar. 

* Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 5th June, 1812. 

" I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 
22nd May. 



1812 - 


PUKNTB GUINALDO. 


209 


^ In cicmsequence of tlie Secretary of State havingt ap- 
prized me that it was the intention of His Majesty’s Go- 
vernment that a force under the command of Lieut. General 
Lord William Bentinck should be employed on the Eastern 
coast of the Peninsula during the summer, I considered it 
my duty to do everything in my power to forward the ob- 
jects of Government. Accordingly, I scut to Gibraltar the 
different equipments and troops referred to in my letters to 
your Excellency of the 19th April, the lOth, 11th, and 27th 
May, of the last of which I have already sent a duplicate ; 
and I now enclose duplicates of those of the 10th and 11th, 
lest they should not have reached your Excellency when you 
shall have received this letter. 

^ I likewise enclose the extract of a letter which I wrote 
to Lord Mulgrave on the 15th of April, which will show you 
that the Master General and Board of Ordnance will expect 
that the means in possession of the ordnance in the gar- 
rison of Gibraltar shall be employed in carrying into execu- 
tion the intentions of Ilis Majesty’s Government in respect 
to the expedition under the command of Lord William 
Bentinck, as far as they will go. 

* After having cominunicated this information and those 
papers in one view to your Excellency, you and tlic officers 
of the ordnance in the garrison of Gibraltar must be the 
best judges whether any proportion, or what proportion, of 
the 24 pound shot in the garrison of Gibraltar ought to be 
embarked with a view to carry into effect the intentions of 
His Majesty’s Government. 

" The total demand of round shot for the thirty nine 
24 pounders is 31,200, at 800 rounds for each gun ; and the 
troops at Cadiz being under my command, and I being re- 
sponsible for the safety of that place, I have ordered that 
twenty thousand 24 pound round shot may be sent to Gib- 
raltar immediately, to be at your Excellency’s disposal for 
the purposes of this equipment. 

‘ I propose, besides, to send from this country 5000 more, 
notwithstanding that the late services here have exhausted 
the stores of all the garrisons in this part of the Peninsula, 
and that it is not impossible that they may have occasion for 
the use of them. There will still, however, be a deficiency 

VOL. IX. p 



210 


SPAIK. 


1812; 


which it is advisable should be provided from the stores of 
Gibraltar. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Li€ut» General CamphelV ^ WELLINGTON. 


To Vice Admiral the Hon. G. Berkeley, 

^ SlR^ ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 5th June, 1812. 

" It is desirable that transports to convey the number of 
troops stated in my letter of the 15th of April, should be 
sent to the eastern coast of the Peninsula for the object 
stated in that letter, as soon as it may be convenient. 

‘ I enclose a letter for His Majesty’s Ambassador at Cadiz, 
who will let the officer in command of this fleet of transports 
know for what number of troops he is to station transports 
at Alicante and in Majorca respectively, or whether he is to 
send the whole to one place. 

' I am obliged to refer to His Majesty’s Ambassador on 
this subject, as the Spanish Government had not decided, 
according to the last accounts on this subject, whether any 
troops were to proceed from Alicante, or how many from 
Majorca. 

^ Sir Henry Wellesley will likewise have orders prepared 
for the officers commanding at those places respectively, to 
embark the troops when Lord William Bentinck shall send 
for them. 

‘ I send him a duplicate of the enclosed letter, and re- 
quest that the orders may be ready to be sent off* as soon as 
the fleet of transports shall appear in the offing. 

‘ In regard to the sailing of these transports from the 
places at which they will take on board the troops, and their 
destination when they sail, that must depend upon Vice Ad- 
miral Sir Edward Pellew, and Lieut. General Lord William 
Bentinck; and I request you will give directions to the 
officer wlio may command this fleet of transports, or any 
division of them, to proceed to the ulterior destination, 
when the Spanish troops arc on board, according to the 
orders which he will receive from Admiral Sir Edward Pel- 
lew, or Lieut. General Lord William Bentinck. 

‘ It is desirable that the tonnage should be calculated at 



FUKNTE OOINALDO, 


1812 . 


21 


\ 

one ton and a half for each man, as it is probable that th< 
numbers will exceed 6000 men. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c« 

• Vice Admiral < WELLINGTON. 

the Hon* G, Berkeley* 


To Lieut Colonel Sir JR* Fletcher^ Bart* 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 5th June, 1812. 9 p.m. 

^ I have received your letter of the 2nd instant. It is 
very necessary that we should be quite certain of finishing 
every thing we have in hand, or have recommended to the 
Marques de Monsalud, at Badajoz, before you come away ; 
but after requesting you would attend to this opinion in 
fixing the period for your departure, I have no objection tc 
leaving it to yourself. 

" You will go on with the works already directed by me 
at our expense, till the Marques de Monsalud shall supplj 
you with money. If he should supply you with money, yon 
will then point out to him the state of the works, and the 
expense remaining to be incurred to complete each; and 
those estimated for under the heads Nos. G, 7, and 10, in 
the estimate forwarded in your letter of the 17th May. li 
he should supply you with money for the whole, you will 
begin Nos. 6, 7, and 10. Next to that work, I conceive 
that a wet ditch to be brought as far as is practicable is the 
most important work to be executed. Next to that the 
completion of any one of the ravelins that you may prefer. 

^ If the Marques de Monsalud should give money only to 
complete the works estimated for in Nos. G, 7, and 10, 1 have 
no objection to continue those ordered by me at our expense. 

" I beg you will let me know whether the Spaniards have 
any and what troops in the garrison, as I want to get the 
Portuguese troops away. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut Colonel ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Fletcher^ Bart,^ 


To the Right Hon* Sir Henry Wellesley ^ K.B* 

< Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 5th June, 1812. 

^ I enclose the duplicate of a letter which I addressed you 
this day, the original of which you will receive from an 

r2 



212 


SPAIN. 


1812 


officer of the navy; and the copy of a letter which I have 
written to Admiral Berkeley. 

* I beg that you will endeavor to have the orders referred 
to in the enclosed letters prepared to be sent off to the fleet, 
when it shall appear in the offing of Cadiz. 

‘ I have tlie honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H Wellesley, K.B: 


To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K,B, 

'Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 5th June, 1812. 

' The officer who will deliver this letter is the commanding 
officer of a fleet of transports, proceeding to the Eastern 
coast of the Peninsula, with a view to take in Spanish troops 
at Alicante and Majorca, for the proposed service under the 
command of Lieut. General Lord William Bcntinck. 

^ I request you to let this officer know whether any and 
how many troops will embark at Alicante, and how many at 
Majorca, in order tliat he may distribute the transports 
under his charge accordingly. 

* I request, likewise, that you will give him the orders, or 
duplicates to the officers commanding at these stations, to 
embark the troops destined for this expedition, when Lieut. 
General Lord William Bentinck shall send to him ; and to 
sail in these transports to the destination pointed out by his 
Lordship, or by Admiral Sir Edward Pcllew, for the ren- 
dezvous of the fleet and army. 

' Tlie transports are calculated for GOOD men, one ton and 
a half for each man ; and they will hold with convenience 
9000 men for a short voyage. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon, ' W ELLINGTON. 

Sir H, Wellesley, K,BJ # 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 5lh June, 1812. 

^ I received your letter of the 1st instant, and I am happy 
to find that you are satisfied tliat the Government ai*e dis- 
posed to reform the abuses of the Custom House. I am 
quite convinced that the revenue of the Customs on imports 



1812. 


FUENTE GITINALDO. 


213 


and exports of Lisbon and Oporto, if honestly collected and 
accounted for, would alone nearly cover the deficit. The 
export of wines from Oporto is enormous : just call for an 
account of the duties paid in the year 1811, 

^ I expect an account of the real value of exports to Por- 
tugal from Great Britain and Ireland, under the different 
heads, in the year 1811, which will serve to show what the 
revenue of the crown of Portugal ought to have been last 
year, for customs on British produce only. 

‘ I have no doubt of the interest which different indivi- 
duals take in the continuance of the abuses, nor of their 
efforts to prevent all reform. The person who mentioned to 
Sir William Beresford that the man employed to superin- 
tend the Customs, and to detect and suggest the reforma- 
tion of abuses, owed his appointment to a job, was 

. The report never reached me in any manner, except- 
ing through Sir William Beresford, and was his 

authority. But I have generally found ’s infor- 

mation erroneous on all subjects. 

‘ I differ entirely from Senhor Nogueira in regard to the 
collection of the income tax. GOO contos, or even double 
that sum, will be far from the truth of the profits of the 
mercantile class in Lisbon and Oporto alone ; and I shall 
never be satisfied with the collection of that tax till it be 
collected in the way it is on us in England. Why is the 
rich merchant in Portugal the only class in the kingdom 
which has gained, and gained immensely, by the war, to be 
the class exempted from bearing its burthens ? Because the 
Government are not equal to their situation ; because they 
dare not meet the unpopularity of forcing people to pay 
what they ought. 

^ Let the following experiment be tried in Lisbon and 
Oporto, and J shall be satisfied ; and I will bear all the 
odium of the measure, and all the blame if it should not be 
successful, provided it is sincerely carried into execution. 

' Both cities are divided into barrios. Let there be a col- 
lector of direct taxes appointed for each barrios. Let each 
individual, of every description, make the following return, 
to the collector of the barrios. 

^ First ; a return, specifying the yearly value of his house, 
stating whether it is let on rent to one or several persons. 



214 


8PAIN. 


1812. 


the rent received for it in the year, and whether he lives in 
it himself. 

^ Secondly; a return of the number of servants, horses, 
dogs, carriages, &c., which he keeps. 

' Thirdly ; a return of his income, specifying whether aris- 
ing from rent of landed property, from commanderias, from 
pensions, from interest of money paid by Government, from 
profits or salary of office, from professional fees and emolu- 
ments, such as lawyers, physicians, judges, players, &c. &c., 
from the profits of commercial speculations of all descrip- 
tions, from interest of money lent to individuals, from annui- 
ties received from individuals, &c. &c. 

* Upon these returns, let the collectors of the direct taxes 
in the barrios calculate the amount of the taxes to be paid 
by each individual in the barrios, and demand payment of 
the same. 

^ Let a return bo printed and published of what each in- 
dividual has made as his return to the collector of the ir/r- 
rios. This may be done in one lino for each individual, and 
one sheet for the whole barrios. Thus, 


Name of 
Iiidividuiil. 


o s 


ii 

■S3 

OJ.’g 

r 

I 


Then let all persons understand that if they make a false 
return on any Iiead, they are liable to pay treble the amount 
of what they really ought to pay on that hea^l. If the col- 
lector of the barrios should receive private information that 
the return of any person in the barrios is incorrect, he 
should have authority to call together two persons of the 
barrios, who, with him, should be empowered to examine 
books, &c., and the individual himself, and to adopt all 
means to discover the truth. On the other hand, if any 
individual of the barrios should conceive that the collector 
has overcharged him, he should have a right to demand 



1813 


FUENTB aWNALDO. 


215 


an investigation^ and the collector should be obliged to call 
two persons to hear, and with him determine upon the re- 
presentation. 

‘ Let this question be first tried in Lisbon and Oporto, 
and if it does not succeed, if really carried into execution, 
and if the Government there will not have an opportunity of 
diminishing some of the taxes, I will bear all the blame. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ‘ W ELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart, 

^ I do not advert in this system to the Teryo Ecclesias- 
tico, which is made a particular regie applicable to the wholo 
dioccsc; and which had better be continued.’ 

To Lieut, General Sir E, Hill, K.B, 

^ My dear Hill, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 6th June, 1812. 9 a,m. 

‘ I received last night your letter of the 3rd, 2 r.M. 

^ As Foy and Clausel have certainly moved towards Cas- 
tille, I did not think it probable that Soult would move 
against you ; however, I conclude that the enemy imagine 
that we have weakened you to a greater degree than wc 
have done. Including Drouct, I do not think that Soult 
can assemble 25,000 men in Estremadura, unless he should 
abandon entirely the blockade of Cadiz, and leave Seville, 
and all the open country, at the mercy of Ballesteros, at 
the moment at which it is important to him to secure tho 
harvest. 

' Beckoning the 5th, 17th, and 22nd regiments, which arc 
still in Badajoz, I conceive that you will have not less than 
19,000 British and Portuguese, besides the Condo de Penno 
Villemur and Morillo. * 

f It must be observed upon this force, however, that it is 
not exactly of the description I should wish to sec with you, 
and it must not be depended upon to manoeuvre in presence 
of an enemy on ground which should not give you an ad- 
vantage. It must be placed on a strong position, in which 
I entertain no doubt of tho result of any general action. 
The best position in the country, in my opinion, particularly 
as Badajoz is now in some degree repaired, is that of Al- 
buora. Whether tbe enemy attempt to turn it by the right 



SPAIN. 


.1812. 


21B 

ot by the left, there is an easy movement to the right or to 
the left, and the position continues equally good, and there 
is always an easy retreat upon Badajoz, or upon Jurumenha, 
or such passage of the Guadiana as it might be thought 
expedient to adopt. It is better at this season than any 
position, on the north side of the Guadiana, because it covers 
more country, and because the enemy cannot, without forc- 
ing the position, pretend to turn the defences of Portugal, 
and to enter that kingdom by the passages of the Guadiana 
about Jurumenha, and by the roads of Villa Viqosa, and 
Estremoz. 

" I therefore recommend the position of Albuera to your 
attention in the first instance, in case Soult should move 
into Estreinadura in force. If you should determine to oc- 
cupy the position of Albuera, you should appear to deter- 
mine to hold the wood and the position in front of the wood 
towards Marta, and throw up a little ground there, in 
order to induce the enemy to believe that you have fortified 
it $ you will then have an opportunity of seeing his whole 
force in and about Marta, and probably of judging on 
which side he proposes to manoeuvre, and you can always 
retire before him across the Albuci'a rivulet, the passages of 
which should, however, be well reconnaitred. 

" If you should find Soult inclined to manoeuvre by your 
right, and to enter Portugal by the roads above mentioned, 
you should place Morillo in Badajoz, and with the remainder 
of the troops cross the Guadiana, and take a position near 
Jurumenha. 

^ If you should find that he intends to manoeuvre by your 
left, you should move upon Badajoz, and take a position 
there, or according to circumstances, take the position of 
San Chrlstoval. 

" If you should find Soult advancing, write to the Marques 
de Monsalud to throw into Badajoz all the troops lately 
arrived from Cadiz, and all that he can collect in the pro- 
vince; and likewise to General Leite at Estremoz, and 
desire him to collect the militia again at Elvas, and to 
occupy Cainpo Mayor and Ouguela. 

‘ 1 intended to have in Badajoz a supply of provisions for 
5000 men for 60 days, which I intended should be made 
over to the commanding officer of the garrison, in case the 



1812. 


FUENTE QUINALDO. 


217 


place should be invested, and I had ordered that 600,000 
rations should be in Elvas, in order to provide for the con- 
tingency, that I might carry the operations of the campaign 
to the southward. Mr. Routli will let you know the pro- 
gress which has been made in both those objects, and you 
will consider both magazines entirely at your disposal. You 
will recollect, however, that I believe that at present there 
are no other provisions in Badajoz, but Elvas is well pro- 
vided. There would not be much harm done if our maga- 
zines at Elvas were reduced to 300,000 rations. 

^ I have a letter from the Condo de Penne Villemur, of 
the 30th, in which he tells me that he has been ordered to 
move into the Condado de Niebla, and asks my consent. 
Tell him that I will answer his letter to-morrow, but that 
I think that just at present the movement would be very 
imprudent. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ^ Wellington* 

Bit R. Hill, K.B.' 

To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

* My dear Sir, ^Fuente Guinaldo, 7th June, 1812. 9 a.m. 

" I enclose letters of the 4th and 5th from Salamanca, and 
one from Avila. I have one intercepted letter from Mar- 
mont to Jourdan ; which I am endeavoring to decipher. It 
is obvious, however, from what I see in it, that both Mar- 
mont and Jourdan discovered that 1 intended to collect in 
this direction, in consequence of Hill's early return ; which 
was certainly occasioned by Sir William Erskine’s false 
alarm. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

- Lieut. General " Wellington. 

Sir T Graham, K.B' 

To Lieut. Colonel May, R.A. 

‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 7th June, 1812. 

^ My dear Colonel, lo p.m. 

^ I have desired the Commissary General to have delivered 
over to you at Almeida, 20 carts to carry six hundred 24 
pounder shot ; 10 carts to carry four hundred 18 pounder 



218 


SPAIN. 


I812L 


shot, 10 carts to carry 60 barrels of powder, for the equip-- 
ment of Dickson's howitzers; and 5 carts to carry 30 
barrels of powder for the 18 pounders ; and 5 spare carts for 
any thing else you might want. Likewise 80 bullocks to 
draw 4 iron 18 pounders, at ten pairs each gun ; and 5 pairs 
of bullocks to draw a transporting carriage loaded with lad- 
ders, which I desired Lieut. Shanahan, of the staff corps, to 
cut and make up at Almeida. 

^ I shall be obliged to you, if you will see the whole of 
this equipment packed and arranged; and I will speak to 
Colonel Framingham to send an officer and conductor over 
to Almeida to morrow, to take charge of it. 

* I beg you will fix upon the best of the transporting car- 
riages in the fort to carry the ladders, and desire the officer 
of the staff to secure them upon it. 

" The bullocks and carts will not be at Almeida till the 
9th. But they ought to be prepared as soon afterwards as 
possible. 

' Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut Colonel May, R,A: ' WELLINGTON. 

To General Conde de Penne Villemur, 

* a Fuente Guinaldo, ce 7 Juin, 1812. 

" Monsieur le General, 

" Je viens d’ avoir Thonneur de recevoir la lettro que votre 
Excellence m’a adresse Ic 3 Mai, qui aurait du etro Ic 
3 Juin. 

^ Je vais marcher sur I’ennemi cn Castille, etjusqu’ace 
que jc puisse connaitre les rcsultats de mon mouvement il 
est tres important de ne pas s affaiblir en Estremadure. Je 
suis sur que la Regence n’a pas connu I’etat des affaires 
quand die voiis a ordonne de partir pour le Condado de 
Niebla; et comme die vous a ordonne de consultcr mon 
opinion, jc vous pric de n’y pas marcher, mais d’agir de con- 
cert avec le General Hill, et d’etre prepare a Jeter en 
garnison a Badajoz les troupes du General Morillo, en cas 
que ce soit necessaire. 

" J’ai rimnncur d’etre, &c, 

< General ^ Wellington. 

Conde de Penne Villemur^ 



1812 . 


FUENXa GinHALDO. 


21 ^ 


To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley, KM* 

* SlK, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 7th June, 1812. 

^ I have the honor to enclose the copy of a letter which 
I have received from the Conde de Pcnne Villemur, inform- 
ing me that the Spanish Government have ordered him into 
the Condado dc Niebla, if I should approve of the move- 
ment ; and a copy of my answer. 

" I am about to move into Castille, and I have calculated 
upon the Conde de Pcnne Villemur and General Morillo 
continuing in concert with Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill, 
till the result of this operation shall be seen. 

' I think it most probable that Soult will move upon 
General Hill as soon as my march is known ; and alfairs 
will be in a bad situation if that General should not be in 
strength. I am the more anxious upon this subject, because 
having this day received a return of the army of the South, 
of the 1st of April, which has been intercepted, I see, that 
notwithstanding all the reports to the contrary, it consisted 
then of more than 56,000 effective men ; from which, de- 
ducting the garrison of Badajoz, since made prisoners, it 
must now amount to more than 50,000 effective men. The 
Polish division which had been sent to France are not in- 
cluded in this return. 

‘ The movements of the enemy may render it necessary 
for Lieut. General Hill to throw a garrison into Badajoz ; 
and I beg to know where that garrison is to be found, if it 
is not for the time composed of the troops under General 
Morillo. 

‘ The Spanish Government have lately desired that, in 
case of a movement by Marshal Soult on General Balles- 
teros, General Hill should make a movement to divert the 
attention of the enemy from General Ballesteros. I have 
directed this movement in the notion that General the 
Conde dc Penne Villemur would co-operate in it. It is 
’ surely better that, if it be possible, the allied troops in 
Estremadura should act together in a concentrated body, 
than that one corps of them should be in the Condado de 
Niebla, and another at Cordova. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. WELLINGTON. 

Sir H Wellesley, KM. 



220 


SPAIK. 


1812. 


To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B. 

* Fuente Guinaldo, 7th June, 1812. 

‘ My DEAR Henry, lo y-m. 

‘ I send you copies of three letters in cipher, of which it is 
very desirable to discover the key ; and I shall be obliged 
to you if you will send them to General Navarro, to try 
what he can do with them. We can make nothing of them 
here. 

‘ I can see, however, that the King and Marmont have 
discovered that I intend to carry on operations on this side ; 
and the King had already given orders to Soult on the 7th 
of May, which he has repeated on the 26th of May, to take 
a position with a view to those operations. I conclude that 
the object of those orders is to distract my attention from 
Marmont by an attack upon Hill. This, I think, will be 
made; but if Morillo and Penne Villemur stay with Hill, 
and there is any garrison for Badajoz besides Morillo’s 
troops. Hill will be in tolerable strength ; and they will all 
be disappointed in their expectations of finding a very weak 
corps in that part of the country. 

‘ I shall send you an abstract of the return of the army 
of the South, the strength of which has certainly surprised 
me, though 1 never reckoned it less than from 42,000 to 
45,000 men. 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. ‘ Wellington. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.Bi 

To the Earl of Liverpool. 

• My Lord, * Fuente Guinaldo, 7th June, 1812. 

‘ I have the honor to enclose a letter from Mr. Deputy 
Commissary General Pipon, pointing out the inconveniences 
likely to be felt by this army, in consequence of the exces- 
sively disadvantageous rate of exchange at which the Com- 
missaries in the Mediterranean negotiate their bills at 
Gibraltar. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Earl of Liverpool.' ‘ Wellington. 



1812. 


FUENTE OUINALDO. 


221 


To Lieut. General Sir E. Hill, K.B, 

‘ My dear Hill, * Fuente Guinaldo, 8th June, 1812. 9 p.m. 

^ I omitted to tell you in my letter of this morning that I 
had ordered one of the Portuguese brigades of artillery in 
the reserve of the army to proceed to join you by the 
bridge of Alcantara. I shall desire De Lancy to send you 
the route. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General ' ‘ W ELLINGTON, 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 


To Dr. M^Grigor^. 

' Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 9th June, 1812. 

^ As I propose to send to England your report on the 
mortality in tliis army, which, however, considering all the 
circumstances, has not been large, and not amounting to 

15.000 men, including losses in actions, from April 1809, to 
January, 1812, I wish to draw your attention to a few re- 
marks upon your report. 

^ In respect to tlic third recommendation, I have to ob- 
serve that it is impossible in any army of the size of that 
under my command to take from the men and return them 
their equipments at every moment when it appears con- 
venient. The demands for food for the army amount to 

200.000 lbs. weight dally, which must be brought from the 
sea, besides ammunition, supplies for hospitals, equipments 
of all descriptions, &c. &c. 

^ The soldiers, therefore, must keep their blankets during 
the summer, in order to be certain of having them in October. 

" In regard to the fourth remark, I have to observe that 
His Majesty has ordered that the soldiers accounts shall be 
settled, and the balance on them paid on the 24th of every 
month. The pecuniary distresses of this army have pre- 
vented obedience to this order, and the pay of the army is 
seldom less than three months in arrear ; but no more than 
one months pay is ever issued at a time, and^the balance 
due on one month’s account only can be given at a time. 
You will likewise see that under the General Order of this 
army of the 24th January, 1810, the balance due on one 

Sir James M^Grigor, Director General of the Army Medical Board, 



222 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


month’s account cannot be paid till two months’ accounts 
shall be settled. 

‘ You will likewise see in the General Order that the at- 
tention of commanding officers of regiments has been fre- 
quently called to the expediency of supplying the soldiers 
with breakfast ; and I believe that in every well regulated 
regiment they are so supplied when the means can be 
procured. 

^ Their rations arc invariably delivered to the soldiers 
daily, except on marches ; and the army would be incapable 
of all movement if I were to order that the soldiers should 
carry no provisions. The British soldiers, on such an occa- 
sion, carry three days* bread ; the Portuguese soldiers, six 
days’ bread; the French soldiers, fifteen days’ bread. 

* The only mode that I know of removing sick to the rear 
is in spring waggons, which are all applied to this service, 
and in aid of them bullock carts. I am aware that the 
drivers of the spring waggons are very irregular, and take 
but little care of their horses; but this, like many other 
evils in the service, which, although equally the cause of 
mortality, you have not noticed, and, among others, the 
irregularities of the soldiers themselves, it is impossible for 
me to remedy, till the Mutiny Law and the whole system of 
the service are altered. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Di\ M^Grigor: ' WklLINGTON. 

To Lieut, General Sir R. Hilly K.B, 

* My dear Hill, ‘ Fuente Guipaldo, 9th June, 1812. 9 a.m, 

‘ I enclose an extract * from the return of the army of the 
South, of the 1st April, from which you will see that they 

♦ Note on the return.^^ The total of the present fit for duty of the French 
army of the South, on the 1st April, was 56,980, in which are included artillery, 
engineers, sappers ; 2nd battalion of Hesse Darmstadt infantry, 940 ; matines, 
1610, &c. &c. The Hesse Darmstadt regiment was taken in Badajoi, and 
artillery, engineers, &c. &c., reducing the fit for duty to about 52.000. It will be 
seen on the othtr side that the reduction of French infantry, on the return of 
the divisions, Was only 2738; but, besides this French infantry returned as 
present on the 1st April, and since taken In Badajoz, there was a detachment 
of 204 men of the 64th regiment, returned detached in the return of the 1st 
April in Badajoz, which were likewise taken, but these make no diminution of 
the present fit for duty in this return, 

* From 



1812. 


FUENTB GUINALDO. 


22a 


are stronger than any body thought they were. I always 
thought them about 45,000. However, I think it impos-* 
sible that they can bring more against you than from 18,000 
to 20,000 infantry, and about 4000 cavalry. 

^ Sir Stapleton Cotton had ordered the 4th dragoon 
guards to join Le Marchant’s brigade, to relieve tbo 3rd 
dragoons, not in very good condition ; but I have written to 
Colonel Sherlock to halt at Niza till you shall send him 
orders; and you had better order him to join his brigade 
by easy marches. The regiment is now very strong, and in 
good order. 

" Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut. General ‘ Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

' You will observe that on the day after to-morrow the 
communication between you and me will pass by Alcantara, 
and it will therefore be necessary that you should send a 
person express to Niza to give Colonel Sherlock his orders.’ 

To Lieut. General Sir R, Hill, K.B. 

^ My dear Hill, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 10th June, 1812. 9 a.m. 

‘ I have received your letter of the Gth. 

^ I consider it most probable that Drouet will retire from 
Estremadura, unless he should be considerably reinforced, 
so as to give him a force equal, or superior to that under 
your command. You cannot follow him out of Estrema- 
dura; and as soon as you get rid of him, you cannot do 
better than canton your troops in the most healthy situa- 
tions in the province, sending the three regiments belonging 
to the garrisons back to Badajoz or Elvas ; and look to as^ 
sombling again on Albuera, if the enemy should again enter 
the province in strength. 

* From what I see of Soult’s disposition of his troops to relieve Badajoz, and 
from what I know of the manner in which he was pressed by Ballesteros on 
that occasion, I conceive that he cannot bring into Estremadura more than 
three divisions, or half of his infantry, present fit for duty, but he may bring 
more than 4000 cavalry. 

* Besides the 56,980 fit for duty, and 4037 detached, of which the greatest 
number is in the south, there are on the return 4869 sick in hospitals (it is 
strange there should be so few), 414 prisdners, 410 absent on leave; making a 
total of 08,283 men, aind 12,529 horses of all descriptions.’ 



224 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


^ By an intercepted letter from Madrid, I see that the 
King is assembling the army of the centre, which may make 
some difference in the situation of us all. However, you 
have two positions from which it will not be easy to dislodge 
you, that at Albuera, and that of Engracia ; and I feel 
no anxiety about you. I wish that I was as strong in re- 
spect to the enemy as you are. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

• Lieut General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir R, Hill, K.B: 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B, 

* Mv DEAR Henry, ‘ Fuente Guiiialdo, 10th June, 1812. 

" I enclose my dispatch. We shall cross the Agueda on 
the I2th. 

‘ I am almost certain that the enemy will move into Es- 
tremadura, upon Hill, as soon as it is known that I have 
moved, and I hope that every thing will be done by Balles- 
teros, the army of Murcia, and the troops at Cadiz, to divert 
the enemy from their intentions upon Hill. 

‘ I shall send, if possible, by this post, the abstract of the 
return of the enemy's force in the south. They have still 
above 50,000 men. 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Rt Hon, ' Wellington. 

SirH, Wellesley, K,B: 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

^ My Lord, ‘Fuente Guinaldo, 10th June, 1812. 

‘ The army are collected upon the Azava, and will pass 
the Agueda on the 12th instant. As I find from inter- 
cepted letters, that King Joseph had, on the 7th and 26th 
May, given orders to Marshal Soult to make a disposition 
of the troops under his command, in expectation of the 
movement which I am about to make into Castille, I have 
left Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill in such strength in 
Estreraadura, as will, I hope, enable him to keep every thing 
in tranquillity in that province, and secure our right flank. 

‘ All the troops belonging to the army of Portugal are 
collected in Castille, excepting Bonet’s division, which, 
however, is reported to have again evacuated the Asturias^ 



1812. FUENTEOmNALDO. 225 

and to have arrived at Leon. I have no official account of 
this movement. 

Marshal Marmont’s quarters are at Salamanca ; but the 
enemy have destroyed all the bridges on the Tormes, ex- 
cepting that of Salamanca ; and it is supposed that they 
propose to evacuate that town, leaving in the fortified con- 
vents a small garrison. 

^ Marshal Soult arrived at Seville, from the blockade of 
Cadiz, on the 28th May ; and I have not heard of his 
quitting that town. 

^ I have not heard of any movement of troops in the north. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ' Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

‘ My Lord, * Fuentc Guinaldo, 10th June, 1812. 

^ The outrages committed by the British soldiers belong- 
ing to this army have become so enormous, and they have 
produced an effect upon the minds of the people of the 
country so injurious to the cause, and likely to be so dan- 
gerous to the army itself, that 1 request your Lordship’s 
early attention to the subject. 

^ I am sensible that the best measures to be adopted on 
this subject are those of prevention, and I believe there are 
few officers who have paid more attention to the subject in 
this view of it than I have done ; and I have been so far 
successful, that few outrages are committed by the soldiers 
who are with their regiments, after the regiments have been 
a short time in this country. But in the extended system 
on which we are acting, small detachments' of soldiers must 
be marched long distances through the country, either as 
escorts, or returning from being escorts to prisoners, or 
coming from hospitals, &c.; and notwithstanding that none 
of these detachments are ever allowed to march excepting 
under the command of an officer, or more, in proportion to 
its size, and that every precaution is taken to provide for 
the regularity of their subsistence, there is no instance of 
the march of one of these detachments that outrages of every 
description are not committed ; and, I am sorry to say, with 
impunity. 

« The foundation of every system of discipline which has 

VOL. IX, Q 



226 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


for its object the prevention of crimes, must be the non- 
commissioned ofGcers of the army. But I am sorry to say, 
that notwithstanding the encouragement which I have given 
to this class, they are still as little to be depended upon as 
the private soldiers themselves ; and they are just as ready 
to commit irregularities and outrages. I attribute this cir- 
cumstance very much to the lowness of their pay in com- 
parison with that of the soldiers. 

^ Within my recollection, the pay of the soldiers of the 
army has been increased from sixpence to one shilling per 
diem, with other advantages; while that of the corporals, 
which was cightpence, has in the same period been raised 
only to one shilling and twopence ; and that of the serj cants, 
which was one shilling, has been raised only to one shilling 
and sixpence, both with the same advantages as the private 
soldiers. 

^ Your Lordship will observe that the old proportions 
have not been preserved ; and the non-commissioned officers 
of the army not only feel no inclination to preserve a dis- 
tinction between them and the private soldiers, but they 
feel no desire to incur the responsibility, and take the 
trouble, and submit to the privations of their situation for 
so trifling a difference in their pay, as that of twopence in 
fourteen pence to corporals, and tliat of sixpence in eighteen 
pence to serjeants ; and they are indifferent whether they 
continue non-commissioned officers or not. 

* The remedy for this evil is to increase the pay of the 
corporals and serjeants, so as at least to restore the old 
proportions between non-commissioned officers and soldiers 
before the first increase of pay to the army at the com- 
mencement of the last war. This measure becomes parti- 
cularly necessary, in consequence of the opinions generally 
prevalent in respect to the punishment of soldiers ; which 
are certainly so far well founded, that it must be admitted 
by all, that the best mode of insuring* regularity among 
soldiers is to prevent the commission of crimes. 

^ Then, not only is it difficult, if not impossible, to preserve 
order in one of these detachments upon a march, owing to 
the badness of the non-commissioned officers of the army, 
but the crimes which the soldiers commit remain unpunished. 
^ It is impossible to try these offences while the soldiers 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. , 


227 


are on their march, from the want of a sufficient number of 
officers to constitute a Court ; and I refer your Lordship to 
xny letter to the Judge Advocate General of the 13th No* 
vember, 1811* for a detail of the difficulties attending the » 
procuring evidence against them when they join the army. 

I proposed remedies for this evil which have not been en- 
tirely adopted. 

' Then if it should be possible to produce evidence of 
these outrages, I refer your Lordship to the Judge Advo- 
cate General for the opinions of the Attorney and Solicitor 
General, of the nature of the powers given by the 4th 
Article of the 24th Section of the Articles of War, to try 
offences of this description by Courts Martial. It appears 
that these powers arc confined to the infliction of punish- 
ments for offences according to the law of England, and of 
course to the exclusion of corporal punishment. 

^ I beg leave likewise to refer your Lordship to a letter 
which I wrote to the Judge Advocate General on the 13th 
of March last to point out the difficulty of the situation in 
which the members of a General Court Martial and I should 
be placed, in consequence of the opinion of the Attorney 
and Solicitor General ; it being impossible for any Court 
Martial or for me to affix the technical name to any crime 
committed by a soldier ; or to know what was the punish- 
ment for that offence under the law of England. 

" In consequence of this opinion, I have been obliged to 
send home for confirmation the proceedings of every General 
Court Martial before which a soldier has been convicted of 
one of these crimes; and to request the Judge Advocate 
General to advise His Royal Highness the Prince Regent 
regarding the measures to be taken upon the subject. 

^ The guard rooms arc therefore crowded with prisoners ; 
and the offences of which they have been guilty remain un* 
punished, to the destruction of the discipline of the army, 
and to the injury of the reputation of the country for justice. 

‘ I have thought it proper to lay these circumstances be- 
fore your Lordship. I am about to move the army further 

♦ The drafts of these, and of other papers, of the period between July, 1811, 
and July, 1812, were lost by shipwreck. A search has been made for these two 
letters in the office of the Judy;e Advocate General, but without success ( 
altfiougfi they are acknowledged to have been received in the answers lo ihemi 

Q 2 



228 SPAIN. 1812, 

forward into Spain; and I assure your Lordship that I have 
not^ a friend in that country who has not written to me in 
dread of the consequences which must result to the army, 
and to the cause, from a continuance of these disgraceful 
irregularities, which I declare I have it not in my power to 
prevent. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ' W ellington. 

To the Earl of LiverpooL 

^ My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 10th June, 1812. 

" When your Lordship apprized me of the design that 
Lieut. General Lord William Bentinck should make an at- 
tack upon the eastern coast of the Peninsula, with the troops 
from Sicily, in the course of the summer, I considered it to 
be my duty to aid his Lordship by every means in my power, 
with troops, if I could spare them from the service in this 
part of the Peninsula, with equipments to facilitate the 
execution of the plans of Government, and with ships to 
transport the Spanish troops ; with wliich 1 requested His 
Majesty’s Ambassador at Cadiz to urge the Spanish Go- 
vernment to co-operate with his Lordship. 

‘ Accordingly, I sent in the first instance to Gibraltar the 
ships named in the margin, containing the stores of which I 
enclose the return, which had recently arrived from England, 
with a battering train, from which I ordered that the shot 
specified in the margin might be landed in Portugal, where 
shot of those calibres was wanted ; and I requested that the 
Governor of Gibraltar would have the shot in the ships re- 
placed by 800 rounds of round shot, 100 rounds of canister, 
and 100 rounds of grape shot for each gun. 

^ I have since sent to Gibraltar, likewise to be at the dis- 
posal of Lieut. General Lord William Bentinck, the ships 
named in the margin ; and I enclose a return of the ord- 
nance and stores they contain, including the stores which 
were at Setuval, and those on their march from Elvas to 
Alcacer de Sal, which were embarked in those ships. 

‘ I requested the Governor of Gibraltar, upon that occa- 
sion, to have the gun carriages put into a state of repair, and 
that guns should be fitted to them ; and with 800 rounds of 
round shot, 100 rounds of canister, and, 100 rounds of grape. 



1812. 


FUENTE GUINALDO. 


229 


for each gun, with a suitable proportion of powder, should' 
be embarked in those ships, and in two others which I had 
requested Admiral Berkeley to send round, the four ships 
not having been sufficient to contain the whole equipment. 

‘ I enclose the copy of the letter which I wrote to the 
Governor of Gibraltar upon this occasion. 

^ I have not yet heard of the arrival of these sliips at Gib- 
raltar ; but I have the honor to enclose the copy of a letter 
which I have received from Lieut. General Campbell, written 
upon the arrival of the three vessels first mentioned ; from 
which your Lordship will observe that the garrison of Gib- 
raltar is stated not to have in store more than eleven thou- 
sand 24 pound shot, and that the officers of the ordnance in 
that fortress have refused to allow any of it to be embarked 
at my requisition. I likewise enclose my answer to Lieut. 
General Campbell, from which your Lordship will observe, 
that for the purposes of this equipment 1 have ordered 
twenty thousand 24 pound round shot from Cadiz to Gib- 
raltar, and five thousand from Lisbon to the same place, 
notwithstanding the wants at both, and I trust that Lieut/ 
General Campbell will find it convenient to supply the re- 
mainder of the demand. 

" I have likewise sent from this country to Gibraltar two 
companies of British, and two companies of Portuguese ar- 
tillery, to remain there in their transports at the disposal of 
Lord William Bentinck, when he shall send for them ; and 
Lieut. Colonel Jones, and four subaltern officers of Engi- 
neers, and two companies of military artificers, including all 
the sappers there are with this army, with the same intention. 

^ Every ship and all the troops and equipments for this 
service have sailed from the Tagus; and I trust that your 
Lordship will approve of these arrangements, and will give 
orders that the 24 pound shot may be replaced at Cadiz 
and Lisbon. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The EarlofLivei^ooi: "Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

" My Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 10th June, 1812. 

" I enclose the abstract of the return of the army of the 
South, of the 1st of April last, from which it appears that it 



330 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


consisted of nearly 57,000 men present and fit for duty, in* 
eluding the garrison of Badajoz. Estimating that garrison 
at 5000 men of all arms, the army of the South now consists 
of 52,000, of which about 38,000 arc infantry, and about 
7000 cavalry. 

^ This army is more numerous and efficient than I imagined 
it was, and much more so than it was ever represented to be ; 
and the state of it affords another ground for adopting the 
plan of operations for the campaign which I have preferred. 

^ I could not take more than 40,000 men into Andalusia, 
where it appears I should have had another army, that of 
Portugal, following my march, consisting of at least 30,000 
more. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl qf Liverpool: ' Wellington. 

To the Earl of Liverpool. 

^ My dear Lord, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 10th June, 1812. 

^ I wish to know from your Lordship wliether it could be 
possible to give the medal to the Prince of Orange. He has 
been in the action at El Bodon, and in the sieges of Ciudad 
Rodrigo and Badajoz ; and although he is not exactly in the 
situation which would entitle him to it, he has the rank, and 
certainly deserves it, and w^ould be highly flattered at ob- 
taining it. I shall be much obliged to your Lordship if you 
will let me know if it can be given to him. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ' Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Sir 11. Ilillt K.B. 

‘ My dear Hill, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, llth June, 1812. 

‘ The army is collected on the Agueda, and I intend to 
move forward on the 13th. I am almost certain, from what 
I have seen of the intercepted letters from Joseph to Soult, 
and from Marmont to Joseph, that Soult will move upon 
you with a part at least of his force, notwithstanding that 
the Marques de Monsalud says in a letter which I have 
from him this morning, that he believes that Joseph has 
ordered Soult to approach the Tagus ; he did not send me 
Ih^ paper on which he founds this notion, and, therefore, I 
am not able to judge of it. 



1812 # FUENTE GUINALDO* 231 

^ In my letter of the 6th instant, I pomted out to you 
what I thought would be the enemy’s line of operations, and 
I recommended certain measures to you. There are still 
two or three objects to which I wish to draw your attention* 

^ First ; my bridge of pontoons, which is at San Vincente; 
I think that for the present, the bridge had better be lodged 
at Elvas, the bullocks, &c., being kept in the best situation 
in the neighbourhood for grazing. I request you to give 
directions accordingly to Lieut. Colonel Sir llichard Fletcher 
Hereafter, if 1 should find, from the course the campaign 
takes, that it is not likely that I shall require that bridge 
for the communication between you and me by Almaraz, 
which will depend very much upon the events of the next 
fifteen days, I shall order that bridge down to Abrantes ; as 
there is no use in being loaded with too many concerns. 

‘Secondly; the bridge at Alcantara. Wc have repaired 
this bridge by a piece of machinery which can be taken up 
and laid down at pleasure, but it will require two days’ notice 
to lay it down, and as much time to take it up. I enclose 
the copy of the instructions which I have given regarding 
this bridge, and you will only send notice if you should want 
to use it. 

‘ If you should find it necessary on any account to retire 
into Portugal, you will in that case send orders to Lieut. 
Pery at Alcantara, to lodge his bridge, &c., at Marva5 ; and 
his bullocks, people, &c., had better continue their march by 
Gastello de Vide, Niza, &c., to Abrantes. 

‘ It is very difficult to manage the defence of the kingdom 
of Portugal, the wliole country being frontier. I am quite 
convinced, that if Soult moves upon you, he will manoeuvre 
by your right flank, and will cross the Guadiana somewhere 
about Jurumenha, where he will be at no great distance 
from our magazine, hospital, &c,, at Estremoz. Wc have 
very little, I believe, in magazine at that place, the greater 
part having been removed to Elvas, and it is as well that 
there should be no great accumulation at Estremoz, upon 
which subject I request you to communicate with Mr. Routh. 
I have desired Dr. M‘G rigor to give directions that the hos- 
pital at Estremoz may be gradually evacuated upon Alter do 
Cha5 and Abrantes, leaving in Estremoz only 400 or 500 
men, which number can always be moved without difficulty. 



232 


SPAIK. 


1812/ 


‘By the last 'account from' Brito, I see that' there had 
been some affair with Ballesteros on the 1st, near Bomos, 
and that some troops had been moved in that direction; 
this may be true, but we must be certain that we are the 
great object of the movement. 

‘ You will have received my letter about the 4th dragoon 
guards : the remounts for the second division of cavalry will 
soon join, and will make you tolerably strong in that arm. 
There is a Portuguese regiment of cavalry in the forts of 
Elvas, Campo Mayor, &c., of which, of course, you will make 
use in the neighbourhood of those places. 

‘ The Marques de Monsalud tells me, that besides the 
regiment of Doyle now in Badajoz, he has 1 500 men which 
he is sending into the place, not reckoning a battalion now 
on its march from Ciudad Eodrigo ; so that Badajoz will 
be very tolerably garrisoned without Morillo’s infantry. It 
ought to have 5000 men, if it is likely to be attacked ; but 
half the number are sufficient if it is not, which is the case 
we have to provide for. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ WellinoTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B.’ 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, llth June, 1812 . 

‘ I have received your letter of the 8th. 'When I was in 

Zealand, I recollect a person by the name of , 

who was afterwards taken prisoner in a Danish privateer ; 
and I saw him in London, and I believe was of use to him. 
The particular circumstances I do not recollect; but this I 
do recollect, that he was of no service to us in Zealand. 

‘Foreigners of that description are of no use to me ; and 
I shall be very much obliged to the Government if they 
should not allow Mr. — ^ — to pass through the country to 
the army. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart' 



1812, 


FUENTB GUINALDO. 


233 


To General . 

‘ a Fuente Guinaldo, ce 12 Juin, 1812. 

" Monsieur le GfiNfiRAL, 

" J*ai re^ii la lettre de votrc Excellence du 8. L’armee 
sous mes ordres passera TAgueda demain matin et s’avan- 
cera sur Salamanca. 

" Comme le [Hoi Joseph commande toutes les armecs 
d’Espagne, votre Excellence peut etre assuree qu’il ne verra 
pas ecraser le Mare dial Due de llaguse, si nous sommes les 
plus forts, sans faire faire un mouvement quelconque en Es- 
tremadure par le Mareclial Soult. Je sais, par les lettres 
interceptees en cliiffrc, qu’il a ordonne un mouvement par le 
Marechal Soult; mais comme je ne peux pas deviner la clef 
du chiffre, je ne connais pas le mouvement. 

" Mais quel quo soit le mouvement, il est a desirer que les 
allies soient en force en Estremadure ; et que les troupes 
soient bien en main. Vous ferez les mouveinens projetes 
dans votrc lettre du 8, ou non, comme il vous plaira; mais 
vous devez compter quo je serai oblige de changer mes dis- 
positions en consequence de la faiblcsse qui en sera la suite 
en Estremadure. 

' J’ai rhonneur d’etre, &c. 

* General ' Wellington. 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley ^ K,B, 

* Sir, ‘ Fuente Guinaldo, 12th June, 1812. 

‘ I enclose a copy of a letter of the 8th, which I have re- 
ceived from the , and of my answ er. 

It appears that that officer, instead of attending to the 
interesting events likely to occur in this quarter, is desirous 
of plundering corn and crimping recruits ; and the conse- 
quence of these advantageous operations will probably be, 
that Lieut. General Sir Howland Hill will be too weak to 
hold his ground in Estremadura, and I shall be obliged to 
evacuate Castille, to go to his assistance. 

" I have already sent you my letter of the 7th instant to 

the , in which I have advised him not to lose his 

communication with Sir Rowland Hill. 

^ I have a report that General Ballesteros was defeated 
on the 1st of June. 



234 


SFAiK* 


1812 * 


‘ I enclose you an extract fi;om the' report of the Chief of 
the Staff of the army of the South, regarding General Bal- 
lesteros’ operations. You will see that he is stopped by any 
thing like a stronghold, however contemptible ; and I beg 
that you will again recommend to the Government that he 
should be equipped with only two or three Spanish 16 
pounders, to enable him to lay open any place of this kind, 
in which the enemy’s small posts may take refuge. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ‘ Wellington. 

Sir H. IVelkdey, K.B.' 


To the Earl qf Liverpool. 

^ My Lord, ‘ Fueiite Guinaldo, 12lh June, 1812. 

^ I enclose a letter from Dr. M^Grigor, containing* obser- 
vations on the mortality in the 7tli regiment, and the 40tli 
regiment, in the last year. 

‘ I concur with Dr. M‘Grigor in deeming it very desirable 
that the troops and recruits destined for this army, should 
be sent out in the winter, before the spring equinoctial 
gales. They should leave England, if possible, with the 
lirst easterly wind in December. 

‘ The same rule is desirable for the remount horses for the 
cavalry and artillery. They likewise should arrive before the 
equinoctial gales in spring ; and the earlier in the winter the 
better. It is likewise desirable, that whatever transport 
tonnage there may be, should be allotted for the remount 
horses of the several regiments, in proportion to the number 
of horses belonging to each regiment to be sent out. 

‘ Tlic liorses for all the regiments are not yet arrived in 
Portugal; and very few have yet joined any of the regiments. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool' ^ Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham^ K.B, 

* Guadapero, 13th June, 1812. 

^ My dear Sir, Half-past 1 p.m. 

‘ I have a letter from Salamanca of the 9th ; there was 
nothing very particular. Marmont was still there, and had 
been at Alba, to reconnaitre the position there. 



1812 - 


CABRILLAS, 


235 


I have sent the orders for the march to be made to 
morrow, which was to have been made this day, under the 
orders of the 11th* 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut, General " W E LLIKGTON. 

^ir T.jGrahaniy K.B.^ 

To Lieut, General Sir E, Hilly K.B. 

‘ My dear Hill, ‘ Cabrillas, 14th June, 1812. 

" We crossed the Agueda yesterday, and are so far ad- 
vanced towards Salamanca. 

" I have received your letters of the 9tli and 11th, and I 
tliink Zafra as convenient a position, in the view of yonr 
former instructions, and more healthy than that which you 
before occupied. I hope that the Condc de Penne Villemur 
will not get himself into a scrape. 

‘ We have deciphered the letter you sent, and it goes 
back to you with the key of the cipher. We have got some 
letters, however, in cipher, which we have not been able to 
decipher ; but as far as I can judge, it appears to me that 
King Joseph has ordered Soul t to send to the Tagus one 
third of the force under his command, in order to join some 
other troops to be assembled there, probably belonging to 
the army of the Centre. I at lirst thought this assembly 
was to take place at tlie bridge of Arzobispo, and that 
Soult’s troops were to march without cannon ; but having 
seen by a letter of the i2th, received this day from Clementi 
Pereira, that a body of troops, attended by five boats, had 
arrived on the 9th at Talavcra, and that the troops had 
moved on to the neighbourhood, and it is probable that the 
boats will follow, I think that Almaraz will be the point of 
assembly for these troops, and that they will communicate 
by the flying bridge to be formed of these boats. 

‘ It is most probable, that if Ballesteros has been beaten, 
which I am afraid is not unlikely, that Soult will, with a 
part of liis army, cover the movement of the third, which 
arc going to the Tagus, and if this is the case, you can do 
nothing to prevent the movement, but must attend to your 
own situation ; but if Ballesteros has not been much hurt, 
and the third of Soult’s army should attempt to move 
through Estremadura alone, you might make their march 



236 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 

very dangerous and difficult ; and I shall be obliged to you 
to attend to it. 

' I shall hear from you, of course, the extent of the force 
which the enemy will send this way. 

' Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General " Wellington. 

Sir R. HUI.K.B: 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham, K,B, 

Cabrillas, 14th June, 1812. 

‘ My dear Sir, 12 at Noon. 

^ I received last night from General Castanos some very 
interesting intercepted documents ; among others, a return 
of the 1st of April of the army of Portugal. 

^ The effective fit for duty are 51,492 ; of which 48,396 
are infantry; 3204 are cavalry; 3393 artillery; and the 
remainder sapeurs, &c. &c. There are besides about 1500 
infantry, and 1000 cavalry, returned on command at Sala- 
manca, Alba, &c., which ought to be added to the present 
fit for duty, and would make the army 43,800 infantry, and 
above 4000 cavalry. 

^ Bonet’s division, consisting of 6270 infantry, are in the 
Asturias. Castanos tells me that the French are about to 
evacuate Astorga; and he mentions that the Adjutant, who 
carried there the order, went on to order Bonct likewise to 
retire from the Asturias. I reckon that he would receive the 
order about the 9th, and he might be on the Tonnes on the 
19th or 20th. 

‘ The army of Portugal have 98 pieces of cannon ; but they 
are very badly provided with horses, and I see that some of 
the cannon have been left at Avila, and some at Talavera; 
and Marmont has ordered that they may be drawn by 
bullocks to Tordesillas. 

^ I enclose a letter just received from Salamanca, from 
which you will see that it is reported that Bonet is coming 
to join the army. It is also said that some of Foy’s troops 
are about Talavera; but that I do not credit. 

^ Notwithstanding that the enemy is considerably stronger 
than I believed he was, I propose to continue our movement 
forward. We shall at legist force them to collect their troops 
ahd I see by Castanos’ letter, that he is about to move the 



1812. 


SALAMANCA. 


237 


army of Galicia, and he has ordered Mendizabal to move all 
the troops and guerrillas in the north, so as to cut off all 
Marmont’s communications ; and if Marmont should detach, 
or he should not be joined by Bonet, or the whole of all his 
divisions, or by the division at Valladolid, we shall be superior 
to him. I have ordered the march for to-morrow. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

• Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir T. Graham^ K.B.^ 

* There are in the army of Portugal 7400 sick ; and the 
grand total amounts to 05,597, including 2277 officers and 
11,147 horses, including 2593 belonging to officers,’ 

To Lieut. General Sir A. Campbell^ Kt. 

‘ My dear Campbell, * Salamanca, 18th June, 1812. 

^ I received yesterday your letter of the 26th May, and 
this day that of the 3rd June. I am very much obliged to 
you, and flattered by your having been my proxy at the in- 
stallation of the Knights of the Bath ; and I agree with you 
in thinking, that I should not have been less happy even if 
I had seen the dress in which it was intended I should ap- 
pear. 

* In regard to the disposal of the money intended for the 
ball, I beg that you will do as others do ; and I enclose an 
order for £350 sterling. 

^ Affairs appear to be in a strange state in England ; how- 
ever, I trust that at last some Government will be formed. 
1 always detested home politics, and late occurrences have 
not given me a relish for them. 

^ You will hear of our march here. The French have a 
fort which I must take, and then we shall see what I can do. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir A. Campbell, Kt. 

^ I have been considering your situation, and your not 
going to the Isle of France ; pray show every desire to go, 
at all events, by the earliest opportunity ; the iron gets cold, 
and does not work well, if not struck when heated ; and if 
you show a disinclination to go to^ that situatiouj, a short 



238 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


turn might be taken, you might be deprived of it, and it 
would be difficult to obtain for you another.’ 

To Lieut. General Sir R. Killy K.B. 

^ My dear Hill, * Salamanca, 18tli June, 1812. 

' I have received your letters of the 13th and 14th. I have 

never been more annoyed than by s affair, and 

I entirely concur with you in the necessity of inquiring into 
it. It is occasioned entirely by the trick our oflScers of 
cavalry have acquired of galloping at every thing, and tlicir 
galloping back as fast as they gallop on the enemy. They 
never consider their situation, never think of manoeuvring 
before an enemy — :>o little that one would think they cannot 
manoeuvre, excepting on Wimbledon Common ; and when 
they use their arm as it ought to be used, viz., offensively, 
they never keep nor provide for a reserve. 

^ All cavalry should charge in two lines, of which one 
should be in reserve ; if obliged to charge in one line, part 
of the line, at least one-third, should be ordered beforehand 
to pull up, and form in second line, as soon as the charge 
should ,bc given, and the enemy has been broken and has 
retired. The Koyals and the 3rd dragoon guards were the 
best regiments in the cavalry in this country, and it annoys 
me particularly that the misfortune has happened to them. 
I do not wonder at the French boasting of it; it is the 
greatest blow they have struck. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ‘ W ELLINGTON. 

Sir R, Hilly K.B. 

‘ We entered this place yesterday. The enemy still hold 
the fort which they have made, but I hope soon to have them 
out.’ 


To the FmvI of Liverpool. 

‘ My Lord, * Salamanca, 18th June, 1812. 

‘ The army crossed the Agueda on the 13th instant, and 
rharched forward in three columns, the troops under Don 
Carlos de Espana forming a fourth; and the whole arrived 
upon the Valmusa rivulet, about six miles from hence, on 



1816. 


SALAMANCA. 


289 


the 1 6th. The enemy showed come caralry and a small 
body of infantry in front of the town on that day, and 
manifested a design to hold the heights on the south side of 
the Tonnes. But their cavalry were immediately driven in 
by ours, and the enemy evacuated Salamanca on the night 
of the 16th, leaving a garrison of about 800 men in the 
fortifications which they have erected on the ruins of the 
colleges and convents which they have demolished. By the 
fire from these they protect the passage of the Tonnes by 
the bridge, and our troops crossed that river yesterday 
morning, by two fords which are in this neighbourhood. 

^ The forts were immediately invested by the Gth division, 
under the command of Major General Clinton, and having 
been accurately rcconnaitrcd it was found necessary to break 
ground before them. This was done last night, and I hope 
that we shall commence our fire to-morrow morning from 
eight pieces of cannon, at the distance of 300 yards from tlie 
principal of the enemy’s works, the possession of which will, 
I hope, give us the possession of the others. 

^ Major General Clinton conducts these operations. 

" It is impossible to describe the joy of the people of tlie 
toAvn upon our entrance. They have now been suffering for 
more than three years ; during which time the French, 
among other acts of violence and oppression, have destroyed 
13 of 25 convents, and 22 of 25 colleges, which existed in 
this celebrated scat of learning. ' 

^ The enemy retired by the road to Toro, and their rear 
guard was about 15 miles from hence last night. They 
retired again this morning by the same road ; and I under - 
stand that they intend to collect their army on the Duero, 
between Toro and Zamora. 

^ Our advanced guard is advanced on the road to Toro, 
and the main body of the army in this neighbourhood. 

" I enclose a return of the army of Portugal, of the 1st of 
April, which has been intercepted, from which it appears 
that there are at present under arms 2074 officers, and 
51,492 troops in this body, of which 43,396 are infantry, 
and 3204 cavalry. Of the 4244 men returned detached, 
there are about 1500 infantry and about 1000 cavalry in 
this neighbourhood, who will of course be called in to join 
the army. 



2^ 


STAiVi 


1 ^ 12 . 


^5 enclose the morning state of this army 6f yesterday, in 
which I have marked thus * those troops which are in this 
part of the country, the others being in Estremadura, uftder 
the command of Lieut. General Hill. To these numbers 
must be added about 3000 Spanish infantry, under Don 
Carlos de Espana, and about 500 Spanish cavalry, under 
Don Julian Sanchez, who are with the army, 

^ This state includes only the cavalry and infantry of the 
army ; but your Lordship will observe that the enemy are 
superior to us in numbers in those arms ; and it appears 
from the return, that the enemy have 92 pieces of cannon. 

^ I have adopted every measure in my power to prevent 
the enemy from collecting their forces against us. I have 
urged the Coiide dc Amarantc to move upon the eneniy’s 
flank from Braganza, along the Douro, with four battalions 
of militia and three regiments of Portuguese cavalry, under 
General D’ Urban, and to cut off the enemy’s communica- 
tion between Zamora and Benavente and Astorga. General 
Castafios has promised me to attack Astorga with the army 
of Galicia ; and I have urged General Mcndizabal and the 
chiefs of the guerrillas in all the nortlicrn parts of Spain, to 
make an effort to prevent Marshal Marmont from collecting 
his whole force against this army. 

^ But I am apprehensive that I can place no reliance on 
the effect to be produced by these troops. The guerrillas, 
although active and willing, and although their operations 
in general occasion the utmost annoyance to the enemy, are 
so little disciplined that they can do nothing against the 
French troops, unless the latter are very inferior in num- 
bers ; and if the French take post in house or church, of 
which they only barricade the entrance, both regular troops 
and, guerrillas are so ill equipped, as military bodies, that 
the French can remain in security till relieved by a larger 
body. 

‘ Then General Castanos, although I believe he is equipped 
with a few guns for the attack of Astorga, has no pecuniary 
resources td enable him to collect and keep together the 
army of Galicia. And if the enemy should abandon Astorga 
to its fate, and should withdraw General Bonet from the 
Asturias, I am very apprehensive that the advantages of 
my march into Castille will bo confined to regaining the 



1812 ; 


SALAMANCA. 


241 


principality of Asturias for General Castafios, and to the 
little advantages which the guerrillas will derive from the 
evacuation of different parts of the country by the enemy's 
posts. 

^ Your Lordship will observe from my letter of the 26th 
ult., that I did not calculate that the enemy’s army of Por- 
tugal was so strong wlien I determined upon this expedition, 
and I had certainly reason to believe that Marshal Mar- 
mont would not evacuate the Asturias. I shall not give up 
the plan, however, unless I should see that success is not to 
be looked for, as I am convinced that the most advantageous 
consequences will result from success in this quarter, or even 
from my remaining in an advanced position in Castillo. 

From intercepted letters between the King and Marshals 
Soult and Marmont, which however I have not been able 
entirely to decipher, I judge that the King’s plan referred 
to in my dispatch of the lOth instant, is to collect a corps 
in the valley of the Tagus, consisting of a part of the army 
of the South, and a division of the army of the centre, in 
order to create a diversion in favor of Marshal Marmont. 
I had requested the Empecinado to alarm the King for the 
safety of his situation at Madrid ; and I hope tliat Marshal 
Soult will find ample employment for his troops in the 
south in the blockade of Cadiz, tlie continued operations of 
General Ballesteros, and those in Estremadura of Lieut. 
General Hill, whoso attention I have called to the probable 
march of this corps of the army of the South through part 
of Estremadura. 

‘ The King is very desirous of restoring the bridge of 
Almaraz, which can only be for the object of collecting a 
corps upon the Tagus, but hitherto he has sent there only 
two small boats, for the purpose of communicating with the 
post at Mirabetc. 

‘ I enclose a letter from Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill* 

* To G<n€ral the Earl of IVellingion, K.B, 

* Mv Lokd, * Zafra, 13th June, 1812. 

* I have the honor to transmit to your Lordship the copies oi‘ reports which 
1 have received from Major General Slade, relative to an affair between two 
regiments of the brigade of cavalry under his command, and the brigade of 
French cavalry under General Lallemand, in the neighbourhood of Valencia 
de las Torres, on the UtU instant. In which, 1 am sorry to observe, we have 

VOL. IX. R 



242 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


and its enclosures, being two from Major General Slade, 
giving an account of an affair which he had with the enemy 
on the 11th instant, in which, owing to the eagerness and 
impetuosity of tlie soldiers, considerable loss was sustained. 

" Your Lordship is aware that misfortunes of this kind 
have happened more than once in this country from the 

suffered severely, and have not gained the advantage which might have been 
expected. 

‘ Major General Slade had advanced to Llera, and was to have proceeded 
the following day in the direction of La Granja, to cover a reconnaissance to 
be made by the Conde de Peiine Villeinur on that day, from Llerena towards 
Azuaga. 

‘The 17th and 27th dragoons, under Major General Lallemand, which had 
been stationed in the neighbourhood of Azuaga, had, however, moved at the 
same time towards Valencia de las Torres, and Major General Slade was in- 
duced to bring him to action. 

^ While I forward these reports to your Lordship, I shall feel it my duty to 
cause further inquiry to be made into the circumstances of this affair, and shall 
have the honor of communicating them to your T.ordship. 

‘I have the honor to be, &c, 

‘ General ‘ R. Him.. 

the Earl of fVellingtou, K,B* 

To Lieut. General Sir E. Hill, K.B. 

‘ SiK, ‘ Llera, 11th June, 1812. i past 4 p.m, 

‘ I beg to have the honor of stating to you that the enemy, whom I reported 
this morning to have been in Valencia, advanced upon this place about 9 o'clock 
with the 17th and 27th regiments of dragoons, under General Lallemand, I 
immediately advanced with the .3rd diago\.>n guards and Royals, attacked and 
pursued him nearly three leagues, to within a short^distance of Maguilla, when 
I had an opportunity of charging him again, broke through his first line, and 
killed a great many; among the munbers are a captain of the 27th dragoons; 
and we took an aide de camp of General Lallemand prisoner. 

‘ 1 am sorry to say our loss was severe, as the enemy brought a support, and 
my troops being too eager in pursuit, we were obliged to relinquish a great 
number of prisoners which we had taken, and to fall back on this place. 

* Nothing could exceed the gallantly displayed by both officers and men on 
the occasion, in which Colonel Sir Granby Calcraft, and Lieut. Colonel Clifton, 
commanding the two regiments, particularly distinguished themselves, as well 
as all the officers present. 

‘ 1 beg particularly to report the conduct of Brig. Major Radcliffe, to whom 
1 feel extremely indebted for his assistance on this occasion. 

^ I have not yet been able to collect the returns, but I am concerned to say, 
Lieuts. Windsor, of the Royals, and Homewood, of the 3rd dragoon guards, 
have fallen into the enemy’s hands, the former having his horse shot, and the 
latter being wounded. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General < John Si.aub, Major Gen. 

Sir R» Hill^ K.Hl^ JHajor 



1812. 


SALAMANCA, 


243 


same cause, and I have frequently been present on occasions 
when the same conduct in the cavalry was likely to be at- 
tended by the same unfortunate results. Notwithstanding 
that this misfortune has occurred upon this occasion to a 
brigade consisting of two of the best and most experienced 
regiments we have, I have concurred with Lieut. General 
Sir Rowland Hill in thinking that it is necessary to make a 
formal inquiry into the causes which occasioned the disorder, 
and the consequent losses in the attack made by Major 
General Slade on the enemy on the 11th instant. General 
Slade’s action was occasioned by his advancing to Llera, to 
cover a movement by the Conde de Penne Villemur on 
Llerena, in order to collect the harvest of Estremadura; 
and I learn that the enemy have since retired to Cordova. 

Major General Slade to Lieut. General Sir R, Hilly K.B, 

* Sir, ‘Camp near Llera, 12th June, 1312. 

‘ In forwarding the enclosed return of the casualties which occurred yester- 
day, I feel it my duty to state, in addition to what I had the honor of commu- 
nicating to you before, that our misfortunes arose from too great eagerness and 
zeal in the pursuit, after having broke the enemy’s first line, each regiment 
vying with each other who should most distinguish itself, which gave him an 
opportunity of bringing up fresh troops, and of charging us at a time when we 
were in confusion. 

‘ I beg leave again to repeat, that the exertions of the officers to restore order 
were conspicuous, but the two regiments having got mixed in the charge, it 
took some time before this object could be accomplished, during which we lost 
most of the prisoners we had taken, and suffered, I am grieved to say, severely. 
It is a satisfaction to me to be able to add, that the enemy lost in killed and 
wounded, full as much as ourselves, and considered himself completely routed. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ John Slade, Major Gen. 

Sir R. Hilly K.B: 


Return of the Killed, Wounded, and Mming, in the affair near Maguilla, 
on the IIM June, 1812. 



OflBcers. 

Serjeants. j 

Rank and File. 

i 

■A 

U 

O 

w 

Total loss of Officers, 

N on-commissioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed . . . 


2 

20 

6 

22 

Wounded 

— 

— 

26 

]4 

26 

Missing • • 

2 

10 

106 

127 

118 


u 2 






244 


J5PAIN. 


1812. 


" I have reports from the south, stating that General Bal- 
lesteros had had an action with the enemy near Bornos, on 
the 1st instant, of which I have not received the detail, or 
any regular confirmation, notwithstanding that there is no 
doubt of the fact. The result has been stated differently 
by the two parties, and it is reported by the enemy that 
Ballesteros is badly wounded. But they have certainly re- 
inforced their troops in that direction since the action, from 
which circumstance it may be inferred that the success, if on 
their side at all, was not very decisive. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ‘ Wellington. 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Salamanca, 19th June, 1812. 

‘ I return the enclosures in Dom Miguel Forjaz’s note, 
respecting Senhor Vasconccllos. Neither Sir W. Beresford 
nor I know any thing about this person, who, I am informed, 
has been seized by the French. But it is not impossible 
that this is part of the trick. Austin should seize him, or 
should get some of the Spanish authorities to seize him, if 
the French should let him go. 

^ Believe me, See. 

‘ His Excellency ‘ Wellington. 

Charles Stuart: 

To Major General H, Clinton, 

‘ On the Heights above Aldea Lengua, 

‘ My dear General, 24th June, 1812. Half past 6 A.M. 

^ The enemy have crossed the Tonnes in some force, and 
arc skirmishing with General Bock’s brigade of dragoons, 
which is in front of Calvarrasa dc Abaxo. 

^ I have ordered the 7th and 1st divisions to cross the 
Tormes at the ford of Marta ; and I shall be very much 
obliged to you if you will order a brigade and a Portuguese 
regiment of the 6tli division to move out of the town, and to 
cross the Tormes at the ford below Marta. 

' You should send your baggage, except camp kettles, 
heavy guns and stores, &c., across the Tormes at the ford 
of El Canto. 

" Believe me, &c. 

• Major General II, Clhiton: ' Wellington. 



1812 . 


ALDEA LENGUA. 


245 


To LieuU (jeneral Sir S, Cfotto% Bart, 

* On the Heights behind Aldea Lengua, 

^ My dear Cotton, 24th June, 1812. 

‘ Upon looking carefully at the plain I can sec but very 
few troops, and the great body of the enemy arc certainly 
still on the right of the Tormcs, some on the bank of the 
river, but mostly on the heights, extending nearly as far as 
Gomecello. 

^ It is my opinion, therefore, that you should keep General 
Lc Marchant’s brigade assembled near the ford of Calvar- 
rasa, at ^vhich they crossed. One regiment might even be 
on this side with advantage. 

‘ I shall observe the enemy's movements here, and will 
take care to reinforce you in time. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut. General ^ WELLINGTON, 

Sir S. CotloTit Bart.* 


, To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham^ K.B. 

* On the Heights in front of Aldea Lengua, 

" My dear Sir, 24th June, 1812. 

" All the enemy’s infantry on the plain on the left of the 
Tormes, arc collected or in march towards Calvarrasa. They 
appear to me to be about 10,000 men, with cavalry, the 
numbers of which I cannot tell, but not so many as we have 
on the left of the Tormes. 

^ I shall observe their movements, and reinforce you as it 
may be necessary. The remainder of the army is in the 
same position as yesterday afternoon, and arc not apparently 
about to make any movement ; I therefore imagine that the 
others arc not about to do any thing of importance. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General " WELLINGTON. 

Sir T. Graham^ K.B.' 

To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

^ My dear Sir, * 24th June, 1812. 5 p.m. 

‘ The enemy’s infantry and cavalry have moved to the 
rear as you will have observed; but I see that they are 
getting under arms at Aldea Kubia, and on the hill on the 



246 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


right of that village. I think it advisable, therefore, that 
if the men of the 1st, 6th, and 7tli divisions are not cooking, 
they should move to the ford of Marta. If they are cook- 
ing, the movement may as well be delayed till they have 
done, unless I should see reason to make it earlier, of which 
I will give you notice. 

‘ I was just going over to you, but the enemy’s movement 
prevents it just at present. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir T*. Graham y K,B." 


To Major General H. Clinton, 

‘ Heights behind Aldea Lengua, 

" My DEAR General, 25th June, 1812. 6 a.m. 

^ I am very anxious to have a little conversation with 
Colonel Burgoyne, Colonel May, and Colonel Dickson, and 
shall be very much obliged to you if you will desire them to 
come to me at the village of Cabrerizos as soon as they can. 

" They can be there, 1 conclude, by 8 o’clock, when I shall 
be there ; and if I should not be there, I will send word 
where I may be found. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General H, Clinton J ^ Wellington. 


To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Salamanca, 25th June, 1812. 

" I have received your letters of the 16th and 17th, re- 
garding the reforms in the Portuguese navy. It is difficult 
to say how far they ought to be carried, but if the British 
Government undertake to protect Portugal from the Barbary 
powers, I see no reason why they should have any ships in 
Europe, excepting probably the flotilla on the Guadiana. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* His Excellency ^ Wellington. 

Charles Stuart. 

‘ You did not enclose in your letter of the 16th the paper 
regarding the guerrillas taking the stud of brood mares.’ 



IS12. 


SALAMANCA, 


247 


To His 'Excellency Charles Stuart. 

* My dear Sir, * Salamanca, 25th June, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 17th instant, and 
although I have but little leisure just at present, I shall not 
delay to reply to it *. 

^ The Chevalier de Souza wrote to me some time ago re- 
specting the schemes for establishing a bank in Lisbon, and 
for lending money on English securities, upon which I gave 
him my opinion, and he must, I believe, have received it 
before he sent his plan to Mr. Hamilton. Nothing can be 
more absurd than all the reasoning respecting the establish- 
ment of a bank in Portugal, to be conducted on the prin- 
ciple of the Bank of England. First, the constitution of 
the country will not allow of such an establishment. Se- 
condly, the military and political situation of the country is 
such that no man in his senses, whether native or foreigner, 
who has capital, will lay it out in this or any other scheme, 
which shall prevent him removing it from the country at a 
moment’s notice. 

^ People appear to me to be as wild now in their notions 
of the security of the Portuguese territory, as they were 
desponding two years ago. But I who, from repeated re- 
flection, must have a tolerably accurate notion of the real 
state of this country, and those who will be called upon to 
lay out their capital upon this banking scheme, and know 
well the relative force of the contending armies in the Pe- 
ninsula, and the advantages and disadvantages attending 
each, and particularly those attending the Portuguese 
frontier as a line of defence, will not be so ready as Senhor 
de Souza (with his 90,000 men) thinks they will, to take 
their money out of their chests to lodge it in those of the 
bank, and eventually in those of the Portuguese Treasury. 

^ At this moment the two armies with which the allied 
armies are engaged, arc exactly double the strength in the 
field, according to the returns, of the allied British and 
Portuguese armies ; and a more serious accident to Balles- 
teros than that which befell him in the beginning of this 
month at Bornos (and which it was totally out of my power 

♦ This letter must hare been written whilst the enemy were manceuvring in 
view. 



248 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


to pre\ent) would bring A larger force upon General Hill, 
and coute qni coute, I should be obliged to withdraw into 
Portugal, and all the prospects of the campaign would 
vanish. 

^ I have put out of the question the accidents which may 
happen to General Hill or to mo, as what I have above 
stated is sufficient to show that Portugal, though I trust she 
will be saved, is not in that state of security in which these 
visionaries would represent her. 

‘ Then in respect to the British funded security for the 
capital of the bank, the reasoning upon that part of the 
subject is as fallacious as that upon other points. We are 
to collect in England the Portuguese duties upon wines 
exported from Portugal to England. The first question 
upon which I am not informed is, whether the existence of 
these duties is conformable to the treaty ? The rest is 
referable to that part of the subject already discussed. Will 
Great Britain guarantee to the bank subscribers their 
capital whether Portugal is lost or saved ? If that country 
should be lost, I believe it will be found that the new pos- 
sessors will understand the mode of levying a duty upon the 
export of wine as well as the old; and will the British Go- 
vernment make the people of Great Britain pay, in the price 
of their port wine, the t\vo duties, viz., the existing one for 
the benefit of the capitalists of the bank, and the new one 
for the benefit of the usurping Government? 

" However, I acknowledge that if all these difficulties 
could be overcome, the plan for establishing a bank, even 
with the views detailed in the project, would not be the 
most beneficial mode in which Great Britain could employ 
her credit for the advantage of Portugal. 

^ All the other plans considered in the papers which you 
enclosed, are mere spendthrift schemes for borrowing money 
on English security, to make up the deficit of the revenues 
of this country to defray the expenses of the war ; which 
schemes, even if the King’s Government could be brought 
to listen to them, would fail, owing to the absolute impracti- 
cability of procuring specie in the Peninsula, or in England 
to send to the Peninsula, or of taking from the military 
chest, for the service of Portugal, more specie than is already 
given in subsidy. 



im. 


SAl^kUA^CA. 


249 


" I have been unifoiiny and, I beJieve** correct, in my 
opinions upon this subject When a nation is dosii'ous of 
establishing public credit, or, in other words> of inducing 
individuals to confide their property to its Government 
they must begin by acquiring a revenue equal to theii^ fixed 
expenditure; and they must manifest an inclination to be 
honest, by performing their engagements in respect to their 
debts. This is what I have invariably recommended to the 
Portuguese Government, and if they had attended to my 
recommendations, instead of flattering themselves with idle 
hopes of loans to be raised from England, the deficit in tho 
revenue for the great war expenditure of last ycar> which I 
calculate at 15 millions of cruzados, would have been covered. 
I do not ask for new taxes : on the contrary, I would repeal 
many ; but I want a real and fair collection of those which 
should be allowed to exist. This is the only measure which 
can relieve Portugal and us ; and it is that one of which we 
ought not to lose sight for one moment. 

' Honesty in the payment of debts has likewise been at- 
tended to. After a great deal of trouble and discussion I, 
at last, forced tho Portuguese Government to pay the in- 
terest on the paper money in circulation, and on the apoliccs 
grandes, by giving notice that I would order the Commis- 
sary General to take no more in payment of his bills on the 
Treasury, if the measure was not adopted. In the mean 
lime the Government jobbed the question of the interest on 
the apoliccs. 

‘ There is no doubt but that the payment of the interest 
has had a most material effect in restoring the credit of the 
paper money securities, notwithstanding that their nominal 
value in the market has not been materially altered. But 
let it be recollected that when this measure was adopted we 
had in the chest nearly £500,000 in paper money, which 
had accumulated there, and of which we could not dispose ; 
and that we have never more now than the sum received in 
the month for bills, and that we experience no difficulty in 
disposing of the paper money to make our payments, par- 
ticularly in the capital and large towns ; and it will be seen 
that the measure has had a very important effect. 

' I beg to refer to the calculations in England, regarding 
the value of bank notes in reference to gold and silver, and 



250 


SPAIN- 


1812 . 


to comparo the result with the existing paper money in 
Portugal^ which, till the interest was paid, depended for its 
existence solely upon its being taken by the Commissary 
General in payment for bills upon the Treasury ; and I be- 
lieve it will be found that the difference in current value, in 
reference to gold and silver, is but trifling, while the Eng- 
lish bank note, as security, is infinitely superior to the 
Portuguese paper money. 

' I believe 1 have now considered all ’s financial 

schemes for Portugal, excepting the commissariat notes, and 
the recoinage of silver from dollars to cruzados. 

^ Your reasoning upon the commissariat notes is undeni- 
able. The bills drawn upon the Commissary General by 
his deputies, in payment of supplies, and by him on his 
deputies at Lisbon, are not very good paper ; and I believe 
that a great deal of money is made by the traffic in them by 
the sharks residing in Lisbon, and other large towns, prin- 
cipally Englishmen, at the expense of the people who 
furnish supplies, and not improbably at the expense of the 
public. I have endeavored to prevent these gains, though 
I fear with but little success; but we may depend upon it 
that the commissariat notes would be as low in value com- 
paratively with money as the commissariat bills, and it would 
be totally out of my power to apply a remedy. 

‘ The other scheme of is, in my opinion, very ob- 

jectionable. A new cruzade, cruzado novo, as it is called, is 
current for 8 per cent, more than the value of the silver it 
contains in reference to dollars, and we should gain 8 per 
cent, by this recoinage. The new cruzade being current at 
Lisbon principally, it is possible that we should gain this 8 
per cent, on all our payments there; but even this is not 
certain, as we may depend upon it that foreigners, Ameri- 
cans particularly, and our own merchants, from whom we 
should purchase any thing, would add the 8 per cent., which 
they would lose on the coin in which we should pay them, 
on the price of the article which we should purchase from 
them. But this is not all. The operations in the expendi- 
ture of the British army are not confined to Lisbon, nor 
even to Portugal. How would the cruzades pass in Spain ? 
Not at all. And we should thus suffer the gi*eatest incon- 
venience from a scheme, at best, not very worthy of the 
British Government. 



1812. 


SALAMANCA. 


251 


Upon the whole I am convinced that the only measure 
to be adopted to relieve the Portuguese from their financial 
difficulties, is never to cease urging them to discontinue all 
their useless expenses and establishments, and to set to 
work in earnest to reform the gross abuses which exist in 
the collection of their revenue. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

^ His Excellency ‘ Welungton. 

Sir Charles Stuart, K.B.' 


; To the Earl of Liverpool, 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Salamanca, 25th June, 1812. 

" Marshal Marmont collected his army on the Duero be- 
tween the iOtli and 19th instant, with the exception of 
General lionet’s division, which I believe is still in the 
Asturias, and some small garrisons, and he moved forward 
from Fuente el Sauco on the ’JOth. I formed the allied army, 
with the exception of the troops engaged in the operations 
against the forts at Salamanca, on the heights extending 
from the neighbourhood of Villares to Morisco ; and the 
advanced posts of the cavalry and infantry retired upon the 
army in good order, and without material loss. The enemy 
remained in our front on that niglit, and during the 21st; 
and during that night they established a post on our right 
flank, the possession of which by them, deprived us of an 
advantage which might eventually be of importance; I 
therefore requested Lieut. General Sir Thomas Graham 
to attack them in that post on the 22nd with the troops on 
the right, which he did with those of the 7th division, which 
were the reserve of the right, under the command of Major 
General Hope and Major General de Bernewitz. The 
enemy were driven from the ground immediately, with some 
loss. Our troops conducted themselves remarkably well in 
this affair, which took place in the view of every man of 
both armies. The enemy retired during that night ; and on 
the following evening, they posted themselves with their 
right on the heights near Cabeza Velloza, and their left on 
the Tormes, at Huerta ; their centre at Aldea Rubia. 

‘ The object of the enemy in this movement being to en- 
deavor to communicate with the garrisons in the posts of 



252 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


Salamasica, by the left of the Tonnes, I changed the front 
of the army, and placed the right at Marta, where there 
is a ford over the Tormes ; and the advanced posts at Aldea 
Lengua; and I extended the troops so as to cover Sala- 
manca completely, while I had it in my power to concen- 
trate the army at any point at a short notice. 

^ I sent Major General Bock s brigade of heavy dragoons 
across the Tormes, in order to observe the passages of that 
river. The enemy crossed the Tormes at Huerta, about 
two o’clock on the morning of the 24th, in considerable 
numbers of cavalry, infantry, and artillery ; and there was 
every appearance of a general movement in that direction. 
The conduct of Major General Bock’s dragoons was con- 
spicuously good upon this occasion. They did every thing 
in their power to make known the enemy’s movement ; and 
opposed their advance vigorously under many disadvan- 
tages, in order to afford time for the dispositions necessary 
to be made upon this occasion. As soon as I was certain 
that the enemy had crossed the Tormes, I requested Lieut. 
General Sir Thomas Graham to cross that river with the 1st 
and 7th divisions, and I sent over Major General Le Mar- 
chant’s brigade of cavalry ; and I concentrated the remain- 
der of the army between Morisco and Cabrerizos, keeping 
the advanced posts still at Aldea Lengua. At about noon> 
the enemy advanced as far as Calvarrasa de Abaxo; but 
observing the disposition made for their reception, they re- 
tired again in the afternoon across the Tormes to Huerta ; 
and they have since remained in the position which they 
occupied on the 23rd. 

" Between the 20th and 22nd, I had a favorable opportu- 
nity of attacking the enemy, of which, however, I did not 
think it proper to avail myself, for the following reasons. 
First ; it was probable he had advanced with an intention 
to attack us, and in the position which we occupied, I con- 
sidered it advantageous to be attacked; and that the action 
would be attended by less loss on our side. 

^ Secondly ; the operations against the forts of Salamanca 
took up the attention of some of our troops ; and although 
1 believe the superiority of numbers in the field was on our 
side, the superiority was not so great as to render an action 
decisive of the result of the campaign, in which we should 
sustain great loss. 



1812 . 


SALAMANCA. 


253 


Thirdly ; in case of failure, the passage of the Tormes 
would have been difficult, the enemy continuing in the 
possession of the forts, and commanding the bridge of Sala- 
manca. 

* The siege of the forts of Salamanca has not advanced 
with the rapidity which I expected when I addressed your 
Lordship last. Although, from the pains taken, and the 
expense incurred in their construction, and the accounts 
which I had received of them, I was prepared to meet with 
some difficulties, and provided an equipment accordingly ; 
the difficulties are of a more formidable nature than they 
were represented ; and the forts, three in number, each 
defending the other, are very strong, althougli not of a re- 
gular construction, and the equipment which 1 had pro- 
vided for their attack was not sufficient ; and I have been 
obliged to send for more, which has created some delay in 
the operations. 

^ We have breaches open in tlie Convent of San Vicente, 
which is the principal convent ; but these cannot be at- 
tacked in security till we shall have possession of Fort Los 
Cayetanos. Major General Clinton made an attcmj)t to 
carry that work by storm on the night of the 23rd inst., the 
gorge having been considerably damaged by the fire of our 
artillery. This attempt unfortunately failed ; and I am 
concerned to add, that Major General Bowes was killed. 
He was so eager for the success of the enterprise, that ho 
had gone forward with the storming party, which consisted 
of a part of his brigade, and was wounded ; and after his 
first wound w^as dressed, he returned again to the attack, 
and received a second wound, which killed him. Our loss 
in officers and men was likewise considerable. 

' I expect that every thing that is necessary to get the 
better of these forts will arrive to-morrow, and that I shall 
soon have the happiness of reporting that they are in our 
possession. 

‘ VVe have discovered the cipher in which King Joseph 
wrote his orders to General Drouet in regard to his opera- 
tions against Lieut. General Sir R. Hill, which were to move 
upon the allied troops in Estremadura. Your Lordship will 
observe from my dispatch of the 10th instant, that I had 
left Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill in strength, and I 



254 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


have desired him to collect his troops in the position of Al- 
buera, which is the best in the country ; and to act according 
to circumstances, and to the movements, of the enemy. By 
a letter from Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill of the 22nd, 
I learn that General Drouet had been considerably rein- 
forced from Andalusia since the defeat of General Balles- 
teros at Bornos, in the beginning of the month, and had 
advanced as far as Almendralejo and Villa Franca ; and 
Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill had concentrated his troops 
at Albuera. He had not decided whether he should attack 
Drouet or not, and he delayed the decision only because he 
was not quite certain of his strength. 

" General Ballesteros had sustained a severe loss in his 
action at Bornos on the 1st of June; and I understand that 
he retired to the neighbourhood of Gibraltar. 

" In the north, General Santocildes, under the direction 
of General Castahos, has invested Astorgawith the Galician 
army, and is about to attack that place ; in which operation 
I imagine that he cannot be interrupted, as the whole of the 
enemy’s army, excepting General Bonet’s division in As- 
turias, is employed against that under my command. 

' The guerrillas are in unmolested possession of all parts 
of the country ; and the enemy’s weak and scattered garri- 
sons are cut off from all communication with each other, or 
with the country. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl qf Liverpool. 'Wellington. 

' P.S. I enclose returns of the killed, wounded and miss- 
ing, from the 17th to the 24th June inclusive.’ {Included in 
the general return at p. 264.) 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

' My dear Lord, ‘ Salamanca, 25th June, 1812. 

' I enclose several letters in a cipher which we cannot 
discover, and it is very important that an endeavor should 
be made to discover it in London. It is the same cipher as 
is used by the Emperor’s Ministers, and the discovery of 
the key, therefore, may be important for other objects as 
well as for our operations. 

' Matters have not gone on as I could wish at Salamanca ; 



1812. 


CABRERIKOS. 


255 


but the truth is that my attention has been so much and so 
constantly taken up with Marmont’s movements and my 
own, that I have not been able to attend to the operations 
of the siege as I ought. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl qf Uverpod, ‘ W K hU NGTON. 

' I enclose the last morning state.’ 

To Major General H. Clinton. 

‘ My dear General, ‘Cabrenzos, 26th June, 1812. 2 p.m. 

" I enclose a letter which I received from Lieut. Colonel 
May on my return here. 

‘ I conclude that you have stopped the firing for this day, 
and I recommend the following preparatory measures to be 
adopted for an attack to-morrow. 

/ First. The batteries to be all repaired, 

‘ Secondly. The approach to be continued as far on as 
may be possible. 

‘ Thirdly. The new approach to be made from which 
Colonel Burgoyne proposed to mine Los Cayetanos. 

' Fourthly. Two 24 pound carronades to be in readiness 
in No. 2, to fire red-hot shot upon those parts of the con- 
vent already breached, the roofs, &c. I am not certain 
that it would not be most convenient to make the attack 
by daylight, and the shot would be ready to be fired so that 
the building may be on fire when the attack is made on 
Los Cayetanos. 

^ Fifthly. Two 24 pound howitzers, with Shrapnell’s or 
common shells, to be placed in the new redoubt, to fire along 
that part of the exterior work from which the enemy can 
annoy the assailants of Los Cayetanos. 

^ Sixthly. I wish that this evening or to-morrow morning, 
you would ride to the left of the Tonnes, and look at the 
ground on which the Ice House stands. I think that guns 
placed at a low stone wall on the top of that hill would see 
the reverse of some of the works from which the enemy could 
annoy the assailants of Los Cayetanos ; and if this be true, 
send over to that point two guns and one howitzer, or three 
guns of the brigade attached to the 6th division, in order to 
perform this service during the attack. They must be con- 





25^ ' 1S12. 

ce^ied till the attack ^ (^on^ttiemiG^ Take dne of the 


artillery officers with you. 

■ ^ Seventhly; JLet some of the’ ladders be carried forward 
into the trenches before daylight in the morning. 

^ Eighthly. Let the ground be well examined on which 
parties may be jposted to keep up a warm fire of musketry 
on the jjarapets of Los Cayetanos, and on the works of San 
Vicente by which Los Cayetanos is defended, during tlie 
time the attack is going on, and let a calculation be made 
of the number of men each of them will contain. 

^ I shall be with you to-morrow if I can. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ ^^ajo7' General H. Clinton,^ ^ Wkllington. 


To the Right Hon, Sir Henry JVellesley, K,B. 

^ My dear Henry, ‘ Salamanca, 26th June, 1812. 

' I enclose my last dispatches. The armies are about five 
miles distant from each other. Marmont will not attack us, 
and 1 doubt whetlier I can attack him, even when I shall 
have taken the Salamanca forts. At all events, not before 
we shall have succeeded in that enterprise. 

^ In answer to your letter of the 9th and 1 0th, I have to 
tell you, that I do not yet know that I shall have demands 
upon me for more than Don Carlos’ troops, although I think 
it probable I shall for the troops in Galicia, from Castahos 
and from Monsalud, for the troops in Estremadura. You 
had better, therefore, keep the sum you propose, £370,000, 
disposable. 

‘ I can give caps and shoes to Doyle’s regiment, but I 
have not great coats, knapsacks, or canteens, I shall desire 
Monsalud to supply them with caps and shoes from those I 
send to him. 

" Ever yours most affectionately, 

* The Right Hon, ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K,B: 

To Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K,B, 

‘ Mvi DEAR Hill^ * Salamanca, 28 th June, 1812 . 

We took the forte of this plafcic yesterday, two of thchi 
by storm, and the third by capitulation. It i was * stormed* 



1812. 


FUENTE^lI^A PKNA. 


257 


however, at the very momeat it oapitulatedt Marmont has 
retired, and we march forward to-morrow. 

^ If you should find that Drouet separates his troops, or if 
he pretends to hold you in check with a smaller body of men 
than you think you can get the better of, fall upon him, but 
take care in doing so to keep a very large proportion of your 
troops in reserve. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ LieuL General ‘Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

‘ P.S. Since writing this letter, I have received yours of 
the 25th. Fall upon the enemy if you can with advantage. 
I should prefer a partial affair to a general one ; but risk a 
general affair, keeping always a very large body in reserve, 
particularly of cavalry, rather than allow Drouct to remain 
in possession of Estremadura, and to keep you in check. 

‘ Be assured of the correctness of the return of the 1st 
April, allowing always for the battalions known to be taken 
or absent.’ * 


To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham, K,B, 

* Fuente la Pena, 30th June, 1812. 

‘ My dear Sir, Half past 7 p.m. 

^ From all that I can learn, the greatest part of the 
enemy’s army are at Alaejos and La Nava. One division 
has certainly gone to Toro, I believe the first ; and I have 
a report that they marched last night at 12 against Silveira. 
We warned him, however, of their movement towards the 
Duero three days ago, and I hope he will be safe. 

‘ I propose to move to-morrow upon Alaejos. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir T, Graham, K.B," 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

^ My dear Sir, * Fuente la Pena, 30th June, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 25th. I see no reason 
to alter the opinion which I formed, that it is desirable to 
Portugal that the Prince Regent should return to Ms Euro- 
pean dominions, even to Lisbon. 

VOL. IX, 


s 



258 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


" I do not sec what assistance it is proposed by Mr. Van- 
sittart's memorandum to give. This appears to me to con- 
tain only another proposal for a bank, and new plans for 
paying or rather securing old debts; but none to relieve 
present difficulties. 

' I shall object to every plan which is to fall upon the 
military chest of this army. Wc are not able to answer the 
demands upon us. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His KxceJhncy ‘ Wei.lington. 

Charles Stuart. 

' P.S, I do not know where the writer of Lord Castlereagh’s 
memorandum found that I had increased the embodied mi- 
litia from 1 5,000 to 40,000 for the defence of the frontiers. 
I recollect desiring that the militia of Silveira, which were 
embodied; of Trant, which, I believe, were not; and of 
Wilson, part of wliicli were embodied, might be embodied 
and moved into Beira, in case the enemy crossed the Agueda 
in March, vdien I went to the siege of Badajoz. I never 
heard it pretended that this militia were 12,000, but the 
Secretary of State has them as 25,000 ! I su])pose in tlie 
same manner as Senhor de Souza lias the army as 90,000. 
'Oo serve this country and (ircat Britain really becomes too 
heavy a task.’ 


To Colouel Torrens. 

* My DKAU ToRHKNS, * Fuente ta Pena, 3fltli June, 1812, 

" I have received your letter of the lOtli May, regarding 
Major Macleod. lie is a very tine young man, for whom 
1 entertain a very great respect and regard, and he con- 
ducted himself remarkably well in the siege of Badajoz, and 
was very useful in the preparations for that operation ; and 
1 think it not improbable that if he liad not been wounded 
early in the siege, 1 should have had an opportunity of men- 
tioning him in such a manner as that His lioyal Highness 
would have thought proper to promote him, as well as others 
wlio were promoted on the same occasion. 

‘ The question is, whether I ought now to recommend him 
for promotion, and I will acknowledge that I feel a great 
bias in his favor, not only on his own account, but on account 



1812. 


FUENTR LA PENA. 


259 


of his brother. But I do not think I ought to do so. Major 
Maclcod is junior to many, even in his own corps, who have 
not been promoted, whose merit is distinguished, and who 
would complain, with reason, of injustice and partiality, if 
he were preferred to them upon the occasion of the siege of 
Badajoz at this late date. 

" I hope that he will soon recover and return to us ; and 
you may depend upon it that there is no person more anx- 
ious for an opportunity of recommending his advancement 
than I am. 

Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colonel Torrens: ' Wellington. 


To the Earl of Livei'pooL 

^ My Lord, * Fuentela Pena, 30th June, 1812. 

‘ The ammunition to enable us to carry on the attack of 
the forts having arrived at Salamanca in the afternoon of 
the 26th, the lire was immediately recommenced upon the 
gorge of tlie redoubt of Los Cayetanos, in which a prac- 
ticable breach was effected at about ten o’clock in the morn- 
ing of the 27th; and we had succeeded nearly about the 
same time in setting fire to the buildings in the large fort 
of San Vicente, by tlie fire from which the approach to Los 
Cayetanos by its gorge was defended. 

" Being in Salamanca at this moment, I gave directions 
that the forts of Los Cayetanos and La Merced should be 
stormed ; but some little delay occurred in consequence of 
the commanding officer of these forts in the first instance, 
and afterwards the commanding officer of San Vicente, hav- 
ing expressed a desire to capitulate after the lapse of a 
certain number of hours. 

‘ As it was obvious that these propositions were made in 
order to gain time till the fire in San Vicente should be 
extinguished, I refused to listen to any terms, unless the 
forts should be instantly surrendered; and having found 
that the commanding officer of Los Cayetanos, who was the 
first to offer to surrender, was entirely dependent upon the 
Governor of San Vicente, and could not venture to carry 
into execution the capitulation wdiich he had offered to make, 
I gave directions that his fort and that of La Merced might 
be stormed forthwith. 

s 2 



260 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


* These operations were effected in the most gallant man- 
ner by a detachment of the 6th division, under the command 
of Lieut. Colonel Davis of the 36th regiment, under the 
direction of Major General Clinton. 

* The troops entered the fort of Los Cayetanos by the 
gorge, and escaladed that of La Merced ; and I am happy 
to add that our loss was but trifling. 

‘ The Governor of San Vicente then sent out a flag of 
truce to ratify the surrender of that fort on the terms I had 
offered him, viz., the garrison to march out with the honors 
of war; to be prisoners of war, and the officers to retain 
their personal military baggage ; and the soldiers their 
knapsacks : and notwithstanding that tlie 9th regiment of 
eaqadorcs had actually stormed one of the outworks of San 
Vicente, and were in possession of it, I deemed it expedient 
to accept the fort by capitulation on those terms, and to stop 
the attack. 1 have already informed your Lordship that 
Major General Clinton commanded the attack against these 
forts, which was carried on with great vigor and ability ; and 
he mentions in strong terms of conmendation the conduct 
of tlic General officers, officers, and troops employed under 
his command ; particularly Colonel Hindc of the 32nd regi- 
ment, Lieut. Colonel Davis of the 3Gth regiment. Captain 
Owen of the 61st rcg'iment. Brigade Major Hobart, and 
Ensign Newton of the 32nd regiment, who distinguished 
lumself in the attack of the night of the 23rd instant, and 
volunteered to lead the advanced party in the attack of the 
27th. 

‘ He likewise mentions in strong terms Lieut. Colonel 
May, who commanded the artillery under the direction of 
Colonel Framingham, and the officers and soldiers of the 
Royal Portuguese Artillery under his command, and Lieut. 
Colonel Burgoync, Lieut. Reid and the officers of the En- 
gineers, and Major Thompson of the 74th regiment, who 
acted as an engineer during these operations. 

* The enemy had been employed for nearly three years in 
constructing these works, but with increased activity for the 
last eight or nine months. A large expense had been in- 
curred; and these works, sufficiently garrisoned by about 
800 men> and armed with 30 pieces of artillery, were of a 
nature to render it quite impossible to take them, excepting 



1812. 


FUENTE LA PKNA. 


261 


by a regular attack ; and it is obvious that the enemy relied 
upon their strength, and upon their being sufficiently gar- 
risoned and armed ; as they had left in San Vicente largo 
depots of clothing, and military stores of every description. 

‘ I was mistaken in my estimate of the extent of the means 
which would be necessary to subdue these forts ; and I was 
obliged to send to the rear for a fresh supply of ammunition. 
This necessity occasioned a delay of six days. 

‘ The enemy withdrew their garrison from Alba dc Tonnes 
as soon as they heard of the fall of the forts of Salamanca ; 
and I have ordered that the works at both places may bo 
destroyed. 

' The operations against the forts of Salamanca were car- 
ried on in sight of Marshal Marmont’s army, which remained 
in its position with the right at Cabeza Vellosa, and the left 
at Huerta, till the night of the 27th instant, when they broke 
up, and retired in three columns towards the river Huero ; 
one of them directing its march upon Toro, and the others 
upon Tordesillas. 

‘ The allied army broke up the following day, and arc this 
day encamped upon the Guarefia. 

‘ We have various reports of reinforcements on their marcli 
to join the enemy, but none on which 1 can rely. I know 
from intercepted letters, that Marshal Marinont expects to 
be joined by a division of the army of the North, reported 
to have been at Burgos on the 24th ; and it is reported that 
General Bonct had withdrawn from the Asturias by San 
Andres, and was on his march likewise for the same pur- 
pose. It is also reported that General Bonet liad received 
a check in the Asturias, and had sustained the loss of a 
considerable number of men. If this last report be true, it 
will account for his withdrawing from the Asturias ; in which 
province I have reason to believe, from the intercepted 
letters, that he had been ordered to maintain himself ; and 
that these orders had proceeded from Paris. 

" By accounts from Estremadura of the 2Gth instant, it 
appears that the enemy still continued in the position which 
they had occupied in Estremadura ; and Lieut. General Sir 
Rowland Hill was in front of Albuera. It is obvious that 
they do not intend to attack him, and I have recommended 
to him to attack them, if he should deem his force suffix- 



262 


SPAIN. 


1812 , 


cicntly strong, and of a sufficiently good description to give 
a fair chance of success, rather than allow them to keep him 
in check, and to remain in possession of a large part of the 
province of Estremadura. 

‘ I have not yet heard that General Santocildes has com- 
menced his attack upon Astorga. General Cabrera is at 
Jlenaventc witli his division ; and I understand there arc 
Spanisli troops in Leon. 

‘ The Conde de Amarante has his infantry at Carvajales, 
and Brig. General D’ Urban had crossed the Duero below 
Zamora, in order to aid in intercepting the enemy’s com- 
munication with Toro, before he heard of the fall of Sala- 
manca. I have now desired him, however, to return across 
the Duero. 

" I have received no late intelligence from the south. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool.'* ^ Wellington. 

" I enclose a return of the killed, wounded, and missing 
of the army since my last dispatch. 


Return of the Killed, JVounded, and Missing of the Arnvj under the command of 
General the Karl of IVellington, K.B.y in the sie^je of the Forts of San Vicente, 
Los Cayetanos, and La Merced, and in the position on the heights of I hi I ares, from 
the 16/A to the Tlth June, 1812, inclusive. 



Officers. 

Serjeants. 

Rank and File. | 

Horses. 

Total loss of Officers, 
Non-Commissioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed . . . 

6 

5 

104 

28 

115 

Woimded 

28 

44 

310 

— 

412 

Missing . 



11 

5 

13 


To the Earl of Liverpool. 

' My Lord, ‘Fuente la Pena, 30th June, 1812. 

' I omitted to report to your Lordship in my last dispatch 
the particulars of a very gallant affair of the cavalry in Es- 








1812. 


FUENTE LA PKNA. 


263 


trpmadurai under the command of Lieut. Strenuwitz, the 
aide de camp of Lieut. General Sir William Erskine. Lieut. 
General Sir Rowland Hill having learnt that the enemy had 
left at Maguilla a great proportion of the soldiers who had 
been taken prisoners in Major General Slade's affair of the 
11th instant, sent Lieut. Strenuwitz on the 13th with a de- 
tachment consisting of 50 men of the 3rd dragoon guards 
and Royal dragoons under the command of Lieut. Bridges 
of the Royal dragoons, to bring them in : on his arrival 
there, he found a detachment of French dragoons, consisting 
of 80 men, whom he attacked with such conduct and effect, 
as to kill many, and to take prisoners one officer, 20 men, 
and 25 horses, with the loss of one man of his detachment 
killed. 

" I have frequently had occasion to draw your Lordship’s 
attention to the conduct of Lieut. Strenuwitz, and I am 
happy to have this fresh opportunity of doing so. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Earl of LiverpooL' ^ W Ellington. 


To the Earl of Liverpool, 

^ My Lord, ‘ Fuentc la Pena, 30th June, 1812. 

‘ I have had the honor of receiving your Lordship’s letter 
of the 4th of June, in regard to the proposed alteration of 
the certificates intended to be granted for money expected 
to be borrowed in this country. 

' I beg leave to remind your Lordship that it is intended 
to note the payment of each half year's interest at the back 
of the certificate, so that it would not be possible for the 
holder to receive his interest both at head quarters and at 
Lisbon. 

‘ In regard to the other objection to the proposed altera- 
tion, viz., that it would be necessary to be prepared with 
money to pay the interest both at head quarters and at Lis- 
bon, I have to observe that there would be no difficulty in 
settling with each holder of a certificate at what place the 
interest should be paid, even though tlie certificate should 
be drawn as I had proposed it should be altered. 

' It is desirable that there should be a place fixed at 
which the interest should be paid besides the head quarters 



264 


SPAIN* 


1812. 


of the army, in case the army should be withdrawn from tho 
Peninsula. 

‘ It is not probable that either the Treasury or the mili- 
tary chest of the army would be called on to pay, within tea 
days, the whole amount of the sum of o£’500,()00 sterling, to 
which the grant of these certificates is limited. 

* I am quite convinced that I shall never be able to im- 
press on the minds of the people of this country, from whom 
I expected to derive some resources by the grant of these 
certificates, that they have any security for their money, if it 
is to be 0 }>tional with the British authorities whether they 
are to be paid in the Peninsula or in England by bills, 
valuing the dollar at five shillings. 

' None of these people can know the value of five shillings 
relatively with a dollar, or any other coin with which they 
are acquainted, and they will certainly lend nothing upon 
such a security. I do not propose, therefore, to make any 
use of these certificates. 

* At the same time I beg leave to point out to your Lord- 
ship how impossible it is to expect tliat this or any other 
army can carry on operations in Spain so ill supplied, as 
this is, witli money. We can get nothing from the country 
witliout ])aynient in ready money, am? every day’s march 
increases our distance from our magazines and the difficulty 
of communicating with them. The troops arc four months 
in arrears of pay ; the Staff of the army six months ; and the 
muleteers nearly twelve months ; and wc are in debt for 
every article of supply, of every description. 

‘ 1 beg your Lordship to advert to the impossibility of 
remaining any length of time in the forward position which 
our successes have enabled us to assume, and to reflect upon 
the consequences which, under these circumstances, would 
result from any misfortune. 

‘ 1 liavc the honor to be, &c. 

* The Earl of Liverpool: ‘ Wellington. 

To Admiral Sir Edtcard Pelleu\ Bart, 

^ Sir, ‘ Alaqjos, 1st July, 1812. 

" I have had the honor of receiving your Excellency’s 
letter of the 13th of May, and I have received one of the 
20th of that month from Lieut. General Lord William 



1812 . 


A LAE JOS. 


265 


Bentinck, from Ivhich I leant that his Lordship was about 
to detach to Mahon a force under the command of Lieut. 
Greneral Maitland, which, howmer, was not of' the strOOgth 
which his Lordship had at first expected he should bo’ ablO 
to detach. 

‘It is probable that this force will be by this time at 
Mahon, and that it will have been met at that post by the 
equipments and stores which I had sent from this country 
to Gibraltar, with a request to the Governor to have thont 
repaired and put in order there (of which there is a general 
enumeration in the margin); and by four companies of 
British and Portuguese artillery, engineer officers, artificers, 
&c., who have likewise sailed to Gibraltar from Lisbon. 

‘ I trust also that the transports for the conveyance of the 
Spanish troops to their destination will have arrived at Ali- 
cante and in Majorca, and that Lieut. General Maitland 
will find every thing prepared to enable him to commence 
his operations. 

‘ In regard to the plan of those operations, I still entertain 
the opinion which 1 did at first, viz., that the force is not 
sufficient to attack Barcelona; and that its first object should 
be to obtain possession of Tarragona, in order to secure tho 
])osscssion of a secure point of communication between the 
llcets under the command of your Excellency and the army 
in Catalonia, It is my opinion that that is all which our 
troops will he able to effect in Catalonia, and the rest of tho 
plan of the Baron d’Eroles, or of any other plan of internal 
warfare in that country, ought to be left to General Lacy 
and the troops under his command. 

‘ But I think, that as soon as Tarragona shall be in our 
possession, and such temporary repairs shall have been given 
to the works as will secure them from a covp de main, and 
measures adopted for those repairs being effectually carried 
into execution, that part of the force, consisting of the troops 
from Sicily, Portugal, Majorca, and Alicante, ought to be 
rcimbarked, and proceed to make an attack upon the city of 
Valencia. 

‘ Your Excellency will observe that I was always of 
opinion that this w as the next object to the establishment of 
the communication by Tarragona, and circumstances have 
come to my knowledge lately which prove in the clearest 



266 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


manner that no blow could be so fatal to the interests of 
the French, or of King Joseph, as to deprive them of this 
city, and to renew the war in the kingdom of Valencia; and 
that no diversion, whether in Catalonia, Aragon, or else- 
where, will have the effect of inducing the enemy to relin- 
quish, or will deprive them of their possession of that king- 
dom and its resources. It must be done, therefore, by a 
direct attack ; and if the attack should first be made upon 
Tarragona, and the secret of the future plan of the opera- 
tions of the allied forces is well kept, I entertain no doubt 
of success 

' It would doubtless be a great object that Valencia 
should afterwards be kept, and that the allied force, under 
Lieut. General Maitland, should be the foundation of our 
system for maintaining the war in the kingdom of Valencia 
and the eastern coast of tlie Peninsula, upon which points 
I shall cornniunicate to your Excellency and General Mait- 
land my opinion hereafter, if 1 should hnd that the plan 
which I have above proposed is adopted, and if it should be 
decided that the force under Lieut. General Maitland is to 
remain in the Peninsula during the winter. 

‘ After 1 wrote to your Excellency on the 16th of April, 
I crossed the Tagus with the army, in order to relieve 
Ciudad llodrigo, which was effected by the enemy retiring 
across the Agueda in front of our army on the 24th of that 
month. It was necessary then to provide for the sub- 
sistence of the garrison of that place for some time in 
advance, and by the time that object was effected, the 
season was so far advanced, that it was too late for our 
operations in the southern parts of the Peninsula. 

" I therefore determined to direct them to this quarter ; 
and in the mean time Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill 
struck a very brilliant and important blow on the enemy’s 
bridge and establishments on the Tagus, at Almaraz, 
whereby the direct communication between their northern 
and southern armies was cut off. 

‘ We crossed the Agueda on the 13th of June, near 
Ciudad Rodrigo, and invested the forts which the enemy had 
constructed at Salamanca, on the 17th; and we took two of 
them by assault, and one by capitulation, on the 27th, in 
the presence of the enemy’s whole army. 



1812. 


VILLA VERDE. 


267 


‘ They retired on the following day towards the Duoro, 
and we have followed them to this point. We hear of their 
expecting reinforcements, but I have no accounts of any on 
which I can rely ; and, upon the whole, it appears to me 
that they are as determined as I am not to fight an action in 
a disadvantageous situation. 

' From this outline of the state of affairs on this side of 
the Peninsula your Excellency will sec what an important 
part the forces on the eastern side of the Peninsula have to 
perform. 

" I request your Excellency to communicate this letter to 
Lieut. General Maitland, who, I conclude, will be near you 
when you will receive it. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

^Admiral ^WELLINGTON. 

^ir E. Pelhucy Bart,' 

To Lieut, General Sir T, Graham ^ K.B. 

* Villa Verde, 3rd July, 1812. 

^ My DEAR Sir, Half past 5 p.m. 

" I returned here about an hour ago, and received your 
letter of this day. I have for some time past been appre- 
hensive that you would be under the necessity of confining 
yourself, in order to apply tlie remedies wliich may be neces- 
sary for your eye; but 1 cannot avoid feeling the utmost 
concern that this necessity should have become urgent at 
the present moment, and that I should now be deprived of 
your valuable assistance. I must, however, make up my 
mind to this loss ; as, from what I liavc heard, 1 am appre- 
hensive that no time is to be lost in applying the remedies 
to your eye, which arc most likely to recover it. 

‘ I made our light infantry (the 60th) pass the Duero this 
day under the fire of our cannon, and I left them on the 
right of the river this afternoon, notwithstanding the enemy’s 
lire. We had nobody hurt. The enemy, about ciglit bat- 
talions, took post on a height about a mile or more from the 
river, there being a plain between them and the river. 1 
think we could have dislodged them ; but it would have 
answered no purpose. The enemy are too near for us to 
keep the post, unless we should pass over the whole army ; 
which it would not be desirable to do, till we shall have 
found at least one more passage for infantry. I have heard 



268 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


of another at Castro Nuno, which I have sent officers to 
look at. 

* I rather think, from the reports of this morning from the 
outposts, that Marmont is about to move to his left. But it 
is impossible to say, as he changes his determination every 
hour. The infantry certainly moved in that direction this 
morning ; but Stanhope * tells me, that upon the firing 
being heard, some were sent towards Polios, who after- 
wards returned. 

‘ It appears certain that Marmont will not risk an action 
unless he should have an advantage ; and I shall certainly 
not risk one unless I should have an advantage ; and mat- 
ters therefore do not appear likely to be brought to that 
criterion very soon. I am anxious to find passages of the 
Duero, in order to be able to take advantage of his detaching 
troops to look for provisions, &c. ; and I wish to get him to 
abandon Tordesillas, or to destroy the bridge at that place. 
The possession of that place and its bridge give him great 
advantages. It is as near Salamanca almost as Toro, and 
nearer than Zamora ; and we cannot move to the right or 
left without exposing our communications, so long as lie has 
that bridge. 1 hope, however, to induce him to abandon it. 

‘ 1 am afraid that the 1st, 7tli, and 4th divisions arc 
encamped in an unwholesome situation, and I have desired 
l)e Lancey to write to have the two former at least encamped 
at Medina del Cainpo, getting their water from the wells 
of the town ; and the latter I proposed to bring towards the 
centre at Foncastin. We wait for the report on the lower 
part of the Zapardiel, before the distribution is made. 

^ I propose to go to llueda in the morning, to look more 
accurately at the ground in front of the bridge than I could 
yesterday ; and 1 propose to establish head cjuarters there 
in order to be more in the way. I will call upon you in my 
way. 

* I have no news whatever from the army of Galicia, or 
from D’Urban, since the 30th. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ Wellington. 

Sir T. Graham, K.B: 

* Captain the Hon. James Stanhope (brother of the present Earl Stanhope),' 
aide de camp to Sir Thomas Graham. 



1812. 


RDRDA. 


269 


To Lieut. General Sir T, Graham, K.B. 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Rueda, 4th July, 1812. § p.m. 

" I have not yet received such accounts of the fords as to 
enable me to arrange a plan for the attack of the enemy’s 
detachment opposite Polios. The upper fords will certainly 
not answer. 

' The enemy have shown a small detachment (150 men) at 
Valdcstillas this day, which I imagine must have come from 
some of the garrisons. Sir Stapleton tells me this evening 
that the troops which marched yesterday to Valladolid, have 
returned ; but he does not say to what place ; probably to 
Simancas. 

' I enclose a letter from Marmont to Drouet, of which I 
have the three copies. It appears that Bonct was at Aguilar 
de Campo*; which I take to be two long marches from 
Valladolid. 

‘ I have written to Admiral Martin to request him to send 
a vessel to Oporto to take you home ; and to write to you to 
Oporto under cover to Governor Trant, to let you know on 
what day the vessel will have left the Tagus. As the post is 
not yet regularly established, and has not come in lately with 
regularity, I send this letter by a messenger. 

' Wishing you a pleasant journey, and the early recovery 
of your sight, 

^ Believe me, &c. 

• Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir T. Graham, K.B.' 


To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My dear Lord, ‘ Rueda, 4th July, 1812. 

" I received this day by Colonel Gordon, your letter of 
the 16th June; and I assure you, that the arrangement by 
which you have been placed at the head of the War Depart- 
ment is perfectly satisfactory to me ; and you will find that 
I shall correspond with you with the same freedom and con- 
fidence as I have with j our predecessors. 

* There is Agiiilar de Campos, ten leagues from Valladolid, north east fiom 
Medina de Rio Seco. Aguilar de Campo on the Pisuerga, in the province of 
Palencia, where General Bonct appears to have been, is twenty-three leagues 
north from Valiadolid. 



270 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


" You will be apprized of the state of affairs here, by my 
late letters to Lord Liverpool. Our principal and great 
want is money, with which I am afraid you cannot supply 
us sufficiently. But we are really in terrible distress ; I 
am afraid, in greater distress than any British army has ever 
felt. 

‘ I hope that I am strong enough for Marmont at present, 
whatever force he may bring from the Asturias or the army 
of the North; but I am anxious to get Castahos’ Galician 
corps forward, in order to establish myself well upon the 
Duero. If we cannot effect that object, we may be obliged 
to fall back. 

" Believe me, (See. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ' W kllington. 


^ My T)1<:ar , ‘ Rueda, 7th July, 1812. 

" At a time when I have other important subjects to think 
of, it is very unpleasant to me to be obliged to write to 

you on the conduct of Captain towards Mr. **** and 

Mr of the Commissariat. 

* It appears that Mr having refused to issue rations 

twice in one day to Captain 's servants, was sent for by 

Captain ; and being then employed by Mr. ****, this 

gentleman desired that Captain might be informed he 

could not then attend him. Captain then went to 

Mr. department, and in presence of Mr. ****, put 

Mr in arrest for not attending him, notwithstanding 

that Mr. **** assured him that Mr was actually em- 

ployed by him in the public service. 

‘ The Commissariat is a public department, under the 
particular charge and direction of the Commissary General 
and his officers ; and no officer of the army, be his rank what 
it may, has a right as a matter of course to interfere in its 
duties. I do not mean to say that the General Officers and 
their Staff are not to superintend the performance of their 
duties by the officers of all the departments of the army 
attached to the particular division of troops placed under 
their command ; but the duty of a General and his Staff in 
respect to these departments is confined to superintendence ; 
he cannot give directions, because he is not responsible for 



1812. 


RUKDA. 


271 


the performance of the duty of the department ; and when 
his interference goes beyond superintendence, he is liable to 
be thrown upon his own justification. 

" Now if the conduct of Captain is tried by this plain 

and simple rule, he will be found highly deserving of blame. 

I know of no right that Captain had to order the 

attendance of Mr to give an account why rations had 

not been issued to his servants. If he has that right, every 
officer in the division has the same ; and if all are to exercise 

it, and all are to call for Mr ’s attendance when they 

please, what is to become of the issues to the division? It is 
clear that he had no such right ; and it follows of course, that 

he exceeded his authority when he placed Mr in arrest 

for not obeying this impro])er command to attend him. 

‘ But this is not all. He went to the Commissariat, and 
in presence of the Deputy Commissary General, wlio ordered 

Mr not to attend him, placed Mr in arrest. 

There is ccriainly no relation of rank between <lic officers of 
tlie Commissariat and the officers of the army ; but (putting 
out of the question tlio unmanly ])roceeding of putting in 
arrest a clerk, who it aj)peared had acted, and was acting 
under the orders of his immediate principal) it was a most 
irregular proceeding to put him in arrest in the presence of 
his principal of the rank of Deputy Commissary General, 
who very properly, in my opinion, ordered liim out of arrest. 

‘ I am very much concerned to be obliged to do any thing 

unpleasant to Captain , who is an officer for whom I 

entertain a very high respect ; but his conduct has been of 
such an improper description on this occasion, that if he does 
not make an apology for it, I must remove him from his 
situation on the staff, and send him to join his regiment. 

‘ I enclose you Mr. report on this transaction; and 

I am sorry to say that I difler with you upon it. But I must 
act upon my own views, or I cannot carry on the service; 

and I only hope that Captain will have the good sense 

to see the impropriety of his conduct, and make that atone- 
ment for it which every man who is aware that he has con- 
ducted himself improperly, ought to make. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

« ; f KLLINGTON. 



m 


SPAIN. 


I8t2. 


To his Eoccdlency Charles Stuart, 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Rueda, 7th July, 1S12. 

' I enclose a lettpr from the Commissary General in regard 
to the supplies demanded by the Portuguese Government iu 
this moil th, enclosed in your letter of the 231x1 June, from 
which you will see that all the supplies will be given, and at 
what places. 

In regard to money, I know that wc have absolutely none. 
‘ I expect some from England, of which I shall take care 
that a proportion, when it docs arrive, shall be given to the 
Portuguese Government. I have written repeatedly to 
England to make known our distresses. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ' W KLLINGTON.. 

Charles Stuart' 


To Colonel Tor reus. 

‘ My dear Torrens, ‘ Rueda, 7th July, 1812. 

‘ I observe from your letter of the 13th June to the 
Secretary of State, that His Royal Highness does not approve 
of the inode in which 1 have carried into execution the plan 
for ixiising Spanish recruits for this army. The fact is, that 
I adopted it because any other that was preferred might be 
adopted in lieu of it ; and I suspected wliat has turned out to 
be the case, that we should get but few or no recruits. We 
have not got enough in the whole army to form one company ; 
and I am sorry to add that some have deserted. 

‘ If His Royal Highness wishes the plan to be altered, and 
additional companies to be added to each regiment, it can 
be done the moment I shall receive the notification of his 
pleasure. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colonel Torrens: * Wellington. 

To Earl Bathurst. 

* My Lord, ‘ Rueda, 7th July, 1812, 

‘ I enclose the copy of a letter which I have received from 
Admiral Sir Edward Pellew, and the copy of one which I 
have written to him on the plan of operations to be adopted 
on the eastern coast of the Peninsula. 

‘I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Wellington. 


Earl Bathurst: 



1812. 


RUISDA. 


273 


Td Edfi Balhuf^ik' 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Ruedt, 7th July,' 1812. 

‘I am concerned to have' to inform you, thut Lieut. 
General Sir Thomas Graham, having for some time suffered 
from a disorder in his eyes, has at last been obliged to quit 
the army, and to return to England in order to apply the 
remedies which arc thought necessary. 

‘ I have every reason to regret the loss of the assistance of 
Lieut. General Sir Thomas Graham at this moment. 

‘ 1 have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wkllington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Rueda, 7th July, 1812. 

‘ The army broke up from the encampment on the Gua- 
rcha on the morning of the 1st instant, and the enemy having 
retired from Alaejos, encamped on the Trabancos, with the 
advanced guard at La Nava del Iley. Having heard that 
the enemy had destroyed the bridge of Tordesillas, and 
knowing, from intercepted letters, that Marshal Mariuont 
intended to take a position near this town, our advanced 
guard crossed the Zapardiel, and moved upon llueda on the 
morning of the 2nd, supported by the left of tlic army, while 
the right and centre moved towards Medina del Campo. 

‘ The enemy, however, had not destroyed the bridge over 
the Duero, as reported ; and the main body of the army had 
retired upon Tordesillas, leaving the rear guard at Rueda. 

‘ Lieut. General Sir Stapleton Cotton immediately at- 
tacked the rear guard with Major General Anson’s and 
Major General Victor Alton’s brigades of cavalry, and drove 
them in upon the main body at Tordesillas. As the right 
and centre of the army were at a considerable distance, I 
could not bring up a sufficient body of troops in time to 
attack the enemy during their passage of the Duero ; and 
they effected that operation without material loss, and took 
their position on that river with their right on the Iicights 
opposite Polios ; their centre at Tordesillas, and their left 
at Simancas on the Pisuerga. 

‘ I moved our left to Polios on the 3rd, and obtained pos- 
session of the ford over tjie Duero that place. But as the 

VOL. IX. ^ T 



274 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


ford was scarcely practicable for infantry, and the enemy’s 
corps was strongly posted with a considerable quantity of 
cannon on the heights which command the plain, on which 
the troops must have formed after crossing the ford; and as 
I could not establish the army on the right of the Duero till 
I should have adequate means of passing the river, I did 
not think it proper to push our troops further. 

" We have since been employed in endeavours to discover 
the fords of the Duero, which arc in general but imperfectly 
known ; and arc waiting till they become practicable for 
infantry. 

‘ By that time I hope that the army of Galicia, under 
General Santocildcs, will have been able to advance, the 
siege of Astorga having been brought to a conclusion. The 
fire against that place opened on the 2nd instant, but I have 
not heard with what effect; and I have recommended to 
General Santocildcs to leave a small body of troops to con- 
tinue the siege, and to move forward with the remainder. 

‘ Lieut. General the Conde de Amarante remains at Car- 
vajales, and Brigadier General D’ Urban is with his cavalry 
in rear of the enemy’s right flank at Castromonte. The 
guerrilla Marquihez is at Palencia. 

‘ General Bonct was at Aguilar de Campo in the end of 
last month, and orders have been sent to him to join the 
army. As many copies of these orders have been inter- 
cepted, it is doubtful whether he has received them; and 
I have not heard of his moving. There are no accounts of 
the movement of the troops of the army of the North. 

‘ By the last accounts from Lieut. General Sir Rowland 
Hill, of the 1st instant, he was about to move to attack 
General Drouct, whose force he considered inferior to that 
under his command. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 

To Lieut General Sir R, HilU K,B, 

' My dear Hill, ‘ Rueda, 8th July, 1812. 

" I have received your letter of the 4th. If Drouet is 
reinforced, you will of course resume the old position. If 
you should find that the enemy propose to make the siege 



1812. 


R0EDA. 


275 


of Badajoz, after they shall have got their reinforcements, 
and shall have dislodged you from Albiiera, you must pre- 
pare to take the position on the hill of Engracia, and 
keep your communication by Campo Mayor. 

" The enemy have got into a strong situation on the other 
side of the Duero, from which we cannot dislodge them till 
the river shall fall. 

" Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut, General * Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 

To Lieut, Genei'al Sir Stapleto7i Cotton, Bart. 

" My dear Cotton, ‘ Rueda, 8th July, 1812. 5 p.m. 

^ I learn from Polios that cannon and carriages, escorted 
by troops, were passing through San Roman, on the road to 
Toro, from ten to twelve last night, the numbers of cither 
cannon or troops not stated. 

^ In a report from Tordesillas, it is stated that 8000 men 
had marched in that direction last night ; but this is stated 
only as a report. 

‘ It is necessary to have a good look out kept this night 
upon the Adaja. 

Have we any thing at Puente do Duero, or any com- 
munication with the guerrilla who is there ? Let me know 
every thing that passes as soon as possible. 

' As I sec that Palombini’s division, expected from the 
army of the North, had not arrived at Valladolid this 
morning, I am inclined to suspect that the movement to- 
wards Toro, if it is of more than carriages, has nothing to 
do with us, but is directed against Santocildcs at Astorga. 
However, it is as well to be prepared to collect our troops ; 
and I have directed that the baggage and Commissariat 
may be pushed out of the town this night. 

" I am going towards Polios to see whether they have 
made any farther discovery of fords, and shall be back 
between eight and nine. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General 'Wellington. 

Sir S, Cotton, Bart, 


T 2 


' Show this to Beresford.’ 



27^ spAiK. lSl2. 

..i - .. s . i •, ' , 

To the Right Hon* Sir Henry Wellesley, K*B. 

^ Mv DEAR Henry, ‘ Rueda, 8th July, 1812. 

* I enclose my dispatch of yesterday. 

* The enemy have got into a very strong position beyond 
the Ducro, to which we cannot look till there shall be more 
fords in the river. 

^ Sir Rowland Hill tells me that Soiilt is about to reinforce 
Drouet still further, and that they talk of the siege of Ba- 
dajoz. This would ruin every thing. I have given him 
directions what to do, and I think he may prevent the siege ; 
but if Drouet should be reinforced, it is very desirable that 
Ballesteros should act. 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. ‘ WELLINGTON, 

Sir H Wellesley, K.B: 


To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K.B. 

y My dear Sir, ‘ Rueda, 9th July, 1812, 

" I have made no alteration in our position since you left 
ns; and the French have continued in their positions on the 
fords, which it is impossible to cross as long as they hold 
them in such strength. Indeed it would not answer to cross 
the river at all in its present state, unless we should be 
certain of having the co-operation of the Galician troops. 

^ I understand that there was a breach in Astorga yes- 
terday, but I doubt the inclination of the Spaniards to 
storm it. 

‘Bonet has joined; and on the evening of the 7th the 
enemy made a movement to their right, and Foy’s division 
arrived at Toro yesterday. I have not heard tliat any other 
troops moved in that direction, and I believe not. 

‘ I see by an intercepted letter that Marmont was a little 
uneasy at the progress of the Galicians and Silveira, and it 
is probable that these movements are the cause of Foy’s ; 
but; at all events, I propose to move two divisions to La 
Nava del Hey this evening, in case the enemy should enter- 
tain any design of striking upon our communication. 

‘1 have an intercepted letter from Marmont to a General 
Palombinb who is coming by Arand^t de Dueto to join him 



rub:oa. 


8X2, 




from tlie army of the North. He had not arrived at Aranda 
on the 7 th. 

^ Marmont has dismounted liis infantry offi^spr^ in or4er 
to remount dragoons. If he takes all the horses, he may get 
700 ; but in a letter froin Valladolid I sec that he gets ^00. 

‘ 1 hope that you bear your journey well. , ^ 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut General ^ WiaLlNGTQN. 

Stir T. Graham^ K,B. 


" I send tliis to the Governor of Almeida, with a request 
that he will send it to meet you at Barca d’ Alva ; and if yon 
should have passed that place, that he should send it to 
Oporto.’ 


To Earl Bathurst, 


^ My dear Lord, * Rueda, 9th July, 1812. 

* I received last night your letter of the 21th June, and I 
do not delay to answer it, as it is possible that there may be 
an opportunity of sending this letter from Lisbon before the 
next packet will sail. 

‘ You will have seen from my dispatch of the 7th (No. 1) 
that Sir Thomas Graham has been obliged to quit tlie army, 
but I must inform you that it is his determination to return, 
if he should save one of his eyes. You will be able to learn 
whether this is probable, and will judge according to what 
you will hear upon this point; and, regarding the period of 
his absence, whether it is expedient to make any and what 
arrangement to fill his station. 

‘ In regard to the first arrangement to which you have 
adverted, I have no objection to it, excepting that it would 
mortify Sir Sta])leton exceedingly. It would likewise be 

necessary to supersede , upon whose sanity , I am 

sorry to say, much reliance cannot be placed. He deprived 
us of many of the advantages which would have resulted 
from Sir Rowland HiU’s expedition to the Tagus in May ; 
and it is impossible to trust to his judgment in any critical 
case. 

" In regard to the second arrangement, I have to inform 
you that I do not believe Lord William Bentinck will come 
to Spain ; at least, if he docs, it will not be till a late period 



278 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


in the season. Besides, in case the event should occur for 
which you wish to provide, you could send an officer from 
England who would reach the army as soon as Lord William 
Bentinck could from the eastern coast. 

' In regard to the third arrangement, I have a great re- 
gard for, and entertain a very high opinion of, Sir Edward 
Paget ; but I think it probable that he would not come, on 
the chance of Sir Thomas Graham returning to the army. 

" Considering that Sir William Beresford is here, and 
would naturally have considerable influence in the conduct 

of the operations, I acknowledge that, although is 

not exactly the person I should select to command an army, 
I do not think any evil would result from his holding the 
command for a short time, till you could make a permanent 
arrangement. However, I shall be perfectly satisfied with 
any arrangement you may make. 

‘ Since I wrote my dispatch of the 7th, Bonet has joined 
the army; and 1 have a letter from Marmont to General 
Palombini, directing him to move quickly from Aranda de 
Ducro to Valladolid, with the troops of the army of the 
North under his command. He is an Italian, and I do not 
believe his troops are of the best kind. Indeed, it appears, 
from letters from Marmont to the King, that he does not feel 
great confidence in them ; but these letters arc written in 
the Paris cipher, of which we have not been able to discover 
the key. 

‘ Marmont has taken the horses from the officers of the 
army to remount the cavalry. This resource, if he carries 
the arrangement into execution strictly, will give him 700 
additional cavalry. He has heard of the siege of Astorga, 
and of the collection of force in that direction ; and he de- 
tached a division towards Toro and Zamora on the night 
before last, to acquire a knowledge of what was going on, I 
believe. This division has been replaced in his line by that 
of Bonet. 

‘ I hear that a breach was open at Astorga on the 7th, but 
I fear that the Spaniards will not storm it. If they do not, 
the Governor will not surrender. 

" I have a letter from Hill of the 4th. Drouet had retired 
to Ribera, as I expected he would ; but it is reported that 
additional reinforcements have been sent to him, in which 



1812. 


RUEDA. 


279 


case Hill will be obliged to retire upon Albuera But I 
have no idea that the French will be strong enough in Es- 
tremadura to make any impression upon Hill. 

‘ They talk of preparing a train at Seville to lay siege to 
Badajoz ; but that appears impossible, unless they should be 
able to beat Hill out of the field. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst.' ‘ Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My dear Lord, ‘ Rueda, 9th July, 1812, 

‘ Since I wrote my letter this day, I have received one 
from Sir Rowland Hill of the 5th, from Bienvenida. The 
French had retired that day from Usagre, and their rear 
guard was at Llera. They will certainly now retire entirely 
into Cordova. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 


To Major General H. Clinton. 

^ My dear General, ‘ Rueda, llth July, 1812. 9 a.m. 

^ I have had no account from Toro since yesterday at 12 
at noon. A part of Foy’s troops, about 800, had then 
moved in this direction, and the remainder were at Toro. 
Very few, if any, had passed the river ; and those which had 
passed had done so only for plunder. They were repairing 
the bridge. 

" The enemy yesterday morning moved a body of troops, 
about five battalions, from the camp opposite Polios, to their 
right, and we were informed in the evening that these had 
halted at San Roman, which place is about two miles from 
Castro Nuno, on the road towards Toro. I desired Don 
Julian’s officer at Castro Nuno to report to you any event at 
that place, to which it will be necessary for you to attend. 
Send a Staff Officer over to Castro Nuno, and let me know 
the distance from Alaejos, the kind of road, country, &c. 

^ Yesterday evening the enemy moved about a division of 
infantry from Tordesillas to the camp opposite Polios, as 
well as I could judge ; and about the same number from 
their left to Tordesillas. 

' I have not yet received the morning reports from Polios, 



SPW‘/ 

1 jnittters ai« , itii .the ;«tatc in wbidi 1 left 

. They aresaat Tordestllaa. 

.j’-.,.,,. ■■;.,<• ‘-‘iBeUeve me, &Ci 

* Major General H. Clinton: ‘ WeLLiINGTON. 

‘ • To leieut. General Sir R Hill, K,B, 

" My dear Hilx., ‘ Ruecla, 11th July, 1812. 

* I , enclose ^ letter which I received yesterday evening 
ft’on^ the Marques de Monsalud, containing the decipher of 
a letter from the King to the Comte d’Erlon*. I wish that 
t^e Marques had sent the ciphered letter here, or at least 
an accurate copy of the decipher, as in this letter there are 
some faults of spelling, &c., and it appears to me that the 
whole letter is too loosely woi'ded to be intended as a mili- 
tary order. It is, besides, in its present form, not consistent 
with the King s orders to Drouct, of which Lord FitzRoy 
sent you a deciphered copy on the 23rd June. 

^ It is necessary, however, that I should give you some 
ciirections for your guidance in case that Drouct, finding that 
he cannot march over you, according to the King’s orders of 
flic 31st May, should cross the Tagus, according to those of 
the 2 1st June. Much will depend upon the force with which 
Drouct will cross the Tagus, and the description of it. If he 
lakes across with him all the cavalry he has, you must scud 
across the whole of the 2nd division of cavalry, with the 
exception of one British and three Portuguese regiments : if 
he should take across only one brigade of cavalry, you must 
send one brigade across. General Slade’s, and the 2nd hus- 
sn^s. If he should take across the Tagus two or three divi- 
sions of infantry, you must send across the following troops : 
Mhjor General Howard’s and Colonel Byng's brigades of 
the 2nd division, and General Hamilton’s Portuguese divi- 
sion. All these troops must cross by the bridge of Alcantara, 
respecting which you must give timely directions to have it 
j^ut down. They arc then to march by the pass of Perales 
and Guinaldo upon Ciudad Rodrigo, where they will receive 
fiir tiler orders from me. 

^ The station for the troops which will remain in Estre- 
madura must depend partly upon the strength which the 
enemy will leave in the province, and partly ppon epnsidera- 
• Lieut. Generui DroueL 



nxjMA: 


1812 ; 


2 !^:: 


tibii£^ df 'He^alth. The liigh groAnd^ t'te* 

most healthy, but il*, oh account of the sif^ngth ^^tlfe ’^ii!6ihfy 
in the province, tho troops cannot remain there, they must 
be brouglit back towards Badajoz, &c. It will be ndeessifer^ 
that you should superintend the movement of these troops 
till they shall come within my reach, and thcJii that yo^u 
should return, and continue in charge in Estreihadura.' ^ ' 

^ * It is not impossible but that the Kihg may incditatd an 
invasion of Portugal along the valley of the Thgus fey Pla- 
sencia, as I see that they are very busy at Madrid construct- 
ing boats, &c. In order to guard against this, therbfdfe, it 
might be expedient that those troops destined, according to 
these directions, to remain in Estremadura, when the others 
shall come into Castille, should move by easy marches to 
Caceres, when the others shall move upon Alcantara, and 
should remain there till Drouet shall have quitted the valley 
of the Tagus. 

^ If the King should attempt to penetrate by the valley of 
the Tagus, you must defend the passages of the Alagon, if 
you should not be in time to prevent the enemy from passing 
the Tictar; in this case you will bring your whole force 
across the Tagus, with the exception of the garrison regir 
ments, leaving Estremadura to tho care of the Marques ^Ic 
Monsalud. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ WELLINGTON. , 

Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

^ There is a regiment of Portuguese cavalry in the valley 
of the Tagus, under the command of Colonel Diggers, find 
three very good battalions of militia in Lower BeirU) 
the command of Brig. General Le Cor.’ ■ m! . 

To Major General H, Clinton, ' 

^ My dear General, ‘ Rueda, 12th July^ I812. 5 ,p.m. 

By a letter just received from Toro, of 11 last nigjfil/ 1: 
fmd that Foy having left that place, had returned tlie^q ii^ 
the evening with part of h|$ force, and that the work tne 
b^idgO proceeded but slowly. , ^ 

At the same time, all the intelligence and the enemy's 
movements lead to a belief that their intention is to cross 
the Puero at that place. 



282 BPAm. 181 % 

^ You Villi see my intentions from the Quarter Masted 
General’s instructions of this day. 

^ I have ordered General Bradford’s brigade to Castro 
Nufio, which will give us ample time to collect upon our left. 

^ I write to Don Carlos to desire that any correspondent 
at Toro may be directed to write to you. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General H. Clinton: ' Wellington. 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

‘ Sir, * Rueda, 12th July, 1812. 

" In reference to Dom M. Forjaz’s question regarding 
the post horses at Thomar, Cabaqos, Espinhal, and Fez 
d’Arouge, I have to acquaint you that Major Scovell has 
discontinued to advance the payment of their maintenance 
in consequence of their services not being required for the 
communications of the army ; but of course it rests with the 
Portuguese Government to decide upon the propriety of 
keeping up this establishment. 

‘ He has also ceased to advance the pay for the support 
of four horses of the ten kept at GolegaS, in consequence of 
the line by Thomar being no longer necessary, that by 
Abrantes being considered fully sufficient for the purposes 
of the army. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ' Wellington. 

Charles Stuart' 

To Lieut. General SirE Hill^ K.B, 

^My DEAR Hill, ‘Rueda, I3th July, 1812. 1 p.m. 

‘ I have received your letter of the Utli instant, 9 a.m., 
and you will have observed from my letter of yesterday that 
I had anticipated the report expected from you, that Drouet 
would march in this direction. The King, from accounts 
received last night, appears to be collecting a large force at 
Madrid, particularly in cavalry, and I am apprehensive that, 
after all, the enemy will be too strong for me ; but we shall 
see. Do not let any time be lost unnecessarily. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' Wellington. 

Sir R. Hilly K.B: 



lam 


RUEDA. 


283 


To Earl Bathurst, 

^ My Lord, * Rueda, 14th July, 18l2. 

^ General Bonet joined the enemy on the evening of the 
7th instant, and they have since extended to their right as 
far as Toro, where they have been actively employed in 
repairing the bridge which they had before destroyed. 

^ It is generally reported that they propose to cross the 
Duero at that point, when they are reinforced by the troops 
expected from the armies of the North and Centre. 

‘ In regard to the reinforcements from the army of the 
North, I have reason to believe that General Caffarelli has 
altered his intention of sending them. Marshal Marmont 
certainly expected a division under General Palombini, 
which had been detached from the army of Aragon at 
Aranda de Duero, in the beginning of this month, but they 
have not yet arrived there ; and I understand have marched 
towards the Ebro. 

^ The King has, however, given orders for the collection 
of the army of the Centre at Madrid, and he has abandoned 
all the posts occupied by that army in La Mancha, and those 
in the valley of the Tagus. 

' The posts of Avila and Mombeltran *, and all those 
destined for the preservation of the communication between 
the armies of Portugal and of the Centre, have likewise been 
abandoned by his orders, and the troops have marched to 
Madrid, in order to enable him to take from thence a body 
of troops. 

" I have not any account on which I can rely, of the 
strength of the army of the Centre. It has been stated to 
be lately as 19,000 men, of which, 5000 cavalry. But this 
account is much exaggerated, or many of the troops must be 
Spanish Juramentados. 

" The King has besides ordered General Drouet to join 
him with a body of troops to be taken from Estremadura ; 
and from the late movements of that general, I conclude 
that he has received those orders, and is about to cross the 
Tagus with about 10,000 men, and to join the army of the 
Centre. 

^ Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill broke up from Albuera 


* Near tho Puerto del Fico, 



SFAIIf.c 




m 

ori {the 2nd install, and mov^d upon the enemy^ who retired 
bOfore him towards Cordova. His last letter is of the 9th, 
from Llercna; and at that time, part of the enemy’s forte 
had marched u{)On Fuente Ovejuna from Berlanga; and Ge- 
neral Drouet with 10,000 men, with a very small pi^oportion 
of artillery, had marched through Campillo upon Zalaraea. 

‘Sir Rowland Hill has been informed of the King's order# 
that General Drouet should cross the Tagus, and join the 
army of the Centre, and he has marched after him ; and I 
ordered him to detach a force to join this army, propor-- 
tionatc to that which General Drouet should take with him 
across the Tagus, as soon as I was made acquainted with 
the King s order to General Drouet. 

‘ I have no authentic account of the siege of Astorga of a 
later date than the 5th instant, at which period General 
Santocildes, who was conducting that operation, entertained 
no hopes of bringing it to an early termination, and he ex- 
pected to be in want of ammunition. It is reported that 
there arc two breaches in the place ; but I am apprehensive 
that there is no foundation for these reports. 

‘ The enemy’s position on the Duero is very strong, and 
their army is sufficient to occupy it. On their right they 
have the strong places of Zamora and Toro, which cannot 
be taken excepting by a regular attack. 

‘ Their left rests upon the Pisuerga, which is not fordable 
any where. They have a fortified post at Simancas, where 
there is a bridge over that river, and they have fortified, 
and have a garrison in Valladolid, where there is another 
bridge. They occupy with their army, and nearly 100 pieces 
of cannon, the bridge of Tordesillas, and the heights which 
command the fords of the Duero, from Toro to the Pisuerga. 

‘It is obvious that we could not cross the river without 
sustaining great loss, and could not fight a general action 
under circumstances of greater disadvantage than those 
which would attend the attack of the enemy’s position on 
the Duero. 

‘ In truth, the enemy’s numbers are equal, if not superior 
to ours; they have in their position twice the amount of the 
artillery which we have, and wc are superior in cavalry alone, 
which arm, it is probable, could not be used in the attack we 
should have to make. 



RtTBDA* 


m 


mm 

i ‘ I have again written to; suggest the e^ipedicndy that the 
siege of Astorga should be carried on by those ti’oops only 
which are necessary for the operation, and that the ro-^ 
maitider of the army of Galicia should be brought forward 
to the Esla; but in the mean time, I have deemed it ex- 
pedient to order General D* Urban to cross the Duero, arid 
join the army with the Portuguese cavalry, in order to be 
more equal to the enemy in that important arm, even though 
the King should not join the array of Portugal with a re- 
inforcement from the army of the Centre. 

‘ I expect that the 5th, 38tli, and 82nd regiments will join 
the ai-my in the course of the next three weeks ; and there 
are not less tlian 2000 recruits and convalescents on the 
road. But at this season of the year it is impossible to'rcly 
upon the fitness for service of troops just arrived, or reco- 
vered from sickness, after such a march. I likewise hope 
that the detachment from Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill’s 
corps will be near us almost as soon as General Drouct can 
join the army of the Centre. 

^ I have this day received a letter from Lieut. General 
Lord William Bentinck, of the 9th of June, in which he has 
enclosed the copy of one of the same date to the Earl of 
Liverpool, from which I am concerned to observe that his 
Lordship does not propose to carry into execution the 
operations on the eastern coast of the Peninsula, which had 
been in contemplation, until he shall have tried the success 
of another plan on the coast of Italy. 

^ I am apprehensive that this determination may bring 
upon us an additional force of the army of Aragon, but I 
still hope that I shall be able to retain at the close of the 
campaign those acquisitions which we made at its eom- 
moncement. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Em'l Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

‘ My dear Lord, ‘ Rueda, Hth July, 1812 . 

^ I have but little to add to my official dispatch of this 

day^ The determination of — ^ — to land in Italy is a 

great disappointment to me. His arrival upon the Eastern 



m 


SPAIK. 


mm 


eoast at this moment, which would have been certain, would 
have relieved me effectually. He would have taken Tarra-- 
gona, and most probably Valencia, and we should have 
made a glorious campaign of it altogether. His success in 
this Peninsula, or even his appearance here, would have had 
permanent good effects. I hope that he has decided right, 
and that he will be successful where he is going ; but I can- 
not believe that the French will allow 15,000 British and 
Neapolitan troops to remain in Italy ; and I am apprehen- 
sive that, however successful he may be at first, he will even- 
tually be obliged to embark. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 


To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley^ K.B. 

^ Sir, ‘ Rueda, 15th July, 1812. 

^ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 2nd 
instant, 

‘ I concur entirely with you respecting the expediency of 
General Ballesteros carrying on his operations at present on 
the side of Gibraltar. 

^ It is true that I at one time preferred that he should be 
in the Condado de Niebla ; and I think it not improbable 
that occasions might occur in which it might be possible to 
concert an operation with more advantage between his corps 
and the allied troops in Estremadura if he were in the Con- 
dado de Niebla, than it is, his troops being in the neighbour- 
hood of Gibraltar. But it must be observed that the great 
object of all, the safety of General Ballesteros’s corps, is best 
provided for in his station near Gibraltar. From the activity 
of his operations likewise, and the greater scope there is for 
them from Gibraltar than from Niebla, I think it very doubt- 
ful whether they could be carried on with so much advantage 
from any station on the right of the Guadalquiver. 

‘From the information received of the strength of the 
French army of the South, and from the account which you 
transmitted in your letter of the 12th June of the nature of 
the enemy’s works at Seville, I consider it quite certain that 
General Ballesteros could not gain possession of the Car- 
thusian Convent, and he would have no chance of entering 



1812. 


nvuuA. 


m 


the city from the right of the Guadalqtiiver. All that we 
can expect from General Ballesteros is, that he should, by 
his operations, prevent as many of the enemy as he can from 
quitting Andalusia to carry their operations into Estrema- 
dura. They must maintain the blockade of Cadiz ; they 
must have garrisons in Seville, and in their works on the 
Guadalete ; and likewise one in Malaga, if General Balles- 
teros should remain where he is, and a corps of observation 
on his movements. 

" I should hope that, after providing for those services, 
they would not have the power of detaching into Estrema- 
dura such a number as would overpower Lieut. General Sir 
Rowland Hill. 

* An attack upon Seville is doubtless the operation in 
Andalusia which is most likely to have decided effect ; but 
that should not be undertaken which the evidence before us 
proves cannot be accomplished. We must not lose in an 
undertaking of this description such a corps as that under 
the command of General Ballesteros ; and if we cannot un- 
dertake that operation, of which the successful result would 
have the most decided effects, wc must others, of which the 
success is more easily attainable, although the advantage 
to be derived will be smaller. 

^ These general principles will be perfectly understood ; 
and I am convinced that General Ballesteros will do every 
thing in his power to prevent the enemy from detaching 
largely to Estremadura, particularly now that I have been 
obliged to order a detachment of Lieut. General Sir Rowland 
Hill’s troops across the Tagus. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B: 


To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B. 

^ My dear Henry, ‘ Rueda, ISth July, 1812. 

' I have received your letter of the 2nd ; and I enclose 
one for Sir Edward Pellew, which I beg you to peruse and 
forward. 

's decision is fatal to the campaign, at least 

at present. If he should land any where in Italy, he will, a$ 



SPAIN. 


288 


1812. 


uswl, te obliged to re-cmbark ; and we shall have lost a 
golden opportunity here. 

^ I have an intercepted letter, stating that the King would 
collect 12,000 men, of which six regiments are cavalry. 

" Castahos tells me he has ordered the Galician army to 
Benavente ; but I have no account of it from Santocildes. 

* I enclose my dispatch of yesterday. 

' Ever yours most affectionately, 

• The Rt. Hon. ' Wellington. 

Sir Hs Wellesley i K.B'. 


To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

^ My dear Sir, * Rueda, 15th July, 1812. 

^ I have just received your letter of the 8tli, and I return 
the estimates for July. I have not yet heard of the money 
expected from England. Till it arrives I can give nothing. 

‘ I shall be very much obliged to you if you will mention 
this subject to Lord Castlereagh, as I have to Lord Liver- 
pool and Lord Bathurst. War cannot be carried on with- 
out money. We are to find money as we can, at the most 
economical rate of exchange, and then comes J-^ord William 
Bentinck to Gibraltar, and carries off four millions of dol- 
lars, giving one shilling for each more than we give; and 
after all, he sends his troops upon some scheme to some part 
of Italy, and not to the Eastern coast of the Peninsula, as 
ordered by Government, and arranged with me. 

‘ I have never been in such distress as at present, and 
some serious misfortune must happen if the Government do 
not attend seriously to the subject, and adopt some measures 
to supply us regularly with money. 

‘ The arrears and distresses of the Portuguese Govern- 
ment are a joke to ours, and if our credit were not better, we 
should certainly starve. As it is, if we do not find means of 
paying our bills for butchers’ meat, there will be an end to 
the war at once. 

" 1 have not leisure to go through the returns ; but there 
never was any thing so fallacious as the statement of 45,000 
militia in arms in March and April, or 25,000 at other times. 
The whole militia are now disbanded, excepting four batta- 
lions with Silveira, three battalions in Almeida, and about 



mt± 


LA NAV'A^ IbfEL REV. 


4000 meri itt the gatri^tbti of Alkftfejd ' i iPiHy fcblfevc that 
the establishments would not amouht t6 hklf the 'riumbef bf 
S5,0(X), and the effectives to be paid, hot t6 one (jUattkv of 
it. I shall speak to Sir William Beresford 6h the stib^eet.*' 

* Believe me, &c. ^ 

* Bis Excellency * ^ 

Charles Stuart* ^ 4 ' 

To Lieut. General Sir T. Graham, K,B. 

‘ My dear Sir, * La Nava tie! Rey, 16th July, 1812. 

‘ I enclose a letter from Admiral Martin, from which you 
will see that he was to send the Peterel to Oporto for your 
use on the 9th. I think it probable that that ship will* have 
arrived before you will. 

Since my last Marmont has continued to reinforce his 
right to Toro, and at last, this morning, has moved every 
thing from opposite Polios. I came here last night, and 
have not yet received the reports from Tordesillas. 
enemy have continued to repair the bridge of Toro, ani 
Marmont was there yesterday. Astorga is not taken, but 
I believe Santocildes is at Benavente. It is impossible 
to communicate with him excepting by a very circuitous 
route. 

^ Either the Galician army have induced Marmont to col- 
lect his troops near Toro, or he has heard that the ^ii^g,is 
collecting the army of the Centre at Madrid ; and he threatens 
our left and our communications in order to prevent us from 
molesting the King, I should think that he would do the 
business more effectually by his left. But he w^ould then 
leave the communication open between Santocildes and us. , 

" The King has ordered Drouet to cross the Tagiii, and 
we thought some days ago that he was about to obey that 
order. But by a letter from Hill of the 12th, fvom Idereph^ 
just received, I find they have sent to Zalamea three regi- 
ments of infantry and a small body of cavalry; the maih 
body of the army having retired into Cordova, 

^ Believe me, &c. 

• Lieut. General ' Wellington. 

Sir T, Graham, K.B* 


VOL. IX. 


U 



290 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To Lieut. General Sir /?. Hill, K.B. 

' My dear Hill, ‘ La Nava del Rey, 16 th July, 1812 . 

" I have just received your letter of the 12th, and I hope 
that being convinced that the enemy were not carrying into 
execution the King’s orders of the 23rd June, you will not 
have detached the troops, notwithstanding my orders of the 
11th and 13th. 

" I have this day got a letter from the King to Marmont 
of the 9th, in cipher, which I cannot entirely decipher ; it 
appears, however, that he thinks that Drouct cannot cross 
the Tagus, and I suspect that he has ordered General 
Treillard to collect some troops in the valley of the Tagus, 
and to move up by Plasencia. 

‘ 1 think it desirable, therefore, at all events, that General 
Campbelfs Portuguese, and Colonel Byng’s British brigades, 
and a brigade of Portuguese artillery, should move in the 
direction of Merida, and there remain. Let General Camp- 
bell put himself in communication with Colonel Diggens, 
who is at Plasencia with a regiment of Portuguese cavalry ; 
and if he should find the enemy advancing in that direction, 
he is to move by Cacercs or Alcantara (to order the bridge 
to be laid for himself), to cross the Tagus, and beat Trcil- 
lard, if he is sufficiently strong; if he is not, he will retire 
before him on Castcllo Branco, and thence into the strong 
country between the Tagus and the Zezere : if he should 
retire beyond Castello Branco, he will order the bridge of 
Villa Velha to be taken up, and floated gradually down the 
river. Let General Campbell take Colonel Diggens under 
his orders, if he should cross the Tagus. 

‘ I am not quite certain that Treillard will not cross the 
Tagus and join Drouet; but if that should be the case. 
General Campbell cannot be better placed than at Merida, 
neither can he be better placed than at Merida, if Drouet 
should carry into execution the King’s orders of the 23rd 
June. 

^ Drouet cannot, at all events, cross the Guadiana by 
Medellin. It will be necessary that some of your cavalry 
should attend General Campbell’s movement, but they need 
not stay with him, as he will find cavalry on the right of the 
Tagus. It may be a question whether you ought to stay so 



1812 , 


LA NAVA DEL KEY. 


291 


far forward as Llerena, when you shall send away General 
Campbell, of which you must be the best judge ; of course, 
if Drouet should cross the Tagus, you will do as directed in 
my letter of the 11th July, and it will be particularly neces- 
sary to attend to that part of it which relates to the force to 
come to Caceres, in case of Treillard becoming part of the 
game with Drouet in the valley of the Tagus. 

' Eemember that the bridge of Alcantara takes time to be 
prepared for the passage of troops. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K,B. 

^ Marmont has collected his troops about Toro, with what 
object I do not know ; but we have rather drawn in our right.’ 

To Major General H, Clinton. 

‘ La Nava del Rey, 16tb July, 1812. 

‘ My DEAR General, - 7 a.m. 

' The only alteration which I wish to make in your instruc- 
tions, in consequence of the enemy’s great movement to 
their right, and the movement which we made yesterday 
evening, is, that in case the enemy should cross the river at 
Toro, or the fords below Castro Nuho, you should move at 
once upon Fuente la Pena with the 6th division, and two 
regiments of General Le Marchant’s brigade. I will order 
the 7th division to follow you as soon as the other troops 
from the right shall approach Alaejos. 

" You should endeavor to get some peasants to watch 
what passes at the bridge of Toro at night, and desire 
Lieut. Shanahan to do the same. 

^ These movements of Marmont are certainly intended to 
divert our attention from the army of the Centre, which is 
collecting at Madrid ; if he knows of this circumstance, 
which I doubt. 

^ I have a letter from of the 9th of June. He had 

sent the 1st division of the expedition to Minorca, and the 
2nd division was about to go to Sardinia; but neither of 
them destined for the operations concerted on the Eastern 
coast of the Peninsula. He has determined in lieu thereof 
to try his fortune in Italy with 15,000 men, instead of 6000, 
which he was to send into Spain. I hope he will succeed ; 

u 2 



292 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


but I doubt it. There is no solid foundation for his plan. 
He has not even fixed the degrees of latitude for his opera- 
tions, much less the place of his landing, nor arranged any 
of the circumstances which ought to be settled before such a 
service should be entered on. The French cannot have less 
than 15,000 men in Italy, and I fear that he will be obliged 
to re-embark. 

" If he were again to alter his determination, and now to 
appear upon the coast of Spain, I believe the army of tlie 
Centre would do us but little harm; at the same time that 
he would succeed in his objects. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General IL Clinton: ' Wellington. 

To Major General H. Clinton, 

‘ La Nava del Rey, ICth July, 1812 . 
‘My DEAR General, i before 9 a.m. 

^ Since I wrote to you I have heard from General Picton 
that the enemy have withdrawn entirely from opposite Polios 
a very large body of' cavalry in the morning early, and their 
infantry at about half-past seven, and marched in the direc- 
tion of Toro. 

‘ I am anxious to hear from you what movements they 
have made on their left, 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General H. Clinton: ‘ Wellington. 

To Major General H, Clinto7i, 

‘ La Nava del Rey, 16 th July, 1812 . 

‘ My dear General, c p.m. 

‘ General Picton has informed me at half-past nine, that 
the enemy had sent a battalion and a few cavalry out of the 
wood of Cubillas to the heights opposite his left. 

‘ I have just now heard from General D’Urban, who 
commands about 800 or 900 Portuguese cavalry, which have 
hitherto been in the rear of the enemy ; but thinking they 
could be more useful on this side of the Duero, I desired 
him to cross the river; and he is to be this night in the 
wood of El Pinero, which you will sec in the map about a 
league south from Benialbo, and about the same distance 
east by north from Fuentes Preadas, on our left of the Val- 



1812. 


LA NAVA DEL KEY. 


203 


de-finjas road. I wish you would communicate with him 
this night through Lieut, Shanahan. The officer at Val- 
de-finjas might also communicate with him. 

* Let General D’Urban know that I wish him to be on 
our left of the Val-de-finjas road, observing the enemy’s 
movements from the neighbourhood of Toro, and keeping 
his communication with Lieut. Shanahan and you. In case 
the enemy should cross the Duero, and he should be obliged 
to retire, he must join the 6th division on the Gareiia. He 
must let you know beforehand if he should want provisions, 
and I will take care that he shall be supplied. 

" From the accounts received by the officer who brought 
D’ Urban’s letter, I guess that the enemy are en be- 

tween Toro and the Palacio de Cubillas. They have nothing 
on their right of Toro, and nothing in the valleys in their 
rear. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ MaJo7^ General H. Clinton: " Wellington. 

To Major General H. Clinton » 

* La Nava del Rev, 16th July, 1812. 

‘ My dear General, Half-past 6 p.m. 

' Since I wrote to you half an hour ago, I have received 
an intercepted letter, which makes it clear that the enemy 
propose to cross the Duero. 

‘ I beg that you will communicate this night with the 
officer belonging to Don Carlos’s corps at Villa Franca, in 
order to receive the earliest information of the enemy’s 
movements on the Duero, whether at that ford or at the 
bridge of Toro, where I think it certain that the enemy will 
cross. 

" If you should move upon Fuentc la Pena, send your 
baggage to Canizal, 

Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General H. Clinton: * Wellington, 

To Major General H, Clinton, 

‘ La Nava del Rey, 16th July, 1812. 

" My dear General, 7 p.m. 

‘ I have just now heard that the enemy have crossed the 
Duero at Toro in strength, and are in march upon Villa 



294 


SPAIN, 


1812. 


Buena. If you have not already moved, you should move 
immediately on Fuente la Pena. 

" I order the 1st division to march immediately ; and the 
7th must follow you as soon as the 1st shall cross the Tra- 
bancos. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General H. Clinton! ^ Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ Cabrerizos, near Salamanca, 

^ My Lord, 2 1st July, is 12 . 

In the course of the 15th and 16th the enemy moved all 
their troops to the right of their position on the Duero, and 
their army was concentrated between Toro and San Roman. 
A considerable body passed the Duero at Toro, on the 
evening of the 16th; and I moved the allied army to their 
left on that night, with an intention to concentrate on the 
Guarena. 

" It was totally out of my power to prevent the enemy from 
passing the Duero at any point at which he might think it 
expedient, as he had in his possession all the bridges over 
that river, and many of the fords ; but he recrossed that 
river at Toro in the night of the 16th, moved his whole army 
to Tordesillas, where he again crossed the Duero on the 
morning of the 17th, and assembled his army on that day at 
La Nava delRey ; having marched not less than ten leagues 
in the course of the 17th. 

^ The 4th and light divisions of infantry, and Major 
General Anson’s brigades of cavalry, had marched to Cas- 
trejon on the night of the 16th, with a view to the assembly 
of the army on the Guarena, and were at Castrejon under 
the orders of Lieut. General Sir Stapleton Cotton on the 
17th, not having been ordered to proceed further, in con- 
sequence of my knowledge that the enemy had not passed 
the Duero at Toro, and there was not time to call them in 
between the hour at which I received the intelligence of the 
whole of the enemy’s army being at La Nava and daylight 
of the morning of the 18th. I therefore took measures to 
provide for their retreat and junction, by moving the 5th 
division to Torrecilla de la Orden ; and Major General Le 



1812. cABRteRizos. 295 

Marchant’s, Major General Alten’s, and Major General 
Bock’s brigades of cavalry to Alaejos. 

^ The enemy attacked the troops at Castrejon at the dawn 
of day of the 18th, and Sir Stapleton Cotton maintained the 
post without suffering any loss till the cavalry had joined 
him. Nearly about the same time the enemy turned, by 
Alaejos, the left flank of our position at Castrejon. 

" The troops retired in admirable order to Torrecilla de la 
Orden, having the enemy’s whole army on their flank, or in 
their rear, and thence to the Guareha, which river they 
passed under the same circumstances, and effected their 
junction with the army. 

‘ The Guareha, which runs into the Duero, is formed by 
four streams, which unite about a league below Cahizal, and 
the enemy took a strong position on the heights on the right 
of that river ; and I placed the 5th, 4th, and Light divisions 
on the opposite heights, and had directed the remainder of 
the army to cross the Upper Guareha at Vallesa, in conse- 
quence of the appearance of the enemy’s intention to turn 
our right. 

^ Shortly after his arrival, however, the enemy crossed the 
Guareha at Castrillo, below the junction of the streams ; and 
manifested an intention to press upon our left, and to enter 
the valley of Cahizal. Major General Alten’s brigade of 
cavalry, supported by the 3rd dragoons, were already en- 
gaged with the enemy’s cavalry, and had taken, among 
other prisoners, the French General de Carrie ; and I de- 
sired Lieut. General the Hon. L. Cole to attack with Major 
General William Anson’s and Brigadier General Harvey’s 
brigades of infantry, the latter under the command of Colonel 
Stubbs, the enemy's infantry, Avhich were supporting their 
cavalry. He immediately attacked and defeated them with 
the 27th and 40th regiments, which advanced to the charge 
with bayonets, Colonel Stubbs’s Portuguese brigade sup- 
porting ; and the enemy gave way ; many were killed, and 
wounded; and Major General Alten’s brigade of cavalry 
having pursued the fugitives, 240 prisoners were taken. 

" In these affairs, Lieut. General the Hon. L. Cole, Major 
General V. Alten, Major General W. Anson, Lieut. Colonels 
Arentschildt of the 1st hussars, and Hervey of the 14th 
light dragoons; Lieut. Colonel Maclean of the 27th, and 



296 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


Major Arclidall of the 40th; Colonel Stubbs, Lieut. Colonel 
Anderson, commanding the 11th, and Major de Azeredo, 
commanding the 23rd Portuguese regiments, distinguished 
themselves. 

‘ The enemy did not make any further attempt on our left, 
but having reinforced their troops on that side, and with- 
drawn those which had moved to their left, I brought back 
ours from Vallesa. 

‘ On the 19th, in the afternoon, the enemy withdrew all 
the troops from their right, and marched to their left by 
Tarazona, apparently with an intention of turning our right. 
I crossed the Upper Guareha at Vallesa and El Olmo, with 
the whole of the allied army, in the course of that evening 
and night ; and every preparation was made for the action 
which was expected on the plain of Vallesa on the morning 
of the 20th. 

^ But shortly after daylight the enemy made another 
movement, in several columns, to his left along the heights 
of the Guareha, which river he crossed below Cantalapiedra, 
and encamped last night at Babila-fuentc and Villoruela; 
and the allied army made a corresponding movement to its 
right to Cantalpino, and encamped last night at Cabeza 
Vellosa, the 6th division and Major General Alten’s brigade 
of cavalry being upon the Tonnes at Aldea Lengua. 

‘ During these movements, there have been occasional 
cannonades, but without loss on our side. 

' I have this morning moved the left of the army to the 
Tonnes, where the whole are now concentrated ; and I ob- 
serve that the enemy have also moved towards the same 
river near Huerta. 

' The enemy’s object hitherto has been to cut off my com- 
munication with Salamanca and Ciudad Rodrigo, the want 
of which, he knows well would distress us very materially. 
The wheat harvest has not yet been reaped in Castille, and 
even if we had money, we could not now procure any thing 
from the country, unless we should follow the example of 
the enemy, and lay waste whole districts, in order to procure 
a scanty subsistence of unripe wheat for the troops. 

‘ It would answer no purpose to attempt to retaliate upon 
the enemy, even if it were practicable. The French armies 
in Spain have never had any secure communication beyond 



1812 . 


CABRERIZOS. 


297 


the greund which they occupy; atid provided the enemy 
opposed to them is not too strong for them, they are indif- 
ferent in respect to the quarter from which their operations 
arc directed, or on which side they carry them on. 

" The army of Portugal has been surrounded for the last 
six weeks, and scarcely even a letter reaches its commander ; 
but the system of organized rapine and plunder, and the 
extraordinary discipline so long established in the FrenOh 
armies, enable it to subsist at the expense of the total ruin 
of the country in which it has been placed ; and I am not 
certain that Marshal Marinont has not now at his command 
a greater quantity of provisions and supplies of every de- 
scription than we have. Any movement upon his flank, 
therefore, would only tend to augment the embarrassments 
of our own situation, while it would have no effect whatever 
upon that of the enemy; even if such a movement could 
have been made with advantage as an operation purely 
military: this, however, was not the case, and when the 
French attempted to turn our right, I had the choice only 
of marching towards Salamanca, or of attacking the enemy 
in a position highly advantageous to him, which, for several 
reasons, I did not think expedient. 

‘ I have invariably been of opinion, that unless forced to 
fight a battle, it is better that one should not be fought by 
the allied army, unless under such favorable circumstances 
as that there would bo reason to hope that the allied army 
would be able to maintain the field, while those of the enemy 
should not. 

^ Your Lordship will have seen by the returns of the two 
armies that we have no superiority of numbers, even over 
that single army immediately opposed to us; indeed, I 
believe that the French army is of the two the strongest; 
and it is certainly equipped with a profusion of artillery 
double ours in numbers, and of larger calibres. It cannot be 
attacked therefore in a chosen position, without considerable 
loss on our side. 

‘ To this circumstance, add that I am quite certain that 
Marshal Marmont’s army is to be joined by the King’s, 
which will be 10,000 or 12,000 men, with a large proportion 
of cavalry, and that troops are still expected from the army 
of the North, and some are ordered from that of the South ; 



298 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


and it will be seen that I ought to consider it almost im- 
possible to remain in Castille after an action, the circum- 
stances of which should not have been so advantageous as 
to have left the allied army in a situation of comparative 
strength, while that of the enemy should have been much 
weakened, 

^ I have therefore determined to cross the Tonnes, if the 
enemy should ; to cover Salamanca as long as I can ; and 
above all, not to give up our communication with Ciudad 
llodrigo ; and not to fight an action, unless under very 
advantageous circumstances, or it should become absolutely 
necessary. 

^ Since I wrote to your Lordship on the 14th, I have learnt 
that General Drouet had not crossed the Guadiana, nor had 
lie moved in that direction. Lieut. General Sir Rowland 
Hill therefore still remains at Llcrena. 

^The siege of Astorga continues. General Santocildes 
had detached a division of 4000 infantry under General 
Cabrera, to Benavente. General D’Urban, with the Portu- 
guese cavalry, joined on the left of the allied army, on the 
17th instant. 

^ The enemy abandoned and destroyed the fort of 
Mirabete on the Tagus on the 11th instant, and the garri- 
son marched to Madrid to form part of the army of the 
Centre. They were reduced to five days’ provisions./ 

^ From all that I have seen and heard, I am quite certain 
that the King is making every effort to collect a body of 
troops to oppose us. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst. ‘ Wellington. 

" I enclose a return of the killed and wounded on the 
18th instant.’ 

Return of the Killed, Wounded, and Missing of the Army under the command of 

General the Earl of Wellington, K.B.,n€ar Castrejon, on the IHthJuly, 1812. 



Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing, 

British ..... 

61 

297 

27 

Portuguese , • 

34 

9G 

v7 

Total . . 

95 

393 

54 







1812. 


FLORES DE AVILA. 


299 


To Lieut. General Sir R. Hillt K.B. 

‘ On the heights near Alba cle Tormos, 

' My dear Hill, 23rd July, 1812. 

^ I write to let you know that we beat Marshal Marmont’s 
army yesterday evening, near Salamanca, and they are now 
in full retreat, and we are following them. 

‘ Our loss has not been severe, I believe, in men ; Marshal 
Bcresford, Generals Leith, Cole, and Victor Alton, are 
wounded; General Le Marchant killed. Sir Staideton 
Cotton was likewise wounded last night by a shot from one 
of our own sentries, who took him for one of the enemy. 

"We have taken a good many prisoners and cannon, above 
3000 of the former, and I should think 20 of the latter, and I 
understand two eagles. All the troops behaved admirably. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

^ Let the Marques de Monsalud know of these circum- 
stances.’ 


To Major General Peacocke. 

‘ My dear General, ‘ Flores de Avila, 24th July, 1812. 

‘ I beg that if Lord Robert Manners is not quite well 
when you shall receive this letter, you will tell him from me 
that I desire he will go to England forthwith. It is of 
no use his endeavoring to struggle through the next two 
months in the Peninsula, which are the most unhealthy of the 
whole year. The sooner he goes, the sooner he will return. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General Peacocke: ‘ Wellington. 

To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Flores de Avila, 24th July, 1812. 

^ My aide de camp, Captain Lord Clinton, will present to 
your Lordship this account of a victory which the allied 
troops under my command gained in a general action, fought 
near Salamanca on the evening of the 22nd instant, which 
I have been under the necessity of delaying to send till now, 
having been engaged ever since the action in the pursuit of 
the enemy’s flying troops. 



300 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


‘ In my letter of the 21st, I informed your Lordship that 
both armies were near the Tormes ; and the enemy crossed 
that river with the greatest part of his troops, in the after- 
noon, by the fords between Alba de Tormes and Huerta, 
and moved by their left towards the roads leading to Ciudad 
Rodrigo. 

' The allied army, with the exception of the 3rd division, 
and General D’Urban's cavalry, likewise crossed the Tormes 
in the evening by the bridge of Salamanca and the fords in 
the neighbourhood ; and I placed the troops in a position, of 
which the right was upon one of the two heights called Dos 
Arapiles, and the left on the Tormes, below the ford of 
Marta. 

* The 3rd division, and Brig. General D’Urban’s cavalry, 
were left at Cabrerizos, on the right of the Tonnes, as the 
enemy had still a large corps on the heights above Babila- 
fuente, on the same side of the river ; and I considered it not 
improbable that, finding our army prepared for them in the 
morning on the left of the Tormes, they Avould alter their 
plan, and manoeuvre by the other bank. 

‘ In the course of the night of the 21st, I received intel- 
ligence, of the truth of which I could not doubt, that Ge- 
neral Clausel had arrived at Polios on the 20th with the 
cavalry and horse artillery of the army of the North, to join 
Marshal Marmont ; and I was quite certain that these troops 
would join him on the 22nd or 23rd at latest. 

‘ There was no time to be lost therefore ; and I dcler- 
mined that, if circumstances should not permit me to attack 
him on the 22nd, I would move towards Ciudad Rodrigo 
without further loss of time, as the difference of the numbers 
of cavalry might have made a march of manceuvre, such as 
we have had for the last four or five days, very difficult, and 
its result doubtful. 

‘ During the night of the 21st, the enemy had taken pos- 
session of the village of Calvarassa de Arriba, and of the 
heights near it called Nuestra Senora de la Pena, our 
cavalry being in possession of Calvarassa do Abaxo ; and 
shortly after daylight, detachments from both armies at- 
tempted to obtain possession of the more distant from our 
right of the two hills called Dos Arapiles. 

‘The enemy, hovever, succeeded^ their detachments 



1812. 


FLORES DE AVILA. 


301 


being the strongest, and having been concealed in the woods 
nearer the hill than we were; by which success they strength- 
ened materially their own position, and had in their power 
increased nfeans of annoying ours. 

^ In the morning the light troops of the 7th division, and 
the 4th cagadores belonging to General Pack’s brigade, 
were engaged with the enemy on the height called Nuestra 
Sehora de la Pena, on which height they maintained them- 
selves with the enemy throughout the day. The possession 
by the enemy, however, of the more distant of the Arapilcs 
rendered it necessary for me to extend the right of the army 
en potence to the height behind the village of Ai’apiles, and 
to occupy that village with light infantry ; and here I placed 
the 4th division, under the command of Lieut. General the 
Hon. L. Cole : and although, from the variety of the enemy’s 
movements, it was difficult to form a satisfactory judgment 
of his intentions, I considered that upon the whole his ob- 
jects were upon the left of the Tonnes. I therefore ordered 
Major General the Hon. E. Pakenham, who commanded 
the 3rd division in the absence of Lieut. General Picton, on 
account of ill health, to move across the Tonnes with the 
troops under his command, including Brig. General D’ Ur- 
ban’s cavalry, and to place himself behind Aldea Tejada; 
Brig. General Bradford’s brigade of Portuguese infantry, 
and Don Carlos de Espafia’s infantry, having been moved 
up likewise to the neighbourhood of Las Torres, between 
the 3rd and 4th divisions. 

After a variety of evolutions and movements, the enemy 
appears to have determined upon his plan about two in the 
afternoon ; and, under cover of a very heavy cannonade, 
which, however, did us but very little damage, he extended 
his left, and moved forward his troops, apparently with an 
intention to embrace, by the position of his troops, and by 
his fire, our post on that of the two Arapiles which we pos- 
sessed, and from thence to attack and break our line, or, at 
all events, to render difficult any movement of ours to our 
right. 

" The extension of his line to his left, however, and its 
advance upon our right, notwithstanding that his troops still 
occupied very strong ground, and his position was well 
defended by cannon, gave me an opportunity of attacking 



302 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


him, for which I had long been anxious. I reinforced our 
right with the 5th division, under Lieut. General Leith^ 
which I placed behind the village of Arapiles, on the right 
of the 4th division, and with the 6th and 7th divisions in 
reserve ; and as soon as these troops had taken their station, 
I ordered Major General the Hon. E. Pakenham to move 
forward with the 3rd division and General D’ Urban’s cavalry, 
and two squadrons of the 14th light dragoons, under Lieut. 
Colonel Hervey, in four columns, to turn the enemy’s left on 
the heights ; while Brig. General Bradford’s brigade, the 
5th division, under Lieut. General Leith, the 4th division^ 
under Lieut. General the Hon. L. Cole, and the cavalry 
under Lieut. General Sir Stapleton Cotton, should attack 
them in front, supported in reserve by the 6th division, 
under Major General Clinton, the 7th, under Major General 
Hope, and Don Carlos de Espaha’s Spanish division ; and 
Brig. General Pack should support the left of the 4th divi- 
sion, by attacking that of the Dos Arapiles which the enemy 
held. The 1st and Light divisions occupied the ground on 
the left, and were in reserve. 

^ The attack upon the enemy’s left was made in the manner 
above described, and completely succeeded. Major General 
the Hon. E. Pakenham formed the 3rd division across the 
enemy’s flank, and overthrew every thing opposed to him. 
These troops were supported in the most gallant style by 
the Portuguese cavalry, under Brig. General D’Urban, and 
Lieut. Colonel Hervey’s squadrons of the 14th, who success- 
fully defeated every attempt made by the enemy on the 
flank of the 3rd division. 

" Brig. General Bradford’s brigade, the 5th and 4th divi- 
sions, and the cavalry under Lieut. General Sir Stapleton 
Cotton, attacked the enemy in front, and drove his troops 
before them from one height to another, bringing forward 
their right, so as to acquire strength upon the enemy’s flank 
in proportion to the advance. Brig. General Pack made a 
very gallant attack upon the Arapiles, in which, however, he 
did not succeed, excepting in diverting the attention of the 
enemy’s corps placed upon it from the troops under the 
command of Lieut. General Cole in his advance. 

‘ The cavalry under Lieut. General Sir Stapleton Cotton 
made a most gallant and successful charge against a body of 



1812. 


FLORES DE AVILA. 


303 


the enemy’s infantry, which they overthrew and cut to pieces. 
In this charge Major General Le Marchant was killed at the 
head of his brigade ; and I have to regret the loss of a most 
able officer. 

^ After the crest of the height was carried, one division of 
the enemy’s infantry made a stand against the 4th division, 
which, after a severe contest, was obliged to give way, in 
consequence of the enemy having thrown some troops on the 
left of the 4th division, after the failure of Brig. General 
Pack’s attack upon the Arapiles, and Lieut. General the 
Hon. L. Cole having been wounded. 

' Marshal Sir William Beresford, who happened to be on 
the spot, directed Brig. General Spry’s brigade of the 5th 
division, which was in the second line, to change its front, 
and to bring its fire on the flank of the enemy’s division ; 
and, I am sorry to add that, while engaged in this service, he 
received a wound which I am apprehensive will deprive me 
of the benefit of his counsel and assistance for some time. 
Nearly about the same time Lieut. General Leith received a 
wound which unfortunately obliged him to quit the field. I 
ordered up the 6th division, under Major General Clinton, to 
relieve the 4th, and the battle was soon restored to its former 
success. 

‘ The enemy’s right, however, reinforced by the troops 
which had fled from his left, and by those which had now 
retired from the Arapiles, still continued to resist ; and I 
ordered the 1st and Light divisions, and Colonel Stubbs’s 
Portuguese brigade of the 4th division, which was reformed, 
and Major General William Anson^s brigade, likewise of the 
4th division, to turn the right, while the 6th division, sup- 
ported by the 3rd and 5th, attacked the front. It was dark 
before this point was carried by the 6th division ; and the 
enemy fled through the woods towards the Tormes. I pur- 
sued them with the lst and Light divisions, and Major 
General William Anson’s brigade of the 4th division, and 
some squadrons of cavalry under Lieut. General Sir Staple- 
ton Cotton, as long as we could find any of them together, 
directing our march upon Huerta and the fords of the 
Tormes, by which the enemy had passed on their advance; 
but the darkness of the night was highly advantageous to 



SPAIN. 


304 


1812. 


the enemy, many of whom escaped under its cover who must 
otherwise have been in our hands. 

' I am sorry to report that, owing to this same cause, Lieut. 
General Sir Stapleton Cotton was unfortunately wounded by 
one of our own sentries after we had halted. 

‘ We renewed the pursuit at break of day in the morning 
with the same troops, and Major General Bock's and Major 
General Anson's brigades of cavalry, which joined during 
the night ; and, having crossed the Tormes, we came up with 
the enemy’s rear of cavalry and infantry near La Serna. 
They were immediately attacked by the two brigades of 
dragoons, and the cavalry fled, leaving the infantry to their 
fate. I have never witnessed a more gallant charge than 
was made on the enemy’s infantry by the heavy brigade of 
the King’s German Legion, under Major General Bock, 
which ^vas completely successful; and the whole body of 
infantry, consisting of three battalions of the enemy’s 1st 
division, were made prisoners. 

‘ The pursuit was afterwards continued as far as Pena- 
randa last night, and our troops were still following tlie 
flying enemy. 

^ Their head quarters were in this town, not less than ten 
leagues from the field of battle, for a few hours last night ; 
and they are now considerably advanced on the road towards 
Valladolid, by Arevalo. They were joined yesterday on their 
retreat by the cavalry and artillery of the army of the North, 
which have arrived at too late a period, it is to be hoped, to 
be of much use to them. 

' It is impossible to form a conjecture of the amount of the 
enemy’s loss in this action ; but, from all reports, it is very 
considerable. We have taken from them 11 pieces of can- 
non several ammunition waggons, 2 eagles, and 6 colors ; 
and 1 General, 3 Colonels, 3 Lieut. Colonels, 130 officers of 
inferior rank, and between 6000 and 7000 soldiers are pri- 
soners f ; and our detachments are sending in more at every 
moment. The number of dead on the field is very large. 


* ^ The official returns only account for 1 1 pieces of cannon, but it is believed 
that 20 have fallen into our hands.’ 

f * The prisoners are supposed to amount to 7000 ; but it has not been pos« 
•ible to ascertain their number exactly, &om the advance of the army imme- 
diately after the action was over.’ 



1812. 


FLORKS DE AVILA. 


305 


‘ I am informed that Marshal Marmont is badly wounded, 
and has lost one of Kis arms ; and that four General Officers 
have been killed, and several wounded. 

* Such an advantage could not have been acquired without 
material loss on our side ; but it certainly has not been of a 
magnitude to distress the army, or to cripple its operations. 

‘ I have great pleasure in reporting to your Lordship 
that, throughout this trying day, of which I have related the 
events, I had every reason to be satisfied with the conduct 
of the General Officers and troops. 

^ The relation which I have written of its events will give a 
general idea of the share which each individual had in them; 
and I cannot say too much in praise of the conduct of every 
individual in his station. 

^ I am much indebted to Marshal Sir William Beresford 
for his friendly counsel and assistance, both previous to, and 
during the action ; to Lieut. Generals Sir Stapleton Cotton, 
Leith, and Cole, and Major Generals Clinton, and the Hon. 
E. Pakenham, for the manner in which they led the divisions 
of cavalry and infantry under their command respectively ; 
to Major General Hulsc, commanding a brigade in the Gth 
division ; Major General G. Anson, commanding a brigade 
of cavalry ; Colonel Hindc; Colonel the Hon. William Pon- 
sonby, commanding Major General Le Marchant’s brigade 
after the fall of that officer ; to Major General W. Anson, 
commanding a brigade in the 4th division ; Major General 
Pringle, commanding a brigade in the 5th division, and the 
division after Lieut. General Leith was wounded; Brig. 
General Bradford ; Brig, General Spry ; Colonel Stubbs ; 
and Brig. General Power, of the Portuguese service ; likewise 
to Lieut. Colonel Campbell of the 94th, commanding a bri- 
gade in the 3rd division ; Lieut. Colonel Williams of the 
60th foot ; Lieut. Colonel Wallace of the 88th, commanding 
a brigade in the 3rd division ; Lieut. Colonel Ellis of the 
23rd, commanding Major General the Hon. E. Pakenham’s 
brigade in the 4th division, during his absence in the com- 
mand of the 3rd division ; Lieut. Colonel the Hon. C. Gre- 
ville of the 38th regiment, commanding Major General 
Hay’s brigade in the 5th division, during his absence on 
leave ; Brig. General Pack ; Brig. General the Conde de 
Rezende of the Portuguese service ; Colonel Douglas of the 

VOL. IX. X 



306 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


8th Portuguese regiment; Lieut. Colonel the Conde de 
Ficalho of the same regiment ; and Lieut. Colonel Bingham 
of the 53rd regiment; likewise to Brig. General D’Urban 
and Lieut. Colonel Hervey of the 14th light dragoons; 
Colonel Lord Edward Somerset, commanding the 4th dra- 
goons ; and Lieut. Colonel the Hon. F. Ponsonby, com- 
manding the 12th light dragoons. 

^ I must also mention Lieut, Colonel Woodford, command- 
ing the light battalion of the brigade of Guards, who, sup- 
ported by two companies of the Fusiliers, under the com- 
mand of Captain Crowder, maintained the village of Ara- 
piles against all the efforts of the enemy, previous to the 
attack upon their position by our troops. 

^ In a case in which the conduct of all has been con- 
spicuously good, I regret that the necessary limits of a dis- 
patch prevent me from drawing your Lordship’s notice to 
the conduct of a larger number of individuals ; but 1 can 
assure your Lordship that there was no officer or corps 
engaged in this action who did not perform his duty by his 
Sovereign and his country. 

' The Boyal and German Artillery, under Lieut. Colonel 
Framingham, distinguished themselves by the accuracy of 
their fire wherever it was possible to use them ; and they 
advanced to the attack of the enemy’s position with the 
same gallantry as the other troops. 

^ I am particularly indebted to Lieut. Colonel De Lancy» 
the Deputy Quarter Master General, the head of the depart- 
ment present, in the absence of the Quarter Master General, 
and to tlie officers of that department and of the Staff corps, 
for the assistance I received from them, particularly Lieut. 
Colonel the Hon. L. Dundas and Lieut. Colonel Sturgeon 
of the latter, and Major Scovellof the former; and to Lieut. 
Colonel Waters, at present at the head of the Adjutant 
General’s department at head quarters ; and to the officers of 
that department, as well at head quarters as with the several 
divisions of the army ; and Lieut. Colonel Lord FitzRoy 
Somerset, and the officers of my personal Staff. Among 
the latter I particularly request your Lordship to draw the 
attention of His Royal Highness the Prince Regent to His 
Serene Highness the Hereditary Prince of Orange, whose 
conduct in the field, as well as upon every other occasion, 



FtORES DE AVILA. 


1812. 


307 


entitles him to my highest commendation, and has acquired 
for him the respect and regard of the whole army. 

* I have had every reason to be satisfied with the conduct 
of the Mariscal de Campo Don Carlos de Espana, and of 
Brigadier Don Julian Sanchez, and with that of the troops 
under their command respectively ; and with that of the 
Mariscal do Campo Don Miguel Alava, and of Brigadier 
Don Josef O’Lalor, employed with this army by the Spa- 
nish Government, from whom, and from the Spanish autho- 
rities and people in general, I received every assistance I 
could expect. 

^ It is but justice likewise to draw your Lordship’s at- 
tention upon this occasion to the merits of the officers of the 
civil departments of the army. Notwithstanding the in- 
creased distance of our operations from our magazines, and 
that the country is completely exhausted, we have hitherto 
wanted nothing, owing to the diligence and attention of the 
Commissary General, Mr. Bissett, and the officers of the 
department under his direction. 

' I have likewise to mention that, by the attention and 
ability of Dr. M'Grigor, and of the officers of the depart- 
ment under his charge, our wounded, as well as those of the 
enemy, left in our hands, have been well taken care of; and 
I hope that many of these valuable men will be saved to the 
service. 

‘ Captain Lord Clinton will have the honor of laying at 
the feet of His Royal Highness the Prince Regent the 
eagles and colors taken from the enemy in this action. 

* I enclose a return of the killed and wounded. 

^ By letters received from Lieut. Colonel Sir Howard 
Douglas, I learn that General Santocildes had left 8000 men 
to carry on the siege of Astorga, and had joined General 
Cabreras division at Benavente with about 3C00: and that 
the whole 7000 were on their march along the Esla towards 
the Duero. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Wellington. 


‘ Earl Bathurst.' 



m 


SPA IK. 


1812. 


Return of Ki/kJ, fVounded, nnd ]li(Iimngf of ike Alliei Arniyt under the command 
of General the Earl of fVellingioitf KJi.jin the battle near Saiamanca, on the 
22Wo/yw/y, 1812. 



rc 

u 

V 

5a 

o 

Serjeants. 

Rank and File. 

Horses. 

Total. 

British. 

Oi 

1 

u 

Spanish, 

Kiiled . . 

41 

28 

625 

114 

C94 

3^8 

1 30 1 ' 

2 

AVoimclttl . 

252 

178 

3840 

133 

4270 

2714 

1 

1 1552 

4 

Missing . 

1 

1 

2.54 

41 

25G 

71 

1 182 

1 

— 


7b l^at'l Bathunt. 

* My dear Lord, ‘ Flores de Avila, 24th July, 1812. 

^ I hope that you will be pleased with our battle, of which 
the dispatch contains as accurate an account as I can give 
you. There was no mistake ; every thing went on as it 
ought; and tliere never was an army so beaten in so short a 
time. If we had had another hour or two of daylight, not 
a man W'ould have passed the Tonnes ; and as it was, they 

would all have been taken if had left the 

garrison in Alba dc Tormes as I wished and desired ; or, 
having taken it away, as I believe before he was aw^arc of 
my wishes, he had informed me that it was not there. If 
he had, I should have marched in tlie niglit upon Alba, 
where I should have? caught them all, instead of upon the 
fords, of the Tormes. But this is a little misfortune, which 
docs not diminish the honor acquired by tlic troops in the 
action, nor, I hope, the advantage to be derived from it by 
the coqntry ; as I do not believe there are many soldiers 
who Avere in that action, who are likely to face us again till 
they shall be very largely reinforced indeed. 

" I am very anxious that a mark of His Iloyal Highness’s 
favor should be conferred upon Sir Stapleton Cotton.' I 
believe he would be much gratified at receiving the Red 
Riband; No cavalry could act better than ours did in.tlie 
action; and I must say for Sir Stapleton, that I do not know 









1812. 


FLORES DE AVILA. 


309 


where we should find an officer that would command our 
cavalry in this country half so well as he does. 

^ I request your Lordship to send us out remount horses 
for the cavalry and the artillery. These daily marches, 
sjvirmishes, battles, &c., consume an immense number of 
them ; and we can get none here to suit our purpose for 
cither artillery or cavalry. Marmont has now had a rein- 
forcement of not less than 2000 cavalry sin.ee I came to 
Salamanca in June. I hope that we have deprived him of; 
a few hundred of them ; and that, at all events, his late- 
rpinforcement does not make him now more than 500 or 600 
more than he was when he last crossed the Diiero. But the 
Ibss has fallen principally upon the French infantry ; and 
qiir cavalry must be kept up, or we cannot stay in the plains.! 
I should wish also to be able to equip some more artillery, 
and of a larger calibre ; as it is not agreeable to be can- 
nonaded for hours together, and not be able to answer even 
with one gun. 

‘ I see that the King is very anxious to collect every thing 
against us. I think the French could not now remain in 
Andalusia, probably not south of the Luero, if the Anglo- 
Sicilian army had appeared upon the eastern coast. 

^Marmont has lost his arm*; Generals Foy, ClauSel, 
Bonct, and Ferrey, arc wounded; General Thomierc is 
killed. These are five of eight Generals of Division. There 
are, besides, a great number of Generals of Brigade killed 
or wounded. General Curto is missing, and I believe is 
prisoner. How they get on their troops at such a rate, I 
cannot conceive ; but they left this about two this morning, 
and they will arrive in Valladolid to-morrow. 

‘ I will answer your letter of the , which I have re- 
ceived, by the next post. 

" Believe mo, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ' WELLINGTON. 

To Lieut, General Sir T Graham, K,B, 

^ My dear SiRi ‘ Flores de Avila, 25th July, 1812. 

Ll cannot allow the dispatches to gooff without writing 
you a few lines respecting our action of the 22nd. You will 

* This intelligence proved to be incorrect. 



SPAIN. 


3J0 


1812. 


see our previous movements detailed in my dispatch of the 
21st, and that of yesterday. 

' I took up the ground which you were to have taken 
during the siege of Salamanca, only the left was thrown 
back on the heights, it being unnecessary, under the circum- 
stances, to cover the Ford of Marta. We had a race 
for the large Arapiles, which is the more distant of tlie two 
detached heights which you will recollect on the right of 
your position : this race the French won, and they were too 
strong to be dislodged without a general action. 

* I knew that the French were to be joined by the cavalry 
of the army of the North on the 22rid or 23rd, and that the 
army of the Centre was likely to be in motion. Marmont 
ought to have given me 2 Lpont d'or, and he would have made 
a handsome operation of it. But instead of that, after 
manoeuvring all the morning in the usual French style, 
nobody knew with what object, he at last pressed upon my 
right in such a manner, at the same time without engaging, 
that he would have either carried our Arapiles, or he would 
have confined us entirely to our position. This was not to 
be endured, and we fell upon him, turning his left flank ; 
and I never saw an army receive such a beating. 

" I had desired the Spaniards to continue to occupy the 

castle of Alba de Tormes. liad evacuated it, I 

believe, before he knew my wishes ; and he was afraid to let 
me know that he had done so ; and I did not know it till 
I found no enemy at the fords of the Tormes. When I 
lost sight of them in the dark, 1 marched upon Huerta and 
Encinas, and they went by Alba. If I had known there 
had been no garrison in Alba, I should have marched there, 
and should probably have had the whole. 

‘ Marmont, Glausel, Foy, Ferrey, and Bonet, arc wounded 
badly. Ferrey, it is supposed, will die. Thomiere is killed. 
Many Generals of brigade killed or wounded. 

^ I need not express how much I regret the disorder in 
your eyes since thi^ action. 

^ I am in great hopes that our loss has not been great. 
In two divisions, the 3rd and 5th, it is about 1200 men, in- 
cluding Portuguese. There are more in the 4th and 6th ; 
but there arc many men who left the ranks with wounded 
officers and soldiers, who arc eating and drinking, and 



1812. 


FLORES DK AVILA. 


311 


engaged m with the inhabitants of Salamanca; I 

have sent, however, to have them all turned out of the town. 

^ I hope that you receive benefit from the advice of the 
oculists in London. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ LieuL General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir T. Graham^ KM, 

‘ Beresford's wound is not dangerous. Leith’s arm is 
broken, and his wound painful. Cole’s wound is through 
the body, and it is apprehended will be tedious. Cotton’s 
is through the fleshy part, and the two bones of his arm. It 
may be a bad wound, if there should be haemorrhage.’ 


To Dr. ATGrigor. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Flores de Avila, 25th July, 1812. 2 p.m. 

‘ I have received your letter of yesterday at noon, and 
I am very much obliged to you for the, good accounts which 
you have given me of our wounded. 1 assure you that I am 
very sensible of the diligence and attention of the medical 
department, of which I have reported my sense to the Se- 
cretary of State. 

' I think you will do well to send to Ciudad Rodrigo only 
those whose wounds are not likely soon to recover, and tlie 
movement of whom will not be prejudicial to them, as we 
must get the men to their regiments again as soon as we can. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Dr, M'Grigor: ‘ Wellington. 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K,B, 

^ Sir, ‘ Flores de Avila, 25tli July, 1812. 

‘ I enclose copies of my last dispatches to the Secretary 
of State containing accounts of the operations of the allied 
army from the 14th instant, including the general action 
fought near Salamanca on the 22nd instant. 

‘ I beg you to lay before the Spanish Government, for 
their information, such parts of these dispatches as you may 
think proper. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon, ‘ Wellington. 

Sir H, Wellesley, K,B: 



•SPAIN*-: : .• 


m2. 


m 


‘ Baihurs^ *' '' ‘ 

^ Mx DKAK |jOuby ' . ■ ' VKores 3e Aviia, 25tli July, 1812. 

"1 enclose a letter ii;oin l)r. M^Grigor, which will show 
the state of our woundcci officers and soldiers. Most of the 
^Younds are, I believe, slight. , / 

, * t beg your itordship’s attention to that part of the letter 
which refers to the sending out additional medical assistance 
to this army. 

^ I have reports this day, that the King moved from 
Madrid on the 21st with 12,000 or 15,000 men to join Mar- 
inont ; and he had arrived yesterday at San Pascual and 
Papatrigo, in the province of Avila, on his road to Alba do 
Tonnes. He there heard of Marmpnt’s defeat, and he re- 
tired, my posts inform me, towards Villa Castin; others say 
on the Adaja, to cover Marmont’s retreat. 

^ He will add to Marmont’s cavalry ; but I do not think 
that both together will venture to allow us to approach them. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

Earl Bathurst,' ' W ELM ^ cnON. 

To Earl Bathurst, 

* My dear Lord, ‘ Flores de Avila, 25th July, 1812. 

" I find the troops so much fatigued by the battle and 
their previous and subsequent marches, and the enemy have 
got SO' far before the infantry, that I halted this day, and 
have sent bn the light cavalry and guerrillas in pursuit. 

‘ I will try the remedy proposed in your dispatch and 
Jotter of the 3rd, for the inconvenience of the Attorney 
and Solicitor General’s opinion on the 24th Section of the 
Articles of War. But I am afraid, it will not answer the 
purpose entirely. I do hot know of any thing that annoys 
me ^o much, as the misbehaviour of a few of the tibops 
(thbsc coming up from hospitals, or those just arrived fixitn 
England) to the Mi^bitaats of the country who invariably 
behave with kindness to them ^ 

>1 trust entirely to Mn Sutton to choose a proper person 
to be sent out here. But besides a knowledge of his pro- 
fession, he should have some little knowledge 6f the world, 
and indulgence' for the manners of the class of people among 
whom bo is coming tb livci : i h 



1812. 


ALDEA^ SEGA. 


313 


' I concur with you in thinking that it is not likely to 
make the measure worse, to make the full increa,se of pay to 
non copimissioned officers depend upon their haying been 
in the situation for two years,, The enjoyment of some 
increase, and the hopes of the further increase, will keep 
them on their good behaviour, and it docs npt much signify 
how men acquire good habits; when once acquired, they do 
not easily abandon them. I should wish, however, if tlie 
public could afford the expense, to see the old proporUons 
of p^y re-established. 

‘ The explanation of the Order in Council respecting 
Spanish merchants is perfectly satisfactory. When I com- 
plainecl of that order, I had it in con tern platipn to march 
into Andalusia; and I was apprehensive that I might bp 
involved with the Spanish authorities for the protection of 
Mr. of Xerez, who has behaved very ill. 

' I am much o])liged to you for the intelligence from the 
North. If the Emperor of Russia has any resources, and 
is prudent, and his Russians \vill really fight, Buonaparte 
will not succeed. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

Earl Bathurst: ‘ WELLl^GTON. 

To Lieut, Colonel Sir IJ. Doaglast Bart, . 

SlPx, ‘ Aklca Seca, 26 tli July, 1812 . 

‘ Marshal Marmont has continued his retreat by Olmedo 
towards Valladolid, and out troops have followed him ; and 
the main body of the army will be to-morrow at Arevalo and 
at Muriel, on the Zapardiel river, the advanced guard being 
forward in pursuit of the enemy, and the army will continue 
its march along the Zapardiel and Adaja rivers. 

^ The King moved from Madrid on the 21st with a corps 
of from 10,000 to 12,000 men, and arrived yesterday at 
Blasco Sanchoj between Arevalo and Avila, He there 
h-Card of the defeat of Marmont, and immediately retired, 
it is said, towards Villa Castin and Madrid. The direction 
of his retrograde march, however, is not confirmed; knd I 
think it most probable that he is gone towards Segovia. 

; f Under these circumstances, it is most desirable that 
General ^ar^tocildcs should approach a little nearer to us 
with that part of the Galician army which ia disposable. 



314 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


‘ It appears that General Silveira remaining on the Esla, 
and observing well the garrison of Zamora, General San- 
tocildcs might move forward as far as the heights of San 
Roman, and communicate with our left by the fords of 
Castro Nuho, to which 1 will request Don Carlos to detach 
a party of Don Julian’s cavalry. 

^ If, contrary to my expectations, a part of Marmont’s 
army should move upon him, he would always have his 
retreat open across the Esla. 

‘ If they should move upon Rio Seco, in order to raise the 
siege of Astorga, he could move in the same direction, in 
order to cover that operation ; and on the other hand, he 
could be so near our left as to be able to co-operate in any 
offensive plan against the enemy ; or if tlie sieges of Toro 
and Zamora should be thought expedient, lie would be in 
readiness to receive the supplies and assistance to carry on 
these operations. 

" I request you, therefore, to suggest to General San- 
tocildes to take up this position. 

' I have not adverted to the garrison of Toro ; as con- 
sisting only of 200 men, it cannot give a moment’s uneasi- 
ness to anybody. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut. Cohnel ' Wellington. 

^ir H. Douglas, Bart.' 

To Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K.B. 

* Aldea Seca, in the province of Avila, 

^ My dear Hill, 26 th July, 1812. 

‘ I received this morning your letter of the 22nd. It is 
difficult to form an opinion of the enemy’s intentions in the 
south. From the three letters sent in your letter of the 
20th, I judge that the King presses Soult to send Drouet 
according to his former orders ; yet it would appear from 
Soult’s letter of the 8th July, that he does not think of such 
a movement ; and according to your accounts to the 22nd, 
nothing had been done towards it ; on the contrary, it ap- 
peared that he was coming himself into Estremadura. 

‘ I think that my instructions to you from the 8th to the 
16th of this month provide for every event. First; that 
of Soult assembling his whole force in Estremadura. Se- 



1812. 


AREVALO. 


315 


conclly ; that of Drouet crossing the Tagus to join the King, 
according to the orders we know the King sent. Thirdly ; 
that of Treillard making an invasion by the valley of the 
Tagus. 

^ In regard to the last, it appears not likely to take place, 
particularly at present, as the King has actually marched 
from Madrid, and is in front of this army ; but you will of 
course have judged it proper to call in General Campbell’s 
detachment from Merida, if SouU should be in Estreinadura 
in force : for the purposes of the march to the north of the 
Tagus, it Avould be nearly as well placed at Badajoz as at 
Merida: and if Soult should be in force in Estreinadura, 
sufficient to keep your main body in check, no detachment at 
Merida can answer any of the purposes for which Campbell’s 
detachment was to be placed there, or even be in safety. 

^ Marmont has gone in all haste on Valladolid: he left 
Olmedo this morning. The King was yesterday at Blasco 
Sancho, between Avila and Arevalo ; he there heard of the 
defeat of Marmont, and went off, it is supposed, towards 
Villa Castin, that is, Guadarrama and Madrid. I do not 
understand this movement, as he leaves Marmont’s remains 
in a manner at my discretion, unless he intends to cross the 
Tagus with his army of the Centre, to join Drouet and Soult, 
and fall upon you : however, I shall observe him closely, and 
can reinforce you, as fast as he can reinforce Soult. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, KS: 


To Major General . 

' My dear General, ‘ Arevalo, 27th July, 1812. 

" I heard some time ago of some dissatisfaction with his 

situation on the part of Lieut. Colonel ; but as you 

did not mention the subject to me, and I heard no more of 
it on his part, I concluded that it was one of those cases of 
difference of opinion which sometimes occur among those 
who mean best by the service ; and I took no further notice 
of what had been mentioned to me. 

" I had heard nothing of the circumstances of which you 



m 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


write ; and I beg to know from you> whether yoti wish wh^ 
you mention to be formally considered, or only that Lieut 
Colonel should be removed from the — th division. 

^ In order to enable you to decide upon this point, it may . 
be expedient to make you acquainted with my opinion. 
There is no doubt that it is the duty of the Assistant 
Adjutant General to make such a reconnaissance as you 

ordered Lieut. Colonel to make upon Alba do Tonnes; 

atid I cannot understand his refusing to make it. 

' If you arc satisfied with his being removed from the — th 
division, I have no objection to the matter being there 

dropped, as I am convinced that Lieut. Colonel cannot 

be serious in supposing that that which he was ordered to 
do, w*as inconsistent with the duty of the Assistant Adjutant 
General. But if you wish the matter to go farther, it must 
be regularly inquired into. 

‘ I shall take no farther stops upon the subject till I shall 
hear from you, which I beg may be as soon as may be con- 
venient to you. I shall be at Olmcdo to-morrow. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Major General ' Wellington. 

To Uin Excellency Charles S heart. 

* My dear Sir, * Arevalo, 27th July, 1812. 

* I have been so much occupied lately, that I have not 
been able to answer your letter of the 13th of July. 

' Besides the 100,000 dollars which I told you in my letter 
of the 1 6th that I had ordered to be i.ssucd to the Portuguese 
Government, I ordered 100,000 dollars of the money in the 
town should be likewise given. 

^ I shall desire the Commissary General to send a note of 
tire value of the supplies to Mr. Bell, when \\6 shall furnish 
them In future. 

^ Ybu omitted to enclose Lord Castlercagh’s letter to 
which you refer in your’s of the 13th July; although you 
did enclose a letter ftorn the Deputy Storekeeper General 
to Mr. Harrison, together with a list of clothing, &c., for 
the Spanish troops ; and a letter from Mr. Hcrrics to Colonel 
Gordon. ' 

‘These articles must remain in store at Li^ibon, ahdl 

... . . : , . . ■ i 



OLMEDO. 


1812* 


317 


afeall order them to be issued in proportion as they may bo 
wantdd, 

^ Believe me, &C, 

* His Excellency ^ Wi: LUNG TON. 

(Charles ^tuart,^ 

To Colonel Torrens. 

" My dkar Torrens, ‘ Olmedo, 28 tli July, 1812 . 

‘ As the fairest way of enabling His Royal Highness to 
judge of the merits of the officers and corps engaged in tlie 
general action of the 22nd, I think it proper to transmit, to 
you the reports which I have received from the several Ge- 
neral Officers commanding divisions engaged; with tho 
cjiception of the cavalry. Sir Stapleton Cotton not having 
transmitted a report. 

‘ Some of these gentlemen have been rather liberal in 
their recommendations of officers for promotion, while others 
have not been so much so ; and I have therefore deemed it 
best to make out a list from the whole, \yhich I beg you to 
submit to His Royal Highness. 

‘ I include Colonel Elley in the list, as His Royal Higli- 
ncss may tliink it expedient to take this occasion to grant 
liim the rank of Colonel, wdiieh he claims as Lieutenant 
Colonel of six years’ standing of the Blues. lie was wounded, 
and had two horses killed under him. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colonel Turreiis: ' Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

^ My Loud, ‘ Olmedo, 28 lli July. 1812 . 

" The army have continued their march in pursuit of the 
enemy since I addressed you on the 2dth instant and we 
have continued to take many prisoners. 

/A part of the enemy’s army crossed the Duero yesterday, 
near Puente de Du^jro, and the remainder, their left wing, 
were in m^rch toiyards the bridge of Tudela this morning at 
nine o’clock, when I last heard from our advanced posts; 

" The main body of the allied army is this day on tlio 
Adaja and Zapardiel rivers, in this neighbourhood, the Ught 
qay^lyy lj)eingdn front, in pursuit of t)ie enemy. ^ I 

‘ I have requested General Santocildcs, who is upon the 



318 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


Esla with 8000 men of the army of Galicia, to move forward 
to the heights of San Roman on this side of Toro, and to 
communicate with our left by the fords of Castro Nuno. 

^ It appears that the King left Madrid on the 21st, with 
the army of the Centre, supposed to consist of from 10,000 
to 1 2,000 infantry, and from 2000 to 3000 cavalry ; and he 
directed his march by the Escurial upon Alba de Tormes. 
He arrived at Blasco Sancho, between Avila and Arevalo, on 
the 25th, where he heard of the defeat of Marshal Marmont ; 
and he retired in the evening ; and between that time and 
the evening of the 26th he marched through Villa Castin to 
Espinar. A non-commissioned officer’s patrole of the 14th 
light dragoons and 1st hussars, from Arevalo, took in Blasco 
Sancho, on the evening of the 25th, shortly after the King 
had left the place, 2 officers and 27 men of the King’s 
cavalry, who had been left there to follow his rear guard. 

^ I have reason to believe that the King had no regular 
account of the action of the 22nd till he passed the Puerto 
de Guadarrama yesterday ; but he then returned, and was 
directing his march upon Segovia. I have not yet heard 
how far he had advanced. 

" All accounts concur in regard to the great loss sustained 
by the army of Portugal; but I think it probable that they 
will endeavour to join the King on the Upper Duero, if the 
King should continue on this side of the mountains, unless I 
should previously have it in my power to strike a blow 
against his corps. 

^ By accounts from Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill to the 
24th instant, it appears that the enemy had in some degree 
reinforced the troops in Estremadura. The Lieut. General 
had removed to Zafra, as being the coolest and most healthy 
situation in Estremadura, and preparatory to the detach- 
ment which I ordered him to make to the right of the Tagus, 
in case the enemy should detach in that direction. 

^ It is reported that General Ballesteros had marched 
on another expedition towards Malaga, and that he was 
opposed by a division of the army of the South, under Ge- 
neral Laval. 

I have not received detailed accounts of Commodore Sir 
Home Popham’s operations on the coast since the capture 
of Lcqueitio, but I understand that he has taken Castro 



1812 . 


COLLEGE 


319 


Urdiales ; and there is no doubt that those operations have 
drawn the enemy’s attention to that quarter, and that Ge- 
neral Caffarelli has been able to detach only cavalry to the 
assistance of the army of Portugal. From the advantage 
derived from these operations, your Lordship will form a 
judgment of that which would have been derived, under 
existing circumstances, from the expedition which had been 
concerted and agreed upon to the Eastern coast of the Penin- 
sula, with the troops from Sicily, combined with the Spanish 
troops in Majorca and at Alicante. 

^ I enclose a statement which 1 have made out from a 
return in my possession of the' strength of the army of Ara- 
gon in the month of April, from which your Lordship will 
see that, after allowing for the divisions detached to the 
army of the North, under General Palombini, which was 
destined to join Marshal Marmont, there will still remain a 
very formidable army under Marshal Suchet, which it is 
desirable should not be added to the other troops acting 
against this army. 

' I have the honor to he, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ WELLINGTON. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

* My dear Lord, ‘ Olmedo, 28 tli July, 1812 . 

' I enclose the last report of our wounded officers and 
soldiers. I shall be much obliged to you if you will urge the 
Medical Board to send us out medical assistance as soon as 
possible. 

" I likewise request your Lordship not to forget horses for 
the cavalry and the artillery, and money. We are absolutely 
bankrupt. The troops are now five months in arrears, instead 
of being one month in advance. The staff' have not been 
paid since February ; the muleteers not since June, 1811; 
and we are in debt in all parts of the country. I am obliged 
to take the money sent to me by my brother for the Spa- 
niards, in order to give my own troops a fortnight’s pay, who 
are really suffering for want of money. 

' It is said that Marmont cannot live, but could not stop 
to have his arm cut off, and that a mortification has taken 
place. It is difficult to judge of the exact loss of the French ; 



320 


SPAIN, 


1812 . 


but it is said to be between 17,000 and 20,000 men. They 
all agree, that if we had had an hour more of daylight, the 
whole army would have been in our hands. General Clausel, 
who is wounded, now commands the army. The only appre- 
hension I have is, that when the army of Portugal and the 
King shall have joined, they will be too strong for us in 
cavalry. I am convinced that their infantry will make no 
stand. 

" Believe me, &c. 

' Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 


To Lieut. General Lord William Beritinck. 

‘ Boecillo, near Valladolid, 

" My dear Lord, 30 th July, I812. 

" I received this morning your letter of the 28th June, 
with all the enclosures you refer to, excepting your instruc- 
tions to Lieut. General Maitland ; and 1 am happy to find 
that, although it appears that you do not expect any suc- 
cessful result from the operations of the Sicilian army on the 
eastern coast of the Peninsula, to which point I shall advert 
presently, you had resumed the intention of sending them 
there. I acknowledge that I thought that, upon considera- 
tion, you would find the grounds for your intended expe- 
dition to the coast of Italy so little satisfactory, that you 
would resume the plan for the eastern coast which had been 
concerted and arranged ; and every thing remains in exactly 
the state in which it was in the beginning of June, excepting 
that the first division of the Sicilian army has gone, accord- 
ing to your former directions, to Sardinia. I should hope, 
however, that there will be no inconvenience in bringing it 
back from thence. 

^ In regard to the aid to Spain to be derived from this 
expedition, I am concerned to find that you have altered 
your opinion upon it since you first proposed the mea.sure 
to Government; and if I did not hope that General Mait- 
land and the Staff and other officers of the Sicilian army 
would alter their opinion upon a nearer view of what they 
have to accomplish, and its effect upon the contest, I should 
despair of any success from persons corning on a service 
holding such opinions. 



im. 


BOECILLO. 


321 


^ I am qmio certain that they can fsnCcefed in taking 
Tarragona, and in opening a communication between the 
fleet and the Spanish army by Tarragona^which is in itself 
a service of the greatest importanca I am likewise quite 
certain tliat they can take tlie city of Valencia; that they 
will thereby give to the Spaniards, and deprive the French 
of, an important resource ; that the war will revive again in 
Valencia; and that, if matters are well arranged in that 
quarter, the enemy will never again gain possession of that 
city. 

‘ But if I should be mistaken in my expectations of their 
success in these operations, I cannot be mistaken in their 
effect upon my own. I have lately, on the 22nd, beaten 
Marshal Marmont in a general action, fought near Sala- 
manca, and I have pursued him beyond the Duero; and cmr 
troops have this day entered Valladolid. The King is at 
Segovia, with a corps of 12,000 or 15,000 men ; and, having 
driven Marmont frCm the lower Duero, my next object is to 
prevent him and Marmont, if possible, from joining, which 
I am about to attempt. But either the French must lose 
all their communications with their troops in the north of 
Spain, or they must oblige me to withdraw towards the 
frontiers of Portugal, They cannot effect this object with- 
out; bringing against me Sachet’s army, or the army of the 
South, or both. I cannot but think it very important that 
the attention of Suchet should be diverted from his supposed 
operations against me by the operations of the Sicilian army, 
which will go to such important objects as Tarragona and 
Valencia. I should think it would be diverted from me by 
the operations of the Sicilian army, if they are in time, be- 
cause I find that Sir Home Pophara, with a few hundred 
marines and the guerrillas of the north, has succeeded in 
preventing Caffarelli from detaching any thing to Mar- 
mont*;S assistance, excepting cavalry, notwithstanding the pp^- 
sitive order of the King ; and that he had obeyed these orders 
so far as to, order ti^ops to march to Marmont, which, upon 
hearing of Popham’s operations, he countermanded. Then, 
if Sachet’s attention should not be diverted from me, and, 
notwithstanding Marmont’s defeat, the French should be^ 
come too strong for me in 014 Castille, I shall at least have 
the satisfaction of reflecting, while I am retiring^ that Gene-^ 

VOL. IX. Y 



322 SPAIN. 1812. 

ral Maitland’s progress will be unopposed, and that we shall 
take Tarragona and Valencia. 

" But it is not impossible, that neither my success in 
Castille, nor General Maitland’s on the eastern coast, will 
eventually give any aid to Spain ; upon which point I have 
nothing to say. That is a subject for tlie consideration of 
politicians ; and, as a military officer, I can advert to any 
plan only as being likely to be attended with military suc- 
cess, or otherwise; but I beg to remark, that the same 
observation is applicable by politicians, not only to evei'y 
military plan, but to the general operations of every war, 
and even to the objects of the war itself. 

" I have taken up so much of your attention upon this 
subject, because, in my opinion, without intending it, you 
have, by a few words, thrown upon the King’s Ministers a 
larger share of the responsibility for the success of General 
Maitland’s expedition than belongs to them. I am certain 
he will succeed ; and, at all events, he will do good to my 
operations. But much as I wish for their success, I assure 
you that I should not give my advice that General Mait- 
land’s credit, or the safety of the troops, should be risked 
for that object only, 

' Believe me, &c. 

^ Lieut. Geueral ' ^ WELLINGTON. 

Lord William Bentinck: 

To Major General Cooke, 

^ Sir, ‘ Mojaclos, 3Jst July, 1812. 

‘ Adverting to the Spring inspection of the 2nd batt. 
87th regiment, I have to request that the return of Courts 
Martial during the period may be an extract from the 
Courts Martial book; in which must be detailed the sol- 
dier’s name, the crime for which tried, the name of the 
officer who ordered the trial, the name of the President of 
the Court Martial, the sentence, and the punishment in- 
flicted or remitted. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

♦ Major General Cooke' ‘ Wellington. 



1812. 


MOJADOS. 


323 


To Dr* MQrigor* 

‘My dear Sir, ‘Mojados, aist July, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 29th, and have spoken 
to General Alava respecting the requisition on Peharanda 
for bedding for the hospital at Salamanca. I shall send the 
requisition ; but you have at Salamanca the Intendant, 
Sehor Mexia, and he is the person who ought to make the 
requisition, and who has the power to enforce it. 

‘ Have we any hospital bedding of our own on the way 
up ? Could we not have paillasses and sheets made at Sala- 
manca ? 

‘ We must expect some, I am afraid a large, increase of 
sickness ; but adverting to the size and commodiousness of 
the buildings at Salamanca, to the existing probability that 
we shall keep possession of it in security, to the general 
healthiness of the situation, and to the ease with which the 
hospital at Salamanca can be evacuated if necessary, I am 
desirous, if possible, of not allowing the men to go farther 
back than that place. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Dr. M^Grigcyr: ' Wellington. 


To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K,B. 


f ‘Mojados, 31st July, 1812. 

‘ I have the honor to transmit a dispatch which I have 
received from Earl Bathurst, containing an application from 
General Mazaredo to have the regiment which he commands 
supplied with arms and clothing; and I shall be much 
obliged to you if you will comply with his wishes, and have 
the “ Voluntaries de la Patria” furnished with arms and 
clothing from the equipments at your disposal at Cadiz, pro- 
vided the corps should be in a sufficient state of discipline 
to receive arms. 

‘ In the event of there being any clothing in store of the 
pattern of that worn by General Mazaredo’s regiment, I will 
thank you to cause that to be issued on this occasion. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Right Hon. ‘ W ELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B.' 


Y 2 



324 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


To Earl BathursU 

' My Lord, • Mojados, 31st July, 1812. 

^ In compliance with the directions contained in your 
Lordship’s dispatch of the 30th of June (No. 6), I have re- 
quested His Majesty’s Ambassador at Cadiz to supply 
General Mazaredo’s regiment with arms and clothing from 
the equipments now at his disposal at that place. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: " W ELLINGTON. 


To General Santocildes. 

< Sir,. ‘ Cuellar, 1st August, 1812. 

' I have had the honor of receiving your Excellency’s 
letters of the 30th, and I have written to the Conde de 
Amarante to request him to form the blockade of Zamora. 

^ I should hope that your Excellency would experience no 
difficulty in procuring mules to draw the artillery which I 
have placed at your disposition, by requisition on the large 
towns of Leon, the Asturias, and Castille. 

" I have moved here in consequence of the reports of the 
King’s intention to move to Aranda de Duero, to join the 
remains of the army of Portugal ; but it appears that he has 
taken the position at Segovia principally to cover Madrid, 
and I conclude he will move as soon as I shall approach 
him. 

‘ I have learnt that the enemy have still about 200 men in 
Tordesillas ; and I beg leave to recommend to your Excel- 
lency to send a force to take them, and gain possession of 
that town and the bridge over the Duero. They have 
nothing in Simancas. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ General Santocildes: ‘ W Ellington. 

To General the Conde de Amarante. 

* Sir, * Cuellar, 1st August, 1812. 

" Having suggested to General Santocildes the expediency 
that he should cross the Duero with the troops under his 
command, it is desirable that, in order to protect the com- 
munication of General Santocildes with the kingdom of 
Galicia, the troops belonging to your Excellency’s division. 



1812 . 


CUELLAR. 


325 


now upon the Esla, should blockade Zamora, at least on the 
right of the Duero, if it should not be practicable for them 
to effect that object on the left of that river. 

* The garrison of Zamora consists of 800 men, I believe 
without cavalry, and your Excellency will be the best judge 
whether the force under your command, now on the Esla, is 
sufficient to undertake the blockade of that place on one or 
both sides of the Duero, under existing circumstances, and 
you will blockade the place or not, on one or both sides of 
the Duero, as you may think best. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Conde de Amarante: " Wellington. 

To General el Conde de Penne Villemur. 

* Monsieur le General, ‘ Cuellar, ce 2 Aout, 1812. 

^ J'ai cu rhonneur de recevoir la lettre de votre Excel- 
lence, sans date, sur rhabillement de la 5™® armee Es- 
pagnole. D'abord il faut que je vous dise que je n’ai pas 
encore d’habillement pour la cavalerie. En second lieu, il 
parait quo le regiment de I’Union est bicn habille, et il 
serait inutile de I’habiller de nouveau ; mais si vous voulez 
envoyer un officier avec des charrcttes a Alcaccr do Sal, 
vous recevrez rhabillement pour 1400 homines pour Ics regi- 
ments de Leon et Tiradores de Badajoz. 

^ Je ne puis vous donner aucune reponsc sur votre pro- 
position de lever un corps d’Hussards pour servir avec les 
troupes Anglaises ; vous devricz la faire a votre Gouverne- 
ment. 

^ Je vous prie d’ordonner a votre Commissaire que vous 
enverrez a Alcacer do Sal, de donner un re^u pour les 
articles d’habillement qu’il recevra. 

^ J’ai rhonneur d’etre, &c. 

‘ El Conde de Penne Villemur: ‘ Wellington. 

To Lieut, General Maitland, 

« Sir, ‘ Cuellar, 2n(l August, 1812. 

^ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 18th 
of July, and with it the duplicates of the enclosures in a 
letter of the 28th June, which I had received from Lieut. 
General Lord William Bentinck. 



S26 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


' I have now the honor of enclosing the copy of a letter 
which I wrote to Admiral Sir Edward Pellew on the 1st 
ultimo, containing my opinion on the line of operations to be 
followed, which I have every reason to believe will be suc- 
cessful. 

' I hope that you will be joined by General Roche’s 
division. 

‘ I have to inform you that this army beat Marshal Mar- 
mont in a general action, fought near Salamanca, on the 
22nd of July ; and we have pursued him beyond the Duero, 
and have taken possession of Valladolid. Marshal Marmont 
is badly wounded. 

^ The King had collected the army of the centre to co- 
operate with Marmont ; and he retired first upon Madrid. 
He afterwards came forward to Segovia, where he remained 
till yesterday morning ; but finding that I had turned some 
troops upon him, after Marmont had been driven across the 
Duero, he has retired through the Guadarrama to Madrid. 

' I enclose a list of the corps of Suchet’s army, and their 
strength of non-commissioned officers and rank and file, as 
present and fit for duty in April last. The 20th and 60th 
regiments besides belong to this army, but I do not know 
their strength ; and I am inclined to doubt their being 
with it. 

‘ Since this return, Suchet has sent a division, under 
General Palombini, to join the army of the North, and I 
believe some troops to join the King. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General Maitland,' ‘ Wellington. 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Cuellar, 2nd August, 1812. 

^ *1 write to inform you that I have ordered the Commissary 
General to pay the chest of the aids 100,000 dollars on 
account of the subsidy for August. You received 200,000 
dollars in July ; that is, 100,000 of the sum received from 
England, and 100,000 of another sum. 

Believe me, &c. 

His Excellency ‘ Wellington. 

Charles Stuart' 



1812. 


CUELLAR. 


327 


To Lieut General Maitland. 

^ Sir, ‘ Cuellar, 3rd August, 1812, 

^ Since I wrote to you yesterday I have received farther 
intelligence of the strength and disposition of the army in 
Valencia. 

^ On the 18th June, the troops in the enclosed list, of 
which you have the strength under arms in the list I sent 
you yesterday, were distributed as therein stated in the 
kingdom of Valencia. 

^ It appears that they were collected on and south of the 
Jucar about the 20th of July, and that the 2iid division, 
under General Harispe, had some success near Castalla, 
where they were attacked on the 21st, as it is stated, by 
12,000 men, under the command of General Joseph O’Don- 
nell and General lloche. 

^ It appears that Suchet felt great uneasiness respecting a 
fleet which appeared off the coast of Cullera at that period ; 
which fleet I suppose to be cither the empty ships attached 
to General Koche’s division at Alicante ; or the transports 
with General Koche’s division on board, returning to join 
you at Majorca, after hearing that Lord William Bentinck 
had sent the troops under your command ; or the transports 
attached to General Roche’s division, with Spanish troops 
on board, proceeding to make a landing on the coast of 
Valencia, in co-operation with the attack by Castalla. 

' The Kith regiment, stated in the enclosed paper to be at 
Cuenca, arrived at Madrid on the 30th of July. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut General Maitland: ' Wellington. 

To Lieut General Roche. 

^ My DEAR Sir, ‘ Cuellar, 3rd August, 1812. 

' I write to let you know that we beat Marshal Marmont 
in a general action fought near Salamanca on the 22nd of 
last month. He and many other General Officers were 
wounded, and some killed ; and the army almost destroyed 
as a military body. We pursued them beyond the Duero, 
and they arc going to Burgos. 

" The King assembled, at Blasco Sancho, the army of the 
Centre, and was in march to join Marmont, when he heard 



828 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


of his defeat ; he retired on the 25th, and went through the 
Guadarrama, but returned again to Segovia on the 27th, 
from whence he retired to Madrid on the 1st instant. He is 
very anxious to receive reinforcements from Suchet ; and one 
regiment, the 16th, has joined him at Madrid. It arrived 
there the 30th. 

‘I see by the French accounts, that the troops under 
General Joseph O’Donnell met with a check at Castalla on 
the 21st instant. They say that you were with them. But 
as there was likewise an expedition at sea off Cullera, I trust 
that that part of the story is not true ; and that you will have 
joined the troops with which you were destined to act, and 
which have at last arrived at their destination. 

" Pray let me hear from you. I send this letter to General 
Joseph O’Donnell, to be opened by him or any of the Spanish 
or English generals. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

*LieuL General Roche: ^ Wellington. 


To Colonel Torrens, 

* My DEAR Torrens, ‘ Cuellar, Srd August, 1812, 

' I have received your letter of the 7th of July, and I am 
much obliged to you for what has been done for March and 
Lord Charles Manners. 

^ In respect to Colonel Gordon, I hope that you will feel 
no uneasiness in regard to representations quite unauthorised 
by me, in respect to his being sent here. If I had felt any 
objections to the appointment I should have objected to it 
with as much freedom as I consented to it with readiness ; 
and I entertain no doubt that he will be of much use to the 
army and to me. 

' I do not consider Stewart to have resigned his office, nor 
do I know how Pakenham feels about succeeding to it if he 
has. I will, however, speak to him. I am glad to find that 
Lord Aylmer is coming out, as it is time that >ve should 
have somebody besides Waters at the head of the Adjutant 
General’s department. 

^ Believe me, &c. 


‘ Colonel Torrem: 


‘ Wellington. 



1812. 


CUELLAR. 


329 


To Earl Bathurst* 

* My Lord, ' Cuellar, 3id August, 1812. 

" I have received your Lordship’s letter of the 8th July, in 
which you have informed me of the additional sums of money 
sent, and to be sent for the use of this army. I am much 
obliged to your Lordship for this attention to our wants. 

^ The arrival of the money will not only be very conve- 
nient and tend much to our security, but adverting to the 
comparative prices of all sorts of grain in this country and 
on the coast of Portugal, and to the expense of transport, I 
can assure your Lordship that it will decrease that part of 
the expense which defrays the consumption of grain by the 
troops and horses, to the amount of very nearly two thirds of 
the whole amount. 

" Your Lordship will therefore see how important it is to 
keep up, if possible, the supply of money to the army. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• Earl Bathurst: ‘ W Ellington. 


To Earl Bathurst* 

* My Lord, ‘ Cuellar, 3rd August, 1812. 

f has transmitted to me a copy of his letter of 

the 29th June to the Earl of Liverpool, in which he has in- 
formed his Lordship of his intention to resume the plan of 
sending the expedition to the eastern coast of Spain ; and I 
received yesterday a letter of the 18th of July, of which I 
enclose a copy, from Lieut. General Maitland, who has 
arrived in Majorca in command of the British and German 
troops. 

"I was concerned to observe in the letter from 

to the Earl of Liverpool, that it was the opinion of , and 

the general opinion in Sicily, that the Spanish cause would 
derive ‘^no real aid ” from this expedition; notwithstanding 

that had been the first to propose the expedition 

to the east coast of the Peninsula, and that I had concurred 
with him in thinking that it would be highly advantageous to 
the cause of the Peninsula in general, and to the operations 
of the army under my command in particular. 

^ Notwithstanding the disadvantage with which every 
service is carried on by officers who are of opinion that their 



330 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


efforts will be useless ; and notwithstanding that it appears 
too by the enclosed letter from Lieut. General Maitland, that 
he is not satisfied with his force, and not decided as to his 
object, I now entertain no doubt respecting the military 
success of this expedition, if the plan of operations is carried 
into execution which I suggested to when the ex- 

pedition to the east coast of the Peninsula was first in con- 
templation ; and which I repeated to Admiral Sir Edward 
Pellew in my letter from Alaejos of the 1st July f. 

^ It is true that, owing to the alteration of the destination 
of the expedition, General Roche’s division has returned from 
the rendezvous to Alicante; and it is probable that they will 
not be employed in the first instance as was intended and 
expected. But it appears that thej^ are employed in opera- 
tions in Valencia against the army under the command of 
Marshal Suchet ; and so far, they divert the attention of a 
part of his force from the troops under the command of 
Lieut. General Maitland. 

‘ If the Lieutenant General should be successful in taking 
Tarragona, he will have rendered a most important aid to the 
cause in Spain. The Spanish army in Catalonia will again 
have a secure point of communication with Ilis Majesty’s licet, 
and with the Government at Cadiz ; and the war in Catalonia 
will assume a new aspect. If Lieut. General Maitland should 
be able afterwards to take the city of Valencia, he will 
deprive the enemy, and will give to the Spaniards a resource 
of the utmost importance to both ; and the retention of the 
possession of that city, connected with the position of the 
allied army in Castille, must have the most important result 
respecting the enemy’s position in the South of Spain. But 
I may be mistaken regarding the military success of Lieut. 
General Maitland’s expedition ; and it is possible, though 
by no means probable, that he will fail in his attack upon 
Tarragona, and may not be able to make that proposed 
upon Valencia. I beg leave, however, still to submit to 
your Lordship my opinion that the disposable troops in 
Sicily could not be employed in a manner more advan- 
tageous to the cause of the allies in Spain, than in drawing 
the attention of the enemy to the east coast. 


* See page 5, 


t See page 264, 



1812. 


CUELLAR. 


331 


" In my dispatch of the 28th ultimo, (No. 8) I transmitted 
to your Lordship a return of the army under the command 
of Marshal Suchct, to which the command of the army in 
Catalonia has recently been added. I see from the inter- 
cepted letters, that the King has been most urgent with him 
to send troops into Castille to reinforce the armies of Por- 
tugal and of the Centre; and one regiment, the 16th of the 
line, arrived at Madrid on the 30th of July. There is no 
doubt that still farther reinforcements would have been sent 
before this time if expectations had not been entertained on 
the eastern coast of the arrival of the troops from Sicily ; 
and they would now be sent before long, if those troops did 
not appear upon the coast. 

' I may bo mistaken ; but it appears to me to be an im- 
portant military object to the cause of the allies, not to allow 
the brave army under my command to be overpowered in 
Castille by the junction in operation against them of all the 
French armies in Spain. In every view, therefore, of success 
or failure by the troops under Lieut. General Maitland, it 
appears to me that they will render material aid to the 
cause of the allies in Spain. 

‘ I now beg to draw your Lordship’s attention to that part 
of Lord William Bentinck’s instruction to Lieut. General 
Maitland, enclosed in his dispatch to the Earl of Liverpool, 
of the 29th June, in which his Lordship directs the Lieut. 
General to quit the coast in the second week in September. 

" It is perfectly true that Ilis Majesty’s Government had at 
first in contemplation only a short service on the east coast ; 
and that I reckoned upon the co-operation of the troops from 
Sicily, only till the period of the equinoctial gales. 

‘ Circumstances, however, have now materially altered ; 
and cither my position in Castille must be supported by the 
continuation of the appearance of the troops on the eastern 
as well as on the northern coast of the Peninsula, or it must 
be expected that I shall be obliged to withdraw into Portugal 
at an early period after those troops shall have withdrawn. 

‘ If Lieut. General Maitland should succeed in taking 
Valencia, there appears no reason for which he should quit 
the coast, unless, indeed, the enemy’s army in the kingdom 
of Naples should be so reinforced, as that the island of Sicily 
shall be in danger. 



332 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


^ If he should not succeed in taking Valencia^ as long as 
the allies shall remain in possession of Minorca, Alicante, 
and Carthagena, there appears no reason why the fleet of 
transports and troops under the command of Lieut. General 
Maitland should quit the coast, or should discontinue their 
efforts to alarm the enemy for the safety of their possession 
of Valencia. The expedition to the northern coast might 
likewise remain on the coast to keep up the alarm which has 
already been so useful to this army. 

^ This is my view of these operations at the present 
moment ; and I hope that, if your Lordship should concur 
in it, you will send orders accordingly to Lieut. General 
Maitland, and to Sir Home Popham. 

' Circumstances may put it in my power to acquire fresh 
successes, particularly against the army of the Centre ; and 
this army may by its own efforts secure its position in Castille 
at least till the French shall evacuate Andalusia. It will 
then remain ’to be considered what ought to be done with 
the Sicilian troops ; but in the mean time, I trust that your 
Lordship will not allow them to withdraw from the Penin- 
sula, as ordered, in the second week in September. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst,^ ‘ Wellington. 

To the Officer commanding His Majesty's Ships at Coruna, 

< Sir, ‘ Cuellar, 4th August, 1812. 

^ I shall be very much obliged to you if you will send one 
of His Majesty’s ships to England with my aide de camp. 
Captain the Earl of March*, who has charge of dispatches 
which it is important that His Majesty’s Government should 
receive at an early period. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Officer commanding ^ Wellington. 

His Majesty's Ships at Coruna,' 

To Commodore Sir Ho7ne Popham, 

* My dear Sir, ‘Cuellar, 4th August, 1812 . 

‘ I take the opportunity of Lord March’s going to Coruna 
with dispatches for England, to write you a few lines to in- 
* The Duke of Richmond, K.G. 



1812. 


CUELLAR. 


333 


form you that we have driven Marmont’s army, I believe, as 
far as Burgos, since our victory of the 22nd of last month. 
I have come here with our right, in order to look a little 
after the King, who had assembled the army of the Centre 
about Segovia, but he has retired upon Madrid. 

^ I beg leave to congratulate you upon the success of your 
operations. They have been of great use to me, as I know 
that CaflFarelli was prevented from detaching more than 
cavalry to Marmont’s assistance, and that he even recalled a 
division of troops which had marched for that purpose. I 
trust, therefore, that you will not discontinue them. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Commodore Sir Home Popham' * WELLINGTON. 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Cuellar, 4lh August, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 28th July, enclosing 
one of the 7th May from Lord Strangford. I beg that you 
will mention to Lord Strangford how much obliged to him I 
am for the trouble he has taken about grain for us ; and I 
beg that you will, without loss of time, take measures for 
the importation to Portugal, from the Brazils and River 
Plata, of as large quantities of wheat and wheat flour, prin- 
cipally, as can be got ; and of barley, oats, and Indian corn. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart* 

To Earl Bathurst, 

* My Lord, ‘ Cuellar, 4th August, 1812. 

‘ The French army of the Centre, after having passed 
through the Guadarrama pass, and after its head had 
arrived at the Venta de San Rafael, returned to Segovia, 
where King Joseph arrived on the 27th of July at night. 
The object of this movement was apparently to divert the 
allied troops from the pursuit of the army of Portugal, and 
to enable the latter to maintain themselves upon the Duero, 
in which, however, the enemy did not succeed. Their rear 
guard remained in some strength on the left of the Duero 
during the 28th and 29th; but the Light and 1st divisions, 
and the cavalry, having crossed the Eresma and Cegar rivers 
on the latter day, the enemy’s rear guard retired during the 



3S4 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


night across the Duero, and thence followed the movements 
of the main body towards Villavaiiez, abandoning Valladolid, 
and leaving there 17 pieces of cannon, a large quantity of 
shot and shells, and other stores, and the hospital, with 
about 800 sick and wounded. 

‘ The guerrilla chief, Marquinez, took 300 prisoners in the 
neighbourhood of Valladolid on the 30th. Our advanced 
guard crossed the Uuero, and our parties entered Valladolid 
on the same day ; and I had the satisfaction of being re- 
ceived by the people in that city with the same enthusiastic 
joy as I had been in all other parts of the country. 

' The army of Portugal having thus crossed and quitted 
the Duero, it was necessary to attend to the movements of 
the army of the Centre, and to prevent a junction between 
the two on the Upper Duero, which it was reported was in- 
tended. While therefore the advanced guard and left con- 
tinued the pursuit of the army of Portugal, I moved the 
right along the Cegar to Cuellar, where I arrived on the 
1st instant. 

" The King retired from Segovia on the evening of the 
1st, and marched through the Guadarrama ; and he left at 
Segovia an advanced guard, principally of cavalry, under 
General Espert, having destroyed the cannon and ammu- 
nition which were in the castle; having carried off the 
church plate and other valuable property, and having levied 
a considerable contribution on the inhabitants of the town. 

‘ I have not yet heard whether a detachment which I sent 
to Segovia yesterday, under Brig. General D’Urban, had 
entered that town. 

" The Army of Portugal have continued their retreat 
towards Burgos. 

‘ The siege of Astorga is not yet brought to a conclusion; 
but upon finding that the King had returned from La Venta 
de San Kafael on the 27th of July, I requested General 
Santocildes to come nearer to this army, and to cross the 
Duero with that part of his corps which had approached that 
river, and he is now at La Nava del Rey; but he is now 
about to return to the right of that river, and he will place 
himself near the fords of Polios and Herreros, and commu- 
nicate with our left. 

' The enemy have continued to increase their force in 



1812. 


CUELLAR. 


335 


Estremadura, and had moved about the 27th or 28th to- 
wards the Guadiana, and threatened a force which I had 
requested Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill to place at 
Merida, with a view to its march to the right of the Tagus, 
in case the enemy’s long-threatened detachment should 
move in this direction. But Lieut. General Sir Rowland 
Hill having moved from Zafra to Villa Franca, the enemy 
retired again into La Serena. 

^ I enclose Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill’s report of a 
very handsome affair with the enemy’s cavalry on the 24th 
of July, by the division of cavalry under the command of 
Lieut. General Sir William Erskine *. 

* Lieut, General Sir R. Hilly K.B., to General the Earl of Wellingtony K.B, 

< My Lord, ‘ Zafra, 27th July, 1812. 

‘ I have the honor to transmit to your Lordship a copy of a letter from Lieut. 
General Sir W. Erskine, and one from Major General Long, reporting an affair 
between some of our cavalry and three regiments of the enemy’s cavalry, in the 
neighbourhood of Ribera, on the 24th instant, 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

^ General ‘R. Hill, 

the Earl of Wellington, K,G.' 

Lieut. General Sir PV, Etskine to Lieut, General Sir R. Hilly K.B, 

‘ Sir, ‘ Los Santos, 25th July, 1812. 

‘ I have the honor to report to you that a body of the enemy’s cavalry, con- 
sisting of two regiments of dragoons and one of chasseurs, under the command 
of General of Brigade Lallemand, attacked yesterday morning the Portuguese 
piquet at Hinojosa, which they drove in as far as Ribera, where four squadrons 
of Portuguese cavalry were stationed under the command of Colonel Campbell f, 

* The force under Colonel Campbell being greatly inferior to that of the 
enemy, he was under the necessity of retiring upon Villa Franca, which he did 
in the best order, Major General Long advancing at the same time from Villa 
Franca, with the brigade of British cavalry under his command, and Captain 
Lefebre’s troop of horse artillery to support him. The enemy, on perceiving 
the advance of General Long's brigade, halted on the high ground betwixt 
Ribera and Villa Franca, General Long also halting until joined by a part of 
his brigade that had been detached in the morning to observe the enemy on 
the side of Usagre. During this interval I directed Major General Slade, with 
two regiments of his brigade, to move from Los Santos, and directed its march 
on the left flank and rear of the enemy. As soon as General Long had col- 
lected the whole of his brigade he moved forward against the enemy, who im- 
mediately withdrew beyond the defile at Ribera. General Long passed the 
defile to the right and left of the town, and attacked the enemy with much 
spirit, whilst the artillery fired with good effect from the high ground on the 
Villa Franca side of the defile. The enemy retired rapidly upon Hinojosa 


f Mar^chal de Campo Sir John Campbell, K«C«T,S* 



m 


SPAiNi 


1 » 12 . 


^ By act^tlntisj from Gadwf‘6f the '24th Jalyi I learn that’ 
General Ballceteros havilig mov^d towards Malaga^ somd^ 

close)/ followed ^ firom Hinc^psa the eoetny retired to ’ Llera^.and from thence to ^ 
Valenc^ijaide Xori^es., They were followed as far , as Llera. At Hinojosa the i 
two regiments under Major General Slade joined Major General Long’s brigade, ^ 
having made a very rapid march at a trot from Los Santos j but from the great 
distance coaid not artiVe in sufficient time to ciit off the enemy's retreat upon 
Llera* ; , , . ■ 

‘ Major General Long speaks m the highest terras of all the troops under hia , 
command, particularly the horse artillery, who displayed great activity in their , 
motemehts and jirecision in their fire, by which the enemy suffered very con- 
siderably. The loss of the enemy oit this occasion has beet! about 30 meh, and^ 
a great many horses killed; 11 men and above 30 horses tal^en,. The loss ott 
our side, has been only one man killed, and seven wounded. 

'I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Lieut. General ‘ W. Erskine. 

Sit R. Hill, K.B.^ 


Mc^or General Long to Lieut. General Sir fV. Enkine, Bart. 

‘ Sib, ‘ Villa Franca, 25th July, 1812. 

^ I have the honor to enclose Colonel Campbell’s report upon the proceedings 
of yesterday, at the point where he was more immediately engaged j and his 
report is sufficiently circumstantial, and, as far as I can judge, correct, to render 
it unnecessary for me to expatiate on the subject. 

‘ I received the report of the enemy’s advance upon Ribera too late to admit 
of my preventing his occupying that town, and the commanding heights oa 
this side. The account of his force was so differently represented, that having 
three troops of the brigade absent, I thought it not advisable to act against him 
until they could be recalled ,* and as the attempt to dislodge him might bring 
on a serious affair, on ground of which all the advantages were on the enemy’s 
side, I was anxious to secure the support of the 3id dragoon guards, stationed 
at Fuente del Maestre, and to wait for the report of what might be passing on 
the side of Usagre, before I commenced any offensive movement. 

‘ Finding upon the arrival of the patrol from Usagre, that no enemy was in 
that neighbourhood, I directed the troops under my command (without waiting 
longer for the 3rd dragoon guards) to proceed against the enemy. They retired 
aciross the river, which enabled me to bring up the artillery upon the heights 
they had relinquished, and to employ it with evident and very good effect ; and 
I continued my advance upon, and pursuit of the enemy as rapidly as I thought . 
consistent with the preservation of order and regularity, beyond the defile of 
Hinojosa, when, from the lateness of the hour, the fatigue sustained by the 
Portuguese troops, the artillery and one squadron of the hussars, I judged it 
proper to halt. 

‘ Nothing could exceed {he steadiness of the 9th and 13th dragoons, the | 
activity of the artillery, and the precision of their fire, or the good countenance ' 
and gallantry displayed by those portions of the Portuguese troops and of my 
own brigade, that had the opportunity of closing with and engaging the enemy* . 
Apd I consider myself justified in estimating the loss of the latter, at the very j 
loivest^ at 45 men killed and prisonew# With respect +o the hcrocr; sir nrniiy* 



1812. 


CUELLAR. 


337 


apprehensions were entertained that he was cut off from San 
Roque and Gibraltar, by the rapid movements of General 
Villatte’s division from the blockade of Cadiz to the neigh- 
bourhood of Los Barrios; and it appears that General 
Laval, with another division, was between General Balles- 
teros and Malaga. 

" There had been no "accounts from Gibraltar of a later 
date than the 2 1st, at which time it appears to me that it 
was not practicable for General Ballesteros to retire to 
Gibraltar; but I trust that, finding that to be impracticable, 
he will at once have taken his line of retreat upon the king- 
dom of Murcia. , 

' It appears that when Lieut. General Roche found that 


were left mutilated and killed in the field, ^i^^d others caught and carried away 
by the peasants, that I have no criterion by which to judge of the enemy’s loss 
in this respect, hut we have only brought away 20. 

‘ I feel myself particularly indebted to Colonel Campbell for his assistance 
and co>operution ; and I should be wanting injustice if I omitted to express my 
admiration of the conduct of the artillery under the immediate orders of Cap- 
tains Lefebre and Whinyates, and my approbation of the spirit displayed by a 
squadron of the 2nd hussars, under Major Wissel, supported by the two divisions 
of the 9th and 13th dragoons, under Lieut. Handley of the former, and Lieut. 
Edwards of the latter regiment. 

‘ It is equally my duty to acknowledge the services I received from Captain 
Wemyss and Lieut. Strenuwitz, two of your personal Staff, whose zeal, spirit, 
and exertions were, as usual, conspicuous ; nor are the officers of my own Staff 
(Brig. Major Dunbar and Captain Dean) less deserving of my notice. 

* Enclosed is a return of casualties sustained upon this occasiioii. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

^ Lieut. General * R. Long, Major Gen, 

Sir TV. Erskine, Bart.* 

Return of Killedy H oundedy and Mis$ing of Major General Long'* a brigade) in an 
affair with the Enemg near Ribera, on the ^lAlh Julg, 1812. 



Officer.s. 

Serjeants. 

Rank and File. 

Horses. 

Total loss of Officers, 
Non-cuiiimissioned 

0 dicers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed . , . 

— 


— 

■ 


Wounded . . 


— 

6 


6 

Missing • • 

— 

— 

— 

1 

— 


VOL. IX. Z 









338 


SPAIN. 


J812. 


Loird William Beatinck did aot propose to carry into exor 
cution the plan of operations which had been concerted 0 :n 
the eastern coast of the Peninsula,, he returned with his 
division from Majorca to Alicante. 

‘ I judge from the French acco;unts which I have received, 
that General Joseph O’Donnell, who commands the Spanish 
army of Murcia, and, it is said. General Roche, attacked the 
French General Harispe, on the 21st of July, at Castalla 
in Valencia, while a body of troops in a fleet of transports, as 
I believe, coming from the south, threatened a landing on 
the coast near Cullera. The French reports state that Ge- 
nerals O’Donnell and Roche were defeated by General 
Harispe, and lost 3000 prisoners and 3 pieces of cannon ; 
but Marshal Suchet had collected the greatest part of the 
French force in Valencia, consisting of three divisions of 
infantry and his cavalry, on and to the south of the Jucar. 

" The 16th French regiment, from Marshal Suchet’s army, 
joined the army of the Centre at Madrid, on the 30th of 

‘ Lord William Bentinck having resumed the expedition 
to the eastern coast of the Peninsula, I have a letter from 
Lieut. General Maitland, of the 18th July, announcing his 
arrival at Majorca, and stating that the troops which were 
sent from Sicily, the equipments from Portugal, and the 
troops under General Whittingham, were collected there. 

^ I have received no further accounts of the operations 
under Sir Home Popham. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst, ‘ Wellington. 

^ P.S. I have just heard that the French troops under 
General Espert have withdrawn from Segovia by San Ilde- 
fonso.’ 


To Earl Bathurst. 

^ My Lord, ^ ‘ Cuellar, 4th August, 1812. 

^ I enclose a letter from Dr. M‘Grigor, giving an account 
of the sick and wounded officers and soldiers, and a medical 
return of the sick and wounded officers. 

" I likewise enclose the money state of the field army of 
the 1st of August; and a memorandum, showing the dif- 



1812. 


CUELLAR. 


339 


ference of oor numbers by this and the state of the 12th of 
July> enclosed on the 14th of July. 

^ I am sorry to say that the British troops are by no 
means healthy, notwithstanding the pains which have been 
taken to make moderate marches with them, and to encamp 
them in healthy situations, and that they have never failed 
to receive their regular food. 

" The 5th and 38th regiments, and the troops recently 
arrived from England, are excessively unhealthy; and those 
arrived from the Mediterranean, viz., the 2nd batt. 4th regi- 
ment, from Ceuta, and the 82nd regiment, from Gibraltar, 
are not much better, although the latter have not yet joined 
the army, and arc not on the returns. 

" The truth is, that neither officers nor soldiers are accus- 
tomed to march. The soldiers are very irregular; and, 
owing to their irregularities, are not able to bear the labor 
of inarching in the heat of the sun ; and then the command- 
ing officers of each of the 2nd batt. 4th, the 1st batt. 5th, 
38th, and 82nd regiments, as well as the commanding officer 
of the 1st batt. 42nd regiment, have disobeyed the orders 
which were given to them, to have their men supplied with 
blankets before they marched from Lisbon, and they are 
consequently very inadequately protected, in comparison 
with the other soldiers, from the sun in the day time, and 
from the dews at night. 

‘ It gives me great concern to be obliged to bring under 
your Lordship’s view this state of this fine army ; but bad as 
it is, I think there is reason to apprehend that it will become 
worse in the course of the next two months. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

^ My dear Lord, ‘ Cuellar, 4th August, 1812. 

^ I have the pleasure to send you a letter from Dr. 
M*G rigor, which I have received since I wrote my dispatch 
on our sickness this day. However, it is very bad ; and it is 
melancholy to see the finest and bravest soldiers in the world 
falling down, owing to their own irregularities, and the igno- 

z 2 



SPAI>.« 


3m 


1313. 


r^nt presumption of ihpjse who think they know better what 
is good for them than those do who have been scrying sp 
long in this country. 

‘ If your Lordship should reinforce this army by an entire 
regiment, or regiments of infantry, I recommend that they 
should come to Cordfia. Let cavalry or artillery horses, or 
detachments of recruits for infantry, go to Lisbon as usual. 

' Let I’egiments of infantry coming to Corufia bring with 
them articles of equipment according to the enclosed list ; 
and I will take measures to have those regiments provided 
with mules and means of transport at Coruna, and that they 
shall be fed and taken care of on the road. 

‘ If you should send any regiments to Coruna, and there 
should be an^^* recruits ready to be sent at the same time for 
any other regiment in the army, they might come by Coruna 
likewise, attached to the regiment, and under charge and 
direction of its commanding ofSccr. 

^ It would be desirable to send with any regiments which 
should land at Coruna a Staff* Surgeon and a hospital mate, 
in case any men should become sick on the road, that they 
might not want medical assistance, as 1 fear tliey could get 
none in Galicia. I am in hopes, however, that as the 
weather becomes cool in Galicia and Leon at an earlier 
period of the season than it does in Portugal, and particu- 
larly as there is no netv wine in Galicia, troops march- 
ing through that province in August and September will 
not suffer in their health as they w’ould in Portugal, and 
that we shall get them to the army in a tolerable state 
for service. But many preparatory arrangements must be 
made for cavalry and artillery horses, and for recruits, which 
can be made only at Lisbon, for which reason I recommend 
that these should be sent to that place. 

* Believe me, &c. 

< Earl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 

To Earl Bathurst, 

^ My Lord, * Cuellar, 4 tli August, 1 si 2. 

^ I send duplicates of my dispatches of the 21st, 24th, and 
28th ultimo, and dispatches of yesterday’s and this day’s date 
to England by ipy aide dc camp, Captaiii the Earl of JJdarch, 



CUEL-tkt?. 


341 


iSl^. 

by^Coto^aj as I think it possible that they maly rcath your 
Lotdship at an earfier period than by way of Lisbon. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• karl Bathurst: ‘ WelLIKgton. 

To Major General Ross, 

^ Sir, ‘ Cuellar, 5th August, 1812. 

^ General llcche or General O’Donnell will have apprized 
you of recent events in this quarter, and I have to acknow- 
ledge the receipt of your letter of the 26th July. 

^ I beg that you will leave a sufficient garrison in the forts 
of Las Galcras and Atalaya, and will proceed with the re- 
mainder of the troops under your command to join and put 
yourself under the command of Lieut. General Maitland, 
applying to Captain Adam, or any other officer of the navy 
on the eastern coast of the Peninsula, to provide you with 
means to transport your troops. 

" In case Lieut. General Maitland should not land on the 
Peninsula, or should rc-cinbark, you will understand that 
you arc to return to Carthagena, with the troops under 
your command, from which place you are detached only for 
the moment; and you will be so kind as to retain in your 
hands the control over all that is going on there, and desire 
the commanding officer to report to you evei'y thing that 
occurs. 

^ I shall apprize Major General Cooke of my having given 
you these instructions, which 1 send open to General O’Don- 
nell ; and you will be so kind as to communicate them to 
General Maitland. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

Major General Ross,' ‘ Wellf^gTON. 


To Lieut, General Roche, 

‘My dear Sir, * Cuellar, 5 th August, 1812. 

‘ I enclose the duplicate of a letter which I wrote to you 
on the 3rd. It is useless to tell you or General O’Dotltiell 
what I propose to do, because you cannot aid in my plans. 
I only rtjqucst that you may not be delbatcd again ; and to 
accomplish this object you must not attack the French if suc- 
cess is not quite certain. 



342 


SPAIN. 


1832. 


^ Threaten as much as yoii can, but do not engage in 
serious affairs. 

^ Send the enclosed to General Ross, and the other to 
General Maitland. You may peruse both. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General Roche: ' Wellington. 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley ^ K.B, 

^ My dear Henry, ‘ Cuellar, 5th August, 1812. 

^ I believe you are aware that I have always had the best 
intelligence from Salamanca, which was given to me by 
persons residing there at the constant risk of their lives, 
who have uniformly refused to be rewarded for their ser- 
vices, which they very justly considered to be rendered to 
their country. They have now applied to me to have their 
services considered and rewarded by the Spanish Govern- 
ment, and I enclose you the papers which they have sent 
me ; and I request you to use your utmost influence with 
the Government, that they may attend to the claims of 
these worthy individuals. 

' Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Ho?i. " Wellington. 

Sir H, Wellesley, K,B: 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Cuellar, 5th August, 1812. 

‘ I have this day received your letters of the 14th, 17th, 
two of the 20th, and one of the 21st, which had been delayed 
in consequence of my having given orders that the post 
might be stopped when Marshal Marmont was moving on 
our right flank. 

^ In answer to that of the 17th, I have to assure you that 
I never authorised Mr. Mackenzie to issue that or any other 
Proclamation. I must observe, however, that our situation 
in Portugal is rather a difficult one. We are required to 
make the greatest exertions to carry on the war, and the 
Government give us no assistance, and take no steps to have 
their own orders and regulations carried into execution. 
Then, if any subordinate British officer surpasses the bounds 
of his authority in order to call forth adequate exertion, the 
subject is immediately made one of serious complaint and 



1M2. 


CUELLAR. 


343 


remonsteauce. How long is this state of tlungs to continue 
to exist ? 

" I have referred your letter to the Commissary General* 
and have desired him to call upon Mr. Mackenzie to account 
for his conduct in issuing such a Proclamation. 

^ In your letter of the 20th, I see another instance of the 
readiness of Dom M. Forjaz to make any complaints, and 
to discover any excuse for not doing that which ought to be 
done. The truth is, that we owe nothing to the Portuguese 
Government on account of posts, as will very easily be 
shown ; and I have ordered the accounts to be closed up to 
the 29th of June last. But if we owed any large sums, it 
must be admitted that we have before paid them regularly ; 
and I see no reason whatever why Dom M. Forjaz should 
be allowed to delay paying Mr. Reynolds till the army ac- 
count should be settled. However, the army account shall 
be settled forthwith, and there shall hereafter be no accounts 
whatever with the Portuguese Post Office. 

" In answer to your other letter of the 20th, regarding an 
increase of subsidy, I have but to repeat that not only I 
shall not propose, but I shall oppose myself to every aug- 
mentation of the Portuguese subsidy in any shape. 

^ It was always settled that the British officers in the 
Portuguese service were to be paid from the chest of the 
aids and neither the Paymaster General of the army, 
nor the Paymasters of their regiments, know any thing 
about their pay. Mr. Bell, as keeper of the chest of the 
aids,” makes such arrangements as he thinks proper, 
either with provincial paymasters, or others, for their pay- 
ment of these officers ; and I deny that the supplies of 
money from the Commissariat to the chest of the aids” 
has been so low as to prevent latterly their regular payment. 

^ I refer to my letter of the 9th of May to Dom M. Forjaz, 
and to the state of our subsequent payments to the end of 
July, to show that the payments in money and kind by the 
Commissariat have exceeded the subsidy; but the real 
state of the case is, that the omission of the Government to 
supply other funds for the support of the army has rendered 
it necessary to issue to the military chest, from the chest of 
the aids,” all the money which has been lodged in the 
latter, and nothing has remained to pay the English ojSiccrs. 



344 


SPAIX. 


1812. 


I believe the arfangeikieTit was> that the Portuguese 
Government should make a specific demand for supplies Of 
grain and provisions by the 20th of every month for the 
succeeding month, with which I would comfply if I ebuld ; 
and I wait for that demand for the month of August. 

^ In regard to money, I have already ordered, as I told 
you in my letter of the 2nd instant, that 100,000 dollars 
should be given immediately for August ; and I shall order 
that further sums be given when I shall hear that we have 
them to give. 

" I have but one answer to give to your letter of the 21st. 
The Government will make such regulations as they may 
think proper regarding entries of grain, or other supplies 
for the British army, and they shall be obeyed as far as it 
may be in my power to enforce them. If the army should 
suffer any inconvenience from such regulations, I shall 
make a representation on the subject to my own Govern- 
ment, who will take such measures as they may think proper. 

^ I conceive that there are strong objections to any in- 
terference on the part of the officers of the Portuguese 
Government in the army stores, or in the purchases by tho 
British Commissariat ; nor do I see what object this in- 
terference is to attain. I do not approve of the Portuguese 
employes, from top to bottom ; and it is not improbable that 
the object of this interference, and these inquiries, is to 
enable some of them to give information to the sellers and 
importers of corn of the state of our stores, to enable them 
to regulate their sales according to this information. How^ 
ever, let the Government regulate the matter as they please, 
and their regulation shall be obeyed ; and if I should find 
that inconvenience results from it, I shall inform my Govern- 
ment of it. " Believe me, &c. 

• His Excellency ' WELU^GTO^'. 

Charles Stuart." 


MEMORA^’DUM. 

To be communicated to General Smtocildes. 

‘ Cuellar, 5th August, 131*2. 
r l'he army under Marshal Marraonf; having decidedly 
retired upon Burgos, and that of the King upon Madridi 
the I^ight and 1st divisions pf the allied British and Poittur^ 



ISKi, 


CUEIXAR. 


345 


guese^ Ari!^^, which have been hitherto . toitrards 4he liver 
DueixHj have received orders to move nearer to the main 
body of the army, which wiE move toiwards Madrid*; 

ft Theibody of Major General Anson’a brigade wiUtremaia 
at VillavaneZi in order to keep up the alarm on that iside ; 
and two or three squadrons are to bo sent to Penafinl, in 
order to observe the Upper Duero. 

^ ^ General Alava is requested to give directions that the 
guerrillas of; Saornil and El Principe [may place themselves 
under the directions of Major General Anson. u 

" The 6th division of infantry, and certain othei* trooj^, of 
which a list will be sent to Major General Clinton by thb 
Quarter Master General, are to remain at Cuellar; and 
those troops of Major General Anson’s brigade of cavalry; 
which have lately been employed to keep up the communi- 
cation with the 1st and Light divisions, must now be em- 
ployed to keep up the communication with Major General 
Clinton. 

"It is recommended that General Santocildes should 
remain oii the right of the Duero, about Tordesillas, occu- 
pying Simancas, and communicating with Major General 
Anson at Villavanez, through Valladolid. 

" The guerrillas of Marquifiez should act under the 
directions of General Santocildes, and should observe all 
that passes towards Palencia, &c., on the right of the 
Pisuerga. 

" The Conde de Araaraiite should continue to blockade 
Zaniora, on the right of the Duero. 

" In case the enemy should move by Palencia, and endea- 
vor to raise the siege of Astorga, or the blockade of Zamora, 
while the allied British and Portuguese army will be engaged 
towards Madrid, which is not very probable, as they have 
nothing but the cavalry in a state lit for service, the Condo 
de Amarante must necessarily raise the blockade of Zamora, 
and retire behind the Esla ; and General Santocildes should 
likewise take such a positioii with his troops on the Esla, 
as to cover the operations of the siege of Astorga. 

" If the siege of Astorga should be brought to a con- 
eWsibn, and that part of » the army of fJalicia should beat 
libcHy,^ we shall fee informed of it ; and this 0vent Will 
make' feb ' impof tabt a chaitgd in o\xt i^tnatibii; dhdi ■ ai new 



3 ^^ 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


arrangement will be suggested to General Santocildes for 
the whole army. 

" In case the enemy should manoeuvre by the Upper 
Duero^ moving above the junction of the Pisuerga, Major 
General Anson should retire upon Major General Clinton’s 
corps, at Cuellar, and, if necessary, both upon Segovia, so as 
to draw nearer to the army. In this case, and more par- 
ticularly if the enemy should not have moved any troops 
upon Palencia, or the right of the Pisuerga, General Santo- 
cildes should cross that river at Simancas, and by moving 
along the Duero, endeavor to cut off their communication 
with Burgos. 

' The troops under Don Julian to be directed by General 
Alava, to follow the movements of the allied British and 
Portuguese army. 

‘ Wellington.’ 


To General Santocildes, 

< Sir, ‘ Mozoncillo, 5th August, 1812. 6 p.m. 

^ Upon considering our situation in all its views, I have 
thought that I should do most good to the cause by march- 
ing immediately upon Madrid, and by endeavoring to dis- 
lodge the enemy from thence ; and I enclose the memo- 
randum of the plan which I have ordered for the troops 
under my command remaining on the Duero, and at 
Cuellar ; of that for the Conde de Amarantc ; and of that 
which I recommended for the adoption of your Excellency. 

' I propose to return to this part of the country, and to 
resume our plans on Zamora, as soon as I shall have re- 
moved the King from Madrid. 

^ I recommend to your Excellency to attend to the enemy’s 
movements from Burgos, towards the kingdom of Leon. I 
propose to return into Old Castille as soon as I can ; but I 
think it most likely that as soon as. they shall hear that I 
am gone towards Madrid, they will move some troops in the 
direction of the kingdom of Leon, and much will depend 
upon your being on the Esla before them. 

" You should lose no time in getting to your army your 
guns from Salamanca; and in removing from Valladolid 
the shot and shells to Salamanca, and the guns into Galicia. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Wellington. 


‘ General Santocildes, ' 



1812. 


TORRE LODONES. 


347 


To General Santocildes, 

^ Sir, ‘ San Ildefoiiso, 9th August, 1812. 

" When I was at Valladolid, it was settled between General 
Alava and me that the officers and soldiers whom the French 
had left there should be sent off to Coruna ; and I under- 
stood from General Alava that Don Benito Marquinez had 
sent off all, of both descriptions, who were able to bear the 
journey. Yet I have heard that French officers have ap- 
peared in the streets of Valladolid, perfectly recovered, and 
with their swords on. 

' I beg to draw your Excellency’s attention to this subject, 
and to point out to you the impropriety of the existence of 
such a practice, and the inconvenience which must result 
from it. 

" It is desirable that, as soon as any officers or soldiers 
should recover sufficiently they should be sent off to Coruna; 
and that every measure should be adopted which is prac- 
ticable, in order to interrupt the communication between the 
enemy at Burgos and the city of Valladolid. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ General Santocildes' ^Wellington. 

To Commodore Sir Home Popham. 

‘ Torre Lodones, near Madrid, 

" My dear Sir, nth August, I812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 4tli instant, but none 
others, whether in cipher or in ordinary writing. 

^ I beg to observe to you that I have no cipher in which 
I could correspond with you ; and unless the Spaniards in 
the north are very different from those I have seen else- 
where, or the enemy opposed to you more active than those 
I have met with, you have no reason to apprehend that your 
letters will be intercepted. Those to whom they may be 
entrusted may not choose to take the trouble of carrying 
them ; but they would prefer death to delivering them to 
the enemy. 

" I am much obliged to you for your account of your ope- 
rations. In regard to those which you have proposed to 
General Mendizabal, I beg to remind you that Marmont’s 
army have fled to Burgos ; and, although they are not in a 



3’48 spAtN; ft 12. 

state to meet us, or any bther body that can be called ah 
army, I fear they would be too much for Mendizabal and 
his guerrillas. Mendizabal will of course have heard of 
Marmont’s march to Burgos, and will have taken care to 
keep out of the way. 

‘ In regard to Mendizabal’s operations, it is difficult, if 
not impossible for me to point out what they ought to be, 
as I am entirely ignorant of his force and means* 1 have 
never yet seen or heard of a Spanish corps capable of under- 
taking any serious operation against the enemy, such as the 
siege of Burgos would be, even if Marmont’s remains had 
not gone there, unless in co-operation with a British coi*ps ; 
and I cannot recommend for Mendizabal that wliich I am 
quite certain he has not the means of accomplishing. 

* In regard to us, after I had driven Marmont’s army 
beyond the Duero, and that they had quitted that river on 
their way to Burgos in a state of disorganization and dis- 
tress, from which they will not soon recover, I turned my 
attention towards the army of the Centre, under the King, 
which was collected on my hank and in my rear. They have 
retired from Madrid, and I hope to be in that city to-mor- 
row, and if I can, give the King a blow ; and when the army 
of Galicia, which has now been two months engaged in the 
siege of Astorga, can bring that operation to a close, I may 
turn my attention to the north. But we have still too many 
enemies in the centre and south untouched to think of that 
side. 

^ In the mean time, the guerrillas in the north, and Men- 
dizabal, should do every thing in their power to harass the 
enemy, to prevent them from collecting magazines of pro- 
visions, and, above all, from communicating with each other. 
Any town or village which should supply the enemy with any 
thing, unless obliged by force of arms, should be destroyed. 

^ If the Spaniards will not raise regular armies, and fight 
like other people, we must make the whole population enter 
into the war if they choose to continue it. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Commodore Sir Home Pojpham»~ ^ Wellington. 

‘ The numbers in your signal book would be as good a 
cipher as we could use ; but you must send me a book by a 



TORRE JPODONES, 


lSjl2. 


349 


messenger from Cqruua, and let me acknowledge the receipt 
of it before you use it in this manner.’ 


To Hu Excellency Charles Stuart 

* Torre Lodonea, near Madrid, 

^ My dear Sir, llih August, 18J2. 

‘ I received this morning your letter of the 3rd, enclosing 
the intelligence from America. 

' As the mouth of the Channel, and the coasts of Portugal 
and Spain, will swarm with American privateers, it will be 
very desirable that you and Admiral Martin should write, as 
I shall, to England, to have measures adopted for the secu- 
rity of our packets in particular, and for the general security 
of our communication with Coruna on one side, and Cadiz 
and Gibraltar on the other. 

' In regard to the first, I shall recommend that we may 
have, at all times, a ship of war cruising off Cape Finisterre, 
and that the packets homeward bound should be ordered to 
make Ushant, from whence they should be seen in safety to 
Falmouth ; and that those outward bound should be ordered 
to make Cape Finisterre. 

^ In regard to the second object, I propose to recommend 
that the Admiral of the Lisbon station should be reinforced 
in frigates and craft to enable him to secure the communi- 
cation between Cape Finisterre and the Rock of Lisbon, 
and between the Tagais and Cadiz and Gibraltar. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ' WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart, 

^ We shall be in Madrid to morrow. I am not quite 
certain whether the enemy mean to leave a garrison in the 
Ketiro. 

‘ The advanced posts w^ere this day withdrawn towards 
T^davera j but I see by letters from Hill of the Gth that to 
that day nothing had moved from Estremadura to join the 
King. I propose to detain the mail till we shall have entered 
Madrid.’ 



360 


SPAIN* 


1812. 


To Colonel Torrens. 

‘ Torre Lodones, near Madrid, 

^ Siu, ‘ 11th August, 1812. 

' I have the honor to enclose a letter from Lieut. General 
Sir Rowland Hill, containing a memorial from Lieut. Colonel 
Stewart, of the 50th regiment, in favor of the widow of Cap- 
tain Candler of that corps, and one from Major General the 
Hon. E. Pakenham, forwarding and recommending an appli- 
cation from the widow of Captain Prescott, of the Royal 
Fusiliers, to receive some provision for herself and children. 
I beg you will submit these papers to the favorable consi- 
deration of His Royal Highness the Commander in Chief. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Colonel Torrens! " Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ Torre Lodones, near Madrid, 

‘ My Lord, lith August, 1812. 

^ I have the honor to enclose the copy of a letter which I 
have received from Marshal Sir William Beresford, on the 
subject of the clothing for the Portuguese army ; and I beg 
to recommend that, if your Lordship should approve of the 
arrangements proposed by the Marshal, measures may be 
taken to insure the early arrival of all the equipments 
required. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst! ‘ Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Sir S. Cotton^ Bart 

‘ My dear Cotton, ‘ Madrid, 13th August, 1812. 

" I have long intended to write to you, but I have really 
not had time to write to any body. I was much concerned 
to learn that you were so unwell ; but I hope that you will 
soon be better, as I am very anxious to have you again with 
the army. 

' Our operations, since you left us, have been as follows. 
We followed Marmont as closely as we could to the Duero, 
but he marched at such a rate, and our troops were so much 
fatigued, that after the first day we did him but little mis- 
chief. After driving him from Valladolid, it appears that 



1812. 


MADRID. 


351 


he and the King, who had returned from this side to Sego- 
via, had thoughts of joining at Aranda de Duero, and I 
moved our right to Cuellar. I there gave the troops a day’s 
halt, upon finding the King retired upon Madrid ; and after- 
wards I thought that, upon the whole, the best thing I could 
do would be to move upon the King and fight him, or force 
him from Madrid, which I have carried into execution. 

' I could not go farther north without great inconvenience, 
and I could at that moment do nothing else. I have left 
Anson’s brigade on the Duero to observe Marmont ; and 
Clinton’s division, and all the new infantry, at Cuellar, to 
support and keep the communication with him. 

" The King has retired upon Aranjuez and Toledo, leaving 
a garrison in the Ketiro. 

^ We had a devil of an affair on the evening of the 11th. 
The French, 2000 cavalry, moved upon the Portuguese 
cavalry ; D’ Urban ordered them to charge the advanced 
squadrons, which charge they did not execute as they ought, 
and they ran off, leaving our guns (Captain McDonald’s 
troop). They ran in upon the German cavalry, half a mile 
or more in their rear, where they were brought up ; but 
they would not charge on the left of the Germans. These 
charged and stopped the enemy ; but Colonel de Jonquieres 
was taken, and we have lost a good many of these fine fel- 
lows. There are 20 killed, and about as many wounded and 
prisoners. We likewise lost three guns of McDonald’s troop 
in the Portuguese flight, but the French left them behind. 

c If Elley is recovered, I wish you would desire him to 
have an eye to the sick and wounded horses and men of 
the cavalry, particularly of Ponsonby’s brigade, which are 
at Salamanca. 

The 5th dragoon guards are very weak. I have written 
to England about horses ; but I am sadly apprehensive that 
our horses will fall off terribly before the campaign will be 
over. They are now, however, in as good condition (the 
Germans in better) as they have been during the campaign: 
but the wear and tear in these constant marches and skir- 
mishes must wear them out. 

‘ I have desired the light dragoons and hussars to mount 
some of their dismounted men upon French and Spanish 
captured horses. I think that the heavy cavalry also might 



352 


spAm. 


1812. 


do something of the same kind : that is, they might mount 
upon French horses the men who attend the baggage, and 
bring all the effective English horses into the ranks. I 
wish you would turn this suggestion over in your mind. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General ' Wellington. 

Sir S, Cotton^ Bart, 

* I shall make every body shoe up wliilc we sliall be en- 
gaged in the siege of the Retiro.* 

To Major General the Hon. W, Stewart, 

" My dear General, ‘ Madrid, isth August, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 29tli June, regarding 
your pay. Your name was not included in the abstract 
solely by mistake, which mistake I have had rectified, and 
the matter will be settled as you wish. 

‘ You see by the date of this letter that we have got on 
since you left us. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Major General ‘ W ELLINGTON. 

the Hon. JV. Sleuuirt* 


To Earl Bathurst. 

* My Lord, ‘Madrid, 13th August, 1812. 

‘ Having found tfiat the army under Marshal Marmont 
continued their retreat upon Burgos, in a state not likely to 
be able to take the field again for some time ; and knowing 
that I could not quit the river Duero in pursuit of them at 
the present moment, without incurring great inconvenience, 
and exposing the rear and communications of the army to 
the operations of the army of the Centre, under the King, I 
determined to move upon that army, and to endeavor to 
bring the King to a general action, or to force him to quit 
Madrid. 

‘ Accordingly I moved from Cuellar on the 6th instant, 
leaving there the 6th division, and the regiments wlilch had 
lately joined the army from England and Gibraltar, and 
which were in a state of health not to be able to bear the 
march, and Major General Anson’s brigade of cavalry on 
the Duero, to observe the movements of the ai*my of Per- 



IkTADHlD. 


353 




troopa were pul in eommui^icftliou with Gene- 
iral S^p^oci^des’ diyiaioii of the army ©f Galicia, likewise on 
ihe Duero> .near the forda’ of Polled and Herm^os ; and the 
parties of guerrillas; under Marquihez, Principe, and Saomil, 
were attached to Major Genml Anson and General San- 
toQildes, and objects fixed for their attention. We arrived 
at Segovia on the 7th, and at San Ildefonso on the 8th, 
where I halted one day^ to allow the right of the army more 
time to come up. 

" No opposition was made to the passage of the troops 
through the mountains ; and Brig. General D’Urban, with 
the Portuguese cavalry, the 1st light battalion of the King s 
German Legion, and Captain McDonald’s troop of horse 
artillery, had been through the Guadarrama pass since the 
9th. He moved forward on the morning of the 11th, from 
the neighbourhood of Galapagar, and supported by the 
heavy cavalry of the King’s German Legion from Torre 
Lodones, he drove in the French cavalry, about 2000 in 
number, and placed himself at Majalahonda, with the Por- 
tuguese cavalry, and Captain McDonald’s troop, and the 
cavalry and light infantry of the King’s German Legion at 
Las Rozas, about three quarters of a mile distant. 

* The enemy’s cavalry which had been driven off in the 
morning, and had moved towards Navalcarnero, returned 
about five in the afternoon; and Brig. General D’Urban 
having, formed the Portuguese cavalry in front of Majala- 
honda, supported by the horse artillery, ordered the cavalry 
to charge the enemy’s leading squadrons, which appeared 
too far advanced to be supported by their main body. The 
Portuguese cavalry advanced to the attack, but unfortunately 
turned about before they reached the enemy ; and they fled 
through the village of Majalahonda, and back upon the Ger- 
man dragoons, leaving behind them unprotected and unsup- 
ported the guns of Captain McDonald’s troop, which had 
been moved forward to co-operate with the cavalry. By the 
activity of the officers and soldiers of Captain M‘Donald’s 
troop, the guns were, however, moved off; but owing to 
the unfavorable nature of the ground over which they were 
mdved, the carriage of one was broken, and two others were 
overturned, and these three guns fell into the enenay’s hands, 

vor. IX, 2 a 



354 


SPAfK. 


1812. 


^ The Portuguese dragoons };iairing fled through Majala- 
honda, were rallied and re-formed, when the heavy dragoons 
of the King’s German Legion, which were formed between 
that village and Las Rozas, and the German cavalry, charged 
the enemy, although under many disadvantages, and stopped 
their further progress ; but I am sorry to say that they suf- 
fered considerable loss, and that Colonel de Jonquieres, who 
commanded the brigade, was taken prisoner. 

^ The left of the army was about 2^ miles distant, at the 
Puente del Hetamar, on the Guadarrama river ; and Colonel 
Ponsonby’s brigade of cavalry and a brigade of infantry of 
the 7th division, having moved forward to the support of the 
troops in advance, the enemy retired upon Majalahonda as 
soon as they observed these troops, and night having come 
on they retired upon Alarcon, leaving our guns at Majala- 
honda. 

^ I have reason to believe, both from the manner in which 
the enemy came on to the attack of the Portuguese troops, 
and from other circumstances, that they had been informed 
that we had none but Portuguese dragoons in front, and that 
there were no troops in the neighbourhood to support them. 
The occurrences of the 22nd July had induced me to hope 
that the Portuguese dragoons would have conducted them- 
selves better, or I should not have placed them at the out- 
posts of the army. But every day’s experience shows that 
no reliance can be placed on cavalry which is not in a per- 
fect state of discipline, and of which the men do not feel a 
perfect confidence in the officers. I shall therefore not place 
them again at the outposts, or in situations in which by 
their misconduct they can influence the safety of the other 
troops. 

f I am happy to report that the officers of the Portuguese 
cavalry behaved remarkably well, and showed a good ex- 
ample to their men, particularly the Visconde de Barbacena, 
who was taken prisoner. The conduct of the brave German 
cavalry was, I understand, excellent, as well as that of 
Captain M‘Donald's troop of horse artillery. The light in- 
fantry battalion were not engaged. 

‘ The army moved forward yesterday morning, and its left 
took possession of the city of Madrid, the King having re- 



mm. 


IVfADRID. 


355 


tired with the army of the Centre by the roads of Toledo 
and Aranjuez, leaving a garrison in the Retiro. 

^ It is impossible to describe the joy manifested by the 
inhabitants of Madrid upon our arrival ; and I hope that 
the prevalence of the same sentiments of detestation of the 
French yoke, and of a strong desire to secure the indepen- 
dence of their country, which first induced them to set the 
example of resistance to the usurper, will induce them again 
to make exertions in the cause of their country, which being 
more wisely directed, will be more efficacious than those 
formerly made. 

^ The heavy guns, with the aid of which we took Sala- 
manca, are in the rear of the army, and I hope that we shall 
not find it difficult to take the Retiro. But I believe that we 
must break ground before the place. 

" I have not yet heard that Astorga has fallen ; but the 
garrison which the enemy left in Tordesillas, about 260 in 
number, surrendered to General Santocildes on the 5th in- 
stant. 

^ I have received no further reports of the situation of 
General Ballesteros since the 21st July. 

^ I have letters from General Joseph O’Donnell and Ge- 
neral Roche of the 26th July; and the army of Murcia, 
under the command of the former, was defeated by General 
Harispe on the 21st July. It appears that the Spanish 
troops moved forward to attack General Harispe’s posts at 
Castalla and at Ybi. Those which attacked the former 
were repulsed with the loss of 2000 men and two pieces of 
cannon. Those which attacked the latter, under the com- 
mand of General Roche, conducted themselves remarkably 
well, and covered the retreat of the troops under General 
O’Donnell, and afterwards effected their own retreat in good 
order to Alicante. 

^ I have not heard from General Maitland since the ISth 
of July. 

^ There has been no movement of importance in Estrema- 
dura as late as the 9th instant. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst' ^ Wellington. 

2 a 2 



356 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


Return of Killed, irowided^ and in the Affair at Mujalahonda, 

on the lltk of Augu\t, 1S12, 



Kin^^s German Legion and 
Royal Horse Artillery. 

Portuguese. 

Officers. 

Serjeants. 

Rank and 
File. 

Horses. 

CO 

O 

O 

i 

n 

I 

1 • 

Horses. 

Killed . . . 

1 

1 

18 

12 

3 


30 

11 

Wounded • . 

5 

5 

36 

12 

3 

— 

49 

5 

Mis.sing . . 

1 

— 

20 

44 

1 

1 

21 

37 


7’o Earl Bathurst, 

* My DKAR Lord, ‘ Madrid, 13tli August, 1812, 

‘ You will sec in my dispatch ray reasons for moving on 
this city, to which I have to add that I could undertake 
nQthing else excepting the siege of Zamora, for which I shall 
have time till the end of September. As the siege of As- 
torga is not concluded, it would have answered no purpose 
to undertake that of Zamora at present. But we must have 
Zamora and Toro before the Duero shall fill. A further 
reason for moving to Madrid is, that I think my being here 
will have a good effect throughout Spain and all Europe. 

' I have heard of war being declared by America, and I 
beg to draw your Lordship’s attention to our communi- 
cations by the packets. We may depend upon it that the 
mouth of the Channel and the coasts of Portugal will swarm 
with privateers, and it will be necessary to take some steps 
to protect the packets. 

" I have desired Mr. Stuart to suggest to Admiral Martin 
to station a vessel off Cape Finisterre; and I would beg leave 
to recommend to your Lordship that the outward bound 
packets should be directed to make Cape Finisterre, and 
those homeward bound to make Ushant; and that the 
squadron off Brest should be directed to detach a small 
vessel to see them in safety to Falmouth. 

' It would be necessary also that the Admiral at Lisbon 
should be reinforced in small vessels, to enable him to 












MADRID. 


1812. 


357 


observe the coasts of Portugal and Spain, as far at least as 
Gibraltar. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst, ^ WELLINGTON. 


^ The troops that are with the army have improved in 
health in the last week. I do not know how those are at 
Cuellar, but I am afraid not as they ought to be. I hope 
your Lordship will not forget horses for our cavalry and 
artillery.’ 


Capitulation proposed hy General the Earl of Wellington^ Commander 
f in Chief of the Allied Army^ and accepted by Colonel La Fondt Com- 

mandant of the Fort of La China, 

* 14tli August, 1812. 

^ 1st. The garrison shall inarch out of the fort with the 
honors of war, and shall lay down their arms on the glacis. 

‘ 2nd. The garrison, and persons of every description in 
the fort, shall be prisoners of war. 

‘ 3rd. The officers shall be allowed to retain their swords, 
their baggage, and their horses, according to the number 
allowed them by the regulations of the French army ; and 
the soldiers shall keep their knapsacks. 

^ 4thly. The magazines of the fort of every description 
shall be delivered to the officers of the respective depart- 
ments, and the French Commandants of Artillery and of 
Engineers, shall furnish lists of the contents of each depot. 
The plans of the fort shall also be delivered to the Com- 
manding Officer of the British Engineers. 

^ .5thly. This capitulation shall take place at four o’clock 
in the afternoon, and the gates of the fort shall be occupied 
by the troops of the allied army, as soon as this capitulation 
is ratified. 

‘ Wellington. 

‘ This capitulation is ratified by the Colonel Commanding 
the Fort of La China.’ 



358 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To Major (General k. Clinton, 

^ My dear General, ‘ Madrid, I4th August, I812. 7 p.m. 

" I have just received your letter of the 13th ; and you will 
have heard that we have this day taken the Eetiro, with 1800 
men, 200 pieces of cannon, and 20,000 stand of arms ; and I 
think it nearly a matter of indifference what movement the 
army of Portugal may make. 

^ The only thing I recommend is that which you have 
suggested yourself, viz., to move the point of communication 
from Medina to Arevalo. Indeed, upon your letter of yes- 
terday, this might as well be done at all events, and I gave 
orders accordingly to Scovell and the Commissary General ; 
but if you should have found occasion to alter the communi- 
cation, I hope you will have sent back along the road as far 
as Salamanca. 

^ I shall expect further intelligence from you ; and shall 
feel no difficulty now in going to you at a moment’s notice. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

; ‘ Major General H. Clinton: ' Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

< My Lord, ‘Madrid, 15th August, 1812. ; 

‘ I have the pleasure to inform your Lordship that the 
garrison of thelletiro surrendered by capitulation yesterday; 
and I have now the honor to enclose a copy of the capitu- 
lation. 

* We invested the place completely on the evening of the 
13th; and in the night, detachments of the 7th division of 
infantry under the command of Major General Hope; and 
of the 3rd division of infantry, under the command of Major 
General the Hon. E. Pakenham, drove in the enemy’s posts 
from the Prado, and the Botanical Garden, and the works 
which they had constructed outside of the park wall ; and 
having broken through the wall in different places, they 
were established in the palace of the Ketiro, and close to the 
exterior line of the enemy’s woi'ks enclosing the building 
called La China. The troops were preparing in the morning 
to attack these works preparatory to the arrangements to be 



1812. MADRID. 359 

adopted for the attack of the interior line and building, when 
the Governor sent out an officer to desiro to capitulate ; and 
I granted him the honors of war, the baggage of the officers 
and soldiers of the garrison, &c., as specified in the enclosed 
agreement. 

^ I enclose a return of the strength of the garrison, which 
marched out yesterday at four o’clock on the road to Ciudad 
Rodrigo. We have found in the place 189 pieces of brass 
ordnance in excellent condition, 900 barrels of powder, 20,000 
stand of arms, and considerable magazines of clothing and 
provisions, and ammunition. We hate likewise found the 
eagles of the 13th and 51st regiments, which I forward to 
England to be presented to His Royal Highness by my aide 
de camp. Major Burgh*. 

^ The King has retired across the Tagus, and his head 
quarters were, by the last accounts, at Ocafia. 

" I have received no letters from General Maitland since 
the 18th of July ; but I have received a letter this day, from 
General Joseph O’Donnell of the 10th instant, from Murcia, 
in which he informs me that General Maitland had arrived 
at Alicante on the 7th instant with the troops from Sicily, 
where he was about to land; and that he, General O’Don- 
nell, intended to join him with 3400 infantry, and 1100 
cavalry, and 8 pieces of cannon, besides the troops of Ge- 
neral Roche’s division, in order to co-operate in his ope- 
rations against Marshal Suchet. 

" As the Italian division of Sachet’s troops are with the 
King, and the 16th French regiment, I should think that 
the allies will be numerically the strongest in the kingdom of 
Valencia, although inferior in composition ; and that pro- 
portion of them at least which will land from their ships, in 
a state of equipment very unfit to take the field. I should 
have preferred the plan of conjoint operations with the Navy 
which I had proposed for the consideration of the naval and 
military officers in the Mediterranean, or any other of that 
description, to the plan which it appears is in contempla- 
tion ; but I hope this plan will be successful. 

‘ I see by a letter from General Ballesteros to Lieut. 
General Sir R. Hill of the 29th July, that he had been in 
Malaga on the 14th July, after an engagement with Gene- 

♦ Major General Lord Downes, K.C.B., &c. 



360 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


ral Laval near Coin. General Ballesteros was at Graza- 
lema on the 9tli ; and he states that General Villatte, with 
a strong division, was near San Hoque, and he is therefore 
cut off from Gibraltar. I have a letter from Lieut. General 
Sir B. Hill of the 8th instant; and although General 
Drouct had been in movement for three days, it docs not 
appear that his movements are of any importance; or 
have any reference to the state of affairs in this part of the 
country. 

" I have received a report of the 13th from Lieut. General 
Clinton at Cuellar, that a detachment of the army of Por- 
tugal had made a movement from the neighbourhood of 
Burgos towards Valladolid. But I imagine this movement 
is made solely with a view to obtain provisions. 

' I enclose returns of the killed, wounded, and missing, in 
the affair at Majalahonda on the 1 1th instant * ; and of the 
loss in the attack of the works of the Ketiro f. 

' This dispatch will be delivered by my aide de camp 
Major Burgh, who will be able to explain any further cir- 
cumstances relating to our situation ; and 1 beg leave to 
recommend him to your Lordship s protection. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst, ^ WELLINGTON. 

‘ Since writing this dispatch, I have received a letter of 
the 10th from General Maitland from Alicante, of which I 
enclose a copy, in which that officer informs me that he had 
on that day landed at that place. 

^ I have omitted to inform your Lordship that I ordered 
on the 5th that General Boss might join Lieut. General 
Maitland with the troops at Carthagena, excepting a suffi- 
cient number to garrison the forts Las Galeras and Atalaya, 
which are the two most important points at Carthagena.’ 

To Major General Cooke, 

* Sir, ‘ Madrid, 16 th August, 1812 . 

‘ The state of affairs in this part of the Peninsula, in Estre- 
madura and Andalusia, induces me to be of opinion that the 
time is at last arrived at which it will be expedient for the 

♦ Ste p. 350. t Om rank and file kilhd, and 16 wounded. 



1812. 


MADRID. 


361 


troops stationed at Cadiz to take some more active mea- 
sures than it has been possible to adopt hitherto, in order to 
raise the blockade of that place. It is certain that the 
effect of these measures, if they should not raise the block- 
ade, will be to divert the enemy’s attention more effectually 
from General Ballesteros, and from General Sir Bowland 
Hill ; and possibly the whole together, combined with events 
in this and other quarters, may produce not only the raising 
of the blackade, but the evacuation of Andalusia. 

* 1 request you, therefore, to consider of a plan, and the 
means of executing it, for the attack of the enemy’s troops 
opposite Cadiz, by which the blockade is maintained. You, 
on the spot, must of course be the best judge of this plan, 
upon which, at this distance, I can scarcely venture to form 
an opinion. But it should be founded solely on its own 
grounds ; should be unconnected with any plans of operation 
by other corps of troops in the field, excepting as far as the 
operations of those corps should affect the strength of the 
blockading army, and should combine the following objects. 
First, the security of your own position on the Isla and at 
Cadiz ; secondly, the facility of carrying the plan into exe- 
cution with the largest proportion of troops which can be 
employed upon it, consistently with the first object, against 
the smallest body of the cncm 3 \ The attack should be 
made, therefore, against one of the enemy’s flanks from your 
weakest point, which I take to be Santi Petri ; but in this I 
may be mistaken ; and the foundation of the plan should be 
an attack in the way of assault or of siege of his works, as 
he does not intend to attack yours in that way. 

^ If, therefore, the enemy’s works on his left flank should 
be too strong to be taken by storm, you should encamp your 
troops and break ground regularly before them, and carry 
them one after another, if you should be strong enough to 
cross the river of Santi Petri at all ; and you will bear in mind 
in these operations, that as long as you can withdraw your 
troops back to their position on the Isla, and your artillery 
and stores, which if depots of too cumbrous a magnitude 
are not formed, will not be difficult, you acepmplish my 
object if you oblige the enemy to recall troops from opera- 
tions against General Ballesteros or Sir Rowland Hill. 

* I beg you to consider and suggest a plan through His 



362 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


Majesty’s Ambassador for the considel*ation bf the Hegency, 
on the principled above pointed out ; and that it inay be 
carried into execution without further refererice tb mb, with- 
out loss of time. 

^ I enclose the copy of an order which I sent on the 5th 
instant to Major General Boss. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General Cooke* ' Wellington. 

To Lieut. General Maitland. 

^ SlIL ’ ‘ Madrid, 16 th August, 1812 . 

"I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 10th 
instant. 

‘ I broke up from Cuellar on the 6th, and marched upon 
Segovia, and thence by San Ildefonso and the passes of 
Navacerrada and the Guadarrama to this place, leaving at 
Cuellar, and on the Ducro, a considerable detachment to 
observe the movements of the enemy’s troops in the north of 
the Peninsula. 

" The King’s army retired before us ; and we entered 
Madrid on the 12th, a French garrison still occupying the 
Retiro. We invested that place completely on the evening 
of the 13th ; and on that night the troops of the 3rd and 7th 
divisions drove the enemy from their works outside of the 
Park wall, within which, and in the Palace of the Retiro, 
they were established during the night. In the morning 
, we were preparing to attack the exterior works of La China, 
when the enemy capitulated; and we have taken about 
2400 prisoners, 189 pieces of cannon, 20,000 muskets, cloth- 
ing, and military stores of all descriptions. 

^ The King retired across the Tagus, and was, on the 13th, 
at Ocaha. He marched yesterday morning towards Villa- 
tobas and Corral de Almaguer ; and it now appears certain 
that he is going into the kingdom of Valencia. 

^ Including the Italian division of Suchet’s army, com- 
manded by General Palombini, and the 16th French regi- 
ment, he has, I should think, from 17,000 to 20,000 men, 
of which number from 2000 to 3000 are cavalry, the greater 
part French, of the 12th, 18th, 19th, and, I think, 22nd 
dragoons. There are some Westphalian and Spanish ca- 
valry> and some of all nations. There is the 75th French 



1812. 


MAPRID. 


363 


regiment of infantry^ thl’ee battalions^ 1500 stroPg; Pne 
battalion of the Vlme legere, 500; and either one or two 
battalions of the 28me leghre. All the rest are troops of 
Baden, Westphalia, Spanish juramentados, and the King’s 
guards of all nations, and are not very respectable. 

‘ I do not know upon what plan of operations you propose 
to proceed. If circumstances should suit, and you propose 
to move forward on Valencia, I recommend to your attention 
my first campaign in Portugal. 1 kept the sea always on my 
flank. The transports attended the movements of the army 
as a magazine, and I had at all times, and every day, a short 
and easy communication with them. The army, therefore, 
could never be distressed for provisions or stores, however 
limited its means of land transport ; and, in case of necessity, 
it might have embarked at any point of the coast. 

^ If you should not advance according to this or any other 
plan, I have no doubt that you can maintain Alicante against 
both Suchet and the King; and if you should effect that 
object, and keep Carthagena, I hope still to derive further 
advantages from the prosperous state of the campaign. 

‘ I think it proper to apprize you that I have applied to 
the Secretary of State, to annul that part of the instructions 
from Lord William Bentinck which directs you to quit the 
coast in the second week in September ; and you will there- 
fore remain cither on the coast of Spain, or in the adjacent 
islands, till you shall receive further orders from the Secre- 
tary of State, notwithstanding the instructions from Lord 
William Bentinck. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General Maitland: ‘ W E llington. 

To the Right Hon, Henry Wellesley, K,B, 

^ My dear Henry, ‘ Madrid, leth August, 1812 . 

^ I enclose my dispatches, which will make you acquainted 
with the state of affairs here. The King is decidedly off to 
Valencia; and I hope now to bo able to clear out Andalusia 
by a direct movement on that kingdom before the year closes. 
However, much will depend upon circumstances. 

^ I have ordered Maitland to remain on the eastern coast, 
notwithstanding Lord William Bentinck’s instructions, till ho 
shall receive the further orders of the Secretary of State; 



364 


SPAIN. 


1812 


and I have desired him to wait for them. I am going to 
write to Hill to tell him that he need not now attend to me 
in any manner, unless Soult should move through La Mancha 
with his whole army ; and to desire him to push Drouet 
hard ; and I desire General Cooke to cross the Santi Petri, 
if the French army of the blockade is not much stronger 
than him ; and if he can do nothing else, he must proceed 
regularly against the enemy’s works. All this will prevent 
Soult from detaching towards Valencia, unless he should go 
with his whole army ; and if he should, my object is gained. 

'The time of the Spaniards here has hitherto been spent 
in regoeijos ; and never did I see such joy as there is in all 
ranks. We shall now, liowever, proceed to business, I hope, 
and shall think of raising and disciplining troops, and of 
finding means to pay and support them. 

‘ I have not heard of Castanos since the 2nd. He was 
then at Lugo, which place he was to quit on the 4th. His 
presence, as being the Chief in all this country, is much 
wanted here. 

‘ Besides the events mentioned in the enclosed dispatches> 
Toledo has been evacuated, and Guadalaxara, with a garrison 
of 900 men, has surrendered upon capitulation. They in- 
sisted upon surrendering to me ; but I forced them to sur- 
render to the Empecinado. I do not mention these events 
in this dispatch, as the first depends upon a guerrilla report, 
which is not always true ; and I do not approve of some of 
the articles of my confrere's capitulation; and I have sent 
it back to him. 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

' The Right Eon. ‘ Wellington. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K. B: 


General the Marquis^' of Wellington, K.B,, to Major General Walker* 

* Mv DEAR General, ‘ Madrid, I8th August, 1812. ; 

' I have received your letter of the 7th ; and I assure you 
that I should have been very sorry if you had remained 
Lisbon one moment after it was in your power to quit that 
place, in order to obey any order of mine, or to conform to 
any military rule. Your case is beyond all rule, and I shouM 
* Advauced to the dignity of Marquis of Wellington) 18th August, 1812. 



1812. 


MADRID. 


365 


be much concerned if you allowed yourself to be put to any 
inconvenience by considering it in any other light. 

^ I hope that you will soon be able again to join us ; and 
in the mean time, 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

' Major General Walker* ‘Wellington. 


To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley t K.B, 

My dear Henry, * Madrid, ISth August, 1812. 

• I have heard that the Government have appointed Sefior 

— to be Intendant of the province of Salamanca, 

instead of Sehor Mexia, in whose favor I have applied. I 
applied for Mexia only because he had rendered important 
services ; and I must add, that since he has acted as In- 
tendant under the orders of General Castanos, he has con- 
ducted himself remarkably well ; and has been of material 
service to the army, as well British as Spanish. 

‘ I am quite certain, that the existing Spanish Government 
have no intention of doing anything offensive to me; but 
if I did not feel this, certainly I should entertain doubts of 
their intention, in consequence of this appointment. Sehor 

— is the person who was employed by the Central 

Junta to attend this army. He is not only the most useless 
and inefficient of God’s creatures, but is an impediment to 
all business ; and he cannot speak one word of truth. After 
knowing the truth of all my complaints of those days, and 
as he assured me (and I believe him), reporting them to his 
employers, he suddenly turned round when the Junta sent 
Sehor * * * * with a sum of money to supply our wants, 
(which sum of money Sehor put into his own pocket) 

and he swore that we wanted nothing, and were amply sup- 
plied. He had the impudence to tell me so at Truxillo ; 
and after I had forced him to acknowledge that he told a 
falsehood, I turned him out of the room, and desired that I 
might never sec his face again. Whether the Government 
appoint him or not, I shall of course hold no communication 
with him ; and it will remain for the Government to consi- 
der whether it is desirable that such a man should be 
appointed to a situation in which he can have any thing to 
say to this army. 



366 


shaik. 


1812. 


^ I shall be very much obliged to you, if you will be so 
kind as to apply to the Government to appoint Don Alexis 
Guillem of Salamanca, to be a Canon of the Cathedral of 
Santiago, in Galicia. He is more intelligent, and has ren- 
dered more service to the cause than any man in Spain ; and 
I earnestly entreat that he may receive this appointment. 

" Ever yours most affectionately, 

* The Bight Hon. ' Wellington. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B: 

To Earl Bathurst. 

* My Lord, ‘ Madrid, IStU August, 1812. 

^ Considering it desirable that a brigade of heavy artillery, 
24 pounders, and a brigade of 9 pounders should be in re- 
serve with this army, I enclose estimates of the carriages, 
horses, &c., which will be required to be added to the 
ordnance establishments which we have at present. 

' The 9 pounders are already at Lisbon ; but I request 
your Lordship to give directions that the 24 pounders, 
horses, &c., required for the whole equipment, may be sent 
to Lisbon as soon as may be convenient ; and that we should 
have an additional company of artillery. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

^ My Lord, ‘Madrid, 1 8th August, 1812. 

‘The King retired from Ocana on the lOth instant, and 
bis army are in march towards Valencia. The enemy have 
abandoned Toledo, which has been taken possession of by a 
party of the guerrillas of El Medico. 

‘In consequence of the King’s retreating, and in order to 
get the troops under shelter from the sun during this month, 
I have moved the whole to the Escurial, with the exception 
of the light and 3rd divisions of infantry, and General Alien’s 
brigade of cavalry, which will continue at Madrid. 

< Since the capture of the Retiro, the garrison of Gnada- 
laxara, consisting pf 700 ipon, has surrendered to theRmpe^ 
cinado by capitulation, on nearly the same tpi'nis as those 
which I granted tp garrifion of the Retiro. 

‘ By reports from Major General Clinton, I learn thal a 



ISIS. 


MADRCD. 


367 


part of the remains of the army of Portugal had moved for- 
ward from the neighbourhood of Burgos, and some of their 
detachments were understood to be in Valladolid on the 14th 
instant, General Santocildes having withdrawn the troops 
of the army of Galicia, which occupied that town. Some of 
their detachments were likewise on the right of the Pisuerga. 
I think it probable that they have made this movement in 
order to drive back the Galician troops from the neighbour- 
hood of Polios and Herreros, that they may communicate 
with, and probably carry off the garrisons of Zamora and 
Toro. It is not impossible likewise, that they may attempt 
to relieve Astorga, and to withdraw that garrison. I had 
expected they would make this movement as soon as they 
should get them together, when I undertook the march upon 
Madrid ; and I suggested to General Santocildes that he 
should fall back in time upon the Esla,if he did not consider 
himself sufficiently strong to oppose the enemy vigorously. 
As the allied British and Portuguese army Avould be obliged 
to attack Toro and Zamora, in case the enemy should not 
withdraw from these places, and possibly even Astorga, 
adverting to the slow progress which has been made in the 
siege of that place by the Galician army, I do not consider 
it a misfortune that the enemy should withdraw the garri- 
sons ; as we shall be saved a long march at an unfavorable 
season, and an operation which will take time, and in which 
we must expect to incur some loss. 

^ I have ordered Major General Clinton from Cuellar to 
Olmedo. 

‘By accounts from Lieut. General Sir R Hill of the 12th, 
it appears that General Drouet had drawn in his right from 
La Guarena ; but he still held Hornachos. 

‘By accounts from Cadiz to the 6th instant, it appears 
that General Villatte had returned to the blockade. General 
Ballesteros had taken 300 prisoners at Osuna ; and by the 
reports of the position of the troops, it appears that the road 
to Gibraltar is again open to him. 

* In consequence of the retreat of the King into Valencia, 
and the certainty that it is not intended to join the troops 
under Drouet to the army of the Centre, and of the landing 
of the troops under General Maitland at Alicante, I have 
again released the troops under Lieut. General Sir R. Hill 



SPAIN. 




rlpl2. 


from tho neces$ity of attending to the movements of this 
army ; and have directed the General to move with activity 
upon iDrouet, to drive him entirely out of Estremadura, if 
his force should be sufficient; and to threaten to enter 
Andalusia. 

^ I have likewise directed Major General Cooke to con- 
sider of a plan for attacking the works of the blockading 
army before Cadiz, either by assault, or more regular 
approach, if it should be necessary ; and to carry that plan 
into execution, if he should consider his force sufficiently 
strong to be able to quit the protection of his works on the 
Isla at all. By these measures, aided by the operations of 
General Ballesteros, we shall at least harass the enemy in 
Andalusia, and we shall prevent him from detaching to 
other quarters ; and we may induce him to withdraw entirely 
without the necessity of collecting in Andalusia a larger 
force. 

^ 1 have the honor to be, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

* My Lord, / Madrid, 18 th August, 1812 , 

^ In reference to the correspondence which has lately taken 
place on the subject of providing supplies of ammunition for 
Cadiz, I beg leave to transmit, for your Lordship’s informa- 
tion, an extract of a letter from Major General Cooke, stating 
the quantity of ammunition which has lately been expended 
at Cadiz, in his opinion, without adequate object ; and the 
remonstrances he has made on the subject to the Spanish 
authorities through His Majesty’s Ambassador. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

^ My dear Lord, ^ Madrid, I8th August, 181^, 

^ I have received your letter of the 23rd July, in which you 
have enclosed statements of the bills drawn on the Treasury 
from this country between the 1st January and the 4th July, 
upon which I beg to assure you that they afford no evidence 
of the quantity of specie which has gone through the military 
chest in that jperit^b 



^812. MADRID. 36& 

* The Commissary General is very unwell ; hut I hope by 
the next post to let you know the exact amount which we 
have received in money, 

^The whole sum of £410,000, drawn by Commissary 
O’Meara is for provisions and supplies for the troops at 
Cadiz ; and the sum of £386,000, drawn by Mr. Mackenzie 
at Oporto, is for the same. The whole of the drafts of Mr. 
Duff is for money, more than half of which is spent at Cadiz, 
&c. ; Mr. Pipon’s drafts are generally for supplies of provi- 
sions purchased from the Americans, &c., and a very small 
proportion for money ; but you shall know exactly how this 
matter stands. 

^In the mean time, whatever may be the sums for which 
we have drawn, we are in the greatest distress, which is cer- 
tainly at present occasioned in some degree by our distance 
from Lisbon, and the difficulty of carrying the money to the 
army. I have been able to pay the troops only half of their 
pay for the month of April, the Staff only for February ; and 
I did that by applying to our own service the money sent by 
tny brother for Spanish services. 

^ I am sorry to say that I have reports that the sick and 
wounded officers at Salamanca have been obliged to sell their 
clothes to get money. 

" The want of money in the army is become a most serious 
evil ; and we may trace to this want many of the acts of 
plunder and indiscipline by which we are disgraced every 
day. We must be regularly supplied, or we cannot go on. 

‘ More has been done by Government lately than had 
been done for many months, I may almost say years, before ; 
but I think that Government have been wrong in employing 
the Bank to make their purchase of bullion to supply this 
army. My opinion has invariably been, tliat if a small sum, 
even £100,000, were sent out every month, it would enable 
us to manage the exchanges, and to obtain our money at a 
cheaper rate. I can never believe that inconvenience would 
be felt in England by the export in coin of £ 100,000 CA^cry 
month ; but the fact is, that Government go to the Bank to 
procure the coin, instead of employing their agents to pur- 
chase it as the dealers in coin do ; and the Directors of the 
Bank, having upon their shoulders the supply of , the coin for 
the interior circulation, as well as the supply of the wants of 

VOL. IX. 2 b 



370 


SPAIN. 


1811 


Government for the service abroad, act like al other men ; 
they supply that demand which is made with most noise and 
clamour, and our distant whispers are unattended to. Thus, 
when the China fleet arrived lately with a sum of money, the 
Bank took the whole that I believe appeared on the manifest 
for the interior circulation, and did not give us even a shil- 
ling ; and we get the gleanings. 

^ I am quite convinced that if Government were to employ 
an agent to purchase £100,000 every month, the circulation 
in England would not feel the drain, and we should be very 
much relieved, and the exchanges would be much improved. 
We must, however, prevent Lord William Bentinck from 
coming to Gibraltar and carrying off four millions of dollars 
at 6^*. 8d. each, while we give from 5 a\ 4r/. to 5.s\ 8d. 

* You will see how we stand by the report in my dispatch. 
I think that the French mean to carry off the garrisons from 
Zamora and Toro, which I hope they will effect, as otherwise 
I must go and take them. If I do not, nobody else will, as 
is obvious from what has been passing for the last two 
months at Astorga. My wish is now to canton the army for 
two or three weeks, till the rains in September, and then to 
march into Andalusia with part of it, and HilFs corps, so as 
to be certain that Soult will go out. 

^ Any other but a modern French army would now leave 
the province, as they have absolutely no communication of 
any kind with France, or with any other French army ; and 
they are pressed on all sides by troops not to be despised, 
and they can evidently do nothing. But I suspect that 
Soult will not stir till I force him out by a direct movement 
upon him ; and I think of making that movement as soon as 
I can take the troops to the south without incurring the risk 
of injuring their health. In the mean time I must have 
possession of the whole course of the Duero, and I may then 
venture to leave in this part of the country a large detach- 
ment of our army, and the Galician army, which I hope I 
shall get Beresford to command. I am not so certain of 
this, however, as he is still confined by his wound. 

' I do not expect much from the exertions of the Spaniards, 
notwithstanding all that we have done for them. They cry 
viva, and are very fond of us, and hate the French ; but they 
are, in general, the most incapable of useful exertion of all 



1813, 


MADRIJ^. 


371 


the nations that I have known ; the most vain, and at the 
same time the most ignorant, particularly of military affairs, 
and above all of military affairs in their own country. I can 
do nothing till General Castafios shall arrive, and I do not 
know where he is. I am afraid that the utmost we can hope 
for is, to teach them how to avoid being beat. If we can 
effect that object, I hope we might do the rest. My opinion 
is, that the Government and Cortes should come to Ciudad 
Rodrigo, or the frontiers of Galicia, which I think of pro- 
posing to them ; but I must wait till I see Castahos. 

Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ' Wfxlington. 


To Major General Cooke, 

^ Sir, ‘ Madrid, 20th August, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 9th ; and although 1 
approve of the expedition to Huelva, I am inclined to be of 
opinion that the operation which I recommended to you in 
my letter of the 16th instant would, upon the whole, answer 
the best effect. 

" As far as I can judge of your force, and that of the 
Spaniards on the Isla, I should imagine that you would be 
able to operate upon the enemy’s works for the blockade with 
10,000 men, still keeping a sufficient body opposite the Tro- 
cadero, and on your own left towards La Carraca. If I should 
be correct in this conjecture, you will have enough for your 
object, and the enemy will soon be forced to adopt some 
decided line respecting the blockade, and possibly regarding 
their position in Andalusia. 

^ You must operate with heavy artillery, however, at once, 
if you cannot carry the enemy’s works by assault, i)r you may 
depend upon it that you will effect nothing that is important, 
even in the way of diversion. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General Cooke: ‘ Wellington. 

To the Bight Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley ^ K.B, 

< ‘ Madrid, 20th August, 1 812. 

^ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 9th 
instant, in which you have enclosed the translation of one 

3b2 



m 


Sl»AIN. 


1812. 


from the Minister of Grace and Justice, and a letter from 
the same Minister to myself, in which he has informed me 
that the Cortes had, at the recommendation of the Kegency, 
done me the honor to confer upon me the order of the 
Golden Fleece. 

^ I beg that you will request the Minister of Grace and 
Justice to take an early opportunity of returning to the 
Regency and the Cortes my thanks for the favor with which 
they have viewed my services, and for the honor which they 
have been pleased to confer upon me. 

‘ I have made application to His Royal Highness the 
Prince Regent for permission to accept this lion or able mark 
of distinction, and of tlie favors of the Cortes and Govern- 
ment of Spain. 

' I have the honor to he, &c. 

‘ The Eight Hon. ' Wkllikgton. 

Sir IL Wellesley, K,B: 

To Earl Bathurst. 

^My Lord, ‘ Madrid, 20 til August, 1812. 

^ I enclose a letter and its enclosures from Sir Henry Wel- 
lesley, by which I have been informed that the Cortes and 
Government of Spain have been pleased to confer upon me 
the order of the Golden Fleece. 

‘ I beg your Lordship to lay these papers before His Royal 
Highness the Prince Regent, and to request liis permission 
that I may accept the honor which the Government and 
Cortes of Spain have conferred upon me. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ W K lli kgton. 

To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley., K.B. 

‘ My dear Henry, ‘ Madrid, 23rd August, 1812. 

^ Since I wrote to you on the 16th respecting the appoint- 
ment of Senor to be Intcndant of Salamanca, I find 

that official notification of that gentleman’s appointment has 
been received, which, however, I hope will be cancelled as 
soon as you shall have received my letter. Alava and 
O'Lalor (particularly the latter) know the reason which I 
have to complain of this person, and both have made repre- 
sentations against the appointment. , 



1812. 


MADRID. 


373 


^ So much depends upon the regular supply of our armies, 
that I hope the Spanish Government will take care to avoid 
making themselves so far responsible for this important 
object, as to dismiss from the office of Intendant of Castille a 
man who has hitherto given the greatest satisfaction, and to 
place in it one entirely inefficient ; one who before was a very 
efficient cause of our withdrawing from the Spanish territory, 
and whom I was obliged to turn out of my house. 

^ I do not at all like the way in which we are going on, 
particularly in relation to appointments to offices and great 
situations, in which branch of the Government alone it is, I 
am afraid, in the power of the existing Regency to do much 
good. 

^ They have sent an inefficient person, a to com- 

mand in Estreinadura, displacing Monsalud, with whom we 
have all hitherto gone on well. 

^ Another equally inefficient, and without character,General 
, has been sent to supersede Don Carlos in Old Cas- 
tille ; and I learn that they have appointed a General 

to command in New Castille, in which situation is included 
that of Governor of Madrid, which is at present by far the 
most important post in the country, with duties to be per- 
formed which require activity and intelligence ; and yet the 
person selected to fill this office is, 1 understand, an idiot, of 
between seventy and eighty years of age. 

‘ I assure you that I do not at all like the way in which 
we are going on, and persons here are much dissatisfied with 
the neglect of them by the Government. 

" A month has now elapsed since the battle of Salamanca, 
and I have not even heard of General Castauos. 

" Excepting in this town, where there was no regular 
authority when I entered it, and when I forced them to pro- 
claim the constitution, and proceed to the elections imme- 
diatel}^ these ceremonies have been, as usual, unaccountably 
delayed; and at Valladolid, Santocildes contrived to delay 
them till the French came in, and there the constitution ha.s 
never been proclaimed at all, and the town is still governed 
by the French authorities. 

" I am afraid also that, owing to the usual delays, the 
French found there their artillery and stores, and, what is 
particularly to be lamented, their muskets, of which they 



374 


8PAIN* 


1812 . 


were much in want, as, even of those who were not wounded 
in the battle, the greater number threw away their arms 
afterwards, or during the retreat. 

^ What can be done for this lost nation ? As for raising 
men or supplies, or taking any one measure to enable them 
to carry on the war, that is out of the question. Indeed, 
there is nobody to excite them to exertion, or to take advan- 
tage of the enthusiasm of the people, or of their enmity 
against the French. Even the guerrillas are getting quietly 
into the large towns, and amusing themselves, or collecting 
plunder of a better and more valuable description ; and no- 
body looks forward to the exertions to be made, whether to 
improve or to secure our advantage. 

" This is a faithful picture of the state of affairs ; and 
though I still hope to be able to maintain our position in 
Castille, and even to improve our advantages, I shudder 
when I reflect upon the enormity of the task which I have 
undertaken, with inadequate powers myself to do any thing, 
and without assistance of any kind from the Spaniards, or I 
may say, from any individual of the Spanish nation. 

‘ I enclose the copy of a letter from Sir Howard Douglas 
of the 18th, and the copy of intelligence from Salamanca of 
the 20th, which will show you how Spanish military affairs 
are going on. 

" I hope the French will carry off the garrisons of Zamora 
and Astorga, as well as that of Toro. Any thing is better 
than that I should have to attack and carry those places ; but 
I am repairing my heavy train for that object, and my troops 
are in march in that direction ; and I must go if the French 
should maintain their garrisons. But whether I go, or the 
French should withdraw these garrisons, wliat will the world 
say ? What will the Spanish nation in particular say of the 
Spanish officers and army upon such occurrences as the 
failure to take such a place as Astorga, after nearly three 
months’ siege, and of allowing the garrison of Zamora to be 
relieved and carried off by a defeated army ? At the same 
time I am so well aware of the inefficiency of the Spanish 
officers and troops when alone, that I recommended the mea- 
sures which will enable the enemy to relieve Zamora ; that 
is, foreseeing that the French would endeavor to relieve or 
carry off the garrison of Astorga as soon as they should 



r8i2. 


MADRID. 


375 


hear that I had marched towards Madrid, I recommended 
that Santocildes should take care to be first upon the Esla ; 
but if I had conceived 8000 Spanish to be equal to 4000 men 
of any other nation, I should have recommended him to 
maintain the blockade of Zamora, and to cover the siege of 
Astorga. 

^ Pray request General O’Donnell to peruse the account of 
the transactions at the liead quarters of the army of Galicia, 
given by Sir Howard Douglas. Can any army carry on 
operations against the French under such circumstances? I 

have a great regard for General ; but I should like to 

know what military part he plays in this drama. If he is a 
commander in chief, why does he not put himself at the head 
of his troops ? The army of Galicia is the only one in Spain, 
and the 8000 men under Santocildes the active part of that 
army. Why is not the Commander in Chief with that part ? 
These are questions which must occur to every reflecting 
mind; but there is no inquiry in Spain on subjects of this 
description. 

1 I am apprehensive that all this will turn out but ill for 
the Spanish cause. If, for any cause, I should be over- 
powered, or should be obliged to retire, what will the world 
say ? What will the people of England say ? What will 
those in Spain say ? That we had made a great effort, at- 
tended by some glorious circumstances ; and that from 
January, 1812, we had gained more advantages for the 
cause, and had acquired more extent of territory by our 
operations than had ever ])een gained by any army in the 
same period of time, against so powerful an enemy; but 
that, being unaided by the Spanish officers and troops, not 
from disinclination, but from inability on account of the 
gross ignorance of the former, and the want of discipline of 
the latter, and from the inefficiency of all the persons se- 
lected by the Government for great employment, we were 
at last overpowered, and compelled to withdraw within our 
own frontier. 

" What will be Lord Castlereagh’s reply to the next pro- 
position for peace? Not that we will not treat if the 
Government of Joseph is to be the guaranteed Government, 
but he will be too happy to avail himself of any opportunity 
of withdrawing with honor from a contest in which it will be 



SPAJN^ f 




1812; 


ijf) 4 nifest that, owing to the inability of those employed to 
carry it on on the part of the Spaniards, there is no pros- 
pect of military success. Thus this great cause will be lost, 
and this nation will bo enslaved for the want of men at their 
head capable of conducting them. 

‘ Pray represent these matters to the Government and 
the leading men in the Cortes, and draw their attention 
seriously to the situation of their affairs. 

‘ I have a letter from General Maitland of the 17tli. Ho 
was at Monfortc, Boche at Alcoy, O’Donnell at Yccla ; and 
Suchet at San Felipe, it is supposed about to cross the 
Jiicar. Maitland says that Soult is certainly about to retire, 
and he sa 3 "s, through Valencia. I do not know how he has 
discovered cither one or the other fact. 1 have later in- 
telligence from Andalusia, and I do not believe Soult will 
retire till I go there. 

‘ I have not heard of the King for two or three days. He 
was near Belmonte when I heard last. 

' Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Rifrht lion, ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H, Wellcdcy, K.B: 


, To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

^ Sir, * Madrid, 23rd August, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 14th, enclosing one 
from Don E. do Bardaxi, in regard to rations for the British 
Commissariat, for officers in the Spanish service who may 
land at Lisbon, and have occasion to travel through Portu- 
gal in the service of Government, or on their private affairs. 

^ I concur in thinking that some measure should be 
adopted to supply these officers with provisions, but I see 
no necessity why they should be so supplied by the British 
Commissariat, and I am glad that you declined interfering. 

appears that Mr. Pipon has misunderstood the orders 
which have been given on this subject. I do not allow any 
officer or soldier in the Spanish service to receive rations 
from the British Commissariat, who is not travelling through 
Portugal by a route from the Quarter Master General of 
tlie army, or one from the Assistant Quarter Master General, 
with Lieut. General Sir Howland Hill. 

‘ When General Castanos, or any other officer, wishes to 



1812. 


HADK(D. 


m 

senil an officer or detachment through Portugal, application 
is made to one of these authorities for a route, aiii in that 
route is specified where provisions arc to be received. 

cannot allow any person, excepting the authorities 
above mentioned, to give these routes ; and, therefore, 
when any Spanish officer or detachment may land in Portu- 
gal, and may have occasion to march through the country, 
receiving provisions from the British Commissariat, appli- 
cation for a route must be made here. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ^ WELLINGTON, 

Charles Stuart' 


To Lieut, General Maitland, 

‘ Sin, ‘ Madrid, 24tli August, 1812, 

* I received yesterday your letter of the 17th. 

^ According to the last accounts which I have of the 
King’s force, his rear guard had gone to La Roda on 
the 19lh. 

' By the accounts of the 17th, which I have from Estre- 
madura, it would appear that Soult was about to make a 
general movement in Andalusia, but in what direction it is 
difficult to judge. I should imagine, liowever, in the direc- 
tion of Granada and Murcia. 

' I do not know what garrison has been left in Carthagena 
besides the detachment of His Majesty’s troops in the castles 
of Las Galcras and Atalaya ; 1 should hope, a sufficient 
body to prevent the enemy from getting possession of that 
post by a C 0 V 2 ) cle main, on his passage through the kingdom 
of Murcia. 

' As the allied forces in Valencia and Murcia will neces* 
sarily be thrown upon the defensive for a moment, while the 
enemy will be in strength in those parts, and as I conclude 
that the greater part of those forces will be collected in 
Alicante, it would be desirable to strengthen our posts at 
Garthagena during the same crisis, which I hope will bo 
only momehtary. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

^ Lieut, General Maitland,' ^WELLINGTON, 



SPAIN^ 


1812 . 




To Earl Bathurst, 

* My DBAR LorD^ ‘ Madrid, 24th August, 1812. 

* I have been going on for more than three years upon 
the usual allowance of a Commander in Chief, that is teii 
pounds per diem, liable to various deductions, among others 
of income tax, reducing it to about eight guineas ; but it 
will be necessary that Government should now either give 
me an additional pay under the head of table money, or any 
other they please, or that they should allow me to charge 
some of the expenses, such as charities, &c., which I am 
obliged to incur, in the existing state of this country, or I 
shall be ruined. 

‘ It is not proper, probably, to advert to other services, 
but I believe there is no service in which a Commander in 
Chief with such a charge as I have, is so badly paid as in 
the British service. Indeed, as far as I can learn, there is 
no instance of an officer holding a permanent command in 
the British service, whose receipts have been confined to 
ten pounds per diem, with deductions. They all receive 
either the allowance of a Government, with that of a Com- 
mander in Chief, or an allowance of some other description ; 
but I doubt that the trouble or responsibility or the expenses 
of any at all equal mine. However, I should not have 
mentioned the subject, knowing that the public expect in 
these days to be well served at the lowest possible rate of 
expense, if I did not find that I was in a situation in which 
I must incur expenses which I cannot defray without doing 
myself an injury. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ^ Wklli ngton. 


To Colonel Torrens. 

‘ Sir, Madrid, 25th August, 1812. 

^ I have the honor to enclose a letter from Dr. M^Grigor, 
containing the names of the medical officers of this army 
who are absent from it, to whom it is desirable that orders 
should be given for their immediate return to their duty ; 
and a letter from the same person, with a requisition of the 
additional assistance he considers necessary for tho per- 
formance of the service under his charge, and recommend- 



1911 


MADRID. 


m 


mg officers to be promoted to different situations in that 
department. I beg you to submit these papers to the Com- 
mander in Chief, and desire his attention to the remarks 
which I have placed on Dr. M'Grigor’s letter. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Colonel Terrene.' ‘ WEtLlNOTON. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

* My Lord, ‘ Madrid, 25th August, 1812. 

^ The King has continued his march towards Valencia, 
and, according to the last accounts which I have received, 
his rear guard was on the 19th at La Roda. 

^ I have received a letter of the 17th from Lieut. General 
Maitland, who had marched from Alicante and was at Mon- 
forte ; General Roche was at Alcoy, from whence Suchet 
had retired to San Felipe; and it was supposed he was 
about to cross the Jucar. General O’Donnell was on the 
same day at Yecla, in Murcia. 

^ The enemy’s troops from Valladolid drove in Major 
General’s Anson’s piquets at Tudela on the 18th. The 
General, however, still maintains them on the left of the 
Duero. 

" The enemy have moved a body of troops from the neigh- 
bourhood of Valladolid, consisting of about 6000 infantry 
and 1200 cavalry, under General Foy, which, on the 17th, 
carried off the garrison of Toro. They then were joined by 
a body of infantry of the same strength, which had likewise 
marched from the Pisuerga on Rio Seco, and the whole 
were, on the 20th, about two leagues distant from Bcna- 
vente; the Galician troops, with the exception of the ca- 
valry, which still remained at Benavente, having marched 
towards Astorga. The enemy had left the garrison of 
Zamora still blockaded by the Conde d’Amarante, but I 
have reason to believe they will relieve and probably carry 
off that garrison, on their return from their expedition to- 
wards the Astorga. 

^ Your Lordship will have observed from my last dispatch, 
that I had expected, when I moved towards Madrid, that the 
remains of the army of Portugal would make the movements 
towards the Duero, and for the relief of Zamora, Toro> and 



880 


SPAIN. 


im. 


Astorga, which they haird made ; and I suggested to Giencral 
Santocildes that he should be certain of being on the Esla 
before the enemy, 

' My motive for this suggestion was the apprehension that 
the detachment of the army of Galicia, or the whole army of 
Galicia engaged singly with the enemy, would be defeated, 
even by the remains of the army of Portugal ; and I con- 
sidered it of little importance that the enemy should relieve 
and carry off these garrisons, which it was obvious must be 
attacked by the allied troops under my command, at great 
inconvenience and some loss if wc hoped to succeed. But 
it is not very encouraging to find that the best army in 
Spain, that of Galicia, cannot take such a place as Astorga 
after a siege of more than two months ; that every important 
operation must be performed by the allied British and Por- 
tuguese army ; and that it would be imprudent to risk the 
best army in Spain alone in operations against the enemy, 
even after the enemy have sustained such a defeat as that 
near Salamanca on the 22nd of July. 

* I am not discouraged by these facts, but I wish that the 
Spanish Government woxild reflect seriously upon them ; and 
it might be hoped that measures would be adopted to apply 
a remedy. 

^ Major General Clinton did not move to Olmcdo, accord- 
ing to my first orders, and I have not heard that he had 
moved in that direction in obedience to a second order which 
I had sent him. His movement in that direction in time 
would have been a check upon those which the enemy have 
made against the Galician army, and upon all their ope- 
rations in that quarter. 

^ By accounts from Cadiz of the 9tli instant, I learn that 
General Cruz had returned to that port, with the detach- 
ment which had been sent to the southward for the relief of 
General Ballesteros. Another expedition had immediately 
been fitted out, consisting of 3500 Spanish troops, under 
General Cruz, and 1500 British and Portuguese, under 
Colonel Skerrett, with a view to attack Niebla. These 
troops had landed at Huelva on the 14th and 15th, but 
the enemy evacuated and destroyed the castle of Niebla on 
the 12th. 

* It is generally reported, and I have reason to believe^ 



1812. 


MAPRID. 


381 


that the enemy’s army of the South is about to make a 
general movement. It is difficult at this distance to form a 
judgment in what direction, but it is supposed in that of 
Granada, and Valencia; and from some circumstances which 
have been stated, such as that carriages with baggage had 
been sent from Druet s detachment towards Cordova, and 
that all persons belonging to the civil departments were to 
march with the army, I am inclined to believe there is some 
foundation for this supposition. 

' I have apprized Lieut. General Maitland of this notion 
of Soult’s movement, and have desired him to take care that 
Alicante and Carthagena do not fall by a covp tie main 
effected by his troops on their march. 

‘ I have informed Major General Cooke that I prefer a 
direct attack upon the enemy’s posts before Cadiz, to any 
other operation by way of diversion, if he should think him- 
self sufficiently strong to attempt to leave the Isla ; and I 
conclude that the troops will immediately be recalled from 
Niebla, and the attempt made upon the enemy’s posts if 
they should still maintain them. 

< I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington, 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

^ ‘ Madrid, 27th August, 1812. 

' I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 18th 
instant, regarding the demands of the Portuguese Govern- 
ment for the month of September, and I have ordered 2000 
moios of wheat, 1000 of barley, and 1000 quintals of salt 
meat to be issued from the British stores. 

" I beg you just to observe that the quantity of wheat is 
sufficient for 100,000 men for 30 days. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* His Excellency ‘ WELLINGTON.’ 

Charles Stuart: 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

< ‘ Madrid, 27th August, 1812. 

^ In answer to your letter of the 16th instant, I have to 

inform you that I have appointed Captain Mackenzie, of the 



m 


SPAIN.! 


im. 


77th regiment, to be Cotnmissdary for prisoners of war at 
Lisbon, and have directed him to take charge of all the 
prisoners of war now at that place, or who may be sent 
there hereafter : and I beg that you will apply to the Por- 
tuguese Government, that all the prisoners now in charge of 
the Portuguese departments may be delivered over to the 
charge of Captain Mackenzie, when he shall be ready to 
receive the charge. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

• His Excellency " WELLINGTON. 

Gharles StuarC 


To Colonel Torrens. 

‘ My dear Torrens, ‘Madrid, 27th August, 1812. 

' I have received your letter of the 6th, and I hope the 
official accounts of the battle of Salamanca will have given 
as much satisfaction as that first received. The consequences 
of that battle have already been very important, and if I am 
not much mistaken will be still more so. 

* In respect to the departments of the Adjutant General 
and Quarter Master General, all the departments of this 
army, excepting the medical department, were already in 
communication with the Quarter Master General. I do not 
know why the medical department was in communication 
with the Adjutant General’s department; but that depart- 
ment particularly ought to have been in communication 
with the Quarter Master General. Every thing else re- 
mains as it has always been, 

* I am not sorry that Colonel Gordon has been with this 
army. He sees now the real difficulties of our situation, 
and he, as well as others, may derive some advantage from 
seeing what an army, particularly a British army, in the 
field really is. I hope he likes his situation and will remain 
in it, and that I shall not have the disadvantage of having 
another Quarter Master General. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘Wellington. 


‘ Colonel Torrens,^ 



1812. 


MADRID. 


m 


To lAeut. General Maitlaind* 

SlR^ * Madrid, 29th August, 1812. 

^ Since I wrote to you on the 24th, I have received a dis- 
patch from the Secretary of State of the 7th instant, en^ 
closing instructions to yourself of the 6th of August. 

‘ I send you a copy of that part of these instructions 
which relate to your conduct. I do not send the whole, as 
the communication is not quite secure, and the latter of 
them refer to points of which it is desirable that the enemy 
should have no knowledge. 

^ Your instructions place you under my command. They 
direct you to return to Sicily, if Lord William Bentinck 
should require the troops under your command to return 
to that island, in consequence of any danger menacing it, in 
his opinion, requiring your return, unless I should have 
given you orders to remain in the Peninsula, notwithstand- 
ing such orders. 

" You are directed to be governed as to your departure 
from the Peninsula by your communications with Admiral 
Sir Edward Pellew, if the safety of the troops under your 
command should depend on the protection to be afforded by 
the fleet. 

^ If the safety of the troops under your command should 
not be compromised by the absence of the fleet, it will not 
be necessary for you to regulate your departure from thp 
Peninsula by any maritime movements which Sir Edward 
Pellew may think it advisable to make. 

' In my letter of the 24th, of which I enclose a duplicate, 
I recommended certain measures to your attention, which I 
find, by a letter from General O’Donnell of the 25th instant, 
that you had adopted, in consequence of the junction in 
Valencia of the army under the King with that under the 
command of Marshal Suchet. 

' It docs not appear to me at all probable tha-t these 
armies united will make any attack on you, nor, as long as 
you will be in the strength in which I understand from 
General O’Donnell that you are in Alicante, is it probable 
that both united will make any attack upon the positions 
occupied by this army and its detachments. Affairs, there- 
fore, cannot be in a better state for all the objects which I 
have in view in this quarter and in other parts of Spain. 



384 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


* If Marshal Soult should move in the direction of Va- 
lencia^ I shall have early intelligence of his movement ; and 
I shall have it in my power to adopt such measures to aid 
the troops at Alicante as I may think proper. 

^ I beg that as soon as possible, you will let me know 
whether ships can lie in safety at Alicante during the gales 
which may be expected in the next month. If they cannot, 
you should send to Mahon, without loss of time, all those not 
required for the supply of the troops under your command. 

' I also request to know from you whether it be possible 
to embark from Alicante, if the enemy should invest the 
place : as far as I can judge from the plan, it is so. 

^ General O’Donnell has informed me that the yellow 
fever prevails at Carthagena. If that should be the case, 
General Ross sliould keep on shore only that part of the 
British garrison which may be sufficient to occupy Las 
Galcras and Atalaya, and the remainder should be kept 
afloat in the offing. 

‘ There is no chance of Soult’s attacking that place if the 
yellow fever prevails, as it is reported to do, throughout the 
country. 

* There was no knowledge in Estremadura on the 23rd of 
Soult’s commencing his movement. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Lieut* General Maitland. * W Ellington . 

" Since writing the above, I have received yours of the 
20th; and I enclose a duplicate of mine of the 16th, which 
appears to be the only one you have not received. 

‘ Tell General Ross that I have received his of the 18th, 
and he may keep his troops on the island instead of afloat, 
as I had proposed ; and take care to remove any men who 
may fall sick at Carthagena as soon as possible, and keep 
them in a separate place on that island. 

^ I shall answer your letter fully this day in cipher, and 
you can decipher it when you get the cipher, which is now on 
its passage from England. In the mean time I rely upon 
you to secure Alicante. 

‘ I take measures this day to have you supplied with pro- 
visions ; and I recommend that both the British and Spanish 
troops should maintain their positions outside of Alicante 



lgF2 


mAdMd. 


886 


as long as possible, in order that bMhJ .’bulrpartieuldrly the 
latter, may draw provisions from the country, and that their 
consumption may not fall on the magazines of the towm’ - '■ 

PKOCLAMAXION. 

^ Spaniards ! ‘Madrid, 29th August, 1812/ 

‘ It is unneccssarj' to take up your time by recalliug to 
your recollection the events of the last two months, or by 
drawing your attention to the situation in which your 
enemies now find themselves. 

‘ Listen to the accounts of the numerous prisoners daily 
brought in, and deserters from their army ; hear tlie details 
of the miseries endured by those who, trusting to the pro- 
mises of the French, have followed the vagabond fortunes of 
the Usurper, driven from the capital of your monarchy ; hedr 
these details from their servants and followers who have had 
the sense to quit this scene of desolation, and if the suf- 
ferings of your oppressors can soften the feeling of those 
inflicted upon yourselves, you will find ample cause for con- 
solation. 

^ But much remains still to be done to consolidate and 
secure the advantages acquired. It should be clearly un- 
derstood that the pretended King is an usurper, whose 
authority it is the duty of every Spaniard to resist ; that 
every Frencliinan is an enemy, against whom it is the duty 
of every Spaniard to raise his arm. 

‘ Spaniards ! you are reminded that your enemies cahilot 
much longer resist ; that they must quit your Country if you 
will only omit to supply their demands for provisions^ and 
money, when those demands are not enforced by supeldor 
force. Let every individual consider it his duty to dci eiery 
thing in his power to give no assistance to the enemy of his 
country, and that perfidious enemy must soon entirelj/ aban- 
don in disgrace a country which he entered only foi* the «ake 
of plunder, and in which he has been enabled to remain only 
because the inhabitants have submitted to his mandates, and 
have supplied his wants. vf i 

^ Spaniards ! resist this odioits tyranny, and be independent 
and happy. ; ^ 

■ ' i ‘ ‘ ■ ■ 

2 c 


VOL. IX. 



386 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To Lieut. General Maitland. 

< Sir, ‘ Madrid, 30tli August, 1812. 

^ Since I wrote to you yesterday, I have received your 
letter of the 20th. 

^ It does not appear to me to be probable that the King 
and Suchet, even when joined, will make any attack upon 
you at Alicante, and you should endeavor to maintain your- 
self at a distance from the town, so as to draw supplies of 
provisions from the country as long as }^ou may find it to be 
possible, particularly for the Spanish troops. 

" In expectation of being obliged to retire within the works 
of the place^ you must immediately land from the transports 
a sufficient quantity of provisions to last the troops under 
your command, including General Roche’s and General 
Whittingham’s divisions, for one month ; and I have di- 
rected that one million rations of flour or biscuit, and five 
hundred thousand of salt meat, may be immediately sent to 
Alicante for the use of the troo];)s under your command, 
from which quantity you will replace what you will have 
taken out of the store ship or transports, or you will make 
such other use of it as you may think proper. But you 
will in the first instance take from the store ships and trans- 
ports a quantity of provisions to last the troops under your 
command not less than one month, and for as much longer 
as you may deem it expedient to liavc provisions in Alicante. 

^ I am aware that taking provisions out of the transports 
may interfere with the execution of orders which you may 
receive from Lord William Bentinck to return to Sicily, but 
I take the responsibility of that inconvenience upon myself. 

^ As far as I can judge from the plan of Alicante, there 
will be no difficulty in communicating with the ships, even 
though the place be closely invested ; and if the measures 
above referred to should not provide sufficiently for the 
troops under your command, you must take more provisions 
from the transports, and you must apply to Mr. Tapper to 
assist you in importing provisions for your troops. 

^ If it be true that, notwithstanding Alicante be closely 
invested, it is possible to communicate with ships in the 
offing, there can be no more difficulty in instructing you 
regarding your military conduct at that place than regard- 
ing the provisions. Nothing of importance can be done till 



1812 . 


MADRID. 


38 ? 


Soult shall have joined the Kin^ ; and you will then under- 
stand that I expect you to maintain yourself at Alicante as 
long as it may be possible. 

^ I conceive that it will be possible for you to maintain 
yourself even against Soult and the King united, as long as 
you can keep the communication open with the sea ; but as 
soon as you find tliat communication so seriously menaced as 
to be in danger to be lost, you arc to withdraw and embark 
the whole army, English as well as Spaniards. 

^ I proceed to-morrow to join the detachment of this army 
collected at Arevalo, with which I shall march to drive the 
detachment of the enemy's army of Portugal from the Duero, 
which have advanced to that river since I have been in this 
quarter, and to establish a good communication between 
this army and the Spanish army of the north, to which 
Astorga has recently surrendered. 

"As soon as matters shall be there arranged to my satis- 
faction, I ])ropose to return here ; and I hope by that time 
to be joined by Sir Howland Hill and his troops from Estre- 
madura, if Marshal Soult should have evacuated Andalusia. 
If he should have marched through Granada and Murcia 
into Valencia, I shall be here, I hope, before he can be in a 
situation to do you any injury. 

"Two divisions of this army, and a brigade of cavalry, 
remain here, and two divisions, and one brigade of cavalry, 
at the Escurial, during my absence in the north. 

" 1 have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General MaitlancV " Wellington. 


To the Marques de AstorgUy Conde de Allamira. 
c ‘ Madrid, 30th August, 1812. 

"I have had the honor of receiving your Excellency’s letter 
of the 7th instant, and its enclosure, and I have forwarded 
the letter to your agent in this city, 

" I beg to return your Excellency my best thanks for the 
politeness of your letter, and for your kindness in permitting 
me to use your Excellency’s palace in this city. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Marques de Astorga , * " Wellington. 


2c2 



388 


SPAIN. 


1812 


To the Right Hon, Sir H, Wellesley, K,B. 

< Sir, ‘ Madrid, 30th August, 1812. 

^ I have received a letter from the Minister of Grace and 
Justice, by the hands of Colonel Don Ildefonso Ruez de 
Hibera, together witli the Collar of the Order of the Golden 
Fleece. 

^ I request you will return *my thanks to the Minister for 
this mark of tlie favor of the Regency. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir H, Wellesley, K.B.' 

To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley, K. B. 

' My dear Henry, ‘ Madrid, 30tli August, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 17th instant. I am 
not desirous that any rule should be departed from in in- 
vesting me with the Order of the Golden Fleece, and I will 
wait till there shall be an opportunity for some Sovereign to 
invest me. You will send me the usual licenses and dis- 
pensation. I wish you would send me the Order of San 
Fernando, or a drawing of it, that I may have it made in 
England. 

^ I send my dispatch off this day. 

' Ever yours most alfectionatcly, 

‘ The Right Hon. ‘ W ELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B: 

To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Madrid, 30tli August, 1812. 

^ I have the honor to enclose a return of intrenching tools 
required for the service of this armj^, which I will thank your 
Loidship to have sent to Lisbon as soon as possible. 

' 1 have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ^ WELLINGTON. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Madrid, 30th August, 1812. 

‘ According to accounts which I have received from General 
Joseph O’Donnell, commanding the Spanish army of Murcia, 
of the 25th and 27th instant, I Icani that the King had 
decidedly marched into Valencia. 



1812. 


MADRID. 


389 


' His troops passed the castle of Chinchilla (the garrison 
of which fired upon them), and they arrived at Bonete on 
the 24th. The cavalry under General O’Donnell, 1500 in 
number, were at Albacete on the 25th, and the General 
himself, still at Hellin on the 27th, and his infantry, 4000 in 
number, were in that neighbourhood. 

^ It appears, that upon hearing of the King s approach to 
the kingdom of Valencia to join Siichet, Lieut. General 
Maitland had determined to retire eventually upon Alicante, 
with the Sicilian division under his command ; and the 
Spanish troops under Generals Whittingham and Roche. 
He had advanced as far as Elda ; but he retired to Monforte, 
from whence he writes on the 20th ; General Whittingham’s 
division being still at Elda, and the Spanish cavalry ad- 
vanced to Castalla. 

" I have directed the General to maintain himself at Ali- 
cante ; and I have ordered that he may be supplied with 
provisions. 

" General Maitland’s determination to retire upon Alicante, 
and his stating that he has a sufficient number of men to 
maintain himself there without the assistance of General 
O’Donneirs corp.s, and the reports which General O’Donnell 
had received of the intention of Soult to join the King's 
army in A^alcncia, through Murcia and Granada, and the 
prevalence of the yellow fever in Murcia, had induced 
General O’Donnell to move to the northward, and I have 
suggested to him to put himself in communication with the 
allied army in this quarter. 

‘ Since I wrote to your Lordship on the 25th instant, I 
have received reports that the garrison of Astorga had sur- 
rendered by capitulation on the 19th, to the number of 1200 
men. General Foy arrived at La Baneza for their relief on 
the 21st, with the detachment which I informed you was in 
march for that purpose; and his parties found the place 
abandoned by the Spanish troops, the French garrison having 
been carried away as prisoners ; and I expect that he arrived 
at Zamora on the 25th or 2Gth. 

^ As soon as the King’s march info Valencia was decided, 
I ordered the 1st and 5th divisions. General Pack’s and 
General Bradford’s brigades, and Colonel Ponsonby’s brigade 
of cavalry, to assemble at Arevalo, to which place the 6th 



390 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


division had been marched also by General Clinton by mis- 
take ; and I propose to join these troops, and to proceed to 
establish a secure communication between this army and 
the army of Galicia ; and to drive off the parties of the army 
of Portugal which have come forward to the Duero since I 
have been obliged to attend to the state of affairs in this 
quarter. 

^ The reports still continue to prevail of the intention of 
Soult to evacuate Andalusia, and I enclose a pa])er which is 
a translation of the order issued to the army of tlie South on 
the 15th instant, the Emperor’s birth-day, from which there 
is reason to believe that such a design is entertained; and 
General O’Donnell tells me in his letter of the 27th from 
Hellin, that he has reason to believe that the march will be 
by Granada and Murcia. Lieut. General Sir Kowland Hill 
had no intelligence that the march was commenced on the 
23rd instant, when 1 last heard' from him ; but there was 
every appearance of it ; and it is reported tlrat General La 
Cruz’s troops were in possession of San Lucar La Mayor, 
and even of San Lucar at the mouth of the Guadalquivir. 
If these re])orts should be well founded, the siege of Cadiz is 
certainly abandoned. 

" I propose to return to this part of the country, as soon 
as I shall have settled matters to my satisfaction on the 
right of the Duero; and I hope I shall be licre, and shall 
be joined by the troops under Sir J^owland Hill before Soult 
can have made much progress to form his junction with the 
King. 

‘ With a view to Sir Rowland Hills inarch, we arc em- 
ployed in repairing the bridge at Ahnaraz. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst,' ' Wellington. 


memorandum 

For Major General Baron Charles Allen and Don Carlos de Espalia, 

* Madrid, 31 si August, 1812. 

' It being necessary that I should go to the northward 
with the troops assembled at Arevalo, the 3rd and Light 
diviBions, and General Victor Alton’s brigade of cavalry, 
are to remain at Madrid till further orders, with one bat- 



1812. 


MADRID. 


391 


talion of Don Carlos’ infantry. The 4th division will be at 
the Escurial, and Don Carlos’ division at Segovia; General 
D’ Urban’s cavalry at the Palacio de Eio Frio. 

^ The King having decidedly gone into Valencia, and 
there being in that kingdom a body of the allied troops too 
strong for Marshal Sachet, and no intelligence having been 
yet received of the commencement of the march of the army 
of the South, it docs not appear at all probable that the 
enemy will attempt to disturb the tranquillity of this part of 
the country during the time that I shall be absent. But it 
is necessary to provide for all events, and the following 
instructions are to be attended to. 

‘ General Joseph O’Donnell, in command of 4000 infantry 
and 1 500 cavalry of the army of Murcia, is at Hcllin, on the 
frontiers of Valencia; and I have recommended to him to 
throw his rear upon this town, and to communicate with our 
troops which will be here ; and to hill back upon them if it 
should be necessary. 

^ The Empccinado, with the troops under his command, is 
gone forward by Cuenca, towards the frontiers of Valencia. 

^ In case the enemy should advance in force, it must be 
from the south ; and if the force should not be considered too 
strong, particularly in cavalry, the 3rd, Light, and Don 
Carlos’ divisions, and General Alton’s and General D’Ur- 
ban’s cavalry, must be collected on the Tagus about Aranjuez, 
first to cover the retreat upon them of General O’DonneU’s 
corps, and next to oppose the farther progress of the enemy. 
The guerrillas of the Medico must be thrown into Toledo. 

^ Attention must be paid to the fords about Fuentiduefia 
by the Empecinado, or the troops collected in that direction, 
if the enemy should direct his inarch by Tarancon. When 
the enemy shall advance, all the arrangements must be made 
for the evacuation of Madrid, such as sending away sick, 
stores, &c. ; and eventually, for the destruction of every thing 
which cannot be carried away. 

" If the enemy’s force should be deemed too strong for the 
allies, the city of Madrid must be evacuated, the troops must 
march by the Escurial upon Arevalo, as soon as General 
Joseph O’Donnell shall either have joined on his retreat, or 
shall have made his retreat in another direction. 

^ Orders have been given to Major Hartmann of the Royal 



392 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


German Artillery to make arrangements for destroying the 
stores, and burning the buildings in the Retiro, which orders 
he will lay before General Alten and Don Carlos de Espana. 
If the retreat from Madrid should be determined upon, 
measures should be immediately adopted for destroying every 
thing in the Retiro according to those orders, before the 
troops shall depart. If the troops should be assembled on 
the Tagus, and the retreat from thence should afterwards be 
dctei’mined upon, orders should be given for destroying the 
stores and buildings in the Retiro, for which the preparations 
should be arranged as above stated, as soon as the retreat 
from the Tagus shall be determined upon. A constant daily 
communication must be kept with me by the guides who will 
remain on the road. 

^ I liave been much satisfied with the conduct of the allied 
troops since they have been in Madrid. I trust that the 
same good conduct of officers and troops will continue ; and 
that General Alton will enforce my orders respecting these 
points. 

‘In case it should be determined to destroy the stores and 
buildings in the Retiro, it will be necessary to order tlic 
inhabitants of Madrid to take away the palisades from the 
ditches, particularly of the exterior works. It is imagined 
tliey will do this willingly if only permitted. 

‘ Wellington.’ 


To Lieut, General Maitland, 

« Sir, ‘Villa Castin, 2nd Sept., 1812. 

" Since I wrote to you on the 30th, 1 liave received your 
letter of the 24t]i August. 

‘ I beg you will understand tliat I propose that the troops 
under your command should occupy the heights outside of 
Alicante, which are to the southward and westward of the 
town, to rest your left on the sea. 

‘ As the cipher sent by the Secretary of State is deficient 
as affording, no means of spelling words, I propose to use 
that which I sent to Lord William Bentinck, when it is 
necessary to cipher words not to be found in the Secretary 
of State’s cipher. 

‘ Understanding from a letter ftvm General Donkin that 



1812. 


AUEVALO. 


393 


the alphabet sent to Sir Edward Pellew was not correct, I 
think it probable that that sent to Lord William may not 
have been so, and I enclose another. You will of course 
have the instructions how to use it. 

‘ Head quarters are this day at Villa Castiii, and will be 
to-morrow at Arevalo. 

^ I am happy to find from Colonel Jones’s report that there 
will be no difficulty in supplying you with provisions at 
Alicante to any amount you can require. If this should be 
the case, it would be a great convenience to me if you would 
write to Mr. O’Meara, the Eeputy Commissary General at 
Cadiz, to say that you will not require the provisions which 
I had ordered should be sent for your use. 

" I hear that the enemy have evacuated Zamora, which is a 
fortunate event, as it will enable me to rejoin the troops to 
the south at a more early period. 

" I have the honor to be, See, 

* Lieut, General Maitland^ ‘ Wellington. 


To General Don Cai'los de Espaua, 

‘ Mon CHER General, ‘ Arevalo, ce 3 Sept. isi2. 

^ Je vous envoie une lettre du General Castafios, et une 
pour le General Maitland a Alicante, quo jc vous prie dc 
faire envoy er par ma cousine la Marquesa de Alcanices ; et 
une pour la Condesa dc Cliinclion, que je vous prie de donner 
au Colonel Kibcra pour etre apportee a Cadiz. 

* Le concierge du palais a deux etendards pris a Guada- 
laxara par TEinpecinado, que vous devricz envoyer a Cadiz 
par le Colonel Kibcra, pour ^tre presentes au Gouvernenient. 

Le General Castafios etait a Astorga le 30; TArmee de 
Galice sur TEsla. Les Franc;ais etaient encore ii Valladolid 
et sur le Ducro aujourd’hui. Nous aliens a Olmedo demaiii. 

‘ Nous avons les gazettes d’Angleterrc du 15, venues par 
la Coruna. Les nouvclles dc la Kussie ne sont pas mau- 
vaises. On dit quo le Danemarck fait lapaix avec les allies. 

" J’ai rcncontr6 aujourd’hui la Marquesa dc Alcanices et 
Guillem aupres dc Labajos. Ils seront a Madrid deraain. 

' Agreez, &c. 

‘ Gefieral Don Carlos de Espana* ‘ Wellington. 



3 ^ 


SPAIN. 


1812 ; 


To Captain General Don F, X. Castanos, 

‘ i Arevalo, ce 3 Sept., 1812, k 2 lieure® 
" Mon CHER General, de Tapres midi. 

^ J’ai ref;u ce matin votre lettre du 30 a Villa Castin, ct je 
viens d’arriver ici. Jc corapte m’avancer sur Olmedo domain 
matin. Jc crois qiic Soult a Tintcntion de quitter le midi 
de I’Espagnc, mais qu’il aye cettc intention ou non, il cst fort 
nccessairc de chasser tout-a-fait les troupes de Marmont sans 
perdrc du temps, pour me laisscr en liberte de m’opposcr a 
Soult avcc toutcs mes forces. Je prends done avantage du 
moment quo le depart du Roi m’a donne, pour venir de cc 
cote ci, ct jc pousscrai les clioscs aussi loin quo je pourrai. 
Mais j’ai grand besoin de votre assistance. J’ai dcs grosses 
pieces, et j’ai I’idee de fairc morne le siege de Burgos. Mais 
il faut que cola dependc des circonstances ; ct en tout cas il 
faut ^tablir unc bonne communication entre vos troupes ct 
les miennes, ct ^tre ferine sur le Duero. 11 est fort a dcsirer 
quo vous vous avancicz vers Valladolid avec toutcs vos 
troupes aussi-tot que vous rcccvrcz cettc lettre ; ct que jc 
puissc m’abouclicr avcc vous bicn-tot. Je compte etre a 
Valladolid le 6 de cc mois ; mais jc vous ecrirai tous les jours 
jusqu’a ce que j’aie le plaisir de vous voir. 

^ J’envoic im oiRcier pour examiner Zamora ct Toro et me 
fairc un rapport de I’etat oii ces places sc trouvent; parccquc 
jc crois qu’il conviendrait bcaucoiip a nos operations futures 
de tenir ces deux places, ou au moins unc des deux. Je vous 
serai bicn oblige si vous voulcz envoycr I’ordre qu’on les 
laisse voir a Tofficier que j’y enverrai ; et qu’on cesse de tra- 
vailler a lour destruction, si on I’a deja commencee jusqu’a ce 
quo j’aic le plaisir de vous voir. 

" Agreez, &c. 

‘ General Don F, X, CasianosJ * Wellington. 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Olmedo, 4th Sept, 1812. 

‘ I shall be very much obliged to you, if you will let me 
know when you get any detailed reports of the stores for the 
Spanish army sent to Coruna. The Government have been 
pleased to leave at my disposal the stores sent to the Penin- 
sula for the Spanish army ; and I had wished that the whole 
should be sent to Cadiz or Lisbon, because I have With those 



1812. 


OLMfeDO. 


395 


places a constant communication, because I can command a 
communication between those places and every other part (of 
the coast at least) of the Peninsula, and because there are 
at those places persons whose services I can command to take 
charge of the stores, to distribute them as ordered, and to 
account for them. I do not possess those advantages in 
relation to Coruna. 

^ I am very glad that Mr. Forster has given licenses to 
American ships to import corn to Lisbon. I wish you would 
give licenses to Portuguese ships to do the same from 
America. We should then be certain of receiving the sup- 
plies. We cannot be certain that Americans having a license 
to import to Portugal, will not import to France ; taking the 
risk of running the latter part of the passage. 

' Believe me, &c. 

^ His Excellency ^Wellington. 

Charles Stuart. 

‘ I conclude that Sir William Beresford lias seen and 
approved of the recruiting papers. I shall write about the 
northern militia as they deserve.’ 

To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley y K.B. 

^ Sir, ‘ Olmeclo, 5th Sept, 1812. 

‘ I think it my duty to enclose, to be laid before the 
Spanish Government, a letter addressed by General J. 
O’Donnell to Lieut. Colonel Jones, stating the total want 
of provisions in Carthagena. 

I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ^ Wellington. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B: 

To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B. 

^ Sir, ‘ Olmedo, 5th Sept., 1812. 

^ I beg to refer to you a letter which I have received from 
the Commissariat of the brigade of Koyal Carabineers with 
General Joseph O’Donnell’s army ; and I request, that if it 
be in your power, you will supply this porps with the cloth- 
ing and cavalry equipments which it requires, and have them 
forwarded to Alicante as soon as possible. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ^ Wellington. 

SirH,milesky,KS. 



396 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To Lieut, General Sir S. Cotton^ Bart, 

‘ My dear Cotton, ‘ Valladolid, 7th Sept., 1812. 

" I have great pleasure in informing )^ou that I have re- 
ceived the directions of the Prince Regent to invest you with 
the Order of the Bath, which direction I shall obey with the 
greatest satisfaction when the insignia, which I expect by 
the first messenger, shall come out. I hope that you will be 
well enough to come to head quarters, but if you should not 
I will try to go to you. 

^ They are sending us immediately a remount of between 
700 and 800 horses for the cavalry, and three squadrons of 
the Blues, and four of the Life Guards, so that we shall be 
tolerably strong again. 

‘ I hear that Soult has raised the siege of Cadiz, and as in 
that case we may have to malcc an effort to hold our ground 
in New Castillo, I have thought it proper, in expectation 
of Soult’s raising the siege of Cadiz, to move this way, and 
oblige the army of Portugal to go further off. Wc turned 
them out of this place this morning. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ‘ Wellington. 

Sir S, Cotto?i, Bart," 


To Commodore Sir Home Popham, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Valladolid, 7th Sept., 1812. 

' I have received your letters of the 1st by Lieut. Macfar- 
lane, whom 1 send back to you. 

‘ The French evacuated this town yesterday morning, and 
their rear guard was last night at Duenas, on the road to 
Burgos. 1 .shall follow them as far as I can; but I must 
attend to the south, where it is reported that Soult is in 
movement having raised the siege or blockade of Cadiz. 

Believe me, &c. 

^Commodore ‘WELLINGTON. 

Sir Home Poyham' 

To Captain Genei'al Don F, X, Casiafios, 

‘ Mon CHER General, * u Valladolid, ce 7 Sept., 1812. 

‘ Je suis arrive ici ce matin. J’ai passe le Duero hier, 
comme je vous I’ai annonce ; mais j’ai trouve I’ennemi bien 



1812 ; 


VALLADOLID. 


:m 

poste a La Cisterniga, ct enforce dans laville ; et comme j’ai 
vu que je pourrais seuleinent einporter le poste de La Cis- 
terniga hier apres midi, et quo jc n'aurais pas eii Ic temps de 
manoeuvrer pour les forcer do quitter la ville, j’ai remis 
raffairc jusqu’d ce matin. 

^ Ils sont restes dans la ville jusqii’aii dernier moment, et 
cn sont sortis enfin par le pont qu’ils ont fait sauter. Ils 
ont aussi fait sauter le pont de Simancas hier au soir. Jc 
les ai laisse, il y a une lieurc, marchant sur Cabezon. 

^ Ils m’ont paruetre de IG a 18,000 homines ; mais je crois 
que Foy les a rejoint ce matin. Jc desire bcaucoup avoir de 
VOS nouvellcs, ct si vous avez marche, ct oh vous etes. Jc 
comptc donner un jour de repos a mon monde domain, et 
i’espere avoir do vos nouvclles. 

^ On me dit que le siege de Cadiz cst love ; mais je n’en ai 
pas des nouvelles officielles. 

" Agreez, &c, 

‘ General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Do?i F, X. CastanosJ 

To General Don Carlos de Espa/ia, 

' Mon CHER General, ‘a Valladolid, ce 7 Sept., 1812. 

^ Je suis arrive ici ce matin, rennevni ayant quitte la ville 
a regret. Jc vous pric de ne pas laisscr publicr dans la 
Gazette oii je suis. Jc vous cnvoic ime lettre du General 
Vives, qui cxige votre attention. Vous voyez qu’il dit qu’il 
n’a pas asscz do monde pour donner une escorte de 300 
homines aux pvisonniers depuis Ciudad llodrigo jusqu’a Sa- 
bugal. Comment cela peut-il arriver ? 

‘ Sur les affaires de las traldoras je vous conseille d’agir 
selon la constitution. Vous n avez aucun droit de les faire 
aller dans un convent si ellcs nc le vculent pas. Mais vous 
pouvez les prevenir, que si dies nc sont pas discretes, vous 
ne pouvez pas les proteger ; ct peut-etre qu’elles voudront 
y aller elles-mfemes. Vous devez leur envoy cr les lettres 
anonymes qui vous parviennent sur leur compte. Ce serait 
la seule attention que j’-y donnerais a votre place, a inoins 
que CCS dames ne commettent des faits qui puissent donner 
prise a la loi. 

‘ Agreez, &c. 

• General ‘ Wellington. 

Don Carlos de EspafuC 



398 


SP4IN. 


1812 . 


To Major General G. Murray 

' My dear Murray, ‘ Valladolid, 7th Sept, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 18th August, for which 
I am much obliged to you, and I assure you that I have every 
day fresh reason to regret your departure. 

' 1 hear that the siege of Cadiz is raised ; and there is a 
storm brewing up from the south, for which I am preparing 
by driving the detachments of the army of Portugal away 
from the Duero ; and I propose, if I have time, to take 
Burgos from them. In the mean time, I have ordered Hill 
to cross the Tagus by Almaraz, when he shall find that Soult 
moves out of Andalusia. There are three divisions of this 
army at Madrid and the Escurial, and between Aliados and 
Spaniards 1 shall have there above 40,000 men. 

" 1 have, 1 hope, relieved General Maitland of all anxiety 
at Alicante, by taking upon myself all responsibility, and 
giving him positive orders for his conduct, so that he will 
only have to fight in a good position, his supplies being 
secured to him from the sea. By keeping this detachment 
at Alicante, with Whittingham’s and lloche’s Spaniards, I 
shall prevent too many of the gentlemen now assembled in 
Valencia from troubling me in the upper country. 

^ Matters go on well, and I hope before Christmas, if 
affairs turn out as they ought, and Boney requires all the 
reinforcements in the North, to have all the gentlemen safe 
on the other side of the Ebro. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

^ ‘ Major General G. Murray: ‘ Wellington. 


To Colonel Torrens, 

^ My dear Torrens, ‘Valladolid, 7th Sept., 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 22nd, and I am very 
much obliged to you for thinking of our Lieutenant Generals, 
bgt I am afraid we shall have more of them than we shall 
have divisions. I enclose a list of our divisions and of the 
Generals of them, and you will see how we stand. 

‘ I put Pakenham to tlie 3rd division by General Picton’s 
desire when he was ill ; and I am very glad I did so, as I 
must say he made the manoeuvre which led to our sucepss in 



1812 , 


VALLAPOLID. 


399 


the battle of the 22nd, with a celerity and accuracy of which 
I doubt that many arc capable, and without both it would 
not have answered its end. Pakeiiham may not be the 
brightest genius, but my partiality Ibv him does not lead 
me astray when I tell you that he is one of the best we have. 
However, he keeps the division till General Colville or some 
other shall return to it, and he will then go to liis Fusileor 
brigade. 

‘ Sir John Murray is a very able officer, and I should be 
very glad to have him, but you will see that we have now 
no room for liim. I should not be sorry to lose the services 

of ; and I think Major General Hope cannot 

bear the climate : but I shall be sorry to lose him, as he 
is very attentive to his duty. I think also that General 
Campbell will not last long. 

" Believe me, &c. 

* Colonel Torrens,'' ^ Wellington. 


To Lieut, General Sir John Murray y Bart, 

* My dear Muuuay, ‘ Valladolid, 7tli Sept., 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 18th, for wliicli I am 
much obliged to you. I liavo written to Torrens about you, 
but we have at present no vacancy. All our divisions are 
filled, except the 3rd, and there are three Lieutenant Ge- 
nerals coming out. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut, General ‘WELLINGTON. 

Sir J, Murray, Bart,'' 


To His Royal Ilighnefis the Duke of York, 

< ‘ Valladolid, 7th Sept., 1 812. 

‘ I have had the lionor of receiving your Royal IIighne.ss’s 
letter of the 15th August, marked “ ihuvate,” regarding the 
command of the two brigades of Guards. 

‘ When General Campbell went to the command of the 1st 
division of infantry, I allowed Colonel the Hon. T. Fermor* 
to succeed to the brigade of Guards, as being the senior 
officer, because General the Hon. E. Stopford was in Eng- 


• The late Earl of Pomfret. 



. ■ -mm. • ISK. 

land, of whose appoi,ntmcfit ta ibis command 5 ’our Royal 
Higliness. Iiad, before , approved, and I could not majse 
any other arrangement without taking upon myself to ”ap- 
]foillt aii'olHter to ’coinrti^id this brigade. I told Cblbnel 
Fcrm^p'that.the arrangement was but teanj^oratyi atid that 
tvhert 'General Stopford should return to the army he muet 
tfesilmo'the’ command of the brigade of (ruardn unless 'yttiif 
HdyhV'tlighness should have ordered any other arrUngb- 
hteht*.*‘-’'‘ '■ ' ■ ' ■ 

think that notwithstanding that marty officers of supe- 
rior rank arc coming out. Major General Campbell will still 
rciitmn ?n 'Command of a diviMon ; and Major General Cboke 
hmst TCmmn-at Cadiz, in consequence of the orderS of tlit; 
Sceifotary of State, notwithstanding that I hate accounts that 
thc' blockade IS raised. ' ■ ■ ; 

‘ Your Royal Highness will have been informed that 
Major General M’^hcatley died at the Escurial on the 1 st in- 
stant; and I am concerned to add that I left Major General 
Hulsc very unwell at Arevalo on the 4th, and worse accounts 
have Since been received of him. Major Gcncml Hulsc is 
at •juesdnt iiv the command of the 5th division. I request 
ybtir Royal Ilighness will therefore let me know ivlVat ar- 
ras gentenfs shait be made for the Command of thctwo 'bri- 
gs^dea*df Guards in the event to be apprehended uf tlib death 
of*Ml^or'Generiil ‘HuI.< 50, or of one brigade if MajolHenm^at 
Hldfe should fortunately recover. As 1 have not yet ifoattl 
ol General Stopford’s arrival at Lisbon, I can receive j'oU'r 
Royal Highness’s commands before I shall have occasion to 
decide whether he shall resume the command of the brigade 
nosv; with tho army, to which he was before appointed with 
yout BoyaMRghness’s approbatidn. i 

■b fi " I havothehonortobc, &ci.' ; .- 1 ;;.; 

Higkttm ‘ WtLtiNeroKw-; . 

br’i/tef&tketc/^YoTii. ■ .1; ■ ■ , , : j : i; 

•jijl /i'ij. I.' ri:i 

t‘j P.>)^ 8 .,-rrI, aw concerned f to hare ^9 iafprm .yq^y 

Royal Highness that the melancholy event .whieji..? ei^P,f.9te,4 
MaiWjjGeqcval.Hql^pdifdjestei^a^jW^ni- 

no dr: ii 

-41 



181 ^. 


VALLADOLID. 


401 


To the Earl of LiverpooL 

* My dear Lord, ‘ Valladolid, 7th Sept, 1812. 

^ I have received your several letters to the 22nd, for which 
I am much obliged to you, and I sincerely congratulate you 
upon the favorable prospect which you have before you. I 
still think, however, that you will require an enlargement of 
the basis of your Government, in order to carry on your 
business in the House of Commons. I have not heard of 
the young men who are in office, but I should doubt their 
being a substitute for Mr. Canning. 

^ I am much concerned that Pole is not with the Go\ern- 
ment. I have always been on the best terms with all my 
brothers, and I am very sorry that he does not belong to a 
Government which I am serving, and by which I have been 
so kindly treated. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

• The Earl of LiverpooL ‘ Wellington. 

" You will see that I have got General Maitland at 
Alicante. I have given him positive instructions, which will 
relieve his anxieties, and he will have nothing to do but 
fight in a good position if he should be attacked, and re- 
ceive his provisions from tlie sea ; in the mean time by 
having an army at Alicante, I shall prevent too many of the 
enemy from leaving Valencia to annoy me in the upper 
country.’ 


To the Earl of LiverpooL 

* My dear Lord, ‘ Valladolid, 7th Sept., 1812. 

^ I have received your Lordship's letter of the 22nd Au- 
gust, in which you have communicated to me that it is the 
intention of His Royal Highness to propose to Parliament 
at its next meeting, to grant me the sum of one hundred 
thousand pounds, to enable me to support suitably the 
honors which His Royal Highness has recently been pleased 
to confer upon me. 

‘ I request your Lordship to take an early opportunity of 
expressing my gratitude to His Royal Highness for all his 
favors; they are far beyond my hopes, and I can show 
my gratitude for them only by continuing to serve His 

VOL. IX. 2 D 



3PAIN* 


m2. 


40g 


Royal Highness with the same zeal and devotion which 
have already acquired for me such substantial proofs of His 
BLoyal Highness’s favor. 

^ Believe me, See. 

? The Earl of Liverpool: ^ WELLINGTON. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My dear Lord, ‘ Valladolid, 7th Sept., 1812. 

^ I am very much obliged to your Lordship for having 
adverted to my expenses in this country, and for having 
provided for them so handsomely. You will have received a 
letter from me on this subject since you dispatched yours of 
the 22nd. I should never have written upon it if I had not 
incurred, an enormous expense at Madrid, which 1 could 
not bear. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

^ My Lord, ‘ Valladolid, 7th Sept., 1812. 

* Upon referring to my dispatch to your Lordship of the 
24th July, as printed in The London Gazette of the 16th 
August, I observe, that although I reported my sense of the 
conduct of the German brigade under Major General Bock, 
on the 23rd July, I omitted to include the name of the 
Major General, in the enumeration which the dispatch con- 
tains of Officers who had opportunities of distinguishing 
themselves. 

" I beg to take this opportunity of rectifying this omis- 
sion ; and of assuring your Lordship that the Major Gene- 
ral distinguished himself in the operations which led to the 
charge, and in the charge made by the gallant troops under 
his command, as he has upon every occasion which has 
offered since he has been under my command. 

" From my personal observation, and the reports which I 
have received since the action of the 22nd July, I am afraid 
that I have omitted the names of many other officers who 
had opportunities of distinguishing themselves; and in a 
case in which all did their duty in a manner so honorable to 
themselves and to their country, the limits of a dispatch do 



1812. 


VAtl^ADOtlD. 


m 

not permit the mention of the names of all who have dyaw^ 
the notice of their superiors by their conduct. I must, how- 
ever, correct the omission of which I have been guilty 
the case of Lieut. Colonel Arentschildt and the 1st hussars 
of the Legion, who were highly distinguished by their con- 
duct throughout the whole of the day of the 22nd July ; and 
likewise in that of Lieut. Colonel Elley, the Assistant Adju- 
tant General, who attended Lieut. General Sir Stapleton 
Cotton throughout the action, was wounded by a bayonet in 
the charge made by General Le M archant’s brigade, and 
had two horses killed under him. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst,' ^ WELLINGTON. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

^ My Lord, ‘Valladolid, 7th Sept, 1812. 

‘ I quitted Madrid on the 1st instant, in order to direct 
the movements of the troops ordered to be collected at 
Arevalo as reported in my dispatch of the 30th of August ; 
to which I subsequently added the 7th division of infantry, 
and Major General Bock s brigade of dragoons. 

' We moved from Arevalo the 4th, and passed the Duero 
on the 6th, at the fords of Herrera and El Abrojo. 

^ After General Foy had found that the garrison of Astorga 
had surrendered by capitulation, he returned to the Esla, 
and marched upon Car vaj ales with a view to surprise and 
cut off the corps of Portuguese militia which had been em- 
ployed under Lieut. General the Conde de Amarante in the 
blockade of Zamora. The Lieut, General, however, made 
good his retreat without loss to the frontiers of Portugal ; 
and General Foy carried off the garrison of Zamora on the 
29th of August, and marched for Tordesillas. 

" I cannot avoid drawing your Lordship’s attention to the 
conduct of the Conde de Amarante, and of the militia under 
his command in these operations. The zeal of the militia 
of the province of Tras os Montes in voluntarily serving 
beyond the frontier of the kingdom, deserves the highest 
commendation. 

‘ The whole of the remains of the army of Portugal having 
been thus collected between this place and Tordesillas, we 
found their advanced guard yesterday strongly posted on 

2d2 



smK 


1812; 


the heights of La Cistemiga, and I knew that there was a 
considerable body of troops in and about this town. As it 
was late in the day before our troops had crossed the Duero, 
wo did not move forward till this morning. The enemy 
retired from La Cisterniga during the night; and they 
abandoned the town on our approach to it in the morning, 
and crossed the Pisuerga, and blew up the bridge. They 
were closely followed by Lieut. Colonel the Hon. Frederick 
Ponsonby with a detachment of the 12th light dragoons 
through the town ; but as some time had elapsed before the 
infantry could come up, the enemy could not be prevented 
ftom destroying the bridge. 

^ They then retired along the right of the Pisuerga to 
Huchas,. where their rear will probably halt this night. 

/ When General Foy moved towards Astorga, the army 
of Galicia retired ; and since his march to the Duero, they 
have again advanced to the Esla. I have requested General 
Castauos, who is now with the Galician army, to move for- 
ward and put himself in immediate communication with me ; 
and I propose to push the army of Portugal as far as I can, 
preparatory to the operations which I may expect to the 
southward. 

» ^ I have received several reports that Marshal Soiilt had 
raised the blockade of Cadiz, and had entirely evacuated 
Seville about the 25th or 26tli of August; but by some 
nriaccoutttable accident, I have received no letter from Lieut. 
General Sir Rowland Hill since the 25th, nor any from 
Cadiz of a later date than the 17th. I give credit, however, 
to the reports to which I have above referred ; and I shall 
return to the south as soon as I shall be made acquainted 
with Soult’s progress. 

^ The Empecinado has infoimed me that General Villa 
Campa had taken prisoners the troops which had been the 
garrison, and had evacuated Cuenca after the surrender of 
the Retire. These troops amounted to 1000 men, with two 
guns; and belonged to Suchet’s army. 

‘ My last accounts from Lieut. General Maitland are of 
the 24th. lie was then in Alicante. Major General Ross 
had returned to Carthagena with his detachment. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

" Wkllington. 


‘ J^ar/ Bathurst' 





VALLAPOIiID. 


m 


To Lieut, General Sir /?. , , ? , ^ 

^ Mv DEAR Hill, ‘ Valladolid, 8th Sopti^ 181^* 

‘ I have received your letters of the 31st of Augustus and I 
conclude this will find you at Truxillo, or possibly further 
on. It appears now quite clear that Soult has eva^niated 
the south-west parts of Andalusia, but I am not cert4iiii 
whether he will direct his march upon Granada oV upon 
La Mancha; from Drouct’s movement upon Cordova, I 
should think upon Granada. “ 

^ Upon the receipt of this letter I beg you will cross the 
Tagus at Almaraz, and canton your troops with their right 
at Almaraz, and their left at Oropesa. Come forward your- 
self to Oropesa. Colonel Diggens commands a regiment of 
Portug\iese cavalry at Plasencia, or thereabouts ; order him 
to join you. Establish letter parties from Oropesa through 
the mountains to Avila, and thence to Arevalo, to com- 
municate with the guides of this anny which are there. 

"Establish other letter parties direct from Oropesa to 
Madrid, to communicate with the Light, 3rd, and 4th 
divisions, and General Alten’s cavalry which arc thci*e. 
General Charles Alton is the senior officer. 

" Let the parties understand well what they arc to do, and 
send somebody along both roads to make arrangements that 
men and horses may be fed. ^ 

‘ I quitted Madrid on the 1st, and came here with the 1st, 
5th, 6th, and 7th divisions, and General Anson’s, Colonel 
Ponsonby’s, and Major General Bock's cavalry, in order to 
drive Marmoiit’s parties to a greater distance preparatory to 
the events likely to occur about Madrid and tho Tagus. 
We drove them from hence on the 7th, and I have waited 
here to receive accounts of the army of Galicia,' and ^ shall 
move on to-morrow; but I shall return to Madrid soon 
as I shall hear that the plot thickens to the southward, va . 

" Believe me, &e.‘ ^ ^ ■ 

* Lieut, General * WELLINGTON*’ : 

Sir Pi, mu, km: 



40 ^ 


SPAIN. 


I8l2. 


To Mafshal Sir W. C* Beres/ordy K.6, 

* My dear BeresforD, * Valladolid, 8th Sept, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 31st of August, re- 
garding the Portuguese cavalry. I did not answer the 
former one upon that subject, because I wished to see and 
talk to D’Urban before I wrote to you. He appears, by 
what I hear from Hervey, anxious that the proposed punish- 
ment should not be carried into execution ; and it is as well, 
therefore, that it should be left alone. As for sending this 
cavalry to the rear, that is impossible just at present. We 
have still a good deal upon our hands, and we are worse 
provided with cavalry than our neighbours; and a body 
commanded by such a man as D’Urban, even though they 
will not fight, are better than none. In fact, they behaved 
infamously, and they must not be employed again alone, or 
with our cavalry, who gallop too fast for them, but only as 
they were on the 22nd of July, viz., in support of our in- 
fantry, and with English dragoons with them. 

* From some mistake in the post office. Colonel Gordon 
received your letter regarding the not sending you the dis- 
tributions before I received that which you wrote to me on 
the 1st instant; and I immediately pointed out to him, not 
only the propriety that a General Officer in your station 
should receive the distribution, but the absolute necessity 
for it, in order to enable you and your Staff to carry on 
your duty ; and I desired him to alter a letter he wrote to 
you from Olmedo accordingly. 

" I shall be very much obliged to you if you will let me 
know what you wish to have done with Assistant Provost 
Mackay, who is in confinement at Salamanca. It is very 
clear to me that he knew the Portuguese serjeant was ser- 
jeant of the guard, and he had no right to confine him ; and 
for this, if you wish it, he shall be dismissed from his station. 
But what is to be done to the Portuguese serjeant of the 
guard, who resisted the authority of the Provost, and pro- 
tected the depredators ? 

' As for Mackay’s releasing the serjeant, I believe he had 
a right to do so, and probably the confinement of the ser- 
jeant may be deemed a sufficient punishment for his offence. 

^ The office of Provost is not adverted to in the Mutiny 



1812 . 


VALLADOLID. 


4 ^ 

Act and Articles of War ; and the application of the au- 
thority of the British Provost to the Portuguese army is 
quite irregular. But I believe if we did not so apply it, the 
unfortunate inhabitants of the country would derive but 
little advantage from its establishment. 

" You will learn the news here from my dispatch. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Marshal ‘ Wellington. 

Sir W. C, Beresford, K»B,' 


To Lieut, Colonel Dalbiac *. 

‘ Sir, ‘ Valladolid, 8th Sept., 1812. 

" I enclose the proceedings of the General Court Martial 
of which the late Major General Le Marchant was President; 
from which it appears that the sentences were agreed to, and 
had been written out, but the Major General had omitted 
the formality of signing them. 

‘ The Court will recollect whether this is the fact, and if it 
is so, I request you to sign the proceedings in presence of 
the General Court Martial, annexing to them a minute of 
your having done so by my orders conveyed in this letter. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

Lieut. Colonel Dalbiac, * Wellington. 

4M Dragoons' 


To the Commissioners of the Transport Office, 

‘ Gentlemen, ‘ Valladolid, 8th Sept., 1812 . 

^ I have the honor to enclose duplicates of cartels which I 
have given to Lieut. Colonel the Viscondc de Barbacena of 
the 12th Portuguese dragoons, Lieut. Miranda of the same 
regiment, and Captain Dynely of the Eoyal Artillery, and I 
shall be much obliged to you if you will have them delivered 
to Lieut. Colonel Voirol, Captain Gravelle, and Lieut. Lon- 
deaux, and have those officers sent to France by the first 
opportunity, in exchange for the three first mentioned. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Commissioners of ^Wellington. 

the Transport Office' 


* Major General Sir Charles Dalbiac, K.C.H. 





1812. 


408 


To His ExtellenCy Charles Stuart. 

* My dear Sir^ ‘ Valladolid, 8th Sept., 1812. 

/ 1 received letter of the 31st. If the 

^joychiment' Ji£tve any funds to spare, I see no objection to 
their J^uying np and destroying paper money. 

/ 1 must observe, however, that the Portuguese paper 
money is not at a discount, in relation to silver, much 
greater than the excess of the market price of silver in 
England beyond the Mint price, by which excess the de- 
preciation of Bank of England notes is estimated. Now, I 
believe that the security for a Bank of England note is infi- 
nitely better tli^n that for the Portuguese paper ; and it is no 
bad thing if the regular payment of the interest has brought 
the Portuguese paper to a par nearly with Bank notes. 

' The reason why the payment of the interest has not 
materially affected the discount is, that since the interest has 
boeu paid, the paper has really been in circulation : before, 
it ^as hot ; it was locked up in our chest, and its value was 
supported solely by our taking it in payment for our bills 
on England. But we could go on no longer in this way; 
and I must have prevented the Commissaries from taking 
the papet at all, if measures had not been adopted to raise 
its credit. 

I do not see exactly what part our Commissaries are to 
play in the purchase of this paper by the Government out of 
the funds allotted for the payment of the interest. 

I do not know what business Captain has to coin- 

naunicate at all with Dom Miguel Forjaz, or with any body 
excepting his commanding officer. Docs Dom Miguel For- 
jaz wish that the enemy should have plans of his works? 
and will he answer for his Portuguese militia, &c., to keep 
the prisoners employed solely on the road, and not to allow 
them to see tho works ? The prisoners are now under ouV 
charge, and I hope that not a man of them will teiUain at 
Lisbon. 

' Believe me, &c. 

* Hxs Excellency * WellinOTON. ' 

Charles Stuart.* 





VAti44QPLID. 


m 


To J^arl Bathurst^ 

‘ Rf X Lpiip, ‘ Valladolid, 8th Sopt., 18||. 

, ‘ l. hav^ the honor to acknowle(^^e the ri^ei^t ^^olir 
dispatch, No. 27, o 21st August ; and 1 h^g to 
your liordship that t concur entirely in Sir HJ^tlen^ 
opinion regarding the expediency of appointing a 
cprisisting of an officer of the army, one of the Commis- 
sariat, and one of the Department of Accounts, to consider 
of the claims of the inhabitants of the Perjiiisula for supplic^ 
furnished to the British army, for which they may riot pos- 
sess regular vouchers. : - ! 

'I have the honor to be, ^c. ' ’ 

^ Earl Bathurst: / ' Wf^llington/ , 


To Earl Bathurst. ' ^ ^ ^ J 

'M^YLoaD, ‘Valladolid, si %Cl 812.^^^ 

‘ Since I wrote my dispatch. No. 28, I have . r^cciyed 
dispatch of the 29th from Lieut. General Sif Rowland ^Hill 
from Llerena, to which place the Cfencral had mpyed.in 
pursuit of the troops under General Drouct . .. , V ' 

. ‘ Jle sends me the enclosed letter fi*om Colonpl feijirret.t^ 
who commands the British and Portuguese t|:oops whic|i 
compose part of the detachment under General I^a Cruz^ 
from which I learn that the allies had entered, Sevilla on 
^»p27th.' ' ’ ■ ■ ‘ ^ 

‘ I conclude that the blockade of Padiz fftised; X. 
have received several .accounts of the destruction, of mjlitary 
stores af Seville by the enemy before they wi^^reyv the}r 
force frQni 4henco ; but I have received no authentic account 
of the raising of the blockade. I enclose the , only one w|iich 
I ^haye received. . . . _ , r 

. ‘ Lieut.. General Sir Howland Hill will move tp the i;>ridge^ 
of -Ahnaraz as soon as he finds the evacuation pf Andaliiaie. 
decided upon. . , ; t i t 

‘ I beg to congratulate your Lordship upon these eyents* ^ 
‘ I have halted here this day to give rest to the troops, 
which have marched for several days, and to receive intel- 
ligence from General Castanos. ^ 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Wellikgton. 


‘ Earl Bathurst: 



Sl»AIN. 


1812. 


4id 


To Eatl Bathurst 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Valladolid, 8th Sept., 1812. 

^ I send the dispatches by the messenger, Mr. Vick, to 
Corufia, in hopes that he will find there the ship Sylvia, 
which brought him to Santander. 

‘ I understand that the Earl of March, whom I sent to 
Coruna from Cuellar on the 4th of August, in consequence 
of Sir Home Popham’s offer to send a vessel to England 
with any dispatches which I might forward, and who arrived 
at Coruna on the 8th, was still there on the 31st, waiting 
for a vessel to convey him. 

^ I beg to draw your Lordship’s attention to my letter of 
the 1 3th of August, regarding the necessity of providing for 
the safety of the packets on their passage to and from 
Lisbon. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst: ' WELLINGTON. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

‘ My dear Lord, ‘ Valladolid, 8th Sept., 1812. 

" I am very much obliged to you and to the Government 
for all that has been done for me, for which I have requested 
Lord Liverpool to thank the Prince Regent. 

‘ I shall receive with gratitude any honor which His 
Royal Highness may think proper to confer upon me, but 
the addition proposed to my arms is the last which would 
have occurred to me. It carries with it an appearance of 
ostentation, of which I hope I am not guilty ; and it will 
scarcely be credited that I did not apply for it. However, I 
prefer the addition ])roposed by your Lordship * to that 
proposed by Lord Wellesley. 

‘ I am quite surprised at the conduct of the . 

I always thought the Order of the Bath that mark of the 

* ‘ Whitt'hall, 25th August, 1812. 

* His Royal Highness the Prince Regent, in the name and on the belialf of 
His Majesty, hath been graciously pleased, by an especial Warrant, to grant 
unto Arthur, Marquis of Wellington, Kuight Companion of the most Honorable 
Military Order of the Bath, and Commander in Chief of His Majesty’s forces 
in Spain and Portugal, His Majesty’s Royal license and permission that he and 
his descendants may bear, as a Royal augmentation, in the dexter quarter of ilte 
arms of Wellington^ An Escocheon, charged with the Crosses of St. George 



VALLADOLID. 


411 


lSi2. 

King s favor which it was most desirable to an officer to 
receive ; and I mentioned it to you, as I thought it likely it 

would be agreeable to . It might be very proper 

to create him a Peer, but I would not propose such an 
arrangement to Government. Even if it had been proper 
that I should do so for any officer, I should have considered 
it my duty to make Government acquainted with what I 
know arc * * * * ’s feelings on this subject. He was much 
disappointed and hurt that this mark of the King s favor 
was not conferred upon him when the restrictions ceased, 
and I really believe that his regard for me alone prevented 

him from resigning his situation. If had been 

made a peer, I really believe he would have resigned, not- 
withstanding that he is junior to . But your 

Lordship is aware that we none of us act discreetly in cases 
in which our own passions are concerned ; and I believe that 
my friend * * * * is anxious to obtain this honor for the 
very reason which would induce the Government to doubt 
the expediency of granting it to him. 

^ I should be very glad to have the assistance of General 
Fane, but we have no vacancy at present in the cavalry. 

The situation lie held with General Hill is filled by 

. But he is a Lieut. General, and must continue in 

that situation ; and unless Fane should get the brigade of 
Horse Guards, there is not even a brigade of cavalry vacant 
for him. 

‘ Upon referring to my dispatch, I observe that as it re- 
lates to the affair with the rear guard on the 23rd, as well as 
to the action of the 22nd, I ought to have mentioned General 
Bock ; but I did not mention him, because neither he nor 
the German brigade were engaged in the general action. 1 
shall correct this ; but I would suggest to your Lordship, 
that as this was a general action, in which all the troops 


St. Andrew, and St. Patrick, being the Union badge of the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Ireland^ as a lasting memorial of the glorious and transcendent 
achievements of the said Arthur Marquis of Wellington, on various impoirtant 
occasions, but ihore particularly in the recent brilliant and decisive victory 
obtained over the French army by the troops under his command, near Sala- 
manca, on the 2‘2nd day of July last ; such Royal augmentation being first duly 
exemplified according to the laws of Arms, and recorded in the Herald’s College. 
And also to command that this especial mark Of His Majesty’s Royal favor be 
registered in this College of Arms.’ 



m 




mm 


were atr least in the canneniides and ait shar^ m the pursuit^ 
even thongh not engaged in the action, all the <Jen^al 
Officers present should receive the thanks of Parliament I 
am aware that tliis is a question of Parliamentary practice^ 
in which 1 may be wrong. 

‘ I have no particular partiality to my sons title; but as 
the King had conferred it upon me, I did not think it proper 
to apply to have it altered. 1 believe he ought to be arl 
Earl ; and as the Earldom is not of that title, I believe 
there must be some alteration. I have no desire, however, 
that the title itself should be altered, nor even that my son 
should bo made an Earl, unless it should be necessary. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 

To Marshal Sir W. C, Beres/ord, K.B. 

* My dear BeRESFORD, * Valladolid, 9th Sept., 1812. 

^ As I understand that General Hamilton is still very 
unwell, and as the Conde de Amarantc will, it is to be hoped;^ 
now have little to do in Tras os Montes, I wish you to con- 
sider whether it would not be expedient to appoint him to 
command Hamilton’s division during the absence of the lat- 
ter. I only suggest this for your consideration. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Marshal " W ELLINGTON. 

Sir me. Beres/ord, K.B: 

To Lieut. General Sir S. Cotton, Bart. 

‘ My dear Cotton, ‘ Valladolid, 9th Sept., 1812. 

‘ I have just received your letter of the 5th, and I imagine 
that Colonel Elley has been troubling you on subjects on 
which he might have relied on my exertions in his favor. 
In regard to his promotion, I enclose you what Torrens ^shys 
of it. The Duke of York says the same. It is not ^iven 
to him now, because the Commander in Chief is unwilling tq 
make a precedent of giving an officer the rank of Colonel 
by brevet as a reward for service. Whether right or wrong; 
this is a reason which cannot be overcome* ^ 

‘ I did Colonel Elley an injustice in not mentioning his 
name in my dispatch of the 24th ; and I declare I thought 



tm. 


VALl<»»OLID. 


413 


1 had) mentioned it Hoteever, I eorrectod this omission in 
d. dispatch 1 wrote yesterday respecting him and other 
dfficers ; bat I am not certain that I have n6t so far done 
him an injury by attending to his wishes upon this subject, 
as that his promotion will be delayed. 

' It is obvious that the Duke of York will not make the 
precedent of promoting for service to the rank of Colonel. 
This shows that a man is not the best judge of what is good 
for himself. 

^ In regard to Captain , I cannot recommend him 

now ; but I will on the first occasion that offers. He like- 
wise has done himself a great injury by writing an intem- 
perate letter, which I ought not to have forwarded for him, 

respecting the promotion of Major ; and the fact turned 

out to be, that his money for the purchase was not forth- 
coming, according to the regulations : another proof that 
we are none of us the best judges in cases in which we are 
personally concerned. 

' 1 wish to God you were well*. Matters are going on 
famously. Hill's corps will soon be across the Tagus; and 
I shall have the whole army either together or in close com- 
munication. The blockade of Cadiz is raised, Seville evacu- 
ated, and Soult retiring through Andalusia. 

" I am about to join here with the Galician arm)% and to 
push the French as far as I can, and then return with some 
of the troops, particularly the heavy cavalry, towards Madrid. 
I have ordered the 2nd hussars round from Cadiz. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ^ Wellington. 

• Sir S, Cotton, Bart,' 

To Captain General Don F, X, CasiaTm* 

^ Mon CUEIL General^ ‘ a Valladolid, ce 9 Sept.* 1812 . 

^ Je vous envoie mon aide de camp, le Colonel Gordon, 
pour vous expliquer I’etat des affaires, et pour vous montrer 
combien il est urgent qiie Tarmee de Galice se mette en 
communication avee noUs le plutot possible, et que je puisse 
tourner toute mon attention a notre droite. 

♦ Wounded at Silkmanca* 



m 


2IPAXK< 


‘ L’infanterie de Tavant-garde a march6 ce matin vers 
Duenas, oil Tarmee les suivra demain, lies Franqais etaient 
hier matin d Duenas. 

" Je mettrai mon Quartier General demain a Cabezon ou 
Cigales . 

" C’est vraiment tres important que je puisse m’abouclier 
avec vous ; sans quoi nous courons risque de perdre la Cas- 
tille en gagnant TAndalousie ct la Valence. Mais nous 
garderons tous trois si nous pouvons faire un bon arrange- 
ment pour ces pays ci. Le blocus de Cadiz est leve, nos 
troupes sont entrees a Seville ; Soult est en pleine marche 
pour evacuer I’Andalousie. II reste a savoir par oii il pas- 
sera. S’il passe par Granade nous avons le temps pour 
tout. S'il vient par La Manche, il faut que je retourne tout 
de suite a Madrid. 

‘ Agreez, &c. 

* General ‘ Wellington. 

Don F, X, Castaiios,' 

To Major General Cooke. 

‘ Sir, ‘ Valladolid, 9th Sept, 1S12. 

^ You will have received the orders of the Secretary of 
State to send to Lisbon the 3rd batt. 1st Foot Guards, 
which were to be relieved, as I am informed, by the 2nd 
batt. 59th regiment; and I conclude that you will have 
carried those orders into execution before you will receive 
this letter. 

^ In the course of yesterday and this day, I have received 
accounts to which I give credit, that the enemy had entirely 
raised the blockade of Cadiz, and it is now necessary that I 
should give you the instructions which I have received from 
the Secretary of State for your guidance, in case of the occur- 
rence of this event. 

‘ You will withdraw the British garrison from Tarifa, with 
the exception of the Eoyal artillery and engineers, Avho are 
to continue to construct the works and buildings on the 
island till fm*ther orders. 

‘ The following troops are to be embarked and sent round 
to Lisbon without loss of time, unless you should have the 
means of transport, &c., so as to enable you to march them 
through the country, viz. ; 





VALT-A^DOLID. 


Detachment of the 2nd hussars, K.G.I 4 . 

20 th Portuguese regiment. 

3rd batt. 1st Foot Guards. 

Detachment 2 nd batt. 95th regiment. 

Company of the Royal Staff Corps. 

2 nd batt. 87th regiment. 

Captain Rowan’s and Captain Dickson’s companies of 
artillery. 

All the artillery horses and mules, excepting 170 
horses. 

Artillery drivers in proportion to the number of horses 
and mules sent. 

‘ Colonel Skerrett must come in command of these troops. 

" If you should be able to equip the troops as they ought 
to be, to be enabled to march through the country, they 
must move by Seville, Monasterio, Medellin, Truxillo, &c. 

' In case the troops should land at Lisbon, Colonel 
Skerrett will have instructions from General Peacocke for 
his guidance. If they should march, he must do every thing 
in his power to communicate with General Hill, and through 
him with me. If he should have any sick with his detach- 
ment in passing through Estrcmadura, he must send them 
to General Hill’s hospitals at Elvas, from the British maga- 
zines at which place he may draw supplies ; giving notice 
to the Commissary there of his wants, and sending means 
of transport to convey what he will require. 

‘ If the troops should march, they must have with them 
the necessary officers of the Commissariat, Medical Depart- 
ment, &c., and each man must be equipped with a blanket, 
as well as his great coat ; they must likewise carry a bill 
hook for 10 men. The men must be provided with tin camp 
kettles, one for six men ; which they must carry. If there 
should be no tin camp kettles, they must have those madq 
of cast iron, which must be carried on mules, one for the 
kettles of each company. There must be a mule to carry 
the entrenching tools of each regiment; one to carry th^ 
Paymaster’s books; and one the Surgeon’s chest of each 
regiment. 

" If the troops should march, you will send with them a 
9 pounder brigade of ordnance, and one hospital waggon 



416 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


for each battalion, drawn by six of the waggon train horses 
if you should have any hospital waggons at Cadiz. 

* I have received the orders of the Secretary of State to 
desire that you will stay in command of the British troops 
which w ill remain at Cadiz and Carthagena, consisting of 

4 companies of the Royal Artillery. 

Artillery Drivers. 

Engineers. 

2nd batt. 47th regiment. 

2nd batt. 67th regiment. 

Waggon train. 

Do Watteville’s regiment. 

Battalion of foreign recruits. 

170 Artillery horses. 

‘ In case the 2nd batt. 59th regiment should have arrived 
at Cadiz before you will receive this order, you will send 
either that battalion, or the 2nd battalion 47th regiment, 
with Colonel Skerrett’s detachment, according to your 
judgment which of the two is most fit for service in the 
field. 

^ Whenever the 2nd batt. 59th regiment shall arrive after 
you shall have carried these orders into execution, you will 
send to Lisbon whichever of that battalion, or the 2nd batt. 
47th regiment, is most fit for service, retaining at Cadiz one 
British battalion. 

^ I beg you to lay these instimctions befoi’e His Majesty’s 
Ambassador at Cadiz, for the information of the Spanish 
Government. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Major General Cooke, ‘ Wellington. 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley^ K.B, 

* Sir, ‘ Valladolid, 9th September, 1812. 

^ Major General Cooke will lay before you the instructions 
which I have sent him in consequence of the information 
which I have received, which renders it probable that the 
enemy have raised the blockade of Cadiz, and have evacu- 
ated the south west part of Andalusia. 

^ I beg you will do me the favor to congratulate the 
Spanish Government on this event ; and at the same time 



1812. 


VALLADOLID. 


417 


convey to them the following suggestions. The experience 
which I have acquired in military affairs has taught me not 
to rely implicitly on any prosperous state of affairs. An 
accident, trifling probably, abstractedly, may be attended by 
the most important consequences ; and it is the duty of a 
prudent Government, by precautions to prevent, or at all 
events diminish the evil which may result from such accidents. 

' I earnestly recommend to them, therefore, first, to keep 
up the works which have been formed at the Isla and Cadiz 
at such vast labor and expense ; and never to leave that 
place without a respectable garrison. With this view, and 
to take care of the stores belonging to the British Govern- 
ment which are there, I have desired that some troops might 
remain at Cadiz. 

‘ 2ndly. To have all the enemy’s works completely de- 
stroyed, and all the guns and stores in them, in the lines of 
the Guadalete and in Seville, &c., removed to Cadiz without 
loss of time. 

^ 3rdly. To secure the Peninsula of the Trocadero by 
good works, in the same manner as has been done with the 
Isla, and the communication between the Isla and Cadiz. 

" I have above recommended to the Spanish Government 
nothing of which I have not myself set the example. All 
the works which saved Portugal in 1810, and will, I trust, 
eventually save the Peninsula, are kept in the most perfect 
state ; and many improvements have been made to them, 
and additional works have been constructed since the 
French have been obliged to retire from Portugal. On the 
same principle, the chief engineer of the British army is 
now employed in the repair and improvement of the works 
of Badajoz ; and the works of all the towns on the frontiers 
of Portugal are kej>t in the best state, and the towns are 
sufficiently garrisoned to preserve them against a coup de 
main, 

‘ I am sorry to say that this is not the case in respect to 
Badajoz or Ciudad Rodrigo. In the former place, I under- 
stand that there arc not more than 700 men, and in respect 
to the latter, the Governor informed me some days ago, 
that he could not afford a detachment of 250 men to escort 
the prisoners taken in the Retiro, till they should be relieved 
by the garrison of Almeida. The consequence of any check 

VOL. IX. 2 E 



418 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


to the allied armies which would oblige them to retire upon 
either of those places, would be the fall of the place for 
want of a garrison to defend it. 

^ I recommend that General Ballesteros’ army should be 
reinforced as far as may be possible, and that it should carry 
on operations at all times between the enemy on the one 
side, and Cadiz and Seville on the other ; taking care not to 
be committed. 

‘ I have ordered General Hill to draw nearer to me, 
and he will cross the Tagus, and move towards Madrid. 
I shall thus have the whole of the allied British and 
Portuguese army collected, and communicating by a short 
communication. 

‘ I shall, I hope, be in communication with the army of 
Galicia by my left ; with the army of Estremadura by my 
right ; and I am already in communication with the troops 
under General O’Donnell from Madrid. 

‘ Thus, General Ballesteros will always be on the left 
flank, or rear of the enemy, while I shall be in their front ; 
supported by the Spanish armies of Galicia, Estremadura, 
and Murcia; and it may be hoped, that, unless some acci- 
dent happens, they will not be long on this side of the 
Ebro. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

The Right Hon, ^ Wellington. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K,B: 


Memorandum for the Commissary General. 

‘ Cigales, lOtli September, 1812 . 

‘ As six scjuadrons of the Life and Horse Guards are 
coming out to Lisbon, consisting of 900 liorses, it will be 
necessary to make arrangements for providing this brigade 
with the regulated number of mules to attend them, 
viz., 450. 

‘ These mules might be hired in Estremadura, and might 
be collected for them at Elvas, Badajoz, and Campo Mayor. 
The Commissary General is requested to report the pro- 
gress in obtaining these mules. 


Wellington/ 



1812. 


MAGAZ. 


419 


To General Saniocildes, 

‘ a Duenas, ce 12 Sept, 1812. 

" Monsieur le GenI^ral, ^ 8 heures du matin. 

^ Je viens do recevoir votre lettre d’hier k 9 heures du 
soir. II est bien vrai que je vous ai donne rendez-vous a 
Valladolid, mais c’etait pour le 6 ou le 7, et non pour le 12 ; 
et depuis je n’ai jamais pu vous dire ou vous devriez aller, 
parceque jusqu aujourd’hui je n’ai pas su oh vous etiez. II 
y a trois jours que mon aide de camp est alle vous chercher 
et le General Castahos, par la route qu’on m’avait indique 
que vous marcheriez. 

^ J’esperais que, sachant que j’etais hier a Duehas, vous 
vous seriez rapproche de moi aujourd’hui ; mais je vois que 
vous en etes plus eloign 6, et que vous avez continue tou- 
jours votre marche sur Valladolid. 

"A present je vous prie de rassembler vos troupes le 14 h 
Palencia. 

^Je pars tout de suite pour Magaz. Mes troupes ont 
marche ce matin, et continueront de s’avancer. 

" J’ai riionneur d’etre, &c. 

‘ General Santocildes: ' WELLINGTON. 

To Don Ramon Nohlezo y Lozemo. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Magaz, 12th Sept, 1812. 

I liave had the honor of receiving your letter, and a most 
beautiful pair of pistols which you have forwarded to me ; 
and I beg leave to return you my most sincere thanks for 
the honor which you have done by sending me this beautiful 
present. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Don Ramon Nohlezo y Lozemo* ‘ WELLINGTON# 

Memorandum for the Quarter Master General, 

* Magaz, 12th Sept, 1812. 

' It is necessary that arrangements should be made at an 
early period for bringing up the clothing of the troops which 
should be put on them about Christinas. 

" There are two great roads by which to communicate with 
the army, viz., that by Badajoz and that by Ciudad Rodrigo. 

2 E 2 



SPAIN. 


1C51Z. 




Besides these, there is that by Gastello Branco and Plasoncia ; 
but this falls into the road from Badajoz to Madrid, and 
difficulties might he experienced in using it. Indeed the 
only roads which can be used for this or any other purpose, 
are those upon which previous arrangements will be made. 

" The clothing for the troops in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 
light divisions, and General Alten s, General Slade’s, and 
General Long’s brigades of cavalry, might be sent by Elvas 
and Badajoz; that for the 1st, 5th, 6th, and 7th divisions, 
Colonel Ponsonby’s, General Bock’s, and General Anson’s 
cavalry, by Ciudad Rodrigo. 

‘ The three modes of communicating with Badajoz should 
be adopted, viz., by the Alcacer do Sal river, by the Tagus 
to Abrantes, and by the great road from Aldea Gallega. 

* Each road should be allotted for the baggage of one or 
two divisions. 

^ The clothing which is to come by Ciudad Rodrigo should 
be tra,nsportcd from Lisbon to Oporto or to Figucira, at the 
mouth of the Mondego. From Oporto it must come by water 
to Barca d’Alva, and from thence to Almeida and Ciudad 
Rodrigo in carts. 

‘ From Figueira it must come up the Mondego in boats as 
far as Foz Da5, and thence in carts by Cclorico to Almeida 
and Ciudad Rodrigo. 

" Each mode should be allotted to one or more divisions. 

" The only mode of arranging tliis carriage of the clothing 
forward from Elvas and Badajoz, Almeida and Ciudad 
Rodrigo, is to have the work done by stages. 

‘ It is supposed that the clothing for each regiment will 
require on an average 30 carts, and it is supposed that in the 
manner above proposed there will not be much difficulty in 
transporting the clothing to Elvas and Badajoz, Almeida 
and Ciudad Rodrigo. 

‘The Commissary General should then make arrange- 
ments for working carts at certain stages on the great mili- 
tary lines of Salamanca, Arevalo, &c., from Ciudad Rodrigo ; 
and of Merida, Truxillo, the bridge of Almaraz, Oropesa, 
Talavcra, from Elvas and Badajoz. 

‘ It is obvious that the same number of carts, or rather 
carts to carry the same weight, should be at each stage. 

^ The Quarter Master General at Lisbon would tlien send 



1812, 


MAGAZ. 


421 

off tho clothing, for which commanding officers of regiments 
should be directed to write by one of the lines of communica- 
tion to Elvas and Badajoz, or Almeida and Ciudad Rodrigo, 
as above arranged. 

"The officer of tho Commissariat at Aldea Gallcga, 
Abrantes, Alcacer do Sal, Oporto, and Figueira, Barca 
d’Alva and Foz should be directed to find means of 
conveyance for the clothing of those places respectively, on 
the requisition of the officers or non-commissioned officers in 
charge of it. 

" An officer of the Quarter Master General’s department 
should be stationed at Elvas, and another at Almeida, to 
communicate with the officers of the Commissariat, and to 
regulate the loading and departure of the clothing of the 
several regiments, which should be sent on in succession by 
stages. According to this mode of proceeding, all the cloth- 
ing of the army would reach the regiments in about eight or 
ten weeks, supposing that the stages of the carts did not 
require more than a week for each trip, and that there were 
carts in sufficient numbers to carry the clothing of two regi- 
ments at a time. 

" The officers of the Quarter Master General’s department 
at Elvas or Badajoz, or at Almeida, or Ciudad Rodrigo, 
should be directed to report to the Quarter Master General 
the arrival and departure of the clothing of each regiment at 
or from that station, specifying in charge of whom, and upon 
how many carriages loaded. 

" The officer of the Commissariat at eacli stage on the road 
should report when the clothing of any regiment passes his 
stage, in charge of whom, and on how^ many carts loaded; by 
which means it would be known at all times what progress 
the clothing should make, and where the clothing of every 
regiment might be. 

" W ELLINGTON.’ 


To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K,B, 

‘ My dear Henry, ‘ Magaz, I2th Sept., 1812 . 

" I have received your letter of the oOth August. 1 do not 
know what to recommend to you abolit the Government. It 
appears to me that every thing in which the Spaniards are 



422 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


concerned is going on as badly as possible ; and I really 
believe there is not a man in the country who is capable of 
comprehending, much less of conducting, any great concern. 
If there w^as, it might be worth while to endeavor to have 
him appointed to the Government, As it is, things cannot 
well be worse than they are, and it is better that we should 
not interfere in any way. 

^ As for military matters in this quarter, I wrote to Cas- 
tahos from Madrid on the 30th, to tell him that I was going 
to move upon Valladolid, and eventually to drive the French 
across the Ebro, if I had time ; and requesting that the army 
of Galicia might join me at Valladolid, where I should be 
on the 6th. He says he did not receive my letter of the 
30th, nor another I wrote him on the 3rd from Arevalo, till 
the 7th. But the fact is that I marched from Madrid to 
Valladolid, halted one day and turned out the French, before 
the courier could carry my letter to Castanos. Then Santo- 
cildes has been six days marching. He was yesterday \vithin 
three leagues of us, and knew it last night, but he has 
this morning moved to Valladolid, eight leagues from us, 
and unless I halt two days for him, he will not join us for 
four or five days. Then, out of 30,000 men that they feed 
in Galicia, he has only brought 11,000 infantry and 350 
cavalry to join us. 

‘What do you think of his losing all the guns and stores 
we took in Valladolid in the pursuit of Marmont’s army, and 
400 of the prisoners ? Then 1 desired him to proclaim the 
Constitution forthwith, but having delayed it a manana, the 
French returned, and the Constitution was not proclaimed 
till I drove them out the other day. 

‘ I certainly did right in proclaiming the Constitution at 
Madrid the day after I entered it. I did the same at Val- 
ladolid, and I shall do the same wherever I go. 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. . ‘ WiaLlNGTON. 

Sirll. Wellesley, K.B: 

To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My dear Lord, * Magaz, I2th Sept, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 26th. My dispatch of 
the 18th August will have shown you what description of 



1812. 


MAGAZ. 


423 


ordnance I wished to have ; and I write to General Peacockc 
to desire him not to send the 12 pounders. 

^ I was misled by Sir H. Popham to send March to Coruna 
from Cuellar. He arrived there in four days, but there was 
no vessel to take him away till the 31st. 

I assure your Lordship that you can depend no more 

upon the reports of than you can upon those 

of any body else ; and I earnestly recommend to Govern- 
ment to publish respecting the army only what comes from 
myself. I write a report once a week, which contains all 
occurrences, and I should think that the public might be 
satisfied with these reports. It might have been as well 
also if Sir H. Popham's exultation upon the success of his 
operations in diverting the attention of the enemy from me, 
had not been published. I mention this because I know 
that the French act a good deal upon any information from 
our papers, which they deem at all authentic. 

^ Your Lordship will see that Andalusia has been eva- 
cuated and the siege of Cadiz raised ; but I do not much 
like the way in which affairs are situated. I cannot get the 
Spaniards to make an exertion for themselves ; and they 
are really more backward in the military art than I had 
thought it possible. Of 30,000 men who are fed as sol- 
diers in Galicia, Santocildes has brought into Castille only 
11,000 ragged infantry and 350 cavalry, and I cannot pre- 
vail on these to make a direct movement to join me. The 
object of our operation to the north is therefore making but 
slow progress, and I fear that I shall have to return to 

Madrid without having accomplished it. has 

contrived to quarrel with and , and he is here in- 
stead of being at the head quarters. 

^ I have a letter from Sir R. Hill of the 4th, from Cas- 
tuera, but he had not received my orders to approach the 
Tagus, which river I have since sent him orders to cross. 
Here also there will, I am afraid, be some delay. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Wellington. 


^ ‘ Earl Bathurst ' 



424 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To General Dumouriez, ' 

Monsieur le General, ‘ aTorqueraada, ce 13 Sept., I 812 . 

" Ily a long temps que je ne vous ai pas ecrit, car je 
savais que je ne pourrais vous rien apprendre que vous ne 
trouveriez pas dans mes depeches. Enfin voila le blocus de 
Cadiz leve, ct TAndalousic evacuee par les Fran 9 ais, par Ics 
suites d’un mouvement en Castillo, et de la bataille de Sala- 
manque et scs suites. Tout le niondc parait vouloir sc 
rasscmbler cn Valence ; ct cn attendant que les plans sc 
devcloppent, que les troupes du General Hill s’ avancent 
d’Estreniadourc, et que les troupes Espagnoles puissent sc 
rassembler, jc cliasscrai les parties de Tarmee de Marmont 
du Duero ; et je les pousscrai aussi loin quo jc le pourrai, 
et je tficherai d’etablir une bonne communication entre les 
detachcmeiis Anglo Portugais que jc dois laisscr ici, ct l ar- 
in^c de la Galice, afin d’assurcr ma gauche quand jc serai 
engage vers Valence. 

‘ La prise de Madrid a ete un coup ties avantageux en 
vue politique et militairc. 11 nous a fait bcaucoup dc bicn ; 
ct, jc crois, nous a valu levacuation dc TAndalousie. 

' II faut quo je vous pric tous en Angleterrc dc ne pas 
volcr trop vite. He corps vraiment militaircs cn Espagne 
a opposer aux Franc ais, il n’y a quo rarmee Anglo Portu- 
gaisc. Pour les autres, j'en serai satisfait s'ils nc sc laissent 
pas detruire. Voila tout cc que je leur demandc. Mais 
vous devez sentir qu’on nc pent pas fairc grand chose bicn 
vite, avee ime telle disparito de forces. 

^ J’ai Vhonneur d’etre, &c. 

^ An (jfffertdlDnmounezJ' ‘ Wellington. 

To Ih's Excellency Charles Stuarts 

* Sir, ‘ Torquemada, 13th Sept., 1812. 

‘ I beg you to apply to the Portuguese Government for 
permission to import tlie grain mentioned in the enclosed 
letter from the Ccminissary General, free of duty. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

\His Eaxellem'U * W E LLl KOTON . 

Charles Stuart" 



1812. 


TORQUEHADA. 


425 


To Colonel Torrens. 

^ Sir, ‘ Torquemada, 13th Sept., 1812. 

‘ Referring to your letter of the 25th August, I have the 
honor to enclose a letter from Dr. M‘Grigor, stating, that 
notwithstanding five Surgeons and twelve Hospital Mates 
have been ordered to proceed forthwith to this country, he 
shall still require those for whom he made a demand on 
the 22nd ult. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Colonel Torrens. * Wellington. 

^ P.S. I beg to observe that there is not a single medical 
officer in reserve with this army, and to refer you to the list 
sent home in my letter of the 25th ult., of those absent. I 
beg leave likewise to inform you, that we have not one officer 
of the Commissariat in reserve, to be employed on any ser- 
vice ; or one officer of the Pay Department ; and I am now 
obliged to send officers of the regiments in charge of money 
from one station to another ; not one regiment being com- 
plete in officers. It is very desirable that heads of depart- 
ments should advert to the ^returns sent home regularly 
from this army, and keep all the departments complete in 
officers. Requisitions from me can be sent only when wants 
occur, take one month to get home, and three months before 
the army can receive the benefit of them,' 


To Colonel 'lorre^is. 

‘ My dear Torrens, ‘ Torquemada, 13th Sept., 1812. 

‘ I received from the Adjutant General by the last post a 
letter of the 1st of August, in answer to one which I wrote 
to him on the 15th of April last, in regard to the transmis- 
sion of invalids from Portugal to England, and the settle- 
ment of their accounts. 

^ Since I received His Royal Highness’s orders, to which 
my letter of the 15th of April was an answer, I have had 
frequent complaints from the Superintendent of Hospitals of 
the detention in Portugal of soldiers after Medical Boards 
have invalided them ; which detention has invariably been 
occasioned by the necessity of settling their accounts pre- 



426 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


vious to their being sent to England under His Royal 
Highness’s orders. 

‘ Upon receipt of the Adjutant General’s letter of the 1st 
of August^ I desired Dr. M‘Grigor to put in writing what 
he had frequently reported to me on this subject, and I 
now enclose his letter. 

" In truth, my dear Torrens, the difficulties under which 
we labor are but little known in England. First : there 
is no soldier in the army who has at present been paid to 
a later date than the 24th of April for want of money. 
His accounts are settled every month. But, 2ndly; if a 
soldier has been in hospital since the month of March last, 
at which time the soldiers had not been paid later than 
January, and the pay for March not received till June or 
July, I should like to know how it is possible ibr any officer 
to come to a settlement by a correspondence with one officer, 
who has to settle the accounts of probably 500 men going 
to England at the same moment ? It is quite impossible ; 
and the consequence is, that the poor men arc detained 
three, four, or five months, to the loss of many, till the corre- 
spondence respecting their accounts is finished, during which 
time many settle all accounts with this world. 

‘ It is a great error to suppose that the lower orders are 
always right in their complaints, and the higher orders 
always in the wrong. My experience has taught me, that 
nine times in ten, the soldiers loudest in their complaints 
and claims have no ground for either the one or the other ; 
and are generally in debt to their Captains. Those who 
arc wounded invariably either throw away or sell their ne- 
cessaries ; and whether the ground is held or not by the 
army, they claim compensation from the public. Their 
claim can be settled only by a Board. No officer of a regi- 
ment has the power either to admit or to refuse it. Yet, if 
a soldier makes such a claim at Lisbon, the officer who is to 
settle the soldiers’ claims before they go to England must 
detain at least as many as one transport will contain, till 
the claims of one for losses of this description shall be in- 
quired into by post ; every letter now requiring three weeks 
to get an answer. While this is going on, many die who 
might be saved ; and after all, a soldier’s account can never 
be settled satisfactorily excepting with his regiment 



1812. 


TORQUEMADA. 


427 


" I have ordered General Peacocke to carry strictl y into 
execution His Royal Highness's orders; and I shall repeat 
my directions to him by this post. But I shall be much 
obliged to you, if you will lay before him the enclosed letter ; 
and make known to him what I have above represented. 

^ There is no point in the service to which I have at all 
times paid so much attention as to the settlement of the 
soldiers’ accounts : I consider early settlements to be essen- 
tial to discipline ; but I am quite convinced that it is impos- 
sible to attain His Royal Highness’s object in this country 
without detaining here the men three or four months after 
the necessity for their return to England shall have been 
pronounced ; and the consequences are seen in Dr. M'Gri- 
gor’s letter. 

" Believe me, &c. 

'Colonel Torrens.' ‘ Wkllington. 


To Colonel Torrens, 

^ My dear Torrems, ‘ Torquemada, 13th Sept., 1812. 

^ I enclose a letter from Major General Hope, from which 
you will sec that he is obliged to c|uit the army. Indeed 
his health has always been in such a state as that he could 
not be said to be fit for service in this country. It does not 
appear to me to be necessary to relieve him, as you will 
have observed from my last letter that we have more General 
Officers to command divisions than we have divisions to be 
commanded. What we want in them is health, good will, 
and abilities to perform the duties of their situation. I am 
sorry to say that the perpetual changes which we are 
making, owing to the infirmities, or the wounds, or the dis- 
inclination of the General Officers to serve in this country, 
are by no means favorable to the discipline and success of 
the army ; and do not augment the ease of my situation. 

Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colonel Torrens.' ‘ WELLINGTON. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

* My dear Lord, * Torquemada, i3th Sept, 1812. 

I see that some person employed by Lord Castlereagh 
has made some discoveries approaching to the key of the 



m 


SPAIN. 


1812; 


PiVl’is cipher, in which some letters were written, which I 
have transmitted to your Lordship. 

^ It is obvious, from the perusal of this cipher, that this 
discovery is not complete ; but as nearly all the letters which 
we now intercept are written in this cipher, I shall be very 
much obliged to you if you will send me what has been dis- 
covered. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathunt: ‘ W ELLINGTON. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

‘ My Lord, ‘Torquemada, 13th Sept., 1812. 

‘ I have continued to follow the movements of the army of 
Portugal since I last addressed you, but I have not pressed 
them as hard as I might, as I wished to be joined by the 
army of Galicia. These troops, to the number of 11,000 
infantry, 350 cavalry, and 6 pieces of artillery, will be at 
Palencia, about three leagues from hence, to-morrow. 

" Your Lordship will have received from Major General 
Cooke the reports of the enemy’s having raised the blockade 
of Cadiz, in the night of the 24th of August*, and of the 
very handsome attack made by the allies under General 
La Cruz on the enemy’s rear guard, at Seville, on the 27th 
of August, in which attack the allied British and Portu- 
guese troops under Colonel Skerrett distinguished them- 

* jMajor Gtneral Cooke to General the Marquie of IFellingtony K<,B, 

* My Loud, ‘ Cadiz, 2(3th August, 1812. 

* 1 have the pleasure to inform your Lordship that the enemy abandoned his 
position and works opposite to Cadiz and the Isla on the night of the 24th and 
morning of the 2r)th, except the town of Puerto S*® Maria, where a body of 
troops remained till the middle of the day, and then withdrew to the ('artuga. 
He has left a very numerous artillery in the several works, and a large quantity 
of stores and powder ; and although most of the ordnance has been rendered 
useless, he appears to have retired from his position with more precipitation 
than 1 should have expected, 

* A considerable body of cavalry was brought down previous to the retreat 
commencing. 

‘ The towns of Puerto Real and Chiclana are now occupied by detachments of 
Spanish troops; and a party of the Hanoverian hussars is at the first mentioned 
place, to which Colonel Lambert had moved from the Portazgo with them, and 
some light troops from this division. 

< I have the honor to be, &c. > ' 

* General « G, Cookk, Major General. 

the Marquis of Wellington^ K.BJ 



m2. 


TORQUEMADA. 


429 


selves. The bridge of Seville was thereby saved, and the 
enemy was prevented from destroying many guns and va- 
luable stores which the town contained. 

^ Marshal Soult directed his march upon Granada, and 
General Drouet upon Jaen, according to the last accounts. 
I have not heard of the arrival of either at those places. 
General Ballesteros, reinforced by the Spanish troops under 
General La Cruz, and by other Spanish troops detached 
from Cadiz, making in the whole, as I am informed, a corps 
of 15,000 men, was in pursuit of the enemy. 

^ I have directed Major General Cooke, by the instruc- 
tions of which I enclose a copy*, to send to join this army 
the allied British and Portuguese troops now at Cadiz, with 
the exception of one British battalion, the llegiment do 
Watteville, and the battalion of foreign detachments and 
four companies of British artillery, the engineers, &c., which 
are to remain at Cadiz : and 1 have desired Major General 
Cooke to remain at Cadiz in the command of these troops, 
and those at Carthagena. 

" The troops will be sent round to Lisbon, or will march, 
according to the facility which Major General Cooke will 
experience in providing for them on their march. I am 
inclined to believe they will march, as I understand, from 
Major General Cooke’s last letter, that he was about to 
move the troops to Seville. 

‘ My last accounts from Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill 
are of the 4th instant. He was then at Castuera in Estre- 
madura, but he had not received ray instructions of the 24th 
August to approach the Tagus. I have since sent him 
orders to cross that river and to move upon Oropesa. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

• Earl Bathurst" ‘ Wellington. 


To General Santocildes, 

‘ a Torquemada, ce 14 Sept,, 1812. 

^ Monsieur LE Gf.NKRAL, ^ 8 heures du matin. 

* J’ai continue k avancer depuis que je vous ai ecrit le 
12, et mes troupes seront aujourd*hui a Palenzuela, et le 
Quartier General et le gros de rarmee a Cordovilla, 


♦ See page 414. 



430 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


" II serait a desirer que vous puissiez vcnir detnain avec 
VOS troupes It Quintana del Puente. 

^ J’ai rhonneur d’etre, &c. 

* General Santocildes* * Wklli-NGTON. 

To General Don Xavier Elio. 

^ Sir, ‘ Corclovilla, 14th Sept., 1812. 

" I have had the honor of receiving your Excellency’s 
letter of the 9th instant. 

‘ I recommended to his Excellency General Joseph O’Don- 
nell that he should put himself in communication with this 
army, lest the troops under his command should be destroyed 
by those of Soult, on the expected march of the latter from 
Andalusia into the kingdom of Valencia; and I recom- 
mended the same to you. 

' All that I am anxious about is that none of the bodies of 
Spanish troops now existing should be defeated, as I am of 
opinion that if that misfortune can be avoided for a short 
time, there are grounds for me to hope that we may be able 
to oblige the enemy to evacuate the Peninsula. 

‘ Under these circumstances, your Excellency will be the 
best judge whether, with a corps now consisting of 4000 in- 
fantry and 1300 cavalry, which when more than double that 
number were lately defeated by one French division, it is 
expedient that you should expose yourself to be attacked by 
an army which does not amount to much less than 50,000 
men. 

^ In regard to the proposal of your Excellency, to draw 
from Alicante the division of Spanish troops under the com- 
mand of General Roche, I have to remind your Excellency 
that these troops are the garrison of Alicante ; and your 
Excellency is much mistaken if you suppose that I will allow 
the British troops under Lieut. General Maitland to be the 
garrison of Alicante, instead of those under General Roche. 

‘ I now give notice to your Excellency, tliat if I do not 
learn by the return of the courier that you have ordered 
General Roche to remain at Alicante, I shall send orders to 
General Maitland to embark the troops under his command 
from Alicante, where it will, in that case, be useless for 
them to remain. 

" The facts regarding Alicante are as follow : — There arc 



1812. 


CORDOVILLA. 


431 


no provisions in the place for the Spanish troops, and the 
place cannot be supplied unless the communication should 
be kept open with the sea. The communication with the 
sea will be lost unless the troops at Alicante can maintain 
themselves on the heights outside of the town ; and there 
will not be a sufficient number to hold that position, if the 
troops under General Roche should be withdrawn. 

" If the eastern heights cannot be maintained, your Ex- 
cellency will see the necessity for my withdrawing my troops ; 
and your Excellency will do well to give orders that the 
Spanish troops under General Whittingham should be with- 
drawn likewise ; and it will be necessary that your Excellency 
should be prepared to give satisfactory reasons to the Go- 
vernment for the loss of this important post. 

^ I would also request your Excellency to consider the 
measure of weakening the force at Alicante, under another 
‘^oint of view. It appears to be the enemy’s intention to 
collect his army in Valencia, or possibly in Valencia and La 
Mancha; and I am doing every thing in my power to collect 
the largest and most efficient body of troops which I can, in 
order, if possible, to oblige them to evacuate that kingdom, 
or, at all events, to enable us to maintain the ground which 
we have acquired. 

^ The views of all ought to be directed to these objects ; 
and certainly nothing will facilitate their execution to such a 
degree as the maintenance in Valencia on the flank and rear 
of the enemy of such a post as Alicante, garrisoned by a 
corps which must secure it, and which is sufficiently strong 
to take the field, and re-conquer the kingdom of Valencia, 
in case the enemy should weaken the force which it is ex- 
pected he will have in that quarter. 

^ I beg your Excellency will consider the suggestions which 
I have above detailed, and let me know whether you intend 
or not to withdraw General Roche from Alicante, that I may 
take my measures accordingly. 

* I assure your Excellency that I have no object in wish- 
ing to keep a strong corps at Alicante, excepting views for 
the benefit of your country, which at least have the merit of 
having been maturely considered, 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

General ' WELLINGTON. 

Don Xavier Elio-' 



, r To ih^ MarlofLiveifmlf . 

‘ My dear LqRD^ * « Revilla, 15th Sept,, 1812. 

‘ I i^cceived by the packet by Coruna your letter of the 
28th August, in which you enclosed the copies of the corre- 
spondence which you had had with Lord Somerville, respect- 
ing the;purchaseof the manor of Wellington, and the estate 
of W^U^gton Park. I am very much obliged to you; for 
your , attention to my interests. It rarely happens that a 
person in your situation lias leisure to attend to his own 
private affairs, much less to those of any other individual *, 
and it is particularly gratifying to me to find that not only 
your Lordship, but Mr, Perceval had recollected me when a 
property was offered for sale which I am most anxious to 
poi^css. 

^ When the Prince Regent promoted me in the peerage 
last spring, and made an addition to my pension, I deter* 
mined, for the sake of my sons, to lay out all the money I 
had in the purchase of land in Great Britain, and I directed 
that inquiries might be made for a suitable purchase for me. 
I likewise intend to lay out in the same manner tlic sum of 
money which His Royal Highness has declared his intention 
to recommend to Parliament to grant me. 

‘ The inquiries which have been made have not hitherto 
produced any favorable result ^ and I could not make any 
purchase with which I should be so well satisfied as that on 
which you have written to me. I am ready therefore tp pay 
the money as soon as I shall receive your answer to this let- 
ter. I am rather inclined, however, to wish to receive the 
estate and manor as a gift from the public as part of the 
£100,000, if your Lordship should see no objection. But if 
tjiej’e should be any, I shall be too happy to make the pur- 
chase out of my private funds. 

" While writing upon this subject, it occurs to me, that 
as I propose to lay out all the money which the pubjic will 
grant me in the purchase of land in Great Britain, it would 
aave me some trouble, and might probably be more advan- 
tageous to tlie public, if the value were granted in land. 
However, 1 suggest this to your Lordship, to be attended to 
only in case there should be no objections. 



1812. villa fdRo. 4 ^ 

^ I beg leave once more to return you my thanks for your 
kind attention to what would be gratifying to me. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl qf LiverpooL' ‘ WELLINGTON. 

To LieuL General Maitland, 

* Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 20th Sept.* 1812. 

' I have received your letters of the 3rd, 6th, and 10th 
instant. In that of the 3rd, in which you have returned 
answers to the queries contained in my letter of the 29th 
ultimo, it appears to be the opinion of the Admiral, that the 
troops can be embarked as long as your extensive line can 
be maintained ; but that the communication with the sea 
would be difficult and uncertain, and probably only partially 
practicable, if it should depend upon the lower lines. The 
opinion of the Admiral concurs with the notion which I had 
formed on this subject when I instructed you to maintain 
your position till you should find the communication with 
the sea to be so seriously menaced, as to be in danger of 
being lost. 

" It appears to me that as long as you can maintain the 
castle of Alicante, and the hills to the south, your communi- 
cation with the sea would be easy and certain. 

‘ I should hope, therefore, that it would not be impracti- 
cable to embark the whole of the troops, after you are of 
opinion that you can no longer maintain the exterior line. 

^ His Majesty and the public have a right to expect from 
us that we should place a reasonable confidence in the gal- 
lantry and discipline of the troops under our command; 
and I have the satisfaction of reflecting that, having tried 
them frequently, they have never failed me ; and in a posi- 
tion particularly on the flanks of which the enemy cannot 
manoeuvre with the advantage of a superior cavalry, their 
success may be relied upon. 

* With a full knowledge of the defects of the Spanish 
troops, I feel the same confidence in them when placed on a' 
position, and having the advantage of the co-operation ahd 
example of the British troops ; and I entertain so littib 
doubt of your success if you be attacked, that there Is 
nothing I wish for so much, for your own honor and the ad- 

VOL, IX. 2 F 



434 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


vantage of the cause> as that the enemy should attack you 

de vive force* 

' If they should proceed by a regular attack upon your 
field positions, or upon those fortified posts with which they 
are connected, you will at least have time to estimate your 
danger, and leisure to make all your arrangements, and 
embark at the moment such a measure may be necessary. 

* 1 assure you that your facilities for embarkation are 
much greater, and your prospects better, even if left by 
yourself, than mine were in the year 1810. 

' I advert to this subject in order to inspire you with con- 
fidence in your own situation ; which you may depend upon 
it is so good that I only fear that the enemy will not think 
of touching you. 

^ Cornet de Lobo is an officer of this army. I shall be 
obliged to you if you will give him 200 dollars, to be sent to 
his father by means of a flag of truce from your out-posts, 
together with any money, clothes, &c., which he may have 
brought with him. Desire him to return and join his corps 
forthwith, as he may depend upon it that the French will not 
allow him to see his father. I should have prevented his 
going if I had known of it. Let me know how I shall repay 
you the 200 dollars. 

^ We invested this place yesterday, and took by storm 
last night the horn work, which commands the greatest part 
of the works of the castle. I doubt however that I have 
means to take the castle, which is very strong. 

" 1 have the honor to be, &c. 

* Lieut* General Maitland*' * Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

^ My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 20th Sept.. 1812. 

' I think it proper to send to you a copy of a letter which 
I have received from General Maitland of the 30th ultimo, 
like\^ise the copy of one of the 2nd instant, and the copy of 
a letter which I have written to him this day. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• Earl Bathurst: ' WELLINGTON. 



1812. 


VILLA TORO. 


435 


To Lieut. General Sir JR. Hillt K.B. 

^ Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 20th Sept., 1812. 

" I have received your letter of the 14th, in which you 
have informed me that you will be at Oropesa on the 18th ; 
and I beg that on the receipt of this letter you will move 
with all the troops under your command to Toledo. You 
will throw your cavalry forward in La Mancha ; and canton 
your infantry in Toledo and Aranjucz, taking care that the 
officers and troops respect the King s houses and gardens. 

" I enclose you the instructions which I gave to Major 
General Charles Alten when I quitted Madrid. I have 
ordered the Major General to place himself under your 
command; and I beg you to communicate with General 
Elio, who commands the troops which are under the com- 
mand of General O’Donnell, and with Don Carlos de 
Espaha. 

‘ I can scarcely think it possible that, with such a force as 
you will have, you will not be able to defend the Tagus ; 
therefore a part of these instructions may not be applicable 
to your situation. 

‘ I think it desirable that you should leave the troops of 
this army in their present situations till you shall find it 
necessary to order them forward to the Tagus. 

^ I enclose the order which 1 have sent to General Cooke, 
regarding the disposal of the troops at Cadiz. I beg you 
to send an officer to meet Colonel Skerrett in Estremadura, 
with orders to follow your march across and along the 
Tagus ; and to join the troops under your command. 

^ I send a duplicate of this letter to Major General 
Charles Alten, to be forwarded to you, and he will report 
himself to you. 

^ As soon as you shall be established at Toledo, and shall 
have opened your communication with me through Madrid, 
you may take off the latter parties ordered to be placed up 
to Arevalo by my letter of the 8th inst. 

‘ I order General Charles Alten to continue to correspond 
with me. 

^ It appears that it would be desirable to deprive the 
enemy of Consuegra, to which I beg to draw your attention. 

" I request you to order Colonel Buchan to return to 

2 F 2 



SIXAIN. 


1812 ; 


EIvAS 'with the 5th, 17th, and 22nd regiments of Portngucse 
infantry of the line, and the 3rd regiment of cavalry. I 
did not know there was a fourth regiment of infantry belong- 
ing to the garrison. If there is, it should return likewise. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

Lieut General ^Wellington. 

Sir Hill, K,B. 


To Lieut, General the Hon, Sir E, Paget, K,B, 

^ My dear Paget, ‘ Villa Toro, 20th Sept., 1812. 

^ I have received your letters of the 8th and Pith, and I 
am delighted to find that 3 ^ou are come out. I direct this 
letter to Ciudad Rodrigo, to which place I think it probable 
that you will come from Gastello Branco, as it is scarcely 
possible that it can meet you at the latter. You will do 
well to come to head quarters by the military route of Sala- 
manca, Arevalo, Valladolid, &c. Arevalo is a little out of 
the way ; but I have kept our communication by that point, 
because it answers for communication with Madrid and with 
Hill, who is, I hope, at Oropesa. 

^ When I found that the King had decidedly passed tlie 
mountains into Valencia, I determined to make use of the 
time which would elapse before I could go to the south 
(which I then thought it possible I should be obliged to do) 
in settling our affairs upon the Ducro, and in establishing a 
good communication between us and the Spanish army of 
Galicia. 

^ The probability that Soult would evacuate Andalusia, of 
which I was aware before I quitted Madrid, or tlie certainty 
that he had raised the siege of Cadiz, and abandoned Seville, 
which I obtained at a subsequent period, was not calculated 
to induce me to alter this determination. I was certain that, 
whenever Soult should connect himself with Suchet and the 
King,, we should be pressed a little on the Tagus, and that 
it was desirable to remove to a distance all embarrassments 
existing on this side, and to strengthen ourselves as much 
as possible in this quarter, preparatory to the events which 
might be expected on the Tagus. 

^ We passed the Duero on the 6th, and drove the French 
from Valladolid : on the 7th we pushed them on, but not 



I812j VILLA TORO. ^ 

very vigorously, till the 16 th, on which dey we were, jpine^ 

by about 12,000 nien of the army of Galicia. ;We ,the^ 
drove the enemy before us to Burgos : on the 17th they re- 
tired through the town that night, and have since continue^ 
their mai*ch to Riobena 

^ The castle of Burgos commands all the bridges over the 
Arlanzon so completely, that wc were not able to cross'that 
river till yesterday morning. Wc immediately drove in all 
the enemy’s posts; and last night took by storm a horn 
work lately constructed upon a hill within 300 yards of the 
castle, which has a considerable command over many of /tlie 
works of the castle. Although we succeeded, the operation 
was not very well carried on, and I am afraid th^ our loss 
is not less than 300 men. After all, I am a little apprehen- 
sive that I have not means to take this castle, which the 
French have strengthened to the utmost of their power. 
1 shall be able to judge better however in a day or tw6. 
Although I have here only four divisions of infantry and 
three brigades of cavalry, I think that with the Spaniards 
wc are strong enough for any thing the French have or can 
now bring against us on this side. If I could get this castle, 
I think I might take some of the force southward, and I 
must still endeavor to do so, even though I should not suc- 
ceed in taking the castle. 

^ I have accounts from Madrid to the 17th. They had not 
any late accounts of Soult, which could be much relied upon; 
nor does it appear that he had quitted Granada. He had 
intended to move into Valencia through Murcia ; but as 
the yellow fever prevails in Murcia, I think he will pass by 
Caravaca to Albacete ; from whence he will communicate 
with the King in Valencia. I have one account stating that 
he was on the 9th within nine leagues of Caravaca'; but, on 
the other hand, I have letters from General Elio from San 
Clemente to the 15th, who does not mention Soult, of whom 
he must have heard, if he had been on the 9th so far forward 
as is stated. I have now given you an outline of our situa- 
tion as far as I am acquainted with it. 

/ Besides Hills corps I have three weak divisions and two 

♦ Thus written in the draft of this letter, and also in the great map ef Lopez ; 
but Rtihena in the Diccionario GeograRco-estadistico of Milano,, aiid,^e Guia 
de Caminos of the Madrid^Foit Office. . 



SPAIN. 


1812. 


weak brigades of cavalry, at and near Madrid. But we 
shall have, I should think, not less than 12,000 Spaniards, 
besides innumerable guerrillas; indeed we have plenty of 
that commodity every where ; and Ballesteros has 12,000 or 
15,000 men, which will be on Soult’s left, where are likewise 
4000 or 5000 men on their march from Cadiz ; and there 
is an army under General Maitland at Alicante. Upon the 
whole therefore I do not despair of the continuance of our 
success through the campaign, particularly if the cavalry 
expected from England should land at an early period. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ' Wellington. 

the Hon, Sir E, Paget, K.B' 

To Major General Baron Charles Alien, 

‘ My dear General, ' Villa Toro, 2l8t Sept,, 1812 . 

^ I have received your letter of the 18th, and I enclose the 
duplicate of a letter to General Sir Rowland Hill, which I 
beg you to peruse and to forward to him by an officer ex- 
press to Oropesa. If he passes through Talavcra he will 
probably meet him there. 

^ You will put yourself under the orders of Lieut. General 
Sir Rowland Hill, and will communicate with him as well us 
with me. 

' Desire your brother to take the command of his brigade. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

^ Major General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Baron Charles Alien. ^ 

To Major General H, Clinton, 

^ My dear General, ‘ Villa Toro, 2lst Sept., 1812. 9 A.M. 

‘ I am anxious to coniine the enemy a little more to the 
castle; and I have it in contemplation to take possession 
this evening of the exterior line of their works. As I un- 
derstand that Colonel Brown was of »reat service, at the 
siege of Salamanca, in keeping down the enemy’s fire of La 
Merced, by the possession of the neighbouring houses, I shall 
be obliged to you if you will leave him in charge of the 
troops of the 6th division in the town, and direct him to 

♦ Sir Gustavus Brown, then Major in the 60th regiment; and Lieut. Colonel 
commanding the 9th Portuguese Ca^adores. 



1812. 


VILLA TORO. 


439 


make arrangements for placing the troops under his com- 
mand in the houses close to the walls, and for keeping pos- 
session, as soon as we shall be prepared to lodge ourselves 
in the exterior line. 

^ I shall also be much obliged to you if you will look at 
the posts occupied by the Spaniards, and see whether, by 
a better connection of their posts with ours, or by a better 
arrangement of them, wc could confine the enemy more 
effectually than we have hitherto. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General H, Clinton' ‘ Wellikgton. 

To Mr. Hey deck, Professor of Oriental Languages. 

^ Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 21st Sept,, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 8th inst., and I had 
before received those which you had written me, to which I 
did not write an answer, as they did not appear to require 
one. 

" I beg leave to return you my thanks for your last letter, 
and to assure you that I shall be happy to receive from you 
the communication of any facts, the knowledge of which by 
me you think interesting to the cause. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Mr. Heydeck.' ^ Wellington. 

To His Excellency Charles Stuart. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 21st Sept, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 12th; the mistake 
regarding the Spanish clothing originates in the constant 
practice of our Government in corresponding with two per- 
sons on the same subject. This clothing was to be at my 
disposal and in charge of the Commissary General, one of 
the officers of this army. For what reason then are they to 
trouble you with it I and it is obvious that with the best 
intention you and I may give different orders regarding it, 
and your arrangements may not suit mine. My letter to 
you of the 8th July referred only to the equipments for 
5000 cavalry. My orders to the Commissary General to 
send clothing to Coruna, and my letter to Admiral Martin 
to request him to supply shipping for that clpthing, referred 



44d sIpAikI lS12i 

iBrily to th^ d^tWitg tnie^ in the order for 

ihc Galician' artny] And for the guerrillas of Marquifiez. 

^ It appears, however, that In cottsequAnce of your letter 
to England, all the clothing for the Spanish army to be 
at my disposal is to go to Coruna, besides the clothing 
which I have sent there for these purposes ; and besides the 
equipments for the cavalry referred to in my letter to you 
on the 8th July. 

^ We are at cross purposes, therefore, on this subject. 
You have sent me accounts of the clothing transmitted 
from Lisbon to Coruna under my own orders. I want to 
have the accounts of the clothing sent there, or to be sent 
there by the Secretary of State : in consequence of your 
letter I have disposed of the former. I must know ac- 
curately what there is before I can dispose of the latter. 

‘ I concur with you respecting licences to vessels under 
Portuguese colors. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

^ His Excellency ‘ Wellington. 

Charles Stuart. 

* P.S. — I enclose an estimate of the value of the supplies 
to the Portuguese Government in this month.' 


To Earl Bathurst 

‘My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 21st Sept., 1812. 

‘ I continued to follow the enemy ^vith the troops under 
my command till the 16th, when 1 was joined at Pampliega 
by three divisions of infantry and a small body of cavalry of 
the army of Galicia, his Excellency the Captain General 
Castahos having arrived at head quarters on the 14th. The 
enemy had on the 16th taken a strong position on the 
heights behind Celada del Camino, and arrangements were 
made tp attack them on the morning of the 17th ; but the 
enemy retired in the night ; and they were driven on the 
17th to the heights close to Burgos. They retired through 
the town in the night, leaving behind them some clothing 
and other stores, and a large quantity of wheat and barley ; 
and have since continued their retreat to Brivicsca, where 
!t is reporidd that thdy hSvc been joined by 7000 conscripts. 







m 


U likewise, 

ordered by the loc^-l; i gov^mwnjt, an . Prappn, tp^ pprjfip) a^d 
iakethe command of the army^ * ,, 

. / Thp. castle of Burgos commands the passagp^ . pf; thp 
river Arlanzon in the neighbourhood and thp, 
municating with them so completely, that >ve. could? qotf pas^ 
the river till the 19th; when we effected that operatiqiq 
two columns, the 5th division and General Bradfpr^’i? 
brigade above, and the 1st division and General Pack’s 
brigade and General Anson’s cavalry below (he town, 

Burgos is situated in that division of Spain .allo|tted tp 
the army of the North; and General Cafifhrelli, who^h^d 
been here on the 17th, had placed in the castle a garrison of 
the troops of that army, consisting, as is reported, of. 2^00 
men. The enemy had taken considerable pains to fortify 
the castle of Burgos ; and had occupied with a horn work 
the hill of San Miguel, which has a considerable command 
over some of the works of the castle at the distance of 300 
yards. They had likewise occupied other parts of the hill 
with fleches and other works for the protection of their 
piquets and out-posts. 

^ As soon as the 1st division crossed the Arlanzon on the 
19th, the enemy’s out-posts were driven in by the Light in- 
fantry battalion of Colonel Stirling’s brigade, under the 
command of Major the Hon. C. Cocks, supported by Brig. 
General Pack’s brigade ; and the enemy’s outworks on the 
hill of San Miguel, with the exception of the horn work, 
were occupied by our troops, wdiich were posted close to the 
horn work. 

^ As soon as it was dark, the same troops, with the ad- 
dition of the 42nd regiment, attacked and carried by assault 
the horn work which the enemy bad occupied in strength. 
In this operation Brig. General Pack, Lieut. Colonel Hill of 
the 1st Portuguese regiment. Colonel Campbell of the I6tb 
Portuguese regiment. Major Williams of the 4th cagadore^. 
Major Dick of the 42nd regiment, and Major the Hon. 
Cocks of the 79th, commanding the light infantry battaimn, 
distinguished themselves. The latter, in particular, Ipd the 
attack of the enemy’s posts in the morning, and enlerpd the 
horn work by the gorge at night. We took, three pieces of 
caanonrand one Capfain and 62 ppsoncrsj, 



SPAIN. 


442 


1812. 


to add that our loss was severe, as appears by the enclosed 
retui*n. 

" It was impossible to ascertain the exact state of the 
works of the castle of Burgos till we had obtained pos- 
session of the hill of San Miguel ; and as far as I can judge 
of them, I am apprehensive that the means which I have arc 
not sufficient to enable me to take the castle. I am informed, 
however, that the enemy are ill provided with water ; and 
that their magazines of provisions are in a place ex- 
posed to be set on fire. I think it possible, therefore, that 
I may have it in my power to force them to surrender, 
although I may not be able to lay the place open to assault. 

^ Since the 19th we have been employed in establishing 
ourselves on the hill of San Miguel, and in constructing 
those works which are best calculated to forward our future 
operations. 

* The whole of the army have crossed the Arlanzon, with 
the exception of the 6th division and one division of Spanish 
infantry. 

^ I have accounts from Lieut. General Hill of the 14th. 
He was then at Truxillo, and had received my orders, and 
was to be at Oropesa on the 18th. I have ordered him to 
march to Toledo, and to defend the Tagus; taking under 
his command the three divisions of this army, and Lieut. 
General Alton's and General D’Urban’s cavalry, and Don 
Carlos de Espana’s division of infantry, which are at and 
near Madrid. 

‘ I have not heard that Marshal Soult has yet left Granada. 
He was still there on the 8th. General Ballesteros had fol- 
lowed the enemy’s movements from the Guadalete, and had 
been very successful. He was at Loja on the 6th. 

‘The enemy had abandoned Andujar and Jacn; and the 
line of their retreat was certainly through Valencia; but it 
is not impossible that, when they shall have heard that I 
have moved to the North, they will endeavor to pass through 
La Mancha, which General HilVs position will prevent. 

‘ The last accounts I liave from Alicante are of the 10th. 
The King’s army and that of Soult were still in Valencia. 

‘ I have no late accounts from Cadiz. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Wkllington. 


* Earl Bathurst,' 



1813 . 


VILLA TORO. 


44d 


Return of the Killed^ fVounded, and Missing^ of the Aemif under the Cemmand 
of General the Marquis of Wellington^ KM,, in the assault and capture of the 
Fort of San Miguel, on the 19M September ^ 1812. 



Officers. 

Serjeants. 

Rank and File. 

Horses. 

.... 

Total loss of Officers, 

N on-Commissioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File, 

Killed . . . 

6 

5 

60 

1 

71 

Wounded . . 

15 

21 

297 


333 

Missing . 

— 

— 

IG 

1 

16 


To Earl Bathurst, 

‘ My dear Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 21st Sept., 1812. 

‘ I beg to draw your attention to the letters which I trans- 
mit this day from Lieut. General Maitland. 

‘ You will see that a reinforcement has already arrived 
for the army of Portugal, and that more are expected. 
Some time will elapse, however, before that army can be 
formidable; and if I can bring this siege to a fortunate 
conclusion at an early period, I do not yet despair of work- 
ing the French beyond the Ebro, particularly if Sir Home 
can draw the attention of the army of the North, so as to 
prevent any large proportion of that body from being 
brought against us. The worst of our situation is, that the 
Spaniards can do nothing by themselves; we must have 
British troops every where, and I am afraid that I must be 
wherever a serious operation is to be carried on. 

‘ General Paget is arrived and on his way up. He will be 
of great use. 

‘The Spaniards have no cavalry. The guerrillas are 
almost useless in serious operations, even when with our 
troops ; and we have not enougli for the extent of ground 
we are obliged to occupy, and the system of our operations. 

‘ Our loss was much greater on the 19th than it ought to 
have been ; which was to be attributed very much to the 
inexperience of the — nd regiment. If I had had here 








444 


SmtK. 


18 'M 


,soBie of the troops tvho have stormfed so often, I should liot 
have lost a fourth of the number. 

‘ I am much obliged to you for your letter of the 31st 
August, and for the money. Napoleons will pass here very 
well. 

' ‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ■ ‘ W ELLINGTON. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My dear Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 2lst Sept., IB13. 

‘ It is very necessary that the heads of the Commissariat 
and Medical Departments, and the Deputy Paymaster 
General, should attend to the state of the civil departments 
of this army. We have not at this moment an officer of 
any one of those departments in reserve ; and I am obliged 
to employ the regimental Surgeons to attend the general 
hospitals, to the great inconvenience of the regiments. 

" With every regiment in the army deficient in officers, 
owing to the number of sick and wounded, and those doing 
duty with the Portuguese service, I am obliged to furnish 
officers of the army to take charge of money going from one 
station to another for the service of the civil departments ; 
because there is no officer of cither the Pay Department or 
the Commissariat who can be spared to go in charge of the 
money. 

" There are many officers of the Pay, Commissariat, and 
Medical Departments, who have gone to England for the 
recovery of their health, and have never returned to their 
duty. I shall transmit you a list of their names. The rule 
which I have adopted in respect to the Officers of the Staff, 
should be applied to them ; viz., that if absent on account 
of sickness for more than two months, they should forfeit 
their Staff pay. It is not reasonable that the public should 
pay officers Staff pay who are unable to serve. 

* The heads of civil departments will tell you that there 
are with this army a number of officers larger than ever 
before attended any British army ; but they forget that our 
operations are extended infinitely beyond those of any army 
that has been sent abroad lately; and that owing to ilm 
nature of the war in which we are engaged, and of the allies 



VILLA TORO. 


4^5 


ism 

with whom We co-opetatei they are extended to a much 
greater degree than might be expected, even in this war* 
In fact we want officers of the civil departments for two 
armies of our number, instead of for one* The only mode 
in which we can be kept complete, is for the heads of de- 
partments in England to pay attention to the returns, and 
to replace officers as soon as they shall learn that those here 
have fallen sick, or are gone home. 

^ As nearly the whole army is here, I see no reason why 
the whole of the officers of the civil departments of the 
army should not be here likewise. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 

To Marshal Sir W, C. Beresford^ K,B, 

‘ My dear Bkresford, ‘ Villa Toro, 22nd Sept., 1812. 

" I received this morning your letter of the 12th, and I am 
happy to find that your general health has been improved 
by your journey. I have no doubt that the voyage will be 
of use to you. 

' I shall be very glad to receive any official complaint, or 
any complaint which I can notice, of the conduct of the gar- 
rison of Ciudad Rodrigo to the French prisoners. In the 
mean time, I have stopped their pay. 

" If I should find that tlie order of the Tower and Sword 
is prostituted, I shall not wear it, and will recommend to all 
British Officers to follow my example ; and I request you 
will inform Dom M. Forjaz of this determination, or any 
otlier person who will carry it to the Prince Regent. 

‘ 1 have ordered the greatest part of the troops at Cadiz, 
including the 20th regiment, either to join the army through 
Estrcmadiira, or to proceed to Lisbon, according as Major 
General Cooke may have it in his power to provide for 
them. I rather think they will march, as I understand from 
his letters that they had already moved up to Seville to wait 
for orders ; so that they must have means. 

^ 1 have ordered Hill’s corps to Toledo, sending back to 
Portugal the 5th, 17th, and 22nd regiments, and the 3rd 
regiment of cavalry. Hill talks of a fourth regiment, as one 



m 


SPAIN. 


1812 , 


of the garrison regiments which I ordered him to send back ; 
but I conclude he means a battalion of caijadores, which, 
whether regiment or battalion, has been halted in Estrema-- 
dura, and is ordered to Elvas. 

" I conceive that the time is now arrived when the greatest 
part, if not the whole, of the Portuguese militia, may be dis- 
banded. I should think one complete regiment, and a bat- 
talion of cacjadores, with the artillery, a sufficient garrison 
for Elvas ; another regiment might be placed at Almeida, 
and one at Abrantes, with dismounted cavalry, &c. 

* There might be two battalions of militia kept in arms in 
the North in case of accidents, and every thing else through- 
out the kingdom might be disbanded. I should hope that 
this reduction of expense would enable the Government to 
provide for the pay of the army beyond the frontiers. I 
assure you that the deficiency of their pay is become a matter 
of serious importance ; and unless the Government can pro- 
vide for it, wc must draw back. 

‘ I do not believe we are at all behindhand with the sub- 
sidy ; but if we are, it is to the amount of a mere trifle ; and 
I will not admit for a moment that the irregularity of the 
payment of the subsidy is any excuse for the irregularity of 
the payment of the troops. I still insist upon it, that the 
Portuguese Government have not adopted the measures 
which they ought to adopt, to raise that revenue from the 
country which the country is able and ought to be made to 
pay, whether the subsidy is in arrear or not ; and however 
the right to demand money may increase in consequence of 
the decrease of the demand for supplies in kind, in conse- 
quence of disbanding the militia, I give notice that I cannot 
increase the advances from the military chest of this army. 
The Portuguese Government had better take an early 
opportunity of representing this matter to the King’s 
Government, and not trouble me upon it when they shall 
feel the evil. 

' I have desired Hill to order Colonel Diggens to join his 
corps with his regiment of cavalry. You will sec, from my 
dispatch of yesterday, how we stand. I hope that wc may 
take this place ; but I doubt it. I have neither oflScers nor 
good troops, the whole of which 1 have left behind me ; and 



1812. 


VILLA TORO. 


447 


I can undertake nothing with hopes of success without great 
loss. However, if I can get the place, which the French 
have made very strong, at an early period, I hope I shall 
have a fine game before me. 

" Believe me, &c. 

^Marshal ^ Wellington. 

Sir W, C, Beresford, K,B.' 

To Limt. General the Hon. W. Stewart. 

‘ Mv oi:au General, * Villa Toro, 22nd Sept., 1812. 

" I received your letter last night. 1 was on the point of 
writing to inform you that I should be happy to have the 
benefit of your assistance again, when I heard from Colonel 
Torrens that you w^crc appointed to the Staff of this army. 
I shall be very happy to place you in your old situation, 
which I liope I shall be able to do. But you had better 
come up to head ([uarters by Ciudad Rodrigo, Salamanca, 
and Arevalo. You will hear at the two last where head 
quarters are ; and before 1 sec you, I shall know whether 
I can place you where you were before. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

the lion. IV. Stewart.' 

To Major General Oswald. 

' Mv DEAR Sir, ‘Villa Toro, 22nd Sept., 1812. 

‘ I received your letter of the Mtli this morning, and I am 
happy to find that you arc appointed to the Staff of this 
army. You will do well to proceed from Ciudad Rodrigo to 
Salamanca, and thence to Arevalo and Valladolid to join 
the head quarters of the army. Y^ou will hear at Salamanca 
or Arevalo where they are. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General Oswald.* ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Plan for the attack of the exterior line of the Castle of Burgos. 

‘22nd Sept, 1812, 

" 1 . Lieut. Colonel Brown to take possession of the houses 
along the south front as soon as it is dark. 

^ 2, He is to be supplied with 12 axes, which are to be 



SPAIN. 


m 


isii 


sent to him by a per on who will certainly find him this 
night 

^3 Tlie 400 men of the 1st division ordered to be in 
readiness, are to move as soon as the moon rises, and to 
proceed to the fleche immediately on the right, looking from 
the camp, of the horn work. Lieut. Colonel Burgoyne will 
take care that there is an officer to conduct them to the spot. 

^ 4. iThey are then to take up the ladders and 12 axes, 
and are to proceed and place themselves under cover of the 
banks opposite the exterior line of the castle. 

^ 5. At 11 p.M. 200 men of this party arc to move forward 
to storm the wall of the exterior line at the place pointed 
out by officers to be named by Lieut. Colonel Burgoyne. 
The remaining 200 men are to be formed behind the bank, 
and are to protect by their fire the advance of the party to 
storm. The storming party arc to consist of 30 men, to 
carry five long ladders, 12 men with axes, and then one 
officer and 20 men, who are to mount the ladders, to be 
followed immediately by 50 more as soon as the ladders arc 
planted, and then by the remainder of the party of 200 
appointed to storm. 

^ 6. At ten minutes before eleven. Colonel Brown is to 
order 130 men of the troops under his command to move out 
from the houses on the south front of the castle. They are 
to pass the small ditch, &c., and arc to move up to the pali- 
sade, which they are to cut down, and open a communication 
with the storming party, which will move to the front of 
the line. 

‘ 7. These men are to protect the right of the storming 
party, being themselves covered by the palisade ; and Co- 
lonel Brown will direct that a heavy fire may be kept up 
from the houses to be occupied by his troops on the enemy’s 
interior line. 

‘ 8. As soon as the enemy arc driven from the interior 
line, and the storming party are established in the guard 
house, and a communication established with Colonel 
Brown’s detachments, the 200 men in reserve behind the 
bank are to be employed at work in laying open the wall, 
and in securing the storming party on the gj^und befqyc 
morning. . , , a i 





VILKVfORO. 


m 


To G^hirdl tiohiihtrtos A^ .ft j t , 

^ Mon CHER General, ‘ ^ VillaToro, ^2 Se|^*, 1812. 

^ Je vous envoie uno gazette dc Madrid, dai^s laque|le il 
est encore une fois question de moi ^t do Tarmee s»iis mes 
ordres. ^ . 

^ Je vous prie de fairc savoir a rimprimciir de <fctte gat 
zette^ qu’il nc pout pas rendre un service plus impof tapt *X 
I’ennemi que de donner des nouvclles sur Tarmee allieOj ct 
sur tout sur moi. Je sais quo les Generaux Fran^ais^ sur 
tout ceux a la distance, nc savent que cc qu’ils apprennent 
par les gazettes que le Gouvernement et les Cortes sont 
assez fous pour laisser imprimfer partout en Espagne. L’im- 
primeur a Madrid jugera s’il est convenable de fournir ces 
nouvclles a I’cnnemi. Je ne serais pas du tout etonne si 
Suchet ct Soult sc dirigent vers Madrid ; et je vous prie de 
dire a Messieurs les maglstrats de la ville de Madrid, ct a 
riinprimeur de la gazette de Madrid, que si j’y vols encore 
inon nom, ou la designation du lieu ou je suis, ou d’aucun 
detacliement de Varmee sous mes ordres, je retircrai mes 
troupes, et je laisscrai la ville dc Madrid a son sort. 

^ Agrecz, &c. 

• General ^ WELLINGTON. 

Don Carlos de Espana,^ 

To General Don Carlos de Espaua. 

^ Mon CHER General, ' Villa Toro, ce 24 Sept., 1812. 

" Vous voycz les consequences des nouvclles publiees dans 
la gazette du 5. Je Tai bicn dit que vers le 15 nous verrions 
que les Franqais de Valence se mettraient en mouvement. 
Comme ce Monsieur a deja tant public, je vous prie de lui 
faire publier que le General Hill, avee son armee, est a To- 
ledo, ct qu on m’attend tons les jours ; mais rien de plus. 

‘ Agrecz, &c. 

'General ‘Wellington. 

Don Carlos de Espam,'^ 

To Marshal Str IV, C, Beresfordj K B, 

' My i>EAR BereSFORD, * Villa Toro, 26th Sept, 1812* 

' I have heard of your arrival at Lisbon, and I am happy 
to find that you are pretty well I enclose an anonymous 
VOL. IX. 2 o 



450 


SPAIN. 


1812 


letter, which cantains some facts regarding Colonel Camp- 
bell, which probably might as well be inquired into. 

^ We are not going on in a very satisfactory way here ; 
however, if we are lucky in the next two days I think I shall 
take the place. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ Marshal ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir m a Beresford, K.B: 

To Commodore Sir Home Popham, 

^ Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 2fith Sept., 1812. 

' I am much in want of 40 barrels of gunpowder, each con- 
taining 90 pounds, for the attack of this place ; and I 
should be very much obliged to you if you can let me have 
this quantity from the ships under your command. 

" I send with this letter one to the principal Spanish au- 
thority at Santander, to request him to supply 20 mules to 
carry here this quantity of powder, whose hire I will pay on 
their arrival with this army ; and I shall be much obliged 
to you if you will communicate .with this gentleman, and 
urge him to send the powder without loss of time. 

' If he will let me know by wliat road it will pass, and on 
what day, I will send relays of mules to meet it. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Commodore ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir Home Pepham: 

To General Don Carlos de Espana, 

^ Mon CHKR Gi;N^:RAL, ‘ Villa Toro, ce 26 Sept., 1812. 

' Je vous envoie Tordonnance pour le payement dc la se- 
condc moitid du mois de Juillet. 

' II faut que je vous dise cependant que je nc suis pas du 
tout satisfait de la conduite de la garnison de Ciudad Rod- 
rigo, J’ai dcs plaintes dc la part de tous les officiers qui 
ont passe par U dernierement, de la conduite atroce qu’ils 
ont tenu envers les prisonniers Franqais, dont ils etaient 
Tescorte depuis Ciudad Rodrigo jusqu’a Sabugal ^ sur-tout 
ceux qui etaient prisonniers par des capitulations a Madrid 
et k Guadalaxara, sign^es par moi. 

‘ Vous savez, Mons. le General, sous quelles conditions 
j’ai promis de donner la solde aux troupes sous vos ordres ; 



1812. 


VILLA TORO. 


451 


et vous savez si j’ai agi selon ma promesse. Le fait est que 
vous avez re^u plus que mes troupes depuis que cet arrange- 
ment a eu lieu. 

^ Mais je ne donnerai plus d’argent aux officiers et troupes 
qui n’ont pas de discipline, et qui osent piller et massacrer 
des prisonniers de guerre avec lesquels j‘‘avais fait capi- 
tulation. Les officiers de la garnison n’ont pas fait leur de- 
voir, ou ce malheur nc serait pas arrive; et je ne payerai 
pas des officiers qui ne font pas leur devoir. N’ayant pas 
fait leur devoir ils auraient du ^tre punis ; et je ne payerai 
pas les chefs qui ne punissent pas ceux qui negligent leurs 
devoirs. 

^ J’esperais pouvoir vous envoyer des rapports officiels sur 
ce sujet, que vous auraient mis dans le cas de punir ceux 
qui ont mal agi ; mais je ne les ai pas encore veqn. Je n’ai 
pas voulu detenir plus long temps la solde de votre divi- 
sion ; mais je vous prie de retenir dans vos mains celle de la 
garnison de Ciudad Rodrigo, jusqu a ce que je sois satisfait 
que ceux qui ont comrais ce desordre ont ete punis. 

* J’ai un hopital a Ciudad Rodrigo ; on me dit que la ville 
est si sale, que je crains que je serai oblige de Ten eloigner. 
Je vous prie d’en dire un mot au Gouverneur. 

^ Agreez, &c. 

* General ‘WELLINGTON. 

Don Carlos de EspanaJ 


To His Excellency Charles Stuart, 

‘ Mv DEAR Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 26th Sept., 1812. 

‘ I have not yet received from Mr. Dalrymple the state- 
ment of prices to enable me to answer your letter of the 17 th 
as fully as I could wish ; but having made up my mind upon 
one point in the question which is the principal one, I think 
it best to lose no time in writing to you. 

f Tbe horses would be of no use to the British army, and 
I believe of none to the Portuguese. The latter can get as 
many horses as they have money to pay for, from Spain, at a 
cheaper rate. 

‘ If the Egyptian corn can be ground by Portuguese 
mills, which is I believe doubtful, and that it can be got at 
all, for goods, or military stores, take it at any reasonable 

2 Q 2 



492 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


'price; and write to England fbr the goods; or 1 will en- 
deavor to give isome of the latter from Portugal and Cadiz. 

^ If the corn cannot be got without rnonej/, I am afraid We 
must do without the corn, for we were never so badly off for 
money as at present. However, if the corn is reasonably 
cheap, and it can be ground, and Sampayo, or any other can 
do any thing in the business, without distressing or rather 
depriving the military chest of any money, I will come into 
any arrangement that may deemed expedient on the 
subject. 

^ Brito had better go to Madrid ; but you must settle this 
matter with Sir William Beresford. 

‘ I find that the Portuguese Commissaries refuse some 
wheat offered to tliem to supply their last demand. Surely 
tlie (Stomachs of the Portuguese soldiers arc not nicer than 
those of our soldiers ; and Senhor Cardoso cannot suppose 
tliat I would allow the soldiers of cither nation to eat bad 
bread ! The truth is, that there is no better wheat than 
what has been offered to him ; and if it will not answer we 
cannot supply their wants. I know the reply, Then give 
us money,” to which I make the usual rejoinder, I have 
none to give.” 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ His Excellency ' WELLINGTON. 

Charles Stuart,' 

To his Excellency Sir Charles Stuart, K.B, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 2Gtli Sept., 1812. 

" I have received your letter of the 18th, and I am very 
happy that you are gratified by my presumption in remind- 
ing Lord Castlereagh of your claim to promotion in your 
line, or to some mark of His Majesty’s favor’*'. 

" I assure you that I did it from a sense of justice to you, 
which I hope will render the act still more agreeable to you ; 
nor did I think or wish that it should ever come to your 
knowledge. 

« Kefming to a letter written to Lord Castlereagh on the 18ih of August, 
‘ suggesting the propriety cf conferring some mark of Royal favOt upon Mr. 
Stuart.’ The draft of the letter is missing. Sir Charles Stuart was gazetted 
Knight of the Bath on the 26th of September, 1812, but not actually knighted 
by Lord Wellington till the 17th of January, 1813. 



1 $ 12 . 


VILLA TbRO. 


453 


I and very happy to find tliat Lord CastWreagli had 
thought of you before he could have received the suggestion 
which 1 made to him. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart^ K.B,' ‘ WELLI^GTO^'. 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellealey^ K,B. 

" My dear Henry, ‘Villa Toro, 27th Sept., 1812. 

‘ 1 have received your letters from the 16th to the 21 st, 
and I now enclose my late dispatches, from which you will 
see how we stand. 

‘ We shall see in what form the proposition will be made 
to me to command the Spanish army, which 1 shall accept 
of, if it should be conferred in such a manner as to enable 
me to be of any service to the cause. At all events I will 
explain myself fully on the subject. 

‘ I strongly recommend to you to withhold all interference 
in the formation of any new government. 

^ Can you supply Ballesteros with clothing and shoes ? 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. . " WELLINGTON. 

Sir li* Wellesley i K.B.' 

To Commodore Sir Home Popham* 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 27th Sept, 1812. 

‘ 1 shall be very much obliged to you if you will let me 
know whether you can let me have from the squadron under 
your command at Santander one hundred or one hundred 
and fifty thousand pounds of biscuit, for which I will send to 
Santander. 

^ We are not getting on very rapidly, and I do not feel 
certain that 1 shall succeed, as I have very little artillery 
and stores for my object ; but I hope I may succeed. The 
enemy appear to be collected at Pancorbo and Miranda. 

' 1 send this in the cipher transmitted by Mr. Croker. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

Commodoi*e ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Popham. 



SPAIN. 


1812. 


454 


To the Earl ofMulgrave. 

‘ My dear Lord^ ‘ Villa Toro, 27th Sept., 1812. 

^ I enclose two letters which I have lately received from 
Colonel Robe, to which I wish to draw your attention, and 
to have your opinion on their contents. An officer of the 

Drivers, Lieut. , was lately put into arrest for absenting 

himself without leave, and taking with him horses, mules, 
and drivers, belonging to the Brigade of Artillery, to which 
he was attached ; and upon the inquiry, which I made into 
the circumstances of his arrest, it appeared to me that the 
number of drivers, horses, and baggage mules allowed to an 
officer of Drivers in this army, was enormous. I therefore 
desired that inquiry might be made from Colonel Robe, 
whether it was customary in the artillery to provide for the 
carriage of the officers’ baggage, when they received b^t 
and forage; in answer to which inquiry, the letter of the 
10th of September was received. 

" In this army there is no baggage of any officer carried 
by the public, excepting of those of the Artillery. I believe 
that the custom of the Artillery service is as stated by 
Colonel Robe ; but it appears that the allowance to a Lieu- 
tenant of Drivers of one horse, two mules, and two drivers, 
is rather more than is necessary^ or than what ought to exist. 

‘ It appears that the horse is no longer allowed, and one 
driver as the servant of the officer, and one mule for the 
baggage of the captain, and one for two subalterns, are as 
much as ought to be necessary, or ought to be given. 

" However, of course I shall make no alteration on this 
subject till I hear from you. 

We have a difficult job in hand, that is, to take a very 
strong castle well provided with artillery, and with a nu- 
merous garrison, without incurring a large loss of men, if 
possible, and without being provided with sufficient artillery, 
and without a large expenditure of ammunition. We arc 
getting on, however, and I hope we may succeed. But I 
wish 1 could be a little more certain of success. If we do 
succeed soon, I hope to send the French army beyond the' 
Ebro before the winter is over. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

" Wellington. 


• The Earl of Mulgrave* 



vai.A TORO, 




18 J 2 . 


To Earl Bathurst, 

*. My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 27th Sept., 1812. 

< The operations against the castle of Burgos have been 
continued, since I addressed you on the 20th; and on the 
night of the 22nd, I directed that an attempt might be made 
to take by storm the exterior line of the enemy’s works, one 
of the batteries destined to support our position within them 
having been in such a state of preparation as to afford 
hopes that it would be ready to open on the morning of the 
23rd. The attack was to have been made by detachments 
of Portuguese troops belonging to the 6th division which 
occupied the town of Burgos, and invested the castle on the 
S.W. side on the enemy’s left, while a detachment of the 
1st division under Major Lawric of the 79th should scale 
the wall in front. Unfortunately, the Portuguese troops 
were so strongly opposed that they could not make any 
progress on the enemy’s flank ; and the escalade could not 
take place. I am sorry to say that our loss was severe. 
Major Lawric was killed, and Captain Frazer, who com- 
manded a detachment from the brigade of Guards, was 
wounded*. Both these officers, and indeed all those em- 
ployed on this occasion, exerted themselves to the utmost ; 
but the attack on the enemy’s flank having failed, the suc- 
cess of the escalade was impracticable. We have since 
established ourselves close to the exterior wall, and have 
carried a gallery towards it ; and I hope that a mine under 
it will be completed in the course of to-morrow. In the 
mean time our batteries are completed, and ready to open 
upon the enemy’s interior lines, as soon as we shall have 
established our troops within the exterior lines. 

‘ The enemy’s army are about Pancorbo, and at Miranda 
on the Ebro, with their advanced posts at Briviesca. They 
have made no movement to interrupt our operations. 

" Marshal Soult left Granada on the 15th, and marched 
towards the kingdom of Valencia, it is said by Caravaca. 
General Ballesteros entered Granada on the 17th. 

^ I imagine that Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill is by 

♦ Now Colonel of the Ross-shire militia, sou of the late Lieut. General 
Aleiamler Ma^keniie Frazer. His leg was amputated. 



4S6 SPA,1K. 1612; 

this time at Tokdd ; ^ut 1 hiaTC not heard from him sitieo 
he passed the Tagus. 

‘ General Elio, who now commands the troops lately 
commanded by General Joseph O’Donnell, took Consuegra 
by capitulation on the 22nd. 

' < I have the honor to be, &C. 

Earl BeahuHC ‘WELLINGTON. 


Bttvrn of tht KWedt IVuundedj fwd Missing of the Army under the command of 
General the Marquis of fVrliingtonf K,B,f in the siege of the castle of Burgos^ 
ft'om the 20/A to the 2ijth September, 1812, inclusive. 



Officers. 

Serjeants. 

Rank and Fil?. 

Horses. 

Total loss of Officers, 
Non-Cotnniistiioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed . . . 

7 

2 

50 

B 

50 

Wounded • * 

12 

13 

•201 

B 

280 

Missing • • . 


— 

B 

B 

— 


To Earl Bathurst. 

* My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 27lh Sept., 1812. 

^ I enclose the return which I have received of the medi- 
cal department in this country, from which your Lordship 
will sec how much we are in want of medical assistance. 
This want arises entirely from the x>ractice of waiting till 
the last moment to send out the officers required from the 
Medical Board. 

^ The returns go to them regularly, but for what purpose 
it is difficult to say, as no deficiency is ever supplied till the 
demand is made, and three or even four months then elapse 
before a medical officer, whose services arc probably im- 
mediately required, can reach the army, after a requisition 
is made. 

^ I likewise beg to draw your Lordship's attention to the 
practice of the Medical Board in promoting to vacancies in 
this army. Instead of promoting the officers on the spot, 
who deserve promotion highly from their merits and services. 








ism 


VlLtK TORO. 


4SZ 


officers seleMi?d England; the Mcditefraihdan, or elsd- 
where, to be promoted. The consequence is^Snci^eiised delay 
in their arrival tb perform their duty ; and all Hvho do arrive 
arc sick im the first instance. ^ 

^ It would be but justice to promote those on the spot; 
who arc performing the duty; ^lid we should enjoy the 
advantagCi and the seniors of the department at least would 
have experience in the disorders of the climate, and of the 
troops serving in this country ; to which climate they would 
have become accustomed. 

‘JThc juniors of the department only could, generally 
^peaking, be absent from their duty from want of health. 1 
\ ‘I have the honor to be, &c. 

£a$'l Bathurst: t • ‘Wellington. 

1 ' ' ; ' I 

> To Earl Bathw'st. 

f My dear Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 27th Sept., 1812.; 

^ I enclose a memorandum from Dr. M^Grigor regarding 
^lis allowance, to which I beg to draw your attention ; and I 
jshall be very happy if something can be done for him. He is 
b most deserving man, and has conducted tlie deparlmeht 
of which he is the head with great success. 

^ You will sec by the morning state how wc stand in 
respect to sick. The army in general is more healthy than 
it was at this season last year; indeed there is no disorder 
among the old soldiers, and none of them would be in 
hospital, if we had not had so many Avounded during the 
campaign. But the regiments recently arrived, whether 
from England or the Straits, arc very unhealthy ; and the 
loss by death is almost confined to them. I am afraid that 
our soldiers arc not sufficiently exercised in marching, when 
at home or in foreign garrisons ; and they become sickly as 
soon as they are obliged to make a march. The non-com- 
missioned officers, and I am afraid the officers, are very bad, 
and they neglect to attend to the food of the soldiers ; and 
when they first take the field, they are not aware of the 
necessity of attending to this important point themselves. 

‘ We are getting on, but not so rapidly as I could wish ; 
and I wish I could be more certain of final success. It is 
not cas}^ however, to take a strong place, well garrisoned, 



458 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 

when one hes not a sufficient quantity of cannon ; when one 
is obliged to save ammunition on account of the distance of 
our magazines; and when one is desirous of saving the 
lives of soldiers. Then, nothing in the way of assault 
can be done excepting by a British soldier ; and we cannot 
afford to lose them at this distance from England and the 
sea. I shall know in a day or two whether I can take the 
place, and how soon. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley ^ K,B, 

‘Sir, * Villa Toro, 28tli Sept., 1812. 

‘ I shall be much obliged to you if you will have sent to 
Alicante, for the use of the troops under the command of 
General Bassecourt, 2500 suits of infantry clothing ; and if 
you can provide him with any equipments for cavalry, I will 
thank you to supply him with the articles named in the 
margin. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon, ^ Wellington. 

Sir H, Wellesley, K,B: 

To Major General Baron Charles Alien, 

^ My dear General, ‘Villa Toro, 29th Sept, 1812. 

' I wish that you would employ working parties of the 
3rd and Light divisions to take up the palisades in the 
ditch of the exterior as well as of the interior line of the 
walls in the Ketiro ; and let them be piled in convenient 
piles within the exterior line, between that and the interior 
line. You will give the piles of wood in charge of the 
Commissary ; to be used eventually as firewood. But in 
case it should be necessary to withdraw the troops from 
Madrid, and to destroy La China, and the stores, as con- 
templated in my Memorandum of the 30th August, the 
piles of palisades must be burnt, and they must be formed 
with a view to that contingency. 

"The troops employed on this occasion afe to receive 
working money, and you will do well to relieve the party 
every six hours. That is to say, one party to work from six 



1812. 


VILLA TORO. 


459 


till twelve, the other from twelve to six every day, till the 
work shall be done. You will give the superintendence of 
it to some officer. 

‘ Inform Don Carlos that I have given you these instruc- 
tions ; which I have arranged with General Castahos. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General " Wellington. 

Baron Charles Alien" 

To General Don Carlos de Espana, 

" Mon CHER General, ‘Villa Toro, ce 29 Sept., 1812. 

‘ J’ai regu votre lettre du 25, et je vous renvoie la lettre 
qui etait dans le baton qui etait pris sur votre espion. J^ai 
perdu Ic baton, 

‘ Agr^ez, &c. 

‘ General Don Carlos de Espam: ‘ WELLINGTON. 

To Don Antonio Tarracio de Cortaba7*ria, Civil Commissioner 
at Madrid. 

^ Sir, * Villa Toro, 29th Sept., 1812. 

* I have heard with great satisfaction of your arrival at 
Madrid ; upon which I beg leave to congratulate you. 

‘ I beg at the same time to offer you my services and 
assistance in any way in which you may think that I can be 
of any use to forward your views. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Don A. T. de Cortabarria: ‘ Wellington. 

To Don Antonio Tarracio de Cortabarria. 
f ‘ Villa Toro, 29th Sept., 1812. 

‘ I beg leave to recommend to your attention Don Alex. 
Guillem, who is now at Madrid, and whom I have requested 
to wait upon you. 

‘ He is a gentleman of Salamanca, with whom I have long 
been acquainted, and have had the most intimate cor- 
respondence on public affairs ; and I have not met in Spain 
any person with more upright intentions, or possessing 
such correct views of public affairs as he has. It is really 
most desirable that his country should have the advantage 
of his talents ; and I had long determined to recommend 



460 sMiN. 19111 . 

him to the attention of the person who ahould be employed 
in the situation which you fill. 

" He is a clergyman ; and I have recommended him to the 
government for a provision in the Church in Galicia, which 
I hope he will obtain. But this will not prevent him from 
devoting his talents to the public service under you. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Do?i A. T. Cortabarria: ' WELLINGTON. 


MEMORANDUM. 

‘ Villa Toro, 29th Sept., 1812. 

^ The mine to be exploded this night at twelve o’clock. 

" The covering party in the trenches, which is ordered to 
be augmented in the evening to 300 men, and the working 
party must be moved into the village before the mine is 
sprung, excepting 100 men of the covering party, who arc to 
remain in the parallel on the right and left. 

^ As soon as the mine shall be exploded, the breach which 
it will have made must be stormed. 

‘ The 100 men who arc to remain in the parallel while the 
mine shall explode, are to be the storming party. 

‘ An officer and twenty men are to advance immediately 
from the right of the parallel to the breach ; keeping on 
their left the trench leading to the breach of the mine. 

‘ These 20 are to be supported by 50 more of the 100, 
which 50 arc to advance as soon as the leaders of the first 
party shall have ascended the breach. 

^ That part of the covering party wliich shall have been 
sent to the village before the mine shall be exploded are to 
return, and form in the parallel as soon as the explosion 
shall take place, and the storming i>arty must be supported 
on the breach. 

^ The working party must be in readiness to establish the 
party on the breach. 

‘ The Field Officer will take care to tell off his parties 
according to these ordci’s ; and that the officers conimanding 
each party under.stands clearly what he is to do ; whci*e ho 
is to go ; and at what time. 

‘ In case the enemy should commence a fire from thq 
parapet on the leaders of the storming party, tho 80 mein 



VILLA TORO. 


m 


whkji are to remain in the parallel till they shall mount the 
breach, are to fire upon the parapet so as to keep down the 
fire of the enemy. 

^ The field officer of the day, on the hill of San Miguel, is 
to move a detachment of 50 men into the hollow way between 
the horn work and the castle, at about eleven at night. This 
detachment will move up and make a false attack on the 
gate leading from the exterior line to the esplanade in front 
of the castle, as soon as the mine shall explode. Lieut. 
Colonel Brown will likewise keep up a fire from the houses 
on the enemy’s left of the exterior line ; and will make a 
false attack on the church, &c., at the moment of the explo- 
sion; and if he can, he will get possession of the house still 
held by the enemy. 

^ He will keep up a fire on the palisades in front of the 
gateway of the interior line. 

" Wellington.’ 

To the Master of the Ellen Transport* 

'Sir, * Villa Toro, 1st October, 1812. 

' You will bo pleased to deliver to the person who will put 
this letter into your hands 200,000 rounds of musket ammu- 
nition, for the use of the Portuguese army, taking his receipt 
for the same. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Master of the Ellen Transport: ‘ Wellington. 

To His Excellency Sir Charles StuarU K,B, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 1st October, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 22iid September, and 
have perused all the enclosures. It will be very inconvenient, 
and increase the difficulties of my situation very much, if the 
communication by sea along the coasts of Portugal and Ga- 
licia should not be secure. I had written to on 

the subject, and have received an answer, which proves how 
clear it is that in our country it is better to suffer any public 
inconvenience, than tp venture to suggest a measure as a 
remedy which is to be carried into execution by another 
public department. In future, therefore, I shall complain 
of inconveniences when they shall be severely felt, and shall 



462 SPAIN. 1812. 

not trouble Government with my expectations of them, and 
with suggestions of remedies or preventatives. 

' I concur entirely with you regarding the proposed mea- 
sure of selling lands in Portugal. It is, like many other 
schemes, easily suggested by those unacquainted with the 
circumstances of the country, but very difficult of execution. 
If we could prevail upon the Prince and clergy to allow 
us to sell their property, where should we find purchasers ? 
I do not mean to say that there are not plenty of people in 
Portugal with money to enable them to purchase ; but who 
believes that this money would be well laid out in the pur- 
chase of land in Portugal, under existing circumstances? 

" The danger of Portugal is lessened, but it is not entirely 
removed. The fate of that kingdom may still depend upon 
the result of military operations, upon which I, who conduct 
them, w^ould not recommend to any body to rely entirely. If 
the war in Russia should fail, Portugal may again become 
the seat of war in the Peninsula. Who would be desirous 
of having property in Portugal under such circumstances ? 
After all, whether we or the French ultimately succeed in 
the Peninsula, it does not appear to me that matters arc 
likely to be in such a state in either Spain or Portugal, as to 
render a purchase very desirable in either country for some 
years to come. 

" I do not recommend our Government to have any thing 
to say to the Portuguese paper money. I do not think they 
could materially raise its exchangeable value in reference to 
silver, and I am quite certain that they could not extend the 
sphere of its circulation. In a former letter I have shown 
you how the British Government would be affected, and the 
risks they would incur, by taking as security for any loan, 
or for any such operation as the substitution of English for 
Portuguese paper, the produce of a tax depending upon the 
continuance of the independence of Portugal. 

^ The great fault of these and other schemes of this de- 
scription is, that the proposers of them have not duly coit- 
sidered the nature of the war in which we are engaged, and 
its consequences, as well to us as to the natives of the Penin- 
sula, nor the character of our enemy. 

' I do not believe that there is any great export of specie 
from Portugal at {present. There was a very considerable 



1812. 


VILLA TORO. 


463 


expott during the last year, but then Portugal depended 
upon this export for articles of the first necessity. I sug- 
gested to Government to endeavor to procure these articles 
from the British American provinces, from the Mediter- 
ranean, &c., but I do not know that any thing has been done. 
As long as the American war lasts I fear that the export of 
specie must continue, unless Government should adopt suc- 
cessful measures to supply Portugal with corn, from the 
British colonies or the Mediterranean. 

^ I have received Mr. Vansittart’s papers from Lord 
Bathurst, to which I shall write an answer, and will send it 
to you. 

" I will let you know to-morrow how much of the demand 
for October will be given to the Portuguese Government ; 
but as I told Sir William Beresford that 1 think all the 
Portuguese militia may be disbanded, I think it probable 
that they will not require so much as they have asked for 
October. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart, K.B. ‘ Wellington. 

^ I have desired tliat the Portuguese Government may 
have the supplies required for October ; likewise 100,000 
dollars of a sum of money expected from Gibraltar, and 
100,000 of another sum expected from England.’ 


To Lieut. General Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

^ My dear Hill, I ‘ Villa Toro, 2nd October, 1812. 

‘ I have received General Alton’s and Don Carlos’ reports 
to the 29th ; but the movements and intentions of Soult and 
the King do not yet appear to me to be quite clear. They 
have to guard against the allied force collected at Alicante 
on the one hand, and against Ballesteros, who I learn is to 
be about Alcaraz, on the other ; and one can hardly believe 
that they will venture to move towards the Tagus in force 
by the road of Albacete. If they do not move in force they 
can effect nothing. If they do, they will expose their inte- 
rests in Valencia, which is an important resource to them 
too great to risk. Yet if they do not purpose to move to 
the Tagus, one cannot understand why the King should 
have gone to Almanza. 



SPAIN. 


im. 




‘ Supposing the march of both to be towards Cuenca, and 
thence towards Soria, in order to communicate with the 
troops on the Ebro, the object might have been accom- 
plished with equal, if not greater ease, by his movement 
from Valencia by the route of Utiel and Requena. On 
the other hand, if the object had been to move to the 
Tagus, much time has been lost by the route taken by Soult, 
and a vast distance gone by bad roads ; and a junction 
might have been formed with equal, if not greater case, by 
the march of Soult direct from Ea Carolina on Consuegra ; 
and the march of the King by Albacete into La Mancha. 
However, the next movement will show what is intended. 

" It is desirable that you should have the banks of the 
Tagus examined from the junction of the Jarama or Man- 
zanarcs to the bridge of Saccdoii, and even higher. I un- 
derstand that there are several fords above Fuentiduena, 
wlicre there is a barca, and fords there at Villamanrique and 
at Oreja, and even at Aranjuez in dry weather. I also un- 
derstand that the ground on the left bank commands tliat 
on the right. Below the junction of the Jarama there are 
likewise fords in dry weather ; but the banks on the right of 
the river command those on the left. 

‘ You should likewise have the course of the Jarama or 
Manzanares examined from Madrid to its junction with the 
Tagus below Aranjuez, as I believe it affords an excellent 
position. 

" We are not going on well at all ; and although I have 
not given up all hopes, I am afraid we shall not succeed in 
taking this castle. It is very strong, well garrisoned, and 
well provided with artillery. I had only three guns, one of 
which was destroyed, and another much damaged last night. 

" Believe me, &c. 

• Lieut General * WELLINGTON. 

Sir R, Hill, K.B: 


To Commodore Sir Home Popham. 

* My dear Sir, ‘Villa Toro, 2ad October, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter by Captain the Hon. P. 
Bouverie, and have conversed with him on your plans and 
your means of carrying them into execution. 

‘ The great object for me is that you should draw the 
attention of the enemy, by your operations, from those which 



1 & 12 . 


VILLA TORO. 


m 


\ve are carrying on on this side, and that yon shdtild prevent 
Gaffarelli from detaching troops to aid Marmonfs army. It 
would be desirable for many reasons that you should get 
possession of Santofia, and also of Guetaria ; but I confess 
that I entertain so bad an opinion of the Spanish troops 
that I do not think you can rely upon them ; and the body 
of marines which you have with you is not sufficiently large 
to do much of themselves, or to be a very efficient example 
to the Spanish troops. 

' In regard to diversion, I imagine that the season is now 
too far advanced for you to think of Guetaria again. Your 
efforts therefore will be necessarily confined to Santofia, re- 
specting which place the enemy are very anxious, for many 
reasons. You miglit continue your preparations for the 
attack of Santofia ; and let me know exactly what you would 
wish Mendizabal and the troops under his command to do, 
as well while the preparations arc in progress, as when all 
Avill he prepared for the attack, and during the attack, if 
you should think it expedient to carry that operation into 
execution. 

' I am very much afraid that I shall not take this castle. 
It is very strong, well garrisoned, and well provided with 
artillery. I had only three pieces of cannon, of which one 
was destroyed last night, and not much ammunition ; and I 
have not been able to get on as I ought. I have, however, 
got a mine under one of the works, which I hope will enable 
me to carry the exterior line ; and when that shall be carried 
I hope that I shall get on better. But time is wearing 
apace, and Soult is moving from the south ; and I should 
not be surprised if I were obliged ta discontinue this opera- 
tion in order to collect the army, 

' It is unfortunate that you should have plenty of cannon 
and ammunition, but that you want good soldiers, and I no 
want of the latter, but very little of the former. The means 
of transport, however, required to move a train from the 
coast or from Madrid, where we have plenty, are so exten- 
sive, that the attempt would be impracticable. 

^ l am obliged to you for the powder and biscuit : I shall 
send for the latter. ^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Commodore ‘ WRLLINGTOK. 

Sir Home PophamJ 

ypL. IX. 2 h 



466 


SPAIN* 


1812 ^ 


To Commodore Sir Home Popham. 

‘ My dear Sir, * Villa Toro, 2nd October, 1812. 

‘ The bearer hereof is employed by General Castanos to 
destroy some of the roads leading into Spain from France, 
for which he requires 200 quintals of gunpowder. I shall 
be veiy much obliged to you if you can aid him with this 
powder, in order to enable him to perform the service on 
which he is employed. 

' Believe me, &c, 

‘ Commodore ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir Home Popham* 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K,B, 

^ My dear Henry, * Villa Toro, 2nd October, 1812. 

I have received your letter about Doyle, and I wish it 
was in my power to do any thing for him, in order to gratify 
you, but I am afraid that he cannot get what he wants, viz., 
the rank of Colonel. Others who have been promoted were 
not Lieut. Colonels, so that their promotion cannot be a pre- 
cedent. Besides, to promote Doyle would put him over the 
head of several deserving officers of this army, among others 
of Cadogan. 

^ I am sorry to say that we do not get on well : of three 
guns we had, one was destroyed, and another very much 
damaged last night. The place is really very strong, well 
garrisoned, and well provided with artillery. I do not yet 
despair, however. 

" Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon, " WELLINGTON. 

Sir H, Wellesley, K,B, 

‘ Upon referring to the Army List I find that Doyle is 
next above Cadogan ; but still there are several meritorious 
officers in this army, whom he would pass over, were he to be 
promoted to the rank of Colonel’ 

To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K,B, 

* Sir, * Villa Toro, 2nd October, 1812. 

^ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 
25th September, in which you have enclosed the translation 
of one of the same date from Don Ignacio de la Pezuela, 



VII,I,A TORO. 


18J3. 


46r 


by which I have been informed that the general and extra- 
ordinary Cortes have been pleased to confer on me the com- 
mand of all the Spanish forces; for which mark of the 
confidence of that assembly and of the Government, I beg 
you to express to the Secretary of State my most grateful 
thanks. 

' I am most earnestly desirous of doing every thing in my 
power to forward and attain the legitimate objects of the 
Spanish nation in their just contest with France ; and I feel 
no objection to taking upon myself the additional labor and 
responsibility which must attend my exercise of the com- 
mand of the Spanish armies. But I cannot announce my 
acceptance of the honor conferred upon me by the Cortes 
and Government until I shall receive the consent of His 
Royal Highness the Prince Regent, for which I shall make 
an immediate application. 

" I feel the less regret on account of this delay, because 
having long been in the habit of communicating confiden- 
tially with the General Officers commanding the different 
corps in which the Spanish army is divided, of making them 
acquainted with the general view of the operations which I 
hoped to carry on with the allied British and Portuguese 
army under my command, and of suggesting to them the 
line of operations which they should adopt, in order to for- 
ward the objects which I had in view, I have invariably 
received from them the utmost attention, and every support 
and assistance which it was in their power to give ; and I am 
convinced they will continue the same practice even though 
I am not invested with the supreme command. The public 
interests, therefore, can suffer no inconvenience by my re- 
ference to His Royal Highness the Prince Regent, of the 
decision on my acceptance of the honor conferred on me by 
the Cortes. 

" This mark of the confidence of the Cortes and Govern- 
ment, and the terms in which it has been conveyed to me, 
afford the most satisfactory proof to my mind that those 
authorities are convinced that in the command with which I 
have already been intrusted by two members of the alliance, 
I have done my utmost to forward the general cause of all 
the allies. It is not necessary to make aiiy professions on 
this subject ; and I hope that in the new and more pro- 

2h2 



SPAIN. 


1812. 


468 


lainent situation in which I shall be placed, as the Gom- 
tnander in Chief of the armies of all the allies in the Penin- 
sula, I shall have not only the full support, but the con- 
fidence of the Spanish Government, Cortes, and nation, that 
the measures which I shall adopt are dictated by an honest 
and correct view of what is best for the general cause in 
which all are so deeply interested . 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Rt. Hon. ^ WELLINGTON, 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B: 


Memorandum for Lieut. Colonel Burgoyne^ Royal Engineers. 

* Villa Toro, 4th October, 1812, 

^ The mine in the exterior line is to be exploded this 
afternoon, at o’clock. 

' The 24th regiment is to be employed to storm the 
breaches made in the exterior line by the explosion of the 
mine, and by the fire of the artillery. 

^ The storming party for each breach is to be formed of 
one officer and 20 men ; who are to rush forward to the 
breaches as soon as the mine shall explode. These are to 
be supported by 50 men for each breach ; who are not to 
move out of the parallel till they shall see the leading men 
of the storming parties ascend the breaches. The remainder 
of the regiment to remain in the parallel, in readiness to 
support those who shall be in the breach. 

" The covering party in the parallel of the exterior line 
must keep up a fire on the parapet, so as to keep down the 
fire of the enemy. The breaching and other batteries arc 
to enfilade the exterior line, and the second and other lines, 
so as to support the attack. 

^ Lieut. Colonel Brown will fire on the rear of the enemy’s 
new palisade, and will make a false attack from the village ; 
and if possible, get along the wall inside cither palisade, 
which he will break through. 

^ As soon as the storming party shall have entered the 
breach made by the mine, they arc to turn to the left, and 
break through the palisade, and communicate with the 
storming party of the old breach. 

" The working parties and engineers will be prepared to 
establish the parties in the breaches. 



isa 


VILLA tORO* 


4B9 


^ Colonel Kelly will tell off the parties for these several 
services ; and they will be ready to rush forward the moment 
the mine shall explode. 

‘ Wellington/ 

To Lieut. General Sir RT Hilly K.B. 

^ My dear Hill, * Villa Toro, 5th October, 1812. 

‘ Colonel Sturgeon has been ordered to lay at Almaraz a 
bridge of the same description with that which is laid at 
Alcantara ; and as soon as it is ready, and quite clear that 
it will answer your purposes, I wish that the bridge of pon- 
toons which is at Almaraz should be taken up, and that 
Lieut. Piper should have orders to go with it by Plasencia 
through the pass of Banos to Salamanca. Let him report 
his progress to me by every opportunity through the Com- 
manding Officer at Salamanca. 

^ It will be necessary that you should send a small guard 
with Lieut. Piper, as far as Salamanca, if he has not one 
already. 

^ 1 have received your letters to the 29th. I do not write 
to General Ballesteros, because I do not know exactly where 
he is ; but I believe he is at Alcaraz. At least I under- 
stand he was ordered there. 

' Tell him, that I think the best thing he can do under 
existing circumstances, is to hang upon the left flank and 
rear of the enemy, if they should move by the debouche of 
Albacete towards the Tagus. If they should move to- 
wards Cuenca, and the northward, he should come into La 
Mancha, still holding the same situation relatively with the 
enemy, and communicating by his own left with your right. 

' We carried the exterior line of the castle yesterday 
evening, without material loss. But this is altogether the 
most difficult job I have ever had in hand, with such 
trifling means. God send that they may give me a little 
more time ! 

' Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lievi. General ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 



m 


SPAIN. 


im. 


To Marshal Sir W, C. Bere^ord, K.B. 

^ My dear Bbresford, ‘ Villa Toro, 5th October, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 25th, and I am glad 
to find that you are better. 

^ I wish that some n[\pde could be discovered of procuring 
money to pay the Portuguese subsidy without reference to 
me in any manner. I certainly do everything in my power 
to make good the payments ; and order money to be issued 
on this account when any is expected, and long before it is 
received. At the moment that every service in the army is 
in arrear, the subsidy alone is regularly paid. There is 
positively no arrear of the gross subsidy ; and having made 
an estimate in the month of May last of the state of the 
subsidy, and of the sum which the Portuguese Government 
might expect in money after receiving certain articles in 
kind, that sum has been exceeded in the monthly payments 
which have since been made, notwithstanding that the dis- 
tresses of the army have been such, that I am ashamed to 
mention what they have occasioned. 

^ However, I will never write another syllable about the 
subsidy to anybody. It is no concern of mine ; and all that 
I shall do, as long as the payment is a charge on the military 
chesty will be to hand over such sums as I think we can do 
without. I have ordered that 200,000 dollars may be given 
this month from a sum expected from Gibraltar, and another 
from England. 

" It is really necessary, however, that some steps should 
be taken to insure the application of that part of the sub- 
sidy which is paid in money, to the payment of the troops 
serving with the army of Spain ; which expense it could 
more than cover. 70,000 dollars would have paid the 
troops with me for a month in August. 

^ Something or other has made a terrible alteration in 
the troops for the worse. They have lately, in several in- 
stances, behaved very ill ; and whether it be owing to the 
nature of the service, or their want of pay, I cannot tell; 
but they are not at all in the style they were. I am rather 
inclined to attribute their misbehaviour to the misery and 
consequent indifference of both officers and soldiers, on 
account of their want of pay. If it be true, as I declare it 



1812 . 


villa TORO. 


471 


is, that the subsidy is not in arrears, ought the pay of the 
Portuguese army to be in arrears at all ? Ought it to be in 
arrears for a longer period than the pay of the British 
army? That it is so, there is no doubt; and yet Dom 
Miguel, &c., will produce hundreds of documents to prove 
this assertion to be false, and contrary to the evidence of all 
the officers of the army, that the men have the money in 
their pockets. 

" It is really deserving your attention to look into this 
subject, and to insist upon the money being applied in the 
first instance to this necessary purpose. 

" I refer you to my dispatch of the 4th instant. I do not 

know what to say of this d d place. Our success of 

yesterday evening has opened a new scene to us ; but our 
final success is still doubtful. Luckily, the French give me 
more time than 1 had a right to expect. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Marshal ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir W. a Beresford, K,B: 

To Commodore Sir Home Popham» 

My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 5th October, 1812. 

‘ Our mine succeeded, and we took the enemy's exterior 
line by storm yesterday afternoon with small loss. The 24th 
regiment behaved admirably well. The powder is arrived, 
for ^vhich I am very much obliged to you, I wish you 
would let me have, and would send me 40 barrels more. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Commodore * ELLINGTON. 

Sir Home Popham.^ 

To Sir Joseph Banksy K.B., Recorder of Boston, 

^ Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 5th October, 1812. 

‘ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 2nd 
September, in which you have enclosed the record of the 
act of the Corporation of Boston, by which they have 
unanimously presented to me the freedom of the borough. 

" I beg that you will take an early opportunity of returning 
my thanks to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council- 
men of Boston for this mark of their attention i and that you 



m 


smN. 


1812 . 


will assure them of my earnest desire to merit their appro- 
bation by a continuance of my efforts to serve His Majesty. 

^ I beg to return you my thanks for the handsome terms 
in which you have conveyed the sentiments of the Corpora- 
tion of Boston. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Sir Joseph Banks, K.b: ' Wellington. 

r To Sir Charles Stuart, K*B, 

^ Mv DEAR Sir, ‘ Villa Tcro, 5tli October, 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 26th. I suppose the 
Portuguese GoA^ernment will arrange some mode by which 
the troops will reap the advantage of the arrangements 
made with the Spanish Regency, for procuring food in the 
country; and I hope that till that arrangement is made in a 
satisfactory manner, you will take care that their commis- 
saries shall be supplied with money. Otherwise, if care is 
not taken upon this subject, I sec very clearly that the pro- 
vision for these troops will fall upon me. 

^ You may depend upon it that this arrangement is just so 
much waste paper. The Spanish Government have not the 
power to provide for their own troops ; how can they provide 
for the Portuguese ? 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart, ‘ Wellington. 

To Earl Bathurst, 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 5tli October, 1812. 

‘ One of the mines which had been prepared under the 
exterior line of the castle of Burgos was exploded at mid- 
night of the 29tli, and effected a breach in the wall, which 
some of the party, destined to attack it, were enabled to 
storm ; but owing to the darkness of the night, the detach- 
ment Avho Avere to support the advanced party missed their 
way, and the advance Avere driven off the breach again 
before they could be effectually supported. The breach 
effected by the mine Avas not of a description to be stormed 
except at the moment of the explosion, and it Avas necessary 
to improve it by fire> before the attempt could be repeated. 
But all our endeavors to construct batteries in the best 



1812. 


VILLA TORO. 


473 


situation to fire upon the wall failed, in consequence of the 
great superiority of the enemy’s fire. One of the only three 
battering guns we had and two carriages were destroyed, 
and another gun was much injured. In the mean time 
another mine had been placed under the wall, which was 
ready yesterday, and a fire was opened yesterday morning 
from a battery constructed under cover of the horn-work. 

‘ The fire from this battery improved the breach first 
made ; and the explosion of the mine, at five o’clock yester- 
day evening, effected a second breach. Both were imme- 
diately stormed by the 2nd bait, of the 24th regiment, 
under the command of Captain Hcdderwick, which I had 
ordered into the trenches for that purpose ; and our troops 
were established within the exterior line of the works of the 
castle of Burgos. The conduct of the 24th regiment was 
highly praiseworthy ; and Captain Hedderwick and Lieu- 
tenants Holmes and Fraser, who led the two storming 
parties, particularly distinguished themselves. I am happy 
to add, the operation was effected without suffering a very 
severe loss. 

^ The enemy are still upon the Ebro, and have not made 
any attempt to interrupt our operations. It is reported they 
have extended to their left as far as Logroiio. 

‘ My last reports from the frontiers of Valencia are of the 
25t]i. It is stated that King Joseph was at Almanza, with 
15,000 men, to join Marshal Soult, who was on his march 
through Murcia from Granada. My last letter from Lieut. 
General Maitland is of the 21st ultimo. He was about to 
relinquish the command on account of ill health, and give it 
over to Major General Mackenzie. 

' Lieut. General Sir E. Hill is on the Tagus, between 
Aranjuez and Toledo. I have not yet heard what steps 
Major General Cooke has taken in obedience to the orders 
which I gave him to send a part of the troops composing the 
garrison of Cadiz to join Lieut. General Sir R. Hill. 

‘ By the last accounts I have of General Ballesteros he 
was at Granada, but he has been ordered to Alcaraz, 

‘ I enclose a return of killed and wounded since the 27th 
ultimo. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

^ Wellington. 


‘ Earl Bathurst* 



474 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


Bkturk tfihtt failed, fVoiinded, <md MUmigt nf ike Army under the Cwnmmd oj 
General the Marquis of fVellinyton^ KM*i in the eiege of the Castle of Burgos, 
from the 27/A September to the 5th October, inclusive. 



Officers. 

Serjeants. 

Rank and File. 

Horses. 

Total loss of Officers, 
Non-commissioned 
Officers, and Rank ^ 
and File. 

Killed , . . 

H 

5 

71 

— 

76 

Wounded . 



302 

— 

323 

Miisiiig . 

B 

B 

4 

— 

4 


To His Royal Highness the Duke of York . 

^ Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 5th October, 1812. 

" I have the honor to enclose extracts of letters to the 
Secretary of State, which will make your Royal Highness 
acquainted with the state of the operations against the 
castle of Burgos to this day. I beg leave to recommend 
Captain Hedderwick, Lieut. Holmes, and Lieut. Fraser 
of the 24th regiment to your Royal Highness s favor and 
protection. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Royal Highness ' WELLINGTON. 

the Duke of York,'* 


To Earl Bathurst. 

* My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 5th October, 1812. 

" I enclose the copy of a dispatch from Sir Henry Wel- 
lesley, by which I have been informed that the Spanish 
Government have conferred upon me the command of their 
armies. 

‘ The circumstances affecting the decision on this subject 
have in some degree changed since it was last under the 
consideration of His Majesty’s Government, and it is cer- 
tainly quite impossible that operations can be successfully 
carried on by the allied British and Portuguese armies, and 
by the Spanish troops, without some concert among the 
different divisions of which each may be composed. Indeed, 















4313 . 


VILtA fbRO. 


4t6 


as in the course of the war the Spaniards have lost nearly 
all their cannon, and all their cavalry, they cannot act 
generally in bodies separate from the armies of the allies ; 
and it is expedient, on every ground, that the general com- 
mand should be vested in one person. 

^ 1 have not thought proper therefore to decline to accept 
the offer made to me by the Spanish Government, in my 
answer to Sir Henry Wellesley, which I enclose; and as 
they required to have an answer, I have expressed a dispo- 
sition to accept the command, if it should meet with the 
approbation of Hisltoyal Highness the Prince Regent. 

^ I beg that your Lordship will take His Royal Highness’s 
pleasure on this subject. 

^ I am sorry that I cannot say that the Spanish troops arc 
at all improved in their discipline, their equipment, their 
organization, or their military spirit. I entertain but little 
doubt that in the same field with our troops they will behave 
well ; and it may be possible, by good management, to pre- 
vent a repetition of those terrible disasters to detached 
corps by which the enemy were enabled to overrun the 
country, and to bring the contest almost to a conclusion. 
But the means of effecting this object, and my power over 
the army, will be much increased, and the army itself will 
be much improved, by tlie adoption of measures by His 
Majesty’s Government to insure the application of whatever 
subsidy may be advanced to the Spanish Government to the 
payment of those troops actually employed in co-operation 
with the allied British and Portuguese army, in operations 
against the common enemy. 

^ It must be observed, however, that unless money can be 
procured to make good any engagements of this description 
which may be entered into with the Spanish Government, 
the performance of such engagements will become a burthen 
upon the military chest of the army, and will so far cramp 
our operations. 

^ My object, in the latter part of my letter to Sir Henry 
Wellesley, was to guard against the pretensions which the 
Spanish Government might form, to direct the operations of 
the war, in consequence of their appointment of me to com- 
mand the Spanish armies. 

" I have the honor to Be, &c. 

‘ Wkllington. 


‘ Earl Bathurst. 



476 




1811 


To C* HemeSf Esq,^ Commmary in Ch^f, 

^ Sir, * Villa Toro, 6th Oct, 1832* 

" I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your 
letter of the 20th of July last, containing a memorial from 
the deputies to you, as Commissary General, for an increase 
of their pay ; and I beg to acquaint you, that in considera^ 
tion of the duty performed by officers of that rank, and of 
the responsibility of their situations, I conceive that it would 
be expedient to grant them an additional allowance of 
per diem (treasury pay.) 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* C. Berries, Esq.' ‘ WELLINGTON. 

To Captain General Don F» X. Castanos, 

^ Mon cHEii General, ‘ a Villa Toro, ce 7th Oct., 1812. 

Jc nc vous ai pas repondu officicllcmcnt sur Ics opera* 
tions du General Mendizabal, parcequ’il est bien difficile de 
donner unc opinion sur Ics operations d’un corps qucl- 
conque, qui n’est pas en etat de faire aucunc operation. Le 
General Mendizabal est A present tenu cn echec pas un 
corps Franc ais a Durango, de la moitie de sa force, et on ne 
pent pas compter qu’il puissc avoir du succes cn quelque 
operation qu’il pent entreprendre contre I’ennemi. 

J’ai prie le Chevalier Popham de faire tout ce qu’il 
pourra pour attirer I’attention de I’ennemi vers la cote. Je 
crois qu’h present il ne pent plus ricn faire contre Guctaria; 
mais je Tai prie do faire des preparatifs pour Tattaque de 
Santoha ; et m^ine de faire I’attaque de cette place s’il le 
peut. Je I’ai prie aussi de m’indiquer comment il croira 
que le General Mendizabal pourrait I’aider, afin que je vous 
soumette ses idees. Si Popham peut faire cette operation, 
le General Mendizabal pourra ou Taider ou tacher de le 
couvrir. Si Popham ne peut pas faire cette operation, alors 
le General Mendizabal ne peut pas mieux faire que de se 
tenir ou il est ; faire travailler et discipliner ses troupes ; et 
laisscr faire des courses par les guerrillas et les troupes 
legeres sur les communications de Pennemi, et rendre dif- 
ficile leur subsistance dans le pays, 

‘ Le General Mendizabal doit prendre grand soin de ne 



1812. 


VILLA TORO. 


477 


pas Hyo battu ni coupe dans les Asturles et la Galice : si 
Tennemi s’avance sur lui en force, il doit se retirer sur les 
Asturies ; et si Tarmee de la Galicc fetait dans le cas de se 
retirer et de passer Ic Duero, le General Mendizabal doit se 
porter dans la Galice pour en defendre Tentree, si Tennemi 
se portait de ce cote la. Voila ce que je pense sur les ope- 
rations du General Mendizabal. 

^ Je vous envoic une lettre qui m*a ete donnee hier par le 
Colonel Robe, qui annonce qu’il est arrive a Madrid un 
Brigadier d’artillerie Espagnole, pour prendre le commando- 
ment du Retiro. Quand j’ai quitte Madrid j’ai fait des 
arrangemens avec Don Carlos pour renvoyer a Ciudad Ro- 
drigo tous les canons et munitions utiles qui etaient au 
Retiro; et j’ai ordonne qu’on fasse des arrangemens pour 
detruire tout ce qu’on ne pouvait pas cmporter, et le batiment 
de la China, si on etait dans le cas d’abandoner Madrid 
avant que tout ne fut cmporte. Je crois que faute de moyens 
de transport tres peu a ete emporte encore ; et quoique je nc 
croye pas qu’on puissc etrc dans la necessite d’abandonner 
Madrid, je ne pcux pas en 6tre sur ; et jo suis bien sur que 
si on est dans ce cas, tout sera detruit sans faire du mal a 
la villc, si on laisse I’affaire dans les mains du Colonel Hart- 
mann; mais je n’cn serai pas aussi sur si on la donne au 
Brigadier Espagnol. Je vous prie done de decider lequcl 
des deux vous voulez avoir. En peu de jours nous saurons 
s’il est possible qu il pent devenir necessaire d’evacuer Ma- 
drid ; et s’il nc Test pas, nous pourrons donner la place an 
Brigadier Espagnol pour en faire ce qu’il en voudra. 

^ Je suis tres inquiet sur I’etat des munitions do votre 
armee. On m’a dit qu’il y a tres peu de coups pour vos 
liuit pieces de canon. Nous avons ramasse des boulets do 4 
que nous pourrions vous donner, pour lesquels vous pourriez 
prendre da la poudre a Santander. Il est necessaire aussi 
de donner un peu d’attention a I’etat de vos munitions a 
fusil. Nous n’en avons jamais avec I’armee plus qu’il n’en 
faut pour les troupes Anglaises. Les Portugais en portent 
pour eux-m^mes. Ainsi il faut compter, qu’en cas d’ affaire, 
nous ne pouvons pas vous en donner. Si vous n’en avez 
pas ce qui est necessaire, vous ferez bien d’en envoyer 
cherchcr tout de suite a Santander, pour lesquelles je vous 
donnerai un ordre. 



sfain. 1812 . 

' Je vois que quelque uxies des troupes ont des fusils 
Fran^ais, pour lesquels nous n’avons pas de uiunitions. 

" Je serai bien content quand je saurai que Thabillement 
des troupes est arrive. 

^ Agreez, &c. 

* Qeneral "Wellington. 

Don F. X. Castaiios: 

To Sir Charles Siuarty K.B, 

" My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 7th Oct, 1812. 

" I shall be very much obliged to you if you will let me 
know whether the Portuguese Government levy any and 
what duties on the importation of corn into Portugal. 

" There is nobody to whom I mention the notable arrange- 
ment between the Portuguese and Spanish Government for 
feeding the Portuguese troops in Spain, who is not amused 
by it. I am afraid, however, that the Portuguese Govern- 
ment rely upon it, and consider it no longer necessary to 
send money to supply their troops. I have already ad- 
vanced money to the Portuguese Commissariat ; and I re- 
quest you to give notice that I shall give no money from the 
military chest at Lisbon, if I find that this Spanish arrange- 
ment is relied upon for the supply of the troops acting in 
Spain. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Sluartf K»B* < Wellington. 

To Marshal Sir W, C, Beresford, K.B, 

‘ My DEAR BeresFOUD, ‘ Villa Toro, 9th Oct., 1812. 

" I enclose a letter received last night from Admiral Dur- 
ham, through Sir Home Popham, which contains bad news. 

I have a confirmation from the French outposts that some- 
thing of the kind mentioned has happened. 

" We have a practicable breach in the second line, not- 
withstanding that all our guns and carriages are what is 
called destroyed; and I am now endeavoring to set on fire 
the magazine of provisions. I cannot venture to storm the 
breach. We have used such an unconscionable quantity of 
musket ammunition, particularly in two sorties made by the 
enemy, one on the 5th, and the other yesterday morning. 



VILLA TORO, 


1812, 


47» 


that I cannot venture to storm till I am certain of the 
arrival of a supply. 

^ I have sent to the rear and to Santander ; and we are 
making some. But I have not yet heard of any approach- 
ing. I fear, therefore, that we must turn our siege into a 
blockade. 

^ I am sorry to say that we lost poor Cocks in the sortie 
yesterday morning. He is on every ground the greatest 
loss we have yet sustained. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Marshal ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir W, C. Beresford, K.Bi 


To Lieut. General Sir /?. Hillt K.B. 

‘ My dear Hill, ‘ Villa Toro, 9th Oct., 1812. 

^ I have received your letters of the 5th and 6th, I do 
not think it yet decided whether the enemy are or not about 
to move towards the Tagus. If the King or Suchet's troops 
have gone to Albacete, as would appear by Wisch’s report, 
it is clear that they are about to move in that direction ; if 
they are Soult’s troops, this is not so clear ; particularly if it 
be true, as is reported, that the King and Suchet have re- 
turned to Valencia. I have reports here that Suchet is 
going to Aragon, and that the King is expected at Pam- 
plona. 

^ I send you a letter from Admiral Durham, containing 
bad news. 1 have a similar report from the French outposts 
in my front. We have a practicable breach in the second 
line, notwithstanding that all our guns and carriages are 
destroyed ; and I am now about to set fire to the magazine 
of provisions. But I am afraid I can do no more. I cannot 
venture to storm, having but little musket ammunition. 
Our consumption has been enormous, particularly in two 
sorties made by the enemy on the 5th, and yesterday morn- 
ing ; in the last, I am sorry to say, we lost poor Cocks, 
which has grieved me much. 

" Believe me, &c, 

‘ Lieut, General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir R, Hill, K,B: 



480 




.n'.5!5 j| iiiv; y’.-i'. ! J 1 I \i i xi-'i ^ ■^' '■'S.' 

To Co^j^pdo^e ^Sir ffome , ! : 

^ Mr PEAR Slli> . : / : : ♦ Villa Toro, 9tli Oct,, 18 1 2i. 

^ I , have rrecmed; your letters of the 4th and 6th> and I 
am glad to find that you will be able to remain on the eoast 
during the winter. ’ 

" We have made a practicable breach in the second line of 
the. oPOmy's works ; and we are now firing hot shot On the 
magazine, but I am afraid I cannot storm for want of mus- 
ket ammunition. Our expenditure has been beyond all 
calculation, particularly in two sorties made by the enemy 
on the 5th and yesterday morning. 

" I sent a fortnight ago to our magazines in the rear, as 
well as to Santander, for a supply; and if I should have 
reason to expect a supply from either, I shall storm when 
the magazine is on fire ; if not I must turn our siege into a 
blockade. 

" Let me know exactly what you wish Mendizabal to do, 
and what troops you wish him to detach towards you, and I 
will arrange the matter with General Castaiios. I shall give 
you notice if any circumstances should make me move to 
the south. Soult and the King and Suchet are certainly in 
motion, but I do not think that the direction of their march 
is yet decided. 

" Admiral Durham’s news is not satisfactor 3 \ I am sure 
there is some truth in it, as I have reports of something of 
the kind from the French outposts. 

" Believe me, &c. 

* Commodore ^ WiaLiNOTON. 

Sir Home Popham,^ 

To Lieut General Sir E. Hill, K,B, 

" My DEAR Hill, ‘ Villa Toro, 10th Octoher, 1812. 

^ I WRs aware of the mistake in the date of your first letter 
of the Gtln I received this morning that of the Gth i^ the 
cvcniiig, and at the same time letters from Don Carlos of 
the 7th. 

" I cannot believe that Soult and the King can venture to 
move forward to attack you in the position on the Tagus, 
without haying possession of the forts in the province of 
i indeed they propose fo give 



1812 . 


VILLA TORO. 


481 


up Valencia cntirel 3 \ They will in that case bring with 
them a most overwhelming force, and you would probably 
be obliged to retire in the direction given to General Alteii. 
I shall of course hear from you constantly, and I should join 
you on the Adaja. 

^ It will be necessary, however, that you should attend to 
some circumstances. If you should retire in that direction, 
it will be necessary to order the new bridge at Almaraz to 
be taken vip and destroyed, if there are not means at hand 
of carrying it away. If there are such means it should be 
removed, the rope work particularly, to Elvas. My pontoon 
bridge should, if in time, get across the Tietar, and go up 
to Salamanca ; if not in time, it must go round by the 
bridge of Alcantara and do the same. 

" I hear from Brito that tlie Cadiz troops marched from 
Seville on the 28th ; if that is the case, they ought now 
to be near the Tagus. If they should not have crossed the 
Tagus when you shall retire, let them march by Cacercs to 
Alcantara, and proceed thence by Guinaldo and Ciudad 
Kodrigo. 

* If they should have crossed the Tagus, and should have 
arrived at or be near Talavcra when you retire, let them 
proceed to Avila, and join your right by Blasco Sancho. I 
believe there is a road for carriages from Oropesa to Avila, 
by which they should go, if they should have arrived at 
Oropesa when you shall have decided to withdraw from the 
Tagus ; or if they should not have arrived at Oropesa, or if 
there should be no road from thence to Avila, they must 
be directed to march upon Plasencia, and thence by the 
Puerto do Banos and Bejar towards, the barca de Avila. This 
last mentioned movement, however, must depend upon the 
state of the Tietar. I believe there is neither bridge nor 
barca on the lower parts of that river, and therefore, if it 
should not be fordable at the time that Colonel Skerrett 
would have to execute the proposed movement, he might be 
in a scrape. It is best, therefore, that the bridge at Al- 
maraz should not be taken up, if Colonel Skerrett’s de- 
tachment should have crossed the Tagus, until his move- 
ment shall have been decided, in order that, in case he 
should not be sufficiently forward to join you from Talavera 
or Oropesa, or that the Tietar should be in such a state as 

VOL, IX. 2 I 



82 


SPAIN. 


1812; 


that it cannot be crossed, he may be able to get back across 
the Tagus, and to make his march by Alcantara. 

" I write all this, as I always do, to provide for every 
event> not believing that these instructions are at all neces- 
sary. I have at the same time to look after troops joining 
from England by Coruna. 

" Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut, General * W Ellington. 

mr R, HiU, k.b: 


To Colonel Torrens. 

< Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 10th October, 1812. 

^ I enclose a report from the Quarter Master General of 
the state of the waggon train with this army. 

' 1 take this opportunity of adverting to a report recently 
communicated to me by the Quarter Master General, re- 
garding the misapplication of the carriages of the waggon 
train in this army to carry baggage ; together with the draft 
of an order which General Hamilton proposed should be 
issued upon this subject, both of which had been laid before 
His Royal Highness the Commander in Chief. 

" I have not issued the order suggested by General Ha- 
milton, because there is no foundation whatever for the 
report that the carriages of the waggon train are misapplied 
to the purposes of carrying baggage. 1 have never been 
able to bring forward a sufficiency of them to carry the sick 
and wounded of the army ; and I am quite certain there is 
no instance in this army of their having been applied to any 
baggage, excepting indeed by the officers of the waggon 
train themselves, as has recently appeared. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Colonel Torrens,' Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, llth October, 1812. 

‘ The enemy have made two sorties .on the head of the 
sap between the exterior and interior lines of the castle of 
Burgos, in both of which they materially injured our works, 
and we suffered some loss. In the last, at three in the 
morning of the 8th, we had the misfortune to lose Major 
the Hon. C. Cocks of thd 79th, who was field officer of 



1812. 


VILLA TdRO. 


483 


the trenches, and was killed in the act of rallying the troops 
who had been driven in. I have frequently had occasion to 
draw your Lordship’s attention to the conduct of Major 
Cocks, and in one instance very recently in the attack on the 
horn work of the castle of Burgos, and I consider his loss 
as one of the greatest importance to this army and to His 
Majesty’s service. 

" Notwithstanding the efforts of the enemy, our troops are 
established within about a hundred yards of the enemy’s 
interior line, which we have it in our power to assault ; and 
we have effected a good breach in another part of the same 
line, and our troops are established close to the breach. 

" I am sorry to say, however, that the consumption of 
musket ammunition by the troops has been so large, parti- 
cularly in the late sorties made by the enemy, that notwith- 
standing that some has been made, and that a supply of 
powder and musket ammunition has been received from 
Commodore Sir Home Popham, I cannot venture to allow 
the consumption of ammunition which must take place in 
the storm of the enemy’s works, till I shall be certain of 
receiving a further supply. 

‘ I have ordered to Santander the transports which have 
musket ammunition on board at Coruna, and an officer of 
the ordnance has been waiting at Santander since the begin- 
ning of the month, to receive what is required. 

‘ I have heard that the vessels sailed from Coruna on the 
3rd instant, but I have not yet heard of their arrival at San- 
tander. I likewise sent to the magazines of the army in the 
rear, on the 24th of September ; but I have not yet heard oi 
the approach of the ammunition. I am obliged to defer anj 
further attack upon the enemy till I shall be certain of s 
supply. 

‘ In the mean time we are carrying on our works undei 
ground ; and I hope that 1 shall have another mine in readi- 
ness in a day or two ; and we are endeavoring to burn the 
enemy’s magazines by the fire of hot shot. 

‘ The enemy have not made any movement to interrupt 
our operations. They are still upon the Ebro, and I under- 
stand have received another reinforcement from France. 

‘ By the accounts which I have from Lieut. General Sii 
Howland Hill, of the 7th instant, it appears that Marshal 

2 i2 



484 SJ^AIN. r 

SquU joined the King on tl>c frontier of Ynlencia and ^Jur- 
cia, on the 29th of September, A detaqhmcnt of Marghai 
Soult’s army occupied Albacete on the 3rd instant, and a 
small detachment of cavalry was as far forward as Minaya> 
on the 6th instant ; but I do not consider the movement to 
be, as yet decided. 

‘ I have not yet heard of General Ballesteros having 
passed the Sierra Morena, or at all of his movements since 
the 17th of September, when he entered Granada ; nor have 
I heard from Major General Cooke since he received my 
directions for the movement of the troops under his commamh 

^ I have reports, however, that the troops marched from 
Seville on the 28th of September. 

^ I enclose a return of the killed and wounded since the 
Glh instant. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ WELLINGTON. 


Relurn of the Killed y PVounded, and Mmingy of the Army under the Command of 
General the Marquis of fVellingtoHy K.B.y in the siege of the castle of IhivgoSy 
from ihe Gth to the \0lh Ociobery 1812, inclusive* 



To Lord Somers. 

My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, nth October, 1812 . 

^ As I have before had the honor of writing to you respect- 
ing your son * I cannot allow my dispatch to go to England 
with tlie melancholy account of the loss which you have sus- 
tained, without addressing a few lines to you. 


Major the Hon, C, S. Cocks; regiment; killed on the 8th* 







VILLA TttRO. 


i8il' 


4^6 


‘ iToitr son foil, as lie IiaH' lived, in tlic‘’z(4ldiiS ^nd gallant 
discharge of his duty. He had already distiligUished him- 
self ill the course of the operations of the attack of the ckstle 
of Btirgos to such a degree as to induce me to rccoitimend 
hint for promotion ; and I assure your Lordship that if Pro- 
vidence had spared him to you, he possessed acquirements, 
and was endowed with qualities, to become one of the great- 
est ornaments of his profession, and to c;pniinue an honor to 
his family, and an advantage to his country. 

' I have no hope that what 1 have above stated to youi^ 
Lordship will at all tend to alleviate yopir affliction on this 
melancholy occasion ; but I could not deny myself the satis- 
faction of assuring you that I was highly sensible of the 
merits of your son, and that I most sincerely lament his loss. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lord Somersr ‘ WELLINGTON. 


To Lieut. Getieral Sir M. Hilly K.B. 

* Mv DEAR Hill, ‘ Villa Toro, I2th October, 1812. 

‘ I hope that the rain which annoys us so much reaches 
you likewise, and I should think that you will have the 
ri’agus in such a state as to feel no apprehension in regard 
to the enemy’s operations, be their numbers what they may. 

' It is quite clear to me, however, that the King, Soult, 
and Suchet, arc joined on the frontiers of Murcia and Valen- 
cia, from the accounts from Madrid of the 9th, which I have 
Received this day, and from letters from Alicante of the 
‘i9tli. It is absolutely necessary, therefore, that I should 
raise this siege, and proceed to the south, and I shall do so 
as soon as the weather holds up a little. 

‘ I recommend to you to have the bridge of Sacedon mined, 
particularly if the rain should have rendered the fords of the 
Tagus impassable. Have no scruple in destroying the 
bridge of Toledo, or that of Aranjuez, or any other, if it 
Lc at all important to your operations. 

* Believe me, &c. 

« 

* Lieut. General ‘WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B.' 



48 ^ 


SPAIN. 


1612 


To Commodore Sir Home Popham, 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 12th October, 1812. 

' I have received this morning your three letters of the 
10th, and one without date, written after the arrival of the 
Surveillante and Ellen. 

' I have sent to General Castanos respecting the move- 
ment of the troops under General Mendizabal towards 
Santoha. The orders to them shall go this night. 

^ In regard to your own notions, I would beg leave to 
suggest to you the following considerations : — If I should 
raise the siege of this place, and should move from hence, 
the movement will be occasioned by the necessity of collect- 
ing our forces in Castille, in consequence of the collection 
of the enemy’s forces in the south and east of the Peninsula, 
and their movement upon Madrid in too great force for Sir 
Rowland Hill. 

‘ We must expect that I shall be followed by the troops 
composing what is called the army of Portugal, but I shall 
likewise be followed by those composing the army of the 
North, if all apprehension of your operations should cease, 
in consequence of your removal from Santander or from the 
coast, of the squadron and battalion of Marines. 

" In your letter of the 10th you mention your intention 
to return to England, in the case supposed, with the Vener- 
able only, and you do not mention the two battalions of 
Marines. 

" If you were not known to be in that ship, possibly her 
removal from the coast (the remainder of the squadron and 
the Marines staying at Santander, or elsewhere on the coast) 
would not be very important; but the enemy, as well as the 
Spaniards, will be convinced that nothing is intended to be 
done, even though the Marines remain, if you should go 
away in the Venerable; and I apprehend that I shall have 
upon my hands in Castille more of the enemy than I can 
well manage. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ Commodore ^ Wellington. 

Sir Home Popham* 



VILL4 TORO. 


m 


Ilia 


To Lieut, General the Hon, Sir B, Pagetf K,B» 

* My dear Paget, ‘ Villa Toro, I3th October, 1812. 

^ I enclose tlie letters received from the South this morn- 
ing, from which you will see that matters are not pressing 
there. I likewise enclose one from General Mackenzie, 
and one from General Donkin, the former containing inter- 
cepted letters, which show the state of the enemy in that 
quarter. I can scarcely doubt of their intention to unite 
in La Mancha. 

" I have just received a report that the enemy are in 
motion in our front. About 1500 infantry and 600 cavalry 
drove in our piquets at Monasterio this morning. I am 
going out to the front at Riobena immediately, and shall 
send word if it be necessary that any troops should move. 

' Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General ' WELLINGTON. 

the Hon. Sir E, Paget, K.B' 

To Major General Mackenzie. 

‘ Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 13th Oct, 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 29th. 

‘ 111 case the enemy should advance from Valencia into 
La Mancha, with a view to attack our troops on the Tagus, 
you must endeavor to obtain possession of the town and 
kingdom of Valencia. You will march from Alicante, or 
will embark, as you may think best. The ordnance and 
stores must of course go by sea, and you will observe, if you 
inarch, that you must at all times keep your communication 
open with the sea. 

^ As you are but ill provided with cavalry, you will take 
care not to risk an action with a superior force of the enemy, 
particularly if they should have a superior force in cavalry. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General Mackenzie^ ' Wellington. 

To Marshal Sir W, C, Beresford, K.B. 

' My dear Beresford, ‘ Villa Toro, 14th Oct., 1812. 

‘ I have not answered your letter of the 2nd, regarding 
the proposal that the Portuguese troops in Spain should be 



isiti 

frdm itW i*efebiir6es ©f itte SpMsh Oovcmtncn^^ 
liid afready^ iri^idb an 'atrati^binent' of tbia deacriftion With^ 
the rntenditit bF Salainaifca, whtdi the amies of both 
nalidns hhdi l bblibved, derived feolrio advantage (to what 
amount r ^anilot tbll), before tho Ritendant, recommended 
% me; had been displaced. Since that event in the ]^ro- 
viiice of Sttlatnanca we have derived no advantage from that 
arhnvgementV nor any in other provinces, partly because the 
Spanish Government have to this moment appointed no 
officers to take chai^ge of thefr concerns in the provinces, 
and partly, because their own numerous but useless troops 
eat up every thing. We have not, therefore, and ought 
not, I think, to expect any great resource for cither army 
from the country, without payment ; and I am sure we 
ought to avoid holding out any hopes to the Poi'tuguese 
Government of such a resource. They shall have, as they 
already have had, their share of any resource of this kind 
that may offer. 

" In answer to your letter of the 4th, I have to mention, 
that it appears to me to be impossible to adopt the arrange- 
ment proposed ; viz., to allow Senhor Cardoso to go into the 
market to purchase corn with our bills. The iiixih is, that 
Senhor Cardoso is a very honest man I believe, but he likes 
meddling in our concerns, and he is anxious to acquire the 
influence over the corn merchants in Lisbon, which would 
result from his making purchases for the Portuguese army. 

I \yish there was money to enable Sir Charles Stuart to pay 
the subsidy; but as there is not, it will not answer to allow 
Senhor Cardoso to go to market with our bills. I do not 
believe that our Commissariat buy, or have in their posses- 
sion, bad corn. 1 do not know why they should, if good 
corn can bo procured, which I believe it can. I am much 
more inclined to believe that Senhor Cardoso complains 
without reason, in order that he may attain his little object, 
than that Mr. Pipon buys bad corn, and offers it to Senhor 
Cardoso. 

^ All these questions give me a great deal of additional 
trouble, which I should bo delighted to avoid by any prac- 
tical arrangement ; but I have never yet had any b^Ore me, 
and wc must only get mias well as wc can, and prevent our 



im^ 


VILLA TORO. 


4 & 9 | 


inferiors from intenvipli^^ the course of tlie> public service 
their private views and complaints about nothing. I 
see> by a letter from Sir Charles Stuart of the 6th^ that he 
concurs very much with me in the notions which I have 
fordaed of the causes of Senhor Cardoso's complaints. 

‘ In regard to money I can say nothing, excepting that I 
will give what I can. If I am to fix the sum, which will bo 
given monthly, it must be the smallest. I wish I could do. 
inore^ 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Marshal ‘Wellington. 

Sir W, a Beresfordy K.B: 

To Sir Charles Stuart, K.B, 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 14th Oct., 1812. 

‘ Upon consulting with Mr. Kennedy regarding the pur- 
chase of corn in Egypt, he concurs very much in my opinion, 
that if the corn can be got with goods it is desirable to have 
it ; but that we are not in immediate want, and it is better 
not to have it than to allow money to be spent in the pur- 
chase, which would find its way into the military chest. 
Kennedy appears to doubt that Sampayo can spend any 
money in this way which would not find its way into the 
military chest. 

‘ 1 concur very much in your opinion regarding the cause 
of Cardoso’s complaints of the corn offered to him by Mr. 
Pipon. He w^ants to have the little influence over the corn 
merchants, and la petite gloire wliich would result from 
making purchases in the market. I wish we had money to 
spare to enable him to make these purchases. 

‘ I do not see any inconvenience that will result from your 
giving Senhor Cardoso, at the market price, any cargoes 
that may be consigned to your orders, if the Commissariat 
do not want them. This is a veiy different arrangement 
from your bills going into the Lisbon market to purchase 
corn for Senhor Cardoso, on Senhor Cardoso being allowed 
to purchase corn in the market with your bills, or those of 
the Commissary General. I am afraid, however, that you 
will find the cimcerii a very troublesome one; 

‘ Believe me, &e. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuarfy K.Bl ' Wellington. 



490 


SPAIN. 


1818. 


To Lieut, General Sir R. Hilt, 

^ My dear Hill, ‘ Villa Toro, 14th Oct., 1812. 

< I have received your letters to the 10th, and finding 
that matters do not press in the South, as they appeared to 
press, according to the accounts received for some previous 
days, I continue our operations here, which afford some 
prospect of a successful termination. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ‘ Wellington. 

Sir R, Hill, 

* I think you would do well to send to Ballesteros a copy 
of the letter from the Minister of War, directing him to 
take the position at Alcaraz.’ 


To Major General the Hon. C. Stewart. 

' My DEAR Stewart, ‘Villa Toro, 14th Oct., 1812. 

‘ I received your letter of the 18th September by the last 
post. I had already answered the letter which you wrote to 
me regarding your office, and I told you, that it was not at 
all inconvenient to me that you should remain in England 
as long as you should find it convenient, and that 1 would 
not hear of your resignation. Goodman is now doing the 
duty of the office, poor Waters being very ill. Goodman 
does the business remarkably well ; but I hope we shall 
soon have Waters again, particularly as the hunting season 
is coming on apace, the hounds are on the road, and I shall 
want Waters for the earth-stopping business, if not for that 
of the A. G. He has been very near dying, poor fellow, 
and what is worse, I hear he has lost all his dogs, including 
Sevilla. 

' I have in hand the toughest job I have ever undertaken ; 
but, notwithstanding deficiencies of means of all kinds, 1 
hope I shall succeed yet. If I do, I shall be better satisfied 
than I have ever been with any success. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General ' Wellington. 

the Hon C. Stewart,' 



1813. 


VILLA TORO. 


m 


To Commodore Sir Home Popham, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 14th Oct., 1812. 

* I shall be very much obliged to you if you will send me 
forty barrels more of gunpowder, as soon as you can with 
convenience. 

" There is nothing new from the South. Matters do not 
appear to press there at all. 

* Believe me, &c. 

• Commodore ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir Home Popham' 

To Lieut, Colonel Gore, 33rd Regiment *. 

‘ My dear Gore, ‘ Villa Toro, 1 4th Oct., 1812. 

* I have received your letter of the 10th of September, for 
which I am much obliged to you ; and I am glad to find 
that you have prospects of getting men to complete the 
regiment. 1 should wish, for the sake of the officers, to get 
men enough to form a second battalion ; but I am afraid 
that that is impossible, till I shall have more leisure to 
attend to the concerns of the regiment than I have had. 

" As well as I recollect, I gave the band a set of in- 
struments some time ago ; but I have no objection to give 
them another. You will accordingly order a set, and desire 
the agents to pay for it on my account. 

^ I beg you will order what you think proper and neces- 
sary for the regiment in the way of clothing and accoutre- 
ments ; and 1 consider you, and not myself, responsible 
that they shall be in every respect fit for service, as far as 
depends upon me. 

‘ I give you no authority which my predecessor did not 
give me, and I believe every preceding Lieut. Colonel of 
the 33rd regiment; and I am confident that you will ex- 
ecute the task with the same feeling for my pocket, and 
regard for my interests, combined with a just sense of what 
is due to the public and the soldiers, which my predecessors 
and I felt for the interests of Lord Cornwallis. 

* I am very anxious that no alteration should be made in 
the uniform or appointments of the regiment, which is not 
required by the orders of the army and the regulations of 

* Major General Gore, killed at Bergen op^Zoom. 



ihc scfvicc/ lEyery is n6\v^l rl)el{eVe^ k fouttd it 
twenty y^airs ago ; arid if oricc wc begin to alter^ we shrill 
have nothing fixed, as there are no bounds to fancy. 

I shall be obliged to you if you will send me by post thp 
button which you propose to substitute for that at present 
worn. 

‘ Let me know whether I can do any thing for the regi- 
ment, or for any individual in it. I am glad you have got 
a Serjeant major whom you like. But wc ought to have 
Serjeants of our own, fit to be serjeants major. 

' Eemcmber me most kindly to your brother if you should 
be with him. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut Colonel Gore, ' Wellington. 

33rd Regiment.^ 


To His Royal Highness the Duke of York, Commander in Chief 
< Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, 14th Oct., 1812. 

‘ I have had the honor of receiving your Royal Highness’s 
letter of the 16th of September; and I assure you that there 
is no person more anxious than I am to adhere strictly to 
the rules of the service established by your Royal Highness ; 
and I am highly flattered and grateful for the confidence 
which your Royal Highness has been pleased to place in 
me, and for the attention which you have given to any sug- 
gestion which 1 have thought it proper to make to you. 

^ In regard to the two subjects referred to in your Royal 
Highness’s letter, that which your Royal Highness has done 
was suggested to me by Colonel Gordon ; and knowing that 
he had possessed your confidence, and that he was in the 
habit of communication with the officers at the head of the 
several departments at the Horse Guards, I consented to 
liis writing to England on those subjects. I saw his letter 
to your Royal Highness regarding the an-angements of the 
Waggon ^rain ; and as well as I can recollect, I saw a letter 
>vrot^ eithpr to your Royal Highness or Gpi|cral 
Cnlvertj regarding the formation into a garrison battalion 
of t)ie soldiers lielqnging to regiments i;n (his army invalided 
for garrison duty at Beleiu. 

/ I ackno^yledge that i( did not occur to me that those 
were official communicatforis ; and 1 alibied thbnfi'46 he 



1812. xihhk |0R0. 493 

on\y bccavi^o he ^ad sug;^estcj^ 
\yhat was proposed ^o he accomplished^ and appeared to 
understand tnoroughly the arrangements ; and pecause 1 
bejieved that he was in the habit of ^writing tayou^ Boyal 
Ilighndss, and to the Ofeers of the General Statf at thp 
tiorse Guards. Independently of my desire to avail myself 
of your Boyal Highness’s permission to address myself di- 
rectly to your Royal Highness op every subject, I am per- 
fectly pware that the Staff Officers of the army arc attached 
to me to enable me to communicate my orders to my infe- 
riors, and otherwise to assist me in the performance of my 
duty ; but not to carry on my coihmunicafiohs with my 
superiors ; and therefore I should not have allowed Colonel 
Gordon to write even upon the subjects referred to, if I had 
considered what he was writing at all of the nature of an 
official communication. 

^ Your Royal Highness may depend upon it that nothing 
of the kind shall occur in future. 

have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Royal Highness * WELLINGTON. 

Tho Duke of York, ’ 


To . 

' Monsieur, ‘ u Villa Toro, ce 16 Oct., I 812 . 

‘ J’ai cu le plaisir de recevoir votre lettre du 8 du cou- 
rant ; et je vous prie d’agrecr incs remcrcimens pour les ren- 
seignemens que vous avez cu la bonte de me communiquer 
sur les evencmens qui out cu lieu depuis mon depart do 
Madrid. 

‘ J’ai riionncur d’etre, &c. 

* d " Wellington. 


To Vice Admiral G, Martin, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Toro, I7th Oct, 1812. 

^ I have this day given orders to the Commissary General 
to send to Corufia, for the use of the Spanish army, 7,500 
suits of clothing, and other equipmepbs for that number of 
men; ^nd I shall be much obliged, tp yon if you will comply 
with thp applica^ipn wjiiph will be made to you by the head 



494 


SPAIN. 


1S12. 


of his department at Lisbon for a vessel to convey these 
stores to Coruna. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Vice Admiral G. Martin: * Wellington. 

To lieut. General Sir Hill, K, B. 

‘ My dear Hill, ‘ Villa Toro, Oct. 17th, 1812. 

' I issue an order this day, disposing of the troops which 
will arrive under the command of Colonel Skerrett, which I 
request you to have executed. The troops in this direction 
should come either from Talavera or Avila ; or from Tala- 
vera or the Escurial. I do not know whether General Cole 
has broken up our establishment at the Escurial; if he has, 
your Commissary must take care of their troops till they 
reach Arevalo. 

" I shall desire the Commissary General to place his esta- 
blishments again at the Escurial, if General Cole has taken 
them away. 

' The rain of these last two days must have settled the 
Tagus for you for some time. What reports have you of 
that river ? Do the upper parts become fordable in the 
winter season after the rain has ceased ? for how many days 
generally ? Let me know when you write what the state of 
the river is. 

* Believe me, &c. 

♦ Lieut General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir R, Hill, K, B: 

To Commodore Sir Home Popham. 

* My dear Sir, ‘Villa Toro, 17th October, 1812. 

‘ I have received two letters from you of the 12th, and two 
of the 14th instant ; and I am sorry to observe that Lord 
Keith has altered his intentions respecting the squadron 
under your command, between the 18th of September and 
5th instant. 

‘ I shall not be under the necessity of withdrawing from 
here, unless the enemy’s armies collected in Valencia should 
move upon the Tagus in too great force for Sir R. Hill. 
The probability that this will be the case diminishes daily, as 
our reinforcements are advancing daily from the South as 
well as from Coruna; and I believe that Ballesteros has 



mm 


VILLA TORO. 


495 


taken the position in La Mancha which I proposed for him ; 
which renders the enemy’s movement upon the Tagus very 
improbable. 

" The possession of Santoha is very important in every 
point of view, particularly if the possession should facilitate 
your remaining on the coast. You know best whether you 
can obtain the possession with the means in your power. If 
you cannot, and if you think that the attempt will draw to- 
wards you the enemy’s operations, and that you may be 
obliged to withdraw from Santander, it is much better that 
tlie attempt should not be made. What I w^ant is, that your 
squadron and marines should remain on the coast during the 
winter, by which they will render me the important service 
of preventing the enemy from taking tlie whole army of the 
?North across the Ebro. If they should lose Santander, it is 
very obvious that they must go to Coruna or home ; and 
either would be a misfortune under our present circum- 
stances. 

' You will judge from your means whether it is fit to 
attack Santoha, I wish I could send you a better General 
than Mendizabal, and better troops than his are; but they 
are not to be found. I do not see the advantage, however, 
which would result from Lord Keith’s proposal that General 
Mendizabal should join me. I have more of that kind than 
I know Avhat to do with. 

‘ In regard to my making Santander my post of communi- 
cation with England, it is quite impossible at present; I 
should doubt the practicability of the plan at any time, on 
account of the want of means of transport in the neighbour- 
ing country ; but it certainly would not answer till the army 
should be firmly established on the Ebro, or probably fur- 
ther on. 

' In consequence of your application of the 17th of July to 
Sir H. Douglas, I have directed Lieut. Colonel Bourke to 
provide Colonel Campillo with 1000 stand of arms, and I 
beg you to let me know if you are desirous that he should 
receive another supply in addition to the above number. It 
has not been customary, I believe, to give shoes and great 
coats to guerrillas, 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Commodore ‘Wellington. 

Bfr Home Phpham,* 



J8PAW,, 




.ye 

Ta'rBdrlBuihitnti 

jvfY'lLosti,''''’ -i*' 

‘ In cc)tn^iahee'‘wftft the! !ek]^kseij yoiiV ’lipi*d- 
shi)i/8 dispatch ' (Nd. '56) Is't ih^tkiit; T'hdve'^wen 

dirfsctioiHB that Clencntl' Esjibz’yMihW m'siy ha' supIpK^d'fllildi 
2500 stand of aftris, with jf»bukes aid htelt8,' ahd'd‘pr(i^k 
tion of amtnunition and 2500 snlts of clothing. Those aitlclk 
of equipment will be forwarded to Santitider. ■ * • 

‘ 1 have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Bart Bathurst: ‘ WfiLLlNGtok' 

To Eaxl Bathurst. 

My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 1 7th October, 1^12. 

^ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the t23rd 
ulto. (No. 49), and I haVe perused the .mcmoranduni it con- 
tains from His Eoyal Highness the Commander in Chip^, 
regarding the levy and discipline of Spanish tropps by 
British officers. t , 

* I doubt whether it \vill be possible to overcome the pre- 
judices and remove the disinclination of the Spanish Govern- 
'ment and officers to receive any assistance from British 
officers in disciplining their troops. As far as 1 have ob- 
seized, they do not admit the superiority of our discipline, 
^tnd do not attribute to that cause our success. However, if 
His Koyal Highness the Prince Regent should consent to 
my takibg upon myself the command of the Spanish armies, 
I shall take an opportunity of submitting to the Spanish 
Government a proposition on this subject. 

^ If it is expected that this lueasure should be as successful 
as one of a similar nature has been in Portugal, it will be 
necessary to provide for the regular payment of the officers 
atid troops to be thus raised and trailed. It is impossible to 
place any reliance 6n the Spanish resources ; in fact, the 
abuses of the Government and tho misfortunes bft|:^ country 
have entirely annihilated them. But I should think that a 
due application of the British subsidy, if it could be realisef^ 
in specie, Nvoiild provide for the pay, not only cif corpSf 
but 6f the whole effective operating afniy. 

‘I form this opinidn from the expense of the corps bif 
troops under Don Carlos de Espafm, ^Yhich has .been paid 



-lSi2. vi1-L!^"^^oro. 497 

under my direction sinee^ Juti6 v It consists of 4000 men 
presen for. the garrison of Ciudfid Sodl’igo, 

And* tl^iC expeiise jdie p^y oJ^.tho pflJpArs and is .25,000 
d 9 )llars a ^ont^ qr 300,000 dollars per aptmiu, ,X)ie 
-storing of suteidy wonld> at the same rate md ujsMfer <th 
^auic arrangements, pay 50,000 men under arms; n^hieli 
pumber I api apprehensive that ^ the Spanish^naUanlriU net 
have in the course of , this war. ; : , ; r : ^ 

^ I haye the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Baihur$f.' ' WELLI^GTON. 

To Eiirl Bathurst, 

* My Lord, ‘Villa Toro, 17th October, 1812- 

‘ I have liad the honor of receiving your Lordship’s dis- 
patch No. 51, of the 24th September, in regard to the 
Portuguese finances, and I have perused with great atten- 
tion all the papers which it contains. 

‘ Your Lordship may be assured that the only practicable 
remedies for the deficit in the Portuguese finances consist in 
augmentations of revenue, to be obtained by reforms of 
abuses in the collection of the customs of the Kingdom, and 
in the collection of taxes on income, and of the direct taxes 
generally, in the great towns of Lisbon and Oporto parti- 
cularly, and by saving unnecessary expenses. 

‘ It is evident to mo that the Conde de Funchal * is not 
accurately informed on the subject on which he has written. 
I have given every facility in my power to prevent frauds 
on the Portuguese revenue, under the cover pf importing 
stores for the army, from a knowledge that His Majesty is 
essentially interested in the prospei'ity of the Portuguese 
finances ; and in point of fact no stores are admitted duty 
free, unless I request His Majesty’s Minister at Lisbon tP 
make application to the Grove|:nmcnt for an prdpr tp thp 
tfustom Hpuse to p^^s goods in that manner. , ? 

‘ Since thp year 1810, I have nevey applied for an px^mp? 
tion frpm duties, excepting for plothing or stores aPtpaUy 
imported for officers or regiments belonging to tb© 
pr on account pf the pphliq, for th© aiiny at large. i r ] " 

! ‘ »'(.■' - -si ■' Ir' A'‘ 

^ ISenfilor <ie ^iiza OoutmhbjPoiiugueseMinister at the Cjurt of St. James's. 

VOL. IX. 2 K 



m 




mmi 


^ I do not apply foi* m exomptibk of duties fav apticlee 
brought to Portugal for sale On speculation^ Frauds how*> 
evor may bo committed by masters of transports, and of 
other vessels resorting to Portugal on account of the public ; 
but to prevent these frauds is one of the objects of. my re^ 
peaiedi remonstrances to the local Government of Portugal 
to reform the Custom House. 

^ I know that the taxes upon income, and the direct taxes 
in Lisbon and Oporto, were very ill collected ; and no 
measure has been adopted by the Government which has 
satisfied my mind that it was a remedy to the existing 
abuses. I proposed for the consideration of the Govern- 
ment, to be applied to the large towns, the system which 
prevails in England, with some alterations, particularly a 
publication of the returns of income which should be made 
by ditferent individuals, in order to obtain greater accuracy 
from those who should make them. But the Government 
declined to adopt what I proposed, and there the matter 
rests ; and as far as the produce of the taxes on income and 
of the direct taxes would affect tho deficit, I believe it 
remains as it was. 

' It rests with the Government and not with me to see 
that strangers pay the taxes upon income, and the direct 
taxes ; and I hope they will bo more successful with this 
description of persons than I know they are with the Por- 
tuguese possessors of large capitals. 

^ In regard to savings, I have desired Marshal Sir William 
Beresford to send to their homes all the militia, excepting 
the few absolutely necessary for the interior duties ; and I 
have not failed to urge the suppression of the naval expenses 
of the Government. 

" I do not know that there is a larger Staff to tho Portiu 
guese army than is required. It is certainly true, however, 
that for want of money, the Portuguese army is very ill 
equipped with many essentials for service ; and that 1 am 
frequently much embarrassed by their wants. Much of 
what appears under the head of military expense, consists in 
pensions to widows, to retired officers, &c. &c. ; the provision 
for these classes provided by the country, viz., the produce 
of the revenue of the military orders being applied to pur- 
posee different from those for wbioh those orders were 



mm 


VILtiA TOUO. 


499 


0 figitially endowed r I believe that the hbepitala are much 
better arranged, and that they are managed with more 
economy by the persons employed by Marshal Sir William 
Beresford, than they were. 

^ I have no knowledge of frauds or extortions ** on the 
country ; or violence on the magistrates,” committed by 
the officers of the Commissariat of the British army ; and if 
the Conde do Funchal has any knowledge of such acts, I 
hope he will make them known to me in detail. If he has 
not, I hope that he will have no objection to make known 
the authority he had for making so serious a charge in a 
public document. 

'It is perfectly true, that owing to the poverty of the 
Government, "exactions and violence” (but not "frauds*’ 
as far as I have any knowledge) have been practised by the 
officers of the Portuguese Commissariat ; but to remedy 
these evils is one of the objects of my repeated remonstrances 
to the Portuguese Government in regard to their finances, 
and other measures. 

' It appears now that the favorite measure of the Portu- 
guese ministers, viz., a loan in England, is abandoned ; and 
recourse is to be had to the sale of the lands of the Crown 
and of the Church, rather than to enforce the adoption of the 
only measures which can relieve the finances. 

' I have already had before me a proposition for the sale 
or rather transfer, to the creditors of the Junta de Viveres, 
of the lands of the Crown; but these were the uncultivated 
lands in Alentejo ; and I pointed out to Government the 
great improbability which existed, that any body would 
take these lands in payment of their claims ; and the injury 
they would do to the public credit by rendering such a 
scheme public, if it were not likely to be successful. 

' My opinion is, that there is nobody in Portugal possessed 
6f capital, who entertains or who ought to entertain such 
an opinion of the state of affairs in the Peninsula, as to lay 
out his money in the purchase of the lands of the Crown. 
The loss of a battle, not in the Peninsula even, but else- 
where, would expose his estate to confiscation ; or at all 
events to ruin ; by a fresh incursion of the enemy ; and even 
if any man can believe that Portugal is secure against the 
ineufsiou of the enemy ; and his estate and person against 

2k2 



SW 18 ^ 8 . 

thp.yip}enjCO, on4?»vy^^}i^. jft 

during the existence ptthc war:, even according to the Conde 
dp, Funchal’s, notion, ’exempt from those evils from his own 
countrymen and their allies. 

^There could be no objection to trying the experiment of 
offering some of , the estates of the Crown for sale ; and, it 
will be seen whether I liave or not formed a porrect judg- 
inent on this subject. I think it more than probable that 
the holders of small farms under the Crown have the means, 
and would purchase at the full value, the fee simple of their 
several farms ; but I should think the produce from this 
resource would not he very large. If the Prince Kegent of 
Portugal consents,, however, the experiment of the sale of 
the Crown lands, in lai’ge parcels as well as in small, to the 
landholders) might be tried. 

, . ‘ Although, if this measure succeeds, it is probable that .it 
will keep back some specie which would find its way into the 
British military chest, I do not recommend that payment for 
these purchases should be taken in paper exclusively. I do 
not think that any measure which can be adopted will have 
the effect of raising the exchangeable value of the Portu- 
guese paper money, as long as the British Commissary at 
Lisbon continues to pay in paper money the drafts made 
upon him by the Commissary General at Head Quarters, 
making an allowance for the discount. 

‘ The receiver of the paper, who resides possibly in a 
distant province of Portugal, is interested in exchanging it 
for money at any rate ; because he cannot pass it in the 
country, the law on this subject not being executed, ex- 
cepting in the large towns. 

‘ In regard to the sale of tlie lands belonging to con- 
vents and the Church, I earnestly recommend that it should 
not be attempted. First, The same abjection exists as to 
the sale of the Crown lands, viz., the want of purchasers. 
Secondly, nothing would render the measure palatable to 
the Chxireh ; and it might be expected that the influence of 
the Church would be exerted against the allies, instead of 
operating, as it has done hitherto, most powerfully in their 
favor. . Thirdly^ the measure is useless, if the sale of , the 
Crown Jands should. Kiicceod ; and it; certainly will not suc- 
ceed if the other should not. At the same time the attempt 



VltLA^^tWlO, 


m 


Wni aliei^nte the* goad wishes of a Wamei^dtis iifd ^wer«i 
ftrt‘party in Spain, as well as in Portugal.' ■ Fourthly, it ittust 
be bbseiwed, that if the tUcasiire should be succesisfWb Arid 
should be hortestl'j carried into execution, it will entail a 
considerable burthen on the fintinccs, viz., 5 per cent) 6n?the 
purchase money, for the ecclesiastical Owners of the eitUtU ; 
which the sale of the Crown lands will not. ‘ 

' The best mode of obtaining for the state, eventually, thb 
benefit of the estates of the Church, would be to prevent the 
monasteries and nunneries from receiving novices ; and' in 
the course of time the Pope might be brought to consent to 
the sale of these estates, for the benefit of the estate ; or the 
state might assume the possession of them, the ecclesiastical 
corporation which held them being extinct. 

" I am however of opinion, that it is not disadvantageous 
to Portugal and Spain, that large portions of the land 
should be in the hands of the Church. The bishops and 
monks arc the only proprietors who live on their estates 
and spend the revenues of them among those by whose 
labors those revenues have been produced; and till the 
habits of the great landed proprietors on this subject shall 
change, the transfer of the property of land from thc Churcli 
to laymen will be a misfortune to those countries. 

' I propose to send Mr. Stuart a copy of this dispatch. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c, 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 

To Marshal Sir W, C. Beresford^ K,B, 

^ My dear Beresford, ‘Villa Toro, 18th October, 1812. 

‘ The 20th* regiment had been ordered to march with the 
other troops, and I expected that they had marched be- 
fore I received your letter expressing a wish that thej 
should return into Portugal, and I have now posted them 
in the Light division in Beckwith’s brigade. 

‘ If you wish to send any other regiment instead of them 
I can have no objection, excepting the —th regiment, Whici 
cannot bo in a state fit for service, or at all complete; In 
deed, it would appear to be necessary to relieve the 20tl 
regiment, as they have no mules for the carriage of ofiScers 

• Poitugueie. 



602 




baggage, 6f ammimiiloti) 6r provirfdTi^} and the whole of 
the concern falls upon our departments, so that the 20th 
regiment must be either supplied with mules, or relieved. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Marshal ^WELLINGTON. 

Sir fV. C. Beresprd, K,B: 

MEMORANDUM 

To Lieut Colonel Burgoyne,for the attack of the Enemy a second line, 

* Villa Toro, 18 th October, 1812 » 

‘ 1 . The enemy's second line is to be attacked this after- 
noon at half past four. 

2. The mine under the church of San Roman is to be 
exploded at that hour ; and Colonel Brown will immediately 
order an officer and 20 men of the troops under his com- 
mand to rush forward, and establish themselves on the 
breach which the mine sliall have made. An officer and 50 
men will be in readiness to support these. 

^ 3. Colonel Brown will have the effects of the mine Well 
reconnaitred ; and if he should find that it is practicable to 
enter the second line after his troops shall have been esta- 
blished on the emplacement of the church, he shall order 
them to do so ; and establish them within the second line, 
communicating by his left with the troops which shall attack 
the second line from the piles of shot. 

^ 4. If Colonel Brown should find that he cannot enter 
the second line, he will keep a fire on it from the emplace- 
ment of the church. 

^ 5. Six ladders of 18 feet long must be sent to Colonel 
Brown. 

^ 6. The troops of the 6th division, cantoned in Burgos, 
must be under arms to support the attack upon the second 
line, if it should be necessary. 

‘ 7. When the mine shall explode at half past four, a 
camp color will be displayed on the hill to the west of the 
castle ; which is to be the signal for the attack on the other 
parts of the line. 

^ At four o’clock, the parallel along the parapet of the 1st 
lino must be fully occupied. 

^8. When the signal shall be made, an officer and 20 



m2. 


viL^A. arotto. 


fi03 


meUr who tnust previously be plaee^ ia th^ sap leading to 
the palisade in front of the gate of the second )inc, are to 
rush forward and drive the enemy from behind that pali- 
sade ; and follow them into the covert way. 

‘ 9v The sap must be immediately reoccupied by an officer 
and 30 men, who are to protect the rear and right flank of 
the detachment which shall have entered the covert way. 

^ 10. At the same time, an officer and 40 men, 18 of them 
carrying ladders, must rush forward from the left breach in 
the first line to the shot piles, and thence to the line in front 
of the shot piles, where they will descend the ditch, which 
they shall pass, at the places where the palisades have been 
destroyed by our shot. They are then to scale the line at 
that point 

" 1 1. An officer and 50 men are to be in readiness at the 
trench in the first lincj to rush forward to the shot piles as 
soon as the first party which shall have gone there shall have 
advanced from thence. These troops are to support the 
storming party ; and are to move on from the cover of the 
shot piles as soon as they shall find the head of the storm- 
ing party established on the parapet of the second line. 
These men are to carry with them tlircc ladders. 

" 12. Fifty men must be in readiness to move up to the 
shot piles, as soon as the 50 ordered in paragraph 1 1 shall 
have moved forward to the escalade. These are likewise to 
carry three ladders. 

‘13. As soon as the party shall have succeeded in the 
escalade, they are to turn to their left, and communicate 
with those who shall storm the breach in the second line. 

‘14. As soon as the party shall have escaladed the line, 
the 30 men ordered into the sap arc to endeavor to force 
tho gate of the second line; and if they should succeed, 
to communicate by their left with the party which shall 
escalade. 

‘ 15. Three hundred and fifty men of the relief for the 
trenches this evening must go down under tjic command of 
a field officer, so as to bq in the trenches at three in the 
afternoon. As soon as they shall arrive, the whole of the 
covering party now in tho trenches, which shall be on the 
left, are to go down to the right ; and the left of the trenches 
ahd. born work shall he occupied by liie removing party. 





18 m 


mn 

naadbLtbli^: ih^ ntiiibi iift 
sprUngv an offim’iiand ?0 men ai! 0 <to rush foi'ward rfi^m the 
advanced trbnch to stomv the breach*, r % ; s < n 

< 17; Fifty mcn fu*o to be in readiness to follow these, And 
arento nrtohre but as so6n as thd head of the 1st detachment 
shall have ascended the breach. 

^18. One hundred men are to be in readiness in the ad- 
vanced i trench to support the storming party in Uie breach. 
But they are not to leave the trench till the storming party 
shall bo established on the breach; and then only in ease 
support should be wanted. « 

Vl9. When the storming party shall enter the breach, they 
mtist turn along tlie parapet to the left, and drive the enemy 
from the stockade which he has there established. 

f 20. The troops formed in the parallel along the parapet 
of? the first lincj and in the trenches under the horn work, 
must keep up a fire during the storm on the enemy’s third 
line and tho castle, so as to keep down the fire of the enemy. 

< 21. Lieut. Colonel Burgoyne will convey these orders to 
the field officer in the trendies ; and he will see that they 
arc carried into execution according to the intentions of tlic 
Commander of the Forces on the right. Lieut, Colonel 
Sturgeon will convey these orders to the field officer com- 
raanding the relief for the trenches ordered by the I5th 
paragraph, to be there at three o’clock ; and he will see that 
aH the arrangements ordered are made, and tliat tho inten- 
tions of the Commander of the Forces arc carried into 
cxeoutioii on the left. 

' Wellington/ 

To Earl Bathurst, 

* My Lord, ‘ Villa Toro, 18 tli Octobori 1812 . 

The great inconvenience which I have experienced in the 
attack on the castle of Burgos, in consequence of the wani 
musket ammunition, and tho probability which exists thai 
oiir operations will continue to be carried on at a distance 
frcHii our former magazines, have induced nio to review thi 
i^tato of the ordnance establishments with this army> and ic 
suggest to your Lordship an augmentation of thetn^ r * > 

This anny has fUbver lmd with it An equipmmoit of ^rd 

nance ft All: even tboiighitbi 



isnM 


VILLA TORO, 


5m 


c^iiblidhtn^i l^otildl be calcdlatiedi for. troops 

ortl^; bosrdds-'the British trobpd,- tlrere Hare nearly 

equal numbers of Portugnesoi trbbps in each divirion of 
wbi^h the'^army id compoedd^ and in the eampaign of 1810, 
arid thd commencement of 181 Ivkvo had. a considerable num- 
ber of Portuguese guns, (nine brigades of six guns each) 
and a* large body of Portuguese artillery ;with the^ army. 
Bet the 'financial difficulties of the Portuguese GoveniiricnU 
and f the irregularity of their system, have caused the de- 
struction of nearly all the animals attached to draw these 
guns ; and the equipment failed first in the quantity of ant* 
miinitioh necessary to be brought into the field to be useful, 
and afterwards in the’ draft for the guns themselves; and 
the service of One brigade after another has been discon* 
tinned, till at last there has been no Portuguese ordnance 
with this part of the army in this campaign> and only one 
bi^igade with Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill. 

In’ the mean time, the British ordnance has not been 
proportionally'increased; and your Lordship will find, that 
in the battle of Salamanca, the French army had more than 
twi(^e ibo number of pieces of ordnance that we had. 

' ^ We have since that battle been joined, and are in co- 
operation with various bodies of Spanish troops ; which are 
in some cases, if not in all, very inadequately supplied with 
ordnance; and as your Lordship is aware, the Spanish 
finances are by no means in a state to form such an equip- 
ment of ordnance as even their armies would require. The 
dependence of the allied armies in the Peninsula^ therefore, 
must be almost exclusively on the British artillery ; which, 
as 1 have above informed your Lordship, is not adequate to 
the numbers of the British army alone. 

' I have, in the course of this year, brought under the 
consideration of the Secretary of State different scales for 
thn; establishment of the ordnance With this army, in pro- 
portion as I have found it absolutely necessary, and in my 
pow«r to increase the number of the pieces of cannon with 
thb army. The first^of the 16th of April, was calculated for 
five brigades of <9 br long 6 pounders, and four troops Of 
horse artillery. ' - ^ ^ ' 

J the® subinittcd to your Xordshipjon the 18th of 
Aklgi^t tbe sesde for a® establiaiment ef of 



506 miK* 

9 or long 6 pounders, and four troops of horse artillery ; and 
of one brigade of heavy ordnance to attend the army* 

< I have since ordered to the army one brigade of 9 
pounders from Cadiz, which will make the number with the 
army eight brigades of 9 or long 6 pounders; and my firm 
conviction is, that we ought to have ten brigades of 9 or 
long 6 pounders, four troops of horse artillery, and one 
brigade of heavy ordnance ; this would make ninety pieces^ 

‘ I enclose the scale of establishment of horses, &c*, re- 
quired for these guns and their ammunition, &c. 

" Tho musket ammunition of the array is carried upon 
mules; and a sufficient number is attached to each division 
to carry the ammunition which is required for the ordinary 
consumption of tho British troops in the division. There 
is, besides, a large quantity carried on mules in the reserve 
of the artillery, to supply extraordinary demands. Besides 
this supply for the British troops, the Portuguese troops 
have a proportion of mules attached to each regiment to 
carry the supply of ammunition which they require. 

^ There were established in different situations on the 
frontiers of Portugal depots of musket and gun ammunition 
equal in amount to the quantity carried by the mules with 
the troops; so that any extraordinary consumption could be 
supplied at any moment without difficulty or inconvenience. 

^ It is obvious, however, that in consequence of the re- 
moval of our operations to a greater distance from tlie 
Portuguese frontier, tliis resource will not answer ; and not- 
withstanding the pains which I have taken to induce tbio 
.Generals of the Spanish army, and the Commanding officers 
of the Portuguese regiments, to take measures to supply 
the wants of their own troops, it is very obvious that they 
will, in the end, fall upon our resources. It is necessary, 
therefore, to provide for the carriage of a large supply of 
musket, as well as of gun ammunition, to he near the army ; 
and I have the honor to enclose a scale of an ordnandc 
establishment required for this purpose. 

' Since I have had the honor of commanding His Majesty's 
troops in the Peninsula, I have never trtade any demand 
upon the Government, but have always considered it my 
duty to do the best I could with the means placed at my 
.disposal ; behig cortmu that tho Goternmont wore dcsiTPUs 



yiLiih rmo. 


507 


im 


of tnaklttg them aa large as drcomstaticea iroiild permit. As 
the same desire still exists in the ordnance, as well as other 
departments, 1 should wait till Government should deem it 
expedient to increase oivr means of this description; but 
finding those at my disposal to be very inadequate to the 
numbers even of the British army, and by no means suffi- 
cient in a view to the circumstances in which we are placed, 
I think it proper to bring the whole subject under your 
view. 

^ I beg leave to mention that we have at Lisbon the 
quantity of ordnance required to complete this equipment, 
excepting the iron guns, the whole of which, I informed 
your Lordship on the 10th June, that I had sent to Gib- 
raltar to be put in a state of repair for the Sicilian army. 

* I find that there was a mistake in the reports of practice, 
oti which was founded my demand of 24 pounders, in my 
letter of the 18th of August; and I should wish to have 
iron 18 pounders of 37 cwt., 8 feet long, instead of 24 
pounders of 30 cwt., and feet long. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c^ 

* Earl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 


Return of Killed, Wounded, and Misting, of the Army under the command of 
General the Marquis cf Wellington, K.B,, in the siege of the Castle of Burgos, 
from the IIM to the \7lh October, inclusive. 



Officers. 

Serjeants. 

■^3 

3 

CO 

« 

Horses. 

TotcU loss of Officers, 
Non-commissioned 
Officers, and Hank and 
File. 

Killed • . 

— 

1 

27 

— 

28 

Wounded « « 

4 

3 

66 

— 

73 

Missing . . 

— 

— 

— 

— * 

— 


MEMORANDUM 

For General Pack, for the Blockade of Burgos, 

‘ Villa Toro, 20th October, 1812. 

' 1. While the enemy shall be in force in front of the 
attny. Brig. General Pack will take diargo of the blockade 








■ WAINV 


of Burgos, keeping possession of the ground which has been 
acquired during the sie^e. H6"Svill have under his coni' 
mand, besides bis own, brigade^ the 24th and 58tH regiments. 
Colonel Bro^vn’s battalion of ca^adorcs, the 11th, 53rd, and 
61st regiments, and the Spanish battalions pf Asturias ^nd 
Guadalaxa^’a, which are in the town of Burgos. , 

^ 2. Tlio guns, howitzers, and ammunition now in the 
trenches, are to be brought down this night, for which pur- 
ppsc a ivorking party of 200 men must be ordered for this 
evening at 5 p.m. . 

" 3. Orders will be sent to Colonel Eobc regarding . the 
disposal of the artillery and ammunition. 

" 4. Orders will likewise be sent for the 11th, 53r(l, and 
61st regiments to go round and occupy the bivouac lately, 
occupied by the brigade of Guards. 

^ 5. Brig. General Pack, and all the troops under his com-, 
mand, will be in readiness to march at a moment’s notice, 
with the exception of 500 men, in their due proportions of 
English and Portuguese troops^ to relieve the trenches at 
the hour of the next relief, and Colonel Brown s battalion 
of caQadores, and the two battalions of Spanish infantry. 
The officer who shall take General Pack his orders will 
show him the road he is to march. 

/ 6. When General Pack shall move, he is to give charge 
of the blockade to Colonel Brown, who will concert his 
measures with Lieut. Colonel Burgoyne to preserve all the 
ground gained. 

‘ 7- General Pack will settle with the Commandant of the 
Spanish troops, to take some of the duties in the town, now 
taken by the caqadorcs. 

^ 8, All the avenues from the tow n to the castle should be 
barricaded. ‘ 

‘ 9. One of the French guns and an howitzer might be 
left in the right hand battery, in order to give thp enemy a 
shot occasionally, and to check sorties. An officer and 
artillerymen of the reserve must remain for this purpose. 

' 10. The Engineer officer must load the mines in the horn 
work, and these mines must be sprung, if by any accident it 
should be necessary to withdraw from the trenches. 

‘Wellington.* 



VILVAiXORO. 




50(9t 


... MEMOHANDU-NJC ...^ 

^6^ CUonel Robe. Jbr tJie r^motal bf gkiis: ' 

^ ‘ Villa Toro, 20tli (5cibi)bi% iS^ 

1. The guns an^ howitzers now in the batteries drc to 
be moved down this nighty with the exception of a PiWh'bh 
gun and howitzer, to to left in the right hand battery, to 
give the enemy a shot occasionally, and to chcck>or^/ci. ' ' 

‘^ 2. Those howitzers which are serviceable, with their am- 
mi^nitioiji, must be sent to Riobena. 

'3. The 18 pouhder guns, with their ammunition, and 
the unserviceable howitzers, are to be sent as soon as they 
shall be brought down, through Quintana-duenas as far as 
the neighbourhood of Vlllalon. Tliey are there to halt, 
200 yarejs short of the village, where they will not be seen 
from the Castle of Burgos. 

‘ 4. The reserve ammunition of the field train should be 
sent this evening to the same place ; and to-morrow inorn- 
irig before daylight it should march by Tardajoz to Fran- 
dovinez. 

^ Wellington.’ 

To Brigadier General Pack, 

‘ Riobena, 21st October, 1812, 

" Hy DEAR Pack, Half past l P.M. 

' I am sorry to say that I am afraid that I shall be obliged 
to. give up our position here, in consequence of the intelli- 
gence which t have received from General Hill of the move- 
ments of the enemy in the South; and unless I should 
receive a contradiction of the intelligence, I propose to 
march this night. 

^ ^8 soon as you shall .receive this letter you should send 
off the baggage of the troops with you by Quintana-duenas 
and Viilalon to Frandovinez. If I should go I shall send 
you word ^ and in that case you will inarch when the moon 
sha^ rise, and will go into the town, entering it by the side 
qf the trenches, of which you will keep possession, as well 
as of the trenches, till 5 o’clock in the morning. Yqu will 
then march with the troops under your command by the 
high roaci of Valladolid to Frandovinez. 



- 'upmm 


mm 




" The troops* in the trenches should evacuate the horn 
work first. They should then evacuate the other part of 
the trenches, and they should proceed along this side of the 
river to Villalon, where they will cross and join you. Your 
brigade, the Spanish infantry and Colonel Brown’s battalion 
should be across the bridge before the trenches are evacuated,! 
leaving of the latter only the sentries necessary to prevent 
the enemy from coming out of the castle. 

‘ At a particular moment to be fixed, shortly before 5 
o’clock, at which the last of the trenches are to be evacuated, 
the mines in the horn work must he exploded by an officer, 
who must be mounted and ride away. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Brig, General Pack, ' WELLINGTON. 

‘ Let the troops belonging to the 1st division, excepting 
those in the trenches, join the division as it shall pass Ga- 
monal, and let those of the 6th division, excepting Colonel 
Brown’s battalion, do the same.* 

To Commodore Sir Home Popham, 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Villa Fria, 21st October, 1812, 

' I have received your several letters of the 17th and 
18th instant. The enemy moved forward on the 18th, and 
have since collected in my front in very large numbers. 
They advanced yesterday evening with three divisions of 
infantry and a considerable body of cavalry, probably with 
the object of reconnaitring the position which we occupy ; 
but upon my moving down some troops to attack them, they 
retired in some haste to the ground about Fresno. 

^ I am inclined to believe that the whole of the troops of 
the armies of Portugal and of the North which are dis- 
posable have been collected for this operation ; but they do 
not appear disposed to make any serious attack upon us. 

‘ By the letters which I have received from the South, it 
seems evident that Soult, contrary to my expectations, is 
about to move on Madrid with the whole of the troops in 
Valencia and Murcia ; and as the weather, which has been 
so very bad in this part of the country, has not been so to the 
south, the fords of the Tagus are unfortunately all passable. 

I have besides learnt that General Ballesteros, who w» 



FRAHOOVINEZ, 


511 


isia 


ordeted t© talco «p a position at Alca^z> has not looted 
from* Gi'anada. Under these circumstances^ if I do not in the 
cour^ of this evening receive any accounts from Sir R. Hill 
which should induce me to believe that the enetny arenot 
marching upon the Tagus, I propose to raise the siege of 
Burgos, and withdraw across the Arlanzon. 

^ I shall not, therefore, want the guns which you were so 
kind as to send to Reynosa; and I forward by this oppor- 
tunity orders to Captain Pack to return with the equip- 
ments under his charge to Santander, 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Commodore t Wellington. 

Sir Home Popham,^ 

To Lieut. General Sir /?. Hill, K.B, 

' Mv DEAR Hill, ‘ Frandovinez. ‘22nd October, 1812. 11 a.m. 

" I have received your letters of the 19th, one p.m. 

* Our affairs in this quarter stand thus : — On the 1 8th in 
tlio afternoon we stormed the breach in the second line of 
the castle, and at the same time, escaladed it ; and a mine 
sprung at the same moment with good effect. 

^ Unfortunately we could not support the storm sufficiently 
in time, and our troops were beat off. Wc lost above 100 
men in killed and wounded. The Guards and Hanoverians 
beliaved remarkably well. 

^ On the same day the enemy moved forward, and attacked 
our outposts in strength, and the two armies have been 
opposite to each other from the 18th till last night. They 
made a great reconnaissance with three divisions and some 
cavalry on the evening of the 20th, in which some of them 
were very roughly handled by the Chasseurs Britanniques ; 
and I made a movement with our left, under Sir E. Paget, 
which induced them to move back rather more quickly than 
they had advanced. Unluckily it was too dark to take any 
advantage of their error or our movement. 

‘ The two armies continued opposite to each other all day 
yesterday ; and having received your letter of the 17th in 
the morning I determined to raise the siege last night, and 
to move towards you. This I have effected, and the troops 
are now on their march, and we shall be this day at Celada 
delCarnino. 



512 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


^ Let me liear from you constantly. If their movement on 
your side is decided upon Cuenca, I conceive that those in 
my* front will go to Lerma or Aranda de Duero, leaving the 
army of the North behind. I am certain that the army of 
Portugal will not follow us if left alone. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut General ‘ Wkllinoton. 

Bir R. Hilt K,B: 

To Earl Bathurst, 

My Lord, ‘ Cabezon, 2Gth October, 1812. 

' I have been so much occupied by the movements and 
operations of the army since the 18th instant, that I have 
not been able to write to your Lordship. The operations 
of the siege of the Castle of Burgos continued nearly in the 
state in which they were when I addressed your Lordship on 
the llth instant, until the 18th. Having at that time re- 
ceived a supply of musket ammunition from Santander, and 
having, while waiting for that necessary article, completed a 
mine under the church of San Roman, which stood in an out- 
work of the second line, I determined that the breach which 
we had effected in the second line should be stormed that 
evening, at the moment this mine should explode ; and that 
at the same time the line should be attacked by escalade. 

^ The mine succeeded, and Lieut. Colonel Brown lodged 
a party of the 9th cacadores and a detachment of Spanish 
troops of the regiment of Asturias in'" the outwork. A de- 
tachment of the King’s German Legion under Major Wur mb 
carried the breach, and a detacliinent of the Guards suc- 
ceeded in escalading the line ; but the enemy brought such 
a fire upon these two last detachments from the 3rd line and 
the body of the castle itself, and they were attacked by 
numbers so superior, before they could receive the support 
allotted to them, that they were obliged to retire, suffering 
considerable loss. Major Wurinb was unfortunately killed 

^ It is impossible to represent in adequate terms my sense 
of the conduct of the Guards and German Legion upon this 
occasion ; and I am quite satisfied, that if it had been pos- 
sible to maintain the posts which they had gained with so 
much gallantry, those troops would have maintained thpm. 





cxa^aroN. 


'^f3 
jit^ one 

<Wa«r kllldd^ih ene*dfthi eWifevttstires'i df itid I»httd 

tbe 4*iiti^{Uctidw df s<^ei*iiigi4iyatif I cmdd’fereJttjfl 

We shedld carry tHc plaeer* ' im / ^li t > d? ;,: 

'Sir Home Popbain liaiS succeeded > 'i A* ati ^ipl^ritwetit 
which he had tried for the rembval of guns from Santander 
for the siege of Santoha ; and knowing our want® of ordn^ce 
and stores, and that our battering guns and carriages had 
been destroyed by the enemy’s fire, he sent two 24 pounders 
and stores from Santander, and I> intended, as soon as they 
should arrive, to endeavor to breach the wall of the castle. 

' In the mean time, another mine was commehceef u^iidcr 
the second line from the church of Sah llonran, of wliicli we 
remained in possession. 

' The enemy had on the 13tli moved forward a consider- 
able body of infantry and si:c squadrons of cavalry from Bri- 
viesca, to rcconnaitre our outpost at Monasterlo. They 
attacked the piquet at the bridge in front of the town, but 
were repulsed by the fire of a detachment of the infantry 
of the Brunswick Legion. In this affair Lieut. Colonel the 
Hon. Frederick Ponsonby, who commanded at Monasterio, 
was wounded, but not severely ; and I hope I shall soon 
again have the benefit of his assistance. 

' I had long had reports of the enemy’s intention tci ad- 
vance for the relief of the Castle of Burgos with the army of 
Portugal, reinforced by troops recently arrived from France, 
and with tliat part of the army of the North which was 
disposable; and tliey did advance in considei^able force 
against the post of Monasterio, on the evening of the iSth. 
Lieut. Liznelsky, of the Brunswick Legion, who commanded 
a piquet in Olalla, disobeyed his orders in remaining in 
that village upon the approach of the enemy ; arid he Was 
^ken with liis piquet. The enemy consequently obtained 
possession of the lieights which command tjie towh of Monas- 
t'jjrio/p.nd our outpost was obliged to retire, on the inprnitig 
of the 19tln to the Burgos side of the town. ; ^ 

‘ I asseniblcd the troops, excepting those necessary for 
carrying oh the operations of the siege, as sobh as it ap- 
peared, by the enemy’s movement of tlie 18th, that they 
ehtertmned serious intentions of endhavpring td raiso it; 
ahd placed the allied army oti The hcights> havihg their 

VOL. IX. 2 L 



514 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


right at Ibeas, on the Arlanzon, the centre at Riobena and 
Mijaradas, and the left at Soto Palacios. The enemy’s army 
likewise assembled in the neighbourhood of Monasterio. 

^ They moved forward on the evening of the 20th with 
about 10,000 men, to drive in our outposts from Quintana- 
palla and Olmos. The former withdrew by order ; but the 
latter was maintained with great spirit by the Chasseurs 
Britanniques. Seeing a fair opportunity of striking a blow 
upon the enemy, I requested Lieut. General Sir Edward 
Paget to move with the 1st and 5th divisions upon the 
enemy’s right flank ; which movement having been well 
executed, drove them back upon Monasterio ; and our posts 
were replaced in Qiiintana-palla. 

^ On the morning of the 2 1st, I received a letter from Sir 
Rowland Hill of the 17th, in which he acquainted me with 
the enemy’s intention to move towards the Tagus, which 
was already fordable by individuals in many places, and was 
likely to become so by an army. 

" The castle of Chincliilla had surrendered on the 9th 
instant, and General Ballesteros, although he had entered 
Granada on the 17Ch September, had not assumed the posi- 
tion in La Mancha which he had been ordered to assume by 
the Spanish Government, at my suggestion. 

" The enemy’s force in Valencia was supposed to amount 
to not less than 70,000 men, a very large proportion of 
which, it was expected, would be disposable for service out 
of that kingdom. 

^ I had desired Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill to retire 
from his position on the Tagus, if he should find that he 
could not maintain himself in it with advantage, and it was 
necessary that I should be near him, in order that the corps 
under my command might not be insulated in consequence 
of the movements wliich he should find himself under the 
necessity of making. I therefore raised the siege of Burgos 
on the night of the 21st, and moved the whole army back 
towards the Duero. 

‘ I felt severely the sacrifice I w as obliged to make. Your 
Lordship is well aware that I never was very sanguine in my 
expectations of success in the siege of Burgos, notwithstand- 
ing that I considered that success was attainable, even with 
the means in my power, within a reasonably limited period. 



1812. 


CABEZON. 


515 


If the attack on the first lino, made on the 22nd or the 29th, 
had succeeded, I believe we should have taken the place, 
notwithstanding the ability with which the Governor con- 
ducted the defence, and the gallantry with which it was 
executed by the garrison. Our means were very limited; 
but it appeared to me that if we should succeed, the advan- 
tage to the cause would be great, and the final success of the 
campaign would have been certain. 

‘ I had every reason to be satisfied with the conduct of 
the officers and troops during the siege of Burgos, particu- 
larly with the brigade of Guards. During the latter part 
of the siege, the weather was very unfavorable, and the 
troops suffered much from the rain. The officers at the 
head of the Artillery and Engineer departments, Lieut. 
Colonel Robe, and Lieut. Colonel Burgoync, and Lieut. 
Colonel Dickson, who commands the reserve artillery, ren- 
dered me every assistance, and the failure of success is not 
to be attributed to them. By their activity we carried off 
every thing in the course of one night, excepting the three 
18 pounders destroyed by the enemy’s fire, and the eight 
pieces of cannon which we had taken from the enemy on the 
night of the 19tli ultimo, in the storm of the horn work, not 
having cattle to move them. 

^ The enemy were not aware of our movements, and did 
not follow us till late on the 22nd, when 10,000 men en- 
camped on this side of Burgos. 

^ The British army encamped at Celada del Camino and 
Hornillos, with the light cavalry at Estepar and Buniel. 
We continued our march the following day ; the right of the 
array to Torquemada, the left to Cordovilla, at which places 
we crossed the Pisuerga. 

^ The enemy followed our movement with their whole 
army. Our rear guard consisted of the two light battalions 
of the King’s German Legion, under Colonel Halkett, and 
of Major General Anson’s brigade of cavalry; and Major 
General Bock’s brigade was halted at theVenta del Pozo, to 
give them support ; the whole under the command of Lieut. 
General Sir Stapleton Cotton. Don Julian Sanchez marched 
on the left of the Arlanzon ; and the party of guerrillas 
heretofore commanded by the late Marquihez, in the hills on 
the left of our rear guard. 


2 l2 



516 


SPAIN. 


ism 


^ Major General Anson’s brigade charged twice, with great 
success, in front of Celada del Camino, and the enemy were 
detained above three hours by the troops under Lieut. Gene- 
ral Sir Stapleton Cotton, in the passage of the Hormaza, in 
front of that village. 

‘ The rear guard continued to fall back in the best order, 
till the guerrillas on the left having been driven in, they 
rode towards the flank of the rear guard of Major General 
Anson’s brigade, and four or five squadrons of the enemy 
mixed with them. These were mistaken for Spaniards, and 
they fell upon the flank and i*earof our troops. We sus- 
tained some loss ; and Lieut. Colonel Felly, of the 16th 
dragoons, having had his horse shot, was taken prisoner. 

^ The delay occasioned by this misfortune enabled the 
enemy to bring up a very superior body of cavalry, which 
was charged by Major General Bock’s and Major General 
Anson’s brigades, near the Venta del Pozo, but unsuccess- 
fully ; and our rear guard was hard pressed. The enemy 
made three charges on the two light battalions of the King’s 
German Legion, formed in squares, but were always repulsed 
with considerable loss by the steadiness of these two bat- 
talions. They suffered no loss, and I cannot sufficiently 
applaud their conduct, and that of Colonel Halkett, who 
commanded them. 

^ The exertions and conduct of Lieut. General Sir Staple- 
ton Cotton, and of the officers and Staff attached to him, 
throughout this day, were highly meritorious ; and although 
the charge made by the cavalry was not successful, I had 
the satisfaction of observing great steadiness in their move- 
ments. Major Bull's troop of horse artillery, under Major 
Downman and Captain llamsay, distinguished themselves. 

^ The army continued its march on the 24th, and took up 
its ground on the Carrion, with its right at Duenas, and left 
at Villa-muriel ; and the 1st batt. 1st Guards joined us 
from Coruna. I halted there on the 25tli, and the enemy 
attacked our left at Villa-muriel. They were repulsed, 
however, by the 5th division of infantry, under the command 
of Major General Oswald, in the absence of Lieut. General 
Leith, on account of indisposition. 

* I had directed the 3rd battalion of the Eoyals to march 
to Palencia, to protect the destruction of the bridges over 



CABEZON. 


517 


1812 ; 

the Carrion at that place ; but it appears that the enemy 
assembled in such force at that point, that Lieut. Colonel 
Campbell thought it necessary to retire upon Villa-muriel, 
and the enemy passed the Carrion at Palencia. This ren- 
dered it necessary to change our front, and I directed Major 
General Oswald to throw back our left, and the Spanish 
troops upon the heights, and to maintain the Carrion with 
the right of the 5th division. Tlie bridge of Villa-muriel 
was destroyed, but the enemy discovered a ford, and passed 
over a considerable body of cavalry and infantry. I made 
Major General Pringle and Brig. General Barnes attack 
these troops, under the orders of Major General Oswald; 
in which attack the Spanish troops co-operated, and they 
were driven across the river with considerable loss. The 
fire upon the left had been very severe throughout the day, 
from which we suffered a good deal; and Major General 
Don Miguel Alava was unfortunately wounded while car- 
rying on the Spanish infantry in the pursuit of the enemy. 

‘ I broke up this morning from the Carrion, and marched 
upon Cabezon del Campo, where I have crossed the 
l*isucrga. 

‘ The enemy appear to be moving in this direction from 
Duenas. I propose to halt here to-morrow. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 


Return of the Killed, Wounded, and Missing, of the Army under the command of 
General the Marquis of Wellington, K*B., in the siege of the Cattle of Burgos, 
from the 18/A to the 2\st of October, inclusive. 



Officer.?. 

Seijeauts. 

Rank and File. 

Horses. 

Total loss of Officers, 
Non-commissioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed • . . 

4 

3 

89 

■ 

96 

Wounded » . 

10 

4 

ICO 


174 

Missing • • . 

— 

— 

4 

B 

4 








518 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To Lieut. General Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

* My DEAR Hill^ * Cabezon, 27th October, 1812, 9 P.M. 

^ I have received your letters to the 26tli. It is not neces- 
sary that I should now enter into an account of our retreat. 
We hatted the day before yesterday at Duehas, and this day 
at this place ; but the enemy arc infinitely superior to us in 
cavalry, and from what I saw to-day, very superior in in- 
fantry. We must retire, therefore, and the Ducro is no bar- 
rier for us. If wo go, and we cannot hold our ground beyond 
the Ducro, your situation will become delicate. We certainly 
cannot stand against the numbers at present opposed to us 
in any situation, and it appears to me, therefore, to be neces- 
sary that you, as well as we, should retire. The only doubt 
which I entertain is respecting tlie road wliich you should 
take, and that doubt originates in tlie insufficiency of this 
army to stop the army opposed to it a sufficient length of 
time to enable you to reach the Adaja. 

^ I propose to remain on the Pisuerga to-morrow, if I can, 
and as long as I can upon the Ducro, and then to retire by 
Arevalo. God knows whether I shall be able to remain on 
either river, and if I cannot, your retreat should be by the 
valley of the Tagus ; if I can, we should join as proposed by 
former letters. If I can remain on the Pisuerga to-morrow, 
I shall cross the Ducro on the 29th, and I tliink it probable 
that I shall be able to prevent the enemy from crossing in 
full force till the 1st, in which case 1 shall arrive at Arevalo 
on tlie 3rd. 

‘ You will not receive this letter till the 29th : you will 
arrive at the Escurial probably on the 31st, at Villa Castin 
on the 2nd, and at Arevalo on the 4th, If you should find 
it necessary to retreat sooner, so much the better, as this ar- 
rangement, which is much more likely to fail on my side 
than on yours, will be more easily accomplished. 

‘ If I should not be able to hold my ground as long as I 
expect, cither on the Pisuerga or the Duero, I shall ap- 
prize you of it at the first moment, and shall suggest your 
line of retreat ; but this will be difficult, as you have a large 
body of cavalry opposed to you, and your march, as pro- 
posed, at least as far as Villa Castin, would have been secure, 
whereas that by Talavcra, &c., will not till you shall cross 
the Tagus. 



1812. 


CABEZON. 


519 


* Do not order the bridge at Almaraz to be taken up, 
or destroyed, till you shall be certain that you will not re- 
quire it. 

^ In respect to the Spaniards, let Don Carlos* division, 
Morillo’s and Penne Villemur s, retire with you ; desire Ge- 
nerals Elio, Bassecourt, and Villa Campa, to join General 
Ballesteros by the bridge of Toledo, if you should have left 
that entire, or by that of Talavcra, or that of Arzobispo if 
you should not ; and desire the Empecinado to go to his old 
ground about Guadalaxara. Tell them all that we shall 
soon be able to set matters on their legs again, but that it is 
impossible for the British army to resist the armies of the 
North; the Centre; of Soult ; and that of Portugal; and 
part of that of Suchet; in co-operation at the same moment. 

^ I send to Major Hartmann to desire that he will destroy 
the stores, &c., at Madrid. I shall let you know the result 
of every day’s proceedings, and my expectations for the next.* 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ W kllington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

^ I do not reply to your letter of the . The Jarama 
appears to me to be the most advantageous line, although 
liable to be turned both on the right and left.’ 

To Earl Bathurst. 

' My Lord, ‘ Cabezon, 28 th October, 1812 . 

^ Since I wrote to you on the 26th, I have had an oppor- 
tunity of seeing the enemy’s whole army, as they placed 
themselves opposite to us on the Pisuerga yesterday. They 
are certainly in very great strength. The army of Portugal 
have received a reinforcement of 10,000 men (including ca- 
valry) from France; and I have reason to believe that there 
are two divisions of infantry now with this army, belonging 
to the army of the North. The cavalry of the army of the 
North is certainly with the army of Portugal, and they have 
at least 5000 good cavalry. 

" I do not think that I am suflBciently strong to contend 
with this army thus reinforced. I have here only four weak 
divisions of British and Portuguese troops, and three very 
weak brigades of cavalry. 

' There are with this army 12,000 Spanish troops of the 



6PAIK. 


520 


1812. 


army of Galicia, including about 600 cavalry, and the ca- 
valry under Don Julian Sanchez. 

* I was sorry to observe, however, in the affair of the 25th, 
that although the Spanish soldiers showed no want of spirit 
or of disposition to engage with the enemy, they were totally 
unable to move upon them with the regularity and order of 
a disciplined body, by which alone success can be hoped for 
in any contest with the French. 

^ Wc must depend upon ourselves, therefore ; and the dif- 
ference of numbers, from what I saw yesterday, is much 
against us. 

^ Under these circumstances, I have thought it proper to 
desire Lieut. General Sir R. Hill to retire from his position 
on the Tagus, and to join me, if possible, on the Adaja. It is 
absolutely necessary that I should cross the Duero; and if 
the enemy should follow me with his whole force, which is 
probable, I cannot expect to be able to maintain myself, and 
I shall be obliged to retire towards the Tonnes. In this 
case Lieut. General Sir R. Hill would be exposed to the evil 
which I raised the siege of Burgos to avoid, thinking it pos- 
sible he might he obliged to retire, and be attacked by a 
superior army in front, and by another in his rear. This 
misfortune would be more certain if any accident should un- 
fortunately happen to the troops under my command. 

* By accounts from Lieut. General Sir R. Hill to the 26tli 
instant, I find that the enemy had approached the Tagus 
with their left, and had moved their right upon Cuenqa. He 
does not state the force they have with them, but I should 
imagine not less than 50,000 men ; and, as far as I can 
judge, there are not less than 40,000 now opposed to this 
army. Both armies are infinitely superior to ours in cavalry 
and artillery, as well as in total numbers. 

* Lieut. General Sir R. Hill has with him about as many 
Spanish troops as there arc witli this army, but I believe 
they arc equally unused to order and discipline. 

^ Under these circumstances, I acknowledge that I have 
no expectations that I shall be able to maintain myself very 
forward in Castille, if the enemy should be able to keep this 
large body collected. 

* Your Lordship will recollect that I have always been of 
Opinion that, as far as the allied British and Portuguese army 



\8l% 


BOEOILLO. 


521 


was concerned, the discontinuance of the blochade of Cadiz 
and the evacuation of Andalusia, would be misfortunes, how* 
ever important as political events. The reason is, tliat in 
consequence of those events, these armies are opposed to 
larger bodies of the enemy than they were before, at the 
same time that they do not receive proportionate assistance 
from the Spanish troops, owing to the state in which these 
troops are found. 

* If General Ballesteros had moved into La Mancha, as he 
was desired, I do not believe the cnem)’' could have ventured 
upon the march towards the Tagus, nor do I believe they 
would have attempted to interrupt the siege of Burgos ; an 
operation which I have reason to believe was ordered by the 
King from Valencia, and is connected with his movement to- 
wards the Tagus. If they had moved towards the Tagus, 
they must have detached to observe and check Ballesteros, 
and their force against Sir R. H ill would have been diminished, 
and I might have drawn reinforcements from him. It is for- 
tunate that I was induced to raise the siege of Burgos, and 
to retire to the Ducro, upon learning the state of affairs on 
the Tagus, as it is obvious that my force is far inferior in 
numbers and composition to that of the enemy ; and the re- 
sult of a battle, fought to save the siege, might have been 
very doubtful. 

* No event of importance has occurred since I addressed 
your Lordship on the ‘ 26 th. The enemy formed their cavalry 
in the plain on our front yesterday ; they have cannonaded 
different parts of our line, without doing us any injury, ex- 
cepting that Lieut. Colonel Robe, of the Royal Artillery, 
was wounded severely, but not dangerously, yesterday. 

♦ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• Earl Bathurst: ‘ W ellingtqn. 


To Lieut, Gerysral Sir R» HilU K^B, 

‘Boecillo, 29th October, 1812. 

* My dear Hill, Half past 5 p.m. 

‘ We crossed the Duero this day, having destroyed all the 
bridges on the lower Pisuerga. The enemy are in march 
towards Tordesillas, where I destroyed the bridge last night. 
That of Toro will have been destroyed this day, I hope. 



522 SPAIN. 1812. 

' I am anxious to hear from you, after the receipt of mine 
of the 27th. 

^ I propose to place myself to-morrow in front of Torde- 
sillas, to prevent the enemy from coming over the Duero 
there. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

Bir L. Hill, K.B* 


To Earl Bathurst, 

^ My dear Lord, * Boecillo, 29th October, 1812. 

^ You will be anxious to receive an answer to your letter 
of the 22nd September, on the subject of sending us guineas. 
If the guineas should come, you may depend upon it that 
they shall be applied strictly, as the law directs ; viz., in the 
payment of the ordinaries of the service ; that is, the pay of 
the officers and troops. It will be a relief to us to receive 
the money to be so applied ; almost as great as it would to 
receive an equal smn in silver, to be applied to any service. 

^ In regard to the rate at which they must be paid to the 
troops, I rather believe that they ought to be paid as one 
pound one shilling ; and let the troops dispose of them as 
they please. It would be rather curious to pay the troops 
in dollars at four shillings andb sixpence, which are worth 
five shillings and sixpence, and afterwards to pay them 
guineas at one pound, because they arc supposed not to 
exchange for more in Portugal or Spain. However, I will 
consider of this point before the guineas arrive. 

^ We crossed the Duero this day ; having destroyed all 
the bridges on the Pisuerga. 

" The enemy are marching on Tordcsillas. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

♦ Earl BathursV ^ W ELLINGTON. 

To Lieut, General Sir%R, Hilly K,B, 

' My dear Hill, ‘ Rueda, 30th October, 1812. 10 P.M. 

** The enemy are collected at and about Tordesillas, and 
last night obtained the bridge of that place by the miscon- 
duct, I believe, of the Brunswick corps. The army are 
formed in front of the enemy, and I hope that the latter 
cannot pass the Duero iill you shall be near me. 



1812. RCE0A. 538 

‘ Let me know particularly how you get on ; whether you 
are followed closely, by whom, and by what numbers. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Ideut General ‘WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hilh K.B: 


To Marshal Sir IV» C. Beresford, K.B. 

* My dear Beresford, ‘ Rueda, 31st October, 1812. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart will show you my letter of this day and 
the accompanying dispatches, and you will see what a scrape 
we have been in, and how well we have got out of it. I say 
we have got out of it, because the enemy show no inclination 
to force the passage of the Duero. I have the army posted 
on the heights opposite the bridge of Tordesillas, of which 
they have possession. The bridge of Toro is destroyed, 
and I hope that of Zamora ; and at all events they cannot 
cross at cither before Hill and I shall join, when they wll 
probably feel no inclination to cross. 

‘ In answer to your letter of the 10th of October, I men- 
tion that I have no intention to dej)rive the Portuguese 
army of the 35,000 dollars. I will take them in payment, 
and lend them again, in order to insure the Government 
sending up another sum to repay me. 

‘ The 3rd Cavalry keep up Hill’s communication with 
Elvas, as the Guides do mine. But Hill will of course order 
them off the communication as soon as he shall join me. 

‘ I am sorry to find that your wound is not healing as it 
ought. You must have patience. Poor Alava’s was in a 
bad way this morning. Bleeding came on, and Gunning 
was not to be found ; he soon stopped it, however, and he is 
now doing well. 

‘ The Government will certainly depute you to invest 
Sir Charles Stuart with the order of the Bath. A person 
receiving a deputation cannot depute another. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

• Marshal * Wellington, 

Sir me. Beresford, K.B, 

‘ I rather think the enemy are gone into cantonmenta. 
They. are wry few in my front; 5000 are g^ne towards 
Tora» and the greater number towards YaUad^d* 





181 ^ 


m 


\ To Sir CharimBiunrtiKS* 

^ My dear Sir^ ‘ Ru^a, 3 ist October, l SI i. 

‘ The dispatches which I send you will show ypu in wHai 
manner I have been occupied for the last fortnight^ and wUl 
account for my not writing to you. 

* I think my junction with Hill on the Adaja is now quite 
certain ; and that I have got clear, in a handsome manner, of 
the worst scrape I ever was in. Caflfarelli’s troops are cer- 
tainly here ; and the enemy have at least 40,000 infantry 
and 5000 cavalry. I have not 20,000 British and Portu- 
guese. Amongst the British are all the foreign troops in 
the army j and I have not 1500 English cavalry ; and only 
24 pieces of artillery. I was shocked when I saw how the 
Spaniards fought on the 25th; and when I saw the whole of 
the enemy’s army, it was very clear to me that they ought 
to cat us up. I detained them two days on the Carrion, 
three on the Pisuerga, and they do not appear inclined to 
pass the Duero at all. Hill will be at Arevalo on the 3rd 
or 4th. 

^From your account of the duty on corn, I think wo 
ought not to pay it on the corn imported by our Commis- 
sariat, or purchased from an importer. 

' I have referred your letter of the 22nd to the Com- 
missary General, in regard to the transfer of your corn to 
the Portuguese Commissariat. He appeared to think there 
would be difficulty in arranging the matter in the mode you 
propose. But I will inquire further. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Sir Charles Stuart^ K,B* * WELLINGTON. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

* My Lord, ‘ Rueda, 31st October, 181^; 

‘ The enemy crossed the Carrion on the 26th ntid 27th, 
and formed their army on the heights near Cigaleis on the 
last of those days, opposite our position on the left of the 
Pisuerga, and their advanced guard, about tw6 miles in ifroiitf 
of their main body, and half that distance from Gahessoh. - 
* On the 28th they extended their right, and endeittbi^ 
to force the bridges of Simancas and Valladolid; the former 



RtmoAi 525 

of which was defended by Colonel Halkett, with his brigade 
of the 7th division, and the latter by the Lieut. General the 
Earl of DaUiousie, with the remainder of the 7.th division. 
At length Colonel Halkett, being hard pressed, blow up the 
bridge. He at the same time detached the JJrunsw^ck light 
infantry regiment to Tordcsillas, towards which quarter the 
enemy detached troops on the evening of the 28th. 

^ As soon as 1 found that this was the case, I thought it 
proper to break up from the Pisuerga, and to cross thp 
Ducro ; which object was cflfccted without difficulty on thfj 
29th instant by the bridges of Puente de Ducro andTudela. 

‘ The bridge of Tordcsillas was destroyed on the enemy’s 
approach to that town on the evening of the 28th; and I had 
sent orders to the regiment of Brunswick Ocls to take post 
on its ruins in such a manner as to prevent the enemy froni 
repairing the bridge. I had the mortification, however, of 
learning, on the night of the 29th, that this regiment had 
been obliged to abandon its post; and as I had seen the 
enemy’s whole army in march towards Tordcsillas on that 
evening, it >vas obvious that no time was to be lost. 

" I therefore marched the army at an early hour yesterday 
morning to their left, and posted the troops on the heights 
between Rueda and Tordesillas, immediately opposite and 
near the bridge of Tordesillas. Wc found the bridge nearly 
repaired on our arrival; but the enemy have made no at- 
tempt to pass it ; and they have now no large assembly of 
troops in this neighbourhood. 

" I learn that some of them marched last night towards 
Valladolid, and others towards Toi*o. 1 have destroyed the 
bridge at Toro ; and I understand that it cannot be repaired 
for some days ; and it is obvious that the enemy cannot 
prevent the junction of Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill’s 
coi*ps with mine ; and it is probable that when that shall be 
effected they will not be anxious to cross the Ducro. 

^ r have received letters from Lieut. General Hill to the 
29th, The Tagus was every where fordable, and the cnetuy 
passed a small body of troops over at Fuentiduejia, 
Sir Rowland Hill collected his troops on the Jarama, think- 
ing that that river afforded th^ most favorable line for 
defence^ 



SPAlMi 

‘ He was likely to receive iny orders to move upon Are- 
vOlo on the 29th. 

‘ I have the honor to be. &c. 

* Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wkllinoton. 

RfUtm ^ Killedi Wounded^ and Missingy in the movfmentt of ihe Army under (he 
command of General ihe Marquis of Wellinglony K,B., from ihe 22nd io the 29/4 
October, inclusive. 



Officers. 

Serjeants. 

Rank and File. 

Horses. 

Total loss of Officers, 

N on^commissioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed . . . 

4 

14 

109 

74 

127 

Wounded 

45 

35 

442 

65 

522 

Missing • • • 

8 

12 

223 

B 

243 


7h Earl Bathurst, 

^ My dear Lord, ' Rueda, 3 1st October, 1812. 

^ You will see that the regiment got us 

into a bad scrape, from which, however, we have extricated 
ourselves ; and I consider my junction with Hill now to be 
secure. I assure you, that considering the numbers of the 
enemy, (among whom is CafFarelli’s infantry, as well as his 
cavalry,) the state of the Spanish troops, the great proportion 
of foreign troops in the divisions which I have with me, 
and their general weakness, and the weakness of our cavalry, 
I think I have escaped from the worst military situation I 
was ever in. 

^ In answer to your letter of the 1st, I have to mention, 
that, under Lord Liverpool’s orders, I do recommend foreign 
officers (Portuguese and Spanish) for the medal. But I do 

not think it ought to be conferred on the — , 

' Believe me, &c. 

* Wellington, 


* Earl Bathurst,^ 













RC7BDA. 




To Lieut. General Sir R, Hilh K.B. 

" My dear Hill, ‘ Rueda, 1st Nov., 1812. 

* I did not write to you last night, as I had nothing par- 
ticular to tell you. 

" The enemy are very quiet in our front. 

* They have sent a division, or possibly two, to Toro, where 
they are repairing the bridge which we destroyed. This will 
take time, as the span of the arch is more than 50 feet. It 
took more than six days last summer ; some of their troops 
have gone towards Valladolid, but I have not heard of their 
appearing on the upper Duero. I have not yet heard from 
you since you received my letter of the 27th, which 1 know 
had passed Madrid. 

' Have you given the orders about taking up the bridge 
at Almaraz ? That should be done now, particularly if you 
have passed the Escurial. 

' Send an officer into the valley of the Tagus, to observe 
the enemy’s movements in that quarter. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General ‘ We LLi ngton. 

Sir i?. Hill, K.B: 

To Commodore Sir Home Popham. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Rueda, 1st Nov., 1812. 

‘ I received last night your letters of the 24th and 26th, 
and I am very sorry that you see cause to be dissatisfied 
with the Governor of Santander, and with General Mendi- 
zabal. I have nothing to say to any Spanish officer, and it 
is impossible for me to apply a remedy to the inconveniences 
of which you complain. I shall mention them however to 
General Castanos. 

* It will be unfortunate if Mendizabal should not have 
moved for the attack of Santona, according to the orders 
which General Castanos assured me had been given to him. 
We have all the disposable force of the army of the North in 
our front, indeed altogether more than I can manage ; and 
there never would have been so good an opportunity for an 
attack, as the present moment affords. 

‘The Spaniards, however, have acted as they chose them- 



ms 


SPAIN* 


1812 . 


selves ever since I have known them ; and I have learnt to 
bear with patience evils and disappointments for which there 
is no remedy. 

* Believe me, &c. 

^ Commodore ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir Home Popham^ 

To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley^ K.B* 

* Sir, ‘ Rueda, 1st Nov., 1812- 

‘ I have the honor to enclose copies of my last dispatches 
to the Secretary of State ; and I beg you to lay such parts of 
them as you may think proper before the Spanish Govern- 
ment, for their information. I beg you also to take that 
opportunity of expressing to them the grateful sense I 
entertain for the cordiality with which his Excellency 
General Castahos and the officers under him have co-ope- 
rated with me. 

* The Spanish troops have invariably manifested a dispo- 
sition to engage with the enemy ; and in an affair of the 
cavalry on the 19th ultimo, the Spanish cavalry under the 
Conde de Fiqiielmont were very successful, and destroyed 
many of the enemy, and took many horses and prisoners. 
The infantry likewise, in the affair of Villa-muriel, on the 
25th, manifested a disposition to engage with the enemy. 

^ The truth, however, ought to be known to the Govern- 
ment; and I must say that the army of Galicia is not in the 
state of discipline in which they ought to be before they are 
brought to a contest with the enemy ; or which could gain for 
them either the confidence of their allies or of themselves. 

^In the affair at Villa-muriel, they could neither advance 
or retreat in order. Their movements were made a la de- 
handadcy and if I had not ordered a movement on the 
enemy’s flank by the British troops, not only the enemy 
would not have been driven across the Carrion, but they 
would have earned the heights above Villa-muriel,. on which 
the Spanish troops were posted. 

^ It may be depended upon, that order and discipline alone 
can insure any solid success against the enemy with whom 
we are engaged. 

‘ I had an opportunity of seeing the enemy’s whole army 
on the 27tli October on their march across the plains to 



1812. 




Cigales, and it appeared to me to consist of 40,000 infkntry 
and 5000 cavalry, with an immense train Of artillery. To 
oppose these troops, I have not more than 20,000 British 
and Portuguese troops ; and there were 12,000 men, including 
600 cavalry, in the army of Galicia. It is obvious, however, 
that, in their present state of discipline, I cannot rechon upon 
these troops in a field of battle. 

* I should have been obliged to continue my retreat there- 
fore ; and my communication with Lieut. General Sir Row- 
land Hill, and his retreat, would have been cut off. 

^ Under these circumstances, I thought it proper to order 
that General to retire from Madrid upon Arevalo, there to 
join with me, sending the troops under General Elio, 
Generals Bassecourt and Villa Campa, and General Freyre, 
to join General Ballesteros. 

^ I beg you to explain to the Spanish Government, that 
Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill, and the allies on the 
Tagus, are as much inferior in force to the enemy opposed 
to them as I am to the enemy opposed to me, the enemy 
having brought all their forces to bear upon the centre of 
Spain, with the exception, I conclude, of a part of Suchet’s 
army left in Valencia. I imagined that they would adopt 
this plan when I wrote to you from Valladolid on the 9tli 
of September ; and it is very unfortunate that General 
Ballesteros did not take the position at Alcaraz which he 
was ordered to take by the Minister at War, in consequence 
of my suggestion. If he had, the enemy could not have 
moved against General Hill ; and I might have drawn a 
reinforcement from his army to this, still keeping posses- 
sion of Madrid. 

* Under present circumstances, I think it not improbable 
that I may not be able to retain much of Castille. But it 
may be depended upon, that I will do every thing in my 
power. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B: 


VOL. IX. 


2m 



m 


SPAIN. 




To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, K.B, 

* My dear Henry, ‘ Rueda, 1st Nov , 1812. 

^ You will see, by the dispatches forwarded on this occa- 
sion, that we have been in a difficult situation. I had no 
notion that the enemy could have been so much reinforced, 
particularly in cavalry, or that the army of the North could 
come so far down this way. 1 expected something better 
also from the army of Galicia ; but they are really in such a 
state, that it is not possible to expect any thing from them. 
Under these circumstances we have made a handsome re- 
treat ; but it was quite impossible to leave Hill at Madrid 
any longer. 

^ I shall attend to what you say about Palmella and Camac. 

^ The plans for raising brigades and for supplying the 
armies are nonsense. 

‘ I am very much afraid that the little experience which 
the country have had of the Government of the Cortes, 
has done that body no good. They are very unpopular 
every where, and in my opinion deservedly so. Nothing 
can be more cruel, absurd, or impolitic, than their decrees 
respecting the persons who have served the enemy. In fact, 
it deprives the state of some of the ablest and most honest 
of its servants, and submits to an inquiry the conduct of 
persons who have rendered the most important services of a 
secret and therefore an invidious nature. 

It is extraordinary that the revolution in Spain should 
not have produced one man with any knowledge of the real 
situation of the country. It really appears as if they were 
all drunk, and thinking and talking of any other subject but 
Spain. How it is to end God knows ! 

^ Buonaparte was at Moscow the 19th of September. 
The Emperor of Russia deceived Lord Cathcart and the 
people of Petersburgh, and pretended that the battle of 
Mojaisk was in his favor, and, strange to say, the truth was 
not known at Petersburgh on the 10th, although Buonaparte 
was at Moscow and Moscow burnt on the 14th ; a courier 
being usually only two days and a half on the road. The 
French in our front have two reports, one that the Russians 



R««P4. 


1912 . 


m 


are making peace ; the other that Buonaparte is marching 
to Petejsburgh. 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Bight Hon. ‘ WMhfjij^OTqs, 

Sir H, Wellesley, K.B. 

' I think you had better not show my letter to Lord 
Bathurst of the 28th to the Spanish Government. The 
substance of it is in my dispatch to you of this date.’ 


To His Excellency Sir Charles Stuart ^ K*B. 

‘ My dear Sir, ‘ Rueda, ist Nov., 1812. 

‘ Since I wrote to you yesterday, I have received an 
answer, which I enclose, from Sir R. Kennedy, in regard to 
the proposition contained in your letter of the 22nd October, 
respecting the transfer of grain consumed, and the mode of 
settling the account, from which you will observe that Sir 
R. Kennedy consents to what you propose. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart, K.B: ' W ELLINGTON. 


To Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K,B, 

‘ My dear Hill, ‘ Rueda, 2nd Nov., 1812. 8 a. if. 

^ I received last night, after I wrote to you, your letters 
of the 31st at noon. All remains quiet in my front; and 
unless I should hear from you in the course of the day that 
you are pressed, I shall not march to-morrow. 

I think that you had better not direct your march upon 
Arevalo ; but from Villa Castin on Blasco Sancho, where 
there is a good passage over the Adaja : thence you can go 
to Fontiveros. 

‘ If the head of your column has gone to Arevalo, it does 
not signify, and the tail can go as above pointed out. 

" Let me hear the disposition of your march. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ LimU General " Wellington. 

Sir R, Hill, K,B.' 


To Lieut, General Sir i?. Hill, K.B, 

< My pear Hill, ‘ Ru^da, 3r4 N9V.1 i|lf. 

' I have just received your letter of yesterday, ci^t § 
and I conclude that, in consequence of mine of yesterday 

2 M 2 



&pAm. 


m 


18124 


niorttingi the rear of your corpSi at least, will have inarched 
upon Blasco Sancho, t 

^ We are all quiet on this side. The enemy have re- 
paired the bridges of Toro and Tordesillas, but have shown, 
no inclination to pass either. It is reported that Caffarelli’s 
two divisions have returned to the north ; but of that I 
have no certainty. If it be so, I conclude that the pre- 
parations to cross the river are made to be taken advantage 
of when the troops of the armies of the Centre and of the 
South approach us. 

^ Under these circumstances, you become the guide of our 
movements, at least for the present. Unless you should be 
pressed by tlie enemy, I recommend you to halt a day upon 
the Adaja at Blasco Sancho or Arevalo, keeping your cavalry 
well out upon the road towards Villa Castin, to give time for 
stragglers, baggage, &c., to come up ; and give me timely 
notice of any movement towards you, or in the valley of the 
Tagus. 

^ If you should be pressed by the enemy, you will move 
upon Fontiveros, giving me the earliest intelligence of the 
circumstances which induce you to move. If you should 
move from the Adaja, take care that all our stores and 
people (including my hounds at Arevalo) move off. 

" Send me all the intelligence you get from Madrid or the 
Tagus. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut. General " WELLINGTON. 

Sir E, Hill, K^B: 


To His Excellency Conde de Villariezo. 

^ Conde de Villariezo, ‘ Rueda, 3rd Nov., 1812. 

‘ I have just now had the honor of receiving your Excel- 
lency’s letter of the 1st instant from Avila. 

" It gave me the greatest concern to be under the neces- 
sity of collecting the allied army in Old Castille, the result 
of which measure was the evacuation of Madrid. The fact 
was, that after I had made every effort in my power to 
obtain possession of the castle of Burgos, but in vain, I 
found myself attacked by the army of Portugal, reinforced 
by 12,000 men, and the army of the North, the two together 



1812. 




588 

cbtf of 40i000 ihfahtry,- md SOO(S> to ^ which 

force I had not sufficient troops to oppose , 

^ It was then necessary to draw reinforoemoiifes feom Efeut. 
General Sir R. Hill ; and General BallOsterofil not hirVlng at 
this moment arrived in La Mancha, it was impbssibte' to 
Ifeave Lieut General Sir R Hill upon the Tagus with a fe^ 
duced force without incurring the risk of losing his array as^ 
well as the capital. It was necessary therefore that the 
whole force should move. 

^ In answer to your Excellency’s letter, I recommend that 
you and the civil authorities of New Castille should cross 
the Torraes; and that you should let me know in what town 
you will place yourself, that I may fake the earliest oppor-* 
tunity of apprizing you of any change of drcumstancee. 
The enemy in my front are stronger than the troops under 
my command ; while those opposed to General Sir R Hill 
are much stronger than he is. It is possible that, notwith- 
standing the advantage which we now enjoy of being joined, 
we may not have it in our power to strike an important blow 
against either, before they likewise will be in communication, 
and will co-operate, on account of the local circumstances of 
their situation. This being the case, it may be necessary 
for us to fall back still farther ; and you and the civil author 
rities might be exposed in Avila. 

‘ At the same time I beg you to understand that eveiy 
thing that is practicable shall be done to preclude the ne- 
cessity of any further retrograde movement. 

" I shall be obliged to you if you will communicate to 
me any intelligence you may receive of the enemy’s proceed- 
ings at Madrid, and of the force collected there, &c. ; and 
particularly whether any force is detached towards General 
Ballesteros in La Mancha. 

* I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ His Excellency " WeLtLINGTon. 

Cmds de Villariezo.' 


To Earl Bathurst 

* My Lord, ‘ Rueda, 3rd Nqv.* li81 

* 1 take the opportunity of the return of the mes^get 
(Mycre) to Coeuna, to inform you that the army have eon- 





181 S. 


JS§i 

tMtied itt th6 positioli i& which I placed them on the 30th 
October, and the enemy have made no attempt to pass the 
Duero. 

* The bridge of Tordesillas is repaired^ and they* are em- 
ployed in the repair of that of Toro. Their troops are ex- 
tended along the Duero, from the latter place to Valladolid. 

^ In the meantime, the troops under Lieut. General Sir 
Howland Hill will arrive this day and to-morrow on the 
Adaja. The General received my orders to break up from 
his position on the Jarama on the 29th, and he intended to 
carry them into execution on the morning of the 30th. He 
had intended to destroy the Puente Larga, but the mine 
failed ; and the enemy having collected a large body of 
troops' between the bridge and Aranjuez, they immediately 
attacked our post on the bridge, but were repulsed, with 
considerable loss, by the 2nd batt. of the 47th regiment and 
a detachment of the 95th, under the command of Colonel 
Skerrett. I have not received the returns of our loss on 
this occasion ; but I understand it is about 40 men. No 
officer was touched. Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill speaks 
in high terms of the conduct of the troops. 

^ These circumstances delayed the march from the right of 
Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill’s position till the evening 
of the 30th ; and he has since continued it, without being at 
all molested by the enemy. 

^ The building called La China in the Retiro, and all the 
guns, stores, &c., which that work contained, which had not 
been carried away, were destroyed before the troops were 
withdrawn from Madrid. 

^ The Spanish divisions of Don Carlos de Espana, and 
Conde de Penne Villemur, are with Lieut. General Sir Row- 
land Hill. 

^ I had recommended that the detachments of the 2nd 
and 3rd armies, under General Elio, Villa Campa, Basse- 
court, and Freyre, should cross the Tagus at Toledo, or 
Talavera, or Arzobispo, and should join General Balleste- 
ros ; but I am not certain that this recommendation has 
been attended to. 

' I have not yet heard that General Ballesteros has entered 
I4 Mancha. 

^ A small body of the enemy’s troops were at Val de More 



rusoa. 


ISIS. 


m 


on the Slst, and entered Madrid at ten o’clodc on tha nioni< 

iog of the 1st instant. 

‘By a letter from General McKenzie to Lieut* Geul^ral 
Sir Kowland Hill, dated at Alicante on the 23rd Ootoher, 
it appears that the enemy had kept but a small force in the 
kingdom of Valencia, under General Harispe, who wa^ ex- 
tended from Caudete to Alcira upon the Jucar ; the works 
of the city of Valencia being dismantled and destroyed, and 
the city itself abandoned by the French troops and their 
adherents. 

^ From the tenor of General McKenzie’s letter, I judge 
that he proposes to attack the force under General Harispe ; 
and he has already pushed forward his posts to Alcoy and 
Concentayna. 

' I have no accounts upon which 1 can rely that Marshal 
Suchet has accompanied the King’s march into the centre of 
Spain with any large portion of his army ; but it is so re- 
ported, and the letter above referred to, from General 
M'Kenzie, tends to confirm the report. The advanced posts 
of Lieut. General Sir Rowland Hill have seen the regiment 
of Cuirassiers which belong to the army of Aragon. 

‘ I have accounts from the North, stating that Longa has 
taken a convoy, escorted by 300 men, near Vitoria. 

^ I learn likewise that the post at Santona is much dis- 
tressed for provisions ; and I hope that Sir Home Popham 
may have been able to make his attack upon that place. 

" These events will probably oblige General Caffarelli to 
withdraw his troops from our front. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ £arl Bathurst: ' Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

* My DEAR Lord, * Rueda, 3rd Nov., 1812. 

‘ The messenger Myers arrived here yesterday morning 
early, with your letters of the I3th ultimo. 

‘ I think it will be very desirable that Sir John Murray 
should be sent to Alicante, to command the troops on the 
eastern coast of the Peninsula, in case Lord William Ben- 
tinck should not arrive to assume the command of them 
lumself. 



58 ^. 


sPJtAir.' 


im. 


* * 1 think it will bb MVisnblri that you sh6uld Wltor yoikr 
dispatch, No. 60^ of the 12th Octdbei*| otnittirig the last 
paragraph; as it will not be con^^enient to apply the guinea^' 
solely to the payment of the troops. 

^ / ^'Believe mci &c. 

* EaH BMmt? " WiiLUNdTON. 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

* My dear Lord, * Rueda, 3rd Nov., 1812. 

" I have received your letters of the 5th and 7tli October, 
for which I am much obliged to you. I shall act as you re- 
commend regarding the settlement of my affairs. 

^ I beg to return you my best thanks for your kindness 
to my sister, respecting whose comfort I am indeed much 
interested. 

^ You will see in my dispatch to Lord Bathurst how we 
stand. I do not know how the French can contrive to keep 
together the force which they have brought against us ; but 
at all events as we have got together they cannot do us 
much harm, and sooner or later they must separate, and wo 
then shall resume again the upper hand. 

^ At all events, although the evacuation of Madrid is a 
material deterioration of the campaign, its effects on the 
contest in the Peninsula arc still most important. 

* Believe me, &c. 

* The Earl of Liverpool,' ‘ Wellington. 

To (he Right Hon, the Judge Advocate General, 

‘ Sir, ‘ Rueda, 4th Nov,, 1812. 

* I have the honor to enclose the proceedings of a General 
Court Martial, of which the late Major General Le Mar- 

chant was president, on the trial of Lieut. , of the 

Eoyal Waggon Train, upon which I request you to take the 
pleasure of His Royal Highness the Prince Regent, 

‘ There is an irregularity, in point of form, in the proceed- 
ings of this Court Martial, to which I beg to draw your 
attention. The proceedings had been closed, and the sen- 
tence agreed to, and copied fair, but had not been signed 
by Major General Le Marchaht when he was killed. When 
I wte idfohned of this circumstance,' I wrote the encl<»sed 







m 

to lieut. Colonel Dalbiac, the noasts ecnior ofiScoj* of 
the Court Martiah directing him to sign the proceedings in 
presence of the members of the Court Owing to the situa- 
tion of the army, the Court could not then be conveniently 
assembled ; and Lieut. Colonel Dalbiac being sick, I have 
now ordered that its proceedings might be signed by M^or 
Gordon, the next in seniority to Lieut. Colonel Dalbiac. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The night Hon. " Wellington.. 

the Judge Advocate GeneraU 


To Lieut. General Sir /?. Hill» K.B. 

^ My dear Hill, ‘ Rueda, 5th Nov., 1812. 9 a.m. 

^ Lord Charles FitzRoy delivered me your letter of half- 
past two p.M. at ten last night. I am doubtful whether, in 
consequence of my letter of the 3rd by Churchill, which you 
must have received shortly after Lord Charles left you, you 
will have halted or marched. If you should have halted 
this day, I conclude that you will march to-morrow. 

^ I sent the 5th division of infantry, and General Pon- 
sonby’s brigade of cavalry, to Alaejos this morning, the ene- 
my having appeared in that quarter from Toro ; and I pro- 
pose^ to move to-morrow to La Nava del Eey. If your 
troops at Arevalo should have marched, or having halted 
this day should march to-morrow upon Madrigal, or Fuente 
cl Sol, we shall be tolerably well connected. 

^ I shall write to you as soon as I shall know what you 
have done this day. 

^ I do not think it clear that the enemy is following you 
in force. I conceive the four regiments and two battalions 
to have been sent only to see what you were doing. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir E. Hill, K.B: 

To Lieut General Sir E. Hill, K.B. 

^ My DEAR Hill, ‘ Rueda, 5th Nov., 1812. 12 at noon. 

^ I received, about two hours ago, your letter of two this 
morning. I think you had better make a movement to- 
morrow morning, and place your troops behind the Tra- 



m 


WMN, 


WlSi 

bancos river, behind Flores de Avila. I propose to place 
this army behind the Same river at Castrq'on, Carpio, &c. 

^ Do not allow the enemy to come too near you with' a 
small advanced guard. Move upon them immediately, and 
make them keep at a proper distance. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ Wklliwqton. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 


To Earl Bathurst, 

* My Lord, ‘ Rueda, 5th Nov., 1812. 

^ I have had the honor of receiving your Lordship s letter 

of the 1 1th of September, regarding the claims of Mr. ^ 

as late of the , which I have referred to 

Marshal Sir William Beresford for his consideration, and I 
enclose an extract of his answer. 

< Mr. left the army without leave, as well as I re- 

collect, in the month of August, 1809 ; and I beg leave to 
remind your Lordship that an officer or soldier guilty of that 
offence, in all services, forfeits all arrears of pay which might 
be due to him. But, supposing your Lordship should be 

inclined to treat Mr. with favor, and to allow him to 

receive his arrears prior to his absence without leave, I 
should imagine that you would not extend your favor so far 
as to give him pay after the period at which he quitted. 

‘ Mr. can have no claim, under the regulation, to 

the bat and forage money issued to the army in September, 
1809, having previously gone away from it. 

‘ I should wish to see Mr. ’s appointment to coin- 

mand at Almeida, or at Alcantara. There was a senior officer 
at Almeida, when he was there, as far as I have any know- 
ledge ; and I know that if he ever commanded at Alcantara, 
it was a fault rather than a service for which he ought to be 
rewarded. He had no order to command there. 

* If your Lordship desires it, I will give my warrant for 
the issue of the whole, or of any part of Mr. ’s de- 

mand; but if I were to exercise my own judgment on this 
demand, and to be responsible for my decision, I would not 
issue my warrant for the payment of any part of the demand. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

gdrl BathUrsU* ^ WsLUNGTON^ 



CAmtBION. 


58d 


mt 


To Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K»B> 

' Mt bKAR Hill, ‘ Castrejon* 6tli Nov., 1^12. at noon. 

^ I have just arrived here, and received, about ah hour 
ago, your letter dispatched at nine last night. I am going 
to take tny quarters at Torrecilla de la Orden, about three 
miles In the rear. 

^ I propose to march in the morning early to Pitiegua, so 
as to cover the road from Toro to Salamanca. The enemy 
were moving in strength towards Toro last night, and if 
they have passed there in force, they are behind our left 
flank ; but I think they are not in force at Toro yet. 

^ I think you had better march at an early hour, and pass 
Penaranda, and encamp either at Nava de Sotro-val, and 
along that river, or at Coca, Tordillos, and Peflarandilla, 
farther in the rear, as you may think proper. 

‘ As you are before me, I think you had better not cross 
the Tormes to-morrow, if you can avoid it without suffer- 
ing inconvenience ; but if it should be inconvenient, or you 
are likely to suffer from waiting, you had better cross the 
Tormes at Alba. 

" Have you any account of the enemy moving in the 
valley of the Tagus ? or whether the King has stopped at 
Madrid? or what force has followed you? It appears last 
night nothing but cavalry. 

^ You, of course, send orders to Don Carlos. 

^ Order the Koyal Infantry, and any other troops or de- 
partments belonging to this part of the army, to cross the 
Tormes, at Alba, to-morrow. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ' Wellington. 

Sir R, Hill, K,B: 


To Lieut, Geiwral Sir R, Hill, K,B, 

* My pear Hill, ‘ Pitiegua, 7th Nov., 1812. 2 p.m. 

^ Fremantle* has delivered me your letter of this 
morning. 

‘ The enemy did not move after us at all yesterday, but 

♦ Colonel Fremantle, C.B.,K.C.T.S., commanding the Colditream Quanis. 



546 




mm. 


16 ,(K )0 fAtlofrs^^ 1 We 

yet heard thftt aiiy h^ic nfibred'^rbirt 1Pb¥6;^ ' ^ ^ ' 

shall take up the pdsitJdn in fiW^ Salainami^, fibw- 
ever, to-morroW^, arid you \ti!l do svell to inatch ih thc lnOfrn- 
ing upon Alba de Tonnes. 

^ I wish that the 3rd, 4th, Light, and Don Carlos’s 
divisions of infantry, and General Alten’s brigade of cavalry, 
should join this part of the army as soon as may be expe- 
dient. They will have but a short march to-morrow to 
Alba do Tormesi and might move on as far as Calvarrasa 
de Arriba, or the woods thereabouts, to which place I will 
send them further orders. 

^ You might canton the 2nd, and General Hamilton’s and 
Morillo’s divisions in Alba dc Tormes, keeping the Light 
cavalry out in front ; and Slade’s brigade in the rear of the 
town. Occupy the castle of Alba with 200 men, which I 
understand commands the bridge effectually. Have the 
neighbourhood of Alba examined, and sec whether there 
are any fords, which must of course be closely watched. 

^ I do not know whether the ford of Huerta is now prac- 
ticable ; if there should be little water in the river it cer- 
tainly is, as the bottom is good. I know there is another 
good ford at Encinas dc Abaxo, and I shall be obliged to 
you if you will have them both examined early to-morrow, 
and let me have the report of them. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut* General " Wellinoton. 

Sir M* Hill, K.B. 

^ An officer is just arrived from Alicante. He says the 
force which arrived from Valencia is stated to be 45,000. 
About 20,000 are following you. The King went into 
Madrid the 3rd instant, and it was supposed was to remain 
there. There were no troops moving in the valley of the 
Tagus. General /W, ClintoUi who now commands in 
Alicante tellsjnu on the 29th, that Suchet is near him with 
20,000 infantry, and 2000 cavalry. There cannot be many 
of his army here. 

< P.S, 8,^ 12 noon. — If you should not 

received and upon ^^e^rigi^l of this let 

might move the 3rd, 4th, Light, and Don. jP^r)osf’s 4ii^sions, 



PITI^A. 


wm 


m 


an/d Qqn^al , :upqn 3a»lamaw»; to-i^ 

morning early, instead of^Caivarrasa^this aHeruqpn* 
f J Jiaye nqt l)Leard of thp finemy s movement to bis right ; 
if sOriit mu^ti be to join \TitJi the army of Portugal’ ( r 

, , , ^ Commissioners the, Tran^^rt Office, . / ^ 


rGENTtEMKN, • ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ‘ Pitiegua, 7th Nov^, iai2.: 

1 Captain Haly, of the 53rd regiment, who was taken pri- 
soner at the commencement of the campaign, having been 
loft by the enemy on the 30th July at Valladolid, on his 
parole not to serve until exchanged, I request that you will 
carry his exchange into effect, by sending any French officer 
of his rank, who may be a prisoner in England, to France in 
exchange for him* 

« I likewise beg that you will send to Franco Mons. Bel- 
tere, Directeur des sewices viunis de VArmie Frangaise, who 
is now on his parole at Dartmoor. He was taken prisoner 
in April, 1811, and was promised his liberty by General 
Castanos ; but by some accident or other he was sent to 
England, and it was not recollected that he had been pro- 
mised leave to return to his country. 

"I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Commissioners ^ WELLINGTON. 

of the Transport Office J' 


To His Excellency Sir Charles Stuart, K,B, 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Pitiegua. 7th Nov., 1812. 

^ I received last night your letter of the 31 st. 1 am glad 
to sec that the Portuguese finances, particularly the customs, 
are in so flourishing a condition. 

^ I recommend to you to buy more corn ; if not wanted for 
the consumption of the army, we can sell it in the market, 
and the amount can be lodged in the military chest. 

* You will see the news in my dispatch. 

" Believe me, &c. 

- Sir Charles Stuart, K.B: ' Wellington. 

To Earl Bathurst, 

^ My DEAR Lord, * Pitiegua, 7tb Noy., 1812. 

' I received your letter df the 12th October, regard- 
iiif^ General Niig^nt. ' ' ■ ^ 



SPAIN. 


ISIS. 


^ It is flcareely necessary to considet what we shall do 
with our army after the French withdraw from Spain ; as 
that event is not at present very probable, unless Buona- 
parte should be so pressed in the North as to be induced to 
weaken his force. We have at present in operation against 
us, at least all the troops which were in the Andalusias, and 
the armies of the Centre and North, besides that of Portugal, 
without any effective addition to our force, excepting the 
little garrison of Cadiz. 

My opinion is, however, that if we should get the French 
out of Spain, and the war should continue, we should carry 
on our operations on the southern frontier of France. I 
think so because we should have the hearty co-operation, 
and probably the direction of a Spanish and of a Portuguese 
army, besides our own ; and our means would be much 
greater than they would be on any other scene, would be 
applicable at a much earlier period, and would, moreover, 
be applied on the most vulnerable part of France. 

" In regard to all schemes in Italy and the North of 
Europe, founded on this army ; First, I would observe that 
you must reckon that six months would elapse, after you 
should decide on the measure and should issue your orders 
in Downing Street, before the army would be fit to engage 
in an operation in the new scene : 

" Secondly, it would be but a small army, incapable of 
acting alone ; at the same time that it would not be easy 
to connect it with any other : 

^ Thirdly, it must not be expected that any of the Powers in 
the North of Europe would give us the direction and manage- 
ment of their concerns, as we now have of those of the 
Portuguese, at least, if not of the Spaniards. The Powers 
of the North would willingly avail themselves of the bravery 
of our troops ; they would share in our riches, partake of 
the plenty in our camps, which our good arrangements and 
money should procure for us ; but they would share with us 
nothing but their distresses. Believe me, that you could 
not keep a British army long in a state of efficiency under 
such circumstances. 

As for Italyi I have never seen any ground on which I 
could venture evun to think of a military operation in that 
country. However, as I said before, unle^^ l ean beat 



PITIEO^A. 


m 


and atmies of Fof tngal and of the NorUi united, we have 
no chance at present of getting the French out of Spain. 
I think Buonaparte will at last give up Spain ; but that is a 
different question, not worth discussing now. 

' Believe me, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst ^Wellington. 

' I see that Ballesteros and the Cortes are fighting, in- 
stead of the former moving into La Mancha as he was 
ordered.’ 


To Earl Bathurst, 

^ My Lord, Pitiegua, 8th Nov., 1812. 

^ The enemy repaired the bridge at Toro at a much 
earlier period than I expected, and by their possession of 
that bridge, and of that of Tordesillas, would have had an 
easy mode of collecting a large force behind our left flank, if 
I had attempted to effect my junction with Lieut. General 
Sir Howland Hill on the Adaja, with a view to any operation 
against the enemy’s force advancing from Madrid. On the 
other hand, a considerable body of the enemy made their 
appearance in the Guadarrama pass, and arrived at Villa 
Castin on the 4th ; and if I had moved Sir Rowland Hill 
along the Adaja to join with this army in its position in front 
of Tordesillas, the enemy would have had the shortest line 
to the Tormes by Fontiveros, if they had preferred to march 
in that direction, to following the march of Sir Rowland 
Hill’s troops. 

" The junction in front of Tordesillas would besides have 
answered no purpose. We had no means of passing the 
Duero, and it was very clear that the enemy would not 
attempt to pass as long as we remained in our position. I 
therefore desired Sir Rowland Hill to continue his march by 
Fontiveros upon Alba de Tormes ; and as soon as I found 
that he was sufficiently forward, I broke up (yesterday 
morning) from the position, which 1 had held in front of 
Tordesillas since the 30th of last month ; and I am in march 
towards the heights of San Christoval, in front of Salamahea. 

^ The enemy has not pressed at all upon the rear of the 
tfoopf under Lieut. Qettci^al Sir Howland Hill; nor have 
those on the Duero followed the march of the troops under 





mn. 




my £j0neliide; that the two coifps will u^W, 

which ia e^^oi^equenee of tho situation of the Puero 1 conhl 
not;p]r^en^.-;.; >. '■ ,■/. r 

The two co^ps of. this army, particularly that which has 
heen in/thoi norths are in want of resh They have been in 
the fields and alniost constantly marching since the month of 
January last j their clothes and equipments are much worui 
and a short: period in cantonments would be very useful to 
them. Tho cavalry likewise are weak in numbers, and tlie 
horses rather low in condition. I should wish therefore to 
be able to canton the troops for a short time, and I should 
prefer the cantonments on the Tormes to those further in 
the rear* > 

do not know exactly what the force of the enemy is. 
The army of Portugal have about 36,000 men, of which 4000 
are cavalry. As far as I can leaim, they received in Septem- 
ber and October reinforcements, amounting to 14,000 in- 
fantry and 1200 cavalry, and I account for the army being 
only 36,000 men, by allowing for the sickness of the con- 
scripts, The army of the North have 10,000 men, of which 
1200 are cavalry, 

have received several reports that General CafFarelli 
had returned to the north with the troops under his com- 
mand, but none on which I can rely. A person who brought 
me a letter from Sir Home Popham, and passed through 
Torquemada, saw 3000 infantry on their march towards 
Burgos on ithe 4th, but he says that no other troops had 
passed or were expected. 

‘ It is difficult to judge of the exact extent of Soult’s force. 
It is reported that the enemy brought from Valencia to the 
Tagus from 40,000 to 45,000 men; and I should consider 
that to be rather below the number, which the armies of An- 
dalusia and the Centre could bring into the field, without 
any of the troops of the army of Aragon and Valencia. Sdult 
is partietilarly strong in good cavalry, and there are several 
regifU^nts of cavalry in the army .of the Centre, 
i ^ l am faicUhed to believe that none of the troops, except- 
ing probably sbme cavalry of the army of Aragon and Va- 
lottcia> have moved to the Tagus. 

" it will still remain to be seen what number of troops can 
bo brought to operate against our position; as, unless 



I8i9. 


SALHIMA^TA. 


Madrid Ishoul^ be agAiftiaMndbiidd ti)^ its ISate^by fife Ki^ 
ArrwgbmentV' md^tibe^mad^ ta tfesi^t th§ ^hfcli-it 

must be expected that the Spanish troops und^ GeWral 
£Ho aiid guerrillas \vill make on that city, ctefii Ihdugli 
General Ballesteros should not move forward in Li Madfeha. 
I propose, therefore, to wait at present bit the Tornibs till 1 
shaU ascertain more exactly the extent of the enemy^s fbiw; 
and if they should move forvirard I will either bring the con- 
tent to a crisis in the position of San Christoval, or fall badft 
to the Agueda, according to what I shall consider at the time 
to be best for the cause. . . 

" General Ballesteros was still at Granada on the 20th 
October, and it was reported had no intention of moving. 

" I enclose the copy of a letter which I have received from 
Major General W. Clinton, who has come to Alicante to 
take the command, dated the 29th of October, from which I 
observe that but few, if any, of Suchet’s troops have moved 
forward to the Tagus. 

‘ I do not understand why it is necessary for Major 
General Clinton himself to have possession of the castle of 
Alicante in case he should move forward, excepting it is that 
he suspects the Governor of treachery, and he thinks that in 
case of misfortune his retreat would not be secure. 

" I enclose likewise the copy of my letter to Major General 
Mackenzie*, to which that of Major General Clinton is a 
reply. ' 

‘ I understand that the King entered Madrid on the 3rd 
instant. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ £ar/ Bathurst' ^ WelIINQTON. 

To Lieut. General Sir R. Hill, K,B* 

* My dear Hill, ‘Salamanca, 9th Nov., 

* By the reports of 5 in the afternoon which I have re- 
ceived from Lieut. Sobers, of the 1st Hussa^rs, it appb^rs 
t|iat enemy are moving ip force on the fprds of-Hperta 
JSpeipas, and I believe, the troops are Soult’b. J |ia¥e 
not heard of any movement from ^he Huero in any^ qparteJl*. 

, I thipk that you w^l tp moye in tke^in^jaiiig to 

2n 


VOL. IX. 



546 


SPAIN. 




your left, to Machacoti, with the 2tid division, excepting one 
British brigade, leaving Hamilton's division and that bri- 
gade at Alba. Take Slade's brigade, and the Spanish 
troops and Portuguese cavalry with you, leaving jLong’s 
brigade looking out in front of Alba. Have a good garrison 
in the castle of Alba. You should not load the mine of the 
bridge, because we must keep a Commandant with the gar^ 
rison. If the enemy should attempt to cross either of the 
fords of Huerta, fall upon the first who cross. 

^ I order my troops to remain at Calvarrasa de Arriba in 
the morning, till I shall see how matters turn. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

^ Lieut. General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir R, Hill, K,B: 

To Lieut, General Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

‘ Salamanca, 9th Nov., 1812. 

‘ Mv DEAR Hill, i before 6 p.m. 

‘ I am just come in from the front ; the enemy have two 
divisions of infantry and some squadrons of cavalry at Piti- 
egua and Cabeza Vellosa, which came from Toro yesterday^ 
and I .saw a body of infantry at Morisco, Babila-fuente, 
Huerta, (one battalion) San-Morales ; the total force of 
which I could not tell; but, from the baggage of Babila- 
fuente, I should suppose them to be a division. There were 
six squadrons of cavalry skirmishing with Pack’s brigade 
at Aldea Lengua, and there might have been four more 
squadrons between that and Babila-fuente. 

" All reports agree that the fords are not now practicable. 
Indeed there is a considerable increase of water in the river, 
and the best proof that they arc not practicable is, that the 
people of the country liave their cattle grazing on the left 
bank. I am certain that if the fords were practicable, the 
enemy would pass the river, rather than attack us on the 
heights of San Christoval ; as it is, I am doubtful. And as we 
have not on our position, or near to it, as many troops as we 
require, I propose to move the troops now at Calvarrasa de 
Arriba into Salamanca early to-morrow morning. 

" If the fords are not practicable, you might move the 2nd 
division, &c., into Calvarrasa de Arriba and de Abaxo, Pela- 
bravo, Machacon, or back upon Alba de Tonnes, observing 
the fords with piquets. 



SALAlHAKeA. 


60 ’ 


* I \mn ftt Alba, aiid i^halt obliged 

to you if you will let me know what garrison ought to be 
in the eastle. I should think 200 men. If the river falls, 
so as to be fordable by all descriptions of troops, all I shall 
wish is to put in a Spanish garrison, to prevent the enemy 
ffotn using the bridge in case of an action, as they did 
before. As long as their movements are uncertain, it would 
be expedient to have a garrison of a better description. If 
you think it necessary to occupy the town of Alba, to prevent 
the enemy from crossing the bridge, what number should 
there be ? 

* I have just received your letter of 4 p.m. You may 
depend upon it that the river is not fordable for troops, 
otherwise the cattle would not have been left on the banks ; 
and all the peasants I saw of Huerta say it is not so, and not 
likely to become so. However, it is easy to have it marked 
this night, and you will know whether it will rise or fall 
before morning. But, as the thing is doubtful, I shall move 
to Salamanca, in the morning, only the Light and Don 
Carlos’s divisions and General Alton’s cavalry. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

^ir R, Hill, K.B: 

To Lieut, General Sir R. Hill, K.B, 

‘Salamanca, 9th Nov., 1812. 

‘ My dear Hill, Half-past 9 p.m. 

‘ I have just received your letter of half-past 6 p.m. If the 
enemy can pass the Tormes at too many fords, and in too 
great force for you, your troops and those at Alba (excepting 
the garrison) must fall back on the heights of Arapiles, taking 
care to keep the village of Calvarrasa de Arriba on your right, 
as you retire ; and to occupy that village, and the height be- 
hind the Convent, or Ermita dc N'‘. S'", de la Pena, and 
givingme the earliest intelligence of this movement, as I must 
collect the whole of the army on the same ground. Have 
this ground reconnaitred. I acknowledge, however, that I am 
not aware of the necessity for this movement in the existing 
state of the river, which is represented to be scarcely fordable 
for cavalry, and not for infantry or artillery. How is the 
bridge of the Tormes then to be forced, having the castle on 

2n2 



SPAIN. 


5^ 


1812. 


one siddr^nd a body of infaniry on commanding ground on 
the x^her ? 

* The consequence of blowing up the bridge under these 
circumstances would be the loss of the garrison in the ea&tle> 
which would lose heart upon seeing all communication with 
them cut off ; and nothing would be gained as to defence, if I 
am correct in the notion, that between the castle and infantry 
on the left bank, the bridge cannot be carried, the river not 
being fordable for infantry. 

' The destruction of a bridge is a measure of great import- 
ance, in reference not only to the enemy’s operations, but 
our own. I am not quite certain that if you were to loxlge 
the powder in the mine, with the intention of exploding it only 
at the last moment, and that you should defend the left of 
the bridge, as I am convinced it would be defended, the enemy 
would not explode the mine for you, in order to be certain at 
least of your garrison in the castle. 

^ Upon the whole, I am convinced that your situation de- 
pends upon the state of the fords and the use the enemy can 
make of them. If ,they are as I believe them to be, the 
enemy may make a desperate attack upon Alba do Tonnes 
and the bridge, but must be defeated in that object ; and they 
arc liable to be attacked on this side. 

' If the fords arc practicable easily for cavalry and artillery, 
and at all for infantry, and are numerous, you must retire, as 
I told you above, if the enemy should attempt to pass in force, 
leaving the garrison in the castle. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ' Wellington. 

Sir R, Hill, K,B: 


To Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K*B, 

* Salamanca, 10th Nov., 1812. 

♦ Mv BEAU Hill, Half-past 4 p.m. 

' *1 am Very soiTy that I did not meet you at Alba, and 
stilt more so, that I did not sec the large force which Colonel 
Gordon tells me was collected in front of the town. However, 
the post is a very good one, and held by good, determined 
troops; and it is my opinion that the enemy can do them up 
harm. Indeed, I should doubt their attacking them, and, J 
think they come there to try the fords. By all af Wunts, 



SALAMAlfCA. 


549 


18 B. 

theiie are not practicable for troops. When I call a ftw^d 
practicable for troops, I do not mean to say that a single 
horseman cannot get over ; but that cavalry, infantry^ and 
artilleiy cannot. The river has certainly fallen since yesterday 
evening; but I believe no infantry soldier can pass now, 
even if a cavalry soldier can ; and small piquets guarding 
the fords, and charging resolutely the first men who pass, or 
firing upon them, if they are piquets of infantry, will effec* 
tually prevent the passage of the fords. 

' I wish that General D’Urban had mentioned where, and 
at what hour he passed yesterday, the 9tli, as the river rose 
considerably in the afternoon, and is higher now than it was 
yesterday morning. 1 understand that it has not fallen since 
morning. 

^ If the fords above the town arc practicable, and those 
below not; or if the former are more practicable than those 
below, it would be expedient to move General Slade’s, and 
General D’ Urban’s, and Penne Villemurs cavalry to the 
nearest woods to join Hamilton’s position, keeping piquets 
on the fords as far as Huerta. The first people who pass 
must be vigorously attacked. 

' Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General " WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B, 

^ I beg you will send some musket ammunition to Albade 
Tormes, for Major General Howard’s brigade.’ 

To Lieut, General Sir R, Hill, K.B, 

‘ Salamanca, 10th Nov., 1812. 

* My dear Hill, lo min. before 8 P.M. 

^ I have just received your letter of 6 p.m. It is my opinion 
that the enemy cannot take the town of Alba ; and that it 
ought to be maintained as long as the force now in it, reason^ 
ably supported, can maintain it; if the fords do not become 
in a state that the enemy’s infantry and artillery can pass 
them, and their cavalry in many places with ease. . ; 

* I gave General Hamilton no instructions. He told like 
that you had instructed him to maintain his post, of wlwh I 
entirely approved. 

‘ Kecollect that I must have timely notice of all that passen 



550 SPAIN. 1812 . 

at Alba; otherwise the troops on the Arapiles will be in a 
worse situation than those now at Alba. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir B. Hill, K.B. 

‘ If you will refer to my instructions, you will see, that 
although the town of Alba should be evacuated, it is, in my 
opinion, not necessary to retire from the Tormes.’ 


To Lieut General Sir i?. Hill, K»B, 

^ My dear Hill, ‘ Salamanca, llth Nov., 1812. 6. p.m. 

^ I enclose the duplicate of a letter which I have given 
to a Spanish officer for you; which officer commands the 
detachment which I have prevailed upon General Castafios 
to send to garrison the castle of Alba. 

' You might as well have all the arrangements made for his 
reception this night. You might also have the mine prepared 
and loaded. I expect that the officer and detachment will 
be at Calvarrasa de Abaxo this night ; and you should im- 
mediately send him to his station. 

‘ If you should withdraw from the Tormes, and from Alba 
before the Spanish garrison arrives, I believe, that upon the 
whole, it will be best to withdraw the English and Portu- 
guese garrison from the castle, blowing up the bridge at the 
same time that ypu evacuate the town ; as I fear that we 
could not expect our soldiers to march through the country 
as the Spaniards would. If, however, the Spanish garrison 
should arrive before you withdraw from the Tormes under 
your instructions, they must occupy the castle. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General ‘ Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

‘ I am still inclined to believe that the fords are not prac- 
ticable for infantry and artillery, and some not for cavalry ; 
although some are, certainly.’ 

To Lieut* General Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

^ My dear Hill, ‘ Salamanca, llth Nov., 1812. 

' The bearer of this letter is Ma|or Josef de Miranda, of the 



1812. 


salai^anca. 


551 


Spfltnish service, who goes in command of .300 men, who are 
eventually to form the garrison of the castle of Alba de 
Tormes. 

‘ It will be necessary to increase the quantity of provisions 
in the castle to ten days for 300, instead of for 200 men ; and 
to leave there 50,000 rounds of musket ammunition, instead 
of 25,000 rounds. 

‘ As it is determined to hold the town, if possible, as long 
as we can remain upon the Tormes at all, I think it would 
be desirable to put this gentleman in charge of his post 
with his garrison as soon as he shall arrive with his troops ; 
and measures must be taken to feed them daily, as long as 
you remain on the river, in order to keep up the stock of 
provisions. 

‘ You will give him instructions to maintain himself in his 
post as long as the army shall remain in this neighbourhood ; 
if possible, for the full extent of the ten days for which pro- 
visions shall be left for him. 

" If any misfortune should happen, or the army should be 
obliged to quit this part of the country, he is then to evacuate 
his post, and to march with the troops under his command 
either towards the Sierra, and thence into Portugal, or to- 
wards Miranda de Douro, and thence into Portugal, or any 
other road that he may think proper. 

‘ When you shall get the Spanish garrison within the castle, 
I think you might complete the mine in the bridge, and 
explode it when the town shall be evacuated by our troops, 
that is to say, if possible, when you should be under the 
necessity of retiring from the Tormes. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut. General ‘Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 


To Lieut. General Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

‘ Salamanca, 11th Nov., 1812. 

‘ My dear Hill, Half-past 9 p.m. 

^ I have received your letter of 6 p.m. I do not think the 
enemy will attempt to pass in the existing state of the river. 
However, the 3rd and 4th divisions are still at Calvarrasa 



SPAlH. 


1812. 


5 ^ 

did Abaxt), at your coiuniand, if you should require their 

sitistsfahde. 

* Believe me, &c. 

^ Lieut General " WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

‘ P.S. The report from the deserters this day is, that 
every thing is moving to the enemy s left.’ 

To Sir Charles Stuart, K.B, 

* Sir, ‘Salamanca, lUh Nov., 1812 . 

‘ 1 beg you to lay the papers enclosed in the accompanying 
letter from Major General Peacoclce before the Portuguese 
Government ; and that you will be so good as to let them 
know that the prisoner therein alluded to shall be placed at 
their disposal, if they wish to have him tried by the civil 
laws of the country. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart K.b: ‘ Wellington. 

• To Dom Miguel Forjaz, 

* Sir, ' Salamanca, 14th Nov., 1812, 

^ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 7th 
instant, in which you have enclosed one written by order of 
the Governors of the Kingdom to the Condo do Funchal, re- 
garding a new mode of finding funds for jiaying the subsidy 
to Portugal, upon which their Excellencies desire to have my 
opinion. 

‘ No arrangement could bo so satisfactory to me as one 
which should relieve the military chest of the British army 
from the burthen of its payments to His Majesty’s Minister at 
Lisbon, to enable him to perform His Majesty’s engagements 
to the Portuguese Government ; but I acknowledge that I do 
not conceive that the scheme proposed would answer the end 
in view. 

First; any scheme of this description must interfere with 
the sU)[)plies of money for the military chest of the British 
arihy of the Peninsula; and I do not believe His Majcstyls 
Government would be disposed to listen to such a scheme,- 
unless it should appear that under the existing system the 
performance of His Majesty’s engagements had bech neg- 
lected. 



ism 


SALAMANCA. 


5 ^ 

* Secondly ; I assert that the performanep of Ilis Majesty’s 
engagements has not been neglected. I will provOwthaUn 
money and in kind the Portuguese Government have to this 
day received more than the subsidy; every tiling is in 
arrear. The pay of the officers and soldiers of the arBay^ and 
of the transport service, arc in arrear, for five months^the 
former ; for a year the latter ; debts are due to all classes 
and descriptions of persons, excepting to the Portugucsb 
Government alone, to whom I assert that not only nothing is 
due, but that the subsidy is overpaid. 

y In point of fact, a loan of money is never received from 
any quarter that a proportion of it is not given to His Ma- 
jesty’s Minister for the use of the Portuguese Government j 
and very lately 1 borrowed a sum of money at Madrid (under 
a very inconvenient engagement which I preferred, to repay 
it in a month,) and gave the greater part of it to relieve the 
distresses of the Portuguese troops in the field which had 
been neglected by the Government, notwithstanding that 
large sums had been paid in subsidy. This money has only 
now been repaid into the chest of the British army. I wish 
that the Portuguese Government had performed their en- 
gagements, and had given to the cause a well equipped army 
of 30,000 men, in return for the subsidy which they have 
received from His Majesty. 

' Thirdly ; It docs not appear to me that the Government 
have at all weighed or digested the schenie for the payment 
of the subsidy in London, the details of which they appear 
to consider very easy to arrange ; and they have left them to 
the Condo de Funchal. I would beg leave just to point out 
to them that the difference between the market price and the 
mint price of bullion in England is now, if I am not piis- 
informed, about 25 per cent.; and they would lospdn the 
receipt of the subsidy such a proportion of that sum as the ’ 
rate at which they now receive the dollar approaches to the 
mint price of bullion. If they now receive the dollar at 
4 a Qd. ptcrling they would lose the whole 25 per cent on tl^o 
subsidy; or one quarter of its amount; if they now fpceiyp 
the dollar at 5s. the loss would be about 1$ per eppt, , , ^ ^ ^ 

^Fourthly ; I have reason to believe that the^spherae .is 
impracticable without taking so much specie put of 



SPAIN. 


554 


1813 . 


iiwy chest of the British army, as must be attended by the 
consequence of recalling the army. 

^ I have never been made sensible of the inconveniences, 
excepting to myself personally, of the mode of paying the 
subsidy now in practice, which have been so frequently com- 
plained of. Notwithstanding the existing prosperity and 
credit of Great Britain, great difficulty is experienced in 
procuring specie for a large foreign expenditure ; and the 
greatest inconvenience has been felt in His Majesty’s domi- 
nions from the efforts which have been made in this manner 
in the cause of the Peninsula. In order to overcome these 
diflficulties, and to obviate some of the inconveniences attend- 
ing the realization of His Majesty’s aid to the powers of the 
Peninsula, it was proposed, and the Portuguese Govern- 
ment were distinctly informed, when the increased subsidy 
was granted, that a part should be given in kind. That is 
to say, that those articles of military equipment and stores 
which the Portuguese Government required, and which could 
be purchased in England at a cheaper rate than in Portugal, 
should be supplied at the rate of their cost ; and that pro- 
visions should be supplied in the same manner from the 
stores of the army. The reason for making this arrange- 
ment was, that the former might be purchased in England 
without an expenditure of specie; and the latter in the 
Peninsula by bills on His Majesty’s treasury, with a condi- 
tion that they should not be negotiated in the Peninsula. 

‘ It might have been expected from the allies of Great 
Britain that they would cheerfully adopt and carry into 
execution an arrangement which His Majesty had a right to 
dictate as the condition on which he would grant any aid ; 
but instead of that, the Portuguese Government have never 
ceased to complain that they do not receive as much money 
as they wish, totally forgetting that they have received more 
in money and money’s worth than His Majesty has ever 
consented to grant them ; and instead of assisting, as they 
ought, they have rejected, or have rendered nugatory, every 
proposition which has been made to them to facilitate the 
means of increasing the specie in the military chest of the 
army. 

' Your Excellency is mistaken in supposing that the 



SAUMAKCA. 


im- 


555 


£100,000 eatimated aa tho amount of tho pay of tho British 
officers in the Portuguese service is exclusively for their 
British pay ; it is for their Portuguese pay ; and I cannot 
recommend to His Majesty’s Government that any increase 
of subsidy -should be granted to the Portuguese Government 
on any ground. 

‘ If the Government will be in earnest in respect to the 
finances, they have ample means at their command to cover 
the deficit for the military expenses ; and they will be en- 
abled to relieve the poorer description of people from many 
burthensome and oppressive, though unproductive taxes. I 
do not consider the scheme, however, of selling quit-rents, 
&c., belonging to individuals by grants from the Crown for 
their lives or others, in order to raise a loan to be employed 
in the liquidation of paper money, to be one of the legitimate 
means in the power of the Government to ameliorate their 
finances ; even though an attempt should be made to conceal 
the manifest arbitrary injustice and attack upon private pro- 
perty of this scheme, under the cloak of a purchase from the 
owner by the grant of an apolice. 

* I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Dorn Miguel Forjaz: ' Wellington. 


To Lieut, General Sir Hill, K.B. 

^ My dear Hill, ‘Salamanca, 15th Nov., 1812. 

" I have been out all the morning, and have only now 
received your letter of twelve at noon. You must have the 
motions of the corps which has marched up the river well 
observed ; and it might be expedient, if the enemy should not 
cross the Tormes in the night, to remove the 4th division to 
the edge of the wood near the top of the hill, (and on the 
right of the road looking to Alba,) at day-light in the morn- 
ing, in order to be in readiness to protect General Hamilton’s 
eventual evacuation of Alba de Tormes, and his withdrawing 
from the river. The 4th division will in this position not be 
much farther from you than they are at present. 

^ I saw the chevalels at Huerta. I do not believe they 
are to be used to construct a bridge ; nor have I seei^ or 
heard of any collection of force at any point, such as the 
enemy must have in order to pass the river. I cannot ob- 



tSB Mn. 

IcmnBfcnjr’veButitiDiii^df^jbcpe fti 1>oiBtq> All tiieitfoo^ 
kie»ti(ftiPdb 5 t tEd Cbtide de P«ini» fViUemur, in hU lettp^ t6 
yoa^nre'tfhose of ithe 5tk and ^th divisions of the amy of Poi^ 
tngalMnd are in front of Pack’s brigade at Aldeal<enguai' 

’ ' “Tfad French; have evacuated Madrid (ow th© 7th). 1 db 
not yet know where the troops have gone. ; • 

'i;'’-' ; -.‘'Believeinej&c.' 

'• lifittii'GMei-a/ WELLlSG^toN. ;• 

5 SirR.mi,K.B: '■ , : . 

■ , Tq General Giron. , ; , 

v? - i Aldehttela de la Bovedai 

' Mon CHER GfiNfeRAL, cq 16 Npv.a ,iai2. ^ 

^ Le General Gomte 4e Bolvcder m’a fait savoir que Ten- 
nemi etait en avant de lui ; ct jc I’ai prie dc marcher demain 
matin a quatre heures au lieu dc septheures i et j'ai fait des 
arrangeiaens pour avoir de la cavalerie a son ai'riere garde 
demain^ L’ennemi s^est aussi moiitre en force sur la route de 
Matilla ; mais nous ferons notre marche demain avec facilite. 
^ Je vous prie de faire mes complimens au General. 

‘ Agr^ez, &c. 

* General Giron' ‘ Weh^ington, 

To UeuU General ihe Hm. Sir E. Paget, K,B. 

^ My DEAR Paget, ‘ Head Quarters, lath Nov,, 1812. 

^ ^ I did hot hear of yoiir misfortune till more than an hour 
after it had occurred, nor was I certain of it till the enettiy 
attached our rear guard, and the firing had continued fbr 
some time, and 1 found you were not on the field ; and you 
Will jiidge of my concern by the sense which I hope' you feel 
I entertain 6f the cordial assistance which I received ifVom 
you durihg the short time that you have been with us. ' 

* I cannot account for your misfortune, excepting that yda 
Were aiohe, and could not see the approach of the 
cavhlty: 

* That Which must how be done is to endeavor to obtaitt 

exehahge. I have no French General Officer ih the 
l^hinWla; bUt'I beg you to mahe it hhowri to the Kifij^, 
,Md t6 the Buhe of Dalmatia, will engage tWt ahV 

techerat Officer they WiU naW shhll be yetit froth llhglthM 
to France in exchange for you. If you should find that 



CIDDAOItODItlOO. 


im. 


m 


it^Miisiiiaj^plospeei <f jnitt beingi^ihaaf^l 
lo i^H-'’tOi>idn<leav!ear'-tio <'pvev«2l u^tt itl# £ii»g<(iii>fc<.>tQ«eDd 
jQOi to France^ > U is: not ueccssarji toenttsriintQ.ihoteason 
fot giviog, you this ad%ic& If the Kiog, .or ithoDufce^^.of 
J^almafiAftiU iiot name aO'oStoer to be<fi!»thanged f<^iyou, 
the sooner you are sent to F'rance tiie better.- . ; ; ■ ;> ( i . u 
‘ I send you some nwmeyr—SiQO/. I will take care of your 
friend Marlay.- You cannot conceive how much I regret your 
loss. This is the second time that I have been deprived of 
your assistance, at an early period after you had joined us, 
and I am almost afraid to wiAh to have you again; but God 
knows with what pleasure I shall hear of your being liber- 
ated, and shaU see you with us. . - ' 

‘Believe me, &ci ’ 

' • Lieut . GenM • WblUnotoN; 

tKeH(»i.SirE.Paget^K,B. > 

* Let me know your wishes on any subject, and they sh'ajl 
bp carried into execution.’ . ; 


To Earl Bathurst. 

* Mr LOrO, ' * Ciudad Rodrigo, ISth Nov., I»t2. 

‘ The troops under the command of Lieut. General Sir 
Bowland Hill crossed the Tormea at Alba on the 8th in- 
stant, and those under my command took the position on 
the heights of .San Ghristoval de la Cuestaon. the same d<iy i 
Brigadier General Pack’s brigade occupying Aldep I,engea» 
and Brigadier General Bradford’s Cabrerizos, on our right, 
aud -the British cOivalry covering our front. I had desired 
Lieut General Sir Rowland Hill to occiipy the twyn and 
pasBe of Alba with Mejor, General Howard’s brigad<^ tV 
2nd divismn, leaving Xjeut. General Hamilton’s Pprtnguesp 
division on :&e, left of thoTormes to snppott , those , trpops, 
while.rthe 2nd division .was posted, in the, neighbonrhood.of 
the fords of Encinas and Huerta, and the 3rd and dth diyir 
ajon* TOHiainod nt Galvarrasa do Arrihh ip, ^eyeryp. , ■ 

,,.:f Qn thfj Qth, the encniy dyoye in, the- piquets 
Gipnnrallipng’s brigade .of cavalry in front pf 4lba;i and 
Jilajn? hWigpd ,to .Withdraw his tf<»j)8 

jfigongh AiWpp tho.inwijng.jof thp, lOtb^ ) In 5^ 



tHe dtlj)’, tlie dneniy’s whble pdsitfeiiiSSSii^ 

tile Toftnes ; and tBey attacked the troops in Alba vrit^ ^ 
pieces of cannon and a considerable body of infantry. 
made no impression on them, however, and withdrew the 
cannon and the greatest part of the troops in the night; and 
this attack was never renewed. 

' I enclose Lieut. General Hamilton’s * report to Sir Bow- 

* To Lieut, General Sir Rowland Hill, K.B. 

‘ S«, ' Alba de Tormes, 1 1th Nov., 1812. 

< I hav« the honor to report the steps I have taken to carry into effect your 
instructions for the defence of this place, which, I am happy to say, have 
obliged the enemy to withdraw the greatest part of the force opjlosed to us ; 
and 1 feel almost confident we shall be able to retain our position as long at 
you may deem expedient. 

^ I yesterday garrisoned and provisioned the castle, and by the exertions of 
Captain Goldfinch of the engineers, it is put into as good a state as circum- 
stances will admit ; he is continuing strengthening it, Captain Goldfinch has 
been of great assistance to me. 

‘ I have appropriated to each regiment a district of this town, and the com- 
manding officer has barricaded the streets and buildings in a very judicious 
manner. Brigadier Pa Costa and Campbell’s brigades are in our position on 
the left bank of the Tormes. Brigadier Campbell reports his having caused the 
enemy some loss, in their attempt to pass a ford near his position. 

* Lieut. Colonel Tulloh has made so good an arrangement of his two brigades 
of guns, that, united with the position of the two brigades of infantry on the left 
bank of the Tormes, I consider my fianks secure. 

* Early yesterday morning Milpr General Long, commanding the cavalry in 
front, reported that the enemy were advancing in great force ; I was therefore 
induced to retire the cavalry. 

‘ About ten o’clock the enemy appeared on the heights in considerable force 
of cavalry, and a few infantry, covering, as I conceived, a reconnaissance of 
several officers of rank. About two o’clock the enemy’s force was increased to 
fifteen squadrons, and six thousand infantry, and twenty guns, including six 
six-inch howitzers, which immediately commenced firing, and continued until 
it was dark. The enemy’s light troops advanced close to the walls we had 
kastily thrown up j but from the cool and steady conduct of the 50th regt.. 
Col. Stewart •, 71st regt.. Col. the Hon. H. Cadogan ; the 92nd, Col. Cameron 
(General Howard’s brigade), the enemy dared not attempt the town. 

* About eight o’clock in the evening, I was repeatedly informed that the 

enemy’s infantry was considerably increasing, which induced me to order three 
battalions of Brigadier Da Costa’s brigade into town, leaving his other battalion 
for the protection of the fords. The enemy during the night withdrew th^ir 
artillery, and I have left a small force of cavalry and infantry, who kept up a 
smart fire. I have to regret the loss of a considerable number of men, but 
which I trust you will not deem great, when you consider the heavy and in- 
cessant fire of artillery for so many hours. The loss of the Fortuguesq was 
while on duty this morning, and 1 have real pleasure in reporting their steady 
and animated conduct. ' 



CIUDAP RODRIGO. 


18i% 


SSU 


tend Hill of tho tmnsacfion&at Alba« wiiich Wghly cre- 
ditable to tlie troops employed. From the 10th to th^ 14th, 
the time was passed in various reconnaissances, as well of the 
fords of the Tonnes, as of the position which the troops under 
my command occupied, on the right of that river in front of 
Salamanca; and, on the 14th, the enemy crossed that river in 
force at the fords near Encinas, about two leagues above Alba. 

^ I immediately brohe up from San Christoval, and ordered 
the troops towards the Arapiles ; and as soon as I had ascer* 
tained the direction of the enemy’s march from the fords, I 
moved with the 2nd division of infantry, and all the cavalry 
I could collect, to attack them, leaving Lieut. General Sir 
Rowland Hill with the 4th and Lieut. General Hamilton’s 
divisions in front of Alba, to protect this movement, and 
the 3rd division in reserve on the Arapiles, to secure the 
possession of that position. 


' I feel much indebted to Major General Howard, who rendered me every 
possible assistance, as also to every officer and soldier of his excellent brigade, for 
their steady, zealous, and soldier-liko conduct. 

* To Captain Pinto Saavedra, my Assistant Adjutant General ; to Captain 
Watson, Royal dragoons, Assistant Quarter Master General j ami to Captain 
Bunbury, my aid de camp, I consider myself obliged, for their prompt execution 
of my orders. 

‘ I enclose a return of the killed and wounded, and trust we shall not have 
many more casualties. 

* I have the honor to be, &c. 

< Lieu/, General ‘ John Hamilton, Lieut. General. 

Sir R, Hill, K,B: 


Rtturn of Killed and Wounded of the Army wider the command of General the 
Marquis of Wellington, K,B,, in the defence of Alba de Tonnes, on the lOtk and 
1 Uh November, 1812. 



Officers. 

Serjeants. 

Rank and File. 

Horses. 

Total loss of Officers, 

N 0 n-commissioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed .... 

— 


21 

■ 

21 

Wounded • • . 

3 

4 

85 


92 

Missing . • • 

— 

— 


B 









‘ eppy. ho™, was 


n^yself io ^^papnon^de c^v^py^.unde^^^ 

1 reconnaitred their position. i Ki .1 : r r v 

^ In the evening I withdrew all th^ troops /roip t^,(f^ tip^^^ 
bourhood of Alba to the Arapiles,; Ica^ying ^ smajll 
garrison in the, castle, with directions to eyacpatp. i^ if| t^ey 
should find that the enemy retired, and having destroyed 


the bridge. < 

‘In the course of the night and following:, morning I 
moved the greatest part of the troops through Salain^ne^, 
and placed Lieut, General Sir Eaward: JPaget ^yith, the, ^st; 
division of infantry on the right at Aldea Tejada, ip oyder 
to secure that passage for the troops oyer the 2iirguqn,^,ip 
case the movements of the enemy on our right flanh.shopld 
render it necessary for me to make choice cither of gjving 
up my communication with Ciudad Kodrigo or Salamanca. 

‘ On the morning of the 15th, I found the enemy fortify- 
ing their position at Mozarbes, which they had taken up 
the night before, at the same time that they were moving 
bodies of cavalry and infantry towards their own left, aud tp 
our communications with Ciudad Rodrigo. It was obvious 
that it was the enemy’s intention to act upon our comipuni- 
cations ; and as they were too strong, and too strongly 
posted for mo to think of attacking them, I detei’nimedito 
move upon Ciudad Rpdrigo. I therefore put the furmy in 
march in three columns, and crossed the Zurguen, and then 
passed the enemy’s left flank, and encamped that nigjit on 
the Valmuza. We continued our march successively, on 
the 16th, 17th, 18th, and this day, when part of the army 
crossed the Agueda, and the whole will cross that river to* 
morrow, and canton between the Agueda and Coin* 

‘ The enemy follpwed our movement on the l^jth with,f 
largo body, probably the Avhole of the cajalryj^apd. , a .con- 
siderable body of infantry; but they did not attoffpt to 
press upon our rear. .They took advahtage of th^ 
to cahh6nade bur rear guard, consisting pf thejlighj,,i^|yi^ip|i^ 
uhdef Major General Alten, on the l7tK, on its pas^^p^J^ 
the Huebra at Sap nnd pccasiope^ poipp > 

■ '* The^trbbpjs^ Havp spSefeeJ cptisi^eraliily jfi^oni 

of thb weather: whiplimpce tbo 13th, ha^.bepp 



CIUDAD RODRIGO. 


im. 


m 


hiv6 of sbldi^^, 

as usual, sttiagglcd from their regiments in searcli df |i|Under, 
arid I aril apprehensive that some may have fallen into tlm 
enemy’s hands. 

^ I atri sorry to add, tliat we have had the luisfortu^c tp 
lose Lieut. General Sir Edward Paget, who was taVen pi;i; 
sotier on the 17th. He commanded the centre column, apd 
the fall of rain having greatly injured the roads, and swelled 
the rivulets, there was an interval between the 5th and 7th 
divisions of infantry. Sir Edward rode alone to the rear to 
discover the cause of this interval, and as the road passed 
through a w'ood, either a detachment of the eriemy's cavalry 
had got upon the road, or he missed the road, arid fell iri to 
their hands in the wood. I understand that Sir Edward 
was not wounded, but I cannot sufficiently regret the loss of 
his assistance at this moment. 

♦In my dispatch of the 7th instant, I communicated to 
your Lordship my opinion of the strength of the enemy as 
far as I could judge of it from the reports I had received, 
and fi’om what I had seen. I have since learnt that General 
Caffarelli, with the army of the North, certainly remained 
joined with the army of Portugal. King Joseph left Madrid 
on the 4th instant, and arrived at Penaranda on the 8lh, 
leaving at Madrid the civil authorities of his Governmerif, 
and a small garrison. These authorities and troops evacu- 
ated Madrid on the 7th, and marched for Castillo ; arid 
Colonel Don Juan Palecca took ppssession of that city. 

♦ Your Lordship will have seen General Ballesteros’ 
letter of the 24th October to the Regency, from which you 
will observe that he disobeyed the orders of the Govern- 
ment given to him at niy suggestion, to march his troops 
into La Mancha, and hang upon the enemy’s left flank, 
because the Regency and Cortes had offered me the chief 
command of the Spanish armies, 

♦ General Virues, who succeeded to the command upon Oc- 

rieral Ballesteros being removed, had not advanced farther 
than Jaen, when I last heard from that quarter on tho Btjb 
instant. , 

♦ The whole of the enemy’s disposable force iri Spain was 
therefore upon the Tormes iri the middle of this, jnonth, and 
ihciy were certainly not less than *80,000 men, l)ut more pro- 

VOL. IX. 2 o 



sm 


aPAIK* 


i8t2. 


bably 90,000. Of these, 10,000 were cavalry; and aa the 
army of Portugal alone had 100 pieces of cannon, it is pro- 
bable that they had not less in all than 200 pieces. 

^ I had 52,000 British and Portuguese troops, of which* 
4000 were British cavalry, on the Tormes, and from 12,000 
to 16,000 Spaniards ; and, although I should have felt no 
hesitation in trying the issue of a general action on ground 
which I should have selected, I did not deem it expedient to 
risk the cause on the result of an attack of the enemy in a 
position which they had selected and strengthened. 

^ I entertained hopes that I should have been able to 
prevent the enemy from crossing the Tormes, in which case, 
they must have attacked me in the position of San Christo- 
val, or must have retired, leaving us in possession of the line 
of the Tormes. I considered either to be likely to be at- 
tended by so many advantages to the cause, that I deemed it 
expedient to delay my march from the Tormes till the enemy 
should be actually established on the left of that river ; and 
if the weather had been more favorable, we should have 
made the movement without inconvenience or loss. 

" It is difficult to form a judgment of the enemy’s inten- 
tions at present. They have not pushed any troops beyond 
the Yeltes, and very few beyond the Huebra. But it is 
obvious, and a general sense is said to prevail among the 
French officers, that until they can get the better . of the 
allied army, it is useless to attempt the conquest and settle- 
ment of Spain ; and as far as I can form a judgment from 
one of Marshal Soult’s letters to the King in cipher, which 
was intercepted, and fell into my hands some time ago, it 
was his opinion, and he urged that Portugal should be made 
the seat of the war. 

' The result of the campaign, however, though not so 
favorable as I at one moment expected, or as it would have 
been, if I could have succeeded in the attack of the Castle of 
Burgos, or if General Ballesteros had made the movement 
into La Mancha which was suggested, is still so favorable, 
that this operation appears out of the question. 

‘ The strong places of Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoss being 
in our possession, and Almeida being re-established, it is 
not easy for the enemy to penetrate by either of the great 
entrances into Portugal ; and although the two former of 



1812. 


ClUDAH ^pDRlGO. 


568 


thiese places (particularly the first-mentioiied) arc neither in 
the state of defence nor garrisoui^ as I should wish to see 
them, having deprived the enemy of their ordnance# arsenals, 
and magazines in Andalusia, at Madrid# at Salamanca# and 
Valladolid, it does not appear possible that these places 
should be attacked. 

^ I conclude, therefore, that for the present they will 
canton their army in Old Castille, and in the valley of the 
Tagus, and will wait for the arrival of fresh reinforcements 
and means from France. 

'I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ ^arl Bathurst* ' Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst* 

‘ My liORD, * Ciudad Rodrigo, 19th Nov., 1812. 

‘ I have the honor to enclose the return of the killed 
wounded, and missing, from that part of the army which was 
under my immediate command, on its march from Burgos, 
from the 22nd to the 29th of October The difficulty of 
making up this return accurately has occasioned the delay 
in transmitting it. 

^ I have the honor also to enclose the return of killed, 
wounded, and missing, to this date. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 


Return qf the Ki/led, Wounded^ and in the operations of the Army under 

the command of General the Marquis of fVeliingion, K,B», from the 15 th to the 
19M of November) inclusive. 



Officers. 

oa 

1 

V 

I 

.-a 

Pm 

1 

1 

i 

j2 

w 

Total loss of Officers, 
Non-commissioned 
Officers, and Rank 
and File. 

Killed # • » 

B 

1 ^ ' 


15 

50 

Wounded • • 


B 


9 

m 

Missing ... 


B 


58 

178 


• KUcdiit p.g« 

2 o 2 








564 dPjMiSr. ' 18KJ. 


' To Sir Oharle^ Stuart, K.Bi > 

^ My DEAR Sir, ' ’ '^Ciudad Rddrlgb, 26tliNdY., fSl2.' 

have received yotir letter of the 1 5th. 1 have licvcr 
known a Knight of the Bath made that lie was hot knighted 
and invested ^vith the Order by some person authori^ied for 
that purpose by the Crown ; but upon this point I ihay be 
mistaken, and you should inquire from England without lo^s 
of time. 

^ Although you may have the insignia, and may be api- 
pointed a Knight of the Bath, liobody can knight you or 
invest you with the insignia that is not duly authorized, nor 
can a person authorized depute another. 

^ I have not received the authority, which I should think 
would have been sent to Beresford, as he is at Lisbon. If 
the messenger brought you the insignia, it is just possible 
that the same messenger may be now on the road with the 
authority to me to invest you ; and if it should be so, or 
if I should receive the authority by any channel, I will 
apprize you of it, and will appoint time and place to meet 
you for the performance of the ceremony. 

" Believe me, &c. 

* Sir Charles Stuart, K.B' * Wellington. 


To the Hon. Berkeley Paget.' 

^ My dear Berkeley, ‘ Ciudad Rodrigo, 20th Nov., 1812. 

^ I am sorry again to have to apprize you of your bro- 
ther’s misfortune at a period almost as early after he iiad 
joined us as I had upon a former occasion. He was taken 
prisoner by the enemy, unhurt, as I am informed, on the 
17th instant. 

‘ I acknowledge that I cannot exactly account for the 
mode in which he was taken. He commanded the centre 
column of the army on its march from Salamanca to Ciudad 
Rodrigo, and Hill the right; the Spaniards were on the 
left. The country was woody but open, and the cavalry 
was ordered to march between the two columns of British 
infantry. 

‘ The roads were very bad, and the rivulets much swelled, 
and there was some delay in the march of the centre column 



C1UDA0 BOPRiaO. 


m 


m% 


in the morning ; and the right crossed the Huebra before 
the head of the centre reached that river.’ The cavalry had 
been encamped near the right, and followed their move- 
ments, and the enemy’s cavalry were consequently on the 
flank and rear of the centre when the head of the cc^ntro 
column reached the Huebra. : , 

" Some , squadrons of Portuguese dragoons had l^en 
thrown out to keep the communication with the centre, 
which they did very insufficiently ; and as soon as I saw the 
mistake, I ordered up Sir William Erskine s division of ca- 
valry to protect the march of the centre column ; and the 
last time I saw your brother I requested him to halt the 
7th division on a height about a mile from the Huebra, 
till the Light division, which was the rear guard, should 
come up. 

" I had come up from the rear to the head of the 5th 
division at this time, which immediately preceded the 7tli, 
and when I passed the latter, there certainly was no interval 
in the column. 

' The badness of the roads and the swelling of the rivu- 
lets had however afterwards occasioned an interval, and 
your brother, with his usual anxiety, rode alone to ascertain 
the cause of it, having sent Marlay with information to the 
Light division, that they would find the 7th halted and ca- 
valry at hand to give them assistance. On liis way to the 
7th division he was taken, cither on the road, or in the wood 
through which it passed. 

' From the account of a French officer to one of ours on 
that afternoon across the Huebra, I am inclined to believe 
that his want of sight was the immediate cause of bis being 
taken. He said that a non-commissioned officer had knocked 
off his hat, but had not hurt him, and that he then sur- 
rendered himself. As ho was remarkably well mounted, 
there is no doubt that he might have got away, either before 
receiving this blow., if he had been able to see the enemy, 
or aftorwards if he had been able to see his way. But hiis 
want of sight is a terrible disadvantage. The interval bo* 
fweeaitho 5th and 7tli divisions could not have been more 
than half a mile, and the French could not have been on 
or near the road more than 5 minutes. 



566 iPkiK WM. 

' I need not tell you how much I ftm annoyed by this mis- 
fortune. 

" I have desired him to tell King Joseph and Soult that I 
will engage that any person they shall name shall be sent to 
France in exchange for him. I have recommended him te 
go to France, if he should find that neither is disposed to 
name a person to be sent in exchange for him, as I think it 
probable that his chance of exchange will in that case be 
better there; he will live more comfortably than in Spain, 
and will be more in the way of hearing and receiving assist- 
ance from his friends. I have sent him money and his 
clothes, and some stores, &c. &c. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* To the Hon. Berkeley Paget: ' WfilLLlNGtON. 

To , Esq.t late Lieutenant^ — th Dragoons. 

* Sir, ‘ Ciudad Rodrigo, 21st Nov., 1812, 

^ I have received your letter of the 9th October. 

" You are much mistaken if you suppose that any thing 
which occurred to you in this country was occasioned by any 
feeling of irritation on my part, or any thing but a desire to 
uphold the discipline and subordination of the army. 

^ I was very sorry that you fell the victim of great and 
persevering indiscretion and misapplication of very good 
talents; and I am happy to find that you are sensible of 
your error, and desirous of beginning your career again with 
a determination to avoid the conduct in future which has 
occasioned your misfortunes. 

‘ It is quite impossible that you can be restored to your 
rank in the service ; and I wish you would consider well, 
whether, ai your time of life, with your talents and your 
prospects in other professions, it is worth your while to serve 
as a volunteer in a regiment of dragoons, in order eventually 
to be appointed a Cornet, thence to continue to rise as an 
officer. At all events, it will be necessary that you should 
have the permission of His Royal Highness the Commander 
in Chief to serve even as a volunteer, 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* ; ^ Wellington. 



1812. 


CIUDAD EODRIGO. 


567 


ToJoseClementi. 

f Sir, * Freneda, ,22nd Nov., 1812. 

^ In regard to the Capita# Mor of Zibreira, I beg that 
you will tell him that he has been guilty of the greatest 
crime of which any individual in modern times can be guilty ; 
viz., he has aided the French in invading his native country, 
in which they committed horrors till then unheard of ; it is 
not surprising, therefore, that his countrymen and the Go- 
vernment should be much displeased with him, and that I 
should experience the greatest difficulty in persuading them 
to pardon him. 

I can undertake this difficult task upon only one con- 
dition, and that is, that the Capita# Mor shall render some 
important services to his Country and her cause. I know 
that he is a person trusted and employed by the enemy; 
and if he will give me early and accurate intelligence of all 
that comes to his knowledge, and by these means serve his 
country, I will endeavor to obtain his pardon, and to restore 
him to the bosom of his country ; otherwise he must not 
expect that I shall attempt it. 

® You will find out the mode of transmitting me his letter, 
and state what the messenger should be paid, which I will 
invariably pay. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

^ Josi Clementi* ‘WELLINGTON. 


MEMORANDUM. 

Orders for Captain Todd and Lieutenant Piper. 

‘ Ciudad Rodrigo, 22nd Nov., 1812. 

* Captain Todd has been ordered to take up the bridge at 
Almaraz, and to carry to Badajos or Elvas that part of it for 
which he has conveyance, and to destroy that part for which 
he has not conveyance. It is concluded that he has obeyed 
these orders, but he has not reported. 

^ If he has not obeyed the above-mentioned orders, he is 
to obey them forthwith. If he has obeyed them he must 
report. 

^ Lieut. Piper was first ordered to take up the pontoon 
bridge, and to proceed with it to Salamanca as soon as 
Captain Todd's bridge shmild be ready. 



mm 


^He was ^hcn ordered on t|ie 6th in- 

stant, to halt oh the roVa from CiudaS Kodrigo to Sala- 
manca, Wlrehcvcrlih shouidteach that road; lie WaiSi^ tlMi 
drdefed on the l^th instWt, by 'an Officer of Ouidesitb pro- 
ceed directly to Badajoz/if the ord^ showld find bilh South 
the Tago4 ; or Erectly to Castollo Branco, if the 6rd(^ 
should meet him dn the riorlh Side of the Thgus. 

‘ There has been no report from him since the Slst of last 
month, when Captain Todd’s bridge was hot ready, and he 
had not of course received the order of the 6th instant This 
order is now sent to him by the south of the Tagus, and if 
he has not already moved from the Tagus, he is io move 
upon the receipt hereof, and to take the bridge by Badajoz 
to Elvas. 

‘Wellington.’ 

To thn Bight Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley^ K*B, 

‘ Sm, ^ Ciudad Rodrigo, 22n(l Nov., 18J2. 

‘ I enclose copies of my last dispatches to the Secretary of 
Stiato, of which I request you to communicate such parts as 
you may think proper to the Spanish Government , i 
^ ^ ‘ I have the honor to be, i&c. 

* The Right Hon, ‘ Wellington. 

’ Sir H, Welledey, K.B: 


To the Right Hon, Sir Henry If'ellesley, K,B. 

‘Sir, * Ciudad Rodrigo, 22nd Nov., 1812. 

‘ I have the honor to enclose the copy of a dispatch wliich 
I have received from the Secretary of State, from which I 
understand that His Boyal Highness the Prince Regent 
approves of my acceptance of the command of the Spanish 
armies. 

‘ I request you therefore to signify this approbation to the 
Spanish Government and to request them to signify to me 
their pleasure respecting the period at which I shall take 
upon myself the command. 

* I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Right Hon, ‘ WellingHon. 

Sir H, WelleeUy, K,B: 

^ ♦ Nw 6ir Fruicv Bott.,^Qovemor of Upptr 



imi 


CIi;0AIX.|im3lIUGO. 


m 




istr ^enty 

, / I ihav^ reejeived yoar Jptter of! tiie 2i^A <| peyfpo^y lo- 
collect Sofio? do la Vega in England, an4 I cntprfai^cd a 
respeet foir hUn ;: and ho may depend upon it that I 
shall always be happy to foyward his views in. favor of ai:iy 
individoal 

? J shall attend to his wishes in favor of ^enor Argucllcs, 
if it should ever: fall in my way to be of use to him. 

; f. ‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

^ The Right Hon» ‘ Wklukoton. 

^ ,,ajir ^.Welksfey^K.B: 


’ ' ^ To ihi^Right Hon, Sir Henry fVellesley^ K,B, 

* My dear Henry, ‘ Ciudad Rodrigo, 22nd Nov., 1812. 

‘ I have received your letters to the 12th: you will sec 
that the French are excessively strong, and, considering how 
we are composed, more than a match for us. We suffered a 
good deal from the weather on the march; and our troops 
require some rest and refitting, before they can undertake 
any active operation again. I am sending the Galician 
army into Galicia, 

‘ If matters remain quiet, I think I should do some good 
by going to Cadiz for a little while, and I have some thoughts 
of going there. Let me know as soon as you can, whether 
you could send any tiros from Cadiz to meet me at Badajoz 
or Merida, and on the road from those places, to draw my 
carriage. This would greatly facilitate and expedite my 
journey. Do not mention to py body that I have thoughts 
of going to Cadiz. 

‘ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley.k.B. 

To the Right Hon. Sir Henry Wellesley f kB. 

Sir, ‘ Ciudad Rodrigo, 22nd Nov., 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 2nd, regarding clothing 
for General Downic’s Legion. 

‘ There is clQlhuig for Lishon ; but I will 



670 




1812. 


order clothing to be sent to Alcacer do Sab for General 
Downie’s eflTective strength of trained soldiers, whenever he 
shall signify to me their numbers. 

* I have the honor to be, &c. 

* The Right Hon, ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K.B: 

To the Earl of Liverpool, 

* My dear Lord, * Ciudad Rodrigo, 23rd Nov., 1812, 

‘ I received by the last post your letter of the 27th of 
October. When one army is so inferior in numbers to 
another as ours is to the French army now assembled in 
Castille, its operations must depend in a great degree upon 
those of its opponent. It is impossible therefore for me at 
this period to point out what line I shall follow. The enemy 
having abandoned Madrid, and having given up all their 
communications with the north, solely with a view to collect 
a still larger force against us, there is no diversion which 
would answer at present to effect an alteration in our rela- 
tive numbers, even if I could depend upon the Spaniards to 
do any thing. But I am quite in despair about them. The 
only man among them who ever did any thing (Ballesteros) 
is gone ; and I am apprehensive that it will be quite impos- 
sible to employ him again. But even he never did more 
than give employment for a short period to one or at most 
two divisions of the enemy’s army. Then there is another 
circumstance which must be attended to, and that is the 
situation of our own army. It has been actively employed 
since the beginning of last January, and requires rest. The 
horses of the cavalry and artillery in particular require both 
that and good food and care during the winter ; and the dis- 
cipline of the infantry requires to be attended to as is usual 
in all armies after so long a campaign, and one of so much 
activity. 

^ I believe that the enemy require repose as much if not 
more than we do; and that their immense numbers are 
rather embarrassing to them in a country already exhausted. 
But I am not quite certain that they do not propose to 
penetrate into Portugal this winter. I hope the enterprise 
will end fatally to them; but our troops will suffer a good 
deal if they are to have a winter eatnpaign, and if the 



CIUDAD ttODRIOO. 




5?1 


weathdi* should continue as severe as it has been since the 
1 5th of this month. 

‘ I believe that I have underrated rather than overrated 
the enemy’s force. They say themSelvcs at Salamanca that 
they have 90,000 infantry and 14,000 cavalry; and their 
demand for provisions from the country is 140,000 rations 
daily. I think they have 90,000 men altogether, including 
from 10,000 to 12,000 cavalry. The morning state will show 
what we have. 

" It is not easy to form a judgment in Spain of the strength 
of the enemy’s armies. The disposition of the Spaniards to 
exaggerate their own advantages induces the best inten- 
tioncd among them to deceive ; and no individual will over 
allow that the French have more men than he has seen him- 
self. The numbers of the army now in Castille have been 
stated to me at 1 5,000, and at almost every number from 
15,000 to 90,000. I have never found myself mistaken in 
my estimate of the numbers of the enemy, when I relied 
upon the returns, making a reasonable abatement for losses 
during the period elapsed since their date. The only occa- 
sion on which I have been seriously mistaken was at Burgos, 
when I relied upon the reports of the country ; and was in- 
duced to believe that Sir H. Popham’s operations would 
continue to give employment to Caffarclli. But I after- 
wards found that the army of Portugal had been very 
largely reinforced in cavalry as well as in infantry, to a 
larger amount even than I stated in my dispatch to Lord 
Bathurst, as it was 31 battalions instead of 23, as I stated, 
and the 130th regiment. There were besides two divisions 
of infantry, and from 1000 to 1400 cavalry of the army of 
the north ; and most certainly when I saw the whole drawn 
out near Cigales, they were not less than 45,000 men, of 
which 5000 are cavalry. Soult has six divisions of infantry, 
and sixteen regiments of cavalry. The gross numbers of 
his army last April were 65,000. He has since sustained 
no great loss excepting the garrison of Badajoz, 5000 men. 
But I strike off from his gross strength, for losses, sickness, 
and men on his strength who were employed principally in 
the siege of Cadis, 25,000 or ^,000, including the garrison 
of Badajoz; and I believe his army consists of 35,000 
mfem, of vddeh from 4000 to 5000 are The army of 



§Jf9 13M 

wh^ quitted Madrid 

2PiX)|0 to 22j000 : ,m0n, . im\\x^r\g* /nmmmiadosi. (and; all 
Jtalian division belonging to Sachet’s army, under General 
Palpmbini> and the^ 16th regiment* likewise <belonging to 
Sachet. Supposing the King to have loi^ by desertion, or 
to have sent away, all the Juramentados, and thht the 
troops belonging to Sachet’s army were left in Valencia, 
there will still remain the French troops of the King'd 
guard,. 5000 men, about 3500 more French and German 
infantry (I know the numbers of the regiments), which 
belong to the army of the Centre, and from 2000 to 3000 
good French cavalry. I believe all this put together will 
amount to 90,000 men. 

^ What are our yjrospects against this army? At present 
none certainly. In the spring, as soon as the green forago 
shall appear, I shall be able to take the field with a very 
large British and Portuguese force, probably larger than wO 
have yet produced, and more efficient 1 hope in cavalry and 
artillery. I have sent the army of Galicia home ; and I 
hope advantage will be taken of the winter to do something 
with them ; but unless some changes arc effected I shall 
certainly bo disappointed. There arc besides, applicable 
to the guerre in Castille, the Spanish army lately under the 
command of Ballesteros, and the troops under the command 
of Elio. 

* If I should find that the French remain quiet daring 
the winter, I propose to go to Cadiz for a short time, to 
endeavor to put matters upon a better footing, at least as far 
as regards the armies of Galicia, and that lately under the 
command of Ballesteros, which must be brought forward 
in co-operation with ns. It will likewise be necessary to 
apprize the Government of the inconvenience and danger of 
the system on which they have been acting in the provinces 
which have been freed from the enemy; and of tho ineffici- 
ency of all the persons selected for public trusts ; and of the 
inconycnicnco of loading thq resources of the provinces vrith 
the maintenance of such people. It is useless to trouble 
your Lordship wHb a detail of these facts; but I ceiiCnly 
say that, if I cannot by the exercise of fair inftuence in con*^ 
cert with my brother produce some alteration, it .is quittl 
hopeless to coniinm^ the contest in tiio Feninsula^^ 



CIUDAto lldDRIGO* 


55^8 


view the Frdneh tt/ etftcUfiitD it by 'force 'itf 4rmei 

After this detail of fticts> yodr Lordship ^iill -sec that it W 
very^msfeless to trmiblo you with my opitiioh of whkt ottglit 
to be done after the French shall lehve the Poninauldi more 
particularly as I have already communicated that opinion to 
Lord Bathurst. 

1 'From what I sec in the newspapers I am much afmd 
that the pubKc will be disappointed at the result of the last 
campaign^ notwithstanding that it is in fact the most sue- 
cessfal campaign in all its circumstances, and has produced, 
for the cause more important results than any campaign ill 
which a British army has been engaged for the last century. 
Wc have taken by siege Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, and 
Salamanca ; awl the Retire surrendered. In the mean time 
the allies have taken Astorga, Guadalaxara and Consuegra, 
besides other places taken by Duran and Sir H. Popham. 
In the months elapsed since .lanu ary this army has sent to 
England little shoi’t of 20,000 prisoners, and they have 
taken and destroyed or have themselves the use of tlio 
enemy’s arsenals in Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, Salamanca, 
Valladolid^ Madrid, Astorga, Seville, the lines before Cadiz, 
&c. ; and upon the whole wc have taken and destroyed, or 
we now possess, little short of 3000 pieces of cannon. The 
siege of Cadiz has been raised, and all the countries south 
of the Tagus have been cleared of the enemy. 

^ We should have retained still greater advantages I 
think, and should have remained in possession of Castillo 
and Madrid during the winter, if I could have taken Burgos, 
as I ought early in October, or if Ballesteros had moved 
upon Alcaraz as he was ordered, instead of intriguing for 
his own aggrandizement. 

^The fault of which I was guilty in the expedition to 
Burgos was, not that I undertook the operation with inade- 
quate means, but that I took there the most inexperienced 
instead of the best troops. I left at Madrid the 3rd, 4th, 
and Light divisions, who had been with myself always 
before; and I brought with me that were good the 1st 
division, and they were inexperienced. In fact the troeps 
ought to have carried the exterior line by escalade on the 
first trial on the 22nd of September, and if they had 
we bad means suffioieiit to take the place* They did not 
take the line because — — the field officer who 



574 




commanded^ did that which is too cojnmqin in our army. He 
paid no attention to his orders, notwithstanding the pains I 
took in writing them, and in reading and explaining th^m 
to him twice over. He made none of the dispositions 
ordered ; and instead of regulating the attack as he ought, 
he rushed on as if he had been the leader of a forlorn hope, 
and fell, together with many of those who went with him. 
He had my instructions in his pocket ; and as the French 
got possession of his body, and were made acquainted with 
the plan, the attack could never be repeated. When he 
fell, nobody having received orders what to do, nobody 
could give any to the troops. I was in the trenches, how- 
ever, and ordered them to withdraw. Our time and ammu- 
nition were then expended, and our guns destroyed in taking 
this line ; than which at former sieges we had taken many 
stronger by assault. 

' I see that a disposition already exists to blame the 
Government for the failure of the siege of Burgos. The 
Government had nothing to say to the siege. It was entirely 
my own act. In regard to means, there were ample means 
both at Madrid and at Santander for the siege of the 
strongest fortress. That which was wanting at both places 
was means of transporting ordnance and military stores to 
the place where it was desirable to use them. 

‘ The people of England, so happy as they are in every 
respect, so rich in resources of every description, having the 
use of such excellent rqads, &c., will not readily believe that 
important results here frequently depend upon 50 or 60 
mules more or less, or a few bundles of straw to feed them ; 
but the fact is so, notwithstanding their incredulity. I 
could not find means of moving even one gun from Madrid. 
— is a gentleman who piques himself upon his over- 

coming all dijficulties. He knows the length of time it 
took to find transport even for about one hundred barrels 
of powder and a few hundred thousand rounds of musket 
ammunition which he sent us. As for the two guns which 
he endeavored to send, I was obliged to send our own 
cattle to draw them ; and we felt great inconvenience from . 
the want of those cattle in the subsequent movements of 
the army; 

* Believe me, &c. 


The Marl qf Liverpool,' 



1813 . 


FEiHIPA. 


576 


To His Excellency* Sir Charles Simri^ 

< Sm, • Fi^neda, 25th Nov*, 1812," 

* I have the honor to inform jrou that His Majesty’s 
Government have sent from England a certain sum of 
money in guineas for the payment of His Majesty’s troops, 
which guineas I propose should be issued to the troops at 
their current value in England, viz., each at the rate of one 
pound one shilling sterling. 

" Dollars are now issued to the troops eacli at the rate of 
four shillings and sixpence sterling, which is the Mint price 
in England ; and the guinea will therefore, in reference to 
dollars, be worth four dollars and four- sixths of a dollar. 

^ The dollar has been stated by an edict of the Portu- 
guese Government to be worth 800 reis metal ; and the 
guinea, by the same rule, ought to be worth 3733 reis 
metal. 

^ I have so frequently failed in the applications which I 
have had occasion to make to the Portuguese Government 
for their interposition for the relief or convenience of His 
Majesty’s service, that I hesitate in requesting you to apply 
to the Government to issue a decree fixing this value as 
that of the guinea in reference to the Portuguese currency ; 
but it is so desirable that there should be no misunder- 
standing on this subject that I venture to solicit you to re- 
quest the Portuguese Government to fix the current rate of 
the guinea in Portugal at 3733 reis metal. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart^ ‘ Wellington. 

To Earl Bathurst. * 

" My Lord, ‘ Freneda, 25th Nov., 1812. 

" The greater part of the enemy’s force, which had crossed 
the Tonnes, have retired across tliat river, and it is reported 
have directed their march towards the Duero; and it is re- 
ported that the King is gone to fix his quarters at Val- 
ladolid, and that those of Marshal Soult are to be at 
Salamanca. 

^ A part of the troops which had moved to the Huebra 
returned towards Salamanca> md others which had advanced 



676 




1812. 

to Tatoamcs returned to the Tormes and towards the Es- 
curial by Los Santos. The road to the Puerto de Banos 
passes by that place, and it is reported that the enemy are 
about to march that way. But I have no reason for giving 
credit to this report. 

‘ I must admit, however, that I have lately received but 
little intelligence from the country. The decree of the 
Cortes, which required every person to justify his conduct 
who had remained in the country occupied by the enemy, 
has obliged many who were heretofore instrumental in 
acquiring and transmitting intelligence, to fly from their 
homes, lest they should be punished by the enemy ; and I 
have not yet had time to establish fresh channels of com- 
munication. 

' The army are cantoned on both banks of the Upper 
Agueda, and between the Agueda and Coa ; and I propose 
to extend the cantonments still further when I shall be cer- 
tain of the enemy’s destination. 

" Many men who were missing have returned to their 
regiments; but I am sorry to say that several who had 
straggled from their regiments, and strayed behind, have 
died from the extreme severity of the weather and the want 
of food which they experienced, all the villages having been 
plundered by the soldiers in hospitals who first passed, and 
abandoned by the inhabitants. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• Farl Bathurst: * Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

^ My Lord, * Frencda, 25th Nov., 1812. 

‘ I have had the honor of receiving your letter of the 29th 
October, enclosing one from Sir Charles Stuart to Lord 
Castlereagh, of the 3rd October, in regard to an arrange- 
ment which had been made between the Spanish and Portu- 
guese Governments, for the supply of the troops of the 
latter with provisions and forage from the Royal magazines 
in Spain, upon which you are desirous of having my opinion. 

‘ It is very difficult to understand from Sir Charles 
Stuart’s letter precisely what was intended by the arrange- 
ment, excepting that the Portuguese Government should 





m 


m 

soiidiagt^irtoiicgrtio 

fpr, vSpppIy Qf thpir tyopps in lS|)ain I? oisei^ve* that 
Sir Charles ^uart, includes meat in the ajrif^ngoinpnt ^ 

‘ Tlie fact is, that there are.np Royal m^aainos im Spain, 
and the crown possesses no cattle whatever^! ^ ^ ^ 

^ The dwn of Spain does possess certain estates id dif^ 
ferent parts of the country, and has a right to the tenth of 
the produce of certain other estates ; and when I ontoped 
Sj)ain in the montli of June last, I agreed with the Spanish 
authorities that the rent of these estates and the dues to thd 
Crown should be received in kind, and should be hmided 
over to the British Commissariat, at the current price of ihd 
day, in such proportions as wore not required by ihe^ Spanish 
armies. , ; ; 

‘We did receive some supplies under this arrangement 
during the campaign, and the Portuguese army likewise 5 
and the i account is now in a train of settlement; and tho 
value of what was received will be payable to the Spanish 
Government. 

‘ It will probably be difficult to distinguish what was re- 
ceived by the Portuguese troops from the estates of tho 
crown of Spain, from what was delivered to them from other 
sources, and to be accounted for as subsidy ; and it may not 
bq possible to allow what they have received from the ctowm 
of Spain to be carried to account against the supposed debt 
of the Spanish to, the Portuguese Government. 

‘ I say supposed debt, because in point of fact, since the 
year 1810 inclusively, the burthen and expense of feeding 
all Spanish detachments which have passed through 
Portugal, have fallen upon the British Commissariat. I 
believe therefore that if there exists any account or any debt 
from one Government to the other, the Portuguese Govern- 
lAentus the debtor. 

' At all events, as the supplies, received from the estates * 
of the 6rown of Spain, by the PortugtiO^e departiiierite^ p^ro-^ 
bably firstr paiised through Jhe British CbihmtsfeaHaf,'it^wW^^^ 
be teasotiable that if the British Gdihhiissariat ^ 
obliged to pey for them, theii^ * valte bhpdld’ 
agatost the British subsidy to Portugal ' ' ^ 

■•''I’haVe'the :• 

voi.. IX. 2 p 



57g 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To Lieut. General Sir R- Hill, K.B* 

* My dear Hill, ‘Freneda, 26th Nov., 1S12. 

^ I enclose some good news. From all accounts I judge 
that the enemy are not moving by Banos, but are crossing 
the Tormes, and I have commenced the movements of my 
troops, and I have desired the Quarter Master General to 
write to you to recommend that you should commence yours, 
in order to take up your cantonments in the province of 
Coria, through the Pass of Perales. 

^ I have desired the officer to return to Alcantara with 
the bridge, and you will send him your orders to lay it ; if 
you should like to use it, you must give him a day’s notice 
of your wanting it. 

^ The Alagon and Tietar are good barriers for your front, 
but you should observe well what passes on the north side 
of the Puerto de Banos. I believe there is only one bridge 
on the Alagon at Monte Hermoso. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ' WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

* I believe the 9th Light dragoons should be sent towards 
Elvas, and probably the Portuguese dragoons likewise, but 
I shall hear from you on this subject.’ 

To Sir Charles Stuart, K,B. 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Freneda, 26 th Nov., 1812 . 

‘ I have received your letter of the 19th instant. 

* If Captain Mackenzie is unable to perform the duty with 
which he is charged, another officer shall be appointed to 
perform it. I shall make inquiry on the subject. 

^ I never yet applied to the Portuguese Government to 
make any arrangement to facilitate the transaction of busi- 
ness by the departments of this army, that they did not 
create difficulties. 

* In regard to the duties on corn, the facts arc jiist these. 
The Commissary purchases corn with his bills upon the 
Treasury, with the condition that the bills shall not be nego- 
tiated at Lisbon. He can continue this practice, and can 
insist on the condition, if the duties on the corn are remitted. 
If they are to be paid, he must either give some money from 



1812, 


FRENEDA. 


579 


the chest, or he must allow a part of the bills to be dis- 
counted at Lisbon, otherwise the seller of the corn has it not 
in his power to pay the duties. 

' There is another reason also why I wish that the people 
of the corn market at Lisbon should have nothing to sAy to 
our concerns. Experience has taught me to entertain the 
worst opinion of every description of Portuguese emploj/e^, 
and I think it desirable that those in the corn market should 
not have that knowledge which the payment of these duties 
would give them of the state of our stores. It is my opinion, 
as it is that of the Commissary General, that the possession 
of this knowledge would very materially affect prices in our 
dealings with the importers of corn, from time to time. 

^ This last reason may be imaginary, but the first is con- 
clusive ; and if the Government do not agree to give up the 
duties, I must refer the subject to His Majesty's Govern- 
ment. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart, K.B: ‘ WELLINGTON. 

To Lieut, General Sir S, Cotton, K.B. 

* My dear Cotton, ‘ Freneda, 27 th Nov., 1812. 10 p.Mf. 

* I was about to write to you last night, to tell you that I 
had ordered the troops to their cantonments, and to request 
you to come over here for a day, on your way to Lisbon. 1 
find, however, that I am too late. 

^ We cannot take the field in this part of the country till 
the end of April, or beginning of May. We may be obliged 
to take it earlier to the southward. However, I hope that 
when we shall take the field, it will be in great strength and 
condition. 

^ There are various cavalry arrangements upon which I 
wished to speak to you. But 1 must now talk them over 
with Elley, whom I shall send for to come here for a few 
days. 

' I shall write to Admiral Martin to give you a passage. 
Wishing you a pleasant voyage, and the early re-establish- 
ment of your health ; and that I may soon have the benefit 
of your assistance again, 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

• Lieut. General * WeLUNOTON. 

Sir S. Cotton, K.B.^ 

2 p 2 



580 


SPAIN. 


1812 . 


To M. La Fond, Aide de Camp du General Maucune. 

^ Monsieur^ ‘ au Quartier G^ujial, ce 27 Nov., 1812 

^ Je vicns dc rccevoir votrc Icttre du 23 Nov., et je prend- 
rai des mesures pour quo la demoiselle Hernavissa Isidro, 
prise par Ics troupes de Don J. Sanchez, puisse rentrer a 
Salamanque chcz scs parens. 

" Agreez, &c. 

* M, La Fond: ‘ Wellington. 


To the Duque del Parqne, 

^ Sir, ‘ Freneda, 27th Nov., 1812. ' 

‘ General Sir Howland Hill has communicated to me the 
letter addressed to him by the Cliief of the Staff of the 4th 
army on the 10th instant, from which I learn that the 4th 
army, under the command of your Excellency, was likely to 
arrive at Val-de-pcnas, on the 17th instant. 

^ From the last letter from General Vives, I had reason to 
believe that the 4th army would not pass Jaen. 

‘ I have now to inform your Excellency that tlie enemy 
having assembled on the Tonnes tlic whole of the dispos- 
able force of the armies of the North, of Portugal, of the 
Centre, and of the South, under King Joseph, having crossed 
that river on the 14th instant, I was under tlie necessity of 
retiring, and I crossed the Agueda on the 19th instant. 

^ The enemy have since withdrawn across the Tonnes, and 
a part of their forces have witlidrawn towards the Duero ; 
but the army of the South, and I believe the army of the 
Centre, have moved towards the Tagus; and it is probable 
will cross the Tagus. 

^ 1 apprize your Excellency of this circumstance, in order 
that you may be prepared to withdraw into the Sierra; and 
to take such position with the troops under your command 
as will enable you to subsist them with facility during the 
winter, at the same time that you will be out of reach of the 
enterprizes of the enemy. 

* It is my opinion that General Elio, with that part of the 
2nd and Srd armies which is disposable, should keep in com^ 
munication with your Excellency, and that those troops 
should equally with those under the command of your Ex- 



FttENEDA. 


1811 


581 


cellency, keep themselves out of the reach of the ciiemy’g 
enterprizes during the winter. 

^ It is impossible for me, at this distance, to point out to 
your Excellency more than a general principle for your 
operations. On a future occasion I shall have the honor of 
writing to you more fully. 

^ I enclose the duplicate of a letter which I have written 
to General Elio*, which I request your Excellency to peruse, 
and beg you to forward, with a copy of,this letter. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Duque del Parque: ' Wellington. 


To the Adjutant General of the Forces, 

< Sir, * Frenoda, 27th Nov., 1812. 

‘ I have liad the honor of receiving a letter from Colonel 
Darling of the 22nd October, enclosing one from Major 
of the — nd regiment, referring to a prior conversa- 
tion on the wants of the 2nd batt. — nd regiment of officers, 
and requiring that the Captains of the — nd regiment be- 
longing to the 2iid battalion, and doing duty with the 1st 
battalion in this country, should be ordered to join tlic 2nd 
battalion in England. 

^ Major forgot to mention, either in the letter or the 

conversation, that according to the return of the 24th Octo- 
ber, there are two Captains, and 

belonging to the 1st batt. — nd regiment, doing duty with 
the 2nd battalion. There were 8 Captains, including Cap- 
tains and , belonging to the 2nd battalion, 12 

Lieutenants, and 4 Ensigns, doing duty with the 1st batt. 
— nd regiment, according to the last returns, 

‘ There are not too many Officers doing duty with any 
regiment in this army ; but of all regiments, from what I 
have seen lately of the state of its discipline, I should con- 
sider the — nd least able to spare any officers ; and I would 
therefore beg leave to suggest that His Majesty’s regulation 
in regard to the relief of the officers of a battalion on service 
should be enforced in regard to the officers of the 2nd batt. 
— nd regiment, serving with the 1st battalion in this coun- 


Missing from the drafts of the Duke of Wellington’s papers. 



582 SPAIN. 1812 . 

try, before Captains and are allowed to depart 

from the 1st battalion. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

• The Adjutant General ^ WELLiNGTOIf. 

of the Forces,^ 

To Officers Commanding Divisions and Brigades. 

* Gentlemen, ‘ Fi-eneda, 28 th Nov., 1812 . 

^ I have ordered the army into cantonments, in wbich I 
hope that circumstances will enable me to keep them for some 
time, during which the troops will receive their clothing, 
necessaries, &c., which are already in progress by different 
lines of communication to the several divisions of Brigades. 

^ But besides these objects, I must draw your attention in 
a very particular manner to the state of discipline of the 
troops. The discipline of every army, after a long and active 
campaign, becomes in some degree relaxed, and requires the 
utmost attention on the part of the general and other officers 
to bring it back to the state in which it ought to be for ser- 
vice ; but I am concerned to have to observe that the army 
under my command has fallen off in this respect in the late 
campaign to a greater degree than any army with which I 
have ever served, or of which I have ever read. Yet this 
army has met with no disaster ; it has suffered no privations 
which but trifling attention on the part of the officers could 
not have prevented, and for which there existed no reason 
^yhatever in the nature of the service ; nor has it suffered 
any hardships excepting those resulting from the necessity 
of being exposed to the inclemencies of the weather at a 
moment when they were most severe. 

‘ It must be obvious however to every officer, that from • 
the moment the troops commenced their retreat from the 
neighbourhood of Burgos on the one hand, and from Madrid 
on the other, the officers lost all command over their men. 
Irregularities and outrages of all descriptions were commit- 
ted \yiih. impunity, and losses have been sustained which 
ought never to have occurred. Yet the necessity for retreat 
existing, none was ever made on which the troops had 
such short marches ; none on which they made such long 
and repeated halts; and none on which the retreating armies 
were so little pressed on their rear by the enemy. 



1812 - 


FKBNEPA. 


« We must look therefore for the existing eyils^ for thg 
situation in which we now find the army, to some cause be- 
sides those resulting from the operations in which >ve have 
been engaged. 

^ I have no hesitation in attributing these evils to the ha- 
bitual inattention of the Officers of the regiments to their 
duty, as prescribed by the standing regulations of the Ser- 
vice, and by the orders of this army. 

" I am far from questioning the zeal, still less the gallantry 
and spirit of the Officers of the army ; and I am quite certain 
that if their minds can be convinced of the necessity of mi- 
nute and constant attention to understand, recollect, and 
carry into execution the orders which have been issued for 
the performance of their duty, and that the strict perfornt- 
ance of this duty is necessary to enable the array to servo 
the country as it ought to be served, they will in future give 
their attention to these points. 

" Unfortunately the inexperience of the Officers of the 
army has induced many to consider that the period during 
which an army is on service is one of relaxation from all rule> 
instead of being, as it is, the period during which of all 
others every rule for the regulation and control of the con- 
duct of the soldier, for the inspection and care of his arms, 
ammunition, accoutrements, necessaries, and field equip- 
ments, and his horse and horse appointments ; for the 
receipt and issue and care of his provisions ; and the regu- 
lation of all that belongs to his food and the forage for his 
horse, must be most strictly attended to by the officers of his 
company or troop, if it is intended that an army, a British 
army in particular, shall be brought into the field of battle 
in a state of efficiency to meet the enemy on the day of trial. 

^ These are the points then to which I most earnestly ii^- 
treat you to turn your attention, and the attention of the 
officers of the regiments under your command, Portuguese 
as well as English, during the period in which it may be 
in my power to leave the troops in their cantonments. 
The Commanding Officers of regiments must enforce the 
orders of the army regarding the constant inspection and 
superintendence of the officers over the conduct of the men 
of their companies in their cantonments ; and they must 
endeavor to inspire the non-commissioned officers with a 



584 


SPAIN* 


1812 ; 


sense of their situation and authority ; and the non-cointnis- 
sioned oflScers must be forced to do their duty by being con- 
stantly under the view and superintendence of the officers. 
By these means the frequent and discreditable recourse to 
the authority of the provost, and to punishments by the sen- 
tence of courts martial, will be prevented, and the soldiers 
will not dare to commit the offences and outrages of which 
there are too many complaints, when they well know that 
their officers and their non-commissioned officers have their 
eyes and attention turned towards them. 

‘ The Commanding Officers of regiments must likewise en- 
force the orders of the army regarding the constant, real in- 
spection of the soldiers’ arms, ammunition, accoutrements, 
and necessaries, in order to prevent at all times the shameful 
waste of ammunition, and the sale of that article and of the 
soldiers’ necessaries. With this view both should be in- 
spected daily. 

^ In regard to the food of the soldier, I have frequently 
observed and lamented in the late campaign, the facility and 
celerity with which the French soldiers cooked in comparison 
with those of our army. 

" The cause of this disadvantage is the same with that of 
every other description, the want of attention of the officers 
to the orders of the army, and the conduct of their men, and 
the consequent want of authority over their conduct. Certain 
men of each company should be appointed to cut and bring 
in wood, others to fetch water, and others to get the meat, 
&c. to be cooked ; and it would soon be found that if this 
practice were daily enforced, and a particular hour for seeing 
the dinners, and for the men dining, named, as it ought to 
be, equally as for parade, that cooking would no longer re- 
quire the inconvenient length of time which it has lately 
been found to take, and that the soldiers would not be ex- 
posed to the privation of their food at the moment at which 
the army may be engaged in operations with the enemy. 

" You will of course give your attention to the field exer- 
cise and discipline of the troops. It is very desirable that 
the soldiers should not lose the habits of marching, and the 
division should march 10 or 12 miles twice in each week, if 
the weather should permit, and the roads in the neighbour- 
boo4 of tno pantonmeiits of the division should bo dry. 



1812 . 


FRENEDA. 


58i 


^ But I repeat that the great object of the attention of the 
General and Field Officers must be to get the Captains and 
Subalterns of the regiments to understand and perform the 
duties required from them, as the only mode by which the 
discipline and efficiency of the army can be restored and 
maintained during the next campaign. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ To Officers commanding * Wellington. 

Divisions and Brigades' 


To General Ic Baron Maucune, 

‘ au Quaitiei* General, 

' Monsieur le General, co 29 Nov., 1812. 

^ Je viens d’ avoir rhonneur dc recevoir votre lettre du 25 ; 
ct je vous suis bien oblige dcs bontes qiie vous avez cues 
pour le General Paget. 

^ J’envoic mon aide dc camp, Colonel Gordon, pour rece- 
voir les lettres que vous voulez m’envoyer ; et je vous prie 
dc me fairc savoir la soinmc d’argent que vous avez avance 
au General Paget, afin quo je prenne dcs mcsurcs pour vous 
la rendre. 

‘ J’ai rhonneur d’etre, &c. 

‘ Le Ghieral ‘ Wellington.’ 

Baron Maucune' 


To Vice Admiral G. Martin. 

‘ My DEAR Sir, ‘ Frencda, 29th Nov., 1812. 

" I have desired the Commissary General to send to 
Coruna 5000 suits of clothing lor the use of the corps of 
Spanish troops under General Porlier ; and I shall be much 
obliged to you if you will provide a ship for the conveyance 
of this equipment to that port. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Vice Admiral G. Martin' * Wellington. 

To General ViveSf Governor of Ciudad Rodrigo. 

'Sir, ‘ Frencda, 30 th Nov., 1812. 

' I have sent to Don Carlos dc Espana a warrant for the 
sum of , being for the pay of the officers 

and troops under the command of Don Carlos de Espana 



58 ^ 


3F4W- 


181 ^. 

OTcl yourself, for the month of August and anojiher warrant 
for the sum of , being for the 

pay of the officers of the division of Don Carlos, and belong- 
ing to the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, for the month of 
September. 

^ I have sent this last in order to enable the officers to 
equip themselves as they ought to be. 

' I have continued to advance this money, notwithstanding 
that I have no scruple in declaring that I am by no means 
satisfied with the conduct of the officers and troops compos- 
ing the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, particularly in respect 
to the mode of performing the duties which they have been 
called upon to perform, in escorting prisoners, &c. 

‘ I hope that such transactions will not occur again ; and 
that when I shall have an opportunity of reviewing the gar- 
rison of Ciudad Rodrigo, which I propose to do at an early 
period, I shall find all the troops in a good state of discipline, 
and their arms, accoutrements, and clothing in good order. 

^ It is my opinion that the whole of Don Carlos’s division 
ought now to be in the garrison and suburbs of Ciudad 
Rodrigo ; that there should be ten rounds of ammunition for 
each piece of ordnance in the outworks ; that there should be 
an officer and 20 men in each of them every night ; and an 
in-line piquet in the fort of 200 men every day, in readiness 
to move to any point which may be threatened. 

^ The officers on guard in the outworks must have orders 
to hold their posts to the last extremity. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ General Fives J ' Wellington. 

To Lieut, General the Hon, W, Stewart, 

* My dear General, ‘ Freneda, soth Nov., 1812. 

^ I did not receive your letter of the 28th till last night. 
The fact is, that by some means or other, the precaution 
which I had taken in the summer, to provide for the army 
35,000 rations of hay at Espeja, was defeated ; and I am 
sorry to say that this occurs so frequently, owing to the mode 
in which we are in the habit of allowing our soldiers, bat- 
men, and followers to go on, that it does require notice and 
serious attention. Possibly, nay, probably, the mischief was 
done before the Guards went to Espeja ; as I hevg ggner^hy 



frenbpa. 


587 


1819 * 

observed that they do less of this kind of mischief, and are 
more regular in all their duties and in every respect than 
the other troops. 

< The utter contempt of the authority of a Portuguese 
guard is one of the evils of which I complain. It is not in 
the natv^re of the Portuguese to oppose any thing in the 
shape of an Englishman ; yet Portuguese, and even Portu- 
guese militia, must be used on these services. British 
officers would think it rather extraordinary if British soldiers 
were scattered all over the country as guards over hay stacks 
or magazines. Indeed, if they were, I doubt their doing 
their duty as it ought to be done. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General * Wellinuton. 

the Hon. W. Stewart: 

To the Commissioners of the Transport Office, 

" Gentlemen, ‘ Freneda, soth Nov., 1812 . 

^ Being desirous of effecting the exchange of Major Jose 
Joaquim Talaya, of the Portuguese Engineers, who was taken 
by the enemy at Campo Mayor, and permitted to return to 
Portugal on his parole, J shall be much obliged to you if 
you will send a French oflSicer of his rank to France in ex- 
change for him, and transmit to me the cartel, in order that 
I may forward it to Major Talaya, and authorize him to 
serve again. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

^ ' The Commissioners ‘ Wellington. 

of the Transport Office: 

To Sir Charles Stuart, K,B. 

* Sir, ‘ Freneda, 30th Nov., 1812. 

^ Some white breeches cloth, which was sent from England 
for the use of the 45th regiment, and was afterwards sold at 
Lisbon, as it was not required for the soldiers, having been 
seized by the officers of the Portuguese customs, I shall be 
much obliged to you if you will lay before the Government 
my request that this cloth should be released, on the amount 
of the established duties on English goods being paid into 
the Custom House. 

^ I have IfLonox to be, &e. 

* iStr Charlee^ Simrt, t Wlt^MKOTON. 



588 


SPAIN. 


1812. 


To Major General H. Clinton, 

^ My dear General, ‘ Freneda, Ist December, 1812. 

‘ I have received yours of the 29th this morning. I have 
no objection to your giving furloughs to the Portuguese 
soldiers in the 6th division, in moderate numbers at a time, 
and in their turn. But it must be understood and positively 
stated, that if any man docs not return to his time, none will 
be allowed to go in future. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Major General H, Clinton: * W ELLINGTON. 

To Lieut, General Sir R. Hill^ K,B. 

* My dear Hill, * Freneda, 1st December, 1812. 

' Fremantle delivered to me last night the letters which 
you had received in regard to the enemy’s movements to- 
wards the Puerto de Banos. 

‘ I do not exactly understand their movements on the 
Upper Tonnes. It appears to me that they have taken up 
their cantonments in the province of Avila, and that their 
advanced guard is on this side of the Tonnes ; and that the 
troops of the advanced guard arc those of whose movements 
we hear so frequently. 

^ I do not think they will come down to Plasencia. If they 
do, it will yu'obably be in large force, and the movement must 
be connected with those of the troops about Salamanca. I 
do not think, therefore, that you will be disturbed in your 
cantonments, particularly as you will be well covered by the 
Alagon. 

" But if you should find the enemy collect in too large 
force for you on the Estremadura side of Banos, audit should 
be necessary for you to retire, you must retire upon Gastello 
Branco. 

' It will be necessary, in that case, to direct the officer at 
the bridge of Alcantara to march away with the bridge to 
Marva5, and to direct all the boats, &c., to be taken up on 
the river. 

" I shall be obliged to you to send to the' officer at the 
bridge, and see what assistance he requires cither to lay it, 
or to take it up, or to remove it ; and have that assistance 



FRRNEDA. 


181 ^ 


589 


given to him by the nearest troops, and by your commis- 
sariat. 

‘ I hear there is a band of robbers between Truxillo and 
Merida, who are playing the devil. If you have sent Penne 
Villemur across the Tagus, desire him to destroy these 
people. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut General " Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 


To Lieut General Sir R. HilL K.B, ' 

^ My dear Hill, ‘ Freneda, 1st December, 1812. 

‘ Since I wrote to you this morning (dated 31st Nov.) I 
have received a letter of yesterday, at 11 o’clock, from 
Blanckley, from Monforte, who says that the enemy are 
moving every thing from Bejar and elsewhere, towards the 
Puerto dc Congosto and Avila. I am inclined to believe 
this. 

‘ I have another letter of the 29th, at 4 in the evening, 
from a clergyman at Batuecas, near Alvcrca, who says tlio 
enemy were moving on Plasencia. Blanckley was, however, 
so certain of tlic truth of his intelligence, that he was about 
to go towards Banos and Bejar himself. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General ' W ELLl NGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K,B: 

To Major General Peacocke. 

‘Sir, ‘ Freneda, 1st December, 1812. 

^ It has been stated to me that the horses of the Life 
Guards have landed at Lisbon in very bad condition ; and I 
have been informed that the men have come unprovided with 
currycombs or* brushes. 

^ As these articles arc essentially necessary on service in 
this country, in which it has been found that attention to 
the cleanliness of the horse’s coat tends essentially to the 
preservation of his health and condition, I beg you will 
desire the Commanding Officers of the two regiments of Life 
Guards to take immediate measures to have the soldiers 
supplied with currycombs and brushes j and that I rely upon 



590 SPAIN* 1812. 

them to make every exertion in their power to restore the 
condition of their horses. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Major General Peacocke* ^ WELLINGTON. 


To Vice Admiral G* Martin, 

^ Sir, ‘ Freneda, 1st December, 1812. 

" Notwithstanding that Lieut. General Sir S. Cotton has 
been serving with the army, his wound is still open, and it is 
necessary that he should return to England. I shall be very 
much obliged to you, therefore, if you will give him a passage 
in a man-of-war. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Vice Admiral G. Martin: ‘ Wellington. 


To Sir Charles Stuart, K,B, 

* My dear Sir, * Freneda, Ist December, 1812. 

‘ I have just received your letter of the 27th November. 
Very great inconvenience is felt at head quarters from Senhor 
Sodre’s absence, and if he is to go to Brazils, somebody must 
be employed here to perform the duty which he has per- 
formed hitherto. 

^ I can have no objection to his going to Brazils if he thinks 
such a voyage will be of advantage to him. But I beg that 
it may be clearly understood by him, by the Local Govern- 
ment, and by the Prince, that Senhor Sodr^ is not deputed 
by me in any manner ; and that he is not charged even with 
a message from me. 

" I do not understand why the 200,000 dollars were not 
paid to the Portuguese Government in dollars as I ordered. 
I ordered a second 100,000 to be given in November, and 
Mr. Kennedy tells me that he likewise ordered the 200,000 
for October to be paid in immediately. I propose to try to 
give 200,000 in November. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

' Wellington. 


‘ Sir Charles Stuart, K,B: 



1812. 


FRENEDA^. 


591 


To Lieut. General Sir R. HilL KJB, 

^ My dear Hill, * Freneda, 2nd Dec., 1812, ^ past 9 a.m. 

^ I received in the night a letter from Blanckley, dated 
Monforte, at ten p.m., the 30th of November, in which he 
confirms the report communicated to you in my letter of 
yesterday afternoon ; and he says that the whole of the 
enemy’s force has passed the Tormes, and moved towards 
Arevalo. 

" Believe me, &c. 

* Lieut General * WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 

To Marshal Sir W, C, Beresford, K.B. 

^ My dear Beresford, ‘ Freneda, 2nd Dec., 1812. 

‘ I have received your letter of the 28th November, and 
although there are other points on which I have to write to 
you, and on which I have proposed to write this day, 1 shall 
not delay to answer that letter immediately. The way in 
which I have always considered your situation in the army, 
was as Marshal of the Portuguese army, and of course next 
in command to myself, as long as I should be in a situation 
to exercise any command at all. 

" An officer has been from time to time appointed second 
in command to this army, upon whom it was the intention 
of the King’s Ministers that the command of the allied army 
should devolve, in case any circumstance should deprive me 
of the command of the army. 

^ I imagined that it had been explained to, and understood 
by, the Portuguese Government, when you were sent to 
command the Portuguese army, that the officer appointed 
to command the British army was to command both ; and I 
tras not aware, till there was a discussion with the Regency 
upon this point, I believe in the beginning of 1811, that 
this point had not been explained, and that I commanded 
the allied army as Marshal General. This point not having 
been explained, it follows of course either that the British 
General officer, second in command, must, in the event of 
my being deprived of the command, be made Marshal Ge- 
neral ; or the awkwardness must occur to which you refer. 



tQ your p\vi3, situation,; or you must take the com- 
mand of the allied army, and not the General officer sent 
out by Gpvcrnnient specially for the purpose of taking the 
command, in case circumstances should deprive me of it. 

I have always felf the inutility and inconvenience of the 
office of second in command. It has a great and high 
sounding title, without duties or responsibility of any de- 
scription ; at the same time that it gives pretensions, the 
assertion of which are, and I believe you know I found them 
in one instance to be, very inconvenient. Every officer in an 
army should have some duty to perform, for which he is re- 
sponsible; and I understand a General officer commanding 
a division or larger body of troops to be in this situation. 
The second in command has none that any body can define ; 
excepting to give opinions for which he is in no manner 
responsible, and which I have found one at least most ready 
to relinquish, when he found that they were not liked in 
England. 

^ Having made known these sentiments to Lord Bathurst, 
Sir Edward Paget w&s lately sent out with the explanation 
that he was coming as a Lieut General in this army, but 
that Government looked to his succeeding to the command, 
in case circumstances should deprive me of it ; so the mat- 
ter would stand in respect to any General officer who should 
now be sent out to fill his situation. In regard to your own 
situation in tlie army, what I have always felt was, that you 
had too many duties of a general nature to perform, and it 
was necessary to refer to you too often, to charge you with 
the details of command ; and excepting on the occasion on 
which I requested you to take the command in the Alentejo 
in 1811, (which Hill had held,) during his absence, I have 
not desired you to take upon you such details. 

* The convenience of the service might however lead to a 
different decision, and I have always felt that you were ready 
to take upon you any duty which might be imposed upon 
you whenever it should be necessary. From the contents 
of this letter you will observe that the conversation between 
us to which you refer, as having passed immediately pre- 
vious to the Wtle of Salamanca, related on my part to the 
situation of the next in British rank to me, solely in the 
evQUt of any circumstance depriving me of the command ; 



PRENKDA. 


1812. 


^^3 


as l novor ontertaiticfd a doubt, particularly after the deci- 
sion of the Commander in Chief, in which I entirely con- 
curred, that you took your rank next to me in the allied 
army as Marshal 

* I shall send your letters to the Secretary of State by this 
post, though I wish some parts of both were altered. 

' Believe me, &c. 

* Marshal * WELLINGTON. 

Sir W. C, Beresfordt K.B.' 


To Earl Bathurst, 

* My Lord, ‘ Freneda, 2nd Dec., 1812. 

* I enclose a letter from Marshal Sir William Beresford» 
in relation to his rank in the allied army, to which I beg to 
draw your attention. 

^ The Commander in Chief having decided, upon reference 
to him in the year 1809, that officers in the service of His 
Majesty and the Prince Regent of Portugal should rank with 
each other according to the dates of their several commis- 
sions ; there is no doubt whatever that Marshal Sir William 
Beresford, holding the rank of a Marshal, ranks next me in 
the allied army. I hold the rank of Marshal General in the 
allied army. 

^ His Majesty’s Government have thought proper from 
time to time to appoint a General officer to be second in 
command to the British araiy, senior in rank in the British 
service to Sir William Beresford, on which officer it has been 
the intention of His Majesty’s Government that the com- 
mand of the allied army should devolve, in case any circum- 
stance should deprive me of the command. 

^ It does not appear, however^ that any explanation in 
regard to command has ever been had with the Portuguese 
Government, in order to remove the awkwardness which 
Marshal Sir William Beresford notices ; and in point of fact 
I command the allied army now as Marshal General of the 
Portuguese army. In case circumstances should deprive me 
of the command, therefore, either the second in command of 
the British army must be made Marshal General likewise, 
or Marshal Beresford must quit the army at a moment when 
hk absence might be interpreted to his disadvantage ; or 
he must assume the command of the allied army and not the 

VOL. IX. 2 Q 



594 


hPA\% ipif, 

officer selected by Majesty’s Oovernmoot as the pefspxi 
on whom they wish it should devolve. 

^ In case Government should think proper to send any 
General officer out to replace Lieut. General Sir Edward 
Paget, it is desirable they should advert to the circumstances 
affecting his situation, stated by Marshal Sir William Beres- 
ford. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst: ' WELLINGTON. 


To the Hon, Berkeley Paget, 

‘ My dear Berkeley, ‘ Freneda, 2nd Dec., 1812. 

' I enclose two letters from your poor brother, I have 
not received that one which he says he wrote to me from 
Matilla ; nor has he received one which I wrote to him and 
sent to him with £200. The latter was sent to the outposts 
of Soult’s army, whereas he was with the army of Portugal. 

" He is gone towards France, and you must try to get him 
exchanged. As he docs not acknowledge the receipt of it, 
I conclude that he has not got the first money we sent 
him on the day after he was taken. He will be badly off 
therefore with his twenty four doubloons, unless you take 
some measures to supply him in France. 

' It is just possible that the French officer will send the 
money after him. 

" There is a letter from him for Lord Uxbridge, which 
will go to England by this mail. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Hon, Berkeley Paget' ‘ Wellington. 

To General Fives, Governor of Ciudad Rodrigo, 

^ Sir, ‘ Freneda, 2nd Dec., 1812* 

' I have received a complaint from Major Napier of the 
43rd regiment, stating that a soldier of the artillery of the 
garrison of Ciudad Bodrigo stabbed with a knife in the helly 
a soldier of the 43rd regiment, on the 29th of last month.. 
The soldier guilty of this offence is known to the Major pf 
the artillery of the garrison, haying been pointed out to him 
by Major Napier; and as offences of this nature have been 
Cf?ypmitted top hrequently lately, J request that the pffence 



PRP^DA. 


m^. 

aC this soldier may be investigated in the most solemn man-^ 
ner, and that he may be punished aceording tp if he 
should be found to deserve punishment. 

^ I am concerned to have to mention to you that Major 
Napier complains that the Major of the ai*tillery> instead of 
doing every thing in his power, as was his duty, to discover 
and bring this offender to punishment, did every thing in 
his power to elude the discovery of the offender, and to 
screen him. If this be true, it is not astonishing that 
offences of this description are frequent. 

‘ But if it be true, the Major of the artillery is highly 
criminal ; and I beg that he may be put in arrest, and may 
be brought to trial for having omitted to do every thing 
in his power to discover a soldier of the artillery of the gar- 
rison of Ciudad Rodrigo on the 29th November, who had 
stabbed a soldier of the 43rd regiment in the belly.” 

^ Major Napier shall attend to give evidence before the 
Court which will be appointed to try the Major of the artil- 
lery, at any time and place which shall be named. 

' I beg to refer your Excellency to the letter which I wrote 
to Don Carlos de Espana, on the 28th of May, when I con- 
sented to advance the pay of the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, 
from the military chest of this army ; and by which you will 
see that it depended upon the attention to discipline of the 
officers and troops ; and that no person was to receive pay 
who should not be actually doing duty. 

‘ The Major of artillery cannot be supposed to be per- 
forming his duty when he is in arrest ; and 1 request that 
your Excellency will retain in your hands the sum of 3000 
reals set down in the estimate for his pay for two months, 
until I shall be made acquainted with the result of his trial. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ General Fives: ' Wellington. 


To General Don Carlos de Espa^ 

< ‘ Freheda, 2nd Dec., 1812. 

‘I am concerned to inform you that the commanding 
officer of the 14th light dragoons has informed me that 
Lieut. Manuel Pastor of the cazadores de Castilla cut down 
a dragoon of the 14th regiment at San Felices el Grande 

2q2 





with his sword, on t|ic 28th November ; this dragoon having 
done nothing to offend him. 

* As drcttmstanecs' of this hind have occurred very fre- 
quently fetcly, I beg that this officer may be put in arrest, 
and bmught to trial; 

Your Ejtcellehcy will recollect that when I consented to 
advance the pay of the troops under your command from 
the ihilitary chest of the army, it was on condition that the 
troops should be disciplined, and kept as soldiers ought 
to be ; and likewise thattio person should receive pay who 
did not perform his duty. 

‘ I leave your Excellency to decide how far the troops 
under your command can be called disciplined. 

' It is certain, however, that when Lieut. Manuel Pastor 
shall be in arrest, he cannot be supposed to be performing 
his duty j and therefore I request that the sum of 900 reals, 
being the amount of his pay for two months, for which you 
have a warrant in your possession, may be detained in your 
hands, till I shall be made acquainted >vith the result of the 
investigation into his conduct. 

" I have the honor to bo, &c. 

^ General ' Wellington. 

Don Carlos de EspoHa,' 


To Vice Admiral G. Martin. 

' My dear Admiral, ‘ Freneda, 2nd Dec., 1812. 

^ It it probable that Government may be desirous of 
sending more men and horses to this country, and I am 
anxious that the whole should arrive before the spring 
equinoctial gales. I shall be very much obliged to you if 
you will send back the horse ships and transports, &c., as 
soon as the horses and men they shall have brought may be 
disembarked ; of -course unless you should have received 
directions from the Admiralty for the disposal of them in a 
different manner. 

* Believe me, See. 

* Vice Admiral 0 . Martin: ' Wellington. 





1812; 


To Sir dkarles Stuart^ / 

< My dear Sir, ‘Fr«iii9d<i^ 894 P«c^ J812. 

^ I have received a long letter from Sir J^enoedy, 

with which I will not trouble you, respecting the elfet of 
an order which you have lately given Mr-jPipon, to. give 
Mr. Sampayo bills upon the Treasury in exchange for eCKr 
tain Commissary paper in his possession, at the: rate nf 
exchange of the day. I am concerned that you did not 
write to me on this subject, as Sir B. Kennedy complains 
that the conduct of Mr. Pipon in this instance ht directly in 
disobedience of his orders, given with a view to the ame- 
lioration of our finances, which effect they had already in 
some degree produced. It is better that upon all these 
occasions we should incur the inconvenience of a little 
delay, and allow matters to go through their regular channel. 

* 1 acknowledge that my opinion of Mr. Sampayo is a 
little shaken by this transaction. I consider the purchasers 
of our Commissariat bills and debts as the worst enemies 
we have in the Peninsula ; and there is no person in the 
Peninsula who knows so well as Mr. Sampayo that I enter- 
tain this opinion. I suspected, unjustly, that he purchased 
our debts incurred on the expedition to Oporto, in the year 
1809, and he knows that I ordered the then Commissary 
General, Mr. Murray, to pay him the last of all our crcr 
ditors. He afterwards convinced me that he had been a 
contractor under Mr. Rawlins, and I ordered that he might 
be paid immediately; but I explained to himi and he per- 
fectly understood, the mischief he would' have done us as a 
purchaser of our debts. 

"Mr. Sampayo is employed as our broker, and he has 
besides had contracts for the supply of vj(.rious sums of 
money on private bargains. Surely i if he had money he 
should have put it in the chesty and should not have specur 
lated in our debts. But then ho says he sold corn for tliese 
securities. That is just as bad. The securities were n^idr 
intended to be transferable ; and they are our worst enemies, 
and the worst enemies of the Portuguese Goverument also, 
who at all aid in making them so. 

" I am not astonished at the determination of the Com- 
missary General no longer to employ Mr. Sampayo as a 



SPAIN. ISIS. 

broker, if he does not clear himself of the charge of specu- 
lating in our^debts. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Sir Charles Stuart, K^B. ' WtiLLlNOTON. 

‘ Will you send the enclosed letter to Madeira by the 
first opportunity V 


To the Earl of LdverpooL 

* My dear Lord, ‘ Freneda, 2nd Dec., 1812. 

^ I beg leave to recommend to your protection the fatnily 
of the late Major Wurmb, of the King’s German Legion, 
who fell at the siege of Burgos. I understand that they are 
very numerous, and totally unprovided for. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ The Earl of Liverpool: ' WELLINGTON. 


To Colonel Torrens. 

« Sir, * Freneda, 2nd Dec,, 1812. 

^ I enclose, to be laid before the Commander in Chiefs a 
letter from Major General Walker relative to the loss of his 
baggage on the day subsequent to the capture of Badajoz. 

‘ I am so fully aware of the outrages committed by the 
troops at the time, and of the very unfortunate situation in 
which the Major General was placed by the plunder of 
every thing he was possessed of, at a if oment when he was 
rendered incapable of attending to his own concerns by the 
severity of his wounds, that I am induced strongly to recom- 
mend the case to his Royal Highness’s favorable notice, 
although it is evidently not customary to grant compensa- 
tion for losses to be attributed solely to the irregularities of 
the soldiers. 

" I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Colonel Torrens: ‘ Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst. 

* My Lord, ‘ Freneda, 2nd Dec., 1812. 

‘ Although I have not yet any intelligence upon which 1 
can rely of the exact position of the enemy’s armies, I am 



FttEKEDA. 


1^11 


5 ^ 


certain that the whole have crossed the Termed^ with the ex- 
ception 0 ^ very small posts in front of Salamahca; and I 
have ordered the whole of the allied army into cantonments, 
those under Sir Rowland Hill in the province of Coria, and 
the remainder in the province of Beira, on the Dotiro and 
Mondego, with the exception of the Light division and Lieut. 
General Alton’s brigade of cavalry, which remain on the 
Agueda. The whole of the troops will be supplied through- 
out the winter without difficulty ; and are in situations in 
which they can receive the clothing and other equipments 
which they require. 

‘ The last accounts from General Elio state his intention of 
being in Alicante on the 9th ultimo. Some detachments of 
his army were in Madrid. The Duque del Parque, who now 
commands the troops lately under the command of General 
Ballesteros, was on the 22nd at Villa Neilva de los Infantes. 

‘ The army of Galicia have crossed the Duero, and have 
moved into Galicia; and the troops under Don Carlos 
de Espaha have gone into the garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo, 
and those under the Conde de Penne Villemur and General 
Morillo have crossed the Tagus at Alcantara into Lower 
Estremadura. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

^Eatl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

^ My dear Lord, ‘ Freneda, 2nd Dec., 1812. 

" You will see by my dispatch how I have disposed of the 
army. I am quite convinced that I have adopted the only 
measure which will set us to rights, and I hope in a short 
time to hear of great improvements. 

I propose to take the field with the largest body I can get 
together as early in the spring as the green forage will be on 
the ground. I shall be obliged to you therefore if you will 
take measures that all the horses, reinforcements, recruits, 
ordnance, &c., which you prepare to send to the army, may 
sail from England by the 1st of February. 

^ I propose to go to Cadiz as soon as I shall be quite cer- 
tain that the French are settled for the winter, and in what 
shape. 1 have much to arrange with the Spanish Govern- 



600 


SFAINt 


m%. 

raent. I shall not be long absent from hence, and indeed 
not many days absent from some of the posts of the army. 

" I write to Admiral Martin not to detain any transports or 
horse ships one moment after they shall have disembarked 
those men or horses which they shall have brought. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Earl Bathurst,* ] f Wellington. 

} To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley ^ K.B. 

" My dear Henry, ‘Frcneda, 3rd Deo., 1812. J 

" I enclose the copy of my last dispatches. I am certain 
that the French have all retired across the Tormes, but I do 
not yet know to what positions, as I can get but little intel- 
ligence. I propose, however, to set out for Cadiz in a few 
days, and I shall be much obliged to you if you will have 
tiros placed for me at Fuente Cantos, one half way between. 
Fuentc Cantos and Seville, and one at Seville. 

* Send a messenger to meet me on the road by Badajoz 
and Valencia de Alcantara, to let me know whether I shall 
find the tiros; and where. 

^ I shall write to the Minister at War to-morrow, and shall 
send you a copy of the letter. 

* Ever yours most affectionately, 

* The Right Hon, * Wellington. 

Sir H, Wellesley, KB. 

^ I shall take my own carriage.’ 

To Marshal Sir W, C, Beresford, K,B. 

^ My dear BeresfORD, ‘ Freneda, 4th Dec., 1812. 

^ You will see from the Quarter Master General’s paper 
how the troops will be distributed in cantonments, where I 
propose that, if possible, they should remain during the 
winter. If I am not disturbed beforehand, it is my wish to 
assemble the army and to move forward as early in April as 
there will be green forage ; that is to say, if we should bo 
strong enough to move forward at all. I therefore wish that 
the recruits, convalescents, and every thing which the troops 
require, should be with their regiments by the middle of 
March. I shall be glad if you will make arrangements ac- 
cordingly. 



FRENEPA. 




m 


' It is best, indeed, that every thing should be sent to the 
regiments as soon as possible; but 1 mention the middle of 
March as the period at which every thing ought to be 
complete, 

' You will see that I have sent D’XJrban^s cavalry into 
Tras os Montes, with which disposition he appears well satis- 
fied. Campbell’s and Diggcns’s will go into the Alentejo, 
I have not seen M‘Grigor since I received your letter, but I 
will speak to him respecting Mr. Burrows, whose assistance 
you wish to have< 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Marshal * WELLINGTON. 

Sir IV, C, Beres/ordt K,B* 


To Lieut. General the Earl of Dalhousie, 

* My Lord, ‘ Freneda, 4th Doc., 1812. 

^ In consequence of the excessive number of men of the 
— nd regiment absent from their regiment on the march 
of the 15tli and 16th Nov., and of the reports which I 
had received of the habitual want of discipline of the — nd 
regiment, I gave orders that the Commanding OflScer of 
that regiment should be put in arrest, with the intention 
of bringing him to trial before a General Court Martial 
for gross neglect of duty, in having allowed the officers 
commanding companies so far to neglect theirs, as to 
allow so many men to quit the ranks of their companies on 
the march. 

‘ I have since found, by a correspondence which Lieut. 
General the Hon. L. Cole has put into my hands, that this 

officer was Colonel ; and although I am of opinion that 

the reasons alleged in that correspondence by Colonel 

afford no justification whatever for his conduct, or for tlio 
neglect of the officers of the regiment, but that, on the con- 
trary, Colonel ’s letters prove that the officers of the 

-^nd regiment were guilty of a further neglect of duty, of 
which 1 was not aware till I read the letters, viz., that the 
soldiers of the — nd did not cook on the evening of the 14th 
November, I am disposed to release Colonel -- — - from his 
arrest. 

* I desire that he may be released, because I am iu hopes 
that the circular letter which I addressed to the General 



SPAtK. 


1811 


divisions on the 28th November, will 
lisvo Its duo weight on the mind of Colonel — and of the 
O^cets tinder his command in particular, and on the army itt 

general ; and that Colonel and the officers under his 

command will see that officers commanding and doing duty 
in regiments have important duties to perform in their can- 
tonments, in their camps, and on marches, besides the regular 
attendance at parades ; and that they will hereafter perform 
those duties, and prevent the recurrence of the evils, of 
which, in the — nd regiment in particular, I have too much 
reason to complain. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut, General ^ Wellington. 

the Earl of Dalhousie.' 

Th Sir Robert Kennedy^ Commissary General, 

‘ Freneda, 4th Dec., 1812. 

' My dear Sir, Half-past 9 a.m. 

" I have perused Mr. ’s report regarding the 

great coats and tents. I consider what he says to be very 
unsatisfactory regarding both these objects. If articles of 
public store arrive to the charge of a particular commissary 
in bad order — from wet, for instance — it is quite a novel 
doctrine to say that he has performed his duty by putting 
them in a place where they could receive no injury ; and that 
the injury they received was on the road, before they came 
to his hands. Surely it is the duty of a Commissary in 
charge of stores to endeavor at least to preserve them for 
the public service ; and if they have received injury from wet 
on the road to have them dried. In this case of the tents and 
great coats, head quarters were at Ciudad Eodrigo, and the 
state of these stores ought to have been reported. There 
were at Ciudad Rodrigo, at the same time, hundreds of con- 
valescents ; and an application from Mr. to the 

Commandant would have got him all the assistance he wished 
for. This is a very bad business altogether. 

" I shall be very much obliged to you if you will desire 

Mr. to deliver to the Governor of Ciudad Rodrigo 

ten of the tents which are there ; and, at all events, let us 
have those remaining dried and properly taken care of in 
the itores. 



FRBItiiM. 


‘ 1 obsefre thftt Mrs Bissett is sflU in Fortt^g&l. It is 
necessary that he should obey the orders of the ^cretary of 
State^ and go to Gibraltar 

ordered^ in the month of May last, that tin camp- 
kettles should be provided for the troops ; and I know that 
orders were given that they should be made at Lisbon and 
at Oporto. I believe they were made ; and, as well as I can 
recollect, Mr. Dalrymple told me at Burgos that there were 
a considerable number at St. Joa5 da Pesqueira. There 
are none in the return of stores 'you gave me the other day, 
excepting about 1000 at Lisbon, Coimbra, and Valada. 
Indeed, the whole concern of our Quarter Master General’s 

stores requires amendment ; as is obvious from Mr. ’s 

having on the 19th returned 15,000 great coats at Ciudad 
Rodrigo, whereas only 10,000 had been ordered there, and 
he had really only 9500. 

* It is very desirable that this concern should be put upon 
a proper footing, and that I should get regular periodical 
returns of what is in store at each place, made out alphabe- 
tically, and specifying whether for the Portuguese, Spanish, 
or British army. 

' I observe, by the returns, that there are in the stores 
at Lisbon, bayonet belts for infantry, 45,150 ; gun slings, 
45,112; pouch belts, 45,143; pouches, 45,148. I should wish 
to know whether these stores were sent out for the Spanish, 
Portuguese, or British army ; whether they are made of 
buff or black leather. At all events, I should wish that ten 
thousand of each should be brought round to Oporto, or 
Figueira, as soon as possible; and that the buff, if there 
should be any in store, should be brought round in pre- 
ference to the others. 

‘ Pray let me know what orders you have given for bring- 
ing the clothing up to the several regiments of the 1st divi- 
sion from Lamego ; Colonel Stirling s brigade from Lamego; 
the 7th division from Figueira ; the 3rd and 4th divisions 
from Abrantes ; General Anson's and General Ponsonby’s 
brigades from Figueira ; General Alten’s brigade, &c. 

* Believe me, &c., 

* Sir Robert Kennedy, ‘ Wellikgton. 

Commissary General* 



604 fjpATNi 

To Don Josef de^di^ajal,M ck iVar, Cadiz. 

f Sir, ‘ Freneda, 4tb Dec., 1812. 

‘ I have had the honor of receiving your Excellency’s 
letter of the 18th November, in which you have enclosed the 
copy of the decree of the Cortes, by which I have been ap- 
pointed to command in chief the Spanish armies ; and I beg 
leave again to express my acknowledgments for the con^ 
fidence which has thus been reposed in me ; and the Cortes 
and Government may rest assured that I will omit nothing 
which depends upon me to forward the just cause of the 
Spanish nation. 

‘Your Excellency and the Government have a right to 
expect from me an accurate representation of facts as they 
shall appear to me ; and you may depend upon it that I will 
perform this duty. 

‘ 1 am concerned to have to inform you that the discipline 
of the Spanish armies is in the very lowest state; and their 
efficiency is, consequently, much deteriorated. Neither offi- 
cers nor troops having been paid for months, nay, some for 
years, it cannot be expected that the troops should be in 
very good order, or that there should exist much subordina- 
tion in the service. 

‘But circumstances have come to my knowledge, and 
under my view, lately, which show that the evil has taken 
deep root ; and that it requires a stronger remedy than 
the mere removal of the causes, viz , want of pay, clothing, 
and necessaries, which have originally occasioned it. Not 
only arc your armies undisciplined and inefficient, and both 
officers and soldiers insubordinate from want of pay, pro- 
visions, clothing, and necessaries, and the consequent en- 
durance of misery for a long period of time, but the habits 
of indiscipline and insubordination are such, that even those 
corps which have been well clothed and regularly paid by 
my directions, and have, to my knowledge, seldom, if ever, 
felt any privations for more than a year, are in as bad a 
state, and as little to be depended upon as soldiers, as the 
others. , The desertion is immense, even from the troops 
last adverted to* I can assure your Excellency, that the 
officers of the army in general (with some exceptioira of 
officers, General and on the Staff, as well as attached to 



FRBNEDA. 


mm 




regiments) take but little pains to apply a remedy to these 
evils ; and, upon the whole, I am sorry to acknowledge to 
your Excellency, that I consider that I have undertaken a 
task of which the result is as little promising as that which 
was ever undertaken by any individual. 

^ I certainly was not aware, till very lately, of the real 
state of the Spanish army, or I should have hesitated before 
I should have charged myself with such an Herculean labor 
as its command ; but having accepted the command, I will 
not relinquish the task because it is laborious and the 
success unpromising ; but will exercise it as long as I shall 
possess the confidence of the authorities who have conferred 
it upon me. It will be necessary, however, that the Govern- 
ment should arm me with powers to enable me to perform 
this task. It is my opinion, 

^ First; that officers should be promoted, and should be 
appointed to commands, solely at my recommendation. 

^Secondly; that I should have the power of dismissing 
from the service those whom I should think deserving such 
punishment. 

^Thirdly; that those resources of the State which are 
applicable to the payment, or equipment, or supply of the 
troops, should be applied in such manner as I might recom- 
mend. 

* Fourthly ; in order to enable me to perform my duties, 
it will be necessary that the Chief of the Staff, and such 
limited number of the Staff Officers of the ai*my as may be 
thought necessary, should be sent to my head quarters ; and 
that the Government should direct that all military reports 
of all descriptions should be sent to me; and I shall, of 
course, make my reports to your Excellency. 

^The division of the Spanish territory into districts, and 
the appointment of an army to each district, was a wise 
arrangement ; and I should propose that it should continue. 
But it must be observed, that it is a most expensive and 
burthensomc arrangement to the public. 

‘ For instance, Castille and Estremadura are the territory 
of the 5th army ; and, besides Captain General Castanos, 
who is most usefully and deservedly employed, there is a 
Captain General with a large staff in Estremadura, and a 
Captain General with a large staff in Caistillc, There are 



60$ 

mt in^e former its mmj it^n m lyiU foriih the 

garpsQU of BadaJoKi nojajip the la|ter as mahy as will form 
the garrison of Ciudad B^drigo. 

^ The large staff lu Castille is not 0 |ily useless^ de- 
structive of the resources by which troops could hp maint^ 
tained# . 

' Then in the same manner the 2nd and 3rd armies do 
not, altogether, compose two divisions, and yet they have 
attached to them all the staff, military as well as civil, of 
two complete armies. 

^ The 7th army in like manner is composed almost entirely 
of bands of guerrillas ; and the only corps that I know of in 
Spain that at all approach in numbers to the size of armies 
are the 4th and 6th. 

‘I would propose to your Excellency that the Captain 
General Castahos should continue, as he is at present, the 
Captain General of the 5th, 6th, and 7th armies, with the 
staff attached belonging to one only of those armies, viz., the 
6th, and that all the rest, of every description, civil as well 
as military, should be recalled by the Government, excepting 
only such officers as General Castanos should think proper to 
retain for the performance of the duties in the provinces of 
Castille and Estremadura. 

‘ An arrangement of the same description ought to be ap- 
plied to the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th armies ; but I should wish to 
defer to make any proposition regarding these armies till I 
shall have seen more of the detail of their state. 

* I should wish also to defer to a future opportunity, to 
draw your attention to the alterations which the existing 
state of the country requires should be made in the powers 
of the Captain General of the provinces, and the Intendants 
respectively. 

' We must not conceal from ourselves that theru is but 
little authority of any description whatever in the proyinces 
which have been occupied by the enemy ; and even that 
little depends on tlie exercise of military ipoytpp It is 
vain to expect that a gentleman c^allcd an Intendant will 
exercise the power to Realize the resources of the countiry 
for the state, or even for the military, without the assistawp^ 
pf a military force \ whicji military force, in the 
of the wifi 4?ftrpy mprp thap 4® wpi|l4 prpfJupp, 






m 


^V0iiiBuppoisffiig th^ tht military cUKf flipul# t>Q at alf times 
disposed ready to a$iiat iiii supportings the authority 
of the Intendant. 

" I am aware that it is wrong in principle to invest military 
tnen with civil powers;' but when the country is in danger 
that must be adopted which will tend most directly to save 
it ; when the enemy is in the country that must be done 
which tends most directly to drive him -out, whatever may 
be ttie constitutional principles which* may be invaded by 
those measures. I throw this out at present for your con- 
sideration, reserving myself to a future time to make a dis- 
tinct proposition on this subject. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Don Josef de Carvajal, ' W ELLINGTON. 

Minister at War* 


To the Right Hon, Sir Henry Wellesley, KJB, 

‘ My dear Henry, ‘ Freneda, 4th Dec., 1812. 

‘ I enclose the draft of my letter to the Minister at War. 
There is nothing new. 

" Ever yours most affectionately, 

• The Right Hon, ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir H, Wellesley, K.B,* 

To Sir Charles Stmrt, K,B, ^ 

< Sir, ‘ Freneda, 4th Pec., 1812. 

^ I enclose a letter and its enclosures, which I have re- 
ceived from Sir R. Kennedy, in regard to the difficulties in 
the construction of Sijetee on the Tagus at Junqueira. 

‘ The object in constructing this jetee is to facilitate and 
expedite the landing of provisions and stores ; in which ob- 
ject it would appear that the Portuguese Government are 
interested, if they are at all interested in facilitating the 
defence of the country. 

^ It is a military object; and I have dways uuderstpod 
and have known, that private property of all descriptionsi 
corn, trees, horses, cattle, carts, houses, &c., have been seized 
by embargo, when required for military purposes, generally 
without payment; but whether with qr without payment, 
every thing has been seized that is required by the Portu- 
guese army, without consulting the inclination of the owner. 



sfSPAi^. 1812 . 

‘ Probably the Government arp of opinion that the same 
rule ought not in reason to be required to be applied to the 
wants of a forfeign army, however necessary the assistance 
of -that fo^ei^h hfmy to' the defence of the country, and 
although that ftireign army are willing to pay for what is 
required! However, as I differ in opinion with the Govern- 
ment uponi this subject, I request that, if the refusal to force 
Serihor Ctildas to Supply the wood required, for payment, is 
persisted in, you will bring this case under the consideration 
of His Majesty’s Government. I shall certainly bring it 
itttder the consideration of His Royal Highness the Prince 
Regent of Portugal. 

‘I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart, K.B' ‘ Wellington. 

To S. Hunter, Esq., Deputy Paymaster General. 

' Sir, ‘ Freneda, 6th Dec., 1812. 

‘ Dr. M'Grlgor has represented to me the great incon- 
venience felt by the Officers of the Medical Staff, in conse- 
quence of their being unable to receive their pay at the 
several hospital stations at which they are employed, even 
at the late periods at which the Staff pay, paid from the 
ordinaries of the army, is issued to the army at large, there 
being at those hospital stations no branch of the pay de- 
partment. It has, therefore, appeared to me to be expe- 
dient to direct that the Purveyor General of the hospital 
shall give in an estimate every two months of the Staff pay 
due to the whole medical department attached to this army 
wherever stationed, with the exception of that part of it at 
Cadiz ; and that a warrant shall be made out in the name 
of the Purveyor General to enable him to receive the Staff 
pay of the whole department for whom he will have esti- 
mated ; for which sum he will give his receipt in triplicate. 

‘ He will then issue their pay to the several officers en- 
titled to receive it, taking their receipts in triplicate, which 
he will forward to the office at Lisbon, when his receipt will 
be returned. 

‘I have the honor to be, &c. 

* S. Hunter, Esi^.\ \ ‘Wellington. 



1812. FftfewfeDA. * 6idi9 

^0 His Royal Highness the Huhe o/Yotk. 

< Sir, * Frened^ 6th Dec., 1812. 

^ According to your Royal Highness’s former direotions, I 
have given directions that the privates of the 24th regiment^ 
and of the 2nd batt. 38th regiment, should be transferred 
to the 1st battalions of those regiments respectively, and 
that the skeletons of those two battalions should be sent to 
England. 

‘ I have directed that the effectives of the Queen’s regi- 
ment, the 24th, 30th, 44th, 53rd, and 58th, should be trans- 
ferred into four companies of each of those battalions, and 
that the officers and non-commissioned officers of those 
companies fi*om which the privates have been transferred 
should be sent home. I have formed the four companies 
of the Queen’s and the four companies of the 53rd into a 
battalion; the four companies of the 24th and the four 
companies of the 58th into another ; and the four companies 
of the 30th and the four companies of the 44th into another. 

^ I enclose a copy of the orders which I have issued upon 
this subject, from which your Royal Highness will see the 
detail of the arrangement. 

* My reason for adopting this arrangement is, that I have 
for the service in this country the whole number of men of 
which these provisional battalions will be composed, all of 
whom are seasoned to the service and climate. Experience 
has shown that they could not be replaced by three times 
their numbers brought from England, or any other part of 
the world. However, if your Royal Highness disapproves 
of the arrangement, it will be easy to break up these bat- 
talions, and to send the officers and men home, upon re- 
ceiving your Royal Highness’s orders to that effect. 

‘ If your Royal Highness should approve of the arrange- 
ment, I should wish to extend its principle to the 51st and 
68th regiments, and to send home the officers and non- 
commissioned officers of four companies of each of those 
regiments. I should wish, however, as those are light regi- 
ments, still to keep them as separate battalions, each con- 
sisting of six companies, in this country. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

• His Royal Highness < WELLINGTON. 

the Duke of ForA.* 

VOL. IX. 2 R 





Ih Colons Torrem. 

^ Mr bEAR TorrRNS, ‘ Fr^neda, 6tb Dec., 1812. 

- ^ I enclose a letter which has been put into toy hands Sy 
Lieut. Colonel Jackson*, who is nqw doing the duty of 
Assistant Quarter Master General with Lieut. General Sir 
Rowland Hill’s detachment. He is called from that duty to 
perform that of a mounted officer with' a battalion of Guards. 

' I have always been in the habit of considering the wish 
of one of their Royal Highnesses respecting their regiment 
as a law, and have acted accordingly, when it has not mili- 
tated with His Majesty’s regulations. 1 beg you, however, 
to represent to the Commander in Chief that Lieut. General 
Sir R. Hill has informed me that he shall feel the greatest in- 
convenience from the want of the assistance of Lieut. Colonel 
Jackson, and I certainly do not know where I shall find an 
officer qualified to replace him in that situation. It might 
not be difficult to find one to replace him as a mounted 
officer with the Coldstream Guards. 

‘ I have frequently mentioned to you the great incon- 
venience which I felt from the constant change of officers 
in charge of every important department, or filling every 
situation of rank or responsibility with this army. No man 
can be aware of the extent of this inconvenience who has not 
got this great machine to keep in order and to direct ; and 
together with the British army, the Spanish and Portuguese 
concerns, the labor which these constant changes occasion 
is also of the most distressing description. No sooner is an 
arrangement made, the order given, and the whole in a 
train of execution, than a gentleman comes out who has 
probably but little knowledge of the practical part of his 
duty in any country, and none whatever in this most difficult 
of all scenes of military operation. Nobody in the British 
army ever reads a regulation or an order as if it were to be 
a guide for his conduct, or in any other manner than, as an 
amusing novel; and the consequence is, that when com- 
plicated arrangements are to be carried into execution (and 
in this country the poverty of its resources renders them all 
complicated), every gentleman proceeds according to his 
fancy; and then, when it is found that the arrangement 


* Major General Sir Richard Jackson, K.C.B. 



FREKEDA. 


mu. 


611 


fails (as it must fail if the order is not strietly obeyed), they 
come upon me to set matters to rights, imd thus my labor is 
iucreased ten fold. 

^ The officers on the Staff of the British army are effi^ires 
in regiments ; and considering that it is most impoi^ant to 
every army to have good and efficient Staff officers, I do not 
know that the Colonels of regiments have any right to inter- 
fere to prevent the appointment of officers to the Staff from 
their regiments, or to occasion by their influence the relin- 
quishment of their offices on the Staff when they think proper. 
If they have this power of interference it is one which may 
very materially affect the public interests, and it ought not 
to be exercised lightly or with caprice. At the same time I 
admit the necessity of keeping regiments well officered, but 
I should wish to know who is more interested in keeping re* 
giments well officered than the officer who commands the 
army ? 

^ Believe me, &c, 

^ Colonel Torrens: * Wellington. 

To Marshal Sir W, C. Beresford, K.B, 

* My dear Beresford, * Freneda, 6th Dec., 1812. 

* I have received your letter of the 3rd. The charges 

against Captain are so serious, that I cannot allow him 

to go unpunished, unless he should give in his resignation 
to quit the service forthwith. I have ordered him in arrest. 

' I am very much afraid that I cannot give Major 
MacGregor the Majority of the Veteran Battalion. 

" Believe me, &c. 

* Marshal . ^ WELLINGTON. 

Sir W. C. Beresford, K. B: 


To Lieut, General Sir R. Hill, K,B. 
f My dear Hill, ‘Freneda, 8th Dec.; 1812. 4 p.m. 

‘ I have just received your letter of the 7th. I was in hopes 
I had put your troops in a plentiful country. I knew that 
part of it had supplied the consumption of Marmont’s army 
last year, from July to December, and that in this year they 
had not a single soldier near them. I likewise recollected 
the fertility of the same country in the year 1809, and I 
knew that there was plenty of barley, at least about Zarza, 
in this year. 


2r2 



m 


SPAIK. 


1812. 


' •’HWWeV’er^ all tli&t I can say is, that I placed the ftrtny iti 
cantoiiQiepts forits convenience, and in order that the horses 
might recover their condition, and the men their discipline, 
and it is nehrly a matter of indifference to me where they are 
cahtoned. 

* If the province of Coriaand Plasencia cannot supply even 
th^ ktraw wanted for your infantry, and the few cavalry which 
I suppose' you' must keep with you, you must then go else- 
where ; and when I shall learn this is decidedly the case, I will 
point out the place for your cantonments. 

* If the 13th dragoons and General Slade’s brigade cannot 
be supplied where they are, they had better cross the Tagus 
at Alcantara, and stay either in Estremadura south of the 
Tagus, or cross the frontier and go to Portalegre. If they 
cannot live there, they must go to Lisbon. But some exertion 
must be made by the oflScers of the cavalry to prevent the 
waste of forage wherever they go. 

' I have got three divisions of infantry, and three brigades 
of cavalry, with their artillery, well cantoned and supplied in 
^the valley of the Mondego, which is neither of half the extent 
or fertility, or so well peopled, as the valleys of the Tietar and 
the Alagon, nor is there one town of 40 houses in the whole 
extent of it. But I must do the General Officers of the 
cavalry the justice to say that they are desirous of overcoming, 
and not of making difficulties. 

' I do not agree with the Conde de Penne Villemur that 
Soult’s troops have not gone to Oropesa. They have certainly 
gone there and to Arzobispo, and are about to look for food 
[south of the Tagus. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

•Lieut. General ‘ WellikgtOK. 

Sir R. mi, k.b: 

To Marshal Sir W. C, Beretford, K.B. 

BeUesFORI), • Freneda, 9th Dec., 1813. 

*^I am glad to find from your letter of the 3rd that the 
ftrrRngemehts of D’Urban’s cavalry, and the cantonmenta of 
'the aFnijf in' general,' will have been satisfactory. 

"/ ' I did nOtiifOve the 20th regiment, as I wished to be in 
s^O’Sfrength’h^’ealxmts, and meant it should wait till; re* 



PRENEDA, 


m2. 


lieved. But I have now desired th^ ^ ipay ippye f^a ppon 
as the weather shall be a little fettled, , . , . . 

* I do not see why the 22nd should remain Mericla*^ 

‘ Believe ,[ [, V,’.!,' 

' Marshal ^ ‘ WELUNaTOIf^ 

Sir m C. Beresford, KM. ^ . V ! 

" P.S. It would probably be best, under existing pirpuipf 
stances, not to put a regiment of militia in Almeida* hut; tp 
keep the three disposable for the garrisons in 4»feptejo^ I 

^ I thought of a regiment of the line for Almeida, to aayp 
calling out the Militia. And if we can carry the war forward 
again, as I hope we may, we might then put the militia rcg^ 
ment in Almeida.’ ^ 


To Lieut, General Sir R. Hill, K.B, 

^ My dear Hill, ‘Freneda, 9th Dec., 1812. 4 p.m. 

^ I have just received your letter of the 8th. When I wrote 
to you to retire, if necessary, upon Gastello Branco, it was in 
the notion that the enemy might be too strong for you in 
your front. I had no idea that the provinces of Coria and 
Plasencia would not feed your troops ; if I had entertained 
such an idea, I should not have directed them for relief on 
Lower Beira. They should have crossed the Tagus at Al- 
cantara, and gone from thence into Estremadura and the 
Alentejo. 

am not astonished at Major Tulloh’s being unable to 
get his carriages into Idanha a Nova. Let him go imme- 
diately with the Portuguese artillery wherever he pleases. 

^ As for the British artillery, it may remain where you 
please, in any place where the horses and men can be fed. 
In regard to forage, oflScers are much mistaken if they 
suppose that any town in the Peninsula, however large, will 
furnish forage for a large number of animals for a length of 
time. The horses of a brigade of cavalry, or even of a 
brigade of artillery, must be separated by 20 or 30 in each 
village. They .should be cantoned with the infantry* ^flSnd 
by this mode all would get good stabling and forage* ? even 
in a country which it might be supposed would pr^uee^nfpim. 

< However, I should prefer that the horses should go ^v^n 
to Lisbon, than that I should be disappointod ip ^my hopes 
of having the cavalry in good order eprly in tlm eauipaigp^ 



8PAIH. 


1812 ;> 


6M 

‘ I imagine you are mistalcen in supposing the bridge at 
Alcantara not to be ready. There is a letter from the officer 
in charge of it, of the 4th instant, in which he says, that it was 
then ready to be laid down. It would require only 12 hours 
to lay it down when you should give orders for it. 

* ‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. Gmtrol ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir R. Eitt, K.B.' 

To Major General H, Clinton, 

* My dear General, ‘ Freneda, 9th Dec., 1812. 10 A.M, 

^ have received your letter of the 6tli, and I entertain no 
doubt whatever that you have done and will do every thing 
in your power for the good of your division. 

^ If matters turn out only tolerably well during the winter, 
I hope to be able to take the field very early with a very large 
army ; and I am very anxious that you should be back at an 
early period. As business requires your absence, the sooner 
you go the better, and come back as soon as you can. In 
regard to your going to the Mediterranean, I confess that I 
do not think the service on that side of the Peninsula is very 
promising at present. 

‘ I had a letter yesterday from your brother, and I saw one 
from Lord W. Bentinck to Sir H. Wellesley. Your brother 
was so much inferior in strength to Suchet, particularly in 
cavalry, that he had not been able to take the field. Lord 
William states his intention to send 5000 men, British, 
Italian, and Sicihan, to the coast of Spain, and to come him- 
self to take the command. This will make his numerical 
force equal to Sachet’s in Valencia, as it is stated by your 
brother ; but not equal to what is stated in the returns which 
I have. In those returns however, Poles are included, who 
probably have been drawn away for the war in the north. 

^ But still, supposing the numbers nearly equal, the want of 
cavalry is a great drawback. I would therefore recommend 
this scene to you, rather than that on the eastern coast 
When you go, as Pakenham will be relieved from the charge 
of the 3rd division, I propose to send him to take care of 
yours till you return. * Believe me, &c. 

* Major General H* CUnion, * WfintlNOTON# 



FRENEOA* 6)1$ 

‘ When you wish to go, make an official application l 9 r 
le«Te, stating how long you wish to stay.’ 

Sir Charles Stmrt, K.B, 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Freneda, 9th Bed./ 1812. 

^ Just to show you what a Portuguese complaint is, I en- 
close one which I received from the Juiz de Fora of Sabugal 

against Mr. of the Commissariat, whom I ordered into 

close arrest for his conduct ; and an officer went over from 
hence to inquire into the circumstances preparatory to 
Mr. -*s trial. 

^ As soon as the Juiz de Fora found that the matter was 
to be seriously noticed, he wrote the enclosed letter of the 
7th instant ; and in the mean time I understand that he has 

been constantly living with Mr. , and the officer of 

whom he complained. 

^Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart^ K.B. * Wellington. 

' Since writing the above, I find that the Juiz de Fora 

has given Mr. a certificate of his good conduct, and, 

stating his wish, and that of the inhabitants, that he should 
return to Sabugal.’ 


To the Right Hon, the Secretary at War, 

( J^Y Lord, ^ Freneda, 9th Dec., 1812. 

^ I beg to submit to your Lordship’s consideration the 

application of Ensign of the — th regiment, to receive 

the pension granted to Ensigns for the loss of a limb, al- 
though at the period when he received the wound which 
rendered amputation necessary, he had not a commission, 
but was serving as a volunteer in the — th regiment, 
and is therefore by the regulation not entitled to the al- 
lowance which has lately been granted to officers in his 
situation. 

"I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ The Right Hon. ‘ WELLINGTON. 

the Secretary at War' 



SPAIN. 


1812. 


Cl$ 


To Earl Bathurtl, 

'Mv Lord, * Freaeda, 9th Dec., 1812. 

* I have the honor to enclose a return of field equipment 
required for the use of the army under my command ; and 1 
beg that your Lordship may be pleased to cause the different 
articles to be sent to Lisbon as soon as may be possible. . 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Bathurst* « WELLl^OTON. 


To Earl Bathurst, 

* My Lord, ‘ Freneda, 9th Dec., 1812. 

^ Nothing has occurred since I addressed you on the 2nd 
instant. Some of Marshal Soult’s troops arrived in the 
valley of the Tagus on the 3rd inst. 

‘ The Spanish troops were still at Madrid in the end of 
last month. 

" By a letter from Major General W. Clinton from Alicante, 
of the 8th November, I learn that he had not thought his 
force sufficiently strong to attack Marshal Suchct ; and he 
was still at Alicante. 

^ Accounts from the north of Spain state, that General 
Caffarelli had returned with the troops, which I informed your 
Lordship in my letter of the 7th ultimo had been seen passing 
Torquemada on the 4th of November. It is reported that 
he has since gone to France with the division of the Imperial 
Guards which still remained in Spain under his command. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

^ Earl Bathurst: ‘ Wellington. 

To Marshal Sir W. (7. Beresford, K,B, 

/ My dear Beresford, ‘ Freneda, 10th Dec., 1812. 

* I have received your letters of the 6th, and I am glad 
that you concur in the disposition of D’Urban’s cavalry. 
Campbell is gone into the Alentejo, and I yesterday de- 
sired Hill to send Major Tulloh's artillery to Elvas and 
Estremoz ; where he proposed it should be sent. 

‘ I am much oblig^ to you for the American news. If 
Buonaparte has any money he will send out a fleet if he is 
wise. But he has no money. 

* I am glad that your ideas and mine agree about your 
military situation. 



1812. 


FREKEbA. 


617 

' It is certain that Government have always thought it 
necessary to have an officer here, selected by them to succeed 
to the command, in case I should be deprived of it ; and 
there are some of the Government so partial to old practice 
and precedent, that they do not like a departure from either, 
in not calling this officer second in command* This officer 
might have been very useful in the days of councils of war, 
&c. ; it may look well in a newspaper to see that such a 
general officer is second in command.” But there is no- 
body in a modern army who must not sec that there is no 
duty for the second in command to perform, and that this 
office is useless. It is at the same time inconvenient, as it 
gives the holder pretensions which cannot be gratified ex- 
cept at the public inconvenience. 

I enclose the copy of the letter which I wrote to Govern- 
ment on this subject, with yours. 

^ I do not know, and indeed I do not believe, that Go- 
vernment have any distinct idea upon thia subject ; but I 

happen to know that they did not consider — as 

second in command at the battle of Salamanca. 

' Matters being quiet here, and having put every thing in 
train for the re-equipment of the army, I am about to go to 
Cadiz to see what I can do there, and what is the real situa- 
tion of affairs. 

' I propose to get into fortune’s way if I should be able to 
assemble an army sufficiently strong ; and we may make a 
lucky hit in the commencement of next campaign. But it 
is obvious that we cannot expect to save the Peninsula by 
military efforts, unless we can bring forward the Spaniards 
in some shape or other; and I want to see how far I can 
venture to go, in putting the Spanish army in a state to do 
something. In your life you never saw any thing m bad 
as the Galicians. Yet they are the finest body of men and 
best movers I have ever seen. 

♦ God knows the prospect of success from this joiUKiey of 
mine is not bright ; but still it is best to try something^^ 

♦ The 20th regiment will march as soon as the weather is 

a little settled. ^ ^ . 

♦ Believe me, &CV ^ ^ - ^ ^ 

^ Matshai - ^ WitiiNOtoji. 

Sir W.C.Bereiiford,K*B: 



sPatf . ’ 


To Limt, Oenercd Sir R. Hilh 

DEAR Hill, ‘ Freneda, 10th Dec., 1812. 6 p.ji. 

< I have received yours of 6 p.m. yesterday evening. I 
doubt the French having arrived at Truxillo in time for the 
Alcalde at Brozas to hear of this event on the 8th in the 
evening. If they have gone there, it can be only a small 
detachment. 

^ I propose going to Cadiz, and as you will command the 
troops in this quarter in my absence, which will last about 
three weeks, it is desirable that I should see you. 

" I leave this on the morning of the 12th, and shall be at 
Moraleja that afternoon, where I shall be happy to meet you 
on that day. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Lieut General " Wellington. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B. 

* If you mean to dine at Moraleja, you had better bring 
your things, as I shall have nothing with me.* 

To Lieut General Sir i?. Hill, K,B, 

^ My dear Hill, ‘ Freneda, 10th Dec., 1812. 

^ I enclose a letter which General Alava has received re- 
garding the conduct of an officer of the Commissariat, who 
was in charge of cattle passing at Payo, and is said to be- 
long to the 2nd division of the army. 

' You will see that his name is said to be Stourk, but Sir 
R. Kennedy does not know of any person of that name in 
the department. I shall be very much obliged to you if you 
will inquire what person of the Commissariat passed lately 
at Payo with cattle to the 2nd division of infantry ; and send 
to Payo to have him identified, and let him be put in close 
arrest, and let me know his name, that I may have charges 
brought against him without loss of time. 

< Thu officer of the staff corps referred to is I believe 
Lieut. Read, who was lately sent from hence to survey the 
course of the Tietar. 

* BeKeve me, &c. 

‘ Lieut. General WelliNgVoW. 

Sir R. Hill, K.B: 



FRBNBDA. 


m 




To Sir Charles Stuart, K.B. 

‘ My DEAR Sib, ‘ Freneda,;i6th Dec., 1812. 

‘ i have received your letter of the 6th, and I will speak 
to Mr. Kennedy respecting Mr. Sampayo’s concern. 1 have 
always entertained the best opinion of Mr. Sampayo, and 
have given my consent to several arrangements proposed by 
him, solely because I relied implicitly on his integrity. 

‘ I may be wrong in my notions respecting the circulation 
of our Commissariat bills; but I have been at least consistent 
in entertaining them. From what I mentioned in my lettmf 
of the 2nd, you will observe that I entertained them in the 
first year I was in the Peninsula. You will find them again 
in my letter of the 22nd of April last, regarding the payment 
of a debt to Messrs. Alcock and Co., on account of some 
bills which they had purchased ; and I am now quite cer- 
tain that if our debts and the Commissariat bills had never 
been purchased by the sharks at Lisbon, our finances would 
now have been in a much better state ; at the same time that 
the people of the country, those who have really supplied us 
with something for our money, would have received more 
value for their commodities than they have received. 

‘ There is no person better acquainted with these opinions, 
whether true or false, than Mr. Sampayo; and it is not 
astonishing that 1 should have been shaken by his having 
had any concern in such transactions. However, I am will- 
ing to believe he did what he thought was right and proper, 

more particularly as he says that Mr. knew that ho 

acted as he did ; and I shall speak to the Commissary Gene- 
ral, and will endeavor to remove any bad impression he may 
■ have received on the same subject. I must observe, how- 
ever, en passant that Mr. has shown himself in this 

instance again to be so stupid as to be quite unfit for the 
situation in which he is placed. 

‘ I am sorry that the bills on the Treasury having been 
exchanged for the Commissariat bills, and, the transaction 
being closed, you did not allow it to remain as it was. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

\SirChini«t Stuart, K.B: ‘ Wei,lingtoiI. 



Tfc ihee AAnir^al ' 

^ My dear Admiral, , / * Freneda, 10th Dec. 1812. 

rlliaycj received your letter of the 6th> for which I am 
much obliged to you. Government appear to be at last 
making a serious effort to get the better of the American 
navy, which might as well have been made before. 

^ If Buonaparte is wise, and has money, he will send out a 
large fleet. He has no money, however, and he must have 
found before now that a fleet cannot be equipped and main- 
tained, as he maintains his armies, by requisitions on the 
unfortunate country which is made the seat of war. 

^ Colonel Gordon, the Quarter Master General, has re- 
quested me to apply to you to facilitate his return to England 
in a ship of war. ’ 

^ I must mention to you that I have received very parti- 
cular directions from Government, not to apply for a passage 
in a man of war for any officer whose return is not occasioned 
by the public service. That is to say, that Government is 
not to be put to the expense of an officer s passage in a ship 
of war, unless the public service should have rendered his 
return necessary. 

‘ Whenever an occasion of this kind occurs, I shall apply to 
you officially, stating the cause of the return of the officer to 
England, and you will grant the passage or not, according to 
the convenience of the service, for which the public will defray 
the expense. 

' But many officers have occasion to go for other reasons 
besides those caused by the public service ; and they are 
anxious to go in a ship of w ar. It may be in your power to 
facilitate their being gi’atified in this respect, either by recom- 
mending them to the Captain who may be going or otherwise, 
and if it is, I shall be much obliged to you. If it is not, they 
must go by the packet, as the Government will not defray the 
expense of these psssages. I shall always apply for these as^I 
now do for that of Colonel Gordon, apprizing them at the 
same time, as I have him, that it is very probable that yon 
may not have it in your power to gratify their wishes. 

^ 1 mention this because 1 fiad that Admiral Berkeley is in 
a scrape for not attending to the distinction between oflicers 
going home on the public service, and officers going home on 



Piii:lfKt)A. 


im. 


m 


their private concerns ; on m occasion, however, in which the 
distinction was quite clear. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Vice Admral 0. Marlin.^ ^ WetuyoTON. 

To Marshal Sir W* C. Beres/ord, K»B» 

• * Freneda» lUh Deo., 1812. 

‘ I have the honor to enclose the copy of a letter of en- 
closures which have been received from General Le Cor, 
complaining of the conduct of Lieut. Colonel of the 

Portuguese artillery, and other officers, in regard to taking 
forage at Idanha a Nova, in consequence of which I have 
given the order, of which the enclosed is a copy, to have 
those officers put in arrest. 

^ I enclose, likewise, the copy of the crime charged against 

Lieut. Colonel ; and I request you to give directions 

that he may be brought to trial for this neglect of duty. 

♦ I have the honor to be, &c. 

'^Marshal * Wellington. 

Sir W. a Beres/ord, K.B: 


To LieuL General Sir R, Hill, K.B, 

^ Mv DEAR Hill, ‘ Freneda, 11th Dec., 1812. 11 a.m. 

^ I enclose letters which I have received regarding the con- 
duct of Lieut. Colonel •’ s and Captain — ’s artillery, 

and the — th light dragoons, at Idanha a Nova, in regard to 
forage. This conduct occasions the difficulty in cantohing 
the troops in any country during the two or three months of 
the winter. Three brigades of artillery and a regiment of 
cavalry get together in one place ; and in one day they de- 
stroy four times the quantity of forage for which they give 
receipts. 

* I have ordered a General Court Martial to be assembled 
in the 2nd division of infantry, before which I request thht 
the commanding officer of the — th light dragoons, and Cap^ 
faiti — may be brought, on charges of which the enclosed 
are copies; and I beg that the Adjutant General atfacHtSd 
to the 2nd division may prosecute them. “ ^ ^ 

^ ^ complainants at Idanha k Nova must be called to 
firfe their evidence before this Court Martial.^ * " 



spwji.. ISIS. 

f . 1 likewise enclose ithe ehiurge »g«in8tl4e«t. Cobnd 
which 1 request may be sent to him by the staff offieer attaeheff 
to General Hamilton’s diviibn. 

' Believe me^ &c. 

‘ Lieut. General ‘ Wellington. 

Sir i?. Hilli KxB.\ 

1.0 Major General He Clinton, 

* My DEAR General, ‘ Freneda, llth Dec., 1812. Noon. 

* I have received your letter of the 8th. The General 
Order of the 4th instant was not intended to refer to you. 
The Quarter Master General mentioned to me what you had 
done at Celorico, and I approved of it. 

‘ The commanding officers of regiments are naturally 
jealous of the general hospitals ; and they were in the habit 
of sending orders occasionally to the men of their regiments 
in hospital, and occasionally to the commandants at the hos- 
pital stations, to send particular men to join their regiments. 
General Officers adopted the same practice ; and, in conse- 
quence, nobody was responsible either for the march of the men 
from the hospitals at the proper period of their recovery, or for 
the conduct of the soldiers on their march to join their regi- 
ments. The orders were therefore given that nobody was to 
interfere with men in hospitals excepting the Commandant. 

^ It is impossible in drawing up a General Order to fore- 
see every case which ought to be excepted from its general 
provisions ; and the case of the passage of a division to the 
rear, by an hospital station still left in front, is not provided 
for. However, the General Officer commanding a division 
would, as you did, communicate with the officer commanding 
the hospital station, and take away with him only those men 
of whose departure the Commandant should approve. 

^ But after you had passed, orders were sent to Major 
Cimitiere by General Officers of all ranks and descriptions, as 
well as by commanding officers of regiments, and adjutants, 
and even serjeant majors, and not only to Major Cin^itiere, 
but to the officers in charge of the sick and convalescents 
under his command, and in some instances even to the sick 
themselves. This is the irregularity to which I referred in 
the General Order. 

* The fact is, however, that I ought to have given an 





mt 

thf should join 

passed Celorico;. But it is impossible to think of efeiry thing. 

* Believe me^ &ci. t ^ 

^ Major General H\ Clinton^ ^ 

To Don Josef de Carvajaly Minuter at War. 

* Sir, ‘ Freneda, 11th Dec., 1812. 

^ I enclose the copy of a letter which I have received from 
Don Estevan Mexia, the Intendant of the province of Cas- 
tille, in which you will observe a relation of the practical 
evils resulting from the appointment of a Captain General 
and Staff to this province. 

^ The Intendant of the army (there' being no army) has 
seized the grain and money which the Civil Intendant of 
the province had destined for the consumption of the troops 
in the garrison of Ciudad Eodrigo, and has applied these 
articles, I conclude, for the support of the staff of the army 
of Castille established at Freixo. I hear the Lanceros have 
seized and sold another portion, which they had been ap- 
pointed to escort to the garrison. 

I enclose the copy of the answer which I have written to 
Don Estevan Mexia regarding the supplies received by the 
army under my command. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Don Josef de Carvajal^ ^ Wellington. 

Minuter at War,' 


To Don Estevan Mexia, 

* Sir, * Freneda, lUh Dec., 1812. 

^ I have received your letter of the 7th instant, which I 
have forwarded to the Minister at War, to be laid before 
the Spanish Government. 

' The allied British and Portuguese army under my com- 
mand has, generally speaking, been subsisted from its 
magazines since it crossed the Agueda. If it has received 
any supplies from the country of Arganan, I conclude Ijiey 
have been paid for; and I do not suppose it is intend^ 
that the allied British and Portuguese army shall not enj^y 
the resources which the country affords, paying for |th^ jame. 
< via regard to the assistance you demand for the garrison 



m 




1 § 12 . 


of Ciudad Bodvigo> I answer. thM I will give no assistauee 
in pirovisions tq the garrison of Ciudad Eodrigo or to any 
Spanish troops while in Spain, being quite convinced that 
the country is well able to supply the wants of all requiring 
supplies, if the abuses are remedied to which you adverted 
in your letter. The remedy does not rest with mq, 

* In answer to that part of your letter in which you require 
payment for the supplies received from you on the part of 
the Government by the British army in the course of the 
campaign, it is only necessary that the account of the amount 
of those supplies should be settled in order to be paid for, 
either to you or to the Government, according to fny pro- 
mise made to you at the commencement of the campaign. 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Don Estevan Meocia.* * WELLINGTON. 

To the Bight Hon. Sir Hennj Wellesley ^ K.B. 

* My dear Henry, ‘Freneda, nth Dec., 1812 . 

‘ I propose to leave this place to-morrow morning, and to 
sleep at Moraleja; on the 13th at Alcantara; 14th at 
Valencia, de Alcantara; 15th at Badajoz; 16th at Fuente 
Cantos ; 17th at Seville ; 18th at Cadiz. 

' Possibly you may find it convenient to meet us at 
Seville, as we shall have many matters to talk over. I have 
no notion of any thing likely to interrupt this proposed 
route, but I shall dispjatch a courier to you if there sliould 
be any thing. I enclose the draft of a letter to the Minister 
at War with its enclosures. I bring nobody with me ex- 
cepting Alava and Lord Fitzroy Somerset. 

" Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The BL Hon. " WELLINGTON. 

Sir H. Wellesley, K,B: 

To Sir Charles Stuart, KsB. 

^ My dear Sir, ‘ Freneda, nth Dec., 1812 . 

^ I set out for Cadiz to-morrow, and I shall be at Moraleja 
the 12th, Alcantara the 13th, Valencia de Alcantara 14th, 
Badajoz 15th, Fuente Cantos 16th, Seville 17tb, Cadiz 18th. 

* I shall be very much obliged if you will send any letters 
that may come from England, or that you may have occa- 



mm. 




9ioii t 0 write mei by a mc^sen'^ Wth 

directions to fottbw me from thence by thb high road of 
Seville to Cadiz. . , . 

* I propose to return here after staying afbW daye at 
Cadiz> by the same road. 

* Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart^ K.B. * WELLINGTON. * 

‘ I have directed Sir R. Kennedy to give the Portuguese 
Government 200,000 dollars in the course of Decembei^.’ 


To Viscount Palmerston, Secretary at War. 

* Mv Lord, ‘ Freneda, 1 Itli Dec., 1812. 

* I beg to call your Lordship’s attention to the case of 

Paymaster , of the — tli foot, about whom I had the 

honor of writing to you on the 18th of August last. 

* Having been directed by His Royal Highness the Com- 
mander in Chief to cause Mr. to settle his outstanding 

accounts, I desired Lieut. Colonel to place him in 

arrest, and order him forthwith to comply with His Royal 
Highness’s commands; but finding that the Paymaster 
delayed doing so on the plea that the papers which related 
to the accounts in question were in England, I subsequently 
gave directions to his commanding officer to prefer charges 
against him, to which I received the enclosed answer from 

Lieut. Colonel ; by which it appears that he is not in 

possession of the documents necessary to enable him to draw 
up the charge. 

* I am, therefore, under the necessity of bringing the sub- 
ject under your Lordship’s consideration ; and I beg to be 
favored with your commands as to the mode of proceeding 
with Mr. — — . 

^ I have the honor to be, &c. 

« The Sight Hon. ‘ WELLINGTON. 

the Secretary at War* 

To Marshal Sir W, C. Beres/ord, K.B. 

' My dear BerEspord, * Moraleja, 13th lgi2i 

^ As I have learnt from Hill that the passage thrbugli 
Estremadura is not quite safe, 1 have written the enclosed 

VOL. IX. 2 3 



626 






latter to General Victoria^ in order to have the 3rd regiment 
of cavalry placed on the road. I shall be obliged to you if 
you will have measures adopted for their supply in Estrema- 
dura. I shall do what I can for them as I pass Badajoa. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

* Marshal * Wellington. 

* ‘ Sir W. C. Beresford, K,B, 

' I was detained at Payo yesterday by the swelling of a 
river, by which I have lost a day ; and I shall not be at 
Badajoz till the 16tli.’ 

To General Victoria, 

^ Monsieur le GfiNERAL, ‘ ^ Moraleja, ce 13 Dec., 1812. 

^ Je suis sur ma route pour aller a Seville ct Cadiz, et je 
corapte passer par Badajoz le 16. Comme on me dit qu’il y a 
plusicurs voleurs en Estremadure et en la Sierra Morena, 
je vous prie, aussit6t quo vous recevrez cette lettre, de faire 
marcher le 3*”® regiment de dragons par les marches r^gu- 
lieres a Fuente Cantos, oil ils attendront nouvel ordre que 
je leur donnerai. Si tout le regiment n’est pas rassemble a 
Elvas, vous aurez la bont^ de faire marcher la partie du 
regiment qui sera a Elvas, et les dfetachemens suivront. Je 
prSviens le Marquis del Palacio pour qu’il n’y ait pas de dif- 
ficulte pour le passage du pent de Badajoz. 

‘Vous aurez soin de pourvoir d la nourriture des hommes 
et des chevaux, pendant qu’ils seront en Estremadure. 

‘ Je vous prie de faire passer une copie de cette lettre au 
Marechal Conde de Trancoso. 

‘ J’ai rhonneur d’etre, &c. 

‘ General Victoria: " Wellington. 


To General Elio, 

‘ Monsieur le GfeN^RAL, ‘ ^ Moraleja, ce 13 Dec., 1812. 

‘ J’ai re 9 u votre lettre du 27 Novembre. 

‘ Je vous ai ecrit entriplicata par la voie du Duque del 
Parque ; et je vous renvoie k cette lettre pour la connaissance 
de mes sentimens sur I’^tat des affaires. 

‘ J’ai rhonneur d’etre, &c. 

* General Elio: ^ WitfLWNOTON. 



1812. 


umMmjA, 


m 


To (he kighi Hon* Sir Henry WetUetey^ K3* 

‘ My DEAR Henry, ‘ Moraleja, I3th Dec., 1812. 

^ 1 write ju8t to let you know that I was detained yester- 
day at Payo by the swelling of a rivulet in the Puerto de 
Perales ; and if the rain continues, I must expect to bo 
detained again. I cannot now arrive at Seville till the 18th, 
nor at Cadiz till the 19th. 

^ Ever yours most affectionately, 

‘ The Right Hon. « WELLINGTON. 

H Wellesley, K.B: 

To Colonel De Lancey. 

^ My dear De Lancey, ‘ Moraleje^ uth Deo., 1812. 

^ I have settled with Sir R. Hill that he shall remain at 
Coria as long as the weather continues as it has been lately ; 
and he will go to Guinaldo, if the rivers should become 
fordable. He wishes you to come to him. The remainder 
of the Staff is to remain at head quarters. 

‘ I omitted to mention to you, that General Alten had 
reported that a battalion of British infantry could be accom- 
modated at Guinaldo, and furnished with bread at the rate 
of four reals a ration. Inform the Commissary General of 
this circumstance ; and if he thinks this price will suit him, 
let one of the battalions of the Light division which are 
badly cantoned at Nave d’Aver and Fuentes, go to Guinaldo 
when the weather shall clear. 

^ I shall be very anxious to learn what has been done in 
the distribution of the great coats from Celorico ; and of the 
blankets, when they arrive there. The 51st regiment 
appeared to me to be much in want of great coats, and 
should be supplied immediately, if they have them not of 
their own. The Commissary General omitted to state how 
many he had delivered to each regiment in the light divi- 
sion. This must be accurately reported to the Secretary at 
War, in order that the expense may be charged against the 
regimental great coat funds^ 

' I enclose an order, which I beg you to give to the Adju- 
tant General to be circulated. I missed my road on the 
12th from Ligiosa, and went to Guinaldo instead of Puente 
de Villa. We were detained that flight at P^ayo, by the 

2 s2 



628 . rawjJiH 1812 . 

swelling of a rivulet, and di^^:[|o^ thrive hero till yesterday. 
But the lumbago is not wor^e. 

\ ; '‘Believe me, &c. . 

• Colonel Ve Zaacey.’ ' , , ^ ‘ Wellii^TON. 

To Marsfhal Sir W. C. Beris/ord, K*B, 

^ Mt DEAR Beresford, * Alburquerque, 18th Dec., 1812, 

' liOrd Fitzroy Somerset has given tne your letter of the 
10th, but I do not exactly understand the arrangement which 
you propose. You say that the Commissariat departments 
and contractors might be allowed to receive and keep in 
their service all those persons who arc not actually desert- 
ers, who did not belong to the troops of the line.” 

^ From the subsequent part of the letter, I imagine that 
you mean to prevent the departments from taking into their 
service, excepting as clerks or persons of trust and confidence, 
any who are liable to be called to serve in the line under the 
recruiting laws. Let me know whether the last or the first 
is your intention. 

* I have been three days longer on my journey than I in- 
tended, owing to the fall of rain, which has swelled all the 
torrents, and I am now detained here by the swelling of the 
Gevora. I hope, however, to get to Badajoz this evening. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Marshal ‘ WELLINGTON. 

Sir W, C. Beresford, K,B* 

To Colonel De Lancey* 

* My dear De Lancey, ‘ Alburquerque, 19th Dec., 1812. 

‘ I received last night your letter of the 16th. I enclose a 
General Order, which will provide for the great coats. The 
distribution might have been better, but it must answer, as it 
is made. 

^ We have been detained here two days by the swelling df 
the Gevora and neighbouring streams, having been before 
delayed and put out of the way by others. However, I hope 
the delay will not be inconvenient to the public service. 

^ Believe me, &c. 

^ Colonel Lc^cey. ‘ WfeLttNOTok 

‘ forward the enclosed; tp qe<idmetRtOvbe pnbMsheA 



ms. 


ALBCrmtO^RQUE. 


6^ 


^ Si R, / , , * 'Alburquerqii'C 1 ^ tli Deci, 1812. 

‘ When I appointed you to take charge of the prisoners of 
war atXisbon, I was in hopes that you woiiliS perVorm your 
duty, and that I should receive no move a^uch complaints as 
the enclosed. I now desire that you will go to the place 
\vhcife the prisoners of 'u’ar are confined, and pee that a 
remedy is applied to the complaints of the writers of the 
enclosed ; and that you will send mb, without Ibss of time, 
directed to head quarters, a certificate from these same 
officers, that you have done your duty by them. 

y I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Captain . ^ Wellington. 

‘ Those officers, who it appears are deserters, must bo 
kept separate from the prisoners and treated with proper 
attention.’ 

To Mrs. . 

‘ Madam, ‘ Alburquerque, I9th Dec., 1812. 

* I received only yesterday your letter of the 10th, and I 
assure you that I feel no inclination to act harshly by Cap- 
tain I must inform you, however, that under a recent 

regulation it is impossible for the commanding officer of the 
— th to make, or for me to forward, a recommendation that 

Captain might be permitted to exchange ; and without 

such recommendation it is not probable that the exchange 
should be allowed. I do not see what can be done, therefore, 
excepting that Captain — — should give in his resignation, 
or take his trial before a General Court Martial. 

' I am much concerned that you are in a situation to be 
distressed by these circumstances, but I am quite unaware in 

what manner it is possible for Captain to avoid quitting 

the service or standing his ti;if^l. 

* I have the honor to be, &c. 

* Mrs .— — .* ‘ Wkelingtok. 

To Colonel Sir H* Pietcher^ Bart, 

* SlRi • Badiyas, 1812 . 

^ I arrived here only this day, having been detained on 
the rbadby the dwelKng bf thelfivbW^^ 



6^ ISISI 

'l am by no mfeans . wiA eithca? Captain ?*, 

whom I have not seeni but who is gone to Merida to destroy 
the bridge without orders that I know of ; or with Captain 

^ who appears to me quite incapable of executing such 

a trust as that of the charge of the works of this place. 

' I beg therefore that both may be relieved from hence 
without loss of time, and that you will send here an oifficer 
on whose judgment and discretion you can rely to execute 
the trust reposed in him. 

' Believe me, &c. 

‘ Colonel ^ Wellington. 

Sir R. Fletcher^ BartJ 

To Lieut PipeVi Royal Engineers. 

< Sir, * Badajoz, 20th Dec., 1812. 

' I beg that upon the receipt of this letter you will send 
to Lisbon for a return of the number of pontoons, with 
carriages, &c., complete, of the different sizes, now at that 
place. 

' I likewise request you will ascertain the size of the cop- 
per pontoons, taken from Badajoz, now at Elvas ; and that 
you will make yourself acquainted with the number of them 
which have carriages fit for service, and balks and tressels. 

' You will likewise ascertain whether they can travel upon 
the carriages of the tin pontoons now at Elvas ; and whether 
the balks, tressels, and anchors of those pontoons will answer 
fbr the copper pontoons taken from Badajoz. You will be 
prepared to report to me on all these points on my return to 
this place in ten days from this time. 

' I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Lieut. Pip$r, R. B: ‘ Wellington. 

To Sir Charles Simrt, K.B. 

^ My DEAR Sir, ‘ Badajoz, 20th Dec., 1812. 

' I do not know what you have done or what has been 
determined respecting your Riband. I am inclined to 
believe that it is not necessary for you to be invested, and 
that this form is imposed only upon us military mm. 

' However, if you are to be invested, and 1 sfawld be 
authorized to invest you, and if eiiicim^tonoes ahouhi enable 



mm 




ine to 1^ to I tsam no oisjliiion on my 

retum> which I expect will be about th.|^ * . 

^But obeenho that i om anxkms %ot to go to Lisbon^ 
exciting fot this object. If I am to go to Zaebc^ 1 wish 
you would order six horses or mules for my carriage to Es- 
tremoz. One relay of the Prince’s saddle horses might bo 
at Monte Mor 6 Novo, one at Vendas Novas, and one at 
Pegnes. I shall leave the carriage at Monte Mor 6 Novo, 
to go across to Abrantes. Alava and Lord FUzroy Somer- 
set are with me, and we shall want six horses for ourselves 
and servants, and two for our baggage at each stage. 

‘ Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart, KB. " Wellington. 

' If I should go to Lisbon to invest you, you must order a 
feast and a ball, and invite the whole town to assist at the 
ceremony. 

‘ I arrived here only this day, having been en voyage par 
terre et par mer ; and detained two entire days at Albur- 
querque. I find that the English messenger Williams has 
passed by.’ 


To His Eoyal Highness the Duke qf York. 

< Sir, * Badajoz, 20th Dec., 1812. 

• When I saw Sir R. Hill lately, under whose command 
the 31st and 66th regiments have been, he mentioned to 
me, that he thought it would be advisable to extend to those 
battalions the arrangement which had been carried into exe- 
cution in respect to other battalions of this army, formed 
into provisional battalions ; that is to say, that four or six 
companies of each should be sent to England. 

^ I am unwilling to adopt this arrangement till I shall 
learn your Royal Highness’s sentiments regarding that 
already submitted to you ; and 1 shall be much obliged to 
you, if you will let me know whether your Royal Highness 
approves of its being extended to the 31st and 66th regi- 
ments. 

^ I am of opinion that it would be advantageous to Send 
home four companies of each of the 51st and 68th regi* 
ments; keeping them, however, still as separate battalions, 
as they are Light, atid I request your Royal Highness will 





\Vith’ yoiot 


Rpprot>a{ion.' ' . ■ «»;iy 

•'{' ••<r '■' >'• '))'■»■■-.■■ ■■•iW SLUIH^OM. i ( 


DiAe ^ybrA.’tl /"j Mt ■•'m 

rjtj ^ 


• My Lord, ‘ Bodajoz, 20th Doc., 1812, 

‘ I beg leave to rcc<^iDend to your Lordship that 10,000 
great coats f^r the use of the British army should be sent to 
Lisbon withiout lossof time. . 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

' Earl Bathurst: ’ ‘Wellington. 


To Viscount Melville, First Lord qf the Admiralty. 

‘ My DEAR Lord, ‘Badajoz, 20 lhDeo., I8I2. 

‘Admiral Berkeley has sent me a message respecting 
his pay being stopped on account of his having ordered a 
passage to England for the late General Craufurd, in a gun 
vessel; in the commencement of the year 1811. I had re- 
ceived orders sOme time before, hot to apply for a passage 
for any officer who was not returning to England on the 
public service, and as General Craufurd not only did not go 
on the public service, but contrary to my inclination, though 
with my consent, I did not apply for a passage for him at 
the expense of the public. 

‘ I perfectly recollect, however, that nearly about the same 
time, many General and other officers were returning to 
England; and the Admiral had allowed them to go in a 
troop or store ship then about to return. I also recollect 
to have requested him to facilitate to Major General Crau- 
furd the means of returning to England in a ship of war, 
meaning that he should allow him to go in that vessel. 
Major General Craufurd had, however, delayed his passage 
till after that vessel had sailed ; and when he did determine 
to go, and waited upon the Admiral with my letter, it is not 
improbable that the Admiral Understood that I applied for 
a passage for the General at the public expense ; whereas 
I only intended to Uppfy thiit his teturn to England might 
be ikuilitated in a ship of war in the same manner as the 



without 'any e}fpcn{ic.'to tW ^p9hUc*,'v^* ''' : 

' Tinder 4he8hooi)Kun4ttaii|ori4^)iii|^^’^^'^ 

may think. it /ftroper to 

receive his pay, whi(^ has been std^pn^*^' ' 4 ^.- 

'Beli^fve me, fikc. 

‘ Viscount Melville: Welungton. 

To €ol(mkt Tc^em, 

^ Sir, * jBadajoz^ 20thjPec,, l%}i* 

enclose some leUeifs which I have received from Dr. 
M‘Grigor, regarding certain promotions made by the Me- 
dical Board. I entirely agree with Dr. M‘Grigor in opinion, 
that it is no encouragement to those who are performing 
their duty with the army in this country to see, that when 
Ly their merits and exertions they have attracted the nottco 
of their immediate superiors, and of the officers under hose 
command they arc serving, and have been recommended 
for promotion, others have been preferred to them who have 
quitted the arduous service on which these have remained, 
probably to solicit from the Medical Board the promotion 
which these have been found to deserve by their exertions. 
The officers promoted by the Medical Board (one of them 
Mr. Higgins I know is) are meritorious ; but neither 
deserve promotion equally with cither Dr. Tyco or Mr. 
Guthrie. 

‘ I have frequently made you acquainted with my sense 
of the inconvenience felt by the constant change of the 
officers employed in every branch of tlm service in this 
country. One of . the principal causes of these changes is 
the practice of going to England to apply for proipotipn 
which ought to be acquired by service here ; and I acknow^ 
ledge that I do not see the utility of my forwarding the 
recommendations of the heads of departments of those 
officers whom they deem deserving of protnotiop, if to these 
recommendations are to be preferred the claims apfi ^pJJr 
cations of those who quit the service here, to go hoi^^ to 
make them. , . . 

• I have the howr to t 

* C(iton€l Torrem* - i 



6d4 SPAIM. 1S12. 

Zb SaA Ba^unt. 

‘ My Lord, ‘ Badsjoz, 20tb Beat 1812. 

‘ I arrived here this day on my way to Cadiz, having been 
detained many days on the road by the swelling of the rivers. 
I propose to be at the head quarters at Freneda early in 
January. 

‘ I heard last night from the headquarters at Freneda 
of the 17th, and from Sir Rowland Hill’s quarters at Coria 
of the 18th. Nothing particular had occurred since I 
quitted that part of the country, and there has been no 
alteration in the situation of affairs since I addressed your 
Lordship on the 9th instant. 

‘ I have the honor to be, &c. 

‘ Earl Bathurst: ‘ W Ellington. 


To Sir Choi'les Stuart ^ K,B. 

* My dear Sir, ‘ Seville, 2Srd Dec., 1812. 6 a.m. 

^ I received your letter by Williams, the messenger, and 
the duplicate of it by a Portuguese messenger on the road 
between Badajoz and this place ; and you may depend upon 
my going to Lisbon for the purpose of investing you with 
the Bath, unless I should receive intelligence which should 
render it necessary for me to return immediately to head 
quarters, in which case I shall apprize you, and you had 
better come to me. 

‘ I shall be at Cadiz to-morrow. 

" Believe me, &c. 

‘ Sir Charles Stuart, K.B: ' Wellington. 


END OP VOL. IX. 



LONDCfN: 

Printed by William Clowes and Sons, 

Stamford Street. 







