

Upon Āqā Moḥammad Khan’s accession in 11 Jomādā I 1200/21 March 1786 in his newly established capital at Tehran, Bābā Khan, long groomed as his successor, was nominated as his heir and vice-regent (nāʾeb-al-salṭana), while Āqā Moḥammad Khan himself did not assume a royal title out of respect for the last of the Safavid nominal claimants, Solṭān Moḥammad Mīrzā (Hedayāt, Rawżat al-ṣafā IX, pp. 174, 201; Rabino, p. 29). Campaigning with his uncle against the Zands in the south of Persia, Bābā Khan was assigned in 1201/1787 to capture Yazd, where he barely succeeded in subjugating the powerful Mo ḥammad-Taqī Khan Bāfqī to Qajar suzerainty (Hedayāt, Rawżat al-ṣafā IX, p. 213). Returning to Gīlān to guard against suspect Qajar chiefs, Bābā Khan found enough time to accomplish his first feat of procreation. In the space of one year (1203/ 1788-89) his wives gave birth to five sons, three of whom were to become the most powerful prince-governors during their father’s reign: Moḥammad-ʿAlī Mīrzā, the future Dawlatšāh (q.v.) who was born to a Georgian concubine; ʿAbbās Mīrzā (q.v.), the future heir-apparent, who was born to Āsīa Ḵānom; and Ḥosayn-ʿAlī Mīrzā (q.v.), the future Farmānfarmā (q.v.) of Fārs, who was born to Badr Jahān. Three of these sons—ʿAbbās Mīrzā, Moḥammadqolī Mīrzā, and Ḥosayn-ʿAlī Mīrzā—were immediately adopted as sons by Āqā Moḥammad Khan and were transferred to his harem (Hedāyat, Rawżat al-ṣafā IX, pp. 225-26). Assigned for the second time to campaign in ʿErāq-e ʿAjam and Fārs, in 1204/1789-90 Bābā Khan confronted Loṭf-ʿAlī Khan Zand in Qomša. The besieged Zand ruler, facing defection within his ranks, was forced to retreat to Shiraz only to be denied entry into his capital by Ebrāhīm Khan Kalāntar Šīrāzī (q.v.), the mayor (kalāntar) of the city and later the future grand vizier (ṣadr-e aʿẓam) of Āqā Moḥammad Khan. Upon the collapse of the Zand rule, in 1207/1792-93, Bābā Khan was engaged in mopping up operations against the remnants of Loṭf-ʿAlī’s forces in Jīroft, Bam, and the environs before advancing toward the Persian Gulf littoral. He thus was absent during Āqā Moḥammad Khan’s brutal massacre of the people of Kermān and his subsequent heinous torture and execution of Loṭf-ʿAlī Khan. Returning from Lār region to Shiraz in the same year, Bābā Khan was appointed governor of Fārs, Yazd, and Kermān and was given the title jahānbānī (guardian of the world; Hedāyat, Rawżat al-ṣafā IX, pp. 253, 260-61). Previously Loṭf-ʿAlī Khan Zand’s title, jahānbānī in contrast to jahānsūz, the title of Bābā Khan’s own father, denoted a gentler side of the Qajar rule. As governor of Fārs during his four-year stay in the former Zand capital, Bābā Khan had an opportunity to learn the art of government and acquire a refined taste (Fasāʾī, ed. Rastgār, I, p. 660; tr. Busse, pp. 53-65).

Accession and consolidation. Upon receiving the news of Āqā Moḥammad Khan’s assassination in Ḏu’l-qaʿda 1211/May 1797 at Šīša in the Caucasus, Bābā Khan declared himself heir to the Qajar throne and in Moḥarram 1212/July 1797 left Shiraz for Tehran. In Kenārgerd, twenty miles south of the capital, he was received by Ebrāhīm Khan, now entitled Eʿtemād-al-Dawla and the grand vizierto Āqā Moḥammad Khan, who had rushed back from the Caucasus at the head of the royal camp to pay homage to the new shah. Bābā Khan’s own brother, Ḥosaynqolī Khan, also grudgingly paid his allegiance. Moḥammad Khan Davallū, the beglarbegī of Tehran, who claimed to have Āqā Moḥammad Khan’s precautionary order not to admit any dignitary into the capital before Bābā Khan’s arrival, then opened the city gates. Such precaution proved necessary in the light of a claim to succession made by ʿAlīqolī Khan (q.v.), Bābā Khan’s youngest uncle who had rushed back from Erevan in the hope of preempting his nephew’s arrival at the capital. His claim was rooted in the yet unresolved order of succession in the newly-established dynasty and came despite Āqā Moḥammad Khan’s removal of nearly all potential pretenders to the throne. After Bābā Khan’s entry into the capital, ʿAlīqolī was lured inside the city gates by Ebrāhīm Khan and was brought to the presence of the new shah to pay his homage. Refusing to acquiesce he was physically forced to bow before the shah, all the while cursing him, before being removed to the next room, deprived of his eyes, and then sent into exile (Sepehr, I, pp. 85-89). Ascending the throne on 4 Ṣafar 1212/28 July 1797, he struck coins in Shiraz and Tehran first as Solṭān Bābā Khan and later as Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah. In a significant departure from earlier Persian coins which invoked the Shiʿite Imams, the new coins cited the shah’s name, thus denoting his claim to full sovereignty (Rabino, pp. 10, 29, pl. 21). The official coronation took place in Tehran on 1 Šawwāl 1212 (feast of Feṭr) /19 March 1798 (two days before Nowrūz; Hedāyat, Rawżat al-ṣafā IX, pp. 319-20). Ebrāhīm Khan was reinstated as the grand vizier with nearly total control over the administration and the army.