

The arrival in Tehran in 1799 of Mahdī-ʿAlī Khan, the envoy of the governor of Bombay, first drew Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah’s serious attention to British India. The envoy’s account of British power and wealth was

Plate IIa, Plate IIb, and Plate IIc

Plate III

exaggerated and that of his own mission spurious (Watson, p. 123; Greaves, pp. 375-76), but it nevertheless prepared the ground for the favorable reception of Captain John Malcolm and his mission on behalf of the governor-general of India in November 1800. Malcolm’s proposal for an alliance against the ruler of Kabul, Zamān Shah Dorranī, was welcomed by the shah, who at the time was afraid of Zamān harboring the unruly khans of Khorasan. The spectacle put up by the envoy, and the expensive array of gifts which he presented to the shah and the Qajar princes and officials, impressed the Persian monarch who in turn bedazzled the British envoy with a show of royal splendor. Although Malcolm insisted that his presents for the shah, which had cost the East India Company a small fortune, were “rarities” and “curiosities” from the governor-general of India, the shah preferred to receive them as “tributes” and “offerings” from an inferior neighboring power. Reconstructing the style of receptions at the Safavid court, the shah’s own love for extravagance, his court’s strict etiquette, his bejeweled appearance, and his kingly manner all served to reflect majesty and might. The British offer for monetary assistance to Persia in the event of war with its neighbors further confirmed in the mind of the shah his superior status (for the text of the 1801 Anglo-Persian treaty and instructions to Malcolm, see Hurewitz, I, pp. 117-24).

This view of Anglo-Persian alliance was soon put to a severe test when in 1804, upon the shah’s request for military and financial assistance, the British refused to extend the terms of the 1801 treaty to defense of Persia in the war against Russia (Greaves, pp. 380-81). Seeking an alternative ally in the tumultuous Europe of the time, the shah responded positively in 1806 to an earlier French prelude and welcomed Napoleon’s envoy, Amédée Jaubert. Offering to employ the French in his service, the shah subsequently dispatched his own envoy to accompany Jaubert back to France (Jaubert, pp. 238-44). Increasingly aware of his own country’s strategic position and disappointed with the British, the shah succumbed to Napoleon’s plan—which at the time appeared deceptively viable—to conquer British India. In exchange for Persian cooperation the shah was promised full assistance to retrain and reorganize his army, manufacture firearms, and create a modern artillery. Napoleon’s letters aroused in the mind of the shah Nāder-like ambitions to prevail over Russia, then an enemy of France, recapture Georgia, and even partake in the French conqueror’s Indian spoils. The Treaty of Finkenstein (May 1807) not only stipulated that the shah “sever all diplomatic relations with England, declare war at once on the latter power, and commence hostilities without delay” (art. 8) but also give the French forces the right of passage through Persia and assist in the Indian campaign (arts. 10-13; for the text see Clercq, II, pp. 201-3 and Hurewitz, I, pp. 184-85). Caught up in the excitement of the Napoleonic adventure, the shah committed a serious blunder by placing his vulnerable domain between two potent enemies, Russia and Britain, unaware of the fact that his French ally had no reluctance to enter into alliance, almost immediately after Finkenstein, with Russia and sign with her the friendship treaty of Tilsit in July 1807 (Nafīsī, I, pp. 93-108; Amini, pp. 111-40).