

A superstitious man, like all his successors, the shah required the court astrologer to determine the auspicious hour for all his important activities and to interpret his dreams, an aspect of his personality which explains many of his trepidations and political inconsistencies. An observant Shiʿite greatly deferential to the men of religion, he managed to preserve the royal prerogatives in the face of the increasing public presence of the ʿolamāʾ. Conscious of their high status, which they acquired in the early decades of his rule, and the influence they wielded among the public, the shah willingly patronized the ranking mojtahed s and revered them through monetary gifts, land tenure (toyūl), appointments to religious offices, and above all by allowing them the control of charitable endowments (waqf s), the judicial process, the pulpit of the mosques, and instruction in the colleges as well a free rein to suppress, and occasionally eliminate, their Sufi and other unorthodox critics.

The reign of Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah should be seen as the golden age of Shiʿite legalism when the production of a vast body of studies in feqh, oṣūl, and related fields transformed modern Shiʿite scholarship. Among many of the Persian and Arab mojtahed s invited to the court and given frequent access to the shah was Mīrzā Abu’l-Qāsem Qomī (better known as Mīrzā-ye Qomī), the renowned Oṣūlī (q.v.) jurist who reconstituted the Qom teaching circle with the full support of the shah and in competition with Isfahan and Najaf. Among the Isfahani mojtahed s, the shah was particularly mindful of the rich and powerful Sayyed Moḥammad-Bāqer Šaftī, the Ḥojjat-al-Eslām, who, despite many of his power struggles with the provincial governors of Isfahan, was considerate of the shah’s wishes. Among the jurists in Najaf he particularly revered Shaikh Jaʿfar Najafī (the author of Kašf al-ḡeṭāʾ), who shared many of his worldly appetites, and Sayyed Moḥammad Ṭabāṭabāʾī, who was the chief instigator of the jehād during the second round of wars with Russia.

Yet despite respect for the mojtahed s, the shah prided himself on his religious latitude and reserved favor for philosophers, mystics, and even the anti-Oṣūlī ʿolamāʾ. In 1811 Mīrzā Moḥammad Aḵbārī promised the shah that through an act of necromancy he would be able to produce the severed head of the Russian commander in the Caucasus, the Inspector-General (Persian ešpoḵtor) Pavel Dimitrievich Tsitsianov (q.v.). Whether by sheer coincidence or acquiescence with the Persian field commanders, Mīrzā Moḥammad made good of his promise at the end of his forty-day retirement (čella, q.v.), though the shah declined to fulfill his exchange promise to remove from positions of power all the Oṣūlī mojtahed s. Despite his careful facade of religiosity, and because of his political failures and private indulgences, he was not immune, especially in his final years, to reproof by the ʿolamāʾ, less out of piety and more because the shah’s financial recourses diminished in reverse proportion to his inborn avarice. 