

Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah’s era also witnessed a period of royal constructions and architectural innovations which are examples of the shah’s taste and mode of patronage. New pavilions, private residential quarters for the harem, a public audience hall, and landscaped gardens were created in Tehran’s Golestān complex; the existing building embellished and expanded; and the Tehran citadel (arg) was reconstructed. New fortifications and gates were built around the enlarged city walls, the Tehran bāzār was reconstructed, and new urban quarters began to emerge with new residences built by the nobility. Other palaces and gardens were completed and repaired in the vicinity of the capital, including the Solaymānīya palace in Karaj, the Qaṣr-e Qājār north of the capital, and a resort pavilion in Solṭānīya, the site of the shah’s summer camp. The prince governors also built their own palaces and public buildings. Yet the shah’s efforts never amounted to a systematic attempt to develop Tehran into a new metropolis and it remained economically, demographically, and culturally behind Tabrīz and Isfahan. The shah’s religious patronage included the Tehran royal mosques (Masjed-e Šāh; now renamed as Ḵomeynī mosque in open breach of the Islamic law of waqf); mosques and colleges (madrasa s) in Kāšān, Isfahan and other cities; and extensive renovations and gilding of the shrines of Imam ʿAlī, Imam Ḥosayn, and ʿAbbās b. ʿAlī (qq.v.) in the holy cities of Ottoman Iraq at enormous cost. Carefully nurturing an image of Shiʿite patronage, the shah extensively added to and beautified the shrines of Fāṭema Maʿṣūma in Qom and Imam ʿAlī al-Reżā in Mašhad. (Hedāyat, Rawżat al-ṣafā X, p. 106)

Honoring the ancient tradition of literary and scholarly patronage, Fatḥ-ʿAlī’ Shah’s court became a center for poets and literati who often benefited from the shah’s personal attention and received state pensions. A heterogeneous mix of the remnants of the Zand court and of Isfahan and Tabrīz circles, these men thrived in the favorable environment of civility and high culture under Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah. The literary movement led by such figures as Fatḥ-ʿAlī Khan Ṣabā, ʿAbd-al-Wahhāb Moʿtamed-al-Dawla Našāṭ, ʿAbd-al-Razzāq Donbolī (Maftūn), Mīrzā Moḥammad Fāẓel Khan Garrūsī, Mīrzā Ṣādeq Waqāyeʿnegār Marvazī, Fażl-Allāh Ḵāvarī, and later Mīrzā Abu’l-Qāsem Qāʾem-maqām Farāhānī constituted the Royal Society (Anjoman-e Ḵāqān) best known for reviving the style of classical masters of Persian poetry (Browne, Lit. Hist. Persia IV, pp. 298-326; Āryanpūr, Az Ṣabā tā Nīmā I, pp. 14-77; see BĀZGAŠT-E ADABĪ). In the spirit of cultural nationalism, the poet laureate, Ṣabā, composed his famous Šāhanšāh-nāma (Book of the king of kings), in competition with Ferdowsī’s Šāh-nāma, chronicling in 70,000 verses the great deeds of his patron Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah and his dynasty. Remarkable for its style and for mythologizing Qajar history, as an epic produced under royal patronage it did not always attempt to depict its hero in a historical light, as in its account of the defeats in the war with Russia (Majmaʿ al-foṣahāʾ, pp. 618-33; Nāṭeq, pp. 143-62). Traces of the shah’s interests are detectable in several other works of this literary circle, although his own limited poetic talent, which resulted in the compilation of a dīvān entitled Kalām al-molūk molūk al-kalām,with the pen name “Ḵāqān,” remained hopelessly facile and unrepresentative of any sincere sentiments of its author, even after many hands conceivably edited and improved it. Since he lacked any formal education, his ability to compose poetry was acquired mostly through the court literati. “Whenever in a gathering discussion would turn to a learned issue,” writes Aḥmad Mīrzā ʿAẓod-al-Dawla, “His Majesty the Ḵāqān conversed with each group according to its own tenet (maslak) in such a way as though for years he had studied that subject. This knowledge, however, was not acquired through education but through what was memorized in the course of many intermingling and discussion with the people of learning and inquiring about works and [spiritual] status of the literati in attendance in the royal anjoman (p. 130). History was among the shah’s favorite topics, and he had his own reader of the Šāh-nāma who loudly recited while the shah was riding (ʿAżod-al-Dawla, pp. 45, 140). In conversations with Malcolm, Jones, and Ouseley brothers he also learned about European literature, history, and religious developments.