

As a miniature version of the shah’s outer court, the harem’s hierarchical order recognized the status and the division of labor among the royal wives. Organized for the shah’s pleasure and comfort, the harem was supervised first by the mother of the shah (Mahd-e ʿOlyā) and later by several of his senior wives and daughters who exercised considerable influence on the shah, his court, and his ministers. After the death of Mahd-e ʿOlyā, among the shah’s Qajar wives Āsīa Ḵānom, mother of the crown prince ʿAbbās Mīrzā, was the most senior, but the shah’s greatest affection was for Ṭāwūs Ḵānom Tāj-al-Dawla, an Eṣfahānī concubine and a close ally of Ḥājī Moḥammad-Ḥosayn Ṣadr Eṣfahānī.The Taḵt-e ḵoršīd (sun throne), which was commissioned by Ṣadr Eṣfahānī as a wedding present, was renamed in her honor as Taḵt-e Ṭāwūs. Żīāʾ-al-Salṭana, the shah’s most learned and sophisticated daughter (by Maryam Ḵānom), who acted as her father’s private secretary and consultant, was the voice of the harem and influential both with the shah and with the royal princes. Golbadan Bājī Ḵāzen-al-Dawla, a lowly concubine who rose to the head of the private treasury, presided over the harem finances and the shah’s private funds, heading a host of women secretaries and accountants (ʿAżod-al-Dawla, pp. 17-27).

Final years (1826-1834). Defeat in the second conflict with Russia brought to the surface the fundamental flaws of Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah’s government and his weakening grip over the country. Compounded by personal tragedies, most significantly the death of his sons Moḥammad-ʿAlī Mīrzā in 1823 and ʿAbbās Mīrzā in 1833, the shah increasingly withdrew from public life and lost interest in the everyday affairs of the state. The last two decades of the shah’s reign witnessed the death of Mīrzā Safīʿ Māzandarānī, the influential grand vizier(d.1234/1818-19); Mīrzā Bozorg Farāhānī the Qāʾem-maqām, minister to ʿAbbās Mīrzā in Azarbaijan and perhaps the most capable statesman of the Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah period (d. 1237/1821); Hājī Moḥammad-Ḥosayn Eṣfahānī Amīn-al-Dawla, the astute state accountant and, later, the grand vizier (d. 1239/1823), soon to be followed by the death of Mīrzā ʿAbd-al-Wahhāb Moʿtamad-al-Dawla Našāṭ in 1244/1828, depriving the shah of a close circle of trusted advisors. They were replaced by a younger generation of ministers, of whom Mīrzā Abu’l-Qāsem Qāʾem-maqām and Mīrzā ʿAbd-Allāh Amīn-al-Dawla Eṣfahānī (qq.v.) were the most prominent. They were, however, not of the stature and experience to harness the growing influence upon the shah of the Qajar princes and nobles, the ranking mojtahed s, and the harem. The events leading to the war with Russia, and especially the unprecedented appointment in 1826 of a Qajar chief, Allāh-yār Khan Āṣaf-al-Dawla Davallū, to the position of grand vizier, demonstrated the shah’s inertia in the face of a mounting pro-war delirium. The loss to Russia of the rest of the Caucasus (and temporarily the province of Azarbaijan) not only was a rude shock to the shah and an irreparable drain on his already dwindling treasury but a major discredit to his authority as he began to encounter immediately after the Russian war a series of debilitating tribal and urban revolts in Isfahan, Yazd, Kermān, and Khorasan. ʿAbbās Mīrzā’s shaky position, and his bad health, was only partially improved as he completed the royal charge of quelling the revolts in the eastern provinces, especially at a time when public resentment of the princely governments was at its height. But his death not only deprived the shah of a beloved son and a capable successor, who in his later years served almost as an equal partner to his aging and demoralized father, but faced Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah with a stiff resistance to his decision to bypass his surviving senior sons in succession and instead nominate as heir-apparent the young Moḥammad Mīrzā, ʿAbbās Mīrzā’s senior son. Most significantly, Ḥosayn-ʿAlī Mīrzā, the Farmānfarmā of Fārs, viewed the nomination not only as a personal affront to his own rightful position but a sign of the shah’s surrender to a pro-Russian interpretation of Article 13 of the Treaty of Torkamānčāy, which guaranteed ʿAbbās Mīrzā’s succession (Hurowitz, I, pp. 234; Amanat, 1997, p. 22). Fatḥ-ʿAlī Shah, witnessing signs of insubordination in Fārs, arrived in Isfahan in October 1834 to collect the tax arrears due from Fārs to the central treasury. With no apparent symptoms of illness, he died there suddenly He was buried in the tomb which he had constructed for himself in the shrine of Fāṭema Maʿṣūmā in Qom (Hedāyat, Rawżat al-ṣafā X, pp. 92-95).