1

Counterfactual Thought Experiments in World Politics

LOGICAL, METHODOLOGICAL, AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
PERSPECTIVES

PHILIP E. TETLOCK AND AARON BELKIN

‘THERE 1s nothing new about counterfactual inference. Historians have been
doing it for at least two thousand years. Counterfactuals fueled the grief of
‘Tacitus when he pondered what would have happened if Germanicus had
lived to become Emperor: “Had he been the sole arbiter of events, had he
held the powers and title of King, he would have outstripped Alexander in
military fame as far as he surpassed him in gentleness, in self-command and
in other noble qualities” (quoted in Gould 1969). Social scientists—from
Max Weber (1949) to Robert Fogel (1964)—have also long been aware of
the pivotal role that counterfactuals play in scholarship on such diverse
topics as the causes of economic growth and the diffusion of religious and
philosophical ideas. Nevertheless, some contemporary historians still sternly
wam us to avoid “what-might-have-been” questions. They tell us that his-
tory is tough enough as it is—as it actually is—without worrying about how
things might have worked out differently in this or that scenario. Why make
a difficult problem impossible? In this view (Fisher 1970; A. J. P. Taylor
1954), we do scholarship a grave disservice by publishing a volume on
counterfactual reasoning. We are luring our colleagues “down the meth-
odological rathole” in pursuit of unanswerable metaphysical questions that
revolve around the age-old riddles of determinism, fate, and free will (Fisher
1970, 18).

‘The ferocity of the skeptics is a bit unnerving. Moreover, they are right
that counterfactual inference is dauntingly difficult. But they are wrong that
we can avoid counterfactual reasoning at acceptable cost. And they are
wrong that all counterfactuals are equally “absurd” because they are equally
hypothetical (Fisher 1970, 19). We can avoid counterfactuals only if we
eschew all causal inference and limit ourselves to strictly noncausal narra-
tives of what actually happened (no smuggling in causal claims under the
guise of verbs such as “influenced,” “responded,” “triggered,” “precipi-
tated,” and the like). Putting to the side whether any coherent and compel-

