


THE  RUSSIAN  AMBASSADORS  5 

and  evil  which  it  is  only  just  to  recognise.  He  had 
unlimited  confidence  in  the  judgment  of  his  brother 
the  Chancellor,  and  adopted  the  favourable  opinions 
he  had  formed  of  me.  His  correspondence  shows  the 
interest  he  took  in  defending  me  against  slanderous 
accusations,  and  in  maintaining  me  in  the  functions 
which  I  performed  at  the  Emperor's  wish  and  that  of 
the  Chancellor.  I  am  paying  a  debt  of  gratitude  in 
here  recognising  the  numerous  and  persistent  marks 
of  affection  he  showed  me,  though  I  cannot  approve 
his  political  views  or  conduct.  His  faults  were  a 
consequence  of  his  simplicity  of  character,  which 
prompted  him  to  an  unreserved  admiration  of 
England,  the  only  country  which  at  that  time  pos- 
sessed liberal  institutions.  Count  Simon  was  deeply 
attached  to  Mr  Pitt  and  some  of  his  colleagues,  and 
had  an  almost  unlimited  admiration  for  them.  This 
prevented  him  from  impartially  watching  the  march 
of  events  and  perceiving  the  true  interests  either  of 
Russia  or  even  of  Europe  in  the  general  scope  of  his 
policy.  The  same  fault  was  to  be  found  with  the 
Russian  Ambassadors  at  Vienna  and  Berlin,  except 
that  neither  Count  Razumovsky  nor  M.  Alopeus 
redeemed  their  defects  by  the  good  qualities  of  Count 
Simon  Vorontzoff.  The  intimate  relations  of  Count 
Razumovsky  with  various  prominent  personages  at 
Vienna,  and  the  servility  shown  by  Alopeus  to  the 
leading  statesmen  at  Berlin,  were  the  cause  of  many 
inaccuracies  in  the  reports  they  used  to  send  me. 
Their  only  desire  was  to  be  on  good  terms  with  the 
Governments  to  which  they  were  accredited,  and  they 


6          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

often  nullified  the  effect  of  our  communications  by 
attenuating  them  at  their  pleasure.  To  prevent  such 
abuses  in  future,  the  Emperor  sent  M.  de  Wintzin- 
gerode  to  Berlin.  He  was  not  disposed  to  be  very 
friendly  to  Prussia,  and  was  determined  not  to  con- 
ceal anything  as  to  the  military  resources  of  that 
Power  or  the  uncertain  policy  of  its  statesmen.  His 
reports  gave  little  hope  of  there  being  anything  to  be 
expected  from  the  co-operation  of  Prussia  in  the 
event  of  a  rupture  with  France. 

Another  special  envoy,  M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  was 
sent  to  London,  as  it  was  impossible  to  rely  entirely 
on  the  reports  of  Count  Simon  Vorontzoff.  This 
appointment  was  approved  by  the  Chancellor  and  was 
consequently  satisfactory  to  his  brother.  When  he 
was  last  in  Russia,  the  Ambassador  had  entered  into 
a  closer  acquaintance  with  Novosiltzoff,  and  highly 
appreciated  his  intelligence  and  his  political  principles. 
NovosiltzofF  had,  moreover,  been  ordered  to  pass 
through  Berlin,  in  order  to  sound  the  feeling  of  that 
Court  before  proceeding  with  the  same  object  to 
London  ;  he  was  also,  if  circumstances  should  render 
it  desirable,  to  go  to  Paris  to  propose  the  most  favour- 
able conditions  for  the  maintenance  of  peace. 