

After  Count  Markoffs  retirement,  the  principal 
personages  of  Russian  diplomacy  were  Count  Razu- 
movsky  and  Count  Simon  Vorontzoff;  and  the 
Chancellor's  favourable  opinion  of  me  contributed 
greatly  to  smooth  down  difficulties  which  might  have 
been  raised  by  Ambassadors  who  were  more  experi- 
enced than  myself.  My  Ministry  was  in  some  degree 


FOREIGN  POLICY  OF  PETER  THE  GREAT  7 

a  continuation  of  the  preceding  one,  though  it  was 
difficult  to  maintain  the  passive  system  of  peace  and 
tranquillity  that  had  been  adopted  by  Kotchoubey  and 
pursued  with  more  self-assurance  and  dignity  by  the 
Chancellor.  A  country  accustomed  to  the  continual 
successes  of  Catherine  or  the  escapades  of  Paul  could 
not  be  satisfied  with  a  subordinate  and  insignificant  part, 
even  if  it  was  thereby  assured  uninterrupted  internal 
prosperity.  Moreover,  the  foreign  policy  of  a  great 
State  should  in  my  opinion  not  be  passive  or  lethargic, 
without  any  interest  for  the  general  good ;  this 
narrow  way  of  looking  at  politics,  this  imperturbable 
gaze  which  soon  becomes  spiritless  because  it  is  always 
fixed  upon  one's  self,  cannot  be  consistent  with  the 
feeling  of  power  and  the  desire  of  achieving  distinction 
by  noble  deeds.  Such  a  system  defeats  its  own  object, 
for,  by  producing  an  incapacity  to  rise  to  larger  and 
more  generous  considerations,  it  creates  improvidence 
and  timidity,  and  leaves  free  scope  to  the  ambitions 
of  others.  This  had  certainly  not  been  the  spirit  of 
Russian  policy  in  former  days.  No  State,  except 
ancient  Rome,  ever  had  a  vaster,  a  more  active,  or  a 
more  persevering  policy,  though  we  must  admit  that 
it  always  disregarded  the  principles  of  justice  and 
right. 

The  Czars  of  Moscow  had  had  the  instinct  of 
conquest  since  the  reign  of  Ivan  the  Cruel ;  they 
employed  artifice  and  violence  by  turns,  and  succeeded 
with  rare  ability  in  augmenting  their  territories  at 
the  expense  of  their  neighbours.  It  \vas  under  Peter 
the  Great,  however,  that  Russian  policy  first  assumed 


8          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

that  decided  and  stable  character  which  it  has  main- 
tained to  this  day.  All  the  objects  which  Russia 
unceasingly  pursues  with  indefatigable  perseverance — 
amounting  to  nothing  less  than  the  subjugation  of  the 
greater  part  of  Europe  and  Asia — were  clearly  con- 
ceived and  designated  to  his  successors  by  Peter  the 
Great.  He  gave  the  first  fatal  blows  to  Sweden  and 
Poland ;  he  began  the  struggle  with  Persia  and 
Turkey ;  he  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Greeks 
and  Slavs,  and  created  a  European  army  and  navy. 
The  impulse  which  his  iron  will  gave  to  the  nation 
still  continues,  and  by  an  extraordinary  concourse  of 
circumstances,  Russia  has  come  alarmingly  near  to 
the  attainment  of  his  objects  without  Europe  having 
succeeded  in  stopping  her.  Internal  difficulties  may 
from  time  to  time  have  retarded  her  advance,  but  the 
spirit  of  Peter  still  hovers  over  his  empire,  and  his 
pitiless  ambition  lies  at  the  bottom  of  every  Russian 
heart. 