

Although  the  new  system  of  policy  was  often 
criticised  on  account  of  its  vagueness  and  utopianism, 
it  soon  had  serious  and  practical  results.  It  was 
impossible  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  European 
affairs,  to  come  forward  as  a  judicial  and  moderating 
influence,  to  prevent  violence,  injustice  and  aggression, 


THE  PRINCE'S  FOREIGN  POLICY  13 

without  coming  into  contact  with  France  at  every 
step.  She  would  have  been  a  dangerous  rival  if  she 
had  wished  to  play  the  same  beneficent  part ;  but  being 
led  by  the  unlimited  ambition  of  Napoleon,  she  sought 
to  do  the  very  contrary  of  what  we  wished.  A 
collision  sooner  or  later  was  inevitable. 

Napoleon  could  not  suffer  any  rivals  in  the  career 
upon  which  he  had  entered.  All  the  attempts  which 
were  made  to  act  on  an  equal  footing  with  him  failed. 
His  ally  had  either  to  carry,  out  his  plans  or  become 
his  enemy.  Scarcely  had  my  system  of  policy  been 
decided  upon  than  by  a  sort  of  instinct  our  relations 
with  the  First  Consul  became  colder,  and  the  com- 
munications on  both  sides  clearly  showed  by  their 
tone  that  neither  was  disposed  to  make  concessions  to 
the  other. 


CHAPTER  II 

EXECUTION  OP  THE  DUC  D'fiNGHIEN. — RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE. — THE 
ENGLISH  AND  AUSTRIAN  AMBASSADORS. — UNIVERSAL  OPPOSITION  TO 
NAPOLEON. 

MATTERS  had  now  arrived  at  such  a  point  between 
Russia  and  France  that  any  incident  might  have 
brought  about  a  rupture  between  the  two  Govern- 
ments ;  and  this  could  not  long  be  deferred  under  the 
system  pursued  by  Napoleon.  The  origin  of  the 
rupture  was  in  this  case  of  a  special  kind,  as  no 
material  interest  was  involved  :  it  was  simply  a  ques- 
tion of  justice  and  right. 

The  seizure  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,*  by  a  French 
detachment  in  an  independent  country  with  which 
France  was  at  peace,  and  his  trial  and  execution  which 
immediately  followed,  produced  a  general  feeling  of 
stupor  and  indignation  which  those  who  did  not 
witness  it  could  not  easily  realise.  The  Emperor 
Alexander  and  his  family  were  most  strongly  im- 
pressed by  it,  and  did  not  hesitate  loudly  to  proclaim 
their  horror  and  detestation  of  the  deed.  The  news 
came  on  a  Saturday ;  on  the  following  day  the  whole 

*  The  Duke  was  seized  by  the  orders  of  Napoleon  on  the  15th  March  1804,  a 
Ettenheim,  in  Baden.  He  was  taken  to  Vincennes,  where  he  arrived  on  the  20th, 
tried  by  a  military  commission,  and  executed  the  same  night. 


EXECUTION  OF  THE  DUG  PENG  HIE N  15 

of  the  Court  went  into  mourning,  and  the  Emperor 
and  Empresses,  as  they  passed  after  mass  through  the 
room  in  which  the  diplomatic  body  were  in  attendance, 
took  no  notice  whatever  of  the  French  Ambassador, 
though  they  spoke  to  various  persons  who  were  next 
to  him.     It  was  indeed  impossible  for  a  Power  which 
proposed   to    carry    out   the    policy    adopted    by   the 
Russian  sovereign  to  be  indifferent  to  such  a  violation 
of  justice  and  international  law.     I  drew  up  a  note  on 
the  subject  which   made  some   noise  at  the  time  ;    it 
was  sent  to  the  French  Ministry  by  M.  d'Oubril,  the 
Russian  Charge  d' Affaires    in    Paris.       In  this  note 
Russia  loudly  protested  against  a  deed  which  seemed 
to  show  entire  forgetfulness  of  the  most  sacred  laws. 
She   demanded   a  satisfactory  explanation — which  it 
was  evidently  impossible  to  give.      The  reply   soon 
came  :    it  was  harsh   and  insulting.      Talleyrand,  at 
that   time   Minister     of    Foreign    Affairs,    reminded 
Russia  that  when   Paul  was  assassinated,  France  did 
not  consider  herself  justified  in  demanding  an  explana- 
tion.    In  handing  me  this  despatch  General  Hedou- 
ville  gave  me  a  letter  which   was  intended  to   soften 
the  bitterness  of  its  language.     Talleyrand  instructed 
the  Ambassador  to  address  himself  to  me  especially. 
He  said  that  Napoleon  had  confidence  in  my  character 
and  intelligence,  and  felfc  certain  that  I  would  use  my 
influence  to    prevent  the   two    countries   from    being 
exposed  to  break   a   harmony    which    was   not   only 
useful  to  themselves  but  necessary  for  the  welfare  of 
Europe.     These  coquetries  did  not  of  course  produce 
any  effect  upon  me  ;  I  regarded  them  as  almost  offen- 