

My  system  was  just  the  one  to  delight  Alexander 
in  the  mood  in  which  he  then  was.  It  gave  free 
scope  to  the  imagination  and  to  all  kinds  of  combina- 
tions without  requiring  immediate  decision  or  action. 
He  was  the  only  man  in  his  Empire  capable  of  under- 
standing my  aims  and  adopting  my  principles  through 
conviction,  and  even  as  a  matter  of  conscience.  At 
the  same  time,  he  only  entered  into  my  ideas  super- 
ficially ;  being  satisfied  with  the  general  principles 
and  the  phrases  in  which  they  were  expressed,  he  did 

*  '  Essai  sur  la  Diplomatic,  Manuscrit  d'un  Philhellene,  publi(5  par  M.  Toulouzan.' 
Paris  and  Marseilles,  1830. 


THE  PRINCES  FOREIGN  POLICY  n 

not  think  of  going  more  deeply  into  them  or  appreci- 
ating either  the  duties  which  the  system  imposed 
upon  him  or  the  difficulties  which  would  necessarily 
impede  its  realisation.  My  colleagues,  who  seemed 
to  share  my  opinions  on  many  points,  listened  with 
approval  to  the  details  of  my  system  of  policy,  which 
comprised  the  emancipation  of  the  Greeks  and  the 
Slavs.  So  long  as  the  only  matter  in  question  was 
the  supremacy  of  Russia  in  Europe  and  the  increase 
of  her  power,  those  who  listened  to  me  were  on  my 
side  ;  but  when  I  passed  to  the  objects  and  obligations 
which  should  be  the  consequence  of  such  supremacy, 
to  the  rights  of  others,  and  the  principles  of  justice 
which  should  check  ambition,  I  observed  that  my 
audience  grew  cold  and  constrained. 

My  system,  through  its  fundamental  principle  of 
repairing  all  acts  of  injustice,  naturally  led  to  the 
gradual  restoration  of  Poland.  But  I  did  not  pro- 
nounce the  name  of  my  country,  not  wishing  to  raise 
all  at  once  the  difficulties  which  a  course  so  opposed 
to  all  preconceived  ideas  was  sure  to  encounter.  I 
spoke  only  of  the  progressive  emancipation  of  the 
nations  which  had  been  unjustly  deprived  of  their 
political  existence,  and  I  named  the  Greeks  and  Slavs 
as  those  whose  restoration  to  independence  would  be 
most  in  conformity  with  the  wishes  and  the  opinions 
of  the  Russians.  It  was  tacitly  understood  between 
the  Emperor  and  myself  that  the  principle  was  to  be 
held  equally  applicable  to  Poland,  but  that  for  the 
present  no  mention  should  be  made  of  that  country. 
I  felt  the  propriety  and  necessity  of  this.  No  Russian 


it        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

was  ever  on  his  own  initiative  or  of  his  own  will 
favourable  to  Poland ;  and  I  afterwards  became  con- 
vinced that  there  is  no  exception  to  this  rule. 

One  day,  when  in  an  intimate  conversation  with 
my  colleagues  we  spoke  of  the  vicissitudes  through 
which  Poland  had  passed,  Novosiltzoff  told  us  that 
when  he  was  travelling  in  that  country  at  the  time  of 
the  Kosciuszko  Revolution,  he  wras  stopped  by  some 
peasants  who  asked  for  his  passport.  It  was  in 
German,  and  none  of  them  could  read  it,  so  they  sent 
to  a  German  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood.  When 
the  latter  arrived,  Novosiltzoff,  who  spoke  German, 
begged  him  to  interfere  in  his  behalf,  upon  which  the 
German  assured  the  peasants  that  there  would  be  no 
harm  in  letting  Novosiltzoff  pass,  and  he  was  then 
allowed  to  proceed  to  the  army  of  the  Prince  of 
Nassau,  who  was  besieging  Warsaw.  I  strongly 
expressed  my  disapprobation  of  the  German's  conduct, 
which  greatly  astonished  my  colleagues,  as  they 
thought  any  step  would  have  been  justifiable  to  save 
Novosiltzoff.  This  showed  how  different  were  our 
respective  points  of  view ;  and  similar  incidents  often 
happened  in  the  course  of  our  relations.  I  had  no 
reason  to  conceal  my  thoughts,  and  no  one  was 
better  informed  of  them  than  the  Emperor  himself. 