

There  was,  however,  a  time  when  Peter's  policy 
was  forgotten  and  suspended ;  this  was  at  the  begin- 
ning of  Alexander's  reign.  Young,  candid,  inoffensive, 
thinking  only  of  philanthropy  and  liberalism,  passion- 
ately desirous  of  doing  good,  but  often  incapable  of 
distinguishing  it  from  evil,  he  had  seen  with  equal 
aversion  the  wars  of  Catherine  and  the  despotic  follies 
of  Paul,  and  when  he  ascended  the  throne  he  cast 
aside  all  the  ideas  of  avidity,  astuteness,  and  grasping 
ambition  which  were  the  soul  of  the  old  Russian 
policy.  Peter's  vast  projects  were  ignored  for  a  time, 
and  Alexander  devoted  himself  entirely  to  internal 


THE  PRINCE'S  FOREIGN  POLICY  9 

reforms,  with  the  serious  intention  of  making  his 
Russian  and  other  subjects  as  happy  as  they  could  be 
in  their  present  condition.  Later  on  he  was  carried 
away,  almost  against  his  will,  into  the  natural  current 
of  Russian  policy  ;  but  at  first  he  held  entirely  aloof 
from  it,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  he  was  not  really 
popular  in  Russia.  His  character  differed  both  in  its 
good  and  its  bad  qualities  from  that  of  his  people,  and 
he  was  far  from  happy  when  he  was  in  the  midst  of 
them. 

After  being  placed  at  the  head  of  affairs,  I  felt 
like  a  soldier  who,  being  thrown  by  chance  and 
friendship  into  the  ranks  of  a  foreign  army,  fights 
zealously  from  a  feeling  of  honour  and  in  order  not  to 
abandon  his  master  and  friend.  Alexander's  un- 
bounded confidence  made  me  feel  it  my  duty  to  do  my 
best  to  serve  him,  and  to  add  lustre  to  his  policy  so 
long  as  I  had  the  direction  of  it.  Moreover,  I  firmly 
believed  that  it  might  be  possible  for  me  to  reconcile 
the  tendencies  of  the  Russian  nation  with  the 
generous  ideas  of  its  ruler,  and  to  make  use  of  the 
Russian  craving  for  glory  and  supremacy  for  the 
general  benefit  of  mankind.  The  object  was  a  great 
but  a  remote  one,  to  be  pursued  consistently  and  with 
perseverance,  and  to  be  executed  with  patience  and 
skill.  I  thought  it  was  worthy  of  the  national  pride 
of  the  Russian  people.  I  would  have  wished  Alex- 
ander to  become  a  sort  of  arbiter  of  peace  for  the 
civilised  world,  to  be  the  protector  of  the  weak  and 
the  oppressed,  and  that  his  reign  should  inaugurate  a 
new  era  of  justice  and  right  in  European  politics. 


io        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

This  idea  quite  absorbed  me,  and  I  endeavoured 
to  reduce  it  to  a  practical  form.  I  drew  up  a  scheme 
of  policy  which  I  sent  in  the  form  of  a  circular  to  all 
the  Russian  representatives  at  Foreign  Courts.  This 
circular,  which  was  intended  to  inaugurate  the  new 
system,  and  was  based  on  the  principles  which  I 
afterwards  developed  in  my  '  Essay  on  Diplomacy,'* 
prescribed  a  line  of  conduct  characterised  by  modera- 
tion, justice,  loyalty,  and  impartial  dignity.  My 
efforts  in  this  direction,  however,  were  fruitless,  owing 
to  the  innumerable  difficulties  I  encountered  and  the 
rapid  march  of  events  which  brought  about  my  fall. 
But,  so  long  as  I  remained  in  office,  I  did  my  utmost 
to  direct  the  course  of  Russian  policy  in  accordance 
with  the  above  principles,  although  not  so  completely 
as  I  should  have  wished.  One  is  often  compelled  by 
circumstances  to  modify  one's  ideas,  and  to  make 
painful  concessions  which  sometimes  frustrate  plans 
long  elaborated  and  cherished. 