


APPOINTED  FOREIGN  MINISTER  3 

for  a  Chancellor,  although  hitherto  he  had  never 
invited  any  of  the  members  of  the  diplomatic  body. 
In  leaving  me  in  his  place  he  was  sure  that  he  would 
be  heartily  received  on  his  return,  and  he  supported 
me  with  all  the  influence  he  possessed  in  the  Govern- 
ment offices  and  in  the  Senate ;  he  had  none  over  the 
general  public.  He  promised  me  to  write  often  and 
give  me  his  advice.  We  entered  into  a  very  volumin- 
ous correspondence,  which  touched  me  much  on 
account  of  the  friendship  it  showed,  but  which  I  soon 
could  not  follow  or  even  read  with  attention,  as  my 
whole  time  was  absorbed  in  public  business. 

I  accepted  the  post  of  Foreign  Minister,  and  the 
Emperor  was  as  glad  as  a  child ;  but  the  young 
Russian  party  did  not  conceal  its  anger  and  excite- 
ment. Even  the  Empress  thought  that  I  had  some 
malevolent  intention,  or  at  least  that  I  was  wanting 
in  delicacy  towards  the  Emperor  in  accepting  so  con- 
fidential an  appointment  in  the  teeth  of  the  general 
opinion  (so  at  least  she  thought)  and  in  spite  of  the  con- 
viction that  I  would  thereby  deprive  the  Emperor  of 
the  affection  of  his  people.  She  now  absolutely  ignored 
me ;  this  lasted  more  than  a  year,  and  did  not  cease 
until  after  Austerlitz.  It  will  be  seen  that  I  had 
powerful  adversaries ;  but  having  made  my  decision, 
I  did  not  flinch,  and  only  thought  how  to  acquit 
myself  of  my  task  in  the  best  possible  way. 

It  so  happened  that  just  at  the  time  when  I  was 
appointed  Foreign  Minister  several  important  Russian 
diplomatists  were  at  St  Petersburg.  I  have  already 
alluded  to  Count  Markoff,  who,  when  the  Chancellor 


4          MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

retired,  was  more  determined  than  ever  to  quit  the 
diplomatic  career.  He  went  to  the  estate  Catherine 
had  given  him,  and  worried  his  neighbours  with  in- 
terminable actions  at  law.  I  made  it  my  duty,  so 
long  as  he  remained  at  St  Petersburg,  to  consult  him 
on  current  affairs  and  on  the  difficulties  which  were 
occurring  between  Russia  and  France ;  he  gave  his 
advice  with  an  air  of  cold  and  disdainful  superiority, 
and  I  think  left  with  a  conviction  that  the  policy  of 
the  Empire  would  be  thrown  into  confusion.  He  had 
a  very  small  opinion  of  Alexander,  but  was  always 
ready  to  obey  his  slightest  wish. 

Count  Razumovsky,  who  had  come  on  short  leave 
from  Vienna,  said  to  me  in  a  half-contemptuous  tone : 
'  So  it  is  you  who  are  going  to  direct  us  ? '  *  So  it 
seems/  I  replied.  When  he  returned  to  his  post  he 
only  addressed  despatches  to  me  on  current  affairs, 
and  reserved  more  secret  and  important  subjects  for 
the  reports  addressed  by  him  direct  to  the  Emperor. 
This  manoeuvre  was  not  successful.  Alexander  was 
offended  at  the  Minister  whom  he  had  selected  being 
so  treated ;  he  held  that  no  one  should  have  less 
confidence  in  any  public  functionary  than  he  had 
himself,  and  ordered  that  all  communications  should 
pass  through  me.  Count  Razumovsky  then  entered 
into  a  private  correspondence  with  me  in  which  he 
concealed  nothing,  and  similar  relations  were  estab- 
lished between  me  and  Count  Simon  Vorontzoff,  the 
Ambassador  in  London.  Yorontzoff  was  frank  and 
loyal,  but  his  opinions  on  men  and  things  were  too 
absolute,  not  admitting  those  shades  between  good 