

I  now  come  to  the  negotiations  with  Austria. 
The  Emperor  received  your  letter  with  gratitude, 
together  with  }*our  observations  which  I  communi- 
cated to  him.  The  decisions  which  have  been  arrived 
at  are,  in  principle,  in  conformity  with  your  Excel- 
lency's opinion,  and  I  flatter  myself  that  the  modifica- 
tions I  have  introduced  will  meet  with  your  approval. 
To  make  things  safer  I  had  a  conference  here  with 
Count  Stadion  to  discuss  with  him  the  draft  of  the 
autograph  letter  which  was  to  be  sent  to  Vienna.  He 
raised  difficulties  on  every  word  that  was  at  all  pre- 
cise in  its  meaning,  and  I  accordingly  had  to  limit 
myself  to  vague  and  general  expressions  in  which  he 
concurred.  Judging  by  the  Ambassador's  talk  and 
the  policy  of  his  Court,  the  Emperor  thought,  as  it 

*  This  was  the  note  addressed  by  Russia  on  the  7th  May  1804  to  the  German 
Diet  at  Ratisbon,  protesting  against  Napoleon's  conduct. 


LETTERS  TO  COUNT  A.   VORONTZOFF  31 

seems  to  me  with  reason,  that  it  would  be  better  not 
to  settle  anything  for  the  present  as  to  the  renewal  of 
the  Russo-Austrian  Alliance,  but  to  make  it  depend 
on  Austria's  conduct,  and  the  way  in  which  she  may 
enter  into  the  execution  of  more  precise  stipulations 
should  such  be  found  necessary.  .  .  . 

The  Emperor  will  leave  shortly  for  Revel ;  he 
will  only  be  away  ten  days,  as  he  does  not  wish  to  be 
absent  from  Sfc  Petersburg  until  he  knows  what  turn 
things  are  taking.  I  am  going  with  him,  and  M.  de 
Tatischeff  has  kindly  undertaken  to  look  after  the 
letters  and  receive  the  Ministers  as  he  did  when  I  was 
away  last  year.  Hedouville  complains  bitterly  of  the 
way  in  which  he  is  being  treated  in  Russian  society. 
This  is  very  wrong,  and  I  wish  I  could  prevent  it. 
He  has  just  asked  in  the  name  of  his  Government  for 
a  private  audience  of  the  Emperor,  but  it  will  be 
refused.* 

To    COUNT   VORONTZOFF. 

ST  PETERSBURG,  May  29,  1804. 

I  write  to-day,  Monsieur  le  Comte,  not  to  answer 
your  letters,  for  which  I  am  infinitely  grateful,  nor  to 
render  you  an  account  of  my  correspondence  since  my 
last  letter  and  his  Majesty's  return,  but  only  to  send 
you  the  replies  we  have  received  from  Paris  and 
d'Oubril's  reports  as  to  what  passed  there.  These 
despatches  are  being  copied,  and  in  order  not  to  delay 
the  departure  of  the  messenger  I  have  only  time  to 

*  He  left  St  Petersburg  and  ceased  to  be  French  Ambassador  there  on  the  7th 
of  June  1804. 


32         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

tell  your  Excellency  that  the  Emperor's  personal 
opinion  is  that  at  this  moment  he  cannot  with  pro- 
priety continue  his  relations  with  France,  unless  she 
consents  to  fulfil  her  engagements  with  us  relative  to 
Naples,  the  King  of  Sardinia,  and  Germany  ;  and 
that  after  the  insulting  note*  which  had  been  received 
from  Paris,  he  can  only  sacrifice  his  just  resentment  in 
so  far  as  not  to  cause  injury  to  his  allies.  If  we 
succeeded  in  bringing  about  the  evacuation  of  the 
kingdom  of  Naples,  in  obtaining  an  indemnity  for  the 
King  of  Sardinia,  and  in  liberating  Hanover,  the 
Emperor's  dignity  will  be  intact,  and  he  will  have 
done  much  good  to  his  friends  and  to  Europe ;  if 
France  does  not  yield  on  these  points,  d'Oubril  should 
I  think  leave  Paris,  and  Russia  should  decline  to 
recognise  the  newly  proclaimed  Emperor  on  any 
other  terms.  Meanwhile  we  will  do  our  utmost  also 
to  persuade  Vienna,  Berlin,  and  even  Constantinople 
to  refuse  the  recognition  without  obtaining  some 
return. 