

(1)  Whether  it  will  be   right,  after  the  announce- 
ment of  the   Court  mourning,  at   once  to  take  final 
steps  for  a  rupture,  or  to  endeavour  to  gain  time  by 
negotiation. 

(2)  If  the    latter,  in   what  sense  the  negotiations 
should  be  opened. 

(3)  How    far  consideration  is    due    to  the  princes 
whose  only  hope  is  in  the  Emperor's  protection. 

(4)  What  steps  should  in  any  case  be  taken  to  pro- 
vide  as   much   as    possible    for   the   safety   of  these 
princes,  and  especially  of  the  King  of  Naples,  who  is 
in  the  greatest  danger. 

(5)  What  steps  should  be  taken  generally  in  order 
not  to  lose  any  of  the  advantages  which  should  be 
obtained  from  the    Emperor's   decision  in  a  manner 
both  honourable  and  glorious  to  himself,  and  to  remedy 
the  inconveniences  which  might  be  connected  with  it. 

Having  thus  carried  out  his  Majesty's  orders,  it 
only  remains  to  me  to  point  out  the  importance  of 
keeping  absolute  secrecy  as  to  the  object  of  the  dis- 
cussion which  is  about  to  take  place,  as  both  the 
Russian  Embassy  and  the  princes,  whom  we  wish  to 
expose  to  the  least  possible  risk,  would  be  in  great 


26        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

danger  if  the  matter  should  transpire.  His  Imperial 
Majesty  feels  perfectly  safe  on  this  point,  knowing 
thoroughly  the  high  character  and  the  zeal  for  the 
service  of  those  whom  he  has  assembled.] 

The  somewhat  crude  language  of  this  memorandum 
was  owing  to  the  haste  with  which  it  was  drawn 
up,  there  being  no  time  to  moderate  the  violence  of 
some  of  the  expressions  in  it.  After  reading  it,  the 
Emperor  called  a  Council  and  invited  each  of  its 
members  freely  to  state  his  opinion,  as  he  wished  the 
question  to  be  thoroughly  considered.  The  discussion, 
however,  was  not  a  very  animated  one.  The  majority 
of  the  Ministers  took  no  interest  in  foreign  politics, 
and  thinking  they  knew  what  was  the  Emperor's 
wish,  they  had  neither  the  capacity  nor  the  inclination 
to  oppose  it.  Kotchoubey  was  the  only  member  of 
the  Council  who  gave  a  reason  for  his  vote.  He  said, 
and  every  one  felt  the  truth  of  his  statement,  that  to 
break  off  relations  with  France  was  not  in  any  way 
dangerous  to  Russia,  as  France  could  not  reach  her, 
while  such  a  step  would  spare  .Russia  many  embarrass- 
ments which  are  inevitable  when  one  deals  with  a 
government  which  claims  to  be  the  sole  dominating 
power  in  Europe.  Count  Romantzoff,  then  Minister 
of  Commerce,  and  afterwards  Foreign  Minister  and 
Chancellor,  raised  some  objections,  as  he  had  a  lean- 
ing for  Napoleon  and  an  aversion  to  England.  He 
was  a  diplomatist  of  the  school  of  Catherine,  and  his 
absolutist  theories  converted  Alexander  some  years 
later  to  the  doctrines  and  tendencies  of  the  old 