

However  well-founded  the  above  considerations 
may  be,  the  event  which  has  just  occurred  obliges  us 
to  disregard  them,  or  at  least  only  to  treat  them  as 
accessory.  His  Majesty  cannot  pass  unnoticed  the 
atrocious  proceeding  of  the  First  Consul  without  a  lo'ss 
of  dignity,  and  without  showing  Europe,  France,  and 
Buonaparte  himself,  that  the  latter  may  do  anything 
with  the  certainty  that  no  one  will  oppose  him. 

It  would  seem  at  first  sight  that  a  means  miofht 


22        MEMOIRS  OF  PR1XCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

be  devised  of  attaining  the  object  in  a  different  way. 
Without  concealing  its  just  indignation,  the  Russian 
Court  might,  instead  of  coming  to  an  immediate 
rupture  with  Buonaparte,  confine  itself  to  going  into 
mourning  for  the  Due  d'Enghien,  declaring  in  Paris 
that  the  Emperor  could  not  see  with  indifference  the 
violation  of  German  territory — especially  of  the  do- 
minions of  the  Elector  of  Baden,  from  which  the  Due 
d'Eno-hien  had  been  draped  to  his  death — and  asking 

o  oo  o 

to  be  informed  whether  the  French  Government  did 
not  disavow  a  deed  so  iniquitous  and  so  much  opposed 
to  international  law.  This  would  lead  to  explanations 
which  might  take  some  two  months  longer,  and  give 
Russia  time  to  complete  her  preparations  in  the  North 
and  South  of  Europe.  The  French  Government  would 
doubtless  not  submit  to  the  humiliation  of  acknow- 
ledging its  misdeed,  which  would  be  almost  as 
damaging  to  it  as  the  misdeed  itself,  and  a  rupture 
would  be  the  necessary  consequence  ;  but  we  should 
have  gained  time.  Against  this  plan  it  is  to  be  re- 
marked that  directly  it  became  known  in  Paris  that 
mourning  for  the  Due  d'Enghien  had  been  ordered  at 
St  Petersburg,  and  especially  that  M.  d'Oubril  was 
making  a  communication  on  the  subject,  the  tenour  of 
which  could  not  be  otherwise  than  very  disagreeable, 
the  First  Consul  would  be  the  first  to  act  by  sending 
back  our  embassy  from  Paris  and  recalling  his  from 
St  Petersburg.  He  would  thus  show  that  he  dares 
to  affront  Russia  and  does  not  fear  her  power ;  in  a 
word,  a  considerable  part  of  the  advantages  which 
would  result  from  the  action  of  Russia  on  this  occa- 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  23 

sion  would  be  lost  if  Buonaparte  were  given  the 
opportunity  of  forestalling  us  by  a  decision  similar  to 
that  proposed  by  his  Majesty,  and  thereby  setting  us 
at  defiance  in  the  eyes  of  Russia  and  of  Europe. 

The  original  idea,  therefore,  seems  preferable. 
The  first  step  is  to  put  the  Court  into  mourning ; 
then  we  should  recall  our  embassy  from  Paris,  retain- 
ing the  French  one  here  until  the  Russian  Charge 
d'Aifaires  leaves  France.  Above  all,  two  couriers 
should  be  sent  to  Naples  and  Copenhagen  to  warn 
the  Governments  in  those  towns  of  the  decision  of 
his  Majesty  and  its  probable  consequences  so  far  as 
France  was  concerned.  As  to  Corfu,  orders  should 
be  sent  to  the  troops  to  hold  themselves  in  readiness 
against  any  sudden  attack,  and  pending  the  arrival 
of  the  reinforcements,  to  raise  a  corps  of  Albanians 
so  as  to  strengthen  our  forces  as  much  as  possible. 
The  details  of  the  measures  to  be  ultimately  taken 
cannot  be  entered  into  here,  and  must  form  the  sub- 
ject of  a  separate  memorandum. 