

Such,  in  brief,  are  our  ideas  here.  But  his  Majesty 
desires  above  all  to  have  your  Excellency's  opinion 
on  the  subject.  There  are  some  difficulties  which 
might  impede  the  execution  of  the  plan.  Supposing, 
which  is  most  probable,  that  all  our  demands  are  not 
refused,  and  that  France  consents  to  evacuate  Naples, 
it  will  be  necessary  to  negotiate  as  to  the  indemnity 
to  the  Kin«:  of  Sardinia  and  even  the  evacuation  of 

o 

Hanover,  besides  guaranteeing  the  neutrality  of  those 
countries.  For  this  a  Charge"  d' Affaires  would  not  be 

*  See  page  15. 


LETTERS  TO  COUNT  A.   VORONTZOFF  33 

sufficient ;  and  M.  de  Tatischeff  has  had  the  good  idea 
of  sending  in  that  case  M.  Stackelberg  to  Paris  with 
full  powers  to  treat,  but  without  any  diplomatic  office. 
Another  question  is  the  way  in  which  we  are  to 
deal  with  various  points  of  the  French  reply.  A  very 
delicate  one  is  the  allusion  to  the  death  of  Paul,  while 
in  our  despatches  we  spoke,  not  of  the  Due  d'Enghien's 
execution,  but  only  of  his  seizure  on  neutral  territory. 
This  is  characteristic  of  Buonaparte's  maliciousness. 
Are  we  to  take  up  this  point  ?  And  if  so,  how  ?  Can 
we  pass  it  over  in  silence,  seeing  that  our  Court  has 
never  admitted  that  Paul  died  a  violent  death,  as  is 
shown  by  the  manifesto  of  the  present  Emperor? 
Moreover,  Talleyrand's  argument  is  as  false  as  it  is 
insulting,  and  they  wish  to  reproduce  it  in  the  note 
which  they  will  send  to  the  Diet.  On  all  these  points 
the  Emperor  wishes  for  your  ideas  and  advice. 
Tchourakoff  will  be  with  you  again  in  three  days,  and 
I  beg  your  Excellency  to  send  him  to  me  as  soon  after 
as  possible,  with  your  remarks  on  the  principal  points 
and  in  general  as  to  the  line  of  conduct  you  think 
should  be  adopted  ;  we  will  do  our  best  as  to  the 
details.  The  interruption  of  all  relations  seems  to  me 
inevitable,  and  cannot  do  us  any  harm  ;  war  will  per- 
haps follow,  but  that  depends  upon  the  turn  things 
will  take.  Meanwhile  I  can  announce  to  you  that  the 
King  of  Prussia  has  signed  a  declaration*  almost 
similar  to  ours  ;  it  is  in  our  hands,  and  it  secures  the 
rest  of  Northern  Europe.  He  has  at  the  same  time, 
however,  promised  the  French  not  to  allow  Russian 

«  Dated  May  24,  1804. 
VOL.    II  C 


34        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

troops  to  pass  through  his  territory  to  attack  them. 
All  that  relates  to  this  matter  will  at  once  be  sent 
you. 

Hedouville  has  asked  for  leave  on  account  of  his 
health,  and  will  leave  Rayneval  as  Charge  d'  Affaires. 
D'Oubril's  messenger  had  not  arrived,  but  after 
waiting  a  few  days  we  could  not  keep  Hedouville  any 
longer,  as  he  himself  came  several  times  to  get  his 
passport.  He  had  no  message  to  deliver  when  he 
went,  and  maintained  an  absolute  silence  as  to  the 
affairs  of  the  day.  I  send  you  the  note  I  gave  him 
with  his  passports. 