


1 6        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

sive  ;  and  I  drily  replied  that  all  the  papers  would  be 
laid  before  the  Emperor,  that  I  had  nothing  to  say 
until  I  knew  his  wishes,  but  that  it  seemed  to  me 
evident  that  a  very  different  reply  would  have  had 
to  be  given  if  France  had  rea.lly  wished  to  maintain 
the  friendly  relations  between  the  two  countries. 

There  could  no  longer  be  any  doubt  as  to  the 
course  the  Emperor  should  take  ;  indeed  all  was 
foreseen  at  the  time  the  first  note  was  sent  to  Paris. 
I  was  instructed  to  draw  up  a  memorandum,  stating 
the  question  and  proposing  the  means  of  dealing  with 
it.  The  matter  was  so  urgent,  in  view  of  the  conduct 
of  the  French  Government,  that  I  had  to  work  all 
at  this  document. 


[The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  memorandum 
here  referred  to  :— 

Aprils,  1804. 

The  incursion  which  the  French  have  ventured  to 
make  upon  German  territory  in  order  to  seize  the  Due 
d'Enghien  and  take  him  into  France  for  immediate 
execution,  is  an  event  which  shows  what  is  to  be 
expected  from  a  Government  which  does  not  recognise 
any  check  upon  its  acts  of  violence,  and  which  treads 
under  foot  the  most  sacred  principles.  His  Majesty, 
indignant  at  so  flagrant  a  violation  of  the  most  binding 
principles  of  equity  and  international  law,  is  reluctant 
to  maintain  any  further  relations  with  a  Government 
which  is  not  restrained  by  any  sense  of  duty,  and 
which,  being  stained  by  an  atrocious  crime,  can  only 
now  be  regarded  as  a  band  of  brigands.  This  act  on 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  17 

the  part  of  Buonaparte  should  bring  down  upon 
France  a  cry  of  revenge  and  condemnation  from  all 
the  European  States  and  be  the  signal  for  a  general 
opposition  to  him  ;  but  if  the  other  Powers,  struck 
with  terror  and  deprived  of  energy,  keep  a  humiliating 
silence  at  sucn  a  moment,  would  it  be  right  for  Russia 
to  follow  their  example  ?  Is  it  not  for  her,  on  the 
contrary,  to  lead  the  way  in  taking  steps  to  save 
Europe  from  the  ruin  with  which  she  is  threatened  ? 
His  Imperial  Majesty,  being  moved  by  these  con- 
siderations and  by  a  feeling  of  what  is  due  to  his 
dignity,  thinks  it  necessary  to  order  the  Court  to  go 
into  mourning  for  the  death  of  the  Due  d'Enghien, 
and  proposes  loudly  to  proclaim  his  indignation  at 
Buonaparte's  iniquitous  proceedings.  His  Majesty  is 
the  less  disposed  to  pursue  any  other  line  of  conduct 
seeing  that  the  outrage  which  has  been  committed 
upon  the  whole  family  of  European  States,  and  upon 
humanity  itself,  has  taken  place  on  the  territory  of  a 
Prince  nearly  related  to  the  Emperor,  and  thus  affects 
him  doubly.  Our  august  master,  considering  that  in 
future  it  will  be  not  only  useless,  but  dishonouring,  to 
continue  in  relation  with  a  Government  which  has  so 
little  respect  either  for  justice  or  for  common  pro- 
priety, is  inclined  to  send  back  the  French  embassy 
and  at  the  same  time  to  recall  the  Russian  embassy 
from  Paris. 