


ao        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

what  would  she  risk  by  such  a  course  ?  To  suspend 
diplomatic  relations  is  not  to  make  war,  and  France 
cannot  directly  attack  us.  To  reach  us  she  would 
have  to  invade  other  States  which  would  then  be 
forced  tox  defend  themselves  and  give  us  an  oppor- 
tunity of  coming  to  their  assistance.  This  could  only 
increase  the  influence  of  Russia ;  an  illustration  of 
which  is  furnished  by  the  part  she  played  during  the 
French  Revolution,  when,  without  being  precisely  at 
war,  the  relations  between  the  two  Powers  were  sus- 
pended. We  should  thus  be  freed  from  the  em- 
barrassments caused  by  our  connection  with  France, 
and  also  from  the  presence  of  the  numerous  French 
agents  spread  all  over  the  country. 

Further,  his  Imperial  Majesty  may  be  sure  to  find 
in  England,  if  necessary,  a  safe  ally,  always  ready  to 
join  him. 

Thus  the  advantages  of  the  course  proposed  by 
his  Majesty  appear  evident.  Its  disadvantages  have 
also  not  escaped  his  attention,  and  they  will  now  be 
here  indicated. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  as  soon  as  the  French 
Government  is  informed  that  Russia  has  decided  to 
break  off  her  relations  with  France,  its  first  step  will 
be  to  avenge  itself  on  all  the  States  that  are  protected 
and  maintained  by  his  Majesty.  The  kingdom  of 
Naples  will  be  its  first  victim  in  the  south.  Once  the 
French  are  masters  of  that  country,  our  troops  at 
Corfu  would  be  in  danger  so  long  as  the  reinforce- 
ments ordered  by  his  Majesty  (which  cannot  arrive  for 
some  months  to  come)  do  not  reach  them.  In  the 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  21 

north  it  is  possible  that  the  French  would  attack 
Denmark,  which,  though  inclined  to  make  a  vigorous 
resistance  and  certain  to  be  promptly  relieved  by  his 
Imperial  Majesty,  is  not  prepared  for  so  sudden  an 
aggression. 

If  the  seizure  of  the  Due  d'Enghien  had  taken  place 
three  months  later,  Russia  would  have  been  in  a  much 
better  position  to  act.  The  views  of  Austria  and 
Prussia  would  then  have  been  clearer  and  more  decisive, 
Denmark  would  have  been  ready,  and  our  troops  in 
the  Ionian  islands,  having  been  reinforced,  would  have 
been  in  a  position  to  secure  Greece  and  relieve  Naples 
by  means  of  an  understanding  with  England.  Buona- 
parte's difficulties  would  also  have  been  increased ; 
and  we  should  perhaps  have  done  him  a  service  by 
furnishing  him  with  a  pretext  for  giving  up  his  plans 
of  a  Continental  war  which  his  Imperial  Majesty, 
desirous  of  sparing  the  blood  of  his  subjects,  would 
not  have  wished  to  break  out  except  under  the  most 
favourable  circumstances  and  after  having  exhausted 
the  means  which  might  have  been  furnished  by  a 
negotiation  at  Paris  of  all  the  European  Powers. 