

O 

no  direct  grievance  of  its  own.  The  sole  cause  of  the 
rupture  was  the  violation  of  international  law.  The 
result  produced  a  state  of  things  which  was  not  war, 
and  the  subjects  of  the  two  States  were  not  threatened 
by  the  dangers  produced  by  war  ;  it  was  simply  an 
announcement  that  we  could  not  remain  in  relation 
with  a  Power  which  had  no  respect  for  the  most 
elementary  principles  of  justice.  The  case  was  like 


RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  29 

that  of  a  man  whose  society  we  drop  because  his  con- 
duct is  opposed  to  our  principles,  though  not  such  as 
to  justify  our  sending  him  a  challenge. 

None  of  the  other  Powers  followed  the  example  of 
Russia  ;  but  it  must  be  admitted  that  she  was  at  that 
time  in  an  exceptionally  favourable  position.  She 
alone  of  the  Continental  Powers  had  managed  to  pre- 
serve her  dignity  and  her  independence.  Unassailable 
by  Napoleon  now  he  had  no  navy,  she  threatened  him 
by  her  disdainful  calm,  like  the  stationary  cloud  which 
is  believed  to  be  loaded  with  storm  and  thunder. 
Russia  should  have  maintained  this  imposing  attitude 
as  long  as  possible ;  applications  for  support  and 
expressions  of  esteem  and  deference  came  to  her  from 
all  sides.  She  should  not  have  abandoned  this  unique 
position  unless  it  were  proved  that  her  interest  and 
those  of  the  other  powers  required  her  to  enter  into 
action  ;  but  things  turned  out  otherwise. 

[The  following  communications  on  this  subject 
were  addressed  by  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  to  the 
Chancellor  :— 

To  COUNT  VORONTZOFF. 

ST  PETERSBURG,  May  7,  1804. 

I  see  with  real  pain  from  your  last  letters,  Mon- 
sieur le  Comte,  that  you  were  not  quite  satisfied  with 
what  has  been  done  in  the  matter  of  the  Due 
d'Enghien,  but  I  am  none  the  less  grateful  to  you  for 
the  frankness  with  which  you  have  expressed  your 
views.  You  do  riot  say  anything  as  to  the  two  notes 


3o        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

presented  at  Paris  and  at  Ratisbon  ;*  yet  in  them  we 
only  lay  stress  on  the  violation  of  neutral  territory, 
which  is  in  accordance  with  your  views.  If  your 
Excellency  had  seen  the  way  in  which  the  matter  is 
considered  here,  and  the  sensation  it  has  produced, 
you  would  have  been  convinced  that  even  if  I  had 
thought  the  sort  of  pressure  which  had  been  put  upon 
the  Cabinet  should  have  been  resisted,  I  should  not 
have  been  strong  enough  to  do  so,  and  that  only  a 
man  of  your  weight  and  consideration  could  have  had 
any  chance  of  succeeding.  No  one  could  have  wished 
for  your  opinion  more  than  myself,  but  I  assure  you 
that  the  matter  did  not  brook  delay  ;  if  anything  was 
to  be  done,  it  had  to  be  done  at  once. 