


PROPOSED  RUPTURE   WITH  FRANCE  27 

Russian  policy.  He  admitted  that  after  what  had 
occurred  it  would  be  difficult  to  abstain  from  taking 

o 

some  steps  to  prove  to  the  world  that  Russia  would 
not  submit  to  an  affront  on  the  part  of  France,  or 
allow  her  to  have  the  last  word  ;  but  he  thought  it 
would  have  been  better  not  to  place  one's  self  in  such 
a  position.  While  recognising  that  considerations  of 
honour  and  respect  for  international  law  should  have 
due  weight,  he  thought  that  material  interests  should 
also  be  considered,  and  that  in  announcing  an  irrevoc- 
able decision  it  was  necessary  to  be  certain  of  the 
advantages  and  support  on  which  one  could  rely. 
Russia  was  free  at  any  moment  to  cast  her  power  on 
either  side ;  her  decision  should,  however,  bo  based 
not  on  abstract  principles,  but  on  considerations  of 
advantage  and  security.  He  asked  whether  the 
consequences  of  the  step  Russia  was  about  to  take 
had  been  duly  weighed,  whether  we  were  clear  as  to 
the  results  we  wished  to  achieve,  and  whether  we  had 
any  security  for  the  advantages  which  were  expected 
to  accrue  or  against  the  dangers  wThich  might 
arise. 

I  answered  that  the  proposed  course  did  not  in- 
volve any  danger  to  the  Empire  ;  that  its  object  was 
to  satisfy  a  sentiment  of  honour  and  equity,  without 
any  idea  of  obtaining  advantages  which  we  did  not 
want ;  that  the  Emperor  was  satisfied  to  fulfil  with 
dignity  and  honour  a  duty  to  the  rest  of  Europe,  and 
that  his  position  left  him  ample  time  to  consider  what 
more  should  be  done  if  the  interests  and  the  security  of 
his  Empire  should  require  it.  This  ended  the  dis- 


28        MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

cussion ;  the  Emperor  approved  the  memorandum, 
and  ordered  its  proposals  to  be  carried  into  effect. 

I  then  sent  for  M.  de  Rayneval,  the  French  Charge 
d'Affaires  (the  Ambassador  having  gone  on  leave),  and 
handed  him  a  note  explaining  the  motives  of  the 
Emperor's  decision,  together  with  passports  for  his 
immediate  departure.  He  received  my  communica- 
tions very  calmly,  without  making  any  remark,  which 
indeed  would  in  the  circumstances  have  been  super- 
fluous. It  was  only  right,  at  a  moment  when  he  was 
about  to  leave  St  Petersburg  with  the  whole  embassy, 
to  remove  as  much  as  possible  any  difficulties  or 
disagreeables  attending  so  sudden  a  departure,  and  I 
accordingly  helped  him  as  much  as  I  could  in  this 
respect.  Both  General  Hedouville  and  M.  de 
Rayneval  afterwards  thanked  me  for  the  services  I 
had  rendered  them.  The  facts  of  the  case  were  not 
correctly  described  by  contemporary  historians.  The 
nature  of  the  relations  then  established  between 
France  and  Russia  was  unprecedented.  The  motive 
of  the  rupture  was  quite  a  novel  one  in  the  annals  of 
diplomacy,  for  it  was  not  a  Russian  prince  that  had 
been  executed,  and  the  Cabinet  of  St  Petersburg  had 