

The  Emperor  is  firmly  convinced  that  it  would 
not  be  in  accordance  either  with  his  personal  dignity 
or  with  the  honour  of  his  Empire  to  remain  passive 
after  the  event  which  has  occurred  ;  but  he  does  not 

VOL.  II.  B 


1 8         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

conceal  from  himself  the  partial  and  temporary  incon- 
veniences which  might  result  from  the  decision  which 
he  thinks  it  necessary  to  take.  His  Majesty  wishes 
to  have  the  benefit  of  the  wisdom  of  others  in  so 
important  a  matter,  and  he  has  accordingly  assembled 
the  members  of  his  Council  and  diplomatists  of  known 
experience  and  ability  for  this  purpose.  He  has 
ordered  me  succinctly  to  lay  before  them  the  state  of 
the  question  and  the  decision  he  is  disposed  to  take, 
with  the  reasons  which  have  led  him  to  it,  in  order  to 
show  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  which  might 
result  to  the  welfare  of  the  world  in  general  and  of 
Russia  in  particular. 

Since  the  re-establishment  of  the  relations  between 
Russia  and  France  it  would  be  difficult  to  point  to 
any  real  advantage  which  has  resulted  from  it  to 
Russia.  The  French  Government  has  not  kept  the 
solemn  engagements  into  which  it  had  entered  with 
us,  and  our  representations  on  the  subject  in  favour 
of  princes  in  whom  the  Emperor  is  interested  have 
had  no  eifect.  On  the  contrary,  the  First  Consul 
seems  lately  to  have  made  it  his  task  to  cause  Russia 
incessant  annoyance  by  unreasonable  demands  and 
proceedings,  notwithstanding  the  firmness  with  which 
his  Majesty  has  opposed  them.  This  brief  sketch  of 
the  conduct  of  France  towards  Russia  shows  that  we 
would  not  lose  much  by  suspending  all  relations  with 
her  for  the  present.  Such  a  course,  besides  being  in 
accordance  with  the  Emperor's  sense  of  dignity  and 
his  outraged  feelings  of  justice,  also  presents  some 
purely  political  advantages.  It  is  to  be  expected  that 


PROPOSED  RUPTURE  WITH  FRANCE  19 

an  energetic  step  of  this  kind  on  the  part  of  Russia  at 
the  present  moment  would  be  likely  more  than  any- 
thing else  to  stimulate  a  general  combination  among  the 
European  States,  to  limit  Buonaparte's  ambition  and 
violence.     One  may  hope  that  the  Courts  of  Vienna 
and  Berlin  would  then  also  be  led  to  take  decisive 
action.     These  two  Governments,  the  latter  especially, 
acting   from    different   motives,  but   both   chiefly  in- 
fluenced by  the    terror   with  which    France    inspires 
them,  could  not  hitherto    be    persuaded   to  abandon 
their  attitude  of  passive  submission,  notwithstanding 
the   offers  and  the    very  strong   representations    his 
Imperial    Majesty    has    addressed    to    them.       The 
Emperor,  in  taking  the  initiative  of  declaring  himself 
in  a  manner  which  would  leave  no  doubt  as  to   his 
views  and  system  of  policy,  would  be  in  a  position  to 
address    these    two    Courts    in    even    more    pressing 
language  than  before — to  which  the  presence  of  his 
armies  on  the  frontier  would  add  weight — and  would 
be  able  to  ask  for  categorical  replies  as  to  the  conduct 
they  would  pursue.     Judging  by  appearances  and  the 
information  in  our  possession,  the  Cabinets  in  ques- 
tion, if  they  were  thus  obliged  to  come  to  a  decision, 
would  elect  to  join  Russia  ;  and  it  would  perhaps  be 
impossible  to  induce  them  to  do  so  in  any  other  case. 
The  same    might  almost  be  said  of  Turkey,  which 
seems  full  of  confidence  and  good-will  towards  us,  and 
quite  alive  to  the  dangers  she  has  to  fear  from  France. 
Assuming,    however,    that    Russia,    after    having 
come   to   a   rupture    with   the    French   Government, 
should  remain  alone  without  an  ally  on  the  Continent, 