

o 

advocacy  and  on  whom  we  could  rely,  or  some 
member  of  the  reigning  family  of  Prussia  or  Denmark, 
so  as  to  gain  a  claim  to  the  alliance  of  one  of  these 
Powers ;  or  it  might  be  made  a  compensation  for  con- 
cessions made  by  other  States.  .  .  .  As  regards  Ger- 
many, its  present  position  is  certainly  not  compatible 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    45 

either  with  the  welfare  of  the  German  nation  or  of 
Europe  generally.  Should  we  allow  part  of  Germany 
to  be  absorbed  by  the  two  Powers  which  have  long 
coveted  it,  and  at  most  form  a  third  great  State  in  the 
midst  of  Germany  ?  Such  a  measure  would  involve 
so  much  injustice  towards  the  princes  of  the  Empire 
who  would  have  to  be  dispossessed  that  it  can  hardly 
be  thought  of.  Could  one  succeed  in  establishing  a 
more  intimate  union,  a  sort  of  more  concentrated 
Federal  Government  among  the  various  States  which 
compose  the  German  Empire,  and  if  so  would  it  not 
be  desirable  to  exclude  from  it  the  Prussian  and 
Austrian  monarchies,  whose  too  unequal  forces  destroy 
all  balance  and  patriotism  ?  This  will  have  to  be 
maturely  considered  if  the  future  organisation  of 
Germany  should  have  to  be  dealt  with.* 

I  now  come  to  the  line  of  conduct  which  I  am 
convinced  it  would  be  indispensable  to  pursue  with 
regard  to  France.  After  having  by  our  successes 
abroad,  and  by  the  just  and  liberal  principles  pro- 
fessed by  us,  inspired  general  respect  and  confidence, 
we  should  declare  to  the  French  nation  that  our  efforts 
are  directed  not  against  her,  but  only  against  her 
Government,  which  is  as  tyrannical  for  France  as  for 
the  rest  of  Europe ;  that  our  only  object  is  to 
deliver  from  its  yoke  the  countries  which  it  oppresses, 
and  that  we  now  address  ourselves  to  the  French 
nation  not  to  preach  revolt  and  disobedience  to  law, 
but  to  urge  all  parties  in  France  to  trust  the  allied 

*  The  same  views  as  to  Germany  are  expressed,  almost  in  the  same  language, 
in  some  notes  made  by  Mr  Pitt  in  1803  (see  Lord  Stanhope's  Life  of  Pitt,  Vol.  Ill, 
p.  269). 


46         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Powers,  whose  only  desire  is  to  emancipate  France 
from  the  despotism  under  which  she  is  suffering  and 
to  make  her  free  to  chose  any  government  she  may 
herself  prefer. 

Assuming  that,  for  the  good  of  Europe  and  of 
France,  it  is  necessary  that  the  constitution  there 
should  be  monarchical,  any  proposal  to  that  effect 
would  have  to  be  made  by  the  nation  itself :  one 
might  endeavour  to  suggest  it,  but  any  intention  to 
that  effect  should  not  be  declared  too  soon. 

The  Cabinets  of  St  Petersburg  and  St  James's  will 
have  to  come  to  an  understanding  on  all  these  points, 
and  also  as  to  the  individual  and  family  who  might 
be  called  upon  to  reign  in  France — if  the  Bourbons, 
which  of  them,  and  what  conditions  he  should  be 
called  upon  to  subscribe  to.  the  most  essential  of 
which  would  be  that  he  should  submit  to  the  constitu- 
tion which  would  be  adopted  by  the  nation.  I  look 
upon  the  choice  of  a  king  as  a  secondary  matter,  and 
I  will  not  for  my  part  attach  any  importance  to  it 
except  in  so  far  as  it  might  impede  or  facilitate  our 
operations. 