

Prussia  will  obtain  in  North  Germany  the  States 
of  the  Grand-Duchy  of  Berg,  the  Duchy  of  Mecklen- 
burg, Fulda,  Anspach,  etc.  Sweden  will  obtain  a  new 


PROPOSED  RE-ARRANCEMENT  OF  EUROPE        53 

principality  in  Germany,  according  to  her  wish  and 
convenience. 

France  will  retain  as  a  frontier  the  Alps  and  the 
Rhine  up  to  a  point  to  be  specified. 

Holland  will  again  become  a  Republic,  with  a 
hereditary  Stadtholder,  and  with  part  of  the  Austrian 
Netherlands  returned  to  her.  The  independence  of 
Switzerland  will  be  guaranteed. 

All  the  German  States  which  will  not  be  absorbed 
by  Austria  and  Prussia  will  form  the  German  Empire, 
a  country  intermediary  between  France,  Austria, 
and  Prussia,  to  be  federated  with  Switzerland  and 
Holland. 

The  Emperor  of  Russia,  taking  the  title  of  King 
of  Poland,  will  have  all  the  territories  that  belonged 
to  Poland  before  the  first  partition,  together  with  the 
country  called  the  Kingdom  of  Prussia,  so  that  his 
new  frontier  would  extend  from  Dantzig  to  the  sources 
of  the  Vistula,  and  thence  along  the  Carpathians  as 
far  as  the  source  of  the  Dniester. 

NOTE  BY  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

The  compensations  above  granted  to  Austria  and 
Prussia  are  sufficient  to  compensate  those  Powers  for 
the  cessions  they  would  make  to  Russia.  Nearly  the 
whole  of  Germany  can  at  this  moment  be  made  the 
subject  of  negotiations,  in  view  of  the  conduct  of  her 
princes,  which  does  not  give  them  any  claim  to  con- 
sideration. Italy  also  will,  if  necessary,  serve  to 
satisfy  Austria  ;  but  it  would  better  suit  the  Court 
of  Vienna  to  seek  compensation  in  Germany,  the 


54        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

southern  territories  of  which  interest  us  less  than  any 
other  part  of  Europe,  and  where,  moreover,  a  sort  of 
balance  would  always  be  kept  up  by  the  jealousy  of 
France  and  Prussia. 

As  to  Prussia,  she  might,  if  such  a  course  should 
be  absolutely  necessary  and  England  consented  to  it, 
be  also  offered  the  Kingdom  of  Holland. 

It  is  desirable,  however,  for  the  general  good  that 
the  proposals  made  above  should  if  possible  be 
adhered  to.  If  they  were  adopted,  we  should  have 
after  the  peace  five  great  Powers  in  Europe  :  Russia, 
England,  France,  Austria,  and  Prussia.  Of  these, 
Russia  and  England,  having  the  same  interests  and 
views,  would  probably  remain  united ;  the  three 
others  could  hardly  make  an  alliance  to  disturb  the 
equilibrium  that  would  thus  be  established,  but  their 
policy  would  have  to  be  watched  and  controlled. 

Further,  there  would  be  three  considerable  masses 
of  intermediary  counterpoises,  each  of  which  would 
have  its  own  particular  federation,  namely,  Spain  and 
Portugal,  Italy,  and  Germany  proper.  These  three 
masses  would  have  the  greatest  interest  in  attaching 
themselves  to  Russia  and  England,  and  sustaining 
their  influence,  as  it  would  also  be  the  interest  of 
those  two  Powers  to  defend  and  strengthen  them. 
In  such  a  European  arrangement  Russia  would  thus 
have  a  marked  preponderance,  which  would  be  the 
more  assured  as  France  and  England  would  then  be 
rivals  for  her  friendship. 