

[The  secret  instructions  given  by  the  Emperor 
Alexander  to  JY.  de  Novosiltzojf,  and  other  documents 
relating  to  the  negotiations  ivith  England  in  1804-5, 
are  in  Chapters  IV  to  IX.  The  concluding  portion  of 
the  Memoirs  forms  Chapter  X.~\ 


CHAPTER  IV 


1804 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  PROM  THE    EMPEROR   OF    RUSSIA  TO    M.    DE 
NOVOSILTZOFF. 

COMPLETE  as  is  the  confidence  which  I  place  in  the 
zeal  and  experience  of  rny  Ambassador  at  the  Court 
of  London,  the  nature  and  importance  of  the  circum- 
stances of  the  moment,  which  may  become  decisive 
for  the  tranquillity  of  Russia  and  the  fate  of  Europe, 
require  the  presence  in  England  at  this  juncture  of  a 
rnari  who,  while  having  long  enjoyed  my  unlimited 
confidence,  has  been  in  a  position  to  become  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  my  opinions  and  views,  and  would  be 
thereby  enabled  both  to  inform  me  clearly  and  pre- 
cisely how  far  the  Court  of  London  is  inclined  to 
share  them,  and  to  direct  in  accordance  with  my 
wishes  any  negotiations  which  might  have  to  be 
undertaken. 

I  could  not  make  a  better  selection  for  so  grave 
and  delicate  a  mission  than  by  entrusting  it  to  you, 
as  you  fulfil  all  the  conditions  necessary  for  carrying 
it  out.  I  accordingly  furnish  you  with  these  secret 


42         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

instructions,  which  are  to  serve  as  a  complement  and 
a  commentary  to  those  received  by  my  Ambassador, 
and  will  guide  you  in  preventing  any  arrangement 
between  Russia  and  England  not  based  on  principles, 
or  likely  to  lead  to  results,  contrary  to  my  just 
wishes. 

A  combination  of  the  resources  and  forces  of 
Russia  and  Great  Britain  would  no  doubt  constitute  a 
vast  mass  of  power,  and  might  promise  the  most  satis- 
factory results.  But  I  would  not  wish  to  contribute 
to  it  unless  I  have  the  assurance  that  it  will  be 
employed  for  a  really  useful  and  beneficent  object. 
I  have  already  explained  myself  on  the  subject  in  my 
rescript  to  Count  Vorontzoff  of  which  you  are  the 
bearer.  But  several  essential  points  could  only  be 
alluded  to  in  general  terms  in  that  document ;  and  it 
will  be  for  you  to  take  to  England  further  explana- 
tions and  developments  in  regard  to  them. 

The  most  powerful  weapon  hitherto  used  by  the 
French,  and  still  threatening  the  other  European 
States,  is  the  general  opinion  which  France  has 
managed  to  promulgate,  that  her  cause  is  the  cause 
of  national  liberty  and  prosperity.  It  would  be 
shameful  to  humanity  that  so  noble  a  cause  should  be 
regarded  as  the  monopoly  of  a  Government  which 
does  not  in  any  respect  deserve  to  be  the  defender  of 
it ;  it  would  be  dangerous  for  all  the  Powers  any 
longer  to  leave  to  France  the  great  advantage  of 
seeming  to  occupy  such  a  position.  The  good  of 
humanity,  the  true  interest  of  the  lawful  authorities, 
and  the  success  of  the  enterprise  contemplated  by  the 