

*  This  was  the  first  time  that  any  Power  proposed  a  settlement  of  European 
differences  by  international  arbitration.  The  idea  was  originated  by  Prince  Adam 
Czartoryski,  and  worked  out  by  him  with  the  assistance  of  the  Abbe  Piattoli  (see 
pages  92  to  94.). 


PROPOSED  ALLIANCE  WITH  ENGLAND  37 

cute  the  mission  to  our  satisfaction.  It  required 
much  prudence  and  reserve,  but  also  great  firmness  in 
following  instructions  ;  while  he  only  hinted  at  the 
conditions  to  which  we  attached  the  greatest  import- 
ance, did  not  mention  the  name  of  Poland,  and  did  not 
allude  to  the  precarious  state  of  Europe  as  a  result  of 
iniquities  which  demanded  redress.  There  were  also 
some  points  as  to  which  he  was  instructed  not  to 
make  any  compromise  without  first  referring  to  his 
Government.  One  of  these  was  the  demand  that 
England  should  evacuate  Malta,  as  she  had  bound 
herself  to  do.  This  question  had  been  the  subject  of 
a  debate  in  Parliament,  during  which  Lord  Nelson 
held  that  by  evacuating  Malta  England  would  not 
expose  herself  to  any  serious  inconvenience.  Be  this 
as  it  may,  the  haughty  refusal  of  England  gave  us  the 
right  to  withdraw  from  the  negotiation  at  the  begin- 
ning ;  our  dignified  attitude  would  have  been  a  proof 
of  our  sincere  desire  for  justice  and  the  prosperity  of 
Europe,  and  must  have  made  a  great  impression  on 
England  herself,  by  showing  her  that  our  just  recla- 
mations should  not  be  disregarded.  Moreover,  it 
would  have  given  Novosiltzoff  facilities  for  negotiating 
in  Paris.  Instead  of  doin<?  this  he  hurried  back  to  St 

~ 

Petersburg,  leaving  matters  to  be  directed  by  England 
at  her  pleasure. 

[A  preliminary  Treaty  between  Russia  and 
England  was,  however,  concluded  on  the  llth  of 
April  1805.  It  stipulated  that  the  contracting  parties 
should  endeavour  to  form  a  general  league  of  the 
European  Powers  against  Napoleon,  and  to  collect  a 


38        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

force  of  500,000  men  for  the  liberation  of  Europe 
from  his  yoke.  The  objects  of  the  league  were  to  be 
the  evacuation  by  the  French  troops  of  Hanover 
and  other  parts  of  Northern  Germany  and  of  Italy ; 
the  independence  of  Holland  and  Switzerland  ;  the 
restoration  of  the  King  of  Sardinia  in  Piedmont; 
and  in  general  the  establishment  of  a  state  of  things 
in  Europe  calculated  to  prevent  future  aggressions. 
The  secret  instructions  to  M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  and 
other  diplomatic  papers  relative  to  the  Anglo-Russian 
negotiations  of  this  period,  will  be  found  in  the 
following  chapters.  As  to  the  question  of  the  pos- 
session of  Malta  by  England,  it  is  not  referred  to  in 
the  Treaty,  and  was  not  raised  by  Russia  until 
after  it  was  signed.  Some  curious  information  on 
this  subject  will  be  found  in  the  letters  from  Count 
Vorontzoff  in  Chapter  VIII  (pp.  69  to  77), -in  Lord 
Stanhope's  Life  of  Pitt,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  333,  and  in 
an  interesting  collection  of  despatches  edited  by  Mr 
Oscar  Browning  under  the  title  of  '  England  and 
Napoleon  in  1803,'  which  has-been  published  by  the 
Royal  Historical  Society. 