


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  30VOSILTZOFF     49 

The  Ottoman  Empire  is  another  country  whose 
fate  will  have  an  influence  on  that  of  the  rest  of 
Europe.  The  most  intimate  concert  is  necessary 
between  Russia  and  England  with  regard  to  the  line 
of  conduct  which  should  be  adopted  towards  Turkey. 
It  cannot  be  disputed  that  her  weakness,  the  anarchy 
of  her  administration,  and  the  growing  discontent  of 
her  Christian  subjects,  are  all  elements  which  stimu- 
late speculative  ambitions  and  are  diametrically  op- 
posed to  the  principles  which  we  hold  are  the  only 
ones  that  can  bring  about  a  stable  condition  of  tran- 

o 

quillity   in    Europe.     It    will   doubtless   be  desirable 
to     arrive    at    some    arrangement    with    regard    to 
Turkey  which  shall  be  in  conformity  with  the  good 
of  humanity  and  the  precepts  of  sound  policy  ;  but  it 
cannot  at  present  be  foreseen  how  far  this  could  be 
done.     The  two  Powers  will  not  be  wanting  in  loyalty 
even  to  an  essentially  tyrannical  government ;  and  this 
would  be  the  chief  obstacle.      But  if  the  Porte  joined 
France    (for  one   can    never    be    quite    sure    of    the 
sincerity  of  its  professions) — if  a  war  and  its  results 
rendered  the  further  existence  of  the  Turkish  Empire 
in  Europe  impossible — the  two  Powers  would  regulate 
among  themselves  the  future  fate  of  the  parties  con- 
cerned.    So  long  as  the  Turkish  Government  can  be 
preserved  in  Europe,  it  will  be  necessary  not  to  lose 
its   confidence ;    but   in   any  case    the    considerations 
hereinafter  stated  should  not  be  lost  sight  of  in  our 
relations  with  it,  and  should  be    maturely  weighed, 
especially  before  deciding  as  to  the  renewal  of  the 
treaty  of  alliance  which  the  Porte  proposes  to  Russia 

VOL.  II.  D 


50        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  England.     In  consenting  to  the  proposal,  it  will 
be  necessary  at  least  to  secure,   if  possible,   a  more 
happy  existence  to  the   Christian  populations  which 
are  suffering  under  the  domination  of  the  Porte,  and 
by  that  very  means  to  render  such  domination  less 
precarious ;  and  since  we  should  do  so  much  to  pre- 
serve the  Turkish  Empire,  it  would  be  desirable  also 
to  foresee  the   advantage  we   could   derive  from  its 
government,  weak  as  it  is,  to  paralyse  the  opposition 
of  France,  to  which  Power  a  rupture  with  the  Porte 
might  be  injurious  in  several   respects.     My  ambas- 
sador in   London,   following   the  instructions  in  this 
sense  which  he  has  received,  has   doubtless  already 
entered  upon  a  discussion  on  this  important  matter 
with  the  British  Ministry.     It  will  necessarily  form 
part  of  the  general  arrangement  here  sketched  out, 
and  you  will  take  care  that  it  shall  be  suitably  com- 
bined with  the  rest  of  the  plan  to  be  adopted. 