

A  further  point  to  be  considered  is  the  obligation 
which  would  fall  upon  the  two  Powers  after  so  costly 
a  struggle  to  obtain  some  advantages  for  themselves 
to  compensate  them  for  their  expenditure  and  to  show 
to  the  people  that  their  own  national  interests  have 
not  been  forgotten.  Russia  especially  will  have  the 
right  to  demand  that  if  her  neighbours,  such  as 
Austria,  Prussia,  and  Sweden,  obtain  advantages 
which  it  will  be  necessary  to  promise  them  in  order 
to  induce  them  to  act,  she  should  have  equivalent 
ones.  The  peace  of  Europe  could  only  be  preserved 
by  means  of  a  league,  formed  under  the  auspices  of 
Russia  and  England,  which  would  be  joined  by  all  the 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  NOYOSILTZOFF     51 

second  class  States  and  by  all  those  who  really  wish 
to  remain  at  peace.  In  order  that  such  a  league 
should  effectually  resist  the  disturbers  of  peace  and 
be  firmly  established,  it  is  necessary  that  the  two  pro- 
tecting Powers  should  maintain  a  certain  degree  of 
preponderance  in  the  affairs  of  Europe,  for  they  are 
the  only  ones  which  by  their  position  are  always  in- 
terested in  order  and  justice  being  maintained,  and 
which,  by  their  union,  would  be  able  to  maintain  it. 

Among  the  important  points  of  which  you  will 
have  to  treat  with  the  English  Government  the  most 
difficult  will  be  that  of  making  it  feel  the  propriety 
and  necessity,  at  a  moment  when  it  would  re-establish 
order  and  justice  in  Europe  in  concert  with  Russia, 
also  to  consent  to  make  some  change  in  its  maritime 
code — the  only  matter  as  to  which  the  British  Cabinet 
is  not  free  from  reproach,  and  which  enables  its 
enemies  to  injure  it  by  exasperating  the  neutral 
Powers.  Some  concessions  on  this  point,  not  of  a 
character  to  do  any  real  damage  to  the  commerce  of 
England  or  to  her  preponderance  on  the  sea,  would 
destroy  the  fears  and  the  mistrust  of  the  neutral 
States  and  sincerely  attach  them  to  Great  Britain.  .  .  . 

ST  PETERSBURG, 
September    11,    1804. 

Signed  : — ALEXANDER. 
Countersigned  : — PRINCE  A.  CZARTORYSKI. 


CHAPTER  V 

1804 


MEMORANDUM  DRAWN  UP  BY  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI  IN  1804,  SHOWING 
THE  RUSSIAN  PLAN  FOR  THE  RE-ARRANGEMENT  OF  EUROPE  IN  THE 
EVENT  OF  THE  COMBINATION  WHICH  WAS  THEN  BEING  PROJECTED 
AGAINST  NAPOLEON  PROVING  SUCCESSFUL. 


AUSTRIA  will  obtain  Bavaria  and  such  frontier  in 
Swabia  and  Franconia  as  may  suit  her. ;  also  the  Tyrol 
and  a  new  frontier  on  the  side  of  Venetia  and 
Dalmatia. 

The  Archduke  Charles  and  the  late  Grand-Duke 
of  Tuscany  will  obtain  principalities  in  Germany  and 
Italy.  Venetia  would  suit  one  of  them. 

Piedmont  will  be  returned  to  the  King  of  Sardinia 
with  Genoa  and  part  of  Lombardy.  This  will  form 
an  intermediary  and  respectable  Power  which  it  is  the 
interest  of  Russia  to  consolidate  as  much  as  possible  ; 
the  same  interest  exists  as  regards  the  kingdom  of  the 
two  Sicilies,  which  will  be  returned  to  its  legitimate 
sovereign. 