

This  is  not  the  place  or  the  moment  to  trace  the 
different  forms  of  government  which  should  be  estab- 
lished in  these  various  countries.  I  leave  you  entire 
freedom  to  treat  with  the  English  Minister  on  this 
important  subject.  The  principles  should  undoubt- 
edly everywhere  be  the  same,  and  it  will  be  above  all 
things  necessary  to  agree  as  to  that  point.  Every- 
where public  institutions  should  be  founded  on  the 
sacred  rights  of  humanity,  and  so  as  to  produce  the 


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  XOVOSILTZOFF     47 

order  which  is  their  necessary  consequence  ;  every- 
where they  should  be  based  on  the  same  spirit  of 
wisdom  and  benevolence.  But  the  application  of  the 
same  principles  may  vary  according  to  locality,  and 
the  two  Powers,  in  order  to  come  to  an  understanding 
on  this  subject,  will  take  steps  to  obtain  on  the  spot 
just,  impartial,  and  detailed  information  on  which  they 
can  rely.  It  is  in  strictly  following  such  a  line  of 
conduct,  in  tearing  oft'  the  masks  worn  by  govern- 
ments which  for  their  private  objects  alternately  have 
recourse  to  despotism  and  to  anarchy,  carefully  separ- 
ating their  interests  from  those  of  the  people  over 
whom  they  tyrannise,  that  we  may  hope  for  the  sin- 
cere assistance  of  the  latter,  and  produce  a  general 
enthusiasm  for  the  good  cause  whose  results  would  be 
incalculable. 

The  adoption  of  the  course  above  indicated  in  in- 
timate concert  with  England  would  not  only  be  the  true 
and  perhaps  the  only  means  of  restricting  French  power 
within  its  just  limits,  but  would  also  contribute  to  fix 
the  future  peace  of  Europe  on  a  solid  and  permanent 
basis.  The  object  would  be,  first,  to  attach  nations  to 
their  Governments,  by  making  it  only  possible  for  the 
latter  to  act  for  the  benefit  of  their  subjects  ;  and 
secondly,  to  fix  the  relations  of  the  various  States 
towards  each  other  on  more  precise  rules,  which 
would  be  so  drawn  up  as  to  make  it  the  interest  of 
each  State  to  respect  them.  .  .  .  When  peace  is 
made,  a  new  treaty  should  be  drawn  up  as  a  basis  for 
the  reciprocal  relations  of  the  European  States.  Such 
a  treaty  might  secure  the  privileges  of  neutrality,  bind 


48        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  Powers  who  take  part  in  it  never  to  begin  a  war 
until  after  exhausting  every  means  of  mediation  by  a 
third  Power,  and  lay  down  a  sort  of  new  code  of 
international  law  which,  being  sanctioned  by  the 
greater  part  of  the  European  States,  would,  if  violated 
by  any  one  of  them,  bind  the  others  to  turn  against  the 
offender  and  make  good  the  evil  he  has  committed.  .  . 
Should  the  two  Governments  agree  in  the  line  of 
policy  thus  sketched  out,  they  will  easily  come  to  an 
understanding  as  to  the  conduct  they  should  pursue 
with  regard  to  the  other  Powers  who  would  be  made 
to  join  in  the  struggle.  The  fear  of  losing  the 
support  of  Russia  and  the  subsidies  of  England  will 
decide  Austria  to  follow  our  impulse  in  the  war  which 
she  is  already  inclined  to  begin  as  our  ally.  As  to 
Prussia,  it  will  be  difficult  to  induce  her  willingly  to 
enter  a  combination  against  France.  Her  engagements 
towards  Russia  are  known  to  you,  and  it  will  be  for 
consideration  whether  it  would  not  be  better  to  force 
her  to  take  a  side  either  with  or  against  us  than  that 
she  should  remain  neutral.  Russia  especially  can  put 
great  pressure  upon  her,  and  the  Berlin  Cabinet,  by 
the  double  engagement  it  has  taken  not  to  allow  either 
Russian  or  French  troops  to  pass  through  its  territory, 
might  find  itself  in  the  difficult  position  it  wished  to 
avoid.  But  whoever  may  be  our  allies,  the  English 
Ministry,  if  it  adopts  our  ideas,  will  feel  the  necessity 
of  not  allowing  any  other  power  completely  to  pene- 
trate our  views,  and  of  only  directing  our  allies  towards 
the  proposed  object  by  such  means  as  we  may  possess 
of  acting  upon  them. 