


SECRET  INSTRUCTIONS  TO  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF    43 

two  Powers,  demand  that  they  should  deprive  France 
of  this  formidable  weapon. 

Such  is  the  first  object  .as  to  which  I  desire  to 
come  to  an  understanding,  if  possible,  with  the 
British  Government,  and  you  will  point  out  that  it 
must  be  an  absolute  condition  of  an  intimate  and 
cordial  union  between  Russia  and  England.  Being 
repugnant  to  any  reaction,  I  would  wish  the  two 
Governments  to  agree  that  far  from  attempting  to 
re-establish  old  abuses  in  the  countries  which  will 
have  to  be  emancipated  from  the  yoke  of  Buonaparte, 
they  should,  on  the  contrary,  be  assured  of  liberties 
founded  on  a  solid  basis.  This  is  the  principle  which, 
in  my  idea,  should  guide  the  conduct  of  the  two 
Powers,  and  their  proclamations  should  always  be  in 
accordance  with  it.  . 

As,  before  thinking  of  the  liberation  of  France, 
we  should  have  to  deliver  the  countries  which  she 
oppresses,  the  first  thing  to  be  considered  would  be 
how  to  regulate  their  future  position.  The  King  of 
Sardinia,  with  regard  to  whom  Russia  and  England 
have  contracted  engagements,  could  not  be  omitted  in 
the  arrangement  of  the  affairs  of  Italy,  and  he  would 
be  perhaps  the  first  to  give  us  a  useful  example.  The 
safety  of  Europe  requires  not  only  that  he  should  be 
restored  to  the  throne,  but  that  his  share  of  the 
territories  to  be  recovered  from  France  should  be  as 
large  as  possible.  At  the  same  time  the  two  Powers, 
while  restorino-  him  to  the  throne  and  increasing  his 

o  o 

dominions,  would  be  fully  justified  in  jointly  urging 
him  to  give  his  people  a  free  and  wise  constitution. 


44        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

He  will  no  doubt  himself  perceive  that  his  own  in- 
terest will  require  him  to  proclaim  a  promise  to  this 
effect  and  keep  it.  It  is  only  by  so  doing  that  this 
prince  would  be  able  personally  to  be  useful  to  the 
common  cause. 

The  political  existence  of  Switzerland  is  also  of 
essential  interest  to  the  safety  of  Europe.  It  is  neces- 
sary as  much  as  possible  to  give  that  country  a  defen- 
sible frontier  and  strengthen  it  in  its  position  with 
regard  to  other  Powers.  I  think  it  should  be  given  a 
Government,  based  on  local  requirements  and  the 
wishes  of  the  people,  which,  without  falling  into  the 
errors  of  the  old  system,  should  be  strong  enough  to 
take  advantage  of  the  resources  of  the  country  and 
make  its  neutrality  respected. 

The  same  principle  should  guide  our  policy  with 
regard  to  Holland,  where  the  national  character  and 
wishes  should  be  impartially  considered  in  deciding 
upon  the  form  of  government  which  should  be  sup- 
ported. If  the  restoration  of  a  hereditary  Stadtholder, 
with  a  suitably  limited  amount  of  power,  should  be 
found  necessary,  Russia  and  England  might  come  to 
an  understanding  as  to  the  selection  of  the  family  on 
which  this  dignity  is  to  be  conferred — either  •  some 
German  Prince  who  would  have  a  right  to  our 