

Vernegues  has  been  given  up  and  Cassini  has  left 
Rome.  The  Pope's  Ambassador  will  be  sent  back; 
this  decision  seems  to  me  indispensable,  but  I  do  not 
quite  know  what  is  the  form  in  which  it  should  be 
notified  to  him. 

I  should  like  to  do  everything  for  the  best,  but  often 
I  confess  that  I  fear  I  do  not  acquit  myself  of  my  task 
as  well  as  I  should.  The  details  you  have  kindly 
given  me  of  your  return  here  have  given  me  great 
pleasure,  and  I  feel  very  strongly  this  proof  of  your 
confidence.  It  is  with  real  joy  I  shall  see  you  here 
again  ;  and  I  am  always  grateful  for  the  advice  your 
frankness  and  your  friendship  dictate  to  me.  Pray 
excuse  my  bad  writing  and  believe  in  my  respect  and 
sincere  attachment. 

P.S. — The  news  from  Georgia  are  good.  The 
Czar  of  Imeritia  has  submitted,  and  has  taken  the 
oath  of  allegiance.] 


CHAPTER  III 

1804-5 

NEGOTIATIONS  FOB  AN  ALLIANCE  BETWEEN  RUSSIA  AND  ENGLAND. 

AFTER  the  diplomatic  rupture  consequent  upon  the 
execution  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,  it  became  indispens- 
able to  come  to  an  understanding  with  the  only 
Power  except  Russia  which  thought  herself  strong 
enough  to  contend  with  France — to  ascertain  as 
thoroughly  as  possible  what  were  her  inclinations  and 
designs,  the  principles  of  her  policy,  and  those  which 
she  could  be  led  to  adopt  in  certain  contingencies.  It 
would  have  been  a  great  advantage  to  obtain  the  con- 
currence in  our  views  of  so  powerful  and  influential  a 
State  as  England  and  to  strive  with  her  for  the  same 
objects;  but  for  this  it  was  necessary  not  only  to 
make  sure  of  her  present  inclinations,  but  to  weigh 
well  the  possibilities  of  the  future  after  the  death  of 
George  III  and  the  fall  of  the  Pitt  Ministry.  We 
had  to  make  England  understand  that  the  wish  to 
fight  Napoleon  was  not  in  itself  sufficient  to  establish 
an  indissoluble  bond  between  her  Government  and  that 
of  St  Petersburg,  and  that  such  a  bond,  to  be  per- 


36         MEMOIRS  Of  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYKKI 

manerit,  must  be  based  not  on  a  common  feeling  of 
revenge,  but  on  the  most  elevated  principles  of  justice 
and  philanthropy.* 

This  was  a  delicate  and  difficult  mission.  It  was 
confided  to  Novosiltzoff,  who,  as  a  member  of  the 
Ministry  and  of  the  Secret  Council,  was  fully 
acquainted  with  all  our  opinions  and  plans.  As  has 
been  already  stated,  he  made  numerous  acquaintances 
during  his  stay  in  England,  and  he  had  not  only 
obtained  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  language,  but  had 
studied  the  social  organisation  and  the  resources  of 
the  country.  He  was  also  on  intimate  terms  with  the 
Ambassador,  whose  personal  feelings  had  to  be  consi- 
dered ;  and  he  thus  seemed  in  every  respect  fitted  for 
the  task  entrusted  to  him.  On  leaving  he  was  fur- 
nished with  two  sets  of  instructions,  one  official  and 
the  other  secret ;  in  the  latter  I  endeavoured  to 
explain  to  him  all  the  points  we  wished  to  gain,  or  as 
to  which  it  would  be  proper  to  sound  the  views  of  the 
British  Government.  I  also  gave  him  a  letter  to  Mr 
Fox,  who  at  that  time  had  the  entire  confidence  of  the 
Prince  of  Wales  and  the  men  of  his  party.  Novosilt- 
zofF  found  Mr  Pitt  not  disposed  to  accept  all  our  pro- 
posals, and  the  Ambassador,  Count  Simon  Vorontzoff, 
in  his  admiration  of  the  narrow  policy  of  the  British 
Cabinet,  constantly  opposed  the  modifications  we 
wished  to  introduce.  Owing  to  the  difficulties  thus 
raised,  or  to  other  reasons,  Novosiltzoff  did  not  exe- 