

Lord  Nelson's  remarks  on  the  article  of  the  Treaty 
of  Amiens,  which  bound  England  to  evacuate  Malta, 
were  made  during  a  debate  in  the  House  of  Lords  on 
the  Preliminaries  of  Peace  with  France  on  the  3rd 
of  November  1801.  They  were  as  follows  (Parliam. 
Hist.  1801): — 'To  speak  next  of  Malta:  when  the 
noble  earl  (Earl  St  .Vincent,  First  Lord  of  the 
Admiralty)  sent  him  down,  the  Mediterranean  was  in 
the  hands  of  the  French,  and  on  his  return  from  the 


LOUD  NELSON  AND  MALTA  39 

battle  of  Aboukir,  he  thought  it  his  first  object  to 
blockade  it ;  because  he  deemed  it  an  invaluable  piece 
of  service  to  rescue  it  from  the  hands  of  the  French. 
In  any  other  point  of  view,  Malta  was  of  no  sort  of 
consequence  to  this  country.  It  was  true  it  contained 
a  most  extensive  and  commodious  harbour,  with  a 
strong  fortification,  which  would  at  least  require  7000 
soldiers  to  man  the  works.  By  the  preliminaries, 
Malta  was  to  be  put  into  the  possession  of  a  third 
Power,  and  he  repeated  that  in  any  hands  but  those 
of  the  French  it  became  immaterial  to  us/ 

The  Russian  emissary  in  the  Anglo-Russian  nego- 
tiations of  1804-5,  M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  afterwards 
became  notorious  in  Poland  as  the  persecutor  of 
the  Polish  children  in  the  Universit}7  and  the 
Schools  of  Lithuania.  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski, 
in  a  letter  addressed  to  his  friend,  Mr  Fox  Strang- 
ways,  Under  Secretary  of  State  for  Foreign  Affairs, 
on  the  18th  of  July  1836,  thus  speaks  of  him: 
'  The  papers  here  announce  the  approaching  arrival 
at  Brussels  of  M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  President  of  the 
Council  of  the  Empire.  Do  you  know  him  personally  ? 
You  are  aware  that  he  played  an  odious  part  in  the 
history  of  the  misfortunes  of  Poland,  and  that  he  is 
regarded  by  my  countrymen  as  the  most  implacable 
and  despicable  enemy  our  country  has  ever  had.  I 
should  not  be  surprised  if  some  Poles  gave  him  a  bad 
reception  should  they  meet  him  ;  the  sight  of  him  would 
make  them  furious  by  recalling  all  the  evil  he  has  done. 
It  is  said  that  he  is  going  to  the  Hague,  and  thence  to 
London.  This  unexpected  journey  of  a  personage 


40        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

who  has  become  eminent  in  Russia  is  probably  not 
without  a  political  object.  Perhaps  he  is  instructed  to 
study  the  policy  of  England  on  the  spot,  and  find  out 
what  you  have  decided  to  do  in  the  East — to  endea- 
vour to  calm  you  and  delude  you.  He  will  speak  to 
you  of  the  old  friendship  between  the  two  countries. 
Perhaps  he  will  hold  out  to  you  a  proposal  of  arrange- 
ment and  an  amnesty  for  the  Poles.  His  language 
will  be  most  conciliatory  ;  he  will  profess  the  most 
liberal  opinions,  and  his  mission,  if  he  has  a  formal 
one,  will  be  a  mission  of  peace,  of  concord,  of  forget- 
fulness  of  all  offence,  and  of  the  harmony  and  reci- 
procal confidence  of  past  times.  Be  on  your  guard. 
There  will  not  be  a  word  of  truth  in  all  this.  He  is  a 
man  without  faith  or  principles,  but  very  clever  and 
astute,  and  with  much  knowledge.  He  has  been 
several  times  in  England,  both  as  a  traveller  and  on  a 
mission  to  Mr  Pitt.'] 