

Supplementary  Memorandum  handed  to  Mr  Pitt  as 
a  development  of  the  ideas  expressed  by  him. 

The  Cabinets  of  St  Petersburg  and  St  James's  will 
agree  as  to  the  above  points  and  come  to  an  under- 
standing as  to  the  individual  and  the  family  which 


68        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

should  be  called  upon  to  reign  in  France.  If  the 
Bourbons,  which  of  them,  and  at  what  moment  he 
should  be  informed  of  his  selection  ;  what  line  of 
action  he  is  to  be  required  to  adopt,  and  to  what 
conditions  ho  is  to  subscribe,  the  most  essential  one 
being  that  of  submission  to  the  constitution  that 

o 

might  be  adopted. 

This  selection  is  regarded  by  his1  Majesty  the 
Emperor  as  a  secondary  matter,  and  he  would  not,  so 
far  as  he  is  concerned,  attach  any  importance  to  it 
except  in  so  far  as  it  might  impede  or  facilitate 
operations. 

Mr  Pit£  is  of  opinion  that  these  points  can  only 
be  determined  upon  as  events  occur. 

(A  confidential  note  in  accordance  with  the  above 
agreement  was  presented  by  Mr  Pitt  to  the  Russian 
Ambassador  on  the  19th  of  January,  1805.  The 
text  of  this  note  will  be  found  in  Alison's  History  of 
Europe,  vol.  vi,  p.  667). 


CHAPTER   VIII 

1805 

EXTRACTS  FROM  LETTERS  ADDRESSED  TO  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 
BY  COUNT  VORONTZOFF,  THE  RUSSIAN  AMBASSADOR  IN  LONDON, 
RELATIVE  TO  THE  FURTHER  PHASES  OF  THE  NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  AN 
ALLIANCE  WITH  RUSSIA. ^-REFUSAL  OF  ENGLAND  TO  EVACUATE 
MALTA  OR  ALTER  THE  MARITIME  CODE. 

LONDON,  ^th  January  (1805). 

I  SAW  Mr  Pitt  this  morning  with  M.  de  Novo- 
siltzoff'.  He  told  us  that  Buonaparte's  letter,*  and 
the  answer  here  given  to  it,  oblige  him  somewhat  to 
change  the  plan  which  had  been  as  good  as  agreed 
upon  between  us.  It  is  necessary,  he  said,  both  in 
England  and  abroad  to  prove  that  what  we  desire  is 
a  sure  and  stable  peace  for  the  future  independence 
and  security  of  Europe.  This  being  the  case,  pro- 

*  Proposing  peace  with  England.  This  proposal  was  thus  referred  to  in  George 
Ill's  speech  from  the  throne  on  the  15th  of  Jaauary,  1805  : 

'  I  have  received  pacific  overtures  from  the  chief  of  the  French  Government,  and 
have  in  consequence  expressed  my  earnest  desire  to  embrace  the  first  opportunity  of 
restoring  the  blessings  of  peace,  on  such  grounds  as  may  be  consistent  with  the 
permanent  interest  and  safety  of  my  dominions  ;  but  these  objects  are  closely  con- 
nected with  the  general  peace  of  Europe.  I  have,  therefore,  not  thought  it  right  to 
enter  into  any  more  particular  explanation  without  previous  communication  with 
those  Powers  on  the  Continent  with  whom  I  am  engaged  in  confidential  intercourse 
and  connection  with  a  view  to  that  important  object,  and  especially  the  Emperor  of 
Russia,  who  has  given  the  strongest  proofs  of  the  wise  and  dignified  sentiments 
with  which  he  is  animated,  and  of  the  warm  interest  which  he  takes  in  the  safety 
and  independence  of  Europe. ' 