


NEGOTIATIONS   WITH  ENGLAND  AND  AUSTRIA     57 

the  Convention  concludes  by  Austria  promising  reci- 
procity to  Russia  in  the  event  of  her  being  attacked 
by  Prussia.  The  Austrian  Ambassador  had  no  in- 
structions as  to  this,  but  he  signed  the  article  sub  spe 
rati. 

The  article  on  the  subsidies  is  the  one  that  gave 
us  most  trouble.  Austria  asks  two  millions  for  the 
preliminary  preparations  and  four  millions  a  year. 
We  had  to  promise  our  good  offices  with  England  in 
this  respect,  although  we  felt  that  the  demand  was 
exorbitant ;  but  we  did  so  only  on  the  understanding 
that  if  the  Court  of  London  should  not  supply  the 
whole  of  that  sum,  the  stipulations  of  the  concert 
were  to  remain  none  the  less  valid.  This  indispens- 
able condition  was  not  signed  by  the  Austrian  Am- 
bassador, as  his  instructions  did  not  justify  him  in 
doing  so.  The  matter  was  arranged  subject  to 
further  declarations.  Notwithstanding  this,  we 
thought  it  best  to  sign,  as  we  thought  it  would  be 
difficult  for  the  Court  of  Vienna  to  refuse  its  ratifica- 
tion, which  we  must  wait  for  before  we  can  regard  the 
matter  as  definitively  settled.  I  forgot  to  say,  with 
regard  to  the  number  of  troops,  that  Austria  is  to 
give  235,000  men  and  we  115,000,  which  makes 
350,000  in  all 

The  worthy  Admiral  Warren*  has  just  left,  full  of 
gratitude  for  the  friendship  which  has  been  shown 
him  here  and  the  kindness  of  the  Emperor.  The  new 
Ambassador,  Lord  G.  L.  Gower,  whom  as  yet  I  have 
only  twice  seen  in  my  house,  seems  to  me  thoroughly 

*  Sir  John  Warren,  British  Ambassador  at  the  Russian  Court. 


58        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

conversant  with  the  matters  with  which  he  will  have 
to  deal.  The  Court  of  London  is  not  quite  satisfied 
with  us,  but  I  hope  it  will  gradually  become  so,  and  I 
do  not  despair  of  matters  taking  a  good  turn.  They 
complain  in  London  of  the  mystery  in  which  we 
shroud  our  negotiations  with  Austria.  At  Vienna 
they  are  very  glad  of  it,  and  if  the  matter  had  not 
been  kept  an  impenetrable  secret,  the  pusillanimous 
Austrian  Cabinet  would  not  have  gone  so  far  with  us 
as  it  has  done.  .  .  . 

2nd  December,  1804. 

The  Court  of  Vienna  wishes  to  make  advances  to 
Berlin  to  try  to  draw  Prussia  into  a  concert  with  us, 
but  I  have  little  hope  of  success  in  this  direction. 
Prussia  wishes  to  preserve  her  neutrality  with  regard 
to  France  as  well  as  with  regard  to  ourselves  ;  that  is 
I  think  her  system,  which  at  the  moment  of  rupture 
might  become  very  embarrassing.  Altogether  the 
problem  of  how  to  deal  with  Prussia  is  not  an  easy 
one. 

We  are  now  drawing  up  instructions  for  Italinsky 
relative  to  a  new  treaty  of  alliance  with  the  Porte 
which  will  I  think  appease  the  alarms  of  Mr  Pitt. 
So  long  ago  as  1790  his  system  was  based  on  the 
greatest  jealousy  of  any  new  acquisition  on  the  part 
of  Russia. 