

O 

Austria  and  Prussia,  or,  if  it  should  be  impossible  to 
do  this  as  regards  both,  at  least  one  of  these  Powers, 
to  form  a  coalition  (which  the  Ottoman  Porte, 
Sweden,  and  perhaps  Denmark,  would  probably  join) 
with  Russia  and  Great  Britain  against  the  extension 
of  France  and  the  barbarous  conduct  of  Buonaparte. 

The  condltio  sine  qua  non  of  this  coalition  would 
be  that  none  of  the  members  of  it  should  in  any  case 
be  able  to  make  a  separate  peace  on  its  own  account. 
Great  Britain  would  on  her  side  engage  to  grant  to 


REPORT  FROM  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF  63 

these  Powers  such  subsidies  as  the  urgency  of  the  case 
might  render  indispensable,  to  furnish  transport  ships, 
and  to  employ  her  own  land  forces  in  as  great  numbers 
as  possible  on  every  occasion  where  such  assistance  on 
her  part  might  be  useful  to  the  common  cause. 

In  this  way  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  forces 
which  might  be  used  against  France  would  be  more 
than  sufficient ;  the  only  question  would  be  how  to 
employ  them  in  the  most  efficacious  manner.  In 
order  to  do  this,  I  said,  it  is  necessary  that  the  two 
Cabinets  should  agree  as  to  the  points  of  attack,  the 
best  plan  of  military  operations  to  be  adopted,  and 
the  means  to  be  employed  for  preserving  among  the 
combined  armies  a  unity  of  aim  and  the  greatest 
possible  harmony  in  all  the  operations  they  might 
undertake.  I  added,  in  order  to  avoid  any  digression 
from  my  principal  subject,  that  I  would  not  fail  after- 
wards to  communicate  to  Mr  Pitt  all  I  knew  of  his 
Imperial  Majesty's  ideas  on  this  matter. 

I  next  passed  to  the  means  of  reducing  the 
enemy's  strength.  These,  I  said,  would  chiefly  con- 
sist in  the  liberation  of  Holland,  Switzerland,  and 
Italy  from  their  enslavement  to  France,  and  in  the 
endeavour  to  employ  them  for  their  own  defence  as 
part  of  the  coalition.  I  remarked  at  the  same  time 
that  no  means  should  be  neglected  which  might  pre- 
pare them  for  this  purpose  as  soon  as  the  coalition 
should  begin  to  be  formed.  It  was  above  all  things 

O  O 

necessary  to  gain  their  confidence  by  not  leaving 
them  any  doubt  that  the  two  Powers  which  would  be 
at  the  head  of  the  coalition  would  not  be  actuated  by 


64        MEMOIRS  OP  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

personal  views,  and  would  only  strive  to  recover  and 
consolidate  their  political  independence ;  that  all  the 
fortresses  which  would  surrender  to  the  armies  of  the 
coalition  would  be  taken  in  the  name  of  the  nation  to 
which  they  belong,  and  would  be  restored  to  it  when 
it  obtains  a  settled  government  after  joining  the 
coalition. 

If  the  language  and  conduct  of  Russia  and 
England  are  always  in  accord  with  these  principles, 
they  would  not  only  produce  the  desired  effect,  but  in 
all  probability  would  prepare  France  herself  for 
salutary  changes  in  her  government  and  render  the 
task  of  the  coalition  much  less  difficult  in  other 
respects. 