

Mr  Pitt  found  that  what  I  had  said  was  perfectly 
just,  and  I  accordingly  entered  upon  my  statement. 
I  began  by  pointing  out  that  what  we  had  to  agree 


REPORT  FROM  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF  61 

about  turned  naturally  on  two  principal  points  :  one 
comprised  the  objects  which  the  two  nations  would 
propose  to  attain  by  the  convention  which  they  would 
draw  up ;  the  other  the  means  best  calculated  to 
ensure  as  complete  a  success  as  possible.  There  can 
be  no  doubt,  I  said,  that  the  objects  in  question,  taken 
collectively,  should  be  reduced  to  a  single  one  only — 
that  of  restoring  the  equilibrium  of  Europe  and 
establishing  its  safety  and  tranquillity  on  more  solid 
bases  ;  but  as  this  object  involves  a  great  number  of 
ideas,  I  thought  it  best,  for  the  sake  of  order  arid  pre- 
cision, to  divide  it  into  three  distinct  parts,  which 
might  be  regarded  as  so  many  periods  through  which 
a  coalition  formed  between  Russia  and  Great  Britain 
would  have  successively  to  pass  in  order  to  arrive  at 
the  ultimate  object  proposed. 

The  first  object,  in  the  opinion  of  his  Imperial 
Majesty,  is  to  bring  back  France  into  its  ancient 
limits,  or  such  other  ones  as  might  appear  most 
suitable  to  the  general  tranquillity  of  Europe.  The 
second  is  to  place  natural  barriers  to  the  ambition  of 
Buonaparte,  so  as  to  prevent  France  from  further 
aggressions  in  future  ;  and  the  third  is  to  consolidate 
the  order  of  things  which  would  be  established  by  an 
intimate  and  perpetual  alliance  between  Russia  and 
Great  Britain,  and  by  a  compact  between  those 
Powers,  the  countries  which  they  would  liberate  from 
the  yoke  of  France,  and  any  other  States  which  might 
be  disposed  to  join  them  for  the  maintenance  of  a 
condition  of  affairs  indispensable  for  the  balance  of 
power. 


62        MEMOIRS  OF  PRIME  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Mr  Pitt  said  that  this  view  was  entirely  in  con- 
formity with  his  own  ;  and  then  I  proceeded  to  the 
means  which  his  Imperial  Majesty  thought  would  be 
best  calculated  to  attain  the  three  objects  above 
stated. 

With  regard  to  the  first,  I  remarked  that  the 
means  for  attaining  it  might  be  stated  as  follows  : — 

1.  The  employment  of  as  large  a  force  as  possible 
against  the  common  enemy. 

2.  The  employment  of  it  in  the  most  advantageous 
manner. 

3.  The  reduction  of  the  enemy's  strength  to  the 
utmost  possible  extent. 

His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Russia  being  practi- 
cally unable  to  make  effectual  war  upon  France  with- 
out the  assistance  of  some  of  the  great  Continental 
Powers,  it  is  evident  that  in  order  to  bring  against  the 
enemy  a  force  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  the 
enterprise,  the  two  Powers,  once  they  agree  by  a  con- 
vention as  to  the  principles  on  which  they  are  to  act, 
would  turn  all  their  attention  to  the  task  of  binding 