


70        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

posals  must  be  made  to  Buonaparte  that  he  should 
give  up  part  of  his  possessions  and  abandon  his  inter- 
ference in  the  affairs  of  the  neighbouring  Govern- 
ments. No  one,  Mr  Pitt  added,  is  better  qualified  to 
make  such  proposals  than  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  who 
is  neither  a  neighbour  nor  an  enemy  of  France,  and 
who  only  desires  to  obtain  a  permanent  peace  for 
Europe  ;  the  proposals  should  be  clear,  precise,  and 
categorical,  and  made  so  as  to  exclude  all  negotiation, 
and  to  be  either  accepted  or  rejected.  If  Buonaparte 
accepts  them,  he  should  be  required  to  evacuate,  within 
a  brief  specified  period,  the  territories  he  has  no  right 
to  possess ;  if  he  rejects  them,  hostilities  should  be 
begun  at  once.  We  should,  he  concluded,  in  order  to 
be  prepared  for  the  latter  contingency,  work  without 
intermission,  and  have  everything  ready  for  crossing 
the  frontier. 

LONDON,  -fa  January  1805. 

After  many  delays  I  am  at  length  able  to  send 
this  by  courier.  The  weight  of  business  which  falls 
upon  Mr  Pitt  from  all  sides,  and  the  quite  recent 
entrance  of  Lord  Mulgrave  into  the  Cabinet,*  are  the 
chief  cause  of  these  delays.  Buonaparte's  proposal 
of  peace  has  also  partly  contributed  to  them.  It  is 
not  possible  for  an  English  Ministry  to  reject  an  offer 
of  peace  without  a  motive  ;  the  country  would  not 
allow  it  to  continue  the  war  at  its  pleasure.  The 
Government  must  therefore  show  that  it  desires  an 
honourable  peace  and  one  that  would  ensure  the 

*  As  Foreign  Secretary. 


TROOPS  FOR  THE  COALITION  71 

safety  of  Europe.  If  Buonaparte  rejects  their  con- 
ditions, the  nation  will  support  the  Ministry  in  a 
continuance  of  the  war. 

You  will  see  from  my  official  letter,  and  especially 
from  the  draft  Treaty  which  accompanies  it,  that 
there  is  a  talk  of  from  four  to  five  hundred  thousand 
men  for  acting  against  France.  This  arises  from  the 
usual  practice  in  time  of  war ;  the  enemy  exaggerates 
the  number  of  his  troops,  and  one's  allies  even  surpass 
this  exaggeration ;  and  as  some  surprise  is  felt  at  the 
little  result  which  has  been  attained,  it  is  thought 
that  the  number  of  troops  must  be  increased.  It  is  a 
known  fact  that  during  the  terrible  campaign  at  the 
be<rinnin£  of  the  last  war,  when  Prussia  received 

o  o 

subsidies  from  England  for  a  great  army  which  was  to 
take  the  offensive,  she  never  had  half  of  the  effective 
troops  for  which  she  was  paid.  Instead  of  having 
80,000  men,  she  had  less  than  40,000,  and  she  wasted 
them  during  the  whole  campaign  in  besieging 
Mayence,  which  could  have  been  taken  by  30,000 
men  in  less  than  six  weeks  if  the  King  of  Prussia  had 
acted  honestly.  Austria,  too,  during  the  first  two 
campaigns,  never  had  more  than  40,000  men  in  Italy, 
and  during  the  last  campaign  60,000,  while  the  Vienna 
Cabinet  alleged  that  60,000  were  engaged  in  the  first 
campaigns  and  100,000  in  the  subsequent  ones.  The 
same  happened  in  Swabia,  in  Switzerland,  and  on  the 
Upper  Rhine.  This  is  the  reason  of  'the  obstinacy 
with  which  the  Government  here  insists  on  armies 
being  employed  in  such  great  numbers,  though  they 
will  find  it  difficult  to  obtain  subsistence. 