

I  have  not  mentioned  Turkey,  which  it  would 
perhaps  be  best,  after  re-establishing  her  rights  under 


PROPOSED  RE-ARRANGEMENT  OF  EUROPE        55 

old  treaties,  to  leave  for  the  moment  in  her  present 
condition,  except  as  regards  the  proposed  change  in 
Servia,  the  reunion  of  Cattaro  to  Montenegro,  and 
the  Ionian  Republic.  If  the  question  should  ever 
arise  of  definitively  settling  the  fate  of  the  Ottoman 
Empire  in  Europe,  the  Powers  which  it  would  be 
necessary  to  satisfy  should  only  obtain  stations  and 
rectifications  of  territory  that  might  be  suitable  to 
them,  but  the  mass  of  the  Turkish  territories  in 
Europe  should  be  divided  into  separate  States, 
governed  locally,  and  bound  to  each  other  by  a 
federation,  upon  which  Russia  would  be  able  to 
secure  to  herself  a  decisive  and  lawful  influence  by 
means  of  the  title  of  Emperor  or  Protector  of  the 
Slavs  of  the  East  which  would  be  accorded  to  his 
Imperial  Majesty.  In  any  case  this  influence  would 
be  established  by  the  part  the  Russians  will  have 
taken  in  the  liberation  of  these  territories,  by  identity 
of  religion  and  origin,  and  by  a  wise  policy  and  a 
skilful  selection  of  posts  to  be  occupied  by  our  troops. 
If  the  consent  of  Austria  should  be  necessary, 
she  might  be  given  Croatia,  part  of  Bosnia  and 
Wallachia,  Belgrade,  Ragusa,  etc.  Russia  would 
have  Moldavia,  Cattaro,  Corfu,  and  above  all  Con- 
stantinople and  the  Dardanelles,  together  with  the 
neighbouring  ports  which  would  make  us  masters  of 
the  Straits.  France  and  England  could  be  offered 
some  islands  in  the  Archipelago  or  establishments  in 
Asia  or  Africa. 


CHAPTER  VI 

1804-5 

LETTERS  RELATIVE  TO  THE  RUSSIAN    NEGOTIATIONS  WITH    ENGLAND  AND 

AUSTRIA. 

FROM  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI  TO  THE  CHANCELLOR 
COUNT  VORONTZOFF. 

Sth  November,  1804. 

I  HASTEN  to  inform  your  Excellency  that  the  concert* 
with  the  Court  of  Vienna  was  signed  two  days  ago, 
and  that  the  Russian  arid  Austrian  couriers  bearing 
this  news  left  yesterday  evening.  The  drift  of  this 
instrument  is  already  known  to  you  ;  the  eventuality 
of  an  attack  on  the  kingdom  of  Naples  is  provided  for 
in  it.  The  Austrian  Ambassador  insisted  that  a 
clause  should  be  added  to  the  effect  that  such  an 
attack  shall  not  be  provoked  by  his  Sicilian  Majesty, 
and,  in  order  to  avoid  any  misunderstanding,  we  have 
endeavoured  to  state  as  precisely  as  possible  in  a 
separate  article  what  is  to  be  meant  by  the  word 
'  provocation.'  The  point  relative  to  the  Court  of 
Berlin  is  inserted  in  a  separate  and  secret  article,  and 

*  This  was  a  secret  Convention  pledging  the  two  Empires  to  united  action 
against  France,  with  a  view  to  preventing  any  encroachments  by  that  power  on 
Germany,  Turkey,  or  Naples. 