


7*        ME.UOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

I  must  here  tell  you  that  all  you  will  find  in  the 
official  despatches  of  the  English  Ministry  as  to 
arran<rinir  indemnities  for  Prussia  and  placing  inde- 

o      o  i  o 

pendent  Powers  between  Holland  and  France  and  on 
the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  are  not  really  matters  to 
which  importance  is  attached  here.  Mr  Pitt  has 
often  told  me,  and  repeated  to  me  yesterday,  that 
these  expedients  are  proposed  because  no  better  ones 
have  been  found,  but  that  if  any  plan  more  likely  to 
be  effective  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  France  in  her 
ancient  limits  could  be  devised,  the  British  Cabinet 
would  gladly  accept  it,  as  it  desired  nothing  more  than 
the  peace  of  Europe  and  the  maintenance  of  a  perma- 
nent friendship  with  Russia. 

LONDON,  26  January  (N.S.)  1805. 

Russia  and  England  should,  and  can,  save  Europe. 
England  ardently  wishes  it,  and  will  do  her  utmost  to 
co-operate  with  Russia  in  this  holy  work  ;  it  only 
depends  therefore  upon  the  latter  to  employ  the 
means  with  which  England  has  decided  to  furnish  her. 
The  King,  Mr  Pitt,  all  that  is  great  and  enlightened 
in  the  country,  and,  which  is  more  important,  the 
whole  nation  (for  this  is  the  only  country  in  the  world 
where  the  people  are  not  treated  like  a  flock  of  sheep) 
desire  a  permanent  alliance  with  Russia.  ... 

Lord  G.  L.  Gower,  in  a  cipher  despatch  dated  the 
12th  or  13th  October  (O.S.)  says  that  Count  Stadion,* 
after  having  received  despatches  from  his  Court,  had 
stated  to  him  that  the  Emperor,  his  master,  had  so 

*  The  Austrian  Ambassador  at  St  Petersburg. 


AUSTRIA  JOINS  THE  COALITION  73 

long  hesitated  as  to  the  course  he  should  adopt  in 
present  circumstances,  because  for  two  years  he  had 
seen  an  intimate  alliance  between  Russia,  Prussia,  and 
France,  the  result  of  which  was  that  these  three 
Powers  disposed  of  everything  in  Germany  in  a 
manner  prejudicial  to  the  power  and  even  the  security 
of  Russia  ;  but  that  now  Russia  prefers  to  follow 
another  system  more  in  conformity  with  the  welfare 
of  Europe,  being  calculated  to  restore  to  it  the  inde- 
pendence of  which  France  has  deprived  it,  the 
Emperor,  his  master,  no  longer  doubted  the  good-will 
of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  and  was  resolved  to  second 
his  views,  provided  he  be  supported  by  Russian  troops 
and  English  money.*  This  despatch,  which  Lord 
Mulgrave  showed  me,  and  which  Mr  Pitt  afterwards 
showed  our  friend, t  has  given  us  all  great  pleasure. 
Here  they  are  ready  to  do  everything. 

LONDON,  -£-§-  April  1805. 

I  am  sending  by  to-day's  courier  a  despatch  to  M. 
de  Novosiltzoff  announcing  that  the  Court  here 
acquiesces  in  the  proposals  he  is  to  make  to  the 
Corsican,  whom  he  will  find  in  Italy.  ...  I  take  this 
opportunity  of  repeating  that  I  intend  to  leave  this 
country  next  spring.  Matters  are  tending  towards  a 
coalition  or  a  peace,  and  this  should  be  settled  before 
the  winter,  after  which  my  stay  here  will  almost  cease 
to  be  necessary.  If  they  send  in  my  place  a  man  of 
frank  and  straightforward  character,  not  given  to 