

Mr  Pitt  answered  that  he  entirely  agreed  to  all 
I  had  said,  and  that  he  only  wished  to  point  out  that 
no  means  should  be  neglected  of  bringing  Prussia 
into  the  coalition.  He  suggested  various  inducements 
which  might  be  held  out  to  her  with  this  object,  and 
he  also  spoke  of  indemnities  which  might  be  promised 
to  Austria.  It  seemed  to  me,  however,  that  there 
were  several  other  matters  to  be  settled  first,  and  I 
merely  said  that  the  principle  which  his  Imperial 
Majesty  thought  should  be  followed  in  any  overtures 
that  might  be  made  was  to  offer  only  what  could  not 
be  refused  ;  by  so  doing  we  should  avoid  the  mistake 
which  had  been  made  recently,  when  all  the  efforts 
that  were  made  were  attributed  solely  to  a  wish  of 
profiting  by  a  general  dismemberment.  I  added, 
however,  that  it  was  not  very  likely  that  we  should 
be  able  entirely  to  avoid  making  some  offers ;  his 


REPORT  FROM  M.  DE  NOVOSILTZOFF  65 

Majesty  had  some  ideas  on  the  subject  which  would 
be  communicated  to  him  hereafter  by  our  Ambassador. 

As  to  the  subsidies,  Mr  Pitt  said  that  England 
would  go  as  far  as  would  be  within  the  limits  of  possi- 
bility. 'We  will  give  £5,000,000,  perhaps  a  little  more  ; 
and  this  is  all  we  can  do,  for  if  we  wished  to  go  further, 
besides  the  want  of  means,  there  would  be  the  addi- 
tional objection  that  our  trade  with  the  countries 
which  would  be  subsidised  would  not  admit  of  our 
sending  them  a  larger  sum.  We  will,  however,  fix 
the  1st  of  January  as  the  date  on  which  the  subsidies 
will  begin  ;  this  would  be  three  or  four  months  before 
the  troops  can  be  sent  into  the  field.  The  sum  thus 
obtained  would  be  pretty  considerable,  and  might 
serve  to  cover  part  of  the  expense  of  preparations.' 

I  next  represented  to  Mr  Pitt  that  with  regard  to 
the  second  object — the  imposition  of  natural  barriers 
to  the  ambition  of  Buonaparte  which  would  both  keep 
France  within  her  boundaries  and  prevent  her  future 
aggrandisement — his  Majesty  thinks  the  most  trust- 
worthy means,  and  the  only  one  on  which  we  could 
rely,  would  be  to  surround  France  with  States  which 
would  be  strong  enough  at  least  not  to  fear  the  first 
blows  of  an  invasion,  and  which  would  thus  be 
capable  to  a  certain  degree  of  making  their  independ- 
ence respected.  Starting  from  this  principle,  it  is 
most  necessary  that  at  the  close  of  a  successful  war 
the  condition  of  Holland,  Switzerland  and  Italy 
should  be  considerably  improved,  and  their  strength 
increased  by  suitable  augmentations  of  territory. 
The  old  Germanic  Confederation,  divided  into  so 

VOL.    II.  E 


66         MKMOIIfS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 