


78         MEMOIRS  OF  I'RINCE  ADAM  CZARTORY8KI 

p.S. — Jf  May. — The  gleam  of  hope  that  some  com- 
promise might  be  arrived  at  here  to  satisfy  our 
Government  has  disappeared.  I  learn  that  Mr  Pitt 
has  looked  for  one  in  vain,  and  that  in  order  not  to  be 
disavowed  and  blamed  by  the  nation  he  will  be 
obliged  to  give  up  the  co-operation  of  the  Continental 
Powers,  as  our  Court  has  peremptorily  declared  that 
it  will  not  ratify  the  Treaty  unless  this  country  will 
abandon  Malta.  They  have  begun  to  prepare  a  long 
reply,  which  will  be  in  great  detail.  I  do  not  think  it 
will  be  handed  to  me  before  five  or  six  days  hence. 

[The  Treaty  of  the  llth  of  April,  1805,  was  not 
ratified,  owing  to  the  difference  between  Russia  and 
England  as  to  Malta  and  the  maritime  code,  until  the 
month  of  July  following,  and  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment only  consented  to  ratify  it  after  placing  on 
record  its  opinion  that  the  restoration  of  Malta  and 
the  alteration  of  the  maritime  code  would  be  in  con- 
formity with  '  the  principles  of  equity  and  justice,'  and 
would  be  'the  most  efficacious  means  of  securing  the 
success  of  the  cause.'  (Despatch  from  Lord  G.  L. 
Gower  to  Lord  Mulgrave  of  the  21st  July  1805,  and 
note  from  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  of  the  same  date, 
both  in  the  Record  Office.)]. 


CHAPTER  IX 

1805 

INTERVIEW    BETWEEN    THE    RUSSIAN    ENVOYS    AND    MR  PITT  (SEPTEMBER 
180n)  AS  TO  THE  QUESTION  OF  GIVING  UP  HANOVER  TO  PRUSSIA. 

THE  negotiations  for  bringing  to  a  practical  issue  the 
convention  of  the  llth  of  April  having  been  procras- 
tinated through  the  refusal  of  England  to  give  up 
Malta  and  alter  the  maritime  code,  Alexander,  who 
had  meanwhile  begun  to  disregard  the  advice  of  his 
Ministers,  and  to  take  the  government  of  Russia  into 
his  own  hands,  entered  with  Austria  into  a  campaign 
against  France,  and  made  overtures  to  Prussia  with  a 
view  to  drawing  her  into  the  alliance.  Prussia  asked 
as  the  price  of  her  co-operation  that  England  should 
give  up  Hanover  to  her  and  provide  her  and  her 
German  allies  with  subsidies  to  enable  them  to  carry 
on  the  war.  Another  special  envoy,  M.  d'Oubril,  was 
then  sent  by  the  Russian  Government  to  London. 
The  following  extracts  from  a  letter  from  Count 
VorontzofF  describe  the  interview  which  took  place 
with  Mr  Pitt  on  this  occasion  : — 

LONDON,  -i-£  September  1805. 

I   am   very  grateful  to  you  for    having   sent  M. 
d'Oubril  to  me.     He  has  given  me  explanations  as  to 


8o         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  papers  of  which  he  is  the  bearer,  and  which  have 
caused  me  inexpressible  astonishment.  But  the  thing 
is  done,  and  nothing  remains  but  to  bow  to  the  decrees 
of  Providence,  which  seems  still  to  protect  the  Corsican. 
I  feared  the  Berlin  interview,  and  my  presentiment  is 
verified.  All  the  weapons  of  intrigue  and  sycophancy 
must  have  been  employed  against  weakness  and 
irresolution.  I  know  too  well  your  judgment  and 
your  elevation  of  mind  to  doubt  for  an  instant  that 
you  have  used  all  your  efforts  to  prevent  the  evil  that 
has  been  done,  and  I  pity  you  very  sincerely  at  not 
having  been  able  to  prevent  it.  As  your  private 
letter  did  not  contain  anything  that  I  could  not 
communicate  to  Mr  Pitt,  and  it  referred  me  for 
further  explanations  to  M.  d'Oubril,  I  sent  it  to  Mr 
Pitt  with  a  request  that  he  should  return  it  to  me, 
and  that  he  should  defer  his  opinion  on  the  papers  I 
would  communicate  to  him  the  same  morning  until 
after  hearing  the  explanations  which  M.  d'Oubril  and 
myself  would  give  him  on  all  the  points  which  might 
seem  new  to  him.  He  returned  me  your  letter  with 
thanks,  assuring  me  that  it  had  not  been  communicated 
to  anybody,  and  that  he  would  be  very  glad  to  see  M. 
d'Oubril.  Though  prepared  to  receive  a  disagreeable 
communication,  and  accustomed  to  master  his  counten- 
ance, one  could  see  his  emotion  on  reading  the 
documents  I  gave  him,  which  he  handed  to  Lord 
Mulgrave  after  he  had  finished  them.  The  proposal 
that  the  King  should  exchange  a  patrimony  which  his 
ancestors  had  enjoyed  for  more  than  a  thousand  years 
struck  him  deeply.  He  told  me  that,  knowing  his 