

The  policy  of  Russia  from  the  beginning  of  the 
reign  of  Alexander  could,  after  what  I  have  said  of 
his  opinions,  only  be  one  of  conciliation  between 
parties  and  Powers  whose  policy  bore  the  character 
of  mutual  exasperation.  It  was  with  this  object  that 
the  Emperor  had  allowed  himself  to  be  drawn  by 
Prussia  into  taking  part  in  the  complicated  question 
of  indemnities  in  Germany.  The  parties  interested 
in  this  matter  showed  a  partiality  and  a  disposition  to 
give  and  accept  bribes  which  did  them  little  honour, 


POLICY  OF  ALEXANDER  I  TOWARDS  NAPOLEON    89 

and  were  not  at  all  in  accordance  with  the  Emperor's 
pure  intentions.  While  supporting  the  claims  of 
princes  who  were  related  to  him,  and  somewhat  too 
partial  to  Prussia,  his  sole  object  was  to  rescue 
Germany  with  as  little  injustice  as  possible  from  the 
confusion  into  which  she  had  been  thrown  by  the 
Revolution  and  the  French  wars. 

The  spirit  which  at  that  time  animated  the  Russian 
Cabinet  rendered  it  eminently  suited  to  speak  to 
inflamed  Europe  in  terms  of  peace  and  conciliation. 
The  character  of  the  sovereign  and  of  his  Ministers, 
which  always  has  an  influence  on  policy,  must  have 
added  weight  to  the  conduct  which  was  then  adopted 
by  the  Cabinet  of  St  Petersburg,  and  its  words  would 
doubtless  have  been  received  with  general  readiness 
and  confidence. 

After  the  retirement  of  Count  Panin,  whose 
principles  and  manner  might  have  inspired  foreigners 
with  distrust,  Count  Kotchoubey,  who  succeeded  him, 
and  especially  the  Chancellor  Count  Vorontzoff,  pos- 
sessed in  a  high  degree  the  qualities  necessary  for 
ensuring  their  acceptance  as  mediators  by  the  parties 
most  hostile  to  each  other.  The  Chancellor  sincerely 
wished  to  remove  difficulties,  to  tranquillise  animosities, 
and  to  do  justice  while  hearing  both  sides.  His  lan- 
guage was  always  calm,  conciliatory,  and  dignified, 
never  showing  irritation  at  the  obstacles  he  met 
with. 

On  each  of  the  occasions  which  divided  Europe  and 
constantly  fomented  war,  Russia  had  repeated  the 
offer  of  her  mediation ;  it  was  never,  however,  sin- 


90        MEMOIRS  ObJ  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ccrely  considered  and  was  always  rejected,  especially 
by  France. 

The  history  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire  is 
the  history  of  Europe  up  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of 
Napoleon.  This  work,  which  may  be  called  immense, 
inspires  an  interest  which  is  always  sustained  by  the 
ability  of  the  narrative ;  it  is  full  of  details  calculated 
to  interest  and  instruct  the  reader,  who  is  lost  in  admira- 
tion before  so  much  practical  and  profound  information 
in  the  various  branches  of  administration  and  policy. 
M.  Thiers,  in  beginning  his  magnificent  work,  is 
enamoured  of  his  hero,  but  this  does  not  prevent  him 
from  being  afterwards  impartial  and  even  severe 
towards  him.  He  strives  to  be  always  unbiassed,  and 
generally  is  so ;  but  I  may  be  permitted  to  point 
out  that  in  some  cases  he  has  not  done  all  that  is  de- 
manded by  a  quality  so  important  in  a  historian. 