


CHAPTER  X 

1805 

CONTINUATION     AND     CONCLUSION     OF     THE    MEMOIRS. GENERAL    VIEW 

OF  THE  POLICY    OF    ALEXANDER  I  TOWARDS    NAPOLEON. REMARKS 

ON  THIERS'  HISTORY  OF    THE  CONSULATE  AND    THE    EMPIRE. THE 

ABB6  PIATTOLI. BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ. 

IN  order  to  understand  the  political  movements  of 
that  time  and  the  animosity  with  which  all  Europe 
wished  to  fight  Napoleon,  notwithstanding  the  defeats 
he  had  inflicted  upon  her,  it  is  necessary  to  recollect 
what  was  the  state  of  public  opinion  in  Europe. 
Those  who  had  become  enthusiastic  at  the  outbreak 
of  the  French  Revolution  had  looked  upon  Buona- 
parte as  the  hero  of  liberalism  ;  he  seemed  to  them 
destined  by  Providence  to  make  the  cause  of  justice 
triumph  and  to  remove  by  great  actions  and  immense 
successes  the  innumerable  obstacles  presented  by  facts 
to  the  wishes  of  oppressed  nations.  When  they  saw 
that  Napoleon  did  not  fulfil  their  expectations  their 
enthusiasm  diminished.  The  French  Republic  and 
the  Directory  had  no  doubt  acted  culpably  and  fool- 
ishly, but  though  they  were  deceived  as  to  the  means, 
they  remained  faithful  to  the  end ;  they  had  done  the 
greatest  harm  to  the  cause  of  freedom,  but  had  not 


86        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

deserted  it.  They  might  in  course  of  time  have 
learnt  the  right  means  of  doing  justice  and  emancipat- 
ing nations ;  but  no  such  illusions  were  possible  when 
Napoleon  became  the  ruler  of  France.  Each  of  his 
words  and  actions  showed  that  he  would  act  only  by 
the  force  of  bayonets  and  of  numbers.  By  ceasing  to 
be  the  champion  of  justice  and  the  hope  of  oppressed 
peoples,  he  lost  one  of  the  strongest  elements  of  the 
power  of  the  French  Republic,  and  descended  to  the 
class  of  ambitious  tyrants,  with  immense  talents  it  is 
true,  but  with  motives  as  mean  as  theirs.  This  made 
other  Powers  attack  him  without  scruple,  as  a  scourge 
of  humanity ;  and  the  general  opinion  of  Europe  on 
this  subject  spread  to  Russia,  thereby  drawing  the 
Cabinet  of  St  Petersburg  into  a  course  of  policy  in 
which  it  lost  sight  of  the  part  Russia  was  really  called 
upon  to  play. 

The  peace  of  Amiens,  which  had  been  hailed  with 
equal  enthusiasm  on  both  sides  of  the  channel,  had 
been  broken  by  an  act  which  Napoleon  resisted  with 
his  usual  violence,  but  in  which  he  had  right  on  his 
side.  He  demanded  the  immediate  evacuation  of 
Malta,  which  England  had  only  occupied  on  the 
express  condition  that  she  should  withdraw  from  it 
when  peace  was  concluded.  It  had  been  agreed  on 
all  sides  that  the  future  destiny  of  this  island  was  to 
be  regulated  by  the  Powers  in  concert.  England 
haughtily  refused  to  execute  this  clause  of  the  treaty, 
and  the  war  was  at  once  resumed.  At  this  time 
Lord  G.  L.  Gower,*  the  British  Ambassador  appointed 