

*  Father  of  the  present  Lord  Granville. 


CONCLUSION  OF  THE  MEMOIRS  87 

by  the  new  Ministry,  arrived  at  St  Petersburg.  He  was 
then  a  young  man,  but  he  had  much  natural  prudence, 
and  an  instinct  of  propriety  which  manifested  itself  in 
every  word  he  uttered,  and  in  the  manner  in  which  he 
did  business.  He  showed  me  entire  confidence,  and 
even  sincere  friendship.  He  was  accompanied  by  Sir 
Charles  Stewart,  who  had  already  had  an  opportunity 
of  acquiring  diplomatic  skill  in  various  embassies 
where  he  occupied  the  post  of  secretary.  These  two 
personages  were  afterwards  well  known  in  Paris, 
where  they  repeatedly  succeeded  each  other.  Lord 
G.  L.  Gower,  who  afterwards  became  Earl  Granville, 
allied  himself  with  the  Whigs,  while  Sir  Charles 
Stewart,  who  became  Lord  Stewart,*  remained  with 
the  Tory  party.  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  arrived  in 
Russia  with  important  despatches  intended  to  draw 
the  Emperor  into  an  alliance  and  active  military  co- 
operation against  France.  The  Austrian  Govern- 
ment, whose  leading  Minister  was  at  that  time  M.  de 

o 

Cobentzel,  at  the  same  time  sent  another  ambassador, 
Count  Stadion,  to  sound  the  real  intentions  of  Russia. 
The  English  representative  spoke  with  as  much  deci- 
sion as  the  Austrian  one  did  with  timidity  and  reti- 
cence. The  latter  was  in  constant  alarm  lest  he 
should  compromise  himself  by  his  proceedings  being 
known  too  soon  in  London,  and  we  had  for  some  time 
to  conceal  them  from  the  English  Government, 
thereby  incurring  its  reproaches,  of  which  Count 
Simon  Vorontzoff  made  himself  perhaps  too  devoted 
an  organ. 

*  Afterwards  Marquis  of  Londonderry. 


88        MEMOIRS  OF  PJRIJtCH  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

In  descending  into  the  arena  Napoleon  had  cast 
aside  everything  that  could  have  led  people  to  believe 
that  he  had  a  high  and  generous  mission.  He  was  a 
Hercules  abandoning  his  task  of  succouring  the 
oppressed  and  thinking  only  how  to  employ  his 
strength  in  order  to  subjugate  the  world  for  his 
own  advantage.  His  sole  idea  was  to  re-establish 
absolute  power  everywhere,  with  its  old  forms  and  the 
greater  part  of  its  inconveniences.  So  long  as  he 
governed,  his  ambition  and  injustice  eclipsed  those  of 
all  other  enemies  of  mankind ;  he  seemed  like  a 
sinister  and  devouring  flame  rising  above  all  Europe. 
In  every  country  men  who  valued  their  national 
dignity,  who  were  brave  and  high-principled,  were 
unanimous  in  their  opposition  to  him.  He  had  no 
supporters  anywhere  except  among  those  in  whom 
fear  was  the  strongest  motive.  As  soon  as  this  feeling 
began  to  subside,  there  was  but  one  voice  of  opposition 
to  the  man  who,  after  having  made  himself  an 
ordinary  despot,  had  everywhere  wished  to  impose 
his  yoke  on  the  other  European  sovereigns. 