

The  Abbe  Piattoli  was  invited  to  come  to  Poland 
by  the  Princess  Lubomirska,  my  aunt ;  she  charged 
him  with  the  education  of  Prince  Henry  Lubomirski, 
whom  she  had  adopted.  During  my  first  visit  to 
Paris  in  1776  and  1777,  having  entered  into  relations 
with  Prince  Henry,  I  naturally  found  myself  under 
the  influence  of  the  Abbe  Piattoli — an  influence  which 
could  only  produce  a  very  salutary  effect.  The  Abbe, 
like  so  many  others  who  bear  this  title,  was  a  layman. 
He  was  a  very  learned  man,  had  successively  devoted 
himself  to  various  branches  of  science,  and  wrote  with 
great  facility.  He  also  had  a  warm  heart,  and  was 
capable  of  self-devotion.  M.  Thiers  does  not  seem 
quite  to  understand  that  people  may  devote  them- 
selves to  an  idea  which  has  taken  possession  of  their 
souls,  only  from  a  feeling  of  generosity.  This  is 
what  happened  to  the  Abbe  Piattoli.  No  sooner 
was  he  in  a  position  to  understand  the  condition  of 
Poland  and  her  mode  of  government,  than  he  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  working  at  her  deliverance,  and 
persisted  in  doing  so  as  long  as  he  could  hope  that 
the  idea  might  be  realised. 

The  state  of  my  country,  before  all  the  convulsions 
through  which  it  has  passed  since,  was  very  different 


THE  ABB£  PIATTOLI  93 

from  what  it  is  now.  It  was  .a  dead  calm  after  the 
storm.  The  recollections  of  the  Confederation  of  Bar* 
no  doubt  existed  in  the  nation  ;  there  was  an  anti- 
Russian  party,  but  it  was  weak,  and  its  efforts  were 
powerless  to  produce  any  resistance  to  the  arbitrary 
acts  of  the  Russian  Embassy.  The  most  famous 
names  in  the  country,  those  which  were  pronounced 
with  the  greatest  respect,  had  distinguished  them- 
selves during  the  Confederation  of  Bar.  I  wrote  a 
memorandum  on  this  subject  from  the  dictation  of  the 
Abbe  Piattoli.  It  was  sent  by  a  safe  hand  to  my 
parents,  whose  opinions  were  known  to  me,  to  Marshal 
Ignatius  Potocki,  and  to  General  Rzewuski,  both  of 
whom  were  sons-in-law  of  the  Princess  Lubomirska. 
It  was  hoped  that  this  document  would  exercise  a 
salutary  influence  and  bring  about  some  practical 
results.  I  recollect  having  passed  a  whole  night  in 
copying  it,  and  it  was  very  well  received.  Piattoli 
now  became  a  steadfast  adherent  of  the  Poles  and 
their  cause.  He  continued  to  occupy  himself  with 
the  education  of  Prince  Henry,  and  accompanied  the 
Princess  Lubomirska  to  England,  Vienna,  and  Galicia. 
When  he  came  to  Warsaw  during  the  Great  Diet  he 
was  appointed  Secretary  to  King  Stanislas,  after 
the  latter,  having  thrown  off  the  Russian  yoke,  had 
joined  the  national  party.  He  contributed  by  his 
influence  and  his  councils  to  maintain  the  King  in  the 
new  course  which  he  had  sincerely  adopted.  Later 
on,  when  this  unfortunate  sovereign,  yielding  to  the 
advice  of  the  Chancellor  Chreptowicz,  his  Foreign 