


76        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

assured  me  that  if  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  had  yielded  on 
these  two  points  he  would  have  been  recalled,  and 
never  again  employed  in  the  diplomatic  service. 
The  Government  here  would  have  preferred  that  he 
should  have  altogether  refused  to  accept  the  note 
you  addressed  to  him  on  the  subject  of  the  maritime 
code,  and  that  he  should  have  replied  to  you  verbally 
that  Great  Britain  simply  adheres  to  her  practice 
durino-  the  last  two  centuries  in  this  matter,  which  is 

O 

in  accordance  with  her  treaties  with  Russia,  Sweden, 
Denmark,  and  Holland.  The  result  of  accepting  the 
Russian  proposal,  added  Lord  Harrowby,  would  be  to 
give  France  facilities  for  maintaining  and  augmenting 
her  naval  forces  to  the  detriment  of  England  ;  and 
this  is  a  further  reason  why  England  will  never  accept 
it  at  any  cost.  France  may  obtain  supplies  for  her 
navy  from  other  countries  in  time  of  peace,  but 
England  will  never  allow  her  to  obtain  them  in  time 

O 

of  war. 

I  have  done  all  that  was  humanly  possible  to  miti- 
gate the  bad  impression  produced  by  my  communica- 
tion on  the  King,  Mr  Pitt,  and  Lord  Harrowby,  who, 
though  still  too  unwell  to  take  an  active  post  in  the 
administration,  assists  at  the  Cabinet  Councils,  where 
he  possesses  the  influence  given  him  by  his  great 
talents  and  the  extreme  deference  paid  to  his  advice 
by  Mr  Pitt.  I  begin  to  hope  that  some  means  may 
be  found  of  avoiding  a  rupture  of  the  negotiations, 
which  during  the  first  four  days  was  almost  decided 
upon.  I  endeavoured  to  gain  time  by  persuading 
them  not  to  send  an  unfavourable  answer  at  once,  and 


REFUSAL  OF  ENGLAND  TO  EVACUATE  MALTA      77 

meanwhile  I  have  had  several  conferences  with  Lord 
Mulgrave  and  Lord  Harrowby.  The  latter  seemed 
somewhat  shaken  on  my  pointing  out  that  if  the  pro- 
posed alliance,  between  Russia  and  England  should 
fail  by  the  absolute  rejection  of  the  Emperor's 
demands,  the  result  would  be  the  enslavement  of  the 
Continent.  He  said  he  would  think  about  the 
matter  further,  but  added  that  he  had  never  seen  his 
friend  Mr  Pitt,  with  whom  he  has  been  on  intimate 
terms  for  more  than  twenty  years,  so  deeply  grieved 
as  he  was  at  the  difference  between  the  two  Courts  ; 
but  he  was  unshakeable,  and  he  never  shrank  from 
any  danger  when  he  saw  it  was  necessary  to  incur  it 
for  the  maintenance  of  the  honour  and  the  interests 
of  his  country.  As  to  the  King,  I  have  employed 
the  services  of  Count  Minister,  in  whom  his  Majesty 
has  the  greatest  confidence.  He  undertook  the  task 
with  zeal,  and  spoke  to  the  King  some  days  ago  in 
order  to  prevent  a  rupture  between  the  two  countries, 
and  with  some  success,  but  as  I  knew  the  Ministry 
would  have  to  be  at  the  fetes  at  Windsor,  and  the 
King,  who  is  incessantly  occupied  with  public  business, 
would  be  sure  to  have  private  conferences  with  Mr 
Pitt  and  Lord  Harrowby  at  which  the  question  of  the 
provisional  treaty  made  at  St  Petersburg  would 
probably  be  finally  settled,  I  begged  Count  Minister 
to  let  me  know  how  things  are  going  on.  Last 
night  I  received  a  note  from  him  by  express  which 
gives  me  some  hope.  I  shall  probably  see  Lord 
Mulgrave  to-morrow  or  the  day  after,  when  I  will 
have  the  reply  of  the  Government.  .  .  . 