


THE  RUSSIAN  ENVOYS  AND  MR  PITT  81 

Majesty's  attachment  for  his  German  subjects  and  his 
inflexible  character,  he  would  break  off  everything  if 
such  a  proposal  were  made  to  him  ;  and  what  is 
worse,  being  old,  infirm,  and  extremely  sensitive,  it 
might  even  place  his  life  in  danger.  M.  d'Oubril  and 
myself  then  pointed  out  that  matters  had  arrived  at 
such  a  point  that  everything  must  be  done  to  avoid 
so  perilous  a  contingency  as  Prussia  remaining  in- 
active, or  even  turning  to  the  side  of  France,  after 
the  disasters  suffered  by  the  Austrian  army  through 
the  folly  or  the  treason  of  Mack  ;*  that  it  was  therefore 
necessary  to  bring  her  over  to  our  side  at  any  cost 
during  the  period  of  four  weeks  given  to  Buonaparte 
to  arrive  at  a  decision  ;  and  that  the  demands  on 
which  Prussia  insists  should  not  be  flatly  rejected. 
Mr  Pitt  replied  that  though  England  would  also  have 
reason  to  complain  of  the  other  articles  of  the  pro- 
posed Convention,  she  will  not  object  to  them.  '  All 
the  subsidies  that  Prussia  asks  for  herself,  for  Saxony, 
for  Hesse,  and  for  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  will  be 
given  ;  we  shall  be  delighted  to  agree  to  any  other 
indemnity  that  Prussia  may  wish  to  have,  but  as  for 
the  exchange  of  Hanover,  no  Minister  would  be 
imprudent  enough  to  make  such  a  proposal  to  the 
King,  and  great  care  will  be  taken  always  to  conceal 
it  from  him.'  He  added  that  in  all  these  proposals  of 
peace  that  are  being  made  to  Buonaparte  there  is  a  sort 
of  affectation  not  to  speak  of  England,  as  if  the  Powers 

*  The  Austrians  under  Mack,  after  occupying  the  line  of  the  Iller  from  Ulm  to 
Memmingen,  were  outmanoeuvred  by  Napoleon,  who  gained  a  position  on  the  Danube 
in  the  Austrian  rear,  upon  which  Mack  surrendered  at  Ulm  and  the  Austrian  army 
was  broken  up. 

VOL.  II.  F 


8a         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

wanted  to  make  him  believe  that  they  did  not  trouble 
themselves  about  her.  This  did  not  produce  much  effect 
upon  the  Ministry,  as  England  does  not  fear  France, 
but  wishes  to  liberate  the  Continent ;  but  it  will  pro- 
duce a  bad  effect  in  the  country  if  Buonaparte  publishes 
the  proposals  which  have  been  made  to  him  at  the  very 
time  when  Parliament  has  to  be  asked  for  enormous 
subsidies  for  Powers  which  ostentatiously  affect  com- 
plete indifference  as  regards  England.  I  endeavoured 
to  account  for  this  omission  by  the  urgent  need  of 
bringing  over  Prussia  to  the  alliance,  and  d'Oubril 
justly  remarked  that  if  there  had  been  any  question 
of  inserting  a  provision  as  to  the  interests  of  England, 
the  limit  of  four  weeks  would  not  have  been  sufficient, 
as  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  write  to  London 
and  wait  for  an  answer,  which  would  depend  on 
favourable  winds,  and  might  not  come  for  months. 
This  would  have  been  playing  into  the  hands  of 
^Prussia,  who  wishes  to  gain  time  and  put  off  as  long 
as  possible  her  final  decision.  Mr  Pitt  afterwards 
admitted  to  me  that  this  explanation  was  a  valid  one, 
but  he  added  that  it  could  not  be  produced  in  Parlia- 
ment. He  further  objected  to  the  passage  in  our 
official  despatch  in  which  occurs  the  following  phrase: 
'  Moreover,  the  extraordinary  defeats  suffered  by  the 
Austrian  armies  might  have  given  them  a  right  to 
regard  themselves  as  freed  from  this  obligation,'  i.e., 
that  of  not  making  peace  except  in  concert  with  an 
ally.  He  remarked  that  if,  instead  of  gaining  a 
signal  victory  and  depriving  the  enemy  of  nineteen 
ships  of  the  line,  the  English  fleet  had  been  beaten 