

The  somewhat  disdainful  way  in  which  he  speaks 
of  the  young  men  by  whom  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
was  surrounded  does  not  seem  to  me  quite  just ;  these 
men  were  not  all  so  very  young.  Count  Kotchoubey, 
M.  de  Novosiltzoff,  and  the  new  Ministers,  were  of  an 
age  sufficient  to  protect  them  against  such  an  epithet. 
In  any  case  the  assemblage  of  these  men  round  the 
Emperor  had  the  great  merit  of  withdrawing  Russia 
from  a  fatal  groove.  Disorder  and  corruption  were 
succeeded  by  a  regular  and  orderly  regime,  and  the 
Empire  could  place  itself  on  an  equal  footing  with  the 
other  disciplined  countries  of  Europe.  As  for  foreign 
policy,  the  idea  of  making  Russian  ambition  serve  an 
honourable  and  just  object  does  not  seem  to  me  to 


THIERS'  HISTORY  OF  THE  CONSULATE  91 

deserve  the  somewhat  severe  criticism  which  M. 
Thiers  has  applied  to  it.  Napoleon  was,  I  think, 
greatest  during  his  consulate ;  a  great  administrator, 
great  by  the  means  he  employed  for  the  restoration 
of  finance  in  France,  great  by  his  victories  and  his 
policy,  which  tended  towards  peace.  But  even  then 
he  allowed  himself  to  be  led  into  committing  acts  of 
useless  severity  and  cruelty.  He  seems  to  me  less 
great  when  I  see  him  seduced  by  Imperial  dignity, 
occupied  with  ceremonials,  titles,  and  ancient  etiquette, 
and  with  a  crown  on  his  head.  All  that  looks  like 
vanity  diminishes  true  greatness.  But  the  author  of 
the  'History  of  the  Consulate,'  by  the  complaisant 
eloquence  of  his  descriptions,  proves  that  this  did  not 
lessen  his  admiration.  Yet  he  perceives  that  Napoleon, 
once  started  on  this  course,  will  no  longer  deviate 
from  it,  and  will  be  fatally  drawn  to  the  last  goal  of 
an  unlimited  vanity  and  ambition. 

I  ask  which  of  these  two  policies  was  the  more 
conscientious,  the  more  nioral,  the  wiser  ?  Was  it  the 
one  which  was  inspired  by  the  mad  longing  for  uni- 
versal empire,  or  the  one  which  took  its  origin  in  the 
dream — if  it  should  be  so  thought — of  peace  and 
justice  ? 

By  dint  of  victories,  Napoleon  had  raised  up  a 
new  order  of  things ;  but  its  short  duration  and  its 
total  destruction  have  proved  that  its  first  idea  was 
not  more  practical  than  other  projects  of  his  which 
M.  Thiers  calls  chimerical  dreams.  The  latter  had 
at  least  the  excuse  of  noble  and  ardent  aspirations, 
while  the  plans  of  the  conqueror  were  only  a  result 


92         MEMOIRS  Or  PRISCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  passion  and  personal  interest  carried  to  the  highest 
point. 

M.  Thiers  was  acquainted  with  the  part  played  by 
the  Abbd  Piattoli  in  the  negotiations  which  were 
opened  at  this  period.  He  acknowledges  that  the 
Abbe  was  a  man  of  some  merit,  but  he  does  not  seern 
to  me  to  have  rendered  him  complete  justice. 