

*  The  preliminary  Convention  for  an  alliance  between  Austria  and  Russia  against 
France  was  signed  on  the  25th  October  1804. 

t  M.  de  Xovosiltzoff. 


74        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

compliments,  ho  will  gain  the  confidence  of  the  King, 
of  the  Ministry,  and  of  English  society  in  general. 
An  intriguer  and  a  flatterer  would  only  inspire  con- 
tempt. 

LONDON,  Wth  May  1805. 
(Written  in  sympathetic  ink). 

I  am  sorry  to  see  our  people  do  not  understand  the 
constitution  of  this  country,  which  is  very  different 
from  its  theory,  as  stated  in  the  works  of  Blackstone 
and  his  abbreviator  Delolme.  It  rests  with  the  nation 
to  decide  as  to  any  point  which  it  may  deem  absolutely 
necessary,  and  no  administration,  however  strong, 
would  dare  to  go  against  that  decision  :  if  it  did,  it 
would  be  overthrown,  prosecuted,  and  punished,  and 
what  it  had  arranged  against  the  public  wish  would  be 
disavowed  and  annulled.  Such  a  question  is  that  of 
the  restoration  of  Malta,  the  possession  of  which 
entails  much  expense  on  England,  but  which  she  feels 
it  indispensable  to  keep  at  any  cost,  in  order  that  the 
Mediterranean  should  not  become  a  lake  belonging  to 
France,  who  would  be  mistress  of  all  its  shores,  and 
thus  be  placed  in  a  position  to  attack  Sicily,  the 
Ionian  Islands,  the  Morea,  Crete,  and  above  all  Egypt, 
whose  possession  by  the  French  troops  would  induce 
them  before  long  to  attack  the  British  possessions  in 
India.  If  Lord  G.  L.  Gowcr  had  agreed  to  the 
evacuation  of  Malta  and  the  new  maritime  code  which 
is  again  brought  forward  by  our  Government,  his  action 
would  certainly  not  have  been  ratified  here.  He  would 
have  been  recalled  with  disgrace,  perhaps  prosecuted, 


REFUSAL  OF  ENGLAND  TO  EVACUATE  MALTA      75 

arid  would  have  lost  all  his  reputation.  .  .  .  You  tell 
me  that  if  England  will  not  yield  Russia  will  not 
ratify  the  Convention.  That  being  so,  I  can  only 
regard  the  negotiations  as  broken  off.  The  Continent 
will  be  enslaved,  and  this  country  will  either  make 
peace  before  Christmas  and  keep  Malta,  or  will  con- 
tinue a  defensive  war  which  will  cost  it  little  money 
and  which  will  preserve  the  rock  which  is  the  cause  of 
all  the  existing  difficulties. 

LONDON,  T"F  May  1805. 

.  .  .  The  English  nation  is  quite  decided  not  to 
give  up  Malta.  I  have  been  here  twenty  years  ;  I 
have  done  my  best  to  make  myself  acquainted  with 
the  country,  the  Government,  and  the  national  char- 
acter, and  when  I  say  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the 
Government  to  make  this  cession,  I  express  not  only 
the  feeling  of  the  Ministry  and  the  most  respectable 
members  of  the  opposition,  such  as  Earl  Spencer  and 
Lord  Granville,  but  also  the  unanimous  sentiment  of 
all  the  most  estimable  and  independent  persons  that 
influence  public  opinion.  ...  I  may  be  blamed  for 
not  having  in  my  official  reports  stated  that  England 
would  never  consent  to  the  evacuation  of  Malta,  but  I 
could  not  anticipate  that  such  a  demand  would  be 
made  by  our  Government,  as  the  matter  was  never 
mentioned  to  me,  and  in  the  conferences  which  M.  de 
Novosiltzoff  had  with  Mr  Pitt,  both  alone  and  in  my 
presence,  there  was  no  question  of  England  abandon- 
ing Malta.  .  .  .  The  proposed  new  code  of  maritime 
law  is  equally  out  of  the  question,  and  Lord  Harrowby 