


THE  RUSSIAN  ENVOYS  AND  MR  PITT  83 

at  the  battle  of  Trafalgar,  and  England  had  then 
negotiated  a  separate  peace,  thinking  herself  freed 
from  all  engagements  to  the  allies  with  whom  she  has 
treaties  stipulating  that  peace  should  not  be  made 
except  by  common  agreement,  would  such  a  course 
have  been  thought  right  at  St  Petersburg  and 
Vienna  ?  As  to  this  point  we  fell  back  on  the 
necessity  of  pleasing  Prussia,  in  order  to  draw  her 
into  the  war,  as  we  were  persuaded  that  Buonaparte 
would  reject  the  conditions  of  peace,  and  the  Court  of 
Berlin  would  then  be  forced  to  show  its  hand.  We 
added  that  the  crudity  of  the  expressions  to  which  he 
objected  was  to  be  excused  by  the  extraordinary 
urgency  of  the  case,  as  the  Emperor  was  only  a  few 
days  at  Berlin  and  Potsdam,  during  which  there  was 
a  constant  struggle  with  the  Prussian  Minister,  so 
that  there  was  really  no  time  to  weigh  words.  After 
we  had  left  Mr  Pitt,  M.  d'Oubril  suggested  to  me 
that  I  should  soften  some  of  the  expressions  in 
our  official  despatch  which  had  shocked  Mr  Pitt,  and 
I  accordingly  went  back  to  him  to  ask  whether  he 
would  agree  to  this  being  done.  He  replied  that  this 
would  make  his  task  much  easier  with  his  colleagues 

o 

in  the  Cabinet.  At  length  everything  was  pretty 
well  accepted  here,  though  with  evident  repugnance, 
except  the  exchange  of  the  electorate,  as  to  which  Mr 
Pitt  spoke  to  me  very  strongly  on  various  occasions 
in  several  conversations  which  I  had  with  him.  He 
repeated  to  me  that  such  a  proposal  might  either  kill 
the  King  or  drive  him  mad,  and  that  after  losing  a 
sovereign  so  much  esteemed  and  cherished,  the  country 


84         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

would  no  longer  consent  to  bear  the  enormous  sacri- 
fices of  money  it  was  making  for  continental  wars.  To 
provoke  so  fatal  a  crisis  as  the  death  or  insanity  of  the 
Kino-  would  therefore  be  most  ruinous  to  the  interests 

o 

of  Europe. 

I  conjure  you  to  weigh  well  the  considerations 
above  stated,  and  I  hope  I  shall  be  spared  the  pain  of 
presenting1  the  memorandum  which  is  being  prepared 
at  Berlin  and  which  will  be  rejected  here.  The  weak- 
ness with  which  the  Emperor  has,  in  order  to  please 
Prussia,  lent  himself  to  a  communication  so  offensive 
to  the  King  of  Great  Britain,  and  so  contrary  even  to 
the  true  interests  of  Russia,  will  be  even  more  felt 
here  when  his  Ambassador  presents  a  detailed  memor- 
andum on  the  subject. 

(Subsequently  a  despatch,  dated  ^^°^r  1805,  a 
copy  of  which  is  in  the  Record  Office,  was  addressed  to 
Count  Vorontzoff  by  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  urging 
that  the  cession  of  Hanover  to  Prussia  was  a  conditio 
sine  qud  non  of  obtaining  the  Prussian  alliance  ;  but 
England  persisted  in  her  refusal  to  consent  to  the 
cession.  The  result  was  that  Prussia  remained 
neutral  during  the  war,  and  afterwards  obtained 
Hanover  from  Napoleon  as  a  bribe  for  her  alliance.) 