

During  our  flank  movement  we  perceived,  on  the 
heights  which  concealed  from  us  the  French  position, 
officers  who  came  up  one  after  the  other  to  observe 
our  march.  Our  movements  were  carried  out  in  an 
orderly  manner  and  placed  the  army  in  the  position 
it  was  wished  to  take  up.  We  were  now  so  situated 
that  we  should  have  had  no  difficulty  in  approaching 
the  Archdukes,  in  case — which  did  not  seem  probable 
—Napoleon  should  wish  to  follow  us. 

On  the  1st  of  December,  the  day  when  Count 
Haugwitz  arrived  in  Napoleon's  camp  with  the  ulti- 
matum which,  in  the  event  of  its  rejection,  was  imme- 
diately to  be  followed  by  the  co-operation  of  Prussia, 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  had  since  the  morning  received 
letters  from  Prince  Dolgorouky,  loading  him  with 
praises  for  having,  as  the  Prince  said,  increased  by  his 
presence  and  his  brilliant  valour  the  courage  of  his 
troops. 

Everything  in  the  French  army  seemed  to  announce 
a  resolution  to  attempt  a  retreat.  It  was  therefore 
decided  to  advance,  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  this 
disposition  of  the  enemy.  Although  it  was  not 
expected  that  they  would  resist,  the  precaution  was 
taken  to  fix  the  line  of  march  of  each  army  corps. 


106      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Colonel  Weirother  was  entrusted  with  this  task  ;  he 
thoroughly  knew  the  ground,  which  he  had  several 
times  gone  over  and  even  measured.  I  did  not  take 
part  in  the  military  council  assembled  to  carry  out 
this  decision,  as  it  was  entirely  opposed  to  my 
opinions.  I  do  not  know  whether  General  Kutusoff 
was  admitted  to  it ;  but  his  advice  was  certainly  not 
listened  to. 

The  instructions  which  were  to  direct  the  move- 
ments of  each  General  did  not,  I  think,  reach  them  till 
the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  December.  On  the  even- 
ing of  the  1st  it  was  cold  and  foggy,  and  the  Emperor, 
surrounded  by  those  who  were  more  especially  attached 
to  his  person,  proceeded  at  a  foot  pace  in  the  direction 
where  the  movements  were  to  begin  on  the  follow- 
ing morning.  We  met  a  detachment  of  Croatian 
Grenzers  ;*  they  struck  up  one  of  their  sad  national 
songs.  This  song,  combined  with  the  temperature 
and  the  fog,  produced  a  melancholy  impression,  and 
some  one  remarked  that  the  following  day  was  a 
Monday,  a  day  regarded  as  unlucky  in  Russia.  As 
the  Emperor  was  passing  over  a  grassy  mound  his  horse 
slipped  and  fell,  and  he  was  thrown  out  of  the  saddle. 
Although  the  accident  was  not  serious,  it  was  re- 
garded by  some  people  as  a  bad  omen. 

At  daybreak  on  the  following  day,  about  seven 
o'clock,  the  Emperor,  surrounded  by  his  friends, 
proceeded  to  the  place  which  had  in  the  general  plan 
been  fixed  as  the  centre  of  operations.  The  united 
armies  were  composed  of  the  corps  of  Buxhoewden, 