

The  proposals  of  Russia  were  of  a  nature  to 
satisfy  France  ;  but  the  cold  reception  which  they 
encountered  in  England,  and  especially  the  peremp- 
tory refusal  to  evacuate  Malta,  gave  Russia  sufficient 
reason  for  withdrawing  from  the  coalition.  If  this 
resolution  had  been  firmly  adhered  to,  it  would  have 
given  the  negotiations  a  different  character,  and  would 
have  produced  different  results. 


96        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

The  tendency  of  public  opinion  in  Europe  also 
manifested  itself  in  Russia,  and  carried  along  with  it 
the  Emperor  and  his  Privy  Council.  To  oppose  it 
would  have  been  regarded  as  showing  an  inclination 
to  yield  to  French  promptings.  Austria  was  already 
arming;  she  insisted  on  the  adoption  of  a  general 
plan  of  military  operations  with  the  object  of  guaran- 
teeing her  against  the  danger  of  foreign  invasion.  It 
was  necessary  to  think  of  preparing  such  a  plan  in 
case  hostilities  should  become  inevitable.  This  was 
done  at  St  Petersburg  with  Austria  on  one  side  and 
England  on  the  other ;  the  latter  was  to  furnish  the 
necessary  funds  for  arming  Europe.  The  negotiations 
lasted  for  some  time,  and  presented  great  difficulties  ; 
the  exigencies  of  Austria  seemed  excessive  to  the 
English  negotiators.  At  length,  however,  by  means 
of  reciprocal  concessions,  an  agreement  was  arrived 
at.  Part  of  the  subsidies  was  received  for  Prussia, 
whom  we  incessantly  spurred  on  and  kept  informed  of 
our  movements  by  more  and  more  urgent  despatches. 
I  must  admit  that  the  improbability  of  Prussia  enter- 
ing into  the  concert  of  the  Powers  was  not  what  I 
most  regretted.  I  did  not  neglect  any  argument 
calculated  to  persuade  her,  but  I  foresaw  with  satis- 
faction the  necessity  of  disregarding  her  interests  in 
the  event  of  a  refusal,  for  in  that  case  Poland  would 
have  been  proclaimed  a  kingdom  under  the  sceptre  of 
Alexander.  He  would  have  been  received  with 
enthusiasm,  for  at  that  time  this  was  the  only  possible 
way  of  resuscitating  Poland,  which  even  France  had 
forgotten.  Meanwhile  Napoleon,  as  if  he  wished  to 


COALITION  AGAINST  NAPOLEON  97 

remove  all  possibility  of  a  peaceful  solution,  had  had 
himself  crowned  King  of  Italy,*  without  any  reserve 
as  to  the  rights  of  succession.  By  seizing  the  Genoese 
Republic,  threatening  Naples,  and  not  leaving  any 
prospect  to  the  House  of  Savoy,  he  increased  the 
general  reprobation  and  also  deprived  Russia  of  all 
hope  of  obtaining  the  conditions  which  she  had  made 
it  a  point  of  honour  not  to  abandon. 

The  only  course  now  open  was  to  prepare  the 
means  for  a  struggle  which  seemed  inevitable.  The 
great  difficulty  consisted  in  arriving  at  an  arrange- 
ment by  which  England  should  agree  to  furnish 
subsidies  of  the  amount  demanded  by  Austria.  This 
was  not  an  easy  matter ;  yet,  thanks  to  our  inter- 
vention, an  agreement  was  arrived  at.  £3,000,000 
were  granted  to  the  Court  of  Vienna,  and  a  like 
sum  was  appropriated  for  overcoming  the  hesitations 
of  Prussia.  The  military  part  of  the  arrangement 
was  executed  without  delay.  An  army  composed  of 
Russian  and  Swedish  troops  assembled  in  the  island 
of  Rtigen  and  at  Stralsund  ;  the  Russian  troops  were 
commanded  by  General  Tolstoi.  Another  Russian 
army  corps,  assembled  at  Corfu,  was  to  set  sail  for 
Naples.  An  army  under  the  orders  of  General 
Kutusoff  moved  towards  the  Austrian  frontier  in 
order  to  be  available  to  assist  General  Mack,  who  was 
concentrating  his  forces  at  Ulm.  Finally,  General 
Michelsen  advanced  towards  the  Prussian  frontier  in 
order  to  put  an  end  to  the  uncertainties  of  the  Berlin 
Cabinet.  All  these  various  movements  took  place  in 