

h  Soldiers  raised  in  the  Croatian  province  known  as  'the  Military  Frontier.' 


BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  107 

the  vanguard  commanded  by  Prince  Bagration,  the 
Guards  corps  under  Miloradovitch,  a  reserve  force 
which  should  have  remained  under  the  direct  orders 
of  General  Kutusoff,  and  an  Austrian  corps  under 
the  command  of  Prince  John  of  Liechtenstein,  which 
was  to  take  part  in  the  battle  should  it  come  to  fighting. 

When  we  had  arrived  at  this  point,  I  looked  round 
in  every  direction  and  saw  a  vast  plain.  A  column  of 
Austrian  infantry  which  seemed  to  me  rather  loose  in 
formation  came  to  arrange  itself  in  order  of  battle. 
Anxiety  was  impressed  on  the  faces  of  the  Austrian 
General,  the  officers,  and  even  the  soldiers.  The 
artillery  officers  alone  did  not  give  way  to  the  general 
depression,  and  expressed  absolute  confidence  in  the 
effect  of  their  guns.  Our  wings  did  not  seem  to  be  in 
any  way  secured  ;  on  the  right  were  to  be  seen  the 
Guards,  who,  following  the  plan  traced  out  to  them, 
were  to  move  off  to  a  greater  distance,  which  would 
render  it  difficult  to  render  any  assistance  on  that  side, 
while  on  our  left  it  was  impossible. 

The  outposts  had  from  the  early  morning  attacked 
the  French  at  various  points  without  gaining  any 
advantage.  Suddenly  we  perceived  some  French 
columns  advancing  rapidly  and  pushing  back  the 
corps  opposed  to  them.  When  I  saw  the  promptitude' 
of  the  French  troops,  it  seemed  to  me  to  augur  ill  for 
the  result  of  the  day ;  the  Emperor  also  was  struck 
by  the  rapidity  of  this  movement,  which  caused  a  real 
panic  in  the  Austrian  ranks.  It  is  to  be  observed 
that  there  was  no  cavalry  at  this  important  point, 
which  should  have  been  the  centre  of  operations. 


io8      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

A  moment  later  there  was  an  outcry  for  the 
Emperor's  safety ;  everyone  turned  his  horse  and 
galloped  off.  I  did  the  same  as  the  others,  and 
reached  a  height  from  which  I  could  see  what  was 
passing  on  the  side  of  the  Russian  Guards  corps,  to 
which  was  attached  nearly  the  whole  of  the  cavalry. 
I  saw  very  distinctly  several  charges  executed  in 
succession  by  the  two  lines  of  the  enemy's  cavalry, 
each  of  which  took  the  offensive  in  turn,  and  was 
then  withdrawn,  passing  some  enclosures  which 
seemed  to  embarrass  their  movements.  These  charges, 
which  were  frequently  repeated,  kept  me  for  some 
time  on  the  hill.  A  moment  later,  as  I  was  advanc- 
ing towards  the  scene  of  action  on  the  right,  between 
the  Guards  corps  and  the  French,  I  met  Prince 
Schwarzenberg.  I  urged  him  to  restore  order  in  the 
detachments  near  him,  and  to  stop  their  retrograde 
movement.  He  seemed  at  first  inclined  to  yield  to 
my  representations,  but  directly  afterwards  he  told 
me  he  feared  to  interfere  with  plans  which  were 
already  in  full  execution.  Having  met  almost  at  the 
same  moment  a  large  battery  of  Russian  artillery, 
which  its  commander,  utterly  disconcerted,  was  lead- 
ing in  an  opposite  direction  to  that  of  the  battle  field, 
'I  forced  him  to  turn  back  and  help  the  columns  which 
were  fighting  in  front.  By  a  fortunate  accident  I 
constantly  met  the  Emperor  at  the  different  points 
which  he  visited  in  succession  :  he  often  sent  me  for- 
ward to  see  what  was  passing,  and  sometimes  I  was 
left  completely  alone. 