

It  would  be  superfluous  to  recapitulate  here  the 
events  which  are  so  admirably  described  by  the  author 
of  the  '  History  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire.'  I 
will  only  cite  some  facts  which  could  not  have  come  to 
M.  Thiers'  knowledge,  and  I  will  add  an  opinion  which 
does  not  in  all  respects  coincide  with  his.  I  will  not 
do  this  without  a  certain  feeling  of  regret.  M.  Thiers 
has  treated  me  with  an  indulgence,  I  might  almost  say 


102       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

with  a  preference,  which  has  deeply  touched  me,  and 
I  wish  here  to  express  my  gratitude  to  him. 

From  Berlin  the  Emperor  proceeded  to  Weimar, 
where  he  wished  to  pay  his  sister  a  visit.  The  old 
Grand-Duke  still  lived  ;  though  of  advanced  age,  he 
was  full  of  life  and  strength.  He  was  an  excellent 
horseman,  and  in  former  years  had  ridden  the  whole 
distance  between  Carlsbad  and  Weimar.  He  seemed 
desirous  of  reviving  the  memory  of  his  ancestor,  who 
had  distinguished  himself  in  the  Thirty  Years'  War. 

We  were  received  with  marks  of  true  affection,  and 
after  making  the  acquaintance  of  several  illustrious 
writers  who  were  assembled  at  the  Court  of  Weimar — 
such  as  Goethe,  Schelling,  Herder,  and  Wieland — we 
continued  our  journey.  Alexander  was  anxious  to 
arrive  at  Olmiitz,  where  the  Emperor  Francis  was 
waiting  for  him.  This  much  tried  and  threatened 
prince  strove  to  console  his  allies  by  telling  them  that 
it  was  not  the  first  time  that  such  disasters  had 
befallen  him. 

The  few  days  we  passed  at  Olmiitz  were  employed 
in  coming  to  an  understanding  as  to  the  operations  we 
were  to  undertake.  Colonel  Weirother,  who  was  to 
act  as  chief  of  the  general  staff,  had  already  passed 
some  time  at  Pulawy,  and  had  obtained  much  influence 
over  Alexander's  mind.  He  was  an  officer  of  great 
bravery  and  military  knowledge,  but,  like  General 
Mack,  he  trusted  too  much  in  his  combinations,  which 
were  often  complicated,  and  did  not  admit  that  they 
might  be  foiled  by  the  skill  of  the  enemy.  His 
presence  at  Olmiitz  and  that  of  Dolgorouky,  whose 


BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  103 

impetuous  ardour  acted  on  the  Emperor's  mind,  con- 
tributed not  a  little  to  reassure  and  animate  him.  Just 
at  this  moment  arrived  the  Count  de  Cobentzel.* 
He  spoke  some  imprudent  words  as  to  its  being 
necessary  for  sovereigns  to  place  themselves  at  the 
head  of  armies  in  times  of  difficulty.  The  Emperor 
thought  these  words  were  meant  as  advice,  perhaps  as 
a  reproach.  He  did  not  pay  any  attention  to  our 
remonstrances,  and  would  not  believe  what  we  con- 
tinually repeated  to  him — that  his  presence  would 
prevent  General  Kutusoff  from  exercising  any  real 
authority  over  the  movements  of  the  army.  This  was 
especially  to  be  feared  in  view  of  the  General's 
timorous  character  and  courtier-like  habits. 