

*  On  the  £6th  May,  1805. 
VOL.  II.  G 


98        MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

accordance  with  a  plan  proposed  by  Austria  and  dis- 
cussed between  the  two  Powers.  It  seemed  to  meet 
the  exigencies  of  the  situation  ;  if  it  failed,  it  would  be 
through  the  fault  of  the  Austrian s.  Should  Prussia 

O 

not  consent  to  join  us,  we  were  to  go  on  without  her. 

The  time  had  come  for  the  Emperor  Alexander  to 
approach  the  theatre  of  events.  But  as  the  hour  of 
action  drew  near  I  perceived  that  his  resolutions  grew 
weaker.  We  started,  however,  and  during  our  journey 
M.  Alopeus'  couriers  brought  us  reports  of  the 
anxiety  produced  in  Berlin,  both  upon  the  King  and 
his  generals,  by  the  Russian  advance.  Alexander 
decided  to  stop  at  Pulawy,  at  the  house  of  my  parents, 
to  whom  he  wished  to  pay  a  visit. 

The  plan  of  forcing  a  passage  through  Prussia  was 
not  yet  abandoned,  and  the  Emperor  also  persisted 
in  his  idea  of  declaring  himself  King  of  Poland.  I 
wrote  to  Count  Razumovsky  to  prepare  the  Court  of 
Vienna  for  this  idea.  Austria  did  not  show  any 
opposition  to  it,  but  she  laid  down  as  a  condition  that 
the  old  frontier  of  Galicia  should  be  maintained. 

Lord  G.  L.  Gower,  on  his  return  from  a  trip  to 
England,  met  us  on  our  journey  and  informed  us  that 
if  we  had  to  force  a  passage  through  Prussia,  England 
would  pay  Russia  the  subsidy  originally  intended  for 
the  King  of  Prussia.  He  also  said  that  if  Poland 
were  to  be  restored,  England  would  give  her  consent. 

I  left  Brzesc  so  as  to  arrive  at  Pulawy  four 
and  twenty  hours  after  the  Emperor.  I  found  every 
one  in  agitation,  and  making  preparations  for  the 
Emperor's  reception.  Major  Orlowski  was  specially 


VISIT  TO  PULA  WY  99 

charged  with  the  preparations,  and  entered  into  com- 
munication with  the  Austrian  authorities  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Pulawy.  Besides  the  Emperor  and 
his  suite,  we  were  expecting  the  arrival  of  two 
army  corps,  those  of  General  Michelsen  and  General 
Buxhoewden.  Prince  Poniatowski  was  warned  of 
the  Emperor's  plan  relative  to  the  restoration  of 
Poland  ;  he  was  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the 
movement  and  give  it  a  national  character.  Immedi- 
ately after  my  arrival  at  Pulawy,  Polish  agents  went 
to  Warsaw  to  announce  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor, 
who  was  received  by  my  parents  on  the  following  day. 
He  spoke  to  them  kind  and  friendly  words,  by  which 
they  were  deeply  touched.  He  seemed  glad  to  find 
himself  in  a  softer  climate,  and  among  people  who 
were  sincerely  devoted  to  him.  My  mother,  my 
sister,  and  my  brother,  tried  to  make  the  fortnight 
he  passed  at  Pulawy  as  agreeable  to  him  as  possible. 