

Night  came  on,  and  we  proceeded  at  a  foot  pace 
on  the  road  that  leads  to  Holitsch.  The  Emperor 
was  extremely  depressed  ;  the  violent  emotion  he  had 
experienced  aifected  his  health,  and  I  was  the  only 
one  to  bring  him  some  relief.  We  thus  passed  two 
days  and  three  nights  before  arriving  at  Holitsch. 
As  we  went  through  the  villages  we  heard  nothing 
but  the  confused  exclamations  of  people  who  seek 
forgetfulness  of  their  reverses  in  drink.  The  inhabi- 
tants suffered,  and  scenes  of  disorder  were  everywhere 
around  us.  After  some  hours  we  arrived  at  a  village 

o 


BA  TTLE  OF  A  USTERLITZ  1 1 1 

somewhat  larger  than  the  others,  and  found  a  bed- 
room for  the  Emperor.  We  had  a  little  rest,  but  our 
horses  were  kept  ready  in  case  of  pursuit.  Indeed  if 
some  French  squadrons  had  been  sent  after  us  to  com- 
plete our  defeat,  I  do  not  know  what  would  have 
happened.  There  were  no  regiments  nor  army  corps 
left  in  the  combined  armies ;  there  were  only  disorderly 
bands  of  marauders  increasing  the  general  desolation 
of  the  scene. 

I  should  have  liked  to  bring  the  two  Emperors 
together  so  as  to  ensure  the  safety  of  both,  but  I  did 
not  succeed.  The  Emperor  Francis  went  off  in  a 
different  direction,  but  he  charged  me  from  time  to 
time  to  communicate  to  Alexander  some  words  of 
consolation.  These  were  always  the  same,  assuring 
us  that  he  had  already  experienced  similar  disasters, 
and  that  although  the  blow  fell  mainly  upon  himself, 
he  was  far  from  losing  hope. 


[The  Memoirs  of  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  here 
come  to  an  end.  He  was  dictating  them  during  his 
last  illness,  and  death  interrupted  his  work ;  but  he 
left  behind  him  a  mass  of  letters,  diaries,  and  other 
documents  relating  to  subsequent  periods  of  his  career, 
a  selection  from  which  will  be  found  in  the  following 
chapters.] 


CHAPTER  XI 

1806 

RUSSIA  AND  PRUSSIA  AFTER  THE  BATTLE  OP  AUSTERLITZ. 

THE  battle  of  Austerlitz  was  fought  on  the  2nd  of 
December  1805.  On  the  26th  of  that  month,  Napo- 
leon signed  a  treaty  of  peace  with  Austria  at  Presburg, 
and  meanwhile  Alexander  and  his  Ministers  were  con- 
sulting as  to  the  best  means  of  retrieving  the  humilia- 
tion that  had  been  inflicted  on  the  Russian  Court.  On 
the  17th  of  January,  1806,  the  following  memorandum 
on  the  situation  was  presented  by  Prince  Adam  Czar- 
toryski  to  the  Czar  : — 

'The  fate  of  the  European  Continent  is  for  the 
present  in  the  hands  of  three  Powers — Russia,  France, 
and  Prussia.  The  relations  which  will  be  established 
between  them- -the  system  of  policy  which  each  will 
follow — the  moderation,  avidity,  energy,  or  weakness, 
which  will  inspire  its  views  and  measures — will 
either  bring  about  the  enslavement  of  the  smaller 
States,  or  secure  to  Europe  at  least  a  period  of  calm 
and  tranquillity,  if  not  of  permanent  independence 
and  happiness. 