

Meanwhile  the  Emperor's  resolution  to  force  a 
passage  through  Prussia  had  been  greatly  shaken, 
and  he  sent  Prince  Dolgorouky,*  who  was  glad  to 
undertake  a  mission  which  seemed  to  be  fatal  to  my 
hopes,  to  the  King  of  Prussia  to  ask  for  an  interview. 
It  was  just  at  this  time  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon, 
who  had  not  as  much  consideration  as  Alexander  for 
circumstances  which  he  regarded  as  of  little  import- 
ance, forced  a  passage  through  a  Prussian  province 
which  was  an  obstacle  to  the  execution  of  his  plans. 

*  '  A  young  officer,  full  of  presumption  and  ambition,  an  enemy  of  the  coterie  of 
clever  young  men  who  were  governing  the  Empire.  He  sought  to  persuade  the 
Emperor  that  these  young  men  were  betraying  Eussia  in  the  interest  of  Poland. 
(Thiers'  History  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire,  Book  xxii.)  See  also  Vol.  I  of  the 
present  work,  p.  331. 


ioo      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

The  King  of  Prussia,  offended  at  this  conduct,  gave  a 
free  passage  to  the  Russian  troops,  and  Prince 
Dolgorouky,  triumphant,  came  to  ask  the  Emperor 
to  go  to  Berlin  to  come  to  an  arrangement  with  the 
King  as  to  the  ulterior  measures.  This  resolution 
for  the  moment  dissipated  the  hope  of  a  restoration  of 
Poland;  but  although  the  project  was  foiled,  it  proved 
to  Napoleon  that  Poland  had  not  ceased  to  exist,  and 
that  it  was  necessary  to  occupy  himself  with  her 
future  destiny — a  necessity  which  he  seemed  to  have 
forgotten  since  the  Treaty  of  Luneville  and  since  the 
Imperial  dignity  had  absorbed  all  his  attention.  The 
Emperor  left  Pulawy  promising  to  return.  We 
passed  through  Warsaw  without  stopping  except  at 
Vilanov,  whose  proprietor  offered  us  a  breakfast. 
Prince  Poniatowski  was  there,  with  various  other 
persons,  who  accompanied  the  Emperor  on  horseback 
up  to  a  few  leagues  from  Warsaw.  They  went  back 
saddened  at  the  disappearance  of  the  first  gleam  of 
hope  for  the  country. 

In  passing  through  Posen  we  met  my  eldest  sister, 
who  was  returning  to  Pulawy  with  her  two  wards. 
The  Emperor  paid  her  a  visit,  and  was  amiable  as 
usual.  She  afterwards  told  me  that  she  was  struck 
by  the  beauty  of  his  features.  He  was  indeed  very 
attractive,  and  his  charm  of  manner  at  once  won  the 
attachment  of  all  with  whom  he  came  in  contact. 

Alexander  was  evidently  much  relieved  on  learning 
that  the  King  of  Prussia  had  given  his  consent  to  the 
passage  of  the  Russian  army.  We  arrived  at  Berlin,* 


On  the  25th  of  October. 


BA  TTLE  OF  A  USTERLITZ  i  o  i 

and  our  reception  was  most  brilliant.  The  Queen 
used  all  her  fascinations  to  make  the  Emperor's  stay 
at  Berlin  agreeable  to  him  and  to  remove  the  diffi- 
culties raised  by  M.  de  Haugwitz.  Another  Minister, 
M.  de  Hardenberg,  whose  influence  increased,  as 
matters  began  to  take  their  present  turn,  and  who  was 
moreover  supported  by  the  Queen,  succeeded  in  bring- 
ing the  negotiations  to  a  successful  result.  The 
Treaty  of  Potsdam  was  signed  on  the  3rd  of 
November  1805.  The  union  of  the  two  princes  was 
confirmed  by  an  oath  of  eternal  friendship  taken  on 
the  tomb  of  Frederick  the  Great.  A  month  was 
allowed  to  Prussia  for  her  war  preparations,  and  the 
day,  even  the  hour,  of  the  commencement  of  hostilities 
was  fixed  in  case  the  proposals  to  be  presented  by 
Haugwitz  should  not  be  accepted.  Meanwhile,  the 
Archduke  Anthony  came  with  the  most  disastrous 
news  as  to  the  progress  of  Napoleon.  The  Emperor 
and  his  suite  hastily  left  Berlin  to  meet  the  Emperor 
Francis,  who  was  proceeding  to  the  army  corps  com- 
manded by  General  Kutusoff.  The  latter,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  plan  sent  him  from  Vienna,  had 
entered  Austrian  Silesia  through  Galicia. 