

It  was  necessary  to  prepare  for  retreat,  and  the 


BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  109 

Emperor  proceeded  to  a  point  opposite  Austerlitz, 
which  was  still  occupied  by  the  corps  of  Bagration, 
now  the  rear  guard  of  the  army.  He  was  met  there 
by  his  aides-de-camp — General  Lieven,  General  Milo- 
radovitch,  and  Prince  Michael  Dolgorouky,  the 
younger  brother  of  Prince  Peter  and  much  wiser 
than  he.  He  had  been  shot  in  the  thigh,  which  did 
not  prevent  him  from  remaining  on  the  field.  I  also 
saw  the  unfortunate  Weirother,  who  had  wandered 
from  point  to  point  and  by  bravely  exposing  his  life 
strove  to  remedy  the  evil  of  which  he  had  been  one  of 
the  chief  causes.  He  was  tired  out  and  in  despair, 
and  hastened  away  without  making  any  attempt  to 
excuse  himself.  Those  of  the  officers  who  had  been 
fortunate  enough  to  make  some  prisoners  presented 
them  to  the  Emperor  with  many  protestations  of 
devotion,  constantly  repeating  that  they  were  ready 
to  shed  their  blood  for  the  glory  and  the  safety  of  the 
Empire. 

I  do  not  know  what  had  become  of  our  friends, 
but  none  of  them  were  present  at  this  meeting.  Being 
separated  by  the  confusion  which  was  everywhere 
prevalent,  they  did  not  succeed  in  finding  the  Emperor, 
and  I  think  they  lost  all  their  baggage.  While  we 
were  standing  round  the  Emperor,  General  Milorado- 
vitch  apostrophised  me  in  somewhat  singular  fashion, 
saying,  '  How  is  it  you  are  so  calm  ? '  At  the  same 
time  he  indicated  to  me  by  a  look  the  aide-de-camp 
General  Lieven,  whose  countenance  showed  great 
anxiety  and  profound  depression. 

It  was   necessary  at   once   to  take    measures  for 


no      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

sending  orders  to  Bagration,  who  was  quite  alone  in 
face  of  the  victorious  columns  of  Napoleon ;  for  it 
was  to  be  feared  that  disorder  might  also  spread  into 
his  army  corps.  General  Wintzingerode  was  directed 
to  take  orders  to  Bagration  to  retire  into  Austerlitz 
and  maintain  himself  there  as  long  as  he  could  with- 
out exposing  himself  to  a  disaster. 

Soon  after  we  heard  the  cheers  of  the  French 
soldiers  ;  they  announced  the  arrival  of  Napoleon  in 
the  midst  of  his  troops.  It  was  growing  dark ;  the 
generals  left  us  to  return  to  their  respective  posts,  and 
the  Emperor,  to  ensure  his  safety,  was  obliged  to  take 
the  road  to  Holitsch.  Having  advanced  to  see  what 
was  passing  on  our  left,  I  met  General  Buxhoewden 
and  his  columns  completely  routed.  The  poor  General 
had  lost  his  hat,  and  his  clothes  were  in  disorder ; 
when  he  perceived  me  at  a  distance  he  cried,  '  They 
have  abandoned  me  !  They  have  sacrificed  me  ! '  He 
continued  his  retreat,  and  I  hastened  to  join  the 
Emperor. 