

The  Emperor  accordingly  proceeded  to  the  field, 
while  I  was  retained  a  few  hours  at  Olmtitz  on 
business.  When  I  had  got  through  my  work  I 
started  also.  A  few  leagues  from  Olmiitz  I  found 
the  Emperor  Francis  and  his  suite  breakfasting  on 
the  grass.  He  invited  me  to  join  them,  but  I 
refused,  as  I  was  anxious  to  see  Alexander.  After 
proceeding  four  leagues  further,  I  arrived  at  Wischau, 
which  was  occupied  by  Russian  troops  ;  they  had  just 
obtained  a  slight  advantage  over  a  French  detachment 
which  left  some  prisoners  behind  in  its  retreat.  The 
Emperor  had  gone  to  the  front,  and  there  was  much 
rejoicing  at  head-quarters.  The  question  now  was 
what  steps  to  take  in  face  of  the  French  army. 
Napoleon  had  advanced  as  far  as  Brlinn,  and  his  out- 
posts were  extended  on  a  line  parallel  to  ours.  I 

*  At  that  time  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  Austrian  Empire. 


io4      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

found  the  Emperor  Alexander  almost  at  the  outposts, 
very  satisfied  at  the  success  obtained  at  Wischau,  and 
surrounded  by  young  officers. 

They  were  discussing  whether  a  movement  should 
be  made  to  the  left  so  as  to  bring  the  army  in  touch 
with  that  of  the  Archdukes  Charles  and  John,  who 
had  repulsed  Prince  Eugene  in  Italy,  or  whether  it 
would  be  more  advantageous  to  move  to  the  right  so 
as  to  join  the  Prussians  who  were,  at  a  moment  pre- 
viously determined  upon,  to  advance  and  take  part  in 
the  operations  of  the  combined  armies.  The  former 
alternative  was  adopted,  thanks  mainly  to  the  influ- 
ence of  Weirother  and  other  Austrian  officers. 

The  best  course  would  have  been  to  abstain  from 
any  offensive  movement,  as  such  a  movement  would 
be  likely  to  expose  the  army  to  danger.  Time  should 
have  been  given  to  the  Archdukes  to  arrive,  and  it 
was  above  all  necessary  to  wait  till  Prussia  should 
declare  herself  and  move  her  army,  which  was  eager 
to  fight. 

It  was  not  probable  that  Napoleon  would  leave 
Briinn  and  place  himself  at  a  distance  from  his  re- 
serves and  his  supplies ;  but  even  if  he  had  made 
such  a  mistake,  the  Russian  army  should  have 
declined  to  accept  battle,  and  should  have  re- 
tired to  meet  the  supports  which  were  coming  up. 
It  was  here  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  his 
advisers  were  in  fault.  They  imagined  that  Napoleon 
was  in  a  dangerous  position,  and  that  he  was  on  the 
point  of  retreating.  The  French  outposts  had  an 
appearance  of  hesitation  and  timidity  which  nourished 


BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  105 

these  illusions,  and  reports  came  at  every  moment 
from  our  outposts  announcing  an  imminent  movement 
of  the  French  army  to  the  rear.  Alexander  forgot 
the  extreme  importance  of  the  moment,  and  thought 
only  of  not  allowing  so  good  an  opportunity  to  escape 
of  destroying  the  French  army,  and  dealing  Napoleon 
a  decisive  and  fatal  blow. 