

*  See  note  to  page  31,  vol.  I. 


94         MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKl 

Minister,  submitted  to  the  fatal  decisions  of  the  Con- 
federation of  Targowitza,  the  Abbe"  Piattoli  resigned  a 
post  in  which  he  no  longer  had  any  hope  of  doing  good. 

Piattoli  had  much  imagination,  and  this  afforded 
him  the  means  of  getting  out  of  difficulties,  but  he 
always  showed  remarkable  disinterestedness  and  good 
sense.  After  the  fall  of  Poland,  he  found  a  refuge  in 
the  house  of  the  Duchess  of  Courland,  who  had  known 
him  at  Warsaw.  This  was  at  the  time  when  she  had 
returned  to  claim  from  the  Great  Diet  her  rights  over 
Courland.  Her  patriotic  Polish  sentiments  were  very 
strong,  and  she  never  abandoned  them.  The  affairs 
of  Courland  took  her  to  St  Petersburg,  and  Piattoli 
accompanied  her  there.  We  met  again  with  mutual 
pleasure  ;  he  did  not  forget  our  former  relations,  and 
sought  to  renew  them,  while  I  was  delighted  to  have 
the  opportunity  of  using  so  trustworthy  and  able  an 
instrument.  A  mere  indication  of  the  chief  points  of 
a  negotiation  or  of  a  political  system  was  sufficient  to 
enable  him  to  develop  all  its  consequences.  He 
generally  did  this  in  too  much  detail,  but  he  readily 
abridged  or  modified  his  statements  in  accordance  with 
the  remarks  that  were  made  to  him. 

M.  Thiers  had  seen  the  first  draft  of  a  statement 
of  this  kind  made  after  some  conversations  we  had  had 
together  as  to  our  plans  and  the  best  means  of  exe- 
cuting them.  To  form  a  judgment  on  so  incomplete  a 
piece  of  work,  written  on  the  spur  of  the  moment, 
would  be  more  than  severe ;  it  would  be  unjust,  and 
this  no  doubt  was  far  from  M.  Thiers'  intention.  I 
certainly  was  not  under  any  illusion  as  to  the  numerous 


MALTA  AND  GIBRALTAR  95 

difficulties  which  would  arise,  some  of  which  were 
insurmountable.  The  possession  of  Gibraltar  by  the 
English  was  not  based  on  any  principle  of  justice;  on 
the  contrary,  it  was  a  violation  of  international  law. 
By  giving  it  up  England  would  have  been  able  to 
detach  Spain  from  France  and  bring  her  over  to  the 
general  interests  of  Europe.  Count  Strogonoff,  in 
proceeding  to  his  post  at  Madrid,  was  to  pass  through 
London  and  to  touch  on  this  question  with  all  possible 
reserve  and  with  the  consideration  due  to  British 
susceptibilities.  This  was,  so  to  say,  an  endeavour  to 
begin  a  reform  in  the  policy  of  the  English  Cabinet— 
an  endeavour  which  did  not  produce  any  satisfactory 
results. 

The  plan  was  rejected  as  a  whole,  but  it  contained 
the  points  which  reproduced  themselves  on  every 
occasion  when  there  was  a  question  of  reconstituting 
the  map  of  Europe.  They  were  repeatedly  brought 
forward  either  by  Germany,  the  Netherlands,  or 
Italy,  and  they  had  occupied  Carnot  when  he  was  a 
member  of  the  Directory.  It  was,  in  fact,  in  the 
nature  of  things  that  they  should  come  to  the  front 
on  various  occasions. 