


AFTER  THE  BATTLE  OF  AUSTERL1TZ  119 

attention  has  frequently  been  directed  to  them,  and 
they  must  become  ours  sooner  or  later.  Prussia 
knows  and  fears  this  ;  she  will  always  endeavour  to 
diminish  our  weight  and  our  resources  in  Europe,  in 
whatever  direction  we  may  attempt  to  extend  them, 
but  especially  if  we  turn  our  eyes  to  Austrian  Galicia, 
for  if  we  possessed  that  country  we  could  at  any 
moment  send  troops  into  the  very  centre  of  the 
Prussian  Monarchy.  Prussia  is  the  open  rival  of 
Austria,  and  does  not  conceal  her  jealousy  and  distrust 
of  her  ;  but  in  secret  she  dislikes  us  perhaps  even 
more,  now  that  crippled  Austria  inspires  her  with  less 
fear.  .  .  .  All  these  reflections  lead  to  the  conclusion 
that  not  only  will  Prussia  never  be  the  sincere  ally  of 
Russia,  but  that  she  will  rather  secretly  incline  to 
France,  and  ultimately  perhaps  revive  the  old  coalition 
between  France,  Prussia,  and  Turkey. 

'  But  though  there  is  so  little  hope  of  sincerely 
attaching  Prussia  to  Russia,  it  is  none  the  less  true 
that  the  union  of  these  Powers  can  alone  at  this 
moment  save  Europe,  and  that  nothing  could  be  more 
injurious  than  an  intimate  rapprochement  between 
Buonaparte  and  Prussia.  The  more  the  inclination 
of  the  latter  to  join  France  becomes  manifest,  the 
more  should  we  strive  to  prevent  such  a  tendency 
from  becoming  too  predominant  at  Berlin,  and  take 
advantage,  with  the  support  of  a  powerful  party  in 
the  Ministry  and  at  Court,  of  every  circumstance 
favourable  to  our  interests  in  order  to  diminish  its 
influence.  .  .  .  At  the  same  time  we  should  be  most 
careful  not  to  be  led  into  taking  mistaken  steps.  It 


1 20      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  A  DA  M  CZA  R  TOR  YSKI 

would  be  most  useful  to  bind  Prussia  by  some  precise 
engagement,  and  every  means  should  be  taken  to 
attain  this  object.  Berlin  should  become  one  of  the 
chief  pivots  of  Russian  policy ;  our  agents  there 
should  make  themselves  acquainted  with  every  detail 
of  the  views  and  relations  of  the  Prussian  Court,  so 
as  to  be  capable  of  deciding  on  every  proposal  that 
might  be  made  to  them.  In  no  case  should  they  be 
authorised  to  confirm  or  guarantee  the  advantages 
Prussia  might  gain  from  her  complaisance  to  France  ; 
on  the  contrary,  they  should  be  instructed  to  show 
Prussia  that  Russia  cannot  tolerate  a  system  entirely 
opposed  to  her  views,  and  inspire  her  with  a  fear  of 
Russia  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  great  as  that  of  Buona- 
parte. .  .  .  They  should  endeavour  to  point  out  to 
the  King  of  Prussia  that  his  interests  coincide  with 
those  of  Europe  generally,  and  withdraw  him  from 
the  influence  of  the  members  of  his  Cabinet,  who  are 
devoted  to  France  either  by  principle  or  through 
corruption. 