


'  As  I  propose  more  especially  to  treat  in  this 
memorandum  of  the  political  relations  of  Russia  with 
Prussia,  I  shall  only  speak  of  France  in  so  far  as  she 
has  an  influence  on  those  relations.  I  will  first  ex- 
amine the  principal  features  of  the  policy  of  each  of 
the  three  Powers. 

'  Russia  does  not  wish  to  acquire  anything  for  her- 
self, but  she  is  not  willing,  and  she  ought  not,  to  lose 
the  place  and  character  which  a  century  of  glorious 
achievements  has  assigned  her.  Satisfied  with  her 
advantages,  her  only  ambition  has  been  to  preserve 
the  weak  against  the  attacks  of  the  strong ;  her 
weapons  have  been  appeals  to  right  and  justice,  and 
she  has  only  used  force  when  those  weapons  have 
proved  ineffectual.  When  the  employment  of  force 
has  also  not  been  successful,  the  general  confidence  of 
mankind  has  been  her  reward,  or  has  at  least  made 
her  forget  her  temporary  reverses. 

*  Between  France  and  Russia,  which,  when  Europe 
was  in  its  normal  condition,  could  hardly  come  in 
contact  with  each  other,  is  Prussia :  timid  by  system 
and  by  the  necessity  of  economising  her  resources,  she 
can  do  nothing  alone  either  against  Russia  or  against 
France.  If  these  two  Powers  were  equal  in  influence 
and  in  activity,  Prussia  would  be  entirely  justified  in 
keeping  on  good  terms  with  both  of  them.  But  one 
is  constantly  encroaching  on  its  neighbours,  while  the 
other  seeks  only  to  protect  them  against  such  encroach- 
ment ;  and  it  is  therefore  both  the  duty  and  the 
interest  of  Prussia  to  join  Russia  in  forming  a  barrier 
against  France.  This  task  devolves  upon  Prussia  as 

VOL.  II.  H 


Ti4       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

i 

a  first-class  State.  Russia,  on  the  other  hand,  should 
not  neglect  anything  that  could  enable  Prussia  to  play 
such  a  part  with  success,  unless  it  were  evident  that 
either  from  necessity  or  under  the  influence  of 
private  interests,  Prussia  would  refuse  to  undertake 
the  task,  in  which  case  Russia  would  have  to  seek 
other  combinations  to  protect  the  weaker  Powers  and 
herself  against  attack.  .  .  . 

'  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  during  the  recent 
war  Russia  in  vain  exhausted  all  her  means  of  per- 
suasion to  induce  Prussia  to  take  part  in  it.  The 
latter  Power  drew  a  line  of  demarcation  which  im- 
peded the  operations  of  the  belligerents,  and  while 
affecting  to  be  neutral,  was  really  the  ally  of  France, 
receiving  as  her  reward  the  great  advantages  she  has 
derived  from  the  partition  of  Germany. 

'  When,  after  the  treaties  of  Luneville  and  Amiens, 
Buonaparte  began  to  make  in  the  midst  of  peace 
conquests  more  important  than  those  which  he  had 
achieved  during  the  war — when  by  his  arbitrary 
conduct  he  violated  the  rights  of  nations  and  the 
integrity  of  neutral  States — Prussia  was  the  first  to 
guarantee  him  in  the  possession  of  the  territories  he 
had  seized,  to  pardon,  excuse,  and  justify  his  aggres- 
sions. .  .  .  When  the  danger  became  greater, 
and  Russia  strove  to  bring  about  a  combination  of 
the  Powers  to  oppose  Buonaparte's  rapid  progress, 
Prussia  was  invited  to  take  part  in  it,  but  she  always 
declined,  at  the  same  time  making  great  professions 
of  impartiality  and  of  attachment  to  the  Emperor's 
person.  Our  wishes,  she  said,  are  for  the  success  of 