


AFTER  THE  BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  115 

Russia's  plans,  but  we  have  adopted  a  system  of  rigid 
neutrality,  and  moreover  we  are  without  resources, 
and  to  make  preparations  would  place  us  in  the 
greatest  danger.  So  determined  was  the  King  of 
Prussia  to  reject  Russia's  proposals,  that  he  punished 
General  Zastrow  for  having  communicated  them  to 
him.  To  put  further  pressure  upon  Prussia,  Russian 
troops  were  sent  to  her  frontier ;  but  the  only  re- 
sult was  that  Prussia  protested  against  being  thus 
threatened,  and  placed  her  army  on  a  war  footing. 
The  Russian  troops  then  withdrew ;  and  this  conde- 
scension was  only  followed  by  new  disasters.  While 
the  negotiations  were  going  on,  the  French  defeated 
the  Austrians  and  entered  Prussian  territory,  arriving 
as  far  as  Olmiitz  before  the  Russians  could  come  to 
the  assistance  of  their  allies.  This  violation  of 
Prussian  territory  on  the  part  of  France  seemed  at 
first  to  change  Prussia's  attitude  towards  that  Power, 
but  she  never  became  an  effective  member  of  the 
coalition.  She  imposed  the  most  onerous  conditions 
on  her  acceptance  of  the  Russian  proposals,  and 
although  Russia  was  ready  to  accept  them,  the  King 
was  evidently  unwilling  to  come  to  an  understanding 
with  us  as  to  a  plan  of  campaign,  and  his  Government 
conducted  the  negotiations  in  such  a  dilatory  manner 
that  no  practical  result  was  arrived  at. 

'  Prussia  might  in  this  have  been  influenced  by  her 
jealousy  of  Austria,  her  rival ;  but  after  Austria  was 
beaten  by  Buonaparte  and  forced  to  sue  for  peace, 
the  conduct  of  the  Berlin  Cabinet  towards  Russia 
was  the  same,  though  the  Emperor  offered  it  all  the 


u6       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

forces  at  his   disposal  if  it  would  join  him  against 
France. 

'The  King  of  Prussia  could  at  that  time  have 
brought  an  army  of  299,000  men  into  the  field,  as  will 
be  seen  from  the  following  table  : 

Prussian  troops,  not  including  reser\7e  battalions,  193,000  men 

Saxon          „  „  15,000  „ 

Hessian       „  „  16,000  „ 

Hesse-Darmstadt  troops  „  8,000  „ 

Brunswick                 „  „  3,000  „ 

English  and  Hanoverian  troops,  „  24,000  „ 

Russian  40,000 


Total  of  troops  under  the  immediate  orders 

of  the  King  of  Prussia,  299,000  men 

'  This  enumeration  was  made  by  Baron  Hardenberg 
after  the  battle  of  Austerlitz. 

'  Russia  acted  entirely  in  the  spirit  indicated  at  the 
beginning  of  this  memorandum.  She  had  a  right  to 
hope  for  a  close  union  and  perfect  confidence  and 
concert  in  the  resolutions  which  were  to  be  arrived  at 
by  mutual  agreement,  and  expected  no  other  reward 
for  her  cordiality. 

'  But  from  that  moment  there  was  an  end  of  all 
frank  intercourse,  and  only  the  appearances  of  friend- 
ship were  retained.  Prussia  made  an  arrangement 
with  France,  not  only  without  consulting  Russia,  but 
even  without  communicating  to  her  the  engagements 
into  which  she  had  entered.  The  Cabinet  of  Berlin 
received  from  Buonaparte  the  price  of  its  complaisance. 
Whether  through  weakness  or  through  fear,  the  King 