

VOL.    II.  T 


i3o       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

did  the  same  in  the  Baltic ;  she  even  went  so  far  as 
to  give  us,  for  the  purpose  of  acting  against  Prussia, 
all  the  subsidies  she  had  offered  to  that  Power  for 
action  against  France.  .  .  . 

We  lost  all  these  advantages  by  our  vacillation  ; 
our  armies  stopped  on  the  Prussian  frontier,  and  the 
violation  of  Prussian  territory  by  the  French  *  made 
Prussia  more   disposed   to  join   the    coalition.     The 
original  plan  of  invading  her  territory  was  now  aban- 
doned, and  your  Majesty's  Ministry  did  their  best  to 
bring  her  over  by  conciliation,  as  she  was  no  longer  to 
be  made  to  yield  by  terror.  .  .   Russia  has  been  re- 
proached  for   using   her   good    offices  in   London  to 
negotiate  the  cession  of  Hanover  to  Prussia,  f     But 
as  to  this  point,  we  may  appeal  to  people  who  were 
then  at  Berlin  and  were  aware  of  the  negotiations,  as 
difficult  as  they  were  disagreeable,  which  led  to  the 
Treaty  of  Potsdam.  .  .  .     Anyhow,  we  succeeded  in 
making  England  understand  the  urgent  motives  which 
had  led  us  to  yield  to  the  wishes  of  the  Berlin  Cabinet. 
She  agreed  not  to  break  off  the  negotiations,  to  sign 
the  treaty  for  the  subsidies,  and  to  assist  in  obtaining 
some  other  acquisition  for  Prussia — even   to   assure 
her  the  possession  of  Holland.     Russia   reserved  to 
herself  equivalent  acquisitions.  .  .  . 

Nothing  was  yet  lost ;  General  Mack's  defeat  had 
even  established  the  preponderance  of  Russia  over 
Austria  to  such  a  degree  that  people  looked  upon 
your  Majesty  as  the  future  saviour  of  the  Austrian 

*  See  page  99. 
t  See  Chapter  IX. 


Monarchy.  .  .  But  the  next  four  weeks  were  wasted 
in  mutual  complaints,  and  ended  in  the  battle  of 
Austerlitz,  in  a  feeling  of  extreme  exasperation  be- 
tween Russia  and  Austria,  in  the  retreat  of  the 
Russian  army  from  Moravia,  and  in  the  abandonment 
of  Europe  to  her  fate. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

1806 


NEGOTIATIONS    WITH    MR    FOX. — CORRESPONDENCE    BETWEEN    HIM    AND 
PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. MR  FOX's  PROPOSAL  TO  ATTACK  PRUSSIA. 


SHORTLY  after  the  appointment  of  Mr  Fox  as  Foreign 
Minister  in  the  administration  of  '  all  the  talents/ 
formed  by  Lord  Grenville  after  the  death  of  Pitt, 
the  following  correspondence  took  place  between  Mr 
Fox  and  Prince  Czartoryski  :— 

From   Mr  Fox 

DOWNING  STREET, 
17 th   March    1806. 

Relying  on  the  confidence  with  which  your 
Excellency  was  so  good  as  to  honour  me  last  year 
as  a  private  individual,  I  think  I  have  almost  a  right 
to  ask  for  a  continuance  of  your  kindness  in  the 
situation  in  which  I  am  now  placed.  I  would  not, 
however,  have  done  this,  notwithstanding  all  the  value 
I  attach  to  the  honour  of  your  friendship,  if  I  did  not 
entirely  adhere  to  the  opinion  I  expressed  to  M.  de 
Novosiltzoff  that  a  full  and  reciprocal  confidence  be- 
tween the  two  Courts  is  absolutely  necessary  both  for 