

h  '  Prince  Czartoryski  was  the  principal  author  of  the  system  of  European 
arbitration  which  had  led  Russia  to  take  up  arms  against  France.  This  system, 
which  was  used  by  Russian  statesmen  as  a  mask  for  their  national  ambition,  was  in 
Prince  Czartoryski  prompted  by  a  sincere  and  frankly  conceived  idea.  .  .  .  He 
addressed  to  the  young  Emperor,  formerly  his  friend,  and  now  again  becoming  his 
master,  noble  and  respectful  remonstrances  which  would  do  honour  to  a  Minister  in 
a  free  country,  and  are  far  more  creditable  in  a  country  where  resistance  to  the 
sovereign  is  an  act  of  rare  devotion  and  remains  unknown  to  the  public.'  (Thiers* 
History  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire,  Book  x.xiv.) 


DISAGREEMENT  WITH  THE  CZAR  125 

not  think  proper  to  order  a  sufficient  levy  of  recruits, 
though  the  necessity  of  such  a  measure  was  repeatedly 
pointed  out  to  you.  This  indecision  was  most  in- 
jurious and  dangerous,  as  was  strikingly  shown  in  our 
conduct  towards  Prussia.  The  proposal  to  send 
Russian  troops  to  act  for  Austria  and  against  Prussia 
had  been  entirely  approved  by  the  most  eminent  per- 
sonages in  Europe.  It  was  this  that  decided  the 
Archduke  Charles  to  declare  himself  for  war,  as  he 
considered  it  a  proof  that  Russia  wished  to  make  war 
in  earnest.  Pitt  and  Fox  also  agreed.  "  If  hostilities 
take  place  with  Prussia,"  said  the  latter,  "  they  should 
be  pushed  on  vigorously  and  without  regard  to  other 
considerations." 

'  It  is  true  that  your  Majesty  afterwards  told  us 
that  you  had  all  along  intended  to  regulate  your 
conduct  by  the  great  probability  that  the  King  of 
Prussia  would  finally  decide  to  join  us.  But  who 
could  answer  for  this  ?  The  disastrous  result  of  our 
operations  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  Memel  interview, 
which  I  look  upon  as  one  of  the  most  unfortunate 
events  that  have  ever  happened  for  the  interests  of 
Russia,  both  through  its  immediate  consequences  and 
those  which  have  followed  upon  it  since  and  will  in 
the  future.  The  intimate  friendship  established 
at  that  interview,  after  a  few  days'  acquaintance, 
between  your  Majesty  and  the  King  caused  you  to 
look  upon  Prussia  not  as  a  political  State,  but  as  an 
individual  dear  to  you.  This  personal  connection 
with  the  sovereign  of  a  State  whose  interests  are 
mostly  opposed  to  those  of  Russia  continually  hamp- 


126      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ered  the  action  of  our  Cabinet,  and  finally  prevented 
the  adoption  of  vigorous  and  decisive  measures  at  the 
beginning  of  the  campaign.  In  my  opinion  the 
suspension  of  the  order  to  march  the  Russian  troops 
into  Prussia,  and  your  Majesty's  departure  for  the 
army,  were  the  chief  causes  of  all  the  misfortunes  that 
have  happened  to  us.  I  strove  in  vain  to  represent 
to  you  all  the  inconveniences  which  would  result  from 
your  presence  with  the  army,  and  my  forebodings  have 
unfortunately  all  been  realised.  Your  presence  trans- 
ferred the  responsibility  of  the  generals  to  yourself, 
and  you  had  neither  the  experience  nor  the  know- 
ledge necessary  for  taking  the  command.  Meanwhile 
the  order  to  send  the  troops  into  Prussia  still 
remained  suspended  ;  yet  each  day  of  delay  was  a  day 
lost  for  Russia  and  Europe,  and  gained  for  Buonaparte. 
He  advanced  and  we  remained  stationary. 