

'  Your  Imperial  Majesty  will  appreciate  my  motives 
in  attaching  to  the  enclosed  memorandum  on  the 
policy  of  your  Cabinet.  .  .  .  some  remarks 

See  Vol.  I,  pages  281  and  282. 


DISAGREEMENT  WITH  THE  CZAR  123 

addressed  solely  to  yourself,  and  stating  the  whole 
truth  without  concealment  or  palliation.  Sovereigns 
are  so  inseparable  from  the  States  which  they  govern 
that  in  speaking  of  their  vicissitudes  it  is  impossible 
to  avoid  dwelling  on  their  personal  conduct ;  which 
indeed  often  determines  the  success  or  the  decline  of 
Empires. 

'  Few  reproaches  have  been  made  to  the  Russian 
Cabinet  with  so  little  justice  as  that  of  having 
allowed  itself  to  be  carried  away  by  exaggerated  ideas 
of  self-sacrifice  to  the  general  good  of  Europe.  Those 
who  made  such  a  reproach  forgot  that  not  only  the 
reputation  but  the  safety  of  Russia  depended  on  the 
general  good  ;  and  they  were  not  aware  of  all  the  con- 
versations with  your  Majesty  during  the  past  two 
years,  in  which  ideas  were  repeatedly  brought  forward 
as  to  the  combinations  which  might  be  advantageous 
to  Russia — such  as  the  possession  of  Moldavia  and 
Wallachia,  the  Vistula  as  a  frontier,  the  reunion  of  the 
Slavonic  and  Greek  populations,  etc. — as  acquisitions 
of  territory  and  securities  for  her  trade.  These  ideas 
were  always  rejected  by  your  Majesty,  and  it  would 
consequently  have  been  difficult  to  entertain  the  plan 
of  a  partition  of  Europe  with  Napoleon. 

'  But  events  were  showing  that  the  need  of  ex- 
tending our  influence  and  our  territory  might  become 
more  and  more  urgent  either  in  order  to  maintain 
Russia  in  the  place  she  ought  to  occupy  or  to  estab- 
lish a  real  and  durable  peace.  It  seemed,  therefore, 
that  the  only  course  to  be  followed  was  one  based  on 
the  purest  and  most  disinterested  sentiments.  But  I 


I24      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

perceived,  perhaps  too  late  and  with  great  pain,  that 
your  Majesty  had  no  deep  or  decided  conviction  as  to 
the  subjects  which  engaged  the  attention  of  our 
Cabinet.  The  consequence  was  that  after  a  plan  of 
action  of  which  you  had  approved  had  been  partly 
carried  out,  you  continually  changed  your  mind,  and 
we  were  obliged  to  reconsider  the  whole  question  as 
if  no  agreement  had  been  arrived  at. 

1  When  the  news  of  the  death  of  the  Due  d'Enghien 
came  to  St  Petersburg,  your  Majesty  will  remember 
that  though  the  despatches  I  prepared  on  the  subject 
were  very  strongly  worded,  they  were  not  intended 
to  be  made  public,  and  that  it  was  your  Majesty  alone 
that  gave  the  impulse  for  further  action.  This 
energy  gave  me  hope,  for  it  seemed  likely  to  develop 
in  your  Majesty  that  decided  conviction  which  until 
then  had  not  sufficiently  shown  itself  in  your  actions.* 
War  now  seemed  to  me  inevitable,  but  you  thought 
otherwise.  You  thought  up  to  the  last  moment  that 
Austria  would  not  dare  to  fight,  and  that  this  would 
serve  as  an  excuse  to  Russia  also  to  hold  aloof.  The 
consequence  was  that  though  the  steps  taken  by  the 
Cabinet  by  the  express  orders  of  your  Majesty  pointed 
directly  to  war,  no  preparations  for  war  could  be  made 
in  the  interior  of  the  Empire.  .  .  .  Your  Majesty  did 