

'  The  chief  object  of  our  negotiations  at  Berlin 
should  be  to  make  Prussia  enter  into  defensive 
engagements,  which  would  not  be  limited  to  the 
north  of  Germany,  and  which  would  especially  include 
the  preservation  of  the  Ottoman  Empire.  These 
should,  if  possible,  be  accompanied  by  a  guarantee 
of  the  order  of  things  which  would  be  established  by 
a  treaty  of  peace  between  France  and  Russia,  and 
also  between  France  and  England,  specifying  among 
the  territories  to  be  guaranteed  those  of  Turkey.  A 
plan  of  military  action  should  also  be  drawn  up  between 


A  FTER  THE  BA  TTLE  OF  A  USTERLITZ     1 2 1 

Russia   and   Prussia,  for   the  eventuality  of   France 
attacking  one  of  the  guaranteed  territories.  .  . 

'  It  is  possible  that  Napoleon's  violent  character 
may  produce  a  renewal  of  the  war  in  North  Germany; 
in  that  case  we  should  support  Prussia  with  all  the 
forces  at  our  command,  and  we  should  at  once  give 
her  an  assurance  to  that  effect.  If  the  King  sincerely 
wishes  to  join  Russia  and  act  as  a  buffer  to  Europe, 
facts  will  soon  prove  his  sincerity.  .  .  .  But  I  must 
repeat  to  your  Majesty  that  it  is  necessary  to  guard 
against  too  many  concessions  to  the  Berlin  Court. 
The  past  has  proved  that  Russia  has  nothing  to  gain 
from  them.  .  .  By  trusting  Prussia  and  blindly 
following  her  suggestions,  Russia  will  run  a  great 
risk  of  disaster.  Such  suggestions  can  only  be  in  the 
Prussian  interest,  which  is  nearly  always  opposed  to 
that  of  Russia  and  of  Europe ;  and  by  yielding  to 
them  we  can  only  be  led  into  taking  steps  which  would 
deprive  us  of  the  respect  of  the  world,  and  of  the 
attachment  and  confidence  of  our  true  allies.  Mean- 
while Prussia  would  continue  to  enlarge  her  territory, 
and  become  a  formidable  Power,  even  to  Russia  her- 
self. .  .  A  war  with  Prussia  is  an  event  which 
circumstances  must  bring  about  sooner  or  later,  and 
we  should  at  once  make  our  preparations  for  waging 
it  with  success.' 


CHAPTER  XII 

1806 


DISAGREEMENT    BETWEEN    THE    CZAR    AND    PRINCE    CZARTORYSKI  AS    TO 

THE    POLICY    OF    RUSSIA    BEFORE    THE     BATTLE    OF    AUSTERLITZ. 

NEGOTIATIONS    WITH    ENGLAND. THE    LATTER    PROPOSES   TO    GIVE 

HOLLAND  TO  PRUSSIA  AS  AN  EQUIVALENT  FOR  HANOVER. 


IT  will  have  been  seen  from  the  last  part  of  Prince 
Czartoryski's  Memoirs  (chapter  x)  that  the  Emperor 
Alexander,  who  since  the  Memel  interview*  had  always 
been  strongly  inclined  to  an  alliance  with  Prussia, 
notwithstanding  her  treacherous  policy,  was  on  this 
and  other  points  at  issue  with  his  Foreign  Minister 
during  the  momentous  year  which  closed  with  the 
battle  of  Austerlitz.  Prince  Czartoryski,  in  a  private 
letter  and  memorandum  addressed  by  him  to  the 
Emperor  in  April  1806,  gives  the  following  details  on 
this  subject  and  on  the  negotiations  with  England 
during  that  period  :— 