


AFTER  THE  BATTLE  OF  AUSTERLITZ  117 

appears  to  have  agreed  to  all  that  his  counsellors 
wished;  the  only  point  he  bore  in  mind  was  that  the 
retreat  of  the  Russians  was  the  probable  condition  of 
the  acquisition  by  Prussia  of  a  country  belonging  to 
the  Emperor  of  Russia's  ally.*  Thus  Prussia,  while 
reserving  to  herself  up  to  the  last  moment  the  power 
of  employing  the  forces  of  the  allies,  only  took  advan- 
tage of  their  being  in  the  field  to  make  an  arrange- 
ment with  France  for  her  own  benefit  and  to  their 
detriment.  Such  conduct,  pursued  with  such  uniform- 
ity and  perseverance,  could  only  be  the  result  of 
unavowed  motives,  which  often  constitute  the  secret 
springs  of  the  policy  of  States  and  are  to  be  inferred 
from  their  geographical  position  and  the  nature  and 
degree  of  their  resources. 

'  The  power  of  Prussia  is  factitious  ;•  created  by 
genius,  it  can  only  be  sustained  by  a  policy  of  greed 
and  deception.  In  constantly  adding  to  her  territories 
she  has  absorbed  into  herself  heterogeneous  elements, 
and  she  keeps  up  an  army  quite  out  of  proportion  to 
her  revenue  and  her  population.  To  consolidate  and 
extend  her  resources  is  the  principal  object  of  her 
policy  ;  every  other  consideration,  except  that  of  fear, 
is  subordinate  to  it.  She  consequently  seeks  her 
advantage  everywhere,  and  interferes  for  this  purpose 
in  every  European  question  ;  but  knowing  her  weak- 
ness, she  always  avoids  proceeding  to  extremes.  She 
withdraws  directly  a  question  has  to  be  dealt  with  by 
the  sword,  because  she  ^has  not  sufficient  means  in 

*  Hanover,  then  belonging  to  England,  was  ceded  to  Prussia  by  France  by  the 
Treaty  of  December  15,  1805. 


1 1 8      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTOR YSK1 

herself  to  carry  on  a  war.  This  want  of  power,  com- 
bined with  the  wish  to  play  a  part  and  the  necessity 
of  keeping  it  up,  leads  Prussian  policy  into  combina- 
tions which  are  essentially  opposed  to  the  interests  of 
Europe  and  to  any  great  or  generous  views  with 
regard  to  Russia.  The  latter  Power  seeks  to  protect 
and  strengthen  the  smaller  States,  while  France 
successfully  pursues  her  system  of  aggression  and 
destruction  ;  and  so  long  as  this  is  the  case  Prussian 
policy  will  take  the  side  of  France  against  Russia. 
Though  Buonaparte's  ambition  and  greed  are  insati- 
able, Prussia  will  firmly  believe,  perhaps  not  without 
reason,  that  by  assisting  France  she  can  only  gain, 
while  by  opposing  her  she  will  be  destroyed  like  her 
neighbours. 

'  In  striving  to  strengthen  her  dominions,  Prussia 
takes  care  to  extend  her  influence  as  much  as  possible. 
She  wishes  not  only  to  be  paramount  in  the  north  of 
Germany,  but  also  to  remove  all  foreign  influence  from 
it,  especially  that  of  Russia  ;  and  with  this  object 
she  seeks  every  means  of  preventing  and  paralysing 
all  developments  of  Russian  influence  in  that  quarter. 
Moreover,  she  is  and  always  will  be  the  rival  of 
Austria  in  German  affairs,  while  our  policy  is  to 
support  Austria  in  Germany  in  order  that  she  should 
not  interfere  with  us  in  Turkey.  France,  on  the 
other  hand,  will  always  be  the  natural  ally  of  Prussia 
against  Austria.  Nor  has  Prussia  so  much  to  fear 
from  France  as  from  Russia.  We  wish  to  be  masters 
of  the  Niemen  and  the  Vistula  ;  these  rivers  are  so 
necessary  to  our  trade,  and  so  close  at  hand,  that  our 