

'  Moreover,  since  your  Majesty's  departure  from 
Pulawy  your  opinions  and  sentiments  underwent  a 
notorious  change  which  necessarily  exercised  great 
influence  on  our  operations.  You  sent  away  those  in 
whom  you  had  previously  trusted,  and  although  I 
accompanied  you  in  your  journey  to  Berlin,  you 
rejected  all  my  proposals  and  showed  by  your  state- 
ments that  your  views  and  system  of  action  had 
entirely  changed.  .  .  .  The  inference  which  was 
drawn  from  all  this  at  Berlin  was  that  your  Majesty's 
policy  was  different  from  that  of  your  Cabinet ;  this 
naturally  encouraged  the  duplicity  of  the  Prussian 
Government,  and  influenced  the  stipulations  of  the 


DISAGREEMENT    WITH  THE  CZAR  127 

unfortunate  Treaty  of  Potsdam,*  at  the  foot  of  which 
I  shall  always  regret  that  circumstances  compelled  me 
to  place  my  name. 

'  If  you  had  listened  to  the  advice  we  were  con- 
stantly giving  you,  at  first  not  to  go  to  the  army, 
and  afterwards  not  to  remain  with  it,  but  to  ask  the 
King  of  Prussia  for  an  interview  in  order  to  move 
him  to  decisive  action,  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  would 
not  have  been  fought  and  lost,  or,  if  lost,  would  not 
have  had  the  results  which  followed  upon  it.t  General 
Kutusoff,  left  to  himself,  would  have  avoided  a  battle 
until  the  Prussians  should  have  joined  his  army.  This 
would  have  obviously  been  the  right  course.  Buona- 
parte's interest  was  not  to  lose  time  ;  ours  was  to  gain 
it.  He  had  every  reason  to  risk  a  decisive  battle  and 
we  to  avoid  one.  Your  Majesty  will  recollect  that  I 
repeatedly  spoke  to  you  in  this  sense,  advising  that 
the  enemy  should  be  harassed  by  partial  combats  and 
that  the  bulk  of  our  army  should  march  into  Hungary 
to  effect  a  junction  with  the  Archduke.  And  if  your 
Majesty  had  not  been  on  the  battlefield,  you  would  have 
been  able  to  issue  your  orders  calmly  and  without 
precipitation.  How  could  you  do  this  in  the  midst  of 
the  confusion  at  Holitsch,  where  you  were  surrounded 
by  people  who  loudly  accused  the  Austrians  of  treach- 
ery and  declared  that  the  Russian  army  was  absolutely 
incapable  of  fighting  any  longer  ? 

*  Signed  on  the  3rd  of  November  1805. 

t  'The  young  Emperor  refused  to  listen  to  any  more  advice,  as  he  thought 
himself  more  clever  than  his  advisers.  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski — honest,  grave, 
ardent  under  a  cold  exterior,  who  had  become  the  inconvenient  censor  of  the  weak- 
ness and  instability  of  his  master — maintained  an  opinion  which  must  have 
completely  alienated  him.  He  thought  the  Emperor's  place  was  not  with  the  army.' 
Thiers'  History  of  the  Consulate  and  the  Empire,  Book  xxxiii. 


