i28       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  In  the  midst  of  this  agitation  and  clamour  it  was 
impossible  to  say  anything  in  favour  of  Austria  or  of 
the  interests  of  Europe.  People  declared  that  your 
Majesty  had  done  enough  for  others  and  that  you 
must  now  think  of  yourself — as  if  your  glory  and 
your  safety  had  nothing  in  common  with  the  fall  of 
Austria  and  your  other  allies.  You  thought  fit  to 
reply  to  me  in  this  sense  when  I  ventured  to  speak  in 
favour  of  the  King  of  Naples ;  and  you  told  the 
Emperor  Francis  that  he  could  not  reckon  any  longer 
upon  your  army.  I  was  so  deeply  penetrated,  how- 
ever, with  the  great  evil  of  such  a  complete  abandon- 
ment of  the  cause  which  we  had  embraced  that  I  took 
it  upon  myself  to  write  to  Berlin  in  another  sense 
without  being  authorised  to  do  so  by  your  Majesty. 
But  this  step  could  have  no  result,  since  your  Majesty 
thought  it  necessary  to  say  to  the  Prussian  Minister 
here  that  you  would  leave  Prussia  at  liberty  to  come 
to  an  arrangement  with  France.  .  .  .' 

In  the  memorandum  which  accompanied  Prince 
Czartoryski's  letter  he  remarks,  referring  to  the 
preliminaries  of  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  : — 

'Prussia  was  a  chief  element  in  the  plan  that  was 
about  to  be  executed.  It  had  been  decided  that  she 
was  to  be  brought  into  the  coalition  at  any  cost,  and 
it  was  in  every  respect  the  interest  of  Russia  especially 
to  do  so,  as  in  sending  a  considerable  force  beyond 
her  frontiers  she  could  not  leave  behind  her  so 
suspicious  a  neighbour  as  Prussia.  If  the  Court  of 
Berlin  had  yielded,  the  success  of  the  plan  as  a  whole 


DISAGREEMENT  AS  TO  THE  POLICY  OF  RUSSIA    129 

could  not  have  been  doubtful.     If  it  had  resisted,  and 
our  armies  had  been  sent  forward  on  the  day  agreed 
upon,  they  would  have  found  the  Prussians  on  a  peace 
footing,  and  in  no  way  prepared  to  receive   us.   ... 
Our  true  policy  was  to  make  war  upon  Prussia :  that 
would  have  been  the  safest,  perhaps  the  only,  means 
of  success  in  our  great  undertaking.  .  .  .     The  opera- 
tion   against   Prussia   was   put    off  till   the   16th   of 
September,  by   which   date  it   was    calculated    that 
Kutusoffs  army  would  cover  Bohemia  and  threaten 
Silesia,  while  the  other  armies  entered  southern  and 
ducal  Prussia ;  and  by  that  date  the  Prussians  had 
had  time  to  make  preparations.     But  even  then  the 
Court  of  Berlin  admitted  that  its  troops  would  evacu- 
ate the  districts  up  to  the  Vistula.     We  might  at 
least  have  taken  possession  of  those  districts,  and  if 
we  had  gone  further,  our  success  would  not  have  been 
doubtful.     The  Prussians  may  be  good  soldiers,  but 
they  are  easier  for  the  Russians   to   beat  than    the 
French.     Moreover,  we  should  have  fought  them  in 
a    country    entirely   devoted   to    our   interests.     The 
enthusiasm  among  the  Poles  was  general ;  all  Poland 
was   ready   to   rise   en    masse,   and   asked   that   the 
sovereign  of  Russia  should  add  to  his  titles  that  of 
King   of    Poland.     None   of   our   allies    could   have 
objected  to  such  a  course,  as  they  had  all  sanctioned 
the  plan   of  marching  into  Prussia.     England,   who 
until  then  had,  in  accordance  with  her  old  principles 
of  policy,  been  jealous  of  our  exercising  a  preponder- 
ant  influence  over  Prussia,  now  declared  war   upon 
her,  destroying  her  trade  in  the  North  Sea  while  we 