


133 

the  good  of  them  both  and  for  that  of  the  whole  of 
Europe.  I  was  unfortunately  not  able  to  approve  the 
plan  of  last  year,  and  I  did  not  conceal  my  opinion  on 
the  subject.  Would  to  God  that  the  last  words  I  said 
to  M.  de  Novosiltzoff  in  the  presence  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales — whatever  you  do,  take  your  time,  piano,  piano 
— had  made  more  impression !  I  beg  you  not  to 
think,  Monsieur  le  Prince,  that  I  remind  your  Excel- 
lency of  all  this  in  order  to  boast  of  my  foresight.  If 
I  look  back  on  the  past,  it  is  only  to  obtain  more 
instruction  as  to  the  future.  A  proposal  of  peace 
such  as  I  wished  to  be  made  when  I  had  the  honour 
of  writing  to  your  Excellency  a  year  ago*  would  per- 
haps be  out  of  place  in  present  circumstances.  Russia 
has  taken  too  prominent  a  part  in  the  war  now  to 
assume  the  office  of  a  mediator.  But  since  Buona- 
parte's last  speech  to  his  legislative  assembly  there  are 
many  people  who  think  he  will  send  us  some  proposal 
at  least  tending  to  a  negotiation.f  Might  I  venture 
to  ask  your  Excellency  what  would  be  your  opinion  as 
to  the  course  to  be  adopted  in  such  a  case  ?  The  first 
answer  would  necessarily  depend  on  the  nature  of  the 
overtures  to  be  made  to  us.  They  might  be  made  in 
such  a  way  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  reject  them 
without  discussion  ;  but  let  us  suppose  they  will  be  too 
plausible  for  us  to  do  this.  In  that  case  it  seems  to 
me  that  it  would  be  well  in  the  first  instance  to  accept 
the  overtures,  at  the  same  time  declaring  that  it  will 

*  This  letter  cannot  be  traced  in  the  Czartoryski  Archives. 

t  The  letters  which  passed  between  Talleyrand  and  Fox  on  this  subject  were  laid 
befoie  Parliament  in  1806.  They  are  published  in  Lord  Russell's  Memorials  and  Cor- 
retpondence  of  Charles  James  Fox. 


134 

be  necessary  that  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
should  take  part  both  in  the  treaty  and  in  the  negotia- 
tions which  may  lead  to  it.  I  have  not  at  this 
moment  any  reason  to  believe  that  any  overtures  what- 
ever will  be  made  to  us :  I  speak  only  in  accordance 
with  the  ideas  of  those  who  attach  more  weight  to 
Buonaparte's  language  than  it  seems  to  me  to  deserve. 
Your  Excellency  will  see  that  I  speak  to  you  frankly. 
If  you  will  equally  show  confidence  in  me  I  will  not 
misuse  it. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  contingency — unfor- 
tunately the  most  probable  one — that  the  war  will 
continue  even  without  matters  coining  to  a  negotia- 
tion. I  must  begin  by  saying  to  your  Excellency 
plainly  that  I  have  in  no  way  altered  my  old  opinions, 
that  offensive  alliances  are  not  at  all  to  my  taste,  and 
that  as  they  exist,  our  best  course  would  now  be  to 
give  them  as  far  as  possible  a  defensive  character.  A 
good  opportunity  now  seems  to  present  itself  for 
attaining  this  object,  and  at  the  same  time  showing 
that  we  are  resolved  to  oppose  injustice  and  aggres- 
sion. The  King  of  Prussia  has  seized  the  electorate 
of  Hanover ;  his  pretext  is  that  he  wishes  to  protect 
it  by  his  troops,  and  under  this  pretext  he  deprives 
the  King  and  the  Regency  even  of  the  civil  govern- 
ment of  the  country.  He  asserts  that  his  occupation 
of  the  electorate  is  only  to  last  until  a  peace  shall 
settle  its  fate,  but  he  has  not  distinctly  stated  that  he 
will  then  restore  it  to  the  Elector.  We  have  made 
representations  to  him  on  this  subject,  and  Lord  G. 
L.  Gower  has  been  instructed  to  communicate  them 