


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  135 

to  your  Excellency.  If  the  powerful  support  of  your 
Court  could  induce  Prussia  to  act  nobly  on  this 
occasion,  infinite  good  would  be  the  result.  In  the 
first  place,  we  would  show  Europe  that  the  King  of 
England  still  preserves  his  influence  in  Continental 
affairs,  which  is  a  great  point,  and  further,  that  he 
employs  this  influence  not  to  attack  others,  but  to 
defend  himself. 

The  King  of  Prussia  has  given  up  Anspach  and 
Bayreuth ;  he  should  not  be  helped  nor  even  en- 
couraged to  retake  them,  but  he  should  be  made  to 
abandon  the  odious  system  of  compensating  himself 
with  the  property  of  others.  In  the  event  of  Buona- 
parte retaliating  on  Prussia  for  such  an  honourable 
policy  by  making  war  upon  her — which  I  do  not 
think  probable — she  will  have  to  be  defended  with  all 
the  forces  at  our  disposal.  Your  Excellency  has  much 
more  means  than  I  have  of  conjecturing  what  the  con- 
duct of  Austria  would  be  under  such  circumstances. 
I  am  inclined  to  think  that  she  would  at  least  do 
no  harm,  if  she  is  not  able  to  do  any  good.  It 
might  perhaps  be  said  that  even  with  your  support  we 
would  not  be  able  to  persuade  his  Prussian  Majesty 
to  abandon  an  object  which  it  is  reported  that  he  has 
long-  coveted.  But  we  would  at  least  have  shown 

o 

him  that  he  can  never  hope  to  have  quiet  and  legiti- 
mate possession  of  it ;  and  so  far  as  our  interests  are 
concerned,  we  would  remain  in  precisely  the  same 
situation  as  that  which  we  now  occupy.  Moreover, 
I  think  one  should  in  any  case  avoid  the  appearance 
of  wishing  to  lay  down  the  law  to  the  King  of 


136      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Prussia,  or  of  provoking  him  to  war  against  France. 
Let  him  temporise  as  much  as  he  thinks  proper  ;  I 
would  be  the  first  to  advise  him  to  do  so ;  but  let  him 
not  attack  any  other  State,  whether  strong  or  weak. 

As  to  Austria,  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  that  public 
opinion  thinks  the  friendship  which  has  so  long 
existed  between  her  and  Russia  has  not  been  altered 
as  much  as  people  thought  some  months  ago.  A  - 
friendly  understanding,  and  if  possible  a  perfect  har- 
mony, between  all  the  countries  which  are  not 
dependent  upon  France  is  to  be  desired  more  than 
ever.  Even  with  regard  to  those  which  are  more  or 
less  under  her  subjection  it  would  I  think  be  necessary 
to  avoid  every  kind  of  offence  and  not  to  show  any  feel- 
ing of  revenge.  Opportunities  might,  for  what  we 
know,  arise  in  the  course  of  time  which  two  Cabinets 
united  as  ours  are,  might  by  judicious  conduct  employ 
to  advantage.  The  existing  state  of  affairs,  if  we  look 
to  the  present  or  the  future,  is  truly  disheartening. 
It  cannot  be  remedied  by  a  coup  de  main  :  a  wise  and 
consistent  course  of  conduct  can  alone  enable  us  to  do 
so.  If  we  cannot  reduce  the  enormous  power  of 
France,  it  will  always  be  something  to  stop  its 
progress. 