

The  explanations  which  I  am  giving  here  to 
Lord  G.  L.  Gower  on  this  subject,  and  those  which 
Count  Strogonoff  is  instructed  to  develop  to  your 
Excellency,  will,  I  trust,  be  of  a  kind  to  satisfy  you, 

*  After  the  battle  of  Austerlitz  the  Russian  troops  occupied  Cattaro,  in  order  to 
prevent  its  being  taken  by  the  French,  to  whom  it  had  been  ceded  by  the  Treaty  of 
Presburg. 


141 

and  will  prove  to  you  that  the  fundamental  maxim  of 
our  policy  continues  to  be  not  to  separate  ourselves 
from  England  and  to  pay  the  greatest  attention  to 
her  wishes  and  her  advice. 

It  is  not  impossible  that  Buonaparte,  after  con- 
vincing himself  that  he  cannot  succeed  in  bringing 
either  of  us  to  an  isolated  negotiation,  will  at  length 
agree  to  treat  with  the  two  Powers  in  concert.  This 
would  be  a  great  point  gained.  Moreover,  whatever 
might  be  the  necessity  and  urgency  for  Europe  of 
peace  with  France,  it  would  not  I  think  be  inoppor- 
tune to  come  to  an  early  understanding  as  to  the 
measures  to  be  taken,  if  the  continuation  of  the 
war  should  become  inevitable  ;  for  it  must  be  anti- 
cipated that  the  more  Buonaparte  will  perceive 
the  great  need  of  peace  on  the  Continent,  the  less 
inclined  will  he  be  to  accept  reasonable  conditions. 
Any  overtures  you  may  eventually  make  in  this 
respect  would  be  eagerly  received  here,  and  would 
be  treated  with  the  greatest  possible  considera- 
tion. 

As  regards  Prussia,  I  do  not  lose  the  hope  that 
the  just  and  energetic  conduct  *  of  the  British  Cabinet 
with  regard  to  her,  will  have  a  salutary  influence  on 
her  policy.  The  more  considerable  the  losses  of 
Prussian  trade  will  be,  the  more  the  general  outcry  of 
the  Prussian  people,  who  already  lift  up  their  voices 
against  the  action  of  their  Government,  will  become 

o 

threatening,  the  less  will  Prussia  be  in  a  position  to 

*  i.e.,  the  blockade  of  the  Prussian  seaports,  and  the  capture  by  the  British 
fleet  of  Prussian  merchant  ships,  after  Prussia  had  seized  Hanover  and  closed  the 
Elbe  and  the  Weser  to  British  trade. 


I42      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

continue  her  present  policy.  She  will  have  to  abandon 
it  in  some  way  or  other.  Our  measures  with  regard 
to  her  are  fundamentally  in  accordance  with  your 
wishes ;  but  our  relations  with  her,  and  our  situation 
generally,  are  not  the  same.  We  flatter  ourselves 
that  we  may  yet  be  able  to  withdraw  Prussia  from 
the  shameful  dependence  to  which  she  has  submitted 
herself ;  the  present  moment  of  crisis,  and  the 
extreme  embarrassment  in  which  she  is  plunged,  are 
perhaps  even  propitious  for  such  an  endeavour.  This 
is  the  sole  reason  why  we  do  not  think  we  ought 
entirely  to  reject  the  explanations  and  protests  which 
she  is  incessantly  sending  us,  and  we  wish  meanwhile 
to  stop  her  at  least  in  the  design  which  she  might 
have  formed — if  she  had  had  nothing  to  care  for  or  to 
expect  from  us — of  abandoning  herself  more  and  more 
entirely  to  the  will  of  Buonaparte  and  the  execution 
of  the  plans  he  is  meditating. 