

I  do  not  know  if  your  Excellency  will  agree  to  all 
the  opinions  I  have  expressed,  but  I  flatter  myself 
that  you  will  at  any  rate  be  satisfied  with  my  extreme 
frankness  and  unreserved  confidence. 

I  have  thought  it  right  to  show  the  Emperor  the 
letter  you  have  done  me  the  honour  of  writing  to  me. 
His  Imperial  Majesty  has  expressly  charged  me  to 
express  to  you,  sir,  how  charmed  he  is  at  the  wisdom 
and  though tfuln ess  of  your  views.  He  desires  that 
his  Cabinet  should  remain  in  intimate  harmony  with 
that  of  his  Britannic  Majesty,  and  your  entrance  into 
the  Ministry  has  caused  him  much  satisfaction.  This 
disposition  on  his  Majesty's  part  can  only  add  to  all 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  143 

the  motives  of  State  which  sincerely  bind  the  Court 
of  St  Petersburg  to  that  of  London. 

Count  StrogonofF  will  have  the  honour  of  handing 
this  letter  to  your  Excellency,  and  I  take  the  oppor- 
tunity of  particularly  recommending  him  to  you.  I 
beg  you  to  show  him  entire  confidence  (which  you 
may  do  without  the  slightest  fear) ;  he  will  deserve  it 
by  the  frankness  and  cordiality  with  which  he  will 
make  his  communications  to  you,  and  I  flatter  myself 
that  at  my  request  your  Excellency  will  not  on  your 
part  fail  to  encourage  him  in  this  conduct  by  acting 
towards  him  in  a  similar  manner. 

Your  Excellency  will  not  take  it  ill  that  I  have 
shown  your  letter  to  Lord  G.  L.  Gower.  I  did  not 
think  any  harm  could  result  from  my  doing  so,  and  as 
he  handed  me  your  letter  himself  I  could  hardly  have 
done  otherwise  in  view  of  the  intimate  friendship 
which  exists  between  us.  It  is  with  pain  that  we  hear 
he  wished  to  leave  his  post ;  I  should  infinitely  regret 
it,  and  I  will  confess  to  your  Excellency  that  I  would 
much  desire  that  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  should  remain 
with  us  for  some  time  longer,  especially  during  the 
difficult  circumstances  of  the  present  juncture.  Your 
Excellency  will  pardon  me  if  in  this  wholly  private 
and  confidential  letter  I  have  thought  I  might  be 
permitted  not  to  conceal  this  wish  from  you. 

If  M.  d'Oubril  should  go  so  far  as  Paris,  it  is 
very  possible  that  circumstances  may  cause  him  to  go 
on  to  London,  perhaps  with  some  mission  from  the 
French  Government.  Should  this  be  the  case,  I 
recommend  him  beforehand  to  your  Excellency's  kind- 


144       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ness.  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  will  have  given  you  good 
accounts  of  the  selection  of  M.  d'Oubril ;  he  is  a  safe 
man,  on  whose  prudence  and  principles  the  two  allied 
Courts  may  wholly  rely.*  This  leads  me  to  request 
your  Excellency  to  speak  of  him  in  the  same  terms  to 
the  English  Plenipotentiary  who  may  proceed  to 
France,  and  to  instruct  him  to  have  confidence  in  him. 