

You  will  see  from  my  official  despatches  that  Fox 
has  the  strange  idea  of  our  troops  quitting  Sicily  in 
order  to  leave  the  English  alone  to  defend  it.  He 

VOL.  n.  K 


146      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

could  not  support  this  proposal  by  any  valid  reason, 
and  this  confirmed  my  belief  that  with  all  his  intel- 
lectual vivacity,  which  in  his  parliamentary  speeches 
even  rises  to  genius,  he  is  not  a  man  of  judgment, 
and  still  less  a  statesman ;  that  he  is  merely  a  party 
leader  of  great  astuteness  and  a  master  of  intrigue, 
and  that  he  will  never  shine  in  the  Ministry  as  he  did 
in  the  Opposition.' 

Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  gives  further  particulars 
as  to  Mr  Fox's  Foreign  Policy  at  this  period  in  the 
following  extracts  from  a  memorandum  presented  by 
him  to  the  Emperor  in  his  capacity  of  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  : — 

Memorandum  of  the  3Qth  May  1806. 

In  the  communications  made  to  us  by  the  Cabinet 
of  St  James's  we  are  urged  to  bring  the  important 
questions  pending  between  us  to  a  definitive  issue. 

The  British  Ministry  at  one  time  thought  there 
might  be  a  means  of  opening  negotiations  with 
France.  It  took  part  in  a  correspondence  started  by 
Buonaparte  himself;  but  the  only  preliminary  point 
on  which  the  Cabinet  of  London  was  bound  to  insist 
— that  of  not  arriving  at  any  definite  conclusion 
except  in  concert  with  Russia — has  just  been  rejected 
by  the  French  Government.  England  now  considers 
the  negotiation  broken  off;  she  has  arrived  at  the 
conclusion  that  Buonaparte  evidently  does  not  wish 
for  peace,  and  that  therefore  she  must  make  up  her 
mind  to  war.  At  the  same  time  England  has  been 
grievously  insulted  by  the  inexcusable  conduct  of 


MR  FOX'S  FOREIGN  POLICY  147 

Prussia  towards  her,  who  has  violated  on  this  occasion 
all  the  obligations  that  were  imposed  upon  her  by  the 
dictates  of  ordinary  morality  and  by  international  law. 
The  British  Government  has  been  obliged  to  take  the 
most  energetic  measures  against  Prussia,  and  it  must 
be  admitted  that  it  neither  could  nor  should  have 
done  otherwise  in  reply  to  so  direct  an  attack  upon  the 
interests  and  dignity  of  the  King  of  England  and  so 
manifest  a  violation  of  international  law.* 

Strong  in  her  rights  against  France  and  Prussia, 
and  in  her  consciousness  of  the  frank  and  loyal  policy 
she  has  pursued  towards  Russia,  England  thinks 
herself  entitled  to  regard  us  as  an  ally  on  whose 
co-operation  she  can  reckon  with  perfect  security. 
She  rightly  thinks  that  very  energetic  measures  can 
alone  bring  about  such  a  peace  as  is  to  be  desired ; 
her  Government  shows  the  necessity  of  striking  a 
great  blow  on  the  Continent  in  order  to  restore  the 
balance  of  Europe,  and  proposes  that,  as  a  matter 
both  of  convenience  and  of  justice,  this  blow  should  be 
directed  against  Prussia. 