

Russia  is  thus  in  a  critical  position  ;  but  it  will 
become  even  more  so  if  she  persists  in  maintaining  a 
system  of  inaction.  If  England  finds  that  we  absol- 
utely decline  to  join  her  either  in  a  war  or  in  arrange- 
ments for  peace,  she  will  find  our  alliance  rather  a 
burthen  than  an  advantage,  and  will  seek  other  means 
of  attaining  the  objects  of  her  policy.  Turkey  would 
then  entirely  emancipate  herself  from  our  influence ; 
Sweden  would  become  indifferent,  if  not  hostile  ;  and 
the  rest  of  Europe,  not  seeing  any  hope  of  Russian 
support,  would  have  no  alternative  but  to  attach  herself 
to  Buonaparte's  chariot.  In  that  case  the  latter  will 
certainly  not  be  idle.  The  Polish  provinces  have  long 
attracted  his  craving  for  glory  and  activity,  and 
already  he  is  spreading  a  report  that  the  Princess  of 
Saxony  is  to  marry  some  member  of  the  Buonaparte 

*  The  Russian  Ambassador  at  Constantinople. 


150      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

family  who  will  become  King  of  Poland.  Another  of 
his  objects  is  the  regeneration  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  ; 
and  it  is  not  to  be  denied  that  notwithstanding  her 
present  decrepitude,  Turkey  could  cause  us  great 
difficulties  if  Buonaparte  should  make  himself  master 
of  all  her  resources  and  direct  them  against  Russia. 

It  would  appear  from  the  above  considerations 
that  the  principal  and  essential  thing  for  the  safety  of 
Russia  is  to  maintain,  and  even  to  draw  tighter,  the 
bonds  which  unite  her  to  England.  Russia  is  perhaps 
more  interested  even  than  England  in  not  abandoning 
an  intimate  alliance  which  is  now  more  necessary  than 
ever  to  save  the  remains  of  independence  in  Europe. 
What  would  tend  above  all  to  make  such  an  alliance 
desirable  to  your  Majesty  is  the  composition  of  the 
present  English  Ministry  and  the  principles  by  which 
it  is  actuated.  It  shows  in  its  policy  as  much 
moderation  and  wisdom  as  energy  and  loyalty.  The 
conduct  of  England  with  regard  to  neutral  commerce 
displays  both  the  prudence  arid  the  liberality  of  her 
Government ;  and  the  loyalty  it  showed  to  Russia 
when  France  offered  England  an  advantageous  peace 
demands  entire  reciprocity  on  our  part. 

Being  deeply  convinced  of  the  truth  of  these 
remarks,  and  considering  the  fatal  results  which  would 
follow  from  the  ties  which  unite  us  to  Great  Britain 
being  loosened  or  broken,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  express 
the  opinion  that  the  honour  of  Russia,  her  dearest 
interests,  and  her  safety,  imperiously  require  her  not 
to  separate  her  cause  from  that  of  England. 


JtUSSIA,  ENGLAND,  AND  PJtUSSIA  151 

[Although,  in  consequence  of  the  annexation  by 
Prussia  of  Hanover  and  the  closing  of  the  Elbe  and 
Weser  to  British  trade,  Mr  Fox  retaliated  by 
blockading  her  harbours  and  seizing  her  merchant 
ships,  neither  England  nor  Russia  sent  any  troops 
against  her.  Meanwhile  the  aggressive  policy  of 
Napoleon  and  the  excesses  of  his  soldiers  caused  an 
explosion  of  patriotic  indignation  in  Prussia  which 
her  King  found  it  impossible  to  resist.  The  Prussian 
Government  demanded  that  the  French  troops  should 
be  recalled,  and  after  some  angry  discussion  Napoleon 
attacked  the  Prussian  army  and  completely  destroyed 
it  at  Jena  (14th  October  1806).] 