

P.S.  of  the  13th  of  May  1806.  My  letter  to  your 
Excellency  was  written  long  ago,  but  the  despatch  of 
the  courier  who  was  to  take  it  was  put  off  from  day  to 
day.  In  the  meantime  we  have  received  despatches 
from  London  which  inform  us  of  the  issue  of  your 
pourparlers  with  France.  I  open  my  letter  to  add 
this  postscript,  as  I  cannot  avoid  expressing  to  your 
Excellency  how  satisfied  and  enchanted  we  are  here 
at  the  wisdom,  the  loyalty,  and  the  energy  which  your 
Government  has  shown  on  this  occasion.  The  good 
faith  and  the  constant  interest  of  which  it  gives  proof 
to  Russia  demand  entire  reciprocity  on  her  part.  I 
will  not  here  multiply  assurances  and  protestations  on 
this  subject,  for  between  us  they  seem  to  me  entirely 
superfluous.  Moreover,  the  communications  which 
you  will  receive,  several  of  which  are  much  in  arrear, 
can  only  refer  to  the  state  of  affairs  anterior  to  the 
present  moment.  I  am  glad  to  look  upon  the  present 
relations  between  the  two  countries  (and  surely  your 
Excellency  will  agree  with  me  on  this  point)  as  those 
of  two  parts  of  the  same  body.  There  is  no  difference 

*  This  estimate  of  M.  d'Oubril's  character  was  unfortunately  not  borne  out  by 
his  subsequent  conduct  in  Paris  (see  Count  Vorontzoff  s  letter  of  the  7 19  October, 
1806,  page  163). 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  145 

in  our  objects,  in  our  principles,  in  our  intentions  ;  and 
our  discussions  can  only  turn  on  the  most  proper  mode 
and  the  most  suitable  means  of  realising  our  common 
wishes  according  to  circumstances. — Receive,  etc. 

(Signed)     A.  CZARTORYSKI. 

Count  Strogonoff,  the  Russian  special  envoy, 
arrived  in  London  in  March  1806,  and  Count  Voront- 
zoff,  the  Russian  Ambassador,  in  a  letter  to  Prince 
Adam  Czartoryski  dated  the  l~  March,  thus  describes 
his  impressions  of  the  interview  which  took  place 
between  the  two  Russian  diplomatists  and  Mr  Fox  : — 

'  I  will  add  to  my  official  reports,  for  your  personal 
information  alone,  that  Fox  wishes  for  peace  at  any 
price,  and  that  he  would  abandon  all  his  allies  to  ob- 
tain it,  but  that  he  will  not  succeed,  as  the  nation  is 
too  strongly  opposed  to  a  shameful  peace,  and  Buona- 
parte, flushed  with  victory,  will  not  offer  him  any 
other,  especially  as  he  knows  Fox's  immoderate  desire 
to  end  the  war.  Lord  Grenville  and  the  British 
nation  will  oppose  him,  for  they  wish  for  a  peace  that 
shall  be  honourable  and  arranged  in  concert  with  us. 
Moreover,  the  great  majority  of  people  here  are  con- 
vinced that  England  will  run  less  risk  in  continuing  a 
purely  naval  war  than  in  making  peace  with  the 
Corsican,  in  whose  good  faith  nobody  trusts.  The 
Cabinet  would  not,  however,  be  overthrown  if  it  made 
peace  together  with  us. 