

I  have  thus  entirely  opened  my  heart  to  you,  mon 
Prince.  Let  us  seek  to  work  together  for  the  good  of 
our  respective  countries  and  for  that  of  all  Europe. 
The  more  the  two  Courts  and  their  Ministers  under- 
stand each  other,  the  better  for  our  common  cause. 

Your  Excellency  will  of  course  understand  that  this 
letter,  like  the  others  which  have  passed  between  us, 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  137 

is  of  a  confidential  nature,  to  be  placed  under  the  eyes 
of  the  Emperor  or  not,  as  your  Excellency  may  think 
proper.  Neither  Lord  G.  L.  Gower,  in  whom  I  have 
the  greatest  confidence,  nor  anyone  else,  knows  the 
contents  of  it. 

Accept,  Monsieur  le  Prince,  etc. 

(Signed)     C.  J.  Fox. 

Answer  from  Prince  Czartoryski. 

Your  Excellency  has  anticipated  me  by  the  letter 
you  were  good  enough  to  write  to  me  on  the  17th  of 
March,  as  I  was  about  to  address  one  to  you  to 
express  my  joy  and  my  congratulations  on  your 
entrance  into  the  Ministry,  and  to  ask  for  a  continu- 
ance of  your  confidence.  I  now  hasten  to  convey  to 
you  the  expression  of  these  feelings,  and  to  add  my 
sincere  thanks  for  the  frank  and  friendly  manner  in 
which  your  Excellency  has  expressed  yourself  in 
your  letter.  Pray  believe  me  when  I  say  that 
personally  I  attach  very  great  value  to  the  friendly 
and  confidential  relations  which  you  are  good  enough 
to  encourage  me  to  maintain,  and  that  no  one  can  be 
more  convinced  than  myself  of  the  reciprocal  advan- 
tage, I  may  say  the  necessity,  of  an  intimate  union 
and  an  invariable  concert  between  our  two  Courts.  It 
is  to  England  and  to  Russia  that  the  remains  of 
Europe  will  cling,  and  their  only  hope  of  salvation  is 
in  the  union  of  these  Powers. 

I  know  too  well  your  Excellency's  views  not  to 
be  certain  that  you  have  seen  with  much  pain  that 


1 38       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

your  forebodings  as  to  the  undertaking  of  the  allied 
Courts  should  have  been  so  completely  realised.  But 
you  are  at  the  same  time  too  just  not  to  agree  that 
there  was  not  after  all  any  positive  reason  for  suppos- 
ing that  our  efforts  would  have  such  disastrous  results. 

o 

It  was  not  the  plan  that  was  in  fault.  Its  failure 
was  due  to  circumstances  which  the  Russian  Cabinet 
had  not  the  means  either  to  foresee  or  to  prevent. 

But  it  is  useless  to  look  back  upon  the  past  except 
for  drawing  useful  lessons  from  it  ;  what  should 
occupy  us  is  the  present  and  the  future.  I  will 
respond  to  your  Excellency's  frankness  by  also 
opening  to  you  my  mind  on  the  subject.  The  com- 
munications which  Count  Vorontzoff  lately  made  to 
you  have  partly  done  this  already.  We  have  ex- 
plained our  views  with  the  greatest  confidence  and 
detail,  and  the  British  Government  must  have  been 
satisfied  with  the  principles  which  we  developed. 
Several  of  the  matters  referred  to  in  the  first  despatch 
rather  required  to  be  discussed  confidentially  and  in 
much  detail  than  to  be  treated  officially,  and  as  to  this 
the  two  Cabinets  will  have  to  come  to  an  under- 
standing hereafter.  The  despatches  which  Count 
Strogonoff  *  will  receive  to-day  will  furnish  him  with 
new  and  very  ample  communications  for  your  Excel- 
ency ;  you  will  see  that  we  do  not  wish  to  conceal 
from  you  any  of  our  thoughts,  and  that  our  invariable 
principle  is  to  do  everything  in  common  and  in 
concert  with  England. 