

The  aspect  of  affairs  is  indeed  disheartening,  and 

The  special  envoy  sent  to  London  to  negotiate  with  Mr  Fox. 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  FOX  139 

I  entirely  agree  with  your  Excellency  that  the 
defensive  principle  should  preferably  be  adopted  in 
the  transactions  and  the  conduct  of  the  European 
States.  It  is  the  principle  held  by  the  Powers  which 
are  opposed  to  the  subversion  of  Europe,  and  never 
was  there  a  more  offensive  policy  than  that  of  Buona- 
parte. Yet  although  a  union  for  purposes  of  defence 
is  always  in  principle  the  most  useful  one,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  when  the  time  for  action  arrives  it  is 
indispensable,  or  at  least  more  advantageous,  to  take 
the  offensive  if  possible. 

It  may  be  that  the  circumstances  of  the  moment 
and  the  nature  of  the  elements  with  which  it  would 
be  necessary  to  act  are  such  that  although  a  different 
policy  would  be  more  suitable,  one  is  forced  for  the 
present  to  maintain  a  passive  attitude  on  the  Conti- 
nent, and  to  avoid  provoking  new  difficulties  which 
might  give  rise  to  new  disasters.  If  such  be  the  case 
— as  your  Excellency  seems  inclined  to  suppose — 
peace  with  France  is  only  the  more  necessary,  and  it 
becomes  the  only  course  open  to  us.  I  confess  that 
even  if  it  were  only  a  patched-up  peace  to  last  but  a 
short  time — if  it  were  only  a  truce  which  would  give 
us  but  a  precarious  and  temporary  security — it  would 
still  be  better  for  the  Continent  than  the  present  state 
of  things,  and  it  becomes  clear  that  circumstances 
oblige  us  to  see  the  danger  increase  and  come  nearer 
to  us  without  our  being  able  to  prevent  or  meet  it. 
On  our  side  it  may  be  said  that  peace  is  a  necessity  to 
us ;  we  can  neither  reach  the  enemy  nor  do  him  any 
serious  harm  ;  it  would  therefore  be  better,  as  it 


1 40      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

seems  to  me,  to  bind  him  by  some  arrangement  so  as 
to  arrest  his  advance  if  only  for  a  short  time,  and 
make  him  believe  and  declare  that  he  is  also  at  peace 
with  us.  I  must  here  remark  that  an  attack  on  the 
part  of  the  Turks,  if  we  leave  them  the  choice  of  the 
time  when  it  is  to  be  made,  might  also  be  inconvenient. 
It  would  begin  on  our  frontiers,  and  at  a  time  when 
the  Turks  would  have  completed  their  armaments,  and 
the  French  been  enabled  to  prepare  all  the  means 
they  could  employ  in  favour  of  Turkey  and  against 
us.  These  various  considerations  lead  me  strongly  to 
desire  that  the  overtures  which  have  been  made  by 
Your  Excellency  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  should  produce 
some  satisfactory  result.  Russia  would  certainly  have 
awaited  the  consequence  of  these  overtures,  if  the 
affair  of  Cattaro*  and  the  dangers  which  threaten 
Austria  had  not  obliged  us  to  hasten  a  direct  discus- 
sion with  Buonaparte,  as  the  only  means  of  escape 
from  the  embarrassing  position  in  which  we  find 
ourselves,  between  the  necessity  of  giving  up  to  the 
French  an  important  post — the  stepping-stone,  so  to 
say,  from  which  they  could  easily  proceed  to  the 
execution  of  their  designs  on  Turkey — and  the  fear 
of  exposing  unhappy  Austria  to  the  resentment  of 
Buonaparte  and  to  complete  ruin. 