

To  secure  the  success  of  such  an  undertaking,  the 
British  Government  thinks  it  will  be  necessary  to 
follow  Buonaparte's  plan,  namely,  the  assemblage  of 
considerable  forces  on  a  single  point,  so  as  to  obtain  a 
decisive  result. 

England  recognises  the  inconveniences  of  our 
position  between  Turkey  and  Prussia,  and  asks  what 
is  the  probability  of  our  not  being  at  war  with  those 
two  Powers  directly  she  attacks  one  of  them.  The 

*  The  annexation  by  Prussia  of  Hanover. 


148 

British  Cabinet  thinks  we  might  direct  our  efforts 
against  either,  and,  in  the  event  of  our  doing  so,  hopes 
we  will  push  our  conquests  as  far  as  possible,  and 
offers  us  assistance  and  subsidies.  But  it  would 
prefer  that  we  should  attack  Prussia,  so  that  she 
might  suffer  exemplary  punishment  for  the  duplicity 
she  has  shown  during  recent  events.  The  example  of 
a  sovereign  increasing  his  power  and  territory  by  a 
policy  of  servility  towards  France  would  encourage 
the  other  Powers  and  dissipate  the  hope  of  any  States 
besides  Russia  and  England  uniting  against  Buona- 
parte. 

At  the  same  time  the  British  Government  still 
sincerely  desires  peace,  and  it  would  prefer  a  policy  of 
conciliation  to  one  of  war,  if  by  such  means  the 
desired  object  could  be  attained.  Mr  Fox  even 
suggests  a  separate  negotiation  with  France,  Russia 
and  England,  each  negotiating  on  its  own  account,  but 

O  '  O  O  ' 

first  coming  to  an  understanding  as  to  the  essential 
conditions  which  are  to  be  sought  or  rejected.  Fore- 
seeing that  Russia,  before  stating  any  opinion  on  this 
suggestion,  would  desire  to  reconcile  Prussia  with 
England,  Mr  Fox  states  the  conditions  on  which  such 
a  reconciliation  might  be  brought  about,  namely,  a 
raising  of  the  blockade  and  a  satisfactory  arrangement 
as  to  Hanover. 

Let  us  now  consider  our  present  position  and  the 
probable  consequences  of  Russia  deciding  to  maintain 
the  passive  position,  midway  between  peace  and  war, 
in  which  she  now  stands. 

The  humiliation  of  Austria,  the  blind  submission 


MR  FOX'S  FOREIGN  POLICY  149 

of  Prussia  to  Buonaparte's  will,  the  occupation  of  the 
greater  part  of  Germany  by  French  troops,  and  the 
invasion  of  the  whole  of  Italy,  are  not  the  only  results 
of  importance  to  us  which  have  followed  from  the 
last  campaign.  Turkey,  over  whom  our  safety  re- 
quires us  to  maintain  exclusive  influence,  not  only 
strives  to  withdraw  herself  from  it,  but  already  begins 
to  defy  us.  M.  d'ltalinsky*  reports  that  the  Porte 
has  requested  that  the  Dardanelles  should  be  closed 
to  Russian  war  vessels  and  transports,  that  Turkey 
permits  flagrant  outrages  upon  persons  under  our 
protection,  and  that  she  will  not  refuse  a  passage  to  a 
French  army  through  the  Herzegovina  and  Monte- 
negro if  Buonaparte  should  desire  it. 