

'  If  Poland  is  declared  a  separate  State,  with  the 
Emperor  as  King,  Buonaparte's  difficulties  in  invading 
Russia  will  be  immeasurably  increased  ;  .  .  .  .  and 
should  he  succeed  in  overcoming  them,  he  will  have 
to  pursue  our  armies  into  the  interior  of  Russia,  as 
they  have  very  wisely  been  ordered  to  retire  until 
they  are  sure  of  victory.  He  would  then  find  himself 
cut  off  by  the  hostile  Poles  in  his  rear,  and  his  defeat 
under  such  circumstances  would  mean  nothing  short 
of  the  absolute  surrender  of  himself  and  his  army.  .  .  . 

'  It  may  be  objected  that  to  declare  Poland  a 
Kingdom  would  be  to  separate  from  the  Empire  one 
of  its  integral  parts ;  but  this  separation  would  only 
be  apparent.  The  crown  of  Poland  would  be  irrevo- 
cably attached  to  the  throne  of  Russia ;  and  the 
Empire  would  at  the  same  time  gain  the  remainder  of 
Poland.  Imperious  circumstances  have  forced  Russia 


1 68      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

to  commit  the  great  political  fault  of  allowing  Poland 
to  be  partitioned  instead  of  entirely  possessing  it. 
This  fault  has,  to  a  great  extent,  been  the  cause 
of  the  misfortunes  which  have  since  overwhelmed 
Europe ;  should  it  not  now  be  made  good  ? 

'  No  doubt,  in  order  to  produce  the  desired  effect  of 
inflaming  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Poles,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  give  them  a  government  in  conformity 
with  their  wishes  and  their  ancient  laws.  .  .  .  But 
these  benefits  would  render  the  bond  between  the 
Empire  and  the  Polish  nation  stronger  and  more 
indissoluble.  The  more  a  nation  is  governed  in 
accordance  with  its  wishes,  its  character,  and  its 
habits,  the  more  devoted  it  is  to  its  rulers.  The 
kingdom  of  Hungary,  notwithstanding  its  special 
liberties  and  prerogatives,  has  for  centuries  been  an 
example  of  fidelity  and  one  of  the  firmest  supports  of 
Austria.  Maria  Theresa  was  saved  by  the  Hungarians. 
The  King  of  France  was  all-powerful  in  the  provinces 
which  had  preserved  their  estates  and  privileges,  and 
it  was  Brittany,  Poitou,  and  Anjou  which  have  up  to 
the  last  moment  been  the  defenders  of  the  throne,  of 
religion,  and  of  the  nobility. 

'  A  further  objection  might  be  raised  on  the  score 
that  by  reuniting  Poland  under  her  sceptre  Russia 
would  be  despoiling  her  ally  the  King  of  Prussia. 
But  the  master  of  the  Prussian  monarchy  is  now 
Buonaparte  ;  he  exercises  all  the  rights  of  a  conqueror 
there,  and  is  advancing  towards  Prussia's  frontier  pro- 
vinces, which  he  proposes  to  disturb  by  a  revolution 
that  will  threaten  ours.  The  question  at  issue,  there- 


169 

fore,  is  not  the  seizure  of  the  property  of  an  ally,  but 
the  forestalling  of  an  active,  inexorable,  and  aggressive 
enemy ;  the  depriving  him  of  a  booty  which  if  he 
obtains  would  cause  a  terrible  conflagration  in  the 
Empire.  This  would  indeed  be  the  only  means  of 
saving  Russia's  ally ;  for  otherwise  she  will  perhaps 
not  be  able  to  continue  the  struggle  and  obtain  some 
compensation  for  the  House  of  Brandenburg  in  forcing 
the  enemy  to  agree  to  an  equitable  peace. 