

'  During  the  last  two  years  Russia  and  her  allies 
have  four  times  made  overtures  of  peace  to  Napoleon, 
and  on  each  occasion  the  shameful  conditions  which  he 


160      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARWRYSKI 

imposed  arid  the  outrageous  pretensions  which  he  put 
forward  rendered  peace  impossible. 

'  Events  which  could  hardly  have  been  expected* 
have  profoundly  shaken  the  system,  but  have  not  de- 
stroyed it.  Mutual  confidence  and  the  wish  to  bring 
together  the  threads  of  an  indispensable  union  of 
which  your  Imperial  Majesty  would  be  the  soul  and 
the  centre  remained ;  the  allies  who  were  neither 
restrained  by  fear  nor  debased  by  discouragement  con- 
tinued their  intimate  relations  with  us. 

'At  the  moment  when  your  Imperial  Majesty 
deigned  to  permit  me  to  transfer  to  other  hands  the  Min- 
istry of  Foreign  Affairs,  the  situation  was  as  follows  : 

'  The  successes  of  France  over  your  Majesty's 
allies,  however  alarming  their  consequences  may 
appear,  only  added  new  ruins  to  those  of  other  States 
without  adding  any  solidity  to  the  fabric  of  the 
French  Empire.  A  greater  number  of  dismembered 
countries  and  humiliated  nations  increased  the  general 
confusion ;  Napoleon's  power  was  increased,  but  not 
made  any  more  secure. 

'  Austria  was  silently  reorganising  her  forces,  and 
was  still  turning  her  eyes  to  Russia.  She  gave  us 
marks  of  confidence  which  we  hastened  to  accept  and 
cultivated  with  the  object  of  renewing  our  old  relations 
and  securing  her  aid  in  case  of  need. 

'  Prussia,  notwithstanding  her  disgraceful  conces- 
sions to  France,  had  not  entirely  bound  herself  to  her, 
and  sought  by  very  secret  and  confidential  negotia- 
tions with  us  to  repair  the  faults  of  her  policy. 

*  A  further  allusion  to  the  disagreement  between  Alexander  and  Prince  Czartoryski. 


RETROSPECT  OF  HIS  FOREIGN  POLICY         161 

'  Sweden,  always  faithful  to  her  elevated  and 
generous  sentiments,  defied  the  threats  of  the  Berlin 
Cabinet  and  remained  steadfast  to  her  alliance  with 
Russia  and  England. 

'  The  Porte,  though  led  astray  by  the  fatal  sug- 
gestions of  French  agents,  disguised  its  malevolent 
designs,  and  did  not  dare  entirely  to  break  the  bonds 
which  united  it  to  Russia. 

'  Finally,  England — the  only  Power  which  by  her 
dominion  over  the  seas  can  in  combination  with  us 
still  justify  the  hope  of  a  possible  equilibrium  in 
Europe — always  faithful  to  our  alliance,  always  frank 
in  her  transactions  with  us  and  strict  in  fulfilling 
them,  showed  herself  ready  to  second  us  everywhere, 
and  was  actually  doing  so  most  effectually  in  the 
Mediterranean  and  on  the  Adriatic.' 

Sir  A.  Alison  (Hist,  of  Europe,  vol.  vii.  p.  155) 
suggests  that  Prince  Czartoryski's  retirement  was 
caused  by  the  Prince  having  been  in  favour  of  making 
an  alliance  with  France  at  the  expense  of  England, 
while  his  successor  '  supported  the  English  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  French  alliance.'  There  is  no  foundation 
whatever  for  this  suggestion.  As  will  be  seen  from 
the  papers  here  published,  Prince  Czartoryski  was 
throughout  a  devoted  adherent  of  the  alliance  with 
England  and  an  uncompromising  adversary  of  Napo- 
leon. Moreover,  when  M.  d'Oubril  signed  the  treaty 
of  alliance  with  France  (July  20),  Prince  Czartoryski 
had  already  ceased  to  be  Foreign  Minister ;  and  that 
he  and  his  political  friends  strongly  disapproved  of  M. 
d'Oubril's  conduct  is  shown  by  the  following  extracts 