

*  After  the  battle  of  Austerlitz. 


i56       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

seem  especially  to  avoid  any  measure  which  would 
be  consequent  upon  them.  Whichever  view  may  be 
correct,  it  is  equally  necessary  either  that  you  should 
require  me  to  retire,  or  that  I  should  ask  permission 
to  do  so. 

Such  are  my  reasons  for  begging  of  your  Imperial 
Majesty  to  allow  me  to  retire.  They  are  strengthened 
by  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  I  am  placed.  .  . 
Your  Majesty  will  recollect  that  I  was  far  from  desir- 
ing my  present  post,  and  that  I  even  long  declined  to 
accept  it,  foreseeing  the  unpleasantnesses  I  should 
have  to  suffer  as  a  Pole.  Since  then,  almost  from  the 
time  when  I  took  up  the  duties  of  my  office,  I  have 
not  ceased  to  look  forward  to  the  moment  when  you 
would  permit  me  to  resign  it  into  your  hands.  .  .  . — 
I  am,  etc.  (Signed)  A.  CZARTORYSKI. 

In  a  memorandum  addressed  to  the  Emperor  on 
his  retirement  from  office,  Prince  Adam  thus  describes 
the  policy  of  Russia  towards  England  and  the  other 
Powers  during  the  time  that  he  was  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  : — 

' .  .  .  The  new  English  Ministry*  not  having  made 
any  statement  to  us  of  its  policy,  this  silence  inspired 
us  with  some  anxiety,  notwithstanding  the  confidence 
we  felt  in  the  British  Government.  We  had  learnt 
that  Mr  Fox  had  made  some  overtures  to  M.  de 
Talleyrand  through  the  Prussian  Minister  Jacoby, 
and  that  negotiations  had  consequently  taken  place 
between  England  and  France,  which  the  British 

*  The  Grenville  Ministry,  formed  in  January,  1806,  after  the  death  of  Mr  Pitt. 


RETROSPECT  OF  HIS  FOREIGN  POLICY         157 

Cabinet  had  not  communicated  to  us.  This  afforded 
us  a  reason  for  also  entering  into  pourparlers  with 
the  Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries  in  order  not  to  remain 
isolated,  or  at  least  to  place  us  in  a  position  to  do 
everything  that  the  interests  of  the  State  might 
require. 

'  Meanwhile  the  British  Cabinet  informed  us  that 
Mr  Fox  had  proposed  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  a  pro- 
visional arrangement  between  England  and  France, 
subject  to  the  consent  of  Russia,  such  arrangement 
to  be  null  arid  void  in  the  event  of  Russia  refusing  to 
acquiesce  in  it.  Mr  Fox  at  the  same  time  invited  us 
to  take  part  in  the  negotiations,  and  we  had  reason 
to  believe  that  he  wished  to  make  peace  at  any  price. 
'  Although  it  is  certain  that  a  war  would  be  the 
only  means  of  breaking  the  yoke  which  was  oppressing 
a  great  part  of  Europe,  yet,  if  through  the  weakness 
of  some  Powers,  the  ill-will  of  others,  and  the  pusil- 
lanimity of  all,  there  was  no  means  of  making  a 
vigorous  resistance  to  France,  it  was  desirable  that  a 
state  of  hostilities  which  was  only  of  advantage  to 
Napoleon  should  cease. 