

1  As  to  Austria,  such  an  arrangement  could  not,  of 
course,  be  made  without  frank  and  loyal  negotiations 
with  the  Court  of  Vienna.  But  the  basis  of  the 
arrangement  is  too  just,  and  the  House  of  Austria 
would  be  too  sensible  of  the  dangers  it  incurs,  not  to 
promise  a  speedy  and  successful  result  of  these 
negotiations. 

'  The  only  question  which  remains  to  be  solved  is 
whether,  supposing  the  proclamation  of  Poland  as  a 
separate  State  is  decided  upon,  Russia  should  act  at 
once  or  wait  until  Napoleon  makes  overtures  to  the 
Poles.  The  first  course  would  appear  the  preferable 
one.  As  soon  as  Russia  enters  into  the  fitting  ex- 
planations with  the  Court  of  Vienna  and  the  pre- 
liminary steps  are  taken  in  Poland  to  secure  that  the 
project  shall  be  fully  carried  into  effect,  nothing 
should  delay  its  immediate  execution.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  matter  is  urgent,  and  the  slightest  delay 
might  weaken  or  destroy  the  results  of  this  important 
operation.  All  the  advantages  of  taking  the  initiative 
would  be  on  Russia's  side,  and  she  would  not  have  to 
combat  the  pride  of  a  violent  and  self-willed  man  who 


170      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

has  not  hitherto  known  what  it  is  to  withdraw  from 
a  course  of  action  after  publicly  proclaiming  that  he 
has  decided  to  adopt  it. 

'  The  preliminary  steps  to  be  taken  would  be  the 
issue  of  proclamations  by  the  Russian  generals,  cir- 
cular letters  to  influential  personages  in  the  country, 
and  instructions  to  governors  and  commanding  officers, 

O  O 

to  show  a  friendly  attitude  to  the  Poles,  to  ensure 
discipline  in  the  troops,  and  to  levy  recruits  ;  and  the 
despatch  of  intelligent  and  zealous  agents  to  the 
Polish  provinces.  The  King  of  Prussia  would  be 
informed  in  the  most  considerate  manner  of  the 
reasons  and  the  necessity  for  the  proposed  measure, 
and  would  be  given  the  hope  of  compensation  as  soon 
as  the  events  of  the  war  should  permit,  and  prepara- 
tions would  be  made  immediately  for  the  reorganisa- 
tion of  the  new  kingdom  and  for  reconciling  the 
inalienable  rights  of  the  sovereign  with  the  institutions 
and  customs  most  congenial  to  the  Polish  nation,  a 
considerable  part  of  which  they  have  retained  under 
the  paternal  Government  of  his  Majesty  the  Emperor.' 

The  following  was  the  Emperor's  reply  to  the 
above  memorandum  and  other  similar  proposals  which 
were  made  to  him  by  Prince  Adam  in  conversation  : — 

The  Emperor  to  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski 

(Written  in  pencil  and  without  date). 

I  have  received  the  paper  you  have  thought  fit  to 
address  to  me.  You  wish  for  a  discussion,  and  I  am 
ready  to  grant  it ;  but  I  cannot  help  telling  you  that 