


154      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ever,  the  necessity  of  introducing  more  unity  among 
the  various  departments  of  Government  constantly 
made  itself  felt.  The  disasters  we  have  experienced 
must  be  partly  attributed  to  the  fact  that  such  unity 
was  not  sufficiently  established,  and  that  afterwards  it 
was  totally  destroyed  at  the  moment  when  it  became 
more  necessary  than  ever  to  preserve  it.  ... 

Your  Majesty  will  permit  me  here  to  observe  that 
I  have  been  greatly  surprised  to  see  that  you  assume 
the  sole  responsibility  not  only  of  every  measure,  but 
of  every  detail  in  its  execution ;  while  the  object  of 
the  establishment  of  your  Ministry  was  to  guarantee 
you  against  such  responsibility.  You  possessed  the 
means  of  calling  any  of  your  Ministers  to  account  for 
any  failure  of  Government  policy ;  but  the  fault  of  such 
failure  must  now  fall  upon  you,  as  you  wish  to  do  every- 
thing alone,  both  in  military  and  in  civil  matters.  .  .  . 
If  the  passive  policy  of  your  Government  should  bring 
war  into  your  frontiers — a  by  no  means  impossible 
case — I  could  not  answer  for  the  conduct  of  the  Poles; 
I  would  even  fear  the  effect  that  such  an  example 
might  produce  on  the  Russians.  Already  the  latter 
see  with  pain  that  the  glory  of  the  State  is  diminished 
and  its  pride  humiliated.  If  our  frontiers  are  crossed 
by  the  enemy,  the  fault  will  be  thrown  on  your 
Imperial  Majesty,  and  the  talk  on  this  subject  in 
the  two  capitals  is  not  reassuring.  .  .  .  But 
if  you  do  not  attach  any  belief  or  value  to  the 
opinions  which  I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  expressing, 
nothing  will  remain  to  me  but  to  retire  with  the  satis- 
faction of  having  done  my  duty.  In  that  case  your 


HIS  RESIGNATION  155 

Imperial  Majesty  will  recognize  the  justice  of  my 
request  that  I  should  be  allowed  to  quit  my  post  at 
once.  I  will  not  remind  you  of  all  that  has  passed 
since  my  return  here,*  how  little  attention  you  have 
paid  to  my  proposals  ;  .  .  .  and  you  are  too  con- 
siderate to  wish  to  impose  upon  me  any  longer  the 
painful  obligation — I  may  say  the  martyrdom — of 
participating  in  an  order  of  things  and  executing 
measures  which  in  my  opinion  are  directly  opposed 
to  the  good  of  the  Empire  and  your  own. 

Your  Majesty  thinks  the  system  into  which  you 
have  been  led  by  your  Cabinet  is  the  source  of  all  the 
disasters  we  have  experienced.  I  could  not  conceal 
from  you,  on  the  other  hand,  that  I  am  convinced 
that  the  true  reason  of  our  disasters  is  that  you 
have  not  followed  that  system  with  frankness 
and  decision  ;  that  you  have  departed  from  the  plan 
that  was  agreed  upon ;  and  that  you  have  withheld 
your  confidence  during  its  execution  from  those  with 
whom  it  was  formed,  so  that  there  was  neither  unity 
nor  sequence  in  what  has  been  done  since.  My 
opinion  is  that  the  principles  which  until  then  had 
regulated  the  conduct  of  the  Russian  Cabinet,  should 
continue  to  direct  it ;  that  they  are  the  only  ones 
which  it  can  properly  adopt ;  and  that  the  greatest 
energy  and  activity  can  alone  rescue  Russia  from  the 
difficult  position  in  which  she  is  placed.  Your  Im- 
perial Majesty  appears  to  be  of  quite  a  different 
opinion  :  you  look  upon  the  principles  which  have 
guided  our  action  as  noxious  and  dangerous,  and  you 