

'  Such  wras  the  view  we  expressed  in  London ;  and 
Austria  and  Prussia  equally  desired  peace.  But  it 
had  yet  to  be  ascertained  whether  peace  was  possible ; 
if  not,  we  should  at  least  acquire  the  conviction  that 
the  only  cause  to  be  adopted  was  to  enter  on  a  vigorous 
and  combined  war.  M.  d'Oubril  was  accordingly  sent 
to  Vienna  and  Paris  to  sound  the  views  of  the  French 
Government,  and  Lord  G.  L.  Gower  was  fully  in- 
formed as  to  this  mission.  .  .  . 


158       MEMOIRS  OF  r RINGS  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

(  Shortly  after  M.  d'Oubril's  departure,  an  essential 
change  occurred  in  the  situation.  From  the  moment 

^ 

that  the  British  Cabinet  became  certain  of  the 
treachery  of  Prussia,  a  new  turn  was  given  to  the 
opinions  and  views  of  the  English  Ministry,  which 
now  showed  us  the  greatest  confidence.  France 
having  repeatedly  refused  to  treat  with  England  and 
Russia  together,  the  Cabinet  of  St  James's  at  once 

O  ' 

broke  off  the  negotiations,  and  declared  that  it  would 
not  resume  them  except  in  concert  with  its  ally.  It 
showed  throughout  equal  loyalty  and  moderation. 

'  Having  declared  war  against  Prussia,  England 
represented  that  it  was  necessary  for  the  allies  to 
strike  a  decisive  blow  on  the  Continent,  so  as  to 
produce  a  strong  impression  of  their  energy  and 
power,  and  thereby  encourage  the  States  under 
Buonaparte's  influence,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
render  him  more  moderate  in  his  pretensions.  In 
laying  this  plan  before  us,  the  British  Ministry 
declared  itself  ready  to  enter  into  any  other  projects 
we  might  form  either  in  the  west  or  the  south,  and  to 
support  them  with  all  the  means  at  England's  dis- 
posal. 

'  Though  for  various  reasons  your  Majesty  did  not 
think  fit  to  accept  the  English  proposals,*  you  were 
deeply  touched  by  this  noble  and  loyal  conduct,  and 
you  gave  strict  orders  that  no  arrangement  should  be 
concluded  with  France  except  in  concert  with  the 
British  Cabinet.  .  .  . 

'  Having   now   arrived   at  the  period    when    the 

*  Ail  allusion  to  one  of  the  causes  of  Prince  Czartoryski's  resignation. 


RETROSPECT  OF  J/1S  FOREIGN  POLICY         159 

Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  has  passed  into  other 
hands,  I  may  be  permitted,  Sire,  to  submit  to  your 
Majesty  a  rapid  survey  of  the  system  which  has  been 
followed  under  my  direction,  of  its  results,  and  of  the 
state  of  affairs  in  Europe  at  the  moment  of  my 
retirement. 

;  Since  the  rupture  of  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  Russia 
has  had  constantly  to  protest  against  the  violation  of 
treaties  by  the  ruler  of  France,  notwithstanding  the 
most  precise  stipulations.  She  has  constantly  been 
threatened  by  the  gigantic  increase  of  a  new  Empire, 
which,  by  destroying  and  subjecting  its  neighbours, 
necessarily  tended  to  fall  with  all  its  weight  upon. 
Russia,  as  the  only  Power  capable  of  struggling  with 
France  for  the  Empire  of  the  world.  .  .  .  There 
was  but  one  mode  of  resisting  Napoleon  with  any 
chance  of  success,  namely,  the  creation  of  a  system  of 
general  alliances.  No  European  Power  was  capable  of 
facing  Napoleon  alone  ;  it  was  therefore  necessary  that 
all  the  greater  Powers  should  unite  to  defend  the 
existence  of  each  of  them.  Russia  especially  was 
bound  to  support  her  neighbours  in  order  to  prevent 
their  falling  a  prey  to  the  conqueror,  and  affording 
him  additional  resources  which  he  could  use  against 
her.  This  system,  worthy  of  a  great  Empire,  and 
conformable  not  only  with  its  own  interests  and  those 
of  its  allies,  but  with  the  good  of  humanity,  was 
created  by  Russia. 