


164      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

tected  by  the  Minister,  concealed  from  him  the 
instructions  he  had  received.  This  passes  belief,  and 
would  in  itself  have  been  a  sufficient  justification  for 
your  resignation. 

I  can  assure  you  positively  that  the  King  of 
England  and  his  Ministry  know  and  appreciate  you, 
and  that  Fox  alone  is  doubtless  very  glad  to  see  your 
withdrawal  from  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs. 
Lord  G.  L.  Gower  speaks  of  you  with  the  greatest 
respect,  esteem  and  attachment.' 

[See  also  Thiers'  History  of  the  Consulate  and  the 
Empire,  Book  xxiv  :  '  M.  d'Oubril  was  strengthened 
in  his  idea  of  signing  a  treaty  of  peace  with  France 
by  the  fact  that  there  had  been  a  change  in  the 
Russian  Ministry  while  he  was  on  his  way  to  Paris. 
Prince  Czartoryski  and  his  friends  having  wished  to 
enter  into  more  intimate  engagements  with  England, 
not  necessarily  in  order  to  continue  the  war,  but  to  be 
in  a  more  advantageous  position  to  treat  with  France, 
Alexander,  fatigued  by  their  remonstrances,  and  fear- 
ing to  be  too  closely  bound  to  the  British  Cabinet, 
had  at  length  accepted  their  resignations,  which  had 
been  frequently  submitted  to  him,  and  had  replaced 
Prince  Czartoryski  by  Baron  Budberg.  The  Baron 
was  formerly  the  Emperor's  tutor  and  a  friend  of  the 
Empress  Dowager,  and  had  neither  strength  nor 
inclination  to  resist  his  master.'*] 

*  The  above  views  are  further  confirmed  by  a  letter  in  the  Record  Office 
addressed  by  Mr  Stuart,  then  Charge"  d'Affaires  at  St  Petersburg,  to  Lord  Grenville 
on  the  20th  of  August  180(5,  in  which  Mr  Stuart  says  that  he  assured  Prince  Czar- 
toryski '  that  the  high  opinion  his  upright  and  honourable  frankness  had  inspired  in 
England  would  remain  unsullied,  and  that  although  the  real  state  of  the  case  could 
not  hitherto  be  perfectly  known,  his  character  was  not  implicated  by  the  slightest 
suspicion  to  his  disadvantage  on  the  part  of  his  Majesty's  Ministers.' 


CHAPTER  XV 

1806 

PROPOSAL  OP  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  FOR  A  RECONSTRUCTION  OP  POLAND. 

— REPLY   OF    THE  EMPEROR   ALEXANDER. ADVANCE  OF  NAPOLEON 

INTO  POLAND. 

THOUGH  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  had  ceased  to  be 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  he  remained  for  many 
years  after  one  of  the  most  esteemed  and  valued  of  the 
Emperor  Alexander's  counsellors,  and  there  are 
numerous  memoranda  on  both  internal  and  external 
Russian  policy  in  the  Czartoryski  archives  which  were 
prepared  for  the  Emperor  by  the  Prince  after  his 
resignation.  Among  these  is  the  following  paper, 
dated  the  5th  of  December  1806,  'On  the  necessity  of 
restoring  Poland  to  forestall  Buonaparte  :' 