

VOL.  II.  L 


1 62       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

from    letters   addressed     to   the     Prince     by    Count 
Vorontzoff,  the  Russian  Ambassador  in  London  :— 

'SOUTHAMPTON,  H  July,  1806. 

'What  I  feared,  and  yet  hoped  would  not  happen, 
has  come  to  pass.  I  have  just  learnt,  to  my  great 
grief,  that  you  have  resigned  your  post,  my  dear 
Prince.  I  pity  the  Emperor  and  my  country,  and  I 
cannot  conceive  how  he  could  have  been  induced  to 
accept  your  resignation. 

I  congratulate  our  mutual  friends  M.  de  Novosilt- 
zoff  and  Count  Kotchoubey  on  not  having  wished  to 
separate  from  you.  It  is  easy  for  those  who  know  you 
as  I  do  to  understand  that  your  resignation  has  been 
the  consequence  of  a  complete  change  in  our  political 
system,  and  that  this  change  was  opposed  to  your 
principles  and  views  and  to  your  high  spirit.  Your 
resignation  does  you  honour  ;  I  am  proud  to  have 
such  a  friend.  .  .  . ' 

'  SOUTHAMPTON,  5th  August  (N.S.)  1806. 
'  I  cannot  blame  you  ;  on  the  contrary,  I  can  only 
approve  your  noble  conduct  on  this  occasion.  Your 
counsels,  which  tended  only  to  the  glory  and  the  good 
of  the  State,  were  not  followed.  The  Government 
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  intriguers,  and  you 
refused  to  soil  your  honourable  name  b}^  lending  it  to 
their  shameful  transactions.  It  is  only  through 
d'Oubril's  knowledge  that  your  resignation  was  im- 
minent and  inevitable  that  he  was  able  to  cast  eternal 
shame  on  Russia. 


HIS  OPPOSITION  TO  AN  ALLIANCE  WITH  FRANCE  163 

'  WALCOT,  TV  October  1806. 

'  Mr  Battye  has  sent  me  here  your  letter  of  the 
25th  of  August,  which  you  gave  him  for  me.  The 
reasons  you  give  for  your  resignation  had  been 
already  anticipated  by  me,  as  I  felt  certain  that  a  man 
of  your  judgment  and  character  could  not  consent  to 
carry  out  a  policy  contrary  to  his  opinions  and  based 
on  cowardly  principles  which  could  only  bring  danger 
and  dishonour  to  the  State  and  the  sovereign  who 
dictated  them. 

'  I  am  now  staying  at  Lord  Powis's  estate  in 
Shropshire,  and  Count  StrogonofF  came  the  day 
before  yesterday  to  bid  me  good-bye.  I  showed  him 
your  letter,  and  he  handed  me  the  one  he  had 
received  from  you.  The  contents  of  these  two  letters 
prove  to  me  that  I  had  rightly  guessed  the  motives 
of  d'Oubril's  infamous  conduct.  He  knew  that  you 
were  no  longer  in  office  ;  that  Baron  Budberg,  like  all 
Livonians,  was  attached  to  Prussia,  whose  interest  is 
to  keep  Hanover  and  obtain  other  advantages  from 
France,  to  promote  dissensions  between  Russia  and 
England,  and  to  reconcile  Russia  with  the  Corsican, 

O  ' 

and  that  the  Emperor  is  weak,  pusillanimous,  and  also 
attached  to  Prussia.  If  he  succeeded,  he  would  be 
decorated  and  rewarded  both  by  Alexander  and 
Napoleon ;  if  he  failed,  Budberg  would  see  that  he 
escaped  punishment.  I  did  not  however  guess  that 
the  Emperor  had  given  instructions  to  a  subordinate 
behind  the  back  of  the  Minister  who  was  his  chief, 
and  that  the  subordinate,  though  selected  and  pro- 