

'  In  the  struggle  which  is  to  decide*  on  the  fate  of 
Russia  and  of  Europe,  Poland  has  at  this  juncture  of 
affairs  become  a  principal  object  of  consideration  with 
the  two  Empires  which  are  about  to  come  into 
immediate  collision  with  each  other ;  but  she  is  looked 
upon  by  each  of  them  in  an  entirely  different  manner. 
For  the  French  she  is  a  source  of  safety,  an  object 

*  It  will  be  observed    that  this  memorandum  was  written  after  Napoleon's 
victory  at  Jena. 


166       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

which  animates  their  courage  and  strengthens  their 
perseverance  ;  it  is  in  Poland  that  Buonaparte  sees 
his  standpoint  for  fighting  Russia  and  penetrating 
within  her  old  frontiers.  Though  moving  away  from 
his  centre  of  operations,  Poland  would  furnish  to  his 
fertile  genius  and  indefatigable  activity  the  same 
resources  as  France — a  population  easily  exercised  in 
the  profession  of  arms,  brave  and  experienced  officers, 
money,  provisions,  and  an  attachment  to  the  existence, 
the  honour,  and  the  liberties  of  their  country  so  deep 
that  it  will  move  them  to  the  highest  efforts.  For 
Russia,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Poles  are  a  motive  of 
continual  anxieties  and  suspicions  ;  they  have  fre- 
quently been  used  by  Buonaparte  as  a  bugbear  to  the 
partitioning  Powers.  Though  Poland  affords  all  the 
resources  capable  of  supporting  the  war  and  power- 
fully contributing  to  the  defence  of  the  throne,  the 
Russian  Government  fears  to  make  use  of  the  Poles 
lest  they  should  turn  against  it.  ...  Under  these 
circumstances  Poland  diminishes  the  power  of  Russia 
in  the  same  proportion  as  she  augments  that  of 
France. 

'  It  is  obviously  desirable,  in  the  Russian  interest, 
to  reverse  this  state  of  things  ;  and  to  obtain  such  a 
result  there  is  only  one  way  :  to  proclaim  Poland  as  a 
kingdom,  the  Emperor  declaring  himself  King  on 
behalf  of  himself  and  his  successors  for  ever. 

'  The  advantages  of  such  a  step — equally  magnani- 
mous and  politic — would  be  incalculable.  The  general 
enthusiasm  it  would  excite  in  all  the  Poles,  the 
gratitude  which  would  rally  all  Polish  hearts  and 


PROPOSAL  TO  RECONSTRUCT  POLAND  167 

arms  round  the  throne,  would  entirely  change  Russia's 
situation  and  that  of  her  enemies.  Instead  of  seeing 
her  provinces  exposed  to  Buonaparte's  seductions,  she 
would  be  able  to  raise  their  inhabitants  against  him ; 
and  Russia,  instead  of  having  an  immense  frontier 
exposed  to  the  colossal  Empire  of  France,  would,  by 
re-establishing  Poland,  create  an  outpost  behind  which 
she  would  remain  intact  with  all  her  forces  at  her 
command.  Moreover,  every  cause  of  anxiety  for 
Russia  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  Poles,  and  every 
motive  for  speculating  on  such  conduct  on  the  part  of 
her  enemies,  would  be  for  ever  removed — an  inappre- 
ciable advantage  for  the  internal  happiness,  tranquillity, 
and  power  of  the  Empire. 