


CHAPTEK  XIV 

1806 


RESIGNATION    BY    PRINCE     ADAM    CZARTORYSKI     OF     THE     POSITION     OF 

MINISTER    OF    FOREIGN    AFFAIRS    IN    RUSSIA. RETROSPECT    OF  HIS 

POLICY  IN  THIS  CAPACITY. — HIS  OPPOSITION  TO  AN  ALLIANCE  WITH 
FRANCE  AT  THE  EXPENSE  OF  ENGLAND. 


ON  the  17th  of  June,  1806,  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski, 
after  repeatedly  requesting  the  Emperor  Alexander 
to  relieve  him  of  the  duties  of  Foreign  Minister, 
finally  retired  from  that  post.  He  had,  as  will  be 
seen  from  the  following  letter,  ample  reason  to  justify 
him  in  taking  this  step,  but  the  chief  cause  of  his 
having  done  so  was  one  that  he  could  hardly  state  in 
precise  terms  to  the  Emperor.  He  had  only  accepted 
his  position  in  the  Ministry  because  he  believed  that 
by  so  doing  he  might  be  of  service  to  Poland.  Alex- 
ander's persistence  in  seeking  the  alliance  of  Prussia 
convinced  him  that  this  belief  was  a  delusive  one,  and 
his  sole  motive  for  remaining  in  the  Russian  Ministry 
thus  ceased  to  exist.  Moreover,  the  hopes  of  the 
Poles  had  been  raised  by  the  approach  of  Napoleon  ; 
if  France  were  to  make  war  again  upon  Russia,  which 
seemed  more  than  probable,  Napoleon  would  doubtless 


RESIGNATION  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI    153 

strive  to  secure  the  support  of  the  Poles  by  promising 
to  restore  their  independence,  and  in  that  case  it  would 
be  impossible  for  Prince  Adam  to  continue  to  direct 
the  foreign  policy  of  a  State  with  which  his  country- 
men might  be  at  war. 

Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  to  the  Emperor. 

22nd  of  March  1806. 

It  is  not  with  the  object  of  exaggerating  to  your 
Imperial  Majesty  the  dangers  which  threaten  your 
Empire,  or  of  uselessly  alarming  you  as  to  its  position, 
that  I  have  prepared  the  memorandum  which  I  now 
submit  to  your  consideration.  It  has  been  dictated  by 
sincere  zeal,  and  after  mature  reflection.  I  have 
thought  it  indispensable  to  point  out  to  your  Majesty 
some  of  the  dangers  by  which  you  are  surrounded  and 
which  you  do  not  seem  to  perceive.  Russia  is  really 
in  a  very  critical  position.  Her  difficulties  and  yours, 
Sire,  may  increase  in  a  degree  which  I  cannot  contem- 
plate without  fear.  I  therefore  think  there  is  not  a 
moment  to  be  lost  in  proposing  to  your  Majesty  the 
only  measure  which  can  render  possible  all  the  others 
which  must  be  necessitated  by  circumstances — a 
measure  not  sufficient  to  secure  the  safety  of  the 
State,  but  without  which  it  would  become  too  pre- 
carious, if  not  quite  unattainable. 

Until  the  late  war  began  there  was  a  certain  de- 
gree of  uniformity  in  the  action  of  the  Government, 
for  your  Majesty  showed  some  confidence  in  the  per- 
sons with  whom  you  consulted,  and  usually  discussed 
affairs  before  deciding  upon  them.  Even  then,  how- 