


CHAPTER  XVII 

1809-10 


CONVERSATIONS  WITH    ALEXANDER  I  ON  POLISH    AFFAIRS. HIS  OPINION 

OF  THE  CHARACTER  OF  NAPOLEON. HIS  PLANS  FOR  A  RECONSTRUC- 
TION OF  POLAND. 


THE  creation  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  by  Napoleon, 
and  the  augmentation  of  its  territory  by  part  of 
Galicia  after  the  war  between  France  and  Austria  in 
1809,  in  which  the  Polish  troops  greatly  distinguished 
themselves,  had  gradually  restored  in  some  degree  to 
the  Polish  provinces  south  of  the  Vistula  the  powers 
of  an  independent  State,  though  its  sovereign,  the 
King  of  Saxony,  was  practically  the  vassal  of  Napo- 
leon. Under  these  circumstances  Prince  Adam 
Czartoryski  gradually  withdrew  from  the  Imperial 
Council*  at  St  Petersburg,  and  retained  only  the  post 
of  Curator  of  the  University  of  Wilna,  which  had  been 
conferred  upon  him  by  the  Emperor  Alexander 
together  with  the  portfolio  of  Foreign  Affairs.  This 
post  gave  him  extensive  powers  over  the  educational 
establishments  in  Lithuania,  which  he  completely 

*  The  date  of  his  last  communication  to  the  Council  (on  Russian  Finance)  is  the 
29th  of  January,  1810. 


CONVERSATIONS  ON  POLISH  AFFAIRS  191 

reorganised  and  developed  in  a  national  sense.  He 
did  not,  however,  lose  sight  of  his  favourite  idea  of 
reconstructing  Poland  as  a  separate  kingdom  under 
the  sceptre  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  ;  and  the  follow- 
ing are  notes,  written  by  himself  at  the  time,  of  his 
conversations  with  Alexander  on  this  subject  in 
1809-10  : 

12th  November,  1809. 

.  .  .  Referring  to  Napoleon's  letter  to  the  Em- 
peror and  M.  de  Champagny's  despatch  on  Poland,  I 
said  that  I  could  only  be  pained  at  the  knowledge  that 
the  Emperor  is  now  made  the  chief  enemy  and  perse- 
cutor of  the  Polish  nation  and  name  ;  that  it  was  only 
to  please  him  that  Poland  had  been  abandoned  and 
deprived  of  all  hope  ;  and  that  he  carried  his  animosity 
so  far  as  even  to  wish  the  name  of  Poland  to  be 
effaced  from  history. 

The  Emperor  at  first  defended  himself  against  this 
charge.  He  said  that  his  personal  sentiments  had  not 
changed,  that  they  had  long  been  known  to  me,  that 
he  was  bound  by  the  duties  of  his  position,  and  that 
every  Russian  Emperor  would  have  done  the  same.  I 
answered  that  I  could  not  on  this  point  separate  the  Em- 
peror's personal  inclinations  from  his  political  opinions  ; 
that  he  had  himself  recognised  that  the  restoration  of 
Poland  could  be  accomplished  not  only  without  injur- 
ing the  interests  of  Russia,  but  on  the  contrary,  to  her 
great  advantage,  by  uniting  the  two  crowns  on  his 
Majesty's  head.  The  Emperor  replied  that  all  this 
might  be  true,  but  that  the  thing  was  not  practicable, 