

As  the  integrity  and  independence  of  the 
Ottoman  Empire  are  of  as  great  interest  to  Russia  as 
to  France,  and  the  two  Powers  equally  wish  to 
guarantee  it,  it  will  only  be  just  that  there  should  be 
perfect  reciprocity  in  this  respect.  Whatever  guar- 
antee the  Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries  may  require  from 
Russia  on  the  north,  the  Cabinet  of  St  Petersburg 
will  have  a  right  to  demand  a  similar  guarantee  in 
the  south.  The  Porte  has  itself  every  interest  in 
seconding  us  in  this  demand,  and  Austria  and  Eng- 
land will  be  called  upon  to  take  part  in  the  arrange- 
ment. 

5.  The  crown  of  Sicily  would  be  retained  in  the 
possession  of  King  Ferdinand.     If  Buonaparte  were 
to  demand  that  the  title  of  King  of  the  two  Sicilies 
should  be  recognized  in  favour  of  Joseph  his  brother, 
one  might  grant  it  without  any  territorial  or  sovereign 
rights.     Although  this  matter  might  seem  of  indirect 
importance  to  Russia,  it  affects  her  safety  and  pros- 


i86       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

perity  too  greatly  not  to  form  an  essential  object  of 
the  negotiations. 

G.  The  kingdom  of  Sardinia  will  be  maintained  and 
guaranteed  by  all  the  Powers  which  have  treaties  with 
the  King. 

7.  If  England  can  make  peace  on  the  basis  indi- 
cated by  Buonaparte  in  his  address  to  the  Senate,  i.e., 
the  retention  of  Malta,  the  island  of  Ceylon,  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope,  and  her  conquests  in  Mysore,  Russia 
will  accede  to  such  an  arrangement,  without,  however, 
interfering  with  regard  to  any  difficulties  which  might 
ultimately  be  raised  with  regard  to  the  negotiations 
between  France  and  England. 

o 

8.  If  Sweden    should  accede  to   this    peace,   the 
two  contracting  Powers  will   guarantee  her  present 
possessions. 

9.  Indemnities  could  be  afforded  for  the  King  of 
Sicily  or  Sardinia  by  the  bay  of  Cattaro,  the  Seven 
Islands,  or  the  part  of  Dalmatia  which  formerly  be- 
longed to  Venice,  should  it  be  given  up.     Dalmatia 
might  also  be  used  for   making  useful  exchanges  of 
territory  with  Austria. 

10.  The  happy  idea  of  destroying   the   Barbary 
States   having   been  formerly  suggested    by   Buona- 
parte, would  probably  be  now  accepted  by  him,  and 
these    States   would    also  afford  a  means  of  making 
arrangements    whose    results    would    be    of    general 
interest. 

Similar  negotiations  will  at  once  be  opened  in 
Austria,  at  Constantinople,  in  England,  and  at  the 
other  Courts,  with  a  view  to  obtaining  their  concur- 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  187 

rence  or  intervention  as  regards  the  objects  of  the  pro- 
posed treaty. 

[After  the  so-called  *  Polish  Campaign/  during  the 
winter  of  1806-7,  Napoleon  made  peace  with  Russia 
at  Tilsit  (July  7,  1807).  Although  Prince  Czar- 
toryski  had  ceased  to  be  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs 
at  St  Petersburg,  he  was  present  at  the  negotiations, 
and  still  exercised  considerable  influence  over  Alex- 
ander's mind,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  letter 
from  the  British  Ambassador,  Lord  Granville 
Leveson  Gower,  urging  him  to  use  his  good  offices 
with  the  Emperor  to  prevent  his  concluding  a  one- 
sided peace  with  Napoleon  :— 