

While  our  enemy,  as  active  as  he  is  fortunate,  is 


i;6       ME. MOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

making  such  terrible  progress,  we  have  only  managed 
to  reunite  the    various    corps    which    compose   our 
great  western  army,  and  are  only  beginning  the  pre-  ' 
parations  for   the  arming  of  the  militia  which  have 
been  ordered  by  your  Imperial  Majesty. 

Notwithstanding  the  immense  resources  of  this 
Empire,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  for 
the  present  we  have  only  one  army  to  oppose  to  the 
victorious  armies  of  Buonaparte ;  that  our  recruits 
cannot  be  ready  to  fight  till  next  spring  ;  that  our 
militia  levies  will  come  in  slowly,  and  that  time  will 
be  necessary  to  enable  them  to  furnish  corps  capable 
of  coming  into  line  with  the  regular  army  and 
supplying  our  losses  ;  further,  that  useful  as  they  may 
be  in  combining  the  operations  of  a  partisan  war  with 
those  of  a  powerful  regular  army,  they  might  be 
equally  injurious,  should  that  army  be  routed,  by 
increasing  the  confusion  and  danger. 

Under  these  circumstances  every  faithful  subject 
of  your  Imperial  Majesty — every  good  Russian — 
must  be  struck  by  the  sad  truth  that  the  Russian 
Empire  is  nearly  in  the  same  situation  as  Prussia  was 
last  October.*  All  the  regular  troops  we  can  dispose 
of  are  on  the  frontier.  If  these  are  beaten,  an  immense 
extent  of  country  will  be  at  the  mercy  of  the  French 
conqueror,  and  the  elements  of  insurrection  which  he 
has  doubtless  spread  in  our  western  provinces  lead 
one  to  fear  that  a  lost  battle  would  have  incalculable 
consequences. 

*  Before  the  battle  of  Jena. 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  177 

Necessity  of  Peace. 

In  presence  of  this  alarming  picture  of  the  situa- 
tion the  want  of  peace  becomes  a  universal  sentiment, 
and  should  unite  all  hopes,  wishes,  and  parties. 

The  enlightened  politician  and  the  determined 
soldier  will  both  agree  to  ask  themselves  why  pacific 
overtures  should  not  be  attempted  rather  than  to  per- 
sist in  a  struggle  whose  danger  is  imminent  and 
directly  menaces  this  Empire. 

Objection. 

How  can  we  forget  the  maxims  of  energy,  perse- 
verance, and  loyalty,  which  are  the  foundations  of  true 
greatness  and  a  sure  policy,  and  which  have  always 
guided  the  Russian  Cabinet  ?  Did  we  not  on  this 
principle  refuse  to  ratify  the  Treaty  of  the  -gV  July  ?  * 
Would  not  an  offer  of  peace  compromise  the  national 
glory  and  show  that  we  feel  our  weakness  ? 

Reply. 

Energy  and  perseverance  have  their  limits,  beyond 
which  they  become  obstinacy  or  rashness.  They 
should  aim  only  at  objects  which  are  attainable,  and 
whose  pursuit  is  not  accompanied  by  dangers  out  of 
all  proportion  to  the  advantages  to  be  secured.  These 
great  qualities  do  not  only  manifest  themselves  in 
military  operations  ;  the  latter  have  to  be  skilfully 
combined  with  political  measures. 