


REPLY  OF  THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER          171 

I  think  it  will  be  useless,  as  our  fundamental  princi- 
ples are  so  diametrically  opposed  to  each  other. 
After  pointing  out  the  critical  position  in  which 
Russia  is  placed  and  the  evils  she  has  to  fear,  the  only 
means  you  propose  for  meeting  the  danger  may  be 
reduced  to  two  : 

1.  That  I  should  declare  myself  King  of  Poland. 

2.  That   my   Ministers   of  War  and    of  Foreign 
Affairs  should  be  changed. 

The  discussion  of  the  first  of  these  points  would  be 
too  long,  but  I  am  ready  to  state  my  views  and  the 
reasons  which  guide  my  conduct.  As  to  the  second 
point,  I  am  satisfied  with  the  services  which  the 
Ministers  in  question  render  me.  Who  is  this  perfect 
Minister  of  whom  everyone  would  approve  ?  Is  it 
General  Suchtelen  ?  I  tell  you  plainly  that  I  do  not 
look  upon  him  as  possessing  the  qualities  required  of 
a  War  Minister,  and  that  of  the  two  I  do  not  hesitate 
for  a  moment  to  give  the  preference  to  General 
Viasnitinoff.  Nor  do  I  see  anyone  for  the  Foreign 
Department.  Would  it  be  a  Panin  or  a  Markoff? 
I  must  esteem  those  with  whom  I  work ;  it  is  only 
on  this  condition  that  I  can  give  them  my  confidence. 
Clamour  troubles  me  but  little  ;  it  is  generally  nothing 
more  than  the  effect  of  party  spirit.  Are  not  you 
yourself  an  example  of  this  ?  Have  you  not  been 
exposed  to  the  criticism  and  animosity  of  the  whole 
nation  ?  I  must  also  remark  that  it  would  have  been 
better  if  the  Committee*  had  not  employed  a  stranger 

*  The  'Secret  Council,'  to  which  Prince  Czartoryski  still  belonged.      See  Vol 
I.,  p.  257. 


1 72       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

to  copy  such  a  paper  as  the  one  I  am  answering.  In 
order  to  bring  us  together  again  it  will  first  be 
necessary  for  us  to  agree  that,  whatever  may  be  said 
in  the  Committee,  our  individual  and  mutual  relations 
shall  remain  intact,  and  that  we  should  follow  the 
example  of  English  Members  of  Parliament,  who,  after 
saying  the  most  bitter  things  to  each  other  in  the 
House  in  the  heat  of  debate,  are  excellent  friends 
when  the  debate  is  over. — Ever  yours, 

ALEXANDER. 


Tlie  Emperor  to  Prince  Czartoryski. 

(Without  date). 

I  was  far  from  intending  to  give  you  pain.  As 
I  was  speaking  of  such  important  matters,  I  was 
obliged  to  do  so  in  accordance  with  my  conviction, 
and  I  expressed  myself  accordingly.  In  the  conclud- 
ing part  of  your  memorandum  you  offer  to  hand  me 
a  detailed  and  general  plan  of  the  measures  to  be 
taken  in  succession  to  those  which  you  propose.  If 
you  like,  we  can  meet  in  committee  to-morrow,  after 
dinner  at  six  o'clock.  We  will  make  the  plan  to- 
gether, and  then  discuss  it. — Ever  yours, 