

Without  ceasing  to  watch  over  the  general  good  of 
Europe — without  losing  sight  of  the  feeble  hopes  of 
our  crushed  allies — the  indefeasible  law  of  our  own 


i8o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

preservation  is  the  only  one  that  should  guide  us  ;  all 
other  duties  and  interests  must  give  way  to  it. 

Our  policy  thereby  becomes  independent,  and  if  a 
tolerable  peace,  affording  some  elements  of  safety, 
could  be  concluded,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  our 
entering  into  negotiations ;  on  the  contrary,  every 
consideration  should  induce  us  to  do  so. 

Even  the  safety  of  our  allies  makes  such  a  course 
imperative ;  for  if  by  a  sentiment  of  false  delicacy,  by 
false  principles  of  loyalty,  or  by  personal  feelings,  we 
exposed  ourselves  to  perish  in  order  to  save  them,  our 
fall  would  not  alleviate  their  misfortune,  but  aggra- 
vate it  by  depriving  them  of  the  most  distant  hope  of 
preserving  what  remains  to  them,  or  of  some  day 
repairing  their  disasters. 

It  is  therefore  evident  that  the  changes  which 
have  occurred  in  our  political  relations,  and  in  the 
situation  of  Europe,  call  upon  us  to  seek  peace  as 
urgently  as  the  position  of  affairs  before  the  ruin  of 
the  Germanic  Empire  and  the  destruction  of  Prussia 
deterred  us  from  doing  so. 

We  should  treat  for  peace  without  losing  time. 

If  the  necessity  of  this  measure  is  agreed  upon,  it 
must  equally  be  admitted  that  the  negotiations  should 
be  opened  as  soon  as  possible,  and  that  there  is  not  a 
moment  to  be  lost. 

It  is  an  incontestable  principle  in  politics  that 
peace  should  be  offered  at  a  time  when  one  is  in  a 
position  to  insist  upon  it,  or  at  least  to  accept  it  with 
dignity. 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  j8i 

Our  armies  are  intact ;  the  enemy  is  no  doubt 
aware  of  the  formation  of  our  reserves  and  the  numer- 
ous levy  of  our  militia.  Soon  he  will  hear  of  the 
patriotic  offers  which  will  be  brought  to  the  foot  of 
the  throne  by  all  parts  of  the  Empire  ;  he  will  also  be 
informed  of  our  successes  against  the  Persians,  and 
the  advantageous  positions  we  have  just  occupied  on 
the  Dniester  and  the  Danube.  He  is  certainly  not 
ignorant  of  the  obstacles  to  his  advance — the  distance, 
the  climate,  the  season  of  the  year — in  a  war  which 
would  be  equally  long  and  dangerous.  His  first 
interest,  therefore,  will  be  again  to  astonish  Europe 
by  the  rapidity  of  his  combined  movements,  and  to 
strike  a  decisive  blow.  He  will  hasten,  therefore, 
directly  he  is  able  to  do  so,  to  fall  on  our  great  army 
with  all  the  weight  of  his  troops  in  order  to  force  a 
battle  ;  and  our  wise  intention  of  evading  one  might 
perhaps  yield  to  the  vivacity  of  his  pursuit,  or  to  the 
thought  of  the  pain  it  would  give  our  generals  to 
abandon  the  field  to  the  enemy. 