

Such  a  situation  cannot  last  long.  Now  or  never 
is  the  time  to  talk  of  peace,  if  we  do  not  want  to  wait 
till  we  are  forced  to  beg  for  it  after  a  reverse.  Arid 
what  peace  could  we  hope  for  from  a  conqueror,  whose 
pride  would  be  swelled  by  his  victory  over  the  best 
troops  in  the  world,  and  who  would  increase  his 
claims  and  his  demand  for  revenge  according  to  the 
greatness  of  the  vanquished  ? 

Let  us  suppose — for  it  is  prudent  to  anticipate 
the  worst  in  our  calculations — that  our  great  army 
is  dispersed,  and  our  Western  provinces  are  agitated 


1 82       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

by  the  hope  of  recovering  their  independence,  or  by 
the  grant  of  liberty  to  the  peasants.  Shall  we  allow 
the  conflagration  to  spread  in  these  rich  territories  ? 
Can  we  foresee  where  it  would  stop  ?  Would  we  con- 
sent to  the  humiliation  of  offering  territorial  cessions 
to  the  conqueror  ?  And  if  so,  within  what  limits  ;  or 
would  we  be  entirely  at  his  mercy  ? 

These  considerations,  improbable  as  the  supposi- 
tion on  which  they  are  based  may  be,  show  that  we 
ought  to  attempt  to  prevent  such  terrible  extremities 
by  concluding  peace.  The  occasion  naturally  presents 
itself  now  that  the  war  is  assuming  a  new  character. 
Before  it  begins  between  these  two  great  nations, 
whose  collision  would  shake  the  Continent,  is  it  not 
natural  that  an  effort  should  be  made,  even  if  only  in 
the  interests  of  humanity,  to  stop  it  ? 

Moreover,  Buonaparte  himself,  in  his  address  to 
the  Senate,  has  declared  that  he  is  ready  to  make 
peace  with  Russia  and  England,  and  even  with 
Prussia.  Even  more  ;  he  declares  that  the  system  of 
making  separate  peaces,  hitherto  followed  by  the 
French  Cabinet,  has  only  produced  delusive  truces 
and  given  rise  to  new  coalitions,  and  that  he  will  now 
only  consent  to  a  general  peace  with  all  the  Powers 
concerned.  He  has  thus,  so  to  say,  taken  the  first 
step,  and  it  is  for  us  to  take  the  second,  if  we  do  riot 
wish  to  leave  him  the  advantage  he  is  always  claim- 
ing, of  having  professed  peaceful  sentiments  in  the 
midst  of  his  success  and  yet  never  having  been 
listened  to. 

This  new  phase  in  the  policy  of  France,  however 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  183 

insidious  may  be  its  motive,  offers  Russia  a  plausible 
pretext  for  proposing  to  open  the  negotiations,  and 
our  Cabinet  may  take  it  the  more  frankly,  as  the 
other  belligerents  are  equally  concerned  in  it. 


On  what  basis  can  we,  treat  f 

The  point  here  to  be  considered  is  on  what  basis 
we  can  expect  to  get  peace. 

We  must  not  forget  that  peace  is,  as  has  been 
shown  above,  absolutely  necessary  to  us  ;  that  in 
present  circumstances  the  sole  object  of  the  negotia- 
tions should  be  the  safety  of  the  Empire,  isolated  as 
it  is  at  present  from  all  that  it  had  to  preserve  abroad; 
that  all  interests  not  affecting  that  object,  or  only 
indirectly  affecting  it,  have  become  subordinate  to  it ; 
and  that  we  must  be  satisfied  even  with  a  tolerable 
peace,  provided  it  offers  elements  of  security  to 
Russia. 