

*  The  Treaty  of  Peace  signet!  by  M.  d'Oubril  at  Paris.     See  page  161. 
VOL.  II.  M 


178      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Difference  of  Circumstances. 

The  circumstances  which  have  drawn  Russia  into 
this  war,  and  which  have  made  its  prolongation  indis- 
pensable, were  essentially  different  from  the  present 
state  of  things. 

Former  Circumstances. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  1801  Russia  was  at 
peace  with  the  French  Government,  whose  friendship 
she  cultivated. 

The  insults  and  provocations  of  all  kinds,  and 
violations  of  the  most  solemn  treaties,  which  were 
perpetrated  by  the  Cabinet  of  the  Tuileries,  forced 
your  Imperial  Majesty  at  first  to  complain,  and  then 
to  make  alliances  to  support  common  rights  and  share 
common  dangers.  The  war  which  followed,  becoming 
every  day  more  fatal,  also  became  every  day  more 
necessary. 

Yet  the  enemy  was  far  from  having  attained  the 
point  to  which  his  astonishing  successes  have  since 
brought  him.  Europe  still  afforded  considerable 
means  of  opposing  the  overflow  of  his  ambition. 

Sacred  engagements  and  those  political  considera- 
tions which  constitute  so  essential  a  portion  of  the 
power  of  a  State,  did  not  permit  Russia  to  abandon 
her  allies  or  to  sacrifice  their  hopes  to  her  particular 
advantage. 

The  Cabinet  of  your  Imperial  Majesty  was  then 
obliged  to  develop  all  its  forces  to  prevent  or  avert  the 
fall  of  the  neighbouring  States,  which  served  her  as  a 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  179 

barrier  against  the  colossal  Empire  of  Buonaparte,  or 
through  which  it  still  had  means  of  making  a 
diversion. 

So  long  as  these  motives  and  views  existed,  it  was 
impossible  to  advise  a  peace  which,  owing  to  the  com- 
plication of  interests  and  the  sacrifices  that  would  be 
demanded  by  an  enemy  intoxicated  with  success,  could 
only  be  a  shameful  one  and  could  in  no  case  reassure 
us  as  to  the  future. 


Present  Circumstances. 

Now  that  by  a  succession  of  reverses,  to  which  there 
is  no  parallel  in  history,  all  the  countries  that  Russia 
has  endeavoured  to  save  are  reduced  to  timid  inaction, 
or  have  altogether  disappeared  from  the  ranks  of  the 
European  States,  there  is  no  longer  any  question  of 
protecting  States  on  our  borders  ;  our  borders  them- 
selves require  to  be  protected.  Our  Empire  is  about 
to  engage  in  a  direct  conflict  with  the  French  Empire, 
for  the  defence,  not  only  of  our  integrity,  but,  if  we 
may  venture  to  say  so,  of  our  existence. 

The  war,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  has  changed 
its  nature.  The  supreme  interest  of  the  State — the 
salvation  of  the  Empire — must  become  the  sole  object 
of  our  policy  at  this  new  epoch  of  a  struggle  equally 
memorable  and  unfortunate  for  so  many  beaten 
nations. 