

ALEXANDER. 

[Prince  Czartoryski's  proposal  was  not  accepted, 
and  the  result  was  that  when  Napoleon  entered 
Warsaw  (at  that  time  belonging  to  Prussia),  on  the 
18th  of  December,  1806,  he  was  received  by  the 


ADVANCE  OF  NAPOLEON  INTO  POLAND         173 

Poles  with  enthusiasm.  Deputations  came  to  him 
from  all  parts  of  Poland,  a  provisional  Government 
was  established,  and  volunteers  presented  themselves 
in  great  numbers  to  be  enrolled  in  the  French 
army.] 


CHAPTER  XVI 

1S06 

PROPOSED    PEACE    BETWEEN    RUSSIA    AND    NAPOLEOX. 

ON  the  21st  December  1806,  Prince  Czartoryski, 
who  was  still  a  member  of  the  Imperial  Council, 
addressed  the  following  Letter  and  Memorandum  to 
the  Emperor  Alexander  proposing  that  he  should 
treat  for  peace  with  Napoleon  : 

'  Novosiltzoff  and  myself  have  of  late  several 
times  had  the  opportunity  of  expressing  to  your 
Majesty  our  conviction  that  it  is  necessary  to 
endeavour  without  delay  to  treat  for  peace  with 
Buonaparte  before  our  army  can  be  attacked.  I 
think  we  cannot  at  this  moment  give  your  Majesty 
a  more  real  proof  of  our  attachment,  than  to  continue 
to  press  this  advice  upon  you. 

'  Having  heard  that  Lesseps  was  about  to  leave,  I 
can  no  longer  hesitate  to  lay  before  your  Majesty 
the  annexed  memorandum  which  had  been  prepared 
on  the  subject. 

'  You  will  consider,  Sire,  the  bad  effect  which 
would  be  produced  by  overtures  of  peace  made  only 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  175 

after  a  defeat,  while  at  this  moment,  even  if  we 
gained  some  victories,  such  overtures  could  in  no 
way  be  prejudicial  to  us.  I  would  suggest  that  your 
Imperial  Majesty  should  have  the  memorandum, 
which  we  take  the  liberty  of  presenting  to  you, 
discussed  in  your  Cabinet  Council.  It  would  be 
only  right  that  you  should  not  take  the  sole  responsi- 
bility for  a  step  which  might  have  decisive  con- 
sequences.' 

MEMORANDUM  ON  THE  NECESSITY  OF  OPENING  NEGO- 
TIATIONS OF  PEACE  WITH  NAPOLEON. 

Present  State  of  Affairs. 

Hardly  a  month  has  passed,  and  the  disasters 
of  Prussia,  following  each  other  with  unexampled 
rapidity,  have  completely  destroyed  her.  A  consider- 
able portion  of  Prussian  Poland  has  been  invaJod, 
Warsaw  is  occupied  by  the  French  troops,  large 
levies  have  been  organised,  and  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Polish  provinces  are  fired  with  the  hope  of 
recovering  their  independence  as  a  nation — a  hope 
stimulated  by  Napoleon's  numerous  proclamations. 

The  Hanseatic  towns,  Mecklenburg,  and  Hoi- 
stein,  have  been  involved  in  the  ruin  of  the  German 
Empire  ;  Stralsund  has  been  invested. 

It  is  with  all  the  forces  and  united  resources  of 
the  French  Empire,  of  Germany,  and  of  Prussia,  that 
Napoleon  is  approaching  our  frontiers. 