

All  else  that  we  could  hope  for  as  regards  our- 
selves and  our  allies — whether  in  augmenting  our 
preparations  and  our  efforts,  or  in  gaining  some 
advantages,  or  through  the  support  of  other  Powers, 
or  the  skill  of  diplomatists,  will  always  be  an  object 
of  our  wishes  and  even  of  our  action,  but  we  should 
not  consider  it  essential  to  realise  such  hopes,  or 
regard  their  non-fulfilment  as  an  insurmountable 

o 

obstacle  to  peace.  We  need  be  the  less  obstinate  on 
this  point,'  that  as  our  enemy  is  ready  to  accept 
negotiation  in  common  for  a  general  pacification,  our 
allies,  especially  England  and  Prussia,  will  each  look 


184      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

after  their  own  interests,  and  we  shall  relatively  have 
greater  latitude  in  working  for  ours. 

The  Treaty  of  A  July  last*  not  to  be  revived. 

Acting  on  the  principle  above  indicated,  it  is 
unnecessary  to  observe  that  the  Treaty  of  ^  July  last 
cannot  be  revived  either  by  Russia  or  by  France  ;  for, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  evacuation  of  Germany  by  the 
French,  as  stipulated  in  that  Treaty,  can  no  longer  be 
hoped  for  after  the  late  immense  conquests  and  aggres- 
sions of  Buonaparte,  and  on  the  other,  we  now  have 
what  we  did  not  have  then — compensations  to 
demand  for  the  district  which  our  safety  compelled 
us  to  occupy  in  Turkey. 

Bases  of  the  Negotiation. 

1.  The  greatest  facilities  would  be  given  as  to  the 
arrangements  Napoleon    might  be  disposed  to    make 
either  with  England  or  Prussia   or  with   any  other 
Power  as  to  the  countries  he  has  occupied  since  the 
renewal  of  the  war. 

The  true  and  permanent  interests  of  Russia  are 
in  no  way  opposed  to  the  creation  of  new  States  of  a 
moderate  size  near  our  frontiers,  even  if  the  enemy 
were  to  retain  them  under  his  protection. 

2.  We  should,  however,  demand  as  a  conditio  sine 
qua  non  that  the  French  armies  evacuate  within  a 
brief    period    the    countries   in    question,    and   retire 
beyond  the  Weser,  or  at  least  behind  the  Elbe,  so  that 

»  This  is  the  Treaty   signed  by  M.  d'Oubril,  in  Paris,  but  not  ratified  by  his 
Government.     See  page  161. 


PROPOSAL  OF  PEACE  185 

their  passing  beyond  those  limits  without  our  con- 
currence should  be  regarded  as  equivalent  to  a  declar- 
ation of  war. 

3.  Russia  would  restore  all  the  fortresses  and  the 
territory  she  may  occupy  at  the  date  of  the  treaty ; 
she  would  consent  not  to  keep  Cattaro  and  even,  if 
absolutely  necessary,  to  evacuate  the  Seven  Islands,  on 
the  express  condition,  however,  that 

4.  France  shall  not  keep  that  portion  of  Dalmatia 
which  formerly  belonged  to  Venice,  and  Cattaro  at 
least   shall    not   in   any    case    be    placed    under   her 
rule. 