

I  then  remarked  that  the  grant  of  a  separate  con- 
stitution to  the  Polish  provinces  now  belonging  to 
Russia  would  probably  meet  with  more  opposition  in 
the  Empire  than  the  idea  of  uniting  the  whole  of 
Poland  to  it.  This  I  felt  convinced  was  necessary  for 
the  security  of  Russia ;  but  I  feared  that  when  Russia 
would  recognise  that  such  is  the  case,  it  would  be  too 

o 

late.  The  Emperor  said  that  if  he  went  to  war  with 
France  it  would  certainly  be  advisable  that  he  should 
declare  himself  King  of  Poland  in  order  to  gain  over 

VOL.  II.  N 


194       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  Poles  to  his  side.  I  answered  that  it  would  then 
be  too  late;  and  seeing  that  the  conversation  had  lasted 
too  long,  I  did  not  wish  to  carry  it  any  further. 

December  26,  1809. 

I  had  written  to  the  Emperor  to  ask  him  for  a  short 
interview,  and  in  doing  so  I  specially  mentioned  my 
wish  to  speak  to  him  about  the  continuation  of  my 
leave,  which  was  about  to  expire.  Some  days  later, 
after  a  dinner  at  my  mother's,  the  Emperor  came  to 
me  and  asked  me  to  go  to  him  on  the  following  day, 
as  he  wished  to  speak  to  me.  I  inferred  from  this 
that  he  wished  to  speak  about  the  contemplated 
changes  in  the  organisation  of  the  Council  which  were 
just  then  the  talk  of  the  town.  Not  knowing  what 
the  Emperor's  plan  was  or  what  he  might  propose  to 
me,  I  was  a  little  anxious,  for  it  is  always  disagreeable 
to  listen  to  a  sovereign's  proposals  when  one  has 
every  reason  to  decline  them. 

Next  day  I  went  to  the  palace,  and  after  waiting 
for  some  time,  I  was  admitted  to  the  Emperor's 
presence.  He  first  asked  me  what  I  wanted.  I 
mentioned  various  private  matters  to  him,  and  then 
begged  him  to  allow  my  leave  to  be  prolonged.  He 
said  he  thought  I  had  intended  to  stop  longer  at  St 
Petersburg,  and  that  he  had  consequently  believed  it 
might  have  suited  me  to  have  more  active  employ- 
ment. He  then  informed  me  that  the  Council  svas  to 
assume  a  new  shape,  with  more  extensive  functions 
and  an  organisation  for  the  formation  of  which  that 
of  similar  institutions  in  France  and  England  had  been 


CONVERSATIONS  ON  POLISH  AFFAIRS  195 

taken  as  an  example  ;  that  he  had  divided  the  Council 
into  four  sections — War,  Home  Affairs,  Finance, 
Justice  and  Law — and  that  a  place  had  been  assigned 
to  me  in  the  fourth  section.  There  was  also  to  be  a 
further  discussion  by  the  general  body  of  the  Council 
of  the  matters  that  had  been  dealt  with  in  the 
sections  ;  but  it  was  for  the  latter  that  good  workers 
would  be  most  required.  I  replied  that  I  was  ex- 
tremely honoured  by  the  confidence  his  Majesty  was 
good  enough  to  place  in  me,  but  that  my  reasons  for 
soliciting  a  prolongation  of  my  leave  were  already 
known  to  him — the  advanced  age  of  my  parents,  from 
whom  I  had  been  long  separated  ;  the  care  of  my 
health,  with  which  the  climate  of  St  Petersburg  did 
not  at  all  agree  ;  and  the  habits  and  tastes  which  I 
had  contracted  during  my  prolonged  absence  from 
active  service.  The  Emperor  said  he  had  no  idea  of 
disturbing  my  arrangements,  adding  that  he  had 
expected  I  should  leave  him,  but  had  thought  I 
would  postpone  my  departure  till  the  summer.  I  re- 
plied that  I  intended  before  the  summer  to  pass  some 
time  at  Wilna,  where  my  presence  was  necessary  in 
order  to  arrange  the  affairs  of  the  university.  .  .  . 