

I  remarked  in  the  course  of  this  conversation  that 
the  Emperor  still  retained  a  sort  of  partiality  for  me, 
but  that  he  had  no  very  strong  desire  to  keep  me.  .  .  . 
As  for  Napoleon,  it  is  clear  that  Alexander  under- 
stands him  thoroughly ;  that  Napoleon  has  preserved 
a  marked  influence  over  his  mind  ;  and  that  he  greatly 
fears  him. 

5th  April  1810. 

About  three  weeks  ago  the  Emperor,  whom  I  had 
not  seen  for  some  time,  suddenly  sent  for  me.  After 


PLANS  FOR  A  RECONSTRUCTION  OF  POLAND     201 

talking  about  private  matters  and  the  grant  of  an 
amnesty  to  those  inhabitants  of  the  Polish  provinces 
of  Russia  who  had  joined  their  countrymen  of  the 
Grand-Duchy  of  Warsaw  in  the  war  against  Austria, 
the  Emperor  mentioned  that  he  had  a  plan  of  uniting 
the  eight  Polish  provinces  under  a  separate  adminis- 
tration, and  asked  my  opinion  on  the  subject.  I 
requested  to  be  given  time  for  reflection.  The  problem 
was  a  difficult  one.  How  could  I  give  the  Emperor 
any  hope  that  the  means  to  be  adopted  for  producing 
a  reconciliation  between  him  and  the  Poles  would  be 
efficacious  ?  And  as  regards  my  country,  might  not 
the  result  be  a  civil  war  ?  Yet  I  thought  it  best  to 
reply,  partly  as  a  matter  of  courtesy,  partly  because 
the  future  was  so  uncertain  that  I  considered  it 
undesirable  entirely  to  break  a  thread  which  under 
different  circumstances  might  become  valuable. 

After  a  few  weeks  I  came  back  to  the  Emperor 
and  read  to  him  a  memorandum  in  which  I  stated  my 
views.  .  .  .  The  Emperor  interrupted  me  at  the 
beginning  with  the  remark  that  it  was  not  only  for 
the  eventuality  of  a  war,  but  to  gain  the  affection  of 
the  Poles  in  any  case,  that  he  thought  of  doing  some- 
thing for  them.  He  then  listened  without  saying  a 
word,  but  with  much  attention.  It  was  only  when  I 
stated  that  the  most  suitable  time  for  doing  some- 
thing in  favour  of  Poland  was  past,  that  he  again 
interrupted  me.  '  In  writing  that,'  he  said,  '  you 
were  no  doubt  thinking  of  the  year  1805  and  my  stay 
at  Pulawy.*  I  now  see  myself  that  that  was  a 

*  See  page  99. 


202       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

favourable  moment — perhaps  a  unique  one.  We 
could  then  have  done  easily  what  can  only  be  done 
now  with  great  trouble  ;  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  we  would  have  had  the  whole  of  the  Prussian 
army  against  us.' 

I  answered  that  another  very  favourable  oppor- 
tunity occurred  at  the  time  of  the  last  war  with 
Austria,  during  which  Russia  could  easily  have 
demanded  the  restoration  of  Poland.  '  That  would 
have  brought  about  the  total  ruin  of  Austria,'  was 
the  Emperor's  reply.  '  Any  how,'  I  rejoined,  '  the 
course  which  was  followed  was  the  worst,  for  it  did 
riot  save  Austria,  whom  it  threw  into  the  arms  of 
France ;  it  annoyed  Napoleon ;  and  it  was  of  no 
material  advantage  to  Russia.' 