

'  When  people  say  Buonaparte  should  not  be  sup- 
ported by  the  Poles  because  of  his  unjust  and 
oppressive  conduct  towards  other  nations,  they  forget 
that  there  is  not  a  single  act  of  iniquity  committed 
by  Napoleon  of  which  the  Powers  which  partitioned 
Poland  did  not  themselves  set  the  example.  It  is 
not  for  them  to  become  the  champions  of  principles 
which  they  have  trodden  under  foot.  ...  A  charac- 
teristic trait  of  the,  Polish  nation  is  to  love  one's 
country  above  everything,  and  to  be  ready  to 
sacrifice  everything  to  recover  it.  Will  you  be 
more  sensitive  to  what  happens  on  the  Tagus  and 
the  Adige  than  on  the  Vistula — be  indignant  at 
the  acts  of  injustice  committed  with  regard  to  other 


FRIENDSHIP  VERSUS  PATRIOTISM  209 

nations,    and    indifferent    to  those    inflicted    on    your 
own  ?  .  .  . 

'  Buonaparte  has  never  done  any  harm  to  Poland  ; 
he  alone  has  held  out  his  hand  to  her  and  has  done 
all  he  could  for  her.  The  Poles  condemn  his  policy 
as  other  nations  do  ;  they  pity  the  Spaniards,  and  are 
ashamed  to  be  obliged  to  fight  against  them  ;  but  no 
nation  can  be  expected  to  commit  suicide  in  order  that 
other  nations  may  be  benefited.  The  Poles  regret 
the  necessity  of  their  being  attached  to  Napoleon's 
fortunes,  but  they  cannot  refuse  benefits  at  his  hands 
which  are  not  offered  them  by  any  one  else.  They 
have  done  everything  to  prove  their  ardent  wish  to 
owe  their  national  existence  to  the  Emperor  Alex- 
ander ;  but  he  has  rejected  all  their  overtures.  On 
one  side  they  find  interest,  support,  and  hope  ;  on  the 
other,  animosity,  persecution,  and  discouragement. 
The  dearest  interests  of  Poland,  supported  solely  by 
France,  have  by  the  present  conduct  of  the  Cabinet 
of  St  Petersburg  become  diametrically  opposed  to 
those  of  Russia.  Poland  is  ready  to  do  the  will  of 
any  Power  that  will  help  her.  Buonaparte  alone 
has  hitherto  done  so,  and  she  hopes  through  his 
assistance  to  recover  her  name  and  her  existence  as  a 
nation.  If  she  is  wise,  circumstances  may  perhaps 
enable  her  to  come  successfully  out  of  the  general 
cataclysm  which  is  approaching,  and  she  may  by  her 
efforts  prove  to  the  Russian  Government  and  nation 
that  it  would  be  useful  to  bring  her  over  to  their  side, 
and  to  unite  the  two  nations  by  bonds  of  mutual 
advantage  and  interest. 

VOL.  II.  O 


210      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  As  to  your  position  in  the  matter,  it  is  quite 
clear.  You  have  loyally  served  the  Emperor,  and 
you  have  always  told  him  the  truth  :  he  knows 
better  than  anyone  your  sentiments  with  regard  to 
Poland.  You  owe  him  a  certain  amount  of  con- 
sideration, which  cannot,  however,  outweigh  your 
duties  to  your  country.  The  policy  you  proclaimed 
as  a  Russian  Minister  was  in  accordance  with  your 
duty  and  the  state  of  Europe  at  the  time.  There 
was  then  a  hope  that  resistance  to  Napoleon  would  be 
efficacious,  and  it  was  certainly  right  that  Russia 
should  attempt  it.  Circumstances  are  now  entirely 
different,  and  as  a  Pole  you  can  no  longer  advocate 
the  same  policy  as  when  you  were  Minister  of 
Russia,  and  Russia  had  not  made  a  treaty  of  peace 
with  France.  Your  principles,  however,  have  always 
been  the  same ;  your  period  of  office  in  Russia  was 
merely  an  episode  in  your  career. 