


HIS  OPINION  OF  THE  CHARACTER  OF  NAPOLEON  199 

compensation  to  the  King  of  Saxony.'  He  added 
that  in  the  meantime  it  would  have  been  well  to  pro- 
ceed in  this  sense  with  the  provinces  now  belonging 
to  the  Empire,  and  to  take  the  title  of  Grand-Duke 
of  Lithuania ;  but  that  in  presence  of  so  skilful  an 
antagonist  as  Napoleon,  he  had  feared  to  awaken  his 
suspicions  and  lead  him  to  anticipate  Russia  by  pro- 
claiming the  independence  of  Poland  himself. 

.  .  .  As  to  this  matter  having  ever  been  discussed 
in  the  Emperor's  frequent  conversations  with  Napo- 
leon— a  subject  regarding  which  he  had  hitherto 
always  avoided  to  give  me  any  precise  answer — 
Alexander  stated  positively  that  no  mention  had 
been  made  of  it  between  the  two  Emperors.  At 
Tilsit  Napoleon  had  spoken  with  much  levity  about 
Poland  and  the  Poles,  and  at  Erfurth  there  was  too 
much  to  do  for  them  to  touch  upon  that  subject.  I 
expressed  my  regret  that  his  Majesty  had  not  taken 
an  opportunity  of  sounding  Napoleon  on  the  matter, 
and  I  added  that  notwithstanding  the  despatches  and 
speeches  of  his  Ministers,  Napoleon  had  succeeded  in 
spreading  among  the  Poles  a  conviction  that  he  not 
only  had  the  interests  of  Poland  at  heart,  but  that  he 
had  a  feeling  of  special  affection  for  her.  .  . 

His  Majesty  replied  that  Napoleon  was  a  man  who 
would  not  scruple  to  use  any  means  whatever  so  long 
as  he  attained  his  object.  As  I  had  for  some  time 
heard  various  rumours  in  the  society  of  St  Petersburg 
as  to  Napoleon's  fits  of  epilepsy  and  his  being 
threatened  with  mental  derangement,  I  asked  the 
Emperor  whether  there  was  any  truth  in  these 


200      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

reports.  '  Napoleon  will  never  go  mad,'  he  answered  ; 
'  the  thing  is  impossible,  and  those  who  believe  it  do 
not  know  him.  He  is  a  man  who  in  the  midst  of  the 
greatest  troubles  keeps  his  head  cool ;  all  his  fits  of 
passion  are  only  meant  to  intimidate,  and  are  often 
the  fruit  of  calculation.  He  does  nothing  without 
thoroughly  considering  and  foreseeing  the  conse- 
quences of  his  acts.  .  .  One  of  his  favourite  sayings 
is  that  nothing  should  be  undertaken  without  a  plan. 
In  his  opinion  there  is  no  difficulty  that  cannot  be 
overcome  if  you  find  the  right  mode  of  proceeding. 
Once  that  is  found,  the  rest  is  easy ;  while  if  the 
simplest  matter  possible  is  undertaken  without  find- 
ing the  method  of  doing  it,  all  is  spoilt  and  no  result 
is  obtained.  His  health  is  excellent ;  no  one  can 
bear  fatigue  and  hard  work  better  than  he  does  ;  but 
he  requires  eight  hours'  sleep  a  day,  though  he  does 
not  keep  regular  hours.  He  is  not  eloquent  either  in 
speech  or  in  writing ;  I  have  heard  him  dictate  letters 
in  an  abrupt  and  unconnected  style.'  .  .  . 