

'  Your  Majesty  must  not  be  astonished  at  senti- 
ments which  I  hold  in  common  with  all  Poles.  I  do 
not  speak  to  you  as  a  sovereign  :  I  beg  you  to  lay 
aside  that  character  and  only  to  keep  that  which  was 
the  first  cause  of  my  attachment  to  you.  .  .  .  Your 
Majesty  will  remember  that  when  I  returned  from 
Italy  I  had  not  the  least  idea  of  entering  your  service. 
When  you  wished  to  employ  me,  I  repeatedly  declined, 
and  my  chief  reason  was  that  being  a  Pole,  my  posi- 
tion might  become  delicate  and  difficult.  I  foresaw 
that  circumstances  might  arise  in  which  the  interests 
of  my  country  might  be  opposed  to  the  duties  of  my 
office.  Your  Majesty  replied  that  there  was  at  that 
time  no  reason  to  anticipate  such  a  thing,  but  that  if 
there  should  be  at  some  future  period  I  would  be  at 
liberty  to  act  as  I  thought  proper.  I  must  now  say 
that  the  general  impression  produced  on  all  my 
countrymen  by  circumstances,  and  by  the  existence  of 
the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  has  also  produced  its  effect 
upon  me.  I  cannot  help  taking  the  strongest  interest 
in  my  country. 

'  In  my  opinion  a  man  who  is  not  attached  to  his 
country  is  despicable.  To  disown  one's  religion,  ones' 


iy8       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

parents,  one's  country,  is  in  my  eyes  equally  odious. 
These  are  feelings  with  which  I  was  born,  which  educa- 
tion has  strengthened,  and  which  in  me  will  never 
change.  Moreover,  my  brother,  my  sisters,  and  all  my 
family  are  in  Poland,  and  I  will  confess  to  your  Majesty 
that  this  is  one  of  the  reasons  which  make  me  wish  not 
to  mix  myself  up  with  any  affairs  here.  It  is  not  enough 
for  me  to  be  clear,  straightforward,  and  sincere  in  my 
actions  ;  I  also  wish  to  be  so  in  my  sentiments  and  my 
thoughts.  I  am  therefore  glad  to  have  been  able  to 
open  my  mind  completely  to  your  Majesty,  and  to 
explain  myself  to  you  without  any  reserve.  My  first 
object  is  to  preserve  my  own  esteem  ;  my  second  is  to 
preserve  that  of  people  whom  I  am  accustomed  to  love 
and  respect.  Should  at  any  time  your  Majesty  think 
fit  to  confiscate  my  property  and  order  me  to  be  shot, 
I  will  bear  my  fate  with  equanimity  if  you  will  do  me 
the  justice  to  think  that  I  was  an  honest  man  who 
always  spoke  the  truth  and  never  deceived  you.' 

The  Emperor  seemed  satisfied,  and  said  that  he 
had  never  misunderstood  me,  and  that  the  way  I  had 
explained  myself  to  him  did  me  credit.  For  a  moment 
he  was  absorbed  in  thought ;  then,  as  if  suddenly 
rousing  himself,  he  said  :  '  There  is  no  other  means  of 
arranging  all  this  than  our  old  plan  of  giving  a  consti- 
tution and  a  separate  existence  to  the  kingdom  of 
Poland  by  attaching  the  title  to  the  Russian  crown.' 
'  We  must  wait,'  he  continued,  '  until  Austria  commits 
some  blunder  (fasse  une  bdtise)  and  provokes  a  new 
rupture  with  France ;  then  we  may  find  means  to 
come  to  an  understanding  with  Napoleon,  and  give 