

The  Emperor  then  told  me  that  all  the  severe 
measures  which  had  been  taken  with  regard  to  the 
Poles  would  be  revoked,  that  a  decision  to  this  effect 
had  been  arrived  at,  but  that  it  would  not  be  published 
for  some  weeks  to  come.  He  added  that  the  motives 
which  had  impelled  him  to  take  these  measures  had 
ceased  to  exist,  and  that  now  he  had  reason  to  be 
tranquil  as  regards  Poland.  I  thanked  him,  and 


196       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

asked  what  were  the  reasons  for  his  tranquillity ;  was 
it  only  the  passage  in  M.  de  Montalivet's  speech,*  or 
was  there  any  other  reason,  such  as  an  engagement 
no  longer  to  contemplate  the  restoration  of  Poland? 
I  knew  from  the  conversations  which  I  had  had  with 
the  Chancellor,  that  there  was  some  question  of  this 
between  the  two  Cabinets,  and  I  remarked  to  the 
Emperor  that  in  that  case  he  would  himself  be  obliged 
to  enter  into  a  similar  engagement,  and  would  thus 
tie  his  hands.  The  Emperor  made  an  evasive  reply, 
merely  saying  that  there  was  no  question  of  what  I 
was  thinking  about. 

He  then  asked  me  as  to  the  public  feeling  in 
Poland.  '  Events,'  I  said,  '  have  revived  the  senti- 
ments of  fifteen  years  ago.  The  hope  of  the  restora- 
tion of  Poland  seemed  for  a  while  to  the  Poles  less 
possible ;  but  now  it  is  as  if  a  half-cicatrised  wound 
were  accidentally  reopened.  It  is  thought  that  their 
hopes  might  have  been  diminished  in  consequence  of 
the  last  peace  with  Austria,  and  certain  letters  and 
despatches  from  Napoleon  which  have  been  made 
public.  Be  this  as  it  may,  public  feeling  is  neverthe- 
less at  the  same  stage  as  it  was  fifteen  years  ago. 
Moreover,  there  is  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  which  has 

*  The  following  was  the  passage  here  referred  to.  It  occurs  in  the  '  statement 
of  the  situation  of  the  Empire,'  presented  by  M.  de  Montalivet  to  the  French  legisla- 
tive body  on  the  1st  of  December,  180J) : 

'  The  Duchy  of  Warsaw  has  been  augmented  by  part  of  Galicia.  It  would  have 
been  easy  for  the  Emperor  to  join  the  whole  of  Galicia  to  this  State  ;  but  he  did  not 
wish  to  do  anything  which  might  have  caused  anxiety  to  his  ally,  the  Emperor  of 
Russia.  Nearly  the  whole  of  the  Galicia  of  the  old  partition  has  remained  in  the 
power  of  Austria.  His  Majesty  has  never  had  in  view  the  restoration  of  Poland. 
What  he  has  done  for  the  new  Galicia  was  prompted  less  by  policy  than  by  honour  ; 
he  could  not  abandon  to  the  vengeance  of  an  implacable  prince  a  population  which 
had  displayed  so  much  ardour  in  the  cause  of  France. ' 


CONVERSATIONS  ON  POLISH  AFFAIRS  197 

been  considerably  augmented  by  the  late  war  arid 
which  helps  to  strengthen  and  maintain  the  patriotic 
sentiment.  It  is  a  sort  of  phantom  of  ancient  Poland 
which  produces  an  infallible  effect  on  all  who  regard 
that  country  as  their  real  fatherland.  It  is  as  if,  after 
you  had  lost  a  dear  friend,  his  shade  should  come  to 
assure  you  that  he  will  soon  be  restored  to  you  in 
person. 