

When  I  had  finished  reading,  I  apologised  for  not 
having  arrived  at  any  definite  conclusion  ;  I  could  not 
say  more,  as  I  was  imperfectly  informed  of  what  was 
going  on,  and  I  did  not  know  what  was  the  predomi- 
nant feeling  in  the  Polish  provinces.  '  Bah!'  said  the 
Emperor,  '  it  is  not  difficult  to  know  what  people 
think  in  the  provinces  and  in  the  Grand -Duchy.  The 
Poles  would  follow  the  devil  himself  if  he  would  lead 
them  to  the  restoration  of  their  country.  But  I  am 
satisfied  at  what  you  have  written  ;  it  will  help  me  to 
reflect  on  a  subject  which  has  so  long  occupied  my 
attention.  I  have  sought  all  kinds  of  means  of  realis- 
ing my  wishes,  but  have  not  arrived  at  any  satisfactory 
solution.  The  greatest  difficulty  is  .to  find  an  indem- 
nification for  the  King  of  Saxony ;  this  could  only  be 
done  by  still  further  dismembering  that  unfortunate 
King  of  Prussia.' 


PLANS  FOR  A  RECONSTRUCTION  OF  POLAND     203 

I  remarked  that  the  greatest  difficulty  was  to 
obtain  the  consent  of  France,  and  that  if  this  were 
obtained  the  rest  would  be  easy.  The  Emperor 
agreed,  saying  that  Napoleon's  interest  was  not  to 
change  the  present  state  of  things,  as  he  cared  much 
less  for  the  good  of  Poland  than  to  use  her  as  a  tool 
in  the  event  of  his  making  war  upon  Russia.  He  at 
the  same  time  admitted  that  it  was  natural  that  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Grand-Duchy  of  Warsaw,  in  view 
of  the  respective  forces  of  the  two  Powers,  the  talent 
and  experience  of  the  Polish  generals  and  armies, 
and  Napoleon's  great  chances  of  victory  in  any  war, 
should  not  be  inclined  to  throw  themselves  into  the 
arms  of  Russia  at  the  risk  of  losing  the  fruits  of  the 

o 

efforts  they  had  made  for  so  many  years.  This  was 
entirely  my  view  of  the  case  ;  and  the  Emperor  then 
told  me  some  of  his  ideas  for  bringing  about  a  restora- 
tion of  Poland. 

One  of  these  was  to  enter  on  a  sham  war  with  the 
Grand-Duchy,  so  that  by  a  preconcerted  arrangement 
the  Russian  troops  might  occupy  positions  in  which 
they  would  be  joined  by  the  Polish  troops,  and  then 
fight  the  French  together.  Such  a  plan  was  obviously 
chimerical ;  its  difficulties  were  palpable,  and  it  in- 
volved a  war  against  Napoleon  with  very  uncertain 
chances  of  success. 

Another  plan  was  to  form  a  kingdom  of  Poland  out 
of  the  Duchy  and  Galicia,  and  to  allow  the  inhabitants 
of  the  Polish  provinces  of  Russia  to  serve  in  the  new 
kingdom  as  if  it  were  their  own  country.  This  idea 
surprised  me  ;  but  the  Emperor  explained  that  the 


204      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Poles,  being  thus  satisfied,  would  have  no  reason  to 
oppose  Russia  ;  that  there  would  then  be  no  longer  any 
cause  of  dissension  between  Russia  and  France ;  and 
that  the  evil  would  thus  be  got  rid  of  by  amputation 
instead  of  by  cure.  The  Emperor's  tone  in  saying 
this  led  me  to  believe  that  the  idea  might  have  been 
suggested  to  him  by  the  French  Ambassador,  that  it 
had  been  discussed  between  them,  and  that  he  might 
be  disposed  to  adopt  it  as  a  convenient  method  of 
avoiding  war  with  France. 