

'  Will  you  now  discard  the  principles  you  have 
proclaimed,  attach  yourself  to  the  chariot  of  the 
tyrant,  and  become  the  tool  of  his  projects,  which  in 
your  opinion  are  fatal  to  the  happiness  both  of  present 
and  future  generations  ? 

'  You  owe  nothing  to  Russia  or  to  the  Emperor 
whom  you  have  served  well  as  long  as  you  could. 
But  do  you  owe  nothing  to  yourself  and  to  Europe  ? 
And  to  what  would  you  sacrifice  such  grave  considera- 
tions and  precious  advantages  ?  Not  to  the  evident 
good  of  your  country,  but  to  vague  hopes  and  dreams. 
.  .  .  Can  you  believe  that  Buonaparte  sincerely  wishes 
for  the  good  of  any  country  ?  All  he  wants  is  to  make 
your  countrymen  his  tools,  and  he  will  be  ready  to 
abandon  them  directly  his  interest  requires  him  to 
do  so. 

'  Would  it  be  right  for  you  to  participate  in  such 
projects  ?  Your  country  has  nothing  to  reproach  you 
with  ;  you  have  been  useful  to  your  countrymen  while 


FRIENDSHIP  VERSUS  PATRIOTISM  207 

you  were  in  office ;  you  have  done  your  utmost  to 
restore  Poland.  Under  present  circumstances  it  is 
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  you  to  take  an  active 
part  in  Russian  affairs ;  but  on  the  other  hand  you 
should  at  least  not  mix  yourself  up  with  what  is  going 
on  in  your  country.  You  should  hold  aloof,  and 
remain  neutral  and  passive  as  long  as  the  present 
storm  lasts.' 

While  I  listen  to  these  reasons  and  feel  their  force, 
the  other  voice  says  to  me  : — 

'  It  is  true  that  your  position  is  different  from  that 
of  the  other  Poles.  They  feel  it,  and  they  give 
you  full  credit  for  the  conduct  you  have  pursued 
hitherto. 

'  But  your  duties  are  changed.  You  passed  under 
the  rule  of  Russia  together  with  the  rest  of  your 
country.  Circumstances  placed  you  in  the  service  of 
Russia,  not  as  a  Russian,  but  because  you  were  a  Pole. 
You  belonged  to  Russia  because  Poland  was  destroyed; 
the  cause  having  ceased,  the  effect  as  regards  yourself 
should  cease  also.  ...  It  was  solely  your  personal 
relations  with  the  Emperor  that  led  }'ou  to  enter  his 
service,  notwithstanding  the  strong  reasons  to  the  con- 
trary which  you  repeatedly  urged  to  him.  When  he 
insisted  upon  your  compliance,  though  still  a  Pole  at 
heart,  you  honestly  and  zealously  laboured  in  the 
interest  of  Russia.  .  .  .  There  was  an  interval  when 
all  hope  of  restoring  Poland  had  disappeared.  Directly 
it  revived,  you  strove  to  make  the  possibility  of  the 
restoration  of  Poland  serve  to  glorify  the  Emperor, 
and  to  unite  by  the  bonds  of  a  common  advantage  the 


2o8      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

two  interests  which  were  most  dear  to  you.  But  your 
counsels  were  not  heard ;  your  plans  were  not  followed. 
The  interests  you  wished  to  unite  again  parted  from 
each  other,  and  you  retired  in  time  to  avoid  a  situation 
where  you  must  have  been  guilty  either  on  one  side 
or  the  other.  These  interests  have  grown  more  and 
more  divergent  and  will  become  entirely  opposed  to 
each  other.  You  should  leave  a  service  and  a  State 
essentially  hostile  to  your  country,  and  bent  on  crush- 
ing out  its  existence  and  that  of  your  countrymen. 
Nor  is  this  all.  A  moment  will  come  when  you  will 
have  to  take  an  active  part — when  Poland  is  declared 
independent  and  will  be  in  arms  to  maintain  her 
existence.  This  will  probably  be  when  France  is 
at  war  with  Russia,  and  every  Pole  who  then  holds 
aloof  will  be  looked  upon  by  his  countrymen  with 
contempt. 