

The  Emperor  concluded  by  saying  that  he  would 
consider  all  these  ideas,  and  that  he  wished  me  also 
to  seek  a  clue  to  the  object  he  had  in  view.  I  replied 
that  I  was  far  from  desiring  to  damp  his  Majesty's 
good  intentions,  but  that  so  far  as  I  could  see  there 
was  nothing  to  be  done  immediately  beyond  taking 
the  measures  I  proposed  in  my  memorandum.  I 
added  that  I  thought  the  present  year  would  not  come 
to  an  end  without  producing  events  more  serious  and 
decisive  than  any  that  we  had  yet  seen.  The 
Emperor,  interrupting  me,  said  in  an  impressive 
tone  that  he  thought  it  would  not  be  this  year,  as 
Napoleon  was  entirely  occupied  with  his  marriage  ;  but 
that  he  expected  there  would  be  a  crisis  next  year. 
*  We  are  now  in  April,'  he  continued  ;  '  it  will  be  nine 
months  hence.'*  While  saying  these  words,  and 
indeed  throughout  the  conversation,  the  Emperor 
had  a  severe  and  fixed  look,  which  reminded  me  of 
his  haggard  gaze  after  Austerlitz. 

*  Napoleon's  Campaign  in  Russia  did  not  begin  till  more  than  two  years  after- 
wards (June  22,  1812). 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

1810 

FRIENDSHIP    verSUS    PATRIOTISM 

ALEXANDER,  notwithstanding  his  promises,  did  nothing 
for  Poland,  and  Prince  Czartoryski  then  deter- 
mined to  take  no  further  part  in  Russian  affairs, 
and  to  devote  himself  exclusively  to  his  own  country. 
This  decision  was  only  arrived  at  after  a  hard 
mental  struggle,  which  he  thus  describes  in  a  paper 
dated  the  20th  of  June  1810  : — 

In  the  difficult  circumstances  in  which  I  am  placed, 
and  which  are  exposed  on  all  sides  to  misunderstanding 
and  misjudgment,  I  owe  a  sincere  account  of  my 
actions  to  those  who  take  an  interest  in  me,  in  order 
to  spare  them  as  much  as  I  can  the  pain  of  finding 
themselves  deceived  in  their  opinion  of  me.  Seeing 
me  as  I  am,  their  judgment  may  console  me  for  the 
injustice  of  the  majority,  from  which  I  shall  perhaps 
not  escape. 

I  seem  continually  to  hear  two  voices  which  ring 
with  equal  force  in  my  ears.  One  speaks  as  follows  : — 

'  Your   position  is,   no  doubt,    extremely  difficult, 


206       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

but  your  difficulties  themselves  trace  out  for  you  the 
course  you  should  follow.  .  .  You  have  played  a  part 
in  Russia  which  for  a  time  made  you  a  prominent 
figure  on  the  theatre  of  European  politics.  In  doing 
so  you  acquired  general  esteem,  and  when  you  resigned 
office  your  withdrawal  was  regretted  by  the  Govern- 
ments and  nations  which  were  suffering  under  the 
devastating  system  of  Napoleon.  After  your  resig- 
nation, you  maintained  the  opinions  you  had  advocated 
when  in  office,  and  Cabinets  and  patriots  still  looked 
up  to  you  as  one  of  those  by  whom  Europe  could  be 
saved. 