


192       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

and  that  it  was  therefore  necessary  to  adopt  another 
line  of  conduct.  I  at  once  rejoined  that  I  could  not 
understand  this  reasoning.  If  a  certain  policy  was 
desirable  in  itself,  it  should  not  be  adopted  at  one 
moment  and  dropped  the  next :  if  opportunities  had 
been  neglected  or  had  not  presented  themselves,  the 
proper  course  was  to  wait  for  new  ones  and  in  the 
meantime  to  prepare  the  ground,  instead  of  alienating 
the  nation  by  measures  of  undeserved  rigour.  Upon 
this  the  Emperor  cast  down  his  eyes  and  said  :  '  If  at 
least  one  could  expect  some  return  on  the  part  of  the 
Poles ! ' 

I  replied  that  I  could  not  see  what  he  had  done  to 
gain  the  affection  of  the  Poles  :  '  Could  anything  be 
more  revolting  than  the  conduct  of  the  three  Powers 
with  regard  to  Poland  ?  And  is  it  surprising  that 
the  idea  of  seeing  their  country  restored  should  fill  the 
Poles  with  enthusiasm  and  bring  them  together  ?  It 
is  thought  that  the  peace  will  diminish  this  enthusiasm. 
I  think  otherwise,  and  the  airs  of  triumph  with  which 
the  papers  here  proclaim  that  the  Poles  have  been 
deprived  of  all  hope  seem  to  me  rather  of  a  nature  to 
serve  Napoleon  than  to  do  him  harm,  as  they  will  cast 
all  the  odium  of  his  conduct  on  your  Majesty.  No 
one  will  now  doubt  that  it  was  at  the  instance  of  your 
Majesty,  and  in  order  not  to  have  war  with  Russia, 
that  Napoleon  yielded  on  a  point  which  he  would 
otherwise  never  have  abandoned,  and  this  can  only 
embitter  the  Poles  against  you.  .  .  .' 

The  Emperor  replied  that  I  knew  his  sentiments 
as  to  the  partition  of  Poland,  and  that  he  still  thought 


CONVERSATIONS  ON  POLISH  AFFAIRS  193 

that  all  the  evils  from  which  Europe  is  now  suffering 
date  from  that  event.  It  could  not,  however,  now  be 
remedied.  He  did  not  see  any  means  of  executing 
the  plan  he  had  formerly  contemplated  with  regard  to 
Poland  ;  all  that  was  possible  was  to  grant  a  separate 
organisation  to  the  provinces  now  under  his  rule,  but 
even  that  would  require  much  consideration,  and 
would  meet  with  much  opposition  in  Russia.  I  said 
that  knowing  his  liberal  sentiments,  which  had  been 
the  origin  of  the  connection  with  which  he  had 
honoured  me,  the  only  difficulty  I  could  perceive 
would  be  the  possibility  of  Napoleon  opposing  the 
scheme  ;  and  that  this  made  me  anxious  to  know 
whether  in  the  numerous  conversations  he  had  had 
with  Napoleon  he  (the  Emperor  Alexander)  had  ever 
touched  upon  the  subject.  The  Emperor  replied 
rather  vaguely  that  the  matter  had  recently  been  in 
question  during  the  Austrian  war.  Here  he  stopped 
short,  and  added  that  Napoleon  would  never  consent 
to  such  a  thing,  as  his  sole  idea  was  always  to  influence 
the  Poles  and  use  them  as  his  tools. 