

'  In  Poland  you  cannot  play  a  passive  part.  No 
family  has  more  distinguished  itself  by  its  attachment 
to  the  country  than  yours,  and  though  still  young, 
you  have  already  fought  for  Poland,*  and  your  words 
as  well  as  your  deeds  have  been  those  of  a  patriot. 
Your  countrymen  have  full  confidence  in  you,  and  you 
cannot  refuse  them  your  assistance  without  dishonour. 

'  There  is  no  question  of  your  becoming  a  satellite 
of  Buonaparte ;  no  one  wishes  you  to  do  so.  Nor  is 
it  necessary  for  you  to  decide  too  soon  or  without 
sufficient  reflection.  But  you  will  have  to  come  for- 
ward at  the  moment  when  the  fate  of  Poland  will 

*  At  the  battle  of  Granno,  in  1792  (see  Vol.  I.  page  53). 


FRIENDSHIP  VERSUS  PATRIOTISM  211 

hang  in  the  balance,  when  there  will  be  no  doubt  as 
to  the  motives  of  those  who  declare  themselves,  or 
excuse  for  those  who  will  withdraw  at  a  time  when 
your  country  will  make  decisive  efforts  to  recover  its 
existence. 

'  Will  your  relations  of  friendship  with  the  Emperor 
excuse  you  ?  Those  relations  have  almost  ceased  ; 
and  your  duty  to  your  country  is  superior  to  any  claims 
of  friendship.  Moreover,  if  you  have  sacrificed  that 
friendship  for  the  interests  of  a  country  which  has 
been  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  Poland,  how  could  you 
do  less  for  your  own  country  ? ' 

Such  are  the  two  voices  that  speak  to  me  one 
after  the  other,  and  the  same  arguments  have  been 
expressed  to  me  with  even  more  force  by  persons 
who  are  dear  to  me  and  whom  I  respect.  Being 
thus  placed  between  two  such  opposite  opinions,  I 
ought  to  decide  for  myself  which  I  should  follow  : 
but  I  confess  that  I  cannot  yet  clearly  see  any 
way  of  escape  from  the  labyrinth  in  which  I  am 
enclosed. 

My  reason  does  not  lead  me  to  any  result,  for 
the  arguments  on  both  sides  seem  to  me  to  have  equal 
weight.  But  at  the  bottom  of  my  heart  the  feelings 
and  motives  which  speak  for  my  country  are  para- 
mount, and  I  would  be  happy  were  I  able  to  follow 
them  without  constraint.  I  was  born  with  these 
feelings ;  my  education  developed  them ;  they  are 
deeply  graven  in  my  heart.  I  think  no  one  loves  his 
country  with  more  passion  than  I  do.  To  keep  the 
esteem  of  my  countrymen  and  to  do  good  to  my 


212       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYbKl 

country  is  the  only  glory  that  would  give  me  pleasure  ; 
and  if  her  misfortunes  continue  and  my  reputation 
perishes  with  her  existence,  I  shall  at  least  have  the 
consolation  of  knowing  that  I  have  never  acted  from 
any  motive  that  is  not  just  and  honourable. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

1810-12 

FURTHER     CORRESPONDENCE     BETWEEN     ALEXANDER     I    AND      PRINCE 