ALEXANDER  PROPOSES  TO  RESTORE  POLAND  215 

the  inhabitants  of  the   Duchy   of  Warsaw ;    and   if 
so — 

2.  Have  you  a  well-founded  belief  that  they  would 
seize  with  avidity  any  offer  giving  them  the  certainty 
(not  probability,  but  certainty]  of  their  regeneration  ? 

3.  Would  they  accept  it  from  whatever  quarter  it 
might  come,  and  would  they  join  any  Power,  without 
distinction,  that  would  espouse  their  interests  sincerely 
and  with    attachment  ?     It  is    self-evident   that   the 
proclamation  of  their  restoration  would  have  to  pre- 
cede any  decision  on  their  part,  and  would  have  to  be 
such  as  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  the  conduct  which 
would  be  adopted  with  regard  to  them. 

4.  Have  you,  on  the  other  hand,  reason  to  suppose 
that  various  parties  exist  in  the  country,  and  that 
consequently — 

5.  One  cannot  reckon  on  a  unanimous  resolution 
eagerly  to  take  the  opportunity  of  the  first  offer  made 
for  the  regeneration  of  Poland  ? 

6.  What  are  these   parties  ?     Are   they  equal  in 
importance,  and  who  are  the  individuals  that  may  be 
regarded  as  their  leaders  ? 

7.  Do    these    parties  also   exist   in   the  army,   or 
should  it  be  regarded  as  more  united  in  opinion  and 
feeling  ? 

8.  Who   is    the    officer   that    has    the    greatest 
influence  upon  opinion  in  the  army  ? 

These  are  the  most  important  questions  I  have  to 
put  to  you  at  present.  Directly  I  get  your  answers, 
I  will  give  you  further  information  as  to  my  plans.  .  . 

I  must  beg  you  to  keep  the  contents  of  this  letter 


216       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

absolutely  secret.  I  rely  on  your  prudence,  and  I 
feel  certain  you  will  take  care  not  to  mar  a  work  to 
which  your  country  would  owe  its  regeneration, 
Europe  its  deliverance,  and  you  personally  the  glory 
and  the  pleasure  of  having  co-operated  in  it,  and 
having  thereby  proved  that  your  conduct  has  through- 
out been  consistent,  and  that  those  of  your  country- 
men who  relied  upon  you  in  the  past  have  been 
justified  in  their  expectations.  If  you  second  me,  and 
lead  me  to  hope  that  the  Poles,  and  especially  the 
Polish  army,  are  practically  unanimous  in  desiring 
the  restoration  of  Poland  from  whatever  quarter  it 
may  come,  success,  with  the  help  of  God,  will  not  be 
doubtful,  for  it  is  based  not  on  a  hope  of  counter- 
balancing the  genius  of  Napoleon,  but  solely  on  the 
diminution  of  his  forces  through  the  secession  of  the 
Duchy  of  Warsaw,  and  the  general  exasperation  of 
the  whole  of  Germany  against  him.  I  annex  a  short 
table  of  the  auxiliary  forces  which  would  be  at  the 
disposal  of  each  side. 

This  is  what  I  had  to  say ;  consider  it  calmly. 
Such  a  moment  presents  itself  only  once ;  any  other 
combination  will  only  bring  about  a  war  to  the  death 
between  Russia  and  France,  with  your  country  as  the 
battlefield.  The  support  on  which  the  Poles  can  rely 
is  limited  to  the  person  of  Napoleon,  who  cannot  live 
for  ever.  Should  he  disappear  from  the  scene,  the 
consequences  to  Poland  would  be  disastrous  ;  while  if 
by  joining  Russia  and  the  other  Powers  which  would 
certainly  follow  her,  the  moral  strength  of  France 
should  be  overthrown,  and  Europe  delivered  from  her 