

ST  PETERSBURG, 
3 1  st   January    1811. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND, — I  received  your  interesting 
letter  of  the  a<r  January  on  the  evening  of  the  day 
before  yesterday,  and  I  hasten  at  once  to  answer  it. 

The  difficulties  which  it  points  out  are  very  great, 
I  admit ;  but  as  I  had  foreseen  most  of  them,  and  the 
results  are  of  such  supreme  importance,  the  worst 
course  to  follow  would  be  to  stop  half-way.  .  .  . 

I  will  begin  by  replying  to  the  chief  points  in  your 
letter— 

(1)    The   Power  to  which   I    referred   as   willing 


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  223 

to    take    in    hand    the    regeneration    of    Poland    is 
Russia. 

(2)  By  such  regeneration  I  mean  the  reunion  of 
everything  that  formerly  constituted  Poland,  including 
the  Russian  provinces  (except  White  Russia),  so  as  to 
make  the  rivers  Dvina,  Beresina,  and   Dnieper   the 
frontiers. 

(3)  The     government     officials,     the     established 
authorities,  and  the  army,  should  be  entirely  of  the 
Polish  nationality. 

(4)  As  I  do  not  well  remember  the  constitution  of 
the  3rd  of  May,  I  cannot  decide  anything  until  I  see 
it,  and  I  shall  be.  obliged  if  you  will  send  it  me.     In 
any  case  a  liberal  constitution  will  be  offered,  such  as 
to  satisfy  the  wishes  of  the  inhabitants. 

(5)  In  order  to  convince  them  of  the  sincerity  of 
my   offer,   the   proclamations    of    the    restoration    of 
Poland  must   precede    everything  else,  and  it   is  by 
them  that  the  execution  of  the  plan  is  to  commence. 

(6)  But  the  conditions  sine  qud  non  on  which  I 
offer  this  are — 

1st  That  the  kingdom  of  Poland  shall  for  ever 
be  united  to  Russia,  wrhose  Emperor  shall  in  future 
bear  the  title  of  Emperor  of  Russia  and  King  of 
Poland. 

2nd.  That  a  formal  and  positive  assurance  shall  be 
given  of  a  unanimity  of  disposition  and  feeling  in 
favour  of  such  a  result  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Duchy,  to  t)e  guaranteed  by  the  signature  of  the 
most  prominent  persons  among  them. 

I    will    now    endeavour   to   diminish   your    fears 


224      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

as  to  the  insufficiency  of  the  military  means  at  my 
disposal. 

The  army  which  is  to  support  and  fight  by  the 
side  of  the  Poles  is  completely  organised,  and  is  com- 
posed of  eight  divisions  of  infantry,  each  comprising 
10,000  men,  and  of  four  divisions  of  cavalry,  each  of 
4,000  horses.  This  makes  a  total  of  96,000  men,  to 
which  should  be  added  fifteen  Cossack  regiments  of 
7,500  horse — 106,500  in  all.  Non-combatants  are 
not  included. 

This  army  will  be  supported  by  another  of  eleven 
divisions  of  infantry,  a  division  of  grenadiers,  the 
Guards'  division,  four  divisions  of  cavalry,  and  seven- 
teen Cossack  regiments — total,  134,000  men. 