


228       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

me  all  the  necessary  papers,  such  as  proclamations, 
the  constitution,  and  other  indispensable  documents. 
....  Our  correspondence  is  an  absolute  secret,  and 
even  the  Chancellor  knows  nothing  of  it,  though  I 
have  often  discussed  the  question  with  him.  As  to 
my  military  preparations,  I  have  given  them  a 
defensive  character,  .  .  .  and  have  sent  a  letter  to 
Napoleon  explaining  that  I  am  obliged  to  take  precau- 
tionary measures,  but  that  I  am  determined  to  adhere 

V 

to  my  system  of  policy,  and  will  certainly  not  take 
the  offensive.  I  must  confess,  however,  that  as 
rumours  are  being  spread  at  St  Petersburg  that  I  am 
about  to  assume  the  title  of  King  of  Poland,  I 
endeavour  to  put  an  end  to  them  by  declaring  that 
the  thing  is  impossible  and  cannot  occur.  Such 
rumours  are  at  present  rather  injurious  than  useful, 
though  they  prove  that  the  plan  would  be  highly 
approved  by  the  Russians. 

I  must  also  warn  you  that  I  know  from  a  good 
source  that  you  are  being  watched  by  the  French 
Minister  of  Police.  You  must  therefore  double  your 
precautions.  .  .  . 

I  shall  expect  your  answer  with  impatience. 
Yours  for  life,  heart  and  soul. 

Pray  remember  me  most  kindly  to  your  parents, 
your  brother,  and  your  sisters. 

THE  EMPEROR  TO  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. 

ST  PETERSBURG,  1st  April,  1812. 

I  do  not  know,  dear  friend,  whether  you  have 
guessed  the  cause  of  my  silence. 


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  229 

Your  previous  letters  had  left  me  too  little  hope 
of  success  to  authorise  me  to  act,  and  I  could  not 
reasonably  do  so  without  some  probability  of  success. 
I  have  therefore,  been  obliged  to  resign  myself  to 
waiting  for  events,  and  not  provoking,  by  any  step  on 
my  part,  a  struggle  whose  importance  and  danger  I 
thoroughly  appreciate,  though  I  do  not  believe  I 
shall  be  able  to  avoid  it.  I  also  had  certain  informa- 
tion that  you  wrere  being  watched  :  and  in  order  not 
to  expose  you  to  the  least  danger,  I  thought  it  best  to 
allow  a  considerable  time  to  elapse  before  resuming 
our  correspondence.  .  .  Finally,  our  projects  have 
acquired  a  publicity  which  could  only  be  very  prejudi- 
cial to  them,  so  much  so,  that  they  were  talked  about 
at  Dresden  and  in  Paris.  .  .  . 

A  rupture  with  France  seems  inevitable.  The 
object  of  Napoleon  is  to  destroy,  or  at  least  to 
humiliate,  the  last  Power  in  Europe  which  remains 
independent  of  him.  and  in  order  to  attain  this  object, 
he  puts  forward  pretensions  which  are  inadmissible 
and  incompatible  with  the  honour  of  Russia. 

He  wishes  all  our  trade  with  neutrals  to  be 
stopped ;  .but  this  is  the  only  trade  which  is  left 
to  us. 