


LIST  OF  TROOPS  AT  ALEXANDERS  DISPOSAL    217 

yoke,  the  existence  of  your  country  would  be  estab- 
lished with  unshakeable  solidity.  .  .  . 

I  await  your  answer  with  the  greatest  impatience, 
and  am  always  yours,  heart  and  soul. 

My   best   remembrances   to    your    parents,    your 
sisters,  and  }Tour  brother. 

(Signed)     ALEXANDER. 

Note  on  the  Forces  which  might  be  opposed  to 
each  other. 

On  one  side — 

100,000  Kussians 
50,000  Poles 
50,000  Prussians 
30,000  Danes 

Total  230,000  men,  who  might  at  once  be  rein- 
forced by  100,000  more  Russians. 

On  the  other  side — 

60,000  French  (it  is  stated  there  are  only 
46,000  in  Germany,  but  I 
add  those  who  might  be 
drawn  from  Holland  and 
the  interior  of  France). 

30,000  Saxons 

30,000  Bavarians 

20,000  Wiirtembergers 

15,000  Westphalians  and  other  German 
troops 


Total  155,000  men. 


218       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

It  is  more  than  probable,  however,  that  the 
example  set  by  the  Poles  will  be  followed  by  the 
Germans,  and  then  there  will  only  remain  the  60,000 
French.  And  if  Austria,  in  return  for  the  advantages 
we  shall  offer  her,  should  also  enter  the  field  against 
France,  this  will  add  200,000  men  to  our  side  against 
Napoleon. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  TO  THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER. 

1%  January  1811. 

SIRE, — Your  Imperial  Majesty  will  easily  imagine 
with  what  attention  and  extreme  interest  I  have  read 
your  letter  of  the  25th  of  December.  .  .  .  Allow  me 
to  express  to  you  my  deep  gratitude  for  your 
benevolent  intentions  regarding  my  country,  the 
favourable  recollection  you  have  retained  of  her  in 
your  political  combinations,  and  the  special  proof  of 
confidence  which  you  are  good  enough  to  give  me  on 
this  occasion,  and  which  I  will  endeavour  to  deserve 
by  carrying  out  your  instructions  with  all  the  zeal  and 
prudence  at  my  command.  ...  I  will  at  once  reply 
to  your  questions ;  but  my  replies,  as  you  will  have 
foreseen,  can  only  be  of  a  preliminary  kind. 

So  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  observe  the  public 
feeling  in  this  country,  I  see  a  unanimity  of  intentions 
and  objects  both  in  the  army  and  among  the  in- 
habitants of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw.  Their  sole  wish 
and  object  is  the  restoration  of  Poland — the  reunion 
of  all  its  parts  into  a  single  national  body,  under  a 
national  and  constitutional  regime.  The  differences 
of  opinion  which  are  observable  as  to  the  amount  of 


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  219 

confidence  to  be  placed  in  generals  and  other  promi- 
nent personages,  and  as  to  their  talents  and  patriotism, 
cannot  properly  come  under  the  designation  of  party 
feeling,  and  these  differences  would  either  disappear  or 
have  a  quite  subordinate  influence  if  the  higher 
interests  of  the  country  were  at  stake.  Unanimity, 
therefore  exists  ;  but  it  would  be  necessary  to  convince 
everybody  that  the  salvation  of  the  country  and  the 
realisation  of  greater  and  more  solid  advantages 
demand  a  total  change  of  policy  and  the  abandon- 
ment of  the  only  supporter  that  the  Duchy  has  as  yet 
possessed. 