

2nd.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  Napoleon  should 
attack  Russia,  and  at  the  same  time  proclaim  the 
regeneration  of  Poland,  his  proclamation  could  only 
have  effect  in  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  for  it  would  be 
necessary  to  deprive  Russia  of  her  Polish  provinces  by 
force  of  arms.  Meanwhile  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  and 
the  Polish  provinces  would  become  the  theatre  of  war 
and  of  all  possible  devastation.  It  may  thus  be 
asserted  with  certainty  that  after  such  a  war,  what- 
ever might  be  its  result,  Poland  would  be  only  a  vast 
desert,  and  its  inhabitants  the  greatest  sufferers  by 
the  war. 

Such  is  the  probable  result  of  the  restoration  of 
Poland  being  proclaimed  by  France. 

Second  alternative,  that  of  the  Poles  joining 
Russia  and  co-operating  with  her. 

The  infallible  results  of  this  would  be— 

1st.  That  the  regeneration  of  Poland,  instead  of 
being  postponed,  would  precede  any  other  event. 

2?ic?,  That  this  regeneration  would  comprise  the 
Duchy  of  Warsaw  and  the  Russian  provinces,  with  a 
tolerably  certain  hope  of  its  being  extended  to  Galicia. 

3rd,  That  the  theatre  of  war,  instead  of  being  in 

7  O 

the   heart   of  Poland,   would    be   transferred   to  the 
Oder. 


FURTHER  CORRESl'ONDENCE  227 

Such  are  the  infallible  results,  while  the  probable 
ones  might  be  : 

1st,  A  complete  revolution  of  opinion  in  Europe. 

2nd,  A  very, marked  diminution  in  the  forces  of 
Napoleon,  increasing  the  chances  of  success ;  for 
Napoleon  would  find  it  very  difficult  to  withdraw  his 
forces  from  Spain,  being  engaged  with  a  nation  bitterly 
hostile  to  him,  and  having  300,000  combatants  in  the 
field,  which  would  not  be  satisfied  with  his  'retreat, 
but  would  take  advantage  of  the  new  war  Napoleon 
would  have  on  his  hands  to  invade  France. 

3rd,  The  deliverance  of  Europe  from  the  yoke 
which  oppresses  her. 

4th,  The  employment  for  the  defence  of  Poland, 
as  a  kingdom  annexed  to  a  strong  Empire,  of  the 
forces  of  that  Empire. 

5th,  The  revival  of  trade  and  prosperity,  a  liberal 
constitution,  and  a  public  revenue  based  on  the  real 
wants  of  the  country,  and  not,  as  now,  applied  solely 
for  the  maintenance  of  a  too  large  army  destined  to 
serve  the  ambitious  plans  of  Napoleon. 

Even  the  fears  that  you  express  as  to  the  fate  of 
the  20,000  Poles  in  Napoleon's  service  do  not  seem  to 
me  well  founded,  for  the  worst  that  could  happen  to 
them  would  be  that  for  a  time  they  would  be  regarded 
as  prisoners  of  war  .... 

To  resume  :  so  long  as  I  cannot  be  sure  of  the 
co-operation  of  the  Poles  I  am  decided  not  to  begin  a 
war  with  France.  If  such  co-operation  is  to  take 
place,  I  must  receive  indubitable  assurances  and  proofs 
of  it ;  it  is  only  then  that  I  shall  be  able  to  act  in  the 
manner  above  stated.  In  that  case  you  must  send 