


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  221 

ineffaceable  characters  on  all  Polish  hearts ;  (2)  The 
reunion  of  the  whole  of  Poland  under  one  sceptre, 
thereby  putting  an  end  to  a  state  of  things  which 
separates  members  of  the  same  family  from  their 
relations  and  estates  merely  because  they  are  under  a 
different  government ;  (3)  The  re-establishment  of 
outlets  for  trade,  the  closing  of  which  has  impoverished 
the  country  ;  and  (4)  A  reasonable  prospect  of  success 
in  a  war  with  Napoleon.  .  .  .  As  to  this  last  point,  I 
can  hardly  believe  that  Napoleon  could  not  get  more 
than  15,000  men  in  Holland  and  France  to  come  to 
the  support  of  the  16,000  he  has  in  North  Germany. 
What  has  become  of  the  new  levy  of  150,000  recruits  ? 
.  .  .  And  are  you  quite  sure  that  you  would  have 
100,000  men  at  your  disposal  at  the  beginning  of  the 
war?  I  have  so  often  seen  in  Russia  100,000  men 
on  paper  represented  only  by  65,000  effectives.  It 
would  also  be  well  to  state  precisely  whether  by  the 
Power  which  will  offer  to  restore  Poland  you  mean 
Russia. 

I  have  answered  as  well  as  I  can  your  principal 
questions.  As  to  the  most  influential  man  in  the 
army,  he  is  undoubtedly  Prince  Poniatowski,  the 
Commander-in-Chief  and  Minister  of  War,  whose  per- 
sonal character  secures  him  an  influence  over  his 
subordinates  greater  than  that  of  any  other  chief. 

In  a  few  days  I  will  go  to  Warsaw  and  sound  the 
opinions  of  the  leading  personages  there.  ...  I  regret 
your  Majesty  has  not  stated  more  precisely  what  you 
propose  to  do,  and  what  you  expect  of  the  Poles,  so 
that  there  should  be  no  misunderstanding  on  either 


222       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

side.  This  alone  could  furnish  sufficient  arguments  to 
influence  the  decision  of  those  who  will  have  to  choose 
between  the  two  alternatives.  I  forgot  to  ask  if  when 
developing  this  plan  you  do  not  intend  to  make  an 
effort  to  bring  about  a  general  peace  and  gain  your 
ends  without  war.  I  cannot  tell  you,  Sire,  with  what 
hopes  and  fears  I  am  continually  agitated.  What 
happiness  it  would  be  to  labour  for  the  deliverance  of 
so  many  suffering  nations,  for  the  restoration  of  my 
country,  and  for  your  Majesty's  glory  !  What  happi- 
ness to  see  those  different  interests  combined  which 
fate  seemed  always  to  oppose  to  each  other  !  But  often 
I  fancy  that  this  is  too  magnificent  a  dream  ever 
to  be  realised,  and  that  the  genius  of  evil,  which  seems 
always  to  be  on  the  watch  to  break  up  combinations 
too  fortunate  for  mankind,  will  also  succeed  in  destroy- 
ing this  one.  I  am,  with  the  profoundest  respect,  &c. 

THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER  TO  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. 