

Finally,  a  third  army,  composed  of  reserve  squad- 
rons and  battalions,  supplies  44,000  combatants, 
reinforced  by  80,000  recruits,  all  clothed  and  trained 
for  some  months  in  the  depots. 

The  army  of  Moldavia  might  in  case  of  necessity 
also  detach  some  divisions,  without  on  that  account 
being  unable  to  maintain  its  defensive  position,  and 
the  armies  of  Finland  and  Georgia,  together  with  the 
corps  in  the  Crimea,  would  remain  entirely  intact. 

Two  initial  difficulties  present  themselves  : 

1st.  The  reunion  of  Galicia  would  create  a  difficulty 
as  regards  Austria.  It  is  most  necessary  to  treat  her 
with  consideration  and  avoid  offending  her  in  any 
respect.  I  have  therefore  decided  to  offer  her  Wal- 
lachia  and  Moldavia  as  far  as  the  Sereth  in  exchange 

o 

for  Galicia.     But  it  would  be  indispensable  to  post- 
pone the  reunion   of  Galicia  until  Austria  gives  her 


FURTHER  CORRESPONDENCE  225 

consent,  so  as  to  prove  that  we  have  no  views  that 
might  be  prejudicial  to  her. 

The  Kingdom  of  Poland  would,  therefore,  in  the 
first  instance  be  formed  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  and 
the  Russian  provinces. 

2nd.  The  compensation  to  be  given  to  the  King  of 
Saxony*  presents  a  second  difficulty  which  I  find  it  not 
so  easy  to  overcome.  But  I  do  not  consider  that  I 
shall  be  bound  to  do  so  unless  he  comes  over  to  my  side. 

Having  thus  stated  the  facts,  I  will  enter  upon  a 
discussion  of  the  subject  generally. 

It  is  beyond  doubt  that  Napoleon  is  striving  to 
provoke  Russia  to  a  rupture  with  him,  hoping  that  I 
will  make  the  mistake  of  being  the  aggressor.  This 
would  be  a  great  blunder  in  present  circumstances,  and 
I  am  determined  not  to  make  it.  But  if  the  Poles 
were  willing  to  join  me,  that  would  put  an  entirely 
new  face  on  the  matter.  Being  reinforced  by  the 
50,000  men  who  constitute  their  army,  by  the  50,000 
Prussians  who  could  then  also  join  me  without  risk, 
and  by  the  moral  revolution  which  would  be  the 
infallible  result  in  Europe,  I  could  advance  to  the 
Oder  without  striking  a  blow. 

I  agree  with  you  that  a  proposal  of  peace  might 
in  that  case  be  properly  made.  If  it  is  not  accepted, 
and  war  becomes  inevitable,  let  us  consider  impartially 
the  alternatives  which  are  open  to  the  Poles  and  the 
probable  results  of  each  of  them. 

First  alternative,  that  of  the  Poles  remaining  on 
the  side  of  France  and  co-operating  with  her. 

This  may  be  subdivided  into  two  cases : 

*  The  King  of  Saxony  was  Grand-Duke  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw. 
VOL.    II.  P 


226       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

1st.  Russia  having  decided  not  to  take  the  offen- 
sive, it  is  possible  that  Napoleon  will  not  do  so  either, 
at  least  so  long  as  the  affairs  of  Spain  occupy  him  and 
the  great  mass  of  his  troops  are  engaged  there.  In 
that  case  matters  will  remain  as  they  are,  and  the 
regeneration  of  Poland  will  consequently  be  postponed 
to  a  more  distant  and  very  uncertain  period. 