

The  certainty  of  the  regeneration  of  Poland  would, 
as  it  seems  to  me,  be  received  with  gratitude  and 

'  o 

eagerness  from  anyone  that  could  offer  it,  provided 
that  the  manner  in  which  it  should  be  offered  and 
brought  about  inspired  more  confidence  and  greater 
guarantees  of  success  than  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Duchy  believe  themselves  to  possess  through  their 
union  with  France.  The  great  difficulty  in  the 
execution  of  your  Majesty's  plan  would  be  at  once 
to  produce  such  a  conviction  in  the  minds  of  the 
Government,  the  army,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Duchy. 

This,  indeed,  is  the  gist  of  the  whole  question. 
However  just  the  grievances  of  the  Poles  against 
Napoleon  may  be,  he  has  yet  persuaded  them  that  it 
was  not  want  of  good-will,  but  absolute  want  of  power, 
which  prevented  him  from  carrying  the  work  of  their 
regeneration  any  farther,  .  .  .  and  that  at  the  first 
rupture  with  Russia^  Poland  would  be  restored.  To 


220      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

this  feeling  is  added  gratitude  for  what  Napoleon  has 
already  done,  and  repugnance  at  the  idea  of  turning 
against  him,  just  a,t  the  moment  when  he  most 
reckoned  upon  its  co-operation,  the  new  Polish  State 
which  he  has  created.  To  all  these  considerations 
must  be  added  the  fact  that  the  French  and  the  Poles 
are  brothers  in  arms,  and  the  idea  that  while  the 
French  are  the  friends  of  Poland,  the  Russians  are 
her  bitter  enemies — an  idea  which  has  been  consider- 
ably strengthened  by  the  events  of  the  late  war. 

A  further  difficulty  is  created  by  the  fact  that 
there  are  20,000  Polish  troops  in  Spain,  whom  their 
friends  and  relatives  in  Poland  would  fear  to  sacrifice 
to  the  vengeance  of  Napoleon.  Moreover,  in  the 
expectation  of  a  war  with  Russia,  many  Poles  have 
sent  their  children  to  be  educated  in  Paris,  as  being 
at  present  the  safest  place  in  Europe ;  and  these 
would  be  so  many  hostages  in  Napoleon's  hands. 
Finally,  Napoleon  has  hitherto  been  so  uniformly 
successful,  even  in  the  most  dangerous  undertakings, 
that  people  think  he  will  always  conquer  in  the  end, 
however  much  appearances  may  be  against  him.  .  .  . 

In  order  to  meet  these  objections  it  would  be 
necessary  to  make  the  Poles  some  offer  so  distinctly 
advantageous  to  their  country  as  to  overcome  all  per- 
sonal considerations.  They  must  be  treated  with 
magnanimity,  for  with  all  their  faults  they  have  the 
qualities  which  appeal  to  the  heart  and  the  imagination. 
The  three  following  points  would  for  such  a  purpose 
be  indispensable:  (1)  The  restoration  of  the  con- 
stitution of  the  3rd  of  May  1791,  which  is  graven  in 