

'  Come,  come,  come,  without  loss  of  time.     As  an 

*  The  date  on  which  Austria  joined  the  coalition  against  France. 


?46       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYHKI 

inducement  I  will  not  be  angry  if  you  pass  byLandeck 
and  remain  there  forty-eight  hours. 

'  Your  ever  affectionate  friend, 

'R  WILSON.' 

'  We  were  on  march  to  assist  Blilcher,  but  Bte's 
return  to  Dresden  recalls  us.' 


CHAPTER  XXI 

1813-14 


THE   BIERNACKI  MISSION   TO  LONDON. — CHASED  BY   A  FRENCH  MAN- 
OF-WAR. — LORD    CASTLEREAGH. CANNING. BROUGHAM. LEIGH 

HUNT. — 'THE  TIMES.' — TOM  MOORE. — SIR  SAMUEL  ROMILLY. 


THE  policy  of  Austria  towards  Poland  did  riot  realise 
Sir  Robert  Wilson's  sanguine  anticipations,  and  the 
hostility  shown  to  the  Poles  by  the  Russian  authori- 
ties, notwithstanding  the  friendly  professions  of  their 
Imperial  master,  made  it  improbable  that  Alexander 
would  be  alone  able  to  carry  out  the  restoration  of 
Poland.  As  there  was  a  talk  of  a  Congress  being 
assembled  at  which  the  Polish  and  other  questions 
would  be  dealt  with  by  the  Powers  collectively, 
Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  sent  his  secretary,  Biernacki, 
to  London  to  sound  the  Government  as  to  its  inten- 
tions with  regard  to  Poland  and  to  bring  the  Polish 
question  generally  before  the  British  public.  During 
his  stay  in  England  M.  Biernacki  kept  a  diary  which, 
though  unfortunately  incomplete,  gives  some  curious 
details  as  to  the  leading  men  in  the  political  and 
literary  circles  of  London  at  that  period. 

He  left  Pulawy  on  the   12th  of  September  1813, 
and  Warsaw  on  the   17th.     Travelling  was  slow  and 


248       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTQRYSK1 

difficult,  owing  to  the  inundations  and  the  crowds  of 
Russian  soldiers  on  both  banks  of  the  Vistula,  who 
behaved  as  if  they  were  the  masters  of  the  country. 
On  the  20th  he  arrived  at  Konigsberg,  where  he 
observed  that  the  lower  classes  still  spoke  Polish, 
though  the  province  had  so  long  been  in  the  hands  of 
Prussia.  He  asked  some  educated  Prussians  the 
reason  of  this,  and  they  answered,  with  some  surprise 
at  his  putting  such  a  question,  that  Polish  is  the 
national  language  of  the  people,  and  that  '  you  cannot 
make  a  whole  nation  speak  a  foreign  language.' 

On  the  22nd  he  reached  Pillau,  and  embarked  on 
board  the  '  Commonwealth,'  Captain  Hesketh,  for 
Carlscrona,  in  Sweden,  where  he  arrived  on  the  28th 
after  a  very  rough  passage.  From  this  place  he 
drove  for  four  days  and  five  nights  to  Gothenburg, 
which  he  calls  *  the  newest,  cleanest,  and  most  regu- 
larly built  city  in  Europe.'  He  remarked  that  '  the 
more  wealthy  merchants,  chiefly  Englishmen,  had 
beautiful  country  houses  in  the  vicinity  of  the  town, 
with  magnificent  gardens  and  well-kept  farm  buildings.' 