

I  will  not  here  discuss  the  chances  of  Russia  in  the 
coming  struggle.  I  will  only  remind  you  of  the  im- 
mense extent  of  territory  which  the  Russian  armies 
have  behind  them  and  into  which  they  can  retire,  while 
Napoleon's  difficulties  would  increase  the  further  he 
proceeds  from  his  resources.  Once  the  war  begins  we 
are  resolved  not  to  lay  down  our  arms.  Our  military 
resources  are  very  great,  and  the  public  feeling  is 
excellent — altogether  different  from  that  boastful 
spirit  which  you  witnessed  during  the  two  preceding 
wars.  .  .  .  People  think  reverses  are  quite  possible, 
but  for  all  that  they  are  resolved  to  maintain  the 
honour  uf  the  Empire  at  any  cost. 

If  under  these  circumstances  the  Poles  should 
join  them,  the  effect  would  be  immense,  and  the 
Germans,  forced  by  Napoleon  to  fight  on  his  side, 
would  certainly  follow  the  example  of  the  Poles. 

Sweden  has  concluded  an  offensive  and  defensive 
alliance  with  us.  The  Crown  Prince  has  a  burning 
desire  to  become  the  antagonist  of  Napoleon,  against 
whom  he  has  an  old  personal  grudge,  and  following 
in  the  footsteps  of  Gustavus  Adolphus,  he  only  wishes 


232       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

to  be  useful   to  a  cause  which  is  that   of  oppressed 
Europe. 

Your  idea  of  Napoleon  consenting  to  a  restoration 
of  Poland,  by  placing  her  under  the  rule  of  a  King 
who  is  also  Emperor  of  Russia,  is  a  chimerical  one. 
He  will  never  agree  to  a  measure  so  advantageous 
to  Russia,  especially  at  a  moment  when  he  thinks 
only  of  destroying  her.  He  will  never  attribute  to 
complaisance  on  the  part  of  Russia  her  inaction  when 
he  invaded  Prussia,  for  it  was  impossible  for  us  to 
interfere,  in  view  of  the  absolute  want  of  energy  on 
the  part  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  thought  only  of 
saving  Berlin  and  his  palace. 

Adieu,  my  dear  friend,  Providence  alone  knows 
what  will  be  the  issue  of  the  great  events  which  are 
preparing.  It  would  have  been  a  great  pleasure  to 
me  to  see  you  again,  if  only  for  a  short  time,  at  so 
interesting  a  crisis,  at  Wilna,  for  which  town  I  shall 
leave  in  three  days  ;  but  I  dare  not  propose  this  to 
you,  knowing  the  danger  to  which  it  would  expose 
you.  Be  guided  in  all  this  only  by  your  prudence, 
and  believe  me,  etc. 

[The  further  development  of  the  plans  referred  to 
in  the  above  correspondence  was  interrupted  by  the 
Russian  Campaign  of  1812.  On  the  26th  of  June  in 
that  year,  immediately  after  Napoleon  had  crossed  the 
Niemen,  the  Polish  diet  assembled  at  Warsaw  under 
the  presidency  of  Prince  Adam  Casimir  Czartoryski, 
Prince  Adam's  father,  and  proclaimed  the  restoration 
of  the  whole  of  ancient  Poland  as  an  independent 
State.  All  the  Poles  in  the  Russian  service  were 
called  upon  to  leave  it,  and  Prince  Adam,  who  still 