

As  to  the  military  operations,  besides  the  armies 
now  in  the  field,  each  regiment  of  the  whole  army  has 
already  in  the  rear  a  reserve  of  1000  men  per  regiment 
of  infantry  and  two  squadrons  per  regiment  of  cavalry, 
completely  equipped  and  mounted,  and  is  also  pro- 
vided with  reserve  companies  of  artillery,  to  enter  the 
ranks  of  the  active  army  in  the  spring.  Besides  these 
reserves  a  levy  of  180,000  men  is  at  this  moment 
taking  place,  which  will  serve  to  reconstitute  the 
reserves  of  the  regiments  as  soon  as  they  are  incor- 
porated in  the  active  army.  Moreover,  all  the  militia, 


ALEXANDER  AND  THE  POLEH  237 

foot,  horse,  and  artillery,  are  on  the  march  under 
Count  Peter  Tolstoi  to  form  a  corps  of  observation  in 
Volhynia.  The  energy  of  the  nation  is  beyond  praise, 
and  I  am  decided  to  push  on  the  war  not  only  during 
this  winter,  but  until  a  general  peace  is  established 
in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  security  of  Russia  and  of 
Europe.  .  .  . 

(Signed)     ALEXANDER. 

KRASNOPOL, 
3rd  January  1813. 

P.S.  It  has  taken  me  two  days  to  write  this 
letter,  as  my  time  was  taken  up  with  the  affairs  of  the 
army  and  other  business. 

As  my  letter  bears  a  certain  official  character,  I 
cannot  allow  it  to  go,  my  dear  friend,  without  adding 
a  friendly  word  for  you.  Success  has  not  changed  me 
either  in  my  ideas  on  your  country  or  in  my  principles 
generally,  and  you  will  always  find  me  such  as  you  have 
known  me.  Say  many  things  from  me  to  your  parents 
and  your  sisters. 

If,  as  a  result  of  all  these  events,  I  should  be  able 
to  stay  for  a  moment  with  your  family  this  would  give 
me  immense  pleasure.  Yours  heart  and  soul. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  TO  THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER. 

WARSAW, 

23rd  April  (±th  May)  1813. 

Sire, — .  .  .  In  returning  from  Kalisz,  I  met  Prince 
Anthony  Radziwill  at  Nieborow.  He  gave  me  some 
details  which  it  is  well  for  your  Imperial  Majesty  to 
know.  The  King  of  Prussia  is  not  at  all  opposed  to 


238       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  existence  of  Poland.  He  feels  the  necessity  of 
satisfying  the  wishes  of  the  Polish  nation,  and  con- 
siders them  just  and  reasonable.  He  was  astonished 
at  your  Majesty  not  having  as  yet  done  anything 
definite  for  the  Poles,  and  complained  that  whenever 
he  wanted  to  touch  upon  the  subject  you  seemed  much 
embarrassed  and  talked  about  something  else.  He 
asked  Prince  Anthony  to  go  to  Warsaw  to  sound  public 
opinion  and  confer  with  me.  From  all  this  it  would 
seem  that  the  King  of  Prussia  would  agree  to  any 
measure  your  Majesty  might  think  fit  to  take  in  this 
sense.  .  .  .  There  are,  in  fact,  no  difficulties  in  the 
way  of  your  undertaking  so  far  as  the  King  of  Prussia 
is  concerned ;  on  the  contrary,  he  will  himself  con- 
tribute in  a  large  degree  to  remove  those  presented 
by  the  Russian  army,  whose  opinion  will  always  be 
preponderant  at  St  Petersburg.  ...  I  know  that 
the  Russian  officers  here  mostly  speak  in  this  sense 
either  by  conviction  or  in  order  to  flatter  the  inhabi- 
tants. 