


NEGOTIATIONS  AFTER  THE  CAMPAIGN         233 

held  a  post  under  the  Russian  government  as  Cura- 
tor of  the  University  of  Wilna,  repeatedly  urged 
the  Emperor  to  accept  the  resignation  which  the  Prince 
had  already  tendered  on  several  previous  occasions. 
Alexander  took  no  notice  of  these  letters,  and  directly 
the  campaign  was  over  the  correspondence  between 
him  and  the  Prince  as  to  the  plan  of  a  reconstruction 
of  Poland  was  resumed.] 

LETTER   FROM    PRINCE    ADAM  CZARTORYSKI   TO  THE 
EMPEROR  ALEXANDER. 

if  December  1812. 

.  .  .  The  events  of  the  war  having  taken  a  turn 
which  seems  to  be  decisive,  I  fear  no  one  will  now 
plead  to  your  Imperial  Majesty  for  the  interests 
of  my  country,  and  I  have  accordingly  sent  Mr  K. 
with  the  accompanying  papers,  in  the  hope  that  they 
may  convince  you. 

I  have  no  hope  in  the  Continental  Powers;  they  will 
strive  to  divert  you  from  an  idea  which  will  be  offen- 
sive to  them,  and  which  is  too  noble  for  their  Cabinets 
to  understand.  What  reassures  me  is  that  England, 
in  view  of  her  clear  interest,  and  of  the  opinions  of  the 
Prince  Regent,  cannot  fail  to  appreciate  the  plan.  ,  .  . 

If  your  Imperial  Majesty,  at  the  moment  when 
the  Polish  nation  is  expecting  the  vengeance  of  a 
conqueror,  will  hold  out  your  hand  and  offer  it  that 
which  for  her  was  the  object  of  the  war,  the  effect 
would  be  magical. 

If  you  would  adopt  the  idea  relative  to  the  Grand 
Duke  Michael,*  I  would  take  it  upon  myself  to  get 

*  The  Grand-Dukes  Constantino  and  Michael  were  the  Emperor's  brothers. 


234      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

everything  signed  without  delay.  I  think  it  my  duty 
not  to  conceal  from  your  Majesty  that  a  cause  of  in- 
cessant anxiety  and  terror  to  the  Poles  is  the  Grand- 
Duke  Constantine,  who  is  your  heir-apparent ;  and 
this  is  the  reason  why  they  would  prefer  another 
branch.  A  King  of  Poland  with  300,000  men  under 
his  orders  would  be  able  at  any  time  to  destroy  what 
his  predecessor  may  have  established.  It  is  this 
which  makes  the  Poles  so  desirous  of  obtaining  a 
regular  constitution,  though  even  that  could  not  guar- 
antee them  against  acts  of  arbitrary  violence.  But 
whatever  arrangement  you  may  prefer  on  the  basis  I 
have  submitted  to  you,  I  do  not  think  I  am  saying 
too  much  when  I  assure  you  that  it  would  be  settled 
to  your  entire  satisfaction. 

THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER  TO  PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI 

LEYPOUNY,  13th  January  1813. 

I  received  your  interesting  letter  of  the  15th  of 
December  1812,  with  its  enclosures,  two  days  ago  .  .  . 
and  to-day  I  have  also  received  a  document  signed 
'  The  Minister  of  the  Interior,  Mostowski/  and  ad- 
dressed to  me.  I  do  not  lose  a  moment  in  answering 
you,  and  this  letter  will  also  serve  as  an  answer  to  M. 
Mostowski. 