

I  hear  with  pain  that  an  order  has  been  given  at 
head-quarters  to  confiscate  the  estates  of  all  who 
serve  in  the  Polish  army.  This  order  seems  to  me 
unjust  and  without  an  object ;  people  should  not  be 
punished  for  serving  their  country  and  obeying  the 
orders  of  their  sovereign,  recognised  as  such  by  your 
Majesty.  .  .  I  confess  that  it  gives  me  much  sorrow 
to  see  measures  so  inconsistent  with  the  policy  of 
generous  equity  which  you  have  adopted — the  noblest 
and  the  most  useful,  even  if  only  looked  upon  as  a 
matter  of  interest. 


PERSECUTION  OF  THE  POLES  IN  LITHUANIA    239 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  TO  THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER. 

WARSAW,  27th  April  1813. 

.  .  .  Those  who  know  your  Imperial  Majesty 
cannot  admit  the  slightest  suspicion  of  the  loyalty  of 
your  sentiments  or  fear  that  you  do  not  intend  to 
fulfil  the  hopes  you  are  holding  out  to  the  Poles  ;  .  .  . 
yet  those  who  have  to  carry  out  your  policy  are  doing 
their  utmost  to  defeat  it. 

The  five  Governments  of  Lithuania,  instead  of 
enjoying  the  benefits  you  wish  to  grant  them,  are 
suffering  under  an  aduiinistration  more  unjust  and 
arbitrary  than  any  of  those  that  have  preceded  it. 
No  one's  property,  life,  or  honour  is  safe.  Any  official 
prompted  by  a  desire  of  revenge  or  greed  of  gain  may 
ruin  the  most  innocent  citizen  and  the  whole  of  his 
family — .  .  .  in  a  word,  the  Government  and  the 
authorities,  instead  of  protecting  the  inhabitants 
placed  under  their  care,  seem  to  think  it  their  duty 
to  persecute  and  plunder  them.  You  have  no  idea, 
Sire,  of  the  evil  that  is  being  done  in  your  name,  for 
if  you  had  you  would  put  a  stop  to  it.  .  .  The 
inhabitants  are  in  despair,  and  though  hitherto  they 
have  been  quiet,  they  may  be  driven  to  insurrection, 
not  by  a  hope  of  success,  but  because  they  think  it 
better  to  perish  than  to  remain  in  their  present 
condition. 


LETTERS    FROM    GENERAL    SIR    ROBERT    WIL«O\. 

AMONG  the  English  friends  of  Prince  Czartoryski  was 
General  Sir  Robert  Wilson.  This  officer  had  fought 
under  Wellington  at  Talavera,  was  afterwards  Military 
Attache  to  the  allied  armies  in  Poland,  and  was  tried 
for  conniving  at  the  escape  of  Count  Lavalette,  who 
had  been  condemned  to  death  as  an  accomplice  of 
Napoleon.  When  Sir  Robert  Wilson  was  asked  at 
whose  instigation  he  had  assisted  Lavalette,  he 
replied  :  '  I  was  born  and  educated  in  a  country  in 
which  the  social  virtues  are  considered  as  public 
virtues,  and  I  have  not  trained  my  memory  to  a 
breach  of  friendship  and  confidence.'  * 

The  following  are  some  of  his  more  characteristic 
letters  to  Prince  Czartoryski  : 