

'  England  has  been  a  little  uneasy,  and  I  do  not 
think  the  Government  quite  settled.  Lord  Wellesley 
and  Lord  Grey  must,  in  my  opinion  be  brought  into 
office.  All  will  then  be  well,  and  you  will  have  firm 
friends.  Pars  pro  toto.  We  only  want  to  see  the 
operation  performed  by  others  than  Buonaparte. 
That  Corsican  never  will  attain  the  object  so  as  to 
receive  our  countenance,  and  I  think  the  Poles  them- 
selves must  be  sensible  that  he  takes  no  real  interest 
in  their  welfare — that  he  considers  Poland  but  as  a 
stepping-stone  to  his  ambition.  His  is  such  pro- 
tection as  vultures  give  to  lambs,  covering  and 
devouring.  .  .  . 

'  I  am  obliged  for  a  few  days  to  be  at  the  Imperial 
head-quarters,  but  in  general  I  rove  about  as  usual, 
and  I  have  not  been  behind  at  the  most  interesting 
turns  of  the  chase.  ...  I  have  escaped  sauf-  et  sain. 
My  nose  only  has  been  in  danger,  but  it  was  in  very 
serious  danger.  For  once  in  my  life  I  shrank  from 


LETTERS  FROM  GENERAL  SIR  ROBERT  WILSON  243 

Glory's  pursuit,  or  rather  lamented  I  had  been  wooing 
a  phantom  who  seemed  resolved  to  wring  off  the  noses 
of  his  votaries.  Mine  were  only  fears  ;  but  how  many 
thousand  poor  wretches  have  suffered  all  the  mutila- 
ting horrors  of  the  angry  climate.  This  campaign  has 
certainly  cost  both  armies  very  near  half  a  million  of 
men,  and  I  calculate  that  more  than  100,000  have 
perished  with  misery  more  terrible  than  any  one  heard 
except  the  Roman  crucifixions  of  the  Jews.  I  have 
seen  sights  of  woe  and  could  tales  unfold — but,  like 
Hamlet,  I  am  forbid. 

'  Adieu,  my  very  dear  Prince.  Keep  me  in  your 
kind  remembrance  and  believe  me  your  gratefully 
attached  friend,  servant,  and  colleague, 

1  ROBT.  WILSON.' 

'  KALISCH, 

1  February  27,  1813. 

'  I  have  only  this  day,  my  ever  dear  Prince, 
received  your  letter  from  Dubnow.  I  am  afraid  your 
messenger  will  depart  before  I  can  communicate  the 
result  of  some  conversations  that  I  expect  on  this 
interesting  subject,  which  should  engage  every  states- 
man's, of  every  country's,  serious  attention,  and  every 
honest  man's  affections. 

'  1  have  never  been  unfaithful  to  the  sacred 
pledges.  Co-operation  in  such  a  cause  has  ever  been 
considered  by  me  as  a  self-approving  act,  teeming 
with  more  joy  and. dignity  of  pride  than  all  the 
distinctions  which  were  conferred  on  those  who 
originally  resisted  the  appeals  which  your  country 
made  to  justice  and  to  honour. 


244       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  Poland  has  proved  that  the  maxim  is  not  infal- 
lible which  recommends  division  to  assure  conquest. 
The  spirit  of  independence  has  been  unconquerable, 
although  its  efforts  have  not  been  undeviating.  .  . 