

'  RUSSOPOL, 
'  January  ^,  1813. 

'  MY  DEAR  PRINCE — I  received  your  letter  with  a 
transport  of  pleasure.     Your  absence  had  always  been 

*  Diary  of  Henry  Crabb  Robinson,  vol.  ii.  p.  G.  Sir  Robert  Wilson  was  Member 
of  Parliament  for  Southwark  from  1818  to  1831,  and  then  re-entered  the  army,  ending 
his  career  as  Governor  and  Coinmander-in-Chief  of  Gibraltar. 


LETTERS  FROM  GENERAL  SIR  ROBERT  WILSON    241 

a  matter  of  deep  regret  to  me,  and  your  vacancy  in 
the  circle  could  never  be  supplied.  To  hear  from  you, 
to  know  that  I  was  preserved  in  your  esteem,  was  a 
high  gratification,  but  I  became  prouder  when  I  found 
that  you  still  considered  me  as  a  champion  true  to  that 
most  interesting  cause,  the  re-establishment  and 
happiness  of  your  brave  nation.  I  participate  in  all 
your  feelings,  and  am  in  accord  with  all  your  senti- 
ments. Your  friend  will  tell  you  what  I  have  done, 
and  I  pledge  myself  to  you  that  everything  which  can 
be  attempted  to  promote  the  object  shall  be  put  in 
execution  with  a  zeal  as  ardent  as  your  own.  It  is  a 
matter  in  which,  as  an  Englishman,  I  feel  so  much 
interest  that  I  would  sustain  the  plea  with  every 
personal  sacrifice  if  it  would  tend  to  the  desired 
accomplishment. 

'  There  are  many  potent  reasons  why  delay  will 
prove  detrimental  to  Russia  (I  cannot  be  more  ex- 
plicit on  that  subject,  but  you  will  discover  my 
allusion,  having  so  well  judged  of  the  past  and  specu- 
lated on  the  probable  future),  if  fatal  prejudices  refuse 
the  only  security  that  offers  for  advantages  obtained. 
The  Emperor's  firmness,  the  patriotism  of  the  nation, 
and  the  courage  of  the  army,  cannot  be  too  highly 
estimated  or  applauded,  but  Buonaparte's  errors  and 
the  climate  have  assuredly  brought  his  misfortunes  to 
the  degree  that  they  have  reached.  If  Buonaparte 
had  been  opposed  by  a  chief  who  had  only  common 
military  skill  or  energy  he  would  indeed  have  perished 
altogether  ;  but  as  that,  or  rather  those  opportunities 
were  lost,  as  the  favours  of  the  good  genius  of  the 
world  were  scorned  at  Maloslavitz,  Krasnow,  and  the 

VOL.  II.  Q 


242       ^fE^tOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYxKI 

Beresina,  Russia  must  not  trifle  with  her  interests. 
Half  measures — timid  policy — will  prove  her  ruin. 
It  is  for  the  Council  of  the  Empire  to  repair  in  some 
degree  the  mischief  which  an  inadequate  direction  of 
the  military  powers  has  occasioned,  for  I  consider  the 
escape  of  Buonaparte,  even  with  his  wreck,  a  serious 
mischief  that  may  cost  her  dear,  and  which  certainly 
entails  great  inconveniences.  I  use  mild  terms- 
milder  perhaps  than  I  should  if  we  conversed  together. 
I  long  to  see  you,  and  certainly  I  will.  I  have  very 
much  to  say  to  you  on  a  variety  of  subjects,  but  if  it 
was  only  for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  half-an-hour, 
I  would  go  several  hundred  versts.  .  . 