

'  Head-quarters  is  not  so  cheerful  as  heretofore  in 
our  happy  time.  There  are  many  good  fellows  in  the 
army,  but  circumstances  have  been  unfavourable  to 
former  good  fellowship  which  prevailed  anywhere  and 
everywhere.  The  campaign  has  been  one  of  great 
rudeness:  toil  and  endurance  with  few  social  pleasures. 
The  tone  was  ab  origine  discordant.  Your  return 
would,  however,  rally  gaiety  and  concord.  God 
grant  it  !  Ever  yours,  with  affectionate  attachment, 

<RoBT.  WILSON.' 

'  September  8,  1813. 

'  MY  DEAR  FRIEND, — You  must  not  suppose  me 
forgetful  of  you  or  of  my  engagements.  There  is  no 
Lethe  so  potent  as  to  erase  these  duties  and  affections 
from  my  remembrance.  There  is  no  centrifugal  force 
so  strong  as  to  withdraw  me  from  our  united  base. 
The  distraction  of  affairs,  the  difficulty  of  communi- 
cation, and  the  desire  of  seeing  a  person  long  expected, 
but  who  has  arrived,  prevented  me  from  writing  since 
I  left  Prague. 

'  I  have  now  to  urge  your  seizure  of  the  earliest 
opportunity  to  make  a  journey  to  this  part  of  the 
world.  Approach  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  and  as 
soon  as  possible  see  Lord  Aberdeen,  our  Ambassador 
to  him.  All  is  arranged  for  your  visit,  and  he  eagerly 
expects  you.  You  will  find  him  all  you  wish.  I  lost 
no  time  in  introducing  the  subject  to  his  notice. 


LETTERS  FROM  GENERAL  SIR  ROBERT  WILSON    245 

He  saw  the  moral  and  political  advantages  as  I 
do,  and  on  this  and  every  other  matter  he  will  pursue 
the  honestum  as  the  most  useful  course  of  proceeding. 

*  Lord  A.  comes  so  fully  aware  of  your  value  that 
he  longs  to  make  your  acquaintance  and  converse  on 
various  matters.  His  society  will  not  be  indifferent 
to  you.  Come  you  must,  and  speedily,  if  you  seek  to 
found  your  fame  on  the  foundation  of  patriotism.  I 
have  also  procured  high  friends  in  other  quarters.  In 
good  truth,  I  have  devoted  all  my  best  efforts  to  the 
subject  since  we  parted,  and  with  very  gratifying 
success.  Corne,  and  we  shall  triumph.  If  you  come 
not,  not  only  much  but  all  may  be  lost.  You  will  of 
course  make  a  suitable  pretext  for  this  journey,  and 
excite  neither  jealousy  nor  suspicion.  As  soon  as  I 
hear  you  are  within  tangible  reach,  I  will  go  to  you, 
as  in  all  probability  I  shall  be  transferred  to  the 
Austrian  Embassy,  [where]  I  can  act  more  independ- 
ently. .  .  . 

'  We  have  had  short  but  severe  service.  The 
worst  spectacle  which  I  beheld  was  the  savage  blow 
by  which  destiny  struck  down  Moreau  and  so  many 
national  hopes.  .  . 

'  I  do  not  enter  into  military  or  political  details. 
All  I  can  say  is  comprised  in  the  statement  of  my 
belief  that  the  events  since  the  17th  of  August*  have 
increased  the  desire  of  peace  in  pacificators,  disposed 
belligerents  to  negotiation,  and  that  to  the  prejudice 
of  war's  amateurs  peace  will  be  made  before  the 
winter. 