

The  proposals  in  these  papers,  and  the  personal 
sentiments  with  regard  to  myself  expressed  in  them, 
have  touched  me  very  deeply.  The  successes  by 
which  Providence  has  wished  to  bless  my  eiforts  and 
my  perseverance  have  in  no  way  changed  either  my 
sentiments  or  my  intentions  with  regard  to  Poland. 
Your  countrymen  may  therefore  abandon  any  fears 


ALEXANDER  AND  THE  POLES  235 

they  may  feel :  vengeance  is  a  sentiment  unknown  to 
me,  and  my  greatest  pleasure  is  to  return  good  for 
evil.  The  strictest  orders  have  been  given  to  my 
generals  to  treat  the  Poles  as  friends  and  brothers. 

To  speak  candidly,  in  order  to  realise  my  favourite 
ideas  as  to  Poland  I  shall  have  to  overcome  some 
difficulties,  notwithstanding  the  brilliancy  of  my 
present  position. 

In  the  first  place,  opinion  in  Russia  would  be 
against  them.  The  sacking  by  the  Polish  troops  of 
Smolensk  and  Moscow,  and  the  devastation  of  the 
whole  country,  has  revived  old  hatreds. 

Next,  if  I  were  at  this  moment  to  publish  my 
intentions  with  regard  to  Poland,  the  result  would 
be  to  throw  Austria  and  Prussia  entirely  into  the 
arms  of  France ;  while  it  is  essential  to  prevent 
such  a  result,  especially  as  those  Powers  already 
show  themselves  very  disposed  to  join  me. 

These  difficulties  will  be  conquered  with  a  little 
wisdom  and  prudence.  But  for  this  it  is  necessary 
that  you  should  second  me,  by  justifying  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Russians  the  predilection  which  I  am  known  to 
feel  for  the  Poles  and  their  ideas.  Trust  me,  my 
character,  and  my  principles,  and  your  hopes  will  not 
be  deceived.  As  military  events  develop  themselves, 
you  will  see  how  dear  the  interests  of  your  country 
are  to  me,  and  how  faithful  I  am  to  my  old  ideas. 
As  to  the  form,  you  know  I  have  always  preferred 
liberal  ones. 

But  I  must  plainly  tell  you  that  the  idea  of  my 
brother  Michael  cannot  be  admitted.  Do  not  forget 
that  Lithuania,  Podolia,  and  Volhynia  are  hitherto 


236      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYXKI 

regarded  as  Russian  provinces,  and  that  no  possible 
reasoning  could  persuade  Russia  to  see  them  under 
the  rule  of  another  sovereign  than  the  one  that  rules 
Russia.  The  name  under  which  they  would  continue 
to  form  part  of  Russia  is  a  difficulty  that  would  be 
more  easily  overcome. 

Pray  communicate  this  letter  to  the  persons 
whose  co-operation  you  think  necessary,  and  urge 
your  countrymen  to  show  good-will  to  Russia  and  the 
Russians,  so  as  to  wipe  out  the  recollections  of  the 
campaign,  and  thereby  facilitate  my  task.  On  my 
part,  in  order  to  give  the  Poles  a  proof  of  the 
sincerity  of  my  intentions,  I  have  given  orders  to  my 
army  not  to  occupy  Warsaw ;  but  for  this  it  is 
necessary  that  no  foreign  troops  should  remain  there, 
and  Polish  ones  least  of  all,  so  as  to  deprive  us  of  the 
anxiety  of  leaving  a  foreign  garrison  behind  us.  Pray 
urge  the  members  of  the  confederation  and  the 
Government  on  my  part,  to  remain  quietly  at 
Warsaw,  and  promise  them  that  they  will  not  regret 
their  doing  so. 