

He  also  asks  that,  while  deprived  of  every  means 
of  exporting  our  own  productions,  we  should  not 
raise  any  obstacle  to  the  importation  of  French 
articles  of  luxury,  which  we  have  prohibited,  not 
being  rich  enough  to  pay  for  them. 

As  I  shall  never  be  able  to  consent  to  such 
proposals,  it  is  probable  that  war  will  follow,*  not- 

*  It  did,  in  the  month  of  June  following. 


230      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

withstanding  all  that  Russia  had  done  to  avoid  it. 
Blood  will  flow,  and  poor  humanity  will  again  be 
sacrificed  to  the  insatiable  ambition  of  a  man  who 
seerns  to  have  been  created  as  its  scourge.  You  are 
too  enlightened  not  to  see  how  any  liberal  ideas  with 
regard  to  your  country  are  in  his  eyes  out  of  the 
question.  Napoleon  has  had  confidential  conversa- 
tions on  this  subject  with  the  envoys  of  Austria  and 
Prussia,  and  the  tone  in  which  he  has  spoken  to  them, 
shows  in  its  true  light  both  his  character  and  his 
indifference  towards  your  countrymen,  whom  he  looks 
upon  only  as  the  instruments  of  his  hatred  of  Russia. 

This  war,  which  seems  inevitable,  frees  me  from 
all  obligation  to  consider  the  interests  of  France,  and 
leaves  me  unshackled  in  working  out  my  favourite 
idea  of  regenerating  your  country. 

All  that  remains  to  be  done,  therefore,  is  to  decide 
upon  the  most  advantageous  course  to  be  followed  for 
securing  the  success  of  our  plans ;  and  in  order  that 
you  may  be  better  able  to  form  a  judgment  upon  them 
I  think  it  useful  to  give  you  some  indications  as  to  the 
military  operations  I  propose  to  undertake. 

Although  it  is  not  impossible  that  wre  may  push  on 
with  our  forces  to  the  Vistula,  and  even  cross  it  so  as 
to  enter  Warsaw,  it  is  more  prudent  not  to  reckon  on 
the  resources  and  the  prestige  we  should  acquire  from 
the  possession  of  that  city.  We  must  therefore  make 
the  provinces  the  centre  of  our  action. 

Several  very  important  questions  will  have  to  be 
settled  in  this  connection. 

Which  is  the  most  suitable  moment  for  declaring 
the  regeneration  of  Poland?  Is  it  directly  the  rupture 


NAPOLEON  STRIVES  TO  PROVOKE  A  RUPTURE    231 

takes  place,  or  after  our  troops  will  have  gained 
some  marked  advantages  ?  If  the  latter,  would  it  be 
useful  for  the  success  of  our  plans  to  organise  the 
Grand-Duchy  of  Lithuania  as  a  preliminary  measure 
and  give  it  one  of  the  two  constitutions  of  which  I 
send  you  drafts,  or  should  the  grant  of  a  constitution 
be  postponed  until  the  whole  of  Poland  is  restored  ? 

It  is  on  these  vital  questions  that  I  invite  your 
candid  opinion,  and  I  would  also  wish  you  to  state 
which  of  the  constitutions  you  think  preferable. 