

O       * 

and  in  which  Mr  Canning  played  so  shameful  a  part, 
has,  though  it  took  place  eight  years  ago,  not  been 
forgotten  by  the  British  public,  and  has  left  an 
indelible  stigma  on  his  character.  But  what  injures 
him  most  in  public  opinion  as  a  politician,  is  his 
unscrupulous  ambition  ;  there  is  a  general  feeling  that 
he  would  even  plunge  the  country  into  war,  if  by  so 
doing  he  could  please  the  Court  and  re-enter  the 
Cabinet.'  The  following  letter  addressed  by  him  to 
M.  Biernacki  after  their  first  interview,  shows  that 
Mr  Canning's  French,  like  Lord  Castlereagh's,  was 
far  from  perfect : 

'  Oserois-je  vous  prier,  Monsieur,  de  vouloir  bien 
prendre  la  peine  de  me  venir  voir  ou  demain,  ou 
1'apres  demain  entre  midi  et  une  heure. 

'  Je  suis  bien  fache  de  vous  donner  cette  peine-la-. 
Mais  je  suis  au  lit,  et  fort  incommode  d'une  grosse 
rhume.  Neanmoins,  si  vous  prefereriez  de  revenir  ici 


CANNING  253 

aujourdhui  meme  entre  une  et  deux  heures,  je  serois 
pr6t  de  vous  recevoir. 

'  Aies    la   bonte    de    m'indiquer   le  jour  qui  vous 
conviendra.' 

The  impression  derived  by  M.  Biernacki  from  his  in- 
terviews with  Mr  Canning  was  that  he  was  'more  polite 
than  is  the  case  with  Englishmen  generally.     He  was 
eager  for  an  opportunity  of  attacking  the  Ministry, 
and  seemed  better  informed  than  Lord  Castlereagh  as 
to  the  affairs  of  Poland.     He  told  me  that  since  1791, 
when    the    Opposition    loudly  advocated    the    Polish 
cause,  Polish  affairs  had  ceased  to  occupy  the  atten- 
tion   of  the    British    Government   and    public.       He 
expressed  interest  in  our  cause,  but  this  was  evidently 
not  so  much  on  account  of  the  thing  itself  as  of  his 
own  political  objects,  and  he    asked  me   with  much 
curiosity  about  the  people  with  whom  I  had  talked 
and  the  views  they  had  expressed.  .  .  .   He  warned 
me  against  asking  the  Opposition  to  take  up  the  cause 
of  Poland.     The  Opposition,  he  said,  is  not  only  quite 
insignificant,  but  is  despised  on  account  of  its  impo- 
tence, as  the  Ministry  defeats  by  means  of  its  majority 
everything  that  the  Opposition  proposes.     He  did  not 
think  the   Ministry  could  take    up    the   question  in 
Parliament,  as  they  wanted   money  for  subsidies  to 
Austria,  Prussia,  and  Russia.     It  was  true  that  there 
was  a  great  deal  of  talk  in  Parliament  on  behalf  of 
Poland  in  the  time  of  Pitt ;  but  this  was  not  prompted 
by  any  partiality  to   the    Poles   or  any  feeling  that 
their   independence    was    necessary  for    the   good    of 
Europe  ;  Poland   was   simply  made    a    stalking-horse 
for  attacks  on  the  Ministry.     It  was  unfortunate  for 