

*  This  pamphlet,  the  manuscript  of  which,  in  Brougham's  handwriting,  is  in 
the  Czartoryski  Archives,  was  published  in  1814,  under  the  title  of  An  Appeal  to  the 
Allies  and  the  English  Ration  on  behalf  of  Poland.  London,  J.  Harding,  St  James's 
Street,  8vo.  pp.  66. 

VOL.    II.  R 


258       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Poland,  of  which  they  are  at  present  profoundly 
ignorant.  He  promised  to  do  this  as  speedily  as 
possible.  The  next  step  would  be  to  enlist  the 
interest  and  sympathy  of  prominent  journalists,  poets, 
and  other  writers  on  behalf  of  Poland,  so  as  to  induce 
them  to  write  in  her  favour ;  also  to  interest  the 
Quakers,  and  the  Irish  Catholic  party  under  the  leader- 
ship of  Mr  Grattan — a  very  powerful  party  which  is 
increasing  in  strength,  has  great  influence,  and  will 
readily  assist  us.  Another  party  which  it  would  be 
very  useful  to  enlist  in  the  cause  is  that  of  Mr 
Wilberforce,  which  comprises  many  eminent  politicians, 
such  as  Mr  Vansittart,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer. 

'  As  it  would  be  impossible  at  present  to  obtain 
anything  from  the  Ministry,  which  has  its  hands  tied 
by  the  allies  of  England  and  matters  of  internal 
policy,  and  it  would  not  be  expedient  to  help  the 
opposition  to  make  Poland  the  occasion  for  a  party 
attack  on  the  Government,  we  decided  to  try  the 
Burke  party,  which  is  not  connected  either  with  the 
Government  or  the  Opposition,  and  has  some  of  the 
ablest  and  most  honest  men  in  the  House  among  its 
members,  who  are  generally  esteemed  both  in  Parlia- 
ment and  in  the  country.  At  their  head  is  the  Right 
Hon.  W.  Elliot,  formerly  Secretary  of  State,*  to 
whom  Burke  dedicated  his  works. 

'  As  public  discussion  is  most  in  fashion  here,  and 
it  is  very  difficult  to  keep  things  secret,  even  in  the 
Cabinet,  we  arranged  that  Mr  Brougham  should 
conduct  the  negotiations,  I  remaining  in  the  back- 
ground until  it  should  become  absolutely  necessary 

*  Mr  Elliot  was  not  a  Secretary  of  State,  but  Chief  Secretary  for  Ireland  in  1806. 


BROUGHAM  259 

for  me  to  treat  with  such  members  of  the  party  as 
might  be  most  relied  upon.  Among  these  are  Sir 
Samuel  Romilly,  a  great  favourite  with  the  public, 
known  as  "  the  champion  of  British  freedom  and  law  ;  " 
Sir  Alexander  Baring,  a  merchant  prince  who  has 
made  himself  very  popular  by  his  patriotism,  his 
talents,  and  his  philanthropy  ;  and  the  young  Marquis 
of  Lansdowne,  a  man  of  great  ability  and  weight  in 
the  House,  with  such  a  reputation  for  prudence  that 
people  say  of  him  that  "he  was  born  in  1780,  in  the 
thirtieth  year  of  his  age." 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  Right  Hon.  W. 
Elliot's  reply  to  the  letter  written  to  him  by  Mr 
Brougham  after  the  conversation  described  above  : 