

He  left  Gothenburg  on  the  6th  of  October  in  her 
Majesty's  Packet  '  Lark,'  Captain  Sherlock  com- 
mander. Among  his  companions  were  an  Irishman, 
*  elegant,  bon  vivant,  and  a  little  feather  brained,'  '  a 
romantic  and  polite  Scotchman,'  and  '  a  well-known 
character  who  is  convinced  that  he  is  John  of  Gaunt, 
Duke  of  Lancaster.  He  amused  us  greatly,  and 
reminded  me  of  Swift's  saying  that  out  of  every 
hundred  of  his  countrymen  five  are  mad.'  The 
'  Lark'  was  a  vessel  of  16  guns  :  there  was  plenty  of 
amusement  on  board,  and  the  cuisine  was  excellent. 


THE  ME  RE  AC  KI  MISSION  249 

One  day  at  noon  M.  Biernacki  went  down  into  the 
cabin  to  dress  for  dinner,  when  as  he  was  shaving  he 
heard  cries  of 'clear  for  action !'  This,  however,  did  not 
disturb  him,  as  he  thought  they  were  merely  rejoicing 
at  having  caught  a  turbot  or  some  other  fish  ;  but  soon 
after  the  captain  called  out  to  him,  '  D —  your  razors  ! 
It's  no  time  for  shaving.  The  French  are  corning  ! ' 
M.  Biernacki  then  hurried  on  his  clothes  and  went  on 
deck,  where  he  found  everything  ready  for  action  arid 
was  ordered  to  take  charge  of  a  gun.  The  French 
ship,  which  was  much  larger  than  the  '  Lark,'  ad- 
vanced straight  upon  her,  but  seeing  her  guns  and 
crew,  sheered  off.  '  I  was  very  glad  to  see  this/  he 
says,  '  and  especially  so  when  I  was  told  that  the 
'  Lark,'  being  a  packet-boat,  was  forbidden  to  pursue 
an  enemy — which  under  the  circumstances  seemed  to 
me  a  very  sensible  rule.' 

M.  Biernacki  arrived  at  Harwich  on  the  16th  of 
October.  '  I  have  often  heard  and  read,'  he  says, 
'  that  directly  you  set  foot  on  English  soil  you 
breathe  more  freely.  My  own  impressions  carried 
me  even  further :  not  only  are  one's  physical  move- 
ments more  free,  but  the  first  few  days  of  one's  stay 
in  England  have  an  even  greater  influence  on  the 
mind.  It  is  a  feeling  like  that  of  gratified  ambition  ; 
you  imagine  yourself  to  be  in  a  more  dignified  posi- 
tion than  you  were  before  you  landed,  and  are 
prompted  to  regulate  your  conduct  accordingly.  .  .  . 
At  St  Petersburg,  on  the  other  hand,  the  visitor 
breathes  with  difficulty,  neglects  himself  and  his 
duties,  and  becomes  less  orderly  and  courteous  than 
usual.' 


25o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

In  London,  M.  Biernacki  put  up  at  the  '  Spread 
Eagle,'  Gracechurch  Street,  and  he  thus  describes  his 
first  impressions  of  the  city  :  *  Thousands  of  people 
from  all  parts  of  the  world,  of  various  complexions 
and  costumes ;  thousands  of  carriages,  carts,  and 
cattle ;  the  horns  blown  on  the  coaches,  of  which 
2000  leave  and  arrive  in  London  daily ;  the  trumpets 
of  the  newsboys,  the  bells  of  the  postmen  ;  the  street 
bands,  the  constant  fights  between  thieves  and  their 
victims,  and  the  crowds  of  beggars,  make  one  deaf 
and  produce  a  confusion  of  mind  which  lasts  for 
several  days,  until  one  gets  accustomed  to  this  inces- 
sant turmoil.'  On  the  third  day  after  his  arrival, 
M.  Biernacki  obtained  an  appointment  with  Lord 
Castlereagh  at  six  in  the  afternoon  in  Downing  Street. 
The  interview  lasted  till  a  quarter  to  eight.  He 
found  Lord  Castlereagh  cold  but  frank  in  manner, 
speaking  with  much  deliberation,  full  of  preconceived 
notions  to  which  he  obstinately  adhered,  and  imper- 
fectly informed  as  to  Polish  affairs.  He  did  not  ex- 
press himself  with  facility  either  in  Englishor  in  French. 