

'  I    have   not   had    the    opportunity    of    learnino- 


256       ZfEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

whether  Prince  Czartoryski  mentions  your  business 
here  to  Lord  Granville  Leveson  Gower — or  whether 
the  letter  to  him  be  merely,  as  you  suppose,  a  letter 
of  introduction.  I  shall  probably  see  Lord  Granville 
Leveson  Gower  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks.  In  the 
meantime  I  have  not  said  anything  to  him  of  the 
nature  of  your  business  ;  nor  shall  I,  unless  I  should 
find  him  informed  of  it. 

'  If  there  is  anything  in  which  I  can  be  of  service 
to  you,  a  letter  addressed  to  me  at  Gloucester  Lodge 
will  always  be  duly  forwarded  to  me.  I  am,  with 
great  truth,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  faithful 
servant,  GEO.  CANNING.' 

'  To  M.  BIERNACKI,  at  Mr  DODD'S,  No.  12 
Aldersgate  Street.' 


M.  Biernacki's  next  interview  was  with  Brougham, 
whom  he  was  instructed  to  sound  as  to  the  best  means 
of  bringing  the  Polish  question  before  the  British 
public  through  the  press.  '  How  am  I  to  describe,' 
he  says,  '  this  noble  mind — what  am  I  to  say  of  him 
whose  character,  talents,  eloquence,  and  knowledge, 
are  celebrated  in  the  whole  of  England,  whose  house 
is  full  of  testimonials  from  towns  and  countries,  and 
from  families  which  he  has  saved  ?  .  .  .  I  have 
observed  that  in  other  countries,  and  especially  in 
Germany,  a  legal  training  narrows  the  mind.  Here 
it  has  an  opposite  effect.  As  was  formerly  to  some 
extent  the  case  in  Rome,  the  teaching  of  law  is  in 
England  necessarily  connected  with  that  of  the  theory 

O  */  •' 

and  practice  of  legislation,  and  is  illustrated  by  fre- 


BROUGHAM  257 

quent  discussions  both  in  Parliament  and  in  the  Law 
Courts  on  the  objects  for  which  laws  were  enacted. 
The  learning  and  practice  of  the  law  evidently  tends 
to  make  English  judges  and  barristers  large-minded, 
thoughtful,  high-principled,  and  merciful.  .  .  .  Mr 
Brougham  is  cold  and  gra\7e  in  manner,  but  it  is 
impossible  not  to  perceive  that  he  has  a  fertile 
imagination  which  he  has  thoroughly  under  control, 
and  with  the  help  of  which  he  gains  some  of  his 
greatest  successes.  He  is  fond  of  pictures  and  music, 
is  an  accomplished  connaisseur,  and  speaks  French 
better  than  is  generally  the  case  with  Englishmen. 

'  Directly  I  broached  the  subject  of  Poland  he 
assured  me  that  he  had  long  taken  an  interest  in  that 
country,  that  he  had  the  best  opinion  of  it,  that  when 
a  young  man  he  had  often  thought  of  plans  for  its 
reconstruction,  and  that  he  was  ready  to  do  every- 
thing in  his  power  to  bring  about  such  a  result. 

'  I  then  mentioned  to  him  the  idea  of  appealing  to 
public  opinion  on  behalf  of  Poland  through  the 
English  press.  He  promised  me  all  possible  assist- 
ance, asked  for  maps  and  books  about  Poland,  and 
wrote  down  a  series  of  questions  as  to  religion  in 
Poland,  the  national  desire  for  independence,  the 
results  of  the  partition,  the  state  of  parties,  etc., 
which  I  took  home  to  answer  in  full.  .  r~:  .••.  He 
read  my  answers  carefully,  and  we  then  agreed  that 
the  first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  write  a  short  appeal* 
to  the  English  nation  fully  stating  all  the  facts  as  to 