

'WELLS,  26th  December  1813. 

'  MY  DEAR  SIR, — Owing  to  an  accident,  I  did  not 
receive  your  letter  of  the  18th  inst.  so  soon  as  it  ought 
to  have  reached  me,  which  circumstance  is  the  occasion 
of  the  lateness  of  my  acknowledgment  of  it. 

'  No  one,  I  assure  you,  can  contemplate  with  more 
abhorrence  than  I  do  the  various  spoliations  which 
Poland  has  undergone,  and  there  is  no  one  who  could 
derive  more  joy  and  satisfaction  from  beholding  her 
resume  her  due  station  amongst  the  nations  of  Europe. 
At  the  same  time  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  disguise 
from  myself  the  many  difficulties  which  stand  in  the 
way  of  the  accomplishment  of  such  a  restoration.  It 
obviously  cannot  be  obtained  without  the  concurrence 
of  Austria  and  Russia  (I  may  add  Prussia),  and  it  is 
but  fair  towards  our  Government  to  say,  that  even  if 


260      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

they  were  to  take  up  the  cause  with  all  the  zeal  and 
authority  by  which  they  could  support  it,  their  inter- 
position could  go  little  beyond  exhortation,  and  means 
very  inadequate,  I  fear,  to  bring  about  an  object  that 
must  be  attended  with  considerable  sacrifices  on  the 
part  of  these  Powers. 

'  With  regard  to  the  course  suggested  by  the 
gentleman  who  has  made  to  you  the  communication 
you  mention,  I  confess  it  appears  to  me  perfectly  hope- 
less. If  I  understand  it  right,  it  is  that  the  affairs  of 
Poland  should  in  some  form  or  other  be  brought  under 
the  view  of  Parliament  without  his  having  made  any 
previous  disclosure  to  the  Government  on  the  subject 
of  his  mission.  Now  I  feel  the  clearest  conviction 
that  this  mode  of  agitating  the  matter  could  produce 
no  beneficial  results  whatever  ;  and  that  on  the  con- 
trary much  censure  would  be  cast  (I  think  not  wholly 
without  reason)  on  the  introduction  of  a  topic  which 
had  been  withheld  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Ministers 
of  the  Crown,  although  materially  affecting  the  in- 
terests of  his  Majesty's  allies,  and  of  peculiar  delicacy 
at  the  present  conjuncture  because  hazarding  the  har- 
mony and  cordiality  amongst  them  necessary  to  the 
continuance  of  that  success  which  has  of  late  accom- 
panied their  arms.  In  truth,  too,  almost  under  any 
circumstances,  I  should  place  little  reliance  on  the 
efficacy  of  the  exertions  of  a  few  individuals  in  Parlia- 
ment in  a  cause  which,  to  ensure  it  any  chance  of 
success,  would  require  all  the  weight  that  the  com- 
bined efforts  of  all  the  political  parties  in  the  country 
could  afford  it.  Such  a  plan  of  proceeding  would,  at 
least  as  it  strikes  me,  be  attended  with  no  solid  utility, 


BROUGHAM  261 

and  it  might  (and  this  is  an  idea  at  which  I  shudder) 
by  exciting  delusive  expectations  and  even  premature 
movements  in  Poland,  involve  that  unfortunate  coun- 
try in  still  more  grievous  calamities  than  those  which 
she  has  already  incurred.  These  considerations  will,  I 
acknowledge,  render  me  very  reluctant  to  share  in  the 
management  of  the  case  ;  and  though  I  am  unapprized 
of  the  details  of  the  extent  of  the  views  entertained,  I 
am  anxious  to  give  you  immediately  these  my  first  and 
hasty  impressions  (for  I  am  writing  under  the  fear  of 
losing  the  post)  in  order  that  the  person  who  is 
charged  with  the  mission  may  not  be  prevented  from 
availing  himself  of  any  other  means  that  may  present 
themselves  to  him  for  the  furtherance  of  the  business 
committed  to  his  care. 