

'  Of  course  I  shall  strictly  observe  your  injunction 
of  secrecy.  On  my  way  to  London  it  is  probable  I 
may  call  at  Milton,  in  which  event  (I  conclude  from 
the  tenor  of  your  letter)  I  may  show  it  to  Lord  Fitz- 
william  and  Lord  Milton,  unless  I  have  an  intimation 
from  you  of  your  wish  to  the  contrary. 

'  It  was  my  intention  to  have  been  by  this  time  on 
my  road,  but  I  have  been  detained  by  the  illness  of 
my  servant,  who  is  not  yet  able  to  travel,  and  I  there- 
fore propose  to  remain  here  for  about  a  fortnight 
longer. 

'  I  have  only  a  moment  left  to  add,  that  I  am 
always — most  faithfully  yours, 

'W.  ELLIOT. 
'  H.  BROUGHAM,  ESQ. 
'  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London.' 


262       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Describing  a  visit  to  Madame  de  Stael,  M.  Bier- 
nacki  says : 

'  Madame  de  Stael  is  immensely  popular  at  the 
British  Court  and  among  the  public.  Her  sentimen- 
talism,  her  enthusiasm,  her  singular  opinions  as  to 
morals  and  politics,  have  in  no  way  prevented  her 
from  gaining  the  highest  consideration  among  all 
classes  ;  it  was  enough  that  as  an  enemy  of  Napoleon 
she  had  been  banished  from  the  Continent  and  had 
taken  refuge  in  England.  Her  extraordinary  elo- 
quence and  readiness  in  debate  inspire  universal  ad- 
miration, and  the  highest  personages  in  the  country 
seek  her  acquaintance.  Her  influence  is,  in  fact,  so 
great  that,  in  spite  of  her  many  indiscretions  and  her 
advocacy  of  Russia,  I  decided  to  seek  her  assistance. 
.  .  .  She  spoke,  at  a  soiree  given  by  her,  with  the 
greatest  enthusiasm  about  Poland  and  loudly  praised 
the  Poles,  and  her  remarks  were  most  strongly 
supported  by  Sir  Samuel  Roinilly  and  Mr  Dumont, 
the  editor  of  Bentham.  We  shall  see  if  she  will  write 
in  the  same  sense ;  but  her  soirees  are  so  largely 
attended  that  even  in  conversation  she  might  help  us.' 
M.  Biernacki  wrote  her  a  long  letter,  urging  her  to 
advocate  the  cause  of  Poland,  to  which  he  received 
the  following  reply : 

'  Je  n'ai  jamais  cesse'  de  m'interesser  a  la  Pologne, 
et  la  noble  perseverance  de  ses  malheureux  citoyens 
est  respectable  et  touchante — mais  qu'esperer  pour 
elle  en  ce  moment !  Si  la  personne  qui  m'a  fait 
1'honneur  de  m'ecrire  une  si  belle  lettre  veut  me  voir, 
je  la  recevrai  dans  le  secret  le  plus  absolu,  mais  ce 
sera  seulement  pour  lui  exprimer  1'admiration  que 


BROUGHAM  263 

m'inspire  un  sentiment  national  si  courageusenienfc 
conserve,  si  courageusement  exprime'  par  les  actions 
et  les  paroles, 

'  A.  L.  G.  DE  STAKL-HOLSTEIN,  n6e  NECKER.' 

Brougham*  was  very  indignant  at  this  smoothly 
worded  refusal,  and  drafted  the  following  characteristic 
rejoinder,  which,  however,  M.  Biernacki  did  not  send 
to  Madame  de  Stael,  as  he  thought  it  was  too 
polemical  to  be  addressed  to  a  woman ;  upon  which 
Brougham  drily  observed  :  *  Perhaps  you  are  right ; 
it  would  be  best  simply  to  tell  her  she  knows  nothing 
about  the  matter  ' — 