

After  M.  Biernacki  had  fully  developed  the  plan 
of  a  reconstruction  of  Poland,  Lord  Castlereagh 
objected  that  if  Poland  were  restored  the  old  anarchy 
would  probably  be  revived,  upon  which  M.  Biernacki 
reminded  him  of  the  Constitution  of  the  3rd  of  May 
and  the  sittings  of  the  diet  of  1788-92,  in  which, 
notwithstanding  the  excitement  produced  by  the 
French  revolution,  the  debates  were  conducted  with 
as  much  order  and  regularity  as  in  the  English 
Parliament,  which  the  Polish  Deputies  took  for  their 
example.  •  To  this  Lord  Castlereagh  made  no  reply, 


LORD  CASTLEKEAGH  251 

but  he  said  that  it  would  be  ungenerous  on  the  part 
of  his  Government  to  encourage  the  Poles  by  empty 
promises  to  indulge  in  hopes  or  attempt  enterprises 
whose  object  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  England  to 
promote.  '  England,'  he  added  with  much  emphasis, 
'  is,  in  fact,  so  placed  that  she,  must  scrupulously  avoid 
everything  that  could  give  rise  to  distrust  either 
between  her  and  her  allies  or  between  any  two 
Powers  on  the  Continent  belonging  to  the  alliance. 
It  cannot  be  assumed  that  any  of  the  partitioning 
Powers  will  consent  to  return  the  provinces  they  have 
taken  from  Poland,  and  I  cannot  think  it  possible 
to  effect  the  restoration  of  Poland  by  mere  negotia- 
tion ;  the  only  means  of  doing  so  is  by  the  sword. 
If  the  Poles  rose  in  arms  for  this  purpose,  England 
might,  under  other  circumstances  than  the  present, 
effectually  assist  them.  But  recent  experience  does 
not  incline  me  to  wish  for  such  an  event,  as  the  result 
would  not  be  worth  the  bloodshed  and  material  ruin 
which  such  a  struggle  would  involve.  In  my  opinion 
the  Poles  should  now  submit  to  Russia  and  endeavour 
to  gain  her  favour.  England  is  prevented  by  treaties 
with  her  allies,  and  by  her  duties  to  the  English 
people — which  must  always  be  the  first  consideration 
— from  mixing  herself  up  in  such  a  matter ;  there 
might,  however,  be  means  of  bringing  the  Polish 
question  before  the  British  public.'  He  then  pledged 
M.  Biernacki  to  secrecy,  and  the  latter  asked  for  a 
similar  promise  as  to  his  mission,  explaining  that 
Prince  Czartoryski  had  purposely  sent  to  London  so 
obscure  an  individual  as  himself  in  order  to  prevent 
inconvenient  reports  or  disclosures. 


252       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

M.  Biernacki  next  called  upon  Mr  Canning, 
though  from  what  '  he  had  heard  of  his  character 
and  political  position,'  he  felt  convinced  '  that  not  the 
slightest  assistance  was  to  be  expected  of  him.'  '  Mr 
Canning,'  he  says,  '  has  much  wit,  but  does  not 
possess  the  ability  which  in  England  is  necessary  for 
dealing  successfully  with  public  affairs.  He  writes 
stanzas,  elegies,  and  epigrams,  and  this  rather  does 
him  harm  with  the  serious  public.  The  general 
opinion  is  that  though  he  is  the  most  fluent  and 
attractive  speaker  in  the  House,  he  wants  staying 
power  ;  that  he  has  excellent  ideas,  but  not  sufficient 
industry  or  perseverance  to  carry  them  out.  .  .  The 
affair  which  led  to  his  duel  with  Lord  Castlereaofh, 