


254      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  Poles  that  the  Powers  which  partitioned  them 
were  England's  allies  against  Napoleon  ;  this  was  the 
reason  of  her  silence  in  presence  of  the  iniquities  com- 
mitted by  those  Powers  in  Poland.  Moreover,  those 
who  advocated  the  Polish  cause  were  also  supporters 
of  the  French  Revolution  ;  and  this  had  led  to  a  general 
belief  in  England  that  the  Poles  are  people  of  the 
same  type  as  the  French  Jacobins.  Under  these  cir- 
cumstances the  ground  was  not  very  favourable  in 
England  for  a  movement  on  behalf  of  Poland  ;  and  he 
would  advise  that  urgent  representations  should  be 
made  to  the  Ministry,  which  has  its  hands  free  with 
regard  to  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  and  even  if  there 
should  be  any  secret  conventions  on  the  matter, 
England  might  yet  wish  for  and  advise  an  alteration 
of  them.' 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  last  communication 
to  M.  Biernacki  from  Mr  Canning,  who  on  this 
occasion  wrote  in  English  : — 

'  HlNCKLEY, 

1  December  3,    1813. 

'  SIR, — I  have  received  the  honour  of  your  letter 
of  the  27th,  and  have  forwarded  that  which  came 
in  it  to  Lord  Granville  Leveson  Gower. 

'  I  am  very  much  concerned  to  hear  of  your  indis- 
position ;  and  particularly  so,  that  it  prevented  me 
from  having  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  again  before  I 
left  town. 

'  Any  interest  that  I  might  take  in  the  subject  on 
which  you  addressed  yourself  to  me  would,  I  am  afraid, 
be  of  little  avail,  if  you  find  nothing  but  indifference 
in  other  quarters. 


CANNING  255 

'  I  am  not  without  apprehension  that  you  may  have 
misunderstood  something  which  passed  between  us 
respecting  Lord  Grenville.  I  expressed,  what  I  feel, 
the  highest  respect  for  his  Lordship's  character  and 
abilities  ;  and  gave  it  as  my  decided  opinion  that  any- 
thing which  he  might  say  on  behalf  of  your  country 
would  carry  the  greatest  weight,  and  would  be  alto- 
gether free  from  any  danger  of  misrepresentation. 
But  I  by  no  means  intended  to  lead  you  to  imagine 
that  /  could  take  the  liberty  of  introducing  you,  or  of 
stating  the  object  of  your  mission  to  this  country,  to 
Lord  Grenville.  Although  much  acquainted  with 
him  some  years  ago,  we  are  not  now  in  those  habits  of 
intimacy  either  publick  or  private,  which  would  at  all 
warrant  my  taking  such  a  step ;  and,  I  confess,  I 
should  also  feel  myself  restrained  not  only  with  regard 
to  Lord  Grenville,  but  to  anyone  else,  by  certain 
expressions  in  Prince  Czartoryski's  letter  to  me,  recom- 
mending a  perfect  silence  on  the  subject  of  its  con  tents. 

'  If  you  think  it  right  to  address  yourself  to  Lord 
Grenville,  and  should  find  it  necessary  to  refer  his 
Lordship  to  me,  merely  for  the  fact  of  your  having 
brought  me  a  letter  from  the  Prince  Czartoryski, 
strongly  recommending  you  to  rny  good  offices,  I  can 
have  no  difficulty  in  giving  a  satisfactory  answer  to 
such  a  reference ;  but  I  should  not  think  myself 
justified  in  originating  such  a  communication,  or  in 
entering  with  any  other  person  into  a  correspondence 
on  the  object  of  your  mission.  Prince  Czartoryski 
does  not,  in  his  letter  to  me,  make  any  exception 
whatever  to  his  general  recommendation  of  secrecy. 