


270       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

matter  of  connection  with  present  events  ;  and  as  this  may  appear 
to  some  persons  important  to  settle,  and  is  settled  by  him  very 
completely,  we  shall  make  a  good  long  extract  on  the  subject. 

1  "  I  question  if  the  time  be  even  yet  come,  when  the  miserable 
catastrophe  can  be  adequately  deplored  that  paralysed  all  those 
noble  efforts,  and  blighted  the  fair  prospect  unfolded  by  them  to  the 
eyes  of  every  friend  of  liberty.  But  one  part  of  the  calamity,  that 
which  pressed  the  most  sorely  upon  the  interests  of  the  European 
community,  will  perhaps  never  be  more  deeply  felt  than  at  the 
present  hour.  I  speak  of  the  peculiar  moment  chosen  by  the  con- 
federate courts.  The  new  constitution  was  enveloped  in  a  cloud  of 
foreign  soldiery — the  patriots  were  scattered  abroad — the  rudiments 
of  the  national  army  were  dissipated — the  country  was  overwhelmed, 
parcelled  out,  confiscated,  jobbed,  turned  into  money — blackened 
with  garrisons,  prisons,  gibbets,  cemeteries,  and  the  desolate  abodes 
of  men  who  had  perished  for  freedom — its  separate  existence  finally 
destroyed — its  name  blotted  out  from  the  map,  and  forbidden  to 
be  any  more  uttered,  as  if  it  had  been  guilty  of  all  the  crimes 
whereof  it  had  been  the  scene  and  the  victim — but  why  enumerate 
particulars  ?  Do  they  not  all  fall  short  of  the  deed  itself  ? — The 
partition  of  Poland  was  completed  AFTER  the  French  Revolution 
had  awakened  slumbering  royalty  ;  had  taught  the  force  of  France 
to  burst  through  its  ancient  bounds  ;  and  had  made  national  inde- 
pendence tremble  in  every  corner  of  Europe. 

' "  This  is  the  fact  upon  which,  at  the  present  moment,  it 
imports  us  well  to  meditate.  There  is  no  getting  over  it.  If  Poland 
had  been  left  as  she  was  when  those  great  changes  began  which  the 
allies  are  now  occupied  in  undoing,  she  would  still  have  been  one  of 
the  greatest  Powers  on  the  Continent.  She  was  seized  when  even 
the  pretences  of  1772  no  longer  existed — when  she  was  a  safe, 
orderly,  and  peaceable  neighbour.  But  above  all  she  was  seized  in 
1793  and  1794,  at  the  very  time  when  France  was  seizing  Savoy, 
Belgium,  and  Holland.  This  is  the  matter  which  now  presses  itself 
upon  our  attention.  We  are  recurring  to  sound  and  ancient 
principles.  We  are  treading  back  our  steps  in  order  to  get  out 
of  the  slough  in  which  we  have  been  since  the  French  Revolution, 
and  to  regain  the  eminence  of  a  pure  morality.  We  are  endeavour- 
ing to  undo  as  much  as  possible  the  recent  changes  of  dominion,  and 
to  place  the  affairs  of  Europe  on  their  former  ground,  with  all  the 
benefits  of  past  experience.  With  what  pretensions  of  consistency 
— by  what  powers  of  face,  marvellous  even  in  this  unblushing  age, 
can  we  meet  either  the  enemy  or  the  Polander,  if  the  only  change 
on  which  we  are  obstinately  silent  is  one  of  the  most  momentous 