


EXTRACTS  FROM  BROUGHAM'S  PAMPHLET      273 

the  first  breaking  out  of  the  war  two  years  afterwards,  she  evinced 
her  sense  of  the  benefits,  unsubstantial  as  they  were,  which  that 
treaty  had  conferred.  The  same  extraordinary  efforts  were  renewed, 
and  the  army  of  the  Duchy  rapidly  over-ran  the  Polish  provinces  of 
Austria,  where  they  met  with  allies  in  every  corner.  Indeed  similar 
exertions  were  made  in  those  districts  themselves,  and  they  were 
rewarded  by  the  incorporation  of  their  better  half  with  the  Duchy, 
at  the  peace  of  Vienna. — In  1812,  a  new  attempt  was  made  to  soothe 
the  Poles  with  the  hope  of  real  independence,  although  the  alliance 
of  France  with  Austria  rendered  it  extremely  difficult.  The  charm 
was  again  found  all  powerful ;  the  people  flocked  from  every  quarter 
to  join  the  invading  army,  and  expended  their  utmost  means  to  supply 
it.  I  question  if  an  equal  amount  of  contribution  was  ever  raised 
upon  the  same  extent  of  a  country  merely  agricultural ;  and  when 
we  reflect  that  it  had  been  exhausted  by  half  a  century  of  misfortune, 
the  exertion  seems  scarcely  credible.  Besides  the  fixed  war  revenue 
of  about  live  millions  sterling,  it  furnished  as  much  more  in  provi- 
sions and  stores  to  the  army  on  its  passage,  with  a  further  sum  of  one 
million  and  a  half  in  money.  Such  efforts,  and  the  subsequent 
exhaustion  of  the  country  in  1813,  may  have  drained  it  of  wealth  ; 
but  the  people  remain ;  iron  is  their  gold  ;  and  if  the  allies  prefer 
the  neighbourhood  of  an  unconquerable  and  friendly  nation,  to  an 
uneasy  rule  over  hostile  subjects,  they  have  only  to  speak  the  word. 
Let  but  the  sound  be  heard  which  can  really  awaken  Polish  independ- 
ence,— name  to  them  the  Constitution  of  the  third  of  May,  and 
every  plain  will  be  alive  with  horse — every  thicket  of  their  forests 
gleam  with  spears.  All  that  Napoleon  could  do  by  offers,  insignifi- 
cant had  they  been  sincere,  will  be  forgotten  in  the  exertions  which 
a  substantial  restoration  would  call  forth.  So  impregnable  a 
bulwark  never  was  raised  against  invasion,  as  Russia  would  present 
to  all  the  rest  of  Europe,  while  Prussia  and  Austria  would  no  longer 
touch  upon  that  too  powerful  neighbour,  and  in  a  quarter  where 
their  security  has  been  the  most  precarious."  pp.  47-50.* 

'We  shall  take  a  hasty  farewell  of  this  work  by  going  somewhat 
farther  than  its  author  in  our  anticipations  of  what  will  be  the 
consequences,  should  the  allied  monarchs  not  perform  what  is 

*  '  The  eulogium  of  Mr  Burke  on  the  Polish  Constitution  of  the  third  of  May, 
is  unbounded.  It  concludes  with  this  passage  : — -"Happy  people,  if  they  know  how 
to  proceed  as  they  have  begun  !  Happy  Prince,  worthy  to  begin  with  splendour  or 
to  close  with  glory  a  race  of  patriots  and  of  Kings.  ...  To  finish  all — this  great  good, 
as  in  the  instant  it  is,  contains  in  it  the  seeds  of  all  future  improvement,  and  may 
be  considered  as  in  a  regular  progress,  because  founded  on  similar  principles,  towards 
the  stable  excellence  of  a  British  Constitution." — Appeal  from  the  new  to  the  old 
Whigs. — The  passage  in  the  former  part  of  these  reflections  was  printed,  before  I 
recollected  the  testimony  of  this  great  authority.'  (Note  by  Leigh  Hunt). 