

VOL.  II.  S 


274      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

expected  of  them.  In  our  opinion,  they  will  not  only  be  insecure 
from  future  attacks  of  the  enemy,  and  from  the  intrigues  which 
harass  monarchs  in  general,  but  all  that  has  happened  in  Europe  for 
the  last  thirty  years  will  not  save  them  and  their  subjects  from  the 
danger  of  fresh  revolutions  ;  for  if  the  times  at  present  differ  in  any 
one  feature  from  what  they  were  eighty  or  a  hundred  years  back,  it 
is  in  the  direct  rank  that  understanding  has  taken  in  society,  in  the 
universal  circulation  of  intelligence  and  good  sense,  and  in  the 
consequent  and  most  formidable  addition  which  has  been  made  to 
the  power,  and  conscious  power  too,  of  public  opinion.  The  people 
have  looked  at  their  sovereigns,  and  the  sovereigns,  it  is  hoped,  have 
now  looked  at  their  people,  with  eyes  of  mutual  understanding.  It 
is  the  interest  of  both  to  let  this  understanding  be  a  good  one.' 


After  seeing  this  article  M.  Biernacki  wrote 
Leigh  Hunt  a  letter  of  thanks,  which  the  latter  thus 
acknowledged  in  the  Examiner  of  February  6, 
1814: 

'  The  letter  written  in  French  has  been  received, 
and  has  given  the  editor  one  of  those  enjoyments 
which  he  prizes  almost  above  every  other,  and  which 
will  always  be  a  sufficient  reward  to  him  for  what 
little  he  may  be  able  to  do  in  a  good  cause.' 

The  Polish  cause  was  also  warmly  taken  up  by 
Mr  Perry  in  the  Morning  Chronicle  and  Dr  Stoddart 
in  the  Times,  which,  according  to  M.  Biernacki,  was 
'  the  only  paper  the  Prince  Regent  allowed  his 
daughter  to  read  ; '  but  Brougham  did  not  succeed  in 
getting  any  leading  politicians  except  Earl  Grey  to 
advocate  it  in  Parliament,  though  Sir  Samuel  Romilly, 
Wilberforce,  Lord  Lansdowne,  Lord  Holland,  and 
Cobbett,  'le  franc,  le  sauvage,  le  farouche,'  expressed 
the  greatest  sympathy  for  it. 

M.  Biernacki,  who,  like  most  educated  Poles  of 
that  time,  was  fond  of  quoting  Latin,  sent  to  some  of 


TOM  MOORE  275 

his  correspondents  the  following  passage  from  Livy 
as  a  prophetic  description  of  England's  political 
mission  :— Esse  gentem  in  terris  quae  sua  irnpensa  ac 
periculo  bella  gerat  pro  libertate  aliorum,  maria 
trajiciat,  ne  quod  toto  orbe  terrarum  injustum  im- 
perium  sit,  ubique  jus,  fas,  lex  potentissima  sint ; — 
they  did  not,  however,  accept  the  suggestion. 

'  Englishmen,'  says  M*  Biernacki,  '  only  do  one 
thing  at  a  time.  Just  now  they  think  only  of  the  war 
with  France.  .  .  .  It  is  impossible  to  see  the 
Ministers  :  they  fear  the  fate  of  Percival  (his  successor 
especially),  and  are  overwhelmed  with  work ;  two 
messengers  go  to  the  Continent  every  day.  More- 
over, there  is  a  split  in  the  Cabinet.  One  party 
wishes  to  make  peace  at  once  on  the  French  terms  ; 
the  other  wishes  to  carry  on  the  war  in  order  to 
obtain  further  compensation  for  the  sacrifices  England 
has  made.  The  Prince  Recent  favours  the  latter 