


272       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  The  author  then  proceeds  to  exhibit  the  miserable  state  of 
Poland  after  its  partition,  to  calculate  the  little  advantages  the 
partitioners  have  derived  from  their  respective  acquisitions  of 
territory,  and  to  enumerate  the  frequent  and  striking  disadvantages 
they  have  experienced  from  the  natural  hatred  of  the  Poles,  in  a 
military  point  of  view.  The  rest  of  the  pamphlet  is  chiefly  occupied 
in  answering  objections  on  the  score  of  Russian  ascendency.  We 
shall  make  our  other  extract  on  the  use  which  Bonaparte  has  made 
of  the  Poles,  as  it  brings  the  matter  down  to  the  time  before  us,  and 
refer  our  readers  for  the  rest  of  the  question  to  what  will  amply 
repay  their  attention  in  the  publication  itself  :— • 

'  "  The  exact  number  of  men  drawn  by  the  enemy  from  this  quarter 
it  is  neither  very  easy,  nor  very  material  to  ascertain.  Since  1806, 
when  he  first  held  out  hopes  of  restoring  Poland,  those  numbers 
have  greatly  increased  ;  and  in  the  campaign  of  1812,  they  did  not 
fall  short  of  100,000.  The  insecurity  of  the  tenure  by  which  the 
country  is  held,  may  be  seen  from  the  events  of  the  two  Polish 
campaigns.  Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Jena,  the  Prussian 
troops  were  compelled  to  withdraw  from  Poland,  as  precipitately  as 
the  French  have  lately  done  from  Holland.  No  exertion  was  too 
great  for  the  country  during  that  winter,  notwithstanding  the  very 
imperfect  degree  in  which  its  wishes  were  met.  Bonaparte,  in 
nattering  them  with  the  hopes  of  independence,  had  imposed  one 
very  harsh  condition,  that  the  code  Napoleon  should  be  established. 
Even  on  such  terms,  as  if  only  anxious  for  existence,  and  careless  of 
the  kind  of  being  they  should  have,  they  accepted  the  offer.  Let 
us  recollect  that  Emperors  and  Kings  have  in  like  manner  received 
their  crowns,  fettered  by  conditions  that  almost  enslaved  them  to 
their  subjects  or  electors.  So  the  Poles  capitulated  for  national 
existence,  upon  terms  which  could  hardly  be  said  to  leave  them  a 
separate  people.  But  they  amply  performed  their  part  of  the  con- 
tract. The  enthusiasm  excited  by  the  mere  semblance  of  restoration 
was  universal.  Many  persons  sacrificed  nearly  their  whole  fortunes 
to  the  State.  Entire  regiments  of  between  two  and  three  thousand 
men  each,  were  raised  and  fully  equipped  by  individuals  in  a  few 
weeks.  Others  furnished  single  battalions,  or  companies,  or  only  a 
few  men,  according  to  their  means ;  and  all  this — not  from  the 
superabundance  of  their  wealth,  not  by  the  sale  of  their  plate  and 
jewels  only  ;  but  by  selling  or  pledging  their  estates,  and  part- 
ing with  everything  that  could  raise  a  farthing,  down  to  the  mar- 
riage rings  of  village  dames,  or  the  single  silver  spoon  of  a  poor 
country  curate.  The  peace  of  Tilsit  closed  the  campaign  which  had 
been  so  materially  influenced  by  the  exertions  of  Poland ;  and  upon 