

'  The  author  of  the  pamphlet  is  evidently  a  true  observer,  who 
sees  things  in  the  gross  as  well  as  detail, — in  their  universal  as  well 
as  their  particular  application.  For  a  writer  who  can  take  so  large 
a  view  as  he  does  of  the  subject  and  its  principle,  we  might  be 
inclined  to  think  that  he  takes  rather  too  much  pains  to  answer 
petty,  Cabinet  objections,  and  questions  of  interest ;  but  as  politics 
go,  and  as  questions  of  interest,  by  a  proper  reasoning,  amount  at 


EXTRACTS  FROM  BROUGHAM'S  PAMPHLET      269 

last  to  the  same  thing  as  questions  of  principle,  it  may  have  been  as 
well  to  show  himself  prepared  at  all  points.  What  we  like  less,  is 
an  insidious  way  of  occasionally  putting  his  own  apprehensions  of  the 
allies  into  the  mouth  of  their  enemies, —  a  kind  of  deprecating  by 
proxy,  and  of  imagining  what  other  people  might  say  of  them,  only 
to  express  his  conviction  that  no  such  terrible  want  of  principle  can 
take  place.  It  would  have  been  better,  we  think,  in  a  pamphlet  on 
such  a  subject,  to  state  at  once  what  his  own  opinion  of  the  allies 
would  be,  should  they  turn  traitors  to  their  profession, — and  to 
state  it  too  in  the  very  broadest  terms.  If  in  the  end  they  deserve 
it,  he  saves  himself  the  pretence  of  a  conviction  to  the  contrary  ; 
and  if  not,  they  can  be  the  less  offended  with  the  plain  speaking. 
But  even  the  opportunities  of  humour  which  this  underhand  mode 
gives  a  writer,  (and  the  one  before  us  handles  a  pleasantry  very 
easily),  cannot  compensate,  we  think,  for  the  opportunities  it  gives 
to  meaner  understandings  of  doubting  his  good  intention  in  general. 
Of  this  there  cannot  be  the  remotest  suspicion.  The  writer  may 
have  his  apprehensions  with  regard  to  the  ultimate  conduct  of  the 
allies,  and  we  know  some  very  excellent  men  who  more  than  agree 
with  him  on  that  point ;  but  whoever  he  is,  he  is  one  that  sees  as 
clearly  as  any  man  the  union  of  sound  principle  with  policy,  and 
who,  notwithstanding  his  legal  mode  of  occasionally  putting  his 
apprehensions,  succeeds  in  convincing  his  reader  that  he  feels  as  well 
as  sees.  The  apostrophe  to  the  "ill-fated  Poniatowski"  (p.  46) 
evinces  cordiality  of  heart  as  well  as  justness  of  thinking. — But  we 
are  detaining  the  reader  from  a  few  extracts  which  it  is  our  inten- 
tion to  give  him,  and  which  we  shall  give  without  any  of  these 
comments  which  the  rest  of  the  publication  itself  will  abundantly 
supply. 

'  After  stating  that  the  subject  of  Poland  need  not  be  so  painful 
to  the  allied  Princes  as  some  people  may  insinuate,  since  it  was  their 
immediate  predecessors,  not  themselves,  that  made  the  partition,  the 
author  proceeds  in  a  very  successful  manner  to  vindicate  the  Poles 
for  having  sided  of  late  with  the  French,  by  putting  a  very  strong 
and  striking  case,  in  which  he  supposes  England  to  be  lorded  over 
by  the  latter,  and  suddenly  visited  by  a  Russian  army,  of  which  she 
takes  advantage  to  try  and  shake  off  her  yoke.  He  then  enters  into 
the  subject  historically,  showing  that  "  the  great  relaxation  of  public 
principles  may  be  distinctly  ascribed  to  the  partition,"  and  the  Poles 
themselves,  at  the  moment  of  their  national  annihilation,  were 
removing  the  last  flimsy  pretext  for  the  outrage  by  forming  a  new 
and  free  constitution.  His  next  step  is  to  prove,  that  the  partition 
is  not  a  thing  gone  by, — the  discussion  of  which  is  no  longer  a 