

O 

party,  as  he  has  made  up  his  mind  to  bring  back  the 
Bourbons.'  The  only  Englishman,  in  fact,  who 
thoroughly  identified  himself  with  the  Polish  cause 
at  that  period  was  Brougham  ;  and  he  threw  himself 
into  the  work  heart  and  soul. 

As  stated  at  the  beginning  of  this  Chapter,  M. 
Biernacki's  diary  is  incomplete  ;  but  it  is  accompanied 
by  a  collection  of  letters  (besides  those  printed  above), 
of  which  the  following  may  be  worth  reproducing  here  : 

From  Tom  Moore. 

MAYFIELD  COTTAGE,  ASHBOURNE, 

Thursday,  Feby.  3rd. 
SIR, — I  believe  I  have  to  thank  you  for  a  very 


276      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

able  pamphlet,  '  An  Appeal  to  the  Allies,'  which  I 
have  just  received  under  a  blank  cover.  It  had  already 
been  sent  to  me  by  a  friend  from  town,  but  I  am  glad 
you  have  given  me  an  opportunity  of  expressing  my 
opinion  of  the  book  through  a  channel  by  which  it 
has  a  chance  of  reaching  the  author  himself;  as  I 
know  that  honest,  sincere  praise,  even  from  so  humble 
an  individual  as  myself,  is  one  of  the  rewards  that 
such  interesting  labours  look  for.  I  have  seldom  seen 
anything  better  meant  or  better  executed. 
Your  very  obliged  st. 

THOMAS  MOORE. 
To  Mr  HARDING, 
Bookseller,  St  James's. 

From  Brougham  to  Mr  Vansittart,  Chancellor  of  the 

Exchequer. 

TEMPLE,  Keby.  21,  1814. 

DEAR  SIR, — I  am  infinitely  unwilling  to  give  you 
the  interruption  of  reading  a  letter  in  the  midst  of 
your  manifold  occupations  at  this  singular  juncture. 
Yet  I  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  my  obligations 
to  you  for  the  patience  with  which  you  listened  to  my 
Polish  friend.  His  situation  is  one  of  extreme 
delicacy — but  as  he  is  one  of  the  most  sincere  and 
devoted  patriots,  so  is  he  likewise  a  person  of  excellent 
sense  and  discretion  in  conduct.  I  am  intimately 
acquainted  with  everything  relating  to  him  and  his 
connections,  and  I  can  give  you  a  most  positive 
assurance  of  his  being  trustworthy. 

He  is  very  anxious  lest  he  should  have  failed  to 
convey  his  meaning  with  distinctness,  and  has  begged 


BROUGHAM  277 

me  to  repeat  several  things  for  him  ;  but  I  am  quite 
sure  his  fears  are  groundless,  and  I  shall  confine 
myself  to  a  single  remark — viz.,  on  the  extreme  im- 
portance of  any,  even  the  smallest,  interest  being  shown 
with  respect  to  the  unfortunate  country  in  question. 
Its  possessors  (especially  Alexander)  look  to  England 
a  vast  deal  more  than  they  will  always  acknowledge 
when  they  are  treating  with  you.  They  regard  the 
publick  opinion  here  almost  as  much  as  our  own  Govern- 
ment does,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  fact  that  they  are 
influenced  by  it  in  the  same  way,  though  certainly  they 
are  not  very  mindful  of  the  publick  opinion  among  their 
own  subjects.  How  much  more,  then,  do  they  con- 
sider any  expression  of  opinion  or  feeling  on  the  part 
of  our  Government !  It  is  very  certain  that  the  mere 
exhibition  of  some  little  interest  (however  little  and 
however  privately)  in  favour  of  the  Poles,  could  it  be 
made  at  the  present  time,  would  have  great,  immedi- 
ate, and  very  practical  effects  on  the  happiness  of 
many  millions  of  people.  I  suspect  the  Emperor 
Alexander  at  least  desires  nothing  more  in  that 
quarter  than  the  authority  of  our  Government  to  back 
him  with  his  allies  on  the  one  hand,  and  his  nobles  on 
the  other,  to  adopt  a  more  paternal  system. 