


EXTRACTS  FROM  BROUGHAM'S  PAMPHLET      271 

and  least  justifiable,  and  which  our  conscience  tells  us  was  effected  in 
the  very  same  month  with  the  conquest  of  the  Netherlands,  ad- 
mitted 011  every  hand  to  be  the  fittest  subject  of  restoration1? 

'  "  A  pernicious  but  very  flimsy  heresy  has  been  propagated  on 
this  question  by  some  foreign  politicians,  the  soundness  of  whose 
principles  in  other  respects  renders  their  mistakes  the  more  danger- 
ous.    It  has  been  said  that  the  partition  of  Poland  is  now  a  mere 
matter  of  history,  and  that  while  the  lapse  of  time  exempts  it  from 
being  again  brought  into  discussion,  the  sanction  of  various  treaties 
stops  the  parties  to  them  from  questioning  it.     This  doctrine  is  so 
full  of  manifest  absurdity,  and  so  easily  refuted  by  the  whole  system 
of  those  who  adopt  it,  that  one  can  scarcely  imagine  it  to  proceed 
from   anything   but  a  misplaced  delicacy  towards  the  partitioning 
Powers,  and  a  determination  to  scare  the  enemy  with  big  words  and 
terms  of  law,  from  flinging  at  us  a  very  favourite  sarcasm  in  return 
for  the  many  attacks  of  this  kind  to  which  we  expose  him.     I  would 
fain  remind  the  very  respectable  persons  to  whom  I  am  alluding,  of 
the  period  at  which  they  first  treated  this  topic  ;    it  was  imme- 
diately after  the  Treaty  of  Luneville,  in  1801,  not  seven  years  after 
the   final  partition,  the  greatest    in   extent    and  the   worst  in  all 
respects,  except  that  it  was  not  the  earliest.     Yet  the  advocates  of 
this   motley  doctrine  of  a  seven  years'  limitation   of  anti-Jacobin 
crimes,  were  the  loudest  against  offences  committed  by  France  eight 
and  nine  years  before  the  date  of  their  invectives.     Happily  for 
Europe  the  same  enlightened  persons  retain  their  influence  over  the 
popular  opinions  at  the  present  day,  and  to  it  perhaps,  next  to  ilie 
headlong  rashness  of  the  enemy  and  the  temperate  firmness  of  the 
allied  chiefs,  we  owe  the  late  successes.     I  hope  their  voice  will  be 
heard  in  the  negotiations,  and  in  the  further  prosecution  of  the 
war,  should  just  terms  be  refused  by  France — I  am  sure  they  will 
spurn    at    the   idea  of  considering   the    French    conquests    in    the 
Revolution  war  as  sacred ;  and  yet  nearly  twice  seven  years  have 
elapsed  since  a  treaty  confirmed  them  ;  so  that  both  their  doctrine 
of  limitation  and  of  estoppel  by  treaties,  is  much  more  applicable  to 
these  than  to  the  last  Polish  partition.     England  too  and  France,  I 
should  think,  may  be  reckoned  something  in  a  question  of  this  sort, 
and  they  never  by  any  treaty  recognised  directly  or  indirectly  the 
dismemberment.     Yet  England  as  well  as  the  allies  themselves,  by 
solemn  treaties,  recognised  those  French  usurpations  and  new  states 
created  in  the  Revolution  war,  which  all  good  men  now  hope  to  see 
restored  to  their  ancient  possessors.     Even  the  Spanish  usurpation 
was  recognised  by  all    the   allies  in   succession,   except  England." 
pp.  22-25. 