


'  The  allies  are  now  supposed,  and  with  great  appearance  of  proba- 
bility, to  be  advancing  to  a  point  at  which  they  will  not  only  be 
able  to  secure  present  peace  for  Europe,  but  to  act  upon  an  im- 
proved scale  the  part  which  has  hitherto  been  performed  by  the 
enemy,  and  settle  the  destinies  of  nations  in  their  turn. 

For  this  change  in  their  prospects  and  power  they  are  eminently 
indebted,  as  they  themselves  acknowledge,  to  the  popular  opinion 
that  has  gone  with  them  ;  and  it  is  desirable,  on  every  account,  that 
they  should  preserve  this  best  of  friends  and  strongest  of  coadjutors 
by  fulfilling  in  their  prosperity  what  they  undertook  to  perform 
when  the  strife  was  doubtful.  Their  enemy  has  found  to  his  cost, 
that  opinion  in  these  times  is  not  what  it  was  even  fifty  years  back, 
and  that  it  cannot  be  put  on  and  off  at  pleasure,  without  risking 
something  worse  than  a  chill. 

'  People's  eyes,  therefore,  are  fixed  with  no  small  anxiety  on  the 
diplomatic  proceedings  of  the  allies,  and  the  more  so,  from   some 


LEIGH  HUNT  ON  POLAND  267 

appearances  of  contradiction  that  have  lately  been  witnessed  in 
their  military  declarations.  For  our  part,  though  we  are  among 
the  most  anxious,  we  confess  we  think  little  of  these  appearances. 
If  the  allies  crossed  the  Rhine  after  their  professions  of  moderation, 
and  after  their  hint  about  not  interfering  with  the  natural  bound- 
aries of  France,  Buonaparte,  by  his  own  statement,  seems  to  have 
attempted  trifling  with  them  on  the  subject  of  peace,  and  it  would 
have  been  mere  weakness  on  their  part  to  lose  more  of  their  time. 

'  The  proceeding  does  not  compromise  the  sincerity  of  their  pro- 
fessions ; — it  is  at  a  peace  the  latter  will  be  brought  to  the  test. 
Again,  there  may  be  a  difference  of  temper  in  the  proclamations  of 
the  Austrian  and  Prussian  Generals,  without  gainsaying  the  general 
spirit  of  the  confederacy.  If  the  Prussian  has  something  of  a 
vindictive  tone,  and  taunts  the  French  Emperor  with  some  of  his 
former  boastings,  he  may  be  supposed  to  construe  the  natural  feel- 
ings of  his  master,  and  to  speak  the  language  of  his  irritated  country- 
men, without  involving  the  cooler  feelings  of  ultimate  negotiation. 
The  Austrian  Emperor  has  suffered  less  than  the  King  of  Prussia, 
and  is  besides  connected  with  Buonaparte,  so  that  his  servant  speaks 
in  a  more  considerate  manner.  As  to  the  Cossacks,  of  whom  such  a 
ridiculous  noise  has  been  made,  it  is  well  known  that  they  enjoy  a 
sort  of  mongrel  independence,  and  that  whatever  antics  they  play 
are  to  be  traced  to  themselves  and  not  to  the  Russian  Commanders  : 
— their  flags,  therefore,  with  Paris  on  the  one  side  and  Moscow  on 
the  other,  have  as  little  to  do  with  the  temper  of  the  allied  sovereigns, 
as  their  beards  and  their  brutality.  If  Napoleon  had  not  played 
the  part  of  a  brother  barbarian,  he  ought  to  have  taken  shame  to 
himself  for  enabling  such  a  tribe  to  come  down  and  play  the  raw- 
head-and-bloody-bones  among  the  people  of  Europe. 