

In  my  above  mentioned  work  a  sample  of  a  penal 
code  is  exhibited.  In  the  first  place  what  I  should 
humbly  propose  is,  to  do  what  remains  to  be  done  for 
the  completion  of  it.  For  this  purpose  not  many 
months  would,  I  hope,  be  necessary. 

Sovereign  and  father — in  this  double  character  it  is 
on  all  occasions  your  Majesty's  wish  and  delight  to 
show  yourself  to  your  people.  In  this  same  character, 
even  on  the  rough  and  thorny  ground  of  penal  law — in 
this  same  happily  compounded  character,  addressing 
them  through  my  pen,  your  Majesty  would  still  show 
yourself  the  sovereign  by  his  commands,  the  father  by 
his  instructions ;  the  sovereign  not  more  intent  on 
establishing  the  necessary  obligations,  than  the  father 
on  rendering  the  necessity  manifest,  manifest  to  all 
men,  and  at  every  step  he  takes  thus  justifying  him- 
self in  their  sight. 

Reasons. — Yet  it  is  by  reasons  that  a  task  at  once 
so  salutary  and  so  arduous  can  be  accomplished  :— 
reasons  connected  and  that  by  an  indiscontinued  chain 
of  references,  on  the  one  hand  with  the  general 
principles  from  which  they  have  been  deduced,  on  the 
other  hand,  with  the  several  clauses  and  ivords  in  the 
text  of  the  law,  for  the  justification,  and  at  the  same 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BENTHAM  293 

time  for  the  elucidation  of  which  they  have  been 
respectively  framed.  An  accompaniment  of  this 
kind  would  form  one  of  the  peculiarities  of  my 
Code :  a  sample  is  given  in  my  above  mentioned 
treatise. 

This  sample  was  a  challenge  to  legislators  :  the 
well-intentioned  but  strictly  shackled  Frenchmen 
shrunk  from  it.  How  acutely  sensible  they  were  of 
the  usefulness  of  such  an  accompaniment,  how  they 
wished  and  how  they  feared  to  expose  their  works  to 
so  searching  a  test — how  they  tasked  themselves  to 
produce  a  sort  of  substitute  test — (I  mean  a  mass  of 
vague  generalities  left  floating  in  the  air,  and  destitute 
of  all  application  to  particulars) — how  sadly  inadequate 
is  that  substitute — what  excuse  is  given  for  the  defici- 
ency, and  how  lame  is  that  excuse — all  this  may  be 
seen  in  their  respective  works. 

All  comprehensiveness,  conciseness,  uniformity,  and 
simplicity—  qualities  the  union  of  which  is  at  once  so 
desirable  and  so  difficult — such,  as  far  as  concerns  the 
choice  of  words,  are  the  qualities  for  which  the  nature 
of  the  work  seems  to  present  a  demand.  To  infuse 
them  into  it,  each  in  the  highest  degree  which  the 
necessary  regard  to  the  rest  admits  of,  would,  on  this 
as  on  all  similar  occasions  it  has  been,  be  to  my  mind 
an  object  of  unremitting  .solicitude.  With  what 
promise  of  success,  let  the  above  mentioned  sample 
speak.  Whoever  sees  that  one  part,  sees  to  all  such 
purposes  the  whole. 