

'  Had  Lord  Castlereagh  denounced  the  original,  as  well  as  the  proposed,  partage, 
instead  of  making  appeals  ad  misericordiam,  his  remonstrances  might  have  been 
effectual.  But  it  was  of  no  avail  to  tell  the  Emperor  that  he  was  exacting  from  his 
neighbours  and  allies  an  arrangement  incompatible  with  their  political  independence, 
and  that  the  demand  by  Russia  to  retain  so  large  a  share  of  Poland  as  that  to  which 
the  Emperor  laid  claim,  was  a  source  of  consternation  and  alarm  to  Austria  and 
Prussia  and  of  general  terror  throughout  all  the  States  of  Europe. 

'  His  Imperial  Majesty's  Austrian  and  Prussian  allies  had  no  claim  upon  his  for- 
bearance, and  it  was  impossible  to  defeat  the  Emperor's  claims  when,  on  the  principle 
on  which  they  were  made,  no  one  could  deny  their  justice. 

'  The  partition  being  admitted,  the  degree  and  the  mode  could  only  be  decided  by 
the  will  of  that  party  whose  claims  were  the  strongest,  and  whose  power  was 
adequate  to  support  the  claims.  The  result  was,  that  Great  Britain  accepted  the 
partition  as  a  fait  accompli,  and  that  Russia  obtained  almost  all  that  she  asked  for. 

'Mr  Cook,  a  man  of  considerable  ability  and  firmness,  who  was  Under-Secretary 
in  the  Foreign  Office,  and  who  accompanied  Lord  Castlereagh  to  Vienna,  endeavoured 
in  vain  to  rouse  his  chief  to  an  uncompromising  condemnation  of  the  two  partitions. 
He  urged  him  to  fling  the  treaties  on  the  table  of  Congress,  and  to  declare  that 
nothing  should  induce  Great  Britain  to  acknowledge  the  validity  of  those  acts.  He 
urged  in  vain  ;  but  he  set  the  seal  on  the  sincerity  of  his  own  opinions,  by  resigning 
at  once  his  post  of  Under-Secretary  of  State.  He  was  succeeded  in  Vienna  by  Mr 
Planta.'  ("  George  Canning  and  his  Times,"  by  Augustus  Granville  Stapleton,  p.  354.) 


286       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSK1 

Ultimately,  however,  concessions  were  made  on  both 
sides,  and  the  result  was  that  by  the  Treaty  of 
Vienna  (signed  on  the  25th  of  February  1815)  Posen 
was  given  to  Prussia,  and  Galicia  (except  Cracow, 
which  was  to  be  a  free  town)  to  Austria,  and  the 
remainder  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  was  made  a 
kingdom  '  irrevocably  attached  by  its  Constitution  '  to 
the  Russian  Empire,  and  with  the  Czar  as  its  King. 
It  was  also  stipulated  that  '  all  parts  of  ancient 
Poland,  as  it  existed  before  the  year  1772,'  should 
enjoy  the  right  of  free  navigation  and  trade,  and  that 
all  its  inhabitants,  whether  subjects  of  Russia, 
Austria,  or  Prussia,  shall  obtain  '  a  representation ' 
and  '  institutions  which  shall  ensure  the  preservation 
of  their  nationality.'  Thus  did  Europe,  while  stipu- 
lating for  the  preservation  of  the  Polish  nationality 
over  the  whole  of  ancient  Poland,  give  the  sanction  of 
public  law  to  a  partition  which  Prince  Talleyrand 
described  as  '  the  prelude,  in  part  perhaps  the  cause, 
and  even  to  a  certain  extent  the  excuse,  of  the 
disorders  to  which  Europe  had  been  a  prey.'* 