

Lord  Castlereagh's  despatches  on  the  subject  will 
be  found  in  the  '  Correspondence  relating  to  the 
negotiations  of  the  years  1814  and  1815  respecting 
Poland'  which  was  presented  to  Parliament  in  1863. 
The  following  extracts  from  memoranda  drawn  up  at 

*  '  De  toutes  les  questions  qui  devaient  etre  traitees  au  Congres,  le  Roi  aurait 
considere  commela  premiere,  la  plus  grande,la  plus  eminemment  Europeenne,  comme 
hors  de  comparaison  avec  toute  autre,  celle  de  Pologne,  s'il  lui  cut  6te"  possible 
d'espe"rer  autant  qu'il  le  de'sirait,  qu'un  peuple  si  digne  de  1'interet  de  tous  les  autres 
par  son  anciennete",  sa  valeur,  les  services  qu'il  rendit  autre  fois  a  1'Europe,  et  par  son 
infortune,  put  etre  rcndu  a  son  antique  et  complete  inde"pendance.  Le  partage  qui 
la  raya  du  nombre  des  nations  fut  le  prelude,  en  partie  la  cause,  et  peut-etre  jusqu'a 
un  certain  point  l'excuse,'des  bouleversements  auxquels  1'Europe  a  et£  eii  proie.'  (Note 
to  Prince  Metternicb,  dated  19th  December  1814). 


THE  VIENNA  CONGRESS  287 

the  time  by   Prince   Czartoryski    show  some   of  the 
arguments  on  the  Russian  side  of  the  question  :— 

'  Hitherto  experience  has  always  proved  that 
people  who  are  unhappy  and  dissatisfied  are  usually 
restless,  and  that  the  surest  way  of  keeping  people 
quiet  is  to  make  them  contented.  There  is  no  reason 
to  believe  that  such  a  universal  and  infallible  means  of 
pacification  would  not  succeed  with  the  Poles,  who 
have  certainly  shown  themselves  very  active  and 
stirring ;  but  all  their  energy  has  been  directed  to  a 
single  object,  that  of  recovering  their  name,  their 
Government,  and  their  nationality.  It  is  difficult  to 
understand  why  people  should  when  speaking  of  the 
Poles  call  that  "  levity  "  which  in  speaking  of  other 
nations  they  call  "  patriotism  and  perseverance."  Such 
a  misuse  of  words  may  lead  to  false  conclusions,  and 
there  is  not  the  slightest  probability  that  the  Poles, 
after  obtaining  the  essence  of  their  demands,  should 
only  become  the  more  turbulent  and  disorderly.  His 
Imperial  Majesty  is  convinced,  after  many  years' 
experience,  that  all  classes  in  Poland  have  the  same 
wish,  and  he  has  had  a  new  proof  of  this  in  the 
addresses  which  have  been  sent  him  from  all  parts  of 
the  Duchy  of  Warsaw.  .  .  . 

'  His  Majesty,  after  much  consideration,  has 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  plan  he  proposes 
would  be  the  best  in  the  interest  of  Europe  generally. 
By  it  he  would  keep  acquisitions  which  he  cannot  give 
up,  but  he  would  so  organise  his  possessions  as  to 
secure  peace  to  his  neighbours  and  to  Europe. 

'  Suppose  the  name  of  the  kingdom  of  Poland  is  re- 
stored, and  part  of  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  is  reunited  to 