

In  the  midst  of  war,  and  without  interruption  to 
the  successes  or  to  the  evils  of  war,  a  line  or  two  from 
your  Majesty's  hand  would  suffice  to  give  commence- 


294      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

ment  to  the  work,  to  this  the  greatest  of  all  the  works 
of  peace. 

As  to  remuneration,  the  honour  of  the  proposed 
employ,  joined  to  such  satisfaction  as  would  be  in- 
separable from  that  honour,  compose  the  only  reward 
which  my  situation  renders  necessary — the  only  one 
which  my  way  of  thinking  would  allow  me  to  accept. 

With  all  the  respect  of  which  the  nature  of  this 
address  conveys  so  much  fuller  an  assurance  than  can 
be  conveyed  by  any  customary  form  of  words,  my 
endeavour  would  be  to  approve  myself,  Sire,  your 
Imperial  Majesty's  ever  faithful  servant, 

(Signed)     JEREMY  BENTHAM. 

To  Prince  Czartoryski. 

Q  itccn  quare  Place,  Westminster, 

2lst  June  1815. 

DEAR  SIR, — For  one  thing  I  must  begin  with 
casting  myself  upon  the  Emperor's  forgiveness  as  well 
as  yours  ;  that  is  the  enormous  length  of  time  (upwards 
of  a  month),  that  has  intervened  between  my  receiving 
of  the  two  letters,  and  the  despatching  of  these  my 
answers.  Another  thing  for  which,  likewise,  I  must 
beg  your  indulgence,  is — the  rough  state  in  which  I 
am  reduced  to  send  a  copy  of  mine  to  the  Emperor, 
for  your  use. 

Both  trespasses  have  their  source  in  an  engage- 
ment under  which  the  letter  found  me  :  viz.  that  of 
drawing  up  for  this  country,  for  the  use  of  a  voluntary 
association,  a  plan  of  National  Education,  in  relation 
to  which  I  may  perhaps  take  the  liberty  of  troubling 
you  with  a  few  words  before  the  close  of  the  present 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BE  NT II  AM  295 

letter ;  or  at  any  rate  by  the  next  messenger :  the 
whole  business  was  in  danger  of  being  put  a  stop  to 
for  an  indefinite  length  of  time  had  I  not  devoted  my- 
self exclusively  to  it.  As  to  your  copy  (I  mean  of  my 
letter  to  the  Emperor)  I  hope  you  will  find  it  legible,  as 
consistently  with  my  engagements,  time  could  not  be 
found  for  the  copying  and  revisal  of  another  fair  one. 

As  to  the  original,  you,  as  well  as  he,  will  (I  fear) 
be  sadly  annoyed  by  it,  were  it  only  for  the  length  of 
it.  It  was,  however,  absolutely  necessary  I  should 
speak  out,  and  I  saw  no  hope  of  being  able  so  to  do,  to 
any  purpose,  in  any  lesser  compass.  I  hear  it  said  every- 
where that  he  is  a  good-natured  man :  by  what  you 
will  find  me  saying  to  him,  that  quality  will  be  put  to 
the  test.  From  me,  if  he  has  patience  enough,  he 
may  thus  read,  what  from  a  man  in  any  other 
situation,  it  is  not  in  the  nature  of  things  that  he 
should  either  read  or  hear. 