


288      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Russia.  This  could  not  in  any  sense  be  dangerous  to 
Austria  or  Prussia,  for  the  Emperor  would  guarantee 
to  them  the  possession  of  their  parts  of  Poland,  and 
the  slightest  attempt  to  recover  them  would  be 
opposed  by  Austria,  Prussia,  France,  and  England, 
leaving  Russia  entirely  isolated.  .  .  It  is  not  a  little 
more  or  less  territory  or  fortresses  that  constitutes 
the  balance  of  power  ;  it  is  the  parity  of  interests 
which  produces  combinations  in  the  hour  of  danger 
that  are  far  more  formidable  and  effective  than  mere 
arrangements  of  frontier.' 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

1815 

LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BENTHAM. 

SIR  JOHN  BOWRING,  in  his  Memoirs  of  Jeremy  Bentham 
(vol  x,  page  478,  of  the  collected  works)  says  that 
'  Bentharn's  hopes  of  being  allowed  to  prepare  a  code 
for  Russia  were  at  this  time  (1815)  strongly  excited. 
His  name  and  writings  were  very  popular  in  that 
country.  He  had  himself  some — his  brother,  who  had 
been  so  long  in  the  Russian  service,  many — influential 
friends  at  the  Court  of  the  Czar.  Dumont  had  lived 
long  at  St  Petersburg,  and  his  reputation  and  his 
labours  were  so  associated  with  those  of  his  master, 
that  strong  expectations  were  indulged  that  authority 
to  prepare  a  Code  would  be  communicated  to  him. 
The  Emperor  Alexander,  who  was  fond  of  being  con- 
sidered the  patron  and  protector  of  literary  and  learned 
men,  sent  to  Bentham  a  diamond  ring,  which  Bentham 
returned  to  the  Imperial  donor,  with  the  seal  of  the 
box  that  contained  it  unbroken.  His  conduct  has 
been  deemed  ungracious,  but  without  reason.  He 
cared  nothing  about  diamond  rings  ;  but  he  desired  to 
legislate  for  the  good  of  the  Russian  people.  The 
Emperor  would  have  had  him  communicate  his 

VOL.  II,  T 


290      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

observations — or  rather  reply  to  the  questionings  of  a 
commission  appointed  to  revise  the  Russian  Codes. 
But  Bentham  knew  that  commission  to  be  wholly 
incompetent  to  the  work  ;  and  its  President,  upon 
whom  everything  depended,  was  peculiarly  unfitted 
for  his  task,  so  that  Bentham  refused  to  take  any 
share  in  a  drama  of  feebleness  and  insincerity.' 

The  following  letters  were  addressed  by  Bentham 
to  the  Czar  and  Prince  Czartoryski  on  this  subject : — 

To  the  Emperor  of  all  the  Russias. 

SIRE, — The  object  of  this  address  is  to  submit  to 
your  Imperial  Majesty  an  offer  relative  to  the  depart- 
ment of  legislation. 

My  years  are  sixty-six.  Without  commission 
from  any  government,  not  much  fewer  than  fifty  of 
them  have  been  occupied  in  that  field.  My  ambition 
is  to  employ  the  remainder  of  them,  as  far  as  can  be 
done  in  this  country,  in  labouring  towards  the  im- 
provement of  the  state  of  that  branch  of  government 
in  your  Majesty's  vast  Empire. 