

A  bandage  on  his  eyes — leading  strings  on  his 
shoulders — on  this  part  of  the  field  of  Government, 
such  has  hitherto  been  his  costume.  My  aim  is  to 
rid  him  of  those  appendages  :  is  it  possible  he  should 
forgive  me  ?  Forgive  me  or  not,  that  is  not  the  point: 
that  he  should  suffer  himself  to  be  rid  of  them,  that  is 
the  one  thing  needful. 

I  hope  this  will  not  draw  you  into  a  scrape ;  a 
scrape  on  your  part  so  perfectly  undeserved :  for  no 
such  thing  as  a  tale  out  of  school  have  I  ever  had  from 
you. 

If,  by  any  thing  I  have  said,  an  end  should  be  put, 
not  only  to  that  correspondence,  but  to  another  which 
is  so  truly  flattering  to  me,  I  shall  be  truly  sorry  ;  but 


296       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

it  was  necessary  to  run  the  risk,  for  I  think  you  will 
agree  with  me  that  whether  ivith  it  anything  be  done 
or  no,  without  it  nothing  was  at  any  rate  to  be  done. 

The  letter  addressed  to  his  Majesty,  I  put  into  a 
separate  packet.  I  avoid  purposely  any  such  attempt 
as  that  of  making  it  pass  through  your  hands.  In 
relation  to  an  official  person  there  so  frequentty 
alluded  to,  it  was  absolutely  necessary  I  should  speak 
without  reserve  :  and  there  seemed  neither  use  nor 
necessity  for  your  being  involved  in  such  business. 

Even  if  it  should  be  in  the  constitutional  part  of 
the  field  of  law  that  my  labours,  such  as  they  are, 
should  be  desired  by  you  (though  for  reasons  already 
given,  that  is  the  part  in  relation  to  which  my  hopes 
of  being  of  use  are  least  sanguine)  I  repeat  my  promise 
to  put  them  under  your  command : 

I.  Because  I  do  not  absolutely  despair  of  being 
able  to  do  some  good — here  a  little  and  there  a  little 

—even  in  relation  to  that  branch. 

II.  Because  (as  I  say  to  the  Emperor)  that  is  the 
branch  which  I  imagine  you  had  more  particularly  in 
view.     But  my  expectations  are  much  more  extensive, 
as  well  as  sanguine,  in  relation  to  the  Penal  and  Civil 
branches  :  including,  in  both  cases  (though  so  far  as 
concerns  the  organisation  of  the    Judicial  Establish- 
ment  it   belongs   to   the    constitutional    branch)   the 
system  of  Procedure. — Why  ? — Because  in  the   Civil 
branch  there  will  be  a  good  deal  of  matter,  and  in  the 
Penal  a  good  deal  more  applicable,  with  little  or  no 
difference,  under  any  form  of  Government.     So  far, 
therefore,    I    could    myself  propose   matter,    with    a 
tolerable  expectation  of  its  being  received,  and  thence 


297 

with  a  proportionable  degree  of  facility  and  alacrity  : 
whereas  in  regard  to  constitutional  law,  in  which  is 
included  iheform  of  Government,  it  would  be  folly  for 
me  to  pretend  to  originate  anything  considerable. — 
What  is  the  monarch  willing  to  leave  or  to  concede  to 
you  nobles  and  the  great  body  of  the  people,  taken 
together  ?  What  are  the  monarch  and  you  nobles, 
taken  together,  willing  to  leave  or  to  concede  to  the 
great  body  of  the  people  ?  What  are  the  people  at 
present  in  a  condition  to  receive,  if  the  powers,  on 
which  it  depends,  were  willing  to  concede  it  to  them  ? 
What  more,  within  a  moderate  space  of  time,  may 
they  be  expected  to  come  of  themselves  to  be  in,  or  to 
be  capable  of  being  put  into  a  condition  to  receive, — 
and  by  what  means  ?  All  this,  if  known  to  anybody, 
is  known  to  you: — not  a  particle  of  it  to  rue. 