

*  Despatch  of  the  24th  December,  1814  (in  the  Record  Office).  In  another 
despatch,  dated  the  5th  November,  1814,  Lord  Castlereagh  says :  'The  day  but  one 
after  the  return  of  the  sovereigns  from  Buda,  the  enclosed  communication  was 
delivered  to  me  by  an  aide-de-camp  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia.  It  was  prepared 
during  his  Imperial  Majesty's  absence  by  Prince  Czartoryski,  the  memorandum  being 
written  in  concert  with  him  by  M.  Anstetem,  a  Conseiller  d'Etat  in  the  bureau.  I 
have  reason  to  believe  that  Count  Nesselrode  was  not  consulted.  The  Emperor  has 
latterly,  ou  the  question  of  Poland,  ceased  to  act  through  his  regular  servants.  It  is 
unfortunately  his  habit  to  be  his  own  Minister,  and  to  select  as  the  instrument  of  his 
immediate  purpose,  the  person  who  may  happen  to  fall  in  most  with  his  views.  This 
has  been  particularly  the  case  on  the  present  question,  all  the  Russians,  I  believe 
without  an  exception,  being  adverse  to  his  projects,  considering  them  both  as 
dangerous  to  himself  and  injurious  to  his  allies.' 

t  'Up  to  the  period  of  the  Congress  of  Vienna,  no  British  statesman  had  ever  set 
his  hand  to  an  instrument  acknowledging,  as  valid  acts,  the  two  partitions  of 
Poland.  Had  the  British  Plenipotentiary  founded  his  objections  upon  this  principle 
— had  he  positively  refused  to  commit  his  Government  to  any  such  acknowledgment, 
and  had  he  insisted  on  the  erection  of  an  independent  Polish  State,  he  would,  to  use 
his  own  words,  have  been  applauded  by  the  whole  of  Europe,  whilst  Austria  and 


TEE  VIENNA  CONGRESS  285 

An  angry  correspondence  followed  between  the 
British  Plenipotentiary  and  the  Emperor,  and  at 
length  the  attitude  of  the  latter  and  his  Prussian 
ally  (who  hoped  to  get  Saxony  as  a  compensation 
for  the  loss  of  his  Polish  possessions)  became  so 
threatening  that  England,  France,  and  Austria,  by  a 
secret  treaty  signed  on  the  3rd  of  January  1815, 
entered  into  a  defensive  alliance  binding  themselves 
each  to  bring,  if  necessary,  150,000  men  into  the  field. 

Prussia  would  not  only  not  have  opposed  it,  but,  on  the  contrary,  would  have 
acquiesced  in  it  with  pleasure. 

'  Backed  by  such  powerful  support,  as  well  as  by  the  voice  of  public  opinion 
throughout  Europe,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  he  might  have  been  successful : 
but  the  moment  he  gave  up  this  principle,  and  told  the  Emperor  that  he  was  not 
indisposed  to  witness,  even  with  satisfaction,  that  his  Imperial  Majesty  should 
receive  a  liberal  and  important  aggrandizement  on  his  Polish  frontier,  and  that  it 
was  to  the  degree  and  the  mode  to  which  he  alone  objected,  he  threw  away  the  only 
weapon  which  he  could  successfully  wield.  The  greater  point  was  attainable,  but 
the  abandonment  of  the  greater  was  fatal  to  the  attainment  of  the  less.  There  was 
—there  could  be — no  answer  to  the  following  argument  of  the  Emperor  as  to  the 
share  of  the  spoil,  considered  as  a  matter  of  spoil,  to  which  he  was  entitled  :  "  Mais 
lorsque  1'Autriche  et  la  Prusse  ont  contribue,  comme  alliees  de  la  France,  a  depouiller 
la  Russie  de  la  plus  grande  partie  des  provinces  Polonaises ;  quand  la  Russie  a  et& 
obligee  de  les  reconquerir ;  lorsque  la  conquete  du  Duche  de  Varsovie  devient 
aujourd'hui  une  compensation  pour  d'enormes  sacrifices  :  il  s'agit  effectivement  d'un 
nouveau  partage,  et  dans  ce  cas,  les  stipulations  qui  ont  accompagne  celui  de  1797 
n'existent  plus." 