

In  the  year  1802,  a  work  extracted,  as  therein 
mentioned,  from  my  papers,  was  by  Mr  Dumont  of 
Geneva,  published  at  Paris  in  nine  vols.  8vo.,  under 
the  title  of  '  Traite"  de  Legislation  Civile  et  Penale,'  etc. 

In  the  year  1805  a  translation  of  it  into  the 
Russian  language  was  published  at  St  Petersburg, 
(by  order,  if  I  am  rightly  informed,  of  your  Majesty's 
Government). 

Since  the  publication  of  that  work  Europe  has 
seen  two  extensive  bodies  of  law  promulgated  within 
its  limits  :  one  by  the  French  Emperor,  the  other  by 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BE  NT II AM  291 

the  King  of  Bavaria.  These  two  are  the  only  bodies 
of  law  of  any  such  considerable  extent  that  have  made 
their  appearance  within  the  last  half-century.  Of  the 
one  promulgated  by  the  French  Emperor,  a  complete 
penal  code  formed  a  part.  In  the  preface  to  that 
authoritative  work,  my  unauthoritative  one  is  men- 
tioned with  honour :  among  the  dead  Montesquieu, 
Beccaria,  and  Blackstone;  among  living  names  (unless 
it  be  for  some  matter  of  fact)  none  but  mine.  In  the 
Bavarian  code  drawn  up  by  Mr  Bexon,  much  more 
particular  as  well  as  copious  mention  is  made  of  that 
work  of  mine,  much  more  eulogy  bestowed  upon  it. 

In  France  under  the  immediate  rod  of  Napoleon, 
in  Bavaria  under  the  influence  of  Napoleon,  the  gen- 
erosity displayed  by  the  notice  thus  taken  of  the 
work  of  a  living  Englishman  could  not  but  call  forth 
my  admiration. 

Approbation  is  one  thing ;  adoption  is  another. 
With  mine  before  them,  both  these  modern  works 
took  for  their  basis  the  jurisprudence  of  ancient  Rome. 
Russia  at  any  rate  needs  not  any  such  incumbrance. 

In  the  texture  of  the  human  frame,  some  fibres 
there  are  which  are  the  same  in  all  places  and  at  all 
times,  others  which  vary  with  the  place  and  with  the 
time.  For  those  last  it  has  been  among  my  constant 
and  pointedly  manifested  cares  to  look  out  and  provide. 

Of  the  particularities  of  Russia  I  am  not  altogether 
without  experience.  Two  of  the  most  observant  years 
of  my  life  were  passed  within  her  limits. 

Codes  upon  the  French  pattern  are  already  in  full 
view.  Speak  the  word,  Sire, — Russia  shall  produce  a 
pattern  of  her  own,  and  then  let  Europe  judge. 


292      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

To  Russia,  it  is  true,  I  am  a  foreigner,  yet  to  this 
purpose  scarcely  more  so  than  a  Courlander,  a  Livo- 
nian,  or  a  Finlander.  In  point  of  local  knowledge  to 
place  me  on  a  level  with  a  native  of  Russia — to  me 
as  to  them — information  in  various  shapes  could  not 
but  be  necessary.  Any  such  assistance  no  person 
could  ever  be  more  ready  to  supply  than  I  should  be 
solicitous  to  receive  and  profit  by  it. 