

Dans  la  societe  je  vois  assez  claireuient  que 
1'interet  va  toujours  en  accroissant,  et  que  nous 
pourrons  esperer  quelque  bon  resultat.  Je  ne  vais 
presque  jamais  dans  les  cercles  sans  entendre  prononcer 
le  nom  de  la  Pologne,  et  toujours  dans  le  meilleur  sens. 

ficrivez-moi,  et  croyez  que  je  suis  toujours,  etc., 

H.  BROUGHAM. 

Par  une  betise  impardonnable  quelques-uns  des 
journaux,  en  publiant  le  discours  de  Lord  G.,  ont  mis 
'  Courland  '  au  lieu  de  '  Poland.'  Us  1'ont  corrige  apres. 

Les  Quakers  etc.,  dans  leur  journal  ( The  Philan- 
thropist) ont  bien  rempli  leur  devoir  vis  a  vis  de  notre 
cause. 

FROM  SIR  SAMUEL  ROMILLY  TO  M.  BIERNACKI. 

RUSSELL  SQUARE, 

Mar.  22,  1814. 
SIR, — I  return  you  many  thanks  for  a  sight  of  the 


282       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

enclosed  papers,  which  I  have  read  with  very  great 
interest.  No  person  can  be  more  sensible  than  I  am 
of  the  wrongs  which  Poland  has  suffered,  or  more  con- 
vinced of  the  bad  policy  as  well  as  the  injustice  of  the 
conduct  of  all  the  States  of  Europe  towards  her. — I 
remain,  Sir,  with  great  respect,  Your  most  obedient 
and  faithful  servant, 

SAML.  ROMILLY. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

1814-15 

THE    VIENNA    CONGRESS. 

WHILE  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  was  endeavouring 
through  his  secretary  to  obtain  the  support  for  his 
country  of  public  opinion  in  England,  the  allies  pur- 
sued their  campaign  against  Napoleon  with  undi- 
minished  success.  The  crushing  defeat  of  Leipzig 
(October  18,  1813)  was  rapidly  followed  by  the  inva- 
sion of  France,  the  occupation  of  Paris  by  the  allied 
troops  (March  31,  1814)  and  the  abdication  of  Napo- 
leon at  Fontainebleau  (April  4,  1814).  The  Emperor 
Alexander,  who  had  granted  an  amnesty  to  all  the 
Poles  who  had  fought  against  him  under  Napoleon 
in  the  campaign  of  1812,  now  reverted  to  his  former 
plan  of  reconstructing  Poland  as  a  separate  State  under 
his  sceptre,  and  invited  his  old  friend  and  counsellor 
to  assist  him  in  executing  it.  Alexander  was  accom- 
panied by  Prince  Adam  in  his  visit  to  London  before 
the  Vienna  Congress,  and  in  a  despatch  preserved  in 
the  Record  Office,  dated  'Paris,  May  23,  1814,' 
General  Cathcart,  then  British  Ambassador  to  the 
Russian  Court,  informs  Lord  Castlereagh  that  '  the 
Emperor  has  been  pleased  this  day  to  add  the  name 


284       MEMOIRS  OF  PRIXCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  Prince  Adam  Czartorisky  (sic)  to  the  list  of  persons 
who  are  to  attend  him  to  London.' 

When  the  Congress  met  at  Vienna  in  October 
1814,  Poland  was  the  first  object  of  its  deliberations, 
and  Prince  Adam  played  so  prominent  a  part  in  them 
that  Lord  Castlereagh  wrote  to  Lord  Liverpool  that 
the  Prince,  '  although  not  in  any  official  situation, 
appears  now  the  actual  Russian  Minister,  at  least  on 
Polish  and  Saxon  questions.'*  The  chief  objections  to 
the  Emperor's  proposal  to  restore  Poland  were, 
strange  to  say,  not  made  by  Austria  and  Prussia, 
whose  Polish  possessions  would  under  that  proposal 
have  been  united  to  the  new  Polish  kingdom,  but  by 
Lord  Castlereagh,  on  the  plea  that  the  creation  of 
such  a  kingdom  under  the  sceptre  of  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  would  make  Russia  too  strong.  He  would 
readily  consent  to  the  restoration  of  Poland  as  an 
independent  State  with  a  sovereign  of  her  own  ;  but 
knowing  that  this  was  too  great  a  sacrifice  to  be 
expected  of  Russia,  he  insisted  on  the  maintenance  of 
the  partition.! 