

*  The  savings  we  have  endeavoured  to  introduce  in 
the  whole  expenditure  of  the  country,  and  especially 
in  the  civil  administration,  by  reducing  to  the  lowest 
possible  point  the  number  and  salaries  of  the  officials, 
will  not  produce  any  effect,  and  cannot  be  maintained, 


PROMISE  AND  PERFORMANCE  305 

if  the  same  spirit  of  rigid  economy  is  not  applied  to 
the  administration  of  the  army,  and  if  a  certain  pro- 
portion is  not  established  between  military  and  civil 
emoluments. 

'  Moreover,  the  administration  of  the  army  touches 
at  so  many  points  on  the  civil  administration  that 
they  can  neither  be  properly  organised  nor  governed 
except  on  a  uniform  system. 

'  The  above  considerations,  the  certainty  that  the 
Polish  army  will  immediately  have  to  be  paid  out  of 
the  treasury  of  the  Kingdom,  and  the  fact  that  its 
revenues  will  not  be  sufficient  for  that  purpose,  have 
decided  the  provisional  government  to  submit  to  your 
Imperial  and  Royal  Majesty  whether  you  will  not 
think  fit  to  order  the  creation  of  a  Ministry  of  War 
to  take  the  place  of  the  military  committee,  and  to  be 
organised  on  the  same  principle  as  the  two  other 
Ministries.  The  first  duty  of  this  Ministry  would  be 
to  present  a  plan  for  its  internal  organisation,  and  the 
Government,  subject  to  your  Majesty's  approval, 
reserves  to  itself  the  duty  of  afterwards  submitting  to 
you  its  observations  on  the  plan  in  question  and  the 
savings  which  might  be  introduced  in  the  establish- 
ment of  the  army.' 

'  WARSAW,  June  1815. 

1 .  .  .  The  general  impression  at  the  promulgation 
of  the  new  Constitution  has  been  as  favourable  as 
could  be  desired  ....  Its  principles  have  attached 
the  people  to  your  Majesty,  and  after  the  long  period 
of  waiting,  and  the  conduct  of  the  Grand-Duke,  the 
grant  of  the  Constitution  was  necessary  to  produce 

VOL.  II.  U 


306       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

such  a  result.  The  change  in  the  Polish  arms  and 
the  interference  of  the  Russians  with  the  Government 
have  caused  some  pain,  but  the  bases  of  the  Constitu- 
tion have  made  the  people  forget  everything.' 

'WARSAW,  i£  July,  1815. 

*  The  organisation  of  the  Ministries  of  the  Interior 
and  of  Finance,  and  of  the  Courts  of  Justice,  is  about 
to  be  completed ;  the  result  will  be  a  pretty  consider- 
able saving.  Our  first  care  was  not  to  stop  the  course 
of  government ;  the  second  is  to  introduce  without 
delay  all  possible  order  and  economy  from  the  begin- 
ning. ...  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  result  would  be 
most  satisfactory  if  it  were  not  for  the  existence  of  an 
independent  military  authority  with  which  the 
Government  is  not  in  a  condition  to  struggle.  I 
would  not  have  ventured  to  touch  on  this  delicate 
point  if  the  urgency  of  the  case  did  not  oblige  me  to 
do  so.  ... 