

'  The  Constitution. — The  Constitution  granted  by 
your  Majesty  has  been  subjected  to  much  unjust 
criticism.  It  cannot  be  made  responsible  for  the  ill- 
directed  or  superfluous  expenditure  of  the  administra- 
tion, for  this  expenditure  has  occurred  because  the 
Constitution  was  not  sufficiently  obeyed.  The  army 
is  too  large,  the  taxes  are  levied  with  extreme  rigour, 
justice  would  be  impartial  if  it  were  not  influenced  by 
persons  above  the  law,  and  the  system  of  police  is  some- 
times inquisitorial  and  vexatious.  The  Constitution 
prevents  nothing  that  is  necessary ;  unfortunately 
it  does  not  prevent  that  which  is  superfluous  and 
injurious  to  the  state.  The  introduction  of  measures 
of  the  latter  class  depends  entirely  on  your  Majesty's 
will,  and  the  Diet  should  not  be  blamed  for  rendering 


RUSSIAN  ATROCITIES  313 

it  difficult  to  introduce  them.  It  is  one  of  the 
advantages  of  Constitutional  Government  that  it 
tends  to  stability  ;  the  rejection  of  a  bill  simply  leaves 
things  as  they  are.' 

The  above  letter  was,  as  will  be  seen  from  its  date, 
written  shortly  after  the  formation  of  the  Holy 
Alliance,  the  Congresses  of  Troppau  and  Laybach, 
and  the  revolutionary  movements  at  Naples,  in  Spain, 
and  in  Piedmont.  Alexander  now  gradually  aban- 
doned his  liberal  tendencies  and  gave  up  Poland 
entirely  to  the  cruel  and  arbitrary  rule  of  his  brother 
Constantine.  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  seeing  that 
any  further  intervention  with  the  Emperor  on  behalf 
of  Poland  was  hopeless,  ceased  all  further  correspond- 
ence with  him  on  the  subject,  and  in  1823  he  gave  up 
his  post  of  curator  of  the  Wilna  University,  which  he 
had  held  for  twenty  years,  the  atrocious  persecution 
of  the  students  by  the  Russian  authorities  rendering 
it  impossible  for  him  any  longer  usefully  to  conduct 
the  affairs  of  the  University,  which  had  under  his  care 
risen  to  the  position  of  the  first  educational  institution 
in  the  Empire. 

In  1825  Alexander  I  died  and  was  succeeded  by 
Nicholas.  Among  the  persons  arrested  in  connection 
with  the  outbreak  at  St  Petersburg  which  preceded 
Nicholas's  accession  were  several  Poles,  who  were 
brought  up  for  trial  before  the  Senate  at  Warsaw. 
Prince  Adam,  who  was  then  in  Italy, hurried  to  Warsaw 
to  take  part  in  this  trial  as  a  member  of  the  Senate. 
After  a  careful  inquiry,  which  lasted  more  than  a  year, 
it  was  found  that  the  accused  had  not  taken  any  part 


3i4       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

whatever  in  the  rebellion,  and  had  merely  protested 
in  a  legal  manner  against  the  repeated  violations  of 
the  Constitution.  Prince  Adam,  as  the  father,  so  to 
say,  of  the  Constitution  and  the  chief  adviser  of  the 
late  Emperor  in  all  matters  relating  to  Poland,  was 
naturally  called  upon  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  the 
deliberations  of  the  Senate  on  this  matter,  and  his 
view  of  the  innocence  of  the  accused  was  accepted  by 
the  whole  of  the  Senate  with  the  exception  of  one 
member.  The  verdict  was  reversed  by  the  Emperor, 
who  ordered  the  Senators  to  be  retained  at  Warsaw 
under  the  surveillance  of  the  military  authorities, 
and  the  accused  to  be  taken  to  St  Petersburg  and 
imprisoned  in  the  casemates  of  the  fortress. 