

When,  near  the  close  of  the  reign  of  poor  King 
Stanislaus,  a  constitutional  code  for  Poland  was  drawn 
up,  Bukati  *  (I  think  it  was  he  that  was  then  resident 
here)  sent  me  a  copy  of  it.  What  is  become  of  it  I  do 
not  exactly  know.  But  what  I  remember  is — that 
people  in  general  were  here  much  pleased  with  it:  my- 
self among  the  rest,  as  far  as  I  had  looked  at  it ;  which 
Avas  very  slightly  ;  for  being  deeply  embarked  in  other 
pursuits  at  the  time,  nothing  called  upon  me  to  sus- 
pend them  for  any  such  purpose  as  the  study  of  it. 

On  the  present  occasion,  that  paper,  is  it  intended 
to  form  the  basis  ?  Here  would  be  a  field  for  experi- 
menting in :  and  to  a  monarch  with  the  whole  Russian 
Empire  under  such  entire  command,  what  possible 

any  such  experiment  ? 

See  Vol.  I.,  p.  160. 


298       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Under  the  Great  Turk  was  not  Ragusa  even  a  Re- 
public ?  In  such  a  case  more  real  efficiency  than  what 
he  would  lose  in  the  shape  of  coercive  power,  the 
Autocrat  of  Russia  would  gain  in  the  shape  of  gentle 
influence  :  loss,  were  there  any,  would  be  all  of  it  to 
the  successor, — who,  not  having  been  the  author  of 
the  boon,  would  not  be  a  sharer  in  the  gratitude  : — 
But,  even  by  him,  he  being  used  to  the  comparatively 
new  state  of  things,  the  loss,  if  there  were  any.  would 
not  be  felt. 

It  is  now  about  forty  years  since  I  began  to  lift  up 
my  prayers  for  Poland.  The  most  intimate  friend  I 
had  was  John  Lind,  privy  counsellor  to  the  King,  and 
under  his  Majesty,  original  institutor,  as  well  as 
director,  of  a  school  for  400  cadets  at  Warsaw,  and 
Governor  of  Prince  Stanislaus,  nephew  to  the  poor 
king,  whose  business  at  our  Court  he  did  for  a  number 
of  years,  writing  a  letter  from  London  every  other  post 
day  ;  Bukati  being  all  the  while  the  resident  kept  for 
show,  because  our  King  would  not  see  in  that  character 
one  of  his  own  subjects. 

Lind's  first  appearance  at  Warsaw  was  in  that  of 
reader  of  English  to  your  father  or  your  uncle,  I  forget 
which  it  was.     Oh,  how  he  used  to  talk  and  talk  of 
Poland !     And  how  he  used  to  curse  the  Fredericks- 
great  as  they  were — not  to  mention  other  persons. 

Being  of  all  countries  and  of  no  party,  I  have  just 
sent  off  to  Paris  a  large  packet  of  printed  copies  of  a 
part  of  the  educational  scheme  to  leading  men  there, 
Bourbonnites,  Napoleonites,  and  Republicans  promis- 
cuously,— some  of  them  old  friends  of  mine. 

If  you  follow   the   camp,  perhaps  you  may  make 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BE  NT II AM  299 

prize  of  them  :  yet  I  should  be  sorry  you  should  ;  were 
it  only  because  while  you  are  at  Paris,  you  would 
not  be  at  Warsaw ;  and  whether  you  are  so  or  no,  I 
am  of  the  number — and  that  I  believe  not  a  small 
one — of  those  who  are  impatient  for  your  being  there. 