

'  His  Highness  the  Grand-Duke  is  not  to  be  moved 
by  any  zeal  or  submission.  He  seems  to  have  taken 
a  dislike  to  the  country  which  is  increasing  in  alarming 
progression,  and  is  the  subject  of  his  daily  conversa- 
tion. Neither  the  army,  the  nation,  nor  individuals 
find  any  favour  in  his  eyes.  The  Constitution 
especially  is  made  by  him  a  subject  of  incessant 
sarcasm  ;  everything  that  is  matter  of  law  or  regula- 
tion he  scorns  and  covers  with  ridicule,  and  unhappily 
his  words  have  already  been  followed  by  deeds.  He 
does  not  even  adhere  to  the  military  laws  which  he 
has  himself  confirmed.  He  insists  upon  introducing 
flogging  in  the  army,  and  he  ordered  some  men  to  be 


PROMISE  AND  PERFORMANCE  307 

flogged  yesterday  without  paying  any  attention  to 
the  unanimous  representations  of  the  committee. 
Desertion  is  increasing,  and  will  become  general,  and 
most  of  the  officers  are  about  to  resign. 

'  It  looks  as  if  a  plan  had  been  formed  for  rendering 
your  Majesty's  benefits  illusory  and  making  your 
scheme  fail  from  the  beginning.  In  that  case  the 
Grand-Duke  is,  without  knowing  it,  the  blind  tool  of 
certain  persons  in  his  confidence  who  encourage  his 
sombre  and  passionate  temper.  I  fear  the  most 
lamentable  results  if  he  should  remain  here.' 


July  1815. 

'  The  position  of  the  Government  of  your  Imperial 
and  Royal  Majesty  in  this  country  has  for  some  time 
become  extremely  painful  and  difficult,  and  I  feel  it 
my  duty  to  bring  to  your  knowledge  details  of  which 
I  would  have  wished  never  to  be  obliged  to  speak. 

'  His  Highness  the  Grand-Duke  has  several  times 
intimated  to  the  Government  that  civil  officials, 
magistrates,  mayors,  etc.,  should  be  brought  before 
him,  and  the  other  day  he  placed  the  President  of  the 
town  of  Warsaw  under  arrest.  Some  days  ago,  too, 
his  Highness  issued  a  decree  by  means  of  which  he 
will  have  the  power  of  trying  any  citizen  by  court- 
martial. 

'  The  provisional  government  cannot  but  recognise 
that  such  proceedings  are  contrary  to  the  rules  estab- 
lished in  all  countries  for  the  public  peace  and  security, 
and  that  they  are  especially  indirect  opposition  to  the 
Constitution  which  your  Majesty  has  just  granted  to 
the  country.  .  .  Under  these  circumstances  all  the 


3o8      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

members  of  the  Government  are  unanimously  of 
opinion  that  the  above  facts  should  be  laid  before  you 
with  a  view  to  your  Majesty  placing  your  Govern- 
ment in  a  position  to  carry  out  your  will.' 

'  WARSAW,  ^«  January  1816. 

' .  .  .  Your  Imperial  Majesty  are  alone  capable  of 
maintaining  the  edifice  you  have  raised.  If  you 
abandon  it  from  the  beginning  to  the  attacks  of  those 
who  are  hostile  to  it,  it  must  fall  to  pieces.  What  else 
can  be  the  fate  of  a  Constitution  granted  by  you  with 
so  much  solemnity  and  violated  almost  immediately 
after  it  was  proclaimed  ?  If  we  obtain  the  support 
which  we  have  a  right  to  ask  of  your  Majesty,  all  will 
go  well.  I  have  observed  with  joy  that  so  far  as  the 
Poles  are  concerned,  more  importance  is  attached  to 
measures  than  to  individuals.  Our  institutions, 
though  as  yet  in  the  process  of  formation,  are  sufficient 
to  wTork  the  Government  machine,  and  since  the 
establishment  of  Constitutional  Government  perfect 
harmony  exists  among  all  the  Ministers.  .  .  .  Your 
Majesty's  Lieutenant  Governor,*  however,  though 
zealous,  persevering,  and  enlightened,  seems  to  con- 
sider that  every  wish  expressed  by  the  Grand-Duke 
Constantino  must  be  regarded  as  that  of  your  Majesty. 
He  is  ready  to  violate  the  Constitution  at  any  moment 
if  his  Highness  should  require  him  to  do  so,  and  he 
has  even  plainly  expressed  himself  to  the  Council  in 
this  sense.  .  .  .  Such  a  degree  of  submission  in  the 
highest  official  of  the  realm  would  make  your  Consti- 