

For  this  purpose  you  will  see  how  necessary  it  has 


LETTERS  FROM  JEREMY  BEN  THAN  301 

been  for  me  to  take  a  fresh  peep  into  every  nook  and 
cranny  of  the  whole  field  of  art  and  science  :  my  busi- 
ness having  been  to  apply  the  new  method  of  instruc- 
tion to  every  part  of  that  field  that  is  deemed  capable 
of  receiving  it.  My  endeavour  has  been  to  reduce  the 
whole  sketch  into  as  narrow  a  compass  as  possible  : 
and  the  narrower  the  com  pass  the  greater  the  quantity 
of  time  which  it  has  cost  me.  Locke's  Essay  (so  he 
tells  us  himself  in  his  preface)  is  too  long — Why  ? 
'  Because '  (says  he)  '  I  had  not  time  to  make  it 
shorter.' 

If  upon  the  field  of  codification,  it  be  in  my  power 
to  throw  any  light,  you  see  the  terms  upon  which  it 
is  in  the  power  of  your  Alexander  to  have  it  ?  Ex- 
actly those  upon  which  God  Almighty  had  His  :  a 
couple  of  words  the  whole  of  the  expense. 

I  hope  the  Emperor  will  not  be  angry  with  me  for 
returning  his  ring  ;  if  it  had  been  a  brass  or  a  glass 
one,  I  would  have  kept  it.  If  he  will  send  the  value 
of  it,  and  no  more,  to  my  masters  and  employers,  as 
above,  for  their  school,  I  as  well  as  they  will  be  all 
gratitude.  But  of  this  in  that  ensuing  letter  with 
which  this  threatens  you.  Believe  me  ever,  with 
the  truest  respect,  dear  sir,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

JEREMY  BENTHAM. 

PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI. 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

1815-22 

THE     POLISH     CONSTITUTION. — PROMISE    AND    PERFORMANCE. — RUSSIAN 
ATROCITIES.—  REVOLUTION. 

AFTER  the  negotiations  at  Vienna,  the  Emperor 
Alexander  issued  a  proclamation  to  the  Poles,  dated 
-|4  May  1815,  stating  the  chief  points  of  the  Constitu- 
tion which  was  to  be  granted  to  the  new  kingdom  of 
Poland  in  conformity  with  the  treaty.  A  provisional 
government  was  formed  at  Warsaw,  with  Prince 
Adam  Czartoryski  as  its  head,  and  the  following  letter 
was  addressed  to  him  by  Alexander  on  the  same  date 
as  that  of  the  proclamation  : — 

VIENNA,  if  May  1815. 

During  the  time  you  have  passed  here  with  me. 
you  have  had  an  opportunity  of  knowing  my  inten- 
tions as  to  the  institutions  which  it  is  my  will  to 
establish  in  Poland,  and  the  improvements  I  desire  to 
introduce  in  that  country.  You  will  take  care  never 
to  lose  sight  of  them  in  the  deliberations  of  the 
Council,  and  to  draw  the  full  attention  of  your 
colleagues  to  them,  in  order  that  the  action  of  the 
Government  and  the  reforms  which  it  is  bound  to 


THE  POLISH  CONSTITUTION  303 

carry  out  may  be  in  accordance  with  my  views.  You 
will  not  fail,  if  necessary,  to  take  the  initiative  in  this 
respect,  so  as  to  hasten  the  progress  of  your  task  and 
bring  forward  bills  in  conformity  with  the  system 
which  has  been  adopted. 