

As  you  are  equally  acquainted  with  my  ideas  as 
to  the  spirit  in  which  I  wish  the  selection  of  the 
various  officials  to  be  made,  you  will  not  fail  to 
see  that  this  is  done  in  accordance  with  them.  In  a 
country  which  has  so  long  been  tossed  about  by 
disturbances  and  revolutions,  it  is  of  the  highest 
importance  that  a  uniform  arid  well  combined  course 
should  be  pursued.  This  is  what  I  wanted  to  recall 
to  your  mind  once  more  by  this  letter,  which  I  allow 
you  even  to  show,  so  as  to  add  confirmation  to  what 
you  will  have  to  say  in  order  to  carry  out  my 
intentions.  ALEXANDER. 

The  new  Constitution,  which  was  promulgated  on 
the  if  November,  1815,  established  a  Parliament  of 
two  Houses,  which  was  to  meet  every  two  years,  a 
responsible  Ministry,  and  liberty  of  the  press,  and  it 
stipulated  that  all  the  officials  should  be  Poles,  and 
that  Polish  should  be  the  official  language.  It  will 
be  seen,  however,  from  the  following  letters  addressed 
to  the  Emperor  by  Prince  Czartoryski,  that,  owing 
mainly  to  the  arbitrary  proceedings  of  the  Grand- 
Duke  Constantine,  the  military  governor  of  the 
country,  this  Constitution  gradually  became  a  dead 
letter  : 

'1815. 

'  As  the  bases  of  the  Constitution  provide  for  a 


304      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Ministry  of  War  among  the  branches  of  the  adminis- 
tration which,  reunited  under  the  same  central  control, 
make  up  the  whole  body  of  government,  we  think  it 
our  duty  to  seek  the  decision  of  your  Imperial  and 
Royal  Majesty  on  the  subject. 

'  The  presence  of  the  Grand-Duke  Constantine  in 
this  country,  and  the  special  powers  with  which  he  is 
invested,  have  precluded  all  relations  between  the 
provisional  government  and  the  military  administra- 
tion, which  is  placed  under  a  separate  committee. 
This  total  separation  between  the  civil  and  military 
administrations  gives  rise  to  the  gravest  difficulties. 
It  has  made  it  impossible  for  the  Government  to 
present  to  your  Majesty  a  general  report  on  the 
situation  and  the  probable  requirements  of  the  State, 
as  the  army  constitutes  one  of  its  principal  elements. 
So  long  as  the  most  considerable  and  expensive  part 
of  the  administration  remains  entirely  independent 
and  isolated  it  cannot  be  subject  to  any  control,  and 
the  expenditure  of  the  country  cannot  be  restricted  in 
proportion  to  its  resources. 

'  The  Government,  being  constantly  brought  to  a 
standstill  in  every  measure  which  has  any  bearing 
whatever  on  military  affairs,  often  finds  itself  obliged 
to  give  up  useful  reforms  whose  execution  is  only 
possible  with  the  regular  and  zealous  co-operation  of 
the  military  administration. 