

Well,  but  about  this  education  scheme:  were  it  only 
to  account  for  the  delay,  a  few  words  I  find  I  must 
trouble  you  with  about  it  even  here  : — 

An  experiment  of  it  is  about  to  be  made  in  a  part 
of  that  garden  of  mine  which  you  saw.  It  has  for  its 
object  the  applying  to  the  higher  branches  of  learning, 
and  the  higher  as  well  as  middling  ranks  of  the  com- 
munity, that  new  system  of  instruction,  of  the  success 
of  which  you  can  not  but  be  more  or  less  apprized. 

Brougham,  Sir  James  Macintosh — and  if  I  can 
persuade  him  to  lend  his  name — for  that  is  all  he  can 
have  time  to  lend — Romilly,  will  be  at  the  head  of  it. 
For  the  details  of  the  management  there  will  be  some 
very  efficient  men,  with  whose  names  you  can  scarcely 
be  acquainted.  For  reasons  not  worth  troubling  you 
with,  my  fixed  determination  has  been  from  the  very 
first,  not  to  be  of  the  number.  In  the  Executive 
department  of  it,  I  accordingly  bear  no  part :  but  of 
the  Legislative  the  initiation  has  fallen  entirely  to  rny 
share.  My  labours  in  that  field  had  (I  believe)  already 
commenced,  when  I  had  the  honour  of  receiving  you  : 
and,  for  want  of  their  being  completed,  the  business 
was  at  a  stand,  and  by  a  few  days  more  of  delay,  the 
season  might  have  been  lost — (I  mean  the  time  when 
the  expected  contributors  are  in  town) — and  the  exe- 
cution of  the  plan  deferred  for  a  whole  twelvemonth ; 
and  thereby  perhaps  finally  defeated. 


3oo      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

It  is  now  in  such  advance,  that  everything  which 
it  is  necessary  to  publish  in  the  first  instance,  is  either 
already  in  print  or  in  the  printers'  hands.  A  copy 
or  two  will,  I  trust,  be  brought  to  you  by  the  next 
messenger.  On  this  field,  at  any  rate,  in  doing  what 
I  have  done,  I  consider  myself  as  being  at  work  not 
less  for  Russia  and  Poland,  than  for  London.  For  the 
elementary  branches,  as  taught  upon  the  Bell  and 
Lancaster  system,  Paris  is  already  provided  with  a 
schoolmaster  from  hence.  The  son  of  a  Protestant 
clergyman — Martin,  I  think,  is  his  name — was  in 
Louis  XVIII's  time  sent  from  the  south  of  France  to 
a  Lancasterian  school  for  the  express  purpose  of 
learning  the  method,  and  is  now  at  Paris ;  and  (I 
understand)  much  caressed  there. 

His  business  there  is  to  form  Instructors.  The 
salary  offered  to  him  was  £200  :  for  such  a  station,  a 
very  considerable  salary  at  Paris.  No,  (says  he)  that 
would  be  too  much.  Success  or  failure  depends  upon 
the  degree  of  economy.  Such  a  sum  (naming  it, 
perhaps  a  quarter  as  much)  is  all  that  you  need  give. 
By  this  the  price  will  be  set  to  those  who  succeed  me. 
If  in  my  instance,  in  consideration  of  my  being  the 
first  institutor,  you  see  any  claim  to  extraordinary 
remuneration,  let  that  come  by  and  by,  when  by 
experience  you  see  what  I  have  done.  Just  the 
same  thing  might  the  Emperor  do  for  Petersburg 
and  Warsaw.  The  expense — I  mean  the  necessary 
expense — would  be  next  to  nothing ;  and  if  this  can 
not  succeed  with  you,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  think  what 
else  can. 