

'  State  of  Public  Feeling. — People's  minds  are  in  a 
state  of  extreme  uncertainty  and  total  discouragement. 
Everything  seems  unsettled  ;  every  institution  is  in 
danger,  and  the  most  lamentable  changes  of  system 


PROMISE  AND  PERFORMANCE  311 

are  expected.  Nothing  can  be  more  pernicious  than 
such  a  state  of  affairs,  which  stifles  noble  aspirations 
and  leads  weak  people  to  look  only  after  their  own 
interests,  in  the,  belief  that  public  considerations  are 
disregarded  by  their  Government. 

'  Causes  of  Alarm. — It  is  feared,  from  certain 
phrases  which  have  been  uttered  by  those  who  are 
supposed  to  be  the  confidential  interpreters  of  your 
views,  that  you  regard  the  Constitution  as  impractic- 
able, useless,  and  involving  too  much  expenditure, 
that  the  independence  of  Courts  of  Justice  is  to  cease, 
that  public  education  is  to  be  restricted,  that  the  diets 
are  inconvenient  obstacles  which  should  be  abolished, 
and  that  the  Kingdom  is  to  be  governed  like  the  other 
Polish  dominions  of  the  Empire.  I  do  not  know  how 
much  truth  there  may  be  in  these  discouraging 
rumours,  but  it  is  asserted  that  your  opinions  have  of 
late  undergone  a  complete  change,  and  are  totally 
opposed  to  those  you  held  before.  I  can  hardly 
believe  this,  and  I  appeal  with  confidence  against 
those  who  wish  to  injure  my  country  and  its  Constitu- 
tion to  principles  and  traits  of  character  which  should 
be  above  all  passing  circumstances. 

'  Expense  of  the  Army. — It  would  be  unjust  to  make 
a  nation  suffer  for  faults  which  it  has  not  committed. 
You  have  been  led,  Sire,  by  motives  whose  force  I  am 
far  from  disputing,  to  decide  that  the  expense  of  the 
Polish  army  shall  not  be  diminished.  But  it  is  a  fact 
that  this  expense  is  greater  than  the  Kingdom  of 
Poland  within  its  present  limits  is  capable  of  bearing, 
and  that  it  is  relatively  greater,  than  that  borne  for 
similar  objects  by  various  independent  kingdoms,  such 


3i2      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

as  Sweden,  Saxony,  Wiirtemberg,  and  Piedmont, 
where,  with  greater  resources,  the  military  system  is 
less  costly. 

1  Limits  of  the  Kingdom. — When  the  fate  of  this 
country  was  decided  your  Majesty  will  remember  that 
you  magnanimously  promised  to  reunite  all  the  Polish 
provinces  under  your  sceptre  and  under  a  national 
regime.  You  yourself  thought  the  regeneration  of 
Poland  should  be  carried  out  on  a  more  extended 
scale  ;  the  present  Kingdom,  smaller  by  a  third  than 
the  Duchy  whose  place  it  occupies,  was  in  your  eyes 
to  be  a  merely  provisional  creation.  Reasons  of 
prudence  have  led  your  Majesty  to  suspend  the  execu- 
tion of  this  promise  ;  but  would  it  not  be  obviously 
unjust  to  punish  the  Kingdom  for  the  restricted  limits 
imposed  upon  it,  the  extension  of  which  the  nation 
would  make  the  greatest  sacrifices  to  procure  ? 