

*  General  Zajonczek,  a  veteran  who  had  lost  both  his  legs  in  the  Napoleonic 
wars. 


PROMISE  AND  PERFORMANCE  309 

tution  a  farce.  If  you  will  inform  him  that  you  wish 
to  respect  your  own  work  and  cause  it  to  be  respected, 
and  that  his  duties  to  his  sovereign  and  his  country 
may  be  combined  with,  but  should  never  be  subordi- 
nated to,  his  obligations  to  the  Grand-Duke,  he  will  no 
doubt  carry  out  your  will.  This,  however,  is  an 
essential  condition  of  preventing  the  ruin  of  the 
country.  .  .  You,  Sire,  are  our  destiny ;  our  only 
resources  and  hopes  are  bound  up  with  your  Majesty, 
and  you  alone  can  give  permanent  solidity  to  the 
institutions  which  you  have  created.' 

'  17th  April  1816. 

'  Suicides  have  for  some  time  been  very  frequent  in 
the  Polish  army.  The  annexed  letter,  the  original  of 
which  is  in  the  Grand-Duke's  hands,  shows  the  cause 
of  most  of  these  unhappy  occurrences.  Its  writer 
was  a  distinguished  officer,  aide-de-camp  to  General 
Krasinski,  and  a  great  favourite  in  Polish  society. 
His  example  was  followed  by  a  sub-officer  who  killed 
himself  because,  as  is  stated,  he  could  not  survive  the 
shame  of  the  disgraceful  punishments  inflicted  upon 
himself  and  his  colleagues.  It  is  absolutely  necessary 
that  the  army  should  be  given  a  code  of  laws  and 
regulations.  At  present  it  is  administered  solely  by 
caprice.  It  suffers  not  from  too  much  severity,  but 
from  constant  humiliations  and  acts  of  arbitrary 
power.' 

(Enclosure.] 

1  MY  DEAR  SISTER,  ...  I  can  no  longer  bear  what 
I  see  daily — my  brothers-in-arms  and  my  fellow- 


310      MEMOIR8  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

citizens  dishonoured,  the  glory  of  our  fathers  trodden 
under  foot,  the  laws  of  the  best  of  sovereigns  violated. 
I  leave  my  poor  country  helplessly  delivered  up  to 
the  caprices  of  one  man. 

'  How  often  have  I  nearly  become  an  assassin ! 
What  a  blow  that  would  have  been  for  you,  dear 
sister  !  I  wished  to  sacrifice  myself  in  order  to  free 
us  from  these  shameful  chains,  but  feeling  that  the 
result  might  not  realise  my  hopes,  I  prefer  to  deprive 
myself  of  an  existence  which  might  become  fatal  to 
my  country.  ...  I  know  that  I  shall  be  accused  of 
weakness ;  I  would  have  done  this  deed  long  ago  if 
our  holy  religion  and  my  attachment  for  you  had  not 
prevented  me.  But  being  now  quite  convinced  that  I 
can  no  longer  be  of  use  to  my  country,  I  and  several 
of  my  friends  have  determined  to  leave  this  world.  .  . 

'  Give  my  sword  to  your  son.  Let  him  wear  it,  as 
I  did,  for  his  country  and  his  friends.' 

*  SIENIAWA,  21st  August  1821. 

'  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  submit  to  your  Imperial  and 
Royal  Majesty  some  observations  on  the  present 
condition  of  Poland.  I  do  not  often  trouble  you  with 
letters,  and  I  beg  to  be  permitted  on  this  occasion  to 
write  to  you  at  greater  length  than  usual.  I  have 
given  a  heading  to  each  paragraph,  so  that  your 
Majesty  need  only  read  those  which  may  seem  to 
you  most  worthy  of  attention. 