


THE  PRINCESS  DINO-TALLEYRAND  321 

and  respected.  Niemcewicz  was  too  plain-spoken  and 
hot-tempered,  however,  for  a  diplomatist :  '  Palmer- 
ston,'  he  says  in  his  Memoirs,  '  found  me  too  hot,  and  I 
found  him  colder  than  ice.'  But  his  unflagging 
industry  and  perseverance  made  up  for  this  defect, 
and  Prince  Adam,  in  his  life  of  Niemcewicz,*  says 
that '  perhaps  he  never  showed  more  boundless  attach- 
ment to  his  country  than  in  this  last  and  difficult 
public  service.  .  .  Notwithstanding  his  age  and 
growing  infirmities,  he  thinks  of  everything,  and  I 
saw  him  day  and  night  working  solely  for  his 
country's  cause.' 

After  narrowly  escaping  capture  by  the  Russian 
army  at  Cracow,  Prince  Adam  had  travelled  with  a 
passport  given  him  by  Metternich  in  the  name  of 
'  George  Hoffman.'  This  was  a  necessary  precaution, 
considering  the  power  at  that  time  exercised  by 
Russia  throughout  the  German  States.  '  He  arrived,' 
says  Niemcewicz  in  his  Memoirs, '  without  a  servant, 
deprived  of  all  property,  and  his  whole  luggage  re- 
presented by  a  small  trunk.  .  .  What  a  freak  of 
fortune !  I  well  recollect  when  I  was  his  father's 
aide-de-camp  fifty  years  ago,  and  when  during  an 
inspection  of  the  Lithuanian  army  the  tents  of  his 
suite  were  carried  by  300  horses  and  fourteen  camels. 
His  son  is  now  destitute  ;  but  he  feels  the  misfortunes 
of  his  country  more  than  his  own.' 

Prince  Adam's  first  visit  was  to  the  French 
Embassy.  The  Princess  Dino  was  an  old  acquaintance 
of  his,  and  in  1808  the  Abbe  Piattoli,  who  was  a  friend 
both  of  the  Prince  and  of  the  Duchess  of  Coburcr 

O  ' 

*  Published  at  Berlin  and  Posen  in  1860. 
VOL.  II.  X 


322       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

had  endeavoured  to  arrange  a  marriage  between 
him  and  the  Duchess's  youngest  daughter.  Although 
nothing  came  of  this  project,  the  young  Duchess,  even 
after  her  marriage,  remained  on  the  most  friendly 
terms  with  Prince  Adam,  and  Talleyrand  had  also  for 
many  years  been  well  acquainted  with  him.  In  1807 
the  French  Minister  was  opposed  to  the  Poles,  say- 
ing:  'avec  les  Polonais  on  ne  fait  que  du  desordre;' 
but  he  afterwards  changed  his  opinion  on  this  and 
other  subjects,  and  showed  some  favour  to  Poland  at 
the  Vienna  Congress.  So  much,  indeed,  was  he 
regarded  as  hostile  to  Russia  that  when  he  was 
appointed  French  Ambassador  in  London,  the  Emperor 
Nicholas  is  said  by  M.  Louis  Blanc*  to  have  con- 
sidered this  appointment  '  as  a  sort  of  declaration  of 
war ; '  and  Count  Walewski  described  him  as  '  one  of 
those  who  were  least  indifferent  to  the  Polish  cause.' 

Talleyrand  and  the  Princess  Dino  received  Prince 
Adam  in  the  most  friendly  manner,  and  repeatedly 
urged  him  to  take  up  his  residence  in  their  chateau  of 
Valei^ay.  Talleyrand  added  that  in  view  of  the 
general  desire  for  peace,  the  only  means  of  raising  the 
Polish  question  would  be  to  appeal  to  the  Treaty  of 
Vienna,  which,  he  thought,  all  the  Cabinets  would 
insist  on  maintaining.  Prince  Czartoryski  would,  he 
said,  be  especially  qualified  to  carry  on  the  negotia- 
tions on  this  subject,  as  he  had  acted  during  the  Vienna 
Congress  as  a  sort  of  mediator  between  the  Poles  and 
the  Emperor  Alexander. 