


3i8       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

chief  men  of  mark  in  the  political  world  were  Earl 
Grey  and  Lords  Palmerston,  Brougham,  Holland, 
Melbourne,  Lansdowne,  and  Althorp,  while  among 
the  diplomatists  at  the  Belgian  Conference  were 
Talleyrand,  Lieven,  and  Esterhazy.  The  feminine 
influence  in  politics,  which  at  that  time  was  not 
inconsiderable,  was  represented  by  Lady  Holland,  the 
Princess  Dino-Talleyrand,  and  the  Princess  Lieven. 
The  first  of  these,  still  bearing  the  traces  of  great 
beauty — proud,  witty,  and  imposing  'as  a  Czarina- 
assembled  at  her  famous  receptions  at  Holland  House 
all  that  was  most  brilliant  by  position,  merit,  or  talent. 
The  Princess  Dino,  daughter  of  the  last  Duchess  of 
Courland  and  wife  of  the  nephew  *  of  Prince  Talley- 
rand, had  lived  with  the  Prince  for  many  years,  and 
was  his  constant  companion.  She  had  great  influence 
over  him,  and  used  to  preside  at  the  magnificent  re- 
ceptions in  the  French  Embassy  while  Talleyrand  was 
Ambassador.  The  rooms  of  the  Embassy  at  Hanover 
Square  were  fitted  up  with  all  the  splendour  of  the  great 
French  aristocratic  salons  of  the  eighteenth  century ; 
the  cuisine  was  perfection  ;  and  the  inexhaustible  wit 
of  the  host,  notwithstanding  his  seventy-eight  years, 
and  the  amiability  of  the  hostess,  made  these  recep- 
tions the  most  brilliant  and  the  most  sought  after  in 
London.  Even  the  Court  was  so  anxious  to  please 

*  When  Prince  Talleyrand,  at  that  time  Napoleon's  Foreign  Minister,  sought  a  wife 
for  his  nephew,  '  Napoleon  appropriated  all  the  heiresses  of  France  for  his  aides-de- 
camp,' and  the  Prince  accordingly  arranged,  through  the  intervention  of  Alexander 
I,  a  marriage  for  his  nephew  with  the  youngest  daughter  of  the  widow  of  the  last  Duke 
of  Courland,  who  was  the  friend  of  King  Stanislaus  Augustus  and  many  other  Poles. 
The  marriage  took  place  in  1808,  and  Talleyrand  afterwards  gave  up  to  his  nephew 
the  title  of  Prince  Dino.  The  latter  was,  however,  so  addicted  to  riotous  living 
that  his  wife  obtained  a  divorce  from  him  and  took  up  her  residence  with  Talleyrand. 


THE  PRINCESS  LIEVEN  31  y 

Talleyrand,  that  the  Princess  Dino,  although  not  his 
wife,  was  admitted,  in  contravention  of  all  the  rules 
of  etiquette,  to  the  position  and  privileges  of  an 
Ambassadress.* , 

'  As  for  the  Princess  Lieven,  the  wife  of  the 
Russian  Ambassador,  everyone  has  heard  of  this 
consummate  type  of  a  Russian  political  agent  in 
petticoats. t  The  poet  Niemcewicz,  who  was  at  that 
time  Polish  envoy  in  London,  and  who  did  not  spare 
people  whom  he  did  not  like,  expressed  surprise  that 
this  '  old  and  ugly  woman,  with  a  red  nose,  should 
possess  such  influence  and  make  everybody  submit  to 
her  decrees  ; '  but  this  is  explained  by  her  rare  intel- 
lectual qualities,  her  dialectic  skill,  and  her  extra- 
ordinary pliancy  in  social  intercourse.  She  had  been 
in  London  for  eighteen  years,  and  having  in  this  long 
period  made  many  friends  and  acquaintances,  she  was 
not  only  an  agreeable  companion  but  a  political  force. 
More  than  once  she  influenced  not  only  the  decisions 
but  the  fate  of  Cabinets,  even  in  England.  The  most 