

7  O 

distinguished  English  statesmen — Lords  Liverpool, 
Castlereagh,  and  Aberdeen,  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
Canning,  Peel,  and  Lord  Harrowby — were  her  con- 
fidential friends,  and  although  by  disposition  and 
training  she  was  an  ultra-Tory,  this  did  not  prevent 
her  from  being  on  the  best  terms  with  Liberal 

*  One  of  Talleyrand's  greatest  admirers  and  pupils  in  the  art  of  diplomacy  was 
Lord  Palir.erston,  and  a  comic  paper  published  a  caricature  representing  them  walk- 
ing together,  with  the  inscription,  '  the  lame  leading  the  blind  '  (an  allusion  to  the 
fact  that  one  of  Talleyrand's  feet  was  deformed). 

t  The  Princess  Lieven,  a  descendant  of  the  Esthonian  family  of  von  Benkendorff, 
was  the  sister  of  General  Alexander  von  Benkendorff,  the  confidant  of  the  Emperor 
Nicholas,  and  the  creator  of  that  mysterious  and  all-powerful  institution,  the  Secret 
Police;  known  in  Russia  by  the  modest  appellation  of  'the  third  section  of  the 
Imperial  Chancellery '. 


32o      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Ministers,  "  for  the  advantage  and  glory  of  the  policy 
of  the  Czar."  The  only  prominent  statesman  with 
whom  she  could  never  agree  was  Palmerston ;  she 
used  to  call  him  "  un  tres-petit  esprit,  lourd,  obstind," 
and  she  cordially  detested  him.  He,  on  the  other 
hand,  used  to  say  that  he  had  been  in  a  Tory  Cabinet, 
and  knew  what  her  services  cost.  Of  Earl  Grev  it 

v 

was  reported  that  every  morning  before  he  got  out 
of  bed  he  used  to  write  her  a  note  on  paper  scented 
with  musk,  in  which  he  mingled  gallantry  with 
politics. 

1  Being  a  zealous  servant  arid  admirer  of  the  Czar, 
Madame  Lieven  showed  bitter  hostility  to  the  Poles 
and  their  cause.  She  would  not  allow  any  Polish  sym- 
pathies to  be  expressed  in  her  presence,  and  she  carried 
her  animosity  so  far  that  when  one  of  the  secretaries 
of  the  French  Embassy  said  something  in  favour  of 
the  Polish  revolution,  she  went  to  Talleyrand  and 
insisted  on  his  dismissing  the  culprit  from  his  post.' 

Such  was  the  position  of  affairs  in  London  when 
Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  eager  as  ever  to  serve  the 
cause  of  his  unhappy  country,  came  to  advocate  it 
before  the  members  of  the  Government  and  the  conti- 
nental statesmen  who  had  assembled  from  all  parts  of 
Europe  for  the  Belgian  Conference.  He  was  received 
in  London  by  the  poet  Niemcewicz,  who  still  remained 
there  after  the  close  of  his  functions  as  envoy  of  the 
Polish  National  Government.  His  venerable  appear- 
ance, his  perfect  knowledge  of  the  English  language 
and  English  customs,  and  his  reputation  as  a  com- 
panion of  Kosciuszko,*  had  made  him  generally  liked 

*  He  was  Kosciuszko's  aide-de-camp,  and  afterwards  accompanied  him  to  the 
United  States,  where  they  remained  together  for  several  years. 