

The  Christmas  of  1831  was  a  melancholy  one  for 

*  Htstoire  de  Dix  Ans,  vol.  ii,  p.  101.  Guizot,  however,  says  that  Talleyrand's 
Polish  sympathies  were  purely  historical,  and  that  he  was  then  entirely  absorbed  with 
the  Belgian  question  (Hist.  vol.  ii,  p.  229). 


PALMERSTON  323 

Poles  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  Prince  Czartoryski 
and  his  few  Polish  friends  in  London  spent  it  in  sad 
reminiscences  of  the  terrible  struggle  through  which 
their  country  had  passed.  Most  of  the  Prince's 
English  friends  and  acquaintances  were  out  of  town, 
but  on  the  29th  of  December  he  obtained  an  interview 
with  Lord  Palmerston,  then  Secretary  of  State  for 
Foreign  Affairs,  which  he  thus  describes  in  a  letter 
written  by  him  shortly  after : 

'  Lord  Palmerston  struck  me  as  a  man  of  very  cold 
temperament,  who,  having  made  up  his  mind  on  the 
Polish  question,  only  thought  of  rebutting  our  argu- 
ments on  the  other  side.  I  began  by  saying  that 
although  England  had  not  given  the  Poles  any  help, 
they  owe  her  gratitude  for  her  good  wishes.  To  this 
Palmerston  rejoined  that  if  the  fate  of  the  Poles  had 
depended  on  his  personal  wishes  and  those  of  English- 
men generally,  their  struggle  for  independence  would 
not  have  had  such  an  unfortunate  result ;  but  that 
circumstances  and  treaties  often  prevent  States  from 
following  their  most  just  impulses.  I  here  remarked 
that  if  treaties  prevented  the  Powers  from  interfering 
in  behalf  of  Poland,  they  should  at  least  see  that  the 
treaties  are  carried  out.  The  Emperor  Nicholas  had 
appealed  to  the  Treaty  of  Vienna  during  the  progress 
of  the  Revolution,  and  he  could  not  repudiate  the 
Treaty  now  that  the  Revolution  was  over.  .  .  .  We 
Poles  have  nothing  to  ask  for  or  to  expect  from  him, 
and  we  only  refer  to  the  Treaty  of  Vienna  as  a  means 
of  diminishing  our  sufferings.  The  maintenance  of 
the  treaties  which  relate  to  Poland  is  a  matter  which 
specially  concerns  the  Powers  that  signed  those 


324      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

treaties.  Lord  Palmerston  made  no  reply  to  this 
remark,  but  said  that  it  is  a  principle  among  States 
not  to  interfere  between  a  Government  and  its  subjects 
except  in  cases  where  a  State  has  a  direct  interest  in 
so  interfering,  or  is  distinctly  authorised  to  do  so  by 
treaty.  The  stipulations  of  the  Treaty  of  Vienna 
with  regard  to  Poland  were  not  clear,  and  might  be 
variously  interpreted.  "  It  provides,  for  instance,  that 
the  kingdom  of  Poland  is  to  be  united  to  Russia  by 
its  Constitution,  but  it  does  not  say  what  the  Constitu- 
tion is  to  be,  or  that  the  Emperor  is  not  to  have  the 
power  to  alter  it.  The  Powers  are  not  therefore 
bound  to  resist  any  modifications  the  Czar  might  deem 
fit  to  introduce  in  the  Constitution  ;  and  Austria  and 
Prussia,  which  are  the  Powers  most  interested  in  the 
question,  concur  in  this  view.  ..."  I  answered  that  it 
was  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  article  about 
Poland  is  not  clear  and  precise,  seeing  that  it  was 
hastily  put  together,  after  much  opposition,  at  the 
moment  when  the  news  arrived  of  the  return  of 
Napoleon  from  the  island  of  Elba,  and  those  who 
drew  it  up,  even  on  the  Russian  side,  did  not  agree 
with  the  Emperor  Alexander  on  the  matter.  It  was 
evident,  however,  that  the  word  '  Constitution '  was 
not  inserted  in  the  Treaty  as  an  expression  without 
any  real  meaning.  By  that  word  was  meant  the 
Constitution  which  Alexander  had  designed  for 
Poland,  and  in  using  it  Alexander  spoke  in  the  name 
of  his  successors,  and  bound  himself  never  to  alter  it. 
Moreover,  all  the  members  of  the  Congress  had 