

*  See  also  a  letter  from  Earl  Grey  to  Brougham  in  Brougham's  Autobiography, 
vol.  Hi.,  p.  164. 


BROUGHAM  327 

Polish  Revolution,  and  the  savage  ukases  issued 
against  him  by  the  Emperor  Nicholas,  made  him  a 
remarkable  and  interesting  figure  in  London  society, 
where  he  was  received  with  an  esteem  almost  amount- 
ing to  veneration.  This  feeling  was  not  confined  to 
aristocratic  circles,  where  he  was  personally  known ; 
it  also  spread  to  the  middle  classes,  and  on  the  2nd  of 
January  1832,  the  'Literary  Union  '  club  gave  him  a 
dinner,  at  which  the  poet  Campbell  made  an  enthusi- 
astic speech.  The  Prince's  popularity  was  still  further 
increased  when  it  became  known  that  Prince  Lieven, 
the  Russian  Ambassador,  had  complained  to  Lord 
Palmerston  of  Earl  Grey's  having  invited  '  the 
President  of  the  rebel  government '  to  his  house,  and 
that  the  Princess  had  at  the  same  time  addressed  a 
letter  full  of  bitter  reproaches  to  Earl  Grey. 

Some  days  later  the  Prince  had  an  interview  with 
Brougham,   who   had  now   risen   to    the    position    of 

» 

Lord  Chancellor,  and  whose  official  position  and 
advancing  years  had  greatly  calmed  the  fervid  enthu- 
siasm with  which  he  had  taken  up  the  cause  of  the 
Poles  eighteen  years  before  (see  Chapter  XXI). 
'  Your  Highness  will  understand,'  he  said,  '  the 
difference  between  the  feelings  of  a  private  individual 
and  the  duties  of  a  Minister.  The  opinions  of  Lord 
Grey  and  myself  as  to  Poland  are  well  known  to  you  ; 
but  we  were  obliged  to  adapt  our  policy  to  the  condi- 
tion of  England,  who  was  absolutely  incapable  (sic)  of 
making  war.'  '  But,'  said  the  Prince,  '  why  did  you 
refuse  to  join  France  in  diplomatic  representations  at 
St  Petersburg  ? '  '  Such  a  step,'  answered  Brougham, 
'  would  have  been  of  doubtful  efficacy.  .  .  .  The  fate 


328      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  Poland  will  always  interest  us,  but  unfortunately 
the  Polish  cause  is  opposed  to  the  wishes  of  all  the 
other  Powers.  They  all  want  peace,  while  to  take  up 
the  cause  of  Poland  means  war.' 

Though  discouraged,  Prince  Adam  did  not  lose 
heart,  but  prepared  a  memorandum,  entering  fully 
into  the  rights  of  Poland  under  the  Treaty  of  Vienna. 

•/ 

After  showing  it  to  Talleyrand,  who  highly  approved 
it,  he  handed  it  to  Palmerston.  The  latter  said  he 
would  do  all  he  could  for  the  Poles,  but  that  nothing 
could  have  been  done  by  England  during  the  Revolu- 
tion, as  the  proclamation  of  the  deposition  of  Nicholas 
by  the  Poles  had  deprived  her  of  the  only  ground  on 
which  she  could  interfere  in  their  behalf.  .  .  '  Now 
that  the  struggle  is  over,  however,'  he  added,  '  we 
have  forwarded  our  representations  and  remarks  as  to 
the  maintenance  of  the  Treaty  of  Vienna.  We  re- 
cognise that  Russia  has  not  fulfilled  it,  for  she  has 
done  nothing  in  the  provinces,  and  after  granting  a 
Constitution  to  the  kingdom,  has  violated  its  pro- 
visions. We  adhere  firmly  to  this  view,  although 
Austria  and  Prussia  dissent  from  it.  We  hold  that 
the  Constitution  granted  by  the  Emperor  Alexander 
should  be  maintained,  and  can  only  be  altered  by  the 
Diet ;  also  that  the  Polish  provinces  of  Russia  should 
have  a  representative  assembly  and  a  provincial 
administration.' 