

IN  PARLIAMENT. 

AFTER  the  collapse  of  the  Polish  Revolution  of  1830-1 
Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  proceeded  to  London,  where 
he  arrived  on  the  22nd  of  December  1831.  The 
revolution  which  had  just  taken  place  in  France  made 
Paris  an  unsuitable  starting-point  for  a  European 
intervention  in  Poland,  as  the  other  Powers  on  the 
Continent  looked  upon  the  new  French  Government 
with  suspicion  as  representing  the  aggressive  and 
revolutionary  tendencies  of  the  year  1792,  which  it 
was  hoped  had  been  finally  crushed  by  the  coalition  of 
1815.  In  London,  however,  a  Liberal  Cabinet  had 
come  into  power  almost  simultaneously  with  the  out- 
break of  the  Polish  Revolution.  This  seemed  a  good 
omen  for  the  Polish  cause,  and  the  more  sanguine  of 
the  Poles  already  looked  forward  to  an  Anglo-French 


PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  IN  LONDON  317 

coalition  in  their  behalf  and  in  that  of  the  other 
oppressed  nationalities.  But  as  usual  Ministers  in 
office  held  very  different  language  from  that  which 
they  had  used  in  opposition.  The  envoys  in  London  of 
the  Polish  national  Government,  Marquis  Wielopolski 
and  Count  Walewski  (afterwards  Minister  under 
Napoleon  III),  reported  that  the  Liberal  Government, 
alarmed  at  the  excitement  in  France  and  the  cries  of 
revenge  for  Waterloo,  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  policy  of  England  should  be  'not  to  weaken 
Russia,  as  Europe  might  soon  again  require  her  services 
in  the  cause  of  order/  and  to  prevent  Poland,  whom 
it  regarded  as  the  natural  ally  of  France,  from  becom- 
ing 'a  French  province  on  the  Vistula.'*  The  Reform 
Bill  and  the  Belgian  Question,  too,  absorbed  the 
attention  of  the  Government  and  rendered  it  indisposed 
to  take  up  so  delicate  and  dangerous  a  question  as 
that  of  Poland.  Accordingly,  although  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Polish  Revolution  the  British  Cabinet  had 
represented  at  St  Petersburg  that  England,  as  a  party 
to  the  Treaty  of  Vienna,  could  not  consent  to  any 
violation  of  its  provisions,  it  afterwards  rejected  the 
proposal  of  the  French  Government  of  July  for  a 
combined  intervention  with  the  object  of  stopping 
further  bloodshed  in  Poland. 

'  London,'  says  M.  de  Gadon  in  his  manuscript 
account  of  the  Polish  mission,  '  was  at  that  time  the 
head-quarters  of  European  diplomacy,  as  the  Confer- 
ence on  the  Belgian  question,  which  presented  many 
difficulties  and  dangers,  was  being  held  there.  The 

*  Despatch  of  the  19th  March  1831,  from  Marquis  Wielopolski  to  the  Polish 
mission  in  Paris,  and  of  the  59th  March  and  8th  April  1831,  from  Count  Walewski 
to  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  in  Warsaw  (MSS.  in  the  Polish  Library  in  Paris;. 