

The  Russian  answer  to  the  representations  referred 
to  by  Lord  Palmerston  came  at  the  end  of  January. 
It  was  very  courteous  in  tone,  but  it  decisively 
rejected  the  English  view  of  the  Treaty,  pointing  out 
that  Russia  had  a  majority  in  her  favour  of  three  to 


PRUSSIA  SUGGESTS  ANNIHILATION  OF  POLAND     329 

two,  as  Russia,  Austria,  and  Prussia  were  on  one  side 
arid  only  England  and  France  on  the  other.  '  Russia 
is  quite  wrong,'  said  Palmerston  to  Prince  Adam, 
'  but  how  can  we  force  her  to  accept  our  view  ?  We 
cannot  send  an  array  to  Poland,  and  the  burning  of 
the  Russian  fleet  would  be  about  as  effectual  as  the 
burning  of  Moscow.'  The  Ministry  did  not,  however, 
even  attempt  to  pursue  the  subject  diplomatically. 
France  was  beginning  to  strive  for  the  favour  of  the 
Emperor  Nicholas,  and  England,  wishing  above  all 
things  for  the  settlement  of  the  Belgian  question, 
also  found  it  her  interest  to  remain  on  good  terms 
with  him.  Under  these  circumstances  it  was  not 
surprising  that  not  only  Russia  but  Prussia  repudiated 
their  obligations  towards  Europe.  Ancillon,  the 
Prussian  Foreign  Minister,  cynically  advocated  the 
complete  annihilation  of  Poland  '  so  as  to  have  done 
with  her  once  for  all,'  *  and  when  the  British  Ambas- 
sador at  Berlin  appealed  to  the  Treaty  of  Vienna,  he 
sharply  replied  that  '  every  one  can  do  as  he  likes  in 
his  own  house.'  f  In  Austria,  too,  Metternich, 
terrified  at  the  re-appearance  of  the  revolutionary 
spectre  in  France  and  Germany,  although  he  had 
admitted  that  '  he  would  rather  have  a  friendly  and 
peaceful  Poland  for  a  neighbour  than  an  aggressive 
Russia,'  £  began  to  talk  of  a  renewal  of  the  Holy 
Alliance,  and  of  the  two  evils — Russia  and  revolution 
—preferred  the  former  as  the  least. 

Although  it  has  often  been  shown  that  the  cases 

*  Conversation  with  General  Flahaut,  the  French  Ambassador,  reported  by 
Count  Walewski  in  a  letter  preserved  in  the  Polish  Library  in  Paris. 

t  Letter  from  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski,  dated  the  24th  of  January,  1832. 

t  Despatch  of  the  25th  September,  1830  (Memoirs  of  Prince  Metternich,  vol.  v. 
P-  77). 


330      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

of  Poland  and  Ireland  bear  no  resemblance  to  each 
other,  it  is  still  the  constant  practice  of  Russian 
writers  and  their  sympathisers  in  the  English  press 
to  compare  them.  Earl  Grey,  in  a  conversation  with 
Prince  Czartoryski  on  the  8th  of  March,  1832,  told 
the  Prince  that  this  comparison  had  been  used  as  a 
tu  quoque  argument  by  the  Russian  Ambassador. 
'  The  Czar/  he  said, '  will  not  allow  anyone  to  interfere 
in  the  affairs  of  Poland.'  '  Le  Prince  et  la  Princesse 
de  Lieven  ont  repete  plusieurs  fois  que  1'Empereur  ne 
permettra  jamais  que  d'autres  puissances  se  melent 
dans  les  affaires  de  la  Pologne,  de  meme  que  FAng- 
leterre  ne  permettrait  pas  qu'on  se  mele  des  affaires 
de  Flrlande.  .  .  .'  Lord  Palmerston,  referring  to  this 
remark  two  days  later,  said  to  the  Prince  :  '  There  is 
not  the  smallest  similarity  between  the  two  cases. 
Ireland  has  belonged  to  us  for  centuries  ;  it  speaks  the 
same  language  as  England  and  is  the  same  nation. '- 
'  Moreover,'  observed  the  Prince  '  the  union  of  England 
and  Ireland  was  not  the  result  of  a  European  Treaty.' 
In  the  conversation  above  referred  to  Earl  Grey 
added  some  interesting  particulars  on  Continental  and 
English  politics.  '  Russia,'  he  said,  '  is  backed  up  by 
Austria  and  Prussia,  and  we  cannot  rely  on  France ; 
her  position  is  too  unsettled.  .  .  As  for  England, 
public  opinion  is  certainly  interested  in  Poland ;  but 
it  is  much  more  interested  in  various  internal  questions, 
and  in  the  maintenance  of  peace.  Moreover,  we  have 
other  questions  pending  with  Russia,  which  demand 
mutual  concessions.  .  .  .  We  have  financial  diffi- 
culties, but  if  public  opinion  were  in  favour  of  war, 
means  would  be  found  of  raising  the  necessary 