


THE  LONDON  PRESS  333 

Government  in  Poland,  the  destruction  of  the  national 
collections,*  and  the  suppression  of  the  university  and 
schools.      '  These,'  said  Lord  Pahnerston  to  the  Prince 
'  are  the  results  of  animosity  after  a  sanguinary  war.' 
'  But,'  observed  the  latter,   '  victory  should  produce 
leniency.'     *  True,'  Palmerston  rejoined,  '  in   civilised 
countries ;  in  half-savage  ones  victory  only  produces 
increased  severities.'     Among  the    documents   which 
reached    the    Foreign    Office    in   this   way  were   two 
letters  from  a  Pole  named  Borowski,  who  was  taken 
in  his  childhood  to  South  America,  fought  there  for 
the  independence  of  the  Spanish  republics,  and  after- 
wards went  to  Arabia.      Here  he  heard  the  news  of 
the   Polish  Revolution,   upon  which  he  at  once  pro- 
ceeded to  Persia,  where  he  was  well  received  by  the 
heir-apparent  Abbas  Mirza  and  attempted  to  induce 
him  to  take   active   steps  against   Russia.     His  last 
plan  of  helping  his  country  was  to  equip  two  cruisers 
on  the  Black  Sea  for  the  capture  of  Russian  ships, 
and  he  asked  that  letters  of  marque  should  be  granted 
by  England  for  this  purpose. 

With  a  view  to  spreading  information  as  to  Polish 
affairs,  Prince  Czartoryski,  assisted  by  several  English 
political  writers,  founded  a  monthly  Magazine, 
'  Polonia,'  afterwards  expanded  into  the  '  British  and 
Foreign  Review,'  containing  articles  on  Polish  history 
and  other  subjects  connected  with  that  country.  He 
also  collected  for  the  use  of  English  writers  a  number 
of  historical  works  about  Poland,  some  of  which  had 

*  The  total  number  of  books  (most  of  which  have  been  destroyed)  taken  by 
the  Kussians  from  the  great  Polish  libraries  is  about  700,000.  Of  these  17,000 
belonged  to  the  Radzivill  Library,  400,000  to  the  famous  Zaluski  Library,  200,000  to 
the  University  of  Warsaw,  30,000  to  the  Society  of  the  Friends  of  Science,  20,000  to 
the  University  of  Wilna,  and  15,000  to  the  Czartoryski  Library  at  Pulawy. 


334       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

already  been  sent  to  London  in  1814  by  his  secretary 
Biernacki,  and  he  presented  some  of  the  latest  works 
published  in  various  countries  on  Polish  affairs  to  the 
British  Museum  Library.  On  the  25th  of  November, 
1832,  'The  Literary  Association  of  the  Friends  of 
Poland,'  a  society  which  has  ever  since  continued  to 
be  the  head-quarters  of  all  English  action  on  behalf  of 
the  Poles,  was  founded.  A  'Polish  Committee'  for 
the  relief  of  Polish  refugees  had  already  been  formed 
by  Messrs  Bach,  Hunter  Gordon,  Arthur  White,  and 
Kirwan,  but,  thanks  to  the  influence  and  efforts  of 
Prince  Czartoryski,  the  scope  and  importance  of  this 
committee  was  considerably  enlarged,  and  it  became 
the  association  above  described,  which  consisted 
entirely  of  Englishmen.  Its  first  President  was  the 
poet  Campbell,  and  among  his  most  distinguished 
successors  were  Lord  Dudley  Stuart — the  most 
devoted,  zealous,  and  indefatigable  of  the  English 
friends  of  Poland — and  Lords  Harrowby,  Houghton, 
and  Lytton.  The  Association  took  up  its  quarters 
at  No.  10  Duke  Street,  St  James's,  where  Oliver 
Cromwell  and  Milton  once  lived  ;  and  there  it  still 
remains,  relieving  out  of  its  scanty  funds  the  helpless 
survivors  of  the  Polish  Revolutions  of  the  last  sixty 
years. 