


PARTY  FEELING  IN  ENGLAND  331 

funds.  What  most  troubles  us  is  the  uncertain  state 
of  Europe.  Some  want  to  maintain  everything 
by  force,  others  to  upset  everything  by  force.  .  .  . 
Party  feeling,  too,  runs  very  high  here.  Wellington  is 
opposed  to  all  liberal  plans,  and  force  is  his  only  policy  ; 
this  pleases  the  other  Cabinets.  He  thinks  he  will 
yet  return  to  office  ;  he  had  never  been  beaten  before, 
and  will  not  believe  that  he  is  beaten  now.  I  did  not 
seek  office  ;  my  advanced  age  did  not  allow  me  to  do 
so.  The  King  himself  called  upon  me  to  form  a 
Cabinet,  as  the  Duke  after  his  declaration  could  riot 
remain  in  office.'  In  reporting  this  conversation  the 
Prince  adds  that  Earl  Grey  asked  him  several  times 
if  he  had  seen  Lord  Palrnerston,  '  as  if  he  feared  to  say 
anything  which  might  not  be  in  accordance  with 
Palmerston's  views,'  and  that  he  'looked  very 
anxious.' 

The  priceless  collections  of  Pulawy,  the  relics  of 
his  fortune  that  had  survived  the  confiscations  of 
Nicholas,  and  his  duties  to  his  family,  now  urgently 
claimed  Prince  Adam's  attention,  but  the  interests  of 
his  country  were  in  his  eyes  paramount  over  all 
private  considerations,  and  he  stuck  manfully  to  his 
post  so  long  as  a  spark  of  hope  remained.  In  a  letter 
written  about  this  time  to  one  of  his  friends  he  says  : 
'  I  am  glad,  at  any  rate,  that  I  have,  though  in  a 
somewhat  violent  and  expensive  way,  liberated  myself 
from  the  chains  that  bound  me.  I  will  certainly  not 
resume  them  even  at  the  price  of  my  whole  fortune. 
.  .  .  Every  Pole  should  all  his  life  be  prepared  for 
oppression  or  exile.  You  have  experienced  it  already. 
My  turn  has  come,  at  too  advanced  an  age  it  is  true, 


332       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

but  I  feel  strong  enough  to  bear  it  even  with  good 
humour.' 

All  through  his  long  life  his  proudest  boast  was 
that  he  was  the  servant  of  his  country ;  while  he 
was  Foreign  Minister  of  Russia  he  did  not  draw  the 
salary  of  the  appointment,  and  repeatedly  refused  the 
decorations  and  other  dignities  which  the  Emperor 
Alexander  pressed  upon  him.  In  one  of  his  speeches 
to  the  Polish  Historical  Society  he  said  he  would  like 
to  add  to  the  family  motto  of  the  Czartoryskis — 
'  Come  what  may ' — that  of  the  Black  Prince,  '  Ich 
dien.' 

Although  it  was  evident  that  neither  England  nor 
France  would  do  anything  for  Poland,  Prince  Adam  was 
anxious  at  least  to  bring  into  prominence  the  fact  that 
international  engagements  had  been  broken,  and  that  a 
wrong  had  been  done  which,  if  not  protested  against, 
might  be  given  the  appearance  of  a  lawful  proceeding, 
and  be  accepted  as  such  by  public  opinion.  The  state 
of  the  Continent,  too,  was  then  so  unsettled  that  a 
conflict  might  at  any  moment  arise  in  which  the 
Polish  question,  if  kept  alive  before  Europe,  might 
play  a  prominent  part.  The  Prince  accordingly  did  his 
utmost  to  keep  both  the  Government  and  the  public 
fully  informed  as  to  the  position  of  affairs  in  Poland. 
The  whole  of  the  London  press — notably  the  Times,  the 
Morning  Herald,  and  the  Morning  Chronicle — advo- 
cated the  Polish  cause,  and  the  Foreign  Office  readily 
accepted  the  information  communicated  by  the  Prince 
on  the  subject,  especially  as  Lord  Heytesbury,  in  his 
despatches  from  St  Petersburg,  was  completely  silent 
as  to  the  persecutions  and  cruelties  of  the  Russian 