

•  o 

specially    expressed   a  wish   to    maintain   the   Polish 
nationality,    and    any    change    of    the     Constitution 


GREY  325 

tending  to  weaken  that  nationality  must  be  opposed 
to  the  spirit  of  the  Treaty.  As  to  the  allegation  of 
Austria  and  Prussia  that  a  separate  Polish  State  under 
the  Russian  sceptre  does  not  afford  more  security  to 
its  neighbours  than  a  Poland  annexed  to  Russia  as 
part  of  the  Empire,  it  was  thoroughly  understood  by 
the  Congress  that  although  a  contented  Poland  would 
increase  the  Czar's  defensive  forces,  a  Poland  with  a 
Constitution  and  a  separate  army  of  its  own  would 
diminish  the  force  of  Russia  for  purposes  of  aggression. 
Lord  Palmerston  seemed  to  admit  the  justice  of  these 
remarks,  and  after  some  questions  as  to  the  Poles  in 
Austria  ...  he  looked  at  his  watch,  and  as  we  took 
our  leave  he  told  me  that  whenever  I  should  wish  to 
see  him  I  would  find  him  at  the  office  every  afternoon/ 
On  the  following  day  Prince  Czartoryski  saw  Earl 
Grey.  He  said  that  the  Ministry  would  be  glad  to 
interpret  the  Treaty  of  Vienna  as  much  as  possible  in 
favour  of  Poland,  but  that  in  his  opinion  this  must 
depend  on  Austria  and  Prussia,  who  were  directly 
interested.  The  Treaty  would  be  maintained,  but  the 
question  was  how  it  was  to  be  interpreted.  Prince 
Lieven,  Earl  Grey  added,  had  communicated  to  him  a 
memorandum  in  which  Austria  holds  that  the  Treaty 
does  not  demand  adherence  to  the  Constitution,  that 
the  Powers  cannot  prevent  Nicholas  from  altering  it  at 
his  pleasure,  and  that  no  more  can  be  required  than 
that  the  Kingdom  of  Poland  should  have  a  provincial 
diet  like  Posen  and  Galicia.  '  Prince  Lieven,'  Lord 
Grey  continued,  '  was  not  at  all  satisfied  with  my 
answer.  I  told  him  that  we  could  not  accept  this 
interpretation  of  the  Treaty  of  Vienna,  and  that  in 


326       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

our  opinion  the  Constitution  should  be  maintained  in 
the  shape  in  which  it  was  granted.  But  what  can  we 
do  when  Austria  and  Prussia  are  of  a  different  opinion  ? 
If  those  two  Powers,  the  neighbours  of  Russia,  are 
not  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  limiting  Russian 
power  by  maintaining  the  concessions  made  to  the 
Poles,  how  can  we  insist  on  their  being  maintained  ? ' 
Prince  Czartoryski  having  here  remarked  that  the 
Poles  did  not  look  to  their  oppressors  Austria  and 
Prussia,  but  to  England  and  France,  to  decide  their 
fate,  Earl  Grey  continued  :  '  Ah,  but  things  in  France 
are  so  unsettled.  The  preservation  of  peace  depends 
there  upon  a  single  man,  M.  Perier.  If  he  falls,  God 
knows  what  will  happen.  But  I  will  do  my  best  to 
maintain  the  Anglo-French  Alliance,  for  I  agree  with 
you  that  it  is  necessary  for  the  good  of  the  two 
countries  and  of  the  whole  of  Europe.'  This  con- 
versation produced  a  bad  impression  on  the  Prince. 
'  The  Ministry,'  he  says,  '  does  not  seem  to  feel  strong, 
or  to  be  conscious  that  it  stands  at  the  head  of  a  great 
nation  capable  of  exercising  a  powerful  influence  on 
the  destinies  of  Europe.  All  this  leaves  a  free  field 
to  our  enemies  in  the  north.'  The  two  friends  dined 
together  next  day  at  Earl  Grey's  house  at  East 
Sheen,  and  after  dinner  the  latter  admitted  that 
England's  policy  had  been  '  too  timid  with  regard  to 
Poland  '  and  that  •'  England  and  France  had  not  been 
sufficiently  conscious  of  the  means  at  their  command.'* 
The  high  social  position  of  Prince  Adam  Czar- 
toryski, the  prominent  part  which  he  had  taken  in  the 