

*  The  drafts  of  t'ae  memoranda  and  notes  drawn  up  on  this  occasion  are  in  the 
Prince's  own  handwriting. 


350       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORY&KI 

Russia  in  the  East.  '  The  conduct  of  Russia  and 
Austria  towards  Turkey,'  says  this  document,  '  re- 
sembles in  all  respects  that  pursued  by  those  Powers 
with  regard  to  Poland,  and  undoubtedly  tends  to  a 
similar  result.  Turkey  and  the  peoples  forming  that 
country  can  only  be  saved  by  the  simultaneous  and 
united  action  of  France  and  England.  They  alone, 
acting  with  the  same  object,  can  neutralise  the 
deleterious  influence  and  the  immense  weight  of  the 
two  former  Powers.  .  .  .  Such  an  alliance,  though 
evidently  necessary  for  the  good  of  Europe,  yet 
presents  many  difficulties.  Under  the  Restoration 
the  French  Government  was  alienated  from  England 
and  sympathised  with  Russia.  The  policy  of  Louis 
Philippe,  though  more  friendly  to  England,  was  too 
vacillating  and  timorous  to  inspire  British  statesmen 
with  confidence  ;  and  the  recent  talk  of  French  officers 
about  an  invasion  of  England  has  naturally  increased 
the  distrust  towards  France  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Channel.  The  subordinate  British  agents  in  the  East, 
on  the  other  hand,  show  an  extreme  jealousy  of  their 
French  colleagues,  and  instead  of  acting  hand  in  hand 

o          '  o 

with  them  in  matters  where  the  two  countries  have  a 
common  interest,  they  often  foil  them  at  the  risk  of 
injuring  the  interests  of  their  own  country.  The 
struggle  which  has  begun  between  the  Protestant 
propaganda  and  Roman  Catholicism  in  the  East  may 
add  to  these  difficulties.  Yet  they  must  be  overcome 
in  view  of  the  supreme  interest  of  justice,  of  the 
common  good,  of  the  security  of  all  Europe,  and  of 
the  dignity  of  the  two  Powers  which  are  its  true 
guardians.  A  sincere,  decided,  and  persevering  line 


THE  CRIMEAN  WAR  351 

of  conduct  will  remove  many  obstacles,  and  if  frank 
communications  and  friendly  overtures  do  not  prove 
sufficient,  France  should  prove  her  sincerity  by  at 
once  offering  to  act  in  concert  with  England  in  any 
warlike  step  she  might  propose  to  take.  Russia  and 
Austria  should  not  be  allowed  any  longer  to  pose  as 
the  protectors  of  the  Christian  subjects  of  the  Porte. 
It  should  be  pointed  out  to  the  Sultan  that  if  in  his 
relations  with  his  Christian  subjects  he  acts  at  the 
dictation  of  his  two  enemies,  he  will  only  humiliate 
himself  in  the  eyes  of  the  peoples  under  his  rule, 
while  if  he  listens  to  the  counsels  of  his  allies,  he  will 
gain  both  in  security  and  in  strength.  To  put  a  stop 
to  the  abuses  of  the  Turks  with  regard  to  the 