

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — The  new  French  Ministry 
is  strongly  inclined  to  go  hand-iii-hand  with  England ; 
and  this  would  add  weight  to  your  representations  at 
Vienna. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — It  would  no  doubt  facilitate 
our  action,  but  France  must  first  reassure  Austria  as 
to  Italy.  She  must  be  disabused  of  the  idea  that  we 
are  revolutionists,  and  she  must  be  able  to  rely  upon 
our  support  in  the  event  of  a  war  with  Russia  ;  biit 


TURKEY  AND  RUSSIA  343 

she  does  not  trust  us.  I  know  that  many  people 
whose  opinions  I  respect  are  in  favour  of  sending  our 
fleet  into  the  Black  Sea,  but  I  have  fully  considered 
the  matter  and  I,  do  not  see  how  such  a  course  would 
be  either  desirable  or  practicable.  .  .  .  Besides,  it 
would  be  a  bad  plan  to  try  to  secure  the  Sultan's  inde- 
pendence by  forcing  his  hand. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — You  have  often  done  such  a 
thing,  as  at  Naples  and  Copenhagen. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — At  Constantinople,  more  than 
anywhere  else,  good  can  be  done  and  evil  prevented 
by  an  increase  of 'moral  influence.  Our  influence,  joined 
to  that  of  France  and  Austria,  would  produce  an  effect 
upon  Russia  which  might  be  attained  without  a  war. 
She  will  not  be  allowed  to  make  any  more  victims. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — Yes,  but  how  about  those 
she  has  made  already  ?  Your  policy  ought  to  satisfy 
Russia  entirely  if  she  is  reasonable.  She  has  taken  so 
much  that  she  can  wish  for  little  more.  She  is  allowed 
to  tear  up  and  devour  at  her  leisure  all  she  has 
unjustly  appropriated,  and  the  sufferings  of  her  victims 
are  not  even  recognised. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — I  know  that  fresh  horrors  have 
been  perpetrated  in  Poland  of  which  people  have  no 
idea  ;  but  this  can  only  be  remedied  by  a  war.  Yet 
who  knows  ?  If  we  could  only  [inspire  Austria  with 
full  confidence  in  us  and  detach  her  from  Russia,  I  am 
convinced  that  her  moral  influence  might  have  a  good 
effect  on  the  fate  of  Poland. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — The  Opposition  seems  very 
warlike,  and  it  would  probably  support  you  in  a  war- 
like policy. 


344       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — Yes,  they  want  us  to  augment 
the  army  and  the  fleet ;  but  when  the  money  will  have 
to  be  found  they  will  oppose  every  new  tax  and  leave 
us  in  the  lurch.  These  are  the  usual  tactics  of 
the  party,  and  we  are  not  going  to  be  duped  by 
them. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

LETTER    FROM    THE    DUKE    OP    SUSSEX. 

ONE  of  the  most  ardent  supporters  and  patrons  of  the 
Literary  Association  of  the  Friends  of  Poland  was 
H.R.H.  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  who  used  to  say  that 
he  once  wore  the  Polish  crown,  as  that  of  the  latest 
Polish  King,  Stanislas  Augustus,  was  put  on  his 
head  by  the  guardian  of  the  crown  jewels  at  Berlin 
when  he  visited  that  city.  The  following  letter  is  in 
reply  to  one  from  Prince  Czartoryski  thanking  him 
for  a  speech  he  made  at  a  meeting  of  the  Associ- 
ation :— 