

*  Formed  of  Poles  who  had  taken  service  with  the  Sultan. 


THE  CRIMEAN  WAR  353 

them  under  the  national  (Polish)  standard.  Finally, 
while  the  English  and  French  fleets  would  threaten 
Riga,  Revel,  and  Cronstadt,  thereby  forcing  Russia 
to  keep  a  large  force  at  those  places,  an  expeditionary 
corps  landed  in  Lithuania  would  produce  most  decisive 
results,  for  it  would  penetrate  into  the  very  heart,  so 
to  say,  of  European  Russia.  It  will  be  for  experienced 
naval  officers  to  determine  at  which  point  of  the  coast 
of  Lithuania,  or  the  adjoining  coast  of  Courland,  the 
landing  could  most  easily  be  effected.  The  corps 
should  consist  of  from  30,000  to  40,000  men.  It 
would  find  itself  in  a  wooded  country  surrounded  by 
marshes  and  lakes,  well  suited  to  a  guerilla  war,  and 
lying  across  the  chief  line  of  communication  between 
the  capital  and  the  western  frontier.  This  country  is  in- 
habited by  a  Roman  Catholic  people  who  are  thoroughly 
Polish  in  sentiment,  and  would  at  once  join  the 
national  standard.  The  combined  force,  after  securing 
its  communications  with  the  sea,  could  then  either 
assist  the  fleet  in  an  attack  upon  Riga,  or  march  upon 
Wilna,  supplying  the  people  with  arms,  destroying 
the  military  magazines  of  the  Russians,  and  cutting 
off  the  Russian  forces  in  the  north  from  those  in  the 
west  and  south.' 

Prince  Czartoryski's  scheme,  it  will  be  seen,  aimed 
at  striking  Russia  where  she  is"  most  vulnerable — in 
Poland.  But  the  allies,  fearing  to  raise  Austria  and 
Prussia  against  them,  only  adopted  that  part  of  it 
which  relates  to  the  Crimea  and  the  Baltic.  More- 
over— as  was  said  by  Lord  Palmerston  to  General 
Zamoyski  when  the  latter  proposed  that  the  Polish 
legion,  which  formed  part  of  the  Turkish  Contingent 

VOL.  n.  z 


354       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

during  the  war,  and  was  paid  by  England,  should  be 
allowed  to  carry  the  Polish  flag — the  allies  did  not 
wish  '  to  make  an  enemy  of  Russia.'  It  was  not 
to  be  a  war  '  h,  outrance,'  but  a  mere  trial  of  strength; 
Russia  was  not  to  be  crippled,  but  only  to  be  forced  to 
abandon  (for  a  time)  her  designs  on  Turkey  and  the 
Black  Sea.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  not  sur- 
prising, though  surprise  has  been  expressed  on  the 
subject  by  some  English  writers,  that  the  Poles 
should  during  the  war  have  maintained  a  passive 
attitude.  There  were  100,000  Russian  troops  in 
their  country ;  the  Poles  were  without  arms  or  war 
material  of  any  kind  ;  and  they  were  not  willing  to 
be  massacred  pour  les  beaux  yeux  of  England  and 
France.  The  following  passages  from  a  letter  ad- 
dressed by  Prince  Czartoryski  to  his  countrymen  on 
the  26th  of  August  1854,  throw  an  interesting  light 
on  the  views  of  the  leading  Poles  at  this  period  :— 