

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — You  might  act  without 
compromising  yourselves  officially.  In  Russia  every- 
thing is  done  by  the  Government ;  in  England  much 
is  left  to  the  initiative  of  individuals  acting  in  a 
private  capacity.  You  might  help  the  Circassians  by 
private  effort  without  open  Government  intervention. 


CIRCASSIA  341 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — Possibly  ;  but  we  have  no 
secret  funds  which  we  could  employ  for  such  a  purpose. 
Besides,  it  would  soon  be  known ;  nothing  can  long 
remain  a  secret  in  our  country. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — But  then  you  are  not  on 
equal  terms  with  Russia.  She  does  not  scruple  to  use 
every  possible  means  of  injuring  you. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — That  is  an  advantage  enjoyed 
by  despotic  States.  Free  States  have  other  advan- 
tages. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — By  leaving  Russia  to  act 
as  she  pleases  you  expose  to  the  greatest  dangers  the 
independence  of  the  Asiatic  States,  and  your  own 
dominions  in  India. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — True  ;  but  John  Bull  will  not 
go  to  war  to  save  Circassia. 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — It  is  not  only  the  fate  of 
Circassia  that  is  in  question.  You  are  losing  all  your 
influence  over  the  Sultan  ;  already  he  has  accepted 
the  demands  of  Russia  as  to  Walla chia,  and  if  you 
continue  your  policy  of  non-intervention  he  may 
abandon  you  altogether. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — I  do  not  believe  it.  Our 
influence  is  like  the  tide,  which,  though  it  advances 
and  then  recedes,  yet  steadily  gains  ground. 
Mehemet  Ali  is  an  animal  that  Russia  is  fattening 
before  she  sacrifices  him.  .  .  .  Russia  is  unfortu- 
nately surrounded  by  weak  neighbours  like  Turkey 
and  Sweden,  and  by  others  attached  to  her  either 
by  an  alliance  of  fear  (Austria)  or  an  alliance  of 
relationship  (Prussia). 

PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI. — So  long  as  Poland  remains 


342       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

divided  between  the  three  Northern  Powers,  you 
cannot  rely  upon  Austria. 

LORD  PALMERSTON. — No  doubt ;  but  how  are  we 
to  induce  her  to  change  her  policy  ?  Prince  Metter- 
nich  is  undoubtedly  a  man  of  great  talent,  but  he  is 
timid  and  prejudiced;  he  fears  revolution  more  than 
anything  else.  He  is  accustomed  to  the  admiration 
and  incense  of  his  coterie,  who  are  offended  if  he  is 
only  praised  in  ordinary  language.  He  cannot  be 
persuaded  that  anything  he  thinks  or  does  is  not  right. 
Besides,  if  there  were  an  independent  Poland,  do  you 
think  Bohemia  and  Hungary  would  not  claim  inde- 
pendence too  ?  Poland  would  no  doubt  want  a  repre- 
sentative Government,  which  implies  a  parliament, 
freedom  of  speech,  and  a  free  press.  The  very  idea 
of  these  institutions  would  make  Metternich's  hair 
stand  on  end,  he  is  so  accustomed  to  be  adored  with- 
out the  slightest  opposition  in  his  drawing-room.  He 
said  once  that  he  would  rather  be  a  convict  than  a 
Minister  in  a  free  country.  I  do  not  think  he  would 
ever  consent  to  the  restoration  of  Poland  unless  there 
were  a  war,  in  which  case  Austria  might  find  the 
Poles  useful  for  defence  or  aggression. 