

o 

Christians  would  be  to  render  a  signal  service  to  the 
Ottoman  Empire  and  furnish  it  with  the  most  efficacious 
guarantee  against  its  early  dissolution.' 

In  a  further  note,  dated  the  28th  of  March  1854 
(the  date  of  the  declaration  of  war  against  Russia), 
Prince  Czartoryski  gave  some  valuable  hints  ao  to 
the  best  means  of  carrying  on  a  war  against  Russia 
by  England  and  France.  ( Russia/  he  says,  '  is 
defended  on  the  west  by  the  two  German  Powers,  and 
cannot  be  reached  from  that  side  so  long  as  their 
neutrality  is  maintained  and  respected.  But  her 
frontier  may  be  attacked  at  other  points  with  advan- 
tage. The  first  of  these  is  the  Crimea  and  the 
adjacent  territories.  The  second  is  the  Lower  Danube 
and  the  Polish  Ukraine  on  the  borders  of  the  Black 
Sea.  The  third  is  the  coast  of  Lithuania  on  the  Baltic. 
These  three  points,  if  attacked  simultaneously,  would 
all  have  the  advantage  of  being  in  territories  inhabited 


352       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

by  populations  which  wish  to  throw  off  the  Russian 
yoke.  It  would  first  be  necessary  to  conquer  the 
Crimea  and  Sebastopol,  which  would  entail  the 
destruction  of  the  enemy's  fleet ;  next,  and  if  possible 
at  the  same  time,  to  occupy  with  an  expeditionary 
force  the  country  between  Batoum  and  Anaklea.  The 
Russian  part  of  the  coast,  being  undefended  on  the 
side  of  the  sea,  could  be  easily  captured  in  a  few 
hours.  The  country  is  surrounded  by  mountains 
which  cannot  be  crossed  by  an  army  with  artillery,  so 
that  the  expeditionary  corps,  being  master  of  the  sea, 
would  be  perfectly  safe,  and  would  be  able,  together 
with  the  Turkish  troops  in  Armenia,  to  march  on 
Tiflis  by  way  of  Kutais  and  Gori.  The  people  of  the 
Caucasus,  who  would  be  supplied  with  arms  and 
ammunition,  would  rise  en  masse  from  the  Caspian  to 
the  Black  Sea ;  while  the  Georgians  and  Imeritians, 
who  also  are  far  from  satisfied  with  the  methods  of 
Russian  Government,  would  ask  to  be  allowed  to  con- 
stitute a  separate  State  as  formerly.  As  the  Russian 
army  in  these  districts  contains  a  great  many  Poles,  it 
would  be  desirable  to  attract  them  to  the  armies  of 
the  allies  by  displaying  the  Polish  flag.  At  the  second 
point  of  attack — the  Lower  Danube  and  the  Polish 
Ukraine — the  allied  armies  would  find  themselves  in 
a  country  rich  in  grain  and  with  a  numerous  and 
friendly  population  and  large  towns.  The  Cossack 
legion,*  if  raised  to  10,000  men,  with  a  corresponding 
proportion  of  infantry  and  artillery,  would  here 
render  important  services.  The  people  would  regard 
them  as  their  brothers  and  co-religionists,  and  would  join 