

Another  matter  to  which  the  Prince  devoted 
much  attention  was  the  introduction  of  the  Polish 
question  in  Parliament.  Neither  the  adherents  of 
the  Ministry  nor  the  members  of  the  Opposition  were 
inclined  to  take  such  a  course,  the  former  because 
they  feared  it  would  embarrass  the  Government,  and 
the  latter  because  they  looked  upon  the  Poles  as 


THE  POLISH  QUESTION  IX  PARLIAMENT        335 

revolutionists.  At  length  Mr  Cutlar  Fergusson,  M.P., 
an  independent  member  with  a  good  position  in  the 
House  and  considerable  talent  as  a  speaker,  consented, 
after  consulting  Lord  Palmerston  and  Sir  James 
Mackintosh,  to  undertake  the  task.  As  his  motion 
would  necessarily  have  to  be  based  on  the  Treaty  of 
Vienna,  he  had  to  be  supplied  with  as  much  informa- 
tion as  possible  on  the  subject ;  unfortunately  the 
Prince  no  longer  had  his  papers  relating  to  the  Vienna 
Congress,  including  despatches  from  Pozzo  di  Borgo, 
Stein,  and  Castlereagh,  as  they  had  been  taken  out  of 
his  wife's  carriage  by  the  Austrian  customs'  authorities. 
Ample  material,  was,  however,  collected  by  the  Prince 
and  his  untiring  companion  and  friend  Niemcewicz 
for  the  proposed  debate,  but  the  Belgian  Question 
and  the  Reform  Bill  prevented  its  coming  on  so  soon 
as  was  hoped,  and  finding  that  for  the  present  there 
was  nothing  to  be  done,  and  that  his  slender  resources 
were  being  exhausted  by  the  expense  of  living  in 
London,  the  Prince  left  in  March,  1832,  for  Clifton, 
where  he  could  live  more  cheaply  and  have  more  quiet 
for  his  political  and  literary  work.  He  also  wanted 
to  become  more  closely  acquainted  with  rural  life  in 
England,  that  being  the  country  which  he  liked 
better  than  any  other,  and  where  he  hoped  ultimately 
to  settle  with  his  family.  He  returned  to  London  at 
the  end  of  March  for  the  Polish  debate  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  which  took  place  on  the  18th  of  April. 
In  June  the  Prince's  family*  also  came  to  London, 

*  The  Prince  married  on  the  25th  of  September  1817,  the  Princess  Anna, 
daughter  of  Prince  Alexander  Sapieha-Kodenski.  He  had  three  children  :  Prince 
Witold,  who  died  on  the  14th  of  November  18G5,  Princess  Isa,  and  Prince  Ladislas, 
tue  present  head  of  the  family. 


336       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

but  the  English  climate  acted  so  injuriously  on  his 
wife's  health  that  he  was  obliged  to  give  up  his 
plan  of  settling  in  England,  and  at  the  end  of 
August  he  took  up  his  residence  in  Paris.  During 
the  interval  two  more  interesting  debates  on  Poland 
occurred  in  the  House  of  Commons.  The  first 
was  on  the  28th  of  June ;  the  subject  was  again 
introduced  by  Mr  Cutlar  Fergusson,  who  was  seconded 
by  Lord  Sandon  (afterwards  the  Earl  of  Harrowby). 
As  on  the  previous  occasion,  the  condemnation  of 
Kussia's  proceedings  in  Poland  was  unanimous.  Lord 
Morpeth  spoke  of  '  the  immortal  memory  of  the  land 
that  first  resisted  the  torrent  of  Mahommedan  inva- 
sion and  secured  the  liberties  and  the  religion  of 
Europe,'  and  O'Connell  even  went  so  far  as  to  call  the 
Emperor  Nicholas  '  a  miscreant.'  This  elicited  an 
expression  of  regret  from  Lord  Palmerston  at  the  use 
of  such  language  in  the  House,  upon  which  Mr 
Beaumont  declared  he  was  delighted  at  the  appella- 
tion which  had  been  given  to  the  Emperor,  and 
entirely  concurred  in  it ;  and  Mr  Hume  said  he  would 
not  only  call  the  Emperor  a  miscreant,  but  a  monster 
in  human  form.  But  nothing  was  to  be  done  by 
denunciation,  however  eloquent.  Poland  was  in  the 
iron  grasp  of  three  of  the  strongest  States  in  Europe, 
and  England  had  no  power  to  help  her. 