

Agreez,  mon  cher  Prince,  les  assurances  de  mon 
sincere  estirne  et  de  ma  haute  consideration,  aussi  de 
mon  amitie,  avec  lesquelles  j'ai  le  plaisir  de  me  dire 

Yotre  devoue  et  sincere  ami, 

(signed)     FREDERIC,  DUC  DE  SUSSEX. 

Au  PALAIS  DE  KENSINGTON, 
ce  16  de  Juillet,  1839. 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

1853-5 

POLISH      MEDAL     TO      LORD     PALMERSTON. PRINCE     CZARTORYSKI    AND 

NAPOLEON  III. THE  CRIMEAN  WAR. 

ALTHOUGH  Lord  Palinerston  did  not  conceal  from 
Prince  Czartoryski  his  conviction  that  in  the  state  of 
affairs  which  then  prevailed  on  the  Continent  nothing 
could  be  done  for  Poland,  the  noble  character  of  the 
Prince,  his  devoted  patriotism,  and  his  wide  knowledge 
and  experience  of  European  politics,  made  him  a 
welcome  visitor  at  the  Foreign  Office,  and  Lord  Palmer- 
ston  repeatedly  took  occasion  to  express  his  admiration 
and  sympathy  for  the  Polish  nation  and  its  venerable 
chief.  After  the  last  spark  of  Polish  independence 
had  been  extinguished  by  the  absorption  of  the 
Republic  of  Cracow  into  the  Austrian  State,  not- 
withstanding the  protests  of  England  and  France— 
which  as  usual  remained  fruitless  in  presence  of  the 
alliance  of  the  three  spoilers  of  Poland — Lord  Palmer- 
ston  made  some  appreciative  remarks  in  a  speech  at 
the  Mansion  House  on  the  devotion  of  Lord  Dudley 
Stuart  to  the  Polish  cause,  arid  a  deputation  from  the 
Polish  Historical  Society  took  the  opportunity  of 
presenting  him,  in  recognition  of  his  sympathy  for  the 


PRINCE  CZARTORYSKI  AND  NAPOLEON  III     349 

Poles,  with  a  medal  of  Prince  Czartoryski,  on  which 
was  the  inscription :  '  H.  T.  P.  Vice  Comiti  Palmerston 
quia  memor  exstat  fandi  atque  nefandi.  Societas 
Historica  Polona  grata  offert.' 

In  1853,  when  the  Prince  came  to  London  to  sound 
the  disposition  of  the  Ministry  in  view  of  the  crisis  in 
the  East,  he  records  in  his  diary  (June  27)  that  he 
found  Lord  Aberdeen  '  abaissd  ;  il  a  Fair  de  succomber 
sous  le  poids  de  la.responsabiliteV  A  few  days  after 
he  saw  Lord  Clarendon,  Palmerston  and  Disraeli.  The 
former  gave  him  an  impression  of '  indecision — desir  de 
conserver  la  paix.'  His  description  of  Palmerston  is 
'  visage  de  bois,  regard  impassible,  bouche  close,  pas 
un  mot  de  reponse  a  tous  mes  arguments,'  and  of 
Disraeli,  '  excellent  pour  la  bonne  cause  ;  nous  causons 
en  parfaite  amitie  sur  la  Pologne.'  Lord  Malmesbury 
called  upon  him  and  expressed  '  excellentes  intentions.' 

In  Paris  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski  was  one  of 
Napoleon  Ill's  most  trusted  counsellors,  and  he  sent 
numerous  memoranda  to  the  Emperor  on  the  conduct 
of  the  Russian  campaign  which,  though  the  Prince  was 
then  eighty -three  years  of  age,  entered  minutely  into 
every  detail  and  showed  an  extraordinary  power  of  re- 
membering past  events  and  adapting^the  knowledge 
derived  from  them  to  existing  circumstances.  He 
was  a  warm  advocate  of  an  Anglo-French  alliance, 
and  in  a  memorandum*  addressed  to  the  French 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  on  the  10th  of  February 
1853,  he  pointed  out  that  such  an  alliance  would  be 
the  only  means  of  preventing  the  encroachments  of 