


CHAPTER  XXVI 

1834 

TALLEYRAND    AND    PALMERSTON. CONVERSATION    WITH     BROUGHAM. 

LORD  DURHAM. 

THERE  is  a  curious  note  in  Prince  Czartoryski's  diary, 
dated  the  12th  November  1834,  on  the  relations 
between  Talleyrand  and  Lord  Palrnerston.  'Talley- 
rand,' he  says,  '  formerly  in  strict  friendship  with 
Palmerston,  has  now  had  a  little  quarrel  with  him 
because,  when  the  latter  complained  that  France  did 
not  respond  to  the  overtures  of  England  in  the  Eastern 
question,  Talleyrand  replied  that  France  was  only 
following  the  example  of  England  when  she  was  asked 
to  act  with  France  on  behalf  of  Poland  during  the 
Revolution  of  1831.'  In  a  subsequent  conversation 
with  Lord  Brougham  (14th  December  1834)  the  latter 
said  of  Talleyrand— '  I  think  he  does  not  just  now  know 
what  he  is  talking  about.  Imaginez  qu'il  m'a  parle  de 
la  necessite  de  rassembler  un  Congres  Europeen  qui 
aurait  pour  but  de  garantir  les  institutions  existantes, 
et  pour  calmer  les  esprits,  et  qu'a  ce  Congres  la  France 
et  1'Angleterre  declareraient  qu'ils  mettraient  des 
limites  a  la  licence  de  la  presse.  C'est  de  la  demence.' 
During  the  same  conversation  Brougham  said  that 

VOL.  II.  Y 


338      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

the  reason  why  the  English  Government  had  refused 
to  join  in  a  demonstration  in  favour  of  Poland  in  1832 
together  with  France,  and  with  the  concurrence  of 

O  ' 

Austria,  was  that  it  would  have  been  necessary  to 
arm,  and  the  Ministry  was  uncertain  of  its  existence 
in  consequence  of  the  Reform  bill.  He  called  Thiers 
'  un  petit  litterateur,'  and  said  that  even  Lord  Durham 
had  not  been  able  to  say  a  word  at  St  Petersburg. 
Prince  Czartoryski  here  remarked  that  Lord  Durham 
had  told  him  he  had  spoken  very  strongly  on  the 
subject  of  Poland  at  St  Petersburg.  '  Oui  bien/ 
answered  Brougham,  'a  M.  de  Nesselrode ;  niais  a 
1'Empereur  lui-me'me  il  n'a  pas  ose  dire  un  seul  mot, 
parcequ'il  lui  ferait  la  cour  pour  obtenir  un  cordon. 
C'est  Fhomme  le  plus  vain,  le  plus  aristocrate,  qui 
existe.  II  a  tourmente  pendant  dix-huit  mois  Lord 
Grey  parcequ'il  ne  1'a  pas  fait  de  suite  comte.  II  a 
ete  contre  Lord  Grey  pendant  le  Ministere  Canning, 
qui  1'a  fait  entrer  a  la  chambre  des  pairs.  Ce  qui  a 
6te  mal  calcule,  parceque  dans  la  chambre  des  com- 
munes il  avait  quelque  influence,  au  lieu  que  dans  la 
chambre  haute  il  ri'en  a  aucune.  C'est  mon  ami,  et 
cependant  je  ne  puis  m'empdcher  de  le  dire.  On  a 
voulu  nous  brouiller,  je  n'ai  rien  dit  de  ce  que  in'on  a 
attribue;  ce  sont  les  journaux  qui  ont  fait  ce  pate.' 
He  afterwards  proposed  to  the  Prince  to  go  to  Italy 
with  him.  '  If  you  do/  he  added,  '  people  will  say  we 
are  plotting  for  Poland,  and  I  shall  be  delighted.' 