

'  It   has    been   said    that    you    have    everywhere 
entered   into  a  conspiracy  of  calmness  and  wisdom. 
Let   us  strive   to  justify  this    charge.     Receive  ad- 
vances  and    offers    from    whatever    side    they   may 
come,    but    before    taking    action    insist    upon    sub- 
stantial guarantees  for  your  future.     Such  guarantees 
would  be  afforded  by  the  creation  of  a  Polish  force 
under  Polish  leaders,  to  serve  as  a  nucleus  for  an  army 
to  be  formed  out  of  those  whose  ranks  are  filled  by  our 
countrymen  ;  by  the  recognition  of  independent  Polish 
authorities ;  and  by  a  declaration  on  the  part  of  the 
Powers,    or   any  one    of  them    with  the   consent   of 
its  allies,  that  Poland  has  a  right  to  an  independent 
existence.  .  .  .  We  have  been  too  often  deceived  by 


THE  CRIMEAN  WAR  355 

promises,  and  been  made  the  victims  of  our  too  adven- 
turous and  trusting  spirit.  My  advice  and  that  of  all 
the  sincere  friends  of  Poland  is  that  you  should  keep 
quiet  and  wait  events.  This  is  not,  as  some  suppose, 
a  proof  of  apathy,  but  of  wisdom  and  prudence  ;  of  the 
strength  of  a  nation  which  knows  how  to  restrain  it- 
self, and  which  will  only  show  the  more  energy  when 
the  time  of  action  arrives.' 

What  his  own  course  would  be  in  such  an  event  he 
had  already  stated  in  an  address  to  the  Polish  Histori- 
cal Society.  '  When,'  he  said,  '  the  decisive  moment 
comes,  I  will  go  with  my  sons  where  duty  calls  me, 
and  will  not  hesitate  to  give  up  to  my  country,  which 
I  have  served  all  my  life,  the  last  remnants  of  my 
strength  and  my  abilities.' 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

1855-Gl 


LAST   DAYS 


THE  following  are  extracts  from  letters  sent  by  the 
Prince  to  London  durin    the  Crimean  War  :  — 


'  16th  MM/  1854. 

'  Sweden  is  ready  for  everything,  and  wishes  to 
act  with  considerable  forces.  She  asks  and  offers  to 
join  the  allies.  What  folly  if  they  refuse  !  Clarendon 
knows  all  about  it,  and  I  hear  would  like  to  accept. 
The  negotiation  is  being  conducted  through  his 
brother  Charles  Villiers.  Here  (in  Paris)  all  is  for 
peace.  Persigny  now  declares  that  the  naval  superi- 
ority of  the  Powers  is  sufficient.' 

'19th  May  1854. 

1  The  allies  can  only  expect  a  fruitful  result  from 
the  war  in  the  alliance  of  Sweden,  who  is  ready  and 
willing  to  act  at  once,  and  of  Poland,  who  only  waits 
to  be  called  upon  and  armed.  These  are  the  only 
real  allies  of  the  Western  Powers.  The  Roumanians 
also  should  not  be  neglected.  ...  If  peace  is  impos- 
sible, can  the  Powers  refuse  the  overtures  of  Sweden, 


LAST  DAYS  357 

who  would  probably  be  followed  by  Austria  ?  I 
cannot  believe  that  the  British  Cabinet  would  neglect 
such  an  opportunity  or  not  use  every  means  at  its 
disposal  to  induce  Prance  also  to  take  advantage  of  it.' 