

«  ISth  December  1854. 

'  If  the  Polish  question  should  be  raised  by  the 
war,  and  Austria  be  unwilling  to  mix  up  Galicia  in  it, 
Russian  Poland  alone  would  rise  if  it  were  declared 
independent,  and  this  would  be  a  decisive  force  on  the 
side  of  the  allies.  Galicia  and  Posen  will  remain 
quiet ;  for  that  I  will  vouch.' 

'  2,0th  December  1854. 

'  On  nous  reprochait  jadis  que  nous  etions  prompts 
a  nous  jeter  en  avant  de  toutes  les  aventures ;  a 
present  nous  somnies  plus  reflechis,  moins  audacieux, 
moins  irnprudents,  et  on  nous  reproche  aussi.  Je 
crois  que  nous  avons  raison  d'etre  sages  et  de  demander 
des  garanties,  avant  d'offrir  un  devouement  sans  bornes. 
Telle  est  1'opinion  positive  du  pays,  et  telle  est  celle  de 
1'emigration,  avec  les  modifications  que  sa  position 
comporte.' 

'23rd  April  1855. 

'  Lord  Stratford  est  un  terrible  homme ;  son 
ambassade  et  les  grandes  affaires  qui  lui  ont  passe  par 
les  mains,  et  les  evenements,  qui  ne  furent  pas 
toujours  heureux,  Font  rendu  je  crois  encore  plus 
nerveux,  plus  irascible  et  difficile  a  vivre,  qu'il  ne 
1'etait  naturellement.' 


358       MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

Prince   Adam    Czartoryski's    long  life   was    now 
drawing  to  a  close.     The  Treaty  of  Paris,  which  closed 
the  Crimean    War,   was  a    great   disappointment   to 
him  ;  but  he  did  not  abandon  all  hope.     At  the  time, 
says  M.  de  Mazade  in  his  introduction  to  the  French 
edition  of  the  Memoirs,  when  the  negotiations  of  the 
Paris  Congress  were  still  going  on,  the  Prince  was 
preparing  a  fresh  memorandum  on  the  Polish  ques- 
tion, when  a  friend  informed  him  that  the  bases  of 
the  Treaty  had  been  agreed  upon,  and  that  Poland 
was   not   mentioned    in   it.      An  expression   of  pain 
passed    across   his   face;    he   stopped   writing   for   a 
moment,  but   soon  proceeded    with   his    manuscript, 
saying :  *  It  will  do  for  another   time.'      The  acces- 
sion of  Alexander  II,   notwithstanding   his  brusque 
speech   to   the    Polish    nobles — '  Point    de   reveries ! 
tout  ce  que  inon  pere  a  fait  est  bien  fait,' — seemed 
to   offer   some    prospect    of   a   change   of  system   in 
Poland,*  and  after  the  conclusion  of  the  Treaty  of 
Paris,  Prince  Adam  drew  up  an  elaborate  paper,  fully 
describing  the  rights  and  grievances  of  his  country, 
for  the  use  of  M.  de  Morny,  the  French  Ambassador 
at  the  Russian  Court,  on  his  proceeding  to  Moscow  to 
take  part  in  the  ceremony  of  the  coronation.     During 
the  first  few  years   of  his  reign,  the  new  Emperor 
seemed  almost  as  well  disposed  to  the  Poles  as  his 
uncle,    Alexander    I,    had   been.     But,  like    him,  he 
admired  liberty  in  theory  and  abhorred  it  in  practice. 
He  gave  the  Poles  some  liberal  and  national  institu- 
tions, and  persecuted  them  directly  they  made  use  of 