

*  In  M.»y  18S3,  Prin33  Orloff  told  Lonl  Clarendon  that  the  Emperor  was  well 
disposed  towards  the  Poles,  but  would  do  nothing  if  any  of  the  Powers  should 
nterfere.  (M.S.  Diary  of  Prince  Czartoryski. ) 


LAST  DAYS  359 

their  newly  acquired  liberties.  The  result  was  the 
national  movement  of  1861-2,*  in  which  the  Poles 
opposed  a  passive  resistance  to  the  oppressive  measures 
of  the  Government,  until  the  Wielopolski  decree  for 
drafting  the  youth  of  the  country  into  the  Russian 
army  drove  them  into  insurrection.  Prince  Czar- 
toryski  admired  and  praised  the  movement,  but  did 
not  live  to  see  its  sanguinary  consequence.  In  a  letter 
written  to  Count  Andrew  Zamoyski  in  his  own  hand, 
at  the  age  of  ninety-one,  a  few  months  before  his 
death,  he  says  (20  March  1861) : — 

v  For  the  last  fortnight  we  have  been  full  of  anxiety, 
emotion,  admiration,  and  inexpressible  joy,  as  if  we 
had  been  present  during  those  days  with  you  in 
Warsaw.  One  may  well  say  that  God  has  manifested 
a  great  deed  in  you.  In  one  day  he  has  raised  the 
nation  to  such  a  height  of  moral  power  as  no  other 
nation  has  ever  reached  ;  it  can  only  be  compared  to  the 
inspiration  of  the  first  Christians,  who  conquered  the 
world  armad  only  with  the  palm  of  martyrdom.  God 
forbid  that  you  should  descend  from  that  position  ;  for 
if  Poland  remains  there,  she  will  attain  her  great  object. 

*  It  is  known  that  after  the  Crimean  War  Austria  began  to  show  herself  favour- 
able to  the  Poles.  This  change  of  policy  became  more  evident  during  the  insurrec- 
tion of  1863,  and  the  Poles  in  Austria  now  have  free  institutions  and  a  national 
self-government  which  make  them  the  envy  of  their  countrymen  in  Russia  and 
Prussia.  The  following  extract  from  a  letter  addressed  to  Prince  Adam  Czartoryski 
on  the  15th  of  May  1860,  by  a  personage  holding  a  high  position  at  Vienna,  may  be 
quoted  in  this  connection  :  — 

'  On  m'a  indique"  comme  candidat  propose  (pour  le  trone  de  la  Pologne)  le  second 
fils  de  la  Reine  d'Angleterre.  On  envisage  ce  choix  comme  un  moyen  pour  calmer 
les  inquietudes  jalouses  de  la  Grande  Bretagne.  Le  Cabinet  d'ici  ne  voit  pas  d'un 
mauvais  osil  cette  question.  II  lui  sera  meme  favorable  du  jour  ou  il  saura  ce  qui  iui 
reviendra  en  echange  pour  la  Galicie.  Le  besoin  d'un  interm  Miaire  entre  I'Autric'.ie 
et  la  Russie  se  fait  sentir  tous  les  jours  davantage.  L'Empereur  F.  J.  (Fran9ois 
Joseph)  reconnait  toute  1'infamie  clu  partage  de  la  Pologne  et  toutes  les  difficulte's 
qu'il  a  amenees  a  1'Autriche .  II  s'est  exprim^  plusieurs  f ois  tres-clairement  a  ce  su  jet. 
Ces  jours-ci  cette  question  sera  portee  au  Conseil  des  Ministres  afin  de  formuler  lea 
instructions  a  donner  au  re'pre'seutant  de  la  cour  de  Vienne  a  Saint-Petersbourg.' 