


360      MEMOIRS  OF  PRINCE  ADAM  CZARTORYSKI 

'  So  long  as  the  news  which  arrived  here  only 
spoke  of  street  disturbances  and  broken  windows,  the 
Emperor  said  this  ought  to  stop,  as  the  'movement  was 
an  untimely  one  and  would  injure  the  cause  instead  of 
helping  it.  But  now,  after  the  important  events 
which  have  occurred  at  Warsaw,  showing  how  strong 
•is  the  national  spirit,  he  thinks  otherwise.  The 
Western  Powers,  at  first  not  believing  the  news,  and 
then  astonished  at  them,  cannot  as  yet  understand 
what  is  going  on  and  fear  that  the  only  result  will  be 
an  exacerbation  of  Russian  severity.  No  one  thinks 
of  giving  us  any  official  help ;  do  not  therefore  in  any 
way  reckon  upon  it;  but  be  convinced  that  if  you 
adhere  to  your  present  line  of  conduct,  public 
opinion  in  Europe  will  be  on  your  side  and  will  insist 
on  a  more  moderate  policy  on  the  part  of  Russia. 
The  present  friendly  understanding  between  that 
Power  and  France,  has  enabled  Napoleon  III  already 
to  make  confidential  representations  on  the  subject  at 
St  Petersburg. 

1  In  conclusion  I  must  again  urge  you  not  to 
descend  from  the  position  which  is  your  strength  and 
moral  support.  Let  all  good  citizens  unite  to 
strengthen  the  conviction  among  our  countrymen 
that  if  they  allow  themselves  to  be  drawn  into  an 
armed  struggle,  they  will  only  bring  upon  their 
country  fruitless  defeats,  while  by  an  unarmed  resist- 
ance to  unjustifiable  and  wicked  oppression,  they  will 
avert  it  and  gain  a  moral  victory.' 

In   the    same   spirit   th.3    Prince    addressed    his 

countrymen  in  a  speech  made  on  the  3rd  of  May,  1861. 

'  Do    not    descend,'    he    said,    '  from    the    elevation 


LAST  DAYS  361 

where  nations  and  sovereigns  must  respect  you.  By 
firmly  remaining  there  you  will  be  safer  and  more 
certain  in  seeing  your  goal  and  continually  approaching 
it.  Though  racked  by  bitter  suffering,  though  driven 
to  despair  by  treason  and  violence,  resist  the  tempta- 
tion to  fight  your  oppressors  by  meaner  weapons. 
You  shine  above  them  by  your  virtue  and  goodness  : 
these  are  the  indomitable  forces  of  Poland,  and  in 
them  lie  her  hopes  for  the  future.' 

He  died  at  Montfermeil,  near  Meaux,  on  the  15th 
of  November  1861.  Like  his  great  contemporary 
Pitt — Prime  Minister  of  England  when  he  was 
Foreign  Minister  of  Russia — Prince  Adam's  last 
words  were  of  his  country.  Pitt,  with  the  sudden 
despair  of  baffled  genius,  lamented  the  misfortunes 
which  he  thought  were  about  to  fall  on  England ; 
Czartoryski's  tender  and  hopeful  spirit  pictured  to 
him  a  new  Poland  rising  chastened  and  invigorated 
by  her  long  martyrdom.  There  was  as  little  ground 
for  despondency  in  the  one  case  as  for  hope  in  the 
other.  The  disappointment  of  Austerlitz  was  soon 
brilliantly  retrieved  by  the  British  victories  in  the 
Peninsula  and  at  Waterloo ;  the  hopes  raised  by  the 
noble  self-sacrifice  of  the  Polish  nation  perished  in 
the  midst  of  blood  and  ruin. 