

1. Typhus fever (spotted fever, exanthematic typhus—called
in France and England simply typhus, in Spain
tabardillo[2]—formerly called contagious typhus, hunger
typhus, camp fever, and Hungarian fever) is an acute
infectious disease of cyclic recurrence, which resembles
typhoid fever only in name. From the eighth to the tenth
day after infection, often somewhat sooner or later, it begins
with a chill, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, violent
headache, and psychic depression. In the first few days the
patient’s temperature rises rapidly, and on the fourth or
5fifth day a rash in the form of dull-red spots, as large as a pea,
breaks out over the entire body. These spots gradually
grow larger, and after two or three days, through the appearance
of very small haemorrhages, change into petechiae.
The apathy of which the patient first gave evidence now
gives way to wild delirium. At the end of the second week
the temperature falls rapidly, and in one or two days becomes
normal; often, however, the fall of temperature takes from
six to eight days. The duration of the entire disease, accordingly,
is from two to two and a half weeks. Death usually
occurs at the crisis of the disease—from the tenth to the
twelfth day—rarely between the sixth and ninth days or
after the twelfth.

The danger of the disease varies greatly in different
epidemics; statements regarding this point diverge according
as we refer to the statistical records of hospitals or to the
private practice of physicians. With the latter the number
of deaths is smaller, since persons suffering from the disease
in mild form less often go to the hospitals. Epidemics in
which a quarter of the patients, and even more, have succumbed
have frequently occurred, especially in war times,
during famines, &c. The cause (infective agent) of typhus
fever is not known; according to recent investigations it
is spread by vermin; Ricketts and others have fixed responsibility
for it upon the body louse. The infection is communicated
from man to man, and very often it is contracted
from the clothes, linen, and other effects of typhus patients.
Recovery from the disease usually renders a person immune
against a second attack. Typhus fever frequently appears
nowadays in the eastern and south-eastern parts of Europe,
in Hungary and Galicia, and also in Spain, Italy, and Ireland.

2. Plague appears in two forms, depending upon the place
where the infective agent enters the body: the bubonic
plague and the pneumonic plague. In the case of the former
the painful plague-sores (buboes) develop, usually two or
three days after infection, from the lymphatic glands; these
6sores,—which appear most often in the region of the groin,
less often in the axilla, on the neck, lower jaw, and in other
places,—soon suppurate. There is either a development of
toxins, which are the cause of the severe general symptoms,
or else the bacilli pestis go from the glands into the circulatory
system and cause septicaemia, which is quickly fatal. Pneumonic
plague takes the form of a catarrhal inflammation
of the lungs, causing a profuse and bloody expectoration,
which contains large quantities of bacilli. This form of the
disease almost always ends fatally in a few days. The
mortality of bubonic plague is somewhat lower; the disease
has an average duration of eight days, and carries away from
fifty to seventy per cent of its victims.