

In the Middle Ages an epidemic of plague (black death)
ravaged all Europe. At the present time it is still endemic
in India, in southern China, in Egypt, in Uganda, and perhaps
in other countries, whence it frequently develops into general
epidemics.

The infective agent in the case of plague is the bacillus
pestis, identified in 1894 by Kitasato, and subsequently, but
independently, by Yersin. Rats, which are very susceptible
to the disease, play an important rôle in spreading it; in
India the outbreak of a plague epidemic is always preceded
by the dying of large numbers of rats. Their excrement contains
large quantities of bacilli, which may be destructive to
human beings. The rat-flea is also known to carry the
infection. The infection may be conveyed directly by plague
patients, when the buboes suppurate, or when the blood
becomes generally infected with the bacilli pestis, which
are contained in abundance in the sputum, urine, and
excrement, or when the lungs are affected and the patient
charges the atmosphere by coughing. One who has recovered
from the disease is usually immune for life.

3. Cholera, after an incubation period of two to eight days,
begins with frequent (ten to twenty times a day) vomitings
of a fluid like rice-water, and incessant retching. The patient,
7owing to the great loss of water, sinks rapidly; he acquires
a corpse-like appearance, loses consciousness, and death may
result on the first or second day. If the attack is survived,
the patient frequently dies from sheer exhaustion afterwards.
The mortality of cholera is great—from forty to fifty per
cent of its victims die. In this calculation the numerous
cases of cholerine, that are always prevalent during cholera
times, are excluded. Recovery from the disease does not
protect a person against contracting it again. The infective
germ in the case of cholera is the ‘comma bacillus’, discovered
by Robert Koch in 1883. The spread of cholera
is caused by the penetration of the comma bacillus into the
alimentary canal, resulting from contact with objects which
have been contaminated by the evacuations of cholera
patients; less frequently it is indirectly caused by the
pollution, from evacuations, of water used for drinking or
washing purposes.

4. Dysentery has always played an important rôle in
military campaigns. To be sure, it is not very dangerous,
so far as the patient’s life is concerned, but in war times,
owing to irregular nursing and scanty nourishment, and the
consequent use of unsuitable food, it may spread over a large
territory and be very destructive to large numbers of soldiers
and other people.

There are two distinct forms of the disease—amoebic
dysentery and bacillary dysentery. The latter is caused
by the bacillus pyocyaneus, discovered independently by
Stiga, Kruse, and Flexner. The disease used to be common
throughout Europe; at the present time it appears in Central
and Western Europe only in small epidemics, whereas in
Eastern Europe it spreads over large territories. It causes
frequent, often blood-coloured, defecations, accompanied by
griping pains in the abdomen and a distressing pressure
(tenesmus). The disease lasts from one to one and a half
weeks, but for a long time after recovery the patient’s
alimentary canal is very sensitive to improper nourishment.
8The disease is transmitted either by direct contact, since the
evacuations of the bowels contain large quantities of bacilli,
or by infected water. Amoebic dysentery, occurring in
tropical countries (Southern Europe, Egypt, Southern Asia,
Central America, &c.), is much more dangerous; it is caused
by an amoeba, carefully studied by Kartulis, and very often
acquires a chronic character, sometimes causing abscess of
the liver.