

7. Scorbutus (scurvy) used to be a common disease on
ships, in prisons, and in times of famine; it appeared with
the greatest malignancy in besieged cities—Thorn, Nuremberg,
Alexandria, Port Arthur, &c. The real cause of the
10disease is unknown, although too much food of one kind,
particularly lack of fresh vegetables, together with long
confinement in poorly ventilated and dark rooms, are
important causative factors. Inasmuch as the disease almost
always appears in the form of an epidemic, it is probable
that there is a specific infective agent. It begins with a
general feeling of weakness; the skin and mucous membranes
become pale and sallow, the gums become inflamed and
ulcerated, and small and large extravasations of blood take
place in the skin and muscles, and at the joints and knuckles.
In serious cases haemorrhages occur in the intestines, kidneys,
bladder, and uterus. A change of diet and surroundings will
quickly cure scurvy; otherwise progressive anaemia will
result in death.

11

## CHAPTER II
THE TIME BEFORE THE THIRTY YEARS’ WAR

Numerous as are the historical notices in former years
regarding the destruction of armies by pestilence, correspondingly
few are the detailed reports on the spread of
pestilence among the non-belligerent population. The best-known
example from antiquity is the Plague of Athens
(430–425 B.C.), described by Thucydides. The plague began
in the second year of the Peloponnesian War, a few days after
the invasion of the Peloponnesians. That it is famous is
due to the classical description of it by Thucydides, himself
a sufferer from the disease. The Plague of Athens broke out
in the Piraeus, a fact which has led to the inference that it
was borne thither by mariners from Egypt. At the time of
the invasion of the Peloponnesians, thousands of country
people fled to the city of Athens, which on the advice of
Pericles opened its gates to them; thus more than 400,000
people were crowded together within its walls. The first
outbreak of the plague lasted two years, then there was an
intermission of a year and a half, whereupon it commenced
anew. The second outbreak, according to Diodorus, carried
away 4,400 hoplites, 300 cavalrymen, a large (but uncertain)
number of other soldiers, and 10,000 women and slaves. The
plague also penetrated to other places, sparing, however,
the Peloponnesus. The nature of the sickness described by
Thucydides cannot be positively determined; it has been
referred to as bubonic plague (Sprengel), as small-pox
(Krause-Daremberg, Kobert), as typhus fever (Häser,
Kanngiesser), as typhoid fever (Seitz), and even as anthrax.
All we know for certain is that it was some highly infectious
12disease, recovery from which rendered a person immune.
Krauss and Hecker believe that it was a special disease
(‘antique plague’), which no longer occurs.[3]

The Plague of the Antonines, also called the ‘Plague of
Galen’, which ravaged Italy in A.D. 166–8, has also been
brought into connexion with warlike events. Avidius
Cassius, who preceded Verus in command of the army, had
been sent to Syria for the purpose of suppressing a rebellion,
and there, after the capture of Seleucia, the plague broke
out. It was borne by the troops back to Rome, where, after
the triumphal procession of 166, it spread far and wide, so
that it was necessary to load its victims on wagons and
carry them off for burial. The plague spread from Italy to
Gaul, to the very banks of the Rhine, and a large part of
the province was literally depopulated—decayed and deserted
villages were found everywhere. Häser inclines to the view
that it was an epidemic of small-pox, while Laveran, Hecker,
Krause, and Littré believe that it was neither small-pox nor
typhus fever, but ‘antique plague’.[4]