

5. Typhoid fever (called in England ‘enteric fever’, in
France ‘fièvre typhoïde’, in Italy ‘febbre tifoidea’) in
many wars has been very widespread among the armies; for
example, in the American Civil War, in the Franco-German
War (Metz), and in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–8.
The progress of the disease is well known; between the time
of infection and the outbreak of the sickness nine to eleven
days usually intervene, sometimes even as much as three
weeks. In the first week the temperature of the patient
rises slowly, during the second week it remains at about
the same height, while in the third week it abates considerably,
becoming normal in the course of the fourth week.
The spleen enlarges a great deal, and in the second week
small pale-red spots (roseola), scarcely as large as a pea,
appear on the buttocks and especially on the belly. The
patient’s bowel-movements, at first normal, now becomes
diarrhoeal, while certain psychic disorders also manifest
themselves, usually in the form of a heavy somnolence. In
the third week the patient’s life is threatened by complications
in the intestines—haemorrhage or perforation. Characteristic
of the disease are the anatomical changes of the small
intestine—at first enlargement, and later ulceration of
Peyer’s patches. The infective agent in the case of typhoid
fever is a bacillus, identified by Gaffky in 1882. It lodges in
the alimentary canal, and is conveyed by food that has been
touched with hands to which matter containing the bacillus
has adhered, or else in contaminated water used for drinking
or other purposes. From eight to ten per cent of the patients
9die, while a single recovery usually insures immunity against
a second attack.

6. Small-pox has an incubation period of ten to fourteen
days. The disease begins with a chill, accompanied by violent
headache. On the third day the eruption appears; little
papules develop and quickly change into pustules, showing
themselves first on the face, then on the back, arms, and hands,
and finally on the legs and feet. On the ninth day the
pustules suppurate, and after that gradually dry up; if it
progresses favourably, the disease is over in two or two and
a half weeks.

In the case of small-pox the infective agent is not yet
known; infection is caused by contact with a patient, or
with objects which he is using or has used. It is particularly
dangerous to touch things on which the contents of the
pustules have dried, for such articles remain infectious for
a long time. Recovery from the disease usually renders
a person immune for life. The mortality in different epidemics
varies greatly; most dangerous of all is the so-called
‘black small-pox’ (haemorrhagic small-pox, with bleeding
in the pustules and under the skin). The total number of
deaths in an epidemic of small-pox is dependent upon whether
the disease appears in a vaccinated or an unvaccinated
community; in the latter case the mortality may reach
thirty per cent, whereas in the former case only three or
four per cent of the patients die. Vaccination renders a person
immune for eight to twelve years, while, if the disease
breaks out anywhere in spite of vaccination, the number of
fatal cases is very few. It should be noted that small-pox
was formerly dreaded, not only because of its danger to
life, but also because it frequently leaves a person disfigured
for life, and in rare instances causes total blindness.