

An appeal to reason is in order when excited feelings render
armed conflicts imminent; but it is quite as surely called
for when no excitement exists and when it may be forestalled
and prevented from developing by sound national policies.
To furnish a scientific basis for reasonable international
policies is the purpose of some of the studies already in progress
and of more that will hereafter be undertaken.

The publications of the Division of Economics and History
are under the direction of a Committee of Research, the
membership of which includes the statesmen, publicists, and
economists who participated in the Conference at Berne in
1911, and two who have since been added. The list of
members at present is as follows:

Eugène Borel, Professor of Public and International Law
in the University of Geneva.

Lujo Brentano, Professor of Economics in the University
of Munich; Member of the Royal Bavarian Academy of
Sciences.

Charles Gide, Professor of Comparative Social Economics
in the University of Paris.

H. B. Greven, Professor of Political Economy and
Statistics in the University of Leiden.

Francis W. Hirst, Editor of The Economist, London.

David Kinley, Vice-President of the University of Illinois.

Henri La Fontaine, Senator of Belgium.

His Excellency Luigi Luzzatti, Professor of Constitutional
Law in the University of Rome; Secretary of the
Treasury, 1891–3; Prime Minister of Italy, 1908–11.

Gotaro Ogawa, Professor of Finance at the University
of Kioto, Japan.

Sir George Paish, Joint Editor of The Statist, London.

viiMaffeo Pantaleoni, Professor of Political Economy in
the University of Rome.

Eugen Philippovich von Philippsberg, Professor of
Political Economy in the University of Vienna; Member
of the Austrian Herrenhaus, Hofrat.

Paul S. Reinsch, United States Minister to China.

His Excellency Baron Y. Sakatani, recently Minister of
Finance; Present Mayor of Tokio.

Theodor Schiemann, Professor of the History of Eastern
Europe in the University of Berlin.

Harald Westergaard, Professor of Political Science and
Statistics in the University of Copenhagen.

Friedrich, Freiherr von Wieser, Professor of Political
Economy at the University of Vienna.

The function of members of this Committee is to select
collaborators competent to conduct investigations and present
reports in the form of books or monographs; to consult with
these writers as to plans of study; to read the completed
manuscripts, and to inform the officers of the Endowment
whether they merit publication in its series. This editorial
function does not commit the members of the Committee to
any opinions expressed by the writers. Like other editors,
they are asked to vouch for the usefulness of the works, their
scientific and literary merit, and the advisability of issuing
them. In like manner, the publication of the monographs
does not commit the Endowment as a body or any of its
officers to the opinions which may be expressed in them.
The standing and attainments of the writers selected afford
a guarantee of thoroughness of research and accuracy in the
statement of facts, and the character of many of the works
will be such that facts, statistical, historical, and descriptive,
will constitute nearly the whole of their content. In so far as
the opinions of the writers are revealed, they are neither
approved nor condemned by the fact that the Endowment
causes them to be published. For example, the publication
of a work describing the attitude of various socialistic bodies
viiion the subject of peace and war implies nothing as to the
views of the officers of the Endowment on the subject of
socialism; neither will the issuing of a work, describing the
attitude of business classes toward peace and war, imply any
agreement or disagreement on the part of the officers of the
Endowment with the views of men of these classes as to
a protective policy, the control of monopoly, or the regulation
of banking and currency. It is necessary to know how such
men generally think and feel on the great issue of war, and it
is one of the purposes of the Endowment to promote studies
which will accurately reveal their attitude. Neither it nor
its Committee of Research vouches for more than that the
works issued by them contain such facts; that their statements
concerning them may generally be trusted, and that
the works are, in a scientific way, of a quality that entitles
them to a reading.