

The writer has drawn as much as possible from original
sources; this applies at least to the pestilences of the
Napoleonic Period, and to the epidemic of small-pox after
the Franco-German War. It would have been impossible
to deal with the other wars in the same way without consuming
considerable time. From the bibliographies it will appear
what sources the author has consulted; rarely are quotations
given from works which he has not seen, and in such cases
it is indicated whence they were taken.

The causes of the origin and spread of pestilences during
a war are clear. Every aggregation of people, even in times
of peace, at celebrations and annual fairs, in barracks, and
3so forth, is necessarily exposed to the danger of pestilence;
but this danger is ten times as great in large assemblages
of troops during a war. The soldiers are then subjected to
all possible kinds of hardship and suffering—lack of food,
or food which is inferior and badly cooked, sleeping out in
the cold and rain, fatiguing marches, constant excitement,
and homesickness—and all these things greatly lessen their
power of resistance. When large bodies of troops are obliged
to remain in one and the same place for a considerable
length of time, the additional difficulty presents itself of
keeping the locality unpolluted by the excrement of men
and animals, and by refuse of all kinds. If an infectious
disease reveals its presence in such an aggregation of people,
energetic and stringent measures must be adopted, even in
times of peace, to prevent it from spreading. In war times
it is often impossible to take the necessary precautions,
since the attention of the commanders is directed toward
very definite objects, to which all other considerations are
subordinate. Whether the germ of the disease is already
in the place, or whether the soldiers bring it with them, in
either case there is danger that the fighting armies will
cause the disease to spread over the entire scene of the war,
and thus seriously endanger thousands of human lives.

Modern methods of sanitation have done much toward
preventing the spread of army pestilences, not only in peace,
but also in war. The last few decades have evinced that
fact. Whatever attitude we may assume toward the question
whether war can ever be wholly abolished, we must all agree
that, if war has once broken out, all possible means must be
employed to prevent the spreading of pestilence within the
armies. Here the interests of the people and of the commanders
coincide, since the efficiency of armies is often
seriously interfered with by the outbreak of pestilence, and
not infrequently the success or failure of a war depends, not
upon the outcome of its battles, but upon the appearance or
non-appearance of pestilence.

4

## CHAPTER I
WAR PESTILENCES

All infectious diseases may spread in consequence of
war and develop into epidemics of varying extent. In the
next chapter we shall see how the wars at the end of the
fifteenth century favoured the spread of an epidemic of
syphilis. In the Union Army, during the American Civil
War of 1861–5, both measles and typhoid fever were very
widespread, and together they were the cause of 4,246
deaths, or about 1·75 per cent of the total enlistment. Scarlet
fever, influenza, yellow fever, relapsing fever, and malaria
(if the war is waged in countries where this disease is endemic—especially
in the Lower Danube region, in the Netherlands,
Spain, and Italy) have also played an important rôle in many
wars. But we give the name ‘war pestilences’ only to
those infectious diseases which in the course of centuries
have usually followed at the heels of belligerent armies, such
as typhus fever, bubonic plague, cholera, typhoid fever,
dysentery, and small-pox; we may also include here scurvy,
the etiology of which has not yet been definitely determined.