

This monograph on epidemics resulting from wars is
designed to bring into light an aspect of international conflict
that has never been adequately appreciated. An examination
of the facts here presented will indicate that until comparatively
recent times the most serious human cost of war
has been not losses in the field, nor even the losses from
disease in the armies, but the losses from epidemics disseminated
among the civil populations. It was the war epidemics
and their sequelae, rather than direct military losses, that
accounted for the deep prostration of Germany after the
Thirty Years’ War. Such epidemics were also the gravest
consequence of the Napoleonic Wars.

It may appear that a study of war epidemics can have
only historical interest, in view of the progress of modern
medical science. Plague, cholera, and typhus can be brought
under control by modern methods of sanitation. One can
point to the fact that in the present great war, the only
serious epidemic that has been reported is the typhus fever
epidemic in Serbia. When the medical history of the war
comes to be written, however, it will be found that the
ixaggregate losses from sporadic outbreaks of war epidemics
have been very considerable. A war sufficiently protracted
to lead to universal impoverishment and a breakdown of
medical organization would be attended, as in earlier times,
by the whole series of devastating war epidemics. And even
in the case of less exhausting wars, the chances of widespread
epidemics is far from negligible. There is much food for
reflection in the author’s account of the small-pox epidemic
following the Franco-German War. In 1870 the means of
coping with small-pox were as nearly perfect as they are
in the greater part of the world to-day. This fact did not
save Europe from a widespread epidemic, entailing human
losses exceeding in gravity the losses in the field. To-day,
as in the past, the probabilities of increased morbidity in
the civil population, not only among the belligerents, but
among neutrals as well, must be entered as a highly important
debit item against war.

John Bates Clark,

Director.

xi

## CONTENTS

PAGE

INTRODUCTION

1

CHAPTER I

War Pestilences

4

CHAPTER II

The Time before the Thirty Years’ War

11

CHAPTER III

The Thirty Years’ War

25

CHAPTER IV

The Period between the Peace of Westphalia and the French Revolution

79

CHAPTER V

The Period between the French Revolution and Napoleon’s Russian Campaign

92

CHAPTER VI

The Epidemics of Typhus Fever in Central Europe following upon the Russian Campaign and during the Wars of Liberation (1812–14)

106

xiiCHAPTER VII

From the Age of Napoleon to the Franco-German War

165

1. The Russo-Turkish War of 1828–9

165

2. The Crimean War (1854–6)

170

3. The North American Civil War (1861–5)

175

4. The Italian War of 1859

183

5. The Danish War of 1864

183

6. The German War of 1866

184

CHAPTER VIII

The Franco-German War of 1870–1, and the Epidemic of Small-pox caused by it