

In the year 1631 that terrible epoch of plague began
which reached its climax in the years 1634–5 and lasted well
into the following year. Its widespread character was due
to the innumerable plundering and devastating marches of
the Protestant-Swedish and Imperialist-Catholic armies back
and forth across the country, and also to the consequent
famine. Everything the brutalized soldiers could not consume
themselves or take with them, they destroyed or burned.
There was an absolute dearth of farm-workers, and in
addition to that, the year 1635 was dry and unproductive.
Horrible are the descriptions of the hunger and misery which
the people in all parts of Germany experienced at that time.
Under such conditions pestilences could spread unhindered;
to be sure, they relaxed a little after the year 1638, but by
no means ceased entirely. Whenever real plague disappeared,
typhus fever, which was prevalent in all parts of
the army took its place; and thus diseases were borne from
place to place until the very end of that disastrous war.

### I. The War in Bohemia and the Palatinate (1618–24)

The year 1620 saw the first warlike events of any importance;
at the beginning they were confined to Bohemia,
where in November 1619, Frederick, Elector of the Palatinate,
had been crowned King of Bohemia. In the first
part of the year 1620 typhus fever broke out in Austria
29and Bohemia among the poorly nourished troops of the
Catholic League, carrying away, it is said, 20,000 Bavarian
soldiers. After the League’s successful battle on White
Hill (November 8, 1620), the disease was borne by Bavarian
soldiers back to Upper Bavaria and Württemberg; it is
stated that it caused an eruption of red spots over the entire
body, and that headache, dizziness, and stupefaction were
prevailing symptoms.[28] Munich, by adopting strict measures
of precaution—isolation of the patients in houses outside
of the city, disinfection of suspected effects and incoming
letters, washing in vinegar of money sent in from infected
localities—managed to exclude the disease from the city
limits. In 1620 the troops of Count Mansfeld conveyed
the disease, which was called ‘head-disease’, to Franconia,
where in the following year it raged extensively. In consequence
of their marauding expeditions, typhus fever also
became very widespread in the Upper Palatinate—Neumarkt
and Weiden are mentioned as places where it appeared;
in Weiden 250 persons died, three or four times as many as
in normal years. Count Mansfeld then marched down the
Main and along the Neckar to Mannheim, and everywhere
his soldiers went they left behind them the germ of typhus
fever: e.g. in Boxberg (near Mergentheim), in Neckarelz
(near Mosbach), in Eberbach, in Ladenburg and Viernheim
(both near Mannheim), and in many other places.

In the following year Lorraine, the Palatinate, and northern
Baden became the scenes of Count Mansfeld’s predatory
incursions. Since the country-people fled to the cities, the
latter became greatly overcrowded; in Strassburg, for
example, whither 23,000 country-people had sought refuge,
a severe pestilence (chiefly dysentery) broke out and carried
away in the course of that year (1622) 4,388 people. ‘Headdisease’
30broke out in Wimpfen-on-the-Neckar, after the
battle fought there on May 6, in consequence of the arrival
of over 900 hundred sick and wounded soldiers; the result
was that a large proportion of the inhabitants were taken
sick, and a third of them died. In the Palatinate, through
which Mansfeld passed on one of his predatory raids, the
mortality in town and country, in consequence of dysentery
and other diseases, was very great. Again, in Frankfurt-on-the-Main
typhus fever broke out in 1622, and 1,785 people
died (as compared with 600–700 in normal years). In
Mayence and vicinity the disease became very widespread
in the year 1624. A plague also broke out in Nuremberg
in October 1624, carrying away 2,487 people that year,
and 2,881 the following year.