

The Palatinate suffered terribly in the year 1623 from the
continued marauding of Mansfeld’s army, and in consequence
of cross-marches of Spanish and Walloon troops
pestilential diseases were conveyed from there to Lorraine.
In July 1623, according to Maréchal and Didion,[29] typhus
fever or bubonic plague broke out in the village of Lessy
and raged furiously for two months. Despite energetic
measures that were taken to prevent the disease from
spreading, neighbouring and even more or less remote
villages were infected, so that in 1624 the entire country
was suffering. In spite of the fact that all strangers were
forbidden to enter the city of Metz under penalty of death,
the disease made its appearance there in May 1625, and in
less than ten months carried away 3,000 people. Of the
cities surrounding Metz, all of which were infected, Verdun
had a particularly high mortality. The epidemic spread
from the Palatinate to Württemberg, Baden, Hanau, Nassau,
and down the Rhine; for the most part it was typhus fever.

In the year 1623 the army of the Catholic League spread
infectious diseases throughout Hesse, particularly in the
region of the Werra. When the army withdrew, it left
31dysentery behind it, for example, in Witzenhausen, Eschwege,
and Hersfeld; in July and August it carried away
many victims. A pestilential disease broke out on June 3,
1624, in Hersfeld, carrying away from October 4, 1624, to
January 1625, 316 persons. In 1625, ‘hunger typhus’ and
bubonic plague appeared in Nassau; the pestilence began
in Dillenburg on December 18, 1625, and lasted until
October 30, 1626, carrying away in this time 378 people—about
one-third of the population. The climax of the
pestilence came in July. A plague also broke out among
the soldiers in Walsdorf-on-the Ems, likewise in Idstein,
remaining there for several years.

### II. The War in Saxony, Thuringia, Brandenburg, and Pomerania (1625–30)

The years 1625 and 1626 were bad pest-years; according
to Lammert, the various epidemics that occurred were
partly typhus fever, partly bubonic plague, and partly
dysentery. The pestilences spread over Saxony, Thuringia,
Silesia, Eastern Prussia, Posen, Poland, and Moravia, and
carried away large numbers of people. They were not
always directly connected with warlike events, as shown
by the fact that many provinces that were spared by the
war were attacked by the diseases. On the other hand,
the incursion of Wallenstein’s troops into Saxony and
Thuringia caused pestilence to become unusually widespread.

From 1625 to the time of the battle of Breitenfeld (1631)
Saxony suffered terribly from pestilences that were caused
and prolonged by the war, though by no means as terribly
as in the years 1631–3. Dresden and Leipzig, comparatively
speaking, were but slightly affected. Of 13,000 inhabitants
that Dresden had in the year 1626, 341 succumbed to a
plague which began in April and disappeared in December;
the disease was called ‘burning fever’, ‘spotted fever’,
32and ‘pestilential spotted fever’, while in the records of the
town council we find mention of ‘spots, often the size of
a groschen, all over the body’, and also of ‘swellings’.
Inasmuch as abscesses and gangrene are often observed in
cases of typhus fever, it seems likely that it was that disease.[30]
Of 14,500 inhabitants in Leipzig only 122 succumbed to it,
although houses in all the streets were infected. Here
again, accordingly, we see how slight the danger to life is
in the case of typhus fever.