

In a supplementary way we may add here that later wars
also caused frequent epidemics of syphilis within narrow
confines; instances of this kind are cited by A. Hirsch[16] and
H. Schwiening.[17]

In August of the year 1486 English sweating-sickness
appeared in England for the first time; it broke out among
the troops of Henry VII shortly before his victory at Bosworth
on August 22, 1486. And when Henry landed at Milford
the disease spread, carrying away many victims wherever
it went. ‘Strong and well-nourished people were particularly
susceptible to it—more so than old men, children, and poor
people. From three to nine, sometimes all the inmates of
a house caught it, and it gradually spread over half the
inhabitants of the town. The first appearance of the disease
is said to have caused more devastation in London (where it
broke out on September 21), Bedford, and Cambridge, than
the sword, which had been ruling for thirty years in a fearful
civil war. According to Forest, an incredible number of
people died from it, while Thomas Moore also speaks of the
dangerous character of this epidemic. In many places
a third of the inhabitants are said to have died from it,
scarcely one in a hundred of its victims recovering.’[18] The
19subsequent appearance of the disease, especially the transplantation
of it to the continent in the year 1529, was not
attributable to warlike events. In the year 1551 it disappeared
as suddenly as it had appeared in 1486.

The disease usually began with a chill, headache, palpitation
of the heart, difficulty in breathing, and later a profuse,
very malodorous emission of sweat from all parts of the body.
The patient quickly lapsed into a state of lethargy. The
progress of the disease was uncommonly rapid; ‘in one
day either the disease or the patient came to an end,’ says
Fracastorius. Any patient who did not succumb, recovered
completely after one or two weeks.

From the sixteenth century on notices are more abundant;
we now hear of epidemics of typhus fever throughout all
Europe, although we do not know positively where the
disease first appeared. ‘At all times,’ says Hirsch,[19] ‘as far
back as historical investigation is able to follow the course
of typhus fever at all, the disease has always been bound
up with the most dismal calamities of the nations. The
supposition is therefore justified that, in the numerous war-pestilences
and famine-pestilences of antiquity and the
Middle Ages, regarding which we have no medical reports
and must rely only upon the chronicles, typhus fever has
played a conspicuous rôle.’ By this, however, Hirsch does
not mean to say that the specific disease in all the so-called
war-pestilences was typhus fever; on the contrary, he adds:
‘In saying this I by no means wish to imply that I always
identify “war-pestilences” and “famine-pestilences” with
epidemics of typhus fever; those pestilences, appearing at
epochs of general misery, for the most part represent a mixture
of diseases, especially catarrh of the stomach, dysentery,
scurvy, typhus fever, and frequently malaria and typhoid
fever, which not only by chroniclers, but also by medical
statisticians, have quite often been lumped together as
20one disease.’ It is to-day almost impossible to analyse these
accounts, in which we can distinguish only individual
characteristics of those various diseases. This appears most
distinctly in the reports of the chroniclers and historians
regarding the war pestilences and famine pestilences of
antiquity, and it also explains the futile effort of the historians
to reduce to one disease known to us the numerous and complicated
symptoms which they have looked upon as the
expression of a single disease-process—an effort which has
led some of them to the somewhat extravagant conclusion,
that they were diseases which are now extinct. The same
backwardness, furthermore, characterizes—though to a lesser
extent—the descriptions which the physicians of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries wrote of the epidemics of
‘putrid fever’, ‘bilious fever’, and ‘mucous fever’ occurring
at that time. Here, too, in many cases it was evidently
a question of the simultaneous outbreak of various diseases,
the nature of which even the most expert critic could not
afterwards determine with certainty.