

At the time of the crusade against the heretics a serious
pestilence broke out in Egypt in the army of the crusaders,
which had already, on August 12, 1218, suffered from
dysentery; it appeared in December during the siege of
Damietta, after a heavy and continuous downfall of rain.
‘The patients’, says Wilken, ‘were suddenly seized with
violent pains in the feet and ankles; their gums became
swollen, their teeth loose and useless, while their hips and
shin bones first turned black and then putrefied. Finally,
an easy and peaceful death, like a gentle sleep, put an end
to their sufferings. A sixth of the pilgrim army was carried
away by this disease, which no medicine could cure.’[9] Only
a few patients who survived the winter were helped to
recovery by the warmth of spring. It was unquestionably
15a severe form of scurvy. The besieged, too, suffered from
the destructive pestilence, and also from Egyptian ophthalmia.
We read further in Wilken: ‘A horrible sight greeted
the pilgrims when they took possession of Damietta. Not
only the houses, but even the streets were filled with unburied
corpses; in the beds dead bodies lay beside helpless and dying
invalids, and the infection of the air was intolerable. Of
80,000 inhabitants which the city had had at the beginning
of the siege only 3,000 were left, while only 100 of these were
healthy.’[10] Other reports say that 10,000 inhabitants
survived.

In 1270, during the Seventh and last Crusade, which
strangely enough passed by way of Tunis, a pestilential
disease broke out in Carthage, carrying away, in addition to
many soldiers and men of rank, King Louis IX of France himself
and his son, Jean Tristan. This pestilence was dysentery,
and it spread even to Sicily, whither the king’s body was
conveyed. After the king’s death conditions were even worse,
since so many people died that it was impossible to bury all
the bodies. The disease also attacked the enemy’s army.[11]

The increased prevalence of leprosy in Europe in the
Middle Ages is often attributed to the Crusades.[12] Leprosy
was very widespread in Germany, France, Italy, and other
countries of Europe before the Crusades; according to
Hirsch it appeared in the Roman Empire in the first century
before the birth of Christ, but did not become very prevalent
until later. Legal regulations governing the marrying of
lepers date back as far as the seventh century, while the
earliest reports regarding leper-houses come down from the
eighth and ninth centuries. Most leper-houses, however,
were built between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries,
and although the reverse opinion has been expressed, it is
16nevertheless improbable that the building of these houses
was not due to the increased prevalence of the disease.
Inasmuch as leprosy was very widespread in the Orient,
where numerous crusaders contracted it, as indicated by
the fact that institutions were founded there for its victims,
many crusaders doubtless returned with the disease in their
systems. But regarding this matter we shall never have
absolutely reliable information; for it is assumed that many
people suffering from other chronic skin diseases were placed
in the leper-houses. A careful study of the available data,
however, leads us to believe that wrong diagnoses were not
so frequent as to account for the large number of cases of
leprosy in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries.
Admittance to leper-houses was regulated by many precautionary
measures, and the diagnosis of the disease was
made by churchmen, even bishops, who without doubt
necessarily acquired a good eye for the disease in the course
of time. Not until later, when we may be certain that
leprosy was no longer brought from the Orient, was the
disease probably now and then confused with syphilis.