

The battles with the Turks in the east did a great deal
toward spreading typhus fever throughout Europe; for
that reason the name ‘Hungarian disease’ came into existence.
Toward the end of the fifteenth century, hitherto
prosperous Hungary, by endless wars with Turkey and by
international strife, was brought to the very verge of ruin.
Agriculture ceased almost entirely, the development of the
country came to a standstill, large tracts of land, such as
the Banat region, assumed the appearance of a vast swamp,
while at the same time the alternate cold nights and hot
days, together with the great dampness, were very unhealthy
for the foreign soldiers, who were not accustomed to such
23a climate. Partly this, and partly the utter lack of sanitation,
increased the baneful effects of camp-life. Dirt and refuse
accumulated in heaps, vermin multiplied so rapidly that it
was impossible to get rid of them, corpses were inadequately
buried, while enormous numbers of flies and gnats molested
the soldiers and did a great deal toward spreading infectious
diseases. The hospitals were in a pitiable condition, and
since the soldiers, after their previous experiences, had little
hope of leaving the country alive, they gave themselves
over to a most dissolute life, in consequence of which the
country suffered terribly. Several contemporaries bear
witness to the fact that a large part of the German troops
never once faced the enemy, for the reason that they succumbed
beforehand to ‘Hungarian disease’, which killed
more of them than the swords of the Turks. Hence Hungary
was called at that time the ‘Cemetery of the Germans’.

‘Hungarian disease’ was typhus fever, which manifested
certain unusual characteristics for the reason that the German
troops, being unaccustomed to the local foods, inclined
considerably toward intestinal catarrh and scurvy, while
many of them also suffered from malaria, which weakened
their power of resistance. The sudden beginning with a chill,
the appearance of lenticular spots on the fourth, fifth, or
sixth day, the duration of about fourteen days, the sudden
fall of temperature—all these symptoms, mentioned by
witnesses, definitely stamp the disease as typhus fever. If
the disease has been identified by many historians with
bubonic plague, the reason is that in serious cases of typhus
fever suppuration of the salivary glands, gangrene of the
lower extremities, of the nose and ears, &c., are not infrequent
occurrences.

According to Györy,[24] the pestilence which raged so
furiously in the army of Joachim, Margrave of Brandenburg,
when the latter was in Hungary in 1542, was typhus fever.
He assumes that the disease was borne thither by the
24Italian troops which the Pope had sent to help fight against
the Turks, although he cannot base his assumption on any
argument save that typhus fever was no rare disease in Italy.
It is much more probable, however, that the disease was
already endemic in Hungary at that time, whether from of
yore, or whether the Turks had brought it there. So much,
however, is certain, that the Germans suffered a great deal
more from it than did the Hungarians and Turks, who had
probably already survived attacks of the disease and had
thus become immune.