

The expeditions of the German emperors to Italy, as well
as the Crusades, offer numerous examples of how large armies
may be destroyed by disease. So, for instance, in 963 or 964
the army of the Emperor Otto I was attacked by a severe
pestilence in Italy—a murderous disease which was usually
fatal in twenty-four hours. The German army of Henry IV
in 1081–2, but especially after the capture of Rome on June 3,
1083, suffered from plagues in Italy; but the same army
fared even worse in 1084, when a plague broke out and
carried away, for example, the entire German garrison in
13Rome. In 1137 Lothair’s army was likewise attacked by
infectious diseases in Italy. But by far the most devastating
of all was the pestilence which broke out in Rome in August,
1167, shortly after the capture of the city by Frederick
Barbarossa, and paved the way to a catastrophe which culminated
in the complete annihilation of the German army.
At that time many eminent men succumbed to the disease,
the army dwindled away in the hands of the leaders, and the
soldiers fled in vast numbers in order to escape certain death.
Even after the Emperor Barbarossa’s withdrawal from Rome
the pestilence continued to rage in his army, and it was a long
time before it disappeared from the city. It was the true
(bubonic) plague, and usually resulted fatally on the first
day. In the winter of 1190–1 a pestilence broke out in Lower
Italy in the army of Henry VI; it appeared at the beginning
of the siege of Naples and carried away many eminent men.
The king himself contracted the disease, and had to be taken
to Capua.[5]

The armies of the Crusades fared even worse; the mortality
in the First Crusade, before and after the conquest of
Antioch (1097–8), was terrible. The pestilence is said to
have broken out first among the children and women who
accompanied the armies, and its dissemination was favoured
by a lack of sustenance and continual rainfall; from September
to the 24th of November the pestilence carried away
100,000. The nature of the disease is not known, although
it is known to have been very infectious. When a new army
of 1,500 Germans arrived, it was quickly attacked by the
disease and in a few days almost completely annihilated.
Several hundred frequently died in a single day, and as the
summer of 1099 was very hot and a number of bodies remained
unburied, the pestilence lasted well into that year. In 1100
another pestilence raged among the crusaders. Again, during
14the Second Crusade a severe epidemic broke out in the army
of the Emperor Louis VII at Attalia in Asia Minor; the pestilence
spread rapidly among the inhabitants of the city, so
that many houses, even entire streets, were depopulated.[6]

During the Third Crusade, shortly after the death of
Frederick Barbarossa (June, 1190), a severe pestilence broke
out in the army that was besieging Antioch; according to
Michaux only 5,000 infantrymen and 700 cavalrymen
survived out of the entire German army.[7] At the siege of
Acre (Ptolemais), which lasted from August 1189, to July
1191, there broke out in the winter of 1191 a terrible pestilence
which played havoc in the pilgrim army; it was caused by
an inadequate supply of food, and its symptoms (enlargement
of the limbs and falling out of the teeth) betoken scurvy.
It also appeared in the army of Saladin, but was much worse
in the Christian army, in which from 100 to 200 crusaders
died every day. Duke Frederick of Swabia succumbed to
this disease on January 20, 1191.[8]