

In general one may say that before 1630 the specific
disease was usually typhus fever, and that after 1630 bubonic
plague spread along with this disease throughout Germany;
the death statistics of the larger cities, adduced at the end
of this chapter, lead us to this conclusion. In addition to
these two diseases, we find frequent mention of dysentery,
scurvy, and, toward the end of the war, small-pox.

Innumerable articles, chronicles, &c., have described in detail
the miserable condition of the German countries during
the Thirty Years’ War. The following account is largely
based upon a notable work by a physician named Lammert,
who offers us a chronological enumeration of the pestilences
of that time, and also an exhaustive bibliography.[27] Since
27it is impossible to discuss here thoroughly all the countless
epidemics that occurred, we can merely point out their
main features and indicate their connexion with warlike
events. The figures quoted may be relied upon, if, as is
usually the case, they are taken from church-registers; as
regards statements taken from chronicles, on the other hand,
there is more occasion for distrust. For a correct understanding
of the facts, to be sure, we should have to know
the exact population of the cities and towns, and this information
is only in rare instances available. We must bear
in mind, furthermore, that the country-people fled to the
cities when armies were approaching, and also that nearly
all cities were surrounded by walls and embankments.

The war began in Bohemia. After the battle on White
Hill, near Prague (November 8, 1620), the soldiers of Count
Mansfeld, who were already infected with typhus fever,
marched down the Main to the Palatinate and to Alsace,
devastating the country as they passed and leaving severe
pestilences behind them. In the year 1625 the main scene
of the war was transferred to the north, where numerous
epidemics had already broken out in the course of that year.
The disorder caused by the war, and especially the wild
warfare of Wallenstein, who in the fall of 1625, after mustering
his army, had joined forces with Tilly, were particularly
favourable to the spreading of disease. Hence in the years
1625–6 we see precisely in North Germany the ‘plague’
doing the greatest damage.

The battle of Barenberg (near Lutter, August 1626) gave
the Imperialists the upper hand in North Germany. This
ascendancy was taken away from them, however, with the
appearance of Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden, who won a
complete victory over Tilly in the battle of Breitenfeld
(September 17, 1631). After that, Gustavus Adolphus
advanced to the Lower Main (Frankfurt and Mayence), and
the following year carried the war into Bavaria, which now
became the principal scene of the fighting. After the battle
28of Nördlingen (September 7, 1634), the fugitive Swedish
Protestant army, pursued by the Imperialists, retreated
through Württemberg, Baden, and Hesse to the Rhine,
where the war was now carried on for several years. Both
armies were badly infected with disease, and spread pestilence
wherever they went. After the battle of Nördlingen
the war became decentralized, splitting up into a number
of warlike movements throughout all Germany; and everywhere
these movements occurred they added, if possible,
to the misery of the people.