

At the end of the fifteenth century typhus fever was
prevalent in many parts of Europe; the first scientific
account of it comes from the pen of Fracastorius, who had
an opportunity to observe the disease during the epidemics
in Italy in 1505–8, and who described it as a disease indigenous
to Cyprus and the neighbouring islands and appearing
for the first time in Italy.

The names given to the disease were numerous and cannot
all be mentioned here; the name ‘Hauptweh’ (headache)
or ‘Hauptkrankheit’ (head-disease) was current in Germany,
while the additional words ‘ohne Sterbedrüsen’ (without
death glands) expressly distinguish the disease from bubonic
plague. T. von Györy[20] mentions a large number of synonyms—Hungarian
disease, lazaret fever, spotted fever, petechial
disease, &c.

In 1490 the disease was borne by Spanish soldiers, who had
21fought in the Venetian army against Turkey, from Cyprus
to Spain, and during the war of Ferdinand the Catholic
against the Moors it spread to Granada and did more damage
to the Spanish army than the swords of the Moors.[21]

In the year 1490 a serious epidemic broke out in Lorraine,
which Maréchal and Didion[22] think was typhus fever; it
appeared in that bitter and indescribably cruel conflict
between René, Duke of Lorraine, and the people of Metz.
Despite the armistice proclaimed on June 18, the pestilence
spread far and wide and in August entered Metz, compelling
the inhabitants to take to flight; the nobles retired to their
castles, and the citizens went out into the country. And
although the city was strictly quarantined, the disease
spread throughout Lorraine and northern Alsace.

In the year 1528 an epidemic of typhus fever occurred in
connexion with warlike events. This pestilence broke out
in Upper Italy and spread to Lower Italy, where a war was
going on between French troops on the one side and German
and Spanish troops on the other. The loss of human life
was uncommonly large, 30,000 French soldiers and twice as
many non-belligerent inhabitants are said to have died.
And the pestilence was also borne from Italy to Germany.

Well known in history is the great pestilence which in
1552 forced Emperor Charles V to raise the siege of Metz,
which had been going on for two months (November and
December). Maréchal gives us detailed information about
this;[23] the Emperor’s army, he says, which consisted of
80,000 German, Spanish, and Italian troops, in addition
to the enormous camp-following that always accompanied
armies at that time, was reduced one-third by the end of
December through desertion, disease, and disablement.
According to the report of the Venetian physician, Andreas
22Gratiolo, the widespread diseases were typhus fever and
dysentery. The appearance of these diseases was favoured
by the congregating of such enormous numbers of people in
tents and inadequate places of shelter, and also by the great
dampness and the lack of the necessaries of life. The extreme
cold, which prevented the dispersion and isolation of the
patients, also favoured the dissemination of the disease.
More than 200 men died in the barracks every day, while
10,000 men, all told, are said to have succumbed. It was
also observed that the Spaniards and Italians suffered more
than the Landsknechte and other German troops, since they
could not stand the severity of the climate so well. During
the siege, hospital-fever and scurvy raged in the city itself,
and after the siege was raised, in the night of January 1, 1553,
typhus fever broke out there, having been borne into the
hospitals by wounded soldiers from the enemy’s camp, or
else brought back by citizens who had been out to inspect
the position of the besiegers. During the siege the surrounding
country had been most terribly ravaged by the enemy’s
soldiers, so that the inhabitants were in the greatest misery,
without food and without any source of help. For the spread
of typhus fever this afforded a very favourable soil, and it
raged furiously in the months of June and July in the villages
surrounding Metz.