

‘Hungarian disease’ acquired greater importance in the
year 1566, when it spread from Hungary over a large part
of Europe. It was then that this name first came into
fashion. According to Thomas Jordanus, who took part
in the expedition, the disease broke out on the island of
Komorn during the war of Maximilian II against the Turks;
from there it spread further west and forced the Emperor
to conclude a treaty of peace which favoured the Turks.
After the dispersion of the army the discharged soldiers
carried the disease in all directions.[25] Vienna was hit very
hard; not only separate houses, but also entire streets,
were filled with victims of the disease. The returning
Italians brought the disease first to Carinthia, where it
broke out severely in Villach, and then to Italy. In the
year 1567 the pestilence carried away 400 people in the little
town of Villach, and from there it spread to Styria. In the
same way it was carried to Bohemia, Germany, Burgundy,
Belgium, and Spain.

At the end of the sixteenth century typhus fever appeared
in Hungary with renewed virulence; during the siege of
Papa it raged with particular severity among the Italian
troops, and according to Coberus all the patients in the field-hospital
died.

25

## CHAPTER III
THE THIRTY YEARS’ WAR

At the beginning of the seventeenth century, epidemics of
bubonic plague and typhus fever were frequent occurrences
in various parts of Central Europe, but they were usually
kept localized by the strict measures that were adopted, in
accordance with the best scientific knowledge of the time,
to prevent them from spreading; the houses in which the
patients lay were quarantined, strangers from infected places
were forbidden to enter the cities under penalty of death,
the clothes and beds used by the patients were burned, while
in the streets and public squares fumigations took place.
But in the storm and stress of the Thirty Years’ War such
precautions could be taken only to a limited extent, and
even when they were energetically carried out, they did no
good, since diseases were so frequently borne from place to
place. A further consequence of the long war was famine,
which was caused by the devastation of the fields and the
non-cultivation of the land, due to the lack of workers.
This made it easier for pestilences to become unusually widespread
throughout Germany. The fact that the scene of
the war kept changing was also to a great extent responsible
for the gradual dissemination of various diseases, since the
regions in which the fighting was going on were always particularly
exposed to pestilential devastation.

Unfortunately we possess, for the various pestilences,
scarcely any accounts written by physicians, and with a
few exceptions must rely upon the information given by
chroniclers. In most cases, therefore, it is impossible to
state with certainty just what the individual diseases were.
Consequently, inasmuch as the word ‘plague’ is used in
the chronicles for any serious pestilence, we have adopted
26it in this same general sense in our account, without necessarily
meaning thereby bubonic plague. Certainly one of
the most common ‘war diseases’ at that time was typhus
fever, and diseases that were commonly called ‘burning,
virulent fever’, ‘plague’, ‘head-disease’, ‘Hungarian
disease’, and ‘Swedish disease’, were undoubtedly nothing
else but that. At the same time real plague, bubonic
plague, now and then occurred, and the word ‘plague’ is
thus very often used in its proper sense, especially in reference
to the pestilences of the years 1630–6. ‘In the history of
this calamitous war,’ says Seitz,[26] ‘we see typhus fever like
a malignant spectre hovering over the armies wherever they
go, in their camps, on their marches, and in their permanent
quarters, and preparing an inglorious end for thousands of
valiant warriors. Its ravages among the non-belligerent
population in town and country caused the inhabitants of
many provinces to remember with hatred and loathing the
departed soldiers, who were usually accused of having
planted the seed of death.’