

The notable pandemic outbreak of syphilis at the end of
the fifteenth century was also largely attributable to warlike
events. The rapid spread of the disease throughout Central
Europe was due, according to contemporary notices, to the
Landsknechte (common foot-soldiers). The rough coincidence
of this epidemic with the discovery of America has given
rise to the view that the disease did not exist in Europe
at earlier periods, but was borne thither from America. But
we can point to numerous instances in the course of the last
century, of how infectious diseases, hitherto unknown, or
existing only sporadically, all of a sudden became pandemic
(cholera, plague, diphtheria, influenza), although no satisfactory
and comprehensive explanation of the phenomenon
has been offered. It is generally known that infectious
diseases break out in a mild form and last for years, and then
suddenly change their character and cause virulent epidemics;
17this is positively confirmed by the epidemic of small-pox in
1870–2, which will be discussed later. At all events we cannot
draw the conclusion from the sudden outbreak of an epidemic
of syphilis, that the disease was not present in Europe before.

A serious epidemic of syphilis broke out in the army of
Charles VIII of France during his expedition to Naples.
Inasmuch as his advance was nowhere opposed, he was able
to enter Naples on February 12, 1495. There the French
army gave itself over to the most unbridled licentiousness,
and the result was that the disease spread rapidly in both
the French and Italian armies. Italians and Frenchmen
accused each other of having brought the disease, so that the
former called syphilis ‘French disease’ and the later ‘Neapolitan
disease’. The disbanding of Charles’s army caused
the disease to spread far and wide in Europe. ‘Those who
had most to do with the further dissemination of the disease,’
says Häser,[13] ‘were the Albanian and Roumanian estradiots
serving in the Venetian army, brutal and rapacious adventurers,
and also the German and Swiss Landsknechte returning
from Italy, who spread the disease over a large part of Europe.’

A large number of writers of the beginning of the sixteenth
century bear witness to the fact that the pestilence was borne
into Germany by Landsknechte; e.g. Pastor N. Berler
(Ruffachische Chronik of 1510), Heinrich Brennwald (1519),
Johann Haselbergk (1533), Valentin Müntzer (1550), Nuremberg
Chronicle of 1580.[14] In the year 1495 the pestilence
broke out in many places in France and Germany; in
Strassburg, for example, the disease was planted by Landsknechte
who had served in, and been discharged from, the
army of Charles VIII; Hans Schott testifies to this fact in
his Weltlich Leyenbuch (Strassburg, 1541). The city of Metz
tried in vain to ward off the disease; according to the
18Metz Chronicle, many Burgundians (500 cavalrymen and 700
infantrymen) came to Metz in May 1495, and since the most
of them were suffering from mal de Naples, they were not
allowed to enter the city. But the soldiers infected the women
in the vicinity, and the disease was later borne by them into
the city, where it prevailed for four years, not beginning
to abate until the year 1500.[15] We also have testimony to
the fact that the outbreak of the disease in Nördlingen (1495)
was caused by the arrival of Landsknechte.