

#### 2. South Germany

##### (a) Bavaria and Upper Swabia

After the battle of Breitenfeld (September 17, 1631)
Gustavus Adolphus passed through Halle and Erfurt to
Würzburg, Aschaffenburg, and Frankfurt-on-the-Main.
Tilly had marched through Halberstadt, Fulda, and Miltenberg
to Würzburg, in order to relieve that city, which had
been captured by the Swedes, and then turned south. Thus
the principal scene of the war was transferred to Bavaria,
which from 1631 to 1634 suffered terribly from the ravages
of the soldiers passing back and forth. No part of the
country was spared. ‘The Thirty Years’ War’, says Lammert,[34]
‘was particularly fatal and disastrous to Bavaria
from the year 1632 on; it converted the country into an
uninhabited waste, especially because it was followed by
pestilence. Like the Imperialist army under Tilly in the
autumn of 1631, so the Swedish army on its marches consumed
everything it found, and wherever it went in the
years 1632–5 it spread ‘hunger typhus’ and ‘war typhus’
and bubonic plague; all the places along the Main lost at
least one-half of their population.’ In September 1632,
when Gustavus Adolphus withdrew from Nuremberg,
Wallenstein turned south, and there on November 6, 1632,
Gustavus Adolphus was killed in the battle of Lützen. After
that Wallenstein returned to Bohemia, while the Swedes
under Bernhard von Weimar marched back into Bavaria.
The acme of misery was reached here in the year 1634. It
51is impossible to enumerate all the places that were infected
by the brutalized, wandering soldiers; the most out-of-the-way
and indigent regions, such as the Spessart and the
Odenwald, were visited by them, and inasmuch as they
brought pestilence wherever they went, the unfortunate
villages were subjected to merciless devastation.

1. The region of the Main. Since Gustavus Adolphus
first had Horn occupy the bishopric of Bamberg, and himself
marched through Aschaffenburg to Nuremberg, while Tilly
returned to Ingolstadt and later to Lech, the region of the
Main, and later the region north of the Danube, were the
first to be attacked by typhus fever and bubonic plague;
not until later, from 1633 on, did the pestilences spread
more or less extensively in the country south of the Danube.

In Aschaffenburg and vicinity a plague broke out in the
summer of 1632 and almost wiped out several villages; the
city of Aschaffenburg itself, which lost a large percentage
of its inhabitants, was revisited in the year 1635. In Würzburg
the pestilence began in August 1632, and in the last
part of July of the following year another serious pestilence
broke out there, in consequence of which 489 bodies were
buried in the cathedral parish alone. The prolonged quartering
of troops, notwithstanding all the precautionary
measures that were adopted, caused the pestilence to rage
with extraordinary fury; not until September did it begin
to abate. In the year 1635, when infected soldiers were
transferred from Schweinfurt to the stronghold of Marienburg,
it appeared once more. In 1632 Schweinfurt lost
‘several hundred people’ in consequence of ‘pestilential
purple-spots’ (typhus fever). The total number of deaths
was 1,055. In December of the following year another
rather large pestilence broke out, and again in August 1635;
in the latter year it reached a climax in September and came
to an end in December. In Bamberg many people succumbed
in 1632 to Hungarian disease, which the Swedes had
borne thither in the spring. This disease was also very
52widespread throughout the entire vicinity. In the year
1634 the Swedes came several times into the region around
Bamberg and plundered the country, so that famine and
plague caused great misery. In the summer of 1635 Bamberg
was once more attacked by an infectious disease (typhus
fever), and only two houses in the city were spared. In
Kulmbach the plague raged extensively in the first part of
the year 1633; the number of the dead was so large that
the bodies could not all be buried in Kulmbach, and some
had to be taken to the churchyards of near-by villages. In
the following year the plague broke out anew, carrying away
60 persons in a single day. In Bayreuth 400 persons succumbed
to a pestilence in the year 1632, and in the following
year 360 died; it raged even more furiously after the city
was plundered by the Master of Ordnance, von der Waal,
on August 19, 1634. From July to October 1,927 out of
7,000 inhabitants died, while the average number of deaths
amounted to only 167 per annum.