

In Brandenburg a severe pestilence raged in the years
1637–8. Berlin was repeatedly attacked in 1637 and again
in 1639. In Spandau it raged very extensively, and lasted
well into the following year. In Luckau 500 inhabitants
died in the year 1637. The pestilence was conveyed to Neu-Ruppin
by an infected soldier, and in the church register
of that town 600 deaths are recorded. In Gransee a pestilence
broke out in May 1638, and in a short time carried away
1,000 persons. Four neighbouring villages were completely
wiped out. In Wittstock 1,599 persons succumbed in the
year 1638 to bubonic plague and other diseases, and in Pritzwalk
1,500 people died (not including the soldiers and
fugitive country-people). In Lychen (district of Templin)
numerous fugitives and two-thirds of the native inhabitants
died. In Angermünde, but 40 out of 700 families were left,
and in Prenzlau a pestilence likewise raged furiously.

Pomerania, while the war was going on between the
Swedes and Imperialists, fared no better. In Massow 400
persons succumbed to a plague. In Ueckermünde, in consequence
70of a plague caused by the capture of the city by
the Swedes, only eight men and seven widows are said to
have survived the year 1638.

Mecklenburg suffered terribly in the years 1637–8 from the
quartering of Swedish troops there. Thousands succumbed
in a short time to dysentery and bubonic plague, especially
in the months of August and September 1638. Güstrow,
in the year 1637, is said to have lost 2,000 persons (most of
them doubtless fugitive country-people). Sternberg, the
population of which was completely wiped out by the
pestilence, stood empty for half a year. In New Brandenburg,
where many country-people had taken refuge,
8,000 people died in the year 1638, according to the church
register. Bützow had 261 deaths.

### IV. The War Years (1641–8)

After the death of Bernhard von Weimar and of Banner,
all centralized warfare in Germany ceased, and there began
an endless series of futile marches across the country.
The great depopulation of Germany, the difficulty of properly
nourishing the few that had survived, and the wide prevalence
of camp-fever, made it impossible to carry out any more
large enterprises. Severe pestilences scarcely ever occurred,
for the simple reason that there were so few people to contract
and spread diseases. Typhus fever had become epidemic
everywhere. ‘In Germany,’ says Schnurrer,[45] ‘where fighting
had been going on for twenty-two years, and where soldier-life
had almost supplanted civil and rural life, a certain war-plague
revealed itself in places where there were soldiers,
and where the war had left its vestiges. This war-plague was
characterized by a mucous fever, began with a chill, accompanied
by coughing, diarrhoea, and, in the case of women,
by increased and irregular menstruation; at the same time
the tongue became dry, headache and insomnia ensued,
71and at the crisis either the brain or the throat became
inflamed, or else petechiae or purpura (then for the first
time observed in Lower Saxony) broke out. Moreover, this
war-plague, if it appeared to have passed a crisis on the
fourteenth or twenty-first day, manifested a remarkable
tendency to relapse. It was quite as infectious as bubonic
plague, and was called by several names—Hungarian fever,
head-disease, and soldiers’ disease.’ We distinctly see in
this description a mixture of various diseases (especially
typhoid fever, typhus fever, and others). Schnurrer’s
authority was Lotichius, a Frankfurt physician.