

Lorraine also suffered terribly. In the year 1635 Bernhard
von Weimar and Cardinal La Valette were obliged to retreat
before Gallas to the vicinity of Metz, where they arrived on
October 1; the troops brought fever, dysentery, and ‘Swedish
plague’ with them; the last-named disease, which has
been held to be typhus fever, became more widespread in
Metz in the year 1636 than it had ever been before—it was
la plus meurtrière et la plus désastreuse des temps modernes
dans notre pays.[43] The precautionary measures of the city
administration—cleaning of the streets, isolation of the
patients, closing of infected houses—were of no avail. Many
66bodies were cast into the Mosel, and before the gates of the
city the streets and fields were covered with dead men and
horses. Also in the neighbouring cities, especially in Verdun
and Nancy, the losses in consequence of the pestilence were
great.

Conditions were equally bad in the adjacent Luxemburg.
‘The French as enemies,’ says Lammert,[44] ‘the Croats,
Hungarians, and Poles as defenders, committed the most
terrible devastations in the country through which they
passed. Famine, poverty, and a furious pestilence completed
the misery. Entire villages were wiped out; in the city
of Luxemburg the churchyards no longer had room for the
bodies, and places for burial had to be prepared within the
fortifications. Throughout the entire province 11,000 persons,
one-third of the inhabitants, lost their lives.’

In the year 1637 Count Bernhard von Weimar transferred
the scene of the war into southern Baden, where, during the
siege of Breisach, from July 5 to December 18, 1638, an
epidemic of scurvy caused increased misery. In the year
1639 large numbers of people in the Lörrach district were
carried away by the pestilence, among them Count Bernhard
himself.

#### 3. North Germany (1636–40)

In North Germany the war against the Imperialists was
continued by the Swedes under Banner. On October 4, 1636,
the Imperialists were defeated at Wittstock (province of
Brandenburg, district of East Priednitz), whereupon the
Swedes in that very same year overran Saxony and Thuringia.
In 1637, to be sure, they were thrown back into Pomerania
by Gallas, but in 1638 they reappeared in Saxony, and in
1639 won a brilliant victory at Chemnitz. Thereupon
Banner undertook a campaign into Bohemia, whence, in
1641, he was forced to retire. Shortly afterwards (May 10,
1641) he died in Halberstadt.

67These campaigns spread severe pestilences throughout the
above-mentioned regions of North Germany, particularly
the southern part of Brandenburg and the modern province
of Saxony. The largest part of the Altmark resembled
a ‘large lazaret’; in Wittstock itself there were 305 deaths
in the year 1636, in Bismark 163, and in Salzwedel 193;
in Werben a plague broke out after the soldiers had been
quartered there and lasted well into the next year. In
Stendal it began in June 1636, and carried away 1,992
persons in that year, as compared with an average annual
mortality of 120–30; nor does the number include the
peasants that had fled to the city, 3,000 of whom died.
The pestilence spread over the entire vicinity and wiped out
whole villages. In Tangermünde a pestilence broke out
even before the battle of Wittstock; it was borne thither by
Imperialists and Saxon artillerymen. In Gardelegen, where
Banner had his head-quarters, 500 people in the parish of
St. Nicholas, and 1,205 in the parish of St. Mary, succumbed
in the year 1636 to bubonic plague and other diseases,
among the dead being 195 soldiers. In Neuhaldensleben,
whither many country-people had fled, a plague broke out
in May 1636, and spread throughout the entire vicinity;
in many days in September, thirty and more bodies were
counted, while the incomplete church register records 778
deaths. The total number of deaths is said to have been
2,560.