

The Upper Palatinate was also severely attacked by
pestilence (typhus fever and bubonic plague), which spread
far into the Bavarian Forest. In Amberg an epidemic of
typhus fever and dysentery broke out in the year 1633, and
in April of the following year bubonic plague appeared; the
latter disease carried away from 15 to 20 persons on many
days of that month, while in July and August as many as
40 people died every day. In the spring of 1634 Weiden
became infected with typhus fever and shortly after that with
bubonic plague; from August 17 to November 6, some 1,800
people died. The bodies were corded up like piles of wood,
placed in ditches in groups of 200 and 300, and covered
with quick-lime. In Schwandorf (north of Regensburg)
the Imperialists had encamped in the summer of 1634;
after their departure a pestilence characterized by ‘swellings
and large unknown spots’ broke out and carried away
almost one-third of the inhabitants. In Hemau (north-west
of Regensburg), after the Swedes had passed through the
town, ‘the malignant pestilence’ (typhus fever) had broken
out in the year 1633; and in 1634, after the devastations
committed by the troops of Bernhard von Weimar, bubonic
plague appeared and carried away one-half of the inhabitants.

3. The cities on the Danube. In the year 1632 Neuburg
was occupied by the Swedes; after their departure, on
October 18, an epidemic of Hungarian head-disease broke
out and carried away many soldiers and citizens (more than
900 in eight months). Again in the two following years
pestilence caused great devastation. On April 29, 1632, the
55Swedes appeared before Ingolstadt, but in a few days
withdrew; there was a strong garrison in the city, however,
and many fugitives had gathered there. In this overcrowded
population typhus fever broke out and carried away large
numbers of people. In the following year the disease became
even more widespread, and 1,039 people succumbed to it
before the end of November. In the first part of the year
1635 the pestilence abated. In the second half of the year
1634 Regensburg was attacked by bubonic plague, and
despite all measures of precaution it carried away two-thirds
of the population (according to other reports there
were 3,125 deaths). The entire vicinity suffered from the
plague. The mortality in Straubing during the siege of the
Imperialists (March 1634) increased greatly; even in the
year before it had been very high (294 deaths). The total
number of deaths in the year 1634 is not known, but of three
parishes St. Jacob’s alone had 631 burials. Deggendorf and
Passau fared similarly.

4. Upper Bavaria and Lower Bavaria south of the Danube.
On May 17, 1632, Gustavus Adolphus had occupied Munich,
and during his short sojourn of three weeks apparently no
epidemic diseases made their appearance among the Swedes.
But since typhus fever had broken out everywhere in the
vicinity, strict measures of precaution were adopted by the
city authorities. According to G. von Suttner[36] 124 people
in the quarantine-house before the Schwabinger Tor succumbed
to ‘burning fever and headache’ between August
and the end of the year. According to a report published
in 1632 the poor people suffered in particular, while red spots,
continual headache, and later on diarrhoea, characterized
the disease. A very severe pestilence broke out in Munich
in the year 1634. ‘The epidemic was caused’, says Seitz,[37]
‘by the arrival of 4,000 Spanish soldiers in July of the year
561634; they were called there from Tölz and Weilheim when
the Duke of Saxe-Weimar and General Horn were threatening
the city. Although shortly after that, in August, a few
evidences of disease were noticed, it was not regarded as
infectious. Finally, however, a real plague broke out with
such fury that four lazarets and a garden outside of the
city had to be made ready for the care of the sick. It raged
most furiously in the months of October and November,
when from 200 to 250 dwellings, among them entire houses,
were quarantined every week. Thus it went on until the
end of December.’ Unfortunately there exists no medical
description of the disease, the most important characteristics
of which were chills, accompanied by internal fever, violent
headaches, great lassitude, haemorrhage, plague-spots, and
swellings. All told, some 15,000 persons are said to have
died in the year 1634—about one-half of the total population
of the city. The bodies of victims became so numerous that
they were piled up in the streets and houses, without attempt
to keep a record of the names, and buried in ditches forty at
a time. Strict isolation of the patients by closing up the
houses was enforced, and the use of the clothes and bedding
of the dead was forbidden under severe penalties; such
effects were burned outside of the gates. Only two gates
remained open, and in front of one of them a garden was
made ready to receive strangers who were denied admittance
into the city. In February 1635, the pestilence had almost
entirely ceased, but in September it broke out anew and did
not disappear until February 1637.