

In the years 1633–4 typhus fever and bubonic plague were
spread throughout all Upper and Lower Bavaria by the
continued marauding of the Swedes. The Imperialists, no
less than the Swedes, helped to devastate the country,
while the Spanish soldiers had the worst reputation of all.
Again in the year 1635, especially in the autumn, the pestilence
appeared. A plague broke out in Freising after the
town was plundered by the Swedes on July 16, 1634 (Landshut
57had already been captured by them on May 10, 1632), and
after their departure they left behind them an infectious
disease which was diagnosed by the town-physician as
Hungarian fever. A pestilence broke out in the city when
it was plundered by the soldiers under Bernhard von Weimar,
on July 10, 1634, and carried away one-third of the inhabitants;
according to a list furnished by the court the number
of deaths was 738, but there were many more with whose
legacies the court had nothing to do. The bodies were piled
up on wagons and conveyed to cemeteries, while the dwellings
of diseased persons were closed. In Dingolfing, which was
occupied by the Swedes from July 22, 1633, to June 1634,
a plague raged with such fury that it was thought the city
would be completely wiped out. Simbach-on-the-Inn and
the near-by market-town of Thann suffered greatly from
a plague in the year 1634. In Thann many bodies lay for
a long time in the houses unburied, while entire families
among the poorer population were wiped out of existence.
The plague also raged in the surrounding localities, and many
bodies lay in the streets as food for scavenger birds. A plague
raged in the years 1633–4 in Traunstein, which had already
had a few isolated cases of disease in the previous year;
123 people died terrible deaths in the two years mentioned,
and also in the years 1635–6. In the year 1634 a pestilence
caused 500 deaths in Rosenheim, while severe outbreaks of
pestilence were reported from many surrounding places—Aibling,
Miesbach, Wasserburg, and Tegernsee.

In Tölz twenty-seven adults succumbed in May and June
1633, to Hungarian disease; a pestilence also broke out in
the spring of 1634 and carried away hundreds of people in the
months of May, June, and July. From July on, the church-registers
contain no more entries; the patients with black
swellings usually had but a few hours to live. In Oberammergau
‘wild headache’ raged in the years 1631 and 1633,
and many people succumbed to it. In September 1634, the
town became infected with bubonic plague, and up to
58October 28, eighty-four people succumbed to the disease—about
one-fifth of the population. The epidemic caused the
people to vow that they would produce the Passion Play
there every ten years. Murnau, Weilheim, and other places
were severely attacked in the year 1634. In Andechs the
mortality was increased in the year 1634 by an outbreak of
dysentery and typhus fever, and on July 27 bubonic plague
also appeared and remained until November, carrying away
200 of the 500 inhabitants of the town. In Landsberg
typhus fever broke out very seriously in the year 1630. ‘All
over the bodies of the people who contracted the disease’,
says Lammert,[38] ‘red spots appeared, and then the victims
lost control of themselves and knocked their heads against
the walls. Many who seemed scarcely to have contracted
the disease died suddenly. Dead bodies were found everywhere,
even in public squares.’ In the following year the
disease spread even further; the vicinity of Landsberg was
infected by the soldiers, who were constantly marching
back and forth. After the terrible plundering of the city in
April and September of the year 1633, a plague broke out
and carried away a large proportion of the few inhabitants
that were left.