

5. In England typhus fever repeatedly broke out after
the year 1622. In the spring of the year 1643 it appeared in
the parliamentary army and in the royal garrison during
76the siege of Reading. The disease, which is described by
Thomas Willis, spread from there to Oxford and the surrounding
country.[51]

### VI. A General Review of the Loss of Human Life in Germany during the Thirty Years’ War

Even if it is impossible to give an accurate numerical
account of the losses due to pestilence in the course of the
Thirty Years’ War, we have seen in a general way how
epidemics of dysentery, typhus fever, and bubonic plague
followed at the heels of armies, how they were borne from
place to place, and how the devastation of the country
caused by the war led to an absolute dearth of the necessaries
of life, and thereby helped the pestilences to spread. We
have mentioned only those places regarding which we have
specific information, and they can be regarded only as
examples of how these pestilences appeared; as a matter
of fact, however, conditions were very much the same in
all parts of the country. At the same time these examples
show satisfactorily that the great depopulation of Germany
during the Thirty Years’ War was chiefly caused by severe
epidemics of typhus fever and bubonic plague.

It will be of interest to assemble the figures (such as have
been recorded) relating to the number of deaths that occurred
in a few of the larger cities during the Thirty Years’ War.
We include Basel among those cities, since, being situated
close to the border of that part of Germany where the war
was carried on during two rather long periods, it was necessarily
attacked by the prevalent pestilences. At the same
time Basel affords an example of how quickly these pestilences
disappeared from the cities, even in the seventeenth
century, if external conditions permitted the authorities
to take the necessary measures of prevention and precaution,
and if the cities were not constantly being reinfected. We
77give the total number of deaths, and merely remark that
the population in all German cities in the course of the
Thirty Years’ War decreased considerably. In the case of
Leipzig, Dresden, and Frankfurt-on-the-Main the still-births
are included, but not in the case of Augsburg, Basel, and
Strassburg. As a rule the country-people who fled to the
cities are not included among the dead; only in the case of
Strassburg, and perhaps also in that of Breslau for the year
1633, are they included.

The total loss of human life in the Thirty Years’ War can
be estimated only approximately. The statement attributed
to Lammert, that the population of Germany, which amounted
to sixteen or seventeen millions before the war, had dwindled
down to four millions after the war, is perhaps an exaggeration.
Other estimates state that Germany lost one-half
of its population. In the case of a few states we have more
exact figures, which probably approach more closely to the
actual loss. Thus the electorate of Saxony, which was much
larger in area than the modern kingdom of Saxony, in the
years 1631–2 is said to have lost some 934,000 persons. The
population of Bohemia is said to have decreased during the
Thirty Years’ War from three millions to 780,000. In Bavaria
80,000 families are said to have been wiped out. The
population of Württemberg decreased from 444,800 in the
year 1622 to 97,300. The population of Hesse decreased
by about one-quarter. So much, however, is sure: that in
the regions where the war was carried on for several years
the population decreased by far more than one-half. The
most positive proof of this is afforded by the hundreds of
burned-down and unrebuilt houses found in so many
German cities, and the numerous unpeopled, or almost
unpeopled, places which Germany had to show at the end
of the war.