

The Turkish army, which passed the winter in Bulgaria,
was severely attacked by plague, but no further information
about this outbreak is available.

88In February 1771, Moldavia and Wallachia suffered very
little from plague, although there were occasional outbreaks
here and there (for example, in Bucharest) until the year
1773; but these were always of short duration.

The transplantation of this disease into neighbouring
countries, especially Russia and its capital, was of particular
importance. In consequence of the widespread occurrence
of bubonic plague in Moldavia and Wallachia when the war
broke out in the spring of 1770, large numbers of fugitives
from those parts gathered along the border of Transylvania,
where a quarantine establishment was opened at Törzburg
(south-west of Kronstadt). In Rukur, a border-village of
Wallachia, whither large numbers of people fled daily, a
Jewess succumbed at the end of April to bubonic plague,
and in the course of the next eight weeks 60 more people
died. From there the pestilence spread to neighbouring
localities, in which 615 out of 3,000 inhabitants (including
31 outsiders) died. The climax of the plague was in September.
It gradually spread throughout the border-towns
of Transylvania, but only in occasional instances did it
reach the interior of the country; all told, there were 1,024
deaths from the pestilence in Transylvania in the year
1770.

Since all the supplies of the Russian army were conveyed
to it on Polish wagons, Polish peasants contracted the disease
in the infected countries, and then spread it throughout
Poland. Jewish pedlars, who purchased clothes, furs, and
war-booty in the Russian camp, likewise helped to spread
the disease. In Poland the plague became unusually widespread,
particularly in Podolia, Volhynia, and in the eastern
part of Galicia; 47 cities and 580 villages, according to
Chenot, were attacked, and 275 of the latter were almost
completely wiped out. The total loss in these regions is
estimated at 250,000. But the disease penetrated no further
into Poland, and Warsaw did not suffer at all.

Southern Russia was attacked later than Poland—not
89until August 1770. Kiev was the first of several cities in
which the plague broke out; the disease, which was borne
there on infected wares from Podolia, carried away 20,000
people, about one-fifth of the population of the city. Fugitives
from Kiev conveyed the pestilence to many cities and
villages in Little Russia, while troops returning from Bender
helped to spread it in the north. In Nieskin, a city in
Ukraine, the plague caused horrible devastation; it broke
out there for the second time in the year 1771, and carried
away from 8,000 to 10,000 people.

It was generally believed that the severe epidemic of
bubonic plague which raged in Moscow in the year 1771 was
directly connected with the expedition against the Turks.
At that time the city had some 230,000 inhabitants; the
streets, full of filth, were narrow, and the houses, most
of which were one-story wooden structures, stood close
together. According to Hecker, the beginning of the plague
is obscure; fugitives from the scene of the war, and wool
imported from Poland or Ukraine are both given as the
original means of dissemination, but inasmuch as the disease
was so widespread in the south, it is probable that it was
conveyed to the north in various ways. Schafonsky, writing
in Russian, described the plague in an excellent book, of
which Hecker made use; the description by a surgeon named
Samoilowitz,[77] who did good service during the plague,
contracted the disease himself, and was roughly treated in
a revolt, according to Hecker, lacks scientific merit and is
unreliable. In November and December, 1770, there were
a few suspected cases in a hospital in the eastern part of
the city; Schafonsky diagnosed the disease as bubonic
plague, while the medical officer of the city called it typhus
fever. By means of strict isolation and other measures
this outbreak was soon entirely checked. As early as
90January and February, however, indubitable cases of plague
had occurred, but they were kept secret. The epidemic
really began in the Imperial cloth-manufactory, where 3,000
working-men were employed; not until 130 people had died
within eight weeks, was this fact made known on March 9,
1771. Since many of the working-men lived in the city and
had meanwhile conveyed the disease to their homes, the
measures of prevention came too late. The patients were
now taken to a convent in Ukresh (near Moscow), while all
the rest of the employees were quarantined. But these
measures merely helped to spread the disease, since many
of the working-men, in order to escape being quarantined,
fled and concealed themselves in the city. When it became
known that bubonic plague was present in Moscow, the
nobility fled to the country. The people themselves refused
to listen to any advice; nobody believed in contagion, and
in September there was actually a revolt in the city against
the measures that had been adopted to check the epidemic.
The compulsory confinement in hospitals of infected people
and the quarantining of their families led to numerous concealments.
In July the pestilence had already become very
widespread; many houses in the suburbs were empty, the
courts of justice and workshops were closed, and, since nurses
and grave-diggers were dying off rapidly, convicts were
employed to do their work. In the southern part of the city
a convent was converted into a hospital, and at the end of
July only one attendant was on hand there to take care of
1,000 patients. The epidemic reached its climax in September,
when from 600 to 1,000 persons died every day.
By January 1772, the pestilence had disappeared. From
the month of April 1771 on, the number of people that contracted
the disease and the number that died were officially
recorded; the number of deaths (excluding the bodies buried
in secret) was: