

The severe epidemic of bubonic plague during the Russo-Turkish
War of 1769–72 has been carefully investigated by
Hecker.[75] The Turkish army, in consequence of inferior
nourishment, was badly infected with intermittent fever,
dysentery, and typhus fever when it set out from Constantinople
in March 1769. When the Russian troops advanced,
the Turks retreated after an engagement near Galatz. Since
the disease had been conveyed on ships from Constantinople
to Galatz, where many Russians succumbed to it, the city
was evacuated. On the way to Jassy every trace of the
pestilence disappeared, and in Jassy the soldiers were quartered
in the houses of the citizens. Since patients suffering
from contagious diseases had not been isolated in the military
hospitals there, in the middle of January typhus fever broke
out in them, accompanied by glandular swellings in the
groin. Four weeks later a Jew and his two children were
taken sick in the city and died, the Jew having bought
a fur coat in the hospital. Since the Russian commander-in-chief
did not hold the disease to be bubonic plague and did
nothing to prevent it from spreading, in March 1770 it spread
far and wide in Moldavia and Wallachia. Not until the end
of April was the presence of bubonic plague officially admitted;
and then the well-qualified physician Orraeus was commissioned
to make an investigation.

From Jassy the disease was conveyed to Botoshany, which
also lies in northern Moldavia, and there it soon developed
into a severe epidemic and carried away more than 800 out
the town’s 2,500 inhabitants; the rest fled to Carpathia.
87‘The patients,’ says Hecker,[76] ‘lay in tents, and without
care or medical help awaited an almost certain death. The
city itself afforded a sight of complete disorder; the houses
were deserted and stood with open windows and doors, the
air was poisoned with the odour of accumulated refuse,
and the general devastation bore silent witness to the most
extreme misery. In addition to that, there were multitudes
of savage, ravenous dogs, which dug up the dead and menaced
the sick.’

Conditions were just as bad in Jassy when Orraeus arrived
there on May 10; of the inhabitants and of the Russian
garrison more than half had died, while many streets were
entirely depopulated. Since the persons infected with the
disease were placed out in a near-by forest, where they were
left without care, many patients were concealed inside the
houses and their bodies afterwards secretly buried in gardens
and cellars. There was no medical help, since both of the
Greek physicians had fled from the city. On May 20 the
Russian troops, at the instigation of Orraeus, withdrew from
Jassy; a convent was converted into a hospital, and soon
after that the pestilence began to subside. By June 22 it
had disappeared.

In Wallachia the disease broke out somewhat later than
in Moldavia, and with considerably less severity. In Bucharest
it lasted until May.

In Bender, situated in Bessarabia on the Dniester, there
was a mild epidemic of bubonic plague after the city had
been stormed on September 16, 1770. The carrying-off of
war-booty caused new pestilences in the army and in the
population of Podolia and Little Russia. For a short time
in the last part of September the main army also suffered
from plague in its fixed quarters on the Pruth.