

91

Months.

Total no. deaths.

Deaths in Hospitals.

April (1771)

778

May

878

56

June

1,099

105

July

1,708

298

August

7,268

845

September

21,401

1,640

October

17,561

2,626

November

5,235

1,769

December

805

456

January (1772)

330

The number of deaths, which at that time averaged 7,000
per annum in Moscow, thus increased to 58,000 (including
some 1,000 secret burials), and at least 52,000 were directly
due to the epidemic. About 150 priests were victims of
their calling.

During the pestilence there was constant intercourse
between Moscow and the surrounding country, since the
necessaries of life had to be brought to the city, where clothes
and household goods were to be bought very cheaply. Thus
most of the villages and cities in the surrounding country
were infected. Some of the latter were almost completely
depopulated, while the estate-owners found protection by
shutting themselves up in their manors. Of the more distant
cities Jaroslav-on-the-Volga was very severely attacked,
while Borowsk, Kaluga, and Tula suffered somewhat less.
St. Petersburg was the only city to prohibit outsiders from
entering, and it was consequently spared.

92

## CHAPTER V
THE PERIOD BETWEEN THE FRENCH REVOLUTION AND NAPOLEON’S RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN

The twenty years of fighting that followed the French
Revolution, and into which all Europe was drawn, were everywhere
accompanied by outbreaks of pestilence, many of which
were very serious. At the very beginning of the first Coalition
War (1792–7) they played an important rôle. A severe
epidemic of dysentery broke out among the Prussian troops
when they were advancing into Champagne, and this was
chiefly responsible for the failure of the invasion. Typhus
fever had also appeared and caused a great many deaths
among the Prussians, as well as among the inhabitants of
the Departments of Meuse, Moselle, Meurthe, and Ardennes.[78]
When the badly infected army of the Allies retreated, after
the engagement at Valmy (September 20, 1792), it left
behind its sick in various cities and villages, and thus
infected the French army that followed in pursuit. In
Longwy itself (which had remained in the power of the Allies
until October 22), and in the immediate vicinity, the streets
were filled with the bodies of soldiers who had succumbed,
partly to exhaustion, and partly to dysentery.[79]

Verdun suffered terribly during the siege of the Allies, and
at the end of August was obliged to surrender. The chief
cause of the widespread occurrence of disease there was the
fearful lack of sanitation; ‘à Verdun,’ say Maréchal and
Didion[80] ‘une des causes les plus puissantes d’infection était
le dépavement de la ville au moment du siège. Tous les
jours on jetait de chaque maison au milieu de la rue des
93immondices de toute espèce, des déjections humaines et
animales, des débris, des végétaux, qui se mêlant à la boue
se liquéfiaient et se putréfiaient par l’action des pluies. Les
agents de la ferme des boues ne pouvaient rien contre tel
foyer. Il s’en échappait une odeur infecte, quand quelque
voiture venait à passer, et l’on voyait souvent des personnes
frappées de spasmes, prises de vomissements et même
asphyxiées en traversant les rues.’ (One of the most potent
causes of the infection at Verdun was the unpaved state of
the town at the time of the siege. Every day refuse of all
kinds was thrown from each house out into the street—the
evacuations of men and animals, rubbish, and garbage—and
there it mixed with the mud, liquefied and rotted through
the action of the rain. The officials in charge of street
sanitation were powerless. All this filth emitted a foul
odour when a carriage drove through it, and one often saw
people seized with convulsions and sickness, or even
suffocated while crossing the streets.) There was no more
thought of taking proper care of the sick and wounded
in Verdun at that time, than there was in the later French
wars; they lay in numbers on rotten straw, in their
own excrement, two or three of them sharing a single
blanket. The result was that two-thirds of the patients
died.