

Failure to take measures of precaution, if the disease
once broke out in a neighbouring place, also contributed
greatly toward the dissemination of it. ‘If typhus fever
was present in any military halting-place, frequently nothing
was done to prevent it from infecting the next place, where
it had not yet made its appearance; or, if anything was
done, it was often merely to issue an order which was not
complied with.’[113] At the same time, to be sure, one must
take into account the fact that sheer ignorance rendered
useful measures impossible. If this ignorance prevailed in
the highest places, nothing better was to be expected of the
small cities and towns.

That the ‘contagious typhus’ prevalent during the Napoleonic
wars was the same disease which we call typhus fever
is very certain. The physicians of the middle of the nineteenth
century, when views of typhus and typhoid fever
112had cleared up somewhat, have confirmed this fact.[114] The
descriptions of the disease are almost invariably reproductions
of the same picture, the sole difference being that it
was much more severe and fatal among the half-starved
soldiers on their return from Russia, and among soldiers
packed together in strongholds, than it was among people
who were less afflicted by the war and who lived at a distance
from the military routes.

As a rule, the disease broke out eight or nine days after
infection. It began with a general indisposition, which
lasted several days, or, if this indisposition failed to appear,
with a chill, great languor, loss of appetite, and weakness in
the limbs; frequently brain disorders also manifested themselves,
at first in the form of a mild stupefaction, singing in
the ears, violent headache, somnolence, or wild delirium.
The exanthema usually appeared between the fourth and
the seventh day. Hufeland describes it as ‘an outbreak of
red spots, covering most of the body; they were mostly
of a violet tinge, but were not sharply defined, and often
gradually merged into the colour of the rest of the skin’.
It was frequently asserted that the petechiae now and then
failed to appear at all, even in severe cases. Jörg says
expressly:[115] ‘Sometimes they broke out sparsely, one here
and one there, and in such cases it was easy to overlook
them.’ After the disease had progressed for two or three
weeks the patient’s temperature went down, and there were
few fatalities after the twenty-first day. Convalescence
was of short duration, provided the outbreak had not been
preceded by exhaustion due to hardships. In regard to
abdominal and intestinal symptoms, great dissimilarity was
observed; Hufeland states that when there were no complications,
an autopsy revealed not the slightest change in
113the intestinal organs, and Horn says that ‘the colour of
the intestines was often almost natural.’ The severity
of the disease varied greatly; it was particularly fatal
among the soldiers homeward-bound from Russia, more than
half of whom died. It is frequently asserted that the
majority of those who were thus directly infected succumbed
to the disease, and that it carried away some ten per cent
of the civil inhabitants who contracted it.