

The German Central Hospital Management, which was
founded in the latter part of November 1813, and from
which Bavaria and Württemberg held aloof, sought to introduce
certain improvements into the military lazaret system,
but it was unable to accomplish a great deal, owing to the
110lack of hospitals, physicians, and all the means necessary for
the treatment of sick and injured people.

Very dangerous for the dissemination of the disease was
the belief that the placing of typhus fever patients together
with other invalids did no harm, but rather that the congregating
of numerous typhus fever patients by themselves
caused the contagion to develop with especial severity.
The Saxon staff surgeon Neumann, for example, writes in
regard to this question:[112] ‘Anybody who lies in a bed to
which the poison is still clinging will without fail contract
the disease; on the other hand, I have often seen people
suffering from other forms of sickness lie alongside of typhus-fever
patients and escape infection, provided they had nothing
in common, did not touch one another, or make use of one
another’s linen. Hence I draw the conclusion that the
poison of typhus fever, like the poison of bubonic plague
and small-pox, cannot enter the system from a distance,
not even from a very short distance, and can be communicated
only by close and direct contact. This seems to
contradict our experience that the intensity of the poison is
greatly increased when several patients lie side by side.
Accordingly, I warn all military physicians not to congregate
all their typhus fever patients in a single room by themselves;
for few would come forth from such a room alive,
while the poisoned atmosphere of the room would pervade
the entire lazaret, infect the physicians and attendants, and
finally spread throughout the immediate neighbourhood.
People think that they can prevent the disease from spreading
by congregating and isolating the patients, but as a
matter of fact this has the opposite effect. This is clear
when we consider that the mere being together of unhealthy
people causes the poison to develop, and that not only the
people themselves, but also the very exhalations from their
bodies, are sufficient to spread the infection. For example,
111if a considerable quantity of dirty clothes or linen is allowed
to accumulate in a pile, and after a short time is picked up,
the usual result is that the people who do the work experience
a severe attack of typhus fever.’

Very often conditions made segregation impossible, even
when it was desired, or else the French generals refused to
permit it. Consequently, infection was so frequent in the
hospitals that the disease at a very early date acquired the
name ‘hôpital fever’ (fièvre d’hôpital).

The fact that the weather conditions exerted some influence
was not to be overlooked; in the year 1813, when the
warm weather began, the disease abated a little, whereas
in the year 1814 it ceased altogether at the beginning of the
warm weather. The reason for this was that the cold
weather forced people to huddle together in houses, and
that bathing and washing, particularly among the soldiers
and poor people, was less frequently and profusely indulged
in; another reason was that the heavier clothing worn in
winter facilitated the breeding of vermin.