

Pont-à-Mousson, where three military hospitals were
erected, also had a severe epidemic, as did Metz; the
hospitals could not accommodate the many patients that
came streaming in from all directions. Typhus fever continued
to appear sporadically in the next two years; from
1792 to 1795 as many as 64,413 patients were received into
the Metz hospitals, and of that number 4,870 died.

In the years 1793–4 typhus fever was frequently conveyed
into Germany in consequence of the warfare along the Upper
Rhine. In May 1793, it was brought to Frankfurt-on-the-Main
by French prisoners-of-war, whom the Austrians on
their march through the country had left behind. In addition
94to the cases of ‘putrid fever’ in the military hospitals, a few
cases were also observed in the city; until November the
disease raged extensively, but in the winter it increased in
fury and did not disappear until the summer of 1794. ‘The
descriptions of putrid fever,’ says L. Wilbrandt,[81] ‘while
they make no mention of exanthema, nevertheless positively
prove that the disease was none other than exanthematic
typhus, war-typhus. The facts that the disease described
was highly infectious, and that it is expressly stated that
diarrhoea was not observed, lead us to this conclusion.’ In
the report of the health-officer, issued at the end of July
1793, it is nevertheless asserted that ‘the disease was of a
putrescent nature, involving spots and purpura’. The transportation
of French prisoners caused the epidemic to spread
to Günthersburg and from there to Bornheim, but only in
a mild form.

A short article by Canz[82] informs us about the spreading
of typhus fever from the Rhine to the Black Forest. The
disease was borne by French prisoners to Hornberg (near
Triberg), where in the autumn of 1793 they spent four weeks.
Owing to numerous outbreaks of ‘infectious nerve-fever’,
a war-hospital for such patients was established at Hornberg,
which had some 1,000 inhabitants. In November the first
patients appeared in the town, and the epidemic lasted until
the beginning of June of the following year; scarcely a single
house was spared, especially among the poor, and often
entire families contracted the disease. All told, sixty people
died, including eight outsiders who had been brought to the
hospital. According to Canz, infectious nerve-fever also
made its appearance in Kinzigtal, in the Rhine region, and
in several parts of Swabia. ‘In some cases,’ he says,
95‘petechiae appeared between the fifth and eighth days on
the breast, arms, and back; at first they were very small
and rose-red, but later they turned yellow, brown, and
finally blue and black, occasionally taking the form of large
blue blotches, like suggilations.’

French prisoners also conveyed typhus fever to Bavaria.
According to Seitz,[83] this was the case, for example in
Regensburg, where the disease raged furiously in December
1793. ‘There is no doubt,’ he says, ‘that the germ of this
disease was brought there by French captives, since many
contracted the disease and succumbed to it on the transport-ships
on which they were carried; and Schäffer (a physician
in Regensburg) also saw many people contract the fever
who had come in contact with them.’ Typhus fever was
disseminated all along the Danube—Donauwörth, Neuburg,
Ingolstadt, Vohburg, Kehlheim, Donaustauf, Pfatter, Straubing,
Deggendorf, and other places. Kulmbach was also
infected by the French soldiers.