

During the Coalition War violent conflicts took place in
western France in the Vendée, where the Royalist population
had risen against the new potentates. When Nantes was
besieged by the Royalists in 1793, a furious outbreak of
typhus fever occurred in that city.[84] The prisons and
hospitals were greatly overcrowded, the city was filled with
dirt which nobody took the trouble to remove, and many
carcasses were left unburied. In the latter part of September
the disease broke out in the prison of Saintes-Claires, where
the prisoners were very closely packed together. According
to le Borgne, the official inspector said of this prison: ‘Tout
manquait dans cette maison—l’air, l’eau, les aliments, les
remèdes, tout jusqu’aux moyens d’ensevelir et d’enterrer les
morts.’ (Everything was lacking in the building—air, water,
food, remedies, and even the means for covering and burying
96the dead.) Without beds, without even straw, the prisoners
had to lie on the damp ground and be scantily fed on bad
bread and water. Regarding the Le Bouffay Prison, we read:
‘Des morts, des mourants, et des prisonniers nouvellement
infectés gisent sur le même grabat! Les cachots répandent
des miasmes putrides, et les lumières s’éteignent lorsqu’on
entre dans ces cloaques empestés!’ (Dead, dying, and recently
infected prisoners lie on the same pallet! The cells reek
with putrid miasma, and the lights go out when one enters
these pestilential sewers.) And regarding the L’Entrepôt
Prison we read: ‘La maladie était si intense à L’Entrepôt
que, de 22 sentinelles qui y montèrent la garde, 21 périrent
en très peu de jours, et que les membres du Conseil de
salubrité, qui eurent le triste courage d’y aller, en furent
presque tous les victimes.’ (The disease was so intense at
L’Entrepôt, that twenty-one out of twenty-two sentinels
who went on duty there died within a very few days, and
almost all the members of the Board of Health who had
the sad courage to go there fell victims to it.) The hospitals
were so crowded that three or four persons were obliged to
occupy the same bed. After December the disease also
spread to the city; of 300 grave-diggers employed by the
Revolutionary Committee, the majority were taken sick and
many died. The total number of deaths in the city and in
the prisons was estimated at 10,000.

In Italy very severe pestilences spread in a very short time
over the entire peninsula, and even to Sicily, in consequence
of the war that had been going on there since 1796. These
pestilences were unusually severe in both camps during the
siege of Mantua (1796–7). (We shall learn more about this
in the tenth chapter.) In the year 1799 the French troops
under Scherer were forced to retreat in disorder before the
victorious advance of Suvarov and the Austrians, and they
took refuge in Nice. There, in the autumn of 1799, a severe
epidemic of typhus fever broke out in the French army and
soon spread to the non-belligerent population, one-third of
97which was carried away by it.[85] In consequence of the removal
of the patients the disease was conveyed into southern
France, infecting Aix, Fréjus, Marseilles, Toulon, and even
Grenoble.[86]