

Of course it would be a mistake to say that all the epidemics
of that time were epidemics of typhus fever; undoubtedly
typhoid fever carried away large numbers of people, since
it is to be assumed that the disease was endemic in many
cities. But owing to the inaccuracy of the descriptions and
the lack of autopsies, it is usually impossible to distinguish
the diseases with certainty. Even when the results of
autopsies were made known, the condition of the intestines
was often described so inaccurately that we cannot even
make out whether or not there were intestinal ulcers, which
are the most important pathological-anatomical symptoms of
typhoid fever. But the initial chill, the short duration of
the disease (three weeks), the presence of petechiae, the rapid
fall of temperature, and the shorter convalescence, all of
which are ever-recurring symptoms, enable us to distinguish
the epidemic of the years 1812–14 with certainty from typhoid
fever.

Through the influence of the works of Hildenbrand and
Hufeland the larger part of the medical world of that time
came to look upon contagious typhus as a specific disease;
other views, however, were vigorously supported, for example,
by Markus of Bamberg, who held it to be an inflammation
of the brain. The difference of opinion regarding the character
of the disease was important, not only theoretically, but also
practically, in view of the therapeutic practice of the time;
for those who regarded the disease as an inflammation of
the brain had naturally, in accordance with the methods
then in vogue, to resort to bleeding. But all unprejudiced
114observers came to the conclusion that bleeding was harmful,
and that it killed all the patients upon whom it was frequently
practised. Very soon the beneficial influence of fresh air
and cold came to be recognized, and the latter was often
provided by means of cold-water baths and douches. ‘It
was a universally confirmed principle, derived from experience,
that the warmer the patients were kept, the more severe
was the disease, and the colder they were kept, the milder
the disease.’ How beneficial fresh air was for the patients
was shown by the fact that those who were kept out in the
open air withstood the disease much more easily than those
who were kept shut up in houses and hospitals, and that it
was much less dangerous to transport patients from place
to place in the open air, than to keep them shut up in overcrowded
hospitals. ‘Thousands of patients’, says H. Häser,[116]
‘survived even the most severe forms of the disease without
human help of any kind. Many, especially physicians,
attributed their recovery to the fact that for weeks at a time
they were constantly being transported in the cold winter
from one halting-place to another, and were not compelled
to lie in overcrowded hospitals, where typhus fever and
dysentery raged most terribly.’

In dealing with the epidemic of typhus fever of the years
1812–14 we have a double epidemic to consider. The one
was disseminated directly by the returning remnants of the
‘Grand Army’, and after causing terrible devastation in
East Prussia it spread, in a relatively milder form, to other
parts of Germany. The other epidemic broke out during
the great battles in Saxony, which lasted several months,
and from there spread virulently over a large part of Germany.
In order to avoid repetition, the following account will
treat of the dissemination of the two epidemics jointly.