

From Spain typhus fever was frequently conveyed by
transports of prisoners to France; the border districts
through which the prisoners passed were the first to be
attacked, as, for instance, the town of Dax (near Bayonne).
Ozanam says:[102] ‘La France en ressentit les effets depuis
les Pyrénées jusqu’aux environs de Paris, sur toutes les
routes suivies par les prisonniers espagnols, et l’Angleterre
en fut infestée au retour des débris de ses troupes du même
pays. En France la ville de Dax, frontière de l’Espagne,
fut une des premières à éprouver les ravages des maladies
épidémiques, qui accompagnent toujours les armées. La
situation basse et marécageuse, jointe à l’encombrement de
son hôpital par des militaires atteints du typhus nosocomial,
ne tarda pas à favoriser la propagation de la contagion, et
elle fut bientôt transmise aux environs. Les prisonniers
espagnols y contribuèrent encore, et le caractère contagieux
de la maladie ne fut pas plus douteux, lorsqu’on vit les
employés au service des hôpitaux et à celui du transport
de ces militaires en être tous atteints.’ (France felt the
effects (of the disease) all along the routes followed by the
Spanish prisoners—from the Pyrenees to the environs of
Paris, while England was infected by the remnants of its
troops when they returned from France. The town of Dax,
situated near the border between France and Spain, was
one of the first places to experience the ravages of the
epidemic diseases which always accompanied the armies.
Its low, marshy situation, together with the fact that its
hospital was overcrowded with soldiers infected with nosocomial
103typhus, greatly favoured the propagation of the
contagion, which soon spread throughout the vicinity. The
Spanish prisoners also helped to spread it, and the contagious
character of the disease was no longer questionable when the
attendants at the hospitals, as well as the men who had
charge of transporting the sick, were seen to contract it.)

The Spanish prisoners were sent far into the interior, and
caused outbreaks of pestilence wherever they went. In
consequence of the strain and exertion involved in their
transportation, and also of the inferior food, typhus fever
soon became very widespread among them. Diseased and
wounded men were always carried in the same wagons,
while it was often necessary to remain for a considerable
length of time in camps, where sick and healthy men lay
side by side on straw; thus many died on the way. In
order to prevent the disease from spreading to the civil
population, it was arranged that the buildings designated
for the prisoners should lie away from the town where the
soldiers were quartered, or that the prisoners should be
sheltered in barracks. All intercourse between the prisoners
and the inhabitants was forbidden, and after their departure
the straw used by them was burned, and the buildings
they had occupied were fumigated.[103]

Since, however, it finally became necessary to house the
sick in hospitals, it was absolutely impossible to prevent
the disease from spreading. The result was that the following
places in Central France were attacked: Limoges,
Guéret, Châteauroux, Issoudun, Moulins, Nevers, La Charité,
and Bourges.[104] As people everywhere were afraid of contracting
the disease, the prisoners were transferred as
soon as possible to near-by districts, and this merely helped
to spread the disease. According to Boin, Bourges, in the
104year 1809, became the rendezvous of all Spanish prisoners,
who were housed there in barracks and in public hospitals;
of 653 prisoners of war received in the public hospitals, 103
died. In the city itself only a few cases of typhus fever
were observed. The highly contagious nature of the disease
was well known to Boin, who says: