

‘Many people stated positively’, says Hufeland,[108] ‘that
they contracted the disease almost immediately after they
had occupied small, narrow rooms in company with infected
French soldiers, or after they had washed their clothes or
waited upon them. This frequently happened in small
houses that undertook, for a small profit, to shelter invalid
108soldiers quartered upon the wealthier citizens. Many asserted
that they contracted the disease by passing the night in
small inns in the towns and villages around Berlin, and on
the roads from Königsberg, Danzig, and Frankfurt, and by
sleeping on beds or straw which had shortly before been
used by infected Frenchmen or Russians. A certain number
of men contracted typhus fever by serving as attendants,
in order to earn a little money, in the local French
military hospital. In this way many of the servants and
attendants employed there, as well as numerous surgeons
and apothecaries, contracted the disease and subsequently
infected the members of their families who brought them
home and took care of them, and who, in turn, infected the
other inhabitants of the house and of the neighbouring
houses.’ Further on, Hufeland adds that only those inmates
of the hospital contracted the disease who, as servants and
attendants, had been in close and constant contact with
the patients.

In the years 1813–14 a large number of physicians were
carried away by typhus fever; it was estimated at that
time that some 500 of them throughout Germany (excluding
the surgeons) fell victims to the disease—in Silesia alone
63 physicians died, in Leipzig 17, in Württemberg 17, and
in Baden 35.[109]

Emphasis was always laid upon the fact that the clothes
and other effects of people who had succumbed to typhus
fever were highly infectious. The wide prevalence of the
disease among the Jewish inhabitants of Vilna was attributed
to ignorance or disregard of this fact; for when orders
were issued to destroy such clothing, the Jews, out of sheer
avarice, disobeyed them. The persons who acquired such
effects in this cheap and illicit manner usually paid the
penalty themselves; in addition, they did a great deal
toward spreading the disease.

The military hospitals were also largely responsible for
109the dissemination of typhus fever; Parenteau-Desgranges[110]
called them outright ‘centres de contagion’. The cities in
which military hospitals were erected were always severely
attacked by the disease. It was generally complained, even
by the French physicians, that the French hospitals were
poorly arranged and badly managed—even simple cleanliness
and competent attendants were lacking. Patients
suffering from infectious disease were placed together with
others suffering from some mild form of sickness or from
a wound, thus giving the infection the best conceivable
chance to spread. Let us read how a French physician
describes the conditions in Verdun during the severe
epidemic of typhus fever that raged there in the years
1792–5:[111]

‘The disease spread with no less severity from other
sources of infection, such as the temporary hospitals established
in the Convent of Canons of Saint Nicholas, in the
Monastery of Saint Vannes, and in the barracks. The unfortunate
patients, thrown in heaps on the damp stone and
earth floors, scarcely having under them a few mats, or
perhaps some dirty straw, filthy with their excrement, three
of them often sharing a single blanket of coarse wool, presented
the most dismal picture one could possibly imagine.
At least three-quarters of the patients died. They were
buried in huge ditches dug in the vicinity of the ramparts,
and in the gardens surrounding the abbeys of Saint Vannes
and of Saint Nicholas.’