

In Fulda, which was forced to take in thousands of sick
soldiers, typhus fever soon began to spread rapidly, as it also
134did in the country surrounding the city. In Giessen, where
a Russian field-lazaret for 1,800–2,000 men was erected,
the epidemic soon spread to the civil inhabitants.

At Hanau the French retreat was opposed by General
Wrede with an army of 50,000 Bavarians and Austrians,
a much smaller number than the French had. The two
days of fighting that ensued (October 30 and 31, 1813)
caused the pestilence to develop murderously. Kopp has
given us a good description of this epidemic in Hanau.[150]
Since the beginning of the war the city had always had
a military hospital, which lay outside the city. During the
battles in Saxony the number of sick and wounded increased,
so that it was necessary to erect a second lazaret within the
city. Many sick-attendants and sub-surgeons contracted
typhus fever, which was prevalent in the hospitals, and
several cases also occurred in the city, especially among
people who quartered soldiers for money in their homes;
many soldiers were thus crowded together in small rooms,
and among them were a great many convalescents from
Saxon hospitals. The infectious nature of the disease and
its consequent dangerousness was shown by the fact that
as a rule entire families gradually contracted it, although
the epidemic was confined to individual houses. The engagement
at Hanau, from which the French emerged victorious,
resulted in the unfortunate city being stormed and plundered.
‘Even while the battle was going on,’ says Kopp,
‘a corps of the French army scattered throughout Hanau.
This corps had brought with it from Saxony the germ of
infection; for the region around Dresden could be looked
upon as the great breeding-place where, in view of the
enormous assemblage of people representing so many nations,
and owing to the concurrence of so many unusual factors,
the soil was uncommonly fertile for pestilential diseases.’
135After the engagement a multitude of French prisoners,
greatly weakened by hardships and hunger, came to the
city. The dissemination of typhus fever was especially
helped along by the fact that many poor inhabitants engaged
in looting on the battlefield, and took home with them the
knapsacks and other effects of the dead. The clothing of
the dead came into the possession of those who were charged
with burying them, and later got into the hands of the
poorest families in the city and in the neighbouring villages.
‘I often entered the houses of poor people,’ Kopp goes on
to say, ‘and found the entire family suffering from typhus
fever, and on the walls of the low sick-room the uniforms,
shirts, and other effects of the dead soldiers would still be
hanging.’ The result was that the number of patients
greatly increased after the battle, and in less than two weeks
an epidemic began to develop; at first it was rather mild,
but later on it carried away large numbers of people, and
lasted until the end of February, having reached its climax
in December. From December 1, 1813, to January 4, 1814,
248 people died, whereas the normal mortality for the month
of December was but 30. The total number of deaths,
including the soldiers, between October 26 and March 1 was
613, while in ordinary years only 125 people died, on the
average. The middle class suffered worst of all, while of
the upper classes three physicians and several clergymen
died. Of the 192 typhus-fever patients that Kopp himself
treated, 21 died (10·9 per cent), but these figures do not
include a rather large number of very mild cases. People
of all ages and both sexes were attacked; children suffered
less than adults, while old people and heavy drinkers were
the most liable to succumb. The disease lasted from two
to three weeks; death usually occurred on the fourteenth
to twentieth day, often somewhat sooner.