

In pursuing the French army the Russians also suffered
severely from diseases; according to Ebstein,[118] between
October 20 and December 14, 1812, they lost 61,964 men,
most of whom died of ‘nerve fever’ (typhus fever).

In Vilna, which was greatly overcrowded, typhus fever
raged furiously. The large number of sick and exhausted
soldiers that were left behind, owing to the extreme cold
(the thermometer went down as low as –28° Réaumur) sought
shelter, partly in private houses, and partly in hospitals.
The latter, for the first few days after the arrival of the
Russians, were in a terrible condition; sick men and dead
men were packed together in the cold, unheated rooms,
the former lying on rotten straw, completely deserted,
and without care or nourishment. The corridors and courts
were filled with dead bodies and with refuse of all kinds,
while in the rooms themselves there was no less filth, since
nobody removed the excrements. ‘The courts and corridors
of the hospitals’, says Gasc, an eye-witness,[119] ‘were so covered
with dead bodies that it was necessary to walk over heaps
of them in order to enter the rooms.’

Not until after the Emperor of Russia arrived in Vilna
was some semblance of order restored. But it was then
too late; almost all the patients in the hospitals were
infected with typhus fever, and according to Gasc and
Lemazurier the great majority of the 30,000 French prisoners
died. For owing to the long series of extreme hardships
which the soldiers had undergone, the disease broke out in
its most severe form, causing wild delirium, very large
118petechiae, abscesses, and gangrene. Many patients succumbed
within twenty-four hours, and recovery was very slow for
those who survived the attack.

In a short time the disease spread throughout the city,
not so much because the soldiers were quartered in private
houses, as because the Jews got possession of the clothes of
the dead. Of some 30,000 Jewish inhabitants no less than
8,000 died. In February and March all classes of society,
even the wealthiest people, were attacked. The disease also
spread to the surrounding country; Lemazurier says that
between the middle of 1812 and the beginning of 1813 some
55,000 bodies were buried in Vilna and vicinity, and that
the estimates made in Wittepsk, Smolensk, and Moscow were
in proportion. The pestilence spread southward and eastward,
and according to Faure, in February 1813 thousands
of French prisoners died in the overcrowded hospitals in
Orel. The same writer says that all of the French soldiers
who fell into the hands of the Russians succumbed to typhus
fever.[120] We may safely assume that the civil inhabitants
of all places in that part of the country were also attacked,
even though we have no figures or statistics to confirm the
assumption.

The pestilence also raged extensively in the region of the
Baltic Sea; St. Petersburg was severely attacked by it.
According to Parrot,[121] in the last months of the year 1812
there were a great many cases of ‘nerve fever’ in Dorpat;
in Riga the military hospitals were overcrowded, and out
of a population of 36,000 and a garrison of 20,000 there were
5,000 sick. The mortality in the hospitals was very high,
since, on account of the extreme cold, two-thirds of the
small windows were covered with boards and hay.