

115

### 2. The Russian Campaign and Typhus Fever in Russia[117]

Napoleon began to make preparations for his Russian
campaign as early as the year 1811; troops were assembled
in Westphalia, Hamburg, Saxony, Holland, on the Rhine,
and near Verona, and several hospitals were founded, as in
Danzig. An army of 550,000 men was organized to take
part in the expedition into Russia; it consisted of Frenchmen,
Germans, Italians, Spaniards, and Poles. How this
army was destroyed on its march to and from Moscow, and
in what a pitiable condition the remnants of it arrived in
Germany, is well known. Since it is our purpose to point out
here how that severe epidemic of typhus fever spread abroad
from those remnants, we can deal but briefly with the
prevalence of the disease in the army itself.

In consequence of the great heat, of the lack of drinking-water
and good food, and of the continual bivouacking (the
peasants burned and deserted all the villages along the way),
116the army suffered greatly even on the march to Moscow.
After crossing the Polish border the soldiers were severely
attacked by dysentery and diarrhoea; Kerckhoffs estimates
that no less than 80,000 men were suffering from dysentery
at the beginning of August 1812. Typhus fever broke out,
very sparsely, to be sure, as early as the latter part of July,
when the army arrived at Vilna; there were also cases in
the hospitals at Minsk, Vilkomir, Globokie, and Mittau, but
the disease was not yet so infectious as it proved to be later.
After the battle of Smolensk (August 14–18) large numbers
of wounded soldiers (between 6,000 and 10,000 according
to various reports) were brought to that city, and from that
time on, typhus fever and other diseases (hospital fever,
diarrhoea, dysentery, gastric fever, &c.) continued to spread
throughout the army. On September 14, Moscow was
entered, and on September 15 the city was in flames. The
army then had peace until October 19, when the return
march began. During their sojourn in Moscow the soldiers
were very improperly nourished, eating almost nothing but
salted meat and fish, and drinking large quantities of wine
and spirits. According to Lemazurier, the number of sick
and wounded soldiers in Moscow was 15,000. The most
common disease even in Moscow was typhus fever; according
to Scheerer, when Napoleon’s army withdrew from the city
it left behind several thousand typhus-fever patients, almost
all of whom died—only the stronger patients were taken
along on wagons.

The horrors of the return march are well known. Thousands
froze to death in the extreme cold of November, horse-meat
and melted snow were the sole means of nourishment, and
any soldier who lay down was irretrievably lost. Between
Moscow and Smolensk, which was reached on November 9,
one-half of the soldiers who had started out from Moscow
died; the number of sick soldiers was enormous, and typhus
fever raged more and more extensively. On December 8
Vilna was reached, but there the army was not given
117a moment’s rest; two days later the Russians advanced
and captured 30,000 of Napoleon’s soldiers who could go
no further.