

Regarding conditions in Warsaw we have more detailed
119information. According to Wolf,[122] two distinct epidemics
raged there after the end of December 1812; the one was
an epidemic of typhus fever (probably typhoid) and appeared
only among the soldiers; the other was an epidemic of
typhus fever, which did not attain to epidemic dimensions
until January 1813, although a few isolated cases had been
observed in Warsaw in the last months of the year 1812.
‘This disease was almost invariably accompanied by a spotted
exanthema, which, if the disease was at first rather difficult
to diagnose, often gave the first clue. In the case of many
people the eruption was so severe and so general, appearing
even on the face, that it resembled measles.’ The comparison
with measles was also drawn by other observers. Typhus
fever was conveyed to Warsaw by the Austrian auxiliary
corps, and it quickly spread to the French hospitals, which
were in a wretched condition. Later the Russian army also
brought typhus fever to the city. A great many civilians
in Warsaw contracted the disease; according to Wolf, the
epidemic reached its climax in February, and lasted until
the end of the year 1813. The lower classes suffered more
than the upper classes from the disease, which, moreover,
seems to have raged much more furiously in the vicinity
of Warsaw than in the city itself.

### 3. The Appearance of Typhus Fever in North and Central Germany

On the return march from Moscow to Vilna the remnants
of the army had all taken the same route; for, though all
bonds of discipline were loosened as far back as Smolensk,
nevertheless the instinct of self-preservation kept all the
soldiers from abandoning the common line of march. This
was also the case during the march from Vilna to the Niemen,
120where the extreme cold caused untold suffering. After
crossing the river, however, the few unfortunate soldiers
who had survived the awful misery of the march, hungry,
clothed in rags, with torn shoes, alive with vermin, with
frozen and gangrenous limbs, scattered in all directions,
some going home, and others to strongholds that were in
the hands of the French. Thus typhus fever, with which
all parts of the army were infected, was spread in a comparatively
short time over a large part of Germany.

At first the eastern provinces of Prussia, through which
these remnants of the army passed, were attacked by the
pestilence; owing to the fact that so many were infected,
measures of precaution were everywhere futile. ‘Adynamic
fever’, says Kerckhoffs,[123] ‘spread also among the civilians,
who were not only afflicted by the terrible scourge of our
passing armies, but also became the victims of a murderous
contagion. It was a fatal present which we gave them, and
which caused such a high mortality among the inhabitants
of the country through which we passed. Wherever we went,
the inhabitants were filled with terror and refused to quarter
the soldiers.’ In the more distant parts of Germany, in
the western provinces of Prussia, in Bavaria, Baden, and
Württemberg, where people had perceived the danger, it
was easier, in the first months of 1813, to guard against the
dissemination of typhus fever, since the number of returning
soldiers was small and it was accordingly feasible to enforce
orders regarding quarantine. With the approach of spring
the disease began to abate a little even in the north and east;
in the month of April it had almost entirely disappeared
from the French troops there, while in May and June the
condition of health among them, according to Kerckhoffs,
was very good. But in July typhus fever broke out again,
and since the Russian army was also infected with it, the
disease became uncommonly widespread throughout Saxony
121and Silesia during the months of fighting that ensued.
After the battle of Leipzig, when southern and western
Germany were overrun by French fugitives and prisoners,
typhus fever once more broke out in that part of the
country with greater severity than ever before; even in
the province of Brandenburg and in the adjacent regions
the pestilence raged, having been borne thither by French
prisoners.