

Presently typhus fever appeared, with the arrival of the
remnants of the Grand Army, in regions further away from
the Russian border. Häser[130] describes the manner in which
the disease spread, always along military roads, as follows:

‘French soldiers returning from Russia’, he says, ‘spread
124the contagion of various diseases over a large part of Central
Europe. Almost naked, or clothed in torn and half-burned
rags, without shoes, their feet covered with straw, and their
frozen limbs covered with festering sores, they marched
through Poland and Germany. Typhus fever and other
diseases associated with it marked their course. The inhabitants
of the country were forced to house the sick; but
teamsters also conveyed the infection to villages which the
soldiers did not visit. The disease raged most furiously in
the hospitals, which scarcely anywhere were able to meet
even the most modest demands made upon them.’

Regarding the appearance of typhus fever in Berlin we
are informed by Hufeland and Horn.[131] First to occur there
(in the months of February and March 1813) were numerous
cases of ‘nervous fever’, which was doubtless typhoid fever.
Still it is likely that cases of typhus fever also occurred at
that time, for Horn, in writing about ‘nervous fevers’ in
the Charité, describes the exanthema with the same words
that Hufeland uses in reference to later cases. Among
these patients there were already some who had returned
from Russia.[132] At all events, in the first part of March 1813
there occurred cases of contagious typhus, which was
brought to Berlin by French, and later by Russian soldiers;
the observed ways of infection, regarding which Hufeland
informs us, are mentioned above. In the middle of April
there were 246 typhus-fever patients in the Charité. In
order to prevent the disease from spreading in this hospital,
Hufeland adopted strict measures of precaution. The
patients were all carefully isolated on the second floor,
which was shut off by means of a grating. The newly-arrived
patients were supplied with clean, fresh linen, their
clothing was disinfected for several days in hydrochloric
acid, and then washed in boiling water containing lye,
125while objects of no value were burned. The sick-rooms were
constantly ventilated by leaving the windows open, and were
thoroughly cleaned every day. The physicians, surgeons, and
attendants, before they entered the sick-rooms, had to put
on black mantles of glazed linen, and on leaving the rooms
they had to wash their hands and faces in cold water and
rinse out their mouths. In this way the disease was prevented
from spreading in the hospital itself.

After the battle of Leipzig typhus fever broke out anew in
Berlin; according to Horn, 144 cases of ‘nerve fever’ were
received into the Charité in January 1814, 92 in February, 54 in
March, 14 in April, 8 in May, and none in June. Regarding the
total mortality in the epidemic of typhus fever in Berlin, which
in the year 1813 had about 155,000 inhabitants, the following
table, compiled by Gurlt,[133] gives us information; there died in: