

All Upper Franconia, through which transports of prisoners
were taken to the Bohemian border, suffered terribly from
the pestilence. The disease was first observed in the towns
and villages lying to the north of Bamberg, whither it had
been conveyed by dispersed troops immediately after the
148battle of Leipzig (in Nordhalben, Hof, and other near-by
villages). Later on it also appeared in the districts further
south. The region between Bayreuth and Münchberg was,
comparatively speaking, less severely attacked. On the
other hand, typhus fever raged furiously in the military
hospital on the Plassenburg, where at the end of December
there were some 700 persons suffering from the disease. In
Kulmbach, a town lying at the foot of the mountain, more
than 100 persons contracted the disease.

While French prisoners were bringing typhus fever into
the country from the west, Austrian and Russian troops
were also bringing it from the east. To be sure, the authorities
were enjoined to restrict the foreign troops to the use of
ten military roads that passed through the country, but the
Austrian and Russian leaders frequently ignored these
instructions. Consequently the pestilence spread over the
entire region, a fact which Seitz confirms with numerous
specific instances; regarding the extent to which it raged
in Munich, he gives us no information.

Typhus fever was conveyed to Regensburg by French
prisoners. ‘Toward the end of the month [December],’
says Schäfer,[161] ‘typhus fever was conveyed to Regensburg
by French prisoners, some of them sick and some of them well,
but all of them scantily clad and half-starved. They were
quartered in the dance-halls, and those that were sick were
taken to a convent which had been hastily converted into
a hospital. There the civil inhabitants, owing to the lack
of appropriate arrangements, were obliged to distribute
food among the sick, and the result was that the fever
finally became general. Not until then was the advice
which the physicians had given at the beginning heeded;
they had urged, namely, that the patients should be cared
for by the hospital-attendants themselves, that each one
should have his own separate attendant, and that only
149those persons should be allowed to enter the hospital whose
presence was absolutely necessary.’ By February, according
to the official report, 308 persons, all told, contracted typhus
fever in Regensburg, and 51 succumbed to it.

In Ingolstadt an unusually severe epidemic broke out after
the arrival of the French prisoners. In the first part of
December the number of prisoners that died every day was
no less than ninety, but after the middle of the month the
mortality was somewhat lower. On December 18 there were
845 typhus-fever patients in the hospitals, and the number
of deaths on this day amounted to only twenty-seven.
From then to the end of the month only fifteen or twenty
persons died per diem. On December 10 several civilians
contracted the disease; on December 18 the number of
civilians suffering from the disease was thirty-six, and about
an equal number on December 30. The total number of
deaths among the prisoners of war amounted to 2,000.
Typhus fever also appeared along the Danube on both sides
of Ingolstadt.