

From Mayence the pestilence spread and infected the
Rheingau; the outbreak in Oestrich (below Hattenheim on
138the Rhine) is described by Thilenius.[153] In October sick and
wounded French soldiers were taken down the Rhine, and
in the latter part of that month 500 soldiers on three boats
were held up by a severe storm at Oestrich, where the bad
weather compelled them to remain for twenty-four hours.
The patients, contrary to orders, left the ships and were
taken in by the inhabitants of Oestrich. Before they went
away fourteen of them died; a number had already died on
the boats. On November 7 five or six citizens of Oestrich
contracted the disease; before the 9th more than thirty
had been taken sick, and on the 10th there were 93 typhus-fever
patients in the city. All told, 330 people in Oestrich
contracted the disease, and 103 succumbed to it. In the
latter part of November neighbouring places were infected
by dispersed French soldiers, by the small lazarets of the
troops of the Allies, by visits to the sick, and by participation
in funeral ceremonies. Particularly hard hit was the
town of Kiedrich, where 336 people contracted the disease
and 69 succumbed to it.

As in Oestrich, so in Winkel (near Rüdesheim), according
to J. B. von Franque, the pestilence broke out on November
5, 1813, when a boat-load of infected French soldiers
was driven ashore there; sixty or seventy of the patients
entered the village of Winkel, where they were housed in
a schoolroom. Presently a large number of the inhabitants
(91 all told) contracted the disease, and 31 of them died.
In the small neighbouring community of Espenschied the
pestilence broke out in a Prussian military lazaret and
spread to all the houses with the exception of one.

Kraft[154] gives us some interesting information regarding
the appearance of typhus fever in Runkel-on-the-Lahn
139(above Limburg). This outbreak affords an example of
how quickly the pestilence spread in small places. Shortly
after the arrival of the Allies, traces of lazaret fever revealed
themselves there, and in the latter part of November 1813,
several sick soldiers were brought there and housed in the
homes of citizens. Presently typhus fever broke out all
over the town; in the first part of December the castle at
Runkel was converted into a lazaret, and it was very soon
filled with patients. The poor allowed themselves to be
employed for short periods as sick-attendants, and the result
was that they either contracted the disease themselves or
else conveyed it to their homes; it was not long before the
entire town, as well as the surrounding country, was infected.
The convalescents from the military lazarets were not isolated
in separate houses, but taken to the surrounding towns and
villages (for example, Weyer, Villmar, Münster, and Erfurt),
many of whose inhabitants were taken sick. The pestilence
raged far and wide; at the climax of the epidemic (February
to the middle of March) entire families lay sick, and a great
many physicians and surgeons were attacked; the disease
disappeared about the middle of May. In Runkel itself,
which had 850 inhabitants, 214 contracted the disease and
70 died; the total number of deaths between December 1,
1813, and July 1, 1814, was 94, whereas the normal number
of deaths for an entire year was but 17. In the village of
Münster, which had 760 inhabitants, 86 were taken sick
and 22 died; and in the village of Weyer, which had 727
inhabitants, 179 were attacked and 58 died; the average
number of deaths per annum in both villages was 12. As in
these small places, so in all the towns and cities the pestilence
broke out wherever a sick soldier of either army passed.