

Frankfurt-on-the-Main suffered terribly in the year 1813
from enforced quartering. Even in the spring, after the
newly-organized French armies had passed through the city,
136the Frankfurt lazarets were overcrowded with sick and
wounded soldiers from Saxony, which was then the scene
of the war. Accordingly it was decided in Frankfurt to
build barracks adapted to the expected requirements; and
in order to protect the city as much as possible from the
infection of typhus fever, the barracks were erected outside
the city limits, before the Allerheiligen Tor, and were situated
in the Pfingstweide along the Main. The building of
these barracks was a large and very expensive undertaking,
but they undoubtedly served a very useful purpose by protecting
the inhabitants for a considerable length of time
against the infection of typhus fever.’[151] On September 21
and 22 large numbers of sick and wounded soldiers came
to Frankfurt; they filled all the lazarets, and many of them
had to be quartered in the homes of citizens. From that
time on typhus fever began to spread throughout the city.
Fortunately for Frankfurt, the retreat of the French army
from Hanau to Mayence passed by the city, since the French
generals were afraid that they would be unable to get their
troops out of Frankfurt again. On October 29 all the sick
and wounded French soldiers in the Frankfurt hospitals
were taken out and conveyed by boat to Mayence. The
hospital on the Pfingstweide, which had room for 1,480
patients, was immediately cleansed and made ready for the
army of the Allies, who were marching into Frankfurt in
large numbers. Typhus fever now reached its climax. The
arrival of the German and Russian armies almost doubled
the number of people in the city; the soldiers were quartered
in the homes of citizens and immediately infected
them with the pestilence. On January 14, 1814, there were
more than 4,000 typhus-fever patients in the city alone,
while in the district their number far exceeded 6,000. How
the mortality among the civil inhabitants was thereby
137increased is shown by the following figures, which include
only the deaths in the civil population:

July (1813)

86

August

83

September

93

October

103

November

328

December

289

January (1814)

264

February

248

March

212

April

132

May

135

June

76

Four physicians and seven surgeons succumbed to the
epidemic in Frankfurt. Of 668 typhus-fever patients taken
in by the Hospital zum Heiligen Geist, 100 died. Generally
speaking, Frankfurt-on-the-Main fared pretty well, for the
reason that most of the patients were housed outside the
city; the lower classes, particularly servants and maids,
suffered the most. In the city itself the disease was confined
chiefly to the narrow streets of the Altstadt. In March
and April the pestilence began gradually to abate, and in
May it ceased altogether.

After leaving Hanau the retreating French army went on
to Mayence and France. The great loss of human life due
to typhus fever during the siege of Mayence will be discussed
in the tenth chapter. Wiesbaden[152] was attacked very
severely; 800 men are said to have died in the military
lazaret there, while of the native inhabitants, who numbered
4,000 at that time, 466 contracted the disease and
141 succumbed to it.