

In November, on the other hand, after the battles near
Leipzig and Hanau, typhus fever broke out suddenly in
many places in Bavaria, and in December raged furiously.
The orders, issued in the spring of 1813, prohibiting all
persons suspected of carrying disease from crossing the
borders could no longer be enforced. Says Seitz:[160] ‘When
French prisoners began to march across the country on their
way from Saxony and Würzburg to Bohemia, the pestilence
spread among the inhabitants of the cities and of the flat
lands. Typhus fever raged in its most terrible form among
these poor prisoners of war; many succumbed to it in
various places along the route, and thousands died in the
hospitals. That the disease, which haunted all defeated
armies like a ghost, would necessarily reap an abundant
harvest among them, was clear to every physician who
observed the physiognomies of these warriors as they were
being led away in captivity from the vicinity of their fatherland
into remote regions. Their pale faces and emaciated
forms bore witness to hunger and sorrow, to a long deprivation
of the usual necessaries of life and to lack of vital energy,
to exhaustion caused by the long marches from Hanau to
Leipzig, when in the ardent struggle to reach their fatherland
they had used up their last ounce of strength. Whosoever
was brought by profession, sentiment, or curiosity into
contact with these unfortunate soldiers sooner or later
contracted the disease. Physicians, police-officers, servants,
national guards (who watched over the prisoners), country-people
(who carried the patients), messengers (who brought
food to the soldiers in their quarters), were as a rule the first
to be attacked.’

The Grand Duchy of Würzburg was next attacked. In
Würzburg itself, where there were 2,000 or 3,000 French
patients in the hospitals, the pestilence broke out furiously
147wherever the soldiers went. In Miltenburg more than
100 persons contracted the disease in the latter part of
December; in the district of Mellrichstadt the number of
typhus-fever patients was 429 (121 deaths), and in the district
of Bischofsheim there were 1,067 patients and 328 deaths.
According to Seitz, the number of deaths throughout the
entire Grand Duchy of Würzburg, which at that time had
a population of 344,500, was 2,500, while no less than 16,000
people contracted the disease. In Nuremberg the pestilence
did not become very widespread; it broke out in the first
part of November and lasted until the middle of January;
150 persons, all told, contracted the disease. Dinkelsbühl
was severely attacked; in the month of November a large
number of French prisoners suffering from typhus fever and
diarrhoea were housed there in the Carmelite Monastery, and
in a short time some 200 of them died. Between the 25th and
30th of November typhus fever spread to the civil population,
and, in a few days, more than 100 people contracted the
disease and 10 died; the number of patients increased until
December 12, and then decreased, until the pestilence
disappeared in the latter part of January; 448 persons, all
told, contracted the disease and 89 succumbed to it.
In the middle of November it was conveyed by a transport
of French prisoners to Bamberg, where it spread with such
fearful rapidity in the military hospital there, that twenty
persons died every day and all the sick-attendants and medical
assistants contracted it. The disease soon spread throughout
the city, even infecting people who had in no way come in
contact with the sick prisoners. Epidemics of typhus fever
were reported in twenty-one villages in the surrounding
country.