

Regarding the total number of deaths due to typhus fever
in Baden no information is available; at all events it was
very large. This is shown by the fact that in the last part of
1813 and first part of 1814 no less than thirty-five physicians
and thirty surgeons of the first class fell victims to the
pestilence.[168]

In November 1813, thousands of scattered French prisoners
came to Darmstadt; many of them were suffering from
typhus fever, which soon spread throughout the city. Many
places in that part of the present Grand Duchy of Hesse
which lies south of the Main were severely attacked by the
epidemic; as many as 2,000 or 3,000 inhabitants of many
places contracted the disease. But by July 5, 1814, it had
everywhere disappeared.[169]

### 5. Typhus Fever on the Left Bank of the Rhine; France and Switzerland

The continued retreat of the French army passed from
Mayence through Metz to Paris, and the route of the retreat
was marked by patients left behind. In this way the epidemic
of typhus fever was quickly transplanted to the north-eastern
part of France. Alsace-Lorraine, the Palatinate, Champagne,
and Burgundy were all attacked in succession. The epidemic
raged from Kreuznach to Strassburg; the dispersion of the
retreating army caused even the smallest villages to suffer,
so that the pestilence appeared in Worms, Frankenthal,
Spires, Oppenheim, Neustadt-on-the-Hardt, Dürkheim,
Landau, Alzey, Trabach, Zweibrücken, Weissenburg, Hagenau,
Zabern, and in other places. Mörs (near Frankenthal) was
154almost completely wiped out.[170] The following places in France
are mentioned as having been attacked by the pestilence:
Saint-Avold, Courcelles-Chaussy, Mars-la-Tour, Sierck, Cattenom,
Pont-à-Mousson, Toul, Nancy, Étain, Verdun, Bar,
Longwy, and Sedan. Thouvenel describes the epidemic of
typhus fever in Pont-à-Mousson, which broke out in December
1813, when transports of sick soldiers arrived there, and
spread to all the surrounding towns and villages; it increased
in severity until the middle of March, and by June had almost
disappeared. He describes in emotional language the endless
succession of wagons that arrived every day:[171]

Who of us will not remember as long as he lives those harrowing
scenes, which one cannot describe without shuddering? Who will
ever forget those hundreds of wagons filled with unhappy wounded
men who had had no medical care since leaving Leipzig; and packed
in with them were sick men suffering from dysentery, typhus fever,
&c., almost all of them dying of inanition, weakness, and filth, as
well as of disease. Those unfortunate men piteously begged only for
a place in a hospital already filled with dying men, only to receive in
reply a forced refusal. And so they were under the cruel necessity
of going further to die, with the result that they infected all the
towns and villages along their route, wherever they were granted
a generous hospitality.

Strassburg, comparatively speaking, suffered but little.
As early as December 1, the prefect of Strassburg had issued
orders that a special building should be set aside in every
town for the reception of sick soldiers that arrived there,
and that they should under no circumstances be housed in
the homes of citizens. In October and November convalescents
had been quartered in the residences of citizens,
who had subsequently been infected. In November the
number of typhus-fever patients, which averaged ten or
fifteen per month, increased to thirty-six, and in December
to 100. In accordance with the above-mentioned decree all
155newly-arrived soldiers were examined by a Board of Health;
the sick were sent to the hospital, and the healthy were
quartered with citizens. ‘Notwithstanding this,’ says Reisseisen,[172]
‘the healthy ones infected a large number of inhabitants
through their old woollen overcoats, which were
thoroughly saturated with the miasma of the hospitals.
The clothes that were sold privately were particularly dangerous,
so that in the latter part of December strict orders
were issued to keep watch for the old clothes and burn them.
In the first part of January, when the rather lax siege began,
typhus fever spread irresistibly throughout the city; in
that month the pestilence reached its climax with 175 deaths.
On January 22 the prefects ordered general fumigations in
all public buildings, and recommended that the citizens
should also fumigate their homes. The result was very
successful; in February 112 people died, in March 75, and
in April 27, and then typhus fever disappeared. No foreign
troops marched through the stronghold, and although all
the French prisoners of war passed through the city, no
more citizens were infected by them, for the reason that they
were quartered in the fortifications.