

As early as the month of February, the disease had reached
its climax in Württemberg; in March it began to abate
rapidly, so that in the first part of the summer only 150
patients could be counted in fifteen Governmental Districts.
From then until the end of the year it broke out only sporadically.
Braun,[164] who asserts that more than half of the
physicians in Württemberg contracted typhus fever, mentions
the names and residences of seventeen physicians who
succumbed to it; we see from this list that the disease was
prevalent throughout all Württemberg. The disease was also
conveyed to the southern part of Upper Swabia. According
to Dillenius, 1,300 sick soldiers were sent in the first part of
the year 1814 from France (especially from Mülhausen in
Alsace) to the military hospital at Tettnang; twenty-four
of them died on the way, and in the course of the following
four months five times as many succumbed to typhus fever
in the hospital.[165]

Baden suffered severely from typhus fever; in Karlsruhe,
for instance, typhus fever raged from October to December
1813. But Baden suffered particularly, for the reason that
152all the sick soldiers in the Bohemian army were sent back
there from France. Their number far exceeded all expectations,
since typhus fever was uncommonly prevalent in the
field army in France, and the soldiers arriving from there
infected the hospitals. Even when the Austrian and Russian
troops marched through the country the number of ‘nerve-fever’
patients was very large. Freiburg im Breisgau, at that
time a city of 9,000 inhabitants, suffered very severely in
consequence of enforced quartering; some 210,000 soldiers
were housed in the homes of its citizens. In the garrison
lazaret and university hospital, which together had room for
500 patients, no less than 1,200 patients were crowded
together in December 1813; almost all of them were suffering
from diarrhoea and typhus, and owing to the lack of linen
they were compelled to lie in their own dirty clothes on sacks
of straw. Every morning two large wagonloads of dead
bodies were driven away for burial. As usual, the pestilence
spread to the civil population, carrying away entire families.
On October 12, 1813, the former Abbey of Thennenbach was
converted into a military lazaret, in which two weeks later
some 1,200 patients were sheltered, although it had adequate
room for only 700. Between December 27, 1813, and
March 1814, 567 soldiers succumbed there, most of them to
typhus and dysentery. The epidemic reached its climax
about the middle of January, when as many as thirty
persons died per diem. After the middle of January the
number of deaths rapidly decreased.[166] Northern Baden was
also attacked. In Mannheim the sick and wounded French
soldiers who arrived after the battles of Lützen and Bautzen
were led around the city and taken to Spires. Thus typhus
fever did not appear in Mannheim itself, where the condition
of health was subsequently also good. The statement of
the Rheinische Merkur, that out of 13,000 patients in the
military lazarets in Mannheim 3,347 died, according to
153Gurlt,[167] is incorrect; the number of deaths was no more
than 346.