

From October 28 on, transports of half-dead typhus-fever
patients for several days kept arriving at Limburg itself,
where they were sheltered in a convent. In only eight days
several inhabitants living near the lazaret, and also several
sick-attendants and their families, contracted the disease.
140In consequence of the quartering of Russian and Prussian
troops in the homes of citizens, and also in consequence of
the erection of a permanent hospital in the city, into which
hundreds of patients were received every day, typhus fever
broke out with great severity among the inhabitants; the
climax of the epidemic came in January. Of 600 civilians
who contracted the disease 76 died.

In the Grand Duchy of Nassau, to which the last-named
places (Wiesbaden, Oestrich, Rüdesheim, Runkel, and Limburg)
belonged, and which had some 270,000 inhabitants,
the number of people who contracted the disease and the
number who died from it, according to the reports of the
church and town authorities, was recorded for the period
between October 1, 1813, and April 1, 1814. According to
von Franque, the following figures were compiled in reference
to the civil population in the Governmental Districts of that
time:

Governmental District.

Due to Typhus Fever.

No. Deaths from all causes.

No. Patients.

No. Deaths.

Ehrenbreitstein

11,522

2,409

3,680

Weilburg

2,173

419

680

Wiesbaden

29,349

6,179

8,099

Total

43,044

9,007

12,459

Altogether, fourteen per cent of the population were attacked
by typhus fever, and three per cent succumbed to it;
scarcely a single community was spared.

Epidemics of typhus fever also occurred further down
the Rhine; Coblenz, for instance, was severely attacked.
According to Bernstein,[155] a small epidemic broke out in
Neuwied in January 1814, having been borne thither by
a Prussian corps under General Kleist, which left behind
eighty-two sick soldiers, many of them suffering from ‘nerve-fever’.
The disease spread in a rather mild form throughout
the city, but lasted only four weeks.

141Typhus fever likewise appeared in North Germany, which
was not directly infected by French soldiers retreating from
Leipzig. Hamburg was attacked with great severity. In
March 1813, the Russian colonel, Tettenborn, by means of
a bold coup de main had captured Hamburg, but he was
unable to hold it, and on May 30 the French returned.
Marshal Davoust erected strong fortifications and drove out
all the poorer inhabitants, most of whom had come from
the neighbouring Altona, and thus made ready for a long
siege, which did not begin until the end of the year, although
the blockade was complete by the middle of January. Large
quantities of filth accumulated in the streets, since all working-men
were employed at the redoubts and hospitals. Food
became more and more scarce. ‘On such a fertile soil’,
says Th. Deneke,[156] ‘typhus fever flourished. The disease
spread rapidly from the hospitals throughout the entire
city, since not only were all arrangements wanting for the
isolation of the patients, but half-recovered patients were
actually discharged from the hospital and quartered in the
homes of citizens. Of the garrison, which at the beginning
of the siege numbered some 25,000 or 30,000 men, sixty or
seventy, at one time as many as 100, died every day between
the first part of February and the last part of March, and they
were all buried outside the Steintor, close by the town-moat.
No less than 10,700 bodies were interred there, 8,200 people
having succumbed to typhus fever, and 2,500 to wounds;
among those buried were numerous prisoners. Regarding
the number of inhabitants that died we have no information.
The condition in the hospitals must have been terrible; since
there was not sufficient room or the proper facilities to take
care of the patients, the physicians and attendants did their
duty only under constraint, and the managing officials in
many instances grossly abused their authority; one of them,
142the director of the Legert Military Hospital, for example,
ended characteristically by becoming in 1824 the leader of
a band of robbers in France.’ Seven physicians fell victims
to the pestilence in Hamburg. The city did not surrender
until May, after the capture of Paris, whereupon typhus
fever appears to have disappeared quickly.