

From Hamburg typhus fever was conveyed by fugitives in
all directions; Altona was attacked with particular severity.
As mentioned above, thousands of the poor driven from
Hamburg had been received in Altona. ‘The people,
driven from their homes by fear,’ says Steinheim,[157] ‘streamed
through our gates and went about seeking shelter. At the
same time the gates of Hamburg were closed, and swarms
of unhappy people, the dregs of Hamburg’s population,
straggled with the sad remnants of their property, bent over
more by sorrow than by the weight of their burden, through
our gates and found protection, nourishment, and shelter in
our homes; it was a heart-rending sight.[106] They were housed,
partly in barracks, stables, and barns, and partly in the houses
of the lower-class citizens, whose homes were thereby ‘so
crammed full that not a single corner was left unoccupied
by some poor stranger’. More than 17,000 refugees were
received in Altona, whose normal population at that time
amounted to some 24,000. At the beginning of January,
when the very cold weather came (the thermometer often
went down as low as –20 degrees Réaumur), all the cracks
and openings in the doors and windows were stopped up to
prevent the entrance of the outside air. In the latter part
of December 1813, typhus fever broke out in these overcrowded
quarters and carried away large numbers of people.
The exact number is unknown; according to Mutzenbecher
1,138 fugitives, all told, died in Altona. According to other
reports sixty-eight per cent of the patients in the hospital
succumbed. The epidemic reached its climax in March, and
143with the coming spring it began to abate, partly because it
became feasible to house the fugitives in better quarters, and
partly because the warmer weather rendered better ventilation
possible.

The disease was also conveyed from Hamburg to Eppendorf,
but no information regarding the number of deaths there is
available.

In Lübeck typhus fever broke out in March 1814, among
refugees from Hamburg, and carried away 613 people.
According to Gurlt, typhus fever was conveyed to Bremen,
partly by the army of the Crown Prince of Sweden, and
partly by fugitives from Hamburg; the epidemic is said
to have been rather mild.

In Mecklenburg typhus fever began to spread after the
erection of a military lazaret in Malchow (October, 1813),
and after the erection of a second lazaret by the Swedes in
Wittenburg (near Schwerin).

In Kiel typhus fever did not appear until the beginning
of the year 1814; Weber[158] attributed the outbreak there to
the Swedish military lazaret, in which physicians and nurses
frequently contracted the disease. At first the poorer people
were attacked (probably because the sick-attendants were of
that class), and later the well-to-do. The pestilence, mild at
first, soon became very severe. The disease also broke out
in other places in Holstein; Pinneberg was severely attacked,
and the disease was also observed in Schleswig. It is
remarkable that, according to Weber, no exanthema was
observed in Kiel; it must, however, have been present
in a scarcely noticeable form, since a rash appeared on the
entire skin of convalescents. The disease always began
with a chill, and was characterized now by obstinate constipation,
now by diarrhoea; no patient who survived the
thirteenth day died. And even if an exanthema was not
144observed, there can be no doubt that it was typhus fever
which raged in Kiel. Weber himself calls the disease contagious
typhus.