

Conditions were as bad in many other places as they were
in Varna; Slobodzie, Kustendji, and Mangalia were likewise
devastated. In Brailow the first cases of plague occurred
in March; in April 132 persons succumbed to the disease,
in May 150, in June 774, and in July the pestilence abated.[192]

After the Russians crossed the Balkan Peninsula in the
summer of 1829, Adrianople, which was reached on August 12,
1829, was free from plague, and it remained free until the
end of the war. In the first part of November, however,
the plague broke out there in the large old barrack which
had been converted into a hospital and had become greatly
overcrowded. Patients, especially persons suffering from
dysentery, had been sent there from all sides, so that their
169number had increased on August 17 to 1,616, on August 27
to 3,666, and on September 1 to 4,641. On November 1,
when the head-quarters were removed from there, 6,000 sick
and healthy persons were left behind, the great majority
of whom fell victims to the plague. According to Rinck,
in the latter part of November ten or twenty soldiers suffering
from plague were taken there every day, and in the
middle of December not one of the 300 sick-rooms was
spared; from fifty to sixty plague-patients were taken in
every day at this time.[193] In the middle of January 1830 the
fury of the disease abated a little among the Russians, but
it raged more and more destructively among the civil inhabitants,
who numbered some 80,000. In almost all the army-divisions
stationed south of the Balkans, plague broke out
in the winter of 1829–30; the entire army, therefore, before
returning to Russia, had to be quarantined twice for a period
of twenty-one days.

Plague also revealed its presence in Transcaucasia, where
fighting was likewise going on. In Armenia it had broken
out shortly before the beginning of the Russo-Turkish War,
as also in Erzerum. The reinforcements coming from there
had brought plague to Kars, where it spread rapidly in the
Turkish army.[194] In June 1828, when the stronghold of Kars
was stormed, the disease was borne by Turkish prisoners
back to the Russian army; but the strict measures of Field-Marshal
Count Paskewitsch prevented it from spreading
further in the army.[195] But the inhabitants of Kars resisted
these orders, and the result was that plague continued to
rage there, partly in the garrison, which in twenty days had
530 plague-patients, and partly among the inhabitants, until
September. The plague was conveyed by Turkish prisoners
to Eriwan, to the region of Tiflis, and to other places. In
170the stronghold of Achalzich, situated midway between Batum
and Tiflis, plague broke out in the year 1829; in the latter
part of February the stronghold was besieged by the Turks,
who were infected with plague. In consequence of a sortie
of the small garrison on March 6, which resulted in the
withdrawal of the Turks, since at the same time Russian
reinforcements were approaching, the plague was conveyed to
Achalzich, where the first cases occurred on March 10 in the
garrison, and shortly afterwards among the inhabitants. On
May 23 that part of the garrison which had been spared by
the plague was marched out into the open country, and the
stronghold was thoroughly cleansed, after which no more
cases were reported. In the fall of 1829 plague completely
disappeared from among the Transcaucasian troops, and
from the territory under their control.