

Typhus fever was conveyed by marching troops to Styria
also; the source of the pestilence was the seven military
hospitals in Graz. We read in the report:[184] ‘The pestilence,
proceeding principally from the seven military hospitals
lying within the city limits as from a focus, was spread
abroad by convalescents, attendants, physicians, &c. The
mortality in these hospitals was extremely high; the buildings
set aside for the purpose could scarcely accommodate
the number of sick. Everything was topsy-turvy; the
corps of field-doctors on hand was not nearly large enough
to take even the most necessary care of the large number
of patients.’ The region around Graz, Marburg, and Bruck
was most severely attacked by the disease, which also spread
to Carinthia and broke out in Klagenfurt and vicinity.

### 7. Survey of the Epidemic of Typhus Fever in the Years 1813–14

It is impossible to draw an accurate picture of the loss of
human life which typhus fever caused in the years 1813–14.
This is due, on the one hand, to the lack of reliable statistics,
and, on the other hand, to the fact that the several regions
suffered to a varying degree, depending upon the number
163of troops, prisoners, and refugees that they received. The
number of persons that succumbed to typhus fever in Germany
during the years 1813–14 must be estimated at least
as high as 200,000 or 300,000. Assuming that 200,000
people succumbed to the disease, the number that contracted
it would amount to some 2,000,000. Since Germany
at that time had hardly more than 20,000,000 inhabitants,
some ten per cent of them, on the basis of this assumption,
contracted the disease. The size of this number is significant,
when we consider that the stronger and older people
manifested particular susceptibility to the disease.

One of the chief causes of the wide dissemination of typhus
fever in the years 1813–14 was the imperfect development
of the lazaret system. If at first a lazaret for infectious
diseases was available, the number of patients it was called
upon to accommodate in a few days became so large that
new buildings always had to be opened for them, and it was
impossible to keep them isolated. The efforts of the various
municipal administrations to have the lazarets erected
outside the city limits were powerless against the brutal
obstinacy of the French, and, later, of the Russian generals.
The severity of the penalty which they had to pay for
unceremoniously housing infected French troops in strongholds
together with healthy men, is evident from the fearful
devastation caused by typhus fever in Danzig, Torgau,
Mayence, &c. The little communities were absolutely helpless
against the dominating power of the soldiers. One
might reproach the municipal administrations of that time
with failing to adopt measures of prevention against the
menacing danger of pestilence, particularly in places which
did not suffer in consequence of the marching back and
forth of soldiers. But one must take into account the
excitement which permeated the entire people at that time—the
hopeful longing to be freed from the national enemy’s
long oppression, toward which all thinking and planning
was directed, the employment of all resources for this
164purpose, and in particular the fact that sheer ignorance
rendered appropriate measures impossible. If this ignorance
prevailed in the highest places, nothing better was to be
expected of the administrations of the smaller cities and
towns. The population was therefore everywhere defenceless
against the intrusion of the pestilence, which was given
an opportunity to become more and more widespread. This,
however, had not been the case in Central Europe since the
Thirty Years’ War.