

In March 1829, plague broke out anew. Surgeon-General
167Witt, who had his head-quarters in Jassy, declared that the
disease was not plague, but an endemic fever, and put an
end to all measures of precaution in March. ‘After the
patients were no longer quarantined,’ says Czetyrkin,[188] ‘the
disease, bringing destruction in its train, in the spring and
summer began to make headway and spread over Moldavia,
Wallachia, and Bulgaria; it also accompanied the Russian
army across the Balkan Peninsula and appeared in Rumelia,
where it completely wiped out several hospitals. Those
divisions of the army which were kept constantly on the
march and were thus exposed to the fresh air, rain, and dew,
suffered less severely; but the garrisons in the cities and
strongholds were more furiously attacked by the dreaded
enemy. The overcrowded condition of the lazarets, the lack
of competent nurses and physicians (most of whom were
exterminated by plague), the uncertainty regarding the
nature of the disease—all this constituted the reason why
the pestilence could not be checked.’

The disease first appeared in March 1829 throughout
Wallachia, but after the middle of May it also revealed its
presence south of the Danube; Galatz, Babadag, Kustendji,
Mangalia, Bazardschik, and Kavarna were attacked in
succession.

Varna suffered very severely; according to Petersenn,
the first cases occurred there in May 1829, in the infantry
regiment Witepsk. The patients were housed in tents on
the sea-shore outside the city, and since the number of
people who contracted the disease continued to increase,
all the patients in the hospitals were soon taken there. The
city was finally completely evacuated and closed up, after
the inhabitants had been assigned to definite places to live
in the open fields and in a near-by forest. The plague
reached its climax in the latter part of June. ‘There was
not a hospital,’ says Petersenn,[189] ‘not a quarter of the city,
not a division of troops, not a family, not a single place,
168which had escaped infection, and everywhere one came
across victims of the pestilence, some dying and some dead;
for it spared neither sex nor age nor class.’ And in another
place the same physician says:[190] ‘If the inside of the plague-camp
afforded a terrible sight, where sick men tossed about,
gasping in the burning summer heat, between the dead and
dying, the conditions outside of the plague-camp were no
more pleasant to witness; for along the roads from the city
to the hospitals, on fields and meadows, behind every shrub,
in every ditch, dead and dying men were stretched out
everywhere.’ And Seidlitz, who visited Varna when the
plague was at its height, asserts that the corpses were piled
up ‘like logs’ and carried away ‘by cartloads’. According
to Petersenn,[191] the number of patients that died in the plague-hospital
at Varna was:

From June 5 to 30

2,238

From July 1 to 31

1,484

From August 1 to 26

210

At the end of August there were only a few plague-patients
in Varna. Of forty-one physicians, twenty-eight contracted
the disease and twenty succumbed to it.