

174In Constantinople, typhus fever, although it infected
numerous persons in the military hospitals, apparently did
not spread to the civil population. Baudens, who after
the capture of Sebastopol came to the Orient, says expressly
that the inhabitants of Constantinople were spared by the
epidemic during its entire course.[206]

According to Murchison, typhus fever was borne by
English troops to English soil, where in the years 1856–7
it caused epidemics in various parts of the country. The
following table indicates the number of typhus-fever patients
taken into the Fever Hospital in London:

1854

337

1855

342

1856

1,062

1857

274

1858

15

The increased number in London was not due to the fact
that the disease was brought over from Ireland, since there
were only fifty-three Irishmen among the patients, and only
two of them had been in the city less than three months.
On the other hand, the warlike events caused a famine,
resulting in much misery among the poor, and this favoured
the further dissemination of the disease.[207]

When the French troops were transported back to France,
energetic and extensive measures of precaution were adopted;
only those troops were allowed to embark who had for several
weeks been entirely recovered from typhus fever; several
stations for the discharge of men who contracted the disease
on the way were located along the coast of the Mediterranean
Sea, and sixty-two patients, all told, were left behind at
them; suspected divisions of troops, before disembarking
at Marseilles, were quarantined for a time on several islands
along the coast, on St. Marguerite (Îles de Lérins), on the
175Îles d’Hyères, and on others, and before entering the city
they were examined again, bathed, and reclothed. The
result was successful. Laveran says:[208] ‘The further one
went away from the seat of the infection, and the more the
soldiers scattered, the more the miasm seemed to lose strength;
in France the typhus-fever patients gave rise to only a few
cases inside the hospitals where they were being cared for;
the disease was never communicated to the civil population.’

Sporadic cases were observed in Marseilles, Toulon,
Avignon, Chalon-sur-Saône, and in other places. A small
lazaret-epidemic also occurred in Paris in the Val-de-Grâce;
according to Godelier,[209] almost all the patients there belonged
to the Fiftieth Regiment, which on November 30, 1855,
embarked at Kamiesch. The condition of health in the
regiment at that time was good, and, in particular, it was
free of typhus fever. Of the two ships on which the soldiers
were transported, the one took only thirty days to get from
Kamiesch to Marseilles and had no cases of typhus fever,
while the other, which had a harder voyage, took fifty days
and had numerous cases of typhus fever on the way; fifteen
patients were put into the hospital at Malta and twenty-five
in that at Marseilles. No less than fifty-eight soldiers in
this regiment contracted the disease in the Val-de-Grâce, and
they infected five nurses; eight soldiers and one nurse fell
victims to the disease.