

Garrison.

Prisoners.

Civil population.

1867

10

25

1868

3

8

1869

4

7

1870

10

150

15

1871

15

25

28

1872

6

20

1873

2

5

Since in the case of typhoid fever it is very often impossible
to trace the source of infection, it is not surprising that in
many instances it is difficult to prove that the disease broke
out in any specific locality in consequence of the arrival
there of a person, or group of persons, from an infected
locality. This applies, for instance, to the epidemic of typhoid
fever that occurred in Meiningen in the year 1871. In many
places the disease, being prevalent among the prisoners
detained there, undoubtedly spread to the civil population,
but nowhere did this occur to such an extent as to attract the
attention of the authorities.

Among the diseases that broke out in the field-armies
during the war of 1870–1, dysentery (epidemic dysentery)
played an important rôle, especially in the months of October
and November. Prior to the year 1870 it was a comparatively
rare disease in Germany, whereas in France it was quite
common. This is indicated by the fact that in the years
1951863–9 the number of deaths due to dysentery in the French
army (home stations) was twelve times as large as in the
Prussian army. Particularly hard hit were the troops in
and around Metz, where dysentery raged continuously and
with considerable severity,[245] as well as in Strassburg and Sedan;
in the city and vicinity of Paris the disease, owing to the
advanced season of the year, raged less furiously. As a rule
it was an open question whether the places in which the
German troops contracted the disease were already infected
beforehand, or whether the disease had been brought there
for the first time by infected divisions of the French army.

Of the German field-army, 38,975 men, all told, contracted
dysentery (47·8 per 1,000 of the average number of troops
under arms), and of these 2,405 died. Of the average number
of French prisoners taken to Germany 41·7 per cent contracted
the disease; nearly all the cases of the disease were among
the prisoners themselves, who brought the germ with them,
and the result was that the number of cases soon began to
decrease. It was, of course, inevitable that numerous prison-guards
should contract the disease, but nowhere did it
spread in a serious way to the civil population.

Of very great importance, as far as the war operations were
concerned, was the fact that typhus fever, which in former
years had played such a fatal rôle, did not make its appearance
among the troops; according to most observers, the disease
did not break out at all during the war. The Prussian
troops along the Russian border were never entirely free from
typhus fever; according to the German Health Report,
91 soldiers contracted the disease in the year 1867, 99 in
the year 1868, and 37 in the year 1869. France itself had
apparently been free from the disease for a long time, but
there was always a possibility that it would be conveyed into
the country from Algiers, where in the year 1868 a severe
epidemic had raged in consequence of a great famine the year
196before; of the army in Algiers the disease had carried away
252 men (3·94 per cent).[246] Consequently both the Germans
and the French watched very carefully any outbreaks of
a disease involving symptoms of typhus fever. Cases of
a disease held by the authorities to be typhus fever were
reported from Nancy, Châlons-sur-Marne, Lunéville, and
Metz, but careful investigations by von Niemeyer indicate
that they were merely cases of typhoid fever exhibiting
unusually well developed roseola. Several French physicians
(Chauffard, Léon Colin, Kelsch) likewise testify to the fact
that typhus fever did not appear in the French army during
the entire war. Grellois, to be sure, asserts that typhus fever
broke out about the middle of the siege of Metz and then
suddenly disappeared. But even this assertion may fairly
be questioned; at all events there was not a single soldier
in the garrison suffering from the disease at the time of the
capitulation, as Grellois himself admits.