

According to Michaux,[247] a former chairman of the Medical
Society in Metz, a small epidemic of typhus fever raged
among the civil inhabitants of that city during the siege.
The correctness of this statement, however, is doubted, as
no post-mortem examinations were made. It seems that
fifty-five children and nine nurses in two orphan asylums
contracted the disease, and that twenty-eight of the former
and one of the latter succumbed to it; the first cases of the
disease were reported early in October, and by the end of
November the epidemic was over. This sudden disappearance
of the disease was attributed by Michaux to the termination
of the siege, a conclusion also upheld by Méry, who studied
the disease in the Crimean War. Viry,[248] who until a few days
197before the siege had charge of the field hospital in Vallières
(near Metz), where he treated some 250–300 patients every
day, performed autopsies on all supposed victims of typhus
fever, but in all cases found only the evidences of typhoid
fever. Nevertheless, he believes it possible that typhus
fever occurred there, and holds the view that the overcrowded
condition of the city favoured a spontaneous
outbreak of the disease. Laveran,[249] who was also present in
Metz during the siege, disputes the correctness of Michaux’s
diagnosis, as does the German Health Report, on the ground
that the disease attacked children almost exclusively, that
it caused such a high mortality, and that it disappeared so
suddenly. He seems to think that it was some acute
exanthema, probably haemorrhagic measles. This leaves
unexplained the fact that a large number of nurses contracted
the disease.

### III. The Great Epidemic of Small-pox caused by the Franco-German War

But while typhoid fever and dysentery in the Franco-German
War attacked the civil population only in those
parts of the country in which the fighting took place, and
nowhere acquired epidemic dimensions, and while it is
probable that typhus fever did not appear at all at that time,
there occurred in connexion with the war a very severe
epidemic of small-pox, which raged more extensively and
furiously than any other epidemic in the course of the
entire century, and spread not only throughout the belligerent
countries, but also throughout all Europe.

Everybody knows how severely Europe suffered from
epidemics of small-pox in the last part of the eighteenth
and first part of the nineteenth centuries, and how the ravages
of that disease were first checked by Jenner’s wonderful
discovery. Nevertheless, small-pox did not entirely disappear
198from Central Europe until the year 1870. The reason for
this is found in the fact that compulsory vaccination was
introduced in only a few states, and even in them was not
properly enforced, and also in the fact that people did not
until later begin to realize that vaccination insures immunity
only for a period of 12–15 years at most. Consequently new
recruits, if they had already been vaccinated once, were not
revaccinated when they began to serve. But since sporadic
outbreaks of small-pox continued to occur in the Prussian
army, orders were issued in the year 1834 that all recruits
must be vaccinated. The result was that from that time on,
the Prussian troops were very rarely attacked by the disease.
The same measure was adopted in Württemberg in 1833, in
Baden in 1840, in Bavaria in 1843, in Brunswick in 1858, in
the Kingdom of Saxony in 1868, and in the Grand Duchy of
Hesse in 1869. Compulsory vaccination did not exist in
Prussia or Saxony before the Imperial Vaccination Law was
passed in the year 1874; the result was that large numbers
of children were never vaccinated. The anti-vaccinationists,
especially in the ‘sixties, carried on a vigorous agitation, and
this had the effect of increasing the number of unvaccinated
persons; the number of revaccinated persons had always
been small. In South Germany compulsory vaccination for
one-year-old children was introduced in the first part of the
nineteenth century—in Bavaria and Hesse in 1807, in Baden
in 1815, in Württemberg in 1818—but revaccination was
not enforced until 1874, when the Imperial Vaccination Law
was passed.