

As stated above, there was a noticeable increase in the
small-pox mortality in the year 1869; this increase lasted
into the beginning of the year 1870, but was confined to
certain localities. Chauffard’s[253] report on epidemic diseases
in France is more incomplete for the years 1869–70, on
account of the war, than for previous years; it was supplemented,
partially at least, by the later reports of Vernois[254] 201for the year 1871, and also by the comprehensive report of
M. Delpech[255] for the years 1870–2. According to these,
epidemics of small-pox occurred in the year 1869 in North-west
France (Bretagne), in North-east France (Departments
of Aisne, Pas-de-Calais), and in South-east France (Departments
of Gers, Ariège, and Pyrénées-Orientales.) In the
winter of 1869–70 the epidemic continued to spread, and by
the end of the year 1870 it included almost the whole of
France. The incomplete reports give us no idea as to which
Departments were attacked before the outbreak of the war
and which after. According to Vernois, the disease appeared
that year in 42 Departments, including 132 arrondissements
and 539 parishes. But, as stated above, the reports are all
very incomplete; a later report submitted by Delpech adds
11 more Departments to the 42. The total number of
deaths caused by small-pox in France in the year 1871 is
unknown; Vernois reported 14,425 deaths in 39 Departments,
but this does not include the figures for Paris, where 10,539
persons succumbed to the disease, or for the Department of
Finistère, or for the Department of Sarthe (in regard to
which it is merely observed that there were ‘beaucoup de
morts’), or for several other Departments.

It is a fact that small-pox raged severely among the civil
inhabitants of all regions in which the second half of the
war was waged (to the south, east, and north of Paris), and
that the war itself helped the disease to spread in the eastern
Departments (Jura, Doubs, Saône-et-Loire, Haute-Saône).
The wide prevalence of the disease among the soldiers is
attributed by many French physicians to the fact that the
army as a whole had been inadequately vaccinated. If this
was true of the regular troops, lack of time made it absolutely
impossible to vaccinate all the men that were afterwards
assembled in such a precipitate manner. The movements
202of the soldiers in the cold season of the year (in December there
was some bitterly cold weather) made it necessary for friends
and enemies to share whatever shelter they could find, regardless
of whether the house had previously been occupied by
small-pox patients, or whether such patients were actually
lying in it at the time. The result was that the disease became
very widespread throughout all France. Says Laveran:[256]
‘The army, being composed of men who had been in service
for a long time, and who had been vaccinated and revaccinated,
suffered very little, but the events which took place after
the declaration of war altered this state of affairs. The
regiments of the Departments on their way to Paris were
quartered in the homes of civilians, where they contracted
small-pox. The disease spread easily among the young people
who, owing to lack of time, had not been revaccinated, and
many of whom had perhaps never been vaccinated at all.
During the first part of the siege of Paris it was these
regiments which suffered the most from small-pox, but
later on the epidemic became more general and spread to
all the corps. The number of soldiers infected with small-pox
during the siege was about 6·76 per 100, or 68 per
1,000.’