

#### 4. The Epidemic of Small-pox in the Civil Population of Germany in 1871–2

In the summer of 1870 Germany was almost free from
small-pox. Later on, thousands of French prisoners, almost
all of them hailing from infected localities, were within
a short time scattered throughout the entire German Empire,
and since the inhabitants of many parts of the country, as
stated above, were very insufficiently vaccinated, it was
213inevitable that epidemics of small-pox should break out
everywhere. The disease was disseminated in several ways:
by prisoners who had contracted it on their way to Germany,
or who had to be transported from an infected to an uninfected
locality, by persons into whose systems the infection
had entered but had not yet revealed its presence, and by
uninfected persons who had come in contact with infected
persons; numerous persons, moreover, contracted the
disease by handling the clothing, blankets, and other effects
of small-pox patients.

‘The dissemination of the disease,’ says the German
Health Report,[264] ‘which broke out simultaneously in various
parts of Germany, was helped along in numerous ways.
From the lazarets and from the prisons it was communicated
by nurses and guards, and by working men and tradesmen,
to the civil population and to the local garrison, and
from there it spread to the surrounding country. It was
conveyed from place to place, often considerable distances,
by the moving population itself, not infrequently by marching
troops, and particularly by the removal of prisoners from
one place of detention to another; the latter measure had
to be adopted in order to make room for the fresh transports
of prisoners that were constantly arriving, many of them
in such an exhausted condition that it was necessary to
spare them the long and trying journey to the far East.
Thus the prisons at Mayence, Coblenz, Wesel, Minden,
&c. became the foci from which the disease was transplanted
into hitherto uninfected places.’

The result was that there broke out in Germany an
epidemic of small-pox which raged more furiously and
extensively than any other epidemic in the course of the nineteenth
century. Whereas among the prisoners-of-war and
among the immobile German troops (who were particularly
exposed to the infection) the disease reached its climax as
early as January 1871, among the civil inhabitants of the
214country this climax did not come until later in the year;
in the more out-of-the-way regions, moreover, where there
was less intercourse, the height of the epidemic was not
reached until the year 1872.

##### (a) The Dissemination of Small-pox in Prussia and in the smaller North German States

After the prevalence of small-pox in Prussia had again
increased somewhat in the years 1864–7, in the following
years the number of cases of the disease grew steadily smaller,
so that around the middle of the year 1870 the country was
practically free from it. Its prevalence again increased in
the first months of the year 1871. The following table indicates
the number of deaths caused by the disease in Prussia
in the course of twelve years: