

In the year 1872, to be sure, small-pox appeared in the form
of epidemics in numerous parts of France, but nowhere did
it spread so widely as in the two previous years. According
to a report worked out by Delpech for the years 1870–2, no
less than 42 Departments failed to make any report at all
in the year 1872, while only 18 of the remaining 41 Departments
sent in reports regarding epidemic outbreaks of small-pox.
The epidemic lasted until 1873, in which year reports
regarding small-pox epidemics came in from 10 Departments;
but only in the Departments of Morbihan and Pyrénées-Orientales
was the epidemic apparently somewhat more
intense.[261]

#### 2. Small-pox among the French Prisoners

Thanks to the well-vaccinated condition of the German
troops, the army suffered comparatively little from small-pox.
In the field army 4,385 men (61·3 per 1,000) contracted the
disease, and 278 of them (3·5 per cent of those who contracted
it) died. Including the officers, physicians, and officials,
the number taken sick was 4,991 and the number that died
was 297. The number of men in the individual army
corps that contracted the disease varied greatly according
to the nature and place of their activity; particularly hard
hit were the army divisions in the south-western and northern
scenes of the war, where the military operations were carried
on in fearfully cold weather, and where it was impossible
208to quarter the infected soldiers in isolated places by themselves.
The French army was attacked much more severely
by small-pox, although there are no accurate reports available
regarding the prevalence of the disease. According to
a report found in the Vienna Medical Weekly,[262] the total
number of French soldiers that succumbed to small-pox was
23,469[263]; but the accuracy of this number, to be sure, is
questionable, since, assuming that there was a very high
mortality, it would mean that some 120,000 troops contracted
the disease. At all events, the French army, taken as a whole,
was badly infected with small-pox, and it was inevitable
that among the French prisoners brought to Germany there
should be numerous small-pox patients, some in the incubation
stage, and some in the convalescent stage of the disease,
and that they should infect other people there.

The number of French prisoners taken to Germany in
the first few months of the year 1871 was no less than 372,918;
the prisoners who at the very beginning, but especially
after the surrender of Metz, were transported in large
numbers to Germany, had to be distributed throughout the
entire Empire, clear over to the eastern boundary. Owing
to the fact that new transports of French prisoners were
constantly arriving at the German frontier, which, in consequence
of severe hardships and privations, they reached in
such a weak physical condition that they could not be taken
very far inland, it became necessary to transfer some of
the earlier arrivals to other places of detention, and this,
of course, favoured the further dissemination of the disease.
This transference was rendered particularly necessary by
the arrival of large numbers of prisoners after the battle
of Sedan (September 1), after the capitulation of Metz
(October 27), and after the battles of Orléans and Le Mans
(December and January respectively). Small-pox occasionally
broke out among these prisoners while they were on their
way to Germany, rendering it necessary to leave them
209behind, or else the disease made its appearance when they
reached their destination; as a rule, however, the first cases
of the disease were observed a few days after their arrival
at their place of detention, where they soon infected the
other prisoners. The further dissemination of the disease
among them was checked by means of wholesale vaccination.