

The number of cases of the disease in the Governmental
District of Stralsund was very large. Small-pox broke out
very severely among the French prisoners in the city of
Stralsund, the maximum number of whom was 2,991; of
these 234 contracted the disease and 35 succumbed to it.
The prisoners arrived on December 4, and among them was
a small-pox patient; he was committed to the lazaret on
December 9. In the garrison, which averaged 3,700 men,
there were only thirty-one cases of the disease and one
death. The first case among the civil inhabitants occurred
on January 7; the patient was a clerk who lived near the
lazaret and had had more or less intercourse with the
prisoners. Of twenty-three more cases that occurred before
January 15, at least six were shown to be directly attributable
to the epidemic among the prisoners; one of the six was
a sick-attendant, two were working-men in the military
lazaret, and the other three were members of the families
of attendants. The epidemic then became very widespread;
to the end of the year 1871 the number of deaths was 366,
and the number of reported cases was 1,807. In Greifswald
229a French prisoner contracted small-pox on October 18, 1870,
in the military reserve lazaret, another on November 1, and
a third on November 16. The first civilian, an attendant,
contracted the disease on December 13, and on January 6,
1871, a working-man, who had transported the attendant
from the military lazaret to the town small-pox hospital,
was taken sick. Until February 14, ten more cases were
reported, and then the epidemic began. Up to the end of
the year 1871 no less than 578 cases of the disease and 111
deaths caused by it were reported to the authorities. In the
year 1872 there were only a few deaths caused by small-pox
throughout the entire Governmental District of Stralsund.

In the case of the two adjacent confederate states of
Mecklenburg-Schwerin and Mecklenburg-Strelitz no small-pox
mortality statistics are available. On September 20,
prisoners from Metz were taken to the reserve lazaret in
Schwerin, and among them was a small-pox patient who
died eight days later. In the same month an assistant in
the lazaret was taken sick, and in October and December
two more members of the lazaret staff contracted the disease.
The pestilence spread to the civil population because the
attendants who were commissioned to dispose of the effects
of the dead, instead of destroying them, sold or gave them
to the inhabitants. The epidemic, which spread rapidly
throughout the surrounding country, was quite severe and
lasted until March 1871. In Wismar two cases of small-pox
were reported among the prisoners in December, and these
were followed by six more cases in January and February;
in the garrison, which averaged 1,219 men, there were 48
cases of the disease (5 in January, 32 in February, 9 in March,
and 2 in April); 3 of the 48 were fatal. At Rostock 649
prisoners arrived on November 11, and these were followed
by 544 more on December 14; among the latter there were
two small-pox patients, and in the course of the next few
months forty-one more cases of the disease and six deaths
were reported.