

Regarding the appearance of small-pox in Brunswick, the
Thuringian States, and Anhalt, only a small amount of
information is available. In the city of Brunswick a German
soldier, who had come from Carignan, contracted the disease
in September, and in November and January six Frenchmen
were taken sick; two of the latter died. In the garrison,
which averaged 1,389 men, there were four cases of small-pox
in March and June. According to a manuscript report of the
Brunswick Bureau of Statistics, the number of deaths due
238to small-pox throughout the entire Duchy was 2 in the
year 1870, 269 in the year 1871, and 215 in the year 1872.
At Gotha a French prisoner suffering from small-pox was
left behind in January, and another prisoner in the same
transport contracted the disease a few days later; in February
there were a few isolated cases in the garrison. At Weimar
a German field-soldier suffering from small-pox arrived in
February; he infected the woman who took care of him,
and presently the disease broke out in the city. In Altenburg
two infected sub-officers of the field-army and two
Frenchmen, likewise suffering from the disease, were committed
to the reserve-lazaret, and shortly afterwards a small
epidemic broke out in the garrison. There were ten cases
of the disease and no deaths among the Frenchmen, and in
the garrison, which averaged 1,178 men, there were eleven
cases and one death. Among the civil inhabitants the first
to be attacked were a sick-attendant and a journeyman
mason; the latter had removed the soot from a stove in
a room occupied by small-pox patients.

In the Duchy of Saxe-Meiningen, according to a manuscript
report of the local Bureau of Statistics, the number of deaths
due to small-pox in the years 1860–71 was 133, in the year
1872 it was 37, and in the year 1873 it was 47. The figures
for the several years before 1871 are not available. Every
transport of sick soldiers from France brought small-pox
patients to the city of Meiningen; five cases, the first in
January, were reported in the garrison, which consisted of
1,663 men, and in the same month there were cases among
the civil inhabitants. It was impossible, however, to establish
a connexion between those in the garrison and those in
the city.

In Dessau, one French prisoner in October and two in
November contracted the disease, which in January appeared
throughout the city and became epidemic. In the garrison,
which consisted of 1,228 men, there were ten cases of the
disease, none of which terminated fatally.

239Hamburg,[272] after the by no means mild epidemic that
raged there in the year 1864 (19·7 deaths per 10,000
inhabitants) suffered very little from the disease in the following
years; in 1868 there were five deaths reported, and
in 1869 the number increased to twenty. After the Franco-German
War an epidemic of small-pox raged in Hamburg,
which was more extensive and more furious than almost any
other epidemic that Germany had ever experienced. In the
years 1870–2 no less than 4,053 persons succumbed to small-pox
in Hamburg. Among the French prisoners there were
twenty-two cases of the disease and one death, and among
the German troops there were twelve cases and no deaths.
The disease first made its appearance in the summer of 1870,
when there were a few cases in the city; but in October
they began to increase in number, and by the first of the
year the disease was spreading rapidly. The number of
deaths in Hamburg was: