

The connexion between the epidemic in the stronghold
of Ulm and the war was very obvious. Says Volz:[287]
‘After the summer of 1870 had produced only a few cases
of small-pox, and a long pause (August to the beginning of
November) had intervened, during which we saw absolutely
no traces of the disease, the arrival of French prisoners
caused the disease to spread far and wide, constituting
a part of the epidemic which raged throughout almost all
of Europe. In the latter part of September the first cases
of small-pox were observed among the prisoners. But
a month and a half elapsed before the disease made its appearance
among the civil inhabitants; one of the first cases was
traced to the beds in the barracks. In January 1871 the
disease was conveyed to Söflingen by a woman from that
place who had been employed as a nurse in the military
hospital at New Ulm. The constant intercourse between
Söflingen and Ulm soon asserted itself through the infection
of working-men who were employed in the latter place and
lived in the former. At the same time the disease frequently
appeared among the laundry-owners, washerwomen, scrubwomen,
innkeepers, sutler-women, and generally among persons
who were employed in any capacity in the field-hospitals
and forts. Then, too, patients kept arriving who had been
infected in Baden, Switzerland, Bavaria, North Germany,
263and in regions which, like ours, had been infected by prisoners
and fugitives arriving from France. In the district of
Beimerstetten the disease also made its appearance, having
been brought there in a carpet which a woman purchased
from a Bavarian soldier who had accompanied a transport
of prisoners. In addition to this woman, sixteen more persons
contracted the disease, and three of them died.’

In the city of Ulm thirty-six civilians (13·7 per 10,000
inhabitants) succumbed to the disease, while in the district
of Ulm forty-six persons (21·2 per 10,000) died. The climax
of the epidemic was reached in May; after a short lull in
August and September it started up again and lasted until
the autumn of 1872. The garrison at Ulm was also attacked,
but not very severely.

Of the immobile troops in Württemberg, who averaged
10,122 men, 7·9 per 1,000 contracted the disease. Of the
French prisoners that were held in Württemberg, 390 contracted
the disease (the climax, 199 cases, was reached in
December). The maximum number of prisoners was 12,958,
and 30·1 per 1,000 contracted the disease and twenty-eight
died (7·2 per cent of those taken sick).

In Heilbronn,[288] as in Stuttgart, a small epidemic had raged
before the war broke out; from February to July 1870 some
forty persons had contracted the disease. From August to
October no more cases were reported, but in November
a new epidemic began and spread with great rapidity. The
following table indicates the number of cases and deaths in
the small-pox hospital at Heilbronn:

Patients.

Deaths.

November (1870)

2

December

19

2

January (1871)

51

3

February