

The number of deaths caused by small-pox in the epidemic
of the years 1870–2 was greatly increased by the extremely
virulent character of the disease. Of course one cannot
estimate the number of deaths caused by small-pox among
the civil inhabitants from the number of reported cases of
the disease, since the reports sent in were always very incomplete.
We know that the mortality of small-pox depends
very much upon vaccination; vaccinated persons succumb
far less frequently to the disease than unvaccinated persons.
This fact explains why among the German field-soldiers, who
were constantly subjected to hardships and privations of all
kinds, only 5·75 per cent of the patients died, whereas of the
French prisoners some 13·85 per cent died. The mortality
among the civil inhabitants of Germany was also very high;
this was chiefly due to the fact that severe forms of the
disease, particularly hemorrhagic small-pox, were of frequent
occurrence. As authority for this we can only refer to these
reports of the hospitals; but since small children, amongst
whom the mortality of small-pox is very high, are less
represented in them, and, on the other hand, since mild
cases among adults can more readily be withdrawn from
hospital treatment, one cannot accept without qualification
the experience of the hospitals. According to Wunderlich,
of 681 patients treated in the Leipzig hospital between the
year 1852 and July 1870, only 29 (4·2 per cent) died, whereas
in the years 1870–1, of 1,727 patients treated, 253 (14·7 per
cent) died. In Breslau, whereas in former epidemics an
average of seven per cent of the patients died, in the epidemic
of the years 1871–2 no less than 13·4 per cent died. Guttstadt
also states that the mortality in the Berlin hospitals was
271fifteen per cent, whereas the number of deaths caused by
the disease in former years was much smaller. We have
seen above that 21·7 per cent of the patients taken to the
Hôtel-Dieu in Lyons died. It is unnecessary to adduce
further statistics; all contemporary observers agreed that
the epidemic involved an extremely severe and virulent form
of the disease, and that this same virulence characterized the
disease wherever it made its appearance.

#### 5. The Epidemics of Small-pox that raged in the European, and in a few of the non-European States in connexion with the Franco-German War of 1870–1

##### (a) Switzerland

Switzerland was exposed to great danger in consequence of
the passage of General Bourbaki’s army, which consisted
partly of very young soldiers who had suffered great hardships,
including cold and hunger, and which contained large numbers
of men who were suffering from small-pox. The little
country was called upon to take in some 85,000 men; when
the latter were examined on the frontier a large number of
them were found to be infected with small-pox and were
held at Verrière in France. But this did not prevent the
disease from being conveyed across the border. Of the
French prisoners confined there, 137, all told, succumbed to
small-pox.