

Vaccination compulsory.

Vaccination not compulsory.

Bavaria.
(1870–5).

Hesse.
(1870–2).

Saxony.
(1872).

Netherlands.
(1870–3).

0–20 years old

22·4

21·8

76·3

68·3

20–60 years old

59·0

65·4

21·9

29·6

Over 60 years old

18·6

12·8

1·8

2·1

This table clearly shows that vaccination protects a person
against contracting small-pox for a number of years, or at
least against succumbing to it, but that this immunity lasts
only for a certain length of time and should be prolonged by
revaccination—a fact which the Prussian military authorities
recognized and took into practical consideration for many
decades prior to the year 1870.

Many have contended that the epidemic of small-pox
which ravaged a large part of Europe, from the year 1870
on, was not a consequence of the Franco-German War, but
an independent outcome of unknown conditions that were
particularly favourable to the dissemination of the disease.
The main argument used to uphold this contention is that
epidemics of small-pox had occurred in all the states in the
years before the war, without having gained such irresistible
headway, and that the disease had broken out in the form
of epidemics in many parts of Germany and the neighbouring
countries even in the first half of the year 1870. But to
refute this argument it can be clearly shown through Guttstadt’s
instructive compilation of data that the German
epidemic was in countless instances, in the case of Prussia
as well as in that of other states in the German Confederation,
284brought about by the transplantation of the disease from
France. Whenever small-pox broke out anywhere in times
of peace, it was possible to keep the disease localized, through
isolation of patients and the vaccination of the inhabitants
of all regions in which fugitives from pestilence took refuge.
In the year 1870, on the other hand, the contagion of small-pox
was spread throughout all Germany in a few months;
the increased intercourse caused by the war, together with
the habit the Germans had of visiting the prisons where the
French soldiers were confined, also helped to spread the
disease in all directions.

For Germany this disastrous epidemic, which throughout
the German Empire, including the Imperial Provinces,
carried away upwards of 170,000 persons, had just one good
result—it led to the passing of a law in the year 1874 which
rendered vaccination compulsory. ‘Besides taking thousands
of human lives the epidemic also caused considerable economic
loss; the care of the sick and the measures adopted to prevent
the disease from spreading necessitated large expenditures
of money, while large numbers of working-men contracted
the disease and were thus incapacitated for a long time;
furthermore, the disease left unnumerable sickly people, who
had to be further supported, and at the same time the fear
of infection interfered with commercial intercourse. Those
who managed to escape infection, or to recover from an attack
of the disease, naturally wished to run no more risks in the
future, or to expose the welfare of their families to danger
or destruction.’[303]