

Jameson, the chief of the army’s medical staff, lamented
the fact that sanitary officers (hygienists), originally appointed
to accompany each division of troops, were dismissed. The
regular doctors, who were then called upon to perform their
functions, were fully occupied with taking care of the wounded,
and were probably not well informed as to hygienic investigations
and measures. The results obtained from preventive
inoculation, which was practised on some of the soldiers,
were in general satisfactory.

In other places the conditions were similar to those along
the Modder River; in Paardeberg the available drinking-water
was equally bad, and in Bloemfontein there was an
explosion-like outbreak of fever. From the beginning of
the campaign to the middle of the year 1900 there were
13,057 cases of disease in the army, and of those 3,174
terminated fatally; the total number of cases during the
entire war was no less than 42,741.

The English troops that were shut up in Ladysmith from
November 1, 1899, to February 27, 1900, were very severely
attacked by typhoid fever. In the first part of November
the English garrison had consisted of 13,496 men, and by
March it had dwindled down to 10,164 men. The number of
292sick soldiers committed to the lazaret amounted to no less
than 10,668, and of these 1,766 had typhoid fever and 1,857
had dysentery; 383 of the former and 117 of the latter died.
When the Boers withdrew there were 1,996 patients in the
hospital, 708 of them suffering from typhoid fever, 341 from
dysentery, and 189 from wounds.[308]

In the Concentration Camps which the English established
in the summer of the year 1900 for the accommodation of the
women and children in the South African Republics, the
pestilences soon gained the upper hand. Lord Roberts
had made arrangements to concentrate the families of the
Boers in camps; since the farms of the Boers were systematically
burned, these camps were supposed to protect their
wives and children against starvation, and at the same time
the wives and children served as hostages for their husbands
and fathers. When the location of these camps was decided
upon, not sanitary, but military considerations were taken
into account; it was necessary that they should be controlled
from a near-by fortress. They soon became overcrowded,
the supply of water was inadequate, and there was much
uncleanliness. The inhabitants of the camps were mostly
women, children, and old men; thus, for example, in October
1901, of the people living in the camps in the Orange Free
State, 55 per cent were children under fifteen years of age,
31.9 per cent were women, and 13.1 per cent were men,
mostly old men. According to the reports submitted to
Parliament the condition of health in the Concentration
Camps in Natal and in the Cape Colony was not unfavourable,
but in those in Transvaal and Orange it was very bad. The
following statistics, covering the time between June and
September 1901, relate to the Concentration Camps in the
Transvaal:[309]