

In consequence of all this grave suffering, the representatives
of the people petitioned the Imperial Government to
provide as soon as possible for a uniform legislative regulation,
making universal vaccination compulsory. The desire
expressed in this petition was soon fulfilled by the submission
of a bill on February 5, 1874; the bill was passed by the
285Reichstag on March 14, and received the signature of the
Kaiser on April 8, 1874. This law required all persons to
be vaccinated in the first year of their lives, and to be revaccinated
in their twelfth year; it applied generally to
all Germany.

The beneficial result of the passing of this law was clearly
demonstrated in the course of the following decades. Notwithstanding
the fact that Germany is almost entirely
surrounded by states in which epidemics of small-pox, in
consequence of insufficient vaccination, are of frequent
occurrence, since the passing of the Imperial Vaccination
Law the disease has not once made its appearance on German
soil in the form of a widespread epidemic. Despite the fact
that small-pox is frequently conveyed into the country,
especially by foreign working-men, the efforts to keep it
confined within narrow limits have always been successful.
The measures which are so effective in the case of other
diseases—isolation of the patients and of suspected persons
living in the vicinity, disinfection of the room and effects
which have been used by patients—in an insufficiently
vaccinated community do not have the desired rapid success,
since the contagion of small-pox clings with extraordinary
tenacity to clothes and articles of general use. This fact
has been abundantly proved in the epidemics of small-pox
that have occurred in Europe in the course of the last few
decades.

286

## CHAPTER IX
FROM THE FRANCO-GERMAN WAR TO THE PRESENT TIME

Among the great advances made in the last few decades
of the nineteenth century must be included the successful
battle of modern hygiene against infectious diseases. This
struggle was introduced by the development of practical
hygiene in England and by the perfection of scientific
hygiene through the work of Pettenkofer. But a firm basis
on which to combat pestilence was not secured until the
brilliant discoveries of Koch and his successors pointed out
to us the cause of these pestilences, and methods were found
to demonstrate in a short time the presence of disease-germs,
even among persons who become ill but slightly, or not at
all, and who for that reason are very dangerous to those
about them.

Since even in time of peace the close quarters in which
soldiers live in barracks greatly favour the outbreak of
epidemics, the military authorities constantly watched and
profited by these advances in the field of disease-prevention;
and with the success of efforts to decrease the prevalence
of infectious diseases among the soldiers in time of peace,
so also in war-times it became possible to check more
thoroughly than ever before the dissemination of these
diseases. Hence the number of men carried away by
epidemics is much smaller in modern wars than used to be
the case.