

It was not long before a lack of the necessaries of life
began to make itself felt in the city. As early as February 27
the Russians had cut off the supply of water afforded by the
Radaune, which fed the wells in the city, and this necessitated
dependence upon rain-water. For the purpose of obtaining
new supplies of food, a sortie along the Nehrung was undertaken
on April 27; and while the enterprise was successful, the only
persons who really derived any benefit from it were the higher
officers and military officials, who sold butter, milk, and
corned beef at exorbitant prices. Thus the well-to-do citizens,
at least, were able to secure food by paying an excessive
price for it. In May the conditions among the poor became
a great deal worse; they were obliged to eat things that were
309positively disgusting; horse-meat and waste from the
breweries were delicacies, while cats and dogs were also
devoured. The rations of the soldiers grew smaller and
smaller, although there was sufficient grain on hand to keep
them supplied with bread. Says Friccius,[332] in regard to a
sortie undertaken on June 9, ‘How hungry the troops in the
garrison were is indicated by the fact that they cut up every
horse that was killed in battle and took the edible parts
with them.’

After the conclusion of the armistice, which became
known in Danzig on June 10, there was a pause in the siege
lasting until August 18; during this time the besiegers
brought food to the garrison every five days, but absolutely
no provision was made for the civil inhabitants. During the
armistice many citizens left the city; indeed the French
expelled from the city all persons who were not sufficiently
provided with the necessaries of life. At first the Russians
allowed the fugitives to pass through their lines, but later
on they raised objections, so that a large number of the
unfortunate inhabitants were obliged to live in the open
fields between the besiegers and the besieged, where many
of them died of starvation. In the latter part of September
General Rapp allowed some 300 of them, who had managed
to keep alive, to return into the city. Blech asserts that the
emigration of beggars and others of the poor reduced the
population of the city by some 16,000.[333]

In October, lack of the necessaries of life reached a climax,
so that rats and mice were eaten. Since the scarcity of
provender made it necessary to slaughter almost all the horses,
the soldiers were supplied with large quantities of horse-meat.
On November 1 the granaries, in which were kept the
provisions of the garrison, were destroyed by fire, resulting
in the loss of about two-thirds of the provisions. This made
it necessary to reduce the soldiers’ bread-rations, and the
310bread with which they were supplied was made of half-burned
flour and of rusks fished out of the stinking Mottlau;
‘it was so disgusting that only ravenous hunger could induce
anybody to eat it.’[334]

In consequence of hunger and the unnatural food eaten,
the mortality among the civil inhabitants, the number of
whom had dwindled down to 16,000, became very high; the
number of deaths per week in the month of October was no
less than 50–80, to which, according to Blech, must be
added the deaths among the poor which were no longer
reported. In the first part of November there were some
80–90 deaths per week. On November 29 General Rapp
surrendered the city to the Russians and Prussians; but
since the conditions of capitulation could not be agreed
upon until January 1, 1814, there was an interval of about
a month during which the French garrison, but not the civil
population, was supplied with food; consequently the death-rate
among the citizens remained high. Furthermore, the
besiegers, among whom a virulent typhus had been raging
since October, communicated the infection to the inhabitants,
107 of whom succumbed to it in the last week of November,
133 in the first week of December, and 138 in the following
week. On December 1, permission was obtained to establish
a market, and from that time on, the citizens could once more
provide themselves with food in a regular way.