

The loss of human life inside the besieged stronghold was
terrible; of the 35,900 troops in the garrison, 15,736 according
to Friccius died in the lazarets; at the time of the capitulation
only 16,532 men were left, and of these 1,482 were sick
and had to be left in the city. According to Blech, a total
of 5,592 civilians died, 1,142 of them in the last three months
(October-December) of the year; the number of deaths in
December alone was 473. Toward the end of the siege some
ninety persons died of starvation.[335]

311

### 3. The Siege of Torgau (1813)[336]

On May 10, 1813, when Napoleon had appeared in Saxony,
and the King, after considerable hesitation, had decided in
his favour, the Saxon garrison of Torgau, at that time a place
of 5,000 inhabitants, was replaced by a French army-corps.
In the course of the summer large transports of sick soldiers
from various lazarets arrived at Torgau, and on July 18
alone 3,000 sick men and 1,000 convalescents came from
Dresden. Consequently the number of sick in the stronghold
was very large even before the siege began; all public
buildings had been converted into lazarets. But even these
were not numerous or large enough to accommodate all the
patients, who numbered some 6,000 in the month of September,
so that the occupants of houses along entire streets
were driven out of their homes, which were used for lazarets
and barracks. ‘A virulent, putrid fever’ raged in all the
lazarets, and at least one-third of the persons who contracted
it died; the inhabitants and the Frenchmen quartered in
the homes of citizens were at first spared by the disease.

After the battle of Dennewitz (September 6, 1813) the
head-quarters of the third and fourth French army-corps was
transferred to Torgau, where also numerous fugitives took
refuge; at the same time the large French head-quarters
from Dresden arrived, so that the size of the garrison was
increased by 10,000 men and 5,000 horses. After the battle
of Leipzig the stronghold was besieged by the Prussians,
and presently the supply of food ran low and the uncleanliness
in the streets and houses grew incredibly worse. ‘Then the
pestilence began to spread at an alarming rate among
the inhabitants and among the Frenchmen quartered in the
312homes of citizens, so that the entire city of Torgau came to
resemble a large, overcrowded lazaret.’[337]

‘The regular lazarets now became veritable hot-beds of
misery; they were scarcely able to accommodate the large
number of patients, who numbered at least 12,000, and whom
it was necessary to place so close together that they almost
touched one another. There was a lack of straw and of
other necessities, of sick-attendants and physicians, of
effective remedies, and especially of order and proper
superintendence.’ The patients suffered partly from severe,
fetid diarrhoea, and partly from typhus. In the courtyards
there were enormous accumulations of dirt and refuse, and
the doors leading into many of the sick-rooms could scarcely
be opened owing to the collections of foul matter which
covered the floor ankle-deep; in order to reach the sick it
was necessary to wade through this and to climb over dead
bodies. Absolutely no thought was given to keeping the
rooms warm. ‘Thus it is quite natural that among these
horrible surroundings the slightest wound, the most insignificant
indisposition, could easily have a fatal termination,
and that it was like sentencing a man to death to bring him
to the lazaret.’ The number of deaths exceeded 8,000 in the
month of November alone.