

Insufficient nourishment is seldom the direct cause of
death; on the other hand, it frequently so weakens people
that they are much more subject to sickness, or, if they have
303already contracted some disease, they are much more likely
to die, or, if they recover, to convalesce slowly. Thus Vacher[324]
states that typhoid fever, which usually results fatally in
one out of four cases, during the siege of Paris carried away
no less than forty per cent of those who contracted it;
tuberculosis, he says, often acquired an acute form and
caused death within a few weeks. Little children present
slight resistance to famine. ‘In regard to new-born and
one-year-old infants I have observed in certain cases that
become more frequent every day, that the effects of insufficient
alimentation show themselves in the form of a progressive
emaciation, which includes all the tissues of the body and
almost always has fatal consequences; oedema of the teguments,
anaemia, uncontrollable diarrhoea, and continual
plaintive crying on the part of the little patients are the
characteristic symptoms of that hunger-fever which actually
decimates our infant generation.’

Another result of insufficient nourishment, one which has
frequently been observed in besieged strongholds, is the
appearance of scurvy.

During sieges, the hygienic measures of precaution, which
are absolutely essential to the maintenance of health in
cities, can no longer be carried out. If spring-water is secured
outside the city for the inhabitants, the besiegers cut off the
source of supply; if the water of rivers is used, then filtration
plants have to be erected. But even filtration does not
prevent the appearance of those infectious diseases the germs
of which are carried in water, since for washing purposes
the river-water is used just as it is found. The removal of
refuse constitutes an extremely difficult problem; the
cleaning out of privies is often possible only to a very insufficient
extent, especially when the besiegers have advanced
very close to the city, and the failure to dispose of garbage
necessarily causes large accumulations of dirt and filth in
the streets; this was especially the case in former times.

304The burying of so many dead bodies, of both men and
animals, especially horses, has met in many sieges with serious
obstacles;[325] if the ditches intended for a large number of
bodies are not dug deep enough, the atmosphere becomes
polluted; to burn them is impossible, owing to lack of fuel;
and if they are cast into the river, this jeopardizes the health
of those living further downstream. During certain sieges
in the past, hard conditions have made it necessary to leave
corpses and carcases lying in the open, with terrible consequences.

If the siege takes place in the winter, it is very difficult to
procure fuel for heating purposes, unless sufficient provision
has been made beforehand. In Paris, for example, the
inhabitants suffered severely from cold, and to meet the
emergency artificial fuel was prepared by mixing stable
manure with tar and reducing the mass to solid form under
the hydraulic press.