

A large share of the high death-rate in them is ascribable to the
condition in which the women and children arrive. Often they have
295been half-starved and are broken down in health. It cannot be
wondered at that under these circumstances measles and other
diseases are inordinately fatal. The dirty personal habits of the
Boers, their use of improper and often disgusting remedies, and their
ignorant errors of dietetics in regard to young children, have rendered
it extremely difficult to secure favourable results in the treatment
of cases of sickness among the Boer children. There appears to be
no doubt, as indicated in our previous special article, that the
measles which has been prevalent has been of a specially malignant
type. Its malignancy has doubtless been intensified by the dirty
condition of the Boer children, and by the overcrowding that has
been permitted in the camps, as well as by the previous bad health
of these children. The present reports afford abundant evidence
confirmatory of the conclusion at which we had previously arrived,
that dysentery, diarrhoea, and enteric fever in a large proportion of
the camps have been prevalent as well as measles.

And in another report we read:[311]

Measles of a particularly malignant type has prevailed. Its
fatality has doubtless been increased by the exhausted and semi-starved
condition in which many of the Boers and their children
have arrived at the camps. It has been impossible to isolate such
cases in the camps; and the crude and ignorant and even mischievous
methods of domestic treatment adopted by the Boer women have
doubtless increased the evil, as have also the personal uncleanliness
of the Boers and their fear of fresh air as well as of clean water.
But, as previously pointed out, enteric fever and diarrhoea and
dysentery have claimed a large toll of victims, and for the excessive
amount of these the deficient sanitary control of the camps must be
held in a large measure responsible.

With the arrival of the better season, when the Concentration
Camps, under the pressure of public opinion, were
thoroughly cleansed, the condition of health improved.
Hönigsberger,[312] who inspected the camp at Merebank (in
Natal) in May 1912, derived a very favourable impression;
notwithstanding the fact that the camp lay on low ground
near the sea-coast, where the soil was necessarily damp,
296there was no visible surface water because of an effective
system of drainage. The drinking-water facilities were
good. Of some 8,000 refugees sheltered there only 110 died
between the months of February and May 1902.

### 3. The War in South-west Africa (1904–7)[313]

In the very first year of the war, typhoid fever broke out
with great severity. The disease first made its appearance
in the war against the Herero nation in the first part of
April 1904; it attacked the eastern division of the army,
which was commanded by Major von Glasenapp and numbered
twenty-five officers and 509 men, in Onjatu (midway between
Windhuk and Waterberg), after the soldiers had been
exposed to rainy weather, cold nights, and extreme hardship.
On April 6 there were six cases of the disease reported, and
by April 16 the number of cases had increased to sixty-six;
the division was then transferred to Otjihaenena, where the
patients were housed in permanent lazarets and the healthy
men were quarantined. Throughout the remaining part of
the war, typhoid fever played an important rôle; the total
number of deaths in the years 1904–7 was 1,491; of these
689 succumbed to diseases, 439 of them to typhoid fever.
The soldiers who fought in the battles against the Hereros
were most severely attacked; of a total of 470 deaths 283
were caused by typhoid fever and only twenty-two by other
diseases. In the three years’ struggle against the Hottentots
some 1,200 soldiers died; 375 of them died of diseases; of
the 375 typhoid fever was responsible for 156.