

In the following pages we discuss a few sieges which were
characterized by severe outbreaks of pestilence.

### 1. The Siege of Mantua (1796–7)[326]

During the siege of Mantua, which the French carried on
from May 30, 1796, to February 3, 1797, war-pestilences
raged with fearful severity among both besiegers and besieged.
The city lay in an extremely unhealthy region—malaria
was ever prevalent and the drinking-water was bad. The
intentional flooding of the region and the great heat of the
summer of 1796 caused malaria to break out with great
severity and to acquire virulent forms that rendered the
disease more dangerous than usual. In the latter part of
305May 1796, the garrison consisted of 18,000 Austrian troops,
whose power of resistance had been greatly reduced by hard
service from November on, and by exposure to rain and cold
with inadequate means of shelter. Besides intermittent
fever, both intestinal catarrh and typhus fever made their
appearance in July; the latter, at least, was probably the
‘nervous fever’ mentioned by Stegmeyer. Thus as early
as the latter part of July there were some 2,000 sick men in
the garrison. In August the investment was not yet complete,
so that the soldiers did not suffer from lack of food.
Notwithstanding this fact, however, the diseases increased in
prevalence and caused many deaths; the number of sick men
was no less than 6,000. On September 12 the Austrian general,
Würmser, with about 12,000 men, succeeded in gaining
entrance into the city; he brought with him a large number
of disabled men who had been wounded in recent fighting,
and many of whom succumbed to tetanus and hospital fever.
The number of patients now increased to 8,500; as there
was no bedding or straw available, the patients were compelled
to lie on the bare ground, and the uncleanliness of the
hospitals grew worse. When the investment was finally
rendered complete in October, it caused a great scarcity of
meat, fat, and wine; the number of patients that month
was 9,000 and the number of deaths 2,560. These figures,
however, are not complete, since they do not include the
patients in the houses set aside for troops overcome by
exhaustion. Up to this time the weather had been good, but
in November rain set in; and while intermittent fever then
decreased in prevalence, dysentery raged even more furiously,
and typhus fever also broke out in a virulent, quickly fatal
form. The supply of food now ran very low, and although
there was sufficient bread on hand, horse-flesh was the only
meat. To add to the general misery, scurvy made its appearance
in November, and all those who contracted it died.
The extreme cold compelled the patients to keep their
clothes on, and they lay without blankets on the hard floors of
306the hospital corridors; their number had now increased
to 9,500, and 2,400 died in November. In December the
misery increased; the cold became more and more intense,
the supply of food was almost exhausted, and the wine gave
out altogether; scurvy raged in an even more severe and
virulent form, being frequently accompanied by copious
hemorrhages from various parts of the body. In the hospitals
there were 7,354 patients, and 2,021 died in the month of
December. In January the acme of misery was reached;
the scarcity of food was terrible, and the ravages of scurvy
were no less than frightful; 1,968 men in the garrison were
carried away in the course of that month. On February 3,
1797, the stronghold was surrendered to the French. The
number of patients taken in by the hospitals between September
and January exceeded 40,000, and of the garrison,
which numbered some 30,000 men, 10,249 (more than one-third
of the total) died. Fodéré estimates the total number
of deaths in the city of Mantua during the siege at 20,000;[327]
regarding the prevalence of diseases and the number of deaths
among the civil inhabitants Steegmeyer unfortunately gives
us no information.