

According to Wittmann, there was not a single trace of
an infectious disease in Mayence in September 1813. In
October the field-lazarets of the army were transferred from
Leipzig to the West, and most of them passed through
Mayence; in the first part of November, moreover, the field-army
itself passed through the city on its return march; thus
sick and healthy soldiers conveyed typhus fever into the
stronghold. ‘In the vicinity of the hospitals and churches,
where sick soldiers were congregated, in the streets through
318which these doomed victims passed, and in the houses in
which they were quartered together with healthy men, or
into which they had crept from sheer inability to go further,
contagious typhus broke out first and with the greatest
severity.’[341] Dr. Petit, the commissary sent out by the
government in Paris, did not have the courage to oppose
the will of Marshal Marmont, who was in chief command,
and so he sought to pacify the inhabitants by means of
notices in the papers to the effect that the prevailing disease
was neither epidemic nor infectious, and was only contagious
typhus.

After the investment was complete, typhus fever caused
terrible devastation throughout the city. When the siege
began, Mayence had a garrison of some 30,000 men, while
the civil inhabitants numbered about 24,500; to the latter,
however, must be added a considerable number of refugees
from the surrounding country. The bad hospital arrangements,
as always happened at that time, greatly helped to
spread the disease in Mayence. According to a report made
out by two French physicians and reproduced by Wittmann,
the air in the hospitals was terrible; every bed was occupied
by two patients, while the straw under them and the blankets
over them were never changed or washed, so that they must
necessarily have constituted a source of infection. A report
by Kerckhoffs[342] regarding the Mayence hospitals describes
even worse conditions:

I was appointed to serve in the hospital established in the Municipal
Octroi Building, and the first time that I went there I found the
living and the dead, the wounded and the sick, scattered in confusion
all over the place. The sick were stretched out on the floor, without
even straw under them, covered with ordure. I was obliged to pick
my way on tip-toe in order not to sink up to the ankles in filth.
I saw sick men lying beside the dead bodies of their comrades.
319In effect, there were so many of them that they were lying on top of
one another. In some of the rooms the windows were closed, so that
no air could enter; in other rooms there was neither glass nor
boarding in the doors or windows, notwithstanding the extreme
cold. The sick men told me that they had been in that same position
for two, three, and even four days, without having had a drop of
water.

The soldiers under arrest, who were compelled to clean
out the hospitals, all died, no more sick-attendants were to
be found, and a large number of physicians perished in the
performance of their duties; all the persons employed in
the hospital entirely neglected their duties, and most of
them were drunk all the time, since large quantities of wine
were on hand for the patients.