

Recent investigations in the field of medicine turn over to
the other sciences all questions regarding ultimate causes,
and confine themselves to what is actually observed. We
know that the agents responsible for infectious diseases are
specific minute organisms which must be present in the
system to produce the disease in question, and that these
micro-organisms are conveyed from place to place by infected
persons, by intermediaries, on articles to which they have
attached themselves, in contaminated food, in drinking-water,
and in many other ways. Investigators have studied
the conditions in which these infective agents live and the
manner in which they are disseminated, they have discovered
methods of determining the nature of the disease in a very
short time, and they have come to recognize the danger of
coming in contact with germ-bearers, that is, with persons,
healthy or convalescent, who have these micro-organisms in
their systems without being themselves sick. Medical science
is now endeavouring, by means of systematic procedure and
330splendid organization, to guard soldiers against the danger
of infection; good drinking-water is provided, the men and
the rooms in which they live are kept clean, persons suffering
from infectious diseases are isolated, all rooms and articles
used by patients are disinfected, infected divisions of troops
are quartered by themselves, germ-bearers are watched for
and discovered, &c. The success of such measures is well
known. The knowledge gained and profited by in times of
peace is also applied in times of war, and to-day we are able
to confine pestilences within much narrower limits than was
formerly possible. In order to do this, however, we must
have, in addition to an efficient system of transporting and
feeding troops, physicians who are well informed in regard
to hygiene and bacteriology.

As early as the eighteenth century, successful efforts were
made to prevent, by means of energetic measures, the
reappearance of plague in Europe; the Russo-Turkish War
of 1828–9 was the last war in which it broke out. On the
other hand, typhus fever continued to be the Nemesis of
belligerent armies, while a new infectious disease, cholera,
entered upon the scene and played a very important rôle in
the Crimean War, and a by no means minor rôle in the war
of 1866. Along with these diseases, typhoid fever advanced
into the foreground about the middle of the last century,
and it soon turned out to be one of the most dangerous
diseases that occur among soldiers. This appearance of
typhoid fever has led some to think that the disease has
prevailed extensively only in comparatively recent times.
Hirsch, however, ably defends the opposite view; he maintains
that typhoid fever was in many instances confused
with the febres pestilentes, malignae, putridae, and nervosae,
with the mucous fevers, bilious fevers, putrid fevers, &c.
In discussing the typhus-fever epidemics that occurred in the
course of the Napoleonic wars, we have several times called
attention to the fact that typhoid fever probably broke out
in the form of epidemics; but it could be diagnosed with
331certainty only after post-mortem examinations began to be
more frequent. At all events, typhoid fever is to-day prevalent
all over the world, and there is always danger that field-armies
will be infected with it, either in their own land or in
the land of the enemy. All the wars of the last few decades
have clearly demonstrated this fact.