

321A severe epidemic of small-pox raged in Paris, as stated
above, even before the siege took place. In the first part of
the siege, moreover, the disease raged with even greater
fury in the city, since most of the young newly-enlisted
mobile guards had never been vaccinated. The maximum
of deaths caused by it were reported between November 6
and November 27. We have already described the course
of the small-pox epidemic in Paris.[345] It was influenced
neither by hunger nor by cold, but developed chiefly for the
reason that it was impossible to congregate and isolate the
large number of unvaccinated and susceptible persons.

Typhoid fever, dysentery, and diarrhoea, because of the
unfavourable conditions brought about by the siege, became
very widespread and virulent. Whereas in the year 1869
there were 630 deaths caused by typhoid fever, during the
siege of 1870 no less than 3,475 persons succumbed to that
disease. Dupinet[346] thinks that the above number is too
small, because the disease was often not recognized, and
pneumonia, a common complication, was entered as the
cause of death. Inasmuch as typhoid fever was endemic in
Paris, and as the native inhabitants had acquired immunity
by recovery from an attack in the early part of their lives,
those who were most severely afflicted by the disease were
chiefly the soldiers in the army and the refugees from the
surrounding country. The largest number of deaths was
reported in the twentieth week of the siege, i.e. between
January 14 and 20.[347] No less than 375 persons succumbed
to typhoid fever in the course of that week, whereas in the
corresponding week of the previous year only sixteen deaths
had been reported. The largest number of deaths caused
by dysentery and diarrhoea in a single week was reported
somewhat later; the limited prevalence of these diseases
322during the siege is indicated by the fact that in the half-year
1869–70 the number of deaths caused by them was
never more than twenty per week. From statistics compiled
by Sueur we have arranged the following table (p. 323),
which also includes the deaths caused by bronchitis and
pneumonia, but not the victims buried on the battle-fields,
of whom there were some 3,000.

The table indicates the gradual diminution of the
food-supply. In December the quality of the bread grew
worse and worse; white bread could no longer be baked,
and in its place an almost inedible form of brown bread was
made out of bran, wheat, rye, rice, barley, and oats. Particularly
noticeable was the lack of good fats, making it necessary
to prepare foods with a bad-tasting tallow that was
sold under the name of ‘Beurre de Paris’. Since the cattle
had to be slaughtered (those that were not killed died of
various diseases), there was very soon a great scarcity of
milk, making it very difficult to feed infants.[348]

Several persons have maintained that the extreme cold
exerted considerable influence upon the death-rate; and
a glance at the two columns in the table indicating
the number of deaths caused by pneumonia and bronchitis
would seem to justify this contention. How great the
difference was, as compared with normal years, will be
obvious when we call attention to the fact that, whereas in
the twenty-second week of the siege (January 28–February 3)
627 persons succumbed to bronchitis, in the preceding year
only seventy-six deaths were caused by that disease between
January 30 and February 5, and that, whereas from 465
to 468 persons succumbed to pneumonia between January 21
and February 18, 1871, the number of deaths caused by that
disease in the corresponding period of the previous year
varied from 90 to 119 per week.