

Regarding the enormous loss of life caused by the epidemic
in Torgau, Richter, who was a Prussian military physician,
says: ‘The devastation that it caused among the Frenchmen,
and unfortunately among the inhabitants of the ill-fated
city as well, was indeed terrible; in fact there is happily
scarcely a parallel to it in the history of the world. One may
safely say that the misery experienced by the French troops
throughout the entire course of that disastrous war reached
its climax inside the walls of Torgau. The French lazarets
in the city represented scenes of horror such as repel human
nature, and such as one must actually witness in order to
appreciate fully their dreadfulness.’

### 4. The Siege of Mayence (1813–14)

The terrible devastation caused by typhus fever in the
strongholds along the Vistula, Elbe, and Rhine, which were
so valorously defended by French generals in the years
1813–14, excited general consternation. Wittmann[340] furnishes
a very accurate description of the misery undergone in
the besieged cities, especially the city of Mayence. First
he comments on the scarcity of supplies, observing that the
vicissitudes of war can never be foreseen; furthermore, he
asserts that the commanders of fortresses, when they anticipated
a siege, purposely kept the inhabitants in uncertainty
about it. In the case of Mayence, Napoleon ordered the
city to be provisioned after the battle of Leipzig. Some
2,000 oxen were collected, and most of them were kept
in the villages surrounding Mayence; but when the Allies
crossed the Rhine the oxen were all quickly driven into
the city, where they grew lean owing to lack of provender,
and died of rinderpest in such large numbers that it
317became necessary to slaughter them all and salt the meat.
This was done in such a careless way that a large part of the
meat was spoiled; even after the stronghold surrendered,
some of this salted meat was still on hand, and it was so
rotten that it had to be destroyed. The citizens had learned
of the danger too late, and numerous unscrupulous citizens
bought up all the important necessaries of life and then took
advantage of the situation by raising the prices so high that
only the wealthy could procure food. Lack of good bread,
which had been so scarce during the previous siege of Mayence
(1793), does not seem to have been so severely felt in the
siege of 1813. Particularly noticeable was the want of fuel,
so that many soldiers froze to death in the exposed guard-rooms
of the outworks. Legumes, especially peas, could not
be thoroughly cooked, so that it was frequently necessary
to throw them away. The supply of good fat, as well as of
fresh vegetables, soon ran out, while the great quantity of
alcoholic beverages stored up in Mayence had a very detrimental
effect. Very inadequate provision was made for the
sheltering of the soldiers; inasmuch as the siege took place
in the winter, they could not camp in the open, and the barracks
were not large or numerous enough to accommodate
them. Consequently the officers were quartered in the homes
of the wealthier citizens, one officer in each house, while the
troops were housed in large numbers in the often insanitary
homes of the poorer people. This of course greatly favoured
the dissemination of infectious diseases.