

The death-rate in Paris during the siege was about three
times as high as normal. Sueur has estimated that in the
years 1867–9 the mortality in the twenty-eight weeks
corresponding with those in the above table was 13·1 per
1,000 inhabitants, whereas in the twenty-eight weeks of the
siege the mortality was 38·6 per 1,000.

### 6. The Siege of Port Arthur (1904)

Port Arthur was besieged by the Japanese from July 30,
1904, to January 2, 1905—a period of 156 days. Whereas,
as stated in the last chapter, the condition of health in the
Russian army was good, the sanitary conditions in Port
Arthur during the siege were very bad, since the supply
of provisions that had been laid in proved to be insufficient.[351] 325The offer made on August 16 by General Nogi and Admiral
Togo, granting all the women, children (under 16 years),
ecclesiastics, members of the diplomatic corps and military
and naval attachés of foreign powers permission to leave the
stronghold, was refused by General Stössel. As early as
August 5 horse-meat began to be distributed;[352] from
September 17 on the troops were supplied four times a week
with horse-meat, since there was no other fresh or canned
meat available. At this time almost everything in the city
was consumed, though the Chinese secretly brought rice, eggs,
and other things, on boats from Chufoo. After September 28
the soldiers were given meat only twice a week (one-half of
a pound of horse-meat or one-third of a can of preserved
meat). Regarding conditions up to October 20 we are informed
by the report of the Russian General Medical Staff:[353] ‘The
supply of food ran lower and lower; beef gave out very
early, only a small quantity of canned meat was left, and even
the portions of horse-meat had to be dealt out very sparingly,
as we had very important use for horses in transporting
ammunition, water, food, &c., to the various positions. In
the city it became more and more difficult every day to
procure food; meat, if by any chance a small quantity was
marketed, was sold in the stores for one and one-half roubles
per pound. A chicken cost twelve roubles, a goose twenty
roubles, an egg one rouble, a pound of onions one rouble,
a pound of horse-meat one half-rouble.’

In November all the soldiers were given was horse-meat;
only the sick received canned meat. The supply of food in
the possession of private individuals was exhausted, while
garlic and vegetables had given out altogether.

On September 19 the Japanese captured the redoubts
326controlling one of the aqueducts that supplied Port Arthur
with water; there was however another aqueduct, and,
furthermore, wells were bored and a plant for distilling seawater
was put into operation. The statement of the Russian
General Staff that there was at no time a serious scarcity of
water is not confirmed in Olga von Baumgarten’s diary,
which frequently refers in plaintive terms to the lack of
drinking-water in the lazarets.[354]

During the summer the condition of health among the
Russian troops was comparatively good;[355] on August 26
there were 132 officers and 5,661 men in the lazarets. In
the first part of October typhoid fever broke out in Port
Arthur, where it was endemic, and before long an epidemic
of such severity was raging in the city that it was difficult
to find places in which to shelter the patients. There were
also a great many cases of dysentery. Owing to the lack of
preserved meat and vegetables, scurvy also made its appearance;
the first cases of the disease were observed early in
October. In the latter part of that month there were in the
lazarets 450 typhoid-fever patients, 855 dysentery patients,
and 167 scurvy patients. In addition to these diseases, cases
of night-blindness (inability to see after dusk) were observed;
the latter disease is quite common among Russian country-people,
being caused by bad nourishment.