

The pestilence continued to rage even after the surrender
of the stronghold, and did not begin to abate until the latter
part of January. Although the Prussian troops were not
quartered in the city, and entered it only in the day-time,
the pestilence nevertheless spread to them and carried away
more than 300 men in the course of three months. Not
until the end of February did the pestilence among the civil
inhabitants begin to abate; the mortality was still high in
March, but in April it sank to normal again.

According to Richter, two-thirds of the patients in the
military lazaret were suffering from ‘colliquative, dysenteric
diarrhoea’, and only one-third from ‘true typhus’, whereas
among the civil inhabitants the latter was by far the more
common. There were two forms of diarrhoea observed; it
appeared either as an acute attack of dysentery, which rarely
lasted longer than two weeks and then terminated in either
315death or recovery, or else as a chronic, dysenteric diarrhoea,
which caused general weakness and finally death.

Typhus fever began always with a frequently recurring chill,
and with a violent headache and general indisposition; this
was followed by a stage of dry fever, accompanied by stupor,
dizziness, and often wild delirium; as a rule the first few days
were characterized by obstinate constipation, and bleeding
at the nose was very common. Later on, somnolence manifested
itself, and the original constipation changed to a copious,
fetid diarrhoea. Petechiae appeared frequently, but not
invariably; at first small, bright-red spots showed themselves,
and later on they assumed a darker colour, grew larger, and
finally turned black. Their size varied considerably; sometimes
they were the size of a pin-head, while often they were
from one to one-and-a-half centimetres in diameter. Most
of the patients died between the tenth and fifteenth days;
but if the disease progressed favourably, signs of improvement
usually showed themselves suddenly on the fourteenth or
fifteenth day; as a rule, convalescence was of short duration.

The two forms of ‘nerve-fever’ mentioned by Richter
doubtless include various other diseases. That many cases
of typhus fever were among the fever patients may be inferred
from the fact that the disease was very prevalent among
the French troops, and also from Richter’s description; he
expressly mentions the sudden appearance of the disease, the
initial chill, the remission of the fever in the third week,
and the rapid convalescence—all of them characteristic signs
of typhus fever. Moreover, typhoid fever doubtless prevailed
more or less extensively. Richter describes ‘a pituitous
modification of typhus’, with a lingering development;[339]
the crisis always came late, frequently not until the sixth or
seventh week, and was invariably uncertain, so that convalescence
was very slow and often interrupted by relapses.
Deuteropathic complications were of almost regular occurrence.
There can be no doubt that we have to do here with a good
316description of typhoid fever, which revealed its presence
chiefly among the newly-conscripted young French soldiers.