

For a successful battle against war-pestilences, it is a fortunate
coincidence that the civil as well as the military authorities
are equally interested in their prevention. Every
military leader knows how important it is for the soldiers to
keep healthy, since their efficiency is otherwise seriously
impaired. It is not our task to describe the particular
measures that are to be adopted; the manuals of military
sanitation give us accurate information regarding these
matters. We merely mention the fact that it is of great
value and importance to have physicians, who are well
acquainted with hygienic problems, make a preliminary
examination of sanitary conditions in the territory through
which the soldiers will be required to pass in order to reach
the scene of hostilities.

Very great difficulties, to be sure, confront the efforts
made in war times to prevent the outbreak of infectious
diseases. If the struggle is carried on in an infected region,
the troops are often compelled to seek shelter in infected
houses; thus during the battles of Orléans and Le Mans in
the Franco-German War the troops, in order to protect
themselves against the severe winter cold, had to live in
houses which small-pox patients had shortly before occupied
or were actually occupying at the time. Circumstances
frequently arise which render impossible the adoption of the
most effective measure calculated to prevent the dissemination
of a pestilence, that is, the isolation of infected divisions
of troops; one can readily imagine how difficult this would
be in the case of an army re-forming after a lost battle.
Furthermore, even if one of the belligerent armies is doing
all it can to prevent diseases from spreading, its efforts must
332be seriously handicapped if the enemy’s army does not
include an equally diligent sanitary corps and does not devote
the same amount of energy to the prevention of the outbreak
and dissemination of infectious diseases. For even if a sanitary
corps is successful in warding off a reaction upon its own
troops, nevertheless this reaction is sure to take place with
respect to the civil inhabitants of the country in which the
war is waged.

During a war, the civil authorities must also do their part
in preventing diseases from spreading to the civil population.
The local administrations of a region in which fighting is
going on are powerless. The generals care very little whether
or not a city or village in the enemy’s country is infected
by their troops, whom they quarter in whatever house or
place best suits their purpose. On the other hand, the communities
in which military prisons are located are confronted
with a very difficult problem, since these prisons, if infected
men are confined in them, easily develop into centres of
infection; this fact was observed a hundred times in the
year 1870. If a disease breaks out in a community in consequence
of the fact that a military prison has been established
there, in my opinion it is incumbent on the central government
of the country to support the local authorities in their
efforts to check the disease, and to give them financial help
as well as scientific advice. Unfortunately, it is not to be
denied that, in many small cities and in almost all rural
communities, absolutely no provision is made for the isolation
of persons suffering from infectious diseases; the authorities
justify themselves with the reflection that in case of emergency
barracks can quickly be erected for the purpose, but at the
same time they fail to remember that working-men are not
always available in the storm and stress of war times, that
building materials in the general scarcity of supplies cannot
always be procured with sufficient promptitude, and that
pestilences, if the isolation of the first cases is delayed, usually
spread with great rapidity.