

In December the garrison was completely exhausted.
Scurvy had become more and more widespread, and between
the fourteenth and twenty-seventh of that month 71 officers
and 1,790 men had been committed to the lazarets. On the
day of the surrender (January 2, 1905) the number of men
in the Russian garrison was 32,400, and of these 6,458 were
lying sick or wounded in the lazarets.[356] Of the remaining
25,942 men, 13,207 were incapacitated; thus the number of
327healthy men (besides 2,193 marines) in the garrison at the
time of the surrender was only 12,735. Regarding the loss of
life during the siege we find no information in the report
of the General Staff. The number of soldiers in the city
(excluding the officers and officials) was 41,780 at the
beginning and 32,400 at the end of the siege. No further
information regarding the condition of health among the
civil inhabitants of Port Arthur is obtainable.

328

## CONCLUSION

The history of war-pestilences has shown how severely
belligerent armies are attacked by infectious diseases, how
seriously their operations are hampered by them, and what
loss of life such diseases cause by spreading to non-combatants.
If we start from the time when more or less
accurate descriptions enable us to determine the nature of
the epidemics, we find that plague and typhus fever were the
two diseases which, until a few decades ago, most commonly
attacked the soldiers; the latter disease, which made its
appearance in almost every war that was waged between
the beginning of the sixteenth and the middle of the nineteenth
century, consequently acquired the name ‘war-plague’.

For a long time nobody knew just how to combat these
pestilences, and nowhere were rational measures adopted
aiming to prevent them from spreading. We have seen the
bitter truth of this statement in connexion with the endless
Napoleonic wars. One reason for the neglect of preventive
measures was the belief that these pestilences broke out
spontaneously when large numbers were crowded together
under miserable living conditions. The physicians of that
time, in their efforts to explain the sudden appearance of
these pestilences, arrived at the conclusion that they were
autochthonic. But modern medical science, realizing its
limitations, contents itself with the hypothesis that the
original cause of these diseases is not to be ascertained, and
with the knowledge that the infective agents in the case
of almost all of them have been discovered, and that an
outbreak of any infectious disease in any specific locality
signifies that the germ of that disease must in some way have
been deposited there. It was precisely the belief in the
329spontaneous origination of pestilences that led people to
neglect watching for and isolating, with all possible dispatch,
the first cases—a measure which is to-day looked upon as the
most important means of preventing the dissemination of
a disease.

The belief in the autochthonic origin of diseases continued
to prevail until the first half of the nineteenth century.
Hecker upheld it in a discussion of the plague-epidemic that
occurred during the Russo-Turkish War of 1769–70; he
believed that the intermittent fever prevalent in the Danube
countries passed over into putrid fever, with or without
petechiae, that carbuncles and buboes gradually developed,
and that putrid fever was thus converted into bubonic plague.
‘It is therefore in all probability true’, says Hecker, ‘that
the outbreak of plague in the Russian army in the year 1770,
as well as in the year 1828, was not caused by direct infection
from the Turkish troops, but was merely an independent
development from intermittent fever and spotted fever.’