

(c) The effects of war upon the supply of the world with food
and raw materials, with special reference to those States which
are in large degree dependent upon other countries for such
supplies, e.g. Great Britain and Germany; by diversion of capital
from those countries which produce food and raw materials
(especially the stoppage of railway building and of new investments
in agriculture and other industries).

(d) The condition of the victorious State: manner of levy and
use of contributions and war indemnities; influence upon industry
and social life.

(e) The manner in which the energy of nations is stimulated or
depressed by war.

11. Loss of human life in war and as a result of war: influence
upon population (birth-rate, relation between the sexes, ratio of the
various ages, sanitary conditions).

12. The influence of war and of the possibility of war upon the
protective policy, upon banking conditions (especially upon banks
of issue), and upon monetary systems.

13. The influence of annexation upon the economic life of the
annexing States, and upon the State whose territory has been annexed.

14. The annexation of half-civilized or uncivilized peoples, considered
especially from the point of view of the economic interests,
which act as motive powers; the methods through which private
enterprises take root in such regions and through which they bring
influence to bear upon their own governments; the effects of such
annexations upon the development of trade with the annexing State
and with other countries, as well as upon the economic and social
life of the natives.

15. The progressive exemption of commercial and industrial
activities from losses and interferences through war.

16. Influence of the open-door policy upon war and peace.

1004

### Report of the Second Commission
ARMAMENTS IN TIME OF PEACE. MILITARY AND NAVAL ESTABLISHMENTS. THE THEORY, PRACTICE, AND HISTORY OF MODERN ARMAMENTS.

1. Definition. Armaments might be described as ‘the preparations
made by a State either for defence or for attack’. These would
include the provision of food, financial preparations, and also semi-military
railways, canals, docks, &c.

2. Causes of armaments. Motives for increasing or commencing
them, distinguishing the great from the small powers.

3. Rivalry and competition in armaments. Motives and consequences
of rivalry, with the possibilities of limitation.

4. Modern history of armaments, with special fullness from 1872.
To be noted as important landmarks:

(a) The introduction of conscription into Germany, France,
Austria, Italy, Japan, &c.

(b) Modern inventions affecting war.

(c) The question of privateering and private property at sea.

(d) Duration of military service.

(e) The traffic in arms.

5. Military budgets from 1872 (distinguishing ordinary from extraordinary
expenditures).

6. The burden of armaments in recent times.

(a) The proportion of military to civil expenditure.

(b) Military expenditure per capita.

(c) Military expenditure from loans in time of peace, i.e. a comparison
of expenditure from taxes with expenditure from borrowed
money.