

4. The Conference desires that investigations be made into:

(a) The volume of the world’s production of all the many articles
of food, of the various raw materials, and of the principal manufactures.

(b) The productions of individual countries, and the extent to
which they are retained for home consumption or are exported.

(c) The consumption of individual countries, and the extent to
which the various articles are supplied from home productions or
are imported.

5. The Conference wishes to ascertain to what extent the economy
of production by large units, instead of by small units, has contributed
to the international dependence of nations.

6. The development of this world-embracing economy has taken
place in great measure in consequence of the investment of capital
by rich countries in less developed lands. Through this there have
arisen close relations and a great increase of wealth, not only for the
lending and the borrowing countries, but for all nations. The Conference
is of the opinion that researches should be made into the
extent of the interdependence of the nations in the matter of capital.

7. The Conference desires to institute inquiries into the interdependence
of the financial centres of the world.

8. The Conference desires to make the unifying effects of international
trade, the building of railways, the progress of shipping,
the improvement and extension of all means of communication and
the progress of inventions, the subjects of careful investigation.

9. The Conference is in favour of making a comprehensive study
of the various international unions and associations, in which the
social and economic interests of all classes of society are now either
organized or in process of organization, through official or private
action.

1. This subject is discussed in a general way in the following works:
J. Pringle, Beobachtungen über die Krankheiten einer Armee sowohl im Felde
als in Garnison. Translation by J. E. Greding. Altenburg, 1754.—Gurlt,
Zur Geschichte der internationalen und freiwilligen Krankenpflege im Kriege.
Leipzig, 1873.—A. Laveran, Traité des maladies et épidémies des armées.
Paris, 1875.—L. Uetterodt zu Schaffenberg, Zur Geschichte der Heilkunde:
Darstellungen aus dem Bereiche der Volkskrankheiten und des Sanitätswesens
im Deutschen Mittelalter mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Lagerepidemien
und der Militärkrankenpflege. Berlin, 1875.—Knaak, Die Krankheiten im
Kriege. Leipzig, 1900.—von Linstow, Kriege, Schlachten und Belagerungen,
in denen nicht die feindlichen Waffen, sondern Krankheiten das entscheidende
Moment waren. Deutsche mil.-ärztl. Zeitschrift, vol. xxix, p. 177, 1900.—H.
Westergaard, Die Lehre von der Mortalität und Morbilität. Second edition.
Jena, 1901. pp. 223, 254, 260, 264, 566.—H. Schwiening, Krieg und Friede,
in Th. Weyl, Handbuch der Hygiene. 4. Supplement, B. 1904. P. 65.

2. We must remember that the word ‘typhus’, without further qualification,
in Germany means typhoid fever, whereas in France and England it
means typhus fever.