

(d) Comparative burdens of individual taxpayers in different
countries and the extent to which the differences are due to
armaments.

(e) Military pensions.

(f) It is desirable to ascertain where possible the ratio between
the total income of each nation and the total expenditure on
armament at various times.

7. The effects of war preparations upon the economic and social
life of a nation:

(a) On the sustenance of the entire population of a country at war.

1005(b) On railway policy.

(c) On public administration and on social legislation.

8. The economic effects of withdrawing young men from industrial
pursuits, into the army and navy:

(a) Compulsory.

(b) Of non-compulsory service (specially in the case of mercenary
troops).

(Allowance being made for the industrial value of military
education and training.)

9. The influence of changes in the occupations of a people upon the
composition and efficiency of armies, and the influence of the changes
in the composition of armies on the economic life.

10. Loans for armaments (participation of domestic and foreign
capital).

11. The industries of war, i.e. the various manufactures and other
industries which are promoted and encouraged by military and naval
establishments, distinguishing between:

(a) Government undertakings (arsenals, dockyards, &c.).

(b) Private undertakings, including the history and working of
the great armament firms, which sell to foreign customers as well
as to their own governments.

12. War materials (munitions of war). Their recent development
and their cost. This includes arms, ammunition, armour-plate, warships,
guns of all kinds, military airships, &c. So far as possible the
effect of recent inventions upon offensive and defensive war should be
indicated.

### Report of the Third Commission
THE UNIFYING INFLUENCES IN INTERNATIONAL LIFE

1. The Conference is of the opinion that the economic life of
individual countries has definitely ceased to be self-contained; and
that, notwithstanding the barriers raised by fiscal duties, it is becoming
in ever-increasing measure a part of an economic life in which the
whole world participates.

2. It desires that this change be studied with the object of ascertaining
to what extent the economic life of individual nations has
ceased to be self-contained, and the causes which are bringing about
the greater interdependence of nations.

3. Special attention should be paid to the following factors:

(a) How far the growth of population is responsible for the
changes that have occurred and are in progress.

1006(b) The extent to which the insufficiency of the natural resources
of individual countries for their own requirements has contributed
to it.

(c) Whether the increasing economic unity of the world is
the cause or the result of the rising in the standard of living, and
how far the increasing welfare of nations has been caused by the
growing unity.

(d) In what measure the need of individual countries to obtain
materials of production from other lands and to find new markets
for their own products is responsible for the growth of international
dependence.