

Leaving Colonel Ochterlony in command at Delhi, General Lake marched down to Agra, which was still held by
Sindia’s troops. In the exercise of the political powers with which he was invested, he concluded a treaty with
the raja of Bhurtpore, who sent a body of 5,000 horse to co-operate with his army. He was the first to seek an alliance
with the British Government in the flood tide of its success, and the first to repudiate it when the tide appeared to be
ebbing. Agra capitulated, after a protracted siege, on the 17th October, and the treasure found in it, twenty-eight lacs
of rupees, was promptly and wisely distributed among the officers and men, in “anticipation of the approval of the
home authorities.”

### Battle of Laswaree, 1st Nov., 1803

On the outbreak of the war Sindia sent fifteen of his disciplined battalions across the Nerbudda to protect his
possessions in Hindostan. They were considered the flower of his army, and usually designated “the Deccan
Invincibles.” But before their arrival the battle of Delhi had extinguished Sindia’s army in the north, with
the exception of two battalions which joined the southern force, and raised its strength to 9,000 foot, 4,000 cavalry,
and 72 pieces of artillery. No attempt was made to relieve Agra, but it hung on the skirts of the British army. General
Lake did not fail to perceive that while so formidable a force continued unbroken it would be impossible to obtain the
general confidence of the province, and he determined to attack it without delay. He had received an unfounded report
that the Mahratta army was endeavouring to avoid him, and, with his usual impetuosity, started at midnight in search of
it with his cavalry alone, leaving orders for the infantry to follow. He came up with the encampment of the enemy at
daybreak on the 1st November, at the village of Laswaree, and found them, as usual, entrenched in a formidable position,
with their guns drawn up in the

Page 159

front. The General led his cavalry up in person to the attack; a fearful discharge of grape and double-headed shot
mowed down column after column, and rendered the fiery valour of the troops useless. To prevent their utter extinction,
the General was obliged to withdraw them from the conflict, to await the arrival of the infantry, who had marched
sixty-five miles in the preceding forty-eight hours, and twenty-five miles since midnight. After a brief rest and a
hasty meal, they were launched on the enemy’s guns and battalions. The engagement was the severest in which the
Company’s troops had ever been engaged, not excepting that of Assye. Sindia’s sepoys fought as natives had
never fought before. They defended their position to the last extremity, contesting every point inch by inch, and
refusing to give way while a single gun remained in their possession. But they were at length overpowered, and lost
their ammunition and camp equipage, together with 71 pieces of cannon. It was even reported that one-half their number
was left on the field, killed or wounded. On the British side the casualties amounted to 824, one-fourth of which
belonged to the 76th Highlanders, who bore the brunt of the action. The General himself conducted every operation
throughout the day, with more credit to his personal gallantry than to his military talent. Though a dashing soldier,
and adored by his men, he was only a second-rate general; but the flagrant defects of his arrangements were covered, as
has frequently been the case in India, by the undaunted valour of his men, at the sacrifice of their own lives. The
battle of Laswaree served to exhibit the high state of efficiency to which the French generals in the Mahratta service
had brought their native troops. It does not appear that there was a single European officer with them during the
engagement, yet so complete had been their training, that when left to themselves they exhibited a degree of skill and
intrepidity which staggered General Lake himself, and constrained him to remark that if they had been led by their
French officers the result of the day would have been exceedingly doubtful.