

The concept of socio–ecological transitions (Fischer-Kowalski and Haberl, 2007; Krausmann et al., 2008a,b) is used to analyse the biophysical features of foreign trade in these two economies during the early stage of industrialisation: how was the socio–ecological transition reflected in the foreign trade relations of the two countries? A detailed analysis of the biophysically most important material categories (coal, wood and cereals) serves to discuss how foreign trade in the Habsburg Empire and the United Kingdom contributed to domestic resource consumption and which international shifts of environmental burdens were associated with foreign trade. With a physical perspective on the history of foreign trade, this article aims to contribute to long-term socio–ecological research (LTSER, see Haberl et al., 2006) and to fill a gap between the quantitative economic history of the 1970s and 80s interested in the (monetary) extent of European foreign trade flows and current research on ecologically unequal exchange, as performed by ecological economics.

The article is organised in the following way: In the next section, the two case studies will be briefly introduced. The materials and methods section presents the data sources and the conversion and aggregation procedures which were undertaken to compile the empirical basis of the analysis. The results of the study will be presented, starting with an overview of total physical foreign trade relations in the two countries. Then, a detailed account of the physically most important material categories will be given: coal and biomass (with an emphasis on wood and cereals). The final section draws some general conclusions on the role of foreign trade in the socio – ecological transition.

## 2. Apples and Pears — Comparing the Habsburg Empire and the United Kingdom

The Habsburg Empire1 and the United Kingdom make promising cases for comparing physical foreign trade relations in the early stage of European industrialisation for three reasons: (1) They represent the pioneer and a latecomer of European industrialisation and can be viewed as economies at different stages of the socio–ecological transition. (2) They differ strongly in terms of economic orientation, including their economic foreign trade policies. Finally, (3) they are very similar in terms of their population totals, allowing for a comparison of total numbers. However, the two countries differ in terms of population density and resource endowments. Comparing these two countries thus illuminates the variations and commonalities of European physical foreign trade during the coal stage of the socio–ecological transition.

The economic differences between the Habsburg Empire and the United Kingdom in the 19th and early 20th centuries, as well as some indicators on resource use are presented in Table 1. The United Kingdom was the most powerful economy in Europe – and the world – throughout large parts of the 19th century, with a per-capita GDP of more than 1500 US Dollars in 1830 and more than 4500 US Dollars by 1910 (Maddison, 2003). The economic power of the United Kingdom went along with distinct features of resource use. In the 19th century, the United Kingdom was home to advanced industrial production, particularly of textiles and iron, and its economy relied on the use of coal much more than continental Europe (see e.g. Allen, 2009): As early as 1830, coal accounted for almost half of the United Kingdom's primary energy use (or Domestic Energy Consumption, DEC, which includes fossil fuels and biomass), and by 1910 it made up over 80% (Krausmann et al., 2008b).