

## 3. Materials and Methods

The empirical analysis of physical foreign trade flows in the 19th and early 20th century Habsburg Empire and United Kingdom makes use of quantitative data derived from historical statistical publications and relies on the framework of Material and Energy Flow Analysis (MEFA). MEFA is used to account for the physical inputs to and outputs from an economy (Schandl et al., 2002; Eurostat, 2007). Inputs include extraction from the domestic environment (“Domestic Extraction”, DE) and imports from other economies, outputs comprise exports and emissions or wastes. This framework aims at a potentially complete depiction of an economy's physical activities. Material Flow Analyses aggregate all material flows to one of the following categories: (1) biomass and biomass products, (2) metal ores and concentrates, processed metals, (3) non-metallic minerals, primary and processed, (4) fossil energy carriers, primary and processed, (5) other products, and (6) wastes. Energy flow analysis covers only those material groups of energetic content, i.e. biomass and fossil fuels. All categories can be disaggregated to more detail (Eurostat, 2007). The MEFA classification thus aggregates material categories and does not distinguish between different levels of processing (unless products cannot be allocated to one of the material categories).

This study presents physical foreign trade flows, covering both their material and energetic dimension. In order to analyse original data from statistical publications, they were converted to metric values and aggregated to fit the categories proposed by the two-digit “Standard International Trade Classification” (SITC) and then allocated to meet the MEFA material categories. In order to assess the energetic dimension of foreign trade, data were converted to their energy content, using factors from Sieferle et al. (2006) and Haberl (1995). Indicators such as the “Physical trade balance”, i.e. imports minus exports, expressed in “net exports” or “net imports” will be discussed. Using the MEFA framework, the study focuses on the environmental burdens associated with the trade of certain (raw) material groups, but does not consider environmental effects of specific manufacturing processes potentially associated to these foreign trade flows (see Weisz, 2008).

The extent of foreign trade was compared to domestic extraction for all materials of energetic importance, i.e. for biomass and fossil fuels. The indicators Domestic Material Consumption (DMC) or Domestic Energy Consumption (DEC) refer to Domestic Extraction plus imports minus exports. Data on the domestic extraction of metal ores and non-metallic minerals were not included in the data discussed here. Wastes and emissions were not included in this data set either.

The foreign trade of specific biomass products was further translated to assessments of land requirements. Thereby the amount of land was estimated which was – actually or in theory – required for net imports or exports. The contemporary domestic yields (again, derived from statistical publications, see below) of the respective years were used, and assumptions were made on processing losses and seed demand. The results of these assessments illustrate one type of environmental pressure exerted by foreign trade. Furthermore, for particular food crops, the nutritional value of net imports was assessed in order to elucidate their importance for domestic food consumption. The specific calculation procedures will be described in the respective results sections.