

Open in a new tab

In the Habsburg Empire on the other hand, imports and exports were structurally quite similar. In both imports and exports, biomass was the most important material category in the early 19th century, and was gradually overtaken by fossil fuels. In exports, the share of biomass settled at a higher level than in imports, owing largely to higher exports of wood. The shift away from biomass as most important trading product is effectively a shift towards the trade of non-renewable or mineral resources. Metallic minerals, i.e. metal ores, metals and finished metal products, were quite important import products in physical terms around 1870, when the rapid construction of railway lines (K.K. Statistische Central-Commission, 1913) required more metals (iron in particular) than were produced domestically (Werner, 1949). Non-metallic minerals made up for relatively high shares of exports in the early and late stage of the period under investigation — they consisted largely of construction material such as cobble stones.

In contrast to the Habsburg Empire, the United Kingdom was a net exporter of non-renewable resources throughout the entire period. In general, the United Kingdom was not only a much more active, but also a much more specialised trading partner than the Habsburg Empire.

What can we learn from these observations with respect to the role of foreign trade in the coal stage of the socio–ecological transition? Obviously, there are strong differences in the physical foreign trade patterns of the two countries. The amount of goods traded was roughly four times higher in the United Kingdom, the country which was more advanced in terms of its transition to an industrial mode of production. While the Habsburg Empire changed from a net exporter to a net importer of materials, the United Kingdom was a net exporter of materials throughout the observed time period. And finally, the physical (and economic) structure of foreign trade differed in the two countries: the Habsburg Empire imported and exported similar materials (at similar prices), while the United Kingdom traded (low-value) minerals for (higher-value) biomass.

Despite these differences, there are also some similarities between the two countries: the physical amount of foreign trade increased at similar rates throughout the time period. In addition, though the structure of foreign trade differed strongly in the two countries, in both the United Kingdom and the Habsburg Monarchy, fossil fuels and biomass taken together made up more than three quarters of total imports and exports throughout most of the time period. The further analysis will focus on these material categories.

## 5. Fossil Fuels: the Energy Transition of Foreign Trade

Coal was the most important energy carrier in early industrialisation: the shift from woodfuel to coal marks the first stage of the “energy transition” and represents an important feature of the first stage of the socio–ecological transition (Gales et al., 2007; Krausmann et al., 2008b; Bartoletto and Rubio, 2008). In both the United Kingdom and the Habsburg Empire, coal consumption increased strongly in the 19th century, and so did foreign trade of coal. Coal was by far the dominating material in fossil fuel trade of both economies, making up over 90% of fossil fuel exports and imports in the Habsburg Empire and virtually all fossil fuel exports of the UK, see Fig. 2.