

Open in a new tab

The two economies differed greatly in terms of their foreign trade relations: the United Kingdom played a unique role in the world economy. Its trade volume surpassed that of any other country of the world throughout much of the 19th century (Bairoch, 1973), especially after the abolition of the Corn Laws which had restricted cereal imports until 1846. In contrast to the continental European countries, its foreign trade relations were dominated by overseas trade, particularly with the United States and India (Bairoch, 1974; Foreman-Peck, 1983). The country's geographic characteristics, an island with relatively flat terrain suitable for the construction of canals, certainly contributed to the early importance of medium- and long-distance transport. The biophysical importance of foreign trade in 19th century United Kingdom has been addressed in previous studies: Hornborg (2006) analyses imports of cotton, wool and wheat to the United Kingdom in 1850 and demonstrates that they represented imports of productive potential, reinforcing British economic development. Pomeranz (2000) presents calculations on British imports of “ghost acres” in the early 19th century, i.e. the amount of land externalised to other countries by importing products, such as sugar, cotton and timber. Schandl and Schulz (2002) discuss the changing social metabolism of the United Kingdom. They stress the importance of food imports during the 19th century and their effects upon domestic land use change (see also Krausmann et al., 2008b; Musel, 2009). Adams (1982) holds late 19th century coal exports partially responsible for the relative “decline” of Great Britain compared to continental Europe and North America. All these studies indicate that foreign trade, both in terms of imports and exports, was of fundamental importance in the United Kingdom's industrialisation process in the 19th century.

In the Habsburg Empire on the other hand, foreign trade played a much less important role: production was to a large extent aimed at the domestic market. The Western part of the monarchy (in particular the provinces of Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia) specialised in the production of manufactured goods, such as textiles, while the Eastern part focused its production on agricultural raw materials, and in the late 19th century, increasingly on processed food such as flour. This development was supported, though not triggered, by the abolishment of the tariffs between the Austrian and the Hungarian parts of the Monarchy in 1851 (Komlos, 1983). Foreign trade was hampered not only by the Empire's policy, but also by its geographical position – its centres (Vienna, Budapest, Prague) lay distant from the Adriatic sea ports, the terrain was unsuitable for the construction of canals, and the most important river — the Danube — connected the country to the Black Sea, a region remote from European centres (Werner, 1949). Most of the Habsburg Empire's foreign trade was exchanged with its North-Western neighbour, Germany (Rudolph, 1976). The biophysical dimensions of foreign trade in the Habsburg Empire are much less studied than those of the United Kingdom. Some economic history has touched upon biophysical questions of resource supply, sometimes including foreign trade, of certain materials, such as coal (Gross, 1971), metal (Hwaletz, 2001; Rudolph, 1976), or agricultural products (Komlos, 1983; Rudolph, 1976). However, no systematic analysis of the Habsburg Empire's biophysical foreign trade relations has been performed until now.