

The United Kingdom was the world's most important importer of cereals. From the abolition of the corn laws in 1846 (see e.g. O'Rourke and Williamson, 1999), the UK's nutritional supply relied increasingly on imports: In 1850, cereal imports accounted for 20% of domestic production. In the 1880 s, imports first outnumbered domestic production, and just before World War I they accounted for over 160% of domestic production. The large cereal imports heavily affected land use in the country and led to a strong decline in agricultural areas from around 1850 (see also Krausmann et al., 2008b; Musel, 2009). The area externalised amounted to up to 30% of the total land area of the United Kingdom. Hornborg (2006) assessed that the actual land required for wheat production in the United States aimed at exports to England was 1.5 times larger than the wheat producing area in England.

In the Habsburg Empire, cereals demand was met by regional integration rather than international foreign trade until the early 20th century. Population growth in the Austrian part of the Monarchy was made possible by cropland area expansion and yield increases in the Hungarian part of the Empire. Only in the early 20th century did imports of cereals play a relatively important role in domestic food supply. The United Kingdom on the other hand represents a (probably quite unique) case of early import dependence for the provision of the most important staple food. While the United Kingdom accessed international land and labour for the production of its food supply, the Habsburg Empire largely relied on domestic land resources and work force for cereals production during the early stage of its socio–ecological transition.

## 7. Discussion and Conclusions

The analysis has shown that in the Habsburg Empire and the United Kingdom the early stage of the socio–ecological transition was accompanied by rising volumes of foreign trade. While the total amount of imports and exports differed greatly between the two examined countries – the Habsburg Empire and the United Kingdom, both import and export volumes in both countries increased dramatically in the long run. The most important material categories in foreign trade were – from a physical perspective — in both countries energy carrying material groups, i.e. fossil fuels and biomass. In these material groups, foreign trade increased even more rapidly than domestic extraction or consumption.

Based on the data and analysis presented in this study, two important physical factors can be identified for explaining the differences of foreign trade relations between the Habsburg Empire and the United Kingdom, which add to the socio–economic differences discussed in economic history literature: Firstly, the stage along the socio–ecological transition impacted the amounts and types of materials traded by a country. Differences in the amount and structure of resource use between the Habsburg Empire and the United Kingdom are reflected in both imports and exports of the two countries. Secondly – and closely related – the endowment with resources, a factor inversely related to population density, affected the relation between foreign trade and resource use. The United Kingdom's higher trade volumes were closely connected to the country's higher resource consumption in general, with coal playing an important role in both domestic consumption and foreign trade. On the other hand, the Habsburg Empire's relative autarky from foreign trade until the mid-19th century was associated to the country's large-scale dependence of domestically-available resources, dominated by biomass. Foreign trade volumes in the Habsburg Empire significantly affected domestic resource supply only when the country's energy base shifted towards the increased use of fossil fuels.