

In the United Kingdom, wood was a far less important resource. Woodland areas were extremely low at 3 to 5% of total land area in the 19th century, and had been very low previously for centuries (Rackham, 1988), allowing for very limited wood production. Wood was an only marginal resource in terms of domestic energy consumption. In the early 19th century, the energetic value of extracted wood was only one quarter of that of coal extraction, and the share decreased to less than 1% until the early 20th century. Still, domestic wood extraction did not meet the rising domestic demand: Increasing amounts of wood were imported in the 19th century. By the late 19th century, wood and wood product imports made up over 7 million tons, consisting almost entirely of timber (as opposed to woodfuel). At the United Kingdom's domestic wood productivity, the area required to produce this wood would amount to over 2.5 times the domestic woodland area.6 This indicates that the United Kingdom's forest areas did not recover to meet domestic demand even after the shift from wood to coal, and wood imports continued to be crucial for domestic wood provision.

The socio–ecological transition affected foreign trade of wood in the Habsburg Empire and the United Kingdom in very different ways: In the United Kingdom, wood trade in the 19th and early 20th centuries was dominated by rising imports of timber, an area-intensive construction material. These imports reflect the United Kingdom's increasing dependence on international land resources. In the Habsburg Empire on the other hand, wood exports dominated wood trade from the late 19th century onwards, a period when domestic woodfuel use was increasingly replaced by the use of coal. Woodland areas which were freed from domestic pressure were used to supply international wood markets – the Habsburg Empire thus “exported” significant shares of its land area.

### 6.2. Cereals

Cereals were the most important staple food in both the Habsburg Empire and the United Kingdom during the 19th and 20th centuries. Demand for cereals was therefore closely connected to population numbers.

The economic history discussion of cereals trade in the Habsburg Empire is dominated by the issue of domestic trade between the Austrian and the Hungarian parts of the Monarchy. It deals with the question if the large transfers of cereals from Hungary to Austria were beneficial or detrimental to Hungary's economic and industrial development (Berend and Ranki, 1980; Eddie, 1977; Komlos, 1983). The Habsburg Empire was largely self-sufficient on cereals throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries. Domestic cereal production provided between 900 and 1500 kcal per inhabitant and day7 in the 19th and early 20th centuries, which is about half of the total nutritional requirement. Domestic trade of cereals and cereal products was very important, also from a biophysical perspective: around 25% of all cereals produced in Transleithania were transferred to Cisleithania in the early 1900 s. The physical analysis of domestic trade of cereals between Cis- and Transleithania in the early 20th century indicates that the land expansion and intensification of Transleithania's cereal agriculture in this period was strongly connected to Cisleithania's demand.8 The Austrian part of the Monarchy thus externalised agricultural areas to the Hungarian part. Compared to the intensive exchange between the two parts of the Habsburg Empire, foreign trade of cereals was of negligible importance in the 19th century. Only in the 20th century did net cereal imports grow significantly and reach around one quarter of the value of imports from Hungary. While this did not affect land use within the Monarchy much (the amount of imports translates to below 1% of total land area), it hints at a decrease in self sufficiency before World War I.