

It follows that this is a book which tries to make connections, some of which have not been explored or even noticed, and about which we know too little as yet to reach definite conclusions. Specialists in the many areas of national history on which this book trespasses will doubtless deplore the author’s ignorance of them: his hope is that they will be stimulated to do better what he has done first. Readers whose primary interest is in war at sea may be disappointed that almost half the book is devoted to the background rather than the foreground of naval history, but this is quite deliberate, for there is no understanding battles and campaigns otherwise. In practice the book is arranged in four parallel ‘streams’: policy, strategy and naval operations; finance, administration and logistics, including all sorts of technical and industrial support; social history; and the material elements of sea power, ships and weapons. Chapters are devoted to each in turn, but they are not meant to be read in isolation. The author’s intention is to unite rather than to divide.

The same observation applies to the national scope of the work. ‘Britain’ in the title is shorthand for the whole British Isles, but it is not intended to ignore or submerge the national histories of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland. In the period covered by this volume, however, unlike the first, naval warfare became a semi-professional business, dominated by the English and later British Royal Navy. Scottish warships make only a brief appearance, and there was no Irish naval establishment. The three kingdoms therefore figure distinctly mainly in the chapters on social history. This is a ‘national’ history, therefore, in reference to the British state rather than its component nations. It is also an international history, as all maritime history must necessarily be, for the sea links nations in peace or war. There can be no naval history of Britain which is not also a naval history of her neighbours and enemies. I have therefore tried to deal as fully as space would permit with the relevant parts of the naval histories of France, Spain, the Netherlands, Denmark, the United States and other naval powers of whom the British were friends or foes.

All this is largely based on printed sources, as it must be in a work on this scale, very much enriched by unpublished theses and dissertations, and garnished in places with my own researches. Most of the facts and many of the ideas will be known to specialists. Nevertheless it is over a century since the publication of Sir William Laird Clowes’s History of the Royal Navy, the last work to tackle the subject on a comparable scale, and it does not seem too soon to stand back from the subject and take a fresh look at it. The first volume of this work, The Safeguard of the Sea, dealt with the naval history of the British Isles from 660 to 1649. Much of it was a history of failure – failure to understand and exploit the facts of geography. It is still easy to find deterministic histories which assume that being an island somehow made Britain ‘invasion-proof, and removed the necessity to go to any trouble or expense to defend against foreign enemies. Readers of The Safeguard of the Sea will know that England was successfully invaded by sea eight times, and Scotland once, between 1066 and 1485, while on numerous other occasions enemy forces large and small were put ashore in various parts of the three kingdoms. The sea is a broad highway, easier and faster than most of those available ashore until modern times, and provides no safeguard whatever to those who have not learned how to use it. In spite of several promising starts, notably under Richard I, Henry V and Elizabeth I of England, and James IV of Scots, it cannot be said that people had really mastered the use of the sea for national defence before 1649. It is in the 166 years covered by this volume that state and nation finally gained the real sovereignty of the seas around the British Isles. To do so they had to overcome numerous strictly professional challenges of seamanship and sea warfare, but it was even more essential to construct administrative systems capable of keeping fleets at sea for long periods, and equally they had to confront questions of ideology, policy and politics without which it would have been impossible to maintain public support. Success in this great national undertaking was not simply important for its obvious fruits, security at home and wealth abroad. Naval dominance of European waters was the largest, longest, most complex and expensive project ever undertaken by the British state and society. Few aspects of national life were unaffected by it, and no history of Britain can be complete which ignores it.