

In this crisis the Commonwealth’s first priority was to correct ‘the manifold distempers of the Navy, and the great decay of Customs, occasioned by evil, malignant, unfaithful and supernumerary officers, employed both by sea and land, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth’ 6 – that is, to eject all those not certainly loyal to the new regime, which meant the great majority. Of those who had managed and commanded the Parliamentary naval cause during the first Civil War, only those were left whose Independent credentials were impeccable. 7 Even so, the army trusted no one connected with the Navy, and ensured that the command of the fleet was put in safe hands. An Act of February 1649 established the new office of General at Sea, having the powers of seagoing command formerly held by the Lord High Admiral without his administrative and legal responsibilities. It is a common misunderstanding to speak of three Generals at Sea: there was but one single General (in the old sense of commander-in-chief’), but the office was put in commission among three colonels, Edward Popham, Richard Deane and Robert Blake, ‘to hold, and execute by yourselves, or any two of you, the place of Admiral and General of the said fleet’. All three were reliable regimental officers, but they were unequivocally junior in rank to the senior officers of the army, and two signatures were required for their orders; none of them was trusted to act alone. Though all three had some relevant experience, and Popham had been a pre-war officer in the Royal Navy, they were chosen entirely for political reasons, to rivet the army’s control on the Navy. 8 

The State’s Navy, as it was now formally known, flying the new ‘cross and harp’ jack in place of ‘the disunion flag or late king’s colours’, 9 had thirty-nine ships, four more than Charles I had had in 1642, but its situation was in every other respect much worse: its experienced officers and administrators mostly removed, its morale shaky, its finances disastrous, and its enemies very numerous. 10 The Council of State encouraged the three colonels with the thought that ‘our own forces are such at sea as our enemies looked not for, and ourselves could scarce have hoped, consisting of so many good ships and faithful and able commanders as have not formerly been set out in any one year. But’, they continued, ‘that it was difficult to have so many set out and furnished you very well know, and how this Commonwealth will be able to continue the same in successive years is not easy to evidence.” 11 In short there was possibly one season only in which to defeat the Royalists at sea.
