

## A Mountain of Iron

Operations 1649–1654

The English Commonwealth which executed its former king Charles I on 30 January 1649 was in principle a republic governed by a sovereign Parliament, but the Parliament was the ‘Rump’ remaining of the Long Parliament (originally elected in 1640) after Colonel Thomas Pride’s troops had purged it of all remaining opponents of military rule in December. Supreme power was held by the Council of State, made up of the senior officers of the New Model Army, and senior Parliamentarians of their mind. In all essentials, England was a military dictatorship, which ruled by force without law, executing troublesome opponents by the use of tribunals without juries. Crudely summarizing a complex and fluid political situation, we may say that this government, like the army officers who stood behind it, was radical in politics and Independent in religion – meaning that its members belonged to ‘gathered congregations’ outside the now-Presbyterian Church of England. Not only Royalists but the vast majority of those who had supported Parliament during the first Civil War were excluded from political life. Nevertheless the Rump represented a faction within the pre-war governing classes, men of property and education, and it feared the yet more radical voices among the common people and the common soldiers of the army; groups like the Levellers, who wished to replace the existing social order with Utopian communism, and the Fifth Monarchists, who looked forward to sweeping away all ecclesiastical order in preparation for the Second Coming of Christ. 1 

The Rump government did not pretend to have, or to desire, the support of the people at large. On the contrary, it gloried in being a godly remnant which had crushed all its enemies with the help of God alone. The new regime was presently to build a formidable fleet of warships named after English victories: the victories the New Model Army had won over its domestic enemies. The new flagship the Naseby (unofficially nicknamed the ‘Great Oliver’) bore a figurehead of the army’s commander-in-chief General Cromwell on horseback, trampling six nations underfoot: England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Spain and the Netherlands. 2 This was not a government of national unity. Nor was it building warships because the military regime was warmly disposed towards the English Navy. On the contrary, the Navy had long been more moderate in politics than the army, and it had played a leading part in the 1648 rebellion which had helped to provoke the army’s coup d’etat. In the aftermath of that a large part of the fleet had deserted to the Royalists in Holland, and the loyalty of the remainder was doubtful. 3 

The soldiers did not like or trust the Navy, but in their situation they could not do without it. In the spring of 1649 the English Commonwealth was completely isolated. Scotland and Ireland, the Channel Isles, the Scillies, the Isle of Man and the colonies were all in Royalist hands. All Europe stood aghast at the murder of an anointed king, and the Peace of Westphalia had freed the powerful armies and fleets hitherto engaged in the Thirty Years’ War for operations against England. A Swedish expedition was known to be preparing to support the Stuarts in Scotland, and others were feared. 4 Private men-of-war with commissions from the exiled Prince of Wales, now proclaimed by his friends as King Charles II, sailed from ports in Ireland, Scotland, the Channel Isles, France and Flanders to capture English merchant ships, financing the Royalist cause, cutting sharply into the Customs revenue which formed a major prop of the Commonwealth’s shaky finances, and undermining its claims to be an effective government. 5 There was nothing the army by itself could do to deal with any of these threats; a powerful fleet was essential to the survival of the military regime.