                                                -4-

between the two countries, Frankel (1982, p. 308) concludes that, although smuggling existed, it

was small: “the Embargo was well-enforced, so each country [the United States and Great

Britain] was reduced practically to autarky vis-a-vis the other.” There are many reports of

smuggling activity across Lake Champlain into Canada, but it is not believed that the volume of

such traffic was very significant.

       The highly controversial embargo was in effect for just fourteen months. Growing

domestic opposition to the trade restrictions, particularly in New England, forced Congress to

repeal the measure in March 1809.5 The consensus among historians is that the embargo failed

to achieve its objective because Britain and France refused to change their policies regarding

American shipping. This was not due to the failure to eliminate trade, but the failure of the trade

measures to weaken the political resolve in Britain to suppress neutral shipping in its effort to

strangle the French economy.6

       Although it did not completely eliminate U.S. trade, the embargo succeeded in having a

dramatic effect on commerce. Figure 2 shows the value of total U.S. merchandise trade

(merchandise exports of domestic produce plus re-exports, and imports) from 1800 to 1815.

Table 1 presents more detailed trade data for the years around 1807. The value of merchandise

exports of domestic produce fell from $49 million in 1807 to $9 million in 1808, a decline of



       5
          The embargo was replaced by non-intercourse act that continued to prohibit trade with
Britain, France, and their colonies and dependencies. Over the next four years, through the War
of 1812 until the Treaty of Ghent in 1813, trade was subject to varying degrees of formal
restriction, but none as draconian as the earlier embargo.
       6
         However, a later non-importation measure in 1811 coincided with an economic
downturn in Britain and apparently contributed to the British decision to lift some of its
draconian measures regarding American shipping. See Irwin (2002).
