                                                -5-

over 80 percent. Net shipping earnings fell considerably less, by 45 percent, such that total

export earnings dropped 64 percent. Meanwhile, the value of imports for domestic consumption

fell from $85 million in 1807 to $45 million in 1808, a decline of nearly 50 percent. These

figures understate the impact of the embargo, however, because the government’s trade statistics

were collected for the fiscal year, not for the calendar year. Therefore, the figures for 1808 refer

to the period from October 1, 1807 to September 30, 1808, and thus include three months in

which the embargo was not in effect.

       Exports fell more sharply than imports in 1808 because of the timing of the embargo and

its effect on trans-Atlantic shipping (Heaton 1941, p. 190). After December 1807, no American

ship was allowed to leave the United States for a foreign destination. However, many American

vessels were then in British ports, where they would typically spend the winter months. To

encourage these ships to return home, Congress allowed merchants to bring into the country

previously purchased foreign goods. Thus, American ships returning from Europe in the spring

and summer of 1808 were permitted to unload their cargoes, but were not then permitted to

return to Europe. (Most ships involved in the trans-Atlantic trade made two round trips during

the sailing season.) As a result, exports fell immediately upon the imposition of the embargo

(because there could be no spring exports) and remained low throughout the year. By late 1808

and early 1809, as disregard for the embargo increased, some ships left U.S. ports in violation of

the law. On the other hand, imports did not fall as much because of the spring and summer ship

arrivals from Europe. But after that, few ships with foreign cargo arrived in the United States.

       The embargo had a dramatic impact on prices in the United States, driving down the

domestic prices of exported goods and driving up the domestic prices of imported goods. Figure
