                                                -3-

costs on Britain in the hope of forcing them to change their policy. In December 1807, President

Jefferson requested that Congress enact a general embargo, and Congress quickly prohibited all

American ships from sailing to foreign ports and foreign ships from taking on any cargo in the

United States.3 Almost all accounts of the embargo considered it to have been effective, at least

initially. Very few American vessels appeared in European ports in 1808. Figure 1 presents the

tonnage of American ships entering into British ports during the period from 1801 to 1810.

While the tonnage entering in 1808 is not zero, that volume fell 80 percent from the previous

year.

        According to Heaton (1941, p. 189), there was “little effort to indulge in large-scale

defiance of the Embargo, at least until the end of 1808, when patience was becoming exhausted

and repeal seemed inevitable.”4 Although the data underlying Figure 1 are not available on a

monthly basis, the American tonnage entering Britain is likely to have been concentrated late in

1808. Late in that year, frustration with the embargo was high, its termination was widely

anticipated, and merchants were increasingly tempted to ignore it. After carefully comparing

U.S. and British price data and considering other quantity measures of direct and indirect trade




        3
         Although foreign ships were permitted to bring goods to the United States, few did so
during the embargo because they would have had to return empty. In addition, the non-
intercourse law prohibited the importation of many British manufactured goods.
        4
          “The ships and brigs which carried on the greater part of the transatlantic trade were in
general tied up in obedience to the Embargo, or they went down the coast to load goods in
readiness for the day when the light would change from red to green, and then returned to
anchorage in their home ports. . . . So far as the western hemisphere was concerned, smuggling
and embargo-breaking could not be prevented; but against Europe the Embargo was largely
effective. And if American ships did not go to Europe, British goods could not be brought back
in them.” Heaton (1941), p. 189. Virtually all of U.S. imports from Britain arrived on American
vessels during this era.
