                                                 - 17 -

substitution is 1.0, then the self-sufficiency tariff is 53 percent and the welfare loss is 4.0 percent.

These figures are remarkably close to the actual findings in this paper. Given that the calculation

is performed in a similar general equilibrium setting, perhaps this should not be too surprising.

        Johnson (1960) also derived the commonly used partial equilibrium measure of the cost

of protection as a percent of GDP as ½ " 0 (J/(1+J)2, where " is the ratio of imports to GDP in

the (initial) equilibrium, 0 is the absolute value of the arc elasticity of import demand, and J is

the average ad valorem tariff rate. In the present case, the ratio of imports to GDP is

approximately 0.13, and if we assume that the absolute value of the elasticity of import demand

is 2 and that the tariff rate is 70 percent, then the cost of protection is 2.2 percent of GDP. As is

commonly pointed out, this partial equilibrium formula yields relatively small figures for the

cost of protection.

        Thus, the massive disruption of trade caused by the embargo imposed a substantial one-

year loss on the U.S. economy, one that was not just a small fraction of a percent of GNP. There

is no doubt that 1808 was a difficult year for the U.S. economy. Berry’s (1988) real GNP

estimates fall 4.7 percent between 1807 and 1808. The year has been called a “depression” by

Thorp (1926, p. 116), who gives it the following description: “rigid embargo causes paralysis on

coast, gradually spreading inland; severe distress in New England; further sharp decline in

commodity prices to low point, third quarter; foreign trade completely checked.”

        It is difficult to consider the policy of embargo a success, given the cost it imposed on the

economy while failing to achieve its objective of changing British and French policy toward

American shipping. One person who almost perfectly anticipated the results of the embargo was

Alexander Hamilton, the first Secretary of the Treasury. Writing in 1794, Hamilton was
