                                               - 10 -

from Table 1. This table also presents the value of imports for consumption, but government

statistics only report the breakdown between ad valorem and specific duties for total imports, not

imports for consumption. The difference between total imports and imports for domestic

consumption is goods that were re-exported. The working assumption will be that imports for

consumption are divided in the same proportion as total imports between those subject to

specific duties (40 percent) and ad valorem duties (60 percent). It might be supposed that

imports subsequently re-exported consisted mainly of commodities from the West Indies (such

as sugar, coffee, etc.) that were subject to specific duties (and then rebated upon re-exportation),

but Pitkin (1816) indicates that re-exports also consisted of manufactures from Britain.10

       As previously noted, the domestic price of imported commodities rose about 33 percent

as a result of the embargo, and the domestic price of exported goods fell 27 percent. There is

little data available on domestic shipping rates between 1807 and 1808, although as Table 1

indicates shipping receipts fell less than domestic exports between 1807 and 1808.11 Therefore,

in the absence of better information, the maintained assumption will be that the price of shipping



       10
           “The valuable articles of colonial produce, such as sugar, coffee, spirits, cocoa,
pimento, indigo, pepper and spices of all kinds, were carried, either directly to Europe, or were
first brought to the United States, and from thence exported in American vessels. . . . The
manufactures of Europe, and particularly of Great Britain, as well as the manufactures and
produce of the East-Indies and China, have also been imported, and again exported, in large
quantities, to the West-Indies, to the Spanish Colonies in South America, and elsewhere. This
trade, which has been called the carrying trade, has, in some years, exceeded in value the trade of
the United States, in articles of domestic produce.” Pitkin (1816), p. 136.
       11
          International shipping rates rose during the embargo, due to the added risk of
undertaking a voyage. But the relevant data would be the price of domestic shipping services,
which presumably fell during the embargo. Pitkin (1816, p. 391) reports that tonnage engaged in
the domestic costal trade rose 23 percent in 1808 from the previous year, as ships normally used
for overseas trade were transferred to local trade.
