                                               - 12 -

high. As previously noted, about 40 percent of imports were subject to ad valorem duties.

       How much import substitution took place? Not much was possible, given the short

duration of the embargo; over a longer horizon, domestic producers would have been able to

establish much higher levels of output of previously imported goods. That said, the stimulus of

the embargo to domestic manufacturers (particularly around Philadelphia) was widely and

favorably noted at the time. The city of Philadelphia apparently did well during the embargo,

not just because income lost by merchants was shifted partly to lawyers (who benefitted from the

proliferation of maritime-related law suits) but because manufacturing production expanded in

such goods as carpets, cloth (from bedspreads to stockings), earthenware, glass, soap, lead and

shot, and chemicals (Sears 1921). As Frankel (1982, p. 301) notes, “There is historical evidence

that Americans were remarkably successful in 1808 at switching into the production of

manufactured goods when they were cut off from their usual source of supply.” Sokoloff (1988)

reports a wave of patent activity coinciding with the embargo.

       Other evidence suggests that domestic manufacturers elsewhere did not necessarily

prosper during the short period in which the embargo was in effect. The records of textile

manufacturers in New England indicates that they suffered considerably with the sudden

collapse of trade. According to Ware (1926, pp. 672, 677), these findings tend “to destroy the

theory that it was the embargo which, by cutting off foreign competition and throwing out of

employment labor and capital, gave the impetus and protection to the American industry which

enabled it to become firmly established. . . . By striking at the prosperity of the commercial

elements of the New England coast towns, it destroyed the purchasing power of the cotton

manufacturers’ chief market.”
