                                                 - 16 -

        What is a plausible range for this welfare cost? The first component (p1m0) is a best

guess and does not change; this also applies to tariff revenue and to B1. The production and

substitution components are subject to greater uncertainty. Columns (2) and (3) present lower

and upper bound calculation based on assumptions about substitution. Column (2) presents a

lower bound calculation in which domestic manufacturers can fully produce what was previously

imported and domestic farmers fully reduce production by the amount that exports decline. This

increases sP from $2.3 to $4.7 million, decreasing the welfare cost to $28 million, or 4 percent of

GNP. Columns (3) an alternative, higher bound calculations on the magnitude of the welfare

loss in which there is no production or consumption substitution at all. This increases the

welfare cost to $38 million, or 5.5 percent of GNP.

        These alternative calculations provide some plausible bounds on the likely true welfare

cost of the embargo. The welfare cost appears to be centered around 5 percent of GNP, but

could be as low as 4 percent or as high as something closer to 6 percent. In 1807, merchandise

exports and net shipping receipts were about 13 percent of GNP.

        In two classic papers on the cost of protection, Johnson (1960, 1965) presents some

different calculations that lend some support to these magnitudes. Johnson (1965) used a

constant elasticity of substitution utility function and a general specification for the production

transformation curve to arrive at the costs of self-sufficiency (autarky) in a computable two-

sector general equilibrium model. In the case where the share of national income spent on

importables under free trade is 0.20 and the elasticity of substitution in consumption between

importables and exportables is 0.5, for example, then a tariff of 76 percent would be sufficient to

induce autarky at a welfare loss of 5.2 percent of free trade utility level. If the elasticity of
