

Ever  since  we  had  broken  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  our 
attitude,  in  effect,  had  been  one  of  defence.  Napoleon's 
unblushing  contempt  for  his  diplomatic  engagements,  and 
his  unconcealed  belief  that   by  sheer  truculence  he  could 


2  PITT'S   AVAR   POLICY  1803 

force  us  out  of  the  European  system  altogether,  had 
driven  Addington's  peace-loving  Government  to  declare 
war.^  To  wage  it  was  another  thing,  and  it  quickly 
proved  to  be  beyond  their  capacity.  From  the  first 
they  were  dominated  by  the  elaborate  threat  of  invasion 
by  which  Napoleon  seized  the  initiative.  Seeing  how 
weak  was  the  army,  it  paralysed  all  hope  of  offensive 
action  in  Europe,  and  our  confident  enemy  could  make 
merry  over  a  country  that  went  to  war  to  show  that  it 
could  defend  itself 

Such  offensive  operations  as  were  within  their  resources 
had  been  purely  maritime — directed  against  the  sea-borne 
trade  of  France  and  her  minor  colonial  possessions.  At  the 
outbreak  of  hostilities  our  military  strength  in  the  West 
Indies  was  considerable,  for  the  garrisons  which  had  been 
in  occupation  of  the  French  islands  captured  in  the  late 
war  had  not  yet  returned.  These  were  well  employed  in 
retaking  St.  Lucia,  which  had  come  from  long  experience 
to  be  regarded  as  the  key  of  the  naval  position  in  the 
Leeward  Islands.  So  high,  indeed,  did  it  stand  as  a  naval 
position  that  the  question  of  its  retrocession  had  almost 
wrecked  the  peace  which  ended  the  Seven  Years'  War. 
But,  not  content  with  this  legitimate  opening,  the  Govern- 
ment, in  spite  of  the  bitter  lessons  of  the  last  war,  proceeded 
to  occupy  Tobago  and  the  four  Dutch  settlements  of  Deme- 
rara,  Essequibo,  Berbice,  and  Surinam.  All  these  sickly 
stations  required  garrisons,  and  the  result  was  to  demobilise 
a  serious  proportion  of  our  slender  military  force,  and  still 
further  to  reduce  the  possibility  of  a  more  active  policy  at 
home.'^ 

For  these  adventures  Addington  and  his  friends  are 
now  blamed  without  mercy,  but  candour  and  a  reasonable 
knowledge  of  the  political  conditions  should  temper  the 
habitual  attitude  of  superiority  which  their  critics  are  wont 
to  adopt.  To  begin  with,  we  had  in  any  case  no  hope  of 
being  able  to  use  our  army  in  Europe  with  effect  single- 

^  For  the  recent  French  recognition  of  Napoleon's  responsibility  for  the 
renewal  of  the  war,  see  P.  Coquelle,  Napoleon  and  Evyland,  translated  by  G.  D. 
Knox.     1904. 

^  Fortescue,  County  Lieutenants  and  the  Army,  p.  10. 


i8o3  OUTBREAK   OF   THE   WAR  3 

handed,  and  at  that  time  we  were  single-handed.  And  in 
the  second  place,  the  opening  moves  against  the  Dutch 
colonies  were,  in  fact,  a  direct  blow  at  the  object  we  had  in 
view.  The  real  cause  of  the  war,  as  is  now  admitted  on 
both  sides,  was  Napoleon's  shameless  behaviour  to  the 
United  Provinces  in  breach  of  the  Treaty  of  Luneville. 
Before  the  ink  was  Avell  dry  he  had  reduced  Holland  to  the 
condition  of  a  subject-ally  of  France.  His  similar  behaviour 
in  Northern  Italy  and  Switzerland  intensified  the  resentment 
his  breach  of  faith  aroused ;  but  the  virtual  annexation  of 
Holland  was  what  made  a  renewal  of  the  war  inevitable. 
It  touched  our  traditional  policy  to  the  quick.  The  menace 
to  our  position  in  the  Narrow  Seas  was  one  we  had  never 
been  willing  to  endure.  Now  our  reply  was  a  refusal  to 
evacuate  Malta  as  provided  by  the  Treaty  of  Amiens,  and 
so  the  war  broke  out  again.  It  was  therefore  a  perfectly 
logical  opening  to  strike  at  the  Dutch  colonies.  It  was  a 
blow  that  could  be  dealt  rapidly,  and  was  well  calculated 
to  teach  any  man  but  Napoleon  the  lesson  he  could  never 
learn.  It  told  him  plainly  that,  if  France  could  find  no 
room  for  England  in  the  councils  of  Europe,  there  would  be 
no  room  for  a  French  empire  beyond  the  seas. 