

No  one  can  approach  our  Naval  History  from  this  point 
of  view,  even  in  the  tentative  and  imperfect  manner  that 
has  been  attempted  in  the  following  pages,  without  feeling 
how  defective  is  the  bulk  of  what  we  now  possess.  It  is 
scarcely  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  whole  requires 
rewriting  on  Staff  lines.  But  it  is  unlikely  that  so  large  and 
technical  a  task  can  ever  be  done  adequately  except  by  an 
Historical  Section  at  the  Admiralty.  The  need  for  such 
a  Section  is  crying.  Buried  in  our  Naval  Archives  is  a  mass 
of  lore,  a  body  of  matured  tradition,  such  as  no  other 
country  in  the  world  possesses ;  but  it  lies  dormant  and  for- 
gotten, a  wasted  power  of  incalculable  force,  that  might  be 
ours  behind  the  guns  and  ours  alone.  But  to  re-awaken 
that  tradition,  to  make  it  a  living  thing,  as  it  was  to  Barham 
and  Cornwallis  and  Nelson,  to  render  it  once  more  the 
active  force  that  gave  them  nerve  and  initiative,  and  that 
certainty  of  touch  which  seems  now  almost  miraculous,  is 


xii  PREFACE 

beyond  the  reach  of  individual  effort.  It  needs,  no  less 
than  the  most  technical  and  material  parts  of  the  naval  art, 
a  laboratory  where  civilian  and  naval  experts  can  work  side 
by  side  to  supply  each  other's  defects  and  ripen  each  other's 
ideas. 

It  has  indeed  been  suggested  that  a  Professorship  of 
Naval  History  at  a  University  might  supply  the  need.  But 
however  such  a  chair  may  succeed  for  Military  History  or 
for  forming  a  sound  national  opinion,  for  the  practical  needs 
of  the  Service  it  seems  foredoomed  to  failure.  What  is  of  the 
sea  must  breathe  the  breath  of  the  sea.  Without  it  it  will 
pine  in  academical  speculation.  In  salt  water  the  old  naval 
tradition  was  born,  and  by  salt  water  alone  can  it  be 
nourished.  Sever  the  work  of  revival  from  the  Admiralty 
and  you  sever  it  from  the  well-spring  of  that  intangible 
spirit  which  is  our  peculiar  asset.  It  is  ours  alone  if  we 
choose  to  use  it.  The  most  perfect  organisation,  the  most 
scholarly  research,  the  most  elaborate  technical  science, 
cannot  supply  its  place.  It  is  the  product  of  centuries  of 
naval  warfare,  and  it  is  we  who  have  the  centuries  behind 
us.  The  atmosphere  they  have  engendered  is  the  soul  of 
the  matter,  and  nowhere  out  of  intimate  touch  with  the  fleet 
can  its  inspiration  be  assured. 

Some  day,  it  may  be  hoped,  the  truth  may  be  realised. 
Some  day,  perhaps,  we  shall  recognise  the  value  of  the  force 
by  which  alone  we  may  bend  again  the  bow  of  Odysseus ; 
and  then  a  Historical  Section  will  seem  as  indispensable 
a  national  asset  as  an  experimental  tank  or  a  laboratory  for 
high  explosives. 