

But  in  political  effect  the  West  Indian  conquests  proved 
of  no  avail,  and  in  the  actual  war  they  counted  for  nothing 
except  in  one  not  unimportant  direction.  The  captured 
islands  were  a  hotbed  of  privateering,  and  privateering  was 
always  the  chief  danger  to  our  sea-borne  commerce.  Long 
experience  had  shown  that  it  could  not  be  dealt  with 
effectually  by  pelagic  operations  alone.  Addington's  policy, 
therefore,  has  at  least  the  justification  not  only  of  having 
dealt  a  direct  blow  at  French  commerce,  and  therefore  at 
her  finance,  but  also  of  having  adopted  the  most  effectual 
method  of  protecting  our  own.  And,  be  it  remembered,  it 
was  the  retention  of  our  financial  position  that  eventually 
enabled  us  to  beat  Napoleon  down ;  it  was  our  sole  hope  of 
securing  allies :  and  furthermore  our  only  possible  means  of 
offence  for  the  moment  was  against  French  sea-borne  com- 
merce. It  was  a  form  of  attack  particularly  embarrassing  to  a 
ruler  like  Napoleon,  whose  chief  aim  in  consenting  to  a  peace 


4  PITT'S   WAR    POLICY  1804 

had  been  to  restore  his  finances  and  his  fleet.  It  is  there- 
fore perhaps  too  narrow  a  judgment  to  condemn  the  West 
Indian  operations  out  of  hand  merely  because  they  seem  to 
sin  against  the  principle  of  concentration,  and  were  a  form 
of  war  which  of  itself  could  never  decide  the  issue.  Where 
a  maritime  empire  is  concerned  caution  is  required  in  apply- 
ing the  simple  formula}  of  continental  strategists.  Oceanic 
and  continental  war  differ  widely  in  some  of  their  cardinal 
conditions.  It  is  not  enough  to  apply  the  maxims  of  the 
one  ^1^  to  the  intricacies  of  the  other,  and  Addington's 
detractors  should  at  least  indicate  in  what  direction  the 
troops  employed  could  have  been  used  more  profitably  than 
in  strengthening  the  position  of  the  navy  and  lightening 
its  burden.^ 

Every  one  was  quick  to  see  that  something  more  drastic 
must  be  done  in  the  future,  and  Pitt  rose  to  power  on  a 
wave  of  opinion  that  the  hour  for  a  change  was  at  hand. 
The  military  forces  at  home  had  considerably  increased. 
We  began  the  war  with  a  home  army  of  little  more  than 
50,000  regulars;  by  the  summer  of  1804  we  had  87,000, 
besides  80,000  militia  and  343,000  volunteers,  or  over  half 
a  million  men.  Pitt's  first  measures  were  directed  to  in- 
creasing the  regular  force  still  further  ;  but  even  so,  offence 
against  such  a  poAver  as  Napoleon's  was  impossible  single- 
handed.  Only  in  alliance  with  the  great  military  states  of 
the  continent  could  his  father's  methods  be  used,  and 
simultaneously  with  the  ripening  of  our  striking  energy 
alliances  came  in  view. 

