

Of  these  charts,  which  have  now  been  constructed  for  the 
first  time,  and  which  are  the  necessary  basis  of  all  strategical 
criticism,  it  must  be  explained  that  they  should  not  be 
taken  as  absolutely  correct.  Except  where  otherwise  indi- 
cated the  tracks  are  simply  plotted  between  noon  positions, 
and  owing  to  the  uncertainty  of  longitude  observations, 
even  these  positions  are  sometimes  only  approximate.  This 
is  especially  the  case  with  the  smaller  cruisers,  whose 
neglected  movements  are  not  infrequently  vital  to  a  correct 
view  of  fleet  operations,  such  as  Orde's  retreat  from  Cadiz 
and  Nelson's  final  decision  to  chase  to  the  West  Indies.  In 
the  important  case,  for  instance,  of  the  Iris,  which  observed 
Villeneuve's  final  movement  from  Ferrol,  no  one  on  board 
seems  to  have  been  able  to  work  out  a  longitude  at  all. 
At  least  none  are  entered  in  her  master's  log,  and  in  run- 
ning down  from  Ushant  she  made  Cape  Penas  instead  of 
Ortegal,  nearly  a  hundred  miles  to  the  westward. 

In  plotting  the  French  tracks  the  difficulty  of  reaching 
precision  has  been  even  greater.  They  are  primarily  based 
on  the  charts  given  by  Colonel  Desbriere,  but  unfortunately 
these  charts  are  not  quite  worthy  of  the  rest  of  the  work. 
They  have  required  careful  correction  from  the  positions  and 
courses  recorded  in  the  documents  themselves.  Sometimes 
these,  too,  are  obviously  false,  especially  in  the  case  of  Ville- 
neuve's retreat  from  Ferrol  and  Cadiz ;  and  in  these  cases 
the  track  shown  is  that  actually  observed  and  reported  by 


PREFACE  xi 

our  cruisers.  When,  as  occurs  in  the  most  doubtful  cases,  two 
or  more  of  such  cruisers  working  independently  give  co- 
inciding observations,  the  positions  and  course  reported  are 
taken  as  correct. 

It  is  hoped  that  the  movements  and  instructions  of 
these  cruisers,  and  indeed  the  whole  system  of  scouting  and 
intelligence,  will  be  found  an  interesting  feature  of  the 
book.  Hitherto,  owing  to  the  unfortunate  precedent  set  by 
James,  cruiser  work  has  usually  been  divorced  from  the 
major  operations  to  which  it  belongs  organically,  and  we 
have  known  little  about  it  beyond  the  frigate  actions  that 
were  fought.  To  naval  officers,  and  indeed  to  all  serious 
students  of  naval  warfare,  history  so  written  must  have  a 
flavour  of  unreality  that  is  little  short  of  repellent.  What 
they  require  is  a  co-ordinated  account  of  the  movements 
of  all  classes  of  ships  engaged  in  each  operation,  and 
a  clear  knowledge  of  the  instructions  and  intelligence 
under  which  it  was  carried  out.  In  short,  if  Naval  History 
is  to  establish  itself  as  a  matter  of  real  instructional  interest, 
students  must  be  able  to  find  in  accounts  of  the  old  cam- 
paigns at  least  an  indication  of  what  they  would  look  for 
in  a  report  on  manoeuvres  to-day. 