

For  the  naval  side  we  have  Mr.  Leyland's  Bespatclies  and 
Letters  relating  to  the  Blochade  of  Brest,  1803-5,  edited  for  the 
Navy  Records  Society,  and  the  Cornvjallis  Fapers,  recently 
published  by  the  Historical  MSS.  Commission  from  the  collec- 
tion of  Mr.  Cornwallis  Wykeham-Martin  {Various  Collec- 
tions,  .\o\.  \\.  1909).  But  for  the  most  valuable  published 
material  by  far  we  must  acknowledge  our  debt  with  humi- 
lity, if  not  with  shame,  to  the  French  War  Office.  The 
monumental  works  of  Colonel  Edouard  Desbriere,  entitled, 
Frojets  et  tentatires  de  d^barquement  av.x  lies  Britanniques 
(1793-1805)  and  La  Campiaign  Maritime  de  Trafalgar,  pub- 
lished under  the  direction  of  the  Section  Historique  de 
I'Etat-major  de  I'Armee,  contain  the  first  attempt  to  form 
a  real  Staff  history  of  the  campaign,  and  although  they 
make  no  pretence  of  dealing  adequately  with  the  unpub- 
lished English  material,  they  place  us  for  the  first  time  in 
a  position  to  see  the  campaign  as  it  really  was.  My  debt 
to  these  volumes,  increased  as  it  is  by  Colonel  Desbriere's 
courtesy  in  personally  elucidating  points  that  were  obscured 
by  faulty  transcripts,  is  almost  beyond  recognition.  A  similar 
w^ork  from  the  Spanish  side  is  still  in  progress  in  the  Bevista 
de  Marina  by  General  Galiano,  a  lineal  descendant  of  a  Tra- 
falgar hero.  It  is  useful  in  supplementing  Colonel  Desbriere's 
volumes,  although  most  of  the  important  Spanish  docu- 
ments were  generously  communicated  to  the  French  Staff 
by  General  Galiano  for  Colonel  Desbriere's  use. 

Amongst  manuscript  sources  only  recently  accessible,  we 
have  the  Pitt  Papers,  deposited  at  the  Public  Record  Office, 
and,  still  more  valuable,  the  Barham  Papers,  which  have  been 
entrusted  for  publication  to  the  Navy  Records  Society.  To 
these  latter  I  have  been  permitted  access,  and  have  received 
invaluable  assistance  in  examining  them  from  the  editor, 
Sir  John  Laugh  ton. 

The  labour  of  working  through  the  mass  of  ship's  Logs 


X  PREFACE 

and  Journals,  the  Admirals'  and  Captains'  letters,  and  the 
other  rich  material  in  the  Admiralty  Archives,  and  of  sub- 
sequently reducing  it  to  narrative  and  critical  form,  has 
necessarily  been  great;  but  in  attempting  the  formidable 
task  my  path  has  been  smoothed  by  many  ready  helpers. 
My  thanks  are  specially  due  to  Captain  Hudleston,  R.N., 
for  placing  at  my  disposal  his  researches  into  the  system  of 
naval  defence  in  home  waters ;  to  Mr.  Perrin,  the  Admiralty 
Librarian,  for  help  in  every  direction,  and  particularly  in 
preparing  the  Schedule  of  Signals  recorded  as  having  been 
made  at  the  battle  of  Trafalgar ;  and  to  Lieutenant  Keate, 
R.N.,  for  assistance  in  preparing  the  track  charts  from  the 
Logs. 