

Nor  is  this  all.  The  military  side  of  the  campaign  has 
been  left  in  even  greater  obscurity  than  the  naval.  In  the 
course  of  the  year,  besides  the  troops  in  the  East  and  West 


viii  PREFACE 

Indies,  we  had  something  like  50,000  men  engaged  in 
active  oversea  operations.  Only  a  fraction  of  these  touched 
Nelson,  and  where  they  did  their  deflecting  influence  on  his 
strategy  has  been  almost  entirely  ignored.  Indeed  it  is  not 
too  much  to  say  that  the  controlling  fact  that  the  campaign 
of  1805  was  a  combined  campaign  and  not  merely  naval, 
has  never  been  given  its  due  importance.  Still  less  has  it 
been  realised  that  it  was  essentially  an  offensive  campaign, 
and  not  merely  a  campaign  of  defence  against  invasion. 
The  failure  to  grasp  these  cardinal  facts  has  clouded  even 
Nelson's  action  and  exposed  him  to  criticism  which  he  did 
not  deserve.  How  much  more  then  has  it  clouded  the 
rest ! 

It  is  not  that  a  minute  study  of  the  campaign  detracts 
in  the  least  from  Nelson's  greatness.  High  as  such  a  study 
lifts  the  reputation  of  his  colleagues,  Nelson  still  remains 
the  greatest  of  admirals.  The  fascination  of  his  dazzling 
personality  still  dominates  the  judgment,  and  it  is  only  by  a 
severe  and  persistent  effort  of  resistance  that  we  can  hope 
to  see  things  in  their  true  proportion  and  real  meaning. 
If  we  would  read  the  lesson  aright  not  only  must  we  keep 
Nelson's  part  in  due  subordination,  but  we  must  also  con- 
tinually forswear  the  calling  of  the  sea  and  closet  ourselves 
with  Pitt  and  Melville,  with  Barham  and  Castlereagh.  It  is 
with  them  alone  we  may  watch  the  inward  springs  at  work, 
by  which  the  fleets  at  sea  were  really  controlled,  and  mark 
the  flow  of  intelligence  from  spies  and  cruisers  and  embassies 
that  set  them  in  motion  or  stayed  their  action. 

For  such  a  detailed  study,  as  most  of  our  military  cam- 
paigns but  not  one  of  our  naval  have  received,  the  time  has 
been  ripened  by  the  publication  of  a  large  proportion  of  the 
essential  documents.  For  the  diplomatic  influences,  which 
in  this,  as  in  most  campaigns,  provides  the  master-key,  we 
have  Mr.  Holland  Rose's  Select  Desimtches  relating  to  the  Third 
Coalition  against  France,  1804—5,  edited  for  the  Royal  His- 
torical Society,  though,  as  the  editor  unfortunately  omitted 
to  note  the  dates  on  which  the  despatches  were  received, 
their  connection  with  naval  and  military  instructions  has 
been  impossible  to  trace  without  collation  with  the  originals. 


PREFACE  ix 

To  this  collection  must  be  added,  besides  the  well-known  cor- 
respondence of  Napoleon  and  Talleyrand,  Mons.  P.  Coquelle's 
Napoleon  et  Angleterre  (1803-13),  and  Mons.  Charles  Auriol's 
La  France,  V Angleterre  et  Naples  (1803-6),  both  invaluable 
works. 