

30th.  Calder's  retreat  to  Ushant  and  return 
in  pursuit  of  Villeneuve.  Villeneuve's  sortie 
from  Ferrol  and  retreat  to  Cadiz,  with  cruiser 
movements    .......,,         254 

Villeneuve's  approximate  course  is  plotted  from 
Reille's  Journal  and  the  reports  of  British 
cruising  ships. 

7.  Chart   to    illustrate   the   operations  to   intercept 

AUemand,  with  course  of  Baird's  expedi- 
tion from  the  end  of  August  to  the  middle 
of  October ,,302 


xvi  CHARTS    AND    DIAGRAMS 

8.  Plan   of   Trafalgar  attached    to    the    Report   of 

Captain    Prigny,     Villeneuve's     Chief-of-the 

Staff Jo /ace  i?.  360 

Reduced  from  the  plan  given  by  Desbricre,  Tra- 
fahjar,  Docuvunts  Annexes,  p.  142,  from  the 
original  in  Archiv(s  dc  la  Marine,  BB'*,  237. 

9,  Diagram  to  illustrate  the  intention  of  Colling- 

wood's  signal  for  the  Larboard  line  of  bearing  Page  369 

10.  Diagram  to  show  how  the  Allied  Line  became 

convex   ........  Page  377 

11.  The  Attack  at  Trafalgar.     Position  of  the  com- 

bined   Forces    of    France   and   Spain   at    the 
commencement    of    the     action,     21st     Oct, 

1805 To  face  p.  384 

From  Craig's  Plan.     See  p.  450,  No.  4. 

12.  Sir  Richard  Strachan's  action,  November  4i:h      .         ,,         402 

Reduced  from  the  plan  attached  to  the  Report 
of  Rear-Admiral  Dumanoir  le  Pelley  as  given 
by  Desbriere,  Trafahjar,  Documents  Annexes, 
p.  308,  from  the  original  in  Archives  de  la 
Marine,  BB^  237. 

13.  Diagram  of  the  Trafalgar  signal  .         .         .  Page  445 

From  the  Signal  Book  of  1816. 


THE     CAMPAIGN     OF 
TRAFALGAR 


CHAPTER   I 

PITT'S  WAR  POLICY 

When,  in  May  1804,  Pitt  returned  to  power  it  was  with  a 
determination  to  conduct  the  lingering  war  on  the  grand 
scale  of  his  father  and  by  his  father's  strenuous  methods. 
Treasured  among  his  papers  of  the  time  is  an  eloquent 
apostrophe  urging  him  to  rise  up  and  take  the  place  that 
had  been  held  by  William  the  Third,  by  Marlborough,  and 
by  his  father :  to  set  himself,  as  they  had  done,  at  the  head 
of  Europe  against  Europe's  great  oppressor,  to  stir  the  faint 
hearts  of  the  Powers  into  united  effort,  and  to  remove  from 
England  the  reproach  that  she  had  not  produced  a  war 
minister  since  the  great  days  of  Chatham. 

The  people,  realising  how  the  country's  strength  had 
grown  with  the  war,  were  looking  to  him  to  give  expression 
to  their  rising  spirit ;  to  teach  them  not  only  how  to  pro- 
tect themselves  from  invasion,  but  how  in  the  consciousness 
of  their  strength  to  strike  down  their  arch-enemy  as  they 
had  been  wont  to  do  in  old  days.  In  this  spirit  he  gathered 
up  the  reins,  and  began  at  once  to  lay  his  widespread  plans 
to  give  the  war  a  new  and  more  worthy  presence. 