

Concurrently  with  the  arrangement  of  the  military 
convention,  the  negotiations  for  a  regular  alliance  Avere 
proceeding,  but  with  constant  difficulties,  owing  to  the  vacil- 
lating attitude  of  Austria,  and  the  mutual  suspicions  of  all 
the  Powers  concerned.  Russia  could  not  reconcile  herself 
to  England's  retention  of  Malta,  and  England  suspected 
Russia's  real  aim  to  be  the  partition  of  the  Turkish  Empire. 
Austria  was  clearly  more  concerned  with  recovering  the  old 
Hapsburg  possessions  in  North  Italy  than  with  the  libera- 
ation  of  Europe ;  and  as  for  Prussia  she  had  obviously  no 
end  in  view  but  the  filching  of  Hanover.  Even  Sweden 
was  only  prepared  to  move  in  return  for  an  unconscionable 
British  subsidy  that  was  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  service 
it  was  in  her  power  to  render. 

To  Pitt  the  position  was  galling  in  the  extreme.     For 

1  Amongst  other  measures  that  were  adopted  at  this  time  was  the  erection 
of  the  Martello  Towers  on  the  threatened  coasts,  not  in  a  spirit  of  passive 
defence,  but  in  order  to  set  free  an  effective  striking  force.  Another  was  the 
digging  of  the  Hythe  Military  Canal.  This  work,  which  seemed  to  be  designed 
to  stop  an  army  which  had  crossed  the  Channel,  came  in  for  much  ridicule  by 
the  "  blue  water"  men  of  the  day.  Writing  in  September  1805,  from  Hythe 
to  the  Viceroy  ofilreland,  Charles  Yorke  says  his  regiment  is  "at  work  in  the 
mud  of  a  large  ditch  called  the  Royal  Military  Canal,  which  is  said  to  be 
intended  to  prevent  the  French  penetrating  into  the  country  .  .  .  when  they 
shall  have  crossed  another  ditch  somewhat  wider  and  rather  more  difficult  to 
pass"  (Rt.  Hon.  Charles  Yorke  to  Earl  of  Hardwicke  :  Add.  MSS.  3750G). 
Military  opinion  would  probably  regard  this  criticism  of  the  work  as  super- 
ficial. It  was,  of  course,  intended  to  delay  the  advance  of  a  force  that  had 
landed,  and  give  time  for  the  concentration  of  the  territorial  forces  which 
had  been  arranged,  just  as  the  Martello  Towers  were  intended  to  delay  the 
lauding. 


i8o4  HOME   DEFENCE   SYSTEM  ii 

as  the  winter  came  on  the  situation  of  England  greatly 
improved,  and  gave  promise  of  freeing  her  arms.  Her 
defensive  system,  as  of  old,  was  showing  itself  to  be  im- 
pregnable, and  the  fear  of  invasion  was  giving  way  to  a 
fierce  desire  to  be  revenged  on  the  man  who  had  put  her 
to  so  much  alarm  and  expense. 

The  system  that  had  been  adopted  was  that  which  had 
so  often  proved  its  strength,  and  which  no  trick  or  device 
had  ever  availed  to  break  down.  Facing  the  army  of  in- 
vasion from  the  Texel  to  Havre  was  a  swarm  of  sloops 
and  gun-vessels,  rendering  the  passage  of  Napoleon's  flotilla 
impossible  Avithout  battleship  support.  Our  own  flotilla 
was  strengthened  w^ith  a  small  battle  squadron  sufficient  to 
deal  with  the  Dutch  battle  squadron  in  the  Texel,  or  with 
any  small  division  that  might  escape  the  vigilance  of  our 
squadrons  that  were  blockading  the  enemy's  Atlantic  ports. 
The  whole  was  under  the  command  of  Lord  Keith,  with 
his  headquarters  in  the  Downs,  and  subsidiary  bases  at 
Yarmouth  for  watching  the  Texel  and  at  the  Nore  for 
Dunkirk.  The  general  plan  of  defence  w^as  to  hold  back 
the  bulk  of  the  defence  flotilla  on  our  own  shores  with 
coast-defence  vessels,  or  "  block-ships,"  as  they  were  called, 
as  rallying  points.-^  Small  advanced  cruiser  squadrons 
Avatched  the  French  movements,  and  seized  every  oppor- 
tunity of  striking  at  the  enemy's  flotilla  as  it  tried  to 
concentrate  in  the  ports  of  departure,  Boulogne,  Etaples, 
Wimereux,  and  Ambleteuse.  At  the  Channel  Islands  was 
an  independent  cruiser  squadron,  under  Rear -Admiral 
Saumarez,  effectually  preventing  the  passage  of  transports 
from  that  direction,  and  barring  a  raid  on  the  islands. 
But  it  also  had  the  important  function  of  acting  as  a  link 
between  Keith  and  the  Western  Squadron,  by  which  the 
whole  position  was  covered.^  This  squadron,  which  was  in 
fact  the  main  fleet,  was  under  Cornwallis,  and  was  holding 