

If  only  a  section  of  it  put  to  sea  and  it  carried  troops, 
its  objective  would  be  Ireland,  and  he  was  to  detach  an 
equal  force  to  act  as  before  explained.  If  such  a  detach- 
ment sailed  to  the  southward  and  without  troops,  the  object 
Av^ould  probably  be  a  junction  with  the  Mediterranean  fleet. 
If  the  detachment  was  no  more  than  five  or  six  ships  with 
troops,  the  objective  would  be  in  the  West  Indies,  and  he 
was  to  detach  thither  an  equivalent  force. 

He  was  also  to  consider  the  possibility  that  the  saihng 
of  the  whole,  or  the  greater  part  of  the  squadron,  might 
mean  raising  the  blockades  of  Rochofort  and  Ferrol.  He 
Avas  to  deal  with  such  a  movement  by  directing  the  two 
Admirals  concerned  "  to  form  a  junction  with  their  two 
squadrons  on  the  north  coast  of  Spain,  or  elsewhere ; "  and 
he  was  to  give  them  a  rendezvous  for  that  purpose.  He 
was  also  to  arrange  for  his  cruisers  to  bring  them  timely 
warning,  and  for  reinforcing  them  from  his  own  fleet  to  the 
extent  the  strength  of  the  escaping  force  might  demand. 
If  either  Admiral  was  forced  by  the  appearance  of  a  superior 
enemy  to  raise  his  blockade,  he  was  to  join  the  other,  and 
they  were  to  wait  in  company  for  the  reinforcement.  Direc- 
tions follow  for  the  general  manner  in  which  the  blockade 
of  Brest  is  to  be  conducted,  but  in  spite  of  their  minute- 
ness they  conclude  with  a  saving  clause,  by  which  it  was 
sought  to  hit  the  mean  between  tying  an  Admiral  to  the 
main  lines  of  the  plan  of  campaign  and  leaving  him  a  free 
hand.  "  We  are  aware,"  it  runs,  "  that  many  circumstances 
may  occur  to  which  these  instructions  are  inapplicable,  and 
for  which  no  provision  is  made.  In  these  cases  you  must 
use  your  discretion  and  judgment  for  your  guidance,  giving 
us  the  earliest  information  of  your  proceedings  through  our 
Secretary."  ^ 

1  Draft,  "Instructions  to  Admiral  Cornwallis  :  Secret,  Aug.  24,  1804," 
signed  by  Melville,  Garabier,  and  Colpoys. — Barhavi  Papers.  For  Cornwallis's 
own  precis  of  the  long  document,  see  Blockade  uf  Brest,  ii.  48. 


i8o4 


INVASION   ABANDONED 


IS 


These  sagacious  and  comprehensive  instructions  cannot, 
of  course,  be  regarded  as  purely  the  work  of  Lord  Melville. 
They  were  almost  certainly  settled  in  concert  with  Corn- 
wallis  while  he  was  ashore,  and  they  reflect  not  only  his 
views,  but  probably  also  those  of  Sir  Charles  Middleton, 
who,  as  Lord  Barham,  was  to  be  the  ultimate  director  of 
the  campaign,  and  who,  as  we  shall  see,  was  even  at  this 
time  unofficially  the  confidential  adviser  of  the  First  Lord. 
They  therefore  may  be  taken  as  the  highest  expression  of 
the  living  strategical  tradition  as  it  existed  after  the  great 
maritime  wars  of  the  eighteenth  century,  and  as  such  they 
deserve  the  most  deferential  study.  Over  and  above  the 
strategical  exposition,  it  will  be  observed  that  they  afford  a 
characteristic  example  of  the  extent  to  which  the  Admiralty 
was  accustomed  to  control  the  action  of  Admirals  in  home 
waters,  and  that  they  also  reveal  how  little  the  Board 
regarded  the  invasion  as  a  serious  danger. 