


i8o4  SPAIN   DECLARES   WAR  17 

tion  of  war  liad  been  our  regular  procedure  in  like 
circumstances  ever  since  Drake  set  out  to  strike  it  in  1585, 
and  failed,  "  the  reason  best  known  to  God."  Again  and 
again  it  had  been  used,  though  seldom  with  success,  and 
yet  we  never  tired.  Before  September  was  out,  orders  were 
speeding  to  Nelson  in  the  Mediterranean  and  Cochrane 
before  Ferrol  to  seize  the  home-coming  galleons  of  Monte- 
video. A  new  squadron  also — of  which  came  much  heart- 
burning— was  formed  under  Sir  John  Orde  to  blockade 
Cadiz  and  the  Andalusian  coast ;  and  in  November,  Com- 
modore Moore,  in  command  of  a  special  cruiser  squadron, 
had  seized  four  treasure  galleons.  Spain  immediately  de- 
clared war,  and  Napoleon's  new  plan  took  shape. 

Spain's  declaration  meant  for  him  nominally  an  increase 
of  his  fleet  by  thirty-two  of  the  line.  It  represented  with 
the  Dutch  a  three-power  coalition,  to  which  our  navy  as  it 
stood  was  barely  superior.  But  Pitt's  prompt  action  had 
caught  Spain  unawares  and  unready,  and  the  utmost  Napo- 
leon could  hope  was  that  she  might  have  some  twenty-five 
of  the  line  fit  for  action  by  the  spring  of  1805.  Till  then 
he  must  do  the  best  he  could  Avith  his  own.  Action  of 
some  kiad  was  imperative  in  order  to  divert  the  attention 
of  the  British  fleet  from  his  coasts.  He  could  even  hope  to 
provoke  in  England  an  outcry  for  peace ;  for  well  within  his 
power  was  a  counterstroke  at  her  colonies.  Thus  originated 
that  famous  movement  to  the  West  Indies — not  with  any 
idea  of  a  crushing  return  upon  the  Channel,  but  simply  in  a 
desperate  effort  to  shatter  Pitt's  position  and  to  get  the  British 
fleet  off  his  back,  while  he  faced  the  threatened  coalition. 

In  the  plan  of  operation  which  he  had  just  abandoned 
it  had  been  the  part  of  the  Toulon  squadron  to  evade 
Nelson,  take  a  wide  sweep  round  Cochrane  at  Ferrol,  release 
the  Rochefort  squadron,  and,  thus  reinforced,  to  take  an- 
other wide  sweep  round  Cornwallis  at  Brest  and  rush  the 
Channel.  Under  the  new  scheme  for  colonial  attack,  the 
Toulon  and  Rochefort  squadrons  Avere  to  sail  independently 
Avith  a  force  of  troops  to  the  West  Indies.  There  they  Avere 
to  recapture  the  Dutch  islands,  reinforce  the  French,  take 
all  they  could  from  the  British,  and  then  return  together  in 

B 


1 8  PITT'S    WAR   POLICY  1804 

the  spring  to  fall  upon  Cochrane,  bring  out  the  Ferrol 
squadron,  and  proceed  to  a  French  port.  At  the  same  time 
Ganteaume  at  Brest  had  orders  to  embark  a  third  military 
force,  and  seizing  the  first  opportunity  of  getting  out,  to 
operate  a  descent  on  Ireland  and  then  to  carry  on  north- 
about  and  liberate  Marmont's  corps  in  the  Texel. 