


1  Warren  to  Harrowbv,  July  24,  1804  :  Eose,  Select  Despatches  relating  to  the 
Third  Coalition  (Eoyal  Historical  Society,  3rd  Series),  vol.  vii.  p.  25. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  32,  August  14. 


8  PITT'S    WAR    POLICY  ,804 

The  words  in  which  these  instructions  were  conveyed 
to  Lcveson-Gower  by  Lord   Harrowby,  who  was  then  Pitt's 
Foreign  Secretary,  are  worth  recording  and  remembering, 
for  in  them  lies  the  exphmation  of  much  naval  strategy,' 
and  in  particular  do  they  afford  the  key  of  Nelson's  attitude 
to  the  Neapolitan  question,  and  the  complex  naval  problem 
which  it  involved.      The  actual  situation  at  our  point  of 
contact   with    Russia    turned   upon   the   command  of    the 
Mediterranean,   and   that  depended   on   Nelson's   power   of 
controlling  the  Toulon  fleet— not  necessarily  of  blockading 
it,  but,  as  he  preferred  to  say,  on  "holding  it  in  check" 
till   it   could   be   met   and  destroyed.     ''It   would  become 
doubtful,"  wrote  Harrowby,  in  directing  Gower  to  insist  on 
the  importance  of  immediate  action,  "  whether  the  blockade 
of  Toulon  could  be  maintained  as  effectually  as  it  has  been 
hitherto  [if  Sicily  were  lost] ;  and  in  case  the  French  fleet 
should  escape  from  that  port   and  be  able  to  detach  any 
considerable  force  to  the  Adriatic,  the  Russian  Government 
would  do  well  to  consider  the  danger  to  which  their  own 
squadron  in  those  seas  would  be  exposed,  and  the  oppor- 
tunity which  would  be   afforded  to  the  French  of  making 
a  successful  attack  upon  Albania  and  the  Morea." 

These  were  exactly  Nelson's  ideas.  He  was  not  of 
course  blockading  Toulon  closely,  but  endeavouring  to  watch 
the  Toulon  fleet  in  such  a  way  that  if  it  attempted  to 
get  to  the  eastward  and  endanger  what  it  was  his  special 
province  to  defend,  it  would  certainly  be  brought  to  action. 
For  this  purpose  Gibraltar  and  Malta  w^ere  of  little  use.  As 
bases  they  were  wrongly  placed.  What  was  wanted  was 
one  that  Avould  enable  him  to  retain  continuously  the  only 
position  that  was  interior  to  either  line  of  operation  the 
French  might  adopt,  whether  westwards  out  of  the  Straits, 
or^  eastwards  agahist  Naples  and  the  Levant.  It  was  for 
this  reason  he  always  insisted  that  Sardinia  and  Sicily  were 
the  keys  of  the  strategical  situation. 

"You  will  receive,"  Harrowby 's  instructions  to  Gower 
went  on,  "  the  assurances  which  were  given  by  me  to  Count 
Woronzow,  that  exertions  would  be  made  to  increase  the 
disposal    force   of   the    garrison   of   Malta:    and   you   may 


i8o4  SARDINIA  9 

express  a  hope  that  a  reinforcement  of  5000  or  6000  men 
will  have  reached  it  in  a  few  months.  These  troops  will 
have  eventual  orders  to  act  in  the  defence  of  Sicily,  of 
Calabria,  or  of  Turkey,  as  circumstances  may  require  .  .  . 
but  it  seems  necessary  that  their  attention  should  be 
specially  directed  to  the  defence  ...  of  Sicily."  ^ 