


6  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1804 

Naturally,  then,  the  Russian  overtures  were  well  received 
in  London,  and  just  as  Pitt  came  to  power  Woronzow,  the 
Czar's  ambassador,  was  able  to  say  that  a  large  Russian 
force  from  the  Black  Sea  would  be  sent  to  the  Ionian 
Islands  or  to  Italy  as  circumstances  might  require,  and 
that  the  Czar  hoped  his  Britannic  Majesty  would  order 
a  corps  of  troops  to  be  kept  at  Malta  in  readiness  to  act  in 
conjunction  Avith  those  of  Russia.^ 

It  is  here  we  pick  up  the  thread  that  led  directly  to 
the  decision  at  Trafalgar.  Slender  as  it  proved  to  be,  it  is 
the  only  sure  guide  through  the  labyrinth  of  the  campaign. 
The  splendour  and  tragedy  of  the  great  day  of  reckoning 
had  long  cast  this  guiding  line  into  obscurity.  Yet,  so  far 
as  human  judgment  can  tell,  without  the  entanglement 
it  Aveaved  about  Napoleon  the  most  famous  naval  battle 
in  history  would  not  have  been  fought.  It  was  an 
effort  to  cut  himself  free  from  it  that  cost  Napoleon  his 
fleet ;  and  unless  we  keep  it  securely  between  our  fingers 
we  must  wander  in  error  through  the  thronging  movements 
of  the  year  and  never  reach  their  real  meanmg.  Let  us 
trace  the  spinning  of  it  till  its  strands  were  securely  twined. 

The  idea  that  was  in  the  Czar's  mind  w^as  to  form,  with 
British  assistance  and  above  all  with  British  subsidies,  a 
great  defensive  league  with  Austria,  Prussia,  and  Sweden. 
Whether  all  or  any  of  those  Powers  could  be  induced  to 
join  was  doubtful.  The  formation  of  the  league  must  at 
least  take  much  time,  during  Avhich  Napoleon  might  greatly 
strengthen  his  position.  But  in  any  event  Russia  and 
England  could  act  together  at  once  to  bar  his  advance  in 
the  Mediterranean.  Under  the  Treaty  of  Amiens  he  had 
agreed  to  evacuate  the  Neapolitan  ports  of  Otranto  and 
Taranto,  in  the  south  of  Italy.  But  he  had  now  reoccu- 
pied  them,  and  from  these  points  was  not  only  threatening 
the  Levant  across  the  Adriatic,  but  was  in  a  position  to 
strike  a  sudden  blow  through  Calabria  at  Sicily.  It  was 
vital  to  the  situation  that  any  such  catastrophe  should  be 
prevented;    and    thus    the    idea   of  British   troops  in   the 

'  J.  Holland  Rose,  Schct  Despatches  rdat'auj  to  the  Third  Coalitiun  (Rojal 
Historical  Society,  I'JUi),  p.  ix. 


i8o4  IMPORTANCE    OF    SICILY  7 

Mediterranean  became  as  it  were  the  symbol  and  test  of 
Pitt's  purpose.  When  he  pressed  that  the  league  should 
be  offensive  and  for  immediate  action,  the  Czar  at  once 
reminded,  him  that  with  respect  to  reinforcing  our  garrisons 
in  the  Mediterranean  and  assembling  a  corps  of  troops  to 
act  in  Italy,  Pitt  had  announced  a  delay  of  two  or  three 
months,  not  having  as  yet  sufficient  troops  available  for 
an  expeditionary  force.  Admiral  Sir  John  B.  Warren,  who 
was  then  our  ambassador  in  Russia,  immediately  replied  that 
a  large  part  of  the  garrisons  of  Malta  and  Gibraltar  could 
be  spared  at  once  and  that  the  remainder  of  the  British 
troops  would  soon  follow  if  the  Czar  would  only  propose  to 
enter  into  a  treaty  to  unite  the  Powers  into  an  offensive 
and  defensive  alliance.^  Within  a  month  Russia  had 
decided  to  send  an  ultimatum  to  Napoleon  demanding  the 
evacuation  of  Apulia,  the  arrangement  of  the  affairs  of 
Italy,  compensation  to  the  King  of  Sardinia  for  what  had 
been  taken  from  him,  and  the  evacuation  of  North  Germany. 
If  there  were  no  satisfactory  answer  in  twenty-four  hours 
his  ambassador  was  to  leave  Paris.'^  Following  on  this 
resolute  step  Pitt  sent  out  Lord  Granville  Leveson-Gower  to 
replace  Warren  in  order  to  negotiate  a  regular  alliance,  and 
the  special  instructions  he  carried  Avere  first  to  clear  up  a 
misunderstanding  that  had  arisen  as  to  the  British  view  of 
Russian  action  in  Italy.  Pitt  wished  the  Russians  at  once 
to  seize  the  passes  leading  into  Calabria  from  Taranto. 
The  Czar  thought  he  was  being  urged  to  drive  the  French 
out  of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  single-handed,  and  Leveson- 
Gower  was  to  assure  him  England  knew  that  was  impossible 
till  Austria  joined.  But  if  he  attempted  the  lesser  opera- 
tion two  thousand  troops  from  Malta  w^ere  ready  to  assist 
at  once.  The  immediate  British  object  was  solely  to 
prevent  France  seizing  Sicily  by  a  coup  de  main  through 
Calabria.  For  without  Sicily  as  a  base  of  supply  the 
position  of  our  fleet  in  the  Mediterranean  would  be  very 
difficult  to  maintain. 