It  is  here — in  the  negotiations  and  preliminary  action 
for  securing  these  alliances — that  we  find  the  key  of  the 
Trafalgar  campaign.  To  treat  it  as  the  mere  expression 
of  the  old  policy  of  defence  against  invasion,  which  Pitt  had 
resolved  to  abandon,  is  to  seek  for  its  meaning  in  vain. 
Yet  it  is  on  these  lines  the  bulk  of  criticism  runs,  with  the 
result  that  the  real  teaching  has  been  almost  entirely  buried 
in  a  mass  of  erroneous  strategical  deduction.     Through  all 

*  Colonel  Henderson,  when  head  of  the  Staff  College,  used  to  lav  down 
the  rule  that  "  the  first  duty  of  the  J3ritish  army  was  to  assist  the  navy  in 
getting  command  of  the  sea."  And  in  this  case  the  assistance  was  real  and 
enduring. 


iSo4  HIS    ENTENTE   WITH    RUSSIA  5 

this  accumulation  we  must  dig  if  we  would  recover  the 
most  precious  treasure  that  naval  experience  has  ever 
fashioned,  and  the  first  step  towards  recovery  is  to  seek  a 
simple  understanding  of  Pitt's  policy  of  military  alliances. 
When  Napoleon  was  trying  to  browbeat  Addington's  Govern- 
ment over  their  refusal  to  evacuate  Malta — trampling  on 
every  decency  of  international  comity — he  had  openly 
boasted  that  he  had  left  England  without  an  ally  in 
Europe.  She  seemed  to  him  helpless.  In  his  almost 
crazy  self-confidence  he  believed  he  could  prevent  the  old 
causes  producing  the  old  effects  and  tread  underfoot  the 
fundamental  laws  which  had  given  England  her  place  in 
international  politics  ever  since  the  European  system  had 
begun.  Ignored  by  him,  these  laws  began  to  reassert  them- 
selves almost  immediately,  and  even  before  Pitt  came  back 
to  power  Russia  had  already  made  advances.  Convinced  by 
Napoleon's  action  in  Holland,  Italy,  and  Switzerland  that 
he  had  not  abandoned  for  a  moment  his  ambitious  dreams 
of  European  empire,  she  Avas  bent  on  forming  a  defensive 
league  to  thwart  his  design. 

It  was  where  the  danger  touched  her  most  nearly  that 
England  and  England  alone  could  give  effective  help. 
Napoleon  was  known  to  be  cherishing  a  purpose  to  overrun 
the  Ottoman  Empire  by  way  of  Albania  and  Greece,  and  for 
this  reason  Russia  had  maintained  a  small  squadron  and  a 
military  outpost  in  Corfu  and  the  Ionian  Islands.  We  were 
as  deeply  concerned  in  Napoleon's  design.  For  us  Turkey 
was  but  a  step  on  the  path  to  India,  and  for  this  reason 
also  we  had  clung,  in  the  face  of  the  Treaty  of  Amiens,  to 
our  hold  on  Malta.  There  was,  moreover,  another  common 
interest  at  stake.  It  lay  in  Southern  Italy,  Avhich  Napoleon 
was  openly  threatening,  and  which  he  seemed  bent  on 
making  the  starting-point  of  his  Near  Eastern  enterprises. 
Russia  had  taken  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  under  her  special 
protection;  and  by  a  tradition  as  old  as  Cromwell,  the 
denying  of  the  Two  Sicilies  to  France  had  become  as 
much  a  dominant  note  of  our  maritime  policy  as  the 
integrity  of  the  Low  Countries  had  been  from  time 
immemorial. 