

The  despatch  ended  accordingly  vvdth  a  renewed  sug- 
gestion that  Russian  troops  should  be  sent  at  once  to  co- 
operate with  the  Calabrians,  whom  we  had  been  supplying 
with  arms,  and  to  assist  them  to  hold  the  passes  while  the 
British  troops  from  Malta  occupied  Messina. 

The  new  ambassador  also  received  special  instructions 
to  press  for  the  re-establishment  of  the  Sardinian  Kingdom 
in  Piedmont  as  a  barrier  to  France  in  the  intended  settle- 
ment of  Italy.  The  aggrandisement  of  the  House  of  Savoy, 
as  a  means  of  preserving  the  balance  of  power  in  the  Medi- 
terranean, had  become  a  constant  of  British  policy.  The 
military  importance  of  the  Sardinian  Kingdom  was  recog- 
nised universally,  but  in  British  eyes  its  naval  value  was 
no  less ;  and  ever  since  Nelson  had  been  in  command  in 
the  Mediterranean  he  had  been  pressing  the  strategical 
value  of  Sardinia  on  the  Government.  So  soon  as  the 
new  administration  was  fairly  in  the  saddle  he  had  re- 
ceived orders  frankly  endorsing  his  ideas,  and  on  the  very 
day  Leveson-Gower's  instructions  were  signed,  Nelson  was 
acknowledging  the  Government's  directions  to  have  a  special 
care  for  Sardinia.^ 

The  British  proposal,  which  was  based  on  separate 
lines  of  operation,  did  not  commend  itself  to  the  Russian 
Government.  They  wanted  a  much  larger  force  and  joint 
operations  in  Italy  itself  under  one  commander:  but  in  view  of 
Napoleon's  threat  from  Boulogne,  Leveson-Gower  had  to  say 
that  an  increase  of  the  British  force  in  the  Mediterranean 
was  as  yet  impossible.^     Meanwhile  Pitt  was  devoting  him- 

1  Harrowby  to  Gower,  October  10  :  Rose,  'Third  Coalition,  p.  45. 

2  Nelson  to  Marsden,  October  10,  1804  :  Nicolas,  vi.  227.  See  also  Earl 
Camden  to  Nelson,  August  29  [Ibid.,  p.  228n),  informing  him  that  the  threat 
of  invasion  will  prevent  their  sending  an  expedition  to  the  Mediterranean 
before  winter,  and  that  meanwhile  they  are  despatching  an  officer  to  Sardinia 
to  report. 

^  Leveson-Gower  to  Harrowby,  November  28  :  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  72. 


lo  PITT'S    WAR    POLICY  1804 

self  with  iill  his  energy  to  increasing  our  disposal  force,  and 
was  still  doing  his  utmost  not  only  to  strengthen  the  regular 
army,  but  to  take  measures  to  render  the  home  defence 
secure  in  the  hands  of  the  territorial  forces.^  Russia,  after 
some  demur,  admitted  the  strength  of  the  British  arguments, 
and  on  the  promise  of  8000  troops  in  a  month  or  two,  she 
consented  to  co-operate  at  once  from  Corfu  with  20,000, 
])rovided  the  whole  force  was  commanded  by  a  Russian 
General,  and  that  England  furnished  the  necessary  trans- 
port. To  this  arrangement  the  British  Government  assented, 
and  before  the  end  of  the  year  Sir  James  Craig,  who  had 
been  commanding  the  Essex  defence  district,  was  ordered 
to  prepare  the  necessary  force  for  Malta. 