

1  The  original  arrangement  was  :  Margate  Roads,  1  or  2  of  the  line  ;  Queen's 
Channel,  2;  King's  Channel,  2;  Goldamore  Gate,  1;  Buoy  of  Rough,  "a 
frigate  to  communicate  "  {i.e.  by  semaphore  telegraph)  ;  Hoseley  Bay,  "  a  ship 
of  force."  Eventually  they  were  done  away  with,  and  their  crews  devoted  to 
a  number  of  hired  cruisers. — Admiralty  Sec.  In-letters,  537. 

2  Barham  to  Cornwallis,  August  15  :  CornwaUis  Pcfpcrs,  Hist.  MSS.  Com., 
Various  Collections,  vi.  p.  411. 


12  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1804 

the  mouth  of  the  Channel,  and  blockading  Brest  with 
extension  squadrons  before  Kochefort  and  Ferrol  where  a 
French  division  had  taken  refuge.^ 

In  this  way,  in  accordance  with  long  tradition,  the  fleet 
kept  a  firm  hold  upon  the  invading  army — the  funda- 
mental postulate  of  all  defence  against  oversea  invasion — 
and  nothing  could  shake  it.  Napoleon,  it  is  true,  believed 
— as  others  had  believed  before  him — that  it  might  be 
possible  to  break  that  hold  by  surprise :  by  the  sudden 
intrusion  of  a  battle  squadron  from  a  distance.  Cornwallis, 
he  assumed,  could  easily  be  evaded,  for  he  would  be  held 
fast  to  Brest  by  the  exigencies  of  the  blockade.  This  belief 
was  due  to  a  failure  to  understand  the  function  of  our 
Western  Squadron,  as  Norris  and  Anson  had  laid  it  down 
more  than  half  a  century  before.  Napoleon  regarded  it,  as 
many  do  to  this  day,  as  a  squadron  blockading  Brest, 
whereas  it  was  in  reality  a  squadron  holding  the  approaches 
to  the  Channel  for  all  purposes  of  home  and  trade  defence. 
The  blockade  of  Brest  Avas  incidental,  as  were  the  blockades 
of  Rochefort  and  Ferrol,  and  in  no  circumstances  of 
reasonable  Avar  risk  could  a  serious  hostile  squadron  enter 
or  even  approach  the  Channel  until  the  Western  Squadron 
had  been  brought  to  action  and  defeated.  The  mere  con- 
fronting of  that  squadron  Avith  superior  force  had  been 
found  useless  over  and  over  again.  The  naval  campaigns 
of  1779  and  1782,  in  particular,  had  proved  this  car- 
dinal fact  up  to  the  hilt,  and  French  naval  opinion  had 
grasped  it  almost  as  securely  as  it  was  held  by  our  oaa'u 
Admiralty. 

The  actual  light  in  which  the  situation  was  regarded 
by  the  British  Government  is  clearly  seen  in  the  instruc- 
tions Avhich  Lord  Melville,  Pitt's  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty, 
issued  to  Cornwallis,  when  in  August  1804  he  returned 
from  his  leave  to  the  command  of  the  Western  Squadron. 
At  the  end  of  July  he  had  come  ashore  for  a  rest  from  the 
strain  of  the  blockade,  leaving  his  second,  Sir  Charles  Cotton, 

'  Pitt  had  offered  this  command  to  Lord  St.  Vincent,  "which,"  he  says, 
♦'  I  spurned  at,  unless  Mr.  Pitt  unsaid  all  he  had  said  in  the  House  of  Com- 
mons against  me." — Cornwallis  Papers,  ibid.,  p.  418. 