


i8o4  THE   WESTERN   SQUADRON  13 

in  command.  It  was  only  for  two  or  three  weeks.  The  in- 
vasion crisis  appeared  to  be  at  hand,  and  so  fully  did  he 
possess  the  confidence  of  the  Admiralty  and  the  country 
that  neither  could  be  easy  in  his  absence.^  Throughout  his 
leave,  Melville  was  in  constant  communication  with  him,  and 
the  instructions  of  August  24th  were  the  outcome. 

After  reciting  that  the  intelligence  indicated  immediate 
action  by  the  Brest  Squadron,  the  instructions  pointed  out 
that  it  might  take  one  of  two  directions.  The  determining 
factor  would  be,  whether  or  not  the  squadron  sailed  with 
a  landing  force.  If  it  did  not,  it  would  mean  that  its 
object  was  to  cover  an  invasion  by  the  Grand  Army. 
"  This,"  the  instructions  say,  ''  seems  a  very  desperate  at- 
tempt, and  is  likely  to  terminate  in  the  destruction  of  their 
fleet,  if  they  should  be  able  by  any  unforeseen  events  to 
elude  your  vigilance,  and  thereby  to  make  their  way  up 
Channel."  So  disastrous  had  been  every  previous  attempt 
of  this  kind  that  the  Admiralty  did  not  think  a  repetition 
likely.^  "  But,"  they  continue,  "  if  the  existing  Government 
of  France  is  determined  to  risk  everything  in  this  long- 
menaced  attempt  against  this  country,  we  are  not  at  liberty 
to  calculate  solely  on  what  is  rational  or  probable,  but  we 
must  likewise  keep  in  view  such  contingencies  as  may  be 
barely  possible,  and  such  as  passion  and  intemperance  may 
give  rise  to."  Cornwallis  was  therefore  to  keep  up  the 
closest  possible  blockade  of  the  enemy,  and  to  take  measures 
so  that  if  by  luck  they  escaped,  he  could  follow  and  destroy 
them.  He  was  further  warned  that  if  their  real  intention 
was  to  enter  the  Channel  and  cover  the  passage  of  the 
Grand  Army,  they  would  use  any  means  in  their  power  to 
mislead  him.  Thus  accurately  did  the  Government  pene- 
trate the  inmost  thoughts  of  Napoleon,  for  it  was  precisely 
on  this  possibility  of  misleading  Cornwallis  that  his  scheme 
was  based. 

The  various  possibilities  of  the  case  were  met  in  the 

1  Melville  to  Cornwallis,  July  29,  1804 :  Blockade  of  Brest  (Navy  Record 
Soc),  ii.  38. 

-  The  leading  cases  were  the  Armada  in  1588,  and  the  French  attempt  to 
invade  from  Dunkirk  in  1744.  In  both  cases  the  intruding  fleet  was  only 
saved  from  destruction  by  the  weather  and  a  sauve  qui  pent. 


14  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  ,804 

following  manner.  If  the  whole  squadron  escaped  and  Corn- 
wallis  lost  touch,  he  was  to  proceed  off  the  Lizard  where  he 
would  be  certain  to  hear  if  it  had  passed  up  Channel.  If 
it  had  not  done  so,  he  was  to  take  station  off  Cape  Clear,  or 
such  other  point  on  the  Irish  coast  he  thought  advisable. 