

How  far  Napoleon  ever  realised  the  impracticability  of 
his  scheme  must  remain  doubtful.  Sometimes  he  said  he 
had  never  intended  it  seriously;  at  others,  that  he  only 
failed  by  bad  luck  and  the  incompetence  of  his  Admirals. 
All  that  we  can  assert  with  safety  is  that  no  great  master 
of  war  ever  so  fatally  miscalculated  the  possibilities  and 
limitations  of  invasion ;  and  no  great  administrator  ever 
failed  so  completely  in  organisation  as  Napoleon  did  with 
the  arrangements  for  passing  the  sea  with  his  Grand  Army. 
Nothing,  not   even  the  army  itself,  was  ever  ready.^     So 


^  The  final  return  of  the  state  of  the  Grand  Army  on  the  coasts,  and  its 
flotilla  (Aug.  1-15)  was  as  follows: — 


Ports. 

Flotilla. 

State  of  Army 

Units. 

Capacity. 

Keady. 

Etaples  .... 
Boulogne 
Wimereux 
Ambleteuse    . 

365 

1153 

237 

173 

Men. 
27,000 
73,000 
16,000 
15,000 

Horses. 

1390 

3380 

769 

673 

Men. 
20,000 
45,000 
13,000 
15,000 

Horses. 
1200 
1500 

131,000 

6212 

93,000 

1700 

-Desbri^re,  Projets  et  Tentntives  de  debnrquement  anx  lies  Britanniques,  v.  465. 


1 6  PITT'S  WAR   POLICY  ,804 

glaring,  indeed,  was  the  breakdown,  that  wherever  the 
Napoleonic  legend  is  still  unsullied,  the  only  admissible 
explanation  of  the  astounding  confusion  in  which  the 
arrangements  sank  ever  more  deeply  is  that  so  great  a 
captain  can  never  have  intended  the  operation  seriously. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  as  the  autumn  came  on,  and  Napo- 
leon began  to  feel  the  toils  that  Pitt  and  the  Czar  were 
weaving  round  him,  he  let  go,  and  was  absorbed  in  making 
himself  Emperor.  For  the  winter  at  least  the  whole  pro- 
ject was  abandoned.  Large  sections  of  the  flotilla  were 
dismantled,  the  ports  of  departure  were  neglected,  and  the 
Channel  sands  began  rapidly  to  devour  the  millions  they 
had  cost  to  make.  After  eighteen  months  of  undisturbed 
effort,  with  a  century  of  experience  behind  him,  he  had 
failed  to  solve  even  the  initial  problem  of  the  operation; 
and  to  save  his  face  before  his  disappointed  country  and 
demoralised  army  he  faced  about  against  Austria. 

Under  pressure  from  the  Czar,  her  attitude  to  France 
was  stiffening.  She  was  even  beginning  to  mass  troops 
and  form  magazines  at  the  head  of  the  Adriatic  and  in 
the  Tyrol,  with  intent  to  strike  directly  at  the  possessions 
Napoleon  had  seized  in  Northern  Italy ;  and  as  the  negotia- 
tions between  England  and  Russia  drew  to  a  head,  it  looked 
as  though  she  had  definitely  made  up  her  mind  to  join  the 
League.  In  Napoleon's  eyes,  at  least,  the  outlook  was  too 
dangerous  to  be  ignored.  He  was  not  prepared  to  face  a 
continental  coalition  in  British  pay.  To  keep  up  the 
threat  of  a  great  invasion,  Avhich  hitherto  had  served  his 
turn  so  well,  was  no  longer  possible,  yet  by  hook  or  by 
crook  England  must  be  kept  quiet.  The  means,  as  he 
thought,  were  ready  to  his  hand.  Spain,  as  always,  must 
be  the  tool  of  French  ambition.  Terrorised  into  openino- 
her  ports  to  French  ships,  she  had  for  long  worn  her  neu- 
trality to  shreds.  A  Httle  increase  of  pressure  would  be 
enough  to  make  her  throw  off  the  rags  and  appear  in  arms 
at  Napoleon's  side.  The  pressure  was  applied,  and  with 
the  normal  result.  Pitt  snatched  up  the  time-honoured 
weapon  Avhich  his  father  had  not  been  permitted  to  employ. 
A  blow  at  the  rich  treasure  trade  of  Spain  before  declara- 