

But  with  the  prospect  of  the  French  coming  out, 
Nelson  had  no  idea  of  availing  himself  of  the  permission. 
He  remained  on,  unaware  of  the  change  in  Orde's  attitude 
towards  him,  and  he  would  have  been  more  than  human  if, 
situated  as  he  was,  he  had  not  resented  the  pecuniary  loss 
the  new  command  involved.  His  letters  indeed  at  this  time 
are  full  of  protests,  somewhat  suspicious  in  their  emphasis 
and  recurrence,  that  prize-money  had  nothing  to  do  with 
his  disapproval  of  the  redistribution.  Be  that  as  it  may, 
the  fact  that  is  of  importance  is  clear — from  first  to  last 
Nelson  regarded  Orde,  with  whom  it  was  of  the  utmost 
importance  that  he  should  co-operate  frankly,  with  a  rooted 
suspicion  that  tended  seriously  to  imperil  the  interests  of 
the  country. 

In  eager  expectation  of  an  action  to  calm  his  troubled 
spirit,  Nelson  remained  before  Toulon  till  January  10th, 
and  then,  leaving  a  couple  of  cruisers  behind,  he  held  away 
for  his  advanced  base  at  Maddalena,  in  the  north  of  Sardinia, 
just  as  Missiessy  was  coming  out  of  Rochefort.  "  With 
respect  to  the  French  fleet,"  he  wrote  to  Hugh  Elliot,  our 
representative  at  Naples,  "  I  wish  to  God  they  were  out." 
His  prayer  was  quickly  answered.  On  the  14th  Villeneuve 
found  the  coast  was  clear.  Two  days  later  he  tried  to 
drive  off  Nelson's  cruisers,  and  on  the  17th,  as  Napoleon  was 
informing  his  Council  he  had  never  intended  to  invade  Eng- 
land, he  put  to  sea  with  eleven  of  the  line  and  nine  cruisers. 
For  two  days  the  British  frigates  shadowed  him,  and  then  in 
the  latitude  of  Ajaccio  both  went  off  to  Maddalena  to  inform 
Nelson  they  had  left  the  enemy  standing  south -south-west. 


3  2  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE  Jan. 

Why  both  of  them  left  together  contrary  to  the  usual 
practice  is  nowhere  explained,  but  it  appears  to  have  been 
duo  to  the  strength  and  activity  of  Villeneuvc's  frigates. 
To  Nelson  it  made  no  difference.  In  his  opinion  there  was 
but  one  thing  to  do.  With  his  unsurpassed  sensitiveness 
to  the  kernel  of  a  situation  and  his  enduring  grasp  of  his 
place  in  a  war-plan,  ho  permitted  no  possibility  of  a 
diversion  to  influence  his  movements.  He  was  there  to 
command  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  permanence  of  that 
command  hung  on  the  integrity  of  Sicily.  We  have  seen 
how  large  a  place  it  was  then  filling  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Cabinet  at  home,  how  they  were  straining  the  resources 
of  home  defence  to  provide  a  force  to  secure  it.  So  far  as 
England's  capacity  for  actively  assisting  the  coming  coali- 
tion was  concerned,  it  was  the  thrust-block  of  the  ensfino 
Pitt  was  constructing  so  laboriously.  And  for  Nelson,  too,  it 
was  no  less.  In  common  with  all  Europe  he  believed  that 
the  entire  conquest  of  Italy  w^as  Napoleon's  immediate  aim. 
He  could  not  dream  any  m^ore  than  Cornwallis  or  Graves 
how  confused  Avas  the  game  the  redoubtable  enemy  had 
begun  to  pla}^  as  he  felt  his  grip  of  the  situation  slipping. 
Had  Nelson  been  less  certain  than  he  w^as  of  the  point 
where  Napoleon's  most  telling  stroke  could  be  delivered,  wo 
may  still  doubt  if  he  would  have  done  otherwise  than  he 
did.  For  all  his  passion  for  action,  for  all  his  firm  belief 
in  the  destruction  of  the  enemy's  fleet  as  the  solvent  of  all 
difficulties,  never  once  did  he  seek  such  a  decision  at  the 
risk  of  laying  open  a  vital  point.  Never  once  did  he 
expose  what  it  was  his  essential  function  to  defend  for  an 
uncertain  chance  of  contact  with  the  enemy's  fleet.  And  so 
he  acted  now. 