

By  the  first  article  Russia  undertook  to  do  her  utmost 
to  form  a  league  of  the  continental  Powers,  and  in  concert 
with  them  to  provide  a  force  up  to  half  a  million  men. 
The  second  declared  the  objects  to  be :  to  force  the  French 
to  evacuate  Hanover  and  North  Germany;  to  establish  the 
independence  of  Holland  and  Switzerland ;  to  re-establish 
the  King  of  Sardinia  in  Piedmont,  and  to  secure  the  integ- 
rity of  the  Kingdom  of  Naples  and  the  evacuation  of  the 
whole  of  Italy,  including  the  island  of  Elba.  By  the  third 
article  England  undertook  to  further  the  common  cause 
with  her  forces  by  land  and  sea,  and  to  provide  transports 
for  moving  the  allied  troops  as  the  plan  of  operations  should 
require,  and  also  to  provide  subsidies  at  the  rate  of  a  million 
and  a  quarter  for  every  hundred  thousand  regular  troops 
the  allies  put  into  the  field. 

Here,  then,  Avas  the  great  new  factor  of  the  changed  war 
policy  which  influenced  it  from  the  outset.  The  British 
fleet  was  no  longer  to  be  used  merely  for  maritime  operations. 
England  bound  herself  to  use  it  in  furthering  a  vast  con- 
tinental war.  Should  Austria  alone  join  the  league  the 
main  active  theatre  for  our  fleet  and  army  must  be  on  the 
Italian  coasts  and  in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean,  where 
Nelson  had  long  been  clamouring  for  military  action.  If 
Prussia  joined  we  should  be  forced  to  act  in  the  North  Sea 
and  the  Baltic,  where  we  already  had  secured  a  footing  at 
Rugen  and  Stralsund. 

The  second  new  factor  was  that  henceforth  the  war  was 
to  be  what  strategists  call  "  an  offensive  return."  It  was 
the  realisation  of  the  spirit  which  Pitt  had  inherited  from, 
his  father,  and  of  the  advice  with  which  Dumouriez  had 
concluded  the  famous  project  of  defence,  presented  to  the 
British  Government  about  the  time  Pitt  had  come  to  power. 
'■'  It  is  time,"  he  said,  "  to  cut  the  thread  v/hich  holds  the 
sword  of  Buonaparte  suspended  over  England.  .  .  .  Nought 
is  more  perilous  than  perpetual  defensive,  nor  offers  a  vaster 


26  PITT'S   WAR    POLICY  1S05 

field  for  attacks  of  all  kind,  whether  near  or  remote,  on  the 
part  of  a  foe.  .  .  .  Whither,  I  ask  you,  would  this  everlast- 
ing defensive  warfare  tend  ?  ...  How  could  the  Powers  of 
Europe  ever  take  heart  anew  if  this  system,  so  nearly  akin 
to  fear,  were  fated  to  endure  much  longer.,  .  .  .  Doubtless 
it  behoved  to  attain  to  the  olfensive  methods  through  the 
defensive  first ;  but  if,  from  this  year  on,  attack  does  not 
supersede  resistance,  then  you  will  see  the  chances  augment 
very  speedily  in  favour  of  Buonaparte."  ^ 

To  approach  the  Trafalgar  campaign  without  these  two 
factors  clearly  in  view  is  to  misconceive  it  from  end  to  end. 
To  judge  it  as  a  defensive  campaign,  to  regard  Trafalgar  as 
having  been  fought  purely  for  the  security  of  these  British 
Islands  is  to  misjudge  the  men  who  designed  it,  and,  above 
all,  the  men  who  fought  it  with  such  sure  and  lucid  com- 
prehension. For  them,  from  first  to  last,  the  great  idea  was 
not  how  to  avoid  defeat,  but  how  to  inflict  it.  England  had 
found  herself  again.  The  spirit  of  Marlborough  and  Chatham 
was  stirring  ;  she  was  striving  to  strike,  and  no  longer  waiting 
for  the  blow — to  strike  for  Europe  and  not  only  for  herself. 
To  think  of  her  as  only  bent  on  her  own  security  is  to  lose 
the  whole  grandeur  of  the  theme ;  to  misinterpret  the  bold 
confidence  with  which  her  seamen  took  risks,  apparently 
reckless.  The  lack  of  clear  grasp  as  to  how  the  great 
campaign  was  conceived  has  led  lesser  men  in  a  later  age 
to  brand  those  strokes  of  genius  as  blunders  of  ignorant 
men.  It  is  time  such  things  should  cease.  Let  us  rather, 
in  tracing  the  broad  sweep  and  subtle  interlocking  of  their 
moves,  humbly  sit  at  the  feet  of  the  giants  who  dared  to 
make  them.  So  may  w^e  learn  what  men,  inspired  by  a 
living  naval  tradition  and  ripened  with  the  maturity  of 
long  war  experience,  could  achieve  by  right  understanding, 
by  instructed  fearlessness  of  risk,  and  by  intelligent  sub- 
mission to  the  central  idea  on  which  the  great  war-plan 
was  designed. 