

Here  we  have  a  clear  exposition  from  Pitt's  own  lips  of 
the  lines  upon  Avhich  he  hoped  to  fight  the  Trafalgar  cam- 
paign and  the  objects  it  w^as  to  achieve.     The  war  hence- 

^  De  Martens,  Rccucil  dcs  Traites,  vol.  ii.  pp.  110-111.     For  the  whole 
negotiation,  see  ibid.,  pp.  75  et  seq. 


i8o5  HE    INSISTS   ON   MALTA  23 

forth  was  to  be  for  the  freedom  of  the  Mediterranean  and 
the  riparian  PoAvers,  and  it  was  to  be  no  longer  a  mere 
maritime  Avar,  but  a  war  by  land  as  well.  WoronzoAv  was 
as  firmly  persuaded  as  Pitt  that  Malta  Avas  a  necessity  to 
the  British  Empire  ;  and  Lord  Mulgrave,  who  had  succeeded 
Lord  Harrowby  as  Secretary  of  State,  could  press  the  point 
Avith  a  clear  conscience  in  the  interest  of  Europe.  The  Czar 
would  have  had  the  Knights  of  Malta  restored,  but  Mulgrave 
pointed  out  that  the  sole  reason  Avhy  Charles  the  Fifth  had 
established  them  in  the  island  Avas  to  protect  Christendom 
against  its  common  enemy.  This  they  had  no  longer  the 
poAver  to  do.  Great  Britain,  as  the  leading  naval  poAver 
Avith  no  territorial  ambitions  on  the  Mediterranean  shores, 
Avas  their  legitimate  successor ;  for  it  was  only  as  a  British 
port  and  arsenal  that  Malta  could  hope  to  check  in  that 
quarter  the  progress  of  the  present  common  enemy  of  Europe. 
"  His  Majesty,"  Mulgrave  concluded,  "  in  reserving  to  him- 
self the  possession  of  Malta,  consults  the  interests  of  Europe 
in  common  AAdth  his  oAvn  by  the  retention  of  this  only 
exception  to  the  national  sacrifices  which  accompany  his 
Majesty's  great  and  almost  unlimited  exertions  in  the 
common  cause."  Considering  not  only  Avhat  the  other 
PoAvers  Avere  expecting  for  their  reward,  but  hoAv  long 
England  had  been  bearing  the  burden  alone,  and  that  she 
was  agreeing  to  subsidise  half  Europe,  the  price  she  asked 
can  scarcely  be  called  excessive.^ 

Such,  broadly  speaking,  Avas  the  strained  diplomatic 
situation  A\^hen  Napoleon  and  Pitt  each  developed  the  open- 
ing moves  of  their  respective  plans  of  campaign.  The  day 
the  treaty  Avas  signed  Villeneuve  Avas  leaving  the  Mediter- 
ranean, and  a  Aveek  later  Craig  sailed  to  all  appearance 
straight  into  his  arms. 

For  months  longer  the  uncertainty  continued,  and  some 
understanding  of  the  complexities  which  the  delay  in  the 
ratification  entailed  is  necessary  for  any  profitable  study  of 
the  campaign.  There  seems  to  have  been  a  real  misunder- 
standing.    The  Czar  had  set  his  heart  both  on  our  evacua- 

1  For  the  whole  of  Mulgrave's  despatch,  which  defines  exactly  the  British 
attitude  as  it  affected  Pitt's  war-plan,  see  post,  Ajipcndix  A,  p.  425. 


2  4  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1805 