

^  Kosc,  DuMOuricz  and  the  Defence  of  Eiicjland,  p.  2G0. 


CHAPTER  II 

NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE 

The  first  move  of  the  campaign  was  made  by  Missiessy  from 
Rocliefort.  In  response  to  the  urgent  orders  to  get  to  sea 
which  Napoleon  sent  down  the  day  his  overtures  for  peace 
started  for  London,  he  embarked  his  troops  to  the  number  of 
3  5  0  0  at  the  Isle  of  Aix.  Here  it  was  the  Rochefort  squadrons, 
owing  to  the  shoals  in  the  river,  had  always  to  complete  for 
sea.  To  blockade  the  Atlantic  ports  securely  during  the 
winter  Avas  not  regarded  by  the  British  Admiralty  as  a 
possible  operation  of  war,  but  Missiessy  was  being  watched 
by  a  detachment  of  the  Western  Squadron  under  Sir  Thomas 
Graves,  an  officer  who  had  distinguished  himself  as  Nelson's 
second  at  Copenhagen.  As  his  duties  also  embraced  the 
blockade  of  Bordeaux  to  prevent  stores  passing  northward 
to  the  invasion  ports,  he  had  to  cover  the  ground  from  the 
Isle  d'Yeu  to  the  mouth  of  the  Gironde,  not  far  short  of  a 
hundred  miles.  To  supply  his  squadron  at  sea  was  more- 
over impossible,  and  it  so  happened  that  just  as  Missiessy  had 
his  orders  to  sail  Graves  found  it  necessary  to  take  his 
battle  squadron  into  Quiberon  Bay  to  Avater,  Quiberon  being 
the  road  we  had  always  used  as  an  advanced  base  for  the 
Rochefort  division  ever  since  Haw^ke's  great  victory  in  1759. 
Captain  Patrick  Campbell  in  the  Doris  frigate  was  left  to 
keep  observation.  On  January  8th  he  ran  inside  for  a  closer 
view,  and  found  Missiessy  busy  embarking  his  troops  and 
stores.  Hurrying  out  again  he  met  the  Feluc  schooner  fresh 
from  Graves,  who  informed  him  of  the  Admiral's  where- 
abouts, and  Campbell  sped  northwards  to  report  his  news, 
leaving  the  Felix  in  his  place. 

On  the  11th  all  was  ready  at  Aix,  the  wind  was  easterly 
with  thick  weather  and  snow,  and  Missiessy  decided  to  weigh 


2  8  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE         jan. 

in  the  early  afternoon  so  as  to  run  through  the  blockading  line 
in  the  night.  Luck  and  good  judgment  gave  him  a  com- 
plete success.  He  believed  indeed  that  he  had  run  entirely 
clear,  but  he  counted  without  the  Felix  who  was  too  vigilant. 
Next  morning  she  sighted  the  French  squadron,  counting 
one  three-decker,  four  seventy-fours,  and  five  cruisers.  All 
day  she  shadowed  them,  and  under  cover  of  night  left  them 
streaming  northward  on  a  rising  south-westerly  wind  about 
fifty  miles  south-west  of  Isle  d'Yeu,  and  ran  for  Quiberon. 

jMcanwhile  the  Doris,  on  her  way  to  join  Graves,  had  also 
sighted  the  French  squadron,  and  under  a  press  of  sail, 
Avhich  led  to  severe  casualties  in  her  rigging,  she  had 
reached  Quiberon,  but  only  to  find  Graves  had  sailed. 
Hearing  he  was  somewhere  south-west  of  Belleisle,  she  tried 
to  beat  out  again,  and  in  doing  so  ran  on  a  sunken  rock. 
All  night  she  toiled  at  the  pumps,  and  at  last  succeeded  in 
mastering  her  leaks.  Then  came  the  Fdiv  to  report  the 
enemy's  position,  and  Campbell  grew  desperate.  A  south- 
westerly gale  was  blowing  up,  and  he  knew  Graves,  accord- 
ing to  the  regular  practice,  would  bear  up  into  the  bay 
for  refuge,  and  then  he  would  be  unable  to  move.  At 
all  hazards  he  must  be  stopped  before  it  was  too  late. 
Scarcely  able  to  keep  his  ship  afloat,  and  with  his  rigging 
badly  damaged,  Campbell  struggled  to  beat  out  against  the 
rising  gale.  It  proved  beyond  his  power ;  he  had  to  bear 
up  and  anchor,  and  two  days  later  the  Doo^is  foundered, 
all  hands  being  saved  by  the  Felix.  On  the  16  th  Graves 
appeared.  The  Felix  signalled  the  enemy  was  out,  and  the 
Admiral  immediately  hauled  his  wind,  and  made  a  great 
eftbrt  to  turn  back.  But  he  had  run  too  far.  In  the  teeth 
of  the  raging  gale  he  could  not  weather  Belleisle,  and  there 
was  nothing  for  it  but  to  bear  up  and  anchor.^ 