


iSos  THE    MALTA   QUESTION  21 

ating  in  that  direction  in  concert  with  Russia.  The  Anglo - 
Russian  negotiations,  moreover,  had  made  so  much  progress 
that  the  main  terms  of  the  alliance  were  agreed  between 
Pitt  and  Woronzow  in  London ;  and,  simultaneously  with 
the  harsh  rebuff  to  Napoleon's  overtures,  a  formal  jprojet 
cValliance  was  forwarded  to  Leveson-Gower  in  St.  Petersburg.^ 

The  progress  of  the  negotiations,  however,  was  not  un- 
chequered.  Craig's  expedition  continued  to  be  for  Russia 
the  test  of  England's  inclination  and  ability  to  carry  out  her 
part  of  the  proposed  bargain,  the  pledge  that  she  was  not 
playing  the  merely  selfish  part  of  turning  Napoleon's  efforts 
away  from  her  own  frontiers.  A  renewal  of  the  British 
suggestion  that  troops  from  Malta  should  occupy  Messina 
while  the  Russians  operated  in  South  Italy,  had  been  received 
with  grave  suspicion  ;  but  on  England's  promising  frankly  to 
let  her  troops  act  under  a  Russian  General  in  any  part  of 
Southern  Italy  the  clouds  were  cleared.  There  still  remained, 
however,  the  question  of  our  retention  of  Malta  when  the 
final  re-settlement  should  come.  It  was  a  point  upon 
which,  unfortunately,  it  was  impossible  for  England  to  give 
way.  It  was  for  Malta  she  had  gone  to  war.  With  the 
Far  East  looming  larger  and  larger  in  her  idea  of  empire 
and  the  discovery  of  Napoleon's  designs  on  the  Ottoman 
dominions,  Malta  had  become  the  keystone  of  her  policy  as 
rigidly  as  Gibraltar  had  been  to  William  the  Third. 

On  this  point  the  whole  affair  came  near  to  wreck.  In 
the  British  2'^'^oj^i  ^'^^  draft  treaty  nothing  had  been  said 
about  Malta  at  all.  But  in  St.  Petersburg,  where  simul- 
taneous negotiations  were  going  on,  the  Czar  by  withholding 
his  ratification  endeavoured  to  force  Leveson-Gower  to  admit 
a  separate  article  on  the  point.  The  Czar's  idea  was  to  use 
the  whole  treaty  as  a  means  of  forcing  Napoleon  by  way  of 
armed  mediation  to  submit  to  the  arrangement  of  Europe 
at  which  the  treaty  was  aimed.  Obviously  if  the  British 
Government  insisted  on  the  retention  of  Malta  the  proposed 
mediation  must  fail.  He  therefore  demanded  that  Ensf- 
land  should  agree  to  evacuate  the  island  if  Napoleon  insisted 
on  it  as  a  condition  of  a  general  peace.     Leveson-Gower, 

^  Eose,  Third  Coalition^  p.  90. 


2  2  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1805 

who  had  strict  instnictions  on  the  point,  firmly  refused  to 
admit  the  addition.  The  Czar  could  not  beheve  that  Pitt, 
his  new  idol,  could  share  the  obstinacy  of  his  envoy.  He 
therefore  referred  the  treaty  back  to  London,  with  a  positive 
declaration  that  unless  the  proposed  terms  were  inserted 
he  would  decline  to  ratify.  Pitt  -vvas  aghast.  There  were 
other  modifications  on  which  he  was  prepared  to  give  way, 
but  on  the  question  of  Malta  he  would  not  budge.  In  his 
eyes  it  was  the  keystone  of  the  whole  fabric.  Relations, 
therefore,  became  strained  to  breaking-point.  To  all  the 
entreaties  and  protests  of  Woronzow,  Pitt  replied  that  France 
was  always  one  of  the  greatest  military  powers  that  had 
ever  been ;  her  dominion  already  stretched  from  Cadiz  to 
Civita  Vecchia,  and  she  was  doing  her  utmost  to  make  the 
Mediterranean  a  French  sea.  Nor  was  that  all.  The 
French  meant  to  conquer  the  w^hole  Ottoman  Empire,  and 
hoped  to  thrust  the  English  out  of  India.  The  liberty  of 
the  Mediterranean  and  the  independence  of  the  Levant  and 
Egypt  demanded  our  retention  of  Malta.  In  a  word,  the 
security  of  Southern  Italy,  of  the  Ionian  Islands,  and  of  all 
the  possessions  of  the  Ottoman  Empire,  were  bound  up  in 
England's  being  firmly  set  in  the  stronghold  of  the  old 
Naval  Knights.  Woronzow  was  unmoved.  Persistence  in 
the  demand,  he  said,  would  break  the  alliance  which  had 
just  been  agreed  for  the  salvation  of  Europe.  "  It  will  not 
save  Europe,"  Pitt  broke  in.  "  The  Mediterranean,  the 
Levant,  and  Egypt,  will  be  in  the  power  of  France  the 
moment  a  British  squadron  ceases  to  have  for  a  base  a  good 
port  protected  by  formidable  fortifications.  .  .  .  So,"  he 
concluded,  "  whatever  pain  it  causes  us,  and  it  is  indeed 
great,  we  must  give  up  the  hope  of  seeing  the  alliance 
ratified,  since  its  express  condition  is  our  renunciation  of 
Malta.  We  will  continue  the  war  alone;  it  ^vill  be 
maritime."^ 