

All  this  time  Missiessy  was  struggling  out  of  the  Bay, 
suffering  all  kinds  of  disasters  aloft,  but  still  holding  on 
with  the  utmost  determination,  and  so  got  clear  away.  In 
the  British  fleet  no  one  knew  what  to  make  of  it.  Some  of 
his  early  disasters  had  been  witnessed  by  the  cruisers,  and 

1  Blockade  of  Brest  (N.R.S.),  ii.  158-16G.     Desbricre's  Projets  ct  Tcniatiies, 
iv.  306. 


1 


Jan.  escape    of    MISSIESSY  29 

the  general  opinion  was  that  the  furious  weather  must  have 
forced  him  back  into  Rochefort,  or  L'Orient,  or  even  Brest. 
Brest  indeed  Avas  believed  to  be  his  destination,  and  the 
northerly  course  he  had  been  forced  to  take  confirmed  the 
impression.  Cornwallis  was  not  there.  He  had  been  driven 
by  the  gale  to  run  for  Plymouth,  and  did  not  return  till  the 
end  of  the  month.  Even  so  it  was  a  full  week  before 
the  weather  permitted  the  three  ports  to  be  looked  into, 
and  then  Missiessy  was  nowhere  to  be  found.  That  the 
Rochefort  squadron  was  bound  for  the  West  Indies  entered 
no  man's  head.  Who  indeed  would  have  guessed  that 
Napoleon  was  throwing  away  the  game  for  which  he  had 
played  so  high,  by  involving  his  fleet  in  colonial  expeditions  ? 
No  one  out  of  intimate  touch  with  the  political  situation 
could  have  been  expected  to  divine  the  truth,  and  naturally 
enough  it  was  at  headquarters — the  centre  of  information — 
that  the  situation  was  first  penetrated. 

But  even  in  London,  Missiessy's  destination  was  a  matter 
of  inference.  The  information  hovered  between  the  West 
Indies  and  the  Mediterranean.  To  the  Cabinet  the  latter 
destination  must  have  seemed  the  most  probable,  because 
it  was  the  one  they  feared  the  most,  since  the  negotiations 
with  Russia  for  joint  operations  in  South  Italy  were  just 
taking  shape.  Their  first  precaution  accordingly,  on  hearing 
of  Missiessy's  disappearance,  was  to  provide  for  the  re- 
inforcement of  Nelson,  should  it  prove  that  the  enemy's 
squadron  had  entered  the  Straits.  It  was  done  in  the 
usual  way.  On  February  14th,  Cornwallis  was  ordered  to 
send  Sir  Robert  Calder,  his  third  flag  officer,  with  six  of 
the  line  from  the  Brest  blockade  to  relieve  Cochrane  off 
Ferrol  and  Cochrane  Avas  to  take  six — a  force  equal  to 
Missiessy's — and  pursue  him.  He  was  to  call  at  Lisbon 
for  information,  and  if  none  was  to  be  had  to  speak  Orde 
off  St.  Vincent,  who,  since  the  breach  with  Spain,  had  been 
watching  Cadiz  with  five  of  the  line.  If  Missiessy  had 
gone  to  the  Mediterranean  he  was  to  follow  him  and  join 
Nelson.  If  there  was  no  news  he  was  to  call  at  Madeira, 
Cape  Verde,  and  finally  Barbadoes.  There  he  was  to  take  up 
Commodore  Samuel  Hood,  who  commanded  on  the  Leeward 