

tion  of  Malta  and  the  reform  of  our  Maritime  War  Code,  and 
each  condition  he  personally  regarded  as  a  sine  qua  non  of 
the  alliance.  In  particular,  Pitt's  continued  insistence  on 
the  retention  of  Malta  only  confirmed  his  doubts  as  to 
England's  disinterestedness.  To  our  ambassador's  protesta- 
tions of  sincerity  he  kept  pointing  to  the  delay  in  the  sail- 
ing of  Craig's  expedition.  But  at  last  news  came  that  it 
was  actually  on  its  Avay  in  the  full  strength  that  had  been 
promised,  and  with  instructions  that  were  entirely  satis- 
factory. The  unratified  alliance  was  thus  partly  performed, 
and  the  Czar's  position  became  more  difficult  to  hold.  All 
he  could  now  ask  was  that  Craig  should  not  actually 
commence  any  operations  in  Italy  till  he  had  concerted 
measures  with  General  Lacy,  Avho  had  been  appointed  to 
the  supreme  command  at  Naples.^  This,  too,  was  agreed. 
Pitt  moreover  ratified  the  whole  treaty,  Avith  the  exception 
of  the  added  clause  about  Malta,  and  on  this  he  even  gave 
way  a  little.  He  was  ready,  if  the  peace  of  Europe  were 
found  to  depend  on  it,  to  evacuate  the  island  on  certain 
conditions,  one  of  which  was  that  Minorca  should  be  ceded 
to  England  in  its  stead.  But  this  concession  was  only  to 
stand  if  Napoleon  accepted  the  terms  of  the  allies  at  once 
and  peacefully.  As  the  result  of  successful  war,  England 
would  still  insist  on  the  retention  of  Malta.  The  Czar  was 
not  immediately  convinced.  Still  he  fought  for  his  own 
dream  and  the  reform  of  the  British  Maritime  Code,  and 
eventually  it  was  not  till  July — by  a  most  unhappy  delay — 
that  his  hesitation  ended  and  the  ratification  w^as  signed." 

In  proceeding  Avith  the  study  of  the  campaign  it  must, 
therefore,  be  kept  firmly  in  mind  that  at  its  outset  the 
dominant  factor  in  the  war  was  still  undetermined.  No 
design  or  act  of  statesmen  or  of  high  officers  must  be  judged 
apart  from  this  controlling  deflection.  Neither  Pitt  nor  the 
Admiralty  could  tell  whether  to  design  the  campaign  as  a 

^  He  was  an  officer  of  Irish  extraction.  He  signed  his  name  "  Lacy." 
(See  his  letter  of  July  8th,  enclosed  in  Elliot's  despatch  of  August  9th,  F.  0. 
Sicily,  25.)     Foreigners  spelt  it  "  Lasci "  or  "  Lascy." 

-  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  pp.  110,  143,  151.  Pitt's  views  on  the  military 
situation  as  it  stood  without  Prussia,  and  his  ideas  as  to  how  the  British  army 
should  be  used,  were  explained  in  detail  in  a  despatch  to  Leveson-Gower, 
drafted  in  July.     See  post,  Appendix  B,  p.  439,  where  it  is  set  out  in  full. 


iSo5  THE    RUSSIAN    ALLIANCE  25 

single-handed  effort  or  on  the  great  linos  of  co-operation 
with  one  or  more  of  the  jirst-class  military  Powers.  With 
this  caution  it  may  be  well  to  give  at  once  the  leading  terms 
of  the  treaty,  as  it  was  eventually  concluded. 