

It  is  always  difficult  to  say  with  confidence  what 
Napoleon  really  intended  by  the  tangle  of  schemes  he 
spun.  Knowing  himself  to  be  surrounded  by  traitors — 
even  at  his  Council  table — his  only  resource  was  to  manu- 
facture plans  for  their  benefit  Avhich  he  never  intended 
to  use.  In  this  case  there  can  be  little  doubt,  from  all 
the  circumstances,  that  Ganteaume's  orders  were  intended 
for  British  spies  in  order  to  keep  alive  the  threat  upon 
the  points  where  we  were  most  sensitive ;  while  those  of 
Villeneuve  and  Missiessy  with  the  Toulon  and  Rochefort 
squadrons  were  genuine.  The  idea  is  obvious.  While  a 
bare  threat  on  Ireland  or  Scotland  was  sufficient  for  his 
purpose,  nothing  short  of  a  real  attack  on  the  distant  West 
Indies  would  avail  to  deflect  British  strategy.  The  whole 
was  clearly  a  plan  to  take  the  place  of  his  abortive  invasion. 
It  was  designed  to  embarrass  the  British  Cabinet  and  prevent 
them  using  their  fleet  and  army  together  against  him 
in  Europe  while  he  was  cutting  Austria  out  of  the  half- 
formed  coalition. 

What  he  saw  beyond  the  point  at  which  in  the  spring 
he  would  have  the  three  squadrons  concentrated  in  a  home 
port  we  cannot  tell.  Probably  he  saw  nothing  clearly. 
He  was  too  great  a  captain  not  to  know  that  it  was  im- 
possible to  plan  beyond  the  shock  with  Austria.  The 
rest  must  depend  upon  the  issue.  In  all  probability  his 
sole  idea  was  to  have  his  Avhole  war  strength  under  his 
hand  for  what  was  to  come  after.  It  may  be  also  that  he 
was  beginning  at  last  to  learn  the  truth,  Avhich  all  his 
predecessors  had  reached  by  painful  experience,  that  there 
was  no  way  of  striking  England  down  except  by  a  fair  and 
successful  fight  for  the  command  of  the  sea ;  and  for  this, 
with  Spain  ready  in  the  spring,  he  could  indulge  at  least 
a  hope. 


i8o5  NAPOLEON   SUGGESTS   PEACE  19 

His  faith  in  the  steps  he  had  taken  for  intimidating 
England  is  evidenced  by  his  next  move.  At  the  end  of  the 
year  urgent  orders  went  down  to  Villeneuve  and  Missiessy 
to  get  away  at  once,  and  no  sooner  were  the  couriers  gone 
than  he  made  overtures  to  George  the  Third  for  peace,  and 
sent  to  Vienna  a  rough  demand  for  an  explanation  of  the 
Austrian  military  movements.  While  he  waited  for  the 
answers  he  explained  his  whole  attitude  formally  to  his  new 
Council  of  State.  By  the  universal  testimony  of  his  rela- 
tions, his  most  intimate  friends,  and  his  most  capable  and 
best-informed  enemies,  he  at  this  time  believed  he  had 
escaped  gracefully  from  having  to  attempt  the  invasion 
of  England.  No  one  who  aspired  to  rule  France  could 
aftbrd  to  ignore  the  old  war-cry  of  the  Republic — l)e- 
lenda  est  Carthago !  Austria  it  seemed  was  about  to  give 
him  a  pretext  for  escape  without  loss  of  prestige,  but 
he  had  to  justify  to  his  Council  the  terrible  cost  which 
his  pose  had  involved.  "  For  two  years,"  he  said,  "  France 
has  been  making  the  greatest  sacrifices  that  it  is  possible 
to  ask  of  her.  .  .  .  But  to  be  able  to  assemble  such 
forces,  to  have  20,000  artillery  horses  and  full  equipment 
it  was  necessary  to  find  a  pretext  for  creating  and  con- 
centrating them  without  giving  the  continental  Powers 
cause  of  alarm :  and  this  pretext  was  furnished  by  the 
project  of  a  descent  on  England.  .  .  .  For  two  years  I 
have  not  been  able  to  tell  you  this,  but  that  nevertheless 
was  my  sole  aim.  You  know  it  now  and  you  see  the 
explanation  of  many  things.  But  we  shall  not  have  war, 
and  I  have  just  opened  direct  negotiations  with  the  King  of 
England  for  a  treaty  of  peace."  ^ 