

He  had  scarcely  made  this  remarkable  declaration  when 
the  British  answer  came.  His  new  title  of  Emperor  was 
still  unfledged,  and  all  his  vanity  was  concentrated  in 
getting  it  recognised.  The  British  answer  was  addressed 
to  "  The  Head  of  the  French  Government "  ;  it  was  signed 
not  by  the  King  but  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  it  con- 

1  The  authority  for  this  is  the  Mcmoires  de  Miot  de  Melito,  ii.  244,  which 
the  French  Staff  accept  as  trustworthy.  See  for  this  and  an  admirable 
summary  of  the  whole  situation,  Desbri^re,  Projets  tt  Tentatives  de  debar- 
qicement,  iv.  336  et  seq. 


20  PITT'S   WAR   POLICY  1805 

taincd  a  curt  refusal  to  treat  apart  from  the  other  Powers 
and  especially  Russia.  It  was  an  answer  that  could  only 
arouse  all  that  was  ugly  in  Napoleon's  character;  and 
to  make  matters  worse,  it  was  followed  immediately 
by  a  peaceful  note  from  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  which 
snatched  from  his  hands  every  pretext  for  attack.  In  the 
moment  of  his  anger  he  found  himself  rudely  thrust  back 
upon  his  desperate  enterprise — with  his  fleet  dispersed  and 
irrevocably  engaged  beyond  the  Atlantic,  with  his  army 
sullen  and  demoralised,  his  Channel  ports  choked  with  sand, 
and  his  flotilla  demobilised.  His  prestige  and  honour  were 
more  than  ever  bound  up  in  the  invasion,  and  the  means  at 
his  disposal  lay  in  more  bewildering  confusion.  This  and 
not  escape  was  all  his  confident  truculence  had  earned 
him,  and  there  was  nothing  left  but  to  pretend  at  least  he 
meant  to  go  on  with  it,  Avith  half  the  costly  work  to  do 
over  again. 

Pitt's  rough  and  even  insolent  reply,  which  is  almost 
universally  condemned,  Avas  exactly  on  a  level  Avith  the  Avay 
his  father  had  dealt  Avith  Choiseul,  and  aa'ouM  have  dealt 
AA^th  Spain.  In  both  cases  transparent  chicanery  Avas  met 
Avith  an  almost  brutal  bluntness.  Knowing  Avhat  avc  do 
and  Avhat  Pitt  knew.  Englishmen  Avill  easily  pardon  it. 
They  Avill  see  in  it  the  reflection  of  the  rising  spirit  of  the 
nation,  the  confidence  in  its  increasing  poAver,  the  high 
belief  in  its  mission  to  awaken  Europe,  and  the  conviction, 
henceforth  unshaken  till  the  end,  that  there  Avas  no  Avay 
of  restoring  tranquillity  and  freedom  to  the  Continent  till 
Napoleon  Avas  crushed  by  force  of  arms. 

The  situation  Avas  ripe  for  a  determined  stand,  and 
negotiations  for  the  league  had  proceeded  so  far  that  in 
loyalty  Ave  could  no  longer  act  alone.  On  November  6  th  a 
defensive  alliance  had  been  concluded  betAveen  Russia  and 
Austria  in  case  of  any  further  French  advances  in  Germany, 
Italy,  or  the  East,  and  both  poAvers  Avere  arming  to  give  it 
effect.  Prussia  Avas  still  holding  back  in  hope  of  securing 
Hanover  as  the  price  of  deserting  the  cause  of  Europe ;  but 
Sweden  had  consented  to  place  England  in  possession  of 
Riigen  and  Stralsund,  so  as  to  give  her  a  sea  base  for  oper- 