


30  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE         jan. 

Islands  station.  If  still  there  was  no  news,  he  was  to  send 
three  of  the  line  to  reinforce  Dacres  at  Jamaica,  but  if  he 
heard  the  enemy  had  gone  to  their  northern  base  at  St. 
Domingo  he  was  to  send  six  to  Jamaica.  In  pursuance  of 
these  orders,  Cochrane  sailed  from  Ferrol  on  Calder's  arrival 
at  the  end  of  January  after  Missiessy  had  been  already  a 
week  at  Fort  de  France  in  Martinique.^ 

In  the  Mediterranean  Napoleon's  sudden  change  of  pur- 
pose caused  the  campaign  to  open  in  equal  bewilderment. 
When  Villeneuve  received  the  urgent  orders  of  January  2nd 
Nelson  was  cruising  close  before  Toulon.  He  had  appeared 
there  on  December  2Gth  for  a  reconnaissance,  having  received 
information  that  Villeneuve  was  "  embarking  troops  and  pre- 
paring for  some  immediate  expedition."  ^  He  was  in  one 
of  the  worst  of  his  shifting  moods.  The  Swifisitrc  had  just 
joined  with  despatches  that  told  how  the  most  lucrative 
part  of  his  command  had  been  taken  from  him.'^  By 
tradition  the  Mediterranean  station  extended  outside  the 
Straits'  mouth  as  far  as  Cape  St.  Vincent,  covering  the 
route  of  the  rich  Spanish-American  trade.  But  so  soon  as 
Pitt  had  made  up  his  mind  to  strike  at  Spain  he  determined 
to  change  the  usual  distribution  of  the  fleet.  The  Medi- 
terranean was  so  far  from  the  centre  of  intelligence  and 
especially  when  its  commander  had  to  fix  his  attention 
upon  its  eastern  half,  that  the  old  arrangement  could  not 
work  smartly  in  the  new  conditions.  Pitt  therefore  sanc- 
tioned the  formation  of  a  new  squadron  to  be  called  the 
"  Spanish  Squadron,"  under  the  direct  control  of  the 
Admiralty.  Its  station  w^as  to  extend  from  the  Straits' 
mouth  up  to  Finisterre,  where  it  joined  hands  with  the 
Ferrol  extension  of  the  Western  Squadron.  The  man  the 
Admiralty  chose  for  this  rich  command  was,  as  we  have 
seen,  Sir  John  Orde,  Nelson's  hete  noir.  He  seems  to  have 
been  possessed  with  the  idea  that  Orde  had  never  forgiven 
him  for  the  Battle  of  the  Nile.  Orde,  being  his  senior,  had 
expected  to  command  the  famous  detachment  himself.     In 

*  Admiralty  Secretary,  Out-Iettcrs  (Secret  Ordei'n),  13(53. 

2  Nelson  to  Marsden,  Dec.   2G,  1804:   Nicolas,  Nelaons  Letters  and  Des- 
patches, vol.  vi. 

3  Nelson  to  Orde,  Dec.  29. 


J 


Jan.  nelson  and  VILLENEUVE  31 

his  disappointment  he  had  behaved  at  the  time  with  some 
insubordination,  and  Nelson  seems  to  have  believed  that 
Orde  owed  him  an  undying  grudge.  Whatever  may  have 
been  Orde's  feelings  under  the  smart,  so  far  as  we  can 
judge,  his  sense  of  injury  was  by  this  time  forgotten  in  a 
genuine  admiration  of  Nelson's  genius.  Possibly  it  was 
this  that  accounted  for  Lord  Melville's  making  an  appoint- 
ment apparently  so  tactless ;  but  more  probably  it  was 
because  permission  was  at  the  same  time  given  to  Nelson 
at  his  own  request  to  come  home  on  sick  leave. 