

In  France  it  was  the  same.  When,  at  the  end  of 
March,  Ganteaume  was  explaining  to  Napoleon  an  abortive 
attempt  he  had  just  made  to  break  out  of  Brest  and  how 
narrowly  he  had  escaped  being  attacked  at  anchor,  he  said  : 
"  The  enemy  had  three  of  the  line  less  than  us ;  but  he  had 
eight  of  the  first  rank,  while  we  had  only  three."  -^  It  was 
a  plea  that  could  not  fail  to  appeal  to  Napoleon,  for  the 
highest  relative  appraisement  of  three-deckers  that  is  known 
comes  from  his  pen.  Speaking  of  Calder's  action  he  says  : 
"  The  advantage  of  three  three-deckers  against  a  squadron 
that  has  none  is  equal  to  a  difference  of  eight  ships  of  the 
line,  all  enured  to  the  sea  and  perfectly  trained."  ^  So 
extreme  a  view  of  the  relative  superiority  of  three-deckers 
need  not  be  taken  too  literally,  for  Napoleon's  object  in  writ- 
ing the  letter  was  to  give  the  action  an  appearance  of  a 
victory  for  Villeneuve.     But  after  all  allowance  made  for 

^  Dcsbriore,  v.  473. 

2  To  Fouche,  August  9,  1805 :  Correspondance  de  Napoleon  /.,  xi.  72. 


i 


VALUE    OF   THREE-DECKERS  45 

exaggeration  it  confirms  the  high  value  that  in  both  services 
was  set  upon  three-deckers.  This  is  the  more  remarkable 
because  the  new  type  of  80 -gun  two-deckers,  both  in  the 
French  and  our  own  service,  could  deliver  a  broadside  as 
heavy  as  the  second-rate  98-gun  three-deckers,  and  only 
one-seventeenth  less  than  the  first-rates.^  But  over  and 
above  weight  of  metal,  three-deckers  were  regarded  as  having 
other  advantages.  "  When  it  comes  to  boarding,"  writes 
Bigot  de  Morogues,  "  they  dominate  vessels  of  lower  rate. 
The  small-arm  fire  of  large  ships  commands  that  of  small 
ones ;  all  the  shot  plunge  and  get  home  over  the  bul- 
warks." When  British  three-deckers  came  to  be  armed  with 
G8-pounder  carronades  on  the  quarter-deck  and  forecastle 
this  advantage  of  "  command  "  became  of  course  very  great. 
"  Finally,"  Morogues  proceeds,  "  the  crew  can  get  down  to 
board  a  small  ship  more  easily  than  they  can  climb  into  a 
big  one.  In  a  heavy  sea  big  vessels  can  use  their  lower 
battery  more  easily.  If  both  have  to  close  their  lower 
ports  the  advantage  of  three-deckers  will  be  still  greater  in 
respect  of  guns,  for  instead  of  three  batteries  against  two 
they  will  have  two  against  one.  .  .  .  Large  ships,  too,  have 
greater  solidity  and  better  resistance  to  attack."  These 
views  still  passed  current  in  the  British  navy,  or  at  least 
appeared  verbatim  in  all  the  English  text-books.'^ 

To  determine  the  actual  relative  value  of  the  two  types 
in  Admiralty  calculations  is  more  difficult.  Captain  Mahan 
has  called  attention  to  a  passage  in  one  of  Nelson's  letters 
as  elucidating  the  point.  "  Two  [two-deckers],"  he  wrote, 
"  alongside  an  enemy  are  better  than  three-deckers  a  great 