

It  was  while  Decres,  his  Minister  of  Marine,  was  working 
out  this  remarkable  vision  that  news  came  of  Villeneuve's 
failure.  It  was  also  the  moment  when  Napoleon  was 
fuming  over  Pitt's  rough  defiance.  The  submission  of 
Austria  had  not  yet  come.  What  was  he  to  do  ?  He  had 
sent  a  challenge  to  Vienna  and  had  failed  to  frighten  Pitt. 
As  the  situation  thus  darkened,  so  his  mind  becomes  almost 
impenetrable,  and  we  can  only  grope  in  it  by  the  light  of 
the  ill-considered  orders  he  gave. 

Missiessy  was  now  beyond  recall,  and  the  first  step 
taken  was  to  warn  him  that  he  would  be  unsupported 
except  for  a  few  more  cruisers,  and  that  the  combination 
with  Villeneuve  was  cancelled.  "  His  Majesty,"  Decres 
informed  him,  "  has  decided  that  the  squadron  under 
command  of  Vice-Admiral  Villeneuve  is  to  have  another 
destination.  .  .  .  Your  operations,  therefore,  become  inde- 
pendent, and  should  be  directed  by  you  in  accordance  with 
your  original  instructions  given  to  meet  the  case  of  your 
not  being  able  to  count  on  the  projected  junction  with 
Vice-Admiral  Villeneuve."  This  meant  he  was  to  throw 
reinforcements  and  supplies  into  St.  Domingo  and  come 
home.    Rochefort,  he  was  told,  would  probably  be  found  open. 

But  what  did  Napoleon  mean  by  the  new  destination 
for  Villeneuve  ?  Clearly  not  the  invasion  of  England. 
Not  a  single  step  had  yet  been  taken  to  reconstruct  the 
shattered  preparations.  Even  without  Austria  and  Russia 
threatening  him  on  his  eastern  frontier  and  in  Italy,  the 
invasion  had  passed  beyond  his  strength,  and  now  was  the 
crisis  of  the  Austrian  threat.  Villeneuve  was  told  to  collect 
his  scattered  squadron,  and  while  he  refitted,  Lauriston  was 
to  disembark  the  troops,  fill  up  his  battalions  to  their 
full  strength,  and  look  out  for  more  transports.     "  At  the 

^  Napoleon  to  Decres:    Desbriere,  iv.  325.     Correftpondance   de  Napoleon, 
X.  117. 


36  NAPOLEON'S   FIRST    MISCARRIAGE  Feb. 

end  of  the  month,"  Napoleon  told  him,  "  you  will  receive 
an  order  to  re -embark  for  elsewhere,  for  the  season  is 
past  for  your  former  destination." 

The  day  this  enigmatic  letter  was  written  the  orders 
for  an  Austrian  campaign  were  countermanded.  A  pacific 
answer  had  come  from  Vienna,  but  still — not  for  a  full 
month — is  there  any  sign  that  Napoleon  felt  himself  forced 
to  return  to  the  necessity  of  a  direct  attack  on  England. 
The  French  General  Staff,  after  a  profound  study  of  the 
situation,  suggest  that  he  was  still  bent  on  his  latest 
idea  of  attacking  India,  and  that  Villeneuve  was  to  com- 
bine with  Ganteaume.  By  this  time  he  must  have  had 
his  suspicions  of  the  joint  effort  of  Russia  and  England 
to  bar  his  progress  in  the  Eastern  Mediterranean.  What 
could  be  more  characteristic  of  his  methods  than  to  out- 
wit them  by  directing  his  attack  by  way  of  the  Cape  ?  It 
is  indeed  difficult  to  avoid  the  supposition  that  at  this 
time  he  had  come  to  regard  the  invasion  of  India  as  an 
easier  matter  than  the  invasion  of  England,  that  he  was 
realising  the  truth  of  the  paradox,  which  history  proves 
up  to  the  hilt,  that  in  default  of  naval  command  attack 
over  an  open  sea  is  far  lest  difficult  than  over  a  narrow 
sea.  The  simple  reason  is  that  over  an  open  sea  evasion 
of  the  enemy's  defensive  arrangements  is  comparatively 
easy,  as  had  been  proved  by  Heche's  attack  on  Ireland 
and  his  own  adventure  to  Egypt. 