


CHAPTER  III 

OPENING   OF  THE   CAMPAIGN 

Of  Napoleon  s  design  the  British  Government  had  no  suspi- 
cion. All  there  seems  to  have  been  to  disturb  their  home 
defence  and  their  effort  to  push  forward  into  the  Mediter- 
ranean was  the  possibility  of  another  colonial  raid  to  follow 
that  of  Missiessy.  To  meet  this  eventuality,  on  March  2nd 
an  order  was  sent  to  Cornw^allis,  who  was  then  in  Torbay,  to 
form  a  flying  squadron  of  five  of  the  line  and  complete  their 
stores  for  foreign  service.^  This  squadron  was  placed  under 
the  command  of  Collingwood  in  his  three-decker,  the 
Dreadnought;  but  Cornwallis  did  not  detach  it  from  his 
flag,  and  when  he  sailed  on  March  7th  to  resume  his  station 
he  had,  with  ships  joining  on  the  way,  a  fleet  of  twenty-one 
sail,  including  no  less  than  eight  three-deckers.  On  de- 
taching Collingwood  he  would  still  have  seven  three-deckers 
and  nine  others,  and  with  this  force  he  was  to  blockade 
Ganteaume,  who  had  been  definitely  ascertained  to  have 
three  large  three-deckers  and  eighteen  others.  In  other 
words,  Cornwallis  was  expected  to  hold  Ganteaume  with 
sixteen  of  the  line  against  twenty-one. 

In  modern  criticisms  of  the  campaign  it  is  always  taken 
for  granted  that  this  relation  between  the  two  forces  placed 
Cornwallis  in  clear  inferiority.  Whether  this  was  the  view 
of  our  Admiralty  or  of  Ganteaume  is,  however,  by  no  means 
certain.  The  difficulty  of  appraising  the  value  of  battle 
units  was  in  those  days  probably  as  great  as  it  is  now ;  but 
unless  one  can  reach  some  idea  of  the  standard  upon  which 
the  dispositions  of  force  were  made,  all  attempt  to  appre- 
ciate the  strategy  of  the  time  is  idls. 

^  Dreadnought    98,    Tonnant    80,    Mars,    Illustrious,    and    Minotaur   74: 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  203. 

43 


44  OPENING    OF   THE   CAMPAIGN 

One  point  comes  out  clearly  at  once.  From  many  indi- 
cations in  lists  and  despatches  we  can  be  sure  that  neither 
the  British  nor  the  French  naval  staffs  were  content  to 
count  numbers  only.  It  is  obvious  they  attached  some 
special  importance  to  three-deckers  over  and  above  two- 
deckers.  Estimates  of  comparative  force  always  distinguish 
these  vessels  from  the  rest,  and  in  the  naval  correspondence 
of  the  time  the  reason  is  made  quite  clear.  "  We  had  seven 
three-deckers,"  wrote  Nelson's  chaplain  just  after  Trafalgar, 
"  they  only  three ;  but  their  ships  in  general  very  large  and 
carrying  eighty  guns."  "  He  knew,"  says  one  of  Nelson's 
captains  in  the  great  chase  to  the  West  Indies,  "  that  the 
French  had  no  three-decked  ships  in  their  fleet,  and  he 
reckoned  on  the  great  superiority  in  close  action  of  three 
batteries  of  guns  over  two."  When  Hardy,  his  flag-captain, 
came  to  be  First  Sea  Lord  he  inaugurated  a  policy  of  large 
three-decked  ships ;  and  Briggs,  who  knew  him  well  at  the 
Admiralty,  assures  us  "  he  attached  as  much  importance 
to  three-deckers  and  90-gun  ships  as  Voltaire  did  to  big 
battalions  " — that  is,  he  regarded  Providence  as  always  on 
their  side. 