

Without  a  moment's  hesitation,  in  the  dead  of  night, 
and  a  north-westerly  gale,  he  led  his  fleet  through  the 
perilous  Biche  Passage  and  sped  down  the  eastern  side  of 
Sardinia  to  bar  Villencuve's  way  to  Naples  and  Sicily. 

The  reasoning  on  which  he  formed  his  decision  he 
explained  to  his  confidant,  Captain  Sir  Alexander  Ball, 
Governor  of  Malta.  Since  easterly  winds  had  prevailed 
for  a  fortniofht  before  Villeneuve  sailed,  it  was  to  be  assumed 


Jan.  nelson   and   VILLENEUVE  33 

he  did  not  intend  to  go  west.  As  he  had  steered  south- 
south-west  and  obviously  wished  to  avoid  an  action,  it  was 
scarcely  less  likely  that  he  meant  to  attack  either  Sardinia, 
Naples,  or  Sicily.  "  However,"  he  said,  "  I  did  not  choose  to 
run  that  risk."  He  had  first  to  assure  himself  the  enemy 
had  gone  to  none  of  these  places.^ 

Having  reached  the  south  end  of  Sardinia,  he  was  faced 
with  a  heavy  westerly  gale  that  held  him  there  till  the  26  th. 
There  his  cruisers  began  to  come  in,  but  with  no  news  of 
Villeneuve's  position.  They  could  only  tell  that  one  ship 
at  least  had  been  disabled  in  the  heavy  weather.  On  this 
Nelson  judged  much  as  Graves  had  done,  but  with  surer 
material.  So  wide  and  complete  had  been  the  sweep  of  his 
cruisers  that  their  failure  to  locate  Villeneuve,  combined 
with  the  evidence  of  the  disabled  ship,  assured  him  that  one 
of  two  things  had  happened — either  he  had  put  back  to 
Toulon  or  had  passed  on  to  attack  Greece  or  Egypt.  These 
two  places  were  second  only  to  Naples,  Sardinia,  and  Sicily 
in  the  defensive  function  that  had  been  assigned  to  him. 
Clinging,  therefore,  to  the  line  he  had  hitherto  followed,  and 
of  whose  correctness  he  had  no  doubt,  he  held  away  for  the 
Morea.  There  he  found  all  quiet.  Nothing  had  been 
heard  of  the  French  squadron,  but  there  was  news  that  the 
French  ambassador  had  just  been  recalled  from  Constanti- 
nople. Egypt,  then,  was  almost  certainly  Villeneuve's 
destination,  and  without  an  hour's  delay  Nelson  carried  on 
to  Alexandria. 

Meanwhile  Villeneuve  had  had  neither  the  luck  nor  the 
determination  of  Missiessy.  With  his  ships  encumbered 
with  troops,  he  found  it  beyond  the  power  of  his  raw  crews 
and  officers  to  face  the  gale.  All  was  soon  havoc  aloft,  the 
fleet  lost  cohesion,  and  Villeneuve,  overcome  with  the  op- 
pression of  an  unlocated  and  redoubtable  enemy,  felt  it  mad- 
ness to  proceed.  He  consulted  General  Lauriston,  a  highly 
trusted  staff  officer  of  Napoleon's,  who  was  in  command 
of  the  troops,  and  together  they  decided  to  turn  back. 
"  Finding  ourselves,"  he  wrote  to  Napoleon  to  explain  his 
conduct,  '^  observed  from  the  first  night  of  our  getting  out 