

^  In  1805  there  were  two  types  of  the  98-gun  second-rates.  The  newer  or 
18-pounder  type  were  over  2100  tons,  with  a  broadside  of  about  1050  lbs. 
There  were  only  three  in  commission — the  Dreadnought  and  the  Neptune 
and  Temeraire,  Nelson's  two  seconds  at  Trafalgar,  but  two  new  ones  still 
larger  were  completed  that  year.  They  averaged  2277  tons.  The  rest,  of 
which  there  were  eight  in  commission,  were  of  the  12-pounder  type,  that  is, 
they  carried  thirty  "twelves"  instead  of  "  eighteens"  on  their  upper  deck. 
They  ranged  from  1870  to  2000  tons.    These  figures  do  not  include  carronades. 

2  Bigot  de  Morogues,  Tactiqtie  Navale,  p.  27.  The  defensive  power  of 
three-deckers  was  strongly  shown  in  the  Victory  at  Trafalgar.  In  an  un- 
published letter  of  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Scott,  dated  October  27  (of  which  Major 
Marsh,  R.A.,  has  kindly  given  me  a  copy),  he  says:  "On  the  quarter-deck, 
poop,  and  forecastle  the  slaughter  was  immense ;  on  the  other  decks  com- 
paratively nothing;  on  the  lower  deck  only  two  wounded,  and,  strange  to  tell, 
by  musket-balls." 


46  OPENING    OF    THE    CAMPAIGN 

Wcay  off."  "  This  remark,"  as  Captain  Mahan  comments, 
"  connotes  that  in  current  naval  opinion  one  three-decker 
was  better  than  two  seventy-fours,  conditions  being  similar."  ^ 
Such  a  conclusion  is  perhaps  more  than  the  passage  would 
bear  if  unsupported.  But  it  is  not  without  corroboration. 
For  if  Ave  analyse  the  opposing  squadrons  of  the  campaign, 
we  find  again  and  again,  that  by  counting  three-deckers  as 
two  units,  and  seventy-fours  as  one  unit,  we  get  something 
like  equality  between  the  two  squadrons.  So  constant  and 
so  nearly  exact  is  this  relation,  at  least  for  the  more  vital 
positions,  that  it  is  just  possible  this  was  actually  the  rough 
basis  on  which  our  Admiralty  made  their  distribution.  The 
idea  indicated  is  that,  having  thus  secured  nominal  equality, 
they  trusted  to  the  superior  efficiency  of  our  service  as  a 
whole  for  the  necessary  margin  of  strength.  A  similar 
basis  of  calculation  appears  to  have  prevailed  in  France. 
When,  at  the  crisis  of  the  campaign,  Ganteaume  was  urged 
by  Napoleon  to  make  a  dash  up  Channel  Avith  his  twenty- 
one  of  the  line,  of  which  three  only  Avere  three-deckers,  he 
objected  "  on  the  ground  that  at  any  moment  he  might  be 
confronted  A\dth  thirty  of  the  line  of  Avhich  tAvelve  Avero 
three-deckers,  a  force,"  he  says,  "  Avhich  Avould  be  almost 
double  ours."^ 

On  the  question  of  tactical  values  there  still  remains 
another  point  to  be  cleared  up  before  Ave  can  approach  the 

1  Life  of  Nelson,  ii.  333. 

*  Ganteaume  to  Napoleon,  July  14th  :  Desbri^re,  v.  640.  The  calculation 
works  out  in  this  way :  30  of  the  line  with  12  three-deckers  =  42  units. 
Ganteanme's  21  with  3  three-deckers  =  24  units.  The  Admiralty  finally  fixed 
the  minimum  force  for  Cornwallis  at  18  of  the  line.  The  three-deckers  varied 
normally  from  5  to  8.  Taking  the  average  number  as  6,  we  again  get  24 
units,  as  against  Ganteaume's  24.  Similarly  when,  on  Missiessy's  return  to 
Kochefort,  Gardner  detached  Graves  to  blockade  him,  he  left  himself  with 
8  three-deckers  and  7  others,  or  23  units  to  watch  Ganteaume's  24;  but 
Gardner's  flagship  was  the  newly-launched  Hihernia  of  120  guns,  the  largest 
ship  in  the  navy.  When  Stirling  from  Rochefort  joined  Calder  in  order  to 
intercept  Villeneuve  and  Gravina  coming  back  from  the  West  Indies,  they 
had  together  15  of  the  line  with  4  three-deckers,  or  19  units.  The  Curlenx 
had  reported  the  allies  to  be  17  of  the  line,  but  they  were  really  20  with  six 
80-gun  ships.  Gardner  before  Brest  at  the  end  of  May  had  10  three-deckers 
and  12  others=:32  units,  including  Collingwood's  squadron  of  2  three-deckers 
and  8  others,  or  12  units.  Under  his  discretionary  power,  therefore,  he  only 
detached  half  Collingwood's  squadron,  which  left  him  with  26  units,  of  whicli, 
however,  3  were  only  sixty-fours. — Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  27.  Many  similar 
instances  will  be  noticed  in  the  course  of  the  campaign. 