

^  Nelson  to  Ball,  Feb.  11th,  and  see  also  same  to  Melville,  Feb.  14th. 

C 


34  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE  Jan. 

by  two  English  frigates,  which  could  not  fail  to  bring  down 
on  us  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy,  and  it  being  out  of 
our  power  to  make  much  sail  with  the  ships  so  much 
maltreated,  we  agreed  to  return."  This  was  on  the  19th, 
and  by  the  21st  he  was  safe  again  in  Toulon,  while  Nelson, 
cleared  for  action,  was  still  waiting  for  him  at  the  south  end 
of  Sardinia.  Obviously,  then,  if  Nelson  had  chosen  to  make 
a  dash  for  Villeneuve  directly  he  heard  he  was  out,  he 
might  have  destroyed  or  captured  the  whole  of  the  ships 
that  w^ere  still  with  his  flag.  A  less  correct  officer  might 
well  have  done  so.  But  for  Nelson  it  was  not  good  war. 
The  chance  of  contact  was  far  too  uncertain  to  justify  un- 
covering the  point  of  greatest  danger.^ 

To  Napoleon  the  breakdown  of  his  naval  combination 
was  a  severe  shock.  He  was  still  bent  on  flinging  his  -whole 
fleet  into  colonial  operations,  and  on  January  16  th,  the  day 
before  Villeneuve  sailed,  he  was  busy  drafting  a  scheme  for 
extending  the  attack  to  India.  It  was  to  be  carried  out 
by  Ganteaume  from  Brest.  With  his  twenty-one  of  the 
line  and  nine  or  ten  cruisers  and  six  transports,  carrying 
altogether  15,000  troops,  he  was  to  break  the  blockade  at  a 
favourable  moment,  move  down  to  L'Orient,  where  he  was  to 
pick  up  a  ship  of  the  line,  and  then  to  Rochefort  for  another 
and  2000  additional  troops.  Thence  he  was  to  proceed 
to  release  the  Ferrol  squadron,  which  would  give  him  live 
more  French  of  the  line,  as  many  Spanish,  and  eight  or 
nine  cruisers.  Half  of  them  would  be  armed  en  jliite  as 
transports,  and  would  have  on  board  a  further  6000 
troops,  half  French  and  half  Spanish.  With  this  force 
he  would  proceed  to  Mauritius  where  he  would  find 
3000  men.  He  would  then  have  an  army  of  23,000 
French  and  3000  Spaniards,  with  which  "indubitably,"  as 
Napoleon  wrote,  "  they  will  make  a  terrible  war  on  England 
which  may  bring  about  a  final  decision."     Of  the  probable 

^  Villeneuve  to  Decres,  Jan.  21  :  Desbri^re's  Projets  et  Tentatives,  iv.  299. 
An  instance  of  an  otficer's  neglecting  Nelson's  principle  was  Admiral  Samp- 
son's almost  fatal  attempt  to  intercept  Admiral  Cervera  at  Puerto  Rico  in  the 
Spanish-American  War.  It  was  this  immutable  principle,  "  so  imperturbably 
followed,"  as  Colonel  Desbrifire  says,  which  rendered  futile  all  attempts  to 
entice  our  fleet  away  from  the  time-honoured  covering  position  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Channel. 


Jan.  he   alters    the    plan  3  5 

action  of  the  British  fleet  there  is  no  mention.  Its  silent 
elimination  from  the  problem  is  striking.  But  it  was 
characteristic  of  all  Napoleon's  naval  strategy  that,  in 
sharp  contrast  to  his  military  plans,  he  practically  ignored 
his  enemy  or  assumed  in  them  an  incredible  simplicity.^ 