

On  the  same  day  went  corresponding  orders  to  Ville- 
neuve. As  Ganteaume  was  to  bring  out  the  Ferrol  squadron 
so  he  was  to  relieve  that  of  Cadiz,  and  to  proceed  with  it 
direct  to  Martinique.  There  for  forty  days  he  was  to 
hold  his  squadron  in  instant  readiness  to  come  out  on 
Ganteaume's  signal,  for  Ganteaume  when  he  arrived  would 
probably  not   anchor;  and  at   the   end    of  that  period,   if 


40  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE       march 

Ganteaume  had  not  appeared,  he  was  to  land  his  troops  in 
the  French  islands,  do  what  harm  he  could  to  the  British 
Colonies,  and  then  take  up  a  station  at  the  Canaries  upon 
the  East  India  trade  route.  Possibly  Ganteaume  might 
meet  him  there,  but  if  he  did  not  appear  in  twenty  days, 
then  Villeneuve  was  to  return  to  Cadiz,  where  he  would  find 
further  orders.  It  will  be  observed  that  these  orders  made 
no  provision  for  the  concentration  at  Ferrol  which  Gan- 
teaume had  been  told  to  expect  if  that  at  Martinique  failed, 
but  possibly  it  was  Napoleon's  intention  to  arrange  for  the 
latter  when  the  situation  was  further  developed. 

Such  was  the  giant  stroke  of  genius,  for  so  it  has  come 
to  be  regarded,  by  which,  as  he  told  Villeneuve,  the  destinies 
of  the  world  were  to  be  changed.  What  did  his  Admirals 
think  of  it  ?  Their  opinion  is  not  on  record.  We  must  be 
content  with  that  of  their  successors,  given  after  patient 
and  exhaustive  study  of  the  whole  question. 

"  Two  escapes,"  says  Colonel  Desbriere  under  sanction 
of  the  French  General  Staff,  "  two  escapes  from  ports 
blockaded  by  a  superior  force ;  two  blockades  to  be  broken, 
at  Cadiz  and  Ferrol ;  a  junction  at  Martinique  already  indi- 
cated to  the  English  by  the  despatch  of  Missiessy — such 
was  the  programme  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  letter  of 
the  instructions.  It  is  useless  for  historians  to  admire 
it.  Such  a  plan  would  be  unworthy  both  of  Napoleon 
and  his  genius,  if  we  could  discover  nothing  deeper 
m  it. 

And  what  is  it  that  is  found  ?  Little  more  than 
another  device  to  save  his  face,  and  escape  from  the  hope- 
less invasion  without  loss  of  prestige.  Since  the  army  of 
Boulogne  must  wait  for  the  fleet,  three  months  was  the 
least  interval  that  must  elapse  before  it  could  think  of 
moving,  and  in  three  months  much  would  have  happened. 
By  that  time  the  air  would  have  cleared.  Napoleon's  course 
would  be  more  sharply  defined.  It  is  pointed  out  on  his 
behalf,  moreover,  that  the  plan  as  it  stands  entirely  ignores 
the  enemy,  whereas  Napoleon's  practice  and  genius  forbid 
us  to  believe  he  did  not  take  the  natural  British  move- 
ments into  serious  account.      He  must  have  known,  it  is 