

Possibly,  however,  the  whole  scheme  was  only  intended 
for  British  spies,  or,  if  not  originally  so  intended,  was  used 
for  this  purpose  when  it  was  found  to  be  impracticable.  We 
know,  at  any  rate,  that  from  this  time  forward  for  several 
months  he  was  under  the  hallucination  that  he  had  diverted 
our  naval  effort  to  India. 

All  we  can  tell  for  certain  is  that,  whether  or  not  the 
Indian  scheme  was  ever  seriously  intended,  it  was  abandoned 
within  a  few  weeks  of  its  conception.  By  the  end  of  the 
month,  for  reasons  it  is  now  impossible  to  fathom,  he  had 
been  forced  to  take  up  the  invasion  again,  and  was  pre- 
paring the  way  for  it  by  a  naval  combination  scarcely  less 
extravagant  in  design  than  his   Indian  dream.      Between 


Feb.  he  resumes  the  invasion  37 

February  29  th  and  March  4th  he  issued  the  orders  for  his 
famous  concentration  in  the  West  Indies. 

To  explain,  so  far  as  is  possible,  this  startling  return  to 
his  abandoned  project — with  the  conditions  far  more  difficult 
than  before — let  us  see  what  was  uppermost  in  his  mind 
at  the  moment.  It  was  undoubtedly  the  absorption  of 
Northern  Italy  into  the  French  Empire  by  forming  a  new 
Kingdom  of  Italy  out  of  the  revolutionary  states  which 
had  arisen  on  the  ruins  of  the  old  Sardinian,  Austrian,  and 
Genoese  possessions.  The  main  objection  to  this  stroke  of 
policy  was  that,  if  crudely  done,  it  would  force  Austria  into 
action  and  give  a  dangerous  stimulus  to  the  efforts  of  the 
Czar  and  Pitt  to  form  their  coalition.  For  some  weeks, 
therefore,  he  had  been  trying  to  persuade  one  of  his  brothers 
to  accept  the  crown  of  the  new  kingdom,  and  on  their 
steadfast  refusal  he  resolved  to  crown  himself.  Here,  then, 
he  had  to  face  the  certain  irritation  of  Austria ;  and  the 
Anglo-Russian  negotiations  for  joint  military  action  to  pre- 
vent his  further  expansion  in  Italy  were  now  practically 
complete.  The  obvious  move,  therefore,  was  to  use  the 
army  he  was  compelled  to  keep  on  a  war  footing  as  a  threat 
to  England.  It  was  the  only  way  to  prevent  her  putting 
forth  such  strength  in  the  Mediterranean  as  would  make  the 
joint  action  with  Russia  really  formidable,  and  encourage 
Austria  to  burn  her  boats. 

Whether  he  still  believed  in  his  heart  the  invasion  was 
possible  we  cannot  tell.  If  he  did,  it  can  only  have  been 
by  the  well-known  trick  of  his  gambler's  mind,  that  every- 
thing was  possible  on  which  he  had  set  his  desire.  His 
star  had  once  removed  mountains ;  he  had  trusted  it  to 
make  the  desert  flow  with  milk  and  honey,  and  now%  per- 
haps, he  believed  it  could  bridge  the  sea. 

Nothing  less  will  explain  the  madness  of  the  resumed 
attempt.  When  he  first  set  himself  to  the  task  he  put 
the  necessary  military  force  at  150,000  men.  Since  then 
the  strength  of  the  British  army  and  the  w^hole  system  of 
defence  had  greatly  increased — in  numbers,  mettle,  train- 
ing, and  organisation.  Yet,  even  in  view  of  the  clouds  that 
were  darkening  the  opposite  horizon,  he  could  barely  keep 