


38  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE  fek. 

half  that  number  m  touch  with  the  Channel  coast.  Even 
when,  after  six  months'  preparation,  what  is  called  the 
supreme  moment  came — when,  so  the  legend  goes,  he  only 
failed  by  the  blunders  of  his  Admirals — he  had  no  more 
than  90,000  men  in  reach  of  his  flotilla.  The  arrange- 
ments for  embarkation  and  transport  were  even  Avider  of  the 
mark.  The  ports  were  choked  with  silt,  so  that  many  of 
the  boats,  even  at  high  tide,  were  aground,  and  months  of 
labour  did  little  to  get  the  harbours  clear,  except  in  the 
unimportant  case  of  Wimereux.  In  Boulogne,  after  six 
months'  effort,  not  half  the  units  assigned  to  the  port  could 
get  out  in  one  tide.  The  flotilla  itself  w^as  still  unconcen- 
trated,  entirely  unorganised,  distributed  in  no  relation  to  the 
various  divisions  of  the  army,  and  in  need  of  formidable 
repairs.  The  idea  that  his  organisation  w^as  such  that  he 
could  embark  150,000  men  in  two  hours,  is  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  myths  of  the  Napoleonic  legend.  The 
utmost  he  ever  even  approached  was  the  bare  possibility, 
in  perfect  w^eather,  of  getting  90,000  afloat  in  from  twelve 
to  eighteen  hours,  but  nothing  like  this  was  ever  actually 
accomplished.^ 

Undoubtedly,  what  caused  him  to  shut  his  eyes  to  all 
these  difficulties  was  the  brightness  of  the  reports  from 
Spain.  Stung  with  the  blow  which  England  had  struck 
before  declaration,  she  was  throwing  herself  into  the  war 
w^ith  unexpected  ardour.  All  that  Napoleon  had  dared  to 
hope  from  her  fleet  bid  fair  to  be  fulfilled.  If,  ashore,  his 
prospects  were  darker  than  before,  at  sea  they  were  far  more 
promising,  and  he  flung  all  his  sanguine  spirit  into  the  naval 
part  of  the  venture,  ignoring  the  rest,  with  w^hich  he  had  no 
heart  to  grapple. 

The  first  indication  of  his  idea  that  an  efiective  concen- 
tration of  his  whole  naval  force  was  possible  in  the  West 
Indies  occurs  in  certain  communications  he  made  to  the 
Spanish  Government  on  February  19th,  but  it  was  not  till 
the  27th  that  the  first  orders  were  issued.  On  that  day 
were  signed  directions  to  Missiessy  cancelling  his  last  orders 
to  return,  and  bidding  him  stay  where  he  was  till  the  end  of 

*  See  Desbriere,  Projets,  vol.  v.,  part  iii.,  chap.  4. 


March        GENESIS   OF   THE    FINAL   PLAN  39 

June,  in  immediate  readiness  to  join  such  forces  as  should 
appear  at  Martinique.  On  the  same  day  Admiral  Gourdon, 
who  commanded  the  French  squadron  at  Ferrol,  was  told  to 
be  ready  to  come  out  with  such  Spanish  ships  as  were  fit 
for  sea,  and  combine  with  a  French  squadron,  which  would 
soon  appear  before  the  port.  Three  days  later  the  main 
orders  went  forward.  Ganteaume  at  Brest  was  told  to 
embark  some  3000  troops  over  and  above  those  serving  as 
marines,  and  to  sail  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  with 
twenty-one  of  the  line,  six  frigates,  and  two  transports  with 
victual  for  Gourdon's  squadron.  He  was  to  make  direct  for 
Ferrol,  endeavour  to  destroy  Calder's  blockading  squadron, 
call  out  Gourdon  by  signal,  and  then  proceed  to  Martinique, 
where  he  would  find  the  Toulon  and  Kochefort  squadrons 
awaiting  him.  There  he  was  to  reinforce  the  garrison  with 
a  thousand  of  the  troops,  and  then,  with  the  rest  and  the  forty 
sail  of  the  line  he  would  have  under  his  flag,  he  would 
operate  his  return  to  Europe  without  losing  an  instant. 
Off  Ushant  he  was  to  attack  any  British  force  he  found 
there,  and  then  push  direct  to  Boulogne,  where  he  would  be 
expected  between  June  10th  and  July  10th.  Such  was  the 
complete  plan  which  Napoleon  hoped  to  achieve,  but  alter- 
native orders  were  given  to  meet  the  case  of  the  Toulon 
squadron  failing  to  appear.  Ganteaume  would  then  have 
twenty-five  of  the  line,  and  after  waiting  thirty  days  for 
Villeneuve  he  was  still  to  try  to  fight  his  way  through  to 
Boulogne.  If,  however,  he  found  that  from  any  adverse 
causes  he  had  less  than  twenty-five,  he  was  to  return  to 
Ferrol,  where  he  would  find  a  concentration  of  all  the 
French  and  Spanish  naval  force  in  Europe  awaiting  him, 
and  thence,  without  entering  the  port,  he  was  to  make  for 
Boulogne  as  before. 