


March  WEAKNESS    OF    THE    PLAN  41 

urged,  how  great  were  the  chances  against  its  success.  "  If 
Ganteaume  succeeded,"  so  runs  the  case  for  the  defence, 
"in  concentrating  an  enormous  fleet  of  forty-eight  sail  in 
the  West  Indies,  a  great  naval  battle  was  inevitable.  It 
might  be  fought  in  American  or  in  European  waters,  but 
with  such  adversaries  as  the  English  it  was  impossible  to 
avoid  it,  and  Napoleon  knew  this  better  than  anybody.  .  .  . 
But  then  the  defeat  of  Ganteaume  ...  it  would  certainly 
mean  the  end  of  the  English  expedition,  but  the  fiasco 
would  not  be  Napoleon's.  On  another's  head  would  lie  the 
responsibility  for  the  check.  .  .  .  On  the  other  hand,  a  great 
victory  at  sea — that  meant  the  ruin  of  England,  even  without 
the  descent  being  put  in  operation.  ...  In  short,  the  plan 
of  March  2nd  seems  to  be  of  the  type  which  his  secretary 
calls  themes  a  deux  fins.  The  worst  that  could  come  of  it 
was  the  defeat  in  distant  seas  of  mediocre  squadrons,  a 
defeat  which  would  quickly  be  forgotten  in  grand  victories 
on  land.  But  the  plan  in  no  way  solved  the  problem  he 
had  set  himself,  '  to  make  the  descent  without  being  master 
of  the  sea.'  On  the  contrary,  it  shrinks  from  the  solution 
and  adjourns  it  till  the  moment  when  the  command  of  the 
sea,  having  been  won  by  force,  the  very  question  of  the 
descent  would  no  longer  exist."  ^ 

Such  is  the  most  authoritative  French  view  of  Napoleon's 
actual  intentions.  Had  he  really  grasped  at  last  that  in 
the  face  of  the  British  fleet,  and  its  traditional  strategy, 
the  problem  of  invasion  over  an  uncommanded  sea  was  in- 
soluble ?  Was  he  really  riding  for  a  fall  ?  To  British  ears 
the  explanation  sounds  almost  as  fantastic  as  the  plan.  The 
old  confusion  of  thought  jars  through  the  orders  from  end 
to  end.  While  they  are  mainly  and  ostensibly  directed  at 
securing  permanent  command  by  fighting,  they  harp  through- 
out on  the  possibility  of  securing  temporary  local  command 
by  surprise.  The  grip  of  the  problem  is  as  loose  as  ever, 
and  Englishmen  with  judgment  unoppressed  by  the  Napo- 
leonic legend,  will  rather  see  in  it  the  work  of  a  self-confident 
amateur  in  naval  warfare,  the  blindness  of  a  great  soldier  to 
the  essential  differences  between  land  and  sea  strategy,  and 

1  Desbricre,  Projets,  v.  371. 


42  NAPOLEON'S    FIRST    MISCARRIAGE      March 

something  perhaps  of  the  exasperated  despot  who  refused 
to  own  himself  beaten. 

But  the  grandiose  plan  went  forward,  and  while  half  the 
world  was  in  labour  with  it,  on  the  English  side  there  was 
scarcely  a  sign  of  movement.  Nelson  was  hurrying  back  to 
his  post  from  Egypt,  but  everywhere  else  the  squadrons 
were  maintaining  their  silent  vigil;  and,  scarcely  to  be 
noticed  beside  the  stupendous  combination  of  Napoleon,  was 
Pitt's  little  expedition,  painfully  gathering  at  Portsmouth, 
which  yet  was  to  prove  the  insidious  drop  of  poison — the 
little  sting  —  that  was  to  infect  Napoleon's  empire  with 
decay,  and  to  force  his  hand  with  so  tremendous  a  result. 