

Sir  Henry  Bunbury,  who  was  Quartermaster-General  to 
the  expedition,  severely  criticises  these  instructions.  "  The 
different  and  unconnected  objects,"  he  writes,  "  to  which 
Sir  James  Craig's  attention  was  thus  directed,  afford  us 
ample  evidence,  that  the  views  of  the  Cabinet  were  based 
on  no  principle  or  sound  plan  of  operations."  But  clearly 
they  were  based — soundly  enough — on  the  uncertain  diplo- 
matic situation  and  on  its  most  likely  developments.  They 
were  designed  in  relation  to  our  engagements  with  Russia, 
and  at  bottom  were  the  expression  of  a  determination  with 
or  without  her  assistance  to  secure  the  naval  positions  which 
in  Nelson's  view  were  essential  to  the  command  of  the 
Mediterranean.  Could  there  be  any  doubt  that  this  was 
the  connection  and  the  principle  in  the  mind  of  the  Cabinet, 
it  must  be  removed  when  we  know  that  the  day  before 
Craig's  orders  were  signed  a  co-py  of  them  was  forwarded 
to  Nelson.^ 

Besides  the  duty  of  escorting  the  expedition  Knight's 
squadron  was  to  take  down  the  Mediterranean  and  East 
and  West  Indian  trade — all  of  which  went  tooether  as  far 

o 

as  the  latitude  of  Cape  St.  Vincent.  To  pass  this  vast 
convoy  through  in  the  face  of  the  enemy's  undefeated 
fleets  was  no  light  task.  Craig  himself  had  to  traverse 
2500  miles  of  uncommanded  sea  in  the  face  of  five  hostile 
squadrons,  none  of  which  were  too  strongly  blockaded  and 
not  one  of  which  had  yet  been  brought  to  action. 

The  principle  on  which  we  have  always  conducted  such 
operations  is  to  provide,  firstly,  an  escort  strong  enough  to 

'  Bunbury,  Passages  in  the  Great  War,  p.  183.      W.O.  {d),  56,  March  28. 
^  Admiralty  Secretary,  In-letters  {Secret  Orders),  vol.  1363,  March  27. 


52  OPENING   OF   THE    CAMPAIGN  march 

resist  sporadic  attacks  from  minor  cruising  squadrons ;  and 
secondly,  powerful  covering  squadrons  to  prevent  serious 
licet  interruption.  Knight's  squadron  formed  the  escort ; 
Avhile  the  cover  was  provided  by  our  various  blockading 
squadrons.  All  that  was  required  was  to  link  them  up  in 
regular  succession,  and  orders  were  now  issued  for  the  chain 
to  be  formed.  Cornwallis  could  make  sure  of  Brest  and 
Calder  of  Ferrol.  Beyond  the  secure  coast  of  Portugal. 
Orde  was  directed  to  look  out  for  the  expedition  and  sec 
it  safe  past  Cadiz  and  Cartagena  a  certain  distance  up  the 
Straits.  There  Nelson  was  to  take  up  a  position  to  cover 
its  passage  to  Malta  against  any  force  issuing  from  Toulon.^ 
It  was  a  bold  operation,  but  the  risk  had  to  be  run,  and  how 
serious  that  risk  was  we  shall  presently  see. 

As  the  last  preparations  were  being  made  and  the  great 
convoy  was  gathering  at  Spithead,  Napoleon's  widespread 
movement  was  ripe  for  execution.  From  every  blockaded 
port  were  coming  in  reports  that  could  not  be  mistaken. 
Off  Ferrol  Calder  obtained  information  that  the  squadron 
was  to  be  ready  to  sail  on  March  22nd.  On  the  26th 
Ganteaume  w\as  observed  moving  out  of  Brest  harbour 
into  the  outer  road.  Cornwallis  had  just  gone  home 
on  sick  leave :  his  successor  had  not  arrived.  Sir  Charles 
Cotton  had  been  left  in  command  with  seventeen  of  the 
line,  and  he  immediately  moved  close  in,  for  the  Brest 
blockade,  unlike  that  of  Toulon,  was  always  of  the  closest 
possible  kind.^  The  idea  of  keeping  the  French  in  seems 
normally  to  have  dominated  that  of  bringing  them  to 
action,  and  in  the  present  case  nothing  could  have  been 
more  exasperating  for  Napoleon.  His  plan  of  campaign 
rested  on  Ganteaurae's  being  able  to  get  to  sea  without 
fighting.  On  March  24th  he  telegraphed  to  Napoleon  that 
the  enemy  were  in  the  Iroise  passage  and  to  sail  without  an 