

An  acute  crisis  in  the  campaign  was  the  result.  As 
Villeneuve  thus  successfully  opened  the  great  attack,  Craig 
at  Portsmouth  had  just  completed  the  embarkation  of  his 
force,  and  all  was  ready.  Knight  Avas  only  Avaiting  for  a 
Avind  and  for  the  trade  to  assemble,  and  to  all  appearance 
the  tAvo  hostile  offensive  movements  Avere  about  to  clash  at 
sea  and  precipitate  a  catastrophe. 

>  Nelson  did  apparently  have  a  cruiser  on  Rendezvous  07,  "  off  Cape  St. 
Sebastian,"  and  this  perhaps  he  thought  was  enough  to  locate  Villeneuve  if 
he  tried  to  steal  down  the  coast  of  Spain.  But  as  the  Toulon  squadron 
started  south  to  pass  outside  the  Balearic  Islands,  Rendezvous  97  was  not 
approached. 


GEORGE  PHILIP!  SON  L^'  THE  LONDON  GEOGRAPHICAL  INSTITUTe 

To  race  pa^e  57  Zongmxaxs,  Green,  Sc  Co.  Landinv,Newyark,  Homing  &  CtHcuOa. . 


CHAPTER   IV 

VILLENEUVE'S  EVASION 

As  yet  Villeneuve  knew  nothing  definitely  of  the  great 
combination  he  was  to  carry  out.  So  far  as  he  had  been 
informed  his  mission  lay  wholly  in  the  West  Indies,  where 
he  was  to  operate  against  the  English  islands  and  reinforce 
those  of  France.  All  else  was  under  sealed  orders,  yet  he 
had  been  given  a  hint  that  there  was  more  beyond.  "  The 
Squadron,"  wrote  Napoleon,  "  with  the  command  of  which  I 
have  entrusted  you  is  destined  for  an  operation  of  an  im- 
portance quite  above  that  for  which  I  first  intended  it."  It 
was  with  these  words  that  on  March  22nd  he  prefaced  his 
final  urgent  orders  for  Villeneuve  to  get  to  sea  and  pick  up 
what  Spanish  ships  should  be  found  ready  at  Cadiz ;  and 
as  the  Emperor  penned  the  orders  Nelson  was  anchoring  his 
battle  squadron  at  his  rendezvous  in  the  Gulf  of  Palmas  to 
watch  the  snare  he  had  set. 

As  he  lay  there  waiting  for  the  word  from  his  observing 
cruisers,  the  strain  upon  his  high-wrought  temperament 
grew  each  day  more  intense.  He  was  still  fretting  over  his 
false  cast  to  Egypt,  for  in  his  absence  our  Levant  convoy 
homeward-bound  had  been  cut  up  by  a  cruiser  squadron 
from  Toulon.  Both  the  escorting  vessels  had  been  cap- 
tured, but  only  after  so  stubborn  a  resistance  that  the 
greater  part  of  the  convoy  escaped  into  Gibraltar.  Nelson 
had  just  heard  of  their  being  there,  and  knowing  they 
would  be  exposed  to  an  attack  from  the  Alge^iras  gunboats, 
he  determined  to  detach  Sir  Richard  Strachan  in  the  Renoum 
74,  which  was  due  home  for  a  refit,  to  see  them  clear. ^ 

^  For  Nelson's  "  Order  of  Battle  and  Sailing  "  issued  here,  March  26th, 
see  Hubback,  Jane  Austen' s  Sailor  Brothers,  p.  132.  It  is  for  twelve  ships, 
including  the  Excellent,  in  two  divisions.     See  x>ost,  p.  162. 