

Toro  is  a  little  island  off  the  south-west  extremity  of 
Sardinia,  and  Galita  lies  olt*  the  coast  of  Tunis  just  a  hun- 
dred miles  to  the  southward.  What  then  was  apparently 
in  his  mind  was  that  the  French,  instead  of  making  the 
usual  landfall  for  a  voyage  from  Toulon  to  Sicily,  would 
try  to  get  round  him  by  hugging  the  African  coast,  and 
he  must  cut  them  off.  There  was  still,  however,  another 
cruiser  to  come  in,  before  he  need  commit  himself  to  any 
serious  movement.  In  the  afternoon  she  appeared,  but  only 
to  say  that  in  the  night  of  the  31st  she  had  completely  lost 
touch.  She  had  in  fact  been  thrown  out  when  Villeneuve 
changed  his  course  in  the  night  on  the  Ragusan  s  report 
of  where  Nelson  really  was.  In  the  absence  of  better 
intelligence  Nelson  was  forced  to  play  for  safety.  He 
immediately  decided  to  take  up  a  position  with  his  battle 
squadron  midway  between  Sardinia  and  Galita,  extending 
his  cruisers  so  as  to  cover  the  whole  passage  from  Toro  to 
the  Tunisian  coast,  and  barring  the  way  to  Naples,  Sicily, 
and  Egypt. 

With  characteristic  concentration  of  purpose  he  was 
fixing  his  mind  firmly  on  his  primary  function.  **  The 
French,"  he  explained  to  Lord  Melville  on  April  5  th,  "  could 
not  pass  before  to-day  if  this  be  their  route.  I  must  leave 
as  little  as  possible  to  chance,  and  I  shall  make  sure  they 
are  to  the  eastward  of  me,  before  I  risk  either  Sardinia, 


6o  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  April 

Sicily,  or  Naples :  for  they  may  delay  their  time  of  coming 
even  this  distance,  from  an  expectation  that  I  shall  push  for 
Egypt  and  thus  leave  them  at  liberty  to  act  against  Sardinia, 
Sicily,  or  Naples."  From  this  clear  determination  to  permit 
no  lesser  object  to  loosen  his  grip  on  the  vital  part  of  the 
war-plan  which  had  been  specially  confided  to  his  charge, 
he  never  swerved  for  one  moment.  For  forty-eight  hours 
he  waited  in  the  central  position  he  had  taken  up,  and 
by  that  time  he  could  feel  sure  he  had  eliminated  from 
the  problem  the  possibility  of  Villeneuve's  adopting  the 
stratagem  that  he  had  suspected.  Still  there  was  another 
way  in  which  it  was  possible  for  his  adversary  to  throw  his 
troops  into  Naples  or  Messina  by  evasion.  He  might 
double  back  from  the  point  where  Nelson's  cruisers  had 
located  him  and  pass  inside  Corsica  and  Sardinia,  either 
north-about  or  through  the  Straits  of  Bonifaccio.  Till  he  had 
cleared  this  possibility  everything  else  must  wait.  "  I  am 
in  truth  half-dead,"  he  wrote  to  Ball  on  the  6  th,  "  but  what 
man  can  do  to  find  them  out  shall  be  done.  But  I  must 
not  make  more  haste  than  good  speed  and  leave  Sardinia, 
Sicily,  or  Naples  open  for  them  to  take  should  I  go  east- 
ward or  westward  without  knowing  more  about  them." 
That  evening  to  make  the  vital  ground  sure  he  redistri- 
buted his  cruisers,  and  next  day  moved  off  with  his  battle 
squadron  to  take  up  the  position  which  the  new  possibility 
demanded.  This  position  was  at  the  island  of  Ustica,  some 
fifty  miles  to  the  northward  of  Palermo.  His  object,  as  he 
said,  was  "  to  be  ready  to  push  for  Naples  should  they  be  gone 
there  or  to  protect  Sicily."  ^  His  new  station  he  reached 
on  the  7th,  resolved  not  to  budge  from  it  till  he  was  certain 
neither  Sicily  nor  Naples  was  Villeneuve's  objective.  "  I 
must  be  guided,"  he  wrote  hurriedly  to  Elliot,  "  on  my 
further  movements  by  such  information  as  I  may  be  able 
to    obtain:    but    I    shall    neither  go    to    the    eastward    of 