


58  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  march 

But  anxiety  for  the  trade  was  the  least  of  his  trials. 
As  the  days  went  by  without  a  sign  of  any  movement  from 
Toulon,  he  began  to  think  VillenCuve  was  not  coming  out 
at  all.  "  I  shall  remain  here  a  few  weeks  longer,"  he  wrote 
to  his  friend  Sir  Alexander  Ball  at  Malta,  "  when,  if  the 
French  do  not  put  to  sea,  I  think  it  very  probable  they  will 
lay  up  for  the  summer,  unless  the  Brest  or  Ferrol  and  Cadiz 
fleets  should  come  into  the  Mediterranean."  To  Elliot  he 
expressed  the  same  opinion.  Ill  news  from  Naples  com- 
pelled him  to  face  the  possibility  of  a  powerful  naval  opera- 
tion in  that  quarter  and  was  turning  his  mind  from  Egypt. 
It  will  be  remembered  that  one  of  Napoleon's  first  steps  in 
the  war  had  been  to  order  General  St.  Cyr  to  reoccupy  the 
southern  Neapolitan  ports  which  he  had  evacuated  under 
the  Treaty  of  Amiens,  and  Apulia  ever  since  had  been  in  the 
occupation  of  a  corps  of  observation,  facing  the  Russians  at 
Corfu  and  watching  the  Neapolitan  Court.  At  the  first 
sign  of  Russian  intervention  Napoleon  had  reinforced  it, 
and  St.  Cyr's  standing  orders  were  to  march  on  Naples 
the  moment  the  Russians  moved.^  Vague  rumours  of 
Craig's  expedition  had  further  aggravated  the  situation. 
The  Neapolitans  had  magnified  it  to  20,000  men,  and  were 
arming  in  readiness  to  co-operate.  This  Napoleon  would 
not  endure,  and  St.  Cyr  had  been  instructed  to  demand  on 
pain  of  an  immediate  attack  not  only  that  the  mobilisation 
should  cease,  but  that  Elliot  must  be  expelled.  To  Nelson's 
dismay  Elliot  was  inclined  to  submit.  He  had  just  told 
the  harassed  Admiral  that  his  object  all  along  had  been  to 
temporise  "  in  order  to  gain  time  for  the  arrival  of  the 
foreign  auxiliaries,  Russian  and  English,  which  have  been 
so  long  promised  " ;  and  if  the  King  asked  him  to  retire  to 
Sicily  he  probably  should  do  so.  In  that  case  he  should 
want  a  passage  in  the  Excellent,  the  ship  of  the  line  which 
Nelson  had  been  authorised  to  keep  permanently  at  Naples 
for  the  safety  of  the  Court."  Elliot's  apparently  weak  atti- 
tude completed  Nelson's  depression.     "  France,"  he  wrote  to 

'  Auriol,  La  France,  V Awjlctevre,  ct  Naples,  vol.  ii.  pp.  33-(5. 
2  Ibid.,  chap.  V.  and  p.  222  (Alquier  to  Talleyrand,  March  29tli) ;  and 
Nicolas,  vi.  377. 


April  NELSON'S   STRATEGY  59 

Earl  Camden,  "  will  have  both  Sardinia  and  Sicily  very  soon, 
if  we  do  not  prevent  it,  and  Egypt  besides."  Then  he  heard 
that  Villeneuve  had  embarked  his  troops  on  March  21st, 
and  his  spirits  rose.  He  weighed  to  move  to  the  south- 
ward, but  squally  weather  compelled  him  to  take  refuge  in 
Pula  Roads.  On  April  3rd  he  weighed  again,  and  on  the 
following  morning  one  of  his  observing  cruisers  ran  into  the 
Heet  with  news  that  three  days  since,  at  eight  o'clock  on 
the  morning  of  the  31st,  she  had  left  Villeneuve  some  sixty 
miles  south-by-west  of  Toulon,  or  about  300  miles  from 
where  Nelson  was.  He  immediately  moved  to  the  west- 
ward, "  as  I  do  not  believe,"  so  he  said,  "  the  French  will 
make  Toro  .  .  . ;  but  I  believe  if  they  do  not  make  Toro, 
they  will  make  Galita." 