

D 


so  OPENING    OF    THE    CAMPAIGN  march 

the  Colonies,  dated  March  28tli,  directed  the  expedition  to 
proceed  to  Malta  unless  in  the  progress  of  the  voyage  extra- 
ordinary circumstances  should  make  it  necessary  to  alter 
the  course.  The  document  was  drawn  in  the  traditional 
manner  of  the  elder  Pitt,  enumerating  every  probable  objec- 
tive upon  which  the  force  might  be  used  with  profit,  so  as 
to  give  the  General  the  freest  hand  to  act  in  accordance 
with  circumstances  as  he  found  them.  But  the  main  purpose 
was  kept  clearly  in  the  front.  "  It  being  of  the  utmost 
importance,"  they  ran,  "  that  Sicily  should  not  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  French,  the  protection  of  that  island  is  to  be 
considered  as  the  principal  object  of  the  expedition."  In 
his  method  of  procedure  Craig  was  to  be  guided  by  Hugh 
Elliot,  our  minister  at  Naples,  who  had  to  consider  the 
possibility  of  having  to  act  with  or  without  the  concurrence 
of  the  King  of  Naples.  In  the  former  case  Craig  was  to  do 
all  in  his  power  to  assist  the  King  to  secure  Sicily.  If, 
however,  the  King  did  not  ask  for  help  and  should  be 
induced  by  France  to  close  his  ports  to  British  ships,  or  if 
the  French  should  attack  the  island  or  even  be  certainly 
known  to  be  preparing  an  attack,  then  he  was  to  use  his 
utmost  exertions,  in  concert  with  Lord  Nelson,  for  the 
defence  of  Sicily,  with  or  without  the  King's  assent.  Such 
was  the  substance  of  Craisf's  instructions — a  clear  enunciation 
of  our  old  policy,  that  the  key  of  the  Mediterranean,  what- 
ever the  attitude  of  its  ruler,  must  not  pass  into  French 
hands.  Upon  so  much  we  were  determined,  and  deter- 
mined, moreover,  with  or  without  the  assistance  of  Russia. 

But  further  "  most  secret  "  instructions  were  given  him 
in  view  of  Russian  co-operation.  Here  again  two  cases  had 
to  be  considered  ;  "  first,  that  of  an  attack  being  made  by  the 
French  upon  Naples  and  his  being  called  upon  by  Mr. 
Elliot  or  the  Russian  commander  to  assist  in  defending 
the  Neapolitan  dominions.  Secondly,  the  case  of  the 
French  forces  being  driven  from  Naples  by  the  Russian 
army  or  withdrawn  with  a  view  to  counteract  the  move- 
ments of  armies  which  might  be  acting  against  France 
in  the  North  of  Ital}^"  In  either  case  he  was  autho- 
rised    on    application    from    Elliot    or     the    Austrian    or 


March  28  CRAIG'S   INSTRUCTIONS  51 

Russian  commanders  to  use  his  force  in  Italy,  if  in  his 
judgment  he  considered  effective  service  could  be  done ; 
and  for  this  purpose  he  might  place  himself  under  General 
Lacy,  the  Russian  Commander-in-chief.  He  was,  however, 
to  bear  in  mind  that  there  might  be  other  services  which 
would  call  for  the  employment  of  his  force,  particularly 
the  protection  of  Alexandria  and  Sardinia,  and  he  Avas 
therefore  not  to  engage  so  far  in  the  continental  campaign 
as  not  to  be  able  to  withdraw  his  force  if  necessary.^ 