


1  Admiralty  Secretary,  In-httrrH  {Secret  Ordevii)^  vol.  13G3,  April  G  and  15. 

2  Cotton  had  6  three-deckers,  2  eightys,  and  9  others,  against  Ganteaunie's 
?>  three-deckers,  2  eightys,  and  IG  seventy-fours.  Cotton,  in  his  despatch 
(as  printed  in  BJorhtdc  of  Brest,  p.  217),  says  he  had  7  of  the  line. 
Collingwood  says  17  [Ibid.,  223).  Gardner  was  about  to  join  in  another  three- 
deckei',  Hihcriiia  120,  which  would  give  him  25  units  against  2.|.  For  Gan- 
teaume's  view  of  the  comparative  foice,  see  ante,  p.  46  n. 


I 


March  26         COTTON   AND    GANTEAUME  53 

action  was  impossible.  The  signal  stations  could  only  count 
fifteen  of  the  line  and  he  wished  to  risk  an  action.  "  Success 
is  not  doubtful,"  he  urged.  "  I  await  your  Majesty's  orders." 
"  A  naval  victory,"  Napoleon  replied,  "  in  existing  cir- 
cumstances can  lead  to  nothing.  Keep  but  one  end  in 
view — to  fulfil  your  mission.  Get  to  sea  without  an 
action." 

It   was  under   these   final   orders   that   Ganteaume  on 
March    26th   moved  outside   the   Goulet  or  Gut  into   the 
Bertheaume  anchorage,  which  had  been  heavily  fortified  to 
facilitate  his  escape.     All  he  required  was  a  spell  of  thick 
weather.     Next  morning  it  came  and  he  signalled  to  weigh ; 
but  just  as  he  was  making  sail  the  fog  lifted,  and  in  the  light 
of  a  glorious  spring  morning  the  signal  station  announced 
the  British  fleet  in  the  offing.     Cotton  was  standing  in  on 
a  gentle   northerly  breeze  with  his  whole    seventeen    sail. 
Bound  by  his  orders,  Ganteaume  directed  the  fleet  to  moor 
where  it  was,  and  Cotton  held  on  to  within  five  miles  of 
him.     It  was  more  than  Ganteaume  could  endure.     He  feared 
an  attack  at  anchor,  another  Battle  of  the  Nile,  and  though, 
with  the  wind  as  it  was,  a  return  into  Brest  was  impos- 
sible, he  signalled  to  prepare  to  make  sail.     "  My  position, 
Sire,"  he  wrote  to  Napoleon,  "  on  this  occasion  was  difficult. 
I  found  myself  compelled  to  disobey  the  orders  you  had 
given  me,  as  to  risking  an  action  of  which  the  issue  was 
doubtful."     He  had  actually  made   the  signal  to  cut  and 
form  battle  order  as  convenient,  when  he  saw  Cotton  tack 
and    stand    out  again.     "  Night   closing   very   fast,"   wrote 
Cotton,  "  and  having  previously  placed  Rear- Admiral   Sir 
Thomas  Graves  with  four  sail  of  the  line  and  other  smaller 
vessels  to  keep  sight  of  the  enemy,  I  stood  out  with  my 
squadron."    It  was  a  fine  chance  missed,  a  chance  of  at  least 
putting  the  Brest  squadron  out  of  action  for  the  campaign ; 
but  seeing  Cotton  was  only  in  temporary  command  he  can 
hardly  be  blamed  for  not  risking  the  fleet  in  such  dangerous 
waters  and  for    preferring  to  take   a  more   open   position, 
where,   as   he  said,  "  should  they  proceed  to   sea   I   have 
confident  hopes  I  shall  be  able  to  intercept  them."     But 
Ganteaume  made  no  further  effort.     On  the  third  morning 