

On  March  11th  Nelson  laid  down  the  whole  scheme  in 
a  "  Most  Secret  Memorandum."  The  fleet  rendezvous  must 
be  one  that  would  cover  Naples,  Sardinia,  and  Sicily.  Palmas 
was  chosen.  But  before  going  there  he  meant  to  show 
himself  off  Barcelona.  This  was  the  trap.  On  the  one 
hand  it  would  prevent  Villeneuve  stealing  down  the  Cata- 
lonian  coast  out  of  reach,  and  on  the  other  it  would  tempt 
him  to  put  to  sea  directly  to  the  eastward  where  Nelson 
believed  his  real  objective  lay.  Accordingly  he  suddenly 
disappeared  from  before  Toulon  and  nothing  but  a  couple 
of  cruisers  were  to  be  seen. 

On  March  26  th  Villeneuve  received  his  final  orders  to 
sail  for  Martinique  not  later  than  the  morrow.  He  had  just 
heard  Nelson  had  been  seen  off  Barcelona  on  the  17  th. 
"  If  he  maintains  this  position,"  he  wrote,  "  I  shall  have 
great  difficulty  in  reaching  the  Straits."  On  the  evening 
of  the  30th  he  put  to  sea  in  the  Bucentaure  80,  with  three 
other  80-gun  ships,  seven  seventy-fours,  eight  cruisers,  and 
over  3000  troops.  In  order  to  give  Barcelona  a  wide  berth 
he  laid  his  course  to  the  southward  intending  to  pass  out- 


56  OPENING    OF    THE    CAMPAIGN  March 

side  the  Balearic  Islands.  Next  day  he  found  himself 
shadowed  by  the  two  frigates  that  Nelson  had  left  on  the 
Toulon  rendezvous.  In  the  night  they  disappeared.  So 
far  then  all  was  going  as  Nelson  Avished.  The  trap  was 
acting  perfectly.  The  course  Villeneuve  was  taking  would 
bring  him  well  within  striking  distance  of  Nelson's  secret 
position.  But  at  the  last  moment  everything  Avas  upset  by 
one  of  those  incalculable  chances  which  are  inseparable 
from  naval  warfare.  In  the  morning  Villeneuve  had  the  luck 
to  speak  a  neutral — a  Ragusan  merchantman — and  learned 
from  her  where  Nelson  was.  She  had  sighted  his  squadron 
not  on  the  Spanish  coast  at  all,  but  at  Palmas.  In  the  very 
hour  of  success  the  trap  Avas  sprung,  and  Villeneuve  imme- 
diately altered  his  course  to  pass  inside  the  Balearic  Islands. 
It  w^as  a  stroke  of  ill  luck  against  which  Nelson  had  not 
provided.  A  rigorous  criticism  Avill  say  that  the  chance 
of  Villeneuve's  getting  intelligence  from  a  neutral  was  one 
on  which  Nelson  ought  to  have  counted  in  those  busy  seas, 
and  that  when  he  left  the  inner  Balearic  channel  open  he 
should  have  had  a  cruiser  there  to  watch  it,  especially  as  it 
led  directly  to  Cartagena  Avhere  a  Spanish  squadron  lay. 
Whether  Villeneuve  was  bound  east  or  west  it  was  a  pro- 
bable line  for  him  to  take.  But  from  this  counsel  of 
perfection  Nelson's  schemes  fell  short — perhaps  from  lack 
of  cruisers — and  Villeneuve  was  able  to  run  clear  down  the 
coast  of  Spain  out  of  his  ken.^ 