


54  OPENING    OF    THE    CAMPAIGN         march 

the  ^vind  came  fresh  from  the  south-west  and  he  was  forced 
to  run  back  into  Brest  for  safety.^ 

As  the  reports  of  these  simultaneous  movements  reached 
the  Admiralty  their  anxiety  centred  on  Ferrol.  It  seemed 
to  be  indicated  as  the  focus  of  the  mysterious  plan  that  was 
obviously  in  the  wind.  Urgent  orders  were  accordingly 
sent  to  Gardner  to  get  to  his  command  at  once  and  to 
reinforce  Calder  to  the  utmost  of  his  ability.  But  the 
danger  Avas  not  there.  Gourdon  was  not  to  move  from 
Ferrol  till  Gantcaume  appeared,  and  in  that  port  too  all 
remained  quiet.  Only  in  Toulon  was  there  any  change. 
"  Get  to  sea  without  an  action,"  Napoleon  had  telegraphed 
to  Ganteaume  on  the  24th.  "  That  which  is  to  join  you  has 
started."  This  was  not  true.  Villeneuve  was  still  in  Toulon 
and  Nelson  was  watching  him  before  the  port ;  but  it 
Avas  characteristic  of  Napoleon's  handling  to  stimulate  his 
Admirals  with  rose-coloured  information.  When  Nelson  had 
satisfied  himself  by  his  cast  to  the  eastwards  that  the  Morea 
and  Egypt  w^ere  safe,  he  returned  in  hot  haste  to  Pula  Roads 
in  the  south  of  Sardinia,  to  meet  his  store-ships.  There 
he  was  kept  by  foul  weather  all  the  first  week  in  March. 
Not  till  the  0  th  could  he  get  to  his  rendezvous  in  the  Gulf 
of  Palmas,  at  the  south-west  of  the  island,  and  next  day, 
having  heard  Villeneuve  was  again  embarking  his  troops,  he 
decided  to  take  the  squadron  up  to  Toulon." 

At  the  crisis  which  had  now  come  he  had  to  act  entirely 
on  his  own  inspiration.  Of  two  successive  despatch  vessels 
which  had  been  sent  him,  one  had  been  wrecked  off  Cadiz 
and  the  other  had  run  into  Villeneuve's  fleet  and  been  cap- 
tured. He  had  heard  nothing  from  home  since  Novem- 
ber, and  his  position  consequently  was  one  of  peculiar 
difficulty.      He   found    at   Toulon    every  appearance    that 

1  Ganteaume  to  the  Emperor  :  Desbricrc,  v.  47o.  Cotton  to  Admiralty : 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  217. 

-  From  various  references  in  his  letters  it  appears  that  Palmas  was  Ren- 
dezvous 98.  The  xjosition  south  of  Toulon  was  No.  102.  No.  97  was  "  under 
Cape  St.  kSebastiaii,"  just  north  of  Palamos  in  Catalonia.  A  list  of  Mediter- 
ranean Rendezvous  in  use  at  this  time  is  yet  to  seek.  In  Add  MSS.  34950, 
p.  49,  there  is  such  a  list  issued  by  Nelson  in  September  1805.  It  was  the 
official  list  which  was  used  throughout  the  rest  of  the  war,  but  its  numbers 
differ  from  those  of  the  earlier  list :  e.g.  "  Off  Toulon  "  was  No.  93  in  the  new 
list. 


March  NELSON   LAYS   A    TRAP  55 

Villeneuve  was  about  to  put  to  sea,  but  whither  he  could 
not  tell.  For  a  long  time  past  he  had  believed  that  his 
resolute  covering  of  Sicily  and  the  Levant  would  sooner  or 
later  force  the  Toulon  squadron  out  of  the  Mediterranean. 
Yet  he  still  inclined  to  think  Egypt  was  their  aim,  and  he 
was  still  bound  both  by  his  orders  and  his  own  judgment 
to  make  Sicily  and  Sardinia  his  first  care.  To  cover  both 
the  eastward  and  westward  lines  of  operation  was  im- 
possible, except  by  lying  close  before  Toulon,  and  that  was  a 
station  that  could  not  be  maintained  indefinitely,  nor  while 
it  was  maintained  was  there  any  hope  of  bringing  Ville- 
neuve to  decisive  action.  Nelson  therefore  had  to  make 
his  choice  between  one  line  and  the  other.  That  which  led 
out  of  the  Straits  was  the  line  of  least  danger;  the  line 
of  greatest  danger  was  that  which  led  to  Sicily  and  Naples, 
and  this  one  he  determined  to  secure.  But  the  other  was 
not  opened  without  an  effort  to  force  his  adversary  away 
from  it,  and  entrap  him  into  an  action  which  would  solve 
the  strategical  dilemma. 