


NAPOLEON'S    ''ALL   BIG-GUN"   TYPE         47 

campaign  with  any  security  of  judgment.  Modem  English 
critics  of  high  authority  have  pronounced  that  although 
the  British  service  was  richer  in  three-deckers,  yet  this 
apparent  superiority  was  discounted  by  the  fact  that,  ship 
for  ship  and  rate  for  rate,  French  ships  were  superior  in 
size  and  weight  of  metal  l^to  the  British.^  This  result  is 
arrived  at  by  comparing  the  nominal  broadside,  or  weight 
of  "rated"  guns  only.  But  this  test  is  misleading  owing 
to  the  fact  that  most  of  the  British  ships  now  carried  a 
formidable  extra  or  unrated  battery  of  heavy  carronades  on 
their  quarter-decks  and  forecastles.  Even  the  largest  class 
of  24-pounder  seventy-fours,  such  as  the  Mars,  carried  from 
tAvelve  to  fourteen  32-pounders,  which  raised  the  weight  of 
the  broadside  at  fighting  range  to  over  1000  Ibs.^ 

As  to  the  undoubted  value  of  the  new  armament  and 
its  logical  consequence,  we  have  the  opinion  of  that  great 
artillerist  Napoleon  himself.  At  the  crisis  of  the  naval 
struggle  nothing  caused  him  more  anxiety  than  the  advan- 
tage derived  by  his  enemy  from  this  carronade  armament. 
In  March  1805,  so  great  was  his  concern  that  he  gave 
Decres  a  definite  order  to  re-arm  certain  types  of  ships  in- 
cluding seventy-fours  on  the  all  big-gun  one-calibre  system. 
"  I  have  several  times  spoken,"  he  says,  "  of  my  project  of 
arming  ships  of  the  line  with  guns  of  the  same  calibre." 
All  light  guns  from  12-pounders  downwards  were  to  be 
abolished,  and  nothing  but  36-pounders  and  36-pound  car- 
ronades retained.  ''  I  think,"  he  says,  "  this  carronade  will 
have  greater  power  than  an  ordinary  18-pounder.  .  .  .  When 
ships  are  firing  at  600  toises  (about  1600  yards),  they  will 
not  do  much  harm ;  at  300  toises  this  volume  of  3 6 -pound 
shot  will  smash  the  masts  and  spars."  Decres  accordingly 
was  to  arm  a  frigate  in  this  way,  and  also  a  seventy-four 
"with  36-pounders  in  its  first  battery,  and  36-pound  car- 
ronades in  its  second,  and  lighter  carronades  on  the  quarter- 
deck and  forecastle.  "  In  this  war,"  he  urges,  "  the  English 
have    been   the   first    to    use    carronades,   and    everywhere 

^  See  particularly  "  Barfleur,"  Naval  Policy,  p.  212. 

2  Many  of  the  smaller  18-pounder  seventy-fours  also  carried  twelve  32- 
pounder  carronades,  e.g.  the  Dragon  (1815  tons)  had  tv^enty-eight  32-pounders, 
thirty-four  18-pounders,  and  twelve  32-pounder  carronades. 


48  OPENING    OF   THE    CAMPAIGN 

they  have  done  us  great  harm.  We  must  hasten  to  perfect 
their  system,  for  the  argument  is  all  on  one  side  for  sea 
service  in  favour  of  the  system  of  large  calibres,  and  we 
ought  to  put  the  calibres  higher  than  36  if  it  were  not  for 
the  difficulty  of  handling  the  shot.  I  specially  desire  that 
you  will  not  lose  sight  of  an  object  so  important.  I  am  per- 
suaded that  a  seventy -four  able  in  this  way  to  fire  seventy-four 
or  seventy-six  guns  with  30 -pound  shot  would  have  an  incal- 
culable advantage  over  a  ship  armed  in  the  ordinary  way."  ^ 
The  trouble  was  to  get  carronades  enough,  and  all  through 
the  year  he  kept  pressing  his  minister  on  the  subject.  "  It 
was  with  carronades,"  he  says,  "  the  English  set  the  Lorient 
on  fire  [that  is,  at  the  battle  of  the  Nile],  and  in  them  they 
have  an  immense  advantage  over  us ; "  and  a  fortnight  later 
more  urgently,  in  answer  to  Decres'  difficulties  in  providing 
them :  *'  The  least  that  can  be  asked  of  the  administrative 
branch  is  that  soldiers  shall  fight  with  equal  arms.  It  is 
the  first  duty  of  a  minister,  and  nothing  can  excuse  his  not 
fulfilling  it.  Have  we  not  disadvantage  enough  without 
that  of  armament  ?  Your  '  ifs  '  and  *  huts  ' — that  is  no 
justification."  Then  a  week  later,  as  the  crisis  approaches 
and  Ganteaume  cannot  move  from  Brest,  more  vehemently 
still :  "  But,  for  God's  sake,  ship  me  some  carronades.  It 
is  only  Avith  guns  you  can  arm  ships  of  the  line,  and  for 
ships  of  the  line  there  is  nothing  but  guns  of  heavy  calibre." 
So  every  w^eek  comes  a  fresh  reprimand.  ''  The  English," 
he  writes  from  Genoa,  as  he  is  about  to  start  for  Boulogne, 
"  without  saying  a  word,  have  practised  this  method.  Here's 
ten  years  Ave  are  behind  their  Admiralty.  ...  I  see  no 
attention  being  paid  to  it."  But  to  the  end  he  could  not 
get  it  done.^ 