

It  is  clear  then  that  we  cannot  assume  that  our  superi- 
ority in  three-deckers  was  neutralised  by  the  greater  size 
and  nominal  armament  of  the  French  two-deckers.  How- 
ever low  may  be  our  opinion  of  Napoleon  on  points  of  naval 
tactics  and  strategy,  as  an  authority  upon  gunnery  he 
stands  in  the  first  rank.     It  is  entirely  a  question  of  gunnery 

^  Napoleon  to  Decr&s,  March  13,  1805  :  Correspondance,  x.  221. 
2  Napoleon  to  Decres,  ibid.,  June  2,  13,  22;  July  5,  19. 


March  RELATIVE    VALUES    OF    SHIPS  49 

and  armament,  and  judging  by  these  tests  Napoleon — the 
man  most  nearly  concerned  and  having  through  his  excellent 
naval  intelligence  department  the  best  means  of  knowing — 
had  no  doubt  whatever  that  we  had  stolen  a  march  on  liim 
and  that  ship  for  ship  we  had  a  material  advantage  that 
was  not  fair  to  his  own  men. 

This  opinion  in  the  absence  of  strong  rebutting  evidence 
we  are  bound  to  accept.  We  must  take  it  that  there  was 
nothing  in  the  respective  armaments  to  negative  the  basis 
of  comparison  which  is  to  be  assumed  from  the  actual 
British  distribution,  and  which  is  confirmed  by  Ganteaume 
and  Napoleon,  that  one  three-decker  in  a  squadron  was 
regarded  as  the  equivalent  of  at  least  two  two-deckers. 
Even  the  presence  of  the  powerful  French  80 -gun  ships 
will  not  detract  from  the  general  rule,  for  we  too  had  this 
type  of  ship,  and  any  excess  the  French  had  would  be 
balanced  by  our  first-rate  three-deckers,  while  the  second- 
rates,  that  is  three-decked  ships  under  100  guns,  balanced 
the  seventy -fours. 

With  this  rule  then  as  a  rough  guide  we  may  approach 
the  campaign  with  some  confidence  in  our  ability  to  appraise 
the  relative  values  of  fleets.  As  March  drew  to  an  end  the 
real  campaign  of  Trafalgar  was  about  to  open.  To  appreciate 
the  situation  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  was  to  open 
not  only  with  the  first  moves  of  Napoleon's  great  offensive 
combination,  but  also  with  the  first  moves  of  our  offensive 
combination  with  Russia.  By  the  middle  of  March,  it  will 
be  remembered,  the  basis  of  the  treaty  with  Russia  had  been 
settled  and  the  British  draft  had  gone  to  St.  Petersburg. 
Without  waiting  for  the  actual  conclusion  of  the  treaty 
Craig's  orders  were  issued.  His  force,  besides  300  light 
dragoons,  consisted  of  six  battalions  of  infantry,  two  of 
which  were  to  be  dropped  at  Gibraltar  and  the  rest  taken 
on  to  garrison  Malta,  thereby  setting  free  some  8000 
seasoned  troops.  Forty-five  transports  were  ready  for  their 
reception,  and  for  the  escort  two  of  the  line,  the  Queen,  a 
three-decker,  and  the  Dragon  74,  which  Rear- Admiral 
Knight  was  taking  out  to  reinforce  Orde  before  Cadiz. 
The  instructions  of  Earl  Camden,  Secretary  for  War  and 