

It  was  a  narrow  escape,  but  there  had  been  no  panic  or 
hurry,  no  cutting  or  slipping,  but  a  thoroughly  seamanlike 
retreat.  What  to  do  next  was  the  difficulty.  Ought  he 
to  stay  where  he  was  and  wait  for  Nelson,  ought  he  to 
go  into  the  Straits,  or  ought  he  to  go  north  and  close  on 
the  Western  Squadron  ?  At  Lagos  he  called  Strachan  to 
council.  Strachan,  who  had  just  left  Nelson  and  knew 
how  much  his  mind  had  been  occupied  with  Egypt,  assured 
Orde  that  Villeneuve's  escape  could  only  be  explained  by 
Nelson's  having  gone  again  to  Alexandria.  Then  Orde 
made  his  decision.  He  could  not  doubt  that  Villeneuve 
had  come  to  bring  out  Gravina's  squadron;  and  he  had  just 
heard  the  news  of  Ganteaume's  having  come  out  of  Brest 
into  Bertheaume  Road.  The  indications  in  his  opinion 
pointed  to  a  great  and  dangerous  concentration  of  all 
Napoleon  s  squadrons,  and  on  this  appreciation  there  was 
in  his  eyes  but  one  thing  to  do.  Strachan's  cruiser  the 
Sophie  Avas  ordered  to  Ushant  immediately  to  warn  the 
Admiral,  and  to  inform  him  that  he  himself  would  close 
upon  him,  if,  as  he  said,  nothing  occurred  in  the  morning 
to  prevent  his  doing  so.  "I  shall  make  the  best  of  my 
way  to  join  Lord  Gardner,"  he  wrote  to  the  Admiralty,  "  as 
an  immediate  accession  of  force  may  be  of  importance  at 
this  critical  juncture." 


64  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  April 

In  view  of  the  charges  which  were  made  so  freely  by 
Nelson  and  others  against  him,  it  is  important  to  note  that 
it  was  not  his  whole  fleet  he  was  taking  north,  but  only  his 
battle  squadron.  The  whole  of  his  cruisers,  as  we  shall  see, 
were  left  behind  with  carefully  framed  orders  for  keeping 
touch  with  Villeneuve.  Two  days  later — on  April  12th — 
as  he  had  seen  nothing  of  the  enemy  his  view  of  the  situa- 
tion was  confirmed,  and  it  became  of  the  utmost  importance 
to  warn  the  Admiralty  as  soon  as  possible.  Baffling  winds 
were  still  preventing  him  from  doubling  Cape  St.  Vincent, 
the  Sophie  was  still  in  company,  and  he  charged  her  with 
further  despatches  in  which  he  developed  fully  the  appre- 
ciation on  which  he  was  acting.  "  I  am  persuaded,"  he 
wrote  to  the  Admiralty,  "  the  enemy  will  not  remain  long 
in  Cadiz,  and  I  think  the  chances  are  great  in  favour  of 
their  destination  being  westward  where  by  a  sudden  concen- 
tration of  several  detachments,  Bonaparte  may  hope  to  gain 
a  temporary  superiority  in  the  Channel,  and  availing  him- 
self of  it  to  strike  his  enemy  a  mortal  blow."  Here,  then, 
for  the  first  time  from  an  English  pen  we  have  a  just  ap- 
preciation of  the  real  situation,  and  it  comes  from  this 
despised  officer.  It  was  not  that  he  did  not  realise  the 
importance  of  the  Mediterranean,  but  that  he  felt  the 
danger  was  past.  "  Could  I  have  brought  myself,"  he  went 
on,  "  to  believe  the  fleet  would  return  towards  the  eastwards 
I  should  not  have  hesitated  one  moment  to  risk  passing  the 
Straits,  although  left  ignorant  by  Lord  Nelson  of  his  posi- 
tion and  movements."  With  him  as  with  Nelson  it  was 
a  question  of  the  point  of  greatest  danger,  and  that  he  saw 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Channel.  "  In  bringing  to  England 
the  large  ships  under  my  command,"  he  says,  "  I  shall 
afford  an  opportunity  to  dispose  of  them  anew :  by  which 
little  can  be  risked,  and  much  might  be  gained  if  the 
enemy's  blow  is  aimed  at  England  or  Ireland." 