


66  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  April 

sea,  if  they  can  avoid  it."  He  was  absolutely  right  though 
he  did  not  as  yet  know  the  sting  that  was  about  to  be  put 
forth,  which  in  the  end  was  to  make  it  impossible  for 
Napoleon  to  avoid  ordering  them  back. 

It  is  but  bare  justice,  therefore,  to  Orde  to  recognise 
that  his  closing  in  with  his  battle  squadron  was  in  line 
with  the  British  strategical  tradition  of  concentration  on 
the  Western  Squadron  and  that  his  decision  was  based  on 
a  sagacious  penetration  of  Napoleon's  war-plan.  Had  he 
made  the  move  without  taking  every  precaution  in  his 
power  to  keep  touch  with  Villeneuve  he  would  neverthe- 
less have  been  seriously  to  blame.  But  in  fact  he  did  do 
everything  that  the  means  available  permitted,  and  his 
first  care  before  moving  his  battle  squadron  had  been  to 
make  a  thoughtful  disposition  of  the  cruisers  he  was  leav- 
ing behind.  He  had  already  sent  off  a  merchantman  to 
find  Nelson,^  and  before  going  north  he  despatched  a 
cruiser  to  the  West  Indies  and  a  cleared  transport  for 
Madeira  to  warn  the  home-coming  East  Indiamen.  Nelson's 
old  friend,  Captain  Sutton,  of  the  Am'phion  frigate,  with  two 
sloops  under  him,  the  Wasp  and  Beagle,  was  all  he  had 
left  to  watch  Villeneuve.  Sutton  was  directed  to  take 
station  off  St.  Vincent  "  to  gain  intelligence  of  the  enemy's 
movements  and  prevent  vessels  bound  east  of  the  Cape 
from  falling  into  the  enemy's  hands."  If  he  ascertains 
Villeneuve  has  gone  west,  he  is  to  direct  all  ships  of  the 
line  he  may  meet  to  go  to  Ushant;  if  he  has  gone  east, 
then  they  are  to  try  to  join  Nelson.  The  Wasp  was  to  observe 
Cadiz.  The  Beagle,  which  was  already  cruising  between 
Capes  Spartel  and  Trafalgar,  Sutton  was  to  keep  there  to 
hold  the  privateers  in  check,  and  report  enemy's  squadrons. 
But  in  truth  she  was  no  longer  there.  Unknown  to  Orde, 
she  had  already  located  the  enemy,  and  having  failed  to 
find  her  chief,  was  then  well  on  her  way  to  England.^ 

With  a  decision  founded  on  so  well  reasoned  an  appre- 

1  Orde  to  Nelson  :  Add.  MSS.  34929,  April  11. 

2  For  Orde's  despatches  and  cruiser  orders,  see  Admiralty  Secretary,  In- 
letters,  410,  March  19,  April  10,  11,  12,  15,  17,  19  ;  and  for  his  flag-captain's 
report,  which  entirely  confirms  them,  Ralfe,  Naval  Biography,  ii.  75.  For  the 
Beagles  movements,  see  post,  p.  111. 


April  ORDE'S    RETREAT  67 

ciation,  there  seems  little  fault  to  find.  It  has  been 
objected  that  he  might  better  perhaps  have  fallen  back 
with  his  battle  squadron  on  Calder,  and  this  indeed  was 
Avhat  the  Admiralty  ordered  him  to  do  when  they  knew 
what  had  happened.  But  in  view  of  the  prevailing  northerly 
winds,  Ferrol  was  notoriously  hard  to  reach.  The  true 
course  for  Ushant  lay  far  to  the  westward,  and  Nelson  him- 
self was  afterwards  forced  to  take  it  when  he  in  his  turn 
closed  on  Cornwallis.  The  fact  is,  however,  that  in  spite 
of  these  difficulties  Orde  did  try  to  get  touch  with  Calder, 
and  it  was  not  his  fault  that  he  failed.  After  holding  the 
usual  course  north -westAvard  till  the  22nd,  he  found  a  wind 
that  enabled  him  to  reach  north-east,  and  in  three  days  he 
passed  near  the  Finisterre  rendezvous.  There  he  should 
have  found  one  of  Calder's  cruisers,  which  was  always 
stationed  there,  but  the  rendezvous  was  bare.  The  fact 
was  the  Melampus  (Captain  Poyntz)  had  left  it  just  a  week 
before.  By  a  piece  of  extraordinarily  smart  work,  to  be 
related  presently,  he  had  got  news  of  Villeneuve's  having 
passed  the  Straits,  and  had  gone  off  to  warn  Calder.  Before 
he  could  be  replaced  Orde  arrived.  Nevertheless  Orde 
held  on  till  he  was  some  fifty  miles  north-west  of  Ferrol 
and  actually  on  Calder's  station.  Still  there  was  no  trace 
of  him,  and  Orde,  assuming  apparently  that  he  must  have 
had  news  of  Villeneuve  and  fallen  back  on  Ushant,  stood 
away  north  to  do  the  same.^ 