

Such  are  the  true  facts  of  this  interesting  case,  and  in 
face  of  them  it  is  bare  justice  to  revise  the  cruel  judgment 
which  has  passed  into  history  upon  Nelson's  hasty  and  ill- 
informed  strictures.  If  Orde  failed  to  do  all  that  might 
have  been  done,  it  was  mainly  due  to  the  disposition  of  his 
scanty  cruisers.  In  the  arrangement  he  adopted  there  was 
one  important  point  he  had  failed  to  reckon,  and  that  was 
the  moral  effect  of  Nelson's  unlocated  fleet  on  the  French 
Admiral's  nerves.  Yet  the  omission  was  pardonable.  He 
was  not  to  guess  that  Villeneuve,  having  risked  so  much  to 
join  Gravina's  fleet,  would  not  dare  to  wait  long  enough  to 

^  Log  of  the  Glory.  For  the  Melampus,  see  her  Log,  and  Gardner  to  Marsden, 
April  22  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  236,  and  post,  p.  73, 


68  VILLENEUVE'S   EVASION  April 

make  the  junction  complete.  Yet  so  it  was.  At  eight 
o'clock  on  April  9th  the  French  anchored  outside  the 
bay  and  signalled  for  the  Aigle,  a  French  seventy-four  that 
had  taken  refuge  there  early  in  the  war,  and  to  Gravina 
and  the  Spaniards  to  come  out.  By  ten  o'clock  they  had 
begun  to  move,  and  at  one  o'clock  Villeneuve  made  the 
signal  to  weigh.  In  his  eagerness  to  hide  his  tracks  from 
Nelson  he  dared  not  sacrifice  the  obscurity  of  a  single 
night.  After  waiting  less  than  four  hours,  he  held  away 
in  the  dark,  leaving  the  Spaniards  to  straggle  after  him  as 
best  they  could.  Had  Orde  remained  he  might  have 
captured  them  nearly  all,  but  can  he  be  blamed  if  he 
never  thought  such  a  movement  possible  ?  And  yet — if 
he  had  only  waited  to  make  sure,  if  just  for  one  day  he 
had  "  hung  heavily  on  their  skirts,"  as  he  expected  Nelson 
to  do  !  But  his  chance  was  gone,  and  so  it  happened 
beyond  all  calculation  before  Sutton  could  even  begin  his 
observation,  Villeneuve  and  Gravina  were  gone,  and  from 
that  moment  they  were  completely  lost  to  British  ken. 


CHAPTER  V 

LORD  BARHAM   AT  WORK 

At  home,  in  the  centre  of  war  direction,  all  was  confusion. 
No  moment  could  have  been  more  inopportune  for  the 
escape  of  the  Toulon  squadron.  At  the  end  of  the  previous 
year  the  famous  Commission  for  inquiring  into  the  state 
of  the  Navy,  which  had  been  sitting  since  1802,  issued  its 
Tenth  Report,  and  public  opinion  was  startled  with  irrefutable 
evidence  that  certain  irregularities  had  been  permitted  with 
the  Navy  balances.  Lord  Melville  as  First  Lord  was  of 
course  responsible.  He  was  moreover  a  bosom  friend  of 
Pitt,  and  the  temptation  for  the  Opposition  to  raise  a  storm 
was  irresistible.  Just  as  Villeneuve  was  approaching  the 
Straits  it  burst  with  a  formal  indictment  in  the  House  of 
Commons.  Pitt  exhausted  all  his  powers  in  the  defence  of 
the  friend  who  had  been  serving  him  and  the  country  with 
so  much  ability.  So  brilliant  and  impassioned  was  his 
effort  that  he  was  within  an  ace  of  success.  In  the  end  the 
motion  was  carried  against  him,  but  only  by  the  Speaker's 
casting  vote.  Under  the  shock  Pitt  broke  down,  and  as  he 
rose  to  leave  the  House  the  young  bloods  of  his  party 
closed  round  like  a  body-guard  lest  his  enemies  should  see 
his  tears.  Next  day,  as  Orde's  blockade  Avas  being  broken, 
Melville  resigned,  and  the  Admiralty  was  without  a  head. 