

1  stanhope,  Life  of  Pitt,  i.  377. 


HIS    ANTECEDENTS  71 

and  Lord  Chatham's  candour  in  admitting  the  propriety 
of  my  resignation."^  Later  on,  however  —  in  1794  — 
when  the  new  war  had  broken  out,  he  loyally  came  for- 
ward again  and  accepted  a  seat  on  the  Board  under  Lord 
Chatham,  with  Hood,  Gardner,  and  Affleck  for  his  naval 
colleagues. 

Since  then  he  had  been  unemployed  but  not  unoccupied. 
Melville  was  his  near  kinsman  and  rested  on  him  as  his 
confidential  adviser.  Wilberforce,  indeed,  who  had  found  in 
Middleton's  progressive  mind  one  of  his  earliest  supporters 
in  the  Slave  Trade  crusade,  assures  us  that  "  Lord  Melville's 
plans  for  the  naval  force  of  the  kingdom  were  in  fact  Sir 
Charles's."  '^  Seeing  what  Middleton's  reputation  was  both 
in  the  service  and  the  Cabinet,  and  that  Gambier  the  First 
Sea  Lord  was  his  nephew,  this  is  credible  enough,  and 
indeed  by  no  other  means  can  we  account  for  the  precision 
and  balance  Avith  which  all  the  best  traditions  of  the  service 
had  been  embodied  in  the  strategy  of  the  war. 

A  further  reason  for  Pitt's  insisting  on  the  appointment 
was,  if  we  may  believe  Wilberforce,  that  Melville  himself 
had  named  Middleton  as  the  best  man  to  succeed  him. 
But  it  was  not  without  a  severe  struggle  that  the  minister 
got  his  way.  The  King  wanted  Chatham  again  or  Castle- 
reagh  or  Charles  Yorke,  who  had  been  Secretary  for  War 
under  the  last  administration.  Addington,  from  whose  in- 
adequate hands  Pitt  had  snatched  the  direction  of  the  war, 
had  consented  early  in  the  year  to  join  his  Government, 
with  the  title  of  Lord  Sidmouth,  but  characteristically  he 
expected  further  reward.  Now  he  demanded  the  vacant 
place  for  one  of  his  own  men.  In  the  stress  of  the  war  on 
his  enfeebled  constitution  it  was  more  than  Pitt  could 
endure.  Without  a  sure  hand  at  the  Admiralty  he  must 
break  down.     "  It  is  inconceivable,"  wrote  Woronzow  to  his 

^  Middleton  to  Pitt,  Feb.  8  and  March  15,  1790:  Chatham,  Papers,  Bundle 
111.  He  left  in  Pitt's  hands  a  long  and  detailed  memo,  on  the  reorganisation 
of  the  Board. — Ibid,  and  Bundle  245. 

2  Stanhope,  Life  of  Pitt,  iv.  287,  and  Wilberforce's  Life,  iii.  223.  In  the 
Barhavi  Papers  there  is  also  a  "  Note  for  Mr.  James,"  the  historian,  in  which 
it  is  stated,  "  Mr.  Pitt  coming  to  power,  it  was  decided  by  Mr.  Pitt  and  Lord 
Melville  to  consult  Sir  Charles  Middleton  in  all  matters  connected  with  the 
restoration  of  the  fleet." 


72  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  April 

Government  in  the  midst  of  the  poKtical  and  naval  crisis, 
"  how  one  man  can  suffice  for  such  a  weight  of  business  and 
fatigue ;  how  he  can  keep  straight  in  his  head  so  many 
tangled  and  heterogeneous  matters ;  how  he  can  disen- 
tangle and  grasp  them  and  develop  them  with  such  singular 
judgment  and  lucidity."  ^  For  a  fortnight  Pitt  hesitated 
under  the  strain.  Then  he  informed  Sidmouth  that  further 
delay  was  impossible  and  that  he  had  submitted  Middleton's 
name  to  the  King.  Sidmouth  and  his  closest  follower,  the 
Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  who  was  his  nominee  for  the 
place,  immediately  tendered  their  resignations.  To  all  Pitt's 
other  troubles  was  added  a  ministerial  crisis ;  but  he  per- 
severed, and  finally,  on  promising  Sidmouth  that  Middleton's 
appointment  was  to  be  regarded  "  as  not  for  long,"  both  the 
recalcitrants  consented  to  retain  office. 