

While  becalmed  off  the  port  he  had  heard  that  the 


62  VILLENEUVE'S    EVASION  April 

situation  at  Cadiz  was  unchanged.  Gravina  was  there  with 
fifteen  of  the  line,  but  of  these  only  seven  or  eight  two- 
deckers  Avere  as  yet  ready  for  sea,  and  he  was  being  watched 
by  Orde  with  a  somewhat  inferior  force  of  one  three-decker 
and  four  others,  of  which  three  were  only  sixty- fours.  For 
Orde  it  was  therefore  a  critical  moment.  His  conduct 
when  the  thunderbolt  fell  on  him  has  been  universally  con- 
demned and  covered  with  contempt.  To  deal  so  with  the 
situation  is  unprofitable.  Let  us  rather  see  what  may  be 
learned  from  an  exact  view  of  his  difficulties  and  of  the  way 
he  arrived  at  the  conclusion  he  did. 

He  was  chafing  even  more  than  Nelson  at  the  strained 
conditions  which  the  division  of  the  Mediterranean  station 
had  set  up.  The  Admiralty,  in  response  to  Nelson's  protest 
against  his  loss  of  prize  money,  had  just  informed  Orde  he 
would  have  to  share  a  proportion  of  his  captures  with  his 
brother  Admiral.  He  had  applied  to  them  as  to  what  he 
Avas  to  do  with  the  treasure  with  which  his  ships  were  laden 
and  this  was  all  the  answer  he  got.  There  were  other 
sources  of  friction  inherent  in  the  situation  which  with  the 
rest  made  it  unendurable,  and  three  days  before  Villeneuve 
sailed  he  had  formally  asked  to  be  relieved.^ 

As  Villeneuve  left  Cartagena  some  store-ships  had  joined 
Orde,  and  since  the  easterly  wind  had  not  reached  him  he 
was  taking  advantage  of  the  calm  to  clear  them.  By  mid- 
day the  work  was  in  full  swing.  Every  ship  had  a  transport 
alongside,  the  decks  were  cumbered  with  casks  and  cases, 
and  the  men  were  at  dinner,  when  suddenly  they  saw  a  ship 
of  the  line  running  before  the  coming  breeze  under  a  press 
of  sail,  firing  guns  and  making  the  signal  for  a  superior 
enemy's  fleet.  It  was  Sir  Richard  Strachan  in  the  Renown. 
On  the  previous  day,  in  pursuance  of  the  mission  on  which 
Nelson  had  sent  him,  he  had  seen  the  homeward-bound 
convoy  clear  of  Cape  Spartel  and  the  Alge<?iras  gunboats 
and  privateers,  and  had  then  turned  back  to  Gibraltar  for 
some  needful  repairs.  As  morning  broke  he  was  off  Tarifa, 
and  so  had  seen   Villeneuve   coming  out  of   the   Straits.^ 

1  Orde  to  Lord  Melville,  March  27  :  Nicolas,  vi.  383  n. 

2  Strachan  to  Nelson,  April  30:  Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSB.  3-1929. 


April  SURPRISES    ORDE  63 

Instantly  he  went  about,  and  accompanied  by  his  frigate 
made  for  Orde,  and  had  it  not  been  for  his  smart  warning 
Orde  always  believed  he  must  have  been  destroyed. 

The  breeze  that  Strachan  was  bringing  down  had  not 
yet  reached  him,  but  he  made  the  signal  to  weigh,  and 
prepare  for  action,  cast  off  his  transports  with  directions  to 
retire  to  neutral  waters  at  Lagos,  and  then  did  his  best  to  form 
order  of  battle.  As  the  breeze  swelled  his  canvas  he  moved 
away  towards  Lagos  under  easy  sail  and  in  the  larboard 
line  of  bearing — that  is,  in  immediate  readiness  to  form  line 
of  battle,  and  engage  to  cover  the  retreat  of  his  store-ships. 
But  Villeneuve  had  but  one  idea  in  his  mind,  and  with  his 
cruisers  ahead  of  him  he  was  content  to  make  for  the 
mouth  of  Cadiz  Bay,  without  any  attempt  to  molest  Orde's 
deliberate  movement. 