

Fortunately  there  was  at  hand  a  means  of  preserving 
continuity.  The  veteran  Sir  Charles  Middleton  was  still 
alive,  and  though  just  turned  eighty  was  still  full  of  vigour 
in  mind  and  body.  Throughout  the  War  of  American  Inde- 
pendence he  had  been  Controller,  standing  out  through  that 
period  of  inept  administration  as  the  pillar  of  the  service, 
the  confidant  to  whom  all  the  best  men  afloat  turned  in 

their  distress  and  despair.     During  his  tenure  of  the  office 

69 


70  LORD    BARHAM   AT    WORK 

the  Supply  department  of  the  Navy  had  been  put  at  last  in 
a  fairly  efficient  state,  though  he  himself  was  dissatisfied. 
He  longed  to  see  much  further  improvement,  which  without 
support  from  above  he  had  not  the  power  to  effect.  A  few 
years  later  the  power  he  sought  was  within  his  grasp.  In 
1788  Pitt,  during  his  first  administration,  decided  to  re- 
place Lord  Howe  by  a  civilian.  The  man  he  selected  was 
his  own  inexperienced  and  not  too  capable  elder  brother, 
Lord  Chatham.  He  had  a  remarkable  talent,  however,  for 
smoothing  business  in  the  Cabinet,  and  to  meet  the  inevi- 
table objections  to  the  appointment  of  such  a  man  to  the 
head  of  the  Admiralty,  Pitt  decided  to  offer  the  post  of 
First  Sea  Lord  to  Middleton.  It  was  felt  that  if  Chatham 
were  given  the  veteran  Controller  for  his  chief  professional 
adviser  public  opinion  would  be  satisfied.  Though  Middleton 
had  never  flown  his  flag,  he  was  recognised  as  a  master  of 
the  naval  art  second  only  to  Howe  himself.  "  Sir  Charles 
Middleton's  name  and  character,"  wrote  Grenville,  "  will  hold 
out  a  solution."  Middleton,  however,  in  loyalty  perhaps 
to  Howe,  would  not  lend  himself  to  the  solution  and  declined 
to  serve.^  About  eighteen  months  later  he  went  even 
further,  in  marking  his  disapproval  of  Lord  Chatham's 
appointment  and  the  way  he  was  administering  the  Ad- 
miralty. Regardless  of  everything  but  the  good  of  the 
service,  he  had  laid  the  shortcomings  of  colleagues  and 
subordinates  candidly  before  a  Committee  of  Inquiry.  Un- 
supported by  the  Government  he  found  his  position  impos- 
sible, and  in  February  1790  he  had  placed  his  resignation 
in  Pitt's  hands.  His  evidence  at  the  Inquiry,  he  explained, 
had  created  so  much  jealousy  of  him  in  the  office  that  in 
view  of  the  delay  that  Avas  going  to  occur  in  acting  on  its 
report  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  go  on.  Pitt  and  his 
brother  apparently  tried  to  induce  him  to  remain,  but  he 
was  obdurate.  "The  motives  of  my  resignation,"  he  wrote  to 
the  Prime  Minister  a  week  or  two  later,  "  are  by  no  means 
merely  personal.  I  am  so  firmly  persuaded  that  the  present 
situation  of  the  Navy  Office  could  afford  me  no  means  of 
continuing  any  longer  useful,  that  I  flatter  myself  with  your 