

For  the  next  two  days  he  laboured  round  St.  Vincent, 
and  then,  owing  either  to  stress  of  weather  or  to  a  desire 
to  sweep  the  ground  he  was  leaving,  he  stood  back  to 
the  south.  By  the  16  th  he  had  stretched  down  below  the 
latitude  of  the  Straits,  and  next  day  he  began  to  make  the 


April  ORDE'S    APPRECIATION  65 

usual  westing  for  a  voyage  north.  In  all  this  time  he  had 
not  found  a  trace  of  Villeneuve,  but  whatever  the  intention 
of  his  movement,  the  result  left  him  convinced  of  the  cor- 
rectness of  his  appreciation.^  He  accordingly  resolved  to 
send  forward  the  Polyphemus,  his  fastest  two-decker,  to 
communicate  his  final  view  to  the  Admiralty.  She  was 
charged  with  a  despatch  in  which  his  appreciation  was 
more  fully  reasoned  in  the  light  of  Villeneuve's  disappear- 
ance. He  assured  them  that  whatever  had  happened  the 
enemy  could  not  possibly  have  got  ahead  of  him  to  the 
northward.  It  was  true  that  his  failure  to  find  Villeneuve 
to  the  westward  might  suggest  a  return  to  the  Mediter- 
ranean, but  he  argued  with  ability  that  the  whole  strate- 
gical conditions  rendered  that  course  the  least  likely  and 
the  least  dangerous.  Villeneuve,  he  urged,  could  not  hope 
to  evade  Nelson  twice ;  and  even  if  he  did  pass  back  into 
the  Straits  reinforced  from  the  Cadiz  squadron,  still  it  did 
not  mean  defeating  Nelson.  The  men  of  the  War  of 
American  Independence  had  too  much  experience  of  the 
preventive  power  that  lay  in  a  well-handled  inferior  fleet ; 
and  of  his  rival's  tactical  genius  Orde  had  the  highest 
opinion.  "  I  dare  believe,"  he  wrote,  "  Lord  Nelson  will 
be  found  in  condition  with  his  twelve  of  the  line  and 
numerous  frigates  to  act  on  the  defensive  without  loss,  and 
even  to  hanof  heavily  on  the  skirts  of  the  enemy's  fleet 
should  it  attempt  any  material  service,  especially  when 
encumbered  with  troops."  It  was  so  Kempenfelt  had  laid 
down  the  power  of  a  naval  defensive  in  the  darkest  days 
of  the  old  war,  and  Nelson's  own  views  to  the  same  effect 
on  the  possibilities  of  retarding  operations  at  sea  are  well 
known. 

Finally,  he  clinches  his  reasoning  with  a  last  penetrat- 
ing appreciation.  "  Besides,"  he  says,  ''  I  am  perfectly  con- 
vinced that  the  French  are  too  well  aware  of  the  advantage 
they  may  derive  in  a  contest  with  us  by  having  their  fleets 
out  of  the  Mediterranean,  ever  to  send  them  back  to  that 

^  This  curious  movement  is  recorded  in  the  Log  of  the  Glory,  Orde's  flag- 
ship, but  not  in  any  of  his  despatches.  The  despatch  he  sent  off  after  making 
it  merely  records,  that  he  had  not  yet  been  able  to  double  St.  Vincent  owing 
to  adverse  weather. 