

^  He  had  just  returned  from  escorting  Nelson's  victual  and  coal  ships  to 
Rendezvous  97,  that  is,  under  Cape  San  Sebastian,  on  .the  Catalonian  coast. 
Nelson  to  Capel :  Nicolas,  vi.  409. 

^  Lord  Mark  Kerr  to  Nelson,  April  9 :  Nelson  Papers,  Add.  3ISS. 
34929. 


74  LORD    BARHAM    AT   WORK  mril 

which  Calder  kept  stationed  on  the  regular  Finisterre  ren- 
dezvous.^ She  went  off  to  Calder  and  Calder  sent  her  on  to 
Gardner,  leaving  Kerr  free  to  go  straight  on  to  warn  Ireland. 
Calder,  unlike  Orde,  boldly  held  his  ground,  but  his  case  was 
widely  different.  Orde's  blockade  had  been  broken,  Calder's 
had  not,  and  it  was  obviously  his  duty  to  maintain  it  as 
long  as  he  could.  Moreover  he  was  in  no  danger  of  being 
embayed  and  held  to  mercy,  as  Orde  was  in  the  precarious 
winds  of  the  Cadiz  station.  By  no  means  could  a  squadron 
coming  from  the  south  force  him  to  action  if  he  chose  to 
retire.  He  therefore  contented  himself  with  retaining  one 
of  Gardner's  cruisers  to  replace  the  Melampus  off  Finisterre  ; 
and  so,  secure  from  surprise,  he  held  on  confidently  where 
he  was. 

Meanwhile  Kerr  hurried  on  for  Ireland.  Midway  across 
the  Bay  he  had  the  luck  to  meet  a  Guernsey  privateer  lugger. 
He  ordered  her  into  Plymouth  with  a  despatch  for  the 
Admiralty  and  himself  carried  on  for  Cork,  communicating 
his  news  to  Gardner's  outlying  cruisers  as  he  passed.'  It 
was  a  fine  performance.  Few  features,  indeed,  of  these  wars 
are  more  striking  than  the  resource  and  decision  which 
cruiser  captains  showed  in  spreading  intelligence  of  this 
nature  on  their  own  responsibility  and  their  own  grasp  of 
the  situation. 

It  was  through  Gardner  that  the  Admiralty  first  got 
Kerr's  startling  news.  They  had  it  on  the  25th,  just  a  week 
after  Craig  and  Knight  had  sailed ;  and  on  that  day  were 
issued  a  series  of  those  remarkable  orders  which  always 
seemed  ready  for  any  eventuality,  and  which  can  only  have 
proceeded  from  the  rich  store  of  strategical  tradition  that 
was  accumulated  in  the  brain  of  Middleton.  By  that  time 
he  knew  the  King  had  approved  Pitt's  choice,  and  doubt- 
less he  was  already  at  work. 

The  first  thought  was  for  the  safety  of  the  West  Indies. 
A  raid  in  that  quarter  had  long  been  expected,  and  in  the 

^  This,  according  to  the  Signal  Book  (1808),  in  which  tl)e  rendezvous  were 
printed  for  the  first  time,  was  No.  52,  "  six  leagues  due  N.W.  of  Finisterre," 
but  James  says  it  was  at  this  time  38  leagues  N.W.  (vol.  iv.  p.  452).  The  two 
cruisers  actually  met  5  or  6  leagues  S.S.W.  of  Finisterre. 

-  Kerr  to  Gardner,  April  23  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  237. 


