

^  The  Dcw  cruiser  distribution  was  as  follows — one  at  Galita,  one  on  the 
coast  of  Africa,  and  one  between  Galita  and  the  shore,  with  instructions  to 
get  information  from  Tunis.  These  three  were  to  stop  Villeneuve  stealing  to 
the  eastward  by  hugging  the  African  coast.  Then  there  were  two  between 
Nelson  and  Toro,  besides  one  to  ascertain  if  the  enemy  had  passed  the 
(Straits  of  Bonifaccio,  another  to  Naples,  and  a  fifth  to  hark  back  and  sec  if 
the  enemy  had  returned  again  to  Toulon. — Nelson  to  Ball :  Nicolas,  vi.  399. 


April  THE   STRAITS   LEFT   OPEN  6i 

Sicily  nor  to  the  westward  of  Sardinia  until  I  know  some- 
thing positive." 

We  are  accustomed  to  dwell  with  exultation  over  Nelson's 
brilliant  inspirations  and  his  fiery  action,  yet  surely  no  great 
commander  was  ever  more  precise  for  "  positive  informa- 
tion," no  one  more  careful  not  to  act  on  mere  intuitions. 
And  surely  no  moment  glows  more  steadily  with  his  real 
genius  for  war  than  this.  In  resolute  singleness  of  purpose 
he  had  narrowed  his  action  down  to  the  utmost  possibility 
of  what  he  was  certainly  able  to  perform,  and  consumed  as 
his  strained  spirit  was  with  thirst  for  action  nothing  would 
induce  him  to  try  for  more  than  his  strength  warranted  or 
to  hazard  the  greater  danger  in  uncertain  possibility  of 
preventing  the  less.  We  can  easily  imagine  what  the  self- 
restraint  must  have  cost  such  a  nature  as  his,  but  he  did 
not  flinch.  Of  all  dangers  the  least  that  could  befall  was 
that  Villeneuve  should  quit  the  Mediterranean  and  abandon 
its  command.  His  duty  was  to  secure  that  command. 
Upon  that  and  the  positions  essential  to  it  he  concentrated 
a  force  which  was  only  just  equal  to  the  task,  as  though  he 
divined  that  upon  the  preservation  of  that  command  the 
whole  of  Pitt's  war-plan  turned — and  the  Avay  out  of  the 
Straits  was  left  absolutely  open. 

So  while  Nelson  waited  resolutely  for  the  one  touch  of 
certainty  that  alone  could  start  him  into  action,  Villeneuve 
pursued  his  way  unmolested — unmolested  but  not  undis- 
turbed. On  his  heels  was  the  menace  of  the  unlocated 
fleet  led  by  the  "  fougueux  amiral,"  as  they  called  him  in 
France.  On  April  7th,  as  Nelson  Avas  taking  up  his  position 
at  Ustica,  he  was  becalmed  off  Cartagena.  There  he  could 
see  Salcedo's  squadron  of  six  of  the  line  apparently  ready 
for  sea,  and  he  sent  in  to  invite  them  to  join  his  flag. 
They  were  willing  enough  in  any  case  to  have  his  escort  to 
Cadiz,  if  he  would  only  wait  till  they  sent  for  permission 
and  got  their  powder  on  board.  But  that  was  more  than 
Villeneuve  dared  do.  In  the  evening  an  easterly  breeze 
came  up  fair  for  a  run  through  the  Straits  and  away  he 
went,  leaving  the  Cartagena  squadron  isolated. 