

So  the  veteran  was  duly  gazetted  as  First  Lord.  To  get 
over  the  difficulty  of  his  not  being  in  Parliament  he  was 
raised  to  the  peerage  as  Lord  Barham,  though  the  King,  in 
giving  his  assent,  made  the  remarkable  stipulation  that "  his 
attending  Cabinet  meetings  ought  to  be  confined  to  subjects 
regarding  the  Navy."  ^  Thus  at  the  eleventh  hour  came 
Middleton's  long-deferred  chance  of  setting  his  seal  on  the 
great  work  to  which  he  had  devoted  his  strenuous  life ;  and 
thus  at  the  crying  moment  the  country,  by  Pitt's  firmness 
and  sagacity,  secured  for  her  councils  the  man  who,  for  ripe 
experience  in  the  direction  of  naval  war  in  all  its  breadth 
and  detail,  had  not  a  rival  in  the  service  or  in  Europe. 
Even  Charles  Yorke,  in  spite  of  his  disappointment  in  not 
getting  the  post  himself,  could  say  handsomely,  "  The  news 
to-day  is,  Sir  Charles  Middleton  is  to  be  First  Lord.  I  was 
not  aware  that  at  his  advanced  age  his  health  and  faculties 
were  equal  to  such  a  post.  If  they  are  he  is  indisputably 
the  fittest  man  that  could  be  chosen  to  occupy  it  at  the  time. 
His  abilities  were  always  considered  great,  his  experience 
is  consummate,  and  he  has  few  equals  in  application  and 
method  of  business."  ^    It  was  not,  however,  till  the  last  day 

1  Woronzow  to  Czartoryski :  De  Martens,  Rccveil  dc  Traites,  xi.  109. 
^  Stanhope,  Life  of  Pitt,  iv.  Appendix,  p.  xxiii. 

^  To  Lord  Hardwicke,  Viceroy  of  Ireland,  April  26  :  Ilardivickc  Papers, 
Add.  MSS.  35706. 


April  A    STRATEGICAL    CRISIS  73 

of  April  that  Barham's  appointment  was  confirmed  and  the 
crisis  was  at  an  end. 

In  the  height  of  it — on  the  19th — Craig  and  Knight  had 
put  to  sea.  It  was  high  time,  if  any  good  was  to  come  of 
the  expedition.  Already  the  Czar  had  been  protesting  at 
the  delay,  and  Napoleon  was  just  starting  for  Milan  to 
crown  himself  King  of  Italy.  Now  or  never  was  the  time 
to  act.  Yet  as  Craig  and  his  troops  pursued  their  way 
down  Channel  there  were  flying  across  the  Bay  two  cruisers 
with  the  momentous  news  that  the  Toulon  fleet  had  passed 
the  Straits — too  late  to  warn  the  Government  that  all  had 
gone  wrong.  Villeneuve  was  out,  no  one  knew  where;  neither 
Nelson  nor  Orde  had  received  their  orders  for  covering 
Craig's  passage,  and  Knight  had  only  a  ninety-eight  and  one 
seventy-four  to  escort  the  expedition.  It  was  practically  in 
the  air. 

Not  till  a  week  after  the  expedition  had  sailed  was  the 
alarming  truth  known,  and  then  only  by  the  promptness 
and  decision  of  a  detached  cruiser  captain.  As  Villeneuve 
passed  through  the  Straits,  Captain  Lord  Mark  Kerr,  of  the 
frigate  Fisgard,  was  refitting  in  Gibraltar  with  half  his 
gear  ashore.^  With  prompt  decision  he  hired  a  brig,  put 
a  lieutenant  in  command,  and  sent  her  away  to  find  Nelson. 
Working  all  night  long,  while  Villeneuve  was  hurrying  away 
from  Cadiz,  he  managed  to  put  to  sea  early  on  the  10  th, 
leaving  his  gear  behind  him,  and  determined  to  carry 
the  news  to  Ireland  and  Ushant  with  the  utmost  possible 
speed.^  Outside  the  Straits  not  a  sign  of  the  enemy  was  to 
be  seen.  He  spoke  two  or  three  cruising  privateers,  but 
they  too  had  not  a  word  to  tell,  so  mysteriously  had 
Villeneuve  disappeared.  His  luck  was  incredible,  and  Kerr 
had  nothing  to  carry  with  him  but  the  certainty  that  he 
had  passed  the  Straits.  In  five  days,  in  spite  of  the  north- 
westerly winds  that  had  baflied  Orde's  efforts  to  double  Cape 
St.  Vincent,  he  managed  to  speak  the  Melampus,  the  cruiser 