

His  special  sphere  of  action  is  then  detailed.  "  He  will, 
with  the  approbation  of  the  First  Lord,  dispose  of  the 
movements  of  all  ships  on  Home  and  Foreign  stations,  and 

^  Trafalgar,  p.  3. 


S6  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  may 

give  orders  to  the  Admirals,  Captains,  and  Commanding 
Officers  of  ships  on  service.  He  Avill  distribute  the  seamen 
and  marines.  .  .  .  He  will  attend  particularly  to  the  equip- 
ment of  all  ships  and  vessels  of  every  description."  His 
duties  in  relation  to  supply  were  thus  confined  to  the 
litting  out  of  vessels  already  commissioned  for  active  service 
which  were  thereby  brought  into  his  depai'tment.  He  was 
also  charged  with  seeing  that  his  orders  had  been  obeyed 
by  comparing  them  with  ships'  journals.  Lastly  he  was  "  to 
take  account  of  all  promotions,"  but  the  First  Lord  was  to 
sign  the  commissions. 

Supply  generally  was  in  the  hands  of  the  "  Second 
Professional  Lord,"  who,  so  the  Memorandum  directs,  "  will 
receive  from  the  Secretary  (after  they  are  read)  " — that  is, 
read  to  the  Board  at  its  daily  sitting — ''  all  letters  and  papers 
belonging  to  the  Navy  Board,  the  Transport  Board,  the 
Board  of  Sick  and  Hurt  and  Greenwich  Hospital." 

The  duty  of  the  Third  Professional  Lord  was  to  super- 
intend the  appointment  of  all  commissioned  and  warrant 
officers  "  under  the  inspection  of  the  First  Lord  "  and  to 
keep  all  vessels  complete  with  them.  Vacancies  for 
Captains  and  Lieutenants  were  to  be  "  stated  to  the 
First  Lord." 

"  The  Civil  Lords,"  so  the  paper  concludes,  ''  in  order  to 
keep  the  Professional  Lords  uninterrupted  in  the  various 
important  duties  committed  to  their  charge,  will  sign  all 
orders,  protections,  warrants,  and  promiscuous  papers  daily 
issuing  from  the  office.  They  will  also  assist  the  Board 
with  their  advice."  ^ 

In  working  this  system  Barham  seems  to  have  treated 
his  colleagues  as  a  staff  under  him — the  First  Sea  Lord 
discharging  approximately  the  duties  of  his  Chief  of  the 
Staff,  directing  w^ar  movements  but  also  seeing  the  material 
fit  for  service  so  far  as  regarded  equipping  and  manning 
ships;  the  Second  Sea  Lord  controlling  the  supply  of 
material;  and  the  Third,  the  higher  personnel.  Barham  him- 
self, so  Barrow  tells  us,  never  sat  on  the  Board.     He  seems 

^  AdmiraW/  Minnies,  -06.    The  memo,  its  signed  and  corrected  in  Bar  ham's, 
hand  and  dated  "  May." 


May  his   seclusion  87 

to  have  concerned  himself  only  with  the  larger  move- 
ments of  the  campaign.  '*  Lord  Barham,"  he  says,  "  at  the 
advanced  period  of  his  life  was  satisfied  to  let  things  go  on 
in  their  usual  course,  to  remain  quiet  in  his  room,  to  make 
few  enquiries  and  to  let  the  Board  consider  and  settle  the 
current  affairs  of  the  Navy  amongst  themselves.  In  fact 
he  never  attended  the  Board ;  but  when  any  doubtful 
question  arose  one  of  the  Lords  or  the  Secretaries  took  his 
decision  on  it  in  his  own  room."  ^ 