

^  Secret  Orders,  1363,  April  27. 


April  THE    TWO    EXPEDITIONS  79 

tion.  Whither  Villeneuve  was  bound  Orde  could  not  tell. 
He  might  go  north,  he  might  go  south,  but,  as  we  have 
seen,  his  carefully  argued  appreciation  inclined  him  to  think 
that  the  destination  was  westward  with  a  view  to  doubling 
back  to  the  Channel. 

So  far  as  is  known,  no  one  up  to  this  time  had  seriously 
suggested  such  a  probability,  but  from  this  moment  at 
least  it  was  never  lost  sight  of.  Still,  knowing  what  Pitt 
did,  it  was  quite  as  likely  that  Villeneuve's  orders  were  to 
hold  the  approaches  to  the  Straits  and  destroy  Craig  and 
Knight.  They  and  their  fifty  transports,  to  say  nothing  of 
the  convoys,  were  obviously  in  the  direst  danger  of  annihi- 
lation, and  what  such  a  shock  would  mean  to  the  great 
Coalition  in  the  crisis  of  parturition  was  too  distressing  to 
contemplate.  The  Government  could  scarcely  flatter  them- 
selves that  Napoleon  had  no  suspicion  of  what  was  in  the 
wind,  for  Craig's  expedition  did  not  stand  alone.  At  Cork 
there  was  another  similar  one  assembling  under  Sir  Eyre 
Coote,  which  appears  to  have  been  intended  for  the  security 
of  India.  The  two  together  could  scarcely  escape  French 
attention,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact,  although  Napoleon  had 
not  yet  divined  Craig's  instructions,  he  had  already  an 
uneasy  eye  on  the  British  military  movements.  Talley- 
rand's smooth  pen  had  been  presenting  them  to  him  as  of 
no  importance,  except  as  evidence  of  the  desperate  political 
position  of  Pitt's  Government.  News  had  reached  the 
French  Foreign  Office  that  at  Lisbon  they  were  in  alarm 
lest  the  Tagus  was  the  objective  of  the  mysterious  expe- 
ditions— a  fear  which  Talleyrand  regarded  as  somewhat 
extravagant.  "  Still,"  he  said,  "  there  is  no  project,  how- 
ever absurd,  which  we  can  safely  reject  as  impossible  in 
the  existing  state  of  opinion  in  England  and  the  embarrass- 
ment of  the  Cabinet.  If  they  must  have  an  expedition  its 
objective  matters  little  to  the  real  motive  for  undertaking 
it ;  and  if,  as  is  possible,  all  that  is  wanted  is  a  display  of 
enterprise,  it  is  still  more  indifferent  whether  it  is  destined 
for  Portugal  or  the  North,  or  for  the  Levant  or  the  Indies."  ^ 

1  Bertrand,  Lettres  inedites  de  Talleyrand  il  Napoleon,  1800-9,  p,  118  :  Lyons, 
April  10. 


8o  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  April 

Napoleon  himself  took  the  matter  more  seriously. 
Affecting  to  believe  a  vague  rumour  that  Missiessy  had 
taken  Dominica  and  St.  Lucia,  he  was  persuading  him- 
self and  his  servants  after  his  manner  that  his  original 
mistake  in  getting  the  Rochefort  squadron  entangled  in 
the  West  Indies  was  a  stroke  of  genius.  By  throwing 
British  strategy  into  confusion  and  diverting  attention  to 
distant  colonies  it  was  paving  the  way  for  invasion.  The 
British  expeditions  served  well  to  support  his  attitude,  but 
reading  between  the  lines  of  his  correspondence  we  may 
well  doubt  if  this  was  his  real  view  of  the  enemy's  new 
activity.  Three  days  after  receiving  Talleyrand's  news  he 
wrote  a  memorandum  upon  it  for  Cambaceres,  Arch-Chan- 
cellor of  the  Empire,  whom  he  had  left  in  Paris  at  his 
brother  Joseph's  side  as  the  real  head  of  affairs  during  his 
absence  in  Italy.  This  despatch  breathes  a  different  note. 
"  It  seems,"  he  wrote,  "that  two  expeditions  of  from  5000 
to  6000  men  each  have  left  or  are  preparing  to  leave,  one 
for  the  Great  Indies  and  the  other  for  the  West  Indies. 
They  are  neither  militia  nor  volunteers  they  are  sending : 
they  are  their  best  troops."  The  fact  that  the  threat  of 
invasion  no  longer  availed  to  contain  the  flower  of  the 
British  army  in  England  clearly  was  unexpected  and  annoy- 
ing. "  If  then,"  he  continued,  "  our  flotilla  receives  the 
signal  and  is  favoured  by  six  hours  of  fair  wind,  of  fog,  and 
of  night,  the  English  will  be  surprised  and  find  themselves 
stripped  of  their  best  troops."  ^ 