

The  impression  which  the  passage  gives  is  that  Barham 
lived  in  Barrow's  memory  as  little  more  than  a  figure-head. 
But  it  must  have  been  also  in  his  own  room  that  he  pon- 
dered over  the  shifting  strategical  exigencies  of  the  cam- 
paign, anticipating  each  one  as  it  arose,  and  having  always 
ready  in  his  mind  the  necessary  orders  for  squadrons  at 
sea.  They  are  all  preserved  in  the  series  of  "  Secret 
Orders,"  and  all  of  them  that  deal  with  the  main  move- 
ments of  the  war-plan  bear  his  signature.  With  "  the 
current  affairs  of  the  Navy,"  as  Barrow  says,  he  did  not 
concern  himself.  The  highqr  direction  of  the  war  was  one 
man's  uninterrupted  work. 

To  this  he  devoted  himself  with  a  singleness  of  purpose 
which  set  all  etiquette  at  defiance.  In  the  Barham  Papers 
there  is  a  long  "  Communication  to  the  King  "  on  the  naval 
situation  in  September  1805,  which  begins  with  an  apology 
for  his  not  going  to  court.  Owing  to  having,  as  he  says, 
two  Boards  to  superintend,  meaning  presumably  the  Board 
of  Admiralty  and  the  Navy  Board,  he  cannot  wait  upon  the 
King  in  person.     In  November  there  is  another  addressed 

^  Autobiographical  Memoirs,  p.  277.  Barrow  was  a  member  of  the  Board, 
having  been  appointed  Second  Secretary  by  Lord  Melville  in  May  1804.  He 
did  not  write  the  Memoirs,  however,  till  he  was  quite  an  old  man,  after  forty 
years'  service  at  the  Admiralty.  His  memory  failed  him  at  times  in  matters 
of  detail,  but  otherwise  the  book  seems  trustworthy.  The  Second  Sea  Lord 
was  Vice-Admiral  Philip  Patton,  a  man  who  had  made  a  special  study  of  the 
personnel  of  the  Navy  and  had  foretold  the  great  mutinies.  The  Third  Sea 
Lord  was  Captain  Lord  Garlies.  .Besides  the  two  Secretaries  there  were  three 
Civil  Lords,  including  two  former  Secretaries  of  exceptional  ability  and  ex- 
perience. One  was  the  veteran  Sir  Philip  Stephens,  who  had  begun  his 
official  life  as  Lord  Anson's  secretary,  and  had  been  Admiralty  Secretary 
from  1763  to  1795  ;  the  other  Sir  Evan  Nepean,  a  Navy  clerk,  who,  after 
serving  as  Under-Secretary  successively  at  the  Foreign  and  War  Offices,  had 
succeeded  Stephens  at  the  Admiralty  until  1804. — (Sir  J.  K.  Laughton  in 
Dictionary  of  Nat.  Bioy.). 


88  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  May 

to  Pitt  for  submission  to  the  Cabinet,  which  concludes  with 
a  hope  that  he  will  not  be  summoned  to  attend  except  for 
business  connected  with  the  fleet.  There  is  nothing  extant 
which  can  throw  doubt  on  BarroAv's  assertion  that  he  never 
sat  upon  the  Board.  His  practice  seems  to  have  been,  where 
war  direction  was  concerned,  to  draft  the  strategical  orders 
with  his  ow^n  hand,  and  to  send  the  draft  down  to  two  or 
more  of  his  naval  colleagues  for  their  formal  approval  and 
signature.  In  the  truest  sense  he  was  the  real  director  of 
the  naval  war,  but  in  his  eyes  his  functions  as  such  did  not 
exclude  the  control  of  the  larger  questions  of  material. 
For  all  his  concentration  of  effort,  he  maintained,  according 
to  the  old  British  tradition,  a  close  watch  on  the  Supply 
department — that  is,  he  continued  to  control  the  Navy 
Board  while  exercising  the  functions  of  a  Chief  of  the  Naval 
Staff  to  Pitt,  as  the  War  Minister. 