

Two  days  later,  however,  a  misgiving  as  to  what  Nelson 
might  do  led  to  further  precautions.  It  was  now  known 
that  he  had  been  in  position  at  Maddalena  about  the  time 
Villeneuve  sailed,  and  the  most  natural  explanation  of  his 
missing  him  was  that  once  more  he  had  gone  to  Egypt. 
The  fear  was,  so  Yorke  wrote  to  Lord  Hardwicke,  "  his  only 
eye  is  directed  eastward,  and  we  shall  find  ourselves  in  a 
great  scrape."  ^  It  was  decided,  therefore,  to  take  steps  to  re- 
inforce the  West  Indies  directly  from  Gardner's  fleet  in  case  it 
should  prove  that  Nelson  had  gone  astray.  The  means  already 
existed  in  the  Flying  Squadron,  which,  it  will  be  remembered, 
had  been  formed  for  special  service  under  Collingwood.  The 
only  difficulty  was  that  Gardner's  fleet  was  not  yet  up  to  its 
full  strength,  and  the  detachment  would  weaken  it  seriously. 
But  the  difficulty  was  faced.  Besides  Gardner's  regular 
reserve  there  were  other  ships  available  which  only  required 
crews  and  fitting  for  sea,  and  wdth  pressure  they  could  be 
ready  in  time  to  replace  the  West  Indian  detachment.  To 
this  end  every  nerve  was  strained  and  every  sacrifice  made. 
The  War  Office  offered  its  help,  and  the  Port  Admirals  were 
informed  that  orders  had  been  issued  for  the  troops  of  the 
garrisons  to  assist  in  the  work.  They  could  apply  to  the 
Generals  for  the  men  they  wanted,  and  they  were  "  to  use 
every  possible  exertion  in  getting  the  ships  ready  for  sea 
with  the  utmost  despatch."  Cruisers  were  freely  sacrificed 
to  the  now  all-important  battle  strength,  and  at  every  port 
authority  was  given  to  draw  upon  any  frigates  that  were  at 

^   Orit-lctters  {Secret  Orders),  13G3,  April  25. 

2  Hardwicke  Papers,  April  30  :  Add.  MSS.  3u70G. 


April  THE    FLYING   SQUADRON  77 

hand  to  complete  the  complements  of  the  ships  of  the 
line.i 

The  Flying  Squadron  at  this  time  consisted  of  ten 
of  the  line,  and  it  was  decided  to  use  half  of  it  at  once. 
Accordingly  Gardner  was  directed  to  detach  Collingwood 
with  his  flagship,  the  Dreadnought  98,  and  four  two- 
deckers,  and  to  hand  him  sealed  orders,  which  were  to  the 
following  effect.  He  was  to  proceed  with  all  expedition  to 
Madeira,  and  without  anchoring  to  send  in  for  intelligence 
of  the  French  fleet  or  of  any  British  ships  that  had  been 
seen  to  pass  that  way.  If  he  heard  for  certain  that  seven 
or  more  of  the  line  were  in  chase  of  the  enemy,  he  was  to 
return.  If  the  intelligence  was  not  positive,  he  was  to 
carry  on  to  Barbadoes,  join  Cochrane,  and  seek  out  the 
enemy's  fleet.  If  he  found  the  French  had  left  the  Lee- 
ward Islands  and  gone  north,  Cochrane  was  to  shift  his 
flag  to  a  frigate  and  remain  in  charge  of  the  station,  while 
Collingwood  was  to  take  the  whole  battle  squadron  to 
Jamaica,  and  in  concert  with  Dacres  to  defend  the  island 
and  seek  to  bring  the  enemy  to  action.  Finally  he  was 
given  as  usual  a  general  discretion  to  act  as  he  found  best 
on  the  spot,  in  order  to  prevent  an  attempt  on  any  of  the 
British  West  Indian  Islands.^ 