

The  meaning  of  the  Madeira  destination  was  that  steps 
had  already  been  taken  to  watch  that  area.  More  than  a 
month  previously,  when  the  precaution  of  organising  the 
Flying  Squadron  was  on  foot,  means  had  been  adopted  to 
supply  it  with  intelligence  of  any  escaping  squadron  it  might 
have  to  chase.  To  this  end  two  frigates  had  been  withdrawn 
from  Keith  and  Saumarez,  with  orders  to  proceed  to  Madeira 
with  all  possible  despatch  and  cruise  from  forty  leagues  south- 
east of  it  to  a  hundred  leagues  north-west.  They  were  to 
hold  the  station  a  month  after  arriving,  and  if  an  enemy's 
squadron  was  sighted  one  was  to  come  home  to  report  and  the 
other  to  shadow  the  enemy  till  his  course  was  determined.^ 

On  the  same  day  that  Collingwood's  orders  were  issued, 

^  Admiralty  Minutes,  152,  April  27. 
2  yiid.,  April  27. 

^  Secret  Orders,   1363,  March   6.     Saumarez   sent  the  Cerberus  away  on 
March  27.     In-lettcrs,  223,  July  15.     See  post,  p.  297  n. 


78  LORD    BARHAM    AT   WORK  April 

corresponding  instructions  went  forward  for  Nelson.  He 
was  informed  that  if  ho  had  made  no  detachment  ColHng- 
wood  would  follow  Knight's  two  ships  to  Barbadoes.  As 
the  effect  of  this  would  be  to  bring  the  squadron  in  the 
West  Indies  up  to  eighteen  of  the  line  with  two  or  three 
three-deckers,  nothing  further  would  be  required  from 
Nelson.  He  was  therefore  to  leave  four  of  his  squadron  with 
Orde  and  bring  home  the  rest,  after  making  due  provision  for 
opposing  any  force  the  enemy  had  left  in  the  Mediterranean. 
At  the  same  time  Gardner  was  told  to  send  down  a  cruiser 
to  get  intelligence  of  Villeneuve's  movements  from  Orde  and 
carry  it  on  to  Madeira  to  meet  Collingwood.i 

It  will  be  seen  that  up  to  this  time  the  Admiralty  had 
little  doubt  that  Villeneuve  was  bound  on  the  original 
mission  which  Napoleon  had  given  him  and  of  which  they 
had  had  intelligence.  As  yet  there  is  no  hint  that  any 
apprehension  of  his  sudden  return  to  the  Channel  was  felt 
at  headquarters,  or  that  Sir  James  Craig's  expedition  was  in 
serious  danger.  The  prevailing  impression  was  that  the 
objective  of  the  Toulon  fleet  was  Jamaica.  It  appeared 
that  Nelson's  resolute  retention  of  his  primary  position 
had  forced  Napoleon  to  play  into  Pitt's  hands.  Denied  all 
chance  of  operating  within  the  Straits,  Villeneuve  had  been 
driven  to  secondary  colonial  ventures  and  had  left  the 
Mediterranean  free  for  the  intended  action  in  concert  with 
Russia.  No  sooner,  however,  had  the  orders  for  the  West 
Indies  been  issued,  on  this  appreciation  of  the  position,  than 
it  was  all  upset.  By  April  30  th  Gardner  had  sent  in  the 
letters  he  had  received  from  Orde.  Picture  for  a  moment 
what  they  meant  at  headquarters.  Nelson  was  no  one 
knew  where.  The  best  information  they  had  was 
Strachan's  opinion  that  he  had  been  thrown  off  the  scent, 
and  was  almost  certainly  on  his  way  to  Egypt.  Orde, 
moreover,  without  having  ascertained  anything  more  of 
Villeneuve's  movements  than  that  he  had  appeared  at 
Cadiz,  was  quitting  his  station.  Neither  Admiral,  there- 
fore, would  receive  his  orders  for  Craig's  security,  and  both 
covering  squadrons  at  the  critical  period  were  out  of  posi- 