April      ORDERS   ON   VILLENEUVE'S   ESCAPE         75 

eyes  of  the  Admiralty  it  was  Villeneuve's  most  likely  object. 
Indeed,  for  some  time  Pitt  had  had  in  his  possession  infor- 
mation from  the  famous  spy,  ''  L'Ami,"  that  an  attack  on 
Jamaica  was  in  contemplation,  and  Missiessy's  voyage  had 
already  indicated  the  West  Indies  as  a  danger  area.  Con- 
sequently Cochrane's  general  instructions  were  immediately 
supplemented  by  orders  that  if  Villeneuve's  objective  were 
found  to  jbe  Jamaica  he  was  to  join  Dacres  at  Port  Royal 
with  his  whole  battle  squadron.  This  would  produce  a  con- 
centration of  eleven  of  the  line,  of  which  one  was  a  three- 
decker,  a  force  strong  enough  to  hold  in  check  Villeneuve 
and  any  Spanish  ships  that  might  have  joined  him  from 
Cadiz,  till  such  time  as  reinforcements  should  reach  the 
station. 

On  this  last  point  they  had  little  cause  for  anxiety.  The 
necessary  reinforcements  would  probably  reach  him  auto- 
matically. It  was  an  old  but  now  forgotten  tradition  which 
throws  much  light  on  Nelson's  great  movement,  that  in 
such  an  eventuality  as  had  occurred  the  Commander-in- 
chief  in  the  Mediterranean  should  send  or  follow  with  a 
proportion  of  his  force  large  enough  to  make  the  British 
squadron  in  the  threatened  area  superior  to  that  of  the 
enemy.  Originally,  indeed,  it  had  been  the  practice  to 
insert  such  a  clause  in  the  Mediterranean  instructions.  In 
1704  Rooke  was  directed  that  if  the  Toulon  fleet  got  out  of 
the  Straits  his  first  duty  would  be  to  follow  it  and  bring  it 
to  action.  As  late  as  1756  Byng's  instructions  contained 
categorical  orders  on  the  point.  Consequently  it  is  no 
matter  of  surprise  to  find  the  Admiralty  expecting  that 
Nelson  would  act  on  the  well-established  tradition,  and  in 
this  spirit  supplementary  orders  were  quickly  framed  for 
him. 

He  was  told  that  Knight's  two  ships,  which  formed  Craig's 
escort,  were  to  proceed  at  once  to  Barbadoes,  "  if  you  have 
not  already  detached  a  number  equal  to  the  enemy."  If  he 
had  done  so,  he  was  to  order  Knight's  ships  to  join  Orde, 
and  Orde  was  to  send  them  on  Avith  Craig's  expedition ;  for, 
of  course,  if  Villeneuve  had  gone  west  there  was  nothing  for 
the  expedition  to  fear  except  the  weak  Spanish  squadron  in 


76  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  April 

Cartagena,  which  was  reported  not  yet  ready  for  sea.  There 
was,  moreover,  no  further  need  for  Nelson  to  act  as  cover- 
ing squadron  m  accordance  with  his  orders  of  ten  days 
before.  "Their  Lordships  trust,"  the  new  orders  ran,  "you 
have  had  early  intelligence  of  the  sailing  of  the  Toulon 
fleet,  and  that  you  have  in  consequence  detached  a  number 
of  ships  equal  to  that  of  the  enemy  in  pursuit."  What 
remained  of  his  squadron  he  was  to  send  to  join  Orde 
before  Cadiz,  he  himself  of  course  being  expected  home  on 
sick  leave.^ 