

In  harmony  with  these  instructions  to  the  outlying 
squadrons,  increased  efi'orts  were  made  to  reinforce  the 
central  division  of  the  Western  Squadron.  The  Prince 
George,  a  three-decker,  was  ordered  to  join  it  immediately. 
Admiral  Rowley  was  sent  down  to  Chatham  to  press  forward 
two  new  seventy-fours  that  were  just  completing,  and  orders 
went  out  to  hire  six  or  eight  fast  vessels  as  despatch 
boats.^ 

The  underlying  ideas  of  the  whole  group  of  orders  is 
not  far  to  seek.  We  have  been  attempting,  they  say,  to 
pass  a  military  force  over  uncommanded  seas — seas,  that  is, 
in  which  no  decision  has  taken  place  ;  our  chain  of  covering 
squadrons  has  been  broken  through  :  therefore  the  expedi- 
tion must  be  withdrawn,  unless  it  has  already  passed  the 
danger  point.     If,  however,  the  enemy's  movement  is  found 

1  Out-ldters  {Secret  Orders),  13G3,  April  30th. 
-  Admiralty  Minutes,  153,  May  1st. 


May        his  admiralty  organisation         85 

not  to  be  aimed  at  the  expedition,  we  must  assume  it  is 
aimed  at  the  point  of  greatest  danger,  and  we  must  make 
sure  of  the  mouth  of  the  Channel,  the  old  focal  point  of 
British  strategy. 

It  was  this  sure  hold  of  British  naval  opinion  on  the 
unbroken  tradition  that  was  to  render  Napoleon's  invasion 
as  impossible  as  all  the  attempts  of  his  predecessors. 
"  Unhappily,"  says  Colonel  Desbriere,  in  speaking  of  the 
discredited  French  belief  in  a  surprise  of  the  Channel, 
"  the  English  had  long  got  wind  of  this  danger,  and  con- 
vinced of  its  gravity  had  given  a  standing  order,  thanks  to 
which  the  entrance  of  the  Channel  was  fated  to  be  held  in 
crushing  force.  All  the  Napoleonic  plans  could  only  dash 
themselves  to  pieces  against  this  primordial  device  so  im- 
perturbably  followed."  1 

So  it  was  that  Barham  began  his  memorable  nine 
months'  administration  ;  but  amidst  all  the  strain  and  stress 
he  found  time  to  give  to  the  Admiralty,  out  of  the  depth  of 
his  long  experience,  the  organisation  for  war  by  which  every 
call  was  to  be  met  so  brilliantly  up  to  the  day  of  final 
triumph.  We  cannot  do  better  than  attempt  to  grasp  his 
system  before  proceeding  further. 

For  himself  he  reserved  no  special  function.  "  The 
First  Lord,"  says  his  Memorandum,  "  will  take  upon  him- 
self the  general  superintendence  and  arrangement  of  the 
whole." 

"  The  senior  or  first  professional  lord,"  it  continued — 
and  this  was  Gambier — "  will  do  the  same  when  the  First 
Lord  is  absent.  His  duty  will  be  also  to  attend  to  the 
correspondence  of  the  day,  but  more  particularly  that  of  the 
ports,  and  all  secret  services  " — that  is,  he  had  control  of 
orders  to  naval  bases  and  intelligence.  "  He  will  minute 
all  such  orders  and  letters  as  may  come  within  his  depart- 
ment and  he  may  see  necessary,  and  deliver  the  same  to  the 
Secretary  to  be  acted  upon." 