

To  Calder  went  orders  to  retain  Knight  and  his  two 
ships,  instead  of  sending  them  to  the  West  Indies,  if  the 
imperilled  expedition  had  come  in  touch  with  him.  Craig 
and  his  transports  he  was  to  send  back  to  Plymouth  or 
Cork  under  cruiser  escort.  Knight  on  his  part  was  in- 
formed that  the  need  of  the  moment  was  to  reinforce  the 
Ferrol  squadron  in  view  of  the  possibility  of  Villeneuve's 
intending  to  break  the  blockade.  If,  therefore,  he  received 
the  fresh  orders  before  he  had  passed  St.  Vincent  with  the 
convoy,  he  was  to  bring  it  back  to  Ferrol,  and  follow  Calder's 
orders  as  above.  If  Calder  was  not  there,  he  was  to  carry 
on  and  close  on  Gardner  off  Ushant.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
he  had  passed  St.  Vincent,  and  ascertained  that  Villeneuve 
had  left  Cadiz,  he  was  to  shift  his  flag  to  a  frigate,  send  his 
two  ships  of  the  line  to  close  on  Calder  or  Gardner  as 
before,  and  carry  on  with  the  convoy  up  the  Straits  under 
cruiser  escort. 

As  for  Orde,  his  instructions  were  to  leave  his  cruisers 
to  watch  Cadiz,  and  join  Calder  immediately  with  his 
battle  squadron.  He  would  then  be  in  command  of  both 
squadrons,  but  was  to  consider  himself  under  Gardner's 
orders.  This  meant,  of  course,  that  the  blockade  of  Cadiz 
was  abandoned,  and  the  new  "  Coast  of  Spain  "  Squadron 
reabsorbed  into  the  old  Western  Squadron.  It  was  ex- 
plained to  Orde  that  the  object  of  the  new  disposition  was, 
if  possible,  to  maintain  the  blockade  of  Ferrol.  Otherwise 
everything  was  to  concentrate  at  the  mouth  of  the  Channel. 
If,  therefore,  it  was  found  that  Calder  had  already  fallen 
back,  Orde  too  was  to  close  on  Ushant.  Assuming,  how- 
ever, that  he  and  Calder  were  able  to  join  hands  on  the 
Ferrol  station  the  blockade  was  to  be  continued,  but  subject 


84  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  April  30 

to  this  proviso.  If  they  had  reason  to  beheve  that  a 
combined  French  and  Spanish  fleet  was  coming  to  Ferrol 
"  under  circumstances  in  which  you  may  not  think  you  can 
advantageously  engage  them,"  then  they  were  to  fall  back 
together  on  Gardner  at  Ushant.  Finally  Gardner  was 
directed  to  order  Calder  to  close  on  him  if  the  combined 
fleet  were  reported  to  be  coming  north. ^  If  now  we 
compare  these  orders  with  what  Orde  was  doing,  it  will 
be  seen  that  he  was  anticipating  the  intentions  of  the 
Admiralty  exactly.  Both  he  and  they  were  following  the 
well-known  tradition,  whereby  it  was  secured  that  all  dis- 
turbances of  our  strategical  distribution  only  produced,  as 
it  were  automatically,  an  overwhelming  concentration  at 
the  vital  time  and  place.  Boldly  as  the  fleet  was  spread, 
it  retained  in  the  alert  instinct  of  its  squadronal  com- 
manders a  reflex  power  of  shrinking  back  to  the  centre 
when  any  rough  touch  gave  warning  that  dispersal  was  no 
longer  Avise.  Orde  acted  on  that  instinct,  and  his  action 
was  approved  by  Barham.  It  were  well  to  remember  this 
before  endorsing  Nelson's  hasty  castigations — well  also  to 
remember  that  Nelson  never  repeated  them  when  he  knew 
the  facts. 