

^  Correspondance,  p.  317. 


82  LORD    BARHAM    AT    WORK  A1RIL29 

leaders  of  the  Opposition,  regardless  of  the  danger  of  the 
nation,  ruthlessly  tormented  the  Prime  Minister  by  sup- 
porting it.  It  was  a  fierce  struggle,  but  in  spite  of  their 
acrimony,  Pitt  secured  its  rejection.  Overwrought  with  the 
defence  of  his  friend,  he  reached  home  at  two  o'clock  in 
the  morning  to  find  Orde's  news  from  the  coast  of  Spain 
awaiting  him.  There  was  also  a  report  from  his  Paris 
agent  saying  that  the  Toulon  fleet  was  about  to  sail,  that 
its  destination  was  a  mystery,  but  it  was  generally  believed 
to  be  Ireland.  The  spy  himself  had  reasons,  he  said,  to 
believe  it  was  intended  for  Jamaica,  but  in  a  second  report, 
dated  April  l7th,  he  had  assured  Pitt  the  whole  system 
of  Napoleon  was  now^  directed  to  diverting  the  British  Navy 
from  his  real  attack.^  The  intelligence  could  only  confirm 
Orde's  view  that  a  sudden  concentration  on  the  Channel 
was  in  the  wind.  Pitt  could  not  go  to  bed,  and  at  half- 
past  two  he  sat  down  to  give  the  alarm  to  his  new  First 
Lord. 

"  On  returning  from  the  House,"  he  wrote,  "  I  have 
just  found  these  papers ;  they  are  of  the  most  pressing  im- 
portance. I  will  not  go  to  bed  for  a  few  hours,  but  will  be 
ready  to  see  you  as  soon  as  you  please,  as  I  think  we  nmst 
not  lose  a  moment  in  taking  measures  to  set  afloat  every 
ship  that  by  any  means  of  extraordinary  exertion  we  can 
find  means  to  man.  At  such  an  emergency,  I  am  inclined 
to  think  many  measures  may  be  taken  to  obtain  a  supply 
of  men  for  the  time,  which  would  not  be  applicable  to  any 
case  less  immediately  urgent."  ^ 

Barham  had  spent  his  first  day  of  office  in  preparing  to 
set  on  foot  a  reorganisation  of  the  Admiralty  in  order  to  fit 
the  distribution  of  work  to  the  condition  of  the  First  Lord's 
being  a  sailor  and  responsible  for  the  actual  direction  of 
the  maritime  war.^      Perhaps    he  too  was  sitting    up  all 

^  "Secret  Intelligence  from  Paris,"  March  29th,  April  17th:  Admiralty 
In-lettcrs  {Secretary  of  State),  4198,  April  30th. 

2  Sir  John  Barrow,  Autobior/raphical  Memoirs,  p.  264. 

3  Admiralty  Minutes,  256,  April  25th.  This  was  a  minute  requiring 
Marsden  the  Secretary  to  furnish  hini  with  a  detailed  memorandum  on  the 
organisation  and  Stall  of  the  Admiralty,  and  the  distribution  and  course  of 
•work.  The  reorganisation  liarham  founded  on  it  will  be  dealt  with  later. 
See  jpoat,  p.  85. 


April  30  HIS    KE  VISED    ORDERS  83 

night.  At  all  events  in  the  course  of  the  next  day,  April 
30th,  a  whole  series  of  characteristically  lucid  orders  were 
issued,  which  tell  of  acute  tension  and  prolonged  hours  of 
labour.  Those  issued  to  the  Admirals  afloat  are  devoted 
primarily  to  saving  Craig's  expedition,  in  the  second  place 
to  maintaining  the  blockade  of  Ferrol,  and  ultimately  to 
the  traditional  closing  in  on  the  mouth  of  the  Channel  in 
case  Orde's  appreciation  should  prove  correct. 