

This  certainly  was  not  what  he  really  thought.  Nothing 
is  clearer  amidst  Napoleon's  shifting  plans  than  that  at 
this  time  he  had  absolutely  abandoned  as  a  hopeless  mili- 
tary operation  the  project  of  a  surprise  invasion  by  the 
flotilla  alone.  He  may  have  believed  it  possible  once,  and 
popular  opinion  in  England  had  believed  it  too.  Now  both 
knew  better.  The  naval  view  had  been  accepted,  and 
Napoleon's  words  can  mean  nothing  but  annoyance  to  find 
that  his  threat  would  work  no  longer.  His  self-esteem 
was  sick,  and  after  his  manner  he  was  treating  it  with  a 
gentle  course  of  self-deception.     He  persuaded  himself  he 

1  To  Cambaceres,  Lyons,  April  13th:  Correspondance,  x.  315. 


April  A    FOG    OF    WAR  8 1 

had  fixed  England's  anxiety  on  her  East  and  West  Indian 
colonies,  as  he  explained  this  same  day  to  General  Pino,  his 
Minister  of  War  in  Italy.  Pino  had  apparently  been  express- 
ing anxiety  about  British  action  in  the  Mediterranean,  but 
Napoleon  assured  him  there  was  now  no  fear  of  England's 
assisting  Austria  except  with  money.  His  threat  on  India, 
he  said,  was  forcing  the  British  Government  to  send  Lord 
Cornwallis  thither  with  several  regiments,  and  they  had  also 
found  it  necessary  to  despatch  eight  or  ten  thousand  men 
to  secure  Jamaica.^ 

Such  at  least  was  the  rosy  picture  he  chose  to  paint,  as 
he  was  about  to  cross  the  Alps  in  quest  of  his  new  crown. 
How  much  he  really  believed  it  is  impossible  to  tell.  All 
we  can  say  with  any  certainty  is  that  he  was  beginning  to 
feel  the  irritation  of  Pitt's  pin-prick.  Probably  he  still 
believed  the  initiative  was  his,  and  had  no  suspicion  as  yet 
that  an  insidious  process  of  wresting  it  from  him  had  begun. 
It  was  of  course  too  much  for  Pitt  to  flatter  himself  he 
had  so  well  deceived  the  master  of  deception,  and  for  him 
Villeneuve's  appearance  in  the  Straits'  mouth  must  mean, 
first  of  all,  that  Napoleon  was  awake  and  after  his  manner 
was  springing  to  meet  the  blow  before  it  could  fall.  If  it 
did  not  mean  this,  there  was  still  Orde's  suggestion,  that  he 
was  bent  after  all  on  attempting  the  invasion,  and  attempt- 
ing it  under  cover  of  a  great  naval  concentration. 

In  a  moment,  then,  the  whole  atmosphere  at  home  was 
changed.  It  throbbed  with  high  tension.  We  can  feel 
the  tremors  still  as  we  handle  the  papers  which  the  crisis 
produced.  Even  Pitt  was  disturbed.  He  had  spent  the 
whole  day  on  which  the  news  arrived — that  is,  April  29th 
— in  the  House  of  Commons.  There  had  been  an  ex- 
hausting and  more  than  usually  acrimonious  wrangle  over 
the  Eleventh  Report  of  the  Navy  Commission.  In  the 
course  of  it  Pitt  had  announced  Middleton's  appointment, 
and  had  been  brutally  accused  by  Fox  of  trying  to  burke 
the  inquiry  into  his  friend's  conduct.  In  the  heat  that 
was  engendered  a  motion  was  made  for  the  institution  of 
criminal  proceedings  against  Melville,  and    nearly  all  the 