


CHAPTER   VI 

NELSON'S    DILEMMA 

During  all  this  time  of  tension  not  a  word  came  of  Nelson. 
So  far  as  headquarters  was  concerned  he  had  disappeared 
as  completely  and  as  mysteriously  as  Villeneuve,  and  there 
Avas  nothing  to  throw  doubt  on  Sir  Richard  Strachan's  con- 
jecture that  he  had  gone  again  to  Egypt.  It  was  not  so.  For 
him,  as  we  have  seen,  there  was  only  one  solution,  and  that 
only  a  partial  solution,  of  the  uncertainties  of  the  problem.  It 
was,  not  to  go  to  the  eastward  of  Sicily  nor  to  the  westward  of 
Sardinia,  until  he  knew  something  positive.  Fixed  in  this 
determination  he  had  taken  up  his  position  at  Ustica  off 
Palermo,  and  there  he  had  to  wait  two  days  before  he  had 
anything  on  which  he  could  act. 

By  April  10  th  a  rumour  had  already  reached  him  that 
a  British  military  expedition  was  on  its  way  to  the  Medi- 
terranean. That  so  great  a  complication  was  to  be  added 
to  his  embarrassment  without  a  word  of  warning  was  past 
bearing  and  almost  beyond  belief,  and  at  his  wits'  end  he 
was  seeking  relief,  after  his  wont,  in  a  letter  to  his  friend 
Ball.  "  I  can  hardly  suppose,"  he  wrote  early  in  the  morn- 
ing, "  that  any  expedition  would  be  sent  to  this  country 
without  my  having  some  intimation,  and  I  have  not  the 
most  distant  idea  of  such  a  thing.  If  they  are  sent,  they 
will  be  taken ;  for  the  French  know  everything  which  passes 
in  England.  However  I  can  do  no  more  than  I  have  done ; 
for  I  am  sorely  vexed  at  the  ignorance  in  which  I  have  been 
kept."  At  this  point  he  was  interrupted  by  one  of  his 
captains  coming  on  board,  and  when  he  sat  down  again  to 
finish  his  letter  the  blow  had  fallen.  "  Hallowell,"  he  con- 
tinued, "  is  just  arrived  from  Palermo.     He  brings  accounts 

that  the  great  expedition  is  sailed,  and  that  seven  Russian 

89 


90  NELSON'S    DILEMMA  april 

sail  of  the  line  are  expected  in  the  Mediterranean :  there- 
fore I  may  suppose  the  French  fleet  are  bound  to  the  west- 
ward. I  must  do  my  best.  God  bless  you.  I  am  very 
very  miserable." 

And  well  he  might  be.  The  stroke  he  had  prayed  and 
longed  for  through  the  weary  months  of  his  vigil  was  about 
to  be  played,  and  played  apparently  so  badly  that  disaster 
seemed  inevitable.  He  could  not  doubt,  any  more  than  the 
rest,  that  Villeneuve's  objective  was  the  doomed  expedition. 
Why  had  he  not  been  warned  ?  He  could  not  tell  that  the 
warning  had  been  sent  the  moment  the  convention  with 
Kussia  had  been  signed,  and  that  it  was  still  far  from  reach- 
ing him.^  All  he  could  know  was  that  his  whole  plan  of 
action  was  upset  by  a  new  factor.  The  position  he  had 
taken  up  would  no  longer  meet  the  case.  When  he  began 
his  letter  to  Ball  he  had  made  up  his  mind  "  to  stand  to- 
wards Madelena  and  Cape  Corse,"  apparently  with  the 
intention  of  ascertaining  whether  Villeneuve  had  doubled 
back,  since  from  all  his  widely  scattered  cruisers  came  not 
a  word  of  the  lost  fleet.  But  now  the  point  of  greatest 
danger  had  shifted  to  the  mouth  of  the  Straits,  and  with- 
out a  moments  hesitation  he  resolved  to  move  westward 
with  all  speed. 