

The  day  after  he  received  Parker's  report  he  was  still 
only  ten  leagues  west  of  Toro,  but  he  had  recovered  him- 
self and  his  purpose  was  settled.  "  Dead  foul — dead  foul," 
he  wrote  again  to  Ball,  "  but  my  mind  is  fully  made  up 
what  to  do  when  I  leave  the  Straits,  supposing  there  is  no 
certain  information  of  the  enemy's  destination.  ...  I  believe 
this  ill-luck  will  go  near  to  kill  me,  but  as  these  are  times 
for  exertions,  I  must  not  be  cast  down  whatever  I  feel." 
And  again  to  Lord  Melville,  whom  he  believed  still -to  be 
his  chief,  "  I  am  not  made  to  despair — what  man  can  do 
shall  be  done.  1  have  marked  out  for  myself  a  decided 
line  of  conduct  and  I  shall  follow  it  up  well." 

It  has  often  been  assumed  that  this  line  was  to  make 
straight  for  the  West  Indies  on  an  intuition  that  Villeneuve 
was  gone  there ;  but  the  rest  of  the  correspondence  shows 
it  was  quite  the  reverse.  At  a  loss  to  locate  his  enemy 
and  sure  now  that  he  had  left  the  Mediterranean,  he  had 
resolved  if  he  got  no  further  information  to  play  the  old 
safe  game  which  Orde  had  played,  and  which  to  the  experi- 
enced Admirals  of  those  days  was  a  second  nature — a 
golden  rule  when  in  doubt.  So  far  was  he  from  any 
determination  to  proceed  to  the  West  Indies  that  he  had 
resolved  to  close  on  the  Western  Squadron  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Channel. 


96  NELSON'S   DILEMMA  April  19 

In  the  course  of  the  day  Parker  found  the  brig  which 
Lord  Mark  Kerr  had  hired,  and  she  brought  an  important 
new  Hght.  Not  only  was  she  able  to  bring  Kerr's  message 
that  Villeneuve  had  passed  the  Straits  ten  days  before,  but 
she  also  carried  later  news  that  he  had  been  to  Cadiz  and 
left  again  with  some  Spanish  ships  in  company/  Nelson 
at  once  deduced  that  Villeneuve  had  not  gone  to  the  West 
Indies,  and  sat  down  to  draw  up  the  following  appreciation 
for  the  Admmalty: — 

"  The  enemy's  fleet  having  so  very  long  ago  passed  the 
Straits  and  formed  a  junction  with  some  Spanish  ships 
from  Cadiz.  ...  I  have  detached  the  Amazon  to  Lisbon 
for  information,  and  I  am  proceeding  oif  Cape  St.  Vincent 
as  expeditiously  as  possible ;  and  I  hope  the  Amazon  will 
join  me  there  or  that  I  shall  obtain  some  positive  informa- 
tion of  the  destination  of  the  enemy.  The  circumstance  of 
their  having  taken  the  Spanish  ships,  which  were  for  sea, 
from  Cadiz,  satisfies  my  mind  that  they  are  not  bound  for 
the  West  Indies :  but  intend  forming  a  junction  with  the 
squadron  at  Ferrol  and  pushing  direct  for  Ireland  or  Brest, 
as  I  believe  the  French  have  troops  on  board.  Therefore, 
if  I  receive  no  intelligence  to  do  away  with  my  present 
belief,  I  shall  proceed  from  Cape  St.  Vincent,  and  take  my 
position  fifty  leagues  Avest  from  Scilly,  approaching  that 
island  slowly,  that  I  may  not  miss  any  vessels  sent  in 
search  of  the  squadron  with  orders.  My  reason  for  this 
position  is,  that  it  is  equally  easy  either  to  get  to  the 
fleet  off  Brest  or  to  go  to  Ireland  should  the  fleet  be 
wanted  at  either  station.  I  trust  this  plan  will  meet 
their  lordships'  approbation;  and  I  have  the  pleasure 
to  say  that  I  shall  bring  with  me  eleven  as  fine  ships 
of  war,  as  ably  commanded,  and  in  as  perfect  order 
and  in  health  as  ever  went  to  sea.  .  .  .  (P.S.)  I  shall 
send  to  both  Ireland  and  the  Channel  Fleet  an  extract 
of  this  letter,  acquainting  the  Commander-in-chief  where 
to  find  me." 