

^  Nicolas,  iv.  406. 


April  i6-i8  NEWS    OF    VILLENEUVE  93 

rendezvous  to  which  he  still  held.  She  also  bore  a  letter  to 
the  cruiser  he  had  kept  off  Cape  San  Sebastian  in  the  north- 
east of  Spain,  whom  she  was  to  relieve.  "  I  am  going,"  was 
his  message,  "  to  ascertain  if  the  French  fleet  is  not  in 
Toulon  and  then  to  proceed  to  the  westward,  and  this  is 
all  I  can  tell  at  present."  ^ 

It  was  not  till  two  days  later  that  his  way  was  made 
plain  before  him  and  he  knew  he  had  been  completely  out- 
manoeuvred. He  had  just  left  Toro  when  away  to  wind- 
ward Captain  William  Parker  of  the  Amazon  telegraphed 
that  he  had  spoken  a  Ragusan  who  said  she  had  seen  the 
Toulon  squadron  passing  the  Straits  on  April  8  th,  ten  days 
since.  And  to  add  to  the  vexation  he  reported  that  the 
homeward-bound  Levant  convoy,  which  had  already  been 
caught  once  and  which  Strachan  had  been  sent  to  protect, 
had  left  Gibraltar  only  a  day  ahead.'^ 

Stunned  and  humbled  by  the  news,  Nelson  changed  the 
rendezvous  to  Rosia  Bay  (Gibraltar)  and  sat  down  to 
rearrange  his  plans.  "  I  am  going  out  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean after  the  French  fleet,"  he  wrote  to  Elliot  in  a 
tone  of  resignation  in  sharp  contrast  with  his  last  indignant 
letter.  *'  It  may  be  thought  that  I  have  protected  too  well 
Sardinia,  Naples,  Sicily,  the  Morea,  and  Egypt  from  the 
French,  but  I  feel  I  have  done  right,  and  am  therefore  easy 
about  any  fate  that  may  await  me  for  having  missed  the 
French  fleet."  So  his  pen  wrote  the  words,  but  they  are 
the  words  of  a  man  who  was  neither  sure  nor  easy.  Next 
he  began  an  apology  to  the  Admiralty  for  his  failure. 
"  Under  the  severe  aflliction,"  he  said,  "  which  I  feel  at  the 
escape  of  the  French  fleet  out  of  the  Mediterranean,  I  hope 
that  their  Lordships  will  not  impute  it  to  any  want  of  due 
attention  on  my  part,  but  on  the  contrary  that  by  my  vigi- 
lance the  enemy  found  it  was  impossible  to  undertake  any 
expedition  in  the  Mediterranean."  That  had  been  his  chief 
function,  as  he  saw  his  duty,  but  would  the  Admiralty  and 
the  country  understand  ? 

1  Nelson  to  Thomas,  H.M.  Bomb  jEtna,  April  16th  :    Nicolas,  vi.  404  ; 
and  Nelson's  Journal,  April  16th. 

2  Phillimore,  Life  of  Sir   William  Parker,  vol.  i.  284.     Parker  to  Nelson, 
April  18th  :  Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS.  34929,  f.  170. 


94  NELSON'S    DILEMMA  April  i8 

As  yet  ho  could  not  see  clearly  what  the  ultimate  des- 
tination of  his  fleet  should  be.  He  merely  informed  them 
he  was  going  to  the  westward  and  must  be  guided  by  what 
he  heard  when  he  reached  Gibraltar,  and  that  meanwhile  he 
Avas  taking  precautions  to  preserve  the  command  of  the 
Italian  seas  during  his  absence. 