

^  FitzGerald  to   Mulgrave,  April    13th  and   14th  :    State  Papers,  Foreign 
{Portugal),  vol.  47. 


I02  HOW   NELSON    MADE    SURE  may  4 

intelligence  was  true.  Accordingly  they  decided  together 
to  send  it  home  at  once  and  take  such  action  as  was  in 
their  power.^ 

Immediate  action  of  some  kind  and  on  their  own  re- 
sponsibility was  absolutely  necessary.  They  knew  Knight 
and  Craig  were  at  hand.  Only  a  few  days  before  the 
Orpheus,  a  frigate  that  was  cruising  on  the  station,  had 
gone  out  to  try  to  meet  them  with  a  warning  that  Orde 
was  gone.  If  she  should  fail  to  find  them  and  Sutton's 
news  was  really  true,  they  would  be  sailing  straight  into 
the  lion's  mouth.  At  all  hazards  they  must  be  warned. 
Another  English  packet  had  just  come  in,  and  one  of 
FitzGerald's  staff  was  hurried  away  in  her  with  orders  to 
find  them  out.  Tw^enty-four  hours  after  he  had  gone  the 
expedition  appeared  off  the  Tagus.  Gambler  sped  out  to 
them  with  the  alarming  news.  He  found  the  Orpheus  had 
met  them  the  day  before,  but  they  had  missed  the  packet. 

What  was  to  be  done  ?  In  view  of  what  was  going  on 
in  Lisbon  it  was  an  extremely  delicate  situation.  But 
Gambler  was  at  hand  to  advise  and  Knight  and  Craig  did 
not  hesitate.  While  the  Orpheus  was  sent  southward  in 
search  of  trustworthy  information  as  to  the  actual  situa- 
tion at  Cadiz,  to  the  Consul  was  committed  a  politely  firm 
letter  from  the  two  commanders  informing  the  Portuguese 
Government  that  they  intended  to  take  refuge  in  the  Tagus, 
and  that  if  any  attempt  were  made  to  obstruct  their 
entrance  it  Avould  be  taken  as  an  act  of  hostility.  The 
Portuguese  were  thus  made  as  comfortable  as  possible  Avith 
a  plea  of  compulsion,  and  it  had  the  desired  effect.  No 
opposition  was  offered,  and  next  day  the  expedition  quietly 
anchored  inside  the  harbour  defences. 

The  diplomatic  air  was  immediately  in  a  tempest.  In 
the  eyes  of  Junot  and  the  Spanish  ambassador,  knowing  as 
they  did  that  Villeneuve  w'as  far  across  the  Atlantic,  the 
British  movement  could  have  but  one  meaning.  It  w^as 
obviously  a  device  to  forestall  their  game — a  repetition 
of  the  successful  British  stroke  of  1762.  They  had  been 
expecting  for  some  time  that  this  was  the  real  object  of 

^  FitzGeraid  to  Mulgrave,  May  3rd  :  S.  P.  Foreijn  {Portuyal),  47. 


May  5-8  CRAIG   IN   THE    TAGUS  103 

Craig's  expedition  and  had  warned  Talleyrand  of  the 
danger.^  Their  fear  was  now  turned  into  stern  reality. 
Junot  stormed,  the  Spaniard  threatened.  It  was  a  pre- 
concerted trick,  they  protested,  between  the  Portuguese  and 
Pitt  to  secure  the  forts  with  British  troops,  and  they  vowed 
they  must  have  at  once  either  an  ample  and  satisfactory 
explanation  or  their  passports. 