


CHAPTER  VII 

HOW   NELSON    MADE   SURE 

On  the  Tagus  was  being  played  one  of  the  many  under- 
plots of  Napoleon's  vast  contest  with  Pitt.  All  through  the 
long  imperial  struggle  between  England  and  France,  Lisbon, 
the  womb  of  the  Oceanic  expansion  of  Europe,  had  been 
recognised  as  a  point  beyond  price.  Napoleon,  like  all  his 
predecessors,  Avas  resolved  not  only  that  Portugal  must  not 
be  a  British  ally,  but  that  even  neutrality  must  be  denied 
her.  Following  the  precedents  of  the  old  Family  Compact, 
it  was  a  term  of  his  convention  with  Spain  that  Portugal 
must  be  forced  at  least  to  close  her  ports  to  British  vessels ; 
and  towards  the  end  of  February  he  had  sent  off  General 
Junot,  his  aide-de-camp  and  Colonel-General  of  his  Hussars, 
as  ambassador  to  Lisbon  to  see  that  it  was  done.  Junot  was 
long  on  the  road,  for  he  had  first  to  visit  Madrid  to  stir  the 
Spanish  Government  to  greater  naval  activity,  and  not  till 
the  second  week  in  April  did  he  finally  set  out  for  Lisbon. 
It  was  an  evil  moment.  Our  minister  there.  Lord 
Robert  FitzGerald,  was  bracing  himself  for  the  coming 
diplomatic  struggle,  when  on  April  13th  he  received  Orde's 
letters  to  say  he  had  been  driven  off  his  station  by  Ville- 
neuve.  On  the  morrow  Junot  arrived,  and  FitzGerald  could 
not  doubt  that  in  a  day  or  two  he  would  see  the  Toulon 
squadron  in  the  Tagus  and  that  Portugal  would  be  forced 
into  the  Napoleonic  system  while  he  stood  by  helpless. 
"  The  junction  of  the  French  and  Spanish  fleets  at  Cadiz," 
he  wrote  home,  "  will  now  enable  the  ambassadors  of  both 
nations  to  hold  what  language  they  please  here."  There  was 
no  means  of  resistance.  The  Portuguese,  it  is  true,  were 
making  an  effort  to  restore  their  navy  and  had  already 
secured    the    services    of    a    British    officer,    Rear-Admiral 


April  SITUATION    AT     LISBON  lOI 

Donald  Campbell ;  but  he  had  recently  been  sent  to  sea 
with  a  ship  of  the  line  and  three  cruisers  to  operate,  osten- 
sibly at  least,  about  the  Straits  against  certain  Algerine 
pirates  Avho  had  become  troublesome.^ 

The  language  which  Junot  and  the  Spanish  ambassador 
held  soon  made  itself  felt.  Sutton,  the  officer  whom  Orde 
had  left  in  command  of  his  cruisers,  found  he  was  refused 
victuals  at  Lagos.  FitzGerald  protested  and  was  told 
quietly  the  prohibition  would  not  be  enforced.  Quarantine, 
moreover,  was  declared  against  the  British  vessels,  and  Sutton 
found  it  impossible  to  carry  out  Orde's  directions  that  he 
was  to  hire  boats  to  look  into  Cadiz.  He  could  thus  get  no 
intelligence  whatever.  Of  his  sloops  the  Wasp  alone  was  in 
touch  with  him :  the  Beagle  had  entirely  disappeared.  On 
April  24th,  however,  FitzGerald  was  able  to  report  home, 
on  direct  information  from  Cadiz,  that  the  allied  squadrons 
had  been  seen  sailing  westward  on  the  10  th.  He  sent 
the  news  off  immediately  by  the  English  packet ;  and  for 
Lisbon  he  could  feel  easier.  But  not  for  long.  On  May 
2nd  he  was  startled  by  an  express  from  Sutton  to  tell  him 
that  on  April  27th  an  officer  of  the  JVasp  had  succeeded  in 
looking  into  Cadiz  in  a  Portuguese  boat  and  had  found  the 
whole  Combined  Squadron  there.  If  this  were  true,  it 
meant  that  Villeneuve  had  come  back,  and  the  danger  was 
as  great  as  ever.  FitzGerald  could  not  believe  it.  He  had 
just  ascertained  from  a  neutral  skipper  exact  details  of 
the  allied  squadrons  as  they  had  sailed  together  to  the 
westward,  and  the  reports  from  Cadiz  were  that  every  one 
knew  they  were  bound  for  Jamaica.  Still  certainty  in  the 
matter  was  beyond  his  reach,  and  in  his  dilemma  he  fell 
back  on  a  principle  that  is  worth  recording.  The  diplomatic 
and  the  naval  intelligence  were  in  conflict  on  a  matter  of 
moment,  but  the  diplomatic  situation  turned  on  the  situa- 
tion at  sea.  It  was  primarily  a  naval  matter,  and  therefore 
in  consultation  with  Gambler,  the  Consul,  a  man  on  whose 
sagacity  and  knowledge  every  one  relied,  he  concluded  there 
was  no  choice  but  to  act  on  the  assumption  that  the  naval 