

To  imagine  Nelson's  feelings  on  reading  such  a  letter  is 
not  difficult.  If  Colonel  Smith's  surmise  was  correct,  if  the 
troops  had  really  sailed  before  the  end  of  March,  it  made 
matters  ten  times  worse  and  the  silence  of  the  Admiralty 
ten  times  more  exasperating.     "  Your  Excellency's  notice," 

1  Phillimore,  Life  of  Sir  William  Parlrr,  i.  281.  The  Decade  had  reached 
Naples  by  the  9th.  She  must  therefore  have  left  England  on  March  22nd 
or  23rd,  that  is,  three  or  four  days  before  the  27th,  the  day  on  which  Nelson's 
instructions  to  co-operate  with  Craig  were  issued.  See  also  Nicolas,  vi. 
406  n. 

2  Nicolas,  vi.  406  n.  The  letter  is  dated  April  9th,  the  same  day  the  Decade 
arrived.    She  had  been  therefore  nearly  six  days  beating  out  to  Nelson. 


92  NELSON'S   DILEMMA  Aprh.  i6 

Nelson  wrote  in  indignant  reply,  "  about  troops  being  sent 
to  the  Mediterranean  is  the  first  word  I  have  ever  heard 
of  it,  nor  have  I  an  idea  that  any  such  thing  could  be  in 
agitation  without  the  Admiralty  telling  me,  in  order  that 
I  might  meet  and  protect  them."  Had  he  been  aware  of 
the  agitation  at  the  Admiralty  over  Melville's  downfall,  he 
would  have  understood  better,  but  of  that  he  knew  nothing 
to  temper  his  anger.  "  Does  your  Excellency  mean,"  he 
went  on,  "  that  you  or  that  I  have  been  long  acquainted 
with  it  ?  If  it  is  yoio,  I  dare  say  it  is  right ;  but  if  /  am 
meant  as  being  in  the  secret  of  the  destination  of  those 
troops,  I  most  solemnly  declare  my  entire  ignorance  as  to 
the  force  or  destination,  or  even  that  07ie  soldier  is  intended 
for  the  Mediterranean.  I  know  certainly  Avhere  many 
thousands  are  wanted;  but,  as  I  said  before,  I  never  will 
believe  that  any  number  of  troops  will  be  risked  inside 
Gibraltar  without  an  assurance  of  my  protection  :  and  that 
I  should  be  directed  to  meet  them  upon  some  fixed  station 
to  the  westward  of  Toulon,  if  not  to  the  westward  of 
Cartagena." 

He  was  not  to  know  the  expedition  w^as  still  windbound 
at  Spithead  as  he  wrote,  or  that  instructions  such  as  he 
sketched  were  just  starting  from  the  Admiralty.  For  all 
he  could  tell  the  troops  were  already  a  fortnight  out ;  and 
before  he  closed  his  letter — at  midday — came  news  from  a 
neutral  just  spoken  that,  nine  days  before,  the  Toulon 
squadron  had  been  seen  off  Cape  Gata  bearing  for  the 
Straits  before  an  easterly  wind.  "  If  this  account  is  true," 
Nelson  ended  in  despair,  "  much  mischief  may  be  appre- 
hended.    It  kills  me,  the  very  thought."  ^ 

The  acuteness  of  the  danger  seems  almost  to  have 
thrown  him  off  his  balance.  Yet  even  so  he  still  held 
unshaken  to  the  line  he  had  followed  all  along.  He  w^as 
resolved  that  even  the  apparent  certainty  of  the  new 
danger  should  not  beguile  him  to  the  westw^ard  till  he 
had  made  absolutely  sure  the  ground  w^as  good  behind 
him.  Accordingly  he  sent  off  yet  another  cruiser  to  look 
into  Toulon,  with  orders  to  meet  him  at  Formentera,  the 