

His  idea  was  not  to  proceed  direct  to  Gibraltar ;  for  he 
now  issued  a  "  secret  route,"  in  which  the  flrst  rendezvous 
was  the  south  end  of  Sardinia  (No.  71)  and  the  second 
Formentera,  the  southernmost  of  the  Balearic  Islands."  The 
route  would  suggest  that,  in  spite  of  his  anxiety  for  Craig's 
force,  his  object  was  still  to  make  sure  that  Villeneuve  had 
not  doubled  back  upon  Naples,  and  his  subsequent  actions 
confirm  the  supposition  that  something  of  the  kind  was  in 
his  mind. 

Bitter  as  was  the  cup  of  his  dilemma  it  was  not  yet 
full.     In  spite  of  every  eflbrt  and  the  splendid  seamanship 

^  Craif^'s  orders  with  instructions  to  co-operate  were  contained  in  a  de- 
spatch to  Nelson,  dated  March  27th  {Out-lctters,  Secret  Orders,  i;^63),  but  there 
is  no  trace  in  his  correspondence  with  the  Admiralty  of  his  having  received 
it  till  May  1st  {po,st,  p.  97).  It  was  not  until  April  15th  that  he  received  the 
Admiralty  bag  of  February  16th. — Nicolas,  vi.  404. 

2  Journa/,  April  10  and  16.  In  the  revised  list  of  rendezvous  used  in 
September,  No.  71  was  Tarifa,  No.  80  was  Formentera  west  end. 


I 


April  IS  HEARS    CRAIG    IS    COMING  91 

of  his  hardened  squadron,  he  could  scarcely  make  any  pro- 
gress to  the  westward  at  all.  Persistent  heavy  weather 
from  the  west  and  north-west  held  him  fast  inside  Sar- 
dinia. On  the  11th  he  was  no  farther  towards  Formentera 
than  the  Island  of  Marittimo  off  the  end  of  Sicily.  Next 
day,  full  of  his  old  doubt,  he  sent  two  more  cruisers  to  look 
into  Toulon,  one  to  go  inside  Sardinia  and  the  other  round 
Toro.  By  the  15  th,  after  four  days'  struggle,  he  was  still 
beating  round  the  south  end  of  Sardinia,  and  here  he  was 
joined  by  two  cruisers  from  Naples.  One  was  a  frigate  of 
his  own,  the  Amazo7i,  which  he  had  sent  in  for  news,  and  the 
other  the  Decade,  a  smart  frigate  which  had  just  made  the 
voyage  from  England  in  seventeen  days.  She  had  brought  out 
Colonel  Smith,  one  of  Lord  Mulgrave's  private  secretaries, 
who  had  been  sent  specially  to  Elliot  with  news  of  the 
expedition  and  his  secret  instructions  for  its  employment. 
Elliot  had  hurried  her  on  to  Nelson  at  the  earliest  moment, 
but  her  information  was  already  nearly  a  week  old.^  "  Lord 
Mulgrave,"  Elliot  wrote,  "informs  me  in  great  secrecy  that 
a  considerable  body  of  troops  was  on  the  point  of  sailing  for 
Malta,  for  the  purposes  with  which  you  have  been  so  long 
acquainted.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  Lord  Mulgrave's 
private  secretary,  who  has  brought  me  secret  instructions 
upon  this  head,  conceives  that  the  regiments  will  have 
left  England  a  few  days  after  the  departure  of  the  Deccale. 
Under  this  impression  I  think  it  highly  material  that  you 
should  not  be  ignorant  of  a  circumstance,  which,  if  known 
to  the  French,  may  have  some  weight  with  them  respecting 
the  destination  of  the  Toulon  fleet."  "^ 