

Once  more,  then,  he  was  as  clear-headed  as  ever,  and 
eliminating   minor   matters  was   able  to  detach  with   pre- 

1  Philliraore,  Sir  William  Parker,  i.  284. 


May  I  A   WRONG   APPRECIATION  97 

cision  the  essential  move.  His  spirit  too  was  healed,  and 
his  letter  to  Lord  Gardner  rings  with  the  old  cheery  note. 
He  began  to  see,  as  indeed  it  proved,  that  his  driving  Ville- 
neuve  through  the  Straits  was  a  strategical  success,  and  he 
had  little  fear  for  what  he  would  do  outside.  "  My  dear 
lord,"  he  wrote,  "  if  the  Toulon  fleet  with  that  of  Cadiz  is 
gone  your  road,  the  ships  under  my  command  will  be  no 
unacceptable  sight.  If  you  do  not  want  help,  tell  us  to 
go  back  again.  I  feel  vexed  at  their  slipping  out  of  the 
Mediterranean  as  I  had  marked  them  for  my  game.  How- 
ever I  hope,  my  dear  lord,  that  now  you  will  annihilate 
them."  From  this  time,  moreover,  there  is  no  further  sign 
of  anxiety  for  the  safety  of  Craig's  expedition.  The  news 
of  Villeneuve's  having  been  to  Cadiz  to  form  a  junction 
with  the  Spaniards  must  have  assured  him  that  the  enemy 
had  some  other  and  higher  aim. 

A  week  of  weary  beating  to  the  westward  followed,  but 
it  brought  no  change  in  his  view.  At  the  end  of  it,  in  a 
letter  to  the  Commissioner  at  Gibraltar,  he  expressed  him- 
self as  unshaken  in  his  conviction  that  the  junction  of 
the  two  squadrons  indicated  the  relief  of  Ferrol,  to  be 
followed  by  a  direct  attack  on  the  British  islands,  and  not 
an  adventure  in  the  West  Indies.^  He  was  then  nearing 
the  Straits,  and  with  his  letter  he  sent  the  Decade  forward 
to  Gibraltar  with  directions  to  bring  him  the  last  word 
known  there.  Four  days  later,  on  May  1st,  with  Ceuta  just 
in  sight,  he  received  a  direct  communication  from  the 
Admiralty  which  not  only  explained  their  silence  on  the 
subject  of  the  expedition,  but  gave  him  hope  it  was  safe. 
"  I  have  this  moment  received  your  letter  of  the  1st  of 
April,"  he  immediately  replied, "  acquainting  me  .  .  .  that 
Rear-Admiral  Knight  with  the  Queen  and  Dragon  w^ere  to 
sail  in  a  day  or  two  .  .  .  having  under  convoy  transports 
with  5000  troops  on  board."  It  was  the  long-expected 
despatch  directing  him  to  take  up  a  covering  position.  His 
relief  was  great,  for  now  he  knew  the  troops  had  not  started 
so  soon  as  Elliot  believed.  There  was  good  ground  to 
hope,  as  he  said,  that  as  the  Fisgard  had  left  for  England 

^  Nelson  to  Otway,  April  26th:  Nicolas,  vi.  415. 

G 


98  NELSON'S   DILEMMA  may  4 

two   hours  after  the  French   had  passed,  she   would   have 
arrived  in  time  to  stop  the  expedition  sailing.^ 

On  the  4th,  as  the  wind  still  held  ahead,  he  resolved  to 
anchor  in  Tetuan  Bay  and  employ  the  time  in  filling  up 
with  water,  beef,  and  fuel.  While  thus  engaged  he  received 
the  first  suggestion  of  what  was  really  happening.  It  was 
a  reply  from  Captain  Otway,  the  Navy  Commissioner  at 
Gibraltar,  telling  him  of  the  entire  disappearance  of  the 
Combined  Squadron  and  of  the  general  belief  that  it  had 
gone  to  the  West  Indies.  The  news  certainly  shook  his 
former  conviction,  but  though  it  filled  him  with  new  anxiety 
it  was  not  enough  to  change  his  purpose.  Of  the  sure  intel- 
ligence he  had  hoped  to  get  from  Orde's  cruisers  there  was 
none,  and  no  matter  how  pressing  was  the  danger  in  the 
west,  he  would  not  act  on  mere  rumours.  "  I  cannot  very 
properly  run  to  the  West  Indies,"  he  replied  to  Otway, 
"  without  something  beyond  mere  surmise,  and  if  I  defer 
my  departure  Jamaica  may  be  lost." 