

For  this  purpose  he  formed  the  greater  part  of  his 
cruisers  into  a  squadron  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Hon.  T.  Bladen  Capel,  of  the  Fhaibe  36,  with  instruc- 
tions to  take  station  off  Tore  and  between  that  island 
and  Marittimo  off  the  west  end  of  Sicily,  *'  for  the  purpose  of 
intercepting  any  expedition  which  the  enemy  may  attempt 
against  Sardinia,  Sicily,  and  Egypt."  "  I  only  mention  it," 
Nelson  wrote,  "  as  the  most  likely  place  to  fall  in  with  any 
expedition  which  the  enemy  may  attempt  against  those 
places  from  Toulon,  but  must  leave  this  important  trust  to 
your  judgment  and  to  act,  as  from  certain  circumstances 
of  information  you  shall  judge  best,  to  prevent  their  effect- 
ing a  landing."  The  squadron,  when  it  was  concentrated  as 
intended  at  Tore,  Avould  consist  of  five  frigates  and  a  bomb, 
and  this  force,  with  the  Neapolitan  squadron  and  the 
Excellent  at  Naples,  he  considered  sufficient  for  the  moment 
without  counting  on  the  arrival  of  the  Russians.^ 

So  to  the  last  he  clung  to  the  base  idea  of  his  strategical 
principle.  His  dominant  function  was  to  keep  command  of 
the  Mediterranean.  For  him  that  was  always  the  end ;  the 
destruction  of  the  Toulon  fleet  was  only  a  means.  To  that 
end,  therefore,  he  sacrificed  more  than  half  his  cruisers — 
keeping  only  three  frigates  and  a  couple  of  sloops  with  his 
flag ;  and  not  even  in  the  moment  of  his  passionate  desire 
to  deal  Avith  the  enemy's  battle  fleet,  Avhen  cruisers  meant 
almost  everything,  did  he  suffer  it  to  turn  him  a  hair- 
breadth from  the  higher  purpose.  No  great  captain  ever 
grasped  more  fully  the  strategical  importance  of  dealing 
with  the  enemy's  main  force,  yet  no  one  ever  less  suftered 
it  to  become  an  obsession ;  no  one  saw  more  clearly  when 
it  ceased  to  be  the  key  of  a  situation,  and  fell  to  a  position 
of  secondary  moment. 

1  Nelson  to  Capel,  April  18tb  :  Nicolas,  vi.  408. 


April  19  HIS    FIRST    INTENTION  95 

For  a  real  insight  into  Nelson's  character  as  a  strategist 
there  is  nothing  in  his  career  so  valuable  as  the  period  of 
trial  that  was  now  before  him.  At  no  other  time  are  we 
permitted  to  see  so  deep  down  into  the  well-laid  fomida- 
tions  on  which  his  brilliant  combinations  were  securely 
based.  The  dramatic  attraction  of  his  immortal  chase  has 
led  to  the  growth  of  a  legend  that  it  was  a  stroke  of  inspired 
daring.  But  in  truth  it  was  a  sober  calculation  patiently 
built  up  step  by  step  with  all  behind  made  solid  and  secure 
and  all  in  front  reduced  by  slow  degrees  to  such  certainty 
as  war  ever  permits.  As  a  precedent  for  conduct  in  such  a 
case  there  is  nothing  within  our  knowledge  that  can  com- 
pare with  the  forging  of  the  final  decision — nothing  that  so 
fully  reveals  the  working  of  a  master  mind  in  war.  It  must 
be  followed  day  by  day,  even  hour  by  hour  where  possible. 