

His  attitude  to  the  dilemma  was  well  expressed  by  his 
first  biographers  in  a  noteworthy  passage.  One  of  them, 
McArthur,  knew  him  well  and  had  come  near  to  being  his 
secretary.  The  legend  of  a  heaven-sent  inspiration  was 
already  arising  when  they  wrote,  and  in  their  view  it  should 
be  nipped  in  the  bud  as  fraught  with  danger.  "  It  was 
entirely  inconsistent,"  they  declare,  ''  with  Lord  Nelson's 
great  professional  character  and  regard  for  the  discipline  of 
the  service  to  take  so  bold  a  step  until  he  had  every  reason 
to  believe  they  could  not  have  sailed  in  any  other  direction. 
...  It  is  the  more  necessary  to  make  this  remark  lest  other 
officers,  led  on  by  the  impulse  of  zeal  unsubdued  by  the  re- 
flection he  employed  and  the  splendour  of  resolute  pursuit, 
may  erroneously  indulge  in  a  contrary  idea  to  their  own 
destruction."  ^ 

His  whole  conduct  at  this  juncture  amply  bears  out  his 
biographers'  remarks.  The  West  Indies  became  a  probable 
destination,  that  was  all.  Till  there  could  be  no  room  for 
doubt  he  kept  an  open  mind,  still  resolved  to  close  on  the 

1  To  Marsden,  May  1st :  Nicolas,  vi.  418. 

2  Clarke  and  McArthur,  Life  of  Nelson,  II.  Part,  iii.  94. 


Mays        precautions   BEFORE   LEAVING  99 

strategic  centre,  if  no  sufficient  information  were  forth- 
coming. But  meanwhile  he  prepared  everything  for  the 
possible  eventuality.  On  May  the  5th  he  formally  con- 
stituted his  second-in-command,  Sir  Richard  Bickerton, 
Commander-in-chief  in  the  Mediterranean  during  his  pos- 
sible absence,  with  orders  to  carry  out  in  every  particular 
"  the  Admiralty  instructions  for  the  protection  and  safety 
of  their  Sicilian  and  their  Sardinian  Majesties'  dominions,  as 
well  as  preventing  the  enemy  from  effecting  any  expedition 
against  Egypt."  The  squadron  he  would  have  for  the  work 
must  at  first  be  weak  enough.  Bickerton's  flag  was  flying 
in  the  Royal  Sovereign,  but  she  was  a  first-rate  and  too  valu- 
able to  be  spared.  Nelson  meant  to  take  her  with  him 
and  intended  Bickerton  to  shift  his  flag  to  any  other  ship 
he  chose  in  the  squadron  that  was  to  be  left  under  his 
command.  It  was  to  consist  of  nearly  the  whole  of  Nelson's 
cruisers  and  any  additional  force  that  might  arrive  from 
home.  There  were  over  a  score  all  told,  and  Nelson  him- 
self kept  only  four,  so  careful  was  he  to  make  good  behind 
him  the  ground  committed  to  his  charge. 

As  these  orders  were  being  prepared  the  wind  at  last 
came  fair,  and  he  moved  for  the  Straits  to  pass  on  and  meet 
the  Amazon  from  Lisbon  whence  alone  he  could  hope  to  get 
the  light  which  would  clear  the  fog.  Lisbon  for  the 
moment  was  the  centre  of  information,  and  there,  while 
Nelson  moves  west  on  the  fitful  Levanter,  we  must  look 
before  the  position  can  be  grasped  in  all  its  bearings. 