

It  will  be  remembered  that  on  first  receiving  Lord 
Mark  Kerr's  intelligence  that  Villeneuve  had  passed  the 
Straits,  they  regarded  Jamaica  as  his  probable  objective, 
and  ordered  Collingwood  with  part  of  the  Flying  Squadron 
to  Madeira.     His  instructions  were  to  reinforce  the  West 


April  THE    BEAGLE  III 

Indian  station,  should  he  ascertain  that  that  was  the 
enemy's  destination  and  that  Nelson  had  not  himself 
anticipated  the  movement.  Then  came  Orde's  news,  with 
the  suggestion  that  Nelson  had  been  diverted  to  Egypt  and 
that  Villeneuve's  operations  indicated  an  attack  on  Craig's 
expedition,  to  be  followed  by  a  concentration  at  some 
western  rendezvous  for  seizing  the  command  of  the 
Channel.  We  savv'  also  how  steps  were  promptly  taken 
with  the  object  of  saving  Craig  and  securing  a  counter 
concentration  on  Gardner  off  Ushant. 

But  even  as  the  necessary  orders  were  being  signed, 
tidings  reached  Plymouth  which  gave  a  new  and  clearer 
light  upon  the  situation.  Again  it  came  from  one  of  Orde's 
cruisers,  and  this  perhaps  will  explain  why  the  Admiralty 
took  a  view  of  his  conduct  so  different  from  the  repre- 
hension which  modern  critics  have  made  his  undiluted 
portion.  His  reception  at  home  was  perfectly  normal.  He 
had  requested  to  be  relieved,  and  on  his  arrival  he  was 
directed  to  bring  his  squadron  to  Plymouth  for  a  refit  and 
to  strike  his  flag,  but  his  conduct  as  a  whole  was  approved. 

The  cruiser  in  question  was  the  long-lost  Beagle,  the 
sloop  which  Orde  had  left  with  Sutton  to  watch  the  Straits 
and  which  it  will  be  remembered  had  disappeared  into 
space.  The  mystery  was  now  explained.  On  April  9  th, 
being  then  under  Cape  Spartel,  sheltering  from  the 
Levanter  with  the  Portuguese  squadron  in  company,  she 
had  sighted  some  strange  vessels  passing  the  Straits  on  the 
heels  of  the  homeward-bound  Mediterranean  convoy.  So 
suspicious  was  the  situation  that  after  comparing  notes 
with  one  of  the  Portuguese  cruisers.  Captain  Burn,  her 
commander,  had  decided  to  beat  into  Tangier  for  intelli- 
gence. There  next  day  he  heard  from  the  Consul  that  it  was 
the  Toulon  squadron  to  the  number  of  thirteen  of  the  line 
and  five  frigates  which  he  had  seen  passing  the  Straits,  and 
that  both  Orde  and  the  convoy  were  in  serious  danger. 
Thereupon  he  immediately  made  sail  again  to  look  for 
the  Admiral  off  Cadiz.  Next  morning  outside  the  Straits  he 
saw  the  strangers  again,  steering  to  the  westward,  and  the 
Portuguese  squadron  still  on  the  watch  off  Cape  Spartel. 


112     COLLINGWOOD'S   FLYING   SQUADKON     april 

They  too  must  have  seen  the  movement  westward  or  at 
least  part  of  it,  and  hence  the  importance  of  Campbell's 
information  to  Nelson.  On  reaching  the  Cadiz  rendezvous 
Burn  found  Orde  already  gone,  and  no  trace  of  the  Toulon 
squadron  inside.  But  to  seaward  ho  could  see  the  four 
belated  Spanish  vessels  beating  out  also  to  the  westward. 
It  was  obvious  they  had  just  left  Cadiz,  and  till  the  evening 
of  the  12th  he  kept  them  in  sight.  Having  thus  fixed 
their  course  he  hurried  away  to  try  to  find  the  Admiral  at 
St.  Vincent.  On  his  way  he  spoke  an  American  bound  for 
Toulon,  who  said  he  had  seen  a  squadron  of  five  of  the  line 
to  the  westward.  Accordingly  Burn  stood  out  in  that 
direction,  but  Orde,  as  we  know,  had  turned  south,  and 
though  the  Beagle  beat  north  and  west  till  the  18th  she 
failed  to  get  touch  with  him.  Once,  it  is  true,  she  came 
within  thirty  miles  of  the  squadron,  but  still  finding  no 
trace  of  it,  Burn  decided,  as  soon  as  he  had  made  sufficient 
westing  for  a  fair  wind,  to  hold  away  for  Ferrol.^ 