

In  this  Burn  showed  admirable  judgment.  For  Orde 
was  then  to  the  westward  of  him  making  for  the  same 
point.  The  Beagle,  however,  being  more  weatherly  than  the 
squadron,  had  got  a  day  ahead,  and  all  she  found  off  Ortegal 
Avas  one  of  Calder's  cruisers,  the  Indefatigable,  of  which 
Moore,  the  captor  of  the  galleons,  was  still  in  command. 
He  took  her  to  the  Admiral,  who  as  usual,  in  the  wild 
westerly  weather  that  had  brought  the  Beagle  up,  had  taken 
the  squadron  under  Cape  Prior  for  shelter.  Of  Orde  there 
was  no  news,  though  he  was  then  actually  passing  north, 
only  a  hundred  miles  to  the  westward.  Accordingly,  after 
communicating  all  she  had  seen,  the  Beagle  made  her  way 
direct  for  homo,  probably  by  Calder's  orders.  Her  informa- 
tion was  indeed  priceless,  for  it  was  actually  later  and  more 
certain  than  anything  Nelson  had  obtained  before  he  decided 
to  chase ;  and  with  it  she  anchored  in  Plymouth  Sound  on 
April  30  th. 

Her  invaluable  report  was  in  Barham's  hands  on  May 
2nd.     It  was  not  entirely  satisfactory.     Captain  Burn  had 

^  For  the  Beagles  movements  see  Burn's  Report:   Captains'  Letters,  1535, 
April  12  and  25  ;  and  Captains'  Logs,  1530  ;  and  Chart,  ante,  p.  57. 


May  2-4        BARHAM   AHEAD    OF   NELSON  113 

said  nothing  explicitly  of  Villeneuve's  squadron,  but  as  he 
had  looked  into  Cadiz  it  was  to  be  assumed  from  his  silence 
it  was  not  there.  Nor  had  he  seen  the  four  Spaniards 
actually  leave  Cadiz.  Still  the  inference  was  pretty  clear. 
Unfortunately,  however,  he  had  omitted  in  his  report  an 
item  that  w^as  indispensable  for  a  trustworthy  interpretation 
of  his  news.  In  those  days  there  was  no  thought  of  train- 
ing officers  in  a  scientific  method  of  reporting  intelligence, 
and  Captain  Burn  had  omitted  to  say  how  the  wind  was 
when  he  parted  company.  Till  this  was  known  there  must 
be  doubt  as  to  whether  the  course  observed  was  a  true  one 
or  not,  and  before  making  any  fresh  distribution  Barham 
sent  down  for  the  Beagles  log.^  Still  something  could  be 
done.  The  threat  to  Jamaica  was  clearly  intensified.  A 
packet  was  on  the  point  of  sailing  for  the  West  Indies,  and 
that  night  went  off  warning  to  the  Admirals,  with  instruc- 
tions that  General  Myers,  Commander-in-chief  in  the  Lee- 
ward Islands,  had  been  given  authority  to  detach  two  or 
three  thousand  of  his  troops  to  Jamaica  in  case  of  need, 
and  that  Cochrane  was  to  do  all  he  could  to  expedite  their 
transport.^ 

Two  days  later  Barham  had  made  up  his  mind.  He 
had  indeed  a  practical  certainty — which  Nelson  did  not 
arrive  at  till  five  days  later — that  Villeneuve's  destination 
was  the  West  Indies,  and  he  determined  to  act  at  once. 
His  first  step  was  to  tell  Gardner  to  send  away  Collingwood 
and  his  five  of  the  line.  Collingwood's  orders  were,  as 
before,  to  go  to  Madeira,  ascertain  whether  Villeneuve  or 
Nelson  had  passed,  and  act  accordingly,  leaving  word  what 
he  had  done  for  the  Consul  to  send  back  to  Gibraltar  and 
Cadiz.  If  there  was  no  certain  intelligence  he  was  to  go 
straight  on  to  Barbadoes  and  co-operate  with  General  Myers 
for  the  security  of  Jamaica.'*^     As,  however,  the  whole  matter 