

At  home  the  decision  was  well  received.  "  He  seems 
to  have  acted  most  handsomely,"  wrote  Lord  Hardwicke 
on  opening  Nelson's  despatch  to  Lxland,  "  as  indeed  he 
always  does  for  the  public  service,  in  weakening  his  own 
force  for  the  security  of  the  convoy  under  the  Queen  and 
the  Dragon."  '-^ 

The  same  evening,  some  twenty  miles  to  the  southward 
of  St.  Vincent,  the  two  squadrons  parted  company,  Knight 
to  see  his  convoy  safely  into  Gibraltar,  while  Nelson  bore  up 
on  his  long  chase,  taking  with  him  his  remaining  ten  of 
the  line  and  the  frigates  Decade,  Ami^hion,  and  Amazon.  The 
last  the  Admiralty  heard  of  him  was  by  a  letter  written  on 

^  Pbillimore,  Life  of  Sir  William  Parker,  \.  289. 

-  Hardwicke  to  Charles  Yorke,  June  1st :  Hardwicke  Papers,  Add.  MSS. 
.35706.  Nelson  was  partly  reconciled  to  the  loss  of  the  Royal  Sovereign 
because  she  wanted  docking  badly  and  was  therefore  slow.  But  the  Superb 
was  in  the  same  condition  and  he  took  her  on.  He  informed  the  Admiralty 
that  his  reason  for  detaching  the  Royal  Sovereign  was  to  render  it  impossible 
for  all  the  force  at  Cartagena  to  make  any  impression  upon  Knight's  force. 
Here  then  we  have  further  evidence  of  the  value  Nelson  placed  on  three- 
decked  ships.  The  Cartagena  squadron  consisted  of  six  two-deckers,  and  he 
considered  he  had  enabled  Knight  to  deal  with  it  by  leaving  him  with  two 
three-deckers  and  one  seventy-four. 


May  14  HIS    LAST   WORD  109 

May  14th,  as  he  approached  Madeira,  to  assure  them  that 
even  if  Villeneuve  had  not  gone  to  the  West  Indies,  little 
harm  could  come  of  his  chase.  "  If  they  are  not  there,"  he 
said,  "  the  squadron  will  be  back  again  by  the  end  of  June 
— in  short,  before  the  enemy  can  know  where  I  am."  This 
element  in  the  reasoning  which  brought  him  to  his  decision 
must  not  be  forgotten — the  moral  effect  of  an  unlocated 
fleet.  How  rightly  he  calculated  the  factor  we  shall  see 
presently  in  Napoleon's  inability  to  make  up  his  mind 
where  Nelson  had  gone  or  in  what  quarter  the  "  fougueux 
amiral "  would  reappear,  no  less  than  in  the  paralysis  which 
the  uncertainty  produced  on  Villeneuve's  will. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

COLLINGWOOD'S  FLYING   SQUADRON 

Of  all  parts  of  the  art  of  war  there  is  none  perhaps  of 
higher  value  than  the  interpretation  of  intelligence.  At 
the  end  of  our  long  series  of  maritime  wars  with  France, 
the  faculty  of  interpretation  had  reached  in  the  sea  service 
its  fullest  powers.  So  Avide  was  the  theatre,  so  slow  the 
means  of  communication  and  so  precious  every  rare  item  of 
news,  that  sharp  necessity  had  developed  an  acuteness  of 
sense  that  gives  at  times  an  impression  of  second  sight. 
The  whole  service  was  as  it  were  irradiated  with  an  alert 
sympathy,  a  mutual  understanding  between  the  War  Staff 
and  the  fighting  lines,  by  which  admirals  afloat  seemed 
always  to  see  into  the  mind  of  the  Admiralty  and  the 
Admiralty  to  rest  assured  of  what  the  admirals  would  do. 
It  was  a  factor  in  the  struggle  which  Napoleon  failed  to 
take  into  account,  or  even  to  appreciate.  In  his  over- 
weening self-confidence  he  would  not  believe  that  the 
British  sea  service  possessed  a  strategic  intuition  as  great 
as  his  own  on  land.  Yet  it  was  even  greater  or  at  least 
more  formidable  than  his — for  in  the  one  case  it  depended 
on  a  single  master-mind,  in  the  other  it  was  an  instructed 
instinct  that  was  alive  and  active  in  every  centre  of  direc- 
tion. At  every  turn  of  the  campaign  we  feel  its  quickening 
impulse,  and  nowhere  more  strongly  than  in  the  process  by 
which  the  Admiralty  came  to  the  same  conclusion  as 
Nelson,  and  in  the  action  they  took  in  consequence. 