

Yet  it  was  not  Campbell's  information  that  brought 
Nelson  to  a  final  decision.  There  must  be  greater  certainty 
still  before  he  could  take  the  crucial  step,  and  this  he 
hoped  to  get  off  St.  Vincent  either  from  the  Amazon  or  one 
of  Orde's  cruisers,  Avhich  he  now  knew  had  been  left  to 
watch.  It  was  on  the  evening  of  May  6th,  the  same  day 
he  saw  Campbell,  that  Nelson  had  left  Gibraltar.      Meeting 

1  Allen,  Life  of  Captain  Sir  William  Hargood,  p.  1 1 0.     Clarke  and  McArthur, 
ii.  489,  and  see  ^os^  p.  111. 


I 


May 9  THE   DECISION    MADE  105 

with  light  airs,  it  was  not  till  the  morning  of  the  9  th 
he  had  made  St.  Vincent.  His  destination  was  still  un- 
certain, and  his  stores  for  a  voyage  across  the  Atlantic  still 
incomplete.  "  We  have  heard  nothing  of  the  French  fleet 
since  they  left  Cadiz  on  the  10th,"  wrote  Hardy,  his  flag 
captain,  as  they  sighted  the  cape.  "  It  is  therefore  strongly 
believed  by  Lord  Nelson  that  they  are  gone  for  the  West 
Indies,  and  of  course  we  shall  follow  them  if  we  hear  no- 
thing of  their  destination  from  Lisbon,  from  whence  we 
expect  the  Amazon  will  join  to-morrow."  Up  to  this  time, 
therefore,  the  question  was  still  open,  but  after  his  manner 
Nelson  made  the  best  use  of  the  delay  till  certainty  could  be 
attained.  The  storeships  which  Orde  had  sent  into  Lagos 
were  still  there,  and  with  evident  enjoyment  he  decided  to 
move  thither  and  help  himself  to  all  he  wanted.  "  Here 
we  are,  my  dear  Campbell,"  he  wrote  to  his  friend  next  day 
from  Lagos,  "  clearing  Sir  John  Orde's  transports  .  .  . 
completing  ourselves  to  five  months,  and  to-morrow  I  start 
for  the  West  Indies.  .  .  .  Admiral  Knight  ...  is  at  pre- 
sent off  Lisbon  with  the  convoy  of  troops.  I  wish  he  would 
come  here;  but  he  has  been  deceived  by  false  informa- 
tion that  the  Combined  Squadrons  were  still  in  Cadiz — I 
wish  they  were."  ^  In  the  evening  he  moved  back  to  St. 
Vincent,  and  at  ten  o'clock  the  same  night  Hardy  added 
a  postscript  to  his  letter.  "  We  are  noAV  ofl*  St.  Vincent, 
and  his  lordship  has  made  up  his  mind  to  bear  up  for 
the  West  Indies  in  the  course  of  to-morrow."^  Thus 
to  a  few  hours  we  can  tell  when  it  was  Nelson  took  his 
momentous  decision,  and  we  can  tell,  moreover,  exactly  on 
what  information  it  was  taken. 

The  first  light  on  the  actual  situation  that  he  obtained 
was  from  his  old  friend  Sutton  in  the  Amphion,  who  was 
still  at  the  post  where  Orde  had  left  him.  It  was  also  the 
fullest,  though  Nelson  in  his  Journal  would  not  admit  it. 
All  he  says  is  that  at  half-past  seven  in  the  evening  of  the  9th 
she  joined  company,   "  and  I  ordered  Captain  Sutton  under 