

The  only  trouble  was  that  the  enemy  had  now  a  whole 
month's  start  of  him.  Yet  he  did  not  despair  of  being  in 
time  to  save  Jamaica  and  the  other  British  islands.  So 
great  was  his  confidence  in  the  superior  seamanship  of  his 
fleet,  he  was  sure  with  luck  and  judgment  he  could  gain 
many  days  upon  the  chase.  But  every  hour  was  precious 
and  yet  he  could  not  give  the  word  to  go.  He  now  knew 
Craig's  expedition  had  put  into  Lisbon  on  the  false  infor- 
mation that  had  been  received  as  to  Villeneuve's  having  re- 
turned to  Cadiz,  and  his  last  orders  from  home  were  to  see 
it  safe  on  its  way.  From  the  American  skipper's  report, 
moreover,  he  had  learnt  what  the  actual  state  of  affairs  at 
Cadiz  was.  A  number  of  ships  of  the  line  were  fitting 
there  for  sea  in  hot  haste,  and  in  spite  of  his  eagerness  to 
be  gone  he  determined  he  must  await  the  arrival  of  the 
expedition  and  see  it  safely  into  the  Gut. 

Next  morning,  to  his  great  relief,  Knight  met  him  off 
Cape  St.  Vincent  with  the  Admiralty  orders  relating  to  the 
expedition.  These  he  at  once  sent  forward  to  Bickerton  that 
he  might  do  what  was  necessary  to  co-operate  with  Craig,  while 
he  himself  made  such  arrangements  for  the  safe  passage  of 
the  convoy  as  would  justify  his  leaving  the  station  without 
an  hour's  delay.  To  this  end  he  directed  Knight  to  take 
the  transports  down  wide  of  Cadiz  and  Tarifa  and  then  run 
straight  along  the  Moorish  coast  into  Gibraltar.^  Beyond 
that  point  there  was  still  the  Cartagena  squadron  to  con- 
sider. At  all  costs  it  must  be  rendered  powerless;  and 
after  a  short  deliberation,  Nelson  resolved,  in  spite  of  his 
relative  inferiority  to  the  Combined  Squadron,  to  hand  over 
the  Royal  Sovereign  to  Knight. 

^  Nicolas,  vi.  430,  and  note. 

^  Nelson  to  Earl  Camden,  May  14th  :  Nicolas,  vi.  438.     His  instructions 
to  Knight  are  ibid.,  p.  433. 


io8  HOW   NELSON   MADE    SURE  may  n 

No  decision  of  Nelson's  is  more  eloquent  of  his  grasp 
of  the  true  end  and  meaning  of  naval  warfare.  He  was 
about  to  pursue  and  try  to  bring  to  action  a  numerically 
superior  force,  and  Captain  Parker  used  to  say  that  one  of 
the  conditions  on  which  he  relied  for  success  was  that 
Villeneuve  had  no  three-deckers,  and  that  "  he  reckoned 
on  the  great  superiority  in  close  action  of  three  batteries  of 
guns  over  two."  ^  Yet  so  firm  was  his  grasp  of  the  war- 
plan  and  the  place  his  fleet  had  to  fill  in  it,  that  at  the 
last  moment  he  gave  up  a  100-gun  ship  to  secure  directly 
the  true  and  paramount  end  of  his  operations.  In  naval 
warfare  there  is  nothing  more  diflicult  than  a  correct  adjust- 
ment of  action  between  the  ever-competing  claims  of  the 
ulterior  and  the  primary  object — between  striking  directly 
to  secure  the  object  of  the  campaign,  and  using  the  indirect 
but  more  drastic  method  of  a  concentrated  stroke  at  the 
enemy's  fleet.  Here  we  have  a  decision  on  the  point  from 
Nelson  in  the  zenith  of  his  powers,  and  it  is  surely  difficult 
to  overestimate  its  value. 