


May  it    is    reinforced  115 

The  instructions  for  detaching  Collingwood  reached 
Gardner  on  May  9th.  He  immediately  proceeded  to 
complete  the  necessary  ships  with  stores,  and  just  as 
Nelson  was  making  up  his  mind  to  go  to  the  West  Indies, 
he  sat  doAvn  to  inform  the  Admiralty  that  as  he  had  no 
further  intelligence  he  intended  to  detach  Collingwood  at 
once/  On  the  morroAv,  however,  it  began  to  blow  hard 
from  the  west  with  a  big  sea,  and  the  work  of  completing 
the  ships  for  foreign  service  was  stopped.  Gardner,  there- 
fore, ran  to  the  Lizard  for  smooth  water ;  but  as  the  heavy 
weather  continued  he  ordered  Collingwood  into  Causand 
Bay,  and  after  handing  him  the  sealed  orders  he  himself 
returned  to  his  station  off  Ushant.^  Meanwhile  the 
Admiralty  had  decided  to  increase  Collingwood's  squadron, 
and  on  May  10th  had'  sent  to  Ushant  an  order  that  Gardner 
Avas  to  give  him  nine  of  the  line.^  On  hearing  what  had 
happened  and  that  the  two  Admirals  were  no  longer  to- 
gether, fresh  orders  were  sent  direct  to  Collingwood  at 
Plymouth.  He  was  to  add  to  his  squadron  three  of  the 
line  that  were  on  the  point  of  sailing  with  sealed  orders 
(probably  to  Gardner  or  Calder),  and  as  before  to  go  to 
Madeira,  and  if  he  found  Nelson  was  in  pursuit  of  Villeneuve 
to  return  to  Plymouth.* 

Everything  was  now  in  order  for  making  sure  that  the 
enemy  would  not  have  a  free  hand  in  the  West  Indies  long 
enough  to  do  serious  harm.  Hardly,  however,  were  the 
orders  on  the  road,  when  a  despatch  reached  the  Foreign 
Office  from  FitzGerald  at  Lisbon  containing  the  unlucky 
false  news  that  Villeneuve  had  put  back  to  Cadiz  and 
announcing  that  Craig's  expedition  had  taken  refuge  in  the 
Tagus.  Without  a  moment's  delay  word  went  off  to  both 
Ushant  and  Plymouth  to  stop  Collingwood  until  further 
orders.  Next  day,  in  fear  he  might  be  already  gone,  an 
urgent  demand  went  forward  for  a  frigate  to  go  down  to 
Cadiz  instantly,  find  out  the  truth,  meet  Collingwood  with 

^  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  9th:   Blocl-ade  of  Brest,  iv.  255. 
^  Same  to  same,  May  11th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  iv.  258. 
^  Out-letters  {Secret  Orders),  1363,  and  Gardner  to  Marsden,   May  15th  : 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  260. 

*  Secret  Orders,  1363,  May  14th. 


ii6     COLLINGWOOD'S   FLYING   SQUADRON       may 

her  report  at  the  Finisterre  rendezvous,  and  then  bring 
home  his  despatches  Avhich  would  explain  what  he  had 
decided  to  do.^ 

That  they  should  know  this  as  soon  as  possible  was 
vital,  in  view  of  the  fresh  instructions  which  had  to  be 
thought  out  for  him.  The  situation  was  one  of  extreme 
difficulty.  Little  credit  was  given  to  the  report  of  Ville- 
neuve's  return,  but  the  possibility  had  to  be  faced.  If  it 
were  true,  it  would  mean  that  his  first  movement  to  the 
westward  was  a  feint  to  draw  attention  to  Jamaica,  and 
Pitt,  it  must  be  remembered,  had  just  been  warned  by  one 
of  his  most  active  agents  abroad  that  Napoleon  was  intent 
on  making  false  movements  in  order  to  conceal  his  actual 
line  of  operations.  The  supposed  return  to  Cadiz  indicated 
that  the  real  objective  was  either  in  the  Mediterranean  or, 
as  Orde  had  argued  so  forcibly,  the  Channel.  Of  the  two 
the  Channel  was  the  less  likely,  for  Napoleon  was  in  Italy. 
Moreover  it  so  happened  that  the  political  situation  called 
acutely  at  the  moment  for  the  security  of  the  Mediterranean. 
The  convention  with  Russia  was  trembling  in  the  balance. 
A  despatch  from  Leveson-Gower  had  arrived  on  May  9  th — 
the  day  the  last  orders  were  issued  to  Gardner — to  say 
the  treaty  had  been  signed  with  the  objectionable  article 
relating  to  the  evacuation  of  Malta.  It  was  actually,  there- 
fore, in  the  midst  of  the  naval  crisis  that  Woronzow  had  his 
stormy  intervicAv  with  Pitt  in  Avhich  he  had  to  inform  the 
hard-pressed  minister  that  the  Czar  demanded  the  absolute 
and  unconditional  assent  to  the  Malta  article  as  a  sine  qua 
non  of  his  ratification  of  the  treaty.^  Pitt,  so  the  ambassador 
tells  us,  received  his  communication  like  a  thunder-clap. 
To  increase  the  difficulty  of  his  position  he  had  heard  from 
St.  Petersburg  that  the  Czar  was  again  complaining  bitterly 
of  the  British  delays  in  fulfilling  the  promises  of  military 
action  in  the  Mediterranean ;  and  here  was  Craig  hard  and 
fast  in  Lisbon,  unable  to  move.^ 