

1  To  Rear- Admiral  George  Campbell,  May  10th  :  Nicolas,  vi.  431.  Nelson 
in  addressing  the  letter  seems  to  confuse  Donald  Campbell  with  Captain 
George  Campbell,  who  had  been  commanding  the  Canopus  under  him. 

2  Hardy  to  Mansfield,  May  10th  :  Nelson's  Hardy,  p.  127. 


io6  HOW  NELSON    MADE    SURE  may  lo 

my  command,  who  informed  mc  he  had  gamed  no  intelli- 
gence of  the  enemy  since  their  leaving  Cadiz."  But  this 
Avas  not  the  whole  story,  for  Sutton  Avas  able  to  give  him 
negative  evidence  which  could  leave  no  doubt  that  the 
enemy  had  left  European  Avaters.  Two  days  earlier  he  had 
spoken  the  Lively,  a  frigate  that  Avas  little  more  than  a 
Aveek  out  from  the  Channel,  and  this  is  Avhat  she  had  to 
tell.  She  had  left  Spithead  as  late  as  April  27th  and 
only  seven  days  before  her  captain  had  been  on  board 
Gardner's  flagship,  Avhere  he  heard  that  Orde  Avas  falling 
back  on  Ushant,  and  that  nothing  had  been  heard  of  Ville- 
neuve.  On  the  morroAv,  as  he  sped  south,  he  had  seen  the 
junction  betAveen  Gardner  and  Orde  actually  made,  and  a 
little  later  he  passed  a  convoy  northAvard-bound  Avhich  had 
not  been  molested.  Nelson  therefore  could  bo  certain  that 
for  more  than  three  Avecks  after  the  Combined  Squadron 
had  left  Cadiz  it  had  not  been  heard  of  anyAvhere  to  the 
northAA^ard. 

Now  according  to  Captain  Parker  of  the  Amazon,  it  Avas 
this  intelligence,  at  least  as  much  as  his  OAvn,  Avhich  caused 
Nelson  to  make  up  his  mind.  Writing  to  his  father  to 
explain  Avhy  the  fleet  went  to  the  West  Indies,  he  says, 
"  Lord  Nelson  was  satisfied  from  the  very  recent  accounts 
from  Lisbon,  as  well  as  from  England,  brought  in  seven 
days  only  by  the  Lively,  that  the  enemy  w^ere  not  gone  to 
the  north,  and  instantly  made  up  his  mind  to  go  to  the  West 
Indies."  ^  Parker  then  believed  that  it  Avas  the  negative 
intelligence  that  had  most  to  do  Avith  removing  Nelson's 
hesitation — that  is,  he  could  be  certain  he  was  not  wanted 
off  Ushant. 

The  Amazon  herself  rejoined  about  an  hour  later,  bring- 
ing all  the  Lisbon  ncAvs.  Amongst  the  papers  handed  over 
to  her  by  the  Orpheus  Avas  the  deposition  of  an  American 
skipper  Avhom  the  Orpheus  had  spoken.  He  had  left  Cadiz 
on  May  2nd  and  Avas  able  to  report  the  exact  composition 
of  the  Combined  Squadron,  the  number  of  troops  it  carried, 
and  the  names  of  the  commanders.  "  The  reports  of  their 
destination,"  he  said,  "  Avere  various.     By  some  it  AA'as  sup- 

1  Phillimore,  Sir  William  Parker,  p.  292. 


May  II  HE    WAITS    FOR    CRAIG  107 

posed  they  were  destined  for  Ireland :  and  by  others,  with 
great  probabiUty,  for  the  West  Indies,  particularly  Jamaica." 
So  perfect  a  confirmation  of  the  intelligence  which  Nelson 
had  from  Campbell,  from  home,  and  from  Lisbon,  must 
have  cleared  away  the  last  shade  of  doubt,  and  then  and 
there  he  sat  down  to  inform  the  Admiralty  he  meant  to  go.^ 