

As  we  know,  Pitt's  military  force  was  far  too  deeply 
engaged  to  permit  him  any  such  design,  but  the  suspicions 
of  the  two  enraged  ambassadors  were  so  far  justified  that 
Craig  Avas  actually  making  arrangements  to  seize  the  sea 
defences  at  the  first  sign  of  a  French  fleet  in  the  offing. 
"  It  would  have  been  excellent  fun,"  wrote  one  of  his  officers 
in  recording  the  curious  incident. 

Aranjo,  the  Portuguese  minister,  was  at  his  wits'  end. 
If  he  could  not  pacify  Junot  and  his  colleague  it  meant  a 
Franco-Spanish  invasion.  If  he  broke  with  the  British, 
retribution  might  come  more  swiftly  still,  for  Nelson  at 
any  moment  might  appear.  He  could  not  afford  to  offend 
either  party.  He  appealed  to  FitzGerald,  hoping  Craig 
did  not  mean  to  stop  long,  and  FitzGerald  could  only  assure 
him  that  the  expedition  would  stay  no  longer  than  the 
day  he  got  further  intelligence  of  the  enemy's  movements 
which  he  was  expecting  hourly  by  the  Orpheus} 

So  the  matter  had  to  rest.  Threaten  as  the  two  ambas- 
sadors would,  they  were  helpless.  Neither  cared  to  take 
the  extreme  step  of  demanding  their  passports,  and  while 
they  still  hesitated  the  tension  was  relieved.  On  the  third 
day  the  Orpheus  came  back  with  confirmation  of  FitzGerald's 
belief  that  Villeneuve  had  not  returned,  and  with  what 
was  still  better,  the  long-expected  tidings  that  Nelson 
had  passed  the  Straits.  Thereupon  Knight  made  the  signal 
to  weigh,  and  prepared  to  go  out  to  meet  him.^ 

Some  fifty  miles  beyond  Cape  St.  Vincent,  the  Orpheus 
had  fallen  in  with  Parker  in  the  Amazon,  Avhom  it  will  be 
remembered  Nelson  had  sent  forward  to  the  Tagus  to  seek 

^  See  ante,  p.  79. 

2  FitzGerald  to  Mulgrave,  May  5th :  8.  P.  Foreign  {Portugal),  47-     Log 
of  the  Orpheus :  Captains'  Logs,  P.  R.  O. 

3  Fitzgerald  to  Mulgrave,  May  8th. 


T04  HOW    NELSON    MADE    SURE  may  6 

the  information  on  which  his  final  decision  was  to  rest. 
Together  they  proceeded  off  St.  Vincent — the  rendezvous 
Nelson  had  given — and  there  Parker  handed  over  his  mails 
and  despatches  to  the  Orpheus  to  be  taken  on  to  Lisbon, 
while  he  waited  to  meet  Nelson  with  the  news  which  the 
Orpheus  had  given  him.  By  this  means  a  couple  of  days 
might  be  saved.  It  was  the  Nelsonian  way,  and  Nelson 
himself  had  been  doing  the  like.  The  fair  breeze  had  come 
before  he  had  completed  his  stores  at  Tetuan,  but  he  would 
not  waste  the  wind.  Off  Gibraltar  it  failed,  and  he  anchored 
again  to  try  to  complete.  But  in  five  hours  it  came  fair, 
and  he  was  away  once  more  for  St.  Vincent,  burning  for 
the  information  which  must  decide  his  course. 

He  was  still,  as  he  said,  as  much  in  the  dark  as  ever ; 
but  since  he  left  Tetuan  the  probabilities  had  changed.  In 
his  letters  to  the  Admiralty  he  no  longer  says  that  if  he 
hears  nothing  he  shall  close  on  the  Channel,  but  that  pro- 
bably he  will  go  to  the  West  Indies.  The  cause  of  this 
change  is  scarcely  doubtful.  At  Gibraltar  he  had  got  into 
contact  with  Admiral  Campbell  and  the  Portuguese  squadron, 
and  Captain  Hargood  of  the  Belleisle  tells  us  he  received 
from  him  "  important  information  as  to  the  destination  of 
the  French  squadron."  Not  a  word  of  this  appears  in 
Nelson's  correspondence,  and  naturally  enough,  since  Camp- 
bell's part  in  it  was  unneutral  service,  which  if  knoAvn  would 
get  him  into  serious  trouble.  What  it  was  w^e  can  surmise 
with  tolerable  certainty.  In  any  case  it  w^as  regarded  as  so 
important  by  Junot  and  his  colleague  that,  on  Campbell's 
return  to  Lisbon,  they  insisted  on  his  dismissal  and  he  had 
to  go  home  to  die  in  poverty  and  neglect.-^ 