

The  point  on  which  the  Czar  insisted  was  the  one  above 

1  Secret  Orders,  1363,  May  loth  and  16th. 

-  Mulgrave  to  Gower,  June  7th  :   Holland  Rose,   Third  Coalition,  p.  IG"). 
7^.  0.  Bussia,  58. 

^  De  Martens,  Mecueil  de  Traitts,  xi.  109,  and  ante,  p.  22. 


MAY  THE    COALITION    IN  EXTREMIS  117 

all  others  on  which  it  was  impossible  for  Pitt  to  yield. 
Already,  on  first  hearing  from  Gower  of  the  proposed 
new  condition,  Mulgrave  had  been  instructed  to  address  a 
strong  note  of  protest  to  Woronzow.  It  was  absolutely 
essential,  he  Avrote,  to  Great  Britain,  and  particularly  in  view 
of  French  designs  on  Egypt  and  India,  to  have  "  a  secure 
port  in  the  Mediterranean  not  liable  to  capture  on  a  sudden 
attack  at  the  commencement  of  war."  If  his  Britannic 
Majesty  were  disposed  to  sacrifice  Malta  he  knew  he  could  get 
a  separate  peace  that  would  absolutely  secure  his  own  posi- 
tion, but  what  he  wished  to  obtain  was  the  permanent  inde- 
pendence of  the  Powers  of  Europe,  It  was  in  this  note  that 
he  had  claimed  that  England  was  the  legitimate  successor 
to  the  Naval  Knights  of  St,  John  of  Jerusalem.  Charles  the 
Fifth  had  established  them  at  Malta  as  guardians  against 
the  then  existing  enemy  of  Christendom,  and  it  was  only  as 
a  British  naval  port  that  the  old  stronghold  could  serve  that 
purpose  now.^ 

Accordingly  Pitt,  in  reply  to  Woronzow,  told  him  with 
equal  firmness  that  the  Czar's  demand  meant  the  breakdown 
of  the  alliance.  Neither  the  King  nor  he  could  grant  it  if 
they  would.  Any  government  that  consented  to  give  up 
Malta  would  be  flung  from  power  in  a  universal  howl  of 
indignation.  Woronzow  privately  shared  Pitt's  view,  but 
he  continued  loyally  to  urge  the  Russian  case,  till  Pitt  Avas 
forced  to  cut  him  short  with  the  ultimatum  already  recorded. 
His  last  words  should  be  recalled.  "  So,"  he  said,  ''  however 
great  our  grief,  we  are  compelled  to  abandon  hope  of  seeing 
an  agreement  consummated,  since  its  express  condition  is 
our  renunciation  of  Malta.  We  will  continue  the  war  alone. 
It  will  be  a  maritime  war."  ^ 

Thus  at  the  unlucky  moment  when  the  false  intelli- 
gence from  Lisbon  came  to  hand  the  whole  situation  turned 
on  the  command  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  to  leave  the 
enemy  concentrated  at  its  entrance  and  free  to  act  was 
impossible.     It  was  there  Collingwood  must  go,  and  go  in 

^  Mulgrave  to  Woronzow,  May  7th  :  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  145.  For 
the  whole  argument  see  same  to  same,  June  7th,  in  which  despatch  it  was 
repeated  and  developed:  Post,  Appendix,  A. 

-  De  Martens,  op.  cit.,  xi.  Ill,  and  cf.  ante,  p.  22. 


ii8      COLLINGWOOD'S    FLYING    SQUADRON    may  17 