

^  Admiralty  Minutes,  153,  May  2nd.  Admiralty  to  Admiral  Young,  Com- 
mander-in-chief at  Plymouth,  May  2nd :  "  Captain  Burn  has  omitted  to  say 
how  the  wind  was  when  he  met  the  squadron,  supposed  to  have  sailed  from 
Toulon  on  9th  or  10th  ultimo."  Villeneuve  does  not  record  having  been 
observed. 

-  Oat-letters  {Secret  Orders),  1363,  May  2nd. 

■'  To  Gardner  and  Collingwood  :  Ibid.,  May  4th.  These  are  the  first 
orders  actually  signed  by  Barham. 

H 


114     COLLING  WOOD'S    FLYING    SQUADRON        may 

was  still  uncertain,  Gardner  was  given  discretion  to  detain 
the  detachment  il'  he  thought  it  desirable,  in  view  of  any 
fresh  information  that  might  have  reached  him.  Colling- 
wood's  orders  were  to  be  handed  to  him  in  a  sealed  packet 
at  the  moment  of  sailing  and  not  to  be  opened  till  he  was 
clear  of  the  Channel. 

Before  the  despatches  Avent  out  there  arrived  Orde's 
message  that  he  was  falling  back  on  Gardner.-^  Thereupon 
Knight's  orders  had  to  be  cancelled.  He  had  been  told,  it 
will  be  remembered,  he  was  to  reinforce  Calder  at  Ferrol. 
He  was  now  again  ordered  to  send  his  two  ships  direct 
to  the  West  Indies  as  a  reinforcement  for  Collinofwood,  if 
Nelson  had  not  gone  there.^ 

In  all  these  arrangements  Barham's  grip  on  the  central 
point  was  never  relaxed.  In  spite  of  all  the  distant  calls 
he  clung  to  it  with  a  tenacity  that  was  beyond  Napoleon's 
calculations  and  made  hopeless  all  his  sanguine  attempts 
to  dissipate  our  home  concentration.  After  the  receipt  of 
Orde's  appreciation  pointing  to  a  hostile  concentration  in 
the  west,  Gardner  was  strictly  enjoined  that  all  orders  for 
detachments  such  as  Collingwood's  were  to  be  read  as 
conditional  on  his  having  enough  force  to  keep  eighteen  of 
the  line  with  his  flag.  Subject  to  this  minimum  he  was 
also,  if  possible,  to  keep  Calder's  squadron  up  to  eight.^  At 
the  same  time  corresponding  directions  were  framed  for 
Nelson  in  order  to  provide  for  filling  the  gap  in  the  home 
fleet  which  Collingwood's  detachment  would  make.  He 
was  authorised,  if  he  had  not  followed  Villeneuve,  to  leave 
in  the  Mediterannean  as  many  ships  of  the  line  and  cruisers 
as  were  needed  to  watch  such  force  as  the  enemy  had  in 
Toulon  and  Cartagena.  With  the  rest  he  was  to  proceed 
off  Cadiz,  and  leaving  there  five  cruisers  to  report  move- 
ments to  Calder  and  home,  he  was  to  close  on  Gardner ; 
or  if  he  preferred  he  might  remain  in  the  Mediterranean 
himself  and  send  his  superfluous  ships  home  under 
Bickerton.* 

^  Admiralty  to  Collingwood,  Postscript :  Out-Letters  {Secret  Orders),  13G3, 
May  4th. 

"^  Ihid.  ^  To  Gardner:    Jbid..  May  9th.  *  Ibid.,  May  9th. 