

The  harrassed  French  governor,  unable  to  touch  it,  had 
been  counting  on  its  reduction  when  Missiessy  and  Ville- 
neuve  should  meet  at  Fort  de  France.  But  by  the  time 
Missiessy  got  back  from  his  expedition  to  the  northAvard,  a 
frigate  had  arrived  with  news  that  Villeneuve's  first  attempt 

1  Naval  Chronic] r.  xii.   205,  and  ix.  201,  where  there  is  a  sketch  of  Ihe 
Rock. 


THE    PLAN    OF   APRIL    11  127 

to  get  out  had  failed,  that  the  combination  was  cancelled, 
and  that  the  Rochefort  squadron  was  to  return  to  France. 
In  Missiessy's  eyes  this  meant  he  was  to  return  immediately. 
In  vain  the  governor  entreated  him  to  devote  a  fragment 
of  his  force  to  the  Diamond  Rock  before  he  left.  In  spite 
of  his  vehement  protests  Missiessy  refused,  and  forthwith 
sailed  away  in  accordance  with  his  programme  to  throw  the 
last  of  his  troops  and  supplies  into  St.  Domingo,  as  he 
passed  on  homeward-bound. 

With  Missiessy's  premature  departure  the  great  combi- 
nation on  which  Napoleon  was  staking  his  success  received 
its  first  serious  blow.  From  the  outset  Napoleon  had  been 
uneasy  that  something  of  the  kind  might  happen,  and 
when,  on  receiving  Austria's  submission,  he  found  himself 
compelled  to  resume  the  invasion  ho  had  sent  a  revocation 
of  Missiessy's  order  to  return.  Villeneuve  was  to  try  again, 
and  Missiessy  was  to  remain  and  meet  him.  The  order  did 
not  reach  Missiessy  in  time  to  stop  him.  Indeed,  as  soon 
as  Napoleon  heard  Villeneuve  had  left  Toulon,  he  realised 
that  this  would  probably  happen,  and  he  set  about  con- 
structing the  first  of  those  interminable  modifications  of  his 
plans  which  ended  not  only  in  reducing  his  Admirals  to  a 
state  of  helpless  bewilderment  as  to  what  he  really  expected 
them  to  do,  but  also  in  leaving  his  own  mind  in  serious 
confusion  as  to  what  orders  he  had  actually  given,  and 
w^hat  they  had  actually  received. 

It  was  on  April  11th — the  day  after  the  junction  at 
Cadiz  was  effected — that  he  drafted  the  new  plan.  As  yet 
he  had  heard  nothing  of  Villeneuve  beyond  the  fact  that 
he  had  left  Toulon,  but  he  did  know  that  Ganteaume  had 
failed  to  get  out  and  that  Missiessy  would  probably  be  on 
his  way  home.  Having  therefore  to  face  the  probability 
that  his  first  combination  would  break  down,  he  fell  back 
on  the  discredited  plan  of  getting  a  surprise  command  of 
the  Channel  by  Villeneuve's  fleet  alone,  and  began  to  paint 
another  of  his  rose-coloured  pictures.  He  assumed  that 
Gravina  would  join  at  Cadiz  with  eight  of  the  line,  and 
there  were  two  more  just  ready  for  sea  at  Rochefort  under 
Admiral  Magon.     These  he  would  send  out  direct  to  Mar- 