


1 28     MODIFICATIONS    OF   NAPOLEON'S   PLANS 

tinique,  if  Giintcaumo  failed  to  get  out  by  May  lOth. 
Villeneuve's  fleet  would  thus  be  brought  up  to  twenty-two 
of  the  line,  a  force  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  return 
round  the  north  of  Scotland  into  the  North  Sea,  set  free 
Marmont's  corps  and  the  Dutch  squadron  in  the  Texel,  and 
come  on  to  Boulogne. 

His  reasons  for  believing  this  plan  feasible  are  a  striking 
example  of  how  entirely  he  failed  to  fathom  either  the 
subtlety  or  the  strength  of  British  strategy.  Villeneuve, 
he  assured  himself,  would  meet  no  force  sufficiently  strong 
to  oppose  him,  because  Ganteaume  would  always  detain  a 
squadron  of  twenty  of  the  line  before  Brest,  and  Missiessy's 
return  would  absorb  another  squadron  to  blockade  him 
in  Rochefort.^  How  hopeless  it  was  to  force  the  British 
government  to  keep  such  a  force  before  Brest  we  have 
already  seen,  and  events  were  to  show  that  no  squadron 
in  Bochefort  could  tempt  Barham  to  weaken  unduly  the 
central  point. 

Sanguine  as  was  the  scheme,  it  was  too  sober  and 
narroAv  to  sit  easily  on  Napoleon's  contempt  of  his  enemy's 
ability.  He  did  not  remain  constant  to  it  for  two  days. 
By  April  13  th  he  had  an  entirely  new  plan  in  his  head. 
The  rumour  that  Dominica  and  St.  Lucia  had  fallen  had 
reached  him  and  he  was  more  sanguine  than  ever.  It  was 
at  this  time,  too,  that  intelligence  of  the  feverish  activity  in 
the  British  naval  ports,  as  well  as  of  the  two  expeditions 
and  of  the  formation  of  Collingwood's  Flying  Squadron, 
inflamed  him  with  the  belief  that  his  devices  had  upset  his 
enemy's  equilibrium,  filled  their  counsels  with  confusion, 
and  that,  in  their  dismay,  they  were  scattering  formidable 
squadrons  and  the  best  of  their  troops  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.2 

It  was,  moreover,  in  an  hour  of  supreme  exultation  that 
the  new  idea  came  to  him.  He  was  on  his  way  to  Italy, 
not  too  sure  of  how  the  French  provinces  regarded  his 
assumption  of  the  Imperial  crown.    He  had  reached  Lyons, 

*  Desbri^re,  v.  507. 

-  Napoleon  to  DecrJis,  April  12th,  and  to  Lauriston,  Cambacdrt'^s,  Talley- 
rand, Murat,  Pino,  and  Decr^s,  April  13th:  Cor resjpondance ,  x,  312-320. 


THE   PLAN    OF   APRIL    13  129 

where,  passing  in  state  through  the  streets,  he  received  an 
ovation.  With  the  shouts  of  the  adoring  populace  in  his 
ears,  he  felt  the  world  was  his  oyster  and  with  his  fleet  he 
could  open  it.  The  possibility  of  securing  the  command 
of  the  Channel  by  an  overpowering  and  unexpected  con- 
centration again  took  possession  of  him,  and  that  night  the 
last  plan  was  cancelled.  Instead  of  waiting  till  May  10th, 
Magon  was  to  sail  immediately,  and  carry  orders  to  Ville- 
neuve  that  if  in  thirty-five  days  from  the  receipt  of  them 
Ganteaume  had  not  appeared  at  Martinique,  he  was  to 
assume  he  had  been  unable  to  break  out,  and  Villeneuve 
with  twenty  of  the  line,  the  least  number  which  Napoleon 
believed  he  would  have,  was  to  return  to  Ferrol.  There 
he  would  raise  the  blockade,  call  out  the  fifteen  of  the 
Gourd  on- Grand  allana  squadron,  and  with  the  whole  proceed 
to  join  hands  with  Ganteaume  off  Brest.  Then  together 
they  would  force  the  Channel  with  an  overwhelming  fleet 
of  fifty-six  of  the  line  and  appear  before  Boulogne.  There 
they  would  find  the  Emperor  in  person,  who  would  himself 
give  them  their  final  orders,  and  "  on  their  successful 
arrival,"  he  said,  "  hung  the  destinies  of  the  world."  ^ 