

Such  then  was  the  solution  of  the  difficult  strategical 
problem  with  which  Pitt  and  Barham  so  suddenly  had  to 
deal.  Interesting  as  it  is,  it  has  long  been  forgotten,  for  it 
was  destined  never  to  be  carried  out.  The  great  mass  of 
our  old  strategical  lore,  which  served  us  so  well  and  cost  so 
much  to  obtain,  has  passed  into  oblivion  for  similar  reasons. 
Only  by  patient  excavation  can  it  be  recovered,  and  only 
by  the  recovery  of  the  unexecuted  schemes  can  we  hope  to 
be  safe  from  the  danger  of  crude  generalisation  based  on 
the  comparatively  few  cases  that  survived  above  the  surface. 
Two  events  at  the  last  moment  occurred  to  stop  this 
particular  movement  and  to  commit  it  to  oblivion.  As 
Collingwood  sailed  from  Plymouth  to  join  Gardner,  Gard- 
ner received  the  despatches  which  Nelson  had  sent  him 
from  Toro  to  announce  his  intention  of  coming  off  Scilly,  if 
he  heard  nothing  of  the  Combined  Squadron  from  Lisbon.^ 
Gardner  immediately  sent  a  cruiser  to  the  rendezvous  and 

1  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  7th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  278. 
^  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  19th,  with  enclosures :    Blockade  of  Brest,  ii. 
26G. 


May  22  MISSIESSY   REAPPEARS  121 

forwarded  Nelson's  despatches  to  tlie  Admiralty  with  a 
request  for  instructions.  The  Admiralty,  however,  decided 
that  no  directions  could  be  given  until  further  intelligence 
of  Nelson's  squadron  should  be  received. 

Close  on  the  heels  of  this  surprise  came  another,  and 
this  time  it  Avas  one  that  called  for  prompter  action.  On 
May  22nd,  as  Gardner  and  Collingwood  were  before  Brest 
making  the  joint  demonstration  which  Barham  had  directed 
as  a  preliminary  to  Collingwood's  parting  company,  word 
came  in  from  Calder  that  one  of  his  cruiser  captains, 
Maitland  of  the  Loire,  had  located  an  enemy's  squadron,  ten 
days  before,  some  five  hundred  miles  to  the  westward  of 
Ferrol.  Shadowing  it  till  nightfall  he  was  chased  off,  but 
not  before  he  ascertained  it  was  the  Rochefort  squadron 
(details  of  which  he  had  obtained  from  an  American)  and 
that  it  was  making  for  Cape  Ortegal.^  With  this  informa- 
tion he  made  off  to  Calder,  and  on  the  14th  found  him  in 
his  usual  position  off  Cape  Prior.  Calder  promptly  assumed 
that  Missiessy  intended  to  make  a  landfall  at  Cape  Ortegal 
on  his  way  back  to  Rochefort,  and  at  daybreak  next  morn- 
ing he  was  off  that  point.  Not  finding  the  enemy  there,  as 
he  hoped,  he  concluded  he  must  have  kept  more  to  the 
north,  and  he  determined  to  make  a  push  north-north-east 
to  cut  him  off  if,  as  he  expected,  he  was  running  down  the 
latitude  of  Rochefort.  This  was  a  move  on  which  he  could 
venture  without  prejudice  to  his  blockade,  for  the  wind  was 
blowing  hard  from  the  south-west,  foul  for  the  Ferrol 
squadron  to  get  out.  In  the  evening,  however,  it  unfortu- 
nately came  into  the  north,  with  every  sign  of  shifting  still 
further.  With  a  chance  of  an  easterly  wind  he  dared  not 
leave  Ferrol  open,  and  he  felt  compelled  to  desist.     There 