

1  See  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  22nd  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  275 ;  and 
Maitland's  report :  In-lettcrs,  128.  Maitland  saw  them  on  the  11th  in  "  lat. 
43°  44'  and  long.  20°  48'  W.  (by  chronometer  20°  16')."  With  a  westerly  wind 
they  were  steering  E.  by  S.^jS.  This  must  be  magnetic,  the  variation  being 
about  22^  degrees  W.  True  E.  by  S.^S.  would  have  brought  them  below  Finis- 
terre,  an  impossible  course  for  Missiessy  to  be  steering  on  a  fair  wind.  The 
practice  of  French  fleets  returning  from  the  West  Indies  to  the  Bay  seems  to 
have  been  to  make  the  latitude  of  Ortegal  about  500  miles  W.  and  then  run 
down  it  for  a  landfall.  The  knowledge  of  this  practice  accounts  for  Cald(?r's 
advanced  cruiser  being  where  she  was.  To  his  other  precise  information 
Maitland  added  coloured  representations  of  the  signals  Missiessy  had  made. 


T22      COLLING  WOOD'S    FLYING   SQUADRON    may  22 

was  nothing  for  it  but  to  send  the  Loire  on  to  Gardner  and 
to  take  his  squadron  back  to  its  station.^ 

Here  then  was  news  which  materially  altered  the  situ- 
ation from  what  it  was  when  Gardner  and  Collingwood 
received  their  last  orders.  In  the  first  place  Missiessy's 
inexplicable  reappearance,  coming  as  it  did  when  the  report 
of  Villeneuve's  return  to  Cadiz  was  still  uncontradicted, 
shook  to  their  foundations  the  deductions  on  which  Barham 
was  proceeding.  It  was  Missiessy's  supposed  presence  in  the 
West  Indies  that  gave  colour  to  the  indications  of  a 
campaign  or  a  concentration  in  that  quarter.  What  then 
could  his  sudden  return  mean  ?  And  why  was  he  coming 
back  just  as  Villeneuve  was  going  out  ?  Or  was  it  pos- 
sible that  Villeneuve  Avas  never  intended  to  go  ?  In  the 
second  place — and  this  is  what  concerned  Gardner  and 
Collingwood  most  nearly — it  meant  a  serious  increase  of 
force  in  their  immediate  neighbourhood.  What  ought  they 
to  do  in  view  of  the  discretion  allowed  them  ?  The  two 
Admirals  conferred  together  and  agreed  there  was  no  doubt 
that  the  three-decker  and  four  of  the  line,  which  Maitland 
had  seen,  were  safe  back  in  Rochefort  or  possibly  L'Orient. 
For  Gardner  to  give  Collingwood  the  reinforcement  that 
had  been  ordered  Avould  now  reduce  the  Ushant  squadron 
to  a  dangerous  Aveakness,  and  taking  advantage  of  the 
latitude  which  had  been  originally  given  him  in  case  of 
fresh  information,  he  decided  to  retain  with  his  flag  the  five 
ships  of  Graves's  division  which  formed  the  last  addition  to 
the  Flying  Squadron  and  to  send  Collingwood  down  with 
the  remaining  nine. 

The  reason  he  gave  to  the  Admiralty  Avas  this :  "  As  five 
of  the  enemy's  ships  are  returned  from  the  West  Indies  and 
the  Vice-Admiral  (CollingA\'ood)  is  directed  to  detach  such 
proportion  of  ships  to  the  West  Indies  as  .  .  .  the  enemy 
may  have  sent  there,  fourteen  ships  Avould  be  more  than  he 
Avould  now  require  to  take  down."  As  for  the  blockade 
of  Cadiz,  he  felt  that  it  Avould  not  be  prejudiced  by  his 
action.     "  I  hope,"  he  concluded,  ''  the  steps  I  have  taken 