

strength.  To  send  him  in  inferior  force  was  to  court  disaster. 
The  probabiHty,  on  Strachan's  report,  Avas  that  Nelson  had 
gone  to  Egypt  and  his  co-operation  could  not  be  counted 
on.  Collingwood  might  have  to  fight  alone,  and  if  he 
fought  the  political  situation  demanded  that  it  must  be 
with  the  assurance  of  a  real  victory.  Sweden  and  Prussia 
were  both  hanging  back,  and  even  the  shock  of  Napoleon's 
coronation  as  King  of  Italy  had  failed  to  stiffen  the  irresolu- 
tion of  Austria.  Nothing  but  a  victory,  decisive  and  in- 
disputable, could  serve  Pitt's  turn.  Anything  less  would 
certainly  destroy  the  faint  hope  that  still  existed  of  forming 
his  great  coalition. 

But  could  he  venture  to  give  Collingwood  the  necessary 
strength  without  loosening  the  hold  on  the  Ushant  position  ? 
The  last  Avord,  it  Avill  be  remembered,  had  been  to  direct 
Gardner  on  no  account  to  reduce  his  force  below  eiofhteen 
of  the  line.  To  give  Collingwood  what  Avas  wanted  would 
bring  the  Ushant  station  below  the  minimum.  It  was  a 
dilemma  that  called  for  the  highest  courage  and  resolution, 
and  the  nicest  balancing  of  risks.  Not  even  the  decision 
which  Nelson  had  just  taken  demanded  a  greater  measure 
of  warlike  virtue,  but  like  him  Pitt  and  Barham  did  not 
Hinch.  In  two  days  they  had  made  up  their  minds  to  run 
the  risk  and  strike  for  the  command  of  the  Mediterranean. 
On  May  I7th,  accordingly,  Collingwood's  final  orders  went 
forward.  At  Plymouth  he  had  already  eleven  of  the  line 
with  his  flag,  but  that  was  not  enough.  He  was  therefore 
to  rejoin  Gardner  and  obtain  from  him  a  flag-officer  with 
another  three-decker  and  two  more  seventy-fours.  With 
this  powerful  squadron  he  was  to  proceed  to  Lisbon,  where 
he  would  find  Knight  and  add  his  two  ships  to  his  com- 
mand. He  Avould  then  have  a  force  of  three  three-deckers 
and  thirteen  others,  and  be  in  a  position  to  proceed  off  Cadiz 
and  clear  up  the  situation.  If  the  Combined  Squadron  Avas 
there  he  Avas  to  blockade  it.  If  he  found  it  had  gone  to  the 
West  Indies  and  Nelson  after  it,  he  Avas  to  reinforce  him  in 
proportion  to  the  enemy's  strength.  The  rest  of  his  force 
he  Avas  to  send  back  to  Plymouth.  If  Nelson  had  not  gone 
he  Avas  to  go  himself  Avith  twelve  sail,  so  as  to  bring  the 


May  17         COOTE'S    EXPEDITION    STOPPED  119 

force  on  the  West  Indian  station  up  to  eighteen ;  and  if  he 
ascertained  the  enemy  had  a  larger  force  than  this,  he  was 
to  take  as  many  more  as  were  necessary.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  he  found  the  enemy  had  gone  into  the  Mediterranean 
he  was  to  follow  them,  and  in  case  of  meeting  Nelson  he 
was  to  show  him  the  new  instructions  and  follow  his 
orders. 