

1  For  this,  sec  Desbricre,  v.  517. 
^  Desbricre,  v.  518. 


April  23  FURTHER   ELABORATIONS  131 

purpose  he  would  form  a  new  Toulon  squadron.  We  have 
seen  how  his  first  idea  for  using  Missiessy,  if  he  should  miss 
his  last  orders  and  return,  had  been  to  keep  him  in  Roche- 
fort  to  occupy  a  blockading  squadron.  Now  he  was  minded 
to  bring  him  to  Toulon  and  to  persuade  the  Spanish  Govern- 
ment to  let  their  Cartagena  squadron  join  him  there. 
Godoy,  Prince  of  the  Peace,  was  then  all  powerful  at 
Madrid,  and  Talleyrand  was  instructed  to  approach  him  on 
the  subject  of  the  new  combined  squadron.  "  My  inten- 
tion," Napoleon  wrote,  "  would  not  be  to  order  the  squadron 
out,  but  to  make  it  a  menace,  and  as  I  shall  have  there  [at 
Toulon]  a  camp  of  four  or  five  thousand  men,  I  shall  cause 
the  English  great  uneasiness.  If  the  Prince  of  the  Peace 
will  not  adopt  this  course,  then  I  think  the  Cartagena 
squadron  ought  to  go  to  Cadiz."  ^  For  his  purpose  of 
drawing  the  attention  of  the  British  to  the  Mediterranean 
the  alternative  of  a  squadron  at  Cadiz,  controlling  the 
entrance  to  the  Straits,  had  almost  as  high  a  diversionary 
value  as  a  new  Toulon  squadron.  To  increase  the  effect  of 
what  he  hoped  for,  while  waiting  for  an  answer,  he  indus- 
triously scattered  through  the  European  press  reports  that 
Villeneuve  had  evaded  the  British  watch  and  had  landed 
ten  thousand  men  in  Egypt. 

By  such  transparent  devices  he  could  think  to  beguile 
Nelson  and  give  Villeneuve  and  Gravina  a  free  hand. 
Decres  was  therefore  directed  to  send  them  ampler  and 
more  explicit  orders  for  attempting  the  conquest  of  the 
British  Leeward  Islands.  They  were  to  expel  the  English, 
not  only  from  Dominica  and  St.  Lucia,  but  from  St.  Vincent, 
Antigua,  and  Barbadoes  as  well,  and  possibly  even  to  re- 
capture Tobago  and  Trinidad.^  Never  did  even  the  elder 
Pitt  in  his  most  sanguine  moments  devise  a  programme  so 
entirely  unrelated  to  the  time  and  force  available. 

If  the  fault  which  Napoleon  most  severely  reprehended 
in  his  Marshals  was  that  of  making  for  themselves  pictures 
favourable  to  the  enemy,  his  own  besetting  naval  sin  was 

^  Napoleon  to  Talleyrand,  and  same  to  Decres,  April  23rd  :  Correspondance, 
X.  338-9.     Same  to  same,  May  4th  :  Ibid.,  p.  375. 

^  Napoleon  to  Decres,  April  23rd:  Correspondance,  x.  339  341,  and  Des- 
brifere,  v.  522. 


132     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

making  pictures  favourable  to  himself.  The  one  over  which 
he  was  now  gloating  represented  England  trembling  for 
India,  Cochrane  half-way  there,  and  Nelson,  Avith  his  eye  on 
the  French  corps  at  Taranto,  devoting  himself  to  the  defence 
of  Egypt.  The  West  Indies  he  saw  defenceless  till  such 
time  as  a  British  force  superior  to  Villeneuve's  squadron 
could  be  detached  from  the  Home  Fleet.  The  picture  Avas 
false  in  every  line,  but  Napoleon  Avould  not  see  it,  and  hard 
on  the  heels  of  Magon,  who  sailed  with  the  earlier  orders  on 
May  1st,  the  Diclon  frigate  carried  the  new  ones,  bidding 
Villeneuve  and  Gravina  oust  the  English  from  the  West 
Indies  as  a  liors  cVceuvre  to  the  full  meal  that  was  spread 
for  them  in  the  Channel. 