

The  new  arrangement,  of  course,  was  not  to  come  into 
force  if  Ganteaume  appeared.  Villeneuve  was  still  to  wait 
for  him  the  specified  period,  but  not  in  inactivity.  The 
delay  was  to  be  made  good  by  reducing  St.  Lucia,  if  it  had 
not  fallen,  and  such  other  of  the  British  islands  as  were 
within  the  means  and  time  at  his  disposal.^ 

That  a  man  of  Napoleon's  ability  should  have  given 
such  orders  is  only  to  be  explained  by  the  intoxication 
which  the  success  of  his  policy  was  producing.  As  be 
journeyed  in  triumph  towards  Italy,  he  found  France  wor- 
shipping at  his  feet,  and  beyond  glittered  within  his  reach 
the  Iron  Crown.  Austria  and  Prussia  were  ignominiously 
looking  on  in  silence  at  this  last  and  most  flagrant  breach  of 
his  engagements,  and  England,  his  only  active  enemy,  seemed 
at  her  wits'  end.  The  sole  merit  of  the  new  scheme  above 
the  rest  is  that  he  seems  now  to  have  faced  for  the  first 

^  Napoleon  to  Lauriston,  April  13th,  and  to  Villeneuve  and  Decres,  April 
14th:  Ibid.,  pip.  314,  321. 

2  Decres  to  Villeneuve,  April  17th  :  Desbriere,  vol.  v.  p.  513. 


130     MODIFICATIONS    OF   NAPOLEON'S   PLANS 

time  the  real  conditions  of  the  problem.  It  appears  to 
contemplate  winning  a  road  across  the  Channel  by  battle. 
Yet  he  does  not  realise — and  here  lay  its  most  vital  defect 
— that  the  battle  off  Brest  must  be  fought  by  Villeneuve 
alone,  and  that  to  escape  defeat  he  must  come  in  over- 
whelming force.  He  still  believes,  for  all  that  Ganteaume 
and  Decr^s  can  say,  that  Ganteaume  will  be  able  to  co- 
operate, as  though  it  were  a  case  of  two  armies  which  he 
could  move  as  he  would.  Moreover,  in  spite  of  the  tre- 
mendous difficulty  of  the  task,  in  spite  of  the  paramount 
necessity  of  concentration  of  effort,  he  bids  Villeneuve 
squander  his  force  prematurely  in  attempting  colonial 
conquest ;  and  to  complete  the  perversity  of  it  all  he 
assumes  throughout  that  his  enemy  will  do  all  the  foolish 
things  he  Avishes  him  to  do.  Surely  never  was  a  project 
more  contrary  to  the  principles  we  are  accustomed  to  call 
Napoleonic.^ 

It  must  further  be  remembered  that  these  ambitious 
orders  were  signed  before  Napoleon  had  a  word  of  news  as 
to  how  Villeneuve  had  fared  after  leaving  Toulon,  or  of 
what  Nelson  was  doing.  They  left  Paris  for  Rochefort  on 
April  17th.  It  was  not  till  the  20  th  that  Napoleon,  who 
had  just  reached  Italy,  heard  from  Genoa  that  Nelson,  as 
late  as  April  10th,  was  still  south  of  Sardinia  and  not  in 
pursuit.^  Two  days  later  came  news  from  Spain  that  on 
the  same  day  on  which  the  new  idea  had  come  to  him, 
Villeneuve  had  safely  effected  a  junction  with  Gravina  at 
Cadiz  and  had  gone  on  his  way.  It  was  a  disappointment 
that  only  five  Spanish  ships  had  joined  instead  of  the  eight 
he  had  expected,  but  he  immediately  set  about  providing 
the  remaining  ships  of  his  ally  with  a  fresh  part  to  play. 
Still  with  sanguine  infatuation  building  on  the  presumed 
folly  of  his  enemy,  he  was  convinced  that,  as  Nelson  was 
not  in  pursuit  of  Villeneuve,  he  had  been  again  enticed  to 
Egypt.  More  elated  than  ever  with  the  prospects  of  his 
new  plan,  he  determined  to  secure  his  advantage  by  measures 
which  would  hold  Nelson  in  the  Mediterranean.     For  this 