

Corresponding  orders  were  issued  to  Nelson,  on  the 
assumption  that  the  report  of  Villeneuve's  return  to  Cadiz 
was  true.  In  that  case,  if  he  met  Collingwood  he  was  to 
blockade  the  Combined  Squadron  with  twenty  of  the  line, 
but  to  be  at  liberty  to  form  such  detachments  as  he  thought 
necessary  to  watch  Cartagena  and  Toulon. 

Thus  was  the  main  situation  dealt  with,  but  there  re- 
mained further  complexity.  To  add  to  the  difficulty  there 
was  another  military  force  to  protect.  In  view  of  the  danger 
which  seemed  to  threaten  the  West  Indies  it  had  been 
decided  to  divert  thither  the  force  which  was  gathering 
at  Cork  under  Sir  Eyre  Coote  to  reinforce  India.  He 
had  accordingly  been  appointed  Governor  and  Commander- 
in-chief  of  Jamaica,  and  was  under  orders  to  sail  as  soon 
as  possible.  This  resolution  had  been  taken  early  in  April, 
apparently  on  news  of  the  complete  pacification  that  had 
followed  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley's  successes  and  on  the  reports 
of  the  Foreign  Office  spies  as  to  Napoleon's  real  objective. 
Orders  had  already  gone  to  Commodore  Hood  to  throw 
out  his  cruisers  to  receive  the  expedition,  but  it  was  also 
necessary  to  cover  its  passage  out  of  the  danger  zone. 
There  was  a  suspicion  that  Villeneuve's  real  object  might  be 
to  cruise  about  Madeira  for  the  East  Indiamen ;  if  so,  Coote 
would  certainly  be  caught.  If  possible  he  must  be  stopped. 
But  his  sailing  orders  had  already  gone  forward  and  the 
countermand  might  come  too  late.  Collingwood  was  there- 
fore informed  that  in  going  or  sending  to  the  West  Indies 
he  must  provide  for  covering  the  passage  of  the  expedition 
till  it  was  past  Madeira.^ 

*  Secret  Orders,  1363.  To  Hood,  April  5th.  To  Captain  Woodriff  of  the 
Calcutta  (East  Indiamen's  escort),  April  29th.  To  Collingwood  and  to  Nelson, 
May  17th. 


I20     COLLINGWOOD'S    FLYING   SQUADRON    may  19 

Though  the  effect  of  the  new  disposition  was  to  reduce 
Gardner's  force  to  fifteen  of  the  line  against  Ganteaume's 
twenty-one,  the  risk  was  probably  not  so  great  as  it  appears 
or  beyond  what  a  sound  defensive  basis  demanded.  Of  his 
fifteen  ships  three  were  only  sixty-fours,  which  at  that  time 
hardly  counted  as  ships  of  the  line ;  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
no  less  than  nine  were  three-deckers/  and  in  Plymouth  and 
Portsmouth  were  Orde's  squadron  and  several  reserve  ships. 
All  of  them  were  actively  refitting,  and  with  a  few  excep- 
tions they  were  capable  of  taking  the  sea  at  twenty-four 
hours'  notice.  Moreover  Barham  had  in  mind  a  device 
which  would  certainly  secure  him  a  respite  of  a  week  at 
least.  It  was  simple  enough.  Gardner  was  instructed,  as 
soon  as  Colling  wood  joined  him,  to  look  into  Brest  with  the 
whole  force  before  he  detached  the  squadron  destined  for 
Cadiz.  Such  a  display  of  strength  could  be  relied  on  to 
keep  Ganteaume  quiet  till  he  was  able  to  ascertain  what 
Gardner's  real  force  was,  and  by  that  time  fresh  ships 
would  be  ready. 