

124 


March  MISSIESSY'S    RAID  125 

therefore  decided  to  allow  the  local  force  to  capitulate ;  but 
before  Lagrange  realised  the  craft  of  his  move  he  had 
withdrawn  the  whole  of  the  regular  garrison,  and  was  in 
full  retreat  to  a  fortress  in  the  extremity  of  the  island 
known  as  Fort  Cabril.  The  moment  Lagrange  detected 
the  movement  he  saw  its  danger,  and  begged  Missiessy  to 
detach  a  division  to  cut  oif  the  British  retreat.  A  flat 
calm  prevailed,  and  Missiessy  protested  not  a  ship  could 
stir.  Lagrange  begged  for  the  squadron's  boats.  Again 
the  Admiral  refused.  To  risk  paralysing  his  squadron  by 
exposing  its  crews  in  a  military  operation  was  a  responsi- 
bility he  did  not  feel  called  upon  to  take,  and  the  result 
was  that  Prevost  secured  himself  in  a  position  that  turned 
the  tables  upon  the  French.  Fort  Cabril  could  only  be 
reduced  by  a  siege,  and  for  a  siege  the  expedition  was 
wholly  unprepared.  Accordingly  while  news  sped  to  Europe 
of  the  capture  of  the  island,  Missiessy  found  himself  com- 
pelled to  withdraw  and  to  rest  content  with  a  contribution 
of  100,000  francs  from  Roseau,  and  about  a  score  of  small 
prizes  captured  at  their  moorings. 

For  the  present  at  any  rate  no  attempt  was  made  upon 
St.  Lucia.  Missiessy  preferred  to  continue  his  way  north- 
ward for  less  hazardous  operations,  and  after  landing  at 
Guadaloupe  the  troops  which  he  had  brought  to  reinforce 
the  garrison,  he  proceeded  to  raid  the  small  British  islands 
that  lay  beyond.  From  Nevis,  St.  Christopher's,  and  Mont- 
serrat  he  exacted  ransoms,  but  there  his  activity  ended. 
In  his  view  it  was  now  time  to  return  to  Martinique  in 
order  to  meet  Villeneuve  and  combine  with  him  in  the 
larger  operations  which  Napoleon's  instructions  enjoined. 
The  damage  he  had  done  was  considerable.  The  ransoms 
and  thirty-three  prizes  actually  produced  £40,000,  but 
this  of  course  did  not  nearly  cover  the  cost  of  the  ex- 
pedition, and  the  British  position  in  the  Leeward  Islands 
remained  unshaken. 

To  the  French  authorities  the  most  galling  point  in 
that  position  was  the  Diamond  Rock,  a  desert  islet  that 
rose  in  a  rugged  cone  barely  a  mile  from  the  south-west 
point  of  Martinique.     Its  strategical  importance  was  out  of 


126     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

all  proportion  to  its  size.  Not  only  did  it  lie  upon  the 
direct  route  from  Europe  to  Fort  de  France  and  St.  Pierre, 
the  political  and  commercial  capitals  of  the  colony,  but  it 
also  broke  the  coastwise  line  of  communication  between 
those  places  and  the  rich  southern  and  western  districts 
from  which  they  were  supplied.  When  in  1803  Com- 
modore Samuel  Hood,  with  his  broad  pennant  in  the 
Centaur,  was  blockading  Martinique,  the  rock  had  proved 
a  serious  hindrance,  since  the  coastwise  traffic  was  con- 
stantly escaping  his  cruisers  by  stealing  inshore  of  it.  The 
French  regarded  its  splintered,  surf-beaten  shore  and  pre- 
cipitous escarpments  as  inaccessible,  but  Hood  did  not,  at 
least  not  for  his  "  Centaurs."  He  resolved  to  possess  it, 
and  use  it  as  a  "  block  ship  "  and  as  a  base  for  his  inshore 
boat  operations.  He  tried,  and  by  miraculous  skill  in  a 
few  hours  the  thing  was  done.  "  Were  you  to  see,"  wrote 
an  eye-witness  during  the  subsequent  proceedings,  "  how 
along  a  dire  and,  I  had  almost  said,  a  perpendicular  accli- 
vity, the  sailors  are  hanging  in  clusters  hauling  up  a  four- 
and-twenty  pounder  by  hawsers,  you  would  wonder  !  They 
appear  like  mice  hauling  a  little  sausage.  .  .  .  Believe  me, 
I  shall  never  take  off  my  hat  for  anything  less  than  a 
British  seaman."  High  aloft  they  created  and  armed  an 
inaccessible  fastness,  and  below  made  a  little  battery  at  the 
landing-place.  Lieutenant  Maurice  of  the  Centaur  was  placed 
in  charge  with  the  rank  of  commander,  and  the  islet  was 
officially  rated  in  the  Navy  List  as  "His  Majesty's  Sloop, 
Diamond  Rock."  Here  for  two  years  the  little  garrison  of 
a  hundred  men  had  lived  in  pure  enjoyment  a  Robinson 
Crusoe  life  amongst  the  caves,  incessantly  raiding  and  cut- 
ting out,  and  proving  an  unendurable  thorn  in  the  side  of 
Martinique.^ 