

^  Gardner  to  Marsden,  May  22nd,  enclosing  Calder  to  Gardner,  May  15th  : 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  pp.  275-7. 


May  23  IT   SAILS    FOR    CADIZ  123 

will  meet  with  their  lordships'  approbation,  as,  should  it  be 
ascertained  that  the  Toulon  fleet  is  returned  to  Cadiz,  the 
five  ships  I  have  detained  can  very  soon  be  sent  after  the 
Vice-Admiral,  and  probably  reach  the  point  of  his  present 
intended  destination  nearly  as  soon  as  himself."  ^  The 
Admiralty  did  approve  his  conduct,  but  while  waiting  for 
directions  he  did  not  think  himself  entitled  to  use  the 
detained  ships  either  to  blockade  Rochefort  or  reinforce 
Calder  who  badly  needed  relief.  All  he  did  was  to  detach 
Collingwood  on  the  23rd  with  his  nine  of  the  line,  and  wait 
for  further  orders. 

^  Gardner  to  Marsdeii,  May  22nd :  Ibid.,  p.  275.  The  ships  he  detained 
were  Foudroy ant  80  (Graves's  flag),  Wi7idsor  Castle  98,  Warrio7-  74,  Bepulse  64, 
Baisonnable  64. 


CHAPTER  IX 

MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

As  things  actually  stood,  Gardner's  action  exactly  fitted 
the  situation.  May  20th  was  the  day  on  which  Napoleon 
had  to  recognise  that  his  scheme  for  a  concentration  in  the 
West  Indies  had  broken  down,  xifter  urging  Ganteaume 
by  every  means  in  his  power  to  get  to  sea  without  fighting, 
he  had  informed  him,  if  he  could  not  escape  by  midnight 
on  the  20th,  he  was  to  stay  where  he  was  for  a  different 
combination.  It  was  on  the  20th,  too,  that  Missiessy  put 
into  Rochefort,  sick  and  dispirited,  and  with  his  squadron 
entirely  unfit  for  action. 

So  far  as  the  campaign  was  concerned  his  mission  had 
been  a  failure.  When  he  had  sailed  at  the  beginning  of 
the  new  year,  it  had  been  for  the  purpose  of  colonial 
attack  to  which  Napoleon,  having  laid  aside  his  invasion, 
intended  to  devote  his  navy.  Missiessy's  special  function 
was  to  throw  suppUes  into  the  French  islands,  capture 
Dominica  and  St.  Lucia  in  concert  with  the  local  forces,  and 
then  to  raid  and  levy  contributions  on  the  smaller  British 
islands.  In  pursuance  of  these  instructions  he  reached 
Martinique  on  February  20th,  and  next  day,  after  consulta- 
tion with  the  local  officers,  proceeded  against  Roseau,  the 
capital  of  Dominica. 

The  surprise  was  complete.  Appearing  off  the  place 
under  British  colours  he  was  welcomed  as  a  friend.  General 
Prevost,  the  governor,  actually  sent  oflf  one  of  his  staff  to 
do  the  honours,  and  the  officer  did  not  discover  the  trick 
till  he  was  on  board  Missiessy's  flag-ship.  General  Lagrange, 
who  was  in  command  of  the  French  troops,  was  consequently 
able  to  land  with  scarcely  any  resistance,  and  to  seize  posi- 
tions so  good  that  Prevost  found  Roseau  untenable.     He 