

^  For  the  above  letters  of  May  2oth  to  28th,  see  Correspondance  de  Napoleon, 
X.  441-454.  The  salvo  was  probably  fired  on  news  of  Prevost's  repulse  of 
the  attack  on  Dominica. 


May  29  PROJECTS    FOR    MISSIESSY  139 

force  at  the  mouth  of  the  Channel — the  force,  that  is,  which 
it  was  his  special  object  to  reduce.  There  was  no  way,  he 
finally  decided,  but  for  Missiessy  to  operate  an  independent 
diversion.  If  he  was  blockaded  in  Rochefort  he  would 
occupy  at  least  six  of  the  enemy,  and  could  conform  to 
their  movements.  If  on  Yilleneuve's  approach  the  blockade 
was  raised  he  must  go  out  and  make  a  demonstration  on 
the  coast  of  Ireland.  "  This  movement,"  he  writes,  "  will 
give  London  a  lit  of  nerves  {la  crispation)  and  oblige  them 
to  detach  six  of  the  line."  Meanwhile  Missiessy  Avould  dis- 
appear mto  the  ocean  and  turn  up  off  Ferrol  in  time  to  meet 
Villeneuve. 

As  further  reports  began  to  reach  Milan  of  the  rapid 
succession  of  orders  that  had  been  issuing  from  the  British 
Admiralty  since  Yilleneuve's  escape,  the  picture  which 
Napoleon  was  painting  for  himself  gained  in  colour.  "  The 
disorder  of  the  English  is  extreme,"  he  wrote  to  Decres. 
But  if  Napoleon  deceived  himself  Decres  had  his  eyes 
open,  and  on  June  1st  he  sat  down  to  warn  his  sanguine 
master  of  the  serious  mistakes  he  was  making.  "  What 
seems  certain,"  he  wrote  with  grave  sarcasm,  "is  that,  if 
the  English  Government  has  not  divined  your  Majesty's 
thoughts,  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  they  have  been 
penetrated  by  the  London  journalists."  ^  He  felt  sure 
Cochrane  had  not  gone  to  India,  but  was  in  the  West 
Indies,  and  he  warns  Napoleon  that  if  Nelson  goes  there 
too  they  will  have  together  eighteen  of  the  line,  "  of  which 
several  are  three-deckers,"  and  that  a  premature  action 
there  is  highly  probable.  "  The  low  speed  of  some  of 
Admiral  Yilleneuve's  vessels,"  he  argues,  "  leaves  little 
hope  that  he  will  be  able  to  avoid  an  engagement.  On 
this  hypothesis  the  die  is  cast,  and  a  fortnight  hence  the 
God  of  Battles  will  have  given  judgment."  Even  on  the 
other  hypothesis  that  Cochrane  was  not  there  and  Yilleneuve 
might  get  away  without  fighting,  his  predicament  would  be 

^  Desbriere,  v.  596.  Decres  quotes  the  Morning  Chronicle  of  May  9th  and 
the  Sun  of  the  16th.  The  May-June  number  of  the  Naval  Chronicle  (vol.  xiii. 
p.  484)  also  published  Napoleon's  intention  to  "  balayer  la  Manche  "  with  sixty 
of  the  line  and  fight  our  fleet,  while  his  frigates  covered  the  passage  of  the 
troops. 


I40     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

even  worse.  Nelson  would  immediately  follow  him  back, 
"  and  if  he  despairs  of  reaching  Ferrol  in  time,  he  will  send 
thither  a  fast  frigate,  and  himself  make  for  Brest,  which  will 
give  the  enemy  an  immense  force  at  that  point." 