

^  For  all  the  above  orders,  see  Desbriere,  v.  iii.  chapters  7  and  9. 

2  For  a  typical  example  of  what  would  happen  should  such  co-operation 
be  attempted,  see  the  case  of  Badiley,  Appleton,  and  Van  Galen  at  Leghorn 
in  1658  :  Enrjland  in  the  Mediterranean,  i.  205  et  scq. 


134     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

favourable  for  the  relieving  force  to  attack  was  usually 
foul  for  the  blockaded  force  to  come  out ;  and  partly  to  the 
fact  that  if  the  blockading  force  moved  away  to  meet  the 
attack  and  left  the  port  open,  still  the  difficulty  which  the 
blockaded  force  always  had  in  locating  the  blockaders,  if  out 
of  sight  of  its  signal  stations,  prevented  its  moving  out 
except  at  great  hazard  until  it  actually  heard  the  engage- 
ment in  progress.  Napoleon,  in  short,  omitted  from  his 
calculations  two  primary  conditions  of  naval  warfare  ;  one — 
that  at  sea  there  was  a  lee  and  a  weather  gage  which  did 
not  enter  into  analogous  problems  on  land,  and  the  other, 
that  it  is  impossible  to  tell  under  a  day  or  two  whether  a 
naval  blockade  has  been  raised  or  not. 

So  things  stood  when  on  May  20th  midnight  sounded 
the  knell  of  the  West  Indian  concentration,  and  the  new 
orders  for  a  concentration  in  home  w^aters  came  into  opera- 
tion. This  was  the  day  Napoleon  had  finally  fixed  as  the 
latest  on  which  Ganteaume  was  to  attempt  to  break  out, 
and  henceforth  the  door  was  shut  on  him  till  Villeneuve 
should  appear  to  open  it.  With  that  Napoleon  had  to  rest 
content  so  far  as  Brest  was  concerned  ;  but  for  Missiessy's 
squadron  to  remain  idle  was  another  matter,  and  since  the 
Spanish  refusal  to  accept  his  idea  of  a  new  Toulon  squadron 
his  restless  mind  was  at  ^vork  again  on  schemes  for  putting  it 
to  the  best  advantage.  He  had  just  heard  from  Spain, 
that  the  Government  had  decided  the  Cartagena  squadron 
must  come  to  Cadiz.  The  reason  is  curious.  If  the  British 
Government  were  at  a  loss  to  fathom  the  meaning  of  Missi- 
essy's unexpected  return,  the  Spanish  Government  had  a 
knot  still  more  difficult  to  untie,  and  much  more  disturbing. 
For  them  the  dominating  fact  was  that  Nelson  had  appeared 
at  the  Straits  at  the  moment  when  Craig  had  reached 
Lisbon.  Craig  they  knew  was  now  waiting  at  Gibraltar,  but 
where  was  Nelson  ?  On  what  was  he  bent  ?  As  Godoy 
remarked  to  the  French  ambassador,  the  answer  to  this 
question  was  nothing  to  the  Emperor  but  everything  to 
Spain.  Nelson  had  last  been  heard  of  off  St.  Vincent. 
He  was  thus  a  month  behind  Villeneuve  and  pursuit 
could  scarcely  lead  to  anything.      Clearly  Spain  must  be 


May  his    views   as    to    CRAIG  135 