

prepared  for  a  blow  at  one  of  her  arsenals — probably 
Caraccas  in  Cadiz  Bay.  Salcedo  and  his  squadron  must 
come  round  from  Cartagena  for  its  defence,  and  this  would 
be  done  so  soon  as  they  knew  where  Nelson  was  and  that 
the  passage  through  the  Straits  was  clear.^ 

Napoleon  was  equally  perplexed  as  to  the  meaning  of 
Craig's  expedition,  but  less  disturbed.  As  usual  he  decided 
it  was  going  to  do  what  Avould  most  nicely  suit  his  plans. 
"  The  famous  secret  expedition,"  he  wrote  to  Decres,  "  put 
into  Lisbon  on  May  7th,  and  sailed  again  on  the  10th.  It 
is  composed  of  two  ships  of  the  line,  a  corvette  and  fifty 
transports  carrying  5000  to  6000  men.  It  seems  to  have 
taken  refuge  in  Lisbon  for  fear  of  Villeneuve.  Where  is  it 
going  ?  It  is  a  problem.  My  opinion  is  that  it  has  nothing 
in  reason  to  do  except  to  take  the  Cape  or  to  carry  assist- 
ance to  Jamaica  or  the  Windward  Islands."  If  it  is  destined 
for  Malta,  so  much  the  better.  Nothing  will  prove  more 
strongly  the  ineptitude  of  the  English  Cabinet ;  for  these 
plans  of  continental  operations  based  on  detachments  of 
a  few  thousand  men  are  the  plans  of  pygmies.  If  then  you 
hear  that  this  expedition  has  gone  to  Malta,  rejoice ;  for 
the  English  have  deprived  themselves  of  6000  men  and 
of  a  certain  number  of  ships.  All  the  reports  I  get  from 
England  agree  in  saying  that  the  English  are  embarking 
troops  on  all  sides."  ^ 

This  criticism  of  Pitt's  strategy  has  been  taken  as 
Napoleon's  real  opinion,  and  even  as  a  condemnation  of  that 
amphibious  form  of  war  which  had  become  characteristic 
of  British  methods.  But  such  an  interpretation  is  by  no 
means  certain.  To  begin  with,  no  one  familiar  with  his 
correspondence  can  have  failed  to  notice  a  habit  he  had  of 
branding  movements  which  he  had  not  foreseen  as  inepties 
or  sottises,  and  the  mOre  disconcerting  such  movements  were, 
the  more  contemptuous  was  his  language.     His  success  and 

^  Beurnonville  (French  ambassador  at  Madrid)  to  Talleyrand,  May  14th  and 
16th  :^  Desbriere,  v.  578-81. 

^  i.e.  the  Lesser  Antilles,  in  English  official  parlance  the  "Leeward 
Islands."      See  England  in  the  Seven  Years'  War,  i.  352. 

3  Napoleon  to  Decres,  May  25th  and  June  8th.  Napoleon  wrote  :  "  Ces 
combinaisons  de  mouvements  du  continent,  fondees  sur  des  detachements 
de  quelques  1000  hommes,  sont  des  combinaisons  de  pygmies." 


136     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

sclf-confidcnco  seem  to  have  brought  him  to  a  state  of 
mind,  in  which  he  could  not  or  would  not  believe  his 
own  appreciations  could  have  missed  any  reasonable  event- 
uality ;  and  if  an  opposing  commander  acted  in  a  way 
which  he  himself  had  failed  to  anticipate,  the  only  explana- 
tion he  permitted  was  that  the  man  was  a  fool  and  a 
blunderer.  Such  a  process  of  thought  was  but  a  piece  of 
the  perverse  self-deception  which  was  probably  his  greatest 
defect  as  a  commander.  In  this  case  it  is  unusually  strik- 
ing ;  for  in  a  month  or  two,  as  we  shall  see,  he  was  speaking 
of  the  expedition  in  a  tone  of  serious  alarm.  Moreover  the 
letters  should  not  be  read  alone.  Those  he  wrote  on  the 
same  and  the  following  day,  suggest  that  his  real  feeling  was 
one  far  removed  from  contempt. 