

Having  thus  taken  the  first  steps  which  his  unreal 
picture  suggested,  he  produced  in  the  following  week  an 
equally  sanguine  plan  for  Villeneuve's  final  move  on 
England.  It  was  elaborated  in  ever}^  detail,  and  every 
detail  was  rose-coloured.  He  did  not  know  Magon  had 
already  sailed.  The  Iron  Crown  of  Italy  which  he  Avas 
about  to  set  on  his  head  had  filled  the  measure  of  his 
intoxication ;  time  and  space  were  ceasing  to  exist ;  the 
wilderness  of  ocean  over  which  he  was  scattering  his 
squadrons  was  but  a  chessboard  on  which  he  could  move 
them  as  he  would,  to  the  utter  confusion  of  a  purblind  and 
nerveless  adversary. 

For  the  final  movement,  as  he  now  formulated  it,  tem- 
porary command  of  the  Channel  by  surprise  still  had  a 
place,  beside  the  idea  of  real  command,  w^on  in  a  great  and 
decisive  action.  Villeneuve,  after  he  had  returned  to  raise 
the  Ferrol  blockade  and  had  formed  his  junction  wdth 
Gourdon  and  Grandallana,  would  be  left  free  to  choose  the 
method  that  seemed  best  at  the  last  moment.  Napoleon 
still  believed  that  all  that  was  Avanted  Avas  three,  or  on 
second  thoughts  four,  days'  command  before  Boulogne. 
Villeneuve  might  gain  it  either  by  joining  Ganteaume  or  by 
leaving  him  to  occupy  the  main  British  squadron  and  going 
north-about  to  take  the  enemy's  position  in  reverse  doAvn  the 
North  Sea.  It  Avas  not  unlikely  that  the  British  Admiralty 
Avould   direct  its  chief  attention   to  preventing  a  junction 


April  PLAN    FOR   THE   LAST   PHASE 


0  J 


between  the  Brest  and  Toulon  squadrons  and  would  endea- 
vour to  deal  with  Villeneuve  in  detail.  To  this  end  they 
would  probably  move  Cornwallis  out  a  considerable  dis- 
tance to  meet  him.  If  they  did,  it  would  only  facilitate 
his  operating  by  surprise.  Instead  of  approaching  Brest 
he  could  run  round  Cornwallis,  make  the  Lizard,  and  from 
there  rush  the  Channel,  or  if  the  wind  Avere  not  favourable 
he  could  go  north-about  to  the  Texel.  If,  however,  he 
decided  on  joining  Ganteaume  and  a  battle,  he  could  either 
previously  bring  out  the  Rochefort  squadron  on  his  way  to 
Ushant  or  leave  it  where  it  was  to  occupy  its  own  block- 
ading squadron.  If  possible  he  was  not  to  fight  till  the 
junction  with  Ganteaume  was  complete,  but  if  a  preliminary 
action  could  not  be  avoided,  he  was  to  fight  as  near  to 
Brest  as  possible,  so  as  to  permit  of  Ganteaume's  co-opera- 
tion. Lastly,  in  case  events  prevented  any  of  these  plans 
succeeding,  he  could  fetch  out  the  Rochefort  squadron  and 
concentrate  with  the  Cartagena  squadron  at  Cadiz  for 
further  orders.^ 

It  was  an  ingenious  method  of  breaking  the  strength  of 
the  interior  position  held  as  of  old  by  our  Western  Squadron. 
But  as  before  it  w^as  the  design  of  a  soldier,  framed  on  the 
lines  of  land  warfare  and  the  movement  of  armies.  Its 
fatal  defect  w^as,  as  we  shall  see  Decres  presently  pointing 
out,  that  it  made  no  deductions  either  for  the  superior 
mobility  of  fleets  and  the  peculiar  limitations  of  that 
mobility  imposed  by  conditions  of  wind  and  tide.  In  short, 
so  far  as  it  rested  on  a  junction  between  Villeneuve  and 
GanteptUme,  it  Avas  a  plan  based  on  the  false  analogy  of  an 
army  relieving  a  beleaguered  garrison.  If  we  are  investing 
a  fortress  it  is  always  possible  for  the  two  sections  of  the 
enemy's  force  to  co-operate  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  but 
there  is  no  recorded  case  in  sailing  days  of  a  blockaded 
squadron  having  been  able  to  take  eflfective  part  in  an 
action  between  a  relieving  force  and  the  blockaders.^  The 
difficulty  was  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  a  wind  that  was 