

To  redress  the  balance  Napoleon  was  of  course  relying 
on  the  junction  between  Villeneuve  and  Ganteaume  being 
made  before  the  "  Battle  of  Ushant "  was  fought,  and  Decres 
as  delicately  as  he  can  tries  to  convince  him  the  thing  is 
impossible.  "  I  will  make  no  comparison,"  he  says,  "  with 
two  columns  of  an  army,  a  case  in  which  the  smallest 
accident  may  often  upset  the  most  nicely  calculated 
junction.  .  .  .  Whatever  the  winds  on  which  Admiral 
Villeneuve  makes  for  Brest  it  is  possible  these  winds  may 
be  foul  for  Admiral  Ganteaume's  fleet.  For  this  junction 
to  operate  with  success.  Admiral  Villeneuve  must  appear 
before  Brest  at  a  moment  favourable  for  the  fleet  to  get 
under  way."  Even  so  it  will  be  impossible  for  Villeneuve 
to  avoid  sustaining  for  a  time  single-handed  the  whole  force 
of  the  enemy.  "  If  Admiral  Villeneuve's  fleet  has  not  force 
sufficient  to  constrain  the  enemy  to  refuse  battle,  he  will 
have  to  measure  strength  with  him  for  at  least  ten  hours 
before  he  can  be  joined  by  the  Brest  fleet.  The  issue  of 
such  an  action  fought  with  such  a  proportion  of  vessels 
will  leave  the  victor  with  an  efl'ective  force  sufficient  to 
sustain  a  second  attack."  In  other  Avords,  if  all  goes  as 
well  as  possible,  no  victory  can  be  expected  to  be  decisive 
enough  to  give  certain  command  of  the  Channel. 

But  he  goes  still  further,  pointing  out  technical  reasons 
why  it  is  impossible  to  hope  that  things  will  go  so  well. 
By  no  process  of  intelligence  will  it  be  possible  to  make 
certain  that  Villeneuve  shall  arrive  when  Avind  and  tide  are 
right  for  Ganteaume ;  in  all  probability,  therefore,  the  Brest 
squadron  would  not  be  in  a  position  to  support  Villeneuve 
till  the  day  after  he  appears.  Moreover  there  was  a  likeli- 
hood of  Villeneuve's  finding  the  enemy  ofl"  Ushant  in  much 
greater  strength  than  Napoleon  has  allowed  for.  It  Avas 
quite  possible  they  Avould  have  not  merely  the  regular 
blockading  squadron,  but  also  the  whole  of  its  reserve,  as 
well  as  the  Ferrol  squadron  and  eventually  Nelson's  too.    He 


June  I  DECRES'    WARNING  141 

reminds  his  master  that  of  the  whole  force  on  which  he 
relies  to  deal  with  such  a  concentration  of  highly  trained 
squadrons,  nineteen  vessels  will  be  Spaniards  just  out  of 
harbour,  commanded  by  inexperienced  officers  and  poorly 
equipped.  Finally  he  begs  that  Villeneuve  may  be  given 
orders  not  to  risk  an  action  unless  he  finds  his  own  squadron 
in  a  superiority  of  at  least  six  to  that  of  the  enemy/ 

It  is  doubtful  whether  this  luminous  appreciation,  with 
its  first  forecast  of  what  actually  happened,  was  ever  com- 
pleted. A  curious  feature  of  it  is  that  though  Decres 
clearly  did  not  put  much  trust  in  Nelson's  being  enticed 
away,  yet  he  dared  not  say  openly  that  he  was  not  the 
simpleton  Napoleon  professed  to  think  him.  Still  he  felt 
bound  to  hint  that  it  was  just  possible  Nelson  might  do 
the  right  thing,  and  he  adopted  a  method  of  conveying  the 
suggestion,  which  was  as  ingenious  as  it  was  delicate.  "  His 
boasting,"  he  says,  *'  only  equals  his  ineptitude  (ineptie) — 
and  I  use  here  the  proper  word — but  he  has  one  striking 
quality,  which  is  to  have  no  pretensions  with  his  captains 
except  for  bravery  and  luck ;  whence  it  follows  that  he  is 
accessible  to  advice,  and  in  difficult  situations,  though  he  is 
nominally  in  command,  it  is  another  who  actually  directs."  ^ 