

The  discretion  which  Gardner  had  exercised  in  with- 
holding Graves's  division  from  Collingwood  received  formal 
approval,  and  he  was  directed  to  devote  it  to  the  blockade 

1  Out-letters  {Secret  Orders),  13G3,  May  30th. 

2  Ibid.,  June  4th.  He  was  told  they  had  intelligence  of  the  Toulon  squadron 
having  left  Cadiz  on  April  10th,  and  that  "  ti)0ugh  very  imperfect  it  increases 
the  probaVjility  of  its  destination  being  for  the  East  Indies  or  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope."     An  earlier  warning  to  the  same  effect  had  been  sent  him. 

144 


June  BREST   AND    ROCHEFORT  145 

of  Rochefort,  with  instructions  to  intercept  the  French 
squadron  if  it  put  to  sea  and  to  follow  it  wherever  it  went. 
Gardner  received  the  order  on  June  5  th,  when  Collingwood 
had  been  gone  a  fortnight.  Decres  had  just  heard  of  this 
weakening  of  the  Ushant  fleet,  and  seeing  in  it  a  chance  for 
Ganteaume  to  strike,  was  appealing  to  the  Emperor  for  the 
necessary  orders.  But  Napoleon  would  not  quit  the  plan 
which  seemed  to  be  working  so  well.  He  was  the  last  man 
in  the  world,  for  all  his  faith  in  the  principle  of  destroying 
the  enemy's  forces,  to  hazard  an  action  except  for  some 
clearly  seen  end.  "  To  what  can  a  battle  lead  ? "  he 
replied.  "  To  nothing.  Simply  put  in  the  papers  that 
the  English  have  sent  eight  (sic)  of  the  line  before 
[Rochefort]  and  that  they  have  weakened  by  so  much 
their  Brest  blockade  .  .  .  and  that  it  is  inconceivable  why 
the  French  fleet  does  not  profit  by  the  occasion.  Next 
day,  in  another  paper,  say  that  it  is  most  extraordinary 
that  journalists  permit  themselves  such  reflexions ;  that 
before  condemning  or  approving  the  conduct  of  an  admiral 
in  an  affair  of  this  nature,  they  should  know  what  are  his 
instructions,  and  that  probably,  as  the  Emperor  has  not 
communicated  them  to  the  journalists,  all  their  talk  on 
the  subject  is  quite  futile."  ^ 

The  prompt  closing  of  Rochefort  reduced  all  his  schemes 
for  the  employment  of  Missiessy  to  the  pis  aller  of  conform- 
ing to  the  movements  of  the  blockading  force.  But  in  any 
case  the  squadron  could  not  have  sailed  for  some  weeks — so 
exhausted  were  its  crews,  and  so  great  the  need  of  repairs — 
and  a  fortnight  after  Missiessy  had  put  into  the  port,  Graves 
had  appeared.  With  his  own  80-gun  ship,  two  three- 
deckers,  and  three  others,  he  was  in  a  marked  superiority 
over  what  the  enemy  was  reputed  to  have.  Thus  by  the 
time  Napoleon  knew  Missiessy  was  back  he  was  already 
firmly  held  to  his  moorings.  Graves  indeed,  on  his  arrival, 
found  the  squadron  so  entirely  unfit  for  sea  that  he  forth- 
with submitted  to  Gardner  whether  it  was  necessary  to  keep 
anything  but  a  frigate  off  the  port.  Gardner  replied — and 
the  point  is  interesting  in  relation  to  the  old  practice  of  war 