

Whether  or  not  Decr^s  ever  ventured  to  forward  his 
crushing  criticism,  it  certainly  had  no  effect  in  shaking 
Napoleon's  obstinacy.  A  week  later  he  reproved  his 
minister  for  not  having  "  a  mind  exclusive  enough  for  a 
great  operation."  ''  It  is  a  fault,"  he  said,  "  which  you 
must  correct,  for  it  is  the  art  of  great  successes  and  great 
undertakings."  Decres  in  despair  begged  him  to  come  back 
to  France.     "  I  don't  know,"  Napoleon  replied,  "  why  you 

^  Desbriere,  v.  596.     This  document  is  an  unfinished  draft. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  599.  Colonel  Desbriere  observes  on  this  remarkable  paper,  "  In 
all  but  what  concerns  the  gross  error  in  appreciating  the  character  of  Nelson, 
we  cannot  admire  too  much  this  letter  whose  forecasts  were  realised  with 
almost  absolute  precision."  Colonel  Desbriere  would  seem  therefore  to  take 
Decres'  remarks  on  Nelson  seriously  ;  but  it  is  submitted  that  there  really 
seems  no  reason  to  do  so.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  believe  that  a  man  who 
could  expose  in  so  masterly  a  manner  the  strategical  fallacies  of  Napoleon 
and  penetrate  so  acutely  the  British  intentions,  could  really  be  so  bad  a 
judge  of  the  main  personal  factor.  The  awe  in  which  Napoleon's  officers 
stood  of  him,  seems  quite  enough  to  account  for  Decres'  preferring  not  to 
contradict  the  Emperor's  shallow  view  of  Nelson's  capacity,  if  there  was 
another  and  safer  way  of  attaining  the  end  which  he  had  in  view. 


142     MODIFICATIONS    OF   NAPOLEON'S   PLANS 

say  so  much  of  my  return  to  Paris.  Nothing  is  better 
calculated  than  my  journey  to  hide  my  projects  and  cheat 
the  enemy."  Always  this  besetting  dream  of  his  enemy's 
imbecility !  Unconvinced  he  continued  incessantly  to  ela- 
borate his  plan,  in  spite  of  news  that  kept  coming  in  to 
shoAV  how  airy  was  the  castle  he  was  building. 

Salcedo  had  tried  to  get  round  to  Cadiz  in  order  to 
attack  Craig  at  Gibraltar,  but  had  been  forced  by  the 
weather  to  put  back  and  was  now  held  in  his  port  on 
rumours  that  both  Orde  and  Nelson  were  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood. The  falsity  of  the  rumours  was  not  penetrated 
by  Napoleon.  He  embraced  them  to  add  colour  to  his 
picture.  For  him  they  meant  a  further  chance  of  weaken- 
ing his  enemy  on  the  Ushant  position.  Missiessy  could 
now  be  sent  to  make  a  demonstration  in  the  North  Sea 
and  off  the  Texel,  and  Marmont  should  emphasise  it  by 
such  a  display  of  activity  ashore  as  would  compel  the 
British  Government  to  take  it  into  account.  The  basis  of 
it  all  was  pure  illusion.  It  was  quickly  demonstrated  that 
owing  to  the  strength  of  the  British  interior  position  be- 
tween Cadiz  and  Cartagena  it  was  impossible  for  the  two 
squadrons  either  to  get  together  or  between  them  to  contain 
a  force  superior  to  their  own.  In  a  week  Salcedo  tried 
once  more  to  get  round  to  Cadiz,  but  only  to  hurry  into 
port  again  in  alarm,  on  tidings  that  Collingw^ood  had  arrived 
to  re-establish  the  command  of  the  Straits'  mouth.^ 