

On  the  morrow  his  preoccupation  with  Craig  at  Gibraltar 
and  the  possibility  of  English  and  Russian  co-operation  in 
the  Mediterranean  continues.  "  It  is  urgent,"  he  writes, 
"  to  get  the  Cartagena  fleet  to  Cadiz  and  to  blockade 
Gibraltar,  if  the  English  do  not  keep  a  superior  squadron 
in  those  seas ; "  and  yet  again  to  Fouche :  "  I  have  already 
told  you  that  the  treaty  of  England  with  Russia  is  false. 
It  is  a  trick  of  the  English  Cabinet.  Their  intrigues 
have  broken  down  completely.  Even  when  you  see  this 
treaty  printed  in  the  English  gazette  and  Pitt  announcing 
it  to  Parliament,  you  can  say  it  is  not  true."  The  same 
day  he  hears  that  the  British  fleet  before  Brest  has  been 
firing  a  salvo,  and  it  gets  on  his  nerves.     He  discusses  it 


138     MODIFICATIONS    OF    NAPOLEON'S    PLANS 

with  Dccres,  is  afraid  it  may  mean  a  regrettable  incident 
for  Magon,  and  he  ends  by  assuring  the  Minister  that 
"  England  is  entirely  abandoned  by  the  continent,  her 
situation  is  worse  than  ever."  ^ 

To  add  to  his  troubles  he  could  get  no  news  of  Missiessy. 
He  had  not  yet  heard  of  his  return.  As  the  Spanish  fear 
of  Craig  had  ended  all  hope  of  a  new  Toulon  squadron,  he 
had  decided  to  send  him  back  to  Villeneuve.  But  as  the 
days  went  by  the  probability  of  his  being  too  late  or  even 
shut  in  by  blockade  grew  more  and  more  disturbing,  and 
Napoleon  began  deluging  Decres  with  projects  for  using  him 
in  some  other  Avay.  In  spite  of  **  the  state  of  disorganisa- 
tion and  embarrassment "  in  England,  everywhere  he  looked 
he  saw  a  British  squadron  in  the  way.  The  problem  was 
how  to  employ  Missiessy  so  as  to  occupy  or  entice  away  an 
equal  British  force  and  yet  have  him  at  hand  at  the  decisive 
moment.  "  If  I  send  Missiessy  to  Cadiz  or  to  Toulon,"  he 
wrote  to  Decres  on  May  29th,  "and  the  English  evacuate 
the  Mediterranean,  it  is  evident  the  English  will  have  on 
the  day  of  the  battle  of  Ushant,  six  more  vessels  against 
me,  which  I  ought  to  make  Missiessy  contain."  There 
was,  to  be  sure,  the  possibility  of  sendmg  him  to  Cadiz 
to  fetch  the  Cartagena  and  Cadiz  squadrons  to  Ferrol, 
but  to  this  course  there  were  two  objections.  He  believed 
Calder  had  ten  of  the  line  before  Ferrol,  and  Missiessy,  if 
he  succeeded  in  rallying  both  the  Cadiz  and  the  Cartagena 
squadrons,  would  have  fifteen.  "  But  is  it  prudent,"  he  says, 
"  to  attack  ten  English  vessels  with  five  French  and  ten 
Spanish  ? "  Moreover  a  concentration  at  Ferrol,  like  all 
concentrations  at  the  wrong  time  and  place,  would  do 
more  harm  than  good.  It  would  attract  at  least  twenty 
of  the  enemy,  and  then  Villeneuve  would  be  unable  to 
get  there  without  fighting  and  the  difficulty  of  the  Brest 
junction  would  be  reproduced.  For  the  same  reason  he 
could  not  send  him  to  Brest,  for  even  if  he  could  slip  in, 
that  again  would  only  lead   to   an  increase  of  the  British 