

They  were  the  two  busy  days  which  preceded  the  cere- 
mony of  his  coronation  at  Milan,  and  over  the  pageantry  of 
the  preparations  there  is  clear  to  see  the  shadow  of  Pitt's 
coming  coalition,  the  first  doubt  as  to  whether  the  initiative 
of  the  campaign  is  to  be  his  own.  On  the  eve  of  his  great 
stroke  for  incorporating  Italy  in  his  empire,  which  had 
ah-eady  caused  him  so  much  misgiving,  he  sat  pouring  out 
despatch  after  despatch,  filled  with  new  anxiety.  To  Marshal 
Berthier,  his  Chief  of  the  Staff,  there  are  two  for  reinforc- 
ing and  rearming  Corsica  and  his  chief  Italian  ports.  To 
Cambaceres,  his  right  hand  in  Paris,  he  writes :  "  You  can 
contradict  loudly  the  news  that  is  being  spread  of  a  treaty 
of  alliance  between  England  and  Russia.  Make  it  known 
indirectly  on  'Change  and  elsewhere  that  Russia,  on  the  con- 
trary, has  refused  to  listen  to  any  hostile  proposals."  Fouche, 
who  controlled  the  press  bureau,  is  told  to  insert  in  the 
papers  that  at  St.  Petersburg  the  French  are  growing  more 
popular,  that  the  English  are  disliked,  that  the  project  of 
a  coalition  has  fallen  through,  and  that  in  any  case  Russia 
will  not  intervene  and  is  too  remote  to  engage  on  her  own 
account  directly  and  effectively.  ''Be  careful,"  he  tells 
Barbe-Marbois,  "to  read  the  English  papers,  and  to  get 
them  by  the  quickest  way.  Do  not  stop  at  a  thousand 
louis  more  or  less  and  send  me  such  information  as  may 
interest  me,  above  all  the  movements  of  ships  and  announce- 


May  25-8       HIS    UNEASINESS    AT    MILAN  137 

ments  of  all  preparations  of  all  expeditions."  "  Monsieur 
mon  Beaufrere  et  Cousin,"  he  writes  testily  to  Prince  Murat, 
"  what  you  write  me  about  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty  of 
alliance  between  England  and  Russia  is  nonsense :  it  is 
entirely  false.  These  reports,  which  the  English  spread  to 
get  themselves  out  of  the  mess  for  the  moment,  are  fabrica- 
tions." In  the  evening,  after  the  fireworks  and  illuminations 
were  over,  he  was  even  haunted  with  the  possibility  of  his 
enemy  playing  their  old  game  of  supporting  insurrections  in 
France  itself :  and  he  wrote  again  to  Fouche :  "  In  the  state 
of  disorganisation  and  embarrassment  in  which  England  finds 
herself,  it  is  possible  she  may  seek  to  renew  trouble  in  the 
interior  of  France.  But  I  can't  think  she  will  make  much 
of  it.     That  string  is  worn  out  like  so  many  others." 

It  is  possible  that  his  orders  for  strengthening  the  Italian 
ports  had  their  origin  in  a  desire  to  provide  secure  points  of 
refuge  for  a  small  frigate  squadron  he  was  about  to  send  out 
for  a  cruise  under  his  wayward  brother  Jerome,  who  had 
just  returned  from  his  escapade  in  America  and  in  whom  he 
hoped  to  find  the  Admiral  he  was  seeking.  But  all  the  rest 
of  the  letters  suggest  strongly  that  the  meeting  of  Craig's 
expedition  and  Nelson  gave  an  ugly  turn  to  the  growing 
rumours  of  an  Anglo-Russian  alliance,  and  that  for  the  first 
time  Napoleon  was  forced  to  doubt  whether  his  invasion 
threat  would  so  effectively  paralyse  British  initiative  as  he 
had  expected. 