

Still  nothing  availed  to  dilute  Napoleon's  optimism,  or 
his  belief  that  he  had  completely  confused  his  enemy  and 
broken  their  concentration.  He  had  heard  that  a  Flying 
Squadron  of  twelve  of  the  line  had  been  detached  from 
the  Ushant  fleet,  and  till  the  actual  announcement  that 
Collingwood  was  blockading  Cadiz  he  believed  he  had  gone 
to  India.  As  to  Nelson  he  was  equally  sanguine.  Though 
he  did  not  know  Avhere  he  was  for  certain,  he  had  little 
doubt  he  was  either  in  England  or  the  Mediterranean,  and 
was  convinced  that  Missiessy's  cruise  would  complete  his 
effort  to  upset  the  equilibrium  of  his  enemy.  "  The  un- 
certainty and  confusion,"  he  repeated,  ''  that   the   London 

1  Beurnonville  to  Talleyrand,  June  13th  and  17th  :  Ibid.,  p.  622. 


June  THEIR    FAILURE  143 

Admiralty  is  in,  declares  itself  on  all  sides.  Orders  and 
counter-orders  and  the  greatest  indecision — that  is  the 
actual  state  of  things."  ^ 

Yet  even  as  he  wrote,  these  orders  and  counter-orders 
over  which  he  was  exulting  had  brought,  not  confusion, 
but  the  quiet  re-establishment  of  the  long  line  of  blockade 
which  Villeneuve's  escape  had  thrown  momentarily  out  of 
gear.  So  nicely  adjusted  was  the  interlocking  of  the  parts, 
so  well  practised  the  hands  at  the  levers,  that  every  un- 
certainty had  been  met  by  a  simple  turn.  Each  part  in 
answer  to  the  adroit  impulse  slipped  smartly  into  its 
appointed  place.  From  the  Texel  to  Cartagena  the  chain 
was  drawn  tight  and  every  gate  was  locked  upon  the 
impotent  squadrons  of  which  Napoleon  had  yet  to  construct 
a  fleet. 

^  To  Decr^s,  June  14th  :  Desbri^re,  v.  612. 


CHAPTER  X 

RESTORING  THE  COMMAND— FERROL  AND  THE   STRAITS 

To  pass  from  the  imaginative  and  almost  feverish  corre- 
spondence of  Napoleon  at  this  time,  to  the  coolly  calculated 
orders  of  Lord  Barham  and  the  confident  motions  of  the 
British  commanders  gives  an  impression  of  quiet  mastery 
that  is  the  note  of  the  campaign  from  now  onwards. 

Ignorant  that  Missiessy's  reappearance  was  a  mistake, 
the  Admiralty's  first  deduction  from  their  intelligence  was 
that  no  serious  attack  or  concentration  was  intended  in  the 
West  Indies.  It  even  indicated  a  possibility  that  Villeneuve 
was  not  bound  thither  at  all,  and  word  was  immediately 
sent  after  Collingwood  instructing  him  to  go  no  further 
than  Madeira  without  fresh  orders.  On  the  same  reasoning 
Pitt  decided  not  to  divert  Sir  Eyre  Coote's  expedition 
to  the  West  Indies,  and  an  express  Avas  hurried  off  to 
Drury,  who  in  Gardner's  absence  was  commanding  the 
Irish  station,  to  stop  him,  or  supposing  he  had  started,  to 
recall  him  if  possible.^  There  was  a  possibility  that 
Villeneuve  had  gone  to  India  after  all,  as  Napoleon  Avas 
trying  to  make  his  enemy  believe.  But  the  Government 
was  not  to  be  enticed  into  making  so  wide  a  dissipation  of 
its  fleet  except  on  the  surest  evidence,  and  they  contented 
themselves  Avdth  a  warning  to  Sir  Edward  Pellew,  who 
commanded  on  the  station.'^ 