

The    first  of   these   orders   Knight   received  when   he 
reached  Gibraltar.     By  that  time  Nelson  had  already  de- 
tached Sir  Richard  Bickerton  in  the  Royal  Sovereign,  and 
had  placed  Knight  under  his  orders.     Bickerton  of  course 
decided,  as  Nelson  was  pursuing,   to  keep  Knight's   ships 
with  his  flag.     His  intention  was,  in  accordance  with  Nelson's 
instructions,  to  use  the  squadron  for  covering  Craig's  passage 
to  Malta  and  meeting  a  Levant  convoy  then  due.  He  informed 
the  Admiralty  that  in  taking  upon  himself  to  do  this  instead 
of  sending  the  ships  to  Orde  as  they  had  directed,  he  was 
influenced  by  the  dominant  consideration,   that  when  the 
Admiralty  issued  the  orders  they  did  not   knov/  that  the 
squadron  in  Cartagena  had  become  active,  and  had  already 
once  been  to  sea.     The  whole  tenor  of  the  order  indicated 
that  had  they  known  this  they  would  certainly  have  wished 
Craig's  escort  to  remain  for  his  protection.     Before,  how- 
ever, he  could  act,  the  second   orders  arrived,  as  to  rein- 
forcing Calder ;  whereupon  Bickerton  considered  he  was  no 
longer^  justified  in  using  his  discretion  in  the  light  of  the 
local  situation.      "  I  must  give  up,"  he  repHed,  "  the  objects 
I  had   and  obey,   though  it   will   expose  the   convoy   and 
transports  to  the  [Algeciras]  gunboats  and  the  Cartagena 
squadron.     As  I  certainly  am  not  strong  enough  to  meet 


148  FERROL    AND    THE    STRAITS 

and  attack  this  force  advantageously,  backed  as  it  is  by 
the  Cadiz  squadron,  which  must  amount  to  five  of  the  line 
...  I  do  not  feel  myself  at  liberty  to  deviate  from  their 
lordships'  orders  when  there  is  no  reasonable  hope  of  my 
being  able  by  an  action  with  such  a  superior  enemy  to 
confine  the  Cartagena  squadron  within  the  Straits,  or  to 
prevent  the  junction  of  at  least  the  larger  part  of  them 
with  that  of  Cadiz ;  and  when  it  is  considered  that  their 
lordships'  future  arrangements  will  be  made  under  a  full 
conviction  that  the  ships  of  the  line  under  my  orders  have 
joined  the  squadron  under  Sir  Robert  Calder  or  Lord 
Gardner's  fleet."  His  principle  may  be  thus  enunciated — 
that  in  dealing  with  explicit  orders  no  exercise  of  discretion 
that  may  confuse  the  war-plan  is  permissible  to  an  officer 
on  the  spot,  unless  he  sees  in  the  local  conditions,  unknown 
to  headquarters,  the  certainty  of  delivering  a  decisive  blow 
at  the  enemy's  naval  force  or  possibly  of  paralysing  a  part 
of  it  greater  than  his  own.^ 

The  decision  was  one  which  called  for  the  highest  quali- 
ties of  a  commander.  In  obeying  his  orders  in  spite  of  his 
knoAvledge  of  the  local  situation,  he  was  exposing  an  im- 
portant military  force  to  present  risk  of  being  destroyed  by 
a  combined  attack  from  Cadiz,  Cartagena,  and  Algeeiras. 
Fortunately,  in  the  General  he  had  to  deal  with  a  man  of 
as  high  and  sound  a  military  spirit  as  his  OAvn.  Directly 
he  received  the  orders  he  showed  them  to  Craig,  and  Craig 
in  spite  of  the  dangers  staring  him  in  the  face  agreed 
there  Avas  but  one  thing  for  Bickerton  to  do.  To  make 
the  position  perfectly  clear,  he  sent  home  a  despatch  to 
the  War  Office  to  assure  them  Bickerton's  conduct  to  him 
throughout  had  been  "  most  confidential  and  cordial."  Of 
his  departure  Avith  the  squadron  he  had  not  a  word  of 
complaint.  "  His  doing  so,"  he  says,  "  is  with  my  perfect 
concurrence  and  acquiescence."  Though  he  well  knew  the 
Admiralty  despatch  had  been  written  without  information 
of  how  large  and  active  was  the  enemy's  force   about  the 