

1  la-httcrs,  410,  Bickerton  to  the  Admiralty,  May  14th  and  IGth.  Knight 
to  same,  May  15th.  Bickerton's  last  letter  is  minuted,  "Approve  his  pro- 
ceedings under  the  circumstances  he  describes." 


May  17  CRAIG    AND    BICKERTON  149 

Straits,  yet  ho  did  not  feel  justified  in  pressing  Bickerton 
on  that  account  to  vary  his  orders.  The  view  he  took 
was  that  all  the  instructions  which  the  Admirals  had  com- 
municated to  him  had  a  certain  "  general  tendency,"  and 
this,  he  said,  was  "  invariably  that  of  assembling  a  great 
naval  force  to  the  westward,  an  object  which  under  the 
present  circumstances  might  be  of  a  magnitude  to  supersede 
every  other." 

No  utterance  could  more  clearly  reveal  how  intimate 
at  that  time  was  the  sympathy  between  the  best  men  in 
the  two  services  and  how  complete  Avas  their  mutual  under- 
standing of  the  principles  of  combined  warfare.  Faced  as 
Craig  was  with  the  prospect  of  his  force  being  left  almost 
without  defence  in  seas  swarming  with  the  enemy,  he  did 
not  forget  that  for  England  there  was  one  condition  of  affairs 
to  which  everything  else  must  be  subservient.  In  the 
Admiralty  orders  he  perceived  indications  that  the  moment 
was  at  hand  for  a  supreme  decision  in  a  great  fleet  action, 
at  the  vital  strategical  point.  If  so  it  was  a  moment  for 
which  everything,  even  his  own  force,  must  be  risked  ;  and 
he  did  not  flinch.  Not  even  by  a  word  Avould  he  tempt 
his  colleague  from  the  supreme  duty.^  On  the  morrow, 
May  17th,  Bickerton  sailed  with  his  three  ships  for  Ferrol, 
leaving  Knight  in  command  at  Gibraltar  to  make  such 
dispositions  as  he  could  with  the  few  cruisers  and  gunboats 
available  for  the  safety  of  the  convoy  and  the  observation 
of  Cartagena. 

Ten  days  later,  as  Bickerton  neared  Finisterre,  he  met 
Collingwood  coming  down  with  his  nine  ships  of  the  line 
and  a  frigate,  and  was  able  to  place  him  in  possession  of 
the  actual  state  of  affairs.  Collingwood,  as  we  knoAv,  had 
been  given  a  wide  discretion  as  to  the  disposal  of  his  own 
force.  The  two  Admirals  held  a  long  consultation  and  had 
little  difiiculty  in  coming  to  a  conclusion  as  to  how  far 
Collingwood's  orders  might  be  modified  to  meet  the  local 

1  Craig  to  Lord  Camden,  May  16th  :  W.  0.  (1),  In-hticrs,  280.  All  Craig's  de- 
spatches go  to  confirm  the  judgment  of  his  enthusiastic  young  admirer,  Ensign 
Charles  Boothby.  "The  name  of  my  new  chief  I  had  long  known  ;  for  his 
fine  person  and  dark  flashing  eye  had  been  pointed  out  to  me  when  a  boy  as 
belonging  to  the  finest  officer  in  the  service." — Under  England's  Flag^  p.  3. 


ISO  FERROL   AND    THE   STRAITS  may  27 