

1  To  Decres,  June  IGth. 

K 


146  FERROL   AND    THE    STRAITS  may 

direction — that  he  did  not  feel  authorised  to  recall  him  or 
any  part  of  his  detachment  without  special  orders  from  the 
Admiralty.  The  orders  he  got  were  to  withdraw  two  ships 
of  the  line  and  to  add  them  to  his  own  squadron  or  to  that 
of  Caldcr  before  Ferrol. 

The  position  of  this  squadron  had  been  causing  Gardner 
some  anxiety.  Calder  had  been  complaining  that  his  force 
was  inadequate  to  watch  the  port.  Besides  his  own  three- 
decker,  the  Prince  of  Wales,  he  had  only  an  80 -gun  ship, 
four  seventy-fours,  and  a  forty-four,  while  Gourdon  and 
Grandallana  had  between  them  eleven  of  the  line  actually 
ready  for  sea,  and  three  more  in  a  forward  state.  To  add  to 
the  inequality,  one  of  Calder 's  ships  had  been  severely 
damaged  aloft,  and  four  others  would  soon  need  relief.  So 
strongly  did  Gardner  feel  Calder's  weakness  that  it  had 
been  his  intention  to  send  him  the  whole  of  Graves's 
division.  This  addition  to  the  Ferrol  squadron,  after  the 
units  requiring  refit  had  been  sent  home,  would  have  given 
it  a  strength  of  ten  of  the  line,  of  which  three  would  be 
three-deckers,  besides  an  80 -gun  ship — a  force  which  by 
the  ordinary  rule  of  calculation  would  have  made  it  superior 
to  the  Combined  Squadron  inside.  The  Admiralty  order  to 
attach  Graves  to  Collingwood  and  subsequently  to  send  him 
before  Rochefort  had  stopped  the  movement,  and  made 
it  impossible  for  Gardner  to  detach  anything  to  Calder 
without  bringing  his  own  squadron  below  the  established 
minimum  of  eighteen. 

His  anxiety,  however,  was  needless.  Barham  was  quite 
alive  to  the  situation  and  had  already  provided  for  it.  The 
nature  of  these  orders  and  the  manner  in  which  they  were 
interpreted  by  the  Admirals  concerned,  are  highly  interest- 
ing. They  afford  a  typical  example  of  what  long  war  ex- 
perience had  established  as  to  the  discretion  which  the 
man  on  the  spot  might  permit  himself  in  reading  his  orders, 
and  the  certainty  and  fearlessness  with  which  officers  in 
those  days  could  weigh  the  spirit  against  the  letter. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Barham's  first  idea  after 
hearing  of  Villeneuve's  escape  was  that  Knight's  two  vessels, 
the  Queen  and  Dragon,  which  formed  Craig's  escort,  should 


MAYI4-I6     BICKERTON   AND    HIS    ORDERS  14; 

proceed  with  Collmg\Yood's  Flying  Squadron  in  chase,  if 
Nelson  had  not  gone  himself.  If  Nelson  had  pursued, 
Knight  was  to  send  both  vessels  to  Orde,  who  was  then 
believed  to  bo  still  on  his  station.  This  was  on  April  27th. 
Three  days  later  came  Orde's  despatch  which  told  of  his 
falling  back  on  Ushant,  and  contained  his  appreciation, 
which  pointed  to  the  probabiHty  of  a  concentration  of  the 
enemy's  squadrons  somewhere  to  the  westward.  To  hold 
the  Ferrol  position  in  strength  was  therefore  of  the  last 
importance,  and  it  became  absolutely  necessary  to  reinforce 
Calder.  Consequently,  it  will  be  remembered,  Knight  was 
instructed  that  if  he  had  not  passed  St.  Vincent  with  his 
convoy,  he  was  to  come  back  to  Ferrol.  If  he  had,  he  was 
to  shift  his  flag  to  a  frigate  at  Gibraltar  and  send  his  ships 
of  the  line  to  Calder,  or  if  Calder  had  raised  the  blockade 
they  were  to  carry  on  to  Gardner. 