


May  COCHRANE    AND    VILLENEUVE  157 

with  the  whole  squadron.^  It  was  a  resolution  that  de- 
manded no  little  loyalty  and  self-sacrifice.  For  it  meant 
depriving  himself  of  almost  the  whole  of  his  squadron. 
He  had  no  intention  of  remaining  there  himself.  His 
place  was  on  the  Leeward  Islands  station.  Indeed  he  only 
stayed  the  few  days  necessary  to  hand  over  to  Dacres  five 
of  his  six  vessels,  for  Dacres  had  nothing  else  of  the  line, 
and  then  on  April  25  th,  keeping  only  his  own  flagship 
the  Northumberland  80,  he  began  the  laborious  task  of 
working  his  way  back  to  Barbadoes. 

Such  was  the  situation  when  on  May  14th  the  Combined 
Squadron  appeared  at  Martinique.  Villeneuve  was  im- 
mediately assailed  by  the  military  authorities  to  attempt 
something  against  the  British  islands.  But  there  were 
difficulties  in  the  way.  The  orders  with  which  he  had  sailed 
strictly  enjoined  he  should  go  to  Fort  Royal  and  hold  him- 
self in  readiness  to  join  Ganteaume  the  very  hour  he  should 
appear.  How  then  could  he  entangle  his  fleet  in  combined 
operations  ?  And  apart  from  this  difficulty  he  had  still 
to  face  the  menace  of  an  unlocated  enemy.  A  powerful 
squadron  had  been  reported  about  St.  Domingo  and  Puerto 
Rico.  It  was  of  course  Cochrane's,  but  at  Martinique  they 
knew  not  what,  nor  where,  nor  how  strong  it  was.  Was  it  a 
squadron  from  England  in  chase  of  him,  under  the  impres- 
sion his  objective  was  Jamaica  ?  That  was  Villeneuve's 
first  thought — it  was  impossible  for  him  to  tell.  Mean- 
while what  could  he  attack  with  safety  ?  Dominica  and 
St.  Lucia  were  the  only  islands  within  his  reach,  but  he 
knew  both  were  on  their  guard,  and  the  recent  example  of 
Dominica  showed  they  could  not  be  reduced  by  a  coiiip 
de  main.  Still,  not  being  able  to  bring  himself  to  spend  the 
whole  of  his  forty  days  waiting  in  inaction,  he  decided  to 
send  three  frigates  to  cruise  against  the  enemy's  commerce, 
and  endeavour  to  glean  intelligence  both  from  local  craft 
and  vessels  arriving  from  Europe. 

This  done,  he  turned  his  attention  to  removing  the  dis- 
grace of  the  Diamond  Rock  where  Captain  Maurice  and  his 
crew  were  still  defiantly  installed  and  active.      Their  last 

^  Cochrane  to  the  Admiralty  :  Jn-htters,  326.     April  5,  8,  9,  14,  17. 


158      OPERATIONS    IN    THE    WEST    INDIES        iMay 

exploit — a  favourite  diversion — had  been  to  entice  one  of 
Villeneuve's  belated  Spanish  consorts  close  in  to  the  rock 
by  hoisting  French  colours  and  to  salute  her  with  a  dose  of 
their  twenty-four  pounders.  It  was  beyond  all  endurance, 
and  the  day  after  the  frigates  left,  Villeneuve  sent  against 
the  rocky  "  sloop  "  a  detachment  of  two  of  the  line,  three 
cruisers,  and  a  dozen  gunboats  with  a  force  of  troops, 
under  Captain  Cosmao  of  the  Pluton  74.  It  was  not  till 
the  31st  that  they  were  able  to  reach  the  landing-place. 
Seeing  the  overwhelming  force  opposed  to  him,  Maurice 
abandoned  the  shore  battery,  and  retired  all  his  "  crew  "  to 
his  fastness  aloft.  The  French  at  once  effected  a  landing, 
but  soon  found  themselves  in  a  scrape.  Maurice's  position 
was  absolutely  inaccessible  without  scaling-ladders ;  the 
troops,  who  had  been  sea-sick  for  two  days,  Avere  starving ; 
and  so  heavy  was  the  shower  of  stones  and  musketry  that 
the  defenders  poured  down  that  neither  food  nor  water 
could  be  fetched  from  the  squadron.  Even  the  boat-guards 
could  not  remain  at  their  post.  Many  were  killed  and 
wounded,  and  all  had  to  take  shelter  in  caves  below  the 
fastness.  They  were  themselves,  as  it  were,  besieged,  and 
had  to  watch  three  gunboats  get  adrift  and  break  up  on 
the  rocks.  Day  after  day  the  ships  bombarded  the  garri- 
son, but  till  scaling-ladders  arrived  nothing  could  be  done. 
A  party  of  five-and-twenty  men  tried  Avith  ropes,  but  they 
were  all  taken  prisoners. 