

Maurice's  gallant  resistance  was  not  without  result. 
The  day  the  attack  opened  there  arrived  at  Martinique  the 
Diclon,  which  it  will  be  remembered  had  sailed  two  days 
after  Magon,  charged  with  Napoleon  s  new  orders  of  April 
29th  and  a  copy  of  the  previous  orders  which  Magon  was 
bringing.  Her  news  was  that  Ganteaume,  though  hourly 
expected  to  sail,  was  still  in  Brest,  but  that,  as  Nelson 
had  gone  to  Egypt,  Villeneuve  himself  was  not  likely  to 
be  molested.  Villeneuve  also  learnt  that  Magon  had 
sailed  from  Rochefort  with  two  of  the  line  and  800  more 
troops  to  swell  his  force,  and  enable  him  '*  to  continue 
his  attacks  on  the  British  colonies."  This  was  the  order 
which  directed  him  to  employ  his  energies  in  this  way  for 


\ 


June  I        VILLENEUVE'S   ORDERS    ARRIVE  159 

thirty-five  days  after  Magon  arrived,  and  if  at  the  expira- 
tion of  that  period  Ganteaume  had  not  appeared,  he  was 
to  return  to  Ferrol,  and  not  to  the  Canaries  as  was  pro- 
vided by  his  original  orders.  With  twenty  of  the  line  and 
12,000  men,  which  with  the  local  forces  and  his  own  he 
would  have  at  his  disposal,  Napoleon,  as  we  have  seen, 
thought  it  possible  he  might  be  able  to  expel  the  British 
entirely  from  the  Leeward  Islands  and  even  from  Trini- 
dad. The  orders,  however,  concluded  with  a  proviso  that 
these  enterprises  were  to  be  kept  "  subordinate  to  the 
grand  object  of  the  essential  operation  which  was  to  crown 
his  Majesty's  arms." 

Villeneuve  was  aghast.  The  new  orders  assumed  he  had 
been  engaged  already  in  attacking  the  British  islands. 
Apparently  Napoleon  had  forgotten  what  orders  he  had 
given  him.  So  far  from  having  been  told  to  operate 
against  the  British  colonies,  he  had  been  strictly  enjoined 
to  do  nothing  but  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  sail  with 
Ganteaume  the  moment  he  appeared.  If  only,  he  said  in 
his  reply,  he  had  been  told  before  he  might  have  done 
something.  But  now  it  was  too  late.  The  English  had 
been  warned  of  his  coming  by  the  frigate  which  he  knew 
Orde  had  sent  out,  and  they  were  now  on  their  guard 
everywhere.  He  had  even  been  three  days  trying  to  take 
a  paltry  rock.  Fifteen  of  his  original  forty  days  were 
already  expired,  and  as  for  waiting  thirty-five  days  after 
Magon's  arrival,  it  was  out  of  the  question.  His  stores  would 
not  permit  it.  "  Still,"  he  wrote  to  his  exasperating  master, 
"  as  I  see  you  condemn  in  advance  the  inaction  to  which  my 
orders  alone  chained  me  ...  I  will  only  say  it  has  been 
to  me  insupportable.  Be  that  as  it  may,  as  soon  as  the 
Diamond  Rock  is  finished,  we  will  start  to  attack  Antigua  or 
Barbuda." ' 