

conditions.  From  Bickerton  Collingwood  learnt  that  Nelson 
with  only  ten  of  the  line  was  in  chase  of  Villeneuve  with 
eighteen.  He  also  learnt  the  important  new  fact  that  both 
in  Cadiz  and  Cartagena  there  were  active  squadrons.  Seeing 
the  comparative  strength  of  Nelson  and  Villeneuve,  and 
that  Cochrane  had  no  more  than  six  of  the  line,  he  ought 
by  his  orders  to  have  despatched  two  of  the  line  after  Nelson 
to  bring  the  whole  naval  force  in  the  Leeward  Islands  up 
to  eighteen  also.  But  in  view  of  the  fact  that  since  his 
orders  were  received  Missiessy  had  returned  and  that  the 
enemy's  force  in  the  West  Indies  was  thereby  reduced  by 
five  ships,  he  decided  not  to  do  so  till  further  orders. 
Bickerton's  urgent  representation  convinced  him  that  the 
situation  demanded  taking  his  whole  force  down  to  the 
Straits  to  secure  the  local  command.  "  In  view,"  Colling- 
wood wrote  home,  "  of  the  active  preparations  in  Cartagena 
and  Cadiz  and  that  a  convoy  is  expected  from  Malta  I  shall 
proceed  off  Cadiz  with  the  utmost  despatch  .  .  .  and  take 
station  there."  He  hoped  their  lordships  would  approve 
this  departure  from  his  orders,  since  the  activity  at  Carta- 
gena w^as  unknown  when  they  were  draw^n  up.  "  I  con- 
sider," he  concluded,  "  the  spirit  of  my  orders  demanded 
that  I  should  not  leave  so  large  a  force  at  liberty  to  sail  in 
execution  of  their  plans."  Here  then  w^as  a  clear  case  of 
modifying  explicit  orders.  They  were  not  merely  ''  instruc- 
tions " ;  and  Collingwood's  despatch  bears  the  Admiralty 
endorsement,  "  Approved  under  the  circumstances."  ^ 

In  consideration  of  Collingwood's  consent  to  take  this 
course,  Bickerton  sacrificed  his  only  cruiser  to  inform  the 
Admiralty.  The  despatches  of  the  two  Admirals  were 
received  on  June  8th  and  instantly  orders  were  returned  to 
them  fully  accepting  their  view  of  the  situation.  Bickerton, 
who  in  obedience  to  his  orders  had  gone  on  to  Ferrol,  was 
to  shift  his  flag  to  the  Queen  and,  leaving  the  Royal  Sovereign 
and  his  two-decker  with  Calder,  Avas  to  go  back  to  the  Straits 
and  place  himself  under  Collingwood's  orders. 

Collingwood  thus   became   Commander-in-chief  of  the 

^  Bickerton  to  Admiralty  and  Collingwood  to  same,  May  27th,  off  Finis- 
terre :  In-letters,  410. 


June  COLLlNGWOOD   AND   BlCKERTON  15! 

regular  Mediterranean  station  from  Cape  St.  Vincent  to  the 
Levant  with  a  force  of  ten  of  the  line  besides  the  Excellent 
which  was  still  on  guard  at  Naples,  and  the  strong  force  of 
cruisers  which  were  exercising  the  control  within  the  Straits. 
His  orders  were  to  establish  a  close  blockade  of  Cadiz  and 
of  St.  Lucar,  the  adjacent  port  of  Seville.  Hitherto,  with 
a  view  apparently  of  conciliating  neutrals,  and  especially 
Americans,  a  commercial  blockade  had  not  been  strictly 
enforced.  But  on  the  urgent  representations  of  the  officers 
on  the  station  of  the  activity  in  the  Spanish  dockyards, 
and  the  abundance  of  supplies  that  were  pouring  in,  the 
two  ports  were  now  definitely  closed. 