

^  Beurnonville  to  Talleyrand,  Madrid,  June  18th  :  Desbriere,  v.  625. 

2  Bickerton  to  Admiralty,  July  28th  :  In-letters,  411. 


CILIPTER   XI 

OPERATIONS   IN   THE   WEST   INDIES 

At  home  the  last  that  had  been  heard  of  Nelson  was  as  he 
approached  Madeh'a,  three  days  after  he  had  parted  com- 
pany with  Craig.  The  Admiralty  had  received  a  short  note 
assuring  them  that  if  he  had  made  a  mistake  and  the  Com- 
bined Squadron  was  not  in  the  West  Indies,  he  could  be 
back  again  off  Cadiz  by  the  end  of  June  before  the  enemy 
could  know  where  he  had  gone,  and  that  then  he  would 
proceed  to  England,  leaving  such  a  force  behind  him  as 
the  service  required.-^  His  faith  in  the  safety  of  his  move 
and  the  influence  of  an  unlocated  fleet  was  fully  justified. 
We  have  seen  how  Napoleon  believed  he  had  not  left 
European  waters,  and  before  the  French  headquarters  were 
sujfficiently  assured  of  his  departure  to  base  any  action  on  it, 
he  appeared  again  at  Gibraltar. 

To  Lord  Camden,  the  Minister  for  War,  who  had  asked 
him  to  give  Craig  his  co-operation  and  advice,  he  had  written 
a  longer  letter  explaining  the  difficulties  of  the  political 
situation.  In  his  opinion — matured  as  it  was  by  the  prac- 
tical experience  of  the  last  war — it  would  be  a  mistake  for 
Craig  to  land  in  Sicily  at  once.  Any  such  move  would  be 
the  signal  for  a  French  advance  on  Naples.  The  King 
would  certainly  not  consent  to  it.  But  the  moment  the 
French  made  a  movement  independently,  our  troops  would 
be  received  with  gratitude.  In  this  advice  Nelson  was 
endorsing  the  Government's  own  view,  nor  had  he  anything 
to  add  except  once  more  to  urge  the  importance  of  securing 
Sardinia.- 

Thus  the  last  thought  they  had  had  from  him,  was  for  the 

^  To  Marsden,  April  14th  :  Nicolas,  vi.  437. 
2  Ibid.,  p.  439. 

IS4 


NELSONS  CHASE  OFYILLENEDVE 

from  William  Faden's  map 

"c4ipied.  froirvTiLe  Lordships  origiruilMS. 

canA  spadal  directicns ." 

PabUsheeL  Aug.U^riaoi. 


British  operautLans  sTwwjhuvred,. 
Irendv  „  „       „  hhiA. 


StORSE  PHILlPtSON  V° 


Zongnvaaia,  Green,  &  Co.  Zcmdarv,Mwl&rk;Bmnhc^  &  CtHaitUi-. 


TNELONDON  GEOGRAPHICAL  IN  STITUTC 

to  Tape  po^e  /54 


May  15  THE    LOST    MEMORANDUM  155 

safety  of  the  station  he  was  leaving  behind.  All  that  man 
could  do,  indeed  all  that  was  necessary,  he  had  done.  To 
speak  of  him  as  having  abandoned  the  Mediterranean  is  to 
misconceive  his  careful  attitude.  Strategically  his  conscience 
was  clear,  and  henceforth  he  could  absorb  himself  freely  in 
what  was  before  him  to  the  westward. 

He  was  already  at  work.  During  the  previous  days,  in 
view  of  a  meeting  with  Villeneuve's  superior  fleet,  he  had 
been  drawing  up  a  tactical  memorandum,  which  he  ordered 
Captain  Parker  of  the  Amazon  frigate  to  distribute  to  the 
fleet  on  May  15th.^  The  nature  of  this  memorandum  is 
quite  uncertain.  Clarke  and  McArthur  believed  it  to  be  one 
they  saw  amongst  Lord  St.  Vincent's  papers,  and  Sir  Harris 
Nicolas  in  his  collection  of  Nelson's  letters  followed  them. 
But  the  document  was  undated  and  there  are  insuperable 
difficulties  in  assigning  it  to  this  occasion.  Interual  evidence 
shows  that  when  Nelson  drafted  the  document  he  was  con- 
templating an  action  against  a  fleet  of  eleven  or  twelve  sail 
with  a  force  about  equal  to  it :  but  now  he  had  before  him 
the  prospect  of  engaging  a  much  larger  squadron  with  inferior 
numbers.  "  I  am  going,"  he  had  written  to  Acton  a  few 
days  before,  "  to  the  West  Indies  where  the  enemy  have 
twenty-four  sail  of  the  line :  my  force  is  very  very  inferior. 
I  only  take  ten  with  me  and  I  only  expect  to  be  joined  by 
six." "  He  meant,  of  course,  Cochrane's  squadron,  and  it 
was  certainly  the  general  expectation  in  the  fleet  that  these 
six  vessels  would  be  united  to  Nelson's  flag  when  he  reached 
the  West  Indies.^  The  loss  of  the  memorandum  of  May 
15th  is  greatly  to  be  deplored ;  for  few  documents  in  Naval 
History  could  be  of  higher  interest  than  one  which  contained 
Nelson's  ideas  of  this  time,  on  dealing  with  a  superior 
enemy. 