

^  Collingwood  to  the  Admiralty  and  Bickerton  to  same,  June  24th:  In-letters, 
441.  Bickerton  had  the  Qiiccn.  98,  the  Tonnant  80,  Bellerophon  74,  and  Mino- 
taur 74.  The  Cartagena  squadron  was  reported  to  be  two  first-rates,  three 
74's,  and  one  G4.  Bickerton  never  called  the  Excellent  to  his  flag.  Writing  to 
Nelson  on  July  30th  he  says:  "  I  have  not  removed  the  Excellent  from  Naples, 
for  besides  the  uncertainty  I  was  under  where  to  order  her  to  meet  me,  I  was 
unwilling  to  take  a  step  which  might  have  defeated  your  lordship's  measures" : 
Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS.  34'J30.  The  Excellent,  except  for  occasional  spells 
under  sail  for  drill  and  gunnery  practice,  remained  at  her  moorings  from 
Jan.  17,  1805,  to  Feb.  11,  180G.— i/o^  of  the  Excellent. 


June  HOW   CRAIG   GOT   THROUGH  153 

troops  to  complete  the  companies  of  both  his  cruiser  s,  and 
assist  in  arming  some  of  the  transports.  They  readily 
agreed,  and  the  whole  convoy  was  taken  out  of  the  bay  to 
the  eastward  of  the  Rock,  where  it  continued  standing  off 
and  on  across  the  Gut  "  in  delicious  weather."  ^ 

The  device  entirely  succeeded.  The  transports  were 
well  out  of  reach  of  Alge(;dras,  and  the  appearance  of 
Collingwood  off  Cadiz  effectually  deterred  any  movement  on 
the  part  of  the  Cartagena  squadron.  So  far  from  thinking 
of  offence,  Salcedo  was  busy  with  harbour  defences,  and  the 
flotilla  of  gunboats  of  which  Fox  had  heard  was  being 
hastily  equipped  for  the  protection  of  the  port.  Indeed 
the  whole  attention  of  the  Andalusian  authorities  was  fixed 
on  making  prepai;4tions  against  the  attack  which,  since 
Craig  had  put  to  sea,  he  seemed  about  to  deliver  at  some 
undetermined  point." 

In  this  situation  the  convoy  was  found  by  Bickerton  on 
his  return,  and  on  June  25  th,  without  anchoring,  he  led  it 
on  with  a  fair  wind  up  the  Straits.  Hugging  the  African 
coast,  he  detached  the  Beagle  to  report  what  Salcedo  was 
doing.  Off  Cape  Tones,  well  to  the  eastward  of  Cartagena, 
the  Beagle  rejoined,  reporting  Salcedo  at  anchor.  There- 
upon Knight  determined  to  send  Craig  on  his  way  under 
an  escort  of  three  frigates,  while  he  himself  parted  company 
to  constitute  a  covering  squadron  for  the  army's  passage 
by  taking  station  before  Cartagena.^ 

So  in  the  face  of  all  Napoleon's  active  and  undefeated 
squadrons  the  passage  of  the  expedition  had  been  secured. 
The  first  step  towards  Pitt's  enveloping  attack  had  been 
taken,  and  as  Craig  passed  quietly  on  his  way  to  the  west- 
ward all  was  in  labour  with  Napoleon's  counter-stroke.  The 
concentration  for  the  great  invasion  had  begun. 

^  Knight  to  the  Admiralty,  June  17th,  enclosing  Fox  and  Craig  to  Knight, 
June  13th,  Fox's  information,  and  Craig  to  Knight,  June  15th :  In-lcttcrs,  441. 
Craig  to  Lord  Camden,  June  17th  :  W.O.  (1),  In-lctters,  280.  Boothby,  Under 
England'a  Flag,  p.  20.  Bunbury,  The  Great  War,  p.  189.  Knight  to  Nelson 
(enclosing  his  journal),  July  16th  :  NcUon  Papers,  Add.  MSS.  34930. 