


1  Phillimore,  Life  of  Sir  William  Parker,  ii.  289. 

•^  Clarke  and  McArthur,  ii.  427  (4th  edition).  For  the  reasons  for  assigning 
the  St.  Vincent  Memorandum  to  1803,  see  Laughton,  Nehons  Letters  and 
Despatches  and  Fighting  Instructions  {Navy  Records  Society),  280-1.  The  fact 
that  it  was  found  amongst  Lord  St.  Vincent's  papers  raises  in  itself  a  strong 
presumption  that  it  was  written  while  he  was  still  First  Lord,  that  is,  before 
May  1804.  In  1805  he  was  playing  Achilles  in  his  tent,  and  Nelson  was  not 
in  correspondence  with  him. 

^  Allen,  Memoirs  of  Sir  William  Hargood,  p.  111. 


156     OPERATIONS    TN    THE    WEST    INDIES      April 

In  order  to  ensure  the  co-operation  of  Cochrane's 
squadron,  he  had  sent  forward  a  frigate  from  Cape  St. 
Vincent,  but  he  was  destined  to  be  disappointed,  owing  to 
the  difficult  situation  of  affairs  in  the  West  Indies.  Cochrane, 
in  his  pursuit  of  Missiessy,  had  reached  Barbadoes  on  April  5  th, 
little  more  than  a  month  before  Nelson  had  left  the  Straits. 
There  he  heard  his  enemy  had  just  been  reported  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  St.  Domingo.  In  these  circumstances  his 
own  inclination  and  the  tenor  of  his  instructions  bade  him 
continue  his  chase,  if  only  for  the  safety  of  Jamaica.  He 
scarcely  waited  to  take  over  the  formal  command  of  the 
station  from  Commodore  Hood :  he  did  not  even  anchor,  but 
leaving  Hood  in  local  command  with  one  of  his  own  ships,  the 
Sjiartiatc,  to  assist  him  in  holding  the  station  and  supporting 
the  local  cruiser  squadron,  he  held  away  with  the  rest — six 
in  number — in  hot  pursuit  and  high  hope  of  an  encounter. 

On  April  9th  ho  reached  St.  Thomas  in  the  Virgins, 
Avhere  he  ascertained  Missiessy  had  already  been  to  St. 
Domingo  and  landed  his  troops.  He  also  received  infor- 
mation that  the  French  were  expecting  a  second  expedition, 
and  that  the  combined  force  was  to  attack  Jamaica.  It 
was  information  too  probable  to  ignore,  and,  little  dreaming 
Missiessy  was  already  ^vell  on  his  way  back  to  Rochefort, 
he  made  up  his  mind  he  would  be  on  the  point  of  return- 
ing to  Martinique  to  join  the  new  comers  from  France  for 
the  grand  attack.  Here,  then,  was  a  fine  chance  of  nipping 
the  combination  in  the  bud  by  intercepting  Missiessy  on 
his  Avay.  Doubling  back,  therefore,  he  passed  along  the 
south  side  of  Puerto  Rico  and  turned  up  into  the  Mona 
passage,  between  that  island  and  St.  Domingo.  There  he 
took  station  expecting  every  hour  to  see  his  adversary  fall 
into  his  mouth.  When,  however,  he  did  not  appear,  and 
all  the  information  Cochrane  could  get  pointed  with  in- 
creasing cogency  to  Jamaica  as  the  point  of  danger,  he  felt 
there  was  nothing  to  do  but  to  act  on  the  instructions  he 
had  received  from  the  Admiralty.  They  directed  that  if  on 
his  arrival  he  heard  the  Rochefort  squadron  had  gone  to 
St.  Domingo,  he  was  to  reinforce  the  Jamaica  station  with 
six  of  the  line.     To  Jamaica,  therefore,  he  decided  to  sail 