

While  CoUingwood  occupied  the  Cadiz  station,  Bicker- 
ton,  as  Nelson  had  arranged,  was  to  command  inside  the 
Straits;  but  he  was  to  report  frequently  to  CoUingwood 
and  obey  all  his  orders  for  the  disposition  of  ships.  To 
begin  with,  however,  for  the  special  purpose  of  getting 
Craig  forward  to  his  destination,  CoUingwood  was  to  give 
him  four  of  the  line,  thus  dividing  the  battle  squadron 
between  them.-^ 

This  arrangement  CoUingwood  was  unable  to  carry  out 
in  full.  On  June  8th,  the  day  his  orders  were  being  issued 
by  the  Admiralty  for  the  blockade,  he  had  taken  up  his 
station  before  Cadiz,  but  after  parting  with  Bickerton  he 
had  reconsidered  his  decision  to  postpone  the  execution 
of  his  orders  to  reinforce  Nelson.  On  thinking  it  over  it 
occurred  to  him  that  possibly  Cochrane  might  do  what 
Nelson  afterwards  did — he  might  think  it  his  duty  to  follow 
his  fleet,  and  was  perhaps  already  in  European  waters  on 
Missiessy's  heels.  His  departure  would  seriously  weaken 
the  naval  force  in  the  West  Indies,  and  to  restore  the  posi- 
tion he  now  sent  away  to  Barbadoes  his  two  fastest  seventy- 
fours.  When  therefore,  on  June  22nd,  Bickerton  rejoined 
him  from  Ferrol  he  had  only  seven  of  the  line  instead  of 
nine.  As  there  were  in  Cadiz  two  first-rates  and  two  two- 
deckers,  he  felt  he  could  not  reduce  his  own  force  below 
four.  Acting  however  in  the  spirit  of  the  order,  he  divided 
his  battle  squadron  with  Bickerton,  giving  him  three.     It 

1  Secret  Orders,  1363,  June  8th. 


152  FERROL   AND    THE   STRAITS 

was  a  force,  he  explained  to  the  Admiralty,  inferior  to  that 
in  Cartagena,  but  he  trusted  it  was  strong  enough  to  pre- 
vent Salcedo's  sailing  till  Bickerton  could  be  joined  by  the 
Excellent  from  Naples.  With  this  force  Bickerton  parted 
company,  and  two  days  later  he  appeared  again  off  Gibraltar.^ 
It  was  high  time.  In  his  absence  both  Craig  and 
Knight  had  been  having  many  anxious  hours.  It  was  only 
the  timely  arrival  of  Collingwood,  as  we  have  seen,  that 
saved  the  expedition  from  an  attack  in  force  by  Salcedo, 
but  even  when  he  was  scared  back  their  troubles  were  by 
no  means  at  an  end.  Across  the  bay  they  could  see  the 
Algeriras  gunboats  continually  increasing  in  numbers. 
Knight  did  his  best  with  the  small  force  at  his  command. 
Anchoring  the  convoy  in  close  order,  he  covered  it  with  the 
only  two  cruisers  he  had,  a  frigate  and  the  Beagle,  who  had 
returned  to  her  station,  kept  one  or  two  gun-brigs  and  gun- 
boats patrolling,  and  had  guard-boats  out  at  night.  Camp- 
bell, the  Portuguese  Admiral,  moreover,  had  come  into  the 
bay  and  had  anchored  his  squadron  in  such  a  position  that 
the  Spaniards  accused  him  of  wilfully  covering  the  trans- 
ports from  attack.  He  certainly  kept  Knight  supplied  with 
information  to  the  best  of  his  ability.  By  the  time,  how- 
ever, the  expedition  had  been  thus  exposed  for  a  month 
things  looked  so  threatening  that  it  became  imperative  to 
make  other  dispositions.  General  Fox,  the  governor,  had 
obtained  information  that  an  attack  w^as  intended  in  a  few 
days,  and  that  the  gunboats  at  Algegiras  now  numbered 
forty,  besides  many  more  at  Cartagena.  Together  Fox  and 
Craig  laid  the  facts  formally  before  Knight  and  a  joint  council 
was  held.  The  Admiral  suggested  taking  the  whole  convoy 
to  sea,  and  offered  to  hoist  his  flag  in  the  frigate  for  its  pro- 
tection, if  the  Generals  would  give  him  a  detachment  of 