

With  this  slender  force  he  was  ready  to  fight,  but  in 
certain  conditions  only.  As  before,  when  he  believed  his 
strategy  had  forced  Villeneuve  from  the  Mediterranean,  his 
object  was  partly  gained  already.  He  had  forced  the  enemy 
from  the  West  Indies,  and  he  could  now  weigh  risks  more 
calmly.  "  Do  not  imagine,"  he  is  reported  to  have  said 
to  his  assembled  captains,  "  that  I  am  one  of  those  hot- 
brained  people  who  fight  at  immense  disadvantage  without 
an  adequate  object.  My  object  is  partly  gained.  If  we 
meet  them  we  shall  find  them  not  less  than  eighteen,  I 
rather  think,  twenty  sail  of  the  line,  and  therefore  do  not 
be  surprised  if  I  should  not  fall  upon  them  immediately. 
We  won't  part  without  a  battle.  I  think  they  will  be  glad 
to  let  me  alone,  if  I  will  let  them  alone,  which  I  will  do 
till  we  approach  the  shores  of  Europe  or  they  give  me  an 
advantage  too  tempting  to  be  resisted."  ^ 

^  Letter  from  an  officer  on  board  one  of  Lord  Nelson's  ships:  Add.  MSS. 
3430,  June  19th;  Nelson  to  Marsden,  June  14th:  In-lcttcrs,  411.  Nicolas  missed 
this  letter  and  it  seems  never  to  have  been  printed.  It  runs :  "  Victory  at  sea, 
June  14th.  The  Nctley  schooner  joined  me  yesterday  morning  about  an  hour 
after  the  fleet  got  under  weigh  [sic)  from  St.  John's  Eoad,  Antigua,  when 
Lieutenant  Carr  came  on  board  and  showed  me  the  accompanying  despatches 
from  Captain  Nourse  of  the  Barbadoes,  addressed  to  you  (which  in  his  hurry 
to  return  to  the  Nctley  he  omitted  to  take  with  him).  I  therefore  judge  it 
proper  to  forward  them  to  you  in  the  state  they  were  left,  and  also  beg  leave 
to  transmit  you  for  their  Lordships'  information  a  letter  from  Lieutenant  Carr 
giving  his  reasons  for  having  opened  the  said  despatches."  The  letter  was 
not  holograph,  but  signed  by  Nelson. 

^  The  authority  for  these  observations  is  not  known.  Clarke  and  McArthur 
give  it  as  the  purport  of  his  remarks  (without  mentioning  their  source  of 
information)  on  one  of  the  occasions  when  during  the  chase  he  assembled  his 
captains  on  board  the  Victory.     There  is  another  traditional  story  on  the 


170      OPERATIONS   IN    THE    WEST    INDIES 

With  these  ideas  in  his  mind  he  disappeared  once  more 
into  the  Atlantic,  leaving  Cochrane  in  no  easy  frame  of 
mind.  So  skilfully  had  the  French  directed  attention  to 
Jamaica  that  he  could  not  share  Nelson's  view.  It  will 
have  been  noticed  that  throughout  all  these  operations  the 
reinforced  squadron  at  Jamaica  had  made  no  move.  They 
had  been  waiting  on  the  defensive  at  Port  Royal  ready  to 
do  their  best  against  the  expected  attack  till  reinforcements 
arrived.  So  far,  it  may  be  said,  they  had  been  enticed 
away,  but  in  fact  they  were  not  off  the  board.  As  we  have 
seen,  it  was  their  presence  in  the  West  Indian  seas  that 
convinced  Villeneuve  he  could  do  nothing.  But  for 
Cochrane  the  menace  still  existed.  Ten  days  after  Nelson 
had  left,  he  was  back  at  Barbadoes  writing  anxiously  to 
the  Admiralty  that  he  was  sure  Jamaica  was  the  objective. 
He  did  not  know,  curiously  enough,  where  Nelson  had 
gone,  but  from  what  he  had  said  in  conversation,  Cochrane 
was  afraid  he  thought  Villeneuve  had  gone  back  to  the 
Mediterranean.^  He  was  naturally  anxious.  He  was  alone 
on  the  station,  for  Hood  had  gone  home  with  a  convoy.  It 
was  not  till  three  weeks  later  that  the  Ramilies  and  Illus- 
trious, which  Collingwood  had  sent  to  reinforce  Nelson, 
appeared  in  Carlisle  Bay,  to  relieve  his  mind.  Yet  no 
sooner  had  they  arrived  than  he  received  a  report  of  the 