

^  For  this  interesting  episode  see  Life  of  Sir  William  Parker,  i.  294,  who 
says  Maurice  had  only  90  men,  and  that  the  French  lost  800 !  Desbrierc,  v. 
541,  gives  Villoneuve's  and  Keille's  accounts.  The  Naval  Chronicle,  xv.  123, 
gives  Maurice's  reports  to  both  Nelson  and  Cochrane,  and  the  French  com- 
mander's report  to  Villaret-Joyeuse,  Captain-General  of  Martinique,  with 
other  official  documents  and  coinments  of  the  local  press.  The  original  of 
Maurice's  report  to  Nelson  is  in  Admiralty  In-letters,  411,  June  6th. 


June 4  FALSE   INTELLIGENCE  i6i 

Laforey  in  the  Spartiate,  who  smce  the  receipt  of  Orde's 
warning  and  the  Admiralty  orders  to  cover  Eyre  Coote's 
arrival,  had  been  cruising  to  windward  on  the  look-out  for 
the  transports  and  convoys  from  home.  Nelson  therefore 
had  now  twelve  of  the  line,  and  the  enemy,  so  he  believed, 
had  only  eighteen,  a  supposition  which  the  local  informa- 
tion confirmed.  Disappointing  as  it  was,  a  superiority  of  a 
third  in  no  way  restrained  his  ardour.  His  only  doubt  was 
where  to  find  them. 

Now  it  so  happened  that  the  day  before  word  had  come 
in  from  General  Brereton,  the  Commander-in-chief  at  St. 
Lucia,  that  the  enemy  had  been  reported  to  him  as  having 
been  seen  passing  Gros  Islet  bay  at  the  north-west  of  the 
island  on  the  night  of  the  28  th,  and  his  belief  was  that  the 
movement  indicated  an  attack  on  Barbadoes  or  Trinidad. 
A  possible  explanation  of  this  unfortunate  piece  of  intelli- 
gence is  that  at  the  Gros  Islet  signal  station  they  had 
seen  the  cruiser  squadron  which  Villeneuve  detached  that 
day,  and  in  the  dark  the  anxious  watchers  had  taken  it  for 
a  fleet.  General  Myers,  commanding  at  Carlisle  Bay,  had, 
however,  no  suspicion  of  its  inaccuracy,  and  immediately 
sent  it  off  to  Nelson  by  his  military  secretary.  As  the 
enemy  had  not  appeared  at  Barbadoes  it  could  only  be 
assumed  they  had  gone  to  Trinidad,  and  by  this  time  they 
would  have  landed  their  army.  Myers,  therefore,  suggested 
that  he  should  be  permitted  to  accompany  the  fleet  with 
2000  men  that  he  had  available.  It  would  mean  a  day's 
delay,  but  Nelson  felt  he  could  not  say  no.  "  I  cannot 
refuse  so  handsome  an  offer,"  he  wrote,  ''  and  with  the 
blessing  of  God  on  a  just  cause  I  see  no  cause  to  doubt 
the  annihilation  of  both  the  enemy's  fleet  and  army." 

He  himself  had  expected  to  find  the  Combined  Squadron 
to  the  northward,  but  the  intelligence  was  precise,  and  he 
felt  himself  bound  by  it.^     Brereton  he  had  known  well  in 

^  A  copy  of  the  intelligence  General  Brereton  had  sent  from  St.  Lucia  was 
given  to  Nelson,  and  at  the  foot  of  it  he  wrote  in  his  own  hand,  "Wrote  by- 
Major  Myers,  Sir  William  Myers'  secretary,  extracted  from  the  General's 
letter,  and  Major  Myers  has  no  doubt  the  intelligence  may  be  relied  on  " 
(Signed)  Nelson  and  Bronte,  June  4th:  Adm.  Sec.  In-letters,  411,  and 
Nicolas,  vi.  446. 