

L 


1 


i62       OPERATIONS  IN   THE  WEST  INDIES     June 4 

the  old  Mediterranean  days  as  an  energetic  and  capable 
stafif-officer  in  the  Corsica  operations,  and  felt  he  was  a  man 
to  be  trusted.  On  the  morrow,  therefore,  with  Myers  and 
his  troops  hastily  embarked,  he  sailed  for  Trinidad  in  high 
hopes  of  a  decision. 

In  the  interval  of  waiting  he  had  issued  a  new  order  of 
battle — to  include  Cochrane's  two  ships — which  is  of  con- 
siderable interest,  for  in  it  we  can  detect  a  foreshadowing  of 
the  order  he  used  at  Trafalgar,  at  least  in  two  important 
points.  In  the  first  place,  like  the  order  of  the  famous 
memorandum,  it  was  an  "  Order  of  Battle  and  of  Sailing  " 
in  two  divisions,  modified  from  the  one  he  had  issued  at 
the  Gulf  of  Palmas  in  March.  In  the  second  place,  it 
shows  his  heaviest  ships  not  distributed  in  the  usual 
manner,  but  massed  at  the  head  of  his  own  division  after 
the  fashion  which  Rodney  first  introduced  into  the  Signal 
Book  from  Bigot  de  Morogues,  and  which  Nelson  was  the 
first  to  employ  on  the  day  of  reckoning.  No  accompanying 
tactical  memorandum  is  known  to  exist,  nor  is  there  any 
express  intimation  that  he  intended  to  fight  in  two  separate 
lines,  though  the  actual  disposition  of  the  ships  was  similar 
to  the  one  used  at  Trafalgar  and  would  have  lent  itself  to 
that  form  of  engaging.^ 

In  this  order,  early  on  the  6th,  he  made  for  Tobago, 
which  lay  in  the  direct  course  to  Trinidad.  Captain 
Bettesworth  in  the  Curieux  brig,  one  of  the  station  cruisers, 
had  been  sent  ahead  for  intelligence.  On  the  morrow  off 
the  island  he  met  Nelson  with  an  important  report. 
The  previous  day  an  American  had  informed  the  Tobago 
authorities  that  he  had  been  boarded  off  St.  Vincent  by  one 
of  the  ships  of  the  French  fleet,  and  that  it  had  proceeded 
south.  This  information  was  of  course  false,  and  probably 
intended  to  mislead,  but  unfortunately  it  was  confirmed 
shortly  afterwards  by  the  sight  of  a  private  schooner 
making  the  agreed  signal  for  the  enemy's  fleet  at  Trinidad. 
Surely  never  had  Admiral  worse  luck  than  Nelson  on  this 

^  This  order  of  battle  was  printed  in  Hubback's  Jane  Austen  s  Sailor 
Brothers,  p.  138,  from  Louis's  copy,  but  with  some  obvious  inaccuracies.  The 
following  is    from   Keats's  copy,  preserved  in  the  Record  Office,  Greenwich 


June  5 


NELSON'S    ORDER    OF   BATTLE  163 

occasion.  It  was  not  intended  as  a  signal  to  the  fleet.  It 
was  the  private  arrangement  of  an  enterprising  Tobago 
merchant,  who,  anxious  to  know  what  the  fleet  was,  had 
sent  out  his  clerk  to  reconnoitre,  and  the  signal  he  had 

Hospital  Miscellanea  {Various),  No.  141.  It  was  drawn  up  apparently  on  an 
official  form  which  provided  for  a  fleet  of  thirty  sail. 