

1  Desbriere,  V.  539-5.  Confusion  has  arisen  by  Villeneuve's  being  supposed 
to  have  written  "Barbade"  instead  of  "  Barboude,"  as  though  he  meant 
to  attack  Barbadoes,  which  was  in  the  opposite  direction  and  far  to  wind- 
ward. It  is  clear  from  his  later  despatch  that  by  "Barbade"  he  meant  the 
island  adjacent  to  Antigua.  See  post,  p.  165,  With  the  experience  of  the 
Diamond  Rock  before  him  he  could  not  have  hoped  to  beat  to  Barbadoes  and 
do  anything  there  in  less  than  a  month,  and  his  stores  permitted  of  no  such 
delay.     "If,"  wrote  Nelson  afterwards,  "Barbadoes  is  the  object  .  .  .  a  fleet 


i6o     OPERATIONS    IN   THE    WEST   INDIES    june4 

All  this  time  the  siege  of  the  "  sloop "  had  been  pro- 
ceeding, and  it  was  not  till  June  3rd  that  any  impression 
had  been  made.  On  that  day  the  French,  having  procured 
the  necessary  scaling  material,  had  succeeded  in  getting  up 
the  back  of  the  Rock.  Maurice  saw  himself  faced  with  an 
assault,  and  by  this  time  he  had  not  a  cartridge  nor  a  drop 
of  water  left.  He  decided  accordingly  that  further  resist- 
ance was  useless,  and  putting  out  a  flag  of  truce,  was  allowed 
to  march  out  of  his  fastness  with  the  honours  of  war.  The 
number  of  his  effective  men  the  French  returns  put  at  107, 
and  he  had  only  lost  two  killed  and  one  wounded.  The 
French  put  their  landing  force  at  260,  but  Maurice  believed 
they  had  1500  ashore  from  first  to  last,  and  that  they  lost 
thirty  killed  and  forty  wounded.  They  themselves  acknow- 
ledge a  loss  of  at  least  fifty.  In  any  case  it  was  a  gallant 
and  useful  defence,  and  when  Maurice  was  court-martialled 
for  the  loss  of  "  His  Majesty's  late  sloop  Diamond  Rock  " 
he  was  honourably  acquitted  with  a  high  expression  of 
admiration.^ 

The  day  after  the  surrender  the  French  detachment 
rejoined  the  flag,  and  as  they  did  so  Magon  appeared. 
Villeneuve,  resolved  not  to  lose  another  hour,  made 
immediate  preparations  to  proceed  northward  against 
Antigua  and  Barbuda.  And  well  it  was  he  did  so,  for 
even  as  Magon  joined  him  the  batteries  of  Barbadoes  were 
saluting  the  Mediterranean  squadron. 

Nelson  had  gained  ten  days  on  his  chase,  and  believed 
he  had  gained  more.  He  was  on  fire  to  be  gone.  The  six  of 
the  line  he  had  expected  were  not  there,  but  Cochrane  was. 
He  had  arrived  only  two  days  before,  after  his  weary  beat 
back  from  Jamaica,  and  the  same  evening  he  was  joined  by 

could  get  there  on  the  average  in  four  or  five  days  from  Martinique.  Therefore 
why  should  they  make  a  passage  of  at  least  fifteen  or  sixteen  days  by  going 
to  the  northward." — Nicolas,  vi.  458.  Spanish  prisoners  taken  in  Caider's 
action  said  the  objective  was  Antigua. — Blochide  of  Brest,  ii.  323. 