

As  they  opened  the  harbour  and  not  a  sign  of  an  enemy 
was  to  be  seen,  they  could  scarcely  believe  their  eyes,  so 
certain  and  doubly  corroborated  had  been  the  intelligence. 
What  Nelson  felt  not  a  single  letter  reveals.  His  self- 
restraint  is  admirable ;  the  best  of  him  came  out ;  he 
simply  cast  all  intelligence  to  the  winds  and  immediately 
turned  back,  resolved  to  act  on  his  own  judgment. 

Early  next  morning,  the  8  th,  as  he  was  repassing  the 
Dragon's  Mouth,  he  was  met  with  a  despatch  from  Captain 
Maurice  telling  him  that  Diamond  Rock  had  fallen  and 
that  the  Combined  Squadron  had  not  yet  left  Martinique. 
There  was  hope  still.  Maurice  also  informed  him  that  he 
had  been  assured  by  his  captors  that  the  Ferrol  squadron  had 
recently  joined.  This  Nelson  was  sure  could  not  be  true, 
for  had  it  come  Maurice  himself  must  have  seen  it.  "I 
have  my  doubts,"  he  wrote  to  the  Governor  of  Barbadoes, 
"  respecting  the  certainty  of  the  arrival  of  the  Ferrol 
squadron  .  .  .  but,  my  lord,  powerful  as  their  force  may 
be  they  shall  not  with  impunity  make  any  great  attacks. 
Mine  is  compact ;  theirs  must  be  unwieldy ;  and  although  a 
very  pretty  fiddle,  I  don't  believe  that  either  Gravina  or 
Villeneuve  know  how  to  play  upon  it."  ^ 

No  one  knew  better  than  he  the  deterrent  power  of  a 
fleet  actively  in  being ;  and  away  he  held  northward,  intent 

^  To  Lord  Seaforth,  June  8th. 


June 5-6    VILLENEUVE   AND    THE    CONVOY  165 

to  prove  the  truth  of  his  theory.  Next  day  he  was  off 
Grenada.  Maurice's  news  that  the  enemy  had  not  yet 
moved  was  confirmed,  but  shortly  afterwards  he  was  met 
by  a  cruiser  from  Dominica  bringing  word  that  on  the 
evening  of  the  6  th,  three  days  before,  the  whole  Combined 
Fleet  had  been  sighted  off  the  south  end  of  Guadaloupe 
steering  north.  "  Whether  the  enemy's  object  is  to  attack 
Antigua  or  St.  Kitts,"  he  wrote  to  the  Admiralty,  "  or  to 
return  to  Europe  time  will  show,"  and  under  a  press  of  sail 
he  carried  on,  giving  successive  rendezvous  at  Montserrat 
and  Antigua. 

This  time  the  information  was  true.  It  was  early  on  the 
morning  of  June  5  th,  as  Nelson  was  steering  to  the  south- 
w^ard  for  Trinidad,  that  Villeneuve  had  moved  north,  *'  with 
the  intention,"  as  he  wrote  in  his  official  report,  "  of  making 
an  attack  on  the  Island  of  Barbuda."  ^  Passing  along  the 
lee  side  of  Dominica  the  French  saw  a  British  convoy  and 
its  escort  under  the  guns  of  a  protected  anchorage,  but 
they  left  it  alone.  Villeneuve  was  bent  on  reaching  Guada- 
loupe to  pick  up  another  battalion,  and  this  done  he  held 
on  his  way.  The  same  night — that  is,  the  6th — when 
Nelson  was  nearing  Tobago — he  was  steering  to  pass 
between  Antigua  and  Montserrat.^  "  At  ten  o'clock  in  the 
morning,"  he  proceeds,  "  after  having  doubled  Antigua,  we 
had  word  in  the  north-north-west  of  a  convoy  of  fourteen 
sail  under  escort  of  a  single  schooner.  I  ordered  a  general 
chase,  and  by  nightfall  the  whole  convoy  was  taken  except 
the  escort  ship."  ^ 