

The  decision  to  which  the  vice  of  the  Emperor's  scheme 

^  Journal  de  Reille :  Desbriere,  v.  681. 


i68       OPERATIONS   IN   THE   WEST   INDIES   June  12 

drove  the  two  entangled  Admirals  was  none  too  prompt. 
On  the  10  th,  as  they  were  transhipping  the  troops,  Nelson 
was  signalling  Montserrat  for  his  rendezvous.  Next  day 
he  sent  in  there  for  intelligence,  but  they  could  give  him 
none  of  any  use — nothing  indeed  but  a  report  from  an 
American  skipper  that  the  Combined  Fleet  had  left  Guada- 
loupe  with  the  intention,  as  it  was  supposed,  of  attacking 
Antigua.  To  Antigua  therefore  he  pushed,  but  only  to  find, 
as  he  approached  the  island,  no  sign  of  the  enemy.  He  was 
now  faced  with  the  necessity  of  making  a  decision  at  least 
as  great  and  really  more  difficult  than  that  he  had  come  to 
off  Cape  St.  Vincent  a  month  before.  On  the  morning  of 
the  12th,  as  he  waited  for  his  cruiser  to  bring  news  from 
the  shore,  he  was  again  in  the  same  uncertainty  as  that 
which  had  tormented  him  at  Gibraltar.  From  "  under 
Antigua  "  he  wrote  to  the  Admiralty :  "  If  I  hear  nothing 
of  the  enemy  at  Antigua  I  shall  stand  for  Prince  Rupert's 
Bay  [that  is,  back  to  Dominica]  and  form  my  judgment; 
but,  I  feel,  having  saved  these  colonies  and  two  hundred 
and  upwards  of  sugar-loaded  ships,  that  I  must  be  satisfied 
they  have  bent  their  course  for  Europe  before  I  push  after 
them."  Here  was  the  same  inspiration  divining  his  enemy's 
intention  and  the  same  restrained  determination  not  to  act 
on  inspiration  alone.  The  ink  was  not  dry  before  the 
information  he  awaited  was  obtained.  Word  came  in  that 
the  French  troops  which  had  been  taken  from  Guadaloupe 
had  come  back  and  disembarked.  Then  he  was  practically 
sure.  "  Therefore,"  he  wrote,  "  I  am  pushing  for  the  anchor- 
age of  St.  John's  [Antigua]  to  land  the  troops  and  hope  to 
sail  in  the  morning  after  them  for  the  Straits'  mouth." 

Thus  before  he  had  Carr's  intelligence  he  had  practi- 
cally made  up  his  mind,  and  Bettesworth,  in  the  Curieiix, 
was  sent  off  with  his  despatches  to  inform  the  Admiralty 
that  Villeneuve  was  on  his  way  back  and  that  he  was  after 
him.  In  the  evening  he  anchored  at  St.  John's  and  pro- 
ceeded to  disembark  his  troops.  By  morn  on  the  morrow 
they  were  all  ashore,  and  the  fleet  got  under  way.  Scarcely 
had  it  done  so  when  the  Nctley  came  in  to  remove  all  doubt 
from  his  mind  and  report  the  enemy  far  stronger  than  he 


June  13  NELSON    PURSUES  169 

had  thought.  Before  dark  she  had  counted  no  less  than 
thirty-two  sail.^  Carr's  report  of  the  enemy's  force  in  no 
way  altered  Nelson's  intention  to  get  at  them  if  he  could. 
It  rather  raised  his  hopes.  Instead  of  thirty  days,  he  was 
now  only  four  or  five  behind  Villeneuve,  and  there  was 
every  prospect  of  a  meeting.  True,  he  thought  it  probable 
the  Spaniards  would  be  detached  to  Havana,  but  the  possi- 
bility of  their  remaining  with  Villeneuve  was  faced  and  did 
nothing  to  check  the  chase.  He  would  not  even  retain 
Cochrane,  who  was  ordered  to  return  to  his  station.  Nelson 
was  content  to  keep  the  Spartiate,  and  so  had  eleven  of  the 
line  with  his  flag. 