

point  which  has  never  been  published.  It  was  related  by  Elliot,  after- 
wards Governor  of  St,  Helena,  to  Lieutenant  A.  H.  Hoskins,  K.N.,  afterwards 
Admiral  Sir  Anthony  Hoskins.  He  repeated  it  to  his  flag-lieutenant,  now 
Captain  Mark  Kerr,  who  has  kindly  given  it  to  me  as  he  wrote  it  down  at  the 
time,  as  follows :  '*  On  the  way  back  from  the  West  Indies  Nelson  was  walk- 
ing up  and  down  the  quarter-deck  talking  to  the  officer  of  the  watch,  who 
said,  •  I  wish  we  could  fall  in  with  Villeneuve,  sir.'  Nelson  :  '  Yes,  it  would 
be  very  satisfactory  to  know  where  he  is.'  The  officer  :  '  What  a  glorious  fight 
we  should  have,  sir!'  Nelson:  '  I  don't  think  I  should  fight  him.'  Officer: 
'  Not  fight  him  !  Why  all  the  way  out  you  were  dying  to  get  at  him.'  Nelson: 
'  All  the  way  out  he  was  getting  stronger  and  I  was  getting  weaker.  All  the 
way  home  I  am  getting  stronger  and  he  is  getting  weaker.  If  we  fell  in  with 
him  now  and  fought  him,  I  don't  doubt  we  should  beat  him,  and  it  would  be 
a  great  thing  for  my  personal  glory  ;  but  I  should  be  doing  my  country  a 
great  wrong.  I  know  that  in  a  week's  time  I  shall  get  reinforcements,  and 
he  will  get  none,  and  then  I  must  annihilate  him.'"  The  moral  of  the  story 
is  obvious,  but  as  it  stands  it  is  in  some  details  difficult  to  understand.  By 
Villeneuve's  growing  stronger  on  the  outward  voyage,  he  presumably  referred 
to  his  fleet  shaking  down  by  being  at  sea ;  but  Nelson's  growing  weaker  is 
curious,  since  we  had  a  squadron  in  the  West  Indies  and  the  allies  had 
nothing. 

1  Li-lettcrs,  326,  June  25th. 


I 
I 


1 


July  COCHRANE    PLAYS    THE    GAME  171 

Combined  Fleet  having  been  seen  steering  a  course  which 
pointed  to  its  intended  junction  with  the  Brest  and  Ferrol 
squadrons.  If  Nelson,  as  he  believed,  had  gone  to  the 
Straits,  the  crisis  would  be  acute.  In  a  moment  all 
thought  of  his  own  comfort  was  cast  aside.  With  the 
usual  insight  into  the  mind  of  the  Admiralty  he  decided 
to  send  both  the  ships  back  at  once  with  two  convoys  that 
were  due  to  sail.  "  Every  line  of  battle  ship  that  can  be 
spared,"  he  wrote  to  the  Admiralty,  "  from  hence  may  be 
wanted  in  the  Channel,"  and  almost  as  he  penned  the 
words  an  identical  order  was  being  drawn  up  at  the 
Admiralty.^ 

It  was  a  belief  of  the  old  Spaniards  that  Drake  had 
a  magic  mirror  in  which  he  could  see  all  the  movements 
of  his  enemies  and  count  their  numbers.  In  a  sense  it 
was  true,  and  in  that  sense  he  had  handed  it  on  to  his 
successors.  That  mirror  was  the  tradition  he  had  founded, 
and  they  had  polished  it  by  rich  experience  till  it  became 
a  living  instinct  for  naval  war  to  which  every  man  could 
turn  for  guidance.  Cochrane,  one  of  the  least  of  Drake's 
heirs,  could  see  in  it  plainly  the  stress  and  strain  that  was 
prevailing  in  home  waters,  and  it  told  him  the  crisis  of  the 
campaign  had  come,  as  indeed  it  had. 