

'  Captain  Nourse  of  the  Barhadoes  to  the  Admiralty  (In-lcttcrs,  2231), 
enclosing  the  merchants'  memorial  and  the  governor's  request. 

-  Carr  to  Nelson,  June  13th,  enclosed  in  Nelson  to  Marsden,  June  14th  : 
In-letters,  411.  See  below  p.  IBO  n.  James  gives  the  name  of  the  Netley  s 
commander  as  Richard  Harward  and  says  Nourse  was  with  him.  There  seems 
no  authority  for  either  statement. — Vol.  iv.  p.  351.  For  Carr's  previous  exploits 
see  Ibid.,  pp.  248-9.  He  was  still  in  comrannd  of  the  Netley  in  1807  when  she 
was  captured  by  a  French  frigate  and  brig. — Ibid.,  v.  466. 


juNEio  VILLENEUVE    DRIVEN    HOME  167 

At  the  same  time  Villeneuve  had  obtained  equally  im- 
portant information.  From  his  prisoners  he  learned  that 
the  British  Mediterranean  fleet  had  arrived  at  Barbadoes 
twelve  or  fourteen  strong.  It  was  what  he  had  dreaded  all 
along,  and  he  had  no  more  spirit  in  him.  "  This  force,"  he 
wrote,  "joined  to  that  of  Admiral  Cochrane,  which  is  about 
in  these  seas,  would  be  enough  to  balance  the  combined 
forces,  even  if  it  were  not  superior,  seeing  the  strength  of 
the  ships,  of  which  several  are  three-deckers."  In  his  eyes 
it  made  every  enterprise  against  the  enemy's  possessions 
impossible.  The  utmost  he  could  do  would  be  to  go  back 
to  Martinique  and  await  the  time  fixed  for  his  return  to 
Europe,  "  in  painful  inaction,"  as  he  said,  "  disastrous  to  the 
health  of  his  crews."  Even  that  would  take  ten  days  and 
might  expose  him  to  a  battle,  and  where  could  he  refit 
afterwards  ?  Even  a  victory,  which  he  clearly  did  not 
expect,  would  render  his  return  to  Europe  impossible.  The 
truth  was  he  found  himself  brought  up  against  one  of  the 
vital  defects  of  Napoleon's  ill-considered  plan.  There  it 
was  inevitably  staring  Villeneuve  in  the  face,  and  in  his 
distress  he  consulted  Gravina.  The  condition  of  the 
Spanish  crews  permitted  of  but  one  answer.  Ganteaume  or 
no  Ganteaume,  they  must  lose  not  a  moment  in  returning 
to  Europe.  Hastily  the  prizes  were  committed  to  a  frigate, 
the  local  troops  crowded  into  four  other  cruisers  to  be 
returned  to  their  garrisons,  and  on  June  10th  they  held 
away  with  all  speed  for  the  Azores. 

Was  ever  the  weakness  of  surprise  command  more 
strongly  exhibited  ?  Was  ever  clearer  proof  of  how  the 
apprehension  of  counter-surprise  by  an  active  and  un- 
located  force  always  neutralises  its  apparent  possibilities  ? 
''  We  have  been  masters  of  the  sea  for  three  weeks,"  wrote 
one  of  Villeneuve's  most  observant  officers,  "  with  a  landing 
force  of  7000  to  8000  men  and  have  not  been  able  to 
attack  a  single  island."  ^  Yet  Napoleon  could  still  dream 
of  conquering  the  world  by  a  few  hours'  command  of  the 
Channel. 