

With  the  exception  of  the  reduction  of  Diamond  Rock, 
this  capture  was  the  only  positive  result  of  the  operations 
from  which  Napoleon  hoped  so  much.     It  was  a  convoy 

^  Desbriere,  v.  679.  Colonel  Desbriere  again  reads  the  word  "  Barbade." 
But  his  text  shows  the  letter  has  been  incorrectly  transcribed  in  other  places, 
and  it  is  certain  that  Villeneuve  wrote  or  meant  to  write  "  Barbude "  or 
"  Barboude."     See  notes  below. 

^  The  transcript  which  Colonel  Desbriere  used  reads  ^'  deharquer  entre 
Antir/oa  et  Mont-Serrat,'"  but  he  has  kindly  informed  me  that  the  word  should 
certainly  be  "■  dthouquer''  Anglice  "disembogue."  This  course  would  not  lead 
anywhere  but  to  Barbuda. 

^  Desbriere,  v.  680.  The  Journal  dc  Reille,  as  Colonel  Desbri^re's  trans- 
cript reads  it,  has  "  d  10  heures  du  matin,  etant  sous  le  vent  de  Barbade,  les  vigies 
ont  signals  un  convoi  dc  quin::e  voiles.''^  Here  "  Barbade  "  must  clearly  mean 
' '  Barbuda. " 


1 66       OPERATIONS   IN   THE   WEST   INDIES    juni:; 

homeward-bound,  which  had  assembled  in  the  usual  way  at 
St.  John's  Road,  Antigua,  to  await  the  coming  of  the  other 
divisions  from  the  southward  with  the  regular  escort.  But 
the  merchants,  on  hearing  that  the  Rochefort  ships  had 
joined  Villeneuve  and  that  the  Combined  Fleet  with  10,000 
men  was  about  to  attack  the  island,  had  fallen  into  so  un- 
fortunate an  alarm  that  they  had  memorialised  the  governor 
to  demand  immediate  convoy  from  the  local  cruisers.  On  the 
governor's  representations  Captain  Nourse,  the  senior  officer 
at  St.  John's,  had  ordered  Lieutenant-Commander  William 
Carr  of  the  Netley  schooner  to  take  them  home.^  The 
reward  of  their  panic  was  to  fling  their  ships  into  Ville- 
neuve's  lap.  Carr,  of  course,  could  do  nothing.  The  moment 
he  sighted  the  advanced  frigates  of  the  enemy  he  signalled 
his  merchantmen  to  make  away  and  save  themselves,  while 
he  kept  the  Netley  lying-by  to  watch  the  enemy  till  they 
were  within  gunshot.  Then  as  he  ran,  chased  by  two 
frigates,  he  had  to  watch  the  French  fleet  spread  to  pick  up 
his  dispersing  convoy.  By  sunset,  when  he  succeeded  in 
dropping  his  pursuers,  he  had  seen  the  whole  of  it  captured. 
He  was  noAV  in  as  difficult  a  position  as  a  young  officer 
could  well  have  to  face.  He  had  nothing  left  to  escort 
home,  but  he  had  despatches  for  the  Admiralty  from 
Captain  Nourse,  his  senior  officer.  On  the  other  hand,  he 
had  located  the  enemy  and  knew  their  approximate  force. 
What  ought  he  to  do  ?  Should  he  carry  on  home  with  his 
despatches  or  return  and  report  to  the  Admiral  the  vital 
information  upon  Avhich  he  had  stumbled.  In  his  dilemma 
he  took  the  extreme  step  of  opening  the  despatches.  He 
found  in  them  nothing  but  Nourse's  explanation  of  why  he 
had  ordered  the  Netley  home.  All  doubt  was  then  removed 
as  to  the  direction  in  which  his  duty  lay,  and  he  promptly 
decided  to  return  to  find  Nelson.'^ 