

The  problem  was  thorny,  and  it  is  clear  that  for  a  while 
Barham  was  in  two  minds  about  it.  As  he  first  drafted  the 
minute  it  ran :  "  My  idea  is  to  send  the  intelligence  im- 
mediately to  Admiral  CornwalHs,  who  may  be  directed  to 
strengthen  Sir  Robert  Calder's  squadron  with  as  many 
ships  as  will  make  them  up  to  15."  This  was  in  accord- 
ance with  the  memorandum  of  the  previous  day,  which 
provided  that  "  Rochefort  is  to  be  kept  strictly  blockaded." 
But  on  second  thoughts  it  must  have  occurred  to  him  that 
the  risk  of  weakening  the  Ushant  position  was  too  great 
— that  in  fact  he  was  trying  for  something  beyond  the 
resources  that  were  immediately  available.  The  only  sound 
solution  was  to  concentrate  on  the  two  most  vital  points. 
For  this  the  Rochefort  blockade  must  be  sacrificed,  and 
Stirling  be  ordered  to  join  Calder.    Accordingly  before  com- 


July 9  HIS   AMENDED    PLAN  183 

pleting  the  minute  he  amended  it  in  this  sense,  and  in  its 
final  form  it  ran  as  follows — the  italicised  passages  being 
those  which  he  inserted  :  "  My  idea  is  to  send  the  intelli- 
gence immediately  to  Admiral  Cornwallis  who  may  be 
directed  to  strengthen  Sir  Robert  Calder's  squadron  with 
the  Rochefort  squadroii  mid  as  many  ships  of  his  oivn  as  will 
make  them  up  to  15,  to  cruise  off  Cape  Finisterre  from  10 
^0  50  leagues  to  the  west.  To  stand  to  the  southward  and 
westward  with  his  own  ships,  at  the  same  distance  for  10 
days.     Cadiz  to  be  left  to  Lord  Nelson.      9th  July."  1 

On  the  minute  as  thus  amended  the  famous  orders  of 
July  9  th  were  framed.  No  strategical  decision  has  received 
more  unanimous  applause,  yet  now  that  we  know  Barham 
hesitated,  it  is  open  to  any  one  to  speculate  as  to  which 
was  the  better  alternative.  As  things  turned  out  the  first 
disposition  would  have  met  the  case  amply.  It  would  have 
saved  a  deal  of  trouble  from  the  Rochefort  squadron  and 
that  trouble  might  well  have  been  much  worse  than  it  was, 
for  in  the  weeks  before  Trafalgar  it  seriously  endangered 
Nelson's  communications,  and  not  only  was  it  an  abiding 
menace  to  our  trade,  but  it  came  near  to  losing  us  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Yet  such  judgments  ex  fost  facto  must 
be  made  with  caution.  It  must  be  remembered  that  to 
devote  a  squadron  to  blockading  Rochefort  was  to  play 
Napoleon's  game.  It  was  what  he  expected  and  desired, 
and  if  Barham  in  his  tried  wisdom  refused  to  permit  any 
consideration  to  loosen  his  grip  on  the  Ushant  position  few 
will  be  found  to  assert  he  was  not  right.  "  When  in  doubt 
make  sure  of  the  mouth  of  the  Channel,"  Avas  a  maxim  too 
long  sanctified  by  its  fruits  to  be  lightly  transgressed. 