

Still  he  could  not  conceal  from  himself  that  Villeneuve 
might  be  caught  and  blockaded  in  Fort  de  France,  and  in 
his  heart  he  doubted  whether  the  great  combination  could 
ever  come  off.  His  memorandum  concluded  with  yet 
another  change  of  plan,  in  which  ultimate  reliance  is 
placed  on  the  Brest  squadron  alone.  Two  lines  of  operation 
on  which,  it  might  act  were  submitted  for  Decres'  opinion. 
If  Ganteaume  saw  a  chance  of  getting  out,  should  he  shape 
his  course  as  though  he  were  going  to  attack  Ireland,  but 
instead  of  doing  so,  plunge  into  the  Channel  and  come 
before  Boulogne  with  his  own  squadron  alone ;  or  should  he 
first  go  down  and  pick  up  the  Ferrol  squadron  and  enter  the 
Channel  with  thirty-three  of  the  line  ?  "  It  is  an  involved 
game  (jeu  mile)  no  doubt,"  he  wrote ,  as  indeed  it  was,  "  but 
one  that  will  always  be  somethir  •  to  fall  back  upon,  if 
Villeneuve  gets  blockaded.  .  .  .  Wi  te  of  it  all  the  same  to 

M 


178         HOW   BARHAM    MET   THE    CRISIS        julv  i 

Ganteaume  as  a  general  theme  to  find  out  what  he  thinks."  ^ 
What  Ganteaume  did  think,  as  we  shall  see  presently  in  his 
crushing  reply,  was  that  it  ignored  the  fundamental  con- 
sideration on  which  the  British  system  of  defence  was 
securely  based. 

Two  days  after  Napoleon  had  penned  this  final  apprecia- 
tion, the  outlook  of  the  British  Admiralty  was  cleared  at 
last  by  certain  information  that  Villeneuve  had  been  to 
the  West  Indies.  He  had  reached  Martinique,  it  was 
said,  on  May  13th  with  sixteen  of  the  line.  The  news 
was  brought  to  Liverpool  by  a  "  running  ship " — one  of 
those  adventurous  merchantmen  who  preferred  the  enjoy- 
ment of  a  hungry  market  to  the  unprofitable  security  of 
a  convoy.  Sent  up  to  Pitt  by  the  Mayor,  it  was  in  his 
hands  by  July  1st.  The  same  day  he  forwarded  it  to  the 
Admiralty  with  an  intimation  that  he  had  decided  to  re- 
issue Sir  Eyre  Coote's  orders  for  the  West  Indies.  All  this 
time  the  expedition  had  been  Avaiting  at  Cork  for  instruc- 
tions. Coote  was  now  directed  to  embark  his  troops  imme- 
diately and  the  Board  was  required  to  provide  him  with 
convoy.^ 

This  resolution  of  the  Cabinet  by  no  means  indicates  that 
Napoleon  had  succeeded  in  diverting  Barham's  attention  to 
the  AVest  Indies.  It  was  merely  a  precaution ;  for  the  same 
day  the  news  was  received  the  Admiralty  sent  off  to  Col- 
lingwood  and  Calder  a  Avarning  to  be  on  their  guard  against 
Villeneuve's  sudden  return.^  Barham,  in  the  ripeness  of  his 
rich  experience,  evidently  had  as  little  doubt  as  Napoleon 
as  to  what  would  be  the  effect  of  Nelson's  breaking  in  upon 
the  Caribbean  Sea.  Indeed  every  British  Admiral  in  Eurc 
pean  waters  was  expecting  Villeneuve's  reappearance  some-] 
where.  At  this  very  time  Collingwood  was  writing:  "  I  think] 
it  not  impossible  I  shall  have  all  these  fellows  coming  from] 
the  West  Indies  again  before  the  hurricane  months,  unless] 
they  sail  from  there  directly  for  Ireland,  which  I  have] 
always  had  an  idea  was  their  plan ;  for  this  Bonaparte  hi 