


i8o  HOW   BARHAM    MET    THE    CRISIS 

astray,  but  not  for  a  moment  did  Barham  neglect  the  alter- 
native possibility  that  the  Combined  Squadron  might  return 
to  a  French  port  in  the  Bay.  Indeed  his  minute  is  mainly 
devoted  to  providing  for  this  eventuality.  His  plan  for 
dealing  with  it  is  based  on  striking  Villeneuve  before  he 
can  get  within  distance  of  his  destination  whatever  it  might 
be,  or  in  touch  with  any  of  the  three  blockaded  squadrons 
in  Brest,  Rochefort,  or  Ferrol.  It  was  obvious  that  one  or 
more  of  the  blockading  squadrons  must  be  used  for  the 
counter-stroke.  The  problem,  therefore,  was  how  to  deliver 
the  blow  at  a  sufficient  distance  to  seaward  and  at  the  same 
time  prevent  any  of  the  blockaded  squadrons  from  moving. 
The  solution  was  worthy  of  his  genius.  He  would  use  the 
Ferrol  and  Brest  squadrons  for  his  striking  force,  each  on 
its  own  line,  but  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  raise  either 
blockade.  "  Let  the  Ferrol  squadron,"  he  wrote,  "  get  three 
additional  frigates  and  be  ordered  to  stretch  north-north- 
west of  Ferrol  by  means  of  frigates  and  show  themselves 
off  Ferrol  itself  occasionally  and  at  such  undetermined 
periods  as  to  disguise  the  real  object  of  their  cruise."  As  for 
Rochefort,  it  is  to  be  kept  strictly  blockaded  ;  but  he  adds, 
"  Let  the  fleet  off  Brest,  reduced  for  the  moment  to  12  sail, 
but  reinforced  by  the  Defence,  Goliath,  and  Zealous  to  15, 
be  ordered  to  stretch  out  to  the  south-south-west  in  a 
direct  line  for  Cape  Finisterre,  and  by  means  of  frigates 
keep  up  communication  with  the  Ferrol  squadron." 

The  plan  was  certainly  daring,  and  particularly  in  his 
handling  of  the  Brest  squadron.  At  first  sight  it  seems 
to  entail  a  serious  loosening  of  the  defensive  basis  of  the 
campaign.  It  appeared  to  involve,  moreover,  not  only  the 
possibility  of  opening  the  Channel,  but  also  of  the  Ferrol 
squadron  escaping  to  break  the  Rochefort  blockade.  Barham 
was  not  blind  to  this  aspect  of  his  disposition,  but  he  cal- 
culated, and  as  it  was  to  prove  afterwards,  calculated 
rightly,  the  risk  had  no  real  existence.  "  Before  these 
plans,"  he  argues,  "  were  developed  to  the  enemy  the  cause 
for  their  existence  would  have  ceased;  that  is,  the  Com- 
bined Fleet  would  have  returned  for  Europe,  or  the  uncer- 
tainty with  regard  to  their  motions  would  be  at  an  end." 


Julys  ARRIVAL    OF    THE    CURIEUX  i8i 

At  any  rate  the  moral  effect  of  success-  would  be  so  great 
as  to  justify  whatever  risk  was  entailed.  "  The  interception 
of  the  fleet  in  question,"  he  concludes,  "  on  its  return  to 
Europe  would  be  a  greater  object  than  any  I  know.  It 
would  damp  all  future  expeditions  and  would  show  to 
Europe  that  it  might  be  advisable  to  relax  in  the  blockad- 
ing system  occasionally  for  the  express  purpose  of  putting 
them  in  our  hands  at  a  convenient  opportunity."  In  other 
words,  the  moral  effect  would  be  to  relieve  materially  the 
almost  unendurable  strain  of  the  great  blockade ;  for  when- 
ever any  part  of  it  was  temporarily  relaxed  the  enemy 
would  suspect  a  trap  was  being  laid  for  him. 