

Such  was  the  masterly  plan  with  which  Barham  in- 
tended to  meet  the  difficult  and  uncertain  situation.  Forty- 
eight  hours  proved  the  soundness  of  his  calculations.  Before 
the  enemy  could  know  what  the  new  disposition  meant,  he 
rightly  judged  the  fog  would  be  cleared  and  it  would  not 
be  wanted.  Before  his  draft  could  even  be  reduced  to  the 
form  of  orders  the  light  came.  For  at  eleven  o'clock  at 
night  on  July  8  th  Captain  Be ttes worth  of  the  Ciorieux, 
direct  from  Nelson,  rattled  up  to  the  door  of  the  Admiralty. 

On  the  7th,  as  Barham  was  quietly  working  out  his 
plans,  the  Cnrieux  was  anchoring  at  Plymouth.  She  had 
made  the  passage  from  Antigua  in  twenty-four  days.  In 
hot  haste  Bettesworth  had  posted  to  London,  but  only  to 
find,  so  the  story  goes,  that  Lord  Barham  had  gone  to  bed 
and  that  no  one  dared  to  rouse  him.  At  an  early  hour  the 
old  man  awoke  and  fell  into  a  fury  when  he  knew  what  had 
been  awaiting  him.  For  it  was  not  only  Nelson's  despatches 
Bettesworth  had  to  deliver,  but  having  taken  a  more 
northerly  course  than  the  Admiral,  who  was  making  for  the 
Straits,  he  had  sighted  Villeneuve  and  determined  his 
course.  It  was  on  June  19th,  as  high  as  latitude  33°  12' 
and  in  longitude  58° — that  is,  some  900  miles  north-north- 
east of  Antigua — that  he  had  seen  him,  and  the  Combined 
Fleet  was  still  standing  to  the  northward.  Till  there  could 
be  no  doubt  Bettesworth  had  shadowed  them,  and  then 
made  all  sail  home  with  his  all-important  news.  That 
Villeneuve  had  stood  so  far  to  the  northward  could  only 


1 82  HOW    BARHAM   MET    THE    CRISIS       juiyq 

mean  he  was  making  for  the  Bay,  and  not,  as  both  Barham 
and  Nelson  expected ,  for  the  Straits.  What  was  to  be  done  ? 
In  half-an-hour  Barham  had  decided. 

The  historian  James,  who  was  provided  with  official 
information  on  the  incident  by  the  First  Lord's  secretary, 
tells  us  that  without  waiting  to  dress  and  growling  that 
seven  or  eight  hours  had  been  lost,  he  wrote  out  the  neces- 
sary orders  and  sent  them  off.  The  story  has  been  doubted, 
but  it  has  certainly  some  foundation.  Amongst  his  papers 
there  still  exists  a  rapid  minute  which  he  dashed  oR'  to 
meet  the  situation.  It  is  written  at  speed  with  several 
interlineations  on  a  small  scrap  of  paper  in  eloquent  con- 
trast to  the  long  memorandum,  which  he  had  just  com- 
pleted. Cadiz  was  no  longer  the  centre  of  anxiety,  and 
with  extraordinary  decision  and  directness  for  a  man  of 
eighty  years  he  recasts  in  half-a-dozen  lines  his  previous 
scheme.  Calder  Avas  clearly  in  the  most  immediate  danger 
and  also  in  the  best  position  for  striking  Villeneuve  before 
he  could  get  a  landfall.  But  to  reinforce  him  from  Corn- 
wallis,  as  he  had  intended,  was  not  w^ithout  danger.  To 
Cornwallis  might  almost  equally  well  fall  the  chance  of  first 
contact,  and  if  he  were  weakened  it  was  now  doubtful 
whether  ships  detached  from  him  to  Ferrol  could  be  re- 
placed from  his  reserve  in  time. 