

*  To  Marmont  and  to  Decres,  Parma,  June  27th  :  Correspojidnncc,  x.  566  8. 
2  To  Decres,  Milan,  June  6th  :  Corirspondance,  x.  482. 


June  ROCHEFORT    AND    FERROL  175 

Missiessy  finally  gave  up  the  command  on  the  ground  of 
ill-health. 

Napoleon's  first  idea  Avas  to  replace  him  by  Rosily,  an 
old  officer  whose  reputation  rested  on  his  cruiser  work 
in  years  gone  by  under  SufFren.  But  he  was  tired  of  old 
Admirals  and  resolved  to  inaugurate  a  change.  "  There  is 
no  good  blinking  the  fact,"  he  wrote  to  Decres  before 
Missiessy's  final  resignation,  "  henceforth  I  must  choose 
my  Admirals  from  young  officers  of  thirty-two  years  of  age, 
and  I  have  enough  cruiser  captains  with  ten  years'  active 
service  to  select  six  to  whom  I  may  entrust  commands.  .  .  . 
Meanwhile  make  the  Rochefort  squadron  sail  with  Missiessy 
or  some  one  else."  ^ 

The  man  Decres  chose  was  Allemand,  Captain  of  the 
Magnanime,  one  of  Missiessy's  ships  of  the  line.  He  was 
reported  to  have  shown  high  ability  and  spirit  during  the 
expedition  and,  as  events  were  to  prove,  no  selection  could 
have  been  better.  His  influence  was  felt  immediately.  By 
the  end  of  the  month  there  was  so  much  activity  in  the 
port  that  Graves  was  regretting  the  two  of  the  line  that 
had  been  removed  from  him  on  his  first  optimistic  reports. 
The  squadron  was  accordingly  brought  up  again  to  five  of 
the  line  and  Graves  himself  was  relieved  by  Admiral  Stirling, 
in  the  Glory  9  8 — an  intrepid  officer,  who  had  been  serving  as 
Navy  Commissioner  at  Jamaica  and  had  just  come  home 
on  promotion  to  fly  his  flag  for  the  first  time. 

At  Ferrol  it  was  equally  difficult  to  conceal  the  immi- 
nence of  the  crisis.  Calder's  intelligence  system  was  perfect. 
An  Englishman,  who  had  been  both  British  and  American 
consul  before  the  war,  had  remained  on  in  the  latter  capa- 
city and  was  furnishing  the  Admiral  with  regular  informa- 
tion. Napoleon  had  just  sent  down  orders  that  Gourdon 
and  his  Spanish  colleague,  Admiral  de  Grandallana,  should 
move  the  thirteen  of  the  line,  which  they  now  had  complete 
for  service,  out  to  Coruna,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  put  to  sea 
the  moment  Villeneuve  and  Gravina  appeared.  Before 
Gourdon  could  acknowledge  the  order  and  point  out  its 
impossibility   owing    to    the    lack    of   anchorage    room    at 

^  June  14th:  Ibid.,  p.  563.     Lacour-Gayet,  Louis  XVI.,  p.  661. 


176  HOW    BARHAM    MET    THE    CRISIS  July 

Corufia,  it  was  in  Calder's  hands.  The  consul  had  sent 
it  out  to  him  by  an  English-American  skipper  who  sailed 
on  July  3rd.  Calder  had  just  been  reinforced  with  the 
two  seventy-fours  which  Graves  had  reported  he  could 
spare  from  before  Rochefort,  but  he  had  had  to  send  home 
his  largest  three-decker,  the  Eoyal  Sovereign,  to  refit.  This 
left  him  with  but  nine  sail  of  the  line,  only  two  of  which 
were  three-deckers.  He  did  not  think  such  a  squadron 
sufficient  for  the  blockade,  but  assured  his  chief  "  that 
everything  in  his  power  should  be  done  for  his  majesty's 
service  with  such  a  force  as  their  lordships  should  deem 
adequate  to  the  critical  service  he  was  employed  upon."  ^ 