

At  all  events  it  was  approved  at  the  time  by  his 
colleagues.  It  went  forward  as  amended,  and  upon  it  were 
framed  the  following  orders  :  "  Admiral  Cornwallis — In- 
telligence being  received  by  H.M.  Brig  Ciorieux  that  the 
combined    French    and   Spanish   squadrons,  which    passed 

^  Barham  Papers.  "Orders  and  Statements,  1805."  The  last  interline- 
ation must  have  been  made  before  the  minute  was  complete,  for  the  pen- 
ultimate sentence  refers  to  it.  The  important  change  as  to  the  Rochefort 
squadron  must  therefore  have  been  made  before  it  left  his  hands  and  without 
any  one  else's  suggestion. 


1 84         HOW   BARHAM    MET    THE    CRISIS        July  9 

Antigua  on  the  8tli  ultimo,  had  been  seen  by  that  vessel  in 
latitude  33°  12' N.,  long.  58°  W,  steering  at  first  N.  by  E. 
but  afterwards  altering  their  course  to  N.N.W. ;  and  there 
being  grounds  to  suppose  that  it  is  their  intention  to  make 
some  port  in  France  or  Spain ;  you  are  hereby  required  and 
directed  to  strengthen  the  squadron  off  Ferrol  under  the 
orders  of  Vice-Admiral  Sir  Robert  Caldcr  with  the  ships 
ofT  Rochefort  under  Rear-Admiral  Stirling,  and  to  instruct 
the  Vice-Admiral  to  proceed  without  loss  of  time  off  Cape 
Finisterre,  from  whence  he  is  to  cruise  for  the  enemy  to  the 
distance  of  30  to  40  leagues  to  the  westward  for  the  space 
of  six  or  eight  days.  You  are  further  required  and  directed 
to  stretch  with  the  fleet  under  your  immediate  command 
about  the  same  distance  to  the  south-westward  and  for  the 
same  space  of  time ;  at  the  expiration  of  which  the  several 
squadrons  are  to  return  to  their  respective  stations. — 
(Signed)  Barham,  J.  Gambler,  Garlics."  ^ 

It  was  all  done  in  about  three  hours.  By  nine  o'clock 
in  the  morning  the  Admiralty  messenger  was  away,  and  as 
he  thundered  down  the  Portsmouth  road  Napoleon  was  in 
the  act  of  leaving  Turin  for  Boulogne  "  to  change  the 
destinies  of  the  Avorld." 

^  Barham  Papers.  The  discovery  of  the  text  of  this  order  finally  disposes 
of  the  story  that  Barham  issued  it  without  consulting  his  colleagues.  We  now 
know  both  Gambler  and  Lord  Garlies  signed  it  in  the  usual  way.  The  story 
as  furnished  officially  to  James  the  historian  was  that  Bettesworth  arrived  "at 
a  late  hour  at  night,"  that  "  orders  were  immediately  sent"  to  Cornwallis  to 
recall  Stirling,  &c.  See  "  Note  for  Mr.  James,"  Ibid.  ("  Drafts  of  Orders  and 
Statements  in  the  hands  of  J.  D.  Thompson.")  There  must,  however,  have 
been  some  hurry  and  irregularity  ;  for  the  order  does  not  appear  in  the  series 
of  Secret  Orders  at  the  Kecord  Office.  It  would  look  as  though  Barham  would 
not  waste  half-an-hour  to  have  it  copied  and  that  it  did  not  go  forward  in 
the  usual  way  through  the  Secretary.  The  laconic  form  in  which  the  orders 
were  drafted  bears  no  trace  of  the  established  secretarial  manner. 