

It  was  an  error  not  confined  to  Napoleon  or  to  his  age — 
to  assume  that  the  energy  and  spirit  with  which  British 
politicians  play  the  Parliamentary  game  denote  incapacity 
for  war  and  real  statesmanship,  or  at  least  neglect  and 
blindness  in  large  imperial  issues.  Still  it  is  difficult 
to  believe  that  so  great  a  soldier,  who  was  not  wont  to 
underrate  his  enemies,  could  really  have  expected  by  means 
so  trivial  to  gull  the  old  hands  against  whom  he  was  play- 
ing into  breaking  their  hold  on  the  long-tried  position. 
Yet  he  himself  sent  Marmont  elaborate  orders  on  the 
subject.  "The  English,"  he  wrote,  "have  at  Yarmouth 
no  more  than  three  vessels  of  a  higher  rate  than  sixty- 
fours.  I  want  to  draw  more  to  that  point  to  further  my 
operations."  Marmont  himself  is  to  keep  away  from  the 
Texel,  but  in  the  second  week  of  July  he  is  to  embark 
a  division,  move  the  squadron  as  far  out  in  the  roads  as 
safety  will  permit,  and  arrange  a  mise  en  scene  which  will 
suggest  a  distant  expedition.  Then  on  July  20th  he  is 
suddenly  to  put  all  his  army  in  motion,  get  it  afloat  in 
the  course  of  the  Aveek  and  embark  in  person  with  pilots 
for  the  voyage  to  Ireland  north-about.  The  Dutch 
Admiral  and  his  officers  are  not  to  be  told  the  real 
meaning  of  the  movement.  "  It  will  look,"  he  says,  "  as 
if  you  were  only  waiting  for  a  gale  to  drive  off  the  English 
blockading  squadron  and  let  you  out,  which  will  necessarily 
compel  the  English  to  keep  there  a  squadron  of  at  least 
ten  of  the  line  and  give  them  all  kinds  of  uneasiness." 
Finally,  in  view  probably  of  one  of  the  many  strokes  he 

^  From  Bologna,  June  22nd  :  Correspondnnce,  x.  556. 


174  HOW    BARHAM    MET    THE    CRISIS  June 

was  contemplating  for  the  Rochefort  squadron,  Marmont  was 
warned  not  to  think  his  embarkation  was  a  mere  parade.  It 
was  quite  possible  it  might  become  a  real  operation.^ 

The  disturbing  power  of  an  army  by  the  sea  with  trans- 
ports and  escort  alongside — a  specially  English  device — is 
often  questioned.  Here  at  least  is  evidence  of  Napoleon's 
faith  in  it — a  faith,  it  must  be  said,  that  was  not  a  little 
justified  by  the  confusing  effect  which  his  garrisons  in  the 
Neapolitan  ports  had  had  upon  Nelson's  judgment;  and  in 
this  case,  as  we  shall  see,  it  did  have  a  certain  effect. 

Though  the  idea  of  combining  the  Rochefort  squadron 
with  Marmont's  corps  attracted  Napoleon's  imagination  for  a 
while,  he  never  regarded  it  very  seriously.  What  he  really 
hoped  to  get  out  of  the  isolated  squadron  for  the  effect  he 
wanted  was  a  raid  as  far  possibly  as  the  mouth  of  the 
Baltic,  which  would  threaten  British  commerce  and  a 
descent  in  Ireland.  The  main  trouble  was  to  find  a  com- 
mander fit  to  conduct  so  daring  and  hazardous  an  enterprise. 
With  Missiessy  Napoleon  was  disgusted,  and  particularly 
for  the  lack  of  energy  and  initiative  he  had  displayed  in 
the  West  Indies.  "  I  choked  with  indignation,"  he  told 
Decres,  "  when  I  read  he  had  not  taken  the  Diamond ; "  and 
again,  "  That  Rock  will  be  an  eternal  monument  of  shame 
to  this  expedition."  He  had  counted  on  the  squadron 
being  out  again  within  a  week  of  its  arrival,  but  in  place  of 
the  news  he  expected  he  received  lamentations  from  the 
old  Admiral  that  he  was  ill,  that  he  doubted  if  he  was  fit 
for  sea  again,  and  that  he  wanted  to  go  to  Paris  to  see  his 
wife.  Unable  to  think  of  any  one  to  replace  him,  Napoleon 
after  his  manner  fell  to  coaxing  and  trying  to  appeal  to  his 
ambition.  Decres  was  to  tell  him  he  was  the  link  on  which 
the  great  combination  depended  and  that  he  could  not  go 
to  Paris.  "  However,"  he  wrote,  "  I  think  Madame  Missiessy 
is  a  reasonable  woman  with  a  little  ambition.  Get  her  to 
go  to  Rochefort.  It  is  only  right  that  Admiral  Missiessy 
should  see  his  wife.  Let  her  make  him  understand  he 
must    finish    the   campaign."  ^     But   all   was    useless,  and 