

^  In-lcttcrs,  326,  July  13th  and  17th  ;  Admimlty  Minutes,  154.  The  minute 
enjoining  the  return  of  the  two  ships  with  any  convoys  that  were  ready  is 
dated  July  11th,  that  is,  in  the  same  week  that  Cochrane  decided  to  return 
them  on  his  own  responsibility. 


CHAFIER  XII 

HOW  LORD  BARHAM  MET  THE  CRISIS 

Towards  the  end  of  May  Cornwallis  had  reported  himself 
fit  for  duty,  but  owing  to  the  dislocation  caused  by  Ville- 
neuve's  escape  and  Missiessy's  return  the  Admiralty  decided 
it  was  better  to  postpone  making  any  change  in  the  main 
command.  By  the  end  of  June,  however,  when  the  situa- 
tion had  been  restored,  he  received  orders  to  relieve  Lord 
Gardner,  who  was  to  return  to  his  old  post  at  Cork  and 
resume  the  management  of  the  cruisers  on  the  Irish 
station. 

The  centre  of  disturbance  had  passed  away  westward. 
No  one  as  yet  could  tell  it  was  moving  back  again,  and 
in  the  home  area  there  was  calm.  As  the  hour  approached 
for  which  Napoleon  had  worked  so  long  and  elaborately,  he 
was  more  than  ever  bent  on  lulling  his  enemy  into  security, 
or  at  least  diverting  British  attention  from  his  focal  point, 
He  was  still  in  Italy  employing  the  last  days  of  his  sojourn 
in  developing  the  military  and  naval  resources  of  his  new 
kingdom,  and  in  particular  at  Genoa,  whose  ancient  status 
he  intended  to  revive  with  a  naval  yard  and  arsenal.  His 
continued  absence  so  far  from  Boulogne  would  serve  well, 
he  believed,  to  deepen  the  impression  he  wished  to  create, 
and  seeing  what  was  in  his  mind  he  could  not  approve  of 
Ganteaume's  desire  to  make  continual  sorties.  Such  de- 
monstrations could  only  serve  to  keep  the  enemy  on  the 
alert.  He  even  doubted  the  wisdom  of  keeping  the  ^vhole 
fleet  out  in  the  Bertheaume  anchorage  and  wished  to  have 
some  of  the  ships  sent  back  into  port.  "  My  intention,"  he 
wrote  to  Decres,  ''  would  be  to  lull  the  English  to  sleep  as 
much  as  possible  about  the  Brest  squadron,  in  a  natural 

manner,  however  (sans  affectation),  and  direct  all  their  atten- 

172 


June  MARMONT'S    FUNCTION  173 

tion  on  the  Tex  el.     Write  in  this  sense  to  Marmont 

I  myself  will  cause  a  picket  of  my  guard  to  march  on 
Utrecht,  and  on  my  arrival  in  Paris,  I  shall  announce  my 
departure  for  that  place.  That  will  make  them  afraid  that 
Villeneuve  is  going  there  and  will  induce  them  to  weaken 
before  Brest,  which  is  the  great  point."  He  assured  Decres 
the  trick  would  serve.  "  There's  nothing,"  he  said,  '*  so 
short-sighted  as  the  English  Government.  It  is  a  govern- 
ment absorbed  in  party  politics  {chicanes  inUrieures),  which 
turns  its  attention  wherever  there  is  a  noise."  -^ 