

^  To  Decrt^s,  June  28th  :   Correftpondance ,  x.  573. 
-  AdmlraHy  In-lettcrs  {Sec.  of  State),  4199,  July  Ist. 
^  Admiralty  Minutes,  154,  July  1st. 


July  7  HIS    FIRST    PLAN  179 

as  many  tricks  as  a  monkey.  I  believe  their  object  in 
the  West  Indies  to  be  less  conquest  than  to  draw  our 
forces  from  home.  The  Rochefort  squadron  seems  to  have 
had  nothing  else  in  view."  ^  And  these  were  the  men  that 
Napoleon  thought  he  had  deceived. 

The  only  uncertain  point  was  the  home  port  for  which 
Villeneuve  would  make.  Should  it  be  Cadiz  or  any  point  in 
the  Mediterranean  there  was  cause  for  considerable  anxiety. 
How  weak  was  the  position  at  the  mouth  of  the  Straits, 
Barham  did  not  know  till  July  7th.  On  that  day  a  despatch 
from  Collingwood  reached  the  Admiralty  informing  them  that 
on  second  thoughts  he  had  obeyed  their  order  to  send  two 
of  the  line  to  Nelson.^  As  he  had  been  told  to  divide  his 
squadron  with  Bickerton,  Barham  correctly  inferred  from 
this  that  he  would  have  only  four  of  the  line  with  his  flag, 
and  the  old  First  Lord  sat  down  in  the  solitude  of  his  room 
to  grapple  with  the  situation.  The  result  was  one  of  those 
priceless  strategical  minutes  in  which  the  old  British  lore 
lies  embalmed  and  almost  forgotten.^ 

It  begins  with  an  exact  statement  of  the  actual  dis- 
position of  the  force  available.  ''Now  off  Brest,  22;  off 
Rochefort,  5  ;  off  Ferrol,  including  2  from  Rochefort,  12;" 
and  two  others  immediately  available,  besides  5  in  reserve 
to  replace  ships  coming  in  to  refit.  This,  he  says,  meant 
from  38  to  40  of  the  line  "  manned  and  stored,"  disposable 
for  Brest,  Rochefort,  and  Ferrol,  that  is,  for  the  "  Western 
Squadron."  What  he  proposed  was  to  detach  immediately 
from  Cornwallis  ten  of  the  line  to  reinforce  Collingwood 
off  Cadiz.  "  Because,"  he  explains,  "  I  take  it  for  granted 
that  only  four  remain  there.  That  makes  a  strong  force 
at  the  very  spot  where  they  may  be  expected."  He  was  at 
one,  therefore,  with  Nelson  as  to  Villeneuve's  most  probable 
destination.     To  this  extent  Napoleon  had  led  them  both 

1  To  Dr.  Carlyle,  July  2nd  :  Bloclcade  of  Bre&t,  ii.  296. 
^  In-lettcrs,  410,  June  8th,  endorsed  "Approved,  July  7th." 
^  This  unknown  document  is  one  of  the  chief  treasures  of  the  Barham 
Papers — a  holograph  in  a  volume  labelled  "  Drafts  of  Orders  and  Statements 
in  the  hand  of  Lord  Barham."  It  is  undated,  but  as  it  is  specially  founded 
on  the  information  of  Collingwood's  havino-  detached  his  two  of  the  line  to 
Nelson,  it  must  have  been  written  on  the  7th  or  8th.  On  the  9th,  as  we  shall 
see,  it  was  cancelled  on  fresh  information. 