

Further  south  Collingwood  was  also  on  the  alert,  keep- 
ing a  close  watch  on  Cadiz  with  three  of  his  battle  squadron, 
and  holding  the  Straits  with  the  fourth  off  Cape  Spartel 
and  a  frigate  at  Gibraltar.  Inside  the  Mediterranean 
Bickerton  with  his  battle  squadron  was  in  a  position  off 
Cartagena  to  cover  the  passage  of  Craig's  expedition  while 
his  cruisers  formed  its  escort  and  secured  it  against  an 
attack  from  the  Toulon  frigates.  These  vessels  as  well  as 
others  in  Genoa  were  also  being  watched  by  the  cruiser 
squadron  which  Nelson  had  committed  to  Captain  Capel, 
and  he  had  been  blockading  one  of  them  in  Villefrance, 
the  port  of  Nice.  The  disposition  Capel  had  adopted  was 
principally  directed  to  preventing  any  expedition  passing  to 
Sardinia.  The  Excellent  was  still  at  Naples — a  comfortable 
pledge  of  British  policy  and  a  symbol  of  the  power  that  was 
at  Elliot's  back,  and  Bickerton,  realising  her  political  im- 
portance, had  refrained  from  calling  her  to  his  flag.  At 
Malta,  Sir  Alexander  Ball  had  a  fifty-gun  ship  and  four  or 
five  cruisers  for  the  protection  of  the  Levant  trade.  There 
was  also  a  frigate  at  Constantinople,  which  had  gone  thither 
with  our  Minister,  and  at  Trieste  was  a  brig  for  commerce 
protection.  The  military  command  of  the  Adriatic  was 
further  secured  by  a  Russian  squadron  at  Corfu,  which  by  the 
end  of  July  amounted  to  four  of  the  line  and  ten  cruisers.^ 

1  Gourdon  to  Beurnonville,  Jitly  7th  :  Desbriere,  v.  627.  Calder  to  Gardner, 
July  5th,  and  Gardner  to  Marsd  n,  July  6th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  298-9. 

^  Knight  to  Nelson,  July  iri.h'.  and  same  to  Collingwood,  August  5th: 
Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS.  3430^' -.Napoleon  to  Decr5s,  June  22,  25,  27  :  Carre- 
gporulance,  x.  555,  564,  568. 


June  28  NAPOLEON'S    APPRECIATION  177 

Such,  then,  was  the  actual  naval  situation  at  the  end  of 
June.  It  remains  to  consider  how  Napoleon  appreciated  it, 
and  we  have  it  all  in  an  elaborate  memorandum  he  prepared 
for  Decres.  He  saw  eighteen  of  the  line  before  Brest,  six 
before  Kochefort,  eight  before  Ferrol,  and  not  more  than 
four  in  the  Mediterranean.  Of  Nelson  and  CoUingwood  he 
knew  nothing.  The  only  information  he  had  was  a  false 
report  that  they  had  met  off  Cape  St.  Vincent  on  May  15  th, 
and  had  then  disappeared.  Possibly  they  had  gone  to- 
gether to  the  West  Indies,  but  he  did  not  think  this  likely. 
He  persuaded  himself  that  while  Nelson  proceeded  there 
alone  to  join  Cochrane,  CoUingwood  had  been  sent  to  the 
East  Indies.  If  this  were  true,  Nelson  would  lose  several 
days  at  Barbadoes  making  his  junction  with  Cochrane  and 
filling  up  his  ships,  and  in  the  interval  Villeneuve,  having 
heard  of  his  arrival,  would  have  time  to  get  clear  away. 
The  only  result,  then,  of  Nelson's  chase  would  be  that 
Villeneuve  would  not  wait  his  allotted  time  and  the  crisis 
would  come  a  little  sooner  than  was  intended.  He  would 
meet  the  situation  by  making  an  earlier  return  to  Boulogne. 
''  I  shall  hasten  my  coming,"  he  says,  "  by  some  days, 
because  I  think  Nelson's  arrival  in  America  may  push 
Villeneuve  to  leave  for  Ferrol." 