

To  such  considerations  Napoleon  had  always  shut  his 
eyes,  and  Ganteaume's  reply  filled  him  with  resentment. 
"  I  cannot  in  the  least  understand  Ganteaume's  immobility," 
he  wrote  to  Decres  on  the  18th.  "  How  is  it  possible  that, 
he  who  is  in  possession  of  all  my  projects,  lets  the  enemy 
disappear  without  making  any  movement  ?  I  anticipated 
in  my  instructions  that  the  enemy  must  disappear  from 
Brest.  Now  for  four  days,  it  seems,  they  have  not  been 
seen,  and  this,  added  to  the  disappearance  of  the  Rochefort 
squadron,  can  hardly  leave  any  doubt  about  Villeneuve's 

the  "  English  and  Irish  Channels  "  (that  is,  the  squadrons  of  Cornwallis  and 
Stirling  and  that  of  Ireland),  30  of  the  line,  including  11  three-deckers. 
Those  "  In  Port  and  Fitting,"  i.e.  the  Keserve,  number  9  of  the  line,  includ- 
ing the  Royal  Sovereign,  besides  half-a-dozen  "guard-ships."  The  French 
Intelligence  Department  probably  obtained  the  list  from  some  other  English 
newspaper.  The  Irish  battle  squadron  no  longer  existed  as  a  separate  unit. 
It  had  been  absorbed  into  the  Western  Squadron. 

^  Here  he  clearly  counts  three-deckers  as  2  units.  Thus  30  of  the  line 
with  12  three-deckers  would  equal  42  units.  His  own  fleet  was  22  with  1 
three-decker,  which  would  equal  23  units,  but  only  21  were  ready. 


190  CORNWALLIS    OPENS    BREST  jui.v  i8 

iirriviil."  Ho  was  in  a  fever  of  impatience,  for  he  believed 
the  crisis  had  come  some  days  earHer  than  he  had 
expected.  Decres  was  therefore  to  send  Ganteaume  a 
peremptory  order  to  drive  oft*  the  British  cruisers  and  see 
Avhat  was  behind  them.  If  he  found  the  battle  squadron 
had  moved  far  out  to  meet  Villeneuve  he  himself  was  to  go 
straight  to  Boulogne.' 

Two  days  later  the  Emperor  heard  from  his  spies  of  the 
arrival  of  the  Cwrieux  and  the  news  she  brought.  It  did 
nothing  to  shake  his  belief  that  Villeneuve  was  close  at 
hand.  It  must  be  some  other  news  that  had  led  to  the 
alteration  of  the  British  disposition,  for  he  was  convinced 
the  Admiralty  could  not  have  made  up  their  minds  so 
quickly  and  got  the  orders  off  in  time.  It  must  be  that 
their  home  cruisers  had  located  Villeneuve,  and  he  issued 
orders  for  immediate  action.  Berthier  was  told  to  get  the 
Grand  Army  embarked  at  once.  ''  Every  moment  presses," 
Napoleon  urged ;  "let  the  four  Marshals  know.  There  is 
no  longer  an  instant  to  lose."  The  orders  to  Ganteaume 
were  repeated  with  increasing  emphasis.  Napoleon  himself 
Avrote  him  a  letter  telling  him  he  was  to  go  out  and  fight 
any  force  before  Brest,  if  he  found  it  less  than  sixteen  of 
the  line.  If  the  enemy  were  gone  to  Ferrol  or  far  to  sea 
to  meet  Villeneuve,  he  was  to  go  straight  to  Boulogne. 
"  There,"  he  said  in  his  sanguine  way  and  in  spite  of  what 
Ganteaume  had  written,  "  there  all  is  prepared ;  and  there, 
master  of  the  sea  for  three  days,  you  will  enable  us  to  end 
the  destiny  of  England.  .  .  .  When  you  receive  this  letter 
we  shall  be  in  person  at  Boulogne-sur-Mer,  and  all  will  be 
on  board  and  moored  outside." 