

1  July  IStli:  Desbricre,  v.  639.  ^  j„iy  iq^^^.  jtid.,U2. 


1 88  CORNWALLIS    OPENS    BREST  July  i6 

Finally  Allemand's  orders  were  completely  changed.  In 
all  probability  the  appearance  of  Villeneuve  off  the  coast  of 
Spain  would  cause  the  raising  of  the  Rochefort  blockade. 
Instead,  however,  of  going  out  according  to  his  previous 
instructions  in  order  to  make  diversions  on  the  coast  of 
Ireland  and  in  the  Narrow  Seas,  he  was  to  wait  for  the 
word  from  Gourdon  and  then  go  straight  to  Ferrol.  But 
it  was  all  too  late.  The  day  the  order  was  penned  Stirling 
moved  away,  and  on  the  morrow  Allemand,  seeing  the  coast 
clear,  put  to  sea — under  his  old  instructions.  In  pursuance 
of  them  he  pushed  out  due  west  straight  for  the  point  which 
Cornwallis  had  reached. 

Meanwhile  Napoleon  had  received  another  blow,  which 
may  well  have  been  the  cause  of  the  doubtful  tone  in  his 
order  to  Villeneuve.  Ganteaume  had  sent  him  his  answer 
to  the  theme  he  had  propounded.  If  the  Brest  squadron 
got  to  sea  should  it  rush  the  Channel,  or  should  it  go  first 
to  pick  up  the  Ferrol  squadron  ?  Ganteaume  knew  too 
much  of  his  profession  to  have  the  slightest  doubt  and  too 
much  character  not  to  state  it.  "  If,"  he  wrote,  *'  the  fleet, 
in  leaving  Brest,  was  fortunate  enough  to  elude  the  vigilance 
of  the  blockading  squadron,  there  exists  no  doubt  that  it 
ought  to  make  for  Ferrol  in  preference  to  Rochefort.  .  .  . 
But  if,  in  accordance  with  the  first  part  of  the  question  in 
your  despatch,  we  venture  into  the  Channel  with  no  more 
than  twenty- two  vessels  which  compose  our  fleet,  it  would 
not  be  long  before  we  were  observed,  or  before  the  vessels 
we  had  eluded  would  get  contact.  To  these  they  would  not 
have  failed  to  join  the  whole  of  the  force  at  their  disposal 
on  the  coasts  and  in  the  ports  of  England,  and  then  it 
seems  to  me  the  chances  would  be  against  us.  The  Channel 
is  too  narrow  a  sea  to  allow  of  being  there  without  detec- 
tion or  of  manoeuvring  with  success  in  the  face  of  superior 
force."  Cornwallis,  he  calculated,  had  twenty-one  sail,  of 
which  tAvelve  were  three-deckers,  besides  five  of  a  supposed 
Irish  squadron,  and  fifteen  in  reserve.^     "  To  attempt,"  he 

^  Desbriere,  v.  640,  July  14th.  Ganteaume' s  estimate  appears  to  be  based 
on  a  list  that  was  afterwards  printed  in  the  Naval  Chronicle,  vol.  xiv.  It  is 
an  "  Abstract  of  the  British  Efficient  Naval  Force,"  and  purports,  as  there 
printed,  to  be  corrected  up  to  July  20tb,  but  is  not  so  corrected.     It  gives  for 


juLYiS  GANTEAUME'S   VIEW  189 

continues,  "  an  expedition  so  important  as  that  of  Boulogne 
in  a  sea  so  stormy  as  the  Channel,  and  one  which  is  not 
always  practicable  for  the  boats  employed  in  that  expedi- 
tion, I  think  we  must  be  able  to  count  on  having  the 
passage  free  for  at  least  a  fortnight.  With  only  twenty- 
one  vessels  we  should  be  in  constant  fear  of  seeing  thirty 
suddenly  appear,  whose  force  would  be  nearly  double  that 
of  our  fleet."  ^  Here,  then,  from  Ganteaume's  own  pen  is 
reason  enough  why  the  movement  opening  Brest  entailed 
little  risk.  Did  Barham  see  into  his  mind  when  he  gave 
the  order,  or  Cornwallis  when  he  more  than  obeyed  it  ?  It 
is  not  unlikely.  At  all  events  they  knew  that  since  1744 
no  enemy,  however  numerous,  had  dared  to  penetrate  the 
Channel  with  an  undefeated  fleet  behind  it,  and  in  that  year 
it  was  only  the  weather  that  saved  it  from  destruction  as  it 
saved  the  Armada.  Both  cases  ended  in  a  disastrous  sauve 
qui  pent.  It  was  the  kernel  of  our  traditional  defensive 
strategy,  as  it  stood  firmly  based  on  the  Western  Squadron. 
No  fleet  could  hope  to  reach  Dover  without  being  brought 
to  action,  ,and  the  further  it  got  the  greater  were  the 
advantages  of  the  home  fleet  and  the  more  crushing  the 
results  of  failure. 