

Surely  never  did  a  great  commander  talk  more  wildly. 
Had  he  lost  his  head,  or  was  it  just  a  theatrical  display  ? 
The  picture  he  painted  had  no  relation  whatever  to  the 
actual  possibilities  of  the  situation.  The  flotilla  returns  of 
July  22nd  and  August  3rd  show  that  he  had  filled  the 
ports  of  embarkation  with  over  two  thousand  vessels  of  all 
kinds,  scheduled  to  carry  some  150,000  men  and  nearly 
10,000  horses.-     So  vast  a  throng  of  shipping  fairly  choked 

1  Saint-Cloud,  July  18Lb  ;    Correnpondtmce,  xi.  22.       -  Desbrit^re,  v.  465-6. 


July  20-31         STATE    OF    THE    FLOTILLA  191 

the  ports,  and  yet  more  Avere  under  orders  to  concentrate 
from  the  Flemish  depots.  Elaborate  organisations  existed 
on  paper,  plan  had  succeeded  plan,  all  beautifully  sym- 
metrical but  none  of  them  corresponding  in  the  least  to  the 
conditions  which  actually  existed.  Instead  of  150,000  men 
ready  to  embark,  there  were  only  90,000;  instead  of 
10,000  horses,  there  were  less  than  3000.  Boulogne  itself 
was  blocked  with  transport  for  73,000  men,  and  there  were 
only  45,000  to  use  it.  Worse  still,  no  one  had  any  idea 
how  long  it  would  take  to  get  the  flotilla  to  sea.  The 
movement  had  never  been  tried  as  a  whole ;  no  plan  of 
operation  had  yet  been  settled,  and  it  passed  the  wit  of 
man  to  devise  one.^ 

"  If,  then  " — so  runs  the  judgment  of  those  best  able  to 
decide — "  in  an  organisation  essential  for  the  success  of  his 
enterprise,  where  order  and  rapidity  of  embarkation  were 
factors  of  the  first  importance,  his  genius  indulged  itself  in 
systems  simply  symmetrical,  bearing  no  relation  either  to 
the  actual  state  of  the  troops  and  their  service,  or  to  the 
means  of  embarkation  accumulated  in  the  ports,  we  must 
surely  ask  ourselves  if  he  ever  seriously  intended  to  make 
a  sudden  departure."  ^ 

What  indeed  could  he  have  meant  ?  In  spite  of  his 
assurance  to  Ganteaume,  he  made  no  attempt  to  leave  Paris, 
and  yet  the  orders  were  not  withdrawn.  It  mattered  little, 
for  before  the  Admiral  could  act  on  them,  Cornwallis  had 
completed  his  eight  days'  cast  for  Villeneuve  and  was  back 
again  before  the  port. 

After  reaching  the  latitude  of  Rochefort  on  July  16th 
he  did  not  remain  there,  but  began  working  back  at  once 
towards  the  north-east,  with  his  fleet  disposed  in  battle  order 
and  exercising  battle  tactics.  On  the  18th  he  returned  to 
his  assigned  position  from  thirty  to  forty  leagues  south-west 
of  Ushant,  and  in  this  region  he  remained  cruising  to  and 
fro   in  open  order.     On  the   20th,  as  his  advanced  ships 

^  Appareillage  general  dc  la  flottille  imperiale.  Dispositions  proposees  par  Ir 
chefmilitaire,  August  3rd  (Desbriere,  v.  398).  Of  this  the  Editor  says  :  "Such 
a  report  is  past  comment ;  the  contradictions  and  material  errors  are  altogether 
too  glaring."     For  details  of  the  final  organisation,  see  ante,  p.  15,  note. 