

Of  all  the  moves  in  the  campaign  none  will  seem  quite 
so  daring  as  this.  It  will  be  observed  that  it  went  some- 
what beyond  the  orders  which  Barham  had  given  him  ;  to 
stretch  30  to  40  leagues  south-west  of  Ushant.  Cornwallis 
clearly  had  his  own  view  of  the  most  likely  ground  to 
secure  his  chief's  objects,  and  he  saw  it  approximately  at  a 
point  where  the  latitude  of  Finisterre  intersected  the  direct 
line  between  Ferrol  and  Ushant.  In  this  position  he  might 
hope  to  intercept  Villeneuve  on  two  of  his  three  possible 
courses.  It  was  equally  good  whether  the  enemy  made 
Ferrol  and  then  came  on  to  Brest,  or  was  making  for 
Rochefort  direct  and  running  down  its  latitude  in  the  usual 
way.  But  to  all  appearance  it  left  the  direct  line  to  Brest 
dangerously  open  at  the  critical  moment.  Still,  that 
Villeneuve  would  take  the  direct  line  and  not  seek  to 
avoid  an  action  by  a  more  devious  course  was  improbable, 
and  in  any  case  the  approaches  to  that  port  were  well 
covered  by  the  squadron  cruisers.  What,  however,  seems 
the  most  serious  risk  of  all  was  that  the  move  left  Gan- 
teaume  free  to  come  out  and  reach  the  Channel.  The 
danger  looks  all  the  more  grave  since,  as  we  know,  the 
last  word  which  Ganteaume  had  had  from  Napoleon  was  a 
suggestion   that   he    should   attempt  this  very  stroke    the 


juLyio-i6    NAPOLEON   AT    FONTAINEBLEAU  187 

moment  he  saw  a  chance.  Imagine,  then,  the  excitement 
which  CornwalHs's  withdrawal  caused  at  Paris  when  it  was 
reported,  quickly  followed  as  it  was  by  news  of  the  dis- 
appearance of  the  squadron  before  Rochefort. 

On  July  10th,  the  very  day  that  Cornwallis  received 
the  new  disposition,  Napoleon  reached  Fontainebleau.  He 
had  come  in  three  days  and  a  half  from  Turin ;  but  for  his 
eagerness  it  had  not  been  nearly  fast  enough,  and  he  was 
scolding  at  the  state  of  the  roads  and  grumbling  that 
the  Empress  had  insisted  on  stopping  everywhere  for 
her  meals.  Once  at  work  again,  plans  poured  out  from 
him  more  feverishly  than  ever.  The  first  was  one  for 
elaborating  his  feint  from  Holland  by  a  sham  expedition, 
which  Marmont  was  to  prepare  at  Helvoetsluys.^  Next 
were  produced  a  long  set  of  instructions  destined  to  meet 
Villeneuve  off  Ferrol.  Once  more  it  was  impressed  upon 
him  that  his  object  was  to  be  master  of  the  Straits  of 
Dover,  if  it  were  only  for  four  or  five  days.  Wide  discretion 
was  given  him  in  the  means  he  might  adopt.  He  might 
join  both  the  Brest  and  Rochefort  squadrons,  or  either  of 
them,  as  he  saw  fit ;  and,  if  only  the  latter,  he  might  go 
north-about  and  join  the  Texel  squadron.  If  as  the  result 
of  having  to  fight  an  action  he  found  the  object  was  beyond 
his  power  to  attain,  he  was  to  content  himself  with  releasing 
the  Ferrol  squadron  and  taking  it  down  to  Cadiz,  but  on  no 
account  was  he  to  enter  Ferrol.  Clearly  Napoleon  was  con- 
templating failure  with  an  eye  behind  him  on  action  in  the 
Mediterranean,  and  Decres'  draft  of  the  instructions  em- 
phasises the  apprehension.  "  His  Majesty,"  he  wrote  to 
Villeneuve,  "desires  that  the  fleet  under  your  command 
shall  carry  through  the  great  project  of  the  invasion  of 
England,  conceived  so  long  since  by  his  genius,  but  so 
much  time  has  gone  by  since  the  issue  of  your  original 
orders,  so  many  things  may  have  happened,  that  in  his 
wisdom  the  Emperor  considers  he  should  not  give  you  an 
absolute  order  to  that  effect  in  spite  of  his  persistence 
in  this  great  design,  but  rather  rely  on  your  sagacity  and 
boldness."  2 