

^  Log  of  the  Glory.  Letters  of  First  Lieutenant  of  Egypticnvc  :  BlncTcadc 
of  Brest,  ii.  318.  At  the  coujt-martial  Stirling  said  he  could  not  remember 
the  date,  but  agreed  it  must  have  been  the  12th. 

2  As  the  Guillaume  Tell  and  the  last  survivor  of  the  Nile,  she  had  struck 
to  the  Foudroyant  in  1800.  Tlie  Malta  by  English  "  Burden  "  measurement 
was  2255  tons  against  an  average  of  2000  of  the  98's,  but  the  OS's,  of  course, 
had  a  higher  "  displacement."  When  she  received  her  carronades  on  being 
brought  into  the  service  she  threw  a  broadside  of  1200  lbs.,  or  about  200  lbs. 
more  than  the  OS's. 


July  12-22         VILLENEUVE'S    APPROACH  195 

and  get  touch  with  Ferrol.  It  was  to  this  end  that 
Barham  had  directed  that  he  should  proceed  off  Cape 
Finisterre,  and  cruise  thence  thirty  or  forty  leagues  to 
the  westward  for  six  or  eight  days/ 

By  July  19th  he  was  already  about  a  hundred  miles 
west  by  north  of  Finisterre.  Here  he  got  fresh  news  of 
Nelson  just  a  month  old.  On  June  1 7th,  when  Nelson  was 
about  six  hundred  miles  north  from  Antigua  in  chase  of 
Villeneuve,  he  had  spoken  an  American  cutter  which  had 
seen  the  Combined  Squadron  on  its  way  home  three  days 
before.  Any  doubt  which  Nelson  may  have  had  of  his 
adversary's  destination  was  thus  removed.  He  believed 
indeed  he  was  hard  on  Villeneuve's  heels,  and  must  catch 
him  before  he  could  make  his  port.  Full  of  this  hope,  on 
June  19th,  he  had  sent  away  the  Martin  sloop  to  warn 
Gibraltar  and  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  Decade  frigate  to 
carry  the  news  to  Lisbon  for  Ferrol  and  Ushant. 

This  news  now  reached  Calder  by  the  Lisbon  packet, 
and  he  began  to  work  north-westward  to  cross  Villeneuve's 
probable  track,  believing  he  must  be  somewhere  close  at 
hand.  Nor  was  he  mistaken.  On  the  12th,  the  day 
Stirling  left  Rochefort,  Villeneuve  had  actually  been  within 
three  hundred  miles  of  the  coast  about  due  west  of  Oporto, 
but  there  the  prevailing  northerly  winds  forced  him  to  go 
about,  and  for  four  days  he  had  to  stretch  back  to  the 
westward  before  he  could  make  his  latitude.'^  It  was  not 
till  the  1 7th  that  he  was  again  able  to  head  to  the  eastward 
for  Ferrol. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22nd  Calder  was  some  three 
hundred  miles  west  by  north  of  that  port.  Here  having 
reached  the  limit  of  his  cruising  ground  he  wore  S.W.  by 
W.,  and  expecting  contact  at  any  moment  signalled  for  the 
fleet  to  prepare  for  action  and  to  close.^  He  had  two 
advanced  ships,  the  Defiance  and  Ajax,  and  his  two  frigates 

^  Court-martial,  Calder's  defence  ;  Naval  Chronicle,  xv.  164.  Lords  of 
the  Admiralty  to  Cornwallis,  July  9th  :  Barham  Papas  {ante,  p.  184). 