


CHAPTER   XIII 

CORNWALLIS    OPENS    BREST 

CoRXWALLis  joined  the  fleet  off  Brest  in  the  Ville  de  Paris 
110^  on  July  7th,  the  same  day  that  the  Curieux  reached 
Plymouth,  and  after  Gardner  took  his  leave  he  found 
nineteen  of  the  line  with  his  flag.  On  the  9  th  the  Terrible 
74,  on  her  way  home  from  Ferrol  to  refit,  gave  him  the 
information,  which  Calder  had  obtained  from  the  American 
Consul,  that  the  enemy  were  under  orders  to  move  to 
Coruna  to  be  ready  for  Villeneuve.  Scarcely  had  he 
received  this  intimation,  which  told  him  that  the  hour  of 
action  was  at  hand,  when  a  despatch  vessel  arrived  from 
the  Port  Admiral  at  Plymouth  Avith  Bettesworth's  news  that 
Villeneuve  was  making  for  the  Bay.  Cornwallis  immedi- 
ately sent  it  on  to  Stirling  and  Calder,  with  a  warning  to 
be  on  their  guard  against  being  surprised  or  caught  em- 
bayed. At  the  same  time  he  was  joined  by  Sir  Richard 
Strachan  in  the  Caesar  80,  whom  he  placed  in  command  of  an 
inshore  squadron  of  five  of  the  line.  But  no  sooner  was  this 
disposition  made  than  Barham's  orders  arrived  to  upset  it. 
By  the  evening  of  the  12  th  the  necessary  directions  were 
on  their  way  to  Stirling  and  Calder,  and  Cornwallis,  having 
left  a  cruiser  squadron  of  six  sail  to  watch  Brest,  was 
moving  out  and  away  to  the  south-westward  in  pursuance 
of  Barham's  plan  of  operations. 

With  his  flag  he  had  now  a  splendid  battle  squadron  of 
twenty  sail,  which,  including  as  it  did  no  less  than  seven 
three-deckers  and  three  80-gun  ships,  Avas  greatly  superior 
to  that  of  Villeneuve  and  Gravina.     His  instructions,  it  will 

^  This  was  not  the  ship  Rodnej'  took  in  1783,  but  a  new  first-rate  built  at 
Chatham  in  1795.  On  her  pre-carronade  armament  she  threw  a  broadside  of 
1236  lbs.    With  her  68-lb.  carronades  it  must  have  been  over  1500  lbs. 

1S5 


i86  CORNWALLIS    OPENS    BREST       July  12-16 

be  remembered,  <as  finally  drafted  were  "  to  stand  to  the 
south-westward  30  to  40  leagues  for  10  days,"  and  he 
interpreted  them  with  the  freedom  that  was  obviously  in- 
tended. At  first  ho  stretched  about  south-south-west,  "  in 
the  direct  line  for  Finisterre,"  as  Barham's  original  orders 
had  provided.  This  course  he  held  for  about  100  miles 
and  then  turned  up  to  the  north-westward,  crossing  the 
natural  approaches  to  Brest  until  he  reached  a  rendezvous 
he  had  given  from  70  to  80  miles  south-west  of  Ushant, 
and  there  he  remained  till  the  evening  of  the  15th.  So  far 
not  a  sign  of  the  enemy  had  been  found,  and  Cornwallis 
seems  to  have  conceived  a  strong  impression  that  they 
were  not  making  for  Brest  at  all.  No  letter  exists  to 
enable  us  to  see  into  his  mind.  All  we  know  is  that, 
leaving  a  cruiser  on  the  rendezvous,  he  now  stretched  away 
south  down  to  the  latitude  of  Rochefort. 