

Calder's  action  off  Finisterre  is  one  that  has  been  little 
regarded.  Dimly  seen  in  the  penumbra  of  Trafalgar,  and 
through  the  cloud  of  a  court-martial,  which  had  nothing 
to  do  with  it,  its  tactical  significance  has  escaped  serious 
investigation.  Yet  its  place  in  the  history  of  tactics  was 
surely  worth  appraising,  if  only  for  the  sake  of  the  school 
to  which  Calder  belonged.  The  three  schools  under  which 
the  final  development  of  sailing  tactics  had  taken  place 
were  those  of  Rodney,  Howe,  and  Jervis.  Rodney's,  after  a 
long  and  successful  rivalry,  had  been  supplanted  by  that  of 
Howe.  The  finish  and  precision  which  Kempenfelt's  genius 
had  given  its  system  had  carried  it  beyond  anything  that 
had  yet  been  seen,  and  it  still  dominated  the  service.  Of 
this  school  Nelson  was  an  adherent,  if  indeed  his  eclectic 
mind  can  be  said  to  have  belonged  to  anything  less  than 
all  schools.  He  certainly  had  a  strong  leaning  to  the  free- 
handed school  of  Jervis,  which  differed  widely  from  the 
other  two,  and  it  was  in  this  school  that  Calder  had  been 
trained.  It  is,  therefore,  no  matter  of  surprise  if  a  study 
of  the  facts  should  suggest  that  the  experience  of  this 
neglected  action  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  most  brilliant 
conception  of  the  Trafalgar  memorandum.     In   any  case 


194  CALDER'S   ACTION  July  12-15 

the  indications  of  its  influence  on  the  tactics  which  Nelson 
employed  are  striking  enough  to  call  for  the  closest  atten- 
tion to  every  attainable  detail. 

It  was  in  the  evening  of  July  12th  that  the  cruiser 
which  Cornwallis  sent  to  Stirling  brought  him  his  orders 
to  raise  the  blockade  of  Rochefort  and  join  Calder.^  In 
the  night  he  slipped  away,  and  on  the  15  th,  as  Cornwallis 
was  making  his  bold  stretch  to  the  southward,  Barham's 
second  concentration  was  complete.  Waiting  only  an  hour 
or  two  for  darkness  to  conceal  his  movement,  Calder 
stole  away  in  his  turn  for  his  appointed  station  to  the 
westward,  leaving  a  brig  to  keep  a  close  watch  on  the 
Ferrol  squadron. 

His  own  force  noAv  numbered,  besides  four  cruisers, 
fifteen  of  the  line,  of  which  four  were  of  98  guns,  and 
one,  the  Malta,  a  splendid  80-gun  ship  of  greater  burden 
than  any  of  the  three-deckers."  The  remaining  ten,  with 
the  exception  of  the  Dragon,  a  powerful  seventy-four,  were 
all  small  and  old  two-deckers,  two  being  of  sixty  guns  only. 
Still  as  the  combined  force  he  was  to  meet  was  supposed 
to  number  only  sixteen  with  no  three-deckers,  he  could  go 
on  his  Avay  with  a  light  heart,  so  far  at  least  as  Villeneuve's 
fleet  was  concerned. 

With  what  he  was  leaving  behind  him  it  was  different. 
Stirling  had  to  report  that  at  Rochefort  he  had  left  nine  of 
the  line  and  several  frigates  ready  to  sail,  and  there  was 
now  nothing  to  prevent  their  joining  the  Combined  Squad- 
ron in  Ferrol.  He  knew,  moreover,  that  a  chain  of  signal 
stations  had  been  established  from  Ferrol  westward  along 
the  coast  in  order  to  give  w^arning  of  Villeneuve's  approach, 
and  enable  Gourdon  to  come  out  to  meet  him  the  moment 
he  appeared.  His  only  chance  of  success  then  was  to 
strike  and  crush  Villeneuve  before  he  could  make  the  land 