

2  See  the  chart  in  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  p.  50. 

^  Signal  52:  "  Keep  in  closer  order  by  closing  towards  the  leading  ship  or 
Admiral."  The  fleet  was,  of  course,  cruising  at  the  time  and  not  in  order  of 
sailing.     In  cruising  each  division  followed  its  flag  in  no  regular  formation. 


196  CALDER'S    ACTION  July  22 

spread  as  usual  six  or  seven  miles  ahead,  while  the  Dragon, 
his  best  seventy-four,  had  been  chasing  a  strange  sail  about 
the  same  distance  to  leeward.  The  wind  was  light,  about 
north-west,  and  the  weather  misty  enough  to  reduce  the 
range  of  vision  very  low.  But  shortly  before  noon  the 
Defiance,  was  able  to  make  the  signal  for  a  strange  fleet  of 
twenty-four  sail  and  then  twenty-seven  to  the  south-south- 
west. Caldcr  at  once  bore  away  towards  them  to  the 
south-west,  and  as  he  did  so  he  formed  close  order  of 
sailing  in  two  columns  and  cleared  for  action.^ 

The  noon  positions  of  the  opposed  flagships  show  that 
the  bodies  of  the  two  fleets  were  then  about  sixteen  miles 
apart,  and  so  thick  was  the  weather  that  for  two  hours 
neither  could  make  anything  of  the  other.  Villeneuve 
had  his  squadron  in  sailing  order  in  three  columns,  the 
Spaniards  to  starboard  and  to  leeward,  and  a  light  division 
of  two  of  the  line  and  two  frigates  thrown  forward."^  His 
course  was  about  east  direct  for  Ferrol,  but  when  his  light 
division  reported  the  advanced  ships  of  the  enemy  he  altered 
it  like  Calder  more  towards  them  to  find  out  what  they 
were.  About  one  o'clock  his  light  division  was  able  to 
report  a  British  fleet  of  twenty-one  sail  approaching  him, 
whereupon  he  signalled  to  form  the  close-hauled  line  of 
battle  on  the  Spaniards  and  to  clear  for  action.  At  this 
time  it  became  brighter,  and  the  Defiance  and  Ajax  were 
able  to  make  out  the  strangers  definitely  as  an  enemy 
with  ships  of  the  line.  On  taking  in  their  signal  Calder 
merely  reduced  his  intervals  by  half  a  cable  and  held  on 
as  he  was.^     No  attempt  was  made  to  weather  his  opponent, 

^  By  the  Signal  Book  Instructions  of  1799  the  intervals  in  close  order  were 
to  be  from  1  h  to  2  cables  {i.e.  300-400  yards),  Art.  xix.  p.  121.  Art.  ii.,  p.  127, 
gives  it  at  2  cables,  and  the  distance  between  the  columns  as  a  mile  and  a 
half.  The  diagram  (Plate  I.),  however,  which  gives  a  fleet  of  fifteen  sail 
exactly  the  same  as  Calder's  shows  a  mile  only  between  the  columns.  The 
practice  probably  was  to  vary  it  with  the  size  of  the  fleet.  (See  A  System  of 
Naval  Tactics,  1797,  p.  170.)  Length  of  ships  of  the  line  averaged  about  GO 
yards.  Eight  ships  with  seven  intervals  of  2  cables  gave  a  column  3280  yards 
long — that  is,  1'64  mile  on  sea  reckoning  of  10  cables  to  the  mile.  Calder's 
fleet  in  close  order  must  have  covered  about  Ih  square  miles.  In  open  order 
the  intervals  were  from  ;>  to  4  cables,  which  with  eight  ships  might  give  a  line 
of  over  3  miles. 