

Immediately  after  opening  fire  Gravina  found  he  had 
reached  the  rearmost  ship  of  his  own  fleet,  and  in  accord- 
ance with  verbal  orders  he  had  received  from  Villcneuve  in 
passing,  he  hauled  to  the  wind  and  stood  west-south-west 
across  the  French  Avake  to  cover  their  rear.  It  was  not 
for  three-quarters  of  an  hour  that  Calder  knew  what  had 
happened.  At  that  time  he  was  hailed  by  the  Ajax,  the 
Herds  second  astern,  who  had  tacked  after  Gardner.  She, 
however,  had  hove-to,  and  getting  engaged  with  two  of  the 
enemy  she  had  been  driven  out  of  the  line  to  leeward,  and 
had  thought  best  to  bear  up  to  Avarn  the  Admiral,  who  had 
just  reached  the  point  for  tacking.^  There  was  nothing  for 
it  now  but  to  confirm  the  movement.  By  this  time  six 
ships  had  followed  Gardner's  lead.  The  flagship  was  the 
seventh,  and  Calder,  hoisting  the  "  General "  to  tack  in 
succession,  went  about  himself. 

Thus  his  well-meant  attack  was  spoiled  by  circumstances 

1  James  (vol.  iii.  360)  says  the  Ajnx  tacked  at  5.45  and  immediately  bore 
up  to  the  Admiral  instead  of  supporting  Gardner,  and  he  condemns  Captain 
Brown  for  his  conduct.  But  Brown's  Log  says  he  began  to  engage  at 
5.3.5,  tacked  at  5.50.  and  hove-to  abreast  of  two  two-deckers,  one"  on  the 
weather  bow  and  one  on  the  weather  quarter,  and  there  remained  "  engaging 
the  enemy  as  they  came  up  out  of  the  fog."  He  certainly  lost  more  heavily 
than  any  ship  of  his  size.  The  Ajax  a  time  must  have  been  ahead  of  that  of 
the  flagship.  James  did  not  observe  this.  He  says  Ajax  tacked  at  5.45,  and 
that  by  5.50  (Calder's  time)  six  ships  had  tacked  ! 


July  22  A     BLIND     FIGHT  201 

over  which  he  had  no  control,  and  by  the  accident  of 
Gravina's  tacking  before  Villeneuve  intended.  Calder  was 
now  committed  to  a  concentration  on  the  van  and  centre, 
an  evil  method  of  engaging  which  led  inevitably  to  a 
counter  concentration  on  his  own  rear  as  the  enemy's  rear 
came  up.  He  had,  moreover,  only  twelve  ships  in  action. 
The  Hero  as  well  as  the  Ajax  had  been  driven  out  of  the 
line  before  he  himself  tacked,  and  the  Barfleiir  98,  the 
fourth  ship,  was  now  at  grips  with  Gravina.  And  not  only 
were  the  two  weak  leading  ships  gone,  but  the  powerful 
Dragon  was  still  beating  up  from  to  leeward,  and  indeed  did 
not  succeed  in  rejoining  till  the  action  was  over. 

The  Malta  in  the  extreme  rear  brought  up  against  the 
twelfth  ship  of  the  enemy's  line,  which  happened  to  be  the 
headmost  of  their  rear,  also  an  80~gun  ship,  carrying  the 
flag  of  Rear-Admiral  Dumanoir,  but  most  of  the  French 
rear  never  got  into  action.  Thus  after  all  Calder  had  suc- 
ceeded in  attacking  an  equal  part  of  the  enemy's  line,  but 
what  happened  afterwards  no  one  could  tell  even  approxi- 
mately. The  fog  settled  down  again  thicker  than  ever  as 
the  fleets  stood  away  to  the  west-south-west  closely  engaged. 
For  the  most  part  they  could  not  even  see  what  they  were 
firing  at,  and  let  fly  at  the  flashes  of  each  other's  guns. 
Villeneuve  himself  as  he  came  about  did  not  know  whether 
the  enemy  were  to  port  or  starboard.  Friend  could  hardly 
be  told  from  foe.  The  Malta  as  she  rounded  into  action 
tired  on  a  British  frigate.  So  the  blind  tight  went  on  till 
the  night  closed  down  upon  it,  and  it  was  not  till  nine 
o'clock  that  all  was  still. 