

This  he  certainly  did.  On  the  morning  of  the  25  th  the 
two  fleets  were  no  longer  in  sight  of  one  another ;  wind  and 
sea  were  rising ;  and  Villeneuve,  fearing  for  his  shattered 
ships,  resolved  to  abandon  the  attempt  to  hold  up  for 
Ferrol  and  bear  away  for  Cadiz  instead.  Even  this,  as  the 
weather  grew  wilder  every  hour,  soon  seemed  too  great  a 
hazard.  Gravina  was  consulted  as  to  the  possibility  of 
getting  into  Vigo,  and  the  result  of  the  conference  was  that 
they  turned  back  and  ran  for  that  port  for  refuge. 

Of  this  movement  Calder  could  have  no  knowledge. 
His  two  frigates  were  too  deeply  engaged  with  the  crippled 
ships  to  keep  touch  with  the  enemy,  and  all  he  knew  was 
that  the  Combined  Squadron  had  disappeared  to  the 
southward.  In  the  circumstances  he  could  not  but  think 
that  he  had  done  all  that  was  required.  In  a  successful 
action  he  had  maintained  the  vital  Finisterre  position ;  he 
had  foiled  the  Ferrol  concentration,  and  he  felt  that  he 
could  take  his  own  line.  His  first  care  was  to  see  the 
Windsor  Castle  and  his  two  prizes  as  far  to  the  northward 
on  their  way  home  as  would  render  them  reasonably  safe 
from  attack  either  from  Rochefort  or  Ferrol.  This  done 
he  held  away  back  for  the  original  rendezvous  Corn- 
wallis  had  given  him  in  hope  of  getting  in  touch  with 
Nelson,  who  might  be  expected  to  appear  any  day.  If 
Nelson  was  not  to  be  found  it  was  his  intention  to  return 
off  Ferrol. 

What  judgment  must  be  passed  on  Calder's  conduct  ? 
It  is  probably  one  of  the  most  difficult  cases  in  history — 
a  case  of  delicate  choice  between  the  primary  object  of 
destroying  the  enemy's  fleet  and  the  ulterior  object  of 
defending  England  against  invasion.  Most  modern  writers 
condemn  him  out  of  hand  as  a  man  of  little  heart,  who  did 


206  CALDER'S     ACTION  July 

what  was  obviously  the  wrong  thing  from  sheer  pusil- 
lanimity. His  brother  officers,  after  hearing  the  evidence 
for  three  days  and  being  in  touch  with  the  sentiment  of 
that  golden  time,  were  not  so  sure.  For  six  hours  they 
sat  in  secret  and  anxious  debate  before  a  decision  was 
reached,  and  then  they  condemned  him  to  be  reprimanded. 
But  for  what  ?  ''  For  not  having  done  his  utmost  to  renew 
the  said  engagement  and  to  take  and  destroy  every  ship  of 
the  enemy."  With  that  he  was  charged,  and  of  that  he 
was  assuredly  guilty.  But  in  Calder's  view,  to  put  the 
charge  in  that  way  was  to  beg  the  whole  question.  In  his 
view  it  was  his  duty  in  the  circumstances  not  to  renew  the 
action  and  not  to  try  to  destroy  every  ship  of  the  enemy. 
His  duty  was  to  keep  his  fleet  in  being  and  prevent  the 
enemy  getting  to  Ferrol.  The  modern  conception  of  war- 
fare is  such  that  probably  any  tribunal  of  naval  officers 
would  condemn  him  again  to-day,  but  in  those  days  the 
creed  of  the  primary  object  was  not  so  ripe.  To  condemn 
Calder  for  a  mistake  is  one  thing;  to  brand  him  as  a  faint- 
hearted blunderer  is  another. 