

Nelson,  however,  still  clung  to  his  waning  hope.  His 
intention  was,  as  he  informed  the  Admiralty,  to  proceed  to 
Tetuan  for  fresh  victuals  and  water.  In  the  meantime,  he 
said,  he  was  sending  to  Collingwood  and  Bickerton  for  the 
orders  they  had  received  in  his  absence,  and  if  he  found 
them  to  contain  nothing  to  the  contrary,  he  would  then, 
after  providing  for  the  blockade  of  Cartagena,  take  station 
outside  the  Mediterranean  and  wait  for  further  instructions. 
If,  however,  he  heard  Villeneuve  had  made  for  the  Bay,  he 

^  Collingwood  to  Nelson,  off  Cadiz,  June  18th  :  Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS. 
34930.     Printed  in  Nicolas,  vi.  472. 


2IO  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION  July  20-25 

would  forthwith  join  the  Fcrrol  or  the  Ushant  squadron,  as 
circumstances  seemed  to  require.^ 

The  interval  he  employed  in  rcstormg  the  situation  in 
the  Mediterranean.  He  could  not  understand  the  existing 
disposition,  with  Collingwood's  fleet  divided  between  Cadiz 
and  Cartagena,  and  nothing  at  all  with  Knight  at  Gibraltar 
to  control  the  Straits.  But  above  all  he  was  concerned  for 
Craig  at  Malta.  He  found  orders  recalling  the  sloops  from 
that  station  to  join  Collingwood.  So  active  were  the 
enemy's  privateers,  and  so  incapable  the  island  of  feeding 
itself  unless  the  adjacent  waters  were  free,  that  he  knew 
this  w^ould  mean  the  starvation  of  the  garrison.  His  first 
letter  to  Barham,  on  hearing  of  his  appointment  as  First 
Lord,  was  to  protest  against  the  arrangement.  He  even 
took  upon  himself  to  cancel  it  and  order  the  cruisers  back 
again.  Nor  did  he  stop  here.  He  reorganised  the  whole 
command  into  three  sections,  and  sent  home  a  requisition 
for  the  force  required  for  each.  Collingwood  was  to  com- 
mand from  St.  Vincent  as  far  as  Cape  Spartel  on  the 
Moorish  coast  for  the  blockade  of  Cadiz  and  Seville.  Knight 
was  to  have  the  Straits  or  Gibraltar  section  extending  from 
Spartel  to  Malaga  with  a  substantial  cruiser  squadron 
under  his  flag.  Bickerton,  whom  he  sent  for  in  person, 
was  to  have  the  rest,  with  explicit  directions  as  to  hoAv  he 
was  to  dispose  his  force  for  the  blockade  of  Cartagena,  the 
defence  of  Sardinia,  Sicily,  Naples,  and  Malta,  and  the  pro- 
tection of  the  Levant  trade.  These  arrangements  were 
completed  on  July  22nd,  and  then  Nelson  moved  out  for 
Tetuan,  little  dreaming  that  to  the  northward  ofl"  Finis- 
terre  another  was  enjoying  the  feast  he  had  prepared  so 
laboriously  for  himself. 

On  the  24th,  still  hungering  for  news — for  not  yet  had 
he  received  one  material  Avord — he  weighed  for  the  ren- 
dezvous he  had  given  off  Cape  Spartel,  where  all  his  cruisers 
were  to  meet  him.  He  had  got  no  further  than  Tarifa, 
just  outside  the  Gut,  when  at  about  half-past  three  in  the 
morning  of  the  25th,  the  Termagant,  a  sloop  recently  out 
from  England,  came  into  the  fleet.     She  had  been  into  the 