41  killed.         158 

wounded. 

Total.  \  Spanish  . 
1  French  . 

111 
44 

24G 

95 

j  155  killed 

341  w 

ounded 

The  Formidahle  and  Athii^  both  lost  their  captains  killed. 

2  By  far  the  best  account  of  the  action  is  that  given  by  James,  iii.  360  ct 
seq.  That  which  Admiral  Ekins  attempted  {Navtil  Battles,  p.  6G2)  is  grotesque. 
He  says  he  could  get  no  very  clear  or  satisfactory  account  from  the  cap- 
tains engaged,  except  that  all  agreed  it  was  a  very  ill-conducted  action. 
Colonel  iSesbriere,  like  Ekins,  unfortunately  thought  Gravina  tacked  instead 


July  23  AFTER   THE    ACTION  203 

The  claim  of  neither  Admiral  was  ever  endorsed  by 
competent  opinion.  Events,  it  is  true,  went  far,  at  least 
strategically,  to  justify  Calder's  boast  that  the  action  Avas 
decisive,  but  Villeneuve's  vaunt  of  retaining  possession  of 
the  field  had  no  justification.  The  actual  result  of  the 
battle  was  that  Calder  had  maintained  his  position,  barring 
Villeneuve's  approach  to  Ferrol  and  the  Galician  signal 
stations  ;  he  had  captured  two  of  the  line  from  a  superior 
force,  and  had  inflicted  on  his  enemy  three  times  the  loss 
he  himself  had  sustained.  So  far  Calder  had  certainly  won 
a  victory.  His  conduct  in  the  action  received  the  commen- 
dation of  the  Admiralty,  and  was  never  called  in  question. 
He  certainly  believed  he  had  done  well,  and  in  the  early 
hours  of  the  night  sent  word  down  the  fleet  that  he  meant 
to  renew  the  battle  in  the  morning. 

When  day  broke,  however,  he  found  his  fleet  widely 
scattered.  The  van  were  far  away  to  windward  towards  the 
distant  enemy;  the  frigates  and  prizes,  together  with  the 
Windsor  Castle  and  Thunderer,  were  out  of  sight  somewhere 
to  leeward.  To  add  to  his  anxiety  for  their  safety  the 
returns  of  damages  to  rigging  which  he  received  were  so 
serious  as  to  forbid  an  attempt  to  work  to  windward,  and  he 
decided  that  his  only  course  was  to  call  down  the  van  and 
then  bear  up  to  get  in  touch  with  the  cripples  to  leeward. 

As  had  happened  so  fatally  in  Byng's  case  Calder's  first 
spirited  determination  to  renew  the  action  had  been  weak- 
ened by  secondary  considerations  when  the  stir  of  excite- 
ment was  over.  The  despatch  which  he  now  resolved  to 
send  to  Cornwallis  exactly  explains  his  altered  view  of  the 
situation.  "  The  enemy,"  he  wrote,  "  are  now  in  sight  to 
windward  and  when  I  have  secured  the  captured  ships  and 

of  wearing,  and  bis  diagrams  are  therefore  misleading.  General  Galiano  {El 
Comhate  de  Trafalgar)  corrects  this  error  in  his  diagram.  Both  he  and 
Desbriere  give  the  invaluable  report  of  Captain  Escano,  Gravina's  Chief  of 
the  Staff,  which  for  the  first  time  renders  a  trustworthy  account  of  the  battle 
possible  {Trafalgar,  Appendix  of  JDocuments,  p.  3).  Villeneuve's  and  other 
accounts  are  in  his  ProjeU  et  Tentative^,  v.  ch.  xiv.  Mr.  Leyland,  in  his 
Blockade  of  BreH,  vol.  ii.  {Navy  Records  Society),  prints  Calder's  account,  and 
two  fuller  reports  by  officers  in  the  Egyptienne  repeating  frigate.  Calder's 
Journal  is  missing,  but  the  Logs  of  all  the  ships  are  in  the  Record  Office.  In 
addition  to  the  documents  given  by  Colonel  Desbriere,  General  Galiano 
prints  the  reports  of  the  captains  of  the  two  captured  vessels  San  Fa2:)hael  and 
Firme. 