

He  himself  believed  that,  like  Byng,  he  was  the  victim 
of  popular  outcry.  In  publishing  his  despatch  the  Admiralty 
had  suppressed  the  last  passage  which  hinted  at  the  possi- 
bility of  his  not  being  able  to  renew  the  action.  The 
country  consequently  in  a  condition  of  elated  expectation  was 
looking  every  day  to  hear  of  the  completion  of  the  victory, 
and  what  they  got  was  news  of  a  retreat.  The  revulsion 
of  the  disappointment,  he  always  maintained,  was  what 
hounded  him  to  his  fate.  But  the  truth  is  the  Admiralty 
and  Government  were  at  one  with  public  opinion ;  and  now 
that  we  know  the  soul  of  Barham's  plan  we  can  see  why  it 
was  so.  He  had  taken  great  risks  to  secure  a  great  moral 
result.  His  object  was  to  estabhsh  an  abiding  dread  that 
though  hostile  squadrons  might  slip  out  of  their  blockaded 
ports,  the  penalty  of  their  success  would  be  never  to  return. 
At  the  cost  of  a  sacrifice  admirably  judged  he  had  placed 
Calder  in  a  position  to  secure  that  end,  and  Calder  had  not 
secured  it.  At  the  psychological  moment  he  had  looked 
behind  him  in  confused  anxiety  for  matters  which  did  not 


July  NELSON'S    OPINION  207 

concern  him,  and  for  which  Barham  had  provided  amply. 
It  was  a  lapse  of  warlike  spirit  for  which  it  was  impossible 
to  forgive  him,  and  a  court-martial  was  inevitable. 

His  real  defence  was  never  raised.  It  was,  that  the 
situation,  the  real  inner  intent  of  Barham's  orders,  was 
never  explained  to  him,  and  he  did  not  know  that  his  one 
and  only  duty,  whatever  the  result  to  his  own  fleet,  was  if  he 
once  got  hold  never  to  let  go  so  long  as  he  had  a  tooth  left. 

This  principle — to  fight  to  a  finish  when  in  doubt — has 
become  an  axiom  in  modern  naval  opinion,  but  it  was 
scarcely  so  when  Calder  fought.  The  hardest  part  of  his 
case  is  that  he  fought  the  action  under  one  standard,  and 
was  tried  for  it  under  another.  Between  the  action  and 
the  court-martial  Nelson  fought  and  won  Trafalgar. 
Trafalgar  set  up  an  ideal  of  hot-pressed  action  and  a 
sentiment  of  confident  superiority  which  did  not  exist 
when  Calder  fought,  anywhere  but  in  Nelson  and  his  band 
of  brothers.  Nelson,  of  course,  had  no  doubt  in  the  matter, 
and  deeply  as  he  sympathised  with  Calder  he  put  his  finger 
at  once  upon  the  black  spot.  ''  He  appears,"  so  he  wrote 
to  the  Second  Sea  Lord,  "  to  have  had  the  ships  at  Ferrol 
more  in  his  head  than  the  squadron  in  sight.  .  .  .  He  lays 
stress  upon  other  considerations  than  fighting  the  enemy's 
squadron,  if  he  could  have  done  it,  ivliich  he  denies  to  he 
possible.  I  have  ventured  to  recommend  Calder  to  keep  to 
that ;  prove  it  and  his  character  is  retrieved."  ^  In  Nelson's 
eyes,  then,  the  one  and  only  excuse  for  not  concentrating 
effort  on  the  squadron  in  sight  was  the  impossibility  of 
bringing  it  to  action.  He  himself  would  certainly  have 
gone  at  Villeneuve  again,  and  so  would  Monck  in  older 
days  ;  but  can  we  say  with  any  confidence  there  were  two 
flag-officers  in  the  service  at  the  time  who  would  not  have 
erred  with  Calder,  knowing  only  what  Calder  knew.  The 
better  way,  then,  is  not  to  indulge  in  facile  condemnation, 
but  to  try  to  realise  with  humility  the  tremendous  power 
upon  overAvrought  nerves  of  the  "  considerations  other  than 
fighting"  which  led  him  astray.  So  may  a  man  best 
strengthen  himself  against  doing  likewise  in  like  case. 