


204  CALDER'S     ACTION  July  24 

put  the  squadron  to  rights,  I  shall  endeavour  to  avail  my- 
self of  every  opportunity  that  may  ofter  to  give  you  some 
further  account  of  these  combined  squadrons.  At  the  same 
time  it  will  behove  me  to  be  on  my  guard  against  the  com- 
bined squadrons  at  Ferrol,  as  I  am  led  to  believe  they  have 
sent  off  one  or  two  of  their  crippled  ships  last  night  for  that 
port.  Therefore  possibly  I  may  find  it  necessary  to  make 
a  junction  with  you  immediately  off  Ushant  with  the  whole 
squadron.  P.S.  I  am  under  the  necessity  of  sending  the 
Windsor  Castle  to  you  in  consequence  of  the  damage  she 
sustained  in  the  action."  ^ 

On  the  morrow  no  such  opportunity  as  he  indicated 
occurred.  It  is  true  that  Villeneuve  did  make  some  show 
of  renewing  the  action,  but  he  always  asserted  that  Calder 
refused  to  let  him  close.  Calder,  on  the  other  hand,  main- 
tained that  Villeneuve,  with  all  the  advantai^e  of  the  weather 
position,  refused  to  come  within  reach  of  him.  On  the  24th 
the  wind  shifted  in  Calder's  favour,  but  still  he  made  no 
attempt  to  engage.  The  enemy  was  barely  in  sight  and  in 
his  opinion  it  was  out  of  his  power  to  force  an  action  with- 
out risking  his  prizes  and  crippled  ships  or  permitting 
Villeneuve  to  get  touch  with  the  Spanish  signal  stations. 
His  view  was  that  so  long  as  he  maintained  a  position 
which  forbade  Villeneuve  to  gain  his  object  without  fight- 
ing, he  secured  the  fruits  of  his  victory.  He  always  con- 
tended that  in  this  resolution  he  followed  the  example  of 
Howe  and  Jervis.  Neither  the  one  after  the  First  of  June, 
nor  the  other  after  St.  Vincent,  had  behaved  differently, 
and  yet  neither  Howe  nor  Jervis  had  a  second  equal  and 
unshaken  fleet  threatening  him  from  behind.  "■  Circum- 
stanced as  I  was,"  he  said,  "it  appeared  to  me  to  be 
impracticable  to  force  the  enemy  to  action  with  such 
advantage  as  would  justify  me,  even  if  I  had  nothing  to 
apprehend  but  the  opposing  squadron.  But  Avhen  I  re- 
flected that  sixteen  sail  were  at  Ferrol,  who  might  have 
come  out  to  the  assistance  of  the  combined  fleet,  or  ...  . 
be  pushing  to  England,  the  invasion  of  which  was  an  event 
daily  expected,  I  felt  by  renewing  the  action  I  should  run 

1  Blockade  of  Bred,  ii.  312. 


July  25  HIS   POSITION    MAINTAINED  205 

too  great  a  hazard  and  put  my  fleet  in  a  state  of  danger 
which  I  could  not  have  been  justified  for  doing.  I  therefore 
thought  it  best  to  keep  my  squadron  together  and  not  to 
force  the  enemy  to  a  second  engagement  till  a  more  favour- 
able opportunity.  At  the  same  time  conceiving  that  their 
object  was  to  join  the  ships  at  Ferrol,  I  determined  to 
prevent  them." 