


July  22  HIS    ATTACK  1 99 

For  Villeneuve  the  line  Calder  was  taking  could  have 
but  one  meaning.  Dominated  as  French  naval  opinion 
was,  and  as  opinion  must  always  tend  to  be  everywhere,  by 
the  last  great  action,  he  was  convinced  that  the  tactics  of 
the  Nile  were  in  the  British  Admiral's  mind  and  that  Calder 
meant  to  double  on  his  rear.^  It  was  not  yet  in  order, 
and  with  a  view  of  supporting  it  Villeneuve  passed  orders 
up  the  line  to  Gravina  for  the  fleet  to  wear  in  succession 
the  moment  he  heard  firing  in  the  rear.  It  happened,  how- 
ever, that  Gravina  just  then  caught  sight  of  a  French  frigate 
through  the  mist  repeating  the  preparative  signal  that  had 
been  made,  and  luckily  for  Villeneuve  he  began  the  move- 
ment immediately.^  At  the  same  moment  the  Hero,  which 
was  leading  the  British  line — an  old  and  weak  seventy-four 
under  Captain  Alan  Gardner — had  reached  the  enemy's 
centre,  and  Calder,  seeing  the  moment  had  come  for  his 
manoeuvre,  signalled  to  tack  in  succession.  His  object  was 
to  bring  his  fleet  close  under  the  lee  of  the  part  he  meant 
to  engage  and  on  the  same  tack  as  the  enemy,  and  directly 
the  signal  was  hauled  down,  he  hoisted  "  Engage  the  enemy's 
centre,"  and  a  quarter  of  an  hour  later  "  Close  order."  ^ 

Thus  not  till  the  last  moment  did  he  let  his  captains 
know  the  plan  of  attack,  and  it  so  happened  that  the  van 
ships  did  not  take  in  the  determinative  signal  to  engage 
the  centre.  In  the  log  of  Captain  Gardner  it  does  not 
appear  at  all ;  in  that  of  the  Ajax,  who  had  taken  her 
station  astern  of  him,  it  stands  simply  as  "  engage  the 
enemy."  The  fact  was  that  before  the  signal  could  reach 
Gardner  at  the  head  of  the  line  he  had  been  driven  to  act 
on  his  own  initiative.  As  he  led  to  the  northward  along 
the  enemy's  line  he  suddenly  became  aware  of  a  large 
Spanish  ship  coming  down  upon  him  free  upon  the  opposite 
tack.  It  was  Gravina's  own  flagship  as  she  led  the  move- 
ment to  save  the  French  rear.      Here,  then,  was  Calder's 


^  Duro,  Armada  Espanola,  viii.  291. 

^  The  promptitude  with  which  this  manoeuvre  was  executed  is  attributed 
to  the  foresight  of  Gravina's  chief  of  the  staff,  Escano,  in  a  MS.  Elogio  de  Don 
Antonio  Escano,  quoted  by  General  Galiano. 

^  This  meant  anything  from  a  cable  to  half  a  cable  according  to  the 
weather. 


200  CALDER'S   ACTION  july22 

intended  attack  completely  parried.  It  was  too  thick  for 
the  Admiral  to  see  what  was  happening,  nor  could  Gardner 
see  Calder's  flagship.  What  was  he  to  do  ?  If  he  held  on 
the  fleets  Avould  pass  again  on  opposite  tacks,  a  form  of 
engaging  which  had  long  been  condemned  as  incapable  of 
producing  a  decisive  result.  He  determined,  therefore,  on 
his  own  responsibility  to  go  about  and  lead  the  fleet  on 
the  same  tack  as  the  enemy.  Before  he  could  get  round 
Gravina  was  upon  him,  and  gave  him  a  broadside  while  he 
was  still  ill  stays.  Fortunately  the  Spanish  flagship  had 
got  a  list  to  port  from  bad  stowage,  and  her  fire  was  not 
well  enough  directed  to  do  much  harm.  Gardner  was, 
therefore,  able  to  continue  the  movement,  and  in  this  way 
about  five  o'clock  the  action  began,  but  in  an  entirely 
difl'erent  form  from  that  which  Calder  had  intended. 