

^  Nelson  to  Gambier,  Oct.  2,  in  Chatterton's  Memorials  of  GamUer,  ii.  4. 


CHAPTER   XV 

MOVEMENTS  AFTER   CALDER'S   ACTION 

Defensible  or  indefensible,  Calder's  misapprehension  of 
what  Avas  required  of  him  had  brought  to  the  ground 
Barham's  bold  conception  for  a  counter-stroke.  Napoleon's 
plan  to  all  appearance  had  so  far  succeeded  that  we  were 
thrust  back  upon  the  defensive,  and  nothing  in  the  cam- 
paign is  more  interesting  than  the  automatic  manner  in 
which  the  wide-flung  fleet  shrank  back  to  the  strategical 
centre,  to  meet  the  threatening  concentration. 

Nelson  was  the  flrst  to  move.  Convinced  like  Barham 
that  Villeneuvo's  destination  was  Cadiz,  he  had  set  his 
course  from  Antigua  straight  for  Cape  St.  Vincent,  sure 
that  the  best  way  to  bring  his  chase  to  action  was  to  make 
that  landfall  before  him.  "  The  enemy,"  wrote  Captain 
Bayntun  of  the  Leviathan  on  June  21st  to  Nelson,  after  he 
had  got  wind  of  Villeneuve  from  the  American  skipper, 
"  the  enemy  cannot  be  far  ahead,  and  by  our  taking  a  more 
easterly  direction  it  is  possible  (if  he  be  bound  that  way), 
we  may  arrive  off  St.  Vincent  before  him.  Your  lordship 
each  night  forms  a  part  of  his  dreams."  ^  The  Decade, 
which  he  had  sent  on  to  Lisbon,  was  to  meet  him  at  the 
cape.  He  made  it  on  July  17th,  but  of  the  enemy  there 
was  no  news  whatever,  except  that  Missiessy  had  got  back 
to  Rochefort  two  months  since.  Nothing  had  been  heard 
of  Villeneuve,  and  after  sending  to  communicate  with 
Collingwood,  Nelson  moved  down  to  Gibraltar  to  renew  his 
stores.  On  the  20th  he  went  ashore — being  the  first  time 
for  all  but  two  years  that  he  had  set  foot  out  of  the  Victory. 
He  had  still  a  remnant  of  hope  that  he   had   forestalled 

1  Nelson  Papers  :  Add.  MSS.  34930. 
2o8 


juLYiS  NELSON    AND    COLLINGWOOD  209 

Villencuve,  and  would  be  able  to  fight  him  as  he  approached 
the  Straits ;  but  he  now  received  a  letter  of  welcome  from 
Colhngwood  containing  an  appreciation  of  the  situation 
which  differed  entirely  from  his  own. 

Throughout  the  war  Collingwood's  service  had  been  in 
the  Channel,  and  his  ideas  inevitably  took  the  colour  of 
his  station.  This  station  bias  appears  to  be  as  constant  as 
anything  in  war — a  condition  of  the  human  factor  that  has 
to  be  taken  into  account.  Every  commander  is  predisposed 
to  see  in  his  own  theatre  of  operations  the  objective  of  those 
of  the  enemy  ;  und  as  Nelson,  against  the  balance  of  pro- 
bability as  it  seems  to  us  now,  clung  to  his  apprehension 
for  the  Mediterranean,  so  Collingwood  had  not  got  rid  of 
his  preoccupation  with  the  Channel.  It  would  be  unsafe, 
therefore,  to  argue  that  because  in  the  main  he  was  right  in 
this  case  and  Nelson  wrong,  that  his  strategical  penetration 
was  greater  than  Nelson's.  The  view  he  now  laid  before 
his  chief  was  that  Villeneuve's  object  was  to  bring  out  the 
Ferrol  and  Rochefort  squadrons,  and  so  appear  off  Ushant 
with  thirty-four  of  the  line,  and  there  be  joined  by  twenty 
more  from  Brest.  Cornwallis  by  concentrating  the  three 
divisions  of  the  Western  Squadron  would  not  have  more 
than  thirty.  "  This,"  he  says,  "  appears  to  be  a  probable 
plan.  For  unless  it  is  to  bring  these  great  fleets  and  armies 
to  some  point  of  service — some  rash  attempt  at  conquest — 
they  have  been  only  subjecting  them  to  chance  of  loss,  which 
I  do  not  believe  the  Corsican  would  do,  without  the  hope 
of  adequate  reward."  ^ 