

Indomptable(80)  Gourreges. 
Aigle  (74)         .     Hubert. 
Achille  (74)      .     Demeport. 
Algeciras  (74)  Magon  (flag). 


-  ti) 


198  CALDER'S    ACTION  July  22 

ward  of  him,  and  an  action  imminent.  The  last  word  of 
Lord  Howe  and  Keiiipenfelt  on  the  subject  had  been  that 
the  proper  thing  to  do  in  these  circumstances  was  to  attack 
the  van  and  the  rear  to  prevent  being  doubled  on,  and  to 
leave  the  centre  alone ;  or  if  the  organisation  was  in  three 
divisions,  the  centre  was  to  engage  so  much  of  the  enemy's 
centre  as  it  could.^  In  other  words  they  adopted  Lord 
Torrington's  famous  principle.  But  this  Calder  did  not 
choose  to  do.  He  Avas  not  of  the  Howe-Kempenfelt  school. 
His  battle  experience  had  been  gained  as  Jervis's  first- 
captain  at  St.  Vincent  on  the  famous  Valentine's  Day,  and  it 
was  but  natural  that  he  should  share  Jervis's  mistrust  of 
formal  tactics.  Instead,  therefore,  of  accepting  the  recog- 
nised form  of  attack — and  in  spite  of  the  enemy's  force  no 
thought  but  attack  was  in  his  mind— he  chose  to  do  what 
Nelson  did  at  Trafalgar  and  concentrate  on  the  enemy's 
rear  and  centre.  The  effect  would  be  to  engage  the  part  of 
the  enemy's  line  which  Avas  not  yet  formed  and  to  leave  the 
Spaniards  alone.  How  far  these  considerations  Avere  in  his 
mind  Ave  cannot  tell,  but  Ave  may  at  least  credit  him  Avith 
the  bold  and  original  resolution  he  took. 

ToAvards  half-past  three  the  tAvo  fleets  Avere  about  eight 
miles  apart  and  bore  from  each  other  about  N.E.  and  S.W. 
Calder  still  made  no  attempt  to  get  to  AvindAvard,  but  after 
calling  in  his  advanced  ships  he  signalled  to  prepare  to 
ent^ag-e,  and  then  to  form  the  order  of  battle  to  the 
south-so uth-Avest,  a  course  Avhich  led  him  frankly  to  lee- 
Avard.-^  A  fcAV  minutes  later  he  signalled  for  another  point 
to  starboard,  and  then  the  fog  closed  doAvn  again  and  once 
more  the  tAvo  fleets  lost  sight  of  each  other.  When  it  lifted 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  later  they  found  themselves  running 
nearly  parallel  on  opposite  tacks  just  out  of  gunshot. 


^  signal  and  Tmtructions  (Navy  Records  Society),  pp,  77,  108,  120,  134,  173, 
319,  328-9. 

-  Jaraes  says  at  3.22  he  made  the  sig^nal  "  to  taok  together,"  which  would 
look  as  thougli  he  wanted  to  get  to  windward.  It  was  really  hoisted  with  the 
preparative  and  was  annulled  at  3.30.  At  3.33  he  made  to  the  Starboard 
division  No.  93,  "  Make  as  much  sail  as  can  be  carried  without  breaking  the 
order  in  which  the  fleet  is  formed,"  with  compass  signal  S.S. W.  This  was  the 
regular  movement  in  forming  line  of  battle  to  enable  weather  division  to  get 
ahead  of  the  lee.     At  3.43  "  Line  of  battle  iu  open  order." 