

The  result  was  all  that  Baker  could  wish.  The  Didon 
had  now  only  three  days  to  reach  Allemand's  rendezvous 
before  he  would  be  gone,  and  Milius,  believing  he  had 
nothing  but  a  weak  enemy  in  his  path,  determined  to  fight 
his  way  through.  His  decision  will  probably  be  applauded 
as  correct  and  seamanlike.  His  case  differed  essentially 
from  that  of  the  Molus,  He  had  definite  material  intelli- 
gence to  convey  to  a  definite  spot,  and,  unlike  the  A^Jolus, 
he  could  not  get  it  through  in  time  without  clearing  an 
inferior  enemy's  cruiser  out  of  his  way.  To  run  was  to  fail 
in  his  mission,  to  fight  was  to  secure  a  chance  of  success.  He 
chose  to  fight,  and  a  very  famous  cruiser  action  was  the  result. 

Both  the  commanders  and  both  the  frigates  had  the 
reputation  of  being  amongst  the  smartest  in  the  service. 
The  Didon  in   size,  force,  crew,  and  speed  was   decidedly 


2  24  AFTER    CALDER'S   ACTION  aug.  io 

superior.'  Baker,  however,  was  confident,  and  being  deter- 
mined not  to  let  her  escape  him,  manccuvred  to  get  to 
leeward  before  he  would  fire  a  shot.  In  the  process,  so 
brilliantly  was  the  IHdon  handled,  he  was  raked  three  or 
four  times  without  being  able  to  ofVcct  his  purpose.  So 
severely  mauled  was  his  rigging  that  further  mancL'Uvring 
was  impossible,  and  in  desperation  he  ran  straight  at  his 
opponent.  Then  at  last  the  two  vessels  were  fairly  engaged 
side  by  side  at  pistol  shot.  Carronadcs,  grape,  musketry — 
everything  got  home  at  its  best.  A  fresh  attempt  to  rake 
which  the  Didon  made,  and  which  Baker  cleverly  parried, 
brought  them  yard-arm  to  yard-arm,  the  stem  of  the  Didon 
almost  foul  of  the  starboard  quarter  of  the  Fhceiiix.  Both 
men  promptly  tried  to  board,  but  so  superior  was  the 
French  strength  that  it  was  all  Baker  could  do  to  keep  his 
own  decks  free.  For  a  while  it  was  a  rough  affair  of  pikes 
and  muskets,  till  Baker  got  a  gun  to  bear  out  of  his  cabin 
windoAv  with  terrible  effect.  Still  the  action  raged  almost 
muzzle  to  muzzle  till  both  vessels  were  no  longer  under 
control,  and  they  fell  away  from  each  other  breathless  to 
repair  damages. 

It  had  become  calm  with  a  big  swell,  and  each  com- 
mander was  eager  to  be  the  first  ready  to  catch  a  return  of 
the  breeze.  Here  the  Fhxnix  had  the  advantage.  Though 
her  rigging  and  sails  were  in  rags,  her  spars  had  suffered 
the  least.  The  Didon,  it  is  true,  had  lost  nothing  but  her 
maintopmast,  but  so  badl}^  was  her  foremast  wounded  that 
before  it  could  be  secured  she  rolled  it  overboard.  The 
Phoenix,  on  the  other  hand,  was  already  nearly  under  control 
again.     All  essential  knotting  and  splicing  were  complete 