


2i8  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION  Aug.  i-8 

from  Villoueuve  to  roach  me.  It  Avill  be  captured  by  the 
quantity  of  enemy's  ships  which  are  cruising  in  every  part 
of  the  Bay."  He  accordingly  concluded  by  saying  he 
intended  to  avail  himself  of  the  discretion  which  his 
instructions  allowed  him,  and  run  for  safety  to  Vigo.  And 
this  he  did  there  and  then,  stretching  far  to  the  westward 
to  get  out  of  harm's  way. 

Except  in  one  important  point  the  actual  situation 
differed  little  from  his  appreciation.  On  August  1st,  the 
day  after  Calder  had  returned  to  the  blockade  of  Ferrol, 
and  Villeneuve  had  left  Vigo  for  the  same  port,  the  strong 
south-westerly  wind  which  was  carrying  the  Combined 
Squadron  so  happily  to  its  destination,  forced  the  British 
Admiral  well  to  leeward  of  the  blockaded  port.  The  result 
was  that  Villeneuve  found  nothing  in  his  way,  and  was  able 
to  run  into  Coruna  without  firing  a  shot.  On  the  following 
day,  in  accordance  with  Barham's  instructions  that  at  the 
end  of  the  specified  period  all  squadrons  were  to  return  to 
their  regular  stations,  Calder  ordered  Stirling  to  return  to 
Rochefort.  If  he  found  the  port  empty  he  was  to  join 
Cornwallis.  Calder  himself  with  his  remaining  nine  ships 
took  the  position  from  40  to  60  miles  to  the  northward 
of  the  port  in  which  the  mysterious  squadron  had  been 
reported  to  Allemand.  Here  he  continued  day  after  day 
laboriously  holding  up  against  strong  south-westerly  winds. 
His  reason  is  nowhere  stated ;  it  was  not  his  usual  practice. 
In  such  weather  his  rule  was  to  run  for  shelter  behind 
Cape  OrtegaU  It  is  to  be  presumed,  therefore,  that  he  was 
looking  out  for  Allemand.  Not  that  he  had  any  definite 
information,  for  the  JSolus,  who  had  just  located  the  Roche- 
fort  squadron,  had  not  yet  reached  him.  But  seeing  how 
anxious  he  had  been  about  it  after  the  battle,  it  is  natural 
he  was  expecting  it  would  make  an  attempt  to  reach 
Ferrol.  He  was  therefore  lying  in  Allemand's  path,  and 
according  to  the  sound  British  method  was  keeping  wide 
of  the  port  of  destination  in  order  to  deal  with  him  before 
his  friends  inside  could  come  to  his  aid. 

Had  he  been  at  the  Emperor's  elbow  he  could  not  have 

'  See  his  Qeneral  Instructions  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  197. 


Aug.  9-13      CALDER    CLOSES  ON    USHANT  219 

judged  more  correctly.  A  direct  movement  on  Ferrol,  if 
Stirling  raised  the  blockade  of  Rochefort,  was  actually 
what  Napoleon  had  enjoined  on  Allemand  in  the  orders 
which  did  not  reach  him.  But  Calder  was  doomed  to 
disappointment.  His  move,  as  we  have  seen,  had  come  to 
Allemand's  ears  and  had  effectually  headed  him  off,  and 
after  cruising  in  vain  for  a  week — that  is,  till  the  9th — 
Calder  sent  the  Dragon  to  look  into  Ferrol  to  see  if  by 
chance  the  Rochefort  squadron  had  slipped  in.  The  same 
evening  she  returned  in  company  with  the  JEohts,  bearing 
news  that  Allemand  was  at  sea  to  the  westward,  and  that 
not  he  but  the  whole  Combined  Fleet  was  in  Ferrol.  To 
remain  with  his  slender  squadron  facing  a  force  of  thirty 
of  the  line  obviously  about  to  sail,  to  say  nothing  of  Alle- 
mand's five,  Avas  in  Calder  s  eyes  useless ;  and,  as  Orde  had 
done  earlier  in  the  campaign,  he  decided  it  was  his  duty  to 
close  on  Ushant.  On  the  10th,  therefore,  he  stood  north, 
leaving  the  Dragon  behind  to  watch  the  port  and  move 
towards  the  Finisterre  rendezvous  to  look  out  for  Nelson. 
Thus  for  a  third  time  Allemand  had  the  narrowest  possible 
escape,  and  his  prudence  in  leaving  the  rendezvous  before 
his  allotted  time  was  justified.  By  his  orders  he  should 
have  held  it  till  the  13  th,  and  on  that  day  Calder  on  his 
way  north  passed  by  it  only  twenty-four  hours  after  Alle- 
mand had  left,  and  nothing  but  his  sagacious  disobedience 
saved  him  from  destruction. 