

To  make  matters  still  more  confused,  the  effect  of 
Stirling's  blockade  had  been  seriously  to  delay  Allemand's 
sailing  under  his  original  instructions,  and  the  consequence 
was  that  when  he  did  get  away  and  opened  his  sealed 
orders,  he  found  the  time  limited  for  his  Irish  demonstration 
had  already  expired.     It  was  for  this  reason  that  Napoleon 

1'  This  rendezvous  was  also  about  30  miles  south  by  west  of  our  own  dis- 
tant Finisterre  rendezvous,  i.e.  3S  leagues  north-west  of  Finisterre. 


2  14  AFTER    CALDEU'S    ACTION  July 

had  sent  down  an  order  to  stop  him.  It  arrived  too  late, 
and  Allemand  put  to  sea  with  the  old  instructions.  They 
directed  him  to  proceed  Avcst  400  leagues,  so  as  to  avoid 
the  British  squadrons  off  Ushant  and  Ferrol,  and  appear  off 
Ireland  from  the  westward  between  July  4th  and  9th. 
There  he  was  to  cruise  for  a  week,  and  then  run  down  to  the 
Finisterre  rendezvous  to  meet  Villeneuve.  If,  therefore,  he 
followed  his  orders  strictly  he  should  have  begun  to  make 
for  the  rendezvous  the  day  he  left  Rochefort.  But  it  was 
characteristic  of  the  man's  high  spirit  not  to  look  too 
closely  at  the  letter  of  his  orders,  but  to  try  to  do  his  best 
to  carry  out  their  intention.  He  determined,  therefore,  not 
to  give  up  the  Irish  diversion  without  an  effort.  "  Although 
the  term  had  expired,"  he  wrote  to  Decr^s,  "  I  thought,  my 
lord,  that  without  missing  my  first  rendezvous,  40  leagues 
from  Ferrol,  I  could,  with  favourable  winds  and  by  cutting 
short  my  route,  still  show  myself  off  Ireland."  ^ 

With  this  idea  he  held  away  due  west,  as  directed,  all 
unconscious  that,  instead  of  avoiding  the  Ushant  squadron,  his 
course  was  taking  him  straight  to  the  southernmost  point 
Avhich  Cornwallis  had  made  in  his  sweep  for  Villeneuve. 
But  while  he  Avas  preparing  to  weigh,  Cornwallis,  as  we  know, 
had  turned  back,  and  when  Allemand  on  July  19th  reached 
the  fatal  point,  he  found  nothing  there  but  the  Ranger  sloop 
which  Cornwallis  had  left  behind  him  to  try  to  get  wind  of 
the  Combined  Squadron  from  neutral  merchantmen.  She 
was  promptly  captured  and  sunk.  An  examination  of  her 
officers  disclosed  her  mission,  and  put  Allemand  on  his 
guard,  and  next  day  he  issued  a  ruthless  order  that  every 
neutral  that  had  been  in  sight  of  the  squadron  while  on  its 
true  course  was  to  be  captured  and  sunk.^ 

On  the  following  day,  the  21st,  he  found  himself  nearly 
150  leagues  west  of  Rochefort.  The  wind  was  drawing 
into  the  west-north-west ;  it  was  foul  for  him  to  go  on ;  and 
as  yet  he  had  not  traversed  half  the  distance  to  the  west- 
ward which  had  been  laid  down  in  his  instructions.     But  it 