

1  August  14th  :  Desbri^re,  v.  759. 

-  Rapport  du  capitaine  Allemand,  July  20th  :  Desbri^re,  v.  759.  Between 
this  date  and  August  IGtli,  when  he  reached  Vigo,  he  saw  91  sail.  Of  these 
he  sunk  3  English,  and  no  less  than  22  neutrals. — Ibid.f  p.  785. 


July  21-28  ALLEMAND  215 

was  fair  for  Ireland.  At  the  risk  of  falling  foul  of  Corn- 
wallis,  he  could  shorten  his  route,  as  he  said,  and  make  up 
for  the  time  lost  at  Rochefort.  This  he  resolved  to  do,  and 
hauled  up  to  the  northward.  But  it  was  all  to  little  purpose. 
The  wind  kept  veering  continually  further  to  the  north,  and 
though  for  three  days  he  struggled  on  he  could  make  little 
progress.  True,  he  captured  a  fine  vessel  from  Guernsey, 
from  which  he  got  a  set  of  large  scale  charts  of  the  Irish 
coast,  but  by  the  23rd  he  saw  his  attempt  was  hopeless. 
While  still  over  300  miles  from  his  goal,  he  had  to  heave- 
to  in  a  stormy  northerly  wind  ;  all  chance  of  reaching  Ire- 
land in  the  time  available  was  gone,  and  next  day  he  bore 
up  for  his  Finisterre  rendezvous.^ 

In  all  naval  story  there  is  probably  no  adventure  so 
full  of  fantastic  fortune  as  this  incredible  cruise  of  Alle- 
mand's.  Pursuing  a  plan  that  was  crossed  at  every  point 
by  Barham's  finished  disposition,  he  sped  from  danger  to 
danger  as  his  master's  wilful  blindness  had  doomed  him. 
Wandering  in  the  midst  of  well-disposed  squadrons  hun- 
gering for  his  destruction,  again  and  again  he  escaped  by  a 
hairbreadth — appearing  and  disappearing  like  a  phantom 
fleet — his  every  move  forestalled,  yet  always  sheltered  by 
some  bewildering  turn  of  fortune  or  happy  stroke  of  judg- 
ment. When  we  consider  that  the  whole  episode  was  born 
of  that  little  interlineation  in  Barham's  order,  whereby  he 
altered  his  mind  at  the  last  moment  and  sent  Stirling  to 
Calder,  its  mythical  colour  is  complete.  It  is  as  though 
some  unseen  power  were  resolved  to  remind  the  veteran 
First  Lord  how  helpless  was  his  art  against  the  Fortune  of 
War. 

As  AUemand  had  begun,  so  he  continued  to  the  end. 
His  cruise  had  opened  by  his  making  straight  for  the  spot 
where  Cornwallis  had  been  waiting  for  him,  and  having 
escaped  by  mere  chance,  he  was  running  blindly  into 
Calder's  arms.  But  his  star  was  still  bright.  He  reached 
the  point  of  danger  on  July  28th,  a  day  before  he  was  due, 
and  it  was  also  the  very  day  Calder  had  moved  away  to  re- 
sume the  blockade  of  Ferrol  and  had  left  the  rendezvous  bare. 

^  Rapport  d'Allemand  :  Desbri^re,  v.  759. 


2i6  AFTER    CALDER'S   ACTION  Aug.  i-6 

Here  then  he  remained  unseen  his  allotted  time,  sending 
out  cruising  ships  to  look  for  Villeneuve.  On  August  3rd 
one  of  them  rejoined.  Of  Villeneuve  there  was  no  trace, 
but  she  had  ascertained  from  an  American,  homeward 
bound  from  Bordeaux,  that  on  the  last  day  of  July  Ferrol 
was  blockaded  by  a  squadron  of  fourteen  of  the  line. 
Thereupon,  in  accordance  with  his  instructions,  Allemand 
moved  to  a  second  rendezvous  which  had  been  given  him, 
about  IGO  miles  south-west  of  Ushant  and  just  outside  the 
Ushant-Finisterre  line — in  fact  just  about  the  limit  of 
Cornwallis's  advanced  cruisers.^  At  the  hour  of  starting 
he  found  he  was  being  watched  by  a  frigate — she  was  the 
Guilts,  of  which  more  presently — but  after  his  manner  he 
sailed  a  false  course  east-south-east  till  he  saw  her  disappear 
towards  Ferrol,  and  then  he  was  able  to  proceed  north- 
ward undetected."  As  he  reached  his  point  on  August 
Gth,  another  of  his  cruisers  came  in  to  report  that,  from 
information  obtained  from  a  Swede,  she  had  definitely 
located  a  squadron  of  eleven  of  the  line  with  three  three- 
deckers  cruising  about  60  miles  north  of  Cape  Ortegal. 
As  we  shall  see  this  Avas  also  Calder,  but  Allemand  could 
not  tell  what  to  make  of  it.  He  could  only  conclude  it 
was  another  squadron  in  search  of  him,  and  that  he  must 
have  passed  close  to  it  in  the  night.  He  naturally  became 
anxious.  His  orders  were  to  remain  where  he  was  for  a 
week.  The  idea  apparently  was  that  at  this  point  he 
would  be  able  to  fall  in  with  Villeneuve  after  he  had 
released  the  Ferrol  squadron,  and  would  be  coming  north  for 
Ushant.  But  Napoleon,  in  his  extraordinary  infatuation, 
had  omitted  to  consider  that  this  would  be  exactly  the 
area  which  his  enemy  would  be  watching  most  closely,  and 
so  it  was.  Allemand  immediately  found  himself  observed 
by  a  little  cloud  of  cruisers,  peeping  at  him  over  the  horizon 
or  pushing  their  attentions  home.  In  vain  he  tried  to 
get  hold  of  them  ;  every  one  slipped  nimbly  through  his 