

^  Instructions  pour  le  commandant  de  I'escadre  de  Rochefort,  June  9th  : 
Desbriere,  v.  600.  The  second  rendezvous  was  46°  55'  N.,  7°  8'  W.  ;  and  see 
Ibid.,  p.  705,  and  chart,  anti,  p.  184. 

-  Rapport  de  la  Glolrc  and  Rapport  d' Allemand  ;  Desbriere,  v.  763-5. 


AuG.7-11  ALLEMAND  217 

fingers/  All  lie  could  come  by  were  one  or  two  merchant- 
men and  a  British  privateer  cutter  just  from  home.  But 
this  last  capture  only  added  to  his  trouble,  for  he  learnt 
from  her  that  as  she  was  sailing  from  Plymouth  two  Spanish 
prizes  had  been  brought  into  the  Sound.  Evidently  an 
action  had  been  fought,  but  was  it  with  Villeneuve  or 
with  the  Ferrol  squadron  ?  Two  days  later  further  infor- 
mation was  obtained  from  a  Portuguese  prize.  She  had 
been  boarded  a  few  days  before  by  the  Dragon,  and  her 
skipper  could  confirm  the  action.  It  was  Calder  who  had 
fought  it,  against  whom  he  knew  not,  but  he  was  sure  the 
squadron  of  eleven  of  the  line  that  had  been  seen  to  the  north 
of  Cape  Ortegal  was  the  same  which  had  fought  the  action. 
What  then  was  it  that  was  blockading  Ferrol  ?  To  make  the 
position  still  more  diflScult,  the  Portuguese  skipper  had  also 
to  tell  that  he  had  been  boarded  by  the  Phoenix  (a  frigate  of 
which  we  shall  hear  more).  She  appeared  to  be  looking 
for  Calder,  and  had  told  him  that  Villeneuve  had  been 
sighted  by  the  Curieux  flying  homewards  with  Nelson  at  his 
heels.^ 

It  was  more  than  the  harassed  Commodore  could 
endure.  There  were  still  thirty  hours  to  run  of  the  time 
he  was  to  remain  on  the  northern  rendezvous,  but  he 
decided  it  was  madness  to  remain  to  the  end.  *'  My  posi- 
tion in  the  Bay,"  he  wrote  in  his  report,  "  has  become  dis- 
turbing, my  lord.  The  squadron  blockading  Brest  must 
know  my  position  by  the  frigate  which  escaped  the  Arniide 
[i.e.  the  Naiact].  The  squadron  blockading  Ferrol  and  the 
one  which  is  cruising  in  latitude  45°  and  longitude  11° 
[that  is,  to  the  north  of  Cape  Ortegal]  are  also  informed  of 
it  by  the  frigates  which  have  watched  me.  My  station  is 
too  plainly  disclosed  for  it  to  be  prudent  for  me  to  remain 
till  the  13th.     It  is  almost  impossible,  my  lord,  for  a  vessel 

^  For  the  narrow  escape  of  the  Naiad,  see  Captain  Dundas  to  Cornwallis  : 
Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  332  ;  and  Rapport  du  Capitaine  de  VArmidc:  Desbriere, 
V.  766.  The  Naiad  had  been  detached  by  Cornwallis  to  the  southward  and 
westward  to  endeavour  to  obtain  information  of  the  Combined  Squadron  on 
August  6th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  331. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  766.  The  Phoenix  had  been  sent  down  by  Cornwallis  shortly  after 
he  returned  off  Brest  to  communicate  with  Calder,  according  to  Barham's 
general  order  to  keep  up  communication  with  Ferrol. 