

So  far  as  Napoleon's  plan  was  concerned  the  Rochefort 
squadron  was,  of  course,  still  in  the  air.  Otherwise  to  all 
appearance,  by  the  junction  of  the  other  French  squadrons 
at  Coruna,  the  combination  had  been  so  far  successful.  Still 
the  Admirals  knew  it  was  only  an  appearance.  On  August 
2nd  as  the  Combined  Squadron  were  making  the  junction 
at  Coruna,  the  Emperor  was  at  last  on  his  way  from  Paris 
to  Boulogne.  On  the  3rd,  he  began  issuing  his  final  orders 
from  the  camp  of  the  Grand  Army,  and  on  that  day 
Gravina  and  Villeneuve  were  writing  to  Decres  under 
honeyed  phrases  a  solemn  warning  that  the  Emperor's  plan 
was  impracticable.  "  I  will  say  to  your  Excellency,"  wrote 
Gravina,  "  that  the  plan  of  operations  could  not  seem  better 


2  20  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION  aug.  6-8 

conceived — it  was  divine.  .  .  .  But  to-day  it  is  sixty  days 
since  we  left  Martinique,  and  the  English  have  had  plenty 
of  time  to  send  warning  in  advance  to  Europe  and  to 
reinforce  their  Ferrol  squadron.  .  .  .  All  this,  in  my  opinion, 
has  much  disconcerted  the  plan,  brilliant  and  well  laid  as 
it  was.  Now  the  enemy  knows  our  force.  ...  It  is  only 
natural  that  on  our  leaving  here  they  will  not  hesitate  to 
give  us  battle,  and  by  sending  forward  their  scouts  to  warn 
their  Brest  squadron  they  will  be  able  to  shadow  us  and 
choose  their  time  for  a  second  battle  before  we  can  make 
our  Brest  landfall.  In  this  Avay  they  can  defeat  the  plan 
of  campaign,  which  certainly  was  very  fine  and  interesting." 
From  first  to  last  the  French  frankly  recognised  Gravina's 
loyalty  and  courage,  and  coming  from  his  devoted  pen 
such  criticism,  for  all  its  courteous  phrasing,  was  in  the 
last  degree  scathing.^ 

Villeneuve,  ill  and  depressed,  was  entirely  of  the  same 
opinion,  and  besides  endorsing  Gravina's  strategical  views, 
he  gave  Decres  frankly  his  real  estimate  of  his  late  "  victory." 
It  had,  in  fact,  shattered  the  last  remnants  of  his  confidence 
in  the  plan  and  his  squadron.  "  The  enemy,"  he  said, 
"  were  warned ;  they  had  been  reinforced ;  they  did  not 
hesitate  to  come  and  attack  us  with  a  force  numerically 
very  inferior.  ...  In  the  fog  our  captains,  without  experi- 
ence of  an  action  or  of  fleet  tactics,  had  no  better  idea  than 
to  follow  their  second  ahead,  and  here  we  are  the  laughing- 
stock of  Europe."  ""  To  complete  his  despair,  he  had  received, 
as  he  was  entering  Coruila  bay,  one  of  Napoleon's  impatient 
orders,  forbidding  him  peremptorily  to  put  into  Ferrol.  He 
was  to  anchor  at  Corufia,  and  wait  there  for  Gourdon  and 
Grandallana  to  come  down  and  join  him.  The  result  was 
that  Gravina,  who  was  leading,  found  himself  too  far  in  to 
obey  the  signal,  and  was  forced  to  go  on,  while  Villeneuve 
had  hurriedly  to  anchor  at  Corufia  with  half  his  ships 
running  aboard  each  other  in  the  confined  anchorage.  At 
Corufia  there  were  no  stores  or  water  to  be  had,  everything 
was  eight  miles  away  up  at  Ferrol  in  the  depth  of  the  bay ; 
and  there,  to  complete  the  trouble,  Gourdon,  the  Commander- 