

1  Desbriere,  v.  775,  August  Stb.  2  ij^id,^  p.  776,  August  Gth. 


Aug.  6  VILLENEUVE   AT    CORUi^A  221 

in-chief,  lay  to  all  appearance  dying,  and  Grandallana  was 
intriguing  to  get  Gravina's  command.  Moreover,  as  the 
squadrons  lay  scattered  between  the  two  ports,  it  was  im- 
possible to  get  them  out  in  one  body,  and  Calder  the  day 
before  had  been  reported  in  the  offing.  Villeneuve  professed 
himself  ready  to  go  out  the  moment  his  fleet  was  revictualled, 
but  it  was  without  hope  of  avoiding  or  winning  an  action. 
''  Eight  of  the  line,"  he  wrote,  "  keep  in  sight  of  the  coast 
at  eight  leagues.  They  will  profit  by  the  lesson  given  to 
Admiral  Orde ;  they  will  shadow  us.  I  shall  not  be  able 
to  close  with  them,  and  they  will  fall  back  on  the  squadron 
before  Brest,  or  that  before  Cadiz,  according  as  I  make  for 
the  one  port  or  the  other." 

The  news  that  Allemand  was  out  and  under  orders  to 
join  him  did  nothing  to  relieve,  what  he  called,  "  the  bitter- 
ness of  his  soul."  He  had  been  told  of  the  commodore's 
two  rendezvous,  but  knowing,  as  every  seaman  must  know, 
how  ill  chosen  they  were,  he  despaired  of  finding  him  at 
either,  and  Decres,  lost  in  the  confusion  of  the  Emperor's 
orders,  had  forgotten  to  tell  him  that  Allemand's  point  of 
retreat  was  Vigo.  As  the  period  for  Allemand's  holding 
the  Finisterre  rendezvous  had  just  expired,  the  only  chance 
of  getting  into  touch  with  him  was  to  send  to  the  northern 
one,  on  the  fringe  of  Cornwallis's  station.  One  frigate  was 
all  Villeneuve  would  risk  on  the  enterprise,  and  on  August 
6th,  just  as  Allemand  reached  the  rendezvous,  Captain 
Milius,  of  the  Diclon  40,  went  out  with  orders  that  the 
squadron  was  to  come  to  Ferrol,  and  if  Villeneuve  were 
gone  it  was  to  follow  the  further  instructions  that  would 
be  found  awaiting  it.^ 

A  famous  cruiser  episode  of  the  highest  interest  was  the 
result.  On  July  20th,  in  response  to  Calder's  urgent  entreaty 
for  more  cruisers,  and  Barham's  instructions  to  keep  up 
communications,  Cornwallis  had  sent  down  the  Niohc  38. 
On  the  29th,  immediately  after  he  received  news  of  the 
action,  he  despatched  another,  the  JEolus  32,  Captain  Lord 
William  Fitzroy,  and,  later  still,  the  FhoBnix  36.  They  were 
to  look  for  him  on  his  Finisterre  rendezvous.     The  Colics 

1  Desbricre,  v.  729,  note  1. 


222  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION  Aug. 4-7 

was  also  charged  with  a  despatch,  which  probably  contained 
Cornwallis's  rendezvous,  as  he  was  expecting  Calder  would 
shortly  come  north,  and  Fitzroy  had  further  orders  to  look 
out  for  enemy's  squadrons  in  the  Bay  as  he  crossed  it.  If 
he  located  one,  he  was  immediately  to  push  on  before  it  to 
report  to  the  admiral  for  whose  station  it  appeared  to  be 
making.^  This  was  the  vessel  wdiich,  as  we  have  seen,  had 
sighted  Allemand  on  August  4th  just  as  he  was  about  to 
leave  his  first  rendezvous;  and  on  the  5th,  having  seen 
him  steer  his  false  course  east-south-east,  had  gone  off  to 
warn  Calder.  On  his  way  down  to  the  rendezvous  Fitzroy 
ascertained  from  the  communicative  American,  by  whom 
Allemand  had  obtained  the  same  information,  that  Calder 
had  resumed  his  blockade,  and  he  accordingly  altered  his 
course  for  Ferrol.  The  result  was  that,  on  the  afternoon  of 
August  7th,  about  60  miles  north-west  of  Finisterre,  he 
sighted  the  Bidon,  who,  after  ascertaining  that  he  was  not 
one  of  Allemand's  cruisers,  turned  and  ran  from  him  off  her 
course  south-west.  Fitzroy  gave  chase  till  dark,  and  seeing 
it  was  impossible  to  close  without  a  long  pursuit,  decided 
that  in  view  of  the  importance  of  the  intelligence  he  bore, 
and  the  clear  tenor  of  his  orders,  it  was  his  duty  to  haul 
off  and  continue  his  mission  to  find  Calder.  And  this,  as 
we  have  seen,  he  did." 