

^  To  Maisden,  Gibraltar,  July  20th  :  Nicolas,  vi.  473. 


July  25  NELSON    MOVES    NORTH  211 

Tagus  on  her  Avay  down,  and  had  brought  on  a  Lisbon 
newspaper  containing  an  account  of  the  arrival  of  the 
Cicrieux,  and  the  news  she  carried.  Nelson's  mind  was 
made  up  in  a  moment.  Clearly  Villeneuve  had  been  making 
for  the  Bay,  and  thither  he  would  go.  A  strong  Levanter 
was  blowing,  making  it  difHcult  to  speak  with  his  old 
friend  Collingwood.  Important  as  an  interview  was,  he 
would  not  waste  a  breath  of  the  fair  wind.  Word  was  left 
for  cruisers  to  join  him  at  St.  Vincent,  or  if  he  were  not 
there,  at  Ferrol — unless  there  was  reason  to  believe  he  had 
taken  a  different  course.  In  that  case  they  were  to  look 
for  him  at  Ushant  or  Ireland,  or  in  the  last  resort  Spithead. 
So  it  was  that  just  as  Calder  was  moving  to  the  distant 
rendezvous  off  Finisterre  in  hopes  of  meeting  him,  Nelson 
was  making  in  all  haste  to  join  hands  with  him.^  On  the 
second  day  he  was  off  St.  Vincent,  but  here  he  encountered 
the  prevailing  northerly  winds.  To  proceed  up  the  coast 
to  Ferrol  would  mean  interminable  delays,  and  would  in- 
volve the  risk  of  leaving  the  Ushant  squadron  unsupported 
at  the  critical  moment.  In  his  hands,  and  his  hands 
alone,  lay  the  possibility  of  redressing  the  balance  which 
Collingwood  had  calculated  so  anxiously.  There  was  no- 
thing for  it  but  to  reach  wide  to  the  westward,  and  he  sent 
word  to  Cornwallis  that  he  was  coming  to  him,  or  to  Ireland, 
as  intelligence  might  dictate. 

It  was  an  unhappy  decision,  for  which  nobody  can  be 
blamed.  Had  Calder  but  sent  word  to  the  southward  im- 
mediately after  the  action  it  might  have  been  avoided,  but 
he  had  no  cruiser  to  spare.  Had  he  but  sunk  his  two 
worthless  old  prizes  it  might  have  been  done.  As  it  was, 
in  default  of  information,  Nelson  had  to  assume  his  enemy 
had  gone  to  the  north,  and  was  forced  to  make  for  the  point 
of  greatest  danger.  Had  he  but  joined  Calder  what  a  world 
of  acute  anxiety  would  have  been  spared  1  what  successes 
would  have  lain  in  his  path  !     Trafalgar  might  never  have 

^  This  was  not  the  regular  rendezvous  No.  52  :  "  North-west  of  Finisterre, 
six  leagues,"  but  probably  that  mentioned  by  James:  "38  leagues  north- 
west." The  latter  position  was  roughly  in  the  latitude  of  Cape  Ortegal,  and 
about  100  miles  to  the  westward  of  Ferrol. 


212  AFTER    CALDER'S    ACTION         July  26-31 

been  fought,  and  Barbam's  great  idea  might  have  been 
fully  rcahsed. 

Ahead  of  him  was  a  strategical  tangle  into  which  he 
must  have  torn  Avith  resounding  advantage.  From  the 
Finistcrre  rendezvous  Calder  had  sent  the  Dragon^  his  un- 
touched seventy-four,  to  look  into  Ferrol.  She  returned 
with  the  surprising  information  that  everything  there  was 
just  as  they  had  left  it.  Gourdon  and  Grandallana  were 
still  at  their  moorings,  and  neither  Villencuve  nor  the 
Rochefort  squadron  had  appeared.  Calder  could  only  con- 
clude that  Villeneuve  had  made  for  Cadiz,  and  was  destined 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  Nelson  and  Collingwood.  With 
a  quiet  mind  he  accordingly  decided  to  resume  his  blockade. 
His  original  intention  had  been  to  leave  the  Dragon  behind 
him  in  case  Nelson  might  still  be  coming  north,  but  as 
there  was  now  little  likelihood  of  this,  he  took  her  with 
him  and  left  the  rendezvous  bare.  By  July  20th  he  had 
reconstituted  the  blockade  with  fourteen  of  the  line,  but 
two  days  later  he  decided  to  send  home  his  80 -gun  ship, 
the  Malta,  to  repair  her  damages. 