

Meanwhile  the  Bidon,  having  run  far  to  the  south-west, 

1  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  July  29th  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  328,  and  Log  of  the 
Phoenix.  Fitzroy' s  orders  are  printed  by  James,  vol.  iv.  p.  451-2,  Appendices 
1  and  2. 

2  The  report  of  Captain  Milius  put  the  incident  on  the  8th.  James,  from 
the  Log  of  the  .fi'oZ?ts,  puts  it  on  the  7th,  in  latitude  43°  41',  longitude  10°  11' ; 
that  is,  considerably  to  the  southward  of  the  point  shown  in  Colonel  Desbriere's 
chart:  Frojcts  ct  Tentatives,  v.  731.  Fitzroy's  conduct  led  to  a  violent  con- 
troversy. James,  for  whom  strategical  questions  had  no  interest,  in  his  first 
edition  practically  accused  him  of  cowardice.  Fitzroy  answered  him  in  a 
not  too  judicious  pamphlet.  Captain  Brenton,  in  his  Nav(d  History,  supported 
l<'itzroy,and  James, in  his  second  edition,  returned  to  the  charge  at  great  length 
and  ever  greater  intemperance.  Fitzroy  was  a  tyrannical  and  unpopular  officer, 
but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  blamed  on  this  occasion  by  his  superiors. 
Modern  naval  opinion  would  now  probably  be  unanimous  in  confirming  the 
correctness  of  the  behaviour  of  both  Milius  and  Fitzroy,  on  the  ground  that 
both  were  charged  with  definite  intelligence  duty  vital  to  the  campaign. 
In  contrast  with  Fitzroy's  behaviour,  James  praises  the  Niohe^s,  who,  having 
no  special  information,  chased  a  strange  sail  for  three  days  and  three  nights 
with  the  result  that  she  never  found  Calder  at  all ;  and  yet  he  blames  Milius 
for  engaging  the  Phoenix  later.  For  the  whole  controversy  see  James 
(ed.  1902),  iv.  pp.  54-G5. 


Aug.  io  DIDON   AND    PIKENIX  223 

and  finding  herself  no  longer  observed,  determined  to  make 
another  effort  to  get  north  to  Allemand's  rendezvous. 
Hauling  her  wind  again  to  the  north-west,  she  headed 
almost  straight  for  Calder's  Finisterre  rendezvous,  and  sure 
enough  at  daybreak  on  the  10  th  she  sighted  a  strange 
cruiser  in  the  distance  that  at  once  gave  chase.  Now  it  so 
happened  that  Milius,  like  every  one  else,  had  just  boarded 
the  American  from  Bordeaux,  who  by  this  time  must  have 
been  entering  into  the  humour  of  his  position  with  thorough 
enjoyment.  He  informed  Milius  that  the  stranger  was 
certainly  the  British  cruiser  Phoenix,  on  board  of  whom  he 
had  been  summoned  the  previous  day.  She  had  only 
twenty  guns,  he  said,  but  her  captain  and  officers  had  so 
high  a  conceit  of  her  and  themselves  that  they  would  cer- 
tainly fight.  But  in  fact  the  Yankee  was  lying.  There 
was  sport  in  hand,  and  he  would  not  spoil  it.  It  was  true 
he  had  been  on  board  the  Phcenix,  as  he  said,  but  having 
asked  to  be  shown  round  the  ship,  he  found  her  commander. 
Captain  Baker,  had  disguised  her  to  look  like  a  sloop.  In 
fact,  she  was  a  frigate  of  thirty-six  guns.  But  Baker  had 
bought  some  cases  of  claret  from  him,  probably  at  his  own 
price,  and  having  been  otherwise  handsomely  treated  he 
went  back  to  his  ship  in  high  good  humour,  determined  to 
play  the  English  captain's  game. 