

Meanwhile  Villeneuve  found  himself  at  Vigo  in  what 
he  called  "  a  most  distressing  situation."  He  had  neither 
orders  nor  intelligence ;  the  port  was  without  defence  or 
any  means  of  repairing  his  ships  ;  scurvy  and  dysentery 
were  playing  havoc  with  his  crews,  and  besides  the  two 
ships  he  had  lost,  three  others,  as  the  result  of  the  action, 
were  unfit  for  service.  In  this  plight  he  had  summoned 
Gourdon  to  come  to  him,  but  Gourdon  could  only  reply  it 
was  impossible.  He  had  not  yet  been  able  to  get  out  to 
Corufia.  There  was  nothing  for  it  then  but  for  Villencuve 
to  try  to  get  to  him  at  the  risk  of  another  action.  "  May 
a  new  meeting,"  he  said,  "  be  more  fortunate  than  the  first." 
By  hook  or  by  crook  he  scraped  together  a  month's  water 
and  victuals  for  the  fifteen  vessels  which  now  constituted 
his  squadron,  and  on  the  last  day  of  July,  leaving  his  sick 
and  wounded  behind  with  the  three  disabled  vessels,  he 
put  to  sea  intent  on  reaching  Ferrol  without  an  action. 
Outside  on  the  morrow,  August  1st,  he  was  fortunate 
enough     to     find     a    strong    south-westerly    breeze,     and 


July  ALLEMAND  2 1 3 

with  all  speed  he  stole  away  northward,  close  along  the 
shore. 

And  where  was  Allemand  ?  Why  had  he  not  made 
Ferrol  ?  Three  days  after  Stirling  had  disappeared  from 
Rochefort  he  had  put  to  sea,  with  his  broad  pennant  in 
the  Majestueiix  120.  His  squadron  besides  comprised  four 
two-deckers  and  five  cruisers — an  ideal  force  for  the  Avork 
he  had  in  hand.  It  must  be  recalled  that  the  last  orders 
which  had  reached  him  were  to  make  a  demonstration  off 
the  West  Coast  of  Ireland,  and  be  back  at  a  certain  ren- 
dezvous 40  leagues  west  of  Ferrol  in  time  to  meet  the 
combined  squadron  on  its  return  from  the  West  Indies. 
His  main  object,  in  fact,  as  laid  down  by  Napoleon,  was  to 
bring  about  the  long-sought  junction  with  Villeneuve.  It 
was  characteristic  of  Napoleon's  inexplicable  elimination 
of  the  enemy  from  his  naval  dispositions,  that  the  ren- 
dezvous he  fixed  for  the  meeting  was  well  within  the  area 
which  Calder  had  been  directed  to  cover. ^  Indeed,  it  was 
just  40  miles  south-east  of  the  point  where  the  battle  of 
July  22nd  was  actually  fought,  and  the  Emperor's  naive 
surprise  Avhen  he  realised  it  we  shall  see  presently.  The 
time  fixed  was  the  end  of  the  month.  Allemand  was  to  be 
on  the  spot  from  July  29th  to  August  3rd,  but  here  was 
another  miscalculation.  The  order  assumed  that  Villeneuve 
would  not  start  home  till  thirty-five  days  after  Magon 
arrived.  A  possible  interference  by  Nelson  had  been 
ignored,  and  now  Nelson's  hot  pursuit  outwards  had  had 
the  effect  of  driving  Villeneuve  home,  not  only  too  soon  to 
meet  Allemand,  but  too  soon  to  receive  the  despatch  which 
explained  the  new  arrangement  for  his  junction  with  the 
Rochefort  squadron. 