

For  all  the  serious  state  of  affairs  in  Turkey,  the  idea  is 
open  to  an  obvious  criticism.  If  Pitt  was  really  focussing 
his  plan  of  campaign  on  a  combined  offensive  movement 
against  Napoleon  in  Italy  in  concert  with  Russia,  elementary 
strategy  demanded  that  he  should  concentrate  all  disposable 
force  upon  that  movement.  It  can  only  be  said  it  was  no 
mere  question  of  elementary  strategy.  The  situation  was 
confused  by  the  mutual  suspicions  of  the  parties  to  the  still 
incomplete  Coalition.  Though  its  prospects  were  certainly 
brightening,  the  British  ministers  could  not  suddenly  dismiss 
their  suspicion  that  the  continental  Powers  concerned  were 
perhaps  playing  for  their  own   hands,   and   might  at  any 

1  Same  to  same,  June  29th  :    Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  185. 

^  In-letters  {Secretary  of  State),  4200,  July  25th.  This  order  and  that  last 
mentioned  of  the  27th  were  anterior  to  the  receipt  of  Gower's  despatches,  on 
which  they  appear  so  obviously  to  be  founded.  According  to  the  endorse- 
ment, the  despatches  were  received  at  the  Foreign  Office  on  July  29th.  But  it  is 
alruost  certain  Worontzow  had  received  the  information  they  contained  some 
days  earlier,  and  according  to  his  practice  he  would  have  communicated  it  at 
once  to  Pitt.  Gower  explains  that  he  himself  had  had  the  information  "  some 
days  before  he  had  sent  it  on,"  but  that  he  had  been  prevented  from  writing 
"  by  a  severe  indisposition." 


2  36  SITUATION    AT    THE    CRISIS  July 

moment  conic  to  terms  with  Napoleon  and  leave  England 
in  the  lurch.  If  so,  Pitt's  great  scheme  to  cover  India  by 
forcing  Napoleon  back  from  his  advanced  position  in  the 
Mediterranean  would  fall  to  the  ground.  In  so  precarious 
and  unstable  a  diplomatic  situation,  was  it  or  was  it  not 
good  strategy  to  prepare  a  second  line  of  defence  for  our 
Eastern  trade  and  possessions  ?  No  one  but  a  beginner  in 
the  study  of  war  would  presume  to  answer  the  question 
with  confidence.  The  answer  would  seem  to  turn  on  the 
reality  of  the  Turkish  danger,  and  on  the  exact  degree  of 
reliance  that  at  the  time  could  be  placed  upon  the  prospect 
of  the  Coalition.  Of  that  there  Avas  certainly  no  better 
judge  than  Pitt.  In  any  case  the  enterprise  cannot  be 
dismissed  as  a  mere  eccentric  or  sporadic  attack  having 
no  organic  connection  with  the  main  issue.  It  was  in  fact 
an  essential  part  in  the  comprehensive  scheme  of  Imperial 
defence. 

Its  higher  strategical  purpose  was  clearly  set  forth  in 
Pitt's  instructions  to  Lord  Cornwallis,  the  Governor-General 
of  India.  Castlereagh's  despatch,  which  conveyed  them, 
informed  him  that  since  it  Avas  possible  that  India  might 
require  reinforcements  before  they  could  be  sent  out  from 
home,  he  was  authorised  in  case  of  need  to  call  on  Baird 
and  direct  Admiral  Popham  to  cover  the  passage  of  the 
force  against  interference  from  the  French  base  at  Mau- 
ritius. But  it  Avas  only  to  be  done  in  case  of  urgent  danger 
to  India.  "  The  whole  of  this  instruction,"  Castlereagh 
explained,  "  proceeds  upon  the  principle  that  the  true  value 
of  the  Cape  to  Great  Britain  is  its  being  considered  and 
treated  at  all  times  as  an  outpost  subservient  to  the  protec- 
tion and  security  of  our  Indian  possessions.  When  in  our 
hands  it  must  afford  considerable  accommodation  and 
facilities  to  our  intercourse  Avith  those  possessions,  but  its 
occupation  is  perhaps  even  more  material  as  depriving  the 
enemy  of  the  best  intermediate  position  betAveen  Europe 
and  India  for  assembling  a  large  European  armament  for 
service  in  the  East  Indies,"  as  Avell  as  for  the  intercepting 
and  protection  of  trade.  Lord  Cornwallis  therefore,  before 
making  a  call  on  the  expeditionary  force,   Avas  to  consider 