

Of  the  effect  this  intelligence  had  upon  Pitt's  mind 
there  is  no  direct  evidence.  But  the  action  he  took  sug- 
gests that  his  quick  eye  for  a  situation  saw  in  it  the 
moment  of  all  others  for  high  action.  Though  England 
was  in  the  crisis  of  her  defence  against  the  long-threatened 
invasion,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  give  new  impetus  to  his 
measure  for  attack.  Certainly  it  was  the  hour  at  which 
England  at  all  risks  should  show  she  had  the  power  and  the 
will  to  strike,  for  all  Napoleon's  effort  to  bind  her  hands. 
What  at  least  is  certain,  is  that  in  the  height  of  the  dis- 
turbance which  the  news  from  the  Texel  was  causing,  and 
regardless  of  the  resulting  strain  on  the  Navy,  Pitt  laid  fresh 
burdens  upon  it.  The  Russian  demand  had  to  be  honoured, 
and  on  July  27th  he  decided  that  the  Commander-in-chief 
in  the  Mediterranean  was  to  concert  measures  with  Craig  to 
carry  out  the  joint  action  in  Italy,  which  the  "  extended  " 
Russian  plan  demanded.  This  meant  providing  transport 
and  escort  for  25,000  troops  from  the  Black  Sea,  as  well  as 
for  the  6000  of  Craig's  force  at  Malta." 

But  this  was  not  all.  For  in  a  separate  despatch  from 
Gower  there  was  news  of  a  fresh  danger  against  which 
England  must  be  prepared  to  strike  alone,  whether  the 
Powers  took  action  or  not.  "  The  state  of  affairs  in  Con- 
stantinople," wrote  the  Ambassador,  "is  at  this  moment 
extremely  critical."  The  Russian  Ambassador  at  the  Porte 
had  sent  his  Government  word  that  General  Joubert  had 
arrived  there  with  a  personal  letter  from  Napoleon  to  the 
Sultan   and  a  large   sum    of  money,  to    secure    adherents 

^  Novosilzow  to  Worontzow,  Berlin,  July  18th:  Holland  Rose,  Third 
CodJition,  p.  182  and  186-7.  This  last  despatch  was  not  actually  communi- 
cated to  the  Foreij:?n  Office  till  Aui2:ust  3rd,  but  its  purport  must  have  been 
known  to  Pitt  much  earlier.     See  next  page,  note  2. 

-  Hawkesbury  to  the  Admiralty,  July  27th :  Admiralty  In-lctters  {Secretary 
of  State),  4199. 


July  BAIRD'S    EXPEDITION  235 

to  the  French  interests.  A  new  Grand  Vizier  devoted  to 
France  had  come  to  power ;  a  typically  indiscreet  Russian 
governor  had  committed  an  untimely  violation  of  Turkish 
territory ;  our  own  Ambassador  had  not  yet  appeared,  and 
the  negotiations  which  had  been  in  progress  for  a  Russo- 
Turkish  Alliance  had  been  broken  offV  Here  then  Avas  a 
recrudescence  of  the  old  danger  which  Nelson  had  scotched 
at  the  Nile,  and  for  all  his  preoccupations  Pitt  would 
not  leave  it  alone.  At  Cork  there  was  still  Eyre  Coote's 
force  waiting  in  inaction.  When  it  was  known  that  Ville- 
neuve  had  left  the  West  Indies,  it  had  been  ordered  to 
stand  fast  a  second  time.  Coote's  appointment  as  Governor 
of  Jamaica,  however,  was  not  cancelled,  and  General  David 
Baird  had  succeeded  him  in  command.  This  force  then 
was  now  disposable,  and  Barham  was  informed  that  the 
Government  intended  to  use  it  for  a  secret  expedition  to 
capture  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  It  would  consist  of 
between  six  and  seven  thousand  men,  and  the  Admiralty 
was  to  provide  a  battle  squadron  and  cruisers  for  the  escort 
under  Sir  Home  Popham."^ 