

'  James,  who  gives  .a  minute  accoant  of  the  action  (iv.  p.  70),  furnishes  the 
following  comparative  table : — 


Jiroadsidc. 

Crcio. 

Tons. 

Phcenix  . 

.     21  guns,  444  lbs. 

245 

844 

Didon     . 

.     23  \,      563    „ 

330 

1091 

The  Phcenix  affords  a  typical  example  of  the  advantage  of  the  carronade 
armament.  Baker  had  had  her  re-armed  on  the  new  system  with  26  short 
18-pounders,  4  9-pounders,  and  12  32-pounder  carronades.  The  effect  was 
almost  to  double  her  weight  of  metal.  Originally  her  broadside  was  only 
265  lbs. 


Aug.  II  13  BIBON  AND    PHCENTX  225 

as  the  breeze  came  back.  In  a  few  minutes  her  tattered 
sails  began  to  draw,  and  she  was  bearing  down  again  to 
renew  the  action.  The  Bidon  had  already  lost  over  seventy 
killed  and  wounded  ;  she  Avas  absolutely  helpless  ;  and  Milius 
ended  a  gallant  and  well-managed  action  by  hauling  down 
his  flag/ 

Baker  had  won,  but  his  position  was  by  no  means  easy. 
Nearly  all  his  officers  were  wounded;  he  had  less  than  200  men 
to  manage  some  350  unwounded  prisoners,  and  a  dismasted 
prize,  200  tons  bigger  than  himself,  to  get  into  safety. 
Taking  her  in  tow,  he  made  away  to  join  Calder  off  Ferrol, 
but  ere  he  reached  his  destination  he  fell  in  with  the  Bragon 
making  for  the  Finisterre  rendezvous  to  try  to  fall  in  with 
Nelson,  with  intelligence  that  the  blockade  was  raised  and 
Allemand  at  sea.  Her  news  was  such  as  made  it  madness 
to  try  to  get  north,  and  under  her  escort  Baker  turned 
back  to  get  out  of  harm's  way. 

For  the  supreme  hour  had  come :  everything  was  in 
movement  for  the  final  cast,  and  it  was  Baker  who,  by  his 
fine  action,  had  ensured  that  at  the  crisis  of  the  campaign, 
in  spite  of  Napoleon's  exhaustive  ingenuity,  the  Rochefort 
squadron  should  remain  as  it  had  begun,  lost  and  in  the 
air — in  touch  Avith  no  one,  and  unable  in  any  way  to  affect 
the  issue. 

^  For  further  details   see  James,  iv.  65    et  seq.^  and  Captain  Baker   to 
Cornwallis  :  BlocJcade  of  Brest,  ii.  338. 


I 


CHAPTER  XVI 

GENERAL   SITUATION   AT  THE   CRISIS 

The  turning-point  of  the  campaign  was  at  hand,  but  the 
hour  was  big  with  far  more  than  the  crisis  of  a  campaign. 
A  hundred  years  of  rivalry  for  the  lordship  of  the  sea  was 
drawing  to  culmination,  and  the  protagonists,  as  in  some 
old  drama  of  destiny,  were  fairly  face  to  face  upon  the 
imposing  stage.  On  the  cliffs  of  Boulogne,  at  the  zenith 
of  his  powers,  was  the  greatest  master  of  war  the  long 
struggle  had  produced,  alert  and  straining  for  the  catas- 
trophe amidst  the  sound  and  pomp  of  the  Grand  Army. 
Over  against  him,  unknown  to  fame  and  bent  with  his 
eighty  years,  a  sailor  sat  alone  in  the  silence  of  his  room 
at  Whitehall.  Unseen  and  almost  unnoticed  he  Avas  gather- 
ing in  his  fingers  the  threads  of  the  tradition  which  the 
recurring  wars  had  spun,  and  handling  them  with  a  deft 
mastery  to  which  the  distant  fleets  gave  sensitive  response. 
The  splendour  of  quick  success  and  an  unrivalled  genius 
for  war  was  arrayed  against  hard- won  experience  and  the 
instinct  it  had  bred,  and  it  was  arrayed  in  vain. 