

'  Baiham  to  Cornwallis,  Aug.  15th  :  Hist.  MSS.  Com.,  Various  Collections,  vi. 
p.  411. 


July  THE    COALITION    RIPENS  233 

he  was  to  stay  at  Berlin  and  endeavour  to  press  the 
halting  Prussian  Government  into  line.^  The  news  which 
now  came  to  hand  was  that  Napoleon's  defiant  annexa- 
tion of  Northern  Italy  had  exhausted  the  Czar's  patience. 
"  Such  an  act,"  wrote  Gower,  "  at  the  very  moment  when 
a  Russian  plenipotentiary  was  expected  in  France  charged 
with  propositions  of  Avhich  the  professed  object  had  been 
the  general  arrangement  of  the  affairs  of  Europe,  is  con- 
sidered so  gross  an  insult  to  both  Sovereigns  whose 
sentiments  that  plenipotentiary  was  empowered  to  declare, 
that  his  Imperial  Majesty  had  judged  he  could  not  .  .  . 
permit  Monsieur  Novosilzow  to  proceed."  An  express 
consequently  had  been  sent  to  recall  him. 

So  far  all  was  well,  but  Gower  had  to  report  that  feeling 
at  the  Russian  Court  was  almost  equally  sore  at  Pitt's  insis- 
tence on  the  retention  of  Malta,  and  his  categorical  refusal 
even  to  consider  a  modification  of  the  Maritime  Code.  To 
Gower's  explanations  and  arguments  they  had  responded 
by  reproaching  him  with  the  fact  that  no  answer  had  been 
received  from  London  to  the  proposition  the  Czar  had  made 
for  an  extended  plan  of  operations  and  an  increase  of  the 
British  subsidy  in  return  for  an  increase  of  the  Russian 
troops.  Fortunately  at  the  moment  a  despatch  arrived 
from  London  frankly  accepting  the  new  proposals,  and 
the  sky  began  to  clear.  Gower  said  he  had  not  been 
able  actually  to  secure  the  ratification,  but  that  he  had 
no  doubt  he  would  be  able  to  announce  it  in  his  next 
despatch.^ 

At  the  same  time  Worontzow,  at  the  Russian  embassy 
in  London,  received  information  from  Novosilzow  at  Berlin 
that  Austria  was  coming  round.  She  was  beginning  to 
realise,  he  said,  that  force  was  the  only  remedy,  and  though 
apparently  acquiescing  in  Napoleon's  seizure  of  the  Iron 
Crown,  was  only  waiting  for  the  right  moment  to  declare 
her  adhesion  to  the  Coalition.     Prussia,  too,  was  inclining 

^  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  June  lOth  :  Foreign  Office,  Russia,  58.  Endorsed, 
"  Received  July  3rd."     Printed  in  Holland  Kose  :  Third  Coalition,  p.  174. 

2  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  June  29tl).  Endorsed,  "Received  July  29th." 
Foreign  Office,  Russia,  58.     Printed  in  Holland  Rose :  Third  Coalition,  p.  18o. 


2  34  SITUATION    AT    THE    CRISIS  July 

to  repent  lier  subservience.  "  They  see  more  clearly," 
wrote  the  Russian  envoy  when  he  reached  Berlin,  *•  Buona- 
parte is  no  more  a  guardian  angel,  but  an  out-and-out 
devil,  and  they  are  persuaded  that  this  devil  will  gobble 
Germany  if  they  let  him  alone  and  persist  any  longer  in 
their  inaction."  ^ 