


July  THE    EAST    INDIAN    DEFLECTION  237 

fully  on  these  lines  the  relative  advantage  of  summoning 
Baird  to  India  or  holding  the  Cape.-^ 

The  reasoning  is  plain.  In  the  previous  winter,  when 
Napoleon  began  to  regard  the  invasion  of  England  as  im- 
practicable, he  had  formulated  a  plan  for  such  an  attack 
on  India  as  Castlereagh's  despatch  indicated.  Seeing  how 
confident  the  Government  was  in  the  impregnability  of 
their  home  defence,  there  was  every  possibility  that  Na- 
poleon would  shortly  be  forced  back  once  more  on  Colonial 
attack  as  a  means  of  containing  the  British  forces ;  and 
Joubert's  appearance  at  Constantinople  gave  strong  colour 
to  the  apprehension  that  India  would  be  the  possession 
chosen.  If  so,  no  success  in  the  Mediterranean  could 
prevent  his  making  such  an  attack,  particularly  if  he 
secured  the  co-operation  of  the  Porte.  Moreover,  howso- 
ever strong  our  position  in  the  Mediterranean  and  the 
Near  East,  it  would  still  be  open  to  him  to  turn  it  by  way 
of  the  Cape.  So  long  as  it  was  in  the  hands  of  his  Dutch 
vassals  it  was  a  real  danger.  It  gave  him  a  line  of  opera- 
tion at  least  as  formidable  as  that  by  way  of  Egypt  and  the 
Red  Sea,  or  of  Turkey  and  the  Persian  Gulf.  To  mass  all 
our  available  force  on  the  one  line  was  to  leave  the  other 
open.  It  lay  over  an  open  sea,  and  it  was  consequently 
impossible  to  secure  it  by  naval  force  alone,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  narrow  seas  at  home.  It  is  therefore  unsafe  to 
dismiss  the  idea  with  contempt  by  applying  crudely  the 
simple  test  of  concentration.  It  was  in  effect  a  concentra- 
tion of  effort  upon  one  object,  but  from  geographical  exi- 
gencies and  the  existing  political  conditions  it  was  more 
than  doubtful  whether  the  correlative  concentration  of 
force  could  surely  be  effective  on  one  line  of  operations 
only.  In  any  case  the  whole  question  will  serve  as  a 
warning  that  the  broad  combined  problems  of  Imperial 
defence  are  not  to  be  solved  off-hand  by  the  facile  applica- 
tion of  maxims  which  are  the  outcome  of  narrower  and 
less  complex  continental  conditions. 

Such   then  were  the   involved  considerations  through 

^  Castlereagh  to  Cornwallis,  September  10th.     (Copy  communicated  to  the 
Admiralty.)     Admiralty  In-letters  [Sec/reUir y  of  State),  4200. 


23  8  SITUATION    AT    THE    CRISIS  July 

Avbicli  Pitt  and  Barhain  had  to  steer  their  course,  as  they 
faced  the  crisis  in  the  Narrow  Seas.  They  are  considera- 
tions which  at  first  sight  may  appear  to  have  little  to  do 
with  it,  but  in  fact  it  will  be  seen  that  they  deter mmed 
the  crucial  movement  which  we  have  now  to  consider  :  and 
no  right  judgment  of  it  is  possible  unless  they  be  kept 
firmly  in  mind. 