


230  SITUATION    AT   THE    CRISIS  Aug.  3-4 

attack  except  when  a  clearly  favourable  opportunity  for  a 
counter-stroke  presented  itself.^ 

The  main  function  of  Cornwallis  was,  of  course,  to  cover 
the  defensive  position  of  Lord  Keith,  and  to  prevent  a 
hostile  battle  fleet  from  disturbing  it.  So  impregnable 
indeed  Avas  Keith's  position,  so  long  as  it  was  undisturbed 
from  the  ocean,  that  that  of  CornAvallis  was  the  real  key  of 
the  situation.  For  this  reason  he  had  been  told,  it  will  be 
remembered,  that  all  orders  for  detachments  Avere  to  be 
regarded  by  him  as  conditional  on  his  keeping  eighteen  of 
the  line  Avith  his  flag.  The  second  order  to  send  three 
vessels  to  Keith  Avas  consequently  difficult  to  deal  Avith. 
He  received  it  on  August  4th,  just  after  he  had  heard  from 
Calder  that  Villeneuve  had  disappeared  after  the  action, 
and  that  he  had  resumed  the  blockade  of  Ferrol  and  sent 
Stirling  back  to  Rochefort.  So  far  all  Avas  well,  but  he  had 
noAv  only  just  eighteen  of  the  line  Avith  his  flag;  the 
detachment  Avould  reduce  the  squadron  beloAv  the  prescribed 
minimum.  Nevertheless,  Cornwallis  obeyed  and  sent  aAvay 
his  three  Aveakest  ships,  Avhich  Avere  also  those  best  suited 
to  the  service  on  the  Dutch  coast.^  Apparently  the  dan- 
gerous Aveakness  to  Avhich  the  central  position  had  thus 
been  reduced  Avas  quickly  realised,  for  on  July  30  th  the 
three  seventy -fours  Avere  ordered  to  return  to  CornAvallis's 
flag.^  It  Avas  just  at  this  time  the  Admiralty  received  news 
of  Calder's  indecisive  action,  and  his  OAvn  opinion  that 
Villeneuve  Avould  probably  get  into  Ferrol,  and  that  he 
himself  Avould  have  to  close  on  CornAvallis.  Barham  Avas 
already  of  opinion  that  a  rapid  concentration  of  every 
available  ship  off  Ushant  Avas  the  simple  and  only  solu- 
tion of  the  disturbed  situation.  The  closing  in  of  the 
Western  Squadron  Avas  already  provided  for,  and  on 
August  3rd  an  order  Avas  sent   down   to  Nelson  to  come 


^  Secret  Orders :  Out-letters,  July  21st.  For  the  operations  in  question  see 
James,  iii.  318-?>23  ;  Desbri^re,  v.  418-425;  Keith  to  the  Admiralty,  July 
18th-23rd,  with  enclosures  :  In-letters,  551. 

'■^  Princess  of  Orange  74  (formerly  the  Washington),  a  Dutch  prize;  Ruht/ 
C)\,  Polyphemus  6i.  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  August  4th:  Blockade  of  Brest, 
ii.  330. 

^  Minute  of  July  30th  :  Barliavi  Papers. 


Aug.  15         CORNWALLIS'S    INSTRUCTIONS  231 

up  and  join  it,  after  detaching  whatever  he  regarded  as 
necessary  to  enable  ColHngwood  to  maintain  the  blockade 
of  Cadiz.^ 

The  broad  strategical  principles  underlying  these  dispo- 
sitions, and  Barham's  fundamental  views  as  to  the  functions 
of  the  Western  Squadron  in  the  war-plan,  are  clearly  indi- 
cated in  a  memorandum  which  he  sent  at  this  time  to 
Cornwallis.  It  will  be  seen  that  his  duties  were  far  from 
being  merely  defensive.  Subject  to  the  primary  exigencies 
of  defence  in  home  waters,  his  fleet  was  the  active  centre 
from  which  minor  counter  attacks  were  to  be  flung  off  as 
opportunity  or  need  arose.  "  I  had  wrote  you,"  the  memo- 
randum runs,  "  a  private  instruction,  when  we  first  heard 
of  the  Rochefort  squadron  being  at  sea,  to  send  four  ships 
of  the  line  to  intercept  them,  but  the  alarm  from  the 
eastward  obliged  us  to  send  those  ships  to  Lord  Keith, 
which  would  otherwise  have  come  to  you."  .   .   . 