

Ever  since  Napoleon  had  realised  with  reluctant  con- 
viction that  to  pass  his  army  across  the  Channel  by  stealth 
or  its  own  force  was  impossible,  he  had  been  exhausting  his 
strategical  ingenuity  to  secure  the  temporary  command. 
He  had  run  the  gamut  of  every  device  his  predecessors 
had  ever  tried.  No  trick  or  compelling  movement  had 
been  neglected  to  dissipate  the  force  that  barred  his  way, 
to  entice  the  persistent  guard  from  its  impregnable  position, 
or  by  surprise  to  fling  upon  it  an  overwhelming  mass  of  his 
own  streno^th.  For  seven  crowded  months  he  had  schemed 
and  striven  with   the  utmost  power  of  his  genius  and  with 


July         EFFECTS   OF    MARMONT'S    THREAT        227 

nearly  the  Avhole  seaboard  of  Europe  at  his  call ;  and  yet 
when  the  hour  came  his  squadrons  were  still  impotently 
divided ;  and  far  from  clearing  the  way  for  their  union, 
his  efforts  were  only  drawing  together  at  the  old  strategical 
centre  practically  the  whole  available  battle  strength  of  his 
enemy. 

For  Barham  and  Cornwallis  it  had  been  a  time  of  acute 
anxiety.  The  mise  en  scene  which  Napoleon  had  directed 
Marmont  to  arrange  in  the  Texel — his  latest  device  to 
loosen  the  British  grip  of  the  Channel — had  had  its  effect. 
Since  the  second  week  in  July  intelligence  reports  had  been 
coming  in  from  Holland  of  a  sudden  activity  in  the  Holder. 
All  transports  had  been  moved  out  to  the  Texel  Roads, 
three  ships  of  the  line  ordered  thence  to  Flushing  had 
been  told  to  stand  fast,  seven  of  the  line  and  four  frigates 
were  ready  for  sea,  and  ammunition  was  pouring  in  along 
the  roads  from  Amsterdam.  Our  agent  was  not  deceived. 
Every  one  believed  it  meant  a  genuine  movement,  "  but  I," 
he  said,  "  am  enabled  to  tell  you  the  truth.  The  plan  is 
now  for  certain  to  risk  a  stroke  on  Ireland,  and  all  that 
is  done  on  our  [that  is,  the  Dutch]  coast  has  no  other 
object  than  to  mislead  the  enemy."  A  few  days  later, 
however,  came  more  emphatic  information  of  Marmont's 
activity,  and  the  Government  felt  they  could  no  longer 
leave  things  as  they  were.^  Then,  as  always,  the  threat 
of  troops  and  ships  in  action  together  could  not  be  ignored. 
They  suggested  naturally  that  Napoleon  was  contemplating 
getting  a  squadron  into  the  Texel  north-about,  and  as 
according  to  the  First  Lord's  calculation,  the  Ushaiit 
squadron  had  then  twenty-five  of  the  line,  it  was  decided 
to  reinforce  Lord  Keith  in  the  Downs,  and  Cornwallis 
was  ordered  to  send  him  three  seventy-fours.^  Keith's 
own  attitude  Avas  one  of  resolute  incredulity,  but  he  told 
the  Government,  if  they  attached  any  importance  to  the 
news,  he  advised   that    Admiral    Russell,   who    under    his 