


JULYI7-I8     BARHAM    AND    THE    FLOTILLA  229 

he  had  repeated  his  orders  to  Va.shon,  and  had  instructed 
Russell  that  in  case  of  need  he  was  to  fall  back  to  the 
Dovvns.^ 

Barham's  attitude  to  the  ilotilla  theatre  of  operations  is 
well  shown  by  an  interesting  episode  which  occurred  just  at 
this  time,  and  which  marks  the  sharp  distinction  he  drew 
between  the  defensive  and  the  offensive  parts  of  the  plan 
of  campaign.  The  young  captains  of  the  advanced  cruisers 
were  seizing  every  opportunity  of  striking  at  the  belated 
sections  of  the  French  flotilla  as  they  passed  to  the  ports 
of  concentration,  and  even  at  the  Bouloo^ne  units  when 
divisions  came  out  for  practice.  On  July  17th  and  18th  a 
more  than  usually  serious  affair  of  this  kind  had  occurred, 
as  Admiral  Ver  Huell  was  passing  a  strong  section  from  Dun- 
kirk to  Boulogne.  The  attack  had  been  pushed  home  with 
so  much  energy  and  daring  that  considerable  damage  was 
inflicted  on  Ver  Hu ell's  vessels ;  but  the  movement  was  not 
stopped,  and  the  British  cruisers  engaged  had  suffered  some- 
what severely  from  the  shore  batteries.  Keith  reported  the 
incident,  with  commendation  of  the  brilliant  behaviour  of 
the  officers  concerned.  But  it  was  all  quite  contrary  to 
Barham's  ideas,  and  while  fully  recognising  the  courage  and 
devotion  of  the  attempt,  he  informed  Keith  that  this  kind 
of  operation  was  not  in  accordance  with  sound  strategy. 
He  was  to  understand  that  it  must  not  occur  again.  On 
no  account  were  attacks  to  be  made  on  the  flotilla  under 
the  shore  batteries  by  the  cruisers  of  his  command.  "  It 
may  be,"  he  said,  "  the  means  of  losing  them  when  they 
may  be  required  for  more  material  service."  In  other 
words,  in  the  defensive  area  of  the  British  plan,  the  forces 
were  to  remain  on   the  defensive,  and   on   no   account   to 

^  Keith  to  the  Admiralty,  July  28th  :  In-lcttcrs,  551.  Keith  had  under  his 
command  at  this  time  four  flag-officers  :  Rear-Admiral  Vashon,  in  one  of  the 
Leith  guardships  ;  Rear-^^dmiral  "  Billy  "  Douglas,  in  the  Leopard  50,  watching 
the  Boulogne  flotilla  ;  Rear- Admiral  T.  M.  Russell,  with  the  Yarmouth-Texel 
division  ;  and  Vice-Admiral  John  Holloway,  in  the  Nore  guardship  for  the 
defence  of  the  Thames.  The  Admiralty,  liowever,  kept  a  ver}'  direct  control 
of  the  distribution  of  the  ships  and  the  general  strategy.  Keith  habitually 
submits  his  proposed  instructions  for  his  flag-officers  to  the  Admiralty,  and 
sometimes  seems  to  request  that  direct  orders  in  accordance  with  them 
should  be  sent  to  the  flag-officer  concerned,  if  the  Admiralty  approved  his 
suggestion.     In-letters,  551-2,  July  22nd  ;  August  15th,  ct  passim. 