


1  Intelligence  from  Holland,  July  10th,  13th,  and  18th  :  Admiralty  In-letters 
{Secretary  of  State),  4199. 

2  Minutes  of  July  22nd  :  Barham  Papers.     The  ships  detailed  in  the  order 
were  Defence,  Goliath,  and  Zealous. 


228  SITUATION    AT    THE    CRISIS         July 22-6 

orders  was  watching  the  Dutch  coast  from  Yarmouth, 
ouofht  to  bo  directed  never  to  leave  the  Texel.  He 
would  reinforce  him  as  soon  as  possible  and  keep  a  frigate 
at  hand,  so  that  he  himself  could  take  command  if  anything 
happened.  Meanwhile  he  had  ordered  Admiral  Vashon, 
who  from  Leith  was  controlling  the  northern  section  of 
his  command,  to  warn  his  cruisers  on  the  Norwegian  coast 
to  be  specially  vigilant.^ 

The  anxiety  of  the  Government,  however,  increased. 
Four  days  later  information  came  in  from  Lord  Strangford, 
our  chargd- d'affaires  at  Lisbon,  that  Villeneuve's  instructions 
were  certainly  to  return  north- about  and  release  Marmont's 
force  in  the  Texel.^  It  was  intelligence  which,  as  we  know, 
was  not  entirely  without  foundation.  The  idea  was  actually 
one  of  the  alternatives  with  which  Napoleon's  brain  was 
teeming.  Strangford  had  received  the  information  direct 
from  Paris ;  the  Curiettxs  report  of  Villeneuve's  course  en- 
dorsed it,  and  the  danger  became  more  serious.  That  very 
day  the  Admiralty  issued  an  order  to  Cornwallis  that  he 
must  send  three  more  of  the  line  to  Lord  Keith  "  with  all 
possible  despatch,"  and  at  the  same  time  Rear-Admiral 
Drury,  who  Avas  still  in  command  of  the  Irish  station,  Avas 
directed  to  keep  a  vigilant  watch  for  "  any  part  of  the 
enemy's  squadron,"  and  if  anything  appeared  to  send  Avord 
by  fast  sailing  vessels  to  Ushant,  to  the  Admiralty,  and  to 
Nelson  at  Lagos.^ 

Lord  Keith  Avas  still  sceptical.  On  receipt  of  Strang- 
ford's  information  he  replied  that  he  attached  little 
credit   to  it,  but   in  deference   to  the  Government's  vicAV 

^  Keith  to  the  Admiralty,  July  22nd :  In-letters,  551.  Keith  at  this  time 
had  his  flag  in  the  block  ship  St.  Albans  off  Ramsgate. 

2  Adraindty  Jn-lcttcrs  {Secretary  of  State),  4199.     Received  July  26th. 

^  Marsden  to  Cornwallis  (two  despatches),  July  26th  :  Barham  Papers.  At 
this  time  also  Hawkesbury  from  the  Home  Office  was  pressing  the  Admiralty 
for  lieutenants  to  take  charge  of  a  chain  of  signal  stations  that  was  being 
established  on  the  Irish  coasts,  and  the  Admiralty  had  difficulty  in  meeting 
the  demand.  The  stations  extended  from  Pigeon  House  (Dublin)  to  Bun- 
raalion  in  Waterford,  clustering  closely  round  the  south-east  corner  of  the 
island.  Beyond  Cork  they  began  again  at  Too  Head,  and  continued  by  Cape 
Clear  and  the  Great  l^lasket  as  far  as  Brandon  Head  in  Kerry.  Thence,  at 
wider  intervals,  they  stretched  by  Galway  Bay  to  Malin's  Head  in  the  extreme 
north.  A  list  of  tliem — twenty-sevon  in  number — is  in  Admiralty  la-lrttcrs 
{Secretary  of  State),  4200,  Augus't  5th. 