

"It  is  truly  mortifying  not  to  be  able  to  seize  such 
opportunities  when  they  offer,  and  it  will  be  my 
study  to  keep  your  fleet  as  strong  in  numbers  as  pos- 
sible, so  as  to  allow  you  to  detach  squadrons  for  annoy- 
ing the  enemy,  as  often  as  you  hear  of  them  being  in 
your  neighbourhood  without  waiting  for  orders  from 
home." 

"  As  the  Western  Squadron  is  the  mainspring  from 
which  all  offensive  operations  must  proceed,  it  shall  be 
my  care  to  keep  it  as  strong  and  effective  as  possible." 

"  The  enemy  to  the  eastward  are  active  in  appearance, 
but  as  many  things  must  concur  to  bring  such  an  armament 
tp  sea,  they  cannot  attack  us  unobserved." 
■.     ''  I  hope  you  have  an  opportunity  of  communicating  fre- 
quently with  Sir  John  Saumarez,  so  that  information  of  an 

^  Adyniralty  Secretary  [Secret  Orders),  1363.  Shortly  afterwards  sealed 
orders,  the  purport  of  which  is  unknown,  were  sent  by  Cornwallis  to 
Stirling  andCalder,  but  they  never  reached  them.  Some  confusion  occurred 
over  the  reinforcement  of  Keith.  Goliath  and  Defence  reached  the  Downs  on 
July  30th,  the  day  Barham  ordered  them  back.  On  August  6th  the  other  three 
vessels  had  arrived,  and  Keith  acknowledged  an  order  to  send  them  back. 
This  was  cancelled  next  day  by  telegraph,  and  the  ships  were  sent  to  Russell 
off  the  Texel,  with  whom  thev  remained.  In-lcttcrs,  .'351,  July  23rd,  20th. 
JbicL,  552,  August  6tb,  7th,  Bth. 


23  2  SITUATION    AT    THE    CUISIS  july 

attack  to  the  eastward  may  bo  as  early  as  possible,  in  case 
your  assistance  should  become  necessary."  ^ 

Lord  liarham  therefore,  it  is  clear,  while  holding  reso- 
lutely to  the  main  defensive  position,  was  alert  to  strike  in 
any  direction  the  moment  the  tortoise  should  show  its  head. 
As  for  Pitt,  just  as  little  as  the  old  First  Lord  had  he 
suffered  the  preoccupation  with  home  defence  to  loosen  his 
grip  on  the  main  offensive  intention  of  his  policy.  And 
this  is  a  point  of  the  highest  importance,  if  we  are  to  judge 
rightly  the  masterstroke  by  which  the  situation  was  even- 
tually solved.  Whatever  Napoleon  might  think,  he  had 
failed  to  wrest  the  initiative  from  Pitt's  hands.  The  Treaty 
of  Coalition,  it  is  true,  had  not  yet  been  ratified  by  the 
Czar,  but  during  the  last  week  of  July  news  reached  the 
Government  from  St.  Petersburg  Avhich  pointed  to  a  speedy 
conclusion  of  the  whole  matter.  The  Czar's  idea  of  the 
Coalition,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  to  use  it  as  an  armed 
mediation  for  forcing  Napoleon  to  abandon  his  intolerable 
policy  of  aggrandisement,  and  to  assent  to  a  general  settle- 
ment of  Europe  on  terms  acceptable  to  England  and  the 
other  Powers.  We  have  seen  how  the  terms  demanded 
by  England  in  regard  to  her  position  in  the  Mediterranean 
were  not  approved  by  the  Czar.  The  last  despatches  from 
Gower,  received  on  July  3rd,  had  announced  that  Austria 
was  equally  irreconcilable  on  the  point,  and  that  although 
she  was  mobilising  her  army  she  was  not  to  be  trusted. 
Russia,  however,  might  possibly  act  alone,  and  the  Ambas- 
sador had  been  given  to  understand  she  was  going  to 
bring  her  force  in  Corfu  up  to  25,000  men.  General 
Lacy  had  actually  reached  Naples,  and  he  seemed  ready 
to  co-operate  with  Craig  in  South  Italy.  Moreover, 
although  the  Czar  would  not  ratify  the  treaty,  he  Avas 
already  acting  on  it.  He  had  arranged  with  Pitt  that 
a  Russian  envoy  charged  with  the  mediation  should  repre- 
sent both  countries.  The  man  chosen  for  the  mission  was 
Novosilzow,  one  of  the  Czar's  most  confidential  servants, 
and  he  was  on  the  point  of  starting  for  Paris.      On  his  way 