

1  Aug.  13th,  Corrcspondancc,  xi.  80. 


246  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  is 

their  craft,  and  while  he  stood  fuming  between  bewilder- 
ment and  wounded  sclf-coniidence,  making  confusion  worse 
confounded,  the  men  of  the  old  tradition  were  playing  in 
sure  mastery  high  over  his  head. 

It  was  now  they  delivered  their  masterstroke.  In  all 
the  campaign  there  is  no  movement — not  even  Nelson's 
chase  of  Villencuvc — that  breathes  more  deeply  the  true 
spirit  of  war,  and  yet  nothing  in  it  has  been  more  severely 
criticised.  Let  us  see  then  exactly  hoAv  things  stood.  The 
middle  of  August  was  the  actual  crisis  of  Napoleon's  long- 
prepared  threat.  He  himself  was  at  Boulogne,  alert  to  give 
the  Avord  at  any  moment,  and  the  Grand  Army  and  its 
transport  w^ere  ready  or  as  nearly  ready  as  Napoleon's 
genius  could  get  them.  But  at  the  vital  moment  the  great 
concentration  of  the  British  battle  fleet  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Channel  was  also  complete,  and  it  made  the  movement  of 
the  Grand  Army  impossible.  So  long  as  that  concentration 
held  England  Avas  impregnable,  even  to  the  most  formid- 
able attack  that  had  ever  threatened  her.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  main  fleet  of  the  enemy  was  at  Ferrol  free  to 
come  north,  but  also  free  to  go  south  for  Cadiz  and  the 
Mediterranean.  For  all  Barham  or  Cornwallis  could  tell 
this  was  the  game  Napoleon  was  playing — the  game  that 
Talleyrand  was  actually  urging  his  master  to  play.  In  the 
eyes  of  the  British  Admirals  the  whole  project  of  the  in- 
vasion was  so  desperate  that  they  could  not  believe  it  was 
real,  and,  with  experienced  penetration,  they  detected  in  it 
a  device  to  force  upon  them  a  concentration  off  Brest, 
which  Avould  leave  Villeneuve  free  to  strike  to  the  south- 
ward. To  prevent  such  a  movement  of  the  Combined 
Fleet  was,  as  the  British  war-plan  stood,  no  less  important 
than  to  overwhelm  it  if  it  came  north.  What  then  should 
Cornwallis  do  ?  Should  he  rest  content  with  the  control 
of  the  invasion  theatre  :  or  should  he  strike  to  control  the 
whole  theatre  of  the  campaign  ?  Should  he  be  satisfied 
with  impregnable  defence,  or  should  he  risk  it  to  deprive 
the  enemy  of  all  initiative  ?  "  The  Western  Squadron  is  the 
mainspring  from  which  all  offensive  operations  must  pro- 
ceed."    Lord  Barham  was  even  then  writing  the  words  to 


Aug.  i6        THE    CONCENTRATION  BROKEN  247 

him,  but  the  letter  had  not  yet  arrived.^  There  was  not 
a  day  to  lose  ;  at  any  time  Villeneuve  might  be  moving,  and 
if  Cornwallis  waited  for  orders  from  the  Admiralty  it  might 
be  too  late  to  act.  Surely  higher  responsibility  never  rested 
on  an  Admiral  at  sea.  Yet  there  is  not  a  sign  of  hesitation 
in  the  stout  old  officer.  To  wait  for  orders  was  to  abandon 
the  game.  In  his  room  at  the  Admiralty  Barham  was  tell- 
ing him  to  strike  when  he  saw  the  chance,  "  without  wait- 
ing for  orders  from  home,"  and  he  did  not  wait,  even  for 
the  permission. 