

Whether  or  not  he  meant  what  he  said  there  is  no 
sign  yet  that  he  had  admitted  himself  beaten.  That  same 
fevered  day,  with  increasing  passion,  he  poured  forth  letter 
after  letter  to  Decres  with  the  instructions  he  was  to  send 
to  Villeneuve.  By  fair  means  or  foul  the  despairing  Ad- 
miral must  be  heartened,  cajoled,  or  bullied  into  getting  to 
sea  again.  If  this  was  not  the  real  object  of  these  extra- 
ordinary documents — if  Napoleon  really  believed  in  the 
possibility  of  what  he  wrote — he  had  entirely  lost  grip  of 
the  situation.  In  his  frenzy— for  it  was  hardly  less — he 
pictured  the  British  squadrons  deceived  by  his  fancied 
diversions  and  scattered  upon  the  seas — off  Ireland,  in 
the  North  Sea,  in  the  Mediterranean,  everywhere  but  where 
they   were  —  in   the   act   of  gathering  at   the   fatal  point. 

1  For  this  story  and  the  doubts  as  to  its  entire  credibility  see  Auriol,  v. 
p.  452  note  and  493  note.  He  cites  Memoircs  dc  Segur,  p.  158,  where  the  date  is 
given  as  August  13th.  Thiers  puts  the  incident  after  the  23rd,  but  gives  no 
authority  for  his  date  [Consulat  ct  Empire,  v.  4(54). 

-  August  13th;   Cor  res  panda  nee,  xi.  81. 


Aug.  13-15  VIENNA    OR   LONDON  245 

Calculation  after  calculation  of  the  British  force  and  dis- 
position he  showered  upon  Decrcs  and  Villeneuve,  each 
more  groundless,  more  sanguine  than  the  last,  and  all  full 
of  glaring  contradictions  and  false  estimates.  But  his 
lahour  was  thrown  away ;  for  at  that  moment  Villeneuve 
was  already  sailing  from  Coruna  with  his  path  barred  before 
him.  It  was  no  longer  a  question  of  what  he  did  or 
left  undone.  The  game  was  played,  and  Napoleon  was 
outmanoeuvred. 

For  all  his  fierce  refusal  to  admit  the  truth  which 
Talleyrand  had  told  him,  he  was  even  then  preparing  to 
face  it.  On  those  same  critical  days — the  13  th  and  14th 
— he  was  actually  directing  Talleyrand  to  issue  his  revised 
ultimatum  to  Austria.  "  The  answer,"  he  wrote,  "  is  easy  to 
forecast.  It  will  contain  denials,  protestations — in  a  word, 
dilatory  phrases.  That  will  not  do  for  me.  My  decision  is 
made.  I  will  attack  Austria  and  be  at  Vienna  before  the 
month  of  November,  to  face  the  Russians  if  they  show 
themselves."  ^  Possibly  then  he  had  already  half  reahsed 
his  failure.  On  the  15  th,  not  knowing  that  Villeneuve  had 
sailed,  he  wrote  again  in  despair  at  what  seemed  to  him 
the  invincible  ineptitude  of  his  Admiral.  On  his  head  he 
visited  the  results  of  his  own  confused  orders,  and  could  not 
see  they  had  brought  their  own  reward.  His  failure  to 
grasp  the  foundations  of  the  game,  which  every  British 
Admiral  knew  by  heart,  is  almost  incredible  in  so  great  a 
genius  for  war.  In  this  very  letter  he  naively  exposes 
what  can  only  be  called  the  simplicity  with  which  his 
fantastic  plan  had  been  framed.  ''What  I  find  so  extra- 
ordinary in  all  this,"  he  says,  "  is  that  the  place  of  Alle- 
mand's  rendezvous  ...  is  just  the  position  where  the 
battle  was  fought."  Surely  the  barest  knowledge  of  the 
theory  and  practice  of  naval  warfare  would  have  taught 
him  that  that  was  just  the  most  natural  thing  to  expect. 
His  confident  egotism  would  not  recognise  that  he  vv^as 
playing  against  past- masters  of  a  game  at  which  he  was 
only  an  amateur.  What  he  took  for  astute  strategical 
inspirations  were   to   his   opponents   the   commonplaces  of 