

^  Mahan,  ^ea  Power  {French  Rcvolulion),  ii.  576.  It  is  only  just  to  the 
learned  and  gallant  author  to  note  that  this  criticism  was  written  before  he 
had  had  any  experience  of  war  direction.  After  he  had  had  such  experience 
he  gave  a  definition  of  concentration  that  seems  incompatible  with  his 
censure  of  Cornwallis  :  "  Like  a  fan  that  opens  and  shuts,  vessels  thus 
organically  bound  together  possess  the  power  of  wide  sweep,  which  ensures 
exertion  over  a  wide  field  of  ocean,  and  at  the  same  time  that  of  mutual 
support,  because  dependent  upon  and  controlled  from  a  common  centre. 
Such  is  concentration  reasonably  understood — not  huddled  together  like  a 
drove  of  sheep,  but  distributed  with  a  regard  to  a  common  purpose  and  linked 
together  by  the  effectual  energy  of  a  single  will." — War  of  1812,  i.  aiG. 


Aug.  i6  DIVISION    OF   THE    FLEET  251 

sense  have  obtained  it,  but  only  in  regard  to  our  defensive 
area.  Looking  at  the  whole  theatre  of  the  campaign,  he 
had  the  central  position  already.  At  Ferrol  he  was  inter- 
posed between  our  main  force  and  Collingwood  with  the 
Mediterranean  fleet.  On  our  keeping  control  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean rested  our  engagement  with  the  Powers  of  the 
Coalition.  Pitt  at  the  moment  was  absorbed  in  fulfilling 
that  engagement.  It  could  only  be  done  by  preserving  the 
initiative  which  we  had  gained  at  Malta  and  Corfu,  and  for 
that  it  was  essential  that  we  should  forthwith  wrest  the 
central  position  from  Villeneuve.  Having  gained  that  posi- 
tion, Napoleon  had  the  choice  of  striking  at  the  Channel 
or  within  the  Straits,  and  as  the  political  situation  had  de- 
veloped in  the  past  weeks,  it  was  vital  to  deny  him  the 
choice.  The  seeds  which  Pitt  had  sown  so  patiently  were 
ripe  for  the  counter-attack.  As  Cornwallis  had  said,  the 
enemy's  fleets  must  be  "  held  in  check  "  and  the  control  of 
military  action  in  the  Mediterranean  placed  beyond  doubt. 
Had  the  movement  not  taken  place,  as  Codrington  wrote  of 
Villeneuve's  fleet  on  the  eve  of  Trafalgar,  "  this  immense 
force  would  probably  by  this  time  have  been  already  in 
Toulon  to  co-operate  with  the  French  army  in  Italy."  ^ 
The  central  position  of  the  whole  theatre,  in  fact,  stretched 
from  Ferrol  to  Brest,  and  it  was  this  position  that  Barham 
and  Cornwallis  decided  at  once  and  simultaneously  to 
re-occupy. 

It  is  obvious,  then,  that  if  the  movement  be  considered 
in  the  light  of  the  whole  situation,  it  was  one  which  has 
ample  justification  in  the  universal  principles  of  strategy. 
But  beyond  those  principles  lay  a  further  vindication  in 
the  special  exigencies  of  maritime  war.  The  case  indeed 
affords  a  typical  example  of  the  frequent  error  which  arises 
from  attempting  to  measure  naval  strategy  by  the  elemen- 
tary maxims  derived  from  warfare  on  land.  The  question 
once  more  was  not  purely  military.  It  was  distorted  by 
the  intrusion  of  commerce  protection.  It  was  the  season 
for  the  home-coming  of  the  great  convoys.  The  concen- 
tration at  Ferrol  directly  threatened  them,  and  the  necessity 