

Q 


242  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  4 

English  a  line  of  at  least  fifty-four  vessels.  "  This  unfore- 
seen concentration,"  he  urged,  "leaves  no  doubt  that  the 
project  of  invasion  is  impracticable  for  the  moment;  but  as 
the  reaUty  of  this  project  cannot  but  gain  the  strongest 
confirmation  by  the  presence  of  your  Majesty  at  Boulogne, 
it  is  probable  it  will  decide  the  English  to  mass  at  some 
Channel  rendezvous,  and  this  disposition  will  give  the 
Combined  Fleet  time  and  means  to  get  into  a  Spanish 
port."  ^ 

Napoleon  after  his  manner  did  not  deign  to  traverse  his 
minister's  conclusions  ;  ho  simply  refused  to  admit  the  facts. 
"  All  this  news  about  Nelson,"  he  wrote  to  Docres,  "  seems 
doubtful.  What  the  devil  could  he  be  after  in  the  Medi- 
terranean ?  Do  they  want  twenty  of  the  line  there  ?  "  At 
this  time,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  he  had  not  heard  of 
Craig's  arrival  at  Malta,  and  not  a  word  of  Villeneuve.  He 
knew  nothing  of  his  arrival  in  Europe  or  of  the  battle.  He 
still  believed  not  only  that  he  had  frightened  his  enemy 
into  an  abject  defensive,  but  that  they  had  no  suspicion  of 
his  great  plan.  "  They  little  know,"  he  added,  "  what  they 
have  got  hanging  in  their  ear.  Everything  here  is  going 
well,  and  certes  if  we  are  masters  of  the  passage  for  twelve 
hours,  England  has  lived.  I  can't  make  out  why  we  have 
no  news  from  Ferrol.  I  can't  believe  Magon  never  reached 
him  [Villeneuve].  I  am  telling  Ganteaume  by  telegraph  to 
keep  out  in  the  Bertheaume  Road."  ^ 

Three  more  days  went  by  and  then  came  news,  not  of 
Villeneuve,  but  again  of  Nelson.  After  watering  and  re- 
victualing  at  Gibraltar  and  Tetuan  he  had  come  back  out 
the  Straits,  and  as  long  since  as  July  25  th  he  had  been 
seen  from  the  Cadiz  signal  stations  making  for  Cape  St. 
Vincent.^     This  same  day,  whether  before  or  after  receiving 

^  p.  Bertrand,  Lettres  inedites  de  Talleyrand  d  Napoleon,  120.  The  French 
Foreign  Office  had  at  this  time  a  department  of  naval  intelligence.  Its  last 
report  was  dated  July  20th,  and  it  showed  that  the  British  had  forty-four  of 
the  line  on  the  coasts  of  Spain  and  France.  In  the  evening  Talleyrand  sent 
tlie  Emperor  "  une  boite  arrangee  conformementh  I'^tat  pr(''sent,"  ibid.,  p.  122. 
A  fortnight  later  Napoleon  wrote  to  him,  "  The  work  that  is  being  done  in 
the  Foreign  Office  on  the  movement  of  the  enemy's  ships  of  the  line  is  very 
useful,  but  it  might  be  more  complete." — Corrcspondancc ,  xi.  146,  August  27th. 

^  August  4th,  Correspondance,  xi.  59. 

3  Desbri^re,  v.  736. 


Aug.  7-13      NAPOLEON   AND    VILLENEUVE  243 

the  news,  we  cannot  tell,  Napoleon  told  Talleyrand  not  to 
send  off  the  note  to  Vienna  before  he  had  seen  it  again,  and 
directed  his  Guard  to  leave  Paris  for  Boulogne.  Then  on 
the  morrow  came  news  at  last  of  Villeneuve.  It  told  of 
his  indecisive  action  with  Calder  and  how  he  had  put  into 
Vigo  to  refit,  but  it  expressed  his  intention  of  proceeding  at 
once  according  to  the  plan  to  join  hands  with  the  Ferrol 
divisions  and  come  on  to  Brest.  Napoleon  chose,  or  at 
least  pretended,  to  see  in  all  this  the  realisation  of  his  hopes. 
He  immediately  had  a  victory  proclaimed,  and  announced 
that  Villeneuve  had  fulfilled  his  mission,  but  at  the  same 
time  he  ordered  his  Guard  to  stand  fast  in  Paris.^ 