


I 


CHAPTER    XVII 

THE  MASTERSTROKE 

It  was  on  August  10th  that  Villeneuve  intended  to  begin  his 
final  movement  from  Coruna.  "  I  am  sailing,"  he  wrote  to 
Decres  on  that  day,  "  and  I  shall  make  for  Brest  or  Cadiz 
according  to  circumstances.  The  enemy  observe  us  here  too 
closely  to  leave  any  hope  of  concealing  our  movement."  ^ 

Light  westerly  airs  prevailed,  and  owing  to  part  of 
the  fleet  being  up  the  Ferrol  arm  of  the  bay  it  was  not  till 
the  13th  that  he  had  all  his  force  together  outside.  So 
severe  had  been  the  punishment  which  Calder  had  in- 
flicted upon  the  original  Combined  Squadron,  that  even 
as  reinforced  by  the  divisions  of  Gourdon  and  Grandal- 
lana,  it  only  numbered  twenty-nine  of  the  line.  Of  these 
fourteen  were  the  raw  Ferrol  ships  that  had  had  no  sea  or 
fleet  training  whatever,  and  of  the  whole  number  only 
one,  the  Principe  de  Asturias  120,  was  a  three-decker. 
Six  were  80 -gun  ships  and  the  rest  seventy-fours.  The 
cruisers  numbered  six  frigates  and  four  corvettes.  There 
was  still,  however,  a  fond  hope  that  the  Didon  might 
get  touch  with  Allemand,  and  that  the  addition  of  his 
squadron  would  bring  the  whole  Combined  Fleet  up  to 
thirty-four  of  the  line  with  another  first-rate. 

It  was  precisely  during  these  days  that  the  British 
counter-concentration  was  taking  place  off  Ushant.  Stir- 
ling having  found  Rochefort  empty  came  in  on  the  13th 
just  as  Villeneuve  was  getting  his  squadrons  together  out- 
side Coruna,  and  the  same  evening  Cornwallis's  cruisers 
signalled  the  approach  of  Calder.  Next  morning,  before 
Villeneuve  had  been  able  to  move,  he  joined,  and  the 
following  day,  the  15th,  Nelson  appeared. 

1  Desbriere,  v.  778. 
239 


240  THE    MASTERSTROKE  Aug.  15 

Ever  since  the  9th,  when  he  had  made  enoufrh  westins" 
to  drop  the  northerly  winds,  he  had  been  steering  a  course 
for  his  original  rendezvous  fifty  leagues  west  of  Scilly.  By 
noon  on  the  13th  he  was  about  150  miles  short  of  it, 
and  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon  he  fell  in  with  the  Niohe. 
She  was  three  days  from  Cornwallis,  and  could  report  that 
when  she  parted  company  nothing  had  been  heard  of  the 
Combined  Squadron  in  the  Bay.  She  had,  however,  spoken 
a  Portuguese,  who  said  he  had  sighted  it  a  short  time  pre- 
viously steering  north.  Assured  by  the  information  that 
Ireland  was  not  in  danger,  Nelson  immediately  bore  away 
to  the  eastward,  signalling  the  Ushant  rendezvous,  and  by 
six  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  he  was  saluting 
Cornwallis's  flag.^ 

Without  even  calling  on  Nelson  to  report  himself, 
Cornwallis,  on  Barham's  instructions,  ordered  him  and  the 
Victory  home  for  their  long- earned  rest.  Stirling  in  the 
Glory  was  also  sent  in  with  several  other  vessels  that  re- 
quired a  refit.  In  the  end  he  had  some  thirty-six  of  the 
line  with  his  flag,  or  on  their  way  to  join  it,  besides  the 
Dragon  and  Goliath,  which  were  to  the  southward  in  search 
respectively  of  Nelson  and  Calder.  Considering  its  pre- 
ponderance in  three-deckers,  and  its  high  efficiency,  it  was 
a  force  that  completely  commanded  the  situation.  Had 
the  allied  Admirals  come  north,  even  with  Allemand  in 
company,  they  certainly  must  have  been  defeated  long 
before  Ganteaume  could  have  come  to  their  assistance." 