

He  was  clearly  at  his  wits'  end.  As  the  vigilant  financial 
world  saw  him  apparently  resolving  to  hazard  the  desperate 
throw  his  credit  was  falling  dangerously,  and  he  was  strenu- 
ously trying  to  restore  it  by  elaborating  the  success  of 
Villeneuve's  action.  To  Villeneuve  himself,  Avho  had 
written  in  the  lowest  spirits,  he  sent  word  to  point  out 
encouragingly  that  the  British  success  was  really  insignifi- 
cant, and  that  he  still  hoped  he  would  proceed  with  his 
mission.  He  persuaded  himself,  on  information  from  his 
spies  in  England,  that  the  Admiralty  believed  the  Combined 
Squadron  had  gone  to  Cadiz  or  was  coming  to  the  Texel, 
and  once  more  he  urged  Marmont  "  to  do  the  impossible  " 
to  draw  the  English  in  his  direction.  He  must  occupy  at 
least  twelve  of  the  line.  It  was  indeed  the  impossible ;  for 
ten  days  were  still  to  pass  before  Marmont  saw  half  that 
number  barring  his  exit.  They  were  all  weak  ships  that 
were  fit  for  nothing  else,  and  that  was  the  utmost  force  ever 
devoted  to  him.  The  only  effect  of  the  feint,  as  we  have 
seen,  was  for  a  moment  to  interfere  with  Barham's  arrange- 
ments for  reinforcing  Cornwallis  in  order  to  permit  of  his 
detaching  a  force  to  strike  at  All  em  and. ^ 

By  stubbornly  ignoring  the  news  of  Nelson  and  by 
crediting  the  British  Admiralty  with  childish  simplicity. 
Napoleon  seems  at  this  moment,  if  ever,  really  to  have 
believed  that  his  hour  had  come,  and  for  three  days  was  all 
amiability  and  encouragement.      But  on  the  13th  the  note 

^  Desbri^re,  v.  739,  note.  2  ggg  j^^^  ^  p^  749  ^nd  ante,  p.  231. 


244  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  13 

was  changed.  Word  came  in  from  Villeneiivc  that,  instead 
of  forming  his  junction  outside  Ferrol  and  immediately 
coming  on,  he  had  entered  the  port  before  the  Emperor's 
stringent  prohibition  had  come  to  his  hands.  Napoleon  was 
beside  himself.  It  is  of  this  day  that  Daru,  the  head  of 
his  War  Office  staff,  tells  the  well-known  story.  The  Em- 
peror sent  for  him,  and  he  found  him  raving  up  and  down 
the  room  railing  coarse  abuse  upon  his  unhappy  Admiral. 
Then,  suddenly  stopping,  he  cried,  "  Sit  down  there  and 
write,"  and  with  that  he  dictated  without  a  check  the  whole 
of  the  orders  for  his  immortal  campaign  of  Austerlitz.^ 

Whatever  truth  there  may  be  in  the  story,  it  must  not 
be  taken  to  mean  that  Napoleon  had  wholly  abandoned  his 
idea  of  invasion.  It  may  have  been  intended  merely  to 
give  emphasis  to  his  threat  to  Vienna.  The  same  day  he 
ordered  Talleyrand  to  see  the  Austrian  Ambassador  and 
urge  instant  demobilisation  in  the  strongest  terms.  "  Al- 
ready," so  the  minister  was  to  tell  him,  ''  he  (Napoleon)  has 
suspended  the  execution  of  his  projects  of  hostility,  and 
has  recognised  that  he  cannot  cross  into  England  with 
150,000  men  when  his  southern  frontiers  are  menaced."" 