

It  was  not  that  they  did  not  realise  the  gravity  of  the 
situation  at  home.  Only  ten  days  before  they  had  given 
Cornwallis  formal  warning  "  that  the  enemy  have  it  in 
contemplation  to  attempt  immediately  the  invasion  of  this 
country  from  the  ports  of  Holland  and  Boulogne."  It  was 
the  period  of  spring  tides,  when  the  Dutch  squadron  would 

^  To  Captain  Keats,  August  24th  :  Nicolas,  vii.  16. 

-  Naiad,  Nimble,  and  Iris  had  been  sent  down  specially  after  Calder 
joined.  Hazard,  Rcvohitionnaire,  and  Melampus  were  already  to  the  southward. 
— Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  337,  345. 

3  Ibid.,  ii.  343,  August  16th. 

*  In-letters  {Secret  Orders)   1363.     Signed  "  Barham,  Gambier,  Garlies." 


2 so  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  i6 

be  able  to  put  to  sea,  and  in  a  private  letter  to  the  Admiral 
Barhain  had  called  special  attention  to  the  danger.  "  I 
just  write  one  line,"  he  said,  "  to  apprise  you,  ministers 
look  to  an  invasion  soon,  and  have  given  directions  to  all 
the  military  corps.  I  have  done  the  same  privately  to  the 
Admirals  at  all  the  ports.  I  take  it  for  granted  you  will 
take  a  near  station  during  the  spring  tides  in  order  to 
reinforce  the  Eastern  force  if  necessary."  ^  The  imminence 
of  the  danger  then,  such  as  it  was,  was  fairly  faced,  but  none 
the  less  both  Pitt  and  Barham  were  determined  not  to  be 
forced  back  upon  the  defensive — determined  not  to  devote 
to  it  more  force  than  they  felt  gave  them  a  sufficiently 
firm  grip  upon  the  threatened  invasion,  and  determined  not 
to  be  intimidated  out  of  their  offensive  plan  of  campaign. 
To  have  kept  the  fleet  massed  where  it  was  would  have  been 
to  surrender  the  initiative  to  Napoleon,  to  have  acted  tamely 
upon  the  defensive.  And  it  is  curious  that  the  critics 
who  most  severely  condemn  the  movement  are  just  those 
who  are  the  most  fanatical  prophets  of  the  offensive. 

"  This  division  of  the  fieet,"  writes  the  most  weighty  of 
them,  "  which  is  condemned  by  the  simplest  and  most 
generally  admitted  principles  of  warfare,  transferred  to 
Villeneuve  all  the  advantage  of  central  position  and 
superior  force,  and  was  stigmatised  by  Napoleon  as  a 
'  glaring  blunder.'  .  .  .  This  censure  was  just." "  But  how 
did  it  transfer  the  central  position  to  Villeneuve  ?  If 
against  all  probability  he  had  dared  to  face  the  concen- 
tration which  he  knew  was  to  the  north  of  him ;  if  by  a 
miracle  he  had  succeeded  in  eluding  Cornwallis's  cruiser 
screen  and  had  got  between  him  and  Calder,  he  would  in  a 

^  Barham  Papers,  Digest  of  Correspondence^  August  9th;  and  Barham  to 
Cornwallis,  August  10th,  Hist.  JLSS.  Com.,  Various  Collections,  vi.  410. 