

It  is  a  point  that  goes  to  the  root  of  naval  strategy,  and 
only  by  a  careful  study  of  the  case  in  detail  can  w^e  under- 
stand why  at  that  hour  in  which  the  war  experience  of 
centuries  culminated  the  judgment  of  the  veterans  con- 
cerned was  unanimous,  without  hesitation,  and  clean 
contrary  to  that  of  their  recent  critics. 

As  to  the  risk  involved — the  possibility  of  Napoleon's 
game  of  "  prisoners'  base  " — let  us  first  take  the  official 
British  view.  Certainly  it  was  not  that  the  result  of  an 
action  between  Villeneuve  and  Calder  would  be  as  Napoleon 
professed  to  believe,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  whole  war 
to  support  the  Emperor's  sanguine  opinion.  On  all  the 
evidence  an  action  fought  out  between  the  two  squadrons 
would  have  put  both  of  them  off  the  board,  and  this  Avas 
Nelson's  view.  When  the  division  of  the  fleet  was  known 
he  was  consulted  by  the  anxious  ministers.  '*  This  I  ven- 
tured without  any  fear,"  he  wrote,  "  that  if  Calder  got  fairly 

^  Ganteaume  to  Decrcs,  August  23rd :  Desbriere,  v.  806. 

^  To  Deores,  August  29th  :  Correspondance,  xi.  160. 

^  Influence  of  Sea  Po^ocr  on  the  Revolution  and  Empire,  ii.  176;  Cambridge 
Modern  History,  ix.  226  ;  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.,  Introduction,  p.  xxxix. ;  Laird 
Clowes,  The  Royal  Navy,  v.  119.  It  is  believed  that  no  naval  officer,  except 
Captain  Mahan  has  taken  this  view.  Neither  Admiral  Colomb,  Jurien  de  la 
Gravicre,  nor  Desbriere  shared  it,  and  it  has  been  distinctly  repudiated  by- 
Sir  John  K.  Laughton. 


Aug.  i6  DIVISION    OF    THE    FLEET  249 

close  alongside  them  with  twenty-seven  or  twenty-eight  sail, 
by  the  time  the  enemy  had  beat  our  fleet  somidly  they 
would  do  us  no  harm  this  year."  ^ 

Nor  did  Cornwallis  fear  for  his  own  position  the  possi- 
bility of  "  prisoners'  base."  Besides  the  Dragon  and  Goliath 
he  had  three  cruisers  watching  Ferrol,  as  well  as  two  or 
three  others  in  the  neighbourhood."  "  Should  their  lord- 
ships," he  wrote,  in  reporting  the  detachment  of  Calder, 
"  be  pleased  to  order  the  ships  in  any  other  direction  it 
may  easily  be  effected."  Clearly  he  considered  them  as 
strategically  still  under  his  hand.  In  his  view  they  were 
still  concentrated  in  the  real  sense  of  the  term,  within 
supporting  distance  of  each  other.  "I  have  thought,"  he  con- 
cluded, ''  the  step  I  have  now  taken  might  meet  with  their 
lordships'  approbation,  as  a  means  of  keeping  the  enemy's 
squadrons  in  check,  if  that  from  Rochefort  is  still  at  sea."  ^ 

Now  the  critics  omit  to  observe  that  their  lordships  did 
approve.  It  was  only  natural  they  should,  for  the  moment 
they  heard  of  Nelson's  return  they  sent  Cornwallis  an  order 
to  do  just  what  he  had  done,  with  only  one  small  difference. 
They  were  dissatisfied  with  Caldcr's  conduct  after  the  action, 
and  he  was  not  to  command.  Barham  and  Cornwallis  then 
were  independently  at  one  upon  the  movement — a  fact 
which  should  make  critics  pause.  The  order  was  signed  on 
August  19  th,  and  it  bade  Cornwallis  retain  eighteen  of  the 
line  off  Ushant  and  detach  Sir  Charles  Cotton,  his  own 
second-in-command,  with  two  flag-officers  under  him,  off" 
Ferrol.  He  was  to  give  him  twenty  of  the  line  and  as  many 
more  as  he  might  have  at  his  disposal  up  to  thirty-two.'^ 