

Not  for  more  than  twenty-four  hours  did  he  hold  the 
concentration.  On  the  16th,  the  day  after  Nelson  joined, 
Cornwallis  signed  orders  to  Calder  to  take  eighteen  of  the 
line,  which,  with  the  Dragon  and  Goliath  already  to  the 
southward,  would  give  him  twenty,  and  proceed  off  Ferrol, 
there  to  use  his  utmost  exertion  to  prevent  the  enemy 
sailing  again,  or  to  intercept  them  if  they  attempted  it. 
The  squadron  detailed  included  five  three-deckers  and 
seven  of  Nelson's  squadron,  with  his  second-in-command, 
Rear-Admiral  Louis,  at  their  head  in  the  Canopies  80 — and 
seeing  the  high  condition  of  the  force  contrasted  with  that 
of  Villeneuve's  sickly,  heterogeneous,  and  demoralised  fleet, 
it  may  be  taken  as  fairly  its  equal.  Such  at  least  was 
Villeneuve's  own  opinion.^ 

Though  at  the  time  Cornwallis  believed  on  Calder 's 
report  that  Allemand  had  probably  joined  Villeneuve,  and 
would  have  raised  his  force  to  well  over  thirty  of  the  line, 
he  could  spare  no  more,  but  even  this  danger  would  not 
deter  him  from  the  bold  stroke  the  situation  demanded.^ 
He  had  in  fact  divided  his  fleet,  keeping  the  minimum  of 

^  Barham  to  Cornwallis,  Aug.  15th,  ante,  p.  231. 

2  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  344,  347,  and  see  2^ost,  p.  257. 

^  See  Captain  Hallowell  ( Z'l^rc)  to  Nelson,  August  17th  :  Add.  MSS.  34980. 
According  to  him  Calder  reported  that  Allemand  had  joined  Villeneuve  in 
Ferrol,  and  Cornwallis  calculated  the  Combined  Fleet  at  twenty-five  French 
and  thirteen  or  fourteen  Spanish.  See  Captain  John  Whitby  (Cornwallis's 
flag-captain)  to  Nelson,  August  19th  :  Ibid.,  "  It  appears  to  me  nothing  could 
have  been  more  a  propos  than  your  junction  here,  as  it  has  enabled  the 
Admiral  to  make  a  large  detachment,  which  the  posture  of  the  enemy  seemed 
to  make  highly  necessary — for  if  the  Rochefort  squadron  have  got  into  Ferrol, 
the  enemy  have  there  thirty  sail  of  the  line."  Barham  also  had  "  no  doubt 
of  the  Rochefort  ships  being  at  Ferrol."  See  his  letter  to  Cornwallis, 
Wykeham- Martin  MSS. — Bint.  MSS.  Com.,  Various  Coll.,  vol.  vi.  410. 


248  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  i6 

eighteen  of  the  line  with  his  flag,  of  which  about  ten  were 
three-deckers/ 

This  was  the  move  which  Napoleon  characterised  as 
an  msigne  hetise  when  he  heard  of  it.  "  What  a  chance 
Villeneuve  has  missed!"  he  wrote.  "By  coming  down 
upon  Brest  from  the  open  he  might  have  played  prisoners' 
base  with  Calder's  squadron  and  fallen  upon  Cornwallis ;  or 
with  his  thirty  of  the  line  have  beaten  the  English  twenty, 
and  obtained  a  decisive  superiority." "  It  is  in  this  opinion 
that  so  many  modern  critics  have  followed  him.  Forgetting, 
as  we  shall  see,  under  Avhat  a  smart  of  irritation  he  uttered 
the  snarl,  they  have  solemnly  endorsed  his  testy  criticism. 
We  are  told  that  the  great  movement  is  "  condemned  by 
the  simplest  and  most  generally  admitted  principles  of  war- 
fare," that  it  was  "  a  strategical  blunder,"  "  a  blunder  which 
might  have  proved  fatal,"  and  more  to  the  same  effect.^ 