

Such  then  was  the  actual  situation.  What  did  Napo- 
leon make  of  it  ?  Did  he  doubt  from  the  first — even 
before  the  concentration  was  complete — that  all  hope  of 
the  invasion  was  at  an  end  ? 

On  August  3rd,  as  we  have  seen,  he  had  reached 
Boulogne,  displaying  an  inspiring  confidence  that  the  com- 
mand of  the  Channel  was  about  to  pass  into  his  hands. 
But  that  is  by  no  means  conclusive  that  he  saw  his  way 

^  Nelson's  Journal,  and  Log  of  the  Victory  [Hardy). 

"  The  number  of  three-deckers  with  Cornwallis  at  the  moment  is  difficult 
to  determine  exactlj'.  But  counting-  tlie  Virtoi'y  and  Glory,  he  must  have 
had  nine  or  ten.  A  return  in  the  Barham  Papers,  dated  August  20th,  shows  the 
Home  Fleet  with  ten  three-deckers  at  sea,  and  five  in  reserve  refitting. 


Aug.  3  NAPOLEON  AT    BOULOGNE  241 

clear  for  attempting  his  hazardous  enterprise.  The  indi- 
cations of  a  coalition  in  his  rear  were  too  ominous  to 
be  ignored.  Austria  was  massing  troops  in  Venetia  and 
the  Tyrol,  constant  communications  were  passing  between 
Naples,  Corfu,  and  Malta,  and  a  levy  en  masse  of  the  Nea- 
politan militia  was  reported  by  St.  Cyr  to  be  going  on  in 
secret.  Before  quitting  Paris  Napoleon  directed  Talleyrand  to 
prepare  an  ultimatum  for  both  the  Austrian  and  Neapolitan 
courts,  and  then,  without  saying  a  word  to  his  ministers, 
he  had  suddenly  left  for  Boulogne.  The  day  after  he  reached 
the  coast,  he  approved  the  text  of  the  Austrian  note,  and 
directed  that  Naples  was  to  be  threatened  with  instant 
invasion  if  the  report  of  the  general  enrolment  proved 
correct.  He  had  no  doubt,  as  he  afterwards  confessed,  that 
these  threats  would  prove  effective,  and  that  he  would  be 
left  free  to  proceed  with  his  invasion. 

Such  was  his  state  of  mind  when,  before  the  ink  of  his 
last  order  was  w^ell  dry,  urgent  Spanish  despatches  came 
in  from  Talleyrand.  They  announced  nothing  less  dis- 
turbing than  that  Nelson  had  almost  certainly  reap- 
peared at  Gibraltar,  and  was  believed  to  have  entered  the 
Mediterranean. 

Talleyrand  made  no  secret  of  what  it  meant.  Ville- 
neuve  was  no  one  knew  where,  and  all  the  far-sighted 
minister  could  see  was  that,  if  he  attempted  to  approach 
the  Channel  under  the  delusion  that  the  British  concen- 
tration Avas  broken,  he  was  doomed  to  destruction.  The 
position  was  alarming  in  the  extreme.  Napoleon's  sudden 
and  quite  unexpected  departure  from  Paris  filled  Talleyrand 
with  dread  lest  his  master's  gambling  spirit  had  got  the 
better  of  him,  and  that  at  last  he  really  meant  to  stake 
everything  on  the  desperate  throw  from  which  he  had  so 
long  held  back.  "  This  unexpected  news,"  he  wrote  to 
Napoleon,  "  has  made  an  impression  upon  me  which  I  try 
in  vain  to  calm.  This  kind  of  agitation  is  only  to  be  en- 
dured by  those  of  your  servants  who  are  supported  by  your 
presence."  Then  he  proceeded  to  tell  his  master  plainly 
that  he  was  beaten.  He  was  sure  that  Nelson  would  come 
north,  and  he  calculated  that   his    arrival  would  give  the 