

What  Gravina  thought  of  it  we  cannot  tell.  Escano,  his 
chief-of-the-staff,  loyally  draws  a  veil  over  it  all  without  a 
word  of  comment.  That  day  and  the  three  that  followed 
he  enters  all  together  in  his  journal.  "  In  these  days,"  he 
says,  "  there  occurred  nothing  more  noteworthy  than  the 
capture  of  a  merchant  vessel,  which  was  burnt.  We  chased 
all  craft  that  were  sighted,  and  pursued  our  course  down 
the  coasts  of  Galicia  and  Portugal." "  Nothing  more  note- 
worthy than  a  merchantman  burnt !  The  pathetic  loyalty 
of  that  entry !  For  every  man  knew  that  what  had 
happened  was  no  less  than  that  the  whole  initiative  was 
being  surrendered  to  the  enemy,  and  no  one  could  see 
there  was  any  help  for  it.     "  The  captains,"  wrote  Lauriston 

^  Desbriere,  v.  046. 

2  Desbriere,  Trafalrjar,  App.,  p.  7. 


Aug.  I5-I6  CRUISER    MOVEMENTS  265 

to  the  Emperor,  "  have  no  heart  left  to  do  well.  Attention 
is  no  longer  paid  to  signals,  which  are  kept  flying  on  the 
masts  two  or  three  hours.     Discipline  is  completely  gone."  ^ 

His  movement  to  the  southward  was  not  observed  by 
any  British  cruiser,  but  ahead  of  him  was  the  Iris  speeding 
down  to  Collingwood  to  carry  warning  of  what  was  likely  to 
happen,  and  spreading  the  news  far  and  wide  as  she  went. 
Early  on  the  15th,  just  before  she  reached  Finisterre,  she 
had  fallen  in  with  Sir  William  Parker  in  the  Amazon, 
whom  Nelson  had  sent  on  ahead  of  him  off  Ferrol  for 
intelligence.  His  orders  were,  if  he  judged  Nelson  had 
not  gone  there,  to  proceed  off  Ushant  or  Ireland.  Hearing 
the  Iriss  intelligence,  and  that  the  Naiad  was  taking  it  to 
Ushant,  Parker  decided  to  proceed  direct  to  Cork,  where  he 
arrived  on  the  24th,  just  in  time  to  enable  Admiral  Drury 
to  stop  the  East  India  convoy  and  Baird's  expedition  then 
on  the  point  of  sailing.^ 

Meanwhile,  on  the  16  th,  the  Iris  as  she  held  on  for 
Collingwood  fell  in  with  Henry  Blackwood,  king  of  cruiser 
captains,  in  the  famous  Euryalus.  His  presence  there  was 
a  curious  piece  of  the  Fortune  of  War.  He  really  belonged 
to  the  Irish  cruiser  squadron.  At  the  end  of  July,  when 
the  attention  of  the  Admiralty  had  been  directed  to  the 
Texel  and  to  the  possibility  of  Villeneuve's  coming  into 
the  North  Sea,  he  had  been  sent  to  Drury  at  Cork  to 
enable  him  to  watch  the  north  coast  of  Ireland.  On  his 
Avay  from  Spithead,  however,  he  had  got  news  of  Calder's 
action  with  the  report  that  it  had  forced  the  Combined 
Squadron  to  go  south  to  Cadiz.  On  reaching  Cork  on 
August  2nd,  he  reported  this  to  Drury,  who  the  day  before 
had  received  an  order  to  inform  Nelson  immediately  at 
Lagos  if  any  of  his  ships  should  succeed  in  locating 
Villeneuve.  Thinking  it  was  now  useless  to  watch  the 
north  coast,  Drury  took  upon  himself  to  send  Blackwood 