

-  There  is  no  trace  of  these  vessels  in  the  reports  of  the  British  cruisers 
which  were  then  to  the  north-east  of  him. 


262        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS      Aug.  13-15 

proved  to  be  neutrals.^  Then  at  kisl  he  spread  his  wings 
to  the  increasing  north-east  wind  and  left  Ferrol  fairly  to 
leeward ;  but  even  so,  he  was  not  to  shake  olf  the  spectre 
that  haunted  him. 

On  the  13 til,  it  will  be  remembered,  Captain  Griffith  in 
the  Dragon,  proceeding  from  Calder  on  his  mission  to  get 
into  touch  with  Nelson,  had  met  the  Phoenix  towing  the 
Didon,  and  had  turned  her  back.  In  company  they  were 
steering  for  the  Finisterre  rendezvous,  when  next  day  about 
two  in  the  afternoon  the  Dragon  boarded  a  Dane  bound  for 
Hamburg.  With  a  view  probably  of  covering  the  Phoenix 
and  her  prize,  Captain  Griffith  informed  the  skipper  that  he 
was  part  of  a  fleet  of  twenty-five  of  the  line  ;  and  to  increase 
the  impression,  when  he  let  the  Dane  go,  he  played  the  old 
trick  of  making  imaginary  signals  to  a  distant  admiral. 
Scarcely  had  he  completed  his  performance  when  he  was 
aware  of  a  strange  fleet  in  the  east-south-east.  For  an 
hour  or  so  he  watched  them,  while  an  advanced  frigate 
came  up  to  observe  him.  About  six  o'clock,  to  his  great 
satisfaction,  he  saw  her  board  the  Dane  he  had  hoaxed  and 
then  hurry  off  to  join  her  fleet.  The  sun  was  just  setting, 
but  before  it  was  too  dark  he  was  able  to  count  twenty-six 
sail  standing,  as  it  seemed,  about  north-westward.^  Where- 
upon he  and  his  consorts  turned  to  the  southward  away 
from  the  danger  with  all  reefs  out.  Next  morning  nothing 
was  in  sight.  So  dismissing  the  Phoenix  and  her  prize  to 
make  the  best  of  their  way  to  Gibraltar,  Griffith  hauled  his 
wind,  presumably  with  the  intention  of  getting  touch  again 
with  the  fleet  he  had  sighted.^ 

Meanwhile,  in  the  early  hours  of  the  loth,  Villeneuve 
had  received  the  report  of  the  cruiser  that  had  sighted  the 

^  Colonel  Desbricre  is  of  opinion  these  eight  sail  were  "  certainly  Alle- 
mand."  But  Reille  says  that  all  of  them  that  were  examined  were  neutrals. 
At  2  o'clock  A.M.  on  the  14th,  Villeneuve  was  tacking  under  Cape  Prior;  at 
4  o'clock  Allemand  saw  three  suspicious  sail  to  the  N.E.,  and  Colonel  Desbricre 
thinks  these  were  some  of  Villeneuve' s  cruisers.  But  Allemand  says  he  was 
then  in  45°  39'  N.,  13°  31'  W.  {i.e.  11°  11'  Greenwich),  which  was  about  150 
miles  N.W.  of  Cape  Prior:  Projets,  v.  783  ;  Trafalgar,  100. 

2  In  this  Captain  Griffith  may  well  have  been  mistaken.  It  was  nearly 
dark,  and  he  himself  apparently  was  not  seen  by  the  fleet  at  all. 