

Finally,  if  these  calculations  proved  false — if  Villeneuve 
in  desperation  did  stake  everything  on  the  chance  of  ''  play- 
ing prisoners'  base "  with  Calder  and  striking  a  swift  blow 
at  Cornwallis  alone,  what  would  be  the  results  ?  It  is  usual 
to  assume  that  the  Ushant  fleet  was  inferior  to  that  of 
Villeneuve.  But  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  CoruAvallis 
had  ten  three-deckers  and  the  rest  all  seasoned  ships  of 
eighty  and  seventy-four  guns,  as  against  Villeneuve's  motley 
twenty-nine  partly  French  and  partly  Spanish.  Of  these 
ten  at  least  were  mere  floating  barracks,  and  amongst  those 
ten  his  only  three-decker.^  Now  with  such  a  force  Corn- 
wallis had  two  possibilities  before  him.  If  he  chose  or  was 
forced  to  fight,  the  effect  must  be  that  Villeneuve's  fleet 
would  bo  fit  for  little  afterwards.  If  he  avoided  and  played 
the  old  game  of  Howe  and  Kempenfelt,  moving  to  the  west- 
ward till  Calder  rejoined,  experience  showed  that  Ganteaume 
and  Villeneuve  together  would  not  dare  enter  the  Channel 
without  having  first  brought  him  to  action.^ 

1  On  the  accepted  basis  of  two  two-deckers  to  one  three-decker  the 
tactical  coefficient  of  Cornwallis'  fleet  was  (10x2) +  8  =  28  against  that  of 
Villeneuve  (1x2) +  28  =  30. 

-  The  most  moderate  and  careful  of,  the  critics  takes  a  different  view  of 
the  result  of  Villeneuve's  catching  Cornwallis  alone.  "  It  seems  possible," 
he  says,  "  that  in  such  circumstances  Cornwallis  would  have  had  no  course 
but  to  fly,  and  that  the  great  concentration  of  fifty  ships  in  the  Channel 
might  have  been  brought  about." — Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  xxxix.  But  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  Cornwallis  would  have  taken  the  traditional  position 
which  Drake  had  inaugurated  and  Howe  and  Kempenfelt  had  recently  adopted, 
and  would  have  hung  to  windward  of  the  enemy  if  they  attempted  to  enter 
the  Channel.  He  might  have  refused  action  except  on  his  own  terms,  but 
it  was  against  all  tradition  and  practice  that  he  should  have  run  away. 


2  54  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  20 

p]very  precaution  to  meet  such  11  situation  was  taken. 
Ciders  of  the  most. urgent  description  had  been  sent  to  the 
Port  Admirals  to  get  everything  to  sea  that  would  float,  and 
Barham  calculated  that  he  had  ready  or  nearly  ready  for 
emergent  service  in  the  Channel  1 5  three-deckers,  4  eighty- 
gun  ships,  and  about  35  other  two-deckers  belonging  to  the 
Western  Squadron  alone ;  and  besides  these  there  were  9 
two-deckers  at  sea  with  Lord  Keith  and  5  more  fitting  in 
the  Thames/  Had  the  worst  happened  that  Barham's 
strategy  risked,  had  Villeneuve  attempted  to  do  what  every 
Admiral  in  Napoleon's  service  knew  to  be  madness,  then 
there  must  have  come  upon  the  enemy  in  the  narrow 
unfamiliar  waters  of  the  Channel — so  dreadful  with  memo- 
ries both  for  French  and  Spaniards — a  catastrophe  more 
terrible  than  the  Armada — more  decisive  than  Trafalgar 
itself. 