

^  Barham  Papers,  August  20tl]. 


Loncpnaji-S.  Ctve^n  Se  t'o- LaTtdrtn.,^M^&rk,.{i€fnv:av &- :..ilcuttcu. 


To  feuce  -page  254 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

THE  SOLUTION  OF  THE  CRISIS 

From  the  above  considerations  it  will  be  seen  that  in  the 
opinion  of  the  responsible  men  the  danger  attending  the 
division  of  the  fleet  was  not  for  a  moment  to  be  weighed 
against  the  decisive  advantage  such  a  division  alone  could 
secure.  The  moral  strength  of  the  British  position  had 
been  accurately  calculated,  but  at  the  same  time  it  must 
not  be  supposed  the  utmost  care  was  not  taken  by  material 
means  to  guard  against  the  remote  probability  of  a  surprise 
from  the  south.  Ferrol  had  not  been  left  unwatched  for  a 
single  day.  On  the  contrary,  Cornwallis  had  taken  elaborate 
measures  to  keep  touch  with  it.  It  was  on  August  9th  that 
Villeneuve  had  begun  to  move  his  fleet  outside,  and  that 
Calder  had  sent  the  Dragon  to  look  into  the  bay.  On  the 
10th  she  had  returned  with  the  JEolus  fresh  from  locatinsf 
Allemand.  Their  report  was  that  all  the  Combined  Fleet 
had  come  down  to  Coruna  with  the  exception  of  eight 
vessels  still  windbound  up  at  Ferrol.  It  was  on  this  report 
that  Calder  had  gone  north  to  close  on  Ushant,  and  no 
sooner  was  he  away  than  the  Nimble  appeared.  She  was  a 
sloop  Cornwallis  had  sent  off  to  communicate  with  Stirling 
and  Calder.  Directly  she  was  sighted  by  Villeneuve's 
cruisers  she  was  chased  oif,  but  not  before  she  too  had  seen 
Villeneuve  at  Coruna.  Five  sail  were  under  way  as 
though  they  had  just  joined — a  fact  which  could  only 
confirm  Calder's  impression  that  Allemand  had  arrived. 
Forthwith  she  sped  back  to  warn  the  Admiral  at  Ushant. 
She  reached  him  early  on  the  14th,  just  after  he  had  had 
the  news  from  Calder.  It  was  now  he  determined  to  divide 
his  fleet,  and  the  Nimlle  was  immediately  sent  down  again 

255 


2  56  THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS       auo.  i8 

with  other  cruisers  to  keep  observation  till  Calder  should 
arrive.^ 

What  it  was  Villencuve  really  meant  to  do  has  always 
been  a  matter  of  doubt.  Did  he  or  did  he  not  intend  to 
make  any  attempt  to  join  hands  with  Ganteaume  ?  In  the 
despatch  he  sent  to  Allcmand  by  the  Didon  he  had  said  if 
he  found  any  difficulty  in  getting  to  Brest  his  definitive 
destination  would  be  Cadiz.-  On  the  10th  he  wrote  to 
Decres  the  letter  already  quoted  :  "  I  am  sailing,  and  I  shall 
make  for  Brest  or  Cadiz,  according  to  circumstances.  The 
enemy  are  watching  us  here  too  closely  to  leave  any  hope 
of  concealing  my  course."^  He  had  no  idea  but  what 
Calder  was  still  off  the  port,  but  this  was  not  the  worst. 
The  moral  effect  of  Nelson's  implacable  chase  had  been 
extraordinary,  and  every  one  in  his  heart  believed  he  was 
somewhere  below  the  horizon  with  Calder,  waiting  till  he 
had  them  well  away  from  their  port  to  strike  his  blow. 
The  last  news  of  him  was  that  he  had  been  seen  speed- 
ing from  the  Straits  towards  Capo  St.  Vincent,  and  the 
inference  that  was  drawn  we  have  in  a  despatch  written 
by  General  Beurnonville,  the  French  ambassador  at  Madrid, 
to  Talleyrand  before  it  was  known  that  Villeneuve  had 
sailed.  "  We  cannot  reasonably  suppose,"  he  argued,  "  that 
the  English  squadrons  are  not  concentrated,  and  to  that 
I  attribute  the  clino^iuG:  of  our  admirals  to  Ferrol.  Nelson 
and  Calder  have  not  less  than  twenty-seven  of  the  line, 
several  of  which  are  three-deckers."  ^  In  the  opinion  of 
Lauriston,  the  General  in  command  of  the  troops  in  the 
fleet,  the  probability  of  such  a  concentration  had  entirely 
upset  Villeneuve's  equilibrium.  "  Indeed,  Sire,"  he  after- 
wards Avrote  to  the  Emperor,  "  the  fear  of  Nelson  has  got 
the  upper  hand  of  him."  The  General  himself  was  not 
free  from  the  oppression.  "  It  will  not  be  long,"  he  wrote 
in  the  same   letter,    "  before  we   have   Nelson  down  upon 