

^  Bourcbier,  Memoirs  of  Codrington,  i.  56,  October  16,  1805. 


2  52  THE    MASTERSTROKE  aug.  i6 

for  securing  their  approach  was  a  dominant  consideration 
in  Lord  Barham's  mind.  "  Fcrrol,"  he  wrote  to  CornwalUs, 
"  is  the  great  object  till  our  East  India  and  West  India 
fleets  are  arrived,  and  which  may  be  in  the  course  of  a 
fortnight.  The  heavy  frigates,  as  far  as  you  can  spare 
them,  cannot  be  employed  better  than  meeting  them 
towards  the  coast  of  Ireland."  That  is,  he  was  in  the 
usual  way  to  provide  a  covering  squadron  against  the 
enemy's  battle  squadron  and  strengthen  the  convoy's  escort 
as  they  reached  the  danger  area  of  the  home  terminal.  And 
then  Barham  added,  "  We  have  at  this  moment  received 
yours,  and  you  have  entered  completely  into  my  views."  ^ 

It  may  be  urged  by  purists  trained  in  the  continental 
school  that  such  deflections  are  essentially  heretical.  But 
in  truth  each  case  must  be  decided  on  its  merits  as  a 
balance  of  advantage  against  risk.  It  is  for  a  naval  power 
to  command  the  sea  for  all  purposes  if  it  has  the  power. 
In  this  case  we  shall  see,  as  we  proceed,  the  safety  of  these 
particular  convoys  was  an  object  of  so  much  importance  as 
to  justify  any  reasonable  risk,  while  to  sufter  a  concentra- 
tion to  be  forced  upon  us  which  would  leave  the  enemy 
free  to  strike  them  with  impunity  would  have  been  to  admit 
an  inability  in  the  fleet  which  nothing  in  the  situation  could 
excuse. 

And  was  there  any  real  danger  ?  Bold  as  was  the 
division  of  the  fleet,  a  closer  examination  of  the  conditions 
will  show  that  it  was  well  within  fair  risk  of  war.  From 
the  prisoners  taken  in  Calder's  action  the  condition  of  the 
Combined  Fleet  was  well  known.  We  also  knew  how 
inadequate  were  the  resources  of  Ferrol  to  supply  so  large 
a  force  as  Villeneuve's  for  the  time  necessary  for  a  campaign 
in  the  Channel.  His  respect  for  Nelson's  unlocated  fleet 
was  fully  manifest,  and  to  war-ripened  judgments  like  those 
of  Barham  and  Cornwallis  it  must  have  seemed  morally 
certain  that  Villeneuve  would  never  venture  to  come  north 
on  his  own  responsibility.  It  was  true  Napoleon  might 
force  on  him  the  desperate  movement,  but  in  that  case 
there  was  a  consideration  well  known  both  to  Barham  and 

^  Hist,  Mas.  Com.,  Various  Collections,  vi.  410. 


AuG.16  ITS    SAFETY  253 

Gornwallis  that  practically  ensured  its  failure.  They  knew 
the  Combined  Fleet  was  so  much  exhausted  and  that 
the  resources  of  Ferrol  were  so  inadequate  to  supply  it, 
that  one  of  two  things  must  happen.  Villeneuve  might 
either  wait  in  the  port  long  enough  to  complete  his  stores 
for  a  Channel  campaign,  in  which  case  Calder  would  be  in 
plenty  of  time  to  blockade  him,  or  he  might  hurry  out  with 
his  supplies  incomplete,  in  which  case  it  would  be  impos- 
sible for  him  to  keep  the  sea  long  enough  to  carry  out 
Napoleon's  intentions.  If,  therefore,  he  moved  before 
Calder  arrived,  it  would  mean  almost  certainly  that  he 
was  bound  for  Cadiz  or  to  attack  the  convoys. 