

^  Log  of  the.  Dragon  (Griffith's).  James  (iii.  374)  is  the  authority  for  Griffith's 
trick.  Lauriston  to  the  Emperor,  August  21st:  Desbricre,  Trafalgar,  App., 
p.  107. 


Aug.  15  .      VILLENEUVE   AND    ALLEMAND  263 

British  ships  and  boarded  the  Dane.  Villeneuve  himself 
says  nothing  in  his  despatch  of  the  false  news  that  had 
been  obtained.  All  we  know  is  that,  although  the  prize 
which  the  frigate  had  seen  in  the  possession  of  the  Dragon 
and  Phoenix,  was  believed  to  be  the  Didon,  the  Admiral 
would  make  no  attempt  to  rescue  her.  He  simply  held  on 
as  he  was,  straight  for  Allemand's  first  rendezvous,  on  the 
chance  apparently  that  he  might  have  returned  there.  At 
noon  he  was  close  upon  it,  but  of  Allemand  there  was  no 
sign.^  Yet  in  fact  they  had  been  within  an  ace  of  running 
into  one  another.  At  daybreak  Allemand  on  his  way  to 
Vigo  found  himself  between  that  port  and  Finisterre.^  By 
yet  another  of  the  fantastic  chances  of  his  cruise  he  must 
therefore  have  crossed  Villeneuve's  track  close  astern  of 
him  in  the  night,  both  being  possibly  without  lights,  and 
neither  had  seen  the  other.  Allemand,  however,  now  got 
tidings  from  a  neutral  that  Villeneuve  had  been  to 
Vigo,  and  thither  he  hurried  in  hope  of  getting  definite 
instructions. 

As  for  Villeneuve,  he  continued  to  push  west  further 
and  further  from  his  lost  colleague.  Whatever  his  original 
intention  on  leaving  Ferrol,  there  can  be  little  doubt  he 
had  now  made  up  his  mind  what  to  do.  Neutrals  visited 
had  confirmed  his  worst  fears.  "  It  appears,"  says  Lauriston, 
"  by  all  the  reports  which  various  ships  made  to  us  since 
leaving  Coruna,  that  Nelson  has  gone  north,  having  heard 
of  our  putting  into  Vigo,  and  without  doubt  after  making 
his  junction  with  Calder."  ^  After  all  his  sanguine  master's 
efforts  to  disperse  the  British  fleet — the  fundamental  con- 
dition of  success — it  was  clear  to  him  it  was  more  closely 
concentrated  than  ever,  while  his  own  concentration  had 
failed.  The  consensus  of  all  the  intelligence  confirmed  the 
hopelessness  of  his  getting  touch  with  Allemand.  If  he 
went  north  in  accordance  with  Napoleon's  plan  he  must 
go  with  what  he  already  had,  and  what  he  had  was  a  fleet 

^  Journal  de  Eeille.  "A  midi  ...  40  lieues  Ouest-nord-ouest  du  Cap 
Finisterre":  Deshxiexe,  Projets,  v.  785.  It  is  this  position  that  fixes  Ville- 
neuve's mean  course  from  Ferrol  as  due  west  true. 

*  Allemand's  Journal  :  Ihid.,  784. 

3  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  App.,  p.  108,  August  21st. 


264        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS      aug.  15-16 

only  in  name.  The  movement  from  Ferrol  had  proved  it  to 
be  a  mere  mass  of  ill-assorted  units  incapable  of  acting  as 
a  squadron  at  all.  To  proceed  was  madness.  The  whole 
plan  of  campaign  had  obviously  broken  down.  In  his 
orders  of  July  16th,  which  had  reached  him  at  Ferrol  and 
under  which  he  was  now  operating,  there  was  the  following 
proviso :  "  The  Emperor  has  kept  in  mind  the  case  in 
which  by  eventualities  impossible  to  calculate  the  situation 
of  the  fleet  would  not  permit  you  to  undertake  the  execu- 
tion of  his  plans  which  would  have  so  great  an  influence 
on  the  fate  of  the  Avorld,  and  in  this  case  only  the  Emperor 
desires  to  concentrate  at  Cadiz  a  mass  of  imposing  force."  ^ 
In  Villeneuve's  eyes  the  case  had  arisen.  The  enemy,  as 
he  explained  in  justifying  his  move,  had  obviously  pene- 
trated the  Emperor  s  plan,  and  it  had  failed.  "  Their  con- 
centration of  force,"  he  said,  "  was  at  the  moment  more 
serious  than  in  any  previous  disposition,  and  such  that 
they  were  in  a  position  to  meet  in  superiority  the  combined 
forces  of  Brest  and  Ferrol."  Added  to  this  a  stormy  wind 
had  been  blowing  for  two  days  from  the  north-east ;  it  was 
likely  to  continue,  and  he  dared  not  hold  his  ill-found 
ships  against  it.  Till  nightfall,  therefore,  he  held  on  as  he 
was,  and  when  darkness  came  to  shroud  his  movement  he 
turned  back  to  Cadiz. 