

^  Lieutenant  Delafons  to  Cornwallis,  August  lltb  :  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii. 
334,  and  Lor/  of  the  Nimble,  P.R.O. 

'  Desbri'.Ve,  v.  730. 

"^  Ibid.,  11  i<. 

*  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  Apj).  38,  and  see  Thiers,  Comidat  et  Empire,  v. 
439. 


Aug.  II-I3       VILLENEUVE'S    INTENTIONS  257 

us  ;  for  we  have  learnt  that  with  those  eleven  vessels  he 
has  sworn  to  follow  us,  even  if  it  be  to  the  Antipodes."  ^ 

For  three  days  more  the  westerly  winds  held  the  Ferrol 
division  fast  and  delayed  the  final  concentration.  As  they 
dallied  in  inaction,  every  hour  was  adding  to  the  chances  of 
Nelson  and  Calder  getting  together  to  intercept  them ;  the 
obsession  increased  daily:  and  by  the  13th,  when  the  wind- 
bound  ships  eventually  were  able  to  reach  Villeneuve,  the 
last  drop  of  his  spirit  seems  to  have  ebbed  away.  Lauriston 
at  least  believed  that  by  the  time  the  fleet  was  under  way 
and  the  final  despatches  had  been  sent  off  to  Paris,  Ville- 
neuve had  abandoned  all  intention  of  attempting  to  effect 
the  junction  with  Ganteaume.  ''  We  are  going  definitely 
to  Cadiz,"  the  Admiral  had  said  to  him ;  "  I  have  told  the 
minister  so."^ 

What  Villeneuve  had  really  written  to  Decres  in  his 
last  despatch  was  this  :  "  I  am  about  to  sail,  but  I  don't 
know  what  I  shall  do.  Eight  of  the  line  keep  in  sight  of 
the  coast  at  eight  leagues.  They  will  follow  us ;  I  shall 
not  be  able  to  get  contact  with  them,  and  they  will  close 
on  the  squadron  before  Brest  or  Cadiz,  according  as  I  make 
my  course  to  the  one  port  or  the  other.  ...  I  do  not 
hesitate  to  say — to  you — that  I  should  be  sorry  to  meet 
twenty  of  them.  Our  naval  tactics  are  antiquated.  We 
know  nothing  but  how  to  place  ourselves  in  line,  and  that 
is  just  what  the  enemy  wants."  ^ 

In  face  of  this  letter  we  might  well  dismiss  Lauriston's 
story  as  an  intentional  perversion.  His  attitude  was  frankly 
hostile  to  Villeneuve,  and  his  report  was  written  with  the 

^  Desbri(ire,  Trafalgar,  App.,  106,  108.  This  letter  was  not  written  till 
August  21st,  when  they  were  in  Cadiz,  but  it  serves  to  show  the  general  feeling 
in  the  fleet.  Nelson  used  the  expression  referred  to  in  his  letter  to  the 
Admiralty  of  May  7th. — Nicolas,  vi.  428. 

^  Desbriere,  Trafahjar,  App.,  p.  105. 

^  Thiers,  Consulat  ct  Empire,  v.  442.  This  is  the  only  known  letter  of  this 
date  (13th),  The  correspondence  of  Decres  was  destroyed  in  the  Tuileries  fire 
during  the  Commune  after  Thiers  had  worked  from  it.  There  are  traces, 
however,  of  another  letter.  On  September  8th,  Napoleon  wrote  to  Decres  : 
"  After  having  had  the  despatches  of  Villeneuve,  you  ought  never  to  have 
supposed  he  would  come  to  Brest.  He  wrote  to  you,  '  I  am  going  to  Cadiz,'  " 
and  then  he  refers  to  Lauriston's  letter  :  Correspondance,  xi.  183.  Decres,  how- 
ever, in  acknowledging  Villeneuve's  letters  on  September  1st,  implies  that 
they  left  his  destination  uncertain. — Desbriere,  v.  822. 