

^  Cornwallis  to  Calder,  August  19th  :  In-lcttcrs,  129.  Endorsed,  -per  Naiad, 
and  a  duplicate  by  Hazard.  See  also  same  to  Marsden,  August  19tli :  Blockade 
of  Brest,  ii.  34G.  This  was  the  despatch  in  which  he  announced  to  the 
Admiralty  his  division  of  the  fleet,  which  Barham  was  ordering  at  the  same 
time. 

'^  Cornwallis  to  Marsden:   Jn-letters,  120,  August  20th. 

^  To  Decres  and  to  Ganteaume  (by  telegraph),  August  21st  :  Correspond- 
ance,  xi.  105-0. 


Aug.  21         GANTEAUME   AND   VILLENEUVE         261 

but  the  tremendous  lire  of  the  batteries  rendered  it  impos- 
sible, and  he  was  forced  to  retire.  He  had  led  the  attempt 
in  person,  and  was  wounded  by  a  spent  fragment  of  shell, 
a  fact  which  the  tough  old  admiral  did  not  think  worth 
mentioning  in  his  despatch.  The  loss  incurred  was 
trifling — the  gain  was  the  moral  effect  in  checking  any 
attempt  of  Ganteaume's  to  exercise  his  fleet,  and  to 
render  still  more  hopeless  the  prospect  of  his  being  able 
to  make  any  move  to  join  hands  with  Villeneuve  should 
he  appear. 

Meanwhile  Villeneuve  held  on  his  course  apparently 
something  north  of  west,  as  the  Iris  had  reported.^  As  he 
dropped  Ferrol,  everything  was  confirming  his  conviction 
that  an  enemy's  fleet  was  watching  him.  The  various 
British  cruisers,  together  with  the  Dragon,  which,  delayed  on 
her  way  to  the  Finisterre  rendezvous  by  the  recent  westerly 
winds,  was  then  passing  some  thirty  miles  to  the  north 
of  him,  had  been  magnified  by  his  scouts  into  two  of  the 
line  and  two  frigates,  and  were  assumed  to  be  the  inshore 
squadron  of  a  blockading  fleet;  and  to  confirm  this  view 
fourteen  sail  had  been  reported  to  Villeneuve,  apparently 
by  a  mistaken  signal  in  the  north-east.^  Then  eight  more 
were  signalled  in  the  north-west,  but  on  examination  they 

^  His  course  is  very  doubtful.  He  and  all  the  authorities,  including 
Escano,  say  it  was  W.N.  W.  on  a  N.E.  wind.  But  Reille  says  the  noon  position 
of  the  15th  was  about  40  leagues  W.N.W.  of  Finisterre,  that  is,  about  55 
leagues  W.  of  Ferrol.  One  means  of  reconciling  this  position  with  the  course 
given  is  to  assume  that  the  positions  are  "  true  "  and  the  courses  "  mag- 
netic." The  variation  about  Finisterre  in  1805  was  about  22^  west  (see  Loy  of 
the  Victory,  August  13th-16th,  where  Hardy  observed  it  each  day,  varying 
from  22°  85'  W.  in  long.,  118°  and  23°  15'  in  long.,  12°  to  22°  49'  in  long.  11°). 
Therefore  a  "magnetic"  course  W.N.W.  would  give  a  "true"  course  just 
about  W.  A  further  corroboration  that  this  was  the  actual  course  is  tliat  it 
led  direct  to  Allemand's  first  rendezvous.  Villeneuve  gives  the  evening  posi- 
tion as  80  leagues  W.N.W.  of  Finisterre;  but  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  for 
him  to  have  covered  the  distance  in  the  time.  Another  explanation  is,  that 
although  he  was  steering  about  W.N.W.,  the  combined  effects  of  the  leeway 
and  drift  of  the  Portuguese  branch  of  the  Biscay  current  setting  strongly 
S.S.E.,  may  have  made  his  actual  course  about  W.  In  any  case,  he  cannot 
have  got  so  far  north  of  the  latitude  of  Ferrol  as  he  is  represented  in  the 
French  staff  map  (Desbriere,  v.  782),  for  after  turning  south  he  was  off  Cadiz 
in  eighty  hours.  It  was  a  run  of  550  miles  from  the  latitude  of  Ferrol  (say 
sixty  leagues  west),  giving  a  speed  of  seven  knots,  which  is  the  utmost  his 
fleet  could  have  done,  as  he  had  to  wait  occasionally  for  laggards. 