

By  this  time  she  was  not  alone.  To  the  south-eastward 
had  appeared  Captain  Dundas  in  the  Naiad.  She  was 
another  of  the  cruisers  which  Cornwallis,  on  deciding  to 
divide  his  fleet,  had  sent  down  to  watch  Villeneuve  till 
Calder  arrived.  She  herself  had  sighted  some  of  the  Com- 
bined Fleet  in  the  morning,  and  the  two  captains  seem  to 
have  had  little  doubt  its  movements  indicated  Cadiz  as  its 
destination.  They  decided,  therefore,  that  while  the  Naiad 
carried  the  news  to  Cornwallis,  the  Iris  should  proceed  to 
warn  Collingwood  of  his  danger.^ 

Dundas  reached  Ushant  early  on  the  19th,  and  Corn- 
wallis immediately  sent  him  back  with  another  cruiser,  the 
Hazard,  to  carry  to  Calder  fresh  orders  and  one  of  his  lucid 
appreciations.  "  The  enemy,"  he  wrote,  "  are  most  likely 
bound  for  Cadiz  or  up  the  Mediterranean.  It  is  hardly  to 
be  supposed  that  they  have  provisions  enough  to  enable 
them  to  go  to  any  distant  part.  The  first  object  is  to 
overtake  them  before  they  can  get  into  port.  It  is  not 
likely  they  have  any  troops  on  board,  and,  in  that  case, 
very  improbable  that  they  should  steer  for  Ireland,  nor  do 
I  think  they  would  venture  to  cruise  for  any  time  in  hopes 
of  meeting  a  homeward-bound  convoy."     Calder,  therefore. 


^  Captain  Edward  Brace's  report,  enclosed  in  Captain  Blackwood's 
despatch  of  August  16th  :  Captains'  letters,  1534.  He  gives  the  course  as 
W.   by  N.  ^  N.,  and  the  position  Lat.  44°  17',  Long.  9°  2G'. 

^  Ibid.,  and  Phillimore's  Life  of  Sir  W.  Parker,  i.  303. 


26o        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS      Aug.  20-21 

was  to  "  go  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  instead  of  going  off 
Ferrol."  ' 

No  sooner  were  these  orders  well  away  than  Cornwallis 
received  from  the  Admiralty  secret  information  of  the 
approach  of  one  of  the  convoys  already  referred  to.  It  was 
that  from  the  East  Indies  under  Admiral  Rainier.  He  was 
informed  of  the  secret  route  it  was  to  take,  and  was  directed 
to  have  special  regard  to  its  safety  if  the  movements  of  the 
enemy  suggested  it  was  their  objective.'^  To  Cornwallis 
the  instructions  made  no  difference.  He  had  discounted 
the  danger  already,  and  so  far  as  was  necessary  or  compa- 
tible with  the  higher  strategy,  he  had  provided  for  it.  In 
any  case,  at  this  moment  he  had  other  fish  to  fry. 

On  the  following  morning,  the  21st,  his  advanced  frigate 
signalled  that  the  enemy  were  coming  out  of  the  har- 
bour. The  fact  was  that  for  the  past  two  days  Napoleon 
in  his  last  sanguine  moments  had  been  telegraphing  to 
Ganteaunie  the  most  peremptory  orders  to  get  out  of  Brest 
and  anchor  outside  in  the  fortified  anchorage  of  Bertheaume, 
so  as  to  be  ready  to  put  to  sea  the  moment  Villeneuve  was 
signalled.^  It  was  an  order  that  had  to  be  obeyed,  and 
Ganteaume  was  now  carrying  it  out.  Without  a  moment's 
hesitation  Cornwallis  stood  in  with  his  whole  squadron,  and 
finding  the  French  lying  in  disorder  across  the  mouth  of 
the  port,  he  boldly  anchored  for  the  night  close  in  off  the 
Black  Rocks,  determined  to  attack  in  the  morning  in  spite 
of  the  batteries.  Surely  it  was  not  the  resolution  of  a  man 
who  would  run  away  from  a  force  even  twice  his  strength. 
At  daybreak  both  fleets  weighed  and  formed  battle  order. 
As  they  stood  for  one  another  it  looked  as  if  Ganteaume 
meant  to  accept  battle,  but  just  before  he  came  within 
gunshot  he  tacked  and  held  back  a^^ain.  Cornwallis  made 
a  desperate  attempt  to  close  and  cut  off  his  rearmost  ships, 