

R 


25  8  THE    SOLUTION    OF   THE    CRISIS       Aug.  13 

avowed  object  of  persuading  Napoleon  to  supersede  an 
Admiral  who  had  lost  his  nerve,  had  entirely  forfeited  the 
confidence  of  the  fleet,  and  was  unfit  to  command  it.  But 
the  General  is,  to  a  great  extent,  confirmed  by  the  most 
careful  and  impartial  authority  we  have — the  Journal  of 
Captain  Escafio,  Gravina's  chief-of-the-stafF.  Under  August 
13th  he  enters  simply,  "  We  sailed  for  Cadiz,"  and  this 
appears  to  have  been  the  general  belief.^ 

Whatever  may  have  been  Villeneuve's  inmost  inten- 
tion, it  is  certain  that  he  recognised  the  movement  he  had 
been  ordered  to  make  as  one  it  was  impossible  to  carry  out 
with  success,  and  probably  without  disaster.  "  Seeing  that 
I  had  no  confidence,"  he  afterwards  explained,  "  in  the  con- 
dition of  my  ships,  in  their  sailing,  and  in  their  poAver  of 
manoeuvring  together,  the  concentration  of  the  enemy  and 
the  knowledge  they  possess  of  all  my  movements  since  I 
reached  the  coast  of  Spain,  leave  me  no  hope  of  being 
able  to  fulfil  the  grand  object  for  which  the  fleet  was 
destined."  ^ 

Every  hour  confirmed  his  depression.  No  sooner  was 
he  well  started  to  the  north-westward,  than  a  sail  was 
reported  to  the  north-east.  He  at  once  went  about, 
signalled  to  clear  for  action,  and  ran  back  under  Cape 
Prior,  keeping  the  port  still  under  his  lee.  The  pre- 
cautions which  Cornwallis  had  taken  were  beginning  to 
work.  The  strange  sail  was  the  Iris  32,  one  of  the 
cruisers  he  had  just  sent  down  to  communicate  with 
Calder.  Immediately  after  leaving  Cornwallis  she  had 
seen  the  Naiad  escaping  from  Allemand's  cruisers,  and 
after  speaking  her  had  proceeded  to  Ferrol  to  inform 
Calder.      Not   knowing  that  he  had  raised   the   blockade, 

^  Desbri^re,  Trafalgar,  App.,  p.  7,  and  Report  of  the  Nimble,  post,  p.  208. 
Decr^s,  even  iu  attempting  to  defend  his  old  friend,  took  the  same  view. 
"  On  August  10th,"  he  says  in  his  report  to  the  Emperor,  "  the  fleet  weighed  ; 
several  vessels  collided  and  suffered  damage.  Numerous  reconnaissances 
were  engrossing  the  enemy's  movements.  The  Admiral  learned  that  Calder 
and  Nelson  had  joined  ;  his  anxieties  redoubled  ;  he  had  only  forty  days' 
victuals.  He  remained  in  the  bay  till  the  13th.  Finally  ...  he  puts  to  sea, 
and  steers  first  W.N.W.,  and  on  the  25th  decides  to  make  for  Cadiz.  It  would 
seem,  from  the  correspondence  of  Vice- Admiral  Villeneuve,  that  he  had  taken 
this  resolution  as  early  as  the  11th." — Desbritire,  Projets,  v.  726  n. 

2  Ibid. ,  v.  786. 


Aug.  14-19  VILLENEUVE    SAILS  259 

she  at  lirst  mistook  the  Combmed  Fleet  for  our  own  Ferrol 
squadron,  but  she  quickly  discovered  the  truth,  and  was 
chased  off  to  the  northward  by  a  frigate.  Concluding,  from 
the  confusion  that  reigned  in  the  enemy's  fleet,  they  must 
be  just  out  of  port  and  on  the  point  of  sailing,  she  stood 
in  again  in  the  morning.  During  the  night  Villeneuve 
had  resolved  to  resume  his  course  and  had  tacked  under  cover 
of  darkness,  hoping  probably  to  conceal  his  movement,  but 
there  again  was  the  Iris  watching  him  as  closely  as  ever. 
This  time  the  whole  light  division  chased  her  off,  but  not 
before  she  had  counted  the  combined  force  exactly ;  and 
when  about  two  o'clock  she  dropped  the  fleet,  she  had  fixed 
its  course  a  little  north  of  west.^ 