

^  Caldev  to  Cornwallis,  Aug.  24th  :  Jn-letters,  129,  and  Lo(j  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales.' 

2  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  356  n. ;  Life  of  Collinywood,  95. 


Aug.  25-30     CALDER   JOINS    COLLING  WOOD  271 

Gravina  with  the  light  squadron  made  a  push  to  cut  off 
Collingwood,  but  he  was  soon  recalled,  and  on  the  20th  the 
whole  fleet  ignominiously  re-entered  Cadiz. 

Next  day,  to  complete  the  exasperation  of  the  French 
and  Spanish  captains,  Collingwood  quietly  resumed  his 
station  before  the  port.  It  was  a  fine  resolution,  especially 
when  contrasted  with  that  of  Orde.  But  it  would  be  unjust 
to  regard  the  two  cases  as  identical.  Orde  had  to  deal  with 
a  fresh  squadron  at  the  outset  of  a  great  adventure ;  before 
Collingwood  was  an  exhausted  force  that  had  failed  in  its 
mission,  and  was  in  retreat.  Somewhere  to  the  north  must 
be  a  fleet  which  had  headed  it  back,  and  that  fleet  must  soon 
be  on  its  way  to  support  him.  Still,  without  disparaging 
Orde,  high  praise  must  be  given  to  Collingwood.  He  at 
least  could  only  guess  how  demoralised  his  enemy  was,  and 
he  expected  them  to  sail  again  at  once.  "  They  are  gone 
into  Cadiz,"  he  wrote  to  Gambler  on  the  20th,  "  for  the 
purpose  of  replenishing  their  ships,  and  are  expected  to  sail 
again  soon,  reinforced  by  eight  from  that  port."  And  again 
next  day  to  his  wife :  "  We  have  been  looking  into  Cadiz, 
where  their  fleet  is  now  as  thick  as  a  wood.  I  hope  I  shall 
have  somebody  come  to  me  soon,  and  in  the  meantime 
I  must  take  the  best  care  of  myself  I  can."  He  had  not 
long  to  wait.  The  moment  Bickerton  heard  what  had 
happened,  though  he  himself  was  sick  ashore,  he  abandoned 
his  watch  on  Cartagena  and  sent  his  ships  to  join  his  chief. 
By  the  28th  the  two  squadrons  were  together  off  Cadiz,  and 
two  days  later  Calder  appeared. 

So  ended  the  insigne  hetise.  Instead  of  waiting  tamely 
on  the  defensive,  Barham  and  his  colleagues  by  sheer  bold- 
ness and  sagacious  penetration  had  secured  both  Channel 
and  Mediterranean.  They  had  refused  to  play  into 
Napoleon's  hands.  Whatever  his  game  might  be  they 
had  it  in  hand,  so  far  as  it  was  possible  for  the  fleet  to 
hold  it.  What  he  had  to  do  must  now  be  done  with  his 
army  alone.  His  whole  fleet — with  the  exception  of  Alle- 
mand's  little  lost  squadron — was  in  fetters,  and  the  great 
crisis  was  at  an  end. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

THE  RETURN  TO  THE  OFFENSIVE 

The  campaign  was  now  transformed.  As  between  France 
and  England,  England  had  regained  the  initiative.  In 
technical  phrase,  "  an  offensive  return  "  was  open  to  her.  It 
was  hers  to  attack,  while  France,  so  far  as  England  was 
concerned,  was  forced  back  upon  the  defensive.  It  was  the 
situation  for  which  Pitt  had  been  working  with  so  much 
quiet  perseverance  ever  since  he  came  to  power — the  situa- 
tion which  Napoleon  had  never  yet  taken  into  account. 
As  all  the  world  knows,  the  way  he  eventually  dealt  with 
it  was  magnificent — the  crowning  exploit  of  his  military 
career,  but  his  recognition  of  the  situation  was  slow  and 
stubborn.  The  shock  to  his  pride  and  his  prestige  was  so 
severe  as  to  upset  his  equilibrium — to  blind  him  with 
savage  exasperation  —  and  in  passionate  rebellion  at  the 
treachery  of  his  Star,  he  refused  to  admit  that  Pitt  had 
beaten  him.  For  three  fevered  weeks— just  the  three 
weeks  in  which  Nelson  was  taking  his  uneasy  rest  ashore — 
he  struggled  against  the  humiliating  truth.  When  at  last 
he  faced  it,  he  saw  Europe  a  live  magazine  beneath  his  feet; 
and  Pitt,  instead  of  cowering  before  him  as  he  thought,  was 
secretly  stretching  out  a  linstock  to  explode  it.  Then  in 
his  heroic  recklessness  of  means  he  arose,  and  in  a  desperate 
effort  to  quench  the  insidious  flame  he  flung  away  his  fleet. 
That  in  a  word  is  the  dramatic  conclusion  we  have  yet  to 
trace. 