

The  truth  is  he  had  received  from  Decres  a  protest  which 
put  the  arrival  of  the  Combined  Fleet  beyond  the  pale 
of  possibility.  The  harassed  Minister  did  not  doubt  that 
Villeneuve  had  gone  to  Cadiz,  and  he  could  not  bring  him- 
self to  forward  him  the  order  to  come  back  with  the  Spanish 
squadrons  in  Cadiz  and  Cartagena.  At  last  his  master's 
extravagancies  had  stung  him  to  something  like  rebellion 
for  the  sake  of  his  own  maltreated  service.  "  At  your 
Majesty's  feet,"  he  wrote,  "  I  implore  you  not  to  associate 
Spanish  vessels  with  your  squadrons.  ...  I  know  no  situa- 
tion more  painful  than  my  own.  I  beg  your  Majesty  will 
consider  that  I  have  no  interest  but  that  of  your  flag  and 
the  honour  of  your  arms.  If  your  fleet  is  at  Cadiz,  I 
implore  you  to  regard  this  event  as  a  decree  of  destiny, 
which  is  reserving  you  for  other  operations.  I  implore  you 
not  to  make  it  come  back  from  Cadiz  into  the  Channel. 
...  I  implore  you,  above  all,  not  to  order  it  to  attempt 
this  voyage  with  two  months'  victuals,  because  Monsieur 
d'Estaing  took,  I  think,  seventy  or  eighty  days  coming  from 

1  Correspondance,  xi.  117,  Aug.  23rd. 


276     THE  RETURN  TO  THE  OFFENSIVE     aug.  22-25 

Cadiz  to  Brest,  and  perhaps  more.'  It  is  above  all  at  this 
moment — when  I  may  stop  the  issue  of  orders  fatal,  as 
I  think,  to  your  Majesty's  service — that  I  ought  to  insist 
strongly.  Would  that  I  might  be  more  successful  in  this 
case  than  I  have  been  before  !  But  it  is  misery  for  me  to 
know  the  trade  of  the  sea,  for  this  knowledge  wins  no 
confidence  nor  produces  any  eifect  on  your  Majesty's  plans. 
Indeed,  Sire,  my  position  is  becoming  too  painful.  I  reproach 
myself  for  being  unable  to  persuade  your  Majesty.  I  doubt 
if  any  one  man  could.  May  it  please  you,  for  naval  opera- 
tions, to  form  about  you  a  council,  a  naval  staff' — such  as 
may  seem  fit  to  your  Majesty.  ...  A  Minister  of  Marine, 
dominated  by  your  Majesty  in  all  that  concerns  the  sea, 
must  serve  you  ill  and  become  as  nothing  for  the  glory  of 
your  arms,  if  even  he  does  not  become  harmful." 

A  letter  so  loyal,  so  wise,  so  broken-hearted,  even 
Napoleon  could  not  ignore.  It  was  probably  this  which 
turned  the  scale,  heavily  weighted  as  it  already  was.  On 
the  morrow  the  routes  for  Vienna  were  issued  to  Marshal 
Berthier,  and  on  the  25  th  Napoleon  informed  Talleyrand 
that  all  was  over  with  the  invasion.  As  yet  the  failure  was 
not  laid  at  Villcncuve's  door,  but  frankly  on  his  own  mis- 
judgment  of  the  military  and  political  situation.  ''  I  could 
not  have  believed  the  Austrians  so  stiff,"  he  said ;  "  but 
I  have  been  so  often  mistaken  in  my  life  that  I  no  longer 
blush  for  it."  " 