

S 


2  74      THE    RETURN   TO   THE    OFFENSIVE     Aug.  23 

the  maritime  war,  he  would  be  content.  But  the  offer 
could  only  stand  for  a  fortnight.  Once  ho  struck  his  Ocean 
camp  he  could  not  stop,  and  it  would  be  too  late.  The 
maritime  war-plan  would  have  failed,  and  the  Prussian 
diversion  not  be  worth  the  price.^ 

Whatever  the  connection  of  this  cold-blooded  stroke  of 
diplomacy  with  British  military  movements,  it  is  certain 
that  they  were  causing  Napoleon  some  uneasiness.  The  old 
law  which'  gives  to  such  expeditions  as  Craig's  a  disturbing 
power  out  of  all  proportion  to  their  intrinsic  force,  was 
beginning  to  work — the  old  law  which  Frederick  the  Great 
and  the  Elder  Pitt  had  understood  so  well.  It  was  in  the 
power  of  Craig  to  secure  a  foothold  at  Napoleon's  weakest 
point,  and  it  was  impossible  to  tell  what  was  behind  the 
little  advanced  guard.  Baird  was  on  the  point  of  sailing  to 
the  southward,  but  whither,  the  Emperor  knew  not.  Nor 
was  this  all.  Since  the  end  of  July,  Pitt  had  been  pre- 
paring on  his  father's  principle  to  have  in  readiness  a  much 
larger  force,  "  either  to  menace  or  attack  the  enemy  or 
their  maritime  frontiers."  Castlereagh  thought  it  might  be 
made  up  perhaps  to  35,000  infantry  and  10,000  cavalry, 
and  that  meanwhile  without  any  prejudice  to  internal 
defence  a  corps  of  10,000  men  might  be  concentrated  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Portsmouth  and  Cork,  with  a  suffi- 
ciency of  transports  standing  by  in  constant  readiness  and 
fully  equipped  and  victualled  for  foreign  service.^ 

It  was  an  old  device.  Napoleon  himself  was  even  then 
endeavouring  to  use  it  with  Marmont's  corps  and  the  Dutch 
transports  in  the  Texel,  and  yet  so  certain  is  its  power  of 
disturbance  that  even  he  found  it  could  not  be  ignored. 
"  Monsieur  Talleyrand,"  he  wrote  the  day  after  he  sent  his 
peremptory  demand  to  Berlin,  ''  the  more  I  reflect  on  the 
situation  of  Europe  the  more  I  see  it  is  urgent  to  take  a 
decisive  line.  I  have,  in  reality,  nothing  to  expect  from 
Austria's  explanation.  She  will  only  reply  with  fair  phrases, 
and  gain  time  to  prevent  my  doing  anything  this  winter. 

^  To  Talleyrand,  Aug.  22nd:  Correspondance,  xi,  107. 

^  Correspondence  of  Castlereagh.    To  the  Duke  of  York,  July  2Gth,  vol.  ii. 
p.  6. 


Aug.  23  NAPOLEON'S    LAST    HOPE  275 

.  .  .  and  in  April  I  shall  find  100,000  Russians  in  Poland, 
supplied  by  England  with  equipment,  horses,  artillery,  &c., 
and  15,000  to  20,000  English  at  Malta,  and  15,000 
Russians  at  Corfu.  I  shall  then  find  myself  in  a  critical 
situation.      My  decision  is  made."  ^ 

Even  so,  he  still  clung  or  pretended  to  cling  to  the  hope 
of  Villeneuve's  appearing  at  the  eleventh  hour.  "  If  he  fol- 
lows his  instructions,"  the  letter  went  on,  "joins  the  Brest 
squadron,  and  enters  the  Channel,  there  is  still  time ;  I  am 
master  of  England.  If,  on  the  contrary,  my  Admirals  hesi- 
tate ...  I  have  no  other  resource  than  to  wait  for  winter  to 
cross  with  the  flotilla.  ...  In  this  state  of  affairs  ...  I  run 
to  the  most  pressing.  I  strike  my  camps  and  replace  my 
war  battalions  by  my  third  battalions,  which  will  still  give 
me  a  sufficiently  formidable  army  at  Boulogne."  Finally 
Talleyrand  was  told  to  prepare  a  manifesto  as  a  declaration 
of  war  against  Austria,  but  it  was  not  to  be  issued.  By  keep- 
ing it  secret  till  the  last  moment,  Napoleon  meant  to  gain  a 
fortnight  on  his  enemy. 