

It  was  in  the  midst  of  these  preoccupations  that  he 
heard  from  London  for  the  first  time  of  the  division  of 
Cornwallis's  fleet  and  gave  vent  to  his  angry  criticism.    Not 

^  Corrcspondanoc,  xi.  146,  Aug.  27. 

2  Ibid.,  157,  Aug.  28. 

^  Castlereayk  Correspondence,  ii.  6,  and  see  ante,  p.  274.  There  is  a  similar 
undated  "  Memorandum  for  moving  the  disposable  force  "  in  the  Pitt  Papers, 
Bundle  243.  It  shows  45,000  foot,  6700  artillery,  and  12,000  cavalry,  requiring 
308,000  tons  of  transport  at  1^  tons  per  man.  On  Russia's  suggestion  that 
peace  might  be  made  with  Spain,  Pitt  was  already  contemplating  the 
possibility  of  using  this  force  on  the  Peninsular.      See  Appendix  B,  p.  444. 

■*  Corrcspondance,  xi.  p.  159,  Aug.  29. 


278       THE    RETURN    TO    THE    OFFENSIVE      Sept.  i 

only  had  he  failed  to  scatter  the  British  fleet  when  he  did 
not  want  it  to  concentrate,  but  he  had  failed  to  force  it  to 
keep  concentrated  when  he  least  of  all  wished  to  see  it 
spread.  He  saw  himself  outwitted  by  the  seamen  he  de- 
spised, and  his  only  relief  was  to  call  them  egregious 
blunderers,  and  to  begin  to  pretend  to  himself  that  the 
fault  was  all  Villeneuve's  for  missing  so  grand  a  chance. 
Yet  we  can  now  see  that  if  Villeneuve  had  come  north  at 
once  on  reaching  Ferrol,  as  Napoleon  wished,  he  would 
have  fallen  into  the  arms  of  the  complete  British  concen- 
tration. If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  had  come  north  after 
the  division  and  had  got  into  the  Channel  by  evasion,  he 
would  have  found  no  army  at  Boulogne.  It  was  not  even 
till  two  days  after  the  order  for  demobilising  the  flotilla 
that  Napoleon  knew  Villeneuve  was  in  Cadiz.  The  decision 
to  attack  Austria  before  she  was  ready  had  been  taken  a 
week  earlier  and  quite  independently  of  whether  his  fleet 
would  come  to  Brest  or  not. 

It  was  on  September  1st  the  news  reached  him  that 
Villeneuve  had  actually  retired  to  Cadiz,^  and  that  same 
evening  the  Euryalus  was  heaving-to  off  the  Needles. 
Blackwood  had  brought  up  his  tidings  in  ten  days  from 
St.  Vincent,  and  that  not  a  moment  might  be  lost  he  left 
his  ship  outside  the  Solent  and  went  ashore  at  Lymington. 
Thence  he  took  a  chaise  and  four  and  galloped  through  the 
night,  rousing  Nelson  at  Merton  in  the  early  morning  with 
his  stirring  news,  as  he  passed  on  his  way  to  the  Admiralty.-^ 

To  the  Government  he  brought  welcome  relief  from  a 
period  of  strained  anxiety.  For  what  he  had  to  tell  was 
not  only  that  Villeneuve  was  in  Cadiz,  but  also — and  this 
Napoleon  did  not  yet  know — that  Calder  had  locked  the 
door  upon  him.  It  will  be  recalled  that  the  most  pressing 
anxiety  which  the  partial  success  of  the  French  plan  had 
caused  the  Government  was  not  so  much  for  the  invasion, 
which  they  considered  they  had  well  in  hand,  as  for  the 
military  expeditions  and  the  home-coming  convoys.     The 