


268        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS      Aug.  21-22 

AUemand  had  put  into  Vigo.  It  was  welcome  news.  It 
meant  there  was  still  a  chance  of  overwhelming  him  before 
he  could  join  Villeneuve.  He  might  well  be  in  the  act  of 
making  the  attempt,  and  Calder  promptly  stood  south- 
westward  Hying  the  signal  to  prepare  for  battle,  and  clear- 
ing for  action.  His  purpose  is  nowhere  expressed,  but  it 
can  be  deduced  clearly  from  his  actual  movements.  In  the 
evening  he  had  taken  a  position  off  the  Sisargas  Islands, 
about  five-and-twenty  miles  west  of  Coruna.  As  this  was 
the  usual  landfall  for  ships  bound  from  Vigo,  and  as  Calder 
still  apparently  believed  the  Combined  Fleet  was  at  Ferrol, 
it  is  obvious  he  was  in  hope  of  intercepting  Allemand  at  this 
point  before  he  could  complete  the  concentration. 

His  judgment  was  as  sure  as  his  action  was  prompt ;  for 
it  so  happened  that  this  was  actually  the  point  for  which 
Allemand  was  making  at  the  time.  Off  Vigo,  on  the  16th, 
he  had  received  Villeneuve's  orders  to  look  for  him  at  Ferrol, 
and  if  he  found  him  gone,  then  off  the  Penmarcks  on  the 
South  Breton  coast.  Next  day  Allemand  had  hurried  away, 
and  ever  since  had  been  trying  to  double  Finisterre  against 
persistent  easterly  and  north-easterly  winds,  on  which 
Calder  had  come  down.^ 

While  he  was  thus  occupied  somewhere  off  Finisterre 
there  came  into  Calder's  fleet  the  JVimblc,  who,  it  will  be 
remembered,  after  bringing  to  Cornwallis  the  first  news  of 
Villeneuve's  sailing,  had  been  immediately  sent  back  with 
fresh  instructions  for  Calder.  Reaching  Ferrol  the  previous 
day,  she  found  Calder's  scout,  the  Attack,  and  learning 
where  the  Admiral  was,  had  made  all  sail  to  him  with 
news  she  had  just  obtained  from  a  Portuguese  skipper.  It 
was  of  the  last  importance.  For  it  told  how  just  a  week 
before  Villeneuve  had  sailed  with  twenty-nine  of  the  line 
and  ten  cruisers,  his  exact  force,  and  that  his  course  had 
been  west  either  for  Cadiz  or  San  Domingo.'-     Thereupon 

'  Allemand  actually  made  Cape  S.  Adrian  (the  Sisargas)  on  August  26th  : 
Journal,  Desbriere,  v.  792. 

2  Log  of  the  Nimbh,  Calder  to  Cornwallis,  August  22nd:  In-lcttcrs,  129. 
Napoleon  was  at  the  time  trying  to  organise  an  expedition  to  relieve  San 
Domingo  which  Villeneuve  had  left  besieged  by  the  black  insurgents. 
Napoleon  to  Decr6s,  August  oth :    Co7' respond ance,  xi.  G3. 


Aug.  22-24  CALDER'S   DECISION  269 

Calder  signalled  to  bear  up,  and  held  on  to  the  westward. 
Apparently  he  suspected  Villeneuve  had  gone  to  Vigo  to 
pick  up  Allemand.  By  nine  next  morning  he  had  doubled 
Finisterre,  and  thence  he  threw  forward  a  chain  of  cruisers 
to  Vigo.  By  yet  another  miracle  he  saw  nothing  of 
Allemand,  who  must  have  been  close  by  to  seaward  of 
him.  At  all  events  four  days  later  the  phantom  squadron 
made  the  Sisargas  Islands,  and  next  day,  finding  Villeneuve 
had  left  Ferrol,  Allemand  held  away  north  to  meet  him  off 
the  Penmarcks. 