

Though  Napoleon's  front  Avas  now  definitely  facing  to 
the  eastward,  ho  himself  stood  fast  at  Boulogne.  The  move- 
ment had  to  bo  masked.  A  fortnight  had  to  be  gained 
before  Austria's  suspicions  should  be  aroused,  and,  further, 
there  Avas  his  rear  to  secure.  Ho  had  at  last  to  face  the 
fact  that  England  was  no  longer  on  the  defensive ;  her 
army  was  free  to  attack,  and  so  soon  as  all  Avas  in  order  for 
his  chan«:e  of  front  he  beoan  to  s^ive  it  serious  attention. 

'  August  22nd,  Desbriore,  v,  814.  The  occasion  referred  to  must  be  the 
great  but  impotent  concentration  of  the  Franco-Spanish  forces  at  Cadiz  in 
tlie  autumn  of  1780.  D'Estiiing  put  to  sea  on  November  6th  and  ancliored 
at  Brest  on  January  3,  1781.  He  spent  some  time  cruising  off  Cape  St. 
Vincent,  and  liis  actual  passage  thence  to  Brest  was  fifty-eight  days.  See 
Lacour-Gayet,  Marine  sous  Louis  XVI.,  p.  322. 

^  Corrtspondance,  xi.  p.  134. 


Aug.  26-29      THE    INVASION    ABANDONED  277 

Berthier  received  the  marching  orders  on  August  26  th, 
and  next  day  Talleyrand  was  told  to  extend  his  Naval  In- 
telligence Department  to  the  British  land  forces.  The 
head  of  the  department  was  "  to  keep  a  box  with  divisions 
for  all  the  movements  of  the  English  army,  including  the 
artillery,  and  reserving  places  for  the  movements  of  the 
generals  and  staff  officers  ;  "  and  as  soon  as  it  was  ready  he 
was  to  send  him  a  travelHng  duplicate  for  his  own  use.^ 
During  the  next  few  days  he  was  much  concerned  with 
the  subject,  making  arrangements  to  prevent  a  descent 
at  Boulogne  for  the  destruction  of  the  flotilla,  and  bidding 
Marmont  before  marching  eastward  to  assure  the  Dutch 
that  this  same  army  could  be  moved  rapidly  to  their 
defence  if  they  were  attacked  from  the  sea  in  his  absence. 
Duroc,  the  Envoy  who  had  just  been  sent  to  Berlin  to  force 
the  King  of  Prussia  to  a  decision,  was  told  that  Napoleon 
did  not  care  much  whether  he  got  rid  of  Hanover  or  not. 
If  Prussia  refused  it,  he  would  merely  garrison  Hameln 
with  3000  men,  and  he  was  in  hopes  that  he  would  bring 
30,000  or  40,000  English  to  besiege  it.  "  Frederick,"  he  said, 
significantly,  "  did  not  take  long  to  get  from  Prague  to  Ros- 
bach."  ^  Forty  thousand  men,  almost  exactly  Castlereagh's 
figure,  was  the  force  which  he  calculated  England  might  have 
at  her  disposal.^  Napoleon  must  have  put  the  British  disposal 
force  at  a  lower  strength,  for  he  fixed  the  Boulogne  defence 
army  at  25,000  men,  with  officers  and  cadres  enough  besides 
to  form  the  flotila  crews  into  regiments.  "  The  English," 
he  told  Berthier,  "  will  then  be  unable  to  attempt  anything 
with  less  than  40,000  men."^^ 