

^  Ibid.,  p.  108.  Villeneuve  in  his  report  says  he  turned  back  at  a  point 
80  leagues  W.N.W.  of  Finisterre,  but  this  is  impossible.  He  could  not  in 
seven  or  eio:ht  hours  run  120  miles  from  his  noon  position. 

^  Life  of  Parker,  i.  p.  303.  Without  anchoring,  Dundas  carried  on  to 
Ushant  "with  a  duplicate  of  the  information,  should  any  unforeseen 
accident  have  prevented  the  Naiad  reaching  Admiral  Cornwallis." — Jbid., 
p.  304. 


266  THE    SOLUTION    OF   THE    CRISIS       aug.  i6 

straight  off  the  station  to  find  Nelson.^  It  was  of  course 
far  too  late  to  find  hini,  and  on  arriving  off  the  Tagus 
Blackwood  heard  from  Lord  Strangford  that  Nelson  had 
left  Lagos,  and  that  he  had  been  seen  on  August 
Sth  a  hundred  leagues  west  of  Lisbon  standing  to  the 
North.2  Strangford  had  also  received  information  of 
Villeneuve's  intentions.  A  spy  of  his  in  the  household 
of  the  Spanish  Ambassador  had  seen  a  letter  of  Gravina's 
written  just  after  the  action,  in  which  he  said,  with  much 
sarcasm  upon  his  French  colleagues,  that  they  meant  to 
go  into  Cadiz,  revictual,  and  get  into  the  Mediterranean 
before  the  British  could  come  up  with  them.'^ 

Whether  this  information  also  was  given  to  Blackwood 
is  uncertain,  but  he  at  once  turned  back  in  hopes  of  finding 
Nelson  off  Finisterre.  So  it  was  he  fell  in  with  Captain 
Brace  in  the  Iris,  and  heard  his  news,  that  Villeneuve  was 
out  and  making  to  the  westward. 

It  of  course  altered  the  whole  situation,  and  Blackwood 
with  characteristic  grasp  and  fearlessness  of  responsibility 
at  once  took  it  firmly  in  hand.  It  was  on  the  Iriss  intelli- 
gence, he  says,  that  he  judged  Villeneuve's  destination  after 
leaving  Ferrol  must  be  to  the  southward,  and  that  he  was 
then  somewhere  close  to  him.  Alone  neither  he  nor  Brace 
could  do  anything  effective.  In  such  circumstances  he  felt 
that  cruisers  must  be  coupled,  and  on  this  sound  principle, 
as  he  explained  to  the  Admiralty,  he  ordered  Brace  to  stay 
by  him.  Cruising  in  company  they  would  try  to  locate  the 
Combined  Fleet,  and  then  if  they  got  touch,  the  ship  which 
proved  to  be  the  faster  should  shadow  it  while  the  slower 
one  carried  the  information  to  the  Admiral.  He  further 
argued  that  he  was  no  longer  under  any  obligation  to  find 
Nelson,  for  Parker  in  the  Amazon  had  learnt  from  the  Iris 
all   he  knew  himself,  and  she  had  gone  to  Nelson's  ren- 

^  For  this  Drury  was  reproved  by  the  Admiralty,  and  told  to  be  more  careful 
how  he  sent  his  cruisers  on  detached  service  for  the  future. — In-lcttcrs,  620, 
August  2nd,  llth,  14th,  16th. 

2  This  was  approximately  accurate,  but  how  Strangford  knew  is  not  stated. 