

In  the  evening  Calder 's  cruisers  reported  that  the 
Rochefort  squadron  had  left  Vigo  four  days  previously, 
sailing  north,  and  at  the  same  time  another  cruiser,  the 
Poulette,  came  in,  who  reported  she  had  been  down  to 
Cadiz  in  search  of  Nelson,  and  had  been  sent  back  by 
Collingwood  a  fortnight  since.  In  all  that  time  she  had 
seen  nothing  of  Villeneuve,  but  thought  it  quite  possible 
that  she  had  passed  him  in  the  night,  and  that  he  might 
be  to  the  southward.  Here  then  for  Calder  was  a  problem 
of  peculiar  anxiety,  little  less  exacting,  indeed,  than  that 
which  Cornwallis  had  just  had  to  decide.  Had  Villeneuve 
gone  north  or  south  ?  Allemand's  reported  course — the 
only  certain  news — must  have  suggested  the  north,  but 
then  nothing  had  been  seen  of  him.  Probably  it  was 
this  persuaded  Calder  that  his  own  intuition  must  be 
correct,  and  he  boldly  decided  to  go  south.  His  explana- 
tion to  Cornwallis  was  this.  Having  no  certain  news  of  the 
enemy,  he  had  resolved  to  bear  along  the  coast  for  St. 
Vincent  and  Cadiz.  There  he  expected  to  find  Collingwood 
if  the  enemy  had  not  passed  that  way.  If  they  had,  and 
Collingwood  had  been  driven  off,  ho  would  have  left  a 
rendezvous,  where  he  would  endeavour  to  join  him.  "  If 
they  have  not  gone  south,"  he  said,  "  I  assume  Admiral 
Collingwood  [who  was  his  senior]  will  approve  my  joining 
you  off  Ushant." 

All  next  day  he  held  on,  having  sent  a  cruiser  ahead  to 
Lisbon  for  intelligence,  and  early  on  the  24th  his  anxiety 
was  at  an  end.  A  cutter  came  in  from  the  ever  active 
Consul  Gambler,  with  information  that  left  no  doubt  that 


270        THE    SOLUTION    OF    THE    CRISIS     Aug.  20-24 

Villencuvo  was  in  Cadiz.  Once  more  the  flag-officers  were 
called  to  council,  and  then  away  they  sped  to  lock  the 
door.^ 

The  news  was  true  enough.  By  sunset,  twenty  leagues 
short  of  Cape  St.  Vincent,  Calder  had  the  whole  story  from 
the  Euryalus.  As  Blackwood  had  expected,  he  had  got 
touch  with  the  Combined  Fleet  Avithin  a  few  hours  of 
sending  the  Iris  away.  He  had  been  severely  chased,  but 
refused  to  be  shaken  oif.  Though  he  escaped  capture,  he 
found  it  impossible  to  get  through  the  scattered  throng  of 
ships  to  inform  Collingwood.  He  was,  however,  able  to 
warn  the  Phoenix,  for  whom  there  was  still  no  rest,  and  she 
turned  north  again  for  England  with  her  prize. 

Collingwood  therefore  came  near  to  being  taken  by 
surprise  at  anchor  before  Cadiz.  "  I  must  tell  you,"  he 
wrote  to  his  wife  on  the  21st,  "  what  a  squeeze  we  had  like 
to  have  got  yesterday.  While  we  were  cruising  off  the 
town,  down  came  the  Combined  Fleet  of  36  sail  of  men-of- 
war.  We  were  only  three  poor  things  with  a  frigate  and  a 
bomb,  and  drew  off  towards  the  Straits."  ^  Still  he  had  had 
two  days'  warning  of  what  to  expect,  probably  from  Gam- 
bier.  He  was  dreaming  of  his  family  and  his  domain — "  the 
oaks,  the  woodlands,  and  the  verdant  meads  " — but  he  was 
ready.  His  idea  was  to  keep  the  Straits  open  so  as  to  be 
able  to  fall  back  on  Bickerton  at  Cartagena  and  his  own 
fourth  ship  at  Tangier,  and  force  anything  that  pursued 
him  to  pass  the  Straits.  But  in  truth  he  was  in  little 
danger,  so  low  had  the  spirit  of  his  enemy  sunk.  The 
spectre  of  Nelson's  unlocated  fleet  was  still  haunting  the 
Admiral,  and  his  cruisers,  mistaking  signals,  kept  sending 
in  confused  reports  of  squadrons  in  the  vicinity.  At  the 
last  moment  they  told  how  a  Swede  had  recently  seen 
eiofht  vessels  within  the  Straits  and  twelve  more  at  Gib- 
raltar,  besides  the  three  before  Cadiz.  *'  It  is  Nelson," 
cried  Villeneuve,  "  who  is  there  with  twenty-three  of  the 
line."  Fearing  an  immediate  attack  on  his  cumbrous  fleet, 
his  only  idea  was  to  get  it  into  safety  as  soon  as  possible. 