

It  was  not  till  August  22nd  that  Napoleon  knew  that 
the  Combined  Fleet  had  come  out  from  Corufia,  and  that 
his  fierce  denunciations  of  his  Admiral  for  unreasonable 
delay  were  unjustified.  Once  more  he  was  sanguine,  or  at 
least  desperate.     Clinging  stubbornly  to  the  belief  that  it 


Aug.  22  NAPOLEON    BEGINS    TO    SEE  273 

was  still  possible  that  Villeneuve  might  be  coming  on  to 
Brest,  he  telegraphed  to  Ganteaume  that  he  was  not  to 
permit  him  to  enter  the  port  to  re-victual.  He  himself  was 
to  put  to  sea  immediately  his  colleague  was  signalled,  and 
taking  the  whole  force  under  his  command  was  to  proceed 
up  Channel  without  a  moment's  delay.  At  the  same  time 
Decres  was  directed  to  inform  Villeneuve  that  if  after  all 
he  did  go  to  Cadiz  he  was  forthwith  to  get  on  board  two 
months'  supplies  and  come  north  without  a  moment's  delay. 
They  were  surely  counsels  of  despair,  but  he  had  caught 
the  first  glimpse  of  Pitt's  linstock.  Till  that  moment  he 
seems  to  have  had  no  doubt  that  his  truculent  menaces 
would  avail  to  keep  Austria  and  Russia  quiet.  But 
now  he  learned  that  Craig  had  reached  Malta  with  6000 
troops  and  was  already  in  close  communication  with  the 
two  Russian  Generals,  Lacy  at  Naples  and  Anrep  at  Corfu. 
Trivial  as  was  the  force,  it  had  for  Napoleon  a  significance 
that  was  not  to  be  measured  by  its  numbers.  There  were 
reasons  why  it  gave  a  fresh  colour  of  seriousness  to  the 
Austrian  mobilisation  which  he  had  fully  expected  to  see 
dissolve  at  his  demand  as  it  had  done  earlier  in  the  year. 
It  was  clear  some  further  emphasis  must  be  sought  to  give 
weight  to  his  threat.  As  a  counterpoise  to  the  pressure 
which  Russia  was  exerting  on  Berlin,  he  had  already  taken 
the  cynical  step  of  offering  Hanover  to  Prussia  as  the  price 
of  her  support ;  and  he  now  suddenly  demanded  an  im- 
mediate answer.^  Accordingly  on  the  very  day  when  the 
arrival  of  Villeneuve's  despatches  from  Ferrol  had  left  the 
whole  situation  in  uncertainty  he  gave  peremptory  instruc- 
tions that  the  King  must  be  told  to  make  his  choice  at  once. 
If  he  accepted  "  the  present "  Napoleon  offered,  so  the 
ambassador  was  instructed  to  say,  and  it  had  the  effect  of 
overawing  Russia  and  Austria  and  setting  his  hands  free  for 

^  The  connection  between  these  two  events  is  only  a  matter  of  conjecture, 
for  it  is  not  clear  at  what  time  exactly  Napoleon  heard  of  Craig's  being  at 
Malta.  He  arrived  on  July  19th.  Elliot  heard  of  it  at  Naples  on  August 
1st  (Auriol,  i.  387).  On  Aug,  8th  the  French  Ambassador  at  Berlin  made  the 
offer  of  Hanover.  St.  Cyr  wrote  on  the  subject  on  Aug.  15th,  but  onl}'  as 
news  which  he  had  sent  some  time  before  :  Ibid.,  398.  The  first  reference  in 
Napoleon's  correspondence  is  on  Aug.  19th,  when  he  had  already  ordered  St. 
Cyr  to  be  reinforced. 