

^  S.P.  Foreign,  Portugal,  vol.  47  :  Strangford  to  Mulgrave,  August  7th.  This 
letter  came  to  hand  on  September  9th,  and  was  sent  to  the  Admiralty  the 
same  day.  Endorsed,  "Send  copy  to  Lord  Nelson":  In-lcttcrs,  Secretary 
of  State, '  4200. 


Aug.  I6-2I  CALDER'S   MOVE    SOUTH  267 

dezvous.  He  therefore  decided,  after  sending  liis  news  into 
Lisbon,  to  proceed  with  the  Iris  to  Cape  St.  Vincent,  as  the 
only  sure  point  to  get  touch  with  the  enemy,  and  wait  there 
forty-eight  hours.  On  the  18  th  he  was  off  the  Cape,  and 
there  he  heard  from  a  Dane  that  there  was  a  large  fleet  to  the 
westward  working  in  towards  him.  It  could  only  be  the 
Combined  Squadron.  His  way  was  now  clear.  He  decided 
at  once  to  stay  where  he  was  and  shadow  Villeneuve,  while 
at  the  same  time  he  sent  off  the  Iris  to  carry  the  news  to 
Ireland,  and  if  possible  to  Cornwallis.^ 

It  was  on  the  19th  she  parted  company,  three  days 
after  Calder  had  received  his  orders  from  Cornwallis  to 
take  his  half  of  the  fleet  to  the  southward.  For  two  days 
he  had  been  held  close  to  Ushant  Avith  baffling  breezes,  but 
now  he  had  caught  the  north-easter,  and  was  surging  across 
the  bay  direct  for  Ferrol  with  his  eighteen  of  the  line. 
Before  him,  believing  as  he  did  that  Allemand  must  have 
found  Villeneuve,  was  the  prospect  of  having  to  encounter 
nearly  twice  his  own  number.  But  there  was  no  sign  of 
the  flinching  of  which  he  was  to  be  accused  for  his  recent 
conduct:  no  sign  of  anything  but  eagerness  to  be  off  the 
port.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  being  then  in  the 
middle  of  the  Bay,  nearly  half-way  to  his  station,  he  spoke 
the  Naiad  on  her  way  north  to  inform  Cornw^allis  that 
Villeneuve  was  out,  and  the  prospect  grew  more  serious 
still.  He  signalled  for  all  flag-officers,  but  after  a  short 
conference  proceeded  under  a  press  of  sail.  His  course 
was  now  more  to  the  westward,  as  though  to  cross  his 
enemy's  track  if  he  meant  to  come  north.  Later  on,  how- 
ever, he  altered  it  again  direct  for  Ferrol,  sending  forward 
the  Attach  gunboat  to  look  into  the  port,  and  by  noon  on 
the  21st  he  was  on  his  old  station  just  north-ivest  of 
Ortegal.^     Here  the  Pickle  met  him  with  information  that 

^  Blackwood  to  the  Admiralty,  August  16th  and  18th:  Captains'  Letters ^ 
1534.     Logs  of  the  Iris  and  Euryalus. 

2  Masters'  Logs,  3673  [Prince  of  Wales).  There  is  no  indication  of  his 
having  had  further  information  when  he  altered  course,  but  at  11.0  a.m.  on 
the  21st  a  large  convoy  of  transports  was  seen,  which,  being  uninjured,  was 
perhaps  taken  as  indication  that  Villeneuve  possibly  had  turned  back.  Or 
his  idea  may  have  been  to  keep  more  to  windward,  so  as  to  be  able  to  reach 
back  to  Cornwallis  if  necessary. 