

It  would  be  Avorth  much  to  know  what  were  the  ideas  of 
Nelson's  that  so  deeply  impressed  the  great  soldier — to  know 
whether  perchance  they  discussed  the  policy  Pitt  even  then 

^  Clarke  and  M'Arthnr,  ii.  117.  Nelson's  opinion  must  not,  of  course,  be 
taken  too  seriously.  Mack  was  a  man  who  had  risen  from  the  ranks,  but 
whether  by  his  ability  or,  like  Kales^h,  by  "his  bold  and  plausible  tongue," 
opinions  differed.  The  British  War  Office  inclined  to  believe  in  him. 
Napoleon  regarded  him  as  a  charlatan. 

2  To  Sir  A.  Ball,  Sept.  30th.     Nicolas,  vii.  55. 

^  Clarke  and  M'Arthur,  ii.  117. 

*  Croker,  Diary,  ii.  233. 


Sept.  II  NELSON   AND   DUMOURIEZ  287 

had  in  mind  and  Avhicli  Wellington  brought  to  so  full  a 
fruition.  The  idea  of  pressing  Napoleon  from  the  sea  at 
his  weakest  point  was  at  least  an  old  and  favourite  one  with 
the  Admiral.  Years  before  he  had  discussed  it  with  another 
famous  soldier  of  the  Revolution.  Dumouriez  was  then  in 
exile  at  Acton,  finding  relief  for  the  disappointment  of  his 
marred  career  in  advising  the  British  Government  on  the 
defence  of  England.  He  had  just  presented  them  with  the 
last  of  his  elaborate  appreciations,  and  now  seeing  in  Nelson 
the  embodiment  of  his  own  and  Pitt's  policy  of  counter- 
attack in  the  Mediterranean,  the  neglected  General  found 
new  hope  of  measuring  swords  at  last  with  the  man  who 
had  supplanted  him.  "  My  constant  desires  are  to  co- 
operate with  you  in  Italy,"  he  wrote.  "  All  my  hopes  at 
the  very  point  of  the  Continental  Avar  are  in  your  counsels 
to  your  Ministry  to  provide  me  with  a  foreign  army  of 
Italians  or  Austrians  to  attack  the  upstart  Corsican  through 
the  centre  of  Italy."  He  had  already  submitted  a  plan  to 
Vienna.  "  And  if,"  he  continued,  "  I  receive  the  command 
of  the  diversion,  we  will  realise  together  the  projects  we 
formed  at  our  first  meeting  in  Hamburg,  against  the  bar- 
barian usurpator  whom  we  equally  abhor."  ^ 

It  was  with  his  mind  filled  with  these  preoccupations 
that  Nelson  had  been  trying  to  enjoy  his  rest  down  at 
Merton.  From  his  first  interview  with  Pitt  he  seems  to 
have  understood  that  he  might  be  called  on  at  any  moment 
to  resume  his  command.^  But  till  Villeneuve's  fleet  was 
located  and  the  situation  cleared  he  could  only  wait, 
holding  himself  ready  for  the  summons  at  any  moment. 
Both  he  and  his  friends  knew  it  must  come.  Lord  Hood 
told  him  on  August  26  th  he  felt  sure  Villeneuve  had  gone 
to  the  Mediterranean  or  Cadiz,  and  that  he  would  certainly 

1  Rose  and  Broadley  :  Dumouriez  and  the  Defence  of  England,  p.  453,  Sept. 
11th,  citing  Add.  MSS.,  34931,  f.  160  ;  and  see  Ibid.,  p.  207,  for  his  letter  to 
Nelson  of  April  20,  1801:  "If  you  have  charge  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea 
we  can  together  deliver  Italy  and  France  of  the  democratic  tyranny."  Two 
other  letters  are  Ibid.,  pp.  208-210.  For  his  appreciation,  written  after  he 
knew  Villeneuve  was  at  Coruna  and  on  the  false  supposition  that  Oalder 
would  blockade  him  there,  see  Ibid.,  ch.  xiii. 