

On  the  same  day,  moreover,  full  confirmation  was 
received  of  the  reported  abandonment  of  the  invasion. 
The  cutter,  Courier,  had  just  cut  out  of  Tr^port  a  French 
schooner  which  had  left  Boulogne  on  the  2nd.  Her 
skipper  asserted  that  the  flotilla  there  was  being  dismantled, 
and  that  the  troops  had  marched  off  into  the  country  six 
days  before,  "  because  of  a  new  war  with  Russia."  Napoleon, 
he  said,  was  still  at  Boulogne  when  he  sailed,  but  was 
expected  to  leave  in  a  day  or  two.  The  Tr^port  division  of 
the  flotilla  was  also  found  to  be  landing  its  stores  and 
ammunition.^ 

By  this  time,  therefore,  it  was  obvious  that  henceforth 
the  head  and  front  of  British  action  was  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean area,  and  that  Nelson  was  the  central  figure.  Flat- 
tering as  was  the  position,  he  regarded  it  without  enthusiasm. 
''  I  hope,"  he  wrote  to  his  friend  Davidson  on  the  6th,  *^my 
absence  will  not  be  long,  and  that  I  shall  soon  meet  the 
combined  fleets  with  a  force  sufficient  to  do  the  job  well ; 

^  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  July  23rd,  received  September  5th  (at  night)  :  F.  0. 
Sicily.     Printed  in  Auriol,  ii.  308. 

'^  Admiralty  Jn-lctters  {Secretary  of  State),  4199,  September  6th. 

^  Admiralty  Jn-letters,  552,  September  5th.  Sent  to  the  War  Office  next 
day. —  W.O.  (i.),  712.  It  is  worth  noting  that  at  this  time  every  scrap  of  naval 
intelligence  was  forwarded  daily  to  the  War  Office  as  soon  as  it  came  in. 


Sept.  6-12  THE    NAVAL   PROBLEM  291 

for  half  a  victory  would  but  half  content  me.  But  I  do  not 
believe  the  Admiralty  can  give  mo  a  force  within  fifteen  or 
sixteen  sail  of  the  line  of  the  enemy.  .  .  .  But  I  will  do  my 
best,  and  I  hope  God  Almighty  will  go  with  me.  I  have 
much  to  lose, 'but  little  to  gain :  and  I  go  because  it  is  right, 
and  I  will  serve  the  country  faithfully."  He  had  had 
scarcely  more  than  a  week's  real  rest  to  restore  the  long 
strain  upon  his  shattered  constitution,  and  the  situation 
before  him  was  one  of  the  utmost  difficulty.  It  was  not 
so  much  a  question  of  how  to  defeat  the  enemy — of  that  he 
had  little  doubt — it  was  how  to  entice  or  force  them  to  a 
decisive  action.  Unless  this  could  be  done,  the  only 
prospect  before  him  was  another  long  winter  blockade. 

This  problem  was  now  his  main  pre-occupation.  In  his 
last  interview  with  Castlereagh,  after  his  meeting  with 
Wellesley,  the  advisability  of  using  a  military  force  for 
the  purpose  of  forcing  Villeneuve's  hand  had  been  dis- 
cussed. Whether  the  suggestion  came  from  Nelson,  or 
the  War  Minister,  or  possibly  from  Wellesley,  is  not  clear. 
Castlereagh  implies  that  Nelson  was  in  favour  of  it,  and  says 
distinctly  that  the  Admiral  only  refrained  from  pressing  for 
military  assistance  because  he  regarded  the  season  as  too 
far  advanced  for  the  operation  to  be  undertaken  that  year.^ 