

Of  the  military  operations  it  was  still  impossible  to  say 
anything  definitely.  But  the  prospect  was  brighter.  The 
Admiralty's  news  that  Bickerton  had  seen  Craig's  expedition 
safely  as  far  as  Cape  Bona  had  come  opportunely  to  hand 
the  day  after  Blackwood's  arrival.  On  September  5th  were 
received  two  despatches  from  Sir  Arthur  Paget,  our 
ambassador  at  Vienna.  The  first  was  filled  with  despair 
at  Austria's  insisting  on  a  preliminary  attempt  at  media- 
tion, but  the  second  announced  that  the  Austrian  Foreign 
Minister,  Cobenzl,  had  just  informed  him  that  he  had 
couched  his  demands  to  Napoleon  in  such  a  way  that  war 
Avas  inevitable.^    In  the  same  hour,  too,  there  was  a  despatch 

^  This  day,  Sept.  4th,  must  have  been  one  of  the  heaviest  known  to  the 
Admiralty.  There  were  then  seven  "Senior  Clerks"  (£800-£350)and  seventeen 
"  Junior  Clerks  "  (£250-£90)  to  deal  with  the  routine  of  the  enormous  number 
of  ships  in  commission  ;  and  only  four  days  before  they  had  memorialised  for 
an  increase  of  salary  {Minutefi,  154,  Aug.  29th).  In  July  Barham  had  made  an 
attempt  to  reduce  this  paper  work  by  issuing  printed  forms  for  returning 
"  Dispositions  "  and  for  acknowledging  orders  and  letters.  The  latter  had 
three  columns:  (1)  The  date,  (2)  Subject  of  the  letter,  (3)  Result,  i.e.  the 
action  that  had  been  or  would  be  taken  on  it.  For  examples,  see  In-letters, 
552,  August  2nd  and  4th. 

■^  Admiralty  In-letters  {Secret  Orders),  1363,  Sept.  3rd.  It  was  on  the  6th 
that  Marsden  the  Secretary  informed  him  they  were  ready  and  requested  him 
to  call  for  them  at  the  Admiralty. — Add.  MSS.,  34931. 

^  Paget  to  Mulgrave,  August  10  and  17,  received  September  5th  (at 
night)  F.O.  Austria,  74. 


290     THE    RETURN   TO   THE    OFFENSIVE    Sept.  4-6 

from  Elliot.  The  Queen,  be  said,  was  prostrate  at  the 
insolence  with  which  the  French  envoy  had  delivered 
Napoleon's  harsh  ultimatum.  The  end  seemed  at  hand,  and 
the  Russians,  impatient  for  action,  were  growing  suspicious 
at  hearing  nothing  from  Craig.  Still  there  was  hope.  The 
attitude  of  Austria  had  prevented  any  reinforcement  of  St. 
Cyr,  and  Elliot  himself  had  been  doing  his  best  to  allay  the 
impatience  of  the  Russians  by  putting  them  in  communica- 
tion with  Captain  Sotheron  of  the  Excellent,  the  sienior 
British  naval  officer  on  the  station.^ 

Immediate  action  was  now  taken.  The  crisis  was 
clearly  acute.  There  could  be  no  doubt  that  Craig  had 
reached  Malta,  and  by  this  time  would  be  in  communi- 
cation with  Lacy ;  and  on  the  morrow  the  Admiralty  was 
requested  to  order  all  transports  at  Gibraltar  to  proceed  to 
Malta  forthwith.- 