

All  this  was  well  so  far  as  it  went,  but  there  was  no- 
thing yet  on  which  Pitt  could  build  securely.  By  the 
time,  however,  that  Nelson  reached  London  the  posi- 
tion had  become  more  stable.  Gower,  as  he  expected,  had 
been  able  to  announce  the  ratification  of  the  treaty,  and 
that  concerted  action  was  opening.     The  Russians  were  to 

^  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  July  21st  and   22nd,  received  Aug    12th  ;    F.   0. 
Hussia,  58.     Printed  by  Holland  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  pp.  188-93. 


Aug.  22-29     UNCERTAINTY   ABOUT   NAPLES  283 

commence  their  march  through  Austria  on  August  20th, 
and  a  force  of  16,000  men  for  Stralsund  was  only  awaiting 
transport.  For  its  support  they  begged  that  the  Hanoverian 
troops  in  England  should  be  sent  to  join  it,  and  that  the 
British  Government  would  hasten  to  come  to  terms  with 
Sweden  as  to  the  amount  of  her  subsidy.^ 

Clearly,  then,  the  time  for  drastic  action  on  the  other 
flank  of  the  French  had  come.  But  unfortunately  the 
situation  in  Southern  Italy  was  in  the  last  degree  precarious, 
and  here  Nelson's  intimate  knowledge  was  a  godsend.  The 
difficulty  was  that  nothing  was  as  yet  known  as  to  the 
arrangements  Elliot  had  been  able  to  make  with  the 
Russian  Generals  for  co-operation  with  Craig.  It  was  not 
even  known  whether  Craig  had  reached  Malta.^  The  last 
information  from  Elliot  was  that  an  envoy  had  arrived 
from  Paris  who,  with  ruthless  brutality,  was  trying  to  brow- 
beat the  Neapolitan  court  into  a  recognition  of  Napoleon's 
new  title.  At  any  moment  they  might  give  way,  and  Lacy, 
the  Russian  General,  wanted  to  have  his  troops  brought 
over  from  Corfu  immediately.  He  was  urgently  pressing 
for  Craig's  co-operation,  but  not  a  word  had  been  heard 
from  him.^ 

It  was  quite  possible,  therefore,  that  under  Napoleon's 
violent  pressure  the  feeble  resistance  of  Naples  might 
break  down,  and  Craig,  even  if  he  arrived  in  time,  might 
find  the  moment  had  come  for  a  forcible  and  adverse 
occupation  of  Messina  to  save  Sicily  from  the  wreck  of 
the  Neapolitan  kingdom.  Seeing  how  long  Nelson  had  been 
pressing  for  troops  to  meet  this  very  situation,  he  natur- 
ally became  anxious  to  know  how  Craig's  force  was  to  be 
used,  but  Castlereagh  could  not  yet  give  him  a  definite 
answer.     "  As  the  man  said  of  the  Parson,"  Nelson  wrote  to 

^  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  July  31st  (two  despatches),  received  August  23rd: 
Ihid. 

^  It  was  not  till  Sept.  3rd  that  the  Admiralty  informed  Ministers  that 
Bickerton  had  seen  him  as  far  as  Cape  Bona  with  a  fair  wind. —  War  Office,  i, 
712.  On  Aug.  1st,  Elliot  had  written  fully  of  his  arrival  and  the  co-operation 
of  the  Russians,  but  though  he  specially  sent  the  letter  to  Rome  to  be 
forwarded  by  post  overland  it  did  not  come  to  hand  till  "  Sept.  17th  at  night." 
— Foreign  Office,  Sicily,  25. 