

*  To  Duroc  (Postscript),  Correspondance,  xi.  157. 

2  Blackwood  to  the  Admiralty  :  Captains  Letters,  1534.  He  submitted  a 
bill  for  £15,  196-.  Od.  for  his  journey,  which  was  allowed.  The  telegraph,  of 
course,  could  not  be  used  at  night  or  in  thick  weather. 


Aug.  22-27        THE   EAST   INDIA   CONVOY  279 

concentration  at  Ferrol  placed  them  in  immediate  danger 
and  the  apprehension  was  seriously  increased  by  Ville- 
neuve's  hasty  sailing  for  Corufia  before  he  could  have 
re-victualled.  The  course  he  had  steered  to  the  westward 
threatened  a  dash  at  the  East  Indiamen.  Or  if  this  were 
not  so,  still  they  might  be  the  objective  of  Allemand.  They 
were  a  source  of  more  than  usual  anxiety.  Not  only  was 
the  convoy  extraordinarily  rich,  but  in  the  Trident  64,  its 
escort  ship,  were  two  men  the  country  could  ill  afford  to 
lose.  One  was  Admiral  Rainier,  who  was  coming  home  in 
command  after  being  relieved  on  the  station  by  Sir  Edward 
PelleAv.  The  other  was  a  passenger — no  less  a  man  than 
Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  returning  from  his  brilliant  campaign 
against  the  Mahrattas,  the  campaign  which  had  removed 
all  fear  of  effective  French  interference  in  India.  A  secret 
route  had  been  sent  out  to  meet  them  at  St.  Helena,  but 
none  the  less  the  danger  was  disturbing.^ 

The  capture  of  this  priceless  convoy  would  mean  not 
only  the  loss  of  a  brilliant  soldier  but  a  disastrous  blow  to 
the  national  finance,  and  commercial  and  family  influence 
alike  demanded  that  it  must  be  secured  at  any  cost.  So 
great  indeed  was  the  anxiety  that  on  August  27th,  when 
as  yet  there  was  no  suspicion  that  Napoleon  had  abandoned 
the  invasion,  Cornwallis  was  told  that  so  soon  as  he  was 
strong  enough  he  would  have  to  detach  a  division  of  four 
or  five  of  the  line  a  hundred  leagues  west-south-west  of 
Scilly  in  order  to  receive  the  threatened  Trade.  Calder 
had  already  been  directed  to  cover  its  arrival,  if  he  found 
Villeneuve  and  Allemand  seemed  to  be  making  it  their 
objective  ;  and  Cornwallis's  new  instructions  provided  that 
if  the  detachment  found  Calder  operating  to  this  end  it 
was  to  consider  itself  under  his  orders.'^ 


^  Rainier  left  Madras  with  Wellesley  on  March  10th,  and  reached  St. 
Helena,  the  great  Southern  convoy  rendezvous,  on  June  21st.  Here  they 
were  joined  by  the  China  ships  and  some  whalers,  making  twenty -nine  sail, 
which  were  valued  at  £15,000,000.  Varying  at  his  own  discretion  the  Ad- 
miralty instructions,  he  sailed  again  on  July  12th  after  forcing  certain 
neutrals  to  remain  behind  anchored  under  the  fort  guns  for  fear  of  their 
betraying  his  route. — Kainier  to  Marsden.  "  Off  the  Start,  Sept.  8  "  :  In-letterSy 
176  ;  and  Log  of  the  Trident.     For  the  secret  route  see  post,  p.  303,  note  i. 