

These  measures  did  not  appeal  to  Pitt.  The  hour  for 
them  had  not  yet  struck,  and  he  was  not  to  be  drawn  into 
ventures  beyond  the  force  at  his  disposal  or  beyond  what 
the  precarious  situation  warranted — and  the  situation  was 
obviously  precarious.  Indeed,  the  whole  plan  of  action  had 
a  half-hearted  ring  about  it  that  was  not  to  his  mind.  It 
was  the  work  of  a  joint  council  of  war  upon  which  the 
Austrian  representative  was  General  Mack.  High  as  was 
his  reputation  as  an  administrative  soldier,  he  was  not  a 
man  to  inspire  confidence,  and  the  suggested  dispositions 
savoured  strongly  of  his  hand.  Pitt,  therefore,  had  no 
hesitation  in  supporting  the  attitude  Gower  had  taken  up. 
"  The  proposals  and  plan  of  operations,"  wrote  Mulgrave  in 
his  reply,  "  present  rather  the  laboured  details  of  obstacles 
to  any  attempt  at  opening  a  campaign  against  the  French 
than  a  system  of  active  and  vigorous  operations."  As  to 
the  special  Russian  demands,  he  was  to  say  that  England 
was  ready  to  subsidise  everybody,  but  that  it  was  useless  to 
send  any  force  to  the  Elbe  and  Weser  to  co-operate  with 
the  Swedes  and  Russians  until  the  main  operations  had 
developed.  This,  of  course,  was  strictly  in  accordance  with 
the  principles  on  which  alone  such  expeditions  could 
materially  affect  a  Continental  campaign.^ 

To  what  extent  Nelson  was  consulted  on  the  main 
scheme  of  the  great  Coalition  is  uncertain.  But  one  con- 
tribution he  made  to  it  is  very  noteworthy.  He  had  known 
Mack  when  in  1798  that  admired  officer  had  been  sent 
down  to  command  the  Neapolitan  army,  and  he  was  con- 
vinced nothing  good  could  come  of  operations  committed 
to  his  charge.     Though  not  consulted  by  the  Government 

^  Same  to  same,  August  14th:  F.  0.  Russia,  58.     Received  September  1st. 
^  Mulgrave  to  Gower,  September  3rd  :  F.  0.  Foreign,  58. 


2  86        THE    RETURN   TO    THE    OFFENSIVE      Sept. 

in  the  matter,  he  did  his  best  to  warn  thcin  through  his 
old  friend  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  and  that  in  no  measured 
terms.  "  If  your  Royal  Highness,"  he  is  recorded  to  have 
said,  "  has  any  communication  with  Government,  let  not 
General  Mack  be  employed,  for  I  know  him  to  be  a  rascal, 
a  scoundrel,  and  a  coward."  ^  It  is  probable  that  his  deep 
interest  in  foreign  politics  led  him  to  make  other  sug- 
gestions. "  No  Minister,"  wrote  his  devoted  chaplain,  "  ever 
better  understood  the  tone  of  the  times  he  lived  in."  True, 
he  himself  says  he  was  so  short  a  time  in  England,  and  not 
more  than  four  times  in  London,  that  he  could  hardly  talk 
of  anything  seriously  but  naval  aftairs.^  Still,  his  con- 
temporary biographers  assert  that  "  he  visited  various  depart- 
ments and  showed  Ministers  the  dangers  to  which  they 
w^ere  particularly  exposed  in  the  Mediterranean,  the  errors 
that  had  too  long  been  persisted  in,  and  the  events  and 
changes  that  might  be  expected  to  take  place  in  Europe 
from  the  prevailing  aspect  of  its  political  horizon."  ^  The 
statement  is  confirmed  by  Wellington's  well-known  account 
of  their  dramatic  meetinsc  in  Castlereaofh's  ante -room,  when 
the  "  Sepoy  General "  came  to  report  himself  on  his  safe 
return,  and  Nelson  was  waiting  to  take  his  leave.  At  first 
impressed  adversely,  like  Barham,  with  his  egotistic  conversa- 
tion, "  so  vain  and  so  silly  as  to  surprise  and  almost  disgust 
me,"  he  changed  his  opinion  when  Nelson  found  out  who  he 
Avas.  "  Then,"  said  the  Duke,  ''  he  talked  of  the  state  of  the 
country  and  of  the  aspect  and  probabilities  of  affairs  on  the 
Continent  with  a  good  sense  and  a  knowledge  of  subjects 
both  at  home  and  abroad,  that  surprised  me  equally.  .  .  . 
In  fact,  he  talked  like  an  officer  and  a  statesman."  ^ 