

^  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  July  9th  and  16th,  received  August  14th  and  22nd : 
F.  0.  Sicily,  25. 


2  84      THE    RETURN    TO    THE    OFFENSIVE      Sept.  i 

Ball,  "  he  preached  about  doing  good,  and  so  Ministers 
talked  of  our  troops  doing  good  to  the  Common  Cause." 
In  the  turbid  mist  that  shrouded  the  situation  Nelson 
clung  to  his  old  idea  of  securing  Sardinia  as  the  key  of  the 
difficulty.  So  long  as  he  had  that  island  for  a  base,  he 
was  sure  he  could  place  Sicily  beyond  Napoleon's  roach/ 

He  was  listened  to  with  respect,  and  indeed  was  even- 
tually furnished  with  means  to  the  amount  of  £40,000  for 
the  organisation  of  the  Sardinian  forces  in  case  of  need. 
The  point  just  then  received  new  emphasis.  On  September 
1st  came  another  despatch  from  Gower,  saying  that  Austria 
had  authorised  a  plenipotentiary  to  sign  her  adhesion  to  the 
Coalition,  but  she  was  making  all  kinds  of  difficulties  over 
details.  With  her  appetite  for  Northern  Italy  unassuaged, 
she  made  special  objection  to  the  restoration  of  the  King 
of  Sardinia  as  a  term  of  the  ultimate  settlement  of  Europe. 
She  also  wished,  in  spite  of  the  recent  Russian  experience, 
to  try  mediation  as  a  means  to  her  end  before  committing 
herself  to  actual  hostilities ;  but  nevertheless  she  expected 
Pitt  to  commence  paying  her  subsidy  at  once.  Naturally 
Gower  had  refused,  and  he  now  warned  Mulgrave  that  the 
character  of  the  Austrian  Court  was  so  weak  and  vacillating 
that,  unless  she  could  be  forced  to  commit  herself  during 
a  momentary  fit  of  vigour,  she  was  not  to  be  trusted. 
The  military  arrangements  she  proposed  were  equally  un- 
satisfactory. She  intended,  of  course,  to  use  her  main  army 
in  Northern  Italy,  and  she  was  demanding  that  Craig's  force 
should  march  with  Lacy's  Russians  to  join  it.  The  proposal 
was  out  of  the  question.  It  would  destroy  the  value  which 
the  expedition  derived  from  its  amphibious  nature — the 
only  real  value  it  had — and  would  jeopardise  Sicily.  Gower 
again  had  refused.'- 

In  the  same  bag  with  this  despatch  was  a  second  giving 
details  of  the  intended  movements  of  the  Russians  for  the 
coercion   of    Prussia  and   their   requirements   in  Northern 

^  Nelson  to  Pitt,  6  a.m.,  Aug.  29th,  and  same  to  Lord  Minto,  Aug.  31st : 
Nicolas,  vii.  20,  25.  Castlereagh  to  Nelson,  Sept.  —  :  Caatlcrcayh'n  Letters  and 
Despatches,  2nd  series,  i.  88.     Nelson  to  Ball,  Sept.  30th  :  Nicolas,  vii.  55. 

-  Gower  to  Mulgrave,  Aug.  l4tb,  received  Sept.  1st:  F.  0.  Foreiyn,  58. 
Holland  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  197. 


Sept.  1-3      CALLS    ON    THE    BRITISH    ARMY  285 

Europe.  "  I  am  to  press,"  wrote  Gower,  "  the  advantage  to 
the  cause  which  would  be  derived  by  a  demonstration  on 
the  English  coast,  and  that  a  collection  of  transports  in  the 
Downs  and  the  movement  of  troops  upon  the  shore  would 
not  fail  to  add  considerably  to  the  embarrassments  of 
Bonaparte."  They  further  hoped  that  when  operations 
began  a  British  force  would  appear  in  the  Elbe  and  land.^ 