

From  this  moment  he  was  treated  frankly  as  the  man 


^  Clarke  and  M'Arthur,  ii.  116.  This  copy  of  the  Journal  is  in  the  Kecord 
Office  with  its  covering  letter  to  Marsden,  which  appears  never  to  have  been 
printed.  It  is  as  follows :  "  Merton,  August  (sic)  1805.  In  answer  to  your 
letter  of  the  19th  requesting,  by  direction  of  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the 
Admiralty,  that  I  will  transmit  you  a  journal  of  my  proceedings  for  their 
information,  I  beg  leave  to  acquaint  you  that  never  having  been  called  upon 
(or  understanding  it  to  be  customary)  as  Commander-in-chief  to  furnish  their 
Lordships  with  a  journal  of  my  proceedings,  none  has  been  kept  for  that 
purpose,  except  for  the  different  periods  the  fleet  under  my  command  was  in 
pursuit  of  the  enemy,  from  the  19th  of  January  1805  till  the  12th  of  March 
following,  and  from  the  4th  of  April  till  the  20th  instant,  which  I  herewith 
transmit  for  the  information  of  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty," 


282       THE    RETURN   TO   THE    OFFENSIVE     aug.  12 

of  the  hour — the  embodiraent  of  the  policy  of  a  bold 
counter-attack  in  the  Mediterranean  into  which  Pitt's  war 
direction  had  ripened.  Barham  consulted  him  freely  on  the 
naval  requirements,  and  this  occupied  the  greater  part  of 
his  time,  and  was  fruitful,  as  we  shall  see,  in  new  develop- 
ments. But  to  the  Ministers  his  political  knowledge  was 
of  equal  value.  Our  relations  on  the  Continent  were  still 
in  the  greatest  uncertainty.  A  week  before  Nelson  landed, 
a  King's  Messenger  had  arrived  from  St.  Petersburg.  In 
his  last  despatch  Gower  had  led  Pitt  to  expect  an  an- 
nouncement that  the  Russian  treaty  had  been  ratified.  But 
now  he  could  only  tell  that  the  Czar  was  still  hanging  back. 
At  St.  Petersburg  they  had  been  pressing  him  further  on 
the  question  of  Malta  and  the  Maritime  Code,  but  he  had 
firmly  refused  even  to  discuss  the  points.  The  Minister 
had  then  hinted  at  the  prospect  of  mediation  being  re- 
sumed. Gower,  however,  was  unmoved,  and  assured  his 
Government  that  the  treaty  would  probably  be  ratified  in 
a  few  days  without  the  mediation  article.  His  hopes  of 
Austria  were  still  more  sanguine.  The  Czar  had  been 
assured  she  had  definitely  decided  to  take  action  at  once, 
so  as  not  to  leave  the  choice  of  time  to  Napoleon,  and  it 
was  said  she  had  already  concerted  a  plan  of  campaign 
with  Russia.  Under  this  arrangement,  as  communicated 
to  Gower,  55,000  Russians  were  to  enter  Galicia  in  the 
middle  of  August,  and  in  two  months  they  would  be  in 
line  with  an  Austrian  army  on  the  frontier  of  Bavaria.  It 
was  calculated — and  most  unhappily  calculated — that  this 
would  enable  them  to  anticipate  Napoleon  by  twenty  days. 
The  Archduke  Charles  was  to  command  the  allied  army 
without  interference  from  Vienna.^ 