

^  Secret  Orders,  August  27th. 


2  8o     THE  RETURN  TO  THE  OFFENSIVE     aug.  19-23 

It  was  on  this  burning  question — the  real  objective  and 
the  whereabouts  of  the  Combined  Fleet — that  Nelson  was 
most  eagerly  consulted  by  the  Ministers  when  he  reached 
London.  He  had  struck  his  flag  on  the  evening  of 
August  19th  in  grave  anxiety  as  to  what  his  reception 
would  be.  In  his  own  eyes  he  had  failed  and  been  out- 
witted. He  was  soon  reassured.  His  heroic  dash  to  save 
the  West  Indies  had  reawakened  all  the  old  enthusiasm  for 
the  hero  of  the  Nile  and  Copenhagen.  At  Portsmouth  he 
had  met  an  ovation,  and  by  the  time  he  reached  London 
it  was  unrestrained  adulation.  So  extravagant  did  it  grow 
that  the  more  sober  spirits  felt  called  upon  to  protest. 
"  Should  the  mad  project  of  invasion,"  wrote  the  editor  of 
the  Naval  Chronicle,  "  ever  be  attempted,  the  public  would 
feel  additional  security  from  having  the  hero  of  the  Nile 
on  our  coast.  But  we  greatly  lament  that  ill-judged  and 
overweening  popularity,  which  tends  to  make  another 
'  demi-god '  of  Lord  Nelson  at  the  expense  of  all  other 
officers  in  the  service,  many  of  whom  possess  equal  merit, 
and  equal  abilities,  and  equal  gallantry  with  the  noble 
Admiral." ' 

But  nothing  could  stem  the  tide.  People,  city,  and 
Ministers  were  all  at  one,  and  Nelson  to  his  no  small  dis- 
comfort found  himself  regarded  as  a  magician,  as  though 
he  were  in  possession  of  Drake's  fabled  mirror  in  which  he 
could  see  "  all  the  movements  of  the  enemy's  ships,  all  that 
passed  in  them,  and  count  their  crews."  On  August  23rd, 
his  first  day  in  London,  he  saw  both  Castlereagh  and  Pitt, 
and  found  them  "  full  of  the  enemy's  fleet,"  and  expecting 
him  to  say  where  it  was.  "  I  am  now  set  up  for  a  con- 
jurer," he  wrote  next  day  to  Keats  of  the  Superb,  his  most 
trusted  counsellor,  who  had  come  ashore  with  him ;  "  and 
God  knows  they  will  very  soon  find  I  am  far  from  being 
one.  I  was  asked  my  opinion  against  my  inclination,  for  if 
I  make  one  wrong  guess  the  charm  will  be  broken." 

Barham  alone  held  aloof.  The  two  great  seamen 
hardly  knew  one  another,  and  to  the  First  Lord's  cold, 
hard-headed    intellect    there    must    have    been    something 

1  Vol.  xiv.  157. 


AUG.20-24  BARHAM   AND    NELSON  281 

antagonistic  in  Nelson's  full-coloured  genius.  It  is  probable 
that,  in  common  with  many  others,  he  regarded  him  as  a 
poseur,  whose  vanity  was  wont  to  make  the  most  of  his 
achievements,  and  whose  impulsive  nature — for  so  it  seemed 
on  the  surface — was  not  to  be  relied  on  in  a  vital  crisis. 
The  crucial  question  was,  of  course,  whom  should  he  entrust 
with  the  Mediterranean  command.  There  the  naval  in- 
terest now  centred  with  acute  emphasis.  Nelson  with 
his  rich  experience  was,  of  course,  the  natural  choice ;  but 
Barham  clearly  shared  Nelson's  own  doubts  as  to  whether 
his  recent  conduct  had  been  as  well  considered  as  it  might 
have  been,  and  the  national  hero  was  met  on  landing  with 
a  cold  request  to  send  up  his  Journal.  Nelson  in  reply 
submitted  that  he  did  not  know  such  a  thing  was  expected 
of  a  Commander-in-chief.  But  he  had  kept  one  for  the 
two  periods  of  his  chase,  and  this  he  sent  up — and  with 
quick  effect.  "  Lord  Barham,"  we  are  told  on  the  best 
authority,  "  on  receiving  .  .  .  Lord  Nelson's  Journals,  per- 
used the  whole  narrative  with  an  attention  which  enabled 
that  Minister  to  form  a  more  complete  idea  of  the  Admiral's 
character;  and  Lord  Barham  afterwards  liberally  declared 
he  had  not  before  sufficiently  appreciated  such  extraordinary 
talents.  This  opinion  of  the  noble  Admiral's  late  proceed- 
ings was  immediately  communicated  to  the  Cabinet  with 
an  assurance  from  Lord  Barham  that  an  unbounded  con- 
fidence ought  to  be  placed  in  Nelson,  who  was,  above  all 
others,  the  officer  to  be  employed  on  the  station  he  had 
so  ably  watched,  and  whose  political  relations  he  had  so 
thoroughly  understood."  ^ 