

^  Nelson  to  Keats,  August  24th :  Postscript,  "  You  see  by  my  writing  tackle 
that  I  am  not  yet  mounted  as  Commander-in-chief"  :  Nicolas,  vii.  16. 


288     THE    RETURN    TO    THE    OFFENSIVE     Sept. 2-3 

have  to  go  to  sea  again.^  The  naval  tension  of  that  last 
week  in  August  was  as  high  as  the  political.  Alert  for  the 
great  summons,  Nelson  would  accept  no  invitations.  In 
refusing  one  on  the  29th  he  says,  "Every  ship,  even  the 
Victory,  is  ordered  out,  for  there  is  an  entire  igncjrance 
whether  the  Ferrol  fleet  is  coming  to  the  northward,  gone 
to  the  Mediterranean,  or  cruising  for  our  valuable  homeward- 
bound  fleet " ;  and  again  the  same  day,  expressing  the  same 
doubts,  he  says,  "  My  time  and  movements  must  depend 
upon  Buonaparte.  We  are  at  present  ignorant  of  his 
intentions." '" 

It  was  four  days  later  that  Blackwood  in  the  grey  dawn 
broke  in  upon  him  with  the  glorious  news.  Nelson  im- 
mediately followed  him  to  London,  and  found  all  excite- 
ment at  the  release  of  the  strain.  "  Thank  God  !  Thank 
God  ! "  wrote  the  veteran  Lord  Radstock,  "  a  thousand  thou- 
sand times  that  these  Jack  o'  Lanterns  are  once  more  safely 
housed  without  having  done  that  mischief  which  was 
justly  dreaded.  The  papers  tell  us  you  will  shortly  be 
after  them."  ^ 

That  his  hour  had  come  he  took  as  a  matter  of  course. 
It  was  the  call  for  which  he  had  been  waiting.  The  first 
order  that  left  the  Admiralty  after  Blackwood's  chaise  had 
rattled  down  Whitehall  was  one  to  stop  the  Victory — pro- 
bably it  was  Nelson's  first  request.'*  The  next  was  to 
Cornwallis  cancelling  the  directions  he  had  received  to  send 
Cotton  to  replace  Calder  in  command  of  the  southern  half 
of  his  fleet.  Then  a  day  passed  in  which  there  is  nothing 
but  one  of  the  cruel  orders  that  tell  so  harshly  the  strain 
of  the  crisis.  Men  were  lacking  for  the  ships  that  were  to 
reinforce  Nelson,  and  all  station  commanders  received 
directions  to  press  seamen  from  the  homeward-bound  con- 
voys. The  next  day  is  silence,  and  well  it  might  be ;  for 
it  so  happened  that  the  day  on  which  Blackwood  reached 

^  Add.  MSS.,  34930. 

-  On  August  29th  there  is  a  Minute  ordering  the  Victory  to  join  Cornwallis 
the  moment  she  is  ready  to  sail,  and  to  tell  Nelson  she  is  no  longer  under 
his  command  :  Admiralty  Minutes,  154. 

^  Admiral  Lord  Radstock  to  ^'elson,  September  3rd  :  Add.  MSS.,  34931. 

*  Admiralty  Minutes,  154,  Sept  2nd. 


Sept.  3-5  A    NEW    DEPARTURE  289 

the  Admiralty  with  the  longed-for  news,  was  also  the  day 
on  which  came  in  the  first  reports  that  the  Boulogne 
camp  was  breaking  up.  The  revolution  in  the  campaign 
had  come  about — an  entirely  new  phase  had  begun,  and 
all  day  Barham  was  at  work  upon  a  remarkable  series  of 
orders  to  meet  it.  On  the  morrow  they  were  complete.^ 
Their  purport  must  be  dealt  with  later.  Suffice  it  now 
to  say  that  when  Nelson's  were  put  into  his  hands  he 
found  them  of  a  nature  which  fully  confirms  what  we  are 
told  of  Barham's  conversion.  "  In  confidence  in  his  zeal 
and  ability,"  the  old  Mediterranean  station  was  to  be 
restored  as  far  west  as  St.  Vincent,  and  it  was  to  be  placed 
in  his  hands  with  full  liberty  to  distribute  his  squadron 
as  he  pleased.  He  was  given  in  fact  a  free  hand,  subject 
only  to  two  provisoes.  He  was  to  prevent  the  enemy  from 
putting  to  sea,  and  he  was  to  protect  the  Mediterranean 
convoys."^ 