


AUG.20-30  THE    HOME    TERMINALS  303 

indication  that  the  enemy  were  making  it  their  objective.^ 
Nor  was  this  all.  The  first  convoy  from  the  Leeward 
Islands  was  also  due,  and  owing  to  the  suspension  of 
the  normal  sailings  by  the  irruption  of  Villeneuve  and 
Missiessy  it  was  unusually  large.  It  consisted  of  no  less 
than  two  hundred  sail,  and  so  rich  was  it  that  it  will 
be  remembered  Cochrane,  anticipating  the  orders  of  the 
Admiralty,  had  taken  upon  himself  to  assign  for  its 
escort  the  Illustrious,  one  of  the  two  fast  seventy-fours 
that  Collingwood  had  detached  after  Nelson.^  Finally  the 
Lisbon-Oporto  convoy  outward-bound  was  also  on  the  point 
of  sailing. 

It  was  a  situation  that  was  causing  Barham  considerable 
anxiety.  He  believed  that  the  next  move  of  the  enemy 
would  be  to  break  up  their  main  fleets  and  "  to  employ 
squadrons  at  sea"  for  preying  on  commerce,  and  this,  as 
we  have  seen,  had  actually  been  Napoleon's  intention  until 
the  news  of  Craig's  expedition  forced  his  hand.'*^  Barham 
accordingly  informed  Gardner  that  he  was  going  to  place 
under  his  orders  a  heavy  cruiser  squadron  as  strong  as 
circumstances  would  permit,  not  only  for  the  annoyance  of 
the  enemy's  cruisers,  but  for  the  protection  of  the  home- 
ward-bound convoys,  and  also  of  the  western  coasts  when 
necessary.  "  By  these  means,"  he  added,  on  the  old 
principle  of  terminal  commerce  protection,  "  much  strength 
will  be  added  to  the  convoys,  when  they  stand  most  in 
need  of  it."  "^ 

But  if  the  enemy  were  likely  to  send  out  heavy 
squadrons  this  was  not  enough.  Without  battle-ship 
support  frigates  could  not  be  effective.  In  the  circum- 
stances   it    was    clear    the    old     Irish    squadron    must    be 

^  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  Aug.  20th  :  In-letters,  129.  The  route  Rainier 
sailed  was  about  two  hundred  miles  west  of  the  Azores  and  then  for  the 
Lizard. 

^  Cochrane  to  the  Admiralty,  July  17th  :  In-lctters,  326.  Admirnlty  Min- 
utes, July  11th,  ordering  him  to  send  home  the  Illustrious  and  Eaniillies  with 
any  convoy  that  was  ready.  He  detained  the  Ramillies  for  the  second 
convoy. 

'^  See  ante,  p.  293. 

*  Barham  to  Gardner :  Barham  Papers,  written  between  August  17th  and 
23rd.  More  than  a  month  before,  July  11th,  he  had  ordered  Dacres  at  Jamaica 
to  send  home  four  of  his  heaviest  frigates  for  this  purpose. — Secret  Orders, 
1363. 


304       SECURING    THE    COMMUNICATIONS      aug.  31 

restored  in  some  form  or  other  from  the  Western  Squadron 
into  which  it  had  been  absorbed.  So  long  as  the  Home 
division  of  that  squadron  was  kept  massed  before  Brest 
it  could  not  support  effectively  the  cruiser  control  of  the 
Soundings.  At  all  reasonable  risk  it  must  be  divided,  and 
we  have  seen  how,  as  early  as  August  27  th,  Barham  had 
directed  Cornwallis  to  detach  four  or  five  of  the  line  to 
receive  the  convoys  a  hundred  leagues  west-south-west  of 
Scilly,  so  soon  as  he  was  reinforced  sufficiently  to  be  able 
to  retain  eighteen  with  his  flag.^  Owing  to  the  extreme 
difficulty  of  manning  the  necessary  ships  until  the  Trade 
came  home  these  reinforcements  had  been  seriously  de- 
layed. Yet  as  soon  as  Cornwallis  had  got  the  report  of 
Allemand's  presence  from  the  Melampus  he  did  not  hesitate 
a  moment.  To  his  broad  view  of  the  meaning  of  his  fleet 
the  danger  to  the  trade  route  overrode  the  letter  of 
Barham's  order.  His  fleet,  as  Barham  had  recently  told 
him,  was  the  mainspring  from  which  all  offensive  operations 
must  proceed,  and  in  this  spirit  he  decided  to  make  the 
detachment  at  once,  having  little  doubt  he  could  contain 
the  Brest  fleet  with  less  than  eighteen  of  the  line  until  his 
reinforcements  arrived. 