

It  would  seem  that  fresh  news  must  just  have  come 
in  about  Baird's  expedition  at  Cork  and  that  it  increased 
Napoleon's  annoyance.  Still  he  did  not  anticipate  that 
it  would  lead  to  any  serious  naval  developments,  nor  was 

1  Canning  was  at  this  time  Treasurer  of  the  Navy,  and  Rose  Vice-President 
of  the  Board  of  Trade  and  Joint  Paymaster  General, 

2  Desbri^re,  v.  823,  and  see  ante,  p.  278. 


Sept.  13  THE    INVASION    LEGEND  293 

ii  fleet  action  any  longer  in  his  mind.  While  Decres 
was  penning  the  new  orders  for  Villeneuve,  Napoleon 
himself  was  sketching  out  a  fresh  plan  of  operation  for 
his  naval  force,  by  which  it  Avas  to  be  broken  up  into  a 
number  of  cruising  squadrons  and  devoted  to  commerce 
destruction.  Besides  three  cruiser  squadrons  it  was  his 
intention  to  establish  no  less  than  seven  others  from 
his  battle  force — three  from  the  Brest  fleet,  and  four  from 
Cadiz,  employing  thirty  of  the  line  and  eleven  frigates.^ 

With  this  unsatisfactory  project  in  his  mind  he  set  out 
next  day  for  Paris,  brooding  over  the  blow  his  prestige  had 
suffered  from  his  ignominious  failure  to  invade,  and  over 
the  tremendous  campaign  he  had  to  face  in  order  to  recover 
it — and  as  he  brooded  his  anger  burned  hotter  and  hotter 
against  Villeneuve.  It  was  in  these  days  that  he  finally 
persuaded  himself  that  the  whole  fiasco  was  due  to  Ville- 
neuve and  to  Villeneuve  alone;  and  on  the  13th,  as  Nelson 
was  passing  his  last  quiet  hours  at  Merton,  he  sat  down  to 
concoct  his  famous  Legend  of  the  Invasion — a  legend  which 
to  this  day  has  lost  little  of  its  vitality. 

"  I  meant,"  he  wrote,  "  to  concentrate  forty  or  fifty  ships 
of  the  line  in  the  port  of  Martinique  by  combined  operations 
from  Toulon,  Cadiz,  Ferrol,  and  Brest  [yet  it  had  never 
been  his  idea  that  the  Ferrol  squadron  should  go  there] ; 
to  bring  them  back  suddenly  on  Boulogne ;  to  make  myself 
master  of  the  sea  for  a  fortnight  [it  had  always  varied  before 
from  a  few  hours  to  four  days];  to  have  150,000  men  and 
10,000  horses  encamped  on  this  coast  [yet  he  had  never 
had  two-thirds  of  that  strength] ;  and  immediately  on  the 
signal  of  my  fleet's  approach  to  land  in  England  and  seize 
London  and  the  Thames.  This  project  failed  to  succeed. 
If  Admiral  Villeneuve  instead  of  entering  Ferrol  [which  he 
never  did]  had  merely  called  out  the  Spanish  squadron 
[it  was  Franco-Spanish  and  could  not  have  got  out  sooner 
for  the  wind]  and  had  sailed  for  Brest  to  join  with  Admiral 
Ganteaume,  my  army  would  have  landed  and  it  would  have 
been  all  over  with  England."  And  yet  he  knew  full  well, 
if  Villeneuve's  stores  had  permitted  him  to  do  so,  he  would 