

What  Nelson  was  so  anxious  to  have  was  the  famous 
code  which  he  was  soon  to  immortalise,  entitled  Telegraphic 
Signals  or  Mcti%nc  Vocabulary,  the  recent  invention  of  Sir 
Home  Popham.  As  yet  it  had  not  been  fully  adopted 
into  the  service,  but  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war  in  1803, 
it  had  been  so  far  recognised  as  to  be  issued  to  ships  of 
the  line.^  Apparently  it  had  been  issued  to  Keith's  cruiser 
squadron,  where  the  inventor  had  been  using  it  with  great 
success.  Under  Popham's  direction  indeed  it  proved  so 
great  a  convenience,  especially  in  bad  weather  when  per- 
sonal communication  was  impossible,  that  its  value  could 
no  longer  be  doubted.  Accordingly,  during  the  time  Nelson 
was  being  consulted  by  Barham,  it  was  decided,  apparently 
in  some  haste,  that  every  ship  should  have  a  copy,  and 
the  decision  seems  closely  related  to  the  new  system  of 
cruising. 

This  system  was  based  on  the  modern  idea  of  cruiser 

'  Nelson  had  certainly  used  it  to  communicate  with  his  battleship  captains 
(see  e.g.  his  letter  to  Hargood,  Aug.  5th  :  Nicolas,  viii.  3).  In  saying  the  code 
had  just  been  improved  and  enlarged  Barrow's  memory  must  have  deceived 
him.  According  to  the  Introduction  and  successive  Prefaces  to  the  work,  the 
first  edition  was  privately  printed  in  1800,  and  was  used  by  Popham  in  the 
Baltic  principally  for  communicating  between  his  ship,  the  Romncy  50,  off 
Copenhagen,  and  Admiral  Dickson  at  Elsinore.  Later  on  he  used  it  in  the 
Red  Sea,  and  by  the  encouragement  of  Lord  Spencer,  then  First  Lord,  he 
prepared  a  new  edition  when  he  came  home,  adding  two  new  parts.  Part  I. 
(the  old  edition)  had  about  1000  words  ;  Part  II.  added  1000  more,  and  Part 
ill.  a  number  of  sentences  and  phrases.  This  edition  was  in  quarto,  and 
issued  in  180:^.  Up  till  1S09  there  were  several  reprints  in  a  cheaper  octavo 
form,  but  no  additions  or  changes  were  made. 


Sept.  6  THE    NEW    CRUISER   LINES  299 

lines.  The  most  important  one  was  to  be  established  by 
the  Irish  Admiral,  to  extend  from  Cape  Clear  to  Finis- 
terre.  The  order  was  one  of  those  forwarded  in  those 
famous  days  of  hard  work  that  followed  Blackwood's  arrival 
and  brought  Nelson  in  hot  haste  up  to  London.  Lord 
Gardner,  whose  sick-leave  had  expired,  and  who  was  about 
to  relieve  Drury  at  Cork,  was  informed  that  his  frigates  were 
to  cruise  in  a  line  between  Cape  Clear  and  Finisterre,  in 
order  to  keep  up  as  direct  a  communication  as  pos- 
sible with  the  other  stations,  and  for  the  protection  of  the 
trade  and  the  annoyance  of  the  enemy.  And  in  case  of 
falling  in  with  any  squadrons  of  the  enemy  they  were  not 
to  quit  them  for  the  purpose  of  giving  information  until 
they  should  have  followed  them  so  far  on  their  course  as  to 
be  certain  of  their  destination.  Then  they  were  to  make 
the  best  of  their  way  to  the  Admiral  to  whom  in  their 
judgment  the  intelligence  was  most  material.^ 