

^  Out-letters  [Secret  Orders),  1184.  For  his  working  of  the  line  see  Captains* 
Letters,  2075, 

^  Admiralty  Minutes,  154,  Sept.  3rd,  9th,  11th.  Drury  to  Admiralty:  In- 
letters,  640,  Sept.  9th.  A  minute  of  Oct.  5th  {Ibid.,  p.  155)  shows  copies  sent 
to  the  West  Indies  and  North  America,  and  twenty  more  copies  for  Nelson. 


302       SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS      aug.  30 

of  course  watching"  this  important  Landfall,  and  had  cruis- 
ing there  the  M  daw  pus  frigate  and  two  sloops.  Allcmand 
chased  them  all  that  day  without  success,  the  Melampus 
making  away  for  Cornwallis  and  the  two  sloops  standing 
by.  They  were  chased  again  next  day  and  this  time  only 
escaped  by  sacrificing  guns  and  gear.  The  Melamjms  re- 
ported to  Cornwallis  the  following  day  and  the  action  he 
took  was  enth-ely  in  the  spirit  of  the  tradition  as  to  the 
functions  of  the  Western  Squadron.  That  function,  as  we 
have  seen,  was  to  secure  the  approaches  to  the  Channel  for 
all  purposes  ;  the  blockade  of  Brest  being  only  part  of  the 
means  to  effect  that  object.  As  has  been  already  explained, 
this  principle  had  been  recognised  in  the  normal  distribu- 
tion of  the  Home  Fleet;  that  is,  a  small  battle  squadron 
was  usually  maintained  on  the  south  coast  of  Ireland,  either 
under  the  Cork  Admiral  or  as  a  division  of  the  Western 
Squadron.  Owing  to  the  strain  on  the  British  naval 
resources  caused  by  the  three-power  coalition,  this  squadron, 
it  will  be  remembered;  had  been  absorbed  into  the  Western 
Squadron  and  Cornwallis  had  devoted  it  to  the  great  Biscay 
blockade.  Hitherto  this  arrangement  had  sufficed  to  pre- 
vent any  battle-ship  interference  with  cruiser  control  of  the 
Channel  approaches ;  but  with  the  appearance  of  Alle- 
mand's  squadron  on  the  scene  that  control  was  threatened, 
and  threatened  at  a  most  critical  time. 

It  so  happened  that  Popham  was  in  the  act  of  sailing 
from  Cork  with  Baird's  expedition  and  a  vast  mass  of  the 
East  and  West  India  trade.  He  had  nothing  but  a  couple 
of  sixty-fours,  a  fifty,  and  a  few  cruisers,  and  an  encounter 
with  such  a  squadron  as  Allemand's  would  have  meant  a 
serious  disaster.^  Whether  Cornwallis  knew  the  acuteness 
of  this  particular  danger  is  not  recorded,  but  there  were 
others  of  which  he  had  certainly  been  informed.  Only  a 
week  before  he  had  received  from  the  Admiralty  the  very 
secret  despatch  already  mentioned,  informing  him  that 
Rainier's  priceless  convoy  was  about  due,  and  bidding 
him  have  a  special  regard  for  its  safety  if  there  was  any 

^  Lofj  of  the  Diadem  (Sir  Home  Popham),  Captains  Logs,  1743.  He  weighed 
ou  Aug.  28th,  but  did  not  get  clear  out  of  Queenstown  harbour  till  the  31st. 