

^  Napoleon  to  Decres,  September  1st :  Correspondance,  xi.  170. 


294       THE   RETURN   TO    THE    OFFENSIVE     Sept.  13 

have  fallen  into  the  midst  of  the  overpowering  concentration 
that  awaited  him  off  Brest.  So  he  goes  on  to  try  to  explain 
away  his  original  mistake  in  believing  the  operation  feasible 
with  the  armed  flotilla  alone.  It  was  absolutely  useless,  he 
says,  but  if  he  had  collected  ordinary  unarmed  transports 
the  English  Avould  at  once  have  penetrated  his  design  of 
bringing  his  massed  fleets  into  the  Channel.  The  costly 
creation  and  armament  of  the  flotilla  was  solely  intended  to 
deceive  them  as  to  the  direction  from  which  the  real  danger 
was  coming  and  it  was  successful.  "  The  enemy  were 
duped,"  he  says  with  heroic  effrontery.  "  They  thought 
I  meant  to  pass  by  main  force  with  the  pure  military 
strength  of  the  flotilla.  The  idea  of  my  real  project 
never  dawned  on  them."  The  unblushing  misrepresenta- 
tion of  what  he  knew  to  be  the  facts  almost  takes  away 
the  breath.  But  that  a  man  of  Napoleon's  imagination 
should  have  penned  such  a  document  is  less  astounding 
than  that  it  should  ever  have  been  taken  seriously.  It 
obviously  reflects  nothing  but  anxiety  for  his  shattered 
prestige,  and  was  simply  a  political  manifesto  designed 
to  save  his  face,  in  which  his  freedom  with  the  facts  of 
the  case  was  only  bounded  by  his  genius  for  gauging  the 
limits  of  popular  credulity.^ 

The  anxiety  under  Avhich  he  invented  his  great  fable  is 
clear  to  see  in  the  next  document  which  came  from  his  pen. 
To  add  to  his  trouble  it  would  seem  that  further  informa- 
tion had  just  reached  him  from  Italy  of  the  danger  that 
threatened  the  right  flank  of  his  vast  movement.  His 
scheme  for  a  world-wide  campaign  against  British  com- 
merce was  suddenly  laid  aside,  and  the  following  day  fresh 
orders   went  off  to   Villeneuve,  which  gave  the  Combined 

^  For  the  vitality  of  the  legend,  see  Captain  Gabriel  Darrieu's  Li  Guerre 
.vir  Mer,  1007,  pp.  63  d  scq.  Writing  seven  years  after  the  publication  of  the 
French  Staff  History,  the  Professor  of  Strategy  can  still  quote  the  paper  and 
say,  "  It  is  a  specimen  of  magnificent  strategy ;  its  principles  are  impeccable 
and  the  plan  in  its  grandiose  proportions  could  and  should  have  succeeded." 
He  accepts  in  their  entirety  Napoleon's  travesty  of  the  facts  and  his  elimina- 
tion of  the  enemy  ;  treats  Barbara's  dispositions  as  matters  of  pure  chance  ; 
and  then,  as  his  better  judgment  and  conspicuous  knowledge  of  his  profession 
reassert  themselves,  he  proceeds  to  show  that  the  whole  plan  was  based  on 
the  Emperor's  profound  ignorance  of  the  elements  of  naval  warfare,  and  had 
no  chance  of  success. 