

"Nelson  &  Bronte."^ 


Nelson's  views  were  adopted,  and  a  special  squadron 
was  devoted  to  the  service.  It  was  to  consist  of  four  sail, 
and  was  entrusted  to  Captain  Lobb,  who  had  been  Popham's 
right-hand  man  off  Boulogne — Popham  himself  being  in 
command  of  Baird's  escort  with  a  broad  pennant.  This  was 
the  first  squadron  to  be  got  off.  An  order  for  Lobb  to 
receive  the  necessary  number  of  Popham's  signal  books  was 
made  on  Sept.  3rd  and  his  instructions  were  signed  the  next 
day.  They  directed  him  to  keep  frequent  communication 
between  St.  Vincent  and  Finisterre,  with  a  view  to  making 
known  intelligence  of  the  enemy's  fleets  immediately  to  the 

^  This  important  letter  has  hitherto  been  unpublished.  It  was  presented 
to  the  Britannia  R.N.  College,  Dartmouth,  on  Trafalgar  Day,  1907,  by  Mrs. 
Scarth  (of  Bearsted,  Kent).     Thompson  was  the  First  Lord's  Private  Secretary. 


Sept.  4-9  ISSUE    OF    POPHAM'S    CODE  301 

Admirals  at  Ushant,  Ferrol,  or  Cadiz,  "  or  to  any  other  line 
of  cruisers  which  from  time  to  time  you  may  be  acquainted 
with."  If  he  failed  to  get  touch  with  any  such  line  the  ship 
entrusted  with  the  intelligence  was  to  make  as  directly  as 
possible  for  one  of  the  Admirals,  and  Lobb  was  to  be  careful 
to  keep  in  constant  communication  with  Lisbon.^ 

With  these  orders  he  received  a  letter  covering  his 
copies  of  the  Signal  Book.  It  explained  that  their  lord- 
ships were  of  opinion  that  it  might  be  used  to  advantage  in 
communicating  between  ships  at  sea.  He  was  to  keep  one 
copy  himself  and  give  the  rest  to  his  captains.  On  the  9th 
fifty  copies  were  ordered  to  be  put  on  board  the  Victory  with 
a  similar  letter  to  Nelson.  The  same  day  Drury  received 
twenty-five  copies,  and  two  days  later  fifty  were  ordered  for 
Cornwallis.^ 

Coming  as  it  did  together  with  the  establishment  of 
cruiser  lines,  the  issue  of  the  telegraph  code  to  cruisers 
reveals  a  distinct  advance  towards  more  scientific  systems 
of  intelligence  and  commerce  protection ;  and  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  Allemand  was  still  at  large,  both  were  certainly 
needed.  Such  a  squadron  operating  boldly  about  the  ter- 
minal area  of  the  great  trade  routes  and  on  the  vital  line 
of  communication  with  the  Mediterranean  fleet  Avas  a 
serious  danger.  Until  it  could  be  met  with  and  disposed 
of,  the  whole  situation  must  be  in  a  constant  state  of 
unrest,  and  it  becomes  therefore  a  matter  essential  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  campaign  to  trace  the  motions  of  the 
disturbing  factor  and  the  eflbrts  that  were  made  to  deal 
with  it. 

With  his  formidable  squadron,  consisting,  as  we  have 
seen,  of  the  Majeshteitx  120,  four  seventy-fours,  three 
frigates,  and  a  couple  of  sloops,  Allemand,  after  finding 
nothing  in  Ferrol,  had  proceeded  to  the  rendezvous  off  the 
Penmarcks  which  Villeneuve  had  sent  to  him  at  Vig^o.  He 
reached  it  by  daybreak  on  August   30  th.     Cornwallis  was 