

Three  frigates  were  all  that  could  be  spared  for  the 
purpose  at  the  moment,  but  Cornwallis  was  directed  to 
keep  one  of  his  own  cruisers  permanently  off  Finisterre 
to  complete  the  line.  His  other  cruisers,  which  he  kept 
normally  to  the  westward,  further  reinforced  it,  but  at  no 
time  do  more  than  six  frigates  appear  to  have  been  em- 
ployed in  the  service."  It  was  not  strictly,  therefore,  a 
cruiser  line  in  the  modern  sense,  but  rather  a  means  of 
securing  a  proper  distribution  of  cruisers  to  cover  the 
ground  as  effectively  as  possible. 

Beyond  Finisterre  the  line  was  to  be  continued  down 
to  St.  Vincent,  so  as  to  connect  Cornwallis's  command 
with  Nelson's,  and  this  extension  was  undoubtedly  the 
suggestion  of  Nelson  himself.  He  had  been  consulted  on 
the  question  by  Barham  soon  after  his  arrival  in  London, 

^  Gardner  to  Admiralty,  Sept.  9th :  In-lcttcrs,  620.  He  says  the  orders 
were  dated  Sept.  6th.     In  the  Barham  Papers  is  a  draft  of  them  undated. 

'^  Cornwallis,  it  should  be  said,  did  not  recognise  anything  peculiarly  new 
in  the  arrangement,  and  perhaps  a  little  resented  the  reflection  on  his  usual 
methods.  In  owning  a  copy  of  the  Irish  Station  order,  together  with  his 
quota  of  Popham's  Signal  Books,  he  says :  "  The  instructions  contained  in 
the  order  are  nearly  the  same  as  have  generally  been  given.  I  can  therefore 
only  guess  why  the  copy  of  the  order  was  sent  to  me." — To  the  Admiralty, 
Sept.  28th:  In-letters,  129. 


300       SECURING    THE    COMMUNICATIONS      Sept.  3 

and  had  reduced  his  opiuion  to  writing  in  the  following 
letter : — 

•"  Albkmarle,'  Au(/t.  2dth,  1805. 

"My  dear  Lord, — With  great  deference  I  venture  by 
Your  Lordship's  desire  to  state  my  opinion  of  the  neces- 
sity of  a  constant  succession  of  frigates  and  fast  sailing 
sloops  being  employed  for  the^  protection  of  our  Com- 
merce and  the  destruction  of  the  Enemy's  numerous 
privateers  on  the  Coast  of  Portugal,  from  off  Cape 
Ortugal  to  St.  Ubes,  many  of  them  small,  lurking  under 
the  Bayonne  Islands  and  the  Burlings.  Ships  on  this 
service  would  not  only  prevent  the  depredations  of  the 
Privateers  but  be  in  the  way  to  watch  any  Squadron  of  the 
Enemy  should  they  pass  on  their  track.  A  frigate  belonging 
to  the  Mediterranean  Fleet  must  always  be  off  Cape  St. 
Vincent.  Therefore  intelligence  will  be  quickly  conveyed  and 
the  Enemy  I  think  never  again  lost  sight  of.  I  was  happy 
to  hear  from  good  Mr.  Thompson  that  Your  Lordship  had 
thought  of  extending  frigates  as  much  as  possible  from 
Cape  Finisterre  to  Ireland.  This  will  effectually  protect  our 
Commerce  and  in  every  way  greatly  annoy  the  Enemy. — I 
am  ever,  my  dear  Lord,  your  most  faithful  Servant, 