

The  fairest  promise  of  bringing  the  enemy  to  action  by 
naval  means  alone  lay  in  the  inferiority  of  the  force  which 
would  be  at  his  disposal  at  least  for  some  time.  But  here 
lay  also  his  chief  trouble ;  for  an  action  with  inferior  force 
could  hardly  prove  decisive,  and  it  was  a  decisive  action 
that  would  be  expected.  To  this  alternative,  however,  he 
reconciled  himself.  His  general  plan  was  to  conceal  as  far 
as  possible  the  amount  of  his  force  in  hopes  of  tempting 
Villeneuve  to  commit  himself  to  an  attack.  All  day  on 
September  11th  he  was  at  the  Admiralty  issuing  orders  as 
Commander-in-chief.  On  the  12th  he  took  leave  of  Pitt 
and  Castlereagh,  and  on  the  morrow,  after  a  day  at  Merton, 
he  set  out  at  night  for  Spithead.     The  enthusiasm  of  his 

^  Castlereagh  to  Nelson  :  Letters  and  Despatches,  2nd  series,  vol.  i.  p.  124. 
This  letter  was  written  the  day  before  the  news  of  Nelson's  death  reached 
London. 


292       THE   RETURN   TO   THE    OFFENSIVE     Sept.  14 

reception  at  Portsmouth  next  morning  did  something  to  lift 
the  weight  of  anxiety  that  oppressed  him.  Early  in  the 
morning  ho  went  oft'  to  the  Victory  and  rehoisted  his  flag. 
Two  of  the  Ministers,  Canning  and  Rose,  accompanied  him 
to  see  him  oft'/  They  dined  on  board,  and  then  Nelson 
made  the  signal  to  weigh,  little  dreaming  that,  as  he  began 
to  face  his  almost  hopeless  task,  Napoleon  in  the  self-same 
hour  was  issuing,  in  untaught  disregard  of  his  enemy,  the 
very  order  he  prayed  for — the  order  which  would  solve 
the  insoluble  and  deliver  Villeneuve  into  his  hands. 

Yet  so  it  was — as  though  Fate  had  willed  that  no  touch 
should  be  wanting  to  the  dramatic  intensity  of  the  campaign 
as  it  pressed  to  its  catastrophe.  It  was  on  August  30th, 
amidst  the  littered  wastes  where  the  Ocean  camp  had  been, 
that  the  Emperor  signed  the  decree  demobilising  the 
Flotilla.  The  following  day,  with  his  eye  on  the  British 
army,  he  was  busy  arranging  for  its  defence  against  a 
descent  from  the  sea.  It  was  at  this  time  he  must  have 
received  from  Villeneuve  the  despatches  which  told  of  his 
return  to  Cadiz;  for  on  September  IstDecres,  on  Napoleon's 
instructions,  was  sending  him  fresh  orders  to  meet  the 
changed  aspect  of  the  campaign.  "  With  those  thirty-six 
of  the  line,"  the  Minister  wrote,  ''  his  Majesty's  will  is  that 
his  flag  and  that  of  his  allies  command  the  whole  of  the 
Andalusian  coasts  and  the  Straits,  because  he  regards  it  as 
impossible  that  the  enemy  can  confront  you  there  with  an 
equal  force.  It  is  said  at  this  moment  that  England  is 
preparing  a  convoy  and  some  sort  of  expedition  which  is 
presumed  to  be  destined  for  the  Mediterranean.  His 
Majesty's  will  is  that  you  should  take  all  fitting  pre- 
cautions to  get  warning  of  the  approach  of  this  expedition 
and  to  destroy  it." " 