

So  the  old  device  which  Pitt  had  inherited  from  his 
father  worked  the  miracle — by  sheer  force  of  strategical  law 
and  by  no  clearly  expressed  intention.  Nelson  at  least  never 
alludes  to  the  possibility  of  its  proving  a  solution  of  his 
difficulty,  and  as  Rosily 's  orders  were  being  written — and 
it  was  these  that  eventually  did  the  work — he  was  clearing 
the  Channel  with  Blackwood  and  two  of  the  line  that  had 
joined  from  Plymouth,  all  unconscious  that  his  arch-enemy 
was  stretching  out  to  him  the  crown  of  his  career. 

^  To  Decres,  September  15th,  and  Kosily's  Instructions,  September  17th: 
Cor  respond  ance,  xi.  20  i  and  217. 


CHAPTER    XX 

SECURING   THE   COMMUNICATIONS 

All's  well  that  ends  well;  but  the  strain  which  had  pre- 
vailed at  the  British  Admiralty  until  Villeneuve  had  been 
located  and  safely  housed  had  driven  home  certain  lessons. 
It  was  clear  that  the  existing  cruiser  system  was  far  too 
loose  and  unscientific  to  ensure  such  an  effective  command 
of  European  waters  as  Pitt's  intended  operations  demanded. 
Barham  at  all  events  set  himself,  in  concert  with  Nelson,  to 
organise  his  cruiser  control  on  sounder  lines  for  the  rest  of 
the  campaign.  Drury,  who  at  Cork  had  been  directing  the 
most  important  squadron  both  for  intelligence  and  com- 
merce protection,  had  shown  little  grasp  of  his  functions, 
and  was  constantly  being  found  fault  with  by  the  Admiralty. 
And  as  for  the  captains,  the  leading  idea  with  many  of  them 
was  that  when  sent  oft'  on  detached  service  they  were  to 
enjoy  the  luxury  of  "  a  cruise  "  with  a  chance  of  distinction 
and  prize  money.  The  freedom  in  which  they  sometimes 
indulged  themselves  was  outrageous,  and  the  whole  system 
cried  out  for  severe  restraint  and  organisation.^ 

Circumstances  were  favourable  for  an  improvement. 
The  release  of  the  strain  on  Keith's  squadron  caused  by  the 
abandonment  of  the  invasion  set  a  good  many  cruisers  at 
liberty,  while  at  the  same  time  a  new  means  of  increasing 
the  power  of  communication  was  available.  With  the  latter 
there  can  be  no  doubt  Nelson  had  a  good  deal  to  do.  Barrow 
relates  that  in  the  morning  of  the  Admiral's  last  day  in 

^  See  especially  the  case  of  the  Cerberus.  After  Missiessy's  escape  from 
Eochefort  she  was  sent  from  Saumarez's  squadron,  on  March  27th,  to  cruise 
about  Madeira  for  a  month  and  to  return  immediately.  She  did  not  come 
back  till  July  15th,  and  Saumaurez  was  directed  to  express  to  her  captain  "  the 
high  disapprobation  of  the  Admiralty." — In-IcUcm,  223 ;  Secret  Orders,  1363. 

297 


298       SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS     Sept.  12 

London,  he  was  at  the  Admiralty  inquiring  earnestly  about  a 
code  of  signals  just  then  improved  and  enlarged.  "  I  assured 
him,"  he  writes,  "  they  were  all  but  ready :  that  he  should 
not  be  disappointed,  and  that  I  would  take  care  they  were 
at  Portsmouth  the  following  morning."  But  even  so,  Nelson 
could  not  rest.  He  looked  in  again  in  the  evening,  the  last 
thing  before  leaving  for  Merton.  Barrow  was  staying  late 
on  purpose  to  see  them  off.  "  I  pledged  myself,"  he  says, 
"  not  to  leave  the  office  till  a  messenger  was  despatched 
with  the  signals,  should  the  post  have  departed,  and  that 
he  might  rely  on  their  being  at  Portsmouth  the  following 
morning.  On  this  he  shook  hands  with  me  .  .  .  and  he 
departed  apparently  more  than  usually  cheerful." 