


Sept.  14     VILLENEUVE  ORDERED  TO  NAPLES      295 

Fleet  a  new  and  pressing  function.  So  immediate  was  the 
necessity  for  bold  and  prompt  action  that  he  would  not 
even  permit  Decres  to  tell  the  unhappy  Admiral  what 
he  thought  of  him.  With  one  more  appeal  to  his  courage 
and  audacity,  he  told  him  not  to  w^ait  for  six  months' 
stores,  as  he  had  been  enjoined  in  the  last  orders,  but 
to  be  content  with  tw^o,  and  get  to  sea  at  once  to  save 
the  situation.  "  Having  resolved,"  he  said,  still  holding 
back  from  admitting  he  was  on  his  defence — "  having  re- 
solved to  make  a  powerful  diversion  by  directing  into  the 
Mediterranean  our  naval  forces  concentrated  at  the  port  of 
Cadiz,  combined  with  those  of  his  Catholic  Majesty,  we 
Avould  have  you  know  that  our  intention  is  that,  imme- 
diately on  receipt  of  these  presents,  you  will  seize  the  first 
favourable  opportunity  of  sailing  with  the  Combined  Fleet 
and  proceeding  into  that  sea.  .  .  .  You  will  first  make  for 
Cartagena  to  join  the  Spanish  squadron  which  is  in  that 
port ;  you  will  then  proceed  to  Naples  and  disembark  on 
some  point  of  the  coast  the  troops  you  carry  on  board  to 
join  the  army  under  the  orders  of  General  St.  Cyr.  If  you 
find  at  Naples  any  English  or  Russian  ships  of  war,  you  will 
seize  them.  The  fleet  under  your  command  will  remain  off 
the  Neapolitan  shores  so  long  as  you  may  judge  necessary 
to  do  the  utmost  harm  to  the  enemy,  and  to  intercept 
an  expedition  w^hich  they  intend  to  send  from  Malta.  Our 
intention  is  that  wherever  you  meet  the  enemy  in  inferior 
force  you  will  attack  them  without  hesitation  and  obtain 
a  decision  against  them.  It  will  not  escape  you  that  the 
success  of  these  operations  depends  essentially  on  the 
promptness  of  your  leaving  Cadiz."  ^ 

It  is  in  this  apprehension  for  St.  Cyr  and  particularly 
in  the  threat  from  Malta,  that  we  get  the  key  of  the  rest  of 
the  campaign,  and  how  it  was  that  Pitt,  by  his  little  expedi- 
tion, forced  Napoleon  to  sacrifice  his  fleet  to  Nelson.  On 
the  following  day  the  Emperor  wrote  again  to  Decres  ex- 
plaining, without  disguise,  that  the  primary  object  of  the 
new  orders  was  to  deal  with  Craig's  expedition  and  prevent 
any  further  action  of  the  same  kind  in  the  Mediterranean. 

^  Napoleon  to  Villeneuve,  Sfc.  Cloud,  Sept.  14th  :  Correspondance,  xi.  195. 


296       THE    RETURN    TO    THE    OFFENSIVE     Sept.  15 

So  absolutely  essential  did  he  regard  the  movement  that  a 
day's  reflection  had  convinced  him  that  he  could  not  risk  leav- 
ing its  execution  to  Villeneuve's  nerveless  hands.  He  must 
be  superseded  by  a  more  vigorous  officer.  Admiral  Rosily, 
Avho  had  been  originally  intended  to  replace  Missiessy,  was 
the  man  he  chose,  and  Decr^s  was  told  he  was  to  order  him 
to  set  out  for  Cadiz  forthwith  and  take  over  the  command 
if  the  fleet  had  not  put  to  sea.^ 