

1  Stirling  to  Cornwallis,  September  IGth.  "  Scilly  bearing  N.E.  by  E.  20 
leagues,"  enclosed  in  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  September  27th. — In-htters, 
129. 

2  Parker  to  his  mother,  August  30th. — "  Since  writing  the  above  I  joined 
Admiral  Cornwallis,  who  with  the  best  intentions  and  in  the  kindest  manner 
has  ordered  me  to  cruise  three  weeks  to  the  westward  for  the  protection  of 
the  homeward-bound  trade." — Phillimore,  Life  of  Sir  W.  Parker,  i.  305. 

^  Parker  to  Cornwallis :  Blochide  of  Brest,  ii.  3.'39.  Her  commander  was 
Fran9ois  Beck.  She  had  taken  our  Lisbon  packet  and  a  letter  of  Marque. 
The  crew  of  the  latter  and  a  considerable  sum  of  specie  were  on  board. 


Sept.  19-22  STIRLING    FAILS  307 

Channel.  On  September  19tli,  as  he  was  thus  engaged, 
he  was  gladdened  with  the  sight  of  a  strange  squadron. 
It  closely  resembled  the  one  he  sought,  and  clearing  for 
action  he  gave  chase.  But  the  strangers  proved  to  be 
Nelson  with  his  four  consorts,  struggling  against  south- 
westerly winds  on  his  way  to  Cadiz.  He  of  course 
could  report  that  nothing  had  been  heard  of  Allemand 
Channelwards,  and  that  Rainier  was  in  safety.  More- 
over, while  they  were  still  together,  the  Decade  appeared 
from  the  southward  bringing  home  Admiral  Bickerton  on 
sick  leave.  She  also  had  nothing  to  report.  Nelson  accord- 
ingly proceeded  on  his  way,  and  Stirling,  instead  of  continuing 
to  hold  the  position,  turned  back  to  rejoin  Cornwallis.^ 

No  decision  could  have  been  more  unfortunate ;  for  it 
so  happened,  as  we  shall  see  directly,  that  on  that  very  day 
Allemand  by  a  remarkably  bold  stroke  was  taking  up  a 
cruising  station  not  forty-five  leagues  to  the  west  of  him. 
With  all  the  facts  before  us  it  is  easy  to  condemn  the 
movement — not  so  much  as  a  stroke  of  ill-luck  as  an  error 
of  judgment — the  only  one  that  can  be  laid  at  Cornwallis's 
door  during  his  admirable  conduct  of  the  station.  Seeing 
that  all  the  convoys  were  not  yet  in  and  Allemand  was 
still  unlocated,  it  will  probably  be  thought  that  he  should 
at  least  have  sent  Stirling  back  the  moment  he  rejoined. 
But  it  must  be  remembered  the  situation  w^as  by  no  means 
easy.  The  probability  was  that  Ganteaume,  now  if  ever, 
would  make  a  desperate  attempt  to  break  out  and  join 
Villeneuve  at  Cadiz,  and  any  weakening  of  the  Brest 
blockade  except  for  high  cause  was  to  be  avoided.  In  the 
view  of  the  Admiralty,  Allemand  must  have  returned  to 
port,  and  even  before  Rainier  had  been  heard  of,  they  had 
actually  informed  Cornwallis  he  was  at  liberty  to  reconsider 
the  necessity  of  making  the  detachment  they  had  ordered.^ 
It  was  on  these  amended  instructions  he  decided  to  keep 
his  squadron  massed  for  the  present. 