

1  Log  of  the  Glory  (Stirling's  flag),  Captains'  Logs,  1544.  Cornwallis  to 
Admiralty  with  Stirling's  Eeport,  August  22-27.  See  also  "Proceedings 
of  the  meet y— Nelson  Papers,  Add.  MSS.,  34973,  and  Nicolas,  vii.  p.  4(j. 
Stirling  rejoined  on  Sept.  22nd. 

-  Admiralty  Minutes,  154,  Sept.  3rd. 


3o8        SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS     Sept.  u 

And  how,  in  fact,  did  Allcmand  come  to  be  where  he 
was  ?  If  ever  squadron  bore  a  charmed  life  it  was  his. 
After  miraculously  escaping  Stirling  off  the  Penmarcks,  as 
above  related,  he  had  made  for  Cadiz  fair  into  the  lap  of 
Calder.  There  seemed  no  possibility  of  his  return,  yet  again 
a  happy  accident  was  to  keep  him  out  of  harm's  way.  This 
time,  however,  it  was  his  characteristic  mixture  of  daring 
and  caution  that  earned  its  reward.  On  his  way  down  the 
coast  of  Portugal  he  heard  for  certain  that  Villeneuve  was 
in  Cadiz,  and  he  pushed  on  under  every  stitch  he  could 
carry,  but  not  direct  for  the  port.  After  passing  St.  Vincent 
on  September  11th  he  warily  held  on  to  the  southward  till 
he  reached  the  latitude  of  the  Straits.  Here  he  would  be 
certain  to  fall  in  with  something  that  could  tell  him  how 
things  stood,  and  sure  enough  the  same  day  a  British  brig 
came  gaily  into  his  squadron  thinking  he  was  Nelson,  who 
was  daily  expected.^  She,  of  course,  had  to  strike,  and 
from  her  crew  Allemand  learnt  that  Cadiz  was  blockaded 
by  twenty-six  of  the  line  and  Cartagena  by  five.  His  posi- 
tion was  now  of  extreme  difficulty.  To  break  the  blockade 
by  force  was  impossible.  A  lucky  flaw  of  weather  might 
enable  him  to  run  it,  but  then  if  he  failed,  so  he  argued, 
his  retreat  would  almost  certainly  be  cut  off  by  Nelson  as 
he  came  down  the  coast.  He  had,  therefore,  to  recognise 
that  his  courageous  attempt  to  join  Villeneuve  had  failed, 
and  he  ran  out  into  the  ocean  to  consider  what  he  was 
to  do. 

The  result  was  worthy  of  him  and  of  the  best  traditions 
of  the  French  service.  Calling  his  captains  to  council,  he 
read  them  the  passages  in  his  instructions  which  seemed 
to  meet  the  case.  "  You  will  consum.e  your  provisions  in 
cruising  wherever  you  can  do  the  enemy  most  harm,  and  you 
will  not  return  to  port  till  six  months  after  sailing."  The 
place  where  he  could  do  most  harm  was  the  mouth  of  the 
Channel,  but  he  did  not  disguise  from  himself  not  only  that 
the  West  Indian  and  American  convoys  then  due  came 
home   under  strong   escort,  but   that   in   all  probability  a 

^  Allemand  says  she  was  the  Fhcehus,  from  Gibraltar  to  Grenada.     She 
does  not  appear  in  any  navy  list,  and  must  have  been  a  simple  trader. 