

All  this  time  the  adventurous  French  commodore  had 
been  cruising  about  fifteen  leagues  from  the  Penmarcks, 
trying   to   pick   up   news   of  Villeneuve.     On  the   5th   he 

1  To  Decres,  September  4tli :  Correspondance,  xi.  176. 

2  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  September  2nd:  Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  352.  His 
actual  orders  to  Stirling  have  not  been  found.  Ifc  is  uncertain,  therefore, 
whether  he  instructed  him  to  take  Barbara's  position — 100  leagues  W.S.W. 
of  Scilly. 

^  The  failure  to  locate  Allemand  seems  to  have  been  partly  due  to  bad 
cruising.  On  September  tJth  the  Melampus  came  back  to  say  she  had  been 
chased  by  four  of  the  line  off  the  Saints  the  day  before  in  thick  weather. 
But  subsequently  it  proved  that  the  ships  from  which  she  had  run  were 
two  of  Cornwallis's  own  frigates  and  two  sloops. — Blockade  of  Brest,  ii.  358, 
361. 

U 


3o6     SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS    Sept.  7-18 

spoke  a  Portuguese  who  had  recently  sighted  the  Combined 
Squadron  at  sea  to  the  north-westward  of  Ferrol,  and  had 
also  seen  Calder  off  Finisterre.  The  natural  inference  was 
that  Villeneuve  had  found  it  impossible  to  proceed  to  the 
northward  and  was  being  forced  to  retire  to  Cadiz.  In  the 
circumstances  it  was  worse  than  useless  for  Allemand  to 
hold  the  rendezvous  longer.  On  the  morrow,  moreover,  he 
found  that  one  of  the  sloops  which  he  had  chased  off  had 
picked  him  up  again,  and  there  and  then  he  decided  to  get 
away  to  the  southward  immediately.  He  was  only  just  in 
time.  Two  days  later  Stirling  ascertained  from  neutrals 
that  the  evasive  squadron  was  not  in  Rochefort,  and  he 
held  away  under  a  press  of  sail  for  his  station  off  Scilly, 
passing  on  his  way  over  the  very  ground  which  Allemand 
had  just  vacated.' 

Narrow  as  w^as  the  escape  it  was  complete.  Stirling 
with  all  the  speed  he  could  make  was  going  as  wide  as 
possible  from  his  chase.  It  was  nearly  a  week  before  he 
reached  the  entrance  to  the  Channel,  and  here  he  found 
Parker  in  the  Amazon,  whom  Cornwallis  had  sent  away  the 
day  before  Allemand  was  reported,  to  cruise  to  the  west- 
ward.- He  had  been  a  fortnight  on  the  station  doing  his 
best  to  protect  the  stragglers  of  the  Jamaica  convoy  which 
had  just  passed  in,  and  two  days  before  meeting  Stirling 
had  been  rewarded  by  capturing  the  Frinciiie  de  la  Paz,  a 
fine  new  Vigo  privateer  of  twenty-four  guns,  commanded 
by  a  famous  French  skipper  ;  but  of  Allemand  he  had 
found  no  trace.'^  Stirling,  however,  continued  to  hold  the 
position.  He  had  heard  the  Jamaica  convoy  was  safe,  but 
nothing  of  Rainier's  East  Indiamen,  although  in  fact  they 
had  all  anchored  safely  in  the  Downs,  as  Stirling  was  leav- 
ing   the   French    coast    to   cover   their   entrance    into   the 