

By  this  brilliant  conduct  Woodriff  had  led  his  pursuers 
into  the  area  Stirling  had  just  left.  Had  Stirling  only  re- 
mained where  he  was  Allemand's  daring  cruise  must  still 
have  been  cut  short,  but  as  it  was  Woodriff  had  done 
enough.  Not  only  had  he  saved  all  his  convoy  except  the 
uninvited  guest,  but  he  had  also  saved  the  West  Indian 
convoy  which  the  Illustrious  was  bringing  home.  On  the 
previous  day  Allemand's  cruisers  had  fallen  in  with  some 
of  its  stragglers,  and  brought  in  four  of  them  richly  laden 
the  morning  of  the  action.  But  Allemand,  in  his  eager- 
ness to  capture  the  Calcutta,  had  chased  far  out  of  the 
convoy's  real  track.  On  the  three  following  days  four 
more  stragglers  were  brought  in,  but  the  mass  of  the 
convoy,  thanks  to  Woodriff"s  cunning,  got  safely  home. 
Allemand's  chief  reward  was  the  Calcutta,  which  he  added 
to  his  squadron.  Woodriff  was,  of  course,  court-martialled 
for  his  loss,  but  his  trial  was  a  mere  excuse  to  give  him 
and  his  company  a  kind  of  triumph. 

Meanwhile  Allemand,  without  perceiving  it,  had  been 
watched.  The  Moucheron,  one  of  the  cruisers  Cornwallis 
had  sent  to  the  westward,  heard  the  firing.     It  was  dead 

^  James,  iv.  47.    Allemand's  Journal :  Desbriere,  v.  795. 


312     SECURING    THE    COMMUNK^ATIONS    Sept.  25-9 

calm,  but  she  made  for  the  sound  of  the  guns  with  her 
sweeps.  During  the  night  she  got  close  to  the  squadron, 
and  in  the  morning  stood  by  and  quietly  counted  them 
while  Allemand  was  refitting  the  Calcutta.  The  Moticheron 
was  apparently  flying  American  colours.  At  all  events 
Allemand  took  no  notice  of  her,  and  having  completed  her 
reconnaissance  she  made  off  to  Cornwallis.^ 

But  this  was  not  all.  One  of  Woodrilfs  whalers  in 
escaping  had  fallen  in  with  the  Portugal  convoy  of  thirty- 
three  sail  outward-bound,  under  escort  of  Commander  Hawes 
in  the  AimaUe.  He  immediately  hauled  off  his  natural 
course  to  give  the  enemy  a  wide  berth,  and  pass  nearer  to 
Cornwallis.  The  admiral  must  be  w^arned,  but  he  had 
nothing  to  send  him  but  the  Dilifjent,  a  valuable  storeship 
for  the  Gibraltar  garrison.  Yet  he  determined  to  take  the 
responsibility  of  detaching  her,  and  so  it  was  Cornwallis  got 
the  first  news  of  what  was  going  on." 

At  the  moment  she  arrived,  Cornwallis,  finding  every- 
thing quiet  in  Brest,  and  some  of  the  ships  refitting, 
Avas  preparing  to  take  his  fleet  into  Falmouth  to  refresh, 
and  he  had  just  formed  an  inshore  squadron  of  four  of  the 
line  to  remain  on  guard  in  his  absence  under  Sir  Richard 
Strachan.^  Like  Barham,  he  w^as  still  under  the  belief  that 
Allemand  must  have  made  for  some  port  to  replenish.  If 
so  there  would  be  plenty  of  time  to  blockade  him,  when  he 
was  located ;  and  he  had  contented  himself  with  detaching 
frigates  to  watch  Rochefort,  L'Orient,  and  Ferrol,  besides 
those  he  had  looking  out  to  the  westward. 