

Stirling,  Avho  had  remained  with  his  flag,  was  chosen 
for  the  command,  and  the  force  entrusted  to  him  was  just 
equal  to  that  of  Allemand  and  no  more — on  the  principle 
perhaps  that  no  squadron  can  do  serious  injury  to  trade 
with  an  equal  squadron  operating  against  it.'"^  His  in- 
structions were  unfortunate,  though  in  the  circumstances, 
correct.  Allemand's  presence  off  the  Penmarcks  deter- 
mined Cornwallis  not  to  send  the  detachment  direct  to 
the  station  Barham  had  ordered,  for  it  indicated  something 
different  from  a  direct  stroke  at  the  convoys. 

Allemand's  position,  however,  was,  as  we  know,  a  mis- 
take. Napoleon  at  this  time  had  almost  given  him  up 
for  lost  and  Avas  raging  at  Villeneuve  for  his  blunder. 
"  Admiral   Villeneuve,"   he   wrote,  "  has   filled  the   cup   at 

1  Secret  Orders,  1363. 

2  Stirling  bad  Glory  98  (flag),  four  sevent)'-fours  {Repulse,  Triumph,  Dragon, 
Warrior),  and  the  Creaccnt  'MS.  The  Melampus  and  other  cruisers  were 
already  out  trying  to  locate  the  enemy. 


( 


Sept.  1-7      STIRLING'S    CAST    FOR   ALLEMAND      305 

last.  On  his  sailing  from  Vigo  he  gives  Captain  Allemand 
the  order  to  go  to  Brest  and  writes  you  that  his  intention 
is  to  go  to  Cadiz.  That  is  absolute  treason.  Here  is 
Allemand's  squadron  seriously  compromised  and  he  must 
roam  the  seas  for  months.  .  .  .  Villeneuve  is  a  wretch 
we  must  break  ignominiously."  ^  But  ignorant  of  these 
cross  purposes  Cornwallis  could  only  interpret  Allemand's 
inexplicable  position  as  indicating  an  intention  to  seek 
supplies  in  L'Orient  or  Rochefort,  and  he  decided  to  fling 
the  division  at  him  at  once.  Stirling  was  therefore  directed 
first  to  look  into  both  those  ports,  and  if  he  found  the 
enemy  in  either  to  blockade  it.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
ascertained  they  had  not  gone  in,  he  was  "  immediately  to 
proceed  to  the  northward  to  protect  the  homeward-bound 
convoys  and  see  them  into  the  Channel."^ 

With  these  instructions  Stirling  parted  company  on 
August  31st,  and  proceeding  along  the  Breton  coast  looked 
into  L'Orient  on  September  1st.  No  attempt  was  made  to 
spread  and  for  this  perhaps  Stirling  is  not  to  be  blamed, 
for  it  was  incredible  Allemand  would  be  cruising  so  close 
to  Cornwallis.  So  without  any  suspicion  of  the  enemy's 
being  so  near,  Stirling  had  passed  inshore  of  him,  and  find- 
ing nothing  in  L'Orient  he  worked  down  with  light  and 
baffling  airs  past  Belleisle  and  the  Morbihan  to  look  into 
Rochefort.  But  in  vain ;  gales  succeeded  the  calm  weather 
and  baffled  his  purpose.  For  a  week  he  was  hovering  on 
the  coast  within  fifty  miles  of  Allemand,  and  yet  neither 
got  wind  of  the  other.'^ 