

^  The  situation  is  by  no  means  certain.  Captain  Sir  Edward  Berrj',  who 
commanded  the  Agamemnon,  says  at  3*30  A.M.  Finisterre  bore  S.70.W.,  meaning 
probably  magnetic.  Allemand  says  he  sighted  her  at  4*0  A.M.  "  ahead  and 
pretty  close,"  but  he  also  says  on  the  7th  he  was  12  leagues  from  Vigo,  that 
is,  much  further  to  the  southward.  The  "  12  "  must  be  an  error  of  transcrip- 
tion. If  he  was  so  close  to  Vigo  on  the  8th  he  could  not  have  seen  the 
Agamemnon  on  the  next  day,  and  moreover  he  must  have  passed  through 
Strachan's  squadron  the  previous  day. 

2  For  Captain  Sir  E.  Berry's  despatch  see  Newbolt,  Year  of  Trafalgar, 
p.  40,  and  Nicolas,  vii.  117  note.  Allemand  thought  he  recognised  the  Aga- 
memnon as  the  Dragon,  "  England's  fastest  ship." 

3  For  an  amusing  account  of  the  Aimahle' s  escape  by  a  newly-joined 
midshipman,  see  Newbolt,  Year  of  Trafalgar,^.  40. 


3i6       SECURING    THE    COMMUNICATIONS      Oct.  n 

While  the  Rochefort  squadron  was  thus  brilliantly  raid- 
ing Nelson's  line  of  communications,  Strachan  was  still 
hovering  off  Finisterre  in  ignorance  that  his  chase  had 
passed.  AUcmand  was  in  fact  lying-to  nearly  two  hundred 
miles  to  the  southward — trying  to  rally  his  scattered 
squadron  and  wondering  what  to  do  next.  Scurvy  had 
possession  of  his  crews,  and  speedy  relief  was  essential.  To 
beat  back  to  Vigo  would  take  ten  days  at  least,  even  if  it  - 
were  still  open.  An  exaggerated  report  of  Strachan's  '^ 
squadron  had  reached  him.  It  was  said  to  be  ten  of  the 
line,  and  to  be  waiting  for  him  off  Ferrol.  He  suspected 
the  Agamemnon  when  she  escaped  him  had  made  for  this 
squadron,  and  that  he  would  find  it  had  come  down  to  bar 
his  way  to  Vigo.  Here  again  he  showed  his  usual  sagacity. 
Strachan  had  indeed  got  wind  of  him,  though  not  from  the 
Agamemnon,  and  that  very  day,  October  10th,  was  moving 
down  to  Vigo,  confident  of  bringing  him  to  action  as  he 
returned.  But  Allemand  was  not  so  easily  handled.  There 
was  still  one  more  chance  for  him,  and  that  was  to  run  to 
the  Canaries.  This  course  he  boldly  took  next  day,  leaving 
Strachan  in  hopeful  patience  covering  the  approaches  to 
Vigo,  while  he  himself  sped  southward  without  knowing  he 
was  on  the  heels  of  Popham  and  Baird. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

THE   DEADLOCK   AT   CADIZ 

It  was  on  the  evening  of  September  28  th  that  Nelson 
reached  the  fleet  off  Cadiz,  and  on  the  morrow — his  birth- 
day— he  took  over  the  command.  On  his  way  down  the 
Portuofuese  coast  he  had  communicated  with  Lobb's  cruiser 
Hne,  and  off  Lisbon  had  issued  directions  that  his  arrival 
was  to  be  kept  secret.  His  mind,  as  usual,  was  occupied 
with  making  good  the  ground  behind  him,  and  guarding 
himself  against  the  interruption  of  his  line  of  communica- 
tion by  an  escape  of  the  Brest  squadron.  The  possibility 
of  such  an  escape  during  the  equinoctial  weather  was  a  long- 
established  strategical  factor,  and  in  view  of  the  import- 
ance of  securing  the  flow  of  his  promised  reinforcements, 
Nelson  could  not  ignore  the  danger.  Off  St.  Vincent  he 
stopped  a  cruiser  that  was  going  home  with  Collingwood's 
despatches,  and  in  accordance  with  the  system  he  had 
recommended  he  ordered  her  to  remain  there  to  continue 
Lobb's  line.  Her  instructions  were  to  direct  new  arrivals 
to  look  for  him  "  between  Cape  St.  Mary  and  Cadiz,"  the 
rendezvous  he  had  chosen.  If  they  should  find  him  gone 
in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  new  orders  would  be  found  off' 
Cape  Spartel.  "  Should  the  enemy's  fleet  from  Brest  make 
its  appearance,"  so  the  instructions  concluded,  "  I  desire  you 
will  join  me  with  an  account  thereof  with  the  utmost 
despatch."  In  this  significant  remark  we  probably  have  a 
reflection  of  the  prevailing  anxiety  which  had  crippled  Corn- 
wallis's  freedom  of  action,  and  by  holding  him  to  Ushant 
had  given  Allemand  his  opportunity. 