

It  was  early  on  September  29  th  that  the  storeship  came 
in.  Cornwallis  immediately  sent  her  on  to  Strachan  to  tell 
him  to  go  in  search  of  the  enemy's  squadron  to  the  south- 
ward and  escort  the  storeship  across  the  Bay.  No  sooner, 
however,  had  he  done  so,  than  the  Moucheron  appeared 
to  report  that  she  had  located  the  enemy,  had  fixed  the 
squadron  beyond  doubt  as  Allemand's,  and  that  she  had 

^  Moucheron  s    Report,    enclosed   in   Cornwallis  to    the    Admiralty:   In- 
letters,   129. 

2  Hawes's  Report,  ibid.     He  took  the  precaution  of  sending  in  a  copy  of 


the  whaler's  log,  for  the  Admiral's  inforn 
^'^  Cwsar  80,  Hero  74,  Namur  74,  Coura^ 


formation. 


geiix  74,  and  two  frigates. 


Sept.  29      CORNWALLIS   AFTER    ALLEMAND         313 

left  him  lying  quietly  in  the  fairway,  repairing  rigging,  and 
picking  up  everything  that  came  by. 

To  be  flouted  in  so  impudent  a  manner  in  the  heart  of 
his  own  station  was  more  than  old  "  Billy-go-tight "  could 
endure.  So  strongly  did  his  paramount  function  now 
assert  itself,  that  he  boldly  determined  once  more  to  leave 
Brest  open  and  do  himself  what  his  detachment  had  failed 
to  achieve.  Ganteaume,  or  no  Ganteaume,  the  control  of 
the  Channel  approach  must  be  secured.  Strachan's  orders 
were  allowed  to  stand,  and  away  he  went  for  Finis terre, 
while  the  Admiral,  leaving  a  single  frigate  to  keep  an  eye 
on  Ganteaume,  made  a  dash  for  the  phantom  squadron  with 
all  the  rest  of  his  fleet. 

Heading  straight  for  the  point  where  the  Moucheron 
had  located  it,  he  hunted  up  and  down  upon  the  scene  of 
Allemand's  depredations,  but  not  a  trace  of  him  was  to  be 
had.  After  three  days'  work  Cornwallis  was  convinced  the 
wary  French  commodore  must  have  got  wind  of  him,  and 
on  the  fourth  day,  having  fallen  in  with  the  homeward- 
bound  Portugal  convoy,  he  decided  to  escort  it  into 
the  Channel  out  of  harm's  way.  This  he  did,  and  by 
October  8th  was  back  again  on  his  station  off"  Ushant,  and 
next  day  was  reinforced  up  to  his  full  strength.^ 

The  truth  was  that,  by  the  time  the  MoK^heron  reached 
Ushant,  Allemand  had  recognised  that  he  had  made  the 
ground  too  hot  to  hold  him.  It  was  then  four  days  since 
Woodriff's  convoy  had  got  away.  Two  days,  he  calculated, 
would  see  the  news  in  England — two  more  Avould  bring  a 
squadron  down  upon  him.  He  dared  not  linger  another 
hour,  and  so  with  just  judgment  the  very  day  Cornwallis 
began  his  dash  at  him,  he  was  flying  away  to  the  southward 
for  Vigo.  Again  he  had  struck  his  blow  and  was  gone, 
with  nine  prizes  for  his  reward.-^ 

The  whole  episode  is  worthy  of  note  as  representing 
probably  the  utmost  effect  that  can  be  hoped  from  raiding 
squadrons  operating  against  trade.  The  only  theatres  in 
which  such  operations    can  count  on  making  a  real  im- 