

^  Cornwallis  to  Marsden,  October  5th,  8tb,  and  9th :  In-lctters,  129, 
^  Allemand's  Journal :  Desbriere,  v.  795. 


314        SECURING    THE    COMMUNICATIONS        Sept. 

pression  on  the  course  of  the  war  are  the  home  termmals, 
and  in  a  lesser  degree,  the  oversea  terminals  and  focal 
points.  Allemand  with  a  squadron,  with  which  no  amount 
of  cruisers  could  hope  to  deal,  had  boldly  chosen  the  home 
terminal  and  with  every  advantage  in  his  favour.  Our 
cruising  system  was  still  so  imperfect,  that  it  was  a  full 
week  before  he  was  located,  and  our  home  battle  squadrons 
were  fully  occupied.  And  yet  their  mere  presence  in  home 
waters  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  hold  his  ground  long 
enough  to  do  vital  damage.  It  was  on  this  immutable 
principle  that  our  trade  protection  had  always  been  founded. 
It  sprang  from  our  geographical  position,  and  must  endure 
so  long  as  that  position  endures.  It  goes  to  the  root  of 
our  whole  system  of  naval  defence,  and  exposes  the  fallacy 
that  any  strength  of  military  defence  would  alter  it.  If  a 
battle  fleet  were  not  required  in  home  waters  to  control  the 
passage  of  a  foreign  army,  it  must  still  be  there  to  control 
the  home  trade-terminals.  No  other  sure  system  of  trade 
protection  has  ever  been  devised — no  patrolling  of  the  seas 
can  ever  supply  its  place.  The  seas  are  wide — the  trade 
routes  are  many,  and  so  long  as  the  point  of  convergence  is 
safe,  nowhere  upon  the  high  seas  can  an  enemy  hope  in 
war  time  to  encounter  enough  trade  to  make  commerce 
destruction  an  adequate  object  for  her  battle  squadrons. 

The  audacity  and  judgment  with  which  Allemand  had 
acted  left  nothing  to  be  desired,  and  yet  as  a  strategical 
operation  his  cruise  had  wholly  failed  in  its  object. 
Napoleon  had  designed  it  with  confidence  as  a  means  of 
disturbing  the  British  dispositions  and  forcing  them  to 
break  their  concentration ;  but  so  sure  was  the  grasp  of 
the  essentials  under  Barham  and  his  admirals  that  it  had 
not  availed  for  one  moment  even  to  loosen  their  grip.  The 
raiding  squadron  had  been  ignored  until  the  conditions 
permitted  operations  against  it  without  prejudicing  the 
security  of  the  main  positions.  The  whole  affair,  indeed, 
will  serve  to  demonstrate  the  futility  of  seeking  to  entice 
our  fleets  away,  so  long  as  a  sound  strategical  tradition 
remains  green  in  the  service. 

Let  us  follow  the  intrepid  and  resourceful  Allemand  a 


Oct.  4-9         STRACHAN   AND    ALLEMAND  315 

little  further,  and  see  how  his  extraordinary  luck  pursued 
him.  He  was  now  making  for  Vigo  to  renew  his  water 
and  secure  his  prizes,  and  at  the  same  time  Strachan  was 
racing  across  the  Bay  to  cut  him  off  at  Finistcrre.  Strachan 
was  there  first.  On  October  4th  he  was  some  sixty  miles 
north-west  of  the  Cape,  and  thence  he  cast  to  and  fro, 
always  nearmg  the  land.  Nothing  could  have  been  more 
scientific  than  the  means  which  Cornwallis  had  adopted  to 
catch  the  elusive  squadron,  and  yet  again  it  escaped.  How 
it  happened  we  cannot  tell,  but  it  would  seem  that  Allemand 
must  have  passed  Strachan  to  seaward.  At  any  rate,  on 
the  morning  of  October  9th  Allemand  sighted  the  Agcc- 
meimion  64.  She  was  following  Nelson  down  and  was  then 
about  sixty  miles  due  west  of  Finisterre,  while  Strachan  at 
the  same  time  was  hovering  about  twenty-five  miles  to  the 
north-north-west.^  Allemand  at  once  gave  chase  and 
pressed  her  so  vehemently  with  his  flagship  that  it  was 
only  by  starting  her  water  she  escaped.  So  desperately, 
indeed,  did  Allemand  push  her  that  he  was  carried  to  lee- 
ward of  his  port.'  Still  nothing  would  hold  him.  Just  as 
he  abandoned  the  Agamemno7i  he  saw  to  the  southward  the 
Aimahle  with  the  Portugal  convoy  which  had  eluded  him  in 
the  mouth  of  the  Channel.  Regardless  of  consequences,  he 
chased  again  still  further  to  leeward  of  Vigo.  The  Aimahle 
was  within  an  ace  of  being  captured.  She  too  had  to  start 
her  water,  cut  away  her  boats,  and  heave  overboard  a  quan- 
tity of  shot.  Once  she  was  on  her  beam  ends  with  the 
press  of  sail  she  tried  to  carry,  but  at  last  she  got  away. 
The  bulk  of  the  convoy  also  escaped,  and  Allemand  had 
nothing  for  his  pains  except  three  stragglers  and  a  small 
letter  of  mark.^ 