


Sept.  12-13        BAIRD'S    NARROW    ESCAPE  309 

battle  squadron  would  be  sent  out  to  meet  them.  Now,  as 
we  have  seen,  Stirling  at  the  moment  was  hurrying  with  all 
speed  to  take  up  the  station,  as  Allemand  feared.  Still  he 
read  on :  "  Your  instructions  will  clearly  inform  you  of  the 
spirit  of  your  mission  and  its  object.  .  .  .  Use  all  your 
audacity  to  do  harm  to  the  enemy — that  is  the  pith  of 
what  the  Emperor  commands."  "  Then,"  says  the  intrepid 
commodore,  "  I  hesitated  no  longer,  and  I  lay  my  course  to 
take  up  a  station  to  the  westward  of  the  Lizard."  ^ 

It  was  a  bold  resolution,  and  it  came  within  an  ace  at 
the  outset  of  winning  him  a  resounding  success.  To  the 
northward  Popham  was  passing  down  with  his  vast  convoy 
and  Baird's  expedition,  and  the  course,  which  Allemand 
was  steering  to  make  his  westing  in  the  usual  way,  would 
take  him  right  athwart  Popham's  track.  As  things  stood, 
it  was  almost  inevitable  they  should  clash,  Popham's 
noon  position  on  the  9th  was  about  200  miles  N.N.W.  of 
Finisterre,  and  on  the  11th  Allemand  started  from  the 
Straits'  mouth  to  the  north-west.  Had  Popham  held  on 
there  is  no  saying  what  might  have  happened,  but  by  good 
luck  it  so  happened  that  he  met  baffling  winds,  and  in  three 
days  made  little  more  than  thirty  miles  on  his  true  course. 
Thus  it  happened  that  Allemand  must  have  crossed  his 
track  certainly  not  more  than  three  days  ahead  of  him,  and 
probably  much  less.^  Recent  writers  have  commented  on 
the  ease  with  which  we  passed  military  expeditions  to  their 
destinations  in  the  height  of  the  Trafalgar  campaign,  but 
it  is  submitted  such  complacency  is  wholly  unwarranted. 
Both  Craig  and  Baird  had  run  the  gravest  risk  of  destruc- 
tion.    In  Craig's  case  the  danger  arose  by  no  fault  of  the 

1  Allemand's  Journal:  Desbriere,  v.  794. 

^  See  Chart,  p.  302.  The  facts  of  this  episode  are  taken  from  the  Log  of 
the  Diadem,  Popham's  ship  {Captains'  Logs,  1743),  and  Allemand's  Journal  : 
Desbriere,  v.  793.  When  Allemand  captured  the  brig  he  was  in  'do"  50'  N. 
and  ir  38'  W.  (^9°  18'  Greenwich).  This  was  at  6  p.m.  on  the  11th.  He 
then  took  "  la  bordee  du  nord-ouest  en  attendant  une  plus  mure  reflexion." 
This  course,  if  he  continued  it,  would  take  him  almost  direct  to  Popham's 
noon  position  on  the  17th  {i.e.  39°  32'  N.  and  14°  12'  W.),  and  on  an  average 
rate  of  sailing  he  cannot  have  crossed  the  British  track  much  before  the  13th, 
and  it  may  have  been  later.  His  Journal,  however,  gives  no  entries  for  these 
days.  Popham  at  this  time  had  only  the  Diadem  64,  Bclliqucux  64,  Diomcdc  50, 
Narcissus  32,  and  the  Leda  36.  The  latter  he  sent  forward  to  Madeira  on 
the  15th. 