


3IO     SECURING   THE    COMMUNICATIONS    Sept.  20-4 

Admiralty,  for  the  most  scientific  arrangement  had  been 
made  to  cover  his  passage.  But  Baird's  saihng  was  based 
on  a  supposition — a  supposition  for  which  there  was  no 
direct  cvidencc^ — that  Allcmand  had  returned  to  port,  and 
the  best  opinion  will  hardly  regard  the  movement  as  a  fair 
risk  of  war.     Luck,  and  luck  alone,  saved  him. 

But  now  Fortune,  having  dealt  so  kindly  with  Baird, 
had  a  smile  for  Allcmand.  After  so  narrowly  missing  the 
glorious  chance,  Avhich  his  audacity  and  enterprise  had 
earned  him,  he  was  making  almost  exactly  for  the  position 
which  Barham  had  told  Cornwallis  to  occupy — that  is, 
about  a  hundred  leagues  west-south-west  of  Scilly.  It  was 
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  to  the  westward  of  the 
position  Stirling  had  taken,  and  we  have  seen  how  Allcmand 
reached  it  the  day  Stirling  and  Nelson  met.  By  what 
reasoning  or  intuition  Barham  divined  that  this  position 
would  not  be  far  enough  to  the  westward  we  cannot  tell, 
nor  why  it  was  Stirling  did  not  carry  out  Barbara's  in- 
structions. It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  Cornwallis  com- 
promised with  a  nearer  position,  since  he  was  going  beyond 
the  letter  of  his  instructions  in  detaching  Stirling  at  all 
before  his  reinforcements  arrived.  All  that  we  can  say 
is  that,  had  Barbara's  strategy  been  followed  to  the  full, 
Allemand's  squadron  almost  certainly  must  have  been 
rendered  incapable  of  further  cruising.  But,  as  it  was, 
while  Stirling  moved  away  to  rejoin  Cornwallis,  Allemand 
sat  down  undisturbed  in  the  midst  of  the  great  trade  fair- 
way, coolly  shifting  spars  and  refitting  his  worst  ships  with 
such  means  as  he  had  at  his  disposal.  There  he  lay  for 
four  days  with  his  cruisers  and  fastest  seventy-fours  spread, 
and  on  the  24th  he  found  about  a  dozen  sail  in  sight  all 
round  him  making  for  the  Channel.  He  gave  chase,  but 
next  day  his  leading  ship  came  back  to  report  a  squadron 
of  eight  of  the  line,  and  it  was  not  till  the  following  morn- 
ingf  that  he  discovered  the  real  nature  of  the  chase. 

It  was,  in  fact,  a  small  convoy  from  St.  Helena,  con- 
sisting of  a  single  Indiaman,  three  South  Sea  whalers,  two 
other  merchantmen,  and  a  damaged  straggler  from  the 
West  Indian  convoy  that  had  sought  its  protection.     The 


Sept.  24      ALLEMAND    OFF   THE   CHANNEL  3 1 1 

escort  was  the  Calcutta,  an  old  East  Indiaman  that  had 
been  converted  into  a  fifty-four,  and  she  was  then  in 
command  of  Captain  Woodriff,  whose  conduct  richly  de- 
serves recording.  Finding  his  pursuers  were  gaining,  he 
ordered  his  convoy  to  disperse  to  the  north  and  east, 
while  he  held  back  to  engage  the  leading  frigate.  As 
the  action  began  Woodriff  held  to  the  southward  to  try 
to  draw  the  enemy  away  from  his  convoy.  In  this  he 
was  entirely  successful.  The  frigate  held  off  at  long 
range  to  let  a  seventy-four  come  up,  and  Allemand, 
enraged  to  see  how  things  were  going,  impetuously  chased 
with  his  whole  squadron.  About  sunset  the  seventy-four 
got  in  range  and  Woodriff  furiously  engaged  her,  but  as 
she  fired  entirely  at  his  rigging  he  was  quickly  disabled, 
though  it  was  not  till  ten  o'clock  that  he  hauled  down 
his  flag,  surrounded  by  the  whole  of  Allemand's 
squadron.^ 