

On  the  following  morning,  therefore,  a  Council  was  held 
on    board    the    Bucentaure.      Villeneuve    opened    the    pro- 

1  Villeneuve  to  Decres,  Oct.  8th:   Ibid.,  p.  96. 


324  THE    DEADLOCK   AT    CADIZ  Oct.  8 

ceedings  by  communicating  the  Emperor's  secret  orders, 
"  that  the  Combined  Fleet  was  to  sail  at  the  first  favour- 
able opportunity,  and  that  wherever  it  found  the  enemy 
in  inferior  strength  it  was  to  attack  him  without  hesitation 
in  order  to  force  him  to  a  decisive  action."  On  these 
instructions,  so  Escafio  says,  Villeneuve  put  it  to  the  Council 
whether  they  should  go  to  sea  or  remain  at  anchor  in  hopes 
the  enemy  would  attack  them,  in  which  case  they  would 
probably  bo  able  to  destroy  them  and  obtain  a  free  passage 
out.  The  Spanish  oflScers  had  been  careful  to  discuss 
the  question  previously,  and  they  unanimously  supported 
Gravina's  opinion  that  in  view  of  the  superiority  of  the 
British  fleet  Napoleon's  orders  did  not  bind  them  to  seek 
an  action  at  the  moment,  and  that  they  ought  to  abide 
an  attack  at  anchor.  The  Frenchmen,  however,  had  not 
taken  the  same  precaution,  and  a  violent  debate  was  the 
result,  some  of  them  hotly  insisting  that  there  could  be  no 
doubt  they  should  go  out  and  fight  immediately.  Captain 
Prigny,  however,  Villeneuve's  Chief  of  the  Staff,  pointed  out 
that  even  if  there  were  no  more  than  twenty-five  of  the 
enemy  outside,  still  the  Combined  Fleet  was  not  superior  to 
them.  "  They,"  he  said,  ''have  kept  the  seas  without  inter- 
mission since  1793,  while  most  of  their  own  fleet  have 
scarcely  Aveighed  anchor  for  eight  years."  He  therefore 
urged  the  success  that  might  be  obtained  with  a  well- 
organised  defence  flotilla,  and  concluded  with  the  maxim 
that  no  superior  order  could  bind  them  to  attempt  the 
impossible.  Admiral  Magon  at  once  sprang  up  to  refute 
the  Chief  of  the  Staff  and  the  opinion  of  the  Spanish 
officers,  and  expressed  himself  so  hotly  and  in  language 
so  violent  that  a  scene  ensued.  General  Galiano,  one 
of  the  brigadiers  of  the  Spanish  troops,  got  up  to  protest. 
The  behaviour  of  the  Frenchman  was  more,  says  Escafio, 
than  his  nice  and  lofty  sense  of  honour  could  endure,  and 
he  demanded  that  Magon  should  be  called  upon  to  with- 
draw his  oflensive  expressions.  The  Council  was  at  once  in 
a  storm.  Higher  and  higher  it  raged,  till  Gravina  quelled 
it  by  moving  suddenly  that  the  question  be  put  without 
further  discussion.      Thus  it  was  he  stated  it :  "  Ought  or 


Oct.  8  WHAT    NELSON    KNEW  325 

ought  not  the  Combined  Squadron  to  put  to  sea,  seeing 
that  it  was  not  in  such  superiority  of  force  as  to  balance 
its  inherent  inferiority  ?  "  A  vote  was  taken,  and  the  result 
was  a  decision  to  remain  at  anchor.  It  was  further  agreed 
to  re-establish  the  defence  flotilla  with  contingents  from 
the  fleet  till  a  favourable  opportunity  for  going  out  should 
occur.^ 