


^  Nicolas,  vii.  85-6,  107.  For  the  service  of  the  battle  fleet  his  requisi- 
tion was  for  8  frigates  and  2  sloops,  of  which  2  frigates  and  4  sloops  were  to 
keep  open  communication  with  Gibraltar  and  Lisbon.  For  observation  and 
commercial  blockade  service  he  required  3  frigates  at  Cape  Spartel,  Cape 
St,  Mary  and  the  Salvages,  and  2  sloops  for  Cape  St.  Vincent,  as  well  as  a 
frigate  and  a  sloop  off  Cartagena.  Besides  these  the  officer  in  command  at 
Gibraltar  required  2  frigates  and  3  sloops  for  the  protection  of  the  Straits, 
while  for  the  rest  of  the  Mediterranean  were  required  3  frigates  and  G  sloops, 
besides  the  3  frigates  which  formed  Craig's  escort. 


Oct.  2-5  NELSON'S   DISPOSITIONS  32; 

To  this  embarrassing  necessity  he  was  no  doubt  reconciled 
and  even  bound  by  his  instructions.  For  so  long  as  there 
was  an  active  squadron  in  Cartagena  he  must  have  sonje- 
thing  to  watch  it.  He  must  guard  against  its  interference 
up  the  Mediterranean  or  on  the  trade  route  through  the 
Straits,  to  say  nothing  of  the  possibility  of  its  slipping  into 
Cadiz  while  the  main  British  fleet  was  kept  wide  of  the 
port.  Accordingly  on  October  2nd,  Louis,  much  against  his 
will,  was  ordered  to  the  Straits  with  his  squadron  and  a 
small  convoy  which  had  arrived  for  Malta. 

The  position  which  Nelson  himself  decided  to  occupy 
was  from  sixteen  to  eighteen  leagues  west  from  Cadiz.  In 
order  to  keep  touch  with  the  enemy  he  gave  Captain  Duff 
of  the  Defence  an  advanced  squadron  of  four  seventy-fours 
with  which  he  was  to  maintain  signal  communication  with 
Blackwood's  cruiser  squadron  without  getting  in  sight  of 
the  Spanish  signal  stations.  "  In  fresh  easterly  breezes," 
he  wrote  to  Blackwood,  '  I  shall  work  up  for  Cadiz,  never 
getting  to  the  northward  of  it,  and  in  the  event  of  hearing 
they  are  standing  out  of  Cadiz,  I  shall  carry  a  press  of 
sail  to  the  southward  towards  Cape  Spartel  and  Arrache."  ^ 

Such  were  his  ideas  and  intentions  before  he  received 
the  information  about  Craig,  that  is,  he  expected  the  enemy 
to  sail  with  the  first  easterly  wind.  On  the  5th  the  wind 
did  come  easterly,  and  in  view  of  Louis's  detachment 
Nelson  began  to  be  seriously  anxious  for  his  promised  rein- 
forcements from  home,  and  in  writing  to  Barham  to  explain 
what  he  had  done  he  urged  the  importance  of  annihilating 
the  enemy  and  not  merely  "  spoiling  their  voyage."  To  Rose 
he  wrote  next  day  more  strongly.  "  I  am  very  venj  very 
anxious,"  he  said,  "  for  its  arrival,  for  the  thing  will  be  done 
if  a  few  more  days  elapse.  ...  It  is,  as  Pitt  knows,  anni- 
hilation that  the  country  wants.  .  .  .  Numbers    can  only 