

1  Castlereagh  to  the  Admiralty,  September  21st :  la-letters  {Sec.  of  State), 
4200. 

2  Secret  Orders.  13G3,  September  21st. 


Sept.-Oct.         the   BOULOGNE    PROJECT  321 

Barham  must  have  shared  the  Nelsonian  view.  As 
soon  as  it  was  known  that  Napoleon  had  abandoned  the 
invasion,  the  Government  had  set  their  hearts  on  destrojdng 
the  demobiHsed  flotilla  by  a  combined  attack  on  Boulogne. 
The  moral  effects  of  the  operation,  if  successful,  would  be 
invaluable  for  securing  the  position  of  the  Government  and 
for  reconciling  the  country  to  the  sight  of  their  army  being 
sent  oversea  to  act  offensively  on  the  Continent.  From 
this  point  of  view  it  may  be  taken  as  justifiable  for  ministers 
to  press  the  operation  whatever  its  purely  strategical  defects. 
These  defects,  however,  the  Admiralty  had  regarded  as 
prohibitive,  ever  since  Nelson's  failure  in  1801.  But 
Colonel  Congreve's  invention  was  thought  by  Castlereagh 
to  have  made  a  difference.  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  with 
characteristic  self-confidence,  was  sure  it  could  be  done, 
and  had  been  charged  to  make  the  attempt.  A  closer 
view  quickly  brought  him  round  to  the  Admiralty  view, 
that  it  was  impossible  without  the  support  of  a  military 
force.  This  Pitt  was  wise  enough  not  to  sanction  without 
a  special  report  from  Sir  John  Moore,  and  that  great  master 
of  war  was  now  ordered  to  make  the  necessary  reconnais- 
sance. Barham,  who  believed  as  little  in  the  rockets  as  he 
did  in  Sidney  Smith,  threw  cold  water  on  the  scheme.  If  a 
military  force  was  available  he  saw  a  far  better  objective 
against  which  it  could  be  employed,  and  that  was  Ville- 
neuve's  fleet.  He  therefore  submitted  that  if  troops  went 
at  all  they  should  go  to  Cadiz.  Moore,  however,  reported 
privately  to  Pitt  that  the  Boulogne  enterprise  was  not  a 
feasible  military  operation,  and  there  it  ended. ^ 

In  the  meantime,  as  we  know,  the  problem  of  getting  a 

^  Maurice,  Diary  of  Sir  John  Moore,  ii.  109.  Castlereagh  to  Moore, 
September  23rd.  Barham  to  Castlereagh,  September  25th.  Pitt  to  same, 
October  6th.  Castlereagh  Corres2Joiidence,  2nd  Series,  i.  86-117  ;  and  Stanhope, 
Life  of  Pitt,  iv.  337  :  "  Walmer  Castle,  October  6th,  1805.— Dear  Castlereagh,— 
You  will  have  learned  from  General  Moore  the  substance  of  what  passed 
between  him  and  me,  which  left  me  convinced  that  any  attempt  at  landing  is 
attended  with  too  much  risk  to  justify  the  experiment.  I  still  entertain  con- 
siderable hopes  of  something  effectual  being  done,  and  I  trust  you  will  not 
have  had  much  further  difficulty  in  overcoming  the  objections  both  of  Lord 
Keith  and  the  Admiralty.  Your  answer  to  Lord  Barham  places  the  subject 
exactly  in  the  true  light.  .  .  .  With  this  wind  I  am  much  disappointed  not 
to  have  heard  of  anything  fresh  from  the  Continent, — Ever  sincerely  yours, 
W.  Pitt."  '         ^  ^  ^ 