

From  this  point,  moreover,  Nelson  sent  forward  an 
order  by  Blackwood  that  no  notice  was  to  be  taken  of 
him  when  he  joined   by  salute   or  otherwise.     His  main 


3i8  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Sept. 

preoccupation  was  still  the  difficulty  of  forcing  Villeneuve 
to  action,  and  his  lirst  precaution  was,  if  possible,  to  con- 
ceal his  arrival.  He  even  begged  General  Fox  at  Gibraltar 
to  forbid  the  publication  of  the* news  in  the  local  press. 
"  For  I  much  fear,"  he  wrote,  "  that  if  the  enemy  know  of 
our  increased  numbers,  wc  shall  never  see  them  out  of 
Cadiz."  On  seeing  how  the  Combined  Fleet  lay  not  in 
the  bay,  but  crowded  up  in  the  harbour,  he  had  hopes  that 
possibly  Colonel  Congreve  and  his  rockets  might  prove 
effective,  if  other  means  failed.  "  Even  should  no  ships 
be  burnt,"  he  wrote  to  Castlereagh,  "  yet  it  should  make 
Cadiz  so  very  disagreeable  that  they  would  rather  risk  an 
action  than  remain  in  port." 

But  the  pressure  on  which  he  had  most  faith  was 
famine.  This,  however,  could  only  be  effected  by  a 
rigorous  blockade  of  all  the  Andalusian  ports  into  which 
Danish  vessels  had  been  pouring  supplies  from  France. 
Now  the  Government  for  political  reasons  had  a  strong 
antipathy  to  these  blockades.  They  never  failed  to  have 
the  effect  of  exasperating  neutrals,  and  so  strongly  was 
this  objection  felt  that  only  a  short  time  since  Lord  Keith 
had  been  absolutely  forbidden  to  close  the  North  Sea  ports 
through  which  Marmont's  corps  and  the  Dutch  squadron 
and  flotilla  were  being  supplied.^  Collingwood,  however, 
had  boldly  taken  the  matter  into  his  own  hands,  and 
established  a  blockade  of  the  whole  coast.  Nelson  resolved 
to  continue  it,  and  begged  Castlereagh  to  support  him  and 
see  that  naval  officers  did  not  suff"er  for  the  execution  of 
his  order.  Neutrals,  he  made  free  to  hint,  would  take  it 
quietly  enough  if  Ministers  at  home  would  only  stop  the 
abuse  of  granting  licences  for  British  vessels  to  enter  the 
blockaded  ports. 

On  starvation,  then,  and  on  concealing  his  force  he 
relied  principally  for  bringing  Villeneuve  to  a  decision. 
From  the  pressure  of  Craig's  expedition  he  had  no  hope 
at  all.     He  even  yet  did  not  know  its  object.     When  he 

1  Keith  to  Admiralty,  July  12tb  :  In-httcrs,  557.  Barham  minuted  the 
letter  that  such  a  blockade  as  Keith  suggested  was  a  question  for  the  Foreign 
Office,  and  the  Minute  was  sent  there  accordingly  and  disallowed. 


Sept.  17  NEWS    OF    CRAIG  319 

sailed  the  situation  at  Naples  was  still  too  obscure  for 
Ministers  to  say  anything  definite ;  but  his  ignorance  of 
what  it  really  portended  was  about  to  be  enlightened.  On 
September  17th,  as  Nelson  was  leaving  the  Channel,  a 
courier  arrived  late  at  night  at  the  Foreign  Office  with 
despatches  that  at  last  cleared  the  uncertainty.  In  his  bag 
was  Elliot's  despatch  from  Naples  announcing  that  Craig 
had  reached  Malta  in  safety,  and  that  conferences  for 
co-operation  between  him  and  the  Russians  Avere  in  full 
swing.  Despatches  from  Craig  were  enclosed  to  say  he 
would  have  at  least  6000  men  ready  for  action  without 
denuding  the  Malta  garrison.  There  was  also  a  despatch 
from  Vienna  in  which  the  ambassador  said  that  as  Cobenzl 
expected,  Napoleon  had  refused  the  offer  of  mediation,  his 
counter  demands  had  been  firmly  rejected,  the  whole 
Austrian  army  had  been  placed  on  a  war  footing,  and  at 
any  moment  the  Archduke  Charles  might  strike  a  blow  in 
Italy.  For  the  Austrians  were  still  persuaded  the  initiative 
would  be  theirs,  and  to  the  Archduke  had  been  committed 
their  main  offensive  movement  against  Napoleon's  new 
kingdom.^ 