


322  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Oct.  2 

decisive  blow  at  Villeneuve,  in  which  Barham  and  Nelson 
were  absorbed,  had  been  solved  for  them  by  Napoleon 
himself.  As  Nelson  appeared  at  Cape  St.  Vincent  the 
order  directing  the  Combined  Fleet  to  sail  forthwith  for 
Naples  reached  Cadiz.  On  hearing  of  it  Gravina  went  on 
board  Yilleneuve's  flagship,  the  BiLcentaure,  and  announced 
that  his  fourteen  ships  were  ready  for  sea.  At  Yilleneuve's 
request  he  gave  instructions  that  the  Spanish  dockyard  was 
to  render  the  French  every  possible  assistance  in  com- 
pleting their  stores,  while  Villeneuve  issued  a  stirring  order. 
By  the  following  Monday  all  troops  necessary  to  fill  up  the 
ships'  companies  were  to  be  on  board,  for  on  that  day  he 
meant  to  go  forth  and  "  to  strike  down  England's  tyran- 
nical domination  of  the  seas."  The  same  evening,  however, 
the  signal  stations  reported  that  a  three-decker  and  two 
seventy-fours  were  joining  Collingwood  from  the  westward. 
"  That  makes  thirty-one,"  wrote  Villeneuve,  in  a  lower  tone, 
"  well  known  to  be  in  the  offing."  Still  it  was  not  yet 
ascertained  that  it  was  Nelson  who  had  come,  and  the 
embarkation  of  the  troops  proceeded.  By  October  2nd  it 
was  complete,  but  towards  evening  Gravina  received  two 
expresses  from  Lisbon  by  Avhich  the  tone  of  confidence  was 
severely  shaken.  They  told  that  Nelson  had  arrived 
"  with  four  of  the  line  and  great  projects  for  attacking, 
bombarding,  and  burning  the  Combined  Squadron."  The 
effect  was  startling.  At  the  cost  of  interrupting  the  pre- 
parations for  sea  a  defence  flotilla  of  gunboats,  bomb- 
vessels,  and  anything  that  could  be  handled  in  bad  weather 
was  hastily  organised  and  manned  with  officers  and  men 
from  the  fleet.^  Moreover,  instead  of  being  able  to  get  the 
ships  out  into  the  bay  as  they  were  ready,  the  fear  of 
Nelson's  doing  something  desperate  made  it  advisable  to 
keep  them  still  croAvded  up  in  the  harbour  out  of  harm's 
way.  Still  Villeneuve  proclaimed  his  intention  of  sailing 
the  moment  he  had  a  fair  breeze. 

At  Cadiz  in  fine  autumn  weather  there  is  a  land  wind 


^  Escano  (Gravina's  Chief  of  the  Staff)  to  Don  Enrique  MacDonnell. 
Captain  of  the  R(iyo :  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  App.  98.  There  was  another 
MacDonnell,  a  brioradier,  in  the  fleet,  who  sat  on  the  Council  of  War. 


Oct.  6-7  THE    COUNCIL    OF    WAR  323 

at  night  from  the  east,  fair  for  coming  out,  while  outside  in 
the  morning  is  found  a  westerly  breeze  fair  for  entering  the  * 
Mediterranean.  On  the  evening  of  the  7  th  an  easterly 
breeze  sprang  up,  and  signal  was  made  to  prepare  to  weigh, 
but  it  was  almost  immediately  annulled,  for  the  wind 
increased  so  rapidly  as  to  threaten  a  real  Levanter  "  dia- 
metrically contrary  to  the  course  they  had  to  make." 
Such  is  the  story  Yilleneuve  told  officially.^  But  the 
truth  would  seem  to  be  that  Nelson's  arrival  had  once 
more  dominated  the  spirits  of  the  French  Admiral  and 
most  of  his  colleagues.  Ever  since  he  had  joined  nothing 
had  been  seen  of  the  fleet  from  the  signal  stations  except 
an  inshore  squadron  of  five  cruisers,  with  an  occasional 
glimpse  of  communicating  ships  of  the  line.  Nelson  must 
be  there,  but  what  he  was  doing  and  what  his  strength  no 
one  could  tell.  "  I  could  not  close  my  ears,"  wrote  Villeneuve 
in  reporting  to  Decres  his  arrested  attempt  to  sail,  "  to  the 
observations  which  came  to  me  from  all  sides  on  the  in- 
feriority of  our  force  compared  with  that  of  the  enemy, 
who  have  now  certainly  from  thirty-one  to  thirty-three  of 
the  line,  of  which  eight  are  of  three  decks,  and  a  large 
number  of  frigates.  To  go  out  in  such  circumstances  is 
stigmatised  as  an  act  of  desperation  beyond  the  power  of 
the  two  Courts."  Accordingly  he  says  he  decided  to  call 
a  Council  of  War.  Escafio,  who  was  still  Gravina  s  Chief 
of  the  Staff',  gives,  however,  another  version  of  the  calling 
of  the  Council  which  rings  more  true.  According  to  him, 
on  October  6  th  Villeneuve  informed  Gravina  that  by 
superior  orders  he  must  put  to  sea  the  moment  supplies 
were  complete,  and  requested  him  to  have  his  squadron 
ready.  "  The  Spanish  Admiral,"  says  Escauo,  "  confined 
himself  to  replying  that  he  considered  it  necessary  before 
weighing  to  hold  a  Council  to  hear  the  opinion  of  all  the 
Staff  officers  of  both  nations,  but  without  further  discus- 
sion he  gave  orders  to  demobilise  the  flotilla  and  for  its 
officers  to  return  to  their  ships." 