

^  According  to  Lieutenant  (afterwards  Admiral  Sir  Humphrey)  Senhouse 
the  general  idea  in  the  fleet  was  that  Nelson  chose  his  position  with  the  fol- 
lowing objects  :  "In  the  first  place  to  give  the  enemy  a  chance  of  escape  ; 
next  to  prevent  our  fleet  being  driven  through  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar  in  the 
winter  westerly  gales  .  .  .  and  lastly  to  be  ready  to  intercept  the  Brest  fleet, 
should  they  have  endeavoured  to  form  a  junction  with  the  fleet  at  Cadiz  before 
the  latter  could  arrive  to  the  assistance  of  the  former." — MacmiUans  Mafja- 
zinc,  vol.  81,  p.  415. 


3  28  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Ocr.  5-8 

annihilate  {sic).  Tlierefore  I  ho])o  the  Admiralty  will  send 
the  fixed  force  as  soon  as  possible."  ' 

Blackwood's  information  that  the  troops  were  embark- 
ing was  at  the  bottom  of  Nelson's  anxiety,  and  he  sent  it  on 
to  Collingwood  together  with  his  own  doubts  as  to  what  the 
enemy  meant  to  do.  Collingwood,  with  his  fresh  experience 
of  the  station,  seized  the  opportunity  to  hint  to  his  chief 
that  his  appreciation  was  incorrect  and  his  anxiety  pre- 
mature. "  Now,  my  lord,"  he  wrote,  with  a  striking  pene- 
tration of  Villeneuve's  mind,  "  I  will  give  your  lordship  my 
ideas  on  the  subject.  ...  If  they  are  to  sail  with  an  easterly 
wind,  they  are  not  bound  for  the  Mediterranean,  and  your 
lordship  may  depend  upon  it  the  Cartagena  squadron  is 
intended  to  join  them.  If  they  effect  that — and  with  a 
strongly  easterly  wind  they  may — they  will  present  them- 
selves to  us  with  forty  sail.  If  by  any  good  fortune  Louis 
was  to  fall  in  wdth  that  squadron  I  am  sure  he  would  turn 
them  to  leeward  .  .  .  and  a  French  ensign  might  bring 
them  to  us.  Whenever  the  Cartagena  people  were  expected 
they  lit  the  light-house.  Captain  Blackwood  should  look 
to  that  as  a  signal." "" 

Now  it  was  on  the  following  day  that  Nelson  received 
the  news  of  Craig's  intended  operations  in  Italy.  The 
despatch  came  out  in  the  Roj/al  Sovcrci/jn,  She  joined  on 
October  8th,  spick  and  span  after  her  relit  for  Collingwood's 
Hag,  and  though  the  easterly  wind  continued  to  blow.  Nelson's 
immediate  anxiety  passed  away.  With  Craig's  instructions 
in  his  hand  it  is  clear  he  had  no  longer  any  doubt  that 
Villeneuvc  was  destined  for  the  Mediterranean,  and  Colling- 
wood's appreciation  had  convinced  him  the  enemy  would 


^  To  the  Right.  Hon.  Sh'  George  Rose,  Oct.  6.  In  view  of  the  fact  tliat  this 
letter  is  often  cited  as  evidence  of  Nelson's  preference  for  a  number  of  units 
as  against  individual  force,  it  should  be  noted  that  what  he  is  pressing  Rose 
for,  is  "  the  fixed  force."  Now  besides  the  Victory  and  Jioijfd  tSovcrcign  and 
the  two  seventy-fours  which  he  had  brought  out,  the  fixed  force  which  he  was 
expecting  included  the  Loudon  and  Barjlcur  98's,  the  A(j<ininnnon  64,  and 
Bcllcifilc  74.  Thus  of  eight  units  half  were  three-deckers.  (To  Blackwood, 
Oct.  8  and  1),  Nicolas  vii.  <S8  and  90.)  In  his  official  letter  to  Barham,  he 
says  nothing  about  "  numbers,"  but  only  "  the  ships  from  England  "  (Oct. 
5,  Jbid.,  p.  75).  The  expression  used  to  Rose  clearly  proves  nothing  either 
way,  if  read  with  its  context. 