

For  the  rest  he  was  busy  with  the  problem  of  con- 
trolling Italian  waters,  difficult  enough  in  itself  without  the 
disturbance  on  his  communications.  The  Agamemnon  had 
brought  out  a  repetition  of  his  instructions  for  co-operating 
with  Craig,  and  the  expedition  was  much  in  his  mind.  He 
had  already  informed  the  Admiralty  he  must  have  three 


1  For  both  these  documents,  see  post,  p.  353,  and  Appendix  D.  It  is  worth 
noting  that  had  Villeneuve  coiue  out  when  Nelson  lirst  expected  him  the 
Memorandum  would  not  have  been  ready. 

-  Log  of  the  Cccsd}'. 

3  Nicolas,  vii.  121  and  12()-7-9.  On  the  same  day,  the  18th,  we  have 
another  ray  of  light  on  Nelson's  regard  for  three-decked  ships.  Collingwood, 
in  discussing  what  ships  should  receive  water  from  the  water-ships,  says, 
"  I  suppose  your  lordship  would  wish  the  three-deckers  to  be  filled  up  well." 
— Ibid.,  note.     This  seems  to  put  force  before  numbers. 


Oct.  i6-i8  THE    DEADLOCK    BROKEN  331 

cruisers  besides  those  he  originally  asked  for,  if  he  was  to  keep 
up  coinrQunication  with  the  expeditionary  force.  He  was 
now  very  anxious  to  send  a  squadron  of  ten  of  the  line  to 
his  own  old  station,  but  till  Yilleneuve  was  dealt  with  this 
was  impossible,  and  all  he  could  hope  for — and  that  not 
immediately — was  a  strong  cruiser  squadron  which  he  in- 
tended to  place  under  Keats  of  the  Siiiicrh.  Still,  so  deeply 
was  he  concerned  with  the  importance  of  supporting  Craig 
that  he  did  take  the  extreme  step  of  sending  Louis  an  order 
to  escort  the  Malta  convoy  past  Cartagena  before  he  rejoined.^ 
At  this  time  he  seems  to  have  had  little  expectation  of  the 
enemy's  putting  to  sea.  He  was  preparing  bomb- vessels  and 
looking  for  the  arrival  of  fire-ships,  as  well  as  Congreve  and 
Francis  with  their  rockets  and  torpedoes  to  force  things  to  an 
issue.'^  But  his  hope  of  a  decision  rested  mainly  as  before 
on  the  slow  pressure  of  famine  and  little  on  the  stimulus 
of  the  Anglo-Russian  threat  in  South  Italy.  There  is 
no  reference  to  it  in  Nelson's  correspondence,  though  he 
must  have  discussed  it  with  Collingwood.  We  know  at 
least  that  on  this  ground  Collingwood  regarded  Villeneuve's 
continued  inaction  as  inexplicable.  "  It  is  very  extra- 
ordinary," he  wrote  to  Nelson  on  the  18th,  "the  people  in 
Cadiz  do  not  make  some  movement.  If  they  allow  the  war 
to  begin  in  Italy,  they  cannot  hereafter  make  up  for  the 
want  of  assistance  they  might  give  in  the  first  instance."  ^ 

Once  more  Collingwood  showed  his  power  of  penetration. 
His  vision  of  what  was  stirring  inside  Cadiz  could  not  have 
been  more  just.     As  he  wrote  the  hour  had  come. 