

2  Nicolas,  vii.  81  note. 


OCT.3-IO  LOUIS   AND    BLACKWOOD  329 

not  sail  with  the  wind  at  east.  This  view  he  now  adopted, 
and  the  characteristic  tenacity  and  singleness  of  mind  with 
which  he  clung  to  it  was  evinced  at  once.  It  so  happened 
that  the  day  after  Louis  parted  company,  Blackwood  in- 
formed him  by  signal  that  the  enemy's  troops  were  embarked, 
and  that  they  intended  to  sail  on  the  first  easterly  wind. 
As  the  wind  had  then  come  east  Louis  decided  to  send  on 
his  convoy  with  two  of  his  squadron  and  to  return  to  Nelson 
with  the  rest.  "  But  Lord  Nelson,"  so  James  tells  us,  ''  con- 
ceiving the  whole  to  be  a  stratagem  to  draw  him  nearer  to 
Cadiz  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  more  accurate  know- 
ledge of  his  force,  ordered  the  Rear-Admiral  to  proceed  in 
the  execution  of  his  orders."^ 

Louis,  therefore,  much  to  his  own  and  his  captain's 
disgust,  had  again  to  part  company,  and  in  accordance  with 
Nelson  s  new  view  of  the  situation  fresh  instructions  were 
sent  to  Blackwood.  His  squadron  had  just  been  made  up 
with  new  arrivals  to  its  full  strength  of  five  frigates  and  two 
sloops.  "  Those,"  Nelson  wrote  to  him,  "  who  know  more  of 
Cadiz  than  either  you  or  I  do,  say  that  after  these  Levanters 
come  several  days  of  fine  weather — sea  breezes  westerly, 
land  wind  at  night — and  if  the  enemy  are  bound  for  the 
Mediterranean  they  will  come  out  at  night  .  .  .  run  to  the 
southward  and  catch  the  sea  breezes  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Gut  and  push  through  while  we  have  little  wind  in  the 
oflfing."  He  was  therefore  to  take  measures  to  ensure 
detecting  any  such  movement,  and  was  furnished  with 
special  long-distance  night-signals  to  give  warning. 

As  for  the  battle  squadron.  Nelson  was  now  quite  clear 
what  to  do  with  it.  ''  At  present,"  he  wrote  to  CoUing- 
wood,  "  I  am  sure  the  Mediterranean  is  their  destination. 
.  .  .  Should  the  enemy  move  ...  it  is  then  probable  that 
I  shall  make  the  signal  to  bear  up  and  steer  for  the  entrance 
of  the  Straits." "  At  the  same  time  all  arrangements  were 
completed  for  the  expected  action.  It  was  now^  he  issued 
his  order  of  battle   and  the   famous   plan  of  attack — the 

^  Hubback,  Jane  Austcn^s  Sailor  Brothcra,  p.  149  ;  James,  Naval  Histonj, 
iv.  380  ;  Log  of  the  Canopus.     Blackwood  had  the  information  from  a  Swede. 
2  Nicolas,  vii.  110,  October  10th. 


330  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ        Oct.  10-17 

"  Nelson  touch  "  as  lie  called  it — which  hitherto  he  had 
only  explained  verbally  to  his  captains  when  they  assembled 
to  greet  him  on  his  taking  over  the  command.' 

Then  for  a  week  all  was  quiet,  save  for  the  painful  duty 
of  sending  Calder  home  for  his  trial  and  the  passing  dis- 
turbance which  Allemand  created.  On  the  13th  Sir  Edward 
Berry  joined  in  the  Agamemnon,  bringing  news  of  his  narrow 
escape,  and  the  same  evening  Calder  parted  company.  The 
belief  was  that  Allemand  was  still  to  the  northward  about 
Vigo,  and  Nelson  was  in  some  anxiety  lest  Calder  should 
fall  into  his  hands.  To  have  such  a  squadron  on  his  com- 
munications Avith  home  was  far  from  pleasant.  He  had  full 
particulars  of  AUemand's  force  and  its  proceedings  from 
a  French  officer  who  had  been  taken  in  a  recapture  by  one 
of  the  ubiquitous  Guernsey  privateers.  Further  intelligence 
was  brought  in  by  the  Diligent,  the  store  ship  which  had 
informed  Cornwallis  of  AUemand's  presence  in  the  Sound- 
ings. Strachan  had  escorted  her  well  to  the  southw^ard  till 
she  was  safe  in  Lobb's  hands,  and  he  was  now  quietly  cruis- 
ing off  Vigo  for  AUemand's  superior  squadron,  under  the 
belief  it  was  somewhere  close  to  him  and  about  to  make 
the  port."  Nelson  was  naturally  far  from  easy  about  him. 
"  I  wish  he  were  stronger,"  he  wrote  to  Blackwood  on  the 
14th,  "but  I  am  sure  he  will  spoil  their  cruising;"  and 
again  to  Collingwood  on  the  l7th,  "  I  wish  he  had  a  good 
three-decker  with  him."  ^ 