

Nothing  could  have  been  more  opportune  for  Pitt. 
Exhausted  by  the  strain  of  the  recently-closed  session,  in 
which  the  opposition  of  Fox  and  his  friends  had  been  more 
implacable  than  ever,  he  felt  unable  to  face  Parliament 
again  on  the  same  terms,  and  conduct  the  war  as  well. 
The  only  chance  he  saw  was  to  form  such  a  coalition  with 
Fox,  as  his  father  had  done  so  triumphantly  with  Newcastle 
in  the  crisis  of  the  Seven  Years'  War.  Party  must  cease 
for  a  time  and  a  true  national  government  take  its  place. 
Full  of  this  idea,  he  had  gone  down  to  Weymouth,  where 
the  King  was  taking  his  accustomed  spell  of  sea  air  guarded 
by  two  or  three  precious  cruisers.  But  the  stubborn  old 
monarch  proved  as  obdurate  as  ever.  Nelson's  friend  Rose 
came  down  to  help.  "  I  told  his  Majesty,"  he  wrote  in  his 
Diary,   "  that   considering    our  situation  in   the   House   of 

^  Foreign  Office  [Sicily),  25.  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  August  1st  {via  Eome), 
endorsed,  "  Received  Sept.  7th  at  night."  Paget  to  same,  August  29th  and 
30th,  "most  secret,"  received  the  same  day:  Foreign  Office  {Austria),  74. 
Craig's  despatches  are  in  War  Office  (1)  280,  July  20-1. 


3  20  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Sept.  21 

Commons,  I  was  perfectly  persuaded,  if  Mr.  Pitt  should  be 
confined  by  the  gout  or  any  other  complaint  for  two  or 
three  weeks  there  would  be  an  end  of  us."  But  it  was 
no  good.  The  King  was  so  much  upset  by  the  bare  idea 
of  Fox  in  the  Cabinet,  that  another  attack  of  insanity  was 
feared.  They  had  to  desist,  and  Pitt  was  left  to  face  the 
prospect  of  yet  another  session,  in  which  he  would  have 
to  fight  Fox  all  day  and  Napoleon  all  night. 

In  these  circumstances  news  that  held  out  a  hope  of 
striking  a  brilliant  blow  before  the  new  session  opened  was 
in  the  highest  degree  inspiriting,  and  in  ten  days  the 
necessary  action  was  decided  on.  On  September  21st 
Castlereagh  informed  the  Admiralty  that  in  the  event  of 
hostilities  on  the  Continent  (which  were  now  certain), 
Craig's  force  might  be  employed  on  the  coast  of  Italy.  He 
desired  them,  therefore,  to  call  Nelson's  attention  to  what 
was  in  the  Avind,  and  to  direct  him,  "  after  providing 
effectually  for  the  blockade  of  Cadiz,  to  keep  in  view  the 
object  of  covering  such  operations  as  Sir  James  Craig  may 
undertake  from  any  interruption  by  the  enemy's  naval  force 
in  the  Mediterranean,"  and  to  keep  in  constant  communica- 
tion with  him.^  Accordingly  on  the  same  day,  secret 
instructions  to  that  effect  went  forward  for  Nelson  with  a 
copy  of  Craig's  orders  enclosed." 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  ideas  of  the  Government  did 
not  quite  coincide  with  those  of  Nelson.  In  Pitt's  eyes  the 
function  of  the  fleet  was  fulfilled  if  it  succeeded  in  sealing 
up  Villeneuve's  fleet  so  that  it  could  not  interfere  with  his 
combined  flank  attack  on  Italy,  and  Nelson's  orders  had 
been  drawn  in  this  sense.  It  will  be  remembered  that 
they  gave  him  practically  a  free  hand,  but  with  the  express 
proviso  that  he  was  to  blockade  Cadiz  so  as  to  prevent  the 
Combined  Fleet  putting  to  sea.  Nelson's  preoccupation,  on 
the  other  hand,  was  to  force  it  to  sea  and  destroy  it,  know- 
ing full  well  the  precariousness  of  a  long  winter  blockade 
on  the  capricious  Andalusian  coast. 