

Thus  it  was  the  Admirals  tried  to  save  Napoleon  from 
his  reckless  determination  to  hurl  his  fleet  upon  Craig  and 
the  Russians ;  and  it  so  happened  that  while  the  resolution 
of  inability  was  being  taken  Nelson  received  from  home  the 
communication  which  for  the  first  time  explained  to  him 
the  meaning  of  the  expedition  at  Malta.  The  effect  of  the 
despatch  was  finally  to  clear  his  mind  and  to  enable  him 
at  last  to  form  a  definite  idea  of  the  shape  the  campaign 
would  thenceforth  assume.  It  is  certain  at  least  that  on 
receiving  the  news  he  changed  his  view  of  the  enemy's 
probable  action  and  fixed  a  plan  of  operations  from  which 
he  never  again  swerved.  To  appreciate  the  point,  it  is 
necessary  to  grasp  clearly  the  information  he  had  previously 
and  the  dispositions  he  had  made. 

Newspapers  of  September  20th  had  already  reached 
the  fleet  announcing  that  the  Continental  war  was  certain. 
There  were  also  local  rumours  that  Napoleon  had  ordered 
the  Cadiz  fleet  to  sea,  and  that  in  Council  of  War  they  had 
decided  to  disobey.  Villeneuve,  it  was  said,  was  to  be 
superseded  in  consequence  by  Decres.-^  Though  the  news 
could  only  strengthen  the  expectation  that  the  Combined 
Fleet  would  soon  put  to  sea,  it  gave  little  light  on  its 
objective.  It  was  quite  as  likely  it  would  be  used  for  a 
diversion  to  the  north  or  west  as  that  it  would  act  directly 
in  the  Mediterranean.  Nelson,  indeed,  had  been  absorbed 
in  arranging  for  the  cruiser  command  of  that  sea,  while  his 
battle  fleet  was  held  to  Cadiz,  and  had  just  sent  home  a 
memorandum  of  the  minimum  cruiser  force  that  was  required 


^  "  Proces-verbal  du  Conseil  du  guerre,  &c.,"  and  Escailo's  letter  to  Captain 
MacDonnell :  Ibid.,  pp.  97-9. 

2  Bourchier,  Life  of  Codrinyton,  i.  53.  Codrington  wrote  Duplex  instead 
of  Decres. 


326  THE    DEADLOCK    AT    CADIZ  Oct.  i 

for  the  whole  of  his  station.'  Bctwueii  writing  this  de- 
spatch, liowever,  and  the  receipt  of  the  new  instructions 
concerning  Craig,  he  made  a  significant  change  in  his 
arrangements. 

His  first  step  on  taking  over  the  command  had  been  to 
send  Bhickwood  to  recall  Admiral  Louis  from  before  Cadiz. 
CoUingwood  had  stationed  him  close  in  with  an  inshore 
squadron  consisting  of  the  Qvccn  1)8,  the  Canopus  80,  and 
three  seventy- fours.  It  was  a  normal  feature  of  blockade, 
as  it  was  then  practised,  of  which  Nelson  did  not  approve, 
unless  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  to  justify  it ; 
and  in  this  case  the  danger  of  a  sudden  v/esterly  squall  to 
an  inshore  squadron  Avas  a  special  reason  for  not  employing 
one.  The  inherent  advantage  of  the  blockader  is  his  power 
of  concealing  from  the  enemy  his  actual  strength,  position, 
and  movements,  and  in  Nelson's  eyes  full  use  should  be 
made  of  this  advantage.  He  had  therefore  decided  to 
remove  the  whole  of  his  battle  fleet  out  of  sight  and  to 
watch  the  port  with  a  cruiser  squadron  only,  which  Black- 
Avood  was  to  command.  The  new  disposition  is  significant. 
For  it  emphasises  the  growing  expectation  that  the  exigencies 
of  the  situation  would  force  the  enemy  to  sea  if  only  they 
were  given  an  apparent  chance  of  escape.  There  was  reason 
enough  to  believe  they  might  make  the  attempt  any  day, 
for  Blackwood  from  his  inshore  position  had  already  re- 
ported that  the  troops  were  being  embarked.  Yet  at  the 
same  time  Nelson  set  about  preparing  for  a  long  and  ex- 
hausting watch.  It  was  mainly  a  question  of  supply.  A 
certain  amount  of  the  work  could  be  done  in  fine  weather 
on  the  spot  from  transports,  but  it  was  only  by  sending  his 
ships  away  in  batches  to  Gibraltar  and  Tctuan  that  he 
could  rely  on  keeping  his  stores  and  water  up  to  the  mark. 