

The  resolution  which  the  Council  of  War  had  first 
taken  was  just  the  kind  of  thing  that  Napoleon  expected, 
and  the  precautions  he  adopted  to  meet  it,  acted  even  more 
promptly  than  he  planned.  On  October  12th,  four  days 
after  the  Council  of  War,  Admiral  Rosily  reached  Madrid 

^  Hubback,  Jane  Aastcns  Sailor  Brothers^  p.  152.  Louis  received  the  order 
by  a  frigate  at  Tetuan  on  the  17th.  He  also  at  this  time  sent  the  Donegal  74 
into  Gibraltar  "  for  a  ground-tier  of  casks." 

^  "  Mr.  Francis  "  was  the  famous  American,  Robert  Fulton.  He  had  in- 
vented a  torpedo,  designed  to  be  fixed  to  the  cable  of  a  ship  in  a  tideway, 
when  it  would  swing  under  her  and  be  exploded  by  clockwork.  It  had  lately 
been  tried  with  success  experimentally. 

=»  Ndson  Papers,  Add.  3ISS.  34968.' 


3  32  THE    DEADLOCK   AT    CADIZ  oci.is 

on  his  way  to  supersede  Villcneuve.  The  posting  system 
had  broken  down,  the  roads  beyond  Cordova  were  infested 
with  brigands,  and  the  French  Ambassador  warned  him  not 
to  i)rocccd  till  arrangen:ients  could  be  made  for  his  travel- 
ling in  safety.  It  was  ten  days'  journey  on  to  Cadiz,  but  in 
half  that  time  word  came  to  Villeneuve  that  Rosily  had 
reached  the  capital.  Guessing  in  a  moment  what  it  meant, 
and  without  saying  a  word  to  any  one,  on  the  18th,  as 
Colling  wood  was  writing  the  letter  just  quoted,  he  suddenly 
ordered  Magon  with  seven  of  the  line  and  a  frigate  to  pro- 
ceed to  sea  at  dark  and  endeavour  to  capture  Blackwood's 
squadron  and  lind  out  what  was  behind  it.  Before,  how- 
ever, the  order  was  executed,  word  came  in  by  telegraph  of 
Louis's  detachment  at  Gibraltar.  The  news  was  that  the 
convoy  which  had  been  waiting  there  for  escort,  had  sailed 
eastward  in  charge  of  four  of  the  line,  and  that  two  others 
were  said  to  be  in  the  port.^  Villeneuve's  inference  was  that 
Nelson  must  be  six  of  the  line  short.  Now  if  ever  was  his 
time.  There  was  no  wind  and  little  sign  of  it,  but  he  was 
desperate,  and  without  consulting  any  one  he  made  the 
general  signal  to  prepare  to  weigh.-^ 

^  One  of  these  was  tlie  Donegal  74,  which  Nelson  had  just  sent  in  there, 
"  beinp  obliged  to  e^o  into  the  Mole  for  two  days."  Nelson  to  Collingwood, 
Oct.  19th  :  Nicolas,  vii.  127.  The  other  may  have  been  the  Zadons  74,  which, 
with  the  Endymion  40  ("both  being  crippled  ships"),  Louis  had  originally 
sent  on  with  the  Malta  convoy. 

-  Villeneuve  to  Decres,  Oct.  18th  (two  letters)  :  Desbriere,  Trufalgar,  ^Ipp. 
101-2. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

THE  MAIN   FLEETS  IN   CONTACT 

"  Enemy  have  their  topsail  yards  hoisted."  At  six  o'clock 
in  the  morning  of  October  19th  the  signal  fluttered  from  the 
SiHus,  the  nearest  frigate  inshore ;  and  then  at  seven  the 
long-awaited  No.  370.  It  meant  "The  enemy's  ships  are 
coming  out  of  port  or  getting  under  sail."  In  ten  minutes 
Blackwood  passed  it  on  to  the  Pte&c, which  he  kept  to  the 
westward.  As  the  light  grew,  they  got  it  through  to  the 
Mars,  Duff's  easternmost  ship,  and  by  half-past  nine  Nelson 
had  it.  He  was  then  nearly  fifty  miles  to  the  westward  of 
Cadiz.  Without  a  moment's  hesitation  or  waiting  to  form 
order  of  sailing  he  gave  the  word  for  ''  General  chase,  south- 
east," and  shortly  afterwards  made  the  signal  to  prepare  for 
battle.^ 