

1  Nelson  to  Collingwood,  October  18tb  and  19th  :  Nicolas,  vii.  127,  129.  No 
instructions  to  Louis  have  been  found,  but  Nelson  says  he  told  him  "an 
easterly  wind  must  not  be  lost,"  even  if  the  convoy  had  to  wait  for  the  next 
detachment. 

2  An  Advance  Squadron  was  established  in  the  Mediterranean  fleet  as 
early  as  1790.  It  was  not  Nelson's  idea,  and  was  borrowed  probably  from 
the  French.  See  Sir/nah  and  Instructions  {Navt/  Record  iSociety),  pp.  72-3.  The 
composition  of  the  Division  in  this  case  is  uncertain.  Codriiigton  in  a  letter 
to  his  wife  {Lift',  i.  57)  says:  "  The  above  four  (A(/amemnon,  Defence,  CoIossuh, 
and  Mars)  and  as  many  more  of  us  are  now  to  form  an  advanced  squadron, 
and  I  trust  by  morning  we  shall  all  be  united  [i.e.  with  Louis]  and  in  sight  of 
the  enemy."  He  also  says  his  own  ship,  Orion,  and  the  Belleisle,  were  amongst 
those  that  went  ahead.  Defence  and  Af/amemri'tn  were  nearest  Cadiz,  with 
Mars  and  Co/o.s.su.s  as  connecting  ships.  Temeraire  records  a  signal  (No.  155) 
to  Belleisle,  Orion,  Leviathan,  Polyphemus,  and  Bellerophon,  ''to  keep  a  look-out 
ahead  during  the  night  at  a  convenient  distance  for  intercourse  by  night 
signals,  carrying  a  light  in  the  stern." — Masters'  Logs,  870G.  Colonel  Owen, 
who  then  commanded  the  Marines  in  the  Belleisle,  also  says  live  were  sent 
forward. — Allen,  Memoirs  of  Sir  W.  Harcjood,  p.  137.  There  must  therefore 
have  been  nine  pennants  in  the  squadron — that  is,  one-third  of  the  force  with 
Nelson's  flag — an  unusually  large  proportion. 

3  Private  Diary,  Nicolas,  vii.  133,  and  Teiaeraire's^\^r\a\  Log,  Masters'  Logs, 
370(i.  A  curious  effect  of  this  order  was  that  the  French  believed  these  three 
ships  had  been  formed  into  an  Escadre  d' observation. 


Oct.  20  WHY    LOUIS    DID    NOT    REJOIN  335 

step  in  the  process  of  disintegration  Avhich  his  "  Order  of 
battle  "  and  "  Plan  of  attack  "  were  to  suffer,  as  the  actual 
tactical  conditions  of  the  occasion  developed  themselves  to 
his  elastic  mind. 

At  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  having  attained  his 
desired  position,  he  hove-to,  and  at  dawn  found  himself  in 
sight  of  Gibraltar  between  Capes  Trafalgar  and  Spartel, 
that  is,  in  the  entrance  to  the  Straits.  In  the  growing  light 
every  eye  was  strained  for  a  sight  of  Louis's  squadron,  but 
not  a  sign  of  it  was  to  be  seen.  The  truth  was  that  his 
return  to  Nelson  after  he  had  first  started  and  the  prevail- 
ing easterly  winds  had  prevented  his  reaching  Gibraltar 
for  five  days  after  he  received  his  orders,  and  it  was  not  till 
the  15th  that  he  was  able  to  complete  his  water  and  victuals 
at  Tetuan.  This  done  he  hurried  away  to  rejoin  Nelson,  but 
meeting  a  Avesterly  wind,  was  forced  back  to  Tetuan,  and 
there  on  the  1 7th,  before  he  could  sail  again,  the  order  reached 
him  to  see  the  Malta  convoy  forward.  The  result  was  that 
he  missed  Blackwood's  sloop,  and  when  Nelson  was  looking 
for  him  between  Spartel  and  Trafalgar  he  was  two  hundred 
miles  away  and  still  going  to  the  eastward.  Nor  was  it  till 
the  21st  of  famous  memory  that  in  accordance  with  the 
usual  practice  he  dismissed  the  convoy  off  Cape  Tenez  and 
stood  back  towards  Cartagena  to  cover  its  further  progress.^ 
Thus  after  all  the  practically  inert  Cartagena  squadron, 
though  it  failed  to  make  any  movement  which  Napoleon 
had  designed  for  it,  did  avail  in  the  hour  of  crisis  to  break 
the  vital  British  concentration.  A  more  significant  instance 
could  not  be  found  of  how  much  more  difficult  to  deal  with 
is  a  purely  expectant  attitude  at  sea  than  on  land.  It 
is  a  radical  and  far-reaching  difference  between  naval  and 
military  strategy,  due  mainly  to  the  exigencies  of  commerce 
protection. 