

Disappointing  as  it  was  to  Nelson's  men  that  Louis  was 
nowhere  to  be  seen,  there  was  a  worse  trouble  to  disturb 
them.  An  action  had  been  expected  confidently  at  dawn, 
but  Villeneuve  v/as  nowhere  to  be  seen.  The  sun  rose 
stormily  ;  the  fine  weather  had  passed  ;  it  was  thick  and  wet, 

^  Log  of  the  Queen.     Hubback,  Jane  Austen's JiCiilor  Brothers,  p.  152. 


336  THE    MAIN    FLEETS    IN    CONTACT      Oct.  20 

with  a  very  short  range  of  visibiHty.  In  breathless  impa- 
tience they  scoured  the  mist,  but  look  as  they  would  there 
was  not  a  sign  of  the  enemy  anywhere.  What  had  become 
of  them  ?  "  All  our  gay  hopes  are  fled,"  wrote  Codrington 
to  his  wife  that  morning,  "  and  instead  of  being  under  all 
sail  in  a  veiy  light  breeze  and  fine  weather,  expecting  to 
bring  the  enemy  to  battle,  wc  are  under  close-reefed  topsails 
in  a  very  stormy  wind  with  thick  rainy  weather  and  the 
dastardly  French  we  find  returned  to  Cadiz."  This  belief 
must  have  been  a  mere  inference  from  their  not  beingr  in 
sight.  "  Had  they  persevered,"  he  added,  "  we  should  cer- 
tainly have  come  up  with  them  from  the  decisive  dash  we 
made  for  the  Gut  of  Gibraltar."  ^  Where  could  they  be  if 
not  in  Cadiz  ?  One  thing  at  least  was  clear.  In  such  foul 
weather  as  was  blowing  up,  the  fleet  could  not  stay  where 
it  was.  "  I  must  guard,"  Nelson  had  written  to  Barham, 
"  against  being  caught  with  a  westerly  wind  near  Cadiz,  {is 
a  fleet  of  ships  with  so  many  three-deckers  would  inevitably 
be  forced  into  the  Straits."  -  Accordingly,  so  soon  as  it  was 
light  enough  to  be  sure  how  things  stood,  he  decided  to 
make  use  of  the  stiff  south-south-west  wind  to  get  back 
towards  his  old  station. 

Scarcely  had  he  made  the  decision  when  one  of  Black- 
wood's frigates  hove  in  sight  flying  the  welcome  signal  that 
the  enemy  bore  to  the  north.  Nelson  immediately  signalled 
for  the  order  of  sailing,  and  about  an  hour  later  hove  the 
Victory  to  and  summoned  Collingwood  on  board  to  consult 
him.  Collingwood,  it  is  said,  was  for  making  an  immediate 
attack,  but  this  was  not  to  Nelson's  mind.  We  can  only 
guess  his  reason.  It  may  have  been  that  he  felt  Colling- 
wood's  plan  would  mean  engaging  too  late  in  the  day  and 
too  near  Cadiz  to  ensure  a  decisive  battle,  and  yet  the  wind 
was  fair  to  carry  him  rapidly  into  action.  What  he  did  was 
to  reform  order  of  sailing  and  to  stand  on  again  north-west 
under  easy  sail  as  though  to  entice  Villeneuve  to  attempt  to 
pass  him  inshore."^ 

^  Bourchier,  Life  of  Codrington,  i.  58.  ^  Nicolas,  vii.  75. 

^  Dr  Beatty  says :  "  At  8  o'clock  the  Victory  hove-to,  and  Admiral 
Collingwood  .  .  .  came  on  board  to  receive  instructions."  Codrington  related 
the  incident  thus:  "On  the  tSunday  morning  Lord  Nelson,  as  a  compliment 