

Meanwhile  Blackwood  had  despatched  one  of  his  tAVO 
sloops  to  the  Victory  and  the  other  to  warn  Louis,  while  he 
himself  watched  the  enemy  struggling  to  get  out  of  the 
harbour  on  the  faint  land  breeze.  By  three  o'clock  a  signal 
came  through  from  him  that  the  enemy's  fleet  was  at  sea, 

1  There  has  been  sorae  confusion  about  Nelson's  exact  position  when  he 
got  the  signal.  He  says  in  his  Diary  :  "  Wind  at  South,  Cadiz  bearing  E.N.E. 
by  compass  {i.c,  magnetic)  16  leagues."  The  variation  as  recorded  in  the 
log  of  the  Montancs  was  20°  West  ^Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  Ajrp.  374).  E.N.E. 
magnetic  was  therefore  about  N.E.  true.  On  a  south  wind  he  could  not  sail 
south-east  true,  nor  from  a  position  16  leagues  true  S.W,  of  Cadiz  could  he 
make  the  Straits  on  that  course.  The  signal  he  used  was  the  single  flag  with 
two  guns  and  the  S.E.  compass  flag,  and  it  meant  "  The  whole  fleet  to  chase 
in  the  S.E.  quarter."  The  course  required  was  a  little  south  of  east,  i.e.  in 
the  south-east  quarter.  Probably,  however,  Nelson's  position  is  wrong,  for 
the  noon  position  in  the  Victory's  log  is  36°  36'  N.  7°  30' W.,  which  makes 
Cadiz  bear  about  19  leagues  E.S.E.  magnetic  and  about  E.  true,  that  is,  his 
regular  position.  From  this  point  a  south-east  course  led  into  the  Straits' 
mouth.  There  is  nothing  to  show  Nelson  had  changed  the  position  of  the 
fleet,  and  probably  therefore  he  wrote  "E.N.E."  for  "E.S.E."  by  mistake. 
According  to  the  TCmcraire^s  log  the  course  was  first  E.  by  S.  and  wind  S.  by 
E.,  and  afterwards  S.E.  by  E.  on  a  W.S.W.  wind. 

333 


3  34  THE    MAIN    FLEETS    IN    CONTACT      Oct.  19 

though  ill  truth  it  was  only  Magon's  division  that  as  yet  was 
outside.  Nelson  held  on  his  way.  The  movement  to  cut 
off  Villeneuve  from  the  Straits  was  that  which  he  had 
settled  from  the  time  he  had  learnt  from  the  Government 
how  much  rested  upon  Craig's  operations,  but  he  had  also 
in  view  an  immediate  object  of  his  own.  The  recent  easterly 
wind  let  him  hope  that  he  might  find  Louis  coming  out  of 
the  Straits  to  give  him  his  whole  fleet  in  hand  for  the  final 
decision.^  As  evening  closed  down,  in  order  to  ensure  his 
purpose  as  far  as  possible  he  formed  the  "Advance  Squadron," 
for  which  in  accordance  with  Mediterranean  practice  his 
tactical  Memorandum  provided.  A  division  of  eight  two- 
deckers  was  placed  under  Captain  Duft'  of  the  Mars,  five  of 
them  to  look  out  ahead  and  the  rest  to  continue  to  keep 
signal  touch  with  Blackwood's  cruisers."  The  rest  of  his 
fleet,  according  to  the  regular  practice,  were  to  observe  the 
Admiral's  motions  closely  during  the  night,  as  he  would 
probably  manoeuvre  without  signals.  At  the  same  time  he 
superseded  "  General  chase  "  by  signalling  for  the  order  of 
sailing ;  but  as  during  recent  exercises  three  of  his  seven 
three-deckers,  Britannia,  Prince,  and  Dreadnought,  had 
proved  very  bad  sailers,  he  directed  tliem  to  take  station 
as  convenient.'^     The  point  should  be  noticed  as  the  first 