

The  negative  testimony  is  richer  and  far  more  explicit. 
Captain  Moorsom  of  the  Revenge,  in  Collingw^ood's  division, 
said :  *'  A  regular  plan  was  laid  down  by  Lord  Nelson  before 
the  action,  but  not  acted  on  ;  "  and  again,  "  Admiral  Colling- 
wood  dashed  directly  down,  supported  by  such  ships  as 
could  get  up,  and  Avent  directly  through  their  line.  Lord 
Nelson  did  the  same,  and  the  rest  as  fast  as  they  could." 

^  To  Lord  Garlies,  Oct.  28th :  Bourchier,  Life  of  Codrington,  i.  60  and  77, 


344  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

Li  his  opinion,  then,  there  was  no  dif'terenco  in  the  way  the 
two  divisions  engaged.  Both  made  an  almost  perpendicular 
attack — that  is,  the  two  lines  went  "  directly  down  "  instead 
of  getting  into  the  designed  position  parallel  to  the  enemy's 
line  and  then  hauling  to  the  wind.'  His  son,  Admiral  Con- 
stantine  Moorsom,  who  earned  hiiiiself  a  rare  reputation  as  a 
scientific  student  of  tactics,  went  farther.  In  his  rrinciples 
of  Naval  Tactics,  the  only  original  treatise  on  the  subject 
which  the  service  had  produced,  he  wrote,  that  "  there  was 
an  entire  alteration  both  of  the  scientific  principle  and  of 
the  tactical  movements."  ^ 

The  only  fully  reasoned  criticism  which  we  have  from 
the  pen  of  an  officer  who  was  present  is  to  the  same  effect. 
It  was  written  about  1820  by  Admiral  Sir  Humphrey 
Senhouse,  who  served  in  the  battle  as  a  lieutenant  in  Israel 
Pellew's  ship,  the  Colossus,  an  officer  who  highly  distin- 
guished himself  in  the  later  years  of  the  war  and  was 
afterwards  fiag-captain,  both  in  the  Channel  and  the 
Mediterranean.^  His  criticism  was  based  on  the  then 
undisputed  fact  that  the  British  Fleet  bore  up  in  suc- 
cession and  attacked  in  two  lines  ahead,  and  his  argument 
is  that  it  would  have  been  better  "  if  the  regulated  plan 
had   been   adhered    to."     "  The   attack   of  this   almost   in- 

^  Captain  Moorsom  to  his  father,  November  1st,  1805  :  Great  Sea  Fujhts, 
ii.  242.  In  this  letter  he  says,  *'  We  kept  going  down  in  two  columns,  point- 
ing to  their  centre  nearly  in  this  manner,"  and  then  in  the  original  he  gives 
a  rough  diagiam  showing  the  two  British  columns  parallel  with  one  another, 
and  nearly  vertical  to  the  enemy's  line.     See  post,  Appendix  E,  p.  453. 

-  The  Principles  of  Naval  2\ictics,  exemplified  with  Ted)les  for  farHitating  the 
several  evolutions.     By  Captain  C.  R.  Moorsom,  R.N.     London,  1843. 

•^  This  remarkable  i^aper  was  communicated  to  Macviillemh  Magazine  in 
1900  by  the  Admiral's  daughter.  Miss  Senhouse  believed  it  was  written  be- 
tween 1827  and  1830,  but  as  it  was  communicated  to  Sir  Charles  Ekins,  and 
printed  in  part  by  him  in  1824  (see  Nav<d  Battles,  p.  271),  it  must  have  been 
originally  written  earlier,  and  possibly  at  Ekins'  request.  Miss  Senhouse's 
manuscript,  however,  is  a  somewhat  amplified  form,  more  careful  to  repudiate 
any  suspicion  of  belittling  of  Nelson,  and  it  may  have  been  written  later, 
possibly  even  when  he  was  Hotham's  liag-captain  in  the  Mediterranean.  It 
contains  at  least  this  curious  addition  :  "  There  is  a  rising  naval  power  which 
possesses  the  germs  of  a  growing  equality  with  the  naval  power  of  this  coun- 
try, and  which  may  one  day  rise  nearly  to  the  colossal  height  its  great  proto- 
type has  obtained."  This  power  he  contrasts  favourably  with  that  of  France 
and  Spain,  and  regards  with  such  serious  apprehension  as  to  deprecate  the 
use  of  Nelson's  tactics  against  it.  He  of  course  is  referring  to  the  rising 
power  of  Turkey  and  Egypt,  which  was  broken  by  Codrington  at  Navarino 
in  1827.  The  manuscript,  therefore,  was  probably  produced  before  that  time, 
but  the  menace  continued  to  exist  for  some  years  after.     It  was,  in  any  case, 