

The  effect  of  these  movements  had  been  to  annul  the 
Order  of  Sailing.  Indeed,  it  would  seem  that  in  those 
days  when  fleets  were  not  accustomed  to  cruise  in  regular 
formation,   the   sailing   order   was    seldom    preserved   after 

^  See  his  earlier  Memorandum,  i^i5'/ifi'n,7 /ns<r«r^/ons,  p.  315.  "  The  other 
mode  would  be  to  stand  under  an  easy  but  commanding  sail  directly  for  their 
headmost  ship,  so  as  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  knowing  whether  I  should 
pass  to  windward  or  to  leeward  of  him." 

2  It  was  already  dark,  and  he  used  No.  31  of  the  Night  Signals,  and  began, 
after  his  custom,  to  burn  blue  lights  to  indicate  his  position  :  Temerairc's 
Signal  Log, 

^  See  Lieutenant  Senhouse  to  his  mother,  October  27th  :  "  The  Africa,  who 
had  parted  in  the  night  "  {post,  p.  344,  note).  She  was  not  sent  to  scout  ahead, 
as  is  sometimes  stated. 


Oct.  2  1  FACE    TO    FACE  341 

dark,  and  especially  as  in  this  case  when  there  had  been 
any  manceuvring  during  the  night.  At  daybreak  accord- 
ingly the  fleet  was  in  no  regular  formation.  Collingwood 
was  apparently  about  the  van  of  his  division,  but  Nelson 
was  not.  Most  of  his  ships  had  stretched  ahead  of  him, 
and  what  the  French  saw  when  it  was  light  enough  was 
a  confused  mass  of  vessels  "  in  no  particular  order  "  stretch- 
ing about  south-east  and  north-west,  with  the  two  flagships 
near  each  other  about  the  centre.^ 

The  fleets  were  now  bearing  from  one  another  about 
south-west  and  north-east,  and  some  eight  or  nine  miles 
apart.  Shortly  after  six  it  was  light  enough  for  each  to 
see  the  other,  and  what  Nelson  made  out  was  the  Com- 
bined Fleet  in  no  distinguishable  formation  steering  for  the 
Straits.  The  moment  of  his  life  and  of  the  campaign  had 
come.  What  should  he  do  ?  Should  he  carry  out  the 
attack,  as  he  had  laid  it  down,  or  should  he  not  ?  What 
in  these  first  minutes  of  the  waxing  light  was  the  thought 
that  held  uppermost  in  his  mind  ?  Death  has  robbed  us 
of  the  answer.  We  can  only  glean  the  fragments  that  lie 
scattered  upon  those  hallowed  waters  and  bid  them  tell  us, 
if  they  will,  the  golden  secret. 

^  See  Reports  of  the  various  commanders  in  Desbriere's  Trafalgar,  and 
particularly  the  plan  attached  to  that  of  Prigny,  Chief  of  the  Staif  {post,  p.  360). 
The  confusion  of  the  British  fleet  is  shown  by  the  entries  in  the  logs  of  how 
the  enemy  bore.  Victory  has  E.  to  E.SE,  ;  Royal  Sovereign  has  E.S  E.  to  E. 
by  N.,  and  must  therefore  have  been  little  south  of  Victory ;  Britannia  E.S.E., 
ahead  of  Nelson;  Tcnurairc  S.E.,  still  further  ahead  ;  Neptune  E.  by  S.,  close 
to  Victory.  Drcadnovght  of  Collingwood' s  division  saw  them  E.N.E.,  and  was 
S.  W.  of  Victory — that  is,  to  windward  instead  of  leeward.  Spartiatc  of  Nelson's 
division  saw  them  N.N.E. ;  Conqueror  N.E. — both  therefore  correctly  astern 
of  him,  as  were  also  Minotaur  and  Agamemnon ;  but  Ajax  and  Africa  were 
ahead. 