

ranean,  but  outside  he  had  met  the  southerly  wind  shifting 
to  the  south-west  on  which  Nelson  under  easy  sail  was 
reaching  back  from  the  Straits,  and  he  had  been  compelled, 
as  Blackwood  had  reported,  to  stand  to  the  westward.  On 
this  course  he  began  laboriously  to  form  his  order  of  sailing. 
His  organisation  was  based  on  the  old  tactical  idea  of 
"  equalising  the  line,"  and  using  the  surplus  units  as  a  corps 
cle  reserve.  Believing  that  after  Louis's  departure  Nelson 
would  have  only  twenty  of  the  line  with  his  Hag,  he  formed 
a  corjjs  de  hataille  of  that  number,  in  three  divisions  under 
his  immediate  command.  With  the  remaining  twelve  he 
constituted  an  esaulre  d! observation  in  two  divisions,  which, 
like  Nelson's  Advance  Squadron,  was  to  be  employed  as  a 
reserve.  Graviua  was  in  command  of  it,  and  his  instructions 
on  the  time-honoured  plan  were  to  keep  somewhat  ahead 
and  to  windward,  so  as  to  be  able  to  succour  any  part  of  the 
fleet  upon  which  the  enemy  should  concentrate.  Seeing 
that  Villeneuve  was  convinced  that  Nelson  would  adopt 
the  principle  of  concentration,  the  organisation  was  well 
conceived  for  dealing  with  it,  had  only  the  power  of  execu- 
tion been  equal  to  the  design.  But  in  the  shifting  squalls 
that  prevailed,  the  lack  of  cohesion  in  the  allied  fleet  and 
its  defects  in  seamanship  became  more  and  more  apparent. 
So  unhandy  was  the  manoeuvring  that  for  three  hours  the 
cumbrous  fleet  laboured  in  vain  to  attain  its  formation. 
About  four  o'clock  the  wind  came  westerly.  The  sailing 
order  was  still  far  from  being  formed,  but  regardless  of 
consequences  Villeneuve  felt  compelled  to  seize  the  oppor- 
tunity of  getting  to  the  southward,  and  he  signalled  to  wear 
together.  The  confusion  that  ensued  was  almost  hopeless, 
and  after  wearing  the  efibrt  to  form  the  order  of  sailing 
continued  more  laboriously  than  ever.  The  evolution  was 
only  possible  by  forming  on  the  ships  furthest  to  leeward, 
so  that  although  Villeneuve  tried  to  keep  close-hauled  on 
the  starboard  tack  and  steer  to  the  west-south-west  as 
though  to  weather  Nelson  or  get  a  good  offing  for  entering 
the  Straits,  his  mean  course  must  have  been  about  south, 
and  he  was  reported  thus  by  the  British  frigates  about 
nightfall. 


0CT.2O  NELSON   RECOVERS   TOUCH  339 

If  Villeneuve  was  in  trouble  with  his  fleet,  it  was  little 
wonder,  for  after  the  shift  of  wind  Nelson  himself  took  two 
hours  to  restore  his  order  of  sailing/  He  did  it  by  coming- 
to  the  wind  on  the  starboard  tack,  so  that  the  fleet  was 
now  heading  about  south-west.  But  towards  four  o'clock — 
that  is,  when  Villeneuve  was  wearing  his  fleet— Nelson  was 
doing  the  same,  but  on  the  opposite  or  port  tack.  Whether 
he  knew  the  enemy  had  gone  about  is  doubtful.  There  is 
no  trace  of  the  movement  having  been  reported  to  him. 
The  Uuryalus  had  run  down  to  the  battle  squadron  and 
w\as  signalling  direct  to  the  Victory,  but  was  not  in  sight 
of  the  enemy ;  and  the  last  signal  she  had  made  was  that 
their  leading  ship  bore  to  the  north  of  him.^  The  effect 
of  the  British  movement  was  to  give  the  fleet  a  course 
very  little  west  of  north,  so  that  Nelson  must  have  known 
he  was  steering  direct  to  meet  his  enemy.  Indeed,  the 
weather  had  cleared  so  much  with  the  westerly  wind  that 
before  sundown  several  of  the  enemy  could  be  seen  from 
the  mast-head  close  in  to  Cadiz.^ 