

Is  it  possible  after  all  that  he  was  thinking  of  engaging 
that  evening  ?  It  is  not  probable.  An  oflicer  present  tells 
us,  that  the  general  impression  in  the  fleet  was  that  the 
enemy  did  not  mean  to  go  back  into  Cadiz,  but  that,  seeing 
they  had  remained  at  sea  in  face  of  the  blustery  weather,  it 
was  evident  they  were  going  to  attempt  to  escape  at  the 
risk  of  an  action.  True,  it  was  at  this  time  that  Nelson 
finally  concentrated  his  fleet.  At  sunset  the  whole  of  the 
Advance  Squadron,  except  the  two  or  three  connecting 
ships,  were  reabsorbed  into  the  order  of  sailing.*  He  was 
also  in  the  most  favourable  position  for  delivering  the  attack 

^  Hardy's  Journal :  Captains'  Logs,  414. 

2  Log  of  Euriialus  :  Great  ^Sea  Fights,  ii  1G7.  "  At  4.10  to  Victory,  No.  413, 
north,  two  guns."  This  was  an  MS.  addition  in  the  Signal  Book.  It  appears 
in  a  copy  belonging  to  Captain  Hope,  R.N.,  with  this  signification:  "The 
leading  ship  of  the  enemy's  line  bears  on  the  point  of  the  compass  shown 
herewith."  Enryalus'  time  was  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  ahead  of 
Victory^ s.  By  Victory's  time  the  signal  would  have  been  made  about  3  30. 
Euryalus'  log  gives  it  as  4.10.     Temerairc  says  Naiad  made  it  at  3.34. 

^  Lieutenant  Senhouse  to  his  mother:  Alacmillan's  Magazine,  vol.  81, 
p  416  The  writer  was  afterwards  Admiral  Sir  Humphrey  Senhouse.  For 
his  authority  as  a  critic  of  the  action,  see  'post,  p   344. 

*  See  Colonel  Owen's  letters.     Allen  :  Memoirs  of  Hargood,  p    138. 


340  THE    MAIN    FLEETS    IN    CONTACT      Oct.  21 

which  the  Alemoranduin  laid  down,  and  we  know  it  was  a 
favourite  idea  of  his  to  approach  directly  end-on,  so  that 
the  enemy  could  not  tell  whether  he  meant  to  engage  to 
windward  or  leeward/  If  he  did  contemplate  engaging,  it 
must  have  been  in  a  night  action,  and  this  was  what 
Villeneuve  was  expecting.  But  he  cannot  in  fact  have  had 
any  such  intention.  For  when  he  absorbed  the  Advance 
Squadron  into  the  fleet,  he  telegraphed  to  Blackwood  that 
he  relied  on  hiui  and  his  cruiser  squadron  to  keep  touch 
during  the  night,  and  at  eight  o'clock,  just  as  Villeneuve 
in  fear  of  an  immediate  attack  was  signalling  for  the  line 
of  battle  as  convenient,  he  wore  away  again  seawards — that 
is,  to  the  south-west."  He  must  therefore  have  been  bent 
on  encouraging  the  enemy  to  make  their  expected  attempt 
to  escape,  and  by  keeping  to  windward  of  them  to  ensure  it 
should  not  succeed. 

This  movement  was  accurately  followed  by  all  the  fleet 
except  one  vessel,  a  chance  that  was  to  have  a  curious  effect 
for  good  on  the  coming  battle.  The  Africa  G4  apparently 
did  not  take  in  the  signal,  and  held  on  to  the  northward 
till  she  lost  touch.^  For  eight  hours  Nelson  held  this 
course  under  easy  sail,  Blackwood  keeping  him  hourly 
informed  of  the  enemy's  position  through  the  connecting 
ships  of  the  line.  At  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  with  the 
wind  at  west-north-west,  he  wore  again  "  to  the  north-east," 
he  himself  sa3^s,  but  the  Victory  s  Log  gives  the  course  more 
accurately  as  north  by  east,  and  this  was  maintained  through 
the  night. 