


CHAPTER   XXIII 

NELSON'S   PLAN   OF   ATTACK 

The  old  and  much-dispuled  question,  whether  Nelson  did 
or  did  not  attack  in  accordance  with  the  Memorandum, 
dates  from  the  morrow  of  the  action.  Some  officers,  in 
every  way  equipped  for  a  right  judgment,  held  that  he 
did ;  others  equally  well  equipped  assumed  the  contrary  as 
a  fact  beyond  dispute.^ 

Collingwood  passes  shyly  over  the  question,  and  leaves 
it  practically  untouched.  All  he  says  in  his  official  despatch 
is  that — "  as  the  mode  of  attack  had  been  previously  deter- 
mined on  and  communicated  to  the  flag-officers  and  captains, 
few  signals  were  necessary,"  and  yet  it  is  certain  many  were 
made.  Two  months  afterwards,  in  a  private  letter  to  Sir 
Thomas  Pasley,  he  wrote  that  the  plan  which  Nelson  had 
determined  to  adopt  was  executed  Avell  and  succeeded 
admirably.  But  what  did  he  mean  by  the  plan  ?  Earlier 
in  the  letter  he  explains  it  thus :  "  Lord  Nelson  determined 
to  substitute  for  exact  order  an  impetuous  attack  in  two 
distinct  bodies.  The  weather  line  he  commanded,  and  left 
the  lee  line  totally  to  my  direction.  He  had  assigned  the 
points  to  be  attacked."  But  no  one  will  assert  that  this  is 
an  adequate  summary  of  the  plan  of  the  Memorandum. 
It  conveys  little  more  than  the  impression  of  an  attack  by 
divisions  in  "  General  Chase."  The  distinctive  idea  is 
barely  indicated,  and  it  entirely  ignores  the  subtle  method 
of  engaging  by  which  Nelson  intended  to  realise  that  idea. 
Collingwood  therefore  was  saying  at  most  that  the  general 
intention  of  an  attack  in  two  independent  divisions  was 
carried  out.  It  need  not,  however,  be  assumed  from  this 
that  Collingwood   did   not   appreciate   the   niceties  of  the 

^  For  the  text  of  the  Memorandum,  &ee  jjost,  Appeyidix  D. 
342 


VIEW   THAT    IT   WAS   EXECUTED  343 

Memorandum.  The  chivalrous  loyalty  of  his  nature  would 
not  in  any  case  permit  him  to  say  more,  and  in  everything 
he  wrote  of  the  action  Ave  can  read  between  the  lines  a 
lofty  determination  to  ignore  any  detail  which  might  be 
turned  even  remotely  to  detract  from  the  glory  of  his  dead 
friend  or  to  suggest  in  any  degree  that  the  victory  was  not 
entirely  Nelson's. 

Captain  Harvey  of  the  Temeraire,  who  was  Nelson's 
second  in  the  line,  is  equally  general,  and  yet  the  Log  of 
the  ship  shows  that  he  was  by  far  the  most  detailed  and 
methodical  observer  of  the  action.  "  It  was  noon,"  he  wrote, 
"  before  the  action  commenced,  which  was  done  according 
to  the  instructions  given  us  by  Lord  Nelson."  Whether  by 
"  the  instructions  "  he  meant  the  written  "  Plan  of  Attack," 
or  the  verbal  instructions  passed  down  the  line  during  the 
approach,  every  one  must  judge  for  himself.  It  is  certainly 
impossible  to  assert  beyond  the  possibility  of  contradiction 
that  he  meant  the  "  Plan  of  Attack."  The  other  two  wit- 
nesses tor  the  affirmative  are  equally  vague.  Thirty  years 
after  the  event,  Codrington  said  he  could  remember  calling 
the  attention  of  his  first  lieutenant  to  Nelson's  movements 
as  he  came  into  action,  remarking,  "  How  beautifully  the 
Admiral  is  carrying  his  design  into  effect ;  "  but  a  week 
after  the  action  he  wTote  to  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  "  We 
all  scrambled  into  battle  as  soon  as  we  could."  ^  Lastly, 
there  is  the  fact  that  Captain  Hope  of  the  Defence  endorsed 
on  his  copy  of  the  Memorandum :  "  It  was  agreeable  to 
these  instructions  that  Lord  Nelson  attacked  the  combined 
fleets  of  France  and  Spain."  This  appears  to  exhaust  the 
affirmative  evidence  such  as  it  is,  and  so  far  as  it  is  known 
at  present. 