


0CT.20      THE    RETURN    FROM    THE    STRAITS      zZ7 

At  the  same  time  he  summoned  Dutt'  and  two  of  his 
captains,  and  instructed  them  to  keep  contact  with  Black- 
wood and  the  enemy.  Then  without  recalHng  the  rest  of 
the  Advance  Squadron  into  the  line,  he  held  on  the  course 
he  had  chosen,  presumably  to  avoid  premature  contact  or  a 
premature  disclosure  of  his  force.  By  noon  it  had  brought 
him  some  twenty  miles  south-west  of  Cadiz.  Blackwood's 
second  sloop  by  this  time  had  communicated,  and  informed 
him  that  she  had  seen  forty  sail  coming  out  the  previous 
evening,  but  this  still  left  the  enemy's  conduct  a  mystery. 
In  the  afternoon,  however,  Blackwood  telegraphed  a  message 
which  put  a  clearer  aspect  on  the  situation,  and  seemed  to 
account  for  the  enemy's  not  having  been  caught  at  the 
Strait's  mouth.  It  was  that  they  appeared  determined  to 
ofo  to  the  westward.  "  And  that,"  wrote  the  Admiral  in  his 
diary,  "  they  shall  not  do,  if  in  the  power  of  Nelson  and 
Bronte  to  prevent  them."  The  course  he  was  steering, 
whether  by  intention  or  not,  was  exactly  what  was  wanted. 
He  therefore  held  on  as  he  was  till  two  o'clock,  when  the 
fleet  was  taken  aback  by  a  sudden  shift  of  wind  into  the 
west-north-west.  The  sailing  order  was  thrown  into  confu- 
sion, and  all  movement  was  checked  till  he  could  restore 
his  formation. 

If  the  mystery  of  Villeneuve's  intention  was  hard  to 
fathom,  it  was  no  wonder,  for  the  true  explanation  of  his 
not  having  been  found  in  the  Strait's  mouth  lay  in  circum- 
stances beyond  his  control.  Blackwood  was  understood  to 
have  reported  that  the  whole  allied  fleet  had  got  to  sea  on 
the  evening  of  the  19th,  but  in  fact  its  seamanship  had 
proved  unequal  to  the  task  in  the  light  airs  that  prevailed. 
It  was  not  till  nearly  noon  on  the  20tli  that  Villeneuve  had  the 
whole  of  his  force  well  under  way.  His  intention,  as  Nelson 
divined,  had  actually  been  to  make  direct  for  the  Mediter- 

to  Collingwood,  called  him  on  board  by  signal  to  consult  with  him,  saying  to 
Hardy  jocosely  that  lie  should  noc  be  guided  Vjy  his  opinion  unless  it  agreed 
with  his  own  ;  and  upon  asking  him,  Collingwood  gave  his  opinion  in  favour 
of  attacking  the  lleet  immediately.  Lord  Nelson,  however,  kept  to  his  plan 
of  waiting  till  he  could  get  them  further  off,  fis  they  did  not  seem  determined 
to  return  to  Cadiz  but  to  persevere  in  their  original  intentions,'  &c.  This 
was  one  of  the  passages  which  Codrington  dictated  to  his  daughter  I^ady 
Bourchier  many  years  later." — Life  of  Codrinyton,  i.  59. 

Y 


338  THE    MAIN    FLEETS    IN   CONTACT      oct.  20 