


It  is  incredible  that  if  Nelson  issued  an  order  of  battle 
subsequent  to  this,  no  copy  of  it  should  have  survived.  We 
may  assume,  therefore,  with  some  certainty  that  the  order 
used  in  the  action  was  that  issued  with  the  Memorandum, 
modified  only  by  the  exigencies  of  the  case.  Judging  by 
the  various  extant  lists  purporting  to  show  how  the  ships 
Avent  into  action  the  actual  battle  order  must  have  been 
formed  by  simply  closing  up  the  intervals  left  by  missing 
units,  but  with  one  important  alteration.  Britannia  was 
certainly  in  Nelson  s  squadron,  and  in  her  own  list  and  two 
others  she  is  shown  sixth.  We  may  assume  then,  as  was 
only  natural,  that  when  Calder  went  home,  Lord  Northesk 
was  brought  over  to  take  his  place  at  the  head  of  Nelson's 
second  division.  His  place  would  naturally  have  been 
taken  by  Louis,  who  was  now  the  fourth  flag-officer,  but  as 
he  was  away,  the  head  of  Collingwood's  second  division  seems 
to  have  been  assigned  temporarily  to  the  Dreadnought,  from 
which  ship  Collingwood  had  just  shifted  his  flag  to  the 
Royal  Sovereign} 

On  these  indications  we  get  the  actual  battle  order  of 
the  reduced  fleet  as  follows  : — 


PROBABLE  ORDER  OF  BATTLE  AT  TRAFALGAR. 

As  modified  from  that  of  October  10  for  the  ships  actually  present. 

Rear  or  Lee  Squadron. 

1.  Prince  98  (Grindall). 

2.  Mars  74  (DuiT). 


Van  or  Weather  Squadron. 

1.  T(^m<5raire  98  (Harvey). 

2.  Victory  100  (Hardy). 

3.  Neptune  98  (Fremantle). 

4.  Conqueror  74  (J.  Pellew). 

5.  Leviathan  74  (Bayntun). 
G.  Africa  (?)  04  (Digby)- 


3.  R. Sovereign  100  (Rotherham). 

4.  Tonnant  80  (Tyler). 

5.  Belleisle  74  (Hargood). 

6.  Bellerophon  74  (Cooke). 

7.  Colossus  74  (Morris). 

8.  Achille  74  (King). 


i  7.  Britannia  100  (Bullen). 

8.  Ajax  74  (Brown). 

9.  Orion  74  (Codrington) 

10.  Agamemnon  G4  (Berry). 

11.  Minotaur  74  (Mansfield). 

12.  Spartiate  74  (Laforey). 


9.  Dreadnought  98  (Conn). 

10.  Polyphemus  04  (Redmilj). 

11.  Revenge  74  (Moorsom). 

12.  Swiftsure  74  (Rutherford). 

13.  Defence  74  (Hope). 

14.  Thunderer  74  (Lechemere). 
^15.  Defiance  74  (Durham). 


up  and  not  left  blank  as  in  the  Northesk  copy.  The  Kent  is  not  mentioned, 
her  place  being  fiiUed  by  Orion  (Codrington),  who  was  finally  stationed  next 
astern  of  Ajax  in  Nelson's  squadron. 

1  The  Dreadnought  appears  in  this  station  in  the  Nicolas  plan  (vol.  vii. 
301).  She  certainly  cannot  have  remained  the  rearmost  ship,  for  she  was 
one  of  the  three  three-deckers  specially  ordered  to  take  station  as  her  speed 
would  allow.     See  Ibid.,  p.  115,  and  ante,  p.  334. 


ORDER   OF   BATTLE,    OCTOBER    21  355 

This  order,  it  is  true,  does  not  coincide  exactly  with 
any  of  the  extant  lists  of  how  the  ships  came  into  action. 
But  no  two  of  them  agree,  none  have  any  certain  authority, 
and  all  are  demonstrably  incorrect  in  detail/  But  taken 
with  the  official  order  of  October  10th,  it  affords  the  best 
indication  of  the  organisation  that  was  in  Nelson's  mind. 
In  that  order  we  have  a  concentration  in  the  van  of  the 
weather  line  of  three  three-deckers  broken  only  by  the 
Sicjjerh,  a  powerful  seventy-four  under  his  special  favourite 
Keats,  whom  he  had  promised  to  be  his  second  if  he  arrived 
in  time.^  Possibly  a  fourth  three-decker  was  intended,  as 
he  was  expecting  two  more,  and  the  fifth  place  was  left 
vacant.  Similarly  in  Collingwood's  line  we  have  in  the  lead- 
ing four  units,  two  three-deckers,  an  eighty,  and  another 
powerful  seventy -four,  with  the  fifth  place  again  left  vacant. 
It  was  given  to  Bellcisle,  an  exceptionally  heavy  two-decker, 
when  she  arrived.^ 