

From  the  approach  which  he  contemplated  it  would  be 
open  to  him  either  to  cut  the  line  at  one  point  in  line-ahead, 
or,  like  Collingwood,  to  cut  it  at  all  intervals;  while  the 
Advance  Squadron,  to  which  in  the  weather  attack  no 
special  function  was  assigned,  would  be  always  in  reserve  to 
support  either  Admiral  as  circumstances  required.  But 
there  are  clear  indications  that  he  relied  mainly  on  the 
former  manoeuvre,  risky  as  it  was.  The  danger  which  had 
caused  it  to  fall  into  disuse  since  the  old  Dutch  Wars  was, 
firstly,  that  the  leading  ship  was  likely  to  be  overpowered 
by  a  concentrated  fire  as  she  approached;  and  the  second 
was,  that  if  any  ships  did  succeed  in  getting  through  they 
were  liable  to  be  cut  off  and  surrounded.  Nelson,  we  are 
often  told,  never  measured  risks.  Nothing  is  really  further 
from  his  character  than  such  folly.  In  this  case  he  faced 
the  risks,  measured  them  with  consummate  tactical  insight, 
and  provided  a  means  of  discounting  them  that  was  with- 
out precedent.  His  highly  original  and  scientific  idea  was 
a  couibination  of  two  principles — high  speed,  and  massing 
guns  to  the  utmost  at  the  point  of  shock.  For  the  first 
time  on  record  the  attack  was  to  be  made  not  under 
''  fighting  sails  "  as  usual,  but  under  every  stitch  the  spars 
would  carry.  He  would  gather  the  highest  attainable 
speed  and  so  bring  his  momentum  to  the  maximum,  and 
the  danger  period  to  the  minimum. 

The  second  expedient  was  still  more  remarkable.  It 
was  obtained,  as  will  be  shown  directly,  by  massing  his 
three-deckers  in  the  van  of  his  line.  This  was  a  method  of 
concentration  which  had  been  suggested  originally  by  Bigot 
de  Morogues  in  his  Tactiqite  Navcdc  in  17G3,  as  the  only  one 
that  was  really  effective.  Rodney  had  introduced  a  signal 
for  it,  but  it  had  never  been  used  till  Nelson  now  set  his 
seal  upon  it,  to  overcome  the  almost  insuperable  difficulties 
of  the  manoeuvre  for  which  his  tactical  scheme  called  most 
loudly.     There  was  no  case  in  which  a  well-formed  line  of 


3  52  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

battle  had  been  broken  successfully  by  the  old  method  in 
line-ahead,  but  Nelson  must  have  thought  that  in  the 
French  theory  he  saw  his  way  where  no  one  before  him  had 
dared  to  tread.  Ho  would  arm  the  head  of  his  line  for  the 
fatal  shock  with  a  mass  of  fire  that  nothing  could  resist, 
and  would  overpower  the  time-honoured  defensive  foi-mation 
by  sheer  weight  of  metal  and  momentum.  He  would  form 
his  van  of  a  group  so  powerful  that  even  if  it  were  cut  off 
and  surrounded  it  could  hold  its  own  against  any  concen- 
tration that  could  be  brought  to  bear  upon  it.  Thus  it  was 
that  at  the  supreme  crisis  he  called  to  his  aid  the  theory  of 
the  great  French  tactician — the  theory  of  concentration  of 
gun  power  in  the  fewest  possible  units  and  in  the  shortest 
possible  length' of  line.  And  so  in  the  culminating  hour  of 
sailing  warfare  the  theorist  and  the  man  of  action  were  at  one. 
Morogues'  solution  of  the  problem  of  concentration 
may  have  been  in  Nelson's  mind  for  some  time.  We  have 
seen  how  the  idea  of  massing  heavy  ships  in  the  van  is 
to  bo  detected  in  the  two  orders  of  battle  which  he  had 
issued  during  his  chase  of  Villeneuve.^  In  both  cases, 
however,  the  arrangement  may  have  been  accidental  or 
due  to  other  considerations.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the 
Trafalgar  order  places  it  beyond  doubt  that  Morogues' 
suo'iJfestion  was  the  fundamental  idea  on  which  he  dis- 
posed  his  ships.  By  a  curious  chance  no  copy  of  the 
order  actually  used  in  the  action  has  come  down  to  us. 
Indeed,  it  is  most  probable  he  never  prepared  one  for  the 
reduced  fleet  with  which  he  eventually  had  to  engage,  since 
he  did  not  anticipate  fighting  without  Louis's  division.  The 
latest  and  only  one  he  is  known  to  have  drawn  up  was 
issued  with  the  Memorandum  on  October  10th.  Calder 
was  still  with  him  at  the  time,  and  it  includes  his  ship  as 
well  as  those  of  Louis's  division  and  one  or  two  that  were 
daily  expected,  leaving  blanks  for  the  rest.  The  original 
signed  and  dated  copy,  issued  "Off  Cadiz,  Oct.  10,  1805," 
is  in  the  museum  of  the  United  Service  Institution,  with 
the  fleet  pennant-board  attached.  It  is  on  a  form  designed 
for  the  forty  sail  that  had   been  promised  him,  as  given 