


THE    CONTRARY    VIEW  345 

fallible  Admiral,"  he  says,  "  was  different  from  that  laid 
down  in  his  instructions,  substituting  a  line-ahead  for  a 
line-abreast  in  his  division  "  ;  and  he  holds  that  the  change 
sacrificed  both  simultaneous  impact  and  superior  concen- 
tration of  attack.  He  assumes  the  form  of  engaging  in 
two  lines  ahead  end-on  as  a  fact  that  no  one  present  at 
the  action  would  dispute,  and  indeed  no  one  did.  "  You 
are  to  understand,"  wrote  Captain  Harvey  of  the  TSmeraire, 
"  that  we  bore  down  on  the  enemy  in  two  columns,"  and 
every  one  who  touched  the  point  said  the  same  thing. 

Sir  Charles  Ekins,  who  had  every  opportunity  of  know- 
ing, proceeds  on  the  same  assumption  without  a  shadow 
of  doubt.  "  It  is  known,"  he  wrote,  "  to  all  the  captains  of 
the  fleet  that  the  plan  of  attack  from  to  windward  was, 
by  previous  concert,  to  have  been  of  a  different  and  still 
more  formidable  nature."  ^  Indeed,  it  is  believed  that 
every  categorical  statement  on  the  point  by  officers  who 
were  present  or  directly  concerned — that  is,  setting  aside 
rough  generalisations,  and  what  is  only  inferential  or  an 
obiter  dictum — asserts  that  the  attack  as  delivered  differed 
in  important  particulars  from  the  plan  of  the  Memorandum. 

For  those  accustomed  to  weigh  historical  evidence 
there  cannot  be  serious  doubt  of  what  the  departure  was, 
in  the  deliberate  judgment  of  the  Naval  Staff'  of  the  time. 
On  this  we  have  evidence  that  no  inferential  argument 
can  shake  :  for  it  lies  in  the  next  edition  of  the  Signal 
Book.  There,  beyond  all  dispute,  is  a  new  Signal  for  a 
form  of  attack  purporting,  as  the  "  Signification  "  explains, 
to  embody  the  experiences  of  Trafalgar  and  the  principles 
of  the  Memorandum.  It  is  to  "  cut  the  enemy's  line  in 
order  of  sailing  in  two  columns."  It  is  accompanied  by  a 
diagram   showing   an   almost   vertical   attack   in   two  lines 

the  result  of  mature  reflection  by  an  experienced  staff  officer.  At  the  battle 
he  was  a  lieutenant  of  only  three  years'  standing,  and  knew  nothing  of  Nelson's 
"Plan"  or  intentions.  (See  his  letter  of  October  27th,  1805.  Ibid.,  p.  41o.) 
He  says  there  that  the  plan  of  attack  had  been  so  well  arranged  .  .  .  that 
nothing  was  requisite  but  the  signal  to  alter  course,  but  he  then  believed  the 
plan  was  for  Collingwood  to  cut  through  the  enemy's  line  or  pass  ahead  or 
astern  of  it  as  convenient  and  engage  them  from  to  leeward,  while  Nelson 
doubled  on  the  part  engaged  from  to  windward. 
1  Naval  Battles,  268.     Ekins  wrote  in  1824. 


346  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

ahead  without  previous  deployment,  and  a  long  instruction 
explaining  the  method  of  engaging  in  succession  and  its 
tactical  advantages,  such  as  they  were,  over  simultaneous 
impact/ 