

The  best  foreign  criticism  took  precisely  the  same  view. 
Here,  for  instance,  is  the  appreciation  sent  to  the  Spanish 
Government  some  six  weeks  after  the  action  by  Escafio, 
Gravina's  accomplished  Chief  of  the  Staff.  "  Nothing,"  lie 
concludes,  "  is  more  seamanlike,  or  better  tactics,  than  for  a 
Heet  which  is  well  to  windward  of  another  to  bear  down 
upon  it  in  two  separate  columns,  and  deploy  into  line  at 
gunshot  from  the  enemy.  But  Admiral  Nelson  did  not 
deploy  his  columns  at  gunshot  from  our  line,  but  ran 
up  within  pistol-shot  and  broke  through  it.  .  .  .  It 
was  a  manner  in  which  I  do  not  think  he  will  find  many 
imitators." " 

How,  then,  in  the  face  of  these  uncompromising  and 
authoritative  statements,  can  we  reconcile  the  view — and  it 
undoubtedly  prevailed — that  the  plan  of  the  Memorandum 
was  carried  out  ?     The  explanation  is  not  far  to  seek. 

On  analysis  the  famous  document,  like  others  of  its 
class,  will  be  found  to  be  composed  of  two  groups  of 
ideas — the  first  relating  to  major  tactics,  and  the  second  to 
minor.  The  origin  of  the  first  group  may  be  traced  back 
to  a  conversation  which  Nelson  had  with  his  faithful 
counsellor  Keats  at  Merton,  while  he  was  waiting  for  his 
call.  ''•  No  day,"  said  Nelson,  "  can  be  long  enough  to 
arrange  a  couple  of  fleets  and  fight  a  decisive  battle  accord- 
ing to  the  old  system.  ...  I  shall  form  the  fleet  into  three 
divisions  in  three  lines.  One  division  shall  be  composed  of 
twelve  or  fourteen  of  the  fastest  two-decked  ships,  which 
I  shall  keep  always  to  windward,  or  in  a  situation  of 
advantage.  ...  I  consider  it  will  always  be  in  my  power 
to  throw  it  into  the  battle  in  any  part  I  may  choose.  .  .  . 
With  the  remaining  part  of  the  fleet  formed  in  two  lines 
I  shall  go  at  them  at  once,  if  I  can,  about  one-third  of  their 

1  Signals  and  Instructions  for  the  use  of  II.  M.  Fleet,  181G.     Sigual  I.  7,  p.  28. 
Post,  Appendix,  C. 

2  Fernandez  Duro :  Arumda  Espuuola,  viii.  353. 


ITS    MAIN    IDEAS  347 

line  from  their  leading  ship.  ...  I  think  it  will  surprise 
and  confound  the  enemy.  They  won't  know  what  I  am 
about.  It  will  bring  on  a  pell-mell  battle,  and  that  is  what 
I  want."  Setting  aside  the  third  division — a  point  to  be 
dealt  with  later — this  scheme  coincides  with  the  action 
much  more  closely  than  it  does  with  the  Memorandum. 
Indeed,  the  expressions  "  go  at  them  at  once,"  and  ''  pell- 
mell  battle,"  suggest  that  Keats's  memory,  by  a  familiar 
psychological  process,  was  coloured  by  what  actually 
occurred.  Still  here  we  have  three  of  the  four  major 
ideas — attack  in  separate  divisions  instead  of  one  line — 
concentration  on  the  rear — and  concealing  the  nature  and 
point  of  the  attack  till  the  last  moment.  The  Memorandum 
itself  is  much  more  subtle.  It  contained  a  fourth  idea  that 
was  entirely  Nelson's  own.  Calder's  main  conception  had 
also  been  concentration  on  the  rear,  and  he  too  had  not 
formed  his  battle  order  or  disclosed  his  attack  till  he  was 
very  close.  But  Calder's  attack  had  been  parried  by  the 
enemy's  van  coming  down  to  the  assistance  of  the  rear. 
It  is  in  the  craft  with  which  the  Memorandum  provides 
against  such  a  move  that  lies  its  most  brilliant  and  original 
feature.  Nothing  else  is  entirely  Nelson's.  Duncan  at 
Camperdown  had  attacked  in  two  divisions ;  Clerk  of  Eldin 
had  suggested  the  principle  of  approach  in  echelon  on 
which  Nelson's  intended  formation  was  based,  while  from 
Calder's  action  he  got  the  warning  of  what  he  had  to  expect 
from  the  enemy. 