


3 so  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

diagram  is  given  to  illustrate  the  intended  position.^  The 
signal  would  then  most  probably  bo  made  for  the  lee  line 
to  bear  np  together  upon  the  twelve  rearmost  ships  of  the 
enemy — that  is,  as  before,  upon  three-fourths  of  its  own 
n  umber. - 

From  the  position  in  which  Nelson  intended  to  place 
him,  the  second  in  command  would  be  able  to  deliver 
Howe's  attack  through  the  intervals  of  the  enemy's  line, 
going  down  with  every  stitch  of  canvas  set  in  the  regular 
line  of  bearing,  obliquely,  as  Byng  tried  to  do  at  Minorca, 
with  his  broadsides  bearing.^  "  Some  ships,"  wrote  Nelson, 
"  may  not  get  through  their  exact  place,  but  they  will 
always  be  at  hand  to  assist  their  friends,  and  if  any  are 
thrown  round  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  they  will  eftectually 
complete  the  business  of  twelve  sail  of  the  enemy." 

Such  an  attack  made  from  to  windward  was  open  to  two 
well-known  parries,  with  Avhich  Nelson  proceeds  to  deal.  The 
enemy  might  wear  together  so  as  to  make  the  rear  their 
van,  or  they  might  execute  the  manoeuvre  of  the  old  French 
text-books,  by  bearing  up  together  and  running  to  leeward, 
so  as  to  get  the  attacking  force  between  two  fires  and  avoid 
being  raked.  In  either  case  CollingAvood  was  to  persist  in 
his  attack  on  the  twelve  ships  assigned  to  him  and  press  it 
home,  "  unless  otherwise  directed  by  the  Commander-in- 
chief,  which  is  scarcely  to  be  expected."  The  remainder  of 
the  enemy's  fleet  was  to  be  left  to  Nelson,  but  of  what  he 

^  For  the  original  as  drawn  by  Nelson,  see  past,  p.  448.     The  diagrams 
differ  slightly   in  the  various  copies.     In   one  in  the  British   Museum,  for 


instance,  it  stands  thus  :  — 

Sail    S          ( 

Advanced  Squadron 

[  British. 

.     10    40^ 

Weather  line 

1''         f 

TiP-e  lin^ 

Enemy 

4G  sail. 

-  The  signal  provided  was  a  "  Single  Flag,"  not  in  the  printed  book.  He 
chose  the  eighth  flag,  on  p.  17,  "Yellow  with  blue  fly,"  which  had  not  been 
appropriated  as  a  tactical  signal,  and  gave  it  this  signification  in  MS.  : — "  Cut 
through  the  enemy's  line,  and  engage  close  on  the  other  side.  N.B. — This 
signal  to  be  repeated  by  all  ships."  It  stands  thus  in  Hardy's  copy  of  the 
Signal  Book  now  in  the  possession  of  Commander  Sir  Malcolm  Macgregor, 
R.N.      The  signal  was  not  made  at  the  action. 

^  For  the  technical  meaning  of  the  line  of  bearing,  see  post,  p.  370. 


MINIMISING    THE    RISK  351 

intended  to  do  he  says  no  more  than  "  that  he  will  endea- 
vour to  take  care  that  the  movements  of  the  second-in- 
command  are  interrupted  as  little  as  possible."  In  short, 
his  major  function  was  to  contain  the  van,  and  the  minor 
tactics  would  depend  on  circumstances. 