

A  further  important  feature  to  note  in  the  arrangement 
of  the  two  vans  is  that  neither  Nelson  nor  Collingwood 
were  to  lead  their  lines  in  order  of  battle,  but  only  in  the 
normal  order  of  sailing.  In  the  Memorandum,  Nelson 
wrote,  "  My  line  would  lead  through,"  not  "  I  should  lead 
through,"  and  Captain  Harvey  says  that  in  consequence  of 
a  signal  made  at  the  last  moment  he  went  into  action  astern 
instead  of  ahead  of  the  Victory,  implying  that  Nelson's 
station  was  second  in  order  of  battle,  as  we  should  expect 
in  the  absence  of  the  Sujocrh.  As  to  Collingwood's  place, 
w^e  have  a  distinct  statement  that  it  was  third,  as  in  the 
official  order  of  battle.* 

There  is  one  more  point  in  the  order  that  was  actually 
used,  and  w^hich  must  be  noticed  as  a  departure  from  the 
Memorandum.  The  various  lists  agree  that  in  the  action 
the  two  squadrons  were  not  equal.    In  all  of  them  Nelson  is 

^  See  post,  Appendix  E. 

2  Nelson  to  Ball,  Oct.  15th :  Nicolas,   vii,  123. 

3  She  was  taken  in  1795,  and  when  first  placed  on  the  Navy  List  was  rated 
as  an  80-gun  ship.  Her  armament  was  30  32-pounders  ;  30  24-pounders  ;  18 
9-pounders  ;  14  32-pounder  carronades,  and  4  24-pounders.  Her  complement 
was  700  men,  only  50  less  than  the  98's. 

*  Harvey  to  his  Wife:  Great  Sea  Fights,  ii.  225,  and  Senhouse  to  his 
Mother:  Macmillans  Magazine,  vol.  Ixxxi.  417. 


3  56  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

shown  with  twelve  units,  and  Colhngwood  with  fifteen. 
The  numerical  inferiority  of  Nelson's  column  was  no  doubt 
partly  due  to  the  absence  of  Louis's  squadron,  since  all 
but  one  of  his  ships  belonged  to  the  weather  line  in  the 
official  order.  But  the  inferiority  is  more  apparent  than 
real,  for  if  three-deckers  are  counted  as  two  units,  Nelson 
has  sixteen  against  Collingwood's  eighteen.  For  the  pur- 
pose of  containing  by  breaking  the  line  in  line-ahead 
Nelson's  numerical  inferiority  was  of  small  moment,  while 
if  Collingwood  was  to  attack  twelve  of  the  enemy,  it  was 
essential  to  keep  his  division  as  nearly  as  possible  one- 
fourth  superior  in  number. 

Such  an  allocation  of  force  was  all  the  more  necessary 
owing  to  the  absorption  of  the  Advance  Squadron  into  the 
two  main  divisions,  and  the  consequent  change  from  a 
triple  to  a  dual  organisation.  This  fundamental  alteration 
has  never  been  clearly  explained,  and  is  worth  considera- 
tion. By  recent  Mediterranean  practice  the  Advance 
Squadron  had  been  nothing  but  an  Observation  Squadron, 
but  it  is  clear  that  Nelson  had  in  his  mind  a  step  forward 
which  Avould  give  it  a  real  tactical  function.  In  the 
Memorandum  he  treats  it  not  merely  as  an  Observation 
Squadron,  but  as  a  kind  of  reserve.  On  the  assumption 
that  his  fleet  would  reach  the  promised  number  of  forty 
sail  of  the  line,  he  gives  it  in  the  Memorandum,  though 
not  in  the  Order  of  Sailing,  an  organisation  in  two  grand 
divisions  of  sixteen  ships  each,  with  an  Advance  Squadron 
of  eight  of  his  fastest  two-deckers,  that  is,  one-fifth  of  his 
battle  squadron  and  not  the  one-third  which,  as  we  have 
seen,  he  had  been  using  on  the  eve  of  the  engagement.  Its 
purpose  he  explains  by  saying  that,  "  It  will  always  make, 
if  wanted,  a  line  of  twenty-four  sail  on  whichever  line  the 
commander-in-chief  may  direct."  Now,  so  far  as  we  know, 
no  such  organisation  was  ever  carried  out,  but  owing  to  the 
circumstance  that  we  have  no  ''  Organisation  "  of  the  fleet 
later  than  the  10th,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say  Avhat 
was  done. 