


^  This  was  certainly  the  view  taken  by  the  author  of  the  Signal  Book  of 
1816.  The  instruction  in  the  "  Trafalgar  Signal "  reads  :  "  It  is  to  be  considered 
that  the  conduct  of  the  Lee  Division,  after  breaking  the  line,  is  left  to  its 
commander,"  i.e.  in  the  absence  of  special  instructions.    See  post,  Appendix  C. 

2  In  a  marginal  note  he  explains  that  if  the  enemy  are  less  than  forty,  only  a 
proportionate  number  of  the  rear  are  to  be  cut  off.  "  British  to  be  -^  superior 
to  the  enemy  cut  off." 


CONTAINING   THE    VAN  349 

will  lead  through  about  the  centre ;  and  the  advance 
squadron,  a  few  ships  ahead  of  it,  "  so  as  to  ensure  getting 
at  their  Commander-in-chief,  whom  every  effort  must  be 
made  to  capture."  This  idea  of  enveloping  the  enemy's 
Commander-in-chief  was  a  return  to  the  central  idea  of 
medioeval  tactics.  Indeed,  nothing  is  so  remarkable  in  this 
immortal  Memorandum  than  the  way  in  which  it  seems  to 
gather  up  and  co-ordinate  every  tactical  principle  that  had 
ever  proved  effective. 

He  then  falls  back  again  into  major  exposition.  The 
principle  of  the  attack  is  concentration  of  the  entire  fleet 
upon  the  enemy's  rear  as  far  forward  as  their  Commander- 
in-chief  and  the  units  immediately  ahead  of  him.  This 
would  leave  some  twenty  sail  untouched  and  free  to  act  as 
Gravina  had  done  in  Calder's  action,  but  he  considers  his 
form  of  attack  provides  sufficiently  against  any  section  of  his 
fleet  being  doubled  on  by  the  unengaged  ships  of  the 
enemy.  "  It  must  be  some  time,"  he  sa3^s,  "  before  they 
could  perform  a  manoeuvre  to  bring  their  force  compact 
to  attack  any  part  of  the  British  fleet  engaged  or  to  succour 
their  own  ships,  which  indeed  would  be  impossible  without 
mixing  with  the  ships  engaged."  His  meaning  clearly  is, 
that  if  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst,  there  will  be  a 
melee,  which  must  result  in  a  decisive  action.  "  I  look 
with  confidence,"  he  adds,  "  to  a  victory  before  the 
van  of  the  enemy  can  succour  their  rear,  and  then  the 
British  fleet  would  most  of  them  be  ready  to  receive  their 
twenty-sail."  He  concludes  this  part  of  the  Memorandum 
by  a  return  to  minor  tactics,  in  which  he  explains  exactly 
what  is  to  be  done  if  the  van  does  tack,  but  as  the  attack 
was  not  made  from  to  leeward  these  details  may  be  dis- 
carded. 

From,  this  point  onwards  the  document  is  concerned 
entirely  with  the  minor  tactics  of  an  attack  from  to  wind- 
ward— the  form  which  he  hoped  to  and  did  adopt.  The 
section  is  headed,  "  Of  the  intended  attack  from  to  wind- 
ward. The  enemy  in  line  of  battle  ready  to  attack."  In  this 
case  he  says  "  the  divisions  of  the  British  fleet  will  be 
brought  nearly  within  gunshot  of  the  enemy's  centre,"  and  a 