

Nelson's  Memorandum  opens  with  a  recital  of  the  delay 
inseparable  from  forming  a  large  fleet  in  one  line,  and  his 
consequent  determination  to  organise  his  fleet  in  such  a 
way  that  the  order  of  sailing  will  be  the  order  of  battle, 
but  with  this  proviso.  The  order  of  sailing  was  to  be  the 
order  of  battle,  "  with  the  exception  of  the  first  and  second 
in  command."  This  neglected  point  is  important.  It 
meant  that  in  order  of  sailing  the  two  admirals  would  as 
usual  lead  their  respective  divisions,  but  in  order  of  battle 
they  would  not.  Some  other  station  would  be  assigned  to 
them.  Assuming  a  fleet  of  forty  sail,  the  organisation 
would   be  in  two  lines  of  sixteen  ships,  with  an  advance 


348  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

squadron  of  eight  (or  one-fifth)  composed  of  the  fastest 
two-deckers — but  as  this  last  factor  eventually  disappeared 
it  can  be  discarded  for  the  present. 

The  next  point  is  new — the  second  in  command  is  to 
have  entire  direction  of  his  line  after  the  Admiral's  in- 
tentions are  made  known  to  him.  The  wording  of  the 
paragraph  docs  not  make  it  quite  clear  at  what  time  this 
independent  direction  was  to  begin.  What  did  Nelson 
mean  by  "  after  the  Admiral's  intentions  are  made  known  to 
him  "  ?  A  later  paragraph  defines  it,  at  least  for  the  attack 
from  to  windward,  which  was  the  attack  actually  delivered. 
In  this  case  Nelson  himself  will  conduct  the  approach  until 
the  whole  licet  is  "  nearly  within  gunshot  of  the  enemy's 
centre."  He  will  then  signal  to  Collingwood  the  manner 
in  which  he  is  to  attack.  The  signal  that  will  probably  be 
made  is  specified,  and  he  is  also  warned  what  he  may  be 
wanted  to  do  in  case  certain  counter-movements  are  made 
by  the  enemy.  Then  Nelson  repeats  that  the  entire 
management  of  the  lee  line  will  be  left  to  the  second  in 
command  "  after  the  intention  of  the  Commander-in-chief 
is  signified."  This  could  only  mean  that  the  independent 
direction  was  to  begin  directly  Nelson  had  given  his  col- 
league the  signal  to  engage,  and  not  before.  In  other 
words,  his  obvious  and  natural  intention  was  to  conduct 
the  approach  himself  and  then  to  leave  his  colleague  a  free 
hand  to  do  his  special  part  of  the  work.^ 

Having  got  thus  far  with  his  major  tactics  he  breaks  off 
into  the  minor,  dealing  successively  with  the  two  conditions 
of  finding  the  enemy  to  windward  or  to  leeward.  In 
engaging  from  to  leeward — he  will  attack  in  three  lines, 
in  line-ahead.  Collingwood  will  lead  through  as  near  as  he 
can  at  the  twelfth  ship  from  the  rear,  so  as  to  concentrate 
on  about  three-fourths  of  his  own  number.-     Nelson's  line 