

An  Observation  Squadron  had  existed  from  the  first. 
On  taking  over  the  command  and  before  the  Memorandum 


THE  ADVANCE  SQUADRON       357 

was  issued,  Nelson  gave  Duff  four  ships,  namely,  the  Mars 
(his  own),  Colossus,  Defence,  and  Ajax,  two  being  from  each 
squadron  according  to  the  original  Order  of  Sailing.  After 
the  issue  of  the  Memorandum,  Bdleisle  and  Agamemnon 
arrived  and  were  added  to  the  connecting  line,  being  again 
one  from  each  squadron.  This  detachment  Nelson  called 
his  Advanced  Squadron.  "  I  have,"  he  writes  to  Ball  ten 
days  before  the  battle,  "  an  Advanced  Squadron  of  fast- 
sailing  ships  between  me  and  the  frigates."  ^  If  Codrington 
is  correct  it  must  by  this  time  have  received  its  full 
organisation.  Eight  units,  he  says,  were  detached  for  this 
service  after  the  Memorandum  was  issued,  of  which  his  own 
ship  Orion  was  one.  But  he  was  obviously  in  some  con- 
fusion as  to  what  Nelson  said  he  was  going  to  do  with 
them.  He  understood  generally  that  the  attack  was  to  be 
made  upon  the  enemy's  rear  in  two  lines,  Collingwood 
making  the  main  attack,  while  Nelson  prevented  the  van 
from  interfering,  as  it  had  done  in  Calder's  action.  He 
would  effect  this  by  cutting  the  line  in  rear  of  the  allied 
Commander-in-chief,  while  the  Advance  Squadron  cut  it 
ahead  of  him  so  as  to  isolate  and  surround  the  enemy's 
flagship  and  her  seconds.  But  Codrington  was  by  no 
means  clear,  and  naturally  enough  ;  for  this  form  of  engage- 
ment was  enjoined  by  the  Memorandum  for  the  special 
case  of  an  attack  from  to  leeward  only.  In  the  other 
part  of  the  document,  which  explains  the  intended  attack 
from  to  windward,  no  independent  attack  is  assigned  to  the 
Advance  Squadron,  though  its  existence  is  clearly  shown  in 
the  diagram.  We  can  only  assume  that  in  this  case  the 
general  reserve  clause  relating  to  it  would  operate,  and  that 
it  would  be  used  to  reinforce  either  line  as  necessary. 

Brilliant  as  the  Memorandum  is  as  a  tactical  concep- 
tion, a  certain  obscurity  in  its  exposition  must  be  admitted. 
It  bears  throughout  marks  of  the  haste  with  which  it  was 
drawn  up  when  Nelson  believed  that  the  shift  of  wind 
into  the  east  Avould  bring  Villeneuve  ovit  in  a  few  hours. 
Its  arrangement,  as  we  have  seen,  is  without  logical  order 
or  system ;  it  is  full  of  repetitions ;  the  diction  in  places 

^  Nicolas,  vii.  Ill,  October  11th. 


3  58  NELSON'S    PLAN    OF    ATTACK 

ignores  grammar ;  and  the  order  of  battle  which  it  predi- 
cates dilVers  radically  from  that  which  was  issued.  The 
meaning  consequently  is  often  far  from  clear  without  care- 
ful interpretive  study,  and  the  actual  conditions  on  the 
eve  of  the  battle  can  only  have  increased  the  captains' 
uncertainty. 