

^  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  p.  129. 

2  Ibid. ,  p.  192,  Neptune's  report.    See  also  p.  166,  Report  of  the  ^cVos,  where 
the  text  has  "  cTicmi  en  pelotons." 

3  Clarke  and  M 'Arthur,  ii.  146,  and  Nicolas,  vii.  138. 


NELSON'S    FIRST   IDEA  365 

taken  too  much  time.  When  Villeneuve  reversed  the 
order  of  his  fleet  the  situation  was  much  more  favourable, 
since  the  position  of  the  Memorandum  could  have  been 
obtained,  when  Nelson  thought  fit,  by  simply  throwing  the 
two  divisions  into  the  larboard  line  of  bearing.  Why  then 
did  Nelson  regret  it  ?  The  answer  is  that  he  did  not  yet 
realise  that  Villeneuve  was  in  order  of  battle.  To  him  the 
allied  fleet  in  the  distance  appeared  to  be  like  his  own  in 
cruising  order — the  route  lihre  of  the  French.  "  At  seven," 
he  Avrote  in  the  last  entry  in  his  Private  Diary, "  the  enemy 
wearing  in  succession.  May  the  Great  God  whom  I  wor- 
ship grant  to  my  country  and  for  the  benefit  of  Europe 
in  general  a  great  and  glorious  Victory."  He  must  have 
thought,  like  Cromwell,  that  the  Lord  had  delivered  them 
into  his  hand.  As  we  know  they  were  not  "  wearing  in 
succession  "  but  "  together,"  and  if  Nelson  had  realised  they 
were  in  order  of  battle  he  could  not  have  mistaken  the 
manoeuvre.  It  must  have  seemed  to  him  that  they  were 
performing  another  manoeuvre — in  fact  the  one  he  himself 
had  just  executed.  In  his  eyes  it  was  not  a  line  of  battle 
being  inverted,  but  an  unformed  fleet  in  which  the  ships 
were  wearing  in  turn  one  after  the  other  in  the  now 
obsolete  sense  of  "  in  succession."  ^  It  could  only  mean 
that  he  had  caught  them  unawares,  and  that  to  save  them- 
selves from  an  attack  in  chase  they  were  hurrying  en  route 
lihre  for  Cadiz. 

At  that  time,  indeed,  the  British  fleet  had  all  the 
appearance  of  threatening  the  old  vehement  attack  of 
Hawke  and  Boscawen — attack  in  general  chase  with  the 
leading  ships  forming  line  as  they  chased.  In  some  of 
the  British  ships  the  impression  seems  to  have  been  that 
this  was  actually  Nelson's  intention.  ''  The  signal  was 
made  to  chase,"  wrote  a  lieutenant  of  the  Eoyal  Sovereign 
in  his  Journal.  "  Bore  up  and  made  all  sail  in  chase,"  says 
the  Master  of  the  Conqueror,^     It  is  then  quite  possible  and 


1  Gravina's  Staff  report  makes  this  quite  clear:  "A  las  8,"  it  says,  "la 
senal  de  virar  en  redondo  a  un  tempo  (to  wear  together)  arrivando  succesiva- 
mente  (bearing  up  in  succession)  para  quedar  alineados  en  la  mura  de  babor 
(in  order  to  get  into  line  on  the  port  tack)." 

^  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  of  the  seventeen  ships  which  record  the  pre- 
liminary signals  onlj'  seven  mention  that  for  the  order  of  sailing. 