

2  The  line  of  bearing  (larboard  or  starboard)  was  a  highly  technical  ex- 
pression meaning  a  bow-and-quarter  line  formed  seven  points  from  the  wind, 
so  that  when  the  ships  hauled  to  the  wind  together  they  would  be  on  the 
(larboard  or  starboard)  tack  in  close-hauled  line  of  battle.  A  line  of  bearing 
meant  any  bow-and-quarter  line  formed  on  the  point  of  the  compass  in- 
dicated.   See  post,  p.  370. 


362  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

tactical  mobility  so  much  as  this  happy  iimovation.'  No 
Admiral  would  have  thought  of  reverting  to  the  discredited 
system  at  such  an  hour,  and  least  of  all  Nelson,  whose  plan 
depended  on  holding  the  fleet  in  his  hand  in  the  highest 
attainable  state  of  ticxibility  and  cohesion  till  the  moment 
came  to  fluig  it  upon  the  enemy  in  the  manner  that  the 
moment  should  require. 

What  he  did  was  to  signal  at  once  for  the  Order  of 
Sailing,  and  a  few  minutes  afterwards — that  is,  probably  as 
soon  as  the  first  signal  was  answered — "  to  bear-up  and  sail 
large  "  with  the  compass  signal  east-north-east.  Now  this 
was  a  signal  not  intended  for  a  formed  fleet,  that  is,  a  fleet 
in  sailing  or  battle  order.  It  was  used  only  to  an  unformed 
fleet,  and  the  effect,  therefore,  of  the  two  hoists  was  an 
order  to  bear-up  one  after  the  other  in  turn  as  they 
happened  to  be  sailing  and  take  their  regular  stations  in 
the  wake  of  their  respective  flagships  as  they  steered  east- 
north-east.'-^  The  plain  evidence  of  the  Signal  Book  is  en- 
dorsed by  the  Master  of  the  NepAtne,  who  expressly  records 

1  See  "  Instructions  respecting  the  Order  of  Sailing  "  :  Signal  Booh,  1799, 
article  ii.  p.  127.  "  The  columns  are  to  be  parallel  to  each  other,  every  ship 
steering  in  the  wake  of  the  leading  ship  of  her  column."  Cf.  Signals  and 
Instructiovs  {Navy  Records  Society),  pp.  75-77. 

"  No.  72.  "  Form  the  order  of  sailing  in  two  columns."  The  corresponding 
instruction  in  the  Signal  Book,  No.  4,  p.  101,  provides  that  "  when  a  signal  is 
made  for  any  line  or  order  of  sailing  "  with  a  compass  signal,  that  signal 
indicates  "the  direction  in  which  the  line  is  to  be  formed,"  If  a  compass 
signal  is  hoisted  after  the  main  signal  has  been  answered  "it  is  to  show  the 
course  the  fleet  is  to  steer."  In  this  case  no  compass  signal  was  hoisted  with 
the  one  for  the  order  of  sailing.  What  followed  was  a  separate  signal,  No. 
76  =  "When  lying-to  or  sailing  by  the  wind  to  bear-up  and  sail  large  on  the 
course  steered  by  the  Admiral  or  that  pointed  out  by  signal."  In  this  case 
east-north-east  was  "the  course  pointed  out."  It  has  been  assumed  some- 
times that  this  meant  "  bear-up  together,"  but  the  corresponding  instruction 
(No  14,  p.  132)  begins,  "When  the  fleet  is  to  bear-up  in  succession  and  sail 
large,"  and  it  proceeds  to  say  how  each  ship  is  to  behave  with  regard  to  her 
seconds  ahead  and  astern.  It  was  a  signal  Nelson  was  in  the  habit  of  making 
to  an  unformed  fleet,  e.g.,  "  Proceedings  of  the  Fleet,  September  30th  "  {Add. 
MSS.,  84973) :  "  At  l.Ohove-to  ;  at  G.O  made  general  signal  to  make  sail  after 
lying-to  {i.e.  No.  76)  ;  at  6.35,  to  tack  in  succession  ;  at  6.35  to  bear-up  and 
sail  large  (No.  76  again)  ;  at  0.42  general,  to  form  the  established  order  of 
sailing."  The  corresponding  signals  for  a  formed  fleet  "  in  hne  of  battle  or 
order  of  sailing"  were  Nos.  79  to  82.  Nos.  79  and  80  to  alter  course  in  suc- 
cession to  port  or  starboard  one  point  or  as  directed  by  compass  signal  ;  Nos. 
81  and  82  to  alter  course  together.  There  was  no  signal  for  an  unformed 
fleet  to  bear-up  together.  Until  it  was  in  order  of  battle  or  sailing  .such  an 
order  could  not  be  given  to  it,  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  would  have 
thrown  the  fleet  out  of  cruising  order,  that  is,  the  loose  order  that  was 
specially  maintained  to  facilitate  a  rapid  formation  of  the  order  of  sailing. 