

As  the  situation  stood,  it  was  obvious  the  attack  must 
be  made  from  to  windward.  The  diagram  in  the  Memo- 
randum clearly  showed  the  existence  and  position  of  the 
Advance  Squadron  for  such  an  attack,  and  yet  the 
Advance  Squadron  had  been  absorbed  the  night  before 
and  had  ceased  to  exist  as  a  separate  organisation.  Up 
till  the  last  moment  there  was  nothing  to  tell  Nelson's 
captains  that  he  had  departed  from  the  organisation  he 
had  laid  down  in  the  Memorandum.  Li  the  voluminous 
evidence  that  is  extant  there  is  no  hint  that  he  explained 
to  the  officers  concerned  that  this  tactical  alteration  had 
been  made.  If  he  had  issued  any  fresh  instructions, 
Codrington  certainly  could  not  have  forgotten  the  circum- 
stance or  omitted  to  mention  it.  Long  afterwards  he  dealt 
with  the  point,  but  the  only  impression  left  in  his  mind 
was  that  the  arrangement  had  not  been  cancelled,  and  that 
Nelson  had  said  that  the  eight  ships  were  to  draw  out  of 
the  line  if  the  enemy's  van  should  threaten  to  come  down 
to  the  assistance  of  the  rear.  But  this  is  hardly  possible. 
The  Advance  Squadron,  as  constituted  on  the  night  before 
the  battle,  consisted,  as  we  have  seen,  of  the  five  ships  sent 
ahead,  and  four  connecting  with  the  cruisers.  But  of  these 
no  less  than  six  belonged  to  the  division  which  Collingwood 
led  into  battle,  and  they  could  not  possibly  have  been  called 
out  of  the  line  without  paralysing  the  main  attack. 

Two  conclusions,  then,  seem  to  be  inevitable.  The  first 
is,  that  so  long  as  Nelson  had  hope  of  recovering  Louis's 
squadron,  the  idea  of  an  Advance  Squadron  was  still  in  his 
mind ;  but  when  that  hope  failed  he  abandoned  the  triple 
organisation  altogether.  The  second  is  that  no  fresh 
tactical  instructions  were  given  to  the  fleet  after  his 
decision  was  made. 

Such,  as  nearly  as  they  can  be  ascertained,  are  the  facts 


THE    TRIPLE    ORDER   ABANDONED         359 

which  are  relevant  to  the  problem  of  Nelson's  real  mten- 
tions.  By  the  light  of  them  we  must  seek  to  penetrate  the 
meaning  of  his  changing  movements.  They  are  all  we 
have  to  reveal  what  was  working  in  his  mind,  and  by  their 
aid  alone  can  we  reach  any  right  appreciation  of  the  tactics 
he  actually  employed. 


CHAPTER   XXIV 

THE   BATTLE   OF   TRAFALGAR 

As  the  morning  of  October  21st  broke  in  soft  serenity, 
Nelson,  as  we  have  seen,  found  himself  with  his  fleet  in 
disorder  and  a  section  of  it  absent,  in  presence  of  a  superior 
enemy  to  leeward — not  as  he  had  pictured  them  "  in  the 
line  of  battle  ready  to  attack,"  but  apparently  in  no  regular 
formation.  The  body  of  them  bore  from  the  flagship  a 
little  south  of  east,  some  nine  miles  away  as  estimated  in 
the  Victory  s  Log ;  and  with  Gravina's  squadron  to  wind- 
ward of  the  van  they  appeared  to  stretch  north-north-east 
and  south-south-west,  with  their  heads  to  the  southward  as 
though  making  for  the  Straits. 