

^  Some  ships  seem  to  have  anticipated  Nelson's  general  signal  in  order  as 
was  usual  to  get  nearer  their  place.  See  Logs  of  Conqueror  and  Ajax  :  Great 
Sea  Fights,  ii.  257  and  285. 

*  See  Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  pp.  184-5  and  in  his  Appendix,  Report  of 
Villeneuve,  p.  129  ;  Dumanoir,  p.  150;  Magendie,  p.^  178  ;  Lucas  (^edowtoWe), 
p.  197;  Philibert  (Magon's  chief -of-staff),  p.  233  ;  Epron  {Argonaute),  p.  249; 
L'Achille,  p.  263.  Two  French  vessels,  Neptune  (p.  192)  and  Fougueux  (p.  214) 
report  the  enemy  forming  en  6chiquier  {i.e.  line  of  bearing)  and  then  in 
column. 


364  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

Villcnouve's  iirsl  idea  was  that  Nelson  was  coming  down 
upon  his  roar  in  a  mass  of  groups  with  the  double  intention 
of  securing  a  superior  concentration  and  cutting  hirn  off  from 
Cadiz. ^  To  meet  such  an  attack  there  was  a  special  signal 
in  the  French  book.  It  ran,  "  The  fleet  of  the  Republic  being 
in  order  of  battle  and  in  any  line  whatever  to  leeward,  the 
enemy  in  group  formation  (en  pdoton)  or  in  any  line  Avhatever 
or  even  in  several  lines,  endeavouring  to  engage  the  rear  of 
the  fleet — order  to  all  the  vessels  to  wear  together."  -  Ville- 
neuve's  fleet  being  in  the  process  of  carrying  out  his  last 
signal  for  ordrc  natiird  was  in  no  condition  to  manoeuvre. 
It  was  indeed  in  so  much  disorder  that  in  many  places  it 
was  en  j)dotons  instead  of  in  line.  Nevertheless  he  deter- 
mined to  make  the  signal,  and  thus  for  the  second  time 
tried  to  wear  his  unformed  fleet  together,  regardless  of  the 
consequences. 

Did  Nelson  expect  this  when  he  made  his  undisguised 
threat  upon  Villeneuve's  rear  ?  Blackwood,  who  had  been 
called  on  board  the  Victory  about  this  time,  says  "  he 
appeared  very  much  to  regret  it."  ^  Yet  the  Memorandum 
anticipated  such  a  movement.  Should  the  enemy  wear 
together.  Nelson  had  w^ritten,  the  original  rear  was  still 
to  be  Collingwood's  "  object  of  attack."  It  is  clear,  how- 
ever, that  he  had  not  looked  for  the  movement  so  soon. 
He  was  providing  for  its  being  made  when  the  attack  was 
fully  developed.  Still  that  Villeneuve  wore  sooner  than 
he  expected  is  hardly  enough  of  itself  to  account  for  his 
annoyance.  There  is,  moreover,  a  further  difficulty  about 
what  was  in  Nelson's  mind  at  this  time.  How  could  he 
possibly  have  attacked  as  he  intended,  on  the  course  he 
was  steering  for  the  rear,  if  Villeneuve  had  held  on  to  the 
southward  ?  The  only  way,  without  interchanging  the 
positions  of  the  two  squadrons,  would  have  been  to  stand 
for  the  enemy's  van  as  it  then  was,  and  then  haul  to  the 
wind  in  succession  on  the  opposite  tack  and  so  bring  his 
fleet  in  echelon  abreast  their  centre.  But  even  this  would 
have  been  very  awkward,  and  in  the  light  wind  would  have 