

This  startling  fact  has  escaped  notice  apparently  because 
it  has  always  been  assumed  that  Collingwood  made  his 
signal  at  the  last  hour.  It  has  further  been  taken,  as  a 
matter  of  course,  that  he  made  it  in  consequence  of  the  fact 

^  This,  the  most  important  tactical  order  in  the  battle,  has  always  been 
placed  about  11  o'clock,  owing  to  the  careless  way  the  Log  of  the  Jioy(tl 
Sovereign  was  kept.  TlmniUrer  also  has  it  entered,  so  that  it  appears  in  the 
afternoon.  But  there  are  two  signal  Logs — Temerairc  and  Defence — which  fix 
it  exactly,  though  by  a  miracle  they  seem  to  have  escaped  the  notice  of  the 
numerous  writers  who  have  dealt  with  the  battle.  Tevuraire  (Master's  Log) 
has  "8.47,  Royal  Sovereign  to  Larboard  Division  Nos.  42  and  88."  Defence 
(both  Captain's  and  Master's  Logs)  has  ''  8.45  Sig.  50  divisional  from  Koyal 
Sovereign  ;  8.46,  ditto  42  and  88."  No.  50  is  "  to  keep  larboard  line  of  bearing 
though  on  starboard  tack."  Agamemnon,  in  Nelson's  division,  answered  it, 
thinking  it  was  general.  It  was  probably  a  mi.-^take  of  the  signal  officer,  and 
was  at  once  annulled  by  No.  42  :  "  Form  the  larboard  line  of  bearing,  steering 
the  course  indicated."  No.  88  was  :  "  Make  more  sail,  the  leading  ship  first  if 
in  line  of  battle  or  order  of  sailing." 


J 


COLLINGWOOD'S    FIRST    SIGNAL 


369 


that  a  concavity  which  developed  in  the  allied  line  had 
brought  Gravina's  division  almost  parallel  with  Colling- 
wood's  approach.  But  if  this  were  so  the  larboard  line  of 
bearing  is  not  the  formation  he  would  have  required.  The 
truth  is,  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  concavity.     Colling- 


AB.  Nelson's  division  in  larboard  line  of  bearing. 

A'B'.  Collingwood's  division  in  larboard  line  of  bearing. 

CD  and  CD'.  The  two  divisions  hauled  into  line  of  battle. 

EF.  Combined  fleet  en  ligne  de  plus  prks. 

Note. — The  line  of  the  British  approach  is  taken  as  E.N.E. 
as  directed  by  Nelson's  first  signal. 


^l 


uV 


Coarsf,€ 


c 

/o 
'^  0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
a 


E 

I 

« 

I 

I 

I 

d 


DIAGEAM   TO   ILLUSTRATE   THE   INTENTION   OF   COLLINGWOOD  S 
SIGNAL  FOR   THE  LARBOARD  LINE  OF  BEARING 


wood  gave  the  order  nearly  two  hours  before  Villeneuve 
made  the  signal  which,  as  we  shall  see,  produced  the  mal- 
formation. 

Why,  then,  did  Collingwood  make  the  signal  ?  Its 
tactical  purpose,  as  laid  down  in  the  Signal  Book,  leaves 
little  room  for  doubt.     A  note  to  the  signification  explains 

*  2  A 


370  THE   BATTLE    OF   TRAFALGAR 

it  somewhat  obscurely  as  meaning  that  the  ships  were  "  to 
bear  from  each  other  on  the  point  of  the  compass  on  which 
they  would  sail,  keeping  a  point  from  the  wind,  if  formed  in 
a  line-ahead  on  the  larboard  tack."  This  survival  of  Howe's 
crabbed  style  is  unintelligible  until  we  know  that  by  "  keep- 
ing one  point  from  the  wind "  Avas  meant  one  point  from 
the  true  close-hauled  line,  that  is,  seven  points  from  the 
w^ind  instead  of  six,  which  was  the  true  close-hauled  line  or 
lig7ie  cle  plus  prds  of  the  French.  The  phrase  therefore  merely 
embodies  the  British  practice  of  keeping  a  point  in  hand  for 
contingencies.^  The  instruction  then  may  be  translated 
thus :  "  The  line  of  bearing  is  to  be  formed  in  such  a  way 
that  when  the  ships  haul  together  into  line  of  battle  their 
line  will  be  seven  points  from  the  wind  or  one  from  the 
true  close-hauled  line."  In  short,  it  was  the  ordinary  evolu- 
tion to  bring  a  column  from  the  approach  into  a  line  of 
battle  parallel  to  and  on  the  same  tack  with  the  ligne  de  plus 
pres  which  the  French  were  trying  to  form.^  The  explana- 
tion of  Collingwood's  conduct  is  that  he  believed  he  was 
doing  what  Nelson  would  naturally  expect  him  to  do,  in 
order  to  get  the  fleet  into  the  position  of  the  diagram,  and 
that  as  soon  as  his  own  manoeuvre  was  fairly  advanced, 
Nelson  would  commence  it  in  his  turn.  It  was  in  fact  the 
obvious  evolution  to  bring  the  two  divisions  into  echelon 
nearly  abreast  the  enemy's  centre,  as  the  Memorandum  dis- 
tinctly laid  down  for  the  windward  attack. 