


366  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

indeed  the  best  explanation  of  all  the  circumstances  that 
this  idea  was  at  first  uppermost  in  Nelson's  mind — to  fling 
his  fleet  upon  the  unformed  enemy  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment,  or  as  Collingwood  told  Pasley,  to  deliver  "  an 
impetuous  attack  in  two  distinct  bodies."  ^ 

Whether  or  not  this  was  actually  his  first  impulse,  it  is 
certain  it  did  not  last  long.  However  much  the  inversion 
of  the  enemy's  line  annoyed  him,  it  quickly  became  apparent 
he  was  adhering  to  the  principle  of  his  plan  of  attack.  So 
soon  as  he  realised  their  intention  to  head  to  the  northward 
he  again  made  the  signal  to  bear  up,  this  time  with  the 
compass  flag  "  East."  He  did  not,  however,  steer  that 
course,  but  as  the  Logs  of  the  leading  ships  show,  from  half 
a  point  to  a  point  north  of  east,  direct  for  the  enemy's 
centre.  It  was  just  what  the  Memorandum  provided,  and 
would  bring  the  whole  weight  of  his  attack  upon  their  new 
rear." 

But  before  proceeding  further,  it  is  necessary  to  clear 
the  expressions  "  centre  "  and  "  rear "  from  the  ambiguity 
which  has  been  so  fertile  in  error.  Owing  to  the  change  in 
the  allied  formation  much  confusion  arose  both  in  their 
own  and  the  British  reports  in  specifying  the  various  parts 
of  the  fleet.  When  Villeneuve  decided  to  invert  the  line, 
he  ordered  Gravina  to  form  the  squadron  of  observation  in 
the  rear  of  the  corps  de  hataille.  This,  the  main  body  of 
the  fleet  which  was  Villeneuve's  immediate  command,  con- 
sisted of  three  squadrons,  which  were  designated  "  Van," 
"  Centre,"  and  "  Rear."  The  new  disposition,  however,  upset 
the  old  designations.  Some  officers  in  their  reports  kept  to 
the  original  nomenclature,  and  used  "  Rear  "  as  meaning  the 
rear  of  the  corps  de  hataille ;  while  others  gave  it  up  and 
used  "  Rear "  to  designate  Gravina's  observation  squadron, 
which  was  now  the  true  rear  of  the  fleet.     So  also  with  the 

^  To  Pasley,  December  lOth  :  Nicolas,  vii.  241. 

^  Victory  records  the  change  of  course  thus  :  "  At  7.0  course  east-north- 
east. At  8.0  (till  noon),  east  by  north."  Neptune  has:  "At  7.0,  north-east 
by  east.  At  8.0  (till  noon),  cast  half-north."  Collingwood's  Journal  has  the 
signal:  "At  7.40  to  bear  up  east."  Jioyal  Sovereign's  Log  gives  her  course 
generally  as  '*  south  80  east."  Tonnant  (her  second)  "  east  by  south."  Con- 
queror (astern  of  Nepttine)  has  "east  half-south."  Confusion  has  arisen  as  to 
the  actual  course  of  the  approacli,  since  some  vessels  record  only  the  first 
compass  signal  and  some  only  the  second.  Ajax  is  the  only  ship  that  records 
both  correctly. — See  Jhst.  Appendix  F,  "Abstract  of  Signals." 