


THE    OPENING   SIGNALS  363 

that  they  bore  uj)  in  succession.^  Moreover,  under  Nelson's 
own  hand  we  have  exactly  what  he  intended.  In  the  last 
entry  in  his  Private  Diary  he  wrote,  "  At  daylight  saw 
the  enemy's  Combined  Fleet  from  east  to  east-south-east ; 
bore  away ;  made  signal  for  order  of  sailing."  There  can 
therefore  be  no  shadow  of  doubt  that  he  regarded  "  bearing 
away  "  as  a  preliminary  to  forming  the  order  of  sailing,  and 
that  he  meant  the  fleet  to  form  upon  him  as  he  bore  away 
east-north-east.^ 

Now  this  is  precisely  what  the  enemy  saw.  The  first 
impression  as  the  British  fleet  bore  up  in  the  distance 
was  that  it  was  forming  line-abreast  or  line  of  bearing 
or  groups  disposed  abreast.^  As  the  movement  went 
on,  however,  it  was  seen  to  be  dividing  into  two  groups 
or  "  pelotons,"  which  would  be  the  natural  effect  of  the 
various  ships  cutting  their  corners  to  get  into  the  Admirals' 
wake.  Finally  in  about  two  hours  it  was  evident  that 
these  two  groups  were  developing  into  two  columns  with 
the  heavy  ships  leading.* 

1  Masters'  Logs,  P.R.O.  This  Log  unfortunatel}^  was  not  printed  either  by 
Nicolas  or  in  the  Great  Sea  Fights.  Otherwise  so  careful  an  historian  as 
Admiral  Colomb  would  never  have  hazarded  his  unlucky  conjecture  that  the 
fleet  bore  up  together  {The  Battle  of  Trafalgar,  1905,  reprinted  from  the 
United  Service  Magazine).  Senhouse  also  is  perfectly  clear  on  the  point. 
"  The  British  fleet,"  he  says,  "  bore  up  in  succession  .  .  .  and  continued  in 
the  order  of  sailing  of  two  divisions  in  line-ahead  until  the  attack  "  [Mac- 
millan^s  Magazine,  vol.  Ixxxi.  422).  The  terra  "  in  succession  "  at  that  time  was 
used  not  only  for  movements  in  line-ahead,  but  also  for  movements  in  cruis- 
ing order — meaning  that  no  ship  was  to  tack  or  haul  upon  the  new  course  till 
the  ship  ahead  of  her  had  done  so.  It  was  a  device  to  prevent  confusion  and 
accident.     For  Nelson's  use  of  the  term,  &ee  ^lost,  p.  36.5. 

^  Nicolas,  vii.  137.  Collingwood  in  his  Journal  clearly  states  that  this 
is  what  happened.  "  6.30,  Oi'der  of  Sailing  in  two  columns.  .  .  .  Bore  up  .  .  . 
the  British  fleet  in  two  columns  bearing  down  on  them  "  {Great  Sea  Fights,  ii. 
201).  At  first  he  bore  up  south  80  east  presumably  to  open  out  the  correct 
distance  from  the  Victory  {Royal  Sovereign,  Captain's  Log).  See  also  Cap- 
tain Moorsom's  and  Captain  Harvey's  descriptions  and  the  hogspassim,  as  sum- 
marised by  Mr.  Newbolt,  Year  of  Trafalgar,  pp.  88-4.  "  Column  "  in  the  Signal 
Book  was  a  technical  equivalent  borrowed  from  the  French  for  "line-ahead." 
"  Line-ahead"  does  not  occur  at  all  in  the  signals  relating  to  order  of  sailing. 