

1  Clarke  and  M' Arthur,  ii.  cb.  xii.  p.  148.  Dr.  Beatty  says  Victory  signalled 
Tcmiraire  and  Leviathan  to  go  ahead. — Nicolas,  vii.  146.  Temeraire  (Master's 
Log)  records  at  0.36  a  signal,  No.  269,  for  Leviathan  to  take  station  astern  of 
Temeraire.     Ncxitune  was  evidently  lagging. 


THE    OLD    FRIENDS'   RIVALRY  375 

obvious  anxiety  to  keep  him  back  had  not  a  little  to  do 
with  his  determination  to  abandon  the  attempt  to  form 
even  a  south-west  line  of  bearing.  Without  his  shortening 
sail  it  could  not  be  done,  and  shorten  sail  he  would  not 
unless  Nelson  set  him  the  example,  or  gave  a  direct  order. 
Still  Nelson  would  not  do  either,  but  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
later  he  tried  again.  This  time  he  went  a  step  further  and 
actually  signalled  Mars  to  lead  the  lee  division.  In  the 
absence  of  the  Prince  it  was  her  proper  station  by  the  order 
of  battle,  and  no  hint  could  have  been  broader  for  Colling- 
wood  to  fall  back  astern  of  her.  But  this  attempt  was  even 
less  effective  than  the  last.  Collingwood,  it  is  clear,  had 
no  intention  of  getting  back  into  his  station  short  of  a 
direct  order,  which  hie  must  have  known  his  old  friend 
would  not  have  the  heart  to  give.  He  at  least  had  the 
justification  that  there  was  now  no  three-decker  but  his 
own  to  lead  his  line,  and  his  defiant  reply  was  to  set  all 
his  studding-sails.^  Then  Nelson  gave  it  up,  and  thence- 
forth there  was  little  chance  of  Temerairc  being  allowed  to 
obey  his  last  order. 

The  story  goes  that  at  this  time  Nelson  caught  sight  of 
some  one  resetting  one  of  his  studding-sails,  and  thinking  it 
was  being  taken  in  without  his  orders,  he  delivered  himself 
with  a  heat  that  seemed  beyond  the  occasion.  Away  to 
leeward  Collingwood,  with  his  division  in  an  irregular  bow- 
and-quarter  line  disposed  steeply  on  his  starboard  quarter, 
was  still  pressing  on  in  his  newly  coppered  ship  and  drawing 
gradually  more  and  more  ahead  of  his  second  astern.  It 
was  no  wonder,  then,  that  when  Blackwood  got  back  to  the 
Victory  he  found  Nelson  in  a  peppery  humour  doing  all  he 
could  to  increase  his  speed  and  prevent  T6meraire  carrying 
out  the  order  that  had  been  wrung  from  him.  But  for  his 
colleague's  disobedience  he  had  nothing  but  admiration. 
"  See,"  he  exclaimed  half-an-hour  later,  "  how  that  noble 
fellow  Collingwood  carries  his  ship  into  action ! " 

Meanwhile  the  situation  had  been  crystallizing.  It  was 
now  perfectly  evident  that,  far  from  running  away,  the 
enemy   were    defiantly   abiding   his   attack.      Welcome    as 

^  Lo(j  of  Royal  Sovcrcujn  :  "  At  11.0,  Set  studding  sails." 


^7^  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 