

^  All  the  reports  of  the  Alhed  Centre,  as  well  as  the  French  official 
"Abstract,"  agree  in  this.  Colonel  Desbriere,  however  {Trafalgar,  p.  208), 
thought  the  evidence  on  the  whole  shows  that  Nelson's  division  made  as  high 
as  the  vessel  at  the  head  of  the  allied  line,  and  then  filed  off  under  the  fire  of 
the  van  on  the  opposite  tack  and  at  half  gun-shot,  till  the  moment  he  at- 
tacked the  stern  of  the  Bucentaurc.  But  he  only  cites  the  reports  of  Intrepide 
and  SrApion,  and  neither  of  these,  if  read  in  the  light  of  Prigny's  warning  as 
to  squadronal  designations,  appears  to  support  his  view.  Scipion  says  Nelson's 
column  "  se  portait  sur  le  centre  de  I'avant-garde,"  by  which  may  well  be 
meant  the  centre  of  the  van  half  of  the  line,  that  is,  just  ahead  of  the 
.S'.  Trinidad.  Intrepide  says  no  more  than  that  Nelson  "  manoeuvrait  pour 
couper  en  arriere  du  Bucentaurc.'"  Dumanoir,  like  the  Scipion,  says  he  made 
"sur  le  centre  de  notre  avant-garde,"  and  refers  to  a  plan  which  shows  the 
Victory  steering  to  cut  the  line  ahead  of  S.  Trinidad.  Of  Nelson's  alleged  feint 
on  the  van  of  the  line  there  is  really  no  evidence  whatever  except  that  of 
Codrington.     S>eepost,  p.  381. 


38o  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

Nelson's  main  anxiety  at  this  time  seems  to  have  been  to 
ascertain  his  position.  "  Although,"  says  James,  "  every 
glass  on  board  the  Victorij  was  put  in  requisition  to  discover 
the  flag  of  the  French  Commander-in-chief,  all  the  answers 
to  Nelson's  repeated  questions  on  the  subject  ended  in  dis- 
appointment." ^  James  must  have  had  this  from  an  eye- 
witness, and  it  affords  a  perfectly  simple  explanation  of  why 
Nelson  made  for  the  Scmtisima  Trinidad.  He  was  then 
under  the  belief  that  Decres  had  come  to  take  the  chief 
command  over  Villeneuve's  head,  and  it  was  natural  to  seek 
him  in  the  largest  ship  in  the  fleet  which  was  also  a  new 
comer." 

A  different  explanation,  however,  related  to  his  function 
of  containing  the  van,  has  come  of  late  years  to  confuse  our 
appreciation  of  Nelson's  tactics.  Because  he  made  for  a 
point  higher  up  the  line  than  the  one  he  eventually 
attacked,  it  is  said  he  was  making  a  feint  on  the  van  in 
order  to  hold  it  inactive.  The  sole  contemporary  evidence 
of  this  is  an  entry  in  the  Master's  Log  of  Codrington's  ship 
the  Orion.  "  The  Victory,  after  making  a  feint  of  attacking 
the  van,  hauled  to  starboard  to  reach  the  centre."  This  in 
itself  contains  no  actual  assertion  that  Nelson  altered  his 
course  to  port  before  turning  to  starboard.  But  when 
questioned  on  the  point  by  Nicolas  in  his  old  age  Cod- 
rington  said,  "  He  was  under  the  impression  that  he  was 
expressly  instructed  by  Nelson  that  he  himself  would  pro- 