

Nelson,  however,  had  a  subtler  idea,  and  made  no  cor- 
responding move.  Still,  although,  as  we  shall  see,  he  did 
not  yet  consider  Collingwood  in  full  control  of  his  division, 
he  must  have  seen  no  harm  in  what  his  second  was  doing. 
At  any  rate  he  raised  no  objection,  and  permitted  the  evolu- 

^  See  Signals  and  Instructions  {Navy  Records  Society),  p.  77,  and  Signal 
Bool,  1799,  Instruction  xv.  p.  120. 

2  The  instruction  attached  to  the  signal  [Signal  Booh,  1799,  p.  149, 
Instruction  vii.)  provides  that  "the  ships  are  to  place  themselves  in  such 
a  manner  that  if  thej  haul  to  the  wind  together  on  the  tack  for  which  the 
line  of  bearing  is  formed,  they  would  immediately  form  line  on  that  tack. 
To  do  this  every  ship  must  bring  the  ship  which  would  be  her  second  ahead, 
if  the  line  of  battle  were  formed,  to  bear  on  that  point  of  the  compass  on 
which  the  fleet  would  sail,  viz.  on  that  point  of  the  compass  which  is  seven 
points  from  the  direction  of  the  wind,  or  six  points,  if  the  signal  is  made  to 
keep  close  to  the  wind. 


COLLINGWOOD'S    LATER    SIGNAL  371 

tion  to  continue  as  best  it  could.  But  it  is  to  bo  observed 
that  by  his  conduct  ho  made  it  practically  impossible  for  it 
to  be  carried  out.  It  is  obvious  that  when  a  fleet  is  going 
large  in  line-ahead,  the  close-hauled  line  of  bearing  cannot 
be  formed  unless  the  leading  ships  shorten  sail.  Nelson 
did  not  shorten  sail  and  Collingwood,  Avho  was  to  com- 
mence the  attack,  had  to  conform  and  keep  his  speed.  But, 
although  the  line  of  bearing  was  thus  put  beyond  his  reach, 
a  line  of  bearing  was  still  possible.  Collingwood's  division 
had  not  had  time  to  get  into  line-ahead  astern  of  him,  and 
most  of  the  rear  ships  were  to  starboard  of  his  wake  and 
already  partly  in  position  for  a  bow-and-quarter  line. 
After  about  half-an-hour  Collingwood  seems  to  have  recog- 
nised the  situation.  His  chief  continued  to  hold  on  without 
any  sign  of  deploying  or  shortening  sail,  and  either  because 
Nelson  did  not  conform  or  because  he  saw  the  line  of  bear- 
ing parallel  to  the  enemy  was  impossible,  he  abandoned 
it  for  a  bow-and-quarter  line  such  as  he  could  hope  to 
achieve. 

Accordingly  he  signalled  to  Belleisle,  whom  he  had  just 
ordered  to  take  station  astern  of  him,  since  his  true  second 
Tonnant  could  not  keep  up,  to  take  station  to  the  south- 
Avest  of  him,  as  though  he  intended  to  substitute  a  south- 
west bow-and-quarter  line  for  the  larboard  line  of  bearing. 
Five  minutes  later  he  signalled  to  the  Revenge,  the  fastest 
ship  about  his  centre,  to  keep  a  line  of  bearing  from  him ; 
but  the  point  on  which  she  was  to  bear  is  not  stated.  We 
might  assume  it  was  south-west  also,  were  it  not  that  im- 
mediately afterwards  he  made  a  signal  to  the  Belleisle  and 
also  to  the  Achille,  a  ship  midway  between  her  and  the 
Revenge,  to  alter  course  one  point  to  starboard  together. 
The  signification  of  the  signal  was,  "Alter  course  together 
one  point  to  starboard  or  to  the  course  pointed  out  by 
compass  signal,  the  ships  preserving  their  relative  bearing 
from  each  other ; "  and  the  instruction  attached  provides 
that  "  when  a  line  of  bearing  has  been  formed  the  ships  are 
to  preserve  that  relative  bearing  from  each  other  whenever 
they  are  directed  to  alter  course  together."  ^     Now,  no  com- 