

^  Signal  81,  and  Instruction  viii.  p.  150. 


372  THE    BATTLE    OF   TRAFALGAR 

pass  signal  was  made,  nor  was  it  possible  the  line  of  bearing 
had  been  formed  in  the  seven  minutes  that  had  elapsed 
since  the  previous  signal.  On  the  evidence  of  the  signals, 
therefore,  the  only  conclusion  is  that  CoUingwood  had  seen 
that  even  a  south-west  line  of  bearing  was  impossible  without 
his  shortening  sail,  that  he  had  consequently  overridden  his 
south-west  signal  by  that  for  one  point  to  starboard,  and 
had  found  himself  forced  to  be  content  with  a  line  of  bear- 
ing only  one  point  from  the  line-ahead. 

This  conclusion  has  all  the  more  weight  since  it  is  the 
only  way  of  reconciling  his  various  signals  for  line  of 
bearing  with  the  fact  that  he  himself,  in  his  official  de- 
spatch and  in  his  tactical  explanation  to  his  friend  Pasley, 
says  he  attacked  in  column.  Of  a  Hne  of  bearing  he  says 
not  a  word  in  either  place.  An  irregular  ill-formed  bow- 
and-quarter  line  one  point  from  the  line-ahead  was  of 
course  in  the  circumstances  tactically  indistinguishable 
from  a  column,  and  this  is  why  Collingwood's  own  official 
statement  that  the  fleet  attacked  in  two  columns  is  en- 
dorsed by  Harvey  and  Senhouse,  as  well  as  by  Moorsom 
himself,  who  was  captain  of  the  Revenge,  and  indeed  by 
every  eye-witness  and  contemporary  writer  who  touched 
the  question. 

It  is  of  course  possible,  by  selecting  fragmentary  passages 
from  the  ill-kept  Logs  and  Journals  and  by  calculations 
based  on  the  various  times  at  which  ships  alleged  they 
engaged,  to  infer  that  possibly  a  real  line  of  bearing  was 
formed ;  but  the  rigour  of  historical  science  absolutely 
forbids  such  fragile  web-spinning  to  obscure  a  question 
which  is  illumined  by  direct  and  unimpeachable  evidence 
to  the  contrary.  Not  only  have  we  the  categorical  positive 
of  the  signals  and  of  the  very  best  authorities  present,  but 
there  is  the  irrefutable  negative  that  in  all  the  mass  of 
contemporary  description  there  is  absolute  silence  as  to  the 
lee  line  having  approached  in  the  manner  suggested.  For 
historical  scholars  such  silence  on  a  matter  of  the  highest 
importance,  even  if  it  stood  alone,  would  be  conclusive. 
But  it  does  not  stand  alone,  and  the  weight  of  direct 
evidence  behind  it  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  that,  however 


ENEMY   AWAIT   THE    ATTACK  373 

anxious  Collingwood  may  have  been  to  form  a  line  of  bear- 
ing, he  found  that,  as  Nelson  held  on  as  he  was,  it  was 
perhaps  contrary  to  his  wish  and  certainly  impossible  to 
achieve. 

What  Nelson  thought  of  it  all  is  difficult  to  fathom. 
His  mind  at  this  time  is  impenetrable.  He  was  still 
steering  for  just  ahead  of  the  centre  under  a  press  of  sail 
with  his  division  forming  in  his  wake  as  best  it  could,  as 
though  he  was  still  bent  on  delivering  Hawke's  attack  in 
chase  to  prevent  the  enemy  escaping.^  "  His  great  anxiety," 
wrote  Moorsom,  "  seemed  to  be  to  get  to  leeward  of  them, 
lest  they  should  make  off  into  Cadiz  before  he  could  get 
near."  But  as  he  advanced  it  became  evident  that  Ville- 
neuve  did  not  mean  to  avoid  him.  To  his  surprise  the 
Combined  Fleet,  after  wearing,  had  boldly  hove-to  to  form 
their  line  of  battle  and  await  his  attack.-^  For  such  a 
condition  of  affairs  Hawke's  attack  was  singularly  ill- 
adapted,  unless  he  could  get  up  before  their  battle  order 
was  complete.  The  bold  attitude  of  the  enemy  certainly 
upset  Nelson  s  calculations.  "  About  ten  o'clock,"  says 
Captain  Blackwood,  "  Lord  Nelson's  anxiety  to  close  with 