

Nor  does  this  conclusion  rest  on  negative  evidence 
alone.  We  have  the  direct  testimony  of  Blackwood  that 
what  Nelson  had  in  his  mind  at  this  time  was  not  a  feint 
on  the  van  but  a  real  attack,  and  that  this  attack  involved 
if  anything  a  preliminary  turn  to  starboard  and  not  to 
port.  In  fact  it  was  well  before  the  time  of  Codrington's 
alleged  feint  that  Nelson  made  up  his  mind  what  he  was 
going  to  do,  and  it  was  one  of  the  curiosities  of  the  oft- 
told  story  that  this  remarkable  decision  has  been  almost 
ignored.  Yet  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  it.  The  Eiiry- 
alus  records  that  at  11.40  she  repeated  a  telegraph  message 
from  Nelson  to  this  effect :  "  I  intend  to  push  or  go 
through  the  end  of  the  enemy's  line  to  prevent  them  from 

^  See  Nicolas,  vii.  154,  note.  The  only  other  mention  of  Nelson's  altering^ 
his  course  is  when  he  altered  it  to  starboard,  e.g.  Thunderer's  Log :  "  Observed 
the  Victory  alter  her  course  and  lead  .  .  .  towards  the  enemy's  centre." — Ihid., 
202,  note. 


382  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

getting  into  Cadiz."  '  It  is  obviously  not  entered  verbatim. 
James,  who  also  knew  of  it,  and  was  told  it  was  made  to 
Collingwood,  gives  it  thus :  ''  I  intend  to  pass  through  the 
van  of  the  enemy's  line  to  prevent  him  from  getting  into 
Cadiz."  ^  Such  a  signal  is  certainly  startling.  No  other 
ship  records  it,  and  yet  it  is  impossible  to  believe  it  was 
not  made  when  it  appears  in  the  Log  of  the  senior  repeating 
frigate.  Whatever  its  actual  words,  it  can  only  have  meant 
that  Nelson  had  abandoned  his  plan  of  attack  on  the  rear 
half  of  the  enemy  in  favour  of  that  recommended  by  Howe 
and  Kempenfelt  for  engaging  a  numerically  superior  fleet.'^ 
It  is  possible  that  the  signal  which  Villeneuve  had  just 
made  to  his  van  to  make  more  sail  had  renewed  Nelson's 
abiding  apprehension  that  his  enemy  meant  to  avoid  a 
decisive  action  by  slipping  back  into  Cadiz.  To  thwart  the 
movement  he  would  attack  the  van,  as  he  had  told  Colling- 
wood to  attack  the  rear,  and  would  leave  the  centre — on 
Torrington's  plan — unengaged. 

Such  a  sudden  and  complete  variation  of  his  plan — 
though  characteristic  enough  of  Nelson's  genius  and  ex- 
pressly foreshadowed  by  the  Memorandum — is  difficult 
enough  to  believe  of  itself.  But  there  is  the  further 
objection  that  it  involved  the  abandonment  of  another 
cardinal  point  of  his  plan.  The  new  attack  sacrificed 
entirely  the  idea  of  enveloping  the  Commander-in-chief. 
This  consideration,  however,  so  far  from  throwing  doubt 
on  the  signal  which  Euryahis  records,  goes  far  to  corro- 
borate it.  For  it  so  happens  that  Nelson  had  at  the 
moment  orood  reason  for  not  seeking:  the  Commander-in- 
chief  in  the  centre.  Collingwood  had  just  telegraphed  to 
him    "  that    the    enemy's    chief   appears    to    command    in 