


^  Victory's  Log  says  :  "  Still  standing  for  the  enemy's  van,"  but  as  he  is 
recorded  to  have  headed  for  the  .14th  ship,  and  he  never  altered  his  course 
from  E.  Vjy  N.,  it  is  clear  "  van  "  here  means  "  the  van  half  of  the  fleet." 

2  In  view  of  the  attempts  to  show  Nelson's  approach  could  not  have  been 
vertical  owing  to  the  supposed  movement  of  the  enemy  to  the  northward, 
the  point  that  they  were  motionless  is  very  important.  The  evidence  is  con- 
clusive from  both  sides.  From  the  Logs  in  the  Great  Sea  Fights  we  have : 
"A.M.  The  enemy  forming  the  line  and  waiting  our  attack"  [Britannia, 
p.  211).  "A.M.  Enemy's  fleet  lying-to  and  forming  the  line"  [Sjiartiate, 
p.  2t)2,  two  entries).  "At  12.10  the  enemy's  fleet  then  ahead,  lying-to" 
[Colossus,  p.  265).  "At  noon  .  .  .  the  combined  fleet  lying-to"  [Entre- 
p7-enant,  p.  320).  Walker  of  the  Bellerophon  says  :  "  While  we  were  bearing 
down  on  them  they  formed  line  and  waited  for  us  with  great  intrepidity  " 
[Ibid.,  p.  323).  Senhouse  says  they  were  "  lying  with  their  main-top  sails  to 
the  mast  and  consequently  could  not  keep  accurate  station"  [MacvLiUan's 
Magazine,  vol.  Ixxxi.  p.  421).  From  the  French  accounts  it  is  clear  the  only 
motion  was  what  was  necessary  for  forming  the  line.  "  Les  vaisseaux  de 
I'arriere-garde  ont  ete  obliges  de  se  tenir  en  panne  pendant  tres  longtemps  " 
[Vrigny's  Abstract,  Desbriere,  p.  285).  In  the  Corps  de  Batailie  he  says  it  was 
the  same,  "  d'autres  etaient  en  panne  au  moment  oti  le  combat  a  commence  " 
[Ibid.,  p.  186,  and  see  the  Reports  he  quotes).  The  Bucentaurc  herself  was 
hove-to  [Ibid.,  p.  187).  We  have  also  the  fact  that  the  Victory  steered  all 
through  the  approach  for  the  14th  ship  from  the  van  and  records  no  change 
in  her  course  till  the  last  moment.  As  other  ships  do  record  their  changes 
of  course  from  hour  to  hour,  the  presumption  is  that  the  Victory  did  not 
change. 


374  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

the  cnciny  became  very  iipparent."  He  must  have  been 
in  a  high  state  of  nervous  tension,  for  he  kept  saying  to 
Blackwood  that  they  put  a  good  face  on  it,  but  always 
added  quickly,  "  I'll  give  them  such  a  dressing  as  they 
never  had  before."  Still  he  made  no  sign  of  deploying  in 
conformity  with  Collingwood's  signal,  but  he  did  begin 
interfering  with  his  colleague's  line,  as  though  he  did  not 
yet  regard  him  as  in  charge  of  it,  and  a  passage  of  some 
humour  took  place  between  the  two  old  friends. 

Both  of  them,  in  breach  of  the  established  order  of 
battle,  were  still  leading  their  divisions.  Neither  showed 
any  inclination  to  get  back  into  his  proper  station,  and 
Nelson's  officers,  in  extreme  anxiety  for  his  Hfe,  were  worry- 
ing about  it.  Blackwood  at  last  undertook  to  approach 
him,  and  after  trying  in  vain  to  persuade  him  to  direct  the 
battle  from  the  Uuryalus,  he  begged  him  to  let  the  three 
ships  astern — Temeraire,  Neptune,  and  Leviathan — go  ahead 
of  the  Vidorij.  With  difficulty  Blackwood  got  permission 
to  carry  the  order  to  the  Temeraire  to  pass  if  she  could,  and 
the  necessary  signals  were  made.-^  But  if  Nelson  consented 
to  get  into  his  proper  station,  "  Coll  "  must  do  the  same. 
The  Prince,  which  should  have  been  leading  the  lee  line,  was 
falling  far  astern.  There  was  no  chance  of  her  ever  getting 
into  her  station,  and  Collingwood  was  seen  coolly  pushing 
on  right  ahead  of  his  division,  regardless  of  support.  Such 
a  challenge  was  more  than  Nelson's  fighting  instinct  could 
endure.  But  even  so  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  use  his 
authority  by  a  direct  order.  So  like  any  schoolboy  he 
began  to  try  to  jockey  him  out  of  the  lead.  Collingwood 
had  just  made  the  signal  for  Belleisle  to  take  Tonnant's  place, 
but  without  regarding  it  Nelson  signalled  the  Mars,  Avhich 
had  been  one  of  the  connecting  ships  and  was  now  coming 
up  fast,  to  take  station  astern  of  the  Royal  Sovereign,  with 
what  intention  soon  appeared.  Collingwood  paid  no  regard. 
On  the  contrary  it  was  now  he  made  his  final  signal  for  a 
point  to  starboard  together,  and  it  is  possible  that  Nelson's 