


AB.  Ligne  de  plus  pres  (6  points 

from  the  wind)  with  the  wind 
at  W.N.  W. 

AC.  The  same  with  wind  at  W. 

DD.  Gravina's  squadron  trying  to 
form  in  Villeneuve's  wake. 

EE'.  Lines  of  Nelson's  and  Colling- 
wood's  approach. 

Note.— The  ligne  de  jjhis  pres  AB  had 
not  been  correctly  formed  after 
the  fleet  wore.  The  mean 
alignment  was  about  N.N.E. 
and  S.S.W. 


:^55«^ 


:j^ 


DIAGRAM   TO   SHOW  HOW   THE  ALLIED   LINE   BECAME  CONVEX 
IN   TRYING   TO   RE-FORM   FOR   THE  SHIFT   OP   WIND 

British  lines  were  approaching  on  a  mean  course  about 
east,  their  general  direction  to  all  tactical  intent  was 
perpendicular  to  the  central  portion  of  the  enemy  at  which 
they  were  aiming. 

For  Nelson  this  fortuitous  malformation  of  the  enemy's 
line  was  very  opportune.  It  went  far  to  remove  the  main 
difficulties  of  carrying  out    the  fundamental  ideas   of  the 


1  Neptune  gives  it  W.  by  S.,  Thunderer  (at  12.15)  S.W.  by  S. 


378  THE   BATTLE    OF   TRAFALGAR 

intended  attack.  But  he  cannot  have  foreseen  it,  for  it 
arose  from  a  chance  shift  of  wind.  Nor  can  it  have 
influenced  him  in  the  first  hours  of  his  approach.  The 
signal  which  produced  it  was  not  made  by  Villeneuve  till 
ten  o'clock,  and  even  when  the  dislocation  commenced 
Nelson  was  too  far  away  to  be  able  to  realise  its  effect  at 
once.  By  eleven  o'clock,  however,  after  the  movement  had 
been  in  progress  an  hour,  it  must  have  become  pronounced, 
and  by  that  time  Nelson  was  not  more  than  three  miles 
from  the  enemy's  centre.^  We  cannot  therefore  place  his 
recognition  of  the  crescent  formation  later  than  that  hour 
nor  much  before.  In  any  case  it  is  impossible  to  trace  any 
influence  it  had  on  the  British  attack.  There  were  no 
fresh  signals  and  no  alteration  of  course.  Both  Nelson 
and  ColUngwood  held  on  as  they  were  with  every  stitch  of 
canvas  set,  and  making  with  their  utmost  efl'ort  between 
two  and  three  knots.^ 

Collingwood's  division  continued  to  struggle  for  the 
formation  he  had  last  signalled,  but  certainly  without 
undue  attention  to  accurate  stations.  Indeed,  in  the  un- 
formed rear  at  least  his  captains  interpreted  their  chiefs 
succession  of  signals  with  characteristic  freedom  as  an  inti- 
mation that  he  wished  them  to  get  into  action  as  quickly 
and  simultaneously  as  possible.  It  was  the  true  spirit  of 
the  British  service  in  its  later  manifestations,  and  as 
Codrington  frankly  says,  "  We  all  scrambled  into  battle  as 
soon  as  we  could."  ^     As  for  Nelson's  division,  it  continued 

^  Lieutenant  G.  L.  Browne  of  the  Victory  wrote  :  "  At  11.0  we  were  about 
three  miles  from  the  enemy. — Great  Sea  Fights,  ii.  197, 