

2  The  fastest  ships  were  doing  a  little  over  three  knots,  the  slower  ones 
about  two.  Prince,  a  very  slow  ship,  gives  her  speed  at  two  knots  excejjt 
between  9.0  and  10.0,  when  it  was  only  one.  Neptune,  who  at  first  had  been 
doing  over  three,  dropped  to  1*4  after  9.0,  and  so  continued.  Minotaur,  who 
had  been  doing  1*4,  increased  to  2  at  9.0.  Spartiate,  her  second,  did  2 
throughout.  Dreadnought,  another  slow  three-decker,  did  only  one  knot  till 
10.0,  when  she  increased  up  to  2  at  noon.  Tonnant  did  2  and  a  little  over,  and 
2 "4  as  she  came  into  action.  Revenge,  a  fast  ship,  increased  from  about  1^  to 
2*4  and  3*4  as  she  came  into  action.  Defence,  a  connecting  ship,  who  had  to 
run  down  from  the  northward  on  a  wind,  only  did  one.  Conqueror  did  2 
throughout.  Swiftsure  at  11.0  increased  from  2  to  3.  Victory  and  Royal 
Sovereign  apparently  were  doing  3  at  the  finish. 

^  Life  of  Codrington,  vol.  ii.  p.  60.  Similarly  Defiance  enters  in  her  Log 
simply  "  Standing  for  the  enemy's  fleet,"  without  the  usual  specification  of 
the  actual  course. 


END    OF   THE    APPROACH  379 

to  trail  after  him,  swarming  roughly  into  line  as  best  it 
could. ^  No  check  was  made.  As  they  approached  the 
fire  zone,  where  the  utmost  impetus  was  vital,  the  speed 
was  even  increased.  CoUingwood  signalled  for  more  sail, 
and  Nelson  promptly  responded  still  more  emphatically 
with  "  Make  all  sail  possible  with  safety  to  the  masts." 
Laggards  were  left  far  behind,  and  the  two  old  friends  in 
exultant  rivalry  seemed  bent  on  nothing  but  to  see  who 
could  be  first  into  the  furnace  that  awaited  them. 

Nelson  apparently  had  not  yet  made  up  his  mind 
exactly  what  he  was  going  to  do,  and  probably,  as  the 
Memorandum  suggests,  did  not  intend  to  decide  till  he  saw 
what  the  situation  called  for  at  the  last  moment.  He  was 
still  steering  steadily  for  the  centre  just  ahead  of  the  San- 
tisima  Trinidad,  the  largest  ship  in  the  allied  fleet."  The 
functions  he  had  assigned  himself,  it  will  be  remembered, 
were  not  only  to  contain  the  van  but  also  to  envelop  the 
Commander-in-chief.  But  as  yet  the  Commander-in-chief 
could    not    be    found.     He    had    not   shown    his   flag  and 

^  Some  of  the  ships  give  their  courses  in  detail.  Of  the  lee  division, 
Tonnani's  was  E.  by  S.  all  the  time.  Revenge,  after  her  signal  was  made, 
shifted  from  E.  by  N.  to  E.,  and  did  not  change  again.  Swiftsurcs  course 
was  at  7.0  N.E. ;  at  8,  N.E.  by  E.  ;  at  10.0,  E.N.E.,  and  at  11.0,  after  Colling- 
wood's  last  signal,  E.S.E.  Defence  came  down  from  the  northward  S.S.W., 
S.  by  W.,  and  at  lO.O  was  going  S.S.E.  again.  Pruwc  did,  E.,  E,  byN.,  E.N.E., 
and  at  10.0  turned  E.  Dreadnow/ht  did,  at  7.0  E.NE. ;  at  8.0  E.  by  N.,  and 
at  10.0  shifted  to  E.  by  S.;^  S.,  and  kept  it  till  she  came  into  action.  The 
ill-kept  Log  of  the  Royal  Sovereign  gives  her  course  as  S.  80  E.  throughout.  In 
Nelson's  division  Temeraire  only  gives  N.  34  E.  Neptune,  at  7.0  N.E.  by  E., 
and,  after  8.0,  E.  |  N. ;  Conqueror,  E.|  S.  till  noon  ;  Orion,  at  7.0  E.  by  N. ;  at  8.0, 
E.;  at  9.0,  E.  by  S".,  then  for  two  hours  E.  by  S.|  S.,  and  at  noon  E.S.E.  Spartiatc 
did,  N.E.  by  E.  till  noon,  and  Minotaur  must  have  done  the  same.  Britannia 
went  E.  till  noon,  and  then  turned  E.S.E. 