

Villeneuve's  attitude  was,  it  had  its  drawbacks.  It  brought 
the  shoals  of  Trafalgar  under  his  lee,  so  that  it  would  be 
difficult  to  push  home  the  attack,  and  it  opened  Cadiz  as  a 
point  of  retreat.  On  the  other  hand  it  greatly  facilitated 
the  plan  of  attack  which  Nelson  had  in  mind.  The  need 
to  hurry  was  obviously  not  so  great  as  he  had  supposed, 
and  it  might  have  been  thought  that  now  if  ever  he  would 
attempt  to  deploy  and  bring  about  the  situation  which  the 
diagram  in  the  Memorandum  had  prescribed.  There  was, 
however,  a  difficulty  about  it  which  did  not  exist  in 
Collingwood's  case.  Most  of  Nelson's  division  were  coming 
into  line  from  his  larboard  quarter,^  so  that  they  were 
very  badly  placed  for  forming  a  line  of  bearing  such  as 
CoUingwood  had  been  attempting.  It  would  take  much 
longer,  and  moreover,  Nelson  had  conceived  a  subtler  and 
more  effective  way  of  performing  the  function  that  he  had 
set  himself  in  the  Memorandum.  He  was  to  contain  the 
van,  and,  as  we  shall  see,  his  infallible  eye  for  a  situation 
told  him  that  by  far  the  best  way  of  concealing  his  intention 
from  the  enemy  and  holding  them  in  uncertainty  was  to 
keep  on  as  he  was  in  line-ahead.  This  at  least  is  what  he 
did,  and  accordingly,  about  this  time,  Villeneuve  began 
to  see  that  the  two  British  pelotons  were  developing  into 
two  lines  ahead,  directed,  the  one  about  his  own  flagship, 
the  other  at  his  own  rear  squadron,  which,  since  Gravina 
was  forming  the  true  rear,  was  now  in  fact  part  of  the 
centre."^ 

The  relative  alignment  of  the  two  fleets  was  now 
becoming  what  it  remained  till  the  moment  of  impact. 
The  two  British  lines,  owing  to  the  manner  in  which  they 
were  being  formed,  had  the  appearance  of  converging  slightly 
upon  the  enemy's  centre,  their  mean  direction  being  now 
about  east.  The  extremities  of  the  allied  fleet  bore  from 
each  other  roughly  about  north-north-east  and  south-south- 
west, with  an  increasing  sag  to  leeward.     The  wind  had 

^  All  the  French  plans  show  this,  and  it  is  confirmed  by  such  ships  of 
Nelson's  division  as  give  their  courses,  c.7.  Orion  ait  7.0,  E.  by  N.  ;  8.0,  E.  ;  9.0, 
E.  by  S.  ;  10-11,  E.  by  S.|  S. ;  12.0  E.S.E.     See  also  p.  379  note. 

-  Villeneuve  himself  says  at  9.0.  The  official  abstract  puts  it  as  late 
as  11.0. 


ENEMY'S   SAG   TO    LEEWARD 


377 


settled  at  about  west,  varying  sometimes  a  little  north  of 
it,  and  sometimes  south,^  and  as  the  van  ship  hauled  up  to 
it,  and  her  successors  edged  into  her  wake,  the  general 
alignment  of  the  van  half  of  the  line  was  about  north  and 
south,  but  a  little  west  of  north  in  the  extreme  van  as  it  is 
shown  in  all  the  French  official  plans.  The  rest  of  the  fleet 
would  have  had  an  alignment  curving  gradually  from  the 
centre  to  almost  south-west  in  the  extreme  rear.     As  the 