

1  Vol.  iii.  397. 

-  ISec  Blackwood  to  his  wife :  Nicolas,  vii.  226.  "  Would  to  God  he  had 
lived  to  see  his  prizes  and  the  Admirals  he  had  taken — three  in  all — amongst 
them  the  French  Commander-in-chief,  who,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  is  Villeneuve 
and  not  Decres."  An  unpublished  letter  of  Nelson's  chaplain,  Scott,  confirms 
his  preoccupation  with  the  capture  of  the  Commander-in-chief.  ' '  It  was  what 
he  particularly  aimed  at,"  he  says  ;  but  adds,  "  As,  however,  the  Frenchman 
never  hoisted  his  flag  it  was  not  yet  known  [i.e.  when  Nelson  died]  that  the 
Admiral  was  taken."  In  this  Scott  was  certainly  mistaken.  "  I  never  went," 
he  says,  "  higher  than  the  middle  deck.  ...  I  was  quartered  below  with  the 
Surgeon."  He  must,  then,  have  gone  to  his  station  before  Villeneuve  showed 
his  flag.  There  can  be  no  doubt  it  was  shown,  as  the  French  and  Spanish  re- 
ports agree,  or  that  it  was  seen  by  Nelson  ;  for  Spartiatc,  the  last  ship  in  the 
line,  records :  "  12.59,  F/'ctory  bearing  down  between  a  Spanish  four-decker 
and  a  French  two-decker  with  an  Admiral's  flag  at  the  main  "  {Captains'  Logs, 
P.R.O.).  In  her  Master's  Journal  is  the  note:  "  The  watch,  the  minutes  of 
the  action  was  taken  by,  appears  to  have  been  34  minutes  too  fast."  It  was 
half-an-hour  faster  still  by  Victory's  time,  which  makes  Spartiatc' s  12.59  equal 
Victory's  1 1.55. 


\ 


ALLEGED    FEINT    ON   THE   VAN  381 

bably  make  a  feint  of  attacking  the  van  "  (instead  of  using 
the  Advance  Squadron  for  that  purpose,  as  he  had  intended 
originally).  "  I  have  no  doubt,"  he  added,  "  of  the  Victory 
having  hauled  out  to  port  for  a  short  space."  He  also  said 
he  remembered  calling  his  First  Lieutenant's  attention  to  it 
at  the  time,  which  would  account  for  the  isolated  entry  in 
Orion's  Log.  Then,  after  giving  some  corroborative  details 
about  Nelson's  studding-sails,  he  went  on  to  say  that  it 
was  this  movement  to  port  which  occasioned  the  Victory  to 
suffer  so  severely  from  the  raking  fire  of  several  ships  ahead 
of  the  centre.  Evidently  then  his  memory  was  failing  him, 
for  the  ships  that  raked  Nelson  were  those  for  which  he 
had  been  steering  all  along  and  which  he  eventually 
attacked.^  No  one  who  was  at  Nelson's  side  knew  anything 
of  such  a  manoeuvre.  Besides  his  own  staff,  he  had  three 
frigate  captains  on  his  quarterdeck,  and  not  one  of  them 
says  a  word  about  it.  Nor  does  it  appear  from  any  of  the 
enemy's  reports.  Like  the  original  entry  in  the  Orion's  Log 
they  duly  record  the  turn  to  starboard,  but  not  the  alleged 
one  to  port.  It  is  impossible  indeed  to  believe  it  ever  took 
place,  and  till  better  evidence  is  forthcoming  it  must  be 
dismissed  as  a  by-product  of  Codrington's  enthusiastic 
admiration  of  his  chief. 