


COLLINGWOOD'S   ATTACK  387 

on  into  action  made  it  impossible  for  Dumanoir  to  come 
down  directly  without  submitting  himself  to  a  crossing  of 
the  T. 

In  Collingwood's  case  the  risk  and  daring  of  the  attack 
Avas  even  greater  than  with  Nelson.  He  had  no  mass  of 
three-deckers  in  his  van,  and  the  speed  of  his  ship  and  the 
steepness  of  his  line  of  bearing  left  him  to  suffer  the  first 
shock  with  even  less  support  than  his  chief  received.  Not 
content,  moreover,  with  the  dozen  ships  which  Nelson  had 
allotted  to  his  division,  he  took  more  than  half  the  original 
allied  rear  as  well  as  Gravina's  advanced  squadron — sixteen 
ships  in  all.  Three  of  them  were  so  far  to  leeward  as  to  be 
out  of  the  line,  and  all  were  so  much  crowded  that  the 
twelfth  ship  was  not  easy  to  distinguish.  Somewhere  about 
the  right  place  was  a  Spanish  three-decker,  flying  a  Vice- 
Admiral's  flag,  and  under  such  temptation  a  man  of  Colling- 
wood's spirit  could  scarcely  be  expected  to  count  with 
scrupulous  exactness.  The  result  was  that  he  too  struck 
the  actual  centre  where  the  enemy's  formation  was  practi- 
cally at  right  angles  to  his  line  of  advance.  "  About  noon," 
he  says,  ''the  Royal  Sovereign  opened  a  fire  on  the  12th, 
13  th,  14th,  and  15  th  ships  from  the  enemy's  rear  and 
stood  on  with  all  sail  to  break  the  enemy's  line.  A  quarter 
past  twelve  altered  course  to  port ; "  that  is,  at  the  last 
moment  he  changed  his  direction  higher  up  the  line  and 
ran  through  under  the  stern  of  the  Spanish  Vice-flagship 
Santa  Anna} 

For  all  his  prompt  attempt  to  deploy  he  was  unsup- 
ported for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  So  far  from  establishing  a 
concentration  on  the  enemy's  rear,  he  himself  was  exposed 
to  the  concentrated  lire  of  four  powerful  ships,  but  in  the 
exhilaration  of  having  beaten  his  chief  in  the  wild  race  he 
could  only  cry  to  his  flag  captain,  "  What  would  Nelson 
give  to  be  here  ! "  He  was  first  into  action  and  the  rest 
mattered  not.  Belleisle,  with  Mars  close  at  hand,  was  first 
to  bring  him  relief.     Then  he  was  left  alone  with  the  Santa 

^  She  was  first-rate  of  112  guns,  bearing;  the  flag  of  Vice- Admiral  de  Alava, 
and  according  to  Colonel  Desbriere  was  thirteenth  from  the  rear  in  actual 
line  :  Trafalgar,  p.  207. 


388  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

Anna,  while  his  consort  was  cut  to  pieces  and  dismasted  by 
a  powerful  concentration  in  her  turn. 

Apart  from  Colling  wood's  refusal  to  check  his  onset, 
the  advance  had  been  too  nearly  vertical  for  the  line  of 
bearing  to  produce  anything  like  unity  of  impact  behind 
him.  Almost  every  ship  in  the  first  half  of  his  division  met 
with  a  similar  reception.  "  Instead  of  doubling  on  the 
enemy,"  says  Senhousc,  who  was  in  the  Colossvs,  the  sixth 
ship  of  Collingwood's  line,  "  the  British  were  on  that  day 
themselves  doubled  and  trebled  on;  and  the  advantage  of 
applying  an  overwhelming  force  collectively  it  would  seem 
was  totally  lost.  The  Victory,  Temdraire,  Sovereign,  Belleisle, 
Mars,  Colossus,  and  Bellrrophon  were  placed  in  such  a  situa- 
tion at  the  onset,  that  nothing  but  the  most  heroic 
gallantry  and  practical  skill  with  the  guns  could  have 
extricated  them.  .  .  .  The  position  of  the  Combined  Fleet 
at  one  time  was  precisely  that  in  which  the  British  were 
desirous  of  being  placed ;  that  is,  to  have  part  of  an 
opposing  fleet  doubled  on  and  separated  from  the  main 
body."  ^  The  same  could  bo  said  of  other  ships  astern  of 
the  Colossus,  such  as  the  B-cvenge.  What  Codrington  saw 
from  Nelson's  line — and  he  says  he  was  placed  so  as  to 
have  a  specially  clear  view — was  the  ships  of  the  lee 
division  coming  up  one  by  one  and  attacking  the  remainder 
of  the  enemy's  rear  in  succession.^  Owing  to  differences 
of  speed  and  the  fact  that  Collingwood's  squadron  was  still 
unformed  when  he  ordered  the  line  of  bearing,  the  ships 
came  into  action  not  only  one  after  the  other,  but  at 
irregular  intervals — so  irregularly  indeed  that  the  enemy 
thought  they  were  being  attacked  by  distinct  groups.  One 
was  Collingwood's  own,  another  seemed  to  follow  the 
Revenge,  while  a  third  was  headed  by  the  Dreadnought  and 
Polyphemus.  So  closely  clubbed  was  the  allied  formation 
by  Gravina's  pressing  on  to  support  the  centre,  that  though 
the  line  was  penetrated  in  all  parts  there  still  remained 
yet  another  group  to  double  on  the  extreme  rear. 