

No  moment  in  the  action,  except  the  first,  was  more 
critical.  The  Victory  and  Royal  Sovereign  had  each  but  a 
single  mast  standing,  and  were  both  unmanageable.  The 
Temeraire  was  a  hulk  absolutely  helpless.  The  Britcmnia 
had  passed  through  to  engage  the  ships  to  leeward  and 
could  not  have  returned,  and  only  the  Neptune  and  a  couple 
of  crippled  two-deckers  remained  in  a  case  to  resist 
Dumanoir's  attack.  But  this  was  far  from  the  worst. 
Collingwood  had  already  been  warned  that  Nelson  was 
dangerously  wounded,  and  now  in  the  strain  of  the  crisis, 

^  Life  of  Codrington,  i.  61.  Lord  Northesk's  part  in  battle  is  very  obscure. 
He  claims  to  have  engaged  ten  minutes  after  Nelson,  "  three  of  the  enemy's 
ships  having  opened  their  fire  on  us  while  edging  (sic)  down." — Log  of 
Britannia:  "At  8.0,"  it  says,  "passed  through  the  line."  This  suggests 
he  engaged  for  two  hours  at  considerable  range.  Collingwood  placed 
him  last  in  his  official  list,  but  Spartiate  and  Minotaur  were  certainly  astern 
of  him.  Magendie  in  the  plan  attached  to  his  report  places  him  fourth 
— possibly  his  real  place  in  the  order  of  battle.  But  the  most  authoritative 
lists  and  plans  put  him  sixth,  with  AJax  and  Orion  following.  See 
Appendix  F. 


392  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

when  no  one  could  sec  liow  it  would  end,  Blackwood  came 
on  board  the  Royal  Sovereign  to  break  the  terrible  news  that 
he  was  dead.  The  soul  of  the  battle  had  sped,  but,  acute 
as  was  the  shock  to  Collingwood,  not  for  one  moment  did 
he  lose  head  or  heart.  He  was  now  in  command.  In  his 
hand  it  rested  to  save  his  friend's  imperilled  victory. 

The  TImndcrcr,  one  of  the  last  of  his  own  squadron,  was 
looming  up  out  of  the  smoke  with  all  standing.  Her  part 
in  the  action  serves  well  to  illustrate  the  kind  of  concen- 
tration which  the  attack  in  succession  was  now  producing. 
She  began  firing  her  starboard  guns  at  the  extreme  rear  at 
1.15  ;  at  two  she  was  alongside  a  two-decker  that  had  been 
already  engaged  ;  and  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  she  had 
brought  down  all  her  masts  and  forced  her  to  strike.  In 
another  quarter  of  an  hour  she  had  served  a  second  crippled 
two-decker  in  the  same  way.  Next  was  Gravina's  shattered 
llagship,  that  after  getting  rid  of  the  Dreadnought  was  hotly 
defending  herself  against  the  Revenge.  Bearing  up  she 
passed  under  her  stern,  and  raked  her  so  severely  as  to 
force  her  finally  to  run  to  leeward  out  of  action.  She  then 
hauled  her  wind  and  passed  up  the  line  as  she  saw  the 
enemy's  van  about  to  come  down.^  At  the  same  moment 
Minotaur  and  Spartiatc  were  coming  up  into  action,  and 
Collingwood's  first  signal  as  commander-in-chief  was  to 
these  three  ships  to  tack  and  engage  Dnmanoir's  five  that 
were  coming  down  to  windward  upon  the  centre  and  were 
then  barely  three-quarters  of  a  mile  away.  "  Set  every  sail 
we  were  able,"  says  the  Thunderer,  who  naturally  had  not 
come  oti'  unscathed.  "  In  passing  cheered  the  Victory T 
Minotaur  and  SjKtrtiate,  as  we  know,  were  anticipating  the 
order,  and  were  already  engaged  with  Commodore  Valdez 
in  the  Ncptuno^'  By  a  desperate  eftbrt  both  Victory  -and 
Royal  Sovereign  got  some  guns  to  bear,  and  so  did  some 
of   the   two-deckers.     Neptune,  too,    was    soon   ready,   and 