

1  MacmiUan  s  Magazine,  vol.  Ixxxi.  424. 

2  Orion  H  Journal:  Nicolas,  vii.  1^2,  note.  What  Codrington  wrote  at  the 
time  is  of  course  good  evidence,  to  be  distinguished  frpm  the  memories  of  his 
old  age. 


THE    ACTION   GENERAL  389 

It  was  nearly  an  hour  before  the  action  became  general, 
and  things  were  reduced  to  a  more  equal  footing.  By  that 
time  some  twenty-two  British  vessels  must  have  been  in 
action  with  the  twenty-two  French  and  Spanish  that  had 
been  cut  off.  It  was  a  melee  at  pistol-shot  all  along  the 
line,  in  which  the  captains  on  both  sides  supported  and 
relieved  one  another  with  brilliance  and  devotion,  and  with 
as  much  skill  of  manoeuvre  as  mangled  rigging,  the  clouds 
of  hanging  smoke,  and  that  almost  breathless  afternoon 
permitted.  Each  side  extorted  bursts  of  admiration  from 
the  other.  It  was  a  fair  fight  against  foes  worth  fightiog, 
and  with  no  advantage  on  either  side,  except  in  the  superior 
sea  training  and  gunnery  of  the  British.  It  was  only 
gradually  by  sheer  hard  fighting  that  Nelson's  and  Colling- 
wood's  men  redressed  the  disadvantage  of  the  impetuous 
attack.  In  an  hour  or  so  they  began  to  reap  its  fruits,  and 
to  establish  a  domination  over  the  raging  fire  into  which 
they  had  flung  themselves  one  by  one. 

All  this  time  the  enemy's  van  had  made  no  movement 
to  intervene.  There  some  ten  or  eleven  ships,  practically 
untouched  save  for  the  little  Africa  as  she  ran  down  from 
the  northward  to  get  into  her  station,  were  held  inactive 
by  Rear- Admiral  Dumanoir,  in  spite  of  what  every  one  re- 
garded as  his  plain  duty.  The  censures  that  he  earned 
may  rest  in  the  grave  of  acquittal  which  his  court-martial 
awarded  him.  We  are  only  concerned  with  what  he  did — 
and  deeply  concerned,  for  here  is  the  measure  by  which  we 
must  gauge  the  value  and  effectiveness  of  the  "  containing  " 
element  in  Nelson's  plan. 

It  was  not  for  more  than  two  hours  after  the  action 
had  begun — one  hour  after  it  had  become  general — that, 
in  response  to  Villeneuve's  repeated  signals,  Dumanoir 
began  to  tack.  Till  then  Nelson's  bewildering  method  of 
engaging  held  him  in  uncertainty  of  what  the  weather 
division  was  going  to  do.  But  when  it  was  clear  that  the 
strange  tactics  meant  an  attack  on  the  centre  in  column, 
he  saw,  so  he  says,  the  possibility  of  cutting  off  Nelson's 
rearmost  ships — a  danger  to  which  the  line-ahead  attack 
obviously  exposed  them.    It  was  a  risk  Nelson  had  calculated 


390  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

and  taken  willi  a  light  heart.  "  It  must  be  some  time,"  he 
wrote  in  the  ]\[emoramlum,  "  before  they  could  perform  a 
manoeuvre  to  bring  their  force  compact  to  attack  any  part 
of  the  British  fleet,"  and  so  it  proved. 