

That  was  the  end  of  his  tactics.  If  he  still  retained 
his  purpose  of  engaging  the  van  from  to  leeward,  the  bold 
move  of  the  RedoutaUe  had  completely  foiled  him.  Though 
magnificently  supported  by  Tem&aire,  who  almost  touched 
his  stern,  he  failed — in  the  tactical  sense  at  least — to  break 
the  line.  Running  hard  aboard  the  RedoutaUe  he  simply 
stuck  in  the  enemy's  formation,  incapable  of  leading  the 

2  B 


3  86  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

movement  if  be  had  had  a  mind,  or  indeed  of  any  further 
manceuvre.  Neptune,  it  is  true,  followed  T^nUraire  through 
the  line  astern  of  Bticentaure,  raking  her  as  she  passed ; 
then  hauled  her  wind  to  the  northward  in  accordance  with 
Nelsons  last  directions  by  Blackwood  and  settled  down 
with  the  Santisima  Trinidad.  But  the  movement  went 
little  further,  and  the  weather  column,  as  it  surged  up 
against  the  enemy's  clubbed  formation,  simply  flattened 
itself  out  with  the  impact. 

In  intention,  risk,  and  daring,  it  was  in  the  end  an  un- 
precedented vertical  attack  in  line-ahead  upon  a  closely 
formed  and  even  reduplicated  line  of  battle.  To  some 
slight  extent,  it  is  true,  its  perpendicular  character  was  at 
the  last  moment  modified.  So  closely  did  Tenieraire  and 
Neptune  follow  their  chief  that  his  sudden  movements 
forced  them  upon  his  port  and  starboard  quarters  to  avoid 
running  foul  of  him.^  In  the  rear,  moreover,  the  line  had 
never  been  formed  accurately,  and  his  captains  hurried  up 
to  port  and  starboard  of  him  more  like  a  pack  of  wolves 
than  a  formed  fleet.  Still  in  tactical  principle  no  attack 
could  have  been  weaker — none  could  have  offended  more 
seriously  against  the  principle  of  simultaneous  impact.  To 
all  tactical  intent  it  ended  as  it  had  begun,  by  both  columns 
making  the  onslaught  which  Hawke  had  devised  for  a 
flying  enemy. 

Hazardous,  even  desperate,  as  seemed  Nelsons  use  of 
it,  it  was  in  truth  the  outcome  of  heroic  judgment  and 
insight.  Both  risk  and  advantage  had  been  accuratel}^ 
weighed.  The  enormous  mass  of  gun  power  at  the  head  of 
Nelson's  line  dominated  the  counter-convergence  of  fire, 
and  brought  on  the  melee  round  the  French  Admiral  which 
Nelson  required,  while  the  rear  of  his  division  as  it  stretched 

^  The  Santisima  Trinidad's  report  (Desbriere,  Trafalgar,  App.  305)  gives 
the  situation  thus:  The  Victory  steered  for  the  combined  centre  "formando 
con  el  Ttvurairc  y  el  Neptune  de  tres  pontes  una  linea  casi  paralela  de  la  que 
formaban  en  acquella  parte  el  Bucentaurc  por  su  proa  el  Trinidad  y  por  la  de 
este  el  Heros."  As  these  three  ships  had  got  into  line  of  bearing  the  meaning 
seems  to  be  that  Nelson  and  his  two  consorts  were  also  in  a  line  of  bearing  or 
irregular  line  abreast,  roughly  parallel  to  that  formed  by  Trinidad  and  her 
two  seconds.  Cf.  Codrington  :  "Our  line  pressed  so  much  upon  each  other  as 
to  be  obliged  to  go  bow  and  quarter  line  instead  of  ahead." — Life,  i.  64. 