

^  The  time  here  seems  to  be  much  the  same  as  Victory's.  Euryalus 
repeated,  "England  expects,  &c."  at  11.50.  Pascoe  says  it  was  made 
about  11.45. 

-  Vol.  iii.  p.  392. 

•■'  The  best  contemporary  French  historian,  a  veteran  of  the  older  wars, 
had  no  doubt,  after  his  careful  and  sagacious  study  of  the  battle,  that  this 
was  wliat  Nelson  meant,  though  he  naturally  regarded  it  as  a  feint.  "  Nelson 
first  made  a  feint  of  attacking  the  van  and  rear  of  the  fleet.  Then  he  re- 
assembled his  force  on  the  centre  and  abandoned  the  fate  of  the  action  to 
the  intelligence  of  his  captains." — Mathieu  Dumas,  Precis  des  Eviuernents 
Milltaires,  xiv.  408. 


i 


ORDER  TO  ATTACK  THE  VAN     383 

a  frigate."  ^  Collingwood  tlicn  must  have  read  in  Nelson's 
message  a  natural  answer  to  bis  own.  If  Villeneuve  was 
not  in  the  centre  it  was  not  there  a  decision  was  to  be 
sought,  but  in  the  van,  and  for  this  reason.  The  most 
serious  change  which  Nelson's  new  idea  made  in  the  plan 
of  attack  was  the  apparent  abandonment  of  his  own  con- 
taining function  on  which  the  success  of  Collingwood's 
attack  depended.  But,  in  truth,  it  involved  no  real 
abandonment.  The  natural  consequence  of  his  altered 
form  of  attack  w^as  that  the  enemy's  centre  would  stand 
on  at  once  to  relieve  the  van.  Indeed  this  was  the 
inherent  weakness  of  all  attempts  to  concentrate  on  the 
van.  Nelson  would  probably  be  doubled  on,  but  that 
would  bring  on  a  meUe  and  Collingwood  would  be  left 
free  to  "  complete  the  business  of  the  rear." 

There  seems,  then,  to  be  no  sufficient  reason  to  reject 
the  explicit  statement  of  Euryaluss  Log.  It  was  just 
at  this  time  that  Nelson  revoked  his  permission  to 
Tim^raire  to  pass  ahead  of  him  and  ordered  her  to  take 
station  astern.^  In  other  words,  at  the  last  moment  he 
strictly  re-formed  his  column  as  though  he  intended  to 
break  the  line  in  line-ahead,  and  this  we  know  from  an 
unimpeachable  source  was  actually  his  intention.  The 
enemy's  van  was  just  opening  fire  on  him  at  long  range, 
and  he  dismissed  his  three  frigate  captains  to  inform  the 
ships  in  his  rear  exactly  what  his  intentions  were.  Black- 
Avood  went  straight  alongside  the  Neptune  in  his  boat  and 
informed  Captain  Fremantle  that  Nelson's  intention  was 
"  to  cut  through  the  enemy's  line  about  the  thirteenth 
or  fourteenth  ship,  and  then  to  make  sail  on  the  larboard 
tack  for  their  van."  ^     Now,  about  the  thirteenth  ship  we 

^  Lieutenant  G.  L.  Browne  of  the  Victory.  Great  Sea  Fights,  ii.  196. 
He  records  it  as  made  at  10.40.  James  says  it  was  "a  few  minutes  before 
the  action  commenced,"  but  Browne  says  distinctly  it  was  at  10.40,  and  he 
was  assistant  flag-lieutenant. 