

1   Thunderer,  Captain's  Loj?,  P.R.O. 

-  Collingwood's  Journal :  Grcut  Sea  Fiyht^,  ii.  20i>.  He  says  ho  signalled 
after  3.30.  See  also  Logs  of  Minotaur  and  Spaiii'tte,  Ihid.,  250  and  270. 
Thunderer  says  she  got  a  verbal  order  after  3.30  (Nicolas,  vii.  202).  For 
Dumanoir's  account,  sec  Desbriere  :  Trafahjar,  A  pp.  152.  The  signals  at 
this  iiitcve.sting  time  unfortunately  are  missing  from  Euryalus's  Log,  and 
I'evierairc  ceased  to  record  anything  after  12.30. 


RETREAT    OF    THE    ALLIES  393 

Diimanoir,  finding  how  much  bite  was  left  in  the  appar- 
ently helpless  centre  and  that  Bucentaure  had  struck,  held 
on  as  he  was  to  see  what  could  be  done  in  the  rear, 
abandoning  the  Ne;pttono  to  the  mercies  of  Minotaur  and 
Spartiate. 

But  in  the  rear,  too,  Collingwood  was  ready  for  him. 
His  hand  was  as  steady  on  the  action  as  ever.  Seeing 
what  Dumanoir  was  threatening,  he  made  the  general  signal 
to  come  to  the  wind  in  succession  on  the  larboard  tack/ 
The  consequence  was  that  by  the  time  Dumanoir  was 
in  a  position  to  attack  the  rear  he  saw  half-a-dozen  ships 
hauling  out  to  form  a  new  line  to  windward.  To  sink  his 
spirit  still  further,  he  coidd  see  Gravina's  flagship  clearly 
bearing  away  out  of  action  and  flying  the  signal  for  the 
fleet  to  rally  round  her.  Here  at  least  was  a  good  reason 
for  Dumanoir  to  hold  on  and  try  to  join  her  to  leeward 
round  the  British  rear.  But  again  his  heart  failed  him. 
The  response  to  Collingwood's  signal  had  assumed  so 
threatening  an  aspect,  and  Gravina  and  the  ships  rallying 
round  him  were  soon  so  far  on  their  way  to  Cadiz,  that  he 
dared  not  make  the  attempt,  and  giving  up  the  action  for 
lost,  he  held  on  to  the  southward  for  the  Straits.  As  for 
the  rest  of  his  squadron  that  had  tried  to  get  down  to  leeward, 
they  were  quickly  headed  off  by  the  Britannia  and  her 
consorts,  who  pursued  them  towards  Cadiz,  capturing  one 
and  crippling  others.  Then  came  Collingwood's  signal  to 
haul  to  the  wind,  and  it  amounted  to  a  recall.'^ 

But  for  this  more  might  undoubtedly  have  been  done. 
Gravina's  flagship  would  certainly  have  been  taken,  for  she 
was  now  unmanageable  and  in  tow.  But  to  say  nothing  of 
the  grand  prizes,  the  situation  of  the  dismantled  British 
ships  on  a  leeshore  and  with  signs  of  a  coming  gale,  was 


^  Log  of  the  Dreadnought.  "At  4.5  made  and  repeated  101  geiierjil  " 
(=aboiit3, 35  Victory'' a  tirae).  7-V(fr6e  (frigate)  says  she  repeated  it  from  the 
Victory  at  3.20  (  =  3.40  Victory's  time).  Victory  still  had  her  mizzen  standing 
at  that  time,  and  probabl}^  repeated  the  signal.  The  signification  was: 
"  Come  to  the  wind  in  succession  on  the  larboard  tack  after  the  leading  ship, 
when  arrived  in  the  wake  thereof."  Kead  with  the  accompanying  instruc- 
tion, it  was  in  effect  an  order  for  each  division  to  re-form  line  by  tacking  or 
wearing  as  the  circumstances  required. 