

The  wind  was  so  light  that  it  was  only  by  using  boats 
that  Dumanoir's  ships  could  get  round  at  all,  and  it  was 
nearly  three  o'clock  before  they  were   standing  down.      By 
that  time  the   back  of  the  Allies'  splendid  resistance  was 
broken.      Not  a  mast  was  left  in  the  flagships  which  Nelson 
and  Collingwood  had  attacked,  and  all  three  of  them  had 
struck.      Still   there  was   a  chance;  for    the   British  ships 
which  had  borne  the  brunt  of  the  struggle  were   for   the 
most  part  dismasted  hulks,  and  Nelson  was  lying  mortally 
wounded.      In  the  extreme  rear  at  any  rate,  if  not  in  the 
centre^    there   were    possibilities    of   efifective    interference. 
Here  the  action  was  comparatively  fresh,  and  Gravina  was 
desperately  holding  his  own  against  a  concentration  that 
was  steadily  increasing.     He  himself,  like  Nelson,  had  been 
laid  low  witli  a  wound  that  was  to   prove  mortal,  but  the 
chief  of  his  staff  was  maintaining  the  struggle  Avith  obsti- 
nate courage,  and  there  was  nothing  to  tell  that  Villeneuve's 
right  hand  was  not  still  strong  to  save  the  situation.     The 
promise   of   this   hope,    and   the  danger   of  the  honoured 
Spanish   Admiral  were  so  great,  that  when   Dumanoir  led 
down    to   windward   only  four  units   followed  him — three 
French  and  the  Spanish  JVeptimo,  the  headmost  ship.     Nearly 
all  the  rest  made  for  Gravina  to  leeward,  and  one,  the  In- 
trSpide,  went  straight  into  the  melee  that  was  dying  round 
the  Bucentaurc.     This,  in  the  opinion  of  Villeneuve's  staff, 
was  the  course  all  should  have  taken.^     It  was  the  most 
direct  and    the    surest   way   to   renew   close    action   while 
there  was  yet  a  ray  of  hope.     But  as  it  was,  the  daring 
Intrepiclc  was  checked  by  the  little  Africa,  which  had  run 
the    gauntlet    of   the    enem3^'s   van   successfully,  and   had, 
now  reached  the  centre.     The  gallant  Frenchman  was  thus 
held  unsupported,  and  was  quickly  captured  by  some  fresh 
ships — Ajax  and  Orion  being  tAvo  of  them — which  Nelson's 

*  See  the  plan  attached  to  Prigny's  report,  No.  4,  Dcsbricrc,   Trafalgar, 
App   142,  and  ante,  p.  360. 


DUMANOIR    COMES   DOWN  391 

Rear-Admiral  Lord  Northesk  seems  to  have  led  up  in  the 
Britannia} 

By  the  time  Dumanoir  was  well  set  on  his  course  there 
were  only  the  last  two  shi|)s  of  Nelson's  column,  Spartiate 
and  Minotaur,  not  in  action,  and  it  was  these  vessels  the 
French  Rear- Admiral  thought  he  could  cut  olf.  They  saw 
the  danger,  but  it  was  not  their  own  they  saw.  It  was  the 
critical  position  of  the  flagships  and  the  T^m^raire,  as  they 
lay  almost  helpless  wrecks  and  cumbered  with  their  prizes. 
Captain  Mansfield  in  the  Minotaur,  the  slower  ship  of  the 
two,  was  leading,  for  the  principle  of  the  line-ahead  had 
been  preserved  to  the  end.  Seeing  there  was  not  a 
moment  to  lose,  Sir  Francis  Laforey,  in  the  Spartiate,  begged 
leave  to  pass  her,  and  so  the  two  devoted  men  held  straight 
on  across  Dumanoir's  bows,  raking  him  at  pistol-shot  as 
they  passed,  and  then  hove-to  to  leeward  between  him  and 
the  British  Admirals.  And  there  they  held  their  ground, 
engaging  the  four  French  ships  as  they  passed  and  forcing 
them  to  keep  their  wind.  It  was  a  splendid  bit  of  work, 
two  seventy-fours  standing  up  to  three  seventy-fours  and 
two  eighty s,  and  it  was  done  on  their  own  initiative  in  the 
true  spirit  of  the  Memorandum. 