

2  Neptune  (Master's  Log-).  "11.50,  Timtrairc  took  station  astern  of 
Victory,  Neptune  next."  Temcraire  (Captain's  Log).  "  Noon,  Victory  to 
Temeraire,  269,  with  Victory's  pennants,"  Temcraire' s  clock  was  20  minutes 
ahead  of  Victory^ s.  Captain  Harvey  says  he  had  the  signal  about  15 
minutes  before  the  Victory  opened  fire.     That  would  make  it  about  11.45. 

^  Neptune's  log  puts  it  at  11,50  :  Nicolas,  vii.  186.  It  was  7  minutes  before 
Royal  Sovereign  opened  fire,  which  Victory  says  was  at  11.40. 


384  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

know  a  wide  gap  had  opened  in  the  enemy's  Hne  owing 
to  ships  to  leeward  not  being  able  to  get  into  station/ 
Nelson  clearly  intended  to  seize  the  opportunity  of  this 
break  in  the  line  to  pass  through  it  and  then  to  run 
up  the  van  and  engage  it  from  to  leeward,  crippling  each 
unit  as  he  passed  with  his  massed  three-deckers,  and  leaving 
them  a  prey  to  his  w^eaker  following. 

It  was  a  conception  entirely  worthy  of  him  and  entirely 
in  accord  with  the  fundamental  principle  of  his  plan.  It 
fully  and  worthily  explains  his  neglect  to  deploy — his  per- 
sistent clinging  to  his  line-ahead,  which  so  much  effort  has 
been  made  to  explain  away.  For  the  purpose  of  containing 
the  van  it  served  admirably.  Till  the  last  moment  it  was 
impossible  for  the  enemy  to  tell  whether  or  not  the  van 
was  his  objective,  for  to  the  last  he  himself  had  not  decided. 
Both  van  and  centre  were  equally  threatened.  For  a  regular 
feint  there  was  no  need,  and  certainly  none  was  made.  If, 
as  several  witnesses  clearly  record,  he  was  steering  for  the 
Santisima  Trinidad,  his  intended  movement  for  the  gap  a 
ship  or  two  astern  of  her  would  mean  a  short  turn  to 
starboard  before  hauling  to  the  wind  on  the  opposite  tack ; 
and  so  far  from  being  a  feint  on  the  van,  it  would  if  any- 
thing amount  to  a  feint  on  the  centre.  But  the  whole 
meaning  of  the  decision  is  this.  At  the  last  moment  his 
unmatched  eye  for  a  battle  had  seized  a  weakness  in  the 
enemy's  position  and  with  perfect  mastery  he  meant  to 
deliver  his  attack  accordingly.  It  was  only  by  keeping 
his  division  in  line-ahead  that  such  a  sudden  stroke  was 
possible.  Surely  it  needs  no  excuse.  Leadership  could 
not  well  rise  higher. 

This  then  was  undoubtedly  the  last  order  which  Nelson 
conveyed  to  his  fleet  before  engaging.  But  no  sooner  were 
the  frigate  captains  away  with  it  than  he  saw  reason  to 
change  his  resolution.  As  the  fleets  drew  together  Ville- 
neuve  had  signalled  to  engage  as  soon  as  they  were  in 
effective  range,  and  then,  as  tlie  rear  opened  fire  on  Colling- 
wood,  he  and  all  the  other  Admirals  displayed  their  flags. 