

'^  Britannia  says  she  obeyed  the  signal  at  4.30  (  =  3.40  Victory's  time). 


394  THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 

far  too  critical  for  anything  more  to  be  attempted.  Every 
ship  that  could  steer  or  make  sail  was  required  to  assist 
them,  and  in  Collingwood's  judgment  the  limit  of  risk  had 
been  reached.  He  did  not  even  deem  it  ])ossible  to  anchor, 
though  Nelson  had  made  the  ])roparatory  signal  before  the 
action  began,  and  it  was  his  last  wish  that  it  should  be 
executed.  Firing  had  now  everywhere  ceased  except  where 
the  Ncptuno  was  making  her  last  ei'i'ort.  Shortly  after  four 
she  struck,  and  the  most  decisive  naval  action  in  our  history 
had  come  to  an  end. 

The  enemy's  commander-in-chief  and  two  of  his  flag 
officers  were  prisoners  in  the  British  fleet.  Of  the  thirty- 
three  of  the  line  which  had  left  Cadiz  the  day  before,  only 
nine  got  back  that  night  to  safety ;  four  were  flying  for  the 
Straits ;  leaving  no  less  than  twenty  on  the  field  of  battle, 
of  which  seventeen  were  totally  dismantled,  thirteen 
actually  in  possession  of  prize  crews,  and  one  in  flames, 
while  every  British  flag  was  still  flying. 

Thus  whether  the  Plan  of  Attack  was  acted  on  or  not, 
elson's  tactics  were  justified.  His  forecast  of  their  con- 
taining capacity  was  fully  realised.  The  van  had  not  been 
able  to  move  till  too  late,  and  when  it  did  it  had  failed,  as 
the  Memorandum  foretold,  to  bring  its  force  compact  upon 
any  part  of  the  British  fleet.  For  the  rest  we  cannot  do 
better  than  take  the  deliberate  summary  of  the  Spanish 
Staff,  drawn  up  when  all  the  circumstances  were  known 
and  after  making  all  allowances  for  inaccuracy  of  detail. 
"  The  attack,"  they  say,  ''  was  upon  the  centre  and  rear 
of  our  line,  and  by  concentrating  their  force  upon  it,  they 
involved  the  riearguard  in  a  regular  action,  line  to  line, 
doubling  our  extreme  rear  and  leaving  the  van  out  of 
action."  ^  The  words  give  an  accurate  estimate  of  the  action 
as  it  eventually  developed.  They  are  also  a  correct  summary 
of  the  main  idea  of  the  Memorandum.  In  the  eyes  of  the 
Spanish  Staff  that  idea  was  carried  out  entirely.  On 
the  other  hand  their  reports,  as  well  as  those  of  the  French, 
are  full  of  bewildered  astonishment  that  an  attack  made  so 

1  Diario  del  navio  Principe  dc   Asturias    (Gravina's  flagship):  Desbriere, 
Trafalrjar,  Apj^.  387.     The  pas.sagc  is  a  note  added  t;ubsequently. 


,1 


THE    PLAN    AND    THE    ACTION  395 

recklessly  and  so  regardless  of  cstablislicd  principle — made 
in  column  without  any  regular  deployment — was  not  crushed 
in  the  bud.  No  ingenuity  of  deduction  can  answer  this 
criticism.  The  approach  up  to  the  moment  of  impact  was 
in  tactical  efiect  an  end-on  approach  in  line-ahead.  Neither 
the  irregularity  of  Nelson's  line  nor  the  accidental  broaden- 
ing of  his  front  at  the  last  moment  will  alter  the  fact,  nor 
will  Collingwood's  well-meant  but  unexecuted  signal  for  the 
line  of  bearing  remove  it  even  in  his  case.  In  neither  line 
was  there  any  developed  deployment  before  the  leading  ships 
were  in  contact,  nor,  taking  the  fleet  as  a  whole,  was  there 
any  such  unity  of  impact  as  Nelson  had  designed  in  his 
diagram. 