

Dumanoir,  who  was  then  sailing  east-north-east, 
promptly  detached  the  Duguaij-Trouin  to  chase  him;  but 
Baker,  instead  of  trying  to  escape,  held  on  south-west  for 
the  regular  rendezvous,  where  he  was  sure  to  hear  of 
Strachan.  In  vain  the  Frenchman  tried  to  cut  him  off. 
By  five  o'clock  he  had  passed  across  her  bows  to  windward, 
and  Dumanoir  signalled  the  recall.  During  the  last  two 
hours  of  the  chase  Baker  had  been  firing  signal  guns,  as 
Dumanoir  naturally  believed,  to  the  other  two  frigates,  but 
in  fact  he  had  not  seen  them.  What  he  had  sighted  was 
part  of  Strachan's  squadron  to  the  southward.  Dumanoir, 
with  all  Allemand's  luck,  must  have  passed  close  by  him 
the  night  before,  unseen,  for  all  that  Strachan  had  his 
squadron  widely  spread,  and  but  for  Baker's  activity  the 

^  Captain  Baker's  Journal  enclosed  in  strachan's  despatch  :  7izcZ ,  Nov.  5th. 

2  C 


402    EXD  OF  THE  NAVAL  CAMPAIGN   Nov.  2 

fugitives  might  well  have  got  awa}'.  The  other  two  frigates 
by  a  strange  chance  did  nothing.  It  was  nearly  nine  and 
quite  dark  before  they  made  out  the  Phoeni.r,  and  as  they  were 
between  her  and  the  enemv,  she  mistook  their  recogfnition 
signals  as  coming  from  Dumanoir's  squadron.  A  little  later 
they  saw  the  squadron  for  which  the  Fhcenb:  was  standing,  but 
again  their  signals  were  mistaken,  and  making  sure  they 
were  alone  between  two  divisions  of  AUemand's  squadron 
they  stood  clear  away  and  were  seen  no  more.'^ 

Even  the  Phcenic  was  fired  upon  before  she  could  make 
Strachan  understand.  Luckily  it  was  his  flagship,  the 
Ccvsar  80,  that  was  nearest  to  her,  the  rest  being  scattered 
far  astern.  Baker  reported  he  had  just  been  chased  by 
AUemand's  squadron,  and  that  they  were  close  by  to 
leeward.  '^  I  was  delighted,"  wrote  Strachan,  "and  told 
him  to  tell  the  captains  astern  I  meant  to  engage  at  once." 
So  away  went  the  Phoenix  again  to  rally  the  squadron,  while 
Strachan  held  on  after  the  chase.  He  could  see  them  in 
the  moonlight  standing  away  m  Ime  abreast,  but  when  the 
moon  set  he  lost  them.  Dumanoir,  m  fact,  m  order  to 
throw  him  off,  altered  course  to  the  south-east  so  .soon  as 
it  was  dark,  but  Strachan  was  not  deceived.  He  merely 
shortened  sail  till  he  was  joined  by  two  of  his  seventy-fours. 
Hero  and  Courageux,  and  one  of  his  frigates,  uEolus  32, 
with  Lord  William  Fitzroy  still  in  command.  Of  the  rest 
of  his  squadron  the  Namur  74,  and  Santa  Margarita.  36, 
were  still  astern,  and  his  fifth  ship  of  the  line,  Bellona 
74,  as  well  as  the  IndefatigaUe  had  unfortunately  just 
parted  company. 

But  weakened  as  he  was  and  though  he  had  lost  sight 
of  the  chase,  he  had  no  doubt  what  to  do.  As  though  he 
saw  clearly  into  Dumanoir's  mind  he  made  straight  east- 
north-east  for  Cape  Ortegal.  It  was  for  that  point  also 
that  Dumanoir  was  steering  to  get  a  departure,  and  possibly 
with  the  hope  of  slipping  into  Ferrol.  But  Strachan  had 
cleverly  cut  him  off.     At  daybreak  on  the   3rd,  with  his 