

It  was  not  till  Strachan  had  the  French  Admiral  on 
board  that  he  discovered  what  he  had  done.  "Judge  of 
my  surprise,"  he  wrote,  "when  I  found  the  ships  we  had 
taken  were  not  the  Rochefort  squadron,  but  four  from 
Cadiz."  He  had  not  been  fighting  Allemand  after  all,  but 
a  mere  remnant  that  had  escaped  Nelson's  hands.  The 
elusive  Allemand  was,  of  course,  far  away,  and  to  the  end  he 
maintained  his  reputation.  The  day  before  the  battle  of 
Trafalgar,  finding  no  European  port  open  to  him,  he  had 
resolved  to  run  for  the  Canaries.  In  a  fortnight  he  was 
close  to  Teneriffe,  where  he  learned  from  a  Portuguese 
schooner  fresh  from  Madeira  that  a  British  expedition,  con- 
sisting of  eight  of  the  line,  as  many  frigates,  and  130 
transports,  had  recently  demanded  shelter  there  and  had 
been  refused.  It  was,  of  course,  Popham  and  Baird,  whom 
he  had  so  narrowly  missed  a  few  weeks  before.  They  were 
said  to  be  destined  for  a  distant  expedition,  and  were  to 
take  the  Canaries  on  the  way.  If  it  were  true,  Allemand 
was  in  a  terrible  plight :  but  he  decided  to  hold  on  in  hopes 
the  British  squadron  had  passed  forward,  and  that  he  would 
be  able  to  retake  the  islands  if  he  found  a  hostile  garrison 
in  occupation.  On  the  morrow,  the  day  Strachan  and 
Dumanoir  met,  he  made  Teneriffe  and  cleared  for  action. 
But  it  was  a  false  alarm.    Baird  and  Popham  had  passed  on 


4o6   END  OF  THE  NAVAL  CAMPAIGN  nov.-Dec. 

to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  without  touching  the  Canaries, 
and  Allemand  was  received  with  open  arms  by  the  Spanish 
Governor.  Hero  ho  stayed  for  a  fortnight  to  Lmd  his  sick, 
revictual,  and  sell  his  prizes,  which  realised  not  fiir  short  of 
£20,000,  and  this,  of  course,  was  all  over  and  above  the 
value  of  the  numerous  less  valuable  captures  lie  had  sunk. 
But,  as  usual,  the  damage  he  had  done  to  British  trade 
cannot  nearly  have  covered  the  cost  of  his  expedition. 

Still  this  indefatigable  officer  was  far  from  regarding  his 
campaign  as  finished.  As  yet  he  had  not  had  a  word  of 
the  Combined  Fleet.  He  believed  it  was  still  blockaded  in 
Cadiz,  and  he  laid  his  plans  accordingly.  Having  obtained 
three  months'  victuals  and  recruited  his  companies,  he 
would  cruise  for  a  while  about  Madeira  for  the  British 
colonial  trade  and  reinforcements,  and  then  would  proceed 
off  the  coast  of  Portugal  to  sit  on  the  communications  of 
the  squadron  that  was  blockading  Villeneuve.  With  this 
intention  he  sailed  on  November  19th.  The  very  next  day 
he  sighted  seven  sail,  which  he  believed  to  be  one  of  the 
British  squadrons  in  search  of  him.  It  was  reported  to  be 
inferior,  and  he  formed  battle  order  and  gave  chase.  In  the 
night,  however,  the  strangers  eluded  him.  There  was,  in 
fact,  no  British  squadron  near  him.  The  strangers  were 
probably  a  convoy,  and  they  must  have  had  a  narrow  escape. 
Three  days  later,  about  Madeira,  he  captured  a  British  West 
Coast  vessel  outward  bound,  and  learned  from  her  skipper 
that  before  leaving  Portsmouth  he  had  heard  a  great  battle 
had  been  fought,  in  which  Nelson  had  been  killed,  but  he 
did  not  know^  the  particulars.  With  no  further  captures 
Allemand  passed  on  from  his  Madeira  station,  but  it  was 
not  till  the  middle  of  December  that  he  reached  the  coast 
of  Portugal.  Here  on  the  18  th  and  19  th  he  took  and  sunk 
three  British  vessels,  and  from  them  he  learned  that  there 
was  a  squadron  about  on  the  look-out  for  him,  and  that 
the  Combined  Fleet  had  been  annihilated  by  Nelson  and 
Strachan.  ''  The  indiscretion,"  he  says,  ''  of  those  who 
brought  me  the  news  struck  consternation  aboard  and 
aroused  keen  anxiety  to  get  into  port."  At  last  the  heart 
was  beaten  out  of  him  and  his  squadron,  and  he  resolved  to 