

Hameln,  on  the  Weser,  to  secure  a  re-entry  from  West- 

408 


I 


Sept.  THE    NORTHERN    EXPEDITION  409 

phalia.  The  opportunity  of  driving  the  French  from 
Northern  Europe  in  Napoleon's  absence  was  too  promising 
to  be  resisted.  A  Russian  force  was  on  its  way  to  join  the 
Swedes  at  Stralsund,  and  Pitt  decided  that  without  waiting 
till  the  whole  disposable  British  force  could  be  mobilised, 
the  king's  German  legion  should  sail  at  once  to  co-operate 
with  the  allies.^  In  view  of  the  approach  of  winter  and  the 
closing  of  the  northern  seas  with  ice,  the  operation  was 
extremely  hazardous,  but  the  risks  were  faced.  To  minimise 
them  it  was  decided  to  send  the  expedition  not  to  the 
Baltic,  but  to  the  Elbe,  where  from  Cuxhaven  and  Stade  it 
could  rapidly  join  hands  with  the  Swedes  and  Russians 
Irom  Stralsund,  at  Lauenberg  on  the  Weser.  Accordingly 
Lord  Keith  was  placed  in  direct  communication  with  the 
War  Office  and  ordered  to  get  the  troops  across  as  quickly 
as  possible,  while  CornwalHs  covered  the  operation  before 
Brest. 

The  Legion,  with  two  British  brigades  which  formed 
the  advanced  force  under  General  Don,  numbered  about 
11,000  men,  and  they  were  to  be  followed  as  soon  as  trans- 
port was  ready  by  the  rest  of  the  disposable  force,  which 
Castlereagh  hoped  would  eventually  bring  the  whole  up  to 
sixty  or  seventy  thousand. 

It  was  not,  of  course,  on  this  force  alone  that  Pitt  relied 
for  success.  The  British  expedition  was  only  one  element 
m  a  grand  combined  movement  on  Napoleon's  left  flank, 
and  the  backbone  of  the  combination  must  be  Prussia! 
Her  attitude  to  the  Coalition  was  still  uncertain.  At 
Berlm  the  War  and  the  Peace  parties  were  still  at  grips, 
and  It  was  to  stiffen  and  embolden  her  that  Pitt  had 
hastened  the  despatch  of  his  first  contingent.  If  Prussia 
could  only  be  enheartened  to  take  a  hand  it  was  calculated 
that  m  the  spring,  with  the  Swedes  and  Russians  from 
Stralsund  and  various  contingents  from  the  minor  German 
States,  the  combined  army  would  reach  a  hundred  thousand 

'  This  famous  corps,  which  served  under  the  British  fla- with  so  much 
distinction  all  over  Europe  till  the  end  of  the  war,  consisted  mainly  of  Hano 
verian  troops  who  rather  than  submit  to  the  French  under  the  Co/vention  of 

service,     bee  Beamish,  History  of  the  King's  German  Legion.  ^ 


4IO  CONCLUSION  oct.  21 

men.  Such  a  force  threatening  Holland  and  the  northern 
French  frontier  could  not  be  neglected.  It  must  at  least 
act  as  a  powerful  diversion  and  cover  an  advance  of  the 
main  Prussian  army  which  it  was  proposed  should  move  at 
once  through  Moravia  against  Napoleon's  left.  Such  was  the 
stroke  which  Pitt  endeavoured  to  play — so  it  was  he  meant 
to  use  his  command  of  the  sea — on  the  well-tried  lines  his 
father  had  folloAvcd  with  so  much  success  to  save  Frederick 
the  Great.  It  is  a  bypath  of  the  Austerlitz  campaign  that 
is  now  long  forgotten.  Yet  it  was  nothing  but  the  incal- 
culable rapidity  of  Napoleon's  heroic  change  of  front  that 
condemned  it  to  failure  and  oblivion. 