

Strachan  still  had  but  three  of  his  squadron  up,  and  in 
accordance  with  the  then  favourite  plan  he  hailed  his 
captains  to  say  he  meant  to  attack  the  rear.  He  himself 
led  into  action  with  his  flagship,  she  being  the  most  power- 


404    END  OF  THE  NAVAL  CAMPAIGN   Nov.  4 

ful  vessel  in  the  squadron.  The  most  approved  method  of 
engaging  for  a  fieet  coming  up  from  astern  of  an  enemy  in 
line  of  battle  and  from  to  windward  was  by  inverting  the 
line,  that  is,  for  the  leading  ship  to  engage  the  enemy's 
rearmost  and  her  second  astern  to  pass  on  under  cover  of 
her  fh^e  and  take  the  next  ahead,  and  so  on.  But  this 
Strachan  did  not  do,  probably  because  Dumanoir  was 
second  in  the  French  line,  and  he  wanted  to  bring  the  two 
flagships  together.  In  any  case  he  himself,  like  Nelson,  led 
the  line,  engaging  the  two  sternmost  ships  as  he  passed 
and  hauling  up  abreast  the  French  flagship.  No  attempt 
was  made  to  break  the  line  and  engage  from  to  leeward, 
as  Nelson  had  laid  down  in  his  Memorandum  of  1803,  and 
this  perhaps  is  explained  by  the  interesting  action  of  the 
cruisers.  Instead  of  taking  the  orthodox  position  to  wind- 
ward of  their  own  line  and  away  from  the  enemy,  they  got 
into  position  on  the  lee  and  weather  quarters  of  the  rear- 
most ship  and  continued  to  engage  her. 

Strachan  thus  secured  a  concentration  on  the  rear, 
and  left  the  van  ship,  the  BiujiLay'Trouin,  out  of  action. 
Dumanoir  promptly  signalled  to  tack  in  succession,  with  the 
intention  of  covering  his  two  rear  ships  and  cutting  off  the 
NamuT,  which  was  now  seen  to  be  coming  up.  It  Avas  a 
bold  move,  for  it  had  to  be  done  under  a  destructive  fire 
from  the  Ca:sar  and  her  second  the  Hero,  and  it  brought  the 
French  down  within  pistol  shot  of  the  British  line.  And 
not  only  this.  The  other  two  heavy  frigates  had  come  up, 
and  it  brought  them  all  four  in  line  to  leeward.  Dumanoir 
was  thus  doubled  on  and  deprived  of  the  possibility  of 
bearing  up  to  get  out  of  action.  It  was,  therefore,  un- 
necessary for  Strachan  to  attempt  the  hazardous  manoeuvre 
of  breaking  the  line  in  order  to  secure  a  decisive  action,  and 
indeed  Dumanoir  evinced  no  desire  to  avoid  one. 

The  effect  of  the  French  move  was  that  the  two  lines 
passed  on  opposite  tacks.  Then,  instead  of  tacking  again, 
Dumanoir  held  on  to  isolate  the  Naninr,  who  was  keeping  her 
wind  to  Aveather  them,  and  for  more  than  half-an-hour  the 
action  ceased.  Strachan  was,  of  course,  trying  to  get  round. 
The  obvious  move  w^as  to  tack,  but  his  rigging  was  so  badly 


Nov.  4  STRACHAN'S    VICTORY  405 

injured  that  he  was  forced  to  wear.  The  result  was  con- 
fusion, and  seeing  the  French  were  getting  away  and  threat- 
ening to  weather  him  he  signalled  to  the  Namnr,  as  Nelson 
had  done  to  the  Africa,  to  bear  up  and  engage  the  van.  To 
save  time,  as  the  Rcro  had  got  round  first,  he  ordered  her 
to  lead,  and  formed  a  new  line  on  her.  In  this  formation 
the  action  was  renewed  Avith  a  fresh  attack  on  the  French 
rear,  the  frigates  retaining  their  position  astern  and  to  lee- 
ward. At  the  same  time  the  Namur  came  into  line  astern 
of  the  Hero,  and  the  Diujuay-Trouin  being  out  of  action, 
Strachan's  four  ships  could  concentrate  on  Dumanoir's 
other  three.  "  The  French  squadron  fought  to  admiration," 
wrote  Strachan  in  his  despatch,  "  and  did  not  surrender  till 
their  ships  were  unmanageable,"  but  by  four  o'clock  the 
business  was  done  and  all  had  struck. 