


Oct.  26  CADIZ    BLOCKADE    RESUMED  399 

ing  with  extreme  fury,  dispersed  the  fleet  in  all  directions, 
driving  most  of  the  captured  hulks  ashore  and  two  or  three 
were  driven  into  the  port  of  Cadiz.  The  rest  so  entirely 
disabled  that  I  have  been  under  the  necessity  of  burning 
and  sinking  them.  .  .  .  The  Combined  Fleet  is  annihilated. 
I  believe  there  are  not  more  than  four  or  five  ships  in 
Cadiz  which  can  be  made  ready  for  sea.  ...  I  understand 
there  are  neither  masts,  sails,  nor  cordage  to  refit  them — a 
shattered  fleet  and  empty  magazines.  But  what  has  raised 
their  admiration  and  excited  their  dread  too  of  the  British 
Flag  beyond  anything,  is  the  keeping  our  station  before 
their  port  after  so  severe  an  action,  which  I  have  done  to 
convince  them  that  we  are  not  to  be  removed  by  their 
utmost  efforts  from  a  station  that  is  necessary  to  be  kept. 
As  soon  as  I  can  make  the  necessary  arrangements,  I  pro- 
pose coming  into  the  Mediterranean,  and  if  the  Spanish 
squadron  of  Cartagena  is  in  motion  and  at  sea,  to  use  my 
utmost  endeavours  to  destroy  them  also  and  send  to  the 
Italian  coast  such  a  force  as  will  check  any  operations  the 
enemy  may  have  in  contemplation  there."  ^ 

There  were  some  who  believed  he  would  have  been 
better  employed  in  making  his  demonstration  at  Naples 
without  the  loss  of  a  day  instead  of  off  Cadiz,  but  after  the 
terrible  strain  of  that  exhausting  week  he  probably  did  all 
that  was  humanly  possible.  "  In  short,"  he  wrote  to  Corn- 
wallis,  "  my  strength  is  exhausted."  ^  From  the  Cartagena 
squadron  or  Dumanoir's,  wherever  it  might  have  gone,  there 
was  really  little  to  fear  as  Louis  was  still  somewhere  about 
the  Straits,  and  even  if  Dumanoir  entered  the  Mediterranean 
and  eluded  him,  he  would  certainly  have  to  make  for 
Toulon  to  refit  before  he  could  do  anything  at  Naples. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  he  had  not  entered  the  Straits. 
On  the  22nd  the  southerly  gale  had  struck  his  crippled 
squadron,  and  it  was  found  impossible  to  stand  up  to  it. 
Towards  evening,  moreover,  he  saw  sails  in  the  Gut  which 
he  believed  to  be  Louis's  squadron,  and  he  decided  to  reach 
to   the   westward  in  hopes   of    falling   in   with   Allemand. 

^  Nicolas,  vii.  231 :  Euryalus  off  Cadiz,  Oct.  24th. 

2  Hist.  MSS.  Com.,  Various  Collections,  vi.  412,  Oct.  26th. 


400    END  OF  THE  NAVAL  CAMPAIGN   Nov.  2 

For  two  days  lie  hunted  for  bim,  doing  the  best  he  could 
to  refit  and  stop  his  leaks,  and  then  on  the  25th  decided 
to  go  northward.  On  the  29th,  as  Louis  was  coming  out 
of  the  Straits  to  rejoin  Colling  wood,  he  doubled  Cape  St. 
Vincent.  Neutrals  were  questioned,  but  not  a  word  of 
Allemand  could  be  had,  and  he  stood  on  for  Rochefort 
in  ignorance  that  Strachan  was  ahead  of  him  still  wait- 
ing patiently  in  eager  hope  of  intercepting  the  squadron 
Dumanoir  was  seeking. 