

Strachan  had  remained  as  we  left  him  in  constant  touch 
Avith  Lobb's  cruiser  line  about  Vigo  till  the  day  of  the 
battle.  Then  hearing  that  the  ships  which  Villeneuve  had 
left  in  Vigo  w'cre  ready  for  sea,  he  had  moved  away  to  let 
them  out,  and  on  the  24th  had  taken  station  off  Finisterre 
convinced  that  with  Nelson  oW  Cadiz  they  would  try  to  get 
north.^  He  was  thus  excellently  placed.  Dumanoir 's 
flagship  and  some  others  were  making  so  much  water  that 
he  felt  forced  to  keep  near  the  coast.  After  passing  the 
latitude  of  Finisterre  early  on  November  2nd,  he  was  actu- 
ally in  sight  of  Cape  Villano,  and  though  he  had  stolen  past 
Strachan  inshore  without  being  seen,  he  was  at  the  point 
of  junction  of  the  two  British  cruiser  lines,  and  as  a  matter 
of  course  quickly  found  he  was  being  observed. 

Two  frigates,  the  Boadicea  38  and  Dryad  36,  which 
seem  to  have  formed  part  of  the  Ushant-Finisterre  line  and 
must  have  been  on  the  Finisterre  rendezvous,  were  to  the 
westward,  while  a  third  had  just  passed  inshore  of  him, 
and  was  a  little  to  the  southward.  It  was  Baker  again  in 
the  Phcenix,  with  his  genius  for  being  in  the  right  place,  and 
another  highly  interesting  piece  of  cruiser  work  ensued. 
After  his  hairbreadth  escape  with  the  Didon  from  Allemand 
he  had  nearly  been  caught  by  the  Combined  Fleet  as  he 
was  trying  to  get  his  prize  to  Gibraltar.  Eventually  he 
had  stood  north  again  and  taken  her  safely  home,  to  be 

1  Covnwallis  to  Marsden,  October  29th,  with  report  of  Captain  Rodd  of 
the  Indefatujahh,  44  :  la-letters,  129.  lie  had  been  sent  to  the  westward  of  the 
Channel  to  cover  the  home-coming  convoys,  and  on  September  20th  had 
sighted  Allemand  in  latitude  48°  57'  and  longitude  18"  19'.  Having  lost  touch 
he  ran  back  to  inform  Cornwallis,  and  meeting  Strachan  just  as  he  was 
starling  in  search  of  Allemand,  was  detained  by  him  and  taken  down 
to  Vigo. 


Nov.  2  PHCENIX  LOCATES    DUMANOIR  401 

rewarded  for  his  feat,  as  the  custom  was,  with  a  cruise.     On 
October   29th  he  had  left  Falmouth  for  a  station  to  the 
westward   of   Scilly,  where  he  was  to  open  sealed  orders. 
On  the  second  day  he  fell  in  with  a  Dane  who  said  he  had 
been  detained  by  Allemand  from  the   13th  to   the   15th. 
He  had  been  released  in  latitude  3  7°   51'  and  longitude 
14°    3',   that  is,   about   250   miles  west-north-west  of  St. 
Vincent,  and  his  captors  then  steered  north-west.^     As  we 
know  that  Allemand  was  then  on  his  way  to  the  Canaries, 
this  was  a  false  course  to  drown  his  scent.     Baker,  of  course, 
could  not  know  this.      It  was  the  ordinary  track  to  reach 
the   French   Atlantic   ports,   and   the    inference    was    that 
Allemand  was  somewhere  down  the  Bay  making  for  Roche- 
fort.     Baker  had  not  yet  reached  his  allotted  station,  but 
so  eager   was  he  to  let  Strachan  know  his  news  that  he 
decided  to  break  the  seal.     He  found  nothing  but  a  hand- 
some order  to  proceed  to  a  very  profitable  cruising  ground. 
Then  he  did  not  hesitate  a  moment.     Prize  money  was  flung 
to  the  winds  and  away  he  went  for  Ferrol,  where  he  ex- 
pected to  meet  with  Strachan.     Not  finding  him  there  he 
made  for  the  Finisterre  rendezvous,  with  the  result  that  at 
daylight  on  November  2nd  he  found  himself,  as  we  have 
seen,  passing  inshore  of  what  he  believed  to  be  Allemand's 
squadron. 