


Dec.  24         END    OF   ALLEMAND'S    CRUISE  407 

seek  shelter  in  Rochefort.  One  last  stroke  of  luck  still 
awaited  him.  It  came  with  a  westerly  gale  and  thick 
weather  that  drove  up  at  the  right  moment  and  carried 
him  on  at  ten  knots  to  the  latitude  of  Rochefort,  and 
there  unseen  he  ran  in  in  safety  on  Christmas  Eve.  So  his 
brilHant  Odyssey  had  ended.  ''On  the  3rd  (Nivose) "  he 
concluded  his  report,  "  I  anchored  in  the  Road  of  Aix 
Island  after  161  days'  absence,  of  which  148  were  under 
sail,  bringing  back,  with  the  squadron  His  Majesty  entrusted 
to  me,  the  enemy's  ship  of  the  line  Calcutta.  If,  my  lord, 
His  Imperial  and  Royal  Majesty  and  your  Excellency  con- 
descend to  approve  the  dispositions  I  made  in  the  various 
difficult  and  embarrassing  circumstances  I  met  with,  I  shall 
feel  highly  recompensed  for  the  pains  I  have  taken  to 
this  end."^ 

Oh  si  sic  omnes !  If  Craig's  expedition  had  not  forced 
Napoleon's  hand,  if,  as  he  first  intended,  he  had  been  able 
to  wait  till  winter  loosened  the  blockades  and  had  been 
able  to  split  up  his  fleet  into  cruising  squadrons  under 
young  officers  of  Allemand's  stamp,  what  infinite  trouble 
they  might  have  caused  to  our  colonial  and  commercial 
interests !  But  that  at  least  Nelson's  crushing  victory  had 
prevented.  Pitt's  offensive  policy  had  undesignedly  forced 
Napoleon  to  expose  his  fleet  to  annihilation,  and  all  hope  of 
effective  action  at  sea  was  gone. 

1  Desbriere,  Projets  et  Tentatives,  v.  798-800. 


CHAPTER   XXVI 

CONCLUSION 

By  universal  assent  Trafalgar  is  ranked  as  one  of  the 
decisive  battles  of  the  world,  and  yet  of  all  the  great 
victories  there  i&  not  one  which  to  all  appearance  was 
so  barren  of  immediate  result.  It  had  brought  to  a 
triumphant  conckision  one  of  the  most  masterly  and  com- 
plex sea  campaigns  in  history,  but  in  so  far  as  it  was  an 
integral  part  of  the  combined  campaign  its  results  are 
scarcely  to  be  discerned.  It  gave  to  England  finally  the 
dominion  of  the  seas,  but  it  left  Napoleon  dicfcato3?-ef  the 
Continent.  So' incomprehensible  was  its  apparent  sterility 
that  to  fill  the  void  a  legend  grew  up  that  it  saved  England 
from  invasion.  That  legend  grew  green  till  the  present 
generation,  unsupported  as  it  was  by  the  plain  succession 
of  events.  Under  the  dry  glare  of  modern  historical 
methods  the  legend  has  withered,  and  in  its  place  springs 
up  the  question,  why  was  it  that  the  consequences  of 
Nelson's  last  achievement  fell  so  far  below  his  confident 
expectation,  and  why  did  Pitt  die  believing  himself  de- 
feated ? 

The  fault,  it  is  certain,  cannot  be  laid  to  his  door.  Not 
a  moment  had  been  lost  in  following  up  the  blow.  So 
soon  as  Napoleon's  change  of  front  was  known,  the  War 
Office  threw  itself  into  bringing  forward  the  disposable 
force  for  immediate  action,  and  by  the  first  week  of  October 
Castlereagh  had  settled  the  first  step  of  the  continental 
campaign.  Bernadotte,  in  conformity  with  Napoleon's  vast 
movement,  had  withdrawn  his  corps  from  Hanover,  and 
was  en  route  to  join  the  Grand  Army  for  the  invasion  of 
Austria,  leaving  nothing  behind  him  but  a  small  garrison  in 