


CHAPTER   XXV 

END   OF  THE   NAVAL  CAMPAIGN 

The  decision  which  Pitt's  policy  required  had  been  obtained. 
Napoleon's  attempt  to  use  his  fleet  in  the  Mediterranean 
had  been  crushed,  but  not  without  cost.  Small  as  it  was 
compared  with  the  results  obtained,  it  was  heavy  enough  to 
prevent  Collingwood  from  following  up  at  once  the  instruc- 
tions which  he  had  inherited  from  Nelson  to  support  the 
military  operations  of  the  Coalition  in  Italy. 

In  the  night  after  the  battle  the  threatening  gale  came 
up,  and  in  the  two  following  days  increased  to  such  violence 
that  had  it  not  shifted  a  little  to  the  southward  not  a 
single  prize  nor  one  of  the  dismasted  victors  could  have 
escaped  wreck.  Three  of  the  vessels  which  had  engaged 
Nelson  and  T4m&airc  most  hotly  went  down — BedoutaUe, 
Fougiieux,  and  Bucentaurc  herself.  Prisoners  had  to  be 
released,  and  with  friend  and  foe  working  resolutely  hand 
in  hand  it  was  only  by  the  most  desperate  exertions  that 
many  of  the  others  could  be  kept  afloat  and  off  the  rocks. 
To  increase  the  difficulty,  on  the  second  day  Cosmao,  one 
of  the  finest  captains  in  the  French  service  and  the  senior 
ofiicer  left  unwound ed  in  Cadiz,  boldly  put  out  with  five  of 
the  line  and  seven  cruisers  to  rescue  such  of  the  prizes  as 
were  drifting  towards  the  bay.  Believing  that  Dumanoir 
as  well  as  Gravina  had  got  into  Cadiz  with  ten  of  the  line, 
Collingwood  ordered  an  equal  number  to  cast  off  their  prizes 
and  form  battle  order.^  The  French  frigates  managed  to 
rescue  the  Santa  Anna  and  Ncptuiw,  both  of  which  were 
little  better  than  wrecks,  but  it  was  only  at  a  cost  which 
made  Nelson's  victory  more  decisive.     For  in  returning  to 

1  Collingwood  to  Cornwallis,  Oct.  26th:  Hist.  MSS.  Com.,  Various  Collec- 
tions, vi.  412. 

397 


398      END    OF    THE    NAVAL    CAMPAIGN     Oct.  22-24 

port  the  Ilayo,  a  three-decker,  together  with  one  eighty  and 
a  seventy-four  of  Cosmao's  squadron,  went  ashore.  Next 
day  the  Doaef/al,  which  just  before  the  battle  Nelson  had 
been  forced  to  send  into  Gibraltar  for  her  needs,  rejoined, 
and  together  with  some  of  CoUingwood's  least  injured  ships 
began  a  wholesale  destruction  of  the  prizes.  There  was 
nothing  else  to  be  done.  Several  that  had  gone  ashore 
were  burnt ;  even  the  splendid  Santisima  Trinidad  had  to 
be  sacrificed.  Of  the  nineteen  vessels  captured  four  were 
recaptured  and  eleven  wrecked  or  destroyed,  and  in  the 
end  only  four  were  brought  into  Gibraltar. 

By  the  24th  the  gale  had  abated  and  Collingwood  was 
able  to  re-establish  the  blockade  of  Cadiz — more  for  the  moral 
effect  than  anything  else,  for  he  now  knew  that  Dumanoir 
was  not  there  and  that  there  was  almost  nothing  seaworthy 
left  in  the  port  to  blockade.  Having  got  things  in  hand, 
one  of  his  first  cares  was  to  send  away  a  sloop  with  the 
new^s  to  Elliot  at  Naples.  His  despatch  admirably  presents 
the  situation  and  his  intentions.  "  As  it  is  of  great  import- 
ance," he  wrote,  "  to  the  affairs  of  Italy  and  Europe  in 
general  that  the  events  which  have  lately  taken  place  on 
this  coast  should  be  known  as  soon  as  possible  at  the  Court 
at  which  you  reside,  I  lose  no  time  in  informing  you,  Sir, 
that  on  the  19  th  instant  the  Combined  Fleet  sailed  from 
Cadiz,  their  destination  certainly  for  Italy.  On  the  21st 
.  .  .  the  action  began  at  noon  and  after  a  most  severe 
conflict  for  three  hours  the  enemy  gave  way  and  Admiral 
Gravina  retired  with  nine  ships  towards  Cadiz;  four  others 
(French  ships)  escaped  under  Kear-Admiral  Dumanoir  to 
the  southward  and  are  supposed  to  have  got  into  the 
Mediterranean  ;  leaving  to  his  Majesty's  squadron  twenty 
sail  of  the  line  captured.  .  .  .  The  most  decisive  and  com- 
plete victory  that  ever  was  gained  over  a  powerful  enemy. 
Eighteen  of  the  enemy's  ships  were  left  without  a  mast  in 
them,  and  I  will  venture  to  say  had  the  battle  been  fought 
in  the  Ocean  far  from  land  and  unembarrassed  by  the  rocks 
and  shoals  of  Trafalgar,  there  probably  would  not  one  of 
the  enemy's  ships  have  escaped.  On  the  22nd  a  gale  of 
wind  arose  which  continued  for  three  days,  sometimes  blow- 