

If,  then,  these  Avere  the  facts,  as  all  the  contemporary 
evidence  agrees,  was  the  battle  fought  in  accordance  with 
the  plan  of  attack  or  was  it  not  ?  The  answer  surely  is 
plain  and  simple  enough,  for  all  the  casuistry  with  which 
it  has  been  inwiebbed.  In  major  tactics  it  was :  in  its 
minor  tactics  it  Avas  not.  The  main  ideas,  as  the  Spanish 
Staff  saw,  were  fully  and  triumphantly  realised,  but  the 
actual  method  of  realising  them  was  not  the  one  Nelson 
had  indicated.  Possibly  he  had  discussed  the  method  he 
used  verbally,  but  of  this  we  know  nothing.  All  we  can 
say  is  that  in  the  culminating  hour  of  his  unmatched 
experience  he  flung  away  the  security  of  scientific  deploy- 
ment, and  in  its  place  he  staked  all  on  the  moral  and 
material  advantage  of  speed  and  momentum  against  an 
enemy  apparently  unformed  and  seeking  to  escape  him. 
The  risk  he  took  of  having  the  heads  of  his  two  columns 
isolated  by  a  loss  of  wind  or  crushed  prematurely  by  the 
concentration  to  which  he  exposed  them  naked,  almost 
passed  the  limits  of  sober  leading.  Its  justification  was 
its  success  and  the  known  defects  of  his  opponents.  Yet 
it  may  be  permitted  to  doubt  whether,  if  he  had  realised 
how  much  higher  was  the  spirit  of  his  enemy  than  he 
expected,  he  would  have  dared  so  greatly.  Blackwood 
lets  us  see  how  acutely  nervous  he  was  when  he  recognised 
how  good  a  face  they  put  upon  it,  but  it  was  then  too  late 
to  alter.     To  check  the  impetuous  attack  at  the  last  moment 


39^ 


THE    BATTLE    OF    TRAFALGAR 


in  order  to  substitute  one  of  lower  risk  would  have  been  an 
error  of  the  gravest  kind. 

Then  surely  ho  was  right.  The  lack  of  training  and 
sea  experience  in  his  enemy  on  Avhich  he  relied  saved  him 
and  justified  the  heroic  risk  he  had  taken.  Some  capable 
officers,  reviewing  the  tactics  afterwards  in  cold  blood, 
believed,  it  is  true,  the  luizard  was  unnecessary,  that  an 
hour  or  so  of  delay  in  attaining  the  position  he  had  designed 
Avould  have  left  time  enough  "to  complete  the  business " 
and  have  given  even  more  decisive  results.  It  is  a  point 
on  which  no  one  can  now  pass  judgment,  seeing  that  it 
depends  on  the  niceties  of  a  dead  art.  All  we  can  say 
is  thai  the  risk  he  took  was  great — that  it  was  not  one 
he  intended  to  take  when  he  made  his  plan,  nor  one  that 
his  captains  expected.  And  yet  when  all  is  said  and  done, 
that  final  resolution  remains  as  the  stroke  that  above  all 
others  touches  his  leadership  with  divinity.  Such  flashes 
of  genius  will  not  submit  to  reasoned  criticism,  they  are 
beyond  rule  or  principle,  and  every  efibrt  to  measure  them 
by  scientific  standards  can  only  be  lost  in  the  final  comment 
— "  It  was  a  glorious  victory." 