

1  Strachan  took  these  two  vessels  for  part  of  the  enemy's  squadron.  "  We 
saw  six  sail,"  he  wrote  to  Cornwallis.  "and  cannot  conceive  which  way  the 
other  two  went  " — Hist.  MSS.  Com.,  Var.  Coll.,  vi.  413. 


Order  of  Battle                                                                                         ^ 

Prendi  (Black)                                                                           ^ 
DuguxiyTroiuxv                N°  1                                                     (^       ^^ 
Farmidable                        N°2                                                       1/^ 

MontBUuLC                        N?3 

Sdpion,                              .Nf4 

Britisli  (WTiite)                                                         ^ 

Ojesar                                 N?  1                                         0 

Eero                                   N?Z 

4 

2 

3 

4        ^ 

12        3                                     4 

4 

12            3                                        4 

<^  <::3  <::d                   ^ 

'o:^Gi 

6 

7 

8 

9 

*9 

3           i.       -- 

10 

c::^     3      ' 

CtORGE.   PHILIPS   SON. I 


SIR  RICHARD  STRACHAN'S  ACTION. 

From  a  plan  attached  to  the  Report  of  Rear-Admiral  Dumanoir  le  Pelley 
(Archives  de  la  Marine  BB*  237).     Desbriere's  Trafalgar. 

To  fouoe.  page  402. 


Nov.  3-4      STRACHAN    CHASES   DUMANOIR  403 

other  frigate  SanUi  MaTyarita  added  to  the  units  iu  com- 
pany, he  had  Ortegal  in  sight,  and  by  nine  o'clock  the  chase 
appeared  again  in  the  north-east.  A  couple  of  hours  later 
the  Phoenix  and  Namuv  were  seen  coming  up,  and  behind 
them  a  stray  frigate  they  had  picked  up.  She  proved  to 
be  the  ESvolutionnaire  38,  a  heavily  armed  cruiser,  that 
went  some  way  to  make  up  for  the  loss  of  the  Bellona. 
The  force  at  his  disposal  thus  amounted  to  four  of  the  line 
and  an  equal  number  of  what  we  should  now  call  first-class 
cruisers,  and  here  lies  the  main  interest  of  the  encounter. 
For  the  first  time  in  anything  that  could  be  classed  as  a 
fleet  action  the  fighting  power  of  cruisers  was  about  to  be 
used  directly  to  influence  the  issue,  and  that  not  in  line 
with  the  battleships  in  the  primitive  style,  but  as  a  detach- 
ment with  separate  functions  in  accordance  with  the  most 
recent  ideas  of  our  own  time. 

All  day  on  the  3rd  the  weary  chase  went  on  towards 
Rochefort  with  the  British  slowly  gaining,  but  when  dark- 
ness fell  the  two  fleets  were  still  far  apart.  So  fine  was  the 
night,  however,  that  the  chase  was  easily  kept  in  sight,  as 
it  stood  on  in  line  of  bearing,  and  when  morning  broke  the 
Cccsar  was  barely  six  miles  from  the  Scipmi,  the  last  of 
Dumanoir's  four  ships.  Ahead  of  the  British  squadron  and 
just  within  gunshot  were  the  frigates  that  had  been  leading, 
and  before  six  they  had  taken  hold  of  the  French  rear. 
The  power  of  heavy  cruisers  to  stop  a  flying  battle  fleet 
was  never  better  shown.  In  an  hour  or  two  the  Margarita 
and  Phoenix  got  near  enough  to  keep  yawing  and  giving 
the  Scipion  their  broadsides.  Dumanoir  was  still  hoping  to 
avoid  an  action.  He  had  had  to  jettison  a  score  of  his 
eighty  guns  to  keep  his  flagship  afloat,  and  was  in  no  con- 
dition to  fight  even  an  inferior  force.  But  by  eleven  o'clock, 
finding  it  impossible  to  shake  ofl'  the  frigates  with  his  stern- 
chasers,  he  was  forced  to  haul  to  the  wind  in  line  of  battle, 
and  an  action  became  inevitable. 