

The  tragic  death  of  the  great  War  Minister  forced  on 
the  King  a  change  of  Government.  Amidst  the  ruins  of 
the  Coalition  he  had  no  choice  but  to  place  himself  in  the 
hands  of  the  Opposition.  With  the  rest  of  the  old  servants 
who  had  shaped  the  campaign  went  Barham.  Without 
honour  or  recognition  the  great  sailor,  who  had  handled 
the  fleet  with  a  mastery  never  equalled  since  Anson's  days, 
retired  into  the  obscurity  from  which  Pitt  had  called  him 
in  the  hour  of  need.  Not  a  word  can  be  found  to  show 
that  the  country  recognised  in  the  least  the  perfection  of 
his  work.  His  rigid  determination  to  permit  none  of  the 
old  evil  influences  to  prejudice  the  efficiency  of  the  machine 
with  which  Pitt  had  entrusted  him  ;  his  ruthless  attitude  to 
family  influence  and  his  sparing  reward  for  plain  duty  done 
had  set  against  him  those  who  make  reputations — the  self- 
seekers  in  society  and  the  service.  ''  The  present  Ad- 
miralty, I  hear,"  wrote  the  wife  of  Cornwallis's  Captain  of 
the  Fleet,  "  are  making  their  arrangements  of  cong6.  .   .   . 


42  2  CONCLUSION  May 

In  no  case  do  I  believe  they  would  have  remained  in, 
for  the  cry  is  violent  among  the  Navy  against  them,  and 
they  have  really  treated  Baker,  Sir  Richard  Strachan,  and 
others  like  delinquents,  Lord  Barham,  as  I  hear,  holding 
the  language  '  that  it  was  his  duty  to  make  other  people 
do  theirs,  because  it  was  their  duty.'  This  sounds  very 
fine,  iiicujnificoit,  and  let  us  add  nonsensical.  .  .  .  Lord 
Townshend  wrote  to  Lord  Barham  to  ask  him  to  make 
him  (Lord  James  Townshend)  a  lieutenant.  What  would 
you  say  if  I  assert  that  this  was  refused  ?  When  you  con- 
sider Lord  Townshend's  services,  his  respectability,  is  it  not 
incredible  ?  Lady  Townshend  is  very  indignant,  but  like- 
wise hurt  to  death  about  it ! "  ^  Trivial  as  is  the  letter,  it 
goes  far  to  explain  how  the  reputation  of  one  of  the  greatest 
of  our  strategists  and  administrators  suffered  so  complete 
an  eclipse.  Such  an  attitude  as  he  assumed  in  such  an 
age,  however  high  the  motive  or  the  occasion,  was  not  to 
be  forgiven ;  and  his  solitude  and  silence  did  the  rest.  No 
one  perhaps  except  Pitt  really  knew  what  he  had  done." 

At  the  Foreign  Office  the  change  was  as  complete  as 
at  the  Admiralty,  and  here  lay  Napoleon's  chance.  In  the 
desperate  condition  of  affairs  the  King  had  at  last  to  accept 
the  services  of  Fox.  The  office  he  selected  was  that  of 
Foreign  Secretary,  and,  as  was  only  to  be  expected,  no  sooner 
was  he  fairly  seated  than  he  tried  to  snatch  a  peace. 
Napoleon  seemed  equally  willing.  Within  a  fortnight  of 
Pitt's  death  Fox  was  in  direct  communication  with  Talley- 
rand. By  May  regular  negotiations  were  established  on  the 
basis  of  uti  possidetis.  But  the  rock  they  split  upon  was 
Sicily.  Fox,  it  is  true,  in  his  fanaticism  for  peace,  did 
his  best  to  throw  it  aAvay.  There  was  a  period  when 
Napoleon  might  have  had  it  on  excellent  terms,  but  he  let 
the  chance  go  by  in  the  intoxication  of  his  success,  and 