

It  was  at  Naples  that  the  reaction  was  first  felt.  On 
the  morrow  of  the  preliminaries  of  peace  being  agreed, 
St.  Cyr  received  orders  to  march.  On  the  25  th  the  Peace 
of  Presburg  was  signed  between  France  and  Austria,  and 
without  waiting  a  day  Napoleon  issued  a  bulletin  to  his 
army  announcing  that  the  Bourbon  dynasty  at  Naples, 
for  its  crimes  and  treason,  had  ceased  to  exist.  By  the 
end     of   the    month    the    Emperor's    brother    Joseph    had 

1  Cathcart  to  Castlereagb,  December  25th  (enclosing  Harrowby  to  Cath- 
cart, December  20th),  and  Cathcart  to  Castlereagb,  January  1st :  W.  0. 
(1)  176. 

2   D 


4 1 8  CONCLUSION  jan. 

received  orders  to  reign  in  his  stead,  and  Mass^na  had 
been  sent  down  to  command  the  army  that  was  to  put 
him  on  the  throne. 

At  the  urgent  entreaty  of  the  doomed  Queen,  Lacy 
and  his  staff  were  engaged  in  a  reconnaissance  of  the 
Neapolitan  frontier  to  sec  if  resistance  were  in  any  way 
possible  before  giving  in  to  Craig's  views.  On  January 
ord  he  was  back,  and  a  full  council  of  war  was  held 
for  a  final  decision.  Lacy  was  there  with  three  of  his 
staff,  and  Craig  with  Stuart  his  second  in  command,  and 
Campbell  his  second  brigadier,  as  well  as  the  Russian 
Commodore  Greig  and  Captain  Sotheron  of  the  Excellent, 
whose  year-long  vigil  was  still  unended.  The  unanimous 
decision  was  that  with  the  force  available  the  frontier 
was  indefensible.  As  to  the  alternative,  there  was  a 
difference  of  opinion.  The  question  was  whether  any 
part  of  the  kingdom  could  be  held  or  whether  the  allied 
forces  should  re-embark.  The  Russians  were  decidedly 
in  favour  of  abandoning  the  capital  and  retiring  the  whole 
of  the  troops — Russians,  British,  and  Neapolitan,  into 
Calabria,  which  they  were  convinced  could  be  retained. 
They  were  supported  by  Stuart  and  Bunbury  against  the 
British  commander-in-chief.  Craig  took  a  different  view. 
His  instructions  enjoined  that  whatever  he  could  or 
could  not  do,  he  was  to  make  sure  of  Sicily.  So  soon 
as  it  was  in  danger  he  was  to  occupy  Messina,  if  possible 
by  consent  of  the  King ;  if  not,  then  without  it.  Since 
neither  he  nor  Elliot  had  been  any  party  to  the  recent 
convention  by  which  Russia  had  undertaken  the  defence 
of  Naples,  they  did  not  regard  the  British  honour  pledged 
like  that  of  the  Russians.  Nevertheless  Craig,  as  a  soldier, 
did  feel  bound  to  Lacy,  just  as  Cathcart  did  to  Tolstoi. 
His  position  was  extremely  difiScult.  He  was  firmly  of 
opinion  that,  under  his  instructions,  the  hour  had  come 
to  secure  Sicily,  that  he  ought  at  once  to  place  Messina 
beyond  Napoleon's  reach,  but,  at  the  same  time,  he  could 
not  permit  his  view  to  carry  him  so  far  as  to  decline  to 
be  bound  by  the  decision  of  the  majority,  Accordingly  he 
entered  a  separate  written  opinion,  in  which  he  pronounced 