


4 1 6  CONCLUSION  Dec. 

into  Hungary.  There  were  even  rumours  that  a  French 
army  was  already  in  movement  for  Naples/ 

It  was  not  quite  true,  but  true  enough.  The  day 
before  Elliot  wrote  Napoleon  had  informed  Prince  Eugene, 
his  viceroy  in  Italy,  who  was  getting  nervous,  that  he 
was  about  to  send  back  St.  Cyr  with  5000  men.  But  it 
was  not  so  easy  to  find  the  troops.  An  armistice  with  the 
Austrians  had  been  signed  and  negotiations  for  peace  were 
commencing,  but  Vienna  was  showing  an  unexpectedly  stiff 
front.  Talleyrand  had  strict  orders  to  keep  Naples  out  of 
the  treaty,  but  Napoleon  was  doubtful  whether  he  Avould 
be  able  to  insist  on  its  annexation.  The  Archduke  was 
in  Hungary,  drawing  near  to  Vienna,  and  it  was  found 
necessary  to  absorb  Massena's  corps  into  the  Grand  Army. 
Clearly  Austerlitz  had  not  finished  the  business  unless 
Prussia  could  be  frightened  out  of  the  path  on  which  she 
had  set  her  timid  foot.  To  this  end  Napoleon  was  exerting 
the  whole  force  of  his  personality,  and  by  the  middle  of 
the  month  it  was  done.  Haugwitz,  the  Prussian  envoy, 
suddenly  collapsed,  and  on  December  15  th  set  his  hand 
to  an  abject  desertion  of  the  allies.  Still  the  end  was  not 
yet.  The  king  refused  to  ratify  what  Haugwitz  had  done, 
and  Austria  was  still  holding  out. 

Meanwhile  British  troops  were  still  pouring  across  the 
North  Sea.  Including  the  recruits  that  had  flocked  to 
the  German  Legion,  Cathcart  had  some  25,000  men  and 
was  already  stretching  forward  to  the  Emms  with  intent 
to  seize  Holland  while  it  was  still  denuded  of  French 
troops.'-  But  a  despatch  from  Harrowby  announcing  that 
the  armistice  which  followed  Austerlitz  had  been  signed, 
brought  all  to  a  standstill.  Kussia,  it  is  true,  had  been 
no  party  to  it,  but  the  Czar  was  on  his  way  back  to  St. 
Petersburg,  and  Prussia  was  begging  that  no  offensive 
movement  should  be  made.  Our  arrangement  with  her 
had   provided  for   Cathcart's  retreat  in   case  of  need  into 

1  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  December  10th:  Printed  by  Anriol,  ii.  r.93, 

2  A  retiivD,  dated  January  180G,  gives  the  whole  force  as  27,000,  of  which 
the  German  Leo;ion  were  1 1,000.  There  were  five  British  brigades  under 
Dundas,  Fraser,  Wellesley.  Shirbrook,  and  Hill.—  W.  0.  (\),  ISG,  January  2nd 
and  14th. 


Dec.  PRUSSIA   DESERTS  417 

Prussian  territory.  No  promise  had  yet  been  given,  and 
clearly  she  was  no  longer  to  be  trusted  without  one. 
Leaving  his  troops  where  they  were,  Cathcart  at  once 
went  up  the  AVeser  to  Nienberg  to  hold  a  conference  with 
Tolstoi. 

The  Russian  General  had  been  given  to  understand 
that  his  master  had  hope  of  continuing  the  war  in  concert 
with  Prussia  in  the  spring ;  but  for  the  present  it  was 
agreed  there  must  be  a  general  falling  back  to  a  defensive 
position.  The  investment  of  Hameln  Avas  raised,  Cathcart 
stopped  all  the  last  arrived  transports,  recalled  his  advanced 
posts  from  the  Emms,  and  began  to  concentrate  on  the 
lower  Weser  round  Bremen.  Still  he  had  no  thought  of 
abandoning  his  loyal  Russian  allies  without  express  orders 
from  home.  To  complete  his  position  he  prepared  to  seize 
Bremen,  as  the  best  means  of  securing  his  retreat  and 
of  defending  himself  if  the  ice  should  shut  him  in.^ 
There  was  indeed  little  hope  of  a  successful  issue,  and 
he  warned  the  Government  not  to  send  on  the  third 
division  of  his  force,  which,  after  sailing,  had  been  driven 
back  by  a  gale  with  some  loss.  It  was  inexpedient,  he 
thought,  in  the  circumstances,  to  lock  up  more  of  the 
disposable  force  in  North  Germany.  But  the  transports 
were  already  at  sea,  and  things  were  going  from  bad  to 
worse.  They  had  sailed  again  on  December  22nd,  and  next 
day  all  was  over.  Prussia  had  given  in ;  Austria  had 
agreed  to  terms  of  peace ;  and  the  main  Russian  army 
was  sullenly  retiring. 