

^  Harrowby 's  first  despatch  from  Berlin,  and  Don's  first  from  Cuxhaven,  are 
dated  November  17th.  See  Rose,  Third  Coalition,  p.  222,  and  War  Office  (1) 
In-letters,  186. 


4 1 2  CONCLUSION  Oct.-Nov. 

The  situation  indeed  was  gone  too  far  to  leave  much 
hope  of  saving  it.  If  Napoleon's  first  blow  had  stirred  up 
a  hornet's  nest  on  his  left  flank,  on  his  right  its  effect  had 
been  all  he  could  wish.  In  view  of  the  threatening  aspect 
of  affairs  in  Italy  he  had  been  compelled  to  withdraw 
St.  Cyr  from  the  south  and  to  use  his  corps  to  reinforce 
Massena  on  the  Adige.  To  Massena  had  been  committed 
the  task  of  holding  back  the  superior  army  of  the  Archduke 
Charles,  whose  mission  was  to  drive  the  French  out  of 
Italy  and  put  an  end  to  Napoleon's  new  kingdom.  Massena's 
function  was,  in  fact,  defensive,  but  the  moment  he  knew  of 
Ulm  he  sprang  forward  and  made  a  rough  attack  on 
the  Austrian  camp.  The  Archduke  hurled  him  back,  but 
seeing  how  desperate  was  the  condition  of  Austria,  it  was 
impossible  to  follow  up  his  success.  All  that  it  secured 
him  was  a  safe  retreat,  and  he  rapidly  fell  back  out  of  Italy 
to  try  to  save  the  situation  at  home. 

With  that  retreat  all  hope  of  effective  action  by  Craig 
and  the  Russians  was  gone.  It  was  on  October  30  th,  the 
day  of  Massena's  unsuccessful  attack  on  the  Archduke's 
camp,  that  Craig  finally  received  his  summons  to  meet  the 
Russian  expedition.  Syracuse  was  to  be  the  point  of  con- 
centration. But  so  perverse  was  the  weather  that  it  was 
ten  days  before  he  even  lost  sight  of  Malta.  Tired  of 
waiting,  the  Russians  passed  on,  and  eventually  the  two 
expeditions  concentrated  off  Cape  Passaro,  where  a  cen- 
tury and  a  half  before  the  elder  Byng  had  struck  one 
of  the  many  blows  which  England  had  delivered  to  save 
Sicily  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  a  first-class  naval 
power. 

Craig  had  brought  his  force  up  to  8000  men,  but  the 
promised  Russian  reinforcement  from  the  Black  Sea  had 
not  arrived,  and  all  told  the  combined  force  numbered  not 
more  than  20,000.  As  the  King  of  Naples  had  just  broken 
down  under  Napoleon's  pressure,  and  had  signed  in  despair 
a  treaty  of  neutrality,  there  was  some  doubt  as  to  what  to 
do.  The  Russian  envoy,  however,  had  little  difficulty  in 
persuading  the  high-spirited  Queen  to  denounce  the  treaty, 
and  to  join  the  Coalition,  promising  that  the  kingdom  would 


Nov.  CRAIG   AT   NAPLES  413 

be  defended.  Elliot  always  said  he  opposed  so  liagrant  a 
breach  of  faith,  and  believed  no  good  could  come  of  it.  He 
was  certainly  no  party  to  the  arrangement,  but  under  it 
both  the  Russian  and  British  troops  were  invited  to  land. 
It  was  not  till  November  20th  they  anchored  in  Naples 
Bay,  and  then  it  Avas  only  to  hear  the  staggering  news  of 
Mack's  capitulation  and  the  Archduke's  retreat.^ 