

The  incapacity  and  blindness  with  which  the  great 
soldier  directed  his  naval  campaign  was  only  equalled  by 
the  astounding  brilliance  and  certainty  of  touch  with  which 
ashore  he  snatched  himself  free  from  Pitt's  toils.  It  was 
one  of  the  many  dramatic  strokes  of  the  campaign  that  on 
the  day  that  Trafalgar  was  fought,  as  Nelson  and  CoUing- 
wood  were  contending  in  their  snail's  race  to  be  first  in  the 
hour  of  reckoning,  Napoleon  was  issuing  from  the  camp  of 
the  Grand  Army  at  Elchingen  in  Bavaria  his  famous  Ninth 
Bulletin.  It  told  how,  two  days  before,  General  Mack,  in 
accordance  with  Nelson's  prophecy,  had  surrendered  at  Ulm 
with  30,000  men.  The  effect,  taken  together  with  that  of 
the  actions  which  led  to  it,  was  that  the  Austrian  home 
army  had  almost  ceased  to  exist.  By  a  last  stroke  of  irony 
it  had  happened  just  as  Villeneuve  was  being  driven  out  of 
Cadiz  by  his  master's  ruthless  treatment  and  there  was  no 
longer  need  for  the  fleet  to  be  hazarded  to  almost  certain 
destruction. 

Staggering  as  was  the  blow  which  Napoleon  had  delivered, 
it  by  no  means  involved  the  end  of  the  Coalition.  It  had 
been  obtained  only  at  the  cost  of  sinning  against  a  high 
strategical  canon  which  condemns  operations  calculated  to 
raise  up  fresh  enemies.  In  order  to  outmanoeuvre  Mack 
Napoleon  had  violated  Prussian  territory,  and  the  insult 
gave  the  War  party  at  Berlin  the  upper  hand  of  the 
vacillating  king.  Advances  were  made  to  the  other 
Powers  engaged,  the  nebulous  threat   on  Napoleon's  left 


Nov.  THE    NORTHERN    EXPEDITION  411 

flank  began  to  materialise  rapidly,  and  on  November  3rd, 
as  Strachan  was  in  the  heat  of  his  chase  after  Dumanoir, 
the  Treaty  of  Potsdam  was  signed.  By  its  terms  Prussia 
accepted  the  British  proposals,  and  agreed  that  if  within 
four  weeks  Napoleon  did  not  accept  her  mediation  she 
would  join  the  Coalition  with   180,000   men. 

At  last  Pitt's  great  idea  seemed  to  be  realised,  and 
Lord  Harrovvby,  a  member  of  the  Cabinet,  was  hurried  off 
to  Berlin  on  a  special  mission  to  push  things  forward  into 
action.  There  he  arrived  in  the  middle  of  November,  just 
as  the  news  of  Trafalgar  was  flashing  over  Europe  and 
as  Don  was  landing  in  the  Weser.^  Harrowby  carried  full 
powers  to  arrange  for  a  complete  alliance,  to  define  the 
common  objects  and  to  concert  a  plan  of  campaign.  The 
main  object  was  to  secure  prompt  action,  and  Prussia,  like 
Austria  before  her,  was  timidly  bent  on  wasting  time  with 
an  armed  mediation.  Harrowby  was  authorised  to  go  even 
beyond  what  England  had  already  offered.  He  was  to 
promise  a  magnificent  subsidy  for  all  her  troops  and  the 
command  of  the  auxiliary  army  on  the  Weser  if  she 
would  begin  operations  in  Moravia  at  once.  He  was  also 
empowered  to  deal  with  Sweden,  Denmark,  and  certain  of 
the  Westphalian  States,  and  to  undertake  that  by  the 
spring  England  would  provide  70,000  men  for  use  on  the 
Continent  or  in  maritime  expeditions  as  the  Allies  desired. 
To  mark  England's  disinterestedness  he  was  to  say  that  if 
the  Coalition  forced  Napoleon  to  a  general  peace  she  was 
willing  to  give  up  without  compensation  all  her  conquests 
excepting  only  Malta  and  the  Cape.  Amongst  the  military 
experts  consulted  was  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  who  had  a 
brigade  in  the  expeditionary  force.  He  threw  cold  water 
on  the  whole  plan — not  for  any  inherent  strategical 
defects — but  because,  with  the  same  sure  military  insight 
that  had  prompted  Nelson  to  protest  against  Mack,  he  was 
certain  the  Prussian  army  could  not  be  mobilised  in  time 
to  do  any  good. 