

^  Details  of  the  whole  episode  are  to  be  found  in  the  despatches  of  Don, 
of  Brioadier  Deoken  (chief  inielliirence  officer  with  Don),  and  of  Lord  Cath- 
cart, the  British  Commander-in-chief,  all  in  War  Office  (1)  la-letters,  18G. 
Castlereagh's  are  in  Ibid.  (0),  Out-letters  {Secretary  of  State),  13,  and  in  his 
Correspoiidence,  Second  Series,  vol.  ii.     Harrowby's  are  in  Rose,  Third  Coalition. 


Dec.  2-15  EFFECTS    OF   AUSTERLITZ  415 

Clearly,  then,  Napoleon's  position  was  one  that  could  not 
be  maintained  for  long,  and  certainly  not  over  the  winter. 
Some  of  the  remnants  of  Mack's  army  had  succeeded  in 
joining  the  Prussians,  while  others  had  escaped  through  the 
Tyrol  and  come  down  in  rear  of  Massena.  At  all  costs, 
then,  another  blow  must  be  dealt,  and  Napoleon,  in  spite  of 
the  danger  that  was  brewing  on  his  left  rear,  staked  every- 
thing on  a  rapid  forward  movement  to  meet  the  advancing 
Russians  still  further  from  his  base.  His  rapidity  and 
daring  were  triumphant.  At  Austerlitz,  on  December  2nd, 
the  fatal  blow  was  delivered,  and  Pitt's  grand  fabric  was  in 
ruins.  Though  at  first  the  truth  was  not  realised,  the  Third 
Coalition  had  ceased  to  exist. 

The  respite  on  which  Prussia  insisted  had  just  expired, 
but  instead  of  keeping  her  word  and  immediately  taking 
advantage  of  the  desperate  position  into  which  Napoleon  had 
pushed  himself,  she  began  to  weaken  at  once.  Harrowby, 
fearing  the  worst,  had  to  warn  Don  not  to  commit  himself 
too  far.  He  was  then  at  Verden  on  the  Weser,  and  so  sure 
had  seemed  the  position  that  he  had  recently  ordered  the 
empty  transports  to  return  for  further  duty.  Now  he  had 
to  recall  them  in  view  of  a  retreat,  and  he  himself  had  to 
stand  fast  as  he  was.  This  was  the  situation  which  greeted 
Cathcart,  when  on  December  15th  he  reached  Cuxhaven, 
and  which  staggered  the  anxious  Generals  in  their  canton- 
ments at  Naples. 

Elliot  was  in  despair.  The  day  after  the  news  of 
Austerlitz  reached  the  Neapolitan  Court,  he  sent  home  a 
hopeless  despatch  reviewing  the  situation.  The  mis- 
fortunes and  blunders  of  the  Austrian  Generals,  he  said, 
had  in  their  fatal  consequences  passed  all  calculation.  In 
the  interval  between  the  embarkation  of  the  troops  at 
Corfu  and  Malta  and  their  arrival  at  Naples,  the  formid- 
able power  of  the  Austrian  monarchy  had  melted  aw^y. 
"  I  am  tempted,"  he  wrote,  "  to  say  with  Shakspeare,  '  It 
has  vanished  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  dream.' " 
Vienna,  the  Tyrol,  and  Venetia  were  in  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  and  the  Archduke  Charles,  who  had  the  only 
Austrian   array  still  in  existence,  was   said  to  be  retiring 