

Still  to  reverse  Pitt's  policy,  as  he  lay  helpless,  was 
more  than  the  Ministers  had  the  heart  to  do  without  his 
consent.  Castlereagh  and  Hawkesbury  therefore  took  the 
responsibility  of  going  to  his  bedside.  The  interview  was 
the  last  blow.  Till  then  there  had  been  fair  hope  of 
recovery,  but  on  the  morrow  it  was  obvious  he  was  dying. 
It  was  the  last  piece  of  business  he  did  for  his  country,  and 
to  the  end  he  strove  against  the  wreck  of  his  heroic  policy. 
The  last  shred  of  hope  must  be  clung  to.  Orders  went  out 
to  General  Cathcart  not  to  withdraw  at  once,  but  that  he 
was  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  re-embark  the  whole 
force  the  moment  he  got  the  word  from  Berlin.  He  had 
not  long  to  wait.  A  despatch  from  Lord  Harrowby  almost 
immediately  quenched  even  the  last  spark  of  hope ;  and  as 
Craig  was  anchoring  at  Messina  definite  and  urgent  orders 
Avent  off  to  Cathcart  to  re-embark  forthwith,  and  to  Keith 
to  cover  the  retirement. 

So  fell  the  last  fragment  of  all  the  dying  Minister  had 
hoped  of  his  great  Coalition.  If  the  British  position  were 
to  be  secured  it  must  be  done  single-handed.  Pitt's  wisdom 
had  foreseen  it,  and  provided  the  means  in  the  two  little 
forces  of  Craig  and  Baird.  They  still  remained  to  close  the 
chapter  with  a  welcome  gleam  of  success. 

With  Craig's  transports  before  Messina,  Sicily  was  safe. 
He  could  secure  his  point  at  any  moment,  and  was  content 
to  hold  his  hand  till  the  consent  of  the  Neapolitan  Court 


Feb.  CRAIG    OCCUPIES    MESSINA  421 

to  an  occupation  was  obtained,  or  till  need  arose  to  act 
without  it.  His  action  was  not  stayed  for  long.  Three 
days  after  he  arrived,  as  London  was  hushed  in  its  waking 
with  the  news  that  Pitt  was  dead,  the  Excellent  was  weighing 
anchor ;  St.  Cyr  was  in  motion ;  the  hour  for  which  Nelson 
more  than  a  year  before  had  bidden  her  stand-by  had  come, 
and  the  King  was  on  board.  He  landed  at  Palermo,  where 
Acton  was  waiting  for  him,  and  with  his  old  adviser  at  his 
side  there  was  little  doubt  how  things  would  go  for  Craig. 
The  Execlleiit  went  back  for  the  Queen,  and  she  too  sought 
the  refuge  Nelson  had  provided.  A  day  or  two  later  she 
was  with  the  King  again,  and  all  was  settled.  An  invitation 
came  at  once  for  Craig  to  land,  and  on  February  16th 
Messina  was  occupied. 

It  was  the  last  stroke  of  the  Trafalgar  campaign — and 
fitly  so ;  for  it  was  the  central  point  around  which  it  had 
turned.  Little  as  seemed  the  gain  in  the  midst  of  the  vast 
continental  struggle,  it  was  enough ;  and  Napoleon  knew  it, 
as  was  quickly  confessed,  although  for  a  while  he  believed 
that  the  removal  of  Pitt's  firm  hand  from  the  helm  would 
enable  him  to  do  with  England  what  he  would. 