

^  Mrs.  Nugent  to  Cornwallis,  Jan.  23,  1806  :  Hist.  MSS.  Co7n.,Various  Collcc- 
tions,  vi.  417. 

2  Barham  lived  in  retirement  nearly  till  the  end  of  the  war,  dying  on 
June  17,  1813,  at  the  advanced  age  of  eighty-seven.  There  was  a  rumour 
that  he  was  to  be  succeeded  by  Lord  St.  Vincent  "as  Lord  High  Admiral  at 
sea,  to  command  from  Cape  Finistcrre  to  John  o'  Groat's  House  in  Scotland," 
but  this  was  entirely  contrary  to  the  British  tradition,  and  his  place  was 
given  to  a  civilian,  Charles  Grey,  the  Earl  Grey  of  the  Reform  Bill. 


June  MAIDA  423 

then  it  was  too  late.^  It  was  a  piece  of  mad  perversity. 
But  for  Napoleon,  at  the  zenith  of  his  power,  the  one  frag- 
ment of  success  that  was  left  to  England  in  Europe  was 
unendurable  to  the  pride  which  had  been  so  completely 
humbled  at  sea.  His  first  orders  to  Joseph  on  his  accept- 
ing the  crown  of  Naples  had  been  that  he  was  immediately 
to  seize  Sicily.  He  had  merely  to  throw  troops  across  in 
the  confusion  that  reigned,  and  the  thing  would  be  done. 
Apparently  Napoleon's  own  failure  had  taught  him  nothing. 
So  far  from  being  able  to  carry  out  his  brother's  order, 
Joseph  had  not  yet  succeeded  in  possessing  himself  of 
Calabria.  Supported  by  a  squadron  under  Sir  Sidney 
Smith,  Gaeta  was  still  Hying  the  Bourbon  flag,  and  the 
"  brigands  "  were  holding  out  in  the  hills.  Napoleon  kept 
urging  more  energetic  measures,  but  though  General  Rejnier 
was  operating  in  the  mountains  with  7000  men,  little  solid 
progress  was  made. 

In  view  of  the  secret  negotiations  with  Fox,  the  delay 
was  exasperating,  and  the  pressure  on  easy-going  Joseph 
grew  stronger.  "  The  English,"  wrote  the  Emperor  in  the 
middle  of  June,  "  are  willing  to  recognise  you  as  King  of 
Naples,  but  without  Sicily  they  will  refuse  to  recognise  you. 
Peace  could  be  made  if  you  were  master  of  Sicily."  Joseph's 
answer  must  have  been  galling  in  the  extreme.  Craig  had 
gone  home  on  sick  leave,  and  Stuart,  left  in  command, 
suddenly  threw  some  5000  of  his  men  across  the  straits, 
and  assisted  by  a  naval  brigade  from  Sidney  Smith's 
Squadron,  inflicted  a  severe  defeat  upon  Reynier  at 
Maida.  It  was  the  first  time  Napoleon's  troops  had 
crossed  bayonets  with  the  British  army,  and  they  had 
been  beaten  by  an  inferior  force.  To  add  to  the  vexation 
of  it  and  the  loss  of  prestige,  the  whole  of  Calabria  was 
immediately  in  flames.  A  strong  counter-movement  set  in 
against  Joseph,  and  so  far  from  his  being  able  to  seize 
Sicily,  it  looked  for  a  while  as  though  he  were  to  lose  his 
crown  as  suddenly  as  it  had  been  gained. 

From  that  day  till  the  end  of  the  war  in  1814,  every 