

What  was  to  be  done  ?  To  Craig  at  least  it  was  obvious 
that  the  French  could  return  whenever  they  liked,  and 
invade  the  Neapolitan  dominions  in  such  strength  as  it 
would  be  impossible  for  the  local  forces  and  their  allies  to 
resist.  Elliot  was  of  Craig's  opinion  that  any  further  at- 
tempt to  defend  Naples  could  only  end  in  disaster.  His 
diplomacy,  he  knew,  was  powerless  in  face  of  the  Russian  as- 
cendancy, but  he  trusted  that  the  British  General's  influence 
over  General  Lacy  was  such  that  the  British  view  would 
prevail.2  But  even  if  it  did,  the  difficulties  of  the  situation 
were  far  from  solved.  Simply  to  re-embark  the  troops 
was  to  leave  the  unhappy  Queen  to  the  extremity  of 
Napoleon's  vengeance  which  their  reception  would  have 
earned  her.  True,  there  was  a  valid  and  urgent  excuse  for 
a  re-embarkation.  A  message  had  come  from  the  Arch- 
duke begging  that  the  expeditionary  force  should  be  brought 
to  Venice  to  act  on  Masscna's  rear  and  stop  his  pursuit ; 
but  this  was  equally  out  of  the  question.  Not  only  was 
the  operation  beyond  the  strength  available,  it  was  also  too 
late,  and  was  certainly  beyond  Craig's  instructions.  The 
two  Generals  agreed,  therefore,  to  go  into  cantonments  and 
collect  transport  and  horses  for  their  cavalry  and  guns,  and 
to  watch  developments  till  further  orders. 

They  had  not  long  to  wait.  The  situation  indeed  had 
been  developing  with  rapidity.  On  November  3rd,  the 
same  day  that  the  Treaty  of  Potsdam  brought  Prussia  into 
the  Coalition,  Castlereagh  issued  final  orders  for  the  whole 
disposable  force  of  the  kingdom  to  prepare  for  foreign 
service.     By  the  end  of  the  four  weeks  on  which  Prussia 

1  Craig  to  Castlereagh,  November  2nd  and  December  9th  :    War  Office  (1) 
280.  •'       ^  '' 

2  Elliot  to  Mulgvave,   Dec.   10th  :  Auriol,   ii.  693.      Napoleon  to  Prince 
Eugene,  and  Berthier  to  St.  Cyr  :  Ibid.,  pp.  704-5. 


414  CONCLUSION  Nov. 

insisted  for  hor  armed  mediation  all  would  be  ready, 
but  things  were  not  going  quite  smoothly.  Prussia  was 
showing  herself  difficult  about  the  ultimate  settlement 
to  be  achieved.  Hanover  was  her  Naboth's  vineyard,  and 
amongst  other  things  she  wanted  England  to  agree  to  its 
cession  in  exchange  for  Frisia  and  part  of  Westphalia. 
This  proposal,  however,  the  Cabinet  refused  even  to  com- 
municate to  the  king.  As  for  the  mediation  it  mattered 
little.  It  was  now  understood  to  be  nothing  but  a  dilatory 
device  to  gain  time  for  mobilisation.  Before  the  end  of 
November,  Pitt  had  not  only  seen  the  full  terms  of  the  treaty, 
but  Harrowby  had  also  received  a  comprehensive  plan  of 
campaign  from  the  German  Staff  which  was  all  that  could 
be  desired,  and  fitted  nicely  with  the  ideas  of  the  British 
Cabinet.  England  was  specially  to  charge  herself  with 
securing  the  mouths  of  the  Elbe,  Weser,  and  Emms,  which 
would  be  the  lines  of  supply  for  the  Combined  Army  of 
the  North,  and  to  further  as  much  as  possible  the  flow  of 
stores  from  Russia  to  the  King  of  Prussia's  magazines. 
Since  the  overthrow  of  Napoleon's  fleet  it  was  a  duty  which 
presented  no  difficulties.  As  for  the  operations  of  the  Allies 
ashore  the  general  plan  of  campaign  was  based  in  full 
accordance  with  the  traditions  of  the  elder  Pitt's  time  on 
defensive  action  upon  the  Emms  and  Weser  to  cover  the 
main  operations  till  events  justified  something  more  drastic. 
All  was  going  well  except  for  the  Swedes,  who  refused  to 
advance  till  Prussia  had  committed  herself  by  an  act  of 
war.  Operations  w^ere  amicably  concerted  between  the 
Duke  of  Brunswick,  who  was  commanding  in  chief,  Tolstoi, 
who  commanded  the  Russian  contingent,  and  Bliicher,  who 
was  Chief  of  the  Staff  in  a  Prussian  corps  commanded  by 
the  Grand  Duke  of  Hesse.  Hameln  was  already  invested 
by  Tolstoi  and  Don ;  and  Lord  Cathcart,  with  the  main 
body  of  the  British  expeditionary  force,  was  at  Yarmouth 
only  waiting  for  a  wind.^ 