


Jan.  CRAIG    LEAVES   NAPLES  419 

strongly  against  the  idea  of  holding  Calabria,  as  a  measure 
that  could  do  no  good  either  to  Naples  or  the  common 
cause.  Nevertheless,  he  said  he  considered  himself  bound 
in  honour  not  to  desert  his  Russian  colleague,  and  solely 
on  that  consideration  he  consented  to  share  the  risks 
and  dangers  which,  in  his  eyes,  the  proposed  operation 
promised.^ 

The  decision  was  immediately  conveyed  to  the  Court. 
They  were  in  despair,  but  worse  was  yet  to  come.  Into  the 
midst  of  their  distracted  protests  broke  an  aide-de-camp  of 
the  Czar.  He  had  come  in  hot  haste  from  Austerlitz,  and 
he  handed  Lacy  a  peremptory  order  to  evacuate  Italy. - 
On  a  smaller  scale  it  was  a  betrayal  as  barefaced  as  that 
of  Avhich  Prussia  had  been  guilty.  Its  sole  and  sufficient 
excuse  was  hard  necessity.  Craig's  conscience  at  least  was 
clear,  his  hands  were  free,  and  he  hesitated  no  longer  to 
carry  out  his  plain  instructions.  His  troops  were  marched 
down  again  to  their  landing-place  at  Castellamare,  while 
the  Russians  returned  to  Baia.  In  vain  the  Court  entreated 
for  a  delay  while  they  attempted  to  avert  Napoleon's 
vengeance  through  the  Pope.  It  was  a  hopeless  expedient. 
Mercy  was  as  much  out  of  the  question  as  resistance,  and 
after  a  few  days'  hesitation  the  Russians  returned  to  Corfu, 
and  Craig  on  January  20th  anchored  his  force  before 
Messina. 

On  the  North  Sea  the  same  unhappy  scene  was  being 
enacted.  As  Craig  marched  down  to  Castellamare  news 
reached  London  that  Prussia  was  certainly  intending  to 
desert  the  Coalition,  and  to  make  the  best  terms  she  could 
for  herself.  To  complete  the  general  perplexity,  Pitt  was 
on  his  death-bed,  stricken  down  by  the  shock  of  Austerlitz. 
He  had  just  come  back  from  Bath,  worse  rather  than  better 
for  the  change,  and  was  in  no  condition  to  transact  business. 

^  Aiiriol,  ii.  745  :  Protocol  of  the  Council  of  War. 

2  Elliot  to  Mulgrave,  January  l.'^th  (Auriol,  ii.  778).  The  reason  for  this 
order  does  not  seem  to  be  known,  but  it  may  be  not  unconnected  with  the 
armistice  and  the  fact  that  the  remnants  of  the  Russian  army  were  permitted 
to  retire  without  further  molestation.  Tolstoi  appears  to  have  told  Cathcart 
the  idea  of  Lacy's  recall  was  to  concentrate  in  Poland  for  an  expected 
campaign  in  concert  with  Prussia.  Cathcart  to  Castlereagh,  December  25th  : 
W.O.  (1),  186. 


420.  CONCLUSION  jan 

But  the  crisis  was  acute.  The  troops  had  been  sent  in  the 
first  instance  mainly  in  the  hope  of  stiffening  Prussia's 
attitude  to  Napoleon,  and  she  Avas  obviously  becoming  again 
like  wax  in  his  hands.  The  Ministers  had  to  face  the 
])ossibility  that  at  any  moment  she  might  accept  the  bribe 
of  Hanover  and  declare  for  Napoleon.  In  that  case  half 
of  our  whole  disposal  force,  which  was  now  with  Cathcart, 
would  be  in  serious  jeopardy.  On  January  3rd  he  had 
occupied  Bremen,  and  had  concentrated  everything  in  its 
immediate  neighbourhood.  But  with  Prussia  hostile  the 
position  was  scarcely  tenable,  even  with  the  rivers  open. 
It  was  obvious  that  Cathcart  must  be  either  reinforced  or 
withdrawn  at  once  before  winter  locked  him  in. 