


430  APPENDIX    A 

Concert.  There  is  also  an  alteration  in  the  7th  Separate  Article 
which  becomes  necessary  in  consequence  of  the  terms  on  which 
His  Majesty  has  expressed  his  readiness  to  admit  of  a  substitute 
for  Malta  in  the  Mediterranean. 

Having  stated  to  your  Excellency  the  view  which  His  Majesty 
has  of  the  probable  degree  of  efficacy  of  the  conditions  provided  by 
the  Treaty,  if  they  should  be  accepted  by  Bonaparte,  I  trust  your 
Excellency  will  be  able  to  convince  the  Russian  Cabinet  that  the 
evacuation  of  Malta  by  Great  Britain  under  such  a  state  of  things, 
would  not  be  consistent  with  the  future  security  and  permanent 
tranquillity  of  Europe.  If  the  continent  should  be  left  (as  stated 
above)  open  to  the  future  aggressions  of  Bonaparte,  and  that  the 
restraint  on  the  naval  operations  of  France  in  the  iMediterranean 
should  be  removed  by  the  surrender  of  the  British  Establishment 
in  that  sea ;  the  coasts  of  Italy,  Turkey,  Greece,  and  Egypt 
would  be  exposed  to  the  unrestricted  enterprizes  of  the  common 
enemy ;  and  would  soon  be  subject  to  his  absolute  control. 

It  would  exceed  the  limits  of  a  dispatch  to  state  (and  would 
indeed  be  superfluous  and  unnecessary  to  your  Excellency,  who  are 
so  well  informed  of  them)  the  long  course  of  historical  events,  in 
which  the  protecting  influence  of  the  British  Navy  in  the 
Mediterranean  has  been  exerted  for  the  advantage  of  Europe. 
It  is  however  essential  to  draw  your  Excellency's  attention  to  the 
particular  circumstances  which,  at  the  present  time,  render  a 
British  station  in  that  quarter  of  peculiar  importance.  To  prove 
this  position  it  is  sufficient  to  observe  the  earnest  and  unremitting 
exertions  of  the  French  Government  to  secure  to  itself  the 
command  of  every  port  in  the  Mediterranean.  Already  in 
possession  of  Toulon,  of  Corsica,  and  of  many  of  the  ports  of 
Italy,  and  with  an  entire  influence  over  the  ports  of  Spain, 
Bonaparte  has  arbitrarily  annexed  to  France  the  Island  of  Elba, 
and,  if  he  had  succeeded  in  the  attempt  which  he  made  subsequent 
to  the  Treaty  of  Amiens  to  place  Malta  in  the  hands  of  the 
Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,  deprived  as  they  were  even  of 
the  benefits  of  the  provisions  of  that  Treaty,  and  of  all  means  of 
maintaining  their  independence,  he  might  again,  at  pleasure,  have 
either  purchased  or  seized  that  Island,  and  have  thereby  secured 
the  absolute  control  of  Sicily  and  Naples,  and  the  means  of 
effecting  his  designs  against  the  Ottoman  territories.  In  the 
absence  of  a  British  fleet,  what  power  could  check  the  progress  of 
French  ambition  to  these  ends?  Would  JNIalta,  in  the  hands  of 
Russia,  operate  that  check,  without  a  British  fleet  ?     No ;  but  it 