

^  For    these    negotiations    see  the  excellent  monograph    by    Coquelle, 
Napoleon  et  Aivjleterrc,  partii.     Translation  by  G.  D.  Knox. 


424  CONCLUSION  jan. 

effort  of  Napoleon's  to  win  the  heart  of  the  Mediterranean 
was  fruitless.  It  remained  in  British  RandsTin"llie~TasrT6 
rnark  the  justness  with  which  Pitt's  great  campaign^  had 
been  conceived.  He  had  failed  to  save  Europe,  but  he  had 
secured  the  British  Empire.  Beside  the  vital  outpost  in 
Sicily  he  had  won  another  as  valuable  in  the  south.  By 
the  middle  of  January  Baird  was  in  full  possession  of  the 
Cape.  These  two  positions  were  the  solid  return  of  the 
unmatched  work  which  Pitt's  Admirals  had  performed  at 
sea,  and  together  they  rendered  the  Empire  impregnable. 

That  and  no  less  was  what  the  campaign  of  Trafalgar 
achieved.  It  was  not  merely  that  it  secured  the  British 
Isles  from  invasion.  The  ramparts  it  built  stretched  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth.  It  was  not  merely  that  it  destroyed  the 
French  naval  power.  By  securing  bases  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean and  towards  the  East,  it  made  it  impossible  for  any 
partial  revival  of  Napoleon's  navy  to  place  any  part  of  our 
oversea  possessions  in  serious  jeopardy.  Against  any  other 
man  than  Napoleon,  with  any  other  ally  than  Prussia  as  she 
then  was,  it  might  well  have  done  much  more.  As  it  was, 
the  sea  had  done  all  that  the  sea  could  do,  and  for  Europe 
the  end  was  failure. 


APPENDICES 


APPENDIX   A 


PITT'S   INSTRUCTIONS   TO   LORD   G.    LEVESON-GOWER 

[Foreign  Office.     Russia.     58.] 

Downing  Street,  June  7,  1805. 

My  Lord, — In  addition  to  the  contents  of  my  Dispatch  No.  15 
of  this  date,  in  which  I  treat  of  the  proposal  that  His  Majesty 
should  consent  without  reserve  to  an  offer  to  be  made,  in  the  last 
resort,  to  Bonaparte  by  Monsieur  de  Novossilzoff  of  the  evacua- 
tion of  Malta,  as  a  condition  of  the  immediate  adoption  of  the 
arrangements  proposed  in  the  Treaty  signed  on  the  11th  of  April 
at  St.  Petersburg!!,  it  appears  expedient,  at  this  crisis,  that,  in 
order  to  place  in  their  true  light  the  great  and  extensive  sacrifices 
already  consented  to  by  the  King,  I  should  declare  more  at  large 
to  your  Excellency  the  sense  which  His  Majesty  entertains  of  the 
comparative  situation  of  Great  Britain  and  of  the  nations  on  the 
Continent  of  Europe,  with  respect  to  the  power  and  views  of 
France,  lest  those  liberal  sacrifices  which  are  the  result  of  a  great 
and  comprehensive  view  of  general  Policy,  should  be  misconceived 
as  the  effect  of  impending  danger  or  of  anxious  apprehension.  It 
cannot,  however,  have  escaped  the  observation  of  the  Cabinet  of  St. 
Petersburgh  that,  whilst  the  energies  of  the  Continental  Powers 
are  held  in  suspense  between  the  danger  of  submission  and  the 
apprehended  consequences  of  opposing  resistance  to  the  un- 
interrupted course  of  insults  or  encroachment  on  the  part  of 
France,  Great  Britain  has  disproved  the  vainglorious  boast  of  the 
French  Government  by  a  contest  maintained,  with  advantage, 
single-handed. 