


444  APPENDIX    B 

to  avow.  I  have  hitherto  in  vain  represented  to  the  Portuguese 
Minister  the  necessity  for  procuring  from  his  Court  an  accurate 
statement  of  the  means  which  it  possesses,  and  of  the  assistance 
it  would  require  to  enable  Portugal  to  hold  the  language  of 
independence,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  provide  such  means  of 
defence  as  would  secure  that  character  to  the  country. 

The  Chevalier  de  Souza  has  indeed  stated  in  conversation  that 
15,000  auxiliary  troops  for  a  twelvemonth  would  give  such  pro- 
tection to  the  country,  and  so  much  energy  to  the  Government, 
that  they  would  be  enabled  to  place  the  native  force  on  such  a 
footing  as  should  render  it  after  that  period  sufficient  for  its  own 
defence.  I  doubt,  however,  whether  any  energy  could  be  created 
in  the  Portuguese  Government  unless  the  Prince  Regent  could 
be  induced  to  commit  the  administration  of  affairs  to  different 
Ministers,  who  should  not  either  from  the  operation  of  their  fears 
or  their  prejudices  appear  so  entirely  devoted  to  France.  The 
recall  of  Messrs.  de  Souza  and  d'Ameida,  or  the  appointment  of 
any  other  persons  of  energy  and  decision  of  character,  might 
possibly  restore  Portugal  to  such  a  state  of  exertion  as  might 
place  that  country  out  of  the  reach  of  French  aggression.  That 
point  being  established,  it  might  be  worth  consideration  whether 
the  present  disposition  of  the  Spanish  nation,  of  a  great  proportion 
of  its  ancient  nobility,  and  of  the  Prince  of  Asturias,  assisted  by 
Portugal  and  the  auxiliary  forces  employed  in  that  country, 
might  not  at  once  deliver  the  King  of  Spain  from  the  control 
of  France  and  the  domineering  influence  of  the  Prince  of  Peace, 
and  once  again  firmly  establish  the  barrier  of  the  Pyrenees 
between  Spain  and  France.  I  am  aware  that  such  an  event 
might  more  reasonably  be  expected  as  the  consequence  of  a 
general  confederacy  of  the  great  military  Powers  of  the  Continent, 
than  as  the  partial  operation  of  a  more  limited  concert,  but  in 
suggesting  even  less  probable  subjects  of  discussion,  I  am  fulfilling 
the  disposition  of  His  Majesty's  Government  to  comply  with  the 
desire  of  the  Russian  Cabinet  that  the  means  of  acting  against 
France  without  the  assistance  of  Austria  and  Prussia  should  be 
amply  discussed  and  fully  considered. 

[Endorsed.]  DRAFT 

To  Lord  G.  L.  Gower, 

July,  1805. 


APPENDIX   C 

THE   TRAFALGAR   SIGNAL,   1816 

Signal  No.  I.  7.     Cut  through  the  Enemy's  Line  in  the  Order  of 
Sailing  in  Two  Columns 

The  Admiral  will  make  known  what  number  of  ships  from  the 
Van  Ship  of  the  enemy  the  Weather  Division  is  to  break  through 
the  enemy's  line,  and  the  same  from  the  rear  at  which  the  Lee 
Division  is  to  break  through  their  line. 