

Another  advantage  of  this  modification  of  the  attack  is  that  every 
enemy's  ship  is  doubled  on  by  the  British  ships  as  they  pass  to 
their  proper  stations.  Thus  in  the  lee  line  No.  8  fires  her  star- 
board guns  on  the  ship  which  No.  9  is  engaging  to  leeward,  and 
reserves  her  larboard  guns  to  rake  her  proper  opponent  as  she 
passes  through  the  line  under  her  stern.  Similarly  the  British 
No.  10  would  double  on  the  two  ships  engaged  by  Nos.  8  and  9 
in  succession,  and  so  on.  If  the  leading  ship  in  each  division 
survived  the  first  shock,  as  they  did  at  Trafalgar,  the  attack  is 
obviously  very  formidable,  but  in  a  commanding  breeze  it  could 
easily  be  parried  or  avoided  by  the  irregular  French  methods. 

Its  interest,  however,  remains,  viz.,  that  being  clearly  founded 
on  Nelson's  Memorandum,  it  represents  an  end-on  attack  in  line- 
ahead,  and  seeks  by  an  ingenious  modification  to  minimise  its 
obvious  tactical  defects. 


APPENDIX   D 


LORD    NELSON'S    MEMORANDUM 

\Ho1ograj)h  draft  in  Nelson's  hand,  unsigned ;  amended  in  that  of  Ms 
diajjlain,  Dr.  Scott.  Tico  sheets  {eight  jiages  4^o),  British 
Museum].'^ 

Menf.^  Memorandum 

Victory,  off  Cadiz,  9th  Oct.  1805.^ 
Thinking  it  almost  impossible  to  bring  a  fleet  of  forty  sail  of  the 
line  into  line  of  battle  in  variable  winds  thick  weather  and  other 
circumstances  which  must  occur,  without  such  a  loss  of  time  that 
the  opportunity  would  probably  be  lost  of  bringing  the  enemy  to 
battle  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  the  business  decisive — 

I  have  therefore  made  up  my  mind  to  keep  the  fleet  in  that 
position  of  sailing  (with  the  exception  of  the  first  and  second  in 
command)  that  the  order  of  sailing  is  to  be  the  order  of  battle, 
placing  the  fleet  in  two  lines  of  sixteen  ships  each  with  an  advanced 
squadron  of  eight  of  the  fastest  sailing  two-decked  ships  ivhich^ 
will  always  make  if  wanted  a  line  of  twenty-four  sail,  on  whichever 
line  the  commander-in-chief  may  direct. 

The  second  in  command  will  ^  after  my  intentions  are  made 
known  to  him  have  the  entire  direction  of  his  line  to  make  the 
attack  upon  the  enemy  and  to  follow  up  the  blow  until  they  are 
captured  or  destroyed. 

If  the  enemy's  fleet  should  be  seen  to  windward  in  line  of  battle, 
and  that  the  two  lines  ^  and  the  advanced  squadron  can  fetch  them  ^ 

^  Paragraphing  and  punctuation  are  given  as  in  the  original.  From  the 
nature  of  Scott's  amendments  (printed  in  italics)  it  would  seem  as  though  he 
read  the  draft  over  to  Nelson  and  suggested  improvements  in  grammar,  &c., 
as  he  went  on. 

2  Inserted  by  Scott. 

2  Nelson  first  wrote  here  "  in  fact  command  his  line  and,"  but  the  words 
are  deleted,  presumably  to  make  it  clear  he  was  not  to  have  the  direction  of 
his  line  at  first, 