


442  APPENDIX    B 

sequence  of  that  threat,  to  justify  the  occupation  of  Naples  by  the 
allies  of  his  Sicilian  Majesty.  If  the  threat  should  be  followed 
by  war,  the  assistance  will  of  course  be  invited  and  accepted,  if  it 
be  followed  by  a  compelled  acknowledgment  of  a  title,  which 
implies  in  terms  the  annihilation  of  the  Sicilian  Monarchy,  the 
King  of  Naples  can  no  longer  be  considered  in  a  situation  to  give 
the  consent  or  refusal  of  an  independent  Sovereign,  and  his 
deliverance  may  be  lawfully  undertaken  without  requiring  his 
assent. 

With  respect  to  the  second  consideration,  it  has  undoubtedly 
been  a  question  frequently  agitated,  whether  an  absolute  defensive 
in  war  were  admissible  in  principle  ;  or  possible  in  practice,  with 
a  general  conclusion  against  the  adoption  of  such  a  state  of  war ; 
in  the  present  instance,  however,  it  is  worthy  of  consideration 
how  far  such  a  system  may  operate  to  the  effectual  injury 
of  the  particular  enemy  against  whom  it  shall  be  employed. 
There  is  every  reason  to  expect  that  the  command  of  the  sea  and 
the  resources  of  the  countries  within  the  reach  of  the  two  proposed 
points  of  operation,  would  enable  the  Allies  to  supply  their 
armies  at  a  much  cheaper  rate,  and  in  greater  abundance,  than 
could  the  enemy  acting  against  those  lines  of  frontier,  and 
drawing  his  supplies  from  the  country  immediately  behind  him. 
The  consideration  of  relative  numbers  may  also  make  an  important 
difference  in  the  expense  of  the  warfare,  if,  from  the  nature  of  the 
country,  a  comparatively  small  army  should  be  found  siifficient  to 
occupy  the  exertions  of  a  very  considerable  force  of  the  enemy. 
A  long  and  unsuccessful  series  of  efforts  would  tend,  more  than  any 
thing,  to  lower  the  military  estimation  of  Buonaparte,  and  thereby 
to  overturn  his  usurped  dominion.  This  however  must  depend 
upon  the  answer  to  the  second  head  of  consideration,  which  I  have 
not  materials  to  ascertain,  and  which  must  depend  upon  the 
numbers  proposed  to  be  employed.  This  also  depends  upon  the 
solution  of  the  question  in  the  3rd  and  last  head  :  "  How  far  it 
has  been  ascertained  that  either  or  both  of  the  lines  of  frontier 
alluded  to,  are  capable  of  such  a  defence  as  may  defy  the  undivided 
exertions  of  the  French  power."  This  question  requires  an  earnest 
and  attentive  consideration.  It  is  in  all  cases  difficult  to  decide 
upon  the  expediency  and  practicability  of  military  operations, 
without  having  first  received  very  detailed  information  from 
intelligent  officers  well  acquainted  with  the  local  circumstances 
and  military  resources  of  the  countries  in  which  a  campaign  is  to 
be  conducted.     This  difficulty  must  be  felt  even  on  an  enlarged 