

'  •'  Friends  "  deleted  and  "  rear  '  substituted. 


NELSON'S    MEMORANDUM  449 

neither  be  seen  or  perfectly  understood  no  captain   can  do   very 
wrong  if  he  phices  his  ship  alongside  that  of  an  enemy. 

1  Of  the  intended  attack  from  to  windward.     The  enemy  in  the 
line  of  battle  ready  to  attack. 


The  divisions  of  the  British  fleet  will  be  brought  nearly  within 
gunshot  of  the  enemy's  centre.  The  signal  will  most  probably  then  - 
be  made  for  the  lee  line  to  bear  up  together  to  set  all  their  sails, 
even  steering-sails  ^  in  order  to  get  as  quickly  as  possible  to  the 
enemy's  line  and  to  cut  through,  beginning  from  the  12  ship 
from  the  enemy's  rear.  Some  ships  may  not  get  through  their  exact 
place  but  they  will  always  be  at  hand  to  assist  their  friends  and 
if  any  are  thrown  round  the  rear  of  the  enemy  they  will  effectually 
complete  the  business  of  twelve  sail  of  the  enemy. 

Should  the  enemy  wear  together  or  bear  up  and  sail  large  still 
the  twelve  ships  composing  in  the  first  position  the  enemy's  rear 
are  to  be  the'^  object  of  attack  of  the  lee  line,  unless  otherwise 
directed  from  the  commander-in-chief  which  is  scarcely  to  be 
expected  as  the  entire  management  of  the  lee  line  after  the 
intentions  of  the  commander-in-chief  is  ^  signified  is  intended  to  be 
left  to  the  judgment  of  the  admiral  commanding  that  line. 

The  remainder  of  the  enemy's  fleet  34  sail  are  to  be  left  to 
the  management  of  the  commander-in-chief,  who  will  endeavour 
to  take  care  that  the  movements  of  the  second  in  command  are  as 
little  interrupted  as  possible.^ 

^  The  draft  breaks  off  before  this  clause  with  a  space.  "Of  the  intended 
attack  from  to  windward,"  occupies  just  one  line,  so  that  it  may  or  may  not 
have  been  intended  as  a  heading  to  all  that  follows.  The  diagram  is  very 
roughly  drawn.  The  lines  are  not  straight  or  parallel,  as  in  the  diagram 
above,  but  their  relative  proportions  and  distances  (half  scale)  are  preserved. 

2  "  Then  "  inserted  by  Nelson. 

^  In  the  upper  margin  is  this  note:  "Vide  instructions  for  signal, 
Yellow  with  blue  fly.  Page  17.  Eighth  flag,  with  reference  to  appendix." 
The  "Appendix"  was  a  small  pamphlet  of  additional  signals  issued  by  the 
Admiralty  in  1804.  This  signal,  however,  is  not  in  it.  The  presumption  is 
that  Nelson  himself  added  it  to  the  Appendix. 

*  Inserted  by  Scott.  ^  Scott  suggested  "are." 

^  Here  Nelson  came  to  the  extreme  end  of  the  second  sheet  of  paper. 

2   F 


APPENDIX   E 

LISTS   AND    PLANS   SHOWING   THE    MANNER   OF 
ENGAGING   AT  TUAFALGAK 

1.  A  list  attached  to  Collingwood's  official  despatch.  Nicolas, 
vii.  215. 