

His  Majesty  thinks  it  necessary  also  expressly  to  declare,  that, 
in  agreeing  to  make  this  last  sacrifice  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining 
security  for  the  Continent  by  negotiation  rather  than  war,  he 
can  consider  this  offer  as  binding  only  in  the  event  of  a  pacific 
arrangement,  and  that  if  the  negotiation  should  not  take  place,  or 
should  not  prove  successful,  it  shall  at  no  future  time  be  made  a 
claim,  that  this  important  possession  shall  again  become  matter 
of  negotiation.  Although  the  King  has  every  reason  to  be  con- 
vinced, that  this' disposition  on  his  part  to  concur  in  the  views  of 
His  Imperial  Majesty,  will  be  met  in  every  respect  with  a  corre- 
sponding sentiment  on  the  part  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia, — His 
Majesty  has  nevertheless  especially  commanded  me  to  repeat  to 
Your  Excellency  in  this  confidential  dispatch,  his  firm  deter- 
mination not  to  concur  in  any  proposal  that  can  countenance  the 
slightest  expectation  of  a  revision  of  the  Maritime  Code, — and  to 
e;xpress  His  Majesty's  confident  hope,  that  His  Imperial  Majesty 
will  not  persevere  in  the  idea  of  a  measure,  which  however 
contrary  to  the  intention  of  His  Imperial  Majesty,  will  neverthe- 


43  8  APPENDIX    A 


less   bear    the   appearance   of  a  disposition  unfavourable    to    the 
rights  and  intei 
practical  result. 


rights  and  interests  of  Great  J>ritain,  and  which  can  lead  to  no 


[Endorsed.]  DRAFT 

To  Loud  G.  L.  Gower, 

Ju?ie  7thj  1805. 

Ko.  16. 

By  the  Messenger  Elsworth. 


I 

i 


APPENDIX   B 


FURTHER   INSTRUCTIONS   TO  LORD   G. 
LEVESON-GOWER 

[Foreign  Offi.ce.     Russia.     58.] 

Downing  Street,  July  1805. 

My  Lord, — The  information  received  by  a  courier  just  arrived 
from  Berlin  is  in  some  respects  so  decisive,  and  in  every  point  of 
view  so  important,  that  I  lose  no  time  in  addressing  some  observa- 
tions to  Your  Excellency  on  the  present  state  of  affairs,  and  on 
the  course  which  it  may  in  consequence  become  expedient  to  adopt 
in  conjunction  with  Russia.  At  the  same  time  that  His  Majesty's 
Government  learned  that  the  arrogant  usurpation  by  Buonaparte 
of  the  obvious  objects  of  the  proposed  negotiation,  had  determined 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  to  put  an  end  to  the  mission  of  Monsr. 
Novossilzoff,  and  that  His  Imperial  Majesty  had  ordered  the 
French  passports  to  be  returned  into  the  hands  of  the  Prussian 
Minister,  information  was  also  received  that  Prussia  is  decidedly 
averse  to  any  exertion  for  its  own  independence,  or  for  the 
deliverance  of  Europe,  and  that  Austria,  though  more  directly 
threatened,  and  more  immediately  in  danger,  has  not  manifested 
any  disposition  to  accede  to  the  proposed  concert,  or  to  enter  into 
any  more  active  alliance  with  Great  Britain  and  Russia  than  that 
which  she  had  contracted  with  the  latter  Power  in  the  defensive 
Treaty  concluded  in  November  1804. 