

To  execute  this  signal  the  fleet  is  to  form  in  the  Order  of 
Sailing  in  two  columns,  should  it  not  be  so  formed  already  ;  the 


*% 


7^ 


'2% 


9 


10  II 


12 


13 


^  I  -O  1  ^  i   ^  i  '^\^» 


3 


DIAGRAM   OF   THE   TRAFALGAR  SIGNAL 
From  the  Signal  Book  of  1816 

leader  of  each  column  steering  down  for  the  position  pointed  out, 
where  he  is  to  cut  through  the  enemy's  line. 

If  the  Admiral  wishes  any  particular  conduct  to  be  pursued  by 
the  leader  of  the  Division  in  which  he  happens  not  to  be,  after  the 
line  is  broken,  he  will  of  course  point  it  out.  If  he  does  not,  it  is 
to  be  considered  that  the  conduct  of  the  Lee  Division,  after  break- 
ing the  line,  is  left  to  its  commander. 

In  performing  this  evolution,  the  second  astern  of  the  leader  is 
to  pass  through  the  line  astern  of  the  ship  next  ahead  of  where  her 
leader  broke  through,  and  so  on  in  succession,  breaking  through 
all  parts  of  the  enemy's  line  ahead  of  their  leaders^  as  described  in 
the  Plate. 

445 


446  APPENDIX    C 

By  this  arrangement  no  sliip  will  have  to  pass  the  whole  of  the 
enemy's  line.  If,  however,  in  consequence  of  any  circumstance, 
the  rear  ships  should  not  be  able  to  cut  through  in  their  assigned 
places,  the  captains  of  these  ships,  as  well  as  the  ships  which  are 
deprived  of  opponents  in  the  enemy's  line  by  this  mode  of  attack, 
are  to  act  to  the  best  of  their  judgment  for  the  destruction  of  the 
enemy,  unless  a  disposition  to  the  contrary  has  been  previously 
made. 

It  will  also  be  seen  that  by  breaking  the  line  in  this  order  the 
enemy's  van  ships  will  not  be  able  to  assist  either  the  Centre  or 
the  Rear  without  tacking  or  wearing  for  that  purpose. 

Note. — Owing  to  the  diagram  in  the  plate  being  apparently 
incomplete,  the  significance  of  the  signal  and  its  instruction  is 
somewhat  obscured.  The  diagram  shows  an  attack  end-on  in  two 
divisions  upon  an  equal  number  of  ships,  all  of  which  are  engaged. 
But  the  first  and  last  paragraphs  of  the  instructions  make  it  clear 
that  a  concentration  on  the  rear  and  centre  of  a  superior  fleet  is 
intended  as  at  Trafalgar,  and  we  must  assume  that  the  unengaged 
van  of  the  enemy  is  not  shown.  The  intention  then  becomes 
clear.  It  is  a  device  to  reduce  the  risk  which  was  so  widely 
recognised  in  Nelson's  attack.  So  far  as  the  weather  column  is 
concerned,  the  exposure  of  the  leading  ship  to  a  dangerous  con- 
centration remains.  But  in  the  lee  column  it  is  avoided.  Instead 
of  leading  for  the  van  ships  of  the  section  which  she  is  to  cut  off, 
she  leads  for  the  rearmost,  and  is  thus  less  exposed  to  a  con- 
centrated fire.  The  rest  of  her  division  then  engage  in  succession 
and  in  reverse  order  till  the  assigned  interval  is  reached. 