

■*  For  the  words  "  to  windward  in  line  of  battle,  and  that  the  two  lines," 
Nelson  first  wrote,  "to  windward,  but  in  that  position  that  the  two  lines." 

^  Here  are  deleted  the  words,  "  I  shall  suppose  them  forty-six  sail  in  the 
line  of  battle."  The  marginal  note  (see  below,  note  6  on  next  page)  was 
substituted. 


448  APPENDIX    D 

they  will  probably  be  so  extended  that  their  van  could  not  succour 
their  rear. 

I  should  therefore  probably  make  the  second  in  command's^ 
signal,  to  lead  through  about  the  twelfth  ship  from  the  rear  (or 
wherever  he  ^  could  fetch,  if  not  able  to  get  as  far  advanced).  My 
line  would  lead  through  about  their  centre  and  the  advanced 
squadron  to  cut  two  three  or  four  ships  ahead  of  their  centre  so 
far  as  to  ensure  getting  at  their  commander-in-chief  on  whom 
every  effort  must  be  made  to  capture  [him].^ 

The  whole  impression  of  the  British  fleet  ^  must  be  to  overpower 
from  two  to  three  ships  ahead  ^of  their  commander-in-chief 
supposed  to  be  in  the  centre  to  the  rear  of  their  fleet.  I  will 
suppose^  twenty  sail  of  the  enemy's^  line  to  be  untouched,  it  must 
be  some  time  before  they  could  perform  a  manoeuvre  to  bring  their 
force  compact  to  attack  any  part  of  the  British  fleet  engaged  or 
to  succour  their  own  ships,  which  indeed  would  be  impossible, 
without  mixing  with  the  ships  engaged.^  Something  must  be  left 
to  chance  ;  nothing  is  sure  in  a  sea  fight  beyond  all  others.  Shot 
will  carry  away  the  masts  and  yards  of  friends  as  well  as  foes 
but  I  look  with  confidence  to  a  victory  before  the  van  of  the 
enemy  could  succour  their  rear  '^  and  then  that  the  British  fleet 
would  most  of  them  be  ready  to  receive  their  twenty-sail 
of  the  line,  or  to  pursue  them,  should  they  endeavour  to 
make  off. 

If  the  van  of  the  enemy  tacks  the  captured  ships  must  run  to 
leeward  of  the  British  fleet,  if  the  enemy  wears  the  British  must 
place  themselves  between  the  enemy  and  the  captured  and 
disabled  British  ships  and  should  the  enemy  close  I  have  no 
fears  as  to  the  result. 

The  second  in  command  will  in  all  possible  things  direct  the 
movements  of  his  line  by  keeping  them  as  compact  as  the  nature 
of  the  circumstances  will  admit.  Captains  are  to  look  to  their 
particular  line  as  their  rallying  point.     But  in  case  signals  can 

^  "  Your"  deleted. 

■-■  Deleted  by  Nelson. 

^  "  Fleet"  inserted. 

*  For  "I  will  suppose"  he  first  wrote  **  supposing." 

''  "  Enemy's  "  inserted. 

^  Here  Scott  inserted  an  asterisk  referring  to  a  note  which  Nelson  wrote 
in  the  upper  margin,  reversing  the  paper.  It  is  as  follows:  "The  enemy's 
fleet  is  supposed  to  consist  of  4(5  sail  of  the  line,  British  fleet  40.  If  either 
be  less,  only  a  proportionate  number  of  enemy's  ships  are  to  be  cut  off. 
B.  to  be  ^  superior  to  the  E.  cut  off." 