


\ 


FURTHER    INSTRUCTIONS  441 

be  collected  and  employed  for  the  general  deliverance  of  Europe. 
The  occupation  of  the  district  between  the  Elbe  and  the  Baltic 
would  not  indeed  hold  out  so  early  or  such  extensive  prospects  of 
any  general  influence  on  the  course  of  events.  The  occupation 
however  of  that  district  would,  in  the  first  instance,  have  the 
effect  of  checking  the  progress  of  French  ambition,  and  of  counter- 
acting any  secret  negociation  which  may  be  on  foot  for  the 
occupation  and  partition  of  those  countries.  Further  advantages 
might  by  contingent  events  be  derived  from  such  a  position,  if 
securely  maintained,  a  force  might  ultimately  be  collected  from 
Hanover,  Denmark,  and  Sweden,  which,  reinforced  by  a  powerful 
army  of  Russians,  and  assisted  by  demonstrations  and  co-operation 
on  the  side  of  Flushing,  might,  if  the  Dutch  nation  should  mani- 
fest a  disposition  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  slavery  with  which  they 
are  oppressed,  effect  the  deliverance  of  the  United  Provinces, 
especially  if  the  collection  of  such  a  force  and  the  temptation  of  the 
acquisitions  to  be  offered  to  Prussia  should  at  length  induce  that 
Government  to  consult  its  true  interest  and  adopt  a  firm,  wise,  and 
dignified  line  of  policy. 

Such  being  the  immediate  and  possible  advantages  to  be 
derived  from  the  secure  occupation  of  the  two  points  in  question, 
there  arise  three  other  heads  of  consideration  necessary  to  be 
discussed  before  those  measures  can  be  determined. 

1st.  Upon  what  grounds  the  occupation  of  those  countries  is 
to  be  assumed. 

2nd.  How  great  a  force,  and  at  what  expense,  it  will 
necessarily  be  employed,  how  long  and  with  what  expectation  of  a 
favourable  result  this  defensive  system  can  be  continued  ;  and, 
lastly,  how  far  it  has  been  ascertained  that  either  or  both  the 
lines  of  frontier  above  alluded  to,  are  capable  of  such  a  defence 
as  may  defy  the  undivided  exertions  of  the  French  power. 

Upon  the  first  head  perhaps  no  great  difficulty  may  exist : 
there  is  little  doubt  that  with  respect  to  Swedish  Pomerania, 
Mecklenburgh,  Lubeck,  &c.,  the  respective  Sovereigns  of  those 
districts  would  readily  invite  or  receive  the  security  offered  by 
Great  Britain  and  Russia.  At  Naples  there  probably  exists  an 
equal  disposition  to  invite  the  assistance  of  a  united  British  and 
Russian  army,  if  such  a  force  should  present  itself  within  reach 
of  affording  immediate  protection  to  those  Kingdoms ;  indeed  the 
recent  threat  of  Buonaparte  that  he  would  consider  Naples  as  in 
a  state  of  war  with  France  if  his  title  of  King  of  Italy  should  not 
be  acknowledged  on  a  given  day,  would  be  sufficient,  in  any  con- 