

1  There  are  two  other  plans  given  by  Desbri^re  which  make  Collingwood's 
attack  practically  parallel.  One  is  that  prepared  by  Captain  Epron  of  the 
Ar()onaute.  The  other  is  from  the  archives  of  the  Captain-General  of  Cadiz, 
but  both  are  so  fanciful  in  other  particulars  that  they  cannot  be  regarded  as 
of  suflScient  authority  to  contradict  the  weight  of  higher  testimony  that  is 
against  them. 


PLANS    OF    TRAFALGAR  453 

7.  The  Nicolas  Plan. — Published  by  him  in  the  Nelsoiis  Despatches 
(vol.  vii.  p.  301),  1846,  without  any  indication  of  its  origin.  This 
also  is  clearly  not  based  on  the  Admiralty  plan,  for  Gravina's 
squadron  is  shown  prolonging  the  rear,  and  not  passing  up  to 
leeward,  as  in  Magendie's  ;  while  in  the  British  fleet  Britannia  is 
fourth  in  Nelson's  line,  and  Dreadnought  is  leading  Collingwood's 
second  division.  Moreover,  it  shows  the  irregularity  in  Nelson's 
van,  but  not  quite  in  the  same  way  as  the  Craig  plan. 

In  endeavouring  to  prove  that  Nelson's  attack  was  not 
practically  vertical,  some  writers  would  discard  the  testimony  of 
the  existing  plans.  A  letter  of  Captain  Moorsom's  is  quoted,  in 
which  he  says  :  "  I  have  seen  several  plans  of  the  action,  but  none 
to  answer  my  ideas  of  it.  Indeed,  scarce  any  plans  can  be  given. 
It  was  irregular,  and  the  ships  got  down  as  fast  as  they  could  and 
into  any  space  when  they  found  the  enemy,  without  attending  to 
their  place  in  the  line."  On  this  three  remarks  arise.  1.  The 
letter  was  written  from  Spithead  on  December  4th,  before  the 
Craig  plan  was  published.  2.  He  is  clearly  referring  not  to  the 
general  plan  of  attack,  but  to  the  positions  of  individual  units 
in  action.  3.  In  a  previous  letter  from  Gibraltar,  November  1st, 
he  himself  gave  a  rough  diagram  showing  the  British  fleet  ^' going 
down  in  two  columns  pointing  towards  the  centre,"  and  only 
slightly  inclined  from  the  perpendicular.  (See  Great  Sea  Fights, 
ii.  p.  242,  where  the  diagram  is  omitted.  The  original  is  in  the 
possession  of  Lady  Longmore.) 


APPENDIX   F 


SCHEDULE    OF   SIGNALS    MADE    AT   TRAFALGAR 

Foil  tlie  tactics  of  any  battle  the  primary  autliority  must  always 
be  the  signals  actually  recorded.  An  attempt,  therefore,  has  been 
made  below  to  tabulate  the  whole  of  the  signals  entered  in  the 
logs  and  journals  of  the  ships,  with  their  signification,  number, 
ship  by  whom  made,  and  ship  or  ships  to  whom  made.  To  each  is 
appended  the  particular  log  or  logs  in  which  it  is  found,  with  the 
time  of  making  as  recorded  by  the  different  ships. 

With  regard  to  these  "  logs,"  it  should  be  remembered  that 
the  official  record  of  a  ship's  movements  and  of  the  events  that 
transpire  on  board  is  the  log  hook.  At  the  time  of  Trafalgar  the 
ship's  log  hook  was  kept  by  the  master,  who  was  the  navigating 
officer.  It  is  therefore  known  as  the  masters  log.  The  master,  in 
common  with  the  other  officers,  was  also  required  to  keep  '*  an 
exact  and  perfect  journal."  When  the  ship  was  paid  olf  he  had  to 
deliver  a  copy  of  the  log  and  of  the  journal  to  the  Navy  Office.  As 
a  rule  the  masters'  journals  were  simply  copies  of  the  log,  made 
solely  to  comply  with  the  regulations.  In  certain  cases,  of  which 
the  Temeraire  is  the  most  striking  instance,  the  log  contains  many 
important  signals  omitted  from  the  journal.  Both  have  been 
denoted  by  the  letter  ''  M." 