

2.  The  Britannia  list. — From  the  Journal  of  Lieutenant  John 
Barclay  of  that  ship.     Great  Sea  Fvjlits  (N.R.S.),  ii.  215. 

3.  The  ''Naval  Chronicle''  piarz.— Published  in  the  Naval 
Chronicle^  December  31,  1805  (vol.  xiv.  p.  495),  and  reproduced  in 
Mr.  Newbolt's  Year  of  Trafalgar,  p.  98.  This  was  the  earliest 
plan  printed.  It  represents  three  stages  of  the  approach  as  in  the 
official  French  plan  {antey  p.  360),  namely,  the  first  "  At  daylight," 
and  the  second  "  At  9  o'clock,"  showing  the  British  fleet  in  process 
of  forming  sailing  order  as  it  bore  up  ;  and  the  third  "  At  12  o'clock 
at  noon,"  showing  the  actual  moment  of  contact  with  the  columns 
almost  vertical  to  the  enemy's  line,  but  slightly  converging.  In 
the  accompanying  note  we  are  told  it  was  engraved  from  a  drawing 
furnished  *'  by  a  gentleman  who  copied  it  from  the  original  in  the 
possession  of  the  Admiralty."  ...  It  further  states  that  "  The 
situation,  as  here  represented,  has  been  vouched  to  be  correct 
by  Admiral  Villeneuve  in  the  original  sent  to  the  Admiralty." 
Several  errors,  and  particularly  in  the  order  of  the  allied  ships, 
suggest  that  the  work  was  hurriedly  and  carelessly  done  by  the 
anonymous  gentleman. 

4.  The  Craig  Plan. — This  little-known  plan  is  a  hand- 
coloured  copperplate  engraving  from  the  design  of  the  famous 
William  Marshall  Craig,  drawing-master  to  the  Princess  Charlotte, 
and  miniature  painter  to  the  Duke  of  York  {Dictionary  of  National 
Biography),  who  was  the  most  fashionable  designer  of  his  time. 
It  was  published  on  January  9,  1806,  by  Edward  Orme,  "Print- 
seller  to  the  King,"  a  well-known  naval  and  military  publisher. 
It  contains  the  noon  position  only ;  that  is,  the  actual  attack,  and 
bears  the  inscription  :  "  Position  of  the  combined  forces  of  France 
and  Spain  at  the  commencement  of  the  action,"  &c.  At  the  foot 
is  this  note,  "  The  above  plan  has  been  certified  as  to  its  correctness 


PLANS    OF   TRAFALGAR  451 

by  the  Flag-officers  of  the  Euryalui^  and  Admiral  Villeneuve." 
From  this  it  would  appear  that  it  was  taken  from  the  same 
original  as  the  Naval  Chronicle  plan,  though  it  is  more  carefully 
done.  That  this  was  its  origin  is  certain,  for  at  the  top  half  of  the 
plate  is  a  picture  purporting  to  represent  Nelson  explaining  his 
plan  of  attack  to  his  officers,  and  on  the  table  before  him  is  a  plan 
showing  the  attack  as  it  was  delivered,  with  all  three  positions  as 
in  the  Naval  Chronicle.  The  inference,  then,  from  what  we  learn 
from  these  two  sources,  is  that  shortly  after  the  battle,  while 
Collingwood  and  Villeneuve  were  on  board  the  Euryalua  with  their 
staffs,  a  plan  was  prepared  in  concert  between  them,  and  that  it 
was  forwarded  to  the  Admiralty  in  the  Euryalus  when  she  went 
home  with  despatches  and  Villeneuve.  It  must  be  doubted,  how- 
ever, whether  the  plan  was  regarded  as  authentic  for  anything  but 
the  disposition  of  the  Combined  Fleet,  which,  indeed,  is  all  the 
inscription  claims.  Clarke  and  M 'Arthur  state,  on  what  they 
regarded  as  very  high  authority,  that  "the  British  fleet  was 
certainly  not  in  the  position  stated  in  the  plan  sent  to  the 
Admiralty,  and  signed  Magendie,  captain  of  the  Burentaurey 
{Life  of  Nelson,  vol.  ii.,  Continuation,  p.  167.)  Clearly,  then,  "the 
plan  sent  to  the  Admiralty  "  must  have  been  the  original  of  that 
signed  by  Magendie,  which  is  given  by  Colonel  Desbriere  in  his 
Trafalgar,  Appendix,  p.  186.  By  "  Flag-officers  of  the  Euryalus, ^^ 
therefore,  the  Craig  print  may  mean  not  Collingwood  and  his  staff, 
but  the  French  "  flag-officers"  only ;  but  as  Villeneuve  is  specially 
mentioned  as  the  French  authority,  it  is  equally  likely  that  the 
British  "  flag-officers"  are  meant. 