

In  any  case  it  must  have  been  considered  that  the  delineation 
of  the  British  fleet  was  not  quite  correct  in  detail.  Nothing 
seriously  wrong  is  suggested.  Clarke  and  M 'Arthur  imply  only 
that  Magendie's  plan  made  the  lines  too  regular,  not  that  the 
general  disposition  or  manner  of  approach  was  wrong. ^  It  is 
evident,  then,  that  it  was  the  order  and  position  of  the  British 
ships  which  left  room  for  improvement  and  not  the  general  line 
of  the  attack.  This  is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  comparing  the 
plans  of  Craig  and  the  Naval  Chronicle.  It  will  be  seen  that  in 
Craig's  design  a  number  of  alterations  had  been  made  in  the  British 
fleet,  but  the  general  plan  of  attack,  in  two  lines  ahead  almost 
vertical,  remains  the  same  in  both.  The  alterations  given  to 
Craig   were   in   details  of  the  order  and   positions  of  individual 

1  Their  words  are,   "  Our  ships  could  not  be  exactly  in  the  same  track 
astern  of  each  other." 


45  2  APPENDIX    E 

units  only.  Britannia,  for  instance,  instead  of  being  fourth  in 
Nelson's  line,  as  she  is  in  the  Naval  Chronicle  and  Magendie's  plan, 
is  shown  hauled  out  to  windward,  with  the  seventh  ship,  Agamemnon, 
passing  her,  approximately  as  in  the  Harbin  plan  {Frontispiece). 
Moreover,  the  Neptune  and  Lemathan,  instead  of  being  in  accurate 
line  (as  Clarke  and  M'Arthur  complained),  are  represented  also 
hauling  out  to  windward  as  though  to  pass  ahead  of  the  Victory  in 
accordance  with  the  signals  that  had  been  made,  certainly  to  the 
Leviatlian,  and  probably  to  the  Ne})fune  as  her  next  ahead. 

On  the  whole,  then,  from  the  above  hints  and  the  standing  of 
the  designer  and  publisher,  we  may  take  it  that  the  Craig  engraving 
is  the  most  authentic  plan  we  have.  True,  it  does  not  show  the 
line  of  bearing  in  the  lee  division,  but  this  was  only  natural,  since 
Collingwood  did  not  regard  it  as  of  sufficient  importance  for 
mention  in  his  dispatch,  and  neither  A'^illeneuve  nor  Magendie 
could  have  seen  it. 

5.  The  Magendie  Plan. — From  Colonel  Desbriere's  version  of 
the  original  in  the  Archives  de  la  Marine  (Paris).  It  may  be 
doubted  if  this  is  identical  with  the  plan  sent  to  the  Admiralty, 
for  the  British  lines  are  not  shown  accurately  formed  as 
Clarke  and  M'Arthur  imply  they  were  originally.  It  is  possible 
that  Magendie  altered  this  on  the  representations  of  British 
officers.  This  appears  to  have  been  the  foundation  of  Prigny's 
final  plan  (see  ante,  p.  360),  and  also  of  the  one  Dumanoir 
exhibited  at  his  court-martial,  both  of  which  are  given  by 
Desbriere.^ 

6.  The  Harhin  Plan  {Frontispiece). — This  hitherto  unpublished 
plan  is  in  MS.,  coloured.  It  is  said  to  have  belonged  to  a  petty 
officer  called  Harbin,  who  was  present  at  the  battle,  and  to  have 
been  handed  down  in  his  family,  till  it  recently  came  into  the 
author's  possession.  Its  value  is  that  it  is  clearly  independent, 
and  not  founded  on  any  other  known  plan,  and  especially  that 
it  alone  shows  Collingwood's  line  of  bearing,  and  shows  it  exactly 
as  would  be  expected  from  the  signals  that  were  made.  For 
Nelson's  line  it  is  of  no  value,  except  for  the  position  of  Britannia, 
since  it  does  not  give  the  irregularity  which  Nelson's  sudden 
changes  of  intention  created  in  his  van. 