

fuard  in  the  city.  He  replied,  that  if  fore  the  insurrection  occurred,  and  it 
e  were  to  ask  tne  Envoy  to  send  him  is  a  singular  fact  that  he  should  have 
a  strong  guard,  it  will  show  that  he  congratulated  me  on  my  approaching 
was  fearing ;  and  at  the  same  (time)  departure  at  a  season  of^  such  pro- 
he  made  an  astonishing  speech,  by  found  tranquillity."  —  \Unvuhhshed 
saying  that  the  time  is  not  far  when  Papers  of  Sir  W,  n,  Macna^im^ 

b2  % 


4  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

nation  against  him.  It  might  be  announced,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  the  King  had  given  orders  for  the  destruction 
of  the  infidels ;  or  a  report  might  be  spread  that  he  had 
declared  his  intention  of  seizing  the  principal  chiefs,  and 
sending  them  prisoners  to  London.*  It  would  seem  that 
the  rebels  did  both.  AbdooUah  Khan,  Achekzye,  de- 
clared the  latter,  in  a  letter  to  the  principal  Sirdars,  and 
the  former  was  accomplished  by  forging  the  King's  seal 
to  a  document,  ordering  the  destruction  of  the  Fering- 
hees,  or  rather,  forging  the  document  to  the  seaLf  Men 
of  different  tribes  and  conflicting  interests  had  made 
common  cause  against  the  Feringhees.  Barukzye,  Po- 
pulzye,  Achekzye,  and  Ghilzye  chiefs  were  all  banded 
together.  Why  they  should  have  fixed  upon  that  parti- 
cular 2nd  of  November  for  the  first  open  demonstration 
at  Caubul  it  is  not  easy  to  conjecture.  To  have  waited 
a  few  days  would  have  been  to  have  waited  for  the  de- 
parture of  the  Envoy,  of  the  Greneral,  and  of  a  consider- 
able body  of  troops  from  A^hanistan.J     The  suppo- 

*  *'  The  immediate  cause  of  the  sion  of  strength.    But  his  Majesty 

outbreak,**  wrote  Macuaffhten,  in  the  has  behaved  throughout   with    the 

memorandum  quoted  in  £e  preceding  most  marked  fidelity,  judgment,  and 

note,  *^  was  a  seditious  letter  from  prudence.     By  forced  orders  from 

Abdoollah  Khau,  Achduje,  to  seve-  him  for  our  destruction,  by  the  well- 

ral  chiefs  of  the  greatest  influence  in  known  process   of  washing  out  the 

Caubul,  assuring  them  that  it  was  the  contents  of  a  genuinelj  sealed  paper, 

intention  of  his  Majesty  to  seize  and  and  substituting  their  own  wiclced 

send  them  to  London.    The  plot  was  inventions.  ♦  ♦  ♦  ♦"    {Sentence  kft 

in  the  tirst  instance  confined  to  but  a  imperfect,) — [Correspondence  of  Sir 

few  individuals ;  but  success  having  Tr.  A  Macnaghten.j 

attended  the  fint  eiforts  of  the  con-  (  "  ^^  ^    difficult    to    account,'* 

spirators,  the  infection  rapidly  spread  writes  Brigadier  Shelton,  *^  for  their 

over  all  parts  of  the  countrv."  having  broken  out  so  soon,  knowing 

t  "  The  principal  rebels,**  wrote  that  toe  Envoy,  General,  and  all  the 
Sir  William  Macnaghten,  in  a  letter  troops,  except  my  brigade,  were  to 
to  Lord  Auckland,  of  which  only  a  march  in  three  or  four  days.**— [A/.S'. 
fragment  has  been  recovered,  "met,  Records."]  Macnaghten  says:  "Those 
on  the  night  before,  and  [relying]  on  who  were  foremost  in  the  rebellion 
the  inflammable  disposition  of  the  were,  up  to  a  day  or  two  before,  the 
people  of  Caubul,  they  first  save  out  loudest  in  their  professions  of  friend- 
that  it  was  the  order  of  his  Majesty  ship,  and  most  constant  in  their  visits 
to  put  all  infidels  to  death,  and  this,  at  my  house.  It  will  be  seen  from 
ofcourse,  gained  them  a  great  acces-  the  opinions  I  have  recorded  from 