


ABDOOLLAH  KHAN.  5 

sition,  indeed,  is,  that  however  widely  spread  the  dis- 
affection, and  however  extensive  the  confederacy,  the 
first  outbreak  was  not  the  result  of  any  general  organi- 
sation, but  was  the  movement  only  of  a  section  of  the 
national  party.  It  was  too  insignificant  in  itself,  and 
there  was  too  little  evidence  of  design  in  it,  to  have 
sprung  out  of  any  matured  plan  of  action  on  the  part  of 
a  powerful  confederacy.  What  that  confederacy  was 
may  be  gathered  firom  Macnaghten's  admission,  that 
when,  early  in  December,  he  met  the  Afghan  leaders 
at  a  conference,  he  saw  assembled  before  him  the  heads 
of  nearly  all  the  chief  tribes  in  the  coimtry.* 

The  meeting  on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  November  was 
held  at  the  house  of  Sydat  Khan,  Alekozye.  Foremost 
among  the  chiefe  there  assembled  was  AbdooUah  Khan. 
By  nature  proud,  cruel,  and  vindictive,  this  man  was 
smarting  under  a  sense  of  injuries  inflicted  upon  him  by 
the  restored  Suddozye  Government,  and  of  insults  re- 
ceived from  one  of  Shah  Soojah's  British  allies.  On  the 
restoration  of  the  King,  AbdooUah  Khan  had  been  dis- 
possessed of  the  chiefship  of  his  tribe,  and  had  ever  since 
been  retained  about  the  Court,  rather  as  a  hostage  than 
as  a  recognised  officer  of  the  government.  Ever  ready 
to  promote  disaffection  and  encourage  revolt,  he  had 
seen  with  dehght  the  rising  of  the  Ghilzyes,  and  during 
their  occupation  of  the  passes  had  been  eagerly  in- 
triguing with  the  chiefs.  Aware  of  AbdooUah  Khan's 
designs,  Burnes  sent  him  an  angry  message — caUed  him 

ihe  earliest  period  of  my  arrival  in  tion  all  the  principal  Douranee  chiefs 

this  countrj,  that  I  considered  a  re-  had  been  summoned  b^  the  Shah  to 

bellion  a  probable  event  at  any  time,  Caubul,  the  object  bemg  to  destroy 

and  that  much  disaffection  prevailed  their  power  by  removing  them  from 

among  the  troops ;  but  I  had  nq  more  all  immediate  connexion  with  their 

reason  to  expect  the  outbreak  at  the  tribes.    At  Candahar  they  could  at 

particular  period  of  its  occurrence  any  time   create    disturbance.      At 

than  at  any  other/'  Caubul  it  was  thought  they  would  be 

*  At  the  Envoy^s  express  requisi-  harmless. 


6  THE  OUTBBEAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

a  dog — and  threatened  to  recommend  Shah  Soojah  to 
deprive  the  rebel  of  his  ears.  When  the  chiefs  met 
together  on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  November,  this  in- 
dignity was  rankling  in  the  breast  of  the  Khan.  The 
immediate  course  to  be  pursued  came  under  discussion, 
and  he  at  once  proposed  that  the  first  overt  act  of  vio- 
lence on  the  morrow  should  be  an  .attack  on  the  house 
of  the  man  who  had  so  insulted  him.  The  proposal 
was  accepted  by  the  assembled  chiefs ;  but  so  little  did 
they  anticipate  more  than  a  burst  of  success  at  the  out- 
set, that  not  one  of  them  ventured  personally  to  take 
part  in  a  movement  which  they  believed  would  be 
promptly  avenged. 