

or  not  the  chiefs  are  at  the  bottom  of  and  Nijrao  is  threatening 

the  business.     He  suspects  they  arc,  I  don't  know  when  I  can  get  away 

but  I  think  not,  and  I  trust  that  in  a  from  Caubul,  for  I  am  very  unwif- 

day  or  two  all  will  be  riffht  again."  ling  to  leave  affairs  in  an  unsettled 

And  in  another  letter  addressed,  on  state/- — [MS,  Correspondence  of  Sir 

the  same  day,  to  Captain  Macgregor  IV,  H,   Macnaghten,\      He  had  in- 

himseir,  he  says,  "I  trust  that  the  tended,  as  he  wrote  on  the  27th  of 

business  last  reported  to  you  was  the  the  preceding  month,  to  leave  Cau- 

expiring  cflbrt  of  the  rebels,  and  that  bul  on  the  1st  of  November;  but 

if  the  chiefs  are  really  innocent,  the  to  retain  charge  of  his  office  until  he 

party  will  have  dispersed,  and  than-  reached  Ferozepore.  —  [3/<S'.   Corre^ 

nahfl  have  been  re-established."   He,  epondence,'] 


MEETING  OF  THE  CHIEFS.  3 

reduced.  On  the  1st  of  November,  Mohim  Lai  again 
pressed  the  subject  of  the  hostile  confederacy  upon  the 
expectant  minister.  Bumes  stood  up  from  his  chair, 
and  said,  with  a  sigh,  that  the  time  had  come  for  the 
British  to  leave  the  country;*  but,  on  the  same  evening, 
he  congratulated  Sir  WiUiam  Macnaghten  on  his  ap- 
proaching departure  at  a  period  of  such  profound  tran- 
quiUity.f 

On  that  very  evening  the  hostile  chiefs  met  and  deter- 
mined,  in  conclave,  upon  the  measures  to  be  taken  for 
the  overthrow  of  the  British  power  in  Afghanistan.  To 
rouse  the  people  into  action  by  a  skilful  use  of  the  king's 
name,  seemed  to  be  the  safest  course  of  procedure.  But 
doubts  arose  as  to  whether  it  were  wiser  to  enlist  the 
loyal  sjmoipathies  of  his  subjects,  or  to  excite  their  indig- 

*  I  most  give  Mohun  Lai's  own  we  must  leaye  this  country.  Taj 
wordsjin  spite  oftbeir  eccentric  phrase-  Mahomed,  son  of  Gholam  Mahomed 
ologj:  ^'On  the  1st  of  November,"  Khan,  the  Douranee  chief,  came  at 
he  writes,  *'  I  saw  Sir  Alexander  ni^ht  to  him,  and  informed  what  the 
Barnes,  and  told  him  that  the  con-  chiefs  intended  to  do,  but  he  turned 
federacy  has  been  grown  very  high,  him  out  under  the  pretended  aspect 
and  we  should  fear  the  consequence,  that  we  do  not  care  for  such  things. 
He  stood  up  from  his  chair,  sighed.  Our  old  friend,  Kaib  SherifiT,  came 
and  said  he  knows  nothing  but  the  and  asked  him  to  allow  his  son,  with 
time  has  arrived  that  we  shoidd  leave  100  men,  to  remain  day  and  ni^ht  in 
this  country.**— [Xtf^ter  of  Mohun  Lai  his  place  till  the  Ghilzye  affair  is  set- 
to  J,  R.  Cowin^  Esq,^  January  9, 1 842 :  tied — but  he  did  not  agree." — ^Letter 
MS.  RecordsJ]  In  a  letter  to  another  of  Mohun  Lai  to  Dr,  James  Bumes : 
correspondent,  Mohun  Lai  makes  a  mS.  Correspondence,'] 
similar  statement ;  and  adds  that,  f  '^^  ^  stated  on  the  authority  of 
upon  the  same  night,  Taj  Mahomed  Sir  William  Macnaghten :  *'  I  may  be 
called  upon  Bumes,  to  no  purpose,  considered  culpable,"  he  said,  in  an 
with  a  uke  warning:  **  On  the  Ist  unfinished  memorandum,  found  after 
of  November  I  saw  nim  at  evening,  his  deaUi,*'for  not  havine  foreseen  the 
and  informed  him,  according  to  the  coining  storm ;  to  this  i  can  only  re- 
conversation  of  Mahomed  Meerza  ply  that  others,  who  had  much  bettor 
Khan,  our  great  enemy,  that  the  opportunities  of  watohingthe  feelings 
chiefs  are  contriving  plans  to  stand  of  the  people,  had  no  suspicion  of 
against  us,  and  therefore  it  will  not  what  was  coming.  The  late  Sir  A. 
be  safe  to  remain  without  a  sufficient  Bumes  was  with  me  the  evening  be- 