

Day  had  scarcely  dawned  on  the  2nd  of  November, 
when  a  rumour  reached  the  cantonments,  and  was  at  once 
conveyed  to  the  Mission-house,  that  there  was  a  com- 
motion in  the  city.*  Macnaghten  heard  the  intelligence 
with  composure.  There  was  nothing  in  it,  he  thought,  to 
startle  or  to  dismay  a  man  with  sound  nerves  and  a  clear 
imderstanding.  Presently  a  note  was  brought  him  fi:om 
Bumes.  It  stated  that  there  was  great  excitement  in  the 
city,  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  his  residence ; 
but  it  spoke  slightingly  of  the  disturbance,  and  said  that 
it  would  speedily  be  suppressed.  Assistance,  however, 
was  sought.  Bumes  wanted  military  support;  and 
Macnaghten,  still  little  alarmed  by  the  tidings  that  had 
reached  him,  hurried  to  the  quarters  of  the  General.  It 
was  thought  to  be  only  a  slight  commotion.  And  so  it 
was — at  the  outset.     But  before  any  assistance  was  sent 

QnoJ*^^     Gonolly,     Macnaghten*!  immediately,  heard  the  firing  in  the 

BflpMw,  who  waa  to  have  accompa-  city,  and  hastened  to  conyey  the  in- 

nied  him  to  Bombay,   waa    giying  telii^ence  to  Macnaghten.    He  afler- 

directions  about  the  packing  of  some  wards  accompanied   the    Enyoy  to 

of  the  Envoy's  chattels,  when  an  General    Elphinstone's    quarters. — 

Afghan  rushed  wildly  in,  and  an-  [Statement  of  Emaurn'OoUm-Khan^a 

nounced  that  there  was  an  insurrec-  chuprassie  in  the  service  of  Lieutenant 

tion  in  the  city.     Conolly  went  out  JohnConoUy:  MS,  Eecords.'] 


IKCBEDULITY  09  BURNES.  7 

to  Bumes,  he  had  been  cut  to  pieces  by  an  infuriated 
mob. 

The  houses  of  Sir  Alexander  Bumes  and  of  Captain 
Johnson,  the  paymaster  of  the  Shah's  troops,  were  con- 
tiguous to  each  other  in  the  city.  On  the  preceding 
night,  Captain  Johnson  had  slept  in  cantonments.  The 
expectant  Resident  was  at  home.  Beneath  his  roof  was 
his  brother,  Lieutenant  Charles  Burnes;  and  Lieutenant 
WiUiam  Broadfoot,  an  officer  of  rare  merit,  who  had 
been  selected  to  fill  the  office  of  military  secretary  to  the 
new  minister,  and  had  just  come  in  from  Charekur  to 
enter  upon  his  new  duties.  It  was  now  the  anniversary 
of  the  day  on  which  his  brother  had  been  slain  by  Dost 
Mahomed's  troopers,  in  the  disastrous  affair  of  Purwun- 
durrah;  and  it  must  have  been  with  some  melancholy 
recollections  of  the  past,  and  some  dismal  forebodings  of 
the  future,  that  he  now  looked  down  from  the  upper  gal- 
lery of  Bumes's  house,  upon  the  angry  crowd  that  was 
gathering  beneath  it. 

Before  daylight  on  that  disastrous  morning  a  friendly 
A%han  sought  admittance  to  Burnes's  house,  eager  to 
warn  him  of  the  danger  with  which  he  was  encompassed. 
A  plot  had  been  hatched  on  the  preceding  night ;  and 
one  of  its  first  objects  was  said  to  be  the  assassination  of 
the  new  Resident.  But  Burnes  had  nothing  but  incre- 
dulity to  return  to  such  friendly  warnings.  The  man  went. 
The  insurgents  were  gathering.  Then  came  Oosman 
Khan,  the  Wuzeer,  crossing  Burnes's  threshold,  with  thp 
same  ominous  story  on  his  Hps.*    It  was  no  longer  per- 