

Brightly  and  cheerfully  the  month  of  November 
dawned  upon  the  retiring  envoy  and  his  successor. 
Macnaghten  was  about  to  lay  down  the  reins  of  office, 
and  turn  his  face,  in  a  day  or  two,  towards  Bombay. 
Burnes,  rejoicing  in  the  thought  of  being  "  supreme  at 
last,"  was  stretching  out  his  hand  to  receive  the  prize  he 
had  so  long  coveted.*  The  one  was  as  eager  to  depart 
as  the  other  to  see  the  departure  of  his  chief;  and  both 

•   Burnes,  however,    though    he  dahar :  "  I  have  not  as  yet  received 

spoke  and  wrote  confidently  of  his  a  line  from  Lord  Auckland,  and  fear 

nomination — not  with  the  title  of  En-  that  my  letters  have  fallen  into  the 

voy  and  Minister,  but  that  of  Resi-  hands   of  the   Philistines.      We   are 

dent — ^had  not  received  any  official  (much  to  Sir  Alexander's  chagrin) 

announcement  of  his   appointment,  still  in  utter  ignorance  of  the  ques- 

On  the  1st  of  November,  Macnaghten  tion  of  the  succession. — [Af5.  C'or- 

WTote  to  Major  Rawlinson  at  Can-  respondenceofSirW.H.MacnaghJtiaiP^ 

VOL.  n.  B 


2  THE  OUTBEEAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

were  profoundly  impressed  with  the  conviction  that  the 
great  administrative  change  was  about  to  be  effected 
under  an  unclouded  sky.* 

There  were  others,  however,  who  viewed  with  dif- 
ferent eyes  the  portents  that  were  gathering  aroimd 
them — others  who  warned  the  Envoy  and  Burnes  of 
the  dangers  of  such  a  confederacy  as  had  been  formed 
against  the  British  in  A%hanistan.  Among  these  was 
Mohun  Lai.  Before  the  arrival  of  Captain  Macgregor 
from  the  Zoormut  country,  he  had  been  deputed  to 
accompany  General  Sales's  camp,  and  on  his  return  to 
Caubul,  he  had  laid  the  result  of  his  observations,  whilst 
on  that  expedition,  before  Sir  Alexander  Burnes.  En- 
tering fully  upon  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  confe- 
deracy, the  Moonshee  emphatically  declared  his  opinion 
that  it  would  be  dangerous  to  disregard  such  threaten- 
ing indications  of  a  coming  storm,  and  that  if  the  con- 
spiracy were  not  crushed  in  its  infancy,  it  would  become 
too  strong  to  be  easily  suppressed.    Burnes  rephed  that 

the  day  had  not  arrived  for  his  interference — that  he 
could  not  meddle  with  the  arrangements  of  the  envoy ; 
but  that  Macnaghten  would  shortly  turn  his  back  upon 
Caubul,  and  that  measures  should  then  be  taken  to  con- 
ciliate the  Ghilzyes  and  Kohistanees,  by  raising  their 
allowances  again  to  the  point  from  which  they  had  been 

♦  In  the  letter  above  quoted  (No-  however,  adda   in  the  former    let- 

vember  1,  1841),  Macnaghten  says:  ter:  "But  these  are  ticklish  times, 

'*  Macgregor  does  not  know  whetner  and  the  aspect  of  afiairs  in  Tugao 