

•  Private  Correspondence.  t  ^Toumal  of  Captain  Johnson :  MS. 

VOL.  n.  c' 


18  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

tion  were  over  and  over  again  recapitulated,  one  and  all 
declaring  positively  that  the  slightest  exhibition  of  energy 
on  our  part,  in  the  first  instance,  more  especially  in 
reinforcing  my  post  and  that  of  Trevor,  would  at  once 
have  decided  the  Kuzzilbashes,  and  all  over  whom  they 
possessed  any  influence,  in  our  favour.  Khan  Shereen 
Khan  also  confirmed  the  idea  that  an  offensive  move- 
ment on  the  opposite  side  of  the  town  by  Brigadier 
Shelton,  had  it  been  made  in  the  early  part  of  the  fatal 
2nd  of  November,  would  at  once  have  crushed  the  in- 
surrection."* Mohun  Lai  says,  that  in  the  first  instance 
no  more  than  thirty  men  were  sent  to  surround  Sir 
Alexander  Burnes's  house,  and  that  the  rest  were  drawn 
thither  subsequently  by  the  hope  of  plunder.f  Captain 
Johnson  says,  "  The  mob  at  the  first  outbreak  did  not 
exceed  100  men.  They  however  speedily  increased; 
the  plunder  of  my  treasury,  my  private  property  a»d 
that  of  Sir  Alexander,  and  seeing  that  no  steps  were 
taken  to  save  either  the  one  or  the  other,  nor  even  what 
was  of  more  considerable  value  to  us  at  that  time,  the 
life  of  Sir  Alexander  Burnes,  was  too  great  a  temptation 
to  the  inhabitants  of  Caubul,  and  when  800  men  would 
have  been  sufficient  in  the  morning  to  have  quelled  the 
disturbance,  3000  would  not  have  been  adequate  in  the 
aftemoon."J 

«  Letter  from  Captain  Colin  Mac-  insigliificaiice  of  tlie  movement,  and 

kenzic  to  Lieutenant  Ejre. — lEtfre^s  the  facility  wi^  which  it  might  have 

JoumaL']  been  sappressed.    It  seems  probable 

t  Letter  of  Mohun   Lai   to  Mr,  that,  as  Mohun  Lai  says,  there  were 

Colvirif  Private  Secretary  to  the  Gover'  only  some  thirty  men  there  by  pre- 

nor- General:  MS,  vious  concert,  but  that  the  number  was 

t   Captain    Johnson^ $   Journal,  —  swelled  by  accidental  rioters,  moved 

Eyre  says  that  the  commencement  of  by  the  greed  of  plunder.    To  the 

the  insurrection  was  **  an  attack  by  evidence  already  adduced  in  the  text, 

certainly  not  300  men  on  the  dwellings  may  be  added  that  of  Lalla  Gunga^- 

of  Sir  Alexander  Burnes  and  Captam  deen,  a  hospital  gomastah  (or  stewanl) 

Johnson."    The  precise  number  of  attached  to  Captain  Johnson^s  esta- 

the  rioters,  at  the  commencement  of  blishment,  who  says,  "  For  three  or 

the  outbreak,  is  of  little  consequence,  four  days,  it  was  the  general  belief 

All  are  agreed  in  opinion  as  to  the  that  there  was  no  formidable  foe  to 


THE  QUESTION  OF  RBSt^ONSIBILITY.  19 

The  question,  then — and  it  is  one  of  the  gravest  that 
can  be  asked  in  the  entire  course  of  this  historical  inquiry 
— ^is,  how  came  it  that  an  insurrectionary  movement, 
which  might  have  been  crushed  at  the  outset  by  a  hand- 
ful of  men,  was  suflfered  to  grow  into  a  great  revolution  ? 
It  is  a  question  not  to  be  answered  hastily — not  to  be  an- 
swered At  all  without  the  citation  of  all  available  evidence. 
It  is  fortunate  that,  at  least,  the  facts  of  the  case  are  to 
be  ascertained  with  sujBGicient  distinctness.  It  is  certain 
that,  on  the  first  receipt  of  authentic  intelligence  of  the 
outbreak  in  the  city,  Macnaghten  repaired  to  Elphin- 
stone's  quarters  to  seek  military  aid.  Shelton,  in  his 
narrative,  says,  that  much  valuable  time  was  lost  at 
the  outset.  "  The  Envoy,"  he  writes,  "  must  have  had 
notice  by  7  A.M.,  so  that  much  valuable  time  was,  I  fear, 
lost  by  remaining  quietly  at  home,  receiving  reports,  in- 
stead of  acting  promptly  and  with  decision."*  But  the 
imputation  is  not  warranted  by  the  real  facts  of  the  case. 
"  On  the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  November" — such  is  the 
evidence  of  the  Envoy  himself — "  I  was  informed  that  the 
town  of  Caubul  was  in  a  state  of  commotion ;  and  shortly 
afterwards  I  received  a  note  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sir 
A.  Bumes,  to  the  eflfect  that  his  house  was  besieged,  and 
begging  for  assistance.  I  immediately  went  to  General 
Elphinstone."f  General  Elphinstone  himself  says :  "  On 
the  2nd  of  November,  at  half-past  7  a.m.,  I  was  told 
by  Colonel  Oliver  that  the  city  was  in  a  great  ferment, 
and  shortly  after  the  Envoy  came  and  told  me  that  it 
was  in  a  state  of  insurrection,  but  that  he  did  not  think 