


12  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

nions  at  the  time  of  their  birth.  He  was  a  man  of  an 
eager,  impi^sive  temperament;  the  slightest  vicissitudes 
of  the  political  atmosphere  readily  affected  his  mercurial 
nature ;  and  he  did  not  always  think  before  he  spoke. 
Hence  it  is  that  such  varying  opinions  have  been  attri- 
buted to  him — all  perhaps  with  equal  truth.  A  passing 
doud,  or  a  transient  gleam  of  sunshine,  and  Afghanistan 
was  either  in  the  throes  of  a  deadly  convulsion,  or 
lapped  in  heavenly  repose. 

It  was  the  hard  fate  of  Alexander  Bumes  to  be 
over-rated  at  the  outset  and  under-rated  at  the  close  of 
his  career.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  justice  has  yet 
been  rendered  him — whether,  on  the  one  hand,  what 
was  innately  and  intrinsically  good  in  him  has  been 
amply  recognised,  and  whether,  on  the  other,  the  ac- 
cidental circumstances  of  his  position  have  been  suffi- 
ciently taken  into  account.  From  the  very  commence- 
ment of  the  Afghan  expedition  Bumes  was  placed  in  a 
situation  calculated  neither  to  develop  the  better  nor 
to  correct  the  worse  part  of  his  character.  In  his  own 
words,  indeed,  he  was  in  "the  most  nondescript  of 
situations."  He  had  little  or  no  power.  He  had  no 
supreme  and  independent  control  of  afiairs;  nor  had 
he,  like  other  political  assistants,  any  detached  employ- 
ment of  a  subordinate  character ;  but  was  an  anomalous 
appendage  to  the  British  mission,  looking  out  for  the 
chance  of  succession  to  the  upper  seat.  In  such  a  posi- 
tion he  felt  uneasy  and  unsettled ;  he  lived  rather  in  the 
future  than  in  the  present;  and  chafed  under  the  re- 
flection that  whilst,  in  all  that  related  to  the  manage- 
ment of  public  affairs,  he  was  an  absolute  cypher  at  the 
Afghan  Court,  much  of  the  odium  of  unpopular  acts 
descended  upon  him;  and  that  much  of  the  discredit  of 
failure  would  attach  to  him  if  the  measures,  which  he 
was  in  nowise  permitted  to  shape,  were  not  crowned 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION.  13 

with  success.  There  is  reason  to  think  that  if  fairer 
scope  had  been  allowed  for  the  display  of  his  abilities, 
and  a  larger  amount  of  responsibility  had  descended 
upon  hini,  he  would  have  shone  with  a  brighter  and  a 
steadier  light,  and  left  behind  him  a  more  honourable 
name.  His  talents  were  great ;  his  energies  were  great. 
What  he  lacked  was  stability  of  character.  Power  and 
responsibility  would  have  steadied  him.  He  would 
have  walked  with  a  firmer  step  and  in  a  straighter 
course  under  a  heavier  burden  of  political  duties.  As 
it  was,  all  the  environments  of  his  life  at  Caubul  were 
too  surely  calculated  to  unhinge  and  unbalance  even  a 
more  steadfast  mind.  It  is  right  that  all  these  things 
should  be  taken  into  account.  It  is  right,  too,  that  it 
should  never  be  forgotten  by  those  who  would  form  a 
correct  estimate  of  the  character  and  career  of  Alexan- 
der Burnes,  that  both  have  been  misrepresented  in  those 
collections  of  state  papers,  which  are  supposed  to  furnish 
the  best  materials  of  history,  but  which  are  often  in 
reality  only  one-sided  compilations  of  garbled  docu- 
ments— counterfeits  which  the  ministerial  stamp  forces 
into  currency,  defrauding  a  present  generation,  and 
handing  down  to  posterity  a  chain  of  dangerous  lies. 