


22  THE  OUTBBBAK  AT  OAUBUL. 

well  as  I  could  understand,  who  sent  me,  and  what  I 
came  there  for."*  He  was  not,  indeed,  allowed  to  ope* 
rate  upon  the  disturbed  city.  All  that,  drcimistanced 
as  he  was,  Shelton  could  do,  was  to  cover  the  retreat  of 
the  Shah's  Hindostanees,  who  had  been  sent  out,  as  we 
have  seen,  against  the  insurgents,  and  been  disastrously 
beaten. 

It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  Brigadier  Shelton  must 
be  acquitted  of  all  blame.  He  recommended,  on  the 
morning  of  the  2nd  of  November,  prompt  and  decisive 
measures,  but  he  was  not  empowered  to  carry  them  into 
effect.  The  responsibility  rests  with  the  Envoy  and  the 
General,  and  must  be  equally  shared  between  them.  It 
does  not  appear  that  either  recognised  the  necessity  of  a 
prompt  attack  upon  the  disturbed  quarter  of  the  city. 
The  Envoy,  always  considerate  and  humane — sometimes 
to  a  point  of  weakness — desired  to  spare  the  inhabitants 
of  Caubul  those  dreadful  scenes  of  plunder  and  violence 
which  ever  follow  the  incursion  of  a  body  of  retributive 
troops  into  an  offending  city.  But  such  tender  mercies 
are  often  cruel.  In  such  cases  the  most  vigorous  mea- 
sures are  commonly  the  most  humane.  It  is  hard  to  say 
how  much  human  life  would  have  been  saved  if,  early 
on  the  2nd  of  November,  a  few  companies  of  infantry, 
and  a  couple  of  guns,  had  been  despatched  to  that  por- 
tion of  the  city  where  Sir  Alexander  Burnes  and  his 
companions  were  standing  at  bay  before  a  contemptible 
rabble,  which  would  have  melted  away  at  the  approach 
of  a  handful  of  regular  troops. 

Burnes  did  not  believe  the  outbreak  to  be  a  formi- 

♦  Letter  of  Brigadier  Shelton^  May  stone,  and  arrived  there  about  nine 
28,  1842 :  MS,  i2ecord!9.— The  enci-  o'clock.  So  Lady  Sale.  Brigadier 
neer  officer  sent  hj  Shelton  to  uie  Shelton*8  report  confirms  the  accu- 
Balla  Hissar  was  Lieutenant  Sturt,  racy  of  that  portion  of  Lady  Sale's 
who  had  been  despatched  to  the  Bri<  narrative — based,  it  is  to  be  pre- 
ffadier's  camp,  at  Seeah  Sunch,  with  sumed,  upon  the  information  of  Lieu- 
instructions  from    General  Elphin-  tenant  Sturt 


THB  QUESTION  OF  BESPONSIBILITY.  28 

dable  one-^Macnaghten  did  not  believe  it  to  be  a  fojs 
midable  one— and  Elphinstone  was  entirely  swayed  by 
the  opinions  of  his  political  associates.  Hence  came  the 
indecision  and  inactivity,  which  were  attended  with  such 
disastrous  results.  Bumes  and  Macnaghten  were  right 
up  to  a  certain  point ;  but  all  beyond  was  lamentably 
wrong.  The  outbreak  was  not  formidable  in  itself;  but 
it  was  certain,  in  such  ^^  ticklish  times/'^  very  soon 
to  become  formidable.  There  are  seasons  when  slight 
indications  of  unrest,  such  as  might  commonly  be  dis* 
regarded,  assume  a  portentous  and  alarming  aspect,  and 
demand  all  the  vigilance  and  energy  of  the  custodians  of 
the  public  safety.  Such  a  season  had  now  arrived ;  the 
minds  of  the  people  were  in  a  feverish,  inflammable 
state,  and  it  required  very  little  to  bring  on  a  dangerous 
paroxysm  of  irrepressible  violence  and  disorder.  Mac- 
naghten was  unwilling  to  believe  that  the  chiefs  were 
connected  with  those  October  disturbances  which  had 
blocked  up  the  passes  between  Caubul  and  Jellalabad, 
and  thought  that  the  Ghiljee  rising  was  of  a  local,  ac- 
cidental character,  with  which  the  Caubulees  had  no 
connexion,  and  in  which  they  took  no  interest;  but 
Brigadier  Shelton  has  declared  his  conviction  that  the 
majority  of  the  insurgents  who  took  possession  of  the 
passes  were  sent  out  from  the  city,  and  that  many  of 
them  passed  through  his  camp  at  Seeah  Sungh.f 