

On  that  day  nothing  else  was  done.  Deserted  by  his 
personal  attendants,  in  the  hour  of  danger  Shah  Soojah 
seems  to  have  sunk  into  a  pitiable  state  of  dejection  and 
alarm.  The  defeat  of  his  Hindostanees  had  given  a 
deeper  shade  to  his  despondency ;  he  was  incapable  of 
acting  for  himself  or  of  offering  counsel  to  others,  and 
all  who  sought  his  presence  were  struck  by  the  anxious 
expression  of  his  countenance  and  the  feeble  petulance 
of  his  manner.  Nothing  effective  had  been  done,  and 
nothing  more  was  to  be  done  at  all  on  that  memorable 
day — General  Elphinstone  had  been  talking  about  to- 
morrow, when  he  should  have  been  acting  to-day.  And 
so  the  evening  of  the  2nd  of  November  fell  upon  an 
irritable  people,  established  and  fortified  in  resistance  by 
the  indecision  of  the  authorities,  against  whom  they  had 
erected  themselves,  and  the  inactivity  of  the  army  by 
which  they  might  have  been  crushed. 

It  is  the  common  opinion  of  all  competent  authorities 
that  a  prompt  and  vigorous  movement,  on  the  morning  of 

•  Statement  of  Brigadier  Shelton:  MS,  Records. 


INSIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  FIRST  MOVEMENT.  17 

the  2nd  of  November,  would  have  strangled  the  insurrec- 
tion at  its  birth.  The  Afghans  freely  admitted  this.  A 
Popidzye  chief  who  was  present  at  the  meeting  at  Sydat 
Khan's  house  on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  November,  told 
Major  Rawlinson  that  not  one  of  the  chiefs,  who  then 
leagued  themselves  together,  ventured  to  stir  from  his 
house  until  the  afternoon  of  the  following  day.  They  ex- 
pected that  the  first  onset — the  attack  on  the  houses  of 
Burnes  and  Johnson — would  be  successful :  but  they  were 
under  an  equally  strong  conviction  that  the  violence  would 
be  promptly  avenged  by  the  troops  from  cantonments, 
and  they  therefore  refrained  from  committing  themselves 
by  taking  any  personal  part  in  the  imeute.  It  seems  to 
have  been  the  impression  of  the  majority  that  such  an 
outbreak  at  the  capital  would  operate  as  a  warning  that 
the  British  in  Afghanistan  would  hardly  neglect,  and  that 
we  should  be  glad,  therefore,  to  withdraw  our  forces  in 
the  spring  and  leave  the  Douranees  to  their  own  devices.* 
"  Not  only  I,  but  several  other  officers,"  says  Captain  John- 
son, "  have  spoken  to  Afghans  on  the  subject;  there  has 
never  been  one  dissenting  voice,  that  had  a  small  party 
gone  into  the  town  prior  to  the  plunder  of  my  treasury 
and  the  murder  of  Burnes,  the  insurrection  would  have 
been  instantly  quashed.  This  was  also  the  opinion  of 
Captain  Trevor,  at  that  time  living  in  the  town."t  Cap- 
tain Mackenzie  has  given  an  equally  emphatic  opinion 
to  the  same  effect.  "  During  our  expedition  into  Kohis- 
tan,  under  General  MacCaskill,"  he  writes,  "  I  accompa- 
nied it,  having  been  placed  by  General  Pollock  in  charge 
of  Shah-Zadah  Shapoor  and  the  Kuzzilbash  camp.  In 
my  frequent  communications  with  Khan  Shereen  Khan, 
some  of  the  late  leaders,  and  other  chiefs  of  the  Kuz- 
zilbash faction,  all  the  circumstances  of  the  late  insurrec- 