

•  "  Befbre  dayligbt  a  well-wisber  truth,  and  paid  no  heed  to  what  he 

of  Burnes  came  to  report   to  him  said.      Shortly  after,    the  Wuzeer, 

that  a  plan  had  been  hatched  during  Oosman  Khan,  arrired  (by  this  time 

the  night,  which  had  for  its  chiS  the   mob  was    assembhng).      The 

object  his  murder.    Unfortunately,  Wuzeer    urged   him   to    leave  his 

Sir  Alexander  oould  not  be   con-  house,  and  proceed  to  cantonments. 

▼inced  that  the  man  was  telling  the  Sir  Alexander  scorned  the  idea   of 


8  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

mitted  to  the  English  officer  to  wrap  himself  up  in  an 
impenetrable  cloak  of  scepticism.  Already  was  there  a 
stir  in  the  streets.  Already  was  an  excited  populace  as- 
sembling beneath  his  windows.  Earnestly  the  Afghan 
minister  spoke  of  the  danger,  and  implored  Burnes  to 
leave  his  house — ^to  accompany  him  to  the  Balla  Hissar, 
or  to  seek  safety  in  cantonments.  The  EngHshman,  deaf 
to  these  appeals,  confident  that  he  could  quell  the  tumult, 

quitting  his  house,  as  he  had  every  danger,  was  not  admitted,  nor  was  his 
hope  of  quelling  the  disturbance ;  messas^e  ever  delivered.  ^^  On  the 
and  let  the  worst  come  to  the  worst  day  of  the  murder,"  says  this  wit- 
he felt  too  well  assured  that  neither  ness,  *^as  early  as  three  o'clock  in  the 
the  Envoy  nor  General  would  permit  morning,  a  Cossid  (Wullee  Mahomed) 
him  to  Vq  sacrificed  whilst  m  the  came  to  me.  I  was  on  duty  outside ; 
performance  of  his  public  dutjr,  so  he  said,  *  Go,  and  inform  your  mas- 
long  as  there  were  6000  men  within  ter  immediately  that  there  is  a  tumult 
two  miles  of  him/* — [^Captain  John'  in  the  city,  and  that  the  merchants 
sorCs  Journal:  MS,  Records.']  *'The  are  removing  their  goods  and  valua- 
Kinff*s  minister  went  to  Burnes  early  bles  from  tne  ^ops.*  I  knew  what 
in  tne  morning  of  the  2nd,  and  my  master  had  said  on  the  subject 
warned  him  of  what  was  about  to  the  da^  before,  so  I  did  not  like 
happen — of  the  danger  of  remaining  awakenme  him,  but  put  on  mv  chu- 
in  his  house — andreouestedhimto  ac-  prass,  and  went  to  the  Char  Chouk. 
company  him  to  the  ISalla  Hissar ;  but  Here  I  met  the  Wuzeer,  Nizam-ood- 
he  was  deaf  to  all  entreaties,  incredu-  Dowlah,  going  towards  my  master*s 
lous,  and  persevered  in  disbelief  that  house.  1  immediately  tunied  with 
any  outbreak  was  intended ;  yet  I  am  him,  and  on  my  arrival  awoke  my 
told  he  wrote  into  cantonments  for  a  master,  who  dressed  quickly,  and 
military  force  to  protect  him.** — [Let'  went  to  the  Wuzeer,  and  tdked  to 
ter  of  Brigadier  Shelton :  MS,  jf2e-  him  some  time.**  As  this  man  speaks 
cords.'^  llie  native  friend  said  by  of  what  he  saw,  and  what  he  did  on 
Captam  Johnson  to  have  warned  the  morning  of  the  2nd  of  November, 
Burnes  early  in  the  morning  of  the  I  conceive  that  his  evidence  is  the 
2nd  of  November  that  his  fife  was  best  that  is  now  obtainable.  He 
in  danger,  was  Taj  Mahomed,  who,  states  that  *^  Sir  Alexander  Burnes 
as  stated  in  a  previous  note,  on  the  was  duly  informed  by  his  Afghan 
authority  of  Mohun  Lai  (and  the  servants,  the  day  previous  to  his 
same  story  is  told  b^  Lieutenant  murder,  that  there  was  a  stir  in 
Eyre  and  Ladv  Sale,  m  their  jour-  the  city,  and  that  if  he  remained  in 
nals),  visited  Burnes  on  the  preced-  it  his  life  would  be  in  danger ;  they 
ing  night.  Bowh  Singh,  Bumes*s  told  him  he  had  better  go  to  the 
chuprassie,  the  only  surviving  witness  cantonments ;  this  he  declined  doing, 
of  what  passed  in  that  officer's  house  giving  as  his  reason  that  the  Af- 
upon  the  fatal  morning,  says  that  his  ghans  never  received  any  injury  from 
master  did  not  wake  before  the  arri-  him,  but,  on  the  contrarv,  he  had 
val  of  the  Wuzeer,  and  that  the  man  done  much  for  them,  and  that  he  was 
(Wullee  Mahomed  by  name),  who  quite  sure  they  would  never  injure 
had  called  to  warn  Burnes  of  his  him.** 