

Burnes  and  his  companions  fell.  There  was  a  great 
plunder  of  property ;  the  treasury  of  Captain  Johnson, 
the  Shah's  paymaster,  was  sacked  ;*  the  noise  in  the  city 
was  growing  louder  and  louder,  and  the  multitude 
swelling  in  numbers,  and  waxing  more  terrible  in  ex- 

♦  '*  The  insurgents,"  B&p  Captain  of  one  lakh  and  seventy  thousand 

Johnson,  "gained  possession  of  my  rupees    (17,000/.) ;    burnt    all    my 

treasury  by  imdermining  the  wall,  office    records    for  tJie    past    three 

and  of  my  house  by  setting  fire  to  years,  which    comprise    unadjusted 

the  gateway.     They  murdered  the  accounts  to  nearly  one  million  ster- 

whole  of  the  guard  (one  subadar  and  ling,  and  possessed  themselves  of  all 

twenty -eight    sepoys,    besides    non-  my  private  property,  amounting  to 

commissioned  officers) ;   all  my  ser-  upwards  of  ten  thousand  rupees." — 

vants  (male,  female,  and  children) ;  ICaptain    Johnson's   Journal :    MS. 

plundered  my  treasure  to  the  amount  Becords.'} 


14  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

citement  and  wrath.  But  still  no  measures  were  taken 
to  quell  the  riot  or  chastise  the  rioters ;  no  troops  were 
poured  into  the  city ;  no  British  officer  led  his  battalions 
to  the  charge,  or  opened  upon  the  enemy  with  a  shower 
of  unanswerable  grape.  The  escort,  at  Bumes's  house, 
held  for  some  time  in  painful  inactivity  by  his  misplaced 
forbearance,  had  fought  with  a  desperate  energy,  which, 
in  the  end,  cost  them  their  lives;  and  the  guard  at  the 
pay-office,  with  scarcely  less  constancy  and  courage,  had 
protected  their  charge  until  overwhelmed  by  the  rush  of 
their  assailants,  and  slaughtered  almost  to  a  man.  What 
could  these  little  bands  of  loyal  men  do  against  the  surg- 
ing multitude  that  flooded  the  streets  ?  Emboldened  by 
impunity,  the  licentious  crowd  pushed  on  to  new  deeds 
of  murder  and  rapine ;  and  soon  the  whole  city  was  in 
a  roar  of  wild  tumultuous  excitement.  Shops  were 
gutted;  houses  were  burned;  men,  women,  and  children, 
in  the  residences  of  our  officers,  mixed  up  in  indiscrimi- 
nate slaughter; — and  all  this  with  six  thousand  British 
troops  within  half  an  hour's  march  of  the  rebellious  city. 
From  the  Balla  Hissar  the  King  looked  down  upon 
the  disturbed  city  beneath  him.  But  even  from  that 
commanding  position  little  could  be  seen  of  what  was 
going  on  below  in  the  narrow  winding  streets,  which 
scarcely  presented  more  than  an  expanse  of  flat  house- 
tops to  the  gazers  from  above.  A  report  had  been  in- 
dustriously propagated  that  the  insurgent  movement  had 
been  favoured,  if  not  directed,  by  the  monarch  himself; 
but  his  conduct  at  this  moment  was  not  such  as  to  give 
colour  to  the  suspicion,  which  soon  began  to  shape  itself 
in  the  minds  of  his  British  supporters,  and  which  has 
not  even  now  been  dislodged**    He  was  agitated,  panic- 