


D£ATH  OF  ALEXANDER  BUBNE8.  9 

and,  scorning  the  idea  of  quitting  his  post^  rejected  the 
firiendly  counsel  of  the  Wuzeer,  and  remained  to  face 
the  fury  of  the  mob. 

But  even  to  Alexander  Bumes,  incredulous  of  im- 
minent danger  as  he  was,  it  seemed  necessary  to  do 
something.  He  wrote  to  the  Envoy,  calling  for  support. 
And  he  sent  messengers  to  Abdoollah  Khan.  Two 
chuprassies  were  despatched  to  the  Achekzye  chief,  as- 
suring him  that  if  he  would  restrain  the  populace  from 
violence,  every  effort  would  be  made  to  adjust  the 
grievances  complamed  of  by  the  people  and  the  chiefs. 
One  only  of  the  messengers  returned.  He  brought  back 
nothing  but  wounds.  The  message  had  cost  the  other 
his  life. 

In  the  mean  while,  from  a  gallery  in  the  upper  part  of 
his  house,  Bumes  was  haranguing  the  mob.  Beside  him 
were  his  brother  and  his  friend.  The  crowd  before  his 
house  increased  in  number  and  in  ftiry.  Some  were 
thirsting  for  blood ;  others  were  greedy  only  for  plunder. 
He  might  as  well  have  addressed  himself  to  a  herd  of 
savage  beasts.  Angry  voices  were  lifted  up  in  reply, 
clamouring  for  the  lives  of  the  English  officers.  And 
too  surely  did  they  gain  the  object  of  their  desires. 
Broadfoot,  who  sold  his  life  dearly,  was  the  first  to  fall. 
A  ball  struck  him  on  the  chest;  and  the  dogs  of  the  city 
devoured  his  remains. 

It  was  obvious  now  that  nothing  was  to  be  done  by 
expostulation — nothing  by  forbearance.  The  violence 
of  the  mob  was  increasing.  That  which  at  first  had 
been  an  insignificant  crowd  had  now  become  a  great 
multitude.  The  treasury  of  the  Shah's  paymaster  was 
before  them;  and  hundreds  who  had  no  wrongs  to  re- 
dress and  no  poUtical  animosity  to  vent,  rushed  to  the 
spot  hungering  after  the  spoil  which  lay  so  temptingly 
at  hand.      The   streets    were  waving  with   a   sea   of 


10  THE  OUTBBEAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

heads;  and  the  opposite  houses  were  alive  with  people. 
It  was  no  longer  possible  to  look  unappalled  upon 
that  fearfiil  assemblage.  A  party  of  the  insurgents 
had  set  fire  to  Bumes's  stables  ;*  had  forced  their  way 
into  his  garden;  and  were  calling  to  him  to  come 
down.  His  heart  now  sank  within  him.  He  saw 
clearly  the  danger  that  beset  him — saw  that  the  looked- 
for  aid  fi:om  cantonment  had  failed  him  in  the  hour  of 
his  need.  Nothing  now  was  left  to  him,  but  to  appeal 
to  the  avarice  of  his  assailants.  He  offered  them  large 
sums  of  money,  if  they  would  only  spare  his  own  and 
his  brother's  Itfe.  Their  answer  was  a  repetition  of  the 
summons  to  "  come  down  to  the  garden."  Charles 
Burnes  and  a  party  of  chuprassies  were,  at  this  time, 
firing  on  the  mob.  A  Mussulman  Cashmerian,  who  had 
entered  the  house,  swore  by  the  Koran  that  if  they 
would  cease  firing  upon  the  insurgents,  he  would  convey 
Burnes  and  his  brother  through  the  garden  in  safety  to 
the  Kuzzilbash  Fort.  Disguising  himself  in  some  articles 
of  native  attire,  Burnes  accompanied  the  man  to  the  door. 
He  had  stepped  but  a  few  paces  into  the  garden,  when 
his  conductor  called  out  with  a  loud  voice,  "  This  is 
Sekunder  Burnes  l"f  The  infuriated  mob  fell  upon  him 
with  frantic  energy.  A  firenzied  mooUah  dealt  the  first 
murderous  blow ;  and  in  a  minute  the  work  was  com- 
plete. The  brothers  were  cut  to  pieces  by  the  Afghan 
knives.  J  Naib  Sheriff,  true  to  the  last,  buried  their 
mutilated  remains. 