

So  fell  Alexander  Burnes.    In  the  vigour  of  his  years 

•  Hyder  Khan,  wbohad  been  cut-  J  This  is  Bowh  Singh's  statement, 

walof  the  city,  and  had  been  removed  He    says:    "His   brother,    Captain 

through  Bumes's  instrumentality,  is  Burnes,  went  out  with  him,  ana  was 

said  to  have  brought  fuel  for  the  pur-  killed  dead  before  Sir  Alexander/' 

pose  from  some  contiguous  hummams  Mohun  Lid  says  that  Charles  Burnes 

or  baths.  was  killed  before  his  brother  went 

t  Statement  of  Bowh  Singh^  a  chu*  down  to  the  garden, 
prassie  in  Bumes*8  service. 


CHARACTEB  0¥  SIB  A.  BUBNES. 


11 


— ^in  the  pride  of  life — ^within  a  few  feet  of  the  goal 
whicli  lie  had  long  held  so  steadily  in  view.  It  has  been 
said  that  he  predicted  the  coming  storm ;  and  by  others 
again  that  he  refused  to  see  it.*  He  may  have  warned 
others ;  but  he  rejected  all  warning  himself.  It  was  only 
in  keeping  with  the  character  of  the  man  that  he  should 
have  been  subject  to  such  fluctuations  of  feeling  and 
opinion.  Sometimes  sanguine — sometimes  desponding — 
sometimes  confident — sometimes  credulous — he  gave  to 
fleeting  impressions  all  the  importance  and  seeming  per- 
manency of  settled  convictions,  and  imbued  surrounding 
objects  with  the  colours  of  his  own  varying  mind.  At 
one  time,  he  could  discern  with  intuitive  sagacity  the 
hidden  dangers  besetting  our  position  in  Afghanistan, 
and  iUustrate  his  views  with  an  impressive  earnestness 
which  caused  him  to  be  regarded  by  his  official  superior 
as  a  wildly  speculative  alarmist.  At  another,  when 
destruction  was  impending  over  his  head— when  the 
weapon  was  sharpened  to  immolate  him — he  saw  nothing 
but  security  and  peace;  and  turned  away  from  the 
warnings  of  those  who  would  have  saved  him,  with  an 
incredulous  smile  upon  his  lips.  This  instability  was  a 
grievous  fault;  and  grievously  he  answered  it.  But 
though  unstable,  he  was  not  insincere.  K  he  deceived 
others,  he  first  of  all  deceived  himself.  If  he  gave  ut- 
terance to  conflicting  opinions,  they  were  all  his  opi- 


*  Lieutenant  Mackenzie,  late  of  the 
41st  Regiment,  who  has  illustrated 
the  melancholy  history  of  our  Cau- 
bul  disasters  in  a  poem  of  twelve 
cantos,  says,  in  a  note,  "  I  am  enabled 
to  state  positively,  on  the  authority 
of  a  letter  from  Sir  Alexander  Bumes 
himself  (one  of  the  last  he  ever  wrote, 
and  addressed  to  an  officer  of  high 
rank,  and  one  of  his  most  intimate 
friends)  that  poor  Bumes  had  long 
foreseen  the  crisis  which  had  ar* 
rired;  for,  in  the  letter  alluded  to, 


he  states  his  conviction  in  the  most 
solemn  terms  that  he  was  a  marked 
man  and  would  inevitablv  bo  the 
first  victim — but  nevertheless  he 
would  never  flinch  from  doing  what 
he  conceived  to  be  his  duty,  al- 
though all  his  warnings  had  been 
disregarded."  Yet  on  the  day  be- 
fore his  death,  as  has  been  shown 
in  a  preceding  note,  he  said  that  he 
felt  no  apprehensions  of  danger,  as 
he  had  always  been  a  friend  to  the 
Afghans. 