

contend  against— perhaps  merely  a  ing — they  are  coming.* " — [Af5.  Re' 

small  body,  similar  to   a   gang  of  cords.'] 

decaiis.     l£  at  this  time  an  attack  ♦  PrivaU  Correspondence  of  BHga' 

had  been   made   upon   the  city,  it  dkr  Shelton :  near  Caubul^  May  2Sth, 

would  have  been  well.    One  'pul-  — [MS,  Records.'] 

ton'  would  hare  been  enough*    The  f  Sir  WiUiam  Macnaghten^s  Report 

people  were   in    great   terror,  and  to  the  Secretary  of  Government,    left 

said  every  moment,  *They  are  com-  unJinishedathisdeaih.'-^lMS, Records."] 

c2 


20  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUX. 

much  of  it,  and  that  it  would  shortly  subside."*  Captain 
Johnson,  too,  writes  that,  on  receiving  in  cantonments 
intelligence  of  the  outbreak,  he  went  to  report  what  he 
had  heard  to  Captain  Lawrence,  military  secretary  to  the 
Envoy.  "  The  latter,"  he  adds,  "  had  just  received  a 
note  from  Burnes  on  the  subject,  and  was  on  the  way  to 
the  General's."  Thus  it  is  established  that  Macnaghten 
lost  no  time  in  seeking  the  advice  and  assistance  of  the 
military  commander. 

Let  us  next  see  what  was  the  result  of  the  visit  to  the 
General.  "  I  suggested,"  says  Macnaghten,  "  that  Briga- 
dier Shelton's  force  should  proceed  to  the  Balla  Hissar, 
thence  to  operate  as  might  seem  expedient;  that  the  re- 
maining troops  should  be  concentrated  in  the  canton- 
ments, and  placed  in  a  state  of  defence,  and  assistance, 
if  possible,  sent  to  Sir  A.  Burnes.  Before  Brigadier 
Shelton  could  reach  the  Balla  Hissar,  the  town  had  at- 
tained such  a  state  of  ferment  that  it  was  deemed  im- 
practicable to  penetrate  to  Sir  A.  Bumes's  residence, 
which  was  in  the  centre  of  the  city." 

General  Elphinstone's  report  is  meagre  and  unsatis- 
factory, and  does  not  even  allude  to  any  supposed  ex- 
pediency of  supporting  Sir  Alexander  Burnes: — "  It 
was  proposed,"  he  says,  "  that  Brigadier  Shelton,  with 
two  regiments  and  guns,  should  proceed  to  the  Balla 
Hissar;  and  the  Envoy  sent  his  military  secretary.  Cap- 
tain Lawrence,  to  intimate  his  wishes,  and  obtain  the 
King's  sanction  to  this  measure,  the  Balla  Hissar  being 
considered  a  commanding  position,  and  the  fittest  route 

to  enter  the  city The  troops,  horse  artillery 

(four  guns),  with  a  company  of  the  44th  Foot,  the 
Shah's  6th  Infantry,  and  a  wing  of  the  54th  N.L,  moved 
under  Brigadier  Shelton,  about  twelve  o'clock,  into  the 
Balla  Hissar ;  the  rest  of  the  troops  were  concentrated 

*  Report  of  Major-General  Elphinstone. 


BRIGADIER  SHELTON's  REPORT.  21 

in  cantonments,  which  arrangements  occupied  the  rest 
of  the  day," 

Brigadier  Shelton's  report  is  much  more  expUcit  and 
inteUigible.     It  throws  a  flood  of  Ught  on  some  of  the 
dark  places : — "  On  the  morning  of  the  2nd  Novem- 
ber," says  the  Brigadier,    "  I  passed  under  the  city 
wall    about    seven    o'clock,   when  the    cavalry  grass- 
cutters,  who  were  in  the  habit  of  going  through  the 
town  for  their  grass,  told  me  that  the  city  gate  was 
shut,  and  that  they  could  not  get  in.     All  was  quiet 
at  this  time ;  and  I  rode  home,  thinking  some  robbery 
might  have  taken  place,  and  that  the  gate  might  have 
been  shut  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the  thieves.     About 
eight  or  nine  o'clock   various  reports  were  in  circu- 
lation, and  between  nine  and  ten  I  got  a  note  from 
Greneral  Elphinstone,   reporting  a  disturbance  in  the 
city,  and  desiring  me  to  prepare  to   march  into  the 
Balla  Hissar,  with  three  companies  64th  N.I.,  the  Shah's 
6th  Infantry,  and  four  guns,  all  I  had  in  camp  (the 
remainder  of  my  brigade  having  been  called  into  can- 
tonments).   I  soon  after  got  another,  telling  me  not  to 
go,  as  the  King  objected  to  it.     I  replied  to  this  note, 
that  if  there  was  an  insurrection  in  the  city  it  was  not  a 
moment  for  indecision,  and  recommended  him  at  once  to 
decide  upon  what  measures  he  would  adopt.     The  an- 
swer to  this  was.  to  march  immediately  into  the  Balla 
Hissar,  where  I  would  receive  further  instructions  from 
the   Envoy's   military  secretary,  whom   I  should  find 
there.    Just  as  I  was  marching  oflF,  a  note  came  from  the 
latter  person  to  halt  for  further  orders.     I  then  sent  in 
the  engineer  officer  to  see  the  cause ;  but  he  was  cut 
down  by  an  Afghan,  in  dismounting  from  his  horse,  just 
outside  the  square,  where  his  Majesty  was  sitting.     Soon 
after  this  the  secretary  himself  came  with  orders  to  pro- 
ceed,    I  then  marched  in,  when  the  King  asked  me,  as 