

*  I  sliall  not  stop  bere  to  eza-  in  a  subsequent  portion  of  the 
mine  the  question  of  the  fidelity  narrative  it  will  be  fully  invcsti- 
or  infidelity  of  Shah  Soojah;  but    gated. 


INSIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  FIBST  MOVEMENT.  15 

struck,  but  not  paralysed*  The  only  movement  made, 
on  that  ill-omened  November  morning,  to  crush  the  in- 
surrection at  its  birth,  was  made  by  the  King  himself. 
He  sent  out  a  regiment  of  Hindostanee  troops — that  re- 
giment which  was  still  commanded  by  the  Indo-Briton 
adventurer  Campbell,  who  had  rendered  Shah  Soojah 
good  service  in  his  attempt  to  expel  the  Barukzye  Sir- 
dars.* Futteh  Jung  and  the  Wuzeer  went  with  them. 
They  moved  down  with  some  spirit  upon  the  city ;  but 
shaped  their  course  with  such  little  wisdom  that  they 
were  soon  in  disastrous  flight  They  should  have  moved 
along  the  base  of  the  hill  to  the  outer  extremity  of  the 
short  thoroughfare  in  which  Bumes's  house  was  situated. 
But  instead  of  this  they  attempted  to  make  their  way 
through  the  heart  of  the  city,  and  were  soon  entangled 
with  their  guns  in  its  narrow,  intricate  streets.  Thus 
embarrassed,  they  were  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy. 
They  lost,  it  was  said,  two  hundred  of  their  number,f 
were  compelled  to  abandon  their  guns,  and  were  soon 
to  be  seen  hurrying  back,  a  disorderly  rabble,  to  the 
shelter  of  the  Balla  Hissar. 

In  the  mean  while.  Brigadier  Shelton,  with  a  body  of 
infantry  and  artillery,  had  made  his  way  to  the  Balla 
Hissar,  and  arrived  in  time  to  cover  the  retreat  of  Camp- 
belFs  regiment,  and  to  save  the  guns  from  the  grasp 
of  the  enemy.  "  Soon  after  my  arrival,"  says  the  Briga- 
dier in  his  narrative  of  these  proceedings,  **  wounded 
men  were  coming  in  from  the  city.  I  was  then  informed 
that  they  belonged  to  the  King's  Hindostanee  Pultun, 
which  his  Majesty  had  sent  into  the  city  with  two  six- 

•  In  1S34. — [5cc  Booh  /.,  Chap"  posing  the  march  of  the  regiment 

ter  F//.]  Eye-witnesses  affirm  that  the  latter 

f  This,    however,    in   all   proba-  fought  with  little  gallantry  on  this 

bility  IS  a  verj  exaggerated  state-  occasion.    It  is  said,  too,  that  Futteh 

ment.     There  were,  jprobablj,  not  Jung,   instead  of  encouraging   the 

more  than  two  or   three   hundred  Hindostanees,  encouraged  the  msur- 

people  in  the  Caubul  bazaars  op-  gents. 


16  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

pounders.  I  despatched  the  light  company  of  the 
54th  NJ.  to  the  gate  of  the  Balla  Hissar  leading  into  the 
town,  and  soon  after  the  remainder  of  the  King's  Pultun 
and  the  two  guns  were  driven  in.  The  latter  they  were 
obliged  to  abandon,  fortunately  sufficiently  under  the 
wall  to  enable  me  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  getting 
possession;  but  too  near  the  houses  for  me  to  bring 
them  in.  I  disposed  a  covering  party  accordingly,  but 
on  the  enemy's  opening  his  fire,  the  Shah's  men  rushed 
back  into  the  gateway,  and  thus  abandoned  the  enter- 
prise." "  I  mention  this,"  adds  the  Brigadier,  "  because 
it  was  said  his  Majesty  was  implicated  in  exciting  the 
rebellion — for  in  such  case  he  never  would  have  made 
80  noble  an  effort,  and  the  only  one  that  was  made  to 
strike  at  the  root."* 