

This  brought  the  General  round  again  to  the  opi- 
nion that  reinforcements  ought  to  be  sent ;  he  promised 
that,  at  two  a.m.,  a  detachment  should  be  under  arms  to 
take  possession  of  Mahomed  Sheriff's  Fort,  and  to 
strengthen  Warren's  position;  and  the  requisite  orders 
were  accordingly  issued.    But  later  counsels  prevailed. 


LOSS  OF  THE  COMMISSARIAT  FORT.  33 

The  march  of  the  detachment  was  postponed  to  the  follow- 
ing morning;  and,  before  it  moved,  Lieutenant  Warren 
and  his  party  had  abandoned  the  fort  and  returned  to  can- 
tonments, leaving  all  our  supplies  in  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  and  inspiring  them  with  fresh  confidence  and 
courage.  The  little  garrison  had  escaped  by  working  a 
hole  from  the  interior  of  the  fort  underneath  the  walls,  by 
the  aid  of  tools  which  had  been  sent  them  for  a  difTerent 
purpose  on  the  preceding  night.* 

Nor  was  this  our  only  loss.  The  commissariat  fort, 
in  which  the  supplies  for  Shah  Soojah's  force  were  stored, 
was  on  the  outskirts  of  the  city.  In  1840,  when  a  gene- 
ral rising  was  deemed  no  unlikely  occurrence,  Captain 
Johnson  laid  in  a  supply  of  17,000  maunds  of  ottah  for 
Shah  Soojah's  force,  and  had  erected  godowns  for  their 
reception  within  the  Balla  Hissar,  where  early  in  1841  the 
grain  was  all  laid  up  in  store.  The  King,  however,  sub- 
sequently exercised  the  royal  privilege  of  changing  his 
mind.  The  godowns  were  inconveniently  situated ;  and 
Captain  Johnson  was  ordered  to  remove  the  grain  from 
the  citadel,  and,  having  no  better  place  for  its  reception, 
to  convert  his  camel-sheds,  on  the  outskirts  of  the  city, 
into  a  godown  fort.f     In  this  fort,  on  the  2nd  of  Novem- 


♦  "  Earlj  on  the  morning  of  the  the  Balla  Hissar,  where  it  was  all 

5th,  the  commissariat  fort  was  aban-  stored  in  May,  1841.  One  of  Sir  Wil- 

doned    by  its  garrison,  the  enemy  liam  Macnaghten's  first  acts,  after 

having  attempted  to  fire  the  gate  and  arrival  from  Jellalabad,  was  a  most 

escalade.    The  garrison  came  out  by  peremptory  Order  to  me  to  take  the 

a  hole  made  from  the  interior — tools  whole  of  my   godown    out^  of   the 

having  been  sent  overnight,  with  a  Balla  Hissar.     On  my  stating  that 

view  to  the  introduction  of  reinforce-  I  had  no  other  place  in  which  to 

ments  and  the  withdrawal  of  supplies  store  so  large  a  quantity,  I  was  told 

from  the  store." — [^Report  of  General  that  the  grain  was  on  no  considera- 

Elpkmstone.'i  tion  to  remain  in  the  citadel,  as  the 

f  "  In  September,  1840,  when  we  King  was  averse  to  it.     There  being 

were    in    expectation  of  a  general  no  other  place  to  store  it,  I  was 

rising    throughout    the    country,    I  ordered  to  convert  my  camel-sheds, 