

It  is  hard  to  say  why  a  stronger  force,  with  a  fair 
allowance  of  cavalry,  was  not  sent  out  in  the  first  in- 
stance ;  or  why,  on  the  return  of  Swayne's  weak  detach- 
ment, it  was  not  reinforced  and  sent  out  against  the  enemy. 

was  awfully  respected),  and  the  pil-  were  driven  back  by  the  enemy.  Had 

lage  of  treasure  was  known  in  the  they  gone  as  directed,  they  would,  In 

adjacent  villages,  it  brought  next  day  the  opinion  of  almost  all,  have  been 

thousands  of  men  under  the  standard  cut  to  pieces,  as  the  whole  road  was 

of  the  rebels.  '* — [3/5.  Records.  ]  taken  possession  of  by  the  enemy,  an  d, 

*  "  So  great  had  become  the  ex-  by  some  misconception  of  the  order 

citement,  that,  by  noon,  the  road  be-  sent  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  no  party 

tween  the  cantonments  and  the  city  had  been  detached  to  co-operate  with 

was   hardly  passable."  —  [Unfinished  them." 

Report  of  Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten:  %  It  would  seem  that  the  party, 

MS,  Records.]  instead  of  taking  the  shortest  and 

t  Captain  Johnson^ s  Journal:  MS,  safest  route  to  the  Lahore  gate,  took 

The  writer  says :  "  They  had  fortu-  the  longest  and  the  most  danger- 

nately  not  proceeded  far  before  they  ous. 


THREATENING  ASPECT  OF  AFFAIBS.  29 

There  was  daylight  enough  left  to  do  good  execution 
with  an  adequate  force,  adequately  commanded.  But  the 
evening  of  this  day,  like  that  of  the  preceding  one,  closed 
in  upon  an  inactive  and  dispirited  British  force,  and  an 
undisciplined  enemy  emboldened  by  impunity  and  flushed 
with  success. 

The  aspect  of  affairs  now  became  more  threatening. 
Before  noon,  on  the  preceding  day,  the  Envoy  and  his 
family  had  vacated  the  Residency,  and  sought  a  more 
secure  asylum  within  the  walls  of  the  cantonment.  Now 
preparations  were  being  made  to  place  those  cantonments 
in  a  state  of  defence.  This  was  no  easy  matter.  The 
works  were  of  "  frightful  extent;"  and  demanded  a  much 
larger  body  of  troops,  and  greater  number  of  guns,  than 
were  at  the  disposal  of  the  General,  to  defend  them  even 
against  the  ^^  contemptible  enemy"  that  was  now  collect- 
ing around  them.  It  was  not  long  after  the  commence- 
ment of  the  outbreak,  before  Lieutenant  Eyre,  the 
ordnance  commissariat  officer,  had  placed  every  avail- 
able gun  in  position.  But  the  want  of  artillery  in  this 
conjuncture  was  soon  lamentably  apparent.  There  had, 
at  no  time,  been  a  sufficiency  of  this  important  arm ;  but 
one  portion  of  the  miserable  allowance  was  now  with 
Sale's  force^  another  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  the  wretched 
remnant  was  in  cantonments. 

It  was  impossible  now  any  longer  to  close  one's  eyes 
against  the  real  state  of  affairs.  They  were  growing 
rapidly  worse  and  worse.  The  Envoy  sate  down  to  his 
desk  and  wrote  importunate  letters  to  Captain  Mac- 
gregor,  urging  him  to  bring  back  .Sir  Robert  Sale's  force 
to  Caubul.  At  the  same  time  he  wrote  to  Candahar,  to 
arrest  the  march  of  the  troops  that  were  about  to  return 
to  India,  and  to  despatch  them  with  all  speed  to  his 
relief.     Nothing  came  of  these  mandates  but  disappoint- 