

laid  m  for  the  Shah's  force  17,000  on  the  outskirts  of  the  cit^,  into 

maunds  of  ottah.    I  got  permission  godowns." — {^Captain  Johnson* s  MS, 

from  the  King  to  erect  godowns  in  Journal.^ 

VOL.  n.  D 


84         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

ber,  there  were  about  8000  maunds  of  ottah.  Captain 
Mackenzie^  an  officer  of  high  character,  greatly  and  de- 
servedly esteemed  by  the  Envoy  and  all  the  officers  of  the 
force,  was  at  this  time  in  charge  of  the  fort.  On  the  morn- 
ing of  the  2nd  of  November  it  was  attacked  by  the  armed 
population  of  Deh- Afghan.  Throughout  the  whole  of  that 
day  Mackenzie  held  his  post  with  unwearying  constancy 
and  unshaken  courage.  Everything  was  against  the 
little  garrison.  Water  was  scarce  ;  ammunition  was  scarce. 
They  were  encumbered  with  baggage,  and  overwhelmed 
with  women  and  children.  Reinforcements  were  written 
for,  and  looked  for  in  vain.  Captain  Trevor,  who  occu- 
pied, with  his  family,  a  neighbouring  fort,  despatched  re* 
peated  letters  to  cantonments,  importuning  the  Envoy  to 
reinforce  these  isolated  posts.  But  in  vain  they  turned 
their  straining  eyes  towards  the  cantonment,  "  looking  for 
the  glittering  bayonets  through  the  trees."*  Not  a  com- 
pany came  to  their  relief.  Instead  of  assistance  they  re- 
ceived nothing  but  melancholy  tidings  of  disaster.  A 
demonstration  from  the  cantonment  would  have  saved 
them.  The  Kuzzilbashes  were  ready  to  declare  them- 
selves on  the  side  of  the  British.  Khan  Shereen  Khan 
was,  indeed,  at  Trevor's  house.  But  when  the  chiefs  saw 
that  not  an  eSort  was  made  by  the  British  commanders  to 
vindicate  our  authority,  or  to  save  the  lives  of  our  officers, 
they  prudently  held  aloof  and  refused  to  link  themselves 
with  a  declining  cause. 

On  the  3rd  of  November,  "  about  the  middle  of  the 
day,"  the  enemy  got  possession  of  Trevor's  house;  and 
it  soon  became  certain  that  Mackenzie,  with  all  his  gal- 
lantry and  all  his  laborious  zeal — working  day  and  night 
without  food  and  without  rest — conducting  the  defence 
with  as  much  judgment  as  spirit — could  not  much  longer 

•  Captain  Mackenzie's  narratire,    and  well- written  report  of  one  of  the 
m  Bi/re  s  Journal;  a  very  interesting    most  honourable  incidents  of  the  war. 


ABANDONMENT  OF  MACKENZIE'S  FORT.  35 

hold  his  post.  His  men  were  wearied  out — ^his  ammuni- 
tion was  exhausted — his  wounded  were  dying  for  want  of 
medical  aid.  He  had  defended  his  position  throughout 
two  days  of  toil,  suffering,  and  danger;  and  no  aid  had 
come  from  cantonments — none  was  likely  to  come.  So 
yielding  at  last  to  the  importunity  of  others,  he  moved 
out  of  the  fort,  and  fought  his  way,  by  night,  to  canton- 
ments. It  was  a  difficult  and  hazardous  march;  and, 
almost  by  a  mii'acle,  Mackenzie  escaped  to  recount  the 
incidents  of  those  memorable  days. 