

Still  it  must  be  remembered,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
wise  after  the  event,  we  are  passing  sentence  on  the  con- 
duct of  men  who  had  not  then  the  fiill  information 
which  lights  us  to  a  more  correct  decision ;  and  that  if 
they  had  dragooned  down  the  insurrection  at  the  outset, 
destroying  innocent  life  and  valuable  property,  they 
would  certainly,  by  one  party  at  least,  have  been  im- 
peached as  incapable  and  dangerous  alarmists.  It  would 
not  improbably  have  been  said,  that  they  had  by  a  pre- 
cipitancy, as  mischievous  as  it  was  uncalled  for,  turned 
friends  into  enemies,  confidence  into  mistrust,  repose 
into  irritation,  and  sown  broad-cast  the  seeds  of  fixture 
rebellion  over  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the 
land. 


26         FR0GBES6  OF  THE  IN8UBBECTI0N. 


CHAPTER  n. 

[November,  1841.] 

Progress  of  the  Insurrection — Attempted  Movement  on  the  Citv — Attack  on 
Aimiomed  SherifTs  Fort— Loss  of  the  Commissariat  Fort — Captain  Mac- 
kenzie's Defence— Capture  of  Mahomed  SheriflTs  Fort — Attempts  to  cor- 
rupt the  Enemy. 

On  this  disastrous  2nd  of  November,  the  British  authori- 
ties in  the  Caubul  cantonments,  instead  of  acting  to-day, 
had  been  talking  about  doing  something  to-morrow.  That 
something  was  a  conjoint  movement  from  the  cantonments 
and  the  Balla  Hissar  on  the  Lahore  gate  of  the  city. 
The  opinions  of  General  Elphinstone  on  this  subject  are 
on  record.  On  the  2nd  of  November  he  wrote  to  the 
Envoy:* 

My  dear  Sir  William, 
Since  you  left  me,  I  have  been  considering  what  can  be  done 
to-morrow.  Our  dilemma  is  a  difficult  one.  Shelton,  if  rein- 
forced to-morrow,  might,  no  doubt,  force  in  two  columns  on  his 
way  towards  the  Lahore  gate,  and  we  might  from  hence  force  that 
gate  and  meet  them.  But  if  this  were  accomplished,  what  shall 
we  gain?  It  can  be  done,  but  not  without  very  great  loss,  as  our 
people  will  be  exposed  to  the  fire  from  th^  houses  the  whole  way. 
Where  is  the  point  you  said  they  were  to  fortify  near  Bumes's 
house?  If  they  could  assemble  there,  that  would  be  a  point  of 
attack;  but  to  march  into  the  town^  it  seems,  we  should  only  have 

*  This  letter  is  without  date,  but    been  written  on  the  2nd  of  Novem- 
there  can  be  no  doubt  of  its  having    ber. 


THE  FIB8T  MOVEMENT  FBOM  CANTONMENTS.  27 

to  come  back  again;  and  as  to  setting  the  city  on  fire,  I  feari  from 
its  construction,  that  is  almost  impossible.  We  must  see  wliat  the 
morning  brings,  and  then  think  what  can  be  done.  The  occupa- 
tion of  all  the  houses  near  tiie  gates  might  give  us  a  command  of 
the  town,  but  we  have  not  means  for  extended  operations.  If  we 
could  depend  on  the  Kuzzilbashes^  we  might  easily  reduce  the 
city.  Yours,  truly, 