

Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  very  certain  that  even  an  inci- 
dental  outbreak  in  the  city  of  Caubul  ought  not,  at  such 
a  season,  to  have  been  regarded  as  a  matter  of  light  con- 
cern. But  an  attack  upon  the  residence  of  a  high  poli- 
tical functionary  could,  in  nowise,  be  looked  upon  as 
an  incidental  outrage,  proceeding  neither  from  political 

*  See  the  expression  of  the  Envoy>        f  Letter  from    Brigadier   Shelton, 
in  a  letter  quoted  at  the  commence-    May  28,  1842. — [MS,  Eecords.^ 
ment  of  the  chapter. 


24  THE  OUTBREAK  AT  CAUBUL. 

causes,  nor  conducing  to  political  results.  It  was  an  emer-* 
gency,  indeed,  that  called  for  promptitude  of  action,  un- 
restrained either  by  shortsighted  considerations  of  hu- 
manity or  feelings  of  official  delicacy  and  reserve.  Too 
anxious  to  conciliate  the  wishes  of  the  King,  the  Envoy 
forbore  from  all  aggressive  measures  until  his  Majesty 
had  been  consulted ;  and  when  he  learnt  that  Campbell's 
regiment  had  been  sent  out  against  the  insurgents,  he  be- 
lieved that  the  insurrection  would  be  speedily  put  down. 
But  in  such  a  crisis  the  British  minister  might  have 
acted,  without  any  breach  of  official  rectitude,  on  his 
own  independent  judgment,  and  taken  upon  himself  to 
decide  at  once  what  was  best,  not  only  for  the  King, 
whom  English  money  and  English  arms  were  supporting 
on  his  throne,  but  for  what  was  of  infinitely  more  im- 
portance, the  honour  of  the  British  nation. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  imderstand  these  restraining  in- 
fluences ;  but  when  all  due  allowance  is  made  for  them, 
it  must  still  be  admitted  that  at  such  a  time,  and  under 
such  circumstances,  nothing  short  of  a  prompt  move- 
ment  upon  the  disturbed  quarter  of  the  city  should 
have  been  counselled  by  the  Envoy  and  ordered  by 
the  General.  There  is  nothing,  indeed,  but  the  imprac- 
ticability of  the  movement  that  can  be  urged  in  ex- 
tenuation of  its  neglect.  The  Envoy  has  declared  that, 
by  the  time  Brigadier  Shelton  had  reached  the  Balla 
Hissar,  it  was  impracticable  for  a  body  of  troops  to 
penetrate  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Burnes's  house.  But 
what  was  impracticable  then  was  not  impracticable  some 
time  before  ;  and  Shelton  would  have  reached  the  Balla 
Hissar  much  sooner,  but  for  the  respect  shown  to  the 
wishes  of  the  King,  the  delay  in  ascertaining  those  wishes, 
and  the  vacillating  orders  which  his  Majesty  thought  fit 
to  issue  on  this  momentous  occasion.  The  attack  on  the 
city  should  have  been  made  some  hours  earlier  in  the 


WISDOM  AFTER  THE  EVENT*  25 

day.  The  movement  may  have  been  impracticable  after 
the  hour  when  Shelton  reached  the  Balla  Hissar ;  but 
why  was  it  not  made  before  f  The  only  point  to  be  de- 
cided by  the  Envoy  and  the  General  was,  what  body  of 
troops — whether  from  Shelton's  camp  or  cantonments — 
could  be  most  expeditiously  despatched  to  the  disturbed 
quarter  of  the  town,  and  most  eflFectually  suppress  the 
disturbance?  But  instead  of  directing  all  his  thoughts 
to  this  one  great  object,  the  Envoy  thought  about  the 
wishes  of  the  Shah  and  the  comforts  of  the  people  ; 
whilst  the  General,  too  glad  to  be  saved  the  trouble  of 
thinking  at  all,  readily  adopted  Macnaghten's  opinions, 
and  believed  that  the  fires  which  had  broken  out  in  the 
city  might  be  left  to  die  out  by  themselves. 