

Shelton  must  then  be  withdrawn,  as  we  shall  not  be  able  to 

supply  him. 

Yours,  sincerely, 

W.  K.  E.* 

Already  had  the  General  begun  to  think  and  to  write 
of  "  making  terms"  with  the  enemy.  It  w^ill  be  seen  that 
he  anticipated  failure;  and  what  but  failure  was  likely  to 
result  from  an  expedition  undertaken  under  such  auspices? 
The  party  was  sent  out  under  Major  Swayne.  It  seems 
to  have  stood  still,  when  it  ought  to  have  rushed  forward. 
The  opportunity  was  lost;  and  the  General,  who  was 
watching  the  movement  from  the  gateway,  ordered  the 
detachment  to  be  withdrawn.     The  Sepoys  of  the  37th 

*  Unpublished  Correspondence  of  General  Elphinstone. 


RISINGS  IN  THE  KOHISTAN.  37 

regiment^  who  had  been  eager  to  advance  to  the  capture 
of  the  fort,  were  enraged  and  disappointed  at  being  held 
back ;  and  the  enemy,  more  confident  and  presumptuous 
than  before,  exulted  in  a  new  triumph. 

Whilst  afeirs  were  in  this  distressing  and  dispiriting 
state  at  Caubul,  our  outposts  were  exposed  to  imminent 
danger ;  and  it  was  soon  only  too  plain  that  the  insurrec- 
tion was  not  confined  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  capital. 
At  Kardurrah,  Lieutenant  Maule,  of  the  Bengal  Artillery, 
commanding  the  Kohistanee  regiment,  with  his  adjutant 
and  sergeant-major  had  been  cut  to  pieces,  at  the  outset 
of  the  insurrection,  by  the  men  of  his  own  corps ;  and 
now  intelligence  came  in  that  the  Goorkha  regiment, 
posted  at  Charekur  in  the  Kohistan,  where  Major  Pot- 
tinger  was  Resident,  was  threatened  with  annihilation. 
Captain  Codrington,  the  commandant,  and  other  officers 
had  been  killed;  and  as  water  was  failing  the  garrison, 
there  was  Uttle  chance  of  its  holding  out.  The  Envoy 
communicated  these  sad  tidings  to  the  General,  who 
wrote  in  reply: 

My  d£ab  Sib  William, 

This  is  most  distressing.  Can  nothing  be  done  by  the 
promise  of  a  large  reward — a  lakh  of  rupees  for  instance,  if 
necessary,  to  any  of  the  Kohistan  chiefs,  to  bring  them  ofi^ 
though  I  fear  the  three  days  have  expired;  but,  perhaps,  I  am 
proposing  what  is  impossible. 

Yours, 

W.  K.  E. 

This  was  written  on  the  6th  of  November.  That  day 
witnessed  our  first  success.  A  party,  under  Major 
Griffiths,  of  the  37th  Native  Infantry,  was  sent  out 
against  Mahomed  Sheriffs  Fort.  A  practicable  breach 
was  effected,  and  the  storming  party  entered  with  an  ir- 
resistible impetuosity,  worthy  of  British  troops.     Ensign 


38         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

Raban,  of  the  44th  Regiment,  was  shot  dead  on  the  crest 
of  the  breach.  The  garrison  escaped  to  the  hills,  where 
a  party  of  Anderson's  horse  dashed  at  them  in  gallant 
style,  and  drove  them  from  their  position.  The  rest  of 
the  day  was  spent  in  dubious  skirmishing.  All  arms 
were  employed  in  a  wild  desultory  manner.  Artillery, 
cavalry,  and  infantry  did  good  independent  service; 
but  they  did  not  support  each  other.  Nothing  great 
was  designed  or  attempted.  A  general  action  might 
have  been  brought  on ;  and,  properly  commanded  at  that 
time,  the  British  troops,  who  were  then  eager  to  meet 
the  enemy,  might  have  beaten  five  times  their  numbers 
in  the  field.  But  General  Elphinstone,  long  before  this, 
had  ceased  to  think  of  beating  the  enemy.  Everything 
seemed  possible  to  him  but  that. 