

The  abandonment  of  our  commissariat  stores  not  only 
threatened  the  British  force  with  instant  starvation,  but 
made  such  a  lamentable  exposure  of  our  imbecility,  that 
all  who  had  before  held  aloof,  thinking  that  the  British  na- 
tion would  arise  and  crush  the  insurgents,  now  gathered 
heart  and  openly  declared  themselves.  The  doubtful 
were  assured; — the  wavering  were  established.  There 
was  a  British  army,  looking  over  the  walls  of  their  can- 
tonment at  an  ill-armed  enemy — almost  a  rabble — gutting 
their  commissariat  fort.  There  were  the  spoliators, 
within  four  hundred  yards  of  our  position,  carrying  off 
our  supplies,  as  busily  as  a  sw£irm  of  ants.  "  The  godown 
fort,"  wrote  Captain  Johnson  in  his  journal,  *'  was  this 
day  something  similar  to  a  large  ants'  nest.  Ere  noon, 
thousands  and  thousands  had  assembled  from  far  and 
wide,  to  participate  in  the  booty  of  the  English  dogs, 
each  man  taking  away  with  him  as  much  as  he  could 
cany — and  to  this  we  were  all  eye-witnesses."  The 
troops  in  cantonments  were  indignant  at  the  imbecility 
of  their  leaders,  who  had  suffered  them  to  be  so  igno- 
miniously  stripped  of  the  very  means  of  subsistence  j  and 
clamoured  to  be  led  out  against  the  enemy,  who  were 
parading  their  spoils  under  the  very  walls  of  the  canton- 
ment. The  feeling  was  not  one  to  be  checked.  Lieu- 
tenant Eyre  went  to  the  quarters  of  the  General,  urged 

d2 


36         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

him  to  send  out  a  party  for  the  capture  of  Mahomed 
Sheriff's  Fort,  and  volunteered  to  keep  the  road  clear  for 
the  advance  of  the  storming  party.  After  some  deli- 
beration the  General  assented,  and  wrote  to  the  Envoy 
on  the  subject : 

November  5, 1841.    5  a.m. 

My  DEAR  Sir  William, 

After  due  consideration,  we  have  determined  on  attacking 
the  fort  this  morning,  with  fifty  men  of  the  44th,  and  200  Native 
Infantry.  We  will  first  try  to  breach  the  place,  and  shell  it  as 
well  as  we  can.  From  information  I  have  received  respecting  the 
interior  of  the  fort,  which  I  think  is  to  be  relied  on,  it  seems 
the  centre,  like  our  old  bazaar,  is  filled  with  buildings ;  therefore, 
if  we  succeed  in  blowing  open  the  gate,  we  should  only  be  ex- 
posed to  a  destructive  fire  from  the  buildings,  which,  from  the 
state  of  preparation  they  evince,  would  no  doubt  be  occupied  in 
force,  supported  from  the  garden.  Carrying  powder-bags  up 
under  fire  would  have  a  chance  of  failure.  Our  men  have  been  all 
night  in  the  works,  are  tired,  and  ill  fed;  but  we  must  hope  for 
the  best,  and  securing  our  commissariat  fort  with  the  stores. 

It  behoves  us  to  look  to  the  consequences  of  failure:  in  this 
case  I  know  not  how  we  are  to  subsist,  or,  from  want  of  provi- 
sions, to  retreat.  You  should,  therefore,  consider  what  chance 
there  is  of  making  terras,  if  we  are  driven  to  this  extremity. 