

Another  was  soon  to  be  recorded  against  us.  In  the 
course  of  the  afternoon,  the  General  determined  to  try  the 
effect  of  sending  out  a  party,  consisting  mainly  of  cavalry, 
to  enable  Lieutenant  Warren  to  evacuate  the  commissariat 
fort.  But  this  party  suffered  more  severely  than  the  pre- 
ceding one.  From  the  loopholes  of  Mahomed  Sheriff's 
Fort — from  every  tree  in  the  Shah's  garden — from  what- 
ever cover  of  wood  or  masonry  was  to  be  found — the 
Afghan  marksmen  poured,  with  unerring  aim,  their  deadly 
fire  upon  our  advancing  troops.  The  unseen  enemy  was 
too  strong  for  our  slight  detachment.  The  troopers  of 
the  5th  Cavalry  fell  in  numbers  beneath  the  fire  of  the 
Afghan  matchlocks.  The  forward  movement  was  checked. 
The  party  retreated;  and  again  the  enemy  gathered  new 
courage  fix)m  the  contemplation  of  our  reverses. 

In  the  mean  while^  it  had  become  known  to  the  com- 
missariat officers  that  the  General  contemplated  the 
abandonment  of  the  fort,  in  which  not  only  our  grain,  but 


*'  On  the  4ih  iitftaiit  another  attempt  to 
throw  in  reinforcements  failed.  The 
troops  emplored  suffered  consider- 
abl/,  particufarlj  the  5th  Caralry.** 
Two  different  attempts  are  here 
mixed  up  together.  Captain  Johnson 
sa^s,  that  the  first  was  an  attempt  to 
remforce  Lieutenant  Warren;  but 


that  the  second,  on  which  the  5th 
Cavalry  were  employed,  was  an  at- 
tempt to  bring  off  the  commissariat 
Saard.  Lieutenant  Eyre  and  Lady 
ale  speak  of  both  movements  in  the 
light  of  efforts  made  to  enable  Lieute- 
nant Warren  to  abandon  his  position. 
It  is  certain  that  the  second  was. 


32  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

our  hospital  stores,  our  spirits,  wine,  beer,  &c.,  were 
garaered.  Dismayed  at  the  thought  of  a  sacrifice  that 
must  entail  destruction  on  the  entire  force,  Captain  Boyd, 
the  chief  commissariat  officer,  hastened  to  General  Elphin- 
stone's  quarters,  and  entreated  him  not  to  withdraw 
Lieutenant  Warren  from  the  fort,  but  to  reinforce  him  with 
all  possible  despatch.  The  General,  ever  ready  to  listen 
to  advice,  and  sometimes  to  take  it,  heard  all  that  was 
advanced  by  the  commissariat  officer,  readily  assented  to 
its  truth,  and  promised  to  send  out  a  reinforcement  to  the 
fort.  But  no  reinforcement  was  sent.  Night  was  closing 
in  upon  the  cantonment,  and  Captain  Boyd,  to  his  bitter 
disappointment,  perceived  that  no  preparations  were 
making  for  the  promised  movement  towards  the  fort. 
Asking  Captain  Johnson  to  accompany  him,  he  again  pro- 
ceeded to  the  General's  quarters,  where  the  two  officers, 
in  emphatic  language,  pointed  out  the  terrible  results  of 
the  sacrifice  of  our  supplies.  Again  the  General  listened 
— again  he  assented — and  again  he  would  have  promised 
all  that  was  required ;  but  other  officers  were  present,  who 
put  forth  other  opinions;  talked  of  the  danger  of  the  move- 
ment; urged  that  it  would  be  necessary,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, to  capture  Mahomed's  Sheriff's  Fort ;  and  so  the 
General  wavered.  But  at  this  juncture,  another  letter  from 
Lieutenant  Warren  was  brought  in.  It  represented  that 
his  position  had  become  more  insecure;  that  the  enemy 
were  mining  under  the  walls,  and  the  Sepoys  escaping 
over  them ;  and  that  if  reinforcements  were  not  speedily 
sent,  he  should  be  compelled  to  abandon  his  position. 