

W.  K.  Elphinstone.* 

The  movement,  however,  was  fixed  for  "  to-morrow.'^ 
That  morrow  was  one  of  early  bustle  and  activity  through- 
out the  British  cantonment.  Before  day  had  broken,  the 
drums  beat  to  arms.  Intelligence  had  come  in  that  a  large 
body  of  men  were  marching  over  the  Seeah  Sungh  hills. 
They  were  believed  to  be  enemies,  but  they  proved  to  be 
iHends.  The  37th  Regiment  of  Native  Infantry  had  been 
called  in  from  Koord-Caubul  on  the  preceding  day;  and  it 
bad  made  good  its  march,  in  the  face  of  no  feeble  oppo- 
sition, bringing  in  its  baggage  and  its  sick  in  an  orderly 
manner,  very  creditable  to  the  commanding  oflScer.f  Two 
guns  of  the  mountain-train  accompanied  the  regiment. 
Any  addition  to  the  cantonment  force  was  valuable  at  such 
a  time ;  and  the  37th  Regiment  was  regarded  as  one  of  the 
best  in  the  service.  Still,  although  when  our  resources 
were  thus  increased,  a  movement  was  made  upon  the  city, 
so  small  a  force  was  sent  out  that  it  was  compelled  to 
retreat. 

The  movement,  such  as  it  was — the  first  attempted  by 
the  British  force — was  made  three  hours  after  noon.  The 
enemy  had  by  this  time  increased  mightily  in  numbers. 
Thousands,  long  ripe  for  revolt,  were  now  ready  to  declare 
themselves  on  the  side  of  the  national  party.  All  the  sur- 
rounding villages  poured  in  their  tributaries,^  and  swelled 
the  great  tide  of  insurrection.   At  noon,  on  the  preceding 

*  UnpubUsked    Correspondence   of       t  "  As  soon,**  sajs  Mohun  Lai,  in 

Qtnercd  EfphingUme,  a  letter  to  Mr.  Colvin,  **  as  the  mor- 

t  Major  GrifBths.  der  of  Sir  Alexander  (whose  name 


28         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

day,  the  road  between  the  cantonments  and  the  city  had 
been  scarcely  passable;*  and  now  all  this  intervening 
ground  was  alive  with  an  angry  enemy.  In  the  face  of  a 
hostile  multitude,  it  was  little  likely  that  a  weak  detach- 
ment could  penetrate  into  the  city.  The  party  sent  out 
on  this  hazardous  service,  under  Major  Swayne,  consisted 
of  one  company  of  H.  M.'s  44th  Regiment,  two  companies 
of  the  5th  Native  Infantry,  and  two  Horse  Artillery  guns. 
The  whole  affair  was  a  failure.  The  only  fortunate  cir- 
cumstance was  that  this  feeble  detachment  retired  in  good 
time.  Owing  to  some  misconception  of  orders,  no  party 
had  been  detached  to  co-operate  with  them  from  the  Balla- 
Hissar;f  and  if  they  had  forced  their  way  to  the  Lahore 
gate  of  the  city,  the  whole  detachment  would  have  been 
cut  to  pieces.  As  it  was,  the  party  was  fired  upon  from 
the  Kohistan  gate,  near  which  it  ought  not  to  have 
gone; J  and  it  was  soon  only  too  obvious  that  a  further 
advance,  in  the  face  of  such  an  enemy,  would  be  a  profit- 
less sacrifice  of  life.  Major  Swayne  brought  back  his 
detachment,  and  so  ended  the  first  attempt  to  operate  upon 
the  city. 