


30  PKOQBISSS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

ment.     It  would  have  been  better  if  the  Caubul  force 
had  trusted  wholly  to  itself. 

The  next  day  was  one  of  more  appalling  disaster.  It 
brought  to  light  a  new  evil  that  threatened  destruction 
to  the  beleaguered  force.  The  commissariat  fort — the 
magazine  in  which  all  the  stores,  on  which  our  troops  de* 
pended  for  subsistence,  were  garnered  up-was  outside 
the  cantonment  walls.  It  was  situated  about  400  witesy^ 
from  the  south-west  bastion  of  the  cantonment.  On  the 
preceding  day,  the  detachment  in  charge  of  the  fort  had 
been  raised  to  a  subaltern's  guard  of  eighty  men.  It  was 
now  threatened  by  the  enemy.  Another  fort,  still  nearer 
cantonments,  known  as  Mahomed  Sheriff's  Fort,  was  al- 
ready in  possession  of  a  hostile  garrison  ;*  and  the  King's 
gardens,  between  which  and  the  cantonments  this  fort 
was  situated,  were  swarming  with  the  insurgents.  The 
communications  between  the  British  cantonments  and  the 
commissariat  fort  were  thus  intercepted  by  the  enemy ;  and 
the  position  of  the  slender  guard  posted  for  the  defence  of 
the  latter  was  therefore  one  of  imminent  peril.  The 
enemy  laid  siege  to  the  fort;  and  began  to  mine  beneath 
the  walls.  Surrounded  as  he  was  by  a  far  superior  force, 
and  seeing  no  possibility  of  repelling  the  assaults  of  the 
enemy,  Lieutenant  Warren,  who  commanded  the  guard, 
oflScially  reported  the  danger  of  his  position;  and  set  forth 
that,  unless  reinforced^  he  should  be  obliged  to  abandon 
his  post.  The  letter  was  conveyed  to  the  General,  who 
ordered  out  two  companies  of  the  44th  Regiment,  under 
Captains  Swayne  and  Robinson,  to  reinforce  the  party  at 
the  commissariat  fort,  or  enable  them  to  evacuate  it  in 
safety.f     They  had  not  proceeded  far,  when  the  enemy, 

*  General  Elphinstone  had,  on  the  declared  that  it  would  not  be  politic 

preceding  day,  expressed  his  desire  to  do  so. 

to  see  this  fort  garrisoned  bj  our  own  f  General  Elphinstone  speaks  of 

troops ;  but  Sir  William  Macnaghten  this  party  as  a  reinforcement.  He  says. 


FUBTHER  DISASTERS. 


31 


posted  in  Mahomed  Sheriff's  Fort  opened  upon  them  with 
deadly  execution.  The  galling  fire  of  the  concealed 
marksmen  checked  their  progress.  Captains  Swayne  and 
Robinson  were  shot  dead.  Other  officers  were  wounded* 
There  seemed  to  be  no  chance  of  success.  To  move  out- 
ward would  only  have  been  to  expose  the  detachment  to 
certain  destruction.  The  officer  upon  whom  the  command 
of  the  party  had  devolved,  determined,  therefore,  to  aban- 
don an  enterprise  from  which  nothing  but  further  disaster 
could  arise.  He  brought  back  his  party  to  cantonments ; 
and  so  another  failure  was  added  to  the  list. 