

Ever  since  his  arrival  at  the  head-quarters  at  Caubul 
he  bad  been,  in  his  own  words,  ^^  unlucky  in  the  state 
of  his  health."  From  the  beginning  of  May  to  the  be- 
ginning of  October  he  had  been  suffering,  with  little 
intermission,  from  fever  and  rheumatic  gout.  Some- 
times he  had  been  confined  wholly  to  his  couch ;  at 
others  he  was  enabled  to  go  abroad  in  a  palanquin. 
During  one  or  two  brief  intervals  he  had  sufficiently 
recovered  his  strength  to  trust  himself  on  the  back  of 
a  horse.  He  was  in  the  enjoyment  of  one  of  these  in- 
tervals— ^but  expecting  every  day  to  relinquish  a  bur- 
den which  he  was  so  ill  able  to  bear* — when,  on  the  2nd 
of  November,   whilst  inspecting  the  Guards,  he  "had 

*  He  had  sent  in  a  medical  certi-    permission  to  return  to  Hindostan.  He 
ficate  some  time  before,  and  received    was  to  have  accompanied  the  Envoy. 


CHARACTER  OF  GENERAL  ELPHINSTONE.  45 

a  very  severe  fall — the  horse  falling  upon  him/^*  and  he 
was  compelled  to  return  to  his  quarters.  From  that  time, 
though  he  never  spared  himself,  it  was  painfully  obvious 
that  the  Caubul  army  was  without  a  chief.  The  General 
was  perplexed — bewildered.  He  was  utterly  without  re- 
sources of  his  own.  A  crisis  had  come  upon  him,  de- 
manding all  the  energies  of  a  robust  constitution  and  a 
vigorous  understanding;  and  it  had  found  him  with  a 
frame  almost  paralysed  by  disease,  and  a  mind  quite 
clouded  by  suffering.  He  had  little  knowledge  of  the 
political  condition  of  Afghanistan ;  of  the  feelings  of  the 
people ;  of  the  language  they  spoke,  or  the  country  they 
inhabited.  He  was  compelled,  therefore,  to  rely  upon  the 
information  of  others,  and  to  seek  the  advice  of  those 
with  whom  he  was  associated.  So  circumstanced,  the 
ablest  and  most  confident  general  would  have  been 
guided  by  the  counsels  of  the  British  Envoy.  But  Gene- 
ral £lphinstone  was  guided  by  every  man's  counsels — 
generally  by  the  last  speaker's— by  captains  and  subal- 
terns,  by  any  one  who  had  a  plan  to  propose  or  any  kind 
of  advice  to  offer.  He  was,  therefore,  in  a  constant  state 
of  oscillation ;  now  inclining  to  one  opinion,  now  to  an- 
other; now  determining  upon  a  course  of  action,  now 
abandoning  it;  the  resolutions  of  one  hour  giving  way 
before  the  doubts  of  its  successor,  until,  in  the  midst  of 
these  vacillations,  the  time  to  strike  passed  away  for  ever, 
and  the  loss  was  not  to  be  retrieved. 

In  such  a  conjuncture,  there  could  have  been  no  greater 
calamity  than  the  feeble  indecision  of  the  military  com- 
mander. Promptitude  of  action  was  the  one  thing  de- 
manded by  the  exigencies  of  the  occasion ;  but  instead  of 
promptitude  of  action,  there  was  nothing  but  hesitation 
and  incertitude — ^long  delays  and  small  doings,  worse  than 