

The  agent  whom  he  employed  was  Mohun  Lai.     On 
the  first  outbreak  in  the  city,  the  Moonshee  had  narrowly 

*  Unpublisked  Corresprndence  of  General  Elphinstone. 


40  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

escaped  destruction  by  taking  refuge  under  the  skirts  of 
Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan.*  Since  that  time  he  had  re- 
sided in  Caubul,  under  the  protection  of  the  Kuzzilbash 
chief  Khan  Shereen  Khan,  and  had  kept  up  a  correspon- 
dence with  Sir  William  Macnaghten,  doing  the  Envoy's 
bidding,  as  he  said,  at  the  risk  of  his  life.  *  His  first  ex- 
periment was  made  upon  the  corruptibility  of  the  Ghil- 
zyes.  At  the  request  of  the  Envoy,  Mohun  Lai  opened 
negotiations  with  the  chiefs  of  the  tribe,  offering  them 
two  lakhs  of  rupees,  with  an  immediate  advance  of  a 
quarter  of  the  amount ;  but  before  the  contract  was  com- 
pleted, the  Envoy,  doubtful,  perhaps,  of  the  sincerity  of 
the  chiefs,  receded  from  the  negotiation.  The  Ghilzyes 
were  mortally  offended ;  but  the  Envoy  had  another  game 
in  hand.  On  the  7th  of  November  he  wrote  to  Mohun  Lai: 

Mt  dear  Sir, 

I  have  received  your  three  letters,  and  am  very  glad  that 
you  are  doing  such  excellent  service.  Enclosed  are  two  letters  for 
Khan  Shereen  Khan  and  Mahomed  Kumy e.  You  may  assure  them 
both,  that  if  they  perform  the  service  which  they  have  under- 
taken, the  former  shall  receive  one  lakh,  and  the  latter  50,000 
rupees,  besides  getting  the  present^  and  everything  else  they  re- 
quire. You  may  assure  them  that,  whatever  bluster  the  rebels 
may  make,  they  will  be  beaten  in  the  end.  I  hope  that  you  will 
encourage  Mohamed  Yar  Klan,  the  rival  of  Ameen-oollah ;  assure 
him  that  he  shall  receive  the  chiefship,  and  all  the  assistance  neces- 
sary to  enable  him  to  support  it.  You  may  give  promises  in  my 
name  to  the  extent  of  500,000  rupees  (five  lakhs). 

Yours,  faithfully, 

W.  H.  M.t 

Intelligence  had  by  this  time  reached  Caubul,  to  the 

*  Mohun  Lai  says :  "  I  had  a  very  years'  service)  was  plundered,  besides 
narrow  escape,  and  was  saved  by  the  murder  of  several  servants  be- 
taking a  shelter  under  the  garment  of  longing  to  Sir  Alexander  and  my- 
Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan  in  the  street,  self .— [XeMcr  to  Mr,  Colvin :  MS.] 
Everything  in  my  house  (which  I  had  t  UnpuUished  Correspondence  of 
saved  in  the  course  of  my  twelve  Sir  W,  H,  Macnaghten, 


ATTEMPTS  TO  BUY  THE  ENEMY.  41 

effect  that  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  the  second  son  of  Dost 
Mahomed,  was  coming  in  from  Toorkistan,  and  had  already 
advanced  as  far  as  Bameean.  Mohun  Lai  suggested  the 
expediency  of  despatching  an  emissary  to  meet  him  on  the 
way,  and  offer  the  Sirdar  a  handsome  allowance  to  league 
himself  with  our  party.     To  this  the  Envoy  replied: 