

And  in  a  postscript  to  this  letter  appeared  the  ominous 
words:  "I  promise  10,000  rupees  for  the  head  of  each 
of  the  principal  rebel  chiefs.* 

Mohun  Lai  received  this  letter,  and  being  ready  for 
any  kind  of  service  not  in  the  field,  began  to  cast  about 
in  his  mind  the  best  means  of  accomplishing  the  object 
spoken  of  in  Conolly's  postscript,  with  the  least  danger 
to  himself  and  the  greatest  benefit  to  his  employers.  It 
was  necessary,  however,  to  tread  cautiously  in  so  delicate 
a  matter.  The  Moonshee  was  not  yet  assured  of  the 
temper  of  the  Kuzzilbash  chief;  and  the  game  might  be 
played  away  by  one  precipitate  move.  So  he  resolved  to 
keep  the .  offer  of  the  head-money  in  abeyance  for  a  few 
days,  and  to  watch  the  course  of  events. 

*  I  set  these  things  down  here,  be-  pears,  in  a  remarkable  article,  on  the 

cause  they  belong,  in  chronological  *'  Outbreak  in  Caubul  and  its  Causes,'' 

order,  to  this  chapter.  The  discussion  published  in  the  Calcutta  Review.    I 

of  them  is  reserved  for  another.    The  wish  I  could  say  that  I  had  any  doubt 

letter,  of  which  I  have  no  copy,  ap-  of  its  authenticity. 


GENEBAL  ELPHINSTONE.  43 


CHAPTER  in. 

[November,  1841.] 

Progress  of  the  Insurrection — General  Elphinstone — His  Infirmities — Recall 
of  Brigadier  Shelton  to  Cantonments — Capture  of  the  Ricka-basbee  Fort 
— Intrigues  with  the  Afghan  Chiefs— The  Envoy^s  Correspondence  with 
Mohun  Lai. 

The  insurrection  had  now  been  raging  for  a  week.  The 
enemy  had  increased  in  numbers  and  in  daring.  The 
troops  in  the  British  cantonments  were  dispirited  and  dis- 
heartened. The  General  had  begun  to  talk  and  to  write 
about  negotiation.  The  Envoy  was  attempting  to  buy  off 
the  enemy.  Nothing  had  yet  been  done  to  avert  the 
disastrous  and  disgraceful  catastrophe  which  now  threa- 
tened to  crown  our  misfortunes.  It  was  plain  that  some- 
thing must  be  done.  Any  change  would  be  a  change  for 
the  better. 

The  officers  who  served  under  General  Elphinstone 
throughout  this  unhappy  crisis  have  invariably  spoken 
of  him  with  tenderness  and  respect.  He  was  an  honour- 
able gentleman — a  kind-hearted  man — and  he  had  once 
been  a  good  soldier.  His  personal  courage  has  never 
been  questioned.  Regardless  of  danger,  and  patient 
under  trial,  he  exposed  himself  without  reserve,  and 
bore  his  sufferings  without  complaining.  But  disease  had 
broken  down  his  physical  strength,  and  enfeebled  his  un- 


44  PBOGRESS  OF  THE  INSURKECTION. 

derstanding.  He  had  almost  lost  the  use  of  his  limbs. 
He  could  not  walk ;  he  could  hardly  ride.  The  gout  had 
crippled  him  in  a  manner  that  it  was  painful  to  con- 
template. You  could  not  see  him  engaged  in  the  most 
ordinary  concerns  of  peaceful  life  without  an  emotion  of 
lively  compassion.  He  was  fit  only  for  the  invalid  esta- 
blishment on  the  day  of  his  arrival  in  India.  It  was  a 
mockery  to  talk  of  his  commanding  a  division  of  the  army 
in  the  quietest  district  of  Hindostan.  But  he  was  selected 
by  Lord  Auckland,  against  the  advice  of  the  Commander- 
in-Chief,  and  the  remonstrances  of  the  Agra  governor,  to 
assume  the  command  of  that  division  of  the  army  which 
of  all  others  was  most  likely  to  be  actively  employed,  and 
which  demanded,  therefore,  the  greatest  amount  of  energy 
and  activity  in  its  commander.  Among  the  general  offi- 
cers of  the  Indian  army  were  many  able  and  energetic 
men,  with  active  limbs  and  clear  understandings.  There 
was  one — a  cripple,  whose  mental  vigour  much  suffering 
had  enfeebled ;  and  he  was  selected  by  the  Governor- 
General  to  command  the  army  in  Afghanistan. 