

•  Two  horse -artillery  gtins,  one  fkntry,  under   Major  Griffiths;    the 

mountain-train  gun,  Walker's  Horse,  6th  Regiment  of  Shah's  Force,  un- 

her  Majesty's  44th  Foot,  under  Co-  der  Captoin  Hopkins.— [i^yrc'a  Jour- 

lonel  Mackrell ;  the  37th  Native  In-  wa/.] 


ATTACK  ON  THE  RICKA-BASHEE  FOBT.  51 

not  countermand  it  at  once.  And  so  the  expedition  was 
countermanded ;  and  the  Brigadier  returned  ^'  disgusted 
with  such  vacillation."* 

The  troops  were  brought  back  within  the  cantonment 
walls;  and  the  Brigadier,  overflowing  with  indignation, 
laid  the  case  before  the  Envoy.  Macnaghten  was  as 
eager  as  Shelton  for  the  movement ;  and  the  scruples  of 
the  General  were  overruled.  But  time  had  now  been  lost. 
The  enemy's  position  had  been  strengthened.  The  spirit 
of  our  troops  had  been  damped — their  forwardness  had 
been  checked.  The  expedition  set  out  with  diminished 
chances  of  success ;  and  the  result  was  a  dubious  victory. 

The  Kicka-bashee  Fort  was  captured  on  that  10th  of 
November,  but  in  a  disastrous  and  calamitous  manner, 
which  made  the  victory  look  more  like  a  defeat.  It  was 
determined  to  blow  open  the  gate  with  powder-bags, 
and  Captain  Bellew,  the  Assistant  Quartermaster-Gene- 
ral, gallantly  volunteered  to  undertake  the  work  of  de- 
struction. But,  by  some  accident,  instead  of  blowing 
open  the  main  gate,  he  blew  open  a  small  wicket.  Two 
companies  of  European  and  four  companies  of  Native 
troops f  had  been  told  off  to  form  the  storming  party; 
and  Colonel  Mackrell,  of  the  44th,  was  ordered  to  conl- 
mand  it.  The  men,  gallantly  commanded,  advanced 
with  spirit  to  the  attack ;  but  they  could  with  difficulty 
make  their  way  through  the  narrow  aperture,  and  the 
enemy,  as  they  struggled  forward,  poured  upon  them  a 
hot  and  destructive  fire.     Colonel  Mackrell  and  Lieu- 

*  **  I  was  occupied/'  says  Brigadier  attack  it."  —  {Statement  of  Brigadier 

Shelton, '•in  telline  off  the  force  about  Shelton:  MS.  Records,']      Eyre  says 

10  A-M.,  when  I  heard  Elphinstone  that  the  force  assembled,  not  at  10, 

say  to  his  aide^e-camp,  « I  think  we  but  at  12  a.m.;  and  as  Brigadier  Shel- 

had  better  give  it  up.'    The  latter  ton's  statement  was  written  from  me- 

Fsplied,  *  Then  why  not  countermand  mory,  it  is  less  likely  to  be  correct  in 

it  at  once,' — which  was  done,  and  I  such  small  matters  as  these.  Ttie  point 

returned,  as  you  may  conceive,  dis-  is  of  little  consequence, 

gusted  with  such  vacillation.    About  t  H.M.'s  44th,  the  37th  N.I.,  and 

two  hours  after  he  again  consented  to  Shah  Soojah's  6th  Infantry. 

e2 


52  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

tenant  Bird*  forced  their  way,  with  a  few  soldiers,  into 
the  fort.  Captain  Westmacott  was  shot  down  outside 
the  aperture,  and  Captain  Macrae  sabred  in  the  en- 
trance.f  The  few  who  made  good  their  way  into  the 
interior  of  the  fort  struck  a  panic  into  the  garrison,  who, 
beUeving  that  the  whole  party  were  following  them,  fled 
in  dismay  out  of  the  opposite  gate.  But  the  storming 
party,  unhappily  at  this  time,  were  checked  by  a  charge 
of  A%han  horse.  The  cry  of  "  Cavalry  "J  seems  to 
have  paralysed  the  British  musketeers,  who  wavered, 
turned,  and  were  soon  in  disastrous  flight — Europeans 
and  Sepoys  together.  In  vain  their  officers  endeavoured 
to  urge  them  on  to  the  attack — in  vain  they  pleaded 
the  desperate  condition  of  those  who  had  already  en- 
tered, if  they  were  not  speedily  supported.  One  man — 
a  private  of  the  44th,  named  Stewart — alone  volunteered 
to  follow  them.  It  was  not  easy  to  rally  the  fugitives. 
Confusion  and  dismay  had  seized  them,  and  for  some 
time  they  were  deaf  to  every  appeal.  But  they  were  com- 
manded by  one  who  at  least  was  a  brave  soldier.  Brigadier 
Shelton  was  a  man  of  iron  nerves  and  dauntless  courage. 
Where  the  fire  was  the  hottest  he  stood  unshaken  by 
the  danger  that  assailed  him,  and  shamed  the  disordered 
crowd  of  men,  no  longer  soldiers.  The  example  of  the 
one-armed  veteran  did  more  than  his  exhortations.  The 
broken  bands  rallied,  re-formed,  and  advanced  to  the 
attack.  But  again  they  gave  way  to  the  Afghan  horse ; 
and  again  Shelton's  expostulations  and  example  brought 
the  waverers  back  to  their  duty.  The  heavy  guns 
from  the  cantonments  were  by  this  time  playing  upon 
the  Afghan  cavalry;  the  impetuosity  of  the  enemy  was 