

We  had  lost  our  commissariat  forts ;  but,  happily,  we 
had  not  lost  our  commissariat  officers.  As  soon  as  it  was 
perceived  that  our  stores  were  in  jeopardy.  Captain  Boyd 
and  Captain  Johnson  had  begun  to  exert  themselves,  with 
an  energy  as  praiseworthy  as  it  was  rare  in  that  con- 
juncture, to  collect  supplies  from  the  surrounding  villages. 
They  were  more  successful  than  under  such  circumstances 
could  have  been  anticipated.  The  villagers  sold  the 
grain,  which  they  had  laid  up  for  their  own  winter  sup- 
plies, at  no  very  exorbitant  rates,  and  the  horrors  of  im- 
mediate starvation  were  averted  from  the  beleaguered 
force.*  The  troops  were  put  upon  half-rations.  The 
ordinary  food  of  the  native  troops — the  ottah^  or  ground 
wheat — was  wanting,  for  the  water-mills  in  the  villages 
had  been  destroyed ;  but  the  unbroken  grain  was  served 
out  to  them  in  its  stead.f 

*  <<  For  the  last  four  days,*'  wrote  able  rate ;  and  the  irillaffers  sell  wil- 

Captain  Johnson,  in  his  journal,  on  linglj  from  the  stores  which  thej  had 

the  8ih  of  November,  **  I  have  been  laid  up  for  themselves  for  winter.** — 

busily  purchasing  grain  from  Deh  [MS,  RecordsJ\ 
Mem  ;  X  have  established  a  reason-        f  Captain  JohnsorCs  MS,  Journal, 


SCARCITY  OF  AMMUNITION.  39 

A  new  danger  was  now  to  be  discovered.  The  force 
bad  been  threatened  with  starvation;  but  now  supplies 
were  coming  in  from  the  surrounding  villages.  It  would 
have  been  impossible  to  hold  out  without  provisions.  It 
would  be  equally  impossible  to  hold  out  without  ammu* 
nition.  As  soon  as  the  one  danger  was  averted,  the  Ge- 
neral b^n  to  look  about  for  the  approach  of  the  other. 
On  the  6th  of  November,  he  again  wrote  to  Sir  William 
Macnaghten.  suggesting  the  expediency  of  making  terms, 
with  the  least  possible  delay : — ^'  We  have  temporarily," 
he  said,  '^  and  I  hope  permanently,  got  over  the  difficulty 
of  provisions.  Our  next  consideration  is  ammunition; 
a  very  serious  and  indeed  awful  one.  We  have  expended 
a  great  quantity ;  therefore  it  becomes  worthy  of  thought 
on  your  part,  how  desirable  it  is  that  our  operations 
should  not  be  protracted,  by  anything  in  treating  that 
might  tend  to  a  continuance  of  the  present  state  of  things. 
Do  not  suppose  from  this  I  wish  to  recommend  or  am 
advocating  humiliating  terms,  or  such  as  would  reflect 
disgrace  on  us ;  but  this  fact  of  ammunition  must  not  be 
lost  sight  of."  And  in  a  postscript  to  this  letter  are  these 
melancholy  words : — ^"  Our  case  is  not  yet  desperate ;  I 
do  not  mean  to  impress  that;  but  it  must  be  borne  in 
mind  that  it  goes  very  fast,***  The  Envoy  needed  no 
better  proof  than  this  that  our  case,  if  not  desperate,  was 
"going  very  fast."  There  was  an  abundant  supply  of 
ammunition  in  store.  But  what  hope  was  there,  so  long 
as  the  troops  were  thus  commanded?  There  was  no 
hope  from  our  arms;  but  something  might  be  done  by 
oar  money.  If  the  enemy  could  not  be  beaten  off,  he 
might  be  bought  off.  The  Envoy,  therefore,  began  to 
appeal  to  the  cupidity  of  the  chiefs. 