

From  the  return  of  Sale's  brigade  alone  did  the  Envoy 
look  for  any  permanent  change  in  the  condition  of  affairs 
at  Caubul.  But  from  that  quarter  no  assistance  could 
come.     The  force  was  moving  in  another  direction. 

But  whatever  might  be  the  chance  of  permanent  im- 
provement in  the  condition  of  affairs,  it  was  still  neces- 
sary to  do  something  for  the  moment.  On  the  morning 
of  the  10th  of  November,  the  enemy  mustered  in  great 
numbers — horse  and  foot — on  the  heights  commanding 
the  cantonment,  sending  up  shouts  of  insolent  defiance 

^  MS.  Records,  On  the  10th  of  No-  the  brigade    to   Caubul. —  [Captain 

▼ember,  Captain  Macgregor  received  Afacgregor" 8 Narrative: MS, Records,"] 

the  first  official  intelligence  of  the  This  was,  of  course,  a  previous  letter, 

outbreak,  10  a  letter  from  Sir  William  — copy  of  which  is  not  given  in  the 

Macnagliten,  urgfng  him  to  bring  back  collection  forwarded  to  gofemment. 

VOL.  II.  E 


50  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

and  &nng  feux  de  joie.  There  were  some  small  forts 
on  the  plain  below,  perilously  near  our  cantonment  walls, 
and  in  these  the  enemy  presently  posted  themselves  and 
grievously  harassed  our  soldiers  on  the  works.  One  of 
these,  known  as  the  Ricka-bashee  Fort,  situated  near  the 
north-east  angle  of  the  cantonment,  was  within  musket- 
shot  of  our  walls.  It  was  easy  to  pour  in  thence  a  galling 
fire  upon  the  troops  manning  our  works ;  and  the  artillery- 
men at  the  guns  were  shot  down  by  the  deadly  aim  of 
the  Afghan  marksmen,  concealed  in  the  ruins  of  some 
adjacent  houses.  This  was  not  to  be  endured.  It  is 
hard  to  believe  that,  whilst  his  men  were  being  shot  down 
before  his  eyes  by  hidden  marksmen,  the  military  chief 
could  have  needed  much  prompting  to  send  out  a  party 
for  the  capture  of  the  fort  that  so  commanded  our  posi- 
tion. But  it  was  only  on  the  urgent  representation  of 
the  Envoy  that  an  expedition  against  the  Ricka-bashee 
Fort  was  undertaken  at  last.  There  was  a  fine  manly 
spirit — there  were  some  good,  true  soldierly  qualities,  in 
Macnaghten ;  and  he  told  the  military  commander  that 
he  did  not  shrink  from  responsibility — that,  in  such  a  case 
as  this,  he  would  take  it  all  upon  himself,  but  that  at 
any  risk  the  fort  must  be  carried.  Reluctantly  the 
General  consented ;  and  a  force  under  Brigadier  Shelton, 
consisting  of  about  two  thousand  men  of  all  arms,  was 
ordered  to  hold  itself  in  readiness.*  The  force  assembled 
about  the  hour  of  noon.  The  Brigadier  was  making  his 
dispositions  for  the  attack,  when  it  again  occurred  to  the 
General  that  the  e^cpedition  was  a  dangerous  one  (as 
though  war  were  not  always  dangerous),  and  that  it  would 
be  more  prudent  to  abandon  it.  The  aide-de-camp  at  his 
elbow  asked  him  why,  if  such  were  his  opinions,  he  did 