

But  there  was  another  evil  soon  to  become  only  too 
painfully  apparent.  Brigadier  Shelton  had  been  sent  for 
to  co-operate  with  the  General;  but  it  was  manifest  that 
there  was  never  likely  to  be  any  co-operation  between 
them.  Each  has  left  upon  record  his  opinion  of  the  con- 
duct of  the  other.  The  General  says  that  the  Brigadier 
was  contumacious  and  insubordinate.  The  Brigadier  says 
that  he  was  thwarted  in  all  his  efforts  to  do  good  service 
— that  he  could  not  even  place  a  gun  in  position  without 
being  reminded  by  the  General  that  he  had  no  indepen- 
dent command.  Upon  whomsoever  the  greater  amount 
of  blame  may  rest,  the  result  was  sufficiently  deplorable. 

♦  "About  four  o'clock  on  the  them  of  frightful  extent — thetwo  sides 
momag  of  the  9th,*'  says  Brigadier  of  the  oblong,  including  the  two  mis- 
Shelton,  "  I  got  a  note  from  Elphin-  sioncompounds,about  1 400 yards cacli, 
itone  calling  me  into  cantonments,  the  two  ends  each  500,  with  a  ram- 
desiring  me  to  take  the  Shah's  6th  part  and  ditch  an  Afghan  could  run 
Infantry,  and  a  6-pounder  gun  with  over  with  the  facility  of  a  cat,  with 
me.  Ileft  the  BaUaHissar  between  many  other  serious  defects.  Themis- 
six  and  seren,  and  marched  in  broad  fortune  of  this  was  that  so  many  troops 
daylight  without  the  enemy  attempt-  were  necessary  for  the  actual  defence 
iog  to  dbpate  my  passage.  I  was  all  of  the  works,  that  only  a  few  could  be 
prepared  for  opposition  had  any  been  spared  for  external  operationsi  I  was 
made.  I  was  cordially  received,  but  put  in  orders  to  command  canton- 
could  read  anxiety  in  every  counte-  ments,  and  consequently,  in  course  of 
nance,  and  they  bad  then  only  three  my  inspections,  gave  such  orders  and 
days'  provisions.  I  was  sorry  to  find  instructions  as  appeared  to  me  ne* 
despondine  conversations  and  remarks  cessary.  This,  however,  Elphinstone 
too  generally  indulged,  and  was  more  soon  corrected,  by  reminding  me 
grieved  to  find  the  troops  were  dispi-  that  he  commanded,  not  I.'* — [Stote- 
nted.  Never  having  been  much  in  ment  of  Brigadier  Shelton :  MS.  ife- 
caotonments,  I  went  round  and  found  cords."] 


48         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

The  military  chiefs  never  acted  in  concert.*  Shelton 
was  a  man  of  a  hard  uncompromising  nature,  and  it  is 
probable  that  he  had  little  toleration  for  the  indecision  of 
the  General,  and  was  little  inclined  to  regard  with  tender- 
ness and  compassion  the  infirmities  of  the  poor  old  chief. 
He  did  what  he  was  commanded  to  do,  if  not  with  much 
military  skill,  at  all  events  with  an  unflinching  gallantry, 
to  which  the  General  himself  bore  willing  testimony.f 
But  from  the  absence  of  a  right  understanding  between 
them  a  fatality  attended  almost  every  enterprise.  Hesi- 
tation and  delay  at  the  outset — then  vacillation  and  con- 
tradiction— resolutions  taken  and  then  abandoned — orders 
issued  and  then  countermanded — so  irritated  the  Briga- 
dier, that  his  temper,  never  of  a  very  genial  cast,  was 
generally  in  a  somewhat  tempestuous  state  before  he 
took  the  field  at  the  head  of  his  men.  How  far  we 
may  rightly  attribute  to  this  the  want  of  success  which  at- 
tended the  Brigadier's  operations  can  only  now  be  conjec- 
tured; but  it  is  very  certain  that  in  all  of  them  the  daring 