

November  8,  1841. 

My  dear  Sib^ 

I  have  received  your  letters  of  this  date,  and  fully  approve 
of  your  having  raised  30,000  rupees  for  distribution  amongst  those 
disposed  to  assist  our  cause.  But  I  would  not  advance  more  than 
50,000  rupees  before  some  service  is  actually  rendered;  and  do  not 
place  any  reliance  on  the  story  about  Gundamuck.  They  are  too 
strong  to  be  resisted  by  any  force  that  the  rebels  could  bring 
against  th^m.  Mahomed  Akbar's  arrival  at  Bameean  is  likely 
enough;  there  can  be  little  use,  I  fear,  in  offering  him  a  separate 
remittance,  if  the  rebels  have  made  overtures  to  him  already. 

Yours, 

W.  H.  M. 
Tell  E^han  Shereen  Khan,  with  my  best  compliments,  that  he 
will  not  be  disappointed  if  he  does  us  quick  and  good  service.* 

Bat  all  this  money  was  spent  to  very  little  purpose. 
There  were  too  many  hungry  appetites  to  appease — too 
many  conflicting  interests  to  reconcile ;  it  was  altogether, 
by  this  time,  too  mighty  a  movement  to  be  put  down  by 
a  display  of  the  money-bags.  The  jingling  of  the  coin 
could  not  drown  the  voice  of  an  outraged  and  incensed 
people. 

I  wish  that  I  had  nothing  more  to  say  of  the  efforts 
made,  out  of  the  fair  field  of  open  battle,  to  destroy  the 
power  of  the  insurgent  chiefs.  There  is  a  darker  page 
of  history  yet  to  be  written.  This  Mohun  Lai  had  other 
work  entrusted  to  him  than  that  spoken  of  in  these  let- 
ters. He  was  not  directed  merely  to  appeal  to  the  cupi- 
dity of  the  chiefs,  by  offering  them  large  sums  of  money 

♦  UnpublUhed  Correspondence  of  Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten, 


42         PHOGBESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

to  exert  their  influence  in  our  favour.  He  was  directed, 
also,  to  offer  rewards  for  the  heads  of  the  principal  insur- 
gents. As  early  as  the  5th  of  November,  Lieutenant 
John  Conolly,  who  was  in  attendance  upon  Shah  Soojah, 
in  the  Ballar  Hissar^  wrote  thus  to  Mohun  Lai : 

Tell  the  Kuzzilbash  chiefs,  Sherin  Khan,  Naib  Sheriff,  in  fact, 
all  the  chiefs  of  Sheeah  persuasion,  to  join  against  the  rebels. 
You  can  promise  one  lakh  of  rupees  to  Khan  Shereen  on  the  con- 
dition of  his  killing  and  seizing  the  rebels  and  arming  all  the 
Sheeahs,  and  immediately  attacking  all  rebels.  This  is  the  time 
for  the  Sheeahs  to  do  good  service.  Explain  to  them  that  if  the 
Sconces  once  get  the  upper  hand  in  the  town,  they  will  imme- 
diately attack  and  plunder  their  part  of  the  town;  hold  out  pro- 
mises of  reward  and  money;  write  to  me  very  frequently.  Tell 
the  chiefs  who  are  well  disposed  to  send  respectable  agents  to  the 
Envoy.  Try  and  spread  "nifak"  among  the  rebels.  In  every- 
thing that  you  do  consult  me,  and  write  very  often.  Meer  Hyder 
Purja-Bashi  has  been  sent  to  Khan  Shereen,  and  will  see  you. 