

*  Memorandum  fofind  among   ike    Elphinstone^  C,B,^  in  his  cum  hand' 
effects    of   the    late    Major- General    writing. 


46         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

nothing — paltry  demonstrations,  looking  as  though  they 
were  expressly  designed  as  revelations  either  of  lament- 
able weakness  or  folly  more  lamentable  still.  To  the 
Envoy  all  this  was  miserably  apparent.  It  was  apparent 
to  the  whole  garrison.  It  was  not  possible  altogether  to 
supersede  the  Greneral.  He  was  willing,  with  all  his  in- 
competency, to  serve  his  country,  and  there  was  no  autho- 
rity in  Afghanistan  to  remove  him  from  his  command. 
But  something,  it  was  thought,  might  be  done  by  asso- 
ciating with  him,  in  the  command  of  the  cantonment  force, 
an  officer  of  a  more  robust  frame  and  more  energetic 
character.  Brigadier  Shelton  was  known  to  be  an  active 
and  a  gallant  soldier.  Macnaghten  counselled  his  recall 
from  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  the  General  believing,  or  per- 
haps only  hoping,  that  he  would  find  a  willing  coadjutor 
in  the  Brigadier,  despatched  a  note  to  him  with  instruc- 
tions to  come  into  cantonments. 

Taking  with  him  only  a  regiment  of  the  Shah's  troops 
and  a  single  gun,  the  Brigadier  quitted  the  Balla  Hissar 
on  the  morning  of  the  9th  of  November,  and  made  his  way, 
without  any  interruption,  to  the  cantonment,  in  broad 
daylight.  The  garrison  welcomed  him  with  cordiality. 
He  came  amongst  them  almost  as  a  deliverer.  Great 
things  were  expected  from  him.  He  was  beloved  neither 
by  officers  nor  by  men ;  but  he  was  held  to  possess  some 
sturdy  qualities,  and  never  to  shrink  from  fighting.  Little 
or  nothing  was  known  of  his  aptitude  as  a  leader.  He 
had  seldom  or  never  been  placed  in  a  position  of  respon- 
sible command.  But  the  time  for  weighing  nice  questions 
of  generalship  had  long  ago  passed  away.  The  garrison 
were  content  to  look  for  a  commander  to  lead  them  against 
the  enemy,  with  sufficient  promptitude  and  in  sufficient 
numbers  to  protect  them  against  the  certainty  of  failure. 
But  a  week  of  almost  unbroken  disaster  had  dispirited 
and  enfeebled  them.     Everything  that  he  saw  and  heard 


DISUNION  OP  THE  MILITARY  COMMANDERS.  47 

was  of  a  nature  to  discourage  the  Brigadier.  Anxious 
faces  were  around  him,  and  desponding  words  saluted  his 
ears.  He  went  round  the  cantonments,  and  saw  at  once 
how  large  a  force  it  required  to  defend  such  extensive 
works,  and  how  small  a  body  of  troops  could  be  spared  for 
external  operations.  Everything,  indeed,  was  against  him. 
He  had  not  been  sent  for  until  a  series  of  disasters  had 
crippled  our  means  of  defence — emboldened  the  enemy, 
disheartened  the  garrison,  and  brought  the  grim  shadow 
of  starvation  close  to  the  cantonment  walls.* 