

*  "  On  the  Oth,"  says  General  El-  officer  more   disposed  to  do  everv- 

phinstone,in  the  memorandum  which  thing  for  the  public  service  [           J. 

I  have  before  quoted,  '*  not  finding  I  wish  I  could  say  the  same  of  Bri- 

myselfequal  to  the  duties,  particularly  gadier  Shelton, —he  appeared  to  be 

at  night,  when  I  could  not  go  about  actuated   by  an  ill   feeling  towards 

on  horseback,  I    recalled  Brigadier  me.    I  did  everything  in  my  power 

Shelton  from  the  Balla  Hissar,  but  I  to  remain  on  terms  with   him.      I 

regret  to  be  obliged  to  disclose  that  I  was  unlucky  also  in  not  understand- 

did  not  receive  from  him  that  cordial  ing  the  state  of  things,  and    being 

co-operation  and  advice  I  had  a  right  wholly  dependent  on  the  Envoy  and 

to  expect;  on  the  contrary,  his  man-  others   for  information.  —  IMS.  Re- 

ner  was  most  contumacious  ;  from  the  cordsJ] 

day  of  his  arrival  he  never  gave  me  f  In  a  public  letter  to  the  Secretary 

information  or  advice,  but  invariably  to  Government  written  by  General 

found  fault  with  all  that  was  done,  Elphinstone  from  Badeeabad,  on  Feb- 

and  canvassed    and    condemned  all  ruary  2drd,  1S42,  he  says :  **  I  beg  to 

orders  before  officers,  frequently  pre-  be  allowed  to  express  my  sense  of  the 

venting  and  delaying  carrying  them  gallant  manner  in  whicli  the  various 

into  effect.    This  and  many  other  in-  detachments  sent  out    were  led  by 

stances  of  want  of  assistance  I  can  Brigadier    Shelton,    and  of  the  in- 

corroborate  by  the  evidence  of  several  variably  noble  conduct  of  the  officers 

officers  still  living.     Had  I  been  so  on  these  occasions.**     I  am  not  aware 

fortunate  as  to  have  had  Sir  Robert  whether  this  letter  has  been  published. 

Sale,  than  whom   I  never  met  any  I  have  never  seen  it  in  print. 


SUMMONS  TO  sale's  BRIGADE.  49 

of  the  soldier  was  more  conspicuous  than  the  judgment 
of  the  commander. 

In  the  mean  while  the  Envoy  was  anxiously  looking  for 
the  return  of  Sale's  brigade  from  Gund  amuck.  Shortly 
after  the  arrival  of  Brigadier  Shelton  in  cantonments,  he 
despatched  another  letter  to  Captain  Macgregor,  urging 
him  to  send  back  the  troops  to  the  relief  of  our  be- 
leaguered position.  Only  a  fragment  of  this  letter  has 
been  preserved  j  but  it  sufficiently  indicates  the  Envoy's 
opinion  of  the  melancholy,  almost  desperate  state  to  which 
our  affairs  had  even  then  attained  : 

Gaubul)  November  9th,  1S41. 

Mt  deab  Macoreoob, 

I  have  written  to  you  several  letters,  urging  you  in  the 
strongest  manner  to  come  up  with  Sale's  brigade  to  our  relief, 
but  I  fear  you  may  not  have  received  them.  Our  situation  is 
rather  a  desperate  one  unless  you  arrive,  because  we  can  neither 
retreat  in  any  direction,  nor  leave  the  cantonments  to  go  into  the 
Balla  Hissar;  but  if  we  had  your  force  we  should  be  able  to  take 
the  city,  and  thus  preserve  both  the  cantonment  and  Balla  Hissar. 
The  enemy  is  a  contemptible  one.* 