


62         PROGRESS  OP  THE  INSURRECTION. 

nearly  dark.  The  further  detention  of  the  force  would 
have  been  attended  with  serious  risk.  Eyre,  therefore, 
spiked  the  gun,  which  it  seemed  impossible  to  carry  ofl^ 
and  then  secured  the  capture  of  the  other.  The  six- 
pounder  was  rolled  down  the  hill;  the  four-pounder  was 
carried  into  cantonments. 

It  was  eight  o'clock  before  Shelton's  force  returned  to 
cantonments.  The  enemy  intercepted  their  movements, 
and  threatened  the  cantonment,  but  the  attack  was  re- 
pulsed by  a  few  rounds  of  grape,  and  a  brisk  fire  fi'om 
Mackenzie's  jezailchees.  Many,  on  both  sides,  had 
fallen  during  the  action  of  the  afternoon.  Major  Thain 
and  Captain  Paton  were  severely  wounded.  All  night, 
firom  the  hill-side,  came  loud  lamentations — the  wailings 
of  the  relatives  of  the  A%hans  who  had  fallen  in  the  fight. 
Lights  were  flitting  about  in  every  direction ;  for  they 
were  burjdng  the  dead.  On  the  following  day  they  were 
busy  with  the  same  melancholy  work. 

This  affair  of  the  13th  of  November  was  set  down  as 
a  success;  and  it  was  wise  to  make  the  most  of  it.  It 
was  the  last  success  even  of  a  doubtftil  and  equivocal 
character  which  the  unhappy  force  was  destined  to 
achieve.  "Henceforward,"  wrote  one  who  has  chro- 
nicled with  no  common  fidelity  the  events  of  these 
miserable  months,*  "  it  becomes  my  weary  task  to  relate 
a  catalogue  of  errors,  disasters,  and  difiiculties,  which, 
following  close  upon  each  other,  disgusted  our  officers, 
disheartened  our  soldiers,  and  finally  sunk  us  all  into 
irretrievable  ruin,  as  though  Heaven  it$e]ifj  by  a  combi- 
nation of  evil  circumstances,  for  its  own  inscrutable  pur- 
poseei,  had  planned  our  downfal." 

For  some  days  the  enemy  remained  comparatively  in- 
active. Occasional  threatenings  kept  the  garrison  on 
the  alert;  but  little  was  done  to  change  the  posture  of 

*  Lieutenant  Eyre, 


LETTERS  TO  MACGREGOR.  63 

aflfairs.  The  Envoy,  still  looking  for  the  return  of  Sale's 
brigade,  continued  to  write  urgent  letters  to  Captain 
M^cgr^or.     On  the  12th,  he  had  written: 

Gaubul,  Noyember  12th,  1841. 

Mr  DEAB  Macgregob^ 

Ibraham  Khan  has  just  come  in  with  your  note  No.  8.  I 
liaye  written  to  you  four  times,  requesting  that  you  would  come 
up  with  Sale's  brigade  as  soon  as  possible.  We  are  still  in  a  very 
bad  way,  though  not  quite  so  badly  off  as  we  were  four  days  ago. 
Our  force  is  so  small  that  we  cannot  act  on  the  offensive,  and 
we  have  not  above  a  fortnight's  suppHes.  We  have  lost  a  great 
many  officers.  I  fear  the  Ghoorka  regiment  is  annihilated ;  and 
as  we  are  in  a  state  of  siege,  we  can  learn  nothing  of  what  is  going 
on  in  other  parts  of  the  country.  Khoda  Buksh,  Mohamed  Shah, 
and  some  other  Ghilzyes  are  here,  and  we  thrashed  them  yester- 
day. I  am  trying,  through  Humza,  to  enter  into  some  arrange* 
mento  with  the  Mufsida,  As  the  Ghilzyes  are  occupied  here,  I 
should  think  you  would  not  meet  with  much  opposition,  except, 
perhaps,  in  the  Khoord  Caubul  Pass. 