

W.  H,  Macnaghten. 

Again,  on  the  14th,  he  wrote — and  it  is  plain  from 
this  letter  that  he  thought  the  action  of  the  preceding 
day  had  in  nowise  improved  their  condition  : 

November  14th,  1841. 

Mt  dear  Macgregor, 

I  have  just  received  your  note  of  the  lOth.  Dozens  of 
letters  have  been  written  from  this,  urging  your  immediate  return 
with  Sale's  brigade  to  Caubul;  and  if  you  have  not  started  by  the 
time  you  receive  this,  I  earnestly  beg  that  you  will  do  so  imme- 
diately. Our  situation  is  a  very  precarious  one;  but  with  your 
assistance  we  should  all  do  well,  and  you  must  render  it  to  us  if 
you  have  any  regard  for  our  Hves  or  for  the  honour  of  our  country. 
We  may  be  said  to  be  in  a  state  of  siege;  and  had  we  not  made 
two  desperate  sallies,  we  should  ere  now  have  been  annihilated. 
We  have  provisions  for  only  ten  days ;  but  when  you  arrive  we 
shall  be  able  to  command  the  resources  of  the  country.    In  our 


64  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

action  of  yesterday  Thain  and  Paton  were  wounded,  the  latter  so 
severely  that  his  arm  has  been  amputated.  I  have  still  some  hope 
of  the  Charekur  detachment,  but  a  faint  one.  I  have  no  news 
from  Ghuzni  or  Candahar.  In  the  interior  of  the  country  they 
seem  to  be  asjoffhee  as  at  the  capital.  Mehtur  Moosa  joined  the 
rebels  yesterday.  We  have  been  unmolested  to-day,  but  it  may 
be  only  the  luU  before  the  storm.  Humza  Khan  has  promised  to 
call  on  me  this  evening.  I  have  no  idea  that  he  will  do  so.  I 
intend  to  make  much  of  him.  I  have  written  to  you  several 
letters  of  late,  so  shall  say  no  more  for  the  present.  The  Ghilzye 
force  being  here,  I  should  conceive  you  will  experience  no  opposi- 
tion on  the  road. 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

The  hopes  expressed  for  the  safety  of  the  Charekur 
detachment  were  dissipated  on  the  following  day.  On 
the  15th  of  November,  Major  Pottinger  and  Lieutenant 
Haughton  came  in  wounded  from  Charekur,  and  reported 
that  the  Goorkha  regiment  had  been  cut  to  pieces. 
They  had  held  out  for  some  time  with  noble  resolution 
— but  their  position  was  untenable  for  want  of  water — 
the  horrors  of  unappeasable  thirst  had  overcome  them 
— they  had  been  compelled  to  abandon  their  post — had 
attempted  to  make  good  their  retreat  to  Caubul — and 
had  perished  by  the  way. 

The  story  which  Pottinger  told  must  be  briefly  re- 
lated. Before  the  end  of  October  the  Kohistanees  and 
Nijrowees  were  in  open  revolt ;  and  on  the  1st  of  No- 
vember, Meer  Musjedee,  with  a  strong  insurgent  force, 
moved  across  the  plain  of  the  Barakab  and  took  up  a 
position  at  Akserai,  completely  cutting  off  the  commu- 
nication between  Charekur  and  Caubul.*  Pottinger 
and  Codrington  now  took  counsel  together.     The  former, 