

*  ^*  This  step  they  ventured  on  in  plain,  in  no  place  twenty  miles  from 

consequence  of  our  want  of  cavalry,  our  own  post,  and  in  some  parts  of  the 

which    prevented   us   from   having  latter  half  approaching  within  eight 

patrols,   and    encouraged   them    to  miles." — [Major  Pottinger^s  BudeeO" 

march  above  forty  miles  across  a  level  had  Report :  SfS,  JlecordsJ] 


RISINGS  IN  THE  KOIHSTAN.  65 

as  Political  Agent  on  the  Toorkistan  frontier,  resided  in 
the  castie  of  Lughmanee,  about  two  miles  distant  from 
Charekur,  where  the  Goorkha  regiment  was  planted  in 
some  fortified  barracks,  the  defences  of  which  were  still 
in  course  of  construction.  Codrington,  who  commanded 
the  r^ment,  was,  at  the  dawn  of  November,  with  Pot- 
tinger  in  the  Lughmanee  castie.  Their  position  was  one 
of  great  difficulty.  They  sent  out  reconnoitring  par- 
ties to  obtain  intelligence  of  the  precise  position  of  the 
enemy;  but,  encumbered  as  they  were  with  women  and 
children,  and  almost  wholly  without  carriage,  it  seemed 
impossible  that  the  Goorkha  regiment  could  be  moved 
out  of  Charekur.  Pottinger  wrote  to  the  Envoy  for 
troops,  called  upon  all  the  friendly  chiefs  to  aid  him, 
and  began  to  strengthen  his  position.  But  it  was  soon 
apparent  that  no  help  could  come  from  Caubul,  and  that 
the  friends  on  whom  he  relied  were,  in  fact,  disguised 
enemies.  Many  Kohistanee  and  Nijrowee  chiefs  visited 
him  on  the  two  first  days  of  November.  Loud  in  their 
expressions  of  friendship,  they  declared  their  willingness 
to  co-operate  with  him  for  the  suppression  of  the  insur- 
rection ;  but  when  he  called  upon  them  to  attack  the 
castles  of  the  chiefs  who  had  gone  out  to  join  the  army 
of  Meer  Musjedee,  it  at  once  became  apparent  that  they 
lied.  The  suspicions  of  Pottinger  were  aroused.  The 
"  fiiends"  around  him  were  assembling  in  such  numbers 
as  to  form  an  army  of  their  own ;  and  Pottinger,  deter- 
mined as  he  was  to  betray  neither  suspicion  nor  alarm, 
could  not  help  feeling  that  a  sudden  attack  was  by  no 
means  an  improbable  event  to  proceed  out  of  all  these 
armed  gatherings. 

On  the  morning  of  the  3rd,  the  numbers  of  armed  men 
around  the  Residency  had  increased.  The  reconnoitring 
parties  had  not  returned.  The  chiefs  were  asking  for 
presents,  but  refiising  to  do  the  service  required  of  them. 

VOL.  II.  P 


66         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

Eveiything  seemed  enveloped  in  an  atmosphere  of  doubt 
and  suspicion ;  and  Pottinger,  as  he  received  the  chiefs, 
who  came  pressing  in  with  offers  of  friendship,  could  not 
help  feeling  that  a  struggle  was  at  hand. 

Before  noon,  he  received  sevqral  of  the  more  powerful 
chiefs  at  the  Residency,  and  at  noon  went  out  to  meet 
the  petty  Sirdars,  who  were  clustering  in  the  garden 
around  his  house.  With  characteristic  A%han  cupidity, 
they  assailed  him  with  questions  respecting  the  amount  of 
the  rewards  that  would  be  paid  for  their  services.  Pot- 
tinger entered  mto  some  explanations,  which  the  fore- 
most  of  the  party  seemed  disposed  to  consider  satisfac- 
tory; but,  expressing  some  doubts  as  to  whether  their 
clansmen  would  be  satisfied,  they  requested  that  the 
nature  of  the  overtures  might  be  made  known  to  those 
who  were  removed  from  the  circle  around  the  British 
Agent.  Lieutenant  Rattray,  the  Political  Assistant,  had 
just  joined  Pottinger  in  the  garden.  He  was  now  re- 
quested to  explain  the  matter  to  the  rest,  who  were 
standing  a  little  way  apart.  Accompanied  by  the  prin- 
cipal chiefs,  Rattray  proceeded  to  the  place  where  they 
were  assembled,  and,  after  some  conversation,  they  quitted 
the  garden,  and  repaired  to  "  an  adjoining  stubble-field, 
where  several  parties  of  armed  men  were  standing." 