

*  Of  the  Shah*8  6tb  InfaDtry.  whose  muskets  and  bayonets  we  have 

f  Eyres  Journal  been  accustomed  to   consider  more 

j:  "  A  cry,"  says  Lieutenant  Eyre,  than  a  match  for  a  desultor}'  charge  of 

**  which  too  often  during  our  opera-  irregular  horsemen." 

tions  paralysed  the  arms   of  those 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  KICKA-BASUEE  FORT.  53 

thus  restrained,  and  Shelton  led  up  his  men  to  the  cap- 
ture of  the  fort. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  few  brave  men  who  had  made 
good  their  entrance  through  the  wicket  were  beset  by 
the  deadliest  peril.  Many  of  the  garrison,  discovering 
how  small  was  the  real  number  of  their  assailants,  had 
returned  with  new  courage  to  the  fort.  The  devoted 
Englishmen  had  endeavoured  to  secure  themselves  by 
shutting  the  gate  through  which  the  garrison  had  escaped, 
and  securing  the  chain  with  a  bayonet.  But  the  enemy 
had  removed  this  slender  obstacle,  and  rushed  in  upon 
the  little  storming  party.  Colonel  Mackrell  was  found 
fearfully  wounded  and  disfigured,  and  was  carried  into 
cantonments  to  die.  Lieutenant  Bird,  with  two  Sepoys 
of  the  37th  N.I.,  sought  refuge  in  a  stable,  which  they 
barricaded  and  defended  with  a  resolution  that  deserved 
and  secured  a  crown  of  success.  When  the  fort  was 
carried  by  the  British  troops  they  were  found,  with  ex- 
hausted ammunition,  but  alive  and  uninjured.  Thirty 
of  the  enemy  had  been  shot  down  by  the  gallant  three. 

On  the  fall  of  the  Ricka-bashee  Fort  some  small  adja- 
cent forts  were  abandoned  by  the  enemy,  and  a  quantity 
of  grain  fell  into  our  hands,  only  to  be  lost  again  for 
want  of  proper  measures  to  secure  it.  Before  the  day 
closed,  Shelton  had  threatened  the  enemy,  who  had 
collected  in  some  force  on  the  Seeah  Sungh  hills.  The 
Horse  Artillery  gims  opened  with  good  eflfect,  and  the 
enemy  retired  towards  the  city ;  but  no  attempt  seems 
to  have  been  made,  on  our  part,  to  bring  on  a  general 
action.  On  this  10th  of  November,  for  the  first  time, 
any  considerable  body  of  troops  was  brought  into  the 
field.  The  opportunity  of  making  a  decided  impression 
was  a  good  one ;  but  it  was  not  turned  to  good  account. 
The  whole  affair  was  mismanaged.  The  spirit  of  the 
troops  was  damped  at  the  outset  by  the  vacillation  of 


54         PBOGEESS  OP  THE  INSUBREOTION. 

the  Greneral.  A  grievous  error  was  committed  in  at- 
tempting, for  want  of  information  to  be  easily  obtained^ 
an  entrance  at  the  wrong  point,  into  the  Ricka-bashee 
Fort.  Then  the  force  sent  out  imder  Brigadier  Shelton 
was  lamentably  weak  in  the  moimted  branch,  although 
there  was  no  want  of  cavalry  in  cantonments.  Had  the 
infantry  been  supported  by  a  stronger  body  of  horse, 
they  would  have  had  more'confidence  in  themselves,  and 
suffered  less  severely  in  the  action.  A  strong  reserve, 
too,  should  have  been  held  in  readiness  for  employment 
in  the  event  of  the  party  meeting  with  any  check,  or 
requiring  any  support.  As  it  was,  when  the  Afghan 
horse  attacked  our  columns  and  threw  them  into  con- 
fusion, there  was  nothing  to  give  them  any  confidence 
but  the  gallantry  of  their  leaders. 