

*  It  consisted  of  two  squadrons  the  37th  Native  Infantry,  under  Ma- 
of  the  5th  Light  Cavalry,  under  jor  Griffiths ;  four  companies  of  the 
Colonel  Chambers ;  one  squadron  of  Shah's  6th  Infantry,  under  Captain 
Shah  Soojah's  2nd  Irregular  Horse,  Hopkins ;  one  horse  artillery  and 
under  Lieutenant  Le  Geyt ;  one  one  mountain-train  gun,  under  Lieu- 
troop  of  Skinner's  Horse,  under  tenant  Eyre,  escorted  by  a  company 
LieutenantWalker;  the  Body  Guard;  of  the  Shah's  6th  Regiment,  under 
six  companies  of  her  Majesty^s  44th,  Captain  Marshall. 
under  Major  Scott ;  six  companies  of 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  EKEMY'S  GUNS.  61 

made  to  receive  them.  For  a  while  all  was  panic  and 
confusion.  Friend  and  foe  were  mixed  up  together,  as 
the  column  gave  way,  and  the  horsemen  charged  through 
and  through  our  ranks  until  the  rout  was  complete.* 
It  was  only  a  temporary  check.  The  British  troops  re- 
treated down  the  slope ;  but  rallied,  re-formed  behind 
the  reserve  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and,  under  cover 
of  the  guns  which  Eyre  was  now  working  with  good 
effect,  advanced  again  to  the  attack.  Anderson's  Horse 
now  came  into  action,  and  making  a  gallant  charge, 
drove  the  enemy  up  the  ascent.  The  infantry  followed, 
and  carried  the  height,  whilst  the  enemy,  escaping 
along  the  ridge,  abandoned  their  guns  to  the  victors. 

Night  was  now  closing  in  upon  the  scene.  The  de- 
tachment had  been  sent  out  to  capture  the  enemy's  guns. 
The  guns  were  in  our  possession;  but  it  would  have 
been  the  mere  shadow  of  a  victory  if  they  had  not  been 
carried  off.  The  Envoy,  who  had  watched  the  struggle 
with  painM  anxiety,  despatched  a  message  of  earnest 
entreaty  that  no  effort  should  be  spared  "  to  complete 
the  triumph  of  the  day,"f  by  bringing  both  the  guns 
into  cantonments.  One  of  the  deserted  guns  was  easily 
removed  by  a  party  of  the  Shah's  6th  Infantry ;  but  some 
Afghan  marksmen  were  pouring  in  so  warm  a  fire  upon 
the  other  and  larger  piece,  that  the  British  soldier — all  his 
character  reversed — seeing  the  danger  and  not  the  honour 
of  the  exploit,  shrunk  from  the  perilous  service,  and  re- 
fused to  advance  for  the  capture  of  the  gun.^     It  was 

♦  "  My  ▼ery  heart,"  said  Lady  to  descend  with  him  to  drag  the  six- 
Sale,  "  felt  as  if  it  leapt  to  my  teetn  pounder  away,  but,  strange  to  say, 
when  I  saw  the  Afghans  ride  clean  nis  frequent  appeals  to  their  soldierly 
throng  them.  The  onset  was  fear-  feelings  were  made  in  yain ;  with  a 
fuL  They  looked  like  a  great  clus-  few  g^ant  exceptions,  they  remained 
tcr  of  bees,  but  we  beat  them  and  immoveable,  nor  could  the  Sepoys  be 
droye  them  up  again."  induced  to  lead  the  way  where  their 
t  Burets  Journal,  European  brethren  so  obstinately 
X  •*  Major  Scott,  of  her  Majesty's  hung  back."— [£yre'«  JoumaQ 
44th^  repeatedly  ralle<l  on  his  men 