


HEAD-MONEY.  57 

You  never  told  me  whether  you  had  written  to  Naib 
Humza«  What  do  the  rebels  propose  doing  now  ?  Have 
you  not  made  any  arrangements  about  the  bodies  of 
the  murdered  officers?  Offer  2000  rupees  to  any  one 
who  will  take  them  to  cantonments,  or  1000  to  any  one 
who  will  bury  them.  Has  not  Sir  Alexander's  body 
been  found  ?  Give  my  salaam  to  the  Naib.  If  Khan 
Shereen  is  not  incUned  to  do  service,  try  other  Kuzzil- 
bash  chiefe  independently.  Exert  yourself.  Write  to 
me  oflen,  for  the  news  of  Kossids  is  not  to  be  depended 
on.  There  is  a  man  called  Hadjee  Ali,  who  might  be 
ioduced  by  a  bribe  to  try  and  bring  in  the  heads  of 
one  or  two  of  the  Mufsids.  Endeavour  to  let  him 
know  that  10,000  rupees  will  be  given  for  each  head, 
or  even  15,000  rupees.  I  have  sent  to  him  two  or 
three  times." 

Mohun  Lai,  having  by  this  time  disencumbered  him- 
self of  some  of  his  misgivings  on  the  score  of  his  own 
personal  safety,  seems  to  have  set  about  the  work  en- 
trusted to  him  with  a  zeal  that  must  have  satisfied  his 
employers.  Hadjee  Ali,  and  another  man  named  Aga 
Mahomed  Soudah,  were  the  agents  to  whom  he  first 
offered  the  price  of  the  blood  of  their  unhappy  coun- 
trymen. But  the  Moonshee,  perplexed  by  doubts  rather 
than  burdened  with  scruples,  did  not  see  very  clearly  at 
first  how  the  chiefs  were  to  be  taken  off;  so  he  wrote 
to  the  Envoy  that  "he  could  not  find  out  by  Lieu- 
tenant ConoUy's  notes  how  the  rebels  are  to  be  assassi- 
nated, but  the  men  now  employed  promise  to  go  into 
their  houses  and  cut  off  their  heads  when  they  may  be 
without  attendants."^ 

The  victims  said  to  have  been  first  marked  for  the 
assassin's  knife  were  Abdoollah  Khan  and  Meer  Musjedee. 

•  Correspondence  of  Mohun  ImI,  quoted  in  the  Calcutta  Review. 


58         PBOQBESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

They  were  known  to  have  been  the  movers  of  the  attack 
on  Barnes's  house ;  and  were  regarded,  therefore,  as  the 
murderers  of  the  ofEicers  who  were  massacred  there  on 
the  morning  of  the  outbreak.  They  were  known,  too, 
as  the  boldest  and  most  unscrupulous  of  the  insurgent 
chiefe.  It  seemed,  therefore,  an  act  alike  of  retribution 
and  expediency  to  strike  them  down  in  the  full  flush 
of  success — ^in  the  hey-day  of  their  sanguinary  career. 
There  is  no  need  in  this  chapter  to  endeavour  to  pene- 
trate the  mist  of  painful  obscurity  that  envelopes  the 
disappearance  of  the  two  chiefs.  It  will  be  time  to 
discuss  the  subject  when  I  come  to  record  their  deaths. 


THE  ENEMT  ON  THE  HILLS.  59 


CHAPTER  IV. 

[Noveinbei^-1841 .] 

Actbn  on  the  Beh-meru  Hillfl — The  last  of  our  Successes — Looked-for 
Adyent  of  Salens  Brigade — Arrival  of  Pottinger  and  Hauehton — The 
Si^e  of  Charekur — Destruction  of  the  Goorkha  ReffimeDt— Withdrawal 
of  Sde  to  Jellalabad— Question  of  Concentration  in  tne  Balla  Hissar. 