

And  again,  writing  two  days  afterwards,  he  said: 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  this  morning's  date, 
and  highly  approve  of  all  you  have  done.  Let  GiDlam 
Hussan  and  Abdool-Ruheem  Ehan  undertake  to  come 
to  the  Zoolfikar  Fort  this  morning,  and  Captain  Tre- 
vor will  be  ready  there  to  receive  them.  Captain 
Trevor  wiU  be  in  that  fort,  night  and  day,  for  some 
time,  to  receive  overtures  from  any  person;  and  parties 
coming  in  should  send  a  single  messenger  before  them. 
Ehan  Shereen  Ehan  is  quite  right   not  to  leave  the 

cfaasine  provisions.    The  fight  of  the  [Captain   Johnsons   Journal.     MS, 

10th   had  a  good   effect    in  giving  Records."] 

the    viUagera    some    confidence    in  *  Unpublished   Correspondence   of 

bringiDg   their    stores   for    Kde.**— *  Sir  W.  H,  Macnaghten. 


56  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

Chundawul  for  a  day  or  two.  Tell  Naib  Sheriff  he 
may  safely  go  security  to  the  Ghilzyes  for  the  pay- 
ment of  the  money.  When  I  see  Humza  Khan  I  will 
talk  to  him  about  the  best  plan  for  the  Ghilzye  chiefs  to 
wait  on  his  Majesty.  You  are  aware  that  I  would  give 
a  reward  of  10,000  rupees  for  the  apprehension  of 
Ameen-oollah  Khan  and  such  of  the  Douranee  rebel 
chiefs.  If  you  could  see  some  of  the  officers  of  the 
Hazirbash  corps  that  is  just  come  in  with  Mahomed 
Azeem  Elhan,  and  give  them  encouragement,  it  would 
be  very  desirable."* 

If  there  had  been  any  hope  of  rescuing  our  force  from 
destruction  by  honest  fighting  in  the  field,  the  Envoy 
would  not  have  resorted  to  such  shifts  as  are  indicated 
in  these  letters.  But  he  had  unhappily  discovered  that 
the  military  commanders  had  abandoned  all  hope  of 
beating  the  enemy,  and  were  thinking  of  making  their 
way  out  of  the  thicket  of  danger  that  encompassed  them 
by  a  path  less  honourable  and  less  secure.  Anxious 
above  all  things  to  escape  the  disgrace  of  an  open  capi- 
tulation, which  would  have  humiliated  us  in  the  eyes  of 
all  the  nations  of  the  East,  the  Envoy  exerted  all  his 
diplomatic  skill  to  create  disunion  among  our  principal 
enemies — to  buy  off  those  whose  cupidity  was  stronger 
than  their  hatred — and  to  offer  a  reward  for  the  seizure 
of  others. 

All  this  was  at  least  within  the  range  of  orthodox 
diplomacy.  But  in  the  mean  while  that  other,  darker 
agency,  of  which  I  reluctantly  spoke  at  the  close  of  my 
last  chapter,  was  being  brought  into  operation.  On  the 
11th  of  November,  John  Conolly  again  wrote  to  Mohun 
Lai :  "  Why  do  you  not  write  ?  What  has  become  of 
Meer  Hyder?  Is  he  doing  anything  with  Khan  Shereen? 

♦  UnpubUahed  Correspondence  of  Sir  W.  H,  Macnaghten, 