

On  the  13th  of  November  the  enemy  occupied,  in  great 
strength,  the  Beh-meru  hills.  They  had  planted  two 
guns  in  a  commanding  position,  and  were  cannonading 
the  British  cantonment.  It  was  at  once  apparent  to  the 
Envoy  that  to  leave  them  unmolested  to  fire  into  our 
works  would  be  miserably  to  confess  our  own  weakness, 
and  to  encourage  the  enemy  in  the  continuance  of  a  course 
of  aggression  which  might  end  in  the  loss  of  our  post. 
But  it  was  difficult  to  persuade  the  miUtary  authorities 
to  fiend  out  a  force  to  dislodge  them.  Captain  Lawrence 
was  despatched,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the  General; 
but  the  message  he  bore  was  coldly  received,  and  he  re- 
turned discouraged  to  the  Envoy,  with  a  recommenda- 
tion that  he  should  prefer  his  request  in  person.  Mac- 
naghten  went.  But  the  miUtary  chiefs  were  in  no  mood 
to  listen  to  his  counsel.  The  pUant  General  would  soon 
have  yielded ;  but  the  more  dogmatic  and  self-confident 
Brigadier  was  ready  with  a  host  of  objections,  and  a 


60         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

great  array  of  difficulties,  to  overwhelm  the  arguments 
of  the  Envoy.  Macnaghten,  however,  was  peremptory. 
The  guns,  he  said,  must  be  taken  at  all  risks,  and  at  once, 
or  the  loss  of  cantonments  to-morrow  might  be  the  result 
of  our  supineness  to-day.  There  was  again  a  talk  of  re- 
sponsibility. The  Envoy  took  the  responsibility  on  him- 
self, and  a  strong  detachment,  with  two  guns,  under 
Brigadier  Shelton,*  was  ordered  out  for  service.  But 
much  time  had  been  lost  in  these  idle  discussions.  It 
was  nearly  four  o'clock  before  the  troops  were  ready  to 
take  the  field.  They  moved  out  in  three  columns,  and 
taking  diflferent  directions,  pushed  forward  with  a  spirit 
and  a  rapidity  worthy  of  British  troops,  to  the  foot  of 
the  hill.  One,  the  most  serviceable  of  the  two  guns  that 
had  been  sent  out  under  Lieutenant  Eyre,  unfortunately 
stuck  fast,  for  some  time,  in  a  canal.  But  the  advanced 
body  of  the  infantry,  under  the  GeneraPs  aide-de- 
camp. Major  Thain,  were  eager  to  move  forward  before 
the  guns,  thus  delayed,  could  be  brought  to  bear  upon 
the  enemy's  position.  Only  one  round  of  grape  had  been 
fired  when  they  closed  with  the  enemy.  It  would  have 
been  well  had  the  insurgents  been  compelled  to  listen 
more  to  that  argument  which  takes  no  denial ;  for  the 
musketry  fire  of  our  detachment,  though  poured  in  at  a 
distance  of  only  ten  yards,  scarcely  took  effect  upon  the 
insurgents.  The  men  took  no  aim — fired  wildly — any- 
where but  in  the  right  direction.  Emboldened  by  impu- 
nity, the  A%han  cavalry  charged  down  upon  the  British 
bayonets  with  irresistible  force.    No  dispositions  were 