

It  was  not  long  before  Rattray  became  aware  that 
treachery  was  brewing.  He  turned  to  leave  the  field, 
and  was  immediately  shot  down.  Pottinger  was  still 
sitting  in  conversation  with  some  of  the  chiefs,  when  a 
man  attached  to  the  Hazerbash  regiment  ran  up,  and  by 
hints,  rather  than  by  intelligible  words,  apprised  him  of 
the  danger  that  surrounded  him.  The  sound  of  firing 
confirmed  the  ominous  intelligence.  The  chiefs  rose  and 
fled.  Pottinger  escaped  into  the  castle,  and  from  the 
terre-pleine  of  the  rampart  looked  down,  and  saw  Rat- 
tray lying  badly  wounded  on  the  ground,  and  "  the  recent 


INVESTMENT  OF  LUGHMANEE.  67 

tenderers  of  service  making  off  in  all  directions  with  the 
plunder  of  the  Hazerbash  camp."* 

Rattray  was  soon  despatched.  A  party  of  the  enemy, 
crossing  the  plain  and  seeing  the  wounded  officer  at  their 
mercy,  fired  their  pieces  into  his  head  and  body.  They 
then  invested  Pottinger's  position,  firing  upon  him  from 
the  shelter  of  the  numerous  water-courses  and  walls. 
But  assistance  was  now  at  hand.  Lieutenant  Haughton, 
the  adjutant  of  the  Goorkha  corps,  was  moving  down 
fix)m  Charekur.  As  soon  as  he  appeared  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  garden.  Captain  Codrington  made  a  sortie,  and 
united  himself  with  the  relieving  force.  The  enemy 
were  driven  out  of  the  garden  with  severe  loss.  Evening 
was  by  this  time  closing  in.  TTie  enemy  had  got  posses- 
sion of  the  Charekur  road,  and  before  any  measures  of 
future  defence  could  be  concerted  between  the  two 
officers,  Codrington  was  obliged,  after  leaving  some  de- 
tails with  Pottinger,  to  move  off  his  Goorkhas  to  his  own 
fortified  barracks.  On  the  following  day,  with  four  com- 
panies of  Goorkhas,  and  a  six-pounder  gun,  Codring- 
ton moved  down  from  Charekur,  to  relieve  Pottinger's 
guard,  and  to  supply  his  little  garrison  with  ammunition. 
Owing  mainly,  however,  to  the  impetuosity  of  a  company 
of  young  soldierSjf  the  colunm  met  with  a  check,  and 

•  Major  PoUinger^s  Badeeahad  Re-  from  the  main  body,  and  followed 

port,  them  up  with  a  boldness  which  oblipjed 

t  **  When  the  party  got  in  motion  Mr.  Salisbury  to  make  frequent  halts. 

the  enemy  retreated  on  all  sides.  One  In  consequence,  Mr.  Haughton  was 

▼ery  Iv^,  l>ody,  however,  remained  obliged  to  halt  the  convoy,  and  detach 

in  a  pontion  on  the  mountain  side,  the  greater  part  of  his  men,  to  extri- 

threat«iing  the  flank  of  the  column,  cate  the  compromised  company.  This 

Ensign  Si^sbory  was  detached  with  halt  encouraged  the  oUier  parties  of 

a  company  to    remove    this.     The  the  enemy,  who  had  retired,  and  they 

enemy  retreated  as  they  advanced,  closed  in  from  all  sides  in  most  for- 