

The  result,  however,  of  the  capture  of  the  forts, 
though  the  achievement  was  clouded  by  a  melancholy 
loss  of  life,  was  more  satisfactory  than  would  be  supposed 
from  such  a  recital  of  the  errors  that  attended  it.  The 
Envoy,  indeed,  subsequently  declared  that  it  averted  the 
necessity  of  a  disastrous  retreat.*  We  had  got  posses- 
sion of  some  positions  contiguous  to  the  cantonment,  the 
occupation  of  which  by  the  enemy  had  grievously  dis- 
tressed  our  force.  For  two  or  three  days  after  the  cap- 
ture the  A%hans  did  little  to  annoy  us.  The  Commis- 
sariat officers  took  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  add 
to  their  available  supplies  jf  and  whilst  they  were  en- 

•  (*  We  had  only  four  or  five  days*  by  the  attack,  on  the  10th  ult.,  of  a 
sopplies  for  the  cantonment,  llie  neighbouring  fort,  which  had  inter- 
Balm  Hissar  as  well  as  the  canton-  mediately  furnished  us  with  a  scanty 
metat  Was  in  a  state  of  siege.  We  supply  of  provisions,  but  which  sub- 
could  not  hope  for  provisions  from  sequently  espoused  the  cause  of  the 
thence,  nor  would  the  place  have  af-  rebels.'* — lUr^finished  Report  of  Sir 
forded  us  either  food  or  shelter,  and,  W.  H,  Macnaghten,  MS,  Records.'} 
in  the  opinion  of  the  military  autho-  f  *'  November  llth,  —  About  six 
rities,  to  return  thither  would  have  hundred  maunds  of  wheat,  found  in 
been  attended  with  ruin.  A  disas-  one  of  the  forts  yesterday,  captured 
trous  retreat  seemed  the  only  alter-  and  brought  into  cantonments.  No- 
native,  but  this  necessity  was  averted  vember  I2ih, — Busily  employed  pur- 


INTRIGUES  WITH  THE  CHIBFS.  55 

deavouring  to  buy  grain,  the  Envoy  was  doing  his  best 
to  buy  the  enemy.  The  negotiations  with  the  Ghil23re8, 
which  had  been  broken  off,  were  resumed ;  and  every 
possible  effort  was  made  to  win  over  the  chiefi  to  our 
cause,  or  to  sow  dissension  among  them.  In  all  these 
operations  he  employed  the  agency  of  Mohun  Lal»  The 
hasty  letters  written  to  this  individual  best  imfold  the 
nature  of  these  transactions.  On  the  11th  of  November 
he  thus  addressed  the  Moonshee:  "You  will  observe 
from  the  enclosed  letters  that  I  have  confirmed  the  pro- 
mises made  by  you  to  the  Ghilzye  rebels;  though  had 
you  known  of  our  successes  yesterday,  the  terms  might 
have  been  more  favorable  for  us.  Humza  Ehan  shotdd 
come  to  me  as  soon  as  possible,  and  I  will  then  talk  to 
him  about  the  case  of  Gool  Mahomed.  The  money 
could  not  be  paid  imtU  the  conditions  of  the  agreement 
are  fulfilled,  and  we  are  perfectly  certain  of  the  fidelity 
of  Hum^a  and  the  chiefs.  The  chiefs  should  go  at  once 
and  pay  their  respects  to  his  Majesty.  You  should  en- 
courage the  rival  of  Ameen-ooUdi  Ehan  by  all  possible 
means.  That  scoimdrel  and  Abdoollah  E[han  should  be 
executed,  if  we  could  catch  them."* 