

♦  MacnaglOetCs  Unfinished  Report  to  t  The  substance  of  this  letter  is 
GoverumaU :  M8.  Eecardt.  given  very  correctly  in  Eyre'a  io\xm«i. 


76         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

thought  of  negotiation,  or  rather  capitulation^  for  such  it  would  be, 
but  in  the  present  unsettled  state  of  affairs  there  is  no  authority 
possessing  sufficient  weight  to  protect  us  all  through  the  country; 
besides,  we  should  hardly  be  justified,  even  for  the  security  of 
our  persons  and  property,  to  abandon  even  one  position  in  the 
country.  Another  alternative  would  be  for  us  to  retire  to  the 
Balla  Hissar;  but  this,  I  also  fear,  would  be  a  disastrous  retreat, 
and  we  should  have  to  sacrifice  a  vast  deal  of  property.  We  pro- 
bably should  not  suceed  in  getting  in  our  heavy  guns,  and  ihey 
would  be  turned  with  effect  by  the  enemy  against  the  citadel. 
We  should  have  neither  food,  nor  firewood  to  cook  it;  for  these 
essentials  we  should  be  dependent  upon  sorties  into  the  city, 
in  which,  if  we  were  beaten,  we  should  of  course  be  ruined. 

Upon  the  whole,  I  think  it  best  to  hold  on  where  we  are  as 
long  as  possible,  in  the  hope  that  something  may  turn  up  in 
our  favour.  It  is  possible  that  we  may  receive  reinforcements 
from  Candahar.  Now  that  the  cold  weather  is  coming  on,  the 
enemy  will  disperse  to  their  houses  very  soon,  and  there  will  only 
be  left  the  rebel  chiefs  and  their  immediate  followers.  We  should 
not,  therefore,  be  molested  during  the  winter:  and  though  circum- 
stances make  it  likely  that  we  should  be  attacked  soon  if  we  are 
to  be  attacked  at  all,  a  victory  on  our  side  might  change  the 
whole  aspect  of  affairs. 

I  was  disposed  to  recommend  that  a  decisive  blow  should  be 
stmck  somewhere  to  retrieve  our  fortunes,  and  that  Mahomed 
Khan's  fort  should  be  captured.  But  I  have  since  had  reason  to 
believe  no  solid  advantage,  such  as  commanding  the  road  to  the 
Balla  Hissar,  would  result  therefrom ;  that  possibly  we  might  not 
be  able  to  hold  it;  and,  in  short,  that  the  benefit  of  the  measure 
would  not  counterbalance  the  risk  attending  it. 

In  eight  or  ten  days  more,  we  shall  be  better  able  to  judge 
whether  there  is  any  chance  of  an  improvement  in  our  position, 
and,  if  not,  it  will  remain  for  the  military  authorities  to  decide 
whether  it  would  be  more  prudent  to  attempt  a  retreat  to  Jella- 
labad,  or  to  retire  into  the  Balla  Hissar.  If  we  could  only  bring 
in  sufficient  provisions  for  the  winter,  I  would  on  no  account 
leave  the  cantonment.  Yours,  &c.  &c., 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

Many  and  anxious,  by  this  time,  had  been  the  discus- 
sions relative  to  the  abandonment  of  the  cantonment,  and 