

Becords,"]  traced  to  the  reduction  of  a  portion 

*  "In  the  castle  of  Luffhmanee,"  of  my  escort,  which  had  so  disgusted 

writes  Pottinger,  in  his  official  report,  the  men  who  remained,  that  they  de- 

*'we  abandoned  the  hostages  from  serted  as  soon  as  Mr.  Rattray  was 

the  Kohistan  chiefs,  two  boxes  of  killed." — [MS,  RecordsJ] 


INVESTMENT  OF  CHAREKUK.  69 

divesting  himself  of  his  political  character,  became  the 
artillery  officer  again,  and  took  charge  of  the  guns. 
Moving  out  with  a  field-piece  to  support  the  skir- 
mishers, he  was  wounded  by  a  musket-shot  in  the  leg. 
But  there  was  too  much  work  in  hand  for  one  of  his 
temper  to  think  much  of  such  an  accident  as  this.  The 
enemy  were  pressing  fiercely  on.  Codrington  and  his 
Groorkhas  were  confined  to  the  barracks  and  a  few  mud 
huts  in  their  immediate  neighbourhood.  They  stood 
their  ground  manfully  and  well.  But  the  hostile  mul- 
titude poured  Uke  a  torrent  upon  the  little  band  of 
devoted  men.*  The  Goorkhas  were  driven  from  the 
huts.  They  saw  their  gallant  commander  fall  mortally 
wounded;  but  they  returned  undaunted  to  the  attack. 
Haughton,  the  adjutant,  was  now  at  their  head.  He 
led  the  men  gallantly  to  the  charge,  and  drove  back  the 
enemy  beyond  the  gardens  they  had  occupied  in  the 
morning.  Again  and  again  the  Afghans  returned  to  the 
attack.  But  the  Uttle  body  of  Goorkhas,  with  heroic 
courage,  held  their  ground  till  night  put  an  end  to  the 
conflict. 

At  a  distance  of  some  three  hundred  yards  fi'om  the 
barracks  there  was  a  castle,  the  towers  of  which  so 
effectually  commanded  them,  that  it  was  necessary  to 
occupy  the  post  with  a  garrison  of  fifty  men.  But  it 
was  not  very  easy  to  retain  it.  The  enemy  increased 
greatly  in  numbers  on  the  6th ;  and,  in  spite  of  the  suc- 
cessful sorties  of  the  Goorkhas,  drove  back  their  out- 
posts, and  confined  them  within  the  narrow  Umits  of 
their  barracks.  On  the  following  day,  the  castle  gar- 
rison, betrayed  by  the  regimental  Moonshee,  were  in- 


*  Havildar  Mootee  Bam,  of  the  their  position  by  saying,  '*  there  were 

Goorkha  regiment,  who  ^ve  a  de-  whole  heegdhs  (acres)  of  gleaming 

tailed  account    of  the    defence    of  swords  moving  towards  us.*' 
Charekur,  described  this  attack  on 


70  PEOGRESS  OF  THE  INSUBRECTION. 

duced  to  surrender.  The  enemy  took  possession  of  the 
place,  and  from  its  commanding  towers  poured  in  a 
galling  fire  on  the  Groorkhas  in  the  barracks.  The  posi- 
tion of  the  little  garrison  was  now  becoming  more  and 
more  critical.  Cut  off  by  the  enemy,  water  had  become 
lamentably  scarce.  They  had  lost  half  their  oflScers  and 
a  large  number  of  their  comrades.  The  enemy  had  in- 
creased  in  number  and  in  fury,  and  completely  com- 
manded their  position.  To  shut  themselves  up  in  their 
barracks  was  to  die  of  thirst ;  to  attempt  to  fight  their 
way  out  was  to  be  cut  to  pieces. 