

Other  arguments  against  the  movement  were  also 
adduced.  It  was  said  that  there  was  a  scarcity  of  fire- 
wood in  the  Balla  Hissar;  and  that  there  was  no  forage 
for  the  horses.  But  to  this  it  was  replied  that  there 
was  a  sufficiency  of  wood  for  purposes  of  cooking,  that 
more  might  be  obtained  by  sallies  into  the  city,  and  that 
the  improved  shelter  and  increased  comforts  of  the 
troops  in  the  Balla  Hissar  would,  under  the  most  unfavor- 
able circumstances,  compensate  for  the  want  of  firing. 
With  regard  to  the  forage,  it  was  replied,  that,  if  the 
horses  could  not  be  fed,  they  might  be  shot ;  and  that 
there  was  little  need  for  the  employment  of  cavalry  in 
such  a  position  as  the  Balla  Hissar. 

One  other  argument,  brought  forward  perhaps  to  give 
respectability  to  the  whole,  was  urged  by  Shelton  and 
his  supporters.  It  was  said  that  the  abandonment  of  can- 
tonments would  have  been  an  acknowledgment  of  defeat, 
and  a  triumph  to  our  enemies.  It  is  enough  to  say  of  this, 
that  it  was  urged  by  men  who  were  clamorous  for  an  aban- 
donment, not  of  one  position,  but  of  all  our  positions  in 


the  lick  would  be  difficult,  it  still  was  ing  suns  there  to  sweep  the  plains 

not  impossible ;  for  so  short  a  distance  on  the  cantonment  side,  the  enemj 

two  or  even  three  men  could  be  con-  could  have  done  little  to  impede  our 

veyed  in  one  doolie :  some  might  ma-  march  without  risking  a  battle  with 

nage  to  walk,  and  the  rest  could  be  our  whole  force  in  fair  field,  to  which 

mounted  on  yaboos,  or  camels,  at  the  they  were  generally  averse,  but  which 

top  of  their  loads."    He  says,  too,  would,  perhaps,  have  been  the  best 

that  **if  we  had  occupied  the  Seeah  mode  for  i<«  or  deciding  the  struggle.** 


OPPOSITION  OF  BRIGADIER  8HELT0N.  79 

A%hanistan,  and  a  precipitate  retreat  from  the  country. 
In  the  one  case  there  might  have  been  a  partial  triumph ; 
in  the  other  there  must  have  been  a  complete  one. 

And  so,  owing  mainly  to  the  pertinacity  of  Brigadier 
Shelton,  the  only  measure  which  could  have  saved  the 
British  force  from  destruction,  and  the  British  name 
from  degradation,  was  rejected  in  this  conjuncture. 
The  troops  remained  in  cantonments,  threatened  by  the 
enemy  and  disheartened  by  the  ominous  gloom  of  their 
own  officers,  only  to  sustain  another  and  more  crushing 
defeat;  and  then  to  sink  into  a  state  of  utter  inactivity 
and  prostration,  whilst  the  leaders  of  the  enemy  were 
being  brought  over  to  consent  to  terms  of  capitulation, 
humbling  indeed  to  the  pride  of  the  proudest  and  most 
saccessM  nation  of  the  world.* 

*  Some  interesting  particulars  of  When  I  had  nearly  reached  it  I  looked 
the  deaths  of  Lieutenant  Rattray  and  back,  and  saw  Mr.  R.  lying  down  on 
C^rtMn  Codrington  are  given  in  a  the  plain.  I  ran  again  towards  him, 
namtiTe  of  the  events  at  Charekur,  and  when  near  him,  he  called  me  and 
supplied  by  Major  Fottinger^s  Moon-  told  me  to  take  hold  of  him  and  help 
sbee.  It  appears  that  some  chiefs  him  into  the  fort.  Directly  I  took 
had  warned  tne  former  officer  that  if  hold  of  his  hand  about  fitly  Kohis- 
he  left  the  fort  he  would  be  killed  by  tanees  fired,  and  Mr.  B.  received  a 
the  people  outside ;  but  that  Rattray  ball  in  his  forehead.  I  then  ran  back 
had  replied,  ^  They  have  eaten  our  and  got  into  the  fort,  where  I  found 
salt,  and  could  not  be  guilty  of  such  Major  Fottinger  looking  towards  the 
an  act.**  The  Moonshee  tnen  goes  Konistanees,  and  firing  at  them." 
on  to  say :  '*  When  Mr.  Battray  came  The  touching  circumstances  of  Cap- 
near  them,  all  the  chiefs  paid  their  tain  Codrington*s  death  arc  thus  rc- 
respects  to  him,  saying,  ^Inshallahl  lated  :—'*  When  Captain  Codrington 
we  shall  go  to-morrow  and  fieht  with  saw  that  Major  Pottmger  was  wound- 
Meer  Musjedee.'  Mr.  R.  said,  *  Very  ed,  he  went  out  to  the  two  companies ; 
good!  If  vou  will  go,  I  shall  give  but  was  very  severelv  wounded  by  a 
your  people  presents  on  their  return ;  shot  in  the  back.    All  his  Sepoys  be- 