


72 


PHOGRESS  OF  THE  INSUREECTION. 


a  disorderly  rabble,  struggling  on  with  the  one  object 
of  allaying  at  the  first  pool  of  water  the  torments 
of  unendurable  thirst.  It  was  impossible  to  keep  them 
together — impossible  to  lead  them  in  safety  to  the 
capital.  Pottinger  and  Haughton  were  exhausted  by 
the  pain  of  their  wounds.  They  could  render  no  ser- 
vice to  their  men;  and  would  have  perished  had 
they  remained  behind.  So  they  determined  on  pushing 
on  to  Caubul.  A  single  Sepoy  of  the  Goorkha  corps, 
who  plodded  on  with  weary  feet  beside  the  horsemen, 
Pottinger's  English  writer,  and  the  regimental  bunt/ah^ 
were  their  only  companions.  The  route  was  unknown 
to  them,  and  they  had  no  guide;  but  they  struggled  on 
through  many  difficulties  and  much  danger,  and  at  last 
reached  the  neighbourhood  of  Caubul.  Here  the  peril 
thickened  around  them.  Descending  into  the  Caubul 
plain  behind  the  lake,  and  intending  to  cross  the  cul- 
tivated ground  to  cantonments,  at  the  back  of  the  Shah's 
garden,  at  Killa  Bolundee,  they  missed  the  turning,  and 
soon  found  themselves  in  the  midst  of  the  enemy's  sen- 
tinels. Fearing  to  attract  attention  by  turning  back, 
they  then  made  for  Deh-Afghan,  but  finding  the  place 
occupied  by  the  enemy,  and  being  closely  challenged  by 
the  sentries,  they  were  compelled  to  pass  into  the  city. 
Pursuing  the  lanes  and  bazaars  along  the  river  bank,  and 
narrowly  escaping  death  from  a  volley  fired  upon  them  by 
one  of  the  enemy's  picquets,  they  made  their  way  at  last 
to  cantonments.  The  regiment  in  the  mean  while  had 
perished.    Rose  and  Grant  were  slain  by  the  enemy,* 


^  ♦  Major  Pottinger  does  not  men- 
tion in  his  report  when  and  how 
these  officers  fell.  Lieutenant  Mel- 
ville, in  his  narrative,  says :  "  From 
all  that  can  be  gathered  from  the  re- 
ports brought  in,  it  appears  that  the 
devoted  corps  had  struggled  on  to 
Kardurrah,  gallantly  headed  by  En- 
sign Rose  and  Dr.  Grant,  where  it 


was  cut  to  pieces.  The  former  officer 
fell,  having  first  killed  four  of  the 
enemy  with  his  own  hand;  and  the 
latter,  although  he  contrived  to  es- 
cape from  the  murderous  hands  at 
Kardurrah,  yet  iust  as  he  had  arrived 
in  the  sight  of  the  haven  of  his  hopes, 
within  three  miles  of  cantonments,  was 
massacred  by  some  wood-cutters.** 


WITHDRAWAL  OF  S^VLE's  BRIGADE.  73 

and  scarcely  a  man  escaped  to  tell  how  his  comrades 
had  been  miserably  destroyed.* 

The  intelligence  brought  in  by  Pottinger  from  the 
Kohistan  was  not  of  a  nature  to  rouse  the  drooping 
spirits  of  the  Envoy.  Charekur  had  been  lost ;  the 
Goorkha  regiment  annihilated;  aAd  there  were  now 
large  bodies  of  Kohistanees  and  Nijrowees,  having  done 
their  bloody  work  at  home,  ready  to  join  the  insurgents 
at  the  capital.  He  had  been  looking,  too,  with  eager 
anxiety,  for  the  return  of  Sale's  brigade  from  Gandamuck, 
and  now  he  learnt,  to  his  bitter  disappointment,  that  it 
had  marched  for  Jellalabad.  Still  he  did  not  despair 
of  being  able  to  recall  it.  On  the  17th  of  November 
he  again  wrote  to  Captain  Macgregor  :f 