

the  rebels. 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 
I  have  received  yours  of  the  16th. 

The  abandonment  of  all  hope  of  assistance  from  Sale's 

*  Correspondence  of  Sir  W,  H,  MaC'  and  instead  of  "We  must  look  for 
naghten:  MS,  Records.  A  version  of  support  chiefly  from  Peshawur/' Mao- 
this  letter  is  ^ven  in  the  published  nagnten  is  made  to  say,  *^  We  must 
papers ;  but  3iere  arc  some  curious  look  for  supplies  chiefly  from  Pesha- 
errors  in  the  official  text,  which  iUus-  wur.**  The  evils  of  such  carelessness 
trate,  in  a  very  forcible  manner,  the  as  this  have  received  a  remarkable 
value  of  these  public  documents  as  iUustration  in  Major  Hough's  Review 
guides  to  historical  truth.  The  pri-  of  the  Military  Operations  at  Cauhd, 
vate  letter,  in  spite  of  its  very  un-  in  which  are  some  pages  of  remark 
official  style,  is  turned  into  an  offi-  on  the  subject  of  Supplies  from 
cial  one,  commencing,  "  Sir." — The  Peshawur^  based  upon  this  identical 
words,  "  the  weather  is  very  cold,"  passage  in  the  mis-copicd  or  mis- 
are  printed  "  the  water  is  very  cold;"  printed  letter. 


LETTER  TO  GENERAL  ELPHIN8T0NE.         75 

brigade  had  now  given  a  new  complexion  to  the  aspect 
of  affairs.  The  military  authorities,  who  had  been  long 
ripe  for  capitulation,  now  pressed  the  Envoy  sorely  with 
their  "  distressM  accounts  of  the  state  of  the  troops  and 
cattle  from  want  of  provisions,"  and  of  the  "  hopeless- 
ness  of  further  resistance."*  But  Macnaghten,  though 
he  saw  the  necessity  of  weighing  well  the  dangers  that 
beset  the  force,  and  the  means  of  extricating  it  from  its 
perilous  position,  was  not  a  man  to  grasp  at  the  degra- 
dation of  surrender  whilst  yet  there  was  a  hope  of  res- 
cuing it  by  any  more  honourable  course.  The  time  had 
come,  however,  for  him  to  declare  fully  his  sentiments  to 
the  military  commander;  so,  on  the  18th  of  November, 
he  addressed  to  him  a  letter,  in  which  the  whole  ques- 
tion is  thus  reviewed  :f 

Caubu],  18th  No v^  1841. 

Mr  DEAR  General, 

The  intelligence  received  last  night  from  Captain  Mac- 
gregor  makes  it  necessary  that  we  should  now  take  our  future 
proceedings  into  consideration.  We  have  scarcely  a  hope  of  re- 
inforcement from  Sale's  brigade.  I  would  recommend  we  hold 
on  here  as  long  as  possible,  and  throughout  the  whole  winter,  if 
we  can  subsist  the  troops  by  any  means,  by  making  the  Mahome- 
dans  and  Christians  live  chiefly  on  flesh  and  other  contrivances. 
Here  we  have  the  essentials  of  wood  and  water  in  abundance,  and 
I  believe  our  position  is  impregnable. 

A  retreat  in  the  direction  of  Jellalabad  would  be  most  disas- 
trous, and  should  be  avoided,  except  in  the  last  extremity;  we 
shall  be  better  able  to  see,  eight  or  ten  days  hence,  whether  that 
extremity  must  be  resorted  to.  In  that  case,  wo  should  have  to 
sacrifice  the  valuable  property  of  government;  we  should  have  to 
sacrifice  his  Majesty,  who  would  not  come  away  without  his  family ; 
and  were  we  to  make  good  our  retreat  to  Jellalabad,  we  should 
find  no  shelter  for  our  troops  (the  cantonments  being  destroyed), 
and  perhaps  no  provisions.  I  fear,  too,  that  in  such  a  retreat  very 
few  of  our  camp  followers  would  survive.     I  have  frequently 