


CONCENTRATION  IN  THE  BALLA  HISSAR.  77 

the  concentration  of  the  Britbh  troops  in  the  Balla  Hissar. 
The  measure  had  been  recommended  by  the  engineer, 
Sturt,  and  others,  very  soon  after  the  first  outbreak  of 
the  insurrection.  The  Envoy  had  favoured  it  at  an  earlier, 
as  he  did  at  a  later,  period  of  the  siege ;  but  he  seems  at 
this  time  to  have  been  more  than  usually  alive  to  the 
•difficulties  of  the  movement.  The  General  had  scarcely 
any  opinion  at  all  on  the  subject.  But  the  Brigadier 
was  resolutely  opposed  to  it.  His  arguments  were  not 
very  overwhelming — ^but  they  were  overwhelmingly  ad- 
vanced ;  and  he  seems  for  some  time  to  have  borne  down 
the  better  reason  of  all  who  supported  the  measure.  No 
one  in  the  whole  force  was  more  profoundly  impressed 
with  a  conviction  of  the  disadvantages  of  the  canton- 
ment as  a  military  position  than  Brigadier  Shelton  him- 
self. He  has  left  on  record,  in  emphatic  language,  his 
opinions  upon  this  point;  but  he  could  see  in  the  ex- 
treme insecurity  of  the  cantonment  an  argument  only 
for  a  discreditable  retreat.  He  could  not  see  that  if  the 
extent  of  the  cantonment-works  were  such  as  to  render 
their  defence  difficult,  and  external  operations  on  a  large 
scale  impossible,  there  was  in  this  circumstance  abim- 
dant  reason  for  the  removal  of  the  force  to  a  position 
cursed  with  none  of  these  annihilating  evils. 

In  the  Balla  Hissar  the  troops  would  have  been  free 
from  molestation.  They  would  not,  as  in  cantonments, 
have  been  harassed  and  dispirited  by  the  necessity  of 
manning  works  exposed  at  every  point  to  the  attacks  of 
the  enemy.  They  could  have  sallied  out  from  such  a 
position  in  large  bodies — have  attacked  the  city  and  the 
neighbouring  forts — have  obtained  supplies  from  the 
surrounding  country — and  held  their  own  till  the  coming 
spring.  But  against  all  this  it  was  alleged  that  the  re- 
moval of  the  force  from  the  cantonment  to  the  Balla 
Hissar  would  be  a  hazardous  operation — that  it  could 
not  be  accomplished  without  great  loss,  including,  in  all 


78  PBOGBESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

probability,  the  entire  sacrifice  of  the  sick  and  wounded. 
That  the  movement  would  not  have  been  free  from 
danger  is  true.  What  movement  could  be  free  from 
danger,  at  such  a  time  ? — what  warlike  operations  ever 
are  free  from  danger?  But  that  it  would  have  neces- 
sarily involved  the  total  sacrifice  of  the  sick  and  wounded, 
is  only  to  be  assumed  upon  the  hypothesis,  that  the  curse 
which  had  so  long  brooded  over  us  would  still  have 
worked  for  our  own  undoing,  and  that,  therefore,  no 
precautions  would  have  been  taken  to  protect  them.* 