

•nd  the  Goorkhas  being  youns  sol-  midable  array  (apparently  not  less 

dien,  having  once  got  heate^  fol-  than  4000    men).     Air.  Haughton, 

lowed  with  great  eagerness,  despite  however,  maintained  his  ground  till 

the  frequentff -sounded   recall;  and  joined  by  Mr.  Salisbury,  when,  seeing 

on  their  finally  stopping,  the  enemy  the  hopelessness  of  making  good  his 

perceived  they  were  too  far  separated  way,  he  retreated    and  gained  the 

f2 


68  PBOGEESS  OP  THE  INSURBECTION. 

was  compelled  to  fall  back  on  Charekur.  Ensign  Salis- 
bury was  mortally  wounded,  and  many  men  of  the 
Goorkha  regiment  fell  on  the  retreat. 

Seeing  little  prospect  now  of  being  relieved,  and  find- 
ing his  ammunition  reduced  to  a  few  rounds  in  the 
pouches  of  his  men,  Pottinger  determined,  after  nightfall, 
to  attempt  a  retreat  on  Charekur.  Disguising  his  inten- 
tions by  collecting  grain  during  the  day,  as  for  a  pro- 
tracted defence,  he  eluded  the  vigilance  of  the  enemy, 
and  disencumbering  himself  of  his  Afghan  followers,  and 
all  whose  fidelity  there  was  any  reason  to  suspect,  he 
mustered  the  Hindostanees  outside  the  postern,  upon  the 
pretext  of  making  a  sortie  upon  the  enemy,  and  then 
marched  for  the  barracks.  Avoiding  the  main  road,  and 
skirting  the  edge  of  the  mountain,  the  little  party,  under 
cover  of  the  night,  made  good  its  retreat,  and  united 
itself  with  the  main  body  of  the  Goorkha  regiment  at 
Charekur.* 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  November  the  enemy 
assembled,  in  large  bodies,  around  the  fortified  barracks ; 
and,  after  attacking  the  outposts,  closely  invested  the 
place.   Codrington  commanded  the  regiment.   Pottinger, 

barracks  in  safety.    A  great  number  treasure,  contuning  10,000  rupees, 

of  men  fell  in  the  retreat,  as  they  were  and  about    sixty  Afghan    firelocks 

obliged  frequently  to  hdt,  formed  in  (confiscated  from  the  deserters  of  the 

close    order  to  resist   the  enemy's  Kohistan  corp),  all  my  office  records, 

cavalry,  which,  being  closdy  on  them,  Mr.  Rattray  s.  Dr.  Grant*s,  and  my 

was  only  kept  in  cneck  by  the  gal-  own  personal  property,  and  a  very 

lantry  of  Mr.  Haughton,  who,  with  large  number  of  horses  belonging  to 

a  few  men  and  the  gun,  remained  in  ourselves  and  the  horsemen  who  had 

the  rear,  and  covered  the  retreat  of  not  deserted.     The    Heratees    and 

the  disheartened  party.     Mr.  Salis-  seven  or  eight  Peshawerees  were  the 

bury  was  mortally  wounded,  and  the  only  A^hans  who  adhered  to  me. 

trail  of  the  field-^un  gave  way  at  the  All  the  Cauboolees  deserted,  and  one 

elevating-screw  just  as  they  reached  principal  cause  of  so  immediate  a 

support/' — [Pottinger' 8  Report:  MS.  termination  to  my  defence  may  be 