

Caubul,  November  17th,  1841. 

Mr  DEAR  Macgregor, 

I  have  written  to  you  daily,  pointing  out  our  precarious 
state,  and  urging  you  to  return  here,  with  Sale's  brigade,  with  all 
pooible  expedition.  General  Elphinstone  has  done  the  same^  and 
we  now  learn,  to  our  dismay,  that  you  have  proceeded  to  Jellalabad. 
Our  situation  is  a  desperate  one  if  you  do  not  immediately  return 
to  our  relief^  and  I  beg  that  you  will  do  so  without  a  moment's 
delay.  We  have  now  been  besieged  for  fourteen  days,  and  with- 
out your  assistance  are  utterly  unable  to  carry  on  any  offensive 
operations.  Tou  may  easily  make  Caubul  in  eight  marches,  and, 
as  the  Ghilzyes  are  here,  you  would  not  have  many  enemies  to 
contend  with. 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

In  the  course  of  the  night  he  received  a  letter  from 
Macgr^or,  which  satisfied  him  that  there  was  no  longer 
any  hope  of  receiving  aid  from  Sale's  brigade.  He  had 
b^un  to  think  by  this  time  of  the  provisions  of  the 

*  This  acconnt  of  the  defence  of  Ejre  seems  to  have  had  access  to 

Chirekur  and  the  destruction  of  the  it. 

Goorkha  corps,  is  taken  from  Major        t  Correspondence  of  Sir  W,  H.  Mac^ 

PottiDger*8  Badeeabad  report  (MS.J.  naghten:  MS,  Records. 


74  PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

tripartite  treaty,  and  to  look  for  aid  from  the  Sikhs. 
On  the  Mowing  morning  he  again  wrote:* 

Caubul,  NoYember  18tb,  1841. 

My  DEAR  Macgregor, 

I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  13  th  instant.  The 
Cossid  gave  us  an  account  of  your  action  on  the  14th  instant; 
which,  if  he  speaks  truth,  must  have  been  a  very  successful  one. 
We  are  in  statu  quo.  Our  chief  want  is  supplies.  I  perceive 
now  that  you  could  not  well  have  joined  us.  I  hope  you  have 
written  to  Mackeson,  asking  him  for  aid  from  the  Sikhs  under  the 
treaty.  If  there  is  any  difficulty  about  the  Sikhs  getting  through 
the  pass,  Mackeson  should  offer  a  bribe  to  the  Khyberees  of  a 
lakh  of  rupees,  or  more,  to  send  them  safe  passage.  These  are  not 
times  to  stick  at  trifles.  The  Goorkha  regiment  has  been  annihi- 
lated, but  Pottinger  and  Haughton  are  here;  the  latter  has  lost 
his  hand.  I  believe  I  told  you  that  Paton  lost  his  arm  in  the 
action  we  had  near  the  cantonment  the  other  day.  It  is  raining 
here,  and  the  weather  is  very  cold;  but  I  am  not  sure  that  tliis  is 
not  as  bad  for  the  enemy  as  for  ourselves.  I  do  not  hear  anything 
from  Ghuzni  or  Candahar,  but  I  should  not  wonder  if  they  were 
in  the  same  mess  as  ourselves.  We  must  look  for  support  chiefly 
from  Peshawur,  Write  to  Mackeson  continually,  and  tell  him  to 
urge  government  to  send  as  many  troops  into  the  country  as 
speedily  as  possible.  John  Conolly  is  in  the  Balla  Hissar  with  his 
Majesty,  who,  as  you  may  imagine,  is  in  a  sad  taking  about  all 
the  Fussad. .  I  am  making  no  progress  in  my  negotiations  with 