

On  the  8th,  the  enemy  offered  them  t^rms.  The  con- 
dition was,  that  they  should  become  Mahomedans.  "  We 
came  to  this  country,"  said  Pottinger,  in  reply,  "  to  aid  a 
Mahomedan  sovereign  in  the  recovery  of  his  rights. 
We  are  therefore  within  the  pale  of  Islam,  and  exempt 
from  coercion  on  the  score  of  religion."  To  this  they 
replied,  that  the  Kling  himself  had  ordered  the  attack; 
and  asked  if  Pottinger  would  surrender  on  receiving  his 
Majesty's  orders.  "  I  can  do  nothing "  said  Pottinger, 
"^; without  a  written  order  fi:om  the  King."  And  with 
this  the  negotiations  ended. 

But  there  was  an  enemy  more  terrible  than  these  in- 
furiated crowds  of  Kohistanees  and  Nijrowees.  The 
garrison  were  suffering  agonies  of  thirst.*  On  the  10th, 
the  last  pool  of  water  was  drawn;  and  half  a  wine-glass 
of  the  precious  fltiid  served  out  to  each  fighting  man* 


*  **  Some  sheep  were  giyen  to  us  in  piercing  accents.     Our  muskets 

by  the  officers ;  we  found  relief  from  were  so  foul  from  incessant  use,  that 

sucking  the  raw  flesh,  and  some  of  the  balls  were  forced  down  with  diffi- 

ihe  men  placed  the  contents  of  the  culty,  although  separated  from  the 

stomach  of  the  sheep  in  cloths,  and,  paper  of  the  cartridge  which  usually 

wringing  them  very  hard,  obtained  wraps  them  round.     The  lips  of  the 

some  moisture  to  assuage  their  raging  men  became  swollen  and  bloody,  and 

thirst.    The  sick  and  wounded  now  their  tongues  clave  to  their  palates.^' 

increased  to  a  frightful  amount,  and  — {^Evidence  of  Mootee  Ram,  UaviU 

were  continually  screaming  for  water  dar,"] 


EVACUATION  OF  CHAliEKUli.  71 

On  the  11th  there  was  not  sufficient  to  serve  out  to  the 
whole  party.  At  night  they  stole  out  with  their  lotahs 
concealed  under  their  clothes,  lest  the  shining  metal 
should  betray  them,  to  snatch  a  few  drops  of  water  from 
a  neighbouring  spring.  But  the  enemy  discovered  the 
practice,  and  shot  down  the  wretched  men.  Parties 
were  then  sent  out  to  cover  the  water-carriers ;  but  the 
soldiers,  mad  with  the  tortures  of  thirst,  quitted  their 
ranks,  and  could  not  be  restrained  from  rushing  forward 
in  search  of  the  liquid  life  for  which  they  had  so  long 
been  languishing.  Every  new  effort  to  obtain  water, 
however  well  devised,  failed  from  the  same  cause.  The 
parties,  which  moved  out  as  disciplined  soldiers,  soon,  in 
the  madness  of  their  sufferings,  became  a  disorderly 
rabble — soon  were  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy,  who  shot 
them  down,  in  their  helplessness,  like  sheep. 

All  hope  was  now  at  an  end.  The  garrison  were  re- 
duced to  a  party  of  two  hundred  fighting  men.  They 
had  but  thirty  rounds  of  ammunition  for  each  musket  in 
store.  The  wretched  Goorkhas  were  literally  perishing 
with  intolerable  thirst.  Pottinger  and  Haughton  took 
counsel  together;  and  determined  to  make  a  desperate 
effort  to  save  the  remnant  of  their  little  force  by  a  rapid 
unencumbered  march  to  Caubul.  Accordingly,  on  the 
evening  of  the  13th  of  November,  the  Goorkhas  eva- 
cuated Charekur.  Pottinger  led  the  advance.  Haugh- 
ton had,  on  the  afternoon  of  that  day,  been  disabled  by 
a  sabre-cut  from  a  jemadar  of  artillery,  whilst  appre- 
hending a  party  of  deserters;  and  was  now  scarcely 
able  to  sit  his  horse.  Mr.  Grant,  a  medical  officer — 
not  the  first  medical  officer  who  has  played  the  part  of 
the  true  soldier  in  battle,  and  justified  the  claims  of  his 
profession  to  the  soldier's  honours  and  rewards — ^having 
spiked  all  the  guns  with  his  own  hands,  led  out  the  main 
body;  whilst  Ensign  Rose  brought  up  the  rear.  The 
order  of  march  was  soon  lost.     The  little  force  became 