

and  to-morrow  they  shall  receive  five    gan  to  cry  for  him Captain 

rupees  each  for  their  expenses,  and  I  Codrington  was    able  to  walk  into 

wiU  also  go  with  my  sowars.^  Mr.  R.  cantonments ;  but  fell  down  before  he 

then  turned  to  go  back  to  the  fort ;  reached  his  house,  and  asked  for  water. 

but  Jubbar  Khan  asked  him  to  look  We  carried  him  and  laid  him  on  the 

at  his  men,  to  which  he  agreed,  and  same  bed  as  Major  Fottinger,  whom 

turned  back  again.    When  he  had  he  asked  for  pen,  ink,  and  paper,  and 

taken  about  six  or  seven  steps,  one  of  wrote  a  letter  to  his  wife,  whose  pic- 

the  Kohistanees  called  him  by  name,  ture  he  also  gave  to  Major  Fottinger. 

and  ran  at  him,  firing  his  gun  at  He  lingered  on  until  the  night  of  the 

Mr.  IL,  who  turned  and  ran  towards  7th,  when  he  died.     We  buried  him 

the  fort.  I,  the  Meerza,  and  the  Chu-  and    Lieutenant    Salisbury    in    one 

prassie,  all    ran    towards   the  fort,  grave.'* — [^MS.  Records,'] 


80         PROGRESS  OP  THE  INSURRECTION. 


CHAPTER  V. 

[November,  1841.] 

Progress  of  the  Insurrection— State  of  Affairs  in  the  Balla  Hissar— Shah 
Soojah— The  Action  of  the  23rd  of  November— Defeat  of  the  British 
Troops — Negotiations  with  the  Enemy. 

Whilst  the  feebleness  of  the  military  commanders  in 
cantonments  had  been  playing  away  stake  after  stake, 
until  every  hope  of  redemption  was  past,  the  King,  shut 
up  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  had  been  watching  the  progress 
of  events  with  the  profoundest  anxiety  and  alarm.  His 
bearing  was  that  of  a  man  heartless  and  hopeless  under 
a  pressure  of  unanticipated  misfortunes;  but  prostrate 
and  imbecile  as  he  was  in  this  conjuncture,  he  could 
see  plainly  enough  the  prostration  and  imbecility  of  the 
British  chiefs.  When  the  commissariat  fort  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  insurgents,  the  great  calamity  rose  up  sud- 
denly before  the  inmates  of  the  Balla  Hissar.  From 
the  summit  of  the  palace  the  enemy  might  be  seen 
throwing  the  plunder  over  the  walls  of  the  fort,  to  be 
carried  off  by  their  companions  below.  There  was  a 
general  rush  upwards  to  this  commanding  position  to 
witness  the  humiliating  sight.  The  King  beheld  it  with 
deep  emotion,  and,  painftilly  agitated,  turned  to  the 
Wuzeer  and  said,  "  Surely  the  English  are  mad."* 

*  Lieutenant  Melville^s  Narrative, 


CONDITION  OF  THE  SHAH.  81 

Dejected  as  he  was  before,  this  crowning  calamity 
sunk  him  into  a  state  of  still  deeper  dejection.  Every 
report  of  the  designs  of  the  enemy,  however  incredible, 
filled  him  with  new  terror.  It  was  said  that  the  in- 
surgents were  running  a  mine  from  the  Shor  Bazaar 
under  the  very  walls  of  the  palace.  Dreading  an  im- 
mediate explosion,  he  quitted  his  apartments,  and  took 
up  his  residence  at  the  gate  of  the  Harem,  where,  seated 
at  a  window  commanding  an  extensive  view  of  the  can- 
tonments and  the  surrounding  country,  he  traced,  through 
a  telescope,  the  progress  of  the  exciting  events  passing 
below.  Day  after  day  he  sate  at  the  same  window, 
looking  down,  from  morning  to  evening  prayer,  upon  a 
scene  which  seldom  yielded  aught  to  comfort  or  reassure 
.  him.  Shah  Soojah  had  never  been  a  courageous  man ; 
but  he  had  always  been  a  very  proud  one.  That  now, 
enfeebled  and  desponding,  he  should  have  clung  to  any 
support,  turned  anywhere  for  assistance,  was  not  strange ; 
but  when  they  saw  the  pompous  and  arrogant  monarch 
now  80  humbled  and  obsequious,  laying  aside  all  the 
environments  of  royalty,  to  which  before  he  had  climg 
with  such  pitiful  tenacity,  the  English  officers  about 
him  felt  that  the  shock  must  have  been  great  indeed  so 
to  revolutionise  his  whole  nature.  He  made  even  the 
British  subalterns  sit  beside  him  on  chairs;  conversed 
fimiiliarly  with  them;  enquired  into  their  wants,  and 
condescended  to  supply  them.  "  If,**  said  one  who  had 
good  opportunities  of  narrowly  watching  the  behaviour 
of  the  King  at  this  time,  "  he  is  acting  a  part,  he  cer- 
tainly performs  it  admirably !" 