


FUTURE  MOVEMENTS  DISCUSSED.  93 

greatest  part  of  our  troops,  and  thereby  leave  the  cantonment 
without  sufficient  defence. 

I  am  ihe  more  confirmed  in  my  opinion  of  the  difficulty  of  the 
operation  from  the  harassed  and  dispirited  state  of  our  troops,  now 
so  much  reduced  in  numbers,  and  failure  would  tend  to  our  certain 
destruction.  With  our  means,  it  would  take  some  days  to  remove 
the  ammunition  and  stores,  during  which  the  enemy  would  be 
collecting  a  great  number  around  us;  our  wounded  would  be  in- 
creasedf  with  diminished  means  of  conveying  them. 

Would  the  Balla  Hissar  hold  us  with  our  followers,  even  after 
the  sacrifice  of  our  horses  and  cattle  ?  I  am  told  that  water  is 
already  selling  there  at  a  high  price,  even  with  the  present  small 
garrison.  We  have,  at  least,  barely  twenty  days'  supplies,  which, 
even  if  we  could  remove,  we  have  little  prospect  of  adding  to  at 
the  Balla  Hissar;  a  retreat  from  thence  would  be  worse  thanfiK)m 
our  present  position,  for,  after  abandoning  our  horses  and  means 
of  transport,  our  sick,  wounded,  and  stores,  would  have  to  be  left 
behind  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy. 

I  have  conferred  with  Briga^er  Shelton,  the  second  in  com- 
mand, and  he  concurs  with  me  in  the  above  opinion. 

Tours,  &c., 

W.  K.  Elphinstone.* 

To  this  letter  the  Envoy  replied: 

Mt  Deab  General, 

In  reply  to  your  note  just  received,  I  beg  to  state  my  opinion 
that  the  move  into  the  Balla  Hissar  would  be  attended  with  the 
greatest  difficulty,  and  I  do  not  see  what  advantage  could  accrue 
dierefrom,  although  the  disadvantages,  as  pointed  out  by  you^ 
are  apparent  in  the  event  of  our  ultimate  retreat.  As  to  the  mere 
question  of  room  for  our  troops  and  followers,  I  do  not  imagine 
that  we  should  feel  much  difficulty  on  that  account. 

Tours,  &c.  &c., 

W.  H.  MACNAGHTEN.f 

The  question  of  a  movement  into  the  Balla  Hissar 

•  Correspaiuknce  of  Qen,  E^hin*       f  Correspondence  of  Sir  W.  iST. 
Utme :  MS.  Jlecords.  The  substance  of   Macnaghten :  MS.  Records. 
this  letter  is  given  in  £yre*8  journal* 


94  PBOQRESS  OF  THE  INSIJBHECTION, 

having  been  thus  disposed  of  for  the  present,  the  Envoy 
turned  his  thoughts  towards  that  other  course,  which 
had  been  so  long  pressed  upon  him  by  the  xniUtary  chief. 
Ho  b^an  U>  thl£  of  nogoSathg  wi4  tto  one^  But 
that  he  might  not,  save  in  the  last  extremity,  enter  upon 
a  line  of  conduct  against  which  the  manliness  of  hia 
nature  revolted,  he  addressed  a  letter  to  the  General, 
asking,  in  specific  terms,  whether  he  considered  it  po8» 
fiible  any  longer  to  maintain  his  position  in  the  country. 
To  this  letter  Elphinstone  replied: 