

Caubul,  24th  Nov.,  1841. 

Sib, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 

letter  of  this  day's  date,  calling  for  my  opinion  as  to  whether,  in 
a  military  point  of  view,  it  is  feasible  any  longer  to  maintain  our 
position  in  this  country. 

Li  reply,  I  beg  to  state^  that  after  having  held  our  position 
here  for  upwards  of  three  weeks  in  a  state  of  siege,  from  the  want 
of  provisions  and  forage,  the  reduced  state  of  our  troops,  the  large 
number  of  wounded  and  sick,  the  difficulty  of  defending  the  ex- 
tensive and  iU-situated  cantonment  we  occupy,  the  near  approach 
of  winter,  our  communications  cut  off,  no  prospect  of  relief,  and 
the  whole  countiy  in  anhs  against  us,  I  am  of  opinion  that  it 
is  not  feasible  any  longer  to  maintain  our  position  in  this  country, 
and  that  you  ought  to  avail  yourself  of  the  ofi^  to  negotiate 
which  has  been  made  to  you. 

W.  K.  El«PHXN8TON»,* 

Upon  the  receipt  of  this  letter  the  Envoy  ceased  to 
hesitate.  The  enemy  had  made  pacific  overtures  to 
him,  and  he  now  believed  that  it  was  no  longer  his  duty 
to  refuse  to  listen  to  them.  So  he  sent  a  message  to  the 
insurgent  chiefs,  intimating  his  willingness  to  receive  a 
deputation  from  them,  and  to  discuss  the  preliminaries 
of  a  treaty.  The  invitation  was  accepted.  On  the  fol- 
lowing day.  Sultan  Mahomed  Ehan,    Barukzye,  and 

*  Corrtspondenct  of  Sir  W.  H,  Maenaghlen:  MS.  Records. 


COlOfENGEMENT  OF  NEG0TIATI0N8.  95 

Meerza  Ahmed  Ali,  Euzzilbash,  made  their  appearance 
at  the  bridge.  Nothing  could  have  been  more  unas* 
smning  than  the  ambassadorial  cortege.  The  deputies 
rode  sorry  horses,  and  were  attended  only  by  their 
groomB,  Captain  Lawrence  and  Captain  Trevor  were 
sent  out  to  meet  them.  The  conference  lasted  two  hours. 
Sultan  Mahomed  Khan,  whose  tone  was  insolent  and 
uncompromising,  demanded  terms  such  as  the  English 
officeTB  could  not  listen  to  without  disgrace.  The  depu* 
ties  then  asked  to  see  Macnaghten,  and  the  party  moved 
to  cantonments.  In  the  guard^room  at  one  of  the 
gateways  the  Envoy  received  the  Afghan  ambassadors. 
The  discussion  was  long  and  animated.  Sultan  Maho- 
med, still  arn^ant  and  offensive,  trode  down,  as  with  the 
heel  of  the  conqueror,  all  the  pretensions  of  his  oppo- 
n^ts;  and  declared  that,  as  the  Afghans  had  beaten  us 
in  battle,  they  had  a  right  to  dictate  terms  of  capitulation. 
He  demanded  that  the  British  should  surrender  at  dis- 
cretion, giving  themselves  up  with  all  their  arms,  am- 
munitioii,  and  treasure,  as  prisoners  of  war.  Macnaghten 
was  not  a  man  to  submit  to  this  dictation.  The  terms  were 
resolutely  rejected.  "  We  shall  meet,  then,"  said  Sultan 
Mahomed,  "  on  the  field  of  battle."  "  At  all  events," 
replied  Macnaghten,  "  we  shaU  meet  at  the  day  of  judg- 
ment."  And  so  the  conference  was  brought  to  an  end." 