


H0YXMBKT8  IN  THB  BALLA  HIS8AB.  83 

points  most  exposed  to  attack  the  components  of  the 
little  garrison  were  posted,  and^  kept  always  on  the  alert 
by  reports  of  some  threatened  movement  of  the  enemy, 
were  always  ready  to  give  them  a  warm  reception. 

The  BSair  of  the  ISth  of  November  struck  a  gleam  of 
hope  into  the  garrison  of  the  Balla  Hissar,  It  seemed  as 
though  new  courage  had  been  infused  into  the  canton* 
ment  force;  and,  as  though  to  second  the  invigorated 
efforts  of  their  comrades^  the  artiller}anen  in  the  citadel 
now  began  to  ply  their  batteries  with  increased  activity. 
They  shelled  the  city,  and  attempted  to  fire  it  with  car* 
cases;  but  the  houses  were  not  of  a  construction  to  be 
easily  ignited,  and  the  shelling  produced  little  effect. 
The  residence  of  Ameen-oollah  Ehan,  in  the  city,  was  to 
be  seen  from  the  batteries;  and  the  gunners,  knowing  the 
old  man  to  be  one  of  our  deadliest  enemies,  singled  it  out 
as  a  mark,  and  poured  their  iron  rain  upon  it.  But  the 
chief  removed  himself  and  his  family  to  another  house; 
and  the  only  loss  was  among  the  horses. 

A  crisis  was  now  at  hand  in  the  fate  of  the  cantonment 
force.  The  23rd  of  November  was  one  of  the  most  eventful 
and  the  most  disMtrous  in  the  history  of  the  insurrection. 
On  that  day  a  battle  was  fought,  which  ended  in  the 
disgraceful  and  calamitous  defeat  of  the  British  troops. 
The  enemy  had  been  for  some  time  making  their  ap- 
pearance on  the  Beh-meru  hill,  and  had  repeatedly 
descended  into  the  vUlage,  whence  the  British  commis- 
sariat officers  had  been  drawing  supplies  of  grain.*    Irri* 

•  «»Xhe  enemy  have  for  sometiine  three,  and  idzed  about  fifty  maimdi 

put  6aSlj  made  their  appearance  on  of  wheat,  as  also  a  few  of  my  camels 

the  Beh-mem  hills,  and  have  repeat-  and  yaboos.    I  am  diuly  up  long  be- 

edly  liaited  the  Tillage  of  Beh-meriL  fore  gunfire,  and  as  soon  as  there  is 

destroyed  the  houses,  and  plundered  sufficient  liffht  commence  purchasing) 

the  innahitants,  and  hare  expelled  as  it  is  omv  early  in  the  morning 

them  from  thdr  homes  on  account  of  that  the  villagers   can   venture  to 

Ihdtr  aid  to  OS,  in  brin|^  in  grain,  bring  thehr  stores  fbr  8ale.**-*[C(m(at« 

T«ro  days  affo,  they  surprised  some  JohntofiCs  Joumot:  MS*  Jiecordt.} 
of  my  peo|^  purchasing,  wounded 

a2 


84  PROGRESS  OP  THE  INSURRECTION. 

tated  by  the  assistance  which  the  villagers  had  rendered 
us,  the  insurgents  had  destroyed  the  houses,  pillaged  the 
inhabitants,  and  attacked  our  commissariat  people  when 
getting  in  their  supplies.  This  was  not  to  be  endured* 
Again  the  Envoy  counselled  the  despatch  of  a  strong 
force  to  occupy  the  Beh-meru  hill,  and  to  dislodge  the 
enemy  from  a  position  in  which  they  were  able  to  work 
us  such  grievous  annoyance.  Again  the  Brigadier  ob-* 
jected.  Urging  that  the  troops  were  exhausted  and  dis- 
spirited  by  constant  harassing  duty  on  the  ramparts,  that 
they  had  been  living  upon  half-rations  of  parched  wheat, 
and  were  therefore  physically  as  well  as  morally  enfee- 
bled^ he  protested  against  a  movement  which  he  said 
would  have  the  effect  of  increasing  the  number  of 
wounded  and  sick,  without  leading  to  any  solid  advan- 
tage.* But  these  objections  were  overruled.  On  the 
22nd  a  weak  detachment  had  been  sent  out,  under  Major 
Swa3aie,  but  it  had  only  added  another  to  our  list  of 
failures.  It  was  plain  that  something  more  must  be 
done.  A  council  of  war  was  held  that  evening  at  the 
General's  quarters,  and  it  was  determined,  after  much 
earnest  discussion,  on  the  special  reconmiendation  of  the 
Envoy,  that  a  strong  force  should  be  sent  out  before 
daybreak  on  the  following  morning,  to  occupy  the  Beh- 
meru  hills.  Shelton  recommended  that  at  the  same  time 
an  attack  should  be  made  on  the  village.  It  was  urged 
that  the  enemy  would  abandon  the  village  as  soon  as 
our  troops  occupied  the  hill.  The  Brigadier  declared 
that  the  occupation  of  the  hill  would  only  make  the 
enemy  hold  the  village  with  greater  pertinacity.    Shel- 