

*  The officen  who  80  distinguished    killed;    and    Captains    Mackeniie, 
themselyet  were  Captain  Miuuntosh    Troup,  and  Leighton. 
and  Lieutenant   Lung,   who  were 


88  PROGBESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

lost,  and  our  disheartened  regiments  were  in  confused 
and  disastrous  flight. 

All,  however,  was  not  then  lost.  Shelton  ordered 
the  halt  to  be  sounded.  The  fljring  regiments  stopped 
and  re-formed;  then  turning  round,  faced  the  enemy 
with  a  shout,  and  seemed  ready  to  renew  the  conflict. 
But  the  Ghazees  now  shrunk  from  the  British  bayonets. 
They  were  few  in  numbers ;  and  they  saw,  too,  a  party 
of  Anderson's  Horse  coming  to  the  chaise.  Taking  the 
horses  and  limber  with  them,  they  abandoned  the  gun, 
and  fled. 

In  the  mean  while  the  enemy's  cavalry  on  the  plain 
had  been  thrown  into  confusion  by  the  fall  of  their 
leader — ^Abdoollah  Eian,  Achetzkye.  How  he  fell, 
or  at  what  moment,  is  not  precisely  known.*  It  was 
generally  believed  that  he  was  wounded  by  a  shot  from 
our  gun — ^but  there  was  a  whisper,  of  doubtful  credi- 
bility, to  the  effect  that  he  had  been  struck  down  by 
the  jezail  of  one  of  his  own  countr3rmen,  who  is  said  to 
have  claimed  a  reward  for  the  act.  Be  the  history  of 
his  fall  what  it  may,  it  discouraged  and  alarmed  the 
A%han  cavalry  on  the  plain.  Seeing  their  leader  car- 
ried from  the  field,  they  fled  in  confusion  towards  the 
city.  !^orant  of  the  cause  of  their  flight,  the  infan- 
try began  to  follow  them ;  and  the  excited  lookers-on 
in  cantonments  now  thought  the  day  was  ours.  Mao- 
naghten  and  Elphinstone  were  standing  together  on  the 
ramparts  watching  the  enemy  as  they  streamed  across 
the  plain.  The  opportunity  seemed  a  great  one.  To 
have  sent  out  of  cantonments  a  body  of  troops  to  pursue 
the  flying  enemy,  and  render  their  confusion  complete, 

♦  Ejrre  says  he  was  struck  by  a  Sale  places  his  fall  after  the  capture 
shrapnel  shot,  before  our  gun  was  of  the  ffun.  The  subject  is  discussed 
captured  for  the  first  time.    Lady    in  a  subsequent  page. 


THE  ACTION  CONTINUED.  89 

would  have  been  to  have  secured  a  victory.  The 
Envoy  urged  it  upon  the  Greneral;  but  the  Greneral  said 
it  was  a  wild  scheme,  and  weakly  negatived  the  worthy 
proposaL 

At  this  moment,  when  the  enemy  were  in  flight, 
and  our  gun  had  been  recaptured,  Shelton  might  have 
brought  back  his  force  with  credit  to  cantonments.  But 
the  opportunity  was  lost.  The  enemy  returned  to  the 
field,  recruited  by  new  hordes  whom  they  met  emerging 
from  the  dty ;  and  soon  the  swelling  multitude  poured 
itself  upon  our  battalions.  The  General  had  sent  out 
new  suppUes  of  ammunition,  with  another  limber  and 
horses  for  the  gun ;  and  it  was  soon  again  in  full  opera- 
tion, playing  with  murderous  effect  upon  the  masses  of 
the  enemy.  But  again  the  British  muskets  were  found 
no  match  for  the  Afghan  jezails.  There  were  truer  eyes 
and  steadier  hands,  too,  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy  than 
in  our  own;  and  now  with  imerring  aim  the  Afghan 
marksmen  mowed  down  our  men  like  grass.  The  artil- 
lerymen were  fidling  fast  at  their  gun;  and  Shelton, 
thinking  it  insecure,  withdrew  it  to  a  safer  position. 
Emboldened  by  this,  the  enemy  continued  the  attack 
with  increased  vigour;  and  again  the  British  troops 
began  to  cower  beneath  the  fire  of  their  assailants. 