


«  u 


I  opposed  it,*' says  Shelton,  in  without  any  apparent  ultimate  ad« 

his  own  statement,  *^  in  the  then  dis-  Tantage,  with  tne  certainty  of  dimi- 

spirited  state  of  the  troops,  harassed,  nishing  our  strength,  and  mcreasing 

exhausted,  and  fatigued  from  constant  our  wounded,  already  too  numerous 

duty  on  the  ramparts,  night  and  day,  to  provide  cattle  for." — ^Statement  of 

and  on  half-rations  of  parched  wheat,  Brigadier  Shelton :  MS.  Records.'} 


ATTACK  ON  THE  BEH-MEBU  HILL.  85 

ton's  advice,  however,  was  overruled.  The  force  went 
out  before  daybreak,*  took  possession  of  the  hill,  and 
posted  themselves  on  the  north-eastern  extremity,  which 
overhung  the  village.  With  a  fatuity  only  to  be  ac- 
counted for  by  the  belief  that  the  curse  of  God  was 
upon  those  unhappy  people,  they  had  taken  out  a  single 
gun.  This  gun  was  now  placed  in  a  position  com- 
manding an  enclosure  of  the  village,  where  the  watch- 
fires  gave  out  their  bright  tokens  that  numbers  of  the 
enemy  were  assembled.  A  shower  of  grape  was  presently 
poured  in  upon  the  bivouac.  Starting  up  in  confusion, 
the  enemy  gave  back  a  fire  fix)m  their  jezaib,  but,  aban- 
doning the  open  space,  sought  the  shelter  of  the  houses 
and  towers,  and  there  exhausted  their  ammunition  in  a 
vain  attempt  to  respond  to  our  grape  and  musketry.  Day 
dawned,  and  it  was  plain  that  the  enemy  were  aban- 
doning the  village.f  A  few,  however,  still  remamed; 
and  it  was  determined  to  carry  the  village  by  assault. 
A  storming  party  was  told  off,  imder  Major  Swa3aie ; 
but  the  village  was  not  carried.  The  detachment  seems 
to  have  gone  down  only  to  be  fired  at,  and,  after  half  an 
hour  of  inactivity,  was  recalled  by  the  Brigadier. 

The  movement  of  the  British  troops,  even  in  the  dim 
twilight  of  the  early  morning,  had  been  observed  fix)m 
the  city ;  and  soon  large  bodies  of  the  enemy  were  mov- 
ing across  the  plain.  Horsemen  and  footmen  streamed 
out  in  thousands  to  give  the  Feringhees  battle.    The 

*  Hie  force  consisted  of  five  com-  geant  Mulhall ;  100  Sappers,  under 

ptnies  of  hex  Majesty's  44th,  under  Lieutenant  Laing,  of  the  27th  N.I. 
Uaptain  Le^ton ;  six  companies  of       f  Shelton  sa;^s  that  the  event  jus- 

the  Sih  NX,  under  Lieut. -Colonel  tified  his  anticipations.    But  it  ap- 

Olirer;  six  companies  of  the  37th  N.L,  pears  to  me   that   this   is    at  least 

under  Captain  Kershaw,  of  the  I  dth;  doubtful.     Our  occupation  of  the 

a  squadron  of  the  5th  Cavalry,  imder  hill  really  did  compel  the  great  body 

Gttrtain  Bott ;  a  squadron  of  Irre-  of  the  enemy  to  evacuate  the  village, 

ff^ir  Horse,  under  Lieutenant  Wal-  Eyre  says  that,  when  it  was  subse- 