

ier;  100  men  of  Anderson's  Horse;  quently  attacked, there  were  certainly 

one  Horse  Artillery  gun,  under  Ser-  not  more  than  forty  men  left  in  it. 


86  PBOGBESS  OF  THB  INSUBBEOTIOlfr. 

horsemen  stretched  across  the  plain;  the  footmen  covered 
an  opposite  hill,  and  some  re-occupied  the  village. 

The  fire  firom  the  enemy's  hill,  which  was  separated 
&om  that  on  which  our  own  troops  were  posted  only  by 
a  narrow  gorge,  soon  became  hot  and  galling.  Leaving 
five  companies  at  the  extremity  of  the  hill,  immediately 
above  the  village,  Shelton  took  the  remainder  of  his 
force,  with  the  one  gun,  to  a  position  near  the  brow  of 
the  hill,  over  the  gorge,  where  the  enemy  were  assem^ 
bling  in  the  greatest  numbers.  Here  he  formed  his  in- 
£uitry  into  two  squares,  and  massed  his  cavalry  imme** 
diately  in  their  rear.  The  one  gun  was  nobly  worked, 
and  for  a  time,  with  terrible  effect,  told  upon  the  A%han 
multitudes,  who  had  only  a  matchlock  fire  to  give  back 
in  return.  But  thus  nobly  worked,  round  after  round 
poured  in  as  quickly  as  the  piece  could  be  loaded,  it 
soon  became  unserviceable.  The  vent  was  so  heated  by 
the  incessant  firing,  that  the  gunners  were  no  longer  able 
to  serve  it«  Ammunition,  too,  was  becoming  scarce. 
What  would  not  those  resolute  artillerymen  have  given 
for  another  gun?  The  firing  ceased;  and  the  British 
musketeers  were  then  left  to  do  their  work  alone.  Little 
could  they  do,  at  such  a  time,  against  the  far-reaching 
A%han  matchlocks.  The  enemy  poured  a  destructive 
fire  into  our  squares,  but  the  muskets  of  our  infantry 
Could  not  reach  the  assailants.  The  two  forces  were  at 
a  distance  fix>m  each  other,  which  gave  all  the  advan- 
tage to  the  Afghans,  who  shot  down  our  men  with 
ease,  and  laughed  at  the  musket-balls,  which  never 
reached  their  position. 

The  nature  of  the  country  was  altogether  unfavor^ 
able  to  the  British  troops.  Between  them  and  the  brow 
of  the  hill  there  was  some  rising  ground,  which  pre- 
vented Shelton  firom  seeing  the  movements  of  the  enemy 
6u  the  side  of  the  hilL    But  firom  the  cantonment  could 


ACTION  AT  BEH-MEBtT.  87 

be  seen  a  party  of  A^hans  crawling  from  the  gorge  up 
the  hill-side,  and  rushing  with  sudden  fury  upon  our 
infimtry  masses.  The  unexpected  attack  seems  to  have 
struck  a  panic  into  the  heart  of  our  troops,  who  turned 
and  fled  along  the  ridge  like  sheep.  Shelton,  who  ever 
in  the  midst  of  danger  stood  with  iron  courage  exposed 
to  the  thickest  fire  of  the  enemy,  vainly  called  upon  his 
men  to  chatge.  Not  a  man  brought  down  his  bayonet 
to  the  position  which  the  English  soldier  bums  to  assume 
when  he  sees  the  enemy  before  him.  The  Afghans  had 
planted  a  standard  upon  the  hill,  only  some  thirty  yards 
fit>m  the  British  squares ;  and  now  an  officer  proclaimed 
a  reward,  equal  in  the  eyes  of  the  common  Sepoy  to  a 
year's  pay,  to  any  one  who  would  advance  and  take  it. 
But  not  a  man  responded  to  the  appeal  A  great  fear 
was  upon  them  alL  The  officers  stood  up  hke  brave 
men ;  and  hurled  stones  at  the  advancing  enemy.*  But 
nothing  seemed  to  infuse  courage  into  our  panic-struck 
troops.  The  enemy,  emboldened  by  success,  advanced 
in  larger  numbers,  and  rushed  upon  our  single  gun. 
Our  cavalry,  called  upon  to  charge,  refused  to  follow  their 
officers.  The  artiller3maien  stood  to  their  gun ;  two  of 
them  fell  dead  beside  it;  a  third  was  deperately  wounded; 
a  fourth,  when  the  enemy  rushed  upon  it,  clung  to  the 
carriage  between  the  wheels,  and  miraculously  escaped 
destruction.  There,  too,  fell  Lieutenant  Laing,  than 
whom  there  was  not  a  braver  soul  in  the  field  on  that 
&tal  day,  waving  his  sword  over  the  gun,  cheering  the 
men  who  were  doing  their  duty,  and  calling  on  the  rest 
to  follow  their  example.  But  the  heroic  courage  of  the 
officers  was  thrown  away  upon  the  men.    The  gun  was 