

unfortanate  action  of  the  23rd  of  A  simultaneous  attack  on  the  vil- 

Kovember.      £yre*s  criticisms    are  lage  and  on  the  hill  was  the  course 

well  known ;  and  their  soundness  has  recommended    by    the    Brigadier  ; 

been  acknowledged  hr  almost  every  but  he  was  overruled    in  council. 

sobeequent  writer.     Major  Hough,  He  went  into  action,  feeling  certain 

however,    sajs,    with    reference   to  that  the  plan  mapped  out  for  him 

Eyre's  assertion  that  Shelton  formed  was  a  wrong  one — and  the  battle 

hs  infantry  into  squares  on  the  Beh-  was  not  fought  the  better  for  the  feel- 

mem  hilL  that  the  Brigadier  assured  ing  that  he  had  been  thwarted  and 

hbn  that  n€f  formed  no  squares  at  all,  opposed. 


92         FBOGBESS  OF  THE  INSUBBECTION. 

pressed  upon  them ;  and  they  had  not  strength  to  bear 
up  against  such  a  burden  of  woe.  It  was  plain  that  no 
use  could  be  made  in  the  field  of  a  force  so  feeble  and 
dispirited.  The  time  for  action  had  passed.  And  so, 
when,  on  the  day  after  this  disastrous  afiair  on  the  Beh- 
meru  hill,  the  enemy  b^an  to  destroy  the  bridge  which 
General  Elphinstone,  a  short  time  before,  had  thrown  over 
the  Caubul  River,  the  military  chiefs  looked  idly  on, 
whilst  this  outrage  was  being  perpetrated  almost  within 
musket-shot  of  our  position. 

There  were  only  two  courses  now  open  to  the  doomed 
force ;  and  the  political  and  military  cliie&  began  again 
to  take  counsel  together.  The  question  of  concentration 
in  the  Balla  Hissar  was  first  revived  and  discussed  be- 
tween them.  John  ConoUy,  at  the  instance  of  the  King, 
wrote  urgently  to  Macnaghten,  recommending  the  mea- 
sure as  the  only  one  that  could  now  secure  the  safety 
and  the  honour  of  the  British  troops.  But  the  mili- 
tary authorities  had  set  their  faces  against  it,  and  the 
Envoy  yielded  his  assent  to  their  opinions  against  his 
own  better  judgment.  After  a  personal  interview,  on  the 
morning  of  the  24th  of  November,  at  which  the  subject 
had  been  discussed  between  them.  General  Elphinstone 
addressed  the  following  letter  to  the  Envoy,  seeking 
Macnaghten's  opinion  and  stating  his  own : 

24th  Nov.,  1841. 

My  deab  Sib  William, 

With  reference  to  our  conversation  this  morning,  I  request 
you  will  let  me  know  what  are  your  views  with  respect  to  moving 
into  the  Balla  Hissar  as  proposed  to  you,  admitting  the  possibility 
of  our  holding  out  there.  Our  getting  into  it  with  our  ammunition 
and  numerous  sick  and  wounded,  amounting  to  near  700,  would 
be  attended  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  if  not  be  altogether  im- 
possible. The  enemy,  no  doubt,  in  the  greatest  force  would 
oppose  us,  which  would  oblige  us  to  cover  the  operation  with  the 