

Other  reports  soon  came  in  from  the  city,  or  started  up 
in  the  Balla  Hissar  itself,  still  more  to  terrify  the  King. 
It  was  allied  that  the  Arabs  in  the  fort*  were  about  to 

*  LieotenaBt  Melvflle  says  they    inhabitants;  bat  I  believe  thb  to  be 
eompoeed  a  Tery  large  portion  of  the    an  error. 

VOL.  H.  O 


82         PROGRESS  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

rise  up  in  a  body^  to  massacre  the  troops  and  to  give  the 
place  over  to  the  rebels.  The  King,  who  never  withheld 
his  beUef  from  any  story  however  improbable,  seized  the 
chief  of  the  Arab  tribe,  and  ordered  that  no  women 
or  children  should  be  suffered  to  leave  the  fort.  But 
women  and  children  of  all  kinds  were  now  clamouring 
for  egress.  Collecting  in  crowds  before  the  Wuzeer's 
house,  they  importuned  him,  with  loud  lamentations,  to 
suffer  them  to  depart.  The  Wuzeer  appealed  to  the 
King,  who,  strictly  prohibiting  the  egress  of  any  Arab 
&milies,  suffered  more  than  seven  hundred  other  women 
and  children  to  pass  out  of  the  fort.  The  English  officers 
thought,  that  if  all  the  Arabs  and  Afghans  had  been  re- 
moved from  the  fort,  and  all  the  provisions  secured  for 
the  use  of  the  fighting  men,  the  whole  force  might  have 
been  saved.* 

The  stores  in  the  Balla  Hissar  had  been  indented 
upon  for  the  use  of  the  cantonment  force,f  and  the 
available  supplies  having  been  thus  reduced,  the  troops 
were  put  upon  half-rations.  The  departure,  however, 
of  Brigadier  Shelton  and  his  escort  had  diminished  the 
number  of  the  fighting  men,  and  now,  under  Major 
Ewart,  they  consisted  of  little  more  than  the  54th  N.I., 
a  portion  of  the  Horse  Artillery  troop  under  Captain 
NicoU,  and  some  details  of  irregular  troops.    At  the 

*  Lieutenant  Melville  sayi :  *'  Had  But  no :  this  waf  not  his  Mijealy^ 

the  more  vigorous  and  energetic  inea«  game;  and  the  withering  hand   of 

sure  been  taken   of  turmng  everv  feebleness  which  seemed  at  this  period 

native  out  of  the  fort,  were  he  Arab  to  ffuide  and  govern  all  our  actions, 

or  Afghan,  the  salvation  of  the  whole  did  not  even  point  out  the  necessity 

force  might  have   been  the  result,  of  its  being  put  into  execution.  There 

Although  all  sorts  of  grain  and  other  would  have  been  no  oppression,  no 

supplies  were  hardly  procurable  in  tyranny  in  so  doine,  as  the  price  of 

the  shops  of  the  bazaar,  yet  it  was  every  grain  would  nave  been  puno« 

known  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  pri-  tualjy  paid,  and   the  Afghans  and , 

vate  dwelling-houses,  of  which  latter  Arabs  In  the  fort  having  friends  liyinff 

there  were  above  a  thousand  in  the  in  the  city  would  have  been  received 

fort,  had  each  of  them  a  four  or  six  by  them  with  open  arms.*' 
months'  supply  stored  in  their  granary.        f  To  no  great  extent,  I  believe. 