

For  now  was  seen  again  that  spectacle  which  had 
before  struck  terror  into  our  ranks  and  scattered  our 
fighting  men  like  sheep.  A  party  of  the  enemy,  headed 
1^  a  band  of  fiirious  Ghazees,  emerged  firom  the  gorge, 
and  crawling  up  the  hill  suddenly  burst  upon  our  waver- 
ing battalions.  The  British  troops  had  been  losing  heart 
b^ore  this;  and  now  it  needed  little  to  extinguish  the 
last  remaining  spark  of  courage  that  warmed  them.  At 
this  inauspicious  moment,  Shelton,  who  had  been  ever  in 
the  thickest  of  the  fire,  and  who  escaped  by  very  miracle 
the  balk  which  flew  about  the  one-armed  veteran,  and 


90  FBOGBESS  OF  THB  mSXTBBECTION. 

Struck  him  five  times  with  no  eflfect,*  fell  back  a  few 
paces  to  order  some  more  men  to  the  front  Seeing 
the  back  of  their  commander  turned  towards  the  enemy, 
our  front-rank  men  gave  way  ;f  and,  in  a  minute,  in&ntry 
and  cavahy  were  flying  precipitately  down  the  slope  g£ 
the  inll.  The  A%han  horse,  seiadng  the  opportunity, 
dashed  upon  our  retreating  force ;  and  presently  friend 
and  foe  were  mixed  up  in  inextricable  confusion.  The 
artillerymen  alone  were  true  to  themselves  and  their 
country.  Thinking  only  of  the  safety  of  their  guu,  they 
dashed  down  the  steep  descent  and  drove  into  the  very 
midst  of  the  A%han  horsemen.};  But  they  could  not 
resist  the  multitudes  that  closed  around  them ;  and  the 
gun,  so  nobly  served  and  so  nobly  protected,  fell  a 
second  time  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

The  rout  of  the  British  force  was  complete.§  In  one 
confused  mass  of  infantry  and  cavalry  —  of  European 
and  native  soldiers — they  fled  to  the  cantonment  walls. 
Elphinstone,  who  had  watched  the  conflict  from  the 
ramparts,  went  out,  infirm  as  he  was,  and  strove,  with 
all  the  energy  of  which,  in  his  enfeebled  state,  he  was 
master,  to  rally  the  fugitives.  But  they  had  lost  them- 
selves past  recovery ;  they  had  forgotten  that  they  were 
British  soldiers.  The  whole  force  was  now  at  the  mercy 
of  the  Afghans.  Had  they  swept  on,  the  cantonments 
must  have  fallen  before  them.     The  enemy  were  so 

*  "  I  stood  by  till  my  own  clotheii  %  "As  before,"  says  Captain  John- 
were  riddled,  havinjr  been  struck  hr  son,  "the  artillerymen  were  the  last 
no  less  than  five  baUs,  none  of  which  to  leave ;  and  it  was  a  fflorious  sight 
did  much  harm ;  one  spent  ball  hit  to  see  these  brave  men  dashing  down 
me  on  the  head  and  nearly  knocked  the  steep  descent  at  the  most  nirioui 
me  down ;  another  made  my  arm  a  rate,  in  the  midst  of  thousands  of  the 
little  stiff." — IBrigadierJSJieUon^s  Nar'  enemy's  cavalr/,  regardless  of  every- 
rative:  MS.  Recardt.^  thingbut  the  safety  of  their  gun." 