

Mohamed  Meerza  Khan  has  not  yet  come  near  me.     When 
he  does,  I  shall  be  glad  to  advance  him  6000  rupees  out  of  the 


106  PBOGBESS  OP  NEGOTIATION. 

50^000  whioh  ii  to  be  given  to  him  for  Ehidmut  (service). ...  I 
had  another  overture  this  morning  from  Zemaun  Khan's  party, 
offering  us  a  safe  retreat  to  Peshawur;  and  they  said  that  Ehazi 
Shereen  was  with  them — the  party  being  Jewan  Khan,  Jubbar 
Khan,  Oosman  Khan,  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  Ameen-oollah 
Khan,  and  Khan  Shereen  Khan.  I  suspect,  from  the  insertion  of 
the  name  of  the  last  mentioned,  that  the  whole  thin||i8  a  £sibrica- 
tion.  Let  me  know  your  opinion  on  this  point.  I  replied  to  their 
overture  by  saying  that  I  would  not  now  do  anything  without  the 
consent  of  his  Majesty.    •    ♦    ♦  Yours,  &c.  &c., 

W.  H.  M* 

In  addition  to  this  written  declaration,  we  have  the 
statement  of  Captain  Skinner,  to  the  effect  that,  when 
at  a  subsequent  period  the  murder  of  Ameen-oollah  was 
suggested  to  him  by  Akbar  Khan,  the  Envoy  shrank 
with  abhorrence  and  disgust  from  the  proposal,  '^  assur- 
ing the  ambassadors  that,  as  a  British  frmctionary,  no- 
thing would  induce  him  to  pay  a  price  for  blood."f 

Against  the  specific  written  declaration  of  the  Envoy 
himself  that  it  was  iiever  his  object  to  encourage  assas- 
sination, coupled  with  the  evidence  of  Captain  Skinner, 
to  the  effect  that  he  revolted  at  the  very  suggestion,  there 
is  nothing  but  bare  presumption  to  be  opposed.  If  pre- 
sumption is  to  carry  weight  with  it,  in  so  grave  a  discus- 
sion as  this,  it  may  fairly  be  presumed  that  a  man  of  a 
nature  so  humane,  and  of  instincts  so  honourable,  would 
not  have  encouraged  or  sanctioned  the  foul  trade  of 
secret  murder,  and  peremptorily  denied  his  approval  of 
measures  which  he  had  himself  originated  or  supported. 
But,  if  he  had  been  utterly  destitute  both  of  humanity 
and  truth,  it  would  still  be  incredible  that,  having  en- 

♦    Unpublished   Correspondence    of  kenzie  to  Questions  put  by  General 

Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten.     Though  the  PoUock :    MS.    Records.      Captain 

portions  omitted  are  of  no  great  hjs<  Skinner  was  the  only  British  officer 

torical  importance,  I  have  given  the  who  attended   Macnaghten  at  this 

letter  entire  in  the  Appendix,  that  conference  on  the  2find  December, 

no  suspicion  might  attach  to  the  inte-  Captain  MadLenflie  says  that  he  had 

grity  of  the  document.  the  assurance  from  Captain  Skinner 

t  Answers  of  Captain  Colin  MaC'  himself. 


DEATHS  OF  MEEB  MUSJEDEE  AND  ABDOOLLAH  KHAN.    107 

couraged  the  assassination  of  the  chiefs,  he  should 
have  boldly  denied  it  to  the  veiy  man  whom,  directly 
or  indirectly,  he  had  employed  to  hire  the  assassins.* 