

30th,  9  P.M. — Your  messenger  has  just  arrived.  I  do  not  like 
to  give  50,000  rupees  without  some  security.  Our  prospects  are, 
I  think,  brightening,  and  if  you  can  assist  us  in  the  way  of 
supplies,  we  have  nothing  to  fear.  *  •  •  •  i  would  give 
any  money  to  Humza  and  the  Ghilzyes  if  I  had  any  security 
that  they  would  be  our  friends,  give  us  supplies,  and  keep 
open  the  communications.  W.  H.  M. 

It  will  be  gathered  from  these  letters,  that,  before  the 
end  of  November,  Abdoollah  Khan  and  Meer  Musjedee 
had  both  been  removed,  by  death,  from  the  scene  of 
their  recent  triumphs.  General  Elphinstone  speaks  of 
the  death  of  the  former ;  Sir  William  Macnaghten  of  the 
death  of  the  latter.  In  the  action  of  the  23rd  of  No- 
vember, Abdoollah  Khan  had  been  carried  wounded 
from  the  field  of  battle;  but  whether  a  shrapnel  shot 
from  Sbelton's  one  gun,  or  a  ball  from  an  A%han  jezail, 
struck  down  the  truculent  chief,  is  a  point  of  history 
which  must  ever  remain,  as  now,  enveloped  in  obscurity 
and  doubt.  The  story  runs,  that  one  of  the  men  who  had 
been  set  upon  the  track  of  the  doomed  chiefs,  declared 
that  he  shot  down  his  victim  from  behind  a  wall ;  and 
promised  that  poison  should  complete  the  work  which 


104  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

the  bullet  had  but  partially  eflfected.  AbdooUah  Khan 
died  before  a  week  had  expired;*  and  it  is  said  that 
Abdool  Aziz  claimed  the  price  of  blood.  But  Mohun 
Lai  did  not  feel  assured  that  either  the  traitorous  bullet 
or  the  poison  of  the  claimant  had  done  the  work  of 
death ;  and  the  reward  was  refiised  on  the  plea  tbat  it 
had  been  oflfered  for  the  heads  of  the  chiefs,  and  the 
head  of  AbdooUah  Khan  had  not  been  brought  to  him. 

How  Meer  Musjedee  died  is  not  very  clearly  known.f 
His  disappearance  firom  the  scene  on  which  he  had 
acted  so  conspicuous  a  part,  was  sudden  and  unexpected. 
A  man  named  Mahomed  Oollah  swore  that  he  had  suf- 
focated the  chief  in  his  sleep,  and  claimed  the  reward 
of  his  service.  But  the  reward,  it  is  said,  was  refused 
upon  the  same  plea  as  was  urged  in  the  other  case.  The 
assassins,  disappointed  of  their  blood-money,  were  not 
likely  to  undertake  any  future  service  of  the  same  hazard- 
ous kind,  or  to  maintain  a  very  discreet  silence  about 
the  past.  If  they  were  employed  upon  such  service,  it 
is  strange  that  their  silence  was  not  secured  by  a  scru- 
pulous fulfilment  of  the  engagement  by  which  their  su- 
borners had  placed  their  own  credit  and  safety  in  their 
hands.  It  was  a  perilous  game,  indeed,  to  invite  dis- 
closures by  exciting  the  anger  and  hostility  of  the  agents 
employed  in  this  miserable  work. 