

There  is  much  obscurity  still  enveloping  all  this  por- 
tion of  the  history  of  the  war  in  Afghanistan.    It  is  cer- 

*  It  was  generallj  belieyed  in  can-        f  It  was  believed  by  the  British 

tonments  thiat  he  had  died  from  the  that  he  had  been  poisoned.    Lady 

efiects  of  his  wounds.     Lady  Sale  Sale  says :  **  Meer  Musjedee  is  dead, 

sajrs :  *|  AbdooUah  Ehan*s  death  has,  Some  say    he  has  been  poisoned ; 

it  is  said,  created  some  confusion  in  others,  that  he  died  in  consequence  of 

the  city.   Whilst  still  living  a  report  the  wounds  received  last  year  in  the 

was  spread  of  his  decease;  and,  like  Kohistan.    A  number  of  this  chiefs 

Alexander,  he  mounted  his  horse  and  followers  have  gone  off  with  the  body 

showed  himself  to  his  followers ;  but  to  the  Kohistan,  there  to  attend  his 

the  exertion  was  too  great  for  him,  funeral  obsequies." 
sod  ho  shortly  afler  expired." 


DEATHS  OF  HEEB  MUSJEDEE  AND  ABDOOLLAH  KHAN.    105 

tain  that,  at  the  end  of  November,  Meer  Mugedee  and 
AbdooUah  Khan  died  under  circumstances  which  have 
been  iregarded,  and  not  unreasonably,  as  suspicious.  It 
is  scarcely  less  certain  that  Lieutenant  John  Conolly,  the 
cousin  and  assistant  of  the  Envoy,  instigated  Mohun  Lai 
to  offer  rwards  for  the  heads  of  certain  of  the  insur- 
gent chieis,  and  that  Meer  Mugedee  and  AbdooUah 
Khan  were  especially  marked  as  the  first  victims.  John 
Conolly  was  at  this  time  with  Shah  Soojah  in  the  Balla 
Hissar,  and  Mohun  Lai  was  in  the  house  of  the  Kuzzil- 
bash  chief.  The  Envoy  was  in  cantonments.  To  what 
extent  John  Conolly  acted  under  Macnaghten's  instruc- 
tions— whether  he  acted  on  his  own  authority,  or  was 
directed  by  Shah  Soojah,  is  not  very  clearly  known. 
That  Conolly  was  in  constant  communication  with  the 
Envoy  we  have  the  authority  of  the  latter  for  believing. 
"Throughout  the  rebellion,"  he  wrote,  in  his  oflScial 
report,  "  I  was  in  constant  communication  with  the 
Shah  through  my  assistant,  Lieutenant  J.  B.  Conolly, 
who  was  in  attendance  on  his  Majesty  in  the  Balla 
Hissar."  It  has  been  questioned,  therefore,  whether 
Conolly,  being  at  this  time  in  constant  communication 
with  the  Envoy,  was  Ukely,  in  a  matter  of  so  much  re- 
sponsibility, to  have  acted  without  instructions  from  his 
chief.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  Macnaghten's 
specific  declaration  in  the  following  letter  that  it  was 
never  his  object  to  encourage  the  assassination  of  the 
insurgents: 

December  1, 1841. 

Deab  Sib, 

I  am  sorry  to  find  from  your  letter  of  last  night  that 
you  should  have  supposed  it  was  ever  my  object  to  encourage 
assassination.  'Ihe  rebels  are  very  wicked  men^  but  we  must  not 
take  unlawful  means  to  destroy  them. 