

Whilst  the  A%hans,  with  noisy  demonstrations  of 
delight,  were  welcoming  the  appearance  of  Akbar  Ehan, 
the  British  were  slow  to  believe  that  his  advent  would 
deepen  the  embarrassments  of  their  position.    Early  in 
November,  Mohun  Lai  had  suggested  to  Macnaghten  the 
expediency  of  endeavouring  to  corrupt  the  Sirdar  before 
his  advance  upon  the  capital;  but  the  Envoy  had  re- 
ceived slightingly  the  proposal,  and  no  overtures  had 
been  made  to  the  son  of   Dost  Mahomed  before  his 
arrival  at  the  capital.    It  was  believed  that  there  was 
sufficient  security  for  his  forbearance  in  the  fact  that  his 
father  and  his  brothers  were  prisoners  in  our  hands ;  and 
in  the  game  of  negotiation,  which  was  now  to  be  carried 
on,  it  was  calculated  that  the  intervention  of  the  Sirdar 
would  &cilitate  rather  than  encumber  our  arrangements 
for  the  honourable  evacuation  of  Afghanistan,  and  our 
safe  return  to  the  provinces  wtich,  in  an  evil  hour,  we 
had  been  so  unhappily  tempted  to  quit. 
Akbar  Khan  appeared  at  Caubul ;  but  he  did  not  at 

h2 


100  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

once  assume  the  direction  of  affairs.  The  Newab  Ma- 
homed Zemaun  Khan,  a  cousin  of  the  late  Caubul  chie^ 
had  been  proclaimed  King  by  the  insurgents.  All  orders 
were  sent  forth  in  his  name;  and  the  "fatiha"  was  read 
for  him  in  the  mosques.  He  was  a  man  of  a  humane 
and  honourable  nature,  polished  manners,  and  affitble 
address.  His  nephew,  Osman  Khan,  who  is  described 
by  the  Envoy  as  "  the  most  moderate  and  sensible  man** 
of  the  insurgent  party,  was  now  employed  to  negotiate 
with  the  British  minister,  and  several  times  passed,  on 
this  errand,  between  the  cantonment  and  the  city.  But 
the  terms  stiU  dictated  by  the  enemy  were  such  as  Mao- 
naghten  could  not  honourably  accept.  Day  followed 
day ;  and  nothing  effectual  was  done  either  in  counsel  or 
on  the  field.  The  enemy  appeared  on  the  hills  com- 
manding cantonments  and  in  the  village  of  Beh-meru, 
now  deserted  and  destroyed ;  and  the  guns  in  the  British 
cantonments  were  playing  all  day  long  upon  these  points. 
But  such  distant  interchanges  produced  no  result;  and 
in  the  mean  while  our  provisions  were  rapidly  dwindling 
down.  Again  starvation  stared  the  garrison  in  the  face. 
With  laudable  zeal  and  activity  the  commissariat  officers 
exerted  themselves  to  obtain  grain  from  the  surrounding 
coimtry;  but  with  equal  zeal  and  activity  the  enemy 
were  striving  to  frustrate  their  efforts.  Akbar  Khan 
himself  had  not  been  many  days  at  Caubul  before  he 
began  to  see  that  to  defeat  our  commissariat  officers  was 
to  overcome  our  unhappy  force.  Threatening  death  to 
all  who  might  be  detected  in  supplying  our  troops  with 
any  description  of  food,  he  soon  baffled  the  best  efforts  of 
Boyd  and  Johnson,*  and  again  brought  the  question  of 
capitulation  to  a  simple  question  of  supplies. 