


102  PROGBESS  OP  NEGOTIATION. 

failed  with  his  promised  supply  of  gmn.  I  ako  heai  that  Ehoja 
"^eev  has  gone  away.  Is  this  the  case?  If  so,  our  position  is 
l)ecoming  more  critical  on  the  score  of  provisions.  What  effect 
do  you  think  the  death  of  Abdoollah  KhaQ,  if  true,  wiU  have  on 
our  prospects?  I  shall  send  into  the  Balla  Hissar  to-morrow 
morning  some  things  for  the  men,  and  ammunition;  but  our 
terrible  want  there  is  fuel.  Major  Ewart  reports  some  men  there 
to  have  died  of  cold,  from  which  they  are  suffering  much,  and 
how  that  is  to  be  remedied  I  don't  see,  as  the  trees  near  could 
afford,  if  obtained,  but  little  relief,  for  I  don't  recollect  many  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  city,  which  I  hear  is  supplied  with 
trees  (firewood)  from  Tezeen.  In  short,  between  ourselves,  J  see 
nothing  we  can  do  but  by  negotiation,  if  such  be  offered,  and 
which  for  the  many  difficulties  we  are  surrounded  with,  I  hope 
may  be  the  case.  The  camp-followers  are  bringing  in  wood  from 
the  village.    There  is  nothing  else  to  be  had,  I  hear. 

Yours, 

W.  K.  E. 

Very  different  from  the  tone  of  this  desponding  letter 
was  the  spirit  which  at  this  time  animated  the  communi- 
cations of  the  Envoy  to  Mohun  Lai.  But  there  are 
other  points  besides  the  sanguine  temperament  of  Mac- 
naghten  which  these  letters  serve  to  illustrate: 

November  26,  1841.    4  p.m. 

My  p£ab  Sib, 

I  have  just  now  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  your  notes 
of  yesterday  and  this  morning.  Tell  our  friends  that  they  need  be 
under  no  alarm;  that  J.  should  be  in  a  hurry  to  trust  what  was 
firranged  by  Sultan  Mahomed  Khan  was  all  nonsense,  because  I 
know  that  he  is  not  a  man  to  keep  his  word  in  anything.  The 
intelligence  you  have  sent  me  is  very  encouraging,  and  I  hope  the 
nifac  among  the  rebels  will  increase.  Meer  Musjedee's  death  will 
probably  cause  the  dispersion  of  the  rebels  who  have  come  from 
Nijrow.  Humza  Khan  never  sent  any  relatives  of  the  Ghilzye 
chie^  to  me.  Yours, 

W.  H.  M. 

T^ll  everybody  that  I  have  no  faith  in  Sultan  Mahomed  Khan, 
and  that  I  only  wished  to  try  the  sincerity  of  his  employers. 


COBBESPONDENCE  WITH  MOHUN  LAL.  103 

November  29.    9  P,u, 
Mr  DEAB  SlB| 

I  enclose  you  a  note  from  Captain  Johnson.  We  are  well 
off  for  everjtliing  but  supplies,  and,  Inshalla,  we  shall  not  be 
badly  off  for  them.  If  you  can  get  any  person  to  undertake  to 
supply  the  grain,  it  should  be  put  down  in  the  ground  lately  occu- 
pied by  Mr.  Deane's  fort.  Pray  do  your  utmost  to  effect  this. 
•  *  *  •  The  enemy  appeared  to-day  in  considerable  numbers, 
but  they  did  nothing,  and  I  am  sure  they  will  never  venture  to 
attack  our  cantonment.  If  we  had  only  provisions,  which,  with 
due  exertions  ought  to  be  obtained,  we  should  be  able  to  defy  the 
whole  of  A%hanistan  for  any  period.  I  am  very  sorry  that  the 
deputation  from  Humza  did  not  make  their  appearance  last  night, 
and  I  am  anxiously  expecting  accounts  from  you  showing  why 
they  did  not  do  so.    *     *    *     *  « 