

On  a  question  so  grave  and  solemn  as  this,  it  is  to  be 
lamented  that  the  judgment  of  the  historian,  after  all  con- 
flicting evidenoe  has  been  weighed  and  sifted,  should  be 
merely  of  an  inferential  character.  The  inference  is,  that 
whilst  not  wholly  ignorant  of  the  offers  of  head-money, 
which  John  Conolly,  living  with,  and  probably  acting 
under  the  directions  of  Shah  Soojah,  was  putting  forth, 
through  the  agency  of  Mohun  Lai,  the  Envoy  neither 
suggested,  nor  actively  encouraged,  these  ^  bloody  in- 
structions," on  which  such  severe  comments  have  been 
passed.  It  has  been  seen  that  he  was  prepared  to  offer 
rewards  in  the  name  of  the  King,  for  the  apprehension  of 
the  principal  rebels ;  and  in  the  heat  and  excitement  of 
active  warfare,  it  is  hardly  probable  that,  if  these  men  had 
been  apprehended,  their  offences  would  have  been  sub* 
jected  to  a  fair  and  impartial  judicial  inquiry.  Mac- 
naghten,  indeed,  stated  that  he  would  recommend  his 
Majesty  to  ^^  execute  them,"  Such  passive  complicity  as 
this,  when  all  the  circumstances  by  which  Macnaghten 
was  environed  are  fairly  estimated,  cannot  be  severely 
censured.  We  can  only  arrive  at  a  just  decision,  in  a 
case  of  80  unprecedented  a  character  as  this,  by  weighing 
well  all  the  difficulties  which  surrounded,  all  the  responsi- 
bilities that  wieghed  upon,  and  all  the  temptations  that 

*  The  charge  of  participation  in  is  no  evidence  before  the  public,  and  1 

these  difcreditable  traniactiona  is  put  have  been  unable  to  discover  any  in 

forth,  as  already  stated,  in  the  CtUcutta  the  course  of  my  researches,  to  show 

Review.    It  is,  of  course,  the  state-  that   Macnaghten  was  implicated  in 

nent  of  an  anonymous  writer.    But  the  transactions  to  which  those  letters 

anonyiDOUS  writers  are  not  alwavs  un-  refer.     On  the  other  band,  there  is, 

known  writers ;  and  the  article  is  sup-  as  I  have  shown,  such  evidence  to 

posed  to  have  emanated  from  one  to  acquit  him  of  all  complicity  in  these 

whom  peculiar  sources  of  information  proceedings,  as  can  only  be  set  aside 

were  open.    The  antecedent  position  on  the  presumption  that  the  Envoy 

of  the  supposed  writer  forbids  us  to  was  at  once  the  most  unscrupulous 

question  the  genuineness  of  the  letters  of  liars,  and  the  most  egregious  of 

attributed  to  John  Conolly ;  but  there  fools. 


108  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

beset  the  Envoy.  If  so  surrounded,  so  weighed  upon,  so 
beset,  he  did  not  actively  interfere  to  arrest  the  ques- 
tionable measures  of  others,  which  seemed  to  offer  some 
means  of  escape  from  the  perils  which  hemmed  in  the 
British  army — an  army  fearfully  sacrificed  by  the  feeble- 
ness of  the  military  chiefs — I  confess  that  I  cannot  see 
that  he  yielded  more  readily  to  temptation  than  other 
men  of  high  honour  would  have  done,  begirt  with  such 
fiery  trial. 