

But  it  is  a  relief  to  turn  aside  from  the  consideration  of 
such  a  question,  even  to  the  record  of  the  imbecility  of  our 
military  leaders  and  the  sufferings  of  our  unhappy  troops. 
— On  the  Ist  of  December  there  were  supplies  for  eight 
days'  diminished  consumption  in  store.  The  camp-fol- 
lowers were  receiving  half  a  pound  of  barley  a  day. 
The  cattle  were  without  provender.  It  was  necessary 
to  keep  them  from  absolute  starvation  by  supplying 
them  with  the  twigs,  the  lighter  branches,  and  the  bark 
of  trees.  Some  small  quantities  of  wheat  were  taken 
from  the  troops  to  feed  the  cattle  used  in  the  guns.  In 
this  conjuncture,  Elphinstone,  who  met  every  difficulty 
more  than  half  way,  and  who  was  not  likely,  therefore, 
to  be  silent  at  such  a  time  as  this,  addressed  the  follow- 
ing letter  to  the  Envoy : 

1st  December. 

My  dear  Sir  William, 

We  have  already  arrived,  I  regret  to  say,  at  one  of  our 
difficulties.  Boosa  for  the  cattle  none  can  be  had,  and  we  have 
been  obliged  to-day  to  give  the  mountain-train  yaboos  some  wheat 
to  keep  them  alive.  I  hope,  therefore,  your  negotiation  may  pros- 
per, as  circumstances  are  becoming  extremely  critical;  little  has 
been  done  in  the  way  of  purchase  this  morning.  I  don't  wish  to 
croak,  but  think  it  right  that  you  should  be  kept  constantly  in- 
formed of  tlie  real  state  of  things. 

Yours, 

W.  K.E. 
Sixty-five  maunds  is  all  that  has  been  got  in  to-day;  twelve 

maundfl  yesterday. 


FAILURE  OF  PROVISIONS.  109 

On  the  same  day,  Captain  Johnson  impressed  upon 
the  Envoy  that  there  was  no  time  to  be  lost — that  if  a 
retreat  on  Jellalabad  were  to  be  determined  upon,  it 
should  be  determined  upon  at  once,  as  it  would  be 
necessary  to  take  provisions  for  five  days  with  the  re- 
treating force.  The  Envoy  assented  to  this;  but,  ever 
eager  to  clutch  at  any  hope,  however  slender,  of  defer- 
ring the  dreadful  day  of  surrender,  he  added,  "  Let  us 
wait  two  days  longer — something  may  turn  up." 

The  military  authorities  continued  to  press  upon  the 
Envoy,  with  oft-repeated  urgent  recommendations,  for  a 
speedy  conclusion  of  a  treaty  with  the  enemy,  enabling 
the  British  troops  in  safety  to  evacuate  the  country.  But 
still  the  Envoy  clung  to  the  hope  that  something  might 
be  evolved  in  our  favour ;  and  delayed,  in  spite  of  their 
importunities  from  day  to  day,  the  dreadful  hour  of  sur- 
render. On  the  5  th  of  December  the  General  wrote  the 
following  letter  to  the  Envoy : 

5th  December. 

Ht  dear  Sir  William, 

It  becomes  my  duty  to  inform  you  that  our  stock  of  pro- 
viaons  is  reduced  to  nine  days,  on  half-rations;  it  therefore  be- 
comes imperative  upon  us  to  consider  what  can  be  done.  We 
have,  for  the  last  few  days,  been  disappointed  in  our  expectation 
of  getting  any,  and  our  hopes  of  success  in  doing  this  seem  every 
day  less.  The  objections  to  retreat  on  the  Balla  Hissar  I  have 
already  stated;  our  wants  there  might  be  the  same,  with  the 
additional  one  of  fuel,  and  part  of  our  ordnance  for  protection. 
Betreat  without  terms  I  think  with  you  almost  impossible,  and 
that  few  would  reach  Jellalabad.  The  only  alternative  (as  there 
now  seems  little  chance  of  the  Ghilzyes  renewing  the  nego- 
tiation you  were  led  to  expect)  is  to  try  if  terms  can  be  made  in 
any  other  quarter,  if  we  do  not  hear  something  favorable  to- 
morrow. With  provisions  we  could  hold  out,  but  without  them 
I  do  not  see  what  can  be  done,  or  how  we  are  to  avert  starvation. 
It  is  true  the  responsibility  is  great,  and  may  fall  on  us;  but  are 
wc  justified  in  risking  the  safety  of  so  many  people  when  we  can 