

VOL.  II.  H 


98  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

as  their  leader.  He  was  known  to  be  a  man  of  high, 
courage  and  energy;  he  had  approved  himself  a  good 
soldier  in  the  field ;  and  he  was  the  favourite  son  of  the 
old  Barukzye  ruler,  who  a  year  before  had  been  con- 
demned to  pine  away  the  remainder  of  his  life  a  captive 
in  the  provinces  of  Hindostan. 

The  arrival  of  the  Sirdar  was  a  great  event.  Both 
parties  looked  upon  it  as  one  that  must  exercise  a  mighty 
influence  over  the  future  destinies  of  the  war.  The  in- 
surgents, wanting  a  leader,  saw  in  the  son  of  Dost  Ma- 
homed one  around  whom  they  could  rally,  with  confi- 
dence alike  in  his  sincerity  and  his  courage.  He  had 
the  wrongs  of  an  injured  family  to  redress.  He  had  a^ 
kingdom  to  regain.  He  had  been  an  outcast  and  a  fugi- 
tive during  two  years  of  suffering  and  danger,  because  it 
had  pleased  the  British  Government  to  invade  his  father's 
dominions  and  to  expel  the  de  facto  rulers  of  the  coun- 
try ;  and  now  he  saw  opening  out  before  him  a  prospect 
of  recovering  the  lost  supremacy  of  the  Barukzyes,  and 
restoring  his  exiled  father  to  the  Balla  Hissar.  All  the 
circumstances  of  his  past  life  and  his  present  position 
were  such  as  to  secure  his  loyalty  to  the  national  cause. 
His  inner  qualities,  no  less  than  his  outer  environments, 
were  of  a  class  to  rivet  his  hostility  to  the  British.  He 
was  a  man  of  an  eager,  impetuous  nature ;  susceptible  of 
good  and  of  bad  impulses,  but  seldom  otherwise  than 
earnest  and  impulsive.  His  education  had  been  n^- 
lected ;  in  his  youth  he  had  been  unrestrained,  and  now 
self-control — a  virtue  rarely  exercised  by  an  A%han — 
was  wholly  foreign  to  the  character  of  the  man.  He  was, 
indeed,  peculiarly  demonstrative,  and  sudden  in  his  de- 
monstrations, passing  rapidly  from  one  mood  to  another 
— ^blown  about  by  violent  gusts  of  feeling,  bitterly  repent- 
ing to-day  the  excesses  of  yesterday,  and  rushing  into 
new  excesses  to-morrow.     His  was  one  of  those  fiery 


CHABACTER  OF  AKBAR  KHAN.  99 

temperaments — those  bold,  dashing  characters — which, 
in  times  of  popular  commotion,  ever  place  their  possessor 
in  the  fix>nt  rank.  But  in  seasons  of  repose  he  was  one 
of  the  most  joyous  fuid  light-hearted  of  men ;  no  man 
loved  a  joke  better;  no  man  laughed  more  heartily,  or 
seemed  to  look  more  cheerftilly  on  the  sunny  side  of  life. 
They,  who  knew  him  before  the  British  trode  down  the 
Barukz3re8f  spoke  of  him  as  a  good-tempered^  well-mean* 
ing  young  man,  and  little  thought,  when  his  large  dark 
eyes  were  glowing  with  child-like  eagerness,  to  have  the 
full  dimensions  of  his  long  spear  introduced  into  his  por- 
trait; or  his  solid  frame  was  shaking  with  laughter  at 
some  joke  passed  upon  his  imcomely  Meerza^  that  he 
would  soon  become  the  chief  actor  in  one  of  the  bloodiest 
tragedies  that  has  ever  disgraced  the  history  of  the 
world. 