

Then  the  Envoy  sent  them  in  writing  a  statement  of 
the  only  terms  on  which  he  was  prepared  to  treat.  "  I 
proposed  to  them,"  he  wrote,  "  the  only  terms  which,  in 
my  opinion,  could  be  accepted  with  honour;  but  the 
temper  of  the  rebels  may  best  he  understood  when  I 
mention  that  they  returned  me  a  letter  of  defiance  the 
next  morning,  to  the  effect  that  unless  I  consented  to 
surrender  our  arms  and  abandon  his  Majesty  to  his  fate, 
we  must  prepare  for  immediate  hostilities.  To  this  I 
repUed,  that  we  preferred  death  to  dishonour,  and  that 


96         PROGRESS  OP  THE  INSURRECTION. 

it  would  remain  with  a  higher  power  to  decide  be- 
tween us."* 

Thus  ended  the  first  attempt  to  secure,  by  negotiation 
with  the  enemy,  the  safety  of  our  discom^ted  troops. 
Whilst  this  movement  was  m  progress  a  strange  sight 
might  have  been  seen  on  the  ramparts  of  the  British 
cantonment.  Over  those  low  walls,  misnamed  defences, 
the  European  soldiers  were  conversing  with  their  Afghan 
enemies.  The  A%hans,  armed  to  the  teeth,  came  clus- 
tering round  the  cantonments ;  many  of  our  soldiers 
went  out  unarmed  amongst  them,  and  were  to  be  seen 
familiarly  shaking  hands  with  those  whom  a  day  before 
they  had  met  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  A%hans  were 
giving  vegetables  f  to  the  men  of  the  44th  Regiment, 
and  declaring  that  everything  had  been  amicably  settled 
between  the  two  contending  hosts. 

*  Unfinished  Report  of  Sir  W,  H.  leayes  mklit  conceal  bottles  of  spirit, 

Macnaghten  to  the  Supreme  Oovem"  wherewitn  it  was  desired  to  intozi* 

ment—found  in  his  wrUing'desk  afier  cate  the  garrison  prcTious  to  an  at- 

Ms  death :  MS.  Records.  tack  on  cantonment ;  but  they  proyed 

t  Principally  cabbages.     It  was  on  examination  to  be  yery  Wmless 

apprehended  by  some  wat  the  broad  cabbages  after  all. 


ABBIVAL  OF  AKBAB  KHAN.  97 


CHAPTER  VI. 

[NoTember — December:  1841.] 

Fh)gre88  of  Negotiation — ^Arrival  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan — Hia  Charao 
ter— N^tiations  continued— Deaths  of  Meer  Moajedee  and  AbdooUah 
Khan^-fievival  of  N^otiationa— The  Draft  Treaty. 

A  NEW  actor  now  appeared  upon  the  stage.  The  advent 
of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  had  been  for  some  time  ex- 
pected. He  had  arrived  from  Toorkistan  early  in  October, 
and  was  known  to  have  been  hovering  about  Bameean,  and 
seemingly  watching  the  progress  of  events  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  Afghan  capital.  How  far  he  may  have 
sown  the  seeds  of  insurrection  among  the  Ghilzyes  is  not 
very  clearly  known,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  influence 
he  exercised  at  that  time  was  rather  of  a  passive  than  an 
active  kind.  That  his  presence  on  the  borders  of  A%han- 
istan  encouraged  his  countrymen  in  their  career  of  hosti- 
lity is  not  to  be  doubted ;  but  there  is  little  or  no  evi- 
dence to  connect  him  more  palpably  with  the  earlier 
movements  of  the  insurrectionary  war.  Whatever  may 
have  been  his  participation  in  the  events  of  October  and 
November,  his  appearance  at  the  capital  was  now  hailed 
by  the  insurgents  with  every  demonstration  of  delight. 
Salutes  were  fired  in  honour  of  his  arrival,  and  the  chiefs 
waited  upon  him  as  upon  one  henceforth  to  be  recognised 