

*  *|  Ut  December^  1841.— For  the  is  the  chief  of  the  Beh-meru  district. 

last  six  days  have  been  daily  up  be-  Notwithstanding  my  ofiera  of  the  mofli 

fore  gun-mre,  and  at  the  fort  of  Khoja  handsome  rewards  to  hhn,  I  cannot 

Mcer  Mahomed,  in  the  hope  of  pro-  now  prevail  upon  him  or  his  people 

curing  some  grain  from  them.    He  to  give  further  aid.     On  going  to  nit 


CONFIDENCE  OF  THE  ENVOY.  101 

But  Still  sanguine  and  confident,  whilst  the  clouds  were 
gathering  more  and  more  thickly  around  him,  Mac- 
naghten  saw  the  skies  brightening  over-head,  and  never 
doubted  that  before  long  the  storm  would  roll  itself 
away.  The  letters  which  he  wrote  at  this  time  present 
a  remarkable  contrast  to  those  written  by  General  El- 
phinstone.  Whilst  the  General  was  looking  around  him 
everywhere  for  whatever  could  be  made  to  swell  the 
mountain  of  difficulty  and  danger  that  he  kept  so  steadily 
before  him,  the  Envoy  was  constantly  arraying  in  the  fore- 
ground every  circumstance  that  could  in  any  way  con- 
tribute towards  the  chance  of  ultimate  success.  Whilst 
the  General  was  discovering  that  "  our  position  was 
becoming  more  and  more  critical,"  the  Envoy  was  per- 
ceiving that  "  our  prospects  were  brightening,"  and 
talking  about  "  defjdng  the  whole  of  Afghanistan."  On 
the  28th  of  November,  General  Elphinstone  wrote  thus 
to  Sir  William  Macnaghten : 

NoTember  28,  1841. 

My  dear  Sir  William, 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  the  persons  expected  last  night  did  not 
come  to  Captain  Trevor,   and  that  the  Hindoo  merchant  has 

fort  thifl  morning  (about  700  yards  that  he  was  glad  I  had  spoken  to  him 
north  of  cantonments^  I  found  merely  on  the  subject,  as  he  felt  convinced 
tiro  or  three  people  mside,  who  told  that,  although  we  might  possibly  con- 
me  that  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  had  tinue  to  go  on  from  hand  to  mouth 
jesterday  come  with  a  party  and  for  a  few  days  longer,  it  was  impos- 
destroyed  every  house  m  it,  and  sible  we  could  exist  throughout  the 
threatened  death  to  the  Khoja  (who  winter ;  *  but,^  said  he,  *  let  us  wait 
had  fled)  and  his  family  in  the  event  two  days  longer,  as  something  may 
of  his  giving  us  further  aid.  Reported  turn  up/  In  the  mean  time,  our 
this  to  the  Envoy,  and  told  Sir  cattle  nave  been  starving  for  some 
WHliam  of  our  having  but  eight  time  past ;  not  a  blade  of  grass,  nor  a 
days*  supply  in  store,  and  that  all  particle  of  bJioosaTi^  nor  grain  pro- 
hopes  of  procuring  more  were  at  an  curable.  The  barley  in  store  is  served 
end.  I  took  the  liberty  of  entreating  out  as  provisions  to  the  camp-fol- 
that  some  decision  might  be  come  to  lowers,  who  set  a  quarter  of  a  seer 
as  to  our  ultimate  fate ;  that  but  Oiree  (half  a  pound^  for  their  daily  food, 
days  more  remained  to  consider  of  it ;  Our  cattle  are  subsisted  on  the  twigs, 
as  in  the  event  of  our  retreat  to  Jel-  branches,  and  bark  of  trees — scarcely 
Udabad  being  determined  on,  we  must  an  animal  fit  to  carry  a  load.'' — 
carry  with  Msfive  out  of  the  eight  days'  [Cay tain  Johnson's  Journal ;  MS.  Re 
sttppliesnowinthegodown.  Hcrcplied  cords.'] 