

*  There  is  some  obscurity  with  re-  neral  were  again  in  consultation  two 

Bpect  to  the  date  of  this  letter,  but  I  days  afterwards  on  the  same  subject 

believe  I  am  right  in  stating  that  it  of  an  attack  upon  the  grain  villages,  it 

was  written  on  the  6th  of  December,  may  have  been  written  on  the  8th. 
As,  however,  the  Envoy  and  the  Gc- 


FURTHER  HUMILIATION.  113 

sideied  as  our  total  defeat;  and,  until  reinforced,  as  we  must 
sacrifice  nearly  all  our  cattle,  we  would  not  have  the  power  of 
moving,  for,  without  the  means  of  transport,  we  would  not  go. 

The  next  consideration  is,  whether  our  being  annihilated  here, 
or  entering  into  honourable  terms,  would  have  the  worst  effect 
for  our  government.  The  responsibility  is  great  for  you  and  I; 
and  (if  we  do  not  hear  of  the  force  from  Candahar  to-niorrow)  it 
only  remains  for  us  to  consider  whether  we  shall  incur  the  re- 
spondbility,  or  risk  the  loss  of  this  force;  for,  under  the  most 
fiivorablc  view  we  can  take,  the  risk  is  great.  Looking  practi- 
cally at  the  obstacles  we  have,  they  are  in  reality  very  difficult  to 
surmount. 

I  submit  all  this  for  your  consideration,  and  have  sent  Major 
Thain  with  this  to  you. 

Yours,  &c., 

W.  K.  E. 

We  must  not  think  of  treating,  after  any  attempt  either  to  re- 
treat, or  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  or  if  we  fail  in  any  attempt.  We 
are  now  comparatively  entire;  a  loss  or  failure  would  increase  our 
destitution,  and  the  terms  will,  of  course,  be  worse.  We  could 
not  expect  anything  else. 

The  General  knew  that  his  troops  were  not  to  be  trusted. 
The  Envoy  knew  this  equally  well }  but,  more  jealous  of 
the  honour  of  his  country,  more  hopeful  and  more  coura- 
geous, he  was  unwilling  to  fling  away  a  single  chance 
which  the  wheel  of  time  might  throw  up  in  his  favour. 
In  that  great  chapter  of  accidents,  however,  to  which  he 
80  bravely  turned,  were  written  down  only  further  disasters 
and  degradations.  On  the  5th  of  December,  the  enemy, 
in  open  day,  ^  burnt  the  bridge  which  the  English  had 
thrown  over  the  Caubul  River,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from 
cantonments.  On  the  day  after  the  calamitous  action  of 
the  23rd  of  November,  the  insurgents  had  begun  to  de- 
stroy it,  and  now  they  completed  the  work  of  destruction. 
They  burnt  it  exultingly  before  the  faces  of  our  troops, 
who  were  lining  the  ramparts  and  looking  idly  on,  as 
though  there  were  no  dishonour  in  endurance.  The  bridge 

VOL.  n.  I 


114  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

was  of  little  use  at  that  season  of  the  year,  for  the  stream 
was  fordable — ^but  it  was  a  burning  disgrace  to  the  mili- 
tary authorities,  that  with  5000  British  troops  at  their 
command,  and  with  the  ramparts  of  the  cantonments 
bristling  with  guns,  they  should  have  suffered  such  an 
insult  as  this  to  be  flung  in  their  face. 