

Very  sincerely  yours, 

W.  H.  M.» 

Then  Macnaghten  visited  the  (xencral,  and  discussed 
with  him  long  and  earnestly  the  condition  of  the  garrison 
and  the  measures  to  be  taken  for  its  extrication  from  the 
perils  that  beset  it  If  terms  w^ere  not  to  be  accepted 
from  the  enemy,  it  was  necessary  either  to  obtain  pro- 
visions by  force  from  some  of  the  surrounding  villages, 
or  to  march  at  once  into  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  Envoy 
suggested  that  a  night  attack  might  be  made  upon  Deh- 

•  UtqnibUshed  Correspondence  of  Sir  W.  H,  Macnaghten, 


112  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

Hadjee,  or  a  similar  enterprise  undertaken  against  Killa 
Bolundee ;  but  the  Greneral  had  no  taste  for  night  attacks 
or  enterprises  of  any  kind.  Macnaghten  went,  and  soon 
after  his  return  home  received  the  following  letter:* 

My  dear  Sir  William, 

Since  your  departure,  I  have  thought  overt  and  given 
my  utmost  attention  to,  every  part  of  the  subject  of  our  conversa- 
tion. The  first  proposition  was  a  night  expedition  against  the  Deh- 
Hadjee,  said  to  be  distant  about  three  coss,  part  of  the  road  through 
a  narrow  gorge,  through  which  I  now  hear  guns  could  not  go; 
and  I  am  also  told  that  parties  (of  cavalry)  have,  for  the  last  five 
or  six  days,  been  seen  going  in  that  direction:  no  doubt  for  the 
object  of  preventing  our  getting  supplies.  If  we  succeeded  in 
taking  the  fort  (if  only  one),  we  must  hold  it  (to  enable  us  to 
remove  any  quantity  of  grain  with  our  means)  for  some  time; 
during  which^  the  enemy,  hearing  of  our  attack,  would,  no  doubt, 
come  out  against  our  detachment;  and  from  Captain  Johnson's 
account,  it  is  difficult  to  find  grain.  Another  difficulty  is  our 
want  of  local  knowledge  (this  may,  perhaps,  be  obtained).  These 
are  the  objections  that  present  themselves  to  this  plan. 

With  respect  to  a  hke  enterprise  on  Killa  Bolundee,  that 
appears,  I  confess  (and  I  would  willingly  grasp  at  anything  to 
enable  us  to  hold  out),  to  be  more  difficult,  from  the  facility 
with  which  a  party  might  be  cut  oflf  by  a  sortie  from  the  city. 
The  other  alternative  is  the  Balla  Hissar;  from  thence  seems  the 
only  chance  we  have  of  getting  supplies;  and  as  you  now  think 
our  being  able  to  make  any  terms  is  impossible,  that  seems  the 
only  one  left.  Colonel  Chambers  has  been  with  me,  and  says  his 
horses  would  be  quite  unequal  to  a  forced  march  to  Jellalabad, 
and  that  many  of  those  of  Anderson's  regiment  are  unserviceable 
from  want  of  food.  Captain  Anderson  reported,  this  morning, 
one-half. 

After  leaving  cantonments,  terms,  I  should  suppose,  are  quite 
out  of  the  question;  our  quitting  would  be,   I   presume,   con- 