

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

On  the  momiDg  of  the  8th  there  were  but  four  days* 
pro^sion  in  store.  The  wretched  camp-followers  were 
living  upon  the  carcases  of  the  camels  which  had  been 
starved  to  death.  The  trees  in  cantonments  had  been 
stripped  of  all  their  bark  and  light  branches  to  supply 
provender  to  the  cattle,  and  were  now  all  bare  and  use- 
less. The  Commissariat  officers,  Boyd  and  Johnson,  vrrote 


STATE  OF  THE  COMMISSAKIAT.  117 

a  joint  letter  to  the  General,  stating  that,  after  much 
fruitless  exertion,  they  had  been  compelled  to  adopt  the 
opinion  that  provisions  were  no  longer  obtainable  by  pur- 
chase. But  before  this  letter  reached  him  the  General 
had  seen  Captain  Boyd,  and  had  written  to  the  Envoy 
declaring  his  opinion  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  hold 
out  longer : 

Dec.  8,  1841. 

Mt  deab  Sib  William, 

The  conimissary  has  just  reported  to  me,  that  on  examina- 
tion of  the  grain  he  has  in  store,  he  finds,  from  the  quantity  of 
dirt  mixed  with  it,  he  has  not  above  four  days'  supplies  left,  at 
most  Under  these  circumstances,  it  becomes  absolutely  necessary 
for  us  to  come  to  a  decision  as  to  our  future  measures^  as  I  do 
not  see  how  we  are  to  hold  out,  without  food  for  our  Sepoys,  be- 
yond that  time. 

Yours  truly, 

W.  K.  E. 

The  letter  of  the  Commissariat  officers  had  not  reached 
the  General  when  the  above  was  written.  It  ran  in  the 
following  words  :* 

Sib, 

In  conformity  with  instructions  received  through  you 
from  Major-General  Elphinstone,  commanding  in  Afghanistan, 
we  have  the  honour  to  report,  from  personal  knowledge  of  the 
country  to  the  north  or  north-cast  of  cantonments^  the  utter  impos- 
sibility of  obtaining,  either  by  force  or  otherwise,  the  smallest 
quantity  of  grain  or  forage  of  any  kind  within  a  distance  of 
from  three  to  four  miles;  and,  further,  that  within  this  space 
the  whole  of  the  forts,  with  the  exception  perhaps  of  one  or  two, 
have  been  evacuated  by  the  inhabitants,  and  more  or  less  de- 
stroyed by  the  enemy. 

With  respect  to  that  portion  of  your  letter  having  reference  to 
drawing  two  or  three  days*  supplies  from  the  Balla  Hissar,  we 
b^  to  bring  to  the  Major-Generars  notice,  that  although  our 
troops  would,  it  is  true,  be  subsisted  for  so  many  days  longer, 

*  Unpublished  Correspondence. 


118  FBOGBESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

the  delay  of  moving  from  the  cantomnents  mu8t  prove  destructive 
to  our  cattle,  and  cripple  the  only  means  we  have  of  removing 
either  our  sick,  treasure,  or  military  stores^  as  the  animals  are 
even  now  in  so  weakly  a  state  as  to  have  scarcely  stamina  suffi- 
cient to  carry  a  load  any  distance^  and  many  are  utterly  incapable 
of  rising  with  a  load  firom  the  ground. 