


THE  DRAFT  TREATY.  123 

every  other  course  to  no  purpose.  He  had  resisted  the 
importunities  of  the  military  authorities,  clamouring  for 
surrender,  until  there  were  no  provisions  in  store  for  the 
morrow,  and  no  hope  of  replenishing  our  empty  granaries. 
He  could  not  now  any  longer  resist ;  so  he  drew  out  the 
rough  draft  of  a  treaty,  and  met  the  Afghan  chiefs  in  con- 
ference. 

The  meeting  took  place  at  the  distance  of  about  a  mile 
from  the  cantonments,  on  the  banks  of  the  Caubul  river. 
Captains  Lawrence,  Trevor,  and  Mackenzie  accompanied 
the  Envoy,  with  a  few  troopers  of  the  body-guard  as  an 
escort.  The  chiefs  of  all  the  principal  tribes  in  the  coun- 
try were  present.  Among  the  leading  men  assembled 
were  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  Oosman  Khan,  Sultan  Ma- 
homed Khan,  Mahomed  Sheriff,  Mahomed  Shah  Khan, 
and  Khoda  Buksh  Khan,  Ghilzye.  The  first  salutations 
over,  the  Envoy  drew  forth  the  draft  treaty  he  had  pre- 
pared, and  read  in  Persian  the  following  articles,  with 
their  preamble,  to  the  assembled  chiefs  : 

Whereas  it  has  become  apparent  from  recent  events  that  the 

continuance  of  the  British  army  in  Afghanistan  for  the  support 

of  Shah  Soojah-ool-Moolk  is  displeasing  to  the  great  majority  of 

the  Afghan  nation;  and  whereas  the  British  Government  had  no 

other  object  in  sending  troops  to  this  country  than  the  integrity, 

happiness,  and  welfare  of  the  Afghans,  and,  therefore,  it  can  have 

no  wish  to  remain  when  that  object  is  defeated  by  its  presence; 

the  following  conditions  have  been   agreed  upon    between  Sir 

W.  H.  Macnaghten,  Bart.,  Envoy  and  Minister  at  the  Court  of 

Shah  Soojah-ool-Moolk  for  the  British  Government  on  the  one 

part,  and  by  Sirdar  [  ]  for  the  Afghan  nation  on  the  other 

part 

Ist.  The  British  troops  now  at  Caubul  will  repair  to  Peshawur 

with  all  practicable  expedition,  and  thence  return  to  India. 

2nd.  The  Sirdars  engage  that  the  British  troops  shall  be  un- 
molested in  their  journey,  shall  be  treated  with  all  honour,  and 
receive  all  possible  assistance  in  carriage  and  provisions. 

3rd.  The  troops  now  at  Jellalabad  shall  receive  orders  to  retire 


124  PKOGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

to  Peshawur  60  soon  as  the  envoy-and-minister  is  satisfied  that 
their  progress  will  be  uninterrupted. 

4th.  The  troops  now  at  Ghuznee  will  follow,  vid  Caubul,  to 
Peshawur^  as  soon  as  arrangements  can  be  made  for  their  journey 
in  safety. 

5th.  The  troops  now  at  Candahar,  or  elsewhere  within  the 
limits  of  Afghanistan,  will  return  to  India,  either  vid  Caubul 
or  the  Bolan  Pass,  as  soon  as  the  necessary  arrangements  can  be 
made,  and  the  season  admits  of  marching. 