

J.  Boyd,  Commissary  General  (Bengal  Troops). 

H.  Johnson,  Commissary  General  (Shah's  Troops). 

A  copy  of  this  letter  was  forwarded  to  the  Envoy  with 
the  General's  letter  of  the  9th  of  December. 

Again  Macnaghten  and  Elphinstone  took  counsel  to- 
gether, and  again  they  parted  to  give  their  opinions 
the  shape  of  official  correspondence.  Returned  to  his 
quarters,  the  Envoy  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the 
General : 

8th  Dec.,  1841. 

Sib, 

With  reference  to  the  conversation  I  had  the  honour  to 
hold  with  you  this  morning,  I  have  to  request  that  you  will  be  so 
good  as  to  state,  for  my  information,  whether  or  no  I  am  right  in 
considering  it  as  your  opinion  that  any  further  attempt  to  hold 
out  against  the  enemy  would  merely  have  the  effect  of  sacrificing 
both  His  Majesty  and  ourselves,  and  that  the  only  alternative 
left  is  to  negotiate  for  our  safe  retreat  out  of  the  country  on  the 
most  favorable  terms  possible.  I  understood  you  to  say  to-day 
that  all  our  cattle  are  starving,  and  that  we  have  not  more  than 
three  days'  provision,  half-rations,  left  for  our  men,  whilst  the  dif- 
ficulties of  procuring  more  appear  to  you  to  be  insurmountable. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  we  hear  rumours  of  the  approach 
of  reinforcements  from  Gandahar,  though  nothing  in  an  authentic 
shape  has  yet  reached  us  on  this  subject. 

W.  H.  Macnaghten. 

To  this  letter  General  Elphinstone  sent  back  an  an- 
swer, signed  also  by  the  three  senior  officers  under  his 
command — ^Brigadiers  Shelton  and  Anquetil,  and  Colonel 
Chambers,  who  were  that  morning  in  council  with  their 
chief: 


RECOMMENDATIONS  OF  THE  MILITARY  CHIEFS.       119 

Caubul,  8th  Dec,  1841. 

Sir, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  of  this  day's  date,  requesting  me  to  state,  for  your  infor- 
mation^ whether  or  not  it  be  my  opinion  that  any  further  attempt 
to  hold  out  against  the  enemy  would  merely  have  the  effect  of 
fluaificing  both  His  Majesty  and  ourselves,  and  that  the  only 
alternative  left  is  to  negotiate  for  our  safe  retreat  out  of  the  coun- 
try on  the  most  favourable  terms  possible. 

In  reply,  I  beg  to  state  that  my  opinion  is  that  the  present 
ntuation  of  the  troops  here  is  such,  from  the  want  of  provisions 
and  the  impracticability  of  procuring  more^  that  no  &me  ought  to 
be  lost  in  entering  into  negotiations  for  a  safe  retreat  from  the 
country. 

As  regards  the  troops  at  Candahar,  and  the  rumours  of  their 
approach  to  our  assistance,  I  should  be  sorry,  in  the  absence  of 
all  authentic  information,  to  risk  the  sacrifice  of  the  troops  here 
by  waiting  for  their  arrival,  when  we  are  ignorant  even  of  their 
having  commenced  their  march,  and  are  reduced  to  three  days' 
supply  of  provision  for  our  Sepoys  at  half-rations,  and  almost  en- 
tirely without  forage  for  our  horses  and  cattle. 