


DESPONDENCY  OF  THE  GENERAL.         121 

every  preparation  was  to  be  made  before  that  hour,  and 
the  troops  under  arms  for  an  immediate  march. 

The  appointed  hour  arrived.  Captain  Johnson  was 
ready  to  accompany  the  detachment.  The  troops  were 
under  arms ;  but  no  preparations  had  been  made  for  their 
departure.  A  bridge  was  to  have  been  laid  down  for  the 
passage  of  the  cavalry  and  artillery,  and  covered  with 
straw,  that  no  noise  might  be  made  to  rouse  the  suspi- 
cions of  the  enemy ;  but  at  two  o'clock  no  orders  had  been 
issued,  and  it  was  evident  that  there  were  doubts  and 
embarrassments  to  impede  the  progress  of  the  expedition. 
Something  was  wrong,  and  it  became  known  at  last  that 
the  enterprise  was  discovered  to  be  a  dangerous  one. 
The  enemy  were  in  force  in  the  dilapidated  village  of 
Beh-meru,  and  so,  just  as  day  began  to  dawn,  the  enter- 
prise was  altogether  abandoned. 

In  the  course  of  the  day  intelligence  of  a  cheering  cha- 
racter was  received  from  Jellalabad.  Sale's  little  garrison 
had  sallied  out  and  gallantly  defeated  the  enemy.  It  was 
hoped  by  the  Envoy  and  a  few  others,  who  were  turning 
their  eyes  in  every  direction,  straining  to  catch  even  the 
faintest  ray  of  hope,  that  the  improved  aspect  of  affairs  at 
Jellalabad  would  induce  the  military  authorities  to  make 
Dew  efforts  to  maintain  their  position.  But  all  hope  of 
this  kind  was  soon  dissipated.  The  General,  fearfiil  of 
the  encouragement  of  such  expectations,  addressed  the 
following  letter  to  the  Envoy  : 

Caubul,  9th  Dec. 

Sir, 

With  reference  to  my  letter  of  yesterday's  date,  No.  215, 
I  beg  to  state  that  the  intelligence  received  this  day  from  Sir  R. 
Sale  does  not,  in  my  opinion,  after  the  most  mature  conside- 
ration, 80  improve  our  situation  as  to  alter  the  sentiments  I 
therein  expressed  as  to  the  necessity  of  a  treaty  being  entered 
into,  if  possible,  with  the  enemy;  but  I  look  upon  the  arrival  of 
this  account  of  the  success  obtained  over  the  rebels  on  the  1st 


122  PROGBESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

inst  as  most  opportune,  for  I  consider  it  cannot  but  prove  highly 
advantageous  in  our  negotiations.  I  beg  to  annex  a  copy  of  a 
letter  firom  the  two  officers  at  the  head  of  the  Commissariat  De- 
partment, by  which  you  will  see  our  destitute  state,  and  the  little 
hope  there  is  of  obtaining  further  supplies. 

W.  K.  Elphinstone,  Major-Gen. 

The  General  could  only  see  in  the  cheering  news  from 
Jellalabad  another  reason  for  entering  into  negotiations 
with  the  enemy. 

All  this  time  the  Envoy  had  been  anxiously  looking  for 
tidings  of  the  advance  of  the  force  under  Colonel  Mac- 
laren,  which  had  been  despatched  from  Candahar.  The 
communications  with  that  place  had  been  so  completely  cut 
off,  that  it  was  not  until  the  1 0th  of  December  that  Mac- 
naghten  received  intelligence  from  Colonel  Palmer,  who 
commanded  the  garrison  at  Ghuznee,  that  there  was  little 
prospect  of  Maclaren's  brigade  making  good  its  march  to 
Caubul.  The  inclemency  of  the  weather  and  the  loss  of 
baggage  cattle  had  been  so  great,  that  Maclaren,  strug- 
gling on  with  difficulty,  was  dreading  the  necessity  of 
a  retrograde  move.  The  Envoy  had  been  eager  to  hold 
out  80  long  as  the  least  hope  remained  of  receiving 
succour  from  the  westward.  That  hope  was  now  rapidly 
waning.  The  provisions  in  cantonments  were  almost 
wholly  exhausted.  On  the  morning  of  the  1 1th  there  was 
just  food  enough  for  the  day's  consumption  of  the  fighting 
men.  The  camp-followers  were  starving.  Food  was  not 
to  be  obtained  by  purchase,  for  the  villagers  would  not 
sell ;  food  was  not  to  be  obtained  by  fighting,  for  the  sol- 
diers would  not  fight.  Macnaghten  had  urged  the  nobler 
course,  until  repeated  disappointments  had  made  him 
despair  of  military  success.  There  was  now,  indeed,  no- 
thing left  him  but  to  negotiate  with  the  enemy,  or  to 
suffer  the  force  in  cantonments  to  perish  by  the  slow 
process  of  starvation  before  his  face.     He  had  suggested 