

Our  number  of  sick  and  wounded  in  hospital  exceeds  600,  and 
our  means  for  their  transport  is  far  from  adequate,  owing  to  the 
death  by  starvation  of  so  many  of  our  camels;  from  the  same 
cause  also  we  shall  be  obliged  at  this  inclement  season  to  leave 
the  tents  and  bedding  behind  with  such  a  march  before  us. 

As  regards  the  King,  I  must  be  excused  entering  upon  that 
point  of  your  letter,  and  leave  its  consideration  to  your  better 
judgment  and  knowledge;  but  1  may  be  allowed  to  say  that  it 
Uttle  becomes  me,  as  commanding  the  British  troops  in  Afghan- 
istan, to  regard  the  necessity  of  negotiating  in  any  other  light 
than  as  concerns  their  honour  or  welfare,  both  of  which  I  should 
be  answerable  for  by  a  further  stay  here,  after  the  sudden  and 
imiverBal  rebellion  which  has  taken  place  throughout  the  domi- 
nions. 

The  whole  of  the  grain  and  forage  in  our  vicinity  is  ex- 
bausted,  and  the  defence  of  this  extensive  and  ill-situated  canton- 
ment will  not  admit  of  distant  expeditions  to  obtain  supplies  from 
the  strongly-fortified  dwellings  of  an  armed  and  hostile  popula- 
tion, our  present  numbers  being  insufficient  for  its  defence,  and 


120  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

obliging  the  whole  of  the  troops  to  be  almost  constantly  under 
arms. 

In  conclusion,  I  can  only  repeat  my  opinion  that  you  should 
lose  no  time  in  entering  into  negotiations. 

W.  K.  Elphinstone,  Major-Gen., 

Commanding  in  Afghanistan. 

I  concur  in  the  above  opinions. 

J.  Shelton,  Brigadier. 

In  a  military  point  of  view,  I  concur  in  the  above. 
^  W.  Anquetil,  Brigadier, 

Commanding  Shah  Soojah's  Forces. 
I  also  concur. 

R.  Chambers,  Lieut.-Col., 

Commanding  Cavalry. 

Still  shrinking  from  the  dreadful  thought  of  surrender^ 
Macnaghten,  soon  after  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  went 
over  to  the  General's  quarters,  and  wrung  from  him  a 
reluctant  promise  to  make  one  more  attempt  to  secure 
supplies  by  an  expedition  against  one  of  the  forts  or  vil- 
lages in  which  they  were  known  to  be  stored.  A  council 
of  war  was  held  that  evening  at  the  GeneraVs  quarters. 
The  Envoy  was  present  at  the  meeting.  The  Commis- 
sariat officers  were  also  in  attendance.  There  was  a  long 
and  stormy  discussion.  At  length  it  was  determined  that 
on  the  following  morning  a  detachment  of  infantry  and 
cavalry,  with  a  gun,  should  be  despatched,  accompanied 
by  Captain  Johnson,  to  the  village  of  Khoja  Rewash, 
some  four  miles  from  cantonments,  where  it  was  believed 
that  a  considerable  supply  of  grain  was  stored.  The 
village  was  to  be  surprised  before  daybreak.  The  inhabi- 
tants were  to  be  called  upon  to  sell  their  grain ;  and,  in 
the  event  of  their  acquiescence.  Captain  Johnson  was  to 
purchase  it;  but  in  the  event  of  their  refusal,  the  village 
was  to  be  carried  by  assault,  and  the  grain  taken  by  force. 
The  detachment  was  to  start  at  two  o'clock,  and,  that 
there  might  be  no  delay  in  the  departure  of  the  force. 