


110  PROGRESS  OP  NEGOTIATION. 

no  longer  do  Anything?  When  reduced  to  the  last  extremity 
(where  we  now  are  almost),  I  think  honourable  terms  better  for 
our  government  than  our  being  destroyed  here,  which,  without 
food,  is  inevitable.  All  this  I  write  in  confidence  for  your  own 
consideration,  that  you  may  think  what  is  best  to  be  done,  aa  t 
have  told  our  real  fdtuation. 

Yoursi  truly, 

W.  K.  E  • 

On  that  day  Macnaghten  sent  back  only  a  brief, 
emphatic  reply: 

My  dear  Oekeral, 

I  have  received  your  note  of  this  morning.  I  am  per- 
fectly aware  of  the  state  of  our  supplies;  but  as  we  have  nine  days* 
provision,  and  had  only  provisions  for  one  or  two  days  when  the 
siege  commenced,  I  conceive  that  wc  are  better  o£f  now  than  we 
were  a  month  ago.  Whenever  we  go,  we  could  not  carry  with 
us  more  than  two  or  three  days*  supplies,  and,  therefore,  it  does 
not  seem  necessary  to  come  to  an  immediate  decision.  But  I 
will  speak  to  you  on  the  subject  to-morrow,  and  will  omit  no 
favorable  opportunity  of  negotiating. 

W.  H.  M.t 

On  the  following  morning,  the  Envoy  wtote  more  cir- 
cumstantially to  the  General,  in  reply  to  the.  letter, 
urging  him  to  obtain  "  honourable  terms.''  He  was  not 
in  a  mood  to  think  of  terms  at  all.  His  voice  was  all 
for  a  movement  into  the  Balla  Hissar : 

(Private.)  Cantonments,  6th  Dec.,  l84l. 

Mt  d£ab  Oenebal, 

I  now  proceed  to  give  you  my  opinion  on  your  note  of 
yesterday.  There  are  three  courses  which  may  be  said  to  be  open 
to  us.  Firsts  a  retreat  on  Jellalabad,  without  terms.  Secondly^ 
a  retreat  to  India,  with  terms,  abandoning  our  position  in  this 
country.  And,  thirdly,  to  retire  into  the  Balla  Hissar.  The 
first  I  regard  as  impracticable;  and,  if  practicable,  the  adoption 

*  UnpublUhed  Correspondence    of       t  Unpublished    Correspondence   of 
OenertU  ElphmsUme.  Sir  W,  H.  Macnaghten. 


RECOMMENDATIONS  OP  THE  ENVOY.       Ill 

of  such  a  measure  would  cover  us  with  everlasting  infamy,  as  we 
could  not  take  the  King's  family  along  with  us,  and  his  Majesty 
would  not  Btir  without  them.  The  second  I  regard  as  nearly 
equally  impiacticable,  from  the  conflicting  interests  of  the  parties 
with  whom  we  should  have  to  treat.  This  cause  would,  I  think, 
lender  any  promised  protection  ineflectual^  and,  if  this  course 
could  be  safely  adopted,  the  consequences  would  be  terrific  as 
legardB  the  safety  of  our  Indian  Empire  and  our  interests  in 
Europe.  The  third  course  seems  to  me  (though  certainly  attended 
with  risk)  to  be  by  far  the  most  safe  and  honourable  which  we 
could  adopt  With  four  or  five  disposable  regiments  in  the  Balla 
Hissar,  it  would  be  strange  if  we  could  not  obtain  fuel  and  pro- 
mons;  we  should  be  in  a  position  to  overawe  the  city,  and  to 
encourage  the  Kuzzilbashes  and  our  other  well-wishers  to  come 
forward  to  our  support;  and  we  should  probably  find  in  the 
Balla  Hiflsar  provisions  for  a  fortnight  or  a  month.  I  would, 
therefore,  lose  no  time  in  sending  every  night,  by  all  possible 
oontrivances,  our  stores,  and  sick,  and  wounded.  Should  the 
report  of  the  advance  of  troops  from  Candahar  prove  correct 
(which  we  shall,  in  all  probabiUty,  hear  to-morrow),  all  our 
troubles  will  cease.  Should  we  have  reason  to  believe  it  un- 
founded, we  can  then  commence  destroying  our  powder  and 
superfluouB  stores.  In  the  mean  time,  I  think  we  have  daily 
proofii  that  the  forces  of  our  enemies  are  diminishing;  and,  with 
the  blessing  of  Providence,  some  event  may  arise  from  their  mis- 
understandings to  relieve  us  from  our  present  perilous  position, 
even  without  the  accession  of  fresh  troops. 