

Dec  7, 1841. 

Mt  bsab  Sib  William, 

Three  companies  of  the  37th  have  been  ordered  into  the 

bsittr  as  a  guard  for  it.     Shelton  wishes  a  support  of  the  44th 

OBtnde.     If  they  have  any  sense  of  shame  left,  they  must  do 

better,  and  their  oflEicers  must  exert  themselves.     8.  is  disposed  to 

attribute  the  blame  to  the  Sepoys — ^from  all  I  hear,  I  fear  imjustly ; 

but  this  raust  be  inquired  into  when  we  have  time.    I  fear  the 

enemy  will  not  to^lay  give  them  an  opportunity  of  retrieving 

their  name. 

W.  K.  E. 

And  now  matters  were  at  their  worst.  To  what  depths 
(^humiliation  our  unhappy  force  had  sunk,  and  with  what 
indignation  the  Envoy  regarded  a  state  of  things  which  he 
was  powerless  to  avert  or  to  remedy,  the  following  letter, 
written  about  this  time  to  Captain  Macgregor,  painfully 
declares: 

k)ld  it     8101^8  answer  is  worth    will  fiffht— tenable  if  thej  don*t  mn 
neordiiig — ^  Practicable  if  the  men    away. 

i2 


116  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

No  date. 

My  dear  Macgregor, 

I  have  received  your  notes  of  the  30th  ultimo  and  Ist  in- 
stant, and  1  am  delighted  at  the  good  news  they  contain.  I  wish 
I  could  repay  you  in  the  same  commodity,  but  I  regret  to  say  that 
everything  in  this  quarter  has  been  going  wrong.  Our  troops 
were  defeated  in  the  field  on  the  23rd;  our  bridge  has  been  burnt 
under  our  very  noses;  and  the  captured  fort  opposite  the  canton- 
ment has  been  recaptured  by  the  enemy  without  the  slightest 
efibrt  at  resistance  on  our  part.  In  short,  our  troops  are  behaving 
like  a  pack  of  despicable  cowards,  and  there  is  no  spirit  or  enter- 
prise left  amongst  us.  The  military  authorities  want  me  to  capi- 
tulate, but  this  I  am  anxious  to  put  off  to  the  last  moment  In 
the  mean  time,  we  shall  soon  have  to  come  to  some  decision,  as 
we  have  only  three  days'  provision  for  our  troops,  and  nothing 
for  our  cattle.  We  are  anxiously  looking  out  for  reinforcements 
from  Candahar.  We  have  rumours  of  their  approach^  but  nothing 
as  yet  authentic.  The  rascals  certainly  contrive  to  intercept  our 
communications  most  effectually.  Tell  Mackeson  that  I  have  got 
his  official  and  private  letters  of  the  20th  ultimo,  but  that  I  am 
not  in  spirits  to  write,  and  I  have  really  nothing  to  commimicate 
in  addition  to  what  I  have  above  written.  John  ConoUy  is  with 
His  Majesty  in  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  Sirkar  is  in  a  dreadful  funk. 
The  Laird  of  Pughman  is  almost  the  only  man  of  respectability 
who  has  stuck  by  him.  I  have  been  striving  in  vain  to  sow  nifak 
amongst  the  rebels,  and  it  is  perfectly  wonderful  how  they  hang 
together.  Congratulate  Mackeson  for  me  on  the  gallant  conduct 
of  his  namesake.  Inshalia !  his  Khidmut  will  be  moojra,  Gould 
you  forward  the  enclosed  to  Erskine  when  you  have  an  oppor- 
tunity? 