

The  following  day  was  one  also  of  humiliation.  Ma- 
homed Sheriff's  fort,  which  was  garrisoned  by  a  party 
of  European  and  Native  troops,  was  abandoned  on  the  6th 
of  December.  The  enemy,  a  day  or  two  before,  had 
endeavoured  to  blow  open  the  gate  with  powder-bags,  but 
had  not  succeeded  in  the  attempt.  They  might  have 
spared  themselves  the  trouble  of  the  effort  and  the  dis- 
credit of  the  failure.  On  the  6th  of  December,  a  very 
small  party  of  the  enemy,  unperceived  by  the  garrison, 
contrived  to  climb  up  the  walls  of  the  fort,  from  the  direc- 
tion of  the  King's  garden.  They  had  no  sooner  shown 
their  heads  at  the  window  of  the  room  where  our  men 
were  sitting,  than,  both  Europeans  and  natives,  panic- 
struck  and  bewildered,  escaped  over  the  opposite  wall, 
and,  abandoning  their  bedding,  arms,  and  ammunition,  fled 
into  cantonments.*  The  fort  was  soon  filled  with  the 
enemy.    Not  an  effort  was  made  to  recapture  it.f     The 

*  The  garrison  consisted  of  about  choose — all  cowards  alike.    After  he 

100  men,  40  bein^  Europeans,  under  was  deserted  by  the  men,  he  himself 

the  command  of  Lieutenant  Hawtrey,  threw  six  hand  grenades  before  be 

d7th  N.I.    Lady  Sale  says :  **  The    followed  them It  was  the 

Afghans  planted  their  crooked  sticks,  most  shameful  of  all  the  runaways 

which  served  them  for  scalinff  ladders ;  that  occurred/* 

got  up  one  by  one;  pulled  out  the  f  Lady  Sale  says  that  the  44th 

mud  (with  which  the   window  had  wished  to  wipe  out  the  stain  on  the 

been  blocked  up)  and  got  in.  A  child  name,  as  did  the  Sepoys  also  (the  37th 

with  a  stick   might  have  repulsed  N.I.).     Lieutenant  Uawtrey*s  com- 

them.  The  Europeans  had  their  belts  pany  volunteered  to  go  with  him  and 

and  accoutrements  off,  and  the  Se-  *'  take  it  without  the  assistance  of  any 

poys  the  same.     They  aU  ran  away  other  troops.**    The  General  sent  a 

as  fast  as  they  could  1    The  44th  say  message  to  the  engineer  officer  (Lieu- 

that  tiie  dTtn  ran  first,  and  as  they  tenant  Sturt)  asking  if  the  fort  was 

were  too  weak  they  went  too.   Haw-  practicable   and  tenable  —  that    is, 

trty  Mjs  there  WM  ^ot  a  pin  to  whether  our  men  could  take  it  and 


MATTEBS  AT  THEIB  WOBST.  115 

guns  on  the  ramparts  played  upon  it  all  day  long,  and 
before  evening  one  of  the  bastions  crumbled  to  pieces 
nnder  our  fire ;  but  the  British  troops  remained  inactive 
in  cantonments,  submitting  patiently  to  every  new  insult, 
88  though  disgrace,  now  become  habitual,  had  ceased  to 
be  a  burden  to  them. 

Another  blot  was,  at  the  same  time,  fixed  upon  the 
character  of  the  unhappy  troops.  The  44th  Queen's 
re^ment  had  supplied  the  details  of  the  guard  for  the 
protection  of  the  cantonment  bazaar.  They  were  now 
withdrawn  under  circumstances  little  calculated  to  raise 
the  reputation  of  the  corps  ;  and  some  companies  of  the 
37th  Native  Infantry  were  sent  to  relieve  them.  The 
following  letter  on  this  subject,  from  the  General  to  the 
Envoy,  supplies  a  painful  commentary  on  the  state  of  the 
troops  at  this  time  : 