

(The  new  Magazine  Fort, 
The  Musjeed, 
The  Fort  of  Zoolfikar, 
The  Fort  of  Eicka-Bashee) 
this  afternoon. 

The  chiefi  have  promised  that  thirty  men,  who  shall  be  under 
control,  are  to  occupy  each  of  the  places  to  be  delivered  up;  and 
I  hope  that  the  brother  of  Newab  Mahomed  Zemaun  IQian  will 
ledde  in  the  cantonment  as  a  hostage  until  our  departure. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c.,  <Sbc., 

W.  H.  M.* 

To  this  letter  the  Greneral  sent  back  the  following 
official  reply : 

Head-(2uarter8,  Canbul,  Dec.  16,  1841. 

Sib, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 

letter  of  this  day's  date;  in  reply  to  which  I  beg  to  say  that, 

*  Unpublished  Correspondence, 


138 


PREPARATIONS  POR  THE  RETREAT. 


firom  the  emergency  of  the  case,  as  therein  stated,  I  see  no  alter- 
native left  us  but  to  give  up  the  forts  mentioned  to  the  chiefi 
with  whom  you  are  treating;  and  I  shall  accordingly  give  orders 
for  their  being  vacated  and  delivered  over  to  the  persons  who 
may  be  authorised  to  receive  them^  immediately  on  your  inti- 
mating their  arrival. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

W.  K.  Elphinstonb,  Major-Gen., 
Commanding  in  Afghanistan. 


No  time  was  lost  in  carrying  this  arrangement  into 
effect.  Whatever  dilatoriness  may  have  been  displayed 
on  other  occasions,  there  was  no  want  of  alacrity  evinced 
when  anything  was  to  be  yielded  to  the  enemy.  Our 
garrisons  were  speedily  withdrawn  from  the  forts,  and 
the  victorious  insurgents  duly  placed  in  possession  of 
them.  By  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  the  Afghan 
conquerors  were  sitting  on  the  walls  of  these  ceded  forts, 
looking  into  the  British  cantonments,  and  joking  over 
our  discomfiture.*  A  brother  of  the  Newab  Zemaun 
Khan  was  sent  in  as  a  hostage  on  the  part  of  the 
enemy  ;f  and  a  small  supply  of  atta  was  furnished  to 
the  troops. 

Provisions,  however,  came  in  very  slowly;  and  car- 
riage was  not  sent  in  at  all.  There  was  a  mixed  crowd 
of  robbers  and  fanatics  swarming  between  the  city  and 
the  cantonments,  ever  on  the  alert  to  intercept  the 
supphes  that  were  sent  in  either  by  the  Sirdars  or  by 
private  speculators.     All  kinds  of  outrages  were  com- 


*  Shelton  was  opposed  to  the  ces- 
sion of  the  forts.  ^*  On  my  opinion 
bein|[  asked,"  he  sajrs,  ^*  I  pronounced 
it  injudicious,  ancl  it  was  declined ; 
but  about  two  days  afterwards  the 
order  was  ffiveny  and  I  was  directed 
to  give  up  wL"— [ifjS.  Records.} 

f  It  was  thought,  however,  that 
there  was  too  much  disunion  among 


the  Afghans,  at  this  time,  to  render 
the  hostage-giving  any  kind  of  se- 
curity— inasmuch  as  the  sacrifice  of  a 
hostage  might  have  pleased  more  than 
it  offended.  It  was  said  by  Sultan  Jan* 
of  the  hostage  now  in  our  camp,  ^^  Oh  I 
he  is  a  dog  of  a  man ;  what  should 
we  have  cared  if  you  had  killed 
him.** — [Lieut.  Melmlle^s  Narrative.} 