


BRIGADIEB  SHELTOK's  DEFENCE.  127 

ment  which  may  be  established  hereafter  will  always 
be  disposed  to  cultivate  a  good  understandisg  with  us. 
A  retreat  without  terms  would  have  been  impracticable. 
It  is  true,  that  by  entering  into  terms,  we  are  prevented 
from  undertaking  the  conquest  of  the  entire  country — a 
measure  which,  from  my  knowledge  of  the  views  of  go- 
vernment, I  feel  convinced  would  never  be  resorted  to 
even  were  the  means  at  hand.  But  such  a  project,  in 
the  present  state  of  our  Indian  finances,  and  the  requisi- 
tions for  troops  in  various  quarters,  I  knew  could  not  be 
entertained."* 

1  wish  that  it  were  not  more  difficult  to  acquit  the 
miUtary  chiefi.  General  Elphinstone's  correspondence 
contains  what  he  conceived  to  be  a  justification  of  his 
conduct  in  urging  Macnaghten  to  capitulate.  Brigadier 
Shelton  has  left  upon  record  a  statement  of  which  it  is 
only  just  to  his  memory  that  it  should  have  the  fiill 
credit :  "  The  great  extent  of  cantonments,"  he  wrote 
in  the  narrative  drawn  up  by  him  at  Buddeeabad,  "  and 
defenceless  nature  of  the  ramparts  (an  officer  having 
actually  ridden  over  them),  effectually  compromised  our 
force,  by  the  necessity  to  watch  and  protect  every  foot  of 
the  works,  from  their  extreme  weakness,  and  the  conse- 
quent danger  of  sending  out  a  force  of  sufficient  strength 
to  ensure  victory,  against  a  numerous  enemy  flushed  with 
success,  while  our  troops  were  disheartened,  on  half- 
rations  of  parched  wheat,  and  harassed  and  worn  out 
from  constant  duty  on  the  ramparts,  whose  weakness  re- 
quired their  presence  night  and  day,  exposed  to  excessive 
cold  by  night,  with  little  covering  and  less  comfort.  The 
great  oversight  of  neglecting  to  bring  in  provisions  for  the 
winter  could  not  be  remedied.  The  impossibility  of  pro- 
curing them  by  force  in  a  country  studded  with  forts, 
every  one  of  which  required  a  regular  attack,  was  appa- 

•  UnfaMed  Report  of  Sir  W,  H,  Macnaghten :  MS,  Records. 


128  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

rent  to  all.  The  Ricka-bashee  Fort,  close  to  cantonments, 
cost  us  200  men.  What  must  distant  ones  not  have  cost 
us — sniped  the  whole  way  out  and  home  by  long  rifles 
out  of  range  of  our  fire,  through  snow,  with  the  thermo- 
meter at  zero?  There  was  nothing  under  such  circum- 
stances dishonourable  in  a  necessary  retreat,  which  might 
have  been  efiected  before  the  snow  fell,  and  whilst  there 
were  a  few  days'  provisions  in  store,  with  some  hope  of 
success.  Had  provisions  been  stored  in  cantonments  for 
the  winter,  the  troops  would  have  been  in  better  heart, 
and  resistance  made  until  timely  assistance  should  arrive. 
The  party  at  Jellalabad  was  more  favoured,  both  in  pro- 
visions and  a  more  congenial  climate.'' 