

Posterity  will  not  accept  such  apologies  as  these. 
That  difficulties  and  dangers  of  no  common  kind  beset 
the  path  of  the  military  commanders  in  those  Caubul 
cantonments  is  not  to  be  gainsaid.  But  war  is  made  of 
difficulties  and  dangers.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  soldier  to 
live  in  the  midst  of  them.  Elphinstone  and  Shelton 
were  sent  to  Caubul  to  face  difficulties  and  dangers, 
not  to  turn  away  from  them.  The  existence  of  the 
evils  here  set  forth  in  such  formidable  array  is  not  ques- 
tioned or  doubted.  Some,  at  least,  of  them  were  the 
growth  of  our  own  weakness ;  for  difficidties  not  met 
with  energy  and  decision  are  wonderfully  reproductive. 
They  thicken  around  the  wavering  and  irresolute.  If, 
on  the  10th  of  December,  Elphinstone  and  Shelton,  after 
bravely  struggling,  throughout  six  long  peril-laden  weeks, 
against  the  difficulties  which  were  thronging  around 
them,  had  at  last  succumbed  to  their  pressure,  they 
would  have  been  entitled  to  the  respect,  no  less  than 
to  the  pity,  of  the  world.  But  it  was  not  so  much  that 
the  circumstances  were  strong,  as  that  the  men  were 
weak.  As  early  as  the  5th  of  November — three  days 
after  the  first  outbreak  of  the  insurrection — Elphinstone 


CONDUCT  OP  THE  MILITARY  CHIEFS.  129 

had  b^un  to  think  and  to  write  about  terms.  Shelton 
was  not  much  behind  him  in  his  recommendations  of 
the  same  ignoble  course.  They  were,  both  of  them, 
brave  men.  In  any  other  situation,  though  the  physical 
infirmities  of  the  one,  and  the  cankered  vanity,  the 
dogmatical  perverseness  of  the  other,  might  have,  in 
some  measure,  detracted  from  their  efficiency  as  military 
commanders,  I  believe  that  they  would  have  exhibited 
sufficient  constancy  and  courage  to  rescue  an  army 
fiom  utter  destruction,  and  the  British  name  from  inde- 
lible reproach.  But  in  the  Caubul  cantonments  they 
were  miserably  out  of  place.  They  seem  to  have  been 
sent  there,  by  superhuman  intervention,  to  work  out  the 
utter  ruin  and  prostration  of  an  unholy  policy  by  ordi- 
nary human  means. 

It  is  remarkable,  indeed,  that  the  chief  conduct  of  oiur 
military  operations,  in  this  critical  conjuncture,  should 
have  been  in  the  hands  of  two  men  so  utterly  unlike 
each  other,  and  yet  so  equal  in  their  incapacity  for  such 
command.  I  believe  it  to  be  no  exaggeration  to  affirm, 
that  there  were  not  in  India  two  men  of  the  same  high 
rank  equally  unfitted  by  circumstance  and  by  character 
for  the  command  of  the  Caubul  army.  The  one  had 
everything  to  learn ;  the  other  had  everything  to  unlearn. 
Elphinstone  knew  nothing  of  the  native  army.  Shelton 
was  violently  prejudiced  against  it.  Elphinstone,  in  a 
new  and  untried  position,  had  no  opinion  of  his  own, 
but  flung  himself  upon  the  judgment  of  any  one  with 
confidence  enough  to  form  and  express  one.  Shelton, 
on  the  other  hand,  was  proud  of  his  experience,  and 
obstinately  wedded  to  his  own  opinions.  Opposition 
irritated  and  enfeebled  him.  To  overrule  and  to  thwart* 
him  at  the  commencement  of  an  enterprise  entrusted 
to  his  charge  was  to  secure  its  ignominious  failure. 
Whether  by  accident  or  by  design,  he  generally  con- 