

of  Korember,  that  his  ammunition  The  Balla  Hissar  had  in  the  mean 

was  faiHnff  lum;  but  on  the  Idth  while  been  liberally  funushed  from 

^  December  the  magazine  was  so  cantonments. 

k2 


132        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

himself  to  conduct  the  party  safely  to  cantonments. 
Grain  was  of  unspeakable  value  at  this  time ;  but  time 
was  valuable  too.  In  our  efforts  to  save  the  former  we 
lost  the  latter.  There  were  1600  maimds  of  wheat  to 
be  conveyed  to  cantonments,  and  the  packing  and  load- 
ing were  more  than  a  day's  work.  Great  as  had  been 
the  exertions  of  the  Commissariat  officer,  and  worthy  of 
all  praise.  Major  Ewart  was  compelled  to  break  in  upon 
his  labours,  and  move  off*  his  force,  before  the  baggage- 
cattle  were  ready  to  start  with  their  precious  loads.  It 
was  six  o'clock  in  mid- winter,  very  dark,  and  bitterly 
cold,  when  the  troops  began  to  march  slowly  out  of  the 
Balla  Hissar.  Akbar  Khan  and  his  followers  had  been 
for  some  time  in  readiness  to  escort  them  to  cantonments ; 
and  now  it  was  whispered  among  the  King's  people  that 
a  trap  had  been  laid  for  the  destruction  of  the  force,  and 
that  not  a  man  would  reach  his  destination.  Major 
Ewart  moved  out  his  men ;  and  the  party  had  scarcely 
cleared  the  gate  when  a  rush,  it  was  said,  was  made  by 
some  of  Akbar  Khan's  jezailchees  to  obtain  admittance 
to  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  gates  were  immediately  closed ; 
the  King's  troops  on  the  walls  opened  a  smart  fire  of 
musketry  on  friends  and  on  foes  alike.  Then  followed 
a  shower  of  grape,  striking  down  some  of  our  Sepoys, 
and  creating  no  little  dismay  and  confusion  in  our 
ranks. 

The  Seeah-Sungh  hills,  along  the  base  of  which  lay 
the  road  between  the  Balla  Hissar  and  the  cantonments, 
were  bristling  with  Ghilzye  banditti.  At  that  late  hour, 
Akbar  Khan  declared  that  it  would  be  almost  impossible 
to  restrain  them,  and  that  therefore,  if  the  British  force 
would  secure  its  safety,  it  must  abstain  from  prosecuting 
its  march  towards  cantonments  until  he  had  made  arrange- 
ments with  the  chiefs — in  fact,  that  it  must  halt  till  the 
morrow.     On  that  dark,  frosty  December  night  this  was. 


WITHDRAWAL  FROM  THE  BALLA  HI88AR.  133 

indeed,  a  discouraging  announcement.  The  troops  were 
halted  on  low  marshy  ground,  under  the  walls  of  the  fort. 
The  ground  was  white  with  the  hoar  frost.  The  air  was 
bitingly  cold.  They  would  have  lit  fires  and  clustered 
around  them,  but  there  was  no  fuel  in  their  reach.  They 
had  no  tents.  They  had  no  bedding.  They  had  no 
food.  They  were  every  minute  expecting  to  be  attacked 
by  the  enemy.  In  this  cheerless,  miserable  state  they 
could  do  nothing  but  stand,  or  walk  about,  looking  for 
the  rising  of  the  morning  star.*  The  night  was  a  long 
one,  but  it  came  to  a  close  at  last.  The  miseries  of  the 
darkness  were  now  to  be  succeeded  by  the  perils  of  the 
dawn.  They  were  only  about  six  hundred  strong,  and 
the  road  was  infested  by  thousands  of  the  enemy.  They 
had  nothing  on  which  to  depend  but  the  good  faith 
of  Akbar  Khan  and  their  own  steadiness  and  courage. 
Happily  the  former  did  not  fail  them.  Akbar  Khan  did 
not  play  the  traitor.  The  rear  guard  was  molested  by  a 
party  of  Afghans,  and  the  Sirdar  himself,  with  a  few  fol- 
lowers, galloped  into  the  midst  of  his  hostile  country- 
men, and  threatened  to  cut  down  all  who  dared  to  oppose 
the  progress  of  the  detachment.  About  ten  o'clock  the 
force  reached  cantonments  in  safety;  but  "thoroughly 
exhausted  with  hunger  and  fatigue."f 