

VOL.  II.  K 


130  PROGBESS  OP  NEGOTIATION. 

trived  to  demonstrate  the  soundness  of  his  own  judgment, 
by  being  disastrously  beaten  in  every  attempt  to  carry 
out  the  projects  forced  upon  him  by  the  preponderating 
counsels  of  others.  Had  Shelton  exercised  the  chief 
military  control,  though  he  might  have  committed  some 
errors,  he  would  probably  have  distinguished  himself 
more  than  in  the  secondary  position  which  he  was  com- 
pelled to  occupy.  On  him  was  thrown  the  burden  of  the 
executive  duties.  Whilst  others  overruled  his  opinions, 
he  was  made  responsible  for  the  success  of  enterprises 
against  which  he  protested,  and  with  which  he  was  the 
last  man  in  the  country  heartily  to  identify  himself  under 
circumstances  so  irritating  and  depressing.  It  would 
have  been  impossible,  indeed,  to  have  brought  together 
two  men  so  individually  disqualified  for  their  positions — 
so  ineflScient  in  themselves,  and  so  doubly  inefficient  in 
combination.  Each  made  the  other  worse.  The  only 
point  on  which  they  agreed  was,  imhappily,  the  one  on 
which  it  would  have  been  well  if  they  had  diflFered. 
They  agreed  in  urging  the  Envoy  to  capitulate.  There 
was  a  curse  upon  them  that  clouded  their  brains  and 
made  faint  their  hearts,  and  moved  them  to  seek  safety 
in  a  course  at  once  the  most  discreditable  and  the  most 
perilous  of  all  that  opened  out  before  them. 


PBEPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETBEAT.  131 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

[December,  1841.] 

Preparations  for  the  Retreat — Evacuation  of  the  Balla  Hissar — ^ProgrcM  of 
the  Neffotiationa—Continiied  Ddaj — ^Variations  of  the  Treatj — DeeLgns 
of  the  Envoy — Overtxires  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan — ^Death  of  Sir  Wil- 
liam Macnaghten — His  Character. 

And  now  began  preparations  for  the  retreat.  Orders 
were  despatched  to  the  Balla  Hissar  for  the  evacuation  of 
that  position  by  the  British  troops ;  and  it  was  said  that 
in  two  days  the  whole  force  would  be  moving  towards 
the  British  provinces.  Doubtful  of  our  good  faith,  the 
chiefe  withheld  the  promised  supplies ;  but  small  quanti- 
ties of  grain  were  procured  from  the  Balla  Hissar.  In  the 
mean  while,  though  our  commissariat  store-rooms  were 
empty,  our  military  magazines  were  full.*  There  was  a 
scramble  among  the  soldiers  for  new  arms  and  accoutre- 
ments ;  and  even  the  camp-followers,  to  whom  ammuni- 
tion was  served  out  by  orders  of  the  General,  came  in  for 
a  share  of  the  spoil. 

The  Balla  Hissar  was  evacuated  by  the  British  troops 
on  the  13th  of  December.    Akbar  Eian  had  pledged 

•  The    Greneral   had   announced  well  supplied  that  he  ordered  it  to  be 

(tt»te,  page  87),  as  early  as  the  6th  served  out  to  the  camp-followers, 