

Dec.  16,  1841. 

My  DEAR  Sir  William, 

I  wish  you  would  write  me  an  official  letter,  with  your 
opinion  as  to  the  necessity  of  giving  up  the  forts,  in  furtherance 
of  your  negotiations.  I  think,  if  absolutely  necessary,  it  must  be 
dene.  Our  situation  cannot  be  made  worse,  but  I  think  they 
ought  to  take  them  one  at  a  time,  beginning  with  Zoolfikar's 
(the  grain  fort)  and  the  Ricka-Bashee,  they  sending  us  supplies. 
This  will  be  a  mutual  proof  of  confidence :  the  abandoning  of  these 
forts  if  they  are  not  sincere,  giving  up  these  cantonments  and  the 
possibility  of  retreat  from  them.  Of  course  the  hostages  will  be 
sent,  as  you  think  they  ought  to  be:  pray  name  them  in  your 
letter,  if  they  have  offered,  or  you  proposed  any. 

I  herewith  return  the  two  letters  from  Trevor  and  Captain 
Drummond. 

Yours  truly, 

W.  K.  £.♦ 

The  magazine  fort  is,  in  fact,  part  of  our  cantonments^  and 
ought  for  the  present  to  be  dispensed  with^  as  an  act  of  courtesy 
and  faith  to  us. 

Upon  the  receipt  of  this  letter  from  the  General,  the 
Envoy  addressed  to  him  the  required  official  communi- 
cation: 

December  16,  1841. 

Sib, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acquaint  you  that  I  have  received  a 
proposition  from  Mahomed  Oosman  Khan  and  Ameen-oollah 

♦  Unpunished  Correspondence, 


ABANDONMENT  OF  THE  FOBTS.  137 

Khan,  to  the  effect  that  we  should  give  up  to  them  certain  forts 
in  the  vicini^  of  the  cantonments,  with  a  view  to  convince  the 
population  of  the  sincerity  of  our  intention  to  leave  the  country; 
by  which  arrangement  also  they  stated  that  they  would  be  able  to 
supply  us  punctually  with  provisions. 

I  am  aware  of  the  objections  to  such  an  arrangementi  in  a 
military  point  of  view;  but  as  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  proposition 
has  emanated  from  a  suspicion  of  our  intentions,  rather  than  from 
any  sinister  motive  on  the  part  of  the  Afghan  chiefs,  I  would 
strongly  recommend  that  the  proposition  be  complied  with.  We 
are  clearly  completely  in  the  power  of  our  new  allies  as  regards 
the  article  of  provisions  ;  and  it  is  not  clear  to  me  what  other 
course  than  compliance  is  open  to  us.  By  this  course  we  show 
confidence,  and  have  at  least  the  chance  of  making  a  safe  and 
honourable  retreat  out  of  the  country:  whereas,  by  refusal,  we  may 
exasperate  those  with  whom  we  are  treating,  and  be  utterly  cut  off 
from  the  means  of  subsistence. 

Since  the  above  was  written,  I  have  received  an  intimation  that 
no  frirther  supplies  will  be  sent  us,  until  the  proposition  of  the 
diiefr  be  complied  with;  and  I  request  that  you  will  inform  me 
whether  you  are  prepared  to  give  up  the  forts 