

It  has  been  stated,  that  when  on  the  evening  of  the  13th 
of  December  the  British  troops  moved  out  of  the  Balla 
Hissar,  an  attempt  was  made  by  some  of  the  followers  of 
Akbar  Khan  to  obtain  admittance.  It  has  been  said  that 
it  was  the  Sirdar's  object  to  seize  the  gate,  so  as  to  admit 
the  main  body  of  his  followers,  and  to  carry  the  place 
by  storm.  It  has  been  surmised,  also,  that  the  Sirdar 
delayed  the  march  of^J^ia^r  Ewart's  detachment,  hoping 

*  At  the  suggestion  of  Lieutenant  son,  who  had  been  ordered  by  the 

ConoUj  they  endeavoured  to  obtain  King  to  admit  no  one. 
r?-adnuttance  to  the  Balla  Hissar,        f  Narrative   of  Lieutenant    Md' 

but  were  fired  upon  by  the  garri-  ville. 


134       PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

that  the  gates  of  the  Balla  Bossar  would  be  re-opened  to 
the  British  troops;  and  that  then,  under  cover  of  the 
night,  his  followers  might  force  an  entrance  into  the 
place.*  A  very  different  account  of  this  incident,  how- 
ever, has  been  left  on  record  by  the  Envoy  himself. 
"  On  the  13th  of  December,"  he  wrote,  "  it  was  agreed 
upon  that  our  troops  should  evacuate  the  Balla  Hissar, 
and  return  to  the  cantonment,  whilst  the  Barukzyes 
should  have  a  conference  with  his  Majesty,  with  a  view 
to  his  retaining  the  nominal  powers  of  sovereignty,  they, 
for  their  own  security,  placing  a  guard  of  their  own  in 
the  upper  citadel.  No  sooner,  however,  had  our  troops 
left  the  Balla  Hissar,  than  his  Majesty,  owing  to  some 
panic  or  misunderstanding,  ordered  the  gate  to  be  shut, 
and  the  proposed  conference  was  thereby  prevented.  So 
offended  were  the  Barukzyes,  that  they  determined  never 
to  offer  his  Majesty  the  same  terms  again.  In  explana- 
tion of  his  conduct,  his  Majesty  states  that  the  party 
whom  the  Barukzyes  desired  to  introduce  was  not  the 
party  which  -had  been  agreed  upon."f  This  was,  pro- 
bably, one  of  the  last  sentences  ever  penned  by  Sir 
William  Macnaghten.  It  closes  the  fragment  of  the  offi- 
cial report  found  in  his  writing-desk  after  his  death. 

The  treaty  read  by  the  Envoy  at  the  conference  on 
the  11th  of  December  contained  an  article  involving  the 
formal  abdication  of  Shah  Soojah.  The  restoration  of 
the  Barukzye  Sirdars  to  their  old  principaUties  was,  at 
that  time,  decreed  by  both  contracting  parties ;  but  the 
meeting  had  scarcely  broken  up,  when  some  of  the 
Douranee  chiefi,  jealous  of  the  power  of  the  Barukzyes, 
which  had  ever  been  put  forth  to  the  injury  and  depres- 
sion of  the  tribes,  recoiled  from  this  perilous  stipulation, 
and  began  to  think  of  the  retention  of  the  King,  at  all 

*  Eyre's  Journal.  +  MS,  Records, 