

18th.  All  British  of&cers  and  troops  who  may  be  unable,  from 
any  cause,  to  quit  Afghanistan  immediately,  shall  be  treated  with 
all  honour  and  respect,  and  receive  every  assistance  until  the  state 
of  the  season  and  of  their  preparations  admits  of  their  departure. 

When  the  Envoy  came  to  the  end  of  the  second  arti- 
cle, Akbar  Khan,  with  characteristic  impetuosity,  inter- 
rupted him,  saying  that  there  was  no  need  to  fiimish  our 
force  with  supplies,  as  there  was  no  impediment  to  their 
marching  on  the  morrow.  The  other  chiefs  rebuked  him 
for  this  interference.  The  remainder  of  the  treaty  was 
read  without  any  further  uncourteous  interruptions; 
and,  this  ebullition  over,  the  young  Barukzye  himself 
subsided  into  courtesy  and  repose.* 

The  conference  lasted  two  hours.  The  terms  of  the 
treaty  were  discussed  with  as  much  calmness  and  mode- 
ration as  could  have  been  expected,  and  its  main  stipu- 
lations were  agreed  to  by  the  assembled  chiefs.  It  was 
resolved  that  the  British  troops  should  evacuate  their 
cantonments   within   three   days,  and  that  the  chiefs 

*  It  18  said  that  Akbar  Khan  pro-  were  adverse  to  the  proceeding.  I  do 
posed  to  seize  the  Envoy  at  this  not  know  whether  this  story  rests 
meeting,  but  that  the    other  chiefs    upon  good  authority. 


126  PROGRESS  OF  NEGOTIATION. 

should,  in  the  mean  while,  send  in  provisions  for  their 
use.  The  meeting  broke  up,  and  Captain  Trevor  ac- 
companied the  Khans  to  the  city,  "  as  a  hostage  for  the 
sincerity  of  the  Envoy." 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  write  anything  in  vindica- 
tion of  the  conduct  of  Macnaghten  with  respect  to  this 
early  treaty.  His  vindication  is  to  be  found  in  the  pre- 
ceding correspondence  with  the  military  chiefe.  But  a 
few  pregnant  sentences,  in  which  he  has  himself  recorded 
the  circumstances  under  which  he  was  at  last  induced 
to  throw  himself  upon  the  forbearance  of  the  enemy, 
ought  to  be  laid  before  the  reader^  embodying  as  they 
do  the  Envoy's  own  justification  of  his  conduct.  "  The 
whole  country,"  he  wrote  in  his  unfinished  report,  "  as 
far  as  we  could  learn,  had  risen  in  rebellion;  our  com- 
munications on  all  sides  were  cut  off;  almost  every  public 
officer,  whether  paid  by  ourselves  or  his  Majesty,  had 
declared  for  the  new  governor,  and  by  fiir  the  greater 
number  even  of  his  Majesty's  domestic  servants  had  de- 
serted him.  We  had  been  fighting  forty  days  against 
very  superior  numbers,  under  most  disadvantageous  cir- 
cumstances, with  a  deplorable  loss  of  valuable  lives,  and 
in  a  day  or  two  we  must  have  perished  fi:om  hunger,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  advanced  season  of  the  year  and  the 
extreme  cold,  from  the  effects  of  which  our  native  troops 
were  suffering  severely.  I  had  been  repeatedly  apprised 
by  the  military  authorities  that  nothing  could  be  done 
with  our  troops ;  and  I  regret  to  add  that  desertions  to 
the  enemy  were  becoming  of  frequent  occurrence  among 
our  troops.  The  terms  I  secured  were  the  best  obtain- 
able, and  the  destruction  of  fifteen  thousand  human  beings 
would  little  have  benefited  our  country,  whilst  our  go- 
vernment would  have  been  almost  compelled  to  avenge 
our  fate  at  whatever  cost  We  shall  part  with  the  Af- 
ghans as  friends,  and  I  feel  satisfied  that  any  govern- 