


IBBESOLUTION  OF  THE  SHAH.  135 

events  as  a  puppet  and  a  name.*  On  the  following  day 
it  was  proposed  by  the  chiefs  that  Shah  Soojah  should 
remain  on  the  throne,  on  condition  of  his  intermarrying 
his  daughters  with  the  leading  Afghan  Sirdars,  and 
vesting  the  Wuzeership  in  the  family  of  the  Barukzyes. 
It  was  stipulated  also  that  the  King,  whose  love  of  pomp 
and  ceremony  was  one  of  his  besetting  infirmities,  and 
who  had  excited  the  indignation  of  many  of  the  chiefs 
by  his  haughty  bearing  towards  them,  should  dispense 
with  some  of  the  regal  formaUties  which  had  given  them 
80  great  offence.f  The  proposal,  sanctioned  by  the 
British  minister,  was  formally  made  to  the  Shah.  There 
was  the  loss  of  his  kingdom  on  the  one  side ;  there  was 
the  loss  of  some  regal  dignity  on  the  other.  The  King 
hesitated;  then  yielded  a  reluctant  assent;  and  a  few 
days  afterwards  withdrew  it  altogether.  His  pride  and 
his  fear  both  deterred  him  from  forming  such  an  alUance 
with  the  chiefe.  He  was  unwilling  so  to  sully  the  purity 
of  the  royal  blood ;  and  he  could  not  trust  to  the  good 
feith  of  the  Sirdars  after  the  departure  of  his  British 
allies.  And  so  the  treaty  with  the  Barukzye  chiefs 
reverted  to  its  original  shape,  and  the  Shah  determined 
to  return  to  the  British  provinces,  fi'om  which  he  had 
never  yet  emerged  without  plunging  into  new  disasters. 

The  stipulations  of  the  treaty  were  now  to  be  brought 
into  effect.  But  mutual  distrust  existed  between  the 
parties,  and  each  was  unwilling  to  give  the  other  any 
advantage  by  being  the  first  to  act  up  to  the  obligations 

*  Mohnn  Lai  8a3r8  that  this  was  asflured  him  to  take  hia  aide,  which, 

the  Envoy's  desi^.     "  This  agree-  in  fact,  was  the  object  of  the  Envoy." 

ment,"  he  wrote  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  — [MS.  Records,^ 
Cdvin,  "  which  the  Envoy  had  pru-        f  Mainly  "  the  offensive  practice 

dently  made    to  create    dissension,  of  keeping  the  chief  nobles  of  his 

disappointed  all  the  Douranee  rebels,  kingdom  waiting   for  hours  at  his 

4c,  who  were  alarmed  at  the  return  gate,  in  expectation  of  audience." — 

of  the  Dost.  They  immediately  began  lEyre^ 9  Journal.'] 
to  conmLonicate  with  the  Shah,  and 


136        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

that  it  imposed.  The  British  authorities  called  upon 
the  chiefs  to  send  in  the  provisions  which  they  had 
undertaken  to  provide ;  and  the  chiefs  called  upon  the 
British  authorities  to  demonstrate  the  sincerity  of  their 
promises  to  retire  from  A%hanistan,  by  giving  up  the 
different  forts  which  they  occupied  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  cantonments,  and  by  placing  hostages  in  their  hands. 
The  question  of  the  abandonment  of  the  forts  was  dis- 
cussed between  the  Envoy  and  the  Greneral.  On  the  16th 
of  DecembeB  the  latter  wrote : 