

6th,  The  stores  and  property  of  whatever  description  formerly 
belonging  to  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  will  be  restored. 

7th.  All  property  belonging  to  British  officers  which  may  be 
left  behind  in  Afghanistan  will  be  carefully  preserved  and  sent  to 
India,  as  opportunities  may  offer. 

8th.  Shah  Soojah-ool-Moolk  will  be  allowed  either  to  remain 
in  Afghanistan  on  a  suitable  provision  for  his  maintenance,  not 
being  under  one  lakh  of  rupees  per  annum,  or  to  accompany  the 
Bntish  troops  on  their  return  to  India. 

9th.  All  attention  and  respect  will  be  paid  to  such  of  the 
Shah's  family  as  may  be  unable  to  accompany  him,  and  they  shall 
be  permitted  to  occupy  their  present  place  of  residence  in  the 
Balla  Hissar  until  their  return  to  India,  should  the  Shah  resolve 
in  accompanying  the  British  troops. 

10th.  On  the  safe  arrival  of  the  British  troops  at  Peshawur, 
arrangements  will  be  immediately  made  for  the  return  to  Afghan- 
istan of  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  his  family,  and  all 
other  Afghans  detained  in  India. 

1 1th.  So  soon  as  the  Ameer  with  his  family  shall  reach  Pesha- 
wur, on  their  return  to  Caubul,  the  family  of  the  Shah  shall  be 
allowed  to  return  towards  India. 

12th.  For  the  due  fulfilment  of  the  above  conditions  four  re- 
spectable British  officers  will  be  left  in  Caubul  as  hostages,  and 
will  be  allowed  to  return^  to  India  on  the  arrival  of  the  Ameer 
and  his  family  at  Peshawur. 

13th.  Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  Sirdar  Mahomed  Oos- 
man  Khan,  and  such  other  chiefs  of  influence  as  may  be  so  dis- 
posed, will  accompany  the  British  troops  to  Peshawur. 

14th.  Notwithstanding  the  retirement  of  the  British  troops 
from  Afghanistan,  there  will  always  be  friendship  between  that 


THE  DRAFT  TREATY.  125 

nation  and  the  English,  so  much  so  that  the  Afghans  will  con- 
tract no  alliance  with  any  other  foreign  power  without  the  con- 
sent of  the  English,  for  whose  assistance  they  will  look  in  the 
hour  of  need. 

15th.  Should  it  hereafter  be  the  desire  of  the  Afghan  nation  and 
the  British  Government  to  consent  thereto,  a  British  Resident  at 
Caubul  may  be  appointed  to  keep  up  the  friendly  communication 
between  the  two  governments,  but  without  interfering  in  any 
way  with  the  internal  administration  of  Afghanistan. 

16th.  No  one  is  to  be  molested  on  account  of  any  part  he  may 
have  taken  in  the  late  contest;  and  any  person  desirous  of  going 
to  India  with  the  British  troops  shall  be  permitted  to  do  so. 

17th.  From  the  date  on  which  these  articles  are  agreed,  the 
Sirdars  above  named  undertake  that  the  British  troops  shall  be 
supplied  with  provisions  on  rendering  payment  for  the  same. 