

Captain  Skinner  came  into  cantonments,  accompanied 
by  Mahomed  Sadig  and  Surwar  Khan,  the  Lohanee  mer- 
chant.* The  English  officer  sate  down  to  dinner  with 
the  Envoy  whilst  the  two  Afghans  remained  in  another 
room.  A  gleam  of  hope  passed  over  Macnaghten's  care- 
worn face  when  Skinner  told  him,  in  a  light  jesting 
manner,  that  he  was  the  bearer  of  a  message  from  Akbar 
Khan  of  a  portentous  nature,  and  that  he  felt  as  one 
loaded  with  combustibles.f    But  the  message  was  not 

I  hetrd  this  by  the  Persian  cliief,  I  Envoy,  which  will  procure  him  all  the 

wrote  to  the  Enroj  that  Mahomed  power  and  monej  he  wishes.    I  wrote 

Akb«r    was    deceiving  us,    and  he  all  this  to  the  Envoy  on  the  very  mom- 

dkould  place  no  faith  m  anything  he  ing  of  his  murder,  begged  him  to  take 

itjrs.     I  also  particularly  informed  very  great  care  of  himself,  and  do  not 

him  that  he  may  give  money  to  any-  go  so  often  to  meet  Mahomed  Akbar 

body  he  likes  to  espouse  the  cause  of  out  of  the  cantonment,  as  he  is  the  man 

the  Shah  and  us,  out  never  to  the  that  nobody  can  trust  his  word  upon 

ckiefa,  as  it  will  not  induce  them  to  oath.     I  also  added  that  the  Dou- 

do  ns  aenrice  like  the  others,  but  will  ranees,  as  well  as  Amcen«oollah  (the 

iodte  and  prepare  them  against  us.  instigation  of  Akbar^,  being  jealous 

Unfortunately  he    was    assured   by  of  the  return  of  his  father,    have 

Surwar  Khan,  Naib  Ameer,  &c.,  of  taken  the  part  of  the  Shah,  and  will, 

their   favorable  service,  and  to  ad-  in  the  course  of  two  days,  wait  upon 

nnoe  lakhs  of  rupees.    He  was  also  his  Majesty,  ask  us  to  remain  here 

promptedbytheteindividualstogive  in  the  hope  of  receiving  the  money 

tlie  paper  of  the  above-mentioned  promised  them  by  me.'  — [^MS.  Rc' 

wreement  to  Mahomed  Akbar.    He  cords.'] 

mowed  it,  and  said  falsely  to  Ameen-  *  Mahomed  Sadig  was  a  first  cousin 

odlah  that  the  Envoy  has  promised  of  Akbar  Khan.     Surwar  Khan  had 

the  money  it  contains,  if  MsJiomed  been,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the 

Akbar  were  to  kill,  catch,  or  send  campaign,    extensively   engaged   in 

hhn  alive  to  the  Envoy.     Ameen-  supplying  the  army  with  camels.  He 

odlah  threw  himself  at  his  feet,  and  was  m   the   confidence   of   Sir    A. 

laid  he  is  doing  all  this  against  us  Bumes,  and  was  generally  esteemed 

merely  for  the  good  of  his  faUier,  and  a  friend  of  the  British, 

be  (AUar)  has  sense  to  know  it  per-  f  iMter  of  Captain   Colin   Mac- 

ferUy;  therefore  he  should  not  lose  kenzie    to    Lieutenant    Eyre:  Eyre^s 

thne  either  to  catch  or  murder  the  Journal 

l2 


148        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 