


DEPARTURE  FOR  THE  CONFERENCE.  151 

rushing  upon  destruction.  So,  hoping  that  yet  some- 
thmg  might  be  done  to  arrest  him,  he  sate  down  and 
wrote  him  this  letter : 

Deoember  28. 

Mr  DEAR  Sir  William, 

I  have  reconsidered  the  subject  of  our  conveisation,  with 

respect  to  which  I  have  to  observe,  that  to  enable  us  really  to 

be  of  consequence  in  assisting  our  adherents,  the  magazine  and 

forts  ought  to  be  restored,  and  the  supplies,  for  at  least  three 

months,  laid  in  at  once;  it  would  not  do  to  depend  on  it  daily,  or 

even  monthly.    I  hope  there  is  no  fear  of  treachery;  the  sending 

two  guns  and  two  regiments  away  would  divide  our  force ;  and 

our  sole  dependence  is  the  union  of  our  force.    The  cantonment, 

I  find,  is  at  present  full  of  Afghans.    All  this  we  must  think  of, 

and  act  for  the  best.    What  guarantees  have  we  for  the  truth  of 

all  that  has  been  said  ?    I  only  mention  this  to  make  you  cautious 

as  to  sending  away  part  of  our  force.     Perhaps  it  is  unnecessary 

with  you,  who  know  these  people  so  well.     I  will  be  prepared  to 

turn  out,  if  necessary,  by  drawing  the  men  ready  to  man  the 

ramparts. 

W.  K.  E.* 

This  was  the  last  letter  ever  addressed  to  the  Envoy. 
It  never  reached  its  destination. 

About  the  hour  of  noon  the  little  party — Macnaghten, 
Lawrence,  Trevor,  Mackenzie,  and  a  few  horsemen — set 
out  on  their  ill-omened  expedition.  Shelton  had  been 
invited  to  accompany  them;  but  he  was  occupied  in 
getting  ready  the  two  regiments  and  the  guns,  and  was, 
therefore,  unable  to  attend  the  conference.f  The  troops, 
however,  were  not  ready  when  the  ambassadorial  caval- 
cade rode  out  of  the  Seeah-Sungh  gate,  and  the  Envoy, 
observing  the  backwardness  of  the  military  chiefe,  bitterly 

*  UnjMibU^ied  Correspondence,  it  out,  an  invitation  came  from  the 

t  **  On  the  morning  of  the  2drd,'*  Envoy  to  accompany  him  to  an  in- 

wrote  Shelton,  **  about  ten  o^clock,  I  terview    with   the    Sirdar.      Being 

got  an  order  to  have  two  corps  and  busy,  I  fortunately  could  not  go,  or 

some  guns  ready,  to  march  out  to  should   probably  have    sharea   the 

seiie,  as  I  understood,   the   Lo^ur  same  fate.** — IMS,  Records,^ 
chief.  While  thus  occupied  in  givmg 


4 


152        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

remarked  that  it  was  of  a  piece  with  all  their  arrange- 
ments since  the  commencement  of  the  outbreak.  He 
then  went  on  to  speak  of  the  enterprise  on  which  they 
were  engaged;  admitted  that  it  was  a  dangerous  one; 
said  that  he  was  playing  for  a  heavy  stake,  but  the  prize 
was  worth  the  risk  that  was  to  be  incurred.  ''  At  all 
events,"  he  said,  "  let  the  loss  be  what  it  may,  a  thou- 
sand deaths  were  preferable  to  the  life  I  have  of  late 
been  leading." 