


EFFOBTS  OF  THE  COMMISSARIAT.  139 

mitted,  in  the  very  face  of  our  guards,  and  under  the 
very  muzzles  of  our  guns ;  but  not  a  shot  was  fired  upon 
the  plunderers.  Our  enemies,  now  become  "our  new 
aUies,"  were  to  be  treated  with  all  possible  consideration. 
Nothing  was  to  be  done  to  interrupt  the  good  feeling 
which  was  now  said  to  have  been  established;  and  so, 
whilst  our  troops  were  starving,  the  military  authorities 
suffered  the  grain  so  eagerly  looked  for  by  the  wretched 
force  to  be  swept  away  from  them,  imder  the  very  walls 
of  cantonments,  by  a  miserable  rabble,  whom  a  few 
roimds  of  grape  would  have  scattered  like  a  flock  of 
sheep.* 

*  Captiun  Johnson's  journal  sup-  ghans,  without  the  most  urgent  ne- 
dies  the  best  information  extant  re-  cessitj,  for  fear  of  putting  a  stop  to 
UtiTe  to  the  measures  taken  through-  the  good  feeling  existing  on  their 
oat  the  si^e  to  supply  the  force  wiUi  part.    The  chiefs  have  been  applied 
prorisions.     Under  dates  Dec*  \21h  to,  to  use  their  influence  to  prevent 
mdXZikf  he  writes:  '^A  few  provi-  these  people  assembling    near    our 
sions  tent  into  cantonments  bj  the  cantonments.    Their  reply  is,   'We 
Sirdars.     A  lakh  of  rupees  advanced  cannot  do  so — they  are  not  under 
to  Mahomed  Akbar  for  the  purchase  our  control ;  but  if  they  misbehave 
of  camels — not  one   as  yet  forth-  themselves,  tire  upon  them.'   To-day, 
coming.   The  Seeah-Sungh  gateway,  I  was  at  the  Seeab-Simgh  gateway, 
throuni  which  all  supplies  come  in,  anxiously  looking  out  for  some  food 
is  dauy  infested  by  parties  of  Af-  for  my  public  cattle.    About  thirty 
sfaans  calling  themselves  Ghazeesj  or  loads  or  hoosah  came  to  within  six 
Dgfaten  for  religion.    They  are,  with-  paces  of  the  bridge,  and  where  the 
out   exception,  the  most  barefaced,  ffuard  was  standing.     The  officer  on 
impertinent    scoundrels   under   the  duty,  as  also  the  field-officer  of  the 
ran.    Armed  with  swords,  daggers,  week,   was    there.      The   wretched 
snd  matchlocks,  they  acknowle(%e  no  rabble  above  alluded  to  stopped  the 
diief^  but  act  independently — they  drivers  of  the  donkeys  and  abused 
ttont  and  insult  the  whole  of  us.  them,  beat  them  and  ordered  them 
Not  a  Sepoy  can  venture  twelve  paces  back,  and  threatened  them  with  more 
from  the  bridge  over  the  ditch  with-  ill-usage  in  the  event  of  their  return- 
oat  beixi^  plundered  of  what  he  has.  ing  to  sell  any  article  to  the  Fering- 
People  from  the  town,  bringing  in  hees.    This  was  reported  by  me  to 
Dwok  or  boosah  (bran),  are  often  plun-  the  Greneral,  and  there  it  ended.'*  ^ 
oered  and  beaten.      Although  our  And  again,  on  the  15th,  the  active 
cattle  and  men  are  starving,  no  mea-  Commissariat  officer  writes :  *' A  few 
sores  are  taken  by  our  military  au-  supplies  sent  into  cantonments,  and 
dnritiefl  to  check  all  this.    It  is  true,  people  still  bringing  in  private  spe- 
ov  ramparts  are  lined  with  our  sol-  culations ;  but  are  subjected  to  the 
(tiers,  and  plenty  of  cannon  at  each  same  ill-treatment  as  noticed  on  the 
Mon,  and  a  six-pounder   at  the  12th  and  13th.  Attah  and  barley  sell 
Mge  loaded  with  grape — but  to  from  1)  to  3  and  4  seers  the  rupee 
vhit  purpose  P    Our  men  arc  told,  (from  3lb.  to  61b.  and  Slb.for  2s.)  . .  . 
OQ  no  account;  to  fire  upon  the  Af«  To-day  a  flock  of  sheep  belonging  to 