


140        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

This  was  a  season  of  perilous  procrastination.  Both 
parties  seemed  anxious  to  postpone  the  day  that  was  to 
witness  the  departure  of  the  British  force ;  and  each  was 
suspicious  of  the  good  faith  of  the  other.  The  chiefs 
withheld,  from  day  to  day,  the  provisions  and  the  car- 
riage-cattle, with  which  they  had  undertaken  to  facilitate 
our  escape  from  Afghanistan ;  and  Macnaghten,  hoping 
still  against  hope,  and  sanguine,  even  in  the  midst  of 
every  kind  of  discouragement,  still  thought  that  "  some- 
thing might  turn  up  "  to  avert  the  humiUation  of  an  en- 
forced withdrawal  from  the  country  which  we  had  en- 
tered with  so  much  pomp  and  parade.  It  was  still 
possible,  he  thought,  that  Maclaren's  brigade  might  make 
good  its  way  to  Caubul.  It  was  not  then  known  that  it 
had  retraced  its  steps  to  Candahar. 

Then  snow  began  to  fall.  On  the  18th  of  December, 
the  doomed  force  looked  out  upon  the  new  horror.  From 
morning  to  evening  prayer  it  fell  with  frightful  perse- 
verance, and  before  sunset  was  lying  many  inches  thick 
upon  the  ground.  Our  difficulties  had  now  fearfully  in- 
creased. Had  the  force  been  set  in  motion  a  few  days 
before  the  first  snow-fall,  and,  moving  lightly,  pushed  on 
by  forced  marches  through  the  passes,  it  might  have 
reached  Jellalabad  in  safety.  But  now  ever3rthing  was 
against  us.  The  elements  were  conspiring  for  our  de- 
struction. It  was  more  and  more  painfully  obvious,  every 
day,  that  the  curse  of  God  was  brooding  over  the  agents 
of  an  unrighteous  policy.  Whatever  may  have  been  the 
causes  of  that  week's  delay — whether  the  bad  faith  of 
the  chiefe,  the  irresolution  of  the  Shah,  or  the  reluctance 

cantonments  was  grazing  outside  of  drove  them  along  the  whole  face  of 

the  walls,  under  the  care  of  the  shep-  cantonment.     Report  made  to  the 

herd.    Two  men  attacked  him  close  Greneral,  whose  replj  was,    *•  Thej 

imder  where  our  sentries,  with  loaded  had  no  business  to  go  outside ;'  and 

muskets,  were  standing.    The  shep-  all  this  time  our  ^irrison  are  starv- 

herd  fled,  and  so  did  the  two  men  ins!^* — {^Captain  JohnsorCs  Journal z 

with  the  whole  flock  of  sheep,  and  IdS,  Records,'] 


NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  THE  CHIEFS.  141 

of  the  British  Envoy,  it  cut  away  from  under  us  the 
last  hope  that  remained  of  rescuing  the  British  force 
from  the  annihilating  dangers  that  hemmed  it  in  on 
every  side. 

The  22nd  was  now  fixed  upon  as  the  day  for  the  de- 
parture of  the  British  troops.  On  the  19  th,  the  Envoy 
and  the  General  despatched  letters  to  Ghuznee,  Canda- 
har,  and  Jellalabad,  ordering  the  evacuation  of  those 
positions.  Money  was  given  freely  to  the  chiefs  for  cattle 
which  was  not  sent  in  for  our  use ;  and  it  was  believed 
that  Mahomed  Akbar  was  expecting  the  treasure  thus 
raised  on  the  instruments  of  our  destruction.  Every  day 
"  our  new  alhes"  became  more  insolent  and  defiant.  As 
our  difficulties  thickened,  their  demands  rose.  All  hope  of 
succours  from  Candahar  had  vanished  on  the  19th,  when 
intelligence  of  the  return  of  Maclaren's  brigade  was  re- 
ceived by  the  Envoy.  Macnaghten  had  clung  to  this 
chance,  with  desperate  tenacity,  to  the  last — and  now  he 
abandoned  all  hope  of  saving  the  reputation  of  his  coun- 
try by  beating  the  enemy  in  the  field. 