

then  delivered.  The  proposals  were  to  be  stated  by 
the  Afghan  delegates,  who  were  soon  closeted  with  the 
Envoy.  Skinner  alone  was  present  at  the  interview. 
Mahomed  Sadig  stated  the  proposals  that  had  been  made 
by  Akbar  Khan.  It  was  proposed  that  an  agreement 
should  be  entered  into  on  the  following  day,  to  the  effect 
that  Akbar  Khan  and  the  Ghilzyes  should  unite  them- 
selves with  the  British  troops,  which  were  to  be  drawn 
up  outside  of  cantonments,  and  at  a  given  signal  should 
assault  Mahmood  Khan's  fort  and  seize  the  person  of 
Ameen-ooUah  Khan.  Then  followed  a  startling  offer,  from 
which  the  Envoy  shrunk  back  with  abhorrence.  This  was 
the  offer  of  Ameen-ooUah's  head,  which,  for  a  sum  of 
money,  Mahomed  Sadig  declared  should  be  presented  to 
the  British  Envoy.  Macnaghten  at  once  rejected  the  offer. 
It  was  never,  he  said,  his  custom,  nor  that  of  his  country, 
to  pay  a  price  for  blood.  Then  Mahomed  Sadig  went  on 
to  state  the  proposals  of  the  Barukzye  Sirdar.  The  Eng- 
lish were  to  remain  in  Afghanistan  until  the  spring;  and 
then,  to  save  their  credit,  by  withdrawing,  as  though  of 
their  own  free  will.  Shah  Soojah  was  to  remain  in  the 
country  as  King,  and  Akbar  Khan  was  to  be  his  Wuzeer. 
As  a  reward  for  these  services,  Akbar  Khan  was  to  re- 
ceive an  annuity  of  four  lakhs  of  rupees  from  the  British 
Government,  and  a  bonus  of  thirty  lakhs ! 

Wild  as  were  these  proposals,  the  Envoy  caught 
eagerly  at  them.  He  did  not  hesitate  for  a  moment.  He 
had,  from  first  to  last,  clung  to  the  hope  of  something 
being  evolved  out  of  the  chaos  of  difficulty,  that  would 
enable  him  to  retain  his  position  in  the  country,  at  all 
events  till  the  coming  spring;  and  now  there  suddenly 
welled  up  within  him  a  hope  that  he  had  obtained  the 
object  of  his  desires.  He  now  accepted  the  proposals ; 
and  signified  his  assent  in  a  Persian  paper  written  by  his 
own  hand.     With  this  the  A%han  delegates  returned  to 


LAST  MEETIKG  OF  THE  ENVOY  AND  THE  GENERAL.   149 

the  city  and  made  known  to  Akbar  Khan  the  success  of 
their  mission.  Captain  Skinner  returned  with  them. 

The  morning  of  the  23rd  of  December  found  Mac- 
naghten  restless  and  excited.  A  great  crisis  had  arrived. 
That  day  was  to  decide  the  fate  of  the  British  force,  and 
determine  the  question  of  the  loss  or  the  salvation  of  our 
national  honour.  It  is  probable  that  the  morning  brought 
with  it  some  doubts  and  misgivings ;  but  he  brushed  the 
obtrusive  thoughts  aside,  and  endeavoured  to  persuade 
himself  as  he  did  to  persuade  others,  that  there  was  no 
treachery  to  be  feared. 

Having  breakfasted,  he  sent  for  the  officers  of  his  staff — 
Lawrence,  Trevor,  and  Mackenzie — who  were  his  friends 
and  counsellors,  to  whom  on  all  occasions  but  this  he 
had  entrusted  his  designs — to  accompany  him  to  the  con- 
ference with  Akbar  Khan.  Mackenzie,  finding  him  alone, 
heard  from  him  now,  for  the  first  time,  the  history  of  this 
new  n^otiation,  and  at  once  exclaimed  that  it  was  a 
plot.  "A  plot!"  replied  the  Envoy,  hastily;  "let  me 
alone  for  that — trust  me  for  that !" 