

He  had  braced  himself  up  with  desperate  courage  for 
the  conference  which  was  to  be  followed  by  such  great 
results;  and  now  he  sent  for  the  General  to  acquaint  him 
with  the  nature  of  the  proposals  and  to  request  his  aid 
to  carry  the  scheme  into  effect.  Startled  by  the  announce- 
ment, and  little  comprehending  all  the  depths  and  intri- 
cacies of  the  perilous  game  which  the  Envoy  had  now  in 
hand,  Elphinstone  asked  what  part  the  other  Barukzyes, 
who  had  been  foremost  in  the  previous  negotiations, 
were  to  take  in  those  now  on  foot,  and  was  told  in  reply 
that  they  were  " not  in  the  plot''  On  the  untutored 
ear  of  the  single-minded  veteran  this  significant  mono- 
^llable  smote  with  an  ominous  sound.  He  began  now 
to  understand  the  double  game  which  was  being  played 
by  the  Envoy  on  one  side,  and  the  young  Barukzye 


150       PBEFABATIOKS  FOB  THE  BETBEAT. 

Sirdar  on  the  other,  and  he  eagerly  asked  the  former  if 
he  did  not  apprehend  that  some  treachery  was  at  work. 
"  None  at  all,"  said  Macnaghten,  in  reply;  *^I  wish  you 
to  have  two  regiments  and  two  guns  got  ready,  as 
speedily  and  as  quietly  as  possible,  for  the  capture  of 
Mahmood  Khan's  fort ;  the  rest  you  may  leave  to  me," 
But  still  the  General  spoke  of  the  danger  of  such  machi- 
nations, and  uiged  him  to  pause  before  he  committed 
himself  irretrievably  to  so  perilous  a  course.  Elphin- 
stone  had  unfortunately  been  talking  about  danger  so 
incessantly  since  the  very  commencement  of  the  out- 
break, that  now,  when  he  uttered  only  words  of  com- 
mon sense  and  prudence,  the  warning  notes  fell  upon 
Macnaghten's  ears  Uke  the  old  imbecile  croakings  of 
timidity  and  irresolution  which  had  been  irritating  him 
for  so  many  weeks,  and  he  now  turned  away  with  im- 
patience, saying,  "  I  understand  these  things  better  than 
you."*  Elphinstone  went;  but,  in  spite  of  Macnaghten's 
confidence,  he  could  not  dispossess  himself  of  the  belief 
that  treachery  was  brewing,  and  that  the  Envoy  was 

*  "  On  the  morning  of  the  23rd,"  begged  to  know  if  there  were  no  fear 
says  General  Elphinstone,  "  I  re-  of  treachery  ?  The  Envoy's  r^ply 
ceived  a  note  from  the  Envoy,  saying  was,  *  None  whatever — I  am  certain 
that  he  hoped  he  had  made  an  ar-  the  thing  will  succeed.  What  I  want 
rangement  which  would  enable  us  to  you  to  do  is  to  have  two  regiments 
remain  in  the  country ;  and  that  he  and  guns  ^ot  quickly  ready,  and, 
would  shortly  acquaint  me  with  all  without  making  any  show,  to  be  pre- 
the  particulars.  I  soon  afterwards  pared  'the  moment  required  to  move 
received  a  message  from  him,  desir-  towards  Mahmood  Khan's  fort.*  I 
ing  to  see  me,  when  he  informed  me  further  discussed  with  him  the  dan- 
that  he  had  made  an  arrangement  ger  he  was  incurring ;  but  he  replied, 
with  Mahomed  Akbar,  by  which  Shah  *  Leave  it  all  to  me — I  understand 
Sooiah  would  remain  on  the  throne —  theie  things  better  than  you  do/  I 
Mahomed  Akbar  being  Wuzeer.  He  then  lefl  him,  and  he  shortly  afler- 
was  to  receive  a  large  sum  of  money,  wards  proceeded  with  his  suite  and  a 
and  Ameen-ooUah  was  to  be  delivered  few  of  nis  cavalry  escort  to  the  inter- 
to  us  a  prisoner.  I  then  asked  what  view.  Before  we  separated,  I  asked 
part  Newab  Zeman  Khan  and  Oos-  him  if  there  was  anytnlnff  else  I  could 
man  Khan  were  to  take  in  this  ?  To  do  ?  He  replied,  '  Nothing,  but  to 
which  I  received  answer  that  they  have  the  two  regiments  and  two 
were  not  in  the  plot.  I  replied  that  guns  in  readiness,  and  the  garrisoii 
I  did  not  like  the  word  'plot' —  to  be  on  the  alert;'  which  was  ao- 
that  it  was  an  ominous  one — and  I  cordingly  ordered.'* 