


NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  THE  GHILZYES.  143 

the  20th  of  December  to  Mohun  Lai,  "  that  after  they 
have  declared  for  his  Majesty  and  us,  and  sent  in  100 
kurwars  of  grain  to  cantonments,  I  shall  be  glad  to  give 
them  a  bond  for  five  lakhs  of  rupees ;  and  if  Naib  Sheriff 
is  satisfied  that  he  will  do  so,  he  should  advance  to  them 
as  much  money  as  he  can.  I  fear  for  Mahomed  Shah 
that  he  is  with  Akbar;  but  you  will  know  best.  You 
must  let  me  know  before  sunrise,  if  possible,  what  is 
likely  to  be  the  effect  of  this  proposal,  as  I  must  talk 
accordingly  to  the  Barukzyes,  who  have  shown  no  dis- 
position to  be  honest.  To  save  time,  you  may  tell  Khan 
Shereen  to  correspond  with  the  Shah,  if  there  is  a  chance 
of  success." 

On  the  following  day  he  wrote  again  to  Mohun  Lai, 
unfolding  his  views  more  distinctly  with  regard  to  the 
contemplated  alliance  with  the  Ghilzyes  and  the  Kuzzil- 
bashes: 

December  21,  4  p.m. 

Mr  DEAB  Sib, 

I  have  received  your  two  notes,  and  I  approve  of  all  that 
you  have  done.  In  conversing  with  anybody,  you  must  say  dis- 
tinctly that  I  am  ready  to  stand  by  my  engagement  with  the 
Barukzyes  and  other  chiefs  associated  with  them ;  but  that  if  any 
pordon  of  the  Afghans  wish  our  troops  to  remain  in  the  country, 
I  shall  think  myself  at  liberty  to  break  the  engagement  which  I 
Ikave  made  to  go  away,  which  engagement  was  made,  believing  it 
to  be  in  accordance  with  the  wishes  of  the  Afghan  nation.  If 
the  Ghilzyes  and  Kuzzilbashes  wish  us  to  stay,  let  them  declare  so 
openly  in  the  course  of  to-morrow,  and  we  will  side  with  them. 
The  best  proof  of  their  wish  for  us  to  stay  is  to  send  us  a  large 
quantity  of  grain  this  night — 100  or  200  kurwars.  If  they  do 
this,  and  make  their  salaam  to  the  Shah  early  to-morrow,  giving 
liis  Majesty  to  understand  that  we  are  along  with  them,  I  will 
write  to  the  Barukzyes  and  tell  them  my  agreement  is  at  an  end; 
bat  if  they  (Ghilzyes  and  Kuzzilbashes)  are  not  prepared  to  go  all 
lengths  with  us,  nothing  should  be  said  about  the  matter,  because 
the  agreement  I  have  made  is  very  good  for  us. 

Yours, 


144       PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

An  hour  afterwards  he  wrote  again  to  Mohun  Lai, 
repeating  all  this  in  still  more  decided  language,  and  de- 
claring that  if  grain  were  obtained  he  should  think  him- 
self "  at  liberty  to  break  his  agreement  of  going  away  on 
Friday,  because  that  agreement  was  made  under  the 
belief  that  all  the  A%han  people  wished  us  to  go  away." 
"Do  not  let  me  appear  in  this  matter,"  he  wrote,  in 
conclusion ;  "  say  that  I  am  ready  to  stand  by  my  en- 
gagement, but  that  I  leave  it  to  the  people  themselves." 
And  again,  after  the  lapse  of  another  hour,  he  wrote : 
"  If  any  grain  is  coming  in  to-night,  let  me  have  notice 
of  it  a  few  minutes  before.  Anything  that  may  be 
intended  in  our  favour  must  appear  before  noon  to- 
morrow." 