

•  Eyr^s  JournaL 
VOL.  n.  L 


146       PREPABATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

ihey  think  that  any  injury  is  likely  to  occur  to  themselves  by  our 
agreement  or  our  leaving  the  country.  If  they  do  not  do  so,  I 
must  stand  by  my  agreement,  whatever  may  be  the  consequences. 
Tou  must  imderstand  that  I  wish  to  be  considered  as  Sahib-i- 
rastee;  and  that  if  while  our  present  agreement  lasts  I  were  to 
receive  a  large  supply  of  grain  from  the  Ghilzyes,  suspicion  would 
be  raised  that  I  intend  to  break  my  engagement,  and  wish  to 
keep  the  troops  here^  in  spite  of  the  wishes  of  all  the  chiefs  to 
the  contrary.  It  would  be  very  agreeable  to  stop  here  for  a  few 
months  instead  of  having  to  travel  through  the  snow;  but  we 
must  not  consider  what  is  agreeable,  but  what  is  consistent  with 
our  faith.  I  am  led  to  expect  a  visit  to-night  from  N  [aib]  S[heriff  ] 
and  the  Ghilzye  chiefs.  Tours, 

W.  H.  M. 

It  was  on  the  evening  of  this  22nd  of  December,  when 
Macnaghten,  long  tossed  about  on  a  sea  of  dqubt  and 
distraction — perplexed  in  the  extreme  by  the  manifest 
bad  faith  and  the  ever-increasing  demands  of  the  chiefs — 
seeing  no  end  to  the  perilous  imcertainties  of  his  position, 
and  wearied  out  beyond  human  endurance  by  days  and 
nights  of  ceaseless  anxiety  and  bewilderment — was  in  a 
temper  to  grasp  at  any  new  thing  that  might  seem  to 
open  a  door  of  escape  from  the  embarrassments  which 
surrounded  him — that  Akbar  Khan  sent  in  Captain 
Skinner  from  the  city  with  a  new  string  of  proposals. 

The  Envoy  had  been  warned  of  the  danger  of  treating 
independently  with  the  young  Barukzye  Sirdar ;  he  had 
been  told  that  treachery  was  spreading  itself  around  him, 
and  that  he  would  be  enclosed  in  its  toils.*    But  he  had 

♦  Mohun    Lal*8    story,  as   given  sion  in  the  city  to  allow  us  to  remain 

in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Colvin,  is  worth  in  the  country,  see  us  safely  pass 

quotmff,  though  its  meaning  is  some-  down  to  Jellalabad,  or  act  as  tne  En- 

what  obscured  by  its  dubious  phrase-  voy  tells  him,  on  the  condition  that 

ology:— "Mahomed    Akbar,    being  Mahomed  Akbar  was  to  receive  four 

afraid  of  the  union  of  the  Douranees  lakhs  of  rupees  annually,  besides  the 

with    the    Shah,    induced    Surwar  reward    of  thirty   lakhs    from   the 

Khan  and  others,  by  the  hope  of  re-  British  Government,  and  made  the 

ward,  to  deceive  the  Envoy,  by  say-  Vizier  of  the  Suddozye  Kings  from 

ing  that  he  will  either  spread  dissen-  generation  to  generation.  As  soon  as 


AKBAR  khan's  PROPOSALS.  147 

now  become  desperate.  Anjrthing  was  better  than  the 
wearing  uncertainty  which  had  so  long  been  unhinging 
his  mind.  Akbar  Khan  sent  tempting  proposals;  and 
the  Envoy  flimg  himself  upon  the  snare.  He  knew  that 
there  was  danger,  but  he  had  become  regardless  of  it. 
Anything  was  better  than  the  life  he  had  so  long  been 
leading.    Even  death  itself  was  better  than  such  a  life. 