

But  he  had  not  yet  abandoned  all  hope  of  saving  the 
reputation  of  his  country  by  playing  a  game  of  dexterous 
diplomacy,  such  as  could  only  have  been  played  against 
a  number  of  disunited  factions,  almost  as  hostile  to  each 
other  as  to  the  common  foe.  It  is  not  easy  to  group  into 
one  lucid  and  intelligible  whole  all  the  many  shifting 
schemes  and  devices  which  distracted  the  last  days  of  the 
Envoy's  career.  It  is  probable  that  at  this  time  he  could 
have  given  no  very  clear  account  of  the  game  which  he 
was  playing.  He  appears  to  have  turned  first  to  one 
party  and  then  to  another,  eagerly  grasping  at  every  new 
combination  that  seemed  to  promise  more  hopeful  results 
than  the  last.  His  mind  was  by  this  time  unhinged; — 
his  intellect  was  clouded ;  his  moral  perceptions  were 
deadened.  The  wonder  is,  not  that  he  was  pressed  down 
at  last  by  the  tremendous  burden  of  anxiety  which  had 


142    ,    PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

sate  upon  him  throughout  those  seven  long  weeks  of  un- 
paralleled su£fenng  and  disaster,  but  that  he  had  borne 
up  so  long  and  so  bravely  under  the  weight 

It  seems,  indeed,  that  Macnaghten,  at  this  time,  never 
knew,  firom  one  day  to  another,  with  whom  he  would 
eventually  conclude  a  treaty  for  the  extrication  of  the 
unhappy  force  from  the  perils  that  girt  it  around  as  with 
a  ring  of  fire.  He  was  throwing  about  money  in  all 
directions,  and  there  were  hungry  claimants,  pressing  on 
now  from  one  direction  now  from  another,  eager  to  turn 
the  sufferings  of  the  Feringhees  to  the  best  account,  and 
to  find  the  best  market  for  their  own  influence  and 
authority.  He  saw  no  honesty  and  sincerity  among  the 
chiefs ;  he  saw  that  they  were  all  contending  one  against 
the  other;  every  man  thinking  only  of  himself.  He 
knew  that  they  had  failed  in  their  engagements  to  him, 
and  he  doubted  whether  he  was  bound  by  the  obliga- 
tions which  he  had  contracted,  or  was  free  to  negotiate 
with  any  one  who  was  willing,  and  able,  to  offer  or  to 
accept  terms  less  degrading  in  themselves  and  less  likely 
to  be  violated.  It  was  his  general  design  to  keep  the 
different  factions  in  a  state  of  antagonism  with  each 
other,  and  to  chng  to  the  one  best  able  to  protect  us 
from  the  malice  of  the  rest.  But  he  could  not  determine, 
of  the  many  combinations  that  could  be  formed,  which 
was  the  best  calculated  to  evolve  a  state  of  things  most 
favorable  to  British  interests,  and  so  he  seems  to  have 
had  more  than  one  game  in  hand  at  the  same  time,  and 
hardly  to  have  known  which  was  to  be  played  out. 

Ostensibly  Macnaghten  was  at  this  time  in  treaty  with 
the  Barukzye  party.  But  he  was  offering  at  the  same 
time  large  sums  of  money  to  the  Ghilzyes  and  to  the 
KuzzUbashes  to  side  with  the  Shah  and  the  British ;  and 
if  they  had  declared  themselves  openly  on  our  side,  he 
might  have  thrown  over  the  Barukzye  alliance.  "  You 
can  tell  the  Ghilzyes  and  Khan  Shereen,"  he  wrote  on 