

Far  better  than  any  explanations  that  I  could  offer  do 
these  letters  unfold  the  character  of  Macnaghten's  designs. 
The  days  on  which  they  were  written  saw  the  Envoy  in 
conference,  near  the  banks  of  the  canal,  with  Akbar 
Khan  and  a  few  chiefs  of  the  Barukzye  party.  As  time 
advanced,  the  Sirdars  rose  in  their  demands ;  and  every 
new  meeting  witnessed  the  dictation  of  fresh  terms. 
They  called  upon  us  to  deliver  up  to  them  all  our  mili- 
tary stores  and  ammunition,  and  to  surrender  the  mar- 
ried families  as  hostages  for  the  fulfilment,  on  our  part, 
of  the  conditions  of  the  treaty.  Then  they  demanded 
that  Brigadier  Shelton  should  be  given  over  to  them  as 
a  hostage ;  but  the  Brigadier  was  unwilling  to  accept  the 
duty,  and  the  proposal  was  declined.  The  hostages 
given  up  on  the  21st  of  December  were  Lieutenants 
J.  B.  Conolly,  the  Envoy's  relative  and  assistant,  and 
Lieutenant  Airey,  of  the  3rd  Buffs,  who  had  been  acting 
as  the  General's  aid-de-camp. 

On  the  following  day  the  commissary  of  ordnance, 
Lieutenant  E3nre,  was  "  ordered  to  conduct  an  officer  of 
the  Newab  Zeraaun  Khan  over  the  magazine,  that  he 


NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  THE  GHILZYES.  145 

might  make  choice  of  such  stores  as  would  be  most 
acceptable  to  the  chiefs."*  At  the  same  time  the  Envoy 
sent  his  carriage  and  horses  as  a  present  to  Akbar  Khan. 
He  was  now  beginning  to  despair  of  deriving  any  real 
assistance  from  the  Ghilzyes,  who  were  slow  to  declare 
themselves  openly  on  our  side,  and  he  saw  plainly  how 
dangerous  it  was  to  appear  to  be  in  treaty  with  them 
and  the  Barukzyes  at  the  same  time.  Some  doubts, 
too,  of  the  honesty  of  the  course  he  was  pursuing  began 
to  obtrude  themselves  upon  him ;  and  he  wrote  accord- 
ingly to  Mohun  Lai,  requesting  him  to  instruct  the 
Ghilzyes  not  to  send  in  any  grain  until  further  advised 
upon  the  subject  : 

December  22,  1841. 

Mr  DEAi^  Sib, 

I  have  just  got  your  notes.  Pray  forbid  the  Ghilzyes  to 
biing  any  grain  to-night  until  I  talk  to  them.  I  cannot  say 
i?hether  they  are  prepared  to  do  any  service.  The  sending  grain 
to  us  just  now  would  do  more  harm  than  good  to  our  cause;  and 
it  would  lead  the  Barukzyes  to  suppose  that  I  am  intriguing  with 
a  view  of  breaking  my  agreement;  but  I  can  never  break  that 
agreement  so  long  as  all  the  Khawanen  wish  mc  to  stand  by  it. 
Pray  thank  our  fiiends,  nevertheless,  for  their  kind  attention  to  our 
interest.  I  wish  very  much  to  please  them,  and  am  sorry  my 
tieasury  is  so  empty.  Tours, 

W.  H.  M. 

December  22,  1841. 

Mr  DEAB  Sib, 

I  have  just  received  your  note,  and  send  7000  rupees  for 
Khan  Shereen  agreeably  to  your  suggestion.  He  is  a  good  friend 
of  ours,  but  pray  request  him  not  to  tell  anybody  that  I  have 
sent  the  money,  for  we  have  scarcely  any  left.  I  have  not  heard 
from  him  according  to  his  promise  of  yesterday,  but  I  suppose  that 
he  had  no  information  of  importance  to  send  me.  I  have  already 
written  to  you  begging  that  the  Ghilzye  chiefs  should  send  no 
grain  to-night.     They  should  first  openly  declare  themselves,  if 