

They  passed  out  of  cantonments.  As  they  went, 
Macnaghten  remembered  that  a  beautiful  Arab  horse, 
which  Akbar  Khan  had  much  coveted,  and  which  the 
Envoy  had  purchased  from  its  owner,*  had  been  left 
behind.  Mackenzie  was  sent  back  for  it,  that  it  might 
now  be  presented  to  the  Sirdar.  Lawrence  was  told  to 
hold  himself  in  readiness  to  ride  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  to 
commimicate  with  the  King.  There  were  many  suspi- 
cious appearances,  which  excited  the  apprehensions  of  all 
but  the  Envoy.  Crowds  of  armed  A%hans  were  hover- 
ing about  the  cantonment,  and  clustering  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Mahmood  Khan's  fort.  Macnaghten  saw 
nothing  but  the  prospect  of  escaping  the  disgrace  of  a 
sudden  retreat  from  A%hanistan.  He  looked  neither  to 
the  right  nor  to  the  left.  He  had  a  great  object  in  view, 
and  he  kept  his  eyes  steadily  upon  it.  He  did  not  even, 
when  the  chiefs  met  him,  perceive  that  a  brother  of 
Ameen-ooUah  Khan  was  one  of  the  party. 

*  Captun    Grant,    the    adjutant-  but  detenuined  to  gratify  the  Sirdar, 

general  of  the  Caubul  force.     "It  Sir  William  sent  me  to  Captain  Grant 

seems,"  says  Captain  Mackenzie,  "that  to  prevail  upon  him  to  take  a  smaller 

Mahomed   Akbar    had  demanded  a  sum,  but  with  orders  that,  if  he  were 

fayourite  Arab  horse  belonsing  to  peremptory,  the  5000  rupees  should 

Ci^tain  Grant,    assistant  adjutant-  oe  given.    I  obtained  the  horse  for 

general  of  the  force.    To  avoid  the  3000  rupees,  and  Sir  William  ap- 

necessity  of  parting  with  the  animal,  peared  much  pleased  with  the  pros- 

Gaptain  Grant  had  fixed  his  price  at  pect  of  gratifying  Mahomed  iJcbar 

the  exorbitant  sum  of  5000  rupees,  bjr  the  present."— [Ca;)tam  Macken- 

Unwilling  to  give  so  large  a  price,  zie's  Narrative:  Eyre's  Journal.} 


THE  CONFERENCE.  153 

Near  the  banks  of  the  river,  midway  between  Mah- 
mood  Khan's  fort  and  the  bridge,  about  600  yards  from 
the  cantonment,  there  were  some  small  hillocks,  on  the 
further  slope  of  which,  where  the  snow  was  lying  less 
thickly  than  on  other  parts,  some  horse-cloths  were  now 
spread  by  one  of  Akbar  Khan's  servants.  The  English 
officers  and  the  A^han  Sirdars  had  exchanged  salu- 
tations and  conversed  for  a  httle  while  on  horseback. 
The  Arab  horse,  with  which  Mackenzie  had  returned, 
had  been  presented  to  Akbar  Khan,  who  received  it 
with  many  expressions  of  thanks,  and  spoke  also  with 
gratitude  of  the  gift  of  the  pistols  which  he  had  received 
on  the  preceding  day.*  It  was  now  proposed  that  they 
should  dismount.  The  whole  party  accordingly  repaired 
to  the  hill-side.  Macnaghten  stretched  himself  at  full 
length  on  the  bank;  Trevor  and  Mackenzie,  burdened 
with  presentiments  of  evil,  seated  themselves  beside  him. 
Lawrence  stood  behind  his  chief  until  urged  by  one  of 
the  Khans  to  seat  himself,  when  he  knelt  down  on  one 
knee,  in  the  attitude  of  a  man  ready  for  immediate  action. 
A  question  from  Akbar  Khan,  who  sate  beside  Mac- 
naghten, opened  the  business  of  the  conference.  He 
abruptly  asked  the  Envoy  if  he  were  ready  to  carry  out 
the  proposals  of  the  preceding  evening  ?  "  Why  not  ?" 
asked  Macnaghten.  The  Afghans  were  by  this  time 
gathering  around  in  numbers,  which  excited  both  the 
surprise  and  the  suspicion  of  Lawrence  and  Mackenzie, 
who  said,  that  if  the  conference  was  to  be  a  secret  one, 
the  intruders  ought  to  be  removed.  With  a  movement 
of  doubtful  sincerity  some  of  the  chiefs  then  lashed  out 
with  their  whips  at  the  closing  circle;  but  Akbar  Khan 