

*  "  Some  time  after  I  had  given  By  myself  and  others  it  was  thought 
the  necessary  orders  (for  the  two  at  the  time  that  Sir  William  had  pro- 
regiments  and  the  guns),  Captain  ceeded  to  the  city  for  the  purpose  of 
Anderson  came  to  me  and  said,  negotiating.  I  was  also  told  that  a 
*They  have  seized  the  Envoy  ;*  and  few  shots  had  been  fired.  Thegarri- 
ODe  of  the  escort  at  the  same  time  son  was  got  ready  and  remained  under 
said,  *  They  have  seized  Uie  Lord  arms  all  day." — IStatemeni  of  General 
Sdub  and  taken  him  off  to  the  city.'  ElphinHtme.'] 


168  THE  CAPITULATION. 

never  hear  the  Envoy's  voice,  or  look  upon  his  living  face 
again.  The  whole  garrison  was  in  a  state  of  painful  ex- 
citement ;  and  when  the  shades  of  evening  fell  over  the 
cantonment,  and  still  no  certain  intelligence  of  the  fate  of 
Macnaghten  had  arrived,  not  an  officer  joined  the  mess- 
table  of  his  regiment,  or  sate  down  to  his  solitary  meal  - 
without  a  leaden  weight  of  gloom  and  despondency  at 
his  heart. 

The  day,  indeed,  had  been  one  of  intense  anxiety.  It 
had  been,  too,  a  busy  stirring  time  within  the  cantonment 
walls.  The  authorities  seem  to  have  been  stimulated 
into  something  of  activity  at  home,  though  they  could  not 
bring  themselves  to  do  anything  abroad.  They  got  up  a 
little  war  against  the  Afghans,  whom  business  or  curiosity 
had  brought  into  cantonments,  and  who  were  now  either 
eagerly  trafficking  or  idly  looking  about  them  in  the  square. 
All  the  men  of  rank  who  could  be  found  were  placed 
imder  arrest;  whilst  hundreds  of  less  note,  apprehending 
that  a  similar  fate  might  be  awaiting  them,  rushed  towards 
the  different  gates,  jostling  and  upsetting  each  other  on 
the  icy  ground,  and  creating  a  scene  of  indescribable  con- 
fusion in  their  efforts  to  escape.  A  lull  succeeded ;  but  as 
the  evening  advanced,  the  noise  and  confusion  in  the  city 
were  such  that  the  troops  were  again  turned  out  and  the 
cantonment  works  manned,*  in  expectation  of  coming 
dangers.  The  Ghazees  were  mustering,  in  the  beUef  that 
the  British  troops  would  attack  the  city  and  avenge  the 
murder  of  their  ambassador.  But  all  thought  of  doing 
had  long  ago  passed  away  from  the  minds  of  our  military 
chiefs.  They  had  settled  down  into  the  belief  that  now 
it  had  become  their  duty  only  to  suffer. 

With  the  morrow  came  a  confirmation  of  the  worst 

*  "At  nine  p.m.  a  great  disturbance  musketry,  caused  the  assembly  to  be 
was  heard  towards  the  city,  horrible  sounded  and  the  walls  again  manned.^* 
shouts  and  cries,  with  rattling    of    — [LieiUenant  Melville's  Narrative^] 


ALiUOK  POTTINGEK.  169 