


DEFENCE  OF  THE  ENVOY.  163 

Ameen-ooUah  Khan  was  an  infamous  wretch,  and  one  of 
the  arch-enemies  of  the  British,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  as 
little  the  duty  of  the  historian  severely  to  condemn  the 
actor  as  to  justify  the  act.*  It  is  one  of  those  cases  in 
which  the  exercise  of  charity  is  a  solemn  duty — one  of 
those  cases,  to  the  consideration  of  which  every  one 
should  bring  the  kindliest  resolution  to  weigh  well  the 
temptation  before  he  measures  the  offence.  There  are 
cases  to  which,  it  is  my  deliberate  conviction,  a  strict  ap- 
plication of  the  ordinary  rules  of  right  and  wrong  would 
be  a  grievous  injustice.  It  is  easy,  in  one's  closet,  to  sit 
in  judgment  upon  the  conduct  of  a  man  tempted  far  be- 
yond the  common  limits  of  human  temptation — envi- 
roned and  hemmed  in  by  difficulties  and  dangers — over- 
whelmed with  responsibility  which  there  is  no  one  to 
share — ^the  lives  of  sixteen  thousand  men  resting  on  his 
decision — the  honour  of  his  country  at  stake — with  a  per- 
fidious enemy  before  him,  a  decrepit  general  at  his  side, 
and  a  paralysed  army  at  his  back — driven  to  negotiate 
by  the  imbecility  of  his  companions,  and  then  thwarted 
m  his  negotiations  by  the  perfidy  of  his  ''  new  allies." 
But  if,  without  injustice  and  cruelty,  we  would  pass 
sentence  on  the  conduct  of  a  man  so  environed,  we 
must  ponder  well  all  these  environments,  and  consider 
what  must  have  been  the  effect  of  seven  wearing  weeks 
of  such  unparalleled  trial  even  on  the  strongest  mind,  and 
what  must  have  been  the  temptation  that  arrayed  itself 
before  him,  when  there  suddenly  gleamed  upon  him  a 
hope  of  saving  at  once  the  lives  of  his  companions  and  the 
credit  of  the  British  nation.  If,  when  that  great  tempta- 
tion burst  suddenly  upon  his  path,  and,  dazzled  by  its 
delusive  brilliancy,  he  saw  the  great  object  set  before  him, 

*  That  it  wiLf  not  actually  com-  as  though  the  loiiare  of  Ameen-ooUah 
nutted  18,  of  course,  nothing  to  the  Khan  luid  been  a  perpetrated  act  and 
poLat.    The  question  is  to  be  argued    not  a  baffled  intention. 

M  2 


164        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

but  did  not  see  the  slough  of  moral  turpitude  to  be  passed 
through  before  it  could  be  attained,  it  is  right  that  we 
should  remember  that  Macnaghten,  though  a  good  and  a 
brave  man,  was  hut  a  man  after  all,  and  that  human 
strength,  at  the  best,  is  but  weakness  to  resist  the  pres* 
sure  of  an  overwhelming  Providence. 

We  have  not  the  same  intelligible  guides  to  a  right 
estimate  of  the  conduct  of  Akbar  Khan,  If  we  regard 
the  assassination  of  the  British  Envoy  as  a  deliberate, 
predetermined  act,  it  can  only  be  said  of  it  that  it  stands 
recorded  as  one  of  the  basest,  foulest  miurders  that  ever 
stained  the  page  of  history.  But  it  does  not  appear 
that  the  murder  of  Macnaghten  was  premeditated  by  the 
Sirdar.  It  seems  to  have  been  the  result  of  one  of  those 
sudden  gusts  of  passion  which  were  among  the  distin- 
guishing features  of  the  young  Barukzye's  character,  and 
which  had  often  before  betrayed  him  into  excesses  laden 
with  the  pangs  of  after-repentance.  Th^lseizure  of  the 
Envoy  and  his  companions,  which  was  designed  by  the 
Sirdar,  was  an  act  of  deliberate  treachery,  iwhich  the 
chiefe  would  perhaps  endeavour  to  justify  by  declaring 
that  they  only  designed  to  do  towards  the  Envoy  as  the 
Envoy  had  declared  himself  willing  to  do  towards  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan.*  But  whilst  Macnaghten  had  only  con- 
sented to  a  proposal  made  to  him  by  others — whilst  he 
had  merely  yielded  to  temptation,  and  at  the  instance  of 
one  Afghan  chief  consented  to  the  betrayal  of  the  other — 
Akbar  Khan,  with  deliberate  subtlety  and  malice,  wove 
the  net  which  he  was  to  cast  over  the  deluded  Englishman, 
and  treacherously  enclosed  him  in  the  toils.     The  trap 