

*  A  handsome  pair  of  double-bar-  expressed  bis  admiration  at  a  previ* 
rdled  pistols  belonging  to  Captain  ous  meeting,  and  which  had  accord- 
Lawrence,  of  which  Akbar  Khan  had    ingly  been  presented  to  him. 


164       PBEPARAT20W8  FOR  THE  BETREAT, 

gaid  that  their  presence  was  of  no  consequence,  as  they 
were  all  in  the  secret  with  him. 

Scarcely  were  the  words  uttered,  when  the  Envoy 
and  his  companions  were  violently  seized  from  behind. 
The  movement  was  sudden  and  surprising.  There  was 
a  scene  of  terrible  confusion,  which  no  one  can  distinctly 
describe.  The  officers  of  the  Envoy's  staff  were  dragged 
away,  and  compelled  each  to  mount  a  horse  ridden  by 
an  Afghan  chief.  Soon  were  they  running  the  gauntlet 
through  a  crowd  of  Ghazees,  who  struck  out  at  them 
as  they  passed.  Trevor  unfortunately  sUpped  from  his 
insecure  seat  behind  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  and  was  cut 
to  pieces  on  the  spot.  Lawrence  and  Mackenzie,  more 
fortunate,  reached  Mahmood  Khan's  fort  alive. 

In  the  mean  while,  the  Envoy  himself  was  struggling 
desperately  on  the  ground  with  Akbar  Khan.  The  look 
of  wondering  horror  that  sat  upon  his  upturned  face 
will  not  be  forgotten  by  those  who  saw  it  to  their  dying 
days.  The  only  words  he  was  heard  to  utter  were,  ''^Az 
harae  Khoda''  ("  For  God's  sake  ").  They  were,  per^ 
haps,  the  last  words  spoken  by  one  of  the  bravest  gentle- 
men  that  ever  fell  a  sacrifice  to  his  erring  faith  in 
others.  He  had  struggled  from  the  first  manfully  against 
his  doom,  and  now  these  last  manful  struggles  cost  the 
poor  chief  his  life.  Exasperated  past  all  control  by  the 
resistance  of  his  victim,  whom  he  designed  only  to  seize, 
Akbar  Khan  drew  a  pistol  from  his  girdle — one  of  those 
pistols  for  the  gift  of  which  only  a  little  while  before 
he  had  profusely  thanked  the  Envoy — and  shot  Mac- 
naghten  through  the  body.  Whether  the  wretched  man 
died  on  the  spot — or  whether  he  was  slain  by  the  in* 
furiated  Ghazees,  who  now  pressed  eagerly  forward,  is 
not  very  clearly  known — but  these  miserable  fanatics 
flung  themselves  upon  the  prostrate  body  of  the  English 
gentleman,  and  hacked  it  to  pieces  with  their  knives. 


DEATH  OF  THE  ENVOY.  165 

Thus  perished  William  Hay  Macnaghten— struck 
down  by  the  hand  of  the  favourite  son  of  Dost  Mahomed, 
Thus  perished  as  brave  a  gentleman  as  ever,  in  the  midst  of 
fiery  trial,  struggled  manfully  to  rescue  from  disgrace  the 
reputation  of  a  great  country.  Throughout  those  seven 
weeks  of  unparalleled  difficulty  and  danger  he  had  con* 
fi'onted  with  steadfast  courage  every  new  peril  and  per- 
plexity that  had  risen  up  before  him ;  and,  a  man  of  peace 
himself,  had  resisted  the  timid  counsels  of  the  warriors, 
and  striven  to  infuse,  by  the  manliness  of  his  example, 
some  strength  into  their  fainting  hearts.  Whatever  may 
be  the  judgment  of  posterity  on  other  phases  of  his  cha- 
racter, and  other  incidents  of  his  career,  the  historian 
will  ever  dwell  with  pride  upon  the  unfailing  courage 
and  constancy  of  the  man  who,  with  everything  to  dis- 
courage and  depress  him,  surrounded  by  all  enervating 
influences,  was  ever  eager  to  counsel  the  nobler  and 
the  manlier  course,  ever  ready  to  bear  the  burdens .  of 
responsibility,  and  face  the  assaults  of  danger.  There 
was  but  one  civilian  at  Caubul ;  and  he  was  the  truest 
soldier  in  the  camp. 