


CHABACTEB  OP  SIR  WILLIAM  MACNAGHTEN.  157 

errors  were  so  numerous,  but  that  they  were  so  few.  To 
govern  such  a  people  as  the  Afghans  through  such  a 
King  as  Shah  Soojah,  was  an  experiment  in  which  an 
English  officer  might  fail  without  the  sacrifice  of  his  re- 
putation. When  we  come  to  think,  now,  of  what  was 
attempted,  we  cease  to  marvel  at  the  result.  The  marvel 
is,  that  utter  ruin  did  not  overtake  the  scheme  at  an  earlier 
date — ^that  the  day  of  reckoning  was  so  long  delayed. 
The  policy  itself  was  so  inherently  faulty  that  success 
was  an  unattainable  result. 

The  causes  of  the  failure  are  not  to  be  sought  in  the 
personal  character  of  the  Envoy.  That  character  may 
have  been  one  of  many  accidental  circumstances  which 
may  in  some  sort  have  helped  to  develop  it ;  but,  sooner 
or  later,  ruin  must  have  overtaken  the  scheme,  let  who 
might  be  the  agent  of  it.  In  this  view  of  the  case,  Mac- 
naghten  is  not  to  be  acquitted ;  but  it  is  on  Macnaghten 
the  Secretary,  not  on  Macnaghten  the  Envoy,  that  our 
censures  must  then  descend.  Macnaghten  the  Envoy, 
however,  was  not  free  from  human  infirmity.  Most  men 
have  an  imhappy  faculty  of  believing  what  they  wish  to 
be  true.  In  Macnaghten  this  propensity  was  unnaturally 
developed.  Grod  had  cursed  him  with  a  strong  delusion 
that  he  should  believe  a  lie.  He  believed  in  the  popu- 
larity of  Shah  Soojah  and  the  tranquillity  of  Afghan- 
istan. To  have  admitted  the  non-existence  of  either, 
would  have  been  to  have  admitted  the  failure  of  the 
policy  which  he  had  recommended,  and  with  which  he 
was,  in  no  small  measure,  personally  identified.  But 
Macnaghten  did  not  seek  to  deceive  others;  he  was  him- 
self deceived.  When  he  spoke  of  the  popularity  of 
Shah  Soojah,  he  believed  that  the  Shah  was  popular; 
when  he  reported  the  tranquillity  of  Afghanistan,  he 
believed  that  the  country  was  tranquil.  He  was  sincere, 
but  he  was  miserably  mistaken.      Everything  he  saw 


k 


158       PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT, 

took  colour  in  his  eyes  from  the  hues  of  his  own  san- 
guine temperament.  From  the  day  when  on  entering 
Candahar  he  beheld  a  joyous  people  welcoming  their 
restored  monarch  with  feelings  almost  amounting  to 
adoration,  to  the  last  luckless  day  of  his  life,  when  he 
went  out  to  the  fatal  conference,  firmly  believing  in  the 
good  faith  and  good  feeling  of  his  Afghan  allies,  he  con* 
tinned  steadily  to  create  for  himself  all  kinds  of  favor- 
able omens  and  encouraging  symptoms,  and  lived  in  a 
state  of  blind  confidence  unparalleled  in  the  history  of 
human  infetuation.  To  this  self-deception  some  of  the 
finest  qualities  of  his  nature  largely  contributed.  The 
very  goodness  of  his  heart  and  generosity  of  his  dispo- 
sition  moved  him  to  regard  the  character  and  conduct 
of  others  with  a  favour  to  which  they  were  seldom 
entitled,  Macnaghten  was  too  noble-minded  to  be  sus- 
picious— ^but  he  erred  on  the  other  side;  he  wanted 
some  of  the  sterner  stuff  which  will  not  suffer  the  sound- 
ness of  the  judgment  to  be  weakened  by  the  generosity 
of  the  heart. 