


r: 


160       PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

for  which  our  country,  in  spite  of  some  dubious  in- 
stances, is  still  honoured  by  all  the  nations  of  the 
East.  In  one  of  the  last  letters  ever  written  by  him, 
the  Envoy  said,  "  It  would  be  very  agreeable  to  stop 
here  for  a  few  months  instead  of  to  travel  through  the 
snow;  but  we  must  not  consider  what  is  agreeable, 
but  what  is  consistent  with  our  faith."  On  the  same 
day,  too — the  day  before  his  death — he  had  written,  "  I 
can  never  break  that  agreement  (with  the  Barukzyes) 
so  long  as  all  the  Khawanen  wish  me  to  stand  by 
it."  It  has  been  questioned  whether  the  negotiations  he 
was  then  carrying  on  with  the  Ghilzyes  and  Kuzzil- 
bashes  were  consistent  with  his  obligations  to  the 
Barukzye  Sirdars.  The  stipulations,  however,  on  the 
part  of  the  British  diplomatist,  in  this  case,  extended  no 
further  than  the  promise  of  certain  money  payments  in 
return  for  certain  specific  services,  and  Macnaghten  may 
have  considered  himself  justified  in  retaining  those  ser- 
vices conditionally  on  the  rupture  of  the  existing  cove- 
nant with  the  Barukzye  chiefs.  That  covenant,  in- 
deed, was  one  of  so  precarious  a  nature — it  was  sliding 
away  from  him  more  and  more  certainly  as  time  ad- 
vanced— there  was  so  little  prospect  of  its  obligations 
being  fulfilled,  that  it  seemed  necessary  to  have  some- 
thing to  fall  back  upon  in  the  event  of  the  open  annul- 
ment of  the  treaty,  the  obUgations  of  which  had  long 
been  practically  denied.  Up  to  the  evening  of  the  22nd 
of  December,  Macnaghten  had  been  willing  to  abide  by 
the  stipulations  of  the  treaty  with  the  confederate  chiefe ; 
but  there  were  such  manifest  symptoms  of  bad  faith  on 
the  part  of  the  chiefs  constantly  breaking  out,  that  it 
appeared  to  him  but  ordinary  prudence  to  prepare  him- 
self for  an  event  so  probable  as  an  open  rupture.  He 
was  ready  to  proceed,  in  mutual  good  faith,  to  the  ac- 
complishment of  the  original  treaty ;  and  so  long  as  the 


INTRIGUES  WITH  THE  CHIEFS.  IfJl 

cliiefs  adhered  to  their  engagements,  he  was  prepared  to 
evacuate  the  country,  but  he  believed  that  it  was  his 
duty  to  prepare  himself  also  for  a  rupture  with  the 
chiefs,  and  to  purchase  supplies  wherever  he  could  obtain 
them,  for  the  use  of  the  troops  in  the  event  of  their  re- 
taining their  position. 

But  the  compact  with  Akbar  Khan  was  altogether  of 
another  kind.  There  was  nothing  of  a  conditional  cha- 
racter about  it.  The  Envoy  had,  in  the  course  of  the 
day,  virtually  acknowledged  that  to  break  off  the  nego- 
tiations then  pending  with  the  chiefs  would  be  a  breach 
of  good  faith.  Nothing  had  occurred  between  the  hour 
in  which  he  wrote  this  to  Mohun  Lai  and  that  in  which 
he  received  the  overtures  of  Akbar  Khan,  to  absolve  him* 
fh)m  obligations  from  which  he  was  not  absolved  before. 
The  same  principle  of  diplomatic  integrity  which  he  had 
applied  to  the  case  of  the  Ghilzye  alliance  was  doubly 
applicable  to  this:  ''It  would  be  very  agreeable  to  stop 
here  for  a  few  months  instead  of  to  travel  through  the 
snow ;  but  we  must  not  consider  what  is  agreeable,  but 
what  is  consistent  with  our  faith."  If  we  read  Mac- 
naghten's  subsequent  conduct  by  the  light  of  these  high- 
principled  words,  it  must  in  truth  be  pronounced  that 
he  stands  self-condemned. 