

When  not  blinded  by  his  partiality  for  any  pet 
projects  of  his  own,  he  was  by  no  means  wanting  in 
political  sagacity.  He  could  decide  justly,  as  he  could 
promptly,  on  points  of  detail  as  they  rose  up  one  by  one 
before  him;  but  as  soon  as  anything  occurred  to  cast 
discredit  upon  the  general  policy  of  the  Afghan  expe- 
dition,  by  indicating  the  germs  of  failure,  he  resolutely 
refused  to  see  what  others  saw,  and  censured  those 
others  for  seeing  it.  Hence  it  was  that  he  received 
coldly,  if  not  contemptuously,  those  elaborate  general 
reviews  of  the  condition  and  prospects  of  Afghanistan 
which  Bumes  and  Conolly  thrust  upon  him,  and  resented 
every  effort  that  was  made  by  RawUnson  and  others  to 
draw  his  attention  towards  the  unquiet  and  feverish 
symptoms,  which,  from  time  to  time,  developed  them- 


CHABACTEB  OF  SIR  WILLIAM  MACNAGHTEN.         159 

selves  in  different  parts  of  the  unsettled  country.  His 
oorrespondence  indicates  an  unwillingness,  rather  than  an 
inability,  to  take  any  large  and  comprehensive  views  of 
A^han  policy.  He  seems  to  have  shrunk  from  applying 
to  that  policy  the  test  of  any  great  principles ;  and  to 
have  addressed  himself  rather  to  the  palliation  of  ac- 
ddental  symptoms  than  to  the  eradication  of  those  con- 
stitutional diseases  which  were  eating  into  the  very  life 
of  the  government  which  he  directed. 

Of  Macnaghten's  humanity  I  have  never  entertained  a 
doubt.  But  it  is  a  proof  of  the  inconsistency  even  of  the 
kindest  and  most  amiable  characters,  that  the  Envoy, 
when  greatly  disquieted  and  perplexed  by  the  difficulties 
which  thickened  around  him,  and  irritated  by  the  opposi- 
tion, which  he  could  not  subdue,  sometimes  thought  of 
resorting  to  measures  repugnant  to  humanity,  for  the 
suppression  of  evils  which  baffled  all  the  more  lenient 
efforts  of  legitimate  diplomacy.  But  these  sterner  feelings 
soon  passed  away;  and  all  the  more  generous  sentiments 
of  his  nature  held  dominion  over  him  again.  He  re- 
gretted the  excesses — always  rather  those  of  word  than 
of  deed — into  which  he  had  been  momentarily  betrayed, 
and  was  as  merciful  towards  a  fallen  enemy  as  he  had 
been  eager  in  his  pursuit  of  a  triumphant  one.  Mac- 
naghten  was  anything  but  a  cautious  man;  his  first 
hasty  impulses  were  often  set  down  in  writing  with 
perilous  unreserve ;  and  it  would  be  unjust  to  record 
against  him,  as  his  positive  opinion,  everything  that  he 
set  down  suggestively  in  his  hasty  letters  to  his  nume- 
rous correspondents,  or  spoke  out  still  more  hastily  to 
his  friends. 

Posterity  may  yet  discuss  the  question,  whether,  in 
these  last  fatal  negotiations  with  Akbar  Khan,  Mac- 
naghten  acted  strictly  in  accordance  with  that  good 
fidth  which    is  the    nilo  of   English   statesmen,   and 