

*  It  appears  to  have  been  Akbar  struggle,  a  cry  was  raised  that  the 
Khan*8  intention  to  have  seized  the  English  were  coming  out  of  canton- 
person  of  the  Envoy,  and  to  have  ments,  and  that  Akbar  Khan,  think- 
held  him  as  a  hostage,  to  secure  both  ing  that  he  might  still  be  baffled,  in  a 
the  evacuation  of  Afghanistan  and  sudden  gust  of  passion  drew  out  a 
the  restoration  of  Dost  Mahomed.  I  pistol  and  fired, 
have  been  informed  that,  dnrinir  the 


CONDUCT  OF  AKBAU  KUAN,  165 

was  cunningly  laid  and  craftily  baited ;  and  the  unhappy 
Envoy,  all  his  perceptions  blunted  by  the  long-continued 
overstraining  of  his  mind,  fell  readily  into  the  snare,  and 
went  insanely  to  his  undoing.  Like  Bumes,  he  had 
been  warned  of  the  treachery  that  encompassed  him ; 
and  like  his  ill-fated  colleague  he  had  disregarded  the 
warnings  that  might  have  saved  him.  The  brave  con- 
fidence of  Macnaghten  clung  to  him  to  the  last;  his 
sanguine  temperament,  at  one  time  so  dangerous  and 
disastrous,  at  another  so  uoblc  and  inspiriting — which 
more  than  anjrthing  else  had  sustained  the  character  of 
the  nation  throughout  the  sore  trials  which  it  had 
brought  upon  us — ^lured  him  at  last  to  his  death. 


166  THE  CAPITULATION. 


CHAPTER  Vni. 

[December,  1841— Januarj,  1842.] 

The  Capitulation— Supineness  of  the  Grarrison — Negotiations  resumed — 
Efforts  of  Major  Pottinger — ^Demands  of  the  Chiefs — The  Final  Treaty — 
Humiliation  of  the  Garrison — General  Remarks. 

It  is  recorded,  that  on  the  23rd  of  December,  1841,  the 
representative  of  the  British  Government  was  slain  at  a 
conference  with  the  Afghan  Sirdars,  within  sight  of  the 
British  cantonments  at  Caubul;  and  it  is  now  to  be 
added  to  the  record  that  this — the  foulest  indignity  that 
one  nation  can  put  upon  another,  the  murder  of  an 
ambassador  in  the  performance  of  his  ambassadorial 
duties — roused  not  the  dormant  energies  of  the  military 
chiefs,  or  awakened  them  to  a  sense  of  the  depths  of 
humiliation  in  which  they  were  plunging  their  unhappy 
country.  The  British  Envoy  was  killed,  in  broad  day, 
and  upon  the  open  plain,  but  not  a  gun  was  fired  from 
the  ramparts  of  the  cantonment ;  not  a  company  of  troops 
sallied  out  to  rescue  or  to  avenge.  The  body  of  the 
British  Minister  was  left  to  be  hacked  to  pieces,  and  his 
mangled  remains  were  paraded,  in  barbarous  triumph, 
about  the  streets  and  bazaars  of  the  city. 

The  miUtary  chiefs  assert  that  they  did  not  know, 
until  the  day  after  his  death,  that  Macnaghten  had  been 


STRANGE  CONFIDENCE  OF  THE  GENERAL.      167 

murdered.    Elphinstone  says  it  was  thought  by  himself 
and  others  that  the  Envoy  had  proceeded  to  the  city  for 
the  purpose  of  negotiating.*    But  there  were  those  in 
cantonments  who  had  seen  the  tumult  at  the  place  of 
conference,  and  who  knew  that  some  violence  had  been 
conmiitted.     One  officer  said  that  he  distiiictly  saw  the 
Envoy  fall — and  that  afterwards  he  could  see  the  Ghazees 
hacking  to  pieces  the  body  of  the  murdered  man.     If  the 
Creneral  did  not  tremble  for  the  safety  of  the  political 
chief,  he  was  the  only  man  in  the  garrison  who  en- 
couraged the  belief  that  the  lives  of  the  Envoy  and  his 
companions,  if  they  had  not  been  already  sacrificed,  were 
not  now  in  imminent  danger.      There  was  something 
very  remarkable,  if  not  suspicious,  in  the  unwonted  con- 
fidence of  the  General  at  this  time.    It  was  not  his  habit 
to  look  upon  the  bright  side  of  things,  or  to  take  any 
great  pains  to  encourage  and  reassure  the  troops  under 
his  command.     He  had,  on  almost  every  occasion,  taken 
the  most  desponding  view  of  affairs,  and  freely  expressed 
his  apprehension  of  dangers,  which  had  no  existence  save 
in  his  own  mind.     But  now  he  sent  round  his  Adjutant- 
General  to  the  troops  to  assure  them  of  the  Envoy's 
safety.     They  were  all  under  arms.     Captain  Grant  rode 
to  the  head  of  each  regiment,  and  by  Elphinstone's  orders 
told  them  that  the  conference  had  been  interrupted  by 
the  Ghazees — that  the  Envoy  and  his  companions  had 
been  removed  to  the  dty — but  that  they  would  return 
immediately  to  cantonments.     Some  who  heard  this  au- 
thoritative announcement  still  believed  that  they  would 