

It  is  not  easy  to  estimate  correctly  the  character  of 
William  Macnaghten.  Of  the  moral  and  intellectual  at- 
tributes of  the  ill-fated  Envoy  very  conflicting  accounts 
have  been  rendered;  and  it  is  probable  that  in  all  these 
conflicting  accounts  some  leaven  of  truth  resides.  There 
are  few  men  whose  characters  are  not  made  up  of 
antagonistic  qualities;  and  Macnaghten  was  not  one  of 
the  few.  In  early  life  he  had  distinguished  himself  by 
the  extent  of  his  philological  acquirements ;  and  was  re- 
puted as  one  of  the  most  accomplished  Oriental  scholars  in 
the  presidencies  of  India.  With  a  deep  insight  into  the 
character  of  the  natives  of  the  East  was  blended  the 
kindliest  sympathy  and  toleration  towards  them.  In  the 
knowledge,  indeed,  of  the  native  languages,  the  institu- 


156        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

tions,  and  the  character  of  the  people  of  Hindostan,  he 
was  surpassed  by  none  of  the  many  accomplished  officers 
who  have  made  them  their  study.  His  long  connexion 
with  the  judicial  department  of  the  public  service  had 
afforded  him  opportunities,  which  his  temper  and  his 
taste  led  him  to  improve,  of  maturing  and  perfecting  this 
essential  branch  of  official  knowledge.  In  attention  to 
business  he  was  one  of  the  most  unwearying  of  men; 
his  pen  was  ever  in  his  hand ;  he  wrote  rapidly,  and  ex- 
pressed himself  on  most  subjects  with  clearness ;  he  was 
quick  in  his  apprehension  of  the  views  of  others,  and 
accommodated  himself  with  facility  to  shifting  circum- 
stances. But  at  this  point  there  are  many  who  believe 
that  they  cease  to  tread  upon  undebateable  ground.  It 
is  admitted  that  he  was  an  accompUshed  Oriental  scholar, 
a  good  judicial  officer,  an  apt  secretary,  and  a  kind- 
hearted  man ;  but  it  is  denied  that,  in  any  enlarged  ac- 
ceptation of  the  word,  he  is  entitled  to  be  called  a 
statesman. 

Sir  Alexander  Burnes  was  constantly  writing  to  his 
friends  in  India,  "  Macnaghten  is  an  excellent  man,  but 
quite  out  of  place  here^  Burnes  was  not  an  imprejudiced 
witness ;  and  he,  doubtless,  expressed  himself  in  language 
too  sweeping  and  unqualified.  But  there  are  many  who 
believe  with  Burnes,  that  Macnaghten  was  out  of  his 
place  in  Afghanistan.  It  is  hard  to  say  who  would  not 
have  been  more  or  less  out  of  place,  in  the  situation 
which  he  was  called  upon  suddenly  to  occupy.  The 
place,  indeed,  was  one  to  which  no  English  officer  ought 
to  have  been  called.  For  a  Calcutta  Secretary  to  be 
at  Caubul  at  all  was  necessarily  to  be  out  of  place.  If 
Macnaghten,  suddenly  transplanted  from  the  bureau  of 
an  Anglo-Indian  Governor  to  the  stirrup  of  an  A%han 
monarch,  is  chargeable  with  some  errors,  it  is,  perhaps, 
more  just,  as  it  is  more  gienerous,  to  wonder  not  that  those 