

In  estimating  the  character  of  these  transactions,  it 
should  always  be  borne  steadily  in  mind  that  the  A%han 
•  chiefs  had  from  the  first  violated  their  engagements  with 
the  British,  and  exacted  from  them  after-conditions  not 
named  in  the  treaty.  Their  want  of  faith,  indeed,  was 
80  palpable,  that  Macnaghten  would,  at  any  time,  have 
been  justified  in  declaring  that  the  treaty  was  annulled. 
It  is  plain,  that  whilst  they  were  violating  their  engage- 
ments he  was  under  no  obliMtion  to  adhere  to  the  con- 
ditions  of  the  violated  treaty.  But  it  appears  to  me  that 
this  matter  is  altogether  distinct  from  the  question  of  the 

VOL.  II.  M 


162        PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  RETREAT. 

honesty  of  negotiating  with  one  party  whilst  negotiations 
are  pending  with  another.  There  would  have  been  no 
breach  of  faith  in  breaking  off  the  treaty  with  the  con- 
federate chiefs ;  but  it  was  a  breach  of  faith  to  enter  into 
any  new  engagements  until  that  treaty  was  broken  off.  It 
is  certain  that  up  to  the  time  of  his  receipt  of  the  fatal 
overtures  from  Akbar  Khan,  Macnaghten  considered  that 
he  was  bound  by  his  engagements  with  the  confederate 
chiefs.  He  might,  it  is  true,  have  declared  those  engage- 
ments at  an  end,  but  until  such  a  declaration  was  made, 
he  was  not  at  liberty  to  enter  secretly  into  any  new  nego- 
tiations practically  annulling  the  old. 

And  whatever  objections  may  lie  against  the  general 
^honesty  of  the  compact,  it  is  certain  that  they  apply  with 
double  force  to  that  portion  of  it  which  involved  the 
seizure  of  Ameen-ooUah  Khan.  It  is  not  to  be  justified 
by  any  reference  to  the  infamous  character  of  that  chief. 
Ameen-oollah  Khan  was  one  of  our  "  new  allies."  He 
had  been,  with  the  other  chiefs,  in  friendly  negotiation 
with  Macnaghten.  It  was  now  proposed,  during  a  sus- 
pension of  hostilities — whilst,  indeed,  we  were  in  friendly 
intercourse  with  the  Afghan  chiefs,  this  very  Ameen-oollah 
Khan  included — that  a  body  of  troops  should  be  got  ready 
as  quietly  as  possible  for  secret  service,  that  a  sudden 
attack  should  be  made  on  the  unsuspecting  garrison  of 
Mahmood  Khan's  fort,  and  that  one  of  our  allies — one  of 
the  chiefe  with  whom  the  Envoy  was  in  treaty — should 
be  violently  seized.  I  confess  that  I  cannot  see  anything 
to  justify  such  a  measure  as  this.  It  certainly  was  not  in  ^ 
tOoordAnce  with  that  good  faith,  the  observance  of  which 
Maianaghteo  had  declared  to  be  of  more  importance  than 
tbft  retention  of  our  position  in  the  country. 
•  But  although  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  justify  the 
either  on  the  plea  that  the  chiefs  had  not  observed 
engagements  into  which  they  had  entered,  or  that 