

BOUGH  DRAFT  OP  THE  TREATY  WITH  THE  ASSENT  OF  THE 

ENGLISH  AUTHORITIES. 

Article  1.  ''  There  shall  be  no  delay  in  the  departure  of  the 
English  army." 

Agreed  to.  They  will  march  twenty-four  hours  after  having 
received  a  thousand  carriage-cattle,  which  shall  be  either  camels 
or  yaboos. 

[Remark.  It  rests  with  them  (the  English) ;  let  them  pay  the 
hire  as  they  may  be  able.] 

Article  2.  "  Afghan  Sirdars  shall  accompany  the  army,  to  pre- 
vent  any  one  offering  opposition,  and  to  assist  in  procuring  sup- 
plies." 

It  is  very  advisable. 

[Remark,  Sirdar  Oosman  Khan  and  Shah  Dowlut  Khan.] 

Article  3.  "  The  Jellalabad  army  shall  march  from  Peshawiur 
before  the  Oaubul  force  starts." 


BOUGH  DRAFT  OF  THE  TREATY.  171 

It  is  agreed  to.  Do  you  name  some  person  who  shall  accom* 
panj  them. 

[^Remark,  Abdool  Ghuffoor  Khan.] 

Article  4.  "  The  Ghuznee  force,  having  made  their  prepara- 
tions, 8hall  speedily  march  to  Peshawur  by  Caubul." 

It  is  agreed  to.  Do  you  name  some  proper  person  to  accompany 
them. 

[Remark,  A  relation  of  the  Naib  or  of  Mehtur  Moossa.] 

Article  5.  "  TheCandahar  force,  and  all  other  British  troops  in 
A^hanistan,  shall  quickly  depart  for  Hindostan." 

It  is  agreed.    Let  proper  people  accompany  them. 

[Remark.  Newab  Jubbur  Klian.] 

Article  6.  "  The  whole  of  the  property  of  the  Ameer  (Dost 
Mahomed  Khan)  which  is  in  the  hands  of  the  English  Govern- 
ment, or  of  individual  officers,  shall  be  left  behind/' 

It  is  agreed  to.  Whatever  is  with  the  public  authorities  is 
known  to  you ;  whatever  is  with  private  officei*s  point  out  and 
take. 

Article  7.  "  Whatever  property  belonging  to  the  English  can- 
not be  carried  away  shall  be  taken  care  of  and  sent  by  the  first 
opportunity." 

It  is  agreed  to:  but  we  have  given  over  all  that  remains  to  the 
Newab. 

[Remark,  The  guns,  ordnance  stores,  and  muskets,  must  be 
given  to  me.] 

Article  8.  ''  In  case  Shah  Soojah  should  wish  to  remain  at 
Caubul,  we  will  give  him  yearly  a  subsistence  of  a  lakh  of 
rupees." 

It  is  agreed  to.  Do  wl^tever  you  think  advisable,  wishing  to 
show  your  friendship  for  us. 

Article  9.  **  In  case  the  family  of  Shah  Soojah  should  be  left 
behind,  from  want  of  carriage-cattle,  we  will  fix  the  place  now 
occupied  by  them  in  the  Balla  Hissar  for  their  dwelling-place, 
until  they  can  depart  for  Hindostan." 

It  is  agreed  to.  The  honour  of  the  King  is  the  honour  of  the 
Douranees;  and  it  is  becoming  in  you.* 

Article  10.  "  When  the  English  army  arrives  at  Peshawur, 
snangements  shall  be  made  for  the  march  of  Dost  Mahomed 

*  The  8th  and  9th  articles  are  Khan,  as  though,  on  consideration, 
scored  out  in  the  orginal  hy  Akbar    they  were  distasteful  to  him. 