


172  THE  CAI'ITULATIOX. 

Khan,  and  all  other  Afghans,  with  all  their  property,  families,  and 
children." 

It  is  agreed  to.  They  shall  all  be  sent  to  you  with  honour  and 
in  safety. 

Article  11.  ''When  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  and  the 
others  arrive  safely  at  Peshawur,  then  the  family  of  the  Shah  shall 
be  at  liberty  to  depart;  that  departing  they  may  arrive  at  the 
place  fixed  upon." 

It  is  agreed  to. 

Article  12.  '^  Four  English  gentlemen  shall  remain  as  hostages 
in  Caubul  until  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  and  the  other 
Afghans  shall  have  arrived  at  Peshawur,  when  the  English 
gentlemen  shall  be  allowed  to  depart." 

It  is  agreed  to. 

[^Remark.  Let  there  be  six  hostages.] 

Article  13.  ''  Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  and  Sirdar  Oos- 
man  Khan  shall  accompany  the  English  army  to  Peshawur,  and 
take  them  there  in  safety."* 

It  is  agreed  to. 

[Remcark.  Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan.] 

Article  14.  "After  the  departure  of  the  English,  friendly  rela- 
tions shall  be  continued, — i.e.,  that  the  Afghan  Government,  with- 
out the  consent  and  advice  of  the  English  Government,  shall  not 
form  any  treaty  or  connexion  with  a  foreign  power;  and  should 
they  (the  Afghans)  ever  ask  assistance  against  foreign  invasion,  the 
English  Government  will  not  delay  in  sending  such  assistance." 

It  is  agreed  to^  as  far  as  we  are  concerned ;  but  in  this  matter 
the  Governor-General  of  India  alone  has  authority.  We  will  do 
our  best  to  bring  about  friendship  bet^^een  the  two  governments; 
and  by  the  blessing  of  the  Almighty  this  wish  will  be  obtained 
and  friendship  exist  for  the  future. 

Article  15.  *'  Any  one  who  may  have  assisted  Shah  Soojah  and 
the  English5  and  may  wish  to  accompany  them,  shall  be  allowed 
to  do  so.  We  will  not  hinder  them.  And  if  they  remain  here, 
no  one  will  call  them  to  account  for  what  they  have  done,  and  no 
one  shall  molest  them  under  any  pretence.  They  may  remain  in 
this  country  like  the  other  inhabitants."t 

*  This  article  is  scored  out  in  the  have  been  extended,  suggestively,  by 

original.  Fottinger,  but  disapproved  of  by  Ak- 

f  The  whole  of  this  article  also  is  bar  Khan, 
scored  out.     Its  provisions  seem  to 


ADDITIONS  TO  THE  TREATY.  173 

We  have  interpolated  a  few  words,  and  it  will  be  friendship  if 
you  comply  with  them. 

Article  16.  "Should  any  English  gentleman  unavoidably  be 
detained,  he  shall  be  treated  honourably  until  such  time  as  he  can 
depart." 

AETICLES  WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  NEWLY  WBITTEN. 

Article  1.  "  Whatever  coin  there  may  be  in  the  public  treasury 
must  be  given  up." 

We  have  set  apart  two  lakhs  of  rupees  for  our  expenses  to 
Peshawur,  which  is  twenty-four  yaboos'  loads.  If  there  is  more 
than  this  in  the  public  treasury,  either  in  gold  mohurs,  ducats,  or 
rupees,  it  is  yours.  If  you  do  not  believe  this,  send  some  one  to 
note  and  inspect  the  loads  on  the  day  of  our  departure.  If  we 
have  said  truly,  give  us  a  blessing;  and  if  we  have  spoken  falsely, 
it  is  your  property,  take  it  away,  and  we  shall  be  convicted  of 
&]sehood. 