

[^Remark.  Let  them  pay  the  hire  of  the  yaboos  and  camels.] 

Article  2.  "  With  reference  to  the  remark  that  was  made  that 
we  should  give  up  all  our  guns  but  six,  we  have  with  the  force 
one  and  a  half  companies  of  artillerymen.  You  have  fixed  six 
guns.  Half  of  a  company  would  remain  without  equipments.  Be 
good  enough  to  give  three  more  small  guns,  such  as  are  drawn 
by  mules,  for  the  other  half-company.  It  will  be  a  great  kind- 
ness." 

\^Remark.  They  cannot  be  given.] 

Article  3.  "  The  muskets  in  excess  of  those  inl  use'  with  the 
regiments  must  be  left  behind." 

This  is  agreed  to.  Whatever  muskets  are  in  addition  to  those 
in  use  with  the  regiments,  together  with  shot  and  powder  and 
other  ordnance  stores,  all  by  way  of  friendship  shall  be  the  pro- 
perty of  the  Newab. 

Article  4.  "  General  Sale,  together  with  his  wife  and  daughter, 
and  the  other  gentlemen  of  rank  who  are  married  and  have 
children,  until  the  arrival  of  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan 
and  the  other  Afghans  and  their  families,  and  Douranees  and 
Ghilzyes,  from  Hindostan,  shall  remain  as  guests  with  us;  that 
when  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  shall  have  arrived,  they 
also  shall  be  allowed  to  depart  with  honour  from  Afghanistan." 

General  Sale  is  with  the  army  in  Jellalabad,  the  departure  of 
which  is  fixed  to  take  place  previous  to  our  arrival;  and  t\^  fot  iVv^ 


174  THE  CAPITULATION. 

Other  two  or  three  gentlemen  who  are  married  and  present  her 
we  have  sent  a  man  to  them.  They,  having  seen  their  familie 
report  that  their  families  will  not  consent  to  this  proposal;  (addinj 
that  you  men  may  do  as  you  like — no  one  can  order  us.  Th 
proposal  is  contrary  to  all  order.  We  now  beg  you  to  be  goc 
enough  to  excuse  the  women  from  this  suffering,  and  we  agree  1 
give  as  many  gentlemen  as  you  may  wish  for.  In  friendshi] 
kindness  and  consideration  are  necessary,  not  overpowering  tl 
weak  with  sufferings.  Since,  for  a  long  time  past,  we  have  sho\« 
kindness  and  respect  to  all  Afghans  of  rank  and  consequence  wil 
whom  we  have  had  dealings,  you  should  consider  what  we  ha-^ 
done  for  them,  and  not  forget  kindness.  As  Shah  Soojah  wi 
father  of  a  family,  and  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  was  wil 
his  family,  and  no  one  gave  them  annoyance,  and  we  showc 
them  respect,  you  also  now  show  similar  kindness,  that  friendsh: 
may  be  increased. 

l^Remark.  Let  them  remain  with  their  families.  Let  the  fami! 
of  the  General  stop  in  Caubul,  until  he  himself  comes  from  Jell 
labad, — Sturt  with  his  family,  Boyd  with  his  family,  and  Ande 
son  with  his  family.] 

Eldred  Pottinger,  Pol.  Agent. 
W.  K.  Elphinstone,  Major-Gen.* 