

*  l%elton*8  reasons  are  giren  else-  they  would  spare  us  the  dishonour 

where.  Pottinger  sajs,  in  another  let-  and  goyemment  the  loss  which  an^ 

ter,  that  it  was  mainly  the  Brigadier's  negotiation  must  entail.   In  a  council 

opiKwition  that  preyented  the  occu-  of  war  held  at  the  General's  house — 

pation  of  the  Balla  Hissar;— the  pas-  Shelton,  Anquetil,  Chambers,  Grant, 

sage  if  on  other  accounts  worth  quo-  and  Bellew  present,  eyerj  one  yoted 

tiDg :  **  There  are  many  points  that  to  the  contrary ;  so  seeing  I  could  do 

my  character  requires  me  to  explain,  nothing,  consented.     At  the  time  we 

psrticalarly  that  we  continued  our  had  but  two   courses  open  to  us, 

n^otiations  with  the  enemy  in  direct  which,   in  my  opinion,  promised  a 

opposition  to  my  adyice,  and  that  we  chance  of  saymg  our  honour  and  part 

were  preyented  from  going  into  the  of  the  army.    One  was  to  occupy  the 

Balla  Hissar   by  the    obstinacy  of  Balla  Hissar,  and  hold  it  till  spring. 

Brigadier  Shelton,  who  declared  the  By  this  we  should  haye  had  the  best 

mttempt  impracticable.  The  General,  chance  of  success.    The  other  was  to 

from  nil  Alness,  was  incapable  of  haye  abandoned  our  camp  and  bag- 

malring  np  his  mmd,  and  the  constant  gage  and  encumbrances,  and  forced 

■■serf ion  of  the  Impossibility  by  his  our  way  down.     This  was  perilous 

Mcond  in  commano,  outweighed  the  but  practicable.     Howeyer,^  I  could 

entreaties  of  the  Enyo^y  when  aliye  not  persuade  them  to  sacrifice  bag- 

(who  was  always  afraid  to  commit  gage ;  and  that  was  eyentually  one  of 

himsdf  in  military  matters),  and  of  the  chief  causes  of  our  disasters.  You 

mine  after ;   and  a  retreat  on  you  may  conceiye  my  anxiety  to  haye  this 

(Jpllalabad)  was  the  only  thing  they  properly  made  known  toeoyemment. 

woold  hear  of;  and,  notwithstanding  X  am  more  anxious  on  the  (jeneral*8 

tiiat  I  pointed  ont  the  yery  doubt-  account,  if  it  be  possible,  than  my 

Ibl  character  of  any  engagement  we  own,  for  the  noble  courage  and  resig- 

might  make  with  the  heads  of  the  in-  nation  with  which  he  bears  himself 

Borgentii,  the  probability  they  could  under  such  a  load  of  misfortune  and 

not  make  it  good;  and  begged  that  physical  suffering  (an  attack  of  rheu- 

n2 


180  THE  CAPITULATION. 

*'  As  soon  as  this  was  decided  upon,"  says  Pottinger, 
"  I  commenced  negotiating.  The  enemy's  first  demand 
(on  complying  with  which  they  promised  to  agree  to  the 
terms  we  oflfered  on  the  25th)  was  that  we  should  settle 
with  the  Hindoos  they  brought  forward  regarding  the 
payment  of  the  money  the  Envoy  had  promised,  t.e., 
which  the  council  of  war  had  decided  should  be  paid. 
*  *  *  I  would  willingly  have  avoided  the  payment  of 
such ;  but  the  enemy,  by  stopping  our  supplies,  obliged 
me  to  suffer  the  imposition,  as  the  military  authorities 
were  urgent  to  prevent  a  renewal  of  hostilities,  cost  what 
it  might.  These  sums  were  promised  in  the  name  of 
Sir  William  Macnaghten,  by  his  agent  (the  Naib  Ameer), 
to  the  diflferent  chiefs  to  bring  about  a  treaty  and  support 
it  when  formed.  Major-General  Elphinstone  recollected 
the  Envoy  having  informed  him  of  his  having  autho- 
rised the  agent  to  make  the  promises,  as  also  did  Captain 
Skinner."* 