

Captain  Lawrence,  who  since  his  seizure  at  the  fatal 
conference,  had  resided  in  the  house  of  Akbar  Khan  in 
the  city,  was  sent  for  to  draw  the  bills,  and  on  the  27th 
of  December  came  into  cantonments.  Fourteen  lakhs 
of  rupees  were  then  signed  away.     Then  came  a  more 

matic  gout  in  the  joints  of  each  hand,  accompanj  us  and  supply  us  with 

and  a  shot   through    the  buttock)  provisions  on  the  road,    llie  refusal 

makes  a  man^s  heart  bleed  that  he  ofthe  Afghans  to  hire  their  cattle,  and 

should  have  been  fated  to  hold  such  a  sinister  reports,  fuUj  convinced  me 

command  when  so  incompetent  from  what  that  protection  would  be.    In- 

disease ;  and  seconded  so  badly,  that  deed,    many    friendly    towards    us 

the  second-in-command  would  never  frankly  forewarned  us  to  prepare  for 

give  advice  but  to  oppose  that  of  the  the  worst.  My  opinion  was  to  march 

other.'' — [Major  Pottinger  to  Captain  early    (by  loading  the  baggage  at 

JMacgregor :  MS.  Records.'^  moonrise),  at  5  A.M.,  and  when  once 

The  following  passage  is  the  only  out  of  cantonments  to  depend  on  our- 

one  in  Shelton^  statement  that  re-  selves,    and    never  to  hdt,  except 

lates    to    the    final   negotiations: —  merely  to  take    refreshments  for  a 

"  Soon  after  this  (the  death  of  the  couple  of  hours,  and  so  to  renew  the 

Envoy)    arrangements,    or     rather  march." — {^MS.  Records.'] 

agreements,  were  entered  into  for  our  ♦  Major  Pottinger*s  Budeeahad  Re- 

retreat,  and  for  a  protecting  force  to  port. 


SUBRENDER  OF  THE  GUNS.  181 

dreadful  concession.  The  enemy  demanded  our  guns. 
All  but  six' field-pieces,  which  were  to  be  suflfered  to 
accompany  the  retreating  force,  were  now  to  be  given 
up  to  the  triumphant  Afghans.  This  was  the  sorest 
trial  that  the  British  garrison  had  yet  been  called  upon  to 
encounter.  It  burnt  in  our  humiliation  as  with  a  brand  of 
iron.  The  troops  chafed  under  this  crowning  indignity; 
and  the  military  chiefs,  when  the  hour  of  surrender 
came,  shrunk  from  the  mortifying  necessity  of  giving  up 
to  a  barbarous  foe  those  muniments  of  war,  which  sol- 
diers of  all  nations  honour,  and  some  almost  idolise. 
But  they  could  not  bring  themselves  to  risk  a  renewal 
of  the  conflict  by  openly  refusing  to  accede  to  the 
demand.  So,  Pottinger  hoping,  perhaps,  that  something 
might  yet  arise  to  break  off  the  negotiations,  determined 
to  procrastinate.  He  began  by  giving  up  the  Shah's 
guns,  by  twos,  on  successive  days ;  but  if  this  alleviated 
the  pain  of  the  concession,  it  did  not  really  soflen  the 
disgrace. 

From  day  to  day,  guns,  waggons,  small  arms,  and 
ammunition  were  surrendered  to  the  enemy.  The 
hostages,  too,  were  given  up.  Lieutenants  ConoUy  and 
Airey  were  already  in  the  hands  of  the  Afghans.  Now 
Captains  Walsh  and  Drummond,  and  Lieutenant  War- 
burton  and  Webb,  were  sent  to  join  them  in  captivity.* 