

To  this  the  chiefs  sent  back  the  following 

Agreement  of  Peace  that  has  been  determined  on  with  the  Frar 
English  gentlemen^  to  which  engagement ^  if  they  consent  and  a 
accordingly^  on  the  part  of  the  heads  and  leaders  ofAfghanistc 
henceforward  no  infractixms  will  occur  to  their  friendly  engag 
ments  : 

1st.  That  the  going  of  the  gentlemen  shall  be  speedy.  Inregai 
to  the  carriage-cattle,  let  them  send  money  that  they  may  be  pu 
chased  and  sent. 

2nd.  As  regards  the  going  of  the  Sirdars  with  the  Englii 
army  that  no  person  may  injure  it  on  the  way,  Sirdar  Mahom< 
Akbar  Khan  or  Sirdar  Mahomed  Oosman  Khan,  whichever  mi 
be  wished  by  the  English,  will  be  appointed  and  sent. 

3rd.  The  army  of  Jellalabad  shall  march  previous  to  the  arn 
of  Caubul,  and  proceed  to  Peshawur.   Sirdar  Abdool  Suffoor  Khj 

♦  MS,  Records. 


ANSWER  OF  THE  SIRDARS.  175 

having  been  appointed^  will  leave  this  and  proceed  that  he  may 
previously  accompany  them;  secondly,  the  road  of  Bhungush  has 
been  appointed. 

4th.  The  Ghuznee  force  having  got  quickly  ready  will  proceed 
by  the  road  of  Caubul  to  Peshawur.  A  relative  of  Naib  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan,  with  Mehtur  Moosa  Khan,  has  been  appointed  to 
accompany  it. 

5th.  The  army  of  Candahar  and  other  parts  of  Afghanistan, 
wherever  an  army  may  be,  will  quickly  depart  for  India.  Newab 
Abdool  Jubbar  Khan  has  been  appointed  to  carry  this  into  effect. 

6th.  Whatever  property  of  the  Ameer  may  be  with  the  English 
will  be  returned,  and  nothing  retained. 

7th.  Whatever  property  of  the  English  may  be  left  for  want  of 
carriage  will  become  the  property  of  the  Newab. 

8th.  If  the  family  of  Shah  Soojah,  on  account  of  want  of  car- 
riage, may  remain  here,  they  will  be  placed  in  the  house  of  Hadjee 
Khan. 

9th.  Whenever  the  English  army  may  arrive  at  Peshawur,  they 
will  make  arrangements  for  the  return  of  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed 
Khan,  the  Afghans  and  their  families,  that  are  in  India. 

10th.  That  the  English  gentlemen,  with  their  families,  will  be 
left  at  Caubul  as  hostages,  until  the  Ameer  Dost  Mahomed  Khan, 
with  the  rest  of  the  Afghans  and  their  families,  may  arrive  at 
Peshawur;  or,  secondly,  that  six  hostages  may  be  lelt. 

11th.  After  the  departure  of  the  English  there  shall  be  perfect 
friendship  between  the  two  states,  in  so  much  so  that  the  Govern- 
ment of  Afghanistan,  without  the  advice  and  approval  of  the 
British  Government,  shall  enter  into  no  connexion  or  correspond- 
ence with  any  other  power;  but  if,  in  its  defence,  it  may  require 
the  assistance  of  the  English,  they  will  not  delay  to  afford  it 
Should  the  British  Government  not  consent  to  this,  the  Afghans 
are  free  to  make  friends  with  any  one  they  like. 