

VOL.  n.  N 


178  THE  CAPITULATION. 

and  that  any  sum,  in  addition  to  what  had  akeady  been 
promised  by  Sir  William  Macnaghten,  if  it  tended  to 
secure  the  safety  of  the  army,  would  be  well  expended, 
and  that  our  right  to  negotiate  on  these  terms  was 
proved  by  Sir  William  Macnaghten  having  agreed  to 
them  before  his  assassination.  Under  these  circum- 
stances, as  the  Major-General  coincided  with  the  officers 
of  the  council,  and  refused  to  attempt  occupying  the 
Balla  Hissar ;  as  his  second  in  command,  who  had  been 
in  there,  declared  it  impracticable,  I  considered  it  my 
duty,  notwithstanding  my  repugnance  to  and  disapproval 
of  the  measure,  to  yield,  and  attempt  to  carry  on  a  nego- 
tiation. For  the  reasons  of  the  military  authorities,  I 
must  refer  you  to  themselves."* 

The  statement  of  the  chief  military  authority  is  to  the 
same  effect,  but  it  does  not  deal  largely  in  "  reasons."  The 
plan  recommended  by  Major  Pottinger  was  pronounced 
to  be  "impracticable."  "On  the  26th,"  says  General 
Elphinstone,  "Major  Pottinger  received  letters  from 
Captain  Macgregor  and  Captain  Mackeson,  addressed  to 
the  late  Envoy,  announcing  the  march  of  strong  rein- 
forcements from  India.  He  also  received  a  tender  from 
Mahomed  Oosman  Khan  to  escort  the  troops  to  Peshawur 
himself  for  five  lakhs  of  rupees.  Shortly  after,  the  Naib 
Ameer  Mahomed  Khan  came  into  cantonments  with  the 
verbal  agreement  to  the  amendments  proposed  to  the 
renewed  treaty,  and  brought  with  him  a  Cashmere 
merchant  and  several  Hindoo  Shroffs  to  negotiate  bills 
payable  to  the  several  chiefe,  on  the  verbal  promise  of 
the  late  Envoy,  amounting  to  about  14  lakhs  of  rupees. 
The  proposal  was  submitted  to  the  council  of  war  com- 
posed as  above.  Major  Pottinger  informed  the  council 
that  he  considered  any  treaty  with  the  chiefs  as  ex- 
^^^^ngly  doubtful,  and  that  he  thought  it  was  our  duty 

•  Report  of  Major  Eldred  Pottinger :  MS.  Records. 


DECISION  OF  THE  COUNCIL  OP  WAB.  179 

either  to  hold  out,  or  to  force  a  retreat  to  Jellalabad,  so 
as,  in  no  way,  to  bind  the  hands  of  our  government  by 
promising  to  evacuate  the  country,  or  to  waste  so  much 
public  money  to  save  our  own  lives  and  property  under 
such  doubtful  circumstances  of  faith  being  kept  with  us. 
The  council,  one  and  all,  were  of  opinion  that  Major 
Pottinger's  views  were  impracticable — that  we  could  not 
hold  out  for  want  of  provisions,  and  from  having  sur- 
rendered the  forts  commanding  cantonments;  and  that 
we  could  not  force  a  retreat  to  Jellalabad ;  also,  that  it 
was  better  to  pay  any  sum  of  money  than  sacrifice  the 
troops  then  at  Caubul.  It  was  consequently  determined, 
nem.  can.^  that  Major  Pottinger  should  enter  into  nego- 
tiations and  pay  the  money  to  the  different  chiefs,  which 
was  accordingly  done/'* 