

fears  of  those  who  never  thought  to  see  the  Envoy  re- 
enter the  cantonment-gates.  They  waited  for  tidings  of 
him,  and  tidings  came  at  last.  Though  he  had  been  killed 
ahnost  within  musket-shot  of  our  ramparts,  nothing  had 
been  done  by  the  military  chiefs  to  solve  the  painful 
doubts  which  perplexed  them  throughout  that  disastrous 
23rd  of  December.  It  was  thought  that  if  they  only 
waited  long  enough  for  it,  some  certain  intelUgence  would 
come  at  last ;  and  it  came  at  last,  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
24th,  in  the  shape  of  a  letter  from  Captain  Lawrence,  and 
certain  overtures  from  the  confederate  chiefs,  seeking  a 
renewal  of  the  negotiations  on  the  basis  of  the  treaty 
initiated  by  the  deceased  Envoy. 

As  the  game  of  negotiation  was  now  to  be  commenced 
anew,  it  was  necessary  to  secure  the  services  of  a  new  ne- 
gotiator. There  was  a  man  then  in  cantonments  of  whom 
little  had  been  seen  or  heard  for  some  weeks,  and  of 
whom  the  chroniclers  and  journaHsts  of  the  insurrection 
hdd  up  to  this  time  made  little  or  no  mention,  in  con- 
nexion with  the  stirring  scenes  in  which  Macnaghten 
had  been  the  chief  actor,  but  to  whom  the  garrison  now 
turned  as  to  the  only  man  fitted  to  take  the  Envoy's 
place.  Ever  since  his  arrival  from  Charekur,  Major 
Pottinger  had  been  incapacitated  from  active  employ- 
ment by  the  wound  he  had  received  in  the  early  part  of 
November.  The  severity  of  his  sufferings  had  neces- 
sarily been  much  increased  by  the  hardships  of  his  perilous 
journey  from  Charekur  to  Caubul,  and  during  the 
greater  part  of  the  time  since  his  arrival  at  the  latter 
place  he  had  been  confined  to  his  bed.  But  he  was  now, 
in  the  difficult  conjuncture  that  had  arisen,  ready  to 
bring  all  the  manly  vigour  and  high  courage  which  had 
done  so  much  to  roll  back  from  the  gates  of  Herat  the 
tide  of  Persian  invasion,  to  the  new  duty  of  endeavour- 
ing to  rescue  his  country  from  the  degradation  in  which 


170  THE  CAPITULATION. 

it  had  been  sunk  by  the  faint  hearts  of  the  military 
chiefs. 

The  evening  of  the  24th  saw  Pottinger  in  council 
with  General  Elphinstone,  Brigadiers  Shelton  and  An- 
quetil,  and  Colonel  Chambers,  the  four  senior  officers  of 
the  garrison.  The  chiefe  had  sent  in  a  letter,  sealed  by 
Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,  Akbar  Khan,  Araeen-oollah 
Khan,  Oosman  Khan,  and  others,  with  a  memorandum 
of  the  terms  on  which  they  were  prepared  to  grant  the 
army  a  safe  conduct  to  Peshawur.  This  was  now  trans- 
lated to  the  miUtary  officers,  who  agreed  upon  a  memo- 
randum  to  be  sent  back  in  reply.  On  the  following 
day  the  memorandum  was  sent  in  by  Ameer  Mahomed 
Khan,  who,  being  in  the  British  cantonments  on  the  day 
of  the  Envoy's  death,  had  been  seized  and  detained  as  a 
hostage.  It  was  a  rough  draft  of  the  treaty  proposed  by 
the  chiefs  with  the  assent  of  the  English  authorities; 
and  it  thus  appears  translated  from  the  original,  with  the 
subsequent  remarks  of  the  chiefs,  after  each  article,  be- 
lieved to  be  in  the  hand- writing  of  Akbar  ELhan  : 