

*  On    these    additional   hostages  as  this.      Thej  will,  therefore,  be 

being  sent.  Captains    Skinner  and  found  in  the  appendix.    Both  the 

Minuenzie,  who  had  been  detuned  English  officers  owed  their  lives  to 

in  ibe  city,  were  released.    Captains  the  efforts  of  the  chiefs,  who  at  much 

Lftwrence  and  Mackenzie  have  ^ach  personal  risk  defended  them  against 

drmwn  up  a  narrative  of  the  circum-  the  furious  assaults  of  the  Ghazees, 

•tancea  attending  their  capture,  and  *'  I  must  do  Mahomed  Akbar  the  jus- 

their  detention  in  the  citj,  the  former  tice  to  say,''  writes  Captain  Macken- 

in  the  houae  of  Ameen-ooUah,  and  the  zie,  ''  that  finding  the  Ghazees  bent 

latter  in  that  of  Akbar  Khan.  These  on  my  slaughter,  even  af\er  I  had 

nairattves,  though  they  have  been  very  reached  his  stirrup,  he  drew  b  is  sword 

eztenaiyely  read  in  Eyre's  Journal,  and  laid  about  him  right  manfully,  for 

are  of  too  much  interest  and  import-  my  conductor  and  Meerza  Baoodeen 

•Doe  to  be  omitted  from  such  a  work  Khan  were  obliged  to  press  me  up 


182  THE  CAPITULATION. 

The  enemy  were  anxious  to  get  some  of  the 
families  into  their  hands ;  but  there  was  a  general  un- 
willingness on  the  part  of  the  officers  to  sufier  their  wives 
and  children  to  be  cast  upon  the  forbearance  of  an 
enemy  supposed  to  be  so  cruel,  so  treacherous,  and  so 
unscrupulous.  On  the  29th,  such  of  the  sick  and 
wounded  as  were  believed  to  be  unable  to  bear  the 
fatigues  of  the  march,  were  sent  into  the  city;  and  two 
medical  officers,  Drs.  Berwick  and  Campbell,  were  ap» 
pointed  to  take  charge  of  them. 

On  the  1st  of  January,  the  ratified  treaty  was  sent  iii| 
duly  bearing  the  seals  of  eighteen  of  the  A%han  Sirdara. 
It  appears  thus  in  its  English  dress : 

TRANSLATION  OF  A  TREATY  BETWEEN  THE  ENGLISH  AUTHO- 
RITIES AT  CAUBUL  AND  THE  AFGHAN  NOBLES.  (DATED  IN 
THE  MONTH  OF  ZE-VOL-KADH.) 

The  cause  of  writing  this  confidential  paper,  and  the  inleu* 
tion  of  forming  this  unparalleled  friendly  treaty,  is  thii:-«*That 
at  the  present  happy  moment,  to  put  away  strife  and  contention, 
and  avert  discord  and  enmity,  the  representatives  of  the  great 
English  nation — that  is,  the  high  of  rank  and  respected  Eldrecl 
Pottinger,  the  ambassador  and  agent  of  the  English  Govemment| 
and  General  Elphinstone,  the  commander  of  the  English  forces — 
have  concluded  a  comprehensive  treaty  containing  certain  arti- 
cles, which  they  have  confided  to  the  hands  of  the  Afghan 
nobility,  that  by  it  the  chain  of  friendship  may  be  strengthened. 
And  it  has  been  settled  that  the  Afghan  nobles  shall  give  a  simi- 
lar writing. 

An  engagement  is  now  made  by  his  Majesty  Newaub  Maho* 
med  Zemaun  Khan,  King  of  Afghanistan,  and  Naib  Ameen-ooUah 