

12th.  If  any  gentleman  would  wish  to  remain  in  Caubul,  on 
account  of  his  private  affairs,  he  may  do  so,  and  will  be  treated 
with  justice  and  respect. 

13th.  Whatever  cash,  whether  gold  or  silver,  may  be  in  the 
treasury,  shall  be  paid  to  Newab  Zemaun  Khan.  A  trustworthy 
person  will  be  appointed,  who  will  issue  supplies  from  stage  to 
stage  as  far  as  Peshawur. 

14th.  With  regard  to  artillery,  six  guns  have  been  determined 


176  THE  CAPITULATION. 

on.  They  are  enough.  More  will  not  be  given.  Secondly,  the 
three  mule  guns  will  be  given. 

15th.  The  spare  arms  shall  be  given  to  Newab  Mahomed  Ze- 
maun  Khan. 

16th.  The  hostages  to  be  left  here^  and  these  persons  with  their 
families — General  Sale,  Captains  Sturt,  Boyd,  and  Anderson. 

17th.  Let  General  Sale  go  with  the  army  to  Jellalabad  and  his 
family  remain  here;  after  taking  the  army  to  Jellalabad,  let  him 
return  to  Caubul. 

18th.  If  any  of  the  Frank  gentlemen  have  taken  a  Mussulman 
wife,  she  shall  be  given  up. 

If  there  may  be  questions  about  any  article,  send  a  note  quickly 
by  the  bearer.* 

All  this  was  grievously  humiliating.  To  treat  upon 
such  terms  with  such  an  enemy — to  be  so  dictated 
to — so  overborne — so  insulted — was  a  sore  trial  to  the 
manly  spirit  of  Eldred  Pottinger ;  who  lifted  up  his  voice 
against  these  degrading  concessions,  but  ever  remon- 
strated in  vain.  On  that  Christmas-day,  which  was  not 
all  cheerless,  there  arrived  the  encouraging  intelligence 
that  reinforcements  were  on  their  way  from  India. 
Macgregor  and  Mackeson  wrote  from  Jellalabad  and 
Peshawur,  urging  Macnaghten  to  hold  out  to  the  last ; 
and  the  letters  were  now  opened  by  one  who  had  car- 
ried to  the  performance  of  Macnaghten's  duties  all  Mac- 
naghten's  constancy  and  courage.  Pottinger  stood  up 
manfully  in  council,  and  declared  that  it  now  became  the 
leaders  of  the  British  army  either  to  fling  themselves 
into  the  Balla  Hissar  or  to  fight  their  way  down  to  Jel- 
lalabad. But  the  military  chiefs  clung  to  the  old  idea 
of  capitulation,  and  determined  to  cast  themselves  on  the 
mercy  of  the  Afghan  Sirdars. 

It  is  right  that  Pottinger  should  tell  his  own  story — 
that  the  reasons  he  urged  for  the  adoption  of  the  nobler 

*  MS.  Records,  This  memoran-  marks  ^*  appended  to  the  preceding 
dum  seems  to  be  based  on  the  "  Re-    document. 


pottinger's  protests.  177 

course  should  be  well  understood :  "  On  that  day,"  he 
writes,  in  his  report  from  Budeeabad,  "  we  received  a 
tender  from  Mahomed  Oosman  Khan,  oflfering  to  escort 
the  army  to  Peshawur  for  the  sum  of  five  lakhs  of 
rupees,  as  had  been  offered  him  (he  said)  by  Sir  W. 
Macnaghten.  At  the  same  time,  letters  from  Captains 
Macgregor  and  Mackeson  were  received,  urging  Sir 
William  to  hold  out,  and  informing  us  of  the  reinforce- 
ments which  were  on  their  way  from  India.  The  in- 
formation from  the  city  showed  that  feuds  were  running 
high  there,  and  that  Shah  Soojah  appeared  to  be  getting 
up  a  respectable  party  for  himself.  When  I  informed 
General  Elphinstone  of  these  facts,  he  summoned  a  coun- 
cil of  war,  consisting  of  Brigadier  Shelton,  Brigadier 
Anquetil,  Lieut.-Colonel  Chambers,  Captain  Bellew,  and 
Captain  Grant.  At  the  Major-Generars  request  I  laid 
the  above-mentioned  facts,  and  the  enemy's  tenders,  be- 
fore these  officers,  and  also  my  own  opinion  that  we 
should  not  treat  with  the  enemy,  because— ;;/?r5%,  I  had 
every  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  were  deceiving 
us;  secondly^  I  considered  it^our  duty  to  hold  aloof  from 
all  measures  which  would  tie  the  hands  of  government 
as  to  its  ftiture  acts;  and  thirdly^  that  we  had  no  right 
to  sacrifice  so  large  a  sum  of  public  money  (amounting 
to  nineteen  lakhs)  to  purchase  our  own  safety — or  to 
order  other  commanding  officers  to  give  up  the  trusts 
confided  to  them — ^for  it  was  especially  laid  down  by 
writers  on  international  law,  that  a  general  had  no  au- 
thority to  make  any  treaty,  unless  he  were  able  to  en- 
force the  conditions,  and  that  he  could  not  treat  for  the 
future,  but  only  for  the  present.  The  council  of  war, 
however,  unanimously  decided  that  remaining  at  Caubul 
and  forcing  a  retreat  were  alike  impracticable,  and  that 
nothing  remained  for  us  but  endeavouring  to  release  the 
army,  by  agreeing  to  the  tenders  offered  by  the  enemy ; 