

(Jeneral  Elphinstone  has  left  upon  record  a  declaration 
of  his  belief  that  if  he  had  been  more  worthily  sup- 
ported he  would  not  have  been  beaten  at  Caubul.  So 
long  as  he  held  the  chief  command  in  his  own  hands, 
he — and  he  alone — ^was  responsible  for  all  the  operations 
of  the  army.  He  never  relinquished  the  command. 
Though  he  did  not  take  the  field  in  person,  every  order 
emanated  from  him.  To  him  the  Envoy  addressed 
himself ;  with  him  the  Envoy  took  counsel.  It  is  pos- 
sible that  if  the  second-in-command  had  been  an  officer 
of  a  different  stamp,  the  army  would  not  have  been  so 
disastrously  and  ignominiously  beaten ;  but  this  admission 
does  not  affect  the  question  of  responsibility.  Brigadier 
Shelton,  throughout  the  siege,  held  a  subordinate  situa- 
tion. He  was  immediately  imder  Elphinstone's  orders; 
and  though  he  may  be  chargeable  with  certain  indi- 
vidual miscarriages — with  certain  errors  in  the  executive 
management  of  details — he  is  not  chargeable  with  the 
great  comprehensive    failure  which    has   plunged  his 


192  THE  CAPITULATION. 

country  into  such  a  sea  of  disgrace.  Of  Shelton's  faults 
I  have  not  been  unmindful ;  but  when  I  have  admitted 
all  his  perverseness,  his  arrogance,  his  contumacy,  and 
expressed  my  belief  that  there  was  not  another  man  in 
the  British  army  so  unfitted  by  nature  for  the  post  he 
occupied  under  such  a  General,  the  admission  amounts 
to  little  more  than  this :  that  Brigadier  Shelton  was  not 
the  man  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  General  Elphinstone. 
It  is  only  because  General  Elphinstone  was  so  incapable 
himself  that  we  come  to  canvass  at  all  the  merits  of  his 
second-in-command.  History  does  not  trouble  itself 
much  about  seconds-in-command  when  the  chiefs  are  fit 
for  their  posts. 

Unquestionably  Elphinstone  was  not  well  supported. 
Macnaghten,  in  emphatic  language,  described  the  troops 
as  "  a  pack  of  despicable  cowards."  On  more  than  one 
occasion  they  forgot  that  they  were  British  troops,  and 
turned  their  backs  upon  the  enemy.  They  did  not  fight 
as  they  would  have  fought  if  they  had  been  well  com- 
manded. The  commander  had  less  reason  to  complain 
of  his  troops  than  the  troops  had  to  complain  of  their 
commander.  It  was  the  faint-heartedness  of  the  com- 
mander at  the  outset  of  the  insurrection  that  dispirited 
and  unnerved  the  troops.  If  Elphinstone,  on  the  2nd  of 
November,  had  struck  a  vigorous  blow  at  the  then  inci- 
pient rebellion,  and  proved  himself,  by  his  energy  and 
resolution,  worthy  of  the  confidence  of  the  troops,  they 
would  have  had  confidence  in  him  and  in  themselves. 
But  they  were  held  in  restraint  by  the  backwardness  of 
their  leader ;  the  fro  ward  feeling  that  then  inspired  them 
was  crushed  and  deadened.  There  was  nothing  to  en- 
courage and  to  animate  them,  but  everything  to  dis- 
hearten and  depress.  They  saw  that  the  enemy  were 
sujQfered  to  triumph  over  and  insult  them — that  the 
worst  indignities  were  unresented,  the  vilest  outrages 