


184  THE  CAPITULATION. 

India  should  not  agree  to  this  proposal^  we  are  at  liberty  to  form 
an  alliance  with  any  other  power. 

Article  9.  Should  any  English  gentleman  be  unavoidably  de- 
tained in  Caubul,  we  will  treat  him  with  all  respect  and  consi- 
deration, and  on  his  departure  dismiss  him  with  honour. 

Article  10.  The  English  can  take  six  horse-artillery  guns  and 
three  mule  guns,  and  the  rest,  by  way  of  friendship,  shall  be 
left  for  our  use.  And  all  muskets  and  ordnance  stores  in  the 
magazine  shall,  as  a  token  of  iriendship,  be  made  over  to  our 
agents. 

Article  1 1 .  Such  English  soldiers  as  may  be  left  sick  or  wounded 
at  Caubul  shall  be  at  liberty  to  return  to  their  own  country  on 
their  recovery. 

This  is  the  treaty,  the  articles  of  which  have  been  entered  into 
between  the  nobles  of  the  Mahomedan  faith  and  the  distinguished 
gentlemen.  From  which  articles  we  will  not  depart.  Written 
in  the  month  of  Ze-vol-E[adh,  in  the  year  of  the  Mahomedan 
faith  1257. 

(Sealed) 

Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan.  Ejeeak  Mahomed  Khan. 

Meeb  Hajee  Khan.  Abdool  Ehalik  Khan. 

Sekundub  Khan.  Ameen-oollah  Khan. 

Dabweesh  Khan.  Meeb  Aslan  Khan. 

Allee  Khan  Sumud  Khan. 

Mahomed  Akbab  Khan.  Mahomed  Nasib  Khan. 

Mahomed  Oosman  Khan.  Abdoollah  Khan. 

Gholam  Ahmed  Khan.  Ghupfoob  Khan. 

Gholam  Mahomed  Khan.  Meeb  Alteb  Khan.     ^ 

Such  were  the  terms  of  the  treaty  under  which  the 
British  commanders  consented  to  evacuate  Afghanistan. 
There  is  nothing  more  painful  in  all  this  painful  history 
than  the  progress  of  the  negotiations  which  resulted  in 
the  accomplishment  of  this  treaty.  The  tone  of  the 
enemy  was  arrogant,  dictatorial,  and  insulting ;  whilst 
the  language  of  our  diplomatists  was  that  of  submission 
and  self-abasement.     It  is  so  rare  a  thing  for  English- 


ENDURANCE  OF  THE  GARRISON. 


185 


men  to  throw  themselves  upon  the  clemency  and  for- 
bearance of  an  insolent  foe,  that  when  we  see  our  officers 
imploring  the  Afghan  chiefs  "  not  to  overpower  the 
weak  with  suffering,"  we  contemplate  the  sad  picture  of 
our  humihation  with  as  much  astonishment  as  shame. 
The  disgrace  rests  on  the  military  commanders.  Pot- 
tinger,  had  he  not  been  overruled  in  council,  would 
have  snapped  asunder  the  treaty  before  the  faces  of  the 
chie&,  and  appealed  again  to  the  God  of  Battles. 

There  were  other  things,  too,  to  humble  us.  The  state 
of  affairs  in  cantonments  was  something  very  grievous 
to  contemplate.  The  Ghazees  hovering  round  the  walls 
were  insulting  our  people  at  their  very  gates,  and  beard- 
ing them  at  the  very  muzzles  of  their  guns.  Intercept- 
ing the  supplies  of  grain  which  the  commissariat  had 
purchased  with  so  much  difficulty,  they  drove  off  the 
cattle  and  ill-treated  their  attendants.  The  chiefs  de- 
clared that  they  had  no  power  to  prevent  these  outrages, 
and  told  the  British  authorities  that  they  should  order 
the  garrison  to  fire  upon  all  who  molested  them.  Officers 
and  men  alike  were  burning  to  chastise  the  wretches  who 
thus  insulted  their  misfortunes ;  but  they  were  not  suffered 
to  fire  a  shot.  The  Afghans  had  triumphed  over  us  so 
long  with  impunity  that  they  now  believed  the  Ferin- 
ghees  had  sunk  into  hopeless  cowardice,  and  had  become 
as  patient  of  injury  and  insult  as  a  herd  of  broken-spirited 
slaves.* 