

It  has  been  said  that  the  British  army  was  not  beaten 
out  of  Caubul,  but  that  it  was  starved  out  of  Caubul. 
This  is  a  belief  that  I  would  willingly  encourage,  if  I 


190  TOE  CAPITULATION. 

could  only  bring  my  judgment  to  embrace  it.  But  the 
fact  is,  that  the  army  was  driven  out  of  Caubul  for  want 
of  supplies,  only  because  the  troops  would  not  fight,  or 
were  not  suffered  to  fight,  to  obtain  them.  The  Com- 
missariat officers  would  have  fed  the  troops,  if  the  mili- 
tary authorities  had  not  shamefiiUy  sacrificed  their  sup- 
plies,— ^if  they  had  not  ignominiously  lost  what  was 
already  in  store ;  and  ignominiously  refiised  to  make  an 
effort  to  obtain  fresh  supplies  from  the  surrounding 
coimtry.  The  troops,  indeed,  fought  neither  to  keep 
their  food  when  they  had  it,  nor  to  procure  food  when 
they  had  none.  There  was  an  alacrity  only  in  losing. 
The  imbecility  which  sacrificed  the  Bengal  Commissariat 
Fort,  on  the  5th  of  November,  and  the  miserable  aban- 
donment of  the  expedition  to  Khoja  Rewash,  on  the 
9th  of  December,  are  equally  apt  illustrations  of  the 

truth,  that,  if  the  army  was  starved  out  of  Caubul,  it 
was  only  because  it  courted  starvation. 

This  is  a  very  humiliating  confession,  but  it  is  impos- 
sible, without  a  sacrifice  of  truth  for  the  sake  of  ad- 
ministering to  our  national  vanity,  to  avoid  the  mortify- 
ing conclusion  that  the  Caubul  army  wanted  food,  only 
because  it  wanted  vigour  and  energy  to  obtain  it.  If 
General  Elphinstone  had  thrown  half  as  much  heart 
into  his  work  as  Captain  Johnson  threw  into  his,  the 
army  would  not  have  been  starved  out  of  Caubul. 
There  is  nothing  sadder  than  the  spectacle  of  a  fine 
army  sacrificed  by  the  imbecility  of  an  incapable  general, 
and  nothing  more  painful  than  to  write  of  it.  But  such 
humiliating  revelations  are  not  without  their  uses. 
They  operate  in  the  way  of  warning.  Never  again, 
after  this  fi:ightful  illustration  of  the  evils  of  a  vicious 
system  of  routine,  will  the  lives  of  sixteen  thousand 
men,  and  the  honour  of  a  great  nation,  be  placed  in  the 
hands  of  a  senile  commander,  crippled  by  disease  and 
enfeebled  by  suffering.     It  was  General  Elphinstone's 


THE  MILITARY  CHIEFS.  191 

miflfbrtune  that  he  was  sent  to  Caubul.  It  was  Lord 
Auckland's  fault  that  he  sent  him  there.  Greneral 
Elphinstone  knew  that  he  was  incapable  of  performing 
worthily  the  duties  of  such  a  command,  and  he  took 
the  earliest  opportunity  of  applying  for  relief  firom  a 
burden  of  responsibility  which  he  was  not  able  to  bear. 
Lord  Auckland  knew  that  he  was  incapable,  for  the 
attention  of  the  Governor-General  was  strongly  called 
to  the  fact ;  but  he  sent  the  infirm  old  General  to  Caubul, 
in  spite  of  the  representations  that  were  made  to  him 
by  men  less  jealous  of  the  integrity  of  the  roster  than 
of  the  honour  of  their  country.  The  British  army  was 
beaten  at  Caubul,  because  it  was  commanded  by  General 
Elphinstone ;  and  it  was  commanded  by  (Jeneral  Elphin- 
stone, because  Lord  Auckland  decreed  that  it  should 
be  so. 