


DETERIORATION  OF  THE  TROOPS.         193 

unpunished.  Thus  abased,  they  soon  lost  their  self- 
respect,  and  forgot  what  was  due  to  their  colours  and 
their  country. 

Brigadier  Shelton  has  attributed  to  physical  causes 
the  deterioration  of  the  troops ;  but  it  is  rather  to  moral 
than  to  physical  causes  that  that  deterioration  is  to  be 
ftscribed.  The  troops  would  have  borne  up  against  con- 
tinued harassing  duty  in  cantonments — against  cold, 
hunger,  and  fatigue ;  they  would  have  kept  up  a  brave 
heart  under  the  sorest  physical  trials,  if  there  had  been 
no  moral  influences  to  sicken  and  to  chill.  They  bore, 
indeed,  their  outward  sufferings  without  complaining. 
Cold,  hunger,  and  fatigue  they  could  endure  without  a 
murmur ;  but  the  supineness  of  those  who  suffered  them 
to  be  robbed  and  insulted  under  the  very  shadow  of 
their  guns  filled  them  with  burning  indignation,  which, 
in  time,  was  succeeded  by  a  reaction  of  sullen  despon- 
dency. They  felt  that  they  were  sacrificed  to  the  imbe- 
cility of  their  commander;  and,  in  time,  under  the  sure 
process  of  moral  deterioration,  they  became  in  all  re- 
spects worthy  of  their  chief. 

Examples  of  individual  heroism  were  not  wanting. 
Wherever  Englishmen  congregate,  there  are  surely  to  be 
found  brave  hearts  and  resolute  spirits  amongst  them. 
There  were  many  in  that  Caubul  garrison  who  bore 
themselves  throughout  the  perilous  season  of  their  be- 
leaguerment  in  a  manner  worthy  of  the  chivalry  of  the 
empire.  When  the  retreating  force  commenced  its  mise- 
rable march  towards  the  British  provinces,  it  left  behind 
it  the  remains  of  many  brave  men  who  had  fallen  nobly 
•on  the  field  of  battle ;  and  many  brave  men  were  now 
bracing  themselves  up  in  the  desperate  resolution  to  sell 
their  lives  dearly  to  the  enemy,  if  treachery  were  at 
work  for  their  destruction..  But  they  who  had  been 
most  eager  to  counsel  a  vigorous  course  of  action,  and 

VOL.  XL  O 


194  THE  CAPITULATION. 

who  had  felt  most  deeply  the  humiliation  into  which 
the  feebleness  of  their  chief  had  sunk  them,  were  mostly 
officers  of  the  lower  grades ;  and  though  the  opinions  of 
captains  and  subalterns  were  sought,  and  offered  when 
not  sought,  in  a  manner  unprecedented  in  the  annals  of 
British  warfare,  they  had  no  power  to  direct  the  current 
of  events  or  to  avert  the  evils  which  they  clearly  foresaw. 
Even  Pottinger,  with  all  the  influence  of  recognised 
official  position,  and  the  prestige  of  an  heroic  character, 
could  only  lift  up  his  voice  in  remonstrance  against  the 
sacrifice  of  national  honour  involved  in  the  humiliating 
treaty  with  the  Afghan  Sirdars.  The  mihtary  chiefe 
were  fixed  in  their  determination  to  abandon  A%han- 
istan,  and  to  leave  Shah  Soojah  to  his  fate. 