


sale's  brigade.  195 


BOOK  VI. 

[1841—1842.] 


CHAPTER  I. 

[November,  1841— January,  1842.] 

Sale^  Brigade — ^Evacuation  of  Gundamuck — Skirmishes  with  the  Enemy — 
Occupation  of  Jellalabad — State  of  the  Defences— SuccessM  Sallies — 
The  Fortifications  repaired — Disastrous  Tidings  from  Caubul — Summons 
to  Surrender — ^Arrival  of  Dr.  Brydon. 

Whilst  Elphinstone  was  flinging  himself  into  the  snares 
of  the  enemy  at  Caubul,  Sale  was  holding  out  manfully 
at  Jellalabad.  Whether  the  latter  ought  not  to  have 
returned  to  Caubul,  or,  if  such  a  movement  were  impossi- 
ble, to  have  stood  his  groimd  at  Gundamuck,  is  a  question 
which  military  critics  wiU  long  continue  to  discuss.  That 
the  appearance  of  this  brigade  at  Caubul  would  have 
changed  the  aspect  of  aflfairs  at  that  place,  and  in  all  pro- 
bability rescued  Elphinstone's  unhappy  force  from  de- 
struction, and  the  national  character  from  disgrace,  there 
seems  no  reason  to  doubt.  But  it  was  the  opinion  of 
General  Sale  that  his  brigade  could  not  reach  Caubul. 
"  My  retracing  my  steps  on  that  city,'*  he  says,  "  was,  in 
a  military  sense,  impracticable^  since  the  first  inevitable 

o2 


196 


SALE  S  BRIGADE. 


sacrifice  would  have  been  of  the  lives  of  300  sick  and 
wounded,  whom  I  could  not  have  left  in  depot  with  the 
treasonable  irregulars  at  Gundamuck,  whilst  my  cattle 
was  unequal  to  the  transport  of  my  camp-equipage,  and 
my  ammunition  insufficient  for  protracted  operations.  In 
the  position  which  I  occupied,  I  could  not  absolutely 
command  a  day's  provisions,  or  even  water,  and  should 
have  been  hemmed  in  on  every  side  by  hostile  tribes, 
amounting  to  thirty  or  forty  thousand  men,  p§irt  of  whom 
might  have  seized  Jellalabad,  and  reduced  it  to  ashes ; 
or,  holding  it,  have  left  me  no  alternative  but  a  disastrous 
retreat  to  Peshawur.  I  therefore  came  to  the  resolution 
of  anticipating  any  movement  of  this  kind,  and,  by  pos- 
sessing myself  of  Jellalabad,  establishing  a  point  on 
which  the  force  at  Caubul  might  retire  if  haraly  pressed, 
and  restoring  a  link  in  the  chain  of  communication  with 
our  provinces." 

This  was  written  five  months  after  the  brigade  had 
abandoned  its  position  at  Gundamuck.  It  does  not, 
however,  differ  much  from  the  statement  of  reasons  sent 
to  General  Elphinstone  only  as  many  days  afterwards.* 
But  the  fact  is,  that  those  few  days  had  given  a  very  dif- 


♦  In  this  letter,  written  from  Jella- 
labad (Nov.  15),  General  Sale  says : 
"  I  have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  jrour  letter  of  the  9th  instant^  re- 
quuring  the  force  under  my  command 
to  move  again  upon  Caubul.  In  re- 
phr,  I  beg  to  represent  that  the  whole 
of  my  camp-equipage  has  been  de- 
stroyed ;  that  the  wounded  and  sick 
have  increased  to  upwards  of  300; 
that  there  is  no  longer  a  single  depot 
of  provisions  on  the  route ;  and  tnat 
the  carriage  of  the  force  is  not  suffi- 
cient to  bring  on  one  day's  rations 
with  it.  I  have,  at  the  same  time, 
positive  information  that  the  whole 
country  is  in  arms,  and  ready  to 
oppose  us  in  the  defiles  between  this 
city  and  Caubul,  whilst  my  ammuni- 