


♦  The foUowingextracte  from  Cap- 
tain Johnaon's  Journal  will  show 
better  than  anything  else  the  indig- 
nitiea  to  which  they  were  subjected : 
^December  28. — Very  busy,  buying 
camels  and  yaboos — the  pnce  of  the 
former  160  rupees  each.  The  Gha- 
zees still  infest  our  gates  and  insult 
OS  in  every  possible  way — stop  our 
supplies  coming  in  from  the  town,  and 
abuse  and  ill-treat  those  who  bring 


them.  No  notice  taken  by  our  mili- 
tary leader,  although  our  officers  and 
soldiers  are  bummg  for  revenge. 
Several  of  my  native  friends  from 
the  city  come  daily  to  see  me,  and  all 
agree,  without  one  dissenting  voice, 
that  we  have  brought  the  wnole  of 
our  misfortunes  upon  ourselves, 
through  the  apathy  and  imbecility 
displayed  at  the  commencement  of 
the  outbreak.    They  also  tell  me  that 


186  THE  CAPITULATION. 

All  this  was  very  hard  to  bear.  Other  trials,  too,  were 
upon  them.  AU  who  had  friends  in  the  city-^^^d  many 
of  our  officers  had  among  the  Caubulees  faithful  and  long« 
tried  friends—were  now  receiving  from  them  alarming 
intimations  of  the  dangers  that  threatened  them  on  the 
retreat.  It  was  no  secret,  indeed,  either  in  the  city  or  in 
cantonments,  that  the  promises  of  the  chie&  were  not  to 
be  depended  on,  and  that  treachery  was  brewing  for  the 
destruction  of  our  wretched  force.  Mohun  Lai  warned 
Pottinger  that  the  chiefs  were  not  to  be  believed,  and 
that  imless  their  sons  accompanied  the  army  as  hostages, 
it  would  be  attacked  upon  the  road.  To  this  Pottinger 
replied:  "The  chiefs  have  signed  the  treaty,  and  their 

our  safety  on  the  retreat  depends  the  plundered  grain  or  punish  the 
solely  on  ourselves — that  no  depend-  offenders.  How  we  must  be  despised 
enoe  is  to  be  placed  on  the  promises  by  our  miserable  foe !  Mahomed  Ze« 
of  any  of  the  chiefs,  and  more  espe-  maun  Khan  sent  in  word  that  some 
cially  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan.  Every  of  the  chiefs  will  be  in  attendance  to 
one  of  them  will  now,  that  they  are  escort  us  to  Jellalabad  to-morrow, 
in  a  measure  paid  before  hand,  do  his  In  the  evening  another  message  came 
utmost  to  destroy  us.  December  80.  that  we  must  halt  another  day. 
— ^A  body  of  Ghazees  made  a  rush  at  Every  day^s  delay  increases  our  dlffi- 
the  rear  gate  of  cantonments;  but  culties  on  the  road.  January '1^1S42» 
did  not  elect  an  entrance.  More  — New  Year's  Day  I  God  grant  that 
guns  and  ammunition  made  over  to  we  ma;^  never  see  such  another.  My 
tne  enemy,  or  what  are  called  our  kind  friends,  Naib  Shureef,  and  Elhan 
new  allies.  Precious  aliies^  who  are  and  All  Eeza  Khan  (both  Kuzzul* 
onljT  waiting  the  opportunity  to  an-  bashes),  sent  me  in  secretly  some  very 
nihilate  us  1  ....  December  excellent  cakes  to  carry  with  me  on 
31. — The  chiefs  say  they  cannot  con-  the  road,  as  we  shall  not  get  a  parti« 
trol  their  men,  and  that  if  their  cle  of  firewood  for  cooking  for  a  dis- 
people misbehave  themselves  at  our  tance  of  ninety  miles,  ere  we  can  get 
^tes,  or  around  our  walls,  we  must  into  a  milder  climate.  How  dreary  a 
nre  upon  them.  No  orders,  how-  prospect  we  have  before  us — having 
ever,  given  by  Greneral  Elphmstone  to  traverse  ninety  miles,  and  the 
to  punish  our  insulting  foe,  who  natu«  greater  part  of  this  distance  through 
rally  attribute  our  forbearance  to  snow  now  upwards  of  a  foot  deep, 
dastardly^  cowardice,  and  take  every  and  the  thermometer  at  night  below 
opportunity  of  taunting  us  with  it.  zero.  Some  negotiations  still  goina 
The  error  lies  with  our  leader,  not  on.  All  the  firewood  that  was  laid 
with  our  troops.  Several  camels  in  for  the  winter^s  consumption  ex- 
laden  with  gram  plundered  close  to  pended,  and  almost  every  tree  in  can- 
the  Seeah-Sung  gateway,  within  a  tonments  cut  down,  lliey  had  long 
few  paces  of  a  gun  loaded  with  grape,  ago  been  stripped  of  their  bark,  and 
and  a  large  fuard  of  Europeans  and  everything  eatable,  for  the  purpose  of 
Natives.    No  steps  taken  to  recover  feeding  our  starving  cattle.**— [MS.] 