


tion is  insufficient  for  more  than  two 
such  contests  as  I  should  assuredly 
have  to  sustain  for  six  days  at  least. 
With  my  present  means  1  could  not 
force  the  passes  of  either  Jugdulluck 
or  Koord  Caubul,  and  even  if  the 
debris  of  mv  brigade  did  reach  Cau- 
bul, I  am  given  to  understand  that  I 
should  find  the  troops  now  garrison- 
ing it  without  the  means  or  subsist- 
ence. Under  these  circumstances,  a 
regard  for  the  honour  and  interests 
of  our  government  compels  me  to 
adhere  to  my  plan  already  formed,  of 
putting  this  place  into  a  state  of 
defence,  and  holding  it,  if  possible, 
until  the  Caubul  ibrce  falls  back 
upon  me,  or  succours  arrive  from 
Peshawur  or  India.** 


SUBMISSION  OF  THE  CHIEFS.  197 

ferent  complexion  to  the  aspect  of  afiairs.  It  was  on  the 
10th  of  November  that  Captain  Macgregor,  who  for  days 
had  been  perplexed  by  alarming  rumours  of  native  origin, 
received  the  first  authentic  intelligence  of  the  outbreak  at 
Caubul,  coupled  with  an  urgent  requisition  from  the 
Envoy  to  bring  back  Sale's  brigade.  Some,  at  least,  of 
the  military  objections  urged  against  the  movement  by 
the  General  had  not  then  begun  to  exist.  The  irregulars 
were  not  then  known  to  be  treasonable.  The  surround- 
ing country  was  not  then  known  to  be  hostile.  Food  was 
believed  to  be  procurable.  The  brigade  was  at  this  time 
halted  in  the  valley  of  Gundamuck.  There  was  no  more 
fertile  spot  than  this  between  Caubul  and  Jellalabad. 
Orchards  and  vineyards,  green  fields  and  rippling  streams, 
refreshed  the  eyes  and  gladdened  the  hearts  of  men  who, 
for  many  weary  days,  had  been  toiling  through  arid 
defiles,  under  the  shadow  of  dreary  walls  of  rock.  Here 
the  brigade  had  encamped  itself  on  the  30th  of  October, 
and  looked  forward  to  a  brief  season  of  repose. 

Everything,  indeed,  at  this  time  wore  a  most  encou- 
raging, aspect.  Provisions  were  freely  coming  into  camp, 
and  the  Ghilzye  chiefs  were  making  their  submission. 
"  On  the  31st,"  says  Captain  Macgregor,  in  his  narra- 
tive of  these  events,  "  Burkutt  Khan  paid  me  a  visit, 
and  brought  with  him  two  of  the  rebel  chiefs,  Sadad 
Meer  and  Sir  Biland  Khan ;  they  had  returned  to  their 
allegiance,  and  delivered  over  to  me  sixteen  camel  loads 
of  property  (not  very  valuable)  which  had  been  plun- 
dered from  some  Reh waree  merchants ;  this  property  I 
made  over  to  their  owners.  Aghur  Khan  Sahuk,  a 
Ghilzye  chief  of  considerable  influence,  and  Attah  Ma- 
homed Khan  Sahuk,  joined  me  at  Gundamuck,  and 
established  their  Thanahs  for  the  protection  of  the 
Caubul  road  within  their  respective  boundaries  from 
Seh  Baba  to  near  Jugdulluck.    Burkutt  Khan  had  re- 