

affalnst  the  wall,  covering  me  with  gereed*  (^oull  seize  my  country,  will 

tneir  own  bodies,  and  protesting  that  70U?)**  The  conduct  of  Akbar  Khan 

no  blow  should  reach  me  but  through  and  other  chiefs  towards  Lawrence 

their  persons.   Pride,  however,  over-  and  Mackenzie  may  be  taken  as  a 

came  Mahomed    Akbar's    sense   of  presumptive  proof  tnat  the  murder  of 

courtesy,  when  he  thought  I  was  safe,  the  Envoy  was  not  designed.    His 

for  he  then  turned  round  to  me,  and  seizure,  however,  was    deliberately 

repeatedly  said,  in  a  tone  of  trium-  planned  between  Ameen-ooUah  and 

phant  derision,  *  Shuma  moolk-1-ma  Akbar  Khan. 


THE  FINAL  TREATY.  183 

Khan,  and  the  chief  nobles  of  AfghaniBtan,  whose  seals  are  affixed 
to  and  ornament  this  document  The  articles  of  the  treaty  are  as 
follow: — 

Article  1.  That  the  British  troops  shall  speedily  quit  the  terrl^ 
tories  of  Afghanistan  and  march  to  India,  and  shall  not  return; 
and  twenty-four  hours  after  receiving  the  carriage-cattle  the  army 
shall  start 

Article  2.  That  on  our  part  the  Sirdars,  Oosman  Khan  and 
Shoojah*ool-dowkh  Khan,  be  appointed  to  accompany  the  before- 
mentioned  army  to  the  boundaries  of  Afghanistan  and  convey  it 
to  the  boundary  of  the  Sikh  territory;  so  that  no  one  shall  offer 
molestation  on  the  road ;  and  that  carriage-cattle  and  provisions 
may  be  procured  for  it 

Article  S.  That  the  English  force  at  Jellalabad  shall  march  for 
Peshawur  before  the  Caubul  army  arrives,  and  shall  not  delay  on 
the  road. 

Article  4.  Having  brought  the  force  at  Ghuznee  in  safety  to 
Caubul,  under  the  protection  of  one  of  the  relations  of  Naib 
Ameen-ooUah  Khan,  we  will  eend  It  to  Peshawur  unmolested  under 
the  care  of  another  trustworthy  person. 

Article  5.  Since  according  to  agreement  the  troops  at  Candahar 
and  other  parts  of  Afghanistan  arc  to  start  quickly  for  India  and 
make  over  those  territories  to  our  agents,  we  on  our  part  appoint 
trustworthy  persons  who  may  provide  them  with  provisions  and 
protection,  and  preserve  them  from  molestation. 

Article  6.  All  goods  and  property,  and  stores  and  cattle,  be- 
longing to  Sirdar  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  which  may  be  in  the 
hands  of  the  English,  shall  be  given  up,  and  none  retained. 

Article  7.  Six  English  gentlemen,  who  remain  here  as  our 
guests;,  shall  be  treated  with  courtesy.  When  the  Ameer  Dost 
Mahomed  Khan  and  the  other  Afghans  shall  arrive  at  Peshawur, 
we  will  allow  the  above-mentioned  English  gentlemen  to  depart 
with  honour. 

Article  8.  After  the  departure  of  the  English  army  according 
to  the  treaty,  should  assistance  against  foreign  invasion  be  at  any 
time  demanded,  they  (the  English  Government)  shall  not  delay. 
Between  (the  Governments)  friendship  and  good- will  shall  exist ; 
and  we  will  not  make  a  treaty  with  any  but  the  above-mentioned 
English  Grovemment.    And  in  case  the  Governor-General  of 