

*  The  letters  written  at  this  time  out  money,  without  provisions,  with- 
from  Caubul  were  full  of  gloomy  out  wood."  At  the  same  time.  Lieu- 
foreboding.  On  the  4th  of  January,  tenant  Sturt  wrote :  *'  The  day  in  the 
Captain  Lawrence  wrote:  '*  The  end  will  be  the  King^s.  If  we  march 
troops  march  to-morrow ;  treachery  we  shall  fiffht  but  once ;  the  result  is 
is  feared.  We  look  to  Jellalabad  for  in  the  hands  of  God.'* — [3f5.  Corre- 
assistance.    We  have  no  money  and  spondence.'} 

no  friends.**    Lady  Sale  wrote  not  f  **  On  the  6th  of  January,  the 

more  hopefully,  describing  the  treaty  military  authorities  refused  to  wait 

as  a  disgraceful  one :  "  Guns,  ammu-  for  the  safeguard ;  and  notwithstand- 

nition,  money,  and  all  the  forts  have  ing    my    advice    to    the    contrary, 

been  given  up ;  and  likewise  six  hos-  marched  out  of  our  entrenchments.** 

tages.     All  the  sick  have  been  sent  — [Major  Pottinger's  Budeeabad  ife- 

to  the  city — to  the  new  King.    We  port:  mS,  Records,'] 
are  to  depart  without  a  guard,  with- 


CAUSES  OF  OUR  DEFEAT.  189 

force,  beaten  and  disgraced,  commenced  its  ill-fated  re- 
treat towards  the  provinces  of  Hindostan. 

I  have  commented  upon  the  various  incidents  of  the 
Caubul  insurrection  as  they  have  arisen,  one  by  one,  to 
claim  the  attention  of  the  reader;  and  little  now  remains 
to  be  said  in  explanation  of  the  causes  which  conduced 
to  the  calamitous  and  disgraceful  defeat  of  a  British 
army  by  an  undisciplined  and  disimited  enemy,  who 
had  no  artillery  to  bring  into  the  field.  Whatever  more 
remote  causes  of  this  lamentable  failure  may  be  found 
elsewhere,  it  is  impossible  to  conceal  or  to  disguise  the 
one  galling  fact,  that  the  British  army  at  Caubul  was 
disastrously  beaten  because  it  was  commanded  by  an 
incapable  chief.  Whether  that  chief  would  have  beaten 
the  enemy  if  the  military  arrangements  for  which  he 
was  not  responsible  had  been  better  ordered — if  the  site 
of  the  cantonments  had  been  more  judiciously  chosen, 
and  its  defences  more  effectively  constructed,  if  all  our 
magazines  and  godowns  had  been  well  located  and  well 
protected, — ^may  still  be  an  open  question ;  but  it  appears 
to  me  that  there  is  no  question  as  to  whether  a  com- 
manding oflBicer  of  the  right  stamp  would  have  triumphed 
over  these  diflSculties,  and  beaten  the  enemy  in  spite  of 
them.  The  Caubul  cantonments  were  very  badly  situ- 
ated, and  very  ill-constructed  for  purposes  of  defence ; 
but  if  our  troops  had  been  commanded  by  an  officer 
with  a  robust  frame,  strong  nerves,  a  clear  understand- 
ing, and  a  proper  knowledge  of  his  business,  as  the  chief 
of  a  mixed  army  of  British  and  Hindostanee  troops,  they 
would  have  crushed  the  insurrection  in  a  few  hours,  and 
demonstrated  the  irresistible  power  of  British  valour  and 
British  discipline. 