


THBEATENED  DANGERS.  187 

sons  accompany  us.  As  for  attacking  us  on  the  road,  we 
are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  him  we  trust."*  Again, 
Mohun  Lai  wrote  that  the  troops  would  be  attacked  as 
soon  as  they  quitted  cantonments;  but  it  was  too  late  now 
to  recede.  Other  warning  notes  of  still  more  ominous 
import  were  sounded  at  this  time.  MooUah  Ahmed  Ehan 
told  Captain  Johnson  that  Akbar  Khan  had  sworn  that 
he  would  obtain  possession  of  the  English  ladies  as  a 
pledge  for  the  safe  return  of  his  own  wives  and  family; 
and  annihilate  every  soldier  of  the  British  army,  with 
the  exception  of  one  man,  who  should  reach  Jellalabad 
to  tell  the  story  of  the  massacre  of  all  his  comrades.f 

But  to  those  who  pondered  well  the  dangers  that 
threatened  the  retreating  force  in  the  gloomy  defiles  be- 
tween Caubul  and  Jellalabad,  there  was  something  more 
terrible  still  than  the  vindictive  treachery  of  the  A%han 
tribes.  Ever  since  the  18th  of  December,  snow  had  been 
&lling  heavily  at  intervals — sometimes  from  morning  to 
evening-r— with  terrible  perseverance.  It  was  now  lying 
more  than  ankle-deep  upon  the  groimd.  Already  had 
the  Sepoys  and  the  camp-followers  begun  to  faint  under 
the  cruel  sufferings  of  a  frosty  winter,  fearfully  aggra- 
vated by  the  exhaustion  of  all  the  firewood  in  their 
reach.  The  trees  in  cantonments  had  already  been  cut 
down  and  consumed.  What  was  once  a  flourishing 
grove  or  orchard  (for  they  were  mainly  fruit-trees)  had 
now  become  a  desert.  But  the  sufferings  which  these 
wretched  men,  transplanted  from  the  torrid  plains  of 
Hindostan,  were  now  enduring  in  the  Caubul  cantonment, 
seemed  but  faintly  to  foreshadow  the  misery  of  a  long 
march  through  the  dreadful  snow.  Even  to  the  hardy 
people  of  the  north  such  a  march,  it  was  known,  must 
be  a  sore  trial;  but  to  the  weak  and  effeminate  strangers 

♦  Letter  of  Mohun  Lai  to  Mr.  Col"        t  Captain  JohmorCs  Journal:  MS. 
nn:  MS*  Records,  Records. 


188  THE  CAPITULATION. 

from  the  plains  of  Hindostan,  who  had  followed  our 
fortunes  into  those  dreary  regions,  it  seemed  to  threaten 
nothing  short  of  absolute  extermination. 

Those  few  first  days  of  January  were  days  of  painful 
doubt  and  anxiety.*  Every  preparation  for  the  march 
had  been  made  by  the  garrison.  For  some  time  our 
oflBicers  had  been  gathering  together  and  securing  such 
property  as  they  could  take  with  them,  and  destroying 
what  they  were  compelled  to  abandon.  Every  night, 
since  the  commencement  of  the  new  year,  they  had  re- 
tired to  rest,  believing  that  the  army  would  commence 
its  march  on  the  following  morning;  but  the  movement 
was  delayed  day  after  day,  because  the  chiefs  had  not 
completed  their  promised  arrangements  for  the  safe  con- 
duct of  the  force.  At  last,  on  the  evening  of  the  5th  of 
January,  the  engineer-officer  received  instructions  actu- 
ally to  commence  the  work,  which  he  had  been  so  long 
in  readiness  to  accomplish.  He  was  ordered  to  cut  an 
opening  through  the  rampart-walls  of  the  cantonment  to 
admit  the  egress  of  the  troops,  more  rapidly  and  less 
confusedly,  than  they  could  pass  out  through  4;he  gates. 
The  chiefe  had  not  sent  the  promised  safeguard;  but, 
contrary  to  the  advice  of  Major  Pottinger,f  the  military 
authorities  determined  to  march  out  of  their  entrench- 
ments.    And  so,  on  the  following  morning,  the  British 