


198  sale's  brigade. 

posted  his  Thanahs  at  Jugdulluck,  and  at  this  time  there 
seemed  to  be  a  great  promise  of  the  Ghilzye  country 
being  shortly  tranquillised."  * 

There  was  one  exception,  however,  to  the  general 
amity  which  the  chiefe  seemed  now  inclined  to  offer  to 
Macgregor.  "  On  the  3rd  of  November,"  writes  that 
officer,  "  1  was  informed  that  Meer  Afzool  Khan  Urz- 
Begee  had  fled  from  Caubul,  and  had  joined  the  rebels, 
and  was  then  at  Ghanni,  endeavouring  to  excite  the 
Khogrannees  and  Ghannees  to  rebel  against  us.  Meer 
Afeool  had  a  fort  and  extensive  lands  at  Mama  Kheil, 
about  two  miles  distant  from  our  encampment  at  Gun- 
damuck,  from  which  he  had  removed  his  family  and 
portable  property,  and  might  chupao  our  camels  when 
at  graze,  stop  our  supplies,  and  molest  us  in  many 
ways  with  impunity.  I  had  information  that  the  party 
which  was  intended  to  garrison  the  fort  had  not  yet 
reached  it;  and  by  our  moving  at  once  on  it,  we 
should  meet  with  less  resistance  at  that  time,  than 
would  be  offered  a  few  days  subsequently ;  on  the  other 
hand,  if  the  British  troops  took  possession  of  this  fort, 
our  position  at  Gundamuck  would  be  greatly  strength- 
ened; I  therefore  requested  Major-General  Sir  Robert 
Sale  to  capture  the  fort  in  question.  The  troops  marched 
against  it  on  the  6th,  found  it  had  been  evacuated,  a 
party  of  Ferris's  Jezailchees  and  fifty  of  Dowson's 
Hazarbash,  xmder  Captain  Grerrard,  having  been  left  in 
occupation  of  it.  The  troops  returned  to  Gundamuck 
the  following  day.  A  quantity  of  grain,  which  had 
been  left  in  the  fort  by  the  enemy  and  had  been  stored 
outside^  fell  into  our  possession."  f 

Up  to  the  day,  indeed,  on  which  Macgregor  received 
the  pressing  solicitations  of  the  Envoy  to  bring  back 

'  ♦  CaptamMaegregor'sBeport:  MS,        t  Iteport   of  Captain  Macgregor: 
BmOfd$.  MS,  Records. 

ik-. 


THE  MARCH  TO  JELLALABAD.  199 

Sale's  brigade  to  Caubul,  circumstances,  since  the  arrival 
of  the  force  at  Gundamuck,  had  been  all  in  its  favour. 
When,  therefore,  Macnaghten's  letter  was  received,  and 
they  took  counsel  together  as  to  the  course  it  then 
became  them  to  pursue,  some  at  least  of  those  strong 
reasons  against  the  movement  on  Caubul,  which  Sale  set 
forth  in  his  official  letters,  had  not  yet  been  forced  into 
being,  A  council  of  war  was  held,  and  the  members  of 
it  were  divided  in  opinion ;  but  the  majority  pronounced 
against  the  movement  for  the  rescue  of  Elphinstone's 
force.  It  was  determined  that  the  brigade  should  throw 
itself  into  Jellalabad.  There  was  a  middle  course  open 
to  them — the  retention  of  their  position  at  Gundamuck ; 
but  it  seems  to  have  found  no  favour  in  their  eyes. 
Had  Sale's  force  remained  in  the  valley  of  Gundamuck, 
it  might  have  saved  Elphinstone's  army  from  annihilation 
on  its  fatal  January  retreat.  As  long  as  it  was  encamped 
there,  the  tendency  of  the  Ghilzye  chiefs  was  towards 
the  establishment  of  friendly  relations  with  the  British, 
but  no  sooner  had  we  determined  to  abandon  our 
position,  than  the  whole  country  broke  out  into  hostility, 
and  the  passes  were  sealed.^ 