

*  General  Sale  to  Secretary  to  Government^  April  16,  1842. 


204  sale's  brigade. 

of  November  our  troops  were  unable  to  maintain  their 
posts ;  and  with  the  exception  of  the  gateway,  a  line  of 
four  hundred  yards  on  the  northern  face  was  without  a 
man  on  the  works.  Had  the  enemy  then  attacked  us, 
we  must  have  been  reduced  to  a  street  combat/'* 

Broadfoot,  now  appointed  garrison  engineer,  set  about 
the  work  entrusted  to  him  with  all  the  energy  and  zeal 
for  which  his  character  was  distinguished.  His  little 
corps  of  sappers  had  brought  with  them  their  pickaxes, 
shovels,  and  other  working  tools  from  Caubul ;  and  were 
now  ready  to  ply  them  with  the  heartiest  good-will. 
There  was  not  a  soldier  in  garrison,  European  or 
Native,  who  was  not  eager  to  join  in  the  work.  Wood 
was  to  be  collected ;  and  iron  was  to  be  collected ;  for 
there  were  no  available  supplies  of  either.  But  from 
the  ruins  of  old  houses  in  the  cantonment  and  in  the 
town  the  former  was  extracted  in  sufficient  quantity, 
and  the  neighbouring  country  supplied  the  latter.f 
Every  difficulty  was  overcome  as  it  arose.  Impossibili- 
ties did  not  grow  in  Jellalabad. 

But  before  our  soldiers  could  carry  on  their  work  in 
safety  upon  the  ramparts,  it  was  necessary  to  give  the 
enemy,  who  assembled  in  great  force  beyond  the  walls  of 
the  city,  a  taste  of  our  military  strength.  The  morning 
of  the  16th  of  November  was  an  exciting,  and  it  proved 
to  be  a  glorious  one.  On  the  preceding  evening  it  had 
been  determined  that  Colonel  Monteith,  of  the  35  th 
Bengal  Infantry,  a  true  soldier  and  a  good  officer,  should 
take  out  eleven  hundred  men,  at  daybreak,  and  give 
battle  to  the  molesting  A%hans.  As  soon  as  the  early 
dawn  would  suflfer  him  to  take  a  survey  of  surrounding 
objects,  Monteith  ascended  to  the  flat  house-top  of  one 

♦  Captain    BroadfooCs   Report  —  smelted,  and  requiring  ten  times  as 

Jellalabad,  Apnl  \6y  I S42,  much  labour  and  time  as  English 

t  **The    iron,"     says    Broadfoot,  iron." 
**  was  good  in  quality,  but  imperfectly 


STATE  OF  THE  DEFENCES.  203 

to  look  for  the  completion  of  the  work  that  he  had  marked 
out  for  his  little  garrison.  "  I  found  the  walls  of  Jellala- 
bad,"  he  said,  "in  a  state  which  might  have  justified 
despair  as  to  the  possibility  of  defending  them.  The 
enceinte  was  far  too  extensive  for  my  small  force,  embrac- 
ing a  circumference  of  upwards  of  2300  yards.  Its  tracing 
was  vicious  in  the  extreme ;  it  had  no  parapet  excepting 
for  a  few  hundred  yards,  which,  there,  was  not  more  than 
two  feet  high  earth;  and  rubbish  had  accumulated  to 
such  an  extent  about  the  ramparts,  that  there  were  roads 
in  various  directions  across  and  over  them  into  the 
country.  There  was  a  space  of  400  yards  together,  on 
which  none  of  the  garrison  could  show  themselves  ex- 
cepting at  one  spot :  the  population  within  was  disaffected, 
and  the  whole  enceinte  w^as  surrounded  by  ruined  forts, 
walls,  mosques,  tombs,  and  gardens,  from  which  a  fire  could 
be  opened  upon  the  defenders  at  twenty  and  thirty  yards."* 
The  first  thing  now  to  be  done  was  to  appoint  a  com- 
mittee of  officers  to  examine  and  report  upon  the  works 
of  the  place.  On  the  13th  of  November,  Captain  Broad- 
foot,  who  commanded  the  corps  of  sappers,  with  some 
other  officers,  went  round  the  dilapidated  works.  Broad- 
foot  alone  succeeded  in  making  the  circuit  of  them. 
"  Large  gaps  cut  off  the  communication,  or  insecure  footing 
compelled  the  officers  to  descend  among  the  adjoining 
enclosures,  from  which  it  was  difficult  to  find  the  way ; 
whilst  on  the  south  side  the  rampart  was  so  embedded  in 
houses  and  surrounded  by  them,  that  its  course  could 
only  be  traced  by  laboriously  threading  the  lanes  of  the 
native  town.  On  the  north  side  the  wall  rose  to  a  very 
great  height  towards  the  town^  but  sloped  down  to  the 
exterior  in  a  heap  of  ruins  almost  everywhere  accessible ; 
while  at  the  foot  were  houses  and  gardens  so  strongly 
occupied  by  the  enemy,  that  during  the  night  of  the  13th 