

On  the  11th  of  November  the  brigade  commenced  its 
march  towards  Jellalabad.  Sale  had  wisely  determined 
to  move  with  as  little  encumbrance  of  baggage  as  pos- 
sible. He  was  partly,  indeed,  compelled  to  this  by  the 
depredations  of  the  tribes  who  had  swept  off  the  bulk  of 
his  cattle  whilst  the  animals  were  grazing  on  the  plain. 
The  injury  inflicted  upon  us  by  their  predatory  adroit- 
ness  was  of  a  very  doubtful  character.    The  taste  for 

^lthBMheeasaid(CalcuitaEevieWt  but  the  letters  from  the  EnTOj  to 

ToL  zIt.)  that  the  instructions  sent  Macgregor  were  couched  in  unquali- 

to  Sale  were  of  such  a  character  as  fied  and  unconditional  language,  and 

to  throw  a  large  amount  of  respon-  the  official  letter  from  Eiphinstone 

•SfaOity  upon  Turn;   and  that  Sale  ordered  Sale  to  return  **a<  a^  mAv.^ 
ahrajf  shnuik  f^om  responsibility, — 


200  sale's  brigade. 

baggage  is  ordinarily  so  strong  that  little  short  of  abso- 
lute necessity  compels  its  abandonment.  Sale  was  forced 
to  move  lightly  out  of  Gundamuck,  and  he  found  the 
advantage  of  the  absence  of  the  usual  impediments  before 
he  had  been  long  on  the  march. 

To  leave,  however,  any  property  at  Gundamuck  was 
virtually  to  sacrifice  it.  To  the  care  of  the  Shah's  irre- 
gulars posted  in  the  cantonment  all  that  could  not  be  car- 
ried away  was  now  consigned.  As  soon  as  Sale's  brigade 
had  commenced  its  march  to  Jellalabad  the  cantonment 
was  attacked.  True  to  their  character,  the  Janbaz, 
who  seem  to  have  been  raised  for  the  express  purpose 
of  going  over  to  the  enemy,  did  it  with  their  wonted 
address.  The  property  left  at  Gundamuck  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Afghans;  the  cantonment  was  burnt  to  the 
ground;  and  all  the  surrounding  country  rose  against  us 
in  open  revolt. 

Without  any  serious  opposition,  the  march  to  Jella- 
labad was  accbmpUshed.  On  the  morning  of  the  12  th, 
however,  soon  after  the  brigade  got  under  arms  in  the 
grey  twilight,  the  tribes  were  seen  clustering  on  the 
steep  hills  on  either  side,  and  soon  poured  themselves 
down  on  the  rear-guard,  vainly  striving  to  sweep  off  the 
baggage.  A  running  skirmish,  which  lasted  for  some 
miles,  and  brought  out  the  fine  qualities  of  our  troops, 
their  admirable  discipline  and  steadiness  under  fire,  the 
gallantry  of  their  bearing,  and  the  rapidity  of  their 
movements,  ended  in  the  complete  dispersion  of  the 
depredators,  and  secured  the  safety  of  the  remainder  of 
their  march.  Clever  were  the  manoeuvres  by  which  on 
that  day  Dennie  drew  the  enemy  into  his  toils,  and 
heavy  the  retribution  which  descended  upon  them. 
Placing  his  cavalry  in  ambush,  he  brought  up  his  in- 
fantry to  the  attack,  ordered  them  to  advance  firing, 
and  then  wheeled  them  about,  as  though  in  panic  flight. 