


OCCUPATION  OF  JELLALABAD.  201 

The  stratagem  succeeded  to  admiration.  The  enemy, 
after  a  brief  pause  of  wonderment,  believed  they  had 
accomplished  a  great  victory,  sent  up  a  wild  shout,  and 
then  rushed  in  pursuit  of  the  flying  Feringhees.  They 
were  soon  in  the  clear  open  space  to  which  Dennie  had 
designed  to  lure  them.  The  cavalry,  whom  they  had 
laughed  at  on  the  hills,  able  now  to  operate  freely, 
dashed  at  them  with  sudden  fury.  The  slaughter  was 
tremendous;  the  rout  was  complete.  It  was  said  of  the 
British  horsemen  that  day  that  "  their  right  arms  were 
wearied  with  the  blows  which  they  struck;  and  the 
quantity  of  dead  that  might  be  seen  scattered  over  the 
fece  of  the  valley  proved  that  they  had  not  struck  at 
random."* 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th  of  November  Sale's  bri- 
gade took  possession  of  Jellalabad.  The  movement  took 
the  A%han8  by  surprise.  They  had  believed  that  the 
Feringhees  were  making  the  best  of  their  way  to  the 
provinces  of  Hindostan;  and  now  their  entrance  into  the 
city  struck  a  panic  into  the  hearts  of  the  inhabitants.  As 
the  regiments  marched  in,  the  citizens  fled  out  in  dismay. 
Everything  was  abandoned  to  the  British  troops.  There 
was  no  need  to  fire  a  shot  or  to  draw  a  sabre.  Sale's 
brigade  had  now  become  the  garrison  of  Jellalabad.f 

Scarcely,  however,  had  Sale  made  himself  master  of 
the  place  before  it  was  surrounded  by  yelling  crowds, 
who  threatened  death  to  the  infidels  if  they  did  not  at 
once  abandon  the  town.  The  utmost  caution  was  now 
necessary.  The  place,  though  surrounded  by  fortifica- 
tions, was  absolutely  without  any  real  defences ;  and  the 

*  *'  SaJ£s  Brigade  in  Afghanistan,'"  who  ruled  the  Jellalabad  dbtrict  in 

By  the  Eev,  G.  R.  Gleig^  Chaplain  to  the  name  of  Shah  Soojah.    Abdool 

ike  Forces.  Rahman  continued  for  some  time  to 

t  The  place,  at  the  request  of  Cap-  reside  in  the  town    under  Captain 

tain  Macsregor,  was  officially  given  Macgregor's  protection.  —  [^Captain 

over  to  the  British  garrison  by  the  Macgregorslleport:  MS,  Records,'} 
nominal  Governor,  Abdool  Rahman, 


202  SALENS  BRIGADE. 

troops  within  its  dilapidated  walls  and  its  filled'*up 
ditches,  were  almost  as  much  exposed  as  in  the  open 
country.  The  extent  of  the  works  was  very  great,  and 
it  was  quite  impossible  to  man  them.  But  guards  were 
posted  at  all  the  gates ;  and  a  strong  piquet  planted  in  a 
central  position,  and  ordered  to  hold  itself  in  readiness  to 
send  supports  to  any  point  from  which  the  sound  of 
firing  might  proceed.*  These  arrangements  made,  the 
remainder  of  the  troops  were  suffered  to  lie  down  to 
rest  by  companies,  with  their  officers  beside  them,  whilst 
Sale  summoned  the  commanders  of  regiments  and  detach- 
ments to  a  council  of  war. 