

And  now,  with  little  or  no  interruption,  the  labours  of 
the  garrison  proceeded,  and  the  works  began  to  assume 
an  appearance  of  effective  defence.  In  fine  health,  in 
good  working  condition,  and  in  an  admirable  state  of 
discipline,  European  and  Native  troops  alike  laboured 
with  axe  and  shovel,  and  soon  saw  the  mud- walls  rising 
around  them.  Had  they  thought  only  of  themselves, 
they  would  have  toiled  on,  in  high  spirits  as  in  high 
hesdth.  But  the  worst  rumours  were  coming  in  from 
Caubul.    It  was  plain  that  their  fellow-soldiers  at  the 


208  sale's  brigade. 

capital  were  not  achieving  like  honourable  success.  It 
was  believed,  too,  that  Sale  and  Macgregor  knew  more 
than  they  were  willing  to  reveal.  Men  asked  each 
other  fearful  questions ;  but  beyond  the  leading  outline 
of  events,  nothing  was  known  that  could  be  shaped  into 
intelligible  replies. 

How  it  happened  that  such  an  army  as  that  com- 
manded by  General  Elphinstone  had  been  so  disastrously 
and  disgracefully  beaten  in  the  field  by  an  enemy  of  such 
calibre  as  these  undisciplined  Afghans,  was  a  terrible 
mystery  to  the  brave  men  who  had  been  scattering  their 
besiegers  like  sheep.  They  heard  something  of  the  want 
of  provisions  that  had  reduced  the  force  to  this  melan- 
choly strait ;  but  when  Sale's  brigade  sate  down  in  Jella- 
labad  it  had  only  two  days'  provisions.  They  heard, 
too,  that  the  extent  and  the  weakness  of  the  Caubul  can- 
tonments had  paralysed  the  efforts  of  the  garrison ;  but 
there,  at  Jellalabad,  they  had  found  their  defences  in  a 
state  of  absolute  ruin.  It  seemed  to  them  easy  to  obtain 
provisions,  and  to  build  up  their  defences.  At  all  events, 
they  had  done  both ;  and  the  troops  at  Caubul  were  of 
three  or  four  times  their  strength. 

Half  of  the  month  of  December  had  worn  away,  when 
a  whisper  went  round  the  garrison  that  the  Caubul  force 
had  capitulated.  With  mingled  feelings  of  incredulity 
and  indignation  the  humiliating  intelligence  was  received. 
Sale  and  Macgregor  knew  only  too  well  how  Elphinstone 
and  Shelton  had  been  throwing  away  chance  after  chance 
of  rescuing  their  miserable  troops  from  destruction.  But 
it  was  not  wise  to  damp  the  spirits  of  their  own  gallant 
and  successful  garrison  by  any  revelations  of  the  unhappy 
manner  in  which  their  old  comrades  had  been  sacrificed 
at  Caubul.  When,  therefore,  on  the  17th  of  December, 
it  was  known  that  some  disastrous  intelligence  had  been 
received  from  the  capital,  it  was  slowly  believed  that  the 


EVIL  TIDINGS  FROM  CAUBUL.  209 

main  body  of  the  British  army  in  Afghanistan  had  thrown 
itself  on  the  mercy  of  a  barbarous  foe. 