

The  question  to  be  determined  was  this.  There  was 
the  extensive,  ill-defended  city  of  Jellalabad ;  and  in  the 
midst  of  it  was  the  Balla  Hissar  or  citadel,  surrounded 
by  a  wall,  sufficiently  extensive  to  enclose  the  brigade 
without  inconvenience,  but  yet  not  so  extensive  as  to 
exhaust  our  means  of  defence.  It  was  now  debated 
whether  it  would  be  more  expedient  to  abandon  the 
town  and  concentrate  our  troops  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  or 
to  hold  possession  of  the  former.  Weighty  and  very  ap- 
parent were  the  arguments  in  favour  of  the  occupation 
of  the  citadel ;  and  for  a  time  the  council  seemed  inclined 
towards  the  adoption  of  that  securer  course;  but  to 
Dennie  and  others  it  was  clear,  that  the  abandonment  of 
the  city  would  be  a  virtual  acknowledgment  of  weakness, 
find  that  it  would  have  a  far  better  political  effect,  as  it 
would  a  more  becoming  military  appearance,  to  hold  the 
city  itself,  than  to  be  cooped  up  within  the  walls  of  the 
citadel.  And  so  it  was  at  last  determined  that  the  city 
should  be  held,  and  the  enemy  resolutely  defied. 

But  to  hold  the  city  it  was  necessary  that  the  defences 
should  be  repaired.  Well  might  Sale  look  with  dismay  at 
their  condition,  and  almost  regard  it  as  a  wild  hope  ever 

*  "  Sale's  Brigade  in  Afghanistan,'*    By  the  Rev,  G,  R,  Gleig, 


STATE  OF  THE  DEFENCES.  203 

to  look  for  the  completion  of  the  work  that  he  had  marked 
out  for  his  little  garrison.  "  I  found  the  walls  of  Jellala- 
bad,"  he  said,  "in  a  state  which  might  have  justified 
despair  as  to  the  possibility  of  defending  them.  The 
enceinte  was  far  too  extensive  for  my  small  force,  embrac- 
ing a  circumference  of  upwards  of  2300  yards.  Its  tracing 
was  vicious  in  the  extreme ;  it  had  no  parapet  excepting 
for  a  few  hundred  yards,  which,  there,  was  not  more  than 
two  feet  high  earth;  and  rubbish  had  accumulated  to 
such  an  extent  about  the  ramparts,  that  there  were  roads 
in  various  directions  across  and  over  them  into  the 
country.  There  was  a  space  of  400  yards  together,  on 
which  none  of  the  garrison  could  show  themselves  ex- 
cepting at  one  spot :  the  population  within  was  disaffected, 
and  the  whole  enceinte  was  surrounded  by  ruined  forts, 
walls,  mosques,  tombs,  and  gardens,  from  which  a  fire  could 
be  opened  upon  the  defenders  at  twenty  and  thirty  yards.''* 
The  first  thing  now  to  be  done  was  to  appoint  a  com- 
mittee of  officers  to  examine  and  report  upon  the  works 
of  the  place.  On  the  13th  of  November,  Captain  Broad- 
foot,  who  commanded  the  corps  of  sappers,  with  some 
other  officers,  went  round  the  dilapidated  works.  Broad- 
foot  alone  succeeded  in  making  the  circuit  of  them, 
"  Large  gaps  cut  off  the  communication,  or  insecure  footing 
compelled  the  officers  to  descend  among  the  adjoining 
enclosures,  from  which  it  was  difficult  to  find  the  way ; 
whilst  on  the  south  side  the  rampart  was  so  embedded  in 
houses  and  surrounded  by  them,  that  its  course  could 
only  be  traced  by  laboriously  threading  the  lanes  of  the 
native  town.  On  the  north  side  the  wall  rose  to  a  very 
great  height  towards  the  town^  but  sloped  down  to  the 
exterior  in  a  heap  of  ruins  almost  everywhere  accessible  j 
while  at  the  foot  were  houses  and  gardens  so  strongly 
occupied  by  the  enemy,  that  during  the  night  of  the  13th 