

So  passed  the  first  week  of  January.  To  Sale  and 
Macgregor  they  were  days  of  intense  anxiety.  Eagerly 
as  they  looked  for  cheering  intelligence  from  Caubul, 
nothing  came  to  refresh  them  with  new  hopes.  On  the 
8th  of  January,  another  letter  from  Pottinger,  dated 
the  28th  of  December,  was  received  by  Macgregor. 
It  was  written  in  French,  as  there  were  men  in  the 
enemy's  camp  who  could  read  and  interpret  English  ;* 

•  I  append  the  letter  itself,  as  well  Fentour  du  cantonnement  ajant  ^te 

as  one,  also  in  French,  written  two  rendus  aux  chefs,  selon  le  traite  que 

days    afterwards    to    Mackeson    at  le  feu  Envoy^  et  Ministre  avoit  com- 

Peshawur :  mene^.      Nous  nous  trouvons  dans 

"  Cabool,  28""'  D^c,  1841.  la  necessity  de  renouveler  les  negocia- 

"  MoN  CHEE  Maccsregor,  tious  dcpuis  qu*il  a  ^e  tu6.      Le 

"  Notre  situation  devient  peril-  manque  de  vivres,    desquels   ils  ne 

leuse  de  plus  en  plus ;    les  forts  i\  nous  restent  que  pour  [huit  jours,  et 


THE  EVACUATION  ORDER.  211 

and  it  announced  that  the  position  of  the  British  force 
at  Caubul  was  becoming  more  and  more  perilous — that 
the  treaty  commenced  by  the  late  Envoy  was  still  being 
negotiated — that  some  delays  had  been  occasioned  by 
the  dilSGiculty,  real  or  pretended,  of  providing  carriage 
and  provisions  to  enable  the  troops  to  commence  their 
march;  and  that  it  was  not  improbable  that,  in  spite  of 
the  promises  of  the  chiefs,  the  British  column  would  be 
compelled  to  fight  its  way  down  to  Jellalabad.  In  con- 
clusion, Pottinger  spoke  of  instructions  for  the  evacua- 
tion of  Jellalabad  that  had  been  despatched  by  Mac- 
naghten,  but  urged  Macgregor  to  stand  fast  until  the 
receipt  of  further  orders  from  Caubul. 

On  the  following  day  those  instructions  arrived.     A 

des  mojens  de  transport  pour  nos  du  part  du  gouvemement  de  quitter 

malades  et  blesses,  qu'ils  nous  ont  Afghanistan,  et  de  donner  liostages 

Sromis  de  jour  en  jour,  font  autant  pour  que  le  Dost  sojait  mis  en  li- 

e  raisons  de  plus  pour  que  nous  bert^,  aussi  que  pour  pr^liminaires  il 

faisons  traite,  s*d  est  possible.    Mais  avait  rendu  le  BaUa  Hissar  et  les 

aussi  leurs  promesses  meritent  si  peu  forts  qui  dominent  les  cantonnements. 

de  foi,  que  peut-dtre  nous   serons  Ces  acts  et   le  manque  des  vivres 

oblige  de  battre  de  retraite  sur  Jel-  faisaient  les  cantonnements  untena- 

lalabad ;  sur  tout,  qu*ils  exigent  que  ble,  et  les  quatre  officiers  militaires 

nous    marchons    par    le    route    de  sup6rieurs  disaient  quUl  fallait  r^- 

Bungeish — demande    que    nous    ne  sumer  le  traits  au  lieu  de  forcer  une 

pouTons  pas  agr^r.  marche  retrograde    sur    Jellalabad. 