

*  General  Sale  to  Secretary  to  Government,  April  16,  1842. 


206  sale's  brigade. 

foot  was  toiling  all  day  long  to  repair  the  decayed  ram- 
parts and  clear  out  the  ditches,  which,  ditches  no  longer, 
had  been  filled  up  to  the  consistency  of  thoroughfares. 
Abbott,  who  had  been  appointed  commissary  of  ordnance 
was  getting  his  guns  into  position,  and  making  up  his 
ammunition  as  best  he  could  from  the  materials  to  be 
found  in  the  neighbourhood.  Macgregor,  with  his 
wonted  activity,  was  playing  the  part  of  the  Conmiis. 
sariat  officer — and  plajdng  it  well — ^bringing  all  his  poli- 
tical influence,  which  was  great,  to  bear  upon  the  im- 
portant business  of  the  collection  of  supplies.  And  so 
successful  were  his  exertions — so  successful  were  the 
efforts  of  the  foraging  parties,  which  went  out  from  time 
to  time  in  search  of  grain,  sheep,  firewood,  and  other 
essentials — that  in  a  little  while  a  month's  provisions 
were  in  store.  It  is  true  that  the  men  were  on  half- 
rations;  but  they  did  not  work  the  worse  for  that.  It 
was  never  said  at  Jellalabad  that  the  soldiery  were 
unequal  to  their  accustomed  duties  because  they  had  not 
their  accustomed  supplies  of  food.  The  gallant  men  who 
composed  the  garrison  of  Jellalabad,  took  their  half- 
rations  cheerfully,  and  cheerfully  did  double  work.* 

Not  again,  until  the  1st  of  December,  was  the  mettle 
of  Sale's  brigade  tried  in  the  open  field.  For  some  days 
before,  the  enemy  had  been  hovering  about  and  threaten- 
ing the  garrison,  who,  chary  of  their  ammunition,  which 
was  running  scarce,  gave  back  nothing  in  reply  to  the 
desultory  fire  of  the  Afghans.  But  on  the  1st  of  De- 
cember they  appeared  in  such  formidable  array,  and 
grew  so  bold  and  menacing— closing  in  nearly  and  more 

♦  Cheerfully,  too,  worked  the  Eu-  health  and  strength  and  elasticity, 
ropeans  without  their  accustomed  and  preserved  a  regidarity  of  disci- 
drams.  There  were  no  ardent  li-  pline  unknown  to  even  the  13th, 
quors  in  Jellalabad ;  and  the  conse-  when  the  fire-water  was  served  out 
quence  was,  that  the  men  enjoyed,  to  them, 
even  on  half-rations,  an  amount  of 


SECOND  DEFEAT  OF  THE  ENEMY.         207 

nearly  about  the  walls,  until  the  workmen  on  the  ram- 
parts could  not  safely  perform  their  accustomed  duties — 
that  Sale  could  no  longer  refrain  from  sending  out  his 
fighting  men  against  them.  Monteith,  an  officer  of  the 
Company's  service,  had  led  the  attack  on  the  14th  of  No- 
vember. Now,  the  direction  of  the  sortie  was  entrusted 
to  an  officer  of  the  Queen's  army,  who  had  already,  on 
more  than  one  occasion,  shown  his  capacity  for  com- 
mand. Dennie  led  out  the  garrison  this  time ;  and  gal- 
lantly they  moved  to  the  attack.  It  was  mid-day  when 
they  sallied  out  with  a  cheer,  and  fell  upon  their  be- 
si^ers.  It  were  scarcely  truth  to  say  that  a  battle  was 
fought  on  that  1st  of  December.  The  affair  began  and 
ended  with  the  rout  of  the  Afghans.  Two  guns  of 
Abbott's  battery  were  unlimbered,  and  with  murderous 
execution  poured  in  their  thick  showers  of  grape  upon 
the  discomfited  mass.  They,  who  had  of  late  been  so 
bold  and  defiant,  now  fled  in  wild  confusion,  but  could 
not  escape  the  sabres  of  our  cavalry,  who  charged  them 
home,  and  drove  them  across  the  plain  into  the  river, 
whilst  our  infantry  pursued  them  up  the  hill-sides,  and 
fell  upon  them  with  their  gleaming  bayonets.  And  so, 
without  the  loss  of  a  single  man,  Dennie  dispersed  the 
investing  force  j  and  not  a  trace  of  it  was^  to  be  seen  on 
the  morrow  except  the  dead  bodies  on  the  plain. 