

But  soon  other  intelligence  of  a  grievous  and  afflicting 
character  was  conveyed  to  the  garrison.  At  first  it  ap- 
peared only  in  the  shape  of  a  native  rumour,  which, 
though  it  seemed  to  swell  into  bulk  and  significance, 
was  believed,  with  something  perhaps  of  self-decep- 
tion, by  Macgregor,  to  be  only  a  shadowy  figment  that 
he  ought  at  once  to  dismiss  from  his  mind.  It  was 
rumoured  that  the  British  Envoy  at  Caubul  had  been 
murdered  at  a  conference  by  Akbar  Khan;  but  Mac- 
gregor argued,  when  communicating,  on  the  30th  of 
December,  this  report  to  the  authorities  below,  that  it 
was  not  likely  Macnaghten  would  have  gone  unattended 
to  a  conference  with  the  chiefs,  or  that  Akbar  Khan, 
whose  father  and  family  were  in  the  hands  of  the  British, 
would  commit  an  act  of  such  outrageous  folly  as  to  mur- 
der the  representative  of  the  British  Government.  But 
Macgregor's  incredulity  was  soon  dispersed.  After  three 
days  of  doubt,  authentic  tidings  came  in  firom  Caubul  to 
disquiet  the  hearts  of  the  British  chiefs  at  Jellalabad. 
On  the  second  day  of  the  new  year,  a  letter  was  received 
firom  Major  Pottinger,  full  of  the  most  painful  and  dis- 
heartening intelligence.  It  announced  the  murder  of 
Macnaghten.  It  announced  that  the  Caubul  force  was 
about  immediately  to  abandon  its  position,  and  to  fall 
back  upon  Jellalabad,  with  every  prospect  of  being 
attacked  by  a  faithless  and  infuriated  enemy  upon  the 
way.  Into  a  few  sentences  of  terrible  significance  was 
crowded  the  record  of  these  melancholy  events.  The 
letter  was  written  on  Christmas-day: 

Caubul,  December  25,  1841. 

My  dear  Macgregor, 

We  have  had  a  sad  Comedy  of  Errors,  or  rather  tragedy 
here.     Macnaghten  was  called  out  to  a  conference  and  murdered, 
VOL.  II.  P 


210  sale's  brigade. 

We  have  interchanged  terms  on  the  ground  ho  was  treating  on 
for  leaving  the  country;  but  things  are  not  finally  settled.  How- 
ever, we  are  to  fall  back  on  Jellalabad  to-morrow  or  next  day. 
In  the  present  disturbed  state  of  the  country  we  may  expect  oppo- 
sition on  the  road,  and  we  are  likely  to  suffer  much  from  the  cold 
and  hunger,  as  we  expect  to  have  no  carriage  for  tents  and,  super* 
fluitiedk  I  have  taken  charge  of  the  Mission.  Mackenzie,  Law- 
rence, and  ConoUy  are  all  seized*  The  first  two  I  fear  for.  The 
latter  is  quite  safe.    The  cantonment  is  now  attacked. 

Yours,  very  truly, 

Eldbed  Pottinger. 

With  deep  emotion  the  officers  now  discussed  the 
dangers  of  this  fearful  retreat  through  the  snow,  and  the 
too  probable  treachery  of  the  chiefs;  and  there  were 
those  among  them  who  predicted  that  Elphinstone's 
army  would  be  cut  to  pieces  by  the  enemy,  or  destroyed 
by  the  snow  almost  to  a  man.  All  this  was  very  dis- 
couraging; but  the  Jellalabad  garrison  were  not  in  a 
temper  to  be  easily  cast  down.  On  they  went  from 
day  to  day,  working  cheerfully  at  the  defences — never 
fearing  for  themselves,  and,  in  spite  of  the  evil  prophe- 
cies of  a  few  amongst  them,  hoping  the  best  for  their 
miserable  comrades. 