

A  shudder  ran  through  the  garrison.  That  solitary 
horseman  looked  like  the  messenger  of  death.  Few 
doubted  that  he  was  the  bearer  of  intelligence  that  would 
fill  their  souls  with  horror  and  dismay.  Their  worst 
forebodings  seemed  confirmed.  There  was  the  one  man 
who  was  to  tell  the  story  of  the  massacre  of  a  great 
army.*  A  party  of  cavalry  were  sent  out  to  succour 
him.  They  brought  him  in  wounded,  exhausted,  half- 
dead.  The  messenger  was  Dr.  Brydon,  and  he  now  re- 
ported his  belief  that  he  was  the  sole  survivor  of  an 
army  of  some  sixteen  thousand  men. 

*  It  is  said  that  Colonel  Dennie  says  Mr.  Gleig,  *^  sounded  like  the 
predicted  that  not  a  soul  would  es-  response  of  an  oracle  when  he  ex- 
cape  except  one  man,  and  that  he  claimed,  'Did  I  not  say  so— here 
would  come  to  tell  that  the  rest  were  comes  the  messenger.'" — iSale's  Bri" 
destroyed.    "  The  voice  of  Dennie,"  gade  in  Afghanvftan,'] 


318  THE  BETBEAT  FROM  OAUBUL. 


CHAPTER  n. 

[January,  1842.] 

The  Retreat  from  Caubul — Departure  of  the  Army — Attack  on  the  Rear- 
Guard —  The  First  Day's  March — Encampment  at  Begramee— The 
Passage  of  the  Koord-Gaubul  Pass — Teaeen — Jugdulluck — Sufibrings  of 
the  Force— Negotiations  with  Akbar  Khan — JAa^sacr^  at  Gundamudc — 
Escape  of  Dr.  Brydon. 

TffB  story  told  by  Dr.  Brydon  was  one  of  which  history 
has  few  parallels.  A  British  army,  consisting  of  more 
than  four  thousand  fighting  men  and  twelve  thousand 
camp-followers,  had,  aa  he  conftisedly  related,  disappeared 
in  a  few  days.  Some  had  perished  in  the  snow ;  others 
had  been  destroyed  by  the  knives  and  the  jezails  of 
the  enemy;  and  a  few  had  been  carried  into  captivity, 
perhaps  to  perish  even  more  miserably  than  the  unhappy 
comrades  who  had  died  in  the  deep  passes  of  Koord- 
Caubul,  Tezeen,  and  Jugdulluck. 

In  the  struggle  between  life  and  death  which  then 
threatened  to  stifle  the  evidence  of  poor  Brydon,  he  told 
but  imperfectly  what  he  knew ;  and  but  imperfectly  did 
he  know  the  whole  dire  history  of  that  calamitous  retreat. 
It  was  long  before  the  garrison  of  Jellalabad  had  more 
than  a  dim  perception  of  the  events  which  ended  in  the 
annihilation  of  the  Caubul  force.  No  one  man  could 
speak  of  more  than  certain  scenes  of  the  great  tragedy ; 


EVACUATION  OF  CANTONMENTS.         219 

what  had  happened  before,  behind,  around  him,  he  could 
only  conjecture.  But  there  were  other  survivors  than 
the  solitary  man  who  was  brought,  wounded  and  feeble, 
into  Jellalabad  on  that  January  morning;  and  enough 
is  now  on  record  to  enable  the  historian  to  group  into 
one  intelligible  whole  all  the  crowded  circumstances  of 
that  lamentable  retreat. 