

*  The  mountain-train  guns  here  ceeded  in  spiking  the  guns,  but  being 

fell  into  the  enemy's  hands,  in  spite  poorly    supported  by  the  infantry, 

of  the  gallantry  of  Lieutenant  Green,  ne  could  not  recapture  them.     Two 

who  was  in  charge,  and  the  artillery-  horse-artillery  guns  were  abandoned 

men  under  his  command.  Green  sue-  soon  afterwards. 

VOL.  II.  Q 


226  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

destructively  on  our  flanks.  Pottinger  went  to  the  Gre- 
neral;  and  the  Greneral  consented  to  the  halt,*  Shelton, 
on  the  other  hand,  was  eager  for  an  advance.  He 
believed  that  their  only  chance  of  safety  lay  in  a  rapid 
forward  movement,  shaking  off  the  ba^age  and  camp- 
followers  as  they  went.  In  this  conviction,  he  hurried 
forward  to  Elphinstone,  and  implored  him  to  proceed-f 
But  the  General  was  not  to  be  moved ;  and  the  doomed 
army  halted  at  Boot-Ehak. 

Here  Akbar  Khan  appeared  upon  the  scene.  With 
a  body  of  some  600  horsemen  he  rode  up,  and  Pottinger 
saw  him  in  the  distance.  Believing  that  he  was  a  Sirdar 
of  note,  the  political  chief  despatched  Captain  Skinner, 
with  a  flag  of  truce,  to  communicate  with  him.  Skinner 
brought  back  a  friendly  message.  The  Sirdar,  he  said, 
had  reproached  the  British  authorities  for  their  hasty 
movement  on  the  preceding  morning;  but  added  that 
he  had  come  out  to  protect  them  from  the  attacks  of 
the  Ghazees.  His  instructions  were  to  demand  other 
hostages,  as  security  for  the  evacuation  of  Jellalabad; 
and  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the  force,  supplying  it  in 
the  interval  with  everything  it  required,  until  such  time 

•"About  mid-day  I  received  a  \Major Poitinger^sBudeedbad Bepcri: 
letter  from  Newab  Zemaun  Khan  and  MS.  Records,} 
Naib  Ameen-oollah,  requesting  us  to  t  '*I  bad  lust  formed  up  a  corps 
bait  till  tbe^  dispersed  the  fanatics,  near  Boot-Khak  to  resist  atnreatened 
and  promismg  us  supplies  of  pro-  attack,  and  was  moving  on  again, 
visions  and  fiiwood  if  we  did  so.  I  when  I  beard  the  General  bad  or- 
communicated  this  to  General  Elphin-  dereda  halt.  I  immediately  hurried 
stone,  with  the  information  that  the  forward  and  entreated  him  to  con- 
defile  in  front  was  strongly  occupied,  tinue  the  march,  having  only  come 
The  General  having  taken  this  into  three  miles,  and  assured  him  a  halt 
consideration,  the  utter  conflision  on  the  snow,  without  tents  or  food, 
which  prevailed,  the  exhausted  state  would  destroy  the  troops ;  but  be  was 
of  the  Sepoys,  who  had  been  under  immoveable,  talked  of  the  Sirdars* 
arms  in  deep  snow  from  daylight  of  promises,  and  sending  a  letter  to  Cau- 
the  6tb  (with  scarcely  any  rest,  and  bul  to  know  why  they  had  not  sent 
neither  food  norwateratthe  bivouac),  us  a  safe^ard.  Here  was  another 
joined  with  the  pressure  on  the  rear-  day  entirely  lost,  and  the  enemy  col- 
guard,  he  determined  to  halt  till  lecting  in  numbers.*' — ^Statement  oj 
night  and  then  pursue  bis  march."—  Briy(uiier  Shelton :  MS,  Iiccords.'} 