

On  the  6th  of  January,  1842,  the  army  commanded 
by  General  Elphinstone,  which,  for  sixty-five  days,  had 
been  enduring  such  humiliation  as  never  before  had  been 
borne  by  a  British  force,  prepared  to  consummate  the 
work  of  self-abasement  by  abandoning  its  position,  and 
leaving  the  trophies  of  war  in  the  hands  of  an  insolent 
enemy,  A  breach  had  been  cut,  on  the  preceding  day, 
by  the  Engineer  Sturt,  through  the  low  ramparts  of  the 
cantonments,  the  earth  of  which  bridged  over  the  ditch ; 
and  now  through  this  opening,  and  through  the  rear 
gate,  the  baggage  filed  out  into  the  open  plain,  and  the 
troops  prepared  to  follow  it.  It  was  a  clear,  bright, 
frosty  morning.  The  cold  was  intense.  The  snow  was 
lying  deep  on  the  ground.  Shelton  had  recommended 
that  the  baggage  should  be  loaded  by  moon-rise ;  but  it 
was  not  before  eight  o'clock  that  it  was  ready  to  move. 
About  half-past  nine  the  advanced-guard*  moved  out  of 
cantonments.  The  English  ladies  and  the  children  were 
with  it ;  for  it  was  supposed  to  be  the  place  of  lafety, 
if  safety  could  be  found  amidst  the  certain  hojror? 
of  this  perilous  retreat. 

*  *(  The  advaneed-gu^d  eonsiated  Shah's  6th  Begimeiit,   two  horae- 

of  the  44tb  Queen's,  4th  Irregular  artillery  sixopounder  guBS.  The  reaF- 

Horse,  and  Skinner  sHorse,  two  horse-  ffuard  was   composed  of  the  54th 

artillerv  six-pounder  guns,  sappers  Native  Infantry,  fithCavahrj,  and  two 

and  miners' mountain^train,  and  the  six-pounder  horse-artillery  guns.  The 

late  Envoy's  escort.    The  main  body  force  consisted  of  about  4500  fighting 

included  the  5th  and  d7th  Native  men,  and  12,000  Mowers.**-HtXa«9 

Infantry;    the  latter    in  charge  of  Sale's  Journal'] 
treasure;    Anderson's    Horse,     the 


220  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

It  had  been  agreed  that  the  chiefs  should  furnish  a 
strong  Afghan  escort  to  protect  our  retiring  troops  from 
the  furious  zeal  of  th?  Ghazees,  and  the  uncontrollable 
cupidity  of  those  Afghan  bandits  who  had  all  along 
looked  upon  the  revolution  only  as  an  opportunity  for 
much  plunder.  But  the  army  commenced  its  march 
without  an  escort;  and  the  Newab  Zemaun  Khan,  whose 
good  faith  and  true  nobility  of  character  are  beyond 
suspicion,  despatched  a  letter  to  Pottinger,  warning  him 
of  the  danger  of  leaving  cantonments  without  any  such 
provision  for  their  safety.*  But  it  was  too  late  now  to 
stand  stilL  The  Mission  premises  had  already  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy ;  and  could  not  be  regained 
without  an  engagement,  which  at  such  a  time  it  would 
have  been  folly  to  risk.  Pottinger  instructed  ConoUy, 
who  remained  as  one  of  our  hostages  with  Zemaun 
Khan,  to  explain  all  this  to  the  Newab.  The  good  old 
man  admitted  the  cogency  of  Pottinger  s  arguments,  and 
promised  to  do  his  best  to  protect  the  retreating  force. 
He  fulfilled  his  promise  to  the  utmost  of  his  ability ;  but 
he  lacked  the  power  to  restrain  the  people  from  per- 
petrating the  outrages  of  which  long  impunity  had 
habituated  them  to  the  commission,  and  made  them 
regard  themselves  as  the  privileged  instruments  of 
chartered  violence  and  rapine. 