


REFUSAL  TO  SUURENDER.  213 

Jellalabad,  January  9,  1842. 

We  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  of  the  29th  ultimo,  which  you  therein  state  was  to  be 
delivered  to  us  by  Abdool  Ghuflfoor  Khan,  appointed  Governor  of 
this  place  by  the  existing  powers  at  Caubul.  That  communica- 
tion was  not  delivered  to  us  by  him,  but  by  a  messenger  of  his, 
and  though  dated  29th  of  December,  1841,  has  only  this  moment 
reached  us.  I  have,  at  the  same  time,  positive  information  that 
Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  has  sent  a  proclamation  to  all  the  chiefs  in 
the  neighbourhood,  urging  them  to  raise  their  followers  for  the 
purpose  of  intercepting  and  destroying  the  forces  now  at  Jellala- 
bad.  Under  these  circumstances  we  have  deemed  it  our  duty  to 
await  a  further  communication  from  you,  which  we  desire  may 
point  out  the  security  which  may  be  given  for  our  safe  march  to 
Peshawur. 

We  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

R.  Sale,  Major-General. 

G.  H.  Macgregor,  Political  Agent. 

It  is  right  that  Macgregor  and  Sale  should  be  suffered 
to  state  in  their  own  words  the  motives  which  impelled 
them  to  adopt  this  worthy  resolution.  "  The  conduct," 
says  Captain  Macgregor,  "  of  Major-General  Sir  R.  Sale 
and  myself,  in  having  declined,  under  the  circumstances, 
to  deliver  up  Jellalabad  to  Abdool  Ghuffoor  Khan,  Ba- 
rukzye,  in  conformity  with  the  instructions  contained 
in  the  letter  to  my  address  of  the  29th  of  December, 
signed  by  Major  Pottinger  and  General  Elphinstone,  has 
alread)'  been  approved  by  government ;  but  perhaps  it 
may  be  proper  here  to  relate  a  few  of  the  causes  which 
led  to  such  a  resolution.  When  the  British  authorities 
at  Caubul  had  decided  upon  capitulating,  and  the  terms 
of  capitulation  were  in  the  course  of  negotiation,  my  spies 
informed  me  that  letters  had  been  received  from  Ma- 
homed Akbar  Khan,  and  the  Ghilzye  chiefs,  desiring  the 
different  tribes  on  the  road  to  assemble  to  attack  the 
British  army,  which   was  shortly  to  leave  Caubul  for 


214  SAIiB's  BRIGADE. 

India.     This  information  was  confirmed  by  the  letter 

from  Burkutt  Khan An  intercepted  letter 

from  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  which  reached  us  at  the 
same  time,  will  serve  to  show  the  spirit  with  which  he 
regarded  ns;  therefore  I  felt  convinced  that  treachery 
was  intended  by  the  Afghan  chiefs,  in  which  case  our 
retaining  possession  of  the  fortress  of  Jellalabad  became 
of  incalculable  advantage  to  the  retreating  force ;  and  if 
it  succeeded  in  reaching  Jellalabad,  strengthened  as  it 
would  be  by  the  garrison,  we  might  yet  have  upheld 
our  authority  in  Ningrahar,  until  an  opportunity  would 
have  been  afforded  to  the  British  Government  to  rein- 
force us,  so  as  to  commence  operations  for  the  recapture 
of  Caubul.  The  troops  left  Caubul  on  the  6th  of 
January;  and  not  until  the  9th  did  we  receive  the  letter 
in  question.  Their  fate  had  been  sealed  ere  that  period; 
and  had  the  requisition  been  complied  with,  govern- 
ment would  most  undoubtedly  have  had  to  lament  the 
destruction  of  the  Jellalabad  garrison  as  well  as  that  of 
the  Caubul  force,  the  wishes  of  the  enemy  evidently 
being  to  inveigle  us  into  their  power,  and  then  to  do 
their  worst  towards  us.  Moreover,  to  have  evacuated 
Jellalabad  would  have  doubtless  increased  a  hundred- 
fold the  diflSculties  of  re-establishing  the  British  autho- 
rity in  this  country,  in  the  event  of  government  deter- 
mining 80  to  do.  Our  national  honour,  and  the  safety 
of  our  Indian  dominions,  seemed  to  render  this  latter 
course  of  paramount  necessity."* 