

accomplished,  had  proper  arrange-  carriages  of  the  gun- waggons  go  out 

ments  for  leaving  cantonments  been  that  were  to  form  a  foot-bridge  for 

made    beforehand,   as   the    distance  the  infantry  over  the  Caubul  river, 

from  Caubul  to  Tezeen  is  only  thirty  about  300  yards  from  cantonments, 

miles.     Had  this  been  effected,  how  and  got  offended  for  my  trouble.  He 

different  would  have  been  the  fate  of  was  just  sitting  down  to  breakfast, 

the  Caubul  army.     We  should  only  They  did  not  go  out  till  between  nine 

have  been  one  night  and  one  day  and  and  ten,  and  having  to  be  dragged 

a  half  in  the  snow,  and  should  have  through  a  canal  caused  further  delay, 

escaped  our  enemy,   who,   the  first  so  that  the  bridge  was  not  completed 

day,  were  not  ready  to  follow  us." —  for  the   advanced-guard  to  pass  till 

[CapL  JohnsorCs  Journal.']  past  twelve."— iStoteJnen/  of  Brigadier 

t  Brigadier  Shelton  says  :  "  I  knew  Shelton :  MS."] 
nothing^  of  the  arrangements  lor  the 


222  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

saved.  But  the  delays  which  arose  on  that  dreadful 
morning  sealed  the  fate  of  the  unhappy  force.  The  day 
was  well-nigh  lost.  It  was  a  day  of  suffering  and  con- 
fusion-— presaging  worse  suffering  and  confusion  to  come. 
The  advanced-guard  under  Brigadier  Anquetil  moved 
out  with  some  order  and  steadiness— but  in  a  little  while 
the  rush  of  camp-followers  destroyed  all  semblance  of 
military  array.  They  mixed  themselves  up  with  the 
soldiers  —  a  vast  overwhelming  assemblage  of  ten  or 
twelve  thousand  men.  Not  a  mile  of  the  distance  had 
been  accomplished  before  it  was  seen  how  heavily  this 
curse  of  camp-followers  sate  upon  the  doomed  army.  It 
was  vain  to  attempt  to  manage  this  mighty  mass  of  law- 
less and  suffering  humanity.  On  they  went,  struggling 
through  the  snow— making  scant  progress  in  their  con- 
fusion and  bewilderment — scarcely  knowing  whether 
they  were  escaping,  or  whether  they  were  rushing  on  to 
death. 

The  main  body  under  Brigadier  Shelton,  with  its 
immense  strings  of  baggage-laden  cattle,  was  moving 
out  of  cantonments  during  the  greater  part  of  the  day. 
The  rear-guard  manned  the  cantonment  -  walls,  and 
looked  down  upon  a  scene  of  uproar  and  confusion  be- 
yond the  imagination  to  conceive.  The  enemy,  as  the 
day  advanced,  began  to  be  busy  at  their  work  of  plun- 
der. Dashing  in  among  the  baggage,  they  cut  down  the 
helpless  camp-followers,  and  carried  off  whatever  they 
could  seize.  The  snow  was  soon  plashed  with  blood. 
From  the  opening  in  the  ramparts  to  the  bridge  across 
the  river  streamed  one  great  tide  of  soldiers  and  camp- 
followers,  camels  and  ponies;  and  at  the  bridge  there 
was  an  enormous  mass  of  struggling  life,  from  which 
arose  shouts,  and  yells,  and  oaths — an  indescribable  up- 
roar of  discordant  sounds ;  the  bello wings  of  the  camels, 
the  curses  of  the  camel-drivers,  the  lamentations  of  the 