

The  night  was  one  of  suffering  and  horror.  The  snow 
lay  deep  on  the  ground.  There  was  no  order — no 
method  in  anything  that  was  done.  The  different  regi- 
ments encamped  anywhere.  Soldiers  and  camp-followers 
were  huddled  together  in  one  inextricable  mass  of  suffer- 
ing humanity..  Horses,  camels,  and  baggage-ponies  were 
mixed  up  confusedly  with  them.  Nothing  had  been  done 
to  render  more  endurable  the  rigour  of  the  northern 
winter.f   The  weary  wretches  lay  down  to  sleep — some 

^  Lieut.   Hivrdyman,  of  the  5  th  rolled  round  the  soldier^s  feet  and 

Cavalry,  was  here  shot  through  the  ankles  after  the  Afghan  fashion,  as  a 

heart.  better  protection  against  snow  than 

f  A  writer  in  the  Calcutta  Review  the  mere  hard  leather  shoes.     This 

says :  "  Major  Pottinger  told  us  that  he  repeatedly  urged,  but  in  vain,  and 

when  the  retreat  was  decided  on,  and  within  a  few  hours  the  frost  did  its 

no  attention  was  paid  to  his,  Law-  work.      Major  Pottinger    said  that 

reuce's,  and  Conolly's  advice  to  con-  there  was  not  an  Afghan  around  them 

centrate  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  he  urged  who  had  not  his  legs  swathed  in  rags 

tlie  o(Hc(TS  to  have  all  the  old  horse-  as  soon  as  the  snow  began  to  fall.^^ 
clothing,    &c.,  cut    into    strips   and 


DISORGANISATION  OF  THE  FORCE.  225 

never  rose  again ;  others  awoke  to  find  themselves  crip- 
pled for  life  by  the  biting  fi:ost. 

The  morning  dawned,  and  without  any  orders,  with- 
out an  attempt  to  restrain  them,  the  camp-followers  and 
ba^age  struggled  on  ahead,  and  many  of  the  Sepoys 
went  on  with  them.  Discipline  was  fast  disappearing. 
The  regiments  were  dwindling  down  to  the  merest 
skeletons.  It  was  no  longer  a  retreating  army;  it  was 
a  rabble  in  chaotic  flight.  The  enemy  were  pressing  on 
our  rear;  seizing  our  baggage;  capturing  our  guns;* 
cutting  up  all  in  their  way.  Our  soldiers  weary,  feeble, 
and  frost-bitten,  could  make  no  stand  against  the  fierce 
charges  of  the  Afghan  horsemen.  It  seemed  that  the 
whole  rear-guard  would  speedily  be  cut  off.  All  thoughts 
of  effectual  resistance  were  at  an  end.  There  was  no- 
thing now  to  be  hoped  for  but  fi:om  the  forbearance  of 
the  Afghan  chiefs. 

The  New.ab  Zemaun  Khan  had  ever  been  true  to  us — 
ever  in  the  midst  of  the  wild  excitement  of  the  Caubul 
outbreak,  and  in  the  flush  of  national  triumph,  he  had 
been  serene, generous,  and  forbearing;  had  borne  himself 
as  a  worthy  enemy;  had  been  betrayed  into  no  excesses; 
but  had  endeavoured  to  vindicate  the  rights  of  the 
Afghans  without  inflicting  upon  the  Feringhees  the 
misery  and  humiliation  which  others  contemplated  with 
irrepressible  delight.  He  had  exerted  himself  on  the 
preceding  day  to  control  the  fierce  passions  of  his 
countrymen,  and  now  he  wrote  to  Major  Pottinger,  ex- 
horting him  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the  retreating  army, 
and  promising  to  send  supplies  of  food  and  firewood,  and 
to  disperse  the  fanatic  bands  which  were  hovering  so 