

"  As  regards  my  own  line  of  conduct,"  writes  General 
Sale,  ''  in  this  diflScult  crisis,  I  am  of  opinion,  in  the  ab- 
sence of  all  instructions  from  India,  that  I  am  at  liberty 
to  choose  between  the  alternatives  of  being  bound  or  not 
by  the  convention,  which  was  forced  from  our  Envoy  and 
military  commander  with  the  knives  at  their  throats, 

*  Captain  Macgregor's  Report :  MS,  Records, 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  DEFENCE.  215 

according  as  I  may  see  either  one  course  or  the  other  to 
be  most  conducive  to  British  interests.  It  does  not  abso- 
lutely impose  any  obligation  on  my  force,  which  is  no 
party  to  it;  and  under  the  consideration  of  its  having 
been  extorted  by  force,  unless  it  should  be  ratified  by 
the  Governor-General  in  Council.  If,  therefore,  I  see  a 
prospect  of  being  reinforced  from  Peshawur  within  the 
period  for  which  my  provisions  and  ammunition  will  last, 
I  propose  to  hold  this  place  on  the  part  of  government, 
until  I  receive  its  orders  to  the  contrary.  If,  however, 
any  untoward  incidents  should  preclude  the  prospect  of 
Brigadier  Wild's  crossing  the  Khybur,  I  should  esteem 
it  wiser  and  better  to  retire  upon  Peshawur,  with  the 
debris  of  the  force  at  Caubul,  on  its  reaching  me,  than 
to  remain  here ;  but  in  no  event  would  I  retire  unsup- 
ported by  other  troops  to  Peshawur,  unless  absolutely 
compelled  to  do  so  by  the  failure  of  food  and  ammuni- 
tion. I  feel  assured  that  the  rebels  at  Caubul  dare  not 
proceed  to  extremities  with  the  force  there,  so  long  as 
they  know  me  to  be  strong  here;  and  that  I  should 
therefore  be  compromising  them  by  evacuatipg  this  place, 
until  they  have  been  permitted  to  retire  upon  it."* 

A  season  of  painful  anxiety  and  suspense  followed  the 
receipt  of  the  letter  from  Pottinger  and  Elphinstone. 
But  it  was  not  without  its  alleviations.  Money  had  be- 
come scarce  at  Jellalabad.  The  cupidity  of  the  Afghans 
had  seldom  been  proof  against  English  money ;  and  now 
to  lack  the  means  of  appealing  to  it  was  to  lose  one  of 
our  principal  means  of  defence.  It  was,  therefore,  with 
no  common  delight  that  the  garrison  now  welcomed  the 
arrival  of  a  sum  of  money  which  Mackeson,  eyer  strenuous 
in  his  activity,  had  sent  on  from  Peshawur,  through  the 
agency  of  Tora-baz  Khan,  the  loyal  chief  of  Lalpoora. 

*  General  Sak  to  Sir  J.  NichoUs,  JeOalahad^  January  11,  1842:  MS,  Re- 
cords. 


216  sale's  brigade. 

The  defences  of  the  place,  too,  were  rising  under  Broad- 
foot's  hands,  and  "  by  the  middle  of  January,  the  com- 
mencement of  the  rainy  season,  a  parapet,  nowhere  less 
than  six  feet  high,  with  a  banquette  as  wide  as  the 
nature  of  the  rampart  allowed,  was  completed  entirely 
iiound  the  place.  The  gates  were  repaired  and 
strengthened  by  buttresses.  Two  of  them  were  re- 
trenched, and  a  ditch  carried  round  the  north-west  angle, 
whilst  some  of  the  most  dangerous  ravines  were  laid  open 
to  our  force,  and  roads  were  opened  into  the  low  ground 
on  the  north  side."*  There  was  little,  indeed,  at  this 
time,  except  a  scarcity  of  ammunition,  to  render  the 
garrison  apprehensive  on  their  own  accounts;  but  every 
day  made  them  more  and  more  anxious  concerning  the 
fate  of  their  countrymen,  who  by  this  time  had  left 
Caubul  on  their  perilous  retreat  through  the  snowy 
passes.  A  letter  from  Captain  Lawrence,  dated  on  the 
4th  instant,f  announced  that  the  force  was  to  march  in  a 
day  or  two  with  every  expectation  of  being  attacked 