


BURNING  OF  THE  MISSION-HOUSE.  223 

Hindostanees,  the  shrieks  of  women,  and  the  cries  of 
children ;  and  the  savage  yells  of  the  Ghazees  rising  in 
barbarous  triumph  above  them  all. 

So  tedious  was  the  exode  of  the  force,  such  were  the 
embarrassments  that  beset  its  progress,  that  when  the 
shadows  of  evening  began  to  descend  upon  this  melan- 
choly scene,  the  rear-guard  was  still  on  the  walls.     At 
six  o'clock  they  marched  out  of  cantonments,  and,  moved 
by  one  common  thirst  of  plunder,  the  Afghans  poured 
themselves  upon  the  abandoned  homes  of  the  English, 
and,  when  they  could  not  gratify  their  cupidity,  began 
to  gratify  their  revenge.     The  Feringhees  had  lefl  little 
behind  them.     They  had  destroyed  almost  everything 
which   they  could   not  carry  away,   except  the  guns, 
which  the  General  had  deemed  it  expedient  to  leave  in 
good  condition  for  the  use  of  his  "  new  allies."*     But  at 
all  events  there  were  buildings  standing  there — build- 
ings erected  by  the  English  for  their  own  purposes — 
insolent  monuments  of  the  Feringhee  invasion.     The 
work  of  the  incendiary  commenced.   The  Mission-house, 
the  General's  quarters,  and  other  public  buildings,  were 
soon  in  a  blaze ;  and  the  British  army,  now  scattered  over 
the  whole  line  of  country  between  Caubul  and  Begramee, 
some  already  at  the  halting-ground  and  others  only  now 
starting  on  their  dreary  march,  looked  out  through  the 
frosty  night  at  the  great  conflagration,  which  lit  up  the 

•  Eyre  says  that  "  the  General  had  character.    As  an  honourable  Eng- 

oflen  been  urged  to  destroy  these  lish  gentleman,  having  covenanted  to 

guns  rather  than  suffer  them  to  fall  give  up  his  guns,  he  considered  him- 

mto  the  enemy's  hands ;  but  he  con-  self  bound  to  deliver  them  over  in 

sidered  that  it  would  be  a  breach  of  the  state  in  which  they  were  at  the 

the  treaty  to  do  so/'    We  cannot  re-  time  the  covenant  was  made.    The 

strain  a  smile  at  Elphinstone's  sim-  enemy  do  not  seem  to  have  appre- 

pHcity ;   but  at  the  same  time,  the  ciatea  Elphinstone's  generosity,  for 

circumstance  noted  affords  rather  a  they  burnt  the  carriages  of  the  guns 

pleasant  indication  of  the  GeneraVs  as  soon  as  our  troops  evacuated  the 

Qonesty  of  purpose  and  singleness  of  cantonments. 


224  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

incumbent  sky  like  a  stormy  sunset,  and  for  miles  around 
reddened  the  great  coverlid  of  snow. 

Not  until  two  hours  after  midnight  did  the  rear-guard 
reach  its  encamping-ground,  on  the  right  bank  of  the 
river,  near  Begramee.  They  had  been  under  arms  since 
eight  o'clock  in  the  morning.  They  had  been  savagely 
attacked  on  leaving  cantonments,  and  had  left  fifty  of 
their  numbers  dead  or  dying  in  the  snow,  and  two  of 
their  guns  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.*  They  had  now 
only  accomplished  five  or  six  miles  of  their  fearful 
journey;  but  they  had  seen  enough  to  fill  them  with 
horrible  forebodings  of  the  fate  that  was  in  store  for 
them.  The  road  was  strewn  with  dying  wretches, 
smitten  by  the  unendurable  cold.  The  miserable  people 
of  Hindostan — the  weaker  women  and  young  children 
— had  already  begun  to  lay  themselves  down  to  die 
in  the  dreadful  snow.  Even  the  Sepoys  were  sinking 
down  on  the  line  of  march,  and  quietly  awaiting  death. 