

*  Captain  Broad/oofs  Report.  send  intelligence  of  these  matters  to 

t  Caubul,  January  4th,  1842.  government  and  Rawlinson,  that  the 

My  dear  Macoregor,  J*"®*"  ""^y  be  aware  of  the  state  of 

Pottinger  being  busy,  1  write  to  affairs,  and  not  do  anything  hurriedly, 

tell  you  of  the  Envoy  being  murdered,  ^^  you  understand  faith  has  been  kept 

and  Trevor,  on  the  23rd.     We  have  and  are  obliged  to  leave  Jellalabad, 

been  obliged  to  conclude  the  treaty,  you  had  belter  not  pass  the  Khybur 

and  it  is  settled  we  march  to-morrow.  ^>U  ^®  come,  as  it  is  feared  our  troops 

Whether  we  are  attacked  on  the  road  ^^^^  ^^  so  disorganised  as  to  require 

depends  upon  their  good  faith.      I  your  aid  through  that  pass.     If  you 

beHeve  we  do  not  run  very  much  risk  <^ould   take   supplies   for  us   to   the 

as  far  as  Jugdulluck,  except  from  the  "outh  of  the  Khybur,  it  would  be 

weather,  which  is  very  severe  here;  very  desirable.  We  are  all  well.    Lady 

and   we  are  obliged  to  march   very  M(acnaghten)  ditto,  though  still  much 

lightly,  and  may  expect  to  lose  many  afflicted.     Keep  your  scouts  on  the 

men.     Orders  have  been  sent  to  you  ""oad,  and  give  us  as  much  intelligence 

to    evacuate   Jellalabad  before    our  as  you  can.    You  must  chiefly  depend 

arrival:    if,  however,  the    treaty  is  on  yourself  for  news  of  us,  as  all  our 

broken  by  our  being  attacked,  you  Afghans  have  deserted  us.     We  have 

will  consider  the  orders  cancelled,  and  "o   money  in  our  treasury;   so  tell 

you  will  use  every  exertion  to  aid  us.  Mackeson  to  have  some  ready  for  us. 

We  have  received  your  letter  of  the  impossible. 

24th,  but  our  word  cannot  be  broken.  Yours,  &c.,  &c., 

Pottinger  wishes  you,  if  possible,  to  ^»  ^"^^  ^*  Lawrence, 


ARRIVAL  OF  DR.  BRYDON.  217 

upon  the  road.     Nothing  could  Sale's  brigade  do  in  this 
emergency,  but  patiently  abide  the  result. 

At  last,  on  the  13th  of  January,  when  the  garrison 
were  busy  on  the  works,  toiling  with  axe  and  shovel, 
with  their  arms  piled  and  their  accoutrements  laid  out 
close  at  hand,  a  sentry,  on  the  ramparts,  looking  out  to- 
wards the  Caubul  road,  saw  a  solitary  white-faced  horse- 
man struggling  on  towards  the  fort.  The  word  was 
passed ;  the  tidings  spread.  Presently  the  ramparts  were 
lined  with  oflScers,  looking  out,  with  throbbing  hearts, 
through  unsteady  telescopes,  or  with  straining  eyes 
tracing  the  road.  Slowly  and  painfully,  as  though  horse 
and  rider  both  were  in  an  extremity  of  mortal  weak- 
ness, the  solitary  mounted  man  came  reeling,  tottering 
on.  They  saw  that  he  was  an  Englishman.  On  a 
wretched,  weary  pony,  clinging,  as  one  sick  or  wounded, 
to  its  neck,  he  sate  or  rather  leant  forward;  and  there 
were  those  who,  as  they  watched  his  progress,  thought 
that  he  could  never  reach,  unaided,  the  walls  of 
Jellalabad. 