

*  "  About  eleven  o'clock,  when  from  the  Newab,  agreeing  to  our 
about  half  of  the  column  had  moved  movement,  and  promising  that  he 
off,  I  received  a  letter  from  Newab  would  protect  us  as  far  as  ne  could ; 
Zemaun  Khan,  remonstrating  against  and  it  is  my  duty  to  state  that  he  did 
our  march.  But  as  the  enemy  had  so  to  the  utmost  of  his  power ;  but 
been  enabled  to  seize  the  enclosures  the  quantity  of  baggage  delayed  the 
of  the  late  Envoy's  house  and  offices,  march  of  the  rear-guard,  which  was 
owing  to  the  early  withdrawal  of  our  obliged  to  retreat  with  severe  loss, 
guards,  we  could  not  consent  without  abandoning  two  guns  and  much  bag- 
commencing  an  action  for  the  re-  gage,  notwithstanding  it  did  not 
covery  of  part  of  our  works.     I  re-  reach  the  bivouac  at  Besramee  till 

Presented  this  to  the  Newab,  and  two   the  next    morning." — [Jlfq/or 

egged  Mr.  ConoUy  to  explain  our  Pottinger's  Budeeahad  Iteport :  MS^ 

situation.      In   consequence,    about  Records.'] 
one  P.M.  I  received   another  letter 


PASSAGE  OF  THE  RIVER.  221 

The  good  intentions  of  the  Newab  are  not  to  be  de- 
nied ;  but  the  true  policy  of  the  British,  on  that  January 
morning,  was  to  wait  for  nothing,  however  advantage- 
ous in  itself,  but  to  push  on  with  the  utmost  possible 
despatch.*  But  everything  seemed  to  favour  delay. 
The  passage  of  the  Caubul  river  was  to  be  accomplished 
by  means  of  a  temporary  bridge  constnicted  of  gun- 
waggons,  though  the  river  was  fordable  at  many  places, 
and  might  have  been  ridden  or  waded  through  without 
detriment  to  those  who  had  been  struggling  through  the 
deep  snow.  On  this  service,  Sturt,  active  in  spite  of  his 
wounds,  was  employed  from  an  early  hour;  but  it  seems 
that  the  despatch  of  the  gun-waggons  was  delayed,  for 
some  unexplained  reason,  and  it  was  not  until  the  hour 
of  noon  that  the  bridge  was  ready  for  the  passage  of 
the  troops.  Shelton  had  endeavoured  to  expedite  the 
movement  ;f  but  had  met  with  his  usual  success.  He 
went  to  the  General's  quarters — found  him  at  breakfast; 
and  returned  with  nothing  but  a  rebuke. 

Had  the  whole  of  Elphinstone's  army  crossed  the 
Caubul  river  before  noon,  and  pushed  on  with  all  pos- 
sible  despatch   to  Koord-Caubul,  it  might  have  been 

*  "  Before  leaving  Caubul,  it  was  retreat  till  they  were  published  the 

generally  believed  to  be  the  General's  evening  before.     The  order  was  for 

intention  to  proceed,  the  first  day  to  the  baggage  to  assemble  at  eight  a.m. 

Koord-Caubul,  and   the    second  to  At  that  hour  I  went  to  Elnhinstone's 

Tezeen,  which  could  easily  have  been  quarters,  to  beg  he  would  let  the 