


THE  HALT  AT  KOOKD-CAUBUL.  231 

his  suggestion  a  halt  was  ordered  by  Elphinstone ;  and 
the  perishing  troops  sate  down  in  the  snow,  which  an- 
other march  would  have  cleared,  for  a  day  of  painful  un- 
certainty.  The  whole  force  was  against  the  delay. 
Shelton  went  to  the  General  to  remonstrate  against  it. 
In  vain  he  urged  that  such  a  measure  would  cause  the 
total  destruction  of  the  column.  The  General  was  not 
to  be  moved  from  his  purpose.*  The  day  was  one  of 
idleness  and  desertion.  The  Native  troops,  led  by  Shah 
Soojah's  cavalry,  began  to  bethink  themselves  of  escaping 
from  the  horrors  of  the  retreat  by  going  over  to  the 
enemy.  The  General  had  paraded  the  ruins  of  the  dif- 
ferent regiments  to  repel  an  anticipated  attack ;  and  now 
Captain  Grant,  the  adjutant-general,  accompanied  by 
the  Tezeen  chief,  Khoda  Bux  Khan,  rode  to  the  head  of 
these  skeleton  corps,  now  numbering  scarcely  more  than 
a  hundred  men  in  each,  and  explained  to  them  that 
Akbar  Khan  had  declared  his  intention  to  kill  all,  who 
deserted  to  him,  on  the  spot.f  But  the  contagion  was 
then  fast  spreading ;  and  nothing  could  check  the  pro- 

*  *^  I  went  to  E.  and  told  him  such  was  immediately  seized  and  as  in- 

a  measure  would  cause  the  total  dc-  stantly  shot.**    The  same  accurate 

struction  of  the  whole  force ;  but  he  writer  thus  describes  the  state  of  the 

was  not  to  be  moved,  replying  that  the  force  at  this  time: — "We  have  no 

Sirdar  had  sent  to  him  to  say,  if  he  means  of  canying  on  the  sick.    All 

would  stop  there,  that  he  (the  Sirdar)  our  dooley-bearers  deserted  the  first 

would  send  him  provisions,  which,  as  day,  or  were  murdered.    The  whole 

I  foretold,  never  came." — ^Statement  of  our  camels  and  yaboos  have  been 

of  Brigadier  Shelton :  MS,  Records.'^  either  seized  by  the  enemy  or  by 

t  Captain  Johnson   says,   in   his  our  camp-followers ;  and  even  were 

JoumaC  "  A  message  was  sent  to  thev  fortncoming,  we  have  not  men  to 

Mahomed  Akbar  regarding  the  deser-  look  afler  them :  the  greatest  confu- 

tion  of  our  troops,  and  a  hope  ex-  sion  prevailed  all  day,  and  anxiety 

pressed  that  he  would  not  encourage  and  suspense  for  our  ultimate  fate 

It.     He  sent  back  one  of  his  chiefs  intense.      Every    man    among    us 

(the  Tezeen  chief,  Khoda  Bux  Khan)  thought  that  ere  many  hours  luould 

to  explain  that  any  of  our  men  de-  pass  he  was  doomed  to  die  either  by 

serting  from  us  and  going  over  to  cold,  hunger,  or  the  swords  of  our 

him  would  be  shot.     Our  ^w  troops  enemies ;  for,  if  attacked,  although 

had  already  been  paraded  to  repel  we  might  for  a  short  time  hold  out, 