

The  married  officers  and  their  families  went  over  to 
the  Sirdar;  and  on  the  following  morning  (the  10th  of 
January)  the  remnant  of  the  doomed  force  resumed  its 
march  towards  Jellalabad.  There  was  the  same  mi- 
serable confusion  as  on  the  preceding  morning.  Soldiers 
and  camp-followers  rushed  promiscuously  to  the  front. 
The  Native  regiments  were  fast  melting  into  nothing. 
Throwing  down  their  arms  and  crowding  in  among  the 
mass  of  camp-followers,  the  Sepoys  were  rapidly  swelling 
the  disorganised  rabble  in  front.  Their  hands  were 
frost-bitten;  they  could  not  pull  a  trigger;  they  were 
paralysed,  panic-struck ;  they  rushed  forward  in  aimless 
desperation,  scarcely  knowing  what  they  did  or  where 
they  went ;  whilst  the  Afghans,  watching  the  cruel  op- 
portunity, came  down,  with  their  long  knives,  amidst 
their  imresisting  victims,  and  slaughtered  them  like 
sheep.  "  A  narrow  gorge  between  the  precipitous  spurs 
of  two  hills"  was  the  appointed  shambles.  There  the 
dead  and  the  dying  soon  choked  up  the  defile.  There 
was  not  now  a  single  Sepoy  left.  Every  particle  of  bag- 
gage was  gone.  About  fifty  horse-artillerymen,  with  one 
howitzer-gun ;  some  250*  men  of  the  44th ;  and  150 
cavalry  troopers,  now  constituted  the  entire  force.  Of 
the  16,000  men — soldiers  and  camp-followers — who  had 
left  Caubul,  not  more  than  a  quarter  survived. 

*  Eyre  says  "seventy  files."     I    authority — they  were  men  of  hii 
give  the  above  n\imber  on  Shelton*s    own  corps,  and  he  was  with  them. 


236 


THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 


Still  hovering  on  the  flanks  of  our  retreating  force, 
Akbar  Khan,  attended  by  a  party  of  horsemen,  watched 
the  butchery  that  was  going  on  below;  and  when  El- 
phinstone  sent  Skinner  to  remonstrate  with  him,  de- 
clared that  he  was  powerless  to  restrain  the  savage 
impetuosity  of  the  Ghilzyes,  whom  even  their  own  im- 
mediate chiefs  could  not  control.  But  he  had  a  proposal 
to  make.  Those  were  not  times  when  any  very  nice 
regard  for  the  national  honour  prompted  the  rejection  of 
even  humiliating  terms  oflfered  by  our  Afghan  enemies ; 
but  when  the  Sirdar  proposed  that  the  remnant  of  the 
British  army  should  lay  down  their  arms,  and  place 
themselves  entirely  under  his  protection,  Elphinstone 
at  once  refused  his  consent.  The  march  was  therefore 
resumed.  The  wreck  of  the  British  force  made  its  des- 
perate way  down  the  steep  descents  of  the  Haft-Kotul, 
into  a  narrow  defile,  strewn  with  the  ghastly  remains  of 
the  camp-followers  and  soldiers,  who  had  pushed  on  in 
advance  of  the  column.  As  they  passed  down  the  de- 
file,  the  enemy  opened  a  destructive  fire  on  their  rear. 
The  rear  was  then  commanded  by  Shelton.  With  a 
handM  of  Europeans  he  repulsed  their  attacks,  ^^  though 
obliged  to  nurse  their  ammunition  by  a  watchful  check 
on  its  expenditure."  "  Nobly  and  heroically,"  says  Shel- 
ton, in  his  rapid  narrative  of  the  march,  "these  fine 
fellows  stood  by  me."*  The  gallantry  of  these  few  men 
was,  for  a  time,  the  salvation  of  the  whole. 