


238  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

Sung.  They  were  still  ten  miles  from  Jugdulluck. 
Halting  only  till  the  rear-guard  had  come  up,  they  pushed 
on  with  an  energy,  which  at  the  commencement  of  the 
retreat  might  have  saved  the  force  from  destruction. 
But  it  was  now  too  late.  The  enemy  were  crowning 
the  heights ;  there  was  no  possibility  of  escape.  Shelton, 
with  a  few  brave  men  of  the  rear-guard,  faced  the  over- 
whelming crowd  of  Afghans  with  a  determined  courage 
worthy  of  British  soldiers ;  and  fought  his  way  to  Jug- 
dulludk.  Almost  every  inch  of  ground  was  contested. 
Gallantly  did  this  little  band  hold  the  enemy  in  check. 
Keeping  the  fierce  crowd  from  closing  in  upon  the 
column,  but  suffering  terribly  imder  the  fire  of  their 
jezails,  they  made  their  way  at  last  to  the  ground  where 
the  advance  had  halted,  behind  some  ruined  walls  on  a 
height  by  the  road-side.  Their  comrades  received  them 
with  a  cheer.  The  cheer  came  from  a  party  of  officers, 
who  had  extended  themselves  in  line  on  the  height  to 
show  an  imposing  front  to  their  assailants.*  The  enemy 
seemed  to  increase  in  number  and  in  daring.  They  had 
followed  the  rear-guard  to  Jugdulluck,  and  they  now 
took  possession  of  the  heights  commanding  the  position 
of  their  victims. 

The  hot  fire  of  the  enemy's  jezails  drove  the  survivors 
of  the  Caubul  army  to  seek  safety  behind  the  ruined 
walls,  near  which  they  had  posted  themselves.  With- 
drawn from  the  excitement  of  the  actual  conflict,  these 
wretched  men  now  began  to  suffer  in  all  their  unen- 
durable extremes  the  agonies  of  hunger  and  thirst.  They 
scooped  up  the  snow  in  their  hands  and  greedily  de- 
voured it.    But  it  only  increased  their  torments.    There 

*  *'  As  scarcely  anj  Europeans  of  when  my  friend.  Captain  Grant,  who 

the  advance  now  remained,  and  the  was  next   to  me,  received  a   ball 

enemv  were  increasing,  the  General  through  his  cheek,  which  broke  his 

callea  several  of  the  officers  (about  jaw.    I  lifted  him  off  hb  horse,  and 

twenty  of  us)  to  form  line  and  show  seated  him  on  the  ground." — ICapt. 

a  front.    We  had  scarcely  done  so,  Johnson's  Journal^ 


STAND  AT  JUGDULLUCK*  239 

was  a  stream  of  pure  water  near  at  hand,  but  they  could 
not  approach  it  without  being  struck  down  by  the  fire 
of  the  enemy.  Behind  the  walls  they  had  a  brief  respite ; 
and  they  tried  to  snatch  a  hasty  meal.  The  ever  active 
Commissariat  officer,  Johnson,  found  among  the  camp- 
followers  three  bullocks,  which  were  instantly  killed  and 
served  out  to  the  famishing  European  soldiers,  who  de- 
voured, with  savage  voracity,  the  raw  and  reeking 
flesh.* 

