

t  Pottinger  says,  that  "  notwith-  tinger's  Report :  MS,  Records."] 
standing  me  repeated  and  urgent  I  *'  On  leaving  Caubul,"  says  Cap- 
orders  of  Mahomed  Akbar  KJian,  the  tain  Johnson,  **  each  Sepoy  had  40 
fanatics  attacked  our  column,  where-  rounds  of  ammunition  in  pouch,  and 
on  the  chief  lefl  us  in  charge  of  his  about  60  camel  loads  per  regiment, 
cousin,  Abdool  Ghyas  Khan,  and  pro-  with  100  spare  loads.  We  have  not 
ceeded,  to  try  if  his  presence  would  re-  at  present  (January  8),  for  the  whole 
strain  the  Afghans.  Afler  some  time,  force,  three  camel  loads  in  box,  and 
we  also  moved  on,  and  afler  a  slow  numbers  of  the  Sepoys  have  not  a 
and  tedious  march  amidst  miserable  single  cartridge  in  pouch." 
scenes  of  cruelty  and  plunder,  through 


230  THE  EETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

suflfered  their  very  firelocks  to  be  taken  out  of  their 
hands. 

The  massacre  was  fearfiil  in  this  Eoord-Caubul  Pass. 
Three  thousand  men  are  said  to  have  fallen  under  the 
fire  of  the  enemy,  or  to  have  dropped  down  paralysed 
and  exhausted,  to  be  slaughtered  by  the  Afghan  knives.* 
And  amidst  these  fearfiil  scenes  of  carnage,  through  a 
shower  of  matchlock  balls,  rode  English  ladies  on  horse- 
back, or  in  camel-panniers,  sometimes  vainly  endeavour- 
ing to  keep  their  children  beneath  their  eyes,  and  losing 
them  in  the  confiision  and  bewilderment  of  the  deso- 
lating march. 

That  night  the  force  again  halted  in  the  snow,  now 
deepened  by  a  heavy  fall,  which,  as  the  army  neared 
the  high  table-land  of  Koord-Caubul,  had  increased  the 
bitterness  of  the  marcLf  The  night  was,  like  its  pre- 
decessors, one  of  intense  suffering,  spent  by  the  perish- 
ing  troops  without  shelter,  without  firewood,  and  without 
food.  At  early  mom  there  was  another  rush  of  camp- 
followers  and  undisciplined  Sepoys  to  the  front ;  but  the 
march  of  the  troops,  which  had  been  ordered  at  ten 
o'clock,  was  countermanded  by  the  General.  Akbar 
Khan  ^as  then  offering  to  supjJy  the  force  with  provi- 
sions,  and  to  do  his  best  for  its  future  protection.    At 

*  Many  officers  perished  in  the  noblest  and  the  manliest  course.  He 
Koord-Caubul  Pass.  Among  these  died  on  the  9th  inst.,  attended  by 
was  Captain  Faton,  the  assistant  his  wife  and  mother-in-law ;  the 
adjutant-general,  who  had  lost  an  daughter  and  wife  of  Sir  Robert  Sale, 
arm  in  action  at  Caubul.  Here,  too,  f  JBjre  says :  "  On  the  force  reach- 
fell  mortally  wounded.  Lieutenant  ing  Koord-Uaubul,  snow  began  to 
Sturt  of  the  engineers,  a  very  fine  faU  and  continued  till  morning.*'— 
young  officer,  who,  though  severely  [^MUitary  Operations^  "psLge  210.]  Qe- 
wounded  at  the  commencement  of  neral  Elphmstone  says :  *'  Ere  we 
the  outbreak,  stabbed  in  the  face  at  reached  the  bivouac  snow  fell  and 
the  door  of  Shah  Sooiah's  presence-  continued  during  the  night."  Bri- 
chamberj  had  exertea  himself  with  gadier  Shelton  says,  on  the  other 
overflowing  zeal  and  unfailing  acti*  hand,  ^^  On  approaching  Koord-Cau- 
vity,  whenever  his  services,  as  the  bul  it  began  to  snow,  but  fortu- 
only  engineer  at  Caubul,  were  re-  nately  cleaned  up  about  dusk.'*  Such 
quired ;  and  whose  voice,  when  others  discrepancies  as  these  may  well  ex- 
counsclled  unworthy  concessions,  had  cuse  the  historian,  if  he  be  guilty  of 
ever  been  lifted  up  in  favour  of  the  any  slight  errors  of  detaiL 