

Pottinger  rode  to  the  rear,  where  Akbar  Khan  sent  a 
party  of  horsemen  to  conduct  him  to  his  presence.  Wel- 
coming the  young  English  officer  with  a  respectful  kindli- 
ness of  manner,  the  Sirdar  declared  himself  willing  to 
receive  three  hostages — ^Major  Pottinger,  Captain  Law- 
rence, and  any  other  officer  whom  the  former  might 
select.  Pottinger  named  Colin  Mackenzie,  than  whom 
there  was  not  in  all  the  army  a  braver  or  a  better 
soUder,f  and  those  three  officers  placed  themselves  in 
the  hands  of  Akbar  Khan. 

The  force  was  now  again  in  motion.  It  was  agreed 
that  they  should  push  on  to  Tezeen,  there  to  await 

*  "I  volunteered  to  go  in  his  place,  services  in  the  disorganised  state  of 
thinking  that  such  a  mark  of  confi-  the  force  could  scarcdv  be  dispensed 
dence  would  induce  the  chief  not  with." — [Major  Pottinger's  ^iport: 
only  to  spare  that  officer  (Shelton^,  MS.  Records,\ 
but  also  Captain  Lawrence  (whose  f  The  Jezailchees  whom  he  corn- 
presence^  was  requisite  in  charge  of  manded  had  been  bv  l^is  time  nearlv 
the  ^fission,  as  mj  wound  rendered  annihilated,  and  **  hb  services  with 
me  incapable  of  exertion),  and  pro-  tiiem,  therefore,"  said  Pottinger, 
bably    some    other     officers    whose  "  could  be  of  little  further  use." 


THE  KOORD-CAUBUL  PASS.  229 

certain  tidings  of  the  evacuation  of  Jellalabad.  Be- 
tween Boot-Khak  and  Tezeen  lies  the  stupendous  pass 
of  Koord-Caubul.  For  a  distance  of  five  miles  it  runs 
between  precipitous  mountain-ranges,  so  narrow  and 
80  shut  in  on  either  side  that  the  wintry  sun  rarely 
penetrates  its  gloomy  recesses.*  Into  the  jaws  of  this 
terrible  defile  the  disorganised  force  now  struggled 
in  fearful  confiision.  In  vain  did  Akbar  Khan  issue 
his  orders;  in  vain  did  his  principal  adherents  exert 
themselves  to  control  the  hordes  of  fanatic  Ghilzyes, 
who  poured  upon  our  struggling  rabble  a  deadly  fire 
fix>m  their  jezails.f  Nothing  could  restrain  the  fierce 
impetuosity  of  our  cruel  assailants.  Pent  in  between 
the  incumbent  walls  of  the  narrow  pass,  now  splashing 
through  the  mountain  torrent,  now  floundering  through 
the  snow  which  filled  the  hollows,  or  was  banked  up 
beside  the  stream,  the  wretched  fugitives  fell  an  easy 
prey  to  the  Ghilzye  marksmen,  who  shot  them  down 
firom  the  hill-sides.  It  was  not  a  time  to  think  of  saving 
anything  but  human  life.  Baggage,  ammunition,  public 
and  private  property,  were  abandoned;!  and  the  Sepoys 

♦  "  Down  the  centre,"  says  Eyre,  which  our  escort  had  considerable 
"  dashed  a  mountain  torrent,  whose  difficulty  in  preserving  our  lives, 
impetuous  course  the  frost  in  vain  Abdool  Ghyas  Khan  being  obliged 
attempted  to  arrest,  though  it  sue-  to  call  in  Sooltan  Ahmed  Khan  to 
ceeded  in  lining  the  edges  with  thick  aid  him,  we  after  dark  reached  Koord- 
layers  of  ice,  over  which  the  snow  Caubul,  having  on  the  way  picked  up 
lay  consolidated  in  slippery  masses,  a  child  of  Captain  Boyd*s,  an  Euro- 
anordingno  very  easy  footing  for  our  pean  women  of  her  Majesty's  13th, 
jaded  animals.  This  stream  we  had  and  a  private  of  her  Majesty's  44th, 
to  cross  and  recross  eight-and- twenty  whose  lives  had  been  saved  by  Ma- 
times."  homed  Akbar  Khan." — [Afq/or  Pot' 