The  respite  was  but  of  brief  duration.  A  party  of 
horsemen  was  observed  near  at  hand,  and  one  of  the 
number,  having  approached  our  people,  said  that  the 
chief  who  commanded  them  was  Akbar  Khan.  Skinner, 
who  had  acted  throughout  as  the  negotiator,  now  went 
to  remonstrate  with  the  Sirdar  against  the  continued 
attacks  of  his  countrymen.  He  had  scarcely  set  out, 
when  the  firing  was  resumed.  The  men  had  lain  down  in 
the  snow,  to  snatch  a  little  brief  repose  after  a  long  vigil 
of  thirty  hours ;  when  the  enemy  poured  in  volley  after 
volley  upon  their  resting-place,  and  compelled  them,  in 
wild  conftision — soldiers  and  camp-followers  again  hud- 
dled together — to  quit  the  enclosure  in  which  they  had 
bivouacked.  Individual  acts  of  heroism  were  not  wanting 
at  this  time  to  give  something  of  dignity  even  to  this 
melancholy  retreat.  A  handful  of  the  44th  Regiment 
here  made  a  gallant  rush  at  the  enemy  and  cleared  all 

•  "  On  the  arrival  of  the  rear-  down  without  a  certainty  of  bemg 
guard,  which  was  followed  up  by  the  massacred.  For  about  half  an  hour 
enemy,  the  latter  took  possession  of  we  had  a  respite  from  the  fire  of  the 
the  heights  close  to  our  position.  For  enemy,  who  were  watching  our  pro- 
security  we  went  within  the  ruined  ceedings.  I  was  desired  by  the  Gre- 
walls ;  our  men  almost  maddened  neral  to  see  if  any  bullocks  or  camels 
with  hunger  and  thirst.  Some  snow  were  procurable  among  the  camp- 
was  on  the  ground,  which  we  greedily  followers.  I  luckily  found^  three  of 
devoured ;  but  instead  of  quenching  the  former,  which  were  instantly 
it  increased  our  thirst.  A  stream  of  killed,  served  out  to  the  Europeans, 
clear  pure  water  was  running  at  the  and  as  instantly  devoured,  although 
foot  of  and  within  150  paces  of  our  raw  and  still  recking  with  blood." — 
position;  but  no  man  could  venture  ICaptain  Johnson's  JoumaLI 


240  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

the  ground  before  them,  Bygrave,  the  paymaster  of  the 
Caubul  army,  was  at  their  head.  Thinking  that  our 
whole  force  would  follow  them,  the  A%hans  fled  in 
dismay.  But  the  little  party  was  soon  recalled  to  the 
main  body,  which  again  retired  behind  the  ruined  walls ; 
and  again  the  enemy  returned  to  pour  upon  them  the 
destructive  fire  of  their  terrible  jezails .• 

All  night  long  and  throughout  the  next  day  the  force 
halted  at  Jugdulluck.  In  the  mean  while  Akbar  Khan 
was  in  communication  with  the  British  chiefs.  Skinner 
had  returned  with  a  message  from  the  Sirdar,  inviting 
the  General,  Brigadier  Shelton,  and  Captain  Johnson  to 
a  conference.  They  went;  and  were  received  with  every 
possible  demonstration  of  kindness  and  hospitality.  A 
cloth  was  spread  on  the  ground.  Food  was  placed 
before  them,  and  draughts  of  tea  satisfied  their  thirst. 
The  meal  completed,  the  A%han  chiefe  and  the  English 
officers  sate  round  a  blazing  fire  and  conversed.  Captain 
Johnson  was  the  spokesman  on  the  part  of  the  latter ; 