

After  another  attempt  at  negotiation,  resulting  only  in 
the  same  demand  for  the  disarming  of  the  remnant  of  the 
force,f  it  was  determined,  at  Shelton's  suggestion,  that  a 


♦  MS.  Records.  Eyre  says :  "  Bri- 
gadier Shelton  commanded  the  rear 
with  a  few  Europeans ;  and  but  for  hb 
persevering  energy  and  unflinching 
fortitude  in  repeuin^  the  assailants, 
it  is  probable  the  whole  would  have 
been  sacrificed." 


f  '^About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  afler 
our  arrival,  the  Sirdar  and  his  party 
came  into  the  valley,  and  proceeded 
to  a  fort  higher  up,  belonging  to 
Ghool  Mahomed  Knan.  A  signal 
was  made  for  some  of  his  horsemen 
to  approach  us.     Two  came ;    and 


THE  MARCH  TO  JUGDULLUCK. 


237 


desperate  eflfort  should  be  made  to  reach  Jugdulluck  by 
a  rapid  night-march.  Enfeebled  by  starvation,  the  troops 
were  little  able  to  struggle  forward,  on  their  perilous 
march,  over  a  diJficult  country,  and  in  the  face  of  an 
active  enemy.  But  despair  had  given  them  strength; 
and  when  the  order  was  given,  having  spiked  their  last 
remaining  gun,  they  moved  off  lightly  and  quietly  in  the 
hope  of  shaking  off,  under  cover  of  the  night,  the  curse 
of  camp-followers,  which  had  sate  upon  them  with  such 
destructive  tenacity  from  the  first.  But  no  sooner  had 
the  soldiers  begun  to  move,  than  the  camp-followers 
started  up  to  accompany  them;  and  throughout  that 
fearM  night-maxch  clustered  around  the  few  good  fight- 
ing  men  and  paralysed  the  movements  of  the  force. 

It  was  a  bright,  frosty  night.  The  snow  was  lying  only 
partially  on  the  ground.  For  some  miles  they  proceeded 
unmolested.  But  when,  at  Seh-Baba,  the  enemy  again 
opened  a  fire  upon  their  rear,  the  camp-followers  rushed 
to  the  front;  and  when  firing  was  heard  ahead  of  the 
column,  again  fell  back  on  the  rear.  Thus  surging  back- 
wards and  forwards — the  ebb  and  flow  of  a  great  tide  of 
people — these  miserable  camp-followers,  in  the  wildness 
of  their  fear,  overwhelmed  the  handful  of  soldiers  who 
were  still  able  and  willing  to  show  a  front  to  the  enemy, 
blocked  up  the  road,  and  presented  to  the  eyes  of  the 
Afghan  marksmen  a  dark  mass  of  humanity,  which  could 
not  escape  their  fire  even  under  cover  of  the  night. 

Soon  after  daybreak  the  advance  reached  Kutter- 


Captain  Skinner,  by  the  General's 
desire,  accompanied  them  to  Ma- 
homed Akbar,  to  devise  some  means 
of  saving  our  now  smaU  party  from 
destruction.  All  was  the  intensest 
anxiety  till  Skinner's  return  at  dusk, 
when  he  brought  back  the  same  mes- 
sage as  at  KJiubbur-i-Jubbar  regard- 
ing the  disarming  of  the  Europeans. 


Again  this  was  not  acceded  to.  The 
Greneral  decided,  weak  and  famished 
as  the  troops  were,  and  as  there  was 
no  prospect  of  provisions  being  had 
at  Tezeen,  on  again  marching  at  seven 
P.M.,  and  proceedinff,  if  possible, 
through  the  JugduUuck  Pass,  by 
eight  or  nine  the  next  morning." — 
{Captain  Johnson* s  JoumaLI 