

the  supposed  attack,  which,  however,  nothing   could  eventually   save  us. 

did  not  take  place.    At  the  time  of  .  .  .  My  eyes  had  become  so  inflamed 

doing  so,  a  Mission  chuprassie  was  from  the  reflection  of  the  snow,  that 

observed  in  the  act  of  deserting.    He  I  was  nearly  blind,  and  the  pain  in- 


232 


THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 


gress  of  the  disease.  The  Shah's  2nd  Cavaky  had  gone 
over  nearly  to  a  man. 

In  the  mean  while  Major  Pottinger,  who  had  passed 
the  night  in  a  neighbouring  castle,  was  in  consultation 
with  Akbar  Ehan,  and  Captain  Skinner  was  acting  as 
the  vehicle  of  communication  between  them  and  the 
head-quarters  of  the  army.  A  new,  and,  at  the  first 
sound,  startling  proposition  was  now  made  by  the 
Sirdar.  He  proposed  that  all  the  English  ladies  with 
the  force  should  be  placed  under  his  charge,  that  he 
might  convey  them  safely  to  Peshawur.  Remembering 
that  the  families  of  the  Sirdar  himself  were  prisoners  in 
the  hands  of  the  British,  and  believing  that  he  was 
sincere  in  his  desire  to  save  the  ladies  and  children  from 
the  destruction  that  awaited  them  on  the  line  of  march, 
Pottinger  sanctioned  the  proposal;  and  Skinner  was 
despatched  to  the  head-quarters  of  the  force  to  obtain 
the  General's  consent.  "  Desirous  to  remove  the  ladies 
and  children,  after  the  horrors  they  had  already  wit- 
nessed, from  the  further  dangers  of  our  camp,  and  hoping 
that,  as  from  the  very  commencement  of  the  negotiations 
the  Sirdar  had  shown  the  greatest  anxiety  to  have  the 
married  people  as  hostages,  this  mark  of  trust  might 
elicit  a  corresponding  feeling  in  him,"*  Elphinstone 
complied  with  the  request.  A  party  of  Afghan  horse 
were  in  readiness  to  conduct  them  to  the  presence  of  the 
Sirdar;  and  so  Lady  Macnaghten,  Lady  Sale,  and  the 
other  widows  and  wives  of  the  Caubul  force,  became  the 
"guests"  of  the  son  of  Dost  Mahomed  Khan. 

They  did  not  go  alone.    The  married  men  went  with 


tense.  Several  officers  were  more 
or  less  affected — one  or  two  quite 
blind."  The  portion  of  Captain 
Johnson's  Journal  which  relates  to 
the  retreat  has  been  published  in  the 
Asiatic  Journal,  The  preceding  por- 
tion, relating  to  the  outbreak,  from 
which  I  have  so  largely  quoted  in 


Book  v.,  and  that  relating  to  the 
captivity,  which  I  shall  have  occasion 
suDsequenUy  to  quote,  have  never 
been  made  public.  It  should  be 
added,  however,  that  Lady  Sale  had 
access  to  these  Journals,  and  has  used 
them  freely  without  acknowledgment. 
*  Statement  of  General  Elphinstone, 


SUBRENDER  OF  THE  MARRIED  OFFICERS,  233 

them.  The  propriety  of  this  step  has  been  questioned. 
It  has  been  even  said  that  they  were  not  demanded  at  all 
by  Akbar  Khan,  but  that  they  threw  themselves  spon- 
taneously upon  the  mercy  of  the  chief.  It  is  right, 
therefore,  that  so  grave  a  question  should  not  be  slurred 
over.  There  were  three  unprejudiced  witnesses,  whose 
statements,  on  such  a  point,  would  be  worthy  of  accep- 
tation, as  the  statements  of  honourable  and  unprejudiced 
men,  familiar  with  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 
Major  Pottinger,  Captain  Skinner,  and  General  Elphin- 
stone  knew  all  these  circumstances,  and  had  no  reason 
to  misrepresent  them.  Major  Pottinger  says  that,  "  on 
Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  offering  to  take  charge 
of  the  ladies  and  protect  them  to  Peshawur,  I  consi- 
dered it  advisable  to  recommend  that  they  should  come 
over,  as  the  Sirdar's  famHy  being  in  o^r  hands  was 
a  sufficient  guarantee  for  their  good  treatment,  and  it 
was  evident  that  our  own  people  were  too  diminished 
to  protect  them.  Captain  Skinner  accordingly  went  over 
and  mentioned  the  offer  to  General  Elphinstone,  who 
approved  of  it,  and  sent  over  the  ladies,  children,  and 
married  officers."  Captain  Skinner  has  left  upon  record 
no  narrative  of  these  proceedings.  But  General  Elphin- 
stone has  distinctly  stated  that  Captain  Skinner  was 
sent  to  him  with  a  proposal  "  that  the  married  people 
and  their  famiUes  should  be  made  over  to  him,  pro- 
mising honourable  treatment  to  the  ladies."  Whatever 
may  have  been  the  proposition,  as  it  originally  emanated 
fix>m  the  Sirdar,  there  is  no  room  to  doubt  that  Gene- 
ral Elphinstone  shaped  it  into  a  recommendation  that 
the  husbands  should  accompany  their  wives,  and  that 
the  former  went  over  to  Akbar  Khan  with  the  entire 
sanction  of  their  military  chief.* 