

♦The  party   consisted   of  Lady    and  one  child;  Mrs.  Trevor  and  seven 
Macnaghten,  Lady  Sale,  Mrs.  Sturt    children ;    Cnptain  Boyd,  wife  and 


234  THE  BETREAT  FBOM  CAUBUL. 

That  the  safety  of  the  women  and  children  was  secured 
by  their  removal  from  General  Elphinstone's  disorganised 
camp  to  the  custody  of  Akbar  Ehan,  is  now  a  fact  which 
stands  out  distinctly  in  the  broad  light  of  historical 
truth.  But  writing  now  after  the  event,  it  becomes  one 
to  consider  rather  the  wisdom  of  the  experiment  than 
the  success  of  the  result.  I  believe  that  Pottinger  and 
Elphinstone  judged  wisely.  There  was  a  choice  of  evils, 
and  it  appears  to  me  that  they  chose  the  least  The 
women  and  the  children  could  not  long  have  survived 
the  horrors  of  that  perilous  march.  They  had  hitherto 
escaped,  almost  by  a  miracle,  the  assaults  of  the  cruel 
climatQ  and  the  inexorable  foe.  They  were  insufficiently 
dad.  They  had  no  servants  to  attend  upon  them.  They 
had  scarcely  tasted  food  since  they  left  Caubul.  They 
had  no  shelter  during  the  frosty  night-season.  Some 
had  just  become,  or  were  about  soon  to  become,  mothers ; 
and  yet  they  had  been  compelled  to  ride  in  jolting 
camel-panniers,  or  on  the  backs  of  stumbling  baggage- 
ponies.  It  was  plain  that  Akbar  Elian  had  no  power 
to  restrain  the  tribes  who  were  butchering  our  helpless 
people.  The  army  was  fast  melting  away.  It  was 
doubtful  whether  a  man  would  reach  Jellalabad  in 
safety.  To  have  left  the  women  and  children  to  pur- 
sue their  march  would  have  been  to  have  left  them  to 
inevitable  destruction.  Akbar  Khan  might  be  a  man 
of  violent  and  ferocious  temper,  and  no  very  scrupulous 
good  faith;  but  because  he  had  slain  the  Envoy  in  a 
gust  of  passion,  it  did  not  necessarily  follow  that  he 

child;  Captain  Anderson,  wife  and  wounded  and  unserviceable,    went 

child ;  Lieutenant  Waller,  wife  and  with  them.    Eyre  says  that  it  was 

child;    Lieutenant   Eyre,  wife  and  the  intention  of  the  General  that  all 

child ;  Mr.  Ryley,  wife  and  child ;  the  wounded  officers  should  go ;  but 

Mrs.  Mainwaring   and  child;    Ser-  that  there  was  not  time  to  make 

geant   Wade  and  family.    Captain  known  his  intentions. 
Troup  and  Lieutenant  Mein,  being 


RENEWAL  OF  THE  MARCH.  235 

would  betray  the  widow  of  liis  victim  and  the  other 
English  ladies  who  were  now  to  be  entrusted  to  his 
safe  keeping.  Moreover,  if  no  sentiments  of  honour 
and  no  feelings  of  compassion  were  within  him,  he  might 
still  be  swayed  by  motives  of  self-interest;  and  it  was 
not  forgotten  that  his  father,  his  brothers,  and  the  ladies 
of  his  family  were  prisoners  in  the  hands  of  the  British 
Grovemment,  in  the  provinces  of  Hindostan. 