


THE  HALT  AT  BOOT-KHAK.  227 

as  intelligence  of  the  retirement  of  Sale's  force  should  be 
received.  *^  It  was  too  late  to  send  a  reply,"  wrote  Pot- 
tinger,  in  his  report  of  these  proceedings,  "  and  nothing 
was  determined — ^but  some  persons  persuaded  the  Gene- 
ral to  abandon  his  intention  of  marching  by  night."  And 
so  the  doomed  force,  whilst  the  enemy  were  mustering 
to  block  up  the  passes  in  advance,  spent  another  night 
of  inactivity  and  suffering  in  the  cruel  snow. 

It  was  at  the  entrance  of  the  Koord-Caubul  Pass  that 
the  force,  now  on  the  evening  of  the  7th  of  January 
having  in  two  days  accomplished  a  distance  of  only  ten 
miles,*  halted  on  some  high  ground.  The  confiision 
far  exceeded  that  of  the  preceding  night.  The  great 
congeries  of  men,  women,  and  children,  horses,  ponies, 
and  camels,  there  wallowing  in  the  snow,  no  words  can 
adequately  describe.  Many  lay  down  only  to  find  a 
winding-sheet  in  the  snow.  There  was  no  shelter — ^no 
firewood — no  food.  The  Sepoys  burnt  their  caps- and 
accoutrements  to  obtain  a  little  temporary  warmth.  One 
oflScerf  narrates  how  he  and  eleven  others  "crowded 
round  the  hot  ashes  of  a  pistol-case,  and  with  some  bottles 
of  wine  still  remaining,  tried  to  keep  off  the  effect  of  the 
cold.  They  then  all  huddled  together  and  lay  down  on 
the  ground  to  sleep." 

The  sun  rose  upon  many  stiffened  corpses;  and  a 
scene  of  still  greater  confusion  than  had  marked  the 
dawn  of  the  preceding  morning  now  heralded  the 
march  of  the  force.  Doubt  and  uncertainty  regarding 
the  intentions  of  their  chiefs  brooded  over  the  officers 
of  the  force;  but  few  of  the  soldiers  now  remembered 
their  chiefe,  and  the  camp-followers  were  wholly  regard- 
less of  their  intentions.  One  paramount  desire  to  escape 
death  held  possession  of  that  wretched  multitude;  and  a 

*  Eyre's  Narraiive,  t  Lieutettdttt  Melville. 

q2 


228  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL, 

crowd  of  soldiers  and  camp-followers,  at  an  early  hour, 
began  to  push  on  confusedly  to  the  front.  Whilst  some 
efforts  were  being  made  to  restrain  them,  Akbar  Khan 
was  in  communication  with  the  officers  of  the  British 
Mission,  Skinner  again  went  out  to  meet  the  Sirdar.  It 
was  proposed  that  the  army  should  either  halt  on  their 
present  ground  at  Boot-Khak,  or  make  their  way  to 
Tezeen,  there  to  await  intelligence  of  the  evacuation  of 
Jellalabad.  Four  hostages  were  demanded  as  security 
for  Sale's  retreat;  and  Brigadier  Shelton  and  Captain 
Lawrence  were  named  as  two  of  them.  But  Shelton  had 
always  resolutely  refused  to  give  himself  up  to  the 
enemy,  and  Elphinstone  was  unwilling  to  order  him. 
Pottinger,  therefore,  volunteered  to  take  his  place,*  and 
Brigadier  Anquetil  consented,  if  a  general  officer  were 
peremptorily  demanded,  to  accompany  the  political  chief. 