

A  few,  however,  had  pushed  on  fi:om  Soorkhab, 
which  lies  between  JugduUuck  and  Gundamuck,  in 
advance  of  the  column.  One  by  one  they  fell  by  the 
way,  until  the  number  was  reduced  to  six.     Captains 

♦  Captain  Johnson's  Journal,  Primrose,  of  H.M.*s  44th ;  Lieutenant 
f  Ibid,  Horsburgh  and  Dr.  Metcalfe,  of  the 
X  The  o&cers  known  to  have  5th  N.I. ;  Captain  Reid  and  Lieu- 
perished  at  Gundamuck  were  Cap-  tenant  Hawtry,  of  the  37th  N.I. ; 
tain  Grant,  Assistant  -  Adjutant-  Lieutenants  Weaver,  Morrison,  and 
General,  who  had  been  severely  Cunningham,  of  the  d4thN.L;  Lieu- 
wounded  at  Jugdulluck;  Lieutenant  tenant  Hobhouse,  of  H.M/s  ISth ; 
Stewart,  Horse  Artillery ;  Captain  Captain  Hay,  Lieutenant  Green  (Ar- 
Hamilton,  5th  Cavalry ;  Captain  Col-  tillery);  and  Lieutenant  Macartney, 
lins.  Lieutenants  Hog^,  Cumberland,  of  the  Shah*s  service, 
and  Swinton,  and  Assistant-Surgeon 


DESTRUCTION  OF  THE  FORCE.  249 

Bellew,  CoUyer,  and  Hopkins,  Lieutenant  Bird,  and  Drs. 
Harpur  and  Brydon,  reached  Futtehabad  alive.  They 
were  then  only  sixteen  miles  from  Jellalabad.  A 
prospect  of  salvation  opened  out  before  them  all;  but 
only  one  was  suffered  to  escape.  Some  peasants  in  the 
vicinity  of  Futtehabad  came  out,  spoke  to  the  fugitives, 
and  offered  them  bread  to  eat.  They  thought  that  a 
little  food  would  strenghten  them  to  toil  on  to  the  end 
of  their  painful  journey;  and  the  agonies  of  hunger  were 
hard  to  endure.  But  again  was  there  death  in  delay. 
Whilst  our  officers  tarried  for  a  few  minutes  to  satisfy 
the  cravings  of  nature,  some  of  the  armed  inhabitants  of 
the  place  sallied  out  and  attacked  them.  Bellew  and 
Bird  were  cut  down.  The  others  rode  off;  but  were 
pursued  and  overtaken;  and  three  of  the  remaining 
number  were  slain.  Dr.  Brydon  alone  escaped  to  Jella- 
labad. Wounded,  and  worn  out  by  famine  and  fatigue, 
he  had  struggled  onward,  borne  by  a  jaded  pony,  till 
the  walls  of  the  fort  appeared  in  sight;  and  a  party 
came  out  to  succour  him. 

So  perished  the  last  remnant  of  a  force  which  had  left 
Caubul  numbering  4,500  fighting  men  and  12,000  camp- 
followers.  The  frost  and  the  snow  had  destroyed  more 
than  the  jezails  and  the  knives  of  the  Afghans.  It  was 
not  a  human  enemy  alone  with  which  those  miserable 
men  had  to  contend.  It  was  theirs  to  war  against  a 
climate  more  perilous  in  its  hostility  than  the  inexorable 
foe.  But  neither  the  cruel  cold  nor  the  malignant  Afghans 
would  have  consigned  the  British  army  to  destruction,  if 
the  curse  which  had  so  long  brooded  over  the  councils  of 
our  military  chiefs,  and  turned  everything  into  folly  and 
imbecility,  had  not  followed  them  on  their  exode  from  the 
Caubul  cantonments,  and  crowned  the  catalogue  of  disaster 
and  disgrace.  It  is  probable  that,  if  greater  energy  had 
been  exhibited  at  the  commencement  of  the  retreat — if 