

In  this  terrible  Jugdulluck  Pass  many  brave  officers 
fell  with  their  swords  in  their  hands.  Up  to  this  time 
death  had  not  been  very  busy  among  the  commissioned 
ranks  of  our  ill-fated  army.  The  number  of  officers  that 
survived,  when  the  column  left  Jugdulluck,  was  large 
in  proportion  to  the  number  of  soldiers  who  remained 
to  follow  them.  Though  they  had  ever  been  in  the 
midst  of  danger,  and  had  been  especially  marked  by  the 
A%han  jezailchees,  they  had  hitherto  escaped  with  an 
impunity  which  had  not  been  the  lot  of  the  common 
soldiers.  This  is  to  be  attributed  partly  to  external  and 
partly  to  internal  advantages.  They  had  enjoyed  no 
better  covering  and  no  better  food  than  their  comrades; 
but  they  had  ridden  good  horses;  and  though,  out- 
wardly, means  of  keeping  off  the  cruel  cold  had  not 
been  enjoyed  by  them  less  scantily  than  by  the  Euro- 
pean soldiers,  they  had  brought  to  their  aid  all  the 
advantages  of  superior  mental  resources.  They  had 
been  more  cautious  and  more  provident,  and  had  been 


246  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

gready  upheld  by  the  knowledge  of  the  responsibility 
which  in  such  a  fearM  conjuncture  devolved  upon 
them.  There  is  a  sustaining  power,  under  severe  phy- 
sical  trial,  in  the  sense  of  moral  responsibiUty ;  the  feel- 
ing that  others  are  dependent  upon  one's  exertions  has 
a  bracing  and  invigorating  effect ;  and  whatever  excites 
mental  activity  is  favorable  to  physical  endurance. 
Many,  in  the  course  of  that  terrible  retreat  from  Caubul, 
had  perished  under  the  influence  of  mental  despon- 
dency; many  had  been  destroyed  by  their  own  incau- 
tion.  The  officers  had  fallen  only  under  the  fire  of  the 
enemy.  Thousands  of  the  soldiers  and  camp-followers 
had  been  destroyed  by  the  cruel  cold. 

But  here,  at  this  fearful  JugduUuck  barrier,  death 
struck  at  the  officers  of  the  wretched  force.  Twelve 
of  the  best  and  bravest  here  found  their  last  resting- 
place.*  Here  fell  Brigadier  Anquetil,  upon  whom,  after 
the  departure  of  Elphinstone  and  Shdton,  had  devolved 
the  command  of  the  column.  He  had  been  the  chief 
of  Shah  Soojah's  force;  was  held  in  esteem  as  a  good 
officer ;  but  during  almost  the  entire  period  of  the  siege 
had  been  incapacitated  by  sickness  from  taking  a  promi- 
nent part  in  the  military  operations  which  had  ended 
in  so  much  disaster  and  di^ace.  Here,  too,  fell  Major 
Thain,  who  had  gone  out  to  India  as  the  friend  and 
aide-de-camp  of  General  Elphinstone,  and  in  that  capa- 
city had  followed  his  chief  to  Caubul;  but  throughout 
the  time  of  their  beleaguerment,  and  all  through  the 
retreat,  had  been  forward  in  the  hour  of  active  danger, 
and  had  gallantly  served  as  a  regimental  officer  when- 
ever one  was  wanted  to  lead  a  charge.     Here,  too,  fell 