


MALICE  OF  THE  GHILZYE  CHIEFS.  243 

If  there  was  any  hope  at  this  time  it  lay  in  an  appeal 
to  the  cupidity  of  the  chiefs,  but  their  hatred  seemed  to 
overlay  their  avarice.  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,*  however, 
had  undertaken  to  work  upon  their  known  love  of  money, 
and  asked  whether  the  British  were  prepared  to  pay 
two  lakhs  of  rupees  for  safe  conduct  to  Jellalabad.  The 
Greneral  had  assented  to  this,  and  Mahomed  Shah  Khan 
had  undertaken  the  office  of  mediator ;  but  it  was  long 
before  he  could  bring  about  any  satisfactory  arrangement. 
At  length,  as  the  shades  of  evening  were  thickening 
around  them,  he  brought  intelligence  to  the  eflfect  that 
everything  had  been  peaceably  settled,  and  that  the 
remnant  of  the  British  army  would  be  allowed  to  proceed 
unmolested  to  Jellalabad.f 

But  scarcely  had  he  announced  this  consoling  intelli- 
gence, when  the  sound  of  firing  was  heard  to  issue  fi:om 

and  take  our  country  from  us.    He  Ghilzjes  not  acceding  to  our  terms, 

would  not  listen  to  our  advice,  and  he  would  himself,  with  his  party  of 

what  is  the  consequence  ?     Let  us,  horsemen,  proceed  at  dusk  to  the  foot 

DOW  that  we  liave  the  opportunity,  of  the  hill,  wliere  our  troops  were 

take  advantage  of  it  and  Kill  these  bivouacked ;  and  previous  orders  hav- 

infidel    dogs.'  '* — \_Captain    JohnsotCs  ing  been  given  by  the  commanding- 

JoumdL']  officer  tliat  they  should  be  held  ready, 

*  Maliomed  Sliah  Khan  was  father-  he  would  bring  away  in  safety  every 

in-law  of  Akbar  Khan.  European,  by    desiring  each  of  his 

t  "  I  must  not,"  says  Captain  John-  horsemen  to  take  up  a  man  behind 
son,  **  omit  to  mention  that  Maliomed  him  ;  that  the  Ghilzyes  would  not  fire 
Akbar  Klian  told  me  in  the  morning,  on  the  Europeans  for  fear  of  hit- 
after  Mahomed  Sliah  Khan  had  gone  ting  him  or  his  men  :  but  that  he  could 
to  consult  witii  the  chiefs  of  the  pass,  not  allow  a  single  Hindostanee  to 
that  the  latter  were  dogs,  and  no  faith  follow,  as  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
to  be  placed  in  them  ;  and  begged  protect  2000  people  (our  computed 
that  I  would  send  for  three  or  four  of  number).  I  mentioned  thb  to  the 
my  most  intimate  friends,  that  their  General ;  but  it  was  deemed  im- 
lives  might  be  saved  in  the  event  of  practicable,  as,  from  past  experience, 
treachery  to  the  troops.  My  reply  we  had  seen  how  impossible  it  was  to 
was  that  I  would  gladly  do  so,  could  separate  the  non-combatants  from  the 
my  request  be  acceded  to ;  but  that  fighting  men.  Four  or  five  times 
the  commanding-officer  would  never  during  the  day  we  beard  the  report 
consent,  and  that  the  feelings  of  mv  of  musketry,  which  appeared  in  the 
friends  would  also  be  opposed  to  such  direction  of  our  troops,  but  were 
a  proceeding  at  a  time  of  so  imminent  always  told  on  making  inquiry  that  all 
peril  to  their  comrades.  The  Sirdar  fighting  had  ceased."* — [Certain  John^ 
also  proposed  that  in  the  event  of  the  ton's  /ouraa^] 