

Next  morning  the  conference  was  resumed.  The 
English  officers  earnestly  implored  the  Sirdar  to  save  the 
renmant  of  the  unhappy  force ;  and  he  promised  to  exert 
all  the  authority  he  possessed  to  restrain  the  tribes  from 
their  unholy  work  of  massacre  and  plunder.  But  the 
petty  chiefs  of  the  country  between  Jugdulluck  and  Jel- 
lalabad came  flocking  in ;  and  it  seemed  impossible  to 
control  the  savage  impulses  of  hatred  and  vindictiveness 
which  broke  out  even  in  the  presence  of  the  English 
officers,  and  seemed  to  shut  out  all  hope  for  the  future.f 


*  « 


Subsequently/'    says    Captain  were  most  bitter  in  their  expressions 

Johnson,  **  we  had  the  extreme  mor-  of  hatred  against  us ;   and  declared 

tification  to  learn  that  not  one  par-  that  nothing  would  satisfy  them  and 

tide  of  food  or  water  had  been  tasted  their  men  but  our  extermmation,  and 

by  the  troops  from  their  arrival  to  money  they  would  not  receive.     The 

their  departure  from  Jugdulluck.**  Sirdar,  as  far  as   words  went,  tried 

t  '*  At  about  nine  a.m.  the  chiefs  of  all  in  his  power  to  conciliate  them, 

the  pass  and  of  the  country  towards  and  when  other  arguments  failed,  put 

Soorkhab  arrived,  when  we  all  sat  them  in  mind  of  his  father  and  the 

down  to  discuss  matters.    The  chiefs  whole  of  his  family  being  in  the  power 

VOL.  II.  R 


242  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

They  had  trampled  down  every  feeling  of  mercy  and 
compassion.  Even  avarice  had  ceased  to  be  a  moving 
principle;  offers  of  money  were  disregarded,  and  they 
loudly  declared  that  they  wanted  only  the  blood  of  the 
Feringhees.  In  vain  Akbar  Khan  tried  to  dissuade 
them  firom  their  horrid  purpose — in  vain  he  urged  that 
his  father  and  his  family  were  prisoners  in  the  hands  of 
the  British  Government ;  in  vain  the  offer  of  large  sums 
of  money  for  a  safe  conduct  to  Jellalabad  was  made  to 
these  unrelenting  chiefi-  Johnson,  who  understood  the 
language  well,  heard  them  conversing  in  Persian ;  and  it 
was  plain  that  they  revelled  in  the  thought  of  cutting 
the  throats  of  the  Feringhees  even  more  than  of  growing 
rich  on  their  plunder.  They  were  not  to  be  conciliated. 
Akbar  Klian  made  an  effort  to  pacify  them,  and  they 
said  in  reply  that  they  had  recommended  his  father  to 
kill  Bumes,  lest  he  should  return  and  bring  an  army 
with  him.* 

of  the  British  Government  at  Lood-  Ghilzyes  with  their  respective  chiefs 
hianah,  and  that  vengeance  would  be  continued  to  pour  in  from  the  sur- 
taken  by  the  latter  in  the  event  of  rounding  country  to  make  their 
mercy  not  being  shown  to  us.  Ma-  salaam  to  Mahomed  Akbar ;  to  par- 
homed  Shah  Khan  offered  them  60,000  ticipate  in  the  plunder  of  our  un- 
rupees  on  condition  of  our  not  being  fortunate  people  ;  and  to  revel  in 
molested.  After  some  time  they  took  the  delights  of  massacring  the  Euro- 
their  departure,  to  consult  with  their  peans.  From  their  expressions  of 
followers ;  and  Mahomed  Sliah  Khan  liatred  towards  the  whole  race  of 
mentioned  to  me  that  he  feared  the  us  Twhilst  conversing  in  Persian, 
chiefs  would  not,  without  some  great  whicn  they  frequently  did,  until  from 
inducement,  resist  the  temptation  of  a  hint  of  the  Sirdar  they  began  to 
plunder  and  murder  that  now  offered  talk  in  Pushtoo,  which  I  did  not 
itself,  and  wound  up  by  asking  if  we  understand),  they  appeared  to  antici- 
would  give  them  two  lakhs  of  rupees  pate  much  more  delight  in  cutting 
on  condition  of  being  allowed  a  free  our  throats  than  even  in  the  expected 
passage.  I  mentioned  this  to  General  booty.  The  Sirdar,  to  all  appearance, 
£Iphinstone,obtained  his  consent,  and  but  possibly  only  as  a  blind  to  his 
made  known  the  same  to  Mahomed  real  feelings>  whilst  sitting  with  me 
Shah,  wlio  went  away  and  promised  endeavoured  as  much  as  possible  to 
to  return  quickly.  The  General  conciliate  them.  The  reply  in  two 
again  begged  of  the  Sirdar  to  permit  instances  was,  '  When  Bumes  came 
him  to  return  to  his  troops;  but  into  this  country  was  not  your  father 
without  avail." — ^Captain  Johnson's  entreated  by  us  to  kill  him ;  or  he 
Journal']  would  go  back  to  Hindostan,  and  on 
*  **  Until  twelve  o  clock  crowds  of  some  future  day  return  with  an  army 