

♦  Brigadier  Anquetil ;  Col.  Cham-  Quartermaster    Halahan ;     Surgeon 

hers,  Captain  Blair,  Captain  Bott,  and  Harcourt  (H.M.'s  44tli)  ;  Lieutenant 

Lieut.  Bazett (5th  Cavalry);  Captain  Steer  (37th N.L);  Captain  Marshall^ 

Nicholl  (Horse   Artillery) ;    Major  Shah's  force. 
Thain,    A.D.C. ;    Captain    Dodgm ; 


NICHOLL  AND  HIS  TBOOP.  247 

Colonel  Chambers,  who  had  commanded  the  cavalry  at 
Caubul,  and  who  now,  with  other  officers  of  his  regi- 
ment, perished  in  the  attempt  to  clear  the  destroying  bar- 
riers.   And  here,  too,  fell  Captain  Nicholl,  of  the  Horse 
Artillery,  who  with  his  men,  all  through  the  dangers 
of  the  investment  and  the  horrors  of  the  retreat,  had 
borne  themselves  as  gallantly  as  the  best  of  English  sol- 
diers in  any  place  and  at  any  time.   Ever  in  the  midst  of 
danger,  now  charging  on  horse  and  now  on  foot,  were 
those  few  resolute  artillerymen.    With  mingled  admira- 
tion and  awe  the  enemy  marked  the  desperate  courage 
of  the  "  red  men,"  and  shrunk  from  a  close  conflict  with 
what  seemed  to  be  superhuman  strength  and  endiu'ance. 
There  is  not  much  in  the  events  of  the  outbreak  at 
Caubul  and  the  retreat  to  Jellalabad  to  be  looked  back 
upon  with  national  pride ;  but  the  monumental  colunm, 
on  which  is  inscribed  the  names  of  the  brave  men  of 
NichoU's  troops,  who  then  fell  in  action  with  the  enemy, 
only  displays  the  language  of  simple,  unostentatious  truth 
when  it  records  that,  on  "  occasions  of  unprecedented 
trial,  officers  and  men  upheld,  in  the  most  noble  manner, 
the  character  of  the  regiment  to  which  they  belonged ;" 
and  years  hence,  when  it  has  become  a  mere  tradition 
that  Dum-Dum  was  once  the  head-quarters  station  of 
that  distinguished  corps,  the  young  artilleryman,  stand- 
ing in  the  shadow  of  the  column,  will  read  how  NichoU's 
troop,  the  oldest  in  the  regiment,  was  annihilated  in  the 
fearful  passes  of  Afghanistan,  will  dwell  on  the  heroic 
conduct  which  preceded  their  fall,  and  glow  with  pride 
at  the  recollection  that  those  brave  men  were  a  portion 
of  the   regiment  which  now   bears  his  name  on  its 
rolls. 

At  this  JugduUuck  barrier  it  may  be  said  that  the 
Caubul  force  ceased  to  be.  A  few  officers  and  a  few 
men  cleared  the  barricade  j  and  struggled  on  towards 


248  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

Gundamuck.  About  daybreak  they  reached  that  place ; 
and  the  sun  rose  upon  a  party  of  some  twenty  officers 
and  forty-five  European  soldiers.  The  enemy  were 
mustering  around  them.  "  Every  hut  had  poured  forth 
its  inhabitants  to  murder  and  to  plunder."*  There  were 
not  more  than  two  rounds  of  ammunition  remaining 
in  the  pouches  of  our  men.  But  they  had  not  lost  all 
heart.  "  Their  numbers  were  as  one  to  a  hundred — ^most 
of  them  already  wounded,"t  l>ut  they  were  resolute  not 
to  lay  down  their  arms  whilst  a  spark  of  life  remained. 
A  messenger  came  from  the  chief  of  the  district  with 
overtures  to  the  senior  officer  present.  Major  Griffiths, 
of  the  37th  Native  Infantry,  was  then  the  chief  of  that 
little  band;  but  whilst  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  Sirdar, 
the  enemy  mustering  around  them  called  upon  them  to 
give  up  their  arms.  The  refusal  of  the  brave  men,  fol- 
lowed by  a  violent  attempt  to  disarm  them,  brought  on 
a  hand-to-hand  contest.  The  infuriated  mob  over- 
whelmed the  little  party  of  Englishmen,  and  cut  them 
up  almost  to  a  man.  Captain  Souter,  of  the  44th  Regi- 
ment, who  had  wrapped  the  regimental  colour  round  his 
waist,  and  a  few  privates,  were  taken  prisoners.  The 
rest  were  all  massacred  at  Gundamuck.J 