

b2 


244  THE  RETREAT  FROM  CAUBUL. 

the  direction  in  which  the  British  troops  were  bivou- 
acked. By  the  order  of  the  General,  Captain  Johnson  had 
written  to  Brigadier  Anquetil,  upon  whom  now  as,  senior 
officer,  the  command  of  the  troops  had  devolved,  direct- 
ing him  to  have  the  troops  in  readiness  to  march  at  eight 
o'clock  on  the  following  morning.  But  the  letter  had  not 
been  despatched  when  the  firing  was  heard,  and  it  be- 
came evident  that  the  British  troops  were  again  on  the 
move.*  It  was  about  eight  o'clock,  on  the  evening  of 
the  12th,  that  the  few  remaining  men — now  reduced  to 
about  a  hundred  and  twenty  of  the  44th,  and  twenty- 
five  artillerymen — prepared  to  resume  their  perilous 
march.  The  curse  of  camp-followers  clung  to  them 
stiU.  The  teeming  rabble  again  came  huddling  against 
the  fighting  men ;  and  the  Afghans,  taking  advantage  of 
the  confusion  stole  in,  knife  in  hand,  amongst  them, 
destroying  all  the  unarmed  men  in  their  way,  and 
glutting  themselves  with  plunder. 

They  did  not,  this  time,  escape.  The  soldiers  turned 
and  bayoneted  the  plunderers;  and  fought  their  way 
bravely  on.  But  there  was  a  terrible  fate  awaiting  them 
as  they  advanced.  The  Jugdulluck  Pass  was  before 
them.  The  road  ascends  between  the  steep  walls  of  this 
dark  precipitous  defile,  and  our  wretched  men  struggled 
onward,  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  till  on  nearing 
the  summit  they  came  suddenly  upon  a  barricade,  and 

* '^  BytheGenerarsdesirel  wrotea  by  the  Ghilzyes.     We  were  all  in 

note  to  brigadier  Anquetil,  requesting  consternation.      At  first  the  Sirdar 

him  to  have  tiie  troops  in  readiness  to  suggested,  and  the  General  concurred 

march  at  eight  o'clock.     I  had  com-  in  the  same,  that  he  and  we  should 

menced  a  letter  to  General  Sale  to  follow  them.  In  two  or  three  minutes, 

evacuate  Jellalabad  (tliis  was  part  of  however,  the  former  changed  his  mind ; 

the  terms).    Suddenly,  and  before  my  and  said    he  feared    our  doing   so 

note  to  the  Brigadier  had  gone  oflT,  a  would,  instead  of  benefiting,  greatly 

great  deal  of  musket  firing  was  heard  injure  the  party,   by  bringing  after 

aown  the  valley  and  in  the  direction  them  the  whole  liorde  of  Ghilzyes  that 

of  the  troops  ;    and   a    report  was  were  then  assembled  in  the  valley." — 

brought  in  that  the  Europeans  were  [^Captain  Johnsons  Journal.^ 
moving  off  through  the  pass,  followed 


THE  JUGDULLUCK  PASS.  245 

were  thrown  back  in  surprise  and  dismay.  The  enemy 
had  blocked  up  the  mouth  of  the  pass.  Barriers,  made 
of  bushes  and  the  branches  of  trees,  opposed  the  progress 
of  the  column,  and  threw  the  whole  into  inextricable 
confusion.  The  camp-followers  crowded  upon  the  sol- 
diers, who,  in  spite  of  the  overwhelming  superiority  of 
the  enemy,  fought  with  a  desperate  valour  worthy  of  a 
better  fate.  The  Afghans  had  been  lying  in  wait  for  the 
miserable  remnant  of  the  British  army,  and  were  now 
busy  with  their  cruel  knives  and  their  unerring  jezails. 
The  massacre  was  something  terrible  to  contemplate. 
OflScers,  soldiers,  and  camp-followers  were  stricken  down 
at  the  foot  of  the  barricade.  A  few,  strong  in  the 
energy  of  desperation,  managed  to  struggle  through  it. 
But  from  that  time  all  hope  was  at  an  end.  There 
had  ceased  to  be  a  British  army. 