

*  "  A  few  horsemen  being  observed  (It  was  here  General  Elphinstone  was 
near  at  hand,  a  signal  was  made  for  wounded.)  All  was  at  once  instant 
one  of  them  to  approach.  He  did  so,  confusion.  Tiiere  was  a  general  rush 
and  was  questioned  as  to  what  chief  outside  the  walls  ;  men  and  cattle  all 
was  present.  He  replied, '  Mahomed  huddled  together,  each  urgently  striv- 
Akbar  Khan.'  A  message  was  sent  ing  to  screen  himself  from  the  murder- 
to  the  Sirdar  by  the  General  as  to  ous  fire  of  the  enemy.  At  this  time 
why  we  were  again  molested.  A  reply  about  twenty  gallant  soldiers  of  the 
was  brought  back  that  the  chief  wished  44th  Queen's  made  a  simultaneous 
to  converse  with  Skinner,  who  accom-  rush  down  the  hill  to  drive  the  enemy 
panied  the  messenger.  This  was  at  off  the  heights.  In  this  they  were 
about  half-past  three  p.m.  We  had  most  successful ;  for  the  latter,  in  the 
nowfondlyhoped  that  further  massacre  supposition  that  they  would  be  fol- 
would  be  stopped.  Scarcely,  however,  lowed  by  others,  had  taken  flight  ere 
had  Skinner  taken  his  departure,  and  our  soldiers  had  reached  their  position, 
we,  who  had  now  been  marching  for  In  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  as  our 
the  last  thirty  hours,  liad  lain  ourselves  small  party  would  not  admit  of  any 
down  i  n  the  snow,  completely  worn  division,  the  before-mentioned  soldiers 
outbycoId,fatigue,hunger,  and  thirst,  were  withdrawn.  We  again  entered 
than  our  persevering  foe,  not  yet  within  our  broken  walls,  and  again, 
glutted  with  the  blood  of  the  thou-  instantly,  was  our  foe  in  its  former 
sands  that  had  fallen,  suddenly  com-  position,  dealing  death  amongst  us.^' — 
menced  firing  volley  after  volley  into  iCaptain  Johnson's  Journal'] 
the  enclosure  where  wc  were  resting. 


RETENTION  OF  HOSTAGES.  241 

for  he  understood  the  language  employed.  Through  him 
the  wishes  of  the  General  were  now  conveyed  to  Akbar 
Khan.  The  Sirdar  promised  to  send  provisions  and 
water  to  the  famishing  troops,*  but  insisted  on  retaining 
the  General,  Shelton,  and  Johnson,  as  hostages  for  the 
evacuation  of  Jellalabad.  Elphinstone  earnestly  entreated 
permission  to  return  to  his  troops — urged  that,  as  com- 
manding officer  of  the  force,  his  desertion  would  appear 
dishonourable  in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen,  and  pro- 
mised, on  returning  to  camp,  to  send  Brigadier  Anquetil 
in  his  place.  But  the  Sirdar  was  inexorable ;  and  so 
General  Elphinstone,  Brigadier  Shelton,  and  Captain 
Johnson  remained  as  hostages  in  the  hands  of  Akbar 
Khan.  That  night,  under  a  tent  provided  for  them  by 
the  Sirdar,  they  laid  themselves  down  in  their  cloaks, 
and  enjoyed  such  sleep  as  they  only  can  know  who  have 
spent  such  nights  of  horror  as  closed  upon  the  sufferers 
in  this  miserable  retreat. 