


250  THE  RETBEAT  FROM  CAUBUIi. 

nothing  had  been  thought  of  but  the  best  means  of  ac- 
complishing the  march  through  the  snow  with  the  utmost 
possible  rapidity — a  large  portion  of  the  force  would  have 
been  saved.  But  the  delays  which  were  suffered  to  arise 
at  the  commencement  of  the  retreat  sealed  the  fate  of 
the  army.  They  threw  the  game  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  We  waited,  indeed,  whilst  the  gates  were  being 
closed  upon  us,  and  then  there  was  no  outlet  of  escape. 
Whilst  our  wretched  people  were  halting  and  perishing 
in  the  snow,  the  enemy  were  gathering  in  advance  of 
them  and  lining  the  passes,  intent  on  their  destruction. 
The  events  of  that  miserable  week  in  January  afforded  a 
fitting  climax  to  the  series  of  disasters  which  had  darkened 
the  two  preceding  months.  There  is  nothing,  indeed, 
more  remarkable  in  the  history  of  the  world  than  the 
awful  completeness — the  sublime  unity — of  this  Caubul 
tragedy. 

It  would  be  unprofitable  to  enter  into  an  inquiry  regard- 
ing all  the  minute  details  of  misdirection  and  mismanage- 
ment, making  up  the  great  sum  of  human  folly,  which 
was  the  permitted  means  of  our  overthrow.  In  the  pages 
of  a  heathen  writer  over  such  a  story  as  this  would  be 
cast  the  shadow  of  a  tremendous  Nemesis.  The  Christian 
historian  uses  other  words,  but  the  same  prevailing  idea 
runs,  like  a  great  river,  through  his  narrative;  and  the 
reader  recognises  the  one  great  truth,  that  the  wisdom 
of  our  statesmen  is  but  foolishness,  and  the  might  of  our 
armies  is  but  weakness,  when  the  curse  of  God  is  sitting 
heavily  upon  an  unholy  cause.  "  For  the  Lord  God  of 
recompenses  shall  surely  requite.*' 


EFJFOBTS  AT  RETRIEVAL.  251 


CHAPTER  m. 

[1841—1842.] 

Efforts  at  Retrieval — Close  of  Lord  Auckland's  Administration — Embar- 
rassments of  his  Position — Opinions  of  Sir  Jasper  Kicolls — ^Efforts  of 
Mr.  Georffe  Clerk — Despatch  of  the  First  Brigade — ^Appointment  of  Gre- 
neral  Poltock — ^Despatch  of  the  Second  Bri^de — Expected  Arrival  of 
Lord  EUenborough — Further  Embarrassments. 

At  this  time  the  Govemor-Greneral  and  his  family 
were  resident  at  Calcutta.  The  period  of  Lord  Auck- 
land's tenure  of  the  vice-regal  office  was  drawing  to  a 
dose.  He  was  awaiting  the  arrival  of  his  successor. 
It  had  seemed  to  him,  as  the  heavy  periodical  rains 
began  slowly  to  give  place  to  the  cool  weather  of  the 
early  winter,  that  there  was  nothing  to  overshadow 
the  closing  scenes  of  his  administration,  and  to  vex  his 
spirit  with  misgivings  and  regrets  during  the  monotonous 
months  of  the  homeward  voyage.  The  three  first 
weeks  of  October  brought  him  only  cheering  intelligence 
finom  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus.  The  Envoy  con- 
tinued to  report,  with  confidence,  the  increasing  tran- 
quillity of  Afghanistan.  The  Douranee  insurrection 
seemed  to  have  been  suppressed,  and  there  was  nothing 
sturing  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Caubul  to  create 
anxiety  and  alarm.* 