

*  On  the  22nd  of  October,  Lord  also  been  completely  put  down  with- 
Ancklandwrote  to  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls,  out  more  fighting.  Griffin's  affair 
that  Macgregor's  expedition  had  seems  to  have  expelled  their  pug- 
ended  prosperously.  "  The  Doura-  nacious  propensities." —  [3/5.  Corre" 
nee  msorrection/'  he  added,   "  has  spotwknce,'] 


i 


252  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

But  November  set  in  gloomy  and  threatening.  The 
clouds  were  gathering  in  the  distance.  It  now  seemed 
to  Lord  Auckland  that  his  administration  was  doomed 
to  close  in  storm  and  convulsion.  Intelligence  of  the 
Ghilzye  outbreak  arrived.  It  was  plain  that  the  passes 
were  sealed,  for  there  were  no  tidings  from  Caubul. 
There  might  be  rebelUon  and  disaster  at  the  capital ; 
our  communications  were  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy; 
and  all  that  was  known  at  Calcutta  was  that  Sale's 
brigade  had  been  fighting  its  way  downwards,  and  had 
lost  many  men  and  some  officers  in  skirmishes  with  the 
Ghilzye  tribes,  which  had  seemingly  been  productive  of 
no  important  results.  There  was  something  in  all  this 
very  perplexing  and  embarrassing.  Painful  doubts  and 
apprehensions  began  to  disturb  the  mind  of  the  Gover- 
nor-General. It  seemed  to  be  the  beginning  of  the 
end. 

Never  was  authentic  inteUigence  from  Caubul  looked 
for  with  so  much  eager  anxiety  as  throughout  the  month 
of  November.  When  tidings  came  at  last — only  too 
faithful  in  their  details  of  disaster — they  came  in  a 
dubious,  unauthoritative  shape,  and,  for  a  time,  were  re- 
ceived with  incredulity.  At  the  end  of  the  third  week 
of  November,  letters  from  Meerut,  Kurnaul,  and  other 
stations  in  the  upper  provinces  of  Hindostan,  announced 
that  reports  had  crossed  the  frontier  to  the  eflfect  that 
there  had  been  a  general  rising  at  Caubul,  that  the  city 
had  been  fired,  and  that  Sir  Alexander  Bumes  had  been 
killed.  Letters  to  this  effect  reached  the  offices  of  the 
public  journals,  but  no  intelligence  had  been  received  at 
Government  House,  and  a  hope  was  expressed  in  official 
quarters  that  the  stories  in  circulation  were  exaggerated 
native  rumours.  But,  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  the 
same  stories  were  repeated  in  letters  from  Mr.  Geoige 
Clerk|  the    Governor-General's  agent  on    the    north- 


FIRST  TIDINGS  OF  DISASTER.  253 

western  frontier,  and  from  Captain  Mackeson  at  Pesha- 
wur;  and  the  intelligence  came  coupled  with  urgent  re- 
quisitions for  the  despatch  of  reinforcements  to  Afghan- 
istan. Though  no  authentic  tidings  had  been  received 
from  Caubul,  the  advices  from  our  political  fimctionaries, 
on  the  intermediate  line  of  country,  were  of  a  character 
not  to  be  questioned ;  and  Lord  Auckland,  who  a 
day  or  two  before  had  received  letters  from  Sir  Wil- 
liam Macnaghten,  assuring  him  that  the  disturbances 
were  at  an  end,  awoke  to  the  startling  truth  that  all 
Caubul  was  in  a  blaze,  and  the  supremacy  of  the  Sud- 
dozye  Princes  and  their  foreign  supporters  threatened 
by  a  general  outburst  of  national  indignation.  Af- 
ghanistan— serene  and  prosperous  Afghanistan — with 
its  popular  government  and  its  grateful  people,  was  in 
arms  against  its  deliverers.  Suddenly  the  tranquillity 
of  that  doomed  country,  boasted  of  in  Caubul  and 
credited  in  Calcutta,  was  found  to  be  a  great  delusion. 
Across  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the  land  the 
history  of  that  gigantic  lie  was  written  in  characters  of 
blood.  It  was  now  too  deplorably  manifest  that,  al- 
though a  British  army  had  crossed  the  Indus  and  can- 
toned itself  at  Caubul  and  Candahar,  the  Afghans  were 
Afghans  still — still  a  nation  of  fierce  Mahomedans,  of 
hardy  warriors,  of  independent  mountaineers;  still  a 
people  not  to  be  dragooned  into  peace,  or  awed  into 
submission,  by  a  scattering  of  foreign  bayonets  and  the 
pageantry  ofa  puppet  king. 