

The  blow  fell  heavily  upon  Lord  Auckland.  An  ami- 
able gentleman  and  a  well-intentioned  statesman  he  had 
made  for  himself  many  friends;  and,  perhaps,  there  was 
not  in  all  Calcutta  at  that  time,  even  amongst  the  most 
strenuous  opponents  of  the  policy  which  had  resulted 
in  so  much  misery  and  disgrace,  one  who  did  not  now 
grieve  for  the  sufierings  of  him  whose  errors  had  been  so 


254  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

severely  visited.  Had  it  fallen  at  any  other  time  it  would 
not  have  been  so  acutely  felt.  But  it  came  upon  him  at 
the  close  of  his  reign,  when  he  could  do  nothing  to  restore 
the  brilUancy  of  his  tarnished  reputation.  He  had  ex- 
pected to  embark  for  England  a  happy  man  and  a  suc- 
cessful ruler.  He  had,  as  he  thought,  conquered  and 
tranquillised  A%hanistan.  For  the  former  exploit  he  had 
been  created  an  earl;  and  the  latter  would  have  entitled 
him  to  the  honour.  It  is  true  that  he  had  drained  the 
treasury  of  India ;  but  he  belived  that  he  was  about  to 
hand  over  no  embryo  war  to  his  successor,  and  that, 
therefore,  the  treasury  would  soon  replenish  itself  The 
prospect  was  sufficiently  cheering,  and  he  was  eager  to 
depart  j  but  the  old  year  wore  to  a  close,  and  found  Lord 
Auckland  pacing,  with  a  troubled  countenance,  the  spa- 
cious apartments  of  Government  House — found  him  the 
most  luckless  of  rulers  and  the  most  miserable  of  men. 

Never  was  statesman  so  cast  down — never  was  states- 
man so  perplexed  and  bewildered.  The  month  of  De- 
cember was  one  of  painful  anxiety — of  boding  fear — 
of  embarrassing  uncertainty.  There  was  no  official 
information  from  Caubul.  The  private  accounts  received 
from  Jellalabad  and  Peshawur,  always  brief,  often  vague 
and  conflicting,  excited  the  worst  apprehensions  without 
dispelling  much  of  the  public  ignorance.  In  this  con- 
juncture, government  were  helpless.  The  Caubul  force, 
cut  off  from  all  support,  could  by  no  possibiUty  be 
rescued.  The  utmost  vigour  and  determination — ^the 
highest  wisdom  and  sagacity — could  avail  nothing  at 
such  a  time.  The  scales  had  fallen  from  the  eyes  of  the 
Governor-General  only  to  show  him  the  utter  hopeless- 
ness of  the  case.  In  this  terrible  emergency  he  seems  to 
have  perceived,  for  the  first  time,  the  madness  of  posting 
a  detached  force  in  a  foreign  country,  hundreds  of  miles 
fi'om  our  own  frontier,  cut  off  from  all  support  by  rugged 


LORD  Auckland's  embarrassments.  255 

mountains  and  impenetrable  defiles.  Before  a  single 
brigade  could  be  pushed  on  to  the  relief  of  the  beleaguered 
force  the  whole  army  might  be  annihilated.  Clearly 
Lord  Auckland  now  beheld  the  inherent  viciousness  of 
the  original  policy  of  the  war,  and,  in  sorrow  and 
humiliation,  began  to  bethink  himself  of  the  propriety 
of  abandoning  it. 