

Having  expedited  the  movement  of  these  regiments, 
Mr.  Clerk  began  to  make  preparations  for  the  despatch 
of  another  brigade  to  Peshawur,  and  addressed  General 
Boyd,  who  at  that  time  commanded  the  Sirhind  di- 
vision,  on  the  subject.  At  the  same  time,  he  addressed 
urgent  letters  to  the  Court  of  Lahore,  apprising  them 
of  the  intended  march  of  the  regiments  through  the 
Punjaub — calling  on  them  to  supply  boats  for  the 
passage  of  the  river — and  suggesting  to  the  Maharajah 
that  he  should  "  cause  the  immediate  march  of  his  son, 
Koonwur  Pertab  Singh,  on  Peshawur,  with  5000  of 
their  best  troops  from  the  neighbouring  district  of 
Chuch  Huzara."  Captain  Mackeson  had  before  applied 
to  the  Sikh  authorities  at  Peshawur  for  6000  men  to 
march  on  Jellalabad;  but  had  been  told  by  General 
Avitabile  that  he  had  few  troops  at  Peshawur,  and 

*  The  60th  Native  Infantry.  ments,  and  to  warn  the  Light  In- 

f  Two  days^before,  Captam  (now  fantry  Battalion   and  some    details 

Sir  Henry)  Lawrence,  Assistant  to  of  the    10th    Cavalry,    for    service 

Mr.  Clerk,  whose  later  career  has  beyond  the  frontier.  —  ICapt,  Laiv 

justified  the  high  expectations  which  rence  to  Mr.  George  Clerk:  Nov.  14, 

were    formed    of    him    daring   his  1841.  MS.  Records.'] 

connexion  with  the  North- Western  t  ^*  Clerk  sent  forward  the  30th, 

Agency,  on  his  way  out  after  a  dacoity  which  was  Wildes  regiment,  in  order 

party,   met  the  mtelligence  of  the  that    the  colonel  might  take  com- 

Caubul  outbreak,  and  immediately  mand  of  the  brigade.  General  Boyd 

after  forwarding  it  on  to  Mr.  Clerk  having  thrown  out  a  hint  that  he  was 

went  to  Colonel  Wild,  to  urge  him  a  more  efficient  officer  than  the  colo- 

to  push  on  the  60th  and  64th  Regi-  nels  of  the  other  regiments. 


MOVEMENT  OF  THE  FIRST  BRIGADE.  267 

that  he  required  them  all  for  the  protection  of  the 
Sikh  territory. 

Lord  Auckland,  however,  was  strongly  of  opinion 
that  the  second  brigade,  which  was  to  comprise  her 
Majesty's  9th  Foot,  the  10th  Light  (Native)  Cavahy, 
and  a  troop  of  Horse  Artillery,  ought  not  to  be  moved 
forward.  "We  do  not  now,"  wrote  the  Governor-General 
in  Council,  on  the  3rd  of  December,  "desire  to  send  a 
second  brigade  in  advance,  for  we  do  not  conceive  it 
to  be  called  for,  for  the  objects  of  support  and  assistance 
which  we  contemplate ;  and  we  think  it  inexpedient  to 
despatch  any  greater  number  of  troops  than  be  abso- 
lutely  necessary  from  our  own  provinces."  And  two 
days  afterwards  he  wrote  privately  to  the  Commander- 
in-Chief:  "  I  heartily  hope  that  the  second  brigade  may 
not  have  been  sent."  He  could  not,  he  added,  "  see  of 
what  service  it  could  be  at  present.  One  brigade,  with 
the  artillery  which  you  purpose  sending,  should  be 
sufficient  to  force  the  Khybur  Pass;  and  ten  brigades 
could  not ,  at  this  season  of  the  year,  force  the  passes  to 
Caubul." 