

♦  MS.  Records.  t  /^'^. 

VOL.  II.  S 


258  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

tice  was  being  inflicted  upon  the  people  of  Hindostan. 
No  man  knew  this  better,  or  deplored  it  more  deeply, 
than  Lord  Auckland  himself.  The  opinions  of  the  East 
India  Company  had,  at  all  events,  been  clearly  expressed, 
and  Lord  Auckland,  not  taking  into  consideration  the 
fact  that  peculiar  circumstances  might  warrant,  or  even 
dictate,  a  departure  from  the  general  policy  inculcated  by 
the  Court,  deemed  that  the  opportunity  had  now  arrived 
for  our  withdrawal  from  the  difficulties  and  embarrass- 
ments which  had  beset  our  unfortunate  career  in  Af- 
ghanistan. 

And  when  he  turned  his  thoughts  from  Leadenhall* 
street  to  Downing-street,  it  appeared  to  him  that  there 
were  still  weightier  reasons  for  the  abandonment  of  our 
ill-omened  connexion  with  the  countries  beyond  the 
Indus.  The  Whigs  had  sent  him  to  India;  the  Con- 
servatives were  now  in  office.  At  the  end  of  August 
the  Melbourne  ministry  had  resigned ;  and  Peel  was  now 
at  the  head  of  the  cabinet.  It  was  known  that  the  Con- 
servative party  either  were,  or  made  a  show  of  being, 
radically  opposed  to  the  Afghan  policy  of  the  government 
which  they  had  displaced.  It  was  natural,  therefore, 
that  Lord  Auckland,  who  was  now  awaiting  the  arrival 
of  his  successor,  should  have  shrunk  from  committing 
him  to  any  extensive  measures  for  the  recovery  of  our 
position  in  Afghanistan,  which,  in  all  probability,  he 
would  not  be  disposed  to  carry  out.  Whatever  amount 
of  energy  the  old  ruler  might  now  throw  into  the  work 
before  him,  it  was  certain  that  he  would  only  be  able  to 
commence  what  he  must  leave  to  his  successor  to  com- 
plete. To  have  handed  over  to  the  new  Governor- 
General  the  outline  of  a  political  scheme,  just  sufficiently 
worked  out  in  its  details  to  render  its  abandonment 
impossible,  would  have  been  to  embarrass  and  hamper 
him  at  the  outset  of  his  career  in  a  manner  that  would 


VIEWS  OP  LORD  AUCKLAND.  259 

have  perplexed  the  new  ruler  in  the  extreme,  and 
jeopardised  the  interests  of  the  empire.  He  believed 
that  the  policy  of  the  Conservatives  was  nearly  identical 
with  that  of  the  East  India  Company,  and  that  they 
would  eagerly  take  advantage  of  the  present  crisis  to 
sever  our  connexion  with  the  countries  beyond  the 
Indus,  and  to  declare  the  failure  of  the  original  scheme 
propounded  in  the  Simlah  manifesto  of  1 838. 

It  is  right  that  Lord  Auckland  should  have  ample 
credit  for  suffering  these  important  considerations  to 
exercise  their  due  influence  over  his  counsels.  It  is  right, 
too,  that  it  should  be  clearly  recognised  how  great  was  the 
moral  courage  it  demanded,  either  practically  to  declare 
by  himself,  or  to  leave  to  others  to  declare,  the  utter 
failure  of  a  great  political  scheme  for  which  he  was  re- 
sponsible to  his  country,  and  with  which,  from  generation 
to  generation,  his  name  will  be  indissolubly  associated  in 
the  page  of  history.  But  when  all  this  has  been  said, 
there  still  remains  to  be  recorded  the  humiliating  fact  that 
a  great  crisis  suddenly  arose,  and  Lord  Auckland  was  not 
equal  to  it.  He  had  begun  himself  to  doubt  the  justice 
and  expediency  of  the  policy  of  1838.  He  knew  that  the 
£ast  India  Company  were  desirous  that  he  should  not 
persevere  in  a  course  which  had  brought  them  to  the 
verge  of  bankruptcy,  and  was  inflicting  grievous  injuries 
upon  the  people  of  Hindostan.  He  knew  that  the  Tory 
government  heartily  disapproved  of  the  occupation  of  Af- 
ghanistan, and  had  only  been  waiting  for  an  opportunity 
to  reverse  the  policy  of  the  WTiigs;  and  he  believed, 
therefore,  that  it  was  his  duty  to  direct  all  his  efforts  to 
the  one  object  of  withdrawing  our  beleaguered  garrisons  in 
safety  to  Hindostan.  But  he  seems,  in  the  bewilderment 
and  perplexity  which  followed  the  stunning  blow  that 
had  descended  so  suddenly  upon  him,  to  have  forgotten 
that  there  are  in  the  lives  of  nations,  as  of  men,  great  and 