

But  the  "one  brigade  with  artillery"  never  went  to 
Peshawur.  The  Native  Infantry  crossed  the  Punjaub 
under  the  command  of  Brigadier  Wild.  Some  artillery- 
men went  with  them  ;*  but  there  were  no  artillery,  for 
there  were  no  guns.  It  was  expected,  however,  that 
the  Sikhs  would  supply  the  ordnance  which  the  British 
had  left  out  of  the  account.  "  You  have  not  at  present 
any  guns,"  wrote  the  Head-Quarters'  Staff  to  Brigadier 
Wild,  "  but  you  have  artillerymen,  sappers  and  miners, 
and  officers  of  both  corps.  His  Excellency  is  not  aware 
of  any  difficulty  likely  to  prevent  your  being  accom- 
modated by  the  Sikh  Governor-General,  Avitabile,  with 
four  or  six  pieces;  and  you  will  solicit  such  aid,  when 

*  These  artillerTmen  were  on  their    company  then  in  the  couiitry,  serving 
way  to  Afghanistan  to  relieve  the    with  Abbott's  battery. 


268  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

necessary,  through  Captain  Mackeson."  But  when  Bri- 
gadier Wild  reached  Peshawur,  a  day  or  two  before  the 
close  of  the  year,  he  found  that  difficulties  had  arisen 
to  prevent  the  preparation  of  the  expected  Sikh  guns 
for  service.  The  artillerymen  were  disinclined  to  hand 
them  over  to  the  British ;  and  though  great  doubts  were 
entertained  as  to  whether  they  were  in  reality  worth 
anything,  it  was  hard  to  compass  a  loan  of  the  suspected 
pieces.  And  so  Brigadier  Wild,  urged  as  he  was  from 
all  quarters  to  push  on  to  Jellalabad,  with  the  provi- 
sions, treasure,  and  ammunition  he  was  to  escort  thither, 
sate  down  quietly  at  Peshawur,  whilst  Captains  Mackeson 
and  Lawrence  were  endeavouring  to  overcome  the  coy- 
ness of  the  Sikh  artillerymen;  and  began  to  apprehend 
that  his  march  would  be  delayed  until  some  field-pieces 
were  sent  him  from  India. 

His  suspense,  however,  was  of  no  very  long  duration. 
On  the  3rd  of  January,  four  rickety  guns  were  handed 
over  to  the  British  officers;  but  not  without  a  show  of 
resistance  on  the  part  of  the  Sikh  artillerymen.  On  the 
following  day  one  of  the  limbers  went  to  pieces  under 
trial ;  and  then  it  had  to  be  replaced.  Other  difficulties, 
too,  met  Wild  at  Peshawur.  His  camel  men  were  play- 
ing the  old  game  of  desertion.  The  Afreedi  Maliks  had 
not  yet  been  bribed  into  submission  by  Mackeson ;  and  the 
loyalty  of  our  Sikh  allies  was  so  doubtful,  that  they  were 
just  as  likely,  on  Wild's  brigade  entering  the  Khybur, 
to  attack  him  in  rear  as  to  keep  the  pass  open  for  him. 
All  these  elements  of  delay  were  greatly  to  be  lamented. 
There  was  a  forward  feeling  among  the  Sepoys  which 
might  have  been  checked.  They  were  eager  to  advance 
when  they  reached  Peshawur ;  and  their  enthusiasm  was 
little  likely  to  be  increased  by  days  of  inactivity  in  a 
sickly  camp,  exposed  to  the  contaminating  influences 
of  the  Sikh  soldiery,  who,  always  dreading  the  deep 
passes  of  the  Khybur,  now  purposely  exaggerated  its 