

But  there  was  something  more  than  his  own  doubts 
and  misgivings  to  be  considered.  Lord  Auckland  knew 
that  the  connexion  he  had  established  in  Afghanistan  was 
distasteful  in  the  extreme  to  the  East  India  Company. 
He  knew  that  the  Court  of  Directors  were  desirous  that 
he  should  avail  himself  of  the  earliest  possible  oppor- 
tunity of  severing  that  connexion  for  ever.  On  the  31st 
of  December,  1840,  the  Court  of  Directors  had  written 
out  to  the  Supreme  Government:  "We  pronounce  our 
'  decided  opinion  that  for  many  years  to  come  the  restored 
monarchy  will  have  need  of  a  British  force  in  order  to 
maintain  peace  in  its  own  territory,  and  prevent  aggres- 
sion from  without.  We  must  add,  that  to  attempt  to  ac- 
complish this  by  a  small  force,  or  by  the  mere  influence 


OPINIONS  OF  THE  EAST  INDIA  COMPANY.  257 

of  British  Residents,  will,  in  our  opinion,  be  most  unwise 
and  frivolous,  and  that  we  should  prefer  the  entire  aban- 
donment of  the  country,  and  a  frank  confession  of  com- 
plete failure,  to  any  such  policy.  Even  financial  consi- 
derations justify  this  view,  inasmuch  as  a  strong  and 
adequate  military  establishment,  costly  as  it  must  be,  will 
hardly  entail  so  much  expense  upon  you  as  those  re- 
peated revolts  and  disorders  which  must  arise  in  an  ill- 
governed,  half-subdued  country;  and  which  will  compel 
you  to  make  great  and  sudden  efforts  to  maintain  your 
character  and  recover  predominance.  To  whatever  quar- 
ter we  direct  our  attention,  we  behold  the  restored  mo- 
narchy menaced  by  dangers,  which  cannot  possibly  be 
encountered  by  the  military  means  at  the  disposal  of  the 
minister  at  the  court  of  Shah  Soojah ;  and  we  again  desire 
you  seriously  to  consider  which  of  the  two  alternatives 
(a  speedy  retreat  from  Afghanistan  or  a  considerable 
increase  of  the  military  force  in  that  country)  you  may 
feel  it  your  duty  to  adopt.  We  are  convinced  that  you 
have  no  middle  course  to  pursue  with  safety  or  with 
honour."*  And  six  months  afterwards  the  court  again 
wrote  (June  2,  1841):  "The  surrender  of  Dost  Maho- 
med does  not  alter  the  views  contained  in  our  late  letters ; 
and  we  hope  that  advantage  will  be  taken  of  it  to  settle 
affairs  in  Afghanistan  according  to  those  views. "f 

Such,  as  Lord  Auckland  knew  them  to  be,  were  the 
views  of  the  East  India  Company.  There  was  very  good 
reason  for  all  this.  The  necessity  of  sustaining  Shah 
Soojah  on  the  throne  of  Caubul  had  drained  the  financial 
resources  of  the  Company  to  the  dregs,  and  was  entailing 
upon  them  liabilities  which,  if  not  speedily  retrenched, 
they  might  have  found  it  impossible  to  discharge.  The 
injustice  of  the  occupation  of  Afghanistan  was  not  con- 
fined to  the  people  of  that  country.     A  grievous  injus- 