

What  Lord  Auckland  now  wrote  publicly  on  this 
subject  is  on  record;  what  he  wrote  privately  is  known 
to  a  few.  That  the  Grovernor-General,  in  this  terrible 
conjuncture,  succumbed  to  the  blow  which  had  fallen 
upon  him — that  his  energies  did  not  rise  with  the 
occasion,  but  that  the  feebleness  of  paralysis  was  con- 
spicuous in  all  that  he  did,  has  often  been  asserted  and 
never  confidently  denied.  But  it  may  be  doubted 
whether  his  feelings  or  his  conduct  at  this  time  have 
ever  been  fairly  judged  or  clearly  understood.  The 
truth  is,  that  he  had  originally  committed  himself  to  a 
course  of  policy  which  never  had  his  cordial  approbation, 
and  his  after-efforts  to  uphold  which  he  inwardly  re- 
garded as  so  many  attempts  to  make  the  worse  appear  the 
better  reason.  It  is  plain  that  very  soon  after  the  occupa- 
tion of  Caubul  had  for  a  time  brought  the  Afghan 
campaign  to  a  close,  the  Grovemor-General  began  to 
entertain  very  painful  doubts  and  misgivings;  and  that, 
although  he  by  no  means  anticipated  the  sudden  and 
disastrous  fall  of  the  whole  edifice  he  had  raised,  he  had, 
long  before  the  close  of  1841,  repented  of  his  own  infir- 
mity of  purpose,  in  giving  way  to  the  counsels  of  others ; 
and  began  to  doubt  whether  we  had  succeeded  in  the 
great  object  of  the  war — ^the  establishment  of  such  a 
friendly  power  in  Afghanistan  as  would  secure  us  against 
western  aggression.  He  must  have  seen,  too — for  he 
was,  in  the  main,  a  just  and  an  honest  man — that  the 
poUcy,  which  he  had  sanctioned,  cradled  in  injustice  as 


256  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

it  was,  was  continually  perpetuating  injustice;  and  lie 
must  have  heard  the  wrongs  of  the  Afghan  chiefs  and  the 
Afghan  nation  eternally  crying  out  to  him  for  redress. 
Macnaghten  complained  that  Lord  Auckland  and  Mr. 
Colvin  were  too  ready  to  believe  all  the  stories  of  the  un- 
popularity of  the  government  and  discontent  of  the  chiefs 
and  the  people,  which  reached  them  through  obscure 
channels  of  information ;  though  those  channels  of  in- 
formation were  the  local  newspapers,  whose  informants 
were  generally  officers  of  rank  and  character.  But  in 
spite  of  the  Envoy's  assurances  and  denials.  Lord  Auck- 
land had  begun  to  suspect  that  there  was  something 
rotten  at  the  core  of  our  Afghan  policy;  and  something 
pre-eminently  defective  in  the  administrative  conduct  of 
those  to  whom  its  working  out  had  been  entrusted.  He 
did  not,  in  the  autumn  of  1841,  believe  that  any  sudden 
and  overwhelming  storm  would  cloud  the  last  days  of  his 
Indian  government;  but  he  had  begun  to  encourage  the 
belief  that  he  had  made  a  fatal  mistake,  and  that,  sooner 
or  later,  the  real  character  of  his  Afghan  policy  would 
be  revealed  to  the  world. 