

But  whilst  such  were  the  opinions  of  the  Governor- 
General  and  the  Commander-in-Chief,  there  were  other 
functionaries  nearer  to  the  scene  of  action  at  the  time, 
whose  feelings  prompted,  and  whose  judgment  dictated, 
a  more  energetic  course  of  procedure.  Among  these  were 
Mr.  Robertson,  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  North- 
western Provinces,  and  Mr.  George  Clerk,  the  Governor- 
General's  Agent  on  the  North- Western  Frontier.  Both 
of  these  able  and  experienced  officers  recognised  the 
paramount  necessity  of  pushing  on  troops  to  Peshawur 
with  the  utmost  possible  despatch.  On  the  latter  de- 
volved, in  the  first  instance,  the  responsibility  of  moving 
forward  the  regiments  which  were  in  readiness  to  proceed 
for  the  periodical  relief  of  the  troops  in  Afghanistan,! 

♦  On  the  27th  of  November  he  so  dissimilar  both  to  our  Sepoys  and 
wrote  to  Lord  Auckland  from  Myn-  ourselves,  at  an  expense  so  decidedlv 
poorie  :  "  If  it  be  decided  that  we  are  ruinous."     And  on  the  30th,  in  still 
to  support  Shah   Soojah   under   all  more  emphatic  language,    he  said: 
circumstances  and  difficulties,  I  must  "  My  opinion  regarding  a  renewal  of 
entreat  your  Lordship^s  early  atten-  our  efforts  to  support  Shah  Soojah 
tion  to  the  means  of  effecting  this  on   his  throne,    and  to  establish   a 
object,  which  may  be  a  more  arduous  permanent  influence  in  Afghanistan, 
undertaking  than  the  occupation  of  is  without  change  or  modification, 
the  country  in  1839."    And  again,  in  That  we  have  no  base  of  operations 
the  same  letter :  **  There  is  a  dark,  has  been  always  clear ;  but  now,  were 
perhaps  a  random  hint,  in  one  of  these  we  to  march  a  reinforcement  on  the 
letters  that  the  rebellion  is  instigated  best  horses,  we  could  not  be  sure  of 
by  the  royaJ  family  at  CaubuL     If  carrying  the  Khybur  Pass,   and  if 
so,  I  would  advise  the  early  abandon-  snow  has  fallen,  the  road  to  Caubul 
men  t  of  them,  their  country,  and  their  would  still  be  closed." — {^MS.  Cor- 
cause."  On  the  28th  he  again  wrote :  respondence  of  Sir  J.  iVtco/fi.] 
"  I    really    would    not    advise    our        f  1^^  53rd  and  64th  Native  In- 
forcing  either  him  or  ourselves  upon  fantry. 
a  nation  so  distant,  and  in  all  respects 


266  EFFORTS  AT  BETBIEVAL. 

as  well  as  a  regiment  which  was  in  orders  for  Sindh.* 
On  the  16th  of  November,  he  addressed  letters  to 
Colonel  Wild,  the  commanding  oflScer  at  Ferozepore, 
and  Colonel  Rich,  who  commanded  at  Loodhianah, 
urging  them  to  send  on  to  Peshawur,  as  speedily  as 
possible,  the  regiments  named  in  the  margin.f  In 
compliance  with  these  requisitions,  the  64th  Regiment 
crossed  the  Sutlej  on  the  18th  of  November,  and  the 
60th  on  the  20th  of  November.  The  53rd,  which  was 
accompanied  by  the  30th  Regiment,  J  crossed  the  river 
on  the  26th. 