

*  About  the  same  time  Lord  Auck-  to  be  looked  to.    It  will  be  for  ^ou 

land  wrote  to  Sir  W.  Macnaghten :  and  for  this  goyemment  to  consider 

^^  I  would  have  jou  share  in  the  feel-  in  what  manner  all  that  belongs  to 

ing  which  is  growing  strongly  upon  India  may  be  most  immediately  and 

me  that  the  maintenance  of  the  posi-  most  honourably  withdrawn  from  the 

tion,  which  we  have  attempted  to  es-  coimtry." — IMS.  Correspondence.'] 

tablish  in  Afghanistan,  is  no  longer  f  mS,  Correspoiuleace* 


264  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

opinions  of  his  oflScial  cotemporaries,  to  whom  statesman- 
ship was  the  profession  and  practice  of  their  lives.     He 
had  all  along  protested  against  the  withdrawal  of  our 
troops  from  their  legitimate  uses  in  the  British  Provinces, 
and  urged  that  it  was  necessary  either  so  to  increase  the 
Indian  army  as  to  enable  the  government  to  keep  up 
an  adequate  force  in   Afghanistan  without  weakening 
the  defences  of  Hindostan,  or  to  withdraw  the  British 
troops  altogether  from  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus. 
It  was   now   his   opinion — an   opinion   in   which  the 
Grovemor-General  participated — that,  inasmuch  as  the 
Indian  army,  largely  indented  upon  as  it  was  for  service 
beyond    the    frontier,  was     greatly    below    the    right 
athletic  strength,  it  would  be  impossible  to  pour  strong 
reinforcements    into    Afghanistan    without    weakening 
the  British  Provinces  in  such  a  manner  as  to  provoke 
both  external  aggression  and  internal  revolt.    But  su- 
pineness,  in  such  a  conjimcture,   was  more   likely  to 
have  provoked  aggression  than  activity,  although  the 
latter  might  have   denuded  India  of  some  of  its  best 
troops.     Macnaghten  told  Runjeet  Singh,  in  the  summer 
of  1838,  that  the  military  resources  of  the  British-Indian 
Government  were  such  that  200,000  soldiers  might  at 
any  time  be  brought  into  the  field  to  resist  simultaneous 
aggression  from  all  the  four   sides   of  India;*   and  al- 
though this  may  have  been  only  an  approximation  to 
the  sober  truth,  it  is  certain  that,  if  the  despatch  of  a 
couple  of  brigades  to  Jellalabad,  and  subsequently  to 
Caubul,  would  have  jeopardised  the  security  of  India, 
the  military  resources  of  the  government  must  have  been 
in  a  very  depressed  state.     When  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs, 
meeting  the  flood  of  intelligence  from  beyond  the  Indus, 
as  he  advanced  through  the  Upper  Provinces  of  India, 
recorded,  in  letters  to  the  Governor-General,  his  belief 
that  it  would  be  unwise  to  prosecute  another  war  in 

*  Ante,  voL  /.,  page  314. 


ROBERTSON  AND  CLERK,  266 

support  of  the  Suddozye  provinces,*  he  expressed  only 
the  sound  opinion  of  a  sagacious  politician.  But  he 
seems  to  have  forgotten  that  there  was  something  more 
than  the  restoration  of  the  Suddozye  dynasty  to  be  ac- 
complished— there  was  the  restoration  of  the  military 
supremacy  of  Great  Britain  in  Central  Asia  to  be 
achieved ;  and  whatever  may  have  been  the  scruples  of 
the  statesman,  in  such  a  crisis  as  this,  the  soldier  ought 
not  to  have  hesitated  for  a  moment. 