

But  from  the  very  first  Lord  Auckland  began  to 
despond,  and  steadfastly  set  his  face  against  any  mea- 
sures of  military  re-establishment.  When,  on  the  26th 
of  November,  he  received  from  Mr.  Clerk  and  Captain 
Mackeson  intelligence  which  confirmed  the  newspaper 
accounts  received  two  days  before,  and  read  the  pressing 
requisitions  of  those  oflScers  for  the  despatch  of  more 


262  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

troops  to  the  frontier,  he  wrote  to  the  Commander-in- 
Chief,  who  was  then  journeying  through  the  Upper  Pro- 
vinces of  India :  "  It  is  not  clear  to  me  how  the  march 
of  a  brigade  can  by  possibility  have  any  influence  upon 
the  events  which  it  is  supposed  may  be  passing  at  Cau- 
bul.  .  .  .  They  may  be  at  Jellalabad  in  February,  and 
could  not  march  onwards  to  Caubul  before  April.  .  •  • 
It  may  be  well,  perhaps,  that  two  or  three  regiments 
should  be  assembled  at  Peshawur.  .  .  I  wish  the  requisi- 
tion had  been  made  with  less  trepidation.'^  Again,  on  the 
1st  of  December,  he  wrote  to  the  same  oflSicer:  "  It  seems 
to  me  that  we  are  not  to  think  of  marching  fresh  armies 
for  the  re-conquest  of  that  which  we  are  likely  to  lose.  .  . 
The  difficulty  will  not  be  one  of  fighting  and  gaining 
victories,  but  of  supplies,  of  movements,  and  of  carriage. 
.  .  .  The  troops  in  Afghanistan  are  sufficiently  nume- 
rous. They  would  but  be  encumbered  by  greater  num- 
bers, and  reinforcements  could  not  arrive  before  the  crisis 
will  have  passed.  If  the  end  is  to  be  disastrous,  they 
would  but  increase  the  extent  of  the  disaster."  On  the 
following  day  he  again  wrote  to  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls,  set- 
ting forth  the  views  of  government,  to  the  effect — "  1st. 
That  we  should  not  fit  out  large  armaments  for  re-conquest 
— such  an  enterprise  would  be  beyond  our  means.  2nd. 
That  even  for  succours  the  season  is  unfavourable  and 
impracticable,  and  months  must  pass  before  it  could  be 
attempted.  3rdly.  That  if  aid  can  be  given,  the  officer 
in  command  should  not  be  prohibited  firom  seizing  the 
opportunity  of  affording  it.  I  fear,"  added  the  Gover- 
nor-General in  this  letter,  "  that  safety  to  the  force  at 
Caubul  can  only  come  from  itself"  On  the  5th  he  wrote 
to  the  same  correspondent,  that  '^  we  should  stand  fast 
and  gather  strength  at  Peshawur" — on  the  Sutlej,  and  on 
the  Indus.  "  Our  power,"  he  said,  "  of  giving  succour 
is  extremely  limited,  and  if  it  come  at  all,  it  can  only 
come  tardily.  .  .  .  We  must  look  on  an  advance  from 


LORD  Auckland's  correspondence.  263 

Jellalabad  for  some  months  as  utterly  out  of  the  question. 
An  advance  even  to  Jellalabad  could  only  be  to  give 
security  to  Sale,  and  with  the  aid  of  the  Sikhs,  one 
brigade,  with  artillery,  should  be  sufficient.  If  all  should 
be  lost  at  Caubul  we  will  not  encounter  new  hazards  for 
re-conquest."*  On  the  9th  of  December  he  wrote,  still 
more  emphatically:  "  The  present  state  of  affairs,  whether 
its  issue  be  fortunate  or  disastrous,  is  more  likely  to  lead 
within  a  few  months  to  the  withdrawal  of  troops  to  our 
frontiers  than  to  the  employment  of  larger  means  beyond 
it."  A  week  afterwards  he  wrote,  still  to  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief: "  We  must  know  more  before  we  can 
decide  anything,  or  lay  down  any  large  scheme  of 
measures.  .  .  .  There  are  already  more  regiments  be- 
yond the  frontier  than  we  can  feed  or  easily  pay.  .  .  . 
You  know  I  would  not  be  too  profuse  in  sending  strength 
forward."!  What  Lord  Auckland's  intentions  were  at 
this  time  may  be  gathered  from  these  letters.  He 
thought  only  of  saving  all  that  could  be  saved;  and  of 
escaping  out  of  Afghanistan  with  the  least  possible  delay. 
The  Commander-in-Chief  to  whom  these  letters  were 
addressed  was,  as  has  been  said,  at  this  time  on  his 
way  through  the  Upper  Provinces  of  India.  Sir  Jasper 
NicoUs  had  been  consistently  opposed  to  the  entire 
scheme  of  A%han  invasion,  and  had  with  rare  prescience 
and  sagacity  foretold  the  disastrous  downfal  of  a  policy 
based  upon  a  foundation  of  such  complicated  error.  He 
had  spent  his  life  in  the  camp ;  but  his  public  minutes,  as 
well  as  his  private  letters  and  journals,  written  through- 
out the  years  1840-41,  indicate  a  larger  amount  of 
political  sagacity  than  we  find  displayed  in  the  expressed 