


FURTHER  REINFORCEMENTS.  269 

terrors,  and  endeavoured  by  other  means  to  raise  their 
fears,  to  excite  their  prejudices,  and  to  shake  their 
fidelity  to  the  government  which  they  served. 

In  the  mean  while  active  preparations  for  the  despatch 
of  further  reinforcements  to  Peshawur  were  going  on  in 
the  North- Western  Provinces  of  India.  Lord  Auckland 
could  not  readily  bring  himself  to  recognise  the  expe- 
diency of  sending  forward  a  second  brigade;  but  Mr. 
Clerk  had  taken  the  initiative,  and  the  Governor-Gene- 
ral was  unwilling  to  disturb  any  arrangements  which 
already  were  being  brought  into  effect.  The  9th 
Foot  had  been  ordered  to  hold  itself  in  readiness,  and 
another  regiment,  the  26th  Native  Infantry,  was  to  be 
sent  with  it,  accompanied  by  some  irregular  horse,  and  a 
scanty  supply  of  artillery.*  The  Commander-in-Chief 
was  "  not  prepared"  for  this  demand,  and  the  Governor- 
General  in  Council  thought  it  "undesirable"  to  send  more 
troops  in  advance.  But  it  was  obvious  to  the  authorities 
on  the  north-western  frontier  that  the  state  of  affairs  in 
Afghanistan  was  becoming  every  day  more  critical ;  and 
that  it  was  expedient  to  concentrate  the  utmost  available 
strength  on  the  frontier  of  Afghanistan.  Towards  the 
end  of  the  year,  the  Governor-General  having  expressed 
a  strong  opinion  regarding  the  necessity  of  attaching 
some  regular  horse  to  the  brigade,  the  10th  Cavalry  were 
ordered  to  proceed  under  Brigadier  M^Caskill  (of  the 
9th  Foot),  who,  as  senior  officer,  took  command  of  the 
force ;  and  on  the  4th  of  January  the  brigade,  con- 
sisting of  3034  fighting  men,  crossed  the  Sutlej  on  its 
way  to  Peshawur. 

To  command  the  body  of  troops  now  assembling  for 
service  beyond  the  frontier,  it  became  necessary  to  select 
an  officer  of  good  military  repute  and  unquestionable 
energy   and  activity,  combined  with  a  cool  judgment 

*  Two  nine-pounders  and  a  howitzer. 


270  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

and  a  sound  discretion.  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  had,  in  the 
month  of  November,  when  the  despatch  of  a  Queen's 
regiment  to  Peshawur  was  first  contemplated,  pointed 
to  Sir  Edmund  Williams,  as  a  general  officer  well  fitted 
for  such  command.*  But  to  the  Governor-General  it 
appeared  expedient  to  place  an  experienced  officer  of 
the  Company's  service  at  the  head  of  aflfairs,  and  Sir 
Edmund  Williams  was  a  general  of  the  royal  army, 
who  had  served  but  two  years  in  India  at  the  time  of 
the  Caubul  outbreak,  and  who  knew  as  little  of  the 
Sepoy  army  as  he  did  of  the  politics  of  Afghanistan. 
Lord  Auckland  had  made  his  election.  In  Major-G^ 
neral  Lumley,  the  adjutant-general  of  the  army,  he 
thought  that  he  saw  all  the  qualifications  which  it  be- 
hoved the  commander  of  such  an  army  to  possess. 
But  there  was  one  thing  that  Lumley  wanted ;  he 
wanted  physical  health  and  strength.  When  the  Go- 
vernor-General sent  up  the  nomination  to  head-quarters, 
the  Commander-in-Chief  at  once  replied  that  Lumley 
could  not  take  the  command ;  and  again  NicoUs  recom- 
mended the  appointment  of  Sir  Edmund  Williams. 
Indeed,  he  had  determined  on  sending  for  that  officer  to 
his  camp,  and  arming  him  at  once  with  instnictions  ;f  but 