

s2 


260  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

imminent  conjunctures,  which  not  only  sanction,  but 
demand,  a  departure  from  ordinary  rules  of  conduct  and 
principles  of  statesmanship.  Such  a  conjuncture  had  now 
arisen ;  and,  important  as  were  all  the  considerations  re- 
capitulated above,  they  should  have  given  place  in  his 
mind  to  the  one  paramount  desire  of  demonstrating  to  all 
the  nations  of  the  East  the  invincibility  of  British  arms. 
Neither  the  wishes  of  the  East  India  Company  nor  the 
opinions  of  the  Conservative  government  had  been  de- 
clared in  the  face  of  a  great  disaster.  The  withdrawal  of 
the  British  army  from  Afghanistan  might,  and  I  believe 
would,  have  been  a  measure  of  sound  policy;  but  only 
if  the  time  and  manner  of  withdrawal  had  been  well 
chosen.  It  could  never  have  been  sound  policy  to  with- 
draw under  the  pressure  of  an  overwhelming  defeat.  To 
retire  from  Afghanistan  was  one  thing;  to  be  driven 
out  of  it  was  another.  A  frank  avowal  of  error,  calmly 
and  deliberately  enunciated,  under  no  pressure  of  im- 
mediate danger  or  insurmountable  difficulty,  would  have 
denoted  only  conscious  strength.  It  would  have  been  the 
dignified  self-negation  of  a  powerful  state  daring  to  be 
just  to  others  and  true  to  itself.  But  to  abandon  the 
country,  precipitately  and  confusedly,  under  the  pressure 
of  disaster  and  defeat,  would  have  been  a  miserable  con- 
fession of  weakness  that  might  have  shaken  to  its  very 
foundation  the  British  Empire  in  the  East. 

And  such  a  confession  of  weakness  Lord  Auckland 
was  inclined  to  make.  He  seemed  to  reel  and  stagger 
under  the  blow — to  be  paralysed  and  enfeebled  by  the 
disasters  that  had  overtaken  him.  His  correspondence 
at  this  time  betokened  such  painful  prostration,  that  some 
to  whom  he  wrote  destroyed,  in  pity,  all  traces  of  these 
humiliating  revelations.  It  was  vaguely  rumoured,  too, 
how,  in  bitterness  of  spirit,  he  spent  long  hours  pacing 
by  day  the  spacious   verandahs  of  Government  House; 


PROSTKATION  OF  LORD  AUCKLAND.  261 

or,  by  night,  cooling  his  fevered  brow  on  the  grass-plots 
in  front  of  it,  accompanied  by  some  member  of  his  house- 
hold endeared  to  him  by  ties  of  blood.  The  curse  brooded 
over  him,  as  it  was  brooding  over  Elphinstone  and  Mac- 
naghten,  darkening  his  vision,  clouding  his  judgment, 
prostrating  his  energies — turning  everything  to  feebleness 
and  folly.  New  tidings  of  disaster — misfortune  treading 
on  the  heels  of  misfortune — came  flooding  in  from  beyond 
the  Indus;  and  the  chief  ruler  of  the  land,  with  a  great 
army  at  his  call,  thought  only  of  extrication  and  retreat — 
thought  of  bringing  back,  instead  of  pushing  forward,  our 
troops;  of  abandoning,  instead  of  regaining,  our  position. 
Fascinated,  as  it  were,  by  the  great  calamity,  his  eyes 
were  rivetted  on  the  little  line  of  country  between  Caubul 
and  Peshawur;  and  he  did  not  see^  in  his  eagerness  to 
rescue  small  detachments  from  danger,  and  to  escape  the 
immediate  recurrence  of  new  disasters  in  Afghanistan, 
that  the  question  now  to  be  solved  was  one  of  far  greater 
scope  and  significance — that  it  was  not  so  much  whether 
Afghanistan  were  to  be  occupied,  as  whether  India  were 
to  be  retained.  But  there  were  old  and  experienced  poli- 
ticians, well  acquainted  with  the  temper  of  the  chiefs  and 
the  people  of  India  and  the  countries  beyond,  who  believed 
that  any  manifestation  of  weakness,  in  this  conjuncture, 
would  have  endangered  the  security  of  our  position  in 
India;  and  that,  therefore,  cost  what  it  might,  a  blow 
must  be  struck  for  the  recovery  of  our  military  supre- 
macy in  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus. 