


284  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

about  the  personal  eccentricities  which  in  England  had 
been  imputed  to  him.  Neither  the  Press  nor  the  Public 
concerned  itself  about  these  manifestations  of  the  outer 
man.  They  thought  of  the  newly-appointed  Governor- 
General  as  an  able  and  laborious  man  of  business,  with 
a  more  than  common  knowledge  of  the  history  of  India 
and  the  details  of  its  administration.  They  knew  that 
not  only  had  his  occupancy,  for  many  years,  of  the  chief 
seat  at  the  India  Board,  rendered  him  famiUar  with  the 
workings  of  the  Indian  Government ;  but  that,  on  every 
occasion,  when  Indian  affairs  had  been  discussed  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  in  power  or  out  of  power,  he  had  taken 
a  prominent  part  in  the  debates.  In  1833,  when  the 
provisions  of  the  existing  charter  were  under  the  con- 
sideration of  Parliament,  he  had  distinguished  himself 
as  one  of  the  ablest,  but  most  moderate  opponents  of 
certain  of  its  clauses,  contending  in  favour  of  the  dimi- 
nution  of  the  powers  of  Indian  Governors  by  the  impo- 
sition of  the  wholesome  control  of  Council;  and  ear- 
nestly protesting  against  the  perilous  evil  of  leaving  too 
much  to  the  unbridled  passions  or  the  erratic  caprice  of 
a  single  man.  In  later  days,  he  had  denounced  the 
war  in  Afghanistan,  in  fitting  terras  of  severe  censure; 
and  all  things  combined  to  render  the  Indian  public 
hopeful  of  a  good,  steady,  .peaceful  administration. 
Conservative  exchanged  congratulations  with  Liberal 
on  the  cheering  prospects,  now  opening  out  before  them, 
of  many  years  of  peaceful  government  and  financial  pros- 
perity. Lord  EUcnborough  was  believed  to  be  a  mode- 
rate statesman — somewhat  too  liberal  for  the  Tories  of 
the  ministerial  camp,  but  not  for  the  modified  conser- 
vatism of  India,  where  every  man  is  more  or  less  a 
Reformer — and  as  a  moderate  statesman  all  men  were 
prepared  to  welcome  him. 

In  October,  1841,  he  was  elected  to  fill  the  office  of 


LORD  ELLENBOROUGH.  285 

Governor-General ;  and  on  the  4th  of  the  following 
month,  he  attended  the  usual  complimentary  dinner, 
given  on  such  occasions  by  the  Court  of  Directors. 
The  report  of  that  dinner,  which  reached  India  simul- 
taneously with  the  intelligence  of  Lord  Ellen  borough's 
appointment,  had  a  natural  tendency  to  increase  the 
confidence,  engendered  by  his  Lordship's  previous  his- 
tory, in  the  judgment  and  moderation  of  the  new  Go- 
vernor-General. On  returning  thanks,  after  his  health 
had  been  drunk.  Lord  EUenborough,  at  that  farewell 
dinner,  on  the  4th  of  November,  1841,  made  a  most 
emphatic  declaration  of  his  intentions  to  govern  India 
upon  peace  principles ;  he  abjured  all  thoughts  of  a  war- 
like, aggressive  policy;  and  declared  his  settled  deter- 
mination, on  assuming  the  reins  of  government,  to  direct 
all  the  energies  of  his  mind  towards  the  due  cultivation 
of  the  arts  of  peace;  to  emulate  the  magnificent  bene- 
volence of  the  Mahomedan  conquerors;  to  elevate 
and  improve  the  condition  of  the  generous  and  mighty 
people  of  India.  He  spoke,  it  is  true,  in  ignorance  of 
the  terrible  disasters  which  soon  afterwards  cast  a  pall 
over  the  land;  but  there  was  in  the  speech  so  clear 
and  explicit  an  exposition  of  what  were  supposed  to  be 
fixed  principles,  that  the  Public  could  not  but  rejoice 
over  a  declaration  which  promised  so  much  eventual 
benefit  to  the  people  of  the  soil.  They  looked  forward 
to  the  advent  of  the  new  Governor-General  as  to  that 
of  a  man  who,  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  consistent 
with  the  dignity  of  our  position,  would  sever  at  a  blow 
our  ill-fated  connexion  with  Afghanistan,  and  devote 
the  remaining  years  of  his  administration  to  the  practi- 
cal development  of  those  high  principles  which  he  had 
so  enthusiastically  professed.* 