

•  Supreme  Government  to  Sir  Jcuper  NicoUs :  January  SI,  1842. — IPub^ 
Ushed  Papers,'] 


282  EFFORTS  AT  BETBIEVAL. 

that  towards  the  Ehybur  and  Jellalabad  is  probably  not 
the  one  to  which  preference  would  be  given)  may  be 
undertaken  after  full  preparation,  with  a  complete  equip- 
ment, and  in  fresh  and  well-organised  strength."* 

Lord  Auckland  had  been  startled  by  the  astounding 
intelligence  of  the  massacre  of  Elphinstone's  army  into 
an  ebullition  of  energy  by  no  means  in  accordance  with 
the  previous  tenor  of  the  measures  which  he  had 
initiated,  and  not  more  in  accordance  with  those  which 
were  about  to  emanate  from  him.  After  the  first 
paroxysm  of  horror  and  indignation  was  over,  he  began 
again  to  settle  down  quietly  in  the  conviction  that  it 
was  best  to  do  as  little  as  possible  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Indus,  lest  worse  misfortunes  should  descend  upon 
us,  and  the  attempt  to  recover  our  lost  reputation 
should  result  only  in  further  disgrace. 

By  this  time  the  doubts  of  those  who  had  speculated 
on  the  subject  of  the  succession  to  the  Governor-General- 
ship had  been  set  at  rest  by  the  arrival  of  the  Overland 
Mail.  The  despatches  received  in  December  announced 
that  the  choice  of  the  home  ministry  had  fallen  upon  one 
of  their  own  body ;  and  that  the  East  India  Company 
had  ratified  the  choice.  Lord  EUenborough,  who  had 
before  filled  and  was  now  filling  the  office  of  President 
of  the  Board  of  Control,  had  been  appointed  Viceroy  of 
India.  The  question  of  the  succession  had  been  can- 
vassed with  more  than  common  eagerness,  and  its  solu- 
tion looked  forward  to  with  unusual  interest.  When 
the  intelligence  at  last  arrived  it  took  the  majority  by 

*  Papers  relcUing  to  Military  OperC"  position  so  perilous  as  to  make  me 

tions  in  Afghanistan.     Lord  Auck-  regard  its  possible  fate  with  extreme 

land^s  private  letters  were  still  more  anxiety."     Two  days  afterwards  he 

decided  on  these  points.     '^  I  should  wrote  to   the   same  correspondent : 

be  glad,"  he  wrote  to  Sir   Jasper  "  I  have  from  the  beginning  believed 

NicoUs   on   the    10th  of  February,  a  second  conquest  of  Caubul  with  our 

^i  to  hear  that  Sir  R.  Sale  has  been  present  means  to  be  absolutely  im- 

able  to  withdraw  hb  brigade  from  a  possible.** — [MS.  Carreqwndence,'} 


LORD  ELLEKBOBOUGH.  283 

surprise.  The  probability  of  the  appointment  of  Lord 
EUenborough  had  not  been  entertained.  Sir  James 
Graham,  Lord  Heytesbury,  Lord  Lichfield — ^nay,  even 
Lord  Lyndhurst,  had  been  named;  but  speculation  had 
not  busied  itself  with  the  name  of  Lord  EUenborough. 

But  the  intelligence,  though  unexpected,  was  not  un- 
welcome. It  was,  indeed,  received  with  universal 
satisfaction.  The  Press,  with  one  accord,  spoke  of  the 
appointment  with  approbation  ;  and  the  Public  con- 
firmed the  verdict  of  the  Press.  All  parties  were  alike 
sanguine — all  prepared  to  look  for  good  in  the  new 
Governor-General.  There  is  not  a  commimity  on  the 
face  of  the  earth  less  influenced  by  the  spirit  of  faction, 
than  the  community  of  British  India.  To  support,  or 
to  oppose  the  measures  of  a  Governor,  simply  because 
he  is  a  Whig  or  a  Tory,  is  an  excess  of  active  prejudice 
wholly  imknown  in  India.  There  are  no  political  par- 
ties, and  there  is  no  party  Press  to  play  out  such  a  game 
as  this.  Public  men  are  judged,  not  by  what  they 
belong  to,  but  by  what  belongs  to  them — and  thus 
was  Lord  EUenborough  judged.  Whig  and  Tory  alike 
haUed  the  appointment :  for  the  new  Governor- General 
was  held  in  some  degree  of  estimation  as  one  who  had 
made  India  his  study,  and  cherished  a  laudable  interest 
in  its  welfare.  He  was  beUeved  to  be  possessed  of  more 
than  average  talent ;  assiduous  in  his  attention  to  busi- 
ness; and  rather  an  able  man  of  detail  than  a  states- 
man of  very  briUiant  promise.  They,  who  thought  most 
about  the  matter,  anticipated  that  he  would  make  a 
good,  steady,  peace-go vernor ;  that  he  would  apply  him- 
self devotedly  to  the  task  of  improving  the  internal  ad- 
ministration of  the  country;  and  by  a  steady  and  con- 
sistent course  of  policy  soon  disengage  the  country  from 
the  pressure  of  financial  embarrassment  which  had  long 
sate  so  heavily  upon  it.   They  knew  Uttle  and  cared  less 