

VOL.  II.  T 


274  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

There  was  a  directness  of  purpose  about  him  which 
won  the  confidence  of  all  with  whom  he  was  as- 
sociated. They  saw  that  his  one  paramount  desire 
was  a  desire  to  do  his  duty  to  his  country  by  con- 
sulting, in  every  way,  the  welfare  and  the  honour 
of  the  troops  under  his  command ;  and  they  knew 
that  they  would  never  be  sacrificed,  either  on  the 
one  hand  by  the  rash  ambition,  or  on  the  other  by 
the  feebleness  and  indecision,  of  their  leader-  The 
force  now  to  be  despatched  to  the  frontier  of  Afghan- 
istan required  the  superintendence  and  control  of  an 
officer  equally  coed  and  firm — temperate  and  decided 
— and,  perhaps,  in  the  whole  range  of  the  Indian 
army,  the  government  could  not  have  found  one  in 
whom  these  qualities  were  more  eminently  combined 
than  in  the  character  of  General  Pollock. 

Hastening  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  his  men. 
Pollock  left  Agra,  and  proceeded  by  dawk  to  the 
fix>ntier.  The  second  brigade  was  then  making  its 
way  through  the  Punjaub,  under  General  M'Caskill; 
and  the  authorities  in  the  North- Western  Provinces 
were  exerting  themselves  to  push  on  further  reinforce- 
ments to  Peshawur. 

On  the  22nd  of  January,  the  Commander-in-Chief  and 
Mr-  George  Clerk  met  at  Thanesur,  some  two  marches 
distant  from  Kurnaul.  They  had  jreceived  the  melan- 
choly tidings  of  the  destruction  of  the  Caubul  force ;  and 
they  took  counsel  together  regarding  the  measures  to  be 
pursued  in  consequence  of  this  gigantic  calamity.  Very 
different  were  the  views  of  these  two  functionaries.  To 
Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  it  appeared  that  the  destruction  of  the 
Caubul  force  afforded  no  reason  for  the  advance  of 
further  reinforcements;  but  rather  seemed  to  indicate 
the  expediency  of  a  retrograde  movement  on  the  part  of 
all  the  remaining  troops  beyond  the  Indus.     It  was  his 


NICOLLS  AND  CLERK.  275 

opinion — an  opinion  to  some  extent  shared  by  the 
Supreme  Grovemment — that  the  retention  of  Jellalabad 
being  no  longer  necessary,  to  support  the  Caubul  army, 
or  to  assist  its  retreat,  the  withdrawal  of  the  garrison 
to  Peshawur  had  become  primarily  expedient ;  and  that, 
as  the  re-conquest  and  re-occupation  of  Afghanistan  were 
not  under  any  circumstances  to  be  recommended,  it  was 
desirable  that,  after  the  safety  of  Sale's  brigade  had  been 
secured,  the  whole  force  should  return  to  Hindostan. 
But  Mr.  Clerk  was  all  for  a  forward  movement.  He  ar- 
gued that  the  safety  and  the  honour  of  the  British  nation 
demanded  that  we  should  hold  our  own  at  Jellalabad, 
until  the  garrison,  reinforced  by  fresh  troops  from  the 
provinces  of  India,  could  march  upon  Caubul,  in  conjunc- 
tion with  the  Candahar  force  moving  from  the  westward, 
chastise  the  enemy  on  the  theatre  of  their  recent  suc- 
cesses, and  then  withdraw  altogether  from  Afghanistan 
"  with  dignity  and  undiminished  honour."*  It  was  gall 
and  wormwood  to  George  Clerk  to  think  for  a  moment 
of  leaving  the  Afghans,  flushed  with  success,  to  revel  in 
the  humihation  of  the  British  Government,  and  to  boast 
of  the  destruction  of  a  British  army.  Emphatically  he 
dwelt  on  the  disgrace  of  inactivity  in  such  a  crisis ;  and 
emphatically  he  dwelt  upon  the  danger.  Coolly  and 
quietly,  as  one  whose  ordinary  serenity  was  not  to  be  dis- 
turbed by  any  accidental  convulsions,  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls 
set  forth  in  reply  that  the  return  of  so  many  regiments 
to  the  provinces,  and  the  vast  reduction  of  expenditure 
that  would  attend  it,  would  place  the  government  in 
such  a  position  of  strength  as  would  enable  it  summarily 
to  chastise  any  neighbouring  state  that  might  presume 
upon  our  recent  misfortunes  to  show  a  hostile  front 
against  us.  The  demand  for  more  troops  he  would  have 
resisted  altogether ;  but  the  urgency  of  G^oi^e  Clerk  was 