

♦  On  the  20tih  of  November  the  a  hale,  strong  man — moreover,  was 

Commander-in-Chief  wrote  to  Lord  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  a  Light  In- 

Auckland :  **  I  purpose  that  H.M.*8  fantry  battalion  of  Portuguese  in  the 

9th  should  proceed  with  the  second  Peninsular  war." — [MjS.    Correspond 

army.     This  corps  is  900  and  up*  dence.'] 

wards    strong,    including    sergeants        f  On  the  15th  of  December,  Sir 

and  drummers.  The  Buns  are  some-  Jasper  Nicolls  wrote  to  Lord  Auck- 

what  nearer,  but  they  have    been  land :  "  I  very  much  regret  that  the 

nineteen  and  a  half  years  out  of  Eng-  state   of  Maior-General    Lumley's 

land,  and  should  be  moved  towards  health  entirely  forbids  the  hope  of 

Calcutta  for  early  embarkation,  es-  his  being  able  to  undertake  the  com- 

pecially  as  the  49th  and  55  th  are  so  mand  of  the   troops  advancing    to 

far  out  of  reach.     The  Buffs  have  Peshawur.     If,  therefore,  the  force 

now  nearly  200  men  in  hospital.  The  is  raised  to  six  regiments,   I  shall 

right  to  join,  which  the  Court's  order  order  the  Major-Greneral  Sir  Edmund 

gives  to  Major-General  Sir  Edmund  Williams  to  join  my  camp  by  dawk, 

William8,may  be  especially  dispensed  and  push  him  forward,  as  soon  as  I 

with  by  your  Lordship,  should  you  shall  nave  furnished  him  with  instruc- 

not  choose  to  give  him  the  command,  tions,   and  armed  him  with  all   the 

Sir  Edmund  is  in  very  good  health,  information  and    advice    which  the 


GENERAL  LUMLET.  271 

subsequent  letters  from  Calcutta  made  it  only  too  plain 
that  the  appointment  would  be  extremely  distasteful  to 
the  Supreme  Government;  and  so  the  intention  was 
abandoned.*  General  Lumley  was  at  head-quarters. 
The  Commander-in-Chief  sent  for  him  to  his  tent, 
placed  in  his  hand  a  letter  his  Excellency  had  just  re- 
ceived from  the  Governor-General  relative  to  Lumley's 
employment  beyond  the  frontier,  and  called  upon  him 
for  his  final  decision.  The  General  was  willing  to  cross 
the  Indus ;  but,  doubtfiil  of  his  physical  ability  to  under- 
take so  onerous  a  duty,  placed  the  decision  of  the  ques- 
tion in  the  hands  of  his  medical  advisers,  who  at  once 
declared  that  he  was  totally  unequal  to  meet  "  the  re- 
quired exertion  and  exposure"  demanded  by  such  a 
Lipaign-t 

known  state   of  afifurs  at  his  de-  .  .   .   The   Gorernor-General  gaTt 

Eartore  may  seem  to    require.**  —  such  an  unwilling  and  discouragpng 
Papers  relating  to  Military  Opera-  reply  to  my  second  communication, 
tions  in  Afghanistan,'^  that  I  clearly  saw  the  whole  onus  of 
*  In  jour  Lordship*s  letter  of  the  the  appointment  and  its  consequences 
8th,  you  have,  I  think,  given  a  pre-  would  be  mine.** — [5tr  J,  NteolUto 
ferencc  to  Greneral  Nott,  wherefore  Lord  Fitzroy  Somerset:  September  2, 
Sir  £.   Williams  need  not  be  dis-  1842.     MS,  Correspondence. "] 
turbed.    To  send  him  to  Cawnpore        f  **  In  obedience  to  your  Lordship's 
merely  to  force  his  way  to  Jellalabad  wishes,  that  Major-General  Lumley 
and  Cfaubul,  and  then  return,  giying  should  be  placed  in  command  of  the 
oyer  the  command  to  a  junior  officer,  force  assembling  at  Feshawur,  I  re- 
would,  I  think,  be  unfau*.    As  to  his  quested  his  attendance  at  my  tent, 
holding  the  chief  command,  it  is  a  and  placed  the  despatch  now  acknow- 
matter  of  no  moment  to  me.    The  lodged  (Governor- General  in  Council 
officer  to  command,  if  your  Lordship  to  Sir  J,  Nicolls:  December  15, 1841) 
could  find  such  a  man,  should  be  also  in  his  hands.    The  General  is  stiU 
the    Envoy — a  Malcolm,  Close,    or  very    weak,    though    improved    in    < 
Ochterlony.** — [^Sir  Jasper  Nicolls  to  health ;  he  is  willing  to  proceed,  but 
Lord  Auckland:  December  19,  1841.  requested  that  his  medical  adviser 
MS,    Correspondence,  ]      "  Twice  I  should  be  consulted  as  to  his  ability 
laid  before  the  Grovemor-Gencral  the  to  undertake  such  a  service.    Assis- 
name  of  Major- General  Sir  Edmund  tant-Surgeon  Turner  decidedly  as- 
Williams,  and  as  a  Light  Infantry  sured  me  that  his   state  of  health 
officer  he  was  deemed  most  qualified  to  would  by  no  means  admit  of  the  re* 
meet  an   enemy  in  a  mountainous  quired  exertion    and  exposure.'*  — 
country;  he  was  active,  zealous,  and  [Sir  J,  NicoUs  to  Government:    D«-* 
in  perfect  health.    In  the  command  cem^er  24,  1841.    Papers  relating  to 
of  a  division  he  had  shown  a  clear  Military  Operations  in  Afghanistan,^ 
judgment,  and  given  me  satisfaction. 