

and  against  the  chance  of  which  we  Peshawur I  would  not 

must  endeavour  to  guard." — On  the  have  it  hastily  retire  beyond  Pesha- 

28th,  growing  still  more  convinced  wur,  or  any  healthy  spot  near  it.     .     . 

of  the  expediency  of  doing  something  The  post  should  be  as  forward  as  it 

for  the  recovery  of  our  lost  honour,  safely  can    be ;   and    my   successor 

he  wrote  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  could  then  pursue  the  line  of  policy 

speaking  first  with  reference  to  the  which  he  may  think  best.    I  would 

refusal  of  Sale  and   Macgregor  to  not  have  the  government  inextricably 

evacuate  Jellalabad :   *'  We  approve  pledged  to  measures  which  my  suo* 

of  the  determination  taken  at  Jel-  cesser  may  regard  as  rash,  impolitic, 

lalabad  not  to  withdraw  the  troops  and  ruinous."    But  he  soon  came  to 

as  directed.      Far  from  withdrawal  modify  these  opinions  in  favour  of  a 

under   such    circumstances,    I    am  forward  position;  and  later  on  the 

anxious  to  learn  that  Brigadier  Wild  same  day  wrote  that  the  disafiection 

has  found  it  safe  to  advance  to  Jel-  of  the  Sikhs  might  cause  him  to  alter 

lalabad Whatever  hap*  his  views  with  regard  to  Peshawur : 

pens  beyond  the  passes,  we  should  "I  am  coining  fast  to  the  opinion," 

be  strong  for  a  time  in  Peshawur.  he  said,  '^  that  our    furthest  point 

.     .     .    For  the  present,  at   least,  of  support  in  advance  must  be  Feroze- 

Jellalabad  should  be  firmly  held ; —  pore,  and  that  we  must  bear  the  dis- 

Greneral  Elphinstone  was  not  in  a  grace  and  disadvantage  of  retiring  to 

condition  to  make  stipulations,  ex-  this  frontier  with  as  little  of  loss  as 

cept  for  his  own  troops  at  Caubul." —  may  now  be  ensured."— [if5.  Cor- 

On  the  3rd  of  February  he  expressed  respondence,'] 


280  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

Clerk,  setting  forth,  on  the  authority  of  letters  received 
from  Macgregor  at  Jellalabad,  that  the  Caubul  force  had 
been  utterly  destroyed.  Some  vague  rumours  of  this 
crowning  disaster  ha'd  obtained  currency  in  Calcutta  a 
day  or  two  before;  and  now  the  terrible  apprehensions 
of  the  public  were  found  to  have  been  only  the  presages 
of  actual  truth.  The  immediate  eflfect  of  this  astound- 
ing intelligence  upon  the  conduct  of  government  was  to 
rouse  the  Governor-Greneral  into  something  like  a  tem- 
porary demonstration  of  vigour.  He  issued  a  proclama- 
tion declaring  that  he  considered  the  calamity  that  had 
overtaken  the  British  arms  only  "  as  a  new  occasion  for 
displaying  the  stability  and  vigour  of  the  British  power, 
and  the  admirable  spirit  and  valour  of  the  British-In- 
dian army."*  But  it  was  little  more  than  a  spasm  of 
energy.  The  ink  with  which  this  notification  was  writ- 
ten was  hardly  dry  before  the  Governor-General  in 