

*  *'  Fort  William,  Jan.  31,  1842.  **  The  ample  military  means  at  the 

"  Intelligence  having  been  received  disposal  of  the  British  Government 

which  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  that,  will  be  strenuously  applied  to  these 

after  the  British  force  at  Caubul  had  objects,  so   as  at  once  to  support 

maintained  its  position  against  over-  external    operations,    and  to  cause 

powering  numbers  of  insurgents  for  efficient  protection  for  its  subjects 

more  than  six  weeks,  the  officer  com-  and  allies. 

manding  had  judged  it  necessary,  in  *'  A  faithless  enemy,  stained  bj 
consequence  of  a  failure  of  provisions,  the  foul  crime  of  assassination,  has, 
to  agree  to  a  convention  of  the  enemy,  through  a  failure  of  supplies  followed 
and  to  retire,  in  reliance  on  the  faith  by  consummate  treachery,  been  able 
of  that  convention,  towards  Jellala-  to  overcome  a  body  of  British  troops, 
bad,  when  the  troops,  exposed  to  the  in  a  country  removed,  by  distance 
worst  rigours  of  cold  and  privation,  and  difficulties  of  season,  from  the 
in  the  mountain  defiles,  and  harassed  possibility  of  succour.  But  the  Go- 
by treacherous  attacks,  suffered  ex-  vemor-Greneral  in  Council,  while  he 
treme  disasters — the  Govemor-Gre-  most  deeply  laments  the  loss  of  the 
neral  in  Council  deems  it  proper  to  brave  officers  and  men,  regards  this 
notify  that  the  most  active  measures  partial  reverse  only  as  a  new  occa- 
have  been  adopted,  and  will  be  sion  for  displaying  the  stability  and 
steadfastly  persecuted,  for  expediting  vieour  of  the  British  power,  and  the 
powerful  reinforcements  to  the  An  a£nirable  spirit  and  valour  of  the 
ghan  frontier,  and  for  assisting  such  British-Indian  army, 
operations  as  may  be  required  in  that  ^^  By  order  of  the  Right  Honour- 
quarter,  for  the  maintenance  of  the  able  the  Gt>vemor-Greneral  of  India 
honour  and  interests  of  the  British  in  Council. 
Government.  "T.  H.  Maddock.'* 


RETROGRADE  TENDENCIES.  281 

Council  wrote  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  that  Jellala- 
bad  was  not  a  place  which  he  desired  to  be  kept  at  all 
hazards,  and  after  succour  should  have  been  given  to  Sir 
R.  Sale's  brigade  then,  and  relief  should  have  been  given 
to  parties  arriving  from  Caubul,  the  Grovemor-General 
in  Council  would  wish  General  Pollock,  rather  than 
run  extreme  risks  in  that  position,  to  arrange  for  the 
withdrawal  of  it,  and  the  assembling  of  his  force  at  or 
near  Peshawur.* 

As  time  advanced,  the  retrograde  tendencies  of  Lord 
Auckland's  determination  became  more  and  more  ap- 
parent.  On  the  10th  of  February,  the  Governor-General 
in  Council  wrote  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  instruct- 
ing him  to  inform  General  Pollock  that,  "  as  the  main 
inducement  for  the  maintenance  of  a  post  at  JeUalabad 
— namely,  that  of  being  a  point  of  support  to  any  of  our 
troops  escaping  from  Caubul — ^having  now  unhappily 
passed  away,  it  is  the  object  of  the  government  that  he 
should,  unless  any  unforeseen  contingency  should  give  a 
decidedly  favorable  turn  to  affairs,  confine  himself  to 
measures  for  withdrawing  the  JeUalabad  garrison  in 
safety  to  Peshawur,  and  there  for  the  present,  hold- 
ing together  all  the  troops  under  his  orders  in  a  secure 
position,  removed  from  collision  with  the  Sikh  forces  or 
subjects."  And  on  the  same  day,  Mr.  Maddock,  the 
chief  secretary,  under  instructions  from  the  Supreme 
Government,  wrote  to  Mr.  Clerk  that  "it  would  be 
highly  desirable  that  when  JeUalabad  was  no  longer 
held  by  us,  our  detachments,  which  have  been  moved 
forward  in  support  to  meet  a  present  emergency,  should 
be  brought  gradually  back  to  their  cantonments,  in 
order  that  any  ulterior  operations  that  may  be  deter- 
mined upon  for  another  advance  beyond  the  Indus  (and 