


THE  ANGLO-INDIAN  COMMUNITY.  277 

Regiment  of  Native  Cavalry  and  a  troop  of  Horse- 
Artillery  were  subsequently  added  to  the  third  brigade. 

In  the  mean  while  increasing  care  and  anxiety  were 
brooding  over  Government  House.  Gloomily  the  new 
year  dawned  upon  its  inmates.  And  there  was  not  in 
that  great  palaced  city,  or  in  any  one  of  the  smaller 
stations  and  cantonments  of  India,  an  Englishman  whose 
heart  did  not  beat,  and  whose  hand  did  not  tremble 
with  anxiety  for  the  fate  of  the  Caubul  force,  when  he 
opened  the  letters  or  papers  which  brought  him  intel- 
ligence from  beyond  the  frontier.  No  one,  who  dwelt 
in  any  part  of  India  during  the  early  months  of  1842, 
will  ever  forget  the  anxious  faces  and  thick  voices  with 
which  tidings  were  sought ;  questions  and  opinions  inter- 
changed; hopes  and  fears  expressed;  rumours  sifted; 
probabilities  weighed ;  and  how,  as  the  tragedy  deepened 
in  solemn  interest,  even  the  most  timid  and  desponding 
felt  that  the  ascertained  reality  far  exceeded  in  misery 
and  horror  all  that  their  excited  imaginations  had 
darkly  foretold.  There  was  a  weight  in  the  social 
atmosphere,  as  of  dense  superincumbent  thunder-clouds. 
The  festivities  of  the  cold  season  were  arrested;  gaiety 
and  hospitality  were  not.  There  were  few  families  in 
the  country  which  did  not  sicken  with  apprehension  for 
the  fate  of  some  beloved  relative  or  friend,  whilst  uncon- 
nected men,  in  whom  the  national  overlaid  the  personal 
feeling,  in  this  conjuncture,  sighed  over  the  tarnished 
reputation  of  their  country,  and  burned  to  avenge  the 
insults  that  had  been  heaped  upon  it. 

It  would  be  pleasant  to  record  that,  in  this  great 
and  melancholy  crisis,  the  public  looked  up  with  confi- 
dence and  assurance  to  the  statesman  upon  whom  was 
now  thrown  the  responsibility  of  extricating  from  the 
quickset  of  danger  and  difficulty  that  environed  them, 
the  imperilled  aflfairs  of  the  British   Indian  Empire. 


278  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

But  history  can  give  currency  to  no  such  fiction.  As 
time  advanced  it  became  more  and  more  painfully  evi- 
dent that  Lord  Auckland  was  reeling  and  staggering  be- 
neath the  blow  that  had  descended  upon  him.  He 
appeared  to  be  unable  to  decide  upon  any  consistent 
plan  of  action.  At  one  time  he  seems  to  have  contem- 
plated the  withdrawal  of  the  Jellalabad  garrison  to 
Peshawur,  leaving  it  to  fight  its  own  way  through  the 
pass ;  at  another,  he  seems  to  have  been  fiiUy  impressed 
with  the  necessity  of  retaining  the  former  post,  if  only 
for  the  protection  of  the  Caubul  force;  then  he  talked 
of  concentrating  a  large  army  at  Peshawur,  and  almost 
immediately  afterwards  began  to  think  that  it  would  be 
more  expedient  to  have  our  advanced  post  at  Ferozepore. 
There  was  only  one  point  on  which  he  seems  clearly  to 
have  made  up  his  mind.  He  was  resolute  not  to 
recommend  a  forward  movement  for  the  re-occupation 
of  Caubul.  He  believed  that  any  such  attempt  would 
be  attended  with  disaster  and  disgrace;  and  he  con- 
sidered that  it  became  him,  on  the  eve  of  departure, 
as  he  was,  not  to  embarrass  his  successor  by  inextri- 
cably pledging  the  government  to  measures  which  the 
new  Viceroy  might  consider  "  rash,  impolitic,  and 
ruinous."* 