


272  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

The  Commander-in-Chief  then  at  once  determined 
to  nominate  another  Company's  officer  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  troops  proceeding  to  Peshawur.  His 
choice  fell  upon  General  George  Pollock,  who  then 
commanded  the  garrison  of  Agra. — Receiving  his  mili- 
tary education  at  the  Woolwich  Academy,  he  had  en- 
tered the  Indian  army  as  a  lieutenant  of  artillery  in  the 
year  1803 — when  Lake  and  Wellesley  were  in  the  field, 
and  all  India  was  watching,  with  eager  expectancy,  the 
movements  of  the  grand  armies  which,  by  victory  after 
victory,  were  breaking  down  the  power  of  the  Mah- 
rattas.  At  the  storm  and  capture  of  Dieg,  in  1803, 
young  Pollock  was  present ;  and  in  1806,  during  the 
gallant  but  unsuccessful  attempts  of  the  British  army 
to  carry  Bhurtpore  by  assault,  he  was  busy  in  the 
trenches.  At  the  close  of  the  same  year  he  was  selected 
by  Lord  Lake  to  command  the  artillery  with  the  de- 
tachment under  Colonel  Ball,  sent  in  pursuit  of  Hol- 
kar.  From  this  time  he  held  diflferent  regimental  staff 
appointments  up  to  the  year  1817,  when,  in  command 
of  the  artillery  with  General  Wood's  force,  he  took  part 
in  the  stirring  scenes  of  the  'Nepaul  war.  In  1818 
he  was  appointed  Brigade-Major;  and  subsequently,  on 
the  creation  of  that  appointment,  held  the  Assistant- 
Adjutant  -  Generalship  of  Artillery  up  to  the  year 
1824,  when,  having  attained  the  rank  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel,  he  volunteered  to  join  the  army  which  was 
assembling  for  the  prosecution  of  the  Burmese  war, 
and  was  nominated  by  Sir  Edward  Paget  to  command 
the  Bengal  Artillery  attached  to  the  force  under  Sir 
Archibald  Campbell,  proceeding  to  Rangoon.  For  his 
services  during  the  war  he  received  the  decoration  of 
the  Companionship  of  the  Bath.  From  this  time, 
except  during  an  interval  of  some  three  years  spent 
in   England  for   the   recovery  of  his  health,  he  held 


GENERAL  POLLOCK.  273 

different  regimental  and  brigade  commands,  until,  at 
the  close  of  1841,  being  then  Major-Greneral,  in  com- 
mand of  the  garrison  of  Agra,  he  was  selected  by 
Sir  Jasper  Nicolls  to  take  command  of  the  troops 
proceeding  to  Peshawur,  and  ordered  at  once  to  pro- 
ceed to  the  frontier  by  dawk. 

The  appointment  of  Greneral  Pollock  gave  the 
greatest  satisfaction  to  the  Supreme  Government,  and 
not  even  a  murmur  of  disapprobation  arose  from  the 
general  body  of  the  army.  The  nomination  of  this 
old  and  distinguished  Company's  officer  was  believed 
to  be  free  from  the  corruption  of  aristocratic  influence 
and  the  taint  of  personal  favouritism.  It  was  believed, 
that  in  this  case  at  least,  the  selection  had  been  made 
solely  on  the  ground  of  individual  merit.  And  the 
merit  which  was  thus  rewarded  was  of  the  most 
modest  and  unostentatious  character.  There  was  not, 
perhaps,  in  the  whole  Indian  army  a  man  of  more 
unassuming  manners  and  a  more  retiring  disposition : 
there  was  not  one  less  likely  to  have  sought  notoriety 
for  its  own  sake,  or  to  have  put  himself  forward  in  an 
effort  to  obtain  it.  Pollock's  merits  did  not  lie  upon 
the  surface.  He  was  not  what  is  called  a  "  dash- 
ing officer;"  he  shrunk  from  anything  like  personal 
display,  and  never  appealed  to  the  vulgar  weaknesses 
of  an  unreflecting  community.  But  beneath  a  most 
unassuming  exterior  there  lay  a  fund  of  good  sense, 
of  innate  sagacity,  of  quiet  firmness  and  collectedness. 
He  was  equable  and  temperate.  He  was  thoroughly 
conscientious.  If  he  was  looked  upon  by  the  Indian 
Government  as  a  ^afe  man,  it  was  not  merely  be- 
cause he  always  exercised  a  calm  and  dispassionate 
judgment,  but  because  he  was  actuated  in  all  that  he 
did  by  the  purest  motives,  and  sustained  by  the 
highest  principles.     He  was  essentially  an  honest  man. 