

*  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  to  Government:  January  24(ft,  1842. 

T  2 


276  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

not  to  be  withstood,  and  two  more  regiments — the  6th 
and  55th  Native  Infantry — were  ordered  to  hold  them- 
selves in  readiness  to  proceed  to  Peshawur.  But  when 
Clerk  asked  for  a  detachment  of  British  dragoons,  NicoUs 
peremptorily  resisted  the  demand,  and  referred  the  ques- 
tion to  the  Supreme  Government.*  Before  the  reference 
reached  Calcutta,  Lord  Auckland  had  received  intelli- 
gence of  the  massacre  of  Elphinstone's  army;  and  he 
wrote  back  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  that  it  was 
essentially  necessary  that  a  commanding  force  should 
assemble  at  Peshawur — that  it  was  particularly  important 
that  the  force  should  be  effective  in  cavalry  and  artillery, 
and  that  at  all  events  two  squadrons  of  European 
dragoons  should  be  pushed  on  to  Peshawur.f    The  1st 

♦  "  We  have  had  a  long  conversa-  to."—  [Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  to  Govern^ 
tion  upon  the  affairs  of  Afghanistan,  ment:  January  23r(f.]  ^^  Thanesur^ 
including  the  statement  of  Assistant-  January  23rd. — ^Mr.  C.  joined  us  on 
Surgeon  Brydon ;  and  Mr.  Clerk  has,  the  ground.  He  is  anxiously  in 
by  various  and  repeated  arguments,  favour  of  our  sending  forward  more 
endeavoured  to  convince  me  of  the  ne-  troops,  in  view,  I  believe,  to  our 
cessity  of  detaching  another  reinforce-  undertaking  the  re-conquest  of  Cau- 
ment  to  Peshawur,  in  order  to  support  bul.  To  this  I  decidedly  object.  We 
Jellalabad.  My  instructions  and  my  have  neither  funds  nor  men  avail- 
opinion  (expressed  in  my  letter  of  able,  without  in  the  latter  instance 
yesterday)  being  widely  different,  I  leaving  India  so  bare  as  to  risk  its 
have  demurred  giving  my  consent  to  safety."  —  [Private  Journal  of  Sir 
the  proposal ;  but  as  your  Lordship  Jasper  Nicolls.  MS.  Records.'] 
was  not  aware,  on  the  date  of  your  f  "  We  regard  it  as  absolutely 
last  orders  of  the  6th  of  January,  of  essential  to  the  maintenance  of  our 
the  murder  of  Sir  Wm.  Macnaghten,  interests  at  this  crisis  that  a  com- 
and  probable  fate  of  our  troops,  I  manding  force  of  all  arms  should  be 
have  ordered  the  6th  and  55th  Kegi-  concentrated  at  or  near  Peshawur, 
ments  of  Native  Infantry  from  Kur-  in  order  to  curb  the  violence  of  excite- 
naul  to  Ferozepore,  which  will  enable  ment  which  may  be  expected  in  that 
me  to  detach  two  corps  to  Peshawur,  quarter,  and  to  protect  the  Sikh 
should  not  your  Lordship  in  Councirs  territory  from  aggression.  It  is  par- 
views  and  orders  have  been  altered  ticularly  important  that  this  force 
or  modified  by  that  event,  and  your  should  be  effective  in  cavalry  and 
resolution  be  made  known  to  me.  light  artillery,  and  we  are  disposed 
Being  fully  aware  of  the  confidence  strongly  to  adhere  to  our  recom- 
enjoyed  by  Mr.  Clerk,  I  have  taken  mendation  that  two  squadrons  of 
this  preparatory  step ;  but  when  he  European  dragoons  should  be  em- 
advised  the  addition  of  some  portion  ployed  on  the  service." — [Governor^ 
of  her  Majesty's  3rd  Dragoons,  I  felt  General  in  Council  to  Sir  Jasper 
myself  unable  to  fjive  him  any  hope  NicoUs:  February  2wc/,  1842.] 
of  such  a  requisition  being  attended 