

*  Lord  Auckland's  private  letters  explicable  as  they  are  appalling,** 
to  tbe  Commander-in-Chief  exhibit  and  declaring  that  ne  ^'was  prepared 
better  than  anything  else  the  alter-  for  eYerythmg  but  for  such  mis- 
nations  in  the  GrOYemor-€reneral*8  direction  and  misconduct  as  seem  to 
opinions.  On  the  3rd  of  January  he  have  taken  place,"  he  proceeded  to 
wrote :  "  It  is  melancholy  to  think  say,  "  I  can  make  no  further  sugses- 
how  mighty  interests  may  be  com-  tions  to  you  until  I  know  more;  out 
promised  by  such  errors  as  seem  to  you  may  shortly  have  to  consider 
have  been  committed.  Our  officers  what  instructions  should  be  given  to 
are  very  wild  in  their  requisitions.  €reneral  Sale,  and  as  to  whether  it 
We  have  given  all  that  we  can  pru-  may  not  be  better  that  he  should 
dently  give  —  perhaps  even  more ;  fight  down,  than  that  Brigadier 
and  the  chance  of  operations  must  Wild  or  General  Pollock  snould 
be  measured  by  those  means.*'— On  fight  up,  the  pass.  This  must  greatly 
the  5th  of  January,  after  describing  depend  on  the  manner  in  whicn  mat- 
the  tidings  from   Caubul  as  ^'  in-  ters  may  end  at  Caubul.*'— On  the 


LORD  Auckland's  cobbespondence.  279 

On  the  30th  of  January  the  worst  fears  of  govern- 
ment were  confirmed.    An  express  arrived  from  Mr, 

2l8t  of  the  same  month,  he  wrote,  his  opinion  that  Jellalabad  should  be 
that  he  ^^  still  adhered  to  his  opinion,  held  so  long  as  there  was  a  chance  of 
that  it  would  be  madness  witn  such  assisting  the  escape  of  fugitives :  **  I 
force  and  means  of  carriage,  as  we  apprehend,''  he  aaded,  *^  Uiat  its  eva- 
could  easily  collect,  to  attempt  a  cuation  will,  in  a  very  short  time, 
fresh  advance  upon  Caubul ;  and  that  become  absolutely  necessary ;  if  so, 
such  a  movement  would  only  have  the  movement  should  not  be  long  de- 
been  justified,  if  we  had  been  led  to  laved/'  He  expressed  a  doubt,  too, 
it  by  objects  of  rescue.  It  would  be  whether,  with  the  "  force  that  we  can 
my  wish,  if  it  could  be  done  with  employ,  the  pass  (Khybur)  can  be  so 
safety,  that  Jellalabad  should  be  re-  occupied  as  to  secure  through  it  a 
tained  for  some  weeks,  and  until  the  safe  passage  of  detachments  and 
fate  of  the  British  troops  in  other  convoys.  A  descent  through  the  Jug- 
parts  of  Afghanistan  should  be  ascer-  dulluck  Passes  to  Caubul  is  beyond 
tained/' — On  the  26th  he  wrote:  our  present  power.  It  would  re- 
*'  I  agree  with  you  that,  at  least  so  quire  vast  exertions  and  months  of 
long  as  the  fate  of  the  force  at  preparation,  and  in  the  end  would  be 
Caubul  is  uncertain,  the  post  at  Jel-  an  enterprise  of  no  light  danger.  I 
lalabad  must  be  maintained.  I  think  almost  conceive  that  it  would  be  an 
it  will  be  absolutely  necessary,  under  impossible  enterprise  with  any  means 
any  circumstances,  to  maintain  for  a  that  we  could  bring  to  bear  upon  it, 
time  a  strong  force  in  Peshawur —  unless  some  party  should  separate 
also  at  Quettah  and  Sukkur.  If  our  from  the  present  combination,  and 
retirement  carry  with  it  a  general  then  with  what  confidence  should 
appearance  of  defeat  and  of  flight,  we  render  it?  I  have  therefore,  in 
it  will  bring  on  Peshawur  and  the  dissent  from  many  for  whom  I  have 
Punjaub— on  Beloochistan  and  Sindh  the  highest  respect,  earnestly  wished 
— a  tide  of  aggression  and  disaster  that  the  force  at  Jellalabad  could  be 
which  it  may  be  difficult  to  stem,  safely  and  creditably  withdrawn  to 