

♦  "  Though  I  have  not  yet  heard    frontier,  I  would  beg  leave  to  recom- 
that  any  artillery  is  ordered  up  to  the    mend,  in  anticipation  of  the  speedy 


THE  ABTILLEBT  QUBSTIOK.  299 

there  was  no  available  artillety  at  Ferozepore,  it  was 
proposed  that  Captain  Aleitander's  troop  of  Horse  Artil- 
lery should  move  at  once  from  Loodhianah  to  the 
former  station  on  its  way  across  the  frontier }  but  on 
hearing  that  the  Commander-in-Chief  had  ordered  some 
details  of  a  foot  artillery  battery  to  be  warned  for 
service,  Mr.  Clerk  withdrew  his  requisition  for  the 
movement  of  the  troop  beyond  the  frontier,  but  still 
suggested  that  it  should  be  pushed  on  to  Ferozepore. 
This  was  on  the  2nd  of  December  *  On  the  4th,  having 
heard  that  some  delay  must  attend  the  despatch  of  the 
details  warned  by  orders  of  the  Commander-in-Chief,  Mr. 
Clerk  wrote  a  letter  to  Captain  Alexander,  requesting 
him,  as  the  means  of  more  rapid  movement  were  at  his 
command,  to  push  on  across  the  Sutlej  with  all  possible 
expedition.t    But  a  few  days  afterwards  he  received  a 

arrival  of  reinforcements  so  necessary  the  British  fVontier  on  my  r6C|uisitioD, 

on  the  Sutlei,  that  artillery  should  though  I  do  not  propose,  in  conse- 

move  forward  from  hence.     I  shall  quence  of  this  information^  to  reouest 

transmit  a  copy  of  this  letter  to  Lieu-  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rich  to  recall  the 

tenant-Colonel  Wild,  in  case  he  may  order  for  the  intended  march  hence  of 

think  proper  to  halt  one  of  the  regi-  that  troop  to-morrow  in  progress  to 

ments  under  his  command,  until  tne  Ferozepore.** — [^Mr,  George  Clerk  to 

arrival  of  such  artillery  as  you  consider  Major^Oeneral    Boyd :     Loodhianah 

can  best  be  spared  from  Loodhianah  December  2m2|  1841.  MS*  Records.^* 

or  Ferozepore ;   but  the  latter  is,  I  f  "  Having  heard  that  it  is  possible 

believe,  for  want  of  horses,  incapable  the  guns  which  his  Excellency  the 

of  moving ;  and  this  leaves  an  insuf-  Commander-in-Chief  has  directed  to 

flciency  for  the  due  protection  of  this  move  across  the  frontier  may  not  be 

border,  during  an  unsettled  state  of  ready  to  move  so  immediately  as  the 

parties  at  Lahore."  —  [Mr.    George  passage  across  the  Sutlej  of  your  troop 

Clerk  to  Major-General  Boyd:  Novem^  may  be  effected,  I  deem  it  to  be  ad- 

her  27M,  1841.    MS,  Records.']  visable,  adverting  to  the  emersency  of 

♦  •*  Having  had;  the  honour  to  re-  the  occasion,  to  recommend  that  jroa 

ceive  from   tlie  acting  Adjutant-Ge-  nevertheless  proceed  on,  in  antiapa- 

neral  a  statement  of  the  reinforce-  tion  of  the  sanction  of  his  Excellency 

ments  which  his  Excellency  the  Com-  to  your  doing  so,  by  orders  of  the 