

The  two  regiments  that  occupied  Ali-Musjid  might 
have  held  that  post  for  any  length  of  time  against  the 
Ehyburees.  But  they  had  a  lamentable  scarcity  of 
provisions.  The  water,  too,  seemed  to  poison  them. 
The  troops  were  put  upon  half-rations,  but  in  a  few 
days  these  supplies  were  nearly  exhausted.  Without 
bedding  and  without  tents,  kept  ever  on  the  alert,  under 
a  severe  climate,  the  health  of  the  Sepoys  was  giving 
way.  They  were  crowding  into  hospital.  There  seemed 
to  be  no  prospect  of  relief;  so,  on  the  23rd  of  January, 
Colonel  Moseley  determined  to  evacuate  the  fortress  of 
Ali-Musjid,  and  to  cut  his  way  back  to  Jumrood. 

To  Mackeson,  who  saw  clearly  the  poUtical  evils  that 
must  result  from  the  surrender  of  so  important  a  posi- 
tion, this  was  a  heavy  blow.  Anything  seemed  better 
than  the  total  abandonment  of  such  a  post.  A  small 
party  of  resolute  men  might  hold  it;  for  a  small  party 
might  be  fed.  There  were  at  least  two  men  in  the  gar- 
rison eager  for  the  proud  distinction  of  holding,  in  an 
imminent  conjuncture,  a  dangerous  isolated  post  against 
a  multitudinous  enemy.  Captain  Burt,  of  the  64th 
Native  Infantry,  volunteered  to  remain  with  a  party  of 
regular  troops;  but  the  Sepoys  would  not  volunteer.  Cap- 
taiu  ThomaTof  the  same  corp8-the  staff  officer  of  the 
detachment — a  man  of  a  bold  and  fearless  nature,  and  of 
large  acquirements — stepped  forward  and  volunteered  to 


moseley's  return  to  jumrood.  295 

hold  the  fortress  with  150  men  of  the  old  Eusofssye 
ganisoiu  The  offer  Vras  accepted;  arwingements  were 
made  for  the  defence  j  but  the  fidelity  of  the  Euaofzyes, 
which  had  been  long  failing,  now  broke  down  idto- 
gether.  They  refused  to  occupy  the  dangerous  post 
after  the  departure  of  the  Sepoy  regiments ;  and  so,  on 
the  24th,  the  entire  force  moved  out  of  Ali-Musjid,  and 
suffered  it  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Afreedis. 

"  The  regiments  are  safe  through — thank  God !"  was 
the  emphatic  announcement  which  Captain  Lawrence, 
on  the  24th  of  January,  forwarded  by  express  to  Mr. 
Gteorge  Clerk.  It  had  been  a  time  of  intense  and  pain^ 
ful  excitement.  The  communications  between  the  two 
detachments  were  cut  off,  and  anxious  aa  they  were  to 
act  in  concert  with  each  other,  they  had,  up  to  the 
evening  of  the  22nd,  failed  to  ascertain  the  intentions  of 
each  other,  and  to  effect  a  combined  movement.*  On 
the  28rd,  the  two  regiments  which  Wild  had  com- 
manded, now,  owing  to  the  Brigadier's  wound,  under 
the  charge  of  Colonel  TuUoch,  with  the  two  serviceabk 
Sikh  guns,  went  forward  to  line  the  pass,  and  cover  the 
march  of  Moseley's  regiments ;  but  no  sound  of  an  ad- 
vancing column  was  heard,  and  about  mid-day  they 
returned  to  camp.  On  the  following  morning  they 
moved  out  again.  Moseley  had  quitted  Ali-Musjid,  and 
was  making  the  best  of  his  way  to  Jumrood.  The  Khy- 
burees  mustered  strong;  but  the  Sepoy  corps  in  both 
detachments  did  their  duty  well,  and  the  r^ments 
made  good  their  passage.  Captain  Wilson,  of  the  64th, 
was  killed  at  the  head  of  his  men ;  and  Captain  Lock, 
of  the  60th,  fell  also  with  his  sWord  in  his  hand. 
There  was  some  loss  of  baggage  on  the  retteat — some 
of  the  sick  and  wounded  were  abandoned;  and  the 
general  conduct  of  the  affair  is  not  to  be  dwelt  upon 