

when  he  is  informed  of  all  by  the  let-  as  far  as  Ali-Musjid  in  support  of  our 

ters  of  Captain  Mackeson.** — [MS.Be'  troops,  and  to  move  on  affain  with 

cords.l  WhenMaokeson received  from  General  Pollock*s  brigadfit' — [ilfoc- 

George  Clerk  a  copy  of  the  purwan-  heaan  to  Clerk:  January^  1842.   MS. 

nah  to  Avitabile  he  was  in  conference  BecordsJ]    The  passages  referred  to 

at   that  officer's  quarters  witJi  the  in  the  purwannah  might  bear  this 

Sikh  general,  Mehtab  Siiu[h,  and  the  construction,  but  it  is  doubtful  whe- 

commandants  of  all  the  Sikh  batta-  ther  this  was  their  intent.     George 

lionsp    **I  read  out  this  purwannah,**  Clerk,  in  a  marginal  note  to  Macke- 

says  Mackesoni  ^*  but  was  somewhat  son's  letter,  says :  ^*  The  purwannah 

ccnfounded  to  fi^d  at  its  conclusion  did  not  limit  it ;  but  directed  them  to 

that  the  Durbar  limited  the  opera*  move  on  to  Futtehgurh  and  act  in 

^pOM  of  Geawal  Avitabile  an4  the  concert  and  by  Captain  Mackeson's 

Sikh  troops  to  Fattehgorii— their  own  advice."— [3/A  Jlecords,'] 


THE  MABCH  TO  ALI^MUSJID.  291 

corps,  composed  of  men  of  the  Eusofeye  tribe — some  of 
whom,  under  Mr.  Mackeson,*  had  been  true  to  their 
employers,  and,  gallantly  commanded,  gallantly  resisted 
the  attacks  of  the  Afreedi  clan.  But  there  was  now 
every  chance  of  its  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 
Nothing  appeared  to  be  of  so  much  primary  importance 
as  the  occupation  of  this  post.  It  was  resolved,  therefore, 
that  one-half  of  the  brigade  should  be  pushed  forward, 
in  the  first  instance,  to  seize  and  garrison  Ali-Musjid. 

Accordingly,  on  the  15th  of  January,  Colonel  Moseley, 
with  the  53rd  and  64th  Sepoy  regiments,  prepared  to 
commence  the  march  to  Ali-Muqid.  They  started  under 
cover  of  the  night,  and  reached  their  destination  soon 
after  daybreak.  They  met  with  little  opposition  on  the 
way ;  but  soon  after  their  arrival  imder  the  rock  of  Ali* 
'  Musjid,  Captain  Mackeson,  who  had  accompanied  the 
force,  discovered  to  his  dismay  that,  instead  of  850 
supply-bullocks,  for  the  advance  of  which  he  had  made 
suitable  arrangements,  only  fifty  or  sixty  now  were 
straggling  in  with  the  rear-guard.  The  remainder,  by 
some  mismanagement  or  miscomprehension  of  orders, 
had  been  left  behind.  Thus  had  the  two  raiments 
which,  had  the  cattle  come  on  to  Ali-Musjid,  might 
have  held  that  place  in  security  for  a  month,  shut  them- 
selves up  in  an  isolated  fortress  without  provisions ;  and 
the  plans  which  had  been  so  anxiously  debated  by  our 
political  oflBcers  at  Peshawur,  utterly  firustrated  by  an 
oversight  of  the  most  disastrous  character,  of  which  it 
is  diflScult  to  determine  on  whom  we  are  to  fibs  the 