

It  is   probable  that  the  nomination  of  Lord  EUen- 

•  Calcutta  Review, 


286  EFFORTS  AT  RETRIEVAL. 

borough  increased  the  embarrassments  of  Lord  Auckland, 
and  strengthened  him  in  his  resolution  to  suspend,  as 
far  as  possible,  all  retributive  measures  until  the  arrival 
of  his  successor.  There  was  no  public  man  in  England 
whose  opinions,  regarding  the  justice  and  policy  of  the 
war  in  Afghanistan,  had  been  more  emphatically  ex- 
pressed than  those  of  the  Governor-General  elect.  Lord 
Auckland  knew  that  he  was  to  be  succeeded  by  a  states- 
man who  had  pronounced  the  war  to  be  a  blunder  and 
a  crime ;  and  there  was  a  strong  conviction  within  him 
that  Lord  EUenborough  would  be  eager  to  withdraw 
every  British  soldier  from  A%hanistan,  and  to  sever  at 
once  a  connexion  which  had  been  attended  with  so  much 
disaster  and  disgrace.  As  the  responsible  author  of  the 
war,  this  demanded  from  him  no  small  amount  of  moral 
courage.  It  was,  indeed,  to  court  a  reversal  of  the 
policy  which  he  had  originated,  and  to  place  the  power 
of  a  sweeping  practical  condemnation  in  the  hands  of  a 
political  rival.  If  the  conduct  of  Lord  Auckland,  at  this 
time,  were  wanting  in  energy  and  decision,  it  was  by  no 
means  wanting  in  honesty.  He  saw  that  he  had  com- 
mitted a  blunder  of  enormous  magnitude,  and  he  left  it 
to  a  statesman  of  a  rival  party,  and  an  opposite  faith,  to 
pronounce  sentence  upon  it. 

But  it  was  not  permitted  to  Lord  Auckland  so  to 
suspend  the  progress  of  events,  as  to  enable  him  to  hand 
over  to  his  successor  only  the  chart  of  a  virgin  cam- 
paign, to  be  accepted  or  rejected  by  the  new  ruler,  as 
might  seem  fit  to  him,  on  taking  up  the  reins  of  office. 
It  was  decreed  that  his  administration  should  set  amidst 
the  clouds  of  continued  disaster.  There  was  nothing 
but  failure  to  be  written  down  in  the  concluding  chapter 
of  his  unfortunate  reign.  Scarcely  had  he  risen  up  from 
the  prostration  that  followed  the  first  stunning  effects 
of  the  dire  intelligence  of  the  massacre  in  the  Caubul 


FAILURE  OF  WILD'S  BRIGADE.  287 

passes,  when  there  came  from  Peshawur  tidings  that 
the  brigade  under  Colonel  Wild  had  been  disastrously 
beaten  in  the  Khybur  Pass.  The  first  scene  of  the  new, 
like  the  last  of  the  old  campaign,  was  a  great  calamity; 
and  Lord  Auckland,  now  more  than  ever  dispirited  and 
dejected,  earnestly  longed  for  the  day  when  it  would  be 
vouchsafed  to  him  to  close  his  portfolio,  and  to  turn  his 
back  for  ever  upon  a  country  where  sloughs  of  difficulty 
and  thickets  of  danger  seemed  to  cover  the  whole 
expanse.* 

♦  It  should  have  been  observed,  allies  generally.''    And  on  the  29th 