

blame.f 

*  A  cousin  of  Captain,  now  Colonel  tlian  hb  defenoe  of  AK*Mu8Jid.  Mr. 

Mackeson.     Holding  no  recognised  Mackeson  had  been  long  disabled  by 

place    in  the  armies  either  of  the  extreme   lioknesfl,  but  wag  carried 

Crown  or  the  Company,  his  senricea  about  in  a  litter  to  soperinteod  the 

were    neither  fairly  estimated   nor  defence. 

adequately  rewarded.  Buttherewere        fSeeMa€he8(mt^€fov€rnmmi:JaM. 

few  more  gallant  episodes  in  the  war  27, 1S4S^.    FMiiked  papefM* 

u2 


292  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

The  only  hope  of  extrication  from  this  dilemma,  with- 
out disaster  and  discredit,  lay  in  the  advance  of  the  two 
other  regiments,  with  the  Sikh  guns  and  the  Sikh 
auxiliaries.  But  day  after  day  passed,  and  Mackeson 
and  Moseley  gained  no  certain  intelligence  of  the  move- 
ments of  their  comrades.  They  were  more  than  once 
under  arms  to  support  the  coming  reinforcements;  but 
the  reinforcements  never  appeared  in  sight.  Wild,  with 
the  two  regiments,  had  made  an  eflFort  to  throw  supplies 
into  Ali-Musjid,  but  had  been  disastrously  beaten  in 
the  attempt. 

Wild  was  to  have  moved  forward  with  the  Sikh 
auxiliaries  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  of  January,  but 
on  the  preceding  evening,  at  eleven  o'clock,  the  Sikh 
•troops  mutinied  to  a  man,  and  refused  to  enter  the 
pass.  They  were  at  this  time  with  the  British  at  * 
Jumrood.  But  when  Wild  prepared  to  advance,  they 
turned  their  &ces  in  an  opposite  direction,  and  marched 
back  upou  Peshawur.*  General  Avitabile  sent  orders 
to  his  oflScers  to  close  the  city  gates  against  the  mutinous 
regiments ;  and  then  shut  himself  up  in  the  fort. 

At  seven  o'clock,  the  80th  and  60th  regiments  with  the 
Sikh  guns  commenced  their  march  to  Ali-Musjid.  The 
enemy  appeared  at  the  entrance  of  the  pass  and  met  the 
advancing  column  with  a  fire  from  their  jezails.  The 
Sepoys  at  the  head  of  the  column  wavered,  stood  still, 
crowded  upon  each  other,  fired  anywhere,  aimless  and 

•  "  The  Nujeebs  struck  their  tents  expect  from  his   miscreant    troops, 

when  we  did,  and  moved  back  to  His  own    intentions  are    kind  and 

Peshawur,  and  the  Sikhs  made  no  de-  friendly  to  our  government  and  our- 

monstration,  though  twice  we  wrote  selves.  *    The  nusconduct  of  Uie  Sikh 

to    Greneral    Avitabile    during    the  troops  was  rendered  more  atrocious, 

niffht;  and  just   before  da;^light  I  and    our    own    mortification    more 

told  him  they  were  not  moving,  and  bitter,    by  the    circumstance    that 

^ain  at  sunrise."— [Cap totn  &  M.  Mackeson    had     advanced    a    lakh 

LawrencetoMr.  Clerk :l9th  January y  and  a  half  of  rupees  to  the    Sikh 

1842.]    Lawrence  adds:  "I  impute  authorities,  for  the  payment  of  the 