

*  The  two  detachmentv  met  at  the  mouth  of  the  pass. 


296  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

with  pride  or  pleasure.  But  when  the  four  regiments 
were  once  more  assembled  together  at  Jumrood,  in 
spite  of  the  disasters  of  the  week,  a  general  feeling  of 
relief  was  experienced ;  and  our  officers  congratulated 
one  another,  thankful  that  it  was  "  no  worse." 

Nothing  was  to  be  done  now  but  to  wait  patiently 
for  the  arrival  of  Greneral  Pollock  and  the  reinforce- 
ments which  were  marching  up  through  the  Punjaub. 
It  was  obvious  that,  without  cavalry  and  without 
guns,  every  eflfort  to  relieve  Jellalabad  must  be  a  dis- 
astrous failure.  The  want  of  guns  was  now  severely 
commented  upon.  Everybody  had  something  to  say 
about  the  remissness  of  those  in  high  places,  who  had 
suflfered  the  advanced  brigade  sent  for  the  relief  of  our 
beleaguered  troops  to  appear  at  the  mouth  of  the  Khy- 
bur  Pass  without  a  single  piece  of  British  artillery. 
Brigadier  Wild  lamented  the  want  of  artillery :  Colonel 
Moseley  lamented  the  want  of  artillery :  Captain  Macke- 
son  lamented  the  want  of  artillery.  All  were  certain 
that  the  first  effort  at  retrieval  would  not  have  been  a 
new  calamity  and  a  new  disgrace  if  a  proper  comple- 
ment of  British  guns  had  been  sent  on  with  the  Sepoy 
regiments.  The  omission  was  a  great  one;  but  it  ap- 
pears to  have  been  more  the  result  of  circumstances 
than  of  any  culpable  negligence  on  the  part  of  the 
military  authorities.  The  four  Sepoy  regiments,  forming 
Wild's  brigade,  were  sent  forward  by  Mr.  George  Clerk, 
on  a  requisition  from  Captain  Mackeson.  Mackeson 
wrote  for  the  immediate  despatch  of  the  troops  which, 
before  the  outbreak  at  Caubul,  had  been  warned  for  the 
ordinary  relief.  The  regiments  under  orders  for  Af- 
ghanistan were  therefore  hurried  forward,  and  another 
regiment,  which  was  on  the  frontier,  ordered  to  march 
with  them.  Expedition  rather  than  efficiency  was  then 
sought;  and  to  have  got  artillery  ready  for  service  would 


WiVNT  OF  ARTILLERY.  297 

have  delayed  the  despatch  of  the  infantry  corps.  Cap- 
tain Lawrence,  himself  an  artillery  officer,  saw  the 
expediency  of  despatching  artillery  to  Peshawur,  and 
did  not  omit  to  throw  out  suggestions  regarding  the 
preparation  of  this  important  arm ;  but  Mr.  George 
Clerk,  who  was  Captain  Lawrence's  official  chief,  and 
subject  only  to  whose  confirmation  that  officer  had  any 
authority  to  call  for  the  despatch  of  troops,  did  not 
follow  up  the  intimation  of  his  subordinate.  "  Your 
Excellency  will  have  observed,"  wrote  Mr.  Clerk  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief,*  ''  that  I  have  limited  the  requisi- 
tions, which  I  have  presumed  to  make  upon  the  com- 
manding officers  of  Loodhianah  and  Ferozepore,  to  the 
three  infantry  regiments  which  were  already  preparing 
to  march  to  Afghanistan.  I  consider  that  this  is  what 
Captain  Mackeson  means  in  his  urgent  request  for  the 
despatch  of  the  brigade  warned  for  the  Caubul  relief. 
I  therefore  have  not  followed  up  the  intimation  made 
by  Captain  Lawrence  to  the  commanding  officer  at 
Ferozepore  regarding  artillery  and  cavalry,  by  request- 
ing that  a  detachment  of  either  should  move  for- 
ward."! 
It  appears,   therefore,    that  Captain    Mackeson,    at 