

no  blame  to  General  Avitabile  for  men  whose   services  we    hoped    to 

the  man  not  telling  us  what  we  might  retain. 


wild's  disaster.  293 

without  effect.  The  officers  moved  forward,  but  the 
raiments  did  not  follow  them.  In  vain  the  Brigadier 
and  his  staff  called  upon  them  to  advance ;  they  only 
huddled  together  in  concision  and  dismay.  The  Sikh 
guns,  when  brought  into  action,  broke  down  one  after 
the  other ;  and  the  Sepoys  lost  all  heart.  Lawrence 
exerted  himself  manfully  to  save  the  guns ;  but  he  could 
not  induce  the  men  to  make  an  effort  to  carry  them 
off;  and  one  of  the  heavy  pieces  was  finally  abandoned.* 
There  was  nothing  to  be  done  after  this  but  to  fall  back. 
The  Brigadier  himself  was  wounded  in  the  face;  seve- 
ral of  oux  officers  were  injured;  one  killed-f  The  loss 
among  the  Sepoys  was  severe.  It  was  plain  that  they 
would  not  advance;  so  the  column  fell  back  on  Jum- 
rood,  and  Ali-Musjid  was  not  relieved. 

How  this  disaster  happened  it  is  not  easy  to  explain. 
Exaggerated  native  reports  of  the  immense  hordes  of 
Khyburees,  who  were  assembling  in  the  pass,  had  been 
in .  circulation ;  and  the  regiments  seem  to  have  com- 
menced  their  march,  anticipating  such  formidable  oppo- 
sition  as  they  were  never  doomed  to  encounter.  The 
ominous  intelligence  from  Caubul  had  alarmed  them. 
The  lies  spread  abroad  by  the  Sikhs  had  probably 
alarmed  them  still  more.  The  opposition  was  not 
strenuous.!     Had  the  regiments  been  in  good  heart, 

*  "We  have  been  disgracefully  t  "  I  confess,"  wrote  Captain  Law- 
beaten  back,"  wrote  Captain  Law-  rence  to  Mr.  Clerk,  "that  I  never 
rence  to  Mr.  Clerk.  "  Both  our  large  heard  any  very  heavy  fire,  or  saw  the 
gans  broke  down ;  one  was  on  an  enemy  in  any  numbers.  I  was  not 
dephant,  but  was  taken  down  to  put  with  the  advance,  and  therefore  may 
together  when  the  other  failed,  out  be  mistaken ;  but  was  afterwards 
its  carriage  breaking  too,  the  Sepoys  within  a  hundred  yards  of  the  ad- 
lost  all  heart,  and  I  grieve  to  say  that  vanced  gun  for  an  hour  or  more,  and 
I  could  not  ^  men  to  bring  one  off,  could  see  into  the  pass,  but  observed 
though  I  tried  for  an  hour,  and  at  no  breast-work,  and  but  very  few  of 
last,  finding  we  were  only  expending  the  enemy ;  certainly  not  above  a 
ammunition,  we  left  it  in  their  hands,  thousand,  and  not  hdf  that  number 
but  it  was  broken  completely  down  of  fire-arms." — [^MS,  RecordsJ] 
and  spiked." — [J/5.  Records.} 


294  THE  HALT  AT  FESHAWUB. 

they  would  not  have  been  beaten  back  But  there  was 
anything  but  a  strong  forward  feeling  among  them  when 
they  commenced  their  march.  The  defection  of  the 
Sikhs  had  damped  their  ardour,  and  the  breaking  down 
of  the  guns  now  seemed  to  complete  what  the  mis- 
conduct of  our  allies  had  commenced.  The  first  attacks 
of  the  enemy  threw  the  Sepoys  at  the  head  of  the 
column  into  confusion;  and  all  hope  of  success  was  at 
an  end  before  a  battle  had  been  fought. 