

♦  It  was,  moreover,  of  great  im-  bile  and  to  RaeeKisbenChund,  calling 
portance  to  accelerate  the  movement,  upon  them  to  aid  the  British  by  every 
because  it  was  believed  that  any  day  means  in  their  power.  "  You  are  a 
might  witness  the  appearance  of  the  general  of  the  Khalsa  Government,** 
Barukzye  horsemen  on  the  road  he  wrote  to  the  former,  "  and  noted 
between  Peshawur  and  Jellalabad.  for  the  confidence  placed  in  you. 
"Time  is  most  precious  tons,**  wrote  This  is  the  time  to  serve  the  two 
Mackeson  to  Clerk ;  "  a  few  days  allied  powers ;  and  you  will,  there- 
more  may  see  a  party  of  the  Baruk-  fore,  imreservedly  devote  your  atten- 
zye  troops  in  the  plains  of  Ningrahar,  tion  to  discharge  your  trust,  so  as  to 
and  then  thousands  will  be  required  please  the  two  friendly  governments, 
where  hundreds  would  now  do  the  and  to  earn  such  a  name  that  the 
work."  services  performed  shall  be  known  in 

t  Shere  Singh  despatched  urgent  London.  *    To  the  latter  he  wrote» 

purwannahs  both  to  General  Avita-  "  Orders  have  been  issued  to  Koon- 

VOL.  II.  U 


290  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUB. 

the  local  governor,  did  everything  that  they  could  do,  to 
render  the  latter  the  more  probable  contingency  of  the 
two.  The  negotiations  with  the  Afreedi  chie&  were  not 
going  on  prosperously,  and  there  was  every  prospect  of 
heavy  opposition  in  the  pass.  Under  such  circiunstances. 
Brigadier  Wild  could  only  write  that  he  was  prepared 
to  move  forward  whenever  it  was  expedient  to  do  so, 
but  that  he  could  not  answer  for  the  consequences  of 
a  precipitate  advance. 

It  was  not,  however,  permitted  him  to  remain  long 
in  doubt  and  inactivity.  The  fortress  of  Ali-Musjid  lies 
some  five  miles  within  the  entrance  of  the  Khybur 
Pass,  and  about  twenty-five  firom  Peshawur.  It  con- 
sists of  two  small  forts,  connected  by  a  wall  of  little 
strength,  and  stands  upon  the  summit  of  an  isolated 
oblong  rock,  commanded  on  the  southern  and  western 
sides  by  two  lofty  hills.  It  has  always  been  regarded 
as  the  key  to  the  Khybur  Pass;  and  it  was  obvious, 
now  that  it  was  lying  between  the  two  positions  of 
Sale  and  Wild,  it  was  of  immense  importance  that  it 
should  be  held  by  British  troops  or  their  allies.  It  had 
recently  been  garrisoned  by  a  small  detachment  of  a  local 

wur  Pertab  Chund  to  inarch  to  Pe-  frontier  post.    It  was  fortupate  that, 

shawTir,  and  the  zeal  of  the  Durbar  before  the  arrival  of  this  punoannah^ 

will  at   once  make  itself  manifest  the  commandants  of  the  auxiliary 

to^  Mr.  Clerk  (as  the  sun  suddenly  Mussulman  troops  had  left  the  room, 

shinii^  forth  from  beneath  a  cloud)  having  previousljf  engaged  to  march 