

Peshawur,  limited  his  requisitions  to  the  troops  actually 
under  orders  to  proceed,  in  ordinary  routine,  to  A%han- 

*  Mr.    G,    Clerk    to  Sir    Jasper    nel  Wild^  for  the  despatch  of  wrtil- 


tencUng  such  compilations,  there  are  says  that  he  was  about  to  call  upon 
two  errors  in  these  few  lines.  Mr.  Colonel  Wild,  and  may  orally  have 
Clerk  is  made  to  say  that  he  had  broached  the  subject  of  the  guns ; 
called  upon  **  the  commanding  officer  but  in  his  official  letter,  written  on 
of  Lahore  and  Ferozepore"  to  send  the  same  day  (November  14),  there 
forward  the  regiments.  is  no  mention  of  artilleryi  alUiouffh 
t  It  is  not  very  clear,  however,  he  suggests  the  expediency  of  send- 
that  Captain  Lawrence  actually  made  in?  forward  the  lOtn  Cavalry  without 
any  written  requisition  to  the  com-  de(ay. 
manding  officer  at  Ferozepore  (Colo- 


298  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

istan — that  Captftin  Lawrence,  at  Feroi^epote^  suggested 
the  expediency  of  sending  forward  some  guns,  if  they 
could  be  got  ready ;  and  that  Mr.  Clerk,  at  Locdhianah, 
declined  to  endorse  the  suggestion,  and  left  it  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief  to  decide  whether  any  artillery 
should  be  sent  forward  with  the  Sepoy  regiments. 

But  the  power  of  decision  was  not  in  the  hands  of 
the  Commander-in-Chief.  The  odium  of  having  sent 
forward  four  Native  infantry  regiments,  without  cavalry 
and  without  guns,  has  been  cast  upon  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls. 
But  the  truth  is,  that  the  regiments  had  crossed  the 
Sutlej  before  he  knew  that  they  had  been  ordered  for- 
ward. He  was  moving  upwards  towards  the  frontier 
when  inteUigence  of  the  outbreak  in  Afghanistan,  and 
the  consequent  measures  of  Mr.  Clerk,  met  him  as  he 
advanced.  On  the  18th  and  20th  of  November  the 
two  first  regiments  crossed  the  Sutlej;  and  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief received  the  notification  of  the  demand 
for  these  regiments  not  before  the  22nd.  On  the  26th 
of  November  the  two  other  regiments  crossed  the 
Sutlej ;  and  the  Commander-in-Chief  did  not  receive  in- 
telligence of  their  despatch  before  the  3rd  of  December. 

Thus  far  it  is  plain  that  no  discredit  attaches  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief,  or  to  any  other  authority,  for  not 
having  sent  forward  any  guns  with  Wild's  brigade.  But 
the  question  yet  remains  to  be  asked  why  guns  were 
not  sent  after  it.  Though  Mr.  Clerk,  in  the  first  in- 
stance, anxious  not  to  delay  the  advance  of  the  infantry 
r^ments,  made  no  requisition  for  artillery,  he  directed 
General  Boyd's  attention  to  the  subject  soon  after  the 
despatch  of  those  corps,  and  suggested  that  one  of 
Wild's  regiments  should  halt  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Sutlej,  whilst  the  guns  were  proceeding  to  join  it.*    As 