

•with  reference  to  the  statement  {paye.  he  wrote  to  the  Lieutenant-Governor 

264)  of  the  unwillingness  of  Sir  Jas-  of    the    North- Western    Provinces 

per  Nicolls  to  strip  India  of  troops  (Mr.  Robertson):   "I  really  do  not 

for  the  prosecution  of  a  new  campaign  see  how  our  muster-roll  is  to  stand 

beyond  the  Indus,  that  Mr.  George  this  draining  of  more  troops— and 

Clerk  at  that  time  entertained  very  probably  many   more,  west — whilst 

similar  opinions  regarding  the  danger  reinforcements  are   also  proceeding 

of   sending   more    regiments    away  eastward.       Undoubtedly    the    re- 

from  the  North- Western  Provinces,  mainder  will  be  inadequate  to  the  due 

**  Whatever  may  take  place,"  he  wrote  maintenance  of  our  high  supremacy 

to  Lord  Auckland  on  the  25th  of  No-  in   India.''  —  [MS.  Correspondence?] 

vember,  "  in  regard  to  Caubul,  and  in  There  was,  unquestionably,  a  choice 

whatever  degree  our  troops  there  may  of  evils  at  this  time.     But  Sir  Jasper 

be  reinforced,  we  should  not  weaken  Nicolls  and  Mr.  George  Clerk  differed 

this  frontier.    Any  reduction  of  our  in  opinion  as  to  which  was  the  greater 

military  strength  causes  some  pre-  of  tne  two. 
sumption  or  audacity  in  our  native 


288  THE  HALT  AT  PE8HAWUB. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

[January — April:  1842.] 

The  Halt  at  Peahawur— Position  of  Briffadier  Wild— Hia  Difficulties- 
Conduct  of  the  Sikhs — Attempt  on  Ali-Musiid — Failure  of  the  Brigade — 
Arrival  of  General  Pollock — ^State  of  the  Force — Affairs  at  Jellalabad— 
Correspondence  between  Sale  and  Pollock. 

The  position  of  Brigadier  Wild  at  Pesliawur  was 
not  one  to  infuse  into  a  military  commander  any  very 
overflowing  feelings  of  hope  and  exultation.  He  was 
called  upon  to  encounter  formidable  difficulties  with 
slender  means.  Everything,  indeed,  was  against  him. 
He  had  four  Native  infantry  regiments,  containing  a 
large  number  of  young  soldiers.  They  had  been  ex- 
posed for  some  time  to  the  deteriorating  contact  of  the 
mutinous  Sikh  soldiery,  who  had  done  their  best  to 
fill  our  Sepoys  with  that  horror  of  the  Khybur  to 
which  they  had  always  abandoned  themselves.  The 
only  cavalry  with  the  brigade  was  a  troop  of  irregular 
horse.  The  only  guns  were  four  pieces  of  Sikh  artil- 
lery, which  had  a  bad  habit  of  knocking  their  carriages 
to  pieces  whenever  they  were  tried.  There  was  a 
scarcity  of  ammunition.  Carriage  was  beginning  to  fail 
altogether.     It  was  believed  that  the  camels  had  been 


DIFFICULTIES  OF  BRIGADIER  WILD.  289 

hired  at  Ferozepore  to  proceed  as  far  as  Jellalabad ;  but 
now  the  owners  declared  that  they  had  entered  into  no 
such  contract,  and  resolutely  refused  to  proceed  further 
than  Peshawur.     The  most  dispiriting  intelligence  was 
coming  in  from  Afghanistan.    Every  day  seemed  to  add 
some  darker  tints  to  the  picture  of  our  discomfiture,  and 
to  bring  out  in  more  prominent  colours  the  triumphant 
successes  of  the  A%hans.     Sale  and  Macgregor  were 
writing  from  Jellalabad  to  urge  the  immediate  advance 
of  the  brigade ;  and  General  Avitabile  was  endeavour- 
ing, on  the  other  hand,  to  persuade  the  Brigadier  that 
it  would  be  dangerous  to  enter  the  pass  with  the  force 
which  he  then  commanded.*    The  co-operation  of  the 
Sikh  soldiery,  in  spite  of  Avitabile's  exertions,  seemed 
every  day  to  become  a  fainter  probability.   They  peremp- 
torily refused  at  one  time  to  proceed  to  Jumrood,  from 
which  point  it  was  intended  that  the  operations  should 
commence,  and  declared  that  they  would  return  to  La- 
hore.  Then  threatening  to  kill  Avitabile  himself  if  he  in- 
terfered with  them,  they  intercepted  one  of  the  guns  which 
were  moving  forward  for  our  use,  and  carried  it  back  to 
their  lines.     It  was  obvious,  indeed,  that  they  desired 
our  discomfiture  more  than  our  success ;  and,  in  spite  of 
the  declared  wishes  of  their  Sovereign,  whose  sincerity 
at  this  time  is  not  to  be  questioned,!  and  the  efforts  of 