

roander-in-Chief  has  ordered  to  be  Major-General  commanding  the  divi- 

put  in  motion  for  the  purposing  of  sion  issued  at  my  request,  provided 

forcing  the  Khybur,  I  beg  leave  to  that  you  can  do  so  without  crippling 

state  to  you  that  I  would  not  now  the  means  of  marching  requisite  for 

wish  that  the  3rd  troop,  2nd  Brigade  the  artillery,  which  his  Excellency 

of  Horse  Artillery,  should  move  from  has  directed  to  be  put  in  motion  for 


300  THE  HALT  AT  PBSHAWUK. 

letter  from  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls,  prohibiting  the  despatch 
of  the  Horse  Artillery;  and  he  accordingly  apprised 
Captain  Alexander  that  the  request  made  to  him  on  the 
4th  of  December  for  the  advance,  of  the  troop  was 
withdrawn.*  And  so,  instead  of  a  troop  of  Horse 
Artillery  beii^  sent  to  overtake  Wild's  brigade,  which 
reached  Peshawur  at  the  end  of  December,  half  of  a 
foot  artillery  battery  was  warned  to  proceed  with 
M'Caskill's  brigade,  which  did  not  arrive  before  the  be- 
ginning of  February.  In  the  interval,  Wild  had  beeil 
disastrously  beaten  in  the  Khybur  Pass,  and  AlirMusjid 
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Afreedis. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  causes  of  this  first 
fjBulure,  and  to  whomsoever  its  responsibility  may  attach, 
it  is  certain  that  its  results  were  of  a  very  dispiriting 
and  deteriorating  character.  The  regiments  remained 
inactive  in  the  vicinity  of  Peshawur ;  and  the  usual 
consequences  of  inactivity,  under  such  circumstances 
were  soon  painfully  appar^it  in  the  camp  of  Brigadier 
Wild.  The  Sepoys  fell  sick;  crowded  into  hospital; 
seemed  to  have  lost  all  heart,  and,  without  any  of  the 
audacity  of  open  mutiny,  broke  out  into  language  only 
a  little  way  removed  from  it.  Exposed  to  the  alarm- 
ing hints  and  the  alluring  temptations  of  the  mutinous 
Sikh  soldiery,  some  began  to  desert  their  colours,  whilst 
others  openly  declared  that  nothing  would  induce  them 

the  frontier,  and  which  should  follow  lery  as  a  reinforcement  to  proceed 

as  expeditiously  as  possible.**— [3fr.  to  Afghanistan,  I  have  apprised  Cap- 

George  Clerk  to  Captain  Alexander^  tain  Alexander,  commanding  the  Srd 

commanding  Srd  troop^   2nd  Brigade  troop,  2nd  brigade,  now  on  its  way 

of  Horse    Artillery:   Dec.  4,    1841.  to    Ferozepore,  and    Major   Hoish, 

MS,  Records.']  commanding  that  station,  that  they 

*  "  I  do  myself  the  honour  to  in-  are  to  consider  the  request  made  by 

form  your  Excellency  that,  in  conse-  me,  for  the  advance  of  that  troop,  to 

quence  of  my  receipt  of  your  Excel-  be  withdrawn.*' — ^Mr.  George  Clerk 

lencjr's  letter  of  the  2nd  instant,  pro-  to  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs:  Dec,  7, 1841.] 
bibiting  the  advance  of  horse  artil- 