

Still  it  required  much  firmness  to  resist  the  pressing 
appeals  made  to  Pollock  by  his  comrades  at  the  other 
end  of  the  Khybur  Pass.     He  had  not  been  many  days 


EXIGENCIES  OF  THE  JELLALABAD  GARRISON.         305 

at  Peshawur  before  he  received  the  following  commu- 
nication from  General  Sale,  setting  forth  the  exigencies 
of  the  Jellalabad  garrison,  and  urging  him  to  advance 
to  their  relief.  The  letter,  written  partly  in  English 
and  partly  in  French,  is  at  once  curious  and  important: 

Jellalabad,  February  14th,  1842. 

My  dear  General, 

Captain  Macgregor's  cossids  yesterday  brought  me  the 
information  of  your  arrival  at  Peshawur,  and  of  full  military 
and  political  powers  in  Afghanistan  being  vested  in  you.  I  lose 
no  time  in  sending  such  a  view  of  the  state  of  this  garrison  as 
may  enable  you  to  form  your  own  opinion  on  the  necessity  ot 
moving  to  its  relief  Nous  avons  des  provisionnemens  pour  les 
soldats  Britanniques  pour  soixante-dix  jours,  pour  les  Sipahis  et 
les  autres  natifs  demi-provisionnemens  pour  le  m^me  temps,  et 
pour  les  chevaux  de  la  cavalerie  et  Partillerie  de  large  pour  vingt- 
cinq  jours.  Autant  que  nous  pouvons  renvoyer  nos  parties  pour 
la  fourrage,  nous  ne  manquerons  cela  pour  la  cavalerie,  raais  nous 
serons  enti^rement  prive  de  cette  ressource  apr^  le  premier  jour 
d'investissement.  A  present  nous  n'avons  de  fourrage  que  pour 
trente  jours  pour  tons  les  animaux.  Les  chevaux  d'artillerie  et 
les  yaboos  des  sapeurs  sont  de  ce  pays  et  mangent  seulement 
boozeut  kurlise.  Nous  manquons  beaucoup  aussi  des  munitions 
de  guerre,  plomb,  &c. 

When  our  animals  can  no  longer  be  sustained  by  com  or 
forage  only,  we  must  of  course  destroy  them.  The  hospitals  are 
ill  suppUed  with  medicines,  and  much  sickness  may  be  appre- 
hended when  the  weather  grows  hot.  At  present  the  health  of 
the  garrison  is  excellent.  We  have  no  prospect  of  adding  to  our 
resources  above  detailed  even  if  we  had  money,  which  we  have 
not.  The  country  possesses  abundance  of  supplies,  of  which  the 
presence  of  a  force  would  give  us  command. 

Mahomed  Akbar  is  at  Cherbyl,  in  the  Lughman  district,  and 
threatens  an  attack;  and  we  may,  in  about  fifteen  days,  though  I 
think  not  sooner,  be  invested  by  a  large  force  from  Caubul,  with 
a  considerable  artillery. 

Believe  me  to  be,  my  dear  General, 

Yours  very  truly, 

Rt.  Sale,  M.-G. 

VOL.  II.  X 


306  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUE. 

P.S. — I  shall  view  la  perte  of  my  cavaby,  should  such  occur, 
with  much  sorrow,  as  from  their  successes  against  the  enemy  they 
have  acquired  a  ooniidence  in  themselves  and  contempt  for  their 
enemies,  which  feeling  is  equally  participated  in  by  the  rest  of 
the  troops.  As  I  cannot  now  get  an  opportunity  to  send  you  a 
return,  I  give  a  memorandum: — Cavalry,  efiective,  deux  cents 
quarante-un;  malade,  vingt-un.  Artillerie,  effective,  un  cent 
soizante-onze;  malade,  quarante-onze.  Sapeurs,  effective,  trois 
cents  quatre;  malade,  quarante-cinq.  Infanterie  Britannique, 
effective,  sept  cents  dix-neuf;  malade,  trente.  Sipahis,  ef^tive, 
huit  cents  trente-huit;  malade,  quarante-huit. 