

**  In  less  than  forty-eiffht  boura  Mler  tlon  wa^  several  times  communicated 
our  (the  9th  Foot  and  26th  Native  to  me  oy  old  Sepoys  and  non-com- 
Infantry)  arrival,  active  emissaries,  missioneid  officers,  and  the  fact  of 
particularly  from  the  53rd  and  60th  the  attempts  made  to  reduce  the  mep 
Kegiments,  were  in  our  camp,  using  from  their  allegiance  is  too  well 
every  effort  to  induce  our  men  to  k^own  to  the  officers  of  the  26th  to 
desert,  and  to  refuse  to  enter  the  admit  of  a  moment's  doubt." — [JfS. 
Khybur ;  and  had  actually  gone  the  Correspondence.'] 
length  of  sending  Brahmins  with  the  •  MS,  Correspondence,  I  need  not 
Gunga  Jul  to  swear  them  in  not  to  say  that  these  statements  would  not 
advance ;  and  did  not  desist  until  be  made  except  upon  the  testimony 
orders  were  eiven  to  seize  the  first  of  officers  who  heard  the  speeches  to 
man  caught  m  the  lines  under  sus-  which  I  have  referred, 
picious  circumstances.  This  informa- 


304  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

under  prosperous  circumstances,  is  one  of  their  most 
noticeable  characteristics ;  and  when  the  hour  of  trial 
came  they  were  not  found  wanting. 

AU  through  the  months   of  February  and  March, 
Pollock  and  his  regiments  remained  inactive  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Peshawur.     Mortifjdng  as  it  was  to 
the  General  to  be  compelled  to  halt  so  long  at  the 
entrance  of  the  Khybur  Pass,  no   other  course  was 
open  to  him,  at  the  time,  that  did  not  threaten  renewed 
disaster.      Pollock's    position   wiEis,   doubtless,    painful, 
but  it  was  not  perplexing.    His  duty  in  this  conjunc- 
ture was  plain.    The  eyes  of  all  India  were  turned  upon 
him.     The  safety  of  the  gallant  garrison  of  Jellalabad 
was  to  be  secured  by  his  advance.     Sale  and  Macgregor 
were  writing  urgent  letters,  calling  upon  him  to  push  on 
without  delay;  but  it  was  still  his  duty  to  halt.     The 
Sepoys  were  gradually  recovering  both  their  health  and 
their  spirits.     But  reinforcements  were  coming  across 
the  Punjaub,  with  British  dragoons  and  horse  artillery 
among  them ;  and  nothing  did  more  to  animate  and  re- 
assure those,  who  had  been  discouraged  by  previous 
failure,  than  the  knowledge  that  when  they  readvanced 
they  would  be  supported  by  fresh  troops  strong  in  every 
branch,  and  numbering  among  them  a  good  proportion  of 
stout  European  soldiers.    Had  the  advance  been  ordered 
before  the  arrival  of  these  reinforcements,  it  is  at  least  a 
probable  contingency  that  some  of  the  Native  raiments 
would  have  stood  fast,  and,  by  open  mutiny  almost  in 
the  face  of  the  enemy,  have  heaped  up  before  us  a 
mountain  of  difficulty,  such    as   no  prudence  and  no 
energy  on  the  part  of  a  commander  could  ever  suffice  to 
overcome. 