

February  16, — Hier  Mahomed  Akbar  a  pass^  la  riviere,  et  a 

pris  position  sur  ce  cdt^  pr^  de  dix  milles  de  cette  ville.     On  dit 

qu'il  a  des  soldats  de  tons  armes  et  quatre  pieces  de  canon.     On 

pent  voir  son  camp  d'ici. 

R.  Sale* 

February  16. — I  have  received  this  morning  yours  of  the  9th 
instant.  S'ils  n'envoyent  pas  des  canons  de  sifege  de  Caubul,/?eMN 
itre  je  puis  maintenir  ma  position  dans  cette  viUe  pour  le  temps 
que  vous  avez  6crit;  mais  si  une  force  avec  les  pieces  (que  nous 
avons  perdu)  arriveront  ici,  ce  sera  impossible,  et  avant  cette 
epoque  nos  chevaux  moureront  de  faim.  II  sera  bien  difiBcile  et 
incertain  de  vous  donner  avis  de  mon  intention  de  retirer,  parce 
qu'^  ce  moment  Mahomed  Akbar  est  pr^s  avec  une  force  de  deux 
milles  hommes  (qui  s'augmente  jour  par  jour),  et  si  present 
ses  patrouilles  et  videttes  parcourent  tout  le  pays. 

Rt.  Sale,  M.-G.» 

A  few  days  afterwards  Sale  again  wrote  to  urge 
Pollock's  advance.  A  great  calamity  had  befallen  the 
Jellalabad  garrison.  On  the  morning  of  the  19th  of 
February  the  men  were  busied  with  their  accustomed 

*  MS,  Records,    It  will,  doubtless,  ploy  capable  of  translating  English, 

occur  to  the  reader  that  in  this  letter  dvlI  Sale,  in  this  letter,  seems  to  nave 

Sale  adopted  the  French  disguise  to  blurted  out,  in  the  plainest  English, 

yery  little  purpose.    The  object  of  all  that  it  was  most  expedient  to  oon- 

corresponding  in  this  hybrid  language  ceal.     He  was  too  old  a  soldier  to  be 

was  to  prevent  the  meaning  of  the  very  clever  in  such  devices ;  and  he 

letters  from  transpiring  in  the  event  had  been  too  long  fighting  the  battles 

of  their  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  of  his  country  in  India  to  write  very 

enemy,  who  had  people  in  their  em-  unexceptionable  French. 


THE  EARTHQUAKE  AT  JELLALABAD.  307 

labour.  With  their  arms  piled  within  reach,  they  were 
plying  axe  and  shovel,  toiling  with  their  wonted  cheer- 
fulness and  activity  at  the  defences,  which  they  had 
begun  to  look  upon  with  the  satisfied  air  of  men 
who  had  long  seen  their  work  growing  under  their 
hands,  and  now  recognised  the  near  approach  of  its 
completion.  They  had  worked,  indeed,  to  good  pur- 
pose. Very  different  were  the  fortifications  of  Jella- 
labad  fi:om  what  they  had  been  when  Sale  entered  the 
place  in  November.*  They  were  now  real,  not  nomi- 
nal defences.  The  unremitting  toil  of  nearly  three 
months  had  not  been  without  its  visible  and  appre- 
ciable results.  It  seemed,  too,  as  though  the  work  were 
about  to  be  completed  just  at  the  time  when  the  defences 
were  most  needed.  Akbar  Khan  was  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Jellalabad,  and  every  day  Sale  expected  that 
he  would  have  to  meet  the  flower  of  the  Barukzye  horse 
on  the  plain.  But  on  this  19th  of  February,  when 
the  garrison  were  flushed  with  joy  at  the  thought  of  the 
near  completion  of  their  work,  a  fearful  visitation  of 
Providence,  suddenly  and  astoundingly,  turned  all  their 
labour  to  very  nothingness.  There  was  an  awful  and 
mysterious  sound,  as  of  thunder  beneath  their  feet;  then 
the  earth  shook ;  the  houses  of  the  town  trembled  and 
fell ;  the  ramparts  of  the  fort  seemed  to  reel  and  totter, 
and  presently  came  down  with  a  crash.f     On  the  first 