


ARRIVAL  OF  GENERAL  POLLOCK.  301 

again  to  face  the  horrors  of  the  Khybur  Pass.  As 
Greneral  Pollock  advanced  through  the  Punjaub,  the 
worst  reports  continued  to  meet  him  from  Peshawur. 
Not  only  was  he  informed  that  the  Sepoys  of  Wild's 
brigade  were  enfeebled  by  disease  and  paralysed  by  ter- 
ror ;  but  that  even  the  ojBScers  of  the  force  were  using, 
in  an  unguarded  and  imworthy  manner,  the  language  of 
disheartenment  and  alarm.* 

On  the  5th  of  February,  Greneral  Pollock  reached 
Peshawur;  and  found  that  the  stories,  which  had  met 
him  on  the  road,  had  by  no  means  exaggerated  the 
condition  of  the  troops  under  Brigadier  Wild.  There 
were  then  1000  men  in  hospital ;  and  the  number  was 
alarmingly  increasing.  In  a  few  days  it  had  increased 
to  1800;  so  that  even  with  the  new  brigade,  which 
marched  in  a  day  or  two  after  the  General's  arrival, 
he  had,  exclusive  of  cavalry,  scarcely  more  troops  fit  for 
service  than  Wild  had  commanded  a  month  before. 

An  immediate  advance  on  Jellalabad  was  not,  under 
such  circumstances,  to  be  contemplated  for  a  moment. 
Greneral  Pollock  had  much  to  do  before  he  could  think 
of  forcing  the  Khybur  Pass  and  relieving  Jellalabad. 
The  duties  of  a  General  are  not  limited  to  operations  in 
the  field.  When  Pollock  reached  Peshawur  he  found 
that  the  least  diflSicult  part  of  the  labour  before  him  was 
the  subjugation  of  the  Afreedi  tribes.     "Any  precipi- 

*  On  the  29th  of  January,  Sir  in  a  Terj  forcible  manner,  and  sham- 
Jasper  Nicolls  wrote  to  General  Pol-  ing  them  out  of  such  very  unbe- 
lock  :  ^^  My  dear  General, — In  some  coming,  unmilitary,  and  dangerous 
late  letters  Captain  Lawrence  has  conduct.  Their  duty  is  obedience — 
expressed  himself  in  a  very  decided  prompt  and  energetic  obedience — 
manner  touching  the  disheartened  such  as  executes  without  expression 
and  unguarded  language  held  by  of  doubt.  If  more  has  been  said  than 
officers  ^longing  to  the  corps  which  the  case  seemed  to  require,  take  no 
were  beaten  back  in  the  Khybur  Pass  notice  of  this  further  than  to  warn 
on  the  19th  instant.  God  forbid  that  Captain  L.,  if  you  think  proper  to  do 
they  should  feel  any  panic,  or  even  so. — Always  yours  faithniUy, 
alarm ;  but  if  you  observe  it,  I  rely  "  J.  Nicolls.** 
on  your  addressing  yourself  to  them  [M5.  Correspondence."] 


302  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

tancy,"  wrote  the  Commauder-iu-Chief  some  time  after- 
wards, "  on  the  part  of  a  general  officer  panting  for  fame 
might  have  had  the  worst  effect."*  To  have  advanced 
on  Jellalabad  in  that  month  of  February  would  have 
been  to  precipitate  a  strangling  failure.  Instead  of 
flinging  himself  headlong  into  the  pass,  Pollock  made 
his  way  to  the  hospitals.  On  the  day  after  his  arrival 
he  visited  the  sick  of  the  different  regiments,  inquired 
into  their  wants,  conversed  with  their  medical  attend- 
ants, endeavoured  to  ascertain  the  causes  of  the  pre- 
valent sickness,  and  encouraged  by  every  means  at  his 
command,  by  animating  words  and  assuring  promises, 