

the  dispirited  and  desponding  invalids. 

Nor  was  there  less  to  do  out  of  the  hospitals.  The 
morale  of  the  troops  was  in  the  lowest  possible  state. 
It  seemed,  indeed,  as  though  all  their  soldierly  qualities 
were  at  the  last  gasp.  The  disaffection  of  the  Sepoys 
broke  out  openly,  and  four  out  of  the  five  regiments 
refused  to  advance.  Nightly  meetings  of  delegates  from 
the  different  regiments  of  Wild's  brigade  were  held  in 
camp;  and  the  26th  Regiment  of  Native  Infantry,  which 
had  come  up  with  M'Caskill's  brigade,  was  soon  brought 
into  the  confederacy.  In  less  than  forty-eight  hours 
after  the  arrival  of  that  corps,  active  emissaries  from  the 
disaffected  regiments  were  busy  among  the  men,  not 
only  working  upon  their  fears,  but  appealing  to  their 
religious  feelings.f    The  taint  seems  to  have  reached 

*  Sir  Jcuper  NicoUs  to  Lord  HiU:  alarm,  and  in  all  ways  encoura^Ins 

Simlakf  Septerkber  ^nd^  1842. — [AfjS.  and  screening  their  desertion,  wnich 

CorrespondenceJ]      In     this     letter,  was  considerable.    It  was  well  that  a 

which  will  be  found  entire  in  the  cautious,  cool  officer  of  the  Company's 

Appendix,  the  Commander-in-Chief  army  should  have  to  deal  with  them 

says :  **  WhenMaJor-Grentn^  Pollock  in  such  a  temper  363  miles  fVom  our 

arrived  at  Peshawur  he  found  1800  frontier.     Oeneral  Pollock  managed 

men  of  the  four  re|[iments  in  hospital ;  them  extremely  well.** 

the  Sepoys  dedarmff  that  they  would  f  An  intelligent  and  trustworthy 

not  yt&in  advance  through  the  Khy-  officer  of  the  26th  Native  Infantry, 

bur  rasa ;  the  Sikh  troops  spreading  whose  letter  is  now  before  me,  writes : 


NECESSITY  OP  THE  HALT,  308 

even  to  some  of  the  officers  of  Wild's  brigade,  who  did 
not  hesitate  openly  to  express  at  the  mess-table  the 
strongest  opinions  against  a  seoond  attempt  to  force  the 
Khybur,  or  to  declare  their  belief  that  very  few  would 
ever  return  to  Peshawur.  One  officer  publicly  asserted 
that  it  would  be  better  to  sacrifice  Sale's  brigade  than 
to  risk  the  loss  of  12,000  men  on  the  march  to 
Jellalabad;  and  another  said  that,  if  an  advance  were 
ordered,  he  would  do  his  best  to  dissuadQ  every  Sepoy  of 
his  corps  from  again  entering  the  pass.* 

To  instil  new  courage  and  confidence  into  the  wa- 
verers  was  no  easy  task;  but  coolly  and  sagaciously,  as 
one  who  understood  the  causes  of  their  disheartenment, 
and  could  make  some  allowances  for  their  misconduct, 
Pollock  addressed  himself  to  the  work  of  reanimating 
and  reassuring  them.  He  made  them  feel  that  they  had 
been  placed  under  the  care  of  one  who  was  mindful  of 
their  welfare  and  jealous  of  their  honour — one  who 
overlooked  nothing  that  contributed  to  the  health  and 
comfort  of  his  men,  and  who  would  never  call  upon 
them  to  make  sacrifices  which  he  himself  was  not  pre- 
pared  to  make.  There  was,  in  all  that  he  did,  such  an 
union  of  kindness  and  firmness — he  was  so  mild,  so  con- 
siderate, and  yet  so  decided— that  the  Sepoys  came  in 
time  to  regard  him  with   that  childlike  faith  which, 