

Gold  mohurs  and  bootkees  would .  be  of  use  to  us,  but  I  fear 
that  Mackeson  would  find  it  impracticable  to  send  them  to  us  in 
safety. 

Captain  Bygrave  is  alive  and  with  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan. 
Captain  Souter,  44th  Regiment,  is  also  there.  He  saved  the 
Queen's  colour  of  his  regiment  by  rolling  it  round  his  waist,  and 
he  writes  that  a  shot  struck  him  there,  and  the  colour  saved 
his  life.  Believe  me,  very  truly  yours, 

G.  H.  Macgbegob. 

But,  in  nowise  disheartened  by  this  calamity,  the 
Jellalabad  garrison  again  took  the  spade  and  the  pic» 
axe  into  their  hands,  and  toiled  to  repair  the  mischief. 
"  No  time,''  says  Captain  Broadfoot,  "  was  lost.  The 
shocks  had  scarcely  ceased  when  the  whole  garrison 
was  told  off  into  working  parties,  and  before  night  the 


THE  MISCHIEF  BEPAIBED.  811 

breaches  were  scarped,  the  rubbish  below  cleared 
away,  and  the  ditches  before  them  dug  out,  whilst 
the  great  one  on  the  Peshawur  side  was  surrounded  by 
a  good  gabion  parapet.  A  parapet  was  erected  on  the 
remains  of  the  north-west  bastion,  with  an  embrasure 
allowing  the  guns  to  flank  the  approach  of  the  ruined 
Caubul  gate;  the  parapet  of  the  new  bastion  was  re- 
stored, so  as  to  give  a  flanking  fire  to  the  north-west 
bastion,  whilst  the  ruined  gate  was  rendered  inaccessible 
by  a  trench  in  front  of  it,  and  in  every  bastion  round 
the  place  a  temporary  parapet  was  raised.  From  the 
following  day  all  the  troops  off  duty  were  continually  at 
work,  and  such  was  their  energy  and  perseverance,  that 
by  the  end  of  the  month  the  parapets  were  entirely 
restored,  or  the  curtain  filled  in  where  restoration  was 
impracticable,  and  every  battery  re-established.  The 
breaches  have  been  built  up,  with  the  rampart  doubled 
in  thickness,  and  the  whole  of  the  gates  retrenched." 
— Such,  indeed,  was  the  extraordinary  vigour  thrown 
into  the  work  of  restoration — such  the  rapidity  with 
which  the  re-establishment  of  the  defences  was  completed, 
that  the  enemy,  seeing  soon  afterwards  no  traces  of  the 
great  earthquake-shock  of  the  19th  of  February,  de- 
clared that  the  phenomenon  must  have  been  the  result 
of  English  witchcraft,  for  that  Jellalabad  was  the  only 
place  that  had  escaped. 

If  Akbar  Khan,  who  at  this  time  was  within  a  few 
miles  of  Sale's  position,  knew  the  extent  to  which  the 
defences  of  Jellalabad  had  been  weakened,  he  com- 
mitted a  strange  oversight  in  not  taking  advantage  of 
such  a  casualty.  The  garrison  felt  assured  that  the 
Barukzyes  would  not  throw  away  such  a  chance;  and 
they  made  up  their  minds  resolutely  for  the  encounter. 
Intelligence  had  just  been  received  of  the  publication 
of  the  government  manifesto  of  the  31st  of  January; 
and  this  spasmodic  burst  of  energy  and  indignation,  wel- 