

R.  Sale,  M.-GenrLf 

*  So  worded  in  the  original.  howerer,  attached  to  me  from  the 

t  MS,  Records. — I  give  the  post-  period  of  my  force  leaving  Gaubul, 

script  to  this  letter  in  a  note,  though  and  I  have  received  from  nim  very 

of  no  historical  importance,  as  I  can-  valuable    assistance    in    every    way 

not  deny  myself  the  pleasure  of  quot-  throughout  our  operations,  as  I  have 

ing  a  tribute  to  the  worth  of  one  whom  already  intimatedin  public  despatches. 

I  am  proud  to  recognise  as  a  fellow-  I  trust  you  will  pardon  my  undertaking 

labourer  in  the  field  of  Afghan  his-  to  say,  that  if  you  would  be  pleased 

tory :    "  P.S. — Understanding   from  to  re-appoint  hmi  to  the  same  situa- 

the  drd  para,  of  the  letter  from  the  tion  under  yourself,  I  feel  persuaded 

Adjutant-Gen.  that  the  authority  of  that  his  local  experience  would  render 

Major-Gren.  Elphinstone  has  ceased,  him  most  useful  to  you.    In  the  mean 

I  venture  to  mention  to  you  that  time  I  have  nominated  him  Per.  Intr. 

Captain  Havelock,  13th  L.I.,  was  ap-  to  myself,  subject  to  confirmation,  as 

pomtedin  general  orders  Persian  In-  I  cannot,  under  present  circumstances, 

terpreter  to  the  jSI .  General  so  long  as  dispense  with  hb  services.     Be  good 

he  continued  to  command  in  Afi^han-  enough  to  make  this  known  also  to 

istan.    He  was  by  his  permission,  H.  £.  the  C.  in  C.^' 


810  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

JeUalabad,  February  19th,  1842. 

Mt  deab  Genebal, 

*  *  *  Since  I  commenced  writing  to  you,  we  have  been 
visited  by  a  very  severe  earthquake^  which  has  in  a  great  mea- 
sure demolished  two  or  three  of  our  bastions,  and  nearly  the  whole 
of  the  parapet  of  the  ramparts,  to  raise  which  cost  the  troops 
more  than  a  couple  of  months  of  hard  labour.  A  number  of 
houses  in  the  town  have  been  thrown  down  by  the  shock,  and 
the  small  court-yard  attached  to  the  house  in  which  the  General 
and  myself  reside,  is  filled  with  the  rubbish  of  a  number  of  out- 
oflSces  which  fell  crashing  at  our  feet,  we  having  sought  the 
centre  of  the  yard  as  a  place  of  safety.  It  was  with  difficulty  we 
could  preserve  our  footing,  so  great  was  the  undulating  motion 
of  the  ground  we  stood  upon.  Our  dwelling-house  seemed  to 
heave  to  and  fro  as  if  it  would  topple  on  us.  I  have  not  heard 
of  more  than  two  or  three  persons  who  have  been  killed  by  the 
falling  houses  or  walls.  Colonel  Monteith  was  buried  up  to  the 
neck;  but  he  has  not,  I  believe,  sustained  any  serious  injury.  K 
this  town  had  been  seriously  bombarded  for  a  month,  I  dotft 
think  it  could  have  suffered  more  than  at  present.  God  grant 
that  we  may  not  have  to  witness  anything  so  fearful  again.  I 
feel  still  giddy,  although  the  earthquake  took  place  a  couple 
of  hours  ago.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  on  the  enemy  discovering 
the  damage  which  our  defences  have  sustained,  they  will  be 
encouraged  to  attack  us. 