

*  Their  design  was  to  arrest  the  coming  np  and  near  at  hand,  should 

progress  of  Gholab  Singh's  force ;  and  he  be  found  making  of  the  high  road 

some  of  our  officers  thought  tliat  the  an  unseemly  and  uncertain  neld  of 

Rajah  ought  to  have  attacked  them,  battle  for  the  coercion  of  mutinous 

But  Mr.  Clerk  was  of  opinion  that  battalions,  so  1  conceive  that  he  may 

his  forbearance   was  a  proof  of  his  very  naturally  feel  disinclined  hastily 

friendship  towards  us.     *'  In  the  same  to  pledge  himself  to  take  as  far  as 

manner,"  he  wrote,  "  that  the  reluct-  Jellalabad,or  into  any  arduous  service, 

ance  of  Rajah  Gholab  Sing  to  have  re-  troops  which  for  fourteen  months  past 

course  to  measures  of  open  hostility  have  generally  assumed  a  tone  of  de- 

towards    the   Mussulman   battalions,  fiance  of  the  control  of  their  appointed 

when  arrayed  against  him  across  the  oflBcers." — [Mr.  George  Clerk  to  Go-' 

Attock,   was,    I   believe,  in  a  great  vemment :  February  13,  1842.     MS. 

measure  caused  by  his  apprehension  Records."] 
of  embarmssing   the  British  brigade 


CONDUCT  OF  GHOLAB  SINGH.  321 

Lawrence  were  crowned  with  success;  and  the  Sikh 
force  moved  oflF  before  M'Caskill's  brigade  arrived  on 
the  banks  of  the  river.  On  the  14th,  Gholab  Singh 
and  the  Prince  reached  Peshawur.  On  the  20th,  Pol- 
lock held  a  conference  with  the  Rajah — Lawrence  and 
Mackeson  being  present  —  and  a  day  or  two  after- 
wards, forwarding  an  abstract  of  the  conversation  that 
had  taken  place  between  them,  wrote  to  the  Supreme 
Government :  "  I  confess  that  I  have  no  expectation  of 
any  assistance  from  the  Sikh  troops." 

On  the  conduct  of  Gholab  Singh  at  tbis  time,  some 
suspicion  has  been  cast.  It  has  been  said  that  he  not 
only  instigated,  through  the  agency  of  an  influential  mes- 
senger, the  Nujeeb  battalions  to  rebel,  but  carried  on  a 
friendly  correspondence  with  our  Afghan  enemies  at 
Caubul.  That  there  was  no  hearty  co-operation,  is  true; 
but  hearty  co-operation  was  not  to  be  expected.  Gholab 
Singh  had  other  work  on  hand  at  that  time;  and,  whilst 
he  was  playing  and  losing  a  great  game  in  Thibet,  it 
would  have  been  strange,  indeed,  if  he  had  thrown  his 
heart  into  the  work  which  he  was  called  upon  to  perform 
for  others  at  the  mouth  of  the  Khybur  Pass.  He  had  no 
confidence  in  his  troops.  He  had  no  inducement  to  exert 
himself.*  The  latter  obstacle,  it  was  thought,  might  be 
removed;  and  Lawrence  and  Mackeson  were  of  opinion 
that  it  would  be  well  to  bribe  him  into  activity  by  the 

♦  Gholab  Singh  was  employed  in  the  government,  "and  the  apprehension 

Hazareh  country  in  operations  against  that  in  his  absence  his  lately  victorious 