


COKDUCT  OF  8HBBE  SINGH.  323 

which  Runjeet  Singh  had  coveted,  and  which  the  Tri- 
partite treaty  had  snatched  from  him,  "would  not  do 
better."* 

In  the  mean  while,  it  appeared  to  Mr.  Clerk  that  his 
presence  at  the  Court  of  the  Sikh  ruler,  would  have  the 
effect  of  cementing  the  alliance  between  the  two  states, 
and  enable  him  the  better  to  obtain  from  the  Lahore 
Grovemment  the  military  assistance  that  was  so  greatly 
needed.  He  had  never  doubted  the  good  faith  of  the 
Maharajah  himself.  Whatever  selfish  motives  he  may 
have  attributed  to  him,  it  was  not  to  be  doubted  that  at 
this  time  his  feeling  and  his  conduct  alike  were  those  of  a 
friend.  Clerk  declared  that  no  native  state  had  ever 
taken  such  great  pains  to  accelerate  the  movement  of  our 
troops  by  preventing  plunder,  supplying  boats  at  the 
ferries,  and  furnishing  food  for  the  use  of  our  army.  He 
had  given  us  the  best  aid  and  the  best  advice,  and  in 
the  opinion  of  the  British  agent  was  willing  to  act  up 
to  the  spirit  of  the  Tripartite  treaty.  He  was,  indeed, 
the  only  man  in  the  Punjaub  who  really  desired  our 
success. 

On  the  2nd  of  March,  Clerk,  arrived  at  Umritsur, 
resolute  to  "get  what  he  could  out  of  the  Sikhs."f 
Early  on  the  following  morning  he  waited  on  Shere 
Singh.  The  first  visit  was  a  visit  of  condolence  on  the 
deaths  of  Kurruck  Singh  and  his  son.     The  attendance 

*  **  Lawrence  is  making  out  a  digest  and,  if  to  my  mind  that  is  ao^thiog 
of  our  conversation  with  the  Rajah  like  substantial  co-operation  in  ad^ 
yesterday.  I  should  say  that  not  yancing  or  even  securing  support  in 
even  with  Sultan  Mahomed  Khan  the  rear,  to  accept  it  for  General  Pol- 
would  the  Sikhs  hold  Jellalabad  with  lock  if  he  will  use  it,  and  officially  to 
any  advantage  to  themselves.  If  we  recommend  to  him  that,  if  it  proves 
would  bribe  them  with  offers  of  terri-  serviceable,  he  should,  contrary  to  the 
tory,  it  must  be  in  some  other  direc-  orders  of  government,  continue  to 
tion.  Would  Shikarpoor  do  better?"  maintain  Jellalabad,  whilst  awaiting 
— IMackesonto  Clerk:  Feb,  2\,lS4t2,  further  orders  from  government  on 
MS.  Records,'\  the  subject."  —  iMr.  Clerk  to  Mr. 

f  *'My  course,  I  think,  is  clear —  Eobertson:  Umritsur j  March  ^  1842.] 
to  get  what  I  can  out  of  the  Sikhs^ 

y  2 


324  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR. 

at  the  Durbar  was  small.  No  troops  were  in  waiting 
beyond  a  single  wing  of  a  battalion  drawn  up  to  salute 
the  arrival  and  departure  of  the  British  Mission,  The 
Court  were  in  mourning  of  white.  Everything  about  the 
Durbar  was  quiet  and  subdued.  It  was  a  meeting  of 
condolence  on  both  sides.  Clerk's  expressions  of  regret 
were  reciprocated  by  those  which  the  Sikh  ruler  freely 
uttered  with  reference  to  the  death  of  Sir  William  Mac- 
naghten.  Dhyan  Singh  and  the  Fakir  Azizoodeen  were 
both  loud  in  their  praises  of  the  envoy ;  and  expressed 
a  lively  hope  that  the  treacherous  Afghans  would  be 
duly  punished  for  their  offences.  After  other  compli- 
mentary interchanges,  the  Mission  departed;  and  on  the 
following  morning  proceeded  to  pay  a  visit  of  congratu- 
lation to  the  new  ruler.  The  Court  now  wore  a  different 
aspect.  Along  the  garden-walks  stretched  walls  of 
crimson  broad-cloth,  and  lines  of  armed  Goorcherrahs,  in 
new  appointments,  glittered  along  the  paths.  Every- 
thing was  bright  and  joyous.  The  courtiers  shone  in 
splendid  apparel.  The  Maharajah  himself  was  bright 
with  jewels,  of  which  the  Koh-i-noor  was  the  lustrous 
chief.  The  young  Rajah  Heera  Singh,  old  Runjeet's 
minion,  radiant  with  emeralds  and  pearls,  sate  beside 
Shere  Singh,  whilst  his  father,  the  minister,  stood  be- 
hind the  regal  chair.  The  officers  of  the  British  Mission 
sate  on  a  row  of  chairs  opposite;  and  the  old  Fakir 
Azizoodeen  was  seated  on  the  floor  beside  the  chair  of 
the  British  chief.  The  conversation  was  of  a  general 
and  complimentary  character.  The  Khelat  of  accession 
was  presented  to  the  new  ruler;  the  fidelity  of  the  Sikh 
Government  and  the  character  of  its  administration  were 
belauded ;  and  then  the  Mission  took  its  departure. 