


312  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

corned  as  an  indication  of  the  intention  of  the  Supreme 
Government  to  wipe  out  at  all  hazards  the  stains  that 
had  been  fixed  upon  the  national  honour,  fortified  and 
reassured  the  heroes  of  Jellalabad,  who  had  been  griev- 
ing over  the  apparent  feebleness  and  apathy  of  the 
official  magnates  at  Calcutta.* 

They  had  felt,  with  some  acuteness  of  mortification, 
the  neglect  to  which  they  had  seemingly  been  subjected  ;f 
but  all  personal  feeling  was  soon  drowned  in  an  over- 
whelming sense  of  what  was  due  to  their  insulted 
country.  Now,  therefore,  that  Lord  Auckland  had 
declared  that  he  regarded  the  disasters  that  had  be- 
fallen us  merely  as  so  many  new  opportunities  of  de- 
monstrating the  military  power  of  the  British  Empire 
in  the  East,  the  hearts  of  the  brave  men,  who  had  been 
so  long  defying  the  enemy  that  had  destroyed  Elphin- 
stone's  army,  again  began  to  leap  up  with  hope  and 
exultation;  and  as  they  saw  their  defences  rising  again, 
almost  as  it  were  by  supernatural  agency,  before  their 
eyes,  they  began  rather  to  regret  the  caution  of  the 
Barukzye  chief  which  seemed  to  restrain  him  fi:om 
venturing  under  the  walls  of  Jellalabad. 

There  seems,  indeed,  to  have  been  in  the  Afghan 

*  *'  The  officers  of  the  garrisoiif"  selves  and  advantage  to  the  state, 
wrote  Macgregor  to  Pollock  on  the  General  Sale  intends  to  publish  in 
21  St  of  February,  **came  upon  ra-  to-day *s  garrison  orders  the  pro- 
tions  to-day.  They  are  willing  to  clamation  of  the  Indian  Government, 
brave  all  difficulties  and  dangers,  now  a  copy  of  which  you  kindly  sent  to 
that  they  feel  certain  that  govern-  me  by  Torabaz^s  Sowars." — [^MS. 
ment  wdl  resent  the  insult  offered  Correspondence.'] 
to  our  national  honour  by  these  t  The  rescue  of  the  Jellalabad 
rascally  Afghans."  And  a^ain,  on  garrison  had  in  reality  been  the 
the  same  day,  writing  to  the  same  primary — indeed,  the  sole  acknow- 
correspondent,  he  said:  "I  am  glad  ledged  reason  of  the  movement  in 
to  find  that  government  intend  to  advance ;  but  the  Supreme  Govern- 
uphold  the  national  honour  by  re-  ment,  whilst  by  no  means  unmindful 
sentin;^;  the  insults  which  have  been  of  the  claims  of  the  Jellalabad  gar- 
offered  to  it  by  the  rascally  Afghans ;  rison,  long  omitted  to  communicate 
and  I  feel  assured  that  this  garrison  with  Sale  or  Macgregor— to  convey 
will  continue  to  perform  the  part  t.o  them  directly  any  instructions  for 
which  has  devolved  upon  tnem  their  guidance,  or  any  expressions  of 
at  this  crisis  with  credit  to  them-  approbation  of  their  conduct. 


INDKCISION  OF  AKBAK  KHAN.  313 

camp  a  strange  shrinking  from  anything  like  a  hand- 
to-hand  encounter  with  the  intrepid  soldiers  of  Sale's 
brigade.  The  reluctance  of  Akbar  Khan  to  near  the 
walls  of  Jellalabad  is  a  painful  commentary  upon  the 
arrogance  and  audacity  of  the  Afghans,  who  a  few 
weeks  before  had  been  bearding  Elphinstone  and  Shel- 
ton  under  the  shadow  of  the  Caubul  cantonments.  Ak- 
bar Khan  now  seemed  resolute  to  risk  nothing  by  any 
dashing  movement,  that  might  decide,  at  once,  the  fate 
of  the  Jellalabad  garrison.  Instead  of  assaulting  the 
place  he  blockaded  it. 