

I  have  sent  five  expresses  to  hurry  on  the  first  division  of  the 
next  brigade.  It  consists  of  the  3rd  Dragoons,  a  troop  of  Horse 
Artillery,  1st  Light  Cavalry,  the  33rd  N.L,  and  two  companies 
of  the  6th  N.I.,  all  fresh  and  without  a  taint.  I  really  beUeve  that 
if  I  were  to  attempt  to  move  on  now  without  the  reinforcement, 
the  four  regiments  implicated  would,  as  far  as  the  Hindoos  are 
concerned,  stand  fast.  Pray,  therefore,  tell  me,  without  the  least 
reserve,  the  latest  day  you  can  hold  out.  If  I  could,  I  would  tell 
you  the  day  when  I  expect  reinforcements,  but  I  cannot.  I  may, 
however,  I  believe  with  safety  say,  that  they  will  arrive  by  the 
end  of  this  month. 

The  case,  therefore,  now  stands  thus: — Whether  I  am  to  at- 
tempt with  my  present  materials  to  advance,  and  to  risk  the 
appearance  of  dissection  or  cowardice,  which  in  such  a  case  could 
not  again  be  got  over,  or  wait  the  arrival  of  a  reinforcement, 
which  will  make  all  sure.  This  is  the  real  state  of  the  case.  If 
I  attempted  now,  it  might  risk  you  altogether;  but  if  you  can 
hold  out,  the  reinforcements  would  make  your  relief  as  certain  as 
any  earthly  thing  can  be. 

Our  only  object  in  going  to  Jellalabad  is  to  relieve  you  and 
bring  you  back  with  us  to  this;  but  it  is  necessary  that  this  should 
be  kept  a  profound  secret. 

I  am,  &c.  &c. 

George  Pollock.* 

•  This  letter  is  given  in  the  published  papers. 


CAUSES  OF  DELAY.  317 

To  this  Sale  replied : 

Jellalabad,  2drd  March,  1842. 

My  dear  General, 

Yesterday  arrived  yours  of  the  12th  Instant,  addressed 
jointly  to  Captain  Macgregor  and  myself.  I  have  only,  in  reply 
thereto,  to  say  that  in  my  last  I  informed  you  definitively  that  I 
would,  by  God's  blessing,  hold  this  place  to  the  31st  instant,  by 
which  time  you  acquainted  me  that  you  could  arrive  at  Jallalabad 
with  the  dragoons.  You  now  state  to  me  your  expectation 
that  they  will  only  reach  your  present  encampment  by  that  date. 
Our  European  soldiers  are  now  on  two-thirds  of  their  rations  of 
salt  meat,  and  this  the  commissariat  supply ;  on  the  4th  proximo 
that  part  of  the  force  will  then  be  without  meat,  notwithstanding 
every  arrangement  to  lessen  the  consumption.  I  have  this  day 
directed  all  the  camels  to  be  destroyed,  with  the  view  of  pre- 
serving the  boosa  for  the  horses  of  the  cavalry  and  artillery  ; 
and  these  valuable  animals  cannot  receive  any  rations  of  grain 
whatever  after  the  1st  proximo,  but  must  be  subsisted  entirely  on 
boosa  and  grass,  if  the  latter  can  be  procured. 

Believe  me  to  be,  yours  sincerely, 

R.  Sale.* 

Pollock  had  expected  the  dragoons  would  reach 
Peshawur  by  the  20th  of  March;  but  on  the  27th  they 
had  not  arrived ;  and  the  General  wrote  to  Jellalabad, 
explaining  the  causes  of  delay,  but  still  hoping  that  he 
would  be  able  to  commence  his  march  ofi  the  last  day  of 
the  month.  "  There  appears,"  he  wrote,  "  to  be  nothing 
but  accidents  to  impede  the  advance  of  the  dragoons. 
They  were  five  days  crossing  the  Ravee.  I  have  sent 
out  300  camels  to  help  them  in ;  and  I  hope  nothing 
will  prevent  my  moving  on  the  31st.  God  knows  I  am 
most  anxious  to  move  on,  for  I  know  that  delay  will 
subject  us  to  be  exposed  to  very  hot  weather.  But 
my  situation  has  been  most  embarrassing.  Any  attempt 
at  a  forward  movement  in  the  early  part  of  this  month 
I  do  not  think  would  have  succeeded,  for  at  one  time 