

♦  MS.  Correspcmdenre. 


318  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

• 

the  Hindoos  did  not  hesitate  to  say  that  they  would  not 
go  forward.  I  hope  the  horror  they  had  has  some- 
what subsided ;  but  without  more  white  faces  I  question 
even  now  if  they  would  go.  Since  the  1st  we  have  been 
doing  all  to  recover  a  proper  tone;  but  you  may  suppose 
what  my  feelings  have  been,  wishing  to  relieve  you,  and 
knowing  that  my  men  would  not  go.  However  desirable 
it  is  that  I  should  be  joined  by  the  31st  Regiment,  your 
late  letters  compel  me  to  move,  and  I  hope,  therefore, 
to  be  with  you  by  about  the  7th.  I  cannot  say  the  day 
exactly,  because  I  want  to  take  Ali-Musjid.  When  that 
is  taken,  your  situation  may,  perhaps,  become  better."* 
The  dragoons  reached  Pollock's  camp  on  the  30th,  and 
on  the  following  day  he  began  to  move  forward. 

*  General  PoUock  to  General  Sale:  from  Ferozepore  to  Peshawur  the 

March  27^A,  1842.    MS.  Correspond  Durbar  had  appointed  him,  had  men- 

dence.    Pollock  did  not  exaggerate  tioned  that  our  Sepojs  in  that  brigade 

the  backwardness  of  the  Native  re-  did  not  like  going  to  the  westward, 

giments,  or  the  importance  of  asso-  and  were  sometimes  grouped  eight 

ciating  with  them  a  larger  body  of  or  ten  together,  expressing  their  dis- 

Europeans.      Even  the   new   corps  satisfaction ;  but  that  on  the  other 

which  were  moving  up  from  the  pro-  hand  the  Europeans  (her  Majesty's 

vinces,  and  which  the  General  be-  31st  and   artillery)  were  much  de- 

lieved  to  be  "  without  a  taint,"  were  lighted  at  the  prospect  of  fighting  with 

openly  expressing  their  disinclination  the  Afghans.    The  Maharajah  added, 

to  advance.     Shere  Singh  mentioned  *•  If  you  could  send  two  or  three 

this    to    Mr.    Clerk.     "  Yesterday,  more  European  corps,    they  would 

early,**  wrote  the  latter,  ^*  the  Maha-  penetrate  tne  Khybur  or  anywhere 

rajan.  Rajah  Dhyan  Singh,  and  my-  else  so  successfully  against  the  Af- 

self  being  together  for  a  short  time,  ghans,  that  the  Hindoos,   who  are 

2uite  unattended,  they  told  me  that  now  alarmed,  would,  after  one  action, 

Commandant  Cheyt  Singh,  who  had  all  take  heart  again.' " — [Mr,  Clerk  to 

come  into  Lahore  for  a  day  from  Co-  Government:  Laliore,  March  1  dth,  1 843. 

lonel  Bolton's  camp,  to  escort  which  MS,  Records.} 


THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR.         319 


CHAPTER  V. 

[April,  1842.] 

The  Forcing  of  the  Khybur  Pass— State  of  the  Sikh  TroopB— Mr.  Clerk  at 
the  Court  of  Lahore — Views  of  the  Lahore  Durbar — Efforts  of  Shere 
Singh — Astemblage  of  the  Army  at  Jtimrood — ^Advanoe  to  Ali-Musjid — 
Affairs  at  Jellalabad — Defeat  of  Akbar  Khan — Junction  of  Pollock  and 
Sale. 