

•t 

Whatever  embarrassments  may  have  lain  in  the  way  of 
General  Pollock  during  these  months  of  February  and 
March,  and  compelled  him,  eager  as  he  was  to  advance 
to  the  relief  of  Jellalabad,  to  remain  inactive  at  Pesha- 
wur,  it  is  certain  that  they  were  greatly  increased  by  the 
reluctance  of  our  Sikh  allies  to  face  the  passes  of  the 
Khybur.  The  conduct  of  the  Nujeeb  battalions,  which 
had  mutinied  on  the  very  eve  of  Wild's  movement  into 
the  pass,  left  no  room  to  hope  for  any  eflfectual  co- 
operation from  that  source.  All  the  eflforta  of  Captain 
Lawrence  to  obtain  any  assistance  from  the  Sikh  troops 
at  Peshawur,  through  General  Mehtab  Singh,*  had  failed ; 

*  Shere  Singh  was  at  this  time  a  the    Ehalsa  will  be   vexed   at  any 

confirmed  drunkard,  and  he  thought  Mahomedan  exultation }    and  Shere 

more  of  potations  than  of  politics.  Singh  will  congratulate    himself  on 

When  the  first  intelligence  of  our  the  prospect  this  may  open  to  him  of 

Caubul  disasters  reached  him,  Mr.  drawing  closer  his  relations  with  us 

Clerk  wrote  I  "The  eflfect  which  these  as  a  means  of  procuring  good  cham- 

events  in  Caubul  will  have  on  Lahore,  pagne." — [il/r.  Clerk  to  Mr,  Bobert^ 

will,  I  imagine,  be  as  follows.     The  son:  Nov.  29, 1841.  MS,  Records.'] 
Hajahs  will  inwardly  rejoice  thereat; 


320  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR. 

and  Lawrence  was  of  opinion  that  the  General's  conduct, 
in  admitting  the  Afreedis  into  his  camp,  had  established 
such  a  clear  case  of  hostility,  that  he  and  his  traitorous 
followers  ought  to  be  dismissed  with  disgrace.  But  now 
that  Rajah  Gholab  Singh,  accompanied  by  the  Crown 
Prince  of  Lahore,  was  advancing  with  his  regiments 
to  Peshawur,  ,as  those  regiments  were  composed  of  a 
different  class  of  men,  and  the  influence  of  the  Rajah 
over  these  hill-levies  was  great,  it  was  hoped,  that  on  his 
junction  with  General  Pollock's  camp,  a  new  order  of 
things  would  be  established.  But  it  soon  became  pain- 
fully evident  to  the  General  that  very  little  cordial  co- 
operation was  to  be  looked  for  from  the  Jummoo  Rajah 
and  his  troops. 

When,  early  in  February,  Pollock,  on  his  way  to 
Peshawur,  reached  the  Attock,  he  found  the  left  bank 
of  the  river  occupied  by  the  Sikh  troops  under  Gholab 
Singh,  whilst  the  Nujeeb  battalions,  which  had  dis- 
graced themselves  a  few  weeks  before,  were  posted  on 
the  opposite  side.*  Captain  Lawrence,  who  had  left 
Peshawur  to  expedite  the  Rajah's  movements,  was  then 
in  the  Sikh  camp;  and  M'CaskiU's  brigade  was  a  few 
marches  in  the  rear.  There  appeared  every  likelihood, 
therefore,  of  a  collision  that  would  impede  the  progress 
of  the  British  troops ;  but  the  exertions  of  Pollock  and 