

On  the  5th,  Clerk,  having  intimated  his  desire  to  wait 
on  the  Maharajah,  to  discuss  matters  of  business,  was  in- 
vited to  attend  at  his  own  time.    He  went  in  the  after- 


CLERK  AT  THE  SIKH  DURBAB.  325 

noon;  and  at  once  solicited  the  honour  of  a  private 
audience.  Heera  Singh  was  sitting  beside  him,  and  other 
courtiers  were  in  attendance.  A  motion  of  the  hand 
dismissed  them  all ;  and  Clerk  was  invited  to  seat  him- 
self in  Heera  Singh's  chair.  But  the  British  minister,  not 
wishing  that  the  conversation  should  be  carried  on  with- 
out any  witnesses,  suggested  the  recall  of  Dhyan  Singh 
and  the  Fakir,  who,  with  Heera  Singh  and  one  or  two 
others,  were  present  at  the  interview.  Clerk  had  a 
difficult  game  to  play  at  this  time.  He  had  to  obtain 
the  most  effectual  co-operation  of  the  Sikh  Government 
that  could  be  elicited  in  this  hour  of  trial;  and  yet  he 
was  unwilling  to  lay  bare  to  the  Sikh  Durbar  the  real 
designs  of  his  own  government.  He  had  been  directed 
to  disclose  those  designs  to  the  Sikhs — to  intimate  that 
it  was  the  intention  of  the  British  government,  after 
rescuing  the  Jellalabad  garrison,  to  withdraw  the  army 
to  the  British  frontier;  but  inwardly  indignant  at  the 
feebleness  of  the  policy  which  was  favoured  at  Cal- 
cutta, he  shrunk  from  avowing  these  intentions  of  with- 
drawal, and  endeavoured  rather  to  eli^jit  the  views  of 
the  Lahore  Cabinet  than  to  expose  the  designs  of  his 
own.  But  Shere  Singh  was  not  inclined  to  be  less 
cautious  than  the  British  envoy.  When  Clerk  asked 
what  he  intended  to  do  to  rescue  Sale's  garrison  from 
destruction,  the  Maharajah  replied  that  the  Sikhs  were 
very  desirous  to  aid  the  British  Government,  but  that 
the  matter  called  for  consideration.  Bristling  up  at  the 
coolness  of  this  reply.  Clerk  said  that  the  whole  ques- 
tion of  the  alliance  between  the  two  states  might  call 
for  future  consideration,  but  that  the  present  moment, 
when  the  safety  of  a  beleaguered  garrison  was  at  stake, 
was  no  time  for  consideration.  Qualifying  then  his  for- 
mer remark,  the  Sikh  ruler  said  that  he  meant  only  that 
the  mode  of  procedure  called  for  consideration,  and  he 


326  TBE  FORCING  OF  THE  EHTBUR. 

began  to  talk  about  the  advantage  of  erecting  sungahs 
and  crowning  the  heights  of  the  Khybur  Pass* — to  all 
of  which  Clerk  readily  assented.  Then  Dhyan  Singh, 
who  all  this  time  had  been  sitting  silent,  with  a  dejected 
air  and  drooping  head,  now  looked  up,  and  with  a 
cheerful  countenance  began  to  take  part  in  the  conver- 
sation. He  had  before  seemed  to  think  that  the  pur- 
port of  the  discussion  was  to  consign  his  brother,  Gholab 
Singh,  to  inevitable  destruction;  but  he  now  said  that 
he  was  certain  the  troops  under  the  command  of  that 
chief  would  willingly  co-operate  with  the  British ;  but 
that  "  an  iron  lock  required  an  iron  key."  He  then 
abruptly  asked  why  more  British  troops  were  not  sent?f 
— and  the  Fakir  Azizoodeen  whispered  the  same  ques- 
tion. Clerk  could  have  blurted  out  an  answer  to  this 
— but  it  was  one  which  would  have  opened  the  eyes 
of  the  Sikh  Durbar,  more  than  it  was  desirable  to  open 
them,  to  the  true  nature  of  British  policy  at  this  time, 
and  the  true  character  of  our  rulers.  He,  therefore, 
answered  in  general  terms  that  the  British  Government 
were  collecting  troops;  but  that,  nevertheless,  the  co- 
operation of  the  Sikh  Government  was  much  desired; 
and,  whilst  he  added  that  an  intimation  would  be  sent 
to  General  Pollock  regarding  the  manner  in  which  the 
Durbar  recommended  the  war  in  the  Khybur  to  be 
carried  on,  Shere  Singh  promised  to  send  the  desired 
instructions  to  Gholab  Singh;  and  so  the  conference 
ended. 