

He  seemed  to  trust  to  the  efficacy  of  a  close  invest- 
ment ;  and  so  moved  in  his  troops  nearer  and  nearer  to 
our  walls,  hoping  to  effect  that  by  starvation  which  he 
could  not  effect  by  hard  fighting  in  the  field.  And  so, 
for  some  time,  he  continued,  drawing  in  more  and  more 
closely — harassing  our  foraging  parties,  and  occasionally 
coming  into  contact  with  the  horsemen  who  were  sent  out 
to  protect  the  grass-cutters.  Not,  however,  before  the 
11th  of  March  was  there  any  skirmishing  worthy  of  re- 
cord. Then  it  was  reported  that  the  enemy  were  about 
to  mine  the  place.  Sungahs  had  been  thrown  up  on  the 
night  of  the  10th,  and  the  enemy  were  firing  briskly 
from  behind  them.  It  was  plain  that  some  mischief  was 
brewing;  so  on  the  morning  of  the  11th,  Sale,  keeping 
his  artillery  at  the  guns  on  the  ramparts,  sent  out  a 
strong  party  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  with  two  hundred 
of  Broadfoot's  sappers.  Dennie  commanded  the  sortie. 
As  they  streamed  out  of  the  Peshawur  gate  of  the  city, 
Akbar  Khan  seemed  inclined  to  give  them  battle.  But 
ever  as  the  enemy  advanced  the  hot  fire  from  our  guns 
drove  them  back.  They  could  not  advance  upon  our 
works,  nor  protect  the  sungahs  which  our  skirmishers 
were  rapidly  destroying.  It  was  soon  ascertained  that 
the  story  of  the  mine  was  a  mere  fable;  ammunition  was 


314  THE  HALT  AT  PESHAWUR. 

too  scarce  to  be  expended  on  any  but  necessary  service ; 
80  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  done.  Dennie  sounded 
the  recall.  The  British  troops  began  to  fall  back  upon 
their  works;  and  then  the  enemy,  emboldened  by  the 
retrograde  movement,  fell  upon  our  retiring  column; 
and  though,  no  sooner  had  our  people  halted  and  re« 
formed,  than  the  Afghans  turned  and  fled,  they  wrought 
us  some  mischief,  for  they  wounded  Broadfoot;  and  those 
were  days  when  an  accident  to  the  garrison  engineer  was, 
indeed,  a  grievous  calamity.  Not  a  man,  however,  of 
Sale's  brigade  was  killed.  The  carnage  was  all  among 
the  enemy. 

The  remainder  of  the  month  passed  quietly  away — 
but  the  anxieties  of  the  garrison  were  steadily  increasing. 
Provisions  had  become  scarce ;  ammunition  was  scarce ; 
fodder  for  the  horses  was  not  to  be  obtained.  It  was 
obviously  the  design  of  the  enemy  to  reduce  the  garrison 
by  a  strict  blockade.  It  would  be  diflSicult  to  exa^erate 
the  eagerness  with  which,  imder  such  circumstances, 
they  looked  for  the  arrival  of  succours  from  Peshawur. 
Excellent  as  were  Pollock's  reasons  for  not  proceed- 
ing to  the  relief  of  Jellalabad  until  his  force  was 
strengthened  by  the  arrival  of  the  European  regiments  on 
their  way  to  Peshawur,  it  is  easy  to  understand,  and  im- 
possible to  condemn,  the  eagerness  with  which  Sale  and 
Macgregor  continued  to  exhort  him  to  advance  for  their 
succour.  The  correspondence,  brief  but  emphatic, 
which  passed  between  the  two  Grenerals  at  this  time, 
better  than  anything  else  unfolds  the  real  nature  of 
their  respective  positions.  On  the  8th  of  March  Sale 
despatched  this  letter  to  Pollock : 