

Poyndah    Khan    and   a  rebel    force  troops  will  lose  ground  in  the  Hazareh 

when   he  was  summoned  to  proceed  country,  Rajah  Gholab  Singh  evinces 

to  Peshawur.     At  this  time,  too,  the  little  ardour  to  co-operate  with  the 

Jummoo  Rajah  had  an  army  in  Ladakh  Sikh  troops  at  Peshawur.     It  is  also 

and  Thibet  engaged  in  active  warfare  probable    that   the   Jummoo    Rajah 

with  the  Chinese,  and  it  was  sustaining  would  rather  contemplate  the  difficul- 

serious  reverses  at  the  time  that  Gho-  ties  of  the  British  Government  in  that 

lab  Singh  was  called  upon  to  aid  the  quarter,  than  be  instrumental  in  re^ 

British    Government.      "What  with  moving  them,**— [Mr.  CUrk  to  Govern" 

this  reverse  on  the  eastern  frontier  of  ment:  January  20,  1842.] 
his  possessions,*'  wrote  Mr.  Clerk  to 

VOL.  II.  Y 


322  THE  FORCING  OF  THB  KHYBUR. 

offer  of  Jellalabad,  to  be  held  by  him  independently  of 
the  Sikh  ruler;  but  Mr.  Clerk  was  of  opinion  that   such 
a  measure   would  be   neither   politic  nor  honest.*     It 
would,  indeed,  at  that  time,  have  been  an  injustice  done 
by  the  British  Government  against  both  the  other  parties 
to  the  Tripartite  treaty.     It  would  have  injuriously  af- 
fected both  Shah  Soojah  and  Shere  Singh;  and  would 
have  involved  the  Jummoo  Rajah  in  diflSculties  and  per- 
plexities  from  which  he  would  have  found  it  difficult  to 
extricate  himself.      Indeed,  Captain    Mackeson   himself 
very  soon  came  to  the  opinion  that,  if  we  desired  to  bribe 
Gholab  Singh  into  co-operation  by  promises  of  territorial 
aggrandisement,  it  was  necessary  that  we  should  lay  our 
finger  on  some  other  part  of  the  map  than  that  which  re- 
presented Jellalabad ;  and  he  asked  whether  Shikarpoor, 

*  On  the   10th  of  February  Mr.  quite  reasonable,  or  the  almost  indefi- 
Clerk    wrote     to    the    Government  nite  extent  of  proposed  reward  judi- 
Secretar}' :  "  There  seems   to    liave  cious,  or  the  direct  negotiation  with 
been   no  good  reason  for  the  delay  the JummooRajahsfortheir immediate 
of  Rajah  Gholab   Singh   in   crossing  aggrandisement  honourable.     .     .     . 
the  Attock,  unless  he  really  feared  a  It  would  not  be  compatible  with  the 
collision  with  the  Nujeeb  battalions,  friendship  long  subsisting  between  the 
encamped  on  the  other  side.     But  for  British  Grovernment  and  the  Lahore 
the  Rajah's  apparent  reluctance  im-  Government,  now  to  assign  suddenly 
mediately  to  undertake  to  co-operate  and  directly  to  the  Jummoo  Rajahs  any 
in   the  Khybur  Pass,  there  may  be  territories  as  a  compensation  for  ser- 
better  grounds.    These  may  be  either  vices  demanded  of  the  Sikh  Durbar, 
an  apprehension  of  his  inability  to  This  would  be  precipitating  the  de- 
oppose  the  enemy  there ;  or,  as  sup-  dine  of  a  power  which   it  may  be 
posed  by  Captain  Lawrence,  a  want  soon  expedient  to  prop,  both  against 
of  incentive  to   exertion  —  or  both  Afghans  and  Jummooees.*' — [MS.Re- 
these  causes  may  retard  his  move-  cordsJ]  But  though  Mr.  Clerk  thought, 
ments.     In  regard  to  the  former,  the  at  this  time,  that  it  would  not  be 
presence  of  the  large  body  of  British  honourable  openly  to  treat  with  the 
troops  assemblingat  Peshawur  will  Jummoo  Rajahs  for  the  transfer  of 
encourage  him.     With  respect  to  the  Jellalabad,  he  was  not  unwilling  to 
latter,  I  should  be  glad  to  be  provided  place  it  permanently  in  their  hands 
with  the  instructions  of  government."  by  a  stroke  of  finesse,    I  confess  that 
— r3f5.  Records.'\  I  cannot  see  very  distinctly  how  the 
Writing  again,  on  the  ISth  of  Feb-  course  suggested  by  Mr.  Clerk  is  so 
ruary,  he  says :  "  In  regard  to  the  much  more  ••  honourable,**  and  "  com- 
means  of  inducing  zealous  co-opera-  patible  with   friendship,**    than   tliat 
tion  on  the  part  of  the  Sikh  troops,  I  suggested  by  Captains  Mackeson  and 
do  not  think  that  the  expectations  of  Lawrence. 
Captains  Mackeson  and  Lawrence  are 