

Jellalabad,  March  8th,  1842,  9  f.m. 

My  DEAR  General^ 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  a  few  hours  ago  yours  of 
the  26th  ultimo.     I  must  confess  that  its  contents  have  deeply 


ANXIETIES  OF  THE  JELI-ALABAD  GARRISOK.         315 

disappointed  me,  since  I  gather  firom  it  that  it  is  not  your  inten- 
tion to  advance  to  my  succour  until  you  shall  have  been  rein- 
forced by  the  brigade  which  you  expect  to  reach  Feshawur  on 
the  22nd  instant.  Now,  independently  of  other  considerations, 
Macgregor  will^  inform  you  that  he  yesterday  got  a  Dus1>-i-Khat 
from  the  Shah's  Durbar  at  Caubul,  demanding  categorically  our 
evacuation  of  this  place.  He  referred  the  King  and  his  councilloni 
to  you^  and  their  next  measure  will  probably  be  to  march  an 
overwhelming  force  against  us,  aided  by  our  captured  iron  nine* 
pounders.  I  have  reiterated  in  several  letters  tiie  fact  that  mea 
mains  ne  sont  pas  assez  forts  pour  resister  tel  artillerie,  and  there- 
fore  desire  to  make  you  once  more  fully  aware  of  the  risk,  if  not 
certainty,  of  our  being  overpowered  if  your  advance  to  our  sup- 
port is  not  sufficiently  prompt  to  anticipate  this  movement  of  our 
enemies.  The  responsibility,  therefore,  of  such  a  result,  wUl  now 
rest  entirely  upon  you,  and  not  on  me.  Money  is  not  now  of  the 
slightest  use  to  me,  Mahomed  Akbar  having  established  a  most 
rigid  blockade,  which  effectually  prevents  all  supplies  from  reach- 
ing us.  Our  foraging  parties  are  also  daily  attacked. 
Believe  me  to  be,  my  dear  Qeneralj  yours  sincerely, 

ROBEKT  SjJjB,  M.-G. 

P.S. — As  I  remark  that  your  letter  does  not  contain  any  distinct 
avowal  of  an  intention  of  advancing  even  when  your  reinforce- 
ments reach  you,  I  shall  be  obliged^  for  the  sake  of  this  garrisoii, 
if  you  will  specifically  inform  me  when  it  is  probable  I  may  cal- 
culate on  its  being  relieved.* 

At  the  same  time  Macgregor  despatched  another 
letter  of  a  similar  tendency,  and  to  this  letter  Pollock 
replied : 

March  13th,  1843. 

My  dear  Macgregor, 

I  will  write  you  a  very  short  note  with  reference  to  yours 
and  Sale's  of  the  8th.  It  must  no  doubt  appear  to  you  and  Sale 
most  extraordinary  that,  with  the  force  I  have  here,  I  do  not  at 
once  move  on.  God  knows  it  has  been  my  anxious  wish  to  do 
so,  but  I  have  been  helpless.    I  came  on  ahead  to  Peshawur  to 

•  MS.  Correspondence, 


316  THE  HALT  AT  TESHAWUK. 

arrange  for  an  advance,  but  was  saluted  with  a  report  of  1900 
sick,  and  a  bad  feeling  among  the  Sepoys.  I  visited  the  hospi- 
tals, and  endeavoured  to  encourage  by  talking  to  them,  but  they 
had  no  heart.  I  hoped  that  when  the  time  came  they  would  go. 
This,  however,  I  could  not  write  to  you  or  Sale  in  t«Af,  either  in 
English  or  French.  On  the  1st  instant  the  feeling  on  the  part  of 
the  Sepoys  broke  out;  and  I  had  the  mortification  of  knowing 
that  the  Hindoos,  of  four  out  of  five  native  corps,  refused  to  ad- 
vance. I  immediately  took  measures  to  sift  the  evil,  and  gradu- 
ally a  reaction  has  taken  place,  in  the  belief  that  I  will  wait  for 
reinforcements.  This  has  caused  me  the  utmost  anxiety  on  your 
account.  Your  situation  is  never  out  of  my  thoughts;  but  having 
told  you  what  I  have,  you  and  Sale  will  at  once  see  that  necessity 
alone  has  kept  me  here. 