


830  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUB. 

difficult  duty  than  this.  Under  no  circumstances  is  the 
general  addition  to  much  baggage  very  easily  overcome. 
Men  are  not  readily  persuaded  to  leave  their  comforts 
behind  them.  A  fine  soldierly  appeal  was  issued  to  the 
army;*  and  men  of  all  ranks  felt  that  it  came  from  an 
officer  who  was  not  less  ready  to  make  sacrifices  himself 
than  to  call  upon  others  to  make  them.f  Circumstances, 
too,  at  this  time,  tended  to  reduce  the  amount  of  the 
baggage.  The  camel-drivers  had  deserted  in  such  num- 
bers, that  there  was  not  even  sufficient  carriage  for  the 
ammunition.  The  33rd  Regiment,  which  had  just 
arrived  at  Peshawur,  could  not  come  up  to  the  encamp- 
ing-ground  for  want  of  cattle ;  and  another  day's  hjdt 
was  the  result  of  the  delay.  J     In  the  mean  while,  the 

*  Afler  alluding  to  the  defence  of  never  be  called  upon  by  him  to  make 

Jellalabad,  and  the  probability  that  useless  sacrifices,  or  to  undergo  un- 

the  Peshawur  force  would  immedi-  necessary  hardships.      Arrangements 

ately  advance  to  its  relief.  General  will  be  made  for  placing  such  baggage 

Pollock  said  :  *'  Success  in  relieving  as  may  be  left  behind,  in  perfect  secu- 

these  troops  will  raise  for  this  force  rity  at  Peshawur." 
the  admiration  and  gratitude  of  all        f  He  had  reduced  his  own  ba^- 

India,  and  the  Major^General  com-  gage-cattle  to  one  camel  and  two 

manding  feels   assured   that  officers  mules. 

and  men   will  cheerfully  make  any        I  **  My  detention  here  has  been 

sacrifices  to  attain  so  noble  an  object,  most  annoying.    We  have  had  heavy 

He  therefore  now  calls    upon    the  rain,  and  the   Sikhs  begged  that  I 

Brigadiers  to  assemble  the  command-  would  wait  till  to-morrow.     I  have 

ing  officers  under  iheir  orders,  and  consented  to  this,  because  the  troops 

determine  on  the  least  quantity  of  of  both  powers   advancing  simulta- 

baggage  and  the  smallest  number  of  neously  u>r  the  same  purpose  ought 

camp-followers  with  which  their  regi-  to  produce  a  good  effect.     I  should 

ments  can  advance.    The  success  of  have  been  better  pleased  had  Ma- 

this  enterprise  will   greatly  depend  homed  Akbar  not  sent  the  last  rein- 

upon  the  quantity  of  baggage  taken,  forcement— save  the  guns,  which  I 

as  from  the  nature  of  the  country  be-  hope  we  shall  be  able  to  give  a  good 

tween  Peshawur  and  Jellalabad,  the  account  of.  The  pluck  of  the  Sepoyi 

line  most  consistent  with  safety  must  is  doubtful ;  but  I  nope  when  we  carry 

be  as  little  encumbered  as  possible,  the  mouth  of  the  pass,  they  will  £eei 

The     Major-  General     commanding  confidence.     The  9th  are  most  anxi- 