

True  to  his  word,  the  Maharajah  at  once  despatched 
instructions  to  Gholab  Singh  to  co-operate  heartily  and 
steadily  with  General  Pollock  and  Captain  Mackeson; 
and  it  is  believed  that  at  the  same  time  Dhyan  Singh 

*  This  was  merely  an  echo  of  what    the  minister  said,  to  beat  all  Afghan- 

adij 


Gholab  Singh  had  been  recommend-    istan  on  the  plains,  but  it  was  admei^ 
inff  by  letter  to  the  Maharajah.  ent  thing  to  convey  suppli 

t  There  were  mor«  than  enough,    the  defiles  of  the  &hjbur. 


KISGIVINGS  07  SH£RB  SINQH.  827 

wrote  privately  to  his  brother  in  a  similar  strain  of 
exhortation  and  encouragement.  But  it  was  plain  to 
Mr.  Clerk  that  both  the  Sovereign  and  his  minister  re- 
garded, with  feelings  of  painful  anxiety,  the  necessity  of 
avoiding  an  open  rupture  with  the  British  Government 
by  aiding  in  the  perilous  work  that  lay  before  the  troops 
posted  at  Peshawur.  Mr.  Clerk  remained  at  the  Maha- 
rajah's  Court,  which  had  removed  itself  from  Umritsur 
to  Lahore,  and  exerted  himself  to  keep  up  the  fidelity  of 
our  ally  to  the  right  point  of  effective  co-operation.  But 
as  time  advanced,  Shere  Singh  became  more  and  more 
uneasy  and  apprehensive.  It  appeared  to  him  that  a 
failure  in  the  Khybur  Pass  would  bring  down  such  a 
weight  of  unpopularity  upon  him  that  his  very  throne 
would  be  jeopardised  by  the  disaster.  One  day — it  was 
the  4th  of  April — holding  Durbar  in  the  Huzooree- 
Bagh,  Shere  Singh  appeared  ill  at  ease.  Having  con- 
versed a  little  while  on  general  topics,  but  with  an  ab- 
stracted air,  he  ordered  the  intelligence  forwarded  to 
him  by  the  Peshawur  news-writers  to  be  read  to  the 
British  envoy ;  then  took  him  by  the  hand  and  led  him 
to  another  seat  in  the  garden.  Alone  with  the  English 
gentleman,  the  Sikh  ruler  opened  out  his  heart  to  him. 
He  was  concerned,  he  said,  to  learn  that  the  British  au- 
thorities at  Peshawur  were  making  no  progress  in  their 
negotiations  for  the  purchase  of  a  safe  passage  through 
the  Khybur,  and  were  disinclined  to  accept  the  offers  of 
the  old  Barukzye  Governor  of  Peshawur,  Sultan  Ma- 
homed, who  had  declared  his  willingness  to  "divide, 
scatter,  and  make  terms  with "  our  enemies.  He  appre- 
hended that  there  would  be  much  fighting  and  much 
slaughter;  and  it  was  only  too  probable  that  the  Sikh 
troops  at  Peshawur,  seeing  clearly  the  danger  of  the 
movement,  and  not  by  any  means  understanding  the 
advantages  that  would  accrue  to  them  from  it,  would 


328  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUB. 

refuse  to  enter  the  pass.  Or  if  they  entered  it,  it  was 
probable  that  they  would  suffer  severely  at  the  hands  of 
the  Afghans — and  in  either  case,  as  he  had  been  con- 
tinually writing  to  Peshawur  to  impress  upon  the  oflScers 
there  the  necessity  of  effective  co-operation  with  the 
British,  the  odium  would  descend  upon  him,  and  perhaps 
cost  him  his  throne.  It  was  easier  to  listen  to  all  this 
than  to  reply  to  it.  Clerk  saw  as  plainly  as  the  Maha- 
rajah himself,  that  as  the  Sikh  troops  had  always 
evinced  an  insuperable  repugnance  to  enter  the  Khybur 
Pass,  even  when  the  glory  of  the  Khalsa  was  to  be 
advanced  by  the  movement,  and  the  dominions  of 
the  Lahore  Government  to  be  extended,  it  was  hardly 
reasonable  to  expect  them  to  show  greater  alacrity  in 
the  advancement  of  the  objects  of  another  nation  whom 
they  cordially  detested,  and  whose  disasters  they  re- 
garded with  secret  delight.* 