

trusts  that  the  confidence  he  feels  in  ous    to  be   let  loose,  and  —  please 

the  troops  will  be  repaid  by  their  con-  God !  by  to-morrow,  we  shall  be  well 

fidence  in  him.    Tlie  soldiers    may  into  the  pass  ...  I  still  much  r^ 

rest  assured  that  his  thoughts  are  con-  gret  that  I  have  not  the  31st;  but 

stantly  engaged  in  ensuring  their  pro-  after  Sir  Robert  Sale's  letter  received 

visions  and  securing  their  comforts,  some  time  back,  I  consider  that  he 

and  they  may  be  convinced  they  will  has  put  it  out  of  my  power  to  wait 


PBELIMIKART  0BDBB8.  331 

Sepoys  were  deserting  fix)m  Wild's  brigade;  and  no 
satisfactory  progress  was  making  in  the  negotiations 
which  Mackeson  had  been  canying  on  for  the  purchase 
of  a  free  passage  through  the  Khybur  from  the  Afreedi 
Maliks.*  But  there  was  one  advantage  in  the  delay. 
It  gave  time  for  the  Sikh  troops  to  prepare  themselves, 
aaer  their  own  fashion,  to  co-operate  with  our  army,  and 
General  Pollock  felt  that  whatever  might  be  the  amount 
of  active  assistance  to  be  derived  from  the  efforts  of 
our  allies,  a  combined  movement  would  have  a  good 
moral  effect. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  April,  General 
Pollock  struck  his  camp,  and  began  to  move  upon  Ali- 
Musjid. 

Before  leaving  their  encamping-ground  at  Kawulsur, 
and  marching  to  Jumrood,  the  order  of  march  had  been 
laid  down,  and  had  been  well  studied  by  commanding 
officers.  Brigadier  Wild  was  to  command  the  advance 
guard,  and  General  M'Caskill  the  rear.  At  the  head 
of  the  column  were  to  march  the  grenadier  company 
of  the  9th  Queen's  Regiment,  one  company  of  the  26th 
Native  Infantry,  three  companies  of  the  30th  Native 

longer,  although  I  am  quite  sure  that  move  all  hostile  Afreedis  from  the 
the  addition  of  900  Europeans  would  pass,  as  far  as  Ali-Musjid,  and  then 
have  operated  very  favorably  for  the  we  were  to  repel  an/  troops  of  Ma- 
prisoners.  I,  however,  hope  that  you  homed  Akbar  Khan  sent  to  oppose 
will  be  able,,  throueh  the  Ghilzjes,  to  us.** — ICaptuin  Mackeson  to  General 
pave  the  way  for  tneir  release  when  Pollock :  April  2,  1842.  MS.  Re- 
we  reach  you  "--[General  Pollock  to  cords."]  Mackeson  adds:  •*  Yesterday 
Captain  Macgregor :  Jumrood^  April  3,  the  Afreedis  in  our  pay  proposed  to 
1 842.  MS.  Correspondence.']  seize  on  the  mouth  of  the  pass ; . but  as 
*  The  negotiations,  indeed,  failed  the  Sikhs  were  not  ready  to  move  on, 
altogether.  The  chiefs  had  given  and  they  promised  to  be  ready  on  the 
hostages,  and  were  to  have  received  following  day,  the  movement  was 
50,000  rupees,  for  the  safe  conduct  postponed.  To-day  the  Afreedia  of 
of  the  force  from  Jumrood  to  Dhaka  our  party  have  pleaded  that  Maho- 
— one  moiety  to  be  paid  in  advance,  med  Akbar*s  troops  have  come  down 
and  the  other  on  the  army  reaching  to  the  mouth  of  the  pass,  and  that 
the  latter  place.  "  They  were  to  they  can  no  longer  perform  their 
clear  the  pass  for  us  to  Dhaka,  and  agreement.  They  offer  to  return  the 
make  arrangements  for  guarding  it  money  that  has  been  given  to  them.** 
afterwards.    They    engaged  to    re-  —  [Afo.  Records."] 