

*  MS>  Records, 


COMMENCEMENT  OF  THE  MABCH.         835 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Taylor's  party  will  be  accompanied  by  the 
Irregulars  who  lately  garrisoned  Ali-Musjid. 

Captain  Ferris's  jezailchees  will  accompany  the  left  advancing 
party. 

When  the  heights  have  been  crowned  on  both  hills,  four  com- 
panies of  the  9th  Foot,  the  eight  companies  of  the  26th,  under 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Taylor  and  Major  Huish,  also  the  jezailcliees, 
under  Captain  Ferris,  will  descend  the  hills  to  be  in  readiness  to 
enter  the  pass. 

Six  horse-artillery  guns,  four  from  the  foot-artillery,  with  the 
two  mountain  guns,  will  be  drawn  up  in  battery  opposite  the 
pass. 

The  advance  guard,  seven  companies  of  the  30th,  and  seven 
companies  of  the  53rd,  will  accompany  the  guns. 

The  whole  of  the  cavalry  will  be  so  placed  by  Brigadier  White, 
that  any  attempt  at  an  attack  from  the  low  hills  on  the  right  may 
be  frustrated.  When  the  baggage,  &c.,  is  directed  to  advance,  the 
same  order  of  march  will  be  preserved  as  was  formerly  prescribed, 
with  the  following  alteration:  Six  companies  of  the  60th  N.I.  will 
be  together  on  the  right,  and  six  companies  of  the  33rd,  now  ar- 
rived, will  follow  the  53rd  N.I.  When  the  rear  of  the  column  is 
entering  the  pass,  the  two  rear  companies  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Moseley's  and  Major  Anderson's  parties  should  descend  the  hills. 

G.  PoNSONBY,  Capt.,  A.  A.  General.* 

That  evening  the  General  went  round  to  all  his  com- 
manding officers  to  ascertain  that  they  thoroughly  imder- 
stood  the  orders  that  had  been  issued  for  their  guidance ; 
and  to  learn  from  them  what  was  the  temper  of  their 
men.  There  did  not  seem  to  be  much  cause  for  inquie- 
tude on  this  score.  The  morale  of  the  Sepoys  had 
greatly  improved. 

At  three  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  April 
the  army  commenced  its  march.  It  moved  oflf  in  the 
dim  twilight,  without  beat  of  drum  or  sound  of  bugle. 
Quietly  the  crowning  columns  prepared  to  ascend.  The 
heights  on  either  side  were  covered  with  the  enemy,  but 

♦  MS.  Records. 


336         THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUB. 

SO  little  was  the  mode  of  attack,  which  the  British  Greneral 
had  determined  upon,  expected  by  the  enemy,  that  it 
was  not  until  our  flankers  had  achieved  a  considerable 
ascent  that  the  Khyburees  were  aware  of  their  advance. 
Then,  as  the  morning  dawned,  the  position  of  the  two 
forces  were  clearly  revealed  to  each  other;  and  the 
struggle  commenced. 

Across  the  mouth  of  the  pass  the  enemy  had  thrown 
up  a  formidable  barrier.  It  was  made  of  mud,  and  huge 
stones,  and  heavy  branches  of  trees.  The  Khyburees 
had  not  wanted  time  to  mature  their  defensive  operations; 
and  they  had  thrown  up  a  barricade  of  considerable 
strength.  It  was  not  a  work  upon  which  our  guns  could 
play  witli  any  good  efiect ;  but  it  was  a  small  matter  ef- 
fectually to  destroy  the  barrier  when  once  our  light  infantry 
had  swept  the  hills.  And  that  work  was  soon  going  on 
gallantly  and  successfully  on  both  sides,  whilst  the  centre 
column,  drawn  up  in  battle  array,  was  waiting  the  issue 
of  the  contest.  Nothing  could  have  proved  better  than 
the  arrangements  of  the  General;  and  no  General  could 
have  wished  his  plan  of  attack  to  be  carried  out  with 
better  effect.  On  the  left,  the  crowning  column  was  soon 
in  vigorous  and  successful  action.  On  the  right,  the 
precipitous  nature  of  the  ground  was  such  that  it  seemed 
to  defy  the  eager  activity  of  Taylor  and  his  men.  But 
he  stole  round  the  base  of  the  mountain  unseen,  and 
found  a  more  practicable  ascent  than  that  which  he  had 
first  tried.  Then  on  both  sides  the  British  infantry  were 
soon  hotly  engaged  with  the  mountaineers,  clambering 
up  the  precipitous  peaks,  and  pouring  down  a  hot  and 
destructive  fire  upon  the  surprised  and  disconcerted 
Khyburees.  They  had  not  expected  that  our  disciplined 
troops,  who  had,  as  it  were,  been  looking  at  the  Khybur 
for  some  months,  would  be  more  than  a  match  for  them 
upon  their  native  hills.     But  so  it  was.     Our  British 