


THE  PASS  ENTERED.  337 

infantry  were  beating  them  in  every  direction,  and 
everywhere  the  white  dresses  of  the  Khyburees  were 
seen  flying  across  the  hills.  The  Duke  of  Wellington 
had  said,  some  time  before,  that  he  "  had  never  heard 
that  our  troops  were  not  equal,  as  well  in  their  personal 
activity  as  by  their  arms,  to  contend  with  and  overcome 
any  natives  of  hills  whatever."*  And  now  our  British 
infantry  and  our  Bengal  Sepoys  were  showing  how  well 
able  they  were  to  meet  the  Khyburees  on  their  native 
hills.  The  mountain-rangers^  whom  Macnaghten  wished 
to  raise,  because  Sale's  brigade  had  been  harassed  by 
the  Ghilzyes,  could  not  have  clambered  over  the  hills 
with  greater  activity  than  our  British  troops,  and  would 
not  have  been  half  as  steady  or  half  as  faithftd. 

It  was  now  time  for  Pollock  to  advance.  The  centre 
column  did  not  attempt  to  move  forward  until  the 
flankers  had  fought  their  way  to  the  rear  of  the  mouth 
of  the  pass.  But  when  he  had  fairly  turned  the  enemy's 
position,  he  began  to  destroy  the  barrier,  and  prepared 
to  advance  into  the  pass.  The  enemy  had  assembled  in 
large  numbers  at  the  mouth,  but  finding  themselves  out- 
flanked— finding  that  they  had  to  deal  with  different  men 
and  a  different  system  from  that  which  they  had  seen  a 
few  months  before,  they  gradually  withdrew,  and,  with- 
out opposition,  Pollock  now  cleared  his  way  through 
the  barricade,  and  pushed  into  the  pass  with  his  long 
string  of  baggage.  The  difficulties  of  the  remainder  of 
the  march  were  now  mainly  occasioned  by  the  great 
extent  of  this  convoy.  Pollock  was  conveying  both 
ammunition  and  provisions  to  Sale's  garrison ;  and  there 
were  many  more  beasts  of  burden,  therefore,  than  were 
used  by  his  own  force.  But  skilfiilly  was  the  march 
conducted.    Encumbered  as  he  was,  the  Greneral  was 

*  See  Appendix,  toL  i. 
VOL.  n.  Z 


388 


THE  FOBCINQ  OF  THE  KHTBUB. 


compelled  to  move  slowly  forward.  The  march  to  Ali- 
Muajid  occupied  the  greater  part  of  the  day.  The 
heat  was  intense.  The  troops  suffered  greatly  from 
thirst.  But  they  all  did  their  duty  well.  Whatever 
doubts  may  have  lingered  to  the  last  in  Pollock's  mind, 
were  now  wholly  dispersed;  and  when  he  reached  Ali- 
Musjid  in  safety,  and  had  time  to  think  over  the  events 
of  the  day,  nothing  refreshed  him  more  than  the  thought 
that  the  Sepoys  had  fairly  won  back  the  reputation  they 
had  lately  lost.* 

The  enemy  had  evacuated  Ali-Musjid  in  the  morning; 
and  now  Feixis's  jezaHchees  were  sent  in  to  garrison  the 
place.  A  part  of  Pollock's  force,  with  the  head- 
quarters, bivouacked  near  the  fortress.  The  night  was 
bitterly  cold;  but  the  command  of  the  heights  was 
maintained,  and  the  men,  both  Europeans  and  Natives, 
who  had  been  under  arms  since  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  did  not  utter  a  complaint.  They  appeared  to 
feel  that  they  had  done  a  great  work;  but  that  the 
utmost  vigilance  was  necessary  to  secure  the  advantage 
they  had  gained.  The  enemy  were  still  hovering  about, 
and  all  night  long  firing  upon  our  people.  It  was 
necessary  to  be  on  the  alert. 