

But  whilst  Shere  Singh  was  thus  expressing  his  mis- 
givings at  Lahore,  and  the  British  agent  was  inwardly 
acknowledging  the  reasonable  character  of  the  Maha- 
rajah's doubts,  the  Sikh  troops  at  Peshawur  were 
settling  down  into  a  state  of  quiet  obedience,  and 
making  up  their  minds  to  penetrate  the  Khybur  Pass. 
The  letters  despatched  by  Shere  Singh  and  his  minister 
to  Avitabile  and  Gholab  Singh  had  not  been  without 
their  effect.     A  confidential  friend  and  adviser  of  the 


•  "  The  aversion  which  the  Sikhs  support  of  its  ally,  whilst  deprived 

have  to  penetrate  the  Khybur  is  not  by  the  circumstances  of  the  alliance 

more  inconvenient  to  the  British  Go-  of  all   latitude  of  securing  parties 

vernment  than  it  is  alarming  to  the  among  the  Afghans,  such  as  it  would 

Maharajah  ;    for    their    resentment  create  and  turn  to  advantage  in  aid 

against  the  government,  which  has  of  its  encroachments,  if  acting  on  its 

imposed  upon  them  the  arduous  duty,  own   account,  it  may  be  raising  a 

will  be  enhanced,  should  they  suffer  homet^s  nest  which  may  involve  the 

from  the  swords  of  the  Afghans.  Nor  Khalsa  in  long  wars  for  the  preserva- 

can  any  thinking  person  in  this  Dur-  tion  of  its  territories  on  the  Indus." 

bar  fail  to  apprehend  that  by  pro-  — IMr,  George  Clerk  to  Government: 

eeeding  to    invade    Afghanbtan  in  Lciiore^  April  5, 1842.  MS,  Records,'] 


IMPROVED  TEMPER  OF  THE  SIKHS.  329 

Sikh  ruler  —  Boodh  Singh — had  arrived  at  Peshawur, 
charged  with  messages  from  the  King  and  the  minister, 
which  were  supposed  to  have  had  an  effect  upon  the 
Jummoo  Rajah,  sudden  and  great.  Lawrence,  too,  had 
been  busy  in  the  Sikh  camp,  and  little  anticipating  the 
circumstances  under  which  it  was  decreed  that  they 
should  one  day  meet  in  that  lovely  province  of  the  old 
Douranee  Empire  over  which  the  Jummoo  Rajah  now 
exercises  undisputed  dominion,  had  been  holding  long 
conferences  with  Gholab  Singh.  The  good  tact,  good 
temper,  and  quiet  firmness  of  General  Pollock,  had  been 
exercised  with  the  best  results,  and  the  arrival  of 
further  reinforcements  of  European  troops  had  done 
much  to  give  new  confidence  to  the  Khalsa.  And  so  it 
happened,  that  when  General  Pollock  prepared  to  enter 
the  Kiybur  Pass,  the  Sikh  troops  had  resolved  not  to 
suffer  their  faces  to  be  blackened  before  all  India ;  and 
really,  when  the  hour  for  exertion  came,  did  more  for 
the  honour  of  their  own  arms  and  the  suppof t  of  the 
British  Government  than  the  most  sanguine  of  our 
officers  had  ventured  to  expect. 

The  dragoons  and  the  horse  artillery  reached  Pesha- 
wur on  the  29th  of  March,  and  Pollock  at  once  made 
his  preparations  to  enter  the  Khybur  Pass.  On  the 
3l8t  he  pitched  his  camp  at  Jumrood,  in  the  expecta- 
tion of  advancing  on  the  following  morning;  but  new 
elements  of  delay  arose.  The  camel  -  drivers  were  de- 
serting. Gholab  Singh  had  not  moved  up  his  camp. 
And,  above  all,  the  rain  was  descending  in  floods.  It 
would  have  dispirited  the  troops  to  have  moved  them 
forward  at  such  a  time,  and  rendered  more  diflicult  the 
advance  of  the  baggage.  Pollock  had  done  his  best  to 
diminish  to  the  least  possible  amount  the  number  of 
carriage- cattle  that  were  to  move  with  him  into  the 
Khybur  Pass.     But  an  Indian  commander  has  no  more 