


332  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR. 

iDfantry,  and  two  companies  of  the  33rd  Native  Infantry, 
under  Major  Barnewell,  of  the  9th.  Then  were  to  fol- 
low the  Sappers  and  Miners,  nine  pieces  of  artillery,* 
and  two  squadrons  of  the  3rd  Dragoons.  After  these, 
the  camels,  laden  with  all  the  treasure  of  the  force  and 
a  large  portion  of  the  ammunition,  were  to  move  on,  fol- 
lowed by  a  squadron  of  the  1st  Native  Cavalry.  Then 
the  Commissariat  stores,  protected  by  two  companies  of 
the  53rd  Native  Infantry,  were  to  advance,  and  a 
squadron  of  the  1  st  Cavalry  were  to  follow.  Then  the 
baggage  and  camp-followers,  covered  by  a  Ressalah  of 
Irregular  Horse,  and  a  squadron  of  the  1st  Native 
Cavalry,  were  to  move  forward,  with  a  further  supply  of 
ammunition,  and  litters,  and  camel-panniers  for  the  sick. 

The  rear-guard  was  to  consist  of  three  foot-artillery 
guns — the  10th  Light  Cavalry — two  Ressalahs  of  Irre- 
gular Horse — two  squadrons  of  the  3rd  Dragoons — two 
horse-artillery  guns  —  three  companies  of  the  60th 
Native  Infantry;  one  company  of  the  6th  Native  In- 
fantry; and  one  company  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot. 

These  details  formed  the  centre  column  which  was 
to  make  its  way  through  the  pass.  Two  other  columns, 
composed  entirely  of  infantry,  were  told  off  into  parties, 
and  instructed  to  crown  the  heights  on  either  side  of  the 
pass.  Two  companies  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot,  four 
companies  of  the  26th  Native  Infantry,  with  400  jezail- 
chees,  were  placed  under  the  command  of  Colonel 
Taylor,  of  the  9th  Foot;  seven  companies  of  the  30th 
Native  Infantry,  under  Major  Payne;  three  companies 
of  the  60th  Native  Infantry,  under  Captain  Riddle;  four 
companies  of  the  64th  Native  Infantry,  under  Major 
Anderson,  with  some  details  of  Broadfoot's  sappers,  and 
a  company  and  a  half  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot;  the 

♦  Four  horse-artillery  guns,  two  guns  of  the  mountain-train,  and  three 
foot-artillery  guns. 


THE  CROWNING  COLUMNS.  333 

party  being  commanded  by  Major  Davis,  of  the  9th, 
made  up  the  right  crowning  column. 

The  left  crowning  column  was  to  consist  of  two  com- 
panies of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot,  four  companies  of  the 
26th  Native  Infantry,  and  200  jezailchees,  under  Major 
Huish,  of  the  26th  Native  Infantry;  seven  companies  of 
the  53rd  Native  Infantry,  under  Major  Hoggan,  of  that 
corps;  three  companies  of  the  60th  Native  Infantry, 
under  Captain  Napleton,  of  that  regiment;  and  four  and 
a  half  companies  of  the  64th  Native  Infantry,  and  one 
and  a  half  companies  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot,  under 
Colonel  Moseley,  of  the  64  th.  With  these  last  were  to 
go  some  auxiliaries,  supplied  by  Torabaz  Khan,  the 
loyal  chief  of  Lalpoorah.  The  flanking  parties  were  to 
advance  in  successive  detachments  of  two  companies,  at 
intervals  of  500  yards. 