

Musjid.  Eheil,  son  of  Khan  Bahadur,  all  of 

f  •«  I  have  been  given  to  under*  whom  were  at  that  time  hostile  to  us, 

stand  that,  on  the  advance  of  our  although  Abdul  Bahman  Khan  has 

army  to  Jellalabad,  the  SiUi  autho-  since  come  over.    There  could  have 

rities  atPeshawur,  witJbout  indmating  been  no  objection  to  the  Sikhs  enter- 

their  intentions  to  Captain  Lawrence,  ins  into  an  arrangement  with  the 

and  without  reference  to  any  engage-  An'eedis ;  but  it  should  hftvt  been 

ments  between  the  Afreedis  and  our-  done  in  communication  with  Uflu  and 

selves,    entered   into   arrangements  without  imparting  to  the  Afreedis  the 

with  the  Afreedis  to  purchase,  for  the  term  for  which  the  Sikhs  were  bound 

sum  of  6000  rupees  or  4000  rupees,  to  hold  the  pass."— [If  acifcewm  to  Pbl- 

the  security  of  that  portion  of  the  look:  May  6, 1842.    MS.  Records.^ 

z2 


340  THE  FORCING  OF  THE  KHYBUR. 

on  the  way,  throwing  their  loads  on  the  ground,  and 
emplojdng  the  animals  to  carry  their  baggage.* 

In  the  mean  while,  Pollock  had  reached  JeUalabad. 
"  We  found  the  fort  strong,"  he  wrote  to  a  friend ;  "  the 
garrison  healthy;  and,  except  for  wine  and  beer,  better 
off  than  we  are.  They  were,  of  course,  delighted  to  see 
U8»  We  gave  three  cheers  as  we  passed  the  colours; 
and  the  band  of  each  regiment  played  as  it  came  up.  It 
was  a  sight  worth  seeing.  All  appeared  happy ."f  It 
was,  indeed,  a  happy  meeting.  Sale's  little  garrison  had 
been  shut  up  for  five  months  in  JeUalabad.  They  had 
long  been  surroimded  with  perils,  lessened  only  by  their 
own  daring.  They  had  looked  in  vain  for  succours, 
until  they  had  become  so  familiar  with  danger  that  they 
had  begun  to  feel  secure  in  the  midst  of  it.  But  they 
were  weary  of  their  isolation,  and  were  eager  to  see 
their  countrymen  again.  Welcome,  therefore,  was  the 
arrival  of  Pollock's  force ;  and  happy  the  day  on  which 
it  appeared  with  streaming  colours  and  gay  music.  But 
the  prospects  of  the  garrison  had  brightened;  and  if 


*  "  I  regret  to  have  to  report  that  being  made  of  the  offenders 

the  Sikh    regiments  posted  at  Ali-  I  repeatedly  returned  to  the  subject, 

Musjid,  yesterday  left  their  post,  and  declaring  the  necessity  of  punishing 

returned  to  Jumrood;  on  their  way  the  offenders,    whom,  I  said,   there 

throwing  the  loads  off*  some  of  our  could  be  uq  difficulty  in  recognbing, 

mules  and  bullocks  that  they  met,  and  as  they  were  there  for  hours  in  the 

employing  the  animals  to  carry  their  heart  of  the  town,  and  had  been  seen 

own  baggage.    My  letter  to  Koonwur  by  General  Avitabile  himself,  as  well 