

After  the  order  of  the  march  was  thus  described,  the 
following  rules  were  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  com- 
manding officers: 

2.  A  bugler  or  trumpeter  to  be  attached  to  each  commanding- 
officer  of  a  party  or  detachment  of  the  several  columns. 

3.  Whenever  an  obstacle  presents  itself,  or  accident  occurs,  of 
a  nature  to  impede  the  march  of  any  part  of  either  of  the  columns, 
and  occasions  a  break  in  its  continuity,  the  officer  in  command 
nearest  to  the  spot  will  order  the  halt  to  be  sounded,  which  will 
be  immediately  repeated  by  the  other  buglers,  and  the  whole  will 
halt  till  the  removal  of  the  difficulty  enables  the  columns  to  pro- 
ceed in  their  established  order,  when  the  signal  to  advance  will 
be  given. 

4.  The  baggage-master  will  superintend  the  placing  of  the 
baggage,  &c.,  in  the  order  prescribed,  and  the  Major-General 
commanding  requests  that  commanding  officers  will  use  their  best 
exertions  to  facilitate  this  important  object.  The  quarter-master 
of  each  corps  will  see  that  the  baggage  of  his  regiment  is  placed 
in  its  proper  position  in  the  column,  and  an  officer  from  each  is  to 
be  appointed  to  the  duty. 

5.  No  private  guards  are  to  be  allowed.    The  parties  of  cavalry 


884         THE  FORCING  OP  THB  KETBUR. 

and  infantry,  allotted  at  intervals  in  the  line  of  march,  are  to  be 
the  only  troops  attending  it 

6.  The  officers  entrusted  with  the  command  of  the  parties 
which  are  to  flank  the  rear-guard  on  the  heights,  must  give  their 
most  vigilant  attention  to  the  important  duty  of  preventing  their 
men  from  hurrying  in  advance  of  it;  its  rear  must  never  be  left 
exposed  to  fire  from  the  heights. 

7.  The  troops  to  be  told  off  on  their  regimental  parades,  as 
above  detailed,  and  marched  at  the  appointed  hour  to  their  re* 
spective  posts. 

8.  The  folrce  will  march  to  Jumrood  to-morrow  morning,  in  the 
order  above  prescribed.  The  general  to  beat  at  four,  and  the 
assembly  at  five  o'clock. 

9.  The  baggage  and  camp-followers  of  each  corps  are  to  be 
kept  with  their  respective  regiments  till  notice  is  given  by  the 
baggage-master  that  they  are  required  to  take  their  places  in  the 
column.* 

These  orders  had  been  issued  before  the  force  marched 
to  Jumrood.  On  the  4th  of  April,  whilst  the  troops 
were  encamped  at  that  place,  Pollock  issued  further  and 
more  specific  orders  to  regulate  the  movements  of  the 
following  morning: 

Gamp  Jumrood,  4t}i  April,  1842. 
The  force  to  be  under  arms  to-morrow  morning  at  half-past 
three  o'clock,  ready  to  move  forward,  at  which  time  all  the  trea- 
sure, ammunition,  baggage,  &c.,  will  be  moved  to  the  low  ground 
to  the  right  front  of  the  hills  now  occupied  by  picquets.  No  fires 
are  to  be  lighted  on  any  account;  no  drums  to  beat,  or  bugles  to 
be  sounded.  The  six  companies  of  the  60th  Regiment,  and 
six  companies  of  the  33rd  Regiment,  will  remain  with  the 
baggage  in  the  vicinity  of  the  treasure  and  ammunition.  The 
parties  for  crowning  the  heights,  under  the  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Taylor  and  Major  Anderson,  will  move  forward  to 
the  hill  on  the  right  of  the  pass.  The  parties  for  the  same  duty, 
under  the  command  of  Major  Huish  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Moseley,  will  in  like  manner  move  forward  to  the  hill  on  the  left. 