

It  was  a  great  thing  to  have  accomplished  such  a 
march  with  so  little  loss  of  life,  and  no  loss  of  baggage. 
Avitabile  said  that  Pollock  and  his  force  were  going  to 
certain  destruction.  Had  he  moved  precipitately  with 
his  main  column  into  the  pass,  he  would  probably  have 


•  "The  Seyoys  behaved  nobly," 
wrote  Greneral  bollock,  on  the  day 
after  the  action.    "  They  merely  re- 

2 aired  a  trial  in  which  they  should 
nd  that  they  were  not  sacrificed. 
There  were,  nowever,  many  deser- 
tions before  we  advanced.  STow  they 
are  in  the  highest  spirits,  and  have 
a  thorough  contempt  for  the  enemy. 
This  18  a  great  pomt  gained.    Yoa 


are  aware  that  Mahomed  Akbar  sent 
a  party,  about  800,  with  one  or  two 
ffons,  to  oppose  us;  but  they  thought 
better  of  it,  and  abandoned  the  rort 
of  Ali-Musjid  this  morning.  I  have 
accordingly  taken  possession.  The 
Sikhs  are  encamped  near  us,  and  are 
much  more  respectful  and  civil  since 
our  operations  of  yesterday.'* — [^MS, 
Correspondence.'] 


AFFEABANCE  OF  THE  6IKH8.  889 

« 

been  driven  back  with  great  slaughter;  but  the  precau^ 
tion  he  took  in  crowning  the  heights  and  turning  the 
enemy's  position,  secured  him,  though  not  without  some 
fighting  the  whole  way,  a  safe  passage.  The  enemy  are 
said  to  have  lost  about  300  men  killed,  and  600  or 
800  wounded. 

The  Sikh  troops  moved  up  by  another  pass  to  Ali- 
Musjid.  Pollock,  still  doubtful  of  their  fidelity,  and  not 
desiring  to  have  them  too  near  his  own  troops,  suggested, 
that  when  he  pushed  forward  by  the  Shadee-Ba^aree 
Pass,  they  should  take  the  other,  known  as  the  Jubogee/ 
Pollock  had  entered  into  a  covenant  with  Gholab  Singh 
for  the  occupation  of  the  pass  by  the  Sikh  troops  until 
the  5th  of  Jime.  It  was  necessary  that  he  should  keep 
open  his  communications  with  the  rear;  and  the  Sikhs 
undertook  to  do  it.  But  when  Pollock  marched  to 
Jellalabad,  they  began  to  bargain  with  certain  A£reedi 
chiefs,  hostile  to  our  interests,  to  keep  open  the  pass  for 
the  stipulated  time,  for  a  certain  sum  of  money,  thus 
making  known  to  the  tribes  the  time  for  which  they 
had  covenanted  to  hold  it-f  Early  in  May  the  Sikhs 
suddenly  quitted  their  position  at  Ali-Musjid  and  re- 
turned to  Jumrood,  seizing  some  of  our  baggage«cattle 

*  Follock  saw  nothing  of  the  Sikhfl  pass  the^  have  engaged  to  protect  fbr 

till  the  afternoon  of  the  6th.    They  a  period  of  two  monuis.    The  parties 

doubted  his  success,  and  held  dis-  they  ^reed  to  pa;jr  were  AbdmBah- 

creetly  back  until  ihey  found  that  man  Khan,  Kooki  Eheil,  Mahomed 

he  had  made  good  his  way  to  AH-  Jalim  Sipa,  and  Alia  Dad  Malik,  Din 