

♦  The   letters   of  John    Conolly  ....  This  momW  the  Newab,  at- 

written  at  this  time  afford  a  suf-  tended  by  Ameen-odlah  and  all  the 

ficiently  clear  insight  into  the  state  chiefs,  went  to  pay  their  respects  to 

of  parties  at  Caubul.    On  the  17th  the  King  in  the  Balla  Hissar.    The 

of  January  he  wrote  to  Macj^egor :  King  has  paid  two  lakhs  of  rupees 

*^  The  accounts  of  our  most  ill-fated  already,  and  has  promised  one  more 

force  become  more  distressing  every  in  ten  days.    The  Newab  is  Minister 

day.   Hundreds  of  Sepoys,  wounded,  — Ameen-oollah,Naib;  and  oaths  and 

frostbitten,  starving,  and  naked,  come  protestations  have  been  taken  on  the 

into  the  city.  The  Oosbegs  buy  many,  Koran  ^at  they  are  to  be  friends  to 

and  some  find  their  way  to  us,  and  each  other,  and  supporters  of  the  true 

are  relieved  in  the  hospital,  which  faith.    The  Newao  abuses  the  King 

is  now  crowded  to  excess ;  and  the  most  loudly  and  openly.    The  King 

poor  wretches  are  dying  off  fast.  That  does  the  same  with  the  whole  family 

villain,  Ameen-oollah,    is   evidently  of  the    Bamkzyes.      Ameeti-oollali 

anxious  that  the  sick  should  die,  for  Khan  has  sworn  eternal  faith  to  the 

he  will  not  assist  them  in  any  way,  cause  of  his  Majesty — bares  his  head 

nor  attend  in  the  least  to  our  repeated  and  swears   most   solemn  oaths  in 

requests  for  assistance.    The  Newab  the  Musjlds  to  uphold  the  Newab's 

is  so  completely  in  the  hands  of  the  dignity  against  the  King  and  all  the 

Naib  that  he  cannot  afford  us  any  royal  family.     His  Majesty  has  sent 

relief.  The  Afghans  are  very  sanguine  me  several  messages,  saying  that  he 

in  the  expectation  of  assistance  and  submits  to  the  extortion  of  uie  three 

co-operation  of  the  Sikhs,  and  talk  in  lakhs  because  he  is  not  strong  enough 

court  of  Sultan    Mahomed  having  to  oppose  the    demand;    but  that, 

received  instructions  from  the  Durbar  Inshaltah!  when  he  has  received  the 

to  do  our  force  as  much  injury  as  salaam  of  the  chiefs,  he  will  gjdn 

possible,  and  that  Shere  Singh  has  an  power  duly,  and  be  able,  should  our 

understanding  with  them  to  prevent  troops  come  on,  to  plajr  his  own  game 

our  force  re-entering  the  country,  with  advantage  to  himself  and  our- 

You  must  be  aware  whether  there  selves.    I  believe  that  he  is  heart  and 

is  any  foundation  for  these  reports,  soul  in  our  interest;  and  it  appears 

2  a2 


356  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

in  the  mean  while  the  English  hostages  remained 
Under  the  protection  of  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan. 
Nothing  could  exceed  the  kindness  of  the  good  old  man. 
Faithful  among  the  faithless,  he  was  resolute  to  defend 
the  Christian  strangers  at  all  risks ;  and  never,  when  the 
popular  clamour  ran  highest,  and  other  men  of  note  were 
thirsting  for  the  blood  of  the  captives,  did  he  waver  for 
an  instant  in  his  determination  to  shield  the  helpless 
Feringhees  from  the  malice  of  his  remorseless  country- 
men. He  was  a  Barukzye  chief — a  near  relative  of 
Dost  Mahomed  Khan;  and  there  was  not  among  the 
Sirdars  of  all  the  tribes  one  in  whom  the  spirit  of 
nationality  glowed  more  strongly  and  more  purely. 
But  whilst  the  independence  of  his  country  was  as  dear 
to  him  as  to  any  of  his  brethren,  he  did  not  burn  with 
that  fierce  hatred  against  the  English  which  broke  out 
in  other  places,  nor  did  he  ever,  in  the  advancement  of 
the  most  cherished  objects  of  his  heart,  stain  his 
patriotism  with  those  foul  crimes  from  which  elsewhere 
there  was  little  shrinking.  Regarding  with  abhorrence 
the  conduct  of  those  who  had  betrayed  our  unhappy 