

The  Grovemor-General  knew  his  men.  He  did  well 
in  trusting  Pollock  and  Nott.  But  after  the  melancholy 
illustration  of  the  trustworthin^s  of  military  oflGicers  of 
high  rank  displayed  in  the  conduct  of  aflFairs  at  Caubul, 
the  time  hardly  seemed  a  happy  one  for  opening  out  the 
question  of  political  and  military  responsibilities,  and 
their  relative  effects  upon  the  interests  of  the  state.  It 
is  right,  however,  now  that  it  has  been  stated  how  the 
whole  system,  which  exercised  so  great  an  influence  over 
events  in  A%hanistan,  was  abolished  by  the  Governor- 
General,  that  something  should  be  said  upon  the  ge- 
neral character  of  the  diplomatic  functionaries  employed 
on  the  great  field  of  Central  Asia. 

There  is  no  single  controversial  topic  which  has 
eliminated  so  many  sparks  of  bad  feeling — so  much  per- 
sonality, so  much  bitter  invective,  and  I  fear  it  must  be 
added,  so  much  reckless  mendacity,  as  this  question  of 
political  agency.  At  one  time  a  "Political"  was,  by 
many  writers,  considered  fair  game.      To   hunt  him 


THE  POLITICAL  AGENTS.  847 

down  with  all  conceivable  calumny  and  vituperation, 
was  regarded  as  a  laudable  achievement.  Every  one 
had  a  stone  to  throw  at  him — every  one  howled  at  him 
with  execration,  or  shouted  at  him  in  derision.  Tem- 
perate men  on  this  topic,  became  intemperate ;  charitable 
men,  uncharitable ;  sagacity  ceased  to  be  sagacious ;  dis- 
crimination ceased  to  discriminate.  All  alike  lifted  up 
their  voices  to  swell  the  chorus  of  popular  indignation. 

The  Caubul  outburst,  with  its  attendant  horrors,  filled 
this  cup  of  bitter  feeling  to  the  brim.  It  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  embody,  in  a  page  of  mere  description,  the  popu- 
lar notion  of  an  Afghan  "  Political."  He  was  believed 
to^be  a  very  conceited,  a  very  arrogant,  a  very  ignorant, 
and  a  very  unfeeling  personage;  a  pretender,  who,  on 
the  strength  of  a  little  smattering  of  Persian  and  some 
iuterest,  perhaps  petticoat  interest,  in  high  places,  had 
obtained  an  appointment,  the  duties  of  which  he  was 
not  capable  of  performing,  and  the  trust  involved  in 
which  he  was  well-nigh  certain  to  abuse.  He  was 
looked  upon  as  a  creature  whose  blunders  were  as 
mischievous  as  his  pretensions  were  ridiculous;  one, 
whose  ideas  of  diplomacy  were  limited  to  the  culti- 
vation of  a  moustache  and  the  faculty  of  sitting  cross- 
legged  on  the  ground ;  who  talked  largely  about  Durbar, 
rode  out  with  a  number  of  Sowars  at  his  heels;  and 
was  always  on  the  point  of  putting  salt  upon  the  tail  of 
some  fugitive  chief,  and  never  achieving  it  after  all.  But 
this  was  only  the  more  favorable  aspect  of  the  picture. 
There  was  another  and  a  darker  side.  He  was  some- 
times represented  as  a  roaring  lion,  going  about  seeking 
whom  he  should  devour;  unveiling  Afghan  ladies  and 
pulling  A%han  gentlemen  by  the  beard ;  inviting  chiefs 
to  a  conference  and  then  betrajing  them;  blowing 
Sirdars  fix)m  guns;  conniving  at  wholesale  massacre; 
bribing  brothers  to  betray  brothers,  fathers  their  sons ; 