


850  THE  FOBOING  OF  THE  KHTBUB. 

ness  to  bring  negotiations  to  a  successful  issue,  departed 
from  that  strict  line  of  integrity,  which  we  could  wish  our 
countrymen  ever  to  maintain.  This  much  at  least  must 
be  admitted — ^but  who  has  ever  gained  a  reputation  as  a 
skilfiil  diplomatist  without  some  deviation  from  the 
straight  path  of  open  and  truthfrd  manliness  of  con- 
duct? 

Among  the  bitterest  assailants  of  the  political  sys- 
tem was  Greneral  Nott.  In  the  summer  of  1841,  he 
wrote: 

When  we  arrived  here,  the  natives  had  an  idea  that  an  English- 
man's wordy  once  given,  was  sacred,  never  to  be  broken.  That 
beautiful  charm  is  gone,  and  every  pledge  and  every  guarantee 
trampled  under  foot.  The  day  of  retribution  and  deep  revenge  wiU 
come.  Come,  did  X  say? — it  is  in  some  measure  here — already 
the  sword  is  sharpened,  and  the  wild  Afghan  song  echoes  upon 
the  mountains  and  in  the  villages — the  forerunner  of  massacre  and 
blood.  I  like  these  people,  and  would  trust  myself  alone  in  their 
wildest  mountains.  When  I  was  in  Ghilzye,  they  soon  found  out 
who  protected  them  from  plunder  and  oppression,  and  who  did 
not.  My  tent  was  always  crowded  with  these  people,  begging  to 
do  something — asking  what  I  wanted — that  they  were  ready  to 
do  whatever  I  ordered  them;  yet  not  a  man  could  be  prevwled 
upon  to  go  near  the  Prince  or  the  political  agent;  and  when  a 
few  workpeople  were  required  for  a  public  purpose,  not  one  could 
be  had.  A  chief  came  to  my  tent  and  boldly  said:  "  After  the 
cruel  treatment  we  experienced  before  you  arrived  here,  how  can 
it  be  expected  that  the  people  will  assist  in  building  barracks? 
You  have  been  just  to  us;  say  what  you  want  for  your  own  comfort, 
and  we  will  fly  to  perform  it."  If  a  man  is  too  stupid  or  too  lazy 
to  drill  his  company,  he  often  turns  sycophant,  cringes  to  the  heads 
of  departments,  and  is  often  made  a  Political,  and  of  course  puts 
the  government  to  an  enormous  expense,  and  disgraces  the  cha- 
racter of  his  country;  this  has  been  the  scene  before  my  eyes 
many  times  since  I  left  Hindostan.  The  troops  I  sent  out  to-day 
will  put  the  government  to  a  great  expense,  and  the  poor  officers 
and  men  will  have  the  thermometer  at  one  hundred  and  eight 


THE  POLITICAL  AGENTS.  851 

degrees  in  their  tents^  and,  if  exposed  to  the  sun^  one  hundred  and 
twenty  and  one  hundred  and  thirty  degrees,  and  all  because  a 
fooUsh  Political  destroyed  a  small  village  containing  twenty-three 
inhabitants.  And  why,  think  you  ?  Because  he  thought — 
thought^  mind  you — he  thought  that  they  looked  insultingly  at 
him,  as  he  passed  with  his  two  hundred  cavalry  as  an  escort  I 
Had  I  been  on  the  spot,  he  would  have  had  eight  troopers  for  his 
protection;  he  would  have  then  been  civil  to  the  inhabitants,  or 
perhaps  not  crueL  Fancy  a  young  Political,  with  two  hundred 
troopers  at  his  heels — why,  I  am  in  the  habit  of  riding  eight  or 
ten  miles  into  the  country,  often  without  a  single  orderly,  or  even 
my  syce  [groom] ;  I  enter  their  gardens  and  their  villages,  and 
meet  with  nothing  but  civility.  Again,  I  say,  that  I  am  ashamed 
of  my  countrymen,  and  I  prefer  the  much-abused  Beluchi.  This 
very  morning,  on  the  march,  I  heard  two  Englishmen,  calling 
themselves  honourable  men  and  gentlemen,  declaring  that  they 
thought  every  native  of  the  country  should  have  his  throat  cut ! 
And  why?  Because  these  poor,  wretched  people  sometimes  shoot 
our  people  in  defence  of  their  wives^  children^  and  property."* 