


348         THE  FOBCmO  OF  THE  KHYBUB. 

keeping  fierce  dogs  to  hound  them  at  innocent  country- 
men ;  desecrating  mosques,  insulting  MooUahs,  trampling 
on  the  Koran — in  a  word,  committing  every  conceivable 
outrage  that  cruelty  and  lust  could  devise.  There  was 
no  amount  of  baseness,  indeed,  of  which  these  men  were 
not  supposed  to  be  capable ;  no  licentiousness  to  which 
they  were  not  addicted ;  no  crimes  which  they  did  not 
commit.  This  was  the  popular  notion  of  an  "  Afghan 
Political,"  It  was  constantly  illustrated  in  oral  conversa- 
tion and  in  the  local  literature  of  the  day.  Men  talked 
and  wrote  upon  the  subject  as  though  the  question — ^if 
ever  question  there  were — had  long  ago  been  settled  by 
conunon  consent ;  and  it  was  not  until  the  war  had  been 
brought  to  a  close,  that  a  doubt  was  raised  respecting 
the  validity  of  the  charges  so  generally  brought  against 
the  Ishmaels  of  diplomacy  in  the  East. 

Very  much  of  this  is  now  mere  exploded  slander. 
I  cannot  say  that  the  political  officers,  who  distinguished 
themselves  throughout  the  Afghanistan  campaign,  have 
lived  down  the  calumny  of  which  they  were  the  victims. 
Very  few  of  the  niunber  survive.  But  a  reaction,  in 
public  opinion,  has  commenced ;  and  there  is  discernible 
a  growing  disposition  to  do  justice,  at  least  to  the 
memories  of  the  dead.  Men  speak  and  write  more  tem- 
perately on  the  subject.  Exaggeration  no  longer  over- 
strides  all  our  utterances  on  this  topic ;  and,  in  some  cases, 
full  justice  has  been  done  to  the  noble  qualities  of  head 
and  heart  which  have  adorned,  perhaps  do  adorn  men 
amongst  us,  under  the  great  "  Political"  reproach. 

It  would  serve  no  good  purpose  to  run  fi'om  one 
extreme  into  the  other.  It  is  the  evil  of  sudden  reac- 
tions of  popular  feeling,  that  men  escape  fi'om  one  error 
only  to  be  precipitated  into  another  of  an  opposite 
class.  The  system  of  political  agency  is  not  one  of 
unmixed  good ;  nor  are  political  agents  exempt  from  the 


THE  POLITICAL  AGENTS.  349 

common  frailties  of  humanity.  Many  mistakes  were  im- 
questionably  committed ;  sometimes  a  stronger  word  might 
without  exaggeration  have  been  applied  to  the  things 
that  were  done  in  Afghanistan  by  our  diplomatic  agents. 
Diplomacy  is,  at  all  times,  a  dangerous  game.  It  has 
seldom,  if  ever,  been  played  in  any  part  of  the  world, 
without  some  loss  of  purity,  some  departure  from  in- 
tegrity. In  Europe,  the  diplomatist  treads  a  tortuous 
path.  Guile  is  met  with  guile.  Fraud  is  often  counter- 
acted by  fraud.  Minister  overreaches  minister.  One  state 
jockeys  another.  And,  in  the  affairs  of  nations,  arts  are 
resorted  to  which,  in  the  concerns  of  private  life,  would 
stamp  the  wily  plotter  with  infamy  not  to  be  escaped. 
But,  in  the  East,  in  the  midst  of  the  worst  contagion, 
tempted  on  every  side,  stimulated  by  the  fear  of  failure, 
irritated  by  the  duplicity  of  others,  far  greater  is  the 
difficulty  of  preserving  intact  the  diplomatic  integrity 
which  is  exposed  to  so  many  corrupting  influences.  I  am 
not  asserting  the  propriety  of  fighting  all  men  with  their 
own  weapons.  I  have  no  faith  whatever  in  the  worldly 
wisdom,  apart  from  all  considerations  of  right  and  wrong, 
of  playing  off*  wile  against  wile — meeting  treachery  with 
treachery — lie  with  lie.  Such  tactics  may  succeed  for  a 
season ;  but,  in  the  long  run,  truth  and  honesty  will  be 
found  the  most  effective  weapons.  All  I  desire  to  plead 
in  behalf  of  our  Oriental  diplomatists  is  the  extraordinary 
temptations  to  which  they  have  been  exposed.  Many 
of  them  were  necessarily  without  experience  in  the  diffi- 
cult game;  and,  therefore,  apprehensive  of  failure — 
little  confident  in  themselves,  when  called  upon  to  en- 
counter, perhaps  for  the  first  time,  the  deep  duplicity  of 
Eastern  intrigue.  Fearful  of  being  drawn  into  a  snare, 
and  deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  responsibilities 
resting  upon  them,  they  have  sometimes,  in  their  eager* 