

voL.  n.  2  a 


354  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

pet;  and  in  the  unhappy  Shah  they  found  the  only  one 
who  was  ever  Ukely  to  stand  between  them  and  the 
vengeance  of  the  British  nation.  Day  after  day  they 
made  their  salaam  to  him  in  the  Balla  Hissar;  but  so 
imperfect  even  was  their  outward  recognition  of  his  regal 
dignity,  that  money  was  still  coined  in  the  name  of  the 
Newab  Zemaun  Khan.  The  Newab,  who  had  been 
raised  to  the  sovereignty  by  the  voice  of  the  chiefs  soon 
after  the  first  outbreak  of  the  insurrection,  had  cheerfully 
resigned  the  honour  that  had  been  thrust  upon  him,  and 
accepted  the  office  of  Wuzeer.  Ameen-oollah  Khan  was 
appointed  Naib,  or  deputy.  For  a  little  time  there  was 
some  outward  show  of  harmony ;  but  there  was  no  real 
union  between  the  King  and  the  chiefs.  The  Barukzyes 
spoke  scornftdly  of  the  King ;  and  the  King  could  not  re- 
frain from  expressing  his  mistrust  of  the  whole  tribe  of 
Barukzyes.  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  openly  swearing  alle- 
giance to  both,  seems  to  have  held  the  balance  between 
the  two  opposing  factions,  and  was  in  reality  the  most 
influential  man  in  the  state.  He  had  amassed,  by  fraud 
and  violence,  lai^e  sums  of  money,  which  the  other  chiefe, 
straitened  as  they  were  by  an  empty  treasury,  and  unable 
to  carry  out  any  great  national  measure,  would  fain  have 
made  him  disgorge.  From  the  Shah  himself  they  con- 
trived to  extort  some  three  or  four  lakhs  of  rupees ;  but 
when  Akbar  Khan  wrote  pressing  letters  to  Caubul  for 
guns  and  ammunition,  that  he  might  lay  siege  to  Jellala- 
bad,  no  one  would  move  without  pay,  and  money  was 
not  forthcoming  for  the  purpose. 

All  parties  were  jealous  of  each  other ;  and  especially 
jealous  of  the  rising  power  of  Akbar  Khan.  The  young 
Barukzye  was  in  Lughman ;  and  the  elder  chiefs  at  Cau- 
bul, even  if  they  had  possessed  the  money  to  enable 
them  to  answer  these  emergent  indents  upon  their 
military  resources,  would  have  been  httle  inclined  to 


STATE  OF  PARTIES  IN  CAUBUL.  355 

send  him  the  reinforcements  and  munitions  for  which 
he  was  continually  writing.  They  talked  about  raising 
an  army  of  their  own,  and  opposing  the  retributory 
march  of  the  British  through  the  Khybur  Pass ;  but  the 
want  of  money  presented  an  insuperable  obstacle  to 
any  miUtary  movement  on  a  scale  that  would  aflford  a 
prospect  of  success.  The  Shah  himself  talked  openly  in 
Durbar  about  standing  forward  as  defender  of  the  faith, 
and  declaring  a  religious  war  against  the  Kaffirs ;  but  he 
privately  assured  Conolly  that  he  was  heart  and  soul 
with  the  British,  and  he  wrote  long  letters  to  the 
Governor-General,  Clerk,  Macgregor,  and  others,  de- 
claring his  inviolable  fidelity,  and  eagerly  clamouring 
for  money.* 