

garrison.  The  d5th  declined  to  accept  dents  of  service  have  parted  them, 

the  boon.    They  sent  a  deputation  to  probably  for  ever,  neither  is  likel;jr  to 

the  General,  which   respectfully  ac-  forget,  at  all  events  as  a  tradition, 

quainted  him  that  animal  food  was  while  they  keep  their  places  respec* 

less  necessary  for  them  than  for  Euro*  tively  in  the  armies  of  tne  Queen  and 

peans,  and  besought  him  to  ^ive  their  of  the  East  India  Company.*' 
portion  of  the  booty  to  theur  gallant       f  M&  Correspondence. 


342  THE  VOBCING  OF  THE  EHTBUB. 

a  royal  salute,  in  honour  of  the  supposed  victory. 
Other  reports  then  came  welling  in  to  Jellalabad.  It 
was  said  that  there  was  another  revolution  at  Caubul, 
and  that  the  Sirdar  was  about  to  break  up  his  camp 
and  hasten  to  the  capital.  In  either  case,  it  seemed 
that  the  time  had  come  to  strike  a  blow  at  Akbar 
Khan's  army;  so  a  council  of  war  was  held,  and  the 
question  gravely  debated.  It  is  said  that  councils  of 
war  "  never  fight.'*  But  the  council  which  now  assem- 
bled to  determine  whether  the  Sirdar's  camp  should  be 
attacked  on  the  foUowing  morning,  decided  the  ques- 
tion  in  the  affirmative.  They  looked  at  it  in  all  its  bear- 
ings, and  then  determined  that  at  daybreak  they  would 
go  out  and  fight,  "  in  the  hope  of  relieving  the  place 
irom  blockade,  and  facilitating  Pollock's  advance  to 
their  succour." 

Sale  issued  directions  for  the  formation  of*  three  co- 
lumns of  infantry,  the  centre  consisting  of  her  Majesty's 
18th  Light  Infantry,  mustering  500  bayonets,  under 
Colonel  Dennie ;  the  left  one,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Monteith,  C.B. ;  and  the  right,  composed  of  one  company 
of  the  13th  Light  Infantry  and  one  of  the  85th  Native 
Infwitry,  and  the  detachment  of  Sappers,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Orr  (the  severity  of  Captain  Broadfoot's  wound 
still  rendering  him  non-effective),  the  whole  amounting 
to  860  men,  commanded  by  Captain  Havelock,  of  her  Ma- 
jesty's 13  th  Light  Infantry.  These  were  to  be  supported 
by  the  fire  of  the  guns  of  No.  6,  Light  Field  Battery, 
under  Captain  Abbott,  to  which  Captain  Backhouse,  of 
Shah  Soojah's  Artillery,  was  attached,  and  by  the  whole 
of  my  small  cavalry  force  under  Captain  Oldfield  and 
Lieutenant  Mayne.*  Such  were  the  components  of  the 
little  force  that  was  to  attack  the  camp  of  the  Sirdar. 

At  daybreak  they  moved  out  of  the  fort.    Akbar 

*  General  Sale's  PubUc  Degpatch. 


DEATH  OF  COLONEL  DENNIS.  348 

Khan  was  ready  to  receive  them.  He  had  drawn  out 
his  troops  before  the  camp,  with  his  right  resting  on  a 
fort,  and  his  left  on  the  Caubnl  river,  fife  had  not  less 
than  6000  men.  Havelock  commenced  the  fight  by  an 
attack  on  the  enemy's  left;  whilst  Dennie,  with  the 
centre  column,  moved  against  a  fort  which  was  vigo- 
rously defended  by  the  enemy.  Gallantly,  at  the  head 
of  his  men,  advanced  Dennie  to  the  attack — a  brave 
and  chivalrous  soldier  ever  in  the  advance — ^but  an  Af- 
ghan marksman  covered  him  with  his  piece,  and  the 
ball  passed  through  Dennie's  body.*  A  better  soldier 
never  fell  on  the  field  of  battle.f  The  victory  was 
dearly  purchased  by  the  death  of  such  a  man.  And 
yet  it  was  a  brilliant  one.  Sale  gave  his  orders  for  a 
general  attack  on  the  Sirdar's  camp;  and  his  orders 
were  carried  into  efiect  with  an  impetuosity  and  success 
worthy  of  the  defenders  of  Jellalabad.  In  the  forcible 
language  of  Sale's  despatch,  on  which  I  cannot  improva 