

Pertab  Singh,  and  his  answer,  are  as  by  Captains  Lane  and  Johnstone, 

herewith  enclosed.   You  will  observe  and  by  many  of  the  Commissariat 

that  the  whole  Sikh  reeiment    was  agents.    It  was  not  denied  that  the 

actually  recalled   by  order,  without  men  could    be    recognised ;    but  I 

notice  being  given  to  me,  or  without  much  fear  that  no  punishment  will 

their  being  relieved,  although  four  be  inflicted  on  them.  ^ — ILawrence  to 

regiments  were  within  a  mile  of  them."  Pollock :  May  8, 1849.  MS,  Records,! 
—iCaptain  Lawrence  to  Mr.  Clerk:        t  Mr.  Gleig  says  that  the    band 

May  9,  1849.    MS.  Records.']  of  the  13th  went  out  to  play  them 

**  I   waited  on   Koonwur  Pertab  in ;    and   that   the   relieving   force 

Singh  yesterday.     I  spoke  strongly  marched  the  two  or  three  last  miles 

on  the  outrage  of  the  morning,  and  to  the  tune,  **  Oh,  but  yeVebeen  lang 

on  the  necessity  of  a  severe  example  o'  coming.** 


SOBTIE  OF  THE  6ABBIS0N.  341 

Pollock  had  to  speak  of  his  victories,  Sale,  too,  had  his 
to  narrate. 

Pollock,  before  he  entered  the  pass,  had  received  in- 
telligence of  the  gallant  sortie  made  by  the  garrison 
on  the  1st  of  April,  when  they  swept  away  from  the 
covering  parties  of  the  enemy  a  flock  of  500  sheep  and 
goats,  which  had  secured  them  a  further  ten  days*  supply 
of  meat*  Writing  of  this  to  Greneral  Pollock,  Mac- 
gregor  had  said :  "  Our  troops  of  all  arms  are  in  the 
highest  pluck,  and  they  seem  never  so  happy  as  when 
fighting  with  the  enemy.  I  verily  believe  we  could 
capture  Mahomed  Akbar's  camp,  even  with  our  pre* 
sent  means,  were  it  our  game  to  incur  the  risk  of  an 
attempt  of  the  kind,"f  This  was  lightly  spoken;  a  mere 
outburst  of  the  abundant  animal  spirits  of  the  writer; 
but  Pollock  was  scarcely  on  the  other  side  of  Ali-Mus- 
jid,  when  he  received  tidings  which  made  it  clear  to 
him  that  now  the  light  word  had  become  a  grave  fact, 
and  the  capture  of  Mahomed  Akbar's  camp  had  been 
actually  accomplished. 

And  now  that  they  had  reached  Jellalabad,  every 
one  in  Pollock's  camp  was  eager  for  details  of  this 
great  victory.  It  was,  indeed,  a  dashing  exploit.  On 
the  5th  of  April,  Macgregor's  spies  brought  in  tidings 
from  Akbar  Khan's  camp  that  Pollock  had  been  beaten 
back,  with  great  slaughter,  in  the  Khybur  Pass.  On 
the  morning  of  the  6th,  the  Sirdar's  guns  broke  out  into 

*  Mr.  Gleig  says :  *<  On  the  2nd,  comrades  of  the  Idth.     No  wonder 

Sir  Robert  Sale  proceeded  to  distri-  that  between  these  two  corps  there 

bute  the  captured  sheep  among  the  should  ha?e  sprung  up  a  romantk; 

corps  and  departments  composing  his  friendship,  which,  though  the  aoci- 