


*  Mr.  Gleig  gives  the  followioff  battle  in  his  ears,  hoping,  bnt  not 

account   of  Dennie*8  end :    **  With  living  to  be  assured,  that  it  woolflend 

undaunted  resolution  the  Idtb  rushed  triumphantly." 
at  the  fort,  Colonel   Dennie  nobly        f  I  rejoice  In  the  opportunity  Ihiis 

leading ;   and  finding    the   aperture  afforded  me  of  laying  on  Dennie's 

sufficiently  large  to  admit  of  it,  they  grave  my  humble  tribute  of  praise; 

rushed  through  the  outer  wall — only  the    more    so,  that,  when  living,  I 

to    find   themselves    exposed    to   a  incurred  his  anger  by  the  freedom  of 

murderous  fire  from  the  untouched  my  remarks  on  some  moot  points 

defences  of  the  inner  keep.      Here  connected  with  his  military  career, 

Dennie  receivedjust  as  he  approached  Dennie*s  services  were  not  duly  re- 

the  breach,  his  mortal  wound.   A  ball  cognised  or  adequately  rewarded.  Ke 

entered  the  side,  passing  throueh  the  was  a  man  of  strong  feeding,  and  hit 

sword-belt ;  and  he  bent  forward  upon  expressed  himself  strop  j;ly ;  and  some 

his  horse.     Lieutenant  and  Adjutant  friends,  not  wisely  regard  Ail  of  Us 

(now  Captain)  Wood  instantly  rode  memory,  published,  tinder  his  name, 

up  to  him,  and  expressed  a  hope  that  some  hasty  letters,  more  than  one  ti 

the  hurt  was  not  serious.     But  it  was  the  dashes  or  asterisks  in  which  point 

more  than  serious ;  it  was  fatal.     A  to  the  writer  of  these  volumes.    I  do 

couple    of    orderlies,    by    Captain  not  now  mind  saying  that  I  think  it 

Wood's  direction,  turned  his  horse's  very  probable  that  I  was  wrong.   But 

head   homewards,  and  leading  it  by  Dennie  was  equally  wrong  when  )ie 

the  bridle,  endeavoured  to  guide  him  attributed  what  I  wrote  to  feelhugp  of 

to  the  town.     But  he  never  reached  personal  animosity, 
it  alive.     He  died  with  the  sound  of 


344         THB  FOBCING  OF  THE  KHTBUB. 

"  The  artillery  advanced  at  the  gallop,  and  directed  a 
heavy  fire  upon  the  A%han  centre,  whilst  two  of  the 
columns  of  infantry  penetrated  the  line  near  the  same 
point,  and  the  third  forced  back  its  left  from  its  support 
on  the  river,  into  the  stream  of  which  some  of  his  horse 
and  foot  were  driven.     The  A%hans  made  repeated 
attempts  to  check  our  advance  by  a  smart  fire  of  mus- 
ketryj    by  throwing  forward  heavy  bodies  of   horse, 
which  twice  threatened  the  detachments  of  foot  under 
Captain  Havelock,  and  by  opening  upon  us  three  guns 
from  a  battery  screened  by  a  garden  wall,  and  said  to 
have  been  served  under  the  personal  superintendence  of 
the  Sirdar.    But  in  a  short  time  they  were  dislodged 
from  every  point  of  their  position,  their  cannon  taken, 
and  their  camp  involved  in  a  general  conflagration.    The 
battle  was  over — and  the  enemy  in  full  retreat  in  the 
direction  of  Lughman  by   about   7    a.m.      We    have 
made  ourselves  masters  of  two  cavalry  standards,  recap- 
tured four  guns  lost  by  the  Caubul  and  Gundamuck 
forces,  the  restoration  of  which,  to  our  government,  is 
matter  of  much  honest  exultation  among  our  troops, 
seized  and  destroyed  a  great  quantity  of  material  and 
ordnance  stores,  and  burnt  the  whole  of  the  enemy's 
tents.     In  short,  the  defeat  of  Mahomed  Akbar  in  open 
field,  by  the  troops  whom  he  had  boasted  of  blockading, 
has  been  complete,  and  signal."    The  enemy's  loss  was 
severe.     "  The  field  of  battle  was  strewed  with   the 
bodies  of  men  and  horses,  and  the  richness  of  the  trap- 
pings of  some  of  the  latter  seemed  to  attest  that  persons 
of  distinction  had  been  among  the  casualties."    The  loss 
on  our  side  was  small.     Eight  privates  of  the  13th 
Native  Infantry,  and  two  of  the  35th  Native  Infantry, 
were  killed.    Three  officers  and  about  fifty  men  were 
wounded. 