


THE  ^^  ILLUSTRIOUS  GABRISON.''  845 

Great  was  the  joy  which  the  intelligence  of  the 
victories  of  Pollock  and  Sale  diflfused  throughout  all 
India;  and  in  no  one  breast  did  so  much  of  gladness 
bubble  up  as  in  that  of  Lord  Ellenborough.  He  wrote, 
that  although  it  was  his  misfortune  not  to  be  a  soldier 
by  profession,  he  knew  how  to  appreciate  soldierly  qua- 
hties  and  soldierly  acts.  It  was  then  that,  being  at 
Benares  at  the  time,  he  issued  that  well-known  notifica- 
tion which  conferred  on  Sale's  brigade  the  honourable 
title  by  which  it  has  since  been  so  well-known — the 
title  of  the  "  Illustrious  Garrison :" 

Secret  Department,  Benares,  2l8t  April. 

The  Governor-General  feels  assured  that  every  subject  of  the 
British  Government  will  peruse'  with  the  deepest  interest  and 
satisfaction  the  report  he  now  communicates  of  the  entire  defeat 
of  the  Afghan  troops,  under  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  by  the 
garrison  of  Jellalabad. 

That  illustrious  garrison,  which,  by  its  constancy  in  enduring 
privation,  and  by  its  valour  in  action,  has  already  obtained  for 
itself  the  sympathy  and  respect  of  every  true  soldier,  has  now, 
gallying  forth  from  its  walls,  under  the  command  of  its  gallant 
leader,  Major-General  Sir  Robert  Sale,  thoroughly  beaten  in 
open  field  an  enemy  of  more  than  three  times  its  numbers,  taken 
the  standards  of  their  boasted  cavaby,  destroyed  their  camp,  and 
recaptured  four  guns,  which,  under  circumstances  which  can 
never  again  occur,  had  during  the  last  winter  fallen  into  their 
hands. 

The  Governor-General  cordially  congratulates  the  army  upon 
the  return  of  victory  to  its  ranks.  He  is  convinced  that  there,  as 
in  all  former  times,  it  will  be  found,  while,  as  at  Jellalabad,  the 
European  and  Native  troops  mutually  supporting  each  other,  and 
evincing  equal  discipline  and  valour,  are  led  into  action  by  officers 
in  whom  they  justly  confide. 

The  Governor-General  directs  that  the  substance  of  this  noti- 
fication, and  of  Major-General  Sir  Robert  Sale's  report,  be  care- 
fully made  known  to  all  troops,  and  that  a  salute  of  twenty-one 
guns  be  fired  at  every  principal  station  of  the  army. 


846  THB  FORCING  OF  THS  EHTBlTB. 

The  "  Illustrious  Garrison^  had  now  become  history. 
Sale  ceased  to  command  at  Jellalabad ;  and  soon  letters 
jBx>m  Lord  Ellenborough  set  aside  the  political  functions 
of  Macgregor.  In  Pollock  and  Nott,  on  either  side  of 
Afghanistan,  had  been  vested  supreme  political  autho- 
rity ;  and  Macgregor  soon  took  his  place  beside  the 
Greneral,  simply  as  his  aide-de-camp.  By  Pollock's  side, 
too,  holding  the  oflGice  of  his  military  secretary,  was 
Shakespear,  who  had  done  such  good  service  in  libe- 
rt^ting  the  Russian  slaves  at  Khiva;  who  had  won  his 
spurs  by  this  Central- Asian  exploit,  and  returned  to 
India  Sir  Richmond  Shakespear.  Pollock  knew  the 
worth  of  these  men,  and  turned  their  experience  to 
account.  But  the  reign  of  the  **  Politicals"  was  at  an 
end.  Lord  Ellenborough  had  determined  to  dethrone 
them. 