

That  there  was  some  mismanagement  in  Western  Af- 
ganistan  I  have  shown.  But  I  protest  against  the  bit- 
terness poured  out  upon  the  general  body  of  diplomatic 
employes  in  Afghanistan — the  taunting  insinuation  that 
being  incapable  of  making  good  soldiers  they  became 
parasites  and  "  Politicals."  "  If  a  man  is  too  stupid  or 
too  lazy  to  drill  his  company,"  wrote  General  Nott,  "  he 
often  turns  sycophant,  cringes  to  the  heads  of  depart- 
ments, and  is  made  a  '  Political,'  and  of  course  puts  the 
government  to  an  enormous  expense,  and  disgraces  the 
character  of  his  country."  Nothing  was  ever  more  un- 
like the  truth.  The  Afghan  "  Politicals"  were  among  the 
best  soldiers  in  the  country.  Many  of  them,  as  Todd, 
Rawlinson,  Nicolson,  &c.,  were  practised  drill-instructors 
— had  shown  an  especial  fitness  for  this  particular  duty 
in  disciplining  foreign  troops  or  raw  levies.     And  no 

*  Correspondence  of  General  Nott^  quoted  in  the  Quarterly  Review* 


352  THE  FOBCING  OF  THE  EHYBUIU 

one,  who  takes  account  of  the  most  honourable  inci- 
dents of  the  Afghan  War,  will  overlook  the  military 
services  rendered  by  Pottinger,  Macgregor,  H.  M.  Law- 
rence,  Mackeson,  Broadfoot,  Outram,  and  others,  who 
are  known  to  us  as  Political  Agents.  There  are  no  finer 
soldiers  in  the  Indian  Army  than  many  of  those  who 
distinguished  themselves  during  the  war  in  A%han- 
istan,  under  the  unpopular  designation  of  "  Politicals."* 

*  Author,  in  the  Calcutta  Review, 


THE  LAST  DAYS  OP  SHAH  SOOJAH.  353 


BOOK  VII. 

[1842.] 


CHAPTER  I. 

[January — April:  1842.] 

The  Last  Days  of  Shah  Soojah— State  of  Parties  at  Caubul—Condltion  of 
the  Hostages— the  Newab  Zemaun  Elhan— Letters  of  Shah  Soojah — 
His  Death — Question  of  his  Fidelity — ^His  Character  and  Conduct  con- 
sidered. 

It  is  time  that  I  should  pause  in  the  narration  of  the 
retributory  measures  of  the  British-Indian  Government, 
to  dwell,  for  a  little  space,  upon  the  events  at  Caubul 
which  succeeded  the  departure  of  Elphinstone's  army.  It 
had  been  rumoured  throughout  India — and  the  rumour 
had  created  no  little  astonishment  in  the  minds  of  those 
who  had  beUeved  that  the  Caubul  insurrection  was  a 
movement  against  the  Feringhees  and  their  Bang — that 
ever  since  the  departure  of  the  former  Shah  Soojah  had 
continued  to  occupy  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  had  been  re- 
cognised as  the  supreme  authority  by  the  very  men  who 
had  recently  been  in  arms  against  him.  And  the  rumour 
was  a  perfect  echo  of  the  truth.  Ever  since  the  depar- 
ture of  the  British  army  Shah  Soojah  had  reigned  at 
Caubul. 

He  had  reigned  at  Caubul,  but  he  had  not  ruled.  His 
power  was  merely  nominal.     The  chiefs  wanted  a  pup- 