

No  one  but  myself  could  manage  these  people  (Afghans)  and 
carry  on  the  government.  My  sincerity  and  friendship  to  the 
East  India  Company  was  formerly  well  known :  at  present  it  is  as 
evident  to  all  the  world  as  the  light  of  day.  If  I  had  only  some 
treasure,  that  during  the  two  or  three  remaining  months  of  winter 
I  might  strengthen  myself,  please  God  there  is  no  one  in  this 
country  who  could  displace  me,  and,  by  the  blessing  of  God, 
everything  would  be  arranged  according  to  my  desire.  The  men 
here  are  not  to  be  won  without  money.  God  grant  this  wish  of 
my  heart !  Before  this  I  spent  four  lakhs  of  rupees  in  this  afiair, 
and  I  also  gave  two  lakhs  more;  I  have  nothing  else  left.  If 
some  money  could  be  received  that  I  might  win  over  these  men, 
please  God  everything  could  be  arranged  according  to  my  desire. 
It  is  to  be  hoped,  as  you  will  see,  that  in  a  few  months  I  could 
collect  horse  and  foot  so  that  no  one  could  stir.  God  grant  this 
wish  of  my  heart  I 

The  bearer  of  this  will  verbally  inform  you  of  all  other  cir- 
cumstances. It  is  advisable  that  you  should  send  this  paper  to 
Peshawur,  or  even  to  the  Governor-General.  And  send  me  an 
answer  to  this  speedily.  Whenever  you  hear  of  the  arrival  of  this 
paper  at  Peshawur,  be  good  enough  to  let  me  know,  that  I  may 
feel  sure  of  its  having  passed  out  of  this  country ;  because  the  evil- 
disposed  are  spreading  reports  that  I  am  united  to  the  Feringhees. 
Until  I  have  gained  my  proper  footing,  it  is  necessary  that,  for 
some  time,  money  should  be  sent  to  enable  me  to  manage  matters. 
When  I  have  succeeded  in  establishing  my  power,  I  shall  not  re- 
quire assistance  from  any  one.     Everything  will  be  easy.     Don't 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  363 

let  the  men  of  this  country  know  these  things.  Afterwards, 
whatever  may  be  desirable  for  my  good  and  for  yours,  Gt)d  will 
grant.  And  God  grant  this  wish  of  my  heart  1  The  bearer  will 
tell  you  how  matters  stand.  Whenever  money  has  been  received 
and  I  have  reinstated  myself,  I  shall  have  these  people  so  much 
under  my  control,  that  if  I  order  it  they  will  carry  the  shoes  of 
the  Sahibs  on  their  own  heads.* 


FREE  TRANSLATION  OF  A  LETTER  FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO 
THE  GOVERNOR-GENERAL  OF  INDIA. 

( Without  datej  brought  on  the  2nd  of  February,  by  a  mestenger  fifteen  daytfrom 

Cauhul,) 

Be  it  known  to  my  friend  that  I  am  King,  and  know  the 
people  well.  It  is  right  to  treat  people  according  to  their  deserts; 
some  by  kindness,  others  by  severity. 

Some  evil-disposed  persons,  from  fear  of  me,  took  refuge  with 
Sir  W.  Macnaghten  and  Sir  A.  Bumes^  and  I  could  say  nothing 
to  them :  they  stirred  up  strife. 