

contrary  to  all   reason  to  suppose  Tengeance  so  much,  that  they  will 

otherwise.      The    measures    which  strain  every  nerve  to  oppose  us,  and 

obliged    the    Newab    to    resign  his  maybe  his  Majesty  will  feel  that  his 

throne  are,  I  believe — 1st.  The  dread  safest  plan  is  to  join  his  coimtrymen 

of  our  vengeance,  which  the  people  against  us.     He  said  at  the  Durbar 

think  the  King  can  in  some  way  avert,  this  morning  that  he  was  glad  that 

if  a  force  is  sent  strong  enough  to  affairs  had  taken  such  a  turn,  and 

shut  out  all  hope  of  opposition.    2nd.  that  he  was  now  able  to  call  himself 

The  dread  of  Akbar  s  rising  power,  defender  of  the  faith.      This  much 

3rd.  The  suspicions  of  the  fidelity  of  could  not  have  been  avoided  under 

their  own   party,  who    had    shown  the  circumstances We  are 

symptoms  of  disaffection,  and  some  amused  all  day  long  by  abuse  and 

of  whom  had  openly  espoused  the  scurrilous  verses  about  the  Kaffirs, 

cause  of  his  Majesty.     Such  a  condi-  Books  are  being  sold  by  the  weight, 

tion  cannot,  I  should  think,  last  long  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  get  hold 

between  such  Yorks  and  Lancasters.  of  the    chddren — most    exorbitant 

There  is  one  thing  very  certain,  that  prices  are  demanded.     The  Newab 

unless  a  very  large  force  is  sent  up,  promises,  but  has  not  the  power  to 

which  will  preclude  all  hope  of  oppo-  fulfil.     Salutes  are  being  fired,  and 

sition,  every  man  in  the  country  will  there  is  a  general  rejoicing  in  honour 

rise  against  us ;  and  the  people  in  the  of   the   coalition    between   the   two 

vicinity  of  Caubul  have  so  compro-  Kings.     Artillerymen  are  being  sent 

mised  themselves,   and    dread    our  to  Akbar."— [3/6'.  Correspondence.'] 


CONDUCT  OF  THE  NEWAB.  357 

people,  he  himself  did  all  that,  single-handed,  he  could 
do,  to  atone  for  the  cruelty  of  his  countrymen ;  and  no 
father  could  have  treated  his  children  more  kindly  than 
the  good  Newab  cherished  and  protected  the  English 
hostages  who  found  a  sanctuary  in  his  house  * 

But  it  was  necessary,  whilst  the  excitement  ran  so 
high  at  Caubul,  and  there  was  a  prospect  of  violent 
contention  among  the  chiefs,  to  do  something  more  than 
this.  Ameen-oollah  Khan  never  slackened  in  his  exer- 
tions to  obtain  possession  of  the  persons  of  the  hostages. 
Having  tried   every  kind  of  stratagem,  and  failed  to 

•  On  the  24th  of  January,  John  pore  treasury,  and  was  produced  on 
Conolly  wrote:  "The  King  holds  the  application  of  iodyne  to  the  paper. 
Durbar  regularly,  at  which  all  the  On  the  same  day  Lieutenant  Conolly 
chiefs  attend.  He  pretends  to  have  wrote  to  Mr.  Clerk :  "  The  King  is 
shaken  off  all  connexion  with  our  obliged  to  talk  of  sending  troops  to 
government,  but  secretly  sends  me  oppose  us  at  the  Khybur;  but  he  de- 
messages,  professing  all  sincerity  and  clares  secretly  to  me  his  sincerity  for 
attachment.  There  is  much  talk  of  the  British  Grovemment.  The  chiefs 
a  large  force  bein^  sent  to  oppose  the  talk  of  collecting  an  army,  but  the 