

pulaye,  many  of  the  Kuzailbash,  and  events  of  the  morrow.     All  eyes  are 


STATE  OF  PARTIES.                                    359 

The  King  regarded  his  proceedings  with  mistrust. 
There  was  no  sort  of  cordiality  between  them.     The 

turned  upon  you.  The  evacuation  There  is  a  report  that  Palmer  has 
of  Jellalabad  will  have  the  worst  broken  up  the  treaty,  and  is  again 
possible  effect.  Every  one  here  has  besieged  in  the  BaJUa  Hissar.  He 
turned  soldier,  and  the  people  are  in  writes  for  orders,  which  kindly  send 
a  high  state  of  excitement,  and  hun-  with  all  expedition.  For  God  s  sake 
gering  after  pay,  which  is  not  forth-  beware  of  Mahomed  Akbar." 
coming.  Our  host  has  assembled  In  a  letter  of  March  5  the  same 
a  regiment  of  1000  bayonets,  1000  writer  says:  **  Futteh  Jung  (Shah 
horsemen,  some  Jezailchees,  and  a  Soojah*8  son)  has  gone  out  yesterday 
park  of  twelve  guns,  the  ammunition  to  join  Akbar.  'Diings  are  very  un- 
for  which,  by  the  Meerza^s  return  settled  here  still,  and  the  Rohistanees 
yesterday,  amounted  to  about  thirty  are  fighting  amongst  themselves, 
shot,  and  no  cartridges.  There  must  The  Newab  is  still  treating  us  with 
be  some  serious  disturbance  ere  long,  the  greatest  kindness.  He  has  en- 
We  are  very  anxious  about  the  sick,  listed  about  3000  men,  principally 
which  we  fear  will  be  sacrificed  in  for  our  protection,  and  is  determined 
any  popular  tumult.  For  ourselves,  to  fight  rather  than  give  us  up.  The 
we  must  trust  to  Providence ;  should  Naib  here  has  been  trying  to  get  us, 
things  come  to  the  worst,  we  shall  and  has  a  strong  party  of  Sepoys  en« 
try  and  escape  to  your  stronghold. —  listed  also.  The  Newab  asked  me 
P.S.  We  have  just  heard  that  a  yesterday  if,  when  his  money  is  out, 
change  of  ministry  has  been  proposed  we  shall  be  able  to  aaaist  him,  as  he 
by  his  Majesty,  and  likely  to  be  ef-  only  has  sufficient  ready  cash  to  pay 
fected,  Oosman  Khan  to  be  acting  his  men  for  one  montn  and  a  half 
premier,  and  the  Newab  to  be  a  morQ.  Can  you  authorise  me  to 
sleeping  partner.  make  him  an  advance  when  his  money 
**  15th,  P.M.,  10  o^clock. — To-day  fails  ?  for,  as  I  said  before,  his  enter- 
there  has  been  a  noisy  debate  be-  taining  troops  is  almost  entirely  oil 
tween  the  Newab  and  Ameen-oollab,  our  account.  He  would  be  safe 
the  former  abusing  the  latter  in  enough  were  we  not  his  guests.  In 
rather  round  terms.  The  Naib  left  the  mean  time  he  has  bought  ammuni- 
the  room  in  a  huff,  and  things  are  as  tion  and  got  his  guns  ready  in  case 
unsettled  as  can  be.      The  Newab  of  an  attack.'* 

says  he  won*t  give  up  his  guns,  or  And  in  another  letter  of  the  same 