

In  the  present  instance  people  said,  **  There  are  crores  of  rupees 
in  the  Chaonee ;  let  us  strengthen  Islam."  Such  are  the  people. 
Three  or  four  dogs  are  gone  (dead);  as  many  remain. 

Nizam-oo-dowlah  was  a  dog  and  ruined  all.  I  begged  the 
Envoy  not  to  ruin  the  people.  Nizam-oo-dowlah  said  to  the 
Douranees,  the  King  and  Envoy  will  destroy  you.  I  will  help 
you,  but  Captain  Trevor  will  not  let  me.  The  people  were  thus 
stirred  up.  I  was  annoyed,  but  could  not  help  myself;  now, 
please  God  and  by  the  help  of  friends,  much  may  be  done. 

All  were  against  me  on  account  of  you.  They  sent  to  me  to 
separate  myself  from  you,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  faith  to  be  King 
myself  (some  Sahibs  were  then  in  the  Balla  Hissar).  I  did  not 
give  a  reply  at  the  time,  but  sent  word  to  the  Envoy,  who  told 
me  to  turn  them  away.  I  did  so,  saying  I  owed  everything  to 
the  Sahibs.     They  told  me  I  would  repent. 

For  some  days  there  was  fighting  near  the  Chaonee  and  Balla 
Hissar  and  Balla  Boorj ;  at  which  time  I  sent  word  to  the  Envoy 
to  come  with  all  his  baggage  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  where  the 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  365 

troops  could  hold  out  for  a  year  or  two,  telling  him  that  three  or 
four  thousand  of  the  inhabitants  might  be  turned  out,  and  guns 
and  stores  brought.  After  much  debate,  no  answer  was  given.  I 
said,   "  Very  good  1     Please  yourselves." 

Some  days  after  I  sent  to  the  Chaonee,  and  warned  them  not  to 
abandon  it;  that  I  knew  the  designs  of  the  enemy,  who  intended 
to  attack  them;  and  by  expending  five  or  six  lakhs  of  rupees  I 
endeavoured  to  bring  the  people  from  the  common  enemy  towards 
myself;  but  they  told  me  to  separate  myself  from  you.  On  this 
account  three  or  four  Barukzyes  separated  themselves  from  me; 
but  though  I  could  not  trust  people,  1  managed  matters  by  first 
paying  three  or  four  lakhs,  and  afterwards  two  or  three,  which 
they  asked  of  me,  thinking  I  would  refuse,  and  they  would  have 
an  excuse  for  separating  from  me;  but  I  gave  all  I  had,  and  now 
am  moneyless.  If,  however,  I  had  money,  I  could  openly  do 
much;  but  nothing  is  to  be  done  without  money  (they  are  dogs). 
If  I  had  money  I  could  raise  troops,  and  many  of  my  old 
(Hindostanee)  ones  who  returned  naked  are  anxious  to  serve  me; 
but  I  have  no  money.  In  heart  I  am  yours,  though  all  the  world 
are  separated  from  me. 

Nizam-oo-dowlah  knew  a  night  before  it  occurred  what  was  to 
happen,  but  did  not  tell  me  or  the  Envoy  that  we  might  pre- 
vent it. 

The  conspirators  told  the  people  that  I  was  with  them ;  and 
when  the  Prince  went  out  with  the  troops,  they  (the  traitors) 
said,  **  They  are  with  us." 