

During  the  last  two  or  three  years  I  considered  the  Sahibs,  and 
especially  the  Envoy,  whom  I  valued  more  than  my  life,  as  my 
equals;  without  their  pleasure  I  did  nothing. 

It  was  God's  will  I  should  sec  what  I  would  have  wished  not 
to  have  seen.     May  no  other  have  such  experiences. 

Could  it  have  been  my  wish  to  see  my  enemies  and  their 
families  in  the  place  of  my  friends? 

Once  or  twice  I  wrote  to  you  to  send  a  person  to  inquire  and 
inform  you  of  the  state  of  things  in  this  country;  but  it  was  not 
done. 

For  two  or  three  years  I  consoled  the  people,  who  told  me  if 
I  was  not  King,  they  should  understand  it  was  the  Feringhee; 
and  they  (the  former)  told  me  that  when  I  came  they  expelled 
Dost  Mahomed,  but  that  I  had  disappointed  them;  that  now 
their  women  left  them,  their  country  was  lost;  and,  although  at 
first  they  received  pay,  even  that  was  stopped.  I  could  not  con- 
sole the  people,  but  I  spoke  of  them  to  the  Envoy,  and  told  him 
that,  sooner  or  later,  there  would  be  a  disturbance ;  but  he  listened 
not  to  me.  I  told  him  they  were  deceiving  him ;  but  he  believed 
me  not,  and  desired  me  to  be  at  ease,  for  that  he  would  settle  the 
country  with  two  Pultuns  (regiments). 

•  MS.  Records. 


364  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

He  further  told  me  to  confine  and  expel  some  evil-disposed 
persons.  I  did  so;  but  they  got  access  to  Nizam-oo-dowlah,  and 
through  him  to  the  Envoy,  who  asked  me  to  release  them.  I  did 
so.     Now  I  am  distressed  by  those  very  people. 

When  the  Envoy  was  going  away  I  asked  him  to  take  me 
with  him;  for  that  I  was  in  an  extremity;  I  told  him  of  what 
was  going  on,  and  was  not  listened  to.  I  told  him  that  com- 
plaints were  daily  made  to  me  of  Afghan  women  being  taken 
to  Bumes's  Moonshee,  and  of  their  drinking  wine  at  his  house, 
and  of  women  being  taken  to  the  Chaonee  (cantonments)  on 
horseback,  and  of  my  having  myself  witnessed  it.  When  people 
complained  to  me  of  such  things,  I  asked  who  did  so,  that  I 
might  inquire;  and  told  them  not  to  defame  the  Sahibs.  I  first 
comforted  and  then  reproved  them ;  and  said,  if  any  person  uses 
violence  to  your  women,  tell  me,  and  inquiry  shall  be  made. 

The  people  have  often  before  acted  as  they  have  now ;  they  con- 
fined my  brother  Mahmood  in  the  Balla  Hissar;  the  conspirators 
then  were  Mooktear-oo-dowlah  and  Ahmed  Khan,  Noorzye,  &c. 
They  pretended  it  was  a  quarrel  between  the  Sheeahs  and  Soonees; 
but  it  proved  a  great  matter,  and  they  saw  that  without  me  they 
could  not  settle  matters.  I  was  then  among  the  Kakurs,  The 
Khans  sent  for  me,  and  all  obeyed  me. 