


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH*  361 

It  now  seemed  that  Caubul  was  about  to  become  the 
theatre  of  internecine  strife.  The  gates  of  the  Balla 
Hissar  were  half  closed,  and  the  Shah  never  ventured 
beyond  them.  The  chiefs  were  all  mustering  retainers. 
The  King  was  endeavouring  to  cast  suspicion  on  the 
nationality  of  the  Newab ;  and  the  Newab's  party  were 
doubting  the  fidelity  of  the  King.  The  Populzye  leaders 
of  the  insurrection  clustered  round  the  monarch,  but 
he  had  neither  popularity  nor  power.  Money  he  had ; 
but  making  an  outward  show  of  poverty,  he  reso- 
lutely refused  to  produce  it ;  and  the  people  began  to 
abuse  him  for  his  parsimony.  In  this  conjuncture  he 
continued  to  write  to  the  British  authorities,  declaring 
that  he  could  do  anything  for  them  if  they  ..would  only 
send  him  money ;  but  the  British  authorities  were  deaf 
to  his  entreaties,  and  only  sent  him  advice. 

Containing  the  King's  version  of  the  causes  and  cir- 
cumstances  of  our  disasters  at  Caubul,  and  throwing 
some  light  upon  his  own  character  and  conduct,  the 
letters  of  Shah  Soojah  are  suflBciently  curious  and  in- 
teresting to  induce  me  to  insert  a  few  of  them  in  this 
place : 

FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR. 
(Beceived  January  2l8i,  1842.) 

Let  it  be  known  to  Captain  Macgregor:  you  are  aware  of 
all  that  has  occurred  here.  Notwithstanding  all  I  said  regarding 
the  treachery  of  these  men,  they  (the  British)  did  not  understand, 
but  were  guided  by  the  advice  of  my  enemies — that  is,  the  Ba- 
rukzyes — until  arrived  at  this  pitch.  The  clans  of  the  Barukzyes 
had  this  object,  that  suspicion  and  ill-will  should  exist  between 
the  British  and  me.  To  the  British  they  said,  that  I  had  insti- 
gated the  rebellion ;  and  to  the  Mahomedans  they  said,  that  I  and 

parsimony  is  as  a  proverb ;  and  bis  unless  some  accommodation  is  made 

suspected  connexion  witb  us  adds  to  witb  bis  Majesty,   the  Bolla  Hissar 

his  unpopularity.    •     .     .     TheNaib  will  in  all  probability  be   the  first 

has  written  for  the  Kohistanees  to  point  of  attack.     It  will  be  a  popular 

accompany  him  on  a  crusade,  and  cause,  as  there  are  hopes  of  plunder." 


362  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

the  Feringhees  were  one,  until  they  made  me  generally  unpopular. 
Well;  such  was  fated !  It  has  caused  me  much  grief  and  regret. 
God  grant  this  wish  of  my  heart,  that  the  fate  of  Sir  William 
Macnaghten  and  Mr.  Trevor  and  the  other  gentlemen  may  befal 
my  enemies !  I  frequently  desired  them,  on  the  first  outbreak 
of  the  rebellion,  to  bring  everything  into  the  Balla  Hissar,  which 
is  a  place  of  strength.  They  did  not  listen  to  ray  advice.  I 
then  begged  them  to  endeavour  to  gain  time — that  when  I  could 
arrange  matters  with  these  men  (Afghans)  all  would  be  well. 
During  the  time  that  I  was  besieged,  I  expended  all  that  I  had 
collected  with  so  much  labour,  until  I  brought  every  one  of  influ- 
ence over  to  my  side  by  payment  Please  God  they  may  remain 
faithful  to  me ! 