

*  On  the  Iflth  of  February  Conollj  some  of  the  Gaubul  chiefs.  Yon  will 
wrote  to  Maogregor :  '^  Since  mj  perceive  among  his  partisan!  the 
former  notes,  the  latest  of  which  was  chief  conspirators  in  tne  late  rebel- 
dated  the  lOtb,  affaire  have  assumed  lion,  Ameen-oollah,  Abdool  Salam, 
a  Tcry  different  a^>ect.  Naib  Ameen*  and  Sekundur,— -men  who  have  no* 
oollah,  having  ffiven  up  the  guns  en*  thing  to  hope  for  at  our  hands.  I 
trusted  to  his  cnai]|e,  nas  i^aken  the  presume  the  first  demand  made  by 
confidence  of  the  Barukzye  party  in  our  government  will  be  the  persons 
his  (the  Naib^s)  sincerity,  and  ex-  of  these  chiefs,  who  planned  and  were 
posed  the  Kine*s  ultimate  designs  of  most  conspicuous  in  the  late  revolu- 
making  himsdf  strong  and  inde-  tion ;  and  if  the  information  I  have 
pendent  of,  if  not  inimical  to,  the  alluded  to  be  correct,  his  Majesty 
Newab*s  clique.  Yesterday  the  Naib  may  object  to  give  up  the  chiefik 
called  on  the  Newab,  on  the  part  of  But  these  are  matters  for  future  con- 
his  Majesty,  to  send  his  guns  to  the  sideration ;  and  should  his  Majesty 
Balla  Hissar.  His  demand  was  di-  be  disinclined  to  use  his  utmost  en- 
reetly  refused ;  and  the  Newab  de-  deavours  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
dared  his  determination  of  not  i^ain  wishes  of  government,  such  unwil- 
attending  the  Durbar  until  his  Ma-  lingness  must,  of  course,  be  regarded 

i'esty  gave  pi'ooft  of  confidence  and  as  hostility.    It  is  generally  bdieved 

lonesty.     This  morning  FuzU^^i-Al-  and  asserted  throughout  the  town 

mud,  son  of  Kasee  Hussun,  brought  that  his  M^esty  instigated  the  late 

an  order  fl'om  his  Majesty  that  I  rebellion.    I  have  never  been  able  to 

should  wait  upon  him ;  but  I  declined  prove  the  accusation,  though  I  can- 

the  honour  in  this  instance,  as  I  had  not  but  think  that  his  Majesty  waa, 

done  before,  feeling  that  no  good  directly  or  indirectly,  the  cause  of  the 

could  come  from  an  interview,  ig^  revolution.    When  you  know  the  in- 

norant  as  I  am  of  the  intentions  of  tentions  of  government,  you  will  be 

government  and  of  your  wishes,  and  able  to  see  your  way  more  clearly, 

aving  been,  moreover,  frequently  I  would,  however,  suggest  that  his 

warned  against  moving  out  of  our  Majesty  be    made    to    understand, 

present  residence.     I  gathered  from  either  from  yourself  or  through  me, 

the  Easee^s  son  that  his  Majesty  was  that  he  must  either  meet  our  wishes 

forming  a  party  in  opposition  to  the  or  go  his  own  road.    Things  are  so 

Barukzye  faction,  the  principal  cha-  very  unsettled  here  just  now  ihat 

racters  being  Ameen-ooUah,  the  Po-  the  most  learned  cannot  foretel  the 