

I  sent  Mahomed  Slierreef  to  settle  matters,  but  he  was  not 
attended  to ;  and  he,  as  well  as  many  of  my  troops,  was  killed, 
which  event  opened  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  Caubul;  so  the  con- 
spirators, to  implicate  the  people,  attacked  Sir  A.  Bumes. 

If  my  counsel  is  taken  much  may  yet  be  done;  or,  if  not,  I  will 
go  to  Mecca.  Here  the  people  are  confirmed  traitors,  or  I  could 
easily  settle  the  whole  country,  and  Persia  and  Khorassan. 

What  was  fated  has  happened.  I  have  not  seen  it  in  my  sleep, 
but  have  actually  witnessed  it.  May  God  remove  the  sorrow, 
that  my  enemies  and  their  families  should  be  in  the  place  of  my 
friends.  Is  there  any  in  the  world  who  gave  their  enemies  the 
means  to  kill  them?  The  dog  Akbar  came  as  a  beggar  from 
Toorkistan.  His  enmity  to  the  Sahib-Log  and  myself  was  ap- 
parent; but  laklis  of  rupees  were  given  him  to  escort  the  troops 


366  THE  LAST  DATS  OF  SHAH  800 JAH. 

in  their  retreat;  and  what  was  the  consequenoe?  In  the  midat 
of  the  discussions  I  sent  several  times  to  the  Envoy,  and  asked 
him  why  he  nourished  his  enemy;  but  I  was  not  attended  to. 

All  Mussulmans  turned  from  me  on  account  of  you;  and 
for  three  months,  for  your  sake,  I  experienced  trouble  and 
distress^  and  then  the  Envoy  agreed  to  give  the  country  to 
Mahomed  Akbar,  and  to  allow  me  a  lakh  of  rupees  a  year,  or 
four  lakhs  in  Hindostan;  but  I  knew  and  said,  that  as  soon  as 
they  left  the  Chaonee  they  would  be  destroyed;  and  so  it  has 
proved. 

Between  us  there  were  no  difierences,  and  there  will  not  be. 

When  I  saw  how  things  were  going,  I  expended  money  to 
draw  the  people  from  Mahomed  Akbar;  but  now  I  can  do  nothing. 
I  sent  news  to  Macgregor^  and  to  Ghuznee,  and  to  Candahar. 

The  load  is  unsafe,  so  I  cannot  write  aright.*^ 


FBOM  SHAH  800JAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR  (WRITTEN  IN 
SECRET  BY  HIS  MAJESTY'S  OWN  HAND). 

(Received  February  6t^.) 

Let  it  be  known  to  Captain  Macgregor  what  misfortunes 
have  befallen  me !  Everjrthing  occurs  contrary  to  expectation. 
I  wrote,  that  after  labouring  from  earliest  morning  to  nightfall, 
I  had  by  a  thousand  schemes  satisfied  these  men  and  made  them 
swear  fidelity.  One  came  and  another  went;  but  all  saying, 
"  Be  not  united  to  the  Feringhees."  This  is  what  the  Barukzyes 
are  spreading  among  the  people.  I  said  in  reply  to  them,  "  You 
yourselves  have  said  that  they  (the  Feringhees)  have  done  nothing 
for  the  Sirkar,  and  have  not  fulfilled  their  promises  ;  then  how 
should  the  Sirkar  be  well  disposed  towards  them?  During  the 
time  that  I  was  with  them  I  felt  that  my  name  sufiered,  and  I  felt 
this  disgrace — that  it  was  known  to  all  the  world.  1  continued 
with  them  until  the  time  when  Sir  William  Macnaghten  purposely 
told  me  to  cast  them  (the  Feringhees)  off*.!  I  then  dismissed 
them,  and  you  yourselves  informed  me  that  they  (the  Feringhees) 
had  come  to  an  imderstanding  with  Mahomed  Akbar.  How 
then  could  I  still  preserve  any  understanding  with  them?    Rest 