

go  to  the  Durbar:  and  insists  upon  date:  ^^The  bearer  will  be  able  to 

his  Majesty  pur-  tell  you  all  the  news.    I  have  written 

suing  the  non-interference  system  to  to  you  several  times,  but  have  received 
which  be  is  bound  by  the  terms  of  no  acknowledgment  of  my  letters, 
his  treaty.  There  is  nothing  but  Ni-  Always  try  solution  of  iodyne  on  my 
fag :  everybody  suspects  his  neigh-  notes.  .  .  .  We  are  very  kindlj 
hour ;  everythmg  is  in  capital  trim  treated  by  the  Newab,  but  close  pn- 
for  us  If  our  army  advances  :  I  only  soners.  Ameen-oollah  has  tried  strata- 
wait  your  authority  to  spend  a  little  gem  and  threats  to  get  us  out  of  the 
money,  and  above  all  a  guarantee  to  NewaVs  hands,  with  a  view  of  screw- 
our  host  of  a  handsome  provision  if  ing  us ;  but,  thanks  to  the  Newab,  we 
he  sides  with  us,  or  stands  neutral —  are  as  yet  safe,  though  our  situation 
for  he  is  a  most  worthy  and  honest  is  an  unpleasant  one.  The  King  it 
old  gentleman,  and  had  no  hand  in  sitting  in  the  Balla  Hissar ;  but  hit 
the  late  melancholy  occurrences,  authority  is  only  nominal,  all  power 
Ghoolam  Mahomed  Khan  has  also  being  in  the  hands  of  Ameen-ooUah. 
kept  aloof  from  the  late  rebellion.  Prince  Futteh  Jung  has  started  with 


360  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

old  Suddozye  and  Barukzye  strife  seemed  about  to  be 
renewed  with  all  its  pristine  vigour.  At  last  the  Shah, 
about  the  middle  of  the  month  of  March,  corrupted  the 
commandant  of  the  Newab's  army,  who  went  over 
with  all  his  followers  to  the  Balla  Hissar.  This  event, 
which  threatened  entirely  to  change  the  state  of  parties 
at  the  capital,  threw  all  Caubul  into  a  ferment.  The 
shops  were  closed ;  the  people  began  to  arm  themselves. 
The  Newab  demanded  the  restoration  of  his  troops;  but 
the  King  only  yielded  a  conditional  assent.  He  appears 
at  this  time  to  have  been  entirely  in  the  hands  of 
Araeen-oollah  Khan ;  and  he  replied,  that  if  the  hostages 
were  sent  to  the  house  of  the  Logur  chief,  the  recreant 
commandant  should  be  sent  there  at  the  same  time. 
The  Newab,  however,  resolutely  refused  to  give  up 
the  English  gentlemen.  The  proposal  seems  to  have 
strengthened  Conolly^s  suspicions  of  the  fidelity  of  Shah 
Soojah.     It  nearly  cost  the  hostages  their  lives.* 

a  few  horsemen  towards  Jellalabad,    Fortunately  for  us  the  Newab  re- 
and  will  probably  halt  for  some  days  fused  to  give  us  up.    This  proposi- 
at  Bootkak.    The  King  sends  me  oc-  tion  was  made  through  jealousy  of 
casionally    messages  professing  sin-  the  Newab,   and  with  the  view  to 
cerity  for  the  British  Government ;  conciliate  Ameen-oollah,  by  whom  it 
but  he  does  not,  in  his  present  circum-  had  been  represented  to  his  Majesty 
stances,  do  anything  which  would  lead  that  we  were    supplying  our    host 
his  subjects  to  suspect  his  attachment  with  money,  &c.    Aineen-oollah  had 
to  us,  or  the  whole  population  would  been  for  many  days  trying  to  get  pos- 
rise  up  against  him." — [Af5.  Corre'  session  of  our  persons  with  a  view  to 
spondence!}  try  and  extort  money  from  us.     His 
*  A  letter  to  Greneral  Pollock,  writ-  IVfajesty's  proposition  nearly  cost  us 
ten   on  the    18th  of  March,    says:  our  lives.    .    .     .    Since  the  deser- 
"  Affairs  here  are  as  unsettled  as  they  tion  of  the  commandant  the   whole 
can  possibly  be.     The    day    before  city  has  been  in  an   uproar.     The 
yesterday   the    commandant    of  the  shops  are  all  closed,  and  every  man 
Newab's  regiment   was    bribed    by  has    armed    himself.      The    feeling 
his  Majesty  to  desert  to  the  Balla  against  us  is  reawakened.    The  gates 
Hissar  with  all  his    soldiers.     The  of  the  Balla  Hissar  are    half  shut; 
Newab   demanded  their  restoration,  and  each  chief  has  collected  his  fol- 
but  was  refused.     Yesterday,  after  lowers.     Three  or  four  thousand  men 
much  dispute,   his    Majesty  sent   a  have  flocked  round  our  host.     The 
message  to  our  host,  saying  that  the  Barukzye's  and    Suddozye*s  party- 
commandant    should     be     sent    to  spirit  bids  fair  to  be  renewed  with  all 
Ameen-ooUah's  house  if  we  were  de-  its  rancour.    .     .     .     The  King  has, 
livered  over  to  the  same  authority,  however,  now  but  few  friends,  and  his 