

army  which  is  said  to  be  advancing  sinews  of  war  are  wanting 

from  Hindostan ;  but  money  is  want-  Thanks  to  the  Newab,  we  are  safe ; 
ing;  the  religious  feeling  against  us  but  it  has  more  than  once  been  pro- 
continues  very  strong,  and  the  chiefs  posed  that  we  should  be  killed.  .  .  . 
have  compromised  themselves  so  Since  our  troops  left  this,  the  King 
much,  that  they  will  rise  to  a  man,  has  been  recognised  by  the  Newab 
unless  an  overpowering  force  is  sent,  and  the  rebel  chiefs  on  the  payment 
The  Newab^s  kindness  is  beyond  de-  of  three  lakhs  of  rupees  to  the  Newab 
scription,  and  he  professes,  and  I  be-  and  Ameen-oollah  Khan.  The  for- 
lieve  sincerely  feels,  great  anxiety  to  mer  is  Vizier ;  the  latter  deputy, 
secure  the  friendship  of  our  govern-  The  Newab  is  most  anxious  to  serve 
ment.  He  is  most  deeply  distressed  our  government.  He  has  not  been 
at  the  treacherous  conduct  of  the  in  any  way  concerned  in  the  trea- 
chiefs.  We  are  quite  ignorant  of  cherous  conduct  to  our  troops.  His 
the  intentions  of  government.  Mo-  kindness  and  attention  to  us  is  great, 
hamed  Akbar  is  continually  writing  and  he  is  sincerely  anxious  to  estar 
for  guns  and  ammunition;  but  not  blish  a  friendship  with  the  British 
a  man  can  be  induced  to  march  Grovemment — bemg  afraid  of  the 
without  pay,  and  every  one  is  jea-  King  and  Mohamed  Akbar,  and  dis- 
lous  of  Akbar  Khan's  rising  power,  gusted  with  the  conduct  of  the  chiefs. 
The  Barukzye  faction  of  his  party  who  deceived  him  with  oaths  and 
view  each  other  with  great  suspicion,  protestations.  Great  excitement  pre- 
Ameen-ooUah  is  the  go-between,  vails  in  the  town ;  the  feeling  against 
Akbar  Khan  is  procuring  all  the  us  continues  very  strong,  and  every 
money  he  can  by  extortion  from  man  will  oppose  our  re-entering  the 
Sourkars  and  others." — [MS.  Corre-  country,  unless  a  force  is  sent  which 
spondence."]  This  was  interlined  in-  will  preclude  all  hope  of  successful 
visibly  on  the  advice  of  a  bill  drawn  opposition." — [MS,  Correspondence,'] 
by  Major  Pottinger  on  the  Feroze- 


358  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

gecure  them  by  firaud,  he  would  have  resorted  to  open 
violence.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  oppose  force 
to  force;  so  the  Newab  raised  an  army  of  his  own. 
His  pecuniary  resources  were  limited;  but  he  did  not 
hesitate  to  spend  his  little  stores  freely  in  entertaining 
followers.  Mainly  for  the  protection  of  the  English 
gentlemen  he  raised  a  body  of  1000  footmen,  whom  he 
armed  with  English  bayonets;  another  body  of  1000 
horse,  and  some  Jezailchees — in  all,  about  3000  men. 
The  English  guns,  too,  were  in  his  possession,  and  he 
refiised  to  yield  them  up  to  the  Shah.* 