


368  THE  LAST  DAYS  OP  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

shall  be  injured.  The  retreat  of  the  Caubul  Pass  was  quite  a 
different  bSbit.  All  were  then  our  mortal  enemies.  If  I  had 
money  I  should  not  require  assistance  from  any  one.  Since  I 
have  no  money,  if  the  Lord  (Auckland)  does  not  think  it  advi- 
sable to  send  it,  I  must  go  somewhere  else.  There  is  not  another 
person  but  myself  who  could  manage  this  a&ir.  I  know  these 
men  well ;  and  I  have  not  seen  a  man  who  could  do  anything 
without  my  permission.  Write  these  circumstances  to  the  Go- 
vernor-General, and  tear  up  this  paper.  What  misfortunes  have 
befallen!  Write  explicitly,  that  arrangements  may  be  made 
accordingly.  They  (the  Afghans)  have  made  many  petitions 
regarding  Candahar,  that  an  order  may  be  sent  to  the  prince.  It 
has  been  written  and  sent,  carefully  worded,  to  the  best  of  my 
ability. 

About  this  affair  of  Mackeson,  I  cannot  understand  what 
management  this  is.  If  it  is  true,  you  are  destroying  yourselves. 
I  don't  know  whether  there  is  an  understanding  between  you  and 
Shore  Singh  that  your  troops  should  have  a  free  passage  (through 
the  Punjaub).  I  wrote  to  Shere  Singh  that  it  was  a  religious  war, 
that  he  might  understand.  Tear  up  this  paper;  and  remove  from 
about  your  person  the  men  of  this  country* 


FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR. 

(Received  February  Sth.) 

Let  it  be  known  to  Captain  Macgregor,  I  have  no  certain 
intelligence  about  affairs.  I  don't  know  what  perverseness  is  tliis, 
that  up  to  the  present  time  you  will  not  appreciate  my  worth,  nor 
understand  your  own  position  or  interests.  You  do  not  correctly 
explain  things  to  me ;  and  if  there  is  a  prospect  of  your  being 
supported  from  the  rear,  and  you  have,  or  are  likely  to  have,  a 
good  understanding  with  Shere  Singh,  so  that  an  army  may  come, 
then  I  would  act  here  as  such  a  state  of  circumstances  would 
render  expedient;  but  if  there  be  no  prospect  of  this,  and  you 
determine  on  any  other  course,  I  will  then  take  such  measures  as 
may  be  desirable.  May  God  grant  the  wish  of  my  heart !  I  have 
prayed  God  to  grant  this  prayer.  God  is  omnipotent.  Write  to 
the  Govern  or- General.     I  am  not  happy  in  this  country ;  but  if 

*  MS,  Records. 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  369 

my  friends  desire  it,  I  cannot  oppose  myself  to  their  wishes.  The 
settlement  of  that  country  can  be  satisfactorily  managed;  but  the 
country  could  never  have  been  settled  in  the  manner  in  which 
you  were  making  arrangements.* 


FBOM  H.  M.  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGBEQOR. 

Let  it  be  known  to  Mr.  Macgregor,  to  the  General,  and 
to  the  other  gentlemen,  that  which  I  did  not  wish  to  see,  and 
which  never  entered  into  my  imagination,  it  has  been  my  lot  to 
see.  What  I  have  already  suffered,  and  am  sufiering,  is  known 
only  to  God. 