

Khan,  which  was  carried  by  Ameen-  people  of  Khaibur;  but  if  the  Eng^ 

oollah  Khan  and  read  by  the  Shah,  fish  enter  and  pass  the  Kliaibur  once, 

It  also  passed  under  my  sight  through  no  one  shall  be  able  to  oppose  them, 

the  kindness  of  the  Persian  chiefs.    It  Therefore  <he  chiefs,  as  well  as  the 

contained  that  Mahomed  Akbar  has  Shah,  at  Caubul,  should  not  quarrel 

been  always  writing  to  send  the  troops  for  the  distribution  of  the  money  and 

to  assist  him  against  Jellalabad,  but  ranks,  but  exert  themselves  to  come 

nobody  has  heard  him.     Now  he  has  down  immediately  to  Jellalabad  and 

been  informed  by  his  trusty  men  at  reduce  it  before  the  English  should 

Peshawur  that  five  battalions  of  the  pass  Khaibur;  otherwise  he  (Akbar) 

English  have  reached  Hussna  Abdal,  is  risking  and  ending  his  life  for  the 

and  when   they  join   the    forces  at  faith  of  Mahomed,  and  will  continue 

Peshawur  they,  in  company  with  the  to  exert  himself  as  long  as  he  lives." 

battalions  of  the  Najeebs  of  the  Sikhs,  — [Af5.  Correspondence.} 


DEATH  OF  SHAH  0OOJAH.  379 

the  Barukyzes.*  Aware  of  these  suspicions,  the  Newab 
sent  his  wife  to  Shah  Soojah  with  a  sealed  Koran,  assur- 
ing the  King  with  a  solemn  oath  that  the  Barukyzes  and 
other  chiefs  would  be  true  to  him.  Fortified  by  this 
assurance,  the  Shah  moved  out  of  the  Balla  Hissar  on 
the  4th  of  April,  but  before  nightfall  returned  to  the 
palace,  determined  on  the  following  morning  to  review 
his  troops  and  then  to  start  for  Jellalabad.  Rising  early 
on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  he  arrayed  himself  in  royal  ap- 
parel, and,  accompanied  by  a  small  party  of  Hindostanees, 
proceeded  under  a  salute,  in  a  chair  of  state,  towards  his 
camp,  which  had  been  pitched  at  Seeah-Sungh.  But 
Soojah-ool-dowlah,  the  son  of  the  Newab,  had  gone  out 
before  him,  and  placed  in  ambush  a  party  of  Jezailchees. 
As  the  Shah  and  his  followers  were  making  their  way 
towards  the  regal  tent  the  marksmen  fired  upon  them. 
The  volley  took  murderous  effect.  Several  of  the  bearers 
and  of  the  escort  were  struck  down ;  and  the  King  him- 
self killed  on  the  spot.  A  ball  had  entered  his  brain. 
Soojah-ool-dowlah  then  rode  up;  and  as  he  contemp- 
lated his  bloody  work,  the  body  of  the  unhappy  King, 
vain  and  pompous  as  he  was  to  the  very  last,  wafi 
stripped  of  all  the  jewels  about  it — ^the  jewelled  dagger, 
the  jewelled  girdle,  the  jewelled  head-dress;  and  it  was 
then  cast  into  a  ditch. 

The  news  of  the  King's  murder  spread  like  wildfire. 
Great  was  the  consternation.  Futteh  Jung,  the  second 
son  of  the  Shah,  on  receiving  the  sad  tidings  of  his 
father's  death,  made  with  all  speed  towards  the  Balla 
Hissar;  but  the  gates  were  guarded;  so  he  turned  back 
and  sought  refuge  in  the  fort  of  Mahomed  Khan,  Bayat. 
That  night  however,  Mahomed  Khan,  in  concert  with 