

•  MS,  Records. 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  373 

have  avoided  in  a  dream ;  may  no  other  have  such  experience. 
I  wish  to  God  to  see  my  enemies  and  their  families  in  the  place 
of  my  friends,  and  no  other  wish  would  then  remain  in  my  heart. 
What  shall  I  inform  you  of?  Whatever  has  happened  is  owing 
to  our  own  carelessness.  Once  or  twice  I  wrote  to  you  to  send 
a  person  to  inquire  and  inform  you  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  this 
country,  but  it  was  not  done.  I  consulted  the  people,  and  they 
told  me,  that  had  I  not  been  concerned,  the  "  Feringhees  "  would 
have  seen  the  state  of  things;  that  when  I  came  they  expelled 
Dost  Mahomed,  anticipating  every  happiness  under  their  old 
master;  that  had  it  been  the  cause  of  the  "Feringhees,"  would 
anybody  have  dared  to  enter  this  country?  or  would  such  a 
day  as  this,  exhibiting  the  loss  of  their  honour,  country,  and  their 
pay,  have  happened  to  them  ?  They  further  observed  that  they 
were  liable  to  be  killed  or  apprehended  by  the  British,  and  given 
up  by  the  King  without  any  investigation;  not  ever  to  sanction 
their  requests  for  the  increase  of  five  rupees  to  their  pay — the  King 
had  no  authority.  I  again  consulted  them,  told  the  Envoy  of  it; 
and  frequently  I  sent  for  the  Envoy  in  the  garden,  and  brought 
the  subject  to  his  notice  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Lawrence,  who 
generally  accompanied  him ;  acquainted  him  of  the  rascality  of  the 
people,  who  would  at  last  create  some  disturbance.  But  I  was 
not  listened  to,  and  the  information  of  their  treacherous  character, 
and  the  advice  not  to  place  confidence  in  them,  was  of  no  avail. 
I  was  therefore  quite  disgusted  with  these  people,  and  proposed 
to  return  with  the  Envoy,  seeing  the  state  of  the  feelings  of  the 
people,  and  a  disregard  to  my  suggestions  by  him.  I  told  him 
that  complaints  were  daily  made  to  me  of  Afghan  women  being 
taken  to  Bumes's  Moonshee;  of  their  drinking  wine  at  his  house; 
of  women  being  taken  to  the  cantonments  on  horseback,  and  of 
my  having  witnessed  it,  and  observing  how  likely  it  was  to  create 
a  disturbance;  but  all  was  in  vain.  1  reproached  the  people  for 
their  own  shamclessness,  desired  them  to  take  care  of  these 
women,  and  not  to  defame  the  Sahibs;  and  said  that  if  any  person 
used  violence  towards  them,  to  tell  me,  and  inquiry  should  be 
made. 

A  Nizam-oo-doulah  was  appointed  who  corrupted  the  minds  of 
the  people.  I  told  the  Envoy  that  he  was  impressing  on  the 
minds  of  the  Douranees,  that  the  King  and  the  Envoy  were 
destroying  them,  and  that  he  had  saved  them.     I  was  anxious  to 


874        THE  LAST  DATS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 