

FROM  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR  TO  HIS  MAJESTY  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

March  9th. 

Your  Majesty's  letter,  which  was  sent  by  the  hands  of  a  trusts 
worthy  person,  has  been  received.  Please  God,  if  you  can  only 
cause  delay  for  one  month,  whatever  may  be  your  wish  can  be 
arranged.  Rest  at  ease,  since  the  army  under  General  Pollock, 
together  with  the  Sikh  force,  has  arrived  at  Peshawur,  and  may 
be  considered  as  having  arrived  near  this.  Whatever  the  bearer 
of  this  may  say  is  worthy  of  belief.* 

But  the  difficulties  of  the  Shah  were  now  drawing  to 
a  close ;  his  days  were  numbered.  Whilst  he  was  await- 
ing the  receipt  of  answers  to  these  letters,  the  excitement 
in  Caubul  was  increasing — the  division  among  the  chiefs 
was  becoming  more  and  more  irreconcilable.  Horribly 
perplexed  and  bewildered,  anxious  at  once  to  appear  in 
the  eyes  of  his  countrymen  true  to  the  national  cause,  and 
to  retain  the  good-will  of  the  English  by  some  show  of 
fidelity  to  them,  he  fell  into  every  kind  of  inconsistency, 
was  suspected  by  both  parties,  and  either  way  was 
rushing  on  destruction.  At  last  the  chiefs  called  upon 
him  to  prove  his  sincerity  by  placing  himself  at  the  head 

*  MS.JUcords* 


378  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

of  all  the  available  troops,  and  marching  down  upon 
Jellalabad.  The  Shah  yielded  a  reluctant  consent ;  and, 
on  the  29th  of  March  sent  round  his  criers  to  proclaim 
that  he  was  about  to  march  southward  on  the  31st;  that 
the  chiefs  were  to  accompany  him,  and  to  send  out  their 
tents  on  the  preceding  day.  The  summons  was  scantily 
obeyed.  The  Kuzzilbash  chief  declared  that  as  neither 
the  King  nor  the  minister  had  supplied  him  with  money, 
he  could  not  move.  The  King  said  that  he  had  no 
confidence  in  the  chiefs,  and  that,  therefore,  he  would 
not  go,  but  that  Ameen-ooUah  might  go  for  him.  And 
so  the  expedition  was  postponed.  In  the  mean  while, 
Akbar  Khan  was  writing  urgent  letters  to  Caubul  cla- 
mouring for  reinforcements,  and  urging  that  it  was 
wretched  policy  to  be  eternally  at  variance  with  one 
another — quarrelling  for  money  and  quarrellmg  for  rank 
— instead  of  making  common  cause  against  the  hated 
Feringhees.* 

After  a  pause  of  a  few  days  the  Eling  again  consented 
to  march.  His  suspicion  of  the  Barukyzes,  however,  was 
not  easily  to  be  allayed.  Nor  was  it  wholly  without  rea- 
son. Even  impartial  lookers-on  prophesied  that  if  he 
left  Caubul  he  would  either  be  murdered  or  blinded  by 

*  On  the  2nd  of  April  Mohun  Lai  will  force  their  march  through  Khai bur, 

wrote  from  Caubul:  *'  A  letter  has  though  he  has  sent  Sultan  Jan  with 

been   received   by  Mahomed  Akbar  a  few  hundred  men  to  reinforce  the 