


376  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

and  would  have  gone  to  Mecca,  had  there  been  no  impediment. 
The  management  of  this  country  and  people  is  easily  accom- 
plished. The  arrangements  of  other  foreign  affairs,  such  as  those 
of  Persia,  Teheran,  and  Khorassan,  are  also  simple,  but  they 
cannot  be  effected  only  by  the  way  I  point  out.  Whatever  was 
destined  in  this  case  has  come  to  pass.  I  never  wished  to  see 
such  a  day.  May  God  fulfil  all  my  hopes.  The  news  of  my  wel- 
fare is  being  sent  to  Candahar  and  Ghuznee,  and  to  Captain 
Macgregor  at  Jellalabad,  and  you  ought  to  remain  satisfied.  If 
you  send  us  assistance  to  uphold  the  case,  the  better;  otherwise 
there  are  other  ways  that  may  be  followed  agreeable  to  the  advice 
of  friends.  There  is  nothing  wanting;  you  can  do  as  you  like, 
and  no  one  can  stir  without  orders.     The  road  is  very  unsafe. 

On  a  slip  of  paper  which  the  Cossid  carried,  separately 
concealed,  was  written  this  postscript : 

Be  it  known  to  my  friend  that  the  road  is  very  unsafe;  this 
paper  is  sent  to  you  (my  friends),  and  it  must  be  speedily  trans- 
mitted and  replied  to,  in  order  that  he  may  act  accordingly. 
Whatever  has  passed  is  known  to  God  only;  such  as  was  never 
expected  to  be  seen,  even  in  a  dream,  has  actually  taken  place. 
If  I  could  manage  to  see  you,  everything  would  be  right,  and  no 
wish  remain  ungratified.  The  bearer  will  give  you  every  informa- 
tion.    The  sign  is,  **  We  have  met  before  the  grape,  *  Tatties.'  "* 

These  letters  produced  little  more  than  general  as- 
surances from  the  British  authorities  that  an  army  was 
on  its  way  to  Caubul.  The  letters  that  Macgregor  wrote 
to  the  Shah  were  very  brief,  and  intended  to  convey  as 
little  meaning  as  possible.  One  or  two  specimens  will 
suffice : 

CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR  TO  HIS  MAJESTY  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

Your  Majesty's  letter  was  received  by  me  on  the  21st  of 
January,  and  I  feel  much  honoured.  The  fact  is,  that  what  has 
occurred  was  fated.  It  is  true  that  they  (the  British)  made  a 
mistake  in  not  following  your  Majesty's  advice. 

Please  God,  you  may  rest  at  ease  regarding  affairs  here.  In 
this  quarter  there  is  no  enemy  except  Mahomed  Akbar^  who  is  at 

♦  MS,  Records, 


LETTERS  OF  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR.  377 

Lughman,  and  is  the  foe  both  of  your  Majesty  and  the  British 
Government.  The  rabble  of  Ghilzyes  who  were  with  him  have 
carried  away  to  their  homes  what  they  were  able  to  steal.  With 
the  exception  of  200  or  300  Barukzyes  there  is  no  one  else  with 
him.  And  please  God,  if  he  comes,  he  will  meet  with  a  warm 
reception. 

A  copy  of  your  Majesty's  letter  was  immediately  forwarded  to 
Peshawur,  requesting  that  it  might  be  sent  with  all  possible  haste 
to  the  Governor-General,  and  that  an  answer  might  be  received, 
which  may  be  soon  expected.  Rest  at  ease,  that  while  I  breathe 
I  will  not  fail  to  assist  your  Majesty  to  the  utmost  of  my  ability. 
The  army  with  the  artillery  may  be  considered  to  have  arrived 
near  this;  indeed,  they  will  bo  here  as  soon  as  the  distance  can  be 
crossed. 