

arranged.    Now,  men  of  all  ranks  are  flocking  to  me I  have 

asked  of  God — if  some  money  could  be  obtained  all  would  go 
well,  by  God's  assistance.  *  *  *  At  present,  my  subjects  make 
petition  to  me  to  send  money,  and  one  of  the  princes  with  guns 
and  an  army  to  Candahar.  *  *  *  I  had  sent  for  Mr.  ConoUy, 
and  other  gentlemen,  to  consult  with  them,  as  they  had  them- 
selves asked  the  Sirdar  to  send  for  them ;  but  some  one  said  to 
them,  **  If  you  go  to  the  king  he  vnll  kill  you."  It  was  their 
(the  Sirdars)  intention  that  the  king  should  kill  them.  They  had 
sent  me  word  secretly  beforehand.  I  replied,  that  if  the  world 
was  upset,  and  every  one  my  enemy,  I  would  not  do  so.  They 
then  said,  that  it  was  really  true  what  Jubbar  Khan  and  Oosman 
KJian  had  said — that  the  king  was  not  separate  from  the  Fering- 
hees.  If  he  is,  they  said,  give  these  (English  gentlemen)  to  the 
king,  that  he  may  kill  them.  I  heard  this,  and  gave  them  answer. 
They  understood  their  position,  and  repented  of  the  step  they 
had  taken.  Since  this  occurrence  they  come  and  go;  and  I  have 
re-assured  them.     They  now  swear  and  protest  that  they  will  do 

♦  Mahomed  Akhar. 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  371 

nothing  whatever  without  my  wishes.    If  you  think  it  can  be 
done,  God  will  shame  my  enemies* 


FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  CAPTAIN  MACGREGOR. 
(  Written  in  secret  by  the  Shah  himself.    Received  at  JeBalabad  on  the  7th  of  March,) 

This  is  the  state  of  affairs — that  night  and  day  I  am  disturbed 
about  you.  God  help  us !  I  did  not  wish  to  see  such  a  day  as 
this.  All  day  I  am  thinking  of  this.  The  evil-disposed  Maho- 
med Akbar,  from  the  day  he  went  to  Lughman,  has  managed 
matters  by  the  means  of  the  money  which  was  given  to  him. 
From  that  quarter  letters  arrived  hero  (Caubul),  and  money  was 
given  to  men  who  went  to  join  him :  at  length  it  was  put  a  stop 
to,  some  men  were  even  stripped  (on  their  way  to  join)  in  Boot- 
khajc.  At  last,  people  went  under  the  plea  of  Gazza  (religious 
war);  by  these  means  only  a  few  now  go.  It  is  nearly  one  month 
that  I  have  delayed  (sending  troops  to  Jellalabad):  no  accounts 
have  been  received  (from  you).  I  have  made  myself  unpopular 
with  all  Mahomedans  on  yoiir  account,  and  you  have  not  compre- 
hended it.  This  is  an  affair  affecting  life.  Up  to  this  time  nothing 
is  known  (of  your  intentions).  I  know  not  upon  what  misfortunes 
I  have  fallen ;  and  these  men  are  displeased  with  me,  (saying)  **  It 
is  not  the  Shah's  wish  that  we  should  go  to  Jellalabad ;  he  wishes 
to  destroy  the  true  faith.*'  God  help  us !  There  is  no  saying 
when  those  men  (British  troops)  will  arrive.  If  things  are  thus 
managed,  what  may  be  expected  in  Hindoostan? 