

Although  I  frequently  remonstrated,  they  paid  no  attention 
to  my  words.  These  men  have  made  fraud  and  deceit  their 
trade During  the  time  they  were  committing  these  ex- 
cesses, and  would  not  come  in  for  some  days,  they  continued 
plimdering  the  shops  and  exciting  disturbances  in  the  city;  and 
in  this  business  all  the  Sirdars  were  concerned,  and  on  this 
account  the  lower  orders  became  like  hungry  dogs:  but  God 
shamed  them  for  they  got  nothing.  What  has  happened  was 
fated,  and  was  owing  to  our  own  neglect.  However  much  I 
said,  "Gome  up  above;  the  fort  is  strong;  for  one  year  no  one 
can  be  brought  within  it;  with  my  servants,  and  from  500 
to  1000  others,  the  fort  would  be  strong  ;  and  2000  or  3000 
others,  with  guns,  sallying  out  might  collect  grain" — [it  was  in 
vain.]  However,  it  has  passed — such  was  our  fate.  I  sent  mes- 
sages to  cantonments,  begging  them  not  to  defer  their  coming 
from  to-day  to  to-morrow,  from  to-morrow  to  next  day — that, 
please  God,  all  would  be  right. 

I  had  collected  five  or  six  lakhs  of  rupees  in  gold  mohurs, 
knowing  that  these  people,  except  for  money,  would  not  act 
honestly,  even  with  God.  I  spent  three  or  four  lakhs  of  rupees 
amongst  them.  Every  tribe  made  oath,  wrote  on  the  Koran, 
and  sealed;  but  they  still  said,  "  The  king  and  the  Feringhees  are 
one.'*  However,  I  have  managed  to  bring  them  thus  far,  and 
given  two  lakhs  more.  It  is  a  pity  that  I  have  no  more  money- 
If  I  had  any  more,  and  could  raise  2000  or  3000  sowars,  and 
2000  foot-soldiers  of  my  own,  I  would  defy  any  one  to  stir.     The 

*  MS.  Records, 

VOL.  II.  2  B 


370  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

foot-soldiers,  too,  who  returned  from  the  army,  I  collected — ^300 
or  400 — that  they  might  be  with  my  regiment.  Oh !  that  God 
had  never  let  me  see  this  day !  Although,  if  money  reaches  me^ 
God  will  prosper  everything.  To  give  money  to  an  enemy  to 
collect  troops,  and  to  come  and  kill  you — did  ever  any  one  so 
trust  an  enemy?  Even  now  have  nothing  to  say  to  that  dog.* 
This,  too,  I  have  said  to  you,  even  as  I  warned  you  before.  I  am 
night  and  day  absorbed  in  this  one  thought;  it  has  occurred  to  my 
mind  that  it  would  be  better  if  the  few  ladies  and  gentlemen 
should  be  brought  here,  in  order  that  they  might  be  released  from 
the  hands  of  that  dog.  This  entered  my  mind,  and  I  consulted 
with  the  Sirdars,  and  brought  them  to  agree;  before  this,  I  had 
sent  a  paper  to  this  effect  to  that  dog.  It  struck  me  that  that  dog 
would  not  release  and  send  them  here.  I  then  decided  that  it 
would  be  judicious  that  Jubbar  Khan  should  be  sent.  I  hope 
that  he  will  bring  them  to  this  place  in  safety.  By  the  blessing 
of  God,  my  mind  will  be  at  ease.  No  one  vnll  have  power  to  say 
anything  to  them ;  they  will  remain  in  safety.  If  this  is  approved 
of  by  you,  I  will  take  this  course;  but  inform  me  if  you  do  not 
approve  of  it,  and  can  suggest  anything  else,  that  it  may  be 