

Bee  some  stipend  fixed  for  them,  but  that  Trevor  would  not 
consent  to  it,  and  he  thus  disappointed  the  people.  All  this  pro- 
duced no  effect,  until  the  insurrection  broke  out,  and  the  insur- 
gents told  every  one  that  the  King  was  concerned  in  it.  I  sent 
Shah-zadah  Futteh  Jung  with  a  few  guns  and  troops  to  the  town; 
the  insurgents  reported  he  was  coming  to  assist  them,  and  on  his 
approach  a  skirmish  took  place,  in  which  Mahomed  Sherreef 
Khan,  who  was  sent  to  restrain  the  people,  received  a  wound 
and  was  killed.  It  then  became  apparent  that  an  insurrection 
had  taken  place;  300  more  were  killed  and  wounded  up  to  the 
evening  of  that  day ;  the  Shah-zadah  narrowly  escaped  by  the 
preservation  of  God.  The  insurgents  then  thought  of  another 
expedient  to  defame  all  the  people.  They  went  round  Sir  A. 
Bumes's  house,  and  did  what  was  written  in  his  lot.  These 
people  have  often  before  acted  as  they  have  now ;  they  confined 
my  brother,  Shah  Mahmood,  in  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  con- 
spirators were  then  Mooktear-oo-dowlah  and  Ahmed  Khan,  &c., 
and  they  pretended  it  was  a  quarrel  between  the  Sheeahs  and 
the  Sconces;  they  saw  that  I  alone  could  settle  matters.  I  was 
then  among  the  Kakurs;  the  Khans  sent  for  me,  and  on  my 
arrival  at  Caubul  they  all  obeyed  me  and  returned  to  their 
respective  avocations.  In  the  present  instance  people  said  there 
were  orores  of  rupees  to  be  obtained  and  lakhs  to  be  shared,  while 
the  Mussulmanee  cause  could  be  strengthened,  and  the  wishes  of 
God  come  to  pass.  A  few  insurgents  have  been  removed  from 
the  way,  and  the  remainder  will  be  removed  by  God.  I  am  quite 
displeased  and  annoyed  at  these  people,  from  whom  every  wicked 
act  may  be  expected ;  but  through  the  kindness  of  my  friends  it 
does  not  appear  difficult  to  me  to  settle  this  country,  or  even 
to  conquer  Persia  and  Teheran.  All  were  against  me  on 
accotmt  of  you;  requested  me  to  separate  from  you,  as  being 
inconsistent  with  my  feelings  of  religion.  I  wrote  to  the  Envoy, 
and  he  told  me  to  give  them  a  straightforward  reply,  which 
I  did,  sajring  I  owed  everything  to  the  Sahibs;  but  they  told  me 
I  should  repent.  I  told  them  their  lives  and  property  were  bound 
to  the  British,  and  they  returned  disappointed;  but  the  same 
night  they  attacked  the  cantonment  and  the  Balla  Hissar,  but 
to  no  purpose;  they  continued  their  attacks  without  intermission 
for  some  days,  and  I  wrote  to  the  Envoy  to  come  with  all  his 
baggage  and  troops  to  the  Balla  Hissar,  where  they  could  hold 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  375 

out  for  a  year  or  two  (even  if  no  assistance  arrived),  and  that  I 
would  detach  parties  to  furnish  supplies  to  avoid  any  scarcity. 
This  I  urged  several  times,  but  finding  he  was  opposed  to  my 
views,  I  abided  by  his  opinion.     The  insurrection  was,  however, 
discontinued,  and  the  Envoy  informed  me  that  he  had  entered 
into  a  convention  with  the  insurgents;   that  M&homed  Akbar 
should   be   the  ruler   of  this  country,  that   the   British    should 
retire  to  Hindostan,  and  that  if  I  accompanied  them  it  would  be 
better,  otherwise  I  should  be  consigned  to  the  proposed  ruler,  and 
receive  a  lakh  of  rupees  per  year.     I  was  annoyed  at  this  treaty, 
and  anticipated  some  treachery  when  the  Sahiban  and  the  gxms 
left  the  Balla  Hissar  for  cantonments ;  but  it  was  diverted  in  a 
very  brave  manner  by  my  orderly  troops.     I  asked  how  a  treaty 
could  be  entered  into  with  the  enemy  without  the  sanction  of 
one  who  had  linked  his  fate  with  the  British;  but  in  vain.     After 
the  troops  had  entered  the  cantonment,  I  cautioned  them  not  to 
stir  out,  but  to  pass  their  days  there,  knowing  the  plundering 
habits  of  the  people.     I  was  watching  for  the  least  intermission 
to  bring  the  people  round,  and  accomplished  the  business  as  for- 
merly.    I  therefore  spent  five  or  nx  lakhs  in  rupees  and  ducats, 
and  acceded  to  every  wish  of  the  people;  and  after  working  night 
and  day  I  reclaimed  them  by  presents.     They  promised  to  obey 
me,  and  to  behave  inimically  to  the  disloyal;  against  every  exer- 
tion of  the  Barukzyes  to  persuade  the  people  of  my  attachment 
to  the  British.     On  the  contrary,  the  Envoy  entrusted  lakhs  of 
rupees,  artillery,  and  other  things  to  the  enemy,  and  thus  in- 
creased their  power  with  his  own  hands,  without  in  the  least 
listening  to  me,  until  what  was  predestined  came  to  pass.     May 
no  one  again  see  such  a  day ;  and  the  desire  I  have  is,  that  I  may 
in  this  world  be  able  to  retaliate  with  my  own  hands.     On  their 
coming  out  of  the  cantonment  the  enemy  began  to  plunder,  and 
discontinued  their  treachery  on   the   payment  of  two  lakhs  of 
rupees  more.     Ameen-ooUah  having  already  been  gained  over,  I 
delayed  the  payment  of  the  sum  for  a  time,  and  the  insurgents 
then  began  to  reproach  him,  and  were  going  to  drag  him  away 
from  me,  when  I  was  forced  to  pay  them  money.     These  people 
are  such  avaricious  dogs  for  worldly  riches,  that  had  I  possessed 
some  lakhs  of  rupees  now,  I  could  have  arranged  every  matter, 
and  quelled  the  rebellion.     I  am  entertaining  all  the  **  Tillungas" 
and  Sowars  that  return  in  distress  with  the  loss  of  their  property, 
although  I  am  quite  disgusted  and  disheartened  with  these  people, 