

I  am  altogether  devoted  to  you — may  God  protect  me !  If 
they  (British  troops)  arrive  within  the  next  ten  or  fifteen  days,  it 
is  well;  but  if  not,  what  ought  to  be  done?  Whatever  you  think 
advisable,  write  to  me  plainly,  that  it  may  be  well  understood 
and  arrangements  made.  I  am  always  thinking  how  lean  ob« 
tain  possession  of  those  gentlemen  and  ladies,  that  they  may  be  in 
safety,  and  that  this  villain  (Mahomed  Akbar)  may  not  injure 
them. 

1  sent  a  message  to  Mahomed  Shah  (Ghilzye)  that,  if  any 
injury  happened  to  them  (the  English  prisoners),  I  would  revenge 
it  on  him  and  his  family,  and  root  out  his  race,  and  that  I  would 

"^  MS.  Records. 

2b2 


372  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

seize  liira.  God  will  prosper  this  matter,  though  it  is  very 
difficult  and  complicated. 

These  rascals  (Afghans)  make  numerous  oaths,  and  in  their 
hearts  there  is  villany.     May  God  put  them  to  shame ! 

The  true  state  of  the  case  is  this;  if  you  think  it  will  succeed, 
and  that  they  (British  troops)  will  arrive,  the  sooner  the  better. 
This  is  not  a  matter  to  be  trifled  with. 

Shumshoodeen  Khan,  who  went  to  Ghuznee,  I  ordered  not 
to  press  the  garrison  hard  until  I  had  completed  an  engagement 
with  you. 

I  have  forgotten  my  own  sorrows,  and  am  grieving  for  yours. 
Neither  day  nor  night  can  I  rest,  nor  think  of  anything  else. 

If  I  came  myself  (to  Jellalabad),  I  could  arrange  the  affidr 
as  I  wished.  It  has  two  advantages  and  one  objection.  I  am  puz- 
zled. God  deliver  me !  All  that  has  happened  has  been  caused 
by  want  of  forethought.     Now  may  God  give  me  assistance ! 

I  always  said  to  Sir  William  Macnaghten  that  this  afiair 
would  end  badly. 

Tlic  day  that  he  made  arrangements  for  leaving  (Caubul  for 
Bombay)  I  was  ready  to  precede  him*,  saying  that  I  did  not  like 
the  appearance  of  things  here.  He  did  not  listen  to  me.  The 
bearer  will  inform  you  of  other  particulars.  What  can  I  do? 
These  men  are  the  greatest  curse  in  the  world.  If  I  had  any 
money  I  could  collect  my  army — ^then  "  could  it  be  in  the  power 
of  any  one  to  injure  even  a  dog  that  belonged  to  you?"* 


FROM  SHAH  SOOJAH  TO  MR.  GEORGE  CLERK. 
(Received  on  the  25th  March  at  Lahore,) 

Be  it  known  to  my  friend  that  I  am  King,  and  know  the 
people  well;  had  everyone  been  treated  according  to  his  deserts,  a 
good  foundation  would  have  been  secured  in  the  country. 

It  is  known  to  all  the  world  how  1  have  behaved  to  Sir  W.  Mac- 
naghten and  the  rest  of  the  Sahiban  during  the  last  three  years. 
I  have  considered  all  of  them  as  dear  to  me  as  my  life,  and 
especially  Sir  William  Macnaghten,  who  was  still  dearer  to  me. 
It  was  God's  will  that  I  should  see  what  I  would  have  wished  to 