

*  MS.  Records. 

t  Alluding  ^to  his  Majesty's  dismissing  the  troops  at  Sir  William  Mac- 
naghten's  request  from  the  Balla  Hissar. 


LETTERS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  367 

perfectly  satisfied.  At  present  I  have  no  understanding  with  the 
Feringhees."  At  length,  by  every  means  in  my  power,  I  paci- 
fied them.  These  men  at  present,  whether  Barukzyes  or  other 
Afghans  or  Parsewans,  are  all  obedient  to  me.  Without  my 
orders  they  do  nothing.  However,  I  place  no  trust  in  them.  God 
grant  that  I  may  obtain  the  wish  of  my  heart !  I  have  no  other 
desire.  I  cannot  think  that  you  are  possessed  of  a  proper  sense  of 
honour,  since  Dost  Mahomed  and  his  family  remain  there  with 
honour.  Should  Akbar  fall  into  my  power,  if  I  am  a  Mussulman 
or  a  man,  what  treatment  he  shall  receive  I  Dost  Mahomed  and  his 
wives  and  children,  in  revenge  for  the  Sahibs  who  have  fallen  in 
this  country,  should  be  seen  wandering  in  destitution  through  the 
bazaars  and  streets,  that  it  should  be  known  to  all  the  world. 
What  has  been  your  treatment  of  that  dog  (Dost  Mahomed)  ? 
So  much  wealth !  And  what  return  have  you  received  &om  this 
£uthless  wretch  (Mahomed  Akbar)  ?  May  God  accomplish  thia 
desire  of  my  heart !  It  is  now  some  days  since  they  (the  Afghans) 
have  requested  me  to  send  Shumshoodeen  Khan  to  Ghuznee. 
Until  to-day  I  have  delayed.  I  have  also  made  delays  in  the 
direction  of  the  Khybur.  At  length  I  am  helpless,  and  if  I  do 
not  consent  I  shall  be  suspected.  And  from  KJiybur  intelligence 
has  come  that  200  men  have  been  killed,  and  two  loads  of  treasure 
and  two  guns  abandoned  to  the  enemy,  and  that  Mackeson  Sahib 
is  shut  up  in  Ali-Musjid  requiring  succour.  If  this  is  true,  what 
management !  How  often  have  I  said  that  if  I  possessed  money 
I  might  collect  some  thousands  of  troops  of  my  own !  I  should 
not  require  assistance  from  any  one.  I  could  do  anything  I  liked. 
But  I  have  nothing  whatever.  At  this  moment  there  is  only 
remaining  two  or  three  thousand  ducats.  These  men,  who  are 
my  own  servants,  have  remained  with  me ;  but,  poor  wretches, 
how  many  months  are  they  in  arrears'!  The  other  Afghans  I 
have  ordered  to  be  mustered  daily  in  my  presence.  Such  as  I  may 
select  I  shall  continue  in  service.  I  never  have  had  and  never 
can  have  any  interest  separate  from  yours.  Alas !  that  you  should 
not  have  known  my  worth !  I  will  delay  the  despatch  of  the  men 
some  days  longer.  I  shall  be  suspected.  If  I  could  know  the 
truth  I  would  arrange  accordingly.  If  you  think  that  this  affair 
will  succeed,  and  that  an  army  will  come,  let  me  know  the  truth; 
and  if  it  is  unUkely,  write  to  me  that  I  may  make  such  arrange- 
ments as  shall  fully  satisfy  you  that  not  a  cat  belonging  to  you 