


CUAKACTER  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH.  389 

cient  to  keep  him  faithful  to  any  one.  He  was  not  even 
true  to  himself.  The  question  is  less  a  question  of  fact 
than  of  character.  The  solution  of  the  difficulty  is  to  be 
found  in  the  idiosyncracy  of  the  man.  He  had  led  a 
very  eventful  life  ;  but  the  vicissitudes  of  his  career  had 
not  strengthened  his  character.  Anything  decided,  ac- 
tive, or  energetic,  was  not  to  be  expected  from  him. 
The  infirmity  of  age  was  now  superadded  to  the  infirmity 
of  purpose  which  had  characterised  his  greener  manhood ; 
and  if  he  had  taken  any  decided  part  in  the  great  contest 
which  followed  the  outburst  of  the  Caubul  insurrection, 
it  would  have  been  an  inconsistency  at  variance  with  the 
whole  tenor  of  his  past  life.  As  it  w^as,  the  conduct  of 
the  man  in  this  crisis  was  in  keeping  with  all  that  was 
known  of  his  character  and  his  antecedents.  Shah 
Soojah  was  not  a  hero;  and  he  did  not  play  a  heroic 
part.  The  British  Government  had  picked  him  out  of 
the  dust  of  Loodhianah,  simply  as  a  matter  of  conve- 
nience to  themselves ;  and  they  had  no  reason  to  com- 
plain that,  in  a  great  and  imminent  conjuncture,  he 
thought  less  of  their  convenience  than  his  own.  He 
proved  himself  at  the  last  to  be  very  much  what  we 
had  helped  to  make  him.  We  could  not  expect  him  to  be 
an  active  workman,  when  we  had  so  long  used  him  as  a 
tool. 


390  AEFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAR. 


CHAPTER  U. 

[November,  1841— April,  1842.] 

Aff^rs  at  Candahar — Evil  Tidings  from  Caubtd— Maclaren^s  Brigade — 
Spread  of  the  Insurrection — ^Arrival  of  Atta  Mahmed — Flight  of  Bufdur 
Jang — Attack  on  the  Douranee  Camp — Continued  Hostilities— Attack 
upon  the  City — Action  in  the  Valley  of  the  Urghundab — Fall  of  Ghuznee 
— Defence  of  Khelat'i-Ghilzye — Movements  of  England's  Brigade. 

The  attention  of  the  reader  ought  now  no  longer  to  be 
withheld  from  that  part  of  the  country  where  General 
Nott  and  Major  Rawlinson  were  gallantly  and  success- 
fully holding  out  agamst  the  insurgent  Douranees,  and 
maintaining  the  character  of  the  British  nation  before 
the  tribes  of  Western  Afghanistan.  At  the  beginning  of 
November,  wrote  Rawlinson,  in  a  summary  of  events, 
drawn  up  with  such  masterly  distinctness  and  compre- 
hensiveness, that  the  historian  has  little  to  do,  in  this 
place,  but  to  submit  himself  to  its  guidance,*  '•  affairs 
wore  a  more  tranquil  and  promising  appearance  in  the 
Candahar  province  than  I  had  ever  witnessed  since  my 
assumption  of  the  charge  of  the  agency.  Akram  Khan, 
the  leader  of  the  Derawat  rebellion,  captured  by  Lieu- 

*  Major  Rawlinson  to  Government :  ter,  written  by  Major  Rawlinson  to 