*  MS.  Correspondence,  of  an  anny  from  Caiibul.    He  knows 

t  Macgregor  was  of  opinion  that  that  whilst  Dost  Mahomed  is  in  our 

afterthedepartnreof  the  British  from  possession  we  can  make  use  of  him 

Caubul,  the  conduct  of  tlie  Shah  in-  as  a  powerful  weapon  against  his  Ma- 

dicated  a  friendly  feeling  towards  us.  jesty,  and  this  is  the  great  hold  we 

**  The  Shah  is,  1  believe,  acting  in  a  have  upon  his    friendship." — IMS, 

friendly  manner  towards  us,"  he  wrote  Correspondence,"] 
to  General  Pollock,  "and  will,  if  he        J  MS,  Correspondence. 
has  the  power,  prevent  the  march 

VOL.  ir.  2  C 


386  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

But  of  all  the  officers  connected  with  the  British 
Mission,  John  ConoUy  was  the  one  who  enjoyed  the 
best  opportunities  of  arriving  at  a  correct  estimate  of  the 
conduct  of  the  Shah.  During  the  insurrection  he  was 
in  attendance  on  the  King  at  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  he 
was  at  Caubul  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.  Conolly's 
opinions  are  on  record.  He  seems  at  one  time  to  have 
entertained  the  strongest  possible  conviction  that  the 
Shah  was  true  to  his  British  allies.  "I  believe,"  he 
wrote  on  the  17th  of  January,  "that  he  is  heart  and 
soul  in  our  interest;  and  it  is  contrary  to  all  reason  to 
suppose  otherwise."  But  by  the  15th  of  February  his 
belief  in  the  fidelity  of  the  Shah  seems  to  have  been 
shaken;  for  he  wrote  to  Macgregor:  "It  is  generally 
believed  and  asserted  throughout  the  town  that  his 
Majesty  instigated  the  late  rebellion.  I  have  never  been 
able  to  prove  the  accusation,  though  I  cannot  but  think 
that  he  was,  directly  or  indirectly,  the  cause  of  the 
revolution."  A  month  afterwards,  writing  still  more 
distinctly  to  General  Pollock,  he  cast  further  doubts  on 
the  fidelity  of  the  Shah.  "  I  would  suggest,"  he  said, 
"  that  some  direct  understanding  be  come  to  with 
his  Majesty.  It  is  generally  believed  that  he  caused 
the  late  rebellion;  and  his  conduct  lately  has  been 
strange,  to  say  the  least  of  it.  He  tried  to  raise 
a  popular  tumult  against  us,  hoping  thereby  to  ruin 
the  Newab.  He  did  not  interest  himself  in  any  way 
about  our  sick  when  their  wretched,  helpless  con- 
dition was  formally  represented  to  him  in  a  petition 
from  me — added  to  the  circumstance  alluded  to  of  his 
telling  our  host  to  send  us  to  Ameen-oolah,  who  is 
our  most  bitter  enemy.  He  is,  moreover,  surroimded 
by  the  Populzye  leaders  of  the  late  insurrection,  whose 
persons,  I  presume,  our  government  will  demand.  I 
have  not  received  a  letter  from  him  for  a  month ;  but 


CHARACTER  OP  SHAH  SOOJAH.  387 

the  fear  of  being  suspected  of  being  in  communication 
with  us  may  be  the  cause  of  his  disregard  of  us."  And 
again,  at  the  end  of  the  month,  writing  to  Major 
Rawlinson,  he  said :  "  The  King  is  generally  abused  and 
reported  as  the  instigator  of  tlie  late  rebellion.  He  has 
proved  himself,  I  think,  unworthy  of  our  friendship.  If 
we  are  not  able  to  prove  his  villany,  his  cunning  will, 
no  doubt,  prompt  him  to  side  with  us  on  the  near 
approach  of  our  troops,  for  he  is  well  aware  that  his 
subjects  would  seize  him  if  he  ventured  out  of  the  Balla 
Hissar.  He  is,  as  the  Afghans  say,  like  grain  between 
two  mill-stones."* 