


DESIGNS  OF  THE  SHAH.  383 

tion  in  whichi  the  tide  of  success  might  be  seen  to  flow. 
He  had  no  affection  for  the  English;  but  he  dearly 
loved  English  money.  He  knew  the  value  of  British 
aid;  but  he  would  fain  have  had  it  from  a  distance. 
From  the  very  first  he  had  disliked  the  obtrusive 
manner  in  which  it  had  been  forced  upon  him.  He 
wanted  the  prestige  of  British  support  without  the  en- 
cumbrance of  British  control.  To  retain  our  friendship, 
and  yet  to  rid  himself  of  our  presence,  was  unquestion- 
ably the  desire  of  the  Shah ;  but  it  is  doubtful  whether 
his  desire  would  ever  have  shaped  itself  into  any  overt 
acts  of  hostility  against  the  government  which  had  re- 
stored him  to  the  throne  of  his  fathers.  He  was  not 
capable  of  gratitude,  even  if  there  had  been  anything  to 
call  it  forth;*  but  he  had  sufficient  sagacity  to  know 
that  his  political  existence  was  dependent  upon  the  will 
of  the  British  Government.  And  he  was  cautious  not  to 
do  anything  to  provoke  its  vengeance.  The  chiefs  be- 
lieved at  the  commencement  of  the  November  outbreak, 
that  though  the  insurrection  would  soon  be  crushed, 
such  a  manifestation  of  popular  feeling  would  in  all  pro- 
bability cause  the  British  authorities  to  tremble  for  the 
safety  of  their  position,  and  induce  them  to  evacuate  the 
country  in  the  ensuing  spring.  Encouraging  a  similar  be- 
liefi  Shah  Soojah  may  have  regarded  with  inward  satisfac- 
tion the  outbreak  of  the  revolution.  But  he  was  surprised 
and  alarmed  by  the  rapidity  of  its  progress;  and  was 
wholly  unprepared  for  the  sanguinary  termination  of  his 
connexion  with  his  Christian  allies.  That  he  was  in  a 
state  of  painful  depression  and  prostration  throughout 
the  entire  period  of  the  insurrection  is  not  to  be  ques- 

*  I    utterly    repudiate    the    cant  we  had  carried  him  back  to  Caubnl, 

which  fixes  the  stigma  of  ingratitude  and  kept  him  there,  not  for  his  pui^ 

on  the  character  of  Shah  Soojah.  No  poses  but  for  our  own. 
one  knew  better  than  the  Shah  that 


384  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

tioned;  and  it  is  scarcely  less  certain  that  he  never 
wholly  recovered  from  the  terror  which  then  bewildered 
him.  The  irruption  culminated  somewhat  too  violently 
for  a  man  of  Shah  Soojah's  temperament;  and  when  he 
foimd  what  a  convulsion  had  been  raised  around  him, 
he  shrunk  back  in  dismay.  On  either  side  dangers  and 
diflSculties  started  up  in  his  path.  He  strove  to  save 
himself  by  doing  little,  and  being  to  all  outward  seem- 
ing the  friend  both  of  the  A%han  insurgents  and  their 
European  foes.  Duplicity  is  never  long  successful. 
Doubted  by  both  parties,  the  King  became  an  object  of 
general  contempt.  He  trimmed  between  the  two  con- 
tending hosts,  and  escaped  the  rocks  on  neither  side  of 
the  vessel. 