

Among  the  obscurer  points  of  Afghan  history,  there 
is  not  one  more  obscure  than  that  which  involves  the 
question  of  the  fidelity  of  Shah  Soojah.  That  doubts 
were  cast  upon  his  sincerity  has  been  already  shown. 
Conscious  of  this,  he  entered  upon  a  defence  of  his 
conduct  in  a  series  of  letters  to  the  British  authorities 
which  I  have  now  given  to  the  world.  Written  hastily, 
and  under  the  influence  of  strong  excitement,  they 
carry  very  little  conviction  with  them.  The  main  object 
of  these  letters  appears  to  have  been  the  extraction  of 
money  from  the  British  treasury.  The  Shah  continued 
to  assert,  that  having  no  money  he  had  no  power,  but 
that  if  money  were  sent  to  him  he  would  be  able  to  do 
great  things  for  his  late  allies.  Death  makes  many  re- 
velations. The  death  of  Shah  Soojah  revealed  the 
mendacity  and  the  avarice  of  the  man.  Some  twenty 
lakhs  of  rupees,  besides  jewels  of  large  value,  were 
found  to  have  been  in  his  possession  when  he  died.* 

This   disagreeable  circumstance,  though  by  no  means 

*  Mohun  Lai,  in  a  letter  to  Cap-  treasury  hoarded  up  with  great  puns 

tain    MackesoD,    Caubul,   April  10,  bj  his  father,  the  King.    He  spends 

1842,    says  :   *'  Prince  Futteh  Jung  a  good  deal  of  it,  to  employ  the  peo- 

was  taken  prisoner  in   the   fort  of  pie  and  make  his  party  strong.  .  .^ . 

Mahomed  Khan,  Bayat,  and  at  even  It  is  estimated  to  be  twenty  lakhs  in 

released  by  force  of  Ameen-oollah  cash  and  a  considerable  quantity  of 

and  the  Populzyes.     As  soon  as  he  jewels." — [J/5.  Corresponaeiice.'] 
reached  the   palace  he   opened  the 


382  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

conclusive  against  the  general  fidelity  of  the  Shah,  cer- 
tainly will  not  predispose  the  inquirer  to  take  an  unduly 
favorable  view  of  his  conduct. 

It  must,  however,  be  always  kept  steadily  in  view, 
that  the  circumstances  of  Shah  Soojah's  position  were 
such  as  to  surround  him  with  an  atmosphere  of  doubt 
and  suspicion.  That  the  chiefs  made  use  of  the  King's 
name  at  the  outset  of  the  insurrection,  and  produced  an  in- 
flammatory document  said  to  bear  the  royal  seal,  is  one  of 
the  most  notorious  facts  in  the  entire  history  of  the  war. 
The  seal  was  genuine,  but  the  document  was  a  suppo- 
sititious one.  Nothing  is  more  common,  in  times  of 
popular  excitement,  than  for  the  Afghans  to  endeavour 
to  injure  one  another  by  giving  currency  to  forged  in- 
struments. It  is  to  the  last  degree  improbable  that,  at 
this  time.  Shah  Soojah  would  have  committed  himself 
by  putting  his  seal  to  any  documents  which  might  have 
fallen  into  the  hands  of  his  European  allies,  and  laid  bare 
the  blackness  of  his  treachery.  But  that  he  would  have 
been  glad  to  have  cast  off  the  Feringhee  alliance  and  to 
have  ruled  without  the  restraint  of  our  superintendence 
and  interference,  is  not  to  be  questioned.  He  may, 
therefore,  have  regarded  with  inward  satisfaction  the 
progress  of  the  insurrectionary  movement,  and  rejoiced 
in  its  ultimate  success ;  but  he  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  more  than  a  passive  instrument  in  the  hands  of 
others.  It  was  obviously  his  policy  to  appear  all  things 
to  all  people.  He  could  not  venture  to  take  any  de- 
cided course.  He  never  in  the  prime  of  life  had  been 
conspicuous  for  manliness  of  character;  and  now,  in 
his  old  age,  he  was  more  than  ever  a  waverer  and  a 
waiter  upon  fortune.  Perhaps,  I  should  not  err  if  I 
were  to  say  that  he  was  true  neither  to  his  own  country- 
men nor  to  his  British  allies.  He  was  prepared  to  side 
with  either  the  one  or  the  other,  according  to  the  direc- 