

March  6,  1842.    This  important  de-  Mr.  Colvin,  on  the  13th  of  December, 

spatch  was  published  by  Lord  Ellen-  I  am  indebted  for  the  information 

borough  in  the  Government  Gazette,  contained  in  the  earlier  portion  of 

and   subsequently  appeared  in  the  this  chapter. 
Blue  Book.    To  an  unpublishedUet- 


MASSACBE  OF  WOODBURN's  DETACHMENT.  391 

tenant  ConoUy,  had  been  executed  at  this  place  by  his 
Majesty's  orders.    Eight  of  the  most  influential  of  his 
colleagues  had  been  sent  by  me,  according  to  the  orders 
of  the  Envoy,  under  the  charge  of  Lieutenant  Crawford, 
to  Caubul;  that  officer  having  my  written  instructions 
to  destroy  his  prisoners  in  the  event  of  an  attempt  at 
rescue.     The  Hazareh  and  the  Belooch  tribes  had  been 
effectually  conciliated ;  the  Douranees  of  the  northern 
and  western  districts  had  been  humbled  and  overawed." 
The  troops  then  at  Candahar  consisted  of  her  Majesty's 
40th  Regiment ;  the  2nd,  16th,  38th,  40th,  and  43rd 
Regiments  of  Bengal  Native  Infantry;  Captain  Blood's 
battery  (Bombay  Artillery) ;  the  Shah's  Horse  Artillery, 
under  Captain  Anderson ;  some  regiments  of  the  Shah's 
infantry,    and    some  detachments  of  Irregular  Horse 
(Shah's  and  Skinner's),  the  weakness  of  the  force  lying 
in  this  arm.     The  tranquillity  of  the  country  seemed  to 
authorise  the  diminution  of  this  force,  and  a  brigade, 
comprising  the  16th,  42nd,  and  43rd  Regiments  of  Ben- 
gal Native  Infantry,  was  about  to  proceed,  under  Colonel 
Maclaren,  to  the  provinces  of  Hindostan.     On  the  7th 
of  November  it  commenced  its  march ;  but  on  the  even- 
ing of  that  day  some  startling  intelligence  was  brought 
into  Candahar.     A  detachment  of  130  men  under  Cap- 
tain Woodburn — that  officer  who,  in  the  month  of  July, 
had  so  distinguished  himself  on  the  banks  of  the  Hel- 
mund,  in  action  with  the  Douranee  rebels  under  Akh- 
tar  Khan — was  proceeding  from  Candahar  to  Caubul, 
when,  on  the  2nd  of  November,  after  they  had  passed 
Ghuznee,  they  were  attacked  by  swarms  of  A%hans, 
through  whom,  with  consummate  gallantry  and  skill, 
Woodburn  fought  his  way  to  the  little  fort  of  Syedabad. 
The  place   was   occupied  by   a  man  supposed  to  be 
friendly  to  us  ;*  and  the  English  officer,  surrounded  as 

*  lie  was  connected  with  our  postal  establishment. 


392  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

he  was  by  the  enemy,  gladly  accepted  his  oflfer  of  pro- 
tection. But  there  was  no  safety  within  the  fort.  For 
a  day  and  a  night  he  held  his  position  against  a  be- 
sieging enemy,  and  nobly  he  defended  himself.  But  his 
ammunition  fell  short;  and  then  there  came  tidings  of 
the  success  of  the  insurgents  at  Caubul.  On  this,  the 
chief  admitted  parties  of  the  enemy  into  the  towers  of 
his  own  Harem,  which  overlooked  the  court-yard  in 
which  the  Sepoys  were  quartered.  Then  the  massacre 
commenced.  Many  of  the  Sepoys  were  killed  on  the  spot. 
Others  threw  themselves  over  the  walls,  and  were  shot 
down  outside  the  fort.  Woodburn  himself,  with  a  few 
of  his  men,  took  post  in  a  tower  of  their  own  court,  and 
for  some  hours  they  gallantly  defended  themselves.  But 
they  fell  at  last.  The  enemy  burnt  them  out;  and  mas- 
sacred them  almost  to  a  man. 