

On  such  a  question  as  this,  it  is  right  that  the 
opinions  of  the  leading  political  officers,  who  were  best 
acquainted  with  the  character  and  the  conduct  of  the 
Shah,  and  had  the  best  opportunities  of  investigating 
the  circumstances  of  the  Caubul  insurrection,  should  be 
summarily  recorded.  "  To  my  mind,"  wrote  Captain 
Mackeson  to  Mr.  Clerk,  "  there  has  ever  appeared  but 
little  doubt  that  his  Majesty  Shah  Soojah  was,  in  the 
commencement,  the  instigator  of  the  Caubul  insurrec- 
tion. Had  the  first  blow  struck  by  the  rebels  been 
effectual,  his  Majesty  might,  perhaps,  have  thrown  off 
the  mask  earlier;  but  our  troops  in  cantonments  held 
their  position  though  surrounded  by  foes  without  num- 
ber, whilst  those  in  the  Balla  Hissar  held  his  Majesty 
in  check.  Nay,  the  chances  were  at  one  time  so  much 
in  favour  of  our  success,  that  his  Majesty  discarded  his 
own  instruments,  refusing  all  their  solicitations  to  place 
himself  at  their  head.  To  such  an  extent  did  he  carry 
his  reluctant  adherence  to  us,  that  at  length  the  rebels, 
in  their  turn,  were  obliged  to  seek  for  a  leader  among 


OPINIONS  OF  MACGREGOR  AND  RAWUNSON.  385 

the  Barukzyes.  His  Majesty  then  husbanded  his  own  re- 
sources, allowing  the  Barukzyes  and  our  people  to  fight 
out  the  battle.  Sir  William  Macnaghten  would  not  have 
treated  with  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  had  he  not  been 
convinced  of  the  treachery  towards  us  of  Shah  Soojah"* 

Captain  Macgregor*s  opinion  coincides,  but  with  some 
amount  of  qualification,  with  that  of  the  last  witness.  "  I 
agree  with  you "  (Mackeson),  he  wrote,  "  in  thinking 
that  the  Shah  was  more  or  less  implicated  in  the  insur- 
rection; but  when  he  saw  that  it  took  such  a  serious 
turn,  I  really  believe  that  he  repented — even  so  soon  as 
he  heard  of  Burnes's  assassination,  and  of  the  massacre  of 
the  other  officers  in  the  city.  His  Majesty  pressed  Sir 
William  to  remove  all  the  British  troops  into  the  Balla 
Hissar,  which  in  itself  looked  like  a  friendly  feeling 
towards  us."t 

The  opinion  of  Major  Rawlinson  sets  in  an  opposite 
direction.  It  throws  a  side-light  from  Candahar  on 
the  conduct  of  the  Shah  at  this  time.  "  From  every- 
thing I  can  learn,  I  should  say  that  the  Shah  was  cer- 
tainly well  inclined  to  us ;  and  if  assured  of  our 
again  placing  confidence  in  him,  would  cordially  sup- 
port our  advance.  He  has  certainly  done  as  little  as 
he  could,  keeping  up  appearances  with  the  Mussulman 
party,  to  complicate  our  position  at  this  place,  and  I 
learn  that  for  some  time  past  the  prevalent  opinion  in 
the  Douranee  camp  has  been  that  the  Shah  desired  our 
success.''^ 

