

On  receipt  of  this  intelligence  Rawlinson  at  once  re- 
commended the  General  to  halt  Maclaren's  brigade.  It 
was  accordingly  brought  back  to  Candahar.  It  was 
plain  that  some  mischief  was  brewing  in  the  country 
to  the  North.  A  week  of  doubt  and  anxiety  passed ;  and 
then  letters  came  from  Macnaghten  and  Elphinstone, 
announcing  that  Caubul  was  in  a  state  of  insurrec- 
tion, and  ordering  Maclaren's  brigade  to  be  despatched 
at  once  to  the  capital.  These  letters  came  on  with 
endorsements  from  Colonel  Palmer  at  Ghuznee,  and 
Major  Leech  at  Khelat-i-Ghilzye,  which  showed  that  in 
the  intervening  country  there  were  signs  of  the  coming 
storm.*     On  the  17th  of  November,  accompanied  by  a 

*  The  letter  to  Greneral  Nott  was  commanding  in  Afghanistan,   to  re- 
worded as  follows  :  quest  tl'.at  you  will  immediately  direct 
,,  .    .         ^            - .         ^  the  whole  of  the  troops  under  orders 
Assistant  Quarter-Master-Gene-  to  return  to  Hindostan  from  Canda- 
ral  8  JJffice,   Head  Quarters,  her  to  march  upon  Caubul  instead  of 
Caubul,  Novembers,  1841.  Shikarpore,  excepting  any  that  shall 
"Sir, — I  have  the  honour,  by  di-  have  got  beyond  the  Khojuck  Pass, 
rection  of  Major-General  Elphinstone,  and  that  you  will  instruct  the  officers 


TBEACHEBY  OF  THE  JANBAZ.  393 

troop  of  horse  artillery,  the  three  regiments  commenced 
their  march  to  the  northward. 

Anticipating  that  some  evil  might  arise  from  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Prince,  Sufder  Jung,  in  the  province,  after 
his  supercession  by  his  elder  and  better  disposed  bro- 
ther, Rawlinson  had  invited  him  to  come  in  from  Ze- 
mindawer,  and  he  now  suggested  the  expediency  of 
his  proceeding  to  Caubul,  with  Captain  Hart's  Janbaz 

who  may  command  to  use  the  utmost  "  Caubul,  Nov.  3,  1842. 

practicable  expedition.    You  are  re-        "  My  deak  Rawlinson, — We  have 

quested  to  attach  a  troop  of  his  Ma-  a  very  serious  insurrection  in  the  city 

jesty  the  Shah's  Horse  Artillery  to  just  now,  and  from  the  elements  of 

the  above  force,  and  likewise  half  the  which  it  is  composed,  I  apprehend 

first  regiment  of  cavalry.  much  disturbance  in  the  surrounding 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be.  Sir,  your  country  for  some  time  to  come.     It 

most  obedient  servant,  would  be  only  prudent,  therefore,  that 

'<  J.  Paton,  Capt.  A.  Q.  M.  G.  the  16tb,  42nd,  and  4drd,  with  a  troop 

"  To  Major-General  Nott,  ^^  Horse  Artillery  and  some  cavalry. 

Commanding  at  Candahar."  should  come  here  immediately.     Ge- 

^, .    ,  ,        /,  .  ne)ral  Nott  will  be  written  to  officially 

This  letter  was  sent,  under  a  flying  in  this  respect.    We  have  been  shelf- 

seal,    through    Colonel    Palmer,    at  jng  the  city  all  day,  but  apparently 