

*  **  The  Shah,  I  am  told,  has  made  he  will  either  be  murdered  or  made 

up  his  mind  again  to  proceed  in  person  blind  by  the  Barukzyes.'' — [^Letter  of 

to  Jellalabad;  but  1  scarcely  believe  Mohun  Lai:  MS,  Correspondence.'] 
that  he  will  ever  march,  and  if  he  does 


380  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

Ameen-ooUah,  who  held  the  Balla  Hissar,  restored  the 
Prince  to  the  palace ;  and  they  agreed  to  proclaim  him 
King.  The  body  of  Shah  Soojah  was  recovered,  and  for 
some  days  it  lay  in  state.  The  royal  family  declared 
that  until  sentence  had  been  passed  upon  the  mur- 
derer it  should  not  be  buried.  The  MooUahs  were  as- 
sembled to  expound  the  punishment  due  to  so  atrocious 
an  offender;  and  they  pronounced,  on  the  authority 
of  their  religious  books,  that  the  murderer  of  the  King 
should  be  stoned  to  death.  But  Ameen-ooUah  Khan 
interposed.  He  said  that  it  was  not  a  time  to  carry  out 
such  a  sentence ;  all  parties  were  bound  to  league  them- 
selves together  to  fight  against  the  Feringhees;  and 
intestine  animosities  ought  therefore  to  be  forgot. 

To  no  one  were  the  circumstances  of  the  Shah's  death 
a  source  of  deeper  horror  and  regret  than  to  the  good 
old  Newab,  the  father  of  the  murderer.  He  is  said  to 
have  sworn  an  oath  never  again  to  see  his  son  beneath 
his  roof,  or  to  suffer  him  to  be  named  in  his  presence.* 
Various  circumstances  have  been  assigned  as  the  proxi- 
mate causes  of  the  murder  of  the  unfortunate  Shah.  It 
was  said  that  he  had  drawn  down  upon  himself  the 
increased  animosity  of  the  Barukzyes,  by  appointing  to 
the  command  of  the  army  a  son  of  Ameen-oollah  Khan. 
Akbar  Khan,  too,  had  recently  been  wounded  by  an 
accidental  shot  from  a  Pesh-Khidmut,  or  attendant, 
which  was  said  to  have  been  designed  to  take  the  life  of 
the  Sirdar;  and  it  had  been  rumoured  that  Shah  Soojah 
had  bribed  the  man  to  make  the  murderous  attempt. 
That  the  Newab  Zemaun  Khan  was  not  implicated  in 

*  *^  I  ought  to  have  mentioned,  in  the  atrocious  murder  by  his  son  of 

justice  to  that  kind-hearted  and  really  the  late  unfortunate  Kong,  that  he 

good  man,  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,  swore  never  again  to  see  him  inside 

whose  character  is  esteemed  bj  all  his  house,  and  that  henceforth  his 

who    know    him,   whether  Afghan,  name  should  never  be  mentioned  in 

Hindostanee,  or  European,  that  he  his  presence.'*  —  [^Captain  JohnsorCs 

was  so  much  horrified  on  hearing  of  l^arrative  of  his  Captivity:  MS^I 


FIDELITY  OF  THE  SHAH.  381 

the  foul  transaction,  all  men  are  willing  to  believe;  but 
it  was  intended  to  strengthen  the  party  of  which  he  was 
then  the  acknowledged  chief  It  was  the  consumma- 
tion of  the  great  strife  which  for  forty  years  had  been 
raging  between  Shah  Soojah  and  the  Barukzye  Sirdars. 
Indeed,  it  would  have  been  little  in  accordance  with 
the  general  tenor  of  Afghan  history  if  this  unfortunate 
Prince  had  not  died  a  violent  death.  After  so  eventftil 
a  life,  it  would  have  been  strange  indeed  if  he  had  sunk 
to  rest  peaceably  on  his  bed. 