

Many  more  passages  might  be  cited  from  the  corre- 
spondence of  our  political  officers  to  show  the  opinions 
entertained  at  this  time  by  those  most  competent  to  de- 
termine the  question  of  the  Shah^s  fidelity.  But,  after  all, 
the  question  remains  an  open  one.  The  future  historian 
may  still  lose  himself  in  a  sea  of  conjecture.  From  the 
facts  before  us,  and  from  all  that  is  known  of  the  cha- 
racter of  Shah  Soojah,  the  inference  is,  as  I  have  said, 
that  the  King  was  faithful  neither  to  his  own  countrymen 
nor  to  his  British  allies.  He  was  at  best  a  poor  creature. 
He  had  few  good  qualities.  But  it  should  in  justice  be 
remembered,  that  he  was  surrounded  by  circumstances 
against  which  an  abler  and  a  better  man  might  have 
struggled  in  vain.  He  had  long  been  greatly  perplexed 
and  embarrassed  by  the  anomalies  of  his  position.  He 
was  tired  of  playing  the  part  of  the  puppet ;  and  had 
begun  to  long  for  an  opportunity  either  of  becoming 
King  indeed,  or  of  throwing  down  the  trappings  and  the 
cares  of  royalty,  and  ending  his  days  in  the  calm  security 
of  his  old  asylum  at  Loodhianah.  He  used  to  say  that 
Macnaghten  did  all  the  good  that  was  done  in  Afghan- 
istan— and  all  the  evil    too }   for  that  he  himself  did 

*  MS,  Correspondence, 

2c2 


388  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  SHAH  SOOJAH. 

nothing.  Unpopular  measures  of  which  he  was  not  the 
author  were  executed  in  his  name;  he  was  compelled 
outwardly  to  sanction  much  of  which  he  inwardly  dis- 
approved ;  he  saw  dangers  thickening  around  him  with- 
out the  power  of  averting  them,  and  painfully  felt  that 
he  had  always  been  a  cypher,  and  had  now  become  a 
hissing  and  a  reproach. 

Under  the  directorship  which  we  had  forced  upon  him. 
Shah  Soojah  was  not  happy.  He  was  altogether  a  dis- 
appointed man.  He  did  not  find  the  sweets  of  restored 
dominion  what  he  expected  them  to  be.  He  was  an 
isolated  being.  The  sympathies  neither  of  the  Afghans 
nor  the  English  were  with  him.  All  men  suspected  him. 
None  loved  him.  When,  therefore,  he  talked  about 
leaving  Caubul  he  was  probably  not  insincere;  but  he 
may  have  thought  sometimes  that  if  the  English  would 
leave  Caubul  he  might  enjoy  his  sovereignty  more.  If 
to  have  desired  to  rid  himself  of  an  incubus,  which  sate 
so  heavily  upon  him,  was  to  be  faithless  to  the  British, 
Shah  Soojah  was  unquestionably  faithless ;  but  this  is  a 
kind  of  infidelity  so  common  to  humanity  of  all  ranks 
and  in  all  places,  that  to  record  it  against  the  Shah  is 
only  to  say  that  he  was  a  man. 

But  as  regards  the  actions  of  the  King,  it  is  to  be  ob- 
served that  Shah  Soojah  was  not  a  man  of  action.  His 
early  life  had  been  one  rather  of  strenuous  passiveness 
than  of  genuine  activity.  He  had  always  been  courting 
suflering — having  much  done  to  him,  and  for  him,  rather 
than  doing  much  for  himself.  Since  the  British  had 
taken  him  in  hand  he  had  actually  done  nothing.  When 
the  insurrection  burst  over  Caubul,  he  sate  down  and 
waited.  After  the  departure  of  the  British  he  sate  down 
and  waited.  He  was  afi-aid  of  both  parties;  and  unwilling 
to  declare  himself  openly  until  he  could  clearly  see  how 
the  contest  would  end.    He  had  not  strength  of  mind  suffi- 