

Ghuznee,  and  Major  Leech,  at  Khe-  ^uh  little  effect.     I  hope  there  will 

lat-i-Ghizye— Palmer  sent  it  on  with  be  no  difficulty  about  supplies.    Your 

this    endorsement  :    "  The    country  writing  to  Leech  will  obviate  this, 

getting  more    disturbed    every  day.  Qq  second  thoughts  I  shall  forward 

iiurnett  came  in  yesterday  after  being  this  letter  under  a  flying  seal  through 

attacked  on  the  road.     He  was  pur-  Palmer  and  Leech.     Unless  you  send 

sued,  when  he  fortunately  fell  m  with  up  this  reinforcement  there  will  be  a 

some  horsemen  I  had  sent  after  the  probability  of  our  supplies  being  cut 

fifty-two  camels  from  Candahar,  which  Qff^ 
have  been  taken  off.     No  tidings  of        '  ..  w.  H.  Macnaghten." 

Crawford.**     Leech  wrote  : —  »  ,.  ^  /.  ^^  r*««*«:«   i  «„.«««-  * 

A  line  from  Captain   Lawrence  to 

"  Khelat,  Nov.  12,  1841.  Colonel  Palmer  requested  him  to  send 

"  The  whole  of  the  Ghilzye  pri-  qj,  ^he  letter  express  through  Leech. 

soners  escaped  from  Caubul,  and  the  j^^ch  forwarded  it  with  a  few  words 

family   of    Husan    Khan  from    this  to  Rawlinson,  saying.  »'  What  think 

neighbourhood.     Khaker   Khan  and  you  of  a  Prince  and  some  treasure 

Munsoor  Khan   in   custody,  and  all  ^ith  the  brigade?     Please  reinforce 

the  other  families  expected  by  this  this  post  (Khelat-i-Ghilzye)  by  160, 

evening  to  be  safe  at  this  place. or  if  possible,  200  men-infantry." 

What  are  we  to  say  to  the  appearance  Another  endorsement  stated,  "  There 

en  route  to  Candahar  at  this  crisis  of  ^^e  nearly  100  maunds  of  atta  here, 

Saifadeen,  nephew  of  Atta  Mahomed  belonging  to  the  Bengal  commissariat 

Khan.     He  was  here  on  the  evening  disposable  for  the  brigade  proceeding 

of  the  8th."  towards  Caubul.   We  have  six  months 

Macnaghten*8  letter  was  addressed  supply  for  the  garrison. 

to  Rawlinson,  and  it  ran  in  the  fol-  "  H.  Milne.** 

lowing  words ;—  —  [AfjS.  Records.'] 


394  AFFAIRS  AT  CAKDAHAB. 

regiment,  which  was  to  follow  in  the  rear  of  Mac- 
laren's  brigade.  The  Prince  yielded  to  the  suggestion, 
and  went.  The  fidelity  of  the  Afghan  horse  was  doubt- 
ful, and  Rawlinson  was  glad  to  rid  himself  of  the  pre- 
sence both  of  a  discontented  Prince  and  a  body  of 
treacherous  A%han  horsemen — soldiers  raised,  mounted, 
armed,  equipped  and  disciplined  by  Shah  Soojah  and 
his  British  supporters,  seemingly  for  the  one  sole  pur- 
pose of  drawing  their  swords  against  the  very  power  to 
which  they  owed  their  military  existence. 

All  through  the  month  of  November  Candahar  re- 
mained tranquil.  But  it  was  obvious  that  the  course  of 
insurrection  was  setting  towards  the  West  Tidings  came 
in  from  the  country  about  Ghuznee,  which  showed  that 
the  road  to  the  capital  was  infested  by  the  insurgents. 
Lieutenant  Crawford,  who  was  escorting  the  Douranee 
prisoners  to  Caubul  had  been  attacked  by  overwhelm- 
ing numbers  near  Ghuznee;  and  had  suffered  his  pri- 
soners to  escape ;  or  rather,  had  lost  them  with  all 
his  baggage,  and  a  considerable  number  of  his  horses 
and  men.*    Soon  afterwards  Guddoo  Khan,  an  Afghan 