

tell  you  that  these  are  not  times  for  the  2nd,  16tb,  38th,  and  a  wing  of  the 

2d2 


404  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

weak  only  in  the  mounted  branch — he  made  a  four 
hours'  march  over  a  few  miles  of  country,  and  came 
upon  the  enemy,*  posted  near  the  fortified  village  of 
Killa-chuk,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Uighundab.  The 
British  troops  crossed  the  river,  and  at  once  advanced  in 
column  of  battalions,  flanked  by  the  artillery  and  cavalry, 
to  the  attack.  The  action  was  of  brief  duration.  At 
the  end  of  twenty  minutes,  during  which  our  guns  and 
musketry,  telling  with  deadly  effect  upon  the  heavy 
masses  of  the  enemy,  were  answered  by  a  wild  and  in- 
effective fire  from  their  ranks,  the  rebel  army  was  in 
confusion  and  flight.  The  Ghilzyes  fled  in  one  direction ; 
the  Janbaz  in  another;  the  people  from  the  villagesf 
hastened  to  their  own  homes.  Atta  Mahomed  attempted 
to  make  a  stand ;  but  our  troops  moved  forward — carried 
the  village  by  storm — and  slaughtered  every  man,  wo- 
man, and  child,  within  its  walls.  The  British  line 
was  then  re-formed,  and  Atta  Mahomed  prepared  to 
meet  a  second  attack.  But  the  cavalry,  with  two  horse- 
artillery  guns,  were  now  slipped  upon  the  enemy,  who 

42nd  Native  Infantry;   the  Shah's  historian  ought  to  speak  with  less 

6th  Infantry;  Anderson's  two  troops  confidence  than  the  *'*'  number  of  the 

of  Horse  Artillery  (Shah's) ;  Bipod's  enemy."   There  is  nothing  more  diffi- 

Battery  QSombay  Artillery) ;    Lee-  cult  to  determine  than  the  fact ;  and 

son's  and  Maldane's  Horse.  nothing  more  likely  to  draw  upon  him 

*  The  number  of  the  enemy  has  a  large  amount  of  acrimonious  criti- 

been  variously  stated  at  all  sorts  of  cism,  than  his  manner  of  stating  it. 

amounts,  from  5000  to  20,000.    Ge-  As  a  general  proposition,  I  think  it 

neral  Nott,  in  his  official  despatch  may  be  laid  down  that  military  com- 

addressed  to  the  Military  Secretary,  manders    seldom    under  -  state    the 

says :  "  After  a  march  of  four  hours  number   of  the    enemy   they    have 

over  a  very  difficult  country,  I  came  beaten. 

in  sight  of  the  rebel  army,  from  fifteen  t  "  Two  canals  in  advance  of  the 

to  twenty  thousand  men,  drawn  up  in  village  were  lined  by  matchlock  men 

a  strong  position  on  the  right  bank  — ^the    horse  crowded  the  slope  of 

of  the  Urghundab."    Major  Rawlin-  the  tuppa  upon  which  Killa-chuk  is 

son  says :  "  From  what  I  myself  saw,  built,  and  occupied  the  entire  space 

as  well  as  from  information  I  have  intervening  between  that  village  and 

received  from  parties  in  the  enemy's  Kohuck,  the  hillocks  adjoining  which 

camp,  I  should  estimate  their  enture  latter  place  were  covered  by  large 