

Two  days  after  the  defection  of  the  Janbaz,  Prince 
Sufder  Jung  fled  from  Candahar  and  joined  the  camp 
of  Atta  Mahomed.  The  Sirdar  had  fixed  his  head- 
quarters at  Dehli,  about  forty  miles  from  Candahar; 
and  there,  early  in  January,  Rawlinson  was  eager 
to  attack  him.  The  political  agent  saw  clearly  the 
expediency  of  crushing  the  insurrection  in  the  bud. 
Every  day  was  adding  to  the  importance  of  the  move- 
ment, and  swelling  the  number  of  the  insurgents.  Some 
of  the  tribes  were  standing  aloof,  unwilling  to  declare 
themselves  against  us,  yet  in  hourly  expectation  of  being 
compelled  to  secure  their  own  safety  by  ranging  them- 
selves under  the  banners  of  the  Prince.  But  the  Gene- 
ral was  unwilling  to  divide  his  force ;  and  refused  to 
send   a  brigade   to  Dehh.    Whilst    Rawlinson   urged 

*  **  The  mutineers  moved  down  to  Our  men  charsed  at  the  same  time  in 
the  Barukzye  villages  in  apparent  line,  and  the  flanks  swept  round  the 
expectation  of  being  joined  by  the  Janbaz  horse,  who  were  probably  not 
Ooloos,  but  wherever  they  went  above  150  strong — numoers  having 
they  received  neither  support  nor  left  the  rebel  standard  before  reach- 
encouragement,  notwithstanding  that  ins  Chuplanee.  For  about  five 
they  gave  out  our  troops  were  on  the  mmutes  a  splendid  fight  took  place, 
march  to  destroy  the  I)ouranee  vil-  hand-to-hand,  when  the  Janbaz 
lages.  The  Janbaz  at  last  took  up  a  broke  and  fled,  pursued  by  our 
position  at  Chuplanee,  a  village  about  cavalry.  Of  the  enemy,  about  thirty 
twelve  miles  on,  where  our  cavalry  were  killed  and  fifty  wounded  in  the 
came  up  with  them ;  Captain  Leeson  flight  and  pursuit.  Our  loss  was 
had  to  file  his  men  across  a  difficult  trifling."  —  [  Major  Bawlinsons  MS, 
canal,  and  had  only  just  formed  line  Journal.^ 
when  the  enemy  charged  in  a  body. 

VOL.  II.  2  D 


402  AiTAIBS  AT  CANDAHAB. 

strong  political  considerations  in  favour  of  promptitude 
of  action,  Nott,  with  equal  firmness,  took  his  stand  upon 
military  grounds,  and  argued  that  it  would  be  inex*- 
pedient,  at  such  a  season  of  the  year,  to  send  a  portion  of 
his  force  a  distance  of  forty  miles  £rom  Candahar  to 
beat  up  the  quarters  of  a  fugitive  Prince.  "  Sufder 
Jung,''  wrote  Sawlinson,  ^^  has  fixed  his  abode  at  Dehli, 
and  has  declared  himself  the  leader  of  an  insurrection, 
aiming  at  our  expulsion  fi:om  the  country.  Up  to  the 
present  time  no  very  considerable  number  of  men  have 
joined  his  standard,  and  the  only  chiefs  in  attendance 
of  any  note,  are  those  who  have  accompanied  Maho- 
med Atta  Khan  fi:om  Caubul,  tc^ether  with  the  Ghil- 
zye  leaders,  Sumud  Khan,  Meer  Alim  Khan,  and  the 
Gooroo.  It  would  thus  be  an  easy  matter  by  the  de- 
tachment of  a  brigade  to  Dehli  to  break  up  the  insurgent 
force,  and  whether  the  rebels  fought  or  fled,  the  con- 
sequences would  be  almost  of  equal  benefit  with  regard 
to  the  restoration  of  tranquillity.  But  I  anticipate  a 
very  serious  aggravation  of  affairs  if  we  allow  the 
Prince  to  remain  unmolested  for  any  length  of  time  at 
Dehli,  or  to  move  fix>m  that  place  in  the  direction  of 
Candahar  with  the  avowed  purpose  of  attacking  us. 
Our  inactivity  would  not  fail  to  be  ascribed  by  the  great 
body  of  the  Ooloos  to  an  inability  to  act  on  the  offen- 
sive, and  an  impression  of  this  sort  having  once  gained 
ground,  the  natural  consequences,  in  the  present  highly 
excited  state  of  religious  feeling,  would  be  a  general  rise 
of  the  population  against  us."* 