

of  Pollock  and  Nott  on  Caubul.    I  had   acted  perfectly  right."     These 

may  add  that  the  Court  of  Inquiry,  escaped  prisoners,   however,   subse- 

which  I  called  for,  after  investigation  quently  became  the  most  active  of 

all  the  circumstances,  decided  that  I  our  enemies. 


396  ^VFiTMHS  AT  CANDAHAK. 

A  pretext  very  soon  presented  itself.  Two  marches 
beyond  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  there  was  a  light  fall  of  snow. 
On  the  following  day  there  was  more  snow,  and  some  of 
the  commissariat  donkeys  died  upon  the  road.  On  the 
next,  Maclaren  halted  the  brigade,  and  ordered  a  com- 
mittee jto  assemble  and  report  upon  the  state  of  the  com- 
missariat cattle,  with  reference  to  their  fitness  for  the 
continuance  of  the  march  to  Caubul.  The  committee 
assembled;  registered  the  number  of  deaths  among  the 
carriage-cattle  during  the  two  preceding  days ;  and  re- 
ported that  as  winter  had  now  set  in,  and  as  the  loss  of 
cattle  would  increase  every  march  that  was  made  to  the 
northward,  it  would  be  impracticable  for  the  force  to 
reach  Caubul  at  all  in  an  efficient  state.  On  this,  about 
the  end  of  November,  Maclaren  ordered  the  brigade  to 
retrace  its  steps. 

But  the  snow  had  now  ceased.  The  little  that  had 
fallen  soon  melted  away,  and  for  weeks  not  another  flake 
fell  throughout  the  entire  country.  The  weather  was  re- 
markably fine  and  open ;  and  there  is  not  a  doubt  that  the 
brigade  might  easily  have  made  good  its  way  to  Caubul. 
But  it  does  not  appear  ever  to  have  been  seriously  in- 
tended that  the  force  should  reach  its  destination.  Mac- 
claren  and  his  officers  knew  well  that  the  return  of  the 
brigade  to  Candahar  would  be  welcome  to  General  Nott, 
and  that  there  was  not  likely  to  be  a  very  close  inquiry 
into  the  circumstances  attending  the  retrograde  move- 
ment. There  was  in  reality  little  more  than  a  show  of 
proceeding  to  the  relief  of  Caubul.  The  regiments  were 
wanted  at  Candahar  ;  and  to  Candahar  they  returned. 
How  far  their  arrival  might  have  helped  to  save  Elphin- 
stone's  force  from  destruction  can  only  be  conjectured; 
but  it  is  right  to  admit  the  belief,  that  if  Nott  had  known 
to  what  straits  the  Caubul  army  would  soon  be  reduced, 
he  would  not  have  uttered  a  word  to  encourage  the  re- 
turn of  the  relieving  brigade  to  Candahar. 


POLICY  OF  MAJOR  RAWL.INSON.  397 

But  whatever  may  have  been  the  causes  of  the  failure, 
soon  after  the  retrograde  movement  of  Maclaren*s  bri- 
gade became  known,  unmistakeable  signs  of  inquietude 
were  discernible  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Candahar. 
Mahomed  Atta  Khan  had  been  detached  by  the  Cau- 
bul  party  to  raise  an  insurrection  in  that  province.  No 
sooner  had  the  chief  reached  the  frontier  than  such 
unequivocal  symptoms  of  popular  excitement  began  to 
manifest  themselves  that  Major  Rawlinson  at  once  per- 
ceived the  necessity  of  adopting  active  measures  for  the 
suppression  of  disorder  and  the  maintenance  of  the  tran- 
quillity of  the  surrounding  country.  His  efforts  in  the 
first  instance  were  directed  to  the  avoidance  of  any  ac- 
tual collision  with  the  people,  and  the  preservation  of 
outward  smoothness  and  regularity  in  the  administration 
of  affairs.  With  this  primal  object,  he  withdrew  from 
the  outlying  districts  all  the  detached  troops,  and  con- 
centrated them  at  Candahar.  A  single  party  of  Janbaz, 
protected  by  the  Hazarehs  from  the  possibility  of  at- 
tack, were  left  in  Tezeen,  whilst  all  the  other  troops, 
Hindostanee  and  Afghan,  were  posted  in  and  around 
the  city  of  Candahar.  But  this  was  not  enough.  The 
safety  of  our  military  position  might  be  provided  for;  but 
it  was  not  sufficient  to  feel  confident  of  our  ability  to 
overcome  any  enemy  that  might  venture  to  attack  us. 
It  was  obviously  expedient  to  strike  rather  at  the  root 
than  at  the  branches ;  to  prevent  the  growth  of  rebellion 
rather  than  to  beat  it  down  full-grown.  At  all  events, 
it  was  politic  to  secure  such  a  division  of  parties  as 
would  annihilate  even  the  possibility  of  a  powerful 
coalition  against  us.  Relying  upon  the  general  unpopu- 
larity of  the  Barukzyes  with  the  Douranee  tribes,  whom 
the  Sirdars  had  so  long  and  so  severely  oppressed,  Major 
Rawlinson  exerted  himself  to  get  up  a  Douranee  move- 
ment in  our  favour.  He  bound  the  chiefs,  by  all  the 
most  solemn  oaths  that  Mahomedanism  affords,  to  stand 