

Before  daybreak  on  the  27  th  of  December  the  men  of 
the  Janbaz  regiments  were  to  have  commenced  their 
march  to  Ghirisk.  There  were  250  men  of  the  1st 
Regiment  under  Lieutenant  Golding,  and  150  of  the  2nd 
imder  Lieutenant  Wilson.  Lieutenant  Pattinson  was  to 
accompany  them  in  political  charge.  The  object  of  the 
movement  was  two-fold — to  escort  treasure  and  ammu- 
nition to  Ghirisk,  and  to  remove  from  Candahar  a  body 
of  men  whose  fidelity  was  more  than  suspected.     Two 


400  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

hours  after  midnight  the  party  was  to  have  moved  and 
made  a  double  march,  for  the  purpose  of  clearing  the 
villages  on  the  Urghundab,  which  had  been  greatly 
excited  during  the  few  preceding  days.  Golding  was 
ready  at  the  appointed  hourj  but,  through  some  miscon- 
ception of  orders,  Wilson's  men  were  not  prepared  to 
march.  So  the  movement  was  countermanded.  Golding 
and  Pattinson,  therefore,  returned  to  the  tent  of  the 
former,  and  laid  themselves  down  again  to  sleep.  The 
1st  Janbaz  regiment  had  been  drawn  up  ready  for  the 
march  with  their  cattle  loaded,  and  the  postponement 
of  the  movement  now  took  them  by  surprise.  They  had 
laid  a  plot  to  mutiny  and  desert  upon  the  march,  and 
they  believed  that  the  conspiracy  had  been  detected. 
After  waiting  for  half  an  hour,  drawn  up  in  the  chill  air 
of  early  morning,  they  determined  at  once  to  throw  off 
the  mask;  so  they  streamed  into  Golding's  tent  with 
their  drawn  swords,  and  attacked  the  two  officers  in 
their  beds.  When  they  thought  that  their  bloody  work 
was  complete,  they  rushed  confusedly  out  of  the  tent, 
mounted  their  horses,  and  fled.  The  treasure  was 
plundered,  and  some  horses  belonging  to  Golding  and 
Pattinson  were  carried  off;  but  nothing  else  was  touched 
by  the  assassins.  Pattinson  was  stunned  by  a  blow  on 
the  head,  but  recovering  his  senses,  he  made  his  way  out 
of  the  tent,  wounded  as  he  was  in  seven  places,  mounted 
a  horse  which  his  Meerza  had  saddled  on  the  spot,  and 
effected  his  escape.*  Golding  was  less  fortunate.  He 
rushed  out  of  his  tent,  and  fled  on  foot  towards  the 
cantonments;  but  the  Janbaz  followed  and  cut  him 
down  when  within  a  short  distance  of  our  camp.f 

A  party  of  the  Shah's  horse  under  Captain  Leeson, 
and  a  detachment  of  Captain  Wilson's  Janbaz,  who  had 

*  He  died,  after  mucb  suffering,  in  March. 
t  Major  liatdinsan^s  MS.  Journal. 


MUTINY  OF  THE  JANBAZ.  401 

remained  true  to  us  in  the  face  of  strong  temptation, 
were  sent  out  against  the  mutineers.  The  detachment 
came  up  with  the  rebels  about  twelve  miles  from  Can- 
dahar.  •  There  was  a  brief,  but  sturdy  conflict.  The 
mutineers  charged  in  a  body,  but  were  gallantly  met  by 
Leeson's  men ;  and  after  a  hand-to-hand  struggle,  were 
broken  and  dispersed.*  Thirty  of  their  number  were 
killed  by  our  cavalry,  who  followed  up  their  advantage ; 
many  more  were  wounded,  and  the  remainder  fled  in 
confusion  to  the  camp  of  Atta  Mahomed. 