

Reason  and  experience  were  both  on  the  side  of  this 
argument,  and  Rawlinson  stated  the  case  clearly  and 
well.  But  Nott  took  a  soldier's  view  of  the  question. 
He  argued,  that  to  send  out  a  brigade  at  such  a  season 

•  Major  Rawlinson    to  Major"  General  Notti  January  7th,  1842.    MS. 
Correspondence, 


ARGUMENTS  OF  GENERAL  NOTT.  403 

of  the  year,  so  far  from  its  supports,  would  be  to  destroy 
his  men  in  the  field,  and  to  expose  the  city  to  the  attacks 
of  the  enemy.  "  I  conceive,"  he  wrote  in  reply  to  Raw- 
linson's  letter,  "  that  the  whole  country  is  in  a  state  of 
rebellion,  and  that  nothing  but  the  speedy  concentration 
of  the  troops  at  this  place  has  saved  the  different  de- 
tachments from  being  destroyed  in  detail,  and  the  city  of 
Candahar  from  being  besieged.  .  .  .  Because  this 
young  Prince  is  said  to  have  assembled  1000  or  1600 
followers  at  a  distance  of  forty  miles  from  Candahar,  it 
would,  indeed,  be  truly  absurd  were  I,  in  the  very  depth 
of  winter,  to  send  a  detachment  wandering  about  the 
country  in  search  of  the  rebel  fugitive,  destroying  my 
men  amidst  frost  and  snow,  killing  the  few  carriage-cattle 
we  have  left,  and  thus  be  totally  disabled  at  the  proper 
season  from  moving  ten  miles  in  any  direction  from  the 
city,  or  even  have  the  means  of  falling  back,  should  that 
unfortunately  ever  become  necessary."* 

The  movements  of  the  rebel  army  soon  settled  the 
question  between  them.  No  attempt  having  been  made 
to  dislodge  the  insurgent  chiefs,  they  quietly  moved  down 
the  valley  of  the  Urghundab,  and  on  the  12th  of  Janu- 
ary took  post  on  the  river,  about  five  miles  to  the  west 
of  the  city  of  Candahar. 

General  Nott  lost  no  time  in  moving  out  to  attack 
them.  Taking  with  him  five  and  a  half  regiments  of 
infantry,  the  Shah's  1st  Cavalry,  a  party  of  Skinner's 
Horse,  and  sixteen  guns,f  a  formidable  body  of  troops^ 

*  General  Nott  to  Major  EawUu'  mere  oeremonj,  and  that  under  pre- 

son:  January  8,  1842.      MS,  Cor^  sent  circumstances,  and  at  a  distance 

respondence.     There  is  a  character-  of  2000  miles  from  the  seat  of  the 

istic  passage  in  this  letter  which  b  Supreme  GrOYemmeat,  I  throw  re* 

worthy  of  quotation.     ^^I  have  no  sponsibilitj  to  the  win^  and  tell  Ton 

right  to  interfere  with  the  affairs  of  that,  in  my  opinion,  you  have  not  had 

the  government  of  this  coimtry,  and  for  some  time  past,  nor  have  yom  ni 

I  never  do — but  in  reference  to  that  present,  one  particle  of  political  in- 

part  of  your  note  where  }rou  speak  of  fluence  in  thb  country." 

political  influence,  I  will  candidly  f  Her  Majesty's  40th  Regiment ; 