

*  It  does  not  appear  that  the  con-  alive,  and  I  had  only  to  decide  on 
duct  of  Lieutenant  Crawford  was,  in  putting  them  to  death  or  setting  them 
any  way,  open  to  censure.  He  was  the  at  liberty.  My  instructions  would 
bearer,  as  has  been  shown,  of  written  have  justified  ray  pursuing  the  former 
instructions,  authorising  him  to  de-  course,  but  the  poor  wretches  had 
stroy  the  prisoners  if  they  attempted  clearly  made  no  attempt  to  escape ; 
to  escape,  but  there  seems  to  have  they  were  in  no  way  answerable  for 
been  no  connivance  between  them  the  attack  made  on  my  party,  as  was 
and  the  party  who  attacked  the  escort,  evident  from  one  of  their  number 
Crawford  himself  says,  in  a  narrative  falling  by  the  sword  of  our  adversa- 
which  he  drew  up,  and  which  was  ries;  and  I  conceived  then,  and  do 
subsequently  published  in  a  Bombay  now  conceive,  that  in  letting  these 
paper  :  ^^  One  prisoner  was  cut  down  men  go  with  their  lives^  I  was  not  only 
by  a  horseman  of  the  enemy  (plainly  acting  according  to  the  strict  letter  of 
showing  there  was  no  collusion  be-  my  instructions,  but  that  justice  and 
tween  them),  two  others  rolled  over  humanity  required  I  should  not  slay 
in  a  ditch,  where,  with  their  horse  a  them  in  cold  blood.  Had  I  put  them 
top  of  them,  and  their  legs  chained  to  death,  then  Shumshoodeen  or  Ma- 
under his  belly,  I  left  them  ;  indeed,  homed  Akbar  would  have  been  equally 
I  now  found  it  was  impossible  I  could  justified  in  taking  our  lives  (the  lives 
ever  get  my  charge  into  Ghuznee  of  all  their  prisoners)  on  the  advance 


BETURN  OF  MACLAREN^S  BRIGADE.  395 

officer  in  the  service  of  the  Shah  and  his  British  sup- 
porters, who  had  accompanied  Crawford's  detachment—. 
a  man  of  unimpeachable  integrity  and  unquestionable 
gallantry  and  good  conduct — ^was  on  his  return  from 
Ghuznee  to  Candahar  "  overpowered  by  numbers  and 
slain,  with  seventeen  of  his  best  men,  losing  at  t\e  same 
time  forty-five  horses,  and  all  the  arms  and  baggage  of 
the  Bessaleh."  These  incidents  seemed  to  portend  the 
near  approach  of  the  thunder-douds  that  were  break- 
ing over  Caubul.  Candahar  was  as  yet  only  beneath 
the  skirts  of  the  storm. 

On  the  8th  of  December  Maclaren's  brigade  returned 
to  Candahar.  How  it  happened  that  these  regiments 
had  failed  to  make  good  their  march  to  Caubul  is  not 
to  be  satisfactorily  explained.  It  is  still  stated  by  officers 
who  accompanied  the  detachment,  that  the  difficulties  of 
the  march  have  been  greatly  exaggerated;  and  that,  at 
all  events,  they  might  have  been  overcome.  Nott  sent 
the  brigade  with  a  reluctance  which  he  took  no  care 
to  conceal.  It  was  his  wish  to  retain  the  three  regi- 
ments at  Candahar ;  and  he  was  not  a  man  to  shrink  from 
the  utterance  of  his  feelings  on  such  a  subject  as  this. 
"  Remember,"  he  said  to  Maclaren  and  his  staff,  when 
they  presented  themselves  at  the  General's  quarters  to 
take  leave  of  their  old  commandant,  "  the  despatch  of 
this  brigade  to  Caubul  is  not  my  doing.  I  am  com- 
pelled to  defer  to  superior  authority;  but  in  my  own 
private  opinion  I  am  sending  you  all  to  destruction." 
The  brigade  marched ;  but,  starting  under  such  auspiceSi 
there  was  little  likelihood  of  its  reaching  its  destination. 
There  were  few  officers  in  the  force  who  did  not  know 
that,  on  the  first  colourable  pretext,  it  would  be  turned 
back. 