

force  was  immensely  superior.  in  Meerza  Ahmed  which  you  appear 

t  The  Prince  seems  to  have  been  to  have.    The  force  under  this  man 

inclined  to  desert  to  the  British  in  has  been  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of 

the  course  of  the  action.    He  and  Tej  Candahar  for  the  last  month.     Why 

Mahomed  (the  Sirdar  of  the  recreant  this  has  been  permitted  I  know  not. 

Janbaz,  who  had  been  forced  to  ac-  He  has  a  very  considerable  body  of 

company  the  mutineers  afler  their  at-  men  with  him,  both  horse  and  foot ; 

tack  on  theirBritish  officers)  had  been  and  my  information  tells  me  that 

in  consultation  in  the  morning  about  they  are  increasing  daily  and  hourly, 

goin^  over  to  the  British  camp.   The  ....     You  ouzhi  to  be  the  b€»t 

chie»  had  some  suspicion  of  this,  and  judge  of  this  man  s  fidelity ;  but  I 

*''  when  they  saw  Tej  Mahomed  de-  believe  him  to  be  a  traitor ;  and  I 

tach  himself,  they  imm^iately  ac-  should  not  be  surprised  to  hear  of  hia 


406  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

had  now  ceased  to  believe  in  his  fidelity ;  but  he  had 
never  ceased  to  respect  his  talents.  He  knew  him  to  be 
an  A%han  of  rare  ability,  and  he  believed  that  the  saga- 
city of  the  Meerza  would  not  suffer  him  to  doubt  the 
difference  between  the  power  of  his  countrymen  and  that 
of  the  British  Grovemment.  But  the  Meerza  had  sounded 
the  depth  of  the  difficulties  which  surrounded  us  with 
no  little  accuracy,  and  had  estimated  aright ,  the  nature 
of  the  crisis.  He  saw  in  the  distance  our  compulsory 
abandonment  of  Afghanistan,  and  doubted  the  wisdom 
of  leaguing  himself  with  a  declining  cause. 

From  the  20th  of  January  to  the  last  day  of  February 
the  Douranees  remained  encamped  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Candahar.  Nothing  but  the  genius  of  Meerzft  Ahmed 
could  have  kept  together,  throughout  so  long  a  season 
of  comparative  inactivity,  all  the  discordant  elements  of 
that  Douranee  force.  The  winter  had  set  in  with  its 
snowy  accessories.  Nott  was  unwilling  to  expose  his 
troops  to  the  severities  of  the  winter  season ;  and  the 
enemy  seemed  equally  disinclined  for  war  whilst  the 
snow  was  on  the  ground.  But  during  this  period  of 
suspended  hostilities  very  different  were  the  occupations 
of  the  two  contending  forces— very  different  the  feelings 
with  which  they  contemplated  the  renewal  of  the  strug- 
gle. The  attitude  of  the  British  at  this  time  denoted  a 
consciousness  of  strength.  There  was  no  despondency 
— there  was  no  excitement.  Our  officers  and  men,  hav- 
ing nothing  to  do  in  the  field,  fell  back  again  into  the 
ordinary  routine  of  cantonment  Ufe,  as  though  the  coim- 
try  had  never  been  convulsed  or  disturbed.     They  rode 