


398  AFFAIRS  AT  CAKDAHAB. 

firm  in  their  allegiance  to  Shah  Soojah  and  the  Shaza- 
dah  Timour.  The  priesthood  ratified  the  bond;  and 
the  families  of  the  Douranee  chiefs  were  placed  as  host- 
ages for  their  fideUty  in  the  hands  of  the  British  officers. 
The  chiefe  themselves,  with  Prince  Timour's  eldest  son 
at  their  head,  and  accompanied  by  Meerza  Ahmed, 
the  Revenue-manager  of  Candahar,  a  man  of  consider- 
able talents  and  unsuspected  fidelity,  to  whom  Major 
Rawlinson  had  entrusted  a  lakh  of  rupees  for  the 
management  of  the  movement,  were  despatched  to  the 
eastern  frontier  to  raise  the  tribes  against  the  Baruk- 
zyes  and  their  Ghilzye  allies.  In  the  mean  while  the 
British,  at  Candahar,  remained  apparently  unconcerned 
spectators  of  the  contest,  which,  it  was  hoped,  would 
resolve  itself  into  a  question  of  Suddozye  or  Barukzye 
supremacy  in  the  Douranee  Empire. 

The  ol^ects  contemplated  by  Major  Rawlinson  were, 
however,  only  partially  attained.  He  succeeded  in  gain- 
ing time,  and  in  removing  the  Douranee  chiefs  from  the 
neighbourhood  of  our  camp.  "  The  Douranees  quitted 
Candahar  in  the  middle  of  December,  delayed  for  a  con- 
siderable time  the  advance  of  Mahomed  Atta  Khan,  and 
prevented  to  the  utmost  of  their  power  the  spread  of 
religious  fanaticism  among  their  tribes."  But  the  good 
faith  so  apparent  at  the  outset  was  destined  soon  to  be 
overclouded.  As  long  as  the  Douranees  believed  that 
to  carry  out  the  wishes  of  the  British  was  really  to  fight 
the  battle  of  the  Suddozyes,  they  were  true  to  our 
cause ;  but  they  soon  began  to  give  credit  to  the  report 
that  Shah  Soojah  himself  was  in  the  ranks  of  our 
enemies,  and  then  they  fell  away  from  us.  Even  Meerza 
Ahmed,  in  whom  so  much  confidence  had  been  reposed, 
turned  his  fine  talents  against  us,  and  became  the  main- 
spring of  a  hostile  Douranee  movement. 

But  they  did  not  at  once  declare  themselves.  For 
a  while  the  Douranees  quietly  watched  the  progress  of 


POLICY  OP  MAJOR  RAWLINSON.  399 

ajffairs.  Those  events  as  they  developed  themselves, 
seemed  more  and  more  favourable  to  the  spread  of  in- 
surrection in  western  Afghanistan.  As  the  old  year 
wore  to  a  close,  it  seemed  that  our  difficulties  were 
thickening,  and  the  new  year  came  in  with  a  crowd  of 
fresh  embarrassments.  Sufder  Jung  had  returned  to 
Candahar.  On  the  retrogression  of  Maclaren's  brigade 
he  had  declared  that  he  could  not  trust  the  Janbaz  to 
escort  him  to  Caubul,  and  again  set  his  face  towards  the 
south.  The  presence  of  these  traitorous  horsemen  at 
Candahar  had  always  been  a  source  of  considerable 
anxiety  to  Major  Rawlinson.  The  1st  Regiment  of 
Afghan  horse  had  been  in  Zemindawer;  and  when  the 
political  agent  recalled  the  other  troops  from  that  part 
of  the  country,  it  was  his  intention  that  the  Janbaz 
should  remain  at  Ghirisk.  Their  enmity  to  the  sur- 
rounding tribes  was  so  well  known  that  there  was  less 
chance  of  their  uniting  with  the  rebels  in  that  part  of 
the  country  than  in  any  other.  Owing,  however,  to 
the  miscarriage  of  a  letter,  Rawhnson's  intentions  were 
defeated.  The  Janbaz  returned  to  Candahar  with  the 
other  details  of  the  Zemindawer  detachment,  on  the  9th 
of  December.  But  Rawlinson  was  determined  to  re- 
move them.  He  suspected  their  treachery ;  but  sooner 
than  he  anticipated,  they  threw  oflF  all  disguise,  and 
openly  arrayed  themselves  against  us. 