

beingjoined  by  his  expected  confede-  Jamtary  8(A,  1842.  MS,  Carrespon" 
rates,  and  before  twenty-four  hours  dence,"]  The  position  of  Meerza  Ah- 
marchin^  off  and  forcing  the  young  med,  and  the  near  prospect  of  his  de- 
Prince  Sekunder  to  accompany  him.  fection,  were  among  the  reasons  urged 
Tet  he  is  on  the  watch,  and  will  play  by  the  General  in  support  of  his  re- 
his  game  according  to  circumstances.  fiisal  to  quit  the  near  neighbourhood 
^[^General  Nott  to  Major  Rawlinson:  of  Candahar. 


ARBANGEMENTS  OF  MEEBZA  AHMED.  407 

steeple-chases ;  they  played  at  rackets ;  they  pelted  one 
another  with  snow-balls.  The  dreadful  snow  which 
had  destroyed  the  Caubul  army  was  only  a  plaything  in 
the  hands  of  their  brethren  at  Candahar.*  The  enemy, 
on  the  other  hand,  were  kept  continually  in  a  state  of 
restless  and  absorbing  activity.  Meerza  Ahmed  saw  the 
danger  of  suffering  the  Douranee  chiefs,  disunited  and 
jealous  of  each  other  as  they  were,  to  dwell  too  in- 
tently upon  the  embarrassments  of  their  own  positions. 
He  gave  their  thoughts  an  outward  direction;  and, 
by  skilful  management,  kept  them  both  fix)m  risking  pre- 
maturely a  general  engagement  with  the  British,  and 
fix>m  breaking  out  into  internal  dissensions.f  "  Meerza 
Ahmed  alone,"  says  Major  RawHnson,  in  the  able  de- 
spatch I  have  already  quoted,  "  could  have  so  long  pre- 
served union  among  the  discordant  elements  of  which 
this  camp  was  composed ;  he  alone  could  have  managed, 
•  by  the  most  careful  revenue  arrangements,  to  have  sup- 
ported the  concourse  which  was  assembled  round  the 
standard  of  Sufder  Jung ;  he  alone,  perhaps,  could  have 
prevented  the  Douranees  from  risking  an  action  in 
which  they  were  sure  to  be  defeated;  his  measures 
throughout  have  been  most  skilful  and  well  sustained. 
The  chiefs  were,  in  the  first  place,  sent  to  recruit  in  the 
different  districts  where  their  influence  chiefly  prevailed; 
revenue  was  raised  in  the  iisual  form  for  the  support  of 
the  troops  in  anticipation  of  the  coming  harvest,  the 
ryots  receiving  an  acquittance  from  Meerza  Ahmed  in 
case  the  management  should  continue  in  his  hands,  and 

*  NeiWs  Recollections,    There  was,  between  the  Janbaz  and  Fopnb^ea 

however,  comparatively  little  snow  rejjardingWkocwa/Sndly.  Sufder  Jtn» 

at  Candahar ;  and  it  seldom  lies  there  feU  out  with  Meerza  Ahmed,  ana 

long  upon  the  groimd.  abused   him   for  not    spending  his 

t  He    was    not,  however,    com-  money  ireely  on  the  Grnazees;  and 

eetely  successful.     It  would  have  drdly.  The   Janbai  have  repdarif 

sen  a  miracle  if  he  had  been.    "J*e5-  cleaned  out  an  Ishakzye  Khail  ia 

ruary  4. — There  have  been  several  another  dilute  about  suppliea."— 