

VOL.  n.  2  E 


418  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

gate  itself  ignited  as  readily  as  tinder,  and  the  flames 
now  lit  up  the  mass  of  white  turbans,  the  gleaming 
arms,  and  the  coloured  standards,  which  had  before 
been  only  seen,  in  scattered  glimpses,  by  the  momentary 
light  of  the  kindled  match  of  the  A%han  jezails.* 

Desperate  was  the  attack  of  the  Ghazees,  and  steady 
the  resistance  of  the  garrison.  A  gun  upon  the  bas- 
tion poured  in  its  deadly  shower  of  grape  among  the 
besiegers ;  and  the  guard  kept  up  a  heavy  fire  from  the 
ramparts.  But  the  Ghazees  pressed  on  with  desperate 
resolution.  The  success  of  their  first  movement  had 
given  them  confidence  and  courage ;  and  now  they  were 
tearing  down  the  blazing  planks  with  intrepid  hands, 
fearless  of  the  red-hot  bars  and  hinges  of  the  falling 
gate.  Many  of  them,  intoxicated  with  bang,  were  send- 
ing up  the  fearful  yell  of  the  Afghan  fanatic,  and  rush- 
ing upon  death  with  the  eagerness  of  the  martyr. 
Others  were  calling  upon  Prince  Timour  to  come  out 
and  win  Paradise  by  aiding  the  cause  of  the  true 
believers.  At  one  time  it  seemed  that  victory  would 
declare  itself  on  the  side  of  the  infuriated  multitude 
that  was  surging  round  the  city  walls.  But  there 
were  men  within  the  city  as  resolute,  and  far  more 
steady  and  collected  in  their  resolution,  than  the  excited 
crowds  beyond  it,  who  were  hungering  after  our  de- 
struction. Major  Lane  commanded  the  garrison.  Raw- 
linson  was  there  to  counsel  and  to  aid  him.  They 
brought  down  the  gun  from  the  bastion  and  planted 
it  in  the  gateway.  They  brought  another  from  the 
citadel  to  its  support.  They  strengthened  the  point  of 
attack  with  fresh  bodies  of  infantry,  and  called  out  all 
the  water-carriers  to  endeavour  to  extinguish  the  flames. 

the  Herat  gate,  and  was  out  of  shot  *  See  the  letter-press  to  Lieut, 
in  a  moment.  At  the  same  instant  Rattray*8  admirable  drawings  of  the 
flames  burst  forth  from  the  brush-  Scenery  and  Costumes  of  Afghan- 
wood,  and  the  gate  was  fired.  istan. 


FAILURE  OF  THE  ASSAULT.  419 

But  more  serviceable  even  than  these  movements  was 
one  which  opposed  a  solid  obstacle  to  the  entrance  of 
the  besieging  multitude.  They  brought  down  from  the 
Commissariat  godowns  a  number  of  grain-bags,  and 
piled  them  up  at  the  burning  gate.  About  nine,  o'clock 
the  gate  fell  outwards,  and  then  a  party  of  Ghazees 
climbed  the  lofty  barricade  of  grain-bags  as  men  weary 
of  their  lives.  Many  fell  dead  or  desperately  wounded 
beneath  the  heavy  fire  of  our  musketry.  Spirited  was 
the  attack — spirited  the  defence.  The  fate  of  Canda- 
har  seemed  to  tremble  in  the  balance.  For  three  more 
hours  the  Ghazees  renewed,  at  intervals,  the  assault 
upon  the  gateway ;  but  they  could  not  make  good  their 
entrance  to  the  city;  and  at  midnight  they  drew  off  in 
despair. 