

The  city  having  thus  been  cleared  of  all  its  suspected 
inhabitants,  Nott,  on  the  7th  of  March,  took  the  field, 
with  the  main  body  of  his  troops.  The  40th  Queen's — 
the  16th,  38th,  42nd,  and  43rd  regiments  of  Native 
Infantry — a  wing  of  one  of  the  Shah's  regiments — 
all  the  cavalry  in  the  force,  and  sixteen  guns,  went 
out  against  the  enemy.  The  2nd  regiment  of  Native 
Infantry,  with  two  regiments  and  a  wing  of  the  Shah's 
foot,  remained  behind  for  the  protection  of  the  city. 
All  the  gates  of  the  city,  but  the  Herat  and  a  part  of 
the  Shikarpoor  gate,  were  blocked  up,  and  Candahar 
was  believed  to  be  secure  against  the  assaults  of  the 
whole  Douranee  force. 

As  Nott  advanced,  the  enemy,  who  had  been  hovering 
about  the  neighbourhood  of  Candahar,  retired  before 
him.     He  crossed  the  Turnuk  and  advanced  upon  the 

m 

*  "  No  doubt  much  property  has  ing  of  the  Hindoos  and  merchants 
been  sacrificed  in  carrying  the  mea-  who  have  remained,  and  the  grain  is 
sure  into  effect ;  but  we  have  done  to  be  all  taken  charge  of  by  the  corn- 
all  in  our  power  to  alleviate  the  evil,  missariat,  receipts  in  money  being 
Valuable  property,  which  the  people  granted  by  us  to  the  owners."— 
were  unable  to  take  away  with  them,  iMajor  RawlinsorCs  MS.  Journal,'] 
has  been  transferred  to  tne  safe  keep- 


416  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

Urghundab  in  pursuit  of  them;  but  they  shrank  from 
meeting  our  bayonets ;  and  it  was  long  before  they  even 
ventured  to  come  within  reach  of  our  guns.  The  artil- 
lery then  told  with  such  good  effect  on  the  dense  masses 
of  the  enemy,  that  they  were  more  than  ever  disinclined 
to  approach  us.  On  the  9th,  however,  there  seemed 
some  prospect  of  a  general  action.  The  enemy's  foot- 
men were  posted  on  a  range  of  hills,  and,  as  our  column 
advanced,  they  saluted  us  with  a  volley  from  their 
matchlocks.  The  light  companies  of  the  40th  Queen's 
and  16th  Native  Infantry,  under  Captain  F.  White,  of 
the  former  regiment,  were  sent  forward  to  storm  the  hills 
on  the  right ;  and  the  grenadiers  of  the  40th,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Wakefield,  performed  the  jsame  good  service  on 
the  ascents  to  the  left.  The  hills  were  soon  cleared;  and 
the  enemy's  cavalry  were  then  seen  drawn  up  in  front 
of  our  columns.  Their  line  extended  across  the  plain ; 
their  right  resting  upon  a  range  of  high  ground,  and 
their  left  on  a  ruined  fort,  built  on  a  high  scarped 
mound.*  Hoping  to  draw  them  within  his  reach,  the 
Greneral  now  kept  his  guns  quiet.  But  they  were  not 
inclined  to  meet  us  in  the  figld.  They  were  planning 
another  game. 

Whether  it  had  been  the  original  design  of  the 
Douranee  chiefs  to  draw  Nott's  army  out  of  Candahar, 
and  to  strip  the  city  of  its  defences ;  or  whether,  despair- 
ing of  success  against  such  a  body  of  troops  as  the 
General  had  taken  out  with  him,  was  not  at  first  very 
apparent.f  But  it  subsequently  became  known  to  the 
British  authorities  that  the  stratagem  was  planned  by  the 