

The  letter  from  the  chiefe  demanded  an  answer  j  and 
Rawlinson  now  took  counsel  with  the  General.  The 
hour  for  decision  had  arrived.  It  became  them  to  look 
their  position  boldly  in  the  face,  and  to  shape  their 


412  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

course  for  the  future.  Nott  was  not  a  man  to  listen 
patiently  to  the  language  of  insolent  dictation  from  the 
A%han  chiefs.  He  had  already  made  up  his  mind  to 
maintain  his  position  at  all  risks,  pending  the  receipt  of 
instructions  from  government  issued  subsequently  to  the 
receipt  by  government  of  intelligence  of  the  Envoy's 
murder.*  Rawlinson  was  of  the  same  opinion.  So  he 
drew  up  a  letter  to  the  Douranee  chiefs,  setting  forth 
that,  as  there  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  Shah 
Soojah  was  acting  under  compulsion,  and  that  he  in 
reality,  in  spite  of  existing  appearances,  desired  the  sup- 
port of  the  British,  it  would  not  become  the  latter  to 
withdraw  from  Afghanistan  before  entering  into  a  final 
explanation  with  the  King.  He  drew  the  attention  of 
the  chiefs  to  the  difierence  of  our  positions  at  Caubul 
and  Candahar — said  that  any  attempt  to  expel  us  by 
force  must  inevitably  fail — and  recommended  the  Dou- 
ranees  to  refrain  from  engaging  in  unprofitable  hos- 
tility. But  he  added,  that  the  British  had  no  desire  to 
conquer  the  country  for  themselves — that  the  Candahar 
army  was  only  waiting  for  instructions  from  govern- 
ment— and  he  believed  it  was  the  desire  of  that  govern- 
ment to  restore  to  Shah  Soojah  the  uncontrolled  exercise 
of  his  authority,  and  to  be  guided  by  the  provisions  of  a 
new  treaty  which  would  probably  be  negotiated  be- 
tween the  two  states.f  On  the  following  day, J  the 
despatch  of  the  letter  having  been  delayed  by  the 
difficulty  of  finding  a  trustworthy  messenger,  Rawlinson 

*  "  I  have  onlj  to  repeat,"  wrote  vernment.   The  letter  signed  *  Eldred 

Greneral  Nott,  on  the  23rd  of  Febru-  Pottmger'  and  *  W.  K.  Elpbinstone ' 

aiT,  in  reply  to  Major  Rawlinson*8  may,  or  may  not,  be  a  forgery.    I 

official  letter  on  the  subject  of  the  conceive  that  these  officers  were  not 

evacuation  orders  received  from  Cau-  free  agents  at  Caubul ;  and  therefore 

bul,   "that  I  will   not    treat   with  their   letter  or  order  can  have  no 

any  person  whatever  for  the  retire-  weight  with  me." — [MS.  Correspon- 

ment  of  the  British  troops  from  Af-  dence,'] 

^hanistan,  until  I  shall  have  received  f  Major  RatvUnson^s  MS.  Journal 

instructions  from  the  Supreme  Go-  %  February  28. 


MEASURES  OP  RAWLINSON  AND  NOTT.       413 

added  a  postscript,  setting  forth  that  intelligence  had 
since  been  received,  which  clearly  demonstrated  that 
the  Shah  was  little  more  than  a  prisoner  in  the  hands 
of  the  Barukzyes;  and  he  added,  that  forces  were  on 
their  way  from  India  to  avenge  the  murder  of  the 
Envoy. 