

The  activity  of  Rawlinson,  at  this  time,  was  unceasing. 
He  exerted  himself,  and  often  with  good  success,  to  de- 
tach different  tribes  from  the  rebel  cause ;  and  was  con- 
tinually corresponding  both  with  the  chiefs  in  the  Dou- 
ranee  camp  and  in  the  neighbouring  villages.  It  was 
his  policy  to  draw  off  the  Barukzyes  from  the  Douranee 
confederacy,  and  to  stimulate  the  Douranees  against  the 
Barukzyes,  by  declaring  that  the  Shah  was  a  mere  in- 
strument in  the  hands  of  the  latter.  It  was  debated, 
indeed,  whether  the  Douranees  could  not  be  induced  to 
move  off  to  Caubul  for  the  rescue  of  the  King.* 

But,  in  spite  of  these  and  other  favorable  indications, 
it  appeared,  both  to  the  military  and  political  cnief  at 
Candahar,  that  it  was  necessary  now  to  strike  some 
vigorous  blow  for  the  suppression  of  the  insurr^tiqp  BXtA 
the  maintenance  of  our  own  security.  So  Nott  deter- 
mined to  attack  the  enemy;  and  Rawlinson,  aft4r  many 
misgivings,  to  expel  the  Afghans  from  the  city.  ^  This 
movement    he    had  been    painfully  contemplating  all 

*  "  I  have  been  for  some  days  post  must,  I  should  think,  expire  of  an 
in  communication  with  the  Barukzye  atrophy.  .  .  .  Timour  suggests 
tribe,  and  have,  I  believe,  succeeded  that  he  should  endeavour  to  eet  the 
in  detaching  them  from  the  Douranee  Douranee  chiefs  to  march  on  Caubul, 
confederacy.  They  had  deserted  their  in  order  to  release  the  Shah  from  the 
villages  and  gone  off  to  the  desert ;  Barukzyes,  feigning  that  he  has  re- 
but, on  a  promise  of  protection,  have  ceived  his  father^s  instructions  to  this 
now  returned,  and  bound  themselves  effect;  and  I  see  no  objection  to  such 
to  admit  none  of  the  enemy  b  horse  an  attempt  being  made.  ^  I  also  hear 
within  their  borders.  The  Alekozyes  that  the  Caubul  Janbaz  insist  on  pro- 
of the  Urghundab  also  propose  to  ceeding  to  the  north,  and  that  Meerza 
enter  into  the  same  engagements ;  and  Ahmed  has  the  greatest  difficulty  in 
if  we  can  fairly  detach  these  two  restraining  them.** — {_Major  Eawlin' 
powerful  tribes,  the  Douranee  cause  soris  MS.  JourtiaLI 


414  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

through  the  month  of  February;  and  now,  at  the  be- 
ginning of  March,  he  believed  that  he  could  no  longer 
postpone,  with  safety,  the  accomplishment  of  this  harsh, 
but  necessary,  measure  of  defence.*  All  doubts  regard- 
ing the  wishes  of  the  Indian  Government  had  been,  by 
this  time,  set  at  rest  by  the  receipt  of  a  copy  of  a  letter, 
addressed  by  the  Supreme  Government  to  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief on  the  28th  of  January,  in  which  letter 
the  continued  occupation  of  Candahar  was  spoken  of  as 
an  event  which  the  British-Indian  Government  believed 
would  be  conducive  to  the  interests  of  the  state ;  and  it 
aJSbrded  no  small  pleasure  to  Nott  and  Rawlinson  to  find 
how  completely  they  had  anticipated  the  wishes  of  the 
Governor-General  and  his  Council. 