

*  Captain  NeilVs  Recollections  of  the  town,  was  all  preconcerted  by 

Service  in  the  East,  Meerza  Ahmed ;    and  on  the  night 

+  "  The  plan  of  enticing  the  Gene-  of  the    attack  every  chief  in    the 

rol  to  Telookham,  delaying  him  there  country    was    present    except    the 

by  keeping  a  body  of  horse  in  his  Noorzyes-"— [3/q/or  liawlinson's  MS, 

Ticinity,  and  then  doubling  back  on  Journal,^ 


STRATAGEM  OF  THE  DOURANEES.         417 

subtle  understanding  of  Meerza  Ahmed.  The  enemy, 
after  the  skirmish  of  the  9th  instant,  retired  before  our 
advancing  battalions,  and,  industriously  spreading  a  re- 
port that  they  purposed  to  attack  Nott's  camp  during 
the  night,  recrossed  the  river  and  doubled  back  upon 
Candahar.  Up  to  this  time  the  city  had  remained  per- 
fectly quiet ;  and  the  minds  of  the  British  authorities  had 
not  been  disturbed  by  any  thoughts  of  coming  danger. 
But  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  it  was  seen  that  a 
number  of  Afghan  footmen  had  come  down  during  the 
preceding  night  and  taken  possession  of  old  Candahar. 
Rawlinson  at  once  despatched  three  messengers  to  Nott's 
camp,  to  inform  him  that  the  enemy  had  doubled  back 
in  his  rear,  and  that  it  was  apparently  their  inten- 
tion to  attack  the  city.  His  suspicions  were  soon  con- 
firmed. His  scouts  brought  in  intelligence  to  the  eflfect 
that  the  Douranee  army  was  to  concentrate  during  the 
day,  before  Candahar,  and  to  attack  it  in  the  course  of 
the  night.  All  day  long  the  numbers  of  the  enemy  con- 
tinued to  increase,  and  at  sunset  Sufder  Jung  and 
Meerza  Ahmed  arrived  and  posted  themselves  in  the 
cantonments.  Night  came  on  with  pitchy  darkness;  and 
the  garrison  could  not  trace  the  movements  of  the 
enemy.  They  had  no  blue  lights — no  fire-balls — no 
means  of  casting  a  light  beyond  the  defences  of  the  city. 
The  Ghazees  were  swarming  close  to  the  walls;  and  at 
eight  o'clock  they  commenced  the  attack.  They  had 
heaped  up  some  faggots  at  the  Herat  gate;  and  now 
they  fired  the  pile.  They  had  poured  oil  on  the  brush- 
Avood,  and  now  it  blazed  up  with  sudden  fury.*     The 

*  The  gate  had  been  closed  for  the  for  no  one ;  upon  which  he  yowled 

night.      Lieutenant  Cooke  was  on  out  a  malediction,  and  tossing  the 

guard,  and  was  endeavouring  to  trace  brushwood  on  the  ground,  said  he 

the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  the  would  leave  it  there  for  the  night, 

distance,  when  a  villager  drove  his  and  take  it  into  the  town  in   the 

donkey,  loaded  with  brushwood,  over  morning.     The  villager,  having  re- 

the  bridge  and  demanded  admission,  crossed  the  bridge  with  his  donkey, 

He  was  told  the  gate  would  be  opened  dived  among  the  rumed  huts  opposite 