

But  whilst  the  hopes  of  the  garrison  were  directed 
towards  the  country  to  the  southward,  their  thoughts, 
with  fear  and  trembling,  turned  themselves  towards  the 
North.  On  the  21st  of  February  a  messenger  arrived  at 
Candahar,  bringing  a  letter  from  General  Elphinstone 
and  Major  Pottinger,  ordering  the  evacuation  of  Can- 
dahar and  Khelat-i-Ghilzye.f    The  original  had  been 

*  "  February  1 1 . — I  am  becoming  CTacuate  Candahar  and  Ehdat-i- 
seriously  alarmed  about  money.  A  Ghilzye,  in  pursuance  of  the  agree- 
lakh  is  the  utmost  that  I  shall  be  able  ment  entered  into  at  Caubul  for  the 
to  raise  from  the  Candahar  merchants,  return  of  our  troops  to  India.  This 
and  with  the  most  rigid  economy  this  letter  appears  to  be  genuine,  but  I 
will  hardly  last  us  to  the  end  of  March  cannot  consider  it  in  any  way  binding 
— the  ^odowns  at  the  same  time  being  on  us ;  and  for  the  reasons  stated  in 
opened  to  supply  the  troops,  n  my  letter  to  Greneral  Nottofthelst 
seems,  therefore,  absolutely  indis-  instant,  I  still  conceive  that  we  are 
pensablc  that  the  road  should  be  best  consulting  the  interesta  of  Re- 
opened from  the  south,  either  by  vemment  in  maintaining  our  position 
Outram  or  ourselves."  —  [^Major  pending  the  receipt  of  further  in- 
RawlinsorCs  MS.  JoumaL]  structions  from  Calcutta The 

f  ^^  February  21.  —  Two  Cossids  question  regarding  Shah  Soojah  is 
reached  me  to-day  from  Leech,  one  very  perplexing.  He  is  certainly 
with  letters  of  the  13th  and  15th,  nominally  at  the  head  of  the  govem- 
the  other  with  letters  of  the  17th.  ment,  and  we  can  no  longer  be  sup- 
Enclosed  was  a  copy  of  a  letter  ad-  posed  to  be  here  in  support  of  hia 
dressed  to  me  by  Major-General  authority.  Still,  however,  a  month 
Elphinstone  and  Major  Pottinser,  re-  sooner  or  later  in  retiring  can  make 
questing  me  to  intimate  to  major-  little  difference,  and  it  seems  tome 
GeneralNott  their  wish  that  h^woiUd  indispensable  that  some  definite  ar» 


410  AFPAIBS  AT  CANDAHAB. 

written  nearly  two  months  before ;  and  that  which  now 
reached  Major  Rawlinson  was  a  copy  forwarded  by  Leech 
firom  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  *  There  was  no  doubt  in  Raw- 
liiison's  mind  about  the  genuine  character  of  the  docu- 
ment ;  but  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  recognise  for  a 
moment  the  obligations  which  it  was  intended  to  im- 
pose upon  him.  He  could  not,  however,  help  perceiving 
that  the  turn  which  political  aflGairs  had  taken  in  Caubul 
placed  him  in  a  strange  and  anomalous  position.  Shah 
Soojah  was  now  the  recognised  sovereign  of  Afghanis- 
tan, ruling  by  the  consent  and  with  the  aid  of  the  Baruk- 
zye  chiefe ;  and  it  could  ho  longer  be  said  that  the  pre- 
sence of  the  British  troops  was  necessary  to  the  support 
of  the  Suddozye  Kings.  The  Douranee  chiefs  saw  this  as 
plainly  as  Rawlinson;  and  they  did  not  fail  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  circumstance.  They  now  endeavoured 
to  reason  the  British  out  of  Candahar  when  they  found 
it  difficult  to  expel  them;  and  Rawlinson  and  Nott 
found  it  less  easy  to  rebut  their  arguments  than  to  repel 
theit  assaults. 