

On  the  3rd  of  March,  Rawlinson  began  to  clear  the 
city  of  its  A%han  inhabitants.f  Inspecting  the  census  he 
had  made,  and  selecting  a  few  who  were  to  be  permitted 

•  *^  March  1. — The  General  now  to  be  concealed.  I  almost  fear  that 
has  made  up  his  mind  to  take  the  affairs  are  approaching  that  state 
field ;  and,  uter  considering  the  case  when,  for  our  iumiediate  safety,  we 
fullj,  I  have  determined  that  the  shall  be  obliged  to  incur  the  odium 
Afghans  must  be  turned  out  of  the  of  expelling  the  Moollahs  and  Af- 
city.  It  is  not  as  if  the  present  affair  ghans  from  the  city.  It  is  not  that 
were  a  mere  transient  disturbance,  these  people  can  do  us  any  serious 
We  are  engaged  in  a  regular  national  injury  within  the  city ;  but  the  pro- 
war,  and  Outram  does  not  anticipate  babihty  of  an  insurrection  inside  the 
that  we  shall  be  able  to  take  the  tield  walls  simultaneously  with  the  dis- 
in  sufficient  force  to  put  down  all  op-  turbances  outside,  gives  confidence 
position  before  next  winter.  Vve  to  Meerza  Ahmed^s  party  and  dis- 
must,  therefore,  look  forward  to  a  pirits  our  Parsewan  adherents.  It  is 
protracted  struggle  at  Candahar  all  to  be  considered,  howeyer,  that  if  we 
through  the  summer ;  and  the  security  expel  the  Afghans  and  retain  the 
of  the  city  appears  to  me,  under  such  Farsewans,  we  shall  embitter  the. 
circumstances,  indispensable.'*— [ilfo-  national  feeling  i^ainst  us  with  the 
jor  RawlinsovLS  MS,  Journal,']  rumour  of  sectarian  animosity,  and 

f  A  week  before,  a  strong  conyic-  shall,  moreover,  sacrifice  the  Sheeah 
tion  of  the  necessity  of  the  measure  party  in  the  event  of  our  retirement, 
had  forced  itself  upon  his  mind.  But  The  moat  obvious  necessity  of  self- 
he  was  only  too  willing  to  postpone  preservation  could  alone,  I  think, 
the  execution  of  it.  On  the  22nd  of  warrant  such  a  course,  and  I  cannot 
February  he  wrote :  '*  The  Moollahs  doubt  but  that  it  is  my  duty  to 
are  now  again  stirring  themselves,  temporise  as  long  as  prudence  will 
'and  I  have  very  good  pounds  for  admit.''  —  [^Major  Rawlinson^s  MS. 
supposing  a  large  quantity  of  arms  Journal,'] 


RENEWAL  OF  HOSTILITIES.  416 

to  remain — peaceful  citizens,  as  merchapts,  followers  of 
useful  trades,  and  a  few  members  of  the  priesthood,  he 
expelled  the  remainder  of  the  Afghan  inhabitants — in 
all,  about  1000  famiUes.  No  resistance  was  oflFered. 
The  work  was  not  completed  before  the  close  of  the  6th. 
The  municipal  authorities  performed  their  duties  so  re* 
missly,  that  it  was  necessary  to  tell  off  an  officer  and 
a  party  of  Sepoys  to  each  district,  to  see  that  the  clear- 
ance was  more  effectually  performed.  Some  5000  or 
6000  people  were  driven  out  of  the  city.  Every  exer- 
tion was  made  to  render  the  measure  as  little  oppres- 
sive as  possible ;  but  the  expulsion  of  so  many  citizens 
from  their  homes  could  not  be  altogether  free  from 
cruelty  and  injustice.* 