

squabbles   in  the  Douranee   camp  [Major  MawUn»(m*8  MS.  Jowmal.'] 
already:  Istly.  A  quarrdi  took  place 


408  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

being  assured  that  if  our  power  prevailed  we  were  too 
just  to  subject  the  cultivators  to  a  double  exaction; 
statements  of  the  Shah's  connivance  in  the  Caubul 
revolution  were  industriously  circulated;  incessant  at- 
tempts were  made  to  tamper  with  our  Hindostanee 
troops  (not  altogether  without  success),  and  letters  were 
designedly  thrown  into  our  hands  to  render  us  suspi- 
cious of  such  chiefs  as  adhered  to  us,  whilst  the  most 
stringent  measures  were  adopted  to  deter  the  villagers 
around  the  city  from  bringing  supplies  into  Candahar. 
Such  was  the  line  of  policy  pursued  by  Meerza  Ahmed 
from  the  20th  of  January  to  the  20th  of  February.  In 
this  interim  General  Nott  had  laid  in  five  months'  sup- 
plies for  the  troops ;  he  had  repaired  the  fortifications  to 
a  certain  extent;  and  intending  on  the  12th  of  February 
to  march  out  and  attack  the  enemy,  he  had  concurred 
in  the  advisability  of  disarming  the  population  pre- 
paratory to  the  movement  of  our  troops.*  Severe 
weather,  however,  rendered  a  march  impracticable  at 
the  time  he  meditated ;  and  before  it  became  sufficiently 
mild  to  enable  him  to  take  the  field,  the  tactics  of  the 
enemy  had  undergone  a  total  alteration  in  consequence 
of  advices  from  Caubul." 

But  there  were  many  circumstances  at  this  time  to 
create  uneasiness  in  the  minds  of  those  to  whom  was  en- 
trusted the  direction  of  aflfairs  at  Candahar.  The  garrison 
was  not  threatened  with  a  scarcity  of  provisions;  but 
fodder  for  the  cattle  was  very  scarce.  The  horses  were 
becoming  unserviceable  from  lack  of  nourishment;  the 
sheep  were  so  miserably  lean  as  to  be  scarcely  worth 
killing  for  food.    It  was  intensely  cold ;  and  fuel  was  so 

♦  Major  Rawlinson,  preparatory  to  to  be  our  intention  to  expel  them, 

the  commencement  ofthe  work  of  dis-  When  it  was  found  that  they  were 

arming,  took  a  census  of  the  inhabi-  only  to  be  disarmed,  they  recovered 

tants    of  the    city,    which   greatly  their   serenity,  and   submitted  very 

idarmed  the  people,  as  it  was  believed  patiently  to  the  ordeal. 


STATE  OF  THE  CANDAHAB  GARRISON.  409 

scarce,  that  the  hixury  of  a  winter  fire  was  denied  even 
to  the  sick.  The  hospitals  had  their  inmates ;  but  there 
were  no  medicines.  And  above  all,  money  was  be- 
coming so  scarce,  that  the  most  serious  apprehensions 
were  entertained  by  Major  Rawlinson,  who  knew  that 
there  was  no  weapon  of  war  so  serviceable  as  the 
money-bag  in  such  a  country  as  A%hanistan.*  Under 
such  circumstances,  it  may  readily  be  supposed  how 
anxiously  the  arrival  of  a  convoy  from  the  southward 
was  looked  for,  and  how  necessary  it  seemed  that  the 
communications  with  Sindh  should  be  opened  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  secure  the  arrival  of  treasure  and  sup- 
plies. 