

Whilst  this  desperate  struggle  was  going  on  at  the 
Herat  gate  of  the  city,  attempts  had  been  made  upon 
the  Shikarpoor  and  Caubul  gates.  But  the  enemy  could 
not  fire  the  brushwood  they  had  collected.  The  garri- 
son were  too  prompt  and  alert.  It  appears  that  Meerza 
Ahmed,  confident  of  the  success  of  the  attack  upon  the 
Herat  gate,  had  arranged  that  a  given  signal  should  an- 
nounce this  success,  and  that  then  he  should  proceed  ta 
the  assault  of  the  Eedgah  gate  leading  to  the  citadel. 
But  when  at  midnight  the  attack  was  finally  repulsed,  a 
council  of  war  was  held.  Baffled  in  their  attempts  on 
the  city,  the  angry  fanatics  levelled  the  most  violent 
reproaches  against  Meerza  Ahmed,  and  were  with  dif- 
ficulty restrained  from  laying  violent  hands  on  the  man, 
who,  they  declared,  had  betrayed  them  into  an  attempt 
which  had  sacrificed  the  lives  of  hundreds  of  true  be- 
lievers, and  ended  only  in  failure  and  disgrace.  It  is 
said  that  the  Ghazees  lost  six  hundred  men  in  the  at- 
tempt. They  were  busy  until  day-break  in  carrying  off 
the  dead. 

2e2 


420  AFFAIKS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that,  during  that  night  of 
the  10th  of  March,  Candahar  was  in  imminent  danger. 
Had  the  city  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  at  this 
time,  it  is  doubtful  whether  Nott's  force,  on  its  return, 
would  have  succeeded  in  recapturing  it.  The  troops  had 
gone  out  without  tents,  and  were  insufficiently  supplied 
with   ammunition.      Everything,    indeed,   was   against 
them;  and  even  if  the  courage  and  constancy  of  the 
force  had  prevailed  at  last,  success  could  have  been 
achieved  only  after  an  immense  sacrifice  of  life.    That 
the  General  was  out-manoeuvred,  is  plain.    But  it  may 
be  doubled  whether  he  is  fairly  chargeable  with  the 
amount  of  indiscretion  which  has  been  imputed  to  him. 
It  has  been  said  that  he  left  the  city  unprotected.     But 
as  he  was  to  have  engaged  the  enemy  himself  in  the 
open  country,  and  all  sources  of  internal  danger  had 
been  removed  by  the  expulsion  of  the  Afghans  and  the 
disarming  of  the  other  inhabitants,  it  was  confidently 
believed  that  the  troops  left  in  the  city  were  more  than 
sufficient  for  its  defence.     It  must,  however,  be  acknow- 
ledged that  Nott  was  lamentably  ignorant  of  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy,  who  doubled   back  in  his  rear 
without  raising  a  suspicion  of  their  designs  in  the  British 
camp.     But  this  is  no   new  thing  in  Indian  warfare. 
To  be  ignorant  of  the  intentions  of  the  enemy  is  the 
rule,  not  the  exception,  of  Indian  generalship.     Our  in- 
telligence-department  is  always  so  miserably  defective, 
that  we  lose  the  enemy  often  as  suddenly  as  we  find 
him,   and   are  either  running   ourselves   unexpectedly 
upon  him,  or  suffering  him  to  slip  out  of  our  hands. 