

On  the  23rd  of  February,  Rawlinson  received  a  packet 
of  letters  from  the  Douranee  camp,  the  contents  of  which 
supplied  much  food  for  earnest  reflection.    Sufder  Jung 

rangementSi  approved  of  bj  govern-  within  your  iurisdictioQ,8hotildretum 
ment^  should  be  entered  into  for  the  to  India  at  the  earliest  convenient  sea- 
future  administratitm  of  the  province  son.  Kewab  Jubbar  Khan,  who  is  the 
before  we  withdraw  our  troops.**-*  bearer  of  this  letter,  will  render  jou 
IMajor  RawUnsofCs  MS.  JournaL]  all  the  assistance  in  his  power.  He 
*  It  ran  thus :  *'  Catibid,  25th  De*  has  been  appointed  Governor  of  Can- 
ceniber^  1841. — Sib, — It  having  been  dahar  on  the  part  of  the  oTig^^|r 
found  necessary  to  conclude  an  ar-  government, 
rangement,  founded  on  that  of  the  "  E.  Pottinoeb. 
late  Sir  W.  H.  Macna^hten,  for  the  "  W.  E.  Ejlphikstone,  M.-G. 
evacuation  of  Afghanistan  by  our  ''P.S. — K  you  require  two  or  three 
troops,  we  have  the  honour  to  request  days  to  make  your  preparations,  you 
that  you  will  intimate  to  the  officer  must  not  remain  in  the  city,  but  pro- 
commanding  at  Candahar  our  wish  ceed  to  your  cantonment.  Whatever 
that  the  troops  now  at  that  place  and  you  are  obliged  to  leave  behind,  you 
at  Ehelat-i-Ghilzye,  togetner  with  will  make  over  to  the  Newab  Jubba^* 
the  Brit'ish  authorities   and  troops  Khan.*' 


LETTERS  FROM  THE  DOURANEB  CHIEFS.  411 

and  the  Douranee  chiefs  wrote  to  the  British  agent,  set- 
ting forth  that,  as  it  had  always  been  declared  that  the 
British  merely  occupied  the  country  in  support  of  Shah 
Soojah,  and  as  the  Shah  was  now  recognised  by  the 
chiefe  and  the  people,  and  had  no  longer  any  need  of 
our  support,  it  was  incumbent  upon  us  to  withdraw  from 
the  country.  If,  it  was  added,  the  British  would  now 
consent  to  retire  from  Candahar,  an  unmolested  passage 
to  Quettah  would  be  guaranteed  to  them;  but  that,  if 
they  insisted  on  maintaining  their  position,  they  must 
expect  that  the  fate  of  the  Caubul  army  would  be  theirs. 
Meerza  Ahmed,  in  a  private  letter  to  Rawlinson,  be- 
sought him  to  retire  before  the  whole  Douranee  nation 
rose  against  the  British.  But  perhaps  the  most  impor- 
tant of  the  letters  brought  in  that  morning,  was  one  from 
Shah  Soojah  to  Prince  Timour,  to  the  following  effect: 
"  You  must  understand  that  the  disturbances  which  you 
have,  no  doubt,  heard  of  at  Caubul,  have  been  a  contest 
between  the  followers  of  Islam  and  the  unbelievers. 
Now  that  the  affair  is  decided,  all  the  Afghans  have 
tendered  their  allegiance  to  me,  and  recognised  me  as 
King.  It  is  necessary  that  you  should  keep  me  duly  in- 
formed of  all  proceedings  in  your  government ;  and  rest 
assured  of  my  favour  and  affection.**  When  Rawlinson 
took  this  letter  to  the  Shah-zadah  Timour,  the  Prince  at 
once  declared  it  to  be  a  forgery ;  but  the  British  officer 
knew  how  to  decypher  stranger  characters  than  those 
of  a  Persian  Dust-Khut^  and  to  decide  upon  the  authen- 
ticity of  far  more  perplexing  scriptures  than  this.  Raw- 
linson's  practised  eye  saw  at  once  that  the  document 
was  a  genuine  one. 