

On  the  following  day,  our  troops  again  encountered 
the  enemy  in  the  field.  A  brigade  under  Colonel  Wy- 
mer  had  been  sent  out,  partly  to  clear  the  country  on 
the  Candahar  side  of  the  Urghundab  from  the  Douranee 
horse,  who  were  threatening  our  position,  and  partly  to 
relieve  the  garrison,  which  was  straitened  for  forage,  by 
sending  out  the  camels  to  graze  in  the  open  country. 
Wymer  took  with  him  three  regiments  of  infantry,  a 
troop  of  horse  artillery,  and  a  party  of  some  four  hun- 
dred mounted  men.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  Baba- 
Wallee  the  Douranee  horse  crossed  the  river — 3000 
strong — to  attack  him.  Having  sent  a  messenger  to 
Candahar  to  inform  the  General  of  his  position,  Wymer 
prepared  to  defend  himself.  He  had  to  guard  his  cattle 
as  well  as  to  fight  the  enemy ;  and  the  former  necessity 
greatly  crippled  his  movements.  Weak,  as  the  Candahar 
detachments  always  were,  in  the  mounted  branch,  he 
found  himself  at  a  disadvantage  opposed  to  the  large 
bodies  of  the  enemy's  horse,  who  now  appeared  in  his 
front.  Our  Hindostanee  cavalry  were  driven  in  by  the 
Douranees  under  Saloo  Khan,  who  gallantly  charged 
our  squares.f    But  the  fire  of  our  guns  and  the  volleys 

*  General  Nott  to  Major  Rawlinson :  nephew,  fell,  and  in  another  part  of 

March  25^  IS42.  MS.  Correspondence,  the  field,   Hubeeb-oollah,  Akhond- 

t  "  In    the   charge  of  the  horse  zadeh,  and  Mahomed  Raheen,  Noor- 

undcr  Saloo  Khan,  when  after  driving  zye,  were  wounded.     The  total  loss 

back  our  cavalry  they  were  stopped  of  the  enemv  in  killed  and  wounded 

by  the  fire  of  the  guns  and  the  light  I  estimate,  from  all  I  could  learn  on 

company  of  the  38Ui,  which  had  been  the  field  and  from  the  villagers,  at 

thrown   out  in  advance,  Yar  Maho-  about  150.    We  had  a  few  men  killed 

med  of  Dehrawat,  who  was  Saloons  and  some  forty  wounded.    Amongst 


ENGAGEMENT  WITH  THE  DOUBANEES.       423 

of  our  musketry  soon  checked  the  audacity  of  the 
Afghan  horsemen;  and  the  affair  became  one  of  distant 
skirmishes.  But,  in  the  mean  while/ the  roar  of  our 
artillery  had  been  distinctly  heard  at  Candahar,  and 
Nott  had  moved  out  to  the  support  of  Wymer's 
brigade.  The  Douranees  were  still  surrounding  our 
camp,  when  the  General,  with  the  reinforcing  brigade, 
entered  the  valley.  What  the  men  who  followed  Nott 
then  saw,  is  described  as  "  a  beautiful  spectacle,"  which 
will  not  readily  be  forgotten.*  The  bright  afternoon 
sim  shed  its  slant  rays  upon  the  sabres  of  the  enemy, 
and  lit  them  up  Uke  a  biuTiing  forest.  Our  infantry 
were  drawn  up  in  a  hollow  square  covering  a  crowd 
of  camels ;  the  horse-artillery  guns,  which  had  done 
such  good  service  before,  were  playing  gloriously,  under 
Turner's  direction,  upon  the  dense  bodies  of  the  enemy's 
horse,  whom  their  heavy  fire  kept  at  a  cautious  distance. 
"And  just  as  Greneral  Nott,"  adds  an  eye-witness,f 
"  with  the  reinforcements  came  in  sight,  Lieutenant 
Chamberlaine,  of  the  Bengal  service,  an  oflGicer  in  the 
Shah's  cavalry,  who  at  the  head  of  a  small  party  had 
charged  the  enemy,  was  driven  back,  and,  emerging  from 
a  cloud  of  dust,  formed  in  rear  of  the  infantry,  with  the 
loss  of  a  few  men  killed,  himself  and  many  of  his  party 
wounded — but  not  without  having  given  very  satisfax> 
tory  proofs  of  his  power  as  a  swordsman,  albeit  his 
treacherous  weapon  had  broken  in  his  hand."    As  our 