

almost  unmolested."  that  they  knew  not  whether  they  had 

f  Major  Rwdinsons  MS.  Journal,  most  to  fear  from  their  friends  or 

Rawlinson  adds :  '^  Our  own  camp-  their  enemies.*' 


EVIL  TIDINGS  FROM  GHUZNEE.  425 

both  from  the  uorth  and  the  south,  which  went  some 
way  to  comfort  and  reassure  them.  It  was  currently 
reported  in  their  camp  that  Ghuznee  had  capitulated. 
This  intelligence  had  been  received  some  days  before 
by  the  British  oflBicers  at  Candahar,  and  had  not  been 
disbeheved.  On  the  31st  of  March,  a  letter  from  Major 
Leech,  at  Kelat-i-Ghilzye,  was  received  by  Nott  at  Can- 
dahar,  and  though  it  announced  the  fall  of  Ghuznee 
only  on  native  authority,  it  seemed  to  divest  the  fact 
entirely  of  all  atmosphere  of  doubt.  It  appeared,  from 
the  statements  that  reached  Candahar,  that  Ghuznee 
had  been  invested  by  an  overwhelming  force,  and  that, 
after  holding  out  for  some  weeks,  the  garrison  had  been 
reduced  more  by  a  want  of  water  than  by  the  attacks 
of  the  enemy.  It  was  reported,  that  before  the  arrival 
of  orders  from  Caubul  for  the  evacuation  of  the  place, 
the  town  of  Ghuznee  had  been  taken  by  the  surround- 
ing tribes — "  that  the  Hindoos  of  the  Bazaar  were  all 
killed,  fighting  on  our  side — that  Palmer,  during  the  two 
months  he  was  in  the  Balla  Hissar,  paid  a  daily  sum 
for  his  provisions,  water,  and  wood — that  Shumshoo- 
deen  was  the  bearer  oi  orders  from  the  British  at 
Oaubul  to  give  up  the  fortress — that  the  failure  of  water 
was  the  reason  that  made  him  agree  to  vacate  the  upper 
citadel  on  the  8th  instant — that  the  mass  of  Ghazees 
did  not  respect  the  treaty  formed,  with  a  guarantee 
given  to  Palmer  by  Shumshoodeen,  but  attacked  our 
garrison,  and  they  only  400  strong,  on  their  leaving 
the  citadel,  killing  100  and  losing  many  themselves — 
that  Palmer  now  wanted  a  guarantee  for  the  safety  of 
the  officers,  and  that  this  being  given,  they  surrendered 
themselves  with  two  or  three  European  females."*  At 
the  same  time,  Leech  reported  that  he  was  in  possession 
of  a  letter,  bearing  the  seal  of  Shumshoodeen  Khan, 

*   Major  Leech  to  General  Noll :  Khelat-i-GhUzye,  March  9,  1842.    MS, 


426  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

and  addressed  to  the  Shamalzye  chiefs,  exhorting  them 
to  asseipble  and  march  on  Khelat-i-Ghilzye,  and  holding 
out  to  them  hopes  of  honour  and  wealth  to  be  conferred 
upon  them  by  the  King  and  Ameen-ooUah  Khan,  if 
they  succeeded  in  capturing  the  place;  and  promising 
himself,  upon  the  breaking  up  of  the  snow,  to  march 
down  upon  it  *'  with  fort-destroying  guns  and  an  army 
crowned  with  victory." 

The  tidings  of  the  fall  of  Ghuznee  were  most  ca- 
lamitously true.  The  fortress,  which  the  English  had 
taken  with  so  much  difficulty,  and  the  capture  of  which 
had  been  proclaimed  with  so  much  pomp,  was  now  in 
the  hands  of  the  enemy.  The  slight  outline  of  the 
melancholy  events  which  had  ended  in  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  garrison  and  the  captivity  of  the  sur- 
viving officers,  which  Leech  had  sent  jfrom  Khelat-i- 
Ghilzye,  was  substantially  correct.  The  enemy  appeared 
before  Ghuznee  on  the  20th  of  November.  On  the 
same  day  snow  began  to  fall.  Maclaren's  brigade 
was  then  advancing  from  Candahar,  and  the  enemy, 
expecting  its  appearance  in  their  neighbourhood,  drew 
off  their  investing  force;  but  they  soon  re-appeared 
again.  Maclaren's  retirement  gave  them  new  heart; 
and  on  the  7th  of  December  they  collected  again,  in 
increased  numbers,  around  the  walls.  The  garrison  were 
now  completely  enlaced.  The  city  was  in  their  possession, 
but  they  could  not  stir  beyond  it.  Soon,  however,  they 
lost  even  that.  The  inhabitants  undermined  the  walls, 
and  admitted  the  enemy  from  without.  On  the  16th  of 
December,  through  the  subterranean  aperture  which 
the  townspeople  had  made,  the  enemy  streamed  in  by 
thousands.  The  city  was  now  no  longer  tenable.  The 
garrison  shut  themselves  up  in  the  citadel. 