


430  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAB. 

oath  from  the  chiefs  that  they  should  be  honourably 
treated  and  conducted  in  safety  to  Caubul,  laid  down 
their  arms,  and  trusted  to  the  good  faith  of  the  Afghan 
Sirdars.*  The  Sepoys,  in  the  mean  while,  were  endea- 
vouring to  prosecute  their  insane  scheme  of  escaping 
across  the  open  country  to  Peshawur.  Snow  began  to 
fall  heavily.  They  wandered  about  the  fields  helpless 
and  bewildered.  Many  of  them  were  cut  down  or  made 
prisoners  by  the  enemy ;  and  to  all  who  survived,  officers 
and  men  alike,  a  time  of  suffering  now  commenced,  all 
the  circumstances  of  which  are  burnt  into  the  memories 
of  men  as  with  a  brand  of  iron. 

In  the  mean  while,  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  was  gallantly 
holding  out  against  the  enemy.  Situated  between 
Ghuznee  and  Candahar,  about  eighty  miles  from  the 
latter  city,  this  isolated  fortress  stands  upon  a  barren 
eminence,  exposed  to  the  wintry  winds  and  driving 
dust-storms  —  one  of  the  dreariest  and  bleakest  spots 
in  all  the  country  of  Afghanistan.  It  had  been  origi- 
nally garrisoned  by  the  Shah's  3rd  infantry  regiment,  a 
party  of  forty  European  artillerymen,  and  some  sappers 
and  miners;  but  Maclaren's  brigade,  on  its  return  to- 
wards Candahar,  had  dropped  some  250  Sepoys  of  the 
43rd  Regiment  at  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  to  strengthen  the 
garrison;  and  now,  commanded  by  Captain  Craigie,  of 
the  Shah's  service,  this  Uttle  party  prepared  to  resist  the 
assaults  of  the  investing  enemy  and  the  cruel  cold.  For 
months   the   cold   was  far  more  irresistible   than   the 

ing  the^  had  no  chance  of  their  lives,        *  It  is  pleasant  to  record  any  act 

determined  on  forcing  their  way  out  of  individual  heroism.    **  Nicholson, 

of  the  town  and  endeavour  to  get  to  then  quite  a  stripling,  when  the  enemy 

Peshawur.    When  we  first  heard  of  entered  Ghuznee,  drove  them  thrice 

this  mad  design  and  s{)oke  to  the  back  beyond  the  walls  at  the  point  of 

men  about  it,  they  denied  it ;  but,  the  bayonet  before  he  would  listen 

on  the  10th,  two  Native  officers  came  to  the  order  given  him  to  make  his 

forward  and  told  us  thev  had  made  company  lay  down  their  arms.     He 

up  their  minds  to  go  off  tnat  night —  at  length  obeyed,  gave  up  his  sword 

that  if  we  chose  to  accompany  them  with  bitter  tears,  and  accompanied 

they  would  be  exceedingly  glad,  but,  his  comrades  to  an  almost  hopeless 

if  otherwise,  they  would  go  alone.  **  imprisonment. " —  \_Ra(tray.  ] 


STATE  OP  KHELAT-I-GHILZYE.  431 

enemy.  In  that  bleak,  exposed  situation,  the  icey  winds 
were  continually  blowing  from  the  north.  "  The  lower 
the  temperature  sunk,  the  higher  blew  the  north  wind." 
The  barracks  were  unfinished ;  there  were  neither  doors 
nor  windows  to  keep  out  the  chilling  blasts ;  and  there 
was  a  scanty  supply  of  firewood  in  store.  How  the 
Hindostanee  soldiers  bore  up  against  it,  it  is  difficult  to 
say,  for  the  European  officers  declare  that  they  "  never 
experienced  a  winter  so  continuously  cold."  There  was 
an  abimdance  of  grain  in  store ;  but  all  the  surrounding 
country  was  against  them,  and  the  wheat  could  not  be 
ground.  After  more  than  two  months  of  ineffectual 
labour  they  at  last  constructed  serviceable  hand-mills. 
The  Europeans  often  lived  for  days  together  upon 
bread  and  water ;  but  not  a  murmur  arose.  The  winter 
passed  wearily  away.  The  enemy  were  inactive.  But 
with  spring  came  a  renewal  of  active  work  on  either 
side.  The  garrison  were  labouring  to  strengthen  their 
defences,  and  the  enemy,  as  the  year  advanced,  began  to 
draw  more  closely  round  the  fortress,  their  numbers 
and  their  boldness  increasing  together.  After  a  time, 
they  began  to  dig  trenches  round  the  place,  and,  covered 
by  the  loopholed  parapets,  to  keep  up  a  hot  fire  upon 
the  garrison,  which  it  was  impossible  to  return  with 
good  effect.  But  Craigie  and  his  men  had  no  thought 
of  surrender.  They  held  out,  cheerfully  and  imcom- 
plainingly,  thankful  if  they  could  get  a  shot  at  the 
enemy  when  the  parties  in  the  trenches  were  being 
relieved. 