

the  latter  are  two  cayalry  officers,  before  they  quitted  the  yicinitj  of 

Chamberlaine,  and  Travers  of  the  2nd.  Candahar,   and  had  not  reinforce- 

The  Douranee  horse  came  on  more  ments  gone  out,  they  would  have  sus- 

boldly  on  this  occasion  than  they  had  tained,  I  doubt  not,  a  much  heavier 

ever  been  seen  to  do  before.     Some  loss,  by  making  repeated  charses  on 

of  the  38th  Sepoys,  indeed,  received  different  parts  of  the  camp  during 

sabre-cuts  from  our  horsemen ;  but  the  afternoon." — {^Major  RawUnson^t 

they  cannot  stand  our    artillery  or  MS.  Journal,'] 

musketry   fire.     They   had  been  so  *  Captain  NeilTs  Recollections  of 

taunted  with   cowardice,   that   they  Service. 

resolved  to  have  one  conflict  with  us  t  Captun  Neill. 


424  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

reinforcing  regiments  approached,  the  enemy  retired; 
and  our  cavalry  were  quite  useless.*  The  Douranee 
camp  had  been  left  standing,  and  Nott,  though  the  day 
was  far  advanced,  was  eager  to  cross  the  river  and 
attack  it;  but  the  guns  could  not  be  brought  down  to 
the  bank  without  great  labour,  and  the  fords  were  well- 
nigh  impracticable.  So  Nott  determined  to  withdraw 
the  brigade  to  Candahar  for  the  night,  leaving  Wymer 
in  position,  and  to  return  on  the  following  morning  to 
disperse  the  Douranee  horse. 

On  the  morning  of  the  26th  Nott  went  out  again, 
with  the  brigade  that  had  accompanied  him  on  the  pre- 
ceding day,  to  the  banks  of  the  Urghundab;  but  the 
enemy  had  struck  their  camp  during  the  night;  and  as 
soon  as  day  broke,  the  Douranee  horse  had  moved  off 
and  dispersed  themselves  in  different  bodies.  So  the 
General  returned  to  Candahar ;  and  Colonel  Wymer  re- 
UKiined  in  the  valley  to  graze  his  cattle,  unmolested  and 
secure.  Rawlinson  remained  in  the  valley  throughout 
the  day,  "  visiting  the  different  villages,  conversing  with 
the  MooUahs  and  head-men,  and  endeavouring  to  restore 
confidence.  Imprecations  against  the  Ghazees  were 
general  in  every  village,  and  the  damage  which  had 
been  caused  by  their  depredations  was  evidently  very 
great."f 

The  result  of  this  affair  was  a  growth  of  fresh  dis- 
union in  the  Douranee  camp.  The  chiefs  accused  each 
other  of  cowardice,  and  all  assailed  Meerza  Ahmed  with 
measureless  abuse.     But  tidings  were  now  coming  in, 

♦  "  A  few  squadrons  of  dragoons,"  followers,  I  also  found,  had  committed 

wrote     Rawlinson    in    his    journal,  extensive  ravages;  and  when  I  en- 

"  would  have  swept  the  Douranee  deavoured  to   persuade   the  people 

horse  from  the  field ;  as  it  was,  they  that  our  troops  were  there  for  their 

were  permitted  to  re-cross  the  river  protection,  they  uniformly  answered 