

Afghans  now Nothing  is 

easier  than  to  retrieve  our  honour 
in  Afghanistan  previously  to  Hnally 
withdrawing,  should  the  government 
so  determine  ;  and  I  pray  God,  Lord 
Ellenborough  may  at  once  see  the 
damnable  consequences  of  shirking 
the  undertaking,  and  order  accord- 
ingly ;  otherwise  the  disaster  of  Cau- 
bul  will  be  but  the  commencement  of 
our  misfortunes.*'—  [Major  Outram  to 
Sir  Jtichmond  ^hakespear :  March  15, 
1842.     MS.  Correspondence.^ 


MOVEMENTS  OF  ENGLAND'S  BRIGADE.  433 

Artillery ;  Major  Sotheby's  company  of  Bengal  Euro- 
pean Artillery ;  her  Majesty's  41st  Foot;  three  regiments 
of  Native  Infantry  and  a  flank  battalion  of  the  same ; 
two  squadrons  of  Native  Regular  Cavalry,  and  200 
Poonah  Horse.  Of  the  above,  two  regiments  of  Native 
Infantry  and  half  a  company  of  artillery  will  be  re- 
quired to  garrison  Quettah.  All  the  remainder  will  be 
available  to  reinforce  General  Nott,  and  will  march  on 
Candahar  with  that  view  in  the  first  week  of  April,  I 
trust,  with  everything  that  is  required  by  the  Candahar 
garrison,  namely,  twenty  lakhs  of  treasure,  ammunition, 
and  medicines.  I  hope,  however,  that  Brigadier  Eng- 
land will,  in  the  mean  while,  push  on  a  detachment  with 
a  portion  of  these  supplies  to  meet  a  brigade  at  the 
Kojuck,  which  General  Nott  talks  of  sending  out  to 
receive  what  can  be  afforded."* 

On  the  16  th  of  March,  Brigadier  England  arrived  at 
Quettah.  On  the  following  day,  he  wrote  to  Lieutenant 
Hammersley,  the  political  agent  at  that  place:  "The 
22nd  is  at  length  fixed  as  the  day  of  my  departure  from 
hence,  and  in  truth  I  do  not  see  how  it  could  advan- 
tageously be  hastened,  owing  to  the  numerous  demands 
made  on  my  small  means.  I  propose,  unless  other  in- 
tervening events  should  change  such  purpose,  to  move 
as  far  as  Hykulzye  on  the  24th,  and  there  await  intel- 
ligence from  the  northern  extremity  of  the  Kojuck  Pass. 
This  you  must  manage  for  me.  I  could  move  at  once  to 
Killa- Abdoollah ;  but  it  seems  to  me  advisable  to  try 
the  influence  of  our  presence  in  the  Pisheen  valley,  in 
the  matter  of  supplies  and  camels.  The  amount  of  trea- 
sure I  take  to  Candahar  will  not  exceed  four  lakhs,  and 
about  one-third  of  a  lakh  of  musket  ammunition;  we 
have  not  carriage  or  protection  for  more  at  a  time."    On 

*  Major  Outram  to  Sir  Richmond  Shakespear:  March  15,  1842.    MS.  Cor- 
respondence. 

VOL.  II.  2  F 


434  AJFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

the  following  day  he  wrote  again  to  Lieutenant  Ham* 
mersley,  stating  that  he  was  determined  to  halt  in  the 
Pisheen  valley,  imless  General  Nott  had  actually  sect 
two  or  three  regiments  to  the  Kojuck  to  meet  the  trea- 
sure; and  Hammersley,  when  he  forwarded  a  copy  of 
this  letter  to  Outram,  wrote  that  there  were  officers  in 
England's  brigade  who  openly  prophesied  that  the  de- 
tachment would  be  sacrificed  between  Quettah  and  the 
Kojuck  Pass.* 