

*  Palmer  reported  that  want  of  mound.   Among  the  officers  of  Nott*8 

water  had  driven  him  to  surrender ;  army  the  loss  of  Ghuznee  was  con- 

but  it  is  believed  that  he  might  have  sidcred  even  less  creditable  than  the 

retained  possession  of  the  great  well  loss  of  Caubul. 
by  running  a  covered  way  down  the 


SURRENDER  OF  THE  GARRISON.  429 

effective  in  those  of  the  eneniy,  were  sending  their 
round-shot  "crashing  through  and  through  the  walls."* 
Hour  after  hour,  and  still  the  enemy  seemed  to  pause, 
as  though  unwilling  to  shorten,  by  a  last  annihilating 
attack,  the  sufferings  of  their  victims.f  But  Shumshoo- 
deen  Khan  had  begun  to  relent.  He  was  in  council 
with  the  other  Sirdars ;  and  it  was  determined  that 
the  wretched  men,  who  were  now  so  wholly  at  their 
mercy,  should  be  admitted  to  terms.  The  Ghazees 
were  still  crying  aloud  for  their  blood.  But  the 
chiefs  assured  the  officers  of  their  safety,  if  they  would 
lay  down  their  arms  and  place  themselves  in  their 
hands.  The  Sepoys  had  by  this  time  thrown  off  all 
authority,  and  determined  to  make  their  own  way  to 
Peshawur.J     So  the  British  officers,  under  a  solemn 

*  If  there  had  been  any  one  in  of  the  enemy ;  I  destroyed  my  watch, 

Ghuznee  acquainted  with  the  use  and  and  flung  it,  and  what  money  I  had, 

practice  of   artillery,    the   garrison  over  the  wall  of  the  ditch;  I  also 

misht  have  held  out  till  AprU.  burnt  my  poor  wife^s  miniature,  first 

f  '*  On  the  morning  of  the  10th  cramming  the  gold  frame  of  it  into 
Poett  and  Davis  were  obliged  to  re-  a  musket,  being  determined  that  one 
tire  from  their  posts,  and  the  survi-  of  the  Ghazees  should  have  his  belly- 
vors  here  now  assembled  in  the  two  ful  of  gold  ere  I  died.  Hour  after 
houses  held  by  Colonel  Palmer  and  hour  passed  on,  and  still  we  sate  ex- 
the  head-quarters  of  the  corps.  You  pecting  everv  minute  to  hear  the 
cannot  picture  to  yourself  tne  scene  shout  of  the  final  attack ;  but  it  came 
these  two  houses  presented;  every  not.  From  our  loopholes  we  saw 
room  was  crammed  not  only  with  the  enemy  swarming  all  around  us — 
Sepoys,  but  camp-followers,  men,  in  every  lane  and  house,  and  on  the 
women,  and  children,  and  it  is  asto-  hill  of  the  citadel — the  place  was 
nishing  the  slaughter  among  them  black  with  their  masses ;  and  as  they 
was  not  greater,  seeing  that  the  guns  themselves  afterwards  told  us,  there 
of  the  citadel  sent  round-shot  crash-  were  not  less  than  ten  thousand  men 
ing  through  and  through  the  walls,  thirsting  for  our  blood." — [Zieute- 
I  saw  hiffh-castc  men  groping  in  the  nant  Crawford's  Narrative,'] 
mud,  endeavouring  to  discover  pieces  t  Lieutenant  Crawford  says  :— 
of  unmelted  ice,  that  by  sucking  them  '*  During  the  three  preceding  days* 
they  might  relieve  the  thirst  that  fighting,  Shumshoodeen  had  repeat- 
tormented  them.  Certainly,  when  edly  offered  us  terms ;  but  they  were 
that  morning  dawned,  I  thought  it  such  as  we  could  not  accede  to,  in« 
was  the  last  I  should  see  on  this  earth,  asmuch  as  they  commenced  by  de- 
and  so  did  we  all,  and  proceeded  to  siring  we  would  surrender  ourselves 
make  a  few  little  arrangements  ere  to  him  and  abandon  the  S^Mys  to 
the  final  attack  on  us  took  place,  the  fury  of  the  Ghazees.  The  Se- 
The  regimental  colours  were  burned,  poys,  it  appears,  had  held  a  consul- 
to  prevent  their  falling  into  the  hands  tation  among  themselyes,  and  believ- 