

Greneral  Nott  re-entered  Candahar  on  the  12th  of 
March.  The  repulse  which  the  insurgents  had  received 
at  the  city  gate  gave  a  heavy  blow  to  their  cause.  It 
brought  disunion  into  the  Douranee  camp,  and  made 
the  Ghazees  denounce  the  chiefs  who  had  plunged  them 


STATE  OF  THE  DOUUANEE  CAMP.  421 

into  disaster,  and  resolve  to  forswear  the  perilous  trade  of 
fanaticism  which  brought  so  much  suffering  upon  them. 
The  ryots,  who  had  joined  the  standard  of  the  true 
believers,  now  returned  in  numbers  to  their  peacefiil 
avocations;  and  Major  Rawlinson  exerted  himself  to 
the  utmost  to  reassure  the  public  mind,  and  restore 
peace  and  prosperity  to  the  surrounding  villages.*  As 
the  month  advanced  there  were  many  encouraging  signs 
of  the  approaching  dissolution  of  the  Douranee  camp. 
Some  of  its  components  were  already  talking  of  moving 
off  to  Caubul ;  and  it  was  said  that  Meerza  Ahmed  had 
sent  his  family  to  the  capital  preparatory  to  a  retreat  in 
that  direction  himself 

But  there  is  never  anything  sustained  and  consistent 
in  Afghan  politics.  The  appearances  of  to-day  differ 
from  the  appearances  of  yesterday,  and  are  again  suc- 
ceeded by  different  symptoms  to-morrow.  The  Dou- 
ranee chiefs  at  one  time  seemed  to  be  on  the  point  of 
a  general  disruption ;  and  then,  after  the  lapse  of  a  few 
days,  they  met  in  council,  and  cooling  down  under  a 
shower  of  mutual  reproaches,  swore  solemn  oaths  to  be 
true  to  each  other,  and  to  league  themselves  together  for 
another  attack  upon  the  Feringhees.  At  the  end  of  the 
third  week  of  March  they  were  again  upon  the  move. 
Upon  the  24th,  they  were  within  a  short  distance  of 
Killa-chuk,  where  Nott  had  attacked  them  before.  On 
this  day  the  Parsewan  Janbaz  attempted  to  renew  cer- 
tain negotiations  which  they  had  initiated  a  few  days 
before;  but  which  had  been  coldly  received.  They 
offered  to  quit  the  Douranee  camp  and  to  move  off  to 
Caubul,  if  a  month's  pay  were  given  them  to  defray 

*  The  Ghazees  had  so  damaged  people  of  the  Urghundab  were  in- 

the  canal  banks,  thut  the  irrigation  duced  to  labour  at  their  repair,  and 

was  destroyed,  and  there  was  every  in  a  short  time   the  waters  began 

prospect  of  a  failure  of  the  crops ;  again  to  flow  in    their  accustomed 

but  through  Rawlinson's  auency  the  course. 


422  AFFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

their  expenses  on  the  march.  But  Nott  indignantly 
rejected  the  proposal.  "  I  will  never  give  them,"  he 
wrote  to  Rawlinson,  "  one  rupee;  and  if  I  can  ever  get 
near  them  I  will  destroy  them  to  a  man.  It  is  my 
wish  that  no  communications  shall  be  held  with  them. 
They  have  murdered  our  people,  and  plundered  the 
country."  * 