

The  winter  now  set  in  with  appalling  severity.  The 
Sepoys,  kept  constantly  on  the  alert,  sunk  beneath  the 


THE  GHUZNEE  GARRISON.  427 

paralysing  cold.  Bravely  as  they  tried  to  bear  up 
against  it,  the  trial  was  beyond  their  physical  papacity 
to  endure.  The  deep  snow  was  lying  on  the  ground; 
it  was  often  falling  heavily  when  the  Sepoys  were  on 
their  cold  night-watch.  The  mercury  in  the  thermo- 
meter had  fallen  many  degrees  below  zero.  Men,  who 
had  spent  all  their  lives  on  the  burning  plains  of  Hin- 
dostan,  and  drunk  their  tepid  water  out  of  vessels 
scorched  by  the  fierce  rays  of  the  Indian  sun,  were  now 
compelled  to  break  the  ice  in  the  wells  before  they 
could  allay  their  thirst.  Fuel  was  so  scarce,  that  a 
single  seer*  of  wood  was  all  that  each  man  received  in 
the  day  to  cook  his  dinner  and  keep  off  the  assaults 
of  the  mysterious  enemy  that  was  destroying  them. 
They  were  on  half-rations;  and  the  scanty  provisions 
that  were  served  out  to  them  were  of  such  a  quality 
that  only  severe  hunger  could  reconcile  them  to  it. 
Numbers  of  them  were  carried  into  hospital  miserably 
frost-bitten.  The  northern  climate  was  doing  its  work. 
The  Afghans,  in  the  mean  while,  in  possession  of  the 
city,  continued  to  harass  the  garrison  in  the  citadel,  by 
firing  upon  them  whenever  they  showed  their  heads 
above  the  walls.  This  continued  till  the  middle  of  the 
month  of  January,  when,  it  appears,  that  some  suspen- 
sion of  hostilities  supervened.  It  was  believed  that  the 
English  at  Caubul  had  entered  into  a  treaty  with  the 
Afghan  Sirdars ;  and  that  Shumshoodeen  Khan  would 
shortly  arrive  with  orders  from  the  existing  government  to 
assume  possession  of  the  place.  Weeks,  however,  passed 
away,  and  the  new  governor  did  not  make  his  appear- 
ance.f  About  the  middle  of  February  he  arrived,  and  * 
summoned  Palmer  to  surrender.  Unwilling  to  submit 
to  the   humiliating   demand,  and  yet  hopeless   of  the 

*  Two  pounds. 

t  Shah  Soojah  claimed  credit  for  having  delayed  his  march. 


428  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

efficacy  of  resistance,  the  English  officer  contrived  to 
amuse  the  Sirdar  until  the  beginning  of  March.  Then 
the  patience  of  Shumshoodeen  Khan  and  the  other 
chiefs  was  exhausted;  and  they  swore  that  they  would 
re-commence  hostilities  with  unsparing  ferocity  if  the 
citadel  were  not  instantly  surrendered.  So,  on  the 
6th  of  March,  Palmer  and  his  men  marched  out  of  the 
citadel.  The  enemy  had  solemnly  sworn  to  conduct 
them  in  safety  to  Peshawur,  with  their  colours,  arms, 
and  baggage,  and  fifty  rounds  of  ammunition  in  the 
pouches  of  each  of  our  fighting  men.* 

But  it  soon  became  only  too  miserably  apparent  that 
the  enemy  had  sworn  falsely  to  protect  Palmer  and  his 
men.  The  British  troops  had  scarcely  taken  up  their 
abode  in  the  quarter  of  the  town  which  had  been  as- 
signed to  them,  when  the  Afghan  chiefs  threw  off  the 
mask.  On  the  day  after  their  departure  from  the  citadel, 
when  the  Sepoys  were  cooking  their  dinner,  the  Ghazees 
rushed  with  sudden  fury  on  their  lines.  Three  days  of 
terror  followed.  House  after  house  in  which  the  English 
officers  and  their  suffering  Hindostanee  followers  endea- 
voured manfully  to  defend  themselves,  was  attacked  by 
the  infuriated  enemy.  Fire,  famine,  and  slaughter  were 
all  working  together  to  destroy  our  unhappy  men.  At 
last,  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  the  survivors  were 
huddled  together  in  two  houses  which  had  been  assigned 
to  the  head-quarters  of  the  force — soldiers  and  camp- 
followers,  men,  women,  and  children,  crammed  to  suffo- 
cation in  every  room,  all  hourly  expecting  death.  The 
enemy  were  swarming  around.  The  citadel  guns,  which 
had  been  useless  in   our  hands,  but  were  now  most 