

On  the  26th  of  March,  the  Brigadier  moved  forward 
on  the  Pisheen  valley,  taking  with  him  five  companies  of 
her  Majesty's  41st  Regiment,  six  companies  of  Bombay 
Native  Infantry,  a  troop  of  the  3rd  Bombay  Cavalry,  fifty 
men  of  the  Poonah  Horse,  and  four  Horse- Artillery  guns. 
Early  on  the  28th  he  "arrived  at  the  entrance  of  a  defile 
which  leads  to  the  village  of  Hykulzye,"  at  which  place  he 
"  had  intended  to  await  the  remainder  of  the  brigade  now 
in  progress  to  this  place  through  the  Bolan  Pass."f  It 
was  plain  that  General  Nott  had  no  intention  to  send 
any  troops  to  the  southward  to  co-operate  with  England's 
detachment ;  J  and  it  soon  became  apparent  that  the  latter 

*  *'There  are  some  officers  in  camp  was  liable  at  anytime  to  be  called 

who  think  that  Brigadier  England*8  upon    to   proceed  to   the   relief  of 

detachment  will  be  sacrificed  between  Khelat-i-G^ilzye.  Rawlinson  pointed 

this  and  the  Kojuck;  but  with  such  out  the  immense  evils  attending  a 

fine  examples  as  those  set  by  Wood-  total  deprivation  of  treasure,  and  said 

bum  on  tne  Helmund,  Anaerson  at  that  even  the  compulsory  abandon- 

Tazee,  and  Wymer  at  Assyab,  surely  ment  of  Candahar  might  follow  the 

there  ought  to  be  no  doubt  of  success  failure  of  General  England  to  effect 

between  this  and  the  Kojuck,  when  the  passage  of  the  Kojuck.    Nott^ 

no  natural  obstacles  to  signify  inter-  however,    was  obdurate.      The  de- 

vene."  —  ^Lieutenant  Hammersley  to  tachment  was  not  sent.      Wymer*s 

Major  Outram:  March  18,  1842.  MS,  brigade,  however,  was  then   out  to 

Corresponde7ice.'\  the  southward  of  Candahar,  and  it 

t  Major-General  England  to  Go-  was  believed  that  the  object  of  the 

vemment :  April  2^   1842.    Published  movement  was  to  support  the  party 

Papers.  advancing  through  the  Kojuck.  Nott 

I  Nott  had  resolutely  refused  to  withdrew  the  brigade  to  Candahar, 

send  any  troops  to  meet  England*8  and    an   impression   gained  ground 

detachment,  though  earnestly  pressed  among  the  enemy  that  we  had  en- 

by  Rawlinson  to  do  so.    The  General  deavoured  to  open  our  communica- 

urged  that  he  could  not  afibrd  to  tions  with  the  troops  below,  but  had 

send  troops  to  the  Kojuck,  whilst  he  drawn  back  in  despair. 


THE  REPULSE  AT  HYKULZYE.  435 

would  have  done  well  to  have  retained  his  position  at 
Quettah  until  reinforced  by  the  troops  moving  up  from 
the  southward.  England  found  himself  near  the  village 
of  Hykulzye,  knowing  nothing  about  the  country,  and 
nothing  about  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  Colonel 
Stacy  accompanied  the  force  as  its  political  director. 
He  had,  some  days  before,  informed  the  Greneral  that  he 
might  expect  to  meet  the  enemy  at  Hykulzye ;  but  as 
they  approached  that  place  no  intelligence  of  their  posi- 
tion was  to  be  obtained,  and  not  before  England  was 
close  upon  them  had  he  any  knowledge  that  they  were 
in  his  front.  Mahomed  Sadig  had  come  down  deter- 
mined to  dispute  our  progress,  and  was  now  posted, 
with  his  troops,  behind  some  swngahs  on  the  Hykulzye 
heights. 