

England  halted  the  column,  and  rode  forward  with 
his  staff  to  reconnoitre  the  enemy's  position.  After  the 
lapse  of  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  he  returned,  and  the 
force  was  ordered  to  advance.  The  horse-artiUery  guns 
were  now  opened  on  the  hills  to  the  left,  whilst  Major 
Aptfaorp,  with  the  light  battalion,  was  instructed  to  storm 
the  hills  to  the  right.  Leslie's  battery  played  with  good 
effect,  throwing  its  shrapnel  among  the  enemy;  but  the 
infantry  column  was  disastrously  beaten  back.  The 
enemy  rose  up  suddenly  from  behind  their  sungahs  and 
poured  in  such  a  destructive  fire  upon  our  columns  that 
the  light  companies  fell  back.  Captain  May,  of  the  41st, 
was  shot  dead.  Major  Apthorp,*  who  commanded  the 
light  companies,  was  carried,  desperately  wounded,  to  the 
rear.  A  sabre-cut  had  laid  open  his  skull,  and  another 
had  nearly  severed  his  right  arm.     Of  a  party  of  less 

*  Of  the  20th  Bombay  Native  In-  to  Oatram,  a  few  days  before  the  bri- 
fantry.  He  was  greatly  esteemed  as  sade  left  Qaettah,  **  and  it  is  to  be 
a  gallant  and  coed  soldier.  **  They  hoped  that  he  will  inspire  the  crest- 
have  a  fine  fellow  at  the  head  of  the  fallen  wiUi  a  little  ardour.** — \JdS, 
light  battalion,*'  wrote  Hammersley  Corretpondence,'] 

2f2 


436  CANDAHAR  AFFAIRS. 

than  500  men  nearly  a  hundred  were  killed  or  wounded. 
The  enemy  fought  with  uncommon  gallantry,  and  many 
of  them  were  bayoneted  or  shot  on  the  hill.  Among 
them  were  five  or  six  of  their  chiefs.  Mahomed  Sadig 
himself,  who  had  been  behind  the  defences,  but  had 
quitted  them  on  the  advance  of  our  light  battalion, 
and  joined  the  horsemen  on  the  hill,  received  a  bayonet- 
wound  on  the  shoulder. 

Our  men,  after  their  repulse,  soon  rallied,  and  were 
eager  again  to  be  led  to  the  attack.  But  England  had 
determined  to  retreat.  Colonel  Stacy  volunteered  to  lead 
a  party  of  a  himdred  men  up  the  hill  and  carry  the  de- 
fences ;  but  the  gallant  offer  was  declined.*  Three  times 
he  pressed  it  upon  the  Greneral,  but  with  no  effect.  It 
was  believed  by  the  latter  that  the  Hykulzye  defences 
could  be  carried  only  by  a  strong  brigade,  and  one,  too, 
equipped  with  mortars.  So  he  wrote  to  General  Nott, 
urging  him  to  send  a  force  so  equipped  to  meet  him; 
and  in  the  mean  while  fell  back  upon  Quettah.f  And 
there  he  began  to  entrench  himself,  as  though  he  were 
about  to  be  besieged  by  an  overwhelming  force. 

No  satisfactory  reasons  have  yet  been  assigned  for  this 

*  *'  General  England  and  his  staff  and  very  bold,  but  our  men  burned 

were  dismounted,  and   standing  in  with  rage  at  seeing  their  comraden 

conversation  not  far  from  where  the  cut  up  before  their  eyes.    I  think  I 