

light  companies  had  rallied.    I  joined  pressed  my  offer  three  times,  the  last 

them.     It  was  useless  to  stand  and  time  volunteering  to  lead  with  eighty 

lament  over  what  could  not  be  re-  men ;  but  the  General  felt  he  had 

called.     A  retreat  was  determined  too  few,  and  that  the  stake  was  too 

upon.     I  observed  to  the  General  CTcat." — [Colonel  Stacy* s Narrative  of 

that  the  day  might  be  retrieved,  and  Services  in  Beloochistan  and  Afghanis-' 

offered  to  lead  into  the  entrenched  tan  in  the  Fear«  1840,  1841,  1842.] 
position  with  a  hundred  men   pro-        f  It  appears  to  have  been  Eng- 

perly  supported ;   and  I  am  confi-  land*8  intention,  afler  the  disaster  on 

dent  that  I  should  have  succeeded,  the  28th,  to  have  commenced  his  re- 

The  men  were  in  courage,  and  anxi-  treat  on  the  same  evening ;  but  Colo- 

ous  to  recover  the  bodies  of  their  nel  Stacy  persuaded  him  not  to  move 

comrades.    The  Greneral  replied,  he  until  the  following  morning.     On  the 

had  not  men.    I  proposed  that  the  29th  he  struck  his  camp  and  marched 

lefl  hill  should  be  attacked  first,  as  to   Hykerzye,  halted  at  Eooch-lag 

it  conmianded  the  smaller  one.    The  on  the  30th,  and  on  the  31st  reacheS 

enemy  were  certainly  in   strength,  Quettah. 


CAUSES  OF  THE  FAILURE.  437 

unhappy  miscarriage.  But  excuses  have  ibeen  urged  in 
abundance.  It  was  alleged  that  the  defences  at  Hykulzye 
were  impracticable — that  they  had  been  two  months  in 
course  of  erection — that  the  Greneral  had  received  no 
plan  of  them  from  the  political  authorities — that  he 
was  not,  in  fact,  aware  of  their  existence — that  he  had 
been  deceived  by  &lse  accounts  of  the  number  of  the 
enemy — that  strong  reinforcements  had  come  down 
from  Candahar — and  that  the  Sepoys  did  not  support 
the  European  soldiers  at  Hykulyze.  But  upon  a  care- 
ful examination  of  all  these  charges  and  assertions,  it 
does  not  appear  that  one  can  be  maintained. 

The  defences  at  Hykulzye  were  not  formidable,  Gre- 
neral England  had  not  seen  them  at  this  time.  Lieu- 
tenant Evans,  of  the  41st,  did  see  them;  and  he  said 
that  there  were  "no  breastworks,  but  merely  a  four- 
foot  ditch  filled  with  brushwood."  The  elevations  were 
nothing  more  than  those  heaps  of  earth  and  stone 
known  as  sungahs^  which  may  be,  and  often  are,  thrown 
up  in  a  few  hours.  The  best  information  that  Ham- 
mersley  could  obtain  went  to  show  that  these  defences 
were  thrown  up  by  Mahomed  Sadig  when  General 
England's  force  had  reached  Kooch-lag — not  before. 
When  the  brigade  advanced  from  Quettah  a  month 
afterwards,  the  Hykulzye  defences  were  found  to  be  so 
formidable  that  some  of  the  officers  rode  over  them,  not 
knowing  where  they  were. 