

it«   Saloo  Khan  accordingly,  with  Ma-  Barukzye,  and  Populzye  Ooloos  to 

homed  Azim  (Noorzye),  Fyz  Tullub,  assist  in  holding  the  pass.^— [Jfajbr 

Uubeeboollah,  Sooltan  Mahomed  (Ba-  Itawlinton*$  MS,  JawmaL'] 


440  ATFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

weak  regiments.*  He  thought  that  her  Majesty's  two 
regiments,  the  40th  and  41st,  were  the  only  two  corps 
that  could  be  reUed  upon.  Nott  told  a  different  story. 
"  My  Sepoys  are  behaving  nobly,"  was  his  constant 
report.  I  can  find  no  mention  of  any  backwardness  on 
the  part  of  the  Sepoys,  in  any  of  the  letters  written  by 
the  officers  of  either  service  after  the  affair  at  Hykulzye ; 
and  I  beUeve,  that  if  Colonel  Stacy  had  been  suffered 
to  storm  the  works  after  the  first  repulse,  a  large  number 
of  Sepoys  would  have  volunteered  to  follow  him. 

When  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  come  to  be 
considered,  it  appears  that  a  disaster  of  a  very  dis- 
couraging  character  was  sustained  by  the  adoption  of  a 
course  which  had  no  object  of  importance  commen- 
surate with  the  risk  that  was  incurred.  General  Eng- 
land had  no  intention  of  advancing  upon  Candahar. 
He  ought,  therefore,  to  have  remained  at  Quettah.  The 
advance  into  the  Pisheen  valley  was  a  grave  error.  It 
was  plainly  England's  duty,  at  this  time,  either  to  have 
cleared  the  pass  with  the  treasure  and  stores  which 
were  so  much  needed  by  the  Candahar  garrison,  or  to 
have  waited  patiently  for  his  reinforcements  at  Quettah. 
To  advance  fix)m  that  place,  and  then  to  fall  back  upon 
it,  was  to  do  that  which  Nott  said,  in  anticipation,  would 
be  more  injurious  to  the  position  of  the  Candahar  force 
than  20,000  of  the  enemy  in  the  field.f    Major  Outram 

*  "  You  will  understand  the  in-  "  This  I  deeply  regret ;    firstly,  be- 

sinuation,"  wrote  one  of  the  most  cause  I  cannot  send  a  force  to  the 

chivalrous  of  the  many  chivalrous  southern  side  of  the  pass ;  secondly, 

officers  who  served  beyond  the  In-  I  require  a  large  supply  of  ammuni- 

dus.     "  If  he  is  ever  heard  to  libel  tion,  which  I  l^ve  for  two  years  been 

our  Sepoys  in  that  manner,  surely  it  endeavouring  to   get,    but  without 

willbe  noticed  by  our  officers.*' — [^MS.  success ;  thirdly,  four  lakhs  of  rupees 

Correspondence,']  will  be  of  little  use  here — the  troops 

f  After  adverting  to  the  reported  and  establishments  are  going  on  for 
intention  of  England  to  leave  Quet-  four  months  in  arrears  ;  fourthly, 
tah  with  a  small  supply  of  money  and  your  moving  into  Pisheen  with  a  con- 
ammunition,  but  not  to  push  through  voy,  known  by  the  whole  country  to 
the  Kojuck,  Nott  goes  on  to  say :  be  intended  for  Candahar,  and  then 