

less  obscure  than  the  letter  to  Ham-  to  keep  it  open  and  communicate  with 

mersley,  which  runs  thus  :  us ;  and  as  the  enemy  is  a  hundred  to 

one  stronger  than  any  one  imagined,  I 
"  Camp,  three  miles  south  of  must  wait  for  the  reinforcements  till 
Hykulzye,  2  p.m.  i  try  them  again.    Meanwhile,  the 
"  My  dear  Hammehslby,— I  wish  fortification  of  Quettah  must  be  pro- 
you  would  acquaint  Colonel  Marshall,  ceeded  with  vigorously.    Show  this 
that  as  the  insurgent  force  has  been  to  Colonel  Marshall  and  Major  Wad- 
much  reinforced  from  Candahar,  and  dington. 

have  so  strongly  protected  themselves  •♦  Sincerely  yours  (in  haste), 

with  breastworks,  &c.,  on  the  ground  «  R.  England." 


THE  ENEMY  AT  HYKULZYE.  439 

from  Mahomed  Sadig  had  arrived  in  their  camp,  and  it 
had  come  at  an  opportune  season.  Greatly  depressed 
by  the  failure  of  their  efforts  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Candahar,  the  Douranee  chiefs  were  abnost  on  the  point 
of  breaking  up  their  camp^  when  intelligence  of  the  fall 
of  Ghuznee  came  to  revive  their  spirits.  They  were 
then  at  Dehla.  There  the  tidings  of  the  advance  of 
England's  convoy  reached  them,  and  there  they  received 
an  invitation  from  Mahomed  Sadig  to  send  troops  to 
reinforce  him.  Expecting  that  their  own  camp  would 
be  strengthened  by  the  arrival  of  Shumshoodeen  Khan, 
they  beUeved  that  they  might  safely  detach  a  party  to 
the  southward.  Accordingly,  Saloo  Khan  and  some 
other  chiefe*  set  out  towards  the  Kojuck.  But  they 
had  hardly  commenced  their  march  when  England  was 
driven  back  at  Hykiilzye.  The  chiefs  fell  out  on  the 
road,  and  Saloo  Khan  alone  made  his  way  to  the 
southern  passes — but  not  a  man  even  of  his  party  had 
joined  Mahomed  Sadig  on  that  disastrous  28th  of 
March,  when  England  sought  to  justify  his  failure  by 
a  reference  to  the  reinforcements  from  Candahar. 

Only  one  more  point  remains  to  be  mentioned  in 
connexion  with  a  subject  which  the  chronicler  of 
these  events  is  but  too  anxious  to  dismiss.  General 
England  insinuated  that  he  had  no  reliance  upon  his 
Sepoy  troops.  He  is  said  to  have  remarked,  that  al- 
though when  his  troops  and  those  of  General  Nott  were 
united  they  would  have  15,000  men  under  their  com- 
mand, they  could  not  oppose  a  whole  nation  with  two 

^  **  April  l.^The  Douranees  hay-  rukzye),  &c.,  have  gone  off  by  the 

iDg  received   positive  accounU  from  desert  to  the  Kojuck  Pass.  The  body 

Mahomed  Sadig  of  the  advance  of  of  horse  with  the  chie&  is  about  1000 ; 

Brigadier  England  with  treasure,  have  but  they  expect  to  raise  some  4000 

resolved  to  make  an  effort  to  intercept  or  5000  of  the  Noorzye,  Atchekzye, 