


nott's  letters  to  pollock.       447 

hope  to  render  you  some  assistance."     I  believe  I  shall  go  mad  I 
I  have  much  to  say,  but  am  confined  to  a  slip  of  paper* 

Yours  sincerely,  W.  Nott* 


Candahar,  May  6ih,  1842. 

Mt  deab  Gekebal^ 

I  have  this  day  received  your  letter  of  the  14th  ultimo. 
I  had  before  heard  of  your  progress  up  to  the  6th  of  April:  this 
is  the  only  note  I  have  received  from  you.  I  enclose  a  copy  of 
my  note  of  the  29th  of  last  month,  which  was  sent  vid  Eelat-i- 
Ghilzye,  and  by  which  you  will  perceive  how  much  I  have  been 
disappointed,  and  the  state  of  the  force  under  my  command. 
It  drove  me  almost  mad  to  be  forced  to  send  the  best  part  of 
my  force  to  the  Eojuck  Pass  instead  of  marching  towards  Caubul; 
but  I  had  not  a  rupee  to  pay  the  long  arrears  of  the  troops,  or 
to  purchase  cattle.  The  people  of  ihb  country  unfortunately 
have  an  idea  that  we  are  to  retire  whether  we  are  successful  or 
not^  and  therefore  they  will  part  with  nothing;  and,  as  far  as 
cattle  are  concerned,  we  are  nearly  helpless.  God  knows  why 
such  delay  has  occurred  in  sending  me  money  and  stores.  This 
is  dreadful.  I  shall  move  towards  Caubul  the  moment  I  can  get 
carriage.  General  England's  retrograde  movement  has  been  a 
sad  disappointment  to  me. 

Yours  sincerely,  W.  NoTT.f 

P.S. — England  has  now,  with  the  aid  of  my  brigade,  crossed 
the  pass.  He  brings  with  him  two  twelve-pounder  howitzers; 
but  for  these  I  should  not  have  a  single  howitzer  at  command. 
Mortars  I  have  none.  I  expect  the  troops  here  on  the  10th. 
The  Ghazehs  still  keep  head  within  a  few  miles  of  us,  not  in 
great  strength:  the  nucleus,  however,  exists.  I  have  directed 
all  camels  within  reach  to  be  procured  on  any  terms:  want  of 
money  alone  prevented  me  doing  thia  earlier.  The  force  I  shall 
take  from  this  must  depend  upon  the  available  cattle.  I  trust  it 
may  amount  to  5000  men.  Rely  on  my  making  every  effort  to 
communicate  with  you;  but  from  past  experience  I  must  regard 
this  as  extremely  doubtful,  and  that  we  must  not  depend  on 
mutual  intelligence  enabling  us  to  make  combined  movements. 
No  opportunity  shall  be  lost;  but  if  all  attempts  at  correspondence 
fail,  I  will  still  hope  that,  as  we  have  one  object  at  heart,  the 

*  MS,  Correspondence.  f  MS,  Correspondence. 


448  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

similarity  of  our  operations  may  in  some  measure  supply  the 
want  of  a  concerted  plan. 

Without  any  opposition  the  two  united  brigades  now 
marched  on  to  Candahar,  and  entered  the  city  on  the 
10th  of  May.  The  enemy  had  broken  up  and  dispersed. 
Saloo  Khan,  who  had  come  down  to  the  assistance  of 
Mahomed  Sadig,  had  fallen  out  with  that  chief.  He 
had  never  thrown  his  heart  into  the  cause,  and  was,  in- 
deed, at  any  time,  to  be  purchased  by  British  gold. 
Rawlinson  thought  that  a  little  money  would  be  well 
expended  on  the  purchase  of  his  allegiance,  but  Nott 
objected  to  the  measure.*  In  the  mean  while,  how- 
ever, Stacy  had  been  exerting  himself  with  good  success 
below  the  Kojuck  to  obtain  the  co-operation  of  this  man 
in  the  important  work  of  keeping  open  the  communi- 
cation between  Quettah  and  Candahar;  and  when  he 
reached  the  latter  place,  he  was  able  to  report  that 
Saloo  Khan  had  promised  all  that  was  required  of  him ; 
and  that  Atta-oollah  Khan,  the  brother  of  the  chief,  was 
now  accompanying  him  for  the  purpose  of  concluding 
the  necessary  arrangements.f 