

The  strength  of  the  enemy  at  Hykulzye  seems  to 
have  been  exaggerated  very  much  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  strength  of  the  defences.  General  England  wrote 
to  Hammersley  on  the  28th  of  March,  after  his  unsuc- 
cessful engagement,  that  the  enemy  were  "  a  hundred  to 
one  stronger  than  any  one  expected."*  Hammersley  and 

*  Hammersley  complained  that  the    factory,  that  if  it  iiad  not  been  for 
General's  letter  was  so  very  unsatis-    some  private  letters,  he  would  have 


438  AEFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAB. 

Stacy  had  both  told  the  General  that  he  might  expect 
Mahomed  Sadig  to  make  a  stand  at  Hykulzye.  The 
former  officer  had  computed  the  strength  of  the  enemy 
at  1000  foot  and  300  horse;  and  his  subsequent  in- 
quiries went  to  show  that  he  had  rather  overstated  than 
understated  the  number  actually  engaged.  England's 
own  officers  estimated  the  strength  of  the  enemy  at  fix)m 
1000  to  1300  men;  and  native  testimony  went  to  show 
that  they  had  overstated  the  number  of  horsemen  in  the 
field.  The  strong  reinforcements  which  were  said  to 
have  come  down  from  Candahar  before  the  28th  of 
March  were  purely  fabulous.  There  had  been  some 
talk  of  such  a  movement,  but  not  until  after  the  aflfair 
with  Colonel  Wymer's  brigade  on  the  25  th  of  March, 
Then  it  was  debated  among  the  chiefs  whether  a  party 
should  not  be  sent  down  to  the  Kojuck  to  intercept  the 
convoy  advancing  from  the  southward.    An  invitation 

been  left  in  ignorance  of  the  real  commanding  our  line  of  route  this 

nature  ofthe  events  that  had  occurred,  side  of  Hykulzye,  I  shall  fall  back 

The  original  letter,  now  before  me,  is  to  Hykerzye  to-morrow,  my  presence 

worth  quoting.      £ngland  seems  to  here  being  now  of  no  use,  and  inviting 

have  been  so  unwilling  to  state  dis-  their  insults ;  and  it  is  probable  that 

tinctly  that  he  had  been  defeated,  that  as  the  position  at  Hykerzye  is  not  a 

even  when  writing  officially  to  Ge-  good  one,  having  much  broken  ground 

neral  Nott  on   the   1st  instant,   he  in  its  rear,  that  I  shall  further  fall 

shrunk  from  a  plain  statement  of  tlie  back  on  Cutchlak.     I  have  had  so 

circumstances  of  the  case  ;   so  that  many  men  killed  and  wounded  by  the 

Nott,   writing  to  him  on  the  18th,  enemy,  that  my  baggage  is  increased 

could  only  say :  *^  I  have  been  favoured  whilst  my  means  of  defending  it  is 

with  your  letter  ofthe  1st  instant,  &c.  lessened.  If  Colonel  Marshall,  through 

...  I  have  also  heard  of  the  affair  your  information,  thinks  the  Cutchlak 

you  had  mth  the  enemy  on  the  28ih  rass  occupied,  he  may  make  such  ef- 

nlt**    The  letter  to  Nott  is,  however,  forts  as  his  numbers  will  enable  him 