

♦  Colonel  Stacy*$  Narrative.  therefore,  been  discarded,  and  the 

f  *'  These  fine  fellows  had  been  men  were  in  their  doties.    As  the/ 

led  forward  by  Colonel  Wymer,  at  showed  on  every   accessible  point, 

daybreak,  to  occupy  the  heights  com-  they  were  the  admiration  of  ail.    I 

manding  the  pass  from  Chummemo  can  easily  imagine  how  painful  it 

to  the  western  side,  to  secure  General  must  have  been  to  the  Bombay  r^« 

England's  party  a  safe  passage.    I  ments  to  find  the  Candahar  troops  in 

have  never  seen  our  Sepoys  to  such  full  possession  of  the  pass  before  they 

advantage.    It    was    impossible  to  were  allowed  to  enter  it"— [Cotone/ 

climb  the  precipitous  hills  in  panta-  Staq/'$  Narrative,"] 
loons;  this  part  of  their  dress  had. 


446  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

every  accessible  height  was  bristling  with  the  bayonets 
of  the  Candahar  force.  The  Bombay  troops  were  bit- 
terly  disappointed;  but  they  cordiaUy  fraternised  with 
their  new  comrades,  and,  if  they  felt  any  pangs  of  envy, 
they  were  too  forbearing  to  express  them. 

It  was  with  no  common  anxiety  that  Nott  now 
awaited  the  return  of  his  regiments.  He  had  sent  them 
reluctantly  to  the  Kojuck,  and  was  eager  to  commence 
operations  m  another  direction— to  march  upon  Ghuz- 
nee,  and  then  onward  to  meet  Pollock  at  the  capital. 
In  the  letters  which  he  addressed  at  this  time  to  his 
brother  General  at  Jellalabad,  his  feelings  found  vent 
They  are  eminently  characteristic: 

Candahar,  April  29th,  1842. 

My  dear  General, 

My  last  news  from  your  side  was  of  the  oth  instant.  I 
regret  I  am  not  on  my  way  to  Ghuznee — I  am  tied  to  this  place. 
My  troops  have  had  no  pay  since  December,  1841.  I  am  in  want 
of  almost  everything.  I  have  not  carriage  even  for  three  regi- 
ments, and  I  have  not  a  rupee  to  buy  or  to  hire  cattle.  For  five 
months  I  have  been  calling  for  aid  from  Sindh — none  whatever 
has  been  sent.  At  last  Major-General  England  moved  with 
money  and  stores,,  but  received  a  check  in  Pisheen,  and  then 
retired  to  Shawl !  I  have  now  been  obliged  to  send  the  best 
part  of  my  force  to  the  Kojuck  Pass,  in  hopes  of  getting  the  trea- 
sure and  stores  I  have  so  long  been  expecting,  and  without  which 
my  small  force  is  paralysed.  It  is  dreadful  to  think  of  all  this. 
I  ought  to  have  been  on  my  way  to  extend  my  hand  to  you  from 
Ghuznee,  instead  of  which  I  am  obliged  to  make  a  movement  on 
the  Kojuck.  I  have  felt  the  want  of  cavalry.  I  have  the  Shah's 
first  regiment,  but  I  have  never  been  able  to  get  them  to  charge. 
My  Sepoys  have  behaved  nobly,  and  have  Ucked  the  Afghans  in 
every  aflair,  even  when  five  times  their  number.  The  moment 
my  brigade  returns  from  the  Kojuck  I  move  on  Kelat-i-Ghilzye 
and  Ghuznee,  in  hopes  of  saving  some  of  our  oflScers  and  men 
at  the  latter  place.  Instead  of  sending  me  cavalry,  money,  &c., 
the  authority  in  Sindh  coolly  says,  **  When  you  retire  bodily  I 