


NOTT's  letters  to  ENGLAND.  441 

also  strongly  advised  General  England  to  await  at 
Quettah  the  arrival  of  tlie  reinforcements  from  below — 
but  England  would  go  on  to  be  beaten.* 

To  Nott,  this  failure  was  mortifying  in  the  extreme. 
He  was  in  no  mood  to  brook  delays  and  excuses.  The 
disaster  at  Hykulzye  was  sufficiently  annoying  to  him; 
but  the  seeming  unwillingness  of  General  England  to  re- 
deem his  character  by  a  vigorous  movement  in  advance, 
irritated  him  still  more.  He  had  been  for  some  time 
complaining  bitterly  of  the  neglect  to  which  he  and  his 
force  had  been  subjected  by  the  authorities  below.  "  I 
know  not  the  intentions  of  government  regarding  this 
country/'  he  wrote  to  General  England;  "  but  this  I 
know  and  feel — that  it  is  now  from  four  to  five  months 
since  the  outbreak  at  Caubul,  and  in  all  that  time  no 
aid  whatever  has  been  given  to  me.  I  have  continually 
called  for  cavalry,  for  ammunition,  treasure,  stores,  and 
medicines  for  the  sick.  I  have  called  loudly,  but  I  have 
called  in  vain.  Had  the  least  aid  been  sent — even  a  rai- 
ment of  cavalry — I  could  have  tranquillised  or  subdued 
the  country.  I  have  been  tied  to  this  important  city, 
when  a  few  additional  troops  for  its  garrison  would  have 
set  me  free ;  and  I  now  would  have  moved  on  Ghuznee 
and  Caubul.  All  I  have  now  to  do  is  to  uphold  the 
honour  of  my  country  in  the  best  manner  I  can  without 
the  assistance  above  alluded  to,  and  in  ignorance  of  the 

halting  or  retiring  to  Quettah,  will  merslej,  in  letters  I  addressed  to 

have  the  very  worst  effects  through-  them  both  so  long  ago  as  the  lOth 

out  Afghanistan,  and  will  be  more  ultimo  (March),  to  await  at  Quettah 

injurious  to  my  present  position  than  the  junction  of  the  remainder  of  his 

20,000  of  the  enemy  in  the  field.     I  brigade,  unless  very  urgent  circum- 

sincerely  hope    that   you  have  not  stances  should  require  nis  more  im- 

moved,  or  that  you  have  determined  mediate  advance  to  meet  an  advance 

to  push  across  the  Kojuck  with  all  from  Candahar.    The  latter,  so  fiur 

the  force  you  can  muster." — [^General  from  being  the  case.  General  Nott 

NoU  to   General  Enqland :  April  2,  requested  might  not  be  attempted." 

1842.    MS,  liecordsJ]  — \^Major  Outram  to  Captain  Durand : 

♦  "  I  strongly  advised  Brisadier  April  3,  1842.    MS.  Correspondence.'] 

England,  through  Lieutenant  Ham-  t. 


442  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAB. 


intentions  of  government."  In  this  frame  of  mind,  his 
patience  well-nigh  exhausted,  his  temper  never  of  the 
most  genial  cast,  now  more  than  ever  overdouded,  he 
received  intelligence,  first  of  England's  defeat,  and  then 
of  his  reluctance  to  move  forward.  England  himself 
announced  the  latter,  if  not  in  so  many  plain  words,  in 
language  equally  mimistakeable.  After  setting  forth  all 
the  dangers  and  difficulties  of  a  forward  movement,  he 
concluded,  on  the  10th  of  April,  a  letter  to  Nott  by 
saying :  "  Whenever  it  so  happens  that  you  retire  bodily 
in  this  direction,  and  that  I  am  informed  of  it,  I  feel 
assured  that  I  shall  be  able  to  make  an  advantageous 
diversion  in  your  favour."f 