

This  was  too  much  for  Nott.  Determined  at  once  to 
settle  the  question  of  England's  advance,  he  sate  down 
and  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the  General.  There  is 
so  fine  a  soldierly  flavour  about  it,  that  I  am  unwilling 
to  omit  a  word: 

Candahar,  April  18,  1842. 

Sib, 

I  have  been  favoured  with  your  letters  of  the  let  and  10th 
instant.  I  have  also  heard  of  the  affair  you  had  with  the  enemy 
on  the  28th  ultimo,  and  deeply  regret  the  result.  I  have  atten- 
tively perused  the  government  despatch  of  the  15th  ultimo  for- 
warded through  you.  I  have  looked  at  our  position  in  Afghan- 
istan in  every  point  of  view  that  my  judgment,  aided  by  three 
years'  experience  of  its  people,  will  admit  of.  I  now  deliberately 
note  what  I  consider  to  be  necessary  to  carry  out  the  intention  of 
the  Supreme  Government  and  to  assert  and  uphold  the  honour  of 
our  country.  Even  should  the  government  ultimately  determine 
on  withdrawing  the  British  troops  from  the  right  of  the  Indus, 
it  would  be  impossible  to  retire  the  troops  below  the  passes  before 
October.  The  troops  at  Candahar  are  four  months  in  arrears,  and 
we  have  not  one  rupee  in  the  treasury.  In  the  event  of  much 
field  service  we  should  run  short  of  musket  ammunition,  and  we 

•  General  Nott  to  General  England :        f  General  England  to  General  Nott : 
April  2,  1842.     MS,  Records.  April  10,  1842.    MS.  Records. 


NOTT's  letters  to  ENGLAND,  443 

are  without  medicine  for  the  sick  and  wounded.  I  think  it  ab- 
solutely necessary  that  a  strong  brigade  of  2500  men  should  be 
immediately  pushed  from  Quettah  to  Candahar  with  the  supplies 
noted  in  the  foregoing  paragraph.  I  therefore  have  to  acquaint 
you  that  I  will  direct  a  brigade  of  three  regiments  of  infantry,  a 
troop  of  horse  artillery,  with  a  body  of  cavalry,  to  march  from 
Candahar  on  the  morning  of  the  25th  instant.  This  force  will 
certainly  be  at  Ghummun,  at  the  northern  foot  of  the  Kojuck,  on 
the  morning  of  the  1st  of  May,  and  possibly  on  the  30th  of  this 
month.  I  shall,  therefore,  fully  rely  on  your  marching  a  brigade 
from  Quettah  so  that  it  may  reach  the  southern  dde  of  {he  pass 
on  the  above-mentioned  date.  I  believe  there  can  be  no  difficulty 
whatever  in  accomplishing  this,  nor  of  crossing  the  Kojuck  with- 
out loss,  provided  the  heights  are  properly  crowned  on  either  side. 
I  have  crossed  it  three  times  in  command  of  troops,  and  I  know 
that  what  I  now  state  is  correct.  There  can  be  no  danger  in 
passing  through  Fisheen  provided  a  careful  and  well-ordered 
march  is  preserved,  and  patroles  and  flanking  parties  of  horse  are 
thrown  well  out.  The  people  of  this  country  cannot  withstand 
our  troops  in  the  open  field.  I  am  well  aware  that  war  cannot 
be  made  without  loss,  but  yet,  perhaps,  the  British  troops  can 
oppose  Asiatic  armies  without  defeat;  and  I  feel  and  know  that 
British  officers  should  never  despair  of  punishing  the  atrocious 
and  treacherous  conduct  of  a  brutal  enemy.  You  say  you  are  not 
aware  if  I  know  the  localities  of  Quettah.  I  know  them  well;  and 
I  hope  I  shall  be  excused  when  I  express  my  surprise  that  the 
authorities  at  Quettah  should  for  a  moment  have  thought  of 
throwing  up  breastworks  and  entrenching  that  straggling  and 
wretched  cantonment,  when  the  town  and  its  citadel  is  so  well 
calculated  for  every  purpose  which  can  render  a  post  at  all  desirable 
in  Shawl,  and  I  am  quite  certain  may  be  well  defended  by  500 
men.  Did  I  command  at  Quettah,  I  would  relinquish  the  canton- 
ment-^it  is  usless:  Quettah  is  not  a  place  for  a  large  body  of 
troops.  I  feel  obliged  to  you  for  pointing  out  the  many  difficulties 
attending  our  position,  but  you  are  aware  that  it  is  our  first  and 
only  duty  to  overcome  difficulties  when  the  national  honour  and 
military  reputation  is  so  deeply  concerned — nothing  can  be  ac- 
complished without  effort  and  perseverance.  In  the  last  para, 
of  your  letter  of  the  10th  instant,  I  have  only  to  observe  that  I 
have  not  yet  contemplated  falling  back.     Without  money  I  can 