


444  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAUAB. 

neither  pay  the  long  arrears  due  to  the  troops^  nor  procure  carriage 
for  field  operations.  I  deeply  regret  this  state  of  things,  which 
ought  to  have  been  attended  to  months  ago.  Had  this  been 
done,  I  should  now  have  been  on  my  march  to  Ghuznee.  I  shall 
folly  rely  on  your  brigade  being  at  Ae  Kojuck  on  the  Ist  of  May 
or  before.  This  letter  I  request  may  be  forwarded  to  Major 
Outram. 

W.  NoTT,  Major-GeneraL 

To  Major-General  Englaod,  commanding 
S.  F.  Force. 

P.S. — You  will  of  course  perceive  that  I  intend  your  brigade 
should  join  and  accompany  the  detachment  sent  from  this  to  Can- 
dahar.    I  have  no  cattle  for  treasure  or  stores. 

It  was  impossible  to  resist  the  urgency  of  this  appeal. 
The  orders  from  Candahar  were  not  to  be  misunder- 
stood. They  were  clear  as  the  notes  of  a  trumpet,  and 
ought  to  have  been  as  spirit-stirring.  England's  brigade 
now  began  to  prepare  for  a  forward  movement.  So  little, 
however,  had  it  been  anticipated  that  the  force  would 
ever  leave  Quettah,  that  the  officers  of  the  brigade  had 
been  buying  houses  and  settling  down  for  cantonment 
life.*  But  on  the  26th  of  April  England  broke  ground; 
and  on  the  28th — precisely  a  month  after  the  date  of 
his  disastrous  failure — was  again  before  Hykulzye.  The 
enemy,  emboldened  by  their  previous  success,  were 
posted  on  the  ground  they  had  occupied  before;  but 
they  soon  found  that  they  had  not  estimated  aright  the 
character  of  British  troops,  and  that  what  they  had  re- 
garded as  a  proof  of  their  own  superiority  in  the  field, 
was  an  accident  not  likely  to  be  repeated.  The  British 
troops  were  told  off  into  three  parties — one,  under  Major 
Simmons,  to  storm  the  hills  to  the  left ;  another,  under 
Captain  Woodburn,  to  attack  the  hill  on  the  right, 
where  the  disaster  of  the  previous  month  had  occurred ; 
and  a  third,  under  Major  Browne,  was  kept  in  reserve. 

*  Colonel  Stacy's  Narrative, 


ACTION  AT  HYKULZYE.  445 

When  they  had  taken  up  their  position,  the  guns  of 
Leslie's  battery  opened  with  good  effect  on  the  enemy; 
and  then  the  infantry  advanced  with  a  loud  "  hurrah" 
to  the  attack.  They  are  said  to  have  moved  forward 
"  as  steady  as  on  parade."*  The  coolness  and  courage 
of  the  infantry  soon  completed  what  the  admirable 
practice  of  the  guns  had  commenced.  The  enemy 
turned  and  fled.  Delamaine's  cavalry  were  then  slipped 
in  pursuit;  and  there  was  an  end  of  the  defence  of 
Hykulzye. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th,  England's  brigade  entered 
the  defile  leading  to  the  Kojuck  Pass.  Here,  for  some 
unaccountable  reason,  the  General  halted  the  column, 
dismounted  from  his  horse,  called  for  a  chair,  and  sate 
himself  down.  In  vain  Colonel  Stacy  implored  him  to 
move  on.  In  vain  he  urged  that  the  Candahar  troops 
were  entering  the  pass  from  the  other  side,  and  that  all 
the  glory  of  the  enterprise  would  be  theirs.  In  vain 
Major  Waddington,  the  engineer,  pressed  the  same  ad- 
vice on  the  General.  The  Bombay  force  was  locked-up 
at  the  entrance  to  the  pass,  whilst  Wymer,  with  the 
Bengal  regiments,  was  gallantly  crowning  the  Kojuck, 
and  reporting  everything  clear  for  the  advance  of  the 
Quettah ,  brigade.  The  Sepoys  of  those  three  noble 
regiments — the  2nd,  the  16th,  and  38th,  who  would 
have  followed  Wymer  wherever  he  pleased  to  lead  them 
— were  now  climbing  the  precipitous  ascents,  disencum- 
bered of  whatever  might  clog  their  movements,f  and 