

What  those  measures  were  it  is  imnecessary  to  re- 
peat. In  the  last  letter  written  by  Lord  Auckland's 
administration  to  the  secret  committee — ^it  bears  date 
February  19,  1842— the  Govemor-General  in  Council 
said:  "  Since  we  have  heard  of  the  misfortimes  in  the 
Khybur  Pass,  and  have  been  convinced  that  the  diffi- 
culties  at  present  opposed  to  us  and  in  the  actual  state 
of  our  preparations  we  could  not  expect,  at  least  in  this 
year,  to  maintain  a  position  in  the  Jellalabad  districts 
for  any  effective  purpose,  we  have  made  our  directions 
in  regard  to  withdrawal  from  Jellalabad  clear  and  posi- 


LORD  ELLENBOROUGH.  457 

live,  and  we  shall  rejoice  to  learn  that  Major-General 
Pollock  will  have  anticipated  these  more  express  orders 
by  confining  his  efforts  to  the  same  objects."  And  on 
the  24th  of  the  same  month — in  one  of  the  last  public 
documents  of  any  importance  written  imder  the  instruc- 
tion of  Lord  Auckland — a  letter  to  General  Pollock, 
that  officer  is  distinctly  informed  that  "  the  great  pre- 
sent object  of  your  proceedings  at  Peshawur  is,  beyond 
the  safe  withdrawal  of  the  force  at  Jellalabad,  that  of 
watching  events,  of  keeping  up  such  communications  as 
may  be  admissible  with  the  several  parties  who  may 
acquire  power  in  the  northern  portion  of  Afghanistan, 
of  committing  yourself  permanently  with  none  of  these 
parties,  but  also  of  declaring  positively  against  none  of 
them,  while  you  are  collecting  the  most  accurate  infor- 
mation of  their  relative  strength  and  purposes  for  report 
to  the  government,  and  pursuing  the  measures  which 
you  may  find  in  the  powers  for  procuring  the  safe  re- 
turn of  our  troops  and  people  detained  beyond  the 
Khybur  Pass."*  These  were  the  parting  instructions  of 
the  old  Governor-General.  Lord  EUenborough  found 
matters  in  this  state  when  he  assumed  the  reins  of  office ; 
and  every  one  was  now  eager  to  ascertain  what  mea- 
sures the  new  ruler  would  adopt. 

The  first  public  document  of  any  importance  to  which 
he  attache^,  his  name  was  a  letter  to  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  It  was  a  letter  firom  the  Governor-General  in 
Council,  dated  the  15th  of  March.  It  is  a  calm  and 
able  review  of  all  the  circumstances  attending  our  posi- 
tion beyond  the  Indus,  and  is  as  firee  firom  feebleness 
and  indecision  on  the  one  side,  as  it  is  firom  haste  and 
intemperance  on  the  other.  Lord  EUenborough  at  once 
decided  that  the  conduct  of  Shah  Soojah  was,  at  least, 

*  Mr.  Maddock  to  General  Pollock:  February  24, 1842.    Published Piq)ers. 


458 


THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 


suspicious,*  and  that  the  British  Government  were  no 
longer  compelled  ^^  to  peril  its  armies,  and  with  its  armies 
the  Indian  Empire,"  in  support  of  the  tripartite  treaty. 
Therefore,  he  said,  "  Whatever  course  we  may  hereafter 
take  must  rest  solely  upon  military  considerations,  and 
hence,  in  the  first  instance,  regard  to  the  safety  of  the 
detached  bodies  of  our  troops  at  Jellalabad,  at  Ghuznee, 
at  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  and  Candahar;  to  the  security  of 
our  troops,  now  in  the  field,  from  all  unnecessary  risk ; 
and  finally,  to  the  re-establishment  of  our  military  re- 
putation by  the  infliction  of  some  signal  and  decisive 
blow  upon  the  A%hans,  which  may  make  it  appear  to 
them,  and  to  our  own  subjects  and  to  our  allies,  that  we 
have  the  power  of  inflicting  punishment  upon  those  who 
commit  atrocities  and  violate  their  faith,  and  that  we 
withdraw  ultimately  firom  A%hani8tan,  not  fix)m  any 
deficiency  of  means  to  maintain  our  position,  but  because 
we  are  satisfied  that  the  Eang  we  have  set  up  has  not,  as 
we  were  erroneously  led  to  imagine,  the  support  of  the 
nation  over  which  he  has  been  placed."  Here,  in  a  few 
sentences,  was  mapped  out  the  policy  recommended  by 
such  men  as  Mr.  Robertson  and  Mr.  Clerk,  the  policy 
which  Pollock  and  Nott  were  eager  to  reduce  to  action, 
and  which,  with  few  exceptions,  the  entire  community 
of  British-India  were  clamorously  expressing  their  de- 
sire to  see  brought  into  vigorous  effect. 