

*  **  A  messenger  from  Shah  Per-  AprU    S,     1842.      MS.    Corrupm' 

sund  Khan  of  Laush  reports  tliat  two  dmnc^^ 

ofthe  horsemen  sent  down  to  Kohun-       t  Kohun-dil-Khan  did  not  make 

dil-Khan  in  January  by  Meerza  Ah-  his  appearance  in  person  in  tiie  Can- 

med,  returned  lately   and  ga?e  out  dahar  territory  till  the  beginning  of 

that  they  were  onl^  a  few  days  in  1849,  when  we  had  announced  to  the 

advance  of  the    Sirdars,   who   had  Persian  GrOTemment  that  we   had 

left    Shuhur-i-Babek    secretly,    and  withdrawn   behind  the  SuUej,  and 

were   coming  here  vid   Seistan."  —  were  indifferent  as  to  what  became 

[ilfajot*  RawUnson  to  Oeneral  NoU:  of  the  Sirdars  or  their  country. 


THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD.  455 


CHAPTER  IIL 

[April— June:  1842.] 

The  Halt  at  Jellalabad — Positions  of  Pollock  and  Nott — Lord  EUenborongh 
— Opening  Measures  of  his  Administration — Departure  for  Allahabad—* 
His  Indecision — The  Withdrawal  Orders — Their  Effects— The  "  Missing 
Letter'* — Negotiations  for  the  Release  of  the  Prisoners. 

Pollock  and  Nott  were  now  eager  to  advance.    On 
both  sides  of  Afghanistan  a  junction  had  been  effected 
which  enabled  the  two  generals  to  maintain  a  bold  front 
in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  to  over-awe  the  surrounding 
country,   and  to   inspire   with    new  hopes    and  new 
courage  the  hearts  of  those  whom  the  failures  of  Wild 
and  England  had  filled  with  despondency  and  alarm. 
The  English  in  India  never  doubted  that  the  conduct  of 
operations  in  Afghanistan  was  now  in  the  hands  of  men 
equal  to  the  duty  which  had  been  entrusted  to   them. 
They  had  full  confidence  in  Pollock  and  Nott.    There 
were  now  two  fine  forces  of  all  arms,  European  and 
Native,  in  good  health  and  good  spirits,  eager  to  advance 
on  Caubul,  and  sure  to  carry  victory  before  them.    It 
seemed  that  the  tide  had  now  begun  to  turn  in  our 
favour.     As  the  hot  weather  came  on,  the  spirits  of  the 
Anglo-Indian  community  rose  with  the  mercury  in  the 
thermometer;   everybody  said   that  we  had  seen   the 
worst ;  and  everybody  looked  for  the  speedy  lustration 


456  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

of  the  national  honour  which  had  been  so  hideously 
defiled. 

But  as  the  confidence  of  the  public  in  the  generals 
and  their  armies  rose,  the  confidence  of  the  public  in  the 
man  upon  whom  had  now  devolved  the  great  duty  of 
shaping  the  counsels  of  the  generals,  and  directing  the 
movements  of  the  armies,  began  rapidly  to  decline.  On 
the  28th  of  February,  Lord  EUenborough  had  landed  at 
Calcutta  and  taken  the  oaths  of  office.  The  guns  on 
the  saluting  battery  of  Fort  William  roared  forth  their 
welcome  to  the  new  Governor-General,  and  drowned 
the  voices  of  those  who  were  assembling  in  the  Town- 
Hall  to  do  honour  to  the  departing  ruler.  The  first 
intelligence  of  the  disasters  that  had  overtaken  our  arms 
in  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus,  had  been  telegraphed 
to  him  from  Fort  St.  George,  when  standing  on  the 
deck  of  the  Cambrian  in  the  Madras  Roads,  he  looked 
out  upon  the  white  surf,  the  low  beach,  and  the  dazzling 
houses  of  the  southern  presidency.  He  arrived,  there- 
fore, at  the  seat  of  the  Supreme  Government  with  little 
to  learn  beyond  the  measures  which  his  predecessor  had 
sanctioned  for  the  extrication  of  the  emperiled  affairs 
of  the  British-Indian  Empire  from  the  thicket  of  diffi- 
culty that  surrounded  them. 