

♦  MS.  Correspondence. 


THE  PROPOSED  PBOCLAMATION.         453 

the  voice  of  the  country  in  their  favour,  they  would  be 
&r  more  likely,  I  think,  to  succeed  in  bribing  Ghazees 
to  kill  our  officers,  than  we  would  be  in  tempting  any 
of  the  Afghans  to  seize  the  persons  of  the  proscribed 
individuals  and  hand  them  over  to  us  for  execution.    I 
cannot  help  thinking  also,  that  even  supposing  the  pro- 
clamation to  be  expressly  stated  and  understood  to  aim 
only  at  the  liberty  of  the  two  heads  of  the  Candahar 
rebellion,  still  it  would   operate  rather  to  our   detri- 
ment than  our  advantage,  and  would  tend  greatly  to  in- 
crease the  inveteracy  of  our  present  contest  with  the 
A%hans.    It  would,  probably,  be  met  by  the  kidnapping 
of  our  own  officers  at  this  place,  and  I  suspect  it  would 
be  fraught  with  danger  to  our  unfortunate  countrymen 
in  confinement  at  Lughman,  at  Caubul,  and  at  Ghuznee. 
Should  you  still,  however,  desire  to  make  the  attempt  to 
obtain  possession  of  the  persons  of  Meerza  Ahmed  and 
Mahomed  Atta,  I  shall  be  happy  to  render  literally  into 
Persian  any  draft  of  a  proclamation  which  you  will  send 
me,  and  to  give  the  proclamation  all  possible  publicity." 
The    arguments  of  Rawlinson  prevailed.     But  soon 
another  source  of  inquietude    arose.     The  ex-chief  of 
Candahar,  Eohun-dil-Ehan,  appeared  to  be  again  turn- 
ing his  thoughts  towards  the  government  of  his  old 
principality.*    He   had,  ever  since  his  expulsion  [from 


*  **  Letters  are  said  to  have  been  GovenimeDt,  nothing  is  more  likely 

received  from  the  ex-  Sirdars  announc-  than  that  they  should  make  an  attempt 

ing  their  intended  journey  to  this  to  recover  Candahar;  and  I  should 

place,  according  to  Meerza  Ahmed's  greatly  dread  their  appearance  on  this 

invitation  which  was  sent  to  them  in  frontier,  for  we  are  enabled  to  keep 

January  last.     Mahomed  Reza  Khan  up  the  form,  and  something  of  the 

of  Seistan  is  also  said  to  have  promised  power  of  a  local  government,  almost 

to  assist  them  with  100  camels,  and  solely  from  the  adherence  to  us  of  the 

to  send  horsemen  to  escort  them  to  old  Barukzye  retainers — people  on 

this  frontier.     This  news  appears  to  whose  fidelity  we  could  not  possibly 

be  vraiseniblahle  in  the  extreme.    If  depend  if  the  Sirdars  took  the  field 

the  ex-Sirdars   can  get  away  from  against  us.** — [Major  Rawlinson* $  MS, 

Shuhur-i-Babek,  either  with  or  with-  Journal:  AprxL  4,  1842.] 
out  the  connivance  of  the  Persian 


454  AFFAIBS  AT  GANDAUAB. 

A%hanistan,  been  quietly  domiciliated  at  Shuhur-i- 
Babek,  in  the  Persian  territories^  between  Shiraz  and 
Eirman;  but  now  it  appeared  that  he  had  sent  an 
agent  into  Seistan  to  communicate  with  his  Candahar 
adherents;  and  was  otherwise  intriguing  for  the  re« 
covery  of  the  dominion  he  had  lost.  Not  without 
some  difficulty  had  Bawlinson  throughout  this  season 
of  convulsion  contrived  to  maintain  a  recognised  sys- 
tem of  government^  in  the  name  of  Shah  Soojah. 
The  internal  administration  of  the  country  had  never 
been  suspended;  but  it  was  only  through  the  agency 
of  some  of  the  old  Barukzye  functionaries  that  the 
British  political  chief  had  succeeded,  in  the  midst  of 
such  disturbing  influences,  in  carrying  on  the  govern- 
ment of  Western  Afghanistan.  But  there  was  little 
hope  of  his  continuing  to  exercise  this  influence  if  the 
old  Barukzye  Sirdars  again  appeared  on  the  stage. 
Already  had  Eohun-dil-Ehan  sent  letters  to  Meerza 
Ahmed  appointing  him  his  Wakeel  in  all  matters  of 
revenue.  It  was  even  reported  at  one  time  that  the 
ex-Sirdars  were  only  a  few  marches  from  Candahar.* 
These  anxieties,  however,  were  but  short-lived.  After- 
intelligence  from  Persia  encouraged  the  belief  that  the 
Persian  Government  would  restrain  the  ex-Sirdars  from 
crossing  the  frontier.f  But  other  sources  of  inquietude 
and  annoyance  soon  came  to  take  their  place.  The 
heaviest  blow  of  all  was  now  about  to  descend  upon 
them.     It  came  from  the  Supreme  Grovemment  itself. 