


460  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

the  KhybuT  Pass  and  forced  his  way  to  Ali-Musjid. 
Sale  had  defeated  Akbar  Ehan  in  a  general  action 
on  the  plains  of  Jellalabad.  But  England  had  been 
beaten  back  at  Hykulzye,  and  withdrawn  his  brigade  to 
Quettah.  AU  these  things  the  Grovemor-General  now 
reported  to  the  Secret  Committee,  in  a  despatch  which 
can  by  no  means  be  regarded  as  a  model  of  historical 
truth.  Writing  again  on  the  following  day  to  the  home 
authorities,  he  stated  that  he  had  "  by  no  means  altered 
his  deliberate  opinion  that  it  is  expedient  to  withdraw 
the  troops  under  Major-General  Pollock  and  those  under 
Major-General  Nott,  at  the  earliest  practicable  period, 
into  positions  wherein  they  may  have  certain  and  easy 
communication  with  India,"  He  had  already  written 
to  General  Nott,  instructing  him  to  take  immediate  mea- 
sures to  withdraw  the  garrison  of  Khelat-i-GhUzye  and 
evacuate  Candahar.  "  Tou  will  evacuate,"  wrote  the 
Chief  Secretary,  "  the  city  of  Candahar.  .  .  .  Tou  will 
proceed  to  take  up  a  position  at  Quettah,  until  the 
season  may  enable  you  to  retire  upon  Sukkur.  The 
object  of  the  above-directed  measure  is  to  withdraw 
all  our  forces  to  Sukkur  at  the  earliest  period  at  which 
the  season  and  other  circumstances  may  permit  you  to 
take  up  a  new  position  there.  The  manner  of  effecting 
this  now  necessary  object  is,  however,  left  to  your  dis- 
cretion.*'*  And  so  the  Governor-General,  who  in  Cal- 
cutta had  determined  to  "re-establish  our  military  repu- 
tation by  the  infliction  of  some  signal  and  decisive  blow 
upon  the  Afghans,"  could  now  hardly  write  a  sentence 
suggestive  of  anything  else  but  withdrawal  and  eva- 
cuation. 

How  it  happened  that,  within  the  space  of  Uttle  more 
than  a  month,  so  great  a  change  had  come  over  the 

*  Mr.  Maddock  to  General  Nott:  April  19, 1842.    Published  Papers. 


WITHDRAWAL  ORDERS.  461 

counsels  of  the  Governor-General,  it  would  be  difficult 
to  determine,  if  he  himself  had  not  furnished  the  neces- 
sary explanation.  "  The  severe  check,"  he  wrote  to  the 
Commander-in-Chief,  "  experienced  by  Brigadier  Eng- 
land's small  corps  on  the  28th  ultimo — an  event  disas- 
trous as  it  was  unexpected — and  of  which  we  have  not 
yet  information  to  enable  us  to  calculate  all  the  results 
— has  a  tendency  so  to  cripple  the  before  limited  means 
of  movement  and  of  action  which  were  possessed  by 
General  Nott,  as  to  render  it  expedient  to  take  imme- 
diate measures  for  the  ultimate  safety  of  that  officer's 
corps,  by  withdrawing  it,  at  the  earliest  practicable 
period,  from  its  advanced  position  into  nearer  commu- 
nication with  India." 