

moderate  measure  of  conciliation." —  Islam  "  wrote  Rawlinson  in  his  Joiir- 

(Major    Rawlinson's  MS,    Journal)  nal,  '*  has  plunged  him  into  personal 

Saloo  Khan,  however,  in  the  sequel  difficulties.     He  has  beeu  twice  at- 

rendered  good  service  and  proved  his  tacked  by  Mahomed  Sadig  and  Meer 

fidelity  in  the  face  of  strenuous  on-  Afzul,   and   has  been  wounded,  to- 

position  from  some  of  the  other  chiera:  gether    with    his    brother    and   his 

'*  His   falling  off  from  the  cause  of  nephew." 

VOL.  II.  2  G 


450  AEFAIBS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

Still  it  was  obvious  that  whilst  Meerza  Ahmed  and 
Atta  Mahomed  continued  to  flit  about  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Candahar,  there  was  no  prospect  of  permanent 
tranquillity.  Lesser  chiefs  might  tender  their  submis- 
sion, but  whilst  these,  the  main-springs  of  the  great 
insurrectionary  movement,  were  employing  their  talents 
and  exercising  their  influence  in  hostility  against  us,  there 
was  little  chance  of  any  effective  movement  for  the  sup- 
pression of  rebellion  m  Western  Afghanistan.  Armed 
with  authority  from  the  Shah  himself,  granted  prior 
to  the  great  outbreak,  Meerza  Ahmed  was  raising  re- 
venue in  the  name  of  the  local  government,  and  expend- 
ing the  money  thus  collected  on  the  maintenance  of  the 
war.  It  appeared  expedient,  therefore,  to  Nott,  to  cause 
a  proclamation  to  be  issued,  cautioning  the  inhabitants 
against  paying  revenue  to  the  Meerza.  This  was  a 
measure  of  unquestionable  propriety  ;  but  Nott  was 
disposed  to  go  far  beyond  it.  He  was  eager  to  offer  a 
reward  to  any  one  who  would  bring  in  either  Meerza 
Ahmed  or  Atta  Mahomed  to  his  camp ;  and  on  the  7th 
of  April  he  wrote  to  Rawlinson  on  the  subject:  "  I  wish 
a  proclamation  to  be  immediately  issued,  prohibiting 
any  person  paying  revenue  to  Meerza  Ahmed  or  to 
Sufder  Jung,  and  making  them  to  understand,  that 
whatever  sums  they  pay  to  these  chiefs  will  be  their 
own  loss,  as  the  regular  revenue  due  to  his  Majesty 
the  Shah  will  be  exacted  jfrom  them  by  the  authorities 
of  Candahar.  I  will  thank  you  in  the  proclamation  to 
offer  a  reward  of  5000  rupees  to  any  person  who  will 
bring  in  either  Meerza  Ahmed  or  Mahomed  Atta.  The 
sooner  this  is  done  the  better.  Let  me  see  the  draft  of 
the  proclamation  before  it  is  issued."* 

Startled  at  this  bold  and  questionable  proposition, 
Rawlinson,  having  asked  in  the  first  place  whether  the 
proclamation  was  to  be  issued  in  the  Greneral's  own 

♦  MS,  Correspondence, 


CORRESPONDENCE  OF  RAWUNSON  AND  NOTT.        451 

name,  or  in  that  of  Prince  Timour,  and  having  sug- 
gested that  on  a  question  of  such  importance  as  that  of 
the  raising  of  revenue  the  wishes  of  the  Prince  should 
be  previously  ascertained,  went  on  to  speak  in  his  letter, 
of  the  proposed  rewards.  "  Is  the  reward  of  5000 
rupees,"  he  asked,  "  also  offered  to  any  one  bringing  in 
Mahomed  Atta  or  Meerza  Ahmed,  to  apply  to  these 
people  dead  or  alive,  or  is  it  merely  to  be  given  in  the 
event  of  any  of  the  A^hans  bringing  them  in  as 
prisoners  ?  I  do  not  think  the  Prince  would  have  any 
objection  to  issue  the  proclamation  about  revenue,  and 
to  signify  to  all  his  subjects  that  he  has  appointed 
Meerza  Wulee  Mahomed  Ehan  to  the  management  of 
this  department,  notwithstanding  he  is  aware  that  papers 
of  an  exactly  opposite  tenor,  issued  by  his  father,  are  in 
Meerza  Ahmed's  hands;  but  I  greatly  doubt  his  aqui- 
escing  in  the  subject  of  the  reward,  as,  whatever  may  be 
the  secret  feelings  of  Mahomedans  regarding  betrayal  or 
assassination,  it  is  altogether  repugnant  to  their  habits  to 
avow  such  objects  in  a  public  proclamation."* 