

This  letter  to  the  Commander-in-Chief  was  written  in 
Calcutta;  and  it  bears  the  signatures  of  the  different 
members  of  the   Supreme  Council  of  India — of  Mr. 


*  "The  information  received  with 
respect  to  the  conduct  of  Shah  Soojah 
during  the  late  transactions  is  nece»- 
sarily  imperfect,  and,  moreover,  of  a 
somewhat  contradictory  character. 
It  is  not  probable  that  the  insurrec- 
tion against  our  troops  should  have 
originated  with  him.    It  is  most  pro« 


bable,  and  it  is  almost  proved,  that 
he  has  adopted  it,  and,  powerless  in 
himself,  is  prepared  to  side  with 
either  party,  by  which  he  may  hope 
to  be  maintained  upon  his  precarious 
throne." — [Crovemor-Generalin  Coun- 
cil to  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs:  March  15, 
1642.     PMished  Papen.'] 


PROCEEDINGS  OF  LORD  ELLENBOROUGH.      459 

Wilberforce  Bird,  of  Greneral  Casment,  and  Mr.  H.  T. 
Prinsep.  Nothing  like  it  was  ever  written  afterwards. 
On  the  6th  of  April  Lord  Ellenborough  left  Calcutta. 
It  seemed  desirable  that  he  should  be  nearer  the  fiontier 
— ^nearer  the  Commander-in-Chie£  The  movement,  at 
all  events,  indicated  an  intention  to  act  with  prompti- 
tude and  energy.  Already  had  the  new  Grovemor- 
Greneral  startled  the  sober,  slow-going  functionaries  of 
Calcutta  by  his  restless,  and,  as  they  thought,  obtrusive 
activity.  He  seemed  resolved  to  see  everything  for 
lum«lf-to  do  everyUu.g  fer  him^lf.  ASTve-y. 
thing  had  been  done  wrongly  by  others;  and  now  he 
was  going  to  do  it  rightly  himself.  All  this  created  a 
great  convulsion  in  the  government  offices;  but  out  of 
doors,  and  especially  in  military  circles,  men  said  that 
the  new  Grovemor-Greneral  was  a  statesman  of  the  right 
stamp — ^bold,  vigorous,  decided,  thoroughly  in  earnest, 
no  fearer  of  responsibility — quick  to  conceive,  prompt 
to  execute — just  the  man  to  meet  with  bold  compre- 
hensive measures  such  a  crisis  as  had  now  arisen.  A 
few  sober-minded  men  of  the  old  school  shook  their 
heads,  and  faltered  out  expressions  of  alarm  lest  the 
vigour  of  the  new  Grovemor-Greneral  should  swell  into 
extravagance,  and  enei^gy  get  the  better  of  discretion. 
But  no  one  ever  doubted  that  the  leading  ideas  in  the 
Grovemor-Greneral's  mind  were  the  chastisement  of  the 
offending  A^hans  and  the  lustration  of  our  national 
honour. 

After  a  day  or  two  spent  at  Barrackpore,  Lord  Ellen- 
borough  put  himself  in  his  palanquin  and  proceeded  to 
Allahabad.  Halting  at  Benares,  he  addressed  the  Secret 
Committee  on  the  21st  of  April.  Much  stirring  intelli- 
gence had  met  him  as  he  advanced.  Grood  and  evil 
were  blended  together  in  the  tidings  that  reached  him 
between  Calcutta  and  Benares.     Pollock  had  entered 