

To  this  Nott  replied  that,  as  a  matter  of  course,  he 
intended  the  proclamation  regarding  the  revenue  to 
be  issued  in  the  name  of  the  Prince.  "  In  regard,"  he 
added,  "  to  the  reward  for  the  apprehension  of  Meerza 
Ahmed,  that  is  a  different  thing;  and  if  the  Prince  will 
not  consent  to  include  it  in  the  proclamation  regarding 
the  revenue,  where  it  ought  to  appear,  I  will  issue  a 
separate  proclamation.  Meerza  Ahmed  has  murdered 
my  camp-followers  and  Sepoys  in  the  most  cruel  and 
atrocious  manner,  and  it  is  my  duty,  merely  as  com- 
mander of  the  force,  to  offer  a  reward  to  any  person 
who  will  bring  him  in.  Mahomed  Atta  has,  like  a 
monster,  murdered  our  officers  in  their  houses,  and  cut 
to  pieces  our  unarmed  and  inoffensive  camp-followers. 
I  will  show  no  mercy  to  these  men.    My  note  said 

*  MS.  CorretpoMkHa, 

2q2 


452  AFFAIRS  AT  CANDAHAR. 

nothing  about '  dead  or  alive/  and  I  thought  clearly  in- 
dicated bringing  them  in  prisoners.  Why  you  make  use 
of  the  word  *  assassination '  I  know  not  —  but  I  do 
know  that  it  ought  not  to  be  used  by  Englishmen  in 
any  public  document,  and  therefore  it  could  never  enter 
into  my  mind  when  speaking  of  a  proclamation.  Meerza 
Ahmed  is  collecting  what  he  is  pleased  to  call  revenue, 
to  enable  him  to  raise  men  to  attack  the  force  under  my 
command.     Such  plunder  ought  to  be  put  a  stop  to."  * 

Then  Rawlinson  answered,  that  he  regretted  that  the 
unguarded  use  of  the  ugly  word  "  assassination,"  which 
he  only  intended  to   convey  the   meaning  which  the 
Prince  might   put   upon    a   general   offer    of   reward 
for  the  persons  of  the  proscribed  chiefs,  should  have 
given  any  offence  to  the  General ;  but  that  he  trusted 
Nott  would  excuse  him  if  he  made  a  few  remarks  upon 
the  subject  of  the  proposed  proclamation.     "  We  are 
accused,  and  perhaps  suspected,"  he  wrote,  "  of  having 
lately  suborned  people  to  attempt  the  life  of  Mahomed 
Akbar  Khan ;  and  Captain  Nicolson  is  known  to  have 
offered  a  high  reward  on  one  occasion  for  the  head  of 
the  Gooroo;  and  it  would  be  very  difficult,  therefore,  it 
appears  to  me,  in  our  present  proclamation,  to  get  the 
A%hans  to  appreciate  the  difference  between  the  offer  of 
a  reward  for  the  betrayal  of  Meerza  Ahmed  and  Ma- 
homed Atta  into  our  hands,  to  be   executed  by  the 
Prince  (as  every  one  must  know  they  would  be)  on 
their  arrival  at   Candahar,   and  for    anticipating  this 
sentence  by  taking  their  lives  on  the  spot,  wherever  a 
man  might  be  found  bold  enough  to  attempt  the  deed. 
Now,  if  any  misunderstanding  on  this  subject  existed,  and 
we  were  believed  by  our  proclamation  to  be  aiming  at 
the  lives  rather  than  at  the  liberty  of  Meerza  Ahmed 
and  Mahomed  Atta,  it  would  be  only  natural  for  them 
to  retaliate,  and,  aided  by  religious  enthusiasm,  and  with 