

On  this  same  19th  of  April  the  Governor-General 
addressed  another  letter  to  the  Commander-in-Chief, 
relating  to  the  position  of  General  Pollock.  "  The  only 
question,"  wrote  the  Chief  Secretary,  "  will  be,  in  which 
position  will  Major -General  Pollock's  force  remain 
during  the  hot  months,  with  most  security  to  itself,  and 
with  the  least  pressure  upon  the  health  of  the  troops? 
its  ultimate  retirement  within  the  Indus  being  a  point 
determined  upon,  because  the  reasons  for  our  first  cross- 
ing the  Indus  have  ceased  to  exist."  The  Commander- 
in-Chief  was  then  directed  to  issue  his  own  instructions 
to  General  Pollock ;  and  another  letter  was  immediately 
afterwards  addressed  to  him  (tfie  third  despatched  to 
Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  on  this  prolific  19th  of  April),  in 
which,  after  speaking  of  the  withdrawal  orders  ad- 
dressed to  Pollock  and  Nott,  the  Governor-General 
goes  on  to  say:  "It  will,  however,  likewise  be  for  con- 
sideration whether  our  troops,  having  been  redeemed 
from  the  state  of  peril  in  which  they  have  been  placed 
in  Afghanistan,  and  it  may  be  still  hoped  not  without 


462  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

the  infliction  of  some  severe  blow  upon  the  Afghan 
army,  it  would  be  justifiable  again  to  push  them  for- 
ward for  no  other  object  than  that  of  revenging  our  losses, 
and  of  re-esfablishing,  in  all  its  original  brilliancy,  our 
military  character." 

It  was  Lord  Ellenborough's  often-declared  opinion 
that  "  India  was  won  by  the  sword,  and  must  be  main- 
tained by  the  sword."  In  his  despatch  of  the  15th  of 
March  he  had  written :  "  In  war,  reputation  is  strength." 
And  yet  we  now  find  him  questioning  the  expediency 
of  imdertaking  operations  beyond  the  Indus  with  "  no 
other  object  than  that  of  re-establishing  our  military 
character."  If  we  hold  India  by  the  sword,  and  repu- 
tation is  strength,  a  statesman  need  hardly  look  for  any 
object  beyond  the  establishment  of  that  reputation, 
which  is  the  strength  by  which  alone  our  empire  in 
India  is  maintained. 

But  England's  miscarriage  at  Hykulzye  had  not  only 
driven  all  the  forward  feeling  out  of  Lord  Ellenborough, 
but  had  blunted  his  logical  acumen  and  deadened  all  his 
feelings  of  compassion.  He  seems  to  have  forgotten  that 
at  this  time  there  was  a  party  of  English  prisoners  in  the 
hands  of  the  Afghans — that  the  generals  who  had  com- 
manded our  army  at  Caubul — the  widow  of  the  mur- 
dered Envoy — the  brave-hearted  wife  of  the  commander 
of  the  illustrious  garrison  of  Jellalabad — the  man  who 
had  rescued  Herat  from  the  grasp  of  the  Persian,  and 
done  the  only  thing  that  had  yet  been  done  to  roll  back 
from  the  gates  of  India  the  tide  of  Western  invasion — 
with  many  more  brave  officers  and  tender  women,  were 
captives  in  the  rude  fortresses  of  the  Afghan  Sirdars. 
The  Governor-General  seems  to  have  forgotten  that 
there  were  prisoners  to  be  rescued ;  and  he  doubted  the 
expediency  of  undertaking  operations  merely  for  the 