


INSTRUCTIONS  OP  THE  COMMANDBtl-IN-CHIEF,       463 

re-establishment  of  our  military  reputation — although 
upon  that  reputation,  in  his  own  opinion,  our  tenure  of 
India  depended. 

The  request  conveyed  to  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  in  the 
government  letter  of  the  1 9th  of  April  met  with  prompt 
compliance;  and  on  the  29th,  the  Commander-in-Chief, 
who  was  then  at  Simlah,  instructed  General  Pollock  to 
withdraw  every  British  soldier  from  Jellalabad  to  Pe- 
shawur.  "  The  only  circumstances,"  he  added,  "  which 
can  authorise  delay  in  obeying  this  order,  are:  1st.  That 
you  may  have  brought  a  negotiation  for  the  release  of 
the  prisoners  lately  confined  at  Budeeabad  to  such  a 
point  that  you  might  risk  its  happy  accomplishment  by 
withdrawing.  2ndly.  That  you  may  have  attached  a 
Ughtly  equipped  force  to  rescue  them.  3rdly.  That  the 
enemy  at  Caubul  may  be  moving  a  force  to  attack  you. 
In  this  improbable  case  should  any  respectable  number 
of  troops  have  descended  into  the  plain  below  Jugdul- 
luck  with  that  intent,  it  would  be  most  advisable  to 
inflict  such  a  blow  upon  them  as  to  make  them  long 
remember  your  parting  effort."  Of  these  instructions 
the  Grovemor-General  "  entirely  approved ;"  and  on  the 
6th  of  May  he  wrote  to  Greneral  Pollock,  sajring:  "  They 
are  in  accordance  with  the  general  principles  laid  down 
by  his  Lordship  for  your  guidance,  and  you  will  execute 
them  to  the  best  of  your  ability,  having  regard  always 
to  the  health  of  your  troops  and  to  the  efficiency  of 
your  army." 

In  the  interval,  however,  between  the  19th  of  April 
and  the  6th  of  May,  the  Governor-General  having  some- 
what shaken  off  the  imeasy  sensation  which  the  disaster 
at  Hykulzye  seems  to  have  engendered  in  his  mind,  and 
having  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  phantoms 
which  had  so  intimidated  him  had  not  struck  terror  into 
the  brave  heart  of  General  Pollock,  had  written  to  the 


464  t6e  halt  at  jellalabad. 

General,  anticipating  the  possibility  of  his  having  ad- 
vanced upon  Caubul. 

"  The  aspect  of  affairs  in  Upper  Afghanistan,"  he  wrote 
on  the  28th  of  April,  "  appears  to  be  such,  according  to 
the  last  advices  received  by  the  Governor-General,  that 
his  Lordship  cannot  but  contemplate  the  possibility  of 
your  having  been  led,  by  the  absence  of  serious  opposi- 
tion  on  the  part  of  any  army  in  the  field,  by  the  divi- 
sions amongst  the  A%han  chiefs,  and  by  the  natural 
desire  you  must,  in  common  with  every  true  soldier, 
have  of  displaying  again  the  British   flag  in  triumph 
upon  the  scene  of  our  late  disasters,  to  advance  upon  and 
occupy  the  city  of  Caubul.     If  that  event  should  have 
occurred,  you  will  imderstand  that  it  will  in  no  respect 
vary  the  view  which  the  Govemor-G^neral  previously 
took  of  the  policy  now  to  be  pursued.     The  Governor- 
General  will  adhere  to  the  opinion,  that  the  only  safe 
course  is  that  of  withdrawing  the  army  under  your  com- 
mand, at  the  earliest  practicable  period,  into  positions 
within  the  Khybur  Pass,  where  it  may  possess  easy  and 
certain  communications  with  India."     Why  Lord  Ellen- 
borough  should  have  entertained  a  belief  even  of  the 
possibility  of  Pollock  advancing  upon  Caubul,  in  the 
face  of  positive  instructions  to  the  contrary  and  a  known 
deficiency  of  carriage,  it  is  not  easy  to  conjecture.     Pro- 
bably, Lord  EUenborough  himself  could  not  have  ex- 
plained the  source  of  this  extraordinary  buoyancy  of 
expectation,  for  six  days  afterwards  he  declared  that  he 
had  been  led  to  expect  "  that  you  (Pollock)  will  have 
already  decided  upon  withdrawing  your  troops  within 
the  Khybur  Pass,  into  a  position  wherein  you  may  have 
easy  and  certain  communication  with  India,  if  considera- 
tions, having  regard  to  the  health  of  the  army,  should 
not  have  induced  you  to  defer  that  movement."     The 
idea  of  the  advance  upon  Caubul  seems  only  to  have 