

♦  "  I  have  only,"  wrote  Nott,  "  to  RawUnson:  April  9, 1842.     MS,  Cor* 

repeat  mj  sentiments— namelj,  that  respondenceJ] 
I  will  not  sanction  a  rupee  being        f  See  Colonel  Stacy* s  Narrative,  and 

S'ven  from  the  British  treasury  to  his  correspondence  with  Major  Raw- 
ese  people.  I  have  for  three  ^ears  linson.  Ilawlinson,  however,  doubted 
viewed  with  deep  regret  the  ruinous  whether  the  negotiations  with  Saloo 
svstem  of  giving  awaj  laree  sums  to  Khan  would  have  a  favorable  result : 
the  chiefs  and  Sirdars  of  Afghanistan,  "Had  a  long  conference,**  he  wrote 
which  I  sincerely  believe  has  brought  on  the  10th  of  May,  "  with  Atta-ool- 
upon  us  all  our  present  difficulties  in  lab  Klian,  who  has  come  in  to  treat 
this  country.  I  have  offered  toguaran-  for  his  brother,  Saloo ;  and  the  latter, 
tee  the  personal  safety  of  Saloo  Khan  if  his  agent  is  to  be  believed,  certainly 
if  he  returns  to  his  allegiance  by  a  cer-  desires  to  espouse  our  cause.  Know- 
tain  day.  Kthere  are  any  other  chiefs  ing,  however,  as  I  do,  Saloo*s  ambition 
who  can  make  it  appear  that  they  are  and  avarice,  I  question  very  much 
worthy  of  the  indulgence  of  my  gua-  whether  we  shall  come  to  any  satis- 
rantee  for  their  personal  safety,  I  will  factory  arrangement  with  him.  We 
take  their  wishes  into  consideration ;  merely  require  Saloo  Khan  s  co-ope- 
but  I  will  make  them  no  other  pro-  ration,  in  order-  to  facilitate  the  re- 
mises. This  does  not  apply  to  Ma-  establishment  of  our  dawk  communi- 
homed  Atta  or  to  Meerza  Ahmed,  as  cation ;  but  the  Khan  talks  of  rank, 
I  will  not  receive  these  two  men  on  power,  and  pay,  as  the  return  he  has 
any  terms,  without  the  order  of  hiffher  a  right  to  expect  for  joining  us,  and 
authority." — ^General  Nott  to  major  is  not  likely  to  be  satisfied  with  any 


STATE  OF  THE  DOURANBE  CAMP.  449 

In  the  mean  while,  the  Douranee  chiefe,  though  dis- 
united, were  not  inactive.  It  was  hard  to  determine 
with  any  distinctness  what  were  their  designs  at  this 
time — so  contradictory  were  the  accounts  which  reached 
our  camp,  and  so  inconsistent  the  movements  of  the 
enemy.  But  it  seemed  that  our  diflGiculties  were  very 
sensibly  diminishing.  As  the  spring  advanced,  the 
general  aspect  of  affairs  was  brighter  and  more  en- 
couraging than  it  had  been  since  the  first  outbreak  of 
the  revolution.  The  chiefs  were  scattered  about  in  all 
directions — some  wounded  and  dying — others  eager  to 
make  terms  with  the  British.  Meerza  Ahmed  and 
Sufder  Jung  were  contemplating  a  withdrawal  across 
the  frontier  to  Laush  and  Jowayn.  The  latter  was 
corresponding  with  the  British  agent,  and  expressing  his 
desire  to  return  to  our  camp.  The  Caubul  Janbaz  had 
deserted  in  disgust.  The  principal  men  of  the  surround- 
ing villages  were  sending  messages  into  our  camp,  offer- 
ing to  withdraw  all  their  people  from  the  rebel  standard 
if  we  would  guarantee  them  against  the  depredations  of 
our  troops.  The  trade  of  the  Qhazee  was  plainly  at  a 
discount.  And  whilst  the  elements  of  decay  were  thus 
discernible  within,  there  were  external  influences  at 
work  to  weaken  the  rebel  cause.  Glad  tidings  arrived 
from  the  eastward.  General  Pollock  had  advanced 
upon  Jellalabad ;  had  relieved  the  garrison  of  that 
place ;  and  had,  it  was  said,  determined  to  march  upon 
the  capital.  A  royal  salute  was  fired  at  Candahar ;  and 
as  the  tidings  of  our  successes  spread  through  the 
country  the  spirits  of  the  insurgents  became  more  and 
more  depressed. 