

I  have  no  reason,  yet,  to  complain  that  the  troops  are  more 
unhealthy  than  they  were  at  Agra.  If  I  am  to  march  to  Pesha- 
wur,  the  climate  is  certainly  not  preferable ;  and  here  I  can  in  one 
or  two  marches  find  a  better  climate,  and  I  should  be  able  to  dictate 
better  terms  than  I  could  at  Peshawur. 

I  cannot  imagine  any  force  being  sent  from  Caubul  which  I 
could  not  successfully  oppose.  But  the  advance  on  Caubul  would 
require  that  General  Nott  should  act  in  concert  and  advance  also. 
I  therefore  cannot  help  regretting  that  he  should  be  directed  to 
retire,  which,  without  some  demonstration  of  our  power,  he  will 
find  some  diflSculty  in  doing.  I  have  less  hesitation  in  thus 
expressing  my  opinion,  because  I  could  not,  under  any  circum- 
stances, move  in  less  than  eighteen  or  twenty  days;  and  your 
reply  might  reach  me  by  express  in  about  twenty-two  days.  The 
difference  in  point  of  time  is  not  very  material,  but  the  importance 
of  the  subject  is  sufficient  to  justify  the  delay  of  a  few  days.  In 
the  mean  time,  I  shall  endeavour  to  procure  carriage-cattle  as  fast 
as  I  can,  to  move  either  forward  or  backward,  as  I  may  be 
directed;  or,  if  left  to  my  discretion,  as  I  may  think  judicious. 
Under  any  circumstances,  I  should  not  advocate  the  delay  of  the 
troops  either  at  Candahar  or  on  this  side  beyond  the  month  of 
November;  and  in  this  arrangement  advertence  must  be  had  to 
the  safety  of  the  Khybur,  which  I  consider  the  Sikhs  would 
gladly  hold  if  they  were  allowed  to  take  possession  of  Jellalabad. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

George  Pollock,  Major-Gen.* 

Unwilling  to  return  to  the  provinces  without  striking 
a  signal  blow  at  the  Afghans,  and  doing  something  great 

.  *  This  is  not  only  a  remarkable    its  misadventures.    Its  outer  history 
letter  in  itself.    It  is  remarkable  for    is  somewhat  curious.    It  never  founcL 


pollock's  reluctance  to  withdraw.  467 

to  re-establish  the  military  reputation  of  Great  Britain 
in  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus,  Pollock  grasped 
eagerly  at  the  faintest  indication  of  willingness  on  the 
part  of  the  Governor-General  to  place  any  discretionary 
power  in  his  hands ;  and  expressed  his  eagerness  to  tra- 
verse, with  a  victorious  army,  the  scene  of  our  recent 
humiliation.  If  he  had  had  carriage  he  would  have  ad- 
vanced at  once;  but  the  want  of  cattle  paralysed  the 
movements  of  the  force,  and  kept  Pollock  inactive  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Jellalabad.  In  one  respect  this  want 
was  a  gain  and  an  advantage.  Mindful  both  of  the 
honour  of  his  country  and  of  the  safety  of  his  captive 
country-men  and  country-women,  Pollock  adroitly  turned 
the  scarcity  of  carriage  to  good  account,  by  declaring 