

In  the  mean  while,  the  announcement  of  the  Go- 
vernor^General's  determination  to  withdraw  the  troops 
from  their  advanced  positions  had  reached  Candahar. 
Nott  had  always  consistently  declared  that  he  would 
not  yield  an  inch  of  ground  without  the  instructions  of 
the  Supreme  Grovemment,  but  that,  fortified  by  such  in- 
structions, he  was  prepared  to  move  either  in  one  direc- 
tion or  the  other — ^to  abandon  all  the  posts  in  Western 
Afghanistan,  or  to  march  victoriously  on  the  capital. 
He  had  his  own  opinions  on  the  subject  of  withdrawal; 
but  the  obedience  of  the  soldier  was  paramount  over  all 
his  words  and  actions;  and  when  he  received  the  in- 
structions of  which  mention  has  been  made,  he  wrote  to 
the  Chief  Secretary  on  the  17th  of  May:  "These  mea- 
sures shall  be  carried  into  effect,  and  the  directions  of 
his  Lordship  accomplished  in  the  best  manner  circum-* 
stances  will  admit  of"  And  again  he  wrote  on  the  21st 
to  the  same  functionary :  ^'  I  shall  not  lose  a  moment 
in  making  all  necessary  arrangements  for  carrying  into 

*  There  was  no  scarcitj  of  provi-  I  did  my  utmost  to  protect  tliem  from 

flions  at  Jellalabad  at  this  time.   But,  plunder,  and  in  most  cases  succeeded ; 

to  secure  a  continued  supply,  Pollock  and  the  consequence  is  that  we,  in  a 

was  sensible  of  the  necessity  of  en-  measure,  command  the  resources  of 

couraging  a  belief  throughout  the  the  country/*    And  on  the  11th  of 

country  that  the  intentions  of  the  the  same  month,  writin^again  to  Mr. 

British  Government  inclined  towards  Clerk,  he  said :  **  While  1  remain  here 

a  forward  movement.    "  We  are  all  I  can  command  supplies,  and  I  have 

quiet  here,*'  he  wrote  on  the  6th  of  no  doubt  that  I  shall  be  able  to  do  so 

May  to  Mr.  Clerk,  "  gr^  coming  in  as  long  as  the  natives  suppose  that 

in  abundance ;  at  least,  in  as  great  we  intend  remaining  in  the  country ; 

quantities  as  we  could  expect  after  but  if  they  thought  otherwise,  our 

toe  dreadful  alarm  into  which  this  supplies  would  be  stopped.*' — {^MS, 

force  seems  to  have  put  the  whole  Correspondence,'] 
country.  Every  village  was  deserted. 


THE  WITHDRAWAL  ORDER  AT  CANDAHAR.  469 

eflfect  the  orders  I  have  received,  without  turning  to  the 
right  or  to  the  left,  by  the  idle  propositions  and  wild 
speculations  daily  and  hourly  heaped  upon  nie  from  all 
parts  of  Afghanistan  and  Sindh,  by  persons  who  are,  or 
fancy  themselves  to  be,  representatives  of  government 
West  of  the  Indus.  I  know  that  it  is  my  duty  and  their 
duty  implicitly  and  zealously  to  carry  into  effect  every 
order  received,  without  inquiring  into  the  reasons  for 
the  measures  adopted,  whatever  our  own  opinions  or 
wishes  may  be,  and  without  troubling  government 
with  unnecessary  references."*  But  it  was  plain  that 
he  read  the  orders  of  the  Supreme  Government  not 
without  acute  mortification.  He  yielded  in  effect 
a  prompt  assent;  but  in  spirit  it  was  a  grudging  one. 
The  orders  for  the  evacuation  of  Candahar  took  Nott 
and  Rawlinson  by  surprise,  and  filled  them  with  as 
much  pain  as  astonishment.  What  was  really  felt  by 
the  Candahar  authorities  is  not  to  be  learnt  firom  the 
published  papers ;  but  in  a  letter  written  by  Rawlinson 
to  Outram  on  the  18th  of  May,  not  only  are  the  real 
feelings  of  the  military  and  political  chiefs  clearly  re- 
vealed, but  the  probable  effects  of  the  evacuation 
of  Candahar  sketched  out,  with  a  free  hand,  by  the 
latter : 