

Patiently,'  therefore,  biding  his  time,  Pollock  turned 
the  halt  at  Jellalabad  to  the  best  possible  accoimt,  by 
endeavouring  to  obtain  by  negotiation  the  ransom  of  the 
British  prisoners.  What  those  negotiations  were,  and 
what  was  their  result,  should  be  stated  in  this  place.  It 
was  on  the  evening  of  the  26th  of  April  that  some  excite- 
ment was  created  in  Pollock's  camp  at  Jellalabad,  by  ru- 
mours, presently  confirmed,  of  the  arrival  of  Captain  Colin 
Mackenzie,  one  of  the  prisoners  in  the  hands  of  Akbar 
Khan,  with  a  letter  firom  Major  Pottinger,  and  overtures 
from  the  Sirdar.  Pottinger's  letter  briefly  shadowed 
forth  the  terms  on  which  Akbar  Khan  and  his  Ghilzye 
confederates  were  prepared  to  release  the  prisoners — but 
the  language  employed  was  rather  that  of  inquiry  than 
dictation.  "  The  Sirdar,"  wrote  Pottinger,  "  wishes  to 
know,  in  the  first  place,  if  we  will  consent  to  withdraw 
the  greater  part  of  our  troops,  and  leave  an  agent  with 
a  small  body  of  men  to  act  with  whomever  the  con- 
federates may  elect  as  chief,  in  which  case  they  propose 
to  be  guided  by  the  wishes  of  the  two  factions  in  Cau- 
bul,  and  wish  us  to  release  Dost  Mahomed  Khan.  /Se- 
condly ; — They  propose,  that  if  the  British  Government 
have  determined  on  subjecting  the  country  and  con- 
tinuing the  war,  that  the  prisoners  at  present  in  Afghan- 
istan shall  be  exchanged  for  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  his 
family  and  attendants,  and  that  the  issue  be  dependent 


476  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

on  the  sword.  Thirdly  ; — ^In  the  event  of  neither  of  these 
propositions  being  approved  of,  they  wish  to  know  what 
terms  will  be  granted  to  themselves  individually ;  whe- 
ther we,  in  the  event  of  their  submission,  will  confine 
them,  send  them  to  India,  take  hostages  fi:om  them, 
reduce  their  pay,  or,  in  short,  what  they  have  to  expect 
fi:om  our  clemency."* 

To  this  General  Pollock  repUed,  that  "  kindness  and 
good  treatment  of  our  prisoners  would  meet  with  due 
consideration  at  the  hands  of  the  British  Government, 
and  the  release  of  them  much  more  so;  that  if  money 
were  a  consideration,  he  was  prepared  to  pay  into  the 
hands  of  any  one  the  Sirdar  might  depute  to  receive  it 
the  sum  of  two  lakhs  of  rupees,  whenever  the  prisoners 
might  be  delivered  into  his  hands ;"  and  that  Mahomed 
Shah  Khan  and  his  brothers  would  be  ''  suflfered  to 
enjoy  the  advantages  arising  firom  their  hereditary  do- 
minions.^'f 

With  this  letter  Mackenzie  left  Jellalabad  on  the 
evening  of  the  28th  of  April.  He  had  been  instructed 
by  the  Sirdar  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  from  General 

*  Major  Pottinger  to  General  Polr  as  their  enemy,  and  the  whole  multi- 
hek:  Tezeen^  Api-U^O^  1S42.  Pub-  tude  will  be  opposed  to  me.  Under 
Ushed  Papers.  Together  with  this  these  circumstances  I  beg  you  to  re- 
letter  from  Pottinger  came  a  paper  fleet,  tliat  not  having  come  to  an 
from  Akbar  Khan  himself.  It  was  understanding  with  you,  and  having 
without  seal  and  signature,  for  the  made  enemies  of  them,  how  can  I 
Sirdar  was  fearful  of  compromising  exist  ?  ....  1  prefer  your 
himself  with  his  countrymen,  and  the  friendship  to  the  throne  of  Caubul, 
document  might  have  fallen  into  because,  if  I  was  to  go  to  Caubul  now, 
their  hands.  After  some  allusions  to  the  men  of  Caubul  would  push  me  for- 
the  painful  past,  and  a  declaration  ward,  and  then  it  would  be  difficult  to 
that  he  was  unable  to  restrain  the  release  my  guests  and  to  be  on  friendly 
disorganised  mob  of  Afghans  from  terms  with  you.  On  this  account  I 
attacking  the  English  army,  the  Sir-  have  written  to  show  my  friendship 
dar  went  on  to  say :  *Mf  I  allow  the  for  your  government.  Please  God 
English,  who  are  my  guests,  to  depart  my  services  shall  exceed  the  injuries 
according  to  your  suggestion  ;  or  ac-  I  have  done  you.*' 
cording  to  Pottinger  Sahib*s  advice,  f  General  Pollock  to  Major  Pot" 
if  I  allow  the  English  ladies  to  depart  tinger:  Jellalabad^  April  26,  1842. 
before  the  gentlemen,  in  eitlier  case  PMished  Papers. 
all  Mahomedans  will  look  upou  me 