


THE  '^  MISSING  LETTER."  '  465 

been  a  temporary  apprehension  arising  out  of  a  not 
erroneous  estimate  of  the  military  aspirations  of  Ge- 
neral Pollock ;  and  it  very  soon  passed  away.  But  it 
had  one  important  result.  It  called  forth  from  the 
General  the  following  soldierly  letter : 

TO  T.  H.  HADDOCK,  ESQ.,  SECRETARY  TO  GOVERNMENT, 

&c. 

Jellalabad,  May  13, 1842. 

Sib, 

I  had  the  honour  to  forward  with  my  letter  No.  32,  dated 

1 2th  instant,  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  his  Excellency  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief. I  have  now  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  re- 
ceipt of  your  letter,  dated  28th  ultimo,  which  adverts  to  the  pre- 
sent aspect  of  affairs  in  Afghanistan,  and  the  probabiUty  of  my 
having  advanced  towards  Caubul;  stating  also,  that  in*  such  an 
event,  the  views  of  the  Governor-General  as  to  the  withdrawal  of 
the  troops  will  not  be  altered;  and  further,  that  whatever  measures 
I  may  adopt  I  must  have  especial  regard  to  the  health  of  the  troops. 
I  trust  that  I  am  not  wrong  in  considering  this  letter  as  leaving 
to  me  discretionary  powers,  and,  coming  as  it  does  from  the 
supreme  power  in  India,  I  venture  to  delay,  for  some  days,  acting 
up  to  the  instructions  communicated  in  his  Excellency  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chiefs letter,  dated  29th  ult. 

I  regret  much  that  a  want  of  carriage- cattle  has  detained  rae 
here;  if  it  had  not  been  so,  I  should  now  be  several  marches  in 
advance,  and  I  am  quite  certain  that  such  a  move  would  have 
been  highly  beneficial.  Affairs  at  Caubul  are,  at  the  present 
moment,  in  a  very  unsettled  state;  but  a  few  days  must  decide  in 
favour  of  one  of  the  parties.  Mahomed  Akbar  is  at  Caubul, 
exerting  all  his  influence  to  overpower  the  Prince.  He  is  without 
means;  and  if  he  cannot  within  a  very  short  period  obtain  the 
ascendancy,  he  must  give  up  the  contest,  in  which  case  I  have  ho 
doubt  I  shall  hear  from  him  again.  With  regard  to  our  with- 
drawal at  the  present  moment,  I  fear  that  it  would  have  the  very 
worst  efifect — it  would  be  construed  into  a  defeat,  and  our  charac- 
ter as  a  powerful  nation  would  be  entirely  lost  in  this  part  of  the 
world. 

It  is  true  that  the  garrison  of  Jellalabad  has  been  saved,  which 
it  would  not  have  been,  had  a  force  not  been  sent  to  its  relief. 
But  the  relief  of  that  garrison  is  only  one  object;  there  still  re- 

VOL.  II.  2  H 


466  •      THE  HALT  AT  JKLLALABAD. 

main  others  which  wc  cannot  disreorard — I  allude  to  the  release 

o 

of  the  prisoners.  I  expect  about  nineteen  Europeans  from  Budee- 
^bad  in  a  few  days.  The  letters  which  have  passed  about  other 
prisoners  have  already  been  forwarded  for  the  information  of  his 
Lordship.  If,  while  these  communications  were  in  progress,  I 
were  to  retire,  it  would  be  supposed  that  a  panic  had  seized  us.  I 
therefore  think  that  our  remaining  in  this  vicinity  (or  perhaps  a 
few  marches  in  advance)  is  essential  to  uphold  the  character  of 
the  British  nation;  and  in  like  manner  General  Nott  might  hold 
bis  post;  at  all  events  till  a  more  favorable  season. 