


474  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

General  earnestly  hopes  that  you  may  be  enabled  to 
draw  the  enemy  into  a  position  in  which  you  may  strike 
such  a  blow  effectually."  And  again,  in  the  same  letter: 
"  It  will  be  for  your  consideration  whether  your  large 
army,  one  half  of  which  would  beat,  in  open  field, 
everything  that  could  be  brought  against  it  in  Af- 
ghanistan, should  remain  entirely  inactive  during  the 
period  which  must  now  apparently  elapse  before  it  can 
finally  retire.  Although  you  may  not  have,  or  soon  be 
able  to  procure,  the  means  of  moving  your  whole  army, 
you  may  possibly  be  able  to  move  a  part  of  it  rapidly 
against  some  portion  of  the  enemy's  force  incautiously 
exposed,  and  of  giving  it  a  severe  blow/'  This  was, 
at  all  events,  something  gained.  And  the  gain  was  a 
sudden  one.  Only  three  days  before,  the  Govemor- 
G^neral,  in  a  letter  to  Pollock,  had  resented  the  pre- 
sumption of  Mr.  Clerk  in  drawing  from  a  former  letter 
an  inference  in  favour  of  the  continued  occupation  of 
Jellalabad,  in  the  event  of  negotiations  being  on  foot 
for  the  release  of  the  prisoners,  and  had  expressed  a 
strong  opinion  that  no  negotiations  had  yet  been  entered 
upon  of  a  nature  to  impede  the  backward  movement 
of  the  force.  The  letter  of  the  1st  of  June  was,  there- 
fore, doubly  welcome.  Pollock  had  now  received  a 
constructive  permission  to  remain  at  Jellalabad  until 
October  ;*  and,  as  every  effort  was  to  be  made  in  the  in- 
terval to  collect  carriage-cattle  in  the  provinces  of  Hin- 
dostan,  ostensibly  for  the  purpose  of  his  withdrawal 
from  A%hani8tan,  he  determined  to  lose  no  opportunity 
of  turning  those  means  of  withdrawal  to  the  best  possible 

*  It  was  outwardly   only  an   ac-  consequence  of   the    very   defectiye 

knowledgment  of  the  General's  in-  state  of  the  means  of  movement  pos- 

ability  to  retire  at  an  earlier  period-^  sessed  by  Major-General  Pollock,  it 

but  there  was  more  meaning  in  it  appears  to  be  out  of  his  power  to 

than  this,  for  on  tlie  same  day  the  retire  from  Jellalabad  until  October, 

Chief  Secretary  wrote  to  Nott :    **  I  when    his    retirement    will   certainly 

am  directed  to  inform  you  that,  in  take  place." — [Puplished  Papers.'] 


OVERTUBES  FROM  AKBAR  KHAN.         475 

account.  If  there  were  carriage  to  enable  him  to  fall 
back  upon  Peshawur,  there  would  be  carriage  to  enable 
him  to  advance  upon  Caubul,  for  the  mistake  of  hiring 
cattle,  with  local  limitations  affixed  to  the  engagements, 
was  not  to  be  perpetuated.  So  General  Pollock  looked 
forward  with  confidence  to  the  coming  autumn,  as  to  a 
time  when  a  vigorous  and  decisive  blow  might  be 
struck  at  the  nation  which  had  humbled  the  pride  and 
defiled  the  honour  of  the  conquerors  of  Hindostan. 