


*  ^*  In  a  late  letter  to  govern-  cease  to  come  in ;  we  should  be  in 
ment,**  he  wrote  to  the  Commander-  difficulty  about  forage ;  all  who  are 
in-Chief  on  the  24th  of  May,  **  you  now  friendly  would  be  ready  to  op- 
will  have  seen  how  anxious  I  was  pose  us ;  and  if  I  had  not  time  to 
that  any  proposed  movement  towards  secure  the  pass,  the  consequences 
Peshawur  should  be  communicated  might  be  serious  indeed."  —  [Pit6- 
to  no  one  from  whom  it  could  be  lisked  Papers  relating  to  Military 
withheld.  The  moment  such  a  thin^  Operations  in  AfghanistanJ] 
is  known,  it  is  probable  supplies  wiS 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  THE  SUPREME  GOVERNMENT.    473 

And  Pollock  still  hoped  that  something  might  arise 
to  wring  from  the  Governor-General  an  order  to  march 
upon  the  Afghan  capital.  But  the  letters  he  received 
from  Lord  Ellenborough  and  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs  were 
calculated  not  only  to  discourage  but  to  embarrass  him. 
There  was  no  possibility  of  misunderstanding  the  wishes 
of  the  Commander-in-Chief;  but  the  Governor-Gene- 
ral,  whilst  imperatively  directing  the  speediest  possible 
withdrawal  of  Pollock's  army,  was  every  now  and  then 
throwing  out  a  hint  that  a  forward  movement  for  the 
chastisement  of  the  A%hans  would  not  be  ungrateful  to 
him.  And  whilst  the  Governor-General  was  obviouslv 
intending  to  place  some  discretionary  power  in  the  Ge- 
neral's hands,  the  Commander-in-Chief  was  writing  to 
assure  him  that  the  orders  of  the  Supreme  Government 
all  tended  towards  an  immediate  and  unconditional 
withdrawal. 

The  letter  of  the  13th  of  May  elicited  no  answer; 
but  a  letter  written  a  week  afterwards,*  in  which  Pol- 
lock pointed  out  the  evils  and  diflSculties  of  an  imme- 
diate withdrawal  to  Peshawur,  found  the  Governor- 
General  in  one  of  his  more  forward  and  chivalrous 
moods.  Pollock,  in  this  letter  of  the  20th  of  May,  had 
said :  "  I  shall  be  glad  if  any  letter  from  government 
may  authorise  my  remaining  till  October  or  November;" 
and  now,  on  the  1st  of  June,  the  Governor-General, 
through  the  Chief  Secretary,  replied:  "  It  would  be  de- 
sirable, undoubtedly,  that  before  finally  quitting  Af- 
ghanistan,  you  should  have  an  opportunity  of  striking 
a  blow  at  the  enemy;  and  since  circumstances  seem  to 
compel  you  to  remain  there  till  October,  the  Govemor- 

•  In  this  letter  of  the  20th  of  May,  before  I  shall  be  able  to  move."    If 

Pollock  says:  "  I  have  already,  in  my  that  letter  of  the  13th  had  not  been 

letter  dated  the  Idth  inst.,  entered  received  and  read,  surely  this  allusion 

on  the  subject   (of  withdrawing  to  to  it  would  have  called  forth  a  re- 

Peshawur),  and  must  receive  a  reply  mark  to  that  effect. 