


PROPOSALS  OF  THE  SIRDAR.  477 

Pollock  whether  there  was  any  chance  of  the  British 
Government  admitting  him  to  terms,  on  his  own  ac- 
count, if  he  would  detach  himself  from  the  national 
cause,  and  exert  his  influence  to  advance  our  interests 
in  A%hanistan.  But  upon  this  Pollock  could  express 
no  definite  opinion.  "  His  position,"  wrote  the  General 
to  the  Supreme  Government,  "is  evidently  difierent  from 
the  others.  That  he  was  the  murderer  of  the  Envoy 
there  cannot  be  a  question,  and  he  evidently  feels  his 
guilt  to  be  an  insuperable  bar  to  any  terms  from  us ; 
but  he  also  feels  that  he  has  possession  of  the  persons  of 
our  countrjmien,  and  that  circumstance  seems  to  hold 
out  to  him  a  hope  that  his  proffers  of  submission  will 
meet  with  a  favorable  reception."* 

The  reply  of  General  Pollock  to  the  overtures  of 
Akbar  Khan  disappointed  the  Sirdar;  and  Captain 
Mackenzie  was  again  despatched  to  Jellalabad.  This 
time  he  was  the  bearer  of  a  string  of  proposals  far  more 
extravagant  than  those  which  had  been  conveyed  by 
him  on  his  first  mission.  The  requests  of  the  Barukzye 
chief,  as  set  forth  in  Pottinger's  letter  to  the  General, 
were — 

Istly.  That  a  written  promise  of  amnesty  be  given  to  himself^ 
Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  and  the  latter's  family,  for  all  past  acts  up 
to  the  date  of  delivery.  2ndly.  That  neither  he  nor  any  of  the 
above-mentioned  family  shall  be  sent  out  of  the  Caubul  and 
Jellalabad  districts  against  their  wishes.  3rdly.  That  they  may 
not  be  obliged  to  pay  their  respects  to  you  in  our  camp  till  they 
be  assured  against  any  danger.    4thly.  If  we  merely  intend  to 

♦  General  Pollock  to  Government :  it  would  be  difficult  so  to  bring  bim 

JeUalabadt  April  28,  1842.     In  reply  to  trial  as  to  protect  the  government 

to  this  letter,    the   Chief  Secretary  from  a  colourable  cliarge  of  violently 

wrote  :  "  It  is  not  consistent  with  the  prosecuting   an    unworthy   revenge ; 

honour  of  the  British  Government  to  but  no  more  than  this  can  be  done, 

enter  into  any  terms  for  the  making  and  this  only  if  he  should  promptly 

of  a  provision  for  so  great  a  criminal*  do  all  he  can  to  repair  the  crimes  he 

We  might  engage  to  spare  his  life  if  has  committed.**— [PuWWked  P/ipcr*.] 
he  were  to  fall  into  our  nands,  because 


478  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

revenge  ourselves  on  the  enemy,  and  then  leave  the  country,  he 
trusts  its  government  will  be  conferred  on  him.  5thly.  He  wants 
a  jaghire  to  support  his  family,  and  he  names  two  lakhs  as 
adequate.  6thly.  He  wants  eight  lakhs  of  rupees  as  a  present  to 
start  him  with.  (His  great  fear,  as  it  is  of  all  Afghans,  is  of  being 
removed  from  this  country.)  He  also  asks  for  his  own  women, 
who  are  in  his  father's  harem-serai.  They  have  asked  for  the 
money,  if  it  is  paid,  to  be  given  to  Sir-Bolimd  Khan,  who  will 
remain  as  a  hostage  till  the  prisoners  are  delivered,  or  that  you 
pay  it  to  Hindoos,  who  can  empower  their  agents  in  Caubul  to 
pay  it  on  deUvery  of  the  prisoners.* 