

its  way  into  the  published  volume  whether  the  original  letter  miscarried 
of  correspondence,  and  its  existence  altogether  on  its  way  to  Lord  Ellen- 
was  only  to  be  inferred  from  the  fact  borough,  or  whether  it  miscarried 
of  a  reference  to  it  in  another  letter,  only  on  its  way  to  the  office.  There 
It  was  at  last  brought  to  li^ht  by  the  is  an  equal  obscurity  about  the 
inquiries  in  Parliament  of  Lord  Lans-  history  of  l^e  duplicate  which  was 
downe  and  Lord  Palmerston.  It  was  **  received  and  acknowledged  on  the 
to  be  found  nowhere  in  England;  11th  of  July.*'  It  might  be  inferred 
but  a  copy  was  at  last  elicited  from  from  this  that  it  was  received  on  the 
India.  The  Governor-General  then  11th  of  July  and  acknowledged  on 
declared  that  **  the  original  despatch  the  same  day.  But  it  happens  that 
of  the  13th  of  May  never  reached  the  dupUoate  was  despatcned  on  the 
the  office,  and  must  have  been  lost  in  30th  of  May — and  ought  surely  to 
transit.  The  duplicate  was  received  have  come  not  among  the  Juij,  but 
and  acknowledged  on  the  llth  of  among  the  June  papers.  In  tms  letp 
July.  It  is  uie  practice  of  the  ter  ofthe  llth  of  July  the  Secretary 
Secretary's  office  to  keep  the  unre-  says :  ^*  I  am  directed  to  state  that  the 
ported  papers  on  all  important  sub-  original  letter  has  never  reached  me, 
jects  for  each  month  together,  and  to  and  that  the  duplicate  7uu  only  latdy 
forward  copies  of  them  to  the  Secret  been  received  and  laid  before  uie  Gro- 
Committee  by  the  monthly  Overland  vemor-Gkneral,  whose  previous  in- 
Mail.  The  despatch  in  question  was  structions  to  you  appeared  to  render 
inadvertently  put  up  in  its  proper  any  special  reply  to  this  communicft- 
place  in  the  May  bundle  of  reported  tion  imnecessary." — |j  MS.  Reeords,"} 
papers,  instead  of  being  left  for  a  In  the  face  of  so  distmct  a  denial  as 
time,  as  it  should  have  been,  among  this,  little  can  be  said,  except  that  in 
the  unreported  papers  of  July,  a  letter  fi^m  Pollock  of  May  201^1, 
Hence,  when  the  July  papers  were  which  was  duly  acknowledged,  re- 
copied  for  transmission  to  the  Secret  ference  is  made  to  the  letter  of  the 
Committee,  thb  despatch  was  omit-  13th.  If  that  letter  had  not  been  re* 
ted.''  Nothing  less  explanatory  than  ceived,  some  allusion  certainly  ou^t 
this  was  ever  offered  m  the  way  of  to  have  been  made  by  government  to 
explanation.      It  does   not  appear  its  non-receipt 

2h2 


468  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

that  he  had  not  the  means  of  retiring  to  Peshawur. 
Thus  gaining  time  for  something  to  be  written  down  in 
the  chapter  of  accidents,  he  continued  to  maintain  his 
advanced  position,  and  exerted  himself  to  secure  by 
negotiation  the  release  of  the  prisoners  from  the  hands 
of  Akbar  Khan.* 