

H.  C.  Rawlinson.* 

*  MS.  Correspondence,  In  his  jour-  order  to  retire  came  upon  us  like  a 
nal,  too,    Rawlinson  wrote :    ^^  The    thunderbolt.  We  had  not,  from  Lord 


THB  RELIEF  OF  KHELAT-I-GHILZTE.  471 

But  however  great  may  have  been  the  mortification 
which  Nott  and  Rawlinson  were  now  condemned  to 
experience,  the  orders  of  the  Supreme  Government 
were  so  explicit,  that  the  Greneral  believed  it  to  be  his 
duty  at  once  to  begin  to  carry  them  into  effect.  A 
brigade  had  already  been  equipped  for  the  relief  of 
Khelat-i-Ghilzye  and  the  rescue  of  the  Ghuznee  pri- 
soners. It  was  now  despatched,  on  the  19th  of  May, 
to  bring  off  the  garrison,  and  to  destroy  the  works  of 
the  former  place.  Colonel  Wymer  commanded  the 
force.  It  consisted  of  those  three  noble  Sepoy  regi- 
ments with  which  he  had  before  done  such  good  ser- 
vice;* her  Majesty's  40th  Regiment,  Leslie's  troop  of 
Horse  Artillery,  four  guns  of  Blood's  battery,  the 
Bombay  cavalry  details,  and  the  Shah's  1st  Regiment 
of  Horse.  Some  troopers  of  Haldane's  cavalry,  some 
details  of  Bengal  artillery,  and  of  the  Madras  sappers, 
completed  the  components  of  the  force. 

Thus,  in  the  later  weeks  of  May,  Pollock  was  hold- 
ing his  post  at  Jellalabad,  eager  to  receive  authority  to 
march  upon  Caubul,  and  rejoicing  in  the  pretext  of  a 
scarcity  of  carriage  for  delaying  the  withdrawal  of  his 
force;  Nott,  eager,  too,  for  a  forward  movement,  but 
unable  to  perceive  in  the  instructions  of  government 
the  least  indication  of  an  intention  to  place  any  discre- 
tionary power  in  his  hands,  was  taking  measures  to  se- 
cure, with  all  promptitude,  the  accomplishment  of  their 
wishes ;  and  the  Governor-General,  from  Allahabad,  was 
writing  strong  letters  to  the  Generals,  impressing  upon 
them  the  necessity  of  maintaining  a  discreet  silence 
regarding  the  intentions  of  government  and  the  future 
movements  of  the  troops. 

Ellenborough^s  former  letter,  thoucht  has  only  had  to  consider  the  best 

such  a  measure  possible  until  CauDul  way  of  carrying  the  order  into  effect.*' 

should  be  retaken.     As  there  is  no  —iMS,  Journal^  > 

discretionary  power,  however,  vested  ♦  The  2nd,  16th,  and  38th. 
in  General  I^ott  by  the  late  letter,  he 


472  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

There  was  nothing,  in  truth,  more  desirable  than  this. 
The  intentions  of  the  Grovemor-Greneral  were  of  such  a 
character  as  to  render  these  revelations,  in  the  existing 
state  of  things,  dangerous,  if  not  fatal,  to  the  interests  of 
Great  Britain  in  the  countries  beyond  the  Indus.  But 
oflScial  secrets  are  not  easily  kept  in  a  country  where  so 
many  copies  of  every  public  letter  are  forwarded  to 
diflferent  authorities,  in  distant  parts  of  the  country; 
where  so  many  clerks  are  employed  to  copy,  and  so 
many  staflf-officers  allowed  to  read  them.  Before  the 
end  of  May,  it  was  known  not  only  in  Greneral  Pollock's 
camp,  but  in  all  the  cantonments  of  India,  that  the 
armies  were  to  be  withdrawn.  The  secret  had  welled 
out  from  the  bureau  of  the  Commander-in-Chief;  and 
bets  were  made  at  the  mess-tables  of  Jellalabad  regard- 
ing the  probable  date  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops. 
No  man  knew  better  than  Pollock  the  danger  of  such 
revelations,*  and  he  did  his  best  to  counteract  the  evil 
tendency  of  the  reports  which  were  now  the  common 
gossip  of  his  camp,  and  were  soon  likely  to  be  current 
in  all  the  Afghan  bazaars.  ''  I  have  taken  steps,"  he 
wrote  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  "  to  prevent  any 
great  mischief  resulting,  by  ordering  the  deputy-quarter- 
master-general  a  few  miles  in  advance,  to  mark  out  a 
new  encamping-ground ;  and  I  shall  have  such  inquiries 
made  among  the  natives  about  bringing  supplies  there, 
that  will  make  them  believe  that  I  shall  move  for- 
ward." 