

Candahar,  May  18th,  1842. 

The  peremptory  order  to  retire  has  come  upon  us  like  a 
thunder-clap.  No  one  at  Candahar  is  aware  of  such  an  order 
having  been  received  except  the  General  and  myself,  and  we 
must  preserve  a  profound  secrecy  as  long  as  possible.  The 
withdrawal  of  the  garrison  from  Kelat-i-Ghilzye  and  the  de- 
struction of  the  fortifications  at  that  place  must,  I  fancy  how- 
ever, expose  our  pohcy,  and  our  situation  will  then  be  one  of 
considerable  embarrassment. 

General  Nott  intends,  I  believe,  to  order  all  the  carriage  at 
Quettah  to  be  sent  on  to  Candahar.    A  regiment  is  to  escort  the 

^  Publislied  Correspondence  relating  to  MUUary  Operations  in  Afghanistan. 


470  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

camels  laden  with  grain  to  Killah  Abdoolah,  where  the  troops 
will  remain  in  charge  of  the  depot,  and  from  whence  a  regiment 
or  two  regiments  detached  from  this  will  bring  on  the  camels 
empty  to  Gandahar.  It  must  be  our  object  to  collect  carriage, 
on  the  pretext  of  an  advance  on  Gaubul;  but  how  long  the 
secret  can  be  kept  it  is  impossible  to  say.  When  our  intended 
retirement  is  once  known,  we  must  eicpect  to  have  the  whole 
country  up  in  arms,  and  to  obtain  no  cattle  except  such  as  we 
can  violently  lay  hands  on. 

If  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst,  we  must  abandon  all  baggage 
and  stores,  and  be  content  to  march  with  sufficient  food  to  convey 
us  to  Quettah,  for  which  I  believe  the  carriage  now  available 
will  suffice. 

It  will  be  quite  impo^ible  to  destroy  the  works  of  Candahar, 
as  directed  in  the  government  letter;  the  worst  that  can  be  done 
is  to  blow  up  the  gateways.  I  have  hardly  yet  had  time  to 
reflect  fully  upon  the  effects,  immediate  and  prospective,  of  our 
abrupt  departure.  There  is  no  man  at  present  on  whom  I  can 
cast  my  eyes  in  all  Candahar  as  likely  to  succeed  to  power, 
Sufdor  Jung  will  be  a  mere  puppet  of  course,  and  will  be  liable 
to  deposition  at  any  moment.  Should  the  Barukzyes  triumph 
at  Caubul,  and  should  we  no  longer  oppose  the  return  of 
Kohundil,  he  will  be  the  most  likely  chief  to  succeed;  but  the 
natural  consequence  of  his  return,  and  of  our  determined  non- 
interference with  the  affair  in  this  quarter,  will  be  of  course  to 
render  Persian  influence  paramount  at  Herat  and  Candahar;  and 
with  the  prospect  of  a  Russian  fleet  at  Astrabad  and  a  Persian  army 
at  Mervo.  it^  by  no  means  impossible  that  the  designs  whii 
threatened  us  in  1838  may  at  last  be  directly  accomplished. 

Strong  measures  of  intimidation,  both  against  Russia  and 
Persia,  will  be  our  best  protection. 

I  enclose  you  an  extract  from  my  last  letter  from  Sir  J. 
McNeill,  in  case  the  copy  formerly  sent  through  Hammersley 
should  not  have  reached  you.  Saloo  Khan  appears  at  last  to 
have  fairly  adopted  our  cause,  and  I  hope,  therefore,  for  a  time 
at  any  rate,  that  our  communications  will  be  less  subject  to 
interruption.  Yours,  &c., 