


♦  "  January  29. — The  Sirdar  and  tary  or  political  news  in  the  ordinary 

Sooltan  Jan  came  to  gee  us.  Made  a  fonn  ot  epistolary  correspondence, 

bet  with  the  latter  of  1000  rupees  So  the  officers  at  Jellalabad  hit  upon 

that  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  the  ex-  the  expedient  of  dotting  off  letters  in 

Ameer,  will  be  released  by  the  dOth  old  newspapers,  so  as  to  form  words 

of  January,  and  will  return  to  Af-  and  sentences — "  an  easy   mode  of 

ghanistan.     The  former  gave  1000  carrying  on  secret  correspondence  not 

rupees  to  be  distributed  among  us  likely  to  be  detected  by  an  Asiatic." 

for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  sugar  These  dotted  letters  communicated  to 

and  other  little  luxuries.    My  share  the  prisoners  the  tiding  of  Wild's 

18  fifty  rupees  ;  which  sum  is  very  repulse  in  the  Khybur  rass — the  de- 

accep table,  as  I  have  not  had  a  pice  spatch  of  General  Pollock  to  Pesha- 

about  me  since  leaving  Caubul." —  wur — and  the  arrival  of  Dr.  Brydon 

[^Captain  Johnson's  Narrative.   A/5.]  at  Jellalabad* 

t  It  was  dangerous  to  send  mili-  ^ 


PRISON- LIFE. 


489 


among  the  captives  to  render  them  not  disinclined  for 
more  active  and  boisterous  sports.  They  played  at 
*'  hop-skotch ;"  they  played  at  "  blind-man's  bnflf."  A 
favourite  game  among  them  was  the  latter  ;  and  when 
some  ten  or  fifteen  healthy  and  cheerful  little  boys  and 
girls  joined  in  the  sport,  the  mirth  ran  fast  and  furious. 
A  Christmas  party  in  old  England  seldom  sees  madder 
gambols  than  these — seldom  has  the  heart's  laughter  risen 
more  freely  from  a  band  of  merrier  children  than  those 
who  romped  with  their  elders  in  prison  at  Budeeabad. 

The  Sabbaths  were  alway  kept  holy.  Every  Sunday 
saw  the  little  party  of  Christian  prisoners  assembled  for 
the  worship  of  their  God.  Sometimes  in  the  open  air, 
sometimes  in  tents,  in  huts,  or  any  other  place  avail- 
able for  the  purpose,  Sunday  after  Sunday,  the  Church 
Service  was  read  to  as  devout  a  band  of  worshippers  as 
ever  assembled  to  render  thanks  to  the  Almighty  and  to 
implore  the  continuance  of  His  mercies.  Nor  were  these 
observances  lost  upon  their  guards.  Wild  and  savage  as 
were  their  keepers,  they  seemed  to  respect  the  Chris- 
tian's day  of  rest.  There  was  more  decorum  in  their 
demeanour,  more  courtesy  in  their  manner,  than  on  the 
working-days  of  the  week.  An  atmosphere  of  peace 
and  rest  seemed  to  envelop  them  on  that  sacred  day. 

On  the  23rd  of  January,  Akbar  Khan,  accompanied 
by  Sooltan  Jan,  returned  to  Budeeabad.  The  object  of 
his  visit  was  to  induce  Pottinger  to  write  to  Macgregor 
at  Jellalabad,  stating  the  terms  on  which  the  Sirdar  was 
willing  to  treat  with  the  British  for  the  release  of  the 
prisoners.     The  letter  was  duly  written;*  but  Pottinger 