

take  me  to  the  Sirdar.      Thb  he  litUe  kindness  to  some  of  his  sick 

a^eed  to  do,  and  placing  me  before  friends  at  Caubul.**  —  [Lady  Sale's 

hmi    on  his  saddle,  he  proceeded.  JoumaL'] 

About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  rear  of  X  "  ^very  attention,"  says  Captain 

the  baj^gage  we  met  the  Sirdar  and  Johnson,  in  his  journal,  ^*  which  cir- 

his  followers,  who  received  me  most  cumstances  admitted  oi^  had   been 

kindly.   He  laid  me  down  on  a  bank,  paid  to  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  ; 

and  with  his  own  hands  dressed  my  nor  had  they  met  with  too  ftligbtest 

wounds,  by  placing  on  them  burnt  annoyance  on  the  road." 
lint  to  stanch  the  blood.     He  then 

2i2 


484  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

Next  morning  they  resumed  their  journey — the  Gene- 
ral, the  Brigadier,  and  Captain  Johnson,  accompanied 
by  Akbar  E^han,  bringing  up  the  rear.  A  more  ru^ed 
and  difficult  road  had  seldom  been  travelled  over.  The 
ascents  and  descents  were  seemingly  impracticable ;  it 
made  the  travellers  giddy  to  look  at  them.  The  road 
was  "  one  continuation  of  rocks  and  stones,  over  which 
the  camels  with  the  greatest  difficulty  scrambled"  with 
their  burdens.*  At  night  they  bivouacked  on  the  banks 
of  the  Punshuhur  river.  There  were  no  tents,  no  shel- 
ter of  any  kind  for  the  ladies.  So  they  rolled  themselves 
up  in  their  warmest  garments,  laid  their  heads  upon 
their  saddles,  and  composed  themselves,  as  best  they 
could,  to  sleep. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  15th  of  January  they 
crossed  the  deep  and  rapid  fords  of  the  Punshuhur  river. 

*  Captain  JohnsorCs  Journal.  The  of  our  Afghan  attendants  told  us  to 
writer  adds:  *^  At  the  conunencement  accompany  him  inside  a  miserable 
of  the  defile,  and  for  some  consider-  cow-shed,  which  on  our  first  entrance 
able  distance,  passed  two  or  three  was  so  blackened  with  the  dense 
hundreds  of  our  poor  miserable  Hin-  smoke  from  a  good  blazing  fire  in  the 
dostanees,  who  had  escaped  up  this  centre  of  the  hut,  that  we  could  see 
unfrequented  road  from  the  massacre  none  of  the  objects  around  us,  until 
of  the  12th.  They  had  not  a  ra^  to  we  had  stretched  ourselves  at  length 
cover  them,  and  were  aU  more  or  less  on  the  fioor,  and  consequently  out  of 
frost-bitten,  wounded,  or  starving,  the  influence  of  the  smoke,  when  we 
The  poor  wretches  were  huddled  to-  perceived  our  companions  to  be  three 
^ther  in  thirties  and  forties,  so  as  to  or  four  half-starved  Hindostanees, 
impart  to  each  other  a  little  animal  who  had  accompanied  our  party, 
heat,  as  other  warmth  was  denied  Our  attendant  wished  to  eject  them ; 
them  by  the  barren,  inhospitable  wil-  but  we  too  truly  sympathised  with 
derness  around  them.  We  after-  their  sufferings  to  permit  such  an  act 
wards  learnt  that  scarcely  one  of  of  tyrannjr.  We  shortly  afterwards 
these  poor  wretches  escaped  from  the  got  an  invitation  from  Mahomed 
defile  in  which  they  had  taken  shcl-  Akbar  to  join  him  and  his  party  to 
ter ;  and  that,  driven  to  the  extremes  dinner  inside  the  fort.  The  room 
of  hunger,  some  of  them  had,  for  a  of  our  reception  was  not  much  better 
few  short  hours,  sustained  life  by  than  that  we  had  left.  We  had,  how- 
feeding  on  their  dead  comrades.  The  ever,  a  capital  dinner,  some  cups  of 
wind  was  blowing  bitterly  cold  at  our  good  tea,  and  a  luxurious  rest  for  the 
bivouac.  No  shelter  of  any  kind  night,  the  room  having  been  heated 
for  the  ladies  of  our  party  dunng  the  with  a  good  blazing  fire  and  lots  of 
whole  ni^ht.  Happiness  is  compara-  smoke,  with  no  outlet  for  either,  ex- 
tive ;  and  tnily  fortunate  did  General  cept  the  door  and  a  small  hole  in  the 
Elphinstone,  brigadier  Shelton,  and  roof." — \MSJ\ 
myself  consider  ourselves  when  one 