


HALT  AT  TUGREE.  486 

The  passage  was  not  accomplished  without  difficulty 
and  danger;  but  the  active  kindness  of  the  Afghan 
Sirdars  availed  to  escort  the  party  over  in  safety.*  A 
bitterly  cold  wind  was  blowing  as  they  passed ;  and  a 
few  followers  and  cattle  were  lost.  Proceeding  then  in 
a  north-easterly  direction,  they  made  their  way  over  a 
barren,  inhospitable  country,  where  neither  grass  nor 
water  was  to  be  seen,  into  the  fertile  valley  of  Lugh- 
man;  and  halted  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Tugree  fort. 
The  following  day  was  the  Sabbath.  A  day's  halt  had 
been  determined  upon ;  and  it  fell,  by  a  happy  accident, 
on  the  Christian's  day  of  rest.  A  Bible  and  Prayer-book 
had  been  "  picked  up  on  the  field  at  Boot-Khak ;"  and 
the  service  of  the  Church  of  England  was  read  to  the 
little  band  of  prisoners.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  with 
what  deep  emotion  they  must  have  joined  in  the  prayer 
beseeching  the  Almighty  to  have  mercy  "  upon  all  pri- 
soners and  captives." 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  they  were  again  upon 
the  move.f    Tugree  is  only  thirty  miles  distant  from 

*  Captain    Johnson   says   in   his  well  up  the  stream.    The  Afghans 

journal, ''  Both  Mahomed  Akbar  and  made  great  exertions  to  save  both 

his  chiefs  were  most    attentive    in  men  and  animals  struggling  in  the 

escorting  over  in  safety  the  ladies  water." — [^Lady  Sale's  Journal,'^ 
and    their    children    and    wounded        +  "  Jan.  17,  1842. — Early  m  the 

Europeans."    There  is  other  testi-  morning  we  were,  to  our  surprise,  told 

mony  to  the  same  effect :  "  Many  of  to  prepare  for  a  march  higher  up  the 

the  ladies,  being  mounted  on  ponies,  valley,  and  further  removed    from 

were  obliged  to  dismount  and  ride  Jellalabad,  from  which  place  Tugree 

astride  on  the  chargers  of  their  Af-  is  about  thirty  miles  distant.    All  our 

ghan  acquaintance,  to  avoid  getting  hopes,  which  we  had  entertained  hi- 

wet.    Nothing  could  exceed  the  po-  therto  of  being  escorted  to  Jellalabad, 

lltencss  and  attention  of  Mahomed  are  now  blighted,  and  we  see  plainly 

Akbar  on  this  occasion,  who  mani-  that  we  are  nothing  more  nor  less  than 

fested  the  greatest  anxiety  until  all  prisoners,  until  such  time  as  General 

had  crossed  over  in  safety." — [^Eyre's  Sale   shall  evacuate  Jellalabad,  or 

Rough  Notes  of  Imprisonment  in  Af*  Dost  Mahomed  Khan  be  permitted 

ghanistan.'j      "  The  chiefs  gave  us  by  our  government  to  return  to  the 

every  assistance.    Mahomed  Akbar  country.     Started  at  nine,  and  ar- 

Khan  carried  Mrs.  Waller  over  be-  rived  at  Budeeabad,  almost  at  the  top 

hind  him  on  his  own  horse.     One  of  the  valley,  and  close  to  the  first 