

rode  by  me  to  keep  my  horse*s  head  range  of  hills  towards  Kafiristan.    It 


486 


THE  CAPTIVITY. 


Jellalabad ;  and  up  to  this  time  a  faint  hope  had  been 
encouraged  by  the  captives  that  they  were  to  be  escorted 
to  that  place.  But  now  an  order  came  for  them  "  to 
prepare  for  a  march  higher  up  the  valley,"  and  in  a 
different  direction.  It  was  now  found  that  their  desti- 
nation was  the  fort  of  Budeeabad.  This  was  to  be  their 
resting-place.  It  had  been  recently  erected;  and  was 
the  property  of  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  the  father-in-law 
of  the  Sirdar.  Five  rooms,  composing  two  sides  of  an 
inner  square,  or  citadel,  were  allotted -to  the  British 
prisoners.  The  buildings  were  "  intended  for  the  chief 
and  his  favourite  wife,"*  and  it  may  therefore  be  pre- 
sumed that  they  afforded  the  best  accommodation  in  the 
place.  The  party  consisted  of  nine  ladies,  twenty  gen- 
tlemen, and  fourteen  children.  Seventeen  European  sol- 
diers, two  European  women  and  a  child,  were  located  in 
another  part  of  the  fort. 

On  that  night  of  the  17th  of  January  Pottinger  and 
Akbar  Khan  were  in  close  and  earnest  conversation. 
The  Sirdar  entered  on  the  subject  of  his  father's  release ; 
and  asked  the  English  officer  if  he  would  guarantee  an 
interchange  of  prisoners  and  the  evacuation  of  Jellala- 
bad. Pottinger  could  only  answer  that  he  was  a 
prisoner  and  powerless;  and  could  give  no  promises 
with  any  certainty  of  their  being  performed.  But  he 
undertook  to  write  to  Macgregor  on  the  subject ;  and  to 
urge  him  to  lay  the  wishes  of  the  Sirdar  before  the 
Supreme  Grovemment.f    It  appeared  to  Pottinger  that 


belongs  to  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  is 
nearly  new,  and  has  a  deep  ditch  and 
/ausse-hraie  all  round  it.  Our  abode 
consists  of  five  rooms  on  two  sides 
of  a  small  square.  This  space  is 
to  accommodate  nine  ladies,  twenty 
gentlemen,  and  fourteen  children, 
and  in  the  Tei-Khana  are  seven- 
teen European  soldiers  and  three 
European  women — all  prisoners.** — 


[Captain  Johnson's  Narrative  of  his 
Captivity.    MS.'] 
*  Lady  Salens  JoumaL 

J  "Last  night,  Mahomed  Akbar 
I  had  a  long  conversation.  He 
was  very  anxious  for  the  release  of 
his  father,  and  made  many  promises 
in  his  name  if  we  would  release  him. 
I  pointed  out  that  at  least  two  months 
must  elapse  before  we  could  in  any 


PRISON-LIFE.  487 

no  more  expedient  course  could  be  adopted  than  that 
involving  a  general  interchange  of  prisoners  and  the 
restoration  of  the  country  to  Dost  Mahomed  Khan. 

Ostensibly  for  the  purpose  of  proceeding  southward 
for  the  reduction  of  Jellalabad,  Akbar  Khan  took  his 
departure  on  the  following  day;  and  the  captives  b^an 
to  settle  down  into  the  monotony  of  prison-life.  In 
this  place  they  continued  to  reside  for  nearly  three 
months.  The  incidents  of  captivity,  during  this  period, 
were  not  many,  or  very  memorable.  Here  for  the  first 
time,  after  the  lapse  of  a  fortnight,  they  were  able  to 
change  their  clothes.*  Clean  linen  was  very  scarce; 
and  the  nice  sensibilities  of  delicate  English  ladies  were 
outraged  by  the  appearance  of  nauseous  vermin.  The 
food  that  was  served  out  to  them  was  not  of  the  most 
luxurious  description.  It  consisted  of  rice,  mutton,  and 
thick  cakes  of  unleavened  dough,  prepared  by  the  Af- 
ghan cooks  in  a  manner  little  relished  by  English 
palates.f  Captain  Lawrence  acted  as  the  steward  of 
the  captive  party,  and  divided  the  supplies,  whether 
they  were  the  daily  food  of  the  prisoners,  or  parcels 