

*  The  questions  were— 1st.  "  What  breach  of  faith?    4th.  What  were  the 

were  the  terms  negotiated  by  Sir  W.  manner  and  causes  of  Sir  W.  Mac- 

Macnaghten  with  the  rebels  ?    2nd.  naghten's  murder  ?"     I  have  found 

What  alteration  was  made  by  Major  the  information  conveyed  in  Captain 

Pottinger?     drd.  What  does  Major  Mackenzie's  answers  of  some  use  in 

Pottlnger  alhide  to  when  he  talks  of  the  course  of  my  narrative. 


THE  CAPTIYITT.  481 


CHAPTER  IV. 

[January— April :  1842.] 

The  Captivity—Surrender  of  the  Married  Families — Their  Journey  to 
Tezeen— Proceed  to  Tugree — Interviews  between  Fottinser  and  Akbar 
Khan— Removal  to  Budeeabad — ^Prison  Life — Removal  to  Zanda— Death 
of  General  Elphinstone. 

Few  were  the  letters  which  Mackenzie  brought  from  his 
fellow-captives  to  their  friends  at  Jellalabad.  There 
may  have  been  state  reasons  for  the  secrecy  which  en- 
veloped his  movements ;  but  to  all  parties  the  disappoint- 
ment was  great.  Every  one  at  Jellalabad  was  eaget  for 
intelligence  regarding  the  incidents  which  had  befallen 
the  little  band  of  prisoners,  and  for  particulars  of  all  the 
daily  environments  of  their  captive  state.  All  through 
the  camp  ran  eager  inquiries;  and  little  by  little  the 
much-coveted  information  began  to  radiate  from  the 
General's  tent,  and  to  diffuse  itself  in  more  remote 
quarters.  What  was  then  told  in  mere  outline  may 
here  be  given  more  in  detail. 

It  was  on  the  9  th  of  January  that  the  married 
families  were  made  over  to  the  protection  of  Mahomed 
Akbar  Khan.  The  following  day  was  spent  by  them  in 
a  small  fort,  where  they  found  Pottinger,  Lawrence,  and 
Mackenzie,  who  had  been   surrendered  a?  hostages  at 

VOL.  II.  2  I 


482  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

Boot-Elhak.  Rude  as  was  the  accommodation,  and 
imtempting  as  was  the  fare,  that  were  here  offered 
them,  after  the  miseries  and  privations  of  the  retreat 
through  the  snowy  passes,  the  "  small  dark  hovels"  in 
which  they  were  crowded  together  were  a  very  palace, 
and  the  "greasy  palao"  in  which  they  dipped  their 
fingers  was  regal  fare.  They  slept  that  night  on  the 
bare  ground — but  there  was  a  roof  between  them  and 
the  open  sky;  and  they  thought  little  of  the  smoke, 
which  almost  suflFocated  them,  whilst  in  the  enjoyment 
of  the  reviving  warmth  of  a  wood  fire.* 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  through  scenes  of  unex- 
ampled horror,  the  party  of  captives  were  conducted  to 
the  Tezeen  fort.  The  road  was  strewn  with  the  stark 
bodies  of  the  mangled  dead.  Here  and  there  little 
groups  of  wretched  camp-followers,  starving,  fix)st- 
bitten,  many  of  them  in  a  state  of  gibbering  idiotcy 
were  to  be  seen  cowering  in  the  snow ;  or  solitary  men, 
perhaps  wounded  and  naked,  were  creeping  out  of  their 
hiding-places,  in  an  extremity  of  mortal  suffering  and 
fear.  The  sickening  smell  of  death  rose  firom  the  bloody 
corpses  through  which  our  English  ladies  guided  their 
horses,  striving  not  to  tread  upon  the  bodies,f  or  in 
their  camel-panniers  jolted  and  stumbled  over  the  ob- 
structing carrion.  Happy  were  they  all,  when,  about 
the  hour  of  evening  prayer,  that  dreadful  journey  was 
at  an  end,  and  the  fort  of  Tezeen  appeared  in  sight. 
There  they  were  hospitably  received — and  there  an- 