

way  have  the  instructions  of  goyern-  prejudicial  to  its  interests  to  release 

ment  regarding  the  release  of  the  the  Dost  and  family.** — {^Major  Pot» 

Ameer.    I  can  see  no  objection  to  linger  to  Major  Macgr^or :  Lughmari^ 

the  release  of  the  Ameer,  unless  go-  January  18,  1842.    MS,  Correspond' 

vemment  intends  making  an  example  ence.J 

of  the  city  of  Caubul.     Our  release  *  January  19. — Changedmy  clothes 

and  that  of  the  hostages  at  Caubul  for  the  first  time  since  leaying  Cau- 

appears  to  depend  upon  his  release,  bul,  January  6,  and  was  fortunate 

His  family*s  release  recjuires  that  of  enouffh  to  have  a  clean  shirt.     My 

the  women  here.    I  wish  for  these  feet  had  become  so  swollen  that  X 

last  something  could  be  done ;  but  I  could  not   again  put  on  my  boots 

fear  not.    You  must  use  your  influ-  when  once  pulled  off.    My  eyes  still 

ence.     They  tcU   me  we   shall  be  very  sore  from  the  effects  of  the  snow 

forwarded  to  Peshawur  if  you  eyacu-  on  the  march." — [Captain  Johnson*8 

ate  Jellalabad;  and  the  Sirdar  hem  Narrative  of  his  Captivity.    MS."] 

me  that  I  write  you  on  the  sub-  t  Subsequently  the  materials  were 

ject.     I  haye  explained  that  I  haye  seryed    out   to    the    prisoners    and 

no  authority  now,  and  said  that  I  dressed  by  their  own  Hindostanee 

cannot  promise  anything  of  the  sort,  seryants. 
I  hope  goyemment  will  see  nothing 


488  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

of  clothes,  money,*  and  other  equally  acceptable  pre- 
sents sent  them  either  by  their  A%han  captors  or  their 
friends  at  Jellalabad. 

There  was  nothing  very  painful  in  their  captivity. 
They  were  not  suffered  to  wander  far  from  their  prison- 
house  ;  but  within  its  walls  they  found  both  occupation 
and  amusement,  and  the  time  passed  at  Budeeabad  is  not 
now,  in  the  retrospect,  the  saddest  of  their  lives.  They 
had  among  them  a  few  books  ;  some  had  been  brought 
for  sale  by  natives  of  the  country,  who  had  picked  them 
up  on  the  road  traversed  by  the  army  on  its  retreat ; 
others  had  been  forwarded  by  friends  at  Jellalabad. 
Now  and  then  a  stray  newspaper  came  in  from  that 
place.  It  is  hard  to  say  how  greedily  its  contents  were 
devoured,  and  how  eagerly  they  were  discussed.  Some- 
times letters  were  received  from  below  ;  there  was 
a  good  deal  of  cypher-correspondence  between  the 
prisoners  and  Sale's  garrison,f  and  many  long  letters 
were  written  to  friends  in  India  or  in  England,  to  be 
despatched  when  opportunity  might  offer.  Then  there 
;were  amongst  them  two  or  three  packs  of  old  playing  . 
cards — dirty  and  limp,  but  not  the  less  serviceable  for 
these  conventional  defects.  Some  rude  backgammon  and 
drafts  boards  had  been  constructed  for  prison  service ; 
and  there  was  quite  enough   elasticity  of  spirits  left 