

Mackenzie  took  his  departure  with  these  replies. 
There  was  stirring  work,  at  this  time,  for  Akbar  Khan 
at  Caubul;  and  the  negotiations  had  no  result.    But  the 

*  General  Pollock  to  Major  Pot'  you  should  have  considered  it  to  be 

finger:   JeUaJabad,   May    10,   1842.  necessary,   under  any  circumstances, 

Published  Papers.  Lord  Ellenborough  to  have  had  any  communication  what- 

was  unwilling  that  any  money  should  ever  of  a  diplomatic  nature  with  Moi- 

be  paid  for  the  release  of  the  captives ;  homed  Akbar  Khan,  in  whom  it  must 

but  was  inclined  to  exchange  Dost  be  impossible  for  any  one  to  place  any 

Mahomed    and    his    family  for    the  trust.  — {Published  Papers.^     Akbar 

prisoners  in  the  hands  of  the  Sirdar.  Rhan,  at  this  time,  seems  almost  to 

"  Undoubtedly,"  he  wrote,  "  on  the  have  considered  the  release  of  his 

26th   of    April,    you  remained    au-  father  and  family  as  hopeless;  and 

thorised,  by  the  instructions  of  the  Pollock  did  not  think   he  was  au- 

24th  of  February,  to  give  money  on  thorised  to  propose  an  exchange  of 

the  public  account  for  the  release  of  prisoners ;  for  although,  on  the  24th 

individual  prisoners ;  and  if,  previously  of  February,  Lord  Auckland  suggested 

to  the  receipt  of  my  letter  of  the  25th  that  he  "  might  speak  of  the  release 

of  April,  you  should  have  concluded  of  Dost  Mahomed  as  an  event  which 

a  negotiation  for  the  release  of  any  might  not  be  altogether  impossible," 

individual  prisoners  on  that  condi-  he  did  not  know  how  far  such  a  mea^ 

tion,   the   Governor- General    would  sure  might  be  sanctioned  by   Lord 

feel  himself  under  the  necessity  of  Ellenborough.  Moreover,  Pollock  be- 

sanctioning  any  payment  of  money  to  lieved  that  the   exchange   had  only 

which  you   may  have  then  pledged  been  authorised  in  the  event  of  his 

yourself.     After  the  receipt  of  that  being  able  to  treat  for  the  release  of 

letter,  you  will,  of  course,  in  any  future  the  whole  of  the  British  prisoners; 

negotiation,  have  adhered  to  the  in-  and  they  were  not  all  in  the  hands  of 

structions  contained  in  it.     It  cannot  Akbar  Khan, 
but  be  a  subject  of  much  regret  that 


480  THE  HALT  AT  JELLALABAD. 

visits  of  the  British  officer  to  Jellalabad  had  not  been 
without  their  uses.  Mackenzie  had  been  the  bearer  of 
much  information  of  the  deepest  interest,  and  had  placed 
many  valuable  documents  in  the  hands  of  General  Pol- 
lock. The  General  had  laid  before  him  a  string  of 
questions  relative  to  the  causes  and  progress  of  the  in- 
surrection at  Caubul,  the  answers  to  which,  in  the 
existing  state  of  information  even  in  the  best-informed 
quarters,  threw  a  flood  of  light  upon  many  dark  points 
of  recent  history.  And  whilst  in  official  places  many 
important  revelations  were  made,  all  through  the  general 
camp  there  transpired,  in  time,  from  the  same  source, 
much  that  was  eagerly  sought,  eagerly  discussed  when 
found,  and  eagerly  transmitted  to  every  cantonment  ia 
India,  where  the  fate  of  the  captives  in  the  hands  of 
Akbar  Khan  was  a  matter  of  the  liveliest  concernment, 
and  a  source  of  the  most  painful  alarm.* 