

*  On  that  day  Akbar  Khan  sought  the  deed  which  he  so  much  regretted 

an  interview  with  Lad^  Macnaghten.  mieht  be  undone. 
Painful  ai  such  a  meeting  must  have        f  *^  The  sight  was  dreadful ;   the 

been,  the  bereaved  widow  was  not  in  smell  of  the  blood  sickening ;  and  the 

a  position  to  refuse  to  see  her  bus-  corpses  lay  so  thick  it  was  mipossible 

band^s  murderer.      He  spoke  very  to  look  from  them,  as  it  required 

kindly  to  her ;  and  as  she  sate  in  care  to  guide  my  horse  so  as  not  to 

flQent  sorrow  before  him,  declared  tread    upon    the   bodies."  —  \,Lady 

that  he  would  give  his  ri^t  arm  that  Sale'*  Joumal.'] 


ARRIVAL  AT  JUGDULLUCK.  483 

Other  captive  was  added  to  their  number.  Lieutenant 
Melville,  of  the  64th  Native  Infantry,  who  had  been 
wounded  on  the  retreat,  and  whose  wounds  had  been 
bound  up  by  the  hand  of  Akbar  Khan  himself,  was 
waiting  their  arrival  in  the  fort  * 

On  the  following  day  they  were  carried  to  Seh-Babaj 
and  the  same  dreadful  scenes  of  carnage  sickened  them 
as  they  went  along.  On  the  march  another  prisoner,  and 
a  welcome  one,  was  added  to  the  party— one  whom  the 
sick  and  wounded  had  much  wanted — a  medical  officer, 
Dr.  Macgrath.f  On  the  18th,  partly  over  remote 
mountain  paths,  so  precipitous  that  the  camels  could 
scarcely  keep  their  footing,  and  partly  along  the  bloody 
track  of  our  slaughtered  army,  the  captive  band  were 
escorted  to  JugduUuck.  Here  three  ragged  tents  had 
been  pitched  for  their  reception.  Here  they  found  Gene- 
ral Elphinstone,  Brigadier  Shelton,  and  Captain  John- 
son, who  had  been  claimed  as  hostages  by  Akbar  Khan; 
and  here  they  learnt  that  all  the  soldiers  and  camp- 
followers  who  had  left  Caubul,  with  the  exception  of 
this  little  handful  of  prisoners,  had,  in  all  probability, 
been  annihilated  on  the  march4 

*  *^  The  column  passed  on,  and  I  mounted  me  behind  a  follower,  and 

had  not  been  there  five  minutes  ere  having  put  a  turban  on  my  head,  and 

a  horseman  rode  up,  who  had  accom-  given  me  a  posteen,  made  me  proceed 

panied  Captain  Skmner  from  his  in-  by  his  side.  — [^Lieut,  MelviUe  s  Nar^ 

terview  with  the  Sirdar,  and  offered  rative,'] 

me  a  *  nan*  (a  native  loaf)  for  a  ru«  f  **  Mr.Macgrath  had  several  nar- 

pee.  This  I  wanted  not ;  but  I  bought  row  escapes  ;  and  when  surrounded 

and  gave  it  to  a  poor  European  strug-  bj  Ghilzye  footmen  with  their  long 

gling  on,    I  then  offered  the  man  knives  drawn,  owed  his  life  in  a  great 

seven  rupees  (being  all  I  had)  if  he  measure  to  an  Afghan  horseman,  who 

would  mount  me  before  him,  and  recognised  him  as  having  shown  some 