

To  these  proposals  Pollock  replied  : 

With  regard  to  the  first,  it  follows  as  a  matter  of  course  that, 
whenever  we  agree  to  any  terms,  amnesty  for  the  past  will  result. 

The  second  request,  about  residing  at  Caubul  and  Jellalabad,  is 
out  of  place  now;  it  must  depend  upon  contingencies,  and  be  dis- 
cussed only  after  other  and  more  important  points  have  been 
agreed  upon. 

With  reference  to  the  third  request,  the  Sirdar  Mahomed 
Akbar  may  be  assured  that  I  would  guarantee  his  personal  safety 
whenever  he  may  visit  my  camp;  but  his  doing  so  would  require 
some  preliminary  arrangement,  unless  he  voluntarily  claims  our 
protection,  in  which  case  I  could  immediately  arrange  for  his 
safety,  and  appeal  to  the  government  on  his  behalf. 

The  fourth  request  refers  to  matters  entirely  depending  on 
future  results,  and  which  are  known  to  God  alone.  It  would 
therefore  be  vain  to  speculate  on  them  at  this  stage  of  our  nego- 
tiation. 

With  regard  to  the  fifth  and  sixth  requests,  I  have  already  told 
you  that  I  suppose  the  Sirdar  rests  his  claim  to  any  present  on 
his  delivering  up  the  prisoners,  which,  as  I  have  before  stated, 
will  be  the  best  evidence  of  good  faith,  and  a  sincere  wish  for 

♦  Major  Pottinger  to  General  Pol-  it  is  paid,  to  be  given  to  Sir-Bolund 

lock:  May  8,  1842.     I  have  quoted  Khan "  — is  printed,    "  They    have 

from  the  original  in  Pottinger^s  hand-  asked  for  the  money,  &c.,  to  be  given 

writing.  But  the  letter  is  given  among  to  Jiis  Colund  Khan.**     It  may  puzzle 

the  published  papers,  with  the  usual  the  future  historian  to  discover  who 

official  emendations.  Thus  the  passage,  ''his  Colund  Khan*'  may  have  been. 
**  They  have  asked  for  the  money,  if 


pollock's  reply.  479 

favorable  terms  with  the  British  Government.  I  have  accord- 
ingly already  mentioned  the  sum  of  two  lakhs  of  rupees.  The 
Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  must  recollect  that  he  is  desirous  of  ob- 
taining the  females  of  his  own  family.  The  British  Government 
will  not  require  any  money  to  be  paid  on  their  account;  and  I 
hereby  guarantee  that,  on  all  the  prisoners  being  delivered  over  to 
me,  I  will  write  to  India  for  the  women  of  the  Sirdar  Mahomed 
Akbar,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  my  request  will  be  complied 
with. 

As  to  the  payment  of  the  money  for  the  prisoners  now  with,  or 
in  the  power  of  Mahomed  Akbar^  it  shall  be  made  to  any  person 
the  Sirdar  may  appoint  to  receive  it,  or  it  shall  be  paid  to 
Hindoos  who  can  give  bills  on  Caubul.  The  good  faith  and 
honour  of  the  British  nation  is  not  doubted,  and  I  therefore 
hereby  pledge  myself  to  pay  the  two  lakhs  of  rupees  on  account 
of  government  whenever  the  prisoners  are  made  over  to  me.* 