

with  money   for  our  ransom — that  into  food  for  a  joke.   Captain  Johnson 

Macgregor  should  be  written  to,  in  says:  ^^  April  1,1842.  Was  awakened 

order   to    ascertain    if  government    early  by  M telling  me  a  letter  had 

would  authorise  the  payment  of  the  been  received  by  L from  Mac- 
sum.  I  wrote  to  Burn,  asking  him  gregor  at  Jellalabad,  informing  him 
to  make  known  to  Macgregor  the  that  our  ransom  had  been  effected  for 
offer  that  had  been  made  to  me.  Re-  three  and  a  half  lakhs  of  rupees,  and 
ceivcd  for  reply  that  we  might  re-  that  we  were  to  start  in  five  or  six 
main  satisfied  government  would  not  days.  Was  up  in  an  instant — off"  to 
begrudge  any  sum  for  our  ransom.  L ;  and  heard  the  story  con- 
Nothing  further  has,  however,  been  firmed  by  him.  The  report  spread 
done." — [Captain  Johnson's  Naira-  through  the  whole  fort,  among  our 
live.    MS."]  servants  as  well  as  the  Europeans,  in 

f  ^*  About  the  middle  of  this  month  less  than  a  minute.    All  was  intense 

Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  while  mount-  delight;  when,  on  its  being  a  little 

inghishorse,  was  wounded  in  the  arm  sobered  down,  to  my  horror,  I  was 

by  a  musket-ball  by  one  of  his  own  told  that  the  story  was  all  fudge.    I 

servants,  who  was  immediately  seized  was  half  mad  with  rage  at  being  made 

and  burnt  alive.    It  is  ten  thousand  such  an  April  fool  of,  on  a  subject 

pities  the  man  had  not  taken  a  surer  which,  of  all  others  in  our  situation, 

aim,  although,  on  the  report  reaching  should  have  been  the  last  for  any  of 

us,  we  were  told  that  all  our  lives  our  party  to  have  expended  his  wit 

would  have  been   sacrificed   if  the  upon.'* — [Captain  Johnson's  Narrative 

Sirdar  had  been  killed.     And  it  is  o/his  Captioity,  MS."] 


494  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

was  the  story  told  at  first.  It  was  said  that  the  Sirdar 
had  been  killed  in  the  action ;  and  that  Mahomed  Shah 
Khan  had  also  fallen.  It  was  a  day  of  intense  ex- 
citement— of  painful  speculation  and  suspense.  Some 
thought  that  Sale  would  push  on  to  their  rescue — 
others,  that  the  Sirdar,  if  alive,  would  condemn  them  to 
death  in  revenge  for  his  discomfiture;  or  that,  if  he  had 
fallen,  they  would  be  massacred  by  their  guards.*  An- 
other day — and  another  of  doubt  and  anxiety  followed. 
The  captives  watched,  with  deep  and  fearful  interest, 
the  deportment  of  their  keepers,  who  were  seen  grouping 
together  and  conversing  in  low  mysterious  whispers. 
"  A  fnghtfiil  stillness  appeared  to  prevail/'  f  Then 
came  terrible  rumours  to  the  eflFect  that  the  captives  were 

*  "  Aj^  7.— Whilst  sitting  with  t  ''April  9.— The  whole  of  this  day 
the  Nazir  who  has  charge  of  us,  at  and  yesterday  passed  in  the  greatest 
about  half-past  one,  a  man  came  in  suspense.  Reports  reached  us  to-day 
great  haste  and  whispered  something  that  the  Sirdar  and  Mahomed  Sban 
in  his  car.  Without  sa3ring  a  word.  Khan  had  arrived  at  the  fort  of  the 
he  instantly  armed  himself  ca/)-a-pt«,  latter,  about  two  miles  distant  from 
and  went  out  of  the  fort.  All  was  us.  The  rout  of  the  Afghan  army 
surmise.  In  two  or  three  hours  a  appears  to  have  been  perfect,  and 
report  reached  us  of  the  total  defeat  we  hear  that  they  have  lost  all  their 
of  Mahomed  AkbarKhan*8  army  this  guns,  camp- equipage,  and  private 
morning  at  Jellalabad.  Some  said  property.  All  our  guard  appear  very 
the  Sirdar  was  killed — odiers,  [that  mysterious  —  group  together  —  and 
Mahomed  Shah  Khan  had  shared  the  talk  in  whispers.  The  mhabitants  of 
same  fate — whilst  a  third  party  gave  the  fort  have  removed  their  pro- 
out  that  they  had  both  fled  with  the  perty  and  lefl  their  homes.  Towards 
greatest  precipitation  towards  Cau-  the  afternoon,  several  of  our  guard, 
bul.  Of  the  authenticity  of  the  ru-  with  whom  we  had  been  in  the  habit 
moured  defeat  no  one  doubted.  Now  of  conversing,  and  who  had  always 
began  surmises  as  to  the  result  of  been  kind  to  us,  on  our  asking  them 
General  Sale's  victory  to  ourselves,  what  would  become  of  us,  would 
Would  he  push  on  to  our  release  ?  shake  their  heads  and  say,  *  You  are 
Fondly  did  we  hope  sol  Or  would  in  the  hands  of  Grod.'  A  frightful 
the  Sirdarjand  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  stillness  appeared  to  prevail.  By 
if  alive,  avenge  themselves  in  our  degrees  we  began  to  hear  fearful 
blood  for  the  ruin  of  all  their  hopes  rumours  that  we  were  all  to  be  mas- 
at  Jellalabad  ?  Or,  should  they  both  sacred  at  sunset.  Whether  these 
be  killed,  might  not  our  guard,  who  first  originated  in  the  imaginations 
were  devotemy  attached  to  Mahomed  of  some  of  our  party,  or  in  those  of 
Shah  Khan,  butcher  us  in  revenge  the  Afghans,  I  cannot  say  —  but 
for  his  death?  We  were  perfectly  knowing  the  revengeful  temper  of 
defenceless.  All  our  swords  and  pis-  those  in  whose  hands  we  were,  no- 
tols  had  long  been  taken  away  from  thing  appeared  to  us  more  probable ; 
tis.  Our  suspense  was  great.** — [Cap-  and  our  anxiety  and  suspense  in- 
tam  Johnson's  Narrative,    MS,]  creased  as  the  day  wore  on.     At 