

that  I  should  record  him  to  the  very  others,  and  the  unfathomable  designs 


ed  a  measure  of  Christian  benevolence,  the  means  are  always  adapted  to  the 

patience,  and  hi^h-souled  fortitude,  end.** — ^Eyre.]    See  also  Tottinger'f 

which  gained  hun  the    affectionate  evidence;  quoted, an/e,  pages  179-180, 

regard  and  affectionate  esteem  of  aU  note. 

2k2 


500  THE  CAPTrVTTY. 

preceding  part  of  my  narrative — but  evea  with  this 
statement  in  his  hand,  he  could  not  have  faced  his 
countrymen  without  bringing  down  upon  himself  a 
verdict  of  condemnation.  After  all  that  has  been 
written  of  his  deficiencies  at  Caubul,  it  may  seem  a 
startling  inconsistency  to  say  that  he  was  a  brave  and 
high-minded  gentleman.  He  was  so  esteemed  before,  in 
an  evil  hour  for  his  own  and  his  country's  reputation, 
he  was  ordered  to  carry  his  infirmities  across  the  Indus ; 
and  in  spite  of  all  the  humiliating  circumstances  of  our 
discomfiture  at  Caubul,  posterity  may  so  esteem  him. 
Not  upon  him,  but  upon  those  who  are  responsible  for 
his  appointment  to  high  military  conmiand  at  such  a 
time  and  in  such  a  place — firstly,  upon  those  who  sent 
him  to  India ;  secondly,  and  chiefly,  upon  those  who  sent 
him  to  Afghanistan — must  we  fix  the  shame  of  this 
great  miscarriage.  When  he  consented  to  leave  the 
quiet  enjoyment  of  an  honoured  old  age  at  home  to 
carry  his  good  fame  and  his  broken  constitution  to  a 
distant  Indian  Presidency,  he  committed  a  fatal  error, 
for  which  he  made  terrible  atonement.  But  thero  are 
few  who  will  not  pity  rather  than  condemn  the  man, 
who  found  himself  suddenly,  with  all  his  weakness  upon 
him,  in  a  sea  of  difficulty  which  demanded  almost  super- 
human strength  to  bufiet  through  it.  In  these  pages  he 
has  appeared  only  as  the  military  leader — as  one  who, 
in  the  hour  of  danger,  was  tried  and  found  wanting. 
His  fine  social  qualities  cannot  be  accepted  as  a  set-oflf 
to  his  military  deficiencies.  It  is  not  to  be  pleaded  in 
answer  to  the  charge  of  having  sacrificed  an  army  at 
Caubul,  that  he  was  an  agreeable  gentleman  in  private 
life,  that  he  was  always  ready  with  an  anecdote  and 
told  it  well,  and  that  it  was  very  hard  not  to  love  him. 
But  now  that  it  has  been  recorded  how  the  soldier  be- 
came the  captive,  and  how  the  captive  passed  away  to 


GENERAL  ELPHINSTONE.  501 

his  rest,  these  things  may  be  set  down  with  a  kindly 
hand  upon  the  last  page  which  bears  his  name ;  and  it 
may  be  permitted  to  us,  for  a  little  space,  to  forget  the 
deficiencies  of  the  soldier  whilst  we  sympathise  with 
the  sufferings  of  the  man.* 

*  Greneral  Elplun8tone*s  remains  deputed  one  of  their  number  to  learn 
were  sent  by  Akbar  Khan,  for  inters  the  truth.  The  Sirdar  is  much 
ment,  to  Jellalabad.  The  General's  grieved  at  the  accident,  and  now 
faithAil  servant,  Moore,  accompanied  sends  a  party,  with  private  Moore, 
the  body.  ^*  I  have  the  honour  to  the  General's  servant,  to  replace  the 
inform  you,"  wrote  Pottinger  to  Pol-  corpse  and  forward  it  on.  The  Sir- 
lock,  on  the  26th  of  April,  *^  that  dar  at  present  is  unable  to  release 
Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  yesterday  the  two  servants  from  the  hostility  of 
despatched  to  you  the  body  of  the  the  intermediate  clans ;  but  he  pro- 
late Major-General  Elphinstone.  It  mises  to  do  so  as  soon  as  a  person 
was,  however,  intercepted  by  a  part^  may  arrive  sufficiently  powerful  to 
of  the  Ghilzyes,  under  the  supposi-  protect  them." — {^Major  Pottinger  to 
tion  that  the  Prince  in  Gaubul  had  General  Pollock :  Castle  of  A/zool 
sent  it,  the  party  made  prisoners,  and  Khan,  Tezeen,  April  26, 1842.  MS. 
the  European  servant,  who  had  been  Becords."]  The  GeneraPs  remains  sub- 
allowed  to  accompany  it,  wounded,  sequently  reached  Jellalabad,  and 
The  savages,  however,  on  hearing  that  were  interred  with  military  honours. 
Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  had  sent  it, 