


502  STODDABT  AISD  CGNOLLT. 


CHAPTER  V. 

[December:  1841— Jane:  1842.] 

• 

Stoddart  and  Conolly— Intelligence  of  the  Caubnl  Outbreak — ^Arrest  of  the 
English  Officers — ^Their  sufferings  in  Prison — Conolly's  Letters  and 
Journals — Death  of  the  Prisoners. 

There  is  a  painful  episode  in  this  epic  of  the  Afghan 
war,  which  perhaps  can  be  introduced  in  no  place 
more  fitly  than  in  this.  Whilst  the  prisoners,  who 
surrendered  themselves  on  the  march  between  Caubul 
and  Jellalabad,  were  suffering  such  hardships  only  as 
were  inseparable  from  their  position  in  a  rude  and 
inhospitable  country,  and  the  hostages  at  Caubul  were 
under  the  protection  of  a  benevolent  and  high-minded 
Afghan  nobleman,  two  enlightened  and  chivalrous  British 
officers  were  enduring  imparalleled  sufferings  in  the  dun- 
geons of  an  Oosbeg  tjrrant,  far  beyond  the  snowy  moim- 
tains  of  the  Hindoo-Koosh.  Colonel  Stoddart  and  Cap- 
tain ConoUy  were  being  devoured  by  vermin  in  a  cheer- 
less prison  in  the  city  of  Bokhara. 

It  was  in  the  middle  of  the  month  of  December,  1841, 
that  intelligence  reached  Bokhara  to  the  effect  that  all 
Caubul  and  the  surrounding  country  had  risen  against 
Shah  Soojah  and  his  Feringhee  allies, 'that  Sir  Alex- 


IMFRISONMBMT  OF  THE  ENGLISH  0FFICEB8.  508 

ander  Bumes  had  been  killed,  and  the  British  troops 
beaten  in  battle.  A  few  days  before,  an  answer  had 
been  received  to  a  letter  addressed  by  the  Ameer  to  the 
Queen  of  England.  The  answer  was  written  by  the 
Foreign  SecrSaxy,  and  it  referred  the  King  to  the  Go- 
vemment  of  India.  This  indignity— for  so  he  regarded 
it — ^was  still  rankling  in  his  mind,  when  tidings  of  the 
Caubul  outbreak  reached  Bokhara.  The  Ameer  now 
sent  for  the  English  officers — asked  them  many  ques* 
tions — said  that  he  would  release  Colonel  Stoddaft  but 
detain  Captain  Conolly;  and  finally,  after  pondering  the 
matter  for  a  few  days,  condemned  them  both  to  im- 
prisonment in  the  house  of  the  Topshee-Bashee,  or  chief 
artilleryman  of  Bokhara.* 

Here  their  condition  became  every  day  more  deplor- 
able. They  were  not  allowed  a  change  of  raiment,  and 
the  clothes  rotted  on  their  backs.  Nauseous  vermin 
preyed  upon  their  bodies,  and  they  tore  the  irritated 
flesh  with  their  nails.  They  were  not  denied  either  a 
sufficiency  of  food  or  firing ;  but  water  leaked  through 
the  roof  of  the  miserable  room  in  which  they  were  con^ 
fined.  Cold  and  fever  racked  them  grievously;  but  they 
comforted  one  another  with  Christian  consolation,  and 
they  prayed  together  to  the  Christian's  God. 

In  this  wretched  prison-house,  though  strictly  guarded, 


*  ^  The  Ameer  was  very  much  guppoBing  he  (the  Ameer)  was  wili- 