

They  had  not  proceeded  many  miles,  when  two  or 
three  horsemen  galloped  up,  and  the  party  of  captives 
were  suddenly  ordered  to  halt.  Tidings  had  come,  it 
was  said,  to  the  eflfect  that  Pollock  had  been  beaten 
back  in  the  Khybur  Pass,  with  the  loss  of  his  guns,  his 
treasure,  and  half  his  force.  Confident  of  the  truth  of 
this  atrocious  story,  the  Afghans  of  the  guard  broke  out 
into  loud  exultation,  and  the  English  officers,  reluctant 
as  they  were  to  beUeve  it,  were  overborne  at  last  by  the 
confidence  of  their  escort  and  compelled  to  credit  the 
distressing  news.  False  as  was  the  report,  it  was  not 
ineflfective.  The  prisoners  were  carried  back  to  Budeea- 
bad.  With  heavy  hearts  and  sad  countenances  they 
returned  to  their  old  prison-house,  thinking  of  the  new 

the  march.  Took  out  my  saddle  to  manded  her,  without  sending  anj 
put  on  mj  horse;  found  that  some  previous  message,  to  open  her  boxes, 
rascal  had  stolen  my  stirmps.  This  These  were  all  very  soon  ransacked ; 
was  soon  rectified  by  a  piece  of  rope,  and  shawls  and  jewels  to  the  amount 
As  I  was  about  saddling  my  horse,  of  near  two  lakhs  of  rupees  were 
which  was  a  good  Hissar-stud  animal,  taken  possession  of  by  this  chief  of 
Mahomed  Shah  E^an  sent  a  man  to  freebooters — politely  telling  her  lady- 
tell  me  that  this  was  to  be  his  pro-  ship  that  she  might  retain  one  or  two 
perty,  and  that  he  would  furnish  me  shawls  and  any  particular  jewel  for 
with  some  other  beast,  as  none  of  us  which  she  mi^ht  nave  more  value  than 
were  to  be  permitted  to  ride  horses  another,  ^lany  of  the  little  things 
for  fear  of  making  our  escape.  .  .  .  were  also  taken  possession  of  by  a 
In  the  mean  time,  Mahomed  Shah  young  whelp — the  worthy  son  of  so 
Khan,  having  heard  that  Lady  Mac-  worthy  a  sire.  Remonstrance  was 
naghten  was  possessed  of  a  great  useless.  About  9  a.m.  we  started; 
number  of  magnificent  shawls  and  but  still  without  the  slightest  know- 
valuable  jewels,  which  she  had  been  ledge  of  where  we  were  going." — 
so  lucky  as  to  have  saved  up  to  this  [Captain  Johnson's  Narrative  of  his 
time,   went    inside   and    coolly    de-  Captivity,    MS.'] 


MISERIES  OF  THE  MARCH.  497 

disasters  which  had  overtaken  their  unhappy  country. 
But  their  hearts  were  soon  reanimated,  and  their  faces 
soon  brightened  up,  by  the  news  which  greeted  them 
at  Budeeabad.  Pollock  had  not  been  beaten  back ;  but 
had  forced  the  Khybur  Pass,  and  was  marching  tri- 
umphantly upon  Jellalabad.  Again,  therefore,  the  cap- 
tive party  were  ordered  to  resume  their  interrupted 
march  ;  and  on  the  following  morning  again  they 
started. 