

This  was  on  the  19th  of  April.  On  the  evening  of 
that  day  the  prisoners  reached  Tezeen,  and  were  con- 
ducted to  a  fort  belonging  to  a  petty  Ghilzye  chief,  in 
which  were  |dl  the  wives  and  women  of  Mahomed  Shah 
Khan.  There  they  remained,  poorly  acconmiodated  and 
scantily  fed,  until  the  22nd,  when,  with  the  exception  of 
Greneral  Elphinstone  and  two  or  three  other  invalids, 

*  **  I  fell  in  on  the  line  of  march/'  times  a  piece  of  bread,  and  at  others 

writes  Captain  Johnson,  **  with  some  some  almonds  and  rabins ;  and  all, 

Afghan  or  other  who  knew  me  in  without  exception,  that  I  come  acroes 

former  days  at  Caubul,  or  who  were  are  civil  ana  courteous,  and  seem 

in  public  employ  under  me,  who  were  really  to  sympathise  with  our  mb- 

very  liberal  m  offering  to  me  some-  fortunes."— [ikCSw  Narrative.^ 


DEATH  OF  GENERAL  ELFHINSTONE.        499 

they  were  all  carried  oflf  in  the  direction  of  the  hills,  up 
a  gradual  ascent  of  many  thousands  of  feet,  to  a  place 
called  Zanda.  There  they  halted  for  some  weeks,  and 
in  the  mean  while  Captain  Mackenzie  was  despatched  to 
Pollock's  camp  at  Jellalabad ;  and  Greneral  Elphinstone 
died. 

By  his  fellow-captives  his  dissolution  had  long  been 
anticipated,  and  was  now  hardly  deplored.  Death 
brought  him  a  merciful  release  from  an  accumulation  of 
mortal  sufferings.  Incessant  pain  of  body  and  anguish 
of  mind  had  long  been  his  portion.  He  felt  acutely  the 
humiliating  position  into  which  it  had  pleased  Provi- 
dence to  cast  him,  and  neither  hoped  nor  wished  to  live 
to  face  his  countrymen  in  the  provinces  of  Hindostan. 
They  who  watched  beside  the  poor  old  man,  during  the 
painful  close  of  his  life,  bear  testimony,  in  touching 
language,  to  the  Christian  fortitude  with  which  he 
bore  his  sufferings,  and  the  Christian  charity  with 
which  he  spoke  of  others,  under  all  the  burdens 
which  pressed  upon  him.*  The  hardships  to  which 
he  had  been  subjected  on  the  march  from  one 
prison-house  to  another  had,  perhaps,  accelerated  the 
crisis  which  was  hanging  over  him;  but  he  had  long 
been  passing  away  to  his  rest,  and  they,  who  loved  him 
most,  scarcely  desired  to  arrest  the  progress  of  the 
maladies  which  were  so  surely  destroying  him.  He 
lefl  on  record  a  statement  of  all  the  drcumsrtances  of  our 
disasters — a  statement  which  I  have  freely  quoted  in  a 

*  "  It  is  due  no  less  to  the  memory  who  witnessed  his  prolonged  snffer- 

of  the  dead  than  to  the  large  cirde  of  ings  and  his  dying  struggles,  and  who 

living  friends  and  relatives,  who,  I  regarded  him  as  the  victim  less  of 

feel    assured,    will  mourn  his  loss,  his  own  faults  than  of  the  errors  of 