

indicated   the   approach  of   such   a  that  our  out-houses  and  the  roof  of 

visitation.     Most  of  us  were  inside  one  of  our  sleeping-rooms  tumbled 

our  rooms,  when  we  heard  a  heavy  in.      The  upper  parts  of  the  walls 

rumbling  noise,  as  of  thousands  of  were  down,  and  those  portions  which 

heavy  carriages.      This  was  imme-  still  remained  were    either  thrown 

diately   succeeded  by   a  heaving  of  out  of  their  perpendicular  or  had 

the  earth,  which  caused  a  rocking  of  large  rents  in  them.     God  grant  we 

the  walls,  and  made  us  all  rush  out  may  never  again  experience  such  a 

into  the  court-yard,  which  we  had  no  visitation.      On  the  shock  ceasing, 

sooner  entered  than  the  shock,  which  we  went  outside  the  fort,  and  frieht- 

had  ceased  for  an  instant,  again  came  ful  was  the  devastation.    The  whole 

on   with    a    hundred-fold  violence,  valley  was  one  cloud  of  dust.  Almost 

The  high  massive  walls,  by  which  eveir  part  had  been  either  wholly  or 

we  were  surrounded,  heaved  to  and  partially  destroyed — and  great  was 

fro  most  fearfully,  whilst  we,  for  se-  the  loss  of  life.     Even  mountains  did 

curity,  huddled  together  as  closely  as  not  escape ;    and  fearful  were   the 

we  possibly  could  in  the  centre  of  crashes  of  huge  rocks,  as  they  were 

the  square,  where  there  was  a  deep  precipitated  with  awful  violence  to 

wood  cellar.     All  of  a  sudden  there  the  plains  below.     We  had  shocks  at 

was  a  frightful  crash  around  us ;  and  least  a  dozen  times  during  the  day — 

the  earth  heaved  up  and  down  to  but  none  of  so  alarming  a  nature'as 

such  a  degree  that  we  could  scarcely  the  first." — [^Captain  Johnson's  NaV" 

stand.     The  crash  was  succeeded  by  rative  of  his  Captivity.   MS.\ 


492  THE  C-tVPTIVITY. 

the  escape  both  of  Lady  Sale  and  General  Elphinstone. 
The  former  was  on  the  house-top  when  the  shock  com- 
menced; and  had  scarcely  time  to  secure  a  footing  on  a 
safer  spot  when  the  roof  fell  in  with  a  crash.  The  poor 
old  Greneral  was  bed-ridden.  His  sufferings  had  been 
every  day  increasing.  He  had  been  wounded  on  the 
retreat.  His  constitutional  infirmities  had  been  a^ra- 
vated  both  by  the  external  hardships  to  which  he  had 
been  subjected,  and  the  corroding  anxieties  which  had 
preyed  upon  his  mind.  It  was  plain  to  all  that  his  end 
was  approaching.  But  he  bore  his  accumulated  suffer- 
ings with  heroic  fortitude ;  and  the  warmest  sympathies 
of  his  fellow-captives  were  with  him.  Unable  to  bestir 
himself,  when  the  walls  of  the  fort  were  shaken  by 
the  earthquake,  he  was  for  a  little  time  in  imminent 
peril ;  but  a  soldier  of  the  44th,  named  Moore,  who  had 
acted  as  the  General's  personal  attendant,  rushed  into 