

Proceeding  for  about  ten  miles,  **  through  a  bleak  and 
barren  country,"  they  came  upon  a  patch  of  cultivated 
ground— which  smiled  up  in  the  faces  of  the  prisoners 
like  an  oasis  in  the  desert.*  Crossing  the  river,  they 
overtook  Akbar  Khan,  sitting  in  a  palanquin,  his  arm 
in  a  sling,  looking  pale,  haggard,  and  dejected,  as  one 
whose  fortunes  were  not  on  the  ascendant.  They 
saluted  the  Sirdar,  passed  on,  and  halted  at  a  short  dis- 
tance from  him.  The  bivouac  was  a  comfortless  one. 
Strictly  guarded  and  insufficiently  sheltered,  they  passed 
the  night  in  dreary  discomfort.  Rain  fell,  and  under 
the  scanty  tents  there  was  not  room  for  the  bedding  of 
the  captives.  The  next  day  was  one  of  equal  misery — 
there  was  scarcely  any  food  either  for  man  or  beast. 
On  the  morning  of  the  13th  a  distressing  rumour  was 
current  among  them.  It  was  said  that  the  married 
families  were  to  be  carried  oflf  in  one  direction,  and  the 
other  captives  in  another.  The  scarcity  w%6  so  great — 
it  was  so  difficult  to  subsist  them  all  on  one  spot — that 
it  was  necessary  to  divide  the  party.  This  was  not  to 
be  submitted  to  without  an  effi3rt  to  obtain  the  recision 
of  the  obnoxious  order.  Lawrence  went  to  the  Sirdar, 
and  implored  him  to  suflfer  them  all  to  remain  together 
and  to  share  the  same  fate.  The  Sirdar  relented ;  and 
they  all  resumed  their  march  together. 

*  Captain  Johnson's  Narratm,   MS. 
VOL.  n.  2  K 


498  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

Their  route  lay  over  barren  hills  and  through  narrow 
stony  valleys.  Every  now  and  then  little  patches  of 
cultivation  sparkled  up  in  the  arid  waste.  Th«^  was 
little  or  no  food  to  be  obtained.  A  few  almonds  and 
raisins,  or  other  dried  fruits,  sufficed  to  appease  the 
hunger  of  the  captives,  whilst  their  horses  were  reduced 
to  skeletons.*  The  heat  was  intense.  The  burning 
sun  scorched  the  faces  of  the  European  travellers,  and 
peeled  oflf  the  white  skin.  The  journey  was  a  long  and 
painful  one,  up  a  steep  ascent  almost  along  the  whole 
line  of  march.  The  prisoners  knew  not  whither  they 
were  going;  and  it  seemed  that  Akbar  Khan  did  not 
know  where  to  take  them.  Some  of  the  captives  were 
suflFering  severely.  The  bad  roads  and  the  vicissitudes 
of  the  climate,  for  heavy  rains  followed  the  parching 
sun,  tried  them  as  in  a  fiimace.  Greneral  Elphinstone 
was  dying.  Lady  Macnaghten  and  Lady  Sale  were 
sick.  When  Akbar  Khan  was  made  aware  of  the  latter 
fact,  he  took  compassion  on  the  English  ladies.  He  was 
still  weak,  and  suflFering  from  the  eflFects  of  his  wound; 
but  he  gave  up  the  palanquin,  or  litter  in  which  he  had 
been  carried,  for  their  use ;  and  rode  on  horseback  to 
the  end  of  the  march. 