

1842.     MS,  Correspondence.^ 

*  Major  Pottinger  to  Major  Mac- 
gregor: Bitdeeabad,  January  30, 1842. 
MS,  Correspondence.  From  Major 
Pottineer's  letters  written  about  this 
time,  his  real  opinion  of  the  conduct 
of  Akbar  Khan  can  only  be  ex- 
tracted by  ascertaining  the  circum- 
stances under  which  the  different 
letters  were  written — some  of  them 
having  been  written  at  the  request  of 
the  Sirdar  himself.  There  are  two 
letters  of  January  23,  one  of  an  offi- 
cial tendency,quoted  above — the  other 
of  a  more  private  and  more  genuine 
character,  in  which  the  writer  says : 
"  He"  (Akbar  Khan)  "  sent  out  the 
day  before  yesterday  a  Persian  letter 
for  me  to  send  to  you  in  English ;  I 
wrote  a  letter  telling  you  the  mean- 
ing, which  he  sent  back  to-day,  and 
requesting  me  to  give  him  an  exact 
copy  of  his  own.  I  have  done  so  it 
is  true  ;  but  I  fancy  his  humanity  was 
only  a  sham,  and  every  sinew  was 
strained  to  destroy  our  poor  fellows. 
He  has,  however,  treated  us  personally 


THE  EARTHQUAKE  AT  BUDEEABAD.        491 

About  the  middle  of  the  month  of  February  the 

captive  party  was  increased  by  the  arrival  of  Major 
Griffiths  and  Captain  Souter;  and  a  few  days  after- 
wards, the  same  terrific  earthquake  which  had  shaken 
down  the  ramparts  of  Jellalabad  made  the  walls  of  their 
prison-house  reel  and  totter,  and  levelled  a  portion  of 
the  fort  with  the  dust.*  For  many  days  lesser  shocks 
of  earthquake  Icept  the  people  in  a  continued  state  of 
alarm.  The  prisoners  slept  in  the  open  court-yard, 
which  was  filled  with  their  beds ;  and  all  kinds  of  rude 
awnings  were  thrown  up  to  secure  a  little  privacy.  The 
cold  was  intense,  and  the  heavy  dews  saturated  the 
bedding  like  rain.  No  lives  were  sacrificed  within  the 
fort  by  this  great  convulsion  of  nature ;  but  narrow  was 

well,  and  very  much  so.*' — [MS,  Cor-  a  dense  cloud  of  dust,  which,  for  five 

respondence.']       "  The    despatch    of  or  six  seconds,  prevented  our  seeing 

these  private  letters  was  discovered  the  amount  of  injury  done.      The 

by  the   Sirdar,  who  is  said  to  have  walls  of  the  wood  cellar  fell  in.    The 

disarmed  all  the  prisoners  in  conse-  earth  around  us  was  giving  way ;  and 

quence  of  this  discovery." — [^Eyre."]  we  were  afraid  to  move  to  the  right 

*  ^^  February  \9. — At  about  eleven  or  left,  as  it  would  bring  us  within 

we  were  visited  by  the  most  fearful  range  of  the  walls  which  were  falling 

earthquake  within    the  memory   of  on  both  sides  of  us.     The  shock  haa 

any  man  in  this  country.     The  day  now    expended    itself.       The    dust 

was  beautifully   clear,   and  nothing  cleared  away.      And  we  then  saw 