

the  room  and  carried  off  the  attenuated  old  man  in  his 
arms.     "  The  poor  General,"  says  Eyre,  who  records 

this  incident,  "  was  greatly  beloved  by  the  soldiery,  of 
whom  there  were  few  who  would  not  have  acted  in  a 
similar  manner  to  save  his  life." 

The  month  of  March  passed  quietly  over  the  heads  of 
the  captives.  There  was  little  to  mark  the  monotony 
of  prison-life.  Good  and  bad  tidings  came  in  by  turns. 
All  sorts  of  rumours  were  in  circulation,  and  all  were 
volubly  discussed.  About  the  middle  of  the  month,  the 
Nazir,  or  steward,  in  charge  of  the  prisoners,  announced 
that  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  was  willing  to  release  them 
all  for  two  lakhs  of  rupees.  The  proposition  was  made 
to  Captain  Johnson,  who  convened  a  meeting  of  the 
gentlemen.  The  offer  was  a  tempting  one,  and  it  might 
have  been  accepted;  but  Pottinger  protested  against  it. 
He  was  unwilling  to  aid  the  enemy  with  money  with- 
out the  express  sanction  of  his  government.  So  the 
Question  was  referred  to  Captain  Macgregor — and  in  the 


THE  SIRDAR  WOUNDED.  493 

mean  while  the  perils  which  beset  their  position  began 
to  thicken  around  them,*  Akbar  Khan  about  this  time 
was  wounded  by  the  accidental  discharge  of  a  match- 
lock in  the  hands  of  one  of  his  attendants ;  and  it  was 
generally  believed  throughout  the  country  that  Mac- 
gregor  had  bribed  the  man  to  assassinate  the  Sirdar. 
Had  the  wound  proved  mortal,  there  was  at  least  a  pos- 
sibility of  all  the  prisoners  being  massacred  in  revenge.f 
April  came; J  and  at  the  end  of  the  first  week  ar- 
rived the  glorious  tidings  of  Sale's  victory  over  Akbar 
ELhan  on  the  plain  of  Jellalabad.     Somewhat  confusedly 

*  March, — In  this  month  nothing  suspected  even  now — and  all  we  can 

of  any  consequence  occurred,  ex-  say  will  not  convince  the  people  to 

cept  that  up  to  the  20th  instant  not  the  contrary  —  that  Maogregor  did 

a  day  even  passed  without  one  or  offer  a  reward  for  the  assassination 

more  shocks  of  earthquake.    About  of  the  Sirdar.** — [Captain  JohnsofCt 

the  18th  I  received  a  message  from  Narrative  of  TUm  Captivity,    MS.  Re* 

the  Nazir  in  charge  of  us  that  Ma-  cordsj^ 

homed  Shah  Khan  would  release  the  %  The  1st  of  April  was  not  forgot- 

whole  of  us  for  two  lakhs  of  rupees,  ten.    It  is  a  curious  proof  of  the  ir- 

Made  this  known  to  the  gentlemen,  repressible  love  of  practical  joking 

Had  a  meeting,  at  which  most  of  us,  which  clings  to  our  countrymen  in 

or  in  fact  all,  agreed,  with  exception  all  places  and  in  all  situations,  that 

of  Major  Pottinser — ^who  was  averse  the  prisoners  in  Afghanistan,  on  the 

to  our  aiding  and  abetting  the  enemy  Ist  of  April,  turned  their  misfortunes 