


ARRIVAL  OF  MAHOMED  SHAH  KHAN.  495 

to  be  massacred  at  sunset.  They  had  been  disarmed; 
they  had  neither  swords  nor  pistols — no  means  of  resist- 
ance were  within  their  reach.  They  could  only  sub- 
mit to  be  slaughtered  like  sheep  in  the  shambles.  But 
at  simset  their  fears  were  dissipated.  Mahomed  Shah 
Khan  arrived  with  a  large  party  of  followers.  He  went 
among  the  prisoners  with  frank  cordiality — civilly  shook 
hands  with  them  all — and  then  sate  down  and  entered 
into  conversation  with  them.  It  was  necessary,  he  said, 
that  they  should  be  removed  from  Budeeabad;  and 
that  they  should  commence  their  march  on  the  follow- 
ing morning.  Not  a  hint  feU  from  him  regarding  their 
future  destination,  and  none  were  inclined  to  question 
him.  He  slept  that  night  in  the  fort ;  and  the  prisoners 
began  to  make  preparations  &t  the  morrow's  march. 
This  was  no  difficult  matter.  ^  All  my  worldly  goods/' 
wrote  Captain  Johnson,  '^  might  be  stowed  away  in  a 
towel." 

Morning  dawned ;  and  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  busied 
himself  in  the  work  of  plunder.*  There  was  still  some 
valuable  property  clinging  to  the  unhappy  captives. 
They  who  had  nothing  else  had  good  horses.  Lady 
Macnaghten  had  jewels  and  rich  shawls.  The  Ghilzye 
chief  helped  himself  freely.     Then,  utterly  ignorant  of 

about  sunset  a  report  was  brought  in  giving  us  any  hint  as  to  our  desti* 
that  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  was  on  his  nation ;  nor  had  any  of  us  inclina- 
way  to  yisit  us.  Even  this  was  a  re-  tion  to  ask  queitions  of  him.  Hit 
lief  to  us,  as  we  knew  that  what  would  will  is  law  to  us.  After  sitting  for 
happen  to  us  must  take  place  shortly,  some  time  he  wished  us  *'  Good  even- 
In  about  ten  minutes  he  arrived  with  ing,*  and  withdrew.  He  slept  in  the 
a  large  party  of  his  followers.  On  fort  that  night,  and  we  were  busy 
coming  up  to  ua,  our  alarms  were  at  making  preparations  for  the  mor- 
an  end  as  regarded  our  lives,  as  he  row^s  march.  These,  however,  were 
rej^arded  us  civilly,  and  shook  hands  shortly  at  an  end.  All  my  worldly 
with  the  whole  of  us.  We  all  sate  goods  and  chattels  might  be  stowed 
down  together.  He  entered  slightly  away  in  a  towel  or  a  handkerchief." 
into  the  defeat  of  the  day  before  — ICaptain  Johnson's  Narrative  of  Ma 
yesterday,  and  told  us  that  we  must  Captivity.  MS."] 
De  in  readiness  to  leave  Budeeabad  *  '^  April  lOih, — Up  at  daylight ; 
in  the  morning,  without,    howeyer,  had  a  cup  of  tea  and  was  ready  for 


496  THE  CAPTIVITY. 

the  direction  in  which  they  were  to  proceed,  the  anxious 
captives  started  for  their  new  prison-house.  Four 
camels,  with  litters,  were  assigned  to  the  ladies  and  such 
of  the  gentlemen  as  sickness  prevented  from  mounting 
the  ponies  which  had  been  parcelled  out  amongst  them. 
A  guard  of  fifty  Afghans,  horse  and  foot,  escorted  the 
little  band  of  prisoners  on  their  mysterious  march.  The 
European  soldiers  were  left  behind. 