


510  STODDABT  AND  CONOLLY. 

quick,  and  hd  must  himflelf  be  made  to  go  down  before  ihe  strong 
spirit  of  Western  civilisation.  Stoddart  has  asked  me  to  put  on 
paper  my  notions  as  to  the  measures  that  should  now  be  adopted 
for  the  settlement  and  independent  happiness  of  the  Central 
Asian  states; — here  they  are,  briefly  and  freely;  those  of  a  man 
bom  and  bred,  thank  Gbdl  in  Protestant  England,  who  has 
seen  Bussia,  Persia,  and  A%hanistan,  and  all  the  three  Oosb^ 
States. 

Turn  out  the  horrible  Wuzeer  Tar  Mahomed  Ehan,  who  has 
sold  12,000  men,  women,  and  children,  since  he  obliged  the  Per- 
sians to  retire  from  Herat,  and  buy  out  Kamran's  femily  from 
that  principality.  Eamran  himself  forfeited  all  his  kingly  right 
here  by  his  letter  to  the  Ehan  Huzrut  of  Khiva,  which  ihe  latter 
chief  gave  me  in  return  for  my  frank  commimication  to  him,  and 
which  I  sent  to  Sir  William  Macnaghten.  Thus  will  be  gained 
the  only  point  from  which  the  Afghcm  nation  can  lend  its  weight 
to  the  preservation  of  peace  and  the  advancement  of  civilisation 
in  Toorkistan,  protect  its  weakest  subjects  horn  being  stolen  or 
sold  away,  and  properly  guard  its  own  and  India's  firontier.  Next, 
let  Pottinger  come  in  attendance  upon  Shah  Soojah's  heir-appa- 
rent, Shah-zadah  Timour,  with  a  few  thousand  select  Afghan 
horsemen  of  both  the  tribes,  half  Douranee  and  half  Ghilzye,  to 
blow  down  the  gate  of  the  citadel,  which  imjustly  imprisoned  us, 
against  the  rights  of  all  nations,  except  those  the  Oosbegs  profess. 
The  Ameer  scomfrilly  says  that  the  Afghans  and  English  are  one 
people ;  let  him  feel  that  they  really  are  so  in  a  good  cause.  I 
really  do  believe  that  if  Shah-zadah  Timour  were  to  return,  after 
such  a  proceeding,  to  assume  the  actual  exercise  of  government  at 
his  father's  capital,  taking  back  with  him  all  real  Afghans  now 
enslaved  in  Toorkistan,  whose  orthodoxy,  according  to  the 
Soonees,  is  unquestionable,  and  who  might  easily  be  collected  for 
a  friendly  oflering,  the  Afghans  would  so  thoroughly  like  him  and 
understand  us,  that  every  English  and  Indian  soldier  might  be 
withdrawn  to  Hindostan. 

Let  the  Shah-i-Shah  of  Persia  at  the  same  time  write  these  few 
words  to  the  Court  of  the  faithful  at  Bokhara,  sending  copies  of 
his  letter  by  friendly  and  high  ambassadors  to  Khiva  and  Kokund : 
'*  I  want  all  my  enslaved  subjects  who  are  not  willing  to  remain 
in  Bokhara,  and  I  am  now  coming,  in  reliance  upon  the  only  God 
of  justice,  to  free  them,  and  to  destroy  the  law  of  thy  Mooftehed, 


conolly's  lettebs  to  his  bbotheil  511 

by  which  people  who  pray  towards  the  same  Kebia  are  sold  aa 
cattle."  Let  Mahomed  Shah  lithograph  this,  and  send  a  copy  to 
be  stuck  up  at  every  mosque  where  his  authority  or  influence  can 
reach,  in  Persia,  Afghanistan,  and  Tartary.  This  writing  will 
tell  the  Ameer  that  his  kingdom  has  been  weighed  and  found 
wanting ;  it  will  do  much  to  soften  and  liberalise  Mahomedan 
feeling  wherever  it  is  read ;  and  if  the  Persian  nation  are  informed 
that  it  comes  to  them  recommended  by  English  sjrmpathy,  they 
will  dismiss  all  irritation  of  mind  that  was  caused  by  our  checking 
their  military  career  at  Herat. 