

We  hope  that,  though  the  Ameer  should  now  dismiss  us  with 
gold  clothing,  the  British  and  Afghan  Governments  will  treat 
him  as  an  enemy;  and  this  out  of  no  feeling  of  revenge.  He 
treacherously  caused  Stoddart  to  invite  me  here  on  his  own 
Imayut-Nameh;  and  after  Stoddart  had  given  him  a  translation 
of  a  letter  from  Lord  Palmerston,  containing  nothing  but  friendly 

^  Obscure  in  MS. 


conolly's  letters  to  ms  brother.  509 

assurances,  which  he  could  have  verified,  with  our  entire  consent^ 
at  the  Russian  embassy,  he  pent  us  both  up  here,  because  we 
would  not  pay  him  as  a  kidnapper  for  our  release,  to  die  by  slow 
rot,  if  it  should  appear  that  he  might  venture  at  last  to  put  us 
altogether  out  of  the  way.  We  hope  and  pray  that  God  may 
forgive  him  his  sins  in  the  next  world ;  but  we  also  trust  that 
some  human  power  will  soon  put  him  down  from  his  oppressive 
throne  at  this  capital,  whence  emanates  the  law  by  which  the 
IQiivans  harry  and  desolate  the  roads  and  homes  of  the  Persians. 
He  wishes  every  soul  to  crouch  before  him,  and  not  breathe  God's 
air  freely  without  his  leave,  nor  dare  to  be  happy  or  at  ease.  For 
instance  (and  wc  are  at  the  fountain-head  of  police  report),  a 
poor  wretch,  confined  without  food  for  three  days  and  nights  in 
the  Bug  House,  an  infernal  hole  used  for  severe  imprisonment, 
said  incautiously,  on  being  taken  out,  that  he  was  alive  and  welL 
'^  He  is,  is  he?"  said  the  Ameer,  on  the  report ;  ''  then  put  him 
in  for  three  dajrs  and  nights  more."  Again,  the  other  night 
fifty-six  grooms  assembled  at  a  house  outside  the  city,  to  make 
merry  on  pilau  and  tea,  with  money  liberally  given  by  one  of  the 
Oosbeg  men,  Rahman  Kool  Tohsaba,  to  his  head-groom,  who 
acted  as  master  of  the  feast:  they  were  convicted  of  having  got 
together,  so  all  that  the  police-master  could  seize  received  seventy- 
five  blows  each  on  the  back  with  a  heavy  thorn-stick ;  and  be- 
cause one  man  uncomplainingly  bore  his  punishment,  which  was 
inflicted  on  all  before  the  King,  he  had  him  hoisted  for  seventy- 
five  more,  saying,  **  He  must  have  been  struck  softly.'^  '*  But  what 
was  the  crime  in  this  innocent  meeting  of  poor  grooms?"  we  asked 
our  gaolers.  "  Who  knows? — he  is  a  king,  and  gave  the  order." 
The  master  of  the  entertainment  stood  with  his  dagger  against 
some  thirty  policemen,  till  he  was  felled  by  a  stone  thrown  at  his 
head,  to  let  all  who  could  escape ;  for  this  heavier  ofience  he  was 
condemned  to  be  thrown  from  a  part  of  the  citadel  wall,  which 
gives  a  culprit  a  chance  of  escape  with  only  the  fracture  of  a 
limb,  because  it  has  a  slope:  he  threatened  to  pull  down  with  him 
any  who  should  approach  the  brink  to  throw  him  off,  and,  leap- 
ing boldly  down,  came  to  the  ground  with  whole  bones,  and 
lives,  let  us  hope,  for  many  a  happy  meeting  yet  with  his  friends 
in  this  now  oppressed  city.  This  is  how  the  Ameer  would  treat 
such  ambassadors  as  he  dares  insult,  who  do  not  bend  reverently 
enough  before  him ;  but  the  days  for  such  despotism  are  passing 