

Abthub  Conolly. 

March  12th. 

I  beg  that  fifty  tillas  may  be  given  to  Jooma  Bai,  the  servant 
who  will  convey  this  to  Long  Joseph.  (Let  the  utmost  caution 
be  used  always  in  mentioning  their  names  while  this  Ameer  lives 
or  reigns.)  As  for  Long  Joseph,  I  don't  know  what  reward  to 
propose  for  him.  He  has  risked  his  life  for  us  in  the  most  gallant 
manner,  as  few  men  would,  except  for  a  brother,  and  he  is  a  noble 
fellow.  I  feel  sure  that  government  will  forgive  me  for  not  being 
able  to  make  an  account  of  my  stewardship  during  my  Toorkish 
mission,  and  that  it  will  use  every  exertion  to  get  free  and  to 
reward  all  who  have  suffered  with  me,  but  remained  alive. 

Allahdad  Khan  had  some  400  tillas  in  cash  when  he  was  brought 
back,  besides  his  baggage  and  horses.  Akhondzadeh  Saleh 
Mohamed  has  served  too  well  to  make  it  necessary  for  me  to  re- 
commend him.  I  trust  that  God  has  preserved  his  life.  Stoddart 
and  I  will  comfort  each  other  in  every  way  till  we  die,  when  may 
our  brotherhood  be  renewed  in  heaven  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Saviour !  Send  this  assurance  to  all  our  firiends,  and  do  you,  my 
dear  John,  stand  in  this  faith.  It  is  the  only  thing  that  can  enable 
a  man  to  bear  up  against  the  trials  of  this  life,  and  lead  him  to  the 
noblest  state  of  existence  in  the  next.  Farewell — farewell  I  I 
shall  send  this  to  be  forwarded,  if  news  reaches  Stoddart's  faithful 
man  Ibraheem  of  our  death,  through  Jooma  Bai  and  Long  JosepK-f 

*  Obscure  in  MS.  f  MS»  Correspondence  of  A.  Conolly. 


conolly's  journal.  513 

On  the  22nd  of  March,  Conolly  again  wrote,  full  of 
affectionate  solicitude  for  the  sufferings  of  his  friends, 
but  little  mindful  of  his  own: 

After  sending  a  page  with  my  thermometer  on  the  15th  ult. 
(February),  to  ask  how  much  cold  it  indicated,  as  detailed  in  my 
last  letter,  the  Ameer  took  no  notice  of  us  till  the  13th  of  this 
month,  when  he  sent  the  gold  chronometer  which  I  had  given 
him,  to  show  that  its  chain  was  broken^  and  to  ask  if  we  could 
repair  it;  a  pretence,  the  Topshee-Bashee  said,  to  ascertain  what 
state  we  were  in.     We  had  both  become  ill,  a  few  days  before, 
from  a  sudden  cold  change  of  weather,  and  the  discomfort  of 
filthy  clothing;  and  I,  who  had  given  in  most  to  the  sickness, 
owing  to  anxiety  of  mind  regarding  the  many  persons  whom  I  had 
been  the  means  of  bringing  into  the  Ameer's  tyrannous  hands, 
was  lying  weak  in  bed  with  fever  when  the  last  page  came. 
The  Topshee-Bashee,  who  for  some  time  spoke  encouragingly 
about  changing  our  clothes,  had  by  this  time  caused  us  plainly  to 
understand  that  he  neither  dared  himself  to  amend  our  position 
in  this  respect,  nor  even  to  represent  it  to  the  Ameer.     He  now 
tried  to  save  us  by  telling  the  page  that  I  had  been  confined  to 
my  bed  eight  days,  and  by  remarking  upon  the  wretched  state  of 
our  apparel  after  eighty-five  days  and  nights'  wear.     I  sliowed  the 
Mchrum  that  Stoddart  had  been  obliged  to  cast  away  all  his 
under-clothing,  and  was  suffering  much  from  cold  on  the  chest. 
I  experienced  hope  that  the  Ameer  would  take  some  pity  upon  us, 
and  especially  upon  such  of  my  late  travelling  companions  and 
people  as  might  be  suffering  under  his  displeasure.   The  page  said 
that  he  would  make  a  representation  if  the  Huzrut  questioned  him; 
and  he  afterwards  told  the  Topshee-Bashee  that,  on  the  Ameer's 
doing  so,  he  had  stated  that  the  King's  last-come  slave,  Kan-Ali 
(Conolly),  had  been  very  ill  for  eight  or  nine  days;  to  which  the 
Huzrut  had  replied,  **  May  he  not  die  (or,  I  suppose,  he  won't 
die)  for  the  three  or  four  days  that  remain  till  his  going."    We 
thought  from  this  that  the  Ameer  proposed  to  send  us  away  with 
the  Russians,  who  were  said  to  be  preparing  to  depart  after  the 
No-roz.     Nothing  else  has  since  transpired  regarding  ourselves; 
but  through  the  indefatigable  Long  Joseph  we  have  learnt  the 
following  items  of  intelligence  about  our  friends.* 