

I  feel  confident  that  this  great  and  most  necessary  measure  of 
Persian  emancipation  may  be  eSected  at  once  without  shedding 
one  drop  of  blood.  I  never  uttered  a  word  of  hostility  against  the 
Ameer,  either  at  Khiva  or  Kokund ;  but  now  I  am  authorised  to 
show  how  I  thought  the  rulers  of  these  states,  who  both  hate  him, 
may  be  made  to  end  or  lessen  their  own  foolish  enmity  ^by  his 
removing  from  between  them.  Let  the  Shah  of  Persia  send  a 
firman  to  Syud  Mahomed  Zahed,  Kurruck  Eojeh  at  Kokund, 
whom  he  knows,  saying — "Tell  the  Khan  Huzrut,  of  Kokund, 
who  I  am  happy  to  find  does  not  deal  in  my  people,  that  I  am 
about  to  liberate  all  those  oppressed  men  and  women  who  are 
unwillingly  detained  as  slaves  in  Bokhara.  I  don't  want  that 
country;  and  if  you  will  send  Lushker  Begglerbiggee,  or  Maho- 
med Shereff  Atalik,  with  the  Kokund  army  about  the  same  time 
to  Samarcand,  my  prime  minister  ishall  me^e  it  over  to  him  by 
treaty,  as  the  capital  of  Mawarulneh.  I  shall  give  up  Merve  to 
the  Khan  Huzrut  of  Khiva  to  be  made  the  capital  of  Kharasm, 
on  condition  of  his  doing  all  he  can  to  restore  and  content  my 
unfortunate  people,  whom  his  tribes  have  carried  off  during  my 
wars  in  other  directions." 

The  best  Oosbeg  troops  are  mere  rubbish  as  opponents  to  Persian 
regulars  and  cannon,  and  they  all  know  it.  Allah  Keuli  Khan  iisT 
the  best  and  most  sensible  man  in  his  country,  and  he  will  remain 
quiet  while  Mahomed  Shah  comes  against  Bokhara,  if  Shakespear 
can  be  empowered  to  tell  him  that  this  is  a  reform  which  must  be 
effected,  and  which  Persia  is  determined  now  to  effect,  with  the 
commerce  of  England  and  Bussia.  Shakespear  can  mediate  be- 
tween the  Khan  Huzrut  and  Mohamed  Shah  for  the  gentle 
emancipation  of  those  who  may  wish  to  return  home  in  the  next 
four  or  five  years,  or  to  settle  in  the  fine  waste  land  of  Merve; 


512  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

and  perhaps  Mahomed  Shah  may  give  to  AUah  Koull  Khan  the 
very  large  colony  of  [  ]*,  now  settled  here,  who  really  yet 

long  for  the  home  of  their  fathers:  this^  and  my  securing  to  the 
Eokan  frontier  up  the  Oxus  to  Balkh,  perhaps  leaving  the  khan 
of  it  his  easy  tiibutary,  would  make  him  agree  to  all  that  the 
Afghans  need  for  the  formation  of  their  frontier  from  Persian 
Ehorassan  to  the  Oxus. 

England  and  Russia  may  then  agree  about  immutable  frontiers 
for  Persia,  Afghanistan,  Mawarulneh,  and  Eharasm,  in  the  spirit 
which  becomes  two  of  the  first  European  nations  in  the  year  1842 
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  God  incarnate  of  all  peace  and  wisdom.  May 
this  pure  and  peaceable  religion  be  soon  extended  all  over  the 
world ! 