

into  tnree  pieces,  and  apparently  sent  remoyed  to  other  quarters.    Tne  ser- 

by  as  many  messengers.  yants  of  the  latter  officer  were  also 

t  AUahdad  Khan,  the  Afghan  en-  thrown  into  prison — some  of  them 

yoy,  who  accompanied  Captain  Co-  into  the  well,  or  lo^-house,  in  which 

nolly,  had  been  permitted  to  take  his  Stoddart  had  been  mcarcerated. 

departure    from   Bokhara,  but  was  X  -^  Afghan  oyer-coat. 

afterwards  brought  back  and  con-  §  Obscure  in  MS. 
finedf    He  remamed  for  some  days 


GLEAMS  OF  HOPE.  505 

delusive.    The  Ameer  had  not  relented.    Day  after  day 
passed,  and  their  sufferings  increased. 

All  through  the  month  of  January  little  change  took 
place  in  the  condition  of  the  captives.  On  the  last  day 
of  the  month,  wrote  ConoUy,  "a  Mehnim  came  to 
desire  that  we  would  minutely  describe  the  city  and 
castle  of  Caubul,  and  also  give  an  account  of  Heraut. 
AUahdad  Khan  drew  a  plan  of  the  first  place ;  Stoddart 
was  named  as  the  one  who  best  knew  the  second ;  but 
the  Mehrum  did  not  take  his  account  of  it.  We  next 
day  learnt  that  he  had  been  sent  to  tlie  Akhond- 
zadeh,*  who  had  drawn  a  large  plan  of  his  native  city." 
As  February  wore  on,  other  encouraging  signs  of  the 
Ameer's  desire  to  treat  the  prisoners  with  greater  kind- 
ness presented  themselves.  On  the  9th  of  February 
another  gleam  of  hope  burst  in  upon  them.  The  inci- 
dent is  thus  touchingly  described  in  ConoUy's  journal: 

February  9  [1842], — Moolla  Nasir  came  to  ask  if  we  had 
seen  the  Peacock  throne  of  India.  As  every  lettered  Asiatic 
should  know  that  Nadir  Shah  carried  that  throne  away  to  Persia, 
and  Moolla  Nasir's  manner  was  pointedly  kind^  we  judged  that 
the  question  he  had  been  sent  to  ask  was  a  pretence,  and  that  the 
Ameer  desired  an  opening  for  a  return  to  proper  treatment  of  us. 
Stoddart,  therefore,  gave  him  this,  by  speaking  of  his  position 
here  as  British  agent,  and  expressing  regret  that  he  had  not  been 
able  to  relieve  the  Huzrut's  mind  from  the  doubts  which  he 
seemed  to  entertain  of  the  English  Government's  friendship.  We 
showed  the  sad  state  of  our  clothes  (Stoddart  had  been  obUged  to 
put  aside  his  shirt  in  consequence  of  the  roofs  having  leaked 
over  him  the  night  before),  and  expressed  hope  that  the  Ameer 
would  soon  improve  our  condition;  but  we  both  spoke  cheer- 
fully, that  the  King  might  not  think  we  entertained  resentment 
for  his  treatment  of  us.t 

*  Saleh  Mahomed,  the  Akhond-  which  are  confirmed  in  many  parti- 
zadeh,  made  a  similar  statement  to  culars  by  the  accounts  of  otoer  wit- 
Colonel  Sheil.    I  see  no  reason  to  nesses. 
doubt  the  statements  of  this  man,  f  Arikur  Conolhfs  MS.  Journal 