


506  STODDABT  AND  CONOLLY. 

A  Susfidan  Mission  was  th^i  at  Bokhara,  under  the 
charge  of  Colonel  Bontenoff,  who  seems  to  have  been  in 
higher  favour  than  the  English  gentlemen ;  and  to  have 
greatly  pitied  their  condition.*  On  the  16th  of  February 
the  prisoners  despatched  a  letter  to  them,  by  the  hancb 
of  one  of  their  dependents,  known  as  Long  Joseph,  whose 
exploits  are  thus  recorded: 

February  15. — ^This  day  Long  Joseph  gallantly  darted  into  our 
room,  and  carried  off  a  note  which  we  had  written  for  Colonel 
Bontenoff,  to  inform  him  of  our  situation. 

February  16. — Long  Joseph  having  won  a  servant  of  theTopshee- 
Bashee'Sy  conveyed  to  us  a  note  from  the  gaoler,  and  sent  it  to 
him;  Stoddart  writing  to  government  through  Sir  J.  McNeill. 

'  All  the  symptoms  of  a  favorable  change  in  the  state  of 
the  Ameer's  feelings  proved  delusive.  Day  after  day  passed, 
and  the  prisoners  still  remained  in  the  same  imhappy 
condition;  at  last,  at  the  end  of  February,  ConoUy  wrote: 

We  hoped  from  Moolla  Nasir's  visit,  and  that  of  the  page,  who 
brought  my  thermometer,  that  the  Ameer  was  relenting,  but 
nothing  has  since  occurred  to  favour  this  idea;  on  the  contrary^ 
the  chief  would  appear  to  find  pleasure  in  his  servant's  accounts 
of  our  discomfort,  which  may  be  imagined  from  the  fact  that  we 
have  now  been  seventy-one  days  and  nights  without  means  of 
changing  or  washing  our  linen,  which  is  hanging  in  filthy  tatters 
from  our  persons.  The  Topshee-Bashee,  who  looks  in  upon  us 
every  seven  or  eight  days,  replies  to  our  entreaties  for  an  im- 
provement in  this  respect,  that  our  state  must  be  well  known  to 
the  Huzruty  whose  mind  retains  thought  of  the  greatest  and  least 
matters^  and  that  nothing  can  be  said  to  his  Majesty  about  us  till  he 
opens  the  subject.  The  Topshee-Bashee  has,  I  believe,  been  as 
kind  to  us  as  he  has  dared  to  be.  We  have  had  quite  enough  firing 
and  food  throughout  the  cold  season  we  have  passed  in  his  housei 

*  Colonel    Stoddart    had    inter-  time  from  the  Russian  Government 

changed  visits  with  them  before  Co-  who  came  twice  to  see  the  English 

noUy  s  arrival.   Shah  Mahomed  savs :  gentlemen,  who  also  visited  him."— • 

*^  Tnere  was  an  ambassador  at  this  \MS.  EecordsJ] 


conoixy's  lettebs  to  his  bbotheb.  507 

and  continue,  thank  God  I  in  good  health.  We  sometimes  think, 
from  the  Ameer's  keeping  back  Said's  and  the  Akhondzadeh's 
packets,  that  he  must  have  zeceived  the  Grovemor-Generars  com- 
munication, and  that  he  is  acting  big  in  irritation  at  not  having 
been  answered  from  the  English  throne ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  form 
certain  conclusions  from  his  conduct,  for  it  is  very  often  influenced 
by  caprice,  which  is  not  very  far  from  madness.  We  hope  that 
aU  is  well  in  Afghanistan,  and  that,  soon  as  the  Hindoo-Koosh 
roads  become  open,  the  Ameer  will  receive  some  commimi- 
cation  which  will  induce  him  to  properly  treat  or  dismiss  us. 
We  beg  that  government  will  convey  its  sentiments  to  the 
Ameer  in  Persian,  as  he  will  not  take  our  word  for  what  is 
written  in  English  any  longer  than  it  suits  him,  and  also  that  no 
allusion  may  be  made  to  the  above  details,  for  if  the  King  knew 
that  we  were  able  to  send  intelligence  he  might  treat  us  worse,, 
and  perhaps  kill  everybody  about  us.  The  Russians  propose  to  go 
about  No-roz.  We  kept  Oolonel  BontenofT  informed  of  our  pro* 
ceedings  up  to  the  date  of  our  seizure,  and  if  he  should  reach 
Europe  ere  our  release  he  may  be  able  to  enlarge  this  abstract, 
which  is  necessarily  very  imperfect. 