

In  the  second  week  of  March,  Conolly's  sufferings 
broke  out  openly  in  the  shape  of  cold  and  fever.  En- 
feebled and  irritated  by  disease,  he  then  began  to  de- 
spond. It  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  in  the  toils  of 
death;  and  in  a  high  state  of  excitement,  after  many 
sleepless  nights,  he  wrote  to  his  brother,  John  ConoUy, 
then  also  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  a  Mussulman  enemy, 
the  following  touching  letter  : 

From  our  FriBon  in  the  Bokhara  Citadel* 
11th  March,  1842. 

My  deab  John, 

This  will  probahly  be  my  last  note  hence,  so  I  dedicate  it 
to  you,  who  now,  alas!  stand  next  to  me.  We  both  dedicate 
everything  we  feel  warmest  to  William,  whom  may  God  bless  in 
all  belonging  to  him,  for  his  long  and  untiring  brotherly  affection 
to  us  all !  Send  my  best  love  to  Henry  and  to  all  our  dear 
sisters. 

This  is  the  eighty-third  day  that  we  have  been  denied  the 
means  of  getting  a  change  of  linen  from  the  rags  and  vermin 


508  STODDABT  AND  CONOLLY. 

that  cover  us;  and  yesterday,  when  we  begged  for  an  amend- 
ment in  this  respect,  the  Topshee-Bashee,  who  had  before  come 
occasionally  as  our  host  to  speak  encouragingly,  set  his  face  like 
a  flint  to  our  request,  showing  that  he  was  merely  a  vane  to  the 
withering  wind  of  his  heartless  master,  and  could  not  help  us 
thus,  so  that  we  need  not  ask  him  to  do  so.  This,  at  first, 
astonished  and  defeated  us;  we  had  viewed  the  Ameer's  conduct 
as  perhaps  dictated  by  mad  caprice;  but  now,  looking  back  upon 
the  whole,  we  saw  instead  that  it  had  been  just  the  deliberate 
malice  of  a  demon,  questioning  and  raising  our  hopes,  and  ascer- 
taining our  condition,  only  to  see  how  our  hearts  were  going  on 
in  the  process  of  breaking.  I  did  not  think  to  shed  one  warm 
tear  among  such  cold-blooded  men,  but  yesterday  evening,  as  I 
looked  upon  Stoddart's  half-naked  and  nail-lacerated  body,  con- 
ceiving that  I  was  the  special  object  of  the  king's  hatred  because 
of  my  having  come  to  him  after  visiting  Kbiva  and  Kokund, 
and  told  him  that  the  British  Government  was  too  great  to  stir 
up  secret  enmity  against  any  of  its  enemies,  I  wept  on  entreat- 
ing one  of  our  keepers,  the  gunner's  brother,  to  have  conveyed 
to  the  chief  my  humble  request  that  he  would  direct  his  anger 
upon  me,  and  not  further  destroy  by  it  my  poor  brother  Stoddart, 
who  had  suffered  so  much  and  so  meekly  here  for  three  years. 
My  earnest  words  were  answered  by  a  "  Don't  cry  and  distress 
yourself;"  he  also  could  do  nothing.  So  we  turned  and  kissed 
each  other,  and  prayed  together,  and  then  said,  in  the  words  of 
the  Kokunders,  "  Mybiah  !"*  Let  him  do  as  he  likes !  he  is  a 
demon,  but  God  is  stronger  than  the  devil  himself,  and  can  cer- 
tainly release  us  &om  the  hands  of  this  fiend,  whose  heart  he  has 
perhaps  hardened  to  work  out  great  ends  by  it;  and  we  have 
risen  again  from  bed  with  hearts  comforted,  as  if  an  angel  had 
spoken  to  them,  resolved,  please  God,  to  wear  our  English 
honesty  and  dignity  to  the  last,  within  all  the  filth  and  misery 
that  this  monster  may  try  to  degrade  us  with. 