

into  -which  he  so  unjustly  and  cruelly  confined  them 

The  Ameer  has  lately  been  talking,  we  hear,  of  sending  us  away, 
and  though  we  do  not  set  much  store  by  his  words,  we  think  it 
possible  he  may  give  us  to  the  Russian  Mission,  who  are  about  to 

depart I  wrote  you  a  longish  letter  on  the  11th  of 

this  month,  when  I  was  in  a  high  state  of  excitement,  from  fever 
and  several  nights  of  sleepless  anxiety.  The  burden  of  it  was  an 
entreaty  to  the  last  effect  regarding  my  poor  people,  and  a  hope 
that  the  British  Government  would  seize  the  opportunity  which 
the  Ameer's  faithlessness  had  given  them  to  come  forward  with 
Persia  to  put  him  down,  and  give  his  country  to  Kharasm  and 
Kokund,  on  condition  of  the  entire  suppression  of  the  Persian  and 
Afghan  slave  trade  in  Toorkistan.  K  that  paper  (which  I  shall 
endeavour  to  recover)  should  reach  you,  compress  its  words  into 
this  purport  and  destroy  it,  reserving  my  last  good  wishes  for  the 
friends  to  whom  I  addressed  them,  thinking  that  I  might  not  Hve 
much  longer.  I  am  now,  thank  God,  almost  well  in  health  again, 
and  the  news  regarding  our  people  has  set  my  mind  at  rest.  Stod- 
dart, also,  who  was  suffering  awhile  from  severe  cold,  is,  I  rejoice 
to  say,  convalescent.  We  are  both  in  a  very  imcomfortable  state, 
as  you  may  imagine,  having  been  ninety-nine  days  and  nights 
without  a  change  of  clothes ;  but  we  are  together.  Stoddart  is 
such  a  friend  as  a  man  would  desire  to  have  in  adversity,  and  our 
searchers  having  missed  the  Uttle  Prayer-book  which  George 
Macgregor  gave  us,  (tell  him)  we  are  able  to  read  and  pray,  as  well 
as  to  converse  together.  God  bless  you,  my  dear  John.  Send 
my  love  to  everybody,  and  beUeve  me. 

Yours,  ever  most  affectionately, 

Arthur  Conolly.* 

To  J.  B.  Conolly,  Esq.,  Caubul. 

*   MS.  CorretpondeHce,  —  Arthur  produced  upon  them  by  his  letter  of 

ConoUy  was  painfully  anxious  to  re-  the  11th  of  March.    Again  he  wrote 

move  from  the  minds  of  his  friends  in  his  journal-letter  :^  "  I  take  this 

the  impression  which  might  have  been  opportunity  of  explaining  that  my 

2l2 


516  STODDAKT  AND  CONOLLY. 

The  passages  omitted  from  this  letter  relate  almost 
entirely  to  the  services  and  the  pay  of  Conolly's  attend- 
ants. There  is  nothing  more  remarkable  in  his  letters 
and  journals,  written  at  this  time,  than  his  tender  regard 
for  others,  and  his  forgetfulness  of  self.  Not  only  did 
he  grieve  for  the  sufferings  of  his  friend,  and  endeavour, 
by  putting  him  forward  as  the  real  representative  of  the 
British  Government,  to  obtain  Stoddart's  release,  or  at 
least  a  mitigation  of  the  severity  of  his  confinement,  but 
he  exhibited  the  tenderest  solicitude  for  the  welfare  of 
all  the  servants  who  had  accompanied  him  to  Bokhara, 
and  in  the  midst  of  his  own  affliction,  even  on  the  bed 
of  sickness  and  in  the  near  prospect  of  death,  thought  of 
nothing  more  earnestly  than  the  ftiture  welfare  of  Jiis 
poor  dependents.*  On  the  5th  of  April  he  wrote  in  his 
journal  : 