

*  The  men  formerly  in  Dr.  Ger-    ago,  whom  I  had  ransomed  at  Khifa 
rBrd*s  service,  enslaved  fifteen  years    by  order  of  Government. 

VOL.  II.  2  L 


514  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

On  the  13th  inst.,  Ibraheem  wrote:  *'  With  regard  to  Caubul  be 
quite  at  ease;  30,000  people  (rebels?)  have  been  slaughtered 
there."  AUahdad  Khan,  the  Akhonzadah,  EusoiF  Khan  (Au- 
gustin),  the  Jemadar,  Meer  Akhor,  with  Bolund  Khan,  Kurreen 
Khan,  and  Gool  Mahomed,  had  been  released;  for  which  we  sin- 
cerely thanked  God.  Their  sufferings,  poor  fellows,  in  that  hor- 
rible dungeon,  must  have  been  great.     .     .     . 

On  the  23rd,  we  were  made  further  happy  by  the  verbal  intel- 
ligence of  Long  Joseph  that  Allahdad  Khan  and  the  rest  of  our 
people  had  been  released. 

On  the  24th,  he  again  recorded  that  a  ray  of  hope 
had  broken  into  his  dreary  dungeon : 

24th. — ^This  forenoon,  the  Topshee-Bashee  coming  to  see  us, 
said,  with  a  cheerful  manner,  **  *  Sewonchee' — Reward  me  for  glad 
tidings.  I  represented  your  great  want  of  clothes,  and  proposed  to 
buy  shirts  and  trousers  for  you  from  the  bazaar,  but  the  Huzrut 
said,  *  They  don't  wear  bazaar  clothes;  in  three  or  four  days  I'll 
give  them  dresses  of  honour  and  dismiss  them.'  And  the  Huzrut 
asked  Meerza  Juneid  which  road  would  be  the  best  one  for  you  to 
travel  by,  saying,  *  They  cannot  now  go  in  that  direction'  (apparently 
meaning  Caubul).  Meerza  Juneid  replied,  that  the  route  by  Persia 
would  now  be  the  best.  After  which  the  Ameer  spoke  graciously 
about  you.  He  said  that  Kau-AU  was  a  well-informed  person, 
that  the  Meerza  represented  that  he  had  conversed  very  little 
with  Kan-Ali,  but  that  Stoddart,  of  whom  he  had  seen  much, 
was  a  man  instructed  upon  all  matters."  We  doubted  the  Topshee- 
Bashee's  having  dared  to  make  a  representation  of  himself  regard- 
ing us.  And  the  old  guardian  mentioned  afterwards  that  Meerza 
Juneid  had  come  to  his  brother's  office.  Probably  desiring  to 
know  whether  I  was  better  or  worse  in  health  since  the  13th,  the 
Ameer  sent  Meerza  Juneid,  in  his  capacity  of  physician,  to  make 
inquiries  in  this  matter. 

A  few  days  afterwards,  remembering  how  he  had 
written,  under  the  excitement,  almost  the  delirium  of 
fever,  a  desponding  letter  to  John  ConoUy,  he  wrote 
more  cheerfully  to  his  brother,  begging  him,  if  the 
letter  reached  its  destination,  not  to  be  dispirited  by 


LETTER  TO  JOHN  CONOLLY.  515 

it,  for  that  both  he  and  Stoddart  were  now  in  good 
health : 

Bokhara  Citadel,  28th  March,  1842. 

My  dear  John, 

We  have  been  comforted  by  intelligence  that  the  Ameer 
has  released  AUahdad  Khan  and  all  my  people  from  the  gaol 