


620  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

another  period,  as  he  said  nothing  about  changing  bur  clothes, 
and  kept  himself  quite  aloof  from  us,  which  he  would  hardly 
have  done  had  he  believed  what  he  reported  in  the  Ameer's 
name. 

Just  before  the  Ameer's  departure,  we  heard  that  a  British 
Elchee  had  arrived  at  Merve  on  his  way  hither.  We  could  get  no 
further  accounts  of  the  said  Elchee,  but  judged  that  it  might  be 

Shakespear  on  his  way  to  Khiva [MS.  defaced] 

From  the  4th  to  the  7th  of  May  the  palace  drums 

and  trumpets  were  continually  sounding  for  intelligence  that 
Kokund  had  been  taken  after  a  faint  endeavour  at  resistance 
under  the  famed  Kokund  general,  Guda  Bai;  that  the  latter  had 
been  taken  prisoner,  and  that  the  rebellious  town  had  been  given 
up  to  plunder,  &c. 

Then  follows  much  of  Bokhara  politics,  the  manu- 
script being  greatly  defaced — and  after  this,  some  passages 
of  personal  narrative,  the  chronicle  of  which  extends  up 
to  the  24th  of  May — the  latest  date  under  which  I  have 
been  able  to  discover  anything  in  the  hand- writing  of 
Arthur  ConoUy  : 

We  had  expressed  to  our  old  guardian  a  wish  to  get  some 
money  from  Meshed,  with  which  to  reward  him  for  his  kindness, 
(and  to  get)  him  privately  to  buy  (us)  a  few  necessaries  in  the 
event  of  our  further  detention,  and,  liking  the  idea,  he,  on  the  19th 
instant  (May),  brought  secretly  to  see  us  his  son-in-law  Budub, 
employed  as  a  caravan-bashee  between  Bokhara  and  the  Holy 
City,  who  agreed  to  act  as  agent  in  the  business  after  another 
week.     Enquiring  the  news  from  Budub,  we  heard  that  Kamran 
was  said  to  be  confined  in  Herat  by  Yar  Mahomed  Khan — that 
the  English  remained  as  before  at  Candahar  and  Caubul — and 
that  four  Elchees,  English,  Russian,  Persian,  and  Turkish,  had 
gone  together  to  Khiva,  each  displaying  his  national  flag,  and 
told  the  Khan  Huzrut  that  he  had  the  choice  of  quietly  giving 
up  plundering  and  slave-dealing,  or  of    meeting  the   Shah  of 
Persia,  who  had  assembled  a  large  army  for  the  redress  of  his 

people. 

****** 

Our  old  friend  now  informed  us,  on  the  authority  of  his  Afghan 


conolly's  journal.  521 

acquaintance,  Meer  Hyder,  that  all  our  people  had  left  Bokhara 
on  hearing  that  they  had  been  inquired  about.  •  .  .  Possibly 
the  Ameer  really  did  mean  to  send  us  away  at  the  time  of  his 
marcliing,  but  deferred  to  do  so  on  hearing  that  we  had  no  servants 
left  here,  or  from  one  of  his  incalculable  caprices.  I  had  noted,  in 
a  detailed  report  of  our  proceedings  after  leaving  Kokund,  which 
when  we  were  seized  I  was  waiting  the  Ameer's  permission  to 
despatch  by  a  courier  to  Caubul,  an  expression  which  the  Naib 
heard  his  Majesty  had  uttered  in  his  camp  after  my  arrival,  to  the 
effect  that  he  would  give  the  English  a  few  rubs  more,  and  then 
be  friends  with  them  again.  Though  we  were  not  sure  that  the 
Ameer  had  so  spoken,  the  plan  seems  one  likely  to  be  entertained 
by  an  ignorant  and  weak  man,  anxious  to  give  an  imposing 
impression  of  his  greatness  and  confidence;  and  to  it  I  partly 
attributed  the  ungraciousness  of  my  public  reception  in  camp, 
though  I  was  the  Naib's  honoured  guest;  the  failure  of  the 
Huzrut  to  recover  the  horses  and  the  property  of  my  servants 
which  had  been  plundered  at  his  outposts,  when  bringing  letters 
to  him,  and  the  hauteur  with  which,  at  the  first  joint  reception  of 
Stoddart  and  myself  here,  he  caused  it  to  be  signified  to  us  that 
as  in  old  times  there  had  been  friendship  between  the  Mussulmans 
and  infidels,  there  existed  no  objection  to  the  establishment  of 
friendly  relations  between  the  states  of  Bokhara  and  England; 
but  that  the  Huzrut  desired  to  know  whether  we  (the  English) 
had  been]  travellers  over  all  Toorkistan  to  spy  the  land  with  a 
view  to  take  it,  as  we  had  taken  Caubul,  or  for  other  purposes; 
and  wished  all  our  designs  to  be  unveiled,  in  order  that  if  they 
were  friendly  they  might  become  apparent,  and  that  if  hostile, 
they  might  still  be  known.  The  Government  of  India,  knowing 
what  communications  it  has  sent  to  Bokhara,  will  be  able  to 
judge  the  Ameer*s  conduct  better  than  we  are. 