

respondence.    It  may  be  gathered  from  striction  which  had  at  first  been  im- 

this  letter  that  Stoddart  had  no  inten-  posed,  his  Lordship  in  Council  autho- 

tion  of  awaiting  Conolly's  arrival  at  rises  you  to  permit  Captain  Conolly 

Bokhara;  and  that  Conolly  proceeded  to  proceed  from  Khiva  to  Kokund,  if 

thither   under  orders  from   Caubul,  he  should  think  it  expedient,  and  if 

and  an  invitation  from  the  Ameer,  he  finds  that  he  can  do  so  without 

An  attempt  has  been  made  to  con-  exciting  serious  distrust  and  jealousy 

trot,  in  some  measure,  the  flood  of  at  the  former  place.     In  his  personal 

sympathy  which  sets  in  so  strongly  intercourse  with  the  Khan  of  Kokund, 

towards  Arthur  Conolly,  by  asserting  he  will  be  guided  by  the  instructions 

that  he  was  not  authorised  to  pro-  which  have  been  issued,  prescribing 

cced    even  as  far  as   Kokund,  and  the  purport  of  his  written  communi- 

that  he  therefore  brought  his  mis-  cations.  Captain  Conolly  may,  in  such 

fortunes  down  upon  his  own  head,  a  journey,  find  increased  means  of 

But  I  have  before  me  the  strongest  using  an  useful  influence  at  Bokhara 

proof  that  Conolly  was  authorised  by  for  the  release  of  Colonel  Stoddart ; 

the  Supreme  Government  to  proceed  and  his  Lordship  in  Council  need  not 

to  Kokund,  and  to  use  liis  best  en-  add,  that  he  would  wish  every  such 

deavours  to  obtain  the  liberation  of  means  to  be  employed  with  the  ut- 

Colonel  Stoddart.      In  a  letter,  an  roost  earnestness  and  diligence  for 

official  copy  of  which  is  now  before  that  purpose." — [Mr,  Maddock  to  Sir 

me,  the  Cnief  Secretary  writes  to  the  TT.  Macnaghten:  jD^c.  28,  1840.  MS, 

Envoy  and   Minister :   "  As  in  the  Records."] 


626  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

On  the  28th  of  February,  1842,  he  wrote  again,  as  a 
kind  of  endorsement  to  one  of  ConoUy's  letters : 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  GOVERNMENT  IN  INDIA. 

Sib, 

The  Governor-General  in  Council  will  be  informed  by 
the  accompanying  abstract  how  far  my  position  here  [and  that  of 
Captain  ConoUi/]  has  been  sacrificed. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir, 

Your  obedient,  humble  servant, 

Charles  Stoddart. 

The  words  within  brackets  were  erased — most  pro- 
bably by  ConoUy.* 

But  Stoddart,  though  he  may  have  resented  the  in- 
justice of  sacrificing  him  to  no  purpose,  was  ready  to 
become  a  sacrifice  if,  by  so  being,  he  could  promote  the 
interests  of  his  country.  "  I  beg  sincerely,"  he  wrote  on 
the  5th  of  April,  "  that  no  one  will  regret  any  sacrifice 
of  me,  for  it  is  nothing  at  all.  It  may  yet  not  be  requi- 
site —but  if  it  be,  I  regard  the  probable  result,  from  the 
action  of  government  in  doing  justice  to  others,  and 
bringing  all  these  countries  to  reasonable  conduct,  as 
fully  compensating  a  much  greater  sacrifice  than  that  of 
so  humble  an  individual  as  I  am."f  If  anything  could 
increase  the  sorrow  with  which  we  contemplate  the  fate 
of  this  brave  man,  it  would  be  the  perusal  of  such  noble 
sentences  as  these. 