

It  was  under  a  high  and  chivalrous  sense  of  duty  to 
his  government  that  Colonel  Stoddart  continued  to  face 
the  dangers  of  his  position  at  Bokhara,  after  he  might 
have  escaped  from  them ;  and  it  was  under  an  equally 

*  Two  other  notes  were  written  by  hear,'*  wrote  Stoddart.      "  Keep  all 

the  prisonerson  the  back  of  this  paper:  friends  informed  of  my  health,  and 

one  to  Miss  Stoddart  at  Norwicn,  and  don*t  let  them  be  disturbed  by  ru- 

the  other  to  John  Conolly  at  Caubul.  mours,*'  wrote  Conolly. 

"  Don't  believe  all  you  hear  or  may  f  MS.  Correspondence. 


LETTER  TO  THE  KHAN  OF  BOKHARA.       527 

Strong  sense  of  duty  that  Captain  ConoUy  made  his  way 
to  the  inhospitable  city.  To  describe  them  officially  as 
*4nnocent  travellers,"  was  clearly  a  misapplication  of 
language ;  and  yet,  when  on  the  famous  1st  of  October, 
1842,  Lord  Ellenborough  addressed  the  following  letter 
to  the  Ameer  of  Bokhara,  he  so  described  them  both : 

Simlah.  October  Ist,  1842. 

A.O. 

The  Queen  of  England,  my  royal  mistress^  has  sanctioned 

my  coming  to  India,  to  conduct  its  government,  dnd  direct  its 
armies. 

On  my  arrival  I  found  that  great  disasters  had  befallen  those 
armies,  and  much  injury  had  been  inflicted  on  my  countrymen 
and  the  people  of  India  by  the  treacherous  Afghans,  under  Ma- 
homed Akbar  Khan. 

In  forty  days  from  the  time  when  I  directed  the  British  armies, 
reinforced  from  India,  to  move  forward,  three  great  victories  have 
been  gained  over  the  Afghans ;  the  city  and  citadel  of  Ghuznee 
have  been  destroved,  and  now  the  Balk  Hissar  of  Caubul  is  in 
my  power. 

Thus,  by  God's  aid,  have  I  afflicted  with  merited  punishment 
the  murderers  of  their  own  king  and  of  a  British  minister.  In 
this  I  have  avenged  the  cause  of  all  sovereigns  and  of  all  nations. 

The  wife  and  family  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  are  prisoners, 
and  my  soldiers  are  now  conducting  them  to  the  sea. 

Thus  are  the  wicked  punished,  even  in  their  wives  and  fami- 
lies. 

I  hear  that  you,  too,  have  gained  great  successes,  at  which  I 
rejoice,  if  you  had  just  ground  of  complaint  against  your  enemy. 

It  is  in  the  midst  of  successes  that  clemency  most  becomes  the 
conqueror,  and  gives  to  him  an  extent  of  permanent  fame  which 
often  does  not  attend  on  victory. 

I  was  informed,  when  I  reached  India,  that  you  detained  in 
confinement  two  Englishmen,  supposing  them  to  have  entertained 
designs  against  you.  This  must  have  been  your  reason,  for  no 
prince  detains  an  innocent  traveller. 

I  am  informed  that  they  are  innocent  travellers.  As  individuals 
they  could  not  entertain  designs  against  you ;  and  I  know  they 