

April  13. — We  heard  that  the  Russians  had  been  dismissed 
with  presents  of  honour,  that  the  Khodiyar  Beg  Karawool 
Beggee^  ranking  as  captain  or  commander  of  100,  had  been 
attached  to  Colonel  Boutenoff  as  the  Ameer's  envoy  to  St. 
Petersburgh,  and  that  the  Huzrut  had  promised  to  promote  him 
to  the  grade  of  Tok-Suba,  commander  of  1000,  pri^dleged  to 
bear  a  cow-tail  banner,  on  his  return  after  the  performance  of 
good  service.  The  Ameer's  own  arrangements  were  said  to  be 
completed,  and  the  direction  of  it  certainly  to  the  eastward.  An 
envoy  from  Kokund,  who  arrived  two  days  ago,  was  not  re- 
ceived, but  was  told  to  go  about  his  own  business  wherever  he 
listed.  Our  informant  mentioned  at  the  same  time  that  the  last 
envoy  from  Khiva  had  been  dismissed  a  fortnight  before  with  ex- 
traordinary honour,  all  his  servants  getting  dresses.  We  now 
also  learned  that  the  heir  of  the  Koondooz  chief  had  sent  an 
envoy  to  the  Ameer,  who  had  ordered  one  of  his  officers,  a  Khojeh, 
styled  Salam  Aghassi,  to  accompany  that  agent  to  Koondooz  on 
his  return.     It  was  thought,  wc  were  told,  that  the  Khojeh  of 


conolly's  journal.  519 

Balkh  would  endeavour  to  take  Koondooz  on  Meer  Morad*s  deaths 
and  the  heir  may,  in  this  apprehension,  have  been  alert  to  put  him* 
self  under  the  Ameer's  protection.  This  morning  the  Ameer 
showed  the  Topshee-Bashee  an  especial  mark  of  favour  by 
sending  him  a  loaf  of  refined  sugar  from  the  palace  ;  towards 
evening  his  Majesty  rode  four  miles  to  a  place  of  pilgrimage,  and 
on  his  return  at  night  had  the  Topshee-Bashee  up  to  give  him 
some  orders. 

The  narrative  then  proceeds  : 

Early    next   morning  (the   14th)  the  Ameer   marched    out 
to  the  sound  of  his  palace  kettle-drums  and    trumpets,  leaving 
us  in  the  filthy   clothes  which  .we    had   worn   for   115   days 
and  nights.      We  said    to   the    Gunner's    old  brother,   when 
he  mentioned  the  Ameer's  having  departed,  "  Then  the  Meshid 
caravan  apparently  stands  fast."     **No,"  was  his  reply;  "please 
God  it  will  go  soon.    I  asked  the  Topshee-Bashee  last  night 
if  nothing  had  been  settled  about  you,  and  he  repHed,  *  When 
the   Russians   get  out  a  march  or   so,    the   Dustan  Kanchee 
will  make  a  petition  about  them,  and  they  will  be  dismissed.' " 
The  old    man    also    remarked,    probably    from   what    he   had 
heard  his  brother  say,   that  the  Ameer  had  expressed  himself 
to  the  effect  that  he  knew  the  Russian  Elchee  was  led  to  get  us 
in  order  to  make  a  boast  of  having  procured  our  release,  which 
made  it  seem  as  though  Colonel  Boutenoff*  had  been  endeavouring 
to  obtain  our  dismissal.    Our  old  keeper  persisted  for  some  days 
in  assuring  us  of  his  belief  that  our  immediate  dismissal  was  de-* 
signed,  and  on  the  18th  said  that  he  was  going  down  into  the 
city  to  seek  out  my  Dewan  Bcggee,  Eusoff  Khan  (Augustin),  to 
set  his  mind  at  ease  about  us;  he  returned,  saying  that  he  had 
been  referred  from  place  to  place  without  finding  Eusoff*  Khan,  or 
any  of  our  people,  but  that  one  Meer  Hyder  and  another  shop- 
keeper of  his  acquaintance  had  assured  him  that  they  were  all  in 
the  town,  and  that  four  or  five  of  them  were  in  the  habit  of  coming 
occasionally  at  night  to  a  certain  quarter  to  hear  books  read.     We 
had  thought  the  Gunners  might  have  received  orders  to  collect 
some  of  our  people  in  order  to  our  respectable  dismissal;  but 
knowing  that  all  our  men,  except  Ibraheem,  had  left  Bokhara,  we 
concluded    that  the   Topehee-Bashee  had  made  use  of  his  old 
brother  to  deceive  us,  in  order  to  keep  us  hopeful  and  quiet  for 