


EXECUTION  OF  THE  PRI80NEBS.  523 

tination — ^'  though  hopes,  so  long  proved  to  be  deceit- 
ful, are  held  out  to  us  on  the  return  of  the  chief."  But 
the  Ameer,  glutted  with  conquest,  returned  from  the 
Kokund  expedition,  and  ordered  them  out  to  death. 
They  died  by  the  hands  of  the  public  executioner.  But 
the  precise  period  of  their  death  is  not  with  certainty 
to  be  ascertained. 

There  is  but  scanty  evidence  to  enable  us  to  deter- 
mine the  point.  That  which  is  most  credible  is  the 
evidence  of  one  Saleh  Mahomed,  a  youth  whom  Major 
Todd  despatched  from  Herat  to  join  Captain  ConoUy's 
suite.  His  story  is,  that  in  the  month  of  June,  1842, 
Stoddart  and  ConoUy  were  executed  by  order  of  the 
Ameer;  that  he  derived  his  information  from  one  of  the 
executioners;  and  that  he  saw  their  graves.  On  the 
17th  of  June,  it  is  related,  they  were  taken  out  of  their 
prison,  and,  in  the  presence  of  an  assembled  multitude, 
led  into  a  small  square.  Their  hands  were  bound  toge- 
ther before  them.  Their  graves  were  dug  before  their 
eyes.  Stoddart  was  first  marked  for  death.  He  cried 
aloud  against  the  tyranny  of  the  Ameer ;  and  his  head 
was  cut  off  with  a  knife.  ConoUy  was  then  offered  his 
life,  on  condition  that  he  would  adopt  the  Mussulman 
faith.  But  he  indignantly  rejected  the  proposal.  "  Stod- 
dart," he  said,  '*  became  a  Mussulman,  and  yet  you  kill 
him :  I  am  prepared  to  die."  And  then  Arthur  ConoUy, 
full  of  faith  in  the  merits  of  his  Redeemer,  stretched 
forth  his  neck,  and  died.* 

*  General    Pollock    officially    re^  vant)  that  his  uncle,  whom  he  left 

ported  Captain  Conolly's  death,  from  here  sick,  saying  he  was  a  great  tra- 

Caubul,  in  a  letter  dated  September  veller  and  had  visited  Kokund,  was 

30 ;  but  he  added :   "  The  only  au-  taken  very  ill,  and  though  we  gave 

thority  for  the  death  of  this  very  in-  him  medicine  and  did  all  in  our  power, 

telligent  officer  is  conveyed  in  a  Per-  it  was  of  no  avail.    It  was  the  will  of 

sian  letter  from  a  native  of  Caubul^  God  that  he  should  die.'    Moostafah 

who  writes  from  Bokhara  to  MooUah  and  Moollah  Ahmed  Khan  are  both 

Ahmed  Khan,  of  this  city,  saying,  of  opinion  that  Captain  A.  ConoUy  is 

*  Tell  Moostafah  (Captain  A.  C/s  sei^  the  person  alluded  to,  and  as  the 


524  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

There  is  nothing  more  painful  than  this  in  all  the 
history  of  the  Central- Asian  war.  It  would  be  unjust 
to  encourage  a  belief  in  the  reader's  mind  that  efforts 
ivere  not  made  to  compass  the  liberation  of  Colonel 
Stoddart.  From  the  time  when  Major  Pottinger  first 
received  at  Herat  intimation  of  his  friend's  captivity, 
and  wrote  to  the  Ameer  a  protest  against  the  outrage  he 
had  committed,  to  a  date  long  subsequent  to  the  deaths 
of  Stoddart  and  ConoUy,  continual  efforts  were  made, 
both  from  the  side  of  India  and  of  England,  to  accom- 
plish this  great  object.  Todd  did  all  that  he  could  do 
from  Herat;  Abbott  and  Shakespear  did  all  that  they 
could  do  from  Khiva ;  Macnaghten  did  all  that  he  could 
do  fi:om  Caubul ;  Lord  Auckland  did  all  that  he  could  do 
from  Calcutta.  From  London,  Lord  Palmerston  directed 
our  ambassadors  at  St.  Petersburgh  and  Constantinople 
to  obtain  the  agency  of  the  Courts  at  which  they  were 
resident;  and  both  the  Sultan  and  Count  Nesselrode 
wrote  urgent  letters  to  Bokhara  in  behalf  of  the  British 
prisoners.*  But  when  all  this  is  related,  it  still  appears 
that  more  regard  might  have  been  shown  for  Stoddart's 
position,  and  that  if  there  had  been  greater  promptitude 