

letter  proceeds  to  say  that  the  effects  story,  and  struck  Stoddart*s  name  out 
of  the  deceased  are  at  Bokhara,aDd  can  of  the  army  list,  from  the  17th  of  June, 
be  sent  when  required  ;  and  as  Moos-  1842.  I  believe  tliis  really  to  have 
tafah  had  no  uncle,  to  whom  could  been  the  date  of  their  deaths.  Major 
the  description  apply  ?  I  fear  there  Rawlinson,  on  the  morning  of  the 
can  be  no  reason  to  doubt  the  death  16th  of  September,  1842,  met  one  of 
of  the  above-named  officer.  Colonel  Stoddart*s  servants  near  Caubul,  and 
Stoddart  is,  from  native  report,  said  to  the  man,  whom  he  knew,  informed 
be  alive,  and  still  in  confinement." —  him  that  he  had  come  direct  from 
[^MS,  Becords.^  Bokhara,  having  started  immediately 
This  is  mere  conjecture;  and  by  no  after  the  execution  of  his  master. — 
means  tallies  with  the  more  credible  IMS,  Notes."]  The  reader  may  con- 
account  of  the  execution  of  the  two  suit  the  works  of  Captain  Grover  and 
prisoners.    On  the  8rd  of  November,  Dr.  Wolff. 

1842,  the  Supreme  Government  as-  *  See  the  Edinburgh  Review^  J^y^ 

sumed  that  Conolly  was  still  alive.  1845,  for  an  account  of  these  efforts. 

[See  letter  from  Mr.  Maddock  quoted  The  paper  derives  additional   value 

mnte,  page  518,  note.]     But  the  home  from  the  assignment  of  its  authorship 

authorities  adopted  Saleh  Mahomed's  to  Sir  John  M*NeilL 


NEGLECT  OF  COLONEL  STODDART.         525 

in  answering  the  references  made  by  him  to  the  home  au- 
thorities, he  might  have  taken  advantage  of  a  favorable 
change  in  the  feelings  of  the  Ameer,  and  of  his  own  cir- 
cumstances, to  take  his  departure  from  Bokhara.  Certain 
it  is  that  Stoddart  felt  acutely  the  culpable  indiflference 
to  his  fate  displayed  by  the  British- Government.  As  far 
back  as  the  July  of  the  preceding  year  he  had  written: 

News  from  me  you  will  not  expect,  nor  have  I  the  least  word 
of  interest  to  oflfer  you,  except  that  1  am  waiting  the  replies  of 
government,  before  I  am  finally  released  and  take  my  departure. 
Nothing  can  be  more  slack  than  the  time  and  means  taken  to 
provide  me  with  those  replies,  and  my  disgust  perfectly  negatives 
any  attempt  to  write  a  commonly  agreeable  note.  My  last  news 
from  Caubul,  dated  June  6,  says  that  poor  Todd  is  there  await- 
ing, if  possible,  a  mitigation  of  his  sentence.  ConoUy  is  not  yet 
here  from  Kokan,  nor  have  my  messengers  to  him  yet  returned. 
They  conveyed  the  orders  from  Caubul,  and  an  invitation  from 
the  Ameer,  to  return  bv  this  route.* 

*  Colonel  Stoddart  to  Major  Ratr/tn-  present  aspect  of  affairs  it  does  not 

son:  BokTuir a,  July  7,  IQAl.  MS.  Cor^  seem  necessary  to  continue  the  re- 