

on  their  reaching  Caubul AUahdad  Khan  behaved  very 

firmly  in  refusing  to  allow  that  he  was  the  servant  of  a  Feringhee 
servant,  as  the  Ameer  wished  him  to  do,  and  did  justice  both  to 
the  dignity  of  his  royal  master  and  to  the  policy  of  the  British 
Government  in  Afghanistan.     I  beg  that  his  conduct  may  be 

Lieutenant  A.  Conolly  to  Kokund,  to  consider  their  position  favorably. 

I  am  directed  to  inform  you  that  the  HisLordship,  therefore,  authorises  the 

Governor-General  has  no  knowledge  disbursement  of  the  sums  stated  in 

of  Lieutenant  A.  Conolly*s  mission  to  the  papers  attached  to  vour  letter, 

Kokund  having  been  authorised.    On  under  reply  to  be  due  to  these  several 

the  contrary,  his  Lordship  was   in-  persons;  but  the  sums  so  paid  on 

formed,  by  the  late  President  of  the  account  of  wages  accruing  to  these 

Board  of  Control,  that  Lieutenant  several  persons,  after  they  left  Khiva 

A.  Conolly  was  expressly  instructed  (after  deducting  therefrom  the  amount 

by  him  not  to  go  to  Kokund ;  and,  in  of  wages  which  would  have  become  due 

all  probabilitv,  he  owes  all  his  mis-  during  a  direct  march  to  Caubul)  will 

fortunes  to  his  direct  transgression  of  be  made  a  charge  aeainst  Lieutenant 

that  instruction.    The  servants  enter-  A.  Conolly,  who  will  be  required  to 

tained  by  him,  however,  are  not  re-  refund  the  amount,  as  well  as  all  ^ums 

sponsible  for  the  indiscretion  of  their  which  may  have  been  drawn  on  ac- 

master.    They  were  in  the  service  of  count  of  such  an  unauthorised  exten- 

an  officer  apparently  employed  on  a  sion  of  his  mission."— [Afr.  Maddock 

public    mission   by   liis   government,  to  General  Poliock :   Simlah,  Nov.  9| 

and  the  Governor-General  is  prepared  1842.    MS,  BecortU,] 


518  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

mentioned  to  Shah  Soojah,  and  I  trust  that  all  his  losses  will  be 
made  up  to  him;  but  if  the  preparation  of  the  account  is  left  to 
him,  he  will  make  it  a  very  large  one,  and  part  of  the  settlement 
may  perhaps  be  deferred  till  it  is  decided  whether  or  no  the 
Ameer  is  to  be  called  upon  for  repayment. 

When  our  last  packet  was  despatched  we  deemed  it  not  im- 
possible, from  the  Ameer's  expressions,  which  had  been  reported 
to  us,  that  his  Majesty  designed  to  send  us  away  with  the  Russian 
Mission.  Our  keepers  rather  inclined  to  the  idea  that  Huzrut 
would  dismiss  us  about  the  same  time  by  the  route  of  Persia;  and 
the  Topshee-Bashee's  old  brother  talked  seriously  about  perform- 
ing a  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  city  of  Meshid  in  our  company. 

These  hopes  were  most  delusive.  As  time  advanced, 
the  prospects  of  restoration  to  liberty  became  more  and 
more  remote.  About  the  middle  of  the  month  of  -ATpril 
the  Russian  Mission  took  its  departure ;  and  the  Ameer 
set  out  from  Bokhara  at  the  head  of  a  grand  military 
expedition  against  the  state  of  Kokund.  On  the  13th 
of  April,  Conolly  wrote  in  his  journal: 