


528  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY- 

were  not  employed  by  their  government  in  such  designs,  for  their 
government  is  friendly  to  you. 

Send  them  away  towards  Persia.  It  will  redound  to  your 
honour.  They  shall  never  return  to  give  you  offence,  but  be  sent 
back  to  their  own  country. 

Do  this  as  you  wish  to  have  my  friendship. 

Ellenbobough.* 

So  ^manifest  a'repudiation''of  the  official  character  of 
these  two  officer^  was  not  right ;  and  it  has  been  said,  by 
one  whose  zeal  and  enthusiasm  overlaid  his  judgment 
and  discretion,  but  who  is  still  entitled  to  honourable 
mention  for  his  generous  exertions  in  a  hopeless  cause,f 
that  this  very  letter,  in  all  likelihood,  caused  the  execu- 
tion of  the  prisoners.  To  describe  them  as  travellers 
was,  it  is  said,  to  proclaim  them  as  spies.  But  the  letter, 
however  dangerous  in  itself,  was  at  least  harmless  in  its 
results.  Before  it  was  even  written,  the  "  innocent  tra- 
vellers" had  gone  to  a  land  where  the  tyranny  of  princes 
could  not  reach  them — where  the  wicked  cease  from 
troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest.  J 

♦  MS.  Correspondence,  damp  and  attrition.    The  perusal  of 

t  Captain  Grover.  the  article  in  the  Edinburgh  Review, 

X  The  extracts  from  Captain  Co-  mentioned  in  a  former  note,  enables 

nolly's  letters  and  journals  in  this  me  to  supply  the  hiatus  at  pa"re  504, 

chapter  are  all  made  from  the  ori-  the  party  there  spoken  of  being  the 

ginals,  and  have,  in  some  places,  been  Meer  Shub,  or  Master  of  the  Police, 

deciphered  witli  much  difficulty,  the  At  page  507,  the  name  of  the  Kus- 

manuscript,  written  in  very  minute  sian  colonel,  Boutenoff,  or  BouteneiflT, 

characters,  being  greatly  defaced  by  is  incorrectly  printed  BontenoflT. 


AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL.  529 


CHAPTER  VI. 

[April- July:  1842.] 

Affairs  at  Caubul— Elevation  of  Futteh  Junff— Opposition  of  the  Barnkzyes 
— Arrival  of  Akbar  Khan— His  Policy — Attack  on  the  Balla  Hissar— Jts 
Capture— Conduct  of  Akbar  Khan — Barukzje  Strife — Defeat  of  Zemaun 
Khan — Situation  of  the  Hostages  and  Prisoners. 

On  the  death  of  Shah  Soojah  there  commenced  in 
Caubul  a  civil  war.  The  whole  city  was  thrown  into 
convulsion.  Futteh  Jung,  the  second  son  of  the  mur- 
dered Shah,  was  proclaimed  King.  He  was  a  man  of 
weak  understanding  and  infamous  character;  but  he 
was  believed  to  be  friendly  to  the  British  Government, 
and  he  both  hated  and  feared  the  Barukzyes.  In  him- 
self a  mere  cypher,  he  could  have  done  nothing  to  resist 
the  encroachments  of  that  powerful  tribe ;  but  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan  threw  all  the  weight  of  his  influence  into 
the  scales  in  favour  of  the  Prince,  and  for  some  time 
they  seemed  equally  balanced.  The  Naib  cared  nothing 
for  the  Prince ;  but  he  scented  the  royal  treasures,  and 
where  the  money  lay  the  thickest,  there  was  sure  to  be 
Ameen-ooUah  Khan. 