

On  the  19th  (May)  the  Topshee-Bashee  paid  us  a  visit  of  a  few 
moments,  after  keeping  away  for  two  months.  He  mentioned  that 
a  man  with  a  name  like  Noor  Mohumnud  had  come  three  or 
four  days  before  from  Persia,  bringing  a  load  of  things  for  Stod- 
dart, of  which  the  Dustan  Kanchee  had  forwarded  a  list  to  the 
Ameer — probably  the  articles  which  should  have  accompanied 
Lord  Palmerston's  letter.  The  Huzrut,  the  Topshee-Bashee 
said,  would  doubtless,  on  his  return,  be  gracious  to  us,  and  give 
us  fine  robes  of  honour,  and  treat  us  even  better  than  before. 


522  STODDART  AND  CONOLLY. 

About  sunset  on  the  23rd,  as  Stoddart  and  myself  were  pacing 
up  and  down  a  small  court  of  twenty  feet  long,  which  encloses 
our  prison,  one  of  the  citadel  doorkeepers  came  and  desired  us 
both  to  sit  down  in  a  comer;  we  complied,  wondering  what 
would  follow,  and  presently  saw  heads  peering  at  us  from  the 
adjoining  roofs^  when  we  understood  that  the  Ameer's  heir,  a 
youth  of  seventeen,  had  taken  this  way  of  getting  a  sight  of  the 
Feringhee  Elchees.  We  must  have  given  him  but  a  poor  impres- 
sion in  the  remains  of  our  clothes,  and  with  heads  and  beards 
imcombed  for  more  than  five  months. 

On  the  23rd,  Jooma  Bai  was  accosted  by  a  man  named  Makh- 
zoom,  known  to  Stoddart,  who  gave  him  a  token,  and  a  note 
written  in  such  bad  grammar  as  scarcely  to  be  understood,  in 
which  he  said  one  Juleb  arrived  lately  from  Khiva,  mentioned 
that  he  saw  Pottinger  Sahib  there,  and  another  person  named 
Moosa  having  come,  bringing  a  letter  from  Pottinger  Sahib,  who, 
he  says,  is  at  Khiva,  with  the  Elchee  of  Mahomed  Shah. 

Authentic  history  here  terminates.  Beyond  this  all  is 
doubt  and  conjecture.  On  the  28th  of  May,  Stoddart 
despatched  an  official  letter  to  the  Indian  Government,* 
which  was  forwarded  with  ConoUy's  journals;  and  at 
this  point  we  lose  altogether  the  track  of  the  footprints 
which  the  Bokhara  captives  have  left  on  the  great 
desert  of  time.  That  they  perished  miserably  is  cer- 
tain. "  No  change  has  taken  place  in  our  treatment/' 
wrote  Stoddart — it  is  the  last  sentence  penned  in  the 
Bokhara  prison  which  seems  to  have  reached  its  des- 

*  An  abstract  of  this  letter  was  now  probably  march  against  E^iva, 
forwarded  by  another  route,  and  it  which,  unless  saved  by  some  demon- 
reached  John  Conolly  at  Caubul  on  stration  from  Persia  or  Afghanistan, 
the  4th  of  July.  In  this  letter,  must  fall  in  August  or  September, 
Stoddart  reports  the  success  of  the  after  a  short  campaign.'*  Withrefer- 
Ameer  at  Kokimd.  "  The  Ameer,"  ence  to  the  efforts  of  the  Russian 
he  wrote,  ^^  entered  Kokund  on  the  Mission,  he  says :  ^*  The  Russian  Mis- 
11th  of  May,  and  gave  it  up  to  sion  left  this  towards  the  end  of 
pillage — destroyed  its  rulers — un-  April.  I  feel  convinced  that  Colonel 
peopled  its  capital,  and  is  now  on  his  Boutenoff's  kind  desire  to  procure 
return,  having  distributed  the  dif-  our  release  failed  solely  in  cons^ 
ferent  governments  among  his  own  quence  of  the  unreasonableness  of 
Bokharan  chiefs.  He  is  become  mas-  the  Ameer." — [3/5.  Correspondence.'] 
ter  of  immense  treasure,  and  will 