

April  5. — When  I  came  here,  Stoddart  did  his  utmost  to  put 
me  forward ;  but  now,  as  long  as  the  Ameer  detains  him,  I  shall 

letter  of  the  1 1th  of  March  was  writ-  When  I  got  better  I  drew  up  for 
ten  when  I  was  very  ill  with  fever.  Stoddart  the  memorandum  which  he 
Thinking  that  he  might  forcibly  be  had  asked  for,  and  which  he  now  de- 
sent  away  from  me  on  the  departure  cides  on  forwarding.  It  is  written  in 
of  the  Kussians  (as  they  brought  a  a  more  calm  and  less  indignant 'tone 
request  for  his  dismissal),  or  that  we  than  the  letter  aforesaid,  but  allow- 
might  be  otherwise  separated,  Stod-  ance  must  be  made  for  the  brevity 
dart  had  begged  me  to  give  him  a  and  freedom  of  the  propositions,  for 
memorandum  of  my  opinions  regarding  we  were  so  liable  to  be  interrupted 
the  policy  to  be  pursued  towards  these  and  discovered,  that  I  could  only  pen 
states  ;  and  I  wrote  off  a  hasty  sum-  my  opinions  by  snatches,  and  paper  is 
mary  of  these  notions,  which  were  a  scarce  article  with  us."—  [Arthur 
running  in  my  head^  with  many  ConoUi/t  MS,  Journal,] 
things  that  I  was  anxious  to  say  *  General  Pollock  exerted  himself 
about  my  unfortunate  servants,  and  to  obtain  an  adjustment  of  the  claims 
to  my  friends,  when  under  excite-  of  Captain  Conolly's  servants ;  and 
ment,  which  must  have  made  my  he  succeeded.  The  letter  which  was 
expressions  very  wild  and  incohe-  written  in  reply  to  Pollock's  appli- 
rent.  I  hoped  that  the  paper  con-  cation  shows  in  what  light  Lord  Ellen- 
taining  them  remained  in  the  hands  borough  regarded  Conolly's  mission : 
of  Long  Joseph ;  but  he,  misunder-  "  With  reference,"  wrote  the  Chief 
standing  our  instructions,  instead  of  Secretary,  *'  to  your  letter  of  the  2drd 
keeping  it,  gave  it  to  £usofee-i-  ultimo,  on  the  subject  of  the  remu- 
Roomee  (Augustin),  who,  apparently,  neration  applied  for,  on  behalf  of  tlie 
went  off  at  once  with  it  to  Caubul.  servants  attached  to  the  mission  of 


conolly's  journal.  '        517 

refer  to  him  as  the  accredited  British  agent,  every  communication 
on  business  that  the  Ameer  may  make  to  me,  whether  we  should 
be  together  or  separated.  He  well  knows  all  the  people  here^  and 
the  dignity  of  our  government  is  safe  in  his  hands. 

We  have  heard  that  the  Russians  are  about  to  depart,  and  that 
they  are  to  take  their  enslaved  people  with  them;  but  we  cannot 
get  at  the  truth  of  the  statement.  Report  also  says  that  the 
Ameer  will  march  with  his  army  seven  or  eight  days  hence. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  he  is  preparing  for  an  early  move;  but 
though  Takkind  and  Kokund  are  named  as  his  points  of  attack, 
it  is  not  certain  that  he  will  go  eastward.  This  is  the  107th  day 
of  our  confinement,  without  change  of  clothes;  but  the  weather 
having  become  warmer,  we  can  «do  without  the  garments  that 
most  harboured  the  vermin  that  we  found  so  distressing,  and  we 
are  both  now,  thank  God !  quite  well.  We  trust  that  our  friends 
wil^be  informed  of  our  well-being.  We  have  desired  all  our 
servants,  except  Ibraheem  (who  remains  behind  to  keep  up  corre- 
spondence), to  return  to  their  homes  as  soon  as  their  strength 
enables  them  to  travel,  begging  them  to  make  their  way  anyhow, 
and  to  rest  assured  that"  everything  due  will  be  made  up  to  them 