

made  liimself  the  eDemv  of  the  British  him,  some  in  fear,  and  others  with  the 

and  of  the  Barukzyes,  he  would  make  hope  that  we  shall  be  driven  out  by 

peace  with  Akbar,  and  so  shelter  him-  him,  and   that  he  will  become   the 

self  under  the  wings  of  the  Sirdar,  master  of  the  country.      Mahomed 

The  people  say  that  me  Barukzyes  will  Zemaun  Khan  is  deserted  by  a  great 

seize   Ameen-oollah ;  but  others  say  many  people,  and  Mahomed  Akbar 

that  Akbar  is  too  wise  to  allow  this  joined  by  them.     There  is  a  dispute 

step  to  be  taken,  as  he  will  find  the  expected  between  him  and  Mahomed 

Naib  serviceable  in  the  present  crisis.  Akbar,  who  says   that  the   English 

....  Mahomed  Akbar  intends  to  will  not  march  for  Caubul  from  Jella* 

get   Captain  Conolly,  &c.,  into  his  labad  for  two  months  to  come." — 

{)ossession.     Since  Akbar  Khan  came  [3/5.  Records,'] 
lere,  all  the  chiefs  have  gone  over  to 


THE  BALLA  HISSAB  UND^BMINED.  541 

engendered  a  rupture  between  them;  and  it  was  plain, 
that  if  some  arrangement  could  not  be  promptly  made 
between  the  Prince  and  the  Barukzyes,  through  the 
agency  of  the  Kuzzilbash  chief,  the  Balla  Hissar,  the 
treasure,  and  the  guns,  would  speedily  fall  into  the  hands 
of  Akbar  Khan  and  his  confederates. 

The  Barukzyes  now  laid  siege,  with  redoubled  vigour, 
to  the  Balla  Hissar.  The  Prince  was  well-nigh  de- 
serted.* He  called  upon  Oosman  Khan,  Shah  Soojah's 
old  minister,  to  aid  him,  but  upon  some  frivolous  pre- 
text he  declined  to  league  himself  with  so  perilous  a 
cause.  It  was  assiduously  given  out  that  the  Prince 
was  holding  the  Balla  Hissar  only  for  the  Feringhees ; 
and,  as  the  national  feeling  became  stronger  and  stronger 
against  him,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  strength  of  the 
place  itself,  he  would  hardly  have  been  able  to  hold 
it  for  a  day  against  the  Barukzyes.  But  the  fortress 
held  out,  in  spite  of  the  weakness  of  the  Prince  and 
the  garrison;  and  so  at  last  the  Barukzyes  began  to 
undermine  the  works.  "  Last  night,"  wrote  Futteh 
Jung  to  General  Pollock,  at  the  beginning  of  June, 
"  they  made  an  assault ;  now  they  have  made  mines 
in  every  direction.  My  affairs  are  in  a  very  critical 
state.  ...  If  you  do  not  come  quickly,  the  Balla 
Hissar  and  the  throne  will  be  lost,  and  you  will  be 
a  sufferer.     At  this  time  I  am  at  my  last  gasp.     More- 

*  According,  however,  to  our  Eng-  arrived  at  the  Balla  Hissar  in  dls- 

lish  notions,  the  contest  was  verj  far  guise,  and  that  on  hearing  this  the 

from  a  vigorous  one.     John  Conolly  Barukzyes  withdrew  their  outposts  to 

wrote  from  Caubul :  "  The  contend-  a  considerable  distance."    In  another 