

In  such  troublous  times  as  he  had  now  fallen  upon, 
the  Prince  had  little  taste  for  royalty.  He  remembered 
the  fate  of  his  father;  and  shrunk  from  the  perilous  ex- 
citement in  which  he  was  now  about  to  be  plunged. 

VOL.  II.  2  M 


530  AFFAIBS  AT  CAUBUL, 

Weak,  too,  as  he  was,  he  had  sagacity  enough  to  per- 
ceive that  British  power  was  again  on  the  ascendant, 
and  that  whatever  might  be  the  result  of  the  internecine 
strife  which  was  now  convulsing  the  capital,  the  supre- 
macy of  the  British  would  be  speedily  re-established. 
It  was  expedient,  therefore,  he  thought,  to  exert  himself 
to  the  utmost,  to  obtain  the  favorable  consideration  of 
his  old  Feringhee  allies ;  so  he  despatched  the  following 
letter  to  Captain  Macgregor  at  Jellalabad,  pleading  both 
for  himself  and  the  memory  of  his  murdered  father : 

High  ik  Place, 

The  astounding  event  of  the  Shah's  murder  wiU  be  known 
to  you.  These  treacherous  tyrants,  how  tyrannical  has  been  their 
act !  If  the  Shah  had  not  been  united  to  the  intereste  of  the 
English,  and  had  not  attended  and  acted  according  to  their  ad- 
vice, why  should  he  have  met  with  such  an  end,  and  why  was 
be  with  them  until  the  last^  save  that  he  hoped  for  their  co- 
operation? They  placed  that  ungrateful  man,  the  Nizam-oo- 
dowlah  (Oosman  Khan),  in  power,  and,  by  their  acting  according 
to  his  advice,  matters  came  to  such  a  pass.  The  Shah  was  aware 
of  the  treachery  and  disaffection  of  these  persons,  and  how  much 
soever  he  warned  the  English  of  this,  it  was  of  no  use.  It  was 
because  the  Shah  looked  upon  himself  and  the  English  as  one, 
and  attended  to  their  pleasure,  that  the  revolution  took  place; 
but  this  is  known  to  you.  The  people,  high  and  low,  having  sealed 
the  Koran,  sent  their  deputies  with  it  to  the  Shah,  stating  that, 
if  the  Shah  would  forsake*  the  English  and  ally  himself  to  Islam, 
they  would  acknowledge  him  as  their  King.  The  Shah  replied: 
*^They  and  I  are  one;  I  am  not  separated  from  them."  These 
bastards  united  and  proclaimed  the  Shah  an  infidel.  The  Shah 
told  the  English  to  leave  the  cantonments  and  enter  the  Balla 
Hissar.  The  English  did  not  consent  to  this.  The  Shah  then 
endeavoured  to  conciliate  the  rebels,  and  night  and  day  took 
oaths  with  them,  with  the  view  of  carrying  out  the  plans  of  the 
English.  After  the  English  left  the  cantonments,  the  people 
tendered  to  the  Shah  their  submission,  and  endeavoured  to  per- 
suade the  King  to  attack  Jellalabad.    The  Shah,  by  a  thousand 


LETTER  OP  FUTTEH  JUNG.  581 

devices^  managed  for  two  and  a  half  months  to  put  them  off,  in 
order  that  the  British  reinforcements  might  reach  you.  All  the 
money  that  the  Shah  possessed  he  gave  to  the  people.  The  people 
gave  out  that  as  the  Shah  would  not  go  to  Jellalabad,  it  was  evi- 
dent that  he  was  friendly  to  the  (British)  infidels;  he  and  they 
were  one.  The  Shah  felt  embarrassed.  He  said  to  his  confidential 
servants :  "  If  I  go  to  Jellalabad,  lakhs  of  people  would  collect,  and 
I  should  be  unable  to  control  them,  and  if  by  this  time  the  British 
reinforcements  had  not  arrived,  it  would  be  bad  for  the  cause." 
The  King,  not  knowing  that  the  reinforcements  had  arrived, 
agreed  to  leave  the  city,  but  determined  not  to  reach  Jellalabad 
for  twenty  days — 500,000  registered  troops — ^and  if  be  saw  that  it 
was  to  their  advantage,  he  would  join  the  British,  On  the  22nd 
Suffur  (5th  of  April),  the  Shah's  murder  took  place;  on  the  23rd 
Suffur,  the  Populzye  nobles,  and  Ameen-ooUah  Khan,  Loghuree, 
placed  me  on  the  throne.  Even  as  the  Shah  was  the  friend  and 
well-wisher  of  the  English,  so  am  I  the  friend  and  well-wisher  of 
the  English.  On  account  of  this  friendship  the  King  sacrificed 
his  life  and  property.  Had  be  accepted  the  friendship  of  the 
Mussulmans,  the  Shah  would  neither  have  been  proclaimed  an 
infidel,  nor  have  thus  met  with  his  death  from  the  hands  of  the 
Barukzyes.  I  am  not  pleased  at  having  been  placed  on  the 
throne  by  these  people.  If  God  places  me  on  the  throne,  and  if 
this  country  is  again  in  the  possession  of  the  British,  and  they 
support  me  on  the  throne  and  in  getting  my  revenge  from  these 
tyrants  who  killed  the  Shah,  then  I  shall  be  pleased.  The  Shah 
sacrificed  his  life  and  property  on  account  of  the  English,  and 
now  it  is  for  them  to  uphold  the  reputation  of  his  family.  If  in 
a  few  days  your  army  does  not  arrive  at  Caubul,  they  will  carry 
off  the  Shah's  family.  Write  speedily,  and  tell  me  what  I  am  to 
do,  and  what  the  family  of  the  Shah  is  to  do.  It  is  necessary  that 
the  British  should  arrive  soon.  The  death  of  the  Shah  has  caused 
disunion  among  the  chiefs.  It  is  necessary  that  your  army,  with 
a  large  army  of  the  Sikhs  (Gt>d  willing),  diould  advance.  When 
I  was  first  placed  on  the  throne,  the  people  were  considering  the 
death  of  the  Barukzyes,  but  on  hearing  that  your  army  had  arrived 
at  Jellalabad,  and  that  Mahomed  Akbar  had  been  defeated,  the 
people  agreed  to  sxispend  hostilities  among  us,  and  endeavoured 
to  induce  me  to  attack  Jellalabad.     Up  to  the  present  time  this 