

It  was  not  likely  that  Akbar  Khan  would  regard 
with  imconcem  these  proceedings  at  the  capital.  He 
was  awaiting  the  return  of  Captain  Mackenzie  from 
Jellalabad,  when  intelligence  of  the  disturbed  state  of 
affairs  at  Caubul  was  brought  to  him.  Determining  first, 
however,  to  learn  the  result  of  the  mission  to  General 
Pollock's  camp,  he  resolved  to  set  out  for  the  scene  of 

*  On  the  5th  of  May,  Mohun  Lai  English  Government  on  the  throne) 

wrote :  "  The  Prince  (JFutteh  Jung)  till  the  arrival  of  General  Pollock, 

is  very,  very  anxious  that  the  Grene-  Secondly,  he  may  keep  them  quietly 

ral  should  march  to  Caubul ;  he  ap-  in  his  possession,  and  catch  them  as 

pears  now  involved  in  difficulties,  and  rebels,  when  you  approach.** — IMS. 

undoubtedly  is  friendlyto  our  govern-  Records/] 

ment.    He  says  he  would  not  allow        f  *^  The  Prince,*'  said  Mohun  Lai, 

Ameen-oollah  and  the  Populzye  rebels  "is  of  course  very  liberal  to  those 

to  come  into  the  palace,  the  evening  that  espouse   his    cause,  while  the 

they  were  obliged  to  leave  the  city,  Barukzyes  pay  verylittle  by  selling 

but  by  allowing  them  to  come  in,  he  jewels  and  finery.    The  Kohistanees 

entertained  two  objects.    Firstly,  to  or  disciples  of  Meer  Hadjee  are  to- 

cmploy  their  services  against  the  ene-  wards  tne  Barukzyes;  but  they  groan 

mies  of  both  states  (the  Barukzyes,  to  receive  money  lesser  than  those 

who  murdered  the  Envoy  and  also  who  are  with  the  rrince.*' — IMS.Re^ 

his  father,  the  King,  placed  by  the  cords."} 


584  AFFAIRS  AT  OAUBUL. 

Strife,  and  to  take  one  or  two  of  the  English  officers  with 
him.  Mackenzie  returned  on  the  3rd  of  May,  and  was 
immediately  despatched  by  the  Sirdar  on  a  second  mis- 
sion to  Jellalabad,  whilst  Akbar  Ehan,  taking  Pottinger 
and  Troup  with  him,  set  out  on  the  following  day  for 
the  capital. 

Arrived  at  Caubul,  he  played  his  game  with  some 
address.  Sedulously  giving  currency  to  the  intelligence 
that  he  had  been  in  treaty  with  General  Pollock,  who 
was  said  to  have  recognised  his  authority,  he  enhanced 
his  own  importance  in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen,  and 
sowed  disappointment  among  the  adherents  of  the  royal 
party.  Many  who  had  before  been  neutral,  now,  be- 
lieving that  the  British  were  on  amicable  terms  with 
the  Sirdar,  openly  espoused  his  cause.  Khan  Shereen 
Ehan  and  the  Euzzilbashes  had  hitherto  remained  in- 
active ;  but  feeling  the  importance  of  their  coadjutancy, 
Akbar  Khan  made  strenuous  efforts  to  obtain  it,  and 
gained  at  last  a  promise  of  support  *  From  day  to  day 
there  was  continual  strife  and  much  fightmg.  The 
advantage  was  for  the  most  part  on  the  side  of  the 
Barukzyes.  The  Prince  had  thrown  up  some  outworks 
round  the  Balla  Hissar;  but  partly  owing  to  the  weak- 
ness and  partly  to  the  treachery  of  the  guards,  they  had 
been  carried  by  the  enemy .f    Pottinger  witnessed  some 