

ing  parties  continue  to  amuse  them-  letter    (May  26)    he    says :    "  The 

selves  with  firing  long  shots  with  their  Prince  holds  out  still  in  the  citadel, 

guns  and  jezails,  and  the  Balla  Boorj  The  Barukzyes  have  been  battering 

IS  attacked— that  is,  fired  at  for  three  at  the  Upper  Boorj,  and  firing  into 

or  four  hours  b^  one  or  two  thousand  the  Balla  Hissar.    According  to  our 

men    every  third  night  or  so.** —  ideas,  their  efforts  have  been  almost 

{^MS.  Correspondence,^    Conolly  says,  harmless ;  but  the  garrison,  I  fear, 

in  the  same  letter  :   '^  There  is  an  have  become  alarmed,  and  would  be 

anecdote  here,  that  three  Feringhees  glad  to  see  relief. " — IMS,  Records,} 


642  AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL. 

over,  there  is  nothing  in  the  magazine.*    Now  is  the 
crieis/'f 

On  the  7th  of  June  the  Balla  Hissar  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Barukzyes.  On  the  preceding  day,  after 
an  ineffectual  attempt  at  negotiation,  Akbar  E^han  had 
issued  orders  for  the  springing  of  the  mine.  But  it  had 
not  been  carried  sufficiently  far  to  damage  the  works4 
The  explosion  killed  a  large  number  of  the  besiegers ; 
whilst  the  storming  party  was  driven  back  by  the  gar- 
rison with  considerable  loss.  The  troops  of  the  Shah- 
zadah  are  said  to  have  **  behaved  very  nobly,  and  like 
heroes,  to  have  defeated  the  assault."  Mohun  Lai  re- 
ported, but  with  some  exaggeration,  that  not  less  than 
1000  of  the  followers  of  Akbar  Khan  fell  upon  this 
day. 

But  the  elation  of  the  garrison  was  but  short-lived. 
On  the  following  day  the  Barukzyes  brought  up  some 
heavy  ordnance  and  began  to  cannonade  the  Balla  Hissar. 
The  defenders  then  lost  heart.  The  Hindostanee  and 
Arab  fighting  men,  who  composed  the  bulk  of  the 
Prince's  followers,  began  to  tremble  for  the  safety  of 
their  families,  and  to  call  upon  Futteh  Jung  to  enter 
into  some  accommodation  with  their  assailants.  Thus 
deserted  by  his  garrison,  who  declared  that  they  would 
open  the  gates  to  the  enemy  if  the  Prince  did  not  sub- 

*  The    Prince    had   no    powder,  time,  contain  the  same  urgent  exhor- 

Mohun  Lai,  however,  contrived  to  tations  to  advance,  as  the  only  means 

Erocure  some  fud  to  convey  it  to  the  of  saving  the  Balla  Hissar  and  the 

(alia  Hissar,  through  the  agency  of  prisoners, 

the  Kuzzilbash  chien.  t  '^^  ^^^^  ^^    altogether    the 

t  On  the  5th  of  June,  Mohan  Lai  merest  bug-bear.    It  frightened  the 

wrote  to  Sir  R.  Shakespear,  Pollock's  Prince  and  the  garrison  j  but  Mohun 

military  secretary :  "  If  you  will  not  Lai  assured  the  former  that  it  could 

march  immediately,  or  in  four  days,  not  by  any  possibility  do  him  any 