

opposite  the  first  or  distant  fort,  Ab-  fly  to  the  Balla  Hissar.    Mahomed 

dm  Salem  became  traitor,  and  waited  Akbar's  people  followed  the  fiieitives 

on  Mahomed  Akbar,  who  gave  him  a  to  the  very  gates  of  the  Balla  Hissar, 

horse  and  desired  him  to  go  to  his  and  possessed  the  ^un  of  the  Prince. 

Tillage.    Upon  this  the  people  of  the  Mahomed  Akbar  nad  taken  Major 

Prince,  who  were  stationed  in  the  Pottinjzer  also  with  him  to  the  fight.** 

forts  between  tlie  fort  of  Abdul  Sa-  —IMS,  Records,^ 

lem  and  Balla  EUssar,  became  dis-  *  **In  conseqttenceof  esiablishinff 

heartened  and  cowardly,  obliged  to  the  British  harmony.*' — IMohunLafi 

desert  the  forts  wiUiout  fighting,  and  TraiuUUion.'] 


S36  AFFAIBS  AT  CAUBUL. 

fifteen  days  more.  After  that  period,  without  assistance  from  tho 
British,  I  shall  be  reduced  to  the  greatest  difficulty.  The  men 
of  the  world  are  the  disciples  and  worshippers  of  money.  If  you 
will  not  raise  the  victorious  standard  of  the  British  troops  quickly, 
or  do  not  send  me  reinforcements  within  a  few  days,  all  the  people 
will  desert  me  on  account  of  not  having  money,  and  the  Barukzyes 
will  then  have  the  upper-hand  over  me. 

If  the  Barukzyes  establish  their  power,  serious  evil  is  to  be 
apprehended;  and  the  household  of  the  British  ally  (Shah  Soojah) 
will  be  destroyed.  After  this  there  will  be  nothing  in  store  for 
us  but  repentance  and  disgrace.  It  is  as  clear  to  all  people  as  the 
sun,  that  I  am  soliciting  the  assistance  of  the  friends  and  nations 
of  my  late  father.  In  delaying  this  object  many  dangers  may 
arise,  and  much  harm  may  befall  the  needy.  In  such  a  crisis  as 
this^  all  objects  will  be  easily  gained;  and  the  afiairs  whicli  are 
now  reduced  to  a  state  of  disorder  will,  without  much  difficulty, 
be  brought  into  order  again. 

If  you  are  delaying  your  march  on  account  of  supplies  of 
grain,  you  need  not  care  for  this.  If  it  pleases  God  that  I  should 
recover  my  authority,  there  will  be  thousands  of  "  Khurwars" 
(measures  often  maunds)  of  grain,  as  well  as  plenty  of  fodder  for 
the  horses. 

I  have  heard  that  the  Bombay  forces  have  reached  Candahar, 
and  also  marched  thence  to  this  quarter.  It  would  be  highly 
desirable,  if  the  victorious  army  of  Calcutta  should  possess  this 
country  before  the  arrival  of  the  Bombay  forces,  that  it  should 
show  the  world  that  your  arras  alone  have  gained  the  victory. 
Although  the  army  of  both  sides  belongs  to  the  same  govern- 
ment, I  write  thus  because  I  wish  you  well.* 

On  the  day  after  this  letter  was  written,  three  holy 
men  presented  themselves  before  the  Prince,  with  over- 
tures of  peace  from  the  Sirdar.  They  set  forth  that 
whatever  oaths  Futteh  Jung  might  desire  the  Baruk- 
zye  chief  to  swear  to  him,  would  be  solemnly  sworn 
on  the  Koran.  "Of what  avail  are  oaths,"  asked  the 
Prince;  and  sending  for  several  Korans  from  another 
apartment,  showed  the  Syuds  how  they  were  covered 