

*  "  Khan  Shereen  Khan,*'  wrote  son  to  Khan  Shereen  Khan,  and  per- 

Mohun  Lai,  on  the  9thof  Maj,  '^  came  suaded  him,  after  a  long  talk,  to  side 

last  night  to  me  and  said,  that  the  with  him  to  oppose  the  Prince  towards 

Barukzyes  press  upon  him  to  sidewith  Bence  Hissar.    When  Mahomed  Ze- 

them  to  oppose  the  Prince ;  and  if  he  maun  Khan  heard  this  he  got  jealous, 

does  agree  ne  is  sure  he  will  be  ruined,  and  sent  a  message  to  Khan  Shereen 

He  says  he  is  going  to  send  his  wives  Khan,  if  he  did  no  go  himself  or  send 

to  some  of  the  country  forts,  and  then  his  son  to  assist  Soojah-ool-Dowlah, 

either  go  into  the  Balla  Hissar  or  wait  as  the  Newab  had  requested  him,  he 

u]>on  you  at  Jellalabad ;  and  then  he  had  better  not  go,  with  Mahomed 

thinks  that  the  whole  of  the  Persians  Akbar  too.    The  latter  at  last  suc- 

will  foUow  him.'* — And  again,  on  May  ceeded.*' — [_MS.  Records.'] 

10th :  ^'  Yesterday,  about  noon,  ...  f  '*  When  Mahomed  Akbar,**  wrote 

Mahomed  Akbar  ithan  came  in  per-  Mohun  Lai,  **  appeared  in  the  field 


f 
SITUATION  OF  TfiB  FBINCE.  535 

of  these  engagements,  and  wrote  of  them  as  most  con- 
temptible affairs. 

It  soon  became  only  too  probable  that  the  Balla 
Hissar  itself  would  fall  before  the  Barukzyes.  The 
energy  and  vigour  of  Akbar  Khan  and  his  confederates 
greatly  exceeded  that  of  the  wretched  Prince  and  his 
few  intelrested  supporters.  Fearful  of  this,  Futteh  Jung 
continued  to  write  pressing  letters  to  the  British  autho- 
rities at  Jellalabad,  urging  them  to  push  on  to  his  relief, 
and  Mohun  Lai  gave  cogency  to  the  request  by  setting 
forth  the  probability  of  the  Balla  Hissar  falling  into  the 
hands  of  the  Barukzyes,  and  the  strength  which  that 
party  would  derive,  not  only  from  the  occupation  of 
such  a  commanding  position,  but  from  the  possession 
of  the  royal  treasures.  Like  his  father,  however,  the 
Prince  continued  to  declare  that  his  money  was  failing, 
and  to  request  the  British  to  supply  him  with  fiinds 
to  carry  on  the  war.  But  more  than  all  he  clamoured 
for  the  advance  of  the  British  army.  On  the  11th  of 
May  he  wrote  to  Captain  Macgregor : 

The  reason  of  the  present  contest  is  this.  I  wished  to  excite 
a  dispute  between  the  Barukzyes  and  the  other  wicked  men^ 
with  a  view  that  they  should  have  no  leisure  even  to  touch  their 
own  heads,  and  thus  the  English  army  may  reach  here  un- 
molested. To  effect  this  cause,  whatever  gold  and  silver  I  had 
has  been  paid  to  the  people,  with  the  object  of  securing  the 
interests  of  the  British.*  Now  I  have  very  little  cash  remain- 
ing in  the  treasury — enough  only  to  support  me  for  some  ten  or 