

2m2 


532  AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL. 

is  what  they  are  striving  to  effect,  but  I  tell  them,  that  if  they 
will  in  the  first  place  avenge  the  Shah's  death,  then  Til  go  to 
Jellalabad.  But  I  am  powerless,  and  shall  anxiously  expect  a 
letter  from  you.  Tell  me  how  to  act.  To  defeat  this  people  is 
at  present  very  easy,  for  preat  is  their  disunion.  Start  soon  for 
Caubul.* 

The  Prince  had  been  proclaimed  King  by  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan  and  the  Populyzes ;  but  the  Barukzyes  re- 
fused to  recognise  him.  Again  they  set  up  the  Newab 
Zemaun  Khan,  and  openly  defied  the  Suddozye  power. 
Soon  the  two  contending  parties  broke  out  into  open 
hostilities.  Ameen-ooUah  Kian  and  his  puppet  were 
the  first  to  draw  the  sword.  On  the  1st  of  May  there 
was  fighting  from  house  to  house — the  whole  city  was 
in  commotion.  On  the  following  day,  success  began  to 
declare  itself  on  the  side  of  the  Barukzyes.  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan  made  a  false  move,  and  disastrously  over- 
reached himself.  Believing  that  the  act  would  dis- 
hearten the  Barukzyes,  he  seized  the  person  of  Meer 
Hadjee,  the  chief  Moollah.  But  very  different  was  the 
real  from  the  anticipated  effect  of  this  outrage.  Nearly 
all  the  townspeople,  before  neutral,  rose  to  avenge  this 
insult  offered  to  their  High  Priest.  The  Kohistanees 
joined  them.  The  Hadjee  was  released.  But  popular 
indignation  ran  high  against  Ameen-oollah  Khan.  His 
house  was  burnt.  His  property  was  plundered.  His  ser- 
vants were  seized.  Compelled  to  seek  safety  in  flight, 
he  flung  himself  into  the  Balla  Hissar. 

T  he  Prince  made  a  show  of  welcoming  him,  but 
secretly  declared  that  he  would  willingly  surrender  him 
and  his  Populzye  associates  to  the  British,  if  Pollock 
would  advance  upon  Caubul — that  one  of  his  main 
objects,  indeed,  in  opening  the  gates  to  them  was  to  have 

•  MS.  Records. 


PROGRESS  OF  CIVIL  WAR,  633 

the  rebels  more  securely  in  his  power.*  The  Naib  knew 
that  his  position  was  a  dangerous  one,  and  declared  that 
he  would  throw  himself  on  the  mercy  of  the  British  and 
take  his  chance  of  being  hanged.  There  was  a  more 
unrelenting  enemy  beyond  the  walls  of  the  Balla  Hissar. 
The  Barukzyes  were  eager  to  destroy  him. 

The  contest  now  raged  furiously.  The  guns  of  the 
Balla  Hissar  were  opened  upon  the  city.  Multitudes  of 
the  townspeople  fled  in  dismay.  There  were  5000  men 
in  the  citadel;  there  was  no  lack  of  provisions.  The 
money  was  all  in  the  hands  of  the  Prince ;  and  he  dis- 
bursed it  freely  to  his  adherents.  But  the  Barukzyes 
were  miserably  poor.  They  could  only  raise  money  by 
the  sale  of  jewels  and  the  exaction  of  fines ;  and  the 
Kohistanees  and  others  who  flocked  to  their  standard 
envied  the  fortunate  followers  of  the  more  opulent 
Prince.f 