

♦  MS,  Records. 


ATTEMPTS  AT  NEGOTIATION.  537 

with  the  seals  of  the  Barukzye,  the  Douranee,  the 
Caubullee,  the  Persian,  and  the  Kohistanee  chiefs. 
"  This,"  added  the  Prince,  "  is  God's  holy  book,  in 
which  all  the  faithful  believe.  Look  at  these  seals  and 
the  oaths  of  fidelity  written  upon  the  margin,  declaring 
that  the  enemies  of  the  royal  family  are  the  enemies  of 
Mahomed — and  yet  the  Barukiyes  have  murdered  the 
King,  my  father.  If  there  be  any  other  Koran  sent 
from  Heaven,  let  the  Barukzyes  swear  solemnly  upon 
it — this  has  been  tried  too  often,  and  too  often  found 
wanting."  The  Syuds  were  then  dismissed.  Nothing 
was  done  towards  a  satisfactory  arrangement.  So  Ma- 
homed Shah  Khan  was  sent  to  conduct  the  negotiations 
with  the  Suddozye  Prince. 

What  were  the  proposals  made  to  the  Prince,  and  in 
what  light  he  regarded  them,  may  be  gathered  from 
the  letter  which,  on  the  following  day,  he  addressed  to 
Captain  Macgregor: 

The  circumstances  of  this  quarter  are  as  follows.  Since  the 
arrival  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  the  Barukzyes  at  the  head  of 
the  Ghilzyes,  Caubullees^  and  the  Kohistanees,  attacked  the 
trenches  I  had  built  out  at  a  distance.  Some  of  them  were  taken 
by  the  enemy  on  account  of  the  weakness  of  my  guards,  and 
others  in  consequence  of  the  treachery  of  my  people.  All  the 
trenches  round  the  Balla  Hissar  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  and  we  are  now  in  a  perfect  siege.  Yesterday,  Mahomed 
Shah  Khan,  Ghilzye,  came  to  treat  with  Ameen-ooUah  Khan  into 
the  Balla  Hissar,  and  the  result  of  their  negotiation,  after  solemn 
oaths,  was  as  follows: — ^That  I  should  be  acknowledged  as  King 
— Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  as  Minister  of  State — and  that  Ameen* 
oollah  Khan  should  hold  the  situation  of  Deputy  (**  Naib  ")  under 
the  minister.  After  this,  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  was  brought  to  my 
presence,  and  I  was  obliged  to  give  him  a  "  Khelat;"  but  agreeably 
to  the  advice  of  my  well-wishers,  I  deferred  giving  my  acquiescence 
to  the  result  of  their  negotiation  for  two  or  three  days  to  come. 

They  have  made  four  proposals  to  me, — Firstly,  that  I  should 
allow  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  to  be  my  minister,  and  Ameen- 


538  AFFAIBS  AT  CAUBUL. 

oollah  Khan  his  deputy.  They  are  then  both  to  raise  an  army 
and  to  go  and  fight  wil^  the  English  forces  coming  up  to  CaubuL 
Secondly,  they  will  stand  neutral,  if  I  like;  but  I  must  prepare  to 
go  and  oppose  the  British  troops.  Thirdly,  if  I  am  powerful,  I 
must  get  ready  to  wage  war  with  the  Barukzyes.  Fourthly, 
that  I  should  take  the  whole  family  of  the  late  King,  and  go 
wherever  I  Uke  to  go  with  them. 