

Khan  went  to  Mahomed  Akbar.  After    has  no  money He  has  sent  out 

two  hours  he  returned  to  Ameen-  all  the  Populzyes,  saying  that  he  does 
oollah,  who  conducted  him  to  the  not  trust  any  one.  He  has  now  the 
presence  of  Futteh  Jung  in  the  Balla  protection  only  of  a  few  Arabs  of  tlie 
Hissar.  He  said  to  the  Prince,  that  fialla  Hissar  and  1500  Indians,  lie 
Mahomed  Akbar  begged  him  not  to  has  no  courage — otherwise  no  one 
raise  disputes  amongst  the  Mussul-  could  take  the  Balla  Hissar.  Ma- 
mans  at  a  time  when  all  the  followers  homed  Akbar  has  acknowledged  tlie 
of  Mahomed  ought  to  unite  against  supremacy  of  the  Prince  only  because 
the  infidels.  If  he  were  a  friend  of  he  is  cunning ;  and  his  object  is  to 
the  Mussulman  cause  he  should  em-  arrest  the  internal  disputes  for  the 
brace  one  or  other  of  four  proposi-  present,  get  hold  of  the  Prince,  and 
tions.  (The  terms  stated  agree  with  possess  himself  of  his  money,  guns, 
those  in  the  Shah-zadah's  letter.)  &c.,  under  the  mask  of  friendship ;  and 
Agreeably  to  the  advice  of  Ameen*  if  unsuccessful  in  this  design,  he  will 
oollah,  the  Prince  was  obliged  to  give  undoubtedly  get  the  money  and  all 
his  consent  to  the  first  proposal.  On  the  military  stores  to  fight  with  us, 
this  he  gave  a  very  handsome  Khelat  which  is  his  fervent  desire.  Ameen- 
to  Mahomed  Shah  Elhan,  who  re-  oollah  went  over  to  Akbar,  because  he 
turned  to  Mahomed  Akbar.  This  found  that  all  the  Douranees  and  his 
morning  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,  followers  were  traitors,  and  had  gone 
hearing  of  the  negotiations,  asked  over  to  the  Barukzyes,  notwithstand- 
who  was  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  that  ing  they  got  from  him  thousands  of 
he  should  enter  into  agreements  with  gold  mohurs.  He  thought,  that  having 


540  AFFAIBS  AT  CAUBUL. 

the  nominal  occupant  of  the  throne.  Akbar  Elhan  was 
to  be  minister;  and  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  his  Naib,  or 
deputy.  It  was  the  object  of  the  Sirdar  to  arrest  the 
internal  dissensions  which  were  so  weakening  the  great 
national  and  rehgious  cause,  to  obtain  possession  of  all 
the  available  money  and  munitions,  and  then  to  carry 
on  the  war  with  new  vigour  against  the  infidels. 

But  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan  was  the  recognised  chief 
of  the  Barukzye  party ;  and  he  now  asked  on  what  autho- 
rity the  Sirdar  ventured  without  his  sanction  to  make 
peace  with  the  Suddozyes.  There  appeared  to  be  every 
chance  of  an  open  rupture  between  them ;  and  scarcely 
had  Akbar  Khan  concluded  his  negotiations  with  the 
Prince,  then  the  Newab  made  a  hostile  demonstration, 
attacked  the  Balla  Hissar,  but  was  beaten  back  with 
much  slaughter.  It  was,  however,  currently  reported 
that  a  secret  understanding  existed  between  the  two 
Barukzye  chiefs,  whose  common  object  it  was  to  obtain 
possession  of  the  Balla  Hissar.  Two  or  three  days  after- 
wards they  were,  outwardly,  again  united.  An  attempt 
had  been  made  to  lure  the  Prince  to  an  interview  with 
Akbar  Khan  beyond  the  walls  of  the  Balla  Hissar. 
The  Arabs  in  the  garrison,  who  remained  true  to  the 
royal  family,  dissuaded  the  Prince  from  exposing  him- 
self to  the  treachery  of  the  Sirdar;  mutual  distrust  soon 