

It  appears  that  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  on  account  of  our  weak- 
ness, has  consented  to  their  proposals,  and  has  therefore  gone  out 
of  the  Balla  Hissar  to  have  a  conference  with  Mahomed  Akbar 
Khan«  These  proposals  have  perplexed  me  greatly,  and  I  am  lost 
in  speculation.  If  I  were  to  appoint  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  my 
minister,  he  would  raise  a  force  to  oppose  the  English,  and  I  should 
be  forced  to  give  up  my  artillery  to  him,  which  will  be  a  danger- 
ous business.  In  case  of  my  refusal,  the  family  of  the  late  martyr 
(King)  will  be  outraged. 

My  anxiety  for  your  departure  from  Jellalabad  for  Oaubul 
appears  thoroughly  useless.  It  is  now  forty  days  since  your 
victorious  army  has  passed  up  through  Khybur,  and  you  have  not 
yet  left  Jellalabad.  I  endeavoured  to  excite  a  dispute  among  the 
rebels,  with  the  view  that  the  English  army  should  reach  here 
without  opposition.  Although  I  have  successively  sent  letters 
through  Mohun  Lai,  asking  you  to  advance  immediately  to  this 
side,  but  no  symptoms  of  the  kind  have  yet  appeared.  In  such 
delay  dangerous  evils  are  to  be  apprehended. 

It  is  a  long  time  that  I  have  deputed  and  entrusted  Meerza 
Ameen-oollah  with  my  verbal  messages  to  you;  but  no  answer 
has  yet  reached  me  about  it.  You  should  quickly  reply  to  my 
letters,  as  well  as  the  messages  I  have  sent  you  by  him,  and  also 
let  me  know  the  day  of  your  march,  as  I  am  now  in  much  per- 
plexity. If  there  be  any  hope  of  your  immediate  advance,  I  will 
undergo  every  hardship  to  defend  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  engage 
the  rebels  in  fight.  In  case  of  any  more  delay  the  object  will  be 
lost,  and  an  easy  end  will  be  obtained  with  the  utmost  difficulty 
hereafter.     What  can  I  write  you  more  than  this?* 

Feeling  himself  utterly  powerless  to  resist  the  de- 
mands of  the  Barukzyes,  for  all  his  principal  supporters 
were  deserting  him,  the  Prince  now  placed  himself  in 

*  MS*  Records. 


FBOGBESS  OF  SEGOTIATIONS.  589 

the  hands  of  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  who  went  out  to  a 

conference  with  Mahomed  Shah  Ehan,  which  mutual 

distrust  nearly  strangled  in  the  womb^  and  consented  to 
the  first  of  these  propositions-*    Futf  eh  Jung  was  to  be 

*  With  reference  to  these  negotia-  the  Prince  without  hii  permission. 
tioDS,  Mohun  Lai  writes,  on  the  ISth  Having  said  this,  he  ordered  tlie  giins 
of  May :  **  Mahomed  Shah  Khan  to  open  upon  the  palace*  Upon  this 
came  out  and  stopped  near  the  tomb,  Maliomed  Akbar  sent  word  to  the 
at  a  distance  from  the  gate  of  the  eunners,  that  if  they  fired  any  more 
Balla  Hissar,  called  Shah  Shahdeed.  their  ears  should  be  cut  ofll  He  also 
He  sent  a  message  to  Ameen-oollah  begsed  the  Newab  not  to  do  anything 
that  he  wanted  to  speak,  and  begged  of  the  kind  until  he  received  his  final 
he  would  Come  out  to  meet  him.  advice.  Ameen-oollah  has  now  gone 
To  this  an  answer  was  sent,  that  if  to  the  camp  of  Mahomed  Akbar,  who 
Mahomed  Shah  would  come  close  to  received  him  with  much  cordiality, 
the  gate,  Ameen-oollah  would  receive  .  •  .  <  The  Prince  has  sent  me  a  mes- 
him  there.  Mahomed  Shah,  appre-  sage  that  he  agreed  to  the  first  pro- 
hending  treachery,  declined  going  too  posal  on  being  deserted  by  all  his 
near  the  gate ;  and  upon  this  Ameen-  people.  If  he  had  not  done  so, 
oollah  sent  bis  son  as  a  hostage  for  Ameen-oollah  Khan  would  have 
the  safety  of  Mahomed  Shah  ;  but  he  seized  him  and  given  Akbar  Khan 
did  not  retain  the  hostage,  but  ad-  possession  of  the  Balla  Hissar  ;  but  he 
vanced  with  a  few  men  to  meet  says,  that  when  Akbar  asks  for  money 
Ameen-oollah.  They  sate  and  had  a  from  him  to  pay  and  raise  the  forces 
secret  conference,  which  lasted  some  against  us,  he  will  put  off  the  pay- 
time  ;   after  which,  Mahomed  Shah  ment  from  day  to  day,  saying  that  he 