

to  Gundamuck,  you  will  lose  all  your  harm,  as  it  had  not  been  properly 

prisoners,  and  the    Barukzyes  will  dug,  nor  run  sufficiently  far  under 

possess  the  riches  of  the  late  Shah,  the  works  to  damage  them,  even  if 

as  well  as  the  Balla  Hissar  and  the  the  strength  of  the  masonry  were  not 

artillery.'*  —  [Af5.  RecordsJ]    John  such  as  to  bid  defiance  to  the  at- 

Conolly's  letters,  written  about  this  tempt. 


THE  81RDAB  AlffD  THE  PRINCE.  543 

mit,  he  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  abandon  the  defence, 
and  to  suffer  the  Barukzyes  to  enter  the  Balla  Hissar. 

With  many  professions  of  fidelity  and  demonstrations 
of  respect,  Akbar  Khan  presented  himself  before  the 
Prince,  declared  that  he  had  the  prosperity  of  the  royal 
family  at  heart,  and  that  he  himself  was  merely  the 
servant  of  the  Suddozyes.  Futteh  Jung  offered  him 
money;  but  he  declined  it  —  offered  him  a  dress  of 
honour,  but  he  meekly  refused  to  wear  it.  He  wanted 
nothing,  he  said,  but  the  prosperity  of  the  Prince,  and 
he  could  not  wear  the  dress  of  honour  until  he  had 
adjusted  all  his  differences  with  Mahomed  Zemaun 
Ehan.  But  these  differences  were  not  very  easily  to  be 
adjusted.  The  Newab  was  imwilUng  to  recognise  the 
sovereignty  of  Futteh  Jung ;  and  was  jealous  of  the 
rising  power  of  the  Sirdar.  Meeting  after  meeting  was 
held,  and  many  attempts  were  made  to  reconcile  the 
conflicting  interests  of  the  two  Barukzye  leaders.  It 
was  lu'ged,  on  the  one  side,  that  if  Futteh  Jung  were 
acknowledged  as  the  nominal  ruler  of  Afghanistan,  all 
his  wealth  would  be  in  the  power  of  the  chiefs,  and  that 
the  war  might  then  be  waged  against  the  infidels  with 
every  chance  of  success.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
was  asked  by  the  friends  of  Zemaun  Khan — and  Meer 
Hadjee,  the  High  Priest,  adopted  the  same  views — since 
during  the  lifetime  of  Shah  Soojah  the  Newab  had  been 
chosen  King  by  the  chiefs  and  accepted  by  the  nation, 
why  should  they  now  revert  to  the  old  Suddozye 
sovereignty,  which  the  country  had  so  emphatically 
repudiated  ?* 

•  Correspondence    of  Mohun  Lai.  known  to  Tou,"  he  wrote  to  Greneral 

MS.  Records.     Futteh   Jung   con-  Pollock,  **  that  Mahomed  Akbar  has 

tinued  to  write  to  the  British  autho*  made  peace,  with  the  view  to  derive 

rities  that  he  had  little  or  no  money ;  wealth  from  me :  but  I  know  that  I 

and  that  if  the  British  did  not  ad-  have  none.    If  I  could  sell  everv- 

vance,    the  royal  family  would  be  thing  that  I  possess,  I  should  not  be 

ruined  and  disgraced.    **  It  is  well  able  to  raise  a  lakh  of  rupees.*' 


544  AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL. 

As  time  advanced,  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  a 
reconciliation  between  the  two  parties  seemed  to  thicken. 
The  Newab  declared  that  he  was  Bang — ^that  Akbar 
Khan  might  hold  the  office  of  Commander-in-Chief  of 
the  Afghan  army,  but  that  Oosman  Khan  was  to  be 
the  Wuzeer  *  In  the  mean  while,  the  Sirdar  was 
gaining  over  the  Kohistanee  chiefs,  and  preparing  him- 
self for  the  inevitable  conflict.  But  the  Kuzzilbashes 
now  refused  to  league  themselves  with  Akbar  Khan, 
and  talked  of  joining  the  British  on  their  advance. 
There  was  no  prospect  of  a  reconciliation  of  the  dif- 
ferences between  the  two  Barukzye  chiefs.  The  old 
Newab  bitterly  deplored  the  strife  which  seemed  likely 
soon  to  plimge  the  city  again  into  the  miseries  of  war, 
and  openly  prayed  that  God  might  send  General  Pol- 
lock quickly,  so  that  he  and  Akbar  m^ht  fly  from 
Caubul  before  they  had  caused  bloodshed  among  the 
people  by  the  violent  arbitrement  of  their  disputes. 