


552'  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

they  are  ordered  to  hold  fast.  Lord  EUenborough  was, 
in  eflfect,  perpetually  telling  the  generals  that  when  he 
suggested  to  them  to  go  forward  it  was  their  business  to 
come  back. 

It  is  probable  that  Lord  EUenborough  himself  had 
no  very  clear  perception,  at  this  time,  of  the  course 
which  he  purposed  to  pursue.  He  had  made  up  his 
mind,  he  said,  to  save  India  in  spite  of  every  man  in  it 
who  ought  to  give  him  support;*  but  it  seemed  to  be 
his  idea  to  save  India  rather  by  withdrawing  all  our 
troops  within  the  Sutlej,  than  by  striking  a  decisive 
blow  for  the  re-establishment  of  our  military  supremacy 
in  A%hanistan.  It  was  his  opinion  that  the  danger 
of  our  position  at  that  time  arose  from  the  absence  of 
so  large  a  body  of  troops  from  the  provinces  of  Hin- 
dostan;  and  that  we  might  better  afford  to  leave  our 
external  injuries  unredressed,  than  weaken  our  means 
of  defence  in  India  itself  for  the  purpose  of  redressing 
them.  •  Viewing  the  matter  in  this  light,  Lord  Ellen- 
borough  thought  less  of  redeeming  the  military  cha- 
racter of  the  British  nation  than  of  bringing  back  the 
troops  to  Hindostan ;  and  he  would  have  brought  them 
back  without  an  effort  at  such  redemption,  if  the  almost 
universal  voice,  not  only  of  the  chief  civil  and  military 
oflBcers,  but  of  the  Anglo-Indian  community  at  large, 

*  "  I  attach  mnch  weight,*'  wrote  India,  too  far  off  to  return  quickly  at 
Lord  Ellenborouffh  at  the  end  of  any  season,  unable  from  the  season 
May,  "  to  what  Major  Sleeman  says  to  return  now,  without  adeauate 
of  tne  disposition  of  theMahomedans;  supplies  of  food  or  carriage.  Tnis  is 
but  I  am  surprised  that  it  has  not  the  danger  which  all  the  great  states- 
occurred  to  hmi  and  to  others,  that  men  in  India  would  perpetuate  if  they 
whatever  may  be  the  disposition  of  could,  and  while  they  maintain  it, 
the  Mahomedans,  it  is  the  absence,  destro;^  the  confidence  of  the  Sepoy 
not  the  presence  of  our  troops,  of  and  ruin  our  finances.  J/IsaveUus 
whom  more  than  three-fourths  are  country,  I  shall  save  it  in  spite  of  every 
Hindoos,  that  alone  can  lead  the.Ma-  man  in  it  who  ought  to  give  me  support, 
homedans  to  act  against  us.  The  but  I  will  save  it  in  spite  of  them  alL** 
danger  is  in  the  position  of  the  army,  — [Jtf  5.  Correspondence,^ 
almost  without  communication  with 


PUBLIC  OPINION  IN  INDIA.  553 

had  not  been  lifted  up  against  so  inglorious  and  de- 
grading a  concession.  The  opinions  and  desires  of  Pol- 
lock and  Nott — of  Robertson  and  Clerk — of  Rawlinson, 
Outram,  Macgregor,  Mackeson,  and  others,  who  were 
eager  for  a  forward  movement,  and  little  inclined  to 
conceal  their  genuine  sentiments  under  a  doak  of  offi- 
cial reserve — how  little  soever  Lord  Ellenborough  may 
have  been  disposed  outwardly  to  acknowledge  their  in- 
fluence— were  not  without  their  effect.  Public  opinion 
he  professed  to  despise.  The  judgments  of  the  Press  he 
pretended  to  hold  in  such  absolute  contempt,  that  he 
lived  in  habitual  ignorance  of  all  that  emanated  from  it; 
but  it  is  believed  that  this  disregard  of  public  opinion 
was  rather  a  profession  than  a  fact,  and  that  Lord 
Ellenborough  was  shaken  in  his  determination  to  bring 
back  the  armies  to  the  provinces  by  the  clamour  that, 
from  one  end  of  India  to  the  other,  was  raised  against 
the  obnoxious  measure  of  withdrawal.  He  had  by  this 
time,  too,  received  information  from  England  that  an 
inglorious  retirement  from  the  scene  of  our  late  hunai- 
liation,  and  the  abandonment  of  all  the  brave  men,  ten- 
der women,  and  innocent  children,  in  the  hands  of  the 
Afghans,  would  be  viewed  with  no  satisfaction  either 
by  his  old  ministerial  colleagues,  or  by  the  people  of 
Great  Britain.  Many  powerful  external  influences, 
therefore,  roused  him  to  a  sense  of  the  necessity  of  doing 
something  in  advance ;  but  the  "  withdrawal  policy " 
was  emphatically  his  own,  and  he  was  resolute  to  pre- 
serve the  shadow  of  it  if  he  could  not  maintain  the 
substance. 