

man  Khan,  who  was  bought  over  on  the  throne  the  King,  high  in  power, 

with  1000  gold  mohurs.  The  Pultans  majestic  as  Alexander,  ambitious  as 

also  went  over,  and  our  host  (Meer  Kai-Khusro,  Shah-zadah  Futteh  Jung, 

Hadjee)  was  bribed  with  4000  gold  son  of  the  late  King,  and  caused  the 

mohurs,  and    during    the  fight  his  Khutha  to  be  read  and  coin  to  be 

brother,  Mahomed  Dost,  took  an  ac-  struck  in  his  name,  redoubted  as  that  of 

tive  part  against  the  Newab.    Poor  Faridoon.    Newab  Mahomed  Zemaun 

old     Zemaiin     Khan    was    a   dupe  Khan,  having  in  some  respects  opposed 

throughout    to    Hotshur's    (Akbar  himself  to  my  views  and  interfered 

Khan^)  perfidy,  and  a  victim  to  mis-  with  me,  at  length  came  to  an  open 

placed  confidence.' ' — {^Lieutenant  John  rupture,  and  commenced  hostilities 

Conolly  to  Captain  Macgregor:  Caubul,  against  me.      After    several  of  mv 

June  23,  1842.     MS.  Records,']  people  had  been  killed  and  wounded, 

Akbar  Khan*s  own  account  of  the  then,  and  not  till  then,  I,  of  necessity, 

affair,  and  of  his  subsequent  treatment  gave  the  order  to  them  to  retaliate, 

of  Zemaun  Khan,  is  on  record  in  the  In  two  hours  the  engagement  was  at 

following   letter  to  the  Shinwarree  an  end  ;  and  all  order  being  destroyed 

chiefs:  **  Up  to  the  day  of  writing  among  the  troops  of  the  Newab,  they 

this,  the  17th  of  Jamadi-ul-aroal  (26th  were  dispersed.     His  guns  and  maga- 

July),  all  is  well  here  with  me.    As  it  zines,  stores    and  horses,  and   regi- 

was  an  object  of  paramount  import-  ments  and  jezailchees,  and  other  ap* 

ance  that  in  the  contest  with  the  race  pendages  of  power   which    he  had 

of  misguided  infidels  the  whole  of  the  newly  prepared,  all  fell  into  my  pos- 

numbers  of  the  true  faith  should  be  session.     As  the  Newab  was  a  part 

united  together,  and  the  attainment  and  parcel  of  myself— not  wishing  to 

and  perfecting  of  this  object  appeared  reduce  him  to  a  stale  of  poverty  and 

indispensable,  therefore  did  the  whole  want — l,on  the^sameday,  restored  to 

ofihedevotedfollowersofthetruefnith  him  all  his  horses:  the  rest   of  his 

consent  tochoose  me  as  their  head,  and  property  I  kept  possession  of.    Since 

to  place  themselves  under  my  com-  then,  all  the  leaders  of  the  different 

VOL.  II.  2  N 


546  AIT'AIBS  AT  CAUBUL. 

The  Prince  was  throned  on  the  29th  of  June.  But 
he  exercised  no  regal  power.  The  Sirdar,  who  con- 
ferred upon  him  the  title  of  sovereign  mainly  to  conciliate 
the,  Populzyes,  began  rapidly  to  strip  him  of  his  wealth, 
and  to  reduce  him  to  a  mere  pageant  and  a  name.*  After 
possessing  himself  of  all  the  tangible  property  upon  which 
he  could  lay  his  hands,  he  called  in  all  the  secretaries 
and  managers  of  the  royal  household,  and  compelled 