

Equally  did  Akbar  Khan  claim  credit  for  his  for- 
bearance.    On  the  21st  of  June,  after  many  fruitless 

*  The  Newab  had  little  money;  but  here  are  no  men  to  purchase 
but  the  most  valuable  jewels  of  Shah  them/* — [375.  RecordsJ]  Akbar  Khan 
Soojah  were  in  his  possession.  The  had  contrived  to  extract  a  consider- 
Shah  was  wont  to  carry  them  about  able  sum  of  money  from  the  Prince, 
with  him  in  a  bag;  and  he  had  them  On  the  17th  of  June,  Mohun  Lai  re- 
in his  possession  at  the  time  of  his  ported  that  the  Sirdar  had  received  a 
murder.  **  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,"  lakh  and  a  half  of  rupees  from  the 
wrote  Mohun  Lai  to  Sir  Richmond  royal  treasury.  On  the  18th,  John 
Shakespear,  **has  got  hold  of  the  Conolly  wrote  that  the  Sirdar  had 
most  valuable  jewels  of  the  late  King,  drawn  two  lakhs,  adding :  "  He  has 
who,  report  said,  had  them  thrown  taken  an  inventory  of  all  the  pro- 
into  a  ditch  when  Soojah-ood-Dow-  perty  and  treasure  in  the  citadel ; 
lah  murdered  him.  This  was  seen  and  has  his  own  men  there.'*  "It  will 
by  an  Afghan  at  a  distance,  who  afler  be  a  great  consolation  to  us  all,*^  he 
some  days  went  to  the  place  and  took  wrote  in  conclusion,  "  if  you  will  tell 
out  the  small  bag  of  jewels,  which  us  that  no  negotiations  beyond  the 
he,  being  ignorant  of  their  worth,  sold  ransom  of  the  prisoners  will  ever  be 
them  for  600  rupees.  This  was  re-  entered  into  with  Akbar.  He  is  cer- 
ported  to  the  Kewab,  who  imprisoned  tainly  the  most  uncompromising  vil- 
the  bidders  and  got  all  the  jewels  lain  that  ever  lived.*'— [Ltetif.  ConoZ/y 
from  them.  The  bankers  say  that  to  Capt.  Mdcgregor :  Caubul^  JunelS, 
they  are  worth  50  lakhs  of  rupees,  1842.    MS,  Recorda.'] 


DEFEAT  OP  THE  NEWAB.  645 

attempts  at  an  amicable  adjustment  of  affairs,  the  two 
factions  came  into  open  collision.  A  battle  was  fought; 
and,  "  after  an  insignificant  fight  of  two  or  three  hours' 
duration,"  the  Newab  was  defeated.  He  and  his  sons 
were  taken.  His  house  was  plundered.  '  The  leading 
chiefs  of  his  party  were  seized  and  subjected  to  every 
conceivable  insult.  The  victory,  indeed,  was  complete ; 
but  it  was  mainly  achieved  by  the  money  which  had 
been  pillaged  firom  the  treasury  of  the  Prince.  Some  of 
the  most  influential  men  of  the  Newab's  party  were 
bribed  over  to  desert  him;  and  he  found,  when  it  was 
too  late,  that  he  was  betrayed.* 

*  "The  reason  of  the  overthrow  mand.  All  the  tribes  and  leaders  of  the 

of  the  Newab  is  the  disaffection  of  DouraneeSgGbilzyes,aDdKuzzilba8hes 

some  of  the  most  influential  men  of  and  Kakulees  and  Kohistanees,  have 

his  partv — the  chief  one  being  Oos-  submitted  to  me,  and  I  have  placed 