

In  Ali  Mahomed's  fort  the  prisoners  led  a  life  of 
comparative  freedom.  They  had  a  spacious  garden  in 
which  to  exercise  themselves.  They  had  the  use  alike 
of  the  walks  and  of  the  fruits.  They  were  suffered  to 
bathe  in  the  river.  They  were  permitted  to  visit,  and 
to  receive  visits  from,  their  friends  in  the  Balla  Hissar. 
Many  of  them  had  the  means  of  borrowing  money  from 
the  Caubullees ;  and  were  able  to  purchase  many 
luxuries  which  they  had  not  enjoyed  at  Budeeabad. 
Letters  and  papers  from  Jellalabad,  from  the  provinces 
of  India,  and  from  old  England,  were  brought  to  them 
without  interruption.  They  had  much  to  think  about 
and  much  to  discuss.  Intelligence  from  Jellalabad  and 
intelligence  from  Caubul  came,  in  some  shape,  every 
day.  Life  was  but  little  wearisome;  there  was  abun- 
dant occupation  for  the  mind,  and  abundant  exercise  for 
the  body.  And  if  it  had  not  been  that  many  of  the  party 
fell  sick,  and  that  ever  and  anon  there  reached  them 
rumours  of  the  intentions  of  Akbar  Elhan  to  carry  them 
off  to  Toorkistan,  they  would  have  enjoyed  as  much 
happiness  as  prison-life  can  possibly  yield. 

*  They  were  turned  out  of  the  for  the  night,  and  then  urged  that 

fort,  indeed,  to  make  room  for  the  the  fort  would  suit  them  better  than 

prisoners,  to  the  infinite  annoyance  any  other  place  in  the  neighbourhood, 

of  the  unhappy  cliief,  who  made  every  It  was  altogether  a  most  unfortunate 

possible    excuse    for    not    receiving  occurrence  for  Alt  Mahomed,  as,  sub- 

them,  but  was  overruled  by  Akbar  sequently,  on  the  advance  of  the  Bri- 

Khan,  who  obtained  admittance  for  tish,  the  fort  was  levelled  with  the 

them,  in  the  first  instance,  on  the  plea  ground,  and  the  garden  destroyed, 
that  he  only  required  accommodation 


THE  AJDVAVCE  VBOH  J2LLALABAD.  551 


BOOK  VIII. 
[June — December:  1842.] 


CHAPTER  I. 

[June— September:  1842.] 

The  Advanoe  from  Jellalabad— Instructions  of  Lord  Ellenborongh— The 
Question  of  Besponsibilitj — Employment  of  the  Troops  at  JelMabad— 
Oi>eration8  in  the  Shinwarree  Valley— Negotiations  for  the  Release  of  the 
Prisoners — ^The  Advance— Mammoo  Ehail— Jugdulluck— Tezeen — Occu- 
pation of  Caubul. 

The  summer  months  passed  away,  and  still  left  General 
Pollock  at  Jellalabad  and  Greneral  Nott  at  Candahar. 
Whether  it  were  the  intention  of  the  Governor-General 
that  they  should  advance  upon  Caubul,  or  fall  back  at 
once  upon  Peshawur  and  Quettah,  was  a  problem  of 
very  difficult  solution.  Such  data  as  were  afforded 
them  by  the  letters  of  Lord  EUenborough  and  his  secre- 
taries sufficed  only  to  plunge  them  into  a  state  of  still 
deeper  bewilderment  and  mystification.  Every  fresh 
letter  seemed  to  render  the  obscurity  more  obscure. 
The  Governor-GeneraFs  instructions  to  Pollock  and 
Nott  at  this  time  resembled  nothing  so  much  as  those 
given  to  children  in  the  "  game  of  contraries" — to  hold 
fast  when  they  are  ordered  to  let  go,  and  to  let  go  when 