


SITUATION  OF  THE  HOSTAGES.  547 

them  to  give  an  account  of  their  stewardship.  He  had 
taken  up  his  residence  in  the  Balla  Hissar ;  was  digging 
a  ditch  around  the  place ;  and  laying  in  military  stores. 
He  then  b^an  to  endeavour  to  compass  the  possession 
of  all  the  hostages  and  captives,  and  to  secure  them 
against  the  chance  of  rescue  by  confining  them  in  the 
Balla  ELissar. 

The  situation  of  the  English  gentlemen  at  Caubul, 
who  had  resided  so  securely  under  the  protection  of  the 
good  Newab,  now  became  more  critical.*  On  the  death 
of  Shah  Soojah  the  Caubullees  had  called  upon  Zemaun 
Khan  to  deliver  them  up  to  Meer  Hadjee,  the  High 
Priest.  The  Newab  had  long  resisted  the  demand.  But 
the  clamour  of  the  people  had  drowned  his  prayers. 
His  tears  and  intercessions  were  fruitless.  At  last  he 
surrendered  them  to  the  Hadjee,  imploring  him  to  treat 

*  All  the  circumstances  attending  at  the  conference  by  telling  them  that 
their  surrender  ought  to  be  related,  their  chief  and  his  own  sister  and  re- 
The  incident  is  thus  feelingly  chro-  lations  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Bri- 
nicled  by  Captain  Johnson  :  "  Two  tish  Government,  and  that  vengeance 
days  after  the  death  of  Shah  Soojah,  would  assuredly  be  dealt  upon  them 
the  people  of  Caubul  demanded  that  if  the  English  gentlemen  sustained  the 
our  nostaees,  who  had  been  lefl  under  slightest  injury.  On  this,  a  grey- 
charge  of  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan,  bearded  old  gentleman  told  him  and 
should  be  given  up  to  the  care  of  the  the  rest  that  they  might  make  tlieir 
son  of  the  late  High  Priest,  Meer  Had-  minds  perfectly  easy  as  regarded  the 
jee.  The  former  noble-hearted  gen-  Afghan  prisoners  in  India,  as  it  was 
tleman,  than  whom  no  father  could  contrary  to  the  uses  of  Enelishmen  to 
have  behaved  more  tenderly  to  his  hurt  a  hair  of  tiie  heads  of  their  cap- 
children,  begged  and  entreated  with  tives.  The  clamour  of  the  people 
tears  that  the  separation  should  not  prevailed  over  all  that  the  Newab 
take  place — adding  that  he  was  willing  could  urge,  and  with  many  a  bitter 
to  give  up  his  own  family  to  the  popu-  feeling  did  thb  amiable  man  make 
lar  will,  but  not  the  English  gentle-  over  the  hosUges  to  Meer  Hadjee, 
men  who  had  been  entrusted  to  his  with  prayers  and  entreaties  to  the  lat- 
care,and  who  werehis  honoured  guests  ter  that  he  would  behave  kindly  to 
— that  he  would,  if  the  people  so  them  ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  sent 
willed  it,  make  over  to  them  his  own  with  them  to  the  latter's  house  all  the 
son,  with  his  sword  round  his  neck,  females  of  his  family,  as  the  surest 
and  his  turban  for  a  winding-sheet,  to  means  of  their  protection  ;  for  how- 
be  dealt  with  according  to  their  plea-  ever  excited  a  Mussulman  population 
sure ;  but  that  force  alone  should  de-  may  be,  it  is  seldom  or  ever  that  they 
prive  him  of  the  society  of  his  friends,  violate  a  harem."  — [Cop tow /o^ 
When  all  entreaties  failed,  he  hoped  s(nC$  MS.  Journal} 
to  work  upon  the  feelings  of  the  party 