

In  this  conjuncture,  he  betook  himself  to  an  expedient 
unparalleled,  perhaps,  in  the  pohtical  history  of  the 
world.  He  instigated  Pollock  and  Nott  to  advance,  but 
insisted  that  they  should  regard  the  forward  movement 
solely  in  the  light  of  a  retirement  from  Afghanistan. 


554  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

No  change  had  come  over  the  views  of  Lord  Ellen- 
borough,  but  a  change  had  come  over  the  meaning  of 
certain  words  of  the  English  language.  The  Grovemor- 
Greneral  had  resolutely  maintained  that  the  true  policy 
of  the  English  Government  was  to  bring  back  our 
armies  to  the  provinces  of  India,  and  that  nothing 
would  justify  him  in  pushing  them  forward  merely  for 
the  re-establishment  of  our  military  reputation.  But  he 
found  it  necessary  to  jdeld  to  the  pressure  from  without^ 
and  to  push  the  armies  of  Pollock  and  Nott  further  into 
the  heart  of  the  Afghan  dominions.  To  preserve  his 
own  consistency,  and  at  the  same  time  to  protect  himself 
against  the  measureless  indignation  of  the  communities 
both  of  India  and  of  England,  was  an  effort  of  genius 
beyond  the  reach  of  ordinary  statesmen.  But  it  was 
not  beyond  the  grasp  of  Lord  Ellenborough.  How 
long  he  may  have  been  engaged  on  the  solution  of  the 
difficulty  before  him  History  cannot  determine.  But 
on  the  4th  of  July  it  was  finally  accomplished.  On 
that  day  Lord  Ellenborough,  who  had  entirely  dis- 
carded the  official  mediation  of  the  Commander-in- 
Chief,*  despatched  two  letters  to  General  Pollock  and 

*  It  was  not  until  the  27th  of  Au-  cannot  be  moved  as  you  will  is  no 

gust  that  the  Commander-in-Chief  was  army  at  all.    lie  will  thus  have  an 

informed,  by  a  letter  from  General  unhealthy,  difficult  pass  behind  him 

Pollock,  of  the  instructions  sent  to  for  four  or  five  months,  and  possibly 

General   Nott  on  the  4th  of  July,  involve  us  in  another  campaign.  These 

How  entirely  the  Governor-General  changes  are  dreadful.    I  wish  that  I 

had  set  aside  the  authority  of  the  had  nothing  to  do  with  them.** 

Commander-in-Chief,  and  what  Sir  "  June  30. — ^The  Secret  Committee 

Jasper  Nicolls  thought  both  of  Lord  review  the  proceedings  of  government, 

£llenborough*s  conduct  and  of  the  from  December  to  February  last,  not 

advance  on  Caubul,  may  be  gathered  with  asperity,  but  with  decided  disap- 

from  the  following  extracts  from  his  probation  of  the  uncertain  policy  of 

journal :  that  time,  and  the  contradictory  reso- 

**June  6.  —  To  my  astonishment,  lutions  and  orders  which  were  then 

Lord  E.,  in  consequence  of  General  passed.     This  is  very  well  deserved, 

Pollock's  complaints  of  want  of  car-  for  it  was  then,  in  November  or  De- 