


SURRENDER  OF  THE  HOSTAGES.  549 

The  hostages  were  now  conveyed  to  the  Balla  Hissar, 
where  they  remained  under  the  immediate  custody  of 
Akbar  Khan.  Mohun  Lai,  who  had  been  rendering 
good  service  to  the  British  Government,  by  keeping  the 
authorities  at  Jellalabad  continually  supplied  with  in- 
formation relative  to  the  events  which  were  passing  at 
Caubul,  was  seized  by  the  Sirdar  and  tortured.  The 
Moonshee  had  been  residing  in  the  house  of  the  Kuz- 
zilbash  chief,  Khan  Shereen  Khan;  but  now,  early  in 
July,  Akbar  Khan,  having  first  seized  the  person  of  the 
host,  contrived  to  obtain  possession  of  the  guest;  and 
immediately  began  to  extort  money  firom  him  by  the 
cruel  agency  of  physical  torture.  It  was  not  until  Gene- 
ral Pollock  wrote  an  urgent  letter  to  Akbar  Khan,  that 
the  unhappy  Moonshee  was  relieved  from  this  terrible 
persecution.* 

In  the  mean  while,  the  British  prisoners,  who  had  been 
in  custody  at  Budeeabad,  were  in  a  fort  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Caubul.  When  last  I  spoke  of  them  they 
were  halting  in  the  valley  of  Zandah,  where  they  were 
detained  for  about  the  space  of  a  month.  On  the  22nd 
of  May  they  received  orders  to  march  on  the  following 
day  for  Caubul.     The  road  lay  along  the  track  of  the 

*  Mohun  Lai's  own  account  of  his  destroyed.  .  .  All  my  feet  is  wounded 

sufFerings  is  worth  quoting :  **  I  have  by  bastinadoing.** —  [Mohun    Lai  to 

the  honour  to  address  you,  for  the  in-  Sir  K  Shakespear:  July  14,  1842. 

formation  of  Major-General  Pollock,  MS.  Records,']     "  I  suffer  very  much. 

C.B.,  that  Akbar  Khan,  on  the  night  Sometimes  I  am  pinioned  and  a  heavy 

of  the  11th  inst.  (July),  put  me  in  stone  is  placed  on  my  back,  whilst  the 

charge  of  Moollah  Said,  Atchekzve,  red  pepper  is  burnt  before  my  nose 

in  whose  house  1  was  forced  to  lay  and    eyes.      Sometimes    I    am   bas- 

down,  and  a  couch  placed  over  me,  on  tinadoed.     In  short,   1  suffer  every 

which  the  people  jumped,  and  are  conceivable  agony.     lie  wants  30,000 

beating  me    with    sticks  in   a    very  rupees,  out  of  which  he  has  hitherto 

unmerciful    manner.     Akbar    wants  got  12,000, after  using  me  very  rudely. 

30,000  rupees  from  me — says,  other-  The  remainder,   if  not  paid  in    the 

wise,  that  lie  will  pull  out  my  eyes,  course  often  days,  he  says  he  will  pull 

All  my  body  has  been  severely  beaten,  out  my  eyes,  and  burn  my  body  with 

I  cannot  promise  anything  without  a  hot  iron.'* — [Mohun  Lai  to  Sir  jR. 

government's  order,  but   see  myself  Shakespear:  July  17.  MS,  Records,] 


550  CONDITION  OP  THE  PRISONEES. 

slaughtered  army,  and  the  putrid  corpses  sickened  the 
captives  as  they  went.  About  three  miles  from  Caubul, 
on  the  banks  of  the  Loghur  river,  is  the  fort  of  Ali  Ma- 
homed, a  chief  of  Euzzilbash  connexions.  Here  they 
were  lodged  in  the  apartments  recently  occupied  by  the 
ladies  of  the  chiefs  family* — the  best  and  most  commo- 
dious quarters  which  the  prisoners  had  yet  enjoyed. 