

2n2 


548  AFFAIRS  AT  CAUBUL. 

them  with  kindness,  and  sending  at  the  same  time  the 
ladies  of  his  family  to  the  priest's  house  that  they  might, 
in  some  sort,  be  a  protection  to  the  British  captives. 
Under  the  guardianship  of  Meer  Hadjee,  Conolly  and  his 
associates  remained  until  the  beginning  of  July.  By 
this  time  Akbar  Khan  was  dominant  in  Caubul.  He 
had  determined  to  gain  possession  of  the  persons  of  the 
whole  of  the  English  hostages  and  prisoners  in  Afghan- 
istan,  and  he  now  began  to  importune  Meer  Hadjee  to 
send  them  to  the  Balla  Hissar.  Day  after  day  he  went, 
on  this  errand,  to  the  High  Priest's  house ;  but  for  some 
time  his  importunities  were  fruitless  *  At  last,  he  tried 
the  effect  of  money.  The  avarice  of  Meer  Hadjee  was 
notorious.  Akbar  Khan  had  bought  him  over  to  his 
cause;  and  now  he  bethought  himself  of  buying  the 
prisoners.  He  did  not  bid  high  for  them.  It  appears 
that  Akbar  Khan  offered  4000  rupees  for  the  persons  of 
the  hostages,  and  that  the  offer  was  accepted. 

*  The  letters  of  Moliun  Lai,  writ-  prisoners,  if  Akbar  may  intend  to 
ten  at  this  time,  show  the  efforts  that  send  them  to  any  quarter.  He  sent 
were  made  to  obtain  possession  of  the  me  answer,  as  long  as  he  and  Meer 
hostages,  and  the  amount  of  resist-  Hadjee  live,  our  prisoners  shall  not 
ance  offered :  **  Mahomed  Akbar  is  be  removed." — iMohun  Lai  to  Sir  R, 
going  every  day  to  Meer  Hadjee,  that  Shakespear  :  June  30,  1842.  MS, 
he  should  give  up  Lieutenant  Conolly,  Records,]  "Mahomed  Akbar  sent 
&c.,  and  not  oppose  him,  when  he  may  the  scoundrel  Meerza  Imaum  Vourdee 
send  the  prisoners  to  Toorkistan.  If  to  Meer  Hadjee,  with  the  message 
^ou  have  never  written  to  Meer  Had-  that  the  Balla  Hissar  is  safer  than  the 
jee,  write  to  him  now,  and  say  that  city  for  the  residence  of  Lieutenant 
he  is  chief  priest  of  Caubiil,  &c.,  and  Conolly,  &c. ;  and  he  therefore  hopes 
it  is  therefore  expected  that  he  will  Meer  Hadjee  will  send  them  to  Inm. 
keep  all  our  prisoners  by  him/* —  Meer  Hadjee  agreed  to  the  proposal, 
[^Mohun  Lai  to  Sir  Richmond  Shakes^  and  sent  the  officers  into  the  Balla  His- 
pear :  June  26, 1842.  MS.  Records.^  sar  with  the  view  that  Akbar  should 
*'  Gholam  Mahomed  Khan,Mooktean,  not  suspect  tliat  the  reports  of  his  stop- 
has  sent  me  a  message  through  his  son,  ping  the  prisoners  is  true,  and  thus  to 
Tej  Mahomed,  that  he  advised  Meer  oppose  him  for  few  officers,  he  may 
Hadjee  not  to  give  Lieut. Conolly,  &c.,  hazard  the  chance  of  securing  the 
to  Akbar ;  and  he  hopes  that  I  have  whole  of  them  before  the  time  is 
approved  of  his  services.  I  replied,  arrived  to  perform  his  service  on  be- 
that  lie  will  be  rewarded  and  made  tlie  half  of  the  prisoners."— [AfoAun  Lai 
minister  of  the  country,  if  he  keeps  to  Sir  R  Shahespear:  July  8,  1842. 
his  word,  and,  being  assisted  by  Meer  MS,  Records,"]  Mohun  Lai  says  no- 
Hadjee,  prevents  (he  removal  of  our  thing  about  the  money. 