

tribes  have  acknowledged  my  au-  while  it  behoves  you,  in  anticipation 
thority,  and  I  firmly  trust  that  all  my  of  the  arriral  of  the  exalted  standards, 
future  undertakings  will  in  like  man-  the  emblems  of  victory,  to  spare  no 
ner  be  crowned  with  success,  and  that  exertions  to  stir  up  the  strife  of  re- 
the  object  nearest  the  hearts  of  me  ligion,  and  send  me  constantly  news 
and  you,  and  all  the  race  of  Islam —  of  your  welfare,  and  of  the  move- 
viz.,  the  extermination,  root  and  ments  of  the  vile  infidels,  that  accord- 
branch,  of  the  detested  race  of  infidels,  ing  to  your  information  I  may  take 
may  be  without  difficulty  accom-  measures  to  counteract  them.  Putteh 
plished.  Set  your  mind  perfectly  at  Mahomed,  the  son  of  Saadat  Khan,  is 
rest  on  this  subject,  and  do  not  enter-  here,  and  will  shortly  leave  me  to  join 
tain  any  misgivings,  and  gird  up  your  you  with  the  Ghazees." — [^MS,  i2e- 
loins  for  action,  and  be  ready  with  the  cords.^ 

fear-inspiring  and  punishment-inflict-  *  "  The  Prince  was  seated  on  the 
ing  Ghazees,  and  use  your  utmost  throne  on  the  29th.  Akbar  consti* 
exertions  and  efibrts  to  close  the  tuted  himself  prime  minister  of  all 
Khybur  road  and  intercept  their  Afghans.  The  Hindostanee  depen- 
dawk  communications,  that  their  mes-  dents  on  the  Prince  had  been  pre- 
sengers  may  not  pass  to  and  fro,  and  viously  removed  from  the  Balla 
that  no  grain  may  reach  them  from  Hissar,  and  none  but  his  immediate 
any  quarter;  for  this  is  the  real  way  attendants  were  allowed  to  remain — 
to  defeat  this  misguided  and  detested  the  garrison  being  composed  of  Ak* 
race, — this  is  the  real  battle  of  martyr-  bar*s  own  soldiers.  The  remnant  of 
dom  which  you  must  fight:  therefore  the  royal  jewels,  treasure,  and  pro- 
consider  this  injunction  as  of  the  very  perty,  even  to  a  few  silver  cooking 
first  importance.  In  a  short  time,  by  utensils,  had  been  also  made  over  to 
the  favour  of  God  the  Almighty,  and  Akbar.  It  was  Akbar*s  intention  to 
the  assistance  of  the  founders  of  our  have  deposed  the  Prince  ;  and  several 
religion,  this  humble  servant  of  God,  meetings  were  convened  to  discuss 
with  a  terror-inspiring  army  from  this  the  question.  The  resolution  to 
country,  and  an  artillery  thundering  crown  the  Prince  was  sudden,  and 
and  flashing  fire,  and  with  jezailchees  suggested  by  an  idea  that  the  PopuU 
threatening  like  Mars,  and  with  ar-  zyes  who  had  connected  themselves 
tillerymen  like  Saturn,  and  Ghazees,  with  Timour  at  Candahar  might  be 
who  march  hand-in-hand  with  victory,  induced  to  recognise  the  present  ar- 
will  set  out  for  your  direction :  and  if  rangements  in  a  preference  to  a  Sud- 
it  be  the  will  of  God,  will  soon  clear  dozye  King  under  British  auspices.** — 
the  surface  of  that  country,  sweeping  lUeut.  J.B,  CcnoUy  to  Sir  Richmond 
from  it  the  rubbish  from  the  bodies  of  Shakespear :  Jtdy  1,  1S42.  MS,  Re* 
the  enemies  of  our  religion.    Mean-  cords.'} 