

ject   of  regret   that   he   should    so  for  the  report  in  question.  Had  there 

hastily  retire,  and  at  such  a  time,  been  any,  it  would  doubtless  have 

while  he  commands  an  army  in  every  formed  a  subject  of  great  grieyance 

respect  efficient^  and  amounting  to  to  the  people,  who  are  so  very  jealous 

about    15,000   men.'* — IMS,    Corre'  of  the  honour  of  their  women.'* — 

sjwndence.']  [_Captain  Macgregor  s  Report   on  the 

•  It  was  reported  in  camp,  and  sub-  Operations  in  the  Shinwarree  districts, 

sequcntly  set  forth  in  the  local  jour-  MS,  Eecords,'] 


monteith's  operations.  661 

was  restored.    Even  the  money  that  had  been  taken 
was  made  over  again  to  the  inhabitants. 

The  report  of  the  violence  that  had  been  committed 
at  Ali-Boghan  spread  like  wild-fire  through  the  valley. 
The  people  believed  that  the  British  troops  were  about 
to  fire  all  the  villages ;  so  they  began  at  once  to  remove 
their  property,  and  to  fly  in  every  direction  fipom  their 
homes.  Macgregor  exerted  himself  to  restore  confidence 
among  them,  by  explaining  the  real  designs  of  his 
government;  and  the  people  began  to  return  to  their 
dwellings.  But,  although  indiscriminate  plunder  and 
destruction  were  not  the  objects  of  the  expedition,  the 
brigade  had  been  sent  out  to  do  certain  work,  and  it 
soon  became  evident  that  it  could  not  be  done  without 
inflicting  some  injury  upon  the  people.  The  captured 
gun  and  the  plundered  property  were  to  be  recovered. 
It  was  known  that  two  of  the  principal  chiefs  of  a  place 
called  Goolai  were  in  possession  of  a  portion  of  the 
treasure  that  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  our  enemies. 
It  was  known,  too,  that  the  captured  gun  was  at  Deh- 
Surruk.  It  was  determined,  therefore,  that  the  brigade 
should  move  against  these  two  places. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th  of  June,  Monteith  moved 
upon  Goolai.  "  It  presented  all  the  appearance  of  a 
flourishing  little  settlement.  Several  of  the  forts  were 
extensive  and  in  good  repair.  They  were  shaded  by 
clusters  of  mulberry  and  willow  trees.  Flowing  water 
passed  close  to  the  forts,  and  served  to  irrigate  the 
neighbouring  fields  of  cotton,  rice,  and  jewaree.  The 
summer  harvest  had  just  been  collected,  and  was 
stocked  outside  the  fort  in  its  unwinnowed  state.  The 
inhabitants  had  evidently  only  time  to  escape  with  their 
portable  property  before  the  troops  reached  Goolai.  In 
fact,  our  visit  was  most  timely.     Three  or  four  days' 

VOL.  II.  2  o 


562  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

delay  would  have   enabled  them   to  carry  off  their 
grain."* 

Monteith  pitched  his  camp  on  some  rising  ground 
near  the  village,  and  demanded  the  restitution  of  the 
plundered  treasure.  On  the  following  day  evasive 
answers  were  received ;  there  was  no  prospect  of  obtain- 
ing, by  peacefiil  negotiation,  the  concession  that  was 
demanded  from  the  chiefs.  So  the  work  of  destruction 
commenced.  Their  forts  and  houses  were  destroyed. 
Their  walls  were  blown  up.  Their  beautiful  trees  were 
ringed  and  left  to  perish.f  The  retribution  was  com- 
plete* 