

*  *^  It  is  impossible/'  wrote  General  too  bigoted  to  his  own  party,  whereas 

Pollock,  "  to  guess  how  this  mission  Hadjee  Buktear  Khan  was  considered 

may  succeed,  because,  in  dealing  with  neutral.    He  is  a  Candahar  man — 

Afghans,  you  deal  with  treachery  and  has  been  at  Bombay  and  others  of 

deceit;   but  appearances  are  as  fair  our  settlements,  and   is   better    ao- 

as  they  can  be  for  the  release  of  the  quainted  with  the  European  diarac- 

prisoners.     Captain  Troup  says  that  ter  than   the    other.*' —  [JeUalabad, 

if  it  had  depended  on  Mahomed  Ak*  July  15.     MS.  Correspondence,'] 
bar  alone,  some  of  the  ladies  would        +  "  Captain  Troup,"  wrote  General 

have  been  sent  with  him ;  but  Ma-  Pollock,  *'  is  still  here.     I  am  glad 

homed  Shah  appears  to  be  a  bitter  that,  in  proposing  terms,  I  insisted  on 

enemy  of  ours — much  more  so  than  I  having  the  guns,  for  I  think  there  b 

had  reason  to  suppose.      The  man  almost  a  certainty  of  an  objection 

who  has  come  with  Captain  Troup  being  made  to  that,  in  which  case,  of 

was  selected  in  opposition  to  the  wish  course,  I  can  back  out.     .     .     .     On 

of  Mahomed  Akbar,  who  wished  to  this  occasion  I  have  written  nothing.'* 

send  Dost  Mahomed  Khan,  a  brother  — [Jellalabad,  July  18.    MS.  Corre- 

of  Mahomed  Shah.     Dost  Mahomed  spondence.] 
was  objected  to  by  the  chiefs  as  being 


B£L£AS£  OF  THE  PRISONERS.  565 

while  Pollock  would  be  supplied  with  the  means  of 
rescuing  the  prisoners  more  majestically  than  by  such 
negotiations.  He  had  received  so  many  assurances  from 
influential  men  at  the  capital  that  the  Caubullees  would 
not  suffer  Akbar  Khan  to  carry  off  the  prisoners  to 
Toorkistan,  that  he  believed  the  advance  of  his  army 
would  tend  more  surely  to  their  release  than  any  diplo- 
matic measure  which  he  could  possibly  adopt. 

But  Akbar  Khan  held  a  different  opinion.  When 
Troup  returned  to  Caubul,  the  Sirdar  summoned  him 
and  Pottinger  to  an  interview,  declared  that  he  was  not 
satisfied  with  Pollock's  verbal  message,  and  candidly 
asked  their  advice.  Pottinger  replied,  that  the  best 
advice  he  could  offer  was,  that  Akbar  Khan  should  im- 
mediately send  down  the  whole  of  the  prisoners  to  Pol- 
lock's camp  at  Jellalabad,  as  a  proof  of  his  sincerity  and 
good  feeUng.  If  there  were  any  delay,  he  added,  the 
negotiations  would  be  broken  off,  and  the  army  would 
advance.  To  this  the  Sirdar  replied,  that  without  a 
written  promise  from  General  Pollock  to  withdraw  his 
troops  from  Afghanistan  the  prisoners  would  not  be  sent 
to  his  camp;  and  that  they  might  at  once  banish  the 
thought  of  a  forcible  release  of  the  prisoners  on  the  ad- 
vance of  the  British  army,  for  that  as  soon  as  intelli- 
gence should  reach  him  of  our  troops  having  arrived  at 
Charbagh,  he  would  send  them  all  off  to  Toorkistan — 
scattering  them  about  by  twos  and  threes  among  the 
different  chiefs — and  come  down  himself  with  his  fight- 
ing men  to  dispute  the  progress  of  the  advancing 
army. 