

♦  "  Nothing  has  occurred  to  in-  JvSy  4,  1842.     Published  Papers,^ 
duce  me  to  change  my  first  opinion, 


558  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

of  conferring  great  and  lasting  benefits  upon  the  govern- 
ment which  they  served,  and  the  nation  which  they 
represented.  But  Lord  Ellenborough's  instructions  to 
the  Generals  were  so  worded — ^whether  by  accident  or 
by  design  I  do  not  presume  to  determine — as  to  cast 
upon  them  all  the  onus  of  failure,  and  to  confer  upon 
the  Govemor-Greneral,  or  at  least  to  divide  with  him,  all 
the  honour  of  success.  One  thing  at  least  is  certain,  the 
letter  of  the  4th  of  July,  addressed  to  General  Nott,  and 
signed  by  the  Chief  Secretary,  ought  not  to  have  been 
written.  It  is  either  from  first  to  last  a  masterpiece  of 
Jesuitical  cunning,  or  it  indicates  a  feebleness  of  will — 
an  infirmity  of  purpose — discreditable  to  the  character 
of  a  statesman  entrusted  with  the  welfare  and  the  ho- 
nour of  one  of  the  greatest  empires  in  the  world.* 

*  It  is  right  that  the  most  im-  communications  from  the   time   of 

portant  passages    of  this  letter  to  your  leaving  Candahar.    Dependent 

Greneral  Nott  should  be  here  quoted,  entirely  upon  the  courage  of  your 

**  But  the  improved  position,   wrote  army,  and  upon  your  own  ability  in 

Lord  Ellenborough,  after  cautioning  directing  it,  I  should  not  have  any 

him  (see  ante^  page  557,  note)  against  doubt  as  to  the  success  of  the  opera* 

believing  any  change  had  come  over  tions ;  but  whether  you  will  be  able 

the  Govemor-Greneral's  opinions  *'  of  to  obtain  provisions  for  your  troops 

your  army,  with  sufficient  means  of  during  the  whole  month,  and  forage 

carriage  for  as  large  as  it  is  necessary  for  your  animals,  may  be  a  matter  of 

to  move  in  Afghanistan,  induces  me  reasonable  doubt.  Yet  upon  this  your 

now  to  leave  to  your  option  the  line  success  will  turn.  You  must  remember 

by  which  you  shall  withdraw  your  that  it  was  not  the  superior  courage  of 

troops  to  that  country.    I  must  de-  the  Afghans,  but  want  and  the  inde- 

sire,  however,  that  in  forming  your  mency  of  the  season,  which  led  to  Uie 

decision  upon  this  most  important  destruction  of  the  army  at  Caubul ; 

question,  you  will  attend  to  the  fol-  and  you  would  feel  as  I  do,  that  the 

lowing  considerations : — In  the  direc-  loss  of  another  army,  from  whiUever 

tion  of  Quettah  and  Sukkur  there  is  cause  it  might  arise,  might  be  fatal 

no  enemy  to  oppose  you ;  at  each  to  our  government  in  Hdia.     I  do 

place,  occupied  by  detachments,  you  not  undervalue  the  fud  which  our 

will  find  provisions,  and  probably  as  government  in  India  would  receive 