

necessary  supplies  to  be  collected  for  my  position  is    inexcusable.** — ^Sir 

the  retreat  through  the  Sikh  territory,  Jasper  NicoWt  MS,  Journal]^ 

which  is,  in  parts  near  that  place,  *  Some  readers,  not  having  maps 

almost  a  desert."  before  them,  will  ^  better  understand 

'*  August  24. — The  9rd  Dragoons,  the  nature  of  this  retirement  if  I 

and  another  troop  of  horse  artillery,  liken  it  to  the  case  of  a  man  wishing 

are  about  to  join  Sir  R.  Sale  at  Put-  to  retire  from  Reigate  to  London, 

tehabad.    Can  the  General  be  now  and  taking  Dover  and  Canterbury  in 

organising  an  advance  on   Caubul?  his  way. 

Is  ne  cQmmaDded  to  do  so?    Can  he  f  See  anU^  page  474. 


656 


THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 


the  statesman  was  running  on  retirement;  the  mind  of 
the  soldier  on  advance.  The  great  obstacle  either  to 
retirement  or  to  advance  had  been  the  scarcity  of  car- 
riage. But  in  the  early  summer  months  every  exer- 
tion had  been  made  by  the  authorities  in  Upper  India 
to  procure  carriage  for  the  use  of  the  armies  in  Afghan- 
istan. Lord  Ellenborough  had  exerted  himself  to  obtain 
cattle;  Mr.  Robertson,  the  able  and  energetic  Lieu- 
tenant-Govemoi^  of  the  North- Western  Provinces,  had 
exerted  himself  to  obtain  cattle.*  The  Governor-Gene- 
ral threw  his  heart  into  the  work,  because  he  was  eager 
to  bring  back  the  armies  to  Hindostan ;  the  Lieutenant- 
Governor  threw  his  heart  into  the  work,  because  he 
was  eager  to  push  them  on  to  Caubul.  So  it  happened, 
that  before  the  end  of  June^  there  was  a  sufficiency  of 
cattle  at  General  Pollock's  disposal  to  enable  him  to  do 
something;  and  he  reported  to  government  that  his 
means  of  movement  were  such  that  he  was  able  to  make 
a  demonstration  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jellalabad. 
Upon  this,  Lord  Ellenborough  wrote  to  him  on  the  4th 
of  July  that  he  was  rejoiced  to  hear  the  General  was 
able  to  do  something;  but  that  he  (the  General)  must, 
on  no  account,  think  that  any  change  had  come  over  the 
opinions  of  government,  which  still  inclined  resolutely 
towards  the  withdrawal  of  the  army  at  the  earliest 
moment  consistent  with  the  health  and  efficiency  of  the 
troops.f 


♦  The  senrices  rendered  by  Mr. 
Robertson  to  his  country,  at  this  time, 
have  never  been  adequately  acknow- 
ledged, except  by  General  Pollock 
himself,  who  never  lost  an  oppor- 
tunity of  expressing  his  gratitude  for 
the  assistance  he  had  derived  from 
the  exertions  of  the  Lieutenant-Gover- 
nor of  the  North- Western  Provinces. 
Mr.  Robertson,  aware  of  the  difficulty 
of  collecting  camels  in  sufficient  num- 
ber for  the  purposes  of  the  army, 


ordered  letters  to  be  addressed  to  the 
principal  collectors  in  Upper  India, 
calling  upon  them  to  purchase  as 
many  pomes  and  mules  as  thev  could 
^et  together  in  their  several  districts. 
Ajid  it  was  in  no  small  measure  owing 
to  these  exertions  that  Pollock  was  at 
leujgth  enabled  to  advance. 