

The  work  of  destruction  went  on  for  some  days.  In 
the  mean  while  the  captured  gun  had  been  given  up, 

^  Captain  Macgregor's  Bqwrt.  MS.  io  the  shade  of  their  trees.    They  are 

Btcords,  to  be  seen  under  them  in  groups, 

f  There  was  no  need  to  cut  them  during  the  summer,  all'  day  long, 
down.  It  was  sufficient  to  cut  deep  talking,  reading,  weaving,  and  sleep- 
rings  through  the  bark  to  the  heart  of  ing.  Even  women  and  children 
the  tree ;  for  they  seldom  survived  seek  the  shade  of  their  trees.  The 
the  operation.  There  is  something  in  Afghan  mountaineer  is  not  tangible 
this  so  repugnant  to  our  civilised  and  to  us  in  any  other  way.  He  removes 
Christian  ideas  of  ri^teous  retribu-*  his  herds,  nocks,  and  property  to  the 
tion,  that  it  is  only  iust  that  I  should  hills  on  the  shortest  notice ;  and  flies 
give  in  this  place  the  explanation  of  before  our  troops  to  places  where  he 
an  act,  perpetrated,  indeed,  upon  is  inaccessible  to  them.  The  Goolai 
other  occasions,  in  the  words  of  an  people,  moreover,  were  deserving  of 
officer  equally  gallant  and  humane,  no  mercy.  The  amount  of  treasure 
''All  the  injury,"  said  Captain  Mac-  they  had  plundered  (viz.,  18,000  or 
sregor,  *'  that  we  could  do  to  their  20,000  rupees)  was  considerable. 
fi>rt8  and  houses  could,  with  facility,  They  had  been  very  pertinacious  in 
in  a  short  time  be  repaired  by  them,  attacking  Captain  Ferns* cantonment; 
From  their  proximity  to  the  hills,  and  equally  so,  subsequentlv,  our 
they  could  always  obtain  timber  in  troops  at  Jellalabad.  Therefore  the 
abundance ;  and  where  water  is  plenti-  Brigadier  determined  at  once  to  com- 
ful  they  could  rebuild  easily  the  has-  mence  the  work  of  destruction,  de« 
tions  we  mi^t  blow  up ;  and  there-  sired  that  neither  fort,  house,  tree^ 
fore  a  greater  degree  of  punishment  grain,  nor  boosa  should  be  spared  to 
than  tills  seemed  to  be  necessary,  and  them.  This  assuredly  was  the  beet 
was  completely  within  our  power,  if  plan  for  preventing  the  necessity  of 
we  destroyed  their  trees — a  measure  harsh  measures  in  future.  Working 
which  seems  barbarous  to  a  civilised  parties  from  the  brigade  were  aocord- 
mind ;  but  in  no  other  way  can  the  ingly  appointed  for  this  purpose." — 
Afghans  be  made  to  feel  equally  the  {^Captain  Macgregor^s  Report,  MS, 
weight  of  otir  power,  for  they  delight  Records,'] 


THE  AFFAIB  AT  MAZKFNA.  563 

md  the  people  of  Deh-Surruk  were  willing  to  restore 
the  treasure  which  they  had  taken ;  but  could  not  easily 
recover  it  from  the  real  possessors.  However,  after  some 
difficulty,  upwards  of  10,000  rupees,  besides  other  pro- 
perty, were  recovered  from  the  Shinwarrees.  A  large 
quantity  of  grain,  timber,  boosa,  and  other  requisites 
was  appropriated  at  Goolai;  and  it  was  supposed  that 
the  dedared  objects  of  the  expedition  had  now  been 
fully  accomplished. 