

But  the  Shinwarrees  had  not  been  thoroughly  co- 
erced. Th^y  had  always  been  a  refractory  people — 
unwilling  to  pay  revenue  either  to  Barukzye  chief  or 
Suddozye  Prince.  It  was  thought  advisable,  therefore, 
to  read  th^m  a  lesson.  So  Monteith  made  a  progress 
through  the  valley,  applied  the  fire-brand  to  their  forts, 
and  shot  them  down  in  their  places  of  refuge.  "  At  one 
time  the  interiore  of  five-and-thirty  forts  were  in  a  blaze 
along  the  valley/'*  At  a  place  named  Mazeena  the 
tribes  made  some  show  of  resistance;  but  the  steady 
gallantry  of  her  Majesty's  Slst  Regiment  and  of  their 
Sepoy  comrades  was  not  to  be  withstood;  the  shells 
from  Abbot's  howitzers  were  irresistible ;  and  so  Monteith 
effectually  beat  down  the  opposition  of  the  Shinwarrees. 
This  was  on  the  26th  of  July.  On  the  8rd  of  August 
the  brigade  returned  to  Jellalabad.  From  the  17th  of 
June  to  this  date,  "  both  men  and  cattle  had  entirely 
subsisted  on  the  resources  of  the  country."  "  The 
cattle  especially,"  added  Cap^jiin  Macgregor,  concluding 
his  report,  "  will  be  found  to  have  greatly  improved  in 
condition  while  employed  on  this  service.  Indeed,  in 
whatever  way  it  may  be  viewed,  it  will  be  found  that 
the  expedition  has  beea  highly  beneficial  to  British 
interests." 

Whilst  Monteith  was  carrying  on  these  operations  in 

*  Report  of  Brigadier  Monteith :  July  27, 1843.    PubHthed  Papert. 

2o2 


564  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

the  Shinwarree  valley,  Pollock  was  carrying  on  n^o- 
tiations  for  the  release  of  the  British  prisoners.  On  the 
10th  of  July,  Captain  Troup,  accompanied  by  a  native 
gentleman,  named  Hadjee  Buktear,  had  been  despatched 
to  General  Pollock's  camp;  but  had  brought  back  no 
satisfactory  intelligence  to  encourage  and  animate  the 
Sirdar.*  The  fact  is,  that  Pollock  had  by  this  time 
begun  to  see  his  way  to  Caubul.  Lord  EUenborough 
and  Mr.  Robertson  had  exerted  themselves  most  suc- 
cessfully to  supply  him  with  carriage.  He  was  eager 
to  plant  the  British  standard  on  the  Balla  Hissar,  and 
was  unwilling  to  hamper  himself  with  any  negotiations 
which  might  impede  or  delay  his  advance.  It  was 
thought  by  some  in  Pollock's  camp  that  the  Sirdar  was 
not  sincere  in  his  overtures,  and  that  his  real  object  was 
to  gain  time.  But  Pollock  was  equally  anxious  to  gain 
time.  The  emissaries  were  not  dismissed  in  a  hurry; 
and  when  they  returned  at  last  to  Caubul  they  carried 
back  only  a  verbal  message,  and  that  message  contained 
a  demand  for  all  the  guns  and  trophies  in  the  possession 
of  the  enemy.f  It  was  expected  that  another  reference 
would  be  made  to  Jellalabad ;  and  that  in  the  mean 