

propriety  of  an  act  for  whicn  I  alone  July  4.     "  My  movement  will    of 

am  responsible,  the  sooner  I  resign  course  depend,"  he  wrote  in  a  con- 

the  command  as  unfit  the  better.    I  fidential  letter  to  Mr.  Robertson  on 

assure  you  that  I  feel  the  full  bene-  the  1 0th  of  August,  "  on  General 

fit  of  being  unshackled  and  allowed  Nott^s  ability  to  meet  me.     Our  late 

to  judge  for  myself." — [3/5.   Corrc"  accounts  from  that  quarter  are  not 

spondence,]  favorable.     They  say  that  General 

t  A  letter,  too,  was  sent  by  Captain  Nott  is  bent  on  retirmg,  and  I  very 

Troup  to  Akbar  Khan  with  a  reouest  much  fear  that  he  will  have  made 

that  ne  would  forward  it  to  Nott.  several  marches  to  the  rear  before 


560  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

In  the  mean  while,  neither  General  had  been  wholly 
inactive.  At  Jellalabad,  Pollock  had  been  making  a 
demonstration  against  some  hostile  tribes,  and  carrying 
on  negotiations  for  the  release  of  the  British  prisoners. 
The  Governor-General  had  several  times,  in  rather  ob- 
scure language,  suggested  to  Pollock  that  it  might  be 
desirable  to  strike  a  blow  at  some  one  somewhere  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Jellalabad ;  and  now  the  General  sent 
out  Monteith  into  the  Shinwarree  valley  to  read  a  lesson 
to  the  tribes  who  had  possessed  themselves  of  the  pro- 
perty plundered  from  our  army,  and  who  held  in  their 
hands  one  of  our  captured  guns.  These  things  were  to 
be  now  demanded  from  the  tribes,  or  to  be  wrested  from 
them  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet.  In  the  middle  of  June, 
Monteith  descended  into  the  valley,  with  a  brigade  of 
European  and  Native  troops,  and  a  sufficiency  of  guns 
for  his  purpose.  The  troops,  so  long  held  in  restraint, 
were  now  all  fire  and  impetuosity.  The  first  sight,  in 
the  village  of  Ali-Boghan,  of  some  property  that  had 
belonged  to  our  slaughtered  army,  maddened  them  past 
control.*  They  began  at  once  to  fire  the  houses  and  to 
plunder  the  inhabitants.  But  Monteith  and  Macgregor 
interfered  for  their  protection.     The  plundered  property 

the  government  despateh  can  reach  nals,  that  some  women  had  been  vio- 

him I  ought  by  this  lated  by  our  soldiery.    "  But,"  says 

time  to    have  heard    from  General  Captain  Macgregor,    "I  made  toe 

Nott,  in  reply  to  my  letter  by  the  strictest  inquiry  into  the  matter,  both 

first  of  the  five  messengers.    If  he  is  from  the  Afghan  chiefs  who  were  with 

not  coming  on,  my  negotiations  for  me,  and  from  the  inhabitants  of  the 

the  prisoners  will  be  a  very  simple  village,  but  could  not  trace  in  the 

afiair ;   but  it  must  ever  be  a  sub*  slightest  degree  any  just  foundation 