

you  descend    the   passes    you   will  from   the    successful  execution   by 

have  increased   means  of  carriage ;  your  army  of  a  march  through  Ghuz- 

the  operation  is  one  admitting  of  no  nee  and  Caubul  over  the  scene  of 

doubt  as  to  its  success.    If  you  de-  our  late  disasters.    I  know  aU  the 

terminc  upon  moving  upon  Ghuznee,  effect  it  would  have  upon  the  minds 

Caubul,  and  Jellalabad,  you  will  re-  of  our  soldiers,  of  our  allies,  of  oar 

quire  further  transport  of  provisions  enemies  in  Asia,  and  of  our  coun- 

— a  much  larger  amount  of^ carriage;  trymen  and  all  forei^   nations  in 

and  you  will  be  practically  without  Europe.      It  is  an  object   of  just 


BESPONSIBILITT  OV  THE  ADVANCE.  559 

But,  whatever  may  have  been  the  amount  of  respon- 
sibility cast  upon  the  two  Generals,  neither  Pollock  nor 
Nott  shrunk  from  it.  They  cheerfully  took  up  the 
burden  and  placed  it  on  their  own  shoulders.*  They 
had  obtained  now  all  that  they  wanted.  They  had  no 
doubt  of  the  ability  of  their  troops  to  carry  everything 
before  them.  Cattle  had  been  supplied,  or  were  being 
supplied,  sufficient  for  all  their  movements.  It  was  only 
necessary  that  they  should  act  in  concert  with  each 
other — that  they  should  so  combine  their  operations  as 
to  reach  the  capital  at  the  same  time,  and  strike  the  last 
blow  together.  But  it  was  no  easy  thing  in  those  days 
to  carry  on  a  correspondence  between  Jellalabad  and 
Candahar;  and  it  was  long  before  Pollock  received  an 
answer  to  his  letters.  Five  messengers  were  despatched 
in  succession  to  Nott's  camp  ;f  but  it  was  not  before  the 
middle  of  August  that  Pollock  could  assure  himself  of 
his  brother-general's  intentions  to  advance  upon  Caubul 
at  all.| 

ambition  which  no  one  more  than  A  few  harmless  lines  were  written  in 

mjself  would  rejoice  to  see  effected ;  ink ;  and  much  important  matter  in 

but  I  see  that  failure  in  the  attempt  rice-water,  to  be  brought  out  by  the 

is  certain  and  irretrievable  ruin ;  and  application  of  iodine.     The  employ- 

I  would  endeavour  to  inspire  you  ment  of  Akbar  Khan  himself,  as  the 

with  the  necessary  caution,  and  make  medium  of  communication  between 

you  feel  that,  great  as  are  the  objects  the  two  Grenerals,  who  were  contem- 

to  be  attained  by  success,  the  risk  is  plating  his  destruction,  is  not  one  of 

great  also.*^ — iLord  Ellenhorough  to  the  least  amusing  incidents  of  the 

General  Nott:   July  4,  1842.     I'ldf-  war. 

Ushed  Papers.']  t  Pollock   was    afraid  that  Nott 

♦  "  If  I  have  not,"  wrote  Pollock,  would  have  commenced  his  retreat 

"  lived  long  enough  to  judge  of  the  before  the  receipt  of  the  despatch  of 