

riage,  has  consented  to  his  remain-  cember,  that  government  ought  to 

ing  beyond  the  Khybur  till  October,  have  decided  to  leave  the  country  or 

though  he  quotes  the  Duke  of  Wei-  to  resume  our  full  control  over  it.** 

lington's  dictum,  that  an  army  which  "  August  8. — The  wants  of  General 


CATTLE  FOR  THE  FOBGE.  555 

two  to  Greneral  Nott.  In  these  letters  he  set  forth 
that  his  opinions  had  undergone  no  change  since  he  had 
declared  the  withdrawal  of  the  British  armies  to  the 
provinces  to  be  the  primal  object  of  government ;  but  he 
suggested  that  perhaps  General  Nott  might  feel  dis- 
posed to  retire  from  Candahar  to  the  provinces  of  India 
by  the  route  of  Ghuznee,  Caubul,  and  Jellalabad;*  and 
that  perhaps  General  Pollock  might  feel  disposed  to 
assist  the  retreat  of  the  Candahar  force  by  moving  for- 
ward upon  Caubul. 

It  has  been  seen,  that  on  the  1st  of  June  Lord  El- 
lenborough  had  granted  General  Pollock  a  constructive 
permission  to  remain  at  Jellalabad  until  the  month  of 
October;  and  that  General  Pollock  had  determined  to 
turn  this  permission  to  the  best  accountf    The  mind  of 

Pollock*8  army  are  put  down  at  6)  effect  it  ?   Is  he  to  encamp  at  Gunda- 

lakhs  per  mensem,  and  we  are  just  muck  till  Nott*s  attack  on  Ghuznee 

going  to  send  20  to  clear  him  off--the  (if  that  take  place)  ?    It  is  curious 

last,  I  believe  and  hope,  which  we  that  I  should  have  to  ask  myself  these 

shall  send  to  be  buried  in  the  Punjab  questions ;  but  so  it  is.     I  am  wholly 

and  Afghanistan.    Twenty-one  lakhs  ignorant  of  the  intended  movements 

he  had  before.^'  of  either.    Lord  Ellenborough  means 

"  August  15.  —  General  Nott  has  to  surprise  friend  and  foe  equally.*' 

fixed  on  the  2nd  of  this  month  for  **  August  27. — To-day  I  find,  b v  a 

leaving  Candahar,  and  in  two  divisions  despatch  from  General  Pollock,  that 

— the  Bombay  troops  by  Quettah  and  General  Nott  has  decided  on  retum- 

Sukicur — the  Bengal  column  by  Dehra  ing  to  the  provinces,  via  Ghuznee  and 

Ismael  Khan.    This  is  quite  new  to  Caubul.    Lord  £.,  by  letter  dated  4th 

me,  and  may  be  either  ordered  by  the  of  July,  gave  him  a  choice  as  to  the 

General  or  suggested  by  Lord  £."  line  by  which  to  withdraw,  and  he  has 

"  August  20. — This  order  as  to  retir-  chosen  this — certainly  the  noblest  and 

ing  by  Dehra  Ismael  Khan  appears  the  the  worthiest;  but  whether  it  will 

e&ct  of  impulse.    Its  neglect  of  me  I  release  our  prisoners  and  add  to  our 

forgive,  though  a  manifest  slieht ;  but  fame,  I  cannot  venture  to  predict. 

I  do  not  find  that  he  has  ordered  the  Lord  £.'8  want  of  decent  attention  to 