

T  "  It  has  given  great  satisfaction 
to  the  Governor-General  to  learn, 
from  your  letter  of  the  1 4th  ult.,  that 
you  have  sufficient  means  of  move- 


mSTBUCTIONS  TO  THE  GBNBAAM.        657 

On  this  same  4th  of  July  the  Governor-General  wrote 
twice  to  General  Nott — once  through  his  secretary  and 
once  with  his  own  hand.  He  sent  the  General  a  copy 
of  his  instructions  to  Pollock,  impressing  upon  him 
that  all  his  views  were  in  favour  of  a  prompt  with- 
drawal; and  he  addressed  to  him  a  long  inconclusive 
letter,  instructing  him  to  withdraw  from  Afghanistan, 
but  telling  him,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  line  of  with- 
drawal was  to  be  left  to  his  own  choice.  He  might 
retire  by  going  backward,  by  Quettah  and  Sukkur,  or 
he  might  retire  by  going  forward,  by  Ghuznee,  Caubul, 
and  Jellalabad.  But  whichever  line  he  might  take,  he 
was  never  to  lose  sight  for  a  moment  of  the  fact  that 
Lord  Ellenborough  had  decreed  that  he  should  retire, 
and  that  retire  he  must.* 

It  was  fortunate  for  Lord  Ellenborough  and  for  the 
country  that  he  had  to  deal  at  this  time  with  men  who 
thought  more  of  the  honour  of  Great  Britain  than  of 
their  own  safety ;  and  who  did  not  shrink  from  respon- 
sibility, if,  by  incurring  it,  they  had  a  reasonable,  chance 

mcnt  to  be  enabled  to  act  on  the  siig-  that  the  measure,  commanded  by  con- 
gestions contained  in  my  letter  of  the  siderations  of  political  and  military 
Ist  ultimo  (June).  You  will  not  prudence,  is  to  bring  back  the  armies 
haye  mistaken  the  object  of  that  now  in  Afghanistan  at  the  earliest 
letter,  which  was  merely  to  suggest  period  at  which  their  retirement  can 
that,  as  far  as  your  means  of  moye-  oe  effected  consistently  with  the 
ment  allowed,  you  should  make  your  health  and  efficiency  of  the  troops, 
strength  felt  by  the  enemy  during  the  into  positions  wherem  they  may  haye 
period  of  your  necessary  detention  in  easy  and  certain  communications  with 
the  y alley  of  the  Caubul  riyer.  No  India ;  and  to  this  extent  the  instruc- 
change  has  from  the  first  taken  place  tions  you  haye  receiyed  remain  un- 
in  the  Goyernor-General*8  views  of  altered.  But  the  improved  position 
the  expediency  of  withdrawing  your  of  your  army,  with  sufficient  means 
army  at  the  earliest  period  consistent  of  carriage  for  as  lar^  a  force  as  it  is 
with  the  health  and  efficiency  of  the  necessary  to  move  in  Afghanistan, 
troops,  that  is,  as  is  now  understood,  induces  me  now  to  leave  to  your  op- 
in  the  beginning  of  October." — ^Mr.  tion  the  line  by  which  you  shall  witn- 
Maddock  to  General  Pollock:  July  4,  draw  your  troops  from  that  country." 
1842.     Published  PapersJi  — [^r.  Maddock   to   General  Nott: 