

*  They,  however,  diverted  them*  his  tent.    The  poor  old  man,  in  an 

selves  with  a  little  internal  mutiny—  extremity  of  terror,  soaght  refuge 

rising  up  against  the  Sikh  general,  under  Pollock's  skirts. 

Gholab  Singh  Fovmdea,  and  burning  t  General  FoUoclC$  Report, 


574  THE  ADVANCE  F]ROM  JELLALABAD. 

So  Pollock  sent  his  infantry  to  the  attack ;  and  gallantly 
they  ascended  the  heights.  On  one  side,  Broadfoot, 
ever  in  advance,  led  up  his  little  band  of  sappers.  On 
the  other,  Taylor,  with  the  9th  Foot,  ascended  the  hilla, 
where  the  enemy,  horse  and  foot,  were  posted  behind  a 
ruined  fort.  In  the  centre,  Wilkinson,  with  the  13th, 
pushed  up  the  ascent  towards  the  key  of  the  enemy's 
position.  All  went  forward  with  impetuous  gallantry; 
and  as  they  clomb  the  hill-sides  and  seized  the  Ghilzye 
standards,  up  went  an  animated  and  enthusiastic  cheer 
from  the  British  stormers,  Jt  was  plain  that  their  heart 
was  in  the  work,  and  that  nothing  could  turn  them 
back.  The  flower  of  the  Ghilzye  tribes  were  there, 
under  many  of  their  most  renowned  chieftains,  and  they 
looked  down  upon  the  scene  of  their  recent  sanguinary 
triumphs.  But  they  had  now  to  deal  with  other  men, 
under  other  leaders.  The  loud  clear  cry  of  the  British 
infantry  struck  a  panic  into  their  souls.  They  turned 
and  fled  before  our  bayonets.  Then  galloped  Lockyer 
with  his  dragoons  after  the  enemy's  horse;  but  the  na- 
ture  of  the  ground  was  against  him,  and  they  escaped 
the  annihilation  which  otherwise  would  have  been  their 
fate. 

But  the  battle  was  not  yet  over.  A  considerable 
body  of  the  enemy  had  betaken  themselves  for  safety  to 
an  apparently  inaccessible  height.  On  the  summit  of  a 
mountain  they  planted  their  standards,  and  seemed  to 
look  down  with  defiance  upon  our  troops.  But  Pollock 
was  resolute  not  to  leave,  on  that  day,  his  work  incom>» 
pletc.  He  believed  that  where  the  enemy  could  post 
themselves  his  infantry  could  attack  them.  So,  imder 
cover  of  Abbot's  and  Backhouse's  guns,  Broadfoot  and 
Wilkinson  again  led  up  their  men,  and  stormed  that 
precipitous  height.     "  Seldom  have  soldiers  had  a  more 


THE  VICTORY  OF  JUGDULLUCK.  675 

arduous  task  to  perform,  and  never  was  an  undertakiag 
of  the  kind  surpassed  in  execution."*  The  Ghilzyes 
looked  down  upon  them  with  astonishment  and  dismay* 
They  saw  at  once  the  temper  of  our  men,  and  they 
shrunk  from  the  encounter.  Our  stormers  pushed  on, 
and  the  Ghilzye  standards  were  lowered.  The  enemy 
fled  in  confusion;  and  left  the  stronghold,  from  which 
they  had  looked  down  in  the  insolence  of  mistaken 
security,  to  be  occupied  by  British  troops. 