

There  were  now  no  longer  any  doubts  regarding  the 
forward  movement  of  the  force.  Officers  and  men  were 
eager  to  push  on  to  Caubul;  and  willing  to  advance 
lightlj  equipped,  leaving  behind  them  all  the  baggage 
that  "was  not  absolutely  necessary  to  their  efficiency. 
The  13th  Light  Infantry,  ever  ready  to  set  an  example 
to  their  comrades,  sent  back  a  considerable  portion  of 
their  ba^age  to  Jellalabad,  and  prepared  to  march  with 
bnly  a  single  change  of  linen.  The  officers  of  the  regi- 
ment were  content  to  congr^ate,  three  or  four  blether, 
in  small  hill  tents;  and  Broadfoot,  at  all  times  a  pattern 
of  chivalrous  zeal,  offered  to  take  on  his  sappers  without 
any  tents  at  all.* 

Full  of  hops  and  courage  the  troops  moved  up,  by 
brigades,  to  Gundamuck.  Making  all  his  arrangements 
for  the  march,  and  waiting  intelligence  from  Nott,f 
Pollock  remained  at  that  place  until  the  7th  of  Septem- 
ber. Supplies  were  pouring  freely  into  camp.  The 
rich  orchards  and  fruit-gardens  of  the  surrounding 
country  yielded  their  luscious  produce;  and  our  officers 
were  writing  to  their  friends  that  they  were  "  luxu- 
riating quietly  on  the  most  deUcious  fruits  and  supplies 
of  all  kind."  The  neighbouring  chiefe  were  coming  in 
and  making  submission  to  the  Enghsh  General  It  was 
pliun  that  already  the  tidings  of  our  advance  were 
tfriking  terror  into  the  hearts  of  the  chiefs  and  people 
of  A&hanistan . 

meet  jour  wishes  to  mircli  aa  light  *  General  Sale  to  GenenU  Pt^loeki 
M  posaiblf.  I  (.alee  no  cimage  from  Aug.  18,  1S42.  MS.  Correwpondeaee, 
the  CommUsailul ;  and  our  officen  f  Pollock  had  receiTed  no  later 
are  doubling  up  fotr  in  a  «nuU  hill  Intelligence  from  Kott'a  camp  than 
Unt,  and  aru  gi'iidiii^  all  to  the  rear  that  contained  in  the  brief  letter  of 
that  the;  cau  diqiciLM  with.  .  .  .  JulyS?,  though  he  had  despatched  ten 
I  am  n  eiciicdifmi  IcamcarcewnU."  messengers  to  the  westward.  It  wai 
—IGeneriU  .Sale  to  OeneriU  Pollock:  not  until  midnight  of  the  6th — 7th  of 
'^"^     ' ~-      TS.     September  that  Uttera  from  Nott'a 

camp  were  recuTed  bj  Pollock  «t 

GmidaDiuGk. 


FLIGHT  01*  FTfTTEH  JUNO.  671 

It  was  on  the  1st  day  of  September,  when  Pollock 
was  awaiting  at  Gundamuck  the  assembling  of  his  bri- 
gades, that  an  Afghan,  of  forlorn  aspect,  in  soiled  and 
tattered  clothes,  rode  upon  a  wretched  pony^  flttend^d 
by  three  followers,  into  the  British  camp.  Two  officer^ 
of  the  general  staff.  Burn  and  Majme,  met  the  stranget 
as  he  approached,  and  recognised  him.  They  knew  him 
to  be  Futteh  Jung.  They  knew  him  to  be  the  man 
who,  a  day  or  two  before,  had  borne  the  title  of  King  of 
Caubul.  The  fugitive  was  kindly  received  and  con- 
ducted to  the  General's  tent.  A  salute  was  fired  in  his 
honour.  Accommodation  was  provided  for  him  in  the 
British  camp,  and  'everything  that  could  conduce  to  his 
comfort  was  freely  granted  to  the  unfortunate  Prince. 