

For  some  time,  Futteh  Jung  had  been  a  wretched 
puppet  at  the  Caubul  Court.  He  had  been  but  a  King 
of  straw.  The  merest  shadow  of  royalty  had  been 
suffered  to  cling  to  him.  Akbar  Khan,  fot  his  own  uses, 
held  the  imbecile  Prince  firmly  in  his  hands ;  and  every 
day  tightened  his  grasp.  He  stripped  him  of  all  his 
power;  he  stripped  him  of  all  his  wealth.  He  threat- 
ened— he  overawed  him.  He  compelled  him  to  attach 
his  seal,  or  his  signature,*  to  papers  resigning  all  autho- 
rity into  the  hands  of  the  Wuzeer,  and  signifying  his 
assent  to  everything  that  might  be  originated  or  sanc- 
tioned   by   him.f      Deeming    that    the    unscrupulous 

*  To  many  of  liis  letters  ^to  Grene*  to  confirm,  and  no  alteration  shall  be 

ral  FoUock,  Futteh  Jung  signed  his  made.**    And  agun  :  "  The  arran^ 

name  in  English  characters.  ments^  which  have  been  made  with 

t  Akbar  Khan  compelled  the  t^rince  Captain  Troup  and  Ha^jee  Buktear 

to  write  to  Pollock :  '*  I  have  given  have  been  all  approved  of  hj  me.    I 

to  Sirdar  Mahomed  Akbar  the  full  have  delegatea  all  powers  over  mj 

and  entire  management  of  all  mj  country  and  wealth  to  the  Wuzeer, 

property  and  affairs  of  every  descrip-  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan,  Barokzye  !** 

lion,  and  have  resigned  to  him  in  But  the  Prince  took  the  first  opporr 

perpetuity  full  power  to  judge  and  tunity  to  write  privately  to  the  G^ne" 

settle  all    questions  on  all  points,  ral :  *^  My  friend,  it  will  have  been 

Whatever  arrangement  he  may  make  evident  to  you  that  in  this  matter  t 

with  the  English  Grovemment  X  agree  have  been  compelled  to  act  thus.    I 


572  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

tjrranny  of  Akbar  Khan  would  soon  manifest  itself  in 
the  murder  of  the  whole  royal  family,  the  Prince 
directed  his  thoughts  towards  the  expediency  of  flight, 
and  determined  to  claim  the  hospitality  of  the  British 
Creneral.  But  Akbar  Ehan  suspected  his  intentions, 
and  flung  him  into  close^confinement  in  the  Balla  His- 
sar.  Cutting  a  hole  through  the  roof  of  his  prison,  he 
effected  his  escape,  and  fled  to  the  quarters  of  the  Kuz- 
zilbashes,  where  he  remained  for  some  days  concealed. 
It  was  reported  that,  he  had  been  murdered.  But  he 
was  now  fixed  in  his  resolution  to  seek  the  protection  of 
the  British  Government ;  and  was  soon  upon  his  way  to 
Jellalabad.  With  some  difficulty,  often  fired  upon  as  he 
went,  he  made  his  way  through  the  passes ;  and  at  last, 
on  the  1st  of  September,  rode  into  Pollock's  camp. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  of  September,  General 
Pollock,  with  the  first  division  of  his  army,  under  the 
immediate  command  of  Sir  Robert  Sale,  moved  fix)m 
Gundamuck,*  in  progress  to  the  capital.  The  second 
division,  under  General  M'Caskill,  marched  on  the  fol- 