

did  not  even  know  that  Captain  prevent  the  treachery  of  one  man 
Troup  and  Hadjee  Buktear  had  from  causing  dissension  between  the 
been  sent,  and  I  had  not  the  slightest  two  ffovcrnments,  and  that  thej  are 
knowledge  of  the  proposals  made  bj  unaUe  to  show  their  good-will  to  us 
them.  Uaptain  Troup  is  well- aware  by  releasing  our  prisoners."  To  this, 
of  this,  since  we  had  never  met,  nor  on  the  Ist  of  August,  Futteh  Jung 
had  any  of  my  confidential  people  replied:  "You  express  surprise  at 
been  employed  between  us.'* — [Fu^-  my  many  well-wishers  not  being  able 
teh  Jung  to  General  Pollock:  Transla-  to  find  a  remedy  for  one  evil-dis- 
tion,  JuZy21, 1842.  MS,  RecordsJ^  posed  person,  xou  write  :  'If  this 
The  letter  was  evidently  written  in  a  could  beefiected,  a  great  object  would 
state  of  painful  alarm.  It  concludes  be  obtained.*  Eminent  in  rank ! 
with  the  words  :  "  You  must  be  very  You  write  truly.  But  in  a  religious 
careful  not  to  let  it  be  known  that  1  war,  a  father  cannot  trust  his  son — a 
have  written  to  you ;  since,  should  son,  his  father.** 
these  villains  hear  ofit,  they  would  put  *  A  squadron  of  the  5th  Light 
me  and  my  family  to  death.**  In  replj  Cavalry ;  a  squadron,  and  the  head- 
to  this  letter  Pollock  expressed  nis  Quarters  of  the  10th  Light  Cavalry; 
surprise  that,  "  notwithstanding  his  the  lefl  wings  of  the  33rd  and  60th 
Majesty*s  friendship,  the  good-will  of  N.I.,  with  two  guns  of  the  3rd  troop 
the  chiefs,  and  the  unanimity  of  the  2nd  brigade  of  Horse  Artillery,  were 
people  at  Caubul,  still  they  cannot  Icfl  at  Gundamuck. 


JUGDULLUCK.  573 

lowing  day.  A  party  of  the  Sikh  contingent,  under 
Captain  Lawrence,  accompanied  this  division.  The 
regiments  had  been  sent  up  to  Jellalabad  in  June,  and 
had  been  encamped  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river. 
They  were  the  old  Mussulman  corps  who  had  behaved 
so  infamously  on  the  other  side  of  the  Khybur,  but  who 
now  had  been  talked  over  by  Gholab  Singh  into  some- 
thing like  propriety  of  demeanour.*  They  behaved  at 
least  as  well  as  the  British  General  expected,  and  when 
Lawrence  sought  permission  for  a  party  of  500  men, 
horse  and  foot,  to  accompany,  under  his  directions,  Pol- 
lock's army  to  Caubul,  the  General  was  but  little  in- 
clined to  refuse  the  request.  So  a  party  of  800  horse 
and  200  foot  marched,  under  Lawrence,  with  M'CaskiU's 
division ;  and  the  remainder  occupied  positions  at  Neem- 
lah  and  Gundamuck. 

On  the  8th  of  September,  as  the  first  division  of  Pol- 
lock's army  approached  the  hills  which  commanded  the 
road  through  the  JugduUuck  Pass,  he  found  that  their 
summits  were  occupied  by  the  enemy.  Large  bodies  of 
Ghilzyes,  under  different  chieftains,  each  with  a  dis- 
tinguishing standard,  were  clustering  on  the  heights. 
"  The  hills  they  occupied  formed  an  amphitheatre  in- 
clining towards  the  left  of  the  road,  on  which  the  troops 
were  halted  whilst  the  guns  opened,  and  the  enemy  were 
thus  enabled  on  this  point  to  fire  into  the  column,  a 
deep  ravine  preventing  any  contact  with  them."f  The 
practice  of  the  guns  was  excellent;  but  the  Ghilzye 
warriors  stood  their  ground.  The  shells  fi'om  our 
howitzers  burst  amongst  them ;  but  still  they  held  their 
posts.     Still  they  poured  in  a  hot  fire  firom  their  jezails. 