568  THE  ADTASCE  FBOM  JEU.AI1ABAD. 

men.  On  the  23rd,  Pollock,  with  the  advance,  reached 
Gundamuck.  About  two  miles  from  tliat  place  lies  the 
village  of  Mammoo  Khail.  Two  hostile  chiefs  with  a 
strong  body  of  the  Ooloos  were  occupying  this  position.* 
Pollock  at  once  determined  to  dislodge  them  ;  and 
ordered  up  from  Sale's  camp  in  the  rear  Broadfoot's 
sappers  and  a  squadron  of  dragoons.  On  the  following 
morning  the  brigade  advanced,  and  the  enemy  b^an 
to  retire.  Then,  dividing  his  infantry  into  two  columns, 
with  a  wing  of  her  Majesty's  9th  Foot  at  the  head  of 
each,  Pollock  entered  the  village.  The  enemy  had 
abandoned  their  positions  there,  and  at  another  village, 
called  Koochlee  Ehail;  but  they  rallied  and  returned  to 
occupy  a  range  of  heights  within  musket-shot  of  the 
latter  place,  and  &om  these  commanding  eminences  they 
kept  up,  for  some  time,  a  hot  fire  from  their  jezails. 
But  Colonel  Taylor  attacked  them  on  one  side;  Broad- 
foot,  with  his  sappers,  on  the  other.f  The  heights  were 
carried.  The  forts  and  villages  were  taken,  and  the 
enemy  dispersed.  The  chiefs  fled  to  Caubul  with  a 
few  followers.     Mammoo  £hail   and  Koochlee  Kbtul 

Lifanlv;;  the  whole  of  Sir  Robert  PoOodi:  Augiut  14,  IS42.  MS.' 
Stde'e  and  of  Colonel  TuUocL's  bri'  "  From  what  I  can  learD,  the  Kc> 
gaiJea;  with  scvcutcen  K}>ii>>  acorn-    gnnees  arc  assembling  and  are  j 


Gu 
■^  the 

^B  i 

^^K        be, 


panT  of  Sappern  and  Minera,  and  a  venting  mpplics  from   Deing  brouKhi 

regtment  of  Bildars  (Pioneers)  under  into  our  camp.     Mammoo  Khail  ap- 

Mr.  Mackcson.     A  email  force  waa  pear*  to  be  tlicir  head-quortera.     I 

left  (chicQj  for  want  of  carriage^  at  allowed  to  remun  unmoleBted,  thei 

Gundaraudi,  and  tlie  restremaioed  maj    become    troublesome.       If   ii 

■-  garrison  at  Jellalabad.  suited  your  views  to  move  forwart 

■  The  enemy  bad  been  collecting  lo   Gundamuck,   we  should  then,    ! 

there  for  socnc  days;  and  Sale,  who  think,  command  the  resources  of  thi 

was   encamned   at   Futtehabad,   re-  Talley."— [Geiteroi   Sale    to    Genera 

ceived    intelli^ncc   of  their  move-  Pollock:  August  16,  1842.      AfS.l 

ments,  which  lie   forwarded  to  the  t  In  this   aflair  we  lost  seTen  mt 

General.     "I  deairedBroadfoot,"  ha  killed,    and    about    fifty     wounded 

wrote,  "  to  send  in  a  man  to  Shake-  Among  the  latter  were  four  officen 

who  Hiud  he   had  come  from  M^or  Huish  (26lh  Native  Infaittrr 

loo  Ehail,  and  that  the  Uri-  Captain  Edwards  (9th   Foot),   Cap 

twee  was  coUtcU.ig  fighting  men,  tain  Tait  (Irregular  Cavalry),  Ensii 

pad  sending  awttj.  their  women  and  Eobertson  (37tb  Native  lafkntrvl 