

duUwn,"— [Generoi  Sate  to  Gaentl  -^"^yj- 


ORDERS  FOR  THE  ADVANCE.  569 

were  destroyed  by  fire ;   and  the  fruit-trees  were  cut 
down.* 

Having  accomplished  this,  Pollock  returned  to  Gun- 
damuck.  The  attack  on  Mammoo  Khail,  which  is  not 
on  the  road  to  Caubul,  was  a  diversion  rendered  neceS' 
sary  by  the  appearance  of  the  enemy  in  that  direction. 
But  the  General  had  yet  to  assemble  his  entire  force, 
to  assure  himself  of  the  sufficiency  of  his  supplies,  and 
to  make  all  the  necessary  arrangements  for  his  advance 
upon  the  capital.  The  delight  with  which  the  an- 
nouncement of  the  intended  advance  upon  Caubul  had 
been  received  throughout  the  general  camp  is  not  to  be 
described.  The  question  of  advance  or  withdrawal  had 
been  for  months  eagerly  discussed.  Every  symptom  had 
been  watched  with  the  closest  interest — every  report 
had  been  canvassed  with  wondering  curiosity.  Acting 
under  instructions  from  the  Supreme  Government,  Pol- 
lock had  kept  all  his  intended  movements  a  close  secret. 
It  was  not,  indeed,  imtil  the  middle  of  August  that  even 
Sir  Robert  Sale  knew  that  the  force  would  advance 
upon  Caubul ;  and  then  he  was  so  wild  with  excitement 
that  he  could  scarcely  write  a  note  to  the  General  to 
express  his  unbounded  delightf 

*  With  regard  to  the  destruction  return  of  the  whole  of  the  troops,  it 
committed  at  Mammoo  Khail,  it  is  was  necessary,  for  their  security,  to 
right  that  General  Pollock's  own  ac-  take  advantage  of  the  gardens  stir- 
count  should  be  given.  "  At  Mam-  rounded  by  walls,  and  the  men  were 
moo  Khail,  I  know  most  positively  accordingly  encam{>ed  there.  The 
that  no  Afghan  was  killea  except  destruction  of  the  vines  was  a  neces- 
in  fair  fighting.  The  families  had,  I  sary  consequence,  as  any  one  must 
believe,  gone  the  day  before  the  place  know  who  has  seen  how  grapes  were 
was  taken.  I  cannot  say  when,  or  cultivated  in  Afghanistan.  There 
by  whom,  the  adjoining  houses  were  were  very  few  trees  cut  down,  but 
set  fire  to.  I  passed  through  with  the  bark  of  a  number  of  them  was 
the  right  column  in  pursuit  of  the  taken  for  about  two  or  three  inches.*' 
enemy,  and  did  not  return  till  the  — ^General  PoUock  to  the  Adjutant" 
afternoon,  when  I  had  determined  to  General:  Dinapore,  April  18,  1843. 
encamp  there.  On  my  return  I  MS.  Records.']  See  Appendix  at  the 
found  Brigadier  Tulloch  with  his  end  of  the  volume  for  the  letter 
column    (uie   left)    occupying    the  entire. 

eardens.      The    fort    and   adhacent  t  "Hurrah I"  he  wrote;  "this  is 

houses  were  still  burning.    On  the  good  news.   AU  here  ore  prepared  to 


570  THE  ADVASCB  FEOM  JELIALABAD. 