


NECESSITY  OF  CO-OPERATION.  567 

Weary  of  these  protracted  negotiations,  Pollock  was 
now  eager  to  advance  upon  Caubul.  He  was  only 
waiting  the  arrival  of  specific  information  from  Canda- 
har  relative  to  the  movements  of  his  brother-generaL 
*^  As  I  have  offered  to  meet  him,'*  he  wrote  to  a  friend 
in  high  place,  "  he  will  find  some  diflSiculty  in  resisting 
the  glorious  temptation ;  but  if  he  does  resist,  he  is  not 
the  man  I  take  him  for."*  The  glorious  temptation  was 
not  resisted.  The  two  Generals  were  worthy  of  each 
other.  Nott  had  determined  to  retire  to  India  by  Ghuz- 
nee,  Caubul,  and  Jellalabad ;  and  in  the  middle  of  the 
month  of  August,  a  messenger,  long  expected  and  most 
welcome,  brought  the  cheering  intelligence  into  Pollock's 
camp.f 

On  the  20th  of  August,  Pollock  began  to  move  from 
Jellalabad.  On  that  day  the  advanced  guard  under  the 
General  himself  reached  Sultanpore,  on  its  way  to 
Gundamuck.  At  the  latter  place  he  intended  to  as- 
seitible  the  whole  of  the  troops  which  he  had  selected 
to  accompany  him  to  the  capitalj — in  all,  about  8000 

authorised  Pollock  to  exercise  his  the  27th  of  July.    It  comprised  but 

discretion  in  ordering  Nott  to  retire  a  few  lines  : — 

by  Quettah,  eren  though  the  march  '*Candahar,  July  27, 1842. 

upon  Ghuznee  and  Caubul  had  been  "  My  deab  Gkhebai^, — You  will 

conmienced. — [Lord  EUenborough  to  have  received  a  copy  of  a  letter  firom 

General  Pollock:   July  29,    1842.1  the  Groyemor-Grenerd  under  date 

Subseauently  the  Goyemor-Genenu  the  4th  instant,  to  my  address,  giyine 

seemea  to  awaken  to  a  sense  of  the  me  the  option  of  retiring  a  |^rt  m 

extraordinary  character  of  this  sug-  my  force  to  India  vid  Caubul  and 

gestion,    for   he   wrote   to    Grene-  Jellalabad.     I  have  determined  to 

ral  PoUock  to  say  that  he  **  could  take  that  route,  and  will  write  to  you 

hardly  ima^e  the  exbtence  of circum-  fully  on  the  subject  as  soon  as  I 

stances  which  could  justify  the  diyer-  have  arranged  for  carriage  and  sup- 

sion  of  Major-Genwral  ISott's  army  plies. — Yours  truly,   wT  Nott."— ^ 

irom  the  route  of  Ghuznee  and  of  Cau-  iMS.  Correspondence.'] 

bul,  when  his  intention  of  marching  %  The  force  consisted  of  the  3rd 

by  that  route  shall  haye  been  once  Dragoons;  the  1st  Natiye  Cayalry; 

clearly  indicated.'*  —  [Lord    Ellen'  a  squadron  of  the  5th  and  of  the 

borough  to  General  Pollock:  August  10th   ditto,  with  the  head-quarters; 

26, 1842.]  600    Sowars  of  the    3rd  Lrr^ular 

•  MS.  Correspondence,  Cayalry;   her  Majesty's  31st  fieffi- 

f  Nott's  letter  was  despatched  on  ment ;  the  d3rd  R^pnent  of  Native 


