

The  victory  was  complete.  It  was  mainly  achieved, 
under  Pollock's  able  directions,  by  the  brave  men  of 
the  old  Jellalabad  garrison.  Sale  himself,  who  was 
never  far  off  when  there  was  likely  to  be  hard  fighting, 
led  up  the  heights  in  front  of  hi^  old  regiment,  and  was 
wounded  in  the  afeay.  The  loss  upon  our  side  was 
trifling.  Nothing  could  have  told  more  plainly  than 
such  a  victory  as  this  how  little  formidable  iu  reality 
were  the  best  Ghilzye  fighting  men  in  their  most  in- 
accessible strongholds,  when  opposed  to  British  infantry 
under  the  eye  of  a  capable  commander.  The  Ghikye 
butchers  were  now  seen  flying  like  sheep  before  the 
comrades  of  the  men  whom  a  few  months  before  they 
had  slaughtered  in  these  very  shambles  at  JugduUuck. 

The  first  division  alone  of  Pollock's  army  was  eu" 
gaged  with  the  enemy  at  JugduUuck.f  The  second 
division  passed  on,  much  molested  by  the  enemy,  and 
often  compelled  to  fight  its  way  against  large  bodies  of 
Ghilzye  footmen.  On  the  11th  of  September  they  joined 
the  advance  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Tezeen.  The 
exertions  of  a  forced  march  had  fatigued  M'Caskill's 
cattle;  so  Pollock  determined  to  devote  the  12th  to  a 
halt.    Before  the  day  had  closed  it  was  evident  that 

*  Oenercd  PoUocVm  Report,  ^  Narratiye  of  the  late  Victoriouf 

f  For  aa  account  of  the  operations  Campaign  in  Afghanistan,  under  Ge* 

of  the  second  division  of  roUock's  neral  Pollock.'* 

armj,  see  Lieutenant    Greenwood's 


/ 


576  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

the  enemy  were  close  at  hand,  and  that  we  were  on  the 
eve  of  a  great  struggle.  Akbar  Khan  had  been  true  to 
his  word.  He  had  despatched  the  bulk  of  the  English 
prisoners  to  the  Hindoo-Koosh,  and  was  now  preparing 
to  meet  our  army.  On  the  6th  of  September  he  had 
moved  his  camp  to  Begramee — distant  some  six  miles 
from  the  Balla  Hissar — and  there  sent  for  Captain 
Troup.*  The  English  oflGicer  repaired  to  the  camp  of 
the  Sirdar,  who  summoned  a  meeting  of  the  principal 
chiefs.  The  Newab  Zemaun  Khan,  Jubbar  Khan, 
Ameen-oollah  Khan,  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  and  other 
chief  people  of  the  empire  attended  the  council.  Troup 
was  not  permitted  to  be  present  at  the  conference ;  but 
he  soon  learnt  its  result.  He  was  required  immediately 
to  proceed  to  Gundamuck  on  a  mission  to  Pollock's 
camp.  The  chiefs  had  determined  to  endeavour  to 
conciliate  the  British  General.  They  were  willing  to 
agree  to  any  terms  he  might  please  to  dictate,  if  he 
would  only  consent  to  stay  the  advance  of  his  army 
upon  the  capital. 

Troup  declared  his  willingness  to  proceed  on  the  mis- 
^  sion.  But  he  had  no  hope,  he  said,  of  its  success.  The 
time  for  negotiation  had  passed.  Nothing  could  now 
stay  the  progress  of  Pollock's  army  but  the  entire 
destruction  of  the  force.  But  so  urgently  did  the  Sirdar 
press  his  request  on  the  British  oflScer,  that  Troup  could 
not  refuse  his  assent  to  the  proposal.  He  made  his  pre- 
parations for  the  journey,  and  then  returned  to  the 
Afghan  camp.  There,  in  the  presence  of  Akbar  Khan 
and  Mahomed  Shah  Khan,  he  again  set  forth  the  use- 