

To  Pollock,  this  appeared  a  mere  idle  threat.  He 
still  clung  to  the  belief  that  there  was  a  party  in  Caubul 
able  and  willing*  to  prevent  the  departure  of  the  pri- 

*  "I  have  reason  to  belieye  that    which  has  determined  not  to  allow 
there  lA  a  strong  party  at  Caubul    the  removal  of  our  prisoners ;  and  I 


566  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLAI^ABAD. 

soncrs;  and  when  Troup,  accompanied  by  Lawrence, 
came  down  again  to  Jellalabad,  he  found  the  Greneral 
still  less  inclined  than  before  to  promise  to  withdraw  his 
army.  He  had,  indeed,  already  moved  a  brigade  for- 
ward to  Futtehabad — two  marches  in  advance  of  his 
old  position ;  and  all  that  he  could  now  promise  was, 
that  he  would  not  advance  beyond  that  point  before  the 
expiration  of  a  certain  number  of  days.*  The  negotia-^ 
tions  had,  by  this  time,  become  the  merest  sham.  It 
was  obvious  that  Pollock  could  not  proceed  with  them 
to  a  successful  issue  without  encumbering  himself  with 
conditions  which  would  have  hung  as  a  mill-stone 
round  the  neck  of  a  military  commander,  eager  to  drive 
his  battalions  into  the  heart  of  the  enemy's  country. 
The  Governor-General  wrote  to  him  that  "  all  military 
operations  must  proceed,  as  if  no  negotiations  were  on 
foot ;"  but  Akbar  Khan  had  rendered  this  impossible,  by 
demanding,  as  a  condition  of  the  delivery  of  the  pri- 
soners, that  all  the  British  troops  should  withdraw  from 
Afghanistan.! 

also  belieye  that  the  Wullee  of  Koo-  directly  the  prisoners  arrived.  To 
loom  has  written  refnsing  to  receive  this  I  objectea.  I  was  then  reqnested 
Mahomed  Akbar  if  accompanied  by  to  state  any  date^ — but  this  I  also  de- 
the  prisoners." — {^General  PoUock  to  clined."  —  [General  Pollock  to  Mr, 
Government']  Robertson:  August  10,  1842.  MS, 
*  *^  I  don't  know  how  my  last  Correspondence,]  Sale  commanded 
message  will  be  received  at  Caubul.  Uie  advanced  bngade  at  Futtehabad. 
Mahomed  Akbar  will  be  annoyed.  '*  I  have  my  camp  in  two  lines,*'  he 
My  address  is  to  Futteh  Jung;  and  wrote  a  few  days  afterwards  to  Pol- 
since  I  have  sent  the  reply  I  have  lock,  **  the  cavalry  facing  the  river, 
moved  up  the  brigade.  I  told  Cap-  and  rear  to  the  water— tiie  fipont 
tain  Troup  that  I  should  not  move  of  our  encampment  an  open  stony 
up  the  bn^de  beyond  Futtehabad  plain — a  good  place  for  a  ^ht.  The 
for  a  certam  number  of  days,  in  the  left  of  our  Une  rests  on  a  small  hill 
expectation  of  hearing  further  from  that  commands  a  view  all  round.*' 
Caubul,  and  that  I  expect  the  ladies  -^[MS.  CorrespondenceJ] 
will  be  sent.  The  negotiation  is  f  The  Governor-General,  how- 
carried  on  in  the  name  of  Futteh  ever,  seems  to  have  considered  it  not 
Jung,  but  Akbar  Khan  is  the  main-  wholly  improbable  that  the  oontem- 
spring.  The  chief,  and  almost  the  plated  military  movement  upon  Cau- 
only  point  he  seemed  to  care  about  bul  would  be  suspended  by  the  fii 
was,  that  I  should  sign  a  declara-  vorable  conclusion  of  the  negotia- 
tion that  I  would  leave  the  country  tions  with  the  enemy ;  and  actuallj 