

*  Captains  Troup  and  Bygrave,  force,  where  Captain  and  Mrs.  An- 
when  the  other  prisoners  were  sent  to  derson  and  Mrs.  Trevor,  with  their 
Bameean,  had  been  taken  by  Akbar  children,  had  been  lefl,  on  account  of 
Khan  to  the  Balla  Hissar — but  had  sickness,  under  charge  of  Dr.  Camp- 
subsequently  been  permitted  to  re-  bell, 
move  themselves  to  All  Mahomed*8 


MOVEMENTS  OF  AKBAR  KHAN.         577 

lessness  of  the  mission,  and  prevailed  with  them  to 
forego  it.* 

There  was  nothing  now  left  for  the  Sirdar  but  to  ap* 
peal  to  the  God  of  battles,  and  bring  all  the  force  that 
he  could  muster  to  oppose  the  progress  of  Pollock's 
army  through  the  passes.  He  now  moved  down  to 
Boodkhak,  and  from  that  place  summoned  Troup  and 
Bygrave  to  his  camp.  It  appeared  to  him  that  the 
English  oflSicers  might  render  him  essential  service  in  the 
negotiation  of  terms,  if  the  tide  of  victory  turned  against 
him.  On  the  morning  of  the  11th  they  entered  his 
camp  at  Boodkhak.  That  evening  he  summoned  them 
to  his  presence,  and  was  for  some  time  in  earnest 
consultation  with  them.  He  declared  that  he  had  no 
wish  to  oppose  the  progress  of  the  British  army,  but 
that  he  had  compromised  himself  too  far  to  recede, 
and  that  the  people  would  not  hear  of  submission.  The 
English  officers  assured  him  that  his  defeat  was  certain ; 
and  that  opposition  to  our  advance  would  only  occasion 
an  useless  expenditure  of  life.  "  I  know,"  said  the  Sirdar, 
"  that  I  have  everything  to  lose ;  but  it  is  too  late  to 
recede."  He  declared  that  he  was  indifferent  as  to  the 
result.  The  issue  of  the  contest  was  in  the  hands  of 
God,  and  it  little  mattered  to  him  who  was  the  victor. 

On  the  following  morning  he  sent  for  Troup,  and  an- 
nounced that  he  and  Bygrave  must  accompany  him  to 
Koord-Caubul.  Arrived  at  that  place,  intelligence  of 
the  intended  halt  of  Pollock's  army  at  Tezeen  reached 
the  Sirdar.  The  Afghan  chiefs  had  intended  to  make 
their  last  decisive  stand  at  Koord-Caubul ;  but  the  halt 
of  the  advancing  army  seemed  to  indicate  indecision, 

♦  They  required  Troup,  however,  the  messengers  returned  some  days 

to  write  a  letter  to  General  Pollock  afterwards,  declaring  that  they  had 

making  known  Akbar  Khan's  wishes,  not  been  able  to  penetrate  the  British 

and  inclosing  one  from  the  Sirdar  camp. — ICaptain   Troup  to   General 

himself.    The  letters  were  sent,  but  Pollock,    MS.  Correspondence,'] 

VOL.  II.  2  P 


^ 


578  THK  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

mi  it  was  rumoured  that  difficulties  had  arisen  to  ob- 
struct the  progress  of  the  force.  On  this,  he  at  once 
determined  to  move  on  to  Tezeen ;  and  sent  to  Troup  to 
announce  his  intentions.*  The  English  officer  sought 
and  obtained  permission  to  return  to  Ali  Mahomed's 
fort;  and  Akbar  Khan  went  forward  to  do  battle  with 