

But  before  Wymer  had  returned  from  the  northward*, 
the  Douranees  had  again  made  trial  of  their  strength 


584  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

in  the  field,  and  had  again  been  signally  beaten.  Aktur 
Khan,  the  Zemindawer  chief,  who  throughout  the  pre- 
ceding year  had  been  keeping  the  western  districts  of 
Afghanistan  in  a  state  of  continual  turmoil,  and  who  had 
more  than  once  given  battle  to  our  troops,  was  now 
again  in  the  field  against  us.  He  had,  since  his  return 
from  Herat,  whither  he  had  betaken  himself  for  safety, 
watched  the  progress  of  events  without  openly  com- 
mitting himself,  and  had  hitherto  shown  little  dispo- 
sition to  link  himself  with  the  Douranee  cause.  Indeed, 
at  the  beginning  of  May  he  had  made  overtures  to  the 
British  authorities,  and  offered,  if  they  would  confirm 
him  in  the  government  of  Zemindawer,  to  attack  the 
Douranee  camp.*  As  the  month  advanced,  his  conduct 
became  more  and  more  mysterious.f  He  was  in  con- 
stant communication  with  the  Douranee  chiefe,  and  yet 
at  the  same  time  he  was  professing  the  strongest  friend- 
ship for  the  British  Government,  and  offering  to  break 
up  the  Douranee  camp.  But  before  the  expiration  of 
the  month  he  threw  off  the  mask,  joined  his  brother- 
chiefe  with  a  considerable  body  of  fighting  men,  and 


*  **  May  8. — I  received  letters  firom  active  communication  with  the  Dou- 

Aktur  Khan,  and  from  our  people  at  ranees,  but  he  has  at  the  same  time 

Ghirisk.    The  former  maintains  his  been  sending,  without  any  solicitation 

tone  of  friendliness,  and  promises  to  on  our  part,  repeated  messages  to  us, 

send  away  Sydul  Khan  from  Zemin-  professing  friendship,  and  proposing 

dawer.     He  also  offers  to  attack  the  to  break  up  the  Ghazee  camp.     He 

Douranee  camp,  if  we  will  let  by-  is  known  to  be  personally  ambitious, 

gones  be  bygones,  and  confirm  him  in  and  most  disinclined,  therefore,  to  act 

the  government  of  Zemindawer.    He  in  subordination  to  the  other  Dou- 

evidently  does  not  think  it  for  his  in-  ranee  chiefs.     He  has  also  an  old 

terests  at  present  to  join  the  almost  grudge  against  Meerza  Ahmed,  and 

desperate  Douranee  cause ;  but  still  I  we  have  thus  thought  it  possible  that 

cannot  believe  that  he  would,  for  our  he  might  be  sincere  to  us,  his  natural 

sakes,  commit  himself  openly  with  his  enemies,  and  false  to  the  Douranees» 

brother-chiefs.'' — [Major  Rawlinson's  his  natural  friends.      After  playing 

MS,  Journal.']  hst  and  loose  for  some  two  months, 

f  *'  Aktur  Khan's  proceedings  have  he  has  at  length  actually  joined  the 

throughout,  and  indeed  still  wear  an  Douranee  camp.*' — [Major  Rawlin^ 