

Whilst  the  force  under  General  Pollock  was  fighting 
its  way  from  Jellalabad  to  Caubul,  and  carrying  every- 
thing before  it,  the  Candahar  division,  under  General 
Nott,  was  making  a  victorious  march  upon  the  same 
point  along  the  countries  to  the  westward. 

But  it  is  necessary  that,  before  I  trace  its  progress  to 
the  capital,  the  circiunstances  which  preceded  the  eva- 
cuation of  Candahar  should  be  briefly  narrated.  It 
has  been  stated  that,  in  obedience  to  the  instructions 
contained  in  the  government  letters  of  the  19th  of 
April,  a  brigade  under  Colonel  Wymer  had  been  de- 
spatched to  Khelat-i-Ghilzye  to  rescue  the  garrison  there 
beleaguered,  and  to  destroy  the  defences  of  the  place. 
On  the  19th  of  May,  Wymer's  force  left  Candahar.  It 
seems  that  the  Ghilzyes  had  obtained  information  of  the 
intended  movement,  and  determined  to  anticipate  the 
attempted  relief  by  making  a  desperate,  and,  as  they 


THE  DEFENCE  OF  KHELAT^I-GHILZYE.       583 

believed^  decisive  assault  upon  the  place.  Accordingly 
they  prepared  a  number  of  scaling  ladders,  practised 
escalading,  and,  in  the  dim  twilight  of  early  morning 
on  the  21st  of  May,  advanced  in  two  heavy  columns^ 
each  2000  strong,  to  the  attack.  Ascending  the  mound 
where  the  slope  was  easiest,  they  placed  their  scaling 
ladders  against  the  waUs,  and  gallantly  mounted  to  the 
assault  Three  times  they  ascended  to  the  crest  of  the 
works,  and  three  times  they  were  nobly  repulsed  by 
Craigie  and  his  men.  The  heavy  showers  of  grape  and 
musket-shot  which  the  garrison  poured  in  upon  them 
did  not  deter  those  desperate  assailants — ^they  went  on 
again  and  again  to  the  attack,  and  were  bayoneted  on 
the  parapets.  For  more  than  an  hour  this  desperate 
struggle  lasted ;  and  then  the  assailants,  whose  impetuous 
courage  had  been  overmatched  by  the  steady  gallantry 
of  Craigie's  garrison,  gave  way  and  abandoned  the  as- 
sault. The  failure  was  dearly  purchased.  More  than 
a  hundred  dead  bodies  were  found  at  the  foot  of  the 
works ;  and  it  was  computed  that  the  entire  loss  of  the 
enemy  did  not  fall  short  of  five  himdred  men.  Not  a 
man  of  the  British  garrison  was  killed. 

Before  sunset  the  Ghilzyes  had  dispersed.  Colonel 
Wymer,  when  he  reached  Khelat-i-Ghilzye,  had  nothing 
to  do  but  quietly  to  withdraw  the  garrison,  and  to  destroy 
the  works  of  the  place.  It  was  believed  that  the  mea* 
sure,  as  indicating  the  intentions  of  the  British  Grovem- 
ment  to  withdraw  from  Afghanistan,  would  create  con- 
siderable sensation  throughout  the  country,  and  greatly 
embolden  the  enemy.  But  the  A%hans  seemed  rather 
to  wonder  why  we  had  not  extricated  the  garrison  of 
Khelat-i-Ghilzye  before,  and  did  not  associate  it  with  any 
ideas  of  the  general  policy  to  be  pursued  by  the  British. 