

the  British.f 

On  the  13th  the  two  forces  met.  Great  were  the 
advantages  of  the  ground  to  the  Afghan  levies.  The 
valley  of  Tezeen  is  commanded  on  all  sides  by  lofty 
hills;  and  the  chiefs  had  posted  their  jezailchees  on 
every  available  height.  Indeed,  on  that  morning  of 
the  13  th  of  September,  Pollock's  camp  was  encircled  by 
the  enemy;  and  it  was  plain  that  every  effi)rt  had  been 
made  to  turn  the  natural  defences  of  the  coimtry  to  the 
best  possible  account.  There  was  a  hard  day's  work 
before  Pollock's  army ;  but  never  were  a  finer  body  of 
troops  in  finer  condition,  or  more  eager  for  the  work 
before  them.  All  arms  had  now  a  chance  of  dis- 
tinguishing themselves — the  cavalry  on  the  plain,  the 
infantry  on  the  hills,  and  the  artillery  everywhere.  For- 
tunately the  enemy's  horse  entered  the  valley,  attracted 
by  the  hope  of  plundering  our  ba^age.  The  oppor- 
tunity so  eagerly  desired  by  the  dragoons  was  now  at 
hand.  The  British  squadrons  were  let  loose  upon  the 
A%han  horsemen.  The  Native  cavalry  followed.  There 
was  a  brilliant  and  successful  charge.  The  enemy 
turned  and  fled;  but  the  sabres  of  the  dragoons  fell 
heavily  upon  them;  and  many  were  cut  up  in  the 
flight. 

The  infantry  were  not  less  successful.  Gallantly  they 
ascended  the  heights  on  either  side  of  the  pass,  and 

•  Bygrave  had  before  cone  on  to    lock,    MS,  Correspondence,    iSee  Ap' 
Tezeen  with  Sir-Bolund  Khan.  pendix, 

t  Captain  Troup  to  General  Pol* 


THfi  BATTLE  OF  TEZBSN.  579 

gallantly  the  Afghans  advanced  to  meet  them.  The 
stormers  of  the  13th  Light  Infantry  domb  the  hills  on  the 
right;  the  9th  and  31st  on  the  left;  and  as  they  went, 
hotly  and  thickly  upon  them  poured  the  iron  rain  £rom 
the  Afghan  jezails.  But  neverr^g  ft  momenta  beneath 
the  terrible  fire  that  greeted  them,  as  they  pushed  up 
the  hill-side,  did  these  intrepid  soldiers  waver  for  a 
moment.  They  knew  that  their  muskets  were  no  match 
for  the  A%han  jezails.  The  enemy,  indeed,  seemed  to 
deride  them.  So,  having  reached  the  hill-top,  they  fixed 
their  bayonets,  and  charged  with  a  loud  hurrah.  The 
cold  steel  took  no  denial.  Down  went  the  Afghan 
marksmen  before  the  English  bayonets;  the  foremost 
men  stood  to  be  pierced,  and  the  rest,  awed  by  the  ML 
of  their  comrades,  and  the  desperate  resolution  of  the 
British  troops,  fled  down  the  hill  in  confiision.  The 
strength  of  the  A%han  force  was  broken ;  but  the  work 
of  our  fighting  men  was  not  done.  All  through  the  day 
a  desultory  warfare  was  kept  up  along  the  ridges  of 
these  tremendous  hills.  The  A^hans  occupying  the 
highest  ground,  fired  down  upon  our  infantry,  hiding 
themselves  when  they  could  behind  the  rocks,  and 
shrinking  now  fix)m  a  closer  contest.  Never  did  British 
troops  display  a  higher  courage  in  action,  or  a  more 
resolute  perseverance.  Nobly  did  the  Native  Sepoy  vie 
with  the  European  soldier;  and  nowhere  was  there  a 
finer  sight  than  where  Broadfoot  with  his  sappers  clam- 
bered up  the  steepest  ascents  under  the  hottest  fire,  and 
drove  before  them  the  stalwart  A%hans — giants  beside 
the  little  Goorkhas  who  pressed  so  bravely  upon  them. 
Many  gallant  feats  were  done  that  day ;  and  many  an 
A%han  warrior  died  the  hero's  death  on  his  native  hillsi 
cheered  by  the  thought  that  he  was  winning  Paradise 
by  such  martyrdom.  Desperate  was  the  effort  to  keep 
back  the  invaders  fix>m  clearing  the  heights  of  the  Hufi^* 