

bppearancc  of  mystery.    He  has  been,  son's  MS.  Journal:  May  25,  1 842.] 
ever  since  his  return  fropa  Herat,  in 


BEAPPEABANCE  OF  AKTUB  KHAN.  585 

took  the  command  of  the  van-guard  of  the  Douranee 
force. 

It  was  obvious  now  that  we  were  on  the  eve  of 
another  conflict.  The  Ghazees  moved  down  on  the  Urg- 
hundab,  and  made  arrangements  to  concentrate  their 
troops  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Baba-Wullee.  It  seemed 
probable  that  they  would  be  able  to  raise  the  neigh- 
bouring tribes  against  us;  and  bring  into  the  field  a 
body  of  4000  or  5000  men.  Weakened  by  the  absence 
of  Wymer's  brigade,  and  remembering  the  danger  to 
which  the  city  had  been  exposed  when  he  last  moved 
out  to  attack  the  Douranee  camp,  Nott  determined  to 
halt  the  detachment  which  he  was  about  to  despatch  to 
the  Kojuck  to  bring  up  the  carriage  which  had  been 
assembled  for  the  withdrawal  of  his  force.  The  enemy 
had  chosen  their  time  wisely  and  well.  They  believed 
that,  in  the  absence  of  some  of  his  best  regiments,  and 
nearly  the  whole  of  his  cavalry  force,  Nott  would  be  little 
able  to  hold  Candahar  and  to  do  battle  with  the  Dou- 
ranee force  in  the  open  field.  So  they  neared  the  city ; 
and  on  the  29  th  of  May  seemed  to  invite  the  contest. 

Aktur  Khan  had  drawn  into  his  hands  the  chief 
control  of  the  force.  What  were  his  designs,  at  this 
time,  it  is  not  easy  to  determine.  On  the  27th  he  had 
again  made  overtures  to  the  British  authorities,  offering 
to  seize  Meerza  Ahmed,  and  to  do  his  best  to  dissolve 
the  Douranee  force.  At  all  events,  if  he  could  not 
accomplish  this,  he  would,  he  said,  on  the  first  attack  of 
the  British,  draw  off  his  own  followers,  and  then,  taking 
advantage  of  their  discomfiture,  fall  on  their  rear  and 
plunder  their  baggage.  But  these  offers  were  thrown 
away  upon  Nott  and  Bawlinson.  They  had  no  fiiith  in 
the  man. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  29th  of  May  the  enemy 
began  to  appear  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Candahar — 


586 


THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAE. 


hovering  about  the  cantonments,  and  carrying  off  our 
baggage-cattle.  As  the  day  advanced,  their  numbers 
increased;  but  it  was  still  believed  by  the  Greneral  that 
they  were  only  reconnoitring  our  position,  and  that 
they  would  not  then  give  battle  to  our  troops.  Under 
this  impression,  Colonel  Stacy,  with  two  regiments  of 
infantry  and  four  guns,  had  been  sent  out  to  sweep 
away  the  intruders.  It  happened  that  his  movements 
deceived  the  enemy.  BeHeving  at  one  time  that  he  was 
retreating,  the  Ghazees  pushed  forward  and  occupied 
some  rocky  heights  to  the  west  of  our  cantonments,  firom 
which  they  opened  a  distant  fire  on  om*  line,  •  These 
movements  were  seen  fi'om  the  city,*  It  was  obvious 
that  the  enemy  were  determined  to  bring  on  an  engage- 
ment So  Nott  sent  out  the  41st  Queen's  and  eight 
guns;  and  an  hour  after  mid-day  mounted  his  horse  and 
rode  out  to  take  the  command  of  his  troops.  Rawlinson 
went  with  him. 