

Covered  by  the  fire  of  the  guns,  the  light  companies 
were  now  ordered  to  storm  the  heights.  The  work  was 
done  rapidly  and  well.  Standing  out  in  bold  relief 
against  the  sky,  the  forms  of  our  stormers  were  soon  seen 
upon  the  ridge  of  the  hills;  and  as  the  enemy  were 
driven  down,  Chamberlaine's  Horse  swept  round  amongst 
them  and  cut  them  up  with  heavy  slaughter.  Bawlinson 
then  took  the  Parsewan  Horse  to  clear  the  hillocks,  to  the 
right,  of  the  detached  bodies  of  the  enemy  which  still 
clung  to  them,  and  Tait,  with  his  HorsCj  was  sent  to 
support  him.     The  Parsewan  Horse  charged  gallantly; 


*  "  The  view  from  the  look-out  in 
the  city,"  wrote  Rawlinson  in  bis  jour- 
nal, **  was  now  very  line.  The  hil- 
locks on  the  right  were  crowned  with 
masses  of  horsemen,  numbering  ap- 
parently about  1500— a  crowd  of  foot- 
men occupied  the  rocky  heights  in 
front  of  our  line  and   beyond,  the 


shoulder  of  the  Peer-Faee-Mal  hiU 
was  covered  with  human  beings  thick 
as  a  flight  of  locusts,  bodies  of  hon^ 
continually  debouching  round  the 
shoulder  and  pushing  on  to  join  their 
comrades  on  the  right." — [Major  RaW' 
Unson^s  MS,  Journal'] 


DISFEBSION  OF  THE  ElinSMY.  587 

bat  the  ground  was  difficult,  and  the  enemy  fled  towardcf 
the  mouth  of  the  BabarWullee  Pass.  Bawlinson  pushed 
on  in  hot  pursuit ;  but  turning  off  to  follow  a  party  of  the 
enemy's  horse»  who  seemed  to  have  missed  the  outlet, 
well-nigh  cut  down  or  captured  Mahomed  Atta  himself 
who  was  afterwards  known  to  have  been  at  the  head  of 
them. 

The  rout  of  the  enemy  was  complete.*  But  the  move- 
ments of  our  troops  were  too  slow  to  turn  it  to  good 
account.  The  Ghazees  made  for  the  Baba-WuUee  Pass* 
They  had  barricaded  this  pass  with  stones,  and  they  had 
thrown  up  a  strong  breast^work  in  another  direction,  in- 
tending  them  as  defences  to  lie  between  the  British  posi- 
tion and  their  own.  But  now,  instead  of  finding  these 
works  in  their  front,  they  found  them  in  their  rear. 
They  had  not  intended  that  the  battle  should  be  fought 
so  near  to  the  walls  of  Candahar.  It  was  their  design 
to  take  up  a  position  within  these  defences;  but,  em- 
boldened by  the  stories  of  the  scouts,  who  had  reported 
that  we  were  too  weak  to  operate  beyond  the  walls,  they 
had  determined  to  pitch  their  camp  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
cantonment  and  to  invest  Candahar.  Had  our  guns  been 
pushed  on  with  sufficient  activity,  the  enemy  would  have 
found  the  barricade  which  they  had  erected  for  their 
defence  a  terrible  obstruction  on  their  retreat.     But  the 

*  Nott^  in  his  public  despatches,  had  8000  men  in  position  and  2000 