

2p2 


580  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  JELLALABAD. 

Kotul;  but  the  British  troops,  on  that  day,  would  have 
borne  down  even  stouter  opposition.  The  Huft-Kotul 
was  mounted ;  and  three  cheers  burst  from  the  victors 
as  they  reached  the  summit  of  that  stupendous  ascent. 

A  more  decisive  victory  was  never  gained.    The  Af- 
ghan chiefs  had  brought  out  their  best  fighting  men 
against  us.    They  had  done  their  best  to  turn  the  difficul- 
ties of  the  country  to  good  account  against  the  strangers. 
Their  people  were  at  home  in  these  tremendous  defiles ; . 
whilst  few  of  our  troops  had  ever  seen  them — few  were 
accustomed  to  the  kind  of  warfare  which  now  alone  could 
avail.    There  was  everything  to  stir  into  intense  action 
all  the  energies  of  the  Barukzye  chief  and  his  follow- 
ers.   They  were  fighting  in  defence  of  iheir  hearths  and 
altars;  the  very  existence  of  the  nation  was  at  stake. 
It  was  the  last  hope  of  saving  the  capital  from  the  grasp 
of  an  avenging  army.    But  with  everything  to  stimulate 
and  everjrthing  to  aid  him,  Akbar  Khan  could  ofier  no 
effectual  resistance  to  the  advance  of  Pollock's  retri- 
butory  force.    The  Afghans  were  fairly  beaten  on  their 
own  ground,  and  in  their  own  peculiar  style  of  warfare. 
It  has  been  often  said  that  our  troops  were  maddened  by 
the  sight  of  the  skeletons  of  their  fallen  comrades,  and 
that  they  were  carried  onward  by  the  irrepressible  energy 
of  revenge.    It  is  true,  that  all  along  the  line  of  country, 
from  Gundamuck  to  Koord-Caubul,  there  rose  up  before 
the  eyes  of  our  advancing  countrymen  hideous  evidences 
of  the  great  January  massacre — enough  to  kindle  the 
fiercest  passions  in  the  hearts  of  the  meekest  men.     But 
I  believe  that,  if  no  such  ghastly  spectacles  had  lain  in 
the  path  of  the  advancing  army,  the  forward  feeling 
would  have  glowed  as  strongly  in  the  breasts  of  every 
soldier  of  Pollock's  force. 

The  struggle  was  now  at  an  end.    Akbar  Khan  saw 
that  the  game  was  up,  and  that  it  was  useless  to  attempt 


FUGHT  OF  AKBAB  KHAN.  581 

to  bring  together  the  scattered  fragments  of  his  routed 
army.  Taking  Captain  Bygrave  with  him  as  the  com- 
panion of  his  flight,  he  fled  to  the  Ghorebund  valley. 
The  fighting  men,  who  had  opposed  us  at  Tezeen,  were 
now  in  disordered  masses,  hurrying  homewards  along 
their  mountain  paths,  and  seeking  safety  in  places  re- 
mote from  the  track  of  the  avenging  army,  whilst  Pol- 
lock marched  onwards  with  his  regiments  in  orderly 
array,*  and  on  the  15th  of  September  encamped  on  the 
Caubul  race-course.f 

*  Nothing  could  have  been  better  four  days'.    In  this  way  we  were  en- 

tban   the    conduct    of   the   troops    abled  to  move ,  The  night 