

was  always  somewhat  chary  of  his  in    reserve.      We  had   1500  of  aU 

praise,  but  in  his  private  letters  he  arms  in  the  field.     The  enemy  have 

delighted  to  dwell  upon  the  achieve-  broken  up.     I  expect  Wvmer  back 

ments  of  his  Sepoy  regiments.    Writ-  in  a  day  or  two,  when  I  will  drive  the 

ing  to  Hammersley  about  this  affair  rebels  out  of  the  Candahar  district, 

of  the  29th  of  May»  he  said :  '*  You  How  I  should  like  to  go  to  Caubul  I 

will  hear  enough  of  our  affair  of  the  It  is  wonderful   that  the  people  in 

29th  with   the  enemy.    The  troops  Hindostan  should  be  so  panic-etrucki 

behaved  well,  and  I  am  really  ^r*  and  they  seem  to  believe  that  our 

prised  that  our  loss  was  so  tnflingi  Sepoys   cannot  stand   the  Afghans, 

but  I  have  remarked  that  the  Afghans  Now  I  am  quite  sure,  and  should  like 

fire  high.     Our  Sepoys  are  noble  fel-  io  try  it  to-morrow,  that  5000  Beneal 

lows— 1000  are  fully  equal  to  5000  Sepoys  would  lick  25,000  Afghans.'*--* 

Afghans  or  more.     A  detail  of  the  [Oeneral  Nott  to  Lieut  Hammersley  t 

1st  Cavalry,  under  Chamberlaine,  be-  June  2, 1842.   MS,  Correspondence,] 
haved  very  well  indeed.    The  enemy 


588         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAB. 

greater  number  of  them  effected  their  escape;  and  Nott, 
contented  with  his  victory,  drew  off  his  troops.* 

On  the  following  day  Stacy  went  oat  v^ith  a  brigade, 
and  Bawlinson  took  the  Parsewan  Horse  to  the  banks  of 
the  river.  The  enemy's  horse  had  not  wholly  disap- 
peared; and  it  was  believed  that  they  might  again  be 
drawn  into  another  skirmish.  But  they  were  not  inclined 
for  more  fighting.  As  our  skirmishers  advanced,  they 
fell  back  and  crossed  the  river.  The  chiefs  held  a  coun- 
cil of  war,  and  the  day  was  spent  in  stormy  debate. 
But  when  the  shades  of  evening  fell  upon  them,  they  had 
matured  no  plan  of  operations.  They  broke  up  without 
a  decision.  Again  they  met  on  the  following  day.  One 
plan  and  then  another  was  discussed.  Some  proposed 
that  they  should  proceed  to  Caubul.  Some  that  they 
should  assemble  in  Zemindawer.  Others  recommended 
that  they  should  hold  their  ground  upon  the  Urghundab; 
but  the  greater  number  were  of  opinion  that  it  would 
be  more  expedient  to  move  off  to  the  northern  district, 
and  there  await  the  issue  of  events  at  the  capital.  Many 
of  them  sent  into  the  British  camp  to  ask  for  terms ;  and  it 
was  obvious  that,  although  the  suspicion  of  our  approach* 
ing  departure  kept  up  considerable  excitement  through- 
out the  country,  the  Douranees  had  now  arrived  at  the 
inevitable  conclusion  that  it  was  useless  any  longer  to 
contend  with  us  in  the  field.f 