

*  It  is  said  that  the  widow  of  Ak-  no  less  a  personage  than  the  slaugh- 

rum  Khan,  who  was    executed   at  tered  widow  of  the  heroic  Aknim 

Candtthar  in  the  preceding  autumn,  Khan.     Throwing  aside    her    timid 

was  in  the  field,  riding  her  husband's  nature  with  her  *  Boorkha,'  she  had 

charger,  and  bearing  a  Ghazee  stan-  left  the  sacred  privacy  of  the  Zenana 

dard.  Lieutenant  Rattray  writes :  **As  for  the  foremost  rank  in  the  iMittle- 

Che  enemy  drew  near,   a  white  ob-  field,   had    bestrode    her  huabajud's 

ject  was  observed  in  the  centre  of  charger,  and  with  his  standard  in  her 

their  front  ranks,  which  seemed  the  hand  had  assembled  the  tribes.** 
lallying-point  for  the  Gbazees,  chief-        f  Major  RawUnson's  MS,  JmamdL 

tains,   moollahs,   kettle-drums,   and  It  appears  that  early  in  June  the 

Standard-bearers.    This  proved  to  be  enemy's  suspicions  of  our  intended 


SUBMISSION  OF  SUEDEB  JUNO.         589 

In  the  mean  while,  Prince  Sufder  Jung  was  waiting  a 
favorable  opportunity  to  cast  himself  upon  the  mercy  of 
his  enemies.  On  the  day  after  the  action  of  the  29th  of 
May,  he  had  received  a  letter  from  his  brother,  Futteh 
Jung,  at  Caubul,  urging  him  to  throw  himself  upon  the 
protection  of  the  British;  and  the  young  Prince,  weary 
of  the  peril-laden  life  he  had  been  leading,  and  seeing 
clearly  the  hopelessness  of  the  cause  to  which  he  had 
attached  himself,  determined  to  follow  the  advice  of  his 
brother.  So,  on  the  following  day,  he  despatched  a  mes- 
senger with  a  note  to  Rawlinson,  informing  him  that  he 
was  on  the  point  of  mounting  his  horse  to  ride  into  the 
British  camp.  But  before  the  British  officer's  answer 
reached  him,  Meerza  Ahmed  and  the  chiefs  discovered 
his  intentions,  and  carried  him  off  with  them  across  the 
river.  His  resolution,  however,  was  not  to  be  shaken. 
The  chiefs  made  him  a  close  prisoner,  and  openly  de- 
nounced him  as  a  traitor.  But  he  continued  to  make  over- 
tures to  Rawlinson,  and  at  last  effected  his  escape.  On 
the  18  th  of  June  a  letter  was  brought  into  the  British 
camp,  announcing  that  he  had  forsaken  the  Douranees, 
and  had  made  a  night-journey  to  Baba-WuUee.  Rawlin- 
son reported  the  circumstance  to  Nott,  and  the  General 
consented  to  receive  the  submission  of  the  boy.*    So,  on 

withdrawal  were  confirmed  in  a  curl-  we  were  preparing  to  destroy  the  four 
ous  manner,  and  that  tliev  seemed  comer  bastions  of  the  city  and  the 
then  to  think  of  terms.  Uawlinson  gateways,  aud  that  we  should  leave 
says  :  *'  It  appears  that  when  the  en-  in  a  month  hence.  This  decided  the 
tire  party  of  the  Douranee  chiefs  were  cliiefs  on  dropping  their  offers  of  ae- 
on the  point  of  dissolution,  a  Uin-  commodation,  aud  holding  on  until 
dostanee  deserter  joined  the  camp  events  became  more  developed." 
from  the  town,  saying  that  lie  and  his  *  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that 
comrades  had  received  letters  from  the  supreme  political  authority  had 
India,  stating  positively  that  orders  been  vested  by  the  Indian  Grovern- 
had  been  sent  up  for  our  retirement,  ment  in  the  GeneraL  Nott,  how« 
The  man,  in  fact,  explained  in  detail  ever,  was  not  inclined  to  interfere  in 
all  our  plans — the  abandonment  and  the  political  management  of  affurs, 
destruction  of  Khelat — the  march  of  and  jEUwUnson  continued  to  conduct 
the  brigade  to  bring  up  camels  from  them  very  much  as  he  had  done 
Quettah— and  he  even  asserted  that  before  the  order  was  issued ;  but  he 