

throughout  the  whole  of  these  opera-  before  I  left  Gundamuck,  I  received 
tions.  **  I  think  no  officer,"  wrote  an  official  letter  and  a  survey  report, 
Pollock,  in  a  private  letter,  on  the  setting  forth  that  the  whole  or  the 
23rd  of  September,  **  could  possibly  camels  of  one  regiment  were  un- 
have  had  nner  raiments  under  lus  serviceable,  and  that  tiiey  could  not 
command  than  I  have,  and  to  Uiem  get  up  even  without  tneir  loads, 
do  I  owe  all  my  success,  which,  as  far  This  was  rather  provoking,  for  I  have 
as  I  am  able  to  judge,  has  been  so  only  three  Native  regiments  with 
far  complete.  I  hope  the  Governor-  me.  My  answer  was  short.  ^  Tell 
General  may  think  so,  and  I  shall  be  the  commanding  officer,  that  if  his 
satisfied.'*  ^  In  this  letter,  the  dif-  regiment  can't  march,  he  will  relieve 
ficulties  with  which  Pollock  had  to  the  two  wines  ordered  to  remain  be- 
contend,  from  the  scarcity  of  cattle,  hind,  and  who  are  willing  to  go  for- 
are  thus  detailed.  **  I  have  had,'*  he  ward  on  any  terms.'  The  regiment 
wrote,  *'  great  difficulties  to  contend  marched,  and  I  heard  no  more  about 
against  even  to  the  last,  from  the  great  their  camels.  Afler  our  last  engage- 
want  of  carriage-cattle.  At  Gunda-  ment  with  the  enemy  (it  was  a  se* 
muck,  afler  my  first  engagement  with  vere  struggle)  we  had  160  killed  and 
the  enemy,  I  foxmd  myaeU  so  reduced  wounded ;  and  again  carriage  was  in 
in  cattle,  that,  to  enable  me  to  take  requisition.  The  spare  horses  of  the 
on  only  fourteen  days*  supplies,  I  was  cavalry  were  had  recourse  to ;  and  I 
obUged  to  leave  at  that  place  two  lentmy  own  riding-horse  to  one  poor 
horse-artillery  guns,  two  squadrons  fellow.** — [ilfS.  Correspondence,'] 
of  cavalry,  and  two  win^  of  Native  f  It  should  have  been  mentioned^ 
infantry ;  and  yet  with  afl  this,  all  the  in  the  note  t  to  puse  567,  that  during 
camp-u>liowers,  public  and  private,  the  advance  or  Pollock's  army  on 
were  compelled  to  carry  eight  days'  Caubul,  a  detachment  of  troops  was 
supplies.  The  fighting  men  carried  posted  at  Dakha  (on  the  Peuiawur 
three.  The  1st  Cavalry  carried  eight  side  of  Jellalabad)  as  well  as  at  Gnuk' 
days*  supplies  on  their  horses.  The  damuck  and  Jellalabad. 
rest  of  uie  cuvalry  carried  three  or 


582        THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAB. 


CHAPTER  n. 

[May— September:  1842.] 

The  Advance  from  Candahar — The  Relief  of  Kelat-i-6hil2je— Reappear- 
ance  of  Aktar  Khan — Greneral  Action  with  the  Douranees^Surrender 
of  Safder  Jang — ^The  Evacuation  of  Candahar — Disaster  near  Mookoor 
—The  Battle  of  Goaine— The  Recapture  of  Ghuznee— Flight  of  Shum- 
flhoodeen  Khan — Arrival  at  Caubul. 