


690         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

the  morning  of  the  19th,  the  British  political  chief  rode 
out  with  a  party  of  Parsewan  Horse  to  the  mouth  of 
the  BabapWuUee  Pass,  and,  through  a  crowd  of  excited 
gazers,  who  lined  the  thoroughfares  from  the  cantonments 
to  the  city,  brought  the  Prince  into  Candahar.* 

No  easy  part  was  that  which  Bawlinson  was  now 
called  upon  to  play.  The  conflicting  claims  and  inte- 
rests of  the  two  Princes  greatly  distracted  and  perplexed 
him.  Justice  and  policy  appeared  to  be  at  variance 
with  each  other.  Timour  was  a  well-intentioned  man; 
his  fidelity  had  never  been  questioned.  He  was  the 
eldest  son  of  Shah  Soojah,  and  his  claims  to  the  throne 
of  Caubul  were  more  valid,  therefore,  than  those  of 
either  of  his  brothers.  But  he  was  utterly  without  in- 
fluence. Convinced  that  he  could  never  make  his  way 
with  the  chiefs  or  people  of  Afghanistan,  the  British 
authorities  were  unwilling  to  support  his  pretensions. 
Even  for  the  governorship  of  Candahar  they  held  him 
to  be  incompetent;  and  now  that  Sufder  Jung  had 
returned  to  his  allegiance,  they  desired,  on  the  earliest 
fitting  opportunity,  to  place  the  administration  in  his 

referred  all  important  questions  to  turbances  rather  than  to  any  popu- 
the  General,  who,  for  the  most  party  lar  admiration  for  the  individual.  I 
deferred  to  the  opinions  of  hui  more  found  Sufder  Jung  considerably  im- 
experlenced  political  associate.  proved  ;  but  in  the  first  bustle  of  re- 
*  "June  19. — I  went  out  this  mom-  ception  I  could  not  satisfy  myself  of 
ing  at  daj^ight  with  the  Parsewan  his  real  views  and  feelings.  I  took 
Horse  and  Tait's  Cavalry  to  the  Baba-  him  to  breakfast  with  Prince  Timour, 
Wullee  Pass.  Met  Sufder  Jung,  and  where  I  understand  a  somewhat  sin- 
brought  him  back  with  me  to  the  gular  scene  occurred  between  the 
town.  The  curiosity  evinced  by  the  brothers.  The  only  feeling  they  po»- 
Candaharees  on  tne  occasion  was  sess  in  common  is,  that  Britisn  sup- 
something  quite  extraordinary  —  in  port  is  necessary  to  protect  them 
general,  a  profound  apathy  prevails  from  the  Barukzyes  —  on  all  other 
on  all  these  matters,  but  to-day,  to  points  they  are  diametrically  opposed. 
my  surprise,  the  entire  population  The  General  insisted  on  Sufder  Jong's 
thronged  out  to  see  the  spectacle,  and  followers  being  disarmed,  which,  of 
from  the  cantonments  to  the  city  the  course,  was  anything  but  agreeable  to 
road  was  lined  with  crowds  of  gazers,  the  boy,  though  he  did  not  yenture  to 
I  think  tills  unwonted  interest  is  to  offer  any  objection.* — [Mtijar  RaW' 
be  attributed,  however,  to  the  excite-  linsons  mS,  Journal,'] 
ment  produced  by   the  recent  dis- 