

The  Candahar  force  was  now  to  be  divided.  A  por- 
tion of  it  was  to  be  sent  to  Quettah  and  Sukkur  tinder 
General  England;  and  the  remainder,  under  General 
Nott,  was  to  !'  retire"  to  India  by  the  route  of  Ghuznee, 
Caubul,  and  Jellalabad.  The  heavy  guns  and  six  pieces 
of  the  Shah's  artillery  were  to  be  sent  down  with  Eng- 
land's column,  and  with  it  were  to  be  despatched  the 
Bombay  Infantry,  two  companies  of  Bengal  Artillery, 
three  regiments  of  the  late  Shah's  force,  and  some  details 
of  Irregular  Horse.  Nott  would  not  part  with  one  of 
those  beautiful  Sepoy  regiments  which  had  fought  so  well 
for  him  ever  since  he  had  commanded  the  Candahar 
division;  nor  could  he  think  of  suffering  the  40th 
Queen's  to  be  disunited  from  their  old  comrades.  But 
of  the  41st  Queen's  he  wrote  to  Lord  EUenborough: 
"  I   certainly  could  have  wished   to   have  taken  her 


ORDERS  TO  ADVANCE.  593 

Majesty's  41st  Regiment  with  me,  knowing  the  great 
consequence  of  the  adventurous  march  before  me.  But 
when  I  look  to  Sindh,  and  to  the  want  of  confidence  in 
our  brave  troops  shown  by  certain  oflScers,  I  must  give 
up  that  wish,  however  desirable,  to  ensure  the  safety  of 
the  division  which  I  am  not  to  accompany."  But  he 
subsequently  changed  his  mind,  and  took  the  41st  with 
him.  Two  or  three  days  passed;  some  slight  prepa- 
rations betokening  departure  were  made;  the  old  and 
unserviceable  guns  were  destroyed;  the  repairs  which 
were  going  on,  on  the  works,  were  arrested ;  and  then  it 
was  publicly  announced  that  the  force  was  to  hold  itself 
in  readiness  to  return  to  India.  But  by  what  route  it 
was  to  retire  was  still  a  secret.  Speculation  was  busy 
throughout  the  garrison.  There  were  all  sorts  of  ru- 
mours and  conjectures,  and  then  it  was  declared  that 
Nott's  column  was  to  make  its  way  across  the  country 
by  the  route  of  Dehra  Ismael  Khan.  It  soon,  however, 
was  obvious  that  this  was  nothing  more  than  a  report, 
which  might  have  its  uses,  and  the  heart  of  every  sol- 
dier in  Nott's  division  soon  beat  with  chivalrous  emo- 
tion at  the  thought,  that  the  General  under  whom  they 
had  so  long  and  so  gloriously  served  was  about  to  lead 
them  on  to  the  re-conquest  of  A%hanistan.* 

And  now  again  came  up  for  adjustment,  rather  than  for 
consideration,  the  question  of  the  disposal  of  the  Princes. 
Timour  was  eager  to  proceed  with  the  British  force 
to  Caubul,  and  hoped  to  ^be  placed  upon  the  throne  by 

♦  "  The    particular    object  to  be  wards  accounted  for,  whether  justly 

gained  by  adopting  this  latter  route  it  or  not,  by  this  fact,  that  if  the  Lohau- 

was  difficult  to  divine,  and  the  gene-  nies,  upon  whom  we  were  dependent 