

*  **  The  extensive  village  or  town  above  its  value.    No  man  nor  living 

of  Roza  is  situated  about  two  miles  thing  was  injured." — {^General  NoU 

from  Ghuznee,and  is  lovely  to  behold,  to   tA«    Adjutant' General :   Lnchnow^ 

When  this  city  was  taken  by  the  force  April  4,  1843.] 
under  my  command,  Roza  was  full  of        f  ^'  An  active  and  spirited  enemy 

inhabitants — men,  women,  and  chil-  might  have  annoyed  us  exceedingly 

dren.   My  troops  were  encamped  dose  during  this  movement;  but  the  At- 

to  its  walls.   Its  gardens  and  its  houses  ghans  appeared  to  have  lost  all  heart 

were  full  of  property ;  its  bams  and  from  the  affair  of  the  morning,  and  a 

farmyards  were  well  stored ;  its  or-  little  cavalry  skirmishing  was  all  that 

chards  were  loaded  with  fruit;  its  occurred.** — [Major  RawUnsoiCs  MS, 

yineyards  bent  beneath  a  rich  and  ripe  Journal.'] 

vintage ;  the  property  taken  from  our        J  "  The  enemy  appear  to  have  been 

murdered  soldiers  of  the  Ghnznee  gar-  unable  to  traverse  their  big  gun  saf- 

rison  was  seen  piled  in  its  dwelling^,  ficiently  to  bring  it  to  bear  on  our 

.  .  .  Four  days  the  victorious  Can-  new   position;   and  I  suspect,   also, 

dahar  army  remained  encamped  close  they  must  have  expended  their  shot, 

to  this  village,  with  all  these  tempta-  for  the  lost  two  rounds  which  were 

tions  before  it,  and  at  its  mercy  ;  but  fired  as  we  were  changing  ground, 

not  a  particle  of  anything  was  taken  and  which  fell  short,  were  old  snclls  of 

from  the  Afghans.   Tlie  fruit  brought  ours  filled  with  earth.*' — [/6tc/.] 
for  sale  was  ppid  for  at  a  rate  far 


604         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

were  of  greater  service  beyond  the  walls — vainly  he  set 
forth  that  as  there  was  no  barley  in  the  city  his  horses 
could  not  be  fed.  They  had  made  up  their  minds  to 
evacuate  the  place ;  and  when  night  closed  in  upon 
them,  they  moved  out  quietly  by  the  water-gate  of  the 
city,  and  betook  themselves  to  the  hills.  Seeing  now 
that  all  was  over,  Shumshoodeen  mounted  his  horse,  and 
with  a  small  party  of  followers  set  off  for  Caubul. 

The  engineers  worked  busily  throughout  the  night; 
but  as  the  batteries  took  shape  under  their  hands,  the 
stillness  within  the  walls  of  Ghuznee  aroused  their  sus- 
picions. So  at  early  dawn,  with  a  party  of  some  twenty 
men.  North,  the  engineer,  went  down  to  reconnoitre ;  and 
finding  the  water-gate  open,  and  the  city  apparently 
abandoned,  sent  intelligence  to  the  party  on  the  hill, 
and  the  16th  Regiment,  which  had  remained  out  to  pro- 
tect the  working  parties,  was  marched  down  to  occupy  the 
place.  They  found  it  almost  deserted.  A  few  Hindoos 
and  some  Sepoys  of  the  unfortunate  27th  Regiment  were 
the  only  occupants  of  Ghuznee.*  And  when,  at  early 
dawn,  the  officers  of  Nott's  camp  looked  through  their 
telescopes  towards  the  citadel,  they  plainly  saw  our 
Sepoys  on  the  ramparts.  Soon  the  British  flag  was 
waving  from  the  highest  tower,  and  Shumshoodeen's 
artillery,  worked  by  his  enemies,  was  roaring  out  a  royal 
salute  in  honour  of  their  triumph.  The  General  and  his 
staff  rode  out  from  camp  to  inspect  the  place,  and  to  make 
arrangements  for  its  destruction.  They  found  the  city  a 
mass  of  ruins;  and  in  the  houses  which  had  been  occu- 
pied by  the  officers  of  Palmer's  garrison,  many  sor- 
rowful mementoes  of  the  sufferings  they  had  endured, 
written  or  scratched  on  the  walls.  The  citadel  was  in 
good  repair,  and  every  one  who  inspected  it  marvelled 
how  it  happened  that  Palmer  had  yielded  it  up,  and 