

*  Major  JRawlinson  to  Major  Ou'  t  Fired,  howeyer,  from  a  height, 
tram:  September  7, 1842.  MS,  CorrC'  the  balls  never  ricocheted,  and  did 
spondenceJ]  little  mischief. 


\ 


602  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

advanced  in  line,  supported  by  the  guns."*  For  some 
time,  the  enemy  seemed  inclined  to  engage  us,  and  kept 
up  a  sharp  fire  from  their  guns  and  jezails;  but  when 
our  troops  came  to  the  charge,  and  pushed  on  with  a 
loud  and  cheerful  hurrah,  they  turned  and  fled  before 
us.  One  of  their  guns  broke  down  and  was  immediately 
captured.  Christie,  with  his  Horse,  went  off  in  pur- 
suit of  the  other,  sabred  the  drivers,  and  carried  off  the 
piece.  Shumshoodeen's  tents,  magazines,  and  stores  were 
found  scattered  about  the  plain.  The  chief  himself  fled 
to  Ghuznee ;  and  the  tribes  who  had  joined  his  standard 
now  dispersed  to  their  homes. 

Nott  halted  upon  his  ground  during  the  following 
day,  and  on  the  Ist  of  September  resumed  his  march. 
On  the  5th  he  was  before  Ghuznee.  The  day  was  spent 
in  desultory  fighting.  Shumshoodeen,  who  had  been 
reinforced  from  Caubul  by  Sultan  Jan,  occupied  with  a 
strong  body  of  horse  and  foot  some  heights  to  the 
north-east  of  the  fortress.  The  gay  attire  and  fine 
chargers  of  the  chiefs  made  them  conspicuous  even  at  a 
distance.f  The  giardens,  the  ravines,  and  water-courses 
were  filled  with  jezailchees;  and  the  city  seemed  to  be 
swarming  with  men.  Before  encamping  his  force,  Nott 
determined  to  clear  the  heights ;  and  gallantly  the  work 
was  done.  Our  troops  ascended  in  noble  style,  and 
drove  the  enemy  before  them  until  every  point  was 
gained.J  In  the  mean  time  the  camp  had  been  pitched. 
Two  infantry  regiments  and  two  guns  were  left  out  to 
occupy  the  heights,  and  the  remainder  of  the  troops 
were  then  withdrawn. 

Scarcely,  however,  had  the  troops  entered  their  camp, 
when  the  great  Ghuznee  gun,  the  "  Zubbur  Jung," 
began  to  open  upon  it.     It  was  plain  that  Nott  had 

*  Major  Ratrlinson  to  Major  Ou'        f  Colonel  Staqfs  Narrative, 
tram:  iicpt,  7,  1842.    MS,  Records.  %  General  NotCs  Official DespatdL 


NOTT  BEFORE  OHUZNBE.  603 

taken  up  a  position  too  near  to  the  enemy's  works. 
Fourteen  shots  were  thrown  into  our  camp  without 
doing  any  mischief;  but  the  warning  was  not  thrown 
away.  The  tents  were  struck,  and  the  camp  was 
moved  to  another  position,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  village 
ofKoza.*  Themovement  was  not  without  danger  ;f  but 
the  enemy  wanted  spirit  to  turn  it  to  good  account — 
and  in  their  new  position  our  troops  were  secure.J 

Before  sunset  the  firing  had  ceased.  Sanders,  the 
engineer,  a  man  of  rare  talent,  now  began  to  make  his 
arrangements  for  the  siege  of  Ghuznee.  It  was  not  be- 
lieved that  the  defence  would  be  conducted  with  much 
vigour.  The  fort  was  very  poorly  manned.  It  was  ob- 
vious that  Shumshoodeen  had  trusted  more  to  external 
operations.  The  tribes  who  had  been  summoned  for 
the  defence  of  the  city  had  already  begun  to  lose  heart. 
When  they  saw  our  engineers  at  work  busily  construct- 
ing their  batteries,  they  called  upon  Shumshoodeen  to 
come  within  the  walls,  and  take  his  share  of  the  dangers 
of  the  siege.     Vainly  he  represented  that  his  cavalry 