

rally-received  impression  among  the  for  a  large  proportion  of  our  camels, 

officers  —  perhaps    because  the  one  had  had  an  idea  that  our  intention 

most  desired — was  that  our  General  was  to  have  marched ^on  Ghuznee  and 

was  to  lead  us  on  to  Caubul,  and  that  Caubul,  they  would  nave  declined  ac- 

the  mention  of  Dehni  Ismael  Khan  companying  our  army." — [^NeilTs  i2c- 

was  merely  to  throw  dust  in  the  eyes  collections.'] 
of  the  natives.     Indeed,  it  was  after- 

VOL.  II.  2   Q 


594         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAUAR. 

his  old  supporters.  His  fidelity  at  least  deserved  our 
support — but  something  else  was  required  to  induce 
the  British  authorities  to  identify  themselves  with  the 
interests  of  the  Prince.  It  was  fortunate  for  Rawlinson 
that  at  this  time  the  decision  was  not  left  in  his  hands. 
On  the  29th  of  July  letters  were  received  from  the 
Governor-General,  emphatically  expressing  his  opinion 
of  the  inexpediency  of  permitting  the  Prince  to  accom- 
pany the  army  in  the  direction  of  Caubul,  or  even  of 
permitting  him  to  remain  at  Candahar.  His  presence 
at  Caubul,  it  was  said,  might  greatly  embarrass  our  pro- 
ceedings there ;  and  though  it  would  be  advantageous 
for  us  that  he  should  establish  his  independent  autho- 
rity at  Candahar,  there  seemed  so  little  likehhood  of 
his  being  able  to  maintain  his  position  after  the  depar- 
ture of  the  British  troops,  that,  on  the  whole,  it  was  the 
most  expedient  coiurse  that  he  should  accompany  that 
portion  of  the  force  which  was  to  proceed  by  the  way 
of  Sindh  to  the  provinces  of  India.  The  communica- 
tion of  these  resolutions  to  the  Shaz-zadah  was  a  painfiil 
duty ;  and  when  Rawlinson  announced  them,  they  pro- 
duced an  explosion  very  foreign  to  the  passive  nature 
of  the  apathetic  Prince.* 

On  the  7th  of  August  the  British  force  evacuated 
Candahar.  There  were  no  demonstrations  of  ill-will  on 
the  part  of  the  inhabitants.  No  acts  of  licentiousness 
were  committed  by  the  soldiery.f    The  movement  was 

•  "  July  29.— I  duly  communicated  roused  him  for  once  from  his  natural 

these  instructions  to  Prince  Timour  insensibilitj,  and  he  spoke  his  mind 

in  the  evening,  and  the  interview  was  pretty  plainly." — {^Major  EawUnsoHS 

as  disaCTeeable  a  one  as  I  ever  went  MS»  Journal'] 

through.  His  Royal  Highness  had  t  "  -^"i/*  7. — We  have  thb  evening 
previously  made  up  his  mmd  that  he  evacuated  Candahar  in  the  most  re- 
was  to  accompany  the  force  to  Cau-  gular  and  orderly  manner  conceiv- 
bul,  and  ou  our  withdrawal  that  he  able.  There  has  been  no  indication 
would  be  left  by  us  on  the  throne,  of  ill-will  on  the  part  of  the  citizens, 
The  sudden  change  in  all  his  views  no  disposition  on  the  part  of  the 
which  my  communication  involved,  Sepoys  to  indulge  in  military  license. 