

But  there  was  still  work  to  be  done.  From  some 
fortified  villages  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  field  of 
action  it  was  said  that  shots  had  been  fired.  The 
General  marched  upon  them.  In  an  attitude  of  abject 
submission  the  villagers  came  out  and  prayed  for  quar- 
ter. Nott  granted  the  boon.  But  a  company  of  the 
40th  Queen's  was  sent  in  to  search  the  houses,  where  it 
was  believed  some  plunder  would  be  found.  From  the 
matchlocks  of  some  Ghazees  shots  were  fired  as  our  sol- 
diers  entered  the  place.  The  result  of  the  misdeed  was 
terrible.  The  place  was  given  up  to  carnage.  The 
women  and  children  were  spared;  but  the  men  were 
indiscriminately  butchered.*    Not  less  than  a  hundred  of 

their  success.  The  horse  artillery  not  think  the  men  were  to  blame- 
reached  firsts  and  Leslie  took  the  had  thej  supposed  themselves  corn- 
command.  We  came  up  shortly  af-  mitted,  they  would  have  fled  to  the 
terwards,  and  found  the  cavalry  still  hills  before  the  troops  moved  out, 
in  a  body,  but  having  evidently  suf-  but  no  doubt  there  were  Ghazui  in 
fered  a  defeat.^* — [^Major  BawlinsorCs  the  place,  desperate  men  who  had  no 
MS,  Journal.']  wish  to  save  their  own  lives,  provided 
*  '^  The  General  now  turned  down  they  could  destroy  an  infidel,  and  to 
to  some  forts,  from  which  some  shots  the  infatuation  of  these  few  men  were 
were  reported  to  have  been  fired,  the  others  sacrificed.  Five  Commis- 
The  villagers  all  came  out  with  Ko-  sariat  camels  were  found  inside,  so 
rans  and  ropes  round  their  necks,  that  parties  in  the  fort  had  certainly 
praying  for  quarter.  The  Greneral  been  plundering;  and  as  we  ap- 
granted  quarter,  but  sent  in  the  light  proached  tlie  place,  I  remarked  a 
company  of  the  40th  to  search  the  Moollah  from  one  of  the  Boorjes, 
houses.  A  shot  was  fired  from  some  evidently  haranguing  the  people  and 
Ghazee  in  the  place,  and  orders  were  urging  them  to  die  as  Ghazees.  It 
then  given  for  an  indiscriminate  mas-  has  been  a  most  unsatisfactory  bu^- 
sacre.  The  women  and  children  ness  altogether,  and  a  few  more  such 
were  spared,  but  I  suppose  100  of  afiairs  will  compromise  us  seriously." 
the  vilUgers  were  butcnered.    I  do  —  [illa/or  RawhMSon*s  MS.  Journal,'] 


600 


THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 


the  villagers  were  massacred  for  the  offences  of  a  few 
men. 

Whilst  the  General  was  thus  employed,  the  cavalry, 
which  had  sustained  so  mortifying  a  defeat,  were  endea- 
vouring, with  the  aid  of  the  horse  artillery  and  some 
infantry  details,  to  rescue  the  bodies  of  their  dead.  The 
corpses  were  brought  off*;*  and  then  the  entire  force 
returned  to  camp.  That  evening  the  two  European 
officers*  received  Christian  biurial.  The  woimded  officers 
recovered. 