

But  the  British  force  approached  Mookoor;  and 
Shumshoodeen  Khan  was  not  ready  to  receive  thenu 
The  chiefs  had  not  come  to  the  rendezvous.  His  pre- 
parations were  not  completed.  He  had  fallen  back 
to  the  vicinity  of  Oba,  and  there  the  chiefe  were 
flocking  to  his  standard.  But,  as  Nott  advanced  that 
sultry  morning  through  a  thick  haze  upon  Mookoor,  it 
was  plain  to  him  that  he  was  in  an  enemy's  country. 
The  villages  were  deserted.  SuppUes  were  not  brought 
into  his  camp.  He  was  compelled  to  send  his  cavalry 
out  to  forage.  It  was  plain,  too,  that  the  enemy  had 
wisely  chosen  the  ground  on  which  they  had  determined 
to  give  us  battle.  There  was  no  more  defensible  posi- 
tion on  the  whole  line  of  country  from  Candahar  to 
Caubul  than  that  at  the  source  of  the  Tumuck,  which 
Shumshoodeen  Khan  had  selected  as  his  point  of  de- 
fence.f 

*  Major  EawUnson  to  Major  Ou"  our  left,  and  the  strong  grounds  inter* 

tram:  Ghuznee,  Sept,  7.     MS.  Cor^  sected  with  bogs  and  canals,  and sup^ 

respondence.  ported  by  forts  upon  our  right,  every 

t  "  We   accordingly  marched  on  one  acknowledged  that  there  was  no 

unmolested  to  our  encamping-ground,  better  defensible  position  on  the  entire 

and  as  wc  passed  the  source  of  the  road  from  Candahar  to  Caubul.** — 

Tumuck,  with  the  precipitous  hill  on  [Majoi'  Rawlinson^s  MS.  Journal,'] 


MOOKOOB.  597 

The  next  day  was  an  eventful  one.  On  the  morning 
of  the  28th  of  August  the  force  advanced  from  Mookoor. 
The  rear-guard  had  scarcely  moved  from  their  encamp- 
i^g-ground  when  the  enemy  came  down  upon  them.  Nott 
ordered  out  his  irregular  cavalry,*  who  cut  up  some 
fifty  of  the  enemy's  footmen ;  and,  but  for  an  interposing 
ravine,  would  have  destroyed  the  whole.  Without  fur- 
ther molestation  the  force  reached  its  halting-groimd 
and  encamped.  It  was  known  that  Shumshoodeen  was 
somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood ;  but  through  the  thick 
haze  which  enveloped  the  camp,  it  was  impossible  to  de- 
termine his  position.  The  camels  went  out  to  graze. 
The  grass-cutters  went  out  to  obtain  forage  for  their 
horses.  Everything  was  going  on  in  camp  after  the 
wonted  fashion,  when,  an  hour  before  noon,  a  report 
came  in  that  Delamain's  grass-cutters  were  being  cut  to 
pieces  by  the  enemy.  Delamain  waited  for  no  orders — 
never  paused  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of  the  story  that 
was  brought  to  himf — but  at  once  ordered  his  troopers 
into  their  saddles,  and  rode  out,  with  all  the  disposable 
cavalry,  in  search  of  an  imaginary  foe. 

He  soon  found  that  it  was  a  false  alarm.  His  grass- 
cutters  were  not  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  But  he 
went  on  to  reconnoitre,  and  about  three  miles  from  camp 
came  up  with  a  party  of  the  enemy's  footmen  on  the 
plain.  Some  twenty  of  them  were  cut  down  by  our 
troopers,  and  the  remainder  put  to  confiision  and  flight. 
Delamain  went  after  them  in  hot  pursuit,  and  coming 
to  the  foot  of  a  range  of  hills,  turned  the  shoulder  of 
one  of  them,  and  found  that  the  heights  were  crowned, 
in  considerable  strength,  by  the  enemy's  jezailchees, 
who  opened  upon  him  a  galling  fire.     He  was  falling 