


THE  EVACUATION  OF  CANDAHAR.         695 

effected  in  the  most  orderly  and  peaceable  manner.  The 
soldiers  and  the  citizens  were  seen  embracing  each  other.* 
Before  night  closed  upon  the  scene,  Prince  Timour  moved 
out  of  the  citadel,  and  Sufder  Jung  remained  in  possession 
of  Candahar. 

On  the  following  day,  completing  their  Commissariat 
arrangements,  Nott  and  England  remained  in  camp  imder 
the  city  walls.  Many  of  the  most  influential  people  of 
the  new  government  waited  upon  Bawlinson,  seeking  his 
advice.  On  the  9th,  Nott  commenced  his  march  to  the 
northward,  and  England  prepared  to  move  in  the  oppo- 
site direction.  The  latter  was  dissatisfied  with  the  com- 
ponents of  his  force.  He  applied  to  Nott  for  an  Euro- 
pean regiment  to  accompany  him,  and  received  in  reply 
an  indignant  rebuke. 

From  Candahar  to  Mookoor  the  progress  of  Nott's 
division  was  easy  and  uneventful.  But  few  traces  of 
the  recent  excitement  were  discernible  along  the  line  of 
march.  The  villages  seemed  wonderfiilly  tranquil  The 
villagers  brought  in  their  supplies  more  freely  than  our 
officers  had  ever  ventured  to  expect.  Every  precaution 
was  taken  by  the  Greneral  to  prevent  the  commission  by 
his  troops  of  acts  of  lawless  depredation.  He  declared, 
that  if  any  soldier  were  caught  in  the  act  of  plundering, 
or  returning  with  plunder  in  his  possession,  he  would 
hang  the  offender,  and  remove  the  officer  to  whose 
regiment  he  might  belong  from  the  command  of  his 
corps. 

On  the  27th  of  August  the  force  arrived  at  Mookoor. 

Instead  of  the  tumult,  the  confusion,  arms  against  us,  I  have  been  agree- 
the  general  excitement  to  which  I  ably  disappointed  in  finding  a  pro- 
used  to  look  forward  as  inseparable  found  tranquillity,  and  eyery  appear- 
from  our  evacuatioa  of  the  capital  of  ance  of  a  mutuallj  good  understand* 
a  province  where  so  many  conflicting  ing." — [Major  RawMUon's  MS,  Jour' 
interests  prevail,  and  where  a  large  nal,"] 

part  of  the  military  population  luis  *  General  Nott  to  the  Adjuiant-Oe' 

been  for  so  long  a  time  arrayed  in  neral 

2q2 


596         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

Up  to  this  point — a  distance  of  160  miles — ^not  a  shot 
had  been  fired.  But  there  were  sjrmptoms  now  of  more 
active  work  for  our  troops.  Some  days  before  their 
arrival  at  Mookoor,  Shumshoodeen  Khan  had  moved 
out  of  Ghuznee  with  a  party  of  500  horse  and  two  gims, 
to  collect  revenue  in  the  adjacent  country.  He  was 
ignorant  at  that  time  of  our  advance;  but  when  the 
tidings  reached  him,  he  prepared  at  once  to  contest  the 
progress  of  the  British  force ;  threw  all  his  energies  into 
the  work  of  raising  the  country  between  Ghuznee  and 
Mookoor ;  and  made  arrangements  "  for  all  the  chiefs  to 
rendezvous  at  the  latter  place,  and  fight  us  at  the  source 
of  the  Tumuck."* 