


*  Captain  Christie  commanded.         movement  to  Nott,  but  the  report 
f  He  appears  to  liave  reported  the    never  reached  the  General. 


598  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAR. 

back,  in  orderly  retreat,  when  a  body  of  the  enemy's 
Horse,  about  150  strong,  showed  themselves  on  the 
ridge  of  a  hill,  flaunting  a  white  standard.  Delamain 
at  once  determined  to  attack  them.  A  squadron  of  the 
8rd  Bombay  Cavalry  charged  up  the  hill;  but  a  hot  fire 
firom  a  party  of  jezailchees,  who  suddenly  appeared  on 
their  flanks,  saluted  them  as  they  advanced;  and  then 
the  enemy's  Horse  poured  down  upon  them  with  tre- 
mendous eflFect.  Captain  Reeves  was  shot  near  the  foot 
of  the  hilL  Captain  Bury  and  Lieutenant  Mackenzie 
gained  the  ridge ;  but  fell  beneath  the  sabres  of  the  Af- 
ghan horsemen.  The  troopers  now  seeing  their  officers 
fall,  borne  down  by  the  weight  of  the  A%han  Horse, 
and  suffering  severely  firom  the  fire  of  the  jezailchees, 
turned  and  fled  down  the  hill.  Their  companions  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill  caught  the  contagion  from  them. 
The  panic  spread,  and  the  whole  body  of  British  Horse 
were  soon  in  disastrous  flight.  Riding  each  other  down 
in  wild  confusion,  they  were  not  easily  reduced  to  order. 
The  loss  among  them  had  been  severe.  Two  officers 
were  killed,  and  three  wounded;  and  fifty-six  of  our 
men  had  been  killed  or  disabled  in  the  fight. 

In  the  mean  while,  exaggerated  stories  of  the  ♦disaster 
had  spread  throughout  Nott's  camp.  Messenger  after 
messenger  had  come  to  the  General,  and  reported  that 
the  enemy  were  in  immense  force,  and  that  Delamain 
and  his  cavalry  had  been  annihilated.*    Twice  he  sent 

*  i^  The  Gfeneral  fini  learnt  of  posted  on  some  rising  grround  to  be 
what  was  going  on  about  two  o^clock,  attacked.  The  Grenersd  again  ordered 
when  an  orderly  came  back  fh)m  the  troops  back.  A  tmrd  orderi/ 
Captain  Delamain  reporting  that  no  came  galloping  in^  to  say  the  cavalry 
enemy  was  in  sight,  and  asking  for  were  engaged;  and  very  shortly  after- 
orders.  The  General  immediately  wards  other  men  came  from  the  fields 
ordered  the  troops  back.  Shortly  at-  declaring  our  Horse  to  be  annihilated, 
terwards  Lieutenant  Brett  galloped  The  General  now  went  out  with  all 
in,  saying  that  about  2000  of  the  the  troops,  for  the  enemy's  force  was 
enemy  hwl  appeared  in  front  of  Cap-  reportccl  to  be  above  7000,  and  we 
tain  Delamain,  and  were  too  strongly  expected  them  to  be  flashed  with 


MASSACRE  IN  A  VILLAGE.  599 

out  instructions  for  the  troops  to  return  to  camp.  At 
last  it  was  reported  to  him  that  the  enemy  were  7000 
strong,  and  that  Delamain,  if  not  already  destroyed, 
was  in  imminent  peril.  So  Nott  took  out  his  army 
and  moved  against  the  enemy — expecting  to  find  them 
flushed  with  success  and  eager  for  a  general  action. 
But  when  they  came  upon  the  ground,  it  was  found  that 
the  enemy  had  moved  off.  Their  videttes  alone  were  to 
be  seen  on  the  peaks  of  the  hills. 