

"  This  was  a  bad  beginning,**  wrote  Rawlinson  to 
Outram,  "  but  we  have  amply  redeemed  it  since."  On 
the  30th  of  August  the  Candahar  division  was  again 
engaged  with  the  enemy ;  and  with  better  success.  On 
the  preceding  day,  Shumshoodeen  Khan  had  sent  round 
the  heads  of  the  officers  who  had  fallen  in  the  action  of 
the  28th,f  and,  greatly  exaggerating  the  victory  he  had 
gained,  endeavoured  to  raise  the  people  against  the  in- 
fidels whom  he  had  beaten  so  gloriously  in  the  field. 
On  that  day  considerable  reinforcements  joined  him. 
He  was  seen  on  the  hills  to  the  right  of  Nott's  camp, 
with  four  or  five  thousand  men,  and  it  was  believed 
that  he  would  attack  our  troops  in  the  course  of  the 
morrow's  march.  The  morrow  came.  Nott  marched 
to  Ghoaine.  Shumshoodeen  Khan  moved  parallel  to 
him,  and  took  up  his  position  again  on  the  hills  to 
the  right  of  the  British  camp.  As  every  hour  was 
increasing  his  numbers,  he  desired  to  postpone  the 
inevitable   collision.       On   the   afternoon   of  the   30th 


*  Reeves  and  Bury — "  Reeves  was 
shot.  Burywas  cut  down.  Mackenzie 
received  a  severe  sabre-wound  in  the 
elbow-joint  of  his  right  arm.  .  .  . 
Ravenscroft  had  been  shot  before 
the  charge ;  but  the  wound  turns 
out  not  to  be  dangerous.  Malet  had 
a  Tery  narrow  escape.  Uis  hunting- 
cap  (round  which  a  shawl  was  wound) 
Aired    him,    but   he   was   slightly 


wounded  in  the  face.  Christie  was 
ridden  over  in  the  confusion  and  lost 
his  horse,  but  was  remounted  by  one 
of  his  Native  officers  and  saved," — 
[^Major  Rawlinson  to  Major  Outram : 
Ghuznee,  September  7,  1842.  MS. 
Records,] 

f  He  declared  that  one  of  them  was 
Nott'^. 


ACTION  AT  GHOAINE.  601 

he  is  said  to    have    mustered  not  less  than   10,000 
men.* 

Not  far  from  the  ground  on  which  Nott  halted  on 
that  morning,  was  a  fort  held  by  the  enemy  which  he 
determined  to  attack.  But  the  day  was  sultry.  The 
troops  were  exhausted  by  their  march.  So  the  General 
pitched  his  camp  at  once,  arid  giving  his  troops  a  few 
hours  to  recruit  and  refresh  themselves,  postponed  the 
attack  to  the  afternoon.  At  three  o*^clock  the  General 
went  out  with  the  40th  Queen's,  the  16th  and  38th 
Native  Infantry  Regiments,  all  his  cavalry  details,  An- 
derson's troop  of  Horse  Artillery,  two  guns  of  Blood's 
battery,  and  two  eighteen -pounders.  The  ground  be- 
tween our  camp  and  the  fort  was  difficult.  Some  time 
elapsed  before  the  guns  could  be  brought  up  to  breach- 
ing distance.  And,  when  at  last  they  opened  upon  the 
fort,  they  made  so  little  impression,  that  Shumshoodeen 
was  persuaded  by  his  chiefs  not  to  shrink  any  longer  from 
a  general  action  with  a  force  whose  cavalry  had  been 
already  beaten  in  the  field,  and  whose  artillery  now 
seemed  so  little  formidable.  So,  scattering  his  horsemen 
on  both  sides  so  as  to  outflank  us,  Shumshoodeen  moved 
down  with  the  main  body  of  his  infantry  and  his  guns ; 
and,  planting  the  latter  on  the  nearest  height,  opened  a 
rapid  and  well-directed  fire  on  the  British  columns,  f 
Then  Nott  drew  oflF  his  troops  from  the  attack  of  the  fort, 
and  advanced  in  column  to  the  right,  flanked  by  An- 
derson's guns  and  Christie's  Horse,  upon  the  main  body 
of  Shumshoodeen's  fighting  men.  On  this  the  enemy 
crowded  upon  the  other  flank,  keeping  up  a  smart  fire 
both  from  their  guns  and  jezails;  so  Nott  "changed 
front  to  the  left,  deployed,  threw  out  skirmishers,  and 