


THE  RIVAL  FBINCES.  591 

hands.  The  Candahar  force  was  under  orders  to  return 
to  Hindostan,  and  the  best  means  of  disposing  of  Prince 
Timour  was  by  the  quiet  removal  of  his  Highness  to  the 
British  provinces.  This  was  not  yet  to  be  openly  an- 
nounced to  the  Prince,  for  it  was  expedient  that  the 
measure  of  withdrawal  should  not  be  publicly  declared ; 
but  Kawlinson  hoped,  that  when  the  time  came,  he 
would  be  able  to  persuade  Timour  to  accompjiny  the 
army  to  India,  and  to  leave  Sufder  Jung  in  possession  of 
Candahar.  In  the  mean  while,  both  Princes  were  un- 
easy and  dissatisfied.  Jealous  of  his  younger  brother, 
Timour  protested  against  his  being  permitted  to  mediate 
for  the  Douranee  chiefs,  or  to  interfere  with  the  Canda- 
har Government;  whilst  Sufder  Jung  was  continually 
complaining  of  the  incertitude  of  his  position,  and  im- 
portuning Bawlinson  to  come  to  some  definite  explana- 
tion with  him  • 

So  Kawlinson  determined  to  temporise.  Putting  off 
from  day  to  day  the  adjustment  of  these  differences,  he 
trusted  to  the  chapter  of  accidents,  and  ere  long  found 
something  written  down  in  his  favour.  Before  the  end 
of  June,  it  was  announced  at  Candahar  that  Futteh 
Jung  had  been  overcome  by  the  Barukzyes  at  Caubul, 
and  that  he  was  in  effect  a  mere  prisoner  in  their  hands. 
The  intelligence,  as  regarded  British  interests  in  general, 
was  supposed  to  be  unfavorable;  but  it  went  far  to 
diminish  the  difficulties  which  the  presence  of  the  two 
Princes  at  Candahar  arrayed  against  the  British  autho- 
rities. "Whilst  Futteh  Jung's  star  was  on  the  ascen- 
dant," wrote  Kawlinson  in  his  journal,  "  it  was  equally 
difficult  to  manage  Timour  and  Sufder  Jung ;  but  now 
they  both  feel  that  they  are  entirely  dependent  upon  us 
for  support,  and  are  disposed,  in  consequence,  to  lay  aside 
their  private  jealousies." 

♦  Major  Ran'linsoiCs  MS.  Journal 


592  THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAB. 

The  three  first  weeks  of  July  passed  away ;  and 
Nott  was  preparing  for  his  retirement  from  Afghanistan. 
Major  Clarkson  had,  at  the  end  of  June,  brought  up  the 
convoy  of  camels  from  Quettah.  The  supply  of  carriage 
and  provisions  for  the  movement  of  the  army  had  now 
reached  its  necessary  amount.  Everything  was  in  train 
for  withdrawal,  when  the  Governor-Greneral's  letter  of 
the  4th  of  July  was  put  into  Nott's  hands.  He  saw 
at  once  the  weight  of  responsibility  that  it  threw  upon 
him;  but  he  did  not  shrink  from  assuming  the  burden. 
Cheerfully  taking  it  up,  he  wrote  to  the  Governor- 
General  on  the  2&th  of  July:  "Having  well  considered 
the  subject  of  your  Lordship's  letter  of  the  4th  instant; 
having  looked  at  the  difficulties  in  every  point  of  view, 
and  reflected  on  the  advantages  which  would  attend  a 
successful  accomplishment  of  such  a  move,  and  the 
moral  influence  it  would  have  throughout  Asia,  I  have 
come  to  a  determination  to  retire  a  portion  of  the  army 
under  my  command  vid  Ghuznee  and  CaubuL" 