

But,  whether  genuine  or  spurious,  upon  these  gates 
Lord  EUenborough  had  fixed  his  desires.  What  he 
knew  about  them,  where  he  had  read  of  them,  or  by 
whom  his  attention  was  drawn  to  them,  History  cannot 
determine.  It  is  sufficient  that  on  the  4th  of  July,  when 
the  Governor-General  wrote  to  Greneral  Nott,  authoris- 
ing him  to  "  retire"  to  the  provinces  of  India,  by  the 
route  of  Ghuznee,  Caubul,  and  Jellalabad,  he  inserted 
in  this  memorable  letter  a  paragraph  instructing  the 
General  to  despoil  the  tomb  of  Sultan  Mahmoud.  "  You 
will  bring  away,''  he  wrote,  "  from  the  tomb  of  Mah- 
moud of  Ghuznee,  his  club,  which  hangs  over  it,  and  you 


excavated  and  repaired  the  place,  and  precise  date  of  the  Su]tan*s  death,  u 

dedicated  to  it  rich  endowments  of  obviously  of  a  much  later  age.    From 

lands.     The  endowments    remained,  many  ciroumstances,  I  feel  positively 

they  say,  till  the  time  of  Nadir,  when  certain  that  the  tomb  does  not  boast 

they  were  resumed    by  tlie  govern-  a  higher  antiquity  than  that  of  Sultan 

mcnt,  and  since  that  time  the  esta-  Abdool  Rizak,  who  built  the  present 

blishment  at  the  tomb  has  been  de-  walls  of  Ghuznee,  and  who  is  himself 

pendent  for  support  upon  a  few  gar-  buried  in  a  rude  mausoleum  on  the 

dens  attached  to  the  village,  and  on  outskirts  of  tlie  village  of  Roza.    The 

tlie  voluntary  offerings  of  devotees,  gates,  therefore,  are  certainly  not  those 

The  Moollahs  uphold  that  the  gates  of  Somnauth ;  but  it  is  of  course  the 

are  really  those  of  Somnauth,  and  tliat  interest  of  the  Moollahs  to  keep  up 

the  inscriptions  on  the  tomb  date  from  the  delusion,  and  to  affect  for  the  spot 

the  time  of  the  son  of  Mahmoud;  but  the  odour  both  of  sandal  and  sanctity. 

this  I  hold  to  be  morally  impossible,  I  was  much  struck  by  the  crowds  of 

for  although  the  Cufic  may  possibly  pilgrims,  Mussulman  officers  in  our 

be  of  the  form  used  in  that  age  (wliich,  ranks,  who  thronged  the  tomb  during 

however,  I  doubt),  the  inscription  in  my  visit  there  to  make  the  ZiaruL*^ — 

the  Nuskh  cliaracter  on  the  reverse  IMajor  BavfUnsonkS  MS.  JoumaL] 
of  the  siircoj)hagus,  which  dernils  the 


THE  GATES  OP  SOMNAUTH.  607 

will  bring  away  the  gates  of  his  tomb,  which  are  the 
gates  of  the  Temple  of  Somnauth."  So,  on  the  8th  of 
September,  under  Sanders's  superintendence,  the  gates 
of  Mahmoud's  tomb  were  carried  off,  as  tenderly  as  they 
could  perform  the  duty,  by  a  party  of  English  soldiers. 
The  MooUahs  wept  bitterly.  But  the  shrine  was  not 
otherwise  profaned  ;  and  the  excitement  which  the 
spoliation  created  scarcely  extended  beyond  the  holy 
circle  of  the  priesthood.* 