

Onward  went  Nott  with  his  trophies.  On  the  12th  he 
was  before  Sydeabad,  where  Woodbum  and  his  men  had 
been  decoyed  and  massacred.  This  fort  was  at  once  de- 
stroyed; and  another  was  fired  by  the  camp-followers.f 

*  Major  Rawlinson's  account  of  ship  of  the  tomb  for  generations  in 
the  removal  of  the  gates  is  very  inte-  their  &mi[y,  will  be  the  chief  sufferers 
resting.  "  We  moved  our  camp,**  he  bv  the  measure.  I  doubt  if  the  Af' 
writes,  "  this  morning  from  the  west  gnan  tribes  lately  risen  from  obscurity 
to  the  east  of  Roza,  preparatory  to  to  power,  and  holding  the  country 
fairlv  settinz  out  on  the  march  to  rather  as  conquerors  than  citizens, 
Caubul ;  and  during  the  day  the  mea-  possess  that  feeling  of  unity  with  each 
sure  was  carried  into  effect  of  remov-  other,  ana  identity  with  the  interests 
ing  the  gates  of  Mahmoud*s  tomb,  they  are  supposed  to  protect,  to  view 
The  work  was  performed  by  Euro-  the  abductionofthe  gates  as  a  material 
peans,  and  all  possible  ddicacy  was  outrage.  The  act  may  be  made  use 
observed  in  not  desecrating  the  shrine  of  by  the  priesthood  to  excite  fanati- 
further  tlian  was  absolutely  necessary,  cism  against  us ;  but  if  the  Barukzye 
The  guardians  of  the  tomb,  when  tliey  chiefs  could  only  retain  their  darling 
perceived  our  object,  retired  to  one  plaything,power,  they  would  care  little 
corner  of  the  court  and  wept  bitterly ;  about  the  gates  of  Somnauth.  With 
and  when  the  removal  was  effected,  Shah  Soojah  the  case  was  different, 
they  again  prostrated  themselves  be-  As  the  representative  of  the  Suddozye 
fore  the  shrine  and  uttered  loud  family,  aiming  at  the  reconsolidation 
lamentations.  Their  only  remark  of  monarchioil  power,  he  could  not 
was :  '  You  are  lords  of  the  country,  but  view  the  demand  of  Runjeet 
and  can  of  course  work)  your  will  on  Singh  for  tlie  eates  as  a  national  in- 
us :  but  why  this  sacrilege  ?  Of  what  dignity,  powerfully  affecting  his  own 
value  can  these  old  timbers  be  to  personal  and  political  interests.  At 
you  ;  while  to  us  they  are  as  the  present,  religious  excitement  is  alone 
breath  of  our  nostrils  ?*  The  reply  to  be  apprehended  from  our  carry- 
was  :  '  The  gates  are  tlie  property  of  ing  off*  these  trophies.  I  call  them 
India — taken  from  it  by  one  con-  trophies,  although  assured  that  they 
queror,  they  are  restored  to  it  by  are  spurious,  for  the  belief  in  their 
another.  We  leave  the  shrine  un-  genuineness  is,  politically  considered, 
desecrated^  and  merely  take  our  own.*  Uie  same  as  if  they  really  were  so." — 
The  sensation  is  less  than  might  have  \^Major  RawUnsons  MS,  JoumalJ] 
been  expected ;  and  no  doubt  the  t  The  enemy  liaraased  our  camp 
MooIIahs,  wiio  Imvchad  thcguardinn-  at  night,  firing  on  our  picquets,  i;nd 