

*  Colonel  Palmer  and  the  other  British  officers  had  been  carried  to  Caubal. 


THE  TOMB  OF  SULTAN  MAHMOUD.  605 

trusted  himself  and  his  men  to  the  hoaour  of  his  trea- 
cherous opponents.* 

And  now  began  the  work  of  destruction.  The  artil- 
lery officers  burst  the  enemy's  guns,  and  the  engineers 
ran  mines  and  exploded  them,  under  different  parts  of 
the  works.  After  this,  the  town  and  citadel  were 
fired.  The  wood- work  soon  ignited,  and  all  through 
the  night  the  flames  of  the  burning  fortress  lit  up  the 
sky. 

But  there  was  something  else  now  to  be  done.  At 
the  village  of  Roza,  in  the  vicinity  of  Ghuznee,  is  the 
tomb  of  Sultan  Mahmoud.  A  peculiar  odour  of  sanc- 
tity is  exhaled  from  that  shrine.  The  priests,  in  whose 
guardianship  it  is  held,  have  their  traditions  concerning 
it,  in  which  the  spurious  greatly  prevails.  Its  boasted 
antiquity  is  not  supported  by  any  credible  evidence ;  and 
when  Major  Rawlinson  carried  to  the  examination  of 
the  inscriptions  on  the  tomb  all  that  profound  knowledge 
and  acute  penetration  which  have  since  attained  for 
him,  in  the  Eastern  and  in  the  Western  world,  so  wide 
a  celebrity  as  the  first  of  Oriental  antiquarians,  he 
had  at  once  detected  unmistakeable  proofs  of  their  be- 
longing to  a  more  recent  period  than  the  MooUahs  had 
claimed  for  them.f ,  Still  the  shrine  was  a  venerable 

*  The  engineer  officers  fathomed  Moollaks  of  the  shrine.    They  assert 

the  great  well  in  tiie  citadel,  and  that  the  tomb  was  constructed  in  its 

found  fif^-one  feet  of  water  in  it.  present  state  immediately  after  Mah- 

The  bottom  of  the  well  is  belieyed  to  moud*s  death ;  that  it  remained  intact 

be  below  the  level  of  the  riyer,  so  during  the  Ghuzneevide  and  Ghooride 

that  it  could  not  be  drained.    The  dynasties,  but  that  when  Ghenghiz 

fear  of  a  failure  of  water  oocht  not,  Khan,  in  his  pursuit  of  Jellaladeeo, 

therefore,  to  have  driven  Pahner  to  tlireatened  Ghuznee,  the  inhabitants 

surrender.     He  might  easily    have  heaped  the  tomb  over  with  earth  and 

secured  the  possession  of  the  well  by  ruins  to  preserve  it  from  desecration, 

running  a  covered  way  from  it,  and  and  deserted  the  place.    They  further 

protecting  it  with  his  guns.  pretend  that  the  tomb  thus  remained 

t  '*  I  visited  Roza  in  the  evening,  buried  until  the  time  of  Sultan  Ah- 

toolc  another  copy  of  the    Cufic  in-  dool  Rizak,  the  grandson  or  great* 

scriptioi)  upon  Mahmoud*s  tomb,  and  grandson  of  Timour,  to  whom  the 

had  a   long  conversation   with    the  spot  was  revealed  in  a  vision,  and  who 


606         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAE. 

one,  and  by  the  priesthood  of  Afghanistan  held  in  no 
common  esteem.  The  famous  sandal- wood  gates  of  Som- 
nauth,  which  IVIahmoud  had  carried  oflf  from  their  home 
in  Guzerat,  were  deposited  at  the  conqueror's  tomb. 
Such  at  least  had  long  been  the  popular  faith;  and 
ampng  the  priesthood  and  the  people  of  Afghanistan,  no 
one  doubted  that  the  trophies  were  genuine.  It  was 
reserved  for  European  scepticism  to  cast  discredit  upon 
the  reality  of  the  sacred  relics. 