

3rd.  I  have  so  many  sick  and  wounded  that  I  fear  I  shall  have 
the  greatest  inconvenience  and  difficulty  in  carrying  them ;  and 
should  any  unnecessary  operations  add  to  their  number,  they  must 
be  left  to  perish.  If  I  remain  here  many  days  I  shall  expect  to 
lose  half  my  cattle,  which  will  render  retirement  very  difficult. 

4th.  I  sincerely  think  that  sending  a  small  detachment  will  and 
must  be  followed  by  deep  disaster.     No  doubt  Mahomed  Akbar, 

•  Statement  o/LieiU.  Mayne, — MS,  sertion,  thatMayne's  escort  crowded 

Correspondence  of  Officers  on  the  Staff  on  Nott's  staff.      Mayne  posted  his 

of  General  Nott.  — The  only  apologetic  horsemen  on  the  reverse  flank,  and 

explanation  of  this  which  has   yet  it  is  his  belief  that  they  were  not  in 

reached  me  is  to  be  found  (n  the  as-  the  way  of  the  staff. 


NOTT  AND  THE  PRISONERS.  617 

Shumshoodeen,  and  the  other  chiefs,  are  uniting  their  forces,  and 
I  hourly  expect  to  hear  that  Sir  R.  Shakespear  is  added  to  the 
number  of  British  prisoners.  In  my  last  affair  with  Shumshoodeen 
and  Sultan  Jan,  they  had  12,000  men;  and  my  information  is 
that  two  days  ago  they  set  out  for  Bameean. 

5th.  After  much  experience  in  this  country,  my  opinion  is 
that,  if  the  system  of  sending  out  detachments  should  be  adopted, 
disaster  and  ruin  will  follow. 

6th.  After  bringing  to  your  notice,  showing  that  my  men 
require  rest  for  a  day  or  two,  that  my  camels  are  dying  fast,  and 
that  my  supplies  are  nearly  expended,  you  should  order  my  force 
to  be  divided,  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  implicitly  to  obey  your 
orders;  but,  my  dear  General,  I  feel  assured  you  will  excuse  me 
when  I  most  respectfully  venture  to  protest  against  it  under  the 
circumstances  above  noted.  I  could  have  wished  to  have  stated 
this  in  person  to  you,  but  I  have  been  so  very  unwell  for  the  last 
two  months  that  I  am  sure  you  will  kindly  excuse  me. 

Yours  sincerely, 

Wm,  Nott. 

On  the  following  day,  Nott  having  excused  himself 
on  the  plea  of  ill  health  from  visiting  Pollock  in  his 
camp,  Pollock,  waving'  the  distinction  of  his  superior 
rank,  called  upon  his  brother-general.  The  conversa- 
tion  which  ensued  related  mainly  to  the  question  of  the 
despatch  of  the  brigade  in  aid  of  the  recovery  of  the 
British  prisoners.  Nott  had  made  up  his  mind  on  the 
subject.  He  was  not  to  be  moved  from  his  first  posi- 
tion. There  were  few  besides  himself  who  considered 
the  arguments  which  he  advanced  to  be  of  the  over- 
whelming and  conclusive  character  which  Nott  himself 
believed  them  to  be;  and  it  was,  at  all  events,  suf- 
ciently  clear,  that  as  it  was  of  primal  importance  on 
such  a  service  to  lose  the  least  possible  amount  of  time, 
it  was  desirable  to  detach  a  brigade  from  Nott's  camp, 
in  preference  to  one  from  Pollock's,  if  only  because  the 
former  was  some  ten  miles  nearer  to  Bameean  than  the 
latter.    Nott  was  inflexible.    Government,  he  said,  "  had 