

*  *'  September  14.— As  we  find  that  vid  Caubul,  without  turning  to  the 

the  prisoners  have   certainly  been  right  or  left ;  and  that  he  considered, 

carried  off  to  Bameean,  and  the  Kuz-  from  the  tenor  of  all  Lord  Ellen- 

zilbashes  are  disposed  to  assist  us  in  borough*s  despatches,  the  recoverj  of 

their  recovery,  while  General  Fol-  the  prisoners  to  be  a  matter  of  indif* 

lock  is  not  likelj  to  encounter  further  ference  to  government." 
opposition  on  his  march  upon  Caubul,        "  September  15. — It  was  again  to- 

it  was  suggested  to  the  General  to-  day  urged  upon  the  General  to  send 

day  that  he  should  despatch  a  brigade  a  brigade  to  Bameean,  or  in  that 

from  Urghundeh,  where  the  Bameean  direction,  to  assist  in  the  rescue  of 

road  strikes  off,  to  form  a  support  for  the  prisoners,  but  he  seems  to  haye 

our  party-,  assisted  by  the  Uazarehs,  made  up  his  mind  that  he  will  not 

tofafl  back  upon.  He  would  not,  how-  separate  his  force  unless  positively 

ever,  listen  to  this  proposal,  declaring  ordered  to  do  so  by  higher  autho- 

that  be  had  only  one  object  in  view,  niy'^^lMaJorEawUnsmiMS.Jotir' 

that  of  marching  his  force  to  India  nat] 


616  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

and  his  escort  all  the  vials  of  his  wrath.  What  he 
said  was  heard  by  many,  and  is  upon  record.  Mayne, 
stung  by  the  insult  put  upon  him  by  the  veteran  com- 
inander,  refused  to  continue  in  his  camp,  and  said  he 
would  await  at  the  outlying  picket  the  answer  which 
he  was  commissioned  to  carry  back  to  PoUoclc's  tent.* 

But  when  Nott  entered  his  tent,  and  sate  down  to 
write  a  reply  to  his  brother-general,  he  did  not  wholly 
forget  the  duties  of  a  soldier  to  his  superior  in  rank.  He 
stated,  in  emphatic  language,  his  reasons  for  protesting 
against  the  adoption  of  the  course  suggested  to  him ;  but 
at  the  same  time  declared  his  willingness  to  obey  the 
orders  of  his  superior  officer.  What  these  reasons  were 
must  be  set  forth  in  his  own  words : 

Mt  DEAB  GenebaL,  Camp,  September  17th,  1842. 

I  have  been  favoured  with  your  note  of  this  date.  In  which 
you  express  a  wish  that  I  should  detach  a  brigade  towards  Bameean ; 
before  you  decide  on  sending  it,  I  would  beg  to  state  as  follows: — 

1st.  The  troops  under  my  command  have  just  made  a  long  and 
very  diflScult  march  of  upwards  of  300  miles,  and  they  have  been 
continually  marching  about  for  the  last  six  months,  and  most  cer- 
tainly require  rest  for  a  day  or  two — the  same  with  my  camels 
and  other  cattle.  I  lost  twenty-nine  camels  yesterday,  and  ex- 
pect to-day's  report  will  be  double  that  number. 

2nd.  I  am  getting  short  of  supplies  for  Europeans  and  natives, 
and  I  can  see  but  little  probability  of  getting  a  quantity  equal  to 
my  daily  consumption  at  this  place.     I  have  little  or  no  money. 