


614  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

tary  secretary,  Sir  Richmond  Shakespear,  with  a  party 
of  600  KuzzUbash  Horse,*  to  overtake  the  prisoners  and 
their  escort.  But  there  was  a  possibility  of  this  party 
being  intercepted  by  the  enemy.  It  was  said  that  Sultan 
Jan  was  hovering  about  with  some  such  mischievous 
intent.  At  all  events,  it  was  expedient  to  send  a  strong 
detachment  of  British  troops  to  the  support  of  Shake- 
spear  and  his  Kuzzilbashes.  The  service  was  one  which 
any  officer  might  have  been  proud  to  imdertake.  Pol- 
lock offered  the  honour  of  the  undertaking  to  Nott 
and  the  Candahar  division.  But  the  offer  was  not 
accepted. 

The  two  divisions  of  the  British  army  were  on  oppo- 
site sides  of  Caubul.  The  first  communication  that  had 
taken  place  between  them  was  accomplished  through 
the  agency  of  Major  Rawlinson.  He  had  ridden  in 
Afghan  costume  from  Nott's  camp  at  Urghundeh,  and 
had  joined  Pollock's  division  on  the  morning  of  the 
16th  of  September,  shortly  after  the  British  colours  had 
been  planted  on  the  Balla  Hissar.  On  the  following 
day  Rawlinson  returned  to  Nott's  camp.  Mayne,  who 
had  done  such  good  service  at  Jellalabad,  and  who  was 
now  attached  to  Pollock's  staff,  rode  with  him,  attended 
by  a  party  of  Irregular  Horse.  They  bore  a  note  from 
Pollock,  suggesting  that  a  brigade  from  the  Candahar 
division  should  be  detached  towards  Bameean,  to  assist 
the  recovery  of  the  prisoners.  The  Candahar  force  were 
pitching  their  camp  at  Char-Deh,  when  Rawlinson  and 
Majme  reached  them.  Nott  received  the  letter  of 
his  brother -general  in  no  very  genial  mood  of  mind. 
He  had  already  made  up  his  mind  on  the  subject. 
Twice  before  had  the  officers  of  his  own  force  suggested 
to  General  Nott  that  the  recovery  of  the  prisoners 

*  Shakespear,  with  characteristic    service.    I'he  Kuzzilbashes  had  ten- 
gallantry,  bad  volunteered  for  this    dered  their  services  to  Pollock. 


MAYNE  S  RECEPTION. 


6ii 


would  be  facilitated  by  the  despatcii  of  a  detachment 
from  his  division.*  But  he  had  always  answered,  that 
he  believed  the  recovery  of  the  prisoners  to  be  a  matter 
of  indifference  to  Government,  and  that  he  did  not  con- 
sider it  expedient  to  divide  his  force. 

When,  therefore,  the  proposal  came  to  him  in  a  mor6 
official  shape  from  his  brother-general — ^upon  whom,  as 
the  senior  officer,  had  now  devolved  the  command  of 
all  the  troops  in  Afghanistan — ^he  received  it  as  one 
on  which  he  had  no  consideration  to  bestow,  and 
determined  at  once,  within  the  bounds  of  due  subordi- 
nation, to  decline  it.  It  would  be  well  if  there  were 
nothing  else  to  record.  Unhappily,  the  temper  of  the 
Candahar  General  was  such  that  the  officer — one  of  the 
bravest  and,  for  his  years,  the  most  distinguished  in 
Afghanistan — who  presented  himself  in  Nott's  cftmp,  to 
bring  back  the  General's  answer,  met  with  a  welcome 
which  may  little  have  surprised,  however  much  it  may 
have  pained,  the  officers  of  Nott's  staff,  but  which,  upon 
one  accustomed  in  Sale's  and  Pollock's  camps  to  the 
courtesies  due  to  a  soldier  and  a  gentleman,  burst  like  a 
loaded  shell.  Chafing  under  the  thought  of  being  re- 
commended by  his  superior  to  do  what  his  own  better 
judgment  suggested  to  him  that  he  ought  to  have  done 
unprompted,  the  Candahar  General  poured  upon  Mayne 