


ELECTION  OF  A  MINISTEB.  613 

British  authorities  were  unwilling  to  interfere  in  any 
way  in  the  administration,  and  that  it  was  necessary 
that  he  should  immediately  proceed  unbiassed  to  the 
election  of  a  minister.  The  choice  lay  between  the 
Nizam-ood-dowlah  and  Gholam  Mahomed  Khan,  Popul- 
zye.  On  the  evening  of  the  18th  a  council  was  held, 
and  the  decision  of  the  Prince  and  the  chiefs  was 
eventually  in  favour  of  the  latter. 

In  the  mean  while.  Pollock's  mind  was  heavy  with 
thoughts  of  the  probable  fate  of  the  British  prisoners. 
They  had  been  carried  off  towards  the  regions  of  the 
Hindoo-Koosh,  and  were,  perhaps,  even  now  on  the 
way  to  hopeless  slavery  in  Toorkistan.  Immediately  on 
his  arrival  at  Caubul,  Pollock  had  despatched  his  mili- 

neral,  on  arriving  at  Urghundeb,  that  ance  to  him,  and  he  had  so  far  given 
I  should  ride  in  and  see  General  Pol-  him  his  countenance  as  to  accompany 
lock.  My  offer  was  accepted,  and  I  him  to  the  Balla  Hissar  in  the  morn- 
immediately  put  on  an  Afghan  dress,  ing,  and  even  as  the  Shah  elect  took 
and  escorted  by  the  Parsewans  who  his  seat  on  the  throne  to  fire  a  royal 
had  come  out  to  the  camp,  rode  in  salute,  ostensibly  for  the  remountm^ 
through  the  town  to  the  race-course,  of  the  British  colours  on  the  citadel 
where  I  found  the  Jellalabad  force  of  Caubul,  but  of  course,  in  the  appre- 
encamped.  I  experienced  no  sort  of  hension  of  the  Afghans,  as  an  honorary 
difficulty  or  inconvenience  on  the  recognition  by  us  of  the  new  mo- 
road,  being  generally  taken  for  an  narcn  s  accession.  I  met  Macgregor 
Afghan.  I  now  learnt  from  General  in  my  way  to  the  camp,  coming  into 
Pollock  that  there  were  no  fresh  the  Balla  Hissar  with  all  the  chiefs 
orders  from  Lord  Ellenborough  re-  to  make  their  salaam  to  Shah  Futteh 
gardin^  the  establishment  of  an  Af-  Jung  as  he  is  now  called,  and  I  now 
ghan  Government;  in  fact,  that  he  hear  that  Macsregor,  who  conducts 
was  prohibited  from  pledging  the  all  the  politiciu  duties  of  General 
government  to  recognise  any  one.  Pollock's  camp,  endeavoured,  in  a 
but  that  still,  as  Futteh  Jung  had  private  audience  which  he  had  of  his 
thrown  himself  on  our  protection,  and  Majesty  afler  the  Durbar,  to  come  to 
that  as  it  was  absolutely  necessary  an  explanation  with  him  regarding 
something  like  a  government  should  our  inability  to  support  him  with 
be  established,  in  order  to  enable  us  men,  money,  or  arms,  and  the  neces- 
to  obtain  supplies  (the  Jellalabad  sity,  in  consequence,  of  his  relying 
Commissariat  being  entirely  exhaust-  entirely  on  his  own  resources.  At 
ed)  as  well  as  to  facilitate  our  sub-  first  sight,  it  appears  to  me  out  of  the 
sequent  departure.  General  Pollock  question  that  Futteh  Jung  should  be 
had  resolved  to  give  Futteh  Jung  able  to  hold  his  own  after  our  de- 
such  indirect  assistance  as  he  was  parture,  and  I  see  no  great  object 
able.  In  this  view  he  had  recom-  even  in  making  the  attempt,  but  I 
mended  the  Kuzzilbash  and  Dou-  cannot  yet  form  a  proper  judgment/' 
rapee  chiefs  to  tender  their  allegi-  [^Major  RawlinsorCs  mS,  Joumal.'] 