

The  march  was  now  nearly  at  an  end.  Passing 
Urghundeh  on  the  16  th  of  September  —  the  place 
where,  in  the  autumn  of  1839,  Dost  Mahomed  had 
planted  his  guns,  and  determined  to  make  a  last  stand 
against  Sir  John  Keane's  advancing  army — ^Nott's  divi- 
sion neared  Caubul.  On  the  17th  it  had  encamped  at  a 
distance  of  some  four  or  five  miles  from  the  city.  But 
the  Jellalabad  army  had  anticipated  its  arrival.  Caubul 
was  already  in  possession  of  the  British.  Pollock  had 
planted  the  British  ensign  upon  the  heights  of  the  Balla 
Hissar. 

VOL.  II.  2  R 


610  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL 


CHAPTER  m. 

[September— October :  1842.] 

The  Re-oceupatlon  of  Caubul— Installttion  of  Futteh  Jun^-— The  Becoverj 
of  the  Prisoners — Theu*  Arriyal  in  Camp — ^The  Expedition  into  the  Ko- 
histan — Destmotion  of  the  Great  Bazaar — ^Depredations  ui  the  City — 
Accession  of  Shahpoor— Departure  of  the  Britbh  Army. 

On  the  15th  of  September,  Pollock's  force  had  en- 
camped on  the  Caubul  race^course.  It  had  encountered 
no  opposition  along  the  line  of  road  &om  Bootkhak,  and 
it  was  plain  now  that  there  was  no  enemy  to  be  encoun- 
tered at  the  capital.  Akbar  Khan  had  fled  to  Ghore- 
bund,  ready,  if  need  be,  to  take  flight  across  the  Hindoo- 
Koosh,  The  other  hostile  chiefs  were  supposed  to  be 
in  the  Kohistan.  Everything  at  Caubul  betokened  the 
panic  engendered  by  the  approach  of  our  retributory 
arms. 

On  the  day  after  his  arrival,  Pollock  prepared  form- 
ally to  take  possession  of  the  Balla  Hissar.  A  detach* 
ment  of  horse  and  foot,  with  a  troop  of  horse  artillery, 
was  told  ofi*,  to  give  effect  to  the  ceremony*  The  British 
flag  was  to  be  hoisted  on  the  highest  point  of  the  cita- 
del, and  the  British  guns  were  to  roar  forth  a  royal 
ealute  in  honour  of  the  re-occupation  of  the  capital  of 
A%hanistan. 

All  this  was  done — but,  on  that  September  morning, 


INSTALLATION  OF  FUTTEH  JUNG.  6H 

there  occurred  coincidentally  with  it  another  event  much 
controverted  and  much  misunderstood.  The  wretched 
Prince  Futteh  Jung,  who,  two  weeks  before,  had  carried 
his  tattered  clothes  and  his  bewildered  brain  to  General 
Pollock's  camp  at  Gundamuck,  had  now  returned  under 
the  General's  protection,  to  start  again  as  ^  candidate  for 
the  throne  from  which  he  had  been  driven  by  the 
Barukzye  Sirdar.  It  was  not  the  policy  of  the  British 
Government  openly  to  interfere  for  the  establishment  of 
any  government  in  Afghanistan,  or  to  identify  itself  with 
any  particular  party  or  Prince.  But  both  Pollock  and 
Macgregor  were  of  opinion,  that  so  long  as  the  British 
were  to  remain  at  Caubul,  it  would  be  desirable  that  a 
government  of  some  kind  should  be  established,  if  only  to 
enable  our  armies  more  aurely  to  obtain  their  supplies. 
Some  sort  of  indirect  assistance  and  protection  was 
therefore  extended  to  the  Prince.  The  friendly  chiefe 
were  encouraged  to  give  in  their  allegiance  to  him ;  and 
he  was  suffered  to  turn  to  his  own  uses  the  ceremony  of 
the  re-occupation  of  the  Balla  Hissar.  He  asked  and 
obtained  permission  to  accompany  the  British  detach- 
ment; because,  he  said,  treachery  was  to  be  appre- 
hended if  he  proceeded  to  the  paUce  without  the  sup- 
port of  his  father's  allies. 