


608         THE  ADVANCE  FROM  CANDAHAB. 

On  the  followiDg  day  tlie  enemy  crowned  the  hills  on 
both  flanks;  but  not  until  the  14th  did  they  appear 
in  sufficient  numbers,  or  assume  such  an  attitude,  as 
to  bring  on  a  collision  with  our  advancing  troops.  On 
that  day,  near  Mydan,  Nott  attacked  them  on  the 
heights.  It  seemed  that  Shumshoodeen  and  Sultan  Jan 
had  determined  to  make  a  last  stand  for  the  defence  of 
the  capital ;  but  having  hitherto  gained  so  little  advan- 
tage by  meeting  us  in  the  open  country,  had  resolved  to 
try  the  effect  of  opposing  us  at  the  gorge  of  the  hills 
stretching  towards  Mydan.  Here  they  had  thrown  up 
breast- works.  Nott,  however,  precipitated  the  engage- 
ment, and  carried  the  contest  to  the  heights.*  All  arms 
were  now  engaged.  The  day  was  a  busy  one.  It  was 
one  of  doubtful  victory  on  either  side.  The  heights 
were  carried;  but  they  were  not  held.  And  when 
night  fell  upon  the  contending  hosts,  and  the  moon 
again  lit  up  the  scene,  it  seemed  that  the  work  was  not 
yet  done.  A  busy  night  was  looked  for  as  the  sequel 
of  a  busy  day.  But  suddenly  the  exertions  of  the 
enemy  slackened.  News  of  the  defeat  of  Akbar  Khan 
at  Tezeen  had  reached  the  camp  of  the  chiefs.  They 
seemed  to  have  changed  their  tactics,  and  to  have 
moved  off  to  Urghundeh — a  place  a  few  miles  nearer  to 
the  capital. 

working  us    other  annoyance.      '*  I  rived  just  in  time  to  prevent  Shum- 

doubt  the  policy ,**  wrote  Rawlinson,  shoodeen  from  availing  himself  of  this 

**  of  our  firing  a  few  forts  and  going  advantage.  We  were  all'most  anxious 

no  further.     It  exasperates  the  Af-  to  have  gone  straight  on  to  Mydan> 

ghans  without  intimidating  them.    I  and  to  have  attacked  Shumshoodeen 

believe  that  we  should  either  have  in  his  position,  throwing  the  light 

abstained  altogether  from  retribution,  companies  along  the  heights  to  the 

or  have  carried  fire  and  sword  before  left,  which  were  already  in  our  pos- 

ns.*' — [^Major  RawlinsotCs  MS.  Jour-  session,  the  wliole  way  down  to  the 

naL]  Mydan  gorge  ;  but  the  General  would 

*  "The  attack  upon  the  heights  not  stir  beyond  the  place  he  liad  first 

and    their  subsequent  abandonment,"  marked  out  for  his  encampment,  for 

says  Major  Rawlinson  "might  have  fearof  harassing  the  cattle." — IMajor 

led  to  unpleasant  consequences,  had  RawUnsorCs  MS.  Journal,'] 
not  the  news  of  Akbar's  defeat  ar- 


ARRIVAL  AT  URGHUXDEH.  609 

The  position  which  Shumshoodeen  had  intended  to 
take  up,  at  the  gorge  of  the  Mydan  Pass,  was  found, 
when  Nott  advanced  on  the  following  day,  to  have  been 
abandoned.     But  the  day  was  a  busy  one.     The  tribes 
were  up  along  the  line  of  march  and  harassed  us  severely 
with  their  jezails.     The  breaking  down  of  one  of  our 
guns  crippled  our  movements  and  gave  some  temporary 
advantage  to  the  enemy.     All  arms  of  our  force  distin- 
guished themselves.    The  practice  of  the  guns  was  excel- 
lent.   The  infantry  clomb  the  heights  with  their  wonted 
gallantry ;  and  the  cavalry  did  good  service.    The  result 
was  all  that  could  be  wished,  and  to  the  Afghans  the 
day  was  a  disastrous  one.     The  Mydanees,  who  had 
been  actively  engaged  in  the  Caubul  insurrection,  and 
some  of  whom  had  now  accompanied  Sultan  Jan  in  his 
march  to  the  southward,  and  been  engaged,  imder  his 
standard,  with  the  British  troops  at  Ghuznee,  now  sent 
a  deputation  to  the  General   claiming  his   protection. 
Nott  dismissed  them  with  an  indignant  rebuke.     Little 
protection  was  there  in  store  for  them.    The  Sepoys  and 
camp-followers  began  to  fire  their  forts,  and  at  sunset 
six-and-twenty  of  them  might  have  been  counted  light- 
ing up  the  evening  sky. 