

And  so  it  happened,  thftt  when  the  British  detach- 
ment moved  from  its  ground  towards  the  Balla  Hissar, 
the  Prince,  attended  by  some  of  his  principal  adherents, 
fell  in  at  the]  head  of  the  procession.  A  portion  of  the 
town  was  traversed  by  the  detachment  on  its  w^y  to 
the  citadel.  But,  although  the  hideous  sights  of  the 
last  few  days  were  still  fresh  in  the  memory  of  the 
troops,  they  resisted  all  temptation  to  violence  and  out- 
rage. Not  ^  man  was  hurt,  or  ^  house  injured.  I^ 
orderly  procession  they  streamed  into  the  citadel.  The 
road  tQ  the  ppint  at  which  the  qoloura  were  to  be 

2r2 


612  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

hoisted  ran  by  the  palace  gates.  As  a  road  for  the  pas- 
sage of  artillery,  indeed,  it  terminated  there.  It  was 
necessary  that  the  General  should  halt  the  guns  and 
troops  in  the  vicinity  of  the  palace.  There  was  no  point 
beyond,  to  which  they  couldj  proceed.  The  Prince  and 
his  attendants  entered  the  royal  abode ;  and  the  British 
General,  with  some  of  his  principal  officers,  were  invited 
to  appear  at  his  installation.  Pollock  sate  on  a  chair  at 
the  right  of  the  throne,  and  M'Caskill  at  the  left.  Then 
was  gone  through  the  ceremony  of  appointing  officers  of 
state ;  and  the  British  allies  of  the  new  King  took  their 
departure,  and  went  about  their  own  work.  The  Ge- 
neral and  his  staff  moved  forward  with  the  British 
colours,  and  planted  them  on  the  highest  conspicuous 
point  of  the  BaUa  Hissar.  As  the  colours  were  raised 
the  troops  presented  arms,  the  guns  broke  out  into  a 
royal  salute,  the  band  struck  up  the  National  Anthem, 
and  three  hearty  cheers  went  up  to  announce  that  the 
vindication  of  our  national  honour  was  complete. 

So  far  was  the  restoration  of  Futteh  Jung  to  the 
throne  of  his  fathers  encouraged  and  aided  by  the  Bri- 
tbh  General.  The  Prince  had  been  suffered  to  hang  on 
to  the  skirts  of  Circumstance,  and  make  the  most  of  a 
favorable  coincidence.  But  so  careful  was  Pollock  not 
to  encourage  in  the  breast  of  the  Shah-zadah  and  his 
adherents  any  hope  of  more  direct  assistance  from  the 
British  Government,  that  Macgregor  was  deputed  to 
wait  on  Futteh  Jung  after  the  Durbar,  and  to  enter  into 
a  definite  explanation  of  our  views.  He  was  empha- 
tically told  that  he  was  to  look  for  no  assistance,  in  men, 
money,  or  arms,  from  the  British  Government;  and  that 
therefore  it  behoved  him  to  turn  his  own  resources  to 
the  best  account.*    He  was  instructed,  too,  that  the 


•  (t 


As  it  appeared  desirable  that    established   between    the  camps  as 
a  direct  communication  should  be    soon  as  possible,  I  proposed  to  the  Ge- 