

*  '^  In  order  "  Bays  Captain  John-    posing  a  front  as  possible,  there  was 
SOD,    from   whose  Narrative   these    no  rear  rank.'* 
details  arc  taken,  "to  show  as  im- 

VOL.  II.  2  S 


626  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

and  moustachios  of  many  months'  growth,  it  was  not  easy 
to  recognise  the  liberated  officers  who  now  pushed  for- 
ward to  receive  the  congratulations  of  their  friends.  On 
that  day  they  skirted  the  ground  on  which  the  Canda^ 
har  force  was  posted,  and  out  went  officers,  and  soldiers, 
and  camp-followers,  eager  and  curious,  to  gaze  at  the 
released  captives,  and  half-inclined  to  fall  upon  their 
guards*  On  the  21st  of  September  they  passed 
through  the  city,  on  their  way  to  Pollock's  camp.  They 
found  the  shops  closed;  the  streets  deserted;  and  paused, 
as  they  went  along,  before  some  melancholy  memorials 
of  the  great  outbreak  which,  a  year  before,  had  over- 
whelmed us  with  misery  and  disgrace.f 

Great  was  the  joy  which  the  recovery  of  the  prisoners 
diffused  throughout  the  camps  of  Pollock  and  Nott ;  and 
great  was  the  joy  which  it  diffiised  throughout  the 
provinces  of  India,  Rightly  judged  Pollock  that,  if  he 
returned  to  Hindostan  without  the  brave  men  and 
tender  women  who  had  endured  for  so  many  months 
the  pains  and  perils  of  captivity  in  a  barbarous  country, 
his^  coimtrymen  would  regard  the  victory  as  incomplete. 
Let  him  fight  what  battles,  destroy  what  forts,  and 
carry  oflf  what  trophies  he  might,  he  would,  without 
the  liberation  of  the  prisoners,  be  only  half-a-conqueror 
after  all.     Pollock  knew  that  his  countrymen  had  not 

*  Seeing  that    Saleh  Mahomed's  to  see  the  whole  place  unroofed,  I 

men  wore   our    English  belts  and  was  not  prepared  for  such  a  scene  of 

{>ouches,  the  soldiers  of  Nott*s  diyi-  desolation.    Not  one  brick  was  left 

sion  were  disposed  to  fall  upon  them,  standing  on  another  in  either  mj 

It    was     intimated     to    the    com-  house    or    that    of   Sir    Alexander 

mandant  that  it  would  be  expedient  Bumes  (the  adjoining  one).     The/ 

to  remove  them  out  of  the  waj  of  were  nothing  but  a  heap   of  dirt» 

danger.  covering  the  mouldering  remains  of 

t  "  On  passing  the  comer  of  the  our  unfortunate  people.    A  spot  was 

street  were  I  formerly  lived,  I  could  pointed  out  to  me  in  Sir  Alexander's 

not  forego  the  desire  of  looking  on  garden  as  that  in  which  his  body  had 

the  ruins  of  a  house  in  which  I  iiad  been  interred.^' — [^Captain  Joknsoris 

Eassed  a  period    of  two   years  of  Narratioe  ofkii  Captivitif,   MS,^ 
appiness.   Although  I  had  expected 


THE  QUESTION  OF  BETBIBUTION.  ()27 

"  thrown  the  prisoners  overboard,"  He  had  rescued 
them  now  from  the  hands  of  the  enemy ;  that  object  of 
the  war  was  obtained.  There  was  little  else,  indeed, 
liow  to  be  done,  except  to  leave  upon  Caubul  some  last- 
ing mark  of  the  just  retribution  of  an  outraged  nation. 
It  had  been  the  declared  wish  of  the  Supreme  Govern- 
ment that  the  army  should  leave  behind  it  some  decisive 
proofs  of  its  power,  without  impeaching  its  humanity ; 
and  now  Pollock  prepared  to  carry,  as  best  he  could 
interpret  them,  those  wishes  into  effect. 