

*  MS.  Correapondenct. 


618  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

thrown  the  prisoners  overboard*' — why  then  should  he 
rescue  them  ?  He  would  obey  the  orders  of  his  superior 
officer,  but  only  under  protest.  So  Pollock  returned  to 
camp,  and  delegated  to  another  officer  the  honoiuable 
service  which  Nott  had  emphatically  declined.  Sir  Ro- 
bert Sale  was  not  likely  to  decline  it.  Though  his  own 
heroic  wife  had  not  been  one  of  the  captives,  every 
feeling  of  the  soldier  and  the  man  would  have  responded 
to  the  appeal. 

So  Sale  took  out  with  him  a  brigade  from  the  Jellala- 
bad  army,  and  pushed  on  in  pursuit  of  Shakespear  and 
the  Kuzzilbashes.  But  already  had  the  release  of  the 
prisoners  been  effected.  They  had  accomplished  their 
own  liberation.  Sale  met  them  with  Shakespear  and 
the  Kuzzilbash  escort  on  their  way  to  Pollock's  camp. 

The  story  which  they  had  to  tell  was  this.  On  the 
afternoon  of  the  25th  of  August  the  prisoners,*  who  had 
already  received  a  general  intimation  that  they  were  to 
be  carried  off  to  Bameean,  but  who  had  still  ventured  to 
hope  that  some  efforts  might  be  made  by  the  chiefs  in 
our  interests  to  release  them,  were  warned  by  Captain 
Troup,  who  had  just  returned  from  an  interview  with 
the  Sirdar,  to  prepare  for  the  journey  towards  the 
Hindoo-Koosh.  Soon  after  sunset  a  guard  of  three 
hundred  men  arrived  to  escort  them.  Their  ponies, 
camels,  and  litters  were  brought,  and  an  hour  or  two 
before  midnight  they  started  upon  their  dreary  journey. 

They  were  not  suffered  to  sleep  that  night,  nor  the 
next;  but  still  hurried  towards  the  inhospitable  regions 
of  the  Indian  Caucasus.  All  the  forts  and  villages  by 
which  they  passed  poured  forth  their  inhabitants  to  stare, 
with  wondering  curiosity,  at  the  Feringhee  captives-f 

*  Thej  had  been  joined  by  their  forth  its    inhabitants    to  stare  and 

fellow-captives  from  Ghuznee.     See  wonder  at  the  Feringhee  prisoners, 

note  at  the  end  of  the  chapter.  Not  an  uncivil  word  or  gesture  have 

f  "  August  28. —Every  hamlet  and  I  ever  heard  or  seen  in  all  oup  wan- 
fort  we  passed  after  daybreak  poured  derings ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  many  a 


THE  PRISONERS  AT  BAMEEAN.  619 

But  none  insulted  them  in  their  misfortunes.  Often, 
indeed,  by  the  rude  inhabitants  of  the  country  through 
which  they  passed,  were  many  looks,  and  words,  and  deeds 
of  kindness  freely  bestowed  upon  them.  Onwards,  still 
in  upward  direction,  they  went,  thousands  of  feet  above 
the  level  of  the  sea.  The  days  were  painfully  sultry,  and 
the  nights  were  bitterly  cold.  The  alternations  of  climate 
told  fearfully  upon  the  constitutions  of  the  European 
prisoners;  and  their  sick  increased  in  numbers.  The 
soldiers  and  camp-followers,  for  whom  no  carriage  was 
provided,  dragged  their  infirm  limbs  wearily  over  the 
barren  wastes  and  up  the  steep  ascents  of  the  Hindoo- 
Koosh,  the  officers  giving  up  their  horses  to  the  ladies, 
for  whom  the  camel  panniers  were  no  longer  secure, 
toiled  wearily  after  them  up  the  rugged  slopes. 