


Remares  bt  General  Nott. 


1.  This  is  unfounded,  with 
the  exception  of  a  few  worthless 
articles,  stolen  by  surwans  and 
grass-cutters,  and  for  which 
they  were  most  severely  pun- 
ished. 


2.  I  never  heard  of  two  Af- 
ghans having  been  killed ;  but 
four  Europeans  unarmed,  walk- 

ceedings  about  our  camp  at  Char  Deh  minister.  .  .  .  .  The  towns- 
are  anything  but  calculated  to  allay  people  had  returned  in  small  num- 
their  suspicions ;  the  city  continues,  oers  to  the  town,  and  had  re-opened 
therefore,  more  than  half'  closed,  and  their  shops ;  but  owing  to  the  affair 
supplies  are  procurable  with  diffi-  at  Deh  Afshur,  I  believe,  a  panic 
culty."  seized  the  people,  and  every  one  fled, 

*^  September  20.  —  Our  men  have  believing  tnat  orders  had  been  issued 

been    plundering  to  -  day  as   usual  for  a  general  massacre.*' 

about  the  camp,  and  in  some  scuffle  *'  September  22. — ^The  depredations 

which  took  place  at  Deh  Afshur,  four  of  the  Sepoys  and  followers  £rom  this 

of  the  Kuzzilbashes,  witb  Khassim  camp  continue,  notwithstanding  all 

Khan,  a  chief,  were  slain  by  the  Se-  the  efforts  that  are  made  to  repress 

poys.'*  them.    The  Kuzzilbashes  cannot  help 

"  September  21. — The  fort  of  Mar  believing  that  we  encourage  these 

homed  Meerza,  one    of  our  worst  excesses,  and  in   consequence  they 

enemies,  was  given  up  to  plunder,  and  are  not  hdf  satisfied  of  General  FoU 

we  did  not  even  respect  the  property  lock's  sincerity."  —  [^Major  BawUn- 

at  Aliabad,  which  belongs  to  Gholam  son*s  MS.  Journal,^ 
Mahomed  Khan,  the  lately  appointed 


CHARGES  AGAINST  NOTT's  DIVISION. 


629 


harries  are  employed  in  your 
service,  in  the  rescue  of  your 
prisoners:  if  their  houses  are 
plundered  and  their  people  (3) 
killed,  all  confidence  among  the 
people  will  at  once  be  destroyed. 
If  it  is  your  intention  that  pro- 
tection should  be  afforded  to  the 
people^  and  to  avail  yourself  of 
our  resources  (4),  redress  should 
be  granted  under  our  promises 
of  protection  to  the  people  re- 
turning to  their  homes. 

We  are  satisfied  that  it  is  not 
your  pleasure  that  the  troops 
should  behave  in  this  manner 
(5). 

To-day,  the  15th  of  Shah  Bau 
(21st  September),  the  army 
which  was  appointed  to  destroy 
Meer  Hajee's  fort  also  destroy- 
ed the  property  belonging  to 
people  of  the  neighbourhood: 
these  people  should  also  have 
redress  granted  them  (6). 

If  the  English  do  not  grant 
them  redress,  the  ryots  (7)  will 
fly  from  their  homes,  and  they 
will  have  no  longer  confidence 
in  us. 

Just  now  news  has  reached 
us  that  the  Candahar  force  has 
encamped  at  Alladbad  (8), 
which  belongs  to  us,  and  where 
our  families  are  lodged  (9);  the 
force  has  already  plimdered  our 
grain  and  fruit  (10). 