

The  interpretation,  however,  was  not  easy.  Very 
different  opinions  obtained  among  the  leading  officers  in 
the  British  camp  relative  to  the  amount  of  punishment 
that  it  now  became  the  British  General  to  inflict  upon 
the  Afghan  capital.  It  is  even  now  a  moot  question 
whether  more  or  less  ought  to  have  been  done ;  but  it  is 
seldom  or  never  questioned  whether,  at  this  time,  justice 
and  expediency  did  not  alike  require  that  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Caubul  and  the  neighbourhood  should  be  pro- 
tected against  unauthorised  acts  of  depredation  and 
violence.  Against  the  plunderings  of  soldiers  and  camp- 
followers  Pollock  had  steadfastly  set  his  face ;  but  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Nott's  camp  much  was  done  to  de- 
stroy the  confidence  which  Pollock  was  anxious  to  re- 
establish, and  to  alarm  and  irritate  the  chiefs  whom  he 
desired  to  conciliate.*     After  a  few  days  the  new  minis- 

*"  September  10.— Our  Sepoy  land  strojred.     In  the   present  »tate   of 

camp-followers,  taking  their  cue,  I  feeling,  any  accidental  quarrel  would 

fancy,  from  their  officers,  are  very  un-  lead  to  a  general  rush  upon  the  town, 

ruly,  and  commit  extensive  depro-  and  the  Sepoys  once  there,  massacre 

dations  on  Uie  lands  and  villages  near  and  conflagration  would   assuredly 

our  camp ;  and  as  the  property  thua  follow.     General  Pollock,  by  procla- 

plundered    chiefly    belongs    to    the  mations  of  encouragement,  has  been 

Kuzzilbash  chiefs.  General  Pollock,  endeavouring  to  persuade  the  Cau- 

who  relies  mainly  on  these  people  for  bullees  to  return  to  their  houses  and 

the  consolidation  of  the  new  govern-  re-open  their  shops;  but,  afler  all  that 

ment,  is  subjected  to  great  embar-  has  happened,  it  is  difficult  to  per« 

rassment.    I  have  a  sort  of  misgiving  suade  tne  townspeople  that  we  do 

that  Caubul  will,  after  all,  be  de-  not  aim  at  retributios,  and  the  pro- 

2s2 


628 


THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OP  CAUBUL. 


ter  and  Khan  Shereen  Khan  determined  to  represent  to 
Pollock,  in  a  joint  letter,  the  grievances  of  which  they 
thought  they  were  entitled  to  complain.  The  Greneral 
at  once  forwarded  a  translation  of  the  letter  to  Nott, 
who  sent  it  back  with  his  comments.  The  charges  and 
the  denials  appear  as  they  were  forwarded  to  Pollock's 
camp: 


Abstract  Tramslatton  of  a  Letter 
FROM    Gholah   Mahomsd  Khan, 

THE  WUZEER,  AND  KhAN  ShBREEN 

Khan,  the  Euzzilbash  Chief,  to 
THE  Address  of  General  Pol- 
lock, C.B. 

A.C. 

On  the  14th  of  Shah 

Bau  (20th  September)  the  in- 
habitants of  Aushar  and  Chai- 
deh  were  plundered  by  the 
Candahar  force,  and  sustained 
loss  of  life  and  property  (1): 
their  women  were  not  respected. 
In  the  village  of  Deh  Dana  Cau- 
sim,  and  in  Zeibah  Shewan 
Khan,  and  at  Chardeh^  two  per- 
sons were  killed  (2).     The  Aus- 