

'*H.  Johnson,    G.St.P.  Lawrence."  bands*  allowances."    The  agreement 

-^[Translated  from  the  counterpart  of  is  drawn  up  on  half-a-sheet  of  fbola- 


pottinger's  proceedings  at  bameeak.        623 

Mahomed  proved  to  be  staunch  and  true.  The  con* 
spiracy  was  wholly  successful;  and  the  conspirators  soon 
grew  bold  in  their  success.  The  rebellion  of  Saleh  Ma- 
homed and  his  European  allies  was  openly  proclaimed  to 
all  the  chiefs  and  people  of  Bameean  and  the  surrounding 
country.  A  flag  was  hoisted  on  the  fort  which  they  oc« 
cupied.  They  deposed  the  governor  of  the  place,  and 
appointed  a  more  friendly  chief  in  his  stead.  They  levied 
contributions  upon  a  party  of  Lohanee  merchants,  who 
were  passing  that  way ;  and  so  supplied  themselves  with 
funds.  And,  to  crown  all,  Major  Pottinger  began  to  issue 
proclamations,  calling  upon  all  the  neighbouring  chiefs  to 
come  in  and  make  their  salaam;  he  granted  remissions  of 
revenue ;  and  all  the  decent  clothes  in  the  possession  of 
the  party  were  collected  to  bestow  as  Khelats. 

But,  in  spite  of  the  boldness  of  their  outward  bearing 
at  this  time,  they  were  not  without  some  apprehensions 
that  their  dominion  might  soon  be  broken  down,  and 
the  lords  of  to-day  reduced  again  to  captives  and  slaves 
to-morrow.  Some  of  the  confederate  chiefs  might  ere  long 
appear  at  Bameean  and  overwhelm  the  rebellion  of  Saleh 
Mahomed.  So  the  new  rulers  began  to  strengthen  their 
position,  and  make  preparations  to  stand  a  siege.  They 
had  promised  their  guards — in  all  some  250  men — four 
months'  pay,  as  a  gratuity,  on  reaching  Caubul ;  and  there 
was  every  reason  to  rely  on  their  fidelity,*  Commanded 
by  European  officers,  it  was  believed  that  they  would 
make  a  good  show  of  resistance.     So  Pottinger  and  his 

cap   paper,   in  the  hand-writing  of  tinger  and  Captains  Lawrence  and 

Captain  Johnson.     The  names  of  all  Johnson,  in  furtherance  of  the  above 

the  prisoners  (officers  and  ladies)  are  scheme" — "In  our   prison    at  Ba- 

attached  to  it ;  the  first  being  that  of  meean  :    11th    September,    1842." — 

Brigadier  Shelton.  There  is  a  codicil  [J/iS.  Records,'] 
to  it,  signed  by  Lady  Macnaghten        *  The  European  soldiers  at  Ba- 

and    Mrs.   Sturt,    in    these  words :  meean  were  so  reduced  by  sickness 

"We,  who  are  widows,  do  pledge  as  to  be  scarcely  able   to   hold  a 

ourselves  to  pay  such  sums  as  may  musket.  And  they  had  lost  all  heart, 
bedcmandcd  irom  us  by  Major  Ptt- 


624  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

companions  began  to  clear  out  the  loopholes  of  the  forts 
— to  dig  wells — to  lay  in  provisions — and  otherwise  to 
provide  against  the  probability  of  a  siege.  They  were 
busily  employed  in  this  manner  on  the  15th  of  Septem- 
ber, when  a  horseman  was  observed  approaching  from  the 
Caubul  side  of  the  valley.  Eager  for  intelligence  from 
the  capital,  they  left  their  work  and  gathered  round  him. 
He  brought  glad  tidings.  Akbar  Khan  had  been  de- 
feated by  General  Pollock  at  Tezeen,  and  had  fled  no 
one  knew  whither.  The  aspect  of  affairs  was  now 
changed,  indeed.  The  common  voice  of  the  prisoners — 
prisoners  no  longer — declared  in  favour  of  an  immediate 
return  to  Caubul.  It  was  decided  that,  on  the  following 
morning,  they  should  set  out  for  Pollock's  camp. 