


622  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

him  a  life-pension  of  1000  rupees  a  month,  and  make 
him  a  present  of  20,000  rupees.  ^^  I  know  nothing  of 
General  Pollock,'*  then  said  Saleh  Mahomed,  ^but  if  you 
three  gentlemen  will  swear  by  your  Saviour  to  make 
good  to  me  what  Syud  Moorteza  Shah  states  that  he  is 
authorised  to  offer,  I  will  deliver  you  over  to  your  own 
people."  The  offer  was  at  once  accepted.  With  little 
delay  an  agreement  was  written  out  in  Persian  by  Syud 
Moorteza  Shah,  and  signed  by  Johnson,  Pqttinger, 
Lawrence,  and  Mackenzie.'*  It  was  a  perilous  game — 
for  Saleh  Mahomed  had  twice  played  the  traitor  before, 
and  might  assume  the  same  character  again.  But  the 
prize  was  too  great  and  too  tempting  for  them  to  hesitate 
even  to  risk  their  lives ;  so  they  flung  themselves  with- 
out hesitation  into  the  hazardous  plot. 

Cheerfully  did  the  prisoners  now  bind  themselves  to 
provide  from  their  own  resources,  all  according  to  their 
means,  the  money  that  was  required  to  carry  out  the 
grand  object  of  their  liberation.  The  signatures  of  all 
the  officers  and  ladies  were  obtained  to  the  bond.f    Saleh 


*  The  words  of  the  bond  may  be  the  Agreement  given  hy  Safeh  Mako' 

thus  translated : —  med  to  Captain  J6hnson,'\ 

"  We  gentlemen,  Pottinger,  John-  t  The  agreement  is  tnus  worded : 

son,  Mackenzie,  and  Lawrence,  in  the  *^  W^e,  whose  si^atures  are  hereunto 

presence  of  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  do  attached,  do  bmd  ourselves  to  paj 

enter  into  the  following  agreement  into  the  hands  of  Major  Pottinger 

with  Saleh  Mahomed  Khan : — When-  and  Captains  Lawrence  and  Johnson, 

ever  Saleh  Mahomed  Khan  shall  free  on  condition  of  our  release  beiiig  ef- 

us  from  the  power  of  Mahomed  Akbar  fectedbyan  arrangement  with  Saleh 

Khan,  we  a^ee  to  make  him  (Saleh  Mahomed  Khan,  such  a  number  of 

Mahomed  Khan)  a  present  of  20,000  months*  pay  and  allowances  as  they 

rupees,  and  to  pay  him  monthly  the  sh^ll  demand  from  us — such   pay 

sum  of  1000  rupees ;  likewise  to  ob-  and  allowances  to  be  rated  by  the 

tain  for  him  the  command  of  a  regi-  scale  at  which  we  shall  find  our« 

ment  in  the  govemment  service ;  and  selves  entitled  to  draw  from  the  date 

we  attest  that  this  agreement  is  not  of  our  release  from  captivity.     We, 

false;   and  should  we  have  spoken  who  are  mamed,  do  further  agree 

falsely  then  will  we  acknowledge  our-  to  pay  the  same  amount  for  our  wives 

selves  to  be  false  men,  even  in  the  and  mmilies  as  for  ourselves.     We, 

presence  of  Kings.  whose  husbands  are  absent,  do  pledge 

"  E.  PoTTixQBB,  C.  Mackenzie,  ourselves  in  proportion  to  our  hus- 