

*  "  The  commandant  of  our  guard  fellow,  and  without  any  prejudices 

appears  very  civil    and  inclined  to  aprainst  us  Kaffirs.     He  is  a  soldier 

oblige  us  in  every  possible  way — at  of  fortune,  cares  little  whom  he  serves, 

any  rate  he  is  so  to  me.    I  was  quite  has  been  to  Bokhara,  Yarkund^  and 

delighted  to  hear  him  talk  in  such  was  at  the  taking  of  Kokund  a  few 

enthusiastic   terms  of  my  deceased  months  ago.     Kode  with    him  the 

and  lamented  friend  Hopkins   (his  whole  march,  and  was  much  amused 

former    commanding   officer).      On  at  his  traveller's  tales.     He  is  the 

asking  him  why  he  deserted  with  his  greatest  hero  in  his  own  estimation  I 

company  to  Dost  Mahomed  in  Sep-  ever  came  across.    There  is  no  end 

tember,  1840,  his  reply  was,  that  he  to  his  feats  of  valour,  to  which  I  am 

was  disgusted  with  the  abusive  Ian-  a  ready  listener,  for  two  reasons : 

guage  used  towards  him  by  the  Euro-  Jirstly,  that  I  am  amused  ;  secondly^ 

ran  non-commissioned  officers ;  and  that  he  is  flattered  by  my  being  so 

do  not  doubt  that  this  had  a  great  good  a  listener — by  which  I  hope  to 

effect  in  alienating  him  from  our  ser-  turn  him  to  good  account." — fCap- 

vice,  although  certainly  not  the  im-  tain  JohnsorCs  Narrative  of  his  Capti' 

mediate  cause  of  his  desertion.  Saleh  vity.     MS,"] 
Mahomed  is  a  good-humoured,  jolly 


NEGOTIATIONS  WITH  SALEH  MAHOMED.  621 

Hindostan  might  be  found  for  him,  if,  instead  of  carry- 
ing off  his  prisoners  to  Bameean,  he  would  conduct 
them  in  safety  to  the  British  camp.  To  Pottinger,  who 
had  hitherto  been  the  chief  negotiator  on  the  part  of 
the  captives,  Johnson  would  have  now  confided  the 
delicate  duty  of  inducing  the  deserter  again  to  desert; 
but  the  task  was  declined,  on  the  plea  that  the  attempt 
was  more  likely  to  succeed  in  the  hands  of  the  latter, 
who  seemed  to  have  inspired  a  feeling  of  friendship  in 
the  breast  of  the  commandant.  Pottinger  disliked  the 
man ;  and  the  man  seemed  to  dislike  him.  So  Johnson 
began,  with  admirable  tact  and  address,  to  work  upon 
the  cupidity  of  his  friend. 

On  the  29th  of  August  the  suggestion  was  put  forth, 
in  a  light  and  jesting  manner ;  and  not  until  he  had  con- 
vinced himself  that  there  would  be  no  danger  in  a  more 
direct  proposition,  did  Johnson  suffer  Saleh  Mahomed 
to  feel  that  he  was  thoroughly  in  earnest.  The  Afghan 
was  in  no  hurry  to  commit  himself.  Days  passed.  The 
party  reached  Bameean;  and  no  allusion  was  made 
to  the  subject;  till  one  day — the  11th  of  September — 
Saleh  Mahomed  sent  for  Johnson,  Pottinger,  and  Law- 
rence, and,  in  a  private  room  of  the  fort,  which  had 
been  appropriated  to  Lady  Sale,  produced  a  letter 
which  he  had  just  received  from  Akbar  Khan.  The 
Sirdar  had  instructed  him  to  convey  the  prisoners  to 
Kooloom,  and  to  make  them  all  over  to  the  WuUee  of 
that  place.  It  seemed  then  that  they  were  about  to 
end  their  days  in  hopeless  captivity  among  the  Oosbegs. 
But  the  despair  which  fell  upon  them  was  but  short-lived. 
Saleh  Mahomed  soon  dispersed  their  fears  by  sajdng  that 
one  Syud  Moorteza  Shah,  a  Cashmeree,  who,  during  the 
Caubul  insurrection,  had  helped  Johnson  to  collect  grain 
from  the  villages,  had  arrived  from  Caubul,  and  brought 
a  message  from  Mohun  Lai  to  the  effect,  that  if  he 
would  release  the  prisoners,  General  Pollock  would  ensure 