

On  the  3rd  of  September  they  reached  Bameean. 
Conducted  to  one  wretched  fort  and  then  to  another, 
they  remonstrated  against  the  noisome  quarters  to 
which  it  was  proposed  to  consign  them  ;  and  twice 
their  importunities  prevailed.  But  at  last,  on  the  9th 
of  September,  the  commandant  of  their  escort  ordered 
them  to  take  up  their  abode  in  another  fort,  scarcely 

STmpatliismg  word  and  look  has  been  generous  and  kindly  feeling.      Our 

expressed,  and  especiallj  by  people  Bttle  fellow-prisoners — botli  boys  and 

who  had  previously  any  knowledge  girls — had  such  a  feast  as  they  have 

of  us.*' — "  August  29.  —  On  passing  not  had  for  many  a  day.    On  arriv- 

the  above  fort  (  Mustapha  Khan,  Euz-  ing  at  our  bivouac,  another  Ruzzil- 

zilbash),  where  Saleh  Mahomed  and  bash,  who  had  a  fort  close  by,  hearing 

I  were  the  first  to  arrive,  I  was  most  from  Ahmed  Khan  that  I  wanted  to 

agreeably  surprised  by  the   owner  buy  a  horse,  brought  me  one  for  sale, 

bringing  out  two  or  three  large  trays  As  I  was,  however,  afraid  of  running 

full  of  excellent  cakes  and  sweet-  out  of  funds,  I  told  him  my  fears, 

meats,  and  begging  I  would  distri-  His  reply  was,  *  I  know  you,  and  I 

bute  them   among  the    ladies    and  will  be  satisfied  with  your  note  of 

children  —  expressing  at  the  same  hand.    I  am  a  relation  of  Naib  Sheriff 

time  the  most  unfeigned  sympathy  Khan.*    This  was  a  mark  of  confi- 

for  all  of  us.    To  people  in  our  un-  dence  I  could  not  have  expected  in 

fortunate  situation,  a  civil  word  even  such  dangerous  times,  when  my  life 

is  well  appreciated,  but  such  a  mark  is  not  worth  twenty-four  hours  pur- 

of  kindness  as  this  worthy  Persian  chase.    I  did  not  take  the  animal.** — 

showed  us,   is  not  easily  forgotten.  ^Captain  Johnson^s  Narrative.    MS,"] 
His  very  look  bespoke  liim  a  man  of 


620  THE  BE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

less  wretched  than  the  others,  and  portioned  out  among 
them  some  small  and  comfortless  apartments,  so  dark 
that  they  could  scarcely  see  in  them,  and  so  filthy  that 
they  could  write  their  names  in  the  soot  that  covered 
the  roof.  But  their  residence  in  this  place  was  but 
brief.     They  soon  effected  their  escape. 

The  commander  of  the  escort  was  one  Saleli  Ma- 
homed. A  soldier  of  fortune,  who  had  visited  many 
countries  and  served  under  many  masters,  he  had  been 
at  one  time  a  subadar  in  Captain  Hopkins's  regiment  of 
infantry,  and  had  deserted  with  his  men  to  Dost  Ma- 
homed on  the  eve  of  the  contest  at  Bameean.  A  good- 
humoured,  loquacious,  boasting  man,  he  was  never 
happier  than  when  narrating  his  adventures  to  the  Eng- 
lish officers  under  his  charge.  Among  them  there  was  not 
one  who  better  understood  the  Afghan  character,  or  who 
had  made  more  friends  in  the  country,  than  Captain 
Johnson;  and  now,  in  a  short  time,  between  him  and 
Saleh  Mahomed  an  intimacy  was  established,  which  the 
former  began  to  turn  to  the  best  account.*  He  rode  with 
the  commandant,  listened  to  his  stories;  and  soon  began 
to  throw  out  hints  that  a  lakh  of  rupees  and  a  pension  in 