

At  eight  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  they  set 
out  on  their  journey.  Sleeping  that  night,  in  the  clear 
moonlight,  on  hard  stony  beds,  they  were  awakened  by 
the  arrival  of  a  friendly  chief,  who  brought  a  letter  from 
Sir  Richmond  Shakespear,  stating  that  he  was  on  his 
way  to  Bameean,  with  a  party  of  600  Kuzzilbash  horse. 
This  was  cheering  intelligence.  At  daybreak  they  were 
again  astir,  pushing  on  with  increased  rapidity,  in  a 
whirl  of  excitement,  unconscious  of  hunger  or  fatigue. 
Their  trials  were  now  nearly  at  an  end.  They  had  heart 
enough  to  do  and  to  suffer  anything. 

About  three  hours  after  noon  on  the  17th  of  Sep- 
tember, a  cloud  of  dust  was  observed  to  rise  from  the 
summit  of  a  mountain-pass  in  their  front.  Presently  a 
few  straggling  horsemen  made  their  appearance,  and,  in 
a  little  time,  the  English  officers  could  plainly  see  a 
body  of  cavalry  winding  down  the  pass.  Great  now 
was  the  excitement  in  our  little  party.  The  horsemen 
who  were  now  approaching  might  be  Shakespear  and 
the  Kuzzilbashes,  or  they  might  be  a  body  of  the  enemy. 
It  was  well  at  least  to  prepare  for  their  reception.    Saleh 


LIBERATION  OF  THE  PRISONERS.  625 

Mahomed's  drums  were  beaten;  all  stragglers  were 
called  in;  every  man  stood  to  his  arms;  a  line  was 
formed;*  the  muskets  were  loaded;  and  Saleh  Maho- 
med seemed  all  eagerness  to  give  the  enemy  a  warm 
reception.  But  there  was  no  enemy  to  be  defeated.  An 
English  officer  soon  appeared  galloping  a-head  of  the 
horsemen.  Shakespear  had  arrived  with  his  Kuzzil- 
bashes.  He  was  soon  in  the  midst  of  the  prisoners, 
offering  them  his  congratulations,  receiving  their  thanks, 
and  endeavouring  to  answer  their  thick-coming  ques- 
tions. 

At  daybreak  on  the  following  morning  they  pushed 
on  again.  Some  better  horses  had  been  obtained  from 
the  Kuzzilbashes ;  and  now  they  moved  forward  with 
increased  rapidity.  On  the  20th,  as  two  or  three  of  the 
officers  riding  on  a-head  of  the  party  were  nearing  Ur- 
ghundeh,  which  was  to  be  their  halting-place,  another 
cloud  of  dust  was  observed  rising  over  the  hills ;  and  soon 
the  welcome  tidings  reached  them  that  a  large  body 
of  British  cavaby  and  infantry  was  approaching.  This 
was  the  column  which  Pollock  had  sent  out  in  support 
of  the  Kuzzilbash  Horse — the  column  that  Sale  com- 
manded. In  a  little  time  that  intrepid  veteran  had  em- 
braced his  wife  and  daughter;  and  the  men  of  the  13th 
had  offered  their  delighted  congratulations  to  the  loved 
ones  of  their  old  commander.  A  royal  salute  was  fired. 
The  prisoners  were  safe  in  Sale's  camp.  Their  anxieties 
were  at  an  end.  The  good  Providence  that  had  so  long 
watched  over  the  prisoner  and  the  captive  now  crowned 
its  mercies  by  delivering  them  into  the  hands  of  their 
friends.  Dressed  as  they  were  in  Afghan  costume,  their 
faces  bronzed  by  much  exposure,  and  rugged  with  beards 