

a  large  quantity  of  ordnance  stores  ;  tainly    be    extirpated,      root    and 

but  not  the  least  of  his  trophies  were  branch.*' —  {Major  RawUmon's  MS. 

a  large  number  of  miserable,  niiiti-  Journal.'] 


THE  GHUZNBE  PRISONERS.  643 

turned  its  back  upon  Afghanistan,  not  as  of  old,  in  the 
agony  of  humiliation  and  defeat,  but  in  the  flush  of  vic- 
tory and  triumph.* 

*  I  have  stated,  at  page  618,  the  terrace  of  the  citadel  for  one  hour. 
Caubul  prisoners,  before  their  removal  .  .  .  Just  at  this  period  (June  15) 
to  Bameean,  had  been  joined  by  their  one  of  our  number,  Lieutenant  Davis, 
fellow-captives  from  Bameean.   Some  27th  N.  I.,  had  sickened  with  typhus 
idea  of  the  sufferings  of  the  latter  may  fever.   We  had  no  medicines,  no  com- 
be derived   from  the  following  pas-  forts  for  him,  and  he  lay  on  the  ground 
sages  of  Lieutenant  Crawford's  Nar-  delirious,  raving  about  home  and  his 
rative:  "Every  little  thing  we  had  family,  and  every  hour  proving  worse, 
managed  to  secure,  such  as  watches,  till,  on  the  19th,  death  put  an  end  to 
penknives,    money,  &c.,  was    taken  his  sufferings.     We  read  the  burial 
from  us,  and  we  were  strictly  confined  service,  and  then  made  his  body  over 
to  a  small  room,  eighteen  feet  by  thir-  to  the  guard  to  bury ;  but  I  am  afraid 
teen.   In  it  there  were  ten  of  us.  .  .  .  they  merely  flung  the  poor  fellow  into 
When  we  lay  down  at  night  we  exactly  a  ditch  outside  the  gate.     On  the  fol- 
occupied  the  whole  floor;  and  when  lowing  day  we  were  removed  to  an- 
we  wanted  to  take  a  little  exercise  we  other  building,  where  we  had  three  or 
were  obliged  to  walk  up  and  down  four  rooms  to  ourselves,  and  a  court- 
(six  paces)  by  turns.     Few  of  us  had  yard  to  walkabout  in.  This  was  a  de- 
a  change  oflinen,  and  the  consequence  lightful  chanee.     From  this  date  the 
was  we  were  soon  swarming  with  ver-  conduct  of  Shumshoodeen  towards  us 
min,  the  catching  of  which  afforded  us  improved  greatly.  .  .  .  It  was  on  the 
an  hour's  employment  every  morning.  19th   of  August,  we  had,  as  usual, 
I  wore  ray  solitary  shirt  for  five  weeks,  wrapped  ourselves  up  in  our  cloaks, 
till  it  became  literally  black  and  rot^  and  taken  lodgings  on  the  cold  ground 
ten.  .  .  .  On  the  7th  of  April  we  for  the  night,  when  the  chief  suddenly 
heard  of  Shah  Soojah's  death, and  from  entered  the  yard,  and  told  us  we  were 
that  date  the  severities  of  our  confine-  to  march  immediately  for   Caubul; 
ment  were  redoubled.  They  shut  and  and  sure  enough  in  half  an  hour  we 
darkened  the  solitary  window  from  found  ourselves  moving  towards  the 
which  we  had  hitherto  derived  light  capital.  .  .  We  went  direct  to  Maho- 
and  air,  and  they  also  kept  the  door  of  med  Akbar's  quarters  in   the  Balla 
our  room  constantly  closed,  so  that  Hissar,  and  from  him  we  met  with  the 
the  air  we  breathed  became  perfectly  kindest  reception.     He  bade   us  be 
pestiferous.   On  the  21st  of  the  month  of  good  cheer,  as  our  future  comfort 
they  tortured  Colonel  Palmer  with  a  would  be  his  care,  and  we  should  find 
tent-peg  and  rope  in  such  a  manner  ourselves  treated  like  officers  and  gen- 
that  It  is  wonderful  he  ever  recovered  tiemen.  .  .  .  We  found  our  country- 
the  use  of  his  foot.     I  cannot  in  a  men  living  in  what  appeared  to  us  a 
letter  explain  the  process  of  the  tor-  small  paradise.  They  had  comfortable 
ture,  but  we  all  witnessed  it,  and  it  quarters,  servants, money,  and  no  little 
was  something  on  the  principle  of  the  baggage,  and  a  beautiful  garden  to 
Scotch  boot  described  in  '  Old  Mor-  walk  in.^'     It  ought  to  have   been 
tality.'  ...  In  the  end  of  April  our  mentioned,  when  last  I  spoke  of  the 
guards  suddenly  became  particularly  Caubul  prisoners,  that  one  of  their 
civil  to  us  for  a  few  days,  and  we  number,  John  Conolly,  the  last  of  the 
found  that  they  had  a  report  of  the  three  brothers,  died  at  Caubul  on  the 
advance  of  our  troops.  .  .  .  On  the  7th  of  August,  deeply  deplored  by  all 
12th  of  May  we  were  permitted  to  who  served  with  him  in  Afghanistan, 
quit  our  prison-room,  and  walk  on  the 