

VOL.  n.  2  T 


642  THE  BE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

with  him  what  trophies  he  could,  but  he  had  not  car- 
riage for  all  the  guns,*  and  even  on  the  first  day's  march 
he  was  compelled  to  begin  their  destruction  ;  whilst 
Nott,  rejoicing  in  a  letter  from  the  Governor-Greneral, 
who  was  in  ecstasies  about  the  gates  of  Somnauth,  and 
in  the  notification  of  his  appointment  to  the  Residency  of 
Lucknow,  went  off  with  those  venerable  relics,  and 
turned  his  face  towards  the  country  irom  which  they 
had  been  traditionally  ravished. 

And  on  that  day,  as  Pollock  was  leaving  Caubul,  and 
Nott  was  striking  his  camp,  the  guns  of  the  Balla  Hissar 
roared  forth  a  royal  salute  in  honour  of  the  accession  of 
Prince  Shahpoor — the  Fatiha  was  read  in  his  name,  and 
the  chiefs  tendered  their  allegiance.  It  was,  perhaps, 
a  mere  mockery;  but  it  had  saved  the  Balla  Hissar.f 
So  the  new  King  was  paraded  about  the  streets  of  Cau- 
bul— only  to  be  dethroned  again  before  the  British 
army  had  reached  the  provinces  of  India ;  and  that  army 

journal*  *'i8  crowded  with  hangers-  lated  natives  of  India,  crippled   by 

on,  imperfectly  provided  with   car-  wounds  or  by  the  frost,  who  had  es- 

riage  or  supplies,  and  he  necessarily  caped  with  their  lives  from  the  great 

experiences  much  inconvenience  in  wreck  of  Elphinstone's  army.     Pol* 

consequence.    General  Nott  has  posi-  lock  now  provided  them   with   car- 

tively  refused  to  permit  his  force  to  riage,  appointed  two  officers  to  the 

be  encumbered  in  the  same  way,  and  charge  of  them,  and  conveyed  them 

yesterday  evening  a  general  clear-  to  Hindostan. 

ance  of  our  camp  took  place,  prepa-        f  Major  Rawlinson  saya :   *^  It  is 

ratory  to  the  march.      About  500  whispered  that    the    recognition   of 

men  were  expelled  from  the  Bazaar  Shahpoor  on  the  part  of  the  Gkolam- 

of  the  16th  Kegiment  alone,  where  Khana  has  been  a  mere  ruse  to  save 

they  had  taken  refuge.      Most   of  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  that  the  chiefs 

these    people     were    the    destitute  hope  to  make  use  of  this  successful 

Hindoos  of   Caubul  and  Ghuznee.  manoeuvre  to    propitiate   Mahomed 

They  had  hoped  to  have  found  means  Akbar.      The  Kuzzilbash,  however, 

of  returning  to  Hindostan  with  our  if  they  do  meditate  anything  of  this 

column;  but  have  been  now  obliged  sort,  will  assuredly  overreadi  them- 

to  go  back  to  Caubul  and  bide  their  selves,  for  if  any  bond  Jide  Afghan 

fate  among  the  Afghans.** — \^Major  Government  succeeds  in  establishing 

RawUn»<m*8  MS,  Journal.'}  itself  at  Caubul,  the  Gholam-Khana, 

*  Pollock  took  forty-four  guns  and  after  what  has  happened,  wlU  cer- 