


OPINIONS  OF  POLLOCK  AND  NOTT.  631 

was  his  belief  that  even  then  the  British  army  ought  to 
have  been  on  its  way  to  Jellalabad.  He  had  with  him 
a  sufficiency  of  supplies  to  carry  him  to  the  latter  place ; 
and  was  irritated  at  the  thought  that  Pollock  had  come 
up  to  Caubul  without  provisions  to  carry  him  back.* 
If  he  had  been  in  supreme  authority  at  Caubul,  he 
would  have  destroyed  the  Balla  Hissar  and  tlie  city  of 
Caubul,  and  marched  on  with  the  least  possible  delay 
to  Jellalabad.  He  placed  his  sentiments  on  record  re- 
garding the  impolicy  of  the  halt  at  Caubul — declared 
that  he  would  be  compelled  to  make  military  requi- 
sitions to  rescue  his  troops  from  starvation;  and  de- 
nounced  Futteh  Jung  and  the  new  ministers  as  the 
enemies  of  the  British.  Nothing,  indeed,  as  the  follow- 
ing letter  shows,  could  dissuade  Nott  that  every  A%han 
in  the  country  was  not  our  bitter  foe : 

Camp  near  Caubul,  22nd  September,  1842. 

Sib, — I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  of  this  day's  date,  and  to  acquaint  you  that  I  conceive  that 
General  Pollock,  C.B.,  must  have  received  some  erroneous  infer* 
mation.  No  army  ever  moved  with  fewer  instances  of  plunder 
than  that  under  my  command,  and  not  an  instance  of  irregularity 
has  occurred  without  punishment  being  inflicted.  The  persons 
who  had  made  this  complaint  ought  to  be  made  to  prove  the 
truth  of  what  they  say.  I  believe  the  enemy  (I  mean  Futteh 
Jung's  party  and  the  rest  of  the  people)  are  organising  a  system 
to  bring  our  men  to  the  same  state  of  starvation  to  which  General 
Elphinstone's  army  was  reduced,  in  hopes  of  the  same  results. 

While  I  think  it  my  duty  to  state  this,  I  must  declare  that  I 
will  not,  to  please  a  few  Afghans,  who  have  scarcely  washed 
their  hands  from  the  blood  of  our  countrymen,  allow  my  army 
to  be  destroyed,  and  my  country  to  be  dishonoured.     There  is 

*  He  asked  Majne,  on  the  17th,  had  about  a  week's  supplies  for  his 

when   that  officer  appeared  in  his  troops,  '*  What  business,  then,*'  asked 

camp,  as  mentioned  at  page  615,  how  Nott,  **  has  General  Pollock  up  at 

many  days'  supplies  General  Pollock  Caubul  with  only  a  week's  suppbes?" 

had  with  him?  and  when  Mayne  re-  Mayne,  of  course,  made  no  answer, 
plied  that  he  believed  the  Greneral 


632  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

grain  in  the  country,  and  I  think  it  ought  to  be  brought  in  im- 
mediately, the  same  being  paid  for. 

General  Pollock's  order  shall  be  proclaimed  through  my  camp 
immediately^  but  I  have  not  heard  of  a  single  act  of  plunder 
during  the  last  twenty-four  hours. 

I  have^  &c. 