

Even  now  was  Futteh  Jung  himself  beginning  to  ac- 
knowledge his  utter  inability  to  maintain  himself  in  the 


634  THE  BB-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

Balla  Hissar  after  the  striking  of  Pollock's  camp.  Pol- 
lock had  refused  to  supply  him  with  troops,  money,  or 
arms;  and  the  Prince  himself  had  closed  the  door  of 
reconciliation  with  his  old  Barukzye  enemies  by  destroy- 
ing their  houses  and  property.  Among  the  houses  thus 
destroyed,  it  is  deplorable  to  have  to  state  that  the 
house  of  Mahomed  Zemaun  Khan  was  one — ^the  very 
house  in  which  the  good  old  man,  with  real  parental 
kindness,  had  so  long  and  so  faithfully  protected  the 
British  hostages.  The  houses  of  Oosman  Khan,  Jub- 
bar  Khan,  and  others  fell  also.  It  was  the  policy  of 
the  Prince  thus  to  compromise  his  supporters,  and  to 
prevent  an  alliance  between  them  and  the  Barukzye 
party ;  but  having  done  this,  he  felt  that  it  was  only  by 
destroying  the  hostile  chiefs  that  he  could,  in  any  way, 
maintain  his  position.  He  watched,  therefore,  with 
anxiety  the  issue  of  the  expedition  into  the  Kohistan, 
and  deferred  his  ultimate  decision  until  the  return  of 
M'Caskiirs  force. 

M^Caskill  was  completely  successful.  He  made  a 
rapid  march  upon  Istaliff,  and  took  the  enemy  by  sur- 
prise. The  Afghan  chiefs  had  collected  in  this  place 
their  treasure  and  their  women.  They  had  looked  to 
it  as  to  a  place  of  refuge,  secure  from  the  assaults  of  the 
invading  Feringhees.  They  had  relied  greatly  on  the 
strength  of  the  place ;  and  scarcely  any  defensive  mea- 
sures had  been  taken  to  repel  the  assaults  of  the  enemy. 
When  M'Caskill  entered  the  gardens  which  surround 
the  town,  a  panic  seemed  to  have  seized  the  people. 
They  thought  no  longer  of  defence.  Their  first  thought 
was  to  save  their  property  and  their  women.  Ameen- 
ooUah  Khan  himself  fled  at  the  first  onset.  As  our 
troops  entered  the  town,  the  face  of  the  mountain  be- 
yond was  covered  with  laden  baggage-cattle,  whilst  long 
lines  of  white-veiled  women,  striving  to  reach  a  place  of 


APPREHENSIONS  OF  FUTTEH  JUNG.        635 

safety,  streamed  along  the  hill-side.  What  our  troops 
had  to  do  they  did  rapidly  and  well;  but  the  fire  of  the 
enemy's  jezails  soon  slackened  when  the  9th  Foot,  with 
Broadfoot's  Sappers  and  the  26th  N.L  dashed  into  the 
gardens  where  the  Afghan  marksmen  had  been  posted. 
And  as  their  gallantry,  so  their  forbearance  is  to  be 
commended.  M'Caskill,  respecting  the  honour  of  the 
women,  would  not  suffer  a  pursuit ;  but  many  fell  into 
the  hands  of  our  people  in  the  town,  and  were  safely 
delivered  over  to  the  keeping  of  the  Kuzzilbashes. 
Two  guns  and  much  booty  were  taken ;  the  town  was 
fired;  and  then  M'Caskill  went  on  towards  the  hills, 
meeting  no  opposition  on  the  way,  destroyed  Charekur, 
where  the  Goorkha  regiment  had  been  annihilated,  and 
some  other  fortified  places  which  had  been  among  the 
strongholds  of  the  enemy ;  and  then  returned  triumph- 
antly to  Caubul. 