

Hindoos  in  particular,  whose  numbers  our  parties  of  plunderers  would  not 

amount  to  some  500  families,  have  have  forced  an  entrance  had  not  the 

lost  everything  they  possess,  and  they  Gholam  Khana  stood  to  their  arms, 

will  have  to  beg  their  way  to  India  in  and  showed  and  expressed  a  deterroi- 

rear  of  our  columns.     The  Chundarw  nation  to  defend  their  property  to  the 

wal  has  had  a  narrow  escape.    Safe-  last.** — [Major  EawUnaotCt  MS.  JoV'' 

guards    have    been    placed    at    the  na/.] 
different  gates ;   but  I  doubt  not  if 


DEPARTURE  OF  THE  ARMY.  641 

exile,  and  to  end  his  days  in  the  same  hospitable 
country.  For  the  family  of  Shah  Soojah  protection 
also  had  been  sought,  and  not  refused;  and  now  all 
these  fragments  of  the  great  wreck  of  royalty — these 
miserable  records  of  a  most  disastrous  enterprise — were 
committed  to  the  charge  of  one  who  had  largely  partici- 
pated in  its  sufferings,  but  had  happily  escaped  the  ruin 
which  had  overwhelmed  his  comrades  and  his  chief.* 
On  the  evening  of  the  11th  of  October  they  came  out  of 
the  town,  and  found  safety  in  Pollock's  hospitable  camp.f 
The  British  colours,  which  had  floated  over  the  Balla 
Hissar,  were  now  lowered ;  the  regiment  which  had  been 
posted  there  was  withdrawn ;  and  every  preparation  was 
made  for  the  departure  of  the  British  army. 

On  the  following  morning  the  two  divisions  com- 
menced their  march.  Fearful  that  the  Candahar  divi- 
sion, if  left  in  occupation  of  its  old  ground,  whilst  the 
head-quarters  of  the  army  were  proceeding  in  advance, 
would  commit  many  unauthorised  excesses,  Pollock 
had  determined  that  the  whole  force  should  move  on 
the  same  day.  There  was  some  inconvenience  in  this, 
for  Nott's  division  came  up  before  Pollock's  had  crossed 
the  Loghur  river ;  but  to  the  cause  of  humanity  it  was, 
doubtless,  great  gain.  The  unfortunate  Hindoos,  who 
had  been  rendered  destitute  by  the  destruction  of  Ghuz- 
nee  and  the  spoliation  of  Caubul  had  crowded  into  the 
British  camps,  hoping  to  obtain,  in  their  utter  misery, 
safe  conduct  to  the  provinces  of  India.J    Pollock  took 

*  Captain    G.  St.    P.   Lawrence,  of  the  Suddozye  seraglio  falling  to 

Sir  W.  Maciiaghten's  Military  Secre-  the  lot  of  either  Mahomed  Akbar  or 

tary,  who  had  been  present  at  his  the  Ghilzyes.     Some  attempte  were 

murder,  and  had  subsequently  shared  in  consequence  made  at  incendiarism, 

the  perils  of  the  captivity.  but  the  flames  did  not  spread." — 

t  "  Futteh   Jung  had  urged  his  iMajor  Rawlin»on*s  MS.  Journal'] 
people  to  set  fire  to  the  palace  as  he        t  They  seem    to  have  been  ad- 
came  out,  observing  that  Shahpoor^s  mitted  by  Pollock,  but  to  have  been 
rule  would  be  a  brief  one,  and  that  expelled  by  Nott.     "  General  Pol- 
his  own  feelings  revolted  at  the  idea  locVs  camp,**  wrote  Rawlinson  in  his 