

That  many  excesses  were  then  committed  is  not  to  be 
denied.  The  principal  gates  of  the  city  were  guarded; 
but  there  were  many  other  points  of  ingress,  and  our 
people  streamed  into  the  streets  of  Caubul,  applied  the 
firebrand  to  the  houses,  and  pillaged  the  shops.  Guilty 
and  innocent  alike  fell  under  the  heavy  hand  of  the 
lawless  retribution  which  was  now  to  descend  upon  the 
inhabitants  of  CaubuL  Many  unoffending  Hindoos,  who, 
lulled  into  a  sense  of  delusive  security  by  the  outward 
re-establishment  of  a  government,  had  returned  to  the 
city  and  re-opened  their  shops,  were  now  disastrously 
ruined.*      In  the  mad  excitement  of  the  hour,  friend 


*  *'  On  the  9th  oar  engineers  set 
to  work  to  blow  up  and  destroy  the 
Char  Chutta.  The  cry  went  forth 
that  Caubul  was  given  up  to  plunder. 
Both  camps  rushed  into  the  city,  and 
the  consequence  has  been  the  almost 
total  destruction  of  all  parts  of  the 
town,    except    the    Gholam    Khana 

quarter  and  the  Baila  Hissar 

Numbers  of  people  (about  4000  or 
5000)  had  returned  to  Caubul,  rely- 


ing on  our  promises  of  protection- 
rendered  confident  by  the  comparative 
immunity  they  had  enjoyed  during 
the  early  part  of  our  sojourn  here, 
and  by  the  appearance,  ostentatiously 
put  forth,  of  an  Afghan  Government. 
They  had  many  of  them  re-opened 
their  shops.  These  people  have  been 
now  reduced  to  utter  ruin.  Their 
goods  have  been  plundered,  and  their 
houses  burnt  over  tl>eir  heads.    Tlie 


640  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

and  foe  were  stricken  down  by  the  same  unsparing 
hand.  Even  the  Chundarwal — where  dwelt  the  friendly 
Kuzzilbashes — narrowly  escaped  destruction.  Such  ex- 
cesses as  were  committed  during  the  three  last  days  of 
our  occupation  of  Caubul  must  ever  be  deplored,  as  all 
human  weakness  and  wickedness  are  to  be  deplored.  But 
when  we  consider  the  amount  of  temptation  and  provo- 
cation— when  we  remember  that  the  comrades  of  our 
soldiers  and  the  brethren  of  our  camp-followers  had 
been  foully  butchered  by  thousands  in  the  passes  of  Af- 
ghanistan— when  everywhere  tokens  of  our  humiliation, 
and  of  the  treachery  and  cruelty  of  the  enemy,  rose  up 
before  our  people,  stinging  them  past  all  endurance,  and 
exasperating  them  beyond  all  control,  we  wonder  less, 
that  when  the  guilty  city  lay  at  their  feet,  they  should 
not  wholly  have  reined  in  their  passions,  than  that,  in 
such  an  hour,  they  should  have  given  them  so  little 
head. 

It  was  now  time  that  the  British  army  should  depart. 
Nothing  remained  to  be  done.  Any  longer  continuance 
at  Caubul  would  only  have  aggravated  the  sufferings  of 
the  people  and  increased  our  own  diflSiculties.  So,  on 
the  11th  of  October,  orders  were  issued  for  the  com- 
mencement of  the  march  on  the  following  day.  The  im- 
happy  Prince,  Futteh  Jung,  had  claimed  and  sought 
j)ermission  to  accompany  Pollock's  camp  to  India,  and 
to  seek  an  asylum  in  the  Company's  dominions.  The 
old  blind  King,  Zemaun  Shah,  after  all  the  vicissitudes 
of  his  eventful  life,  was  now  about  again  to  become  an 