

On  the  7th  of  October,  M^Caskill's  force  rejoined  the 
British  camp.  It  was  now  necessary  that  immediate 
measures  should  be  adopted  for  the  withdrawal  of  the 
British  troops  from  the  capital  of  Afghanistan.  Already 
had  Pollock  exceeded,  but  with  a  wise  discretion,  the 
time  which  the  Supreme  Government  would  have  ac- 
corded to  him.  But  there  was  yet  work  to  be  done.  No 
lasting  mark  of  our  retributory  visit  to  Caubul  had  yet 
been  left  upon  the  accursed  city.  Pollock  had  been 
unable  to  shape  his  measures,  for  the  nature  of  the 
retribution  to  be  inflicted  was  dependent  upon  the  con- 
stitution of  the  new  Afghan  Government;  and  it  was 
long  uncertain  what  government  the  British  General 
would  leave  behind  him.  Futteh  Jung  had  been  for 
some  time  trembling  at  the  thought  of  the  prospect  be- 
fore him.  If  M'Caskill  had  brought  back  Akbar  Khan 
a  prisoner,  or  had  sent  his  head  to  the  British  camp,  the 
new  King  might  have  summoned  resolution  to  maintain 


636  THE  KE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

his  seat  on  the  throne.  But  he  could  never  forget  the 
treatment  he  had  received  from  the  Sirdar,  or  nerve 
himself  again  to  meet  the  unscrupulous  Barukzye.*  So 
now  he  peremptorily  declined  to  wear  the  crown  which 
we  would  fain  have  kept  a  little  longer  on  his  head; 
and  implored  the  British  General  to  afford  him  the  pro- 
tection of  his  camp,  and  convey  him  to  the  provinces  of 
India. 

Willing  to  spare  the  city  and  the  Balla  Hissar  for  the 
sake  of  a  friendly  government,  Pollock  had  despatched 
Shakespear  to  the  Kuzzilbash  camp,  which  was  then  in 
the  Kohistan,  to  take  counsel  with  Khan  Shereen  Khftn^ 
and  the  other  chiefs  of  the  Persian  party.  It  seems 
that  they  had  been  sceptical  of  the  intentions  of  the 
British  Greneral  to  evacuate  the  country ;  but  Shakespear 
now  announced  that  the  departure  of  the  army  was  at 
hand,  and  that  it  was  necessary  finally  to  determine 
upon  the  nature  of  the  new  government.    In  this  con- 

*  '^  Shortly  after  my  arrival  at  Cau-  chief  of  the  Kuzzilbashes,  on  the  part 

bul  I  despatched  a  force,  under  Ma-  of  several  other  chiefs,  avowing  tneir 

jor-General  M^Caskill,   to    disperse  determination  to  support  the  brother 

the  followers  of  Ameen-ooUah  Khan  of  Futteh  Jung  (Snahpoor)  on  the 

and  Mahomed  Akbar,  and  to  endea-  throne   of   Caubul.      It    was    long 

vour  to  secure  the  person  of  Uie  before  I  could  convince  the  chi^ 

latter.    Futteh  Jung  continued  for  comprising    this    party    that    they 

several  days  in  power,  and  appeared  could  not  hope  for  any  assistance 

disposed  to  endeavour  to  retain  it.  from  the  British  Grovemment,  either 