

Determined  to  make  a  last  eflfort  to  obtain  substantial 

•  MS.  Beeardi. 


638  THE  RE-OCCUPATION  OF  CAUBUL. 

assistance  from  the  British  authorities,  the  chiefe  now 
waited  upon  Pollock,  and  entreated  him  to  leave  some 
British  troops  behind  him  for  the  support  of  the  new 
monarch.  Pollock  resolutely  refused  the  request.  They 
then  asked  him  for  money.  This  he  also  refused.  Then 
came  before  them  the  painful  subject  of  the  "  mark" 
that  was  to  be  left  on  Caubul.  The  chiefs  pleaded  for 
the  city  and  for  the  Balla  Hissar.  Urgently  they  now 
set  forth  the  necessity  of  a  Suddozye  Prince  maintaining 
the  appearance  of  royalty  in  the  palace  of  bis  fatheni 
— urgently  they  now  set  forth  that  the  Arabs  and  Hin> 
dostanees,  who  in  the  hour  of  extremest  peril  had  been 
so  faithful  to  Futteh  Jung,  were  all  located  in  the  Balla 
Hissar ;  and  that  the  blow  would  £a.ll  with  the  greatest 
severity  on  those  who  were  least  deserving  of  punish* 
ment.*  So  Pollock  consented  to  spare  the  Balla  Hissar. 
But  it  was  still  necessary  that  some  mark  of  the  re- 
tributory  visit  of  the  British  should  be  left  upon  the  of- 
fending city;  so  Pollock  determined  to  destroy  the  great 
Bazaar.  There  the  mutilated  remains  of  the  murdered 
Envoy  had  been  exhibited  to  the  insolent  gaze  of  the 
Afghans ;  and  there  it  was  deemed  fit  that  the  retribu- 
tory  blow  should  fall.  So,  on  the  9  th  of  October, 
Abbott,  the  chief  engineer  with  Pollock's  force,  received 
instructions  from  the  General  to  destroy  the  Bazaar; 
but  so  anxious  was  Pollock  not  to  extend  the  work  of 
destruction,  that  he  strictly  enjoined  the  engineer  to 
abstain  from  applying  fire  to  the  buildii^,  and  even 
from  the  employment  of  gunpowder,  that  other  parts 
of  the  city  might  not  be  damaged  by  his  operations. 
At  the  same  time,  a  strong  detachment  of  British  troops, 
under  Colonel  Kichmond — one  of  the  best  and  ablest 
officers  of  the  force — was  sent  with  the  engineers,  to  pro- 
tect the  town  from  injury  and  the  inhabitants  from 
plunder  and  outrage. 

*  Major  Rawlmmm's  MS,  Journal 


EXCESSES  IN  THE  CITY. 


639 


But  it  was  no  easy  task  to  destroy  that  great  Bazaar 
simply  by  the  work  of  men's  hands.  Abbott  did  his  best 
to  obey  the  instructions  he  had  received  from  the  Gene- 
ral ;  but  he  was  baffled  by  the  massiveness  of  the  build- 
ings on  which  he  had  been  sent  to  operate.  It  was  neces- 
sary to  employ  a  more  powerful  agent.  On  his  own  re- 
sponsibility, therefore,  he  betook  himself  to  the  use  of  gun- 
powder. But  the  explosions  damaged  no  other  buildings 
than  those  which  had  authoritatively  been  marked  for 
destruction.  The  operations  against  the  great  Bazaar 
lasted  throughout  the  9th  and  10th  of  October.  Every 
effort  was  made  to  save  the  city  from  further  destruction ; 
but  all  Richmond's  protective  measures  were  insufficient 
to  control  the  impetuosity  of  the  soldiers  and  camp-fol- 
lowers who  poured  themselves  into  the  town. 