

^  W.  NOTT,  Major-Greneral, 

Commanding  Field  Forces. 

To  Captain  Fonsonby, 
Assistant  Adjutaat-Greneral,  Camp. 

Pollock,  however,  was  inclined  to  discriminate — to 
protect  our  friends  and  to  punish  our  enemies.  Whilst 
supplies  were  coming  in  but  slowly  to  his  camp,  it 
seemed  good  to  him  that  another  blow  should  be  struck  at 
the  hostile  chiefs.  It  was  reported  to  him  that  Ameen- 
oollah  Khan  was  in  the  field  at  Istalifi*,  in  the  Koh-i- 
da-man,  endeavouring  to  bring  together  the  scattered 
fragments  of  the  broken  Barukzye  force.  It  was  believed 
to  be  the  design  of  the  chief  to  attack  the  British  on  their 
retirement  from  Caubul;  and  it  was  expedient,  there- 
fore, at  once  to  break  up  his  force,  and  to  leave  some 
mark  of  our  just  resentment  on  a  part  of  the  country  which 
had  poured  forth  so  many  of  the  insurgents  \vho  had 
risen  against  us  in  the  preceding  winter.  A  force  taken 
fi:om  the  two  divisions  of  the  British  army  was  there- 
fore despatched,  under  General  M'Caskill,  to  Istaliff,  to 
scatter  the  enemy  there  collected,  and  to  destroy  the 
place.  It  was  thought,  moreover,  that  Ameen-ooUah 
Khan,  dreading  the  advance  of  the  retributory  army, 
would  endeavour  to  conciliate  the  British  General,  by 
delivering  up  to  him  the  person  of  Mahomed  Akbar 
Khan,  if  he  could  adroitly  accomplish  his  seizure.  The 
Sirdar  had  sent  his  family  and  his  property  into  Turk- 
istan ;  and  was  himself  waiting  the  progress  of  events 
in  the  Ghorebund  Pass,  ready,  it  was  said,  to  follow 


RELEASE  OF  CAPTAIN  BYGRAVE.         633 

his  establishment  across  the  hills,  if  the  British  troops 
pushed  forward  to  overtake  him. 

The  hostile  chiefe  were  all  now  at  the  last  gasp — all 
eager  to  conciliate  the  power  that  a  few  months  before 
they  had  derided  and  defied.  Already  had  Ameen- 
oollah  Khan  begun  to  make  overtures  to  the  British 
authorities — to  declare  that  he  had  always  at  heart  been 
their  friend ;  but  that  he  had  been  compelled  to  secure 
his  own  safety  by  siding  with  the  Barukzyes.  And 
now  Akbar  Khan,  with  the  same  object,  sent  into  Pol- 
lock's camp  a  peace-offering,  in  the  shape  of  the  last 
remaining  prisoner  in  his  hands.  Captain  Bygrave 
was  now  restored  to  his  friends.  It  might  have  been  a 
feehng  of  generosity — for  generous  impulses  often  welled 
up  in  the  breast  of  the  Sirdar — or  it  might  have  been  a 
mere  stroke  of  policy,  having  reference  solely  to  his 
own  interests — or  it  might,  and  it  probably  was,  a  mix- 
ture of  the  two  influences  that  prevailed  upon  him ;  but 
he  would  not  any  longer  make  war  upon  a  single  man, 
and  upon  one,  too,  whom  he  personally  respected  and 
esteemed  with  the  respect  and  esteem  due  to  a  man  of 
such  fine  qualities  as  Bygrave.  So  he  sent  the  last  re- 
maining prisoner  safely  into  Pollock's  camp;  and  with  him 
he  sent  a  letter  of  conciliation,  and  an  agent  commis- 
sioned to  treat  for  him.  He  was  eager  to  enter  into 
negotiations  with  the  British.  It  was  little  likely  that  so 
weak  a  Prince  as  Futteh  Jung  would  be  able  to  main- 
tain his  regal  authority  in  Afghanistan  a  day  after  the 
departure  of  the  British;  and  it  appeared  to  him  not 
wholly  improbable  that,  wishing  to  leave  behind  them  a 
jfriendly  power  in  Afghanistan,  the  British  authorities 
might  be  induced  to  enter  into  a  convention  with  him 
before  their  final  departure  from  the  country. 