

The  hope  which  then  existed,  that  in  money  or  troops;  but  as  they  still 

Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  would  fall  persisted  in  urging  me  to  allow  the 

into  our  hands,  no  doubt  had  great  rrince  Shahpoor  to  remain,  and  as 

influence  with  him;  but  when  this  he  repeatedly  assured  me   he  was 

hope  vanished,  the  representations  of  anxious  to  do  so,  I  did  not  conceive 

his  female  relations,  and  the  remem-  myself  authorised  by  my  instructions 

brance  of  the  gross  treachery  he  had  to  remove  him  forcibly  from  Caubul, 

experienced  from  the  chiefs  on  former  and  only  stipulated  that  the  British 

occasions,   appear  to  have   alarmed  Government  should  not  be  supposed 

him ;  and  at  length  he  announced  to  to  have  raised  him  to  the  throne. 

me  his  determination  to  accompany  On  the  morning  of  the  12th  instant, 

the   British   troops    to   Hindostan.  after  the  British  troops  had  marched 

At  the  same  time  I  received  a  let-  from  Caubul,  Prince  Shahpoor  was 

ter,   a  translation   of  which  I  have  put  on  the  throne,  and  the  chiefii 

now  the  honour  to  forward,  from  took  the  oaths  of  fidelity  to  him."— 

Gholam  Mahomed  Khan  (the  minis-  [General  Pollack  to  Lord  EUenborough: 

ter)  and  ELhan  Shereen  Khan,  the  MS.  Correspondence. 


NOMINATION  OP  SHAHPOOR.  637 

juncture,  the  Kuzzilbashes,  trembling  for  the  safety  of 
the  city,  and  feeling  that  there  was  little  hope  of  their 
being  reconciled  to  the  Barukzye  party,  laid  their  hands 
upon  another  puppet.  There  was  a  younger  scion  of 
the  Suddozye  House  then  at  Caubul — the  Prince  Shah- 
poor.  His  mother  was  a  high-born  Populzye  lady,  and 
it  was  believed  that  his  recognition  would  tend  to  con- 
ciliate the  Douranees.  Postponing,  however,  the  final 
enunciation  of  their  views  until  their  return  to  Caubul, 
they  now  proposed  that  the  young  Prince  should  be  set 
up  in  the  place  of  his  brother.  At  Caubul  a  general 
meeting  of  the  chiefe  was  held.  The  voice  of  the 
assembly  declared  in  favour  of  the  elevation  of  Shah- 
poor.  The  Prince  himself,  a  high-spirited  boy,  willingly 
accepted  the  crown  that  was  oflFered  to  him,  and  the  fol- 
lowing declaration  was  then  sent  in  to  Pollock's  camp : 

From  Wuzeer  Gholam  Mahomed  Khati^  Populzye ;  and  Khan 
Shereen  Khan^  chief  of  the  Kuzzilbashes^  on  the  parts  of  all 
the  chiefs  at  Caubul. 

A.C. 

Be  it  known  to  you,  that  since  we,  the  Populzyes  and  the 

other  Douranee  tribes  and  the  Kuzzilbash  cannot  exist  under  the 
Barukzyes;  and  as  such  a  state  of  things  is  altogether  out  of  the 
range  of  possibility;  and  moreover,  since  his  Royal  Highness 
Putteh  Jung  has  decided  on  quitting  the  country  ;  we  agree 
and  accept  of  the  Prince  Shahpoor  as  our  King,  and  will  obey 
him  as  our  ruler.  But  we  hope  that  you  will,  from  this  time, 
put  a  stop  to  the  destruction  of  forts  and  other  property,  that  the 
people  may  regain  confidence  and  return  to  their  own  houses; 
and  we  also  beg  that  Meer  Soofaee  Byanee,  who  is  a  prisoner  in 
Charekur,  be  sent  for  and  made  over  to  us,  that  people  may  be 
induced  to  come  in  to  us.  And  if  you  will  make  over  to  us  any 
guns  and  ammunition,  it  will  be  a  great  assistance.  For  the  rest, 
as  long  as  we  live  we  shall  hope  for  the  friendship  of  the  British 
Government.* 