

Sincerely  attached  to  peace  for  the  sake  of  the  benefits  it  con- 
fers upon  the  people,  the  Governor-General  is  resolved  that  peace 
shall  be  observed,  and  will  put  forth  the  whole  power  of  the 


648        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEBOZEPORE, 

British  Government  to  coerce  the  state  by  which  it  shall  be  in- 
fringed. 

By  order  of  the  Right  Honourable  the  Goveror- General  of  India. 

T.  H.  Maddock, 

Secretary  to  the  Gt>vemment  of  India,  with  the 
Governor-General. 

It  would  have  been  well  if  Lord  Ellenborough  had 
resisted  the  puerile  temptation  to  date  this  proclamation 
on  the  1st  of  October.  That  it  was  written  then  is  not 
to  be  doubted.  But,  though  written,  it  was  not  issued.* 
The  Governor-General  was  not  prepared  to  issue  it. 
There  was  no  immediate  necessity,  indeed,  for  the  pre- 
paration of  such  a  notification  as  this.  It  might  have 
been  delayed  for  a  few  weeks  without  injury  to  the 
state;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  it  could  not  have  been 
delayed  for  a  few  days  without  great  advantage  to 
Lord  Ellenborough.  On  the  1st  of  October,  the  Go- 
vemor-General  knew  that  the  British  ensign  was  float- 
ing over  the  Balla  Hissar  of  Caubul;  but  he  did  not 
know  that  the  British  prisoners  had  been  released  from 

♦  Lord   Ellenborough's  explana-  here  on   the    5th    removed    every 

tions  on  this  subject  are  to  be  found  ground  for  withholding  the  publica- 

in  the  following  letter  to  General  tion  of  the  proclamation^   had  the 

Pollock,  which  calls  for  no  comment :  translation  been  prepared ;   but    in 

"  Simlah  Oct.  12  1842.  consequence  of  the  absence  of  Mr. 

"Genebai^— I  enclose  for  your  in-  Clerk  on  duty  in  the  plains,  no  such 

formation  a  copy  of  a  proclamation,  translation  had  been  made  as  I  could 

signed  by  me  here  on  the  1st  of  this  ^"1^7  rely  upon, 

month,  but  withheld  from  immediate  .  "  In  the  mean  time,  by  a  combina- 

publication,   with  the  view   to   the  t»op  o(  accidents,  and  some  irregu- 

having  previously  made  and  circu-  larity  in  the  transaction  of  business 

lated  to    the    IS  ative  Courts,    and  in  the  Secretary's  office,  the  printed 

amongst  the    natives    generally,    a  copies    of  the    proclamation   were, 

correct  translation  which  might  be  without  my  knowledge,  or  that  of 

the  official  document  in  the  native  the  Secretary  himself,  transmitted  to 

language,  and  prevent  any  misrepre-  the   presidencies  and    the  _  political 

sentation,  or  misapprehension  or  the  officers  generally.     There  is  no  ob- 

intentions  of  the  government.   I  fur-  ject  in  your  publishing  the  procla- 

ther  wished  not  to  make  known  here  mation  m   your  camp.     Mr.  Clerk 