

the  intention    of  withdrawing    the  returned  last  night,  and  the  transla- 

army,  until  I  knew  that  you  had  tion  will  hardly  be  ready  for  trans- 

actually  the  prisoners  in  your  hands,  mission  before  to-morrow, 

and  had  made  arrangements  for  leav-  "  I  have,  &c.       Ellenborough," 

ing  Caubult    Your  letter  received  —[^JS,  Correspondence,^ 


THE  PROCLAMATION  OF  THE  GATES.        649 

captivity.  Had  he  suppressed  the  inclination  to  write 
"  October  1"  at  the  head  of  his  proclamation,  he  might 
have  announced  in  it  the  attainment  of  all  those  objects 
which  his  countrymen  had  at  heart,  and  fully  declared 
that  the  war  was  at  an  end.  But  there  were  not  want- 
ing those  who  now  commented  bitterly  on  the  fact 
that  this  proclamation  was  drawn  up  by  the  Governor- 
General  of  India  whilst  yet  in  ignorance  of  the  fate 
of  the  prisoners.  The  delay  of  a  few  days  would 
have  placed  him  in  possession  of  the  intelligence,  for 
which  all  India  was  looking  with  the  deepest  interest 
and  anxiety;  but  the  temptation  of  the  "  1st  of  October" 
was  not  to  be  resisted ;  and  Lord  EUenborough  sacrificed 
his  character  for  humanity  for  the  sake  of  a  little  dra- 
matic effect. 

Having  drawn  up  this  proclamation,  and  handed  it 
over  to  the  translators  to  be  anayed  in  Oriental  costume. 
Lord  EUenborough  began  to  take  counsel  with  Sir 
Jasper  NicoUs  on  the  subject  of  the  honorary  distinctions 
to  be  conferred  on  the  officers  and  men  who  had  gained 
these  great  victories  in  Afghanistan;  and  to  draft  an- 
other proclamation  to  be  issued  to  the  Chiefe  and  Princes 
of  India.  This  was  the  famous  proclamation  of  the 
Gates.  On  the  5  th  of  October  he  sent  a  rough  draft  of 
it  to  Sir  Jasper  Nicolls,  inviting  the  comments  of-  the 
Chief.  Freely  asked,  they  were  freely  given.  What 
they  were  is  not  on  record.  The  Governor-General 
took  the  comments  of  the  Commander-in-Chief  '•  in  good 
part,'*  and  was  not  wholly  impervious  to  the  criticism  of 
the  veteran  commander.*  Subjected  to  a  long  and 
laborious  incubation,  this  address  to  "all  the  Princes, 
chiefs,  and  people  of  India,"  was  translated  into  the 

*  "  October  5. — His  Lordship  sent  vited  remarks  on  it,  which  I  freely 

me  the  draft  of  his  letter  to  the  gave;   and  he  took  them  in  good 

Hindoo  chiefs,  relating  to  the  gates  part,  adoptin?  some  of  them.*' — [6'ir 

of  the  Somnauth  temple ;    and  in-  Jasper  Nicola  MS,  JoumaL'} 


650  THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZBPORB. 

Hindee  language,  circulated  among  those  to  whom  it 
especially  appealed,  and  finally  published  in  its  Eng- 
lish dress  on  the  16th  of  November, ♦  It  was  by  no 
means,  therefore,  an  ebullition  of  impulse  and  enthu<> 
siasm  on  the  part  of  the  Governor-General,  but  the 
result  of  many  weeks  of  thought  and  study,  and,  per* 
haps,  much  consultation  with  others.  The  Duke  of 
Wellington  called  it  a  *^  Song  of  triumph."  Thus  rose 
the  psBan,  in  its  Enghah  dress: 