

*  Memorandum  by  Captain  Peter    Mahomed  Khan:  February  13,  1842. 
Nkol$an  of  a  Convermtion  with  Dost    MS.  Records, 


LOBD  ELLENBOROUGH  AT  FEROZEPORE.      655 

hands  the  shaping  of  his  future  destinies,  and  to  win  his 
way  back  to  empire  by  violence  or  fraud.* 

It  has  been  seen  that  the  Government  of  India,  ever 
since  the  disastrous  downfall  of  our  efforts  to  prop  up 
the  Suddozye  dynasty,  had  contemplated  the  possibility 
of  restoring  Dost  Mahomed  to  the  country  from  which 
we  had  expelled  him.  Lord  Auckland  had  hinted  at 
the  restoration  of  the  ex- Ameer  as  a  measure  to  which, 
under  certain  circumstances,  he  would  offer  no  opposi- 
tion. He  would  gladly,  indeed,  have  availed  himself  of 
the  opportunity  afforded,  by  a  proposed  interchange  of 
prisoners,  to  render  tardy  justice  to  the  man  whom  he 
had  so  palpably  wronged.  The  subsequent  progress  of 
events  had  tended  to  render  more  and  more  obvious  the 
propriety  of  this  resolution.  It  was  now  plainer  than 
ever  that  the  retention  of  Dost  Mahomed  as  a  prisoner 
of  state  could  no  longer  be  justified,  on  the  score  either 
of  political  rectitude  or  expediency.  So  Lord  Ellen- 
borough  did  as  it  became  him  to  do.  He  issued  a  pro- 
clamation, setting  forth  that  when  the  "  British  army  re- 
turning from  Afghanistan  shall  have  passed  the  Indus, 
all  the  Afghans  now  in  the  power  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment shall  be  permitted  to  return  to  their  country." 
This  was  equally  reasonable  and  just.  But  the  procla- 
mation was  not  without  characteristic  disfigurements,  for 
•the  Governor-General,  who  had  set  his  heart  upon  a 
grand  pageant  at  Ferozepore,  added  a  codicil,  to  the  effect 
that  the  released  Afghan  Princes  were  to  present  them- 
selves, before  returning  to  their  desolated  country,  at  the 

•  He  was  candid  enough  too,  at  above,  "  by  using  an  expression  ex- 
one  time,  to  acknowled^  that,  after  actly  the  same  as  one  Shah  Sodah 
the  expulsion  of  the  iBritish  firom  uses  in  his  letter  to  Captain  Mac- 
Caubul,  the  only  chance  of  establish-  gregor.  He  said :  "  The  people  can- 
ing a  settled  government  was  through  not  now  do  without  the  Kmg,  for 
the  agency  m  Shah  Soojah.  "  The  there  is  no  one  else  could  carrv  on 
Ameer  concluded,"  says  Captain  the  government.'' — [.MS.  Eecoras,'] 
Nicolson,  in  the  memorandum  cited 


656        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 

Durbar  of  the  Governor-General  in  his  camp  at  Feroze- 
pore. 

The  popular  feeling  against  this  contemplated  outrage 
was  strong  and  universal.  There  was  not  a  generous 
mind  in  the  country  which  did  not  feel  deeply  the 
wrong  that  was  to  be  done  to  these  imfortunate  Princes. 
But  the  Govemor-General,  in  a  better  hour,  con- 
scious  of  error,  consented  to  forego  the  pitiful  delight  of 
gracing  his  triumph  with  the  presence  of  a  dethroned 
monarch,  whose  national  feelings  were  not  so  wholly  ex- 
tinguished by  exile  as  to  render  his  appearance  at  the 
Ferozepore  festivities  anything  but  a  painful  and  humi- 
liating trial.  The  order  issued  in  thoughtlessness  was 
revoked  in  good  feeling,  and  Dost  Mahomed  returned  to 
Afghanistan,  without  enduring  this  last  crowning  injury 
at  the  hands  of  the  British  Government.* 