

From  the  Governor-General  to  all  the  Princes  and  Chiefs^  and 

People  of  India. 

My  Brothers  and  my  Friends, 

Our  victorious  army  bears  the  gates  of  the  temple  of  Som- 
nauth  in  triumph  from  Afghanistan,  and  the  despoiled  tomb  of 
Sultan  Mahomed  looks  upon  the  ruins  of  Ghuznee. 

The  insult  of  eight  hundred  years  is  at  last  avenged.  The 
gates  of  the  temple  of  Somnauth,  so  long  the  memorial  of  your 
humiliation,  are  become  the  proudest  record  of  your  national 
glory;  the  proof  of  your  superiority  in  arms  over  the  nations  be- 
yond the  Indus. 

To  you,  Princes  and  Chiefs  of  Sirhind,  of  Rajwarra,  of  Malwa, 
and  of  Guzerat,  I  shall  commit  this  glorious  trophy  of  eucceasful 
war. 

You  will  yourselves,  with  all  honour,  transmit  the  gates  of 
sandal-wood  through  your  respective  territories  to  the  restored 
temple  of  Somnauth. 

The  chiefs  of  Sirhind  shall  be  informed  at  what  time  our 
victorious  army  will  first  deliver  the  gates  of  the  temple  into  their 
guardianship,  at  the  foot  of  the  bridge  of  the  Sutlej. 

My  Brothers  and  my  Friends, 

I  have  ever  relied  with  confidence  upon  your  attachment 
to  the  British  Government.  You  see  how  worthy  it  proves 
itself  of  your  love,  when,  regarding  your  honour  as  its  own,  it 

*  The  Goyemor-General,  when  he  it,  lest  bj  some  untoward  acoident 

first  drafted  the  proclamation,  only  the  gates   might  be   lost    on    their 

knew  that  Nott  had  reached  Caubiu  journey  throogh  the  paases  of  Af- 

with  the  gates.  He  maj  have  thought  ghanistan. 
it  expedient  to  withhold  the  issue  of 


THE  PBOCLAMATION  OF  THE  GATES.       661 

exerts  the  power  of  its  arms  to  restore  to  you  the  gates  of  the 
temple  of  Somnauth,  so  long  the  memoiial  of  your  subjection  to 
the  Afghans. 

For  myself,  identified  with  you  in  interest  and  in  feeling,  I  re« 
gard  with  all  your  own  enthusiasm  the  high  achievements  of  that 
heroic  army;  reflecting  alike  immortal  honour  upon  my  nativQ 
and  upon  my  adopted  country. 

To  preserve  and  to  improve  the  happy  union  of  our  two 
countries,  necessary  as  it  is  to  the  welfare  of  both,  is  the  constant 
object  of  my  thoughts.  Upon  that  union  depends  the  security  of 
every  ally,  as  well  as  of  every  subject  of  the  British  Government, 
from  the  miseries  whereby,  in  former  times,  India  was  afflicted: 
through  that  alone  has  our  army  now  waved  its  triumphant 
standards  over  the  ruins  of  Ghuznee,  and  planted  them  upon  the 
Balla  Hissar  of  Caubul. 

May  that  good  Providence,  which  has  hitherto  so  manifestly 
protected  me,  still  extend  to  me  its  favour,  that  I  may  so  use  the 
power  now  entrusted  to  my  hands,  as  to  advance  your  prosperity 
and  secure  your  happiness,  by  placing  the  union  of  our  two 
countries  upon  foundations  which  may  render  it  eternal. 