

retire  from  Afghanistan,  leaving  to  some  of  his   predecessor's   military 

the  Afghans  the  choice  of  their  sove-  errors ;  but  he  has  not  touched  at 

reign.    It  was  on  this  day,  four  years  any  length  on  the  political,  further 

ago,  that  Lord  Aucklana  issued  the  than  that  we  lost  our  name  and  an 

proclamation  announcing  the  grounds  army  by  neglect  on  the  part  of  our 

of  his  interference;  and  on  the  same  agents.'' — [Sir  Jasper  NicolU  MS, 

day,  in  the  same  roonu,  Lord  Ellen-  Journal.'] 


THE  MANIFESTO  OF  1842.  647 

to  create  a  government  amidst  the  anarohy  whioh  is  the  oonee- 
quence  of  their  crimes. 

To  force  a  sovereign  upon  a  reluctant  people,  would  be  as  in- 
consistent with  the  policy  as  it  is  with  the  principles  of  the  British 
Government,  tending  to  place  the  arms  and  resources  of  that 
people  at  the  disposal  of  the  first  invader,  and  to  impose  the  bur- 
den of  supporting  a  sovereign,  without  the  prospect  of  benefit 
from  his  alliance. 

The  Govemor^General  will  willingly  recognise  any  government 
approved  by  the  Afghans  themselves,  which  shall  appear  desirous 
and  capable  of  maintaining  friendly  relations  with  neighbouring 
states. 

Content  with  the  limits  nature  appears  to  have  assigned  to  its 
empire,  the  Government  of  India  will  devote  all  its  efforts  to  the 
establishment  and  maintenance  of  general  peace,  to  the  protec- 
tion of  the  sovereigns  and  chiefs  its  allies,  and  to  the  prosperity 
and  happiness  of  its  own  faithful  subjects. 

The  rivers  of  the  Punjaub  and  Indus,  and  the  mountainous 
passes  and  the  barbarous  tribes  of  Afghanistan,  will  be  placed 
between  the  British  army  and  an  enemy  approaching  from  the 
West,  if  indeed  such  enemy  there  can  be,  and  no  longer  between 
the  army  and  its  supplies. 

The  enormous  expenditure  required  for  the  support  of  a  large 
force,  in  a  false  military  position,  at  a  distance  from  its  own  fron- 
tier and  its  resources,  will  no  longer  arrest  every  measure  for  the 
improvement  of  the  country  and  of  the  people. 

The  combined  army  of  England  and  of  India,  superior  in 
equipment,  in  discipline,  in  valour,  and  in  the  officers  by  whom 
it  is  commanded,  to  any  force  which  can  be  opposed  to  it  in  Asia, 
will  stand  in  unassailable  strength  upon  its  own  soil,  and  for  ever^ 
tmder  the  blessing  of  Providence,  preserve  the  glorious  empire  it 
has  won,  in  security  and  in  honour. 

The  Governor-General  cannot  fear  the  misconstruction  of  his 
motives  in  thus  frankly  armouncing  to  surrounding  states  the 
pacific  and  conservative  policy  of  his  government. 

AfghanistlEm  and  China  have  seen  at  once  the  forces  at  his  dis- 
posal, and  the  effect  with  which  they  can  be  applied. 