

Ellenbobough. 

No  document  that  ever  emanated  from  the  bureau  of 
a  statesman  has  been  overwhelmed  with  so  much  ridi- 
cule as  this.  It  is  still  fresh  in  the  recollection  of  men 
who  dwelt  in  India  at  this  time,  how  the  authenticity 
of  the  proclamation  was  gravely  doubted — ^how  many, 
at  first,  declared  their  conviction  that  it  was  a  news- 
paper satire  upon  the  Napoleonic  style  of  address  which 
Lord  EUenborough  had  recently  adopted ;  and  how  at 
last,  when  it  came  to  be  known — thoroughly  known  and 
understood  that  it  was  a  genuine  emanation  from  the 
"  Political  Department,"  with  the  right  official  stamp 
upon  it,  such  a  flood  of  ridicule  and  censure  was  let 
loose  upon  it  as  had  never  before  descended  upon  an 
Indian  state-paper.  The  folly  of  the  thing  was  past  all 
denial.  It  was  a  folly,  too,  of  the  most  senseless  kind,  for 
it  was  calculated  to  please  none  and  to  offend  many.     It 


652        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 

was  addressed  to  "  all  the  Princes  and  Chiefs,  and  People 
of  India."  The  "  Brothers  and  Friends"  thus  grandilo- 
quently apostrophised,  were  a  mixed  family  of  Maho- 
medans  and  Hindoos.  Upon  the  Mahomedans  it  was 
an  open  and  most  intelligible  outrage.  To  the  Hindoos, 
the  pompous  offer  of  the  polluted  gates  of  Somnauth  was 
little  better  than  a  covert  insult.  The  temple  to  which 
it  was  to  have  been  restored  was  in  ruins,  and  the  sacred 
ground  trodden  by  Mahomedans.  Looking  at  the  effu- 
sion from  the  Oriental  side,  it  was  altogether  a  failure  and 
an  abortion.*  Among  Europeans,  worldly  men  scouted 
the  proclamation  as  a  folly,  and  religious  men  denounced 
it  as  a  crime.  It  was  said  to  be  both  dangerous  and 
profane.  The  question  suggested  by  the  latter  epithet 
I  do  not  purpose  to  discuss;  but  of  the  dangers  of  such 
a  proclamation  it  may  be  said  that  they  existed  only  in 
the  imaginations  of  those  who  discerned  them.  It  was 
altogether  an  event  of  no  political  importance.  In  Af- 
ghanistan, the  rape  of  the  Gates  created  little  or  no 
sensation.  In  India,  the  proclamation  produced  no  ex- 
citement among  the  "  brothers  and  friends"  to  whom  it 
was  addressed.  The  effect  of  the  measure  was  personal 
to  Lord  EUenborough  himself.  It  damaged  his  reputa- 
tion, and  left  the  rest  of  the  world  as  it  was  before. 

But  there  was  another  proclamation  pubUshed  about 
this  time — launched  into  the  world,  indeed,  before  the 
proclamation  of  the  Gates,  but  of  a  somewhat  later 
conception.  The  Afghan  drama  was  now  well-nigh 
played  out.  The  Afghan  policy  of  Lord  Auckland  had 
been  publicly  declared  a  failure,  and  the  grounds  on 
which  it  had  been  originated  wholly  a  mistake.  Every- 
thing, indeed,  was  to  be  reversed.    The  Tripartite  treaty 