

2t2 


644  THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

[October— December :  1842.] 

Effect  of  the  Victories— Lord  Ellenborough  at  Simlab — The  Manifesto  of 
1842 — The  Proclamation  of  the  Gates— The  Restoration  of  Dost  Maho- 
med— The  Gathering  at  Ferozepore — ^Reception  of  the  Troops — The 
Courts-Martial. 

Never  was  intelligence  received  in  India  with  stronger 
and  more  universal  feelings  of  delight  than  the  inteUi- 
gence  of  the  victories  of  Pollock  and  Nott;  and  the 
happy  recovery  of  the  prisoners.  There  was  one  gene- 
ral shout  of  triumphant  congratulation,  caught  up  from 
station  to  station  along  the  whole  line  of  country  from 
Sirhind  to  Tinnevelly.  Suspense  and  anxiety  now  died 
away  in  the  European  breast ;  and,  in  the  words  of  one 
of  the  ablest  Indian  statesmen,  "  it  was  a  comfort  again 
to  be  able  to  look  a  native  in  the  face."* 


*  The  late  Colonel  Sutherland,  end,  perhaps,  shown  that  they  did, 

**  It  is,  indeed,"  he  wrote,  '*  a  comfort  had  not  the  noble  resolution  been 

to  be  able  to  look  a  native  in  the  face  taken  of  moving  forward  to  retrieve 

again  with  confidence ;  for  although  our  tarnished  reputation.     Now  all 

there  was  in  reality  no  change  that  is  right.  How  easily  achieved !    And 

one  could  see  in  their  bearing  to-  wc  stand  on  surer  ground  now  in  all 

wards  us  in  this  region,  yet  one  could  quarters  than  we  ever  did  at  any 

Hot  help  feeling  that  we  had  fallen  iormer  period  of  our  Indian  history, 

from  our  high  position;    and  they  — [3/iS.  Correspondenct.'] 
would  have  felt  this  too,  and  in  the 


EFFECT  OF  THE  VICTORIES.  645 

To  Lord  EUenborough  the  brilliant  achievements  of 
the  two  Generals  were  a  source  of  unbounded  gratifica- 
tion. Everything  that  he  could  have  desired  had  been 
accomplished.  Pollock  and  Nott,  under  his  orders,  had 
"retired"  so  adroitly  from  A%hanistan,  that  everybody 
believed  they  had  advanced  upon  the  capital  of  the 
country.  The  movement  had  produced,  or  was  pro- 
ducing, a  grand  moral  eflFect  all  over  Hindostan.  Again 
was  there  likely  to  be  a  season  of  universal  repose.  The 
excitement  which  had  stirred  the  hearts  of  the  native 
community  was  now  passing  away.  All  those  vague 
hopes  and  longings  which  had  sprung  up,  at  the  contem- 
plation of  our  disasters,  in  Native  States  of  doubtful 
fiiendliness  and  fidelity,  were  now  stifled  by  the  know- 
ledge of  our  success.  The  Governor-General  had 
threatened  to  save  India  in  spite  of  every  man  in 
it  who  ought  to  give  him  support  ;*  but  it  now  seemed 
as  though,  in  reality.  Pollock  and  Nott  had  achieved 
the  work  of  salvation,  in  spite  of  the  Governor-General 
himself. 