

•  We  have  no  word  very  fitly  to    h^ldse.    It  was  a  Ae^e  of  the  (irsl 
represent  the  character  of  the  anair.    magnitude. 
Toe  French  would  have  called  it  a 


THE  RESTORATION  OF  DOST  MAHOBfED.  653 

was  at  an  end.  Shah  Soojah  was  dead.  The  people  of 
Afghanistan  had  felt  an  obvious  distaste  for  foreign  in- 
terference, and  had  evinced  it  in  a  very  unmistakeable 
manner.  The  Suddozye  Princes  had  demonstrated  the 
feebleness  of  the  tenure  by  which  they  could  hope  to 
maintain  possession  of  the  throne.  It  was  impossible 
wholly  to  revert  to  the  state  of  things  that  had  existed 
in  1838,  for  thousands  of  lives  and  millions  of  money 
had  been  buried  in  the  passes  of  Afghanistan — and  there 
was  no  earthly  resurrection  or  restoration  for  them.  But 
there  was  one  victim  of  the  war  in  Afghanistan  for  whom 
restoration  was  yet  possible.  The  first  victim  of  our 
national  injustice  was  yet  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the 
British.  The  Governor-General  had  publicly  announced, 
in  his  proclamation  of  the  1st  of  October,  that  Dost  Ma- 
homed was  only  "  believed  to  be  hostile  to  British  in- 
terests," and  that  Shah  Soojah  was  only  "  represented 
to  be  Mendly  to  those  interests,  and  popular  with  his  own 
people."  It  was  announced,  too,  in  this  proclamation, 
that  the  British  Government  had  determined  to  leave 
the  Afghans  to  form  a  government  for  themselves,  and 
to  recognise  that  government  when  formed.  After  such 
announcements  as  these,  the  retention  of  Dost  Mahomed 
in  captivity  would  have  been  confessedly  inconsistent 
and  unjust. 

Ever  since  intelligence  of  the  outbreak  at  Caubul  had 
reached  the  provinces  of  Hindostan,  Dost  Mahomed 
had  been  watched  with  greater  suspicion,  and  guarded 
with  greater  care.  It  was  believed  that  he  would  place 
himself  in  communication  with  the  leaders  of  the  revo- 
lutionary party,  and  would  make  an  effort  to  escape 
from  the  captivity  which  surrounded  his  lot.  It  does 
not  appear,  however,  that  he  manifested  any  feelings  of 
exultation  at  the  thouc^ht  of  the  calamities  which  had 
befallen  his  captors,  or,  in  any  way,  desired  to  increase 


k 


654  THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPOBE. 

the  difficulties  which  surrounded  them.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  seemed  willing,  if  not  anxious,  to  impart  to  the 
British  Government,  through  Captain  Nicolson,  such 
local  information  as  he  thought  would  be  serviceable  to 
them  in  the  conjuncture  which  had  arisen;  and  even 
offered  suggestions  tending  to  facilitate  their  re-invasion 
of  his  country.  The  vigilance  with  which  he  was 
guarded,  and  the  consequent  inconveniences  to  which 
he  was  subjected,  seemed  to  cause  him  much  vexation 
and  annoyance.  He  always  protested  that  he  knew 
nothing  of  the  secret  history  of  the  Caubul  outbreak — 
that  it  was  his  beUef  the  Suddozyes  had  instigated  it,  as 
no  other  family  in  Afghanistan,  since  the  overthrow  of 
the  Barukzyes,  had  sufficient  influence  to  initiate  a  great 
national  movement.  Any  expression  or  intimation  of  a 
doubt  of  his  honesty  seemed  to  pain  him.  "  Recollect," 
he  said,  on  one  occasion  to  Captain  Nicolson,  "  that  I 
have,  from  the  first  day  I  came  in,  been  on  your  side, 
heart  and  soul.  I  swear  by  the  most  holy  God,  that 
since  my  submission  I  have  not  communicated  with 
Caubul  and  its  people,  except  through  you.  But  it  is 
possible  that  news  may  have  reached  my  sister  at  Loo- 
dianah  through  her  other  brothers.  I  am  your  guest 
or  your  prisoner,  whichever  you  please.  I  came  to 
you  in  the  hope  of  being  in  time  employed  by  you;  and 
I  should  say  what  is  not  true,  if  I  denied  still  entertain- 
ing that  hope ;  and  I  am  ready  to  lay  down  my  life  in  your 
service."*  It  may  be  doubted  whether  he  entertained  any 
hope,  or  any  desire  to  regain  the  dominion  he  had  lost. 
He  had  resigned  himself  submissively  to  his  fate.  If  it 
seemed  to  be  the  will  of  God  that  he  should  return  to 
Caubul,  he  was  wilUng  to  retrace  his  steps  to  the  Balla 
Hissar.     But  he  was  Httle  inclined  to  take  into  his  own 