

Quitting  Simlah,  the  Governor-General  moved  down 
to  the  plains  of  Ferozepore.  There  an  army,  under 
the  personal  command  of  Sir  Jasper  NicoUs,  was  now 
assembled.  It  had  been  originally  projected  by  Lord 
Auckland,  at  a  time  when  it  was  believed  that  the 
presence  of  such  an  army  on  our  north-western  fron- 
tier would  have  a  great  moral  eiOfect  upon  the  neigh- 
bouring states.  It  has  been  said,  that  when  it  did 
assemble,  at  the  commencement  of  the  cold  season  of 
1842-1843,  it  was  intended  to  answer  no  other  purpose 
than  that  of  a  vast  pageant;  that  the  Governor-General 
had  determined  on  celebrating  the  return  of  the  vic- 
torious armies  with  all  possible  pompj  and  that  he 
looked  forward,  with  childish  delight  and  anxiety,  to 
the  magnificent  fHe  champHre  of  which  he  had  ap- 
pointed himself  director-in-chief.  It  must  be  admitted 
that  Lord  EUenborough  took  a  somewhat  undignified 
interest  in  the  details  of  these  puerilities;  but  the  justice 

*  Calcutta  Kevietv, 


LORD  ELLENBOROUGH  AT  FEROZEPORE.      657 

of  the  assertion,  that  the  army  was  kept  together  for  no 
other  purpose  than  that  of  presenting  arms  to  the  "  Illus- 
trious Garrison"  of  Jellalabad,  and  turning  out  for  a 
grand  field-day,  may  be  reasonably  disputed.  The  fidelity 
of  the  Sikhs  had  long  been  suspected.  It  was  now  con- 
sidered by  no  means  an  impossible  event,  that  the  march 
of  our  army,  worn,  sick,  and  encumbered,  through  the 
Punjaub,  would  offer  a  temptation  too  strong  to  be 
resisted  by  the  mutinous  Sikh  soldiery,  whose  real 
feeling  had  betrayed  itself  early  in  the  year  at  Peshawur. 
Had  the  Governor-General  felt  secure  in  the  reality  of 
the  formal  alliance  with  the  Punjaub,  he  might  have 
dispersed  the  Army  of  Reserve  when  the  Afghanistan 
force  crossed  the  Attock.  Such  expositions  of  the  mili- 
tary resources  of  a  great  nation  are  never  wholly  with- 
out profit  in  such  troubled  times;  and  as  doubts,  and  not 
unreasonable  doubts,  of  Sikh  fidelity  had  arisen,  it  was 
sound  policy  to  keep  a  force  on  the  frontier  until  the 
returning  troops  had  actually  crossed  the  Sutlej. 

On  the  9th  of  December  the  Governor-General  ar- 
rived at  Ferozepore.  The  Army  of  Reserve  was  drawn 
out  to  receive  him.  A  noble  sight,  it  must  have 
stirred  the  heart  of  one  who  loved  to  express  his  regret 
that  circumstances  had  not  made  him  a  soldier.  There 
was  much  work  to  be  done ;  and  he  flung  himself  into  it 
with  characteristic  energy,  resolute  to  give  the  returning 
warriors  an  honourable  reception,  and  to  dazzle  the  eyes 
of  all  the  native  potentates  who  could  be  lured  to  the 
scene  of  triumph.  Four  years  before  there  had  been  a 
grand  gathering  at  the  same  place,  when  Runjeet  Singh 
and  Lord  Auckland  had  exchanged  courtesies,  and  the 
Army  of  the  Indus  had  commenced  its  march  for  the 
invasion  of  the  Douranee  Empire.  The  war  in  Afghan- 
istan had  opened  with  a  grand  spectacle  at  Ferozepore; 