

But  Lord  EUenborough  was  not  less  delighted  than  if 
the  work  had  been  emphatically  his  own.  He  was  at 
Simlah  when  the  glad  tidings  of  the  re-occupation  of 
Caubul  reached  him.  He  was  at  Simlah,  and  in  the 
very  house  which  had  been  the  cradle  of  the  great 
manifesto  of  1838,  out  of  which  had  come  all  our 
disasters.  He  was  at  Simlah;  and  the  1st  of  October 
was  temptingly  at  hand.  On  the  1st  of  October,  four 
years  before,  that  manifesto  had  been  issued.  From 
Simlah,  therefore,  now,  on  the  1st  of  October,  another 
manifesto  was  to  be  made  to  issue.  The  utter  failure  of 
Lord  Auckland's  policy  in  A%hanistan  was  to  be  pro- 
claimed from  the  very  room  in  which  it  had  taken  shape 

*  See  letter,  ante^  pa^  552,  note^ 


646        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEBOZBPORE. 

and  consistency.*  From  this  very  room  was  to  go  forth 
to  all  the  chiefs  and  people  of  India  a  proclamation,  lay- 
ing bare  to  the  very  core  the  gigantic  errors  which  had 
been  baptised  in  the  blood  of  thousands,  and  shrouded 
in  contumely  and  disgrace. 

And  thus  ran  the  proclamation : 

Secret  Dqtartment,  SMah^  the  1st  of  October^  1842. 

The  Government  of  India  directed  its  army  to  pass  the  Indus 
in  order  to  expel  from  Afghanistan  a  chief  believed  to  be  hostile 
to  British  interests,  and  to  repkce  upon  his  throne  a  sovereign 
represented  to  be  friendly  to  those  interests,  and  popular  with 
his  former  subjects. 

The  chief  believed  to  be  hostile  became  a  prisoner,  and  the 
sovereign  represented  to  be  popular  was  replaced  upon  his  throne ; 
but,  after  events,  which  brought  into  question  his  fidelity  to  the 
government  by  which  he  was  restored,  he  lost  by  the  hands  of 
an  assassin  the  throne  he  had  only  held  amidst  insurrections^ 
and  his  death  was  preceded  and  followed  by  still  eidsting 
anarchy. 

Disasters  unparalleled  in  their  extent,  unless  by  the  errors  in 
which  they  originated,  and  by  the  treachery  by  which  they  were 
completed,  have,  in  one  short  campaign,  been  avenged  upon 
every  scene  of  past  misfortune ;  and  repeated  victories  in  the  field, 
and  the  capture  of  the  cities  and  citadels  of  Ghuznee  and  Caubul, 
have  again  attached  the  opinion  of  invincibility  to  the  British 
arms. 

The  British  arms  in  possession  of  Afghanistan  will  now  be 
withdrawn  to  the  Sutlej. 

The  Governor-General  will  leave  it  to  the  Afghans  themselves 

•  "  October  1 . — The  Governor-Gc-  borough  signed   his  notification   of 

neral  brought   me   some  papers  to  altered  intentions,  in  a  clear,  ihort, 

consult  me  upon.     Among  others,  a  decided  paper,  which  I  much   ap- 

proclamation  announcing    that    we  prove.     He  could  not  avoid  avowing 