

Whilst  such  were  the  tidings  from  the  returning  army 
which  reached  the  Governor-General  in  the  midst  of  his 
preparations,  there  came  from  Afghanistan  intelligence 
of  a  more  dubious  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  less  interest- 
ing character.  Lord  Ellenborougli  had  left  the  Afghans 
to  sufier  the  punishment  due  to  their  crimes;  and  it 
little  mattered  to  him  whether  one  party  or  another 
were  dominant  at  Caubul.  But  the  news  which  now 
reached  him  from  the  Afghan  capital  all  went  to  show 
that  the  Suddozye  Princes  were  utterly  destitute  of 
power  and  influence;  and  that  the  new  government  had 
not  the  means  of  supporting  the  youthful  puppet  upon 
the  throne.  The  Wuzeer  had  sought  to  re-establish  the 
supremacy  of  the  Douranees,  had  hedged  in  the  new 
King  with  Douranee  influences,  and  by  his  exclusiveness 
given  general  ofience.    The  downfall  of  the  Suddozye 

♦  Pollock,  determined  to  give  the  not  come  on  should  be  shot,   and 

robber  tribes  as  little  opportunity  as  that  his  load,  if  it  could  not  be  brought 

possible  of  plundering  his  baggage,  on,  should  be  immediately  burnt. 

ordered  that  every  eamcl   that  cofild 


RECEPTION  OP  THE  ILLUSTRIOUS  GARRISON.  663 

Prince  followed  rapidly  upon  this.*  Akbar  Khan  had 
been  biding  his  time  about  the  regions  of  the  Hindoo- 
Koosh.  He  was  in  no  hurry  to  return  to  Caubul.  It 
was  more  prudent  to  leave  the  dissensions  which  were 
certain  to  arise  at  the  capital  to  work  out  their  own 
debilitating  effects  upon  those  in  power,  and  pave  the 
way  for  his  triumphant  return  to  the  capital. 

And  so,  after  a  time,  there  came  into  Ferozepore 
tidings,  forwarded  from  Pollock's  camp,  to  the  effect 
that  the  Suddozye  Prince,  Shahpoor,  had  been  expelled 
from  the  Balla  Hissar,  and  had  fled  for  safety  to  Pesha- 
wur.    The  poor  boy  had  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life. 

♦  One  more  glimpse  at  Afghan  homes  at  Caubul.  Newab  Zemaun 
politics  from  Major  llawlinson^s  in-  Khan,  Jubbar  Khan,  Oosman  Khan, 
terestingjournal,  may  be  afforded  be-  and  Meer  liadiee,  arc  said  to  be  at 
fore  we  finally  close  it :  "  A  messenger  Khooloom.  The  people  of  Caubul 
arrived  to-daj  from  Caubul  with  letters  have  nearly  all  returned  to  the  city, 
from  the  Kuzzilbash  party,  inviting  and  are  busy  reopening  their  houses 
the  Nizam-ood-Dowlan  to  return,  as  against  the  winter.  Many  of  the 
Gholam  Mahomed  Khan  had  already  Kohistan  chiefs,  Gool  Mahomed  and 
given  offence  by  endeavouring  to  re-  Khoda  Buksh,  Ghilzyes,  have  also 
establish  an  exclusive  Douranee  in-  paid  their  respects  to  Shahpoor,  and 
fluencc  round  the  puppet  King.  At  Ameen-oollah  was  expected  shortly 
present.  Khan  Shereen  is,  as  far  as  to  return.  Mahomed  Akbar  either 
real  power  is  concerned,  paramount,  really  fears  for  his  personal  safety, 
and  ne  seems  determined  to  carry  now  that  a  party  with  which  accommo- 
things  with  a  high  hand,  having  given  dation  is  impossible  has  come  into 
out  that  if  Shahpoor  lends  himself  to  power,  or  he  thinks  it  better  policy  to 
Douranee  intrigue  he  will  force  him  allow  dissension  to  fructify  in  the 
to  abdicate  in  favour  of  another  capital  before  he  makes  his  reappear- 
Prince.  A  strong  Kuzzilbash  de-  ance  on  the  scene.  The  Douranees 
tachment  has  at  the  same  time  been  are  in  a  large  minority  at  Caubul, 
sent  to  Ghuznee  under  Mahomed  and  must  necessarily  give  way  before 
Hussein  Khan,  to  occupy  that  place,  the  Gholam  Khana,  if  Khun  Shereen 
and  in  conjunction  with  the  Hazarehs  acts  with  any  energy.  I  look  to  Can- 
to hold  in  check  any  possible  move-  dahar  as  their  natural  and  necessary 
ment  of  Ghilzyes  or  Douranees  from  retreat,  and  no  doubt  at  that  place 
the  Westward.  Prince  Hyder,  with  Suddozye  royalty,  supported  by  their 
another  party  of  the  Gholam  Khana,  influence,  will  continue*  to  glimmer 
has  gone  to  Bameean,  and  expects  to  on,  until  Persia  turns  her  attention 
secure  the  passes  during  the  winter  to  her  eastei^n  frontier,  and  pushes 
against  the  return  of  the  Barukzyes.  forward  the  Barukzye  Sirdars  to  play 
Mahomed  Akbar^s  force,  which  re-  a  game  for  her.  The  Kuzzilbasbes, 
mained  for  some  time  at  ELhanjan,  is  at  the  same  time,  cannot  expect  to 
said  to  have  completely  dispersed,  the  hold  their  ^und  at  Caubul  for  anv 
Sirdar  himself,  with  Ameen-oollah,  leng^  of  time." — [Major  RawUmon  a 
having  gone  to  Tash  Noorghan,  and  MS,  Journal.'] 
the  men  having  all  returned  to  their 