

It  has  been  said  that  the  tendency  of  all  these  great 
movements  in  Central  Asia  has  been  to  diminish  the 
mutual  jealousies  and  apprehensions  of  the  British  and 
the  Muscovite  powers,  by  revealing,  in  all  their  true  pro- 
portions, the  tremendous  quicksands  which  lie  waiting  to 

of  the  war,  in  spite  of  a  feeble  efibrt  ters  of  the  Crown  are  mainly  respon- 

to  shift  a  part  of  the  burden  upon  sible  for  the  invasion  of  Afghanistan, 

the  revenues  of  Great  Britain^  have  but  the  revenues  of  the  East  India 

all  been  defrayed  from   the   Indian  Company  have  been  compeiled    to 

treasury.      And  yet  it    was  a    war  bear  the  expense.    It  wos  aaruitly  de- 

neither  initiated  by  the  East   India  signed,  inderd,  from  the  beginninjr, 

Company,  nor  at  any  stage  approved  that  tlko  Company  sliould   hear  the 

of  by  that  great  body.     The  mini^  charges  of  the  war. 


670  CONCLUSION. 

engulph  our  armies  in  the  inhospitable  countries  between 
the  borders  of  the  Russian  and  the  Indian  Empires, 
But  although  both  states  have  learnt — ^the  one  from  her 
Afghan,  the  other  from  her  Khivan  expedition — terrible 
lessons  not  to  be  forgotten,  it  may  still  be  questioned 
whether  the  Cossack  and  the  Sepoy  are  further  apart 
than  they  were.  The  "  macadamisation"  of  Sindh  and 
the  Punjaub  has  given  England  a  forward  position, 
which,  advantageous  as  it  is  in  itself,  may  have  stimu- 
lated Russia  to  increased  activity,  whilst  our  awftil  dis- 
asters in  Afghanistan  have  encouraged  anew  the  aggres- 
sions of  the  Persian,  and  the  intrigues  of  his  Muscovite 
ally,  by  revealing  the  sources  of  our  disinclination  to  en- 
tangle our  armies  again  in  its  perilous  defiles. 

It  needed  but  the  announcement  of  the  arrival  of  a 
Persian  army  at  Herat  to  consummate  the  completeness 
of  the  failure.  The  very  policy  which  ought  to  have 
been  pursued  in  1837 — the  pohcy  which  was  recom- 
mended by  Sir  John  M'Neill* — is  that  which  now 
presents  itself,  but  under  what  altered  circumstances,  for 
our  adoption.  If,  instead  of  expelling  Dost  Mahomed 
from  his  principality,  we  had  advanced  him  a  little 
money  to  raise,  and  lent  him  a  few  officers  to  drill,  an 
army,  the  Persians  would  not  now  be  lining  the  walls 
of  Herat.  But,  instead  of  strengthening  the  Afghans,  we 
have  weakened  them.  Instead  of  making  them  our 
friends,  we  have  made  them  our  implacable  foes.  The 
policy  which  we  pursued  was  disastrous,  because  it  was 
unjust.  It  was,  in  principle  and  in  act,  an  unrighteous 
usurpation,  and  the  curse  of  God  was  on  it  from  the 
first.  Our  successes  at  the  outset  were  a  part  of  the 
curse.  They  lapped  us  in  false  security,  and  deluded  us 
to  our  overthrow.  This  is  the  great  lesson  to  be  learnt 
from  the  contemplation  of  all  the  circumstances  of  the 
Afghan  War.  ''  The  Lord  God  of  recompenses  shall 
surely  requite." 