


664        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPOBE. 

Akbar  Khan  had  made  a  descent  upon  Caubul  and  car- 
ried everything  before  him.  The  Newab  Zemaun  Khan, 
it  was  said,  had  been  made  Governor  of  Jellalabad, 
Shumshoodeen  of  Ghuznee,  Sultan  Jan  of  Candahar; 
and  in  the  mean  while  Dost  Mahomed  was  making  his 
way  through  the  Punjaub  to  his  old  principality. 
"Everything,"  it  was  added,  with  bitter  significance, 
"  is  reverting  to  the  old  state  of  things — as  it  was  before 
we  entered  the  country." 

And  now  the  heart  of  the  Governor-General  began  to 
beat  with  expectation  of  the  immediate  arrival  of  the 
victorious  armies.  Everything  was  ready  for  their  recep- 
tion. The  Array  of  Reserve  was  spread  out  over  the 
great  plain  of  Ferozepore.  Triumphal  arches  had  been 
erected.  A  temporary  bridge  had  been  thrown  across 
the  Sutlej.  The  elephants,  no  insignificant  portion  of 
the  coming  spectacle,  had  been  gorgeously  painted  and 
decorated,  and  tricked  out  in  their  gayest  trappings  and 
caparisons ;  and  as  much  of  tinsel,  and  bamboo- work,  and 
coloured  cloth,  as  could  give  eflfect  to  the  triumph,  had 
been  expended  to  grace  the  occasion.  On  the  17th  of 
December,  Sir  Robert  Sale  crossed  the  Sutlej  at  the  head 
of  that  gallant  body  of  troops  which  had  cou)posed  the 
garrison  of  Jellalabad.  The  Governor-General  went 
forth  to  meet  them.  A  street  of  two  hundred  and  fifty 
elephants,  more  or  less  caparisoned,  had  been  formed, 
and  through  this  marched  the  heroes  of  Jellalabad — the 
13th  Light  Infantry,  Sale's  own  regiment,  at  the  head 
of  the  column.  The  morning  was  dull  and  lowering — 
not  a  gleam  of  sunshine  lighted  up  the  festive  scene; 
but  there  Avere  sunny  hearts  and  bright  faces;  and  as 
the  horse-artillery  guns  boomed  forth  their  Avelcome, 
and  the  band  of  the  Lancers  struck  up  the  ever-animating 
"  Conquering  Hero"  tune,  and  each  regiment  in  suc- 
cession, as  the  column  passed  on,  saluted  their  loner  ab- 


THE  COUKTS-MAKTIAL.  665 

sent  comrades,  the  heart  must  have  been  a  dull  one  that 
did  not  acknowledge  that  there  is  something  of  a  bright 
side  even  to  the  picture  of  war. 

On  the  19th,  General  Pollock  crossed  the  Sutlej;  and 
on  the  23rd,  General  Nott  arrived,  bringing  with  him 
the  Gates  of  Somnauth.*  Then  there  was  feasting  and 
festivity  in  the  gigantic  tents,  hung  with  silken  flags,  on 
which,  in  polyglot  emblazonments,  were  the  names  of 
the  actions  that  had  been  fought;  many  complimentary 
effusions,  in  tlie  shape  of  after-dinner  harangues  ;f  and  in 
the  mornings  grand  field-days,  more  or  less,  according  to 
the  "  skyey  influences."  The  year — a  most  eventful  one 
— was  closed  with  a  grand  military  display.  The  plain 
was  covered  with  British  and  Sikh  troops,  and  in  the 
presence  of  Pertaub  Singh,  the  heir  apparent  of  Lahore; 
Dhyan  Singh,  the  minister;  tlie  Governor-General,  the 
Commander-in-Chief,  and  others  of  less  note,  some  forty 
thousand  men,  with  a  hundred  guns,  were  manoeuvred 
on  the  great  plain.  On  this  grand  tableau  the  curtain 
fell;  and  the  year  opportunelv  closed  in  gaiety  and  glit- 
ter—in prosperity  and  parade. 