

Altogether,  the  return  march  of  the  British  troops  was 
singularly  peaceful  and  imeventful.  If  the  same  precau- 
tions to  crown  the  heights  along  the  line  of  march,  as 
were  systematically  taken  by  Pollock,  had  been  taken 
by  M'Caskill  and  Nott,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  we 
should  even  have  heard  of  the  appearance  of  an  enemy. 
The  Afghans  arc  famous  plunderers,  and  they  are  ha- 
bitually armed.  When  they  saw  their  opportunity,  they 
came  down  upon  our  baggage-laden  columns,  and  mo- 
lested us  as  best  they  could.  But  there  was  nothing 
like  organised  resistance;  and,  in  all  probability,  if  the 

♦  Lieut.  Christie,  of  the  Artillery;  and  all."  —  [Af5.  Correspondence  of 

and  Ensign  Nicolson,  of  the  30th  Na-  General  Pollock :  Camp  nearAlirMus^ 

tive  Infantry.  jidj  Nov,  1,  1842.]     Of  this  unfortu- 

f  "  It  was  a  night  attack  of  some  nate  business,  another  officer  writes  : 

plunderers  to  obtain  baggage.    There  "  Night  overtook  our  unfortunate  3rd 

appears  to  have  been  sad  confusion.  Brigade.     The   enemy,   emboldened 

Tlie  two  otiicers  were    about    that  by   the  darkness,  came  down  upon 

time  killed.     But  the  guns  were  not,  them  in  strength.    Some  of  our  men 

I  believe,  even  attempted  to  be  car-  were  cut  off  in  the  column.     Numbers 

ried  off;  otherwise  we  certainly  never  of  them   were  hit  by  stones,  which 

should  iiave  seen  anything  of  them  were  flying  in  all  directions.     The 

again,    whereas,  the    next  day,  the  confusion  must  have  been  great.   Tlie 

mountain  howitzer  and  carriage  were  Irregular  Cavalry  rode  right  over  the 

found  in  statu  quo,  and  the  carriage  infantry,  knocking  down  several   of 

of   the     three-pounder ;    and    were  the   officers.     Christie  and  his  two 

brought  in.     I  dare  say  the  three-  mountain-guns  were  lost  sight  of  in 

pounder  was  not  far.     It  in  all  pro-  the  dark,  and  are  lost,  himself  killed, 

bability  upset  and  parted  from  the  Young    Nicolson,    of   the    30th,   is 

carriage;  but  if  an  enemy  (so  usually  killed.     As  to  the  number  of  men 

termed)  had  made  the  attack,  it  is  very  killed,  nothing  is  yet  known  ;  but  the 

improbable  that  either  guns  or  car-  whole  of  the  Gholundauz  that  were 

riage  would  have  been  left,  for  a  very  with  Christie  are  missing." —  IMS, 

few  men  could  carry  gun,  carriage,  Correspondence,'] 


662  THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEFOKE. 

heights  had  been  crowned  by  the  second  and  the  third 
divisions,  as  they  were  by  the  first,  they  would  have 
achieved  the  march  with  comparative  immunity.  Not 
a  shot  was  fired  at  Pollock  between  Caubul  and  Pe- 
shawur.* 

The  fortress  of  Ali-Musjid  was  destroyed,  and  the 
army  then  pushed  on  to  Peshawnr.  Having  partaken 
of  Avitabile's  magnificent  hospitality,  the  victorious  Ge- 
nerals commenced  their  march  through  the  Punjaub. 
It  was  an  uneventful,  but  a  melancholy  one.  Sickness 
broke  out  in  the  returning  army.  There  had  always  been 
a  scarcity  of  carriage- cattle,  and  now  the  number  of  sick 
made  it  more  severely  felt.  But  all  the  inconveniences 
of  the  march  were  from  within.  The  Sikhs  wrought  us 
no  annoyance. 