

The  Sepoy  regiments  having  been  feasted  with  their 
"  favourite  mehtoys^^  (sweetmeats),  and  the  important 
event  announced  in  a  Government  notification,  the  Army 
of  Reserve  was  broken  up;  but  not  before  the  Governor- 

♦  Lord   Ellenborough    had  deter-  vice."  —  [^Sir   Jasper   Nicolls'    MS. 

mined  to  bestow  exclusive  honours  Journal,'] 

upon  Sale's  brigade  ;  but  Sir  Jasper        t  The  rejoicings,  in  the  opinions  of 

Nicolls  desired  to  receive  both   Pol-  many,  were  very  much  marred  by 

lock  and  Nott  with  the  same  mili-  the  prejudiced  exclusiveness  of  the 

tary  distinctions.     **  I  wished"    he  Grovernor-General,who8eemetohave 

wrote  in  his  journal,  "  to  have  one  of  set  his  face  very  strenuously  against 

the  reserve  divisions  to  receive  each  the  political  officers,  no  matter  what 

of  the  divisions  as  it  came,  but  he  theur  services.     With  all  his  admira- 

(Lord  Ellenborough)  did  not  desire  tion  of  the  Illustrious  Garrison,  Lord 

that  the  honours  paid  to  the  garrison  Ellenborough    slighted    Macffregor, 

should  be  extended  to  any  other  part  who  was  its  very  life  and  soul;  and 

of  the  army.    This  I  regret,  for  they  with  all  his  appreciation  of  gallantry , 

have  all  seen  hard  work,  great  expo-  he  seemed  unable  to  appreciate  too 

sure,  and  some  arduous  days  of  ser-  services  of  Eldrcd  Pottmger. 


666        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 

General,  moved  by  that  characteristic  admiration  of 
gallantry,  which  earned  for  him  in  India  the  title  of  the 
*'  Friend  of  the  Army,"  had  done  all  that  lay  in  his 
power  to  reward  the  troops  who  had  achieved  such 
brilliant  successes.  The  honours  which  he  could  not 
bestow  he  solicited  from  the  Crown,  on  behalf  of  the 
brave  men  who  had  so  fairly  earned  them;  and  the  dis- 
tribution of  honorary  distinctions  which  ensued  gave 
almost  universal  satisfaction.  It  erred  rather  on  the 
side  of  liberality;  and,  perhaps,  there  are  some  old  sol- 
diers, in  the  scantily-decorated  Queen's  army,  who  think 
that  during  the  last  few  years,  honours  have  been  be- 
stowed so  profusely  as  to  lower  their  real  value,  by 
showing  how  easily  they  are  to  be  earned.  But  it  is 
better  to  err  on  the  side  of  liberality  than  of  chariness — 
better  even  that  the  unworthy  should  be  decorated,  than 
that  the  worthy  should  pine  in  vain  for  distinction.* 

But  there  was  still  something  more  to  be  done.  The 
prisoners,  towards  whom  the  flood  of  sympathy  had 
been  setting  in  so  strongly  for  many  months,  and  whom 
the  English  in  India  now  welcomed  back  with  cordiality 
and  delight,  were  not  to  be  suffered  all  at  once  to  sink  into 
privacy  and  obscurity.  Some  of  them  were  to  be  tried 
by  courts-martial,  or  to  be  summoned  before  courts  of 
inquiry,  for  abandoning  their  posts,  going  over  to  the 
enemy,  or  otherwise  disgracing  themselves.  The  courts 
sate,  but  they  could  not  pronounce  the  officers  arraigned 
before  them  guilty  of  any  offence.  Brigadier  Shelton  was 
acquitted.    Colonel  Palmer,f  Captains  Anderson,  Boyd, 