

♦  Pollock  and  Nott  received  most  Fcrozepore  on  a  triumphal  car,  were 

deservedly    the    distinction    of    the  deposited  in  the  magazine  of  Agra. 
Grand  Cross  of  the  Batli ;  and  Lord        f  In   confirming  the  acquittal  of 

Ellenborough,  who  was  created  ah  Colonel  Palmer,  Sir  Jasper  Nicolk 

Earl,  formally  invested  them  at  Agra,  wrote  tliat  "  the  circutnstances  under 

and  delivered  some  flowing  speeches  which  Colonel  Palmer   surrendervd 

upon  the  occasion.     It  may  be  men-  Ghuznec  to  the  Afghans,  were  such 

tioned  here  that  the  gates  of  Som-  as  he  could  neither  control,  alter,  or 

nautli,  that  Ind  been  brought  up  from  alleviate." 


CONCLUSION.  667 

Troui"),  and  Waller,  and  Lieutenant  Ejrre,  Ivere  honour- 
ably acquitted ;  and  the  court  of  inquiry,  over  which  Mr. 
Clerk  presided,  must  have  risen  from  its  investigation  into 
the  conduct  of  Major  Pottinger  with  increased  respect 
for  the  high  soldierly  qualities  of  the  young  officer  who 
had  beaten  back  the  Persians  at  Herat,  and  protested 
against  the  capitulation  of  Caubul  in  the  teeth  of  all  the 
veterans  of  the  force. 

On  the  20th  of  January  1843,  Dost  Mahomed  arrived 
at  Lahore,  on  his  way  to  the  frontier  of  Afghanistan, 
and  was  honourably  received  by  the  Sikh  Durbar.  The 
Suddoyze  Princes  and  their  families,  to  whose  reception 
in  the  British  provinces  Lord  Ellenborough  had  evinced 
an  insuperable  repugnance,  found  an  asylum  in  the  Sikh 
dominions;  and  British  connexion  with  Afghanistan  was 
now  fairly  at  an  end. 

Little  more  remains  to  be  said.  The  proclamations 
which  were  issued  by  the  Supreme  Government  of 
India  in  the  autumn  of  1842,  are  in  themselves  the  best 
commentaries  on  the  War  in  Afghanistan.  The  Gover- 
nor-General of  1842  passed  sentence  of  condemnation 
upon  the  measures  of  the  Governor-General  of  1838. 
No  failure  so  total  and  overwhelming  as  this  is  recorded 
in  the  page  of  history.  No  lesson  so  grand  and  im- 
pressive is  to  be  found  in  all  the  annals  of  the  world. 
Of  the  secondary  causes  which  contributed  to  the  utter 
prostration  of  an  unholy  pohcy,  much,  at  different  times, 
has  been  written  in  the  course  of  this  narrative ;  much 
more  might  now  be  written,  in  conclusion,  of  the  mighty 
pohtical  and  military  errors  which  were  baptised  in  the 
blood  and  tears  of  our  unhappy  countrymen.  These 
errors  are  so  patent — are  so  intelHgible — ^they  have  been 
60  often  laid  bare  by  the  hand  of  the  anatomist — and 
they  have  been  so  copiously  illustrated  in  these  volumes, 
that  I  do  not  now  purpose  to  enlarge  upon  them  be- 


668  CONCLUSION. 

fore  I  lay  down  my  pen.  The  secondary  causes  of  the 
great  failure  were  not  badly  summed  up  by  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief, when,  on  the  24th  of  March,  1842,  he 
wrote  to  the  Governor-General: 