

The  causes  to  which  I  ascribe  our  failure  in  Afghanistan  are 
these: 

1st.  Making  war  \yith  a  peace  estabhshment. 

2n(l.  Making  war  without  a  safe  base  of  operations. 

3rd.  Carrying  our  native  army  out  of  India  into  a  strange  and 
cold  climate,  where  they  and  we  were  foreigners,  and  both  con- 
sidered as  infidels. 

4th.  Invading  a  poor  country,  and  one  unequal  to  supply  our 
wants,  especially  our  large  establishment  of  cattle. 

5th.  Giving  undue  power  to  political  agents. 

6th.  Want  of  forethought  and  undue  confidence  in  the  Afghans 
on  the  part  of  Sir  William  Macnaghten. 

7  th.  Placing  our  magazines,  even  our  treasure,  in  indefensible 
places. 

8th.  Great  military  neglect  and  mismanagement  after  the  out- 
break. 

But  if  none  of  these  things  had  been  in  operation  to 
defeat  and  frustrate  our  policy,  it  must  still  have  broken 
down  under  the  ruinous  expenditure  of  public  money 
which  the  armed  occupation  of  Afghanistan  entailed 
upon  the  Government  of  India.  It  is  on  record,  by  the 
admission  of  Lord  Auckland  liimself,  that  when  our 
friendly  connexion  with  Afghanistan  was  brought  sud- 
denly to  a  violent  and  disastrous  termination,  it  had  cost 
the  natives  of  India,  whose  stewards  we  are,  more  than 
eight  millions  of  money.*  To  this  are  to  be  added  the 
cost  of  the  great  calamity  itself,  and  the  expenses  of  the 
War  of  Retribution.  All  this  enormous  burden  fell  upon 
the  revenues  of  India;  and  the  country  is  still  groaning 
under  the  weigh  t.f 

*  Lord  Auckland's  Finance  Minute:  f  The  bitter  injustice  of  this  need 
February  19,  1842.  hardly  be  insisted  upon.   Thcchar^ 


CONCLUSION.  669 

And  what  have  we  gained  ?  What  are  the  advantages 
to  be  summed  up  on  the  other  side  of  the  account  ? 
The  expedition  across  the  Indus  was  undertaken  with 
the  object  of  erecting  in  Afghanistan  a  barrier  against 
encroachment  from  the  West.  The  advance  of  the  British 
army  was  designed  to  check  the  aggressions  of  Persia  on 
the  Afghan  frontier,  and  to  baflBie  Russian  intrigues,  by  the 
substitution  of  a  friendly  for  an  unfriendly  power,  in  the 
countries  beyond  the  Indus.  And  now,  after  all  this 
waste  of  blood  and  treasure,  a  Persian  army  is  at  Herat, 
and  every  town  and  village  of  A%hanistan  is  bristling 
with  oiu:  enemies.  Before  the  British  army  crossed  the 
Indus,  the  English  name  was  honoured  in  Afghanistan. 
Some  dim  traditions  of  the  splendour  of  Mr.  Elphinstone's 
Mission  were  all  that  the  Afghans  associated  with  their 
thoughts  of  the  English  nation ;  and  now,  in  their  place, 
are  galling  memories  of  the  progress  of  a  desolating  army. 
The  Afghans  are  an  unforgiving  race;  and  everywhere 
from  Candahar  to  Caubul,  and  from  Caubul  to  Pesha- 
wur,  are  traces  of  the  injuries  we  have  inflicted  upon 
the  tribes.  There  is  scarcely  a  family  in  the  country 
which  has  not  the  blood  of  kindred  to  revenge  upon  the 
accursed  Feringhees.  The  door  of  reconciliation  is  closed 
against  us;  and  if  the  hostility  of  the  Afghans  be  an 
element  of  weakness,  it  is  certain  that  we  have  contrived 
to  secure  it. 