

VOL.  II.  2  u 


658        THE  GATHERING  AT  FEROZEPOBB. 

and  now,  with  due  dramatic  propriety,  it  was  to  close 
with  a  similar  effect.  The  Maharajah  of  the  Punjaub, 
with  his  ministers  of  state  and  his  principal  military 
chiefs,  were  invited  to  grace  the  festival.*  The  Princes 
of  Sirhind,  and  other  "  brothers  and  friends,"  were  asked 
to  take  part  in  the  rejoicings.  And  everywhere  from 
the  neighbouring  stations,  under  lordly  encouragement, 
flocked  our  English  ladies  to  Ferozepore — the  wives  and 
daughters  of  the  returning  warriors  and  of  the  oflicers 
there  assembled — and  everywhere  was  a  flutter  of  ex- 
citement, such  as  had  not  been  known  in  those  regions 
for  years. 

Day  after  day,  as  Lord  EUenborough  busied  himself 
with  his  preparations  for  the  reception  of  the  victorious 
Generals,  tidings  reached  him  from  their  camps.     There 
was  nothing  in   this  intelligence   to   dim  the  pleasure 
which  was  animating  his  Lordship's  breast.      Pollock 
had  brought  back  his  army  with  little  loss  through  the 
formidable  passes  of  Afghanistan,  and  was  now  making 
an  uninterrupted  march  through  the  Punjaub.       The 
withdrawal  of  the  force  had  been  looked  forward  to 
with  some  anxiety   by  many,  who  believed  that  the 
tribes  would  harass  the  rear  of  the  retiring  army,  and 
work  them  grievous  annoyance.     But  so  completely  had 
the  strength  of  the  Afghans  been  broken  by  continual 
defeat,  that  they  scarcely  made  an  effort  to  annoy  the 
British  columns  on  their  line  of  march.     Pollock  wrote 
that  he  had  not  seen  an  enemy ;  but  M'Caskill  and  Nott, 
who  followed  with  the  centre  and  the  rear  divisions, 
were  not  quite  so  fortunatei     From  Caubul  to  Jellala- 

♦  Mr.  Clerk  was    despatched  to  Prince,   Pertab  Singh,    and  Dhjan 

Lahore  with  an  invitation  from  the  Singh,   the  minister,  were  sent  to 

(Tovemor^ General ;  and  Shere  Singh  represent    the    Maharajah    at    the 

was  inclined  to  accept  it,  but  he  was  Governor- General's  Court, 
overruled  in  Durbar.     The  Crown 


THE  DESTRUCTION  OF  JELLALABAD.  659 

bad,  however,  there  was  little  to  contend  against,  except 
some  desultory  night  attacks  on  our  baggage.*  There 
was,  indeed,  no  organised  resistance. 

The  entire  force  assembled  at  Jellalabad ;  and  halted 
there  for  a  few  days.  Pollock  had  determined  to  de- 
stroy the  defences  of  the  place.  It  had  been  in  con- 
templation to  transfer  Jellalabad  to  the  government 
of  the  Sikhs;  but  the  Durbar  had  been  so  slow  to  an- 
nounce its  acquiescence  in  the  proposed  arrangement, 
that  when  the  acceptance  of  the  offer  was  announced  to 
General  Pollock,  he  had  already  completed  the  work  of 
destruction.  When  the  British  army  was  halting  at 
Peshawur,  the  question  of  the  transfer  of  Jellalabad  to 
the  Sikhs,  as  a  douceur  to  ensure  cordiality  of  co-opera- 
tion with  us,  had  been  earnestly  discussed  ;f  but  at  that 
time  the  project  had  fallen  to  the  ground.  It  was  felt, 
that  so  long  as  Shah  Soojah  existed,  and  the  Tripartite 
treaty  had  not  been  annulled,  any  design  to  dissever  the 
Douranee  Empire,  and  to  invite  the  Sikhs  to  share  in 
the  partition,  would  be  premature,  both  as  regarded  the 
justice  and  the  expediency  of  the  measure.  But  the 
death  of  Shah  Soojah  gave  a  new  aspect  to  the  state  of 
affairs ;  and  the  British  Government  lost  little  time,  after 
authentic  intelligence  of  that  event  had  been  received,  in 
communicating  to  Mr.  Clerk  its  willingness  that  certain 
territories  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Indus  should  pass 
into  the  possession  of  the  Sikh  Government  or  of  the 
Jummoo  Rajahs,  with  the  permission  of  the  Lahore  Dur- 