


♦  A  smart  skirmish  between  NottV  In  Colonel  Stacy^s  Narrative  and  Can- 
division  and  the  enemy,  on  the  Hufl-  tain  NeilTs  Recollections  ofSeryicey  the 
Kotul,  may,  perhaps,  be  considered  reader  will  find  ample  details  of  all 
OS  an  exception.  Uolonel  Stacy  de-  the  operations  of  tne  rear  division, 
scribes  it  as  "a  severe  affair;'^  and  Lieutenant  Greenwood's  Narrative  msLy 
Nott,  who  was  not  inclined  to  write  also  be  consulted  for  some  particulars 
lengthy  despatches,  or  to  exaggerate  of  the  movements  of  M'Caskill's  divi- 
the  importance  of  his  engagements,  sion. 
thought  it  worthy  of  a  brief  despatch.  f  See  ante^  book  vi.,  chapter  v. 

2u2 


G60  THE  GATIIKRING  AT  FEROZEPORE. 

bar;  and  it  was  intimated  that  the  British  Government 
would  facilitate  the  accomplishment  of  this  object  by 
placing  Jellalabad  in  the  hands  of  the  Sikhs.     The  offer 
was  formally  made ;  but,  in  the  then  uncertain  position 
of  affairs,  prudently  declined.     It  was  not  unreasonably 
urged  by  the  Durbar,  that  until  they  were  in  possession 
of  the  ultimate  intentions  of  the  British  with  respect  to 
Afghanistan,  it  would  be  hardly  politic  in  the  Sikhs  to 
place  themselves  in  a  prominent  position,  or  in  any  way 
to  identify  themselves  with  measures  the  future    out- 
turn of  which  they  could  as  yet  but  dimly  foresee.     But 
it  was  believed,  that  as  soon  as  ever  our  withdrawal 
from  Afghanistan  was  fully  determined  upon,  and  about 
to  be  put  in  execution,  the  Sikhs,  without  further  ex- 
planation, would  be  willing  to  take  possession  of  Jellala- 
bad.    And  they  were  so ;  but  not  having  fully  made  up 
their  minds  upon  the  subject  (probably  from  some  mis- 
trust of  our  intentions)   until    the  British   force  had 
actually  marched  from  Caubul,  their  acceptance  of  the 
offer  came  too  late  to  save  the  place  from  destruction. 
General  Pollock  had,  in  accordance  with  instructions, 
destroyed  the  fortifications  of  Jellalabad  before  he  re- 
ceived a  communication  from  the  government,  intended, 
if  possible,  to  arrest  such  proceedings,  and  ordering  him 
to  make  over  the  place  uninjured  to  our  allies.     It  may 
be  doubted  whether  either  party  very  much  regretted 
the  accident.* 

Having  destroyed  the  defences  of  Jellalabad,  Pollock 
pushed  on  to  Peshawur.  The  Khybur  Pass  had  now 
to  be  traversed  again.  The  Afreedi  Maliks  offered  to 
sell  us  a  free  passage;  but  Mackeson  answered  that 
Pollock  would  take  one.  The  first  division,  under  the 
General  himself,  who  effectively  crowned  the  heights  as 
he  advanced,  passed  through  with  only  the  loss  of  two 

*  Calcutta  lie  view. 


THE  RETUKN  THROUGH  THE  PUNJAUB.       661 

or  three  privates.  M'Caskill  was  not  equally  successful. 
He  had  not  taken  the  same  precautions,  and  the  Khy- 
burees  came  down  upon  the  rear-guard,  under  their  old 
enemy,  Brigadier  Wild.  Favoured  by  the  darkness  of 
night,  they  rushed  among  our  people,  and  threw  them 
into  confusion.  Two  of  our  officers  were  killed,*  and 
two  of  our  guns  were  abandoned.  But  the  only  object 
of  the  Khyburees  seems  to  have  been  plunder.  They 
made  no  effort  to  carry  off  the  guns.f 