

*  Ante,  \o\. \,^  v^^"^  *i^'^. 


APPENDIX. 


[Vol.  II.,  Book  v.] 

SIR  WM.  MACNAGHTEN'S  REPORT  OF  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF 

THE  CAUBUL  OUTBREAK. 

[^Found  unfinished  in  the  Envoy's  desh  after  his  death.] 

Sir, 

1.  It  is  with  feelings  of  the  deepest  concern  that  I  acquaint 
you,  for  the  information  of  the  Right  Honourable  the  Governor- 
General  in  Council,  of  my  having  been  compelled  to  consent  to 
the  abandonment  of  our  position  in  this  country. 

2.  The  Major-General  commanding  in  Afghanistan  will  doubtless 
detail  the  military  disasters  which  have  led  to  this  direful  neces- 
sity, and  I  shall  have  occasion,  therefore,  to  touch  upon  them  but 
briefly  in  the  course  of  this  narrative. 

3.  On  the  morning  of  the  2nd  ult.  1  was  informed  that  the  town 
of  Caubul  was  in  a  state  of  commotion,  and  shortly  afterwards  I 
received  a  note  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sir  A.  Burnes,  to  the 
effect  that  his  house  was  besieged,  and  begging  for  assistance.  I 
immediately  went  to  General  Elphinstone,  and  suggested  that 
Brigadier  Shelton's  force  should  proceed  to  the  Balla  Hissar, 
thence  to  operate  as  might  seem  expedient;  that  the  remaining 
troops  should  be  concentrated,  the  cantonment  placed  in  a  state  of 
defence,  and  assistance,  if  possible,  sent  to  Sir  A.  Burnes. 

4.  Before  Brigadier  Shelton  could  reach  the  Balla  Hissar,  the 
town  had  attained  such  a  state  of  ferment  that  it  was  deemed  im- 
practicable to  penetrate  to  Sir  A.  Burnes's  residence,  which  was  in 
the  centre  of  the  city.  I  also  sent  messages  of  assurance  to  his 
Majesty  by  my  assistant  (Captain  Lawrence),  but  so  great  had  be- 
come the  excitement,  that,  by  noon,  the  road  between  the  canton- 
ment and  the  city  was  hardly  passable. 


G72  APPENDIX. 

5.  His  Majesty,  on  first  hearing  of  the  insurrection,  had  sent  out 
his  son,  Futteh  Jung,  and  the  Minister,  with  some  of  the  house- 
hold troops,  to  repress  it;  but  this  party  was  speedily  repulsed 
with  great  slaughter,  and  in  the  mean  time  I  grieve  to  state  that 
Sir  Alexander  Bumes,  his  brother,  Lieutenant  C.  Bumes,  and 
Captain  W.  Broadfoot,  had  fallen  victims  to  the  fury  of  the  mob. 

6.  From  that  time  affairs  grew  generally  worse.  The  enemy 
showed  great  judgment  in  their  work  of  annoying  us.  They 
seized  the  strongest  positions  between  the  cantonment  and  the  city, 
and,  what  was  worse  than  all,  they  seized  the  fort,  which  contained 
all  our  stores  and  provisions.  This  step  was  well-nigh  effecting  our 
immediate  destruction,  and  it  is  chiefly  to  it  that  I  attribute 
our  final  discomfiture.  We  had  only  four  or  five  days'  supplies 
for  the  cantonment.  The  Balla  Hissar,  as  well  as  the  cantonment, 
was  in  a  state  of  siege.  We  could  not  hope  for  provisions  from 
thence,  nor  would  the  place  have  afforded  us  either  food  or  shelter, 
and,  in  the  opinion  of  the  military  authorities,  to  return  thither 
would  have  been  attended  with  ruin.  A  disastrous  retreat  seemed 
the  only  alternative,  but  this  necessity  was  averted  by  the  attack, 
on  the  10th  ult.,  of  a  neighbouring  fort,  which  had  intermediately 
furnished  us  with  a  scanty  supply  of  provisions,  but  which  subse- 
quently espoused  the  cause  of  the  rebels.  The  place  was  carried, 
after  a  desperate  resistance.  We  lost  in  the  operation  no  less  than 
sixty  men  killed  and  wounded  of  her  Majesty's  44th  Regiment 
alone,  but  our  immediate  wants  were  supplied  by  the  provisions 
found  in  the  fort.  I  lament  to  add,  that  Colonel  Mackrell, 
Captain  M'Crae,  and  Captain  Westmacott,  fell  on  the  occasion. 