

[Vol.  IL,  Page  271.] 

SIR  J.  NICOLLS  TO  LORD  FITZROY  SOMERSET,  K.C.B. 
[On  the  Appointment  of  General  Pollock  to  the  Command  of  the  Troops.] 

My  Lord, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  your  Lordship's  letter 
of  the  13  th  of  June,  calling  upon  me  for  explanation  on  the  sub- 
ject  of  an  appeal  made  to  the  General  Commanding  in  Chief,  by 
Major-General  Sir  Joseph  ThackwcU,  in  consequence  of  his  not 
being  permitted   to   accompany  the  regiment   of  which   he  is 


APPENDIX.  681 

senior  Colonel,  on  service  beyond  the  Indus — I  beg  you  will 
apprise  liis  Lordship,  that,  in  addition  to  the  rule  quoted  by  Sir 
J.  Thackwell,  the  special  appointment  of  Major-General  Pollock 
prohibited  his  employment  in  Afghanistan. 

I  shall  explain  the  circumstances  of  that  appointment. 

In  December,  1841,  the  Governor-General  of  India  in  Council 
instructed  me  to  place  Major-General  Lumley,  of  the  Company's 
army,  in  command  of  the  reinforcements  which  passed  through 
the  Punjaub  in  January  last;  and,  in  addition  to  the  command  of 
the  whole  force  in  Afghanistan,  it  was  his  Lordship's  intention  to 
place  in  his  hands  the  political  control  also. 

Major-General  Lumley's  health  was  such  as  to  preclude  all 
hope,  or  even  desire,  that  he  should  undertake  so  great  a  charge, 
and  it  became  necessary  that  I  should  propose  another  officer  for 
this  important  duty.  Twice  I  laid  before  the  Governor-General 
the  name  of  Major-General  Sir  Edmund  Williams;  and  as  a  Light 
Infantry  officer  he  seemed  most  qualified  to  meet  an  enemy  in 
a  mountainous  country:  he  was  active,  zealous,  and  in  perfect 
health.  In  the  command  of  a  division  he  had  shown  a  clear 
judgment,  and  given  me  satisfaction. 

I  need  not  inform  Lord  Hill  that  the  management  of  the  native 
army,  or  of  small  portions  of  it,  is  a  matter,  at  times,  of  delicacy 
and  difficulty.  It  will  not  do  to  distrust  or  disparage  it,  as 
Colonel  Monson  did.  The  Governor-General  gave  such  an  un- 
willing and  discouraging  reply  to  my  second  communication,  that 
I  clearly  saw  the  whole  onus  of  the  appointment  and  of  its  con- 
sequences would  be  mine.  This  I  would  not  undertake,  and 
Major-General  Pollock  being  near  at  hand,  and  honoured  by 
Lord  Auckland's  confidence  (as  I  know),  I  ordered  him  by  dawk 
to  join  the  9tli  Foot  and  other  corps.  This  done,  Government 
was  pleased  to  confer  upon  him  the  political  powers  intended  for 
Major-General  Lumley;  without  which  Sir  Edmund  Williams 
would  have  had  to  act,  not  from  himself,  but  according  to  requi- 
sitions made  by  the  local  political  authorities — viz., Brevet-Captains 
Mackeson  and  M*Gregor.  Upon  the  more  abstract  question  of  the 
Lieutenant-Colonelcy,  it  must  be  remarked  that  Sir  Edmund  Wil- 
liams held  that  rank  in  the  9th  Foot,  which  gave  him  no  claim  to 
go  to  Afghanistan,  though  some  officious  friend  has  since  asserted  it. 