

The  GeneraPs  reply  was  dated  the  same  day,  a  copy  accom- 
panies, as  Appendix  B. 

11.  Affairs  had  attained  so  desperate  a  state  on  the  8th  instant, 
that  I  again  addressed  the  General  a  letter,  copy  of  which  accom- 
panies, as  Appendix  C,  and  a  copy  of  the  General's  reply  of  the 
same  date,  signed  by  three  of  his  principal  officers,  accompanies 
as  Appendix  D.  On  the  next  day  I  received  another  letter  from 
the  General,  copy  of  which  is  sent  as  Appendix  E.* 

At  my  invitation,  deputies  were  sent  from  the  rebels,  who  came 
into  cantonment  on  the  25th  ultimo,  I  having  in  the  mean  time 
received  overtures  from  them  of  a  pacific  nature,  on  the  basis  of 
our  evacuating  the  country.     I  proposed  lo  tWoL^^  ^'^^  n^wsa 
*  The  letters  here  alluded  to  are  printeiWn  iVetViQ^^  o^VN^a^^^-— ^^^""^ 
VOL.  IT.  2  X 


674  APPENDIX. 

which,  in  my  opinion^  could  be  accepted  with  honour;  but  the 
temper  of  the  rebels  may  best  be  understood  when  I  mention 
that  they  returned  me  a  letter  of  defiance  the  next  morning,  to 
the  effect  that,  unless  I  consented  to  surrender  our  arms,  and  to 
abandon  his  Majesty  to  his  fate,  we  must  prepare  for  immediate 
hostilities.  To  this  I  replied,  that  we  preferred  death  to  dis- 
honour, and  that  it  would  remain  with  a  higher  Power  to  decide 
between  us. 

12.  I  had  subsequently  a  lengthened  correspondence  with  Ma- 
homed Oosman  Khan,  Barukzye,  the  most  moderate  and  sensible 
man  of  the  insurgents,  and  as  on  the  11th  instant  we  had  not  one 
day*8  provisions  left,  I  held  a  conference  with  the  whole  of  the  rebel 
chiefs.  The  day  previous  I  had  learnt  from  a  letter  from  Colonel 
Palmer,  at  Ghuznee,  that  there  was  no  hope  of  reinforcements 
from  Candahar.  I  had  repeatedly  kept  his  Majesty  informed  of 
the  desperate  state  of  our  a£&irs,  and  of  the  probability  that  we 
should  be  compelled  to  enter  into  some  accommodation  with  the 
enemy. 

13.  The  conference  with  the  rebels  took  place  about  a  mile 
from  cantonments.  I  was  attended  by  Captains  Lawrence,  Trevor, 
and  Mackenzie,  and  there  were  present  on  the  part  of  the  rebels 
the  heads  nearly  of  all  the  chief  tribes  in  the  country.  I  had 
committed  to  paper  certain  propositions,  to  which  I  had  reason  to 
believe  they  would  have  no  objection,  and  I  read  it  to  the  meet- 
ing. A  copy  accompanies  as  Appendix  F.*  When  I  came  to  the 
second  article,  Mahomed  Akbar  interrupted  me,  and  observed 
that  we  did  not  require  supplies,  as  there  was  no  impediment  to 
our  marching  the  next  morning.  I  mention  the  above  fact  to 
show  the  impetuous  disposition  of  this  youth.  He  was  reproved 
by  the  other  chiefs,  and  he  himself,  except  on  this  one  occasion, 
behaved  with  courtesy,  though  evidently  elevated  by  his  sudden 
change  of  fortune. 