


676  APPENDIX. 

sures  of  economy  to  which  it  was  found  necessary  to  resort  were 
particularly  galling. 

Throughout  this  rebellion  I  was  in  constant  communication 
with  the  Shah,  through  my  assistant,  Lieutenant  J.  B.  ConoUj, 
who  was  in  attendance  on  his  Majesty  in  the  Balla  Hissar.  On 
the  18th  inst.  it  was  agreed  upon  that  our  troops  should  evacuate 
the  Balla  Hissar,  and  return  to  the  cantonments,  while  the  Ba- 
rukzyes  should  have  a  conference  with  his  Majesty  with  a  view 
to  his  retaining  the  nominal  powers  of  sovereignty,  they  for  their 
own  security  placing  a  guard  of  their  own  in  the  upper  citadel 
No  sooner,  however,  had  our  troops  left  the  Balla  Hissar,  than  his 
Majesty,  owing  to  some  panic  or  misunderstanding,  ordered  the 
gate  to  be  shut,  and  the  proposed  conference  was  thereby  prevented. 
So  offended  were  the  Barukzyes,  that  they  determined  never  to  o£fer 
his  Majesty  the  same  terms  again.  In  explanation  of  his  conduct, 
his  Majesty  states  that  the  party  whom  the  Barukzyes  dearcd 
to  introduce  was  not  that  party  which  had  been  agreed  upon. 

His  Majesty  shut     *     ♦     *     ♦ 
True  Copy. 

(Signed)  G.  St.  P.  Lawrence,  Capt., 

Mil.  Sec,  late  Envoy  and  Minister. 

IMS.  Records.;\ 

[Vol.  II.,  Page  106.] 

STATEMENT  OF  CAPTAIN  MACKENZIE. 
[Belative  to  the  Circumstances  preceding  the  Death  of  Sir  W.  Mocnagfaten.] 

The  proposition  which  induced  the  envoy  (in  opposition  to  his 
theretofore  avowed  principle  and  practice  in  refusing  to  meet 
Mahomed  Akbar  or  any  of  the  other  Khans,  save  in  a  body)  to 
grant  the  fatal  interview  to  the  Sirdar  and  his  more  imm^ate 
confederates,  had  emanated  from  the  murderer  himself,  and  had 
been  conveyed  to  the  envoy  the  night  previously  by  Mahomed 
Sadig  Kiian,  half  brother  of  Akbar,  by  Surwar  Khan  Lohanee, 
who  came  into  the  cantonment  in  company  with  the  late  Captain 
Skinner,  then  released  for  the  first  time  from  the  custody  in  which 
he  had  been  retained,  first  by  Ameen-oollah  Khan,  and  latterly  by 
Mahomed  Akbar  himself. 

The  Sirdar  had  acquainted  Captain  Skinner  with  the  nature  of 
his  pretended  wishes,  as  if  in  friendly  conference,  requesting  him 
to  act  the  part  of  chief  ambassador.  Captain  Skinner's  disapproval 


APPENDIX.  677 

of  which  in  all  probability  saved  his  life  for  the  time  being;  but 
he,  Captain  Skinner,  was  the  only  officer  present  during  the 
eventful  conference  of  the  evening  of  the  22nd,  and  from  him  I 
subsequently  derived  the  information  which  I  now  give  of  the 
nature  of  Mahomed  Akbar's  message.  It  was  to  this  effect, — that 
he  and  his  particular  friends  (to  wit,  the  Ghilzyes)  should  either 
come  over  in  a  body  into  the  cantonment,  placing  themselves 
under  the  orders  of  the  envoy,  or  that,  at  a  preconcerted  signal, 
without  giving  warning  to  the  other  confederates,  in  concert  with 
a  body  of  British  troops,  take  possession  of  the  fort  of  Mahmood 
Khan ;  then  seizing  the  person  of  Ameen-oollah  Lohganee,  whom 
for  a  pecuniary  reward  they  proposed  to  murder;  that  the  Sirdar 
should  acknowledge  Shah  Soojah  for  his  sovereign,  his  reward 
being  the  payment — a  present  bonus  from  the  British  Govern- 
ment— of  thirty  lakhs  of  rupees,  and  a  stipend  of  four  lakhs  of 
rupees  per  annum  for  life ;  that  the  British  troops  should  be  allowed 
to  remain  unmolested,  as  if  with  the  perfect  concurrence  and  by 
the  express  wish  of  the  so-formed  Afghan  Government,  for  a  period 
of  six  months,  at  which  time  they  were  to  evacuate  the  country  as 
if  by  their  own  free  will,  thus  carrying  with  them  an  untarnished 
reputation  (the  expression  was  **  saving  their  PurrfaA"),  and  thus 
securing  a  favourable  opportunity  for  the  British  home  Govern- 
ment to  negotiate  a  treaty  favourable  to  the  security  of  our  Indian 
frontier  with  the  cabinet  of  St.  Petersburgh.  Up  to  that  date, 
viz.,  22nd  of  December,  Sir  Wm.  Macnaghten  had,  in  spite  of  his 
conscientious  fulfilment  of  his  verbal  engagements  with  the 
assembled  Khawaneen  (for  no  written  treaty  had  theretofore  been 
exchanged),  been  worn  out  by  their  utter  falsehood  and  bad  faith, 
their  original  demands  having  risen  to  a  pitch  of  insolence  and 
unreasonableness  which  amounted  to  open  mockery — their  con- 
duct had  in  fact  virtually  released  him  from  any  obligation  to 
adhere  to  any  of  his  original  propositions ;  and  in  despair,  as  a 
drowning  man  catches  at  straws,  the  troops  having  long  before 
proved  themselves  utterly  inadequate  to  his  support,  or  in  fact  to 
their  own  protection,  with  immediate  ruin  and  disgrace  to  him- 
self and  his  country  staring  him  in  the  face,  he  was  in  an  evil 
moment  induced  to  assent  to  the  above  proposals,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  murder  of  Ameen-oollah,  from  which  (Captain  S. 
assured  me)  he  shrank  with  abhorrence  and  disgust^  assuring  the 
ambassadors  that  as  a  British  functionary  nothing  would  induce 
him  to  pay  a  price  for  blood.     So  far  as  it  may  be  said  that  the 