

I  had  soon  occasion  to  rejoice  that  Sir  Edmund  was  not  ap- 
pointed to  the  command  on  my  sole  responsibility,  for  the  four 
sepoy  corps  first  sent,  under  Brigadier  Wild,  having  been  most 


682  APPENDIX. 

sadly  mismanaged  (at  the  instance  of  the  political  atUhorUiet^ 
against  my  instructions  and  earnest  caution\  when  Major-Greneral 
Pollock  arrived  at  Peshawur  he  found  1800  men  of  the  four 
regiments  in  hospital ;  the  sepoys  declaring  that  they  would  not 
advance  again  through  the  Khybar  Pass;  the  Sikh  troops  spread- 
ing alarm^  and  in  all  ways  encouraging  and  screening  their 
desertion,  which  was  considerable.  It  was  well  that  a  cautious, 
cool  officer  of  the  Company's  army  should  have  to  deal  with  them 
in  such  a  temper,  363  miles  from  our  frontier.  Greneral  Pollock 
managed  them  exceedingly  well,  but  he  did  not  venture  to  enter 
the  pass  till  April  (two  months  and  a  half  after  Brigadier  Wild's 
failure),  when  reinforced  by  the  3rd  Dragoons,  a  regiment  of 
cavalry,  a  troop  of  horse  artillery,  and  other  details.  Lord  Hill 
will  at  once  perceive  that  the  morale  must  have  been  low  when 
horse  artilkry  and  cavalry  were  required  to  induce  the  General 
to  advance,  with  confidence,  through  this  formidable  pass.  Any 
precipitancy  on  the  part  of  a  general  officer  panting  for  fame 
might  have  had  the  worst  effect.  I  must  now  return  to  Sir  J. 
Thackwell's  appeal.  The  General  Order,  quoted  very  ingenuously 
by  the  Major-General,  contains  a  full  and  complete  reply  to  his 
complaint.  He  was  senior  to  Major-General  Pollock,  and  his 
proceeding  with  the  3rd  Dragoons  would  have  interfered  with  a 
divisional  command.  He  certainly  did  oflfer  to  serve  under  that 
officer,  but  I  could  not  recommend  the  government  to  suffer  him 
to  do  so,  all  such  arrangements  being  in  my  opinion  most  &ulty 
in  principle,  and,  depending  chiefly  on  good  temper,  dangerous. 
I  have  since  called  up  Sir  Joseph  Thackwell  to  my  head-quarters 
in  order  to  command  the  cavalry,  had  it  been  necessary  (as  seemed 
possible)  last  winter  to  collect  an  army.  The  Major-Greneral  is 
in  error  when  he  states  that  I  intended  him  to  command  an 
army  of  observation  on  the  Sutlej:  that  post  I  retained  for 
myself,  aided  by  Lieutenant-General  Sir  Robert  Arbuthnot.  In 
November  next  it  is  proposed  to  collect  an  army  of  reserve  in 
this  vicinity,  and  Sir  J.  Thackwell  will  have  the  command  of 
the  cavalry.  I  cannot  have  the  smallest  objection  to  the  Major- 
General's  bringing  himself  to  Lord  Hill's  notice  as  he  has  done, 
except  the  infraction  of  a  rule  in  doing  so  direct.  But  if  he  had 
remembered  that  he  commanded  the  cavalry  of  Lord  Keane's 
army;  had  been  twice  named  by  me  for  similar  duty;  has  long 
been  a  Brigadier  commwidcvxi^  «i  Kv^m^iTR.  ^^t^taAion;  he  would 
hove  found  little  cauae  lo  cota^iva.  ^l  '^  iotXxiTL^  <st  t^kj^^^x.  \ 