

7.  On  the6th  ult.  I  received  a  hurried  note  from  Major  Pottinger, 
to  the  effect  that  he  was  closely  besieged  at  Charekar,  and  unable 
to  hold  out  for  want  of  water.  Major  Pottinger  himself,  with 
Lieutenant  Haughton,  came  into  cantonments  a  day  or  two  after- 
wards, having  left  the  4th  Regiment  in  a  disorganised  state  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Istaleff;  but,  melancholy  to  relate,  that  no 
authentic  tidings  of  them  have  up  to  this  day  been  received. 
There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  entire  corps  (officers  and 
men)  have  been  annihilated.  Captains  Codrington  and  Rattray 
and  Lieutenant  Salisbury  were  killed  before  Major  Pottinger  left 
Charekar,  and  both  he  and  Lieutenant  Haughton  were  severely 
wounded. 

8.  I  had  wvlttcu  \o  C\\tvi\s\\\xT  ^wA.  Vq  Ci\\vi^i\muck  for  assistance 


APPENDIX.  673 

immediately  on  the  occurrence  of  the  outbreak,  but  General  Sale's 
brigade  had  proceeded  to  Jellalabad,  the  whole  country  between 
this  and  that  place  being  in  a  state  of  insurrection,  and  a  return  to 
Caubul  being  deemed  impracticable.  From  Candahar,  though  I 
sent  Cossids  vrith  pressing  requisitions  for  assistance  almost  every 
day,  I  could  gain  no  intelligence,  the  road  being  entirely  occupied 
by  the  troops  and  emissaries  of  the  rebels.  We  learnt  from  native 
reports  that  Ghuznee  was  invested  by  the  enemy,  and  that  Captain 
Woodburn,  who  was  on  his  way  to  Caubul  from  Candahar,  had 
been  massacred,  with  a  party  of  leave-of-absence  men  by  whom 
he  was  accompanied,  in  a  small  fort  on  this  side  of  Ghuznee. 

9.  We  continued,  up  to  the  commencement  of  the  present  month, 
to  derive  a  scanty  supply,  at  great  pecuniary  sacrifices,  from  the 
neighbouring  villages,  but  about  that  time  the  enemy's  plans  had 
become  so  well  organised,  that  our  supplies  from  this  source  were 
cut  off.  The  rebels  daily  made  their  appearance  in  great  force  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  cantonment,  and  I  lament  to  add  that 
their  operations  were  generally  attended  with  success.  The  details 
will  be  communicated  by  the  military  authorities.  In  the  midst 
of  their  successes  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  arrived  from  Toorkistan, 
an  event  which  gave  new  life  to  the  efforts  of  the  rebels. 

10.  In  the  mean  time  I  had  received  so  many  distressful  ac- 
counts from  the  General  commanding  of  the  state  of  our  troops 
and  cattle  from  want  of  provisions,  and  I  had  been  so  repeatedly 
apprised  by  him  (for  reasons  which  he  will  himself  doubtless  ex- 
plain) of  the  hopelessness  of  further  resistance,  that,  on  the  24th 
ultimo,  I  deemed  it  my  duty  to  address  an  official  letter  to  him, 
a  copy  of  which  accompanies  Appendix  A. 