

What  I  have  stated  above  will  not  be  considered  as  justifying 
excesses  on  the  part  of  a  British  army ;  but  it  may  be  admitted  in 
extenuation  of  individual  cases. 

A  few  days  previous  to  the  march  of  the  brigade  under  Bri- 
gadier Monteith,  an  European  was  murdered  by  the  Afghans  at 
Jellalabad.  The  destruction  of  Alii  Boghan  by  some  men  under 
Brigadier  Monteith *s  command,  was  caused  by  one  of  those 
sudden  bursts  of  feeling  which,  being  wholly  unexpected,  no  pre- 
cautions were  deemed  necessary;  but  it  was  a  solitary  instance, 
and  occurred  nearly  as  follows: — Some  camp  followers  entered 
the  village,  and  having  found  parts  of  the  dress  of  some  of  our 
soldiers  who  had  been  massacred  on  the  mai*ch  from  Caubul,  a 
number  of  men  proceeded  to  the  village,  which  was  eventually 
burnt,  whether  accidentally  or  intentionally  is  doubtful,  so  very 
soon  was  the  mischief  perpetrated,  that  the  Brigadier  was  hardly 
aware  of  it  till  the  place  was  in  flames.  He  immediately  took 
measures  to  prevent  a  recurrence  of  such  scenes,  and  I  wrote  in 
strong  terms  on  the  subject.  Subsequent  to  that  event,  during 
the  whole  time  the  Brigadier  was  detached,  I  heard  of  no  more 
excesses.  In  the  instance  of  Alii  Boghan,  after  a  most  minute 
inquiry,  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  not  a  man,  woman,  or  child 
was  injured,  and  I  know  the  greater  part  of  the  property  was  re- 
turned to  the  head  man  of  the  village. 

In  subsequent  engagements  with  the  enemy  at  Mamookail, 
JugduUuck,  and  Tezeen,  I  neither  saw  nor  heard  of  any  excesses. 


APPENDIX.  685 

A  report  was  circulated  that  an  European  was  burnt  alive  at 
JugduUuck,  and  that  two  Afghans  were  burnt  in  like  manner  by 
our  troops  in  revenge,  the  whole  of  which  was  an  infamous 
fabrication. 

I  know  of  no  instances  of  cruelty  or  excess  at  Istaliff;  and  the 
feeling  of  the  army  could  not  have  been  very  prone  thereto  when 
about  four  or  five  hundred  women  and  children  were  protected 
from  insult  and  injury,  and  made  over  to  their  families  after  the 
engagement.  If  any  excess  has  been  committed  which  I  have 
not  noticed,  I  can  only  affirm  that  I  recollect  none ;  and  I  beg  to 
add,  that  the  praise  bestowed  on  the  troops  on  a  late  occasion  by 
your  Lordship  for  their  **  forbearance  in  victory,"  is,  as  far  as  I 
am  able  to  judge,  well  merited;  and  I  trust  your  Lordship  will 
never  have  cause  to  alter  your  good  opinion  of  their  conduct. 

On  the  subject  of  trees  being  destroyed,  I  am  unable  to  call  to 
recollection  what  occurred  in  Brigadier  Monteith's  detachment; 
and  the  only  instance  of  their  destruction,  which  came  under  my 
personal  observation,  was  at  Mamookail,  where  the  ground  was 
such  that  I  was  obliged  to  encamp  the  different  regiments  in  the 
gardens  surrounding  the  fort.  Without  this  precaution  I  should 
have  been  subjecting  the  troops  to  constant  annoyance,  as  the 
enemy  would  certainly  have  occupied  them.  The  destruction  of 
the  vines  and  other  small  plants  was  almost  a  necessary  conse- 
quence of  our  occupying  Mamookail. 