


678  APPENDIX- 

lute  Envoy  allowed  hiniBclf  to  be  duped  by  s  man  of  the  notoiio 
bad  character  of  Mahomed  Akbar  Khan  in  all  matten  of  % 
iaith  even  among  his  treacherous  countrymen,  I  can  only  mj 
it  is  Bot  only  my  firm  belief,  but  that  also  of  Captain  Lawrei 
and  others  who  best  knew  Sir  William,  that  two  montha  <^ 
cessant  fatigue  of  mind  and  body,  and  the  load  of  care  which 
during  tliat  time  weighed  him  down,  had  at  last  completely 
hinged  his  strong  mind.  Contrary  to  his  usual  practice,  he  i 
suited  none  of  tboac  who  had  all  along  posaened  his  perfect  i 
fidencc;  his  manner  was  flurried  and  agitated;  and  when,  ; 
vious  to  leaving  the  cantoumcnt  on  the  morning  of  the  23rd 
having  for  the  first  time  learnt  his  intentions,  declared  my  < 
viction  "  tliat  it  was  a  trap,"  he  abruptly  answered,  "  Leave 
to  manage  that;  trust  mc  for  that."  He  also  observed,  I  beli 
to  Captains  Trevor  and  Lawrence,  while  riding  forth  to  the  si 
of  his  murder,' "  Death  is  preferable  to  the  life  we  are  lev 
now." — [Answer  to  Interrogatoriet  put  by  Oen.  PoUock.  MS. 
cordM.  I  have  given  this  statement,  and  the  important  evidi 
contained  in  the  next  section  of  the  Appendix,  in  place  of 
letters  referred  to  at  page  181,  note.] 


[Vol.  II.,  Page  106.] 

[Instead  of  the  letter  from  Mohun  Lai  alluded  to  at  page  106,  note,  I  giv 
following  extmcta  Trom  an  elaborate  article  in  the  Fnatd  iif  India  (Senn 

newspaper),  on  tlic  cliurgcs  brought  againit  Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten.] 

"  To  crown  the  evidence  of  Sir  William  Macnaghtcn'a  n 
having  been  implicated  in  this  alleged  assassinatioQ  of  the 
cliicfa,  we  have  an  acknowledgment  under  Mohun  Lal'a  own  sij 
tiirc.     When  he  was  claiming  remuneration  for  hia  services  of 
Court  of  Directors,  he  delivered  in  the  following  document,  wl 
has  been  copied  for  u^  from  a  paper  in  his  own  handwriting. 
Advanced  to  Abdool   Aziz,  who  ofiered  to  kill 
Abdoolkili  Khan,   by  such  means  which  the 
Envoy  did  not  approve,  therefore  the  balance       Rs. 

11,000  rupees  was  not  paid 4,000 

"  Thus  it  appears  that  while  Mohun  Lai  told  the  Reviewer  I 
Sir  William  objected  to  pay  the  balance,  because  he  had 
seen  the  heads;  lie  told  the  Court  of  Directors  that  the  bala 
was  not  paid  because  the  Envoy  did  not  approve  of  the  nu 
liiat  had  been  uscdV     •     •     •     • 


APPENDIX.  679 

Major  Colin  Troup  writes  thus  in  a  letter  now  before  us: 
**  Akbar  Khan  never  would  allow  Macnaghten's  name  to  be 
mentioned  before  him  but  in  terms  of  the  greatest  respect;  and 
has  in  private,  both  to  poor  Pottinger  and  myself,  over  and  over 
again  regretted  the  deed,  and  stated  that  it  never  was  premedi* 
tated;  so  far  the  contrary,  that,  having  been  accused  by  Ameen- 
ooUah's  party  of  being  friendly  to,  and  intriguing  with  the  English, 
to  disarm  suspicion,  he  in  open  Durbar  volunteered,  if  he  was 
allowed  time,  to  bring  Macnaghten  a  prisoner  into  Ameen-oollah's 
house  within  eight  days.    This  being  agreed  to,  it  was  then  that 
he  planned  the  treacherous  conference  with  Sir  William;  but, 
finding,  after  some  delay,  that  he  was  not  likely  to  accomplish  his 
object,  and  fearing  to  meet  his  party  if  he  failed  in  his  boasted 
adventure,  and  hearing  a  cry  that  our  troops  were  marching  out 
of  the  cantonments  to  where  he  and  Sir  William  were  sitting,  he, 
in  a  moment  of  desperation,  out  with  his  pistol  and  shot  Sir 
William ;  but  he  always  loudly  declared  that  on  the  morning  of 
the  conference,  when  he  came  out  to  meet  Sir  William,  he  never 
for  one  moment  contemplated  doing  him  any  harm  whatever.     I 
have  all  this  written  down,  and  can,  if  necessary,  take  my  oath  to 
what  I  have  written,  as  coming  from  the  mouth  of  Akbar  Khan 
himself,  and  you  are  most  welcome  to  make  what  use  of  it  you 
please,  in  defence  of  the  character  of  one  of  the  brightest  orna* 