


AFPSNDIX.  683 

have  known  many  of  her  Majesty's  officers,  Colonels  and  old 
Lieutenant-Colonels,  to  reside  ten  to  fifteen  years  in  India  with- 
out having  had  any  such  opportunities  of  service  and  distinction, 
and  further  to  command  divisions  without  receiving  the  smallest 
remuneration. 

I  have  the  honour,  Ac. 

(Signed)        J.  NiCOLLfl. 
P.S. — I  am  happy  to  say  that  the  Governor-General  has  dis- 
placed all  the  minor  political  agents  in  Afghanistan  but  one,  and 
entrusted  the  power  to  the  Generals  Pollock  and  Nott. 

J.N. 

Simlah,  2nd  Sept.,  1842. 

IMS.  Records,'] 


[Vol.  II.,  Book  VIII.] 

BIB  GEORGE  POLLOCK  TO  LORD  ELLENBOROUGH. 

[Touching  the  Destruction  of  Bazaar  at  Caubul,  and  the  imputed  Excessei 

of  the  Troops.] 

April  2nd,  1843,  Allahabad 

My  Lord, 

I  have  had  the  honour  to  receive  your  Lordship's  letter, 
dated  23rd  ultimo,  intimating  that  disapprobation  had  been  ex- 
pressed at  the  destruction  of  the  bazaar  and  mosque  at  Caubul, 
and  of  trees;  also,  that  excesses  have  been  imputed  to  the  troops. 
It  is  difficult  to  grapple  with  vague  and  anonymous  accusa- 
tions against  the  conduct  of  the  troops.  Many  detailed  state- 
ments in  the  newspapers  were  entirely  unfounded^  and  were  got 
up  with  the  sole  object  of  creating  a  sensation;  but  I  confess  that 
if  individual  and  isolated  instances  of  excess  had  occurred,  I 
should  not  have  been  much  surprised,  composed,  as  all  Indian 
armies  are,  of  such  a  heterogeneous  mass,  comprising  all  classes  and 
castes ;  more  than  two-thirds  of  whom  are  either  public  or  pri- 
vate servants  and  adventurers,  who,  though  nominally  following 
some  occupation  useful  to  an  army,  proceed  with  it  for  the  sole 
purpose  of  plundering  when  a  favourable  opportunity  offers. 
Some  excesses  may,  unknown  to  me,  have  been  committed ;  but 
I  will  venture  to  assert  that  no  troops  ever  conducted  themselves 
with  more  forbearance  under  such  unprecedented  aggravations: 
perhaps  no  army  was  ever  placed  in  a  viioi^  Xr^Vxi^^ANxaJ^wi* 


684  APPENDIX. 

During  the  whole  course  of  their  progress  towards  the  capital 
they  had  ocular  proofs  of  the  treachery  and  brutality  of  a  merci- 
less enemy;  but  still  I  am  unable  to  call  to  mind  any  wanton, 
deliberate  act  of  inhumanity  on  the  part  of  the  troops ;  and  can- 
not but  regret  that  the  culpable  instances  alluded  to  have  not 
been  specified,  as  I  may  possibly  be  suspected  of  suppressing 
facts.  This,  however,  I  beg  to  assure  your  Lordship  I  have  no 
wish  to  do. 

The  feeling  of  the  Hindoos  against  the  Afghans  was  tcij 
naturally  strong,  in  consequence  of  the  latter  having  deprived  the 
Hindoos  of  their  caste  whenever  they  came  into  their  power; 
but  no  troops  could  feel  otherwise  than  excited  at  the  sight  of 
the  skeletons  of  their  late  brethren  in  arms,  which  still  lie  cover- 
ing the  road  from  Gundamuck  to  Caubul ;  and  as  if  the  more  to 
rouse  a  spirit  of  revenge,  the  barricade  at  JugduUuck  was  lite- 
rally covered  with  skeletons. 