

ments  our  country  ever  did,  or  ever  will  produce." 

We  have  the  most  abundant  evidence  that  Sir  William  Mac- 
naghten's  character  for  integrity  and  good  faith  always  stood 
equally  high  among  the  Afghans;  and  that  when  their  chiefs 
were  triumphant,  and  bitterly  reproached  the  British  prisoners  for 
the  wrongs  their  nation  had  inflicted  on  Afghanistan,  the  charge 
of  encouraging  assassination  was  never  whispered  for  a  moment. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lawrence  states:  **  During  our  lengthened 
imprisonment,  I  unhesitatingly  affirm  that  not  one  of  the  prisoners 
ever  heard  Mahomed  Akbar,  or  any  of  the  chiefs,  accuse  Sir 
William  of  bribing  men  to  assassinate  them;  and  it  is  not  likely 
they  would  have  been  silent,  if  they  had  so  heavy  a  charge  to 
bring  forward.  On  the  contrary,  I,  as  well  as  others,  have  heard 
both  Mahomed  Akbar  IQian  and  other  chiefs  express  deep  regret 
at  the  Envoy's  untimely  death,  and  much  admiration  of  his  cha- 
racter. Ameen-oollah  Khan,  when  1  was  his  prisoner,  told  me 
that  Sir  W.  H.  Macnaghten  had  offered  a  lakh  of  rupees  for  his 
head.     Prisonez^  though  I  was,  I  deivoxmcfcdL  \\i\tv  cy^T\.X>M^w.  ^^ 


680  APPENDIX. 

an  Infamous  lie,  and  never  heard  any  more  about  it."     Captain 
Colin  Mackenzie  writes:  "If  Sir  William  had  ever  instructed 
Mohun  Lai  or   any   other   person   to   employ  assassins  for  the 
removal  of  our  treacherous  and  inveterate  enemies,  it  would  have 
been  well  known  to  the  Afghans  themselves,  and  they  would  pot 
have  failed  to  urge  so  plausible  a  ground  of  complaint  against  us, 
while  we  were  captives  in  their  hands,  which  they  never  did,  al- 
though they  constantly  reproached  us  with  every  act  of  supposed 
injustice  on  the  part  of  government,  and  with  the  private  vices 
and  improprieties  of  individuals."    Captain  W,  Anderson,  another 
of  the  prisoners,  writes:  **  I  never  heard  any  Afghan  accuse  Sir 
W.  H.  Macnaghten  of  any  acts  for  which  any  friend  of  his,  or 
any  Englishman,  need  feel  ashamed.     On  the  contrary,  I  always 
heard  him  spoken  of  with  great  respect,  and  frequently  with 
admiration."     Captain  Warburton  states:    **I  went  into  Caubul 
to  the  Newab's  on  the  28th,  I  think,  of  December,  1841.    I 
remained  in  his  house  till  we  were  forced  out  of  it  on  the  12th  of 
April  following.     During  that  time,  no  one  was  prevented  seeing 
us.     Our  party  consisted  of  J.  ConoUy,  Airey,  Walsh,  Webb, 
Drummond,  and  myself  (besides  Haughton  and  Campbell,  who 
joined  us  afterwards).     We  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  and 
conversing  with  most  of  the  chiefs  at  Caubul,  who  remained  after 
Akbar  Khan  had  left.     None  of  these  people  ever  concealed  their 
opinions  regarding  the  acts  of  our  government,  or  people.    Ameen- 
oollah  Khan,  in  particular,  spoke   at  times  very  strongly,  but 
neither  from  him,  nor  from  any  other,  during  the  period  of  my 
residence,  did  I  ever  hear  a  word  regarding  the  charge  now 
brought  forward  against  Sir  William  of  having  offered  money  for 
the  assassination  of  the  chiefs.     I  had  sufficient  opportunities  of 
hearing  something  about  the  matter,  if  any  such  offer  had  been 
made." 