

15.  The  next  day  I  was  waited  upon  by  a  deputation  from  the 
chiefs,  with  a  proposition  that  Shah  Soojah-ool-Moolk  should  be 
left  nominally  as  king — the  Barukzye  exercising  the  functions 
of  minister;  but  this  proposition,  owing  to  the  mutual  jealousies 
of  the  parties  concerned,  as  will  appear  in  the  sequel,  fell  to  the 
ground. 

16.  From  the  foregoing  review  of  occurrences,  I  tnist  it  will  be 
evident  that  I  had  no  recourse  left  but  that  of  negotiation ;  and  I 

*  Given  «A>  1918^  Yl*^. — AvJliKor. 


APPENDIX.  675 

had  ascertained  beyond  a  doubt  that  the  rebel  chiefs  were  perfectly 
aware  of  our  helpless  situation,  and  that  no  terms  short  of  our 
quitting  Afghanistan  would  satisfy  them. 

17.  The  whole  country,  as  far  as  we  could  learn,  had  risen  in 
rebellion;  our  communications  on  all  sides  were  cut  off;  almost 
every  public  officer,  whether  paid  by  ourselves  or  his  Majesty, 
had  declared  for  the  new  governor,  and  by  far  the  greater  number 
even  of  his  Majesty^s  domestic  servants  had  deserted  him.  We 
had  been  fighting  for  forty  days  against  very  superior  numbers, 
under  most  disadvantageous  circumstances,  with  a  deplorable  loss 
of  valuable  lives,  and  in  a  day  or  two  we  must  have  perished 
from  hunger^  to  say  nothing  of  the  advanced  season  of  the  year, 
and  the  extreme  cold,  from  the  effects  of  which  our  native  troops 
were  suffering  severely.  I  had  been  repeatedly  apprised  by  the 
military  authorities  that  nothing  could  be  done  with  our  troops; 
and  I  regret  to  add  that  desertions  to  the  enemy  were  becoming 
of  frequent  occurrence  amongst  our  troops.  The  terms  I  secured 
were  the  best  obtainable,  and  the  destruction  of  fifteen  thousand 
human  beings  would  little  have  benefited  our  country,  whilst  our 
government  would  have  been  almost  compelled  to  avenge  our 
fate,  at  whatever  cost.  We  shall  part  with  the  Afghans  as  friends, 
and  I  feel  satisfied  that  any  government  which  may  be  esta- 
blished hereafter,  will  always  be  disposed  to  cultivate  a  good  un- 
derstanding with  us. 

18.  A  retreat  without  terms  would  have  been  impracticable. 
It  is  true  that,  by  entering  into  terms,  we  are  prevented  from 
undertaking  the  conquest  of  the  entire  country,  a  measure  which, 
from  my  knowledge  of  the  views  of  government,  I  feel  convinced 
would  never  be  resorted  to,  even  were  the  means  at  hand.  But 
such  a  project  in  the  present  state  of  our  Indian  finances,  and  the 
requisitions  for  troops  in  various  quarters,  I  knew  could  not  be 
entertained.  If  the  expense  already  incurred  in  such  a  case  would 
have  been  intolerable  .  .  .  {^Sentence  imperfect.'] 

13.  I  would  beg  leave  to  refer  to  the  whole  tenor  of  my  former 
correspondence  for  the  causes  which  have  produced  this  insurrec- 
tion. Independently  of  the  genius  of  the  people,  which  is  prone 
to  rebellion,  we,  as  conquerors  and  foreigners,  of  a  different  creed, 
were  viewed  with  particular  disfavour  by  the  chiefs,  whilst  the 
acts  of  some  of  us  were  particularly  calculated  to  excite  the  general 
jealousy  of  a  sensitive  nation.  The  haughty  demeanour  of  his 
Majesty  was  not  agreeable  to  the  nobles,  and,  above  all^  the  mea.- 