


APPENDIX.  689 

I  beg)  however,  to  state  distinctly,  that  until  plundering  com- 
menced supplies  of  every  description  were  abundant,  and  the 
people  were  fast  returning  to  the  city.  In  reply  to  that  part  of 
the  third  paragraph  In  which  I  am  directed  to  state  what  Injury  I 
understood  had  been  committed  by  the  Candahar  force  after  my 
march,  I  have  merely  to  observe,  that  from  all  I  had  heard  I 
thought  it  advisable  that  the  whole  foix^e  should  move  from 
Caubul  the  same  day ;  and  this  precaution,  I  have  reason  to  believe, 
prevented  some  excesses. 

In  reply  to  the  fourth  paragraph^  I  believe  I  may  with  great 
truth  state  that  no  Afghans  were  destroyed  in  cold  bloody  either 
before  or  after  reaching  Caubul.  No  women  were  either  dis- 
honoured or  murdered,  that  I  am  aware  of.  With  regard  to  the 
destruction  of  that  particular  part  of  the  Caubul  bazaar  where  the 
envoy's  remains  were  treated  with  indignity,  and  brutally  dragged 
through  to  be  there  dishonoured  and  spit  upon  by  every  Mussul- 
man^  I  admit  that  I  considered  It  the  most  suitable  place  In  which 
to  leave  decided  proofs  of  the  power  of  the  British  army,  with- 
out Impeaching  Its  humanity. 

I  have,  as  directed  by  you,  forwarded  a  copy  of  this  letter  and 
the  original  documents  to  Colonel  Stewart,  for  the  information  of 
the  Governor-General. 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  Sir,&c.  &c.  &c. 

Geo.  Pollock. 


POLITICAL  DEPARTMENT. 

THE   COUBT  OF   DIRECTOBS  TO  THE  GOVERNOR-GENERAL   OP 

IINDA  IN  COUNCIL. 

London,  2nd  April,  1843. 

The  Secret  Committee  has  communicated  to  us  the  letters 
noted  below*  relating  to  Inquiries  addressed  by  order  of  the 
Governor-General  to  the  General  Officers  lately  commanding  in 

*  Extract    letter   from    the    Go-        Major-General    Pollock    to   Lord 

vemor-General  to  tlie  Secret  Com-  Ellenborough,  2nd  April,  1843. 
mittee,  No.  26,  dated  6th  April,  1843.        Major-General  Pollock  to    Lord 

Letter  from  Major-General  Mac-  Ellenborough,  16th  April,  1843. 
Caskil  to  Military  Secretary  to  Go-        Major-General    Nott  to    Military 

vernmenty  2nd  April,  1843.  Secretary  to   Government  of  India, 

Letter  to  Adjutant-General  Lum-  4th  April,  1843. 
Icy,  2nd   April,   1843,    with    enclo-        Major-General  Nott  ls\  KASjaXawsN*- 

sure.  Oeti^t^X  VaxtxAs^  ,  V^  Kv^^*'^^*^^  - 

VOL.  IL  2  i: 


690  APPENDIX. 

Afghanistan,  on  the  subject  of  certain  rumours  of  outrages  alleged 
to  have  been  perpetrated  by  the  British  toops,  and  conveying 
replies  to  those  inquiries  from  Major-Generals  Sir  George  Pollock^ 
Sir  William  Nott,»  and  Sir  John  M^Caskill. 

When  these  rumours  were  first  brought  to  our  knowledge,  we 
deemed  them  to  be  great  exaggerations,  if  not  altogether  un- 
founded; and  we  did  not  doubt  that  we  should  receive,  in  due 
course,  full  and  exculpatory  explanations  as  to  what  had  actually 
taken  place. 