

With  regard  to  the  destruction  of  the  Caubul  bazaar  and 
mosque,  it  may  possibly  be  supposed  that  with  them  was  de- 
stroyed other  property;  but  this  was  not  the  case. 

The  insult  offered  to  the  remains  of  the  late  Envoy  was  noto- 
rious to  the  whole  of  the  chiefs  and  inhabitants  of  the  city.  They 
admitted  that  the  mutilated  body  was  dragged  through  the 
bazaar  and  treated  by  the  populace  with  every  indignity,  and 
eventually  hung  there,  that  every  Afghan  in  the  city  might  wit- 
ness the  treatment  of  the  remains  of  the  representative  of  the 
British  Government.  The  intended  measure  was  communicated 
to  the  chiefs,  who  not  only  admitted  the  propriety  of  destroying 
a  place  where  such  scenes  had  transpired,  but  offered  to,  and  did, 
accompany  the  party  sent  for  its  destruction.  Those  who  resided 
at  and  near  the  bazaar  had  two  days'  previous  notice  to  remove 
their  property  (which  they  did),  and  I  am  not  aware  of  any  in- 
stances of  violence  having  occurred.     It  was  not  possible  entirely 


686  APPENDIX. 

to  prevent  plundering;  but  during  the  time  the  engineer  was  em- 
ployed in  the  destruction  of  the  bazaar  and  motque  attached,  both 
cavalry  and  infantry  were  on  duty  in  the  city  to  prevent  any 

outrage. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

Qeo.  Polloci:. 

IMS.  Records.'] 


FROM  QENEEAL  POLLOCK  TO  LORD  ELLENBOBGUGH. 

Ghazeepore,  lOth  April,  1843. 

My  Lord, 

Since  I  had  the  honour  to  address  your  Lordship  on  the 
2nd  instant,  in  reply  to  your  Lordship's  letter  dated  the  23rd 
ultimo^  it  has  occurred  to  me  that  I  could  not  produce  better 
proof  of  the  forbearance  of  the  troops  under  my  command  than 
by  a  reference  to  their  conduct  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  of 
September  last.  I  have  already  officially  detailed  the  number  of 
troops  which  accompanied  me  on  the  occasion  of  planting  the 
colours  on  the  Balla  Hissar.  It  was  deemed  advisable  on  that 
occasion  to  go  through  a  part  of  the  city,  and  although  the  troops 
had  arrived  only  the  day  before  from  a  march  which  was  abun- 
dantly calculated  to  irritate  and  exasperate  them,  they  so  fully 
and  literally  obeyed  the  orders  I  had  previously  given,  that  not  a 
house  or  an  individual  was  injured,  either  in  going  or  returning 
from  the  Balla-Hissar.  The  destruction  of  the  residence  of  Eoda 
Bux,  the  chief  of  Teezeen,  may  perhaps  have  been  considered  an 
excess ;  I  will  therefore  explain,  that  during  the  time  the  army  re- 
mained in  advance  of  Teezeen^  the  chief  of  that  place  was  the 
cause  of  our  communication  being  cut  ofif.  He  was  repeatedly 
warned  what  the  consequences  would  be,  when  an  opportunity 
offered,  if  he  persisted  in  such  a  course;  but  I  beg  to  add  that 
the  injury  sustained  by  the  chief  in  the  destruction  of  his  resi- 
dence entailed  no  loss  on  others  that  I  am  aware  of,  as  the  injury 
done  was  confined  almost  entirely  to  the  fortified  dwelling. 
Forage  was  found  there  and  brought  to  camp,  but  not  an  indi- 
vidual was  injured. 