

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c.  &o. 

Geo.  Pollock. 


APPENDIX.  687 


FROM  GENERAL  POLLOCK  TO  THE  ADJUTANT-GENERAL. 

Dinapore,  18th  Aprils  1843. 

Sir, 

I  have  the  honour  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letter  dated  the  29th  ult.,  which  awaited  my  arrival  here.  I  re- 
gret that  I  was  not  sooner  in  possession  of  your  letter,  as  I  fear 
this  will  be  too  late  for  the  purpose  required.  Nearly  all  the  in- 
formation it  is  in  my  power  to  give  is  contained  in  the  accom- 
panying copies  of  letters  which  I  have  addressed  to  the  Right 
Honourable  the  Governor-General  in  reply  to  a  reference  his 
Lordship  was  pleased  to  make  to  me.  With  respect  to  the  extent 
of  injury  done  by  the  brigade  under  Brigadier  Monteith,  I  am 
unable  to  give  any  detailed  account.  The  provisions,  grain,  &c., 
and  materials  for  building,  were  taken  from  those  of  the  inha- 
bitants who  were  openly  opposed  to  our  troops;  but  in  both  cases 
the  cost  of  things  taken,  were  carried  to  the  account  of  govern- 
ment. I  have  already,  in  my  letters  to  his  Lordship,  stated  that  I 
am  not  aware  of  any  Afghans  having  been  killed  when  unresist- 
ing, or  from  any  feeling  of  revenge  on  the  part  of  the  troops. 
Torabauz  Khan,  the  chief  of  Lallpoora,  and  the  governor  of 
Jellalabad,  accompanied  the  brigade  to  point  out  what  property 
should  be  respected.  With  regard  to  the  violation  of  women,  I 
heard  of  no  instance  of  the  kind;  and  I  am  quite  sure  that 
Brigadier  Monteath  would  have  done  his  utmost  to  prevent  such 
excesses.  I  have  stated  to  his  Lordship  what  occurred  at  Mamoo 
Kail,  and  I  know  most  positively  that  no  Afghan  was  killed  on 
that  occasion  except  in  fair  fighting.  The  families  had,  I  believe, 
gone  the  day  before  the  place  was  taken.  I  cannot  say  when  or 
by  whom  the  fort  or  adjoining  houses  were  set  fire  to.  I  passed 
through  with  the  right  column  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  and  did 
not  return  till  the  afternoon,  when  I  had  determined  to  encamp 
there.  On  my  return  I  found  Brigadier  TuUoch  with  his  column 
(the  left)  occupying  the  gardens.  The  fort  and  adjacent  houses 
were  still  burning.  On  the  return  of  the  whole  of  the  troops,  it 
was  necessary  for  their  security  to  take  advantage  of  the  gardens 
surrounded  by  walls,  and  the  men  were  accordingly  encamped 
there.  The  destruction  of  the  vines  was  a  necessary  consequence, 
as  every  one  must  know  who  has  seen  how  grapes  are  cultivated 


688  APPENDIX. 

in  Afghanistan.  There  were  very  few  trees  cut  down,  but  the 
bark  of  a  number  of  them  was  taken  for  about  two  or  three 
inches.  With  reference  to  the  third  paragraph  of  your  letter,  I 
beg  to  state,  that  from  the  date  of  my  arrival  at  Caubul  on  the 
15th  of  September,  the  inhabitants  commenced  Fetursing  to- 
their  houses.  They  had  assurances  from  me  of  protection,  and, 
with  the  exception  of  the  covered  bazaar,  I  did  my  utmost  to 
protect  both  the  inhabitants  and  their  dwellings  from  injury.  I 
have  already  stated  to  his  Lordship  why  I  considered  that  particu- 
lar spot  (the  bazaar)  should  sufier,  and  on  the  9th  of  October  the 
engineer  commenced  his  operations.  I  believe  I  am  quite  justified 
in  stating  that  no  lives  were  lost;  the  private  property  had  been 
removed,  and  I  had  both  cavalry  and  infantry  on  duty  in  the  city 
to  prevent  plundering.  Some  injury  was  no  doubt  sustained  by 
the  city,  but  the  damage  done  even  when  we  left  it  was  partial 
and  comparatively  trivial.  I  consider  it  mere  justice  to  the 
troops  who  proceeded  under  my  command  to  Caubul,  and  who 
passed  over  scenes  which  were  particularly  calculated  to  cause 
great  excitement  among  them,  to  state,  that  their  conduct  on  pro- 
ceeding to  the  Balla  Hissar  (passing  through  a  part  of  the  city) 
was  quite  unexceptionable,  and  the  good  effect  resulting  there- 
from was  immediately  felt:  confidence  was  restored;  in  proof  of 
which  I  may  state  that  supplies  both  of  grain  and  forage  were 
brought  in  abundantly,  everything  being  paid  for.  I  have  no 
memorandum  from  which' to  quote  the  exact  quantities  of  grain 
which  came  into  camp,  but  my  recollection  of  the  quantities  in 
round  numbers  is  as  follows: — The  first  day  500  maunds,  second 
day  1000  maunds,  third  day  1600  maunds,  fourth  day  2000 
maunds,  fifth  day  1000  maunds.  The  falling  off  of  the  supplies 
on  the  fifth  day  was  the  consequence,  I  was  told,  of  some  of  the 
men  of  General  Nott's  force  having  plundered  those  who  were 
bringing  in  supplies.  I  wrote  to  General  Nott  on  the  subject; 
but  from  that  period  the  supplies  never  came  in  so  freely  as 
before,  and  I  am  sorry  to  add  that  many  complaints  were  made. 
I  have  hitherto  been  silent  on  this  subject,  and  should  have 
continued  so,  for  reasons  which  it  is  perhaps  unnecessary  to  ex- 
plain ;  but  as  the  third  paragraph  of  your  letter  calls  for  a  more 
particular  report  than  I  have  hitherto  made,  I  reluctantly  forward 
the  accompanying  documents,  upon  which  it  is  unnecessary  for 
me  to  make  any  commeii\;&. 