collect the required fees. Other Tuscan captains managed to navi­ gate the Straits under their own colors.15 But the Grand Duchy still
wanted the security for its ships which only a treaty could provide. In 1823, the Austrian consul at Constantinople gave helpful advice to
the Tuscan government.16 To gain a treaty, it would have to cul­ tivate the chief ministers of the Porte. Cash might be offered to the grand
vizier and other personages in key positions. If cash payments seemed too crass, the officials were known to be partial to gold tobacco
cases set with diamonds. But beyond cultivating the sym­ pathies of these high-placed Ottomans, the Grand Duchy needed to enlist the help of
the Russians: The Court of Russia will willingly take an active part in the negotia­ tions. It must increase the number of ships able to
anchor at its ports in the Black Sea, and especially at its emporium at Odessa, a market with which the port of Livorno is in active
correspondence. And it would be useful to Russia if our [i.e. the Tuscan] flag might be among those admitted to trade in that sea.17 Treaty
or no treaty, ships were required to stop at Constantinople to obtain written permission (a firman) to sail the Straits. In 1830, the
procedure still took several days and cost 108 piasters.18 But the Ottomans were becoming progressively more liberal in granting the permit.
The Tuscan consul at Constantinople reported in 1832: It is true that for two years the Turkish authorities located at the Dar­ danelles
have abandoned their traditional vigor, so that no visits are made upon ship arrivals, no delay or trouble is caused them.19 The consul,
however, laid stress on the uncertainties inherent in the situation and on the critical need that representatives, such as himself, be
employed to protect the interests of the passing mer­ chants. He predicted darkly: Trade and Industry, 1814-1861 101 The old practices could
be renewed, and could cause critical injuries to those navigators who might lack in such a place consular agents ready to give them
efficacious aid.20 For twenty-five years after the Treaty of Adrianople (1829), the Ottomans did not return to the old policies. Seemingly,
the Otto­ mans learned that the expeditious release of ships increased fees and not foes. At least by the 1850s, consuls or representatives
of ship­ ping companies at Constantinople were applying for firmans in advance of ships’ arrivals, thus minimizing delays.21 The ships were
still subject to numerous charges—to maintain lighthouses and horns, for example. And health regulations, punctiliously enforced, cramped
free-moving traffic.22 Still, from the 1830s shipping moved through the Straits with unprecedented facility. Law and Technology Expeditious
passage through the Straits was a necessary but not sufficient condition for the revival of massive cereal exports from the South Ukraine.
Local harvests obviously mattered, and harvests were poor from 1830 to 1834. Indeed, 1834 was long remembered as a “ black year,” when
people hungered and a few speculators grew rich. For example, in testimony given before a committee of the British House of Commons, an
English merchant told how he had purchased wheat at St. Petersburg in August and shipped it to New­ castle.