F.1.2     Excluding practically irrelevant values for terrain ruggedness
As we discuss in the main body of the text (Section 3), high values of terrain rugged-
ness for some departments may be capturing the high altitude levels due to the
presence of very tall mountains.
    However, not all rugged terrains gave draftees the same chance of success in
escaping their military obligation. Highly rugged areas in the Alps and Pyrenees
were often inaccessible or too dangerous to travel through. Perpetual snows would
cover some steep mountains in both regions and temperatures stayed below freezing
for most of the year. Similarly, these areas were mostly lacking of vegetation and
fauna, due to both their low temperature and high elevations and are known as the
“alpine zone.” This area starts at altitude levels of between 1800 and 2300 meters
in the Alps and at 2300 meters in the Pyrenees (Nagy et al. 2003, p.2).1 In this
appendix, we use two strategies to account for this fact and exclude ruggedness
values that are likely to be irrelevant for conscription choice and therefore could bias
the results:

    • First, we exclude any data point within the raster file with altitude of 2000
      meters above the sea level and higher.

    • Second, we exclude any data point within the raster file classified as being
      covered in mountainous rocks or glaciers by the European geological survey.2

     With respect to the first method, we use the raster files on elevation data provided
by the U.S. Geological Survey and constructed from the Shuttle Radar Topography
Mission. We then modified our department shapefile by removing all land more than
2,000 meters above the sea level.
     For the second method excluding glaciers and mountainous bare rocks, we use
Corine land cover data for the reference year 2006 (CLC2006) which is derived from
satellite imaging (Büttner & Kosztra 2007). We then modified our department shape-
file by removing land cover which was characterized as “glaciers and perpetual snows”
and “bare rocks” in the CLC2006 data.
     Figure 6 shows portions of the raster file excluded from the new calculation of
average departmental ruggedness when using either of our two strategies. Table
7 reproduces the results of evaluating the specifications from Table 1 using both
   1
      The Church of the highest village in Europe, Saint-Véran, is at an elevation of 2,042 meters
above the sea level. Already in 1929, there was only 3 villages inhabited all year above 2,000 meters
in the Alps (Godefroy 1938).
    2
      https://image.discomap.eea.europa.eu/arcgis/rest/services/Corine/CLC2006_WM/
MapServer.

                                                 18
