G       Alternative hypotheses
G.1      The allocation of soldiers
One worry with our results may be that draftees from more rugged regions were allo-
cated systematically to different destinations or army battalions and therefore faced
different payoffs of draft-dodging than the rest, in which case our main results may
be spurious. For instance, draftees in more rugged regions may have to travel longer
to join their units, hence giving them additional opportunities to desert. Similarly,
draftees from rugged departments may have been less likely to be assigned to the
cavalry due to the latter’s higher height requirements, and since those those assigned
to cavalry and artillery regiments received higher compensations they may have been
less likely to desert. Hence, by not controlling for the allocation of soldiers we may
be spuriously attributing to geography the effects of these correlates.
    However, the historical record suggests that the bias may be going in the op-
posite direction and that our measured impact of ruggedness on draft-dodging and
conscription rates may be an underestimation. Specifically, the French government
seems to have adopted the strategy of sending draftees from rural (and thus deser-
tion prone) to regiments located in areas that made deserting harder (Pigeard 2000,
p.235).
    The documents compiled by Lacuée (AF/IV/1124) do not include detailed infor-
mation about the destination of draftees. It does however gives information about
the levy of 80,000 men from the 1810 cohort in 1808 in Etat des départemens Qui
doivent fournir les Conscrits de 1810 et des Corps qui les recoivent. This document
identifies the number of soldiers allocated to each regiment as well as the latter’s lo-
cation. There were, in 1808, 3 levies for a total of 255,225 men Pigeard (2000, p.419).
Hence we have detailed data about the allocation of around 30% of soldiers drafted
in 1808. This is likely to be representative of the overall army since the allocation
of soldiers followed a very consistent pattern through time as is made clear by the
archival documents we collected.4
    Using these data, we calculate the geographic distance between the capital of each
department and the location of the regiment to which local draftees were sent. We
then calculate the average geographic distance conscripts from each departments had
to travel to their assigned military barracks (see variable “Distance to depot” in Table
22). We also calculate the percentage of conscripts allocated to infantry, cavalry, and
artillery units. Finally, we calculate what percentage of conscripts (allocated to either
    4
     See especially the “Tableau des corps qui ont eu le plus de déserteurs pendant le 1er semestre
de 1808 ”, Archives Nationales, AF/IV/1124.


                                                36
