the infantry or cavalry) from each departments went to the 3 main war theaters:

   • About 40.6% of the infantry conscripts were sent to Spain.

   • About 16.9% of the infantry conscripts were sent to Italy.5

   • About 40.1% of the infantry conscripts were sent to Germany (including today’s
     Belgium).

   • About 2.4% of the infantry conscripts were allocated to other minor regions
     (defense of the atlantic coast etc.)

     To come up with this measure, we cross-referenced the data included in the
“Etats des départemens Qui doivent fournir les Conscrits de 1810 et des Corps qui
les recoivent” (AF/IV/1124) with data about the location of each of the 68 cavalry
and 125 infantry regiments in activity at the time given in Pascal (1864).6
     We first show that the allocation of soldiers was not random. Departments clas-
sified as belonging to Groups 1 or 2 by Lacuée in 1809 were more likely to be sent
to Germany and less likely to be sent to either Spain or Italy. As Morgan (1994,
p.2) puts it, “The French Ministry of War organized the new Armée d’Espagne with
younger and more green conscripts as well as more allied contingents so as to main-
tain the strength of the Grande Armée in Germany, and the Armée d’Italie.”
     Table 21 reports the results of 6 OLS regressions where the dependent variables
(“Rhine,” “Spain” and “Italy”) are the percentage of conscripts from the 1810 cohort
(drafted in 1808) from a given department sent to the German, Spanish, or Italian
front respectively. The dependent variables are dummies for whether a department
was considered by the regime as among the best for conscription (first class), rela-
tively good (second class), average (third class) or relatively bad (fourth class). The
worst departments (fifth class) for conscription are omitted and are therefore used
as a benchmark. Finally, column (2), (4) and (6) had a dummy variable for whether
a department is adjacent to the German/Belgian border, the Spanish border, or the
Italian border.
     The results, shown graphically in figure 9, indicate that the allocation of soldiers
was not random: departments classified as worse for conscription by the authorities
were less likely to have their conscripts sent to Germany and more likely to have them
sent to Italy or Spain. Conscripts in the first and second class departments were more
than twice as likely to be sent to Germany than conscripts in other departments.
   5
       This includes Illyria and the Ionian islands.
   6
       Information about artillery and special forces is missing in Pascal (1864).


                                                  37
