    To investigate whether the relationships we identify between ruggedness, draft-
dodging, and conscription hold when accounting for the demarcation the cultural
differences between the Southern and Northern regions of France, we use a variable
constructed by Le Bris (2019). This variable, named “Civil law,” is equal to 1 when
a department had exclusively civil law institutions on its territory and 0 otherwise.
Departments using a mix of “customary” and “civil” law institutions are assigned a
value of 0.5.
    Table 27 reproduces the specifications from table 1 while controlling for “Civil
law” (Panel A), using only departments in which civil law was used as a sample
(Panel B), and using only departments in which customary law was used (Panel C).
    As one might expect, introducing “Civil law” as a control makes the results statis-
tically weaker because our “Civil law” variable is highly correlated with ruggedness,9 .
Despite this, our results have the right sign for “Log of ruggedness”—except for
the univariate regression using civil law department only which is virtually equal
to zero,10 and are generally statistically significant. The results are strongest for
customary law departments—which is also the group with the most observations.
    In addition, “Distance from Paris” is highly correlated with both the log of rugged-
ness (0.64) and “Civil law” (0.83).11 The absence of statistical significance in some
of the columns may therefore be the result of our data having too few observations
to identify the independent effect of those 3 highly correlated variables. Once we
exclude “Distance from Paris,” all regressions, using Conley standard errors, are sig-
nificant at the 10% level and a majority are significant at the 5% level. As for Panel B
and C, excluding “Distance from Paris” leads all of the ‘Log of ruggedness” coefficient
to be significant at the 5% level in columns 2 to 5.
    Finally, table 28 reproduces the specifications from Table 3 and show that its
results are, here too, robust to accounting for legal origins. The relationship between
the log of ruggedness and the rate of conscription, on the other hand, seems markedly
more pronounced in “civil law” departments than in “customary law” ones.




   9
      The correlation coefficient between the log of ruggedness and “civil law” is equal to 0.64.
  10
      This is likely due to departments in the Alps with much higher ruggedness values than the
rest of France. Note also that the regressions in Panel C rely on fewer than half observations as in
Panel A.
   11
      The VIF score for the “Distance from Paris” variable is equal to 37.9 in Panel A, column 5. A
VIF greater than 10 is said to indicate potential issues with multicollinearity.


                                                48
