G.3      Ideology
Measuring directly the ideological profile of the local population unfeasible for early
19th century France. However, we construct a proxy measure by using data collected
by Tackett (1986) on the percentage of the French clergy who agreed to swear an
oath to the Constitution in 1791 in each department. The 1790 Civil Constitution
of the Clergy ordered clergymen to swear an oath of allegiance to the State “on
a Sunday at the conclusion of the mass” (Decree on the clerical oath, 1790). As
Tackett (1986, 4) writes, “the issue of the oath soon became a veritable obsession,
unleashing emotional reactions and factional strife in parishes everywhere.” In 1791,
in both Paris and provinces, the oath became “the central public event” and “the
most discussed problem” Tackett (1986, p.5).
     While anti-revolutionaries and the King himself championed a return to the
Church of the Ancien Régime, revolutionaries wanted to ensure the loyalty of the
clergy to the new constitution. The politicization of the oath became so intense
that it “became a sort of indirect referendum for or against the religious politics of
revolutionaries” (Langlois et al. 1996, 32) as clergymen who had been in parishes for
several long periods of time could scarcely resist popular pressure (Forrest 1989, 77).8
Hence we can use data about oath-taking to investigate whether ideology impacted
conscripts’ choice to dodge the draft. An administrator in Saône-et-Loire during the
end of the Directory (1795-1799), for instance, complained that in various cantons
“fifteen to sixteen [refractory priests] go through the countryside” and “forbid the
conscripts to leave [to the army].” (Waquet 1968, p.193).
     If ideology matters, we should expect the “Oath” variable to have a negative im-
pact on the draft-dodging rate and a positive one on the conscription rate, reflecting
the higher adherence of the population to the revolutionary policies of the central
government. Our results in table 25 and 26 suggest that neither the draft-dodging
rate nor the conscription rate was significantly affected by our “Oath” variable while
coefficients for the “Log of ruggedness” remain generally large and statistically sig-
nificant throughout.




   8
    The data on the oath could also measure in part religiosity as suggested by Tackett (1986) and
Blanc (2019). Forrest (1989) argues that religion may have been a factor the dynamics of desertion.


                                                45
