G.2     National identity
The existing historiography on the pervasiveness of draft-dodging in Napoleonic
France identifies one main alternative explanation for the variation in draft-dodging
rates across the country: culture (Forrest 1989). As the reaction to the revolution
made clear, the country was all but in agreement when it came to the religious sensi-
bility of the local populations, their attachment to revolutionary ideals, and even to
their national identity. Varying cultural values, social norms, and attitudes may have
generated variation in the response to the conscription effort. As Levi (1997, p.5)
puts it, “Debates over the introduction of obligatory military service in democracies
rehearses themes of ennobling self-sacrifice, nationalism, and the superiority of the
needs of the state to the rights of the individual.”
    Variation over cultural traits may affect the propensity to desert of the population
across departments. For example, departments with stronger popular support for the
regime or with a more ardent sense of French national identity may experience lower
draft-dodging rates. Because national identity, ideology, or adherence to the regime
could be negatively correlated to ruggedness on the one hand and conscription choice
and draft-dodging on the other, not controlling for national identity could lead us
to overestimate the effect of ruggedness. Hence we use data measuring how strongly
people in each department identified as French and data measuring support for the
new revolutionary ideology.
    To test for the national identity hypothesis, we rely on data from Johnson (2015),
who draws from Hyslop (1934), on the regional identification of the population with
the French Crown or the French state on the eve of the revolution. In preparation
for the Estates Generals of 1789, the capital of each French district was to collect
grievances from the local population and communicate them to the national assembly.
This resulted in a collection of documents known as Cahiers de Doléances.
    Based on these documents, Hyslop (1934) creates an index for national identity
across French localities, which Johnson (2015) codes as having values of 3 for localities
with strong patriotism, 2 for those with mixed loyalties, 1 for those with strong local
identities, and “missing” for those presenting no significant loyalties, either their local
identity or to the Crown. Hyslop (1934) recorded whether the topic is mentioned in
the general cahier of the that electoral city for that estate. Thus, missing values are
really missing, not zeroes. Following Johnson (2015), we spatially interpolate the
150 observations for city-level measures of national identity. We show the results in
figure 10. We then create a new variable for the average measure of national identity
at the departmental level and add it to the specifications of tables 1 and 4.
    Our measure of national identity is consistent with broad historical evidence
regarding national identity: Basque country, Brittany and Alsace, which were regions

                                            41
