Since a, b and ci are strictly larger than 0 and a, c strictly smaller than 1, the partial
effect of ci on x∗i is negative.



K     Aux Armes, Citoyens
K.1     The French Army and the Revolution
At the eve of the revolution of 1789, the French army was one of the largest in the
continent (Downing 1992, p. 69). The infantry force alone was over 130,000 men
strong (Nafziger 1987, p. 1). The country had one of the longest military traditions
in Europe, going back to the establishment of the Compagnie d’Ordonnance in the
fifteenth century, and had come to embody the principles of the military revolution
more than any other armed force, second only to that of Frederician Prussia (Parker
1996). Traditionally, military recruitment in France operated through four sources
(Best 1998). The two largest had been domestic volunteers and foreign mercenaries
(Tozzi 2016). The state would also sometime compel service from convicts and
beggars. Only recently had France begun experimenting with military conscription,
though conscripts were few and relegated to garrisons and to the newly formed
provincial militia, which was responsible mainly for domestic service. With few
exceptions, only members of the French nobility had access to the officer corps (Best
1998, pp. 24-26).
     When the revolutionaries began to bring down the country’s social, political, and
religious institutions, they did not spare the Ancien Régime army. Officers suspected
of royalist sympathies were encouraged to step-down. Many of them left the country
altogether, fearful for their necks (Nafziger 1988, p. 11). By 1792, only three of
the Ancien Régime generals had remained in service. All others were guillotined
(Delbrück 1985, p. 396). The revolutionary government also disbanded all regiments
of foreign mercenaries and did away with any form of conscription, which it deemed
a form of servitude incompatible with the principles of the new regime (Best 1998,
p. 77). Reform was warranted. In the century before the revolution, the army had
claimed few consequential victories. It had also developed a notoriety for the lack
of discipline among its ranks (Delbrück 1985, p. 390). The two most consequential
changes to the organization of the French armed forces pertained to the access to the
officer corps and the logic of promotion within it. Officers needed not be of noble
extraction anymore, which had a democratizing effect on army life and culture, and
advancement to the top of the hierarchy was driven by merit more than seniority
and status: “The distinction between the officer corps and the men no longer had

                                           57
