J         Theoretical appendix
This appendix develops a simple model of discriminatory conscription enforcement.
Consider the problem of a rational ruler who must raise an army of size X from a
population of size N , where X is so large as to make reliance on volunteers incom-
patible with its fiscal constraints.12 A volunteer army being off-the-table, our ruler
must rely on conscription. An army of size X requires a conscription rate x where
x = X/N . The ruler’s subject population consists of identical agents distributed
homogeneously across d regional departments. Thus, each department has the same
population N/d. While identical in size and population, these departments may vary
on a variety of margins. Our analysis focuses on variation in geographical and envi-
ronmental characteristics and its effect on the ruler’s ability to enforce conscription
a given conscription rate.
    Equation (1) gives the ruler’s value function for a given rate of conscription.
                                              i=d
                                              X               1/a
                                        V =         (bxi − ci xi )                     (1)
                                              i=1

where xi is the conscription rate in department i and i ∈ (1, 2, ..., d). Sine xi
indicates a share of the department’s population, xi ∈ [0, 1]. The ruler’s total benefits
are given by the sum of the benefits of conscription across all departments, where
these are linear in the conscription rate. b measures the benefits to the ruler of
increasing the rate of conscription across all departments and reflects the urgency of
drafting more men due to an increase in the optimal army size. A threat of foreign
invasion or newly discovered opportunities for territorial expansion both increase the
value of b. Thus, b is strictly positive and—since we assume that individuals are
identical regardless of where they come from—it does not vary across departments.
    The ruler’s total cost is given by the sum of all department-level cost functions
                1/a
of the form ci xi , where a, ci ∈ (0, 1). a represents the reciprocal of the elasticity
of the cost function with respect to the conscription rate. ci is a shift parameter
that measures the effects (direct and indirect) of geographical and environmental
factors on the ruler’s cost of administrating conscription in a given department. Since
these characteristics vary across departments, so will ci . Underlying this discussion
is the relationship between conscription, environmental characteristics, and draft-
dodging. The higher the conscription rate, the more individuals will desert their
legal obligation to serve in the national army. The costs of administrating a system
of conscription will be linked to the subjects’ ability to evade their military obligation.
    12
         See the discussion in Ross (1994).


                                                     55
