obligation were death and serious injury.

K.2     The Napoleonic Way of War
At the time of Napoléon’s ascent to power in 1799, France’s national army had
no match on the continent. Nobody knew this better than Napoléon himself. He
had led much of it in two campaigns (1796 and 1797) that had effectively extended
France’s sphere of influence to a majority of Northern Italy. The strength of this army
lied chiefly in its size. By mobilizing an unprecedented number of men—however
poorly trained and lacking in discipline—France would overwhelm its enemies on the
battlefield. Nor were fortifications much of an obstacle to it. The national army was
large enough to “break the stranglehold of the trace italienne” which had frustrated
the ambitions of invading armies since the sixteenth century (Parker 1996, p. 153).
      Napoléon did not invent this new way of doing war. However, he was responsible
for perfecting it and exploiting it to achieve his goal of French hegemony over Europe
(Best 1998, p. 63). He maintained and strengthened those features of the revolu-
tionary army he found effective. Its reliance on conscription, for instance, and the
more democratic attitude towards admission and promotion to the officer corps (Best
1998, p. 111). He also introduced a variety of innovations. For instance, the army
he inherited from the République was not a professional one. Soldiers and officers
were inexperienced and undisciplined. This changed under his leadership. By 1805,
the newly baptized Grande Armée had become “an admirable instrument of war
. . . troops with experience and enthusiasm who were rested and confident” (Furet
1996, p. 255). He abandoned the customary approach to rationing armed forces
employed on foreign land. Traditionally, an army would have to invest resources into
maintaining secure lines of communication with the homeland. This had the effect
of reducing drastically how deeply an army could penetrate into enemy territory.
Instead, Napoléon would have his men rely almost entirely on the resources of their
immediate surroundings wherever they were (Delbrück 1985, p. 421).
      Most consequentially, Napoléon revolutionized the organization of the army by
introducing corps and divisions, which formed self-sustaining and independent units
within the army. He entrusted each marshal (the officer responsible for a corps) with
significant independence on the battlefield. As long as their actions were consistent
with Napoléon’s overall strategic vision, they were free to make their own decisions
and adjust to changes in circumstances without having to receive direct input from
the top. The new organization gave the Grande Armée its characteristic quickness of
action and flexibility, even as its numbers dwarfed those of enemy forces (Delbrück
1985, p. 409). Napoléon introduced another tactical innovation that leveraged his


                                            59
