Geography can enable draft-dodging via its effect on the ruler’s own ability to catch
deserters. Thus, the total cost of administrating conscription in department i are
increasing in this measure of department-specific geographical characteristics and
in the ruler’s choice of the conscription rate in the same department or ∂T         Ci
                                                                                  ∂xi
                                                                                        > 0,
∂T Ci
 ∂ci
       > 0.
     If the ruler wishes to maximize the value of V , it must choose x∗i ∀ i ∈ (1, 2, ..., d)
subject to the constraint that the sum of all department-level     contingents must equal
the (exogenously determined) optimal army size or i=d             N
                                                          P
                                                            i=1 i d = X. The first order
                                                               x
conditions to the ruler’s optimization problem yield the equimarginal principle in
equation (2):
                                          1 1−a
                                       b = ci x i a                                      (2)
                                          a
Solving for x∗i :
                                           a 
                                       ba 1−a
                                      x∗i =                                   (3)
                                       ci
Proposition 1: The optimal conscription rate in every department is increasing in
the marginal benefit of conscription.

Proof: Equation (4) gives the value of the effect of a change in the marginal benefit
of conscription on the optimal draft-dodging rate in department i.
                                              2a−1
                               ∂x∗i   a2 ba
                                          ci
                                               1−a

                                    =               >0                           (4)
                                ∂b      c(1 − a)
Since a, ci ∈ (0, 1) and b > 0, equation (4) shows that an increase in b positively
affects the ruler’s choice of the conscription rate in department i. When the bene-
fits of increasing the conscription rate increase—for example, due to an unexpected
threat of foreign invasion—the ruler will want to draft more men across the board,
bumping up the rate of conscription in every department.

Proposition 2: The optimal conscription rate is decreasing in the shift parameter ci .

Proof: To prove proposition 2, we look at the partial effect of a change in ci on the
optimal rate of conscription in department i. This is given by equation (5).
                                               2a−1
                            ∂x∗i       ba2    ba 1−a
                                 =−                   <0                                 (5)
                            ∂ci     (1 − a)c2 c

                                              56
