army’s numerical advantage on the battlefield. Standard military practice would
relegate only a small share of the available forces in the army reserve. The French
Emperor took the opposite stance. He would assign large numbers of men to the
reserve and have them join the fight as the battle went on so as to have attacks of
ever-growing intensity and overwhelm the enemy (Delbrück 1985, p. 409).
    Taken together, these innovations contributed to the emergence of a new way
of war. This was Napoléon’s “strategy of annihilation” (Delbrück 1985, p.427). He
saw war as having only one objective: The destruction of the enemy army. Once a
country had lost its army, it had no alternative but to bend to the victor. There
was no need for long military campaigns, war of attrition, sieges, or the occupation
of enemy territory. As Napoléon himself put it:

       There are many good generals in Europe; but they see too much at the
       same time. As for me, I see only one thing, and that is the masses of men,
       I seek to destroy them, because I am certain that with that everything
       else falls at the same time.13

    With the Grande Armée at his disposal and having crowned himself emperor
of the French in 1804, Napoléon was ready to put the strategy of annihilation to
the test. Over the following ten years, this army fought five major wars against an
evolving coalition of anti-French powers, often including Austria, Prussia, Russia,
and the United Kingdom. By 1812, of the major European powers only Russia was
left opposing Napoléon on the continent. The emperor had finally gotten his empire,
which included France, most of Central Italy, the former Venetian territories in the
Adriatic, North-Eastern Spain, the Netherlands, and most of Saxony. But Napoléon’s
control extended well beyond the empire’s nominal boundaries. He was the head of
the Kingdom of Italy, "protector" of the Confederation of the Rhine (encompassing
almost all of modern Germany), and de facto ruler of Spain, Westphalia, and the
Duchy of Warsaw. Even Prussia and Austria had turned into French client states.
    France’s hegemony over the continent would not have been possible without a
continuous inflow of young men into its ranks. This was necessary just to maintain
the size of the Grande Armée constant, compensating for the tens of thousands of
soldiers killed in action or seriously wounded year after year.14 Yet, as more fronts
were opening up Napoléon demanded a larger army. The French infantry alone was
640,000 men strong in 1809, 700,000 in 1810, 720,000 in 1811, and almost 750,000
  13
    Quoted in Delbrück (1985, pp. 427-428).
  14
    Over 900,000 Frenchmen lost their lives while serving in the army during the Napoleonic Wars
(Gates 2011).

                                              60
