

Diana and Semiramis anchored off Pointe de Grave, between the 
Cordouan and Royan ; under the batteries of which latter place 
and of Verdon lay the Teazer, in company with the brig-corvette 
Pluvier,of 14 carronades, 24-pounders, and two sixes, commanded 
by the captain of the port, Capitaine de fregate Michael-Augustin 
Dubourg , and stationed there for the protection of the different 
convoys passing along that part of the coast. 
The Teazer’s convoy having anchored about four miles up the 
river, Captain Ferris, at 7 h. 30 m. p. m., despatched seven boats, 
to attempt cutting the vessels out ; three from the Diana, under 
the orders of Lieutenants Francis Sparrow and George B. Roper, 
and master’s mate William Holmes, and four from the Semiramis, 
under Lieutenants Thomas Gardner, Percy Grace, and Robert 
Nicholson, and master’s mate Timothy Renou. The tide pre¬ 
vented the execution of this service until very late in the night; 
and at daylight on the 25th the boats and the captured vessels, 
five in number, were still up the river, at the mouth of which lay 
the two French men-of-war brigs. Captain Ferris now deter¬ 
mined to attack the two brigs with the ships ; and accordingly, 
at 6 a . m., the two frigates, using the same artifices as before, got 
under way and steered for Verdon road. As a proof that the 
deception fully succeeded, Captain Dubourg went on board the 
Diana in his boat, and did not discover his mistake until he had 
ascended the quarterdeck. 
While the Semiramis stood towards the inner brig,the Pluvier, 
the Diana laid the outer one, the Teazer, close alongside, the 
frigate’s lower yards carrying away the brig’s two topgallant 
masts. In an instant Lieutenant Robert White Parsons, first of 
the Diana , attended by Lieutenant Lewis Pryse Madden of the 
marines, Mr. Mark G. Noble the boatswain, and about 30 
seamen and marines, sprang on board, and, without the loss of 
a man on either side, carried the brig. Lieutenant Parsons 
then caused the prisoners to be put below without the force of 
arms and consequent destruction of life ; thereby evincing a 
humanity which did him much honour. One of the Diana’s 
seamen was afterwards accidentally lost overboard. 
The moment she discovered what had befallen the Teazer, 
and saw the Semiramis approaching to put the same plan in 
practice upon herself, the Pluvier, now commanded by Lieutenant 
de vaisseau Page St.-Vaast, cut her cables and made sail for the 
beach ; where she grounded near to the battery of Royan . The 
Semiramis chased until she got into five fathoms’ water ; then 
anchored with a spring, so as to bring her broadside to bear 
upon the brig and her bow guns upon the fort, within grape-shot 
distance of both. After a few minutes’ engagement, and just as 
the boats were about to pull alongside the Pluvier to carry off 
her crew, numbering 136 officers and men, Lieutenant Gardner, 
with the barge, pinnace, and cutter, rejoined his ship from the 
service of capturing the convoy. These boats were immediately 