

Admirals . . . . . 65 
Vice-admirals . . . . 60 
Rear-admirals . . . . 56 
„ superannuated 35 
Post-captains . . . . . 753 
» » 29 
Commanders, or sloop-captains . 558 
,, superannuated 50 
Lieutenants . . . . . 3071 
Masters . . . . . 544 

* See Appendix, Annual Abstract No. 19. 
See Appendix, No. 15. 
j See Appendix, No. 1G. 

328 BRITISH AND FRENCH FLEETS. 1811.

And the number of seamen and marines, voted for the service of the same year, was 145,000.* Such had been the unremitting exertions of the shipwrights in the arsenal of Antwerp, that , by the latter end of the summer, Vice-admiral Missiessy was at anchor at the mouth of the Scheldt , with a fleet of 15 sail of the line, one frigate, and nine brigs, waiting to elude the vigilance of Admiral Young ; who, since the preceding May, had superseded Sir Richard Straclian in the chief command, and, with a corresponding fleet, w'as cruising outside. In addition to the above French force in this quarter, the Goree squadron , consisting of three sail of the line, the Chatham of 80, Hollander of 74, and Tromp of 68 guns, bad recently been buoyed over the flats and brought to Antwerp, where they were repairing. Upon the stocks at Antwerp, Terneuse, and Flushing , were from 12 to 15 ships of the line, fiveor six of them in a state of great forwardness. To protect thevast depot now formed and forming along the shores of the Scheldt, immense fortifications had been constructed, particularly at Flushing ; the sea-front alone of which mounted 100 long 36pounders and 60 (French ) 12-inch mortars. The opposite or Cadzand shore had also had its fortifications greatly strength¬ ened. In the Texel seven Franco-Batavian sail of the line were ready for sea. Proceeding southward, we find that , besides the two 74s at anchor in the road of Cherbourg, two were on the stocks in the arsenal ; and that Lorient, Rochefort, and Toulon had all their building slips full. The latter port, indeed, was dividing with Flushing the attention of the British. The road of Toulon, in the course of the present year, contained as many as 16 sail of the line, and nearly half as many frigates, including among the former four

immense three-deckers. The command of this fine and powerful fleet had, since the preceding year, devolved upon Vice-admiral Emerian, who had under him Rear-admirals Cosmao, Lhermite, and Baudin. During the first half of the year the British Mediterranean fleet remained under the command of Admiral 
Sir Charles Cotton ; but the latter, returning to England to take the command of the Channel fleet, was succeeded off 
Toulon, on the 18th of July , by Vice-admiral Sir Edward Pellew, whose force consisted of the 
Gun -shjp * 
f Caledonia • , 
120 . m., having hoisted French colours, and the Diana a com¬ 
modore’s pendant and a French jack at the fore, the signal for a 
pilot, the two British frigates stood boldly in towards the mouth 
of the Gironde. The Teazer immediately hoisted her colours, 
and fired a gun to leeward, the signal for a friend. The two 
frigates promptly repeated the gun, and at 6 p. m. tacked . The 
battery at Pointe dela Coubrenow fired a few shot*; but Captain 
Papineau , as the Teazer ran past the battery , hailed the com¬ 
mandant, and informed him that the two frigates were the Pallas 
and Elbe from Rochefort. The battery , on this, ceased firing; 
and at 6 h. 30 m. p. m. a pilot-boat came alongside the Diana. 
The Frenchmen were soon handed out of her, and their boat 
secured astern. At 7 r. m., which was just as it got dark, the 