

Cherbourg from Boulogne. On the 7th the two British brigs fell in with seven French gun-brigs, mounting three long 24- pounders and a mortar each, and manned with 75 men. These the Barbadoes and Goshawk immediately attacked and chased into Calvados, driving one of them on shore. On the 8th the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Hotspur, Captain Josceline Percy , arrived off Calvados, to endeavour to destroy the French brigs. Having a pilot on board, who undertook to carry the frigate within pistol-shot of the enemy, Captain Percy stood in to the attack ; and at 6 p. m., when within less than half-gun-shot, the Hotspur grounded. Notwithstanding her situation, the frigate succeeded in sinking one gun-brig and driving two on shore, but lay fast for four hours, exposed all the while to a heavy fire from the vessels, a battery , and some field- pieces. The consequence was, that the Hotspur sustained a very serious loss ; having two midshipmen (William Smith and Alexander Hay), two seamen, and one boy killed, and 19 seamen

1811. RINALDO& REDPOLE WITH BOULOGNE FLOTILLA. 337 
and three marines wounded. The ship also received considerable 
damage in her hull, masts, and rigging. 
On the 3d of September, at 11 a . m., while the two 10-gun 
brig sloops Rinaldo, Captain James Anderson, and Redpole, 
Captain Colin Macdonald, were watching the main body of the 
French flotilla, moored along the coast of Boulogne bay, under 
the protection of the heavy batteries in that neighbourhood, four 
of the 12-gun prames, one bearing a commodore’s broad pen¬ 
dant, four 4-gun brigs, and seven lugger-rigged gun-boats, of 
one gun each, got under way from the west end of the bay, with 
the flood tide and a strong breeze from the east-north-east, 
apparently to shift their birth upon the eastern land. Hoping 
that a chance might offer, should these vessels venture a little 
way from the shore, of intercepting some of them, Captain 
Anderson, with his two brigs, hovered about them to windward. 
Observing, after a while, one of the prames and a brig astern of 
the others, the Rinaldo and Redpole made all sail, in the expec¬ 
tation to cut one or the other of them off; but , seeing the 
British captain’s intention, the French prame and brig also made 
sail, and succeeded in joining the others, who were lying to for them within the Basse bank. 
At 1 p. m., having followed the prame and brig within the 
bank, the Rinaldo and Redpole commenced action with them 
and the rear of the flotilla. Having stood as close in-shore as 
they could, the prames, gun-brigs, and luggers tacked and stood, 
out in two lines, pointing in the direction of the two British brigs, 
who were lying to receive them. After a little partial firing, the 
flotilla stood in again, followed and engaged by the Rinaldo and 
Redpole. This manoeuvre was repeated once or twice ; and 
eventually the flotilla bore round up, and came to at their former 
anchorage, having done no greater injury to the two British 
brigs, than cutting away some of their rigging and making a few 
holes in their sails. Considering that the two British brigs 
mounted only 18-pounder carronades, and their antagonists long 
French 24-pounders, although we may wish for some further 
particulars of this action before we apply a term to the behaviour 
of the latter, we may safely say of the former, that they con¬ 
ducted themselves in the most gallant manner. 
On the 20th of September, at noon, as the British 38-gun 
frigate Naiad, Captain Philip Carteret , was at anchor oft' 
Boulogne road, the French emperor, who was honouring the 
Boulognese with a visit, embarked in his barge, and, proceeding 
along the line of prames and gun-brigs, went on board the 
centre prame. The imperial flag immediately waved at the main 
topgallantmast-head, and remained there for a short time ; when, 
Napoleon departing, it was lowered down, and the flag of Reai- admiral Baste hoisted at the mizen. Several of the other vessels 
were honoured in a similar manner, and Buonaparte continued 
rowing about the road. All this was plainly seen from on board VOL . V. z 