

of the 12-pounder 32-gun frigate Quebec, Captain Charles 
Sibthorpe John Hawtayne, 16-gun brig-sloop Raven, Captain 
George Gustavus Lennock, gun-brigs Exertion and Redbreast, 
Lieutenants James Murray and Sir George Morat Keith, Bart., 
and hired armed cutters Alert and Princess-Augusta, was 
cruising off the coast between the Texel and the Elbe, informa¬ 
tion was received, that a division of gun-boats lay at an anchor 
within the island of Nordeney. The Quebec’s first lieutenant, 
Samuel Blyth , immediately volunteered, and was permitted to 
attempt, to cut them out. 
Accordingly, 10 boats, containing 117 seamen and marines, 
including the following officers: Lieutenants Samuel Blyth , of 
the Quebec, John O’Neale, Alert, Samuel Slout, Raven, and 
Charles Wolrige, Quebec, lieutenant of marines, Humphrey 
Moore, Quebec, sub-lieutenant Thomas Hare, Exertion, second 
master George Downey, Redbreast, carpenter Stephen Pickett, 
Raven, master’s mates Robert Cook and John M'Donald, 
Quebec, midshipman Richard Millet, Raven, and mates James 
Muggridge (pilot to the expedition), Princess-Augusta , and 
George Johnson , Alert, pushed off from the frigate, and shaped 
their course towards the coast of East-Friesland . On the 2d the 
boats entered the river Jahde , and captured a boat belonging to 
the imperial douaniers; whose peculiar duty it was to support 
the continental system, and to cut off all commercial intercourse 
with England . Passing through the intricate navigation called 
the Wadden , between the islands Wanger-oog, Spyker-oog, and 
Langer-oog, the British boats, on the same afternoon, came in 
sight of the enemy’s gun-boats, four in number ; each armed 
with one long 12, and two long 6 or 8 pounders and 25 men, 
including five soldiers, and commanded by a lieutenant de 
vaisseau in the French navy. 
As soon as the British arrived within gun-shot, the gun -brigs 
opened upon them a fire of grape and canister. Lieutenant Blyth, 
in the Quebec’s barge, pulling rapidly up, sprang upon the deck 
of the first gun-boat, and killed one man and wounded two in 
the struggle . Mr. Muggridge , who was also in the barge, was 
opposed, while boarding, by two soldiers, one of whom he shot 
dead ; but the other wounded the young man in the throat with 
his bayonet ; and, had the latter not fallen into the sea, he must 
have been killed . Mr. Muggridge eventually reached one of 
the boats. In a few minutes the British mastered the crew of 
the headmost boat, and, driving the hands below, turned the 
long 12-pounder upon the other three boats ; which were so 
situated that they could not fire upon the captured vessel without 
destroying their.own people. There was a quantity of cartridges 
lying on the deck, covered by a sail, and from these the British 
loaded the gun, but could find no lighted match . The gunner 
of the Quebec, having primed the 12-pounder from a French 
powder-horn, which from its peculiar construction scattered a 

1811. BOATS OF QUEBEC, &C. ON COAST OF EAST-FRIESLAND. 341 part of the powder on the deck, discharged the piece by firing his pistol at the priming ; when the flash, communicating to the loose powder on deck, and thence to the cartridges under the sail, caused an explosion that killed or wounded 19 persons, including Lieutenant Blyth himself, who was blown into the sea, but afterwards reached one of his boats. He had previously been wounded in the shoulder by a French soldier, and was burnt in his face, hand, and foot, by the explosion. This disaster, fatal as it was to the British on board the outermost gun-boat, did not save the other three from capture. In 10 minutes they were compelled to surrender, with the loss of two men killed and 10 wounded. In the attack , the British lost two killed and nine wounded, including among the latter Lieutenants Blyth and Slout, and Messieurs Millet and Muggridge . Lieutenant Slout had been dreadfully wounded by the second gun-boat’s 12-pounder, which put two grape-shot through his thigh and one through his leg. The wounds in the thigh were so high up, that there was no chance of saving this young officer’s life, but by taking off the leg at the hip-joint. To this painful and precarious .operation Lieutenant Slout would not submit, and soon died from the effects of mortification. With respect to Mr. Muggridge, although , incase of being disabled, not belonging to the royal navy, he could expect no pension from the government, that gallant young seaman had volunteered his services: his wound, fortunately for him, was not dangerous. Of those blown up by the accident, three died the next day ; and several were dread¬ fully scorched, including Lieutenant Moore of the marines. Having thus achieved their very gallant exploit, Lieutenant Blyth and his party, with their boats and prizes, returned to the little squadron off the island of Heligoland. As a reward for his behaviour on the occasion, Lieutenant Blyth was promotedto the rank of commander. The small island of Anholt in the Cattegat , which, it will be recollected, was captured from the Danes in May, 1809,* became this year the scene of a very splendid exploit. The British garrison at present upon it consisted of 350 royal marines and 31 marine artillery ; the marines under the command of Captain Robert Torrens of that corps, and the whole under Captain James Wilkes Maurice of the navy, the governor of the island, and the officer who, six years before, had so distinguished himself in his defence of the Diamond rock. The island of Anholt, in the languishing state of commerce occasioned by the rigorous edicts of Buonaparte, was found very useful to England as a depbt and point of communication between her and the continent . Whether Napoleon instigated the Danes to aid his views by expelling the British from Anholt, or that the Danes