

1811. I1AWK AND FRENCH CONVOY. 335

sent to attack the brig ; and, after receiving the broadside of 
the Pluvier, Lieutenant Gardner boarded and carried her, with 
no greater loss on the British side, than himself and two seamen 
wounded. 
The prize being fast on shore, the ebb tide running rapidly, 
and the Semiramis in only 25 feet water, Captain Richardson 
found it necessary to take out of the Pluvier the remainder of 
her crew and burn her ; a service soon executed. The Semiramis 
then stood out to join the Diana, who had anchored in the 
Gironde out of gun-shot, in company with the Teazer and the 
five vessels late under her charge ; one of which, the transport 
Mulet, mounted eight swivels, with a crew of 42 men, and was 
laden with ship-timber. At 1 h. 30 m. p.m. the Pluvier ex¬ 
ploded ; and thus was consummated an enterprise, planned with 
judgment , and executed with skill and gallantry. 
After lying tolerably quiet for several years, the famous 
Boulogne flotilla began again, this autumn, to be seized with 
fits of restlessness. It consisted at this time of 16 prames , or 
ship-rigged gun-vessels, mounting 12 long 24-pounders, with 
112 men each ; 28 brigs, with false keels, mounting from three 
to eight long 24s, and occasionally a large mortar, with from 70 
to 80 men each ; eight schooners of 10 guns and 40 men each, 
and between 200 and 300 gun-boats, rigged chiefly as luggers, 
some with one, others w’ith two, long ' 18 or 24-pounders and 26 
men each. 
On the 19th of August, at 2 p. m., the island of St.-Marcouf 
bearing west by north distant six leagues, the British 16-gun 
brig-sloop Hawk, Captain Henry Bourchier, observed from the 
mast-head a convoy of French vessels steering for Barfleur. All 
sail was immediately made in chase ; and,on her near approach, 
the Hawk discovered that the convoy was under the protection 
of three gun-brigs and two large luggers, the latter carrying 
from eight to 10 guns, and the former from 10 to 16, and ap¬ 
parently well armed. These five armed vessels immediately 
hauled out from their convoy, with the evident intention of giving 
battle to the British brig, and the latter hove to in readiness to 
receive them. 
At 3 h. 30 m. p. m., Pointe Piercue bearing north-west half 
west distant four miles, the action commenced within half pistol 
shot, and continued, with great spirit on both sides, until the 
Hawk succeeded in driving on shore two of the brigs and the two 
luggers, with 15 sail of their convoy. While in the act of 
wearing to prevent the third brig from raking her, the Hawk 
took the ground ; whereby that brig and a few of her convoy, 
although they had previously struck , effected their escape. 
During an hour and a half that the Hawk was employed in 
lightening herself of booms, spars, anchors, and a few of her 
guns, she lay exposed to incessant discharges of artillery and 
musketry from the shore. Having got again afloat, the Hawk 

anchored to repair her damaged rigging ; and Captain Bourchier took that opportunity of despatching his boats, under the orders of Lieutenant David Price, second of the brig (the first absent in a prize), assisted by John Smith tiie master, and Thomas Wheeler tbe gunner, to bring out or destroy as many of the vessels as practicable. Lieutenant Price, under a galling fire of musketry from the beach, succeeded in bringing out the Heron, national brig, pierced for 16 guns, mounting when the attack commenced only 10 (and of these she had since, to lighten herself, thrown over¬ board four), together with three large transports, laden with ship-timber, The remainder of the grounded vessels were on their broadsides and completely bilged ; but Lieutenant Price was prevented from burning them, owing to the strength of the tide against him. The loss sustained by the Hawk , in this her very gallant enterprise, amounted to one seaman killed and four wounded. Captain Bourchier, in his official letter, speaks very highly of Mr. Henry Campling, purser ; “ who,” lie says, “ volunteered to command the marines and small-arm men, and from whose continued and well-conducted fire I attribute the loss of so few men.” In these instances, where officers step out of their way to serve in posts of danger, we are particularly gratified in being able to record their names. For his gallantry on the occasion, Captain Bourchier was deservedly promoted to post-rank. On the 6th of September, in consequence of information brought by some deserters from the French admiral’s ship in Cherbourg, Captain Pulteney Malcolm, of the 74-gun ship Royal-Oak , cruising off tbe port, detached the 28-gun frigate Barbadoes, Captain Edward Rushworth , and 16-gun brig-sioop Goshawk, Captain James Lilburn, to the eastward of Barfleur, for the purpose of intercepting some gun-brigs expected at