

181 ]. NAIAD AND THE BOULOGNE FLOTILLA. 339

to the west-north-west and colours hoisted, to await the approach 
of the enemy ; the town of Boulogne bearing from the leading brig south-east by east distant five or six miles. At 8 h. 30 m. 
a . m. the Naiad , who had weighed when the prames did , joined 
the Rinaldo and her companions, and, lay to on the same tack.f 
slowly stretching off shore, in the hope of imperceptibly 
drawing the French from the protection of their formidable batteries. 
At 9 h. 30 m. a. m. the rear-admiral’s prame, which was the 
leading one of the weather line, tacked in-shore, and on coming round fired her broadside. The instant her helm was down, the 
British line, by signal from the Naiad, wore together and bore 
up in chase. The six remaining prames had wore at nearly the 
same instant as their admiral, and the whole were now crowding 
sail to regain the protection of the batteries. The Naiad hauled 
up for the prame of the French admiral ; while the brigs, 
bearingaway and passing the frigate, stood for the sternmost prame of 
the lee line. At 10 h. 20 m. a. m. the Naiad, having got nearly within pistol-shot between the two lines, opened her fire from 
both sides ; and the Rinaldo and Redpole poured their broad¬ 
sides into the sternmost prame of the lee line, the Ville-de-Lyon, 
commanded by Lieutenant de vaisseau Jean Barbaud, who had 
been gallantly endeavouring to succour bis admiral. Finding it 
impossible to reach the latter owing to shoal water, the Naiad, 
being then on the starboard and weather bow of the Ville-de 
Lyon, bore up, and, wearing round, boarded and carried her ; but 
not without an obstinate resistance on the part of the French 
officers and men, with a loss of between 30 and 40 of them in 
killed and wounded, including among the latter the prame’s 
commander, Lieutenant Barbaud. 
While the Naiad stood away with her prize in tow, the 
Rinaldo , Redpole, and Castilian continued engaging the re¬ 
mainder of the flotilla. The first two brigs succeeded in getting 
alongside the prame next in the line to the Ville-de-Lyon, and 
soon obliged her to haul up for the weather line. Being by this 
time fired upon by all the batteries, and having but three 
fathoms’ water under their bottoms, the three British brigs 
ceased firing and stood out to join the Naiad. The damages of 
the latter were very trifling ; but her loss amounted to two 
seamen killed, one lieutenant of marines (William Morgan), one 
midshipman (James Dover), and 12 seamen wounded. The 
Castilian had her first Lieutenant, Charles Cobb, killed, and 
one seaman severely wounded ; and the Redpole, her pilot 
wounded. The capture of this prame, out of the midst of the 
flotilla and almost under the guns of the batteries, must have 
wofully disappointed the spectators on shore, and have given 
rather an awkward finish to the morning’s amusement of the 
French emperor and his generals. 
On the 1st of August as a small British squadron, consistingz 2 