

the Naiad. Whether the presence of this British frigate kindled 
the wrath of Napoleon, and he wished her away, or that he 
considered she would make an excellent target, for his prames 
and brigs to exercise their guns at, certain it is, that he ordered 
a division of the flotilla to weigh and stand towards her. At 1 
p. m., the wind at south-south-west, and a strong flood tide 
setting to the north-east, Rear-admiral Baste, with seven 
prames, each armed and manned as already stated, got under 
way, and steered for the Naiad, then bearing from them nearly 
north. 
As, in the state of the wind and tide, the Naiad by getting 
under way would only increase her distance from the prames, 
she remained at an anchor with springs on her cable. At 1h. 
40 m. r . m. the leading prame, having arrived just within gun¬ 
shot, opened her fire, and received the frigate’s in return ; then 
tacked and stood off. Each of the leading prame’s six followers 
did the same ; and at about 2 p. m. 10 brigs, mounting each four 
long 24-pounders, and a sloop fitted as a bomb-vessel, joined in 
the cannonade. At 3 h. 30 m. p. m., it being then slack water, 
the Naiad weighed and stood off' on the larboard tack ; partly to 
repair some trifling damage, but chiefly, by getting to windward, 
to be better able to close with the prames and brigs, and get 
within shove of some of them. At 4 h. 45 m. the flotilla stood 
in under the batteries to the eastward of Boulogne, and ceased 
firing. At 5 h. 30 m. the Naiad tacked and stood in-shore, under 
all sail, in chase ; but, about sunset, the wind fell to a calm. 
Shortly afterwards the prames and gun-brigs came to anchor 
near Pointe la Creche ; and at 7 h. 30 m. p.m. the Naiad herself 
anchored in her former position without having a man hurt . Nor 
had she the smallest spar shot away, as some token to the French 
emperor, who, no doubt, was honouring the British frigate with 
his regards, that the long 24-pounders of his flotilla, having 
failed to drive the Naiad off the coast, had even struck her with 
any effect. 
On the 21st, at 7 A. m., when the weather tide made, the seven 
prames, 10 brigs, and bomb-sloop, with several one-gun luggers, 
got under way, and stood to the westward on the larboard tack, 
formed in two lines. The weathermost line consisted of three 
prames, the admiral’s first, then a commodore’s, and lastly a 
pendant prame ; and the lee line, of four prames; the brigs and 
small craft taking stations as most convenient in the rear of 
either line. The British in-shore squadron consisted this 
morning, besides the Naiad, of the Rinaldo and Redpole, the 
18-gun brig-sloop Castilian, Captain David Braimer, and the 
8-gun cutter Viper, Lieutenant Edward A. D’Arcey. These four 
vessels, having during the night stood in upon the Basse bank 
at the westernmost part of the bay, near fort L’Heurt, had, when 
the prames weighed at 7 a . m., tacked and hove to, formed in 
line thus : Rinaldo, Redpole, Castilian, Viper, with their heads 