

2 A2

r

Corona . c/J~

Vo i/>

Tlorc Act.

ilh.tim.

iXoin

Having her sails and rigging in a more perfect state than either the Cerberus or Corona, the Active soon passed to windward of the former, and at about 30 minutes past noon, when just in midchannel between Lissa and Spalmadon, received the fire of the Corona ; a most galling fire too, as the Active could not bring any number of her own guns to bear, without keeping off the wind, and of course losing way in the chase. At length, at about 1h. 45 m. p. m., the Active closed the Corona to leeward. A spirited action now ensued between these two frigates, and continued until 2 h. 30 m. p. m., when the Corona surrendered, after a resistance highly honourable to the Venetian flag ; and which resistance she had protracted until almost within reach of the batteries of Lessina. The Carolina and Danae , the latter of whom, had she supported the Corona, might perhaps have saved her from capture, were already in safety under the guns of those batteries, and just about to enter the road. The whole of the Venetian small - craft also effected their escape in different directions. The Amphion had all her lower masts badly shot through, particularly her foremast as already stated, her larboard main yard-arm and mizen topmast shot away, and her sails and rig¬ ging much cut. Her loss, out of a complement of 251 men and boys, amounted to her boatswain (Richard Unshank ), two midshipmen (John Robert Spearman and Charles Hayes), seven seamen, and five marines killed, her captain (in his right arm, and with some severe contusions, but he would not quit the deck till the action was over), one lieutenant (David Dunn, severely), one captain of marines (Thomas Moore), two midshipmen {Francis George Farewell and Thomas Edward Hoste), one captain’s clerk (Frederick Lewis), two first-class volunteers (Charles Buthane and the Honourable William Waldegrave), 34 seamen, and four private marines wounded ; total, 15 killed and 47 wounded. The Active, whose damages were compara¬ tively slight, out of her complement of 300 men and boys, had four seamen killed, one lieutenant of marines (John Meares), 18

1811. ACTION OFF LISSA. 357 seamen, and five private marines wounded ; total, exclusive of a subsequent loss, which will be noticed presently, four killed and 24 wounded. The Cerberus, although without a stick shot away except her mizentopsail yard, was a good deal battered in the hull, as her loss will testify. Out of a complement the same originally as the Amphion’s, but since reduced by absentees to about 160 men and boys, the Cerberus had her purser (Samuel Jeffery), one midshipman (Francis Surrage Davey), eight seamen, and three marines killed , one lieutenant (George Cumpston), 33 seamen (one mortally), and seven marines wounded ; total, in the action, 13 killed and 41 wounded. The Volage had her main yard shot away in the slings, and lost her fore topgallant mast : she was also greatly damaged in sails, rigging, and masts. Her hull, on the larboard side especially, was completely riddled, and her loss of men was in proportion : in reference, indeed, to her complement, it was far more severe than that of any one of her consorts, except the Cerberus. Out of a crew of 175 men and boys, the Volage had one midshipman (John George), 10 seamen, and two private marines killed, one lieutenant of marines (William Stephens Knapman ), 27 seamen, and four private marines wounded ; total, 13 killed and 33 wounded : making the total loss of the British, in the action, 45 killed and 145 wounded. Contrary to what is customary, the British official account makes not the slightest allusion to the loss sustained by the opposite party ; a circumstance attributable , no doubt, to the difficulty of ascertaining it, and to the necessity of forwarding the despatch , in all possible haste, to Captain Eyre of the Mag¬ nificent, the British commanding officer in the Adriatic, in order that he might adopt measures to complete the capture or destruction of the enemy’s squadron. Moreover, when he dictated the despatch, Captain Hoste was lying in his cot under severe sufferings from his wounds. Nor, minute as it is in other respects, does the French official account enumerate the killed and wounded on board the Favorite. VVe may gather, however, that, as 200 of her men were all that remained after the action, about the same number comprised the killed and badly wounded. Among the former were Commodore Dubourdieu and Captain Meillerie, the first lieutenant , and other of the principal officers; so that the command at last devolved upon Colonel Gifflenga, with an enseigne de vaisseau to direct the working of the ship. The Corona had her rigging and sails cut to pieces, her masts all badly wounded, and her hull shattered in every direction; and appears, from subsequent inquiry, to have sustained a loss of upwards of 200, in killed and w'ounded together. The Bellona had 70 officers and men killed, and about the same number badly wounded, including Captain Duodo himself, who died of his wounds. This ship’s masts and yards, at the close of the action, were all standing ; but her hull, a mere shell in