planted the British colours at the very gates of the town. The 
seamen then secured the vessels in the harbour , which, besides the 
armed trabaccolo, were 10 in number, and all laden with wheat, 
oil, hemp, &c. ; and the marines and division on shore burnt two 
large magazines, filled with all sorts of naval and military stores 
destined for the garrison of Corfu. Having, by 3 p. m., executed 
the whole of this important service, Lieutenant Dickinson and his 
party got back to their ships with so comparatively slight a loss 
as four men wounded. 
We last year left in the harbour of Ancona, a Franco-Vene 
tian squadron , under the orders of the French Commodore Du 
bourdieu ; and who, it will be recollected, in his official letter 
published in the Moniteur, expressed regret that his squadron of 
five frigates and two 16-gun brigs, should have been “ avoided” 
by a British squadron of “ three frigates, one corvette, and two 
brigs.”# On the evening of the 11th of March M. Dubourdieu 
sailed from Ancona, with, besides his former ship, the Favorite, 
and three Venetian frigates Corona, Bellona, and Carolina. the 
two French 40-gun frigates Danae and Flore, the latter com¬ 
manded by Captain Jean -AlexandrePeridier, but the name of the 
Danae ’s we are unable to state . M, Dubourdieu had also with 
him the Venetian 16-gun brig-corvette Mercure, one 10-gun 
schooner, one 6-gun xebec, and two gun-boats, having on board 
from 400 to 500 troops, under Colonel Gifflenga of the Italian 
army, as a garrison for the island of Lissa, as soon as they should 
succeed in conquering it. Early on the morning of the 13th this 
Franco-Venetian squadron, of four 40-gun frigates, two of a 
smaller class, brig-corvette and other vessels, arrived off the north 
point of Lissa, and there fell in with a British squadron, of three 
frigates and a 22-gun ship, under the orders of Captain William 
Hoste, the very officer who had commanded the squadron, which 
M. Dubourdieu and his crews, as formerly mentioned, were so 
desirous to meet. Captain Hoste’s three frigates were the Am 
phion, Cerberus, and Active, already so frequently named ; and 
he had also with him the 22-gun ship Volage, Captain Phipps 
Hornby. 
At 30 A. m., when about a mile from the entrance of Port St.- 
George, the Active, the weathermost ship of her squadron, then 
close hauled on the larboard tack , with the wind a fine breeze 
from the north-north-west, discovered the Franco-Venetian 
squadron, lying to to-windward. After making the night-signal 
for an enemy, the Active bore up to join her consorts. At 4 
A. m. the extremes of Lissa bore from the Amphion , who was 
then one mile off' shore, from west by north to north by east. At 
daylight the force of M. Dubourdieu ’s squadron was made out, 
and the squadron of Captain Hoste earned all sail in chase. At 
6 a . m. the Franco-Venetian squadron began bearing down to 

* See p. 255. f See p. 253.

352 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. 1811. 
the attack in two divisions; the starboard or weather one con¬ 
sisting of the Favorite, Flore, Beilona, and Mercure, and the 
larboard or lee one, of the Danae , Corona, Carolina, and small 
craft. 
The British ships immediately formed in line ahead, with, 
besides the customary red ensign at their respective peaks, union 
jacks and ensigns, blue and red, at their foremast heads and at 
their different stays. Thus nobly decorated, the four ships 
continued working to windward to close the enemy. Just 
before the two squadrons got within gun-shot, aware of what 
would be the tahsmanic effect, at such a moment, of the name 
and example of his late friend and patron , Captain Hoste tele¬ 
graphed, “Remember Nelson !” The loud “ hurrahs !” of 
the four ships’ companies quickly responded to a signal, so ad¬ 
mirably calculated to inspire the hearts of both officers and men 
with all the zeal, all the valour, and all the confidence, necessary 
to withstand a force of such apparently overwhelming superiority 
as that which, in the full expectation of achieving an easy vic¬ 
tory, was now rapidly approaching. 
At 9 a . m. the Amphion, then under top and topgallant sails, 
on the starboard tack, with the Active, Volage, and Cerberus, in 
close order astern, so close indeed, that the ships almost touched 
each other, opened her fire upon the Favourite ; who was rather 
ahead of the Danae , the leading ship of the larboard division. 
The Amphion and Active kept up so well-directed a fire upon the 
Favorite, and the line they formed was so close and compact, 
that M. Dubourdieu was completely frustrated in his gallant 
attempt to pass between those ships. The Favorite now evinced 
a disposition to board the Amphion upon the quarter, and the 
French crew seemed all ready on the forecastle to carry the plan 
into effect; when, just as the Favorite had approached within a 
few yards, a brass 5J inch howitzer upon the Amphion’s quarter¬ 
deck, loaded with 750 musket-balls, was discharged at her lar¬ 
board bow, and, sweeping the French ship’s forecastle, committed 
dreadful havoc among the crowd of boarders there assembled. 
Amidst them was observed, ready to lead on his men to the 
assault, the French Commodore himself; and he, it appears, was 
among those who fell on the occasion. 
As the British ships were moving at the rate of about three 
knots an hour, the course of each of the Franco-Venetian 
columns became more and more oblique, until the Danae , Corona, 
and Carolina, especially the two former, brought their larboard 
guns to bear upon the Volage and Cerberus ; which ships, 
although unable to cope with three such opponents, returned their 
fire with spirit. In the mean time, foiled in her endeavours 
either to board the Amphion, or to cut the line astern of her, and 
deterred by the Active’s apparent superiority of force from 
wearing and coming to close action with her, the Favorite stood 
on engaging the Amphion, with the evident intention of rounding 