

by a cannon-ball ; and another cannon-shot put an end to the life of the gallant Lieutenant Holstein. The incessant fire from the batteries had already strewed the plain with killed and wounded; and, just at this moment, the Anholt schooner, a small armed vessel attacheS to the island, manned by volunteers and com¬ manded by Lieutenant Henry Loraine Baker, anchored close to the northern shore, on the flank of the besiegers. The sand-hills being no longer a protection, and finding it impossible either to advance or retreat, the assailants hung out a flag of truce, and offered to surrender upon terms ; but Governor Maurice wouldaccept of nothing less than an unconditional surrender, and to that, after some deliberation, the Danes acceded.

The gun-boats on the south side, observing the approach of the Tartar, had in the mean while got under way and steered to the westward. Thus abandoned, and having no means of retreat, the Danes on this side also hung out a flag of truce. An officer from the works went to meet it, and must have smiled when he found the object of the truce was to call upon the British to surrender. However, the Danes very soon withdrew their claims, and consented themselves to surrender as prisoners of war; making, with those that had surrendered on the north side, a total of 520 officers and men, exclusive of 23 wounded. The remaining half of the assailants had fled towards the west end of the island, whither the gun-boats and transports had proceeded, in order to embark them. Captain Maurice,accompanied by Captain Torrens, immediately marched in that direction, with the brigade of how¬ itzers and about 40 men, all that could be spared with reference to the safety of the prisoners ; but the formidable appearance of the Danes preserved them from molestation, and they embarked without further loss. That previously sustained amounted to between 30 and 40 killed, including four principal officers and the wounded as already enumerated ; and the loss on the British side amounted to two men killed and 30 wounded, includingamong the latter Captain Torrens, slightly.

Being enabled to sweep directly to windward, and from their light draught of water, to pass within the western reefs, the gun¬ boats were at the point of embarkation long before the Tartar could get near them ; nor could the Sheldrake molest them, she being to leeward. Having re-embarked the remainder of the troops, the flotilla, at about 4 p. m., made sail in the direction of the Sheldrake, but shortly afterwards separated, eight of the gun¬ boats and nearly the whole of the transports steering for the coast of Jutland and the remaining four gun-boats and an armed transport running before the wind towards the coast of Sweden.

While the Tartar stood after the division standing for Jutland, the Sheldrake pursued that endeavouring to escape to Sweden. At 4 h. 30 m. p. m. the Sheldrake opened a heavy fire, and pre¬ sently captured No. 9 gun-boat, mounting two long 18-pounders and four brass howitzers, with a lieutenant of the Danish navy