

/ 10h. 30m. AM.

/ i Carol;

Corona' Dana ©;

Flora S

Suffering greatly from the fire of the two ships that had placed themselves on her quarters, the Amphion gradually bore up to close her heaviest and most annoying opponent. Having passed so close ahead as almost to touch the Flore, the Amphion, at about llh. 15 m. A. m., came to the wind on the same tack as before, with her larboard broadside bearing directly on the French ship’s starboard and lee bow.# So well-directed a fire was now opened upon the latter, that , in about five minutes, the Flore ceased firing and struck her colours. Immediately after the Amphion had bore up, the Bellona did the same ; and, placing herself across the former’s stern, maintained a heavy

* See diagram at p . 356.

and destructive fire. Although particularly careful not to fire 
into her late consort, some of the Bellona’s shot appear to have 
struck the Flore, who had imperceptibly forereached upon the 
Amphion. Conceiving the shot to come from the Amphion, 
one of the officers of the Flore took the French ensign, halliards 
and all, and, holding them up in his hands over the taffrail, as 
if for the Amphion’s people to witness the act, threw the whole into the sea. 
After an ineffectual attempt , owing to the damaged state of 
her rigging and yard-tackle , to hoist out a boat to take posses¬ 
sion of the Flore, the Amphion bore up to close and silence the 
Bellona. Having wore round on the starboard tack, and taken 
a position on the Bellona’s weather bow, the Amphion poured 
in one or two broadsides ; and at a few minutes before noon 
compelled the Bellona to haul down the Venetian, as the Flore 
had the French colours. In the mean time the Mercure brig 
had also been firing occasionally at the Amphion ; but an 
18-pounder was at length brought to bear upon her, and the 
brig soon swept herself beyond the reach of either giving or 
receiving annoyance. Lieutenant Donat Henchy O’Brien, by 
Captain Hoste’s orders, now went with two seamen in the punt, 
and took possession of the Bellona. 
Having secured this prize, the Amphion wore round ; and, 
making the signal for a general chase, brought to on the lar¬ 
board tack, a little to leeward of the Cerberus and Volage, whose 
greatly disabled state had obliged them to bear up. The 
Amphion had now the mortification to see her first and most 
valuable prize, the Flore, out of gun-shot on her weather bow, 
making sail for the island of Lessina ; and towards whom the 
Danae presently edged away, as if to encourage the Flore’s 
commander in the dishonourable act : dishonourable indeed, for 
the French ship, had lain, for some time, at the mercy of the 
Amphion. The Active also, until she made sail after the 
Corona, might have sunk the Flore, and probably would have 
taken possession of her, but that it did not comport with Captain 
Gordon’s spirit, to stay by a beaten enemy, while a fighting 
enemy remained te be subdued ; above all, when a friend stood 
in need of his assistance. Had even the Cerberus or Volage been 
aware that the prize was not secured, either ship, as the Flore 
passed them, might have sent a boat and taken possession of 
her, having had her rigging sails cut to pieces, and expecting 
her foremast every moment to fall, the Amphion was as much 
incapacitated from giving chase as the Cerberus and Volage. 
The surrender of the Flore and Bellona, the escape of the 
former, and the closing of the Active with the Corona, we have 
attempted to show by the following diagram. 