

1811. ACTION OFF LISSA. 353 the latter ship’s bows and placing the British squadron between two fires. At 9 h. 40 m. a . m., being within half a cable’s length of the shore of Lissa, Captain Hoste threw out the signal for his ships to wear together. Just as the latter were in the act of obeying the signal, the Favorite made an effort to wear and get to leeward of the British line, but had scarcely put her helm up,ere she struck on the rocks in the utmost confusion. This im¬ portant circumstance of the battle , to produce which had been the object of Captain Hoste in standing so long upon the star¬ board tack, we have endeavoured to illustrate by the following diagram.

a’.x. ir. \ sh.10m.AM.

Flo:

Mere;

Ed.

Set.

&

Carol,

& Corona

Fafo. iMi shore

l -Aton. Act. Vol.

While the Cerberus was in the act of wearing, her rudder became choked by a shot. This occasioned the Volage to get round before her, and that ship consequently took the lead on the larboard tack ; on which board, being close to the wind, the four ships fell into a bow and quarter line. Sheltered as she had been in some degree by her leader, the Flore was in much better trim for performing any evolution; and, now that the British line had stood off from the land, Captain Peridier found no difficulty in passing under the stern of the Amphion. The Flore then opened her first fire, and immediately afterwards hauled up on the larboard tack upon the Amphion’s lee quarter. Almost at the same moment the Bellona hauled up on the Amphion’s weather quarter, and both ships opened upon her a heavy fire. See the diagram on the following page. By this time the Danae , carefully avoiding the Active’s line of fire, had wore on the larboard tack, followed by the Corona and Carolina. Thinking to make an easy conquest of the Volage, the Danae took up a station abreast of her. Thus honoured with occupying a frigate’s post, the Volage bravely vol . v , 2 a

maintained a frigate’s character, and poured in her 32-pound shot with steadiness and precision. Finding the unexpected weight of these, and soon discovering that they proceeded from carronades, the Danae hauled off to a greater distance ; where her long 18s could produce their full effect, but where carronades could not reach. The Volage was now obliged to increase the charge of powder for her carronades ; and they, in consequence, broke their breechings and upset. So that , at last, the 6-pounder on the forecastle was the only gun which this gallapt little ship had to oppose to the 14 long 18-pounders of her wary antagonist. While the Volage and Danae were thus employed, the Cerberus and Corona were not looking inoffensively at each other. In a little time, however, the Cerberus, who was upwards of 90 men short of complement, became greatly shattered in hull, and nearly disabled in rigging, by the heavy and well-maintained fire of the Corona; with whom the Carolina co-operated only in a slight degree, that ship not appearing very ambitious of closing. At length the Active, who had been striving her utmost to get to the assistance of her two friends in the van, approached under a press of canvass. The moment they saw her coming up, the Danae, Corona, and Carolina made all sail to the eastward. The following diagram will serve to illustrate this period of the action ; the date of which we may fix at from 10 to 10h. 30 m. A. m.