

Although, as the Danish official account states, the Manly was much crippled, and there was no part of her hull but had.more or less suffered, she came out of the action with so com¬ paratively slight a loss, as one seaman killed, and one seaman and two marines dangerously wounded. All three Danish brigs received some trifling damage in their sails and rigging ; but the Loland alone is admitted to have sustained any loss, and thatwas only one man killed. The Danish Captain Holm, with afeeling that establishes him for a brave man, says in his letter to Rear-admiral Lutkin : “ It must be confessed, that it reflects much honour on the commander of the Manly to have made such a resistance.” And it is really a question, in our view of the subject, whether more honour was not gained by the loss of the Manly, than by the escape of the Chanticleer. Lieutenant Simmonds, when subsequently tried for the loss of his brig, wasnot only most honourably acquitted , but received from the president of the court, Captain Richard Lee, when the latter returned him his sword, a very handsome eulogium on his conduct.

Before we quit the subject of Danish brigs of war, we will submit a remark or two upon the nature of their armament. From the concurrent testimony of all the British officers who have b«en engaged with them, the Langland, Lougen, Loland, and other Danish brigs of that class, carried “ long 18-pounders;”and, if we are not mistaken, we have seen the same caliber of guns mentioned in some of the Danish official accounts. We strongly suspect, however, that the gun was not the “ long 18pounder,” as usually understood by that term, but a sort of medium gun, not much longer nor much heavier than a Danish carronade of the same, or at all events of a 32-pound, caliber. Our opinion is founded upon the fact, that 18 long English 18pounders, with their carriages, weigh about 856 cwt. ; while 18 carronades, 32-pounders, with their slides and carriages, weigh but 415 cwt. The British brig that carries the lattermeasures about 382 tons, and therefore the Danish brig that could carry the former would measure at least 600 tons. Now the largest brig of war, which the British have taken from the Danes, was the Gluckstadt , and she measured but 338 tons. Her force, as well as that of the seven or eight other Danish

1811. LOSS OF THE ST.-GEORGE, DEFENCE, & HERO. 349 
brigs taken with her, was officially stated to be 18 guns ; but 
we doubt if any of these vessels had their guns on board. In 
this case the ports only (a practice that ought to be laid aside) 
would be reckoned ; from which, in a single decked vessel, a 
deduction of two is always to be made for the bridle or bow 
ports. Hence the Gluckstadt and her companion, when fitted 
out in the British service, carried no more than 16 guns. The 
only Danish vessels taken on the same occasion, capable of 
mounting 20 guns, were the Fylla and Little-Belt, and they 
measured but 490 tons ; less, by 20 or 30 tons, than the 
generality of French ships carrying the same number of guns. 
Upon the whole, we conclude,that the Lougen, and her consorts 
of the largest class, carried 18-pounders, about six feet in length 
and weighing from 26 to 28 cwt. ; and that consequently, even 
at a moderate range, they were a full match for the largest class 
of British brig-sloops. 
This year closed with a lamentable catastrophe , which befel 
a part of the British Baltic fleet, on its return to England for the 
winter months. On the 9th of November the British 98-gun 
ship St.-George, Captain Daniel Oliver Guion, bearing the flag 
of Rear-admiral Robert Carthew Reynolds, accompanied by 
several other men of war of the Baltic fleet and a convoy of 
120 merchant vessels, sailed from Hano sound for England . On 
the 15th, when the fleet lay at anchor off the island of Zealand 
waiting for a fair wind, a violent storm arose, in which about 30 
of the convoy perished, and the St.-George drove on shore, but 
eventually got off with the loss of her three masts and rudder. 
The men of war, with the remainder of the convoy, then pro¬ 
ceeded to Wingo sound ; where the St.-George was fitted with 
jury masts and a Pakenham ’s rudder, and the whole fleet got 
ready to depart with the first fair wind. 
On the 17th of December the fleet, consisting of eight sail of 
the line, several frigates and smaller vessels of war, and about 
100 merchant vessels, sailed from Wingo sound ; and as the St.- 
George was, as we have seen, in a greatly disabled state , the 74- 
gun ships Cressy and Defence, Captains Charles Dudley Pater 
and David Atkins, w'ere appointed to attend her. The fleet had 
just cleared the Sleeve, wdien a tremendous gale of wind came 
on, which blew successively from the west-north-west, the west, 
and south, and then shifted, with greater violence than ever, to 
the north-west. On the 24th, after combating with the gale for 
five days, the St.-George and Defence were wrecked on the 
western coast of Jutland ; and the whole of their united crews, 
except six men of the one, and 12 of the other, perished. The 
Cressy saved herself by wearing from the starboard tack, and 
standing to the southward ; but Captain Atkins of the 
Defence could not be persuaded to quit the admiral without 
the signal to part company, and therefore shared his melancholy fate. 