

On the 25th the 74-gun ship Hero, Captain James Newman 
Newman, who had sailed from Gottenburg on the 18th, met a 
similar fate on the Haak sand off the Texel, with the loss of all 
her crew except 12 men, that were washed on shore ; making a 
total of nearly 2000 officers and men thus entombed in a watery 
grave. The 18-gun brig-sloop Grasshopper, Captain Henry 
Fanshawe, was in company, and struck also, but drove over the 
bank close in with Texel island. No alternative now remained 
but to surrender to the Dutch admiral ; which the Grasshopper 
accordingly did. 
On the 4th of February the British 18-pounder 32-gun frigate 
Cerberus, Captain Henry Whitby , and 38-gun frigate Active, 
Captain James Alexander Gordon, cruising off the north-east 
coast of Italy , discovered four vessels lying at an anchor in the 
port of “ Peitichi ” or Pescaro . It being nearly calm, Captain 
Whitby despatched Lieutenant George Haye of the Active, with 
the barge of each frigate, to endeavour to cut them out. Lieu¬ 
tenant Haye and his little party, although exposed to a heavy 
fire of musketry from the soldiers quartered at the place, suc¬ 
ceeded, with the loss of only one man wounded, in capturing 
three of the vessels, and in destroying the fourth after removing 
her cargo. They were all merchant trabaccolos, last from 
Ancona. 
On the 12th, in the morning, several vessels were discovered 
at anchor in the harbour of Ortona on the same coast ; and, as 
the wind was light, Captain Whitby despatched the boats of the 
two frigates, under the orders of Lieutenant James Dickinson, 
first of the Cerberus, assisted by Lieutenant George Haye and 
George Cumpson, Lieutenant of marines Peter Mears and master’s 
mates James Gibson and James Rennie, to endeavour to bring 
out the vessels from the strong position in which they were moored. 
The harbour of Ortona is formed by a large pier, running out into 
the sea and connected with a range of hills leading to the town, 
which stands on the top of the highest, completely commanding 
the vessels in the harbour and in the road to it. 
At 10 a . m., on the near approach of the boats, a fire of great 
guns and small arms was opened from an armed Venetian trabac 
colo, not before observed, and from soldiers posted on the beach 
and hills. The British seamen and marines instantly gave three 
cheers, and, pushing on, carried all before them. Lieutenant 
Dickinson , in the gig of the Cerberus, supported by Mr. Rennie 
in the barge, boarded and almost instantly carried the armed tra 
baccolo, although she mounted six guns and was full of men. 
Lieutenant Dickinson then landed, with the marines under Lieu¬ 
tenant Mears and the small-arm men under Mr. Rennie ; and this 
party had to climb up the rocks by their hands, with the prospect 
of falling down a precipice every step they took. At length the 
strong post was attained ; and, while the launches with their car 
ronades kept the soldiers and inhabitants in check, Mr. Rennie 

