

1811. BREVDRAGEREN WITH LANGLAND AND CONSORTS . 345

and 64 men. Having removed the prisoners, the brig resumed 
the chase, and at 8 p. m. overtook , and after the exchange of a 
few shot captured, a large lugger No. 1, mounting two long 24- 
pounders and four brass howitzers, with a lieutenant and 60, out 
of a complement of 70 men. Another gun-boat, as declared by 
several of the Sheldrake ’s people, and acknowledged to be missing 
by the Danes, was sunk by the brig’s shot. The Sheldrake , on 
her part, sustained no loss and very slight damage. 
The division, of which the Tartar was in chase, separated, 
and three of the transports steered for the island of Lessoe. 
These the frigate pursued, and succeeded in capturing two ; one 
with 22 soldiers and a considerable quantity of ammunition on 
board, the other laden with provisions. Soon afterwards the 
shoal water to the southward of the island obliged the Tartar to 
haul off and discontinue the chase. Thus ended the Danish 
expedition to Anholt ; an expedition, in the conduct of it, highly 
creditable to both parties ; for , if the British gained honour by 
their victory, the Danes lost none by their defeat. 
Captain Maurice, in his official letter, computes the whole 
Danish force employed in this expedition at 4000 men. The 
private letter of a British officer present at the attack reduces 
that amount to one half. Our contemporary states the number 
at 1590 men and, although Captain Brenton gives the Danes 
more gun-boats and transports than, it appears, they had with 
them, we see no objection to his estimate of the aggregate 
number of troops and seamen. 
On the 31st of July , in the evening, the British 10-gun cutter 
Algerine, Lieutenant John Aitkin Blow, and 12-gun brig Brev 
drageren, Lieutenant Thomas Barker Devon, lying off Long 
sound on the coast of Norway, discovered three brigs standing 
towards them from the shore. These were three Danish men of 
war, one brig the Langland, of 20 long 18-pounders, and, it is 
believed, two sixes out of the stern-ports, with 170 men; 
another the Lougen, already known to us,f and the third the 
Kiel, mounting two guns less than the latter, or 16 long 18- 
pounders, with about 150 men ; total, 54 long Danish 
18-pounders and 480 men. On the British side, there were 10 
carronades, 18-pounders, in the cutter, and the same, with two 
long 6-pounders, in the brig. The complement of each vessel 
was 60, but the Brevdrageren had only on board 47, men and 
boys. 
Under these circumstances, Lieutenant Blow was justified in 
retreating ; and accordingly the cutter and gun-brig, in the light 
airs then prevailing, used every exertion, by sweeping, to effect 
their escape. On the 1st of August, at 5 a . m,, it was perceived 
that the three Danish brigs had gained considerably in the chase, 
the Langland being about four miles distant on the larboard and 

* Brenton , vol. iv., p. 505. f See p. 29.

346- light SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. 1811.

lee beam of the two British vessels, and the Lougen and Kiel about two distant on the same quarter of their commodore, the Langland. Lieutenant Blow now sent a boat on board the gun brig, and proposed to Lieutenant Devon, that the two vessels should bear down and cut off this brig. The proposal was cheer¬ fully acceded to, and the Algerine and Brevdrageren began sweeping towards the Langland ; but the latter, seeing their intention, bore away and closed her consorts. Their plan being thus frustrated , the cutter and gun-brig hauled up and resumed their efforts to escape. This well-meant manoeuvre, on the part of the Algerine and Brevdrageren, had brought them much nearer to the Danish brigs ; and these, being now concentrated , resumed the chase with redoubled vigour. By 11 a . m. the Langland, with sails clewed up, and assisted by boats from her consorts, had again swept herself ahead of them. Again the Algerine and Brev¬ drageren, it now being quite calm, began sweeping towards her. On this occasion finding the Lougen at no great distance astern of him, the Danish commodore awaited the attack . At about noon the Langland began firing at the Algerine and Brev¬ drageren ; and at a few minutes before 1 p. m., while the Brevdrageren was in close action with the Langland , and just as the Lougen had got upon the British brig’s starboard quarter, the Algerine suddenly ceased firing and swept herself out of the battle ; making a signal to the Brevdrageren to do the same. Circumstanced as the gun-brig then was, with the Langland close on her larboard beam and the Lougen advancing rapidly on her starboard quarter, a compliance with the order was imprac¬ ticable, unless the Brevdrageren hauled down her colours, and that Lieutenant Devon had no intention of doing. He therefore answered Lieutenant Blow’s signal, by hoisting the recal. That was not attended to ; and the Algerine, whose facility of moving by sweeps, both from the form of her hull and the increased number of her crew, far exceeded that of the Brevdrageren, was presently beyond the reach of active co-operation. At 1 h. 30 m. p. m., when the Brevdrageren had received several shot between wind and water, and had had three of her guns disabled, a light air sprang up from the westward. Of this immediate advantage was taken by the British brig, whose sails, being already set, had only to be trimmed to the breeze; while the Langland still had hers clewed up. The promptitude of the Brevdrageren certainly saved her ; for, just as she had got one mile from the Langland, the breeze died away, and it was then only that the Danes, who had never ceased firing, began to sheet home their topsails to go in pursuit . The Langland con¬ tinued to fire occasionally at the Brevdrageren ; but, making a good use of her sweeps, and receiving a reinforcement of two additional sweeps and 10 men from the Algerine, the British brig kept gradually increasing her distance. When at about 5