

ascertained that the brig could be cannonaded with effect where she was then lying. Accordingly the Belle-Poule , followed closely by the Alceste, stood in within a cable’s length of the rocks at the entrance of the harbour, and opened an animated fire, as well upon the brig as upon a battery under which she lay ; and, after an hour’s cannonade, compelled the brig to haul on shore under the town, out of gun-shot. In this attack the two frigates had been frequently hulled, but sustained no other damage than could be immediately repaired, and no greater loss than the Belle-Poule one, and the Alceste two, seamen slightly wounded. All further efforts on the part of the ships being useless, the Belle-Poule and Alceste, after the close of the day, anchored about five miles from the shore ; and Captain Brisbane deter¬ mined to take possession of an island that lay in the mouth of the harbour, and was within musket-shot of the town. Accord¬ ingly at 11 P. m., the boats of the two frigates, containing 200 seamen and the whole of the marines (about 100 in number),under the orders of the Belle-Poule ’s senior Lieutenant John M'Curdy, assisted by Lieutenants Richard Ball Boardman, Edward A. Chartres, and Alexander Morrison, and midshipmen, Hamilton Blair, Charles Matthew Chapman, Edward Finlay, Henry Maxwell, John Hall, and Arthur Grose, of the Belle Poule , and Lieutenants John Collman Hickman and Richard Lloyd, Mr. Howard Moore the master, and Messieurs James Adair, CharlesCroker , and Thomas Redding, midshipmen, of the Alceste, proceeded and took quiet possession of the island. By 5 a. m. on the 5th, with incessant labour, and the most extraor¬ dinary exertions, a defence was thrown up, and a battery of four pieces, two howitzers and two 9-pounders, mounted on a com¬ manding position. A field-piece wras also placed at some distance on the left, to divide the attention of the enemy ; who, aware of the operations of the British, had been busily employed during the night in planting guns in various parts of the harbour. Soon after 5 a. m. the French opened a cross fire from four different positions which was immediately returned ; and the mutual cannonade continued, with great vigour, during five hours. At the end of that time, the French brig being cut to pieces and sunk, and of course the object of making the attack accomplished, the British re-embarked with their guns and ammunition ; after having sustained a loss of four men, the gunner and one seaman of the Belle-Poule , and two marines of the Alceste, killed, and one man slightly wounded ; making the total loss to the British on the occasion four killed and four wounded. On the 26th of May, at daybreak , the British 18-gun brig sloop Alacrity (sixteen 32-pounder carronades and two sixes), Captain Nesbit Palmer, cruising off Cape St.-Andre, island ot Corsica, with the wind a moderate breeze from the eastward,

1811. ALACRITY AND ABEILLE. 365

discovered about six miles to leeward, and immediately chased, 
a large man-of-war brig, which proved to be the French brig 
corvette Abeille, of 24-pounder carronades, commanded by 
acting Lieutenant de vaisseau Ange-Rene-Armand De Mackau. 
Observing that the vessel approaching was a brig, Lieutenant 
De Mackau knew at once the extent of her force; and accord¬ 
ingly shortened sail, hoisted his colours, and fired a gun of 
defiance. By manoeuvring skilfully, the Abeille managed to 
pour into the Alacrity one or two raking fires. The French 
brig now tried for tne weathergage, and having obtained it, 
passed and engaged her opponent on the opposite tack ; then 
bore up, and running close under the Alacrity’s stern, raked her. 
The Abeille afterwards hauled up on the same (the larboard) 
tack as the Alacrity, and engaged her to leeward, keeping just 
upon the British brig’s quarter ; so that , while her own guns 
were playing havoc upon the decks of her antagonist , the 
Alacrity had scarcely a gun which she could bring to bear. In 
a vessel whose tiller works on deck, the quarter is much more 
decidedly the “ point of impunity,” than in a vessel whose tiller 
works below. For instance, in the Alacrity and brigs of her 
class, the space between the aftermost port and the stern is 
upwards of 11 feet, to allow room for the sweep of the tiller, 
consequently, the whole of the space, one ninth part of the 
length of the deck, is without a gun. 
The damaged state of the Alacrity’s rigging soon obliged her to 
drop astern, and thereby afforded her the opportunity of bestow¬ 
ing a few shot in return for the many she had received; but 
the Abeille quickly freed herself from the effect of those by 
ranging ahead, and placing herself upon the Alacrity’s starboard 
bow. The latter, feeling sensibly the ill effects of this diagonal 
fire, threw all back, and endeavoured to pass astern of her anta¬ 
gonist ; but the Abeille saw the well-meant manoeuvre, and at 
once frustrated it by bearing up. The two brigs continued thus 
engaged, side by side, for a few minutes longer ; when the 
Alacrity, having had her sails and rigging cut to pieces, fell off, 
with her stern completely exposed to the Abeille’s broadside. 
In this defenceless state the British brig remained, until, having 
had all her officers killed or driven from the deck but the boat¬ 
swain, she was compelled to haul down her colours. This took 
place about three quarters of an hour after the commencement of 
the action. 
The Alacrity, out of a crew on board of 100 men and boys, 
including 13 of the latter, had her first and only lieutenant 
(Thomas Gvvynne Rees) and four seamen killed, her captain 
(slightly), master (David Laing), one and her only master’s mate 
(Mr. Warren, mortally), surgeon (William Turner, slightly, 
while dressing the w'ounded), boatswain (severely), and eight 
seamen and marines wounded. Lieutenant De Mackau, in his 
letter, as given in the Moniteur, enumerates 15 killed and 20 