

himself the hearts of those into whose temporary custody he had 
fallen. 
After the destruction of the Favorite, the 200 survivors of her 
late crew retired to Lissa : in which port lay two prizes to the 
Active, in charge of two of her midshipmen, James Lew and 
Robert Kingston. These enterprising young men, assisted by 
come privateer’s men, actually summoned the 200 French sea¬ 
men and troops to surrender. As a contrast to this very gallant 
behaviour, a Sicilian privateer-brig, of 14 guns, commanded by 
Clemento Farna, lying in the port, hauled down her colours to a 
one-gun Venetian schooner: and that in the face of the British 
squadron. This was “ Fama” indeed ! The Active’s two mid¬ 
shipmen, with the true Gordon spirit, went on board and took 
charge of the brig, beat off the schooner, and prevented her from 
destroying the British and Sicilian vessels in the bay. 
On the 15th Captain Hoste sent a letter by a flag of truce to 
Captain Peridier of the Flore, at anchor in the road of Lessina, 
demanding restitution of the frigate in the same state as when she 
struck to the Amphion. This letter was replied to by the cap¬ 
tain of the Danae ; who, in consequence of the wounds of M. 
Peridier , had assumed the command of the Franco-Venetian 
squadron. He declared that the Flore did not strike her colours, 
but had them shot away, and requested Captain Hoste , if he had 
any thing further to say, to address himself to the French go¬ 
vernment. This letter was neither signed nor dated ; and Cap¬ 
tain Hoste sent it back, repeating his demand to have the Flore 
restored to him. Thus ended the business. The Danae , Flore, 
and Carolina remained at Lessina about a week, and then pro¬ 
ceeded to Ragusa. 
The Corona was a remarkably fine frigate, built early in the 
preceding year at Venice, and became added to the 38-gun class 
of the British navy by the name of Daedalus. The Bellona, a 
ship of 692 tons, was purchased for a troop-ship, and named 
Dover. Each of the four captains present at the Lissa action 
received a medal : and the first lieutenants of the ships, David 
Dunn of the Amphion, James Dickinson of the Cerberus, Wil¬ 
liam Henderson of the Active, and William Wolrige of the 
Volage, were each promoted to the rank of commander. 
If only to add another to the many proofs which the world has 
witnessed, that the boldest heart in deeds of arms is generally 
the most alive to the softer impulses of humanity we subjoin an 
extract from a letter of condolence addressed by Captain Hoste 
to a near relative of John Robert Spearman, one of the two 
young midshipmen killed on board the Amphion. “ It is impos¬ 
sible I can describe to you the exemplary conduct of the poor 
lad I am now writing to you about. If it is any consolation to 
his friends to learn how he behaved, tell them that, even in 
those days when all strove to emulate, he distinguished himself 
amongst his shipmates in the post where honour or danger was 

in view. And, I assure you, not only am I deprived of a most excellent youngster, and one whom 1 dearly esteemed, but his country, as far as his youth may speak for him, has lost one of its brightest hopes : indeed, he is deeply lamented by all.” On or about the 25th of March the two french 40-gun frigates Amelie and Adrienne, accompanied by the 20-gun store-ship Dromadaire, laden with 15,000 shot and shells of various sizes, and 90 tons of gunpowder, escaped out of Toulon, bound to the island of Corfu. On the 26th, Admiral Sir Charles Cotton detached the 74-gun ship Ajax, Captain Robert Waller Otway, and the 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Unite, Captain Edwin Henry Chamberlayne, to the eastward in pursuit. On arriving off Corsica, Captain Otway sent the Unite round Cape Corse, and with the Ajax pushed through the straits of Bonifacio. On the 30th, when off the isle of Elba , the Unite fell in with and was chased by the three French ships ; who, on hauling off from her, steered for the Piombino passage, and were left working through it. On the same evening the Ajax joined company, and the two British ships proceeded in chase under all sail. On the 31st, at daylight, Captain Otway discovered the objects of his pursuit to windward. Owing to the short distance they were from the land, the Amelie and Adrienne effected their escape into Porto-Ferrajo ; but the Dromadaire was overtaken and captured . She was a fine ship of 800 tons, and had a com¬ plement of 150 men, commanded by a lieutenant de vaisseau. The two French frigates afterwards got into Genoa ; and thence reached Toulon in the succeeding J uly, as already mentioned.* In the latter part of the month of April the two armed store ships Giraffe and Nourrice, each mounting from 20 to 30 guns, the first with 140, the other with 160 men, having in their com¬ pany a merchant ship, also armed, and laden, as they also were, with ship-timber for the dock-yard at Toulon, lay at anchor in the bay of Sagone, island of Corsica, under the protection of a battery , mounting four guns and one mortar, and of a martello tower above the battery , mounting one gun. On the 30th, in the evening, the British 38-gun frigate Pomone, Captain Robert Barrie, the frigate Unite, and the 18-gun brig-sloop Scout, Captain Alexander Renton Sharpe, arrived off the coast, with the intention of attacking these ships. The French Commodore well imagining what was meditated against his ships, moored them within a stone’s throw of the battery , each with two cables on shore, so as to present their broadsides to the narrow entrance of the bay. As an additional defence, the Nourrice landed her quarterdeck guns ; and about 200 regular troops, along with her marines and those of the Giraffe, were posted on the neigh¬ bouring heights. All these preparations were seen from the British ships on the