

* See p. 329.

1811. ACTION IN THE BAY OF SAGONE. 363 morning of the 1st of May, and only rendered those on board of them the more anxious to commence operations. Notwith¬ standing the strong position of the three French ships, the crews of the tw'o British frigates and brig came forward in the most noble manner, and volunteered their services to land, or, as it was quite calm, to attack the enemy by boats. Neither of these methods being considered practicable, Captain Barrie re¬ solved, as soon as a breeze sprang up, to make the attack by the ships. Finding, by 5b . 30m. p. m., that the calm still continued, and fearing that any longer delay would enable the French to increase their force, the Pomone, Unite , and Scout, in the most animated manner, were towed by their respective companies, in the face of a heavy raking fire, into a position within range of grape ; when, at 6 p. m. the British ships opened their broad¬ sides. The mutual cannonade lasted, without any intermission, until 7h . 30 m. p. m. when ; the Giraffe, bearing a commodore’s pendant, and then the Nourrice, was observed to be on fire. Afterwards the brands from the Nourrice set fire to the mer¬ chantman , and in 10 minutes all three ships were completely in a blaze. The Pomone and her consorts now quickly towed themselves out of danger from the explosions; the first of which, that of the Giraffe, took place at 8h . 50m. p. m., and that of the Nourrice a few minutes afterwards. Some of the timbers of the latter, falling on the tower, entirely demolished it, and the sparks set fire to the battery below, which also exploded. The object of the attack having thus completely succeeded, the three British vessels stood out to sea, to repair their damages ; which, except as to the Pomone, who, having had to choose her station, became of course exposed to the brunt of the action, were not very material. The Pomone had two seamen killed, and 10 seamen (four dangerously), seven marines (one dangerously), and two boys wounded ; the Unite, one midship¬ man (Richard Goodridge), one seaman, and one marine slightly wounded ; and the Scout, her first lieutenant (William Neame), severely, and her boatswain (James Stewart) and one seaman slightly wounded ; total, on board the three British ships, two killed and 25 wounded. The loss on the part of the French could not be ascertained, but, in all probability, was very severe. On the 4th of May, at 10 a . m., the British 38-gun frigates Belle-Poule, Captain James Brisbane, and Alceste, Captain Murray Maxwell, being off the coast of Istria , discovered and chased a French man-of-war brig, of 18 guns, which shortly afterwards hauled into the small harbour of Parenza . Having received intelligence that a vessel of that description was ex¬ pected at Ragusa , with supplies for the French frigates Danae and Flore, which had escaped from Captain Hoste off Lissa, Captain Brisbane resolved to attempt the capture or destruction of the French brig. Although there was only 15 feet of water in the harbour, and therefore no passage for the frigates, it was