

360 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. 1811. demate de tous ces mlits, etait echoue surles roches de File. II doit s’etre perdu. Le resultat de ce combat est, pour nous, laperte de deux fregates qui ont peri, et pour les Anglais la perte d’une fregate et d’un vaisseau rase. L’opinion de tous les marins est que, si le Capitaine Dubourdieu avait bien rallie sa division,nous prendrions deux bfitimens anglais, quoique l’ennemi eut deux vaisseaux rases.”

It is not a little extraordinary that Colonel Gifflenga’s “ vais¬seau rase” was at this time within five or six of being the smallest ship of the numerous class of British 38-gun frigates ; but shewas larger, undoubtedly , than either of the two 32-gun frigates associated with her. The Active measured 1058, the Amphion 914, the Cerberus 816, and the Volage 529 tons. Yet the Activewas a smaller ship than the Corona, which measured 1094 tons, and than either the Favourite, Danae, or Flore ; not one of which, we believe, measured less than the Corona. Why , therefore, the Active should have been so avoided during the battle, and so magnified in force after it was over, we cannot conceive. The fire on board the Corona accounts, in some degree, for what is stated respecting that ship ; and had any one of the British ships merely touched the ground, there would have been a pre¬ text for the colonel’s assertion on that head ; but no accident of the kind occurred. In stating, at the commencement of his letter, that the British had one “ cut-down ship of the line,” and at the end of it, that they had two, the writer reminds us of that prince of braggarts Falstaff and his men of buckram.

Leaving the letter of Colonel Alexander Gifflenga to the con¬ tempt it merits, we shall make a few admissions, which, even in the opinion of a reasonable Frenchman or Italian , will outweigh all the colonel’s rodomontade. CommodoreDubourdieu advanced to the attack in a brave and masterly manner ; and, had the Fa¬ vorite escaped being driven on shore, a much more serious task, in the nature of things, would have devolved upon Captain Hoste . Captain Peridier also deserves credit, for the gal¬ lant manner in which he seconded the views of his unfortunate chief ; and, as the captain was badly wounded and below at the time the Flore struck to the Amphion, we should be disposed to exculpate him from the dishonourable act of making sail after his ship had so unequivocally surrendered . Of the Danae ’s captain,we are unable to state the name ; and perhaps it is better for him that we are so. With respect to the Corona’s captain, no officer,to whatever navy he may belong, could have fought his ship bet¬ ter. The Corona, it will be recollected, was not subdued by oneopponent : she had two frigates upon her in succession ; and both, the first in particular, felt the effects of her steady and well- directed fire. By his gallant behaviour in the action, and his frank and manly deportment afterwards, Captain Paschaligonot only afforded a bright example to the little navy of Venice, and ennobled an already noble name, but gained for