

wounded ; but the account, as we have stated it, may be 
depended upon as correct. The Abeille, whose crew amounted 
to at least 130 men and boys, lost, according to the acknow¬ 
ledgment of her officers, seven seamen and marines killed and 
12 wounded. Neither brig, as far as it appears, had any mast 
shot away ; although both, particularly the Alacrity, had 
received damage in them, as well as in the rigging, sails, and 
hull. 
Here were two brigs, when the action began, about equally 
matched, and, when it ended, nearly equal sufferers in point of 
numerical loss : a circumstance that renders the termination of 
it, by the capture of one of them, so much the more extraordinary. 
It was, however, in numbers merely, that the loss came so near to 
an equality ; as the Alacrity’s almost unparalleled loss of officers 
has already in part shown, and as the further explanation, which 
our duty calls upon us to give, will completely establish. Out 
of her full net complement of 120 men and boys, the Alacrity 
sailed upon her last cruise with only 101 men and 13 boys. 
Falling in with and detaining a Greek ship, rather largely 
manned, Captain Palmer sent on board his second lieutenant, 
Mr. Alexander Martin, a skilful and zealous officer, and 13 able 
seamen, with orders to carry the ship to Malta . This was in the 
beginning of May. Thus left with all her boys, and with very 
little more than four fifths of her men, the Alacrity encountered 
the Abeille in the manner already stated . In the early part of 
the action, Captain Palmer received a lacerated wound in his 
hand and fingers, and went below, and remained below. The 
command, in consequence, devolved upon Lieutenant Rees, and 
a more efficient officer could not be found. Presently Lieutenant 
Rees had his leg badly shot, and was borne to a carronade-slide. 
There he sat, persisting in not being carried below, and animating 
the men by every means in his power, until a second shot laid 
him dead on the deck. His place was filled by Mr. Laing, the 
master. While he was in command, the master’s mate, Mr. 
Warren , received his mortal wound ; and at length Mr. Laing 
got wounded also, by a contusion in the upper part of the thigh, 
and he went below. 
The men on the quarterdeck now called out, that there was no 
officer to command them. Instantly James Flaxman , the 
boatswain, stepped aft, who, although he had received a painful 
wound in the left arm by a nail and been knocked into the waist 
by a splinter, was again at his post on the forecastle cheering the 
people. Here, again, all might have gone on well, in spite of the 
disheartening effect produced upon the crew by the absence of 
their finger-wounded captain . Although his hand had been 
dressed, the latter was so stomach-sick, or so sick somewhere 
else, that he remained below ; and, whether it was that a shot, 
which about this time wounded the surgeon in the cockpit, 
alarmed the captain in the cabin, or that the latter began to com- 