

1811. ALACRITY AND ABEILLE. 367

passionate others, as well as himself, Captain Palmer sent up orders to strike the colours. No sooner was the order announced 
on the quarterdeck , than, snatching up a pistol from off the 
binnacle, the boatswain swore he would blow out the brains of 
the first man who attempted to execute it. The threat had its 
effect, and the ensign of the Alacrity continued to wave at her 
gaff-end. In a very short time, however, while the intrepid 
Flaxman was standing near the main hatchway, exhorting the 
crew to act like British seamen, the gunner, who ranked above 
the boatswain, and seems to have caught the captain’s infection, 
hauled down the brig’s colours. 
It was as fortunate for the memory of the Alacrity’s late 
commander, as, in reference to the merits of this action, it was 
unfortunate for the cause of truth , that he died a month after¬ 
wards of a locked jaw brought on by his originally insignificant 
wound. Every person does not know that , in warm climates, a 
comparatively slight cut between the thumb and fore-finger will 
frequently produce locked jaw ; and therefore the undisputed 
fact, that Captain Palmer “ died of his wounds,” not only 
exonerated him, in public opinion, from all blame, but stamped 
his character with a quality, to which, as is now evident, he had 
not a pretension. Let those who maintain, that the dead are not 
to be spoken ill of, answer the question, whether the good of the 
individual should not give way to the good of the many ? 
Whether , in short, it is not more consonant to justice to show, 
that a certain mishap or calamity arose from the defection of one 
man, than leave it to be inferred, that 100 men failed in their 
duty? 
But, there were gems in the British character, that, had the 
Alacrity not met the Abeille, and had the captain of the former 
not behaved as he did, would perhaps for ever have lain hid. 
Lieutenant Rees, for instance, might never have had an oppor¬ 
tunity of displaying the trait of heroism which caused his death; 
nor James Flaxman, the boatswain, the undaunted spirit that 
animated him, and which at least delayed, although it could not 
prevent, the surrender of the British brig. Satisfied we are that, 
if the details of every British naval defeat were fully made 
public, instead of, as is usually the case, suppressed or but par¬ 
tially given, sufficient glory would be elicited to counteract the 
disgrace , which the unexplained result of the action is, in almost 
every case, calculated to produce. 
Before we dismiss the action of the Alacrity and Abeille, let 
us do justice to the officers and crew of the latter. They did 
their duty like brave men and good seamen ; and, as an addi¬ 
tional proof that they were brave men, treated their prisoners 
with attention and kindness. With respect to the Abeille’s 
commander, he obtained the promotion to which his gallantry so 
justly entitled him : he was immediately confirmed in his ap¬ 
pointment of a lieutenant de vaisseau, and made a member of 
368 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. 1811. 
the legion of honour. On the 7th of February , 1812, Lieutenant 
De Mackau was made a capitaine de fregate ; soon afterwards 
a baron of the French empire ; and on the 1st of September, 
1819, a capitaine de vaisseau. 
On the 30th of May, 1814, on board the Gladiator at Ports¬ 
mouth, a court-martial sat on the surviving officers and crew of 
the Alacrity. The court acquitted them of all blame, and attri¬ 
buted the brig’s loss to so many of her officers having been 
killed or wounded, and to the “ captain’s not returning on deck 
after having had his wound dressed by the surgeon.” The court, 
also, greatly eulogized the conduct of James Flaxman, the 
boatswain ; and he now, we believe, fills a similar station on 
board a line-of-battle ship. 
The French official account states the force of the Alacrity at 
“ 20 carronades, 32-pounders.” For this there was some 
ground, the brig having really mounted two small brass guns, 
2 or 3 pounders, abaft. But there were no shot for them ; they 
were the captain’s playthings, and served occasionally to exercise 
the crew in the necessary art of polishing. Of this oversight, or 
whatever it may have been, in Captain De Mackau, we feel the 
less disposed to complain, because he fairly states the force of 
his own brig at “ 20 carronades, 24-pounders.” A French 
writer, whose works are of deservedly high repute in this 
country, has selected about four cases out of the mass to be 
found in these pages, in order to show, that “ French valour can 
triumph over British bravery,” “ la vaillance frangaise pouvait 
triompher de la bravoure britannique.”* Far be it from us to 
discourage the laudable endeavours of M. Dupin to reanimate 
the drooping navy of his country : we heartily wish he may 
succeed, because we are convinced that , unless the French navy 
thrives, the British navy will droop. By the French the British 
can afford to be beaten occasionally ; and, had the British been 
oftener defeated during the six years that preceded, they would, 
we are sure, have been oftener successful in the three years that 
followed, the 18th of June, 1812. 
However, not to lose sight of M. Dupin, let us remark that, 
in stating the broadside-force of the Alacrity at 127 “ kilo¬ 
grammes,” and that of the Abeille at 109, he proves the in¬ 
accuracy of his information respecting the mounted force of the 
two vessels. M. Dupin may correct his error by reducing the 
following into French weights : Alacrity, broadside-force 262 lbs., 
Abeille, same, 260 lbs. In stating that the French brig Renard 
was of the same force as the Abeille, M. Dupin is also wrong, 
owing probably to his being unacquainted, that the Abeille was 
not a regular-built French corvette, but a large American brig, 
purchased at some port in the Mediterranean and fitted out by 
the admiral at Toulon as a cruiser. The very circumstance of 