

* See p. 330.

1811. BOATS OF UNITE, THAMES, &C. ON ROMAN COAST. 371 
in four fathoms, and the French were quickly driven from their 
guns at the battery . The boats of the Unite , commanded by 
the same officers who had distinguished themselves in the - 
morning, then joined the boats of the Cephalus, under Captain 
Clifford ; and the whole went in and brought out, without the 
slightest loss, although exposed to a smart fire of musketry from 
their crews, and from a party of soldiers drawn up on a height 
above them, three merchant-vessels. The remainder of those 
at anchor in the road proved to be fishing-vessels. 
On the 21st of July , at 5 p.m., the British T2-pounder 32-gun 
frigate Thames, Captain Charles Napier, joined the Cephalus off 
Porto del Infreschi, into which port the latter had the day 
before compelled a French convoy of 26 sail to run for shelter. 
The Cephalus, followed by the Thames, then stood in and 
anchored : and the two opened a heavy cannonade upon 11 
French gun-boats and a felucca, mounting between them six 
long 18-pounders, two 12-pounder carronades, three brass and 
two iron 6-pounders, and manned with 280 men ; moored across 
the port, for the protection of 15 merchant vessels, and of 
36 spars for the line-of-battle ship and frigate building at 
Naples. 
The fire of the gun-boats, as well as of a round tower, and of a 
body of musketry on the adjacent hills, was soon silenced ; and, 
while the boats, under Captain Clifford, took possession of the 
vessels of war and merchantmen, the marines, under Lieutenant 
David M'Adams, landed, and stormed and carried the round 
tower, making an officer and 80 men prisoners. Within two 
hours from their anchoring, the Thames and Cephalus were 
again under way, with all their prizes in company, and all the 
spars alongside, except two which could not be got off. Nor did 
this dashing and important enterprise cost the life of a man ; the 
whole loss sustained amounting to the boatswain (Hood Douglas) 
and three seamen of the Cephalus wounded. 
On the 27th of July the British 38-gun frigate Active, Captain 
James Alexander Gordon, anchored off the town of Ragosniza 
on the island of that name in the Adriatic, and despatched her 
boats, with the small-arm men and marines, under the orders of 
Lieutenant James Henderson, assisted by Lieutenants George 
Haye, who, though an invalid, very handsomely volunteered, and 
Robert Gibson, Lieutenant of marines Peter Mears, master’s mate 
Charles Friend, and midshipmen Henry Lew, Redmond Mori 
arty , Norwich Duff, William Simpkins, Joseph Camelleri, 
Nathaniel Barwell, Charles Bentham, George Moore, William 
Wood, and William Todd Robinson, to attack a convoy of 
28 vessels, laden with grain for the garrison of Ragusa , which 
had run up above the island and taken shelter in a creek on the 
main. 
The creek being very narrow at its entrance, and protected by 
three gun-boats, as well as by a force of armed men on each 
2 b 2 

point, reported to amount in the whole to 300, Lieutenant Hen¬ 
derson, accompanied by Lieutenants Haye and Mears and Mr. 
Friend, and the small-arm men and marines, landed on the 
right, in order to take possession of a hill that appeared to 
command the creek ; leaving Lieutenant Gibson to push for the 
gun-boats, the moment a concerted signal should be made from 
the top of the hill. After dislodging several soldiers, who fired 
upon them during their ascent, Lieutenant Henderson and his 
party gained the summit, and found themselves immediately 
above the gun-boats and convoy. Having made the preconcerted 
signal, Lieutenant Henderson descended the hill, exposed to the 
fire of one of the gun-boats and several soldiers; but the attack 
had been so well planned, and was so nobly executed, that the 
boats under Lieutenant Gibson boarded the gun-vessels imme¬ 
diately after Lieutenant Henderson’s men had fired two volleys 
into them. Being attacked so warmly, the crews of the gun¬ 
boats, except three men and several others that were wounded, 
jumped overboard and got on shore just as the frigate’s boats 
came alongside. The guns in the vessels were immediately 
turned towards the flying enemy ; and the British, without 
experiencing any further resistance, took possession of the whole 
convoy. Ten of the latter were burnt by the captors, and the 
remaining 18 vessels, along with the three gun-boats, were 
brought safely out ; nor was there the usual drawback of a 
serious loss to lessen the value of the exploit, four men only 
having been wounded in the British boats. 
On the 26th of May, in the morning, the British 18-gun 
brig-sloop Pilot , Captain John Toup Nicolas, observing four 
settees on the beach almost immediately under the town of 
Strongoli, near the entrance of the gulf of Taranto, despatched 
her boats to bring them off, under the orders of Lieutenants 
Alexander Campbell and Francis Charles Annesley, Mr. Roger 
Langland the master, master’s mate Henry Pierson Simpson, 
midshipman John Barnes (the second), and Mr. Scotten the 
carpenter . The Pilot herself at the same time anchored off the 
spot, but, on acount of the shoal water, not so close as was 
desirable. 
In spite of an opposition from 75 gens d’armes, all dragoons, 
and 30 regular foot soldiers, sent from Cotrone, and above 40 of 
the civic militia, Lieutenant Campbell and his party effected a 
landing ; and, after dislodging the enemy from an advantageous 
position behind a bank and in a tower within half musket-shot 
of the beach, launched three of the vessels, and destroyed the 
fourth, because unable from shot-holes to float. The whole of 
this service was executed with no greater loss than one marine 
slightly wounded. 
On the 6th of September, early in the morning, the Pilot, 
cruising off the town of Castellan in the same neighbourhood, 
observed an armed ketch secured to the walls of the castle of 