

squadron . With the cheering prospect in view, Lieutenant‘Dougal resumed his station on board the Unite ; and the three British frigates were soon under all the sail they could carry, against the fresh wind that now blew from the east-south-east. On the 29th, at 9 h. 20 m. a . m., the island of Augusta in sight, the Active made the signal for three strange sail in the east-north-east. At 10 a . m. the strangers were made out to be frigates, and were in fact, not the three French ships already named, but the 40-gun frigates Pauline , Commodore Franqois- Gilles Monfort, aine , and Pomone, Captain Claude-Charles- Marie Ducamp-Rosamel, and the frigate-built store-ship Persanne, of 26 guns, Captain Joseph -Andre Satie, from Corfu since the 16th, going to join the French squadron at Triest ; for which, and for the batteries of the place, they had on board aquantity of iron and brass ordnance. At first the three French frigates formed in line on the larboard tack, and stood towards the British ships; but, on making out the latter to be an enemy’ssquadron, M. Monfort bore up to north-west, and set studding- sails, followed, under an equal press of canvass, by the Alceste and her two companions. At about 11 a .m., finding that she could not keep way with the Pauline and Pomone, the Persanne separated from them and

1811. ALCESTE AND ACTIVE WITH PAULINE AND POMONE. 377

stood to the north-east. The Active now steered for the Per 
sanne, but was immediately recalled, and the Unite detached 
after her. In the mean time the Alceste and Active continued in 
pursuit of the Pauline and Pomone, and, especially the Alceste, 
were rather gaining upon them. x4t 11h. 50 m. a . m. Captain 
Maxwell telegraphed the Active, “ Remember the battle of 
Lissa.” At 30 minutes past noon, just as the rocky island of 
Pelagosa bore from the Alceste south-west distant five 
leagues, the Persanne was seen to fire her stern chase-guns at 
the Unite , and to receive in return a fire from the latter’s bow 
chasers. 
At 1h. 20 in. p. m. the Alceste, then running above nine knots 
an hour with the wind on the larboard quarter, fired a shot from 
her foremost gun on the starboard side directly into the larboard 
quarter of the Pomone ; who immediately hoisted a French 
ensign and pendant, and fired a single shot, which splintered the 
Alceste’s main topgallantmast . The Pauline , who was close 
ahead of the Pomone, also hoisted her colours, with a commo¬ 
dore’s broad pendant. At 1 h. 24 m., being still under a crowd 
of sail to get to the French commodore, the Alceste opened her 
broadside upon the Pomone, and received a fire in return . At 
1 h. 40 m., when directly a-beam of the Pomone, with every 
prospect of quickly reaching the Pauline, who had taken in her 
royals to keep nearer to her consort, the Alceste received a shot 
from the Pomone, which carried away her main topmast just 
above the cap. As the wreck, with the topgallant and royal 
studding-sails, fell over on the starboard side, and the Alceste in 
consequence dropped a little astern, “ cheers of ‘ ViVe l’em 
pereur !” ’says Captain Maxwell, “ resounded from both ships: 
they thought the day their own, not aware of what a second I 
had in my gallant friend Captain Gordon, who pushed the Active 
up under every sail.” 
At about 2 p. m., having gained a station on the starboard or 
lee quarter of the Pomone, the Active brought that frigate to 
close action. At about 2 h. 20 m. p. m., resetting his royals, the 
French commodore braced up, and presently tacked and stood 
for the weather beam of the Alceste. At 2 b. 30 m. the latter 
and the Pauline became closely engaged. At about 3 h. 5 m. 
p . m., seeing that the Pomone stood no chance with the Active, 
and observing, probably, the British 18-gun ship-sloop Kingfisher, 
Captain Ewell Tritton, approaching in the distance, the French 
commodore set all sail and stood to the westward. Shortly 
afterwards the Active, although with all three topsails to the 
mast, unavoidably shot ahead of her antagonist, and a suspen¬ 
sion of the firing ensued. At about 3 h. 40 m. p. m., just as the 
Alceste had arrived up and opened a fire from her. starboard 
broadside, the main and mizen masts of the Pomone came down 
by the board ; and almost immediately afterwards the French 
frigate hoisted a union-jack as the signal of his having struck. 