

litan gun-boats lying in the port of Palinuro , together with a 
number of merchant vessels, also a quantity of spars hauled up 
on the beach, intended for the equipment of the Neapolitan navy. 
From the strength and situation of the harbour, Captain Duncan did not consider that he had a sufficient force to make the attack 
with a prospect of complete success. He therefore sent the 
Thames to Sicily, to request Lieutenant-general Maitland to lend 
him a detachment of soldiers. On the 28th the Thames returned, 
with 250 of the 62d regiment under Major Darby ; but, as this 
was just at the commencement of a south-west gale, no operation 
could for the present be carried on. 
On the 1st of November, in the evening, the time proving 
favourable, the troops under Major Darby , together with the 
marines of both frigates under Lieutenant Pipon, and a detach¬ 
ment of seamen under Lieutenant Travers, the whole commanded 
by Captain Napier, were disembarked from the Thames at the 
back of the harbour. The British immediately ascended and 
carried the height in a very gallant style, under a heavy fire 
from the French, who had assembled in force to oppose them, 
and who, soon after dark, endeavoured to retake their position; 
but one well-directed volley obliged the enemy to retire. The 
Imperieuse , meanwhile, bad been endeavouring to occupy the 
attention of the gun-boats and battery in front ; but the light 
and baffling winds prevented the frigate, during the evening, 
from getting nearer than long range. 
On the 2d, in the morning, finding that nothing could be done 
on the land side against the battery and a strong tower that pro¬ 
tected the vessels on the beach, and within pistol-shot of which 
the gun-boats were moored, Captain Duncan ordered the Thames 
to close, and Captain Napier to return to her from the shove. 
This done, the two frigates bore up at the commencement of the 
sea-breeze, and, running along the line of gun-boats within half 
musket -shot, sank two and obliged the remainder almost in¬ 
stantly to surrender. The Imperieuse and Thames then, an¬ 
choring close to the fort, silenced it in 15 minutes, and in 15 
minutes more compelled the garrison to haul down the colours. 
The fort was instantly taken possession of by Lieutenant 
Travers : who, on seeing the ships stand in, had most gallantly 
pushed down the hill with a party of seamen and marines, and 
was waiting almost under the walls of the fort, ready to take 
advantage of any superiority the ships might gain over it. 
The guns at the fort, 24-pounders, being thrown into the sea, 
and the gun-boats secured, the crews of both frigates proceeded 
to launch the vessels and the spars. This could not be accom¬ 
plished until the afternoon of the 3d ; when the troops, who 
had all this time remained in undisturbed possession of the 
heights, were re-embarked, and the marines withdrawn from the 
tower. The tower was then completely blown up, together with 
two batteries, and also a signal-tow'er on the hill. The two ships, 