

1811. ALCESTE& ACTIVE WITH PAULINE& POMONE. 379 
would have enabled both French frigates to have effected their 
escape. 
The best voucher an officer can obtain of his good conduct in 
action is the testimony of his enemy ; but, unfortunately, it is 
not every heart that can cherish such a sentiment, nor every 
understanding that can perceive how much it redounds to true 
glory, to give to that sentiment free and unrestrained utterance. 
Captain Rosamel, however, had the happiness to fall into the 
hands of an officer, who both felt, and publicly expressed, what 
was due from one brave enemy to another. Captain Maxwell 
thus expresses himself on the subject : “ Captain Rosamel 
fought his ship with a skill and bravery, that has obtained for 
him the respect and esteem of his opponents.” That this act of 
justice emanated solely from principle, may be gathered from the 
following well-attested anecdote. According to the etiquette of 
the service, Captain Maxwell, as senior officer of the two British 
frigates, became entitled to the sword of the French captain: 
indeed, the French captain would deliver his sword to no one 
else ; but, no sooner did Captain Maxwell receive it, than, con¬ 
sidering the Pomone to be the fair trophy of the Active, he 
sent, or rather took, the sword to Captain Gordon, as his by 
light of conquest. 
It was about noon when the Unite so far closed in the wake 
of the Persanne , whose end-on appearance indicated that she 
also was a frigate, as to exchange bow and stern chasers ; but 
the variable state of the wind, which shifted from south to east, 
and the continuance of the Persanne in a course that kept the 
Unite directly astern, made it nearly 4 p. m. before the latter got 
close enough to open a part of her broadside. As soon as this 
was done, the Persanne fired a broadside in return, and hauled 
down her colours. 
The masts, yards, sails, and rigging of the Unite were more 
or less cut by the galling stern-fire to which she had been 
exposed ; but her loss was restricted to one seaman severely 
wounded. The Persanne was also tolerably damaged aloft; and, 
out of her 190 men in complement, had two killed and four 
wounded. Animated by the same spirit of fairness which, as we 
have shown, characterized his commodore, Captain Chamberlayne 
says in his official letter, that Captain Satie’s “ masterly 
manoeuvres and persevering resistance, for nearly four hours 
reflect great credit on him.” 
The Pomone was one of the largest class of French frigates, 
and had in her hold 42 iron guns, chiefly 18-pounders, and nine 
brass guns, besides 220 iron wheels for gun-carriages. The 
Persanne , whose 26 guns were 8-pounders, was a ship of 860 
tons, and had in her hold 130 iron 24-pounders, and 20 brass 
9-pounders. The Pauline , in all probability, had on board a 
quantity of the same description of warlike stores. The Pomone 
was built by the citizens of Genoa at the commencement of the 

380 LIGHT SQUADRONS AND SINGLE SHIPS. J811.