

1811. CAPTURE OP THE CORCEYRE. 375

accompanied by their prizes, consisting of six gun-boats of one 
long 18-pounder each, 22 feluccas laden with oil, cotton, &c., 
and 20 large spars brought off from the beach, put to sea with 
the land breeze. Four other gun-vessels, one with two long 
18-pounders were also destroyed ; but this very dashing service 
was not executed without loss, Lieutenant Kay of the 62d regi¬ 
ment and four men being killed, and Lieutenant Pipon of the 
marines and 10 men wounded. The commanding officer of the 
gun-boats was Captain Caraccioli, and the troops and armed 
peasantry , estimated at 700 men, were commanded by General 
Pignatelli Cercaro. Although Lieutenant Travers was an older 
lieutenant than many who were at that time commanders, and 
although Vice-admiral Sir Edward Pellew, the Mediterranean 
commander-in-chief, requested the attention of the lords of the 
admiralty to “ the distinguished services ” which he had on that 
and on former occasions performed, Lieutenant Travers, as we 
observe by the list, was not made a commander until the 15th of 
June , 1814. 
On the 27th of November, at 9 A. m., Fano in the Adriatic 
bearing south-east distant four leagues, the British 74-gun ship 
Eagle , Captain Charles Rowley, discovered and immediately 
chased three vessels in the north-west quarter. These were the 
French 40-gun frigate Uranie, the armed en flute frigate Cor 
ceyre, and brig-corvette Scemplone, from Triest on the 13tb, 
bound to Corfu. In the course of a short time the brig sepa¬ 
rated from her two companions; and the Eagle continued in 
pursuit of the latter down the north-east coast of Italy until 
about 7 h. 30 m. p. m.; when, having lost her fore topmast by an 
overpress of sail, and been otherwise crippled by the 74’s fire, 
the Corceyre hauled down her colours. 
Owing to the extreme darkness of the night and the necessity, 
in the disabled state of the prize and the strength and direction of 
the wind, for the Eagle to stay by the Corceyre to prevent her 
going on shore near Brindisi, the Uranie effected her escape, as 
was supposed, into that port. The Corceyre is represented to 
have been pierced for 40 guns, and to have mounted 26 long 18- 
pounders on the main deck and two 6-pounders on the quarter¬ 
deck, with a crew of 170 seamen and 130 soldiers; of whom she 
had three men killed and six or seven wounded, including her 
commander, Lieutenant de vaisseau “ Longlade.” The Corceyre 
was laden with 300 tons of wheat, and a quantity of military 
and other stores. 
On the 28th of November, at 7 a . m., while the British 38- 
gun frigates Alceste and Active, Captains Murray Maxwell and 
James Alexander Gordon, 18-pounder 36-gun frigate Unite, 
Captain Edwin Henry Chamberlayne, and 20-gun ship Acorn, 
Captain George Miller Bligh, were lying in Port St.-George, 
island of Lissa, the telegraph on Whitby hill announced three 
suspicious sail south. Captain Maxwell, the senior officer in the 

port, immediately unmoored the squadron and prepared to go in pursuit of what was supposed to be a French squadron from Triest bound to Corfu, consisting of the 40-gun frigates Danae and Flore and 32-gun frigate Carolina, the fugitives from Captain Hoste in the preceding March. As a strong French force was at this time assembled at Scisina, for the avowed purpose of making an attack upon Lissa, Captain Maxwell could not leave the island without providing for its defence. Accordingly a lieu¬ tenant , midshipman, and about 30 seamen, from the Alceste and Active were embarked on board three prize gun-boats lying in the port ; and the whole of the marines belonging to the Alceste, Active two , and, we believe, Unite, were landed as a garrison for the batteries erected on Iloste island at the entrance of the har¬ bour. Leaving, then, the direction of affairs to Captain Bligh of the Acorn, Captain Maxwell, with the Alceste, Active, and Unite, began warping out of the harbour against a fresh east-north-east wind ; and by 7 p. m., after very great exertions on the part of their officers and crews, the three British frigates were at sea. At 9 h. 30 m., when close off the south end of Lissa a strange vessel to windward fired two guns, and the Unite boarded her. She proved to be a neutral, on board of which Lieutenant John M'Dougal, of the Unite, had taken his passage to Malta . On that same morning, about 40 miles to the southward, this vessel had discovered three French frigates. Lieutenant M‘Dougal instantly obliged the master of the neutral to put back, in order that the squadron might be informed of the circumstance, and the vessel was on her return to Lissa when thus fallen in with by the M