

This will be evident on a mere perusal of them. 
It will be seen that the Israelites have separate 
elective assemblies, separate contributions, and a 
separate police, exercised by their own Rabbies, 
who are to inforce military service among them, 
keep an exact account of their numbers, and even 
interfere in their private concerns. In this, they 
are indeed under the hand of government, but 



PREFACE. 



they are totally secluded from the mass of the 
people. Their actual strength, their several oc« 
cupations, will be known accurately ; they may 
be ready at a moment's warning. 

These Regulations have another remarkable fea« 
ture, common to all the recent politico-religious 
conceptions of the French government. The 
Rabbies are by them set as spies over the Jews, 
like the ministers of the Roman Catholic religioi^ 
over the rest of Frenchmen. Nor does this part 
of the plan stop here ; by means of the close union 
existing between the seteral Jewish communities 
scattered over Europe, the French ruler hopes to 
extend the system far and wide. Already deputies 
of all the Synagogues have been invited to Paris, 
to assist at the Great Saxhedrim. An uniform- 
ity of doctrine will connect them more closely 
with those among the French Jews who are de- 
voted to Bonaparte. What other advantages had 
lie in view in framing the too famous Concordat 
with the Pope of Rome? 

This part of the plan is far from being incom- 
patible with the further views we have alluded to; 

b2 



PREFACE. 



it will even prepare and insure, in some measure, 
their success ; and, should they be frustrated after 
all, will secure advantages sufficient to lessen the 
disappointment. Let it be remarked here, that, 
yvhile the French ruler is so anxious to extend his 
influence in foreign countries by means of the 
Israelites, he has taken care, by the eleventh and 
twenty-sixth articles of hisRegulations, to prevent 
a retaliation from foreign powers. Indeed these 
clauses destroy completely the idea entertained at 
first, by many, that he had in contemplation to in- 
tice the Jews indiscriminately to settle in France: 
and we here repeat it, his motives for calling that 
assembly were his love of money, his fondness of 
theatrical pomp, his plans on the east, and his ex* 
tensive system of espionage. 

It could not be reasonably expected that, under 
Bonaparte, an assembly of any kind should enjoy 
a great share of liberty in their deliberations. 
Indeed, little care was taken, in this instance, to 
disguise the exertions of power; the answers and 
the measures were evidently agreed between the 
Imperial Commissioners and a few of the leading 



FREFACE. 



members, and read afterwards to the assembly 
jno forma; the power attributed to the President, 
devoted to the court, his naming the members of 
every committee, his dissolving the meeting at 
pleasure, hardly left the shadow of deliberating 
forms, while the casual opposition some of the 
propositions experienced was removed by means 
WE should deem unwarrantable in any meeting. 