

From the speeches of the deputies, it will be 
seen thsi,t the Jewish assembly could boast of as 
great talents as could probably have been expect- 
ed from any other French assembly of the same 
number of men, taken indiscriminately in any 
class, and this fully justifies our assertion, that, 
under the old government, the Jews enjoyed a 
sufficient share of liberty to encourage the dis« 
play of their natural abilities, and that, with 
equal protection, and liberty of conscience, is 
perhaps the full extent of the advantages which 
non-conformists can expect from a regular govern* 
ment. 

But while we pay a just tribute to their talents, 
we must deplore the way in which they have been^ 



xir PRepACE. 

shamefully abused, in many instances. Few of 
them, indeed, have raised their voices against the 
tyrannical Regulations, which have been imposed 
upon them ; some of their answers it is true, are 
highly satisfactory, and, among them, those con- 
cerning usury ; but, in many other cases, they have 
manifested a culpable readiness to accede to or 
even to anticipate whatever might suit the views 
of their government, without much regard to the 
precepts of their law. But for the stmng opposi- 
tion of the Rabbies, the assembly would, as far as 
its authority could have gone, sanctioned the 
marriages of Jews with Christians, nay, in the 
tumultuous debate which took place on the occa- 
sion, a member broadly declared that marriage 
had nothing of a divine institution, and that the 
first precept was increase and multiply. Nor is 
this the only instance in which we remark, with 
sorrow, that the contagious infidelity of France 
had crept in among the Israelites. In the festival of 
the I5th of August, the cyphei-s of Napoleon and 
of Josephine were profanely blended with the un* 
utterable name of Jehovah, and the Imperial Eagle 
was placed over the Sacred Ark, This we under- 



PREFACE* X? 

stdnd has given much offence, and with very just 
reason, we think, to the most respectable men 
of that community in these kingdoms. 

The answer to the sixth question, by which the 
French Jews acknowledge France as their country, 
without any restriction whatever, is a still more 
heinous dereliction of the tenets of the Mosaic law; 
for they give up, by it, the hope of the expected 
Messiah, and of the everlasting possession of the 
promised land of Canaan, which they deem a part 
of the sacred covenant between God and his chosen 
people. 

While we thus inculpate the Jewish deputies, 
it cannot be expected that we shall lay too great a 
stress on the fulsome and frequently impious flat- 
tery which characterises all their productions. 
Perhaps we even ought to make some apology for 
having so faithfully translated them, could we 
think it possible that any rational man should 
adopt or suspect us of entertaining sentiments 
which the Jews themselves, most probably, only 
feigned to suit their own purposes. 

But flattery is the opiate of the guilty con- 
science; it sooths the pangs of remorse; and great 