

These exhortations to embrace the profession of 
arms, so zealously repeated by the leading mem- 
bers of the French Jews, are, besides, always cou- 
pled with strong recommendations to follow me- 
chanical trades and husbandry; in short, those pro- 
fessions without which a nation cannot ejcist by 



PREFACE. 



ttself^ but which are not more particularly us^efut 
than any others to a small given number of people^ 
who consider cls their country an empire in which 
these professions abound. 

We find these same recommendations strongly 
inforced in the answer of Furtado to the com« 
mercial Jews of Frankfort, who hardly can have a 
choice of employment. " We have/' says he, " too 
many merchants, and bankers among us, and toa 
few artificers and husbandmen, and, above all, toa 
few soldiers:^^ but if their countrymen thorough- 
ly fin these branches of employment, what necessi^ 
ty is there for having husbandmen, artificers and 
soldiers of their own? 

The Jewish deputies ssy that Bonaparte concei- 
ved the idea of their regeneration^ or their />a^i/^ca/ 
redemption^ in the land of Egypt, and on the bank^ 
of the Jordan. This wedoubt not; and though we 
are almost adiamed to hazard the extravagant sup« 
portion,, we feel a conviction that his gigantic mind 
entertains the idea of re-establishing them in Pa- 
lestine, and that this forms a part of hi& plan 



PREFACE. ix 

respecting Egypt, which he is well known never 
to have abandoned. 

No one will contend that this idea is too wild 
for his conception ; it is, on the contrary, perfectly 
consonant with his love for extraordinary, dazzlltig 
enterprises; he acts in this even with more than 
his usual foresight, by attempting to prepare 
the Jews for the new situation he intends for them. 
It is with this vi^w that he encourages them to 
follow those professions which are nect^ssary for 
men forming a distinct nation in aland of their 
own; for certainly, a body wholly composed of 
merchants and traders could never exist as such. 
He attempted, in a like manner, to introduce the 
arts of civilization among the Copts and the Arabs 
of Egypt, and with the same views. Idque apud 
imperitos humanitas vocabatuvj cum pan servitutis 
esset Tacit. 

These measures, we know, are represented as 
the means of uniting the Jews more thoroughly 
with their fellow-citizens, and of checking their 
supposed propensity to usury. 

We have already said that the reproach of usury 
b 



X 



PRlSFACX. 



was only the pretence n^ad^ use of to ciall them 
together; remedies for an evil so general now 
among the French, and of such a magnitude, 
are not to be found in exhortations to a few in** 
dividuals, who, in their rapacious pursuits, are re- 
gardless even of the precepts of their sacred law. 
The other alledged motive is equally fallacious. 
For why recommend the same measures to Jews of 
foreign countries? It is well known, besides, that 
men are more closely united in a state of society 
by their mutual wants than by the similitude of 
their occupations; and, in short, the Regulations 
forced upon the Israelites prove that the intention 
of Bonaparte was to sepamte them more than ever 
from the rest of Frenchmen. 