



TRANSACTIONS 

or TBB 

PARISIAN SANHEDRIM 



TRANSACTIONS 

OF THE 

PARISIAN SANHEDRIM, 

OR 

ACTS OF THE ASSEMBLY 

OF 

3[0mlttt05 l^tputtt» of iFrance oitti 3[talp> 

CONVOKED AT PARIS BY AN IMPERIAL AND ROYAL DECREE. 
DATED MAY 90, 1806. 



T&AJrSLAXED FROM THE ORIGINAL PUBLISHE0 BT 

M.DIOGENETAMA, 

WITH A PREFACE AND ILLUSTRATIVE NOTES 

BY F. D. KIRWAN, Esq, 



LONDON; 
murrsD BY miiAM bukton, PBTifit lami. 
PuBUSBSD BY CHARLES TAYLOR, Ujoiotf Sram. 

1807, 



ERRATA.-^In p. 134, after line 5, read, 7tli. Who elects the Rabbies?** 
The succeeding question should be numbered 8. 

The Binder is requested to notice the folios of P, Q, and It, a mbtake 
having occuired in one of those signatures in a few. copies. 




PS 

A ■ '7 
c 



All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, 
or otherwise without the prior permission of 
Gregg International Publishers Limited. 



ISBN 576 80151 8 



Republished in 1971 by Gregg International Publishers Limited 
Westmead, Farnborough, Hants., England. 

Printed in Offset by Kingprint Limited 
Richmond, Surrey, England. 



PREFACE. 

THE novelty of a Jewish assembly deliberating 
on the national interests of a people which has so 
long ceased to be numbered among nations, in^- 
duces us to offer an account of its proceedings to 
the English public. The French^ Jewish editor, M. 
Diogene Tama, in an advertisement prefixed to his 
collection, expatiates with wonderful complacency 
on the immense utility of his publication. Without 
being quite so sanguine in our expectations, we 
cannot help expressing our conviction that it will 
prove highly gratifying to that curiosity which has 
been excited by the first mention of the meeting of 
such an assembly, 

The ultimate views which Bonaparte may have on 
the Jewish nation are, to this day, involved in ob* 
scurity; while the supposed advantages he so pom- 
pously conferred on them may reasonably be caU« 
ed in question. This will warrant our attempting 
to elucidate them, as far as his dark purposes can 
admit of investigation. 

a2 



iy 



PREFACE. 



The conduct of the former government of France 
towardsits Jewish subjects happilyunited tolerance 
and even encouragement with circumspection: 
indeed their state was, in many instances, preferable 
to that of the Protestants; they were secured in 
tibe enjoyment of their property ; their religious ce- 
remonies were acknowledged by law, (which, till 
the reign of Louis XVL was not the case in respect 
to the Protestants,) and those who proved really 
useful citizens received letters of naturalization. 

Some local badges of their former slavery still 
existed in several of the provinces ; but, as early as 
the year 1785, government had in contemplation 
to remove them ; and it is rather singular that this 
very M. Furtado, who appears so conspicuously as 
President of the present assembly, should have been 
called to Paris, with several other Jews, by M. de 
Malesherbes, Minister of Louis XVL to give the 
necessaiy information on the subject. 