

As early as the first of October of the same 

(1) These cahters were written instructions given by llie electors in 
the several towns and proYincc^ of Irance to the deputies they sent 
to Us Elats Ccneram^ 



( 8 ) 



year, a member of les Etats Gineraux^ obtained 
from that assembly a vote tliat, on a future day, it 
should, in a sitting held on purpose, take into its 
consideration the condition of the Jews in France. 

And this member, I must observe, was a clcr- 
gj-man, a dignitary of the second rank. 

The sitting thus granted was delayed by mat- 
ters of general interest. But on the one hand, a 
special decree, of the 24th of December, granted 
to all non-catholics the right of being elected 
members of the assembly, and opened for them the 
way to all employments, civil and military. 

And on the other, the decree of the 28th of Ja- 
nuary, 1790, acknowledged, as active citizens, all 
those among us who, previous to the year 1789, 
had obtained letters of naturalization. 

As this decree is the first step towards our adop- 
tion, I shall g-ive it at full length. 

Decree of the 28th of January, 1790, sanctioned 
the same month. 

" All the JewSj known in France^ under the name 

of Portuguese^ Spanish^ and AvignoneseJews^ shall 
" continue to enjoy the same rights they have hitherto 
" enjoyed^ and which have been granted to them 

by letters patent. 

" In consequence thereof, they shall enjoy the 
^* rights of active citizens, if they possess the other 

b2 



( * ) 



" requisite qualifications, as enumerated in the 

decrees of the national assembly.^' 

Still however prejudice led into error. A genei-al 
fei-ment served too well the evil intention of a few 
unjust men. 

The deci'ee of the 16th of April, 1790, sanction- 
ed on the 18th, shews the kind protection of which 
we stood in need, and which was considered as 
justly due to us. 

" The National Assembly again places the Jetos 
^ of Alsace^ and of the other provinces of the king^ 
" doniy under the special protection of the law; 
^'forbids any one from disturbing their peacc^ or 
" otherwise injuring them; directs all municipal offi- 
" cers and national guards to exert their authority for 
" the protection of their persons and property. 

There still remained a ground of prejudice 
against us. In some i^arts of the countrj% people 
could hardly bring themselves to look upon us as 
worthy of the advantages granted by the law, 
because we were still liable to personal taxes. 

We were freed from this burthen by a special 
decree of the 20th of July, 1790, sanctioned the 
7th of August following. 

" The Nafional Assembly^ considering that the 
" public protection is due to all the inhabitants of 
** ihi kingdom^ indiscriminately^ tcithout any other 



( 5 ) 



condition but that of di^c/uzrging their share of the 
" general contributions; 

" Having heard the report of its committee of 
" deines7ies, 

Has decreed and decrees^ that the annual tribute 
of 20,000 livres^ paid by the Jews of Metz and of 
the Messin country, under the denomination of 
duty of habitation, protection and toleration, is 
suppressed and abolished, without any indemnity to 
the present owner of and contractor for the saidiri* 
" bate. 