



( 25 ) 

" men who will strive to deserve esteem by eani- 
ing honourably their livelihood. Thus shall we 
banish sloth and indolence, occasioned by the 
idleness of our youth. 

" You will here observe to me, with some truth, 
dear brethren, that it is much easier to propose 
these plans than to carry them into execution, 
and that these proposed establishments would 
require funds probably to a large amount. But 
you will not believe, I trust, that this considera- 
tion has escaped me; and indeed I had already 
found the means of meeting all necessary ex- 
pences, when I determined to impart to you my 
ideas on the sul^ect, Undoubtedly we must 
have fixed and regular revenues before we can 
think of undertaking any of the establishments 
I have proposed. But what Jew is there in 
tolerable circumstances who will not be ready 
" to make sqme sacrifices? Who will refuse to be 
subject even to personal privations, in order 
to contribute something to the general happiness 

of his brethren, and thus give, as far as lays in 
" him, a pledge of our gratitude for the fraten^al 
" act of our fellow-citizens ? 

" When we were forming a separate community 
" in the ci-dev^mt province of Lorraine, we had 

excessive chargestosupport, besides a sum of be- 

tween fifteen and sixteen thousand livres, which 

E 



26 ) 

" we were bound collectively and individually to 

pay either to the king, or as a tax on industry; 
" or for wages of the Parliament, &c. We had 
" besides, individually, to pay arbitrary taxes in 

the places of our residence, for the quartering 
" of soldiers, for the poor, the parish, the public 
" works, public wells, &c.; and again, besides the 

charges peculiar to us, the syndics [wardens) 

elected by our former community were by it au- 
" thorised, with the approbation of government, to 

form lists of contribution, and to tax individuals, 
" members of that community, according to their 

meansarid abilities. Now this community is dis- 
" solved; and, thanks to those who were at the 

head of its administration for more than fifty 
" years in succession, the receipts and the general 
" expences balance each other, without its being 

encumbered with considerable arreai's, or loaded 
" with any debt whatever. We shall pay in fukire 
" our equal share of national taxes, like the rest of 
" assessed people in Fmnce, and in the same pro- 
" portions: we shall, in a manner, pay only what 
" we have consented to pay by the vote of our re- 

presentatives, who are equally those of all French- 

men. In that case, dear brethren, let us make 
" one single effort ; let us shew ourselves capable 
*- of foregoing present advantages, to make our* 

selves worthy of greater ones at a future period, 



( 37 ) 



" not very distant. Let us voluntarily deprive 
" ourselves of a part of the benefits conferred upon 
" us by the new constitution, in order to enable us 
" to offer to the country, in the persons of our chil- 
" dren, worthier objects of her favours than we 
" ourselves are. Let us form communities, such as 
" we had in Lori-aine, and invite those Jews to join 
us, who, by the new division of the kingdom in- 
" to eighty-three departments, are now, like us, 
" inhabitants of that of La Meurthe. Let us 
" unanimously and voluntarily consent to support, 
" for ten years longer, a charge equal to that we 
" were heretofore obliged to pay. Let us employ 
" that sum, by which we formerly purchased tole- 
" ranee and protection, in forming men worthy of 
" that liberty they have just obtained. Once sure 
of a fixed and regular income, nothing can pre- 
" vent us from forming those establishments ne- 
" cessary for the education of our children. 