



( 30 ) 



it will be a lasting monument of the good sense of 
the Israelites acquainted with their duties, and en- 
Kghtened as to their true interests. It will prove 
that, at the very epoch when the rights of citizens 
have been conferred on individuals, till then pining 
unregarded in an abyss of misfortune, those 
among them who were able to make them ac- 
quainted with all the advantages of their new 
condition, have been eager to instruct them ; and 
it is certainly obvious that these men, well ap- 
prized of the habits, the misfortunes, and, if you 
will have it so, the weaknesses of their brethren, 
were before-hand certain of the success of their 
observations, since they chose to give them so 
gi'eat a publicity. 

It would be an absurd thing to suppose that 
M. Berr-Isaac-Berr was widting in 1791, for the 
very purpose of anticipating the contrast between 
the future conduct of the Jews and his sentiments, 
and was thus preparing, beforehand, against his 
brethren a mass of proofs to convince them of 
want of submission and of a breach of the oath 
they were about to take. 

It is impossible not to own that he published 
this letter because, like all men well informed 
of the principles of their religion, he was firmly 
and sincerely persuaded that his brethi^n would 
not turn a deaf ear to the voice of the country, and 



( 31 ) 



to that of honour, but would eagerly fulfil all the 
duties of their new condition. 

We see therefore, a praise-worthy zeal in this 
conduct of M, Berr-Isaac-Berr, and in that of the 
other Israelites, who, like him, have enlightened 
their brethren at the epoch of the decree of Sep- 
tember, 1791. 

On the other hand, the publication of this let- 
ter proves, that there was then a well-grounded 
hope and a moral ceitainty, that all the Israelites 
would loyally exert themselves to deserve the fa- 
vour conferred on them by that law, in fulfilling 
;ill the conditions which did not militate against 
their religious principles. 

And all this has been confirmed by their con* 
duct since 1791. 

In general, the Jews become Frenclmien have 
fulfilled their new duties; this is notorious: all 
have been faithful to the laws of regenerated France; 
all have done their duty as national guards ; all 
have vied with Frenchmen in zeal for the defence 
of the country. Many have vested their fortunei^ 
in landed property, others in commercial esta- 
blishments; some have acquired celebrity in sci- 
ences; some, too, have acquired honour in the 
fields of glory ; and these last are certainly enti- 
tled to some praise for their constancy in overcom- 
ing the disheartening obstacles thrown in their 
way by illiberal prejudices. 



( 92 ) 



The errors of some Jews (2) have aggravated the 
misfortunes of their fellow-citizens; but the jus- 
tice of the laws has put a stop to the evil ; and, 
what is still better, the source of the mischief is 
on the point of being closed by decisions and re- 
gulations, for which we shall be indebted to the 
great thoughts of our august Emperor. 