

" We shall continue to maintain the Kabbi 
" elected by our ci-devant community, who will 
*' fulfil the functions of Grand Rabbi in whatever 
relates to our religious customs and ceremonies. 
" Wherever the number of Jewish inhabitants is 
*^ sufficiently numerous, we shall establish parti- 
" cular Rabbis, or vicars^ who shall be named by 
" us likewise, shall be approved by the Grand Rab- 
bi, and placed under his inspection. Wherever 
e2 



( 28 ) 



a vicar shall be appointed, he will have his par- 
ticular district, in which he will be bound to 
discharge his religious and civil functions, inas- 
" much as these last are connected with our reli- 
" gion. All children of the Jews of the depart- 
" ment, and of those who will have voluntarily 
" consented to contribute, according to tlieir 
means, to the general fund, shall be admitted in 
the establishments for education, and in the 
houses of industry, instruction, arts, and trade. 
" We may easily fix the mode of collecting the ne- 
" cessary contributions, and of accounting for the 
produce, by placing at the head of the adminis* 
" tration men in whom we can confide. By means 
" of this general contribution we shall likewise 
relieve and prevent the wants of our aged and 
infirm poor, who are unable to earn their daily 
" bread. It is exclusively to this class that we 
" must direct our attention and extend our cares; 
*' but we must go farther; and when we meet with 
*' men able to work unblushingly asking for alms, 
" let us strive to refuse them; let them experience 
" the harshness of a humiliating refusal, however 
*' repugnant to our charity and to our feelings. 
^* By this means we shall put a stop to idleness, 
" which too often prefers the bread of charity to 
that of labour. If we have been reproached at 
one time with want of industrj', indolence, and 



( 29 ) 

*' aversion to labour, let us now avoid such re- 
** proaches, which might be unjust formerly, but 
" which we should now deserve. Let us exert all 
our influence to accustom our poor, who, till 
now, have been fed by our alms, to prefer the 
gains of labour, even at the sweat of their brows. 
In thus imparting to you my humble ideas on 
" our present situation, I am, dear brethren, fulfil- 
" ling a duty the most congenial to my feelings. 

My thoughts, as you may see, are presented to 
" you in a crude state: it is by your attention and 
by your meditations, should you deem them wor- 
thy of them, that they are to be matured and 
" quickened into action. Whatever success may 
" attend them, I hope, at least, that you shall do 
" justice to the fraternal sentiments, which, un- 
*' mixed with any other motives, have urged me 
to exhort and press you, dear brethren, not to 
lose one moment in taking our situation into 
" your consideration. 

1 have the honour to be most fraternally, 
" Gentlemen and dear brethren, 
" Your most obedient 

" And very humble servant, 
(Signed) " BERR.ISAAC-BERR.'^ 

Every one must feel that this letter deserves to 
be preserved, and to be handed down to posterity. 