

According to their principles of morality, an 
oath, naturally binding for a man of probity, is 
further strengthened by their religious maxims« 

The God of their fathers, called to witness of 
their engagements, lias forbidden all manner of 
infringement. 

They have been, they are unshaken in the per- 
formance of all their duties as citizens, without a 
»ngle exception, iu the whole of their political or 
civil conduct. 

Of this they are conscious : they have stood the 
test ; they will not swerve from their fidelity to the 
country. 



( 8 ) 



In the year 9, they were deemed worthy of recei- 
ving a proof of national regard. French ag-ents 
obtained for them an exemption from the tributes 
levied on them in the country of Mentz. 

In the year 10, the then government gave them 
leave to establish regulations founded on justice, by 
which the debts of their ancient communities have 
been discharged. 

It is then true that motives of gratitude have 
daily added new strength to those engagements by 
which we are become French citizens; and as, from 
this, we should be the more guilty, were it possible 
that we could be wanting in due submission to 
those measures which are at last to make us com- 
pletely worthy of the honour conferred upon us by 
our adoption; so the world cannot be surprised at 
the eager joy which wehavemanifestedon receiving 
the decrees dictated by the benevolence of our so- 
vereign, to complete the great work of our regene- 
ration. 

Already we were acquainted with his heroic 
virtues; already our hearts, filled with veneration , 
had indulged in the most flattering hopes; we saw 
in the Conqueror of the World, in the Model 
of Sovereigns, the support of our political and 
civil existence, the man whom our childi*en should 
bless as the author of their felicity. 

At the gi*and epochaof his elevation, our temples 
have resounded with joyful exultations ; our pray- 



( 9 ) 



ers^ the effusions of guileless hearts, have been 
poured before the Eternal, with that exquisite 
feeling which is produced bythe prospect of future 
happiness. 

Hymns sung with solemnity, preceeded and fol- 
lowed by fervent prayers, have crowned those days 
of happiness and festivity. 

In that too, we have vied in loyalty with all 
classes of citizens^ 

In that too, our religious ceremonies have con- 
firmed our engagement of concurring, by every 
means in our power, in whatever may tend to pro- 
mote that degree of illustrious celebrity and pros- 
perity which the exalted views of our august Em- 
peror are preparing for the French empire. 

In the productions to which the exemplary zeal 
of our brethren gave birth, we must mention with 
distinction the hymn composed by M. Meubel 
Kargeau, translated into French by M. Michel 
Berr. 

I should hiave given it a place in my collection, 
but that the principles, the respectful sentiments, 
and the wishes it contains, are to be found in wri- 
tings which come more specifically within the plan 
of my work. 