



( 18 ) 



py event ! From being vile slaves, mere serfs^ z 
species of men merely tolerated and suffered in 
the emp]]*e, liable to heavy and arbitrary taxes, 
we are, of a sudden, become the children of th« 
country, to bear its common charges, andshare in 
its common rights. 

What orator could presume to express to the 
nation and to it's king, all the extent of our 
** gratitude, and of our unalterable submission? 
** But neither the kingnor the representatives of the 
" nation seek for praises or acknowledgments; their 
only wish is to behold people happy. In that 
" they expect and they will find their reward. 

Let us then, dear brethren, let us conform to their 
" wishes; let us examine with attention what re- 
" mains to be done, on our part, to become truly 
happy, and how we maybe able to shew, in some 
" measure, our grateful sense for all the favours 
" heaped upon us. On this subject, gentlemen 
and dear brethren, give me leave to submit to 
" your judgment the result of some reflection^, 
" which our change of condition has suggested to 
" me. 

" The name of active citizen, which we have just 
" obtained, is, without a doubt, the most precious 
" title a man can possess in a free empire ; but this 
title alone is not sufficient ; we should possess also 
the necessary qualifications to fulfil the duties 



( u ) 



^* annexed to it: we know oursclres how very dc- 
•* ficient we are in that respect; we have been in a 
" manner compelled to abandon the pursuit of all 
•* moral and physical sciences, of all sciences, in 
" short, which tend to the improvement of the 
•* mind, in order to give ourselves up entirely to 
" commerce, to be enabled to gather as much 
** money as would insure protection, and satisfy 
" the rapacity of om* persecutors: in justice to 
*' truth we must say, however, that these many 
years' our hardships have been greatly alleviated 
in France, and particularly in I^orraine, since 
the reign of Stanislaus the benevolent, and that 
we never experienced from our rulers and magis- 
trates but marks of good will and protection; 
yet we always felt the inutility of mental acquire- 
•* ments, from the impossibility in which we saw 
ourselves of ever making any use of them. We 
" must then, dear brethren, strongly bear this 
truth in our minds, that till such a time as we 
work a change in our manners, in our habits, in 
" short, in our whole education, we cannot expect 
to be placed by the esteem of our fellow citizens 
" in any of those situations in which we can give 
signal piX)ofs of that glowing patriotism so long 
" cheri^ed in our bosoms. God forbid that I should 
" mean any thing derogatory to our professed re- 
" ligion, or to our established form of worship; far 



( 15 ) 



from me the idea of proposing any innovation 
in them. I should consider as monsters those 

«' among us, who, from the prospect of some ad- 
vantages they might expect from the new con- 
stitution, would presume to alter the dogmas of 
their religion. If, during our tribulations, we 
have derived some consolation from our strict 
adherence to our religion, how much more are we 
bound to remain firmly attached to it now, when 