

of that community was accused of any misde* 
" meanqrwhatever, the reproaches and thehumilia* 
*'tion fell on the whole; we were exempt from 

militia and from pub}ic works, but it was be- 
** cause we were deemed unworthy of it; and to 
" palliate the injustice of such proceedings, we were 

exempted, on condition of paying in money three 
" times the valueof such services, &c. It is certain- 

ly no hard matter to give up such privileges. 

" By the taking of this oath, which will be con- 
" sideredas a renunciation to all privileges and im- 
" munities heretofore introduced in our favour, we 
*• shall enjoy the rights and qualities of active citi- 
" zens, provided always we have the other necessaiy 

qualifications. You see then, dear brethren, that 

n 



( 18 ) 



there cannot be a shadow of difficulty or of scru- 
" pie about taking this oath, by means of which 
" we shall be constitutionally acknowledged as 
" French Jews. 

" This oath once taken, let us exert ourselves to 
" fulfil the dutieswithin our reach, but let us avoid 
" grasping at our rights; let us not rush headlong 
" against the opinions of some of our fellow citizens 
who, rendered callousbyprejudice, will reject the 
idea of Jews being fellow men, fellow creatures. 
" Let it be sufficient for us, at present, to have ac- 
quired the invaluable right of assisting at all as- 
" semblies of French citizens; but let us not attend 
" them, till we have acquired knowledge sufficient 
" to make ourselves useful members; till we know 
how to discuss and to defend the interests of the 
country; in short, till our most bitter enemies are 
convinced, and acknowledge the gross miscon- 
" ceptions they had entertained of us. 

If we cannot ourselves enjoy all the sweets of 
" the new constitution, for it is a hard matter to 
change habits and manners indulged in for thirty 
" or forty years, we shall at least see the first blos- 
" soms of the thriving plant gathered by our chil- 
" dren; we may even expect that indulgence from 
" our generous fellow citizens, should not our pwn 
" regeneration proceed as rapidly as we ourselves 
" could wish. Our education has been defective 



1 



( 19 ) 



inmany pointsof view. Already thefitmous Rab- 
" biHartwik Vessely, of Berlin, has rendered us an 
" eminent service, by publishing several works in 
" Hebrew on thissubject. One of his productions, 

entitled Salutarif Instructions addressed to the 
" Jewish Communities of the Empire^ has beentrans- 
" lated into French, in the year 1782. It details 
" the causes of our present ignorance, and the 
" means by which we may deserve once more the ap- 

pellation of the learned and intelligent nation, 

which God himself gave us. I shall not repeat 
^' here what you find in these useful publications; 
" but I entreat you, dear brethren, to follow this 

author in his meditations; and you will easily re- 
" mark that our fate, and the fate of our posterity, 
" depends solely on the change we shall effect in 
^* our mode of education. 