



( 22 ) 



that it is entirely in our power to atoid encumber- 
ing the minds of our youth with the useless study 
" of foreign languages. Have we not the example 
of the Jews of Asia, the most devout and the most 
" scrupulousof our brethren, who readandwriteon- 
" ly Hebrew and the language of their country ? 
" Why should we continue to bear thenameof Ger- 
" man or Polish Jews, while we are happily French 
" Jews ? 

I am well aware, dear brethren, that this pfo- 
" position cannot be adopted until we have a 

great part of our holy writings faithfully trans- 
" lated into French ; but till such a time as men 
" are found among us equal to that gi'eat task, let 
" us not neglect the means which may be con- 
" ducive to the unfolding of the necessary talents. 

I would, then, propose to you, dear brethren, to 
" establish a public school for us, on a plan similar 

to that of Berlin, and of several other places in 
"the empire; we shall appoint professors of 
" Hebrew, whom we must, it is true, procure from 
^' great distances ; and we shall likewise appoint 
" French teachers. I have no doubt but our chil- 
" dren will make a rapid progress in both the 
" languages thus taught them ; they mil become 
" at the same time the supports of our religion and 
"of the French constitution; and, after going 
" through the several classes^ they will return to 



( 23 ) 



US with a deep sense of the holiness of our re- 
" ligion, whose dogmas they will here learn from 
^* the true principles, and may prove at the same 
" time good Jews and good French citizens. j4fter 
** the first essay, we may add to the school pro- 
" fessorships of all Arts and Sciences, that our 

children may see glorious careei-s open before 
" them, and may choose, according to their incli- 

nation, that kind of pursuit in which the esteem 
" of their fellow citizens, and an honest mainte- 

nance, will be the reward of their exertions. 

We shall then no longer be exclusively addicted 
" to that mercantile and trafficking spirit, which, 
*^ till now, has been almost the only one by which 
" we have been actuated. 

" Moreover, dear brethren, when we have ful- 
" filled our first duty towards our children ; when 

once they are thoroughly initiated in the prin- 
" ciples and spirit of our religion, we may, with- 
" out apprehension of danger, avail ourselves of 
" the resources offered to us by our generous 
" countrymen, by pending them to share the ad- 
" vantages of national education in the public 
" schools; certainly they will not be thwarted in 
" their religious opinions; and once easy on that 
" score, they soon will become beloved among 
" their comrades, by sharing their emulation and 

their wishes of deserving the approbation of 



( 24 ) 



«^ their superiors. By means of that union in 
^ schools, our children, like those of our fellow- 
^ citizens, willremark from their tender youth that 
^ neither opinions, nor difTcrence of religion, are 
a bar to fraternal love; and that every one na- 
turally embracing and following the religion of 
^ his fathers, all may, in fulfilling their religious 
^ duties, fulfil also those of citizenship; from that^ 
^ aversion, all hatred, all antipathy between 
** them will be done away. In, proportion as they 
increase in years, those ties of friendship and of 
fraternity will b© drawn closer, in whatever is 
^ of social and political nature, not conti'ary to the 
^ dogmas of religion. They will have learned 
that, on leaving the school, some have been with 
*^ their parents to church, others to chapel, others to 
the synagogue, ta worship, in difi^rent modes 
*^ and with different dogmas, the true living 
God, the sole Creator of the Universe. 
^^Let us establish charitable houses of in- 
dustry, tn which the children of poor people and 
those who are not bom to a higher rank, shall 
learn all the trades and mechanical occupations 
necessary to society. Let us form among us 
** carpenters, smiths, tailor$&, &c. And if we can 
succeed to have a man in each profession, able to 
** work as a master, he will soon fonn appren- 
tices; and gradually we shall see Jewish work- 