

1 must record here, what should be known in 
all our families, that at the very epoch of that fa- 
mous decree^ which, in September, 1791. gave every 

c 



10 ) 

one of lis a country, many among us, in congra- 
tulating their brethren on the greatness of the boon^ 
addressed to them instructions on the full extent 
of their duties, and proved the necessity of altering, 
in our habits and in our manRei*s, whatever might 
tend to perpetuate prepossessions and prejudices 
which had kept us till then in a state of forlorn 
misery. 

I must give at full length the famous letter whicli 
M. Berr4saac-Berr, manufacturer at Nancy, &ther 
of M • Michel Berr, addressed to all his brethren at 
the close of the year 1791. 

Those among us who are acquainted with it will 
be gratilfied by this opportunity of again perusing 
it ; those who have not yet seen it will gratefully 
receive the instructiot^ of enlightened men, whose 
knowledge and judgement have constituted them 
Our supports and directors. 

They will be convinced that our religious max- 
ims, agreeing with every rule of moraLs and of civil- 
ization, elevate us to that rank and those rights 
which a generous nation has conferred on us. 

Our teachers, our children, will therein see those 
principles which will concur in the great work cf 
our happiness^ 



( n ) 



Letter of M. Berr-Isaac-Berr to his Brethren, in 
1791, on the Rights pf active Citizem being grant* 
to the Jews, 

" Gentlemen and dear brethren, 
At length the day is arrived when the veil, by 
which, parted from om' fellow-citizens, we were 
" kept in a state of humiliation,, is rent ; at length 
we recover those rights which have been taken 
*' from us more than eighteen centuries ago. How 
much are we at this moment indebted to the cle- 
inency of the God of our forefathers ! 
" We are now, thanks to the Supreme Being, 
" and to the sovereignty of the nation, not only 
** Men and Citizens, but we are Frenchmen ?— 
" What a happy change thou hast worked in us, 
merciful God ! So late as the 27th of Septenaber 
last, we were the only inhabitants of this vast 
empire who seemed doomed to remain for ever 
in bondage and abasement; and on the foUow- 
" ing day, on the 28th^ a day for ever sacred among 
" us^ thou inspirest the immortal legislators of 
" Fiance. They pronounce, and more than sixty 
" thousand unfortunate beings, mourning over their 
*' sad fate, are awakened to a sense of>their happi- 
" nessby the liveliest emotions of the purest joy, 
" Let it be acknowledged, dearest brethren, that 

c2 



C 12 ) 

we have not desen^ed this wonderftd change by 
" Our repentance, or by the rdformation of our 
manners: we can attribute it to nothing but to 
the everlasting goodness of God: He never for- 
sook us entirely; but, finding that we were not 
yet worthy of seeing the accomplishment of his 
promises of a perfect and lasting redemption, he 
has not, however, thought proper still to aggra- 
vate our sufierings: and surely our chains had 
^< become the more galling from the contemplation 
of the rights of man, so sublimely held forth to 
public view. Therefore, our God, %vho readd 
the heart of man, seeing that all our resignation 
would have proved unequal to the task, and that 
<^ supernatural strength was %vanting to enable us 
to support these new torments, has thought of 
•* applying the remedy; He has chosen the gene- 
" rous French nation to reinstate us in our rights, 
and to operate our regeneration, as, in other 
^* times, he had chosen Antiochus, Pompey, and 
" others, to humiliate and enslave us. How glori- 
ous it is for that nation, who have, in so short a 
time, made so many people happy ! And surely, 
** if Frenchmen are become so themselves, by the 
additional rights and the additional liberty they 
have just acquired, how much the more are we, 
** in particular, gainers by the change! and what 
boimds can there bo to our gratitude for the hap- 