

I should ask also, why M« Poujol, in acknow* 
ledging that he should except the Portuguese, has 
forgot the Avignonese Jews ? 

He must know, or assuredly he can learn, that 
when the first National Assembly took into its con- 
sideration the situation of the Jews in France, its 
decrees expressly mentioned Portuguese ^ Spanish^ 
and Avignonese Jews, the Jews of Alsace^ and of the 
other provinces (4). He may learn, that this as- 
sembly having made no distinction, all the Jews 
residing in France, from whatever country they 
came, enjoy the rights of French citizens. 

Why then except the Portuguese Jey/s only, from 
a measure apparently levelled against the German 
Jews only ? 

And lasdy. Why, according to M. PoujoPsideas, 
why, I say, include in a kind of general ostracism 
even those among the Portuguese, Spanish, Avig- 
nonese , or German Jews, who, previous to the year 
1789, had obtained letters of naturalization ? had 
acquired landed property or commercial establish- 
ments, which they securely eiyoyed, and had a 
right to enjoy as French citizens ? 

(4) Decrees of the 28th of January, aad tUth of April; 1790. 



( 40 ) 

For it is notorious, that, besides the Jews of 
Bourdeaux and of Metz, who had collectively ob- 
tained that privilege by letters patent, many indi- 
viduals had obtained letters of naturalization. 
M. Poujol may also rest assured, and it is easy to 
prove, that Avignonese Jews had also been natu- 
ralized as Frenchmen, and on the strength of that 
they had acquired landed property, which was 
indeed almost their whole fortune. 

What would become of them? How should 
they rank in society, they or their descendants, if, 
according to M. Poujol's ideas, all Jews should lose 
their rights of naturalization ? 

The decree of the 2d of January, which declares 
that they shall enjoy the rights of active citizens^ 
should then be annulled likewise. 

And this would produce a fresh degree of con* 
fusion. 

We must be astonished, from everj' circum- 
stance, that M. Poujol, who has proved himself an 
^ble writer, should not have perceived that his plan 
and his ideas are in open contradiction with all the 
principles of public order and of private interest. 

How could it have escaped him, that the reso- 
lutions of the imperial decree of the 30th of May, 
1S06, without altering the laws of 1790 and 1791, 
contains all tlie rules of our future conduct, and 
all the means which an enlightened benevolence 



I 



( 41 ) 



could suggest to conciliate all clashing interests, 
and to make all the Israelites, even those who were 
guilty of the faults laid to their charge, worthy of 
their new condition. 

Instead of a distinction, which a partial measure 
would have rendered necessary, in order to except 
those Jews residing in France who have proved 
worthy of the benefits of the law, the decree of 
the 30th of May gi-ounds its wise resolutions oa 
the general basis fixed in J 791 ; and this is certainly 
a grand and glorious thought of a protecting ge- 
nius. 