

And was it even true, that other sovereigns had 
ever entertained the idea of giving the Jews an 
acknowledged rank in the state, still it is beyond a 
doubt that excessive prejudices have been pro- 
ductive of great evil, by constantly preventing 
so generous an idea from being carried into execu- 
tion. 

g2 



( 44 ) 

Still, in this point of view, the whole merit is to 
be solely attributed to the measures of tlie decree 
of the 30th of May, and of that now preparing, 
which will combine whatever instruction and the 
love of duty can suggest, to assuage, on the one 
hand, the religious apprehensions of the Israelites, 
and to conquer, on the other, those prejudices 
which have too long raised enemies against them. 

M. Poujol has filled three chapters of his publi- 
cation with common place subjects often treated 
before, and now unwittingly or maliciously repro- 
duced. One is an exposition of facts^ explanatory 
of the laics concerning the Jews; the other, a view of 
the measures adopted against them in several countries y 
and particularly in France and in Alsace ; the third 
is a faithful account of the manners and jrresent 
habits of the Jews in general^ and particularly of the 
Jews of Alsace. Every thing that could be said on 
this head will be found in the Moniteur of the 25th 
of July, 1806 : M. Poujol knew it, since he notices 
it in his preface. 

Why then bring back to oup minds the recollec- 
tion of subjects which, to the wise and impartial 
man, present only scenes of misfortune ? 

The remembrance of these things was perfectly 
fresh; they were recorded in our histories; and, 
more than once, even in courts of justice, zealous 
advocates have been heard attempting to over* 



( 45 ) 



power the Jews against whom they were retained 
by the recital of all the imputations laid to the 
charge of their fathers. 

But must the past errors, or, as they are called, the 
past crimes of some, be for ever the pretence or the 
ground of the oppression and misfortune of all? 

In 1790 and 1791 eveiy thing relating to us was 
perfectly known. In the very report which was 
read at the tribune of the first National Assembly, 
the committee intrusted with the inquiry disguised 
nothing, neither of the facts recorded in history, 
nor of the numerous consequences which writers 
have thought themselves warranted to draw from 
them. 

But this inquiry put a stop to all opposition: it 
was acknowledged that, by giving the Jews a coun- 
try and the rights of citizens, it would be laying 
the basis of their future happiness, and of all those 
advantages which might be expected from their 
residence in France. 

And since, to sum up all, our august Emperor 
had formed the same opinion, why seek for pretexts 
cf hatred and prejudice which an enlightened 
benevolence has determined to bury in oblivion ? 
Would the Israelites be allowed to avail themselves 
now of the loyalty, of the fidelity, of the stupen^ 
dous works of their fathers, previous to those 