

Again. — Instead of proposing inquisitorial mpa*.^ 
sures, by which every Israelite residing in 1 ranee 
would have been, in a manner, brought to account 
for his conduct, government has included them all 
in its thoughts, has selected the good to bring back 
the weak to their duty, and to create, with salutary 
foresight, the means of preventing future evils. 

M. Poujol has misconceived every thing; the 
pen sliould have droi)ped from his hand, or, better 
still, he should not have taken it up, since he de- 
clares that lie has been strack by tlie sublime wis- 
dom of the measures prescribed by the imperial 
decree of the 30tli of May, 1806. 

M. Poujol ought to have perceived also that the 
kind of measures prescribed in this decree, indica- 
ted that the views of His Imperial Majesty were 

G 



( 42 ) 

directed towards the attainment of advantages 
which will be an eternal source of glory and of 
prosperity for the whole empire. 

Is it by rigorous measures that moral improve- 
ments are to be effected? That men debarred from 
civil rights by ancient prejudices are to be resto- 
red to society? That they are to be rendered sub- 
servient to the interests of arts and of commerce 
for which they are so eminently qualified by their 
industry and by their economy ? 

And why make use of compulsion, when reason 
and persuasion may, with more certainty and more 
glory, produce all the wished for advantages? 

What then must be the prpsent thoughts of 
Poujol? now that this first examination of his pub- 
lication must have exposed its glaring errors even 
to himself? especially now, that our august Empe- 
ror has announced, by a receipt resolution, that this 
benevolence calls on all Israelites scattered on tlie 
face of the globe, to pave the way for institu- 
tions conceived in his sublime wisdom ? 

The measures proposed by M. Poujol would 
have prevented any good effects ; they would have 
rendered success impossible, A great Emperor, by 
his justice, by his wisdom, and by the sublimity 
of his views, has created means which will be 
crowned with such successes as to astonisli this 
tvorld. 



( 43 ) 



The great work will be accomplished. France 
will become the common country of all Israelites, 
capable of fulfilling all the moral duties of man, 
A combination of knowledge will produce incal* 
culable advantages ; their blessings, ascending to 
the God of their fathers, will be the solemn pled« 
ges of their gratitude. 

And when we should give ourseh es up entirely 
to the contemplation of those exalted ideas, M, 
Poujol presumes to mislead the judgment of his 
readei-s, by saying that His Imperial Majesty has 
conceived the idea of doing what the greatest sove^ 
reigns had vainly attempted to do in former centuries. 

It is not proved that the idea of giving the Jews 
all the rights of citizens useful to society, has ever 
been entertained* 

Oppressive means have always l^een unjustly re- 
sorted to and renewed against them ; they have al- 
ways been punished with excessive severity, perhajis 
for crimes almost justifiable by the iryustice to 
which they have been subjected. 