

M. Poujol will not presume to say so; he must 
be convinced, then, that the measure |ie proposes 
would go beyond the limits fixed by the fourth 
and fifth articles of the constitution of the year 8: 
and that the act, which should thus deprive of their 
rights even those Israelites who have acted wrong, 
would be in itself an unconstitutional measure. 

And what character would it assume towards 
those whom he acknowledge^ to be free from the 
blame he imputes to otliers ? 

M. Poujol must wonder himself at having ever 
conceived the horrid idea of inflictini>* so terrible a 
punisliment on citizens whom he pronounces 
blameless. 



( 49 ) 



What assurance, too, to insinuate that it is im- 
possible to mend the morals of the Jews, or to 
make useof measuresnot general, against them with'- 
out depriving them of the rights of citizens/ 

Indeed M. Poujol himself has taken care to 
prove his own error ; for he says, a few pages lower 
down, that the ^first National Assembly^ in giving the 
Jews their liberty, seemed disposed to adopt towards 
them measures calculated to reform their manners and 
their habits. 

Taking this wish and this resolution for granted, 
it follows that even then the granting of the rights 
of citizens was not considered as an obstacle to sa- 
lutary reforms. 

How could M. Poujol foi-m a different idea? 

How could he take upon himself to publish an 
error now demonstrated more clearly than ever by 
the decree of the 30th of May, 1806, and by the 
succeeding acts? 

It is acknowledged, it is settled, that the bene- 
volence of government will bring back misled 
citizens to the observance of their duties, in which 
they will find their greatest happiness. 

It is a kind of madness in a man to raise his 
voice in opposition, and vainly to censure the acts 
of the first National Assembly, and those of a so- 
vereign who, faithful to his coronation«oath, main- 
tains the bases fixed by our constitutional acts;, and 

H 



( 50 ) 

mngnanhnously fulfils his duties by giving^strength 
and efficacy to their dispositions. 

But, on the other hand, let us see what are, accor- 
ding to M. Poujol, the obstacles to our reforma- 
tion, which might result from the rights of citizens? 

The Jews require, he 'says, particular measures 
which are inconsistent with the titles the quality y and 
the prerogatives of citizens. 

Then he adds, legislative measures are general; 
no particular ones can be adopted against this or that 
class of citizens. 

It is necessary tlien to exclude the Jews from the 
rights of citizens^ in order to submit them to particu* 
iar regulations, to a kind of inquisitorial police, a7id 
io more severe penalties. 

Mere sophism, which most certainly proceeds 
from blindness, from hatred, or from the fancies 
of a delirious imagination* 

What else is this new principle, which goes to 
prevent, in civil legislation, all recourse to mea- 
sures required by the paramount consideration of 
public welfare? 

In the first ages of the ancient monarchy, were 
not the Roman laws adopted in France, while se- 
eral tribes which had obtained leave to settle in 
the country continued to follow their own. 