



( 46 ) 



epochas where commenced that long train of mis- 
fortunes which are now cited against them? 

This, however, would be engaging in the contro- 
versy with equal weapons- 

But it is agreed, and it is consonant to sound 
reason, that no men whatever are to be governed 
according to the prejudices which may result from 
the conduct, the virtues, or the crimes of their an- 
cestors. 

Whenever men c^n be useful, can serve a coun- 
tryj and increase its means of prosperity, they 
have a right to the benevolence of their fellow 
men ; they may expect from their wisdom all the 
encouragements necessary to produce the good 
they are cajlable of effecting. 

And what influence can those results have on the 
exposition which composes the fourth chapter of 
M. PoujoFs Observations : What is the use which 
the Jews have made since 1791 of the protection 
granted to them by the latcs^ and of the rights of ci* 
tizens whichit has conferred on them? 

According to right, the faults or the misdemea- 
nours of some Israelites cannot be imputable to all. 

By the same rule, if some of them have been 
guilty of actions which the decree of the 30th 
of May, 1806, denominates shameful resourcesy how 
many others have shewn talents and virtues which 



( 47 ) 



have rendered them celebrated, and adorned the 
age they li re in ? 

Amoa^ tliem may be enumerated enlightened 
administrators; among them may be enumerated 
me?i glowing with zeal, which they have proved 
bj their services in the French armies; among 
them may be enumerated merchants highly valued 
in tlieir community, and in all commercial towns. 

According to the views of government, measures 
prepared with wisdom and foresight, writings 
which will disseminate instruction, will prevent 
the return of the talked of evils. 

And most certainly it is wiser to forgive a few 
misguided men, than to seek in their faults a pre- 
tence to punish those who have always fulfilled 
their duties. 

That is by far the surer way to obtain those ad- 
vantages which may be expected from the great 
views of a sovereign, who in this, as in every thing 
else, will beheld as a model to future centuries. 

M. Poujol has been guilty of a very strange er- 
ror when he affirms, in his Observations, that 7to 
measures can be taken to correct the manners and the 
habits of the Jews, without taking from them the 
rights of citizens. 

To make any class of men better, why sliould it 
be necessary to go back to the social contract, to 



( 48 ) 



irescind and annul it as far as it concerns them, and 
to begin by throwing them back in a forlorn state 
of political nullity? 

Can the country find no other means to bring 
her children back to habits of virtue, that she 
should resort to the violent measures of exclusion 
and ostracism against those she wants to improve ? 

Again, how will M. Poujol reconcile his ideas 
with the basis laid by the constitutions of the em- 
pire, and especially that of the year 8? Are the 
faults, the usuries, of those Israelites w ho have 
neglected their duties, among those evils which car- 
ry with them the forfeiture or even the suspension 
of the rights of French citizens ? 