

I own it; thus far the habits of some of our bre- 
thren have afforded pretences to censure ; and in- 
deed there were not wanting men to take hold of 
the subject, in order to make it the theme of their 
declamations against us all indiscriminately. 

In February, 1806, means were sought to plunge 
us again into misfortune. M. de Bonald, more ad- 
vantageously known by other publications, made 
this the subject of his observations, and I must 
give an account of them in this collection. 

I have pledged myself to disguise nothing, and I 
shall adhere to my engagements. It is neccssaiy 
that our brethren, that our children, should be ac- 

(2) This is a liint at the enormous usury practised by the Jews, who 
have been known to take five and six per cent, per month upon bills of 
landholders, the payment of which was the moixi secure, as, by the 
present French laws, landed property is liable to those debts, and a man's 
estate may be sold there for the most trivial debt of that nature, with 
less formality and delay than would be necessar}- to foreclose a mortgage 
in this country. The evil had risen to such a height, that an imperial 
decree had suspended actions for debt in departments where Jews chief- 
ly rrslde. We shall see more on thi* subject in the coiu'se of this work. 



{ 33 ) 



quainted with whatever has passed. It is our duty 
to strengthen our political situation by all the 
means which can possibly prevent dangerous in- 
fringements. We must never forget all the pains 
we have experienced before we could be admitted 
citizens of a great state ; we must frequently look 
back; we must transmit to our children all that 
has been published by our enemies, boasting of 
their zeal, with a view to plunge us again into a 
state of slavery inimifcal to prosperity. Our chil- 
dren, like ourselves, will then appreciate more 
justly the advantages of our new condition, and 
all the extent of the duty imposed on them, to 
shew themselves worthy of it. By this they will 
shew our sincere gratitude for the benefits which 
are our pride, and at the same time they ^vill 
put a stop to those prejudices, which, gi-ounded 
on the errors of some of us, have uniforndy gi- 
ven birth to declamations agiiinst us all, highly 
detrimental, till now, to our dearest interests. 

I am then to give an account of M. de Bonald's 
obsei-valions ; but I must first notice a publication 
of a M. Poujol, entitled, Some Obsermtions con-- 
cerning the Jews in general^ and particularly those 
of Alsace. 

The general wish has been that I should give the 
priority to this work of M. Poujol ; and I am the 



( 84 ) 



more induced to do it, as he has gone farther than 
any of our enemies. Indeed he has been so fatr led 
astray by error, that he has pix>posed to deprive us^ 
at least for a time^ of the rights of citizefiship/ He 
proposes, consequently, the revocation of the de- 
cree of 1791, and would, by an act of the legisla- 
ture, throw us again in the forlorn state from 
whence we have been extricated by the first Na- 
tional Assembly, deferring, says he, to restore to us 
the rank of citizens till such time as the measures 
he proposes will have made us more deserving of 
it. 