

M. Poujol has not said, what, however, is very 
true, that his special jury would have all the cha- 
racteristic of a special commission, named by the 
sovereign to distribute justice in his name. 

But at all times and in every circumstance, the 
unlimited power of putting a stop to law proceed- 
ings has justified all the measures taken to fulfil 
that intention of the sovereign. 



( 54 ) 



Thus special criminal courts have hiien institu- 
ted for forgery and for crimes daily renewed hy 
a set of desperate and hardened ruffians (5). 

Thus, to put a stop to the depredations commit** 
ted in our forests, the court des eatsx et forits^ (6) 
has been empowered to pass judgment whenever 
the accused has been taken in the fact, or when 
one of the rangers should become an accomplice 
for the purpose of turning evidence. 

In the case before us, debtors, receiving from 
their sovei*eign a solemn pledge of his protection, 
will see with pleasure their interests placed in the 
hands of men deemed worthy of his confidence. 

In this case too, the Jews, who are creditors, will 
see in the jury who are to decide on their demands, 
judges invested with a special authority, similar to 
that which their first lawgiver, in his wisdom, gave 
to those among their fathers, whom he appointed 
to stand at the gates of cities, to settle all differ- 
ences with justice and promptitude. 

(5) We believe tliis alludes to the famous chauffeurs^ a gang which had 
ramifications over the whole country, and accomplices in men high in 
office : they were guilty of the most enormous atrocities, and got t heir 
name from their practice of Axpotiing their victims to a raging fire alter 
hiving rubbed them with grease, in order to make them discover where 
their money or other properly was hid. 

(6) Aspcciul tribunal, which takes cognizance of tre<f asses in forests, 
'in rivers, &c. 



( 55 ) 



I would also remark, if it come to my point, tliat 
the Emperor Theodosius, wishing to do strict jus- 
tice to the Jews, thought that the best way was to 
give them particular judges, especially bound to 
decide according to the maxims of social interest, 
always paramount to every other consideration (7). 

If this memorable example justifies the idea of 
forming a special tribunal to pronounce defini- 
tively on the merits of judgments, whose execution 
has been suspended by the decree of the 30th of 
May, it evinces at the same time the monstrous 
thought of giving a power of this kind to legisla- 
tors actually in the exercise of their functions. 

But I have said a great deal, and I haye certain- 
ly dwelt long enough on M. PoujoPs publication. 

Let us leave him to calculate and anticipate, in 
his own way, the measures our august Emperor 
will adopt, to efiect the grand regeneration he has 
in view. 

Let us leave him in the full enjoyment of his 
researches, on the several useful alterations which 
may be effected in the rules of conduct which the 
Israelites have received from their doctors, without 
at the same time encroaching on their religious 
principles. 