

This is plainly proposing the question, Mliether 
the public power should not go back to the decree 
of 1791, to rescind and annul it ? 

It is then perfectly right that I should first exa- 
mine a question which, by attacking that decree, 
undermines the very basis of our new condition. 

This inquiry will fiurther the views of M. Poujol. 
if, as he has said in his prefece, he wishes sincerely 
that his iileas should be matured i/i the contest of a 
spund discussioiu 

Certainly this expression itself is not sufficient- 
ly matured ; however, I understand it. M. Poi^ol 
b^ns the discussion. He courts inquiry^ to ap- 
pear just and impartial ; he cannot, therefore, take 
it amiss, if his ideas are submitted to a close in- 
vestigation. The task of maturing them rested 



( 35 ) 



with him ; no one but himself can judge or ap- 
preciate his meaning but by hii^ expressions: and 
since I see myself called upon to publish a critical 
examination, I wish, in my turn, that M. Polijol 
may read it with the intention of benefitting by 
the solutions I give of his questions, and which I 
trust will be found satisfactory. 

In a critical discussion, an adversary must 
expect no favour. 

I cannot pass over even the epigraph M. Poujol 
has affixed to his publication. 

It is a strange inconsistency to introduce the 
idea of all manner of crimes in the title-page of a 
publication, held out as impartial, and whose pre^ 
tended aim is to bring about, with more certain*- 
fy, the happiness of those who are the objects of it. 

In this the heart of M. Poujol is not to blame, 
if, as he says in his preface, he had no injuries of 
his friends to avenge. 

But what name are we to give to that kind of 
wit, which, affecting a treacherous indulgence, ush-f 
ers in his protestations by announcing that the 
subject he is going to treat will offer the picture 
of all the crimes w hich have ever disgraced man- 
kind? 

If the inquirer cannot impeach the rectitude of 
M. PoujoPs intentions, he may justly reproach him 
with a great error of judgment. 



( 36 ) 



Again, was he more judicious in the time cho- 
sen to publish his Observations? after the decree of 
May 30, 1806, (3) and during the sittings of the as- 
sembly it had called together? and at such a mo- 
ment M.Poujol writes to inquire what aretliejittest 
vsays to reform the manners and the habits of ihcJews^ 
and to induce them to adopt those of the nation to 
which they belong? 

These questions were already decided; the 
necessary resolutions were adopted; and this 
is proved by the imperial decree of the 30th of 
May itself, and by the benevolent declarations 
contained in its preamble. 

We had an express declaration that their eiTors^ 
or if you will have it so^ their faults^ sprung from the 
degrading state to which they had been too long redu-- 
ced. 

Another declaration, equally express, states, that 
it is not the sovereign's intention to maintain 
and to renew this order of things. 

It is then very evident, that M. Poujol has pro- 
posed an useless inquiry. It is evident that his 
publication is the produce of error, if not of ha- 
tred. 