

In the centuries which followed, down to 1790, 
did w^e not remark in the civil code, special laws 



( 51 ) 



between the lords and their vassals, and others 
which made unlawful for some classes of citizens 
what tliey allowed to others? 

Are not instances of laws affecting only some 
particular individuals to be found even in the pre- 
sent civil code? 

There is, then, neither contradiction nor incon- 
sistency when the civil law annexes to its disposi- 
tions of general interest particular exceptions 
which the situation of individuals renders neces-^ 
sary* 

Will M. Poujol, speaking as a rash reformer, 
pretend that no Frenchman should be bound by 
laws not general, without being previously degrad* 
ed by the forfeiture of his rights of citizen? 

He presumes to say that the French government 
will do a great deal for the Jews by giving back 
to those who may appear to deserve it those rights 
which he wishes to see taken from them. 

But has he calculated the extent of the calami- 
ties which would befal even those he acknowledges 
as blameless from the harsh measure he proposes 
against all? 

Indeed M. Poujol is much to be pitied, if he does 
not consider himself bound to renounce publicly 
the errors and the injustices he has so plentifully 
introduced in his publication.. 

It is certaiply the duty of goveiii^m^nt to see that; 

Hi? 



( 52 ) 



justiceis done to debtors who complain of usury 
and extortion. 

But it is equally certain that courts of justice 
can pronounce only according to the rules laid 
down by the laws. 

Why then propose, in this publication, to annul 
written agreements freely entered into by the con- 
tracting parties? 

^Vhy bring to our recollection the ruinous epochs 
of the suppression and abolition of debts — measures, 
which to prevent the success of some partial in- 
justices, aimed a deadly blow to all rights of pro- 
perty, always entitled to the protection of the law? 

M. Poujol has proposed a more useful idea, an 
idea more consonant to the magnanimous views of 
government, when he has observed that a kind of 
special jury might with propriety settle all differ- 
ences between debtors and creditors. 

But why did he propose the unconstitutional 
measure of forming a jury of deputies, who, in the 
legislative body, represent the departments by 
which they have been returned ? 

Legislators can, in no case, receive from the so- 
vereign the commission of distributing justice, as it 
is one of his prerogatives. 

Other men, worthy of his confidence, will then be 
called upon, to form a special jury, whose equlta- 



( 53 ) 



ble verdict will terminate suits which have already 
lasted too long. 

The appeal proposed by M* Poujol is the last of 
his errors. 

A trial by jury does not admit of this mode of 
proceeding. Our laws have wisely ordered that, in 
the ordinary course of justice, each suit should 
bear the test of two judgments. 

But trials by special jury are, from their very na- 
ture, excepted from this rule. Decisions essen- 
tially grounded on the knowledge of facts, and dic- 
tated by an impartial view to general interest, ad- 
mit of no revisions ; they may be useful in ordinary 
cases, where all the rules of actions have been pre- 
viously laid down by the law, but in special cases 
they would supersede all motives arising from cir- 
cumstantial evidence, to make room for general 
opinions, less applicable to them, and defeating the 
true purposes of essential justice. 