

(3) An assembly had been called together to assist by its observatlonr 
in the choice of the means which mis;ht be successfully employed to in- 
duce the Jews to follow useful professiom, and to replace, by an honest iiH 
duttrtf, those shameful resources to which tlicy had too long rcsoried. 



( 37 ) 

Why open a discussion on matten^ alreacly settled 
by a solemn imperial decree ? 

Mv Ponjol has been unwittingly hurried by his 
wish of indulgint^in unavailing declamations. 

This of itself would be a sufficient rea^n to re* 
ject his pamphlet among those publications which 
are the offspring of error or passion, which do not 
^ven deserve the attention of the wise or the ho- 
nest man. 

But there ai-e, besides, special motives which 
have actuated M.Poujol, and these 1 must notice. 

Mark the drift and meaning of his publication ; 
he proposes to take from us, at least for some timey 
the benefits resulting from the decree of 1791. 

And this he proposes because, as he says in the 
course of his Observations, we must be made to 
be whatweought to be, before we can be considered 
as citizens. 

But, first. Why that daring censure on the im- 
perial decree of the 30th of May, 1806? 

What, our august Emperor, constituted the 
guardian of the French constitution, has declared 
that it is not his intentioii to maintain or to renew the 
degrading state to which we have been too hiig re^ 
diicedf 

And M. Poujol wants to bring us back to it, 
simply by annulling the decree of 1791 ! 

In opposition to those benevolent and protecting 



( 38 ) 



intentions, to which we are indebted for the decree 
of the 30th of May, 1806, M. Poujol proposes art 
act pregnant with confusion and destruction, such 
as the blind policy of former centuries too often 
produced. 

If such an idea does not tell against his heart, if 
it is not the proof of most malignant hatred, it 
affords, at least, an instance of want of judgment, 
which borders on insanity. 

Indeed this idea of M . Poujol is so vicious in every 
point of view that it cannot fail of meeting with 
universal reprobation. 

In writing these Obsei*v^tions, M. Potijot had 
forgot then the assertion be makes in bis prefece. 

He says there, tluU the faeU and obserocUions he 
is going to preface can an4 ifwt^t applicable to the 
German Jews (mly^ amd not tQ the Fovtuguese JewSf 
who form a different sect^ 

How has it happened, thenj that the measures he 
proposes should be levelled indiscriminately at all 
the Jews who* are become French citizens? M, 
Poujol has thus given an instance of inconsistent 
cy ; bis warmth or his hatred have carried him be- 
yond the bounds he himself had fixed. 

Why did he announce that his Observations were 
applicable to German Jem only, if his intention 
^vas to attack all tliose who have been made French 
citizens ? 



( 39 ) 



Or, if he really intended to stand forth against 
the German Jews only, why pass over the exception 
he had made himself in favour of the Portuguese 
Jews? 