

persecutors woukl have us to kiss our fetters, and 
" hug to our heart's the murderers of our brethren, 

in return for the inveteracy whicji they manifest 

against us evtjry where but in France. The 
" slightest expression of grief wrung from us, 
** marks us a ferocious people, lliey wish to take 

from us even the last distant hope of future hap- 
" piness, to seize wliatever belongs to us most legi-. 

timately, and that, like senseless victims, we 
k2 



( 68 ) 



" should in the mean time refrain from any sign of 
resentment, which, powerless in itself, excites on- 
ly derision or contempt. 

" Since the light of philosophy began to dawn 
over Europe, our enemies have ceased to satisfy 
tlieir revenge with the sacrifice of our lives ; 
Jews are no longer seen, who, generously refu- 
sing to bend under the yoke of intolerance, were 
led with solemn pomp to the fatal pile: but al- 
thou2:h the times of these barbarous executions 
" are past long ago, although the hearts of sove- 
reigns are now strangers to this cruelty, yet sla- 
very itself and i)rcjudices are still the same. 
By what crimes have we then deserved tliis fnri- 
ous intolerance ? What is our guilt? Is it in 
that generous constancy we have manifested in 
defending the laws of oar fathers ? Uut this con- 
stancy ought to have entitled us to tlie admira- 
*' tion of all nations, and it has only sliarpened 
" against us the daggers of persecution. Braving 
" all kinds of torments, the pangs of deatli, the 
still more terrible pangs of life, we alone have 
*' withstood the impetuous torrent of time, sweep- 
ing indiscriminately in its course nations, reli- 
gions, and countries. W hat is become of those 
celebrated empires, whose very name still excites 
" our admiration by the ideas of splendid great- 
ness attached to them, and whose power embra- 



( 69 ) 



cedthe whole surface of the known globe? They 
" are only remembered as monuments of the va- 

" nity of human greatness Rome and Greece 

"are no more; their descendants, mixed ivith 
other nations, have lost even the traces of their 
" origin ; while a population of a few millions of 
" men, so often subjugated, stands the test of thir- 
" ty revolving centuries, and the fiery ordeal of 
fifteen centuries of persecution ! We still pre- 
*' serve laws which were given to us in the first 
days of the world, in the infancy of nature ! 
" The last followei-s of a religion which had em- 
*' braced the universe have disappeared these fif- 
teen centuries, and our temples are still stand- 
" ing ! We alone have been spared by the indis- 
** criminating hand of time, like a column left 
*' standing amidst the wreck of worlds and the 
ruins of nature. The history of this people 
connects present times with the first ages of the 
world, by the testimony it bears of the existence 
of those early periods ; it begins at the cradle of 
mankind, and its remnants are likely to be'preser- 
" ved to the very day of universal destruction. All 
men, whatever may be their opinions and the 
party they have adopted, whether they suppose 
that the will of God is to maintain the people he 
has chosen, or whether they consider that con- 
" stancy which characterises the Jews as a repre- 
hensible obstinacy, or iff at last, they believe in 