



( 75 ) 



you will find fathers of families whose only care 
" is to insure the happiness of dutiful children, 
^' who are one day to follow their example. 

" Observe, ye philosophers, who delight in stu- 
" dying the heart of man, and in penetrating in- 
" to its inmost recesses; mark what distinguishes, 

among all others, the funeral of a father of a 
*' family of the Jewish nation: you will never re- 
*' mark there those forced tears which a trouble- 

bfesome sense of propriety draws from men, 
" who, for a great while before, were hastening, by 
" their wishes, the moment when they would bar- 

ter for a vile metal even the picture of their fa- 

ther: there you will see real grief, surrounded by 

its darkest and heart-rending attributes ; children 
" frantic with despair, tearing their hair and their 
" clothes, covering their forehead with dust and 
" ashes, embracing the inanimate cor^jse of their 

father, and rending the air with their disma} 
" eries. 

(>ome with me into their cemeteries, where 
every thing traces this idea, that death is the 
passage to immortality. Behold those friends, 
" lying on the tombs of their departed friends, 
" and kissing with transport their cold inanimate 
" remains. There, at least, if an envious fate de- 
" prive me of the object of my affections, I shall 
bedew his tomb with my tears In this di-eary 



( 76 ) 



and silent abode I shall exclaim, ^ Consoling im- 
" mortality 1 no, thou art not a chimera/ The 
" souls of those benevolent beings, whose endear- 
" ing intercourse made the delight of my life, are 
" not surely returned to non-entity ; they exist, no 
" doubt, in a better and purer world; they are ho- 
overing around me ; they hear me; and they are 
" the judges of my actions. If ever I should 
swerve from the path of virtue, if ever I should 
" forget my duties, I would go to this abode of 
melancholy, and, bedewing the sacred tomb 
" with tears of repentance, I should again become 
worthy of visiting these monuments of my love. 
" Will you learn how to appreciate still better a 
" nation which owed its abject state solely to its 
" misfortunes? Reflect on the part the Jews have 
acted in the French revolution, and during the 
" reign of terrpr ; when, suddenly made free, they 
" dared to look in the face those who lately had a 
" right to insult them with impunity. 1 ask those 
" men who know how the multitude is inclined to 
" pass without reflexion from one extreme to ano- 
" ther, and how much persecution sours even the 
mildest tempers— I ask them, I say,in what class 
was it likely to fi|id the greatest number of 
those, who, regardless of the most sacred and 
inviolable duties, have shewn to what excesses 
ipen may be hurried by the violence of passion? 



( 77 ) 



How natural it was to expect that the Jews, iq 
fi*antic delirium, would have laid destructive 
hands on the very last traces of a form of go* 
" vernment under which they had suffered, so 
**much! Well! let the blood-stained annals of the 
infamous reign of Roberspierre be opened, and 
" if, in the number of his supporters, yon find the 
" name of one of these men, who alone could be 
^'justified by the sense of their former sufferings, 
*^ I abandon every one of them to their sad fate. 