

It was with wonder that in February, 1806, we 
saw M. de Bonald betray a weakness in blanung 
what had passed, and a want of candour by repro- 
ducing ancient charges which hatred had heaped 
against us. 

His observations found a place in the Mercure^ 
and there M. de Bonald wondered at the senti-^ 
ments we had inspired. He went so far as to 
blame what had been done in 1783, and to con- 
demn the favour we had received from the first 
National Assembly. The better to prejudice peo- 
ple's minds against the possibility of our ever be- 
coming better, he wanted to persuade that no one 
had ever entertained the idea of effecting such a pur- 
pose. The object in viewj says he, was much rather 
io improve the political condition of the Jews^ than 
to change their natural state^ or to make the indivi-* 
duals themselves better. 

But how could it ever happen that M. de Bo- 
nald should publish such declam>itions, who$« 



( 59 ) 



manifest errors cannot but betray in him a great 
want of the principles of justice? 

He has, first, been guilty of an erroneous pre- 
tention, by attempting to mislead the public as to 
the object and the true state of the question pro- 
posed in 1783 by the Academy of Metz. 

The question did not go to examine into thepo* 
litical condition of the Jews; the Academy pointed 
out, as the only object of the researches, the means 
of giving them a milder system of morality, and 
habits more congenial to those of all Frenchmen* 
And if, in the various means proposed, and in the 
proofs adduced to support them, it has been said 
that the Jews, once raised to the rank of citizens, 
would be the better disposed to receive benevolent 
instructions, this idea was, shortly after, sanc^ 
tionedby thelegislative decree of September, 1791. 

deBonald, in the second place, has been guil- 
ty of presumption in attempting to attack the de^* 
cree which raised us to the rank of French citizens. 

Doubts and opposition might have appeared 
useful when the question was first proposed fordism 
cussion by the Academy at Metz, 

The examination once closed, and its results, 
whatever they might have been, once sanctioned by 
the decree of 1791, it w^ the duty of M. De Bo- 
nald, in conunon with all his fellow-citizens, to ac-> 



knowledge that a superior wisdom had already pla* 
ced us in a way of being more happy and more 
useful ; and also that we had been judged by it 
capable of proving worthy of so great a favour. 

In the third place, M. de Bonald has been guih 
ty of the grossest calumnies in his assertions 
against us. 

As late as the year 1767, the answer to the un» 
just pretentions of the body of Merchants, who 
wished to see us excluded from the privilege* 
granted, at that epocha, to that class of men, had 
fully demonstrated, by anumber of proofs, that neu 
ther our religion, nor our mode of worship, could 
furnish grounds to perpetuate the abject state of 
degradation, which was the immediate cause of 
the ill-conduct alleged against some of us. 