

" Weighed down by taxes, and forced to contri- 
" bute more than Christians for the support of so- 
" ciety, they had hardly any of the rights which it 
*' gives. If a destructive scourge happened to 
spread havock among the inhabitants of a coun- 
" try, the Jews had poisoned the springs, or those 
" men, cursed by Heaven, had, nevertheless, in- 
censed it, by their prayers, against the nation 
they were supposed to hate. Did sovereigns 
" want pecuniary assistance to carry on their 
** wars? The Jews were compelled to give up 
" those riches in which they sought some consola- 
" tion against the oppressing sense of their abject 

K 



( 66 ) 



''^ condition: as a reward for their sacrifices, fhey 
" were expelled from the stale they had support- 
" ed, and they were afterwards recalled to be 
" stript again. Compelled to wear exteriorly the 
^' badges of their abject state, they were, every 
" where, exposed to the insults of the vilest popu- 
*^ lace. When from his solitary retreat an enthu- 
" siastic hermit preached the crusades^ to the na- 
tions of Em-ope, and a part of its inhabitants 
" left their country to moisten with their blood 
" the plains of Palestine, tlie knell of promiscuous 
" ftiassacre tolled before the alarm-bell of war. 
" Millions of Jews were then murdered to glut the 
" pious rage of the crusaders. It was by tearing 
*' the entrails of their brethren that these warriors 
" sought to deser^^e the protection of Heaven. 

Skulls of men and bleeding hearts were offered a& 
^' holocausts on the altars of that God who has no 
" pleasure even in the blood of the innocent lamb^ 
^ and ministei*s of peace were thrown into a holy 
enthusiasm by these bloody sacrifices* It is thus 
that Basil, Treves, Coblentz, and Cologn, be- 
** came human shambles. It is thus that upwards 
" of four hundred thousand victims, of all ages, 
and of both sexes, lost their lives at Cesarea and 
" Alexandria. The recollection of these horrors 
dmws tears of blood from my eyes, and I cannot 
^ help blushing for the whole race of mankind. 



( 67 ) 



And is it after they iia\^ experienced such ti^at- 

ment that they are reproached with their vices? 

Is it after being for eigiiteen centuries the sport 
" of contempt, that they are reproached with be- 

ing no longer alive to it ? Is it after having so 

often glutted with their blood the thirst of their 
" persecutors, tliat they asre held out as enemies to 

other nations ? Is it, when tiiey have been be- 
*^ reft of all means to mollify the heaits of their 

tyrants, that indignation is roused if, now and 
^ then, they cast a mournful look towards the ru- 
" ins of their temple, towards their couutry^ wherci 

formerly , happiness crowned their peaceful days, 
^ free from the cares of ambition and of riches? 
^ Is it when the career of arts and of industry has 

been completely shut against them, that the 
" Jewish nation is represented as a lazy, indolent, 
" usekss race, a burthen to the country which 
" supports them ? But whither am I going ? Our 