

But let M. Poujol be persuaded, that, after all, 
success will cro\^Ti whatever salutary reforms His 

(7.) Theodosian Code, vol. viii. p. 22T; 



t 56 ) 



Imperial and Royal Majesty shall, in his wisdom, 
think fit to effectuate. 

Let him know, that in the fifteenth century* 
Abarbanel,one of the most esteemed writers among 
the Israelitish doctors, was known by a very learn- 
ed dissertation on the Bible ; and that, in this pro- 
duction, to which he owes, in great measure, his 
celebrity, he establishes a judicious distinction be- 
tween things essentially connected with religious 
dogmas, and those which have reference only to 
points of civil morals, which last are always sus- 
ceptible of changes and modifications, according 
to the civil and jxilitical state of those whose hap- 
piness they have in view. 

Let us once more tell M. Poujol, and all those 
who, like him, are liable to unjust prejudices, that 
the true principles laid down by Abarbanel had 
been already proclaimed in the t^velfth century by 
Maimonides, one of the greatest Rabbics that the 
Israelites ever had. It has been said of him, that 
his philosophical views excited, at first, a violent 
indignation among all those Hebrews who had 
thought, till then, that every article of the law of 
their fathers bore the stamp of a dogma, and, of 
course, that every attempt to alter them was sacri- 
legious. But the temperate philosophy of Mai- 
monides soon became a source of light and instruc- 
tion. There remained but few Israelites w ho were 



( 57 ) 



not convinced by his arguments; and those whom 
prejudice kept longer in error, were at last per- 
suaded by the observations and proofs which the 
talents of Abarbanel presented in a point of view 
the best calculated to ensure conviction. 

This first dawn of a new day had certainly been 
observed, when in 1783, the Academy of Metz 
proposed to examine if means could be found to 
make the Jews happier and more mefulto France? 

It was also acknowledged then, that, even with- 
out waiting for a change in their political state, it 
was possible to give them a milder system of mo- 
rals, and habits more consonant to the interests of 
those nations by whom they were received and tole- 
rated. 

The question occasioned deep researches and 
profound reasoning ; the prize was adjudged to one 
of those men, who, by their talents and their sub- 
lime views, have given the grand impulse to French 
regeneration. M.Gregoire, now a senator, proved 
at the same time, that neither the religion of the 
Jews, nor their mode of worship, were obstacles to 
their being made better men, and that their system 
of morality, brought back to its genuine princi- 
ples, would make them happier and more useful. 

In 1790 and 1791, men zealous for the public 
welfare re-produced these truths already acknow- 
ledged. No one has forgot the speeches of the 

I 



( 58 ) 

Gregoires, the Lally Tolendals, the Bergasses, the 
Desezes ; their cheering assertions sprang from a 
consciousness of the advantages which a mild phi. 
losophj would produce, and all hearts were opened 
to those sentiments of benevolence, to which we 
were at last indebted for the salutary decree which 
gave us a country. 