

The inhiretance which our lawgiver had expect- 
ed us to retain, essentially constituted us a nation 
of husbandmen. By our dispersion we were reduced 
to whatever moveable property we could save from 
the wreck, and of course, compelled by necessity, to 
have recourse to commerce as the only means left 
to maintain our existence; and in these pursuits 
we reaped the greatest advantages fi^om our econo- 
my, which insured and furthered the progress of our 
industry. From our experience in trade the great- 
est success was expected^ it then became the du- 
ty of gt)vemment to increase the range of our acti- 



( 61 ) 



vilj, as it was an inducement to grant usevery fe* 
cility in our commercial pursuits. 

And all this was to be found in the expositions 
presented in 1783 to the Academy of Metz. 

All this was strengthened by the authority of 
the benevolent decree of 1791, and by the most in- 
controvertible demonstrations, which have convin* 
ced every mind capable of forming a sound judg«> 
ment, that our belief and our dogmas do not mili* 
tate against any improvement in morals or in ci* 
rilization which may be deemed necessary to make 
us citizens worthy of the country, and to injure 
that success which must contribute to its prospe- 
rity. 

M, Moses Peinado, of Bourdeaux, published an 
answer to M. de Bonald's philippic; it was 
strong in proofs, and has met with no reply. 

In shoxt M. de Bonald might have been con-> 
vinced by proofs of another kind before he at- 
tempted to write, 

These proofs were to be found, in great number, 
in the obser\'ations which M.Gregoire, senator, had 
just published ; and in documents of 1800 and 
1801 ; by which it appeared, that the progress of 
instruction had already produced among the Is- 
raelites the spontaneous resolution of drawing a 
line, first, in the book of their law, between those 
institutions which relate to their belief, and those 



C 62 ) 



which simply inforce rules of conduct suitable to 
their then politcal situation ; and secondly, in the 
works of their doctors, between those interpreta- 
tions connected with dogmas and the mode of 
worship, to which they will always bow with faith 
and submission, and those which, guided by sound 
reason, have carefully selected such articles in the 
book of the law and in the writings of the doctors, 
asare susceptible of the alterations which a change 
in the political and civil situation always renders 
requisite. 

In 1800 a society of Dutch Jews had published 
their resolution to acknowledge only the pure and 
genuine law of Moses, and to reject all those insti- 
tutions which, till then, had been called Talmudic 
taws. 

This society had numerous followers. In 1801 
a plan was proposed to assemble at Luneville a ge- 
neral congress of the representatives of all the Jews 
scattered in the different countries of Europe. 

The object of this assembly was known; the 
strength and the authority of the proofs already 
adduced left no doubt but, by general resolution, 
the prejudices and practices of a banefiil fanatic 
cism should be entirely laid aside, to make room, 
in whatever was not connected with dogmas and 
modes of worship, for institutions calculated for 
meli in a state of civilization, and who already 