

Morose philosophers pretend that misfortunes 
" deaden sensibility ; I believe, on the contrary, for 
" the honour of mankind, that weeping over our 
own misfortunes, teaches us to weep over those of 
others. It is in the crucible of adversity that the 
" Jew has acquired that feeling soul which is his 
" characteristic. No where are the poor of that 
" nation seen abandoned without assistance to be- 
^ come a burthen to the country ; and while those 
" very men, who regard as barbarians those w ho 
are strangers to the world and to its ways, reluc- 



( 73 ) 



" tantly give a trifling portion of their superfluity 
to the wretched victims of misery, a people whose 
" name is held almost synonymous with ferocity, 
" would really think they should deserve the ap- 
" pellation, if they could hesitate to share their 
*' moderate resources with the unfortunate who 
" surround them. Those who delight in affixing 
*' guilty intentions to praise-worthy actions will 
see nothing in this union but a dangerous associ- 
" ation ; but the sentimental observer will never 
" hold back his just approbation. 

It is also in this devoted nation that we must 
" seek for that inviolable attachment among the 
members of the same femily, too scarce among 
** us, where gloomy jealousy, a spirit of contradic- 
** tion and hatred, almost always divides those 
" whom nature intended to bind in everlasting 
" friendship. There, you will never see ungrate- 
" ful children, unmindful of the last will of their 
" parent, tearing each other to come at the spoils 
" of their father. 

" Luxury, that bane of virtue and of peace, is 
hardly known among them ; their inclinations 
" and their sentiments are unsophisticated, like na- 
" ture,fi'om whence they spring ; they do not know, 
** it is true, how to deck with all the ornaments 
of eloquence, actions which they consider as du- 
" ties ; but if they do not know how to extoll the 

L 



( 74 ) 



" charms of virtue, they have learnt to appreciate 
" its intrinsic worth, 

".You will see but seldom among them guilty 
" husbands leaving their virtuous partners foraban- 
" doned prostitutes, or shameless wives abandon- 
" ing the care of their families, and the sacred du- 
" tiesof matrimony and maternity, to plunge heed- 
" lessly inio debaucheiy. 

"It is there that lovely cliastity follows the graces 

and enhances their charms; there an amiable blush 
" still overspreads the face of the modest virgin. 

" The dissolution of the sacred tie of marriage, 
" altho allowed by their religion, always leaves the 
" stamp of i-eprobation on him who gives the sad 
" example of divorce. Vainly would you attempt 
" to find among the Jews, people who coolly part 
" after solemn oaths of eternal love, and who give 
" up without emotion the blessing of ever behold- 
" ing the innocent beings who owe to them their 
" existence. 

" But you will find among them couples united 
" by the bonds of the most inviolable attachment, 
" who, finding in their old age the first links which 
" bring to their minds the beginning of their union, 
" bedew with their tears those sacred pledgesof love ; 
*' you will find mothers who weep for joy when the 
" solemn day approaches in which they are to lead 
" an only daughter under the sacred nuptial veil; 