



( 89 ) 

*^ attacks on Homer and the other Greek poets. 
" The Proverbs of Solomon are preferable to the 
" Gnomai of the Greeks, and they contain at least 
as much philosophy, and as much knowledge of 
" the human heart, as the writings of Voltaire. 
" Maimonides, Abenesdra, Abarbanel, Kimchi, 
and many other Hebrew writers, were fully 
" equal, in their times, to the contemporary writers 
of other nations. Raschi, or Solomon Jarchi, 
" was the best commentator of the age he lived 
" in ; and we might mention some modern Hebrew 
" poets, whose productions M. de Voltaire would 
" admire, and by which he would even be impjo- 
ved, were he able to understand them. What he 
saysof the cheats of the inferior Jewish merchants 
" and traders, is what is commonly to be met with 
in tlie conduct of inferior dealers of other na- 
" tions. But, at least, Jews do not bring them- 
" selves to untimely death by their robberies, or it 
happens very seldom. I can bear wiiiiess, that 
" during these thirty years that I have resided in 
" Paris, there has not been three Jews condemned 
to death for robbery or other crimes; so that, 
taking all together, the manners of the Jews in 
general are not worse than those of other people 
in similar stations. The Superstition which M. 
" de Voltaire lays to the charge of the Jews, does 
" not go to prove that they are or ever were equally 

N 



( 90 ) 



" ignorant and barbarous as the Egj^tians are 
•* represented to have been. Neither the Greeks 
** nor the Romans were barbarous nations, and 
" they had superstitions more • dangerous, more 
" absurd, more ridiculous, than those which the 
" Jews are supposed to retain. David, after ha- 
" ving conquered the Syrians, the Ammonites, the 

Moabites, the Idumeans, nnd part of the country 
" of the Philistines, did not condemn to the flames 
** or otherwise put to death, a single individual, 

on accountof religion or of superstition ; he rest- 
" ed satisfied with making these nations tributary, 
" and he treated them with the humanity of a fa- 
" ther as soon as they became his subjects. Na- 
" tions are beside naturally more inclined tosuper- 
" stition than to irreligion, and this disposition 
" turns to the advantage of society. The super- 
" stitious practices of a people are never hurtful 
" to mankind, like the impious maxims of the athe- 
** ists. Let our pretended philosophers, instead of 
" blaspheming the Divinity, offer tlieir thanksgi- 
" vings that nations are so averse to Atheism ; for if 
'* the nations now existing were impious or atheistical^ 
neither the property nor the lives of these pretended 
^^philosophers would be safe (10). Superstition is 

(10) If we bear in mind that this letter was written in i762, this sen- 
tKM% will look like a prediction, too well fidfiUed in the untimely death 



C 91 ) 



•* like those weeds we carefully pluck up from onr 
*• gardens, without hurting the com or the useful 
" vegetables. But our pretended philosophers 
*' want to tear up every thing by the roots. Let 
" not M. de Voltaire exclaim so much against the 
^' superstitions of the Jews in particular. This 