

Letter of M. PAdvocat, Doctor^ Librarian, and 
Professor of Sorbonne. 

Sorbonne, 30th of August, 1762. 

" I am very sorry, Sir, to have been absent from 
" Sorbonne, when you did me the honour of call- 
" ing upon me there. I have received in the coun- 

try the little Apology of the Jews, in answer to 



( 87 ) 



** Voltaire. I have read it, and I have affixed my 
" approbation (8) to it, making, however, some 
" slight alterations, which, as you will own your- 
self, do not in the least hurt your cause. No- 
thing can be more unjust than the contempt in 
*' which the Jews are held: this sentiment is repre- 
hensible even in the mob, which is hurried toha- 
" tred or contempt, often without knowing why; 

but it is much more so in a thinking or honest 
" man, since humanity teaches us that we must 
*' avoid hatred and contempt for every one of our 
" fellow creatures, whatever may be his country, 
" his religion, or his profession. If M . de Voltaire 
gloried in being a Christian, I M ould tell him, 
" that Christianity obliges him absolutely to re- 
tract every thing he has advanced against the 
Jews, since Jesus Christ has ordered us to con- 
sider all men, without distinction, as our bre- 
" thten, and to love them as we love ourselves: 
a direction which is incompatible with hatred 
" and contempt towards the Jews. 

" But this famous poet prides himself more on 
being a philosopher than on being a Christian, 
and it was right to refute him in that point of 
*' view in your Apology; nothing being farther 

(8) Every one knows that in the ancient government of France 
books could not be published without the approbation of the censors. 



( 88 ) 



" removed from true philosophy than blindly to 
give up to popular prejudices and prepossessions. 
The reproach of ignorance and barbarism, which 
" he lays to the charge of ancient and modern 
Jews, arising in reality from his own ignorance 
** of the language and of the writing's of the He- 
" brews. It is not from barbarous and tame 
translations that original wi-itings can be judged. 
" If M. de Voltaire's translations were again to be 
" translated, word for word, into barbarous Latin, 
these translations would make M. de Voltaire 
appear more ignorant and more barbarous than 
he is aware of, and he would find himself in the 
" garb of a Vandal or an Ostrogoth (9). Job, 
Moses, David, Solomon, Isaiah, and most of the 
Hebrew poets, are by no means inferior to the 
Greek, Latin, and French poets, without except- 
ing even M. de Voltaire. The poetic writings of 
" the Hebrews are superior to those of every other 
** nation, by the pomp of the expressions, the 
** grandeur of the images, the sublimity of 
" thought, in short, by all the genuine charaeteris- 
** tics of true genius and of poetrj-; and M. de 
\ oltaire will no more succeed in his attempt to 
bring them into disrepute, than Perrault in his 

(9) Favourite €\pressions of M. Voltmirc, by which he compared his 
atiti^iusts to those Dorthern bttbmrimns. 