

" Can it be said that men who behave thus ch 
not acknowledge the laws of France ? 
" Can it be a matter of doubt that their man- 
ners will gi*adually blend with those of nations 
*' who admit them to share their advantages and 
" their civil rights? 

" Certainly the change is not yet general, nor is 
it the work of a day; but it is wished for by all 



( 101 ) 



" enlightened Jews: many among them have spon* 

" taneously given the example. The impulse is 
given; wise regulations will do the rest; and I 
doubt not but we shall be indebted for them to 

^' the assembly which is now sitting, 

I shall not examine here into the means cal- 
culated to accelerate this happy change, and 
oblige the Jews to follow, more especially, pix>£^-> 
sions from which they were excluded by £>rmer 
laws. But I think that it is absolutely necessa* 
ry to adopt some efficacious measures to obtain 

" this result, and I would even ventm'e to propose 

*' some, if I did not place the most implicit confi- 
dence in the intentions and in the talents of those 
who compose and lead the assembly. 

You would not have received this long letter, 

^' Sir, if, instead of unjustly inculpating the 
Jews, you would have proposed means to make 

" them what government wishes tiiem to be. But 
what did you expect in affirming that Jews do not 

" acknowledge the laws of France? No doubt you 
wanted to represent them as bad citizens, as 
men whom it is impossible to bring under the 
yoke of the laws. Such avowed intentions 

" sour the mind, instead of mending the manners, 
and increase the evil instead of effecting a cure, 
" I would, to conclude, answer M. de Bonald, 
whom you quote towards the end of your article; 



( 102 ) 



^ but the production of this writer does not threat- 
" en much danger; the nature of his intentions is 

too evident, and the acrimony of his zeal acts as 
" an antidote to his opinions. IM. de Bonald sees 

the present in the past and the past in the pre- 
" sent. This illusion may contribute to his hap- 
" piness; but it cannot seduce men of sound minds 
" and enlightened understandings ; and whatever 

he may do, he will not, in this age of knowledge, 
" and under a government equally wise and firm 

in its resolutions, form a party very formidable 
" to the Jews.'* 

(Signed) SIMON MAYER/* 

Thus, in a word, every thing is disposed to in^ 
sure the complete success of measures, by which 
Israelites will, at last, receive manners and habits 
capable of raising them to the ]*ank of citizens 
eminently useful. 

Nations will know, more generally, how to ap^ 
preciate those vicious prejudices which, till now, 
have been the prolific sources of manifold persecu- 
tions, to which they attribute their incessant mis- 
fortunes, not objected to them as crimes. 

Truths placed beyond a doubt, will prove to 
every one that the Jews are capable of fulfilling 
all social duties, and that they zealous>ly support 



( 103 ) 



all those measures which are likely to produce and 
insure their happiness. 