

of the human heart andofthetrueaimof legisla- 

tion; and I venture to say, that there has never 



( 96 ) 



existed on earth a nation capable of Ailfillin^ 
such an engagement. 

Self interest is in man the fii*st and principal 
spring of action; the advantages he derives 

" from the laws must tend to favour this inclina- 

" tion; but the grand art, I might almost say the 

" cunning of the legislator, consists in regulating 
the use of each of these advantages in such a 
manner as to be naturally productive of the ge- 
neral welfare. It might be asked, then, if, in the 

** opinions of the Jews, in their manners, in the 
professions to which they usually give the pre- 
ference, some particular obstacles may not be 
found which prevent the advantages they share 
in common with all Frenchmen from tending 

*' so directly to the public welfare as when in 
other hands ? Inquiries might be set on foot to 
ascertain the nature of these obstacles, and laws 
or i-egulalions might be afterwards adopted to 
lessen or to do them away altogether; but Jews 
are only men ; and, surely, efibrts above the 

" strength of human nature will not be required 

" of them. 

Thei-eisthen, in reality, no reasonable meaning 
" in the two questions about the Jews which the 
*• author supposes are to come under discussion. 
" These set aside, there remains only this gratui- 
" tons supposition : 



( 97 ) 



*' The Jews do not acknowledge the laws of France. 
Let us examine this assertion: 
A commonand grand mistake in writers, pass- 
" ing judgment on different societies of men, is, 

that they confound times, places, and other cir« 
" stances, according to the side they have taken, 
' " and to the opinion they wish to establish on this 
** or that society. In thus confusing every thing, 
" there exists no nation, no community, no religi- 

ous association, which may not be represented 
" at pleasure, as virtuous or vicious, just or unjust, 

brave or cowardly, atrocious or generous, loyal 

or rebellious, useful or dangerous, as deserving 

the highest praise, or as the fittest object of 

contempt. 

" Certainly, if you consider the Jews at a time 
" when, as says a writer you quote, they were de- 
" barred from possessing lands, from commerce^ 

from industnj, when, in short, they were in a 

manner outlawed, it may be said that they did 
" not acknowledge the laws of France, or, to speak 
" more correctly, that they had been placed in the 

impossibility of acknowledging them. Exclud- 
" ed from all the advantages of general society, 
" they were forced to withdraw into their own 
" particular community, and to seek in their cus- 
" toms, their institutions, the doctrine of their 
" doctors, support and consolations they could 

o 



( 98 ) 



•* find no where else. But, it would be the height 
" of injustice to alledjs^e against them as a crime, 
" tlie state to which they had been reduced by 
" others, and to accuse them of liaviug refused to 
" acknowledge the laws of a society from which 
" they had been ex|>elled. 1 will go still farther; 
" it would be unjust, now, to reproach them w ith 
" some remaining attachment to those custon^s 
" and to those manners, the common source from 
" which generations after generations have drawn 