

assistance, hope, and some alleviation of the 
" hardships heaped upon them. 

" Certainly the Jews w ould have been reprehen- 
" sible, they would have justified the severity of 
*' the laws by w hich they were excluded from so- 
" ciety, and even desened to be excluded again, 
" if, when governments more enlightened have 

taken them under their protection, have called 
" them into the bosom of general society by giving 
" them a countr}', they, in return, had ungr.it efuU 

ly rejected the proftered benefits, violated tlio 
*' laws under whose protection they were allowed 

to live, and disdained all the advantages of civil 
" society, to give obstinately the preference to the 
" customs and manners of their particular society; 
** then, indeed, it might have been said, that their 
" abhorrence of the laws of other nations was, to 
" this day, an inherent principle of their associa- 



( 99 ) 



tioii, as it was in those days when the politics of 

their lirst lawgiver made this abhorrence a fun- 
" damental maxim of their gwernment. 

" But considering the Jews, such as they are in 
" in modern times, we shall see that every where 
" their hatred has ceased with persecution; that 
" wherever thev have been admitted to share the 

benefits of the laws, they have gradually been 

united with those nations who have consented 
" to adopt them ; that every where they have re- 
" spected the laws under whose protection they 
^* were allowed to live, 

*^ It has been asserted, that the Jews have be- 
" haved well in Holland, and that, far from giving 

occasion to complaints against them, they have, 

by their industry, contributed to the prosperity 
^' of the country. The cause of this difference 
" between the Jews of Holland and those of other 
^' countries is evident; it is because in Holland 
" they participate in all the advantages from w;hich 

they were excluded elsewhere ; in that coimtry, 
" facts have proved, that when they are considered 
" as men and citizens, they shew themselves, like 
" others, men and citizens. The particular ad- 

vantages they obtain become in their hands con- 
" ducive to public welfare. 

Let us now consider them in France : since 

they have obtained the advantages common to 

2 



( 100 ) 



all Frenchmen, can it be said that they have/re- 
" fused to obey the laws ? Can it be said that, spurn^ 
" ing these advantages and the institutions of their 
" new country, they have remained, as before, ex- 
" clusively attached to their particular society ? 
" On the contrary, many among them have 
abandoned the exclusive professions to which 
" they had been condemned, to follow others which 
" bring them nearer theirnew fellow-citizens; they 
" have acquired considerable landed property, they 
" have formed vast commercial establishments, and 
erected manufactories ; among them are to be 
seen artists and mechanics, practising me* 
" chanical arts and following trades. They have 
sought for a new education in the national 
schools. Called to the armies, they have zea- 
lously taken up anns, they have fought with 
" courage ; and many, under the very eyes of the 
hero, who now governs France, have deser\^ed 
" the recompence of the brave. 