

is, Sir, my opinion as to the hatred and unjust 
" contempt to which the Jews are exposed. Some 

years ago I was applied to for advice on this sub* 
*' ject by the ministry of Poland, My memorial 
" confounded their accusers, and their chief was 
" arrested and punished by order of the King of 

Poland. I keep a copy of this memorial, and 
*^ shall with great pleasure eonununicate it to you. 

I am, sincerely, 

UADVOCAT, 

Doctor^ Librarian, and Prqfestorin SorhwM. 

Letter of M, Simon Mayer, Vice Deputy of the De* 
partments o/*La Seine to the Jewish Ammbly^ to 
the Editor of the Journal dePEmpire, 

" Sir, 

^* The Jews, filled with respect and gratitude for 
the august Sovereign Tvho deigns to take their 

bf the leaders of th^ philosophical partj who were at the head of the 
French revolution. 



( 93 ) 



situation into his consideration, were far indeed 
" from expecting that periodical writers would 

presume, without any authority, to judge ques- 
" tions which are on the point of being discussed 

in the assembly, where their deputies are called, 
" and still less that those premature judgments 

should be such as to establish, as an incontro- 
" vertible fact, the greatest reproach to which a 
" class of men can be liable, that of not acknow^ 
" ledging the laws of their country. 

" This asseition, which is represented as an un- 

doubted truth in your paper of the 26th of Ju- 
" ly instant, might have frightened the Jews in 

those times, when, excluded from every class of 
" citizens, their keeping apart was nevertheless 
" considered as a crime — ^when the most absurd 
** inculpations were sought for with avidity, were 
" adopted and employed against them as pretexts 
" for proscription. It cannot cause tlie smallest 

uneasiness at a time when our hear ts are opened 
" to the liveliest gratitude for the benefits we de- 
" rive from those laws which have put us on an 
" equal footing with all citizens, under a prince 
" equally just and firm, whose genius dispels the 
" clouds of ancient prejudices, and whose councils 

ar6 actuated by truth, justice, reason, humanity, 

and the ardent wish of making all Frenchmea 

happy. 



( 93 ) 



But accasationS) made in so public a manner 
and on so important an occasion, mustneverthe- 
" less be confuted ; because tliey may lead into 
" error a few credulous men, allbrd pretences to 
" the evil intentions of others, excite ill-will 
" against us, and throw difficulties in the way of 
*' that union of all Frenchmen, which is the aim of 
" government, and the wish of every wise and en- 
" lightened man. 
" On examining the article of your journal al- 
ready alluded to, it becomes evident tliat the sole 
" object the writer had in view was to present, as 
" an incontrovertible truth, the following suppo* 
sition : 

The Jews do not acknowledge the laws of France; 
** and that, without much minding whether or no 
** his commentary on this assertion afforded any 

meaning, he has run his chance of meeting with 
** credulous readers. 