

" It is by such a glorious deed that Europe must 
" crown the century just elapsed, and in which 
" posterity will behold events of such a magni- 
" tude, and succeeded by consequences so dread- 

Nothing in this was intended for France, where 
the progress of knowledge, and sound views of na- 
tional interest had already removed those prejudi- 
ces which had brought oppression and hatred on 
the Jews. 

It may be expected that those observ ations will 
produce on the other states of Europe those senti- 
ments of justice and benevolence on which alone 
can rest the happiness and stability of empires. 

We see, not far distant, the moment when the 
genius of a great and glorious Emperor will, in his 
benevolence, make us reap all the advantages of 
our new situation. We must redouble our pray- 
ers, to obtain from the God of our fathers that he 



( 85 ) 



may be pleased to direct the attention of kings to 
the Israelites living under their dominion, and to 
inspire them with the resolution of distinguishing 
themselves by deeds of greatness and of national 
utility. 

I shall also be entitled myself to the blessings of 
my brethren scattered in all the states of the world, 
since my collection will expose to all kings and to 
all nations, the truths which have opened for us the 
way to happiness, and will record acts which most 
certainly will lay the grounds for a general rege- 
neration. 

On the first of these two points, I must add to 
the proofs I have already adduced, two kinds of tes- 
timonies in our favour, which will acquaint the 
public with the opinions entertained by the wise, 
even before our august Emperor had called us to- 
gether to establish the basisof our future prosperity. 

The first of these testimonies is a letter, replete 
with force and truth, written in the Sorbonne the 
SOth of August, 1762, by M. TAdvocat, Doctor, 
Librarian, and Professor in that University. It con- 
tains his ideas- on the Apologie des Juifs^ just then 
published, in answer to Voltaire^s writings. 

The second is the letter which M . Simon Mayer, 
Jewish deputy for the department of La Seine, 
wrote the SOth of July, 1806, to the editor of the 
Journal de r Empire, to prove that the Israelites re- 



{ 86 ) 



siding in France, far from considering themselves 
foreigners in the territory of the French empire, 
were, in truth, devoted to the country which had 
granted them an honourable adoption and which 
did not cease to contribute to their happiness. 

Sovereigns and nations will see in the letter of 
M. TAdvocat, what they are to think of the unjust 
judgments which the vulgar passed indiscriminate- 
ly on the Israelites. 

In that of M. Simon Mayer, they will see the 
absurdity of the calamities, lately reiterated against 
us, for want of consideration, or by the impulse of 
hatred. 

And if M. de Bonald and M. Poujol do not 
abandon their unjust prepossessions, they will have 
these two antagonists more, whose testimonies in 
favour of truth and justice they nmst strive to do 
away. 