

sprung up at the fierce cries of pei*secution, and 

that man prizes the objects of his love only from 
" the extent of the sacrifices they cost him ? The 
" hope of detaching the Jews from the religion of 
*' their fathers must be extravagant and ground- 
" less, as long as they shall be obliged to endure 
" the greatest hardships to follow it. 

" Is it not owing to the rage of the Inquisition 
" and to Auto da fez, that we must principally at- 
" tribute the miraculous existence of this nation 



( 80 ) 



** through the greatest revolutions which have 
•* changed the face of the globe? hen religi- 

on shall have ceased to be for them the dear 
** bought consolation of so many sacrifices, usher- 

ed into the busy scenes of life, Will they not 
" begin to experience the workings of ambi^ 
" tion, superseding in their hearts their religious 
"sentiments? Then, and then only, some hopes 

may be entertained that they may, at some fu- 

ture period, renounce their ancient faith. AVhat-^ 
" everj in short, may be the just or unjust views 
** which are supposed to actuate governments, it is 

an undoubted fact, that the abject state in w hich 
*' the Jews are kept, even now, is excessively impo* 

litic^ and contrary to the interests of those who 
" might put a stop to it. Every thing proves that 
" even their regeneration, which was thought to 
" be the work of centuries, will be equally sudden 
^ and complete. The rapid progress which the 
" French Jews have already made in the career of 
*' civilization^ are the surest pledges of this pro* 
" mise ; the greatest number of them have already 
" got rid of that timid crouching demeanour, 
*' which excluded them from company, or made 

them appear ridiculous- The greater part, 
" throwing off perjudices of all kinds^ intend 
" their children for honourable professions, in- 
" stead of limiting their views, as they hither- 
" to have done. Many attend the national 



( 81 ) 



schools with the most brilliant success, and bid 
*' fair to increase the demesne of sciences by their 
" labours and by their genius. The Jew avoided 
" the Christian, only because he saw in him a fero- 
cious and inveterate enemy; the Christian avoid- 
ed the Jew, only because he considered him as a 
" being devoted from his brith to contempt and 
" slavery ; friendship has been the mutual wish of 
" both, as soon as they have learnt to esteem each 
" other. What should we mind if a few men still 
" preserve hatred against us? They alone are to 
" be pitied, since they are strangers to the sweets of 
" reconciliation. 

I shall not deny that many among us, still deaf 
to the voice of reason, persist in drawing all their 
^' resources from a shameful and dishonest traffic: 
" but this obstinacy of a few individuals will ap- 
*' pear astonishing only to men unacquainted with 
the force of habit, and with the time and cares 
necessary to change the manners and the dispo* 
sitions of a whole nation. I must add, that in 
other European countries, the Jews must ad- 
*' vance more rapidly in civilization than they have 
" done in France, where, since the revolution, each 
** succeeding government, intent only on the de- 
'* structioii of its predecessors, could not accele- 
rate their progress, nor gradually encourage 
*' them. It is incumbent on every government to 