

" In this century says the writer, " the only 
" questions at issue between the friends of the Jews 
" and those who are against them are — to know if 

France, for instance, must reckon those men who 
" do not acknowledge her laws, in the number of her 

children, till such a time as they have pledged 

themselves to assimilate their manners, as much 
" as possible, to those of the rest of the nation ; or if 

sound policy requires that government, before 



( 94 ) 



" it admits the Jews to share all the advantages 
" common to all other Frenchman, should acquire 
" the certainty that they shall make use of them 
" only for the general interests of the empire 
" The absurdity of the first question is evident. 
Can government put in question whether it should 
consider as children of the same country men who 
would refuse to acknowledge its laws^ should they 
even engage to change their manners? 

Whoever refuses to acknovi^ledge the laws of a 
country must be excluded from it,, let his man- 
•* ners bewhatthey may ; and if it were true, as the 
** author pretends, that the Jews refuse to acknoxo^ 
^' ledge the laws of France^ their proposed admission 
among the children of France would not de- 
" serve the slightest consideration. Luckily tlie 
^* falsehood of that assertion will be hereafter 
" proved by facts. 

*^ And how could the author suppose that the 
*' object of discussion was whether France should 
'* admit the Jews among her children? Do not Jews 
*^ enjoy already that advantage ? Have they not 
" been called by the laws to the full enjoyment of 
all civil rights, conmion to all Frenchmen ? Did 
" not the same laws, grant th^m the free exercise 
" of their mode of worship ? Did they not, in short, 
adopt them in the number of the children of 
" France? 



( 95 ) 

" Was the writer ignorant of all this? or does 
" he refuse himself to acknowledge the laws of 
" France while he inconsiderately urges that re- 

proach against the Jews ? 

" The question, then, is not to know if Jews are 
" to be admitted among the children of France. 
" It might be asked, at most, if they have made a 

bad use of the advantages they have received by 

their adoption? if they are become worthy or 
" unworthy of retaining them ? and if there are 
" grounds to hope that the facility they have re- 
" ceived, in common with all Frenchmen, to avail 
" themselves of the protection of the laws, shall 

gradually induce them to adopt the general 

manners of the nation and at last level that 

barrier which the barbarism of antient legisla- 
** tors had raised between them and other nations? 
The Jews do not shun the discussion of these 

questions: well authenticated facts speak in 
" their favour on all these points; and the present, 

if examined without prejudice, will be deemed 

a sufficient pledge for the future. 

" The second question is as absurd as the first; 
" for, to propose advantages to men on condition that 
*' thei/ shall make use of them only for the interest of 
" //i^pw6//c, would prove a total want of knowledge 