

In France, the grand act of justice announced 
by our august Emperor was totally unexpected. 

Memorials w ere transmitted calling the atten- 
tion of His Imperial and Royal Majesty to a number 
of bond-debts which were represented as likely to 
ruin many unfortunate land-holders. 

The history of past centuries induces a belief, 
that, in other times, and under the reign of a weak 
or irresolute sovereign, rigorous coercive measures 
would have been proposed as the means of redi*es- 
sing wrongs, whose existence is not even yet legally 
ascertained. 

Those of our brethren who are accused of injus- 
tice, and the Jews altogether, would have been, 
once more, exposed to the rigour of sanguinary 
laws, similar to those which too often have exposed 
our ancestors to the hatred of nations, and thrown 
them into all the horrors of misery. 

A soul formed forgreatthings;a mindincessant- 
ly bent upon thoughts the best calculated to 
accelerate the liappiness of mankind ; a genius ac- 
customed to conceive whatever can consolidate 
the basis, the stability, and the prosperity of an 
empire created by a provident wisdom; virtues 
which constitute the greatness of sovereigns, up- 



( IM ) 

lidd by the qualities which form the estates* 
man, have produced the memorable example of a 
resolution heretofore unparalleled, and whose uti- 
lity will excite in all the powers of Europe a gene- 
rous emulation. 

Let us place and preserve in our annals the im*- 
perial decree of the 30th of May, 1806. Soon 
will this collection spread it through all .the states 
of Europe. 

It gives us an immediate right to the esteem of 
manlund; it lays the grounds of our future happi- 
ness ; and will afford us the means of proving wor- 
thy of our country. 

The acts to which it has given birth do not re- 
late it; and it is rather surprising that the editor of 
the proces verbal of the sittings of the assembly, 
did not affix it at the head of his work. 

This imposes on me the duty of giving it here at 
full length. It is the work of protecting benevo- 
lence, a deed of a magnanimity unknown before 
on earth ; it bears the stamp of the decrees of Pro- 
vidence. It will cany to the most distant genera- 
tions the pleasing conviction, that, in our times, 
we beheld in our august Emperor the living image 
of the Divinity. 



( 105 ) 



Imperial Decree^ given at the Palace of St. Cloud, 
May 30, 1S06. 

" Napoleon, Emperor of the French, King of 
" Italy. 

" On the report which has been made to us, that 
" in many of the northern departments of ourem* 
" pire, certain Jews, following no other profession 
" than that of usurers, have, by the accumulation 
" of the most enormous interests, reduced many 
" husbandmen of these districts to the greatest 
" distress : 

" We have thought it incumbent on us to lend 
" our assistance to those of our subjects whom ra- 
" pacity may have reduced lo these hard extremi- 

ties, 

" These circumstances have, at the same time, 
" pointed out to us the urgent necessity of revi- 
ving, among individuals of the Jewish persua- 
sion residing in our dominions, sentimexits of 
^' civil morality, which, unfortunately, have been 
" stifled in many of them by the abject state in 
*' which they have long languished, and which it 
" is not our intention either to maintain, or to re- 
" new. 