

A writing published in France at the epocha of 
the first meeting of the assembly^ whose acts I am 
now recording, has^ proved that the Jewish nation 
in Germany, is greatly indebted to the public esta- 
blishment of M. Jiacobson, Privy Councellor of Fi- 
nances at Brunswick, for the instruction of Jew- 
ish youth. 

It is very certain, then, that, to the principles 
containedin this letter, and published by M. Mi- 
chel Berr, in 1801, these first advantages are to be 
attributed. The learning and the views of this 
last writer will assist powerfully in the completion 
of the great work which the enlightened benevo- 



( 125 ) 

lence of a beloved monarch is preparing to efTec* 
tuate in the French empire* 

Immediately after the first sitting of the assem* 
bly, M. Berr-Isaac-Berr published observations 
which afford a new proof and a new pledge of his 
praise-worthy zeal. 

M. Lipmann Cerf-Berr has also contributed 
his share, by ideas and reflexions which have ob- 
tained universal approbation. 

M. Baruch Cerf-Berr, emulous of his father's 
constant zeal, has adopted the sentiments and opi- 
nions of those distinguished writers, whom he 
quotes honourably, in a publication well entitled 
to notice, and which I should introduce in this 
collection, if I was not apprehensive that it would 
interrupt too nmch the account of the sitting of 
the assembly. 

The works of the deputies I have just mention- 
ed, the zeal of all, are the honorable pledges of 
their intentions, and prove that they place their 
happiness in their efforts to deserve the gratitude 
of their bi-ethren. 

Could the French Jews have been assembled to 
name themselves their representatives their choice 
could not have been happier. 

The whole of the acts of the assembly has pro- 
Ted that their interests could not be placed in the 
hands of men better entitled to their confidence. 



( ^6 ) 



Sedond Sitting, July^QQ^ 1S06« 

The president opened the sittings precisely aC 
twelve o'clock. He named, as Commissioners for 
the maintainance of order, MM. Kodrigue, sen- 
Ldpmann Cerf-Berr, and Castre, jun. 

One of the secretaries read a letter addressed 
to the President by His Excellency the Minister of 
the faiterior, dated the asth of this , month, in 
Adiichheiaferms him, that MM. Mole, Portalis, 
•* jtin.and Pasquier^ Maitres des Requiiesj , {12) apd 
chosen by His Majesty as Conmiissioners to 
transact whatever belongs to us, will attend the 
assembly, this day, at three o'clock, to impart 
the inted^tions of His Majesty the £mperor and 
King. 

" The Minister, at the isame time, desires the 
President to acquaint the assembly, that, before 

^* proceeding further, it is necessary to name a 
conunission, which shall prepare the ground- 
work of the discussions which are to take place 
on the communications which the commissioners 

" have received directions to make." 
The President opened the discussion on the 

formation of this commission. 

(12) Law officers attached to the Council of State, with fanctioiu 
nearly similar to those of our Masten in tb« Court of Chancery* 