

The 26th of the same month was the day fixed 
for their first meeting; but Hid Excellency, having 
remarked that it haf^ned to be on a Saturday, 
sent word to the deputies that if they thought 
themselves bound to abstain from every kind of 
labour, on such a day, they were at liberty to ad^ 
journ their first meeting. 

The deputies, however, wishing to prove that 
they observe faithfully their antient laws, which 
command, above all things, a prompt obedience 
to all orders whatever from their sovereign, have 
fulfilled, on that very day, 26th of July, the in- 
tentions of His Majesty the Emperor and King. 

Sitting of the OGth of July, 1806. 

This day, the 26th of July, 1806, at eleven 
o'clock in the morning, the French deputies of 
the Jewish persuasion, called to Paris by the de- 
cree of His Imperial and Royal Majesty dated 
the 30th of May last, have assembled in a hall 
adjoining the town-house, according to the invi- 
tation contained in the circular letter of His Ex- 



( 118 ) 



celleiicy the Minister of the Interior, of the 13th 
of this month, in order to name a president, two 
secretaries and three scrutineers (10). 

In order to proceed to these nominations, thd 
assembly has been formed under the presidency 
of M. Solomon Lipman^ as the oldest member^ 
assisted by MM; Moses Levy and Henry Castrd 
jun. as secretaries. 

It began its proceedings by calling over the 
names of the members; at the same time a scru- 
tiny began for the nomination of a president; 
M. Abraham Furtado, having obtained the ma- 
jority of votes, has been proclaimed president by 
the oldest member. But before taking the 
chair he addressed the assembly to return thankd 
for the honour they had conferred upon him^ 
warning them, at the same time, to avoid tumult 
and dissentions, which too often take place in 
deliberating assemblies. " A sad experience, he 
" saidi has too well proved that men, assembled 

together in great numbers, oftener bring into 
" contact their passions than their virtues.^^ He 
spoke with the most profound respect, and the 
liveliest admiration of the protecting hero who 
governs us, and invited the assembly to second 

(10)Member9 chosen to examine the num^roiii scrutinies which always 
take place in French assemblies. 



( 11» ) 

his magnanimous views by its sbadind^ and it9 
?igilance. 

The assembly tapturously applauded the 
speech of its President, and the erics of long live 
the Emperor, long live the Imperial Family^ 
resounded through the hall. 

The assembly having proceeded afterwards, 
by way of scrutiny, to the nomination of two 
secretaries, MM. Rodrignes, Junr. and Samuel 
Avigdoo obtained the majority of votes. 

The President proclaimed them secretaries, 
and they took their places at the table accord- 
ingly, The nomination of scrutineers began 
afterwards; MM. Olry Bayem Worms, Theo- 
dore Cerf-Berr, and Emilie Vitta, having ob- 
tained the majority of votes, the President pro- 
claimed them scrutineers, and they also took 
their places at the table accordingly. 