

R 



( 123 ) 

Attachment to their duties, extensive knowledge, 
wise principles, and an ardent desire to serve the 
country, characterise the Deputies, and have pro- 
duced these resolutions, to which they will adhere, 
of furthering by all the means in their power, the 
magnanimous designs of our August Emperor. 
They are strengthened in these resolutions by^ a 
wish of proving useful to their brethren, and by the 
praise-worthy ambition of fulfilling the hopes en- 
tertained of their ability to consolidate, on firmer 
grounds, the happiness arising from our new con- 
dition. 

BychusingM. Furtado of Bourdeaux for Presi- 
dent, a most worthy choice in every respect, the 
assembly has proved its judicious intentions, and 
given a pledge of the line of conduct it intends to 
follow. 

Portuguese Jews, in general, are, both in theory 
and in practice, far superior to other Jews in the 
habits of social virtues. 

M. Furtado is well known among merchants^ 
and has obtained a distinguished rank among those 
useful writers who consider accurately their ideas 
and diffuse salutary knowledge. 

And lastly, the qualities of his h^art, would, 
without any other merit, amply justify the choice 
of the assembly. 

He has given the first example of ifceal ; he en- 



( 123 ) 

CDumges and employs for the general advantage the 
various talents of the several members. 

Many others, advantageously known alreadyt 
are also distinguished by their extensive know-* 
ledge: their conduct justifies the opinion enter- 
tained of them, and they honourably deserve all the 
gratitude of their brethren, the esteem and the 
consideration of their contemporaries. 

M. Avigdov, one of the secretaries of the assem- 
bly, author of several writings in favour of the 
Jews, has every day given fresh proofs of his zeal. 

M. Michel Berr, councellor at law, member of 
several academies, one of the deputies for the de- 
partment of ZaiS^sn^, author of a pamphlet entitled 
An Appeal to the Justice of Kings andNations, from 
which I have given ample extracts in this collec- 
tion, continues still to exert all his talents in de- 
fence of the rights and interests of the Jews, whom 
he proved, in 1801, entitled to the benevolence of 
all sovereigns. 

M. Segre, Rabbi, deputy for the department of 
La Seine, is highly commendable for his extensive 
learning which he zealously employs in promoting 
the interests and the wishes of his brethren. 

Other deputies have confirmed the hopes con- 
tained in tbeletter of M. Berr Isaac Berr, (11) by 



(11) Sec page 11. 
k2 



( 124 ) 

a remark which proves that this pi-odilction, pub- 
lished in 1791, has really been productive of some 
good effects. It is very true, as they have advan-^ 
ced, and I have ascertained thefact, that, in April, 
1803, an establishment was formed in Copen- 
hagen for the instruction of Jewish youth ; that 
at the end of the year 1805, tlie number of the pu- 
pils was forty ; that, by a public examination, held 
in June, 1806, their success in their studies had 
been ascertained; that they had made great pro- 
gress in the Hebrew, French, and German lan- 
guages, in geography, and in natural history; and 
in short, that this establishment was in a very flou- 
rishing condition. 