

s 



( 130 ) 



gues, sen. Moses Levy, Marx, jun. Jacob Lazara, 
Levy, and Baruch Cerf-Berr, to go and meet the 
Commissioners of His Majesty. 

The President then suspended the proceedings 
of the assembly until the arrival of the Commis- 
sioners. 

At three o'clock, it was announced that the Com- 
missioners of His Majesty were conriing to the as- 
sembly, by a door facing that by which the depu- 
ties are admitted. 

Immediately, the fifteen members of the depu- 
tation, with the President and the officers at their 
head>, went to meet them. 

The Commissioners of His Majesty were intro- 
duced into the hall, amidst repeated acclamations 
of Long live the Emperor^ Long live the Imperial Fa* 
mily. The most profound silence succeeded to this 
spontaneouseffusion; the members remained stand- 
ing to hear His Majesty's intentions read. 

M^. Mole, Maitre des Requetes^ one of the Com- 
inissionei-s of His Majesty, opened the letter di-^ 
rected to them which laid on the table, took out 
the documents it contained, and pronounced the 
following discourse to acquaint the assembly with 
the intentions of His Majesty. 

Gentlemen, 
His Majesty, the Emperor and King;, having 



( 131 ) 

^ ttamed us Commissioners to transact whatever 
^ relates to you, has this day sent us to this as- 
^ sembly to acquaint you with his intentions, 
" Called together from the extremities of this vast 
empire, no one among you is ignorant of the 
" object for which His Majesty has convened this 
" assembly. You know it. The conduct of many 
among those of your persuasion has excited 
complaints, which have fbund their way to the 
foot of the throne: these complaints were founds 
ed on truth ; and nevertheless, His Majesty has 
been satisfied with stopping the progress of the 
evil, and he has wished to hear you on the means 
♦* of providing a remedy. You will, no doubtt 
•* prove worthy of so tender, so paternal a conduct^ 
and you will feel all the importance of the trusty 
«^ thus reposed in you. Far from considering the 
government under which you live as a power 
against which you should be on your guard, you 
^ will assist it with your experience and co- 
operate with it in all the good it intends; thus 
«^ you will prove that, following the example of 
all Frenchmen, you do not seclude yourselves 
from the rest of mankind* 

The laws which have been imposed on indi«i 
viduals of your religion have been different in 
the several parts x)f the world: often they have 
been dictated by the interest of the day^ But, 

Mi 



( 132 ) 



as an assembly like the present, has no precedent* 
" in the annals of Christianity, so will you be 
judged, for the first time, with justice, and you 
" will see your fate irrevocably fixed by a Christian 
Prince. The wish of His Majesty is, that you 
should be Frenchmen ; it remains with you to 
" accept of the proffered title, without forgetting 
" that, to prove unworthy of it, would be renounc* 
ing it altogether. 

You will hear thequestions submitted to you; 
" your duty is to answer the whole truth on every 
" one of them. Attend, and never lose sight of 
" that which we are going to tell you ; that, when a 
monarch equally firm and just, who knows every 
thing, and who punishes or recompences every 
" action, puts questions to his subjects, these would 
" be equally guilty and blind to their true interests^ 
if they were to disguise the trath in the least. 
" The intention of His Majesty is. Gentlemen, 
that you should enjoy the greatest freedom in 
** your deliberations: your answei*s will be trans- 
** mitted to us by your President, when they hava 
** been put in regular form. 