

" To carry this design into execution, we have 
" determined to call together an assembly of the 

p 



( 106 ) 



principal Jews, and tQ make our intentions 
" known to them by commissioners whom we 

shall name for that purpose, and who shall, at 
" the same time, collect their opinions as to the 
" means they deem the fittest, to re-establish 
" among their brethren the exercise of mechanical 
** arts and useful professions, in order to replace, 
*' by an honest industry, the shameful resources to 
" w hich many of them resorted, from generation 
" to generation, these many centuries. 

" To this end, 

" On the report of our Grand Judge, Minister 
" of Justice, of our Minister for the interior, 

** Our Council of State being heard, 

" We have decreed, and do decree as follows; 

" Art. L There is a suspension for a year, from 
" the date of the present decree, of uU executions 
** of judgment and bond -obligations, except so far 
•* as to prevent limitation, obtained against hus- 
" bandmen, not traders, of the departments of La 
" Sarre, La Roer, Mont Terrible, Upper and 
" Lower Rhine, Rhine and Moselle, and Vosges, 
whenever the bonds entered into by these hus- 
** bandmen are in favour of Jews. 

" 11. There shall be fonued, on the 15th of July 
" next, in our gt)od city of Paris, an assembly of 
individuals professing the Jewish religion and 
" I'esiding in the French territorj% 



( 107 ) 



" 111, The members of this assembly, of the 
" number fixed in the annexed List, shall be cho- 

sen in the departments therein named, and no- 
«* minated by the prefects from among the rabbis, 
" the land-holders, and other Jews, the most dis- 
" tinguished by their integrity and their know- 
" ledge. 

" IV. Im all the other departments of our em- 
" pire, not mentioned in the aforesaid table, and 

where men of the Jewish persuasion should re- 
" side to the number of one hundred, and less 

than five hundred, the prefect may name a depu- 

ty for every five hundred, and for a higher num- 
** ber, up to one thousand, he may name four 
** deputies, and so on. 

" V. The deputies thus named shall be in Pa- 

ris before the 10th of July, and shall send no- 
" tice of their arrival, and of their place of resi- 
" dence, to the secretary's office of our Minister of 
^* the Interior, who shall acquaint them of the 
" place, day, and hour of the meeting. 

VI, Our Minister for the Interior is charged 

with the execution of the present decree. 

(Signed) " NAPOLEON- 

" By the Emperor. 
(Signed) " H. B. Maret. 

" Secretart/ / 5/a/«." 

p2 



( 108 ) 



List of the Number of Jews to be returned to the 
Assembly of Individuals of the Jewish persuasion^ 
whose Meeting has been ordered by His Majesty, 



Names of the Departments. Number of Deputies to be sent. 

Upper Rhine - .- .- --12 
Lower Rhiae - -- -- --15 

Mont Tonnerre ------ 9 

Khinie and Moselle 4 

Sarre - 1 

Roer - - - 1 

Moselle - - 5 

Metirtbe - 7 

Vo^65 7 

Gironde - - 2 

Lower Pyrenees ------ 2 