

I shall, then, with pleasure, introduce them here. 



( 157 ) 



I shall, iii the like manner, and immediately 
after each sitting, give the different writings rela- 
tive to the questions debated. 

Reflections of M. Baruch Cerf-Berr, Deputy to 
tJie Jewish Assembly convened at Paris by Order 
of His Majesty the Emperor. 

It is under the auspicious pi*otection of Napo- 
leon the Great, of that hero whom Providence 
has sent in his mercy to regenerate the French 
empire — that hero, equally wonderful by his 
" profound genius and by his promptitude in ex- 
ecution, and who was destined to fix irrevocably 
" the fate of Europe, that this assembly was formed: 
" it is to our august Sovereign's tender solicitude 
" for the welfare of his faithful subjects, that we 
" are indebted for the happiness of being, for the 
first time, assembled together to represent a 
" part of the nation which, differing from their fel- 
low citizens in religious opinions, are not sur- 
passed by them in love for the sacred person of 
our august Sovereign, or in zeal for the public 
welfare. 

" At the same time General and Soldier, pro- 
found Legislator and consummate Politician, 
His Majesty has formed, in his high wisdom, the 



( 158 ) 



*' means of conciliating the diversity of religions 
**with the public welfare, and binding together 
those divergent opinions, which, nevertheless, 
" tend to the same aim through different ways. 

" Catholics and Lutherans, Jews and Calvinists, 
" are considered by His Majesty as children of the 
same father: he leaves to the Supreme Being the 
" right of calling them to account for their opini- 
«'ons; they enjoy in safety tlie same rights and 
protection, and share equally his paternal atten- 
tion; His Majesty acknowledges no difference 
among them, except that which results from vir- 
" tue and from talents. 

" In reading the annals of history, the most ob- 
durate heart must feel for the misfortunes which 
" we have experienced ; but tears are dried up; the 
" heart is relieved when the reader reaches the age 
" of Napoleon. His Majesty has been pleased not 
only to make us forget hardships which degrade 
mankind, but also to put us in full enjoyment 
of all the rights of French citizens : his wish is 
" to unite us more closely with the greatest nation 
on earth, so as to form but one people. 
" But, to second the benevolent views of His Ma- 
" jesty, how many reforms must be made !....How 
" many abuses are to be corrected !....A11 those in- 
" conveniencies, produced, no doubt by the vari- 
" ous political systems under which we have 



( 159 ) 



^ groaned, have been deeply felt by the celebrated 
writers of our persuasion, and by distinguished 

" persons among our brethren, who luive noticed 
them long ago, but who did not judge tl»c?m in- 
superable. 

And truly under what pretence can a man re- 
" fuse his whole support to a government whicliin- 
" sures him the enjoyment of his rights and of his 
" property? The venerable father, Cerf-Berr, pit) ved 
" that his heart w^s truly French ; that he knew the 
obligations which men contract informing part of 
^ society, when he sought for, when he courted, 
the honour of being useful to his country, even 
at a period when the Jewish nation was groaning 
under an oppressive system.. 