

Amembersaid that certainly govern nen should 
be made acquainted with all the obstacles which 
stood in the way of unions of tha nat ure. 

Another thought that sdl the members who 
composed that assembly were sufficiently enlight* 
enedon their religion, to deliver their opinion accor* 
ding to their conscience. He deemed the ansvrer 
of the commission perfectly correct, and demanded 
that it should be put to the vote in the smne mode 
as the others had been. 

A member declared, that, in questions of this 
importance, the Rabbies should be more particu- 
larly consulted, in order to be better fixed in the 
true principles. 

Another observed, that Rabbies delivering their 
Opinion like other members, must rest satisfied 
with the inftuence their profession gave them, 
without attempting to increase it. 

A Rabbi intreated his fellow-doctors to discuss 
the question with moderation and docility, as be^ 
came true disciples of Moses; he declared that 
he too would stand forth the champion of religion, 
but that he thought it also a duty incumbent uixm 
him to expose publicly the additions which de« 
gradeit, and which he attribute, with the celebra- 



( 144 ) 

ted Mendelshon, to the pestilent breath of supers 
stition, which had often shewn itself opcnlj. 

A member said, " We shall always hear the 
" Rabbies with pleasure; but their opinion must 
" not have more authority than that of the other 
** members/' 

Another added, that a commission having beeri 
named to prepare the answers, and this commis- 
sion presenting them afterwards to the assembly, 
every member was at liberty to deliver his senti- 
ments, and that, consequently, in the deliberations, 
one vote could not have more weight than another. 

A Rabbi said, that, whenever his feUow-doctoi*s 
delivered an opinion, they should adduce proofs to 
support it ; and consequently that the assembly 
should not admit contrary opinions, unless sup- 
ported by arguments which should refute theirs. 

Several members spake in support of the ansT* er 
proposed by the commission, and at the same time 
approved the- principles laid down by the last 
speaker. 

A Rabbi said, that marriage is a religious act, 
and that the pei-sons united in wedlock, must be 
of the same religion. 

A member stated tl»at it did not appear to him, 
that this necessary condition is expressed in any 
law. " ThedifFerence of religion," says he, " cer- 
" tainly makes those unions more difficult, but 

they cannot be considered as forbidden on that 



( 145 ) 



account ; it will be sufficient to point out these 
" obstacles in the answer/* 

Another observed that, since no law forbade that 
kind of marriages, they must be lawfuL 

A member said that the first precept of the law 
is increcLse and multiply; that in the sacred writings 
he finds no religious ceremonies relative to mar- , 
riage ; that some, indeed, are prescribed in the . 
Talmud, but only to enliven the festivity of the ' 
day, and make it more agreeable to the married 
couple, to their parents, and to their friends. 