

This proposition was adopted; the President 
suspended the discussion, and prepared a new 
answer with the assistance of the Rabbies and the 
members of the commission. 

After a lapse of three-quarters of an hour, the 
President announced that the discussion was re- 
sumed; he read the new answer to the third ques- 

u 2 



( 148 ) 



tion. M. Lyon Maix traudated it verbally into 
German. The question was called for on every 
side. The President put the new answer to the 
vote, and it was adopted almost unanimously. 
The President then called for the reading of a de- 
claration which he thought should be affixed to the 
answers: the assembly approved it by acclamation, 
and with shouts of Long live the Emperor! This 
declaration was translated into German by M. 
Lyon Marx. 

The assembly also ordered that this declaration, 
and the answers to the three first questions, should 
be inserted in the minutes of the proceedings of 
the day. In consequence these four documents 
were annexed to that day's minutes. 

The President proposed afterwards to name a 
commission to prepare the ceremonies of a festival 
to be celebrated in the synagogues, on the 15th of 
August next, in commemoration of His Majesty's 
birth day, and of the re*establishment of religious 
worship, as one of the greatest blessings of his 
reign. 

The assembly adopted this proposition unani- 
mously, and the President named as Commission- 
ers to prepare this festival, MM. J. Rodrigues, sen, 
of La Gironde; Gumpel Levy, of Nancy, May, 
jun. of Paris, Sabaton Constantini, of Marseilles^ 



( i4d ) 



«nd Aaron Schmol, of Paris, who are to €on$aIt 
irith the Adminisirators of Synagogues. 

A member reminded the assembly that in the 
sitting of the 26th of July, he made a proposition 
analogous to this subject, the discussion of which 
had been adjourned to another meeting; he de* 
manded that it should be now taken into consider* 
ation. 

The President referred the propositions of this 
member to the Commissioners, whose report would 
be received at the next meeting^ which the Presi« 
dent fixed for Thurisday the 7th. instant. The 
sitting closed at half past five. 

Declaration adopted by the Assembly, and the 
Answers to the three first Questions^ 

OECLARATION. 

Resolved, by the French deputies professing the 
religion of Moses, that the following Declaration 
shall precede the answers returned to the ques« 
tions proposed by the Commissioners of His Im- 
perial and Royal Majesty. 

The assembly y impressed with a deep sense of 

gratitude^ love, respect, and admiration, for the 



( 150 ) 



" sacred person of kis Imperial and Royal Majesty^ 
declares^ in the name of all Frenchmen prof essing 
the religion of Moses, that they are fully deter^ 
mined to prove worthy of the favours His Majesty 
intends for them, by scrupulously cortforming to 
his paternal intentions; that their religion makes 
it their duty to consider the law of the prince as 
the supreme law in civil and political matters; that, 
consequently, should their religious code, or its 
various interpretations, contain civil or political 
" commands, at variance with those of the French 
" code, those commands would, of course, ceetse to in* 
^^Jluence and govern them,since they must, above all^ 
acknowledge and obey the laws of the prince. 
" That, in consequence of this principle, the Jews 
" have, at all times, considered it their duty to obey 
*' the laws of the state, and that, since the revolution^ 
they, like all Frenchmen, have acknowledged no 
" others:' 