



FIRST QUESTION. 

Is it lawful for Jews to marry more than one wife? 

ANSWBR. 

It is not lawful for Jews to marrv more than one 



( 151 ) 

wife : in all European countries they conform to 
the general practice of marrying only one. 

Moses does not command expressly to take 
several ; but he does not forbid it. He seems even 
to adopt that custom as generally prevailing, since 
he settles the rights of inheritance betvireen chil- 
dren of different wives. Although this practice 
still prevails in the East, yet their antient doctors 
have enjoined them to restrain from taking more 
than one wife, except when the man is enabled by 
his fortune to maintain several. 

The case has been different in the West; tha 
wish of adopting the customs of the inhabitants of 
this part of the world has induced the Jews to 
renounce Polygamy. But as several individuals 
still indulged in that practice, a synod was conve- 
ned at Worms in the eleventh century, composed 
of one hundred Rabbies, with Guerson at their 
head. This assembly pronounced an anathema 
against every Israelite who should, in future, take 
more than one wife. 

Although this prohibition was not to last for 
ever,, the influence of European manners has uni- 
versally revailed. 



( 1«2 ) 



SECOND question; 

Is divorce allowed by the Jewish Religion? Is di^ 
wrce valid when not pronounced by Courts of Justice 
by Virtue of Laws in Contradiction with those of the 
French Code? 

ANSWER. 

Repudiation is allowed by the law of Moses; 
but it is not valid if not previously pronounced 
by the French code. 

In the eyes of every Israelite, without excep- 
tion, submission to the prince is the iirst of du- 
ties. It is a principle generally acknowledged 
among them, that, in every thing relating to civil 
or political interests, the law of the state is the su« 
preme law. Before they were admitted in France 
to share the rights of all citizens, and when they 
lived under a particular legislation which set them 
at liberty to follow their religious customs, they 
had the facility of repudiating their wives; but it 
was extremely rare to see it put into practice. 

Since the revolution, they have acknowledged no 
other laws on this head but those of the empire. 
At the epocha when they were admitted to the 
rank of citizens, the Rabbies and the principal 
Jews appeared before the municipalities of their 



( 158 ) 



respective places of abode, and took oath to 
conform, in every thing to the laws, and to ac* 
knowledge no other rules in all civil matters. 

Consequently they can no longer consider a$ 
valid the repudiation pronounced by their Rabbie$, 
since, to make it valid, it must have been pre» 
viously pronounced by competent tribunals; for, 
in like manner as by an arrete of the Consular 
Government, the llabbies could not impart the 
matrimonial benediction till it appeared to them 
that the civil contract had been perf<mned before 
the civil officer, in like manner they cannot pro* 
nounce repudiation, until it appears to them that 
it has already been pronounced by a sentence which 
gives it validity. Supposing even that the afore- 
said arr^/^ had been silent on this head, still the 
rabbinical repudiation could not be valid ; for, ac« 
coi'ding to Rabbies who have written ofi the civil 
code of the Jews, such as Joseph Csurro in th^ 
Abeneser^ repudiation is valid only, in case there 
should be no opposition of any kind. And as the 
law of the state would form an opposition, in point 
of civil interests — since one of the parties could 
avail himself or herself of it against the other— «it 
necessarily follows that, under the influence of the 
civil code, rabbinical repudiation cannot be valid. 
Consequently, since the time the Jews have begun 
to enter into engagements before the civil officer, 