

" 7 he choice which His Majesty has been pleas- 
" ed to make of you. Gentlemen Commissioners, tc> 
" con^ ey to us his intentions, adds a new value to 
*^ the favour he intends for the Jews. The most 

unlimited confidence will reign between us, in 
" the course of our communications. 

" While this confidence pleads some excuse for 

our involuntary enots, it will be a pledge of the 
"purity of our intentions. 

Have the goodness, Gentlemen Commissioners. 

to convey our sentiments to His Majesty, and t6 

assure him that he does not reign over subje^bts 

more faithful, or more devoted to his sacred p^r- 
" son, than we are.^^ 

The discourse of the President being ended^ 
the hall resounded with repeated cries of Long liv9 
the Emperor* 

The Commissioners of His Majesty have request- 
ed an official receipt for the questions they laid oil 
the table. 

It was given by the President. 

Many members manifested their intention of 
delivering their sentiments before the Commis- 
sioners. But they left the assembly amidst the 
criesof Long live the Emperor? They were conduct* 



( 139 ) 

by the same deputation which had introduced 
them into the halL 

The assembly proceeded afterwards to form a 
commission to prepare the ground work of the 
discussions, which are to take place on the Com- 
munications which the Commissionei*s of His Ma- 
jesty have made to the assembly. The President 
names to compose it — MM. Berr-Isaac-Berr, 
S^gre, Rabbi, David Zinzheimer, Rabbi, Abraham 
Andi*ade, Rabbi, Jacob Lazare, Jacob Gondehaux 
Berr, Moses Levy, Rpdrigues, Samuel Jacob 
Guediglia, Micb^l Berr, Baruch»Cerf-Berr, and 
JLyon Marx. 

Previous to the rising of the assembly, the Prc- 
isident observed, that it was useless for him to ob- 
ijerve, that no answer will be sent to the Commis- 
sioners, without having been previously submit- 
ted to the deliberation of the assembly. 

The President closed the sitting at four o'clock, 
and announced to the deputies that they will be 
acquainted, by letters of convocation, with the 
day and hour of the next meeting. 



Sitting of the 4th of August^ 1S06. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock ; 
one of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 

T 2 



140 ) 



sitting of the 29th of July last, which passed with-* 
out any objection. 

The President named MM. May, of Paris, Sa- 
muel Wittersheim, and Gumpel Levy : as Conunis- 
sionersto maintain order in the assembly. 

The President read a letter from His Excellency 
tlie Minister of the Interior, acquainting him, that 
His Majesty the Emperor and King had consented 
to admit the assembly into his presence, in a hody^ 
whenever its laboui-s shall be sufficiently forward- 
ed to promise some results. The readingof this let- 
ter was followed by repeated acclamations of Long 
live the Emperor^ long live the Imperial Family. 

The President informed the assembiy that a 
secretary would read the answers which the com- 
mission, named to prepare the ground-work of the 
discussions of the assembly, on the questions pro- 
posed by His Majrsty^s Commissioners, had thought 
fit to return to the thrive first questions. He in- 
treated the assembly to remain calm during the 
discussion, and invited those membe*^ who may 
chuse to deliver their sentiments, to give in their 
names at the table. 