

X 



( 154 ) 



no one, attached to religious practices, can repudi- 
ate bis wife but by a double divorce — that pro- 
nounced by the law of the state, and that prescribed 
by the law of Moses; so that under this point of 
view, it may be justly affirmed, that the Jewish re- 
ligion agrees on this subject with the civil code. 



THIRD QUESTION. 

Can a Jewess marry a Christian^ and a Jew a 
Christian woman? or does the law allow the Jews to 
intermarry only among themselves? 

ANSWER. 

The law does not say that a Jewess cannot 
marrj'^ a Christian, nor a Jew a Christian woman ; 
nor does it state that the Jews can only interman-y 
among themselves. 

The only marriages expressly forbidden by the 
law, are those with the seven tTanaanean nations, 
witii Amon and Moab, and with the Egyptians. 
The prohibition is absolute concerning the seven 
Canaanean nations: with regard to Amon and Moab, 
it is limited, according to many Talmudists, to the 
men of those nations, and does not extend to the 
women; it is even thought that these last would 
h^ve embraced the Jewish religion. As to Egyp- 



( 155 ) 



tians,tlie prohibition is limited lo the third genera- 
tion. The prohibition in general applies only to 
nations in idolatry. The Talmud detlares for- 
mally that modern nations are not to be considered 
as such, since they woi^ship, like us, the God of 
heaven and earth. And, accordingly, there has 
been, at several periods, intermarriages between 
Jews and Christians in France, in Spain, and in 
Germany: these marriages were sometimes tolera- 
ted, and sometimes forbidden by the laws of those 
sovereigns, who had received Jews into their do* 
minions. 

Unions of this kind are still found in France; 
but we cannot dissemble that the opinion of the 
Rabbies is against these marriages. According to 
their doctrine, although the religion of Moses 
has not forbidden tlie Jews from intermarrying 
with nations not of their religion, yet, as mandage^ 
according to the Talmud, requires religious cere- 
monies called Kiduschim^ with the benediction 
used in such cases, no marriage can be religiously 
valid unless these ceremonies have been perform- 
ed. This could not be done towards persons who 
would not both of them consider these ceremonies 
as sacred; and in that case the married couple 
could separate without the religious divorce ; they 
would then be considered as married civillf/ but 
not religiously. 



( 156 ) 

Such is tht opinion of the Kabbies, members 
of this assembly. In general they would be no 
more inclined to bless tlie union of a Jewess with 
a Christian, or of a Jew with a Christian woman, 
than Catholic priests themselves would be dis- 
fiosed to sanction unions of this kind. The 
Rabbies acknowledge, however, that a Jew, who 
marries a Christian woman, does not cease on 
that account, to be considered as a Jew by his 
brethren, any more than if he had married a Jew- 
ess civilli/ and not religiouHly. 



After the sittings of the 26th and 29th of July, 
I should naturally have placed many discourses, 
fiome of which, from unforeseen circumstances, 
could not be delivered in the assembly. I was 
forced, much against my intention, by the press of 
matter, to notice them briefly, as may have been 
already remarked ; but many persons having ex- 
pressed a wish to see them inserted in this collec- 
tion, I have been induced to accede to it, particu- 
larly as the sentiments which they contain are ho- 
nourable to the authors, and prove their zeal for 
the interest of our brethren whom they represent, 
and their dutiful attachment to the wise govern- 
ment which protects them. 