

One of the Secretaries read the answer proposed 
by the commission to the first question. M. L.yon 
Marx, one of the interpreters of the assembly and 
member of the commission, read the literal ti*ans- 



( 141 ) 

la tion he had made of it into German. The discus- 
sion opened on the first question. 

A member ascended the tribune^ and said, that 
though the answer was within the meaning and 
sense of the law, yet the wording of it was not suffi- 
ciently clear. The President ased if he had another 
to propose in its stead ; he answered in the nega* 
tive. 

Another member expressed his surprize, thatthe 
member who had just sat down should not point 
out in what particulai-s he found the wording re- 
prehensible. A third observed that the French 
word in the question, which means lawful^ more 
particularly alluded to religious law ; the answer 
should be made with a view to this meaning. 
*^ Nobody," said another, having otTered to speak 
against the sense of the answer proposed by the 
commission, it ought to be put to the vote.'' This 
proposition was seconded, and put to the vote; and 
the answer to the first question, was adopted almost 
unanimously, without any alteration. 

The answer to the second question was read. M. 
Lvon Marx read, as before, the translation he had 
made of it into the German language ; no one offer- 
ing to s|>eak on the answ er proposed by the com- 
mission, it w as put to the vote, and passed unani- 
jnously. 

Oi^e of the si?cretaries read the answer to the 



1 



( 142 ) 



third question ; M, Lyon Marx read the German 
literal translation he had made of it. A. Rabbi 
proposed that whenever principles purely theologi- 
cal should be presented for discussion, his brethren 
the Rabbies should be more particularly consulted. 
Is it not evident/^ says he, " that if astronomical 
" subjects were proposed, you would consult only 
*' astronomers? Why then should you not leave tq 
theologiai^s, whatever relates to religion He 
thought that questions of this nature should not be 
determined by the mjgority of votes, 

The President observed to this speaker, that the 
principle of the majority of votes was inherent to 
the nature of every deliberative assembly, and that 
it was impossible to depart from it. 

One of the Secretaries read the written opinioq 
of the Rabbies, members of the assembly, on the 
third question. 

A member said, that government, in forming 
that assembly, had not composed it entirely of 
Rabbies; it had selected also land-holders and 
other pei-sons known by their integrity and by 
their learning; that, on the other hand, the two 
answers were written nearly on the same principles; 
since both acknowledged thj^t Christians were our 
brethren. He thought that the two answers might 
be combined together, so as to make only one. 
A Rabbi expressed as his opinion that the answer 



( 143 ) 

did not include all the bearings 6f the question; 
he thought that it should contain observations oil 
the probable consequences of such marriages. 