

As to us, our most ardent wish is to be able to 
report to the Emperor, that, among individuals 
of the Jewish persuasion, he can reckon as many 
** faithftd subjects, determined to conform in eveiy 
^ thing to the laws^ and to the morality, which 



( laa ) 

^'^ught to regulate the oondnisi of idl Fraodv- 

men/' 

One of the Secretaries res(d afterwavds the fol- 
lowing twelve questiom propoeed by theCoiimua* 
sioners* 

Questions proposed to the Asserphly of the Jem by 
the Commissioners named hy His Mqfesty the 
peror and King^ to transact whativMr conesma thenw 

%sk. h it lawful &r Jews to marrj more than 
one wife ? 

and. Is diycHToe allowed by the Jewidi religion? 

Is divorce valid, although not pranemiced hf 
warts of Justice, and by virtue of laws in con- 
tradiction with the French code? 

3d, Can a Jewess^ marry a Christian, or a Jew a 
Christian woman? 

Or has the law ordei«d that die Jws rimM 
only intermarry among themselves ? 

4th« In the eyes of Jews are Frenchmi^n con^ 
sidered as brethren or as strangers ? 

dtlu In either case what conduct does tlwir law 
prescribe towards Frenchmen not of their rdi- 
gion? 

fith. Do the Jew9 bom iaFiancey and treated 



( 134 ) 

by the law as French citizens, acknowledge Fmnca 
as their country? 

Are they bound to defend it ? 

Are they bound to obey the laws, and to follow 
the directions of the civil code? 

7th, What kind of Police-jurisdiction have the 
Rabbies among the Jews ? 

What judicial power do they exercise among 
them? 

9th. Are the forms of the elections of the Rab«- 
bies and their police-jurisdiction, regulated by the 
law, or are they only sanctioned by custom ? 

10th. Are there professions from which the Jews 
are excluded by their law ? 

11th. Does the \aw forbid the Jews fronx taking 
usury from their brethren? 

12th. Does it forbid or does it allon^ usury to- 
wards strangers ? 

During the reading of these questions, the 2s% 
sembly manifested by unanimous and spontanea 
ous emotions, how deeply it was afiected by the 
doubt which the questions seemed to convey, as to 
the attachment of Frenchmen, following the law of 
Moses, for their fellow citizens, and for their coun*> 
try, and as to their sense of the duty by which they 
are bound to defend it. 

-The assembly was not able to conceal the^ 
emotions caused by the sixth question, in which it 



( 135 ) 



is asked if Jews bom in France and treated by the 
law as French citizens, acknowledge France as 
their country, and if they arc bound to defend it. 
The whole assembly unanimously exclaimed,— 
Even to death. 

The reading of the questions being ended, the 
President addressed the following discourse to the 
Commissioners of His Majesty the Emperor and 
King. 

Gentlemen Commissioners, 
" We have listened with all the attention we 
could command to the intentions of his Majesty 

" the Emperor, which you have just communicated 

" tons. 

" Chosen by this assembly as the interpreter 
of its sentiments, 1 must assure you, in the name 
of all those who compose it, that, when His Majes- 
ty determined to call us together in his capital^ 
in order to further the accomplishment of his 
glorious designs, we saw, with inexpressible 
joy, this occasion of doing away many errors and 
putting an end to many prejudices. 