

A Rabbi thought that marriages with Chris- 
tians were forbidden. He requested the assembly 
to consider that when Moses forbad those unions 
with the proscribed nations, he gave, as the mo- 
tive of this prohibition, the fear and apprehension 
lest, by the seduction of women, men should be led 
astray from the the law of the God in whose name 
he spoke ; that, consequently, the probability of se- 
duction still existing in unions: with other nations, 
the prohibition still existed likewise. 

Another member spake on the same side of the 
question ; he begged of the assembly not to hurry 
the decision, but to give lime to the deputies to 
weigh the question maturely; he proposed to ad- 
journ the deliberation to the following day. 

Another began by reading the four first verm 
of the 7th chapter of Deuteronomy ; then he said, 

u 



( 146 ) 



" Why should we supply to Christians the prohibi- 
" tion contained in these verses? Are we com- 
"missioned to destroy them? not to give them any 

quarter? Do they not u'orship the same God we 
" adore? Surely if God wei^e to send us a second 
*' Moses, far from tracing a line of separation be- 
" tween us, he would tell us — 'Love the Christians ; 
*' cherish them as your brethren ; uiiitewilh them; 
" consider them as children of the same family. 
** You all acknowledge that they are no idolators ; 
*' that they worship, as you do, the Creator of hea- 
" ven and earth; that they are your brethren and 
" your benefactors/ What more is necessary to 
" make marriages lawful betM'een Jews and C^hris- 
" tians? U ill you say that the present Rabbies do 
** not consider them as such? 1 he answer iramed 

by the commission contains this declaration. 

" Great stress has been laid on the domestic in- 
" conveniences which would result from such 
" marriages; but has a word been said of the great 
" political advantages they would produce ? If 
" both should be put into the scale, could the su- 
" periority of the last be doubted? Certainly not: 
" we must, then, adopt the answer proposed by the 
" commission, which contains the whole truth/' 

This opinion was strongly supported by many 
members. 

A Rabbi answered that truth must be told, let 



( U7 ) 

the consequences be what they may. He declared, 
as his opinion, that marriages with Christians are 
not lawful. 

A member said that it would be a difficult 
matter to come to a resolution, if the question be 
not regularly proposed. He demanded that the 
President should put the first part of it tothevote. 

Several Members demanded the priority for the: 
answer of the Rabbies, others for that of the com- 
mission. — [Some tumult took placed] 

A member proposed to adjourn the discussion. 

Another proposed, on the contrsuy, that the de- 
bate should be closed, and that the assembly should 
proceed to^'a division. 

Another insisted that the assembly could not 
rise till the question was decided. 

Another proposed to suspend the discussion ; to 
call the Rabbies to the table, in order to unite the 
two answers into one, in such a manner, as to con- 
ciliate the principles advanced on both sides of the 
question. 