

The President quitted the chair at five o'clock, 
and announced the next meeting for Tuesday the 
12th inst. at nine o'clock. 

Here follow the answers adopted to the fourth, 
fifth, sixth, and seventh questions proposed to the 
assembly by the Commissioners of His Royal and 
Imperial Majesty. 



FOURTH QUESTION. 

In the eyes of JewSj are Frenchmen considered 
as their brethren f Or are they considered as siran^ 
gers? 

ANSWER. 

In the eyes of Jews Frenchmen are their brc- 
tibren, and are not strangers. 

The true spirit of the law of Moses is consonant 
to this mode of considering Frenchmen. 



( 177 ) 



Wheii the Israelites formed a settled and in- 
dependant nation, their law made it a rule for them 
to consider strangers as their brethren. 

With the most tender carefOr their welfare; their 
lawgiver commands to love them, (13) " Love ye 

therefore the strangers/' says he to the Israelites^ 

for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt/* 

Respect and benevolence towards strangers are 
inforced by Moses, not as an exhortation to the 
practice of social morality only, but as an obliga« 
tion imposed by God himself. " When ye reap 

the harvest of your land^^ (14) says he to them, 

thou shalt not make clean riddance of the cor-* 
" ners of the field when thou reapest^ neither shalt 

thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest; 

thou shalt leave them unto the poor and to the 
"stranger; I am the Lord thy God. (15) When 
" thou cuttest down thy harvest in the fields and hast 

forgot a sheaf in the fields thou shalt not go hack 
" again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, /or 
" the fatherless^ and the widow: that the Lord thy 
** God may bless the tvork of thy hands. (16) Thou 

shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him. 

(13) Dcut X. 19. Lev. xix. 34. Exod. xxii. 21. xxiii. 9, 

(14) Levit. xxiii. 22. 

(15) Deut. xxiv. 19. 

(16) Exod. xxii. 81, 

A ▲ 



( 178 ) 

" (17) The jLord your God doth execute the judg* 
" ment of the fatherless and widow ^ and love th the 
** stranger, in giving him food and raiment. Love 
V ye therefore the si ranger; for ye were strangers in 
" the land of Egypt 

To these sentiments of benevolence towards 
the Stranger^ IVIoses has added the precept of gene- 
ral love for mankind : Love thy fellow creature 
as thyself. 

David also expresses himself in these terms: 
(18) The Lord is good to all : and his tender 
mercies are over all his works J' This doctrine is 
also professed by the Talmud. 

" We are bound/^ says a Talmudist, " to love as 
" our brethren all those who observe the (19) 
" Noachides^ whatever their religious opinions may 

otherwise be. We are bound to visit their sick, 
" to burj^ their dead, to assist their poor, like those 
" of Israel. In short, there is no act of humanity 

which a true Israelite is not bound to perform to- 
" wards those who observe the Noac hides. What 
are these precepts ? To abstain from idolatry, from 
blasphemy, from adultery, not to kill or hurt our 
neighbours, neither to rob or to deceive, to eat only 