

the whole assembly. 

" IV. The Saturday next after the 26th of July, 

shall, every year, be commemorated as an ex-» 
" traordinary festival by all the Jews residing in 
" the French empire 

" V. The Rabbies, sitting among us, are re- 
" quested to compose a new prayer, in form of a 
" benediction, for the welfkre of His Majesty the 
" Emperor, Her Majesty the Empress, and their 
" august family, which shall be solemnly addressed 

to God on that day. 

"VI. A copy of this present Arrete^ shall be 
** most humbly presented to His Majesty, with the 
^' Address of the whole assembly.^^ 



( 165 ) 



Discourse of M, Berr Isaac Berr Deputy of tM 
Department of La Meurthe. 

" Gentlemen, 
More than seventeen centuries have elapsed 

** since the ever memorable epocha when, by victo- 
nous and foreign legions, the Jewish people was 
subjugated and reduced from a tributary to a 
servile condition, and scattered by the storm of 

" adversity, over the face of the habitable globe; 

" always unfortunate, always persecuted, always 
faithfully adhering to the religion of its ances- 

" tors, in spite of tortures and of sufferings, it at- 

" fords, to this very day, a striking phenomenon 
incomprehensible to human reason; it stands 
like a column, erect amidst the wrecks of sue- 

" ceeding centuries; andwhile,in tracing the origin 

*' of this people, wereascend to the cradle^f man- 
kind, it should seem as if its remains are to 
be preserved until the day of universal destruc- 

" tion. 

" Our ancestors, for a considerable time, had to 
encounter injustices and the misfortunes produ- 
" ced by oppression ; we ought to admire their 
" conduct while we congratulate our brethren on 
their better fate; we ought, above all, to return 
our thanks to Providence, who has not suflbred 



( 166 ) 



" that the aged tree should be torn up by the roots, 
though it has often permitted that its branches 
should severely suffer. 

" The Jews have been alternately persecuted and 
" degraded as a punishment for their faithful adhe- 
" rence to the religion of their fathers; they ceased 
" to be considered as men in proportion as they wish- 
" ed to remain Jews. Mixed among civilized na- 

tions, they would have proved useful citizens, had 

they not been prevented by a barbarous policy. 

In fact, humiliation and misfortune did often real- 
" ly degrade us. To these baneful causes is to be 
" attributed the degraded state in which many 

of our brethren still languish in some countries. 
" The progress of reason and of justice among 

the nations of Europe will put an end to these 
" sufferings; but, during our misfortunes, and inthe 
" times of our slavery, religious constancy was not 
" the only characteristic of our fathere. The 

splendid light of talents, the sacred flame of vir- 
" tue, shone among the unfortunate Israelites, 
" under the iron-hand of oppression. Our anna's 
" are stained with blood, since the taking of Jei ii- 
" salem by Titus ; in reading them over, we do not 