

to our august Enrperor. 

" Let us all together invoke the Almighty^ the 
" God of Armies, the Guide of Kings, terrible in 

his judgments, and return our grateful thanks, 

that he has been pleased to pour incessantly on 
" the great Napoleon the unspeakable treasures of 
" his grace, of his wisdom, and of his might. 

As to you. Gentlemen Commissionei-s, who 
" have been intrusted with so important and so 

interesting a mission, deign to convey to govem- 

ment, and to its august and immortal head, our 
" sentiments and our wishes; assure him of our 
" dutiful and profound gratitude, and our readi- 
" ness to further, by all the means in our power, 
" his benevolent views and his salutary designs^ 

" A noble task has been imposed on you, Gen- 
" tlemen ; you are here, sent by His Majesty to 
" communicate to the assembly the questions sub- 

mitted to its judgment ; this mission is for you 
" an honourable testimony of the esteem of a So- 
" vereign, who knows how to appreciate talents, 
" services, and virtue. Reason, justice, and the 
" love of public weal will guide your steps: we, 

too, shall strive to make these the grounds of 
" our dutiful communications. Happy will be our 

z 



( no ) 



" ^ate, if, on leading this hall, we carry with m 
" the heart'soothing consciousness of having con- 
" tributed to increase, in the bosom of thegeneral 
" civil society, the number of just, laborious, vir- 
tuous, and useful men ; and in having: assisted in 
doing away the traces of eighteen centuries of 
" persecution, from among a class of men, who 
have alwaj^ been, and always will be, attached 
" to the religion of their fore-fathers; this new 
" benejfit will, in future times, mark the most bril- 
" liant period of our history 



Sitting of Augmt 7, 1806. 

The President took the chair at three quarters 
past twelve. One of the Secretaries read the mi- 
nutes of the sitting of the 4th of the month. 

The President demanded if any member had 
any obser^'ations to make on them. 

No one offering to speak, they were put to the 
vote, and adopted unanimously. 

The President named, as Commissionei's to. 
maintain order in the hall, MM. Auguste Ratis« 
bonne, Cadet Carcassonne, and Schawb,jun. 

M. Moses Levy, of Nancy, was requested, by 
the President, to give in the report of the Commis^^ 
sion on the answers to be returned to the fourth, 
fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth questions* 



( 171 ) 

He ascended the tribune, and submitted to the 
assembly the draft of the answer to the fourth 
question* 

M. Lyon Mai-x read the German translation, 
and M. Avigdor verbally translated the answer in- 
to Italian, 

A member thought that the answer was consi- 
derably too long, and contained matters quite fo« 
jreign to the question ; he demanded that it should 
again be referred to the Commission, with direc* 
tions to prepare another. 

Another member said, that the too great length 
of this answer is not its only fault ; it establishes 
a difference between Portuguese and German 
Jews, which ought to be suppressed; he concluded 
by supporting the motion of the last speaker. 