

One of the Secretaries read the answer proposed 
by the Commission to the fifth question. M. Lyon 



( 174 ) 



Marx read it in German, and M. Avigdor transia* 
ted it into Italian. 

A member wished to see an expression altered, 
which was done accordingly. After this correc- 
tion, the President put the answer to the vote, and 
it was adopted unanimously. 

The same Secretary read the answer to the sixth 
question* MM. Lyon Marx and Avigdor transla- 
ted it verbally, the first into German, the second 
into Italian. No objections being made to this 
answer, it was put to the vote, and adopted unani- 
mously. 

The President called afterwards for the reading 
of the answer to the seventh question. MM. Ly-* 
on Marx and Avigdor translated it likewise into 
German and into Italian, 

A member observed, that, in the answers to the 
former questions, allusions had been made to the 
order of things previous to the revolution, whcn-» 
ever the case made it necessary ; he thought that, in 
this answer, government should, in like manner, be 
made acquainted with the mode of choosing Ila1>-« 
bies before the revolution, and with that which 
J^as prevailed since, 

A member said, that a difference should be 
made between the officiating Rabbi who holds 
the first rank in a Jewish society, and the man 



( 175 



having only the title of Rabbi, who, ftltfao«^ 
equally learned as the first, is not distinguish* 
ed from the rest of the Jews; that, in this laisft 
point of view, the Rabbi was only an indivi- 
dual, like all others, while in the first instance^ 
the Rabbi became entitled to the consideration 
annexed to this rank, only by the votes of those 
who named him, whether simple individuals or 
administrators of charities. 

The board framed a new answer, whicih was 
also translated into German and into Italian. 

The President afterwards put it to the vote, and 
it was adopted by the majority. 

One of the Secretaries read the answer prepared 
by the Commission to the eighth question. 

M. Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. Avigdor into Italian. 

One of the members observed, that these 
translations contained contradictions, as to the 
functions of Rabbies, and demanded that the mis* 
take might be rectified. 

Another said, that the answerwas not sufficient-* 
ly explicit. One of the Secretaries attempted se^ 
veral altemtions, which he read successively ; they 
were all rejected. The answer was sent back to 
the Commission for revision. 

A deputy mentioned a writing circulated amon^ 
the membeirs by a stranger, and which had ap- 



( 176 ) 



peaxed in several new&^papers; he thought that 
the assembly should publicly disown the proposi-* 
tions it contained. Some members seconded this 
motion; others called for the order of the day. 
In the midst of the tumult which ensued, a mem- 
ber exclaimed that the assembly should be perfect- 
ly indifferent to writings which did not originate 
with its members. Others maintained contrary 
opinions. 