

A member complained that the Jews of the 
northern departments were particularly pointed at 
in the answer: he declared that, in the department 
in which he resided, although a northern one, 
Jews are as much esteemed and as much consider*^ 
ed as those of the south : he therefore requested 
that these distinctions should be expunged from 
tlie answer, which, with this alteration, he should 
approve. 

Another member proposed to refer the draft of 
the answer to another Commission, which should 
examine all the details it contained, and suppress 



( 172 ) 



whatever did not immediately fell within the 
meaning of the question. 

Another ascended the tribune ; he laid down 
the principles on which, according to his opinion, 
the answer ought to be framed, and read to the as-^ 
sembly the draft of another answer. 

A deputy observed, that the second part of the 
answer only had been the subject of animadver- 
sion; he therefore jproposed to suppress it altoge* 
ther, and to adopt the fir^ part alone, which, by 
itself, fulfilled every purpose. 

This proposition was supported by several mem- 
bers. The President observed, that when the 
Commission established a ditference between the 
Jews of the north and those of the south, it only 
meant to remark that these last have made greater 
progress in civilization, because their hardships 
were much less than the others ; he thought, in the 
mean time, ^vith the last speaker, that the first 
part of the answer might be adopted by itself. 

The President accoi-dingiy read a second time 
the first part of the answer prepared \>y the Com- 
niission. He afterwards requested M. Lyon Marx 
to inform, in German, those members who were not 
sufliciently acquainted with the Jprench language, 
that he was going to put to the vote the answer to 
the fourth question, consisting only of the first 
part, which he had just read. 



( 173 ) 



A member obtained leave to speak ; heobservect, 
that, in the circular letter of the 23d of July, ad- 
dresjsed hy His Excellency the Minister of khel In- 
terior to all the deputies, mention is made of three 
Scrutineers, who have been named accordingly* 
He vras surprized that the assembly should not 
vote by ballot, and demanded that that mode of 
collecting votes shoidd be exclusively adopted in 
the present discussions. 

The President observed to the last speaker, that 
recourse uas had to that mode, (which occasioned 
great dela v ) only when the shew of hands left some 
doubt ; but that it was useless when the majority 
was evident. 

The same speaker replied, that there was a great 
difference between deliberations on principal 
points, and those on acces^ry objects ; that, for 
the last, the shew of hands might be admitted, but 
that the twelve questions, being of the highest im- 
portance, the assembly ought to vote on the answers 
by way of ballot. 

The order of the day was called for. 

The President put to the vote, by shew of 
hands, the new draft of the answer to the fourth 
question : it was adopted unanimously. 