

T 



( 162 ) 



came; let there be no longer distinction between 
" Alsatian, Portuguese, or German Jews. 

** Scattered on the face of the globe, we form 
only one people, worshipping the same God, ad- 
" hering religiously to the obedience which our 
law commands towards the power under whose 
" protection we live ; and this obedience, which, 
" towards princes in general, is only the expression 
of our duty, is when, paid to Mapoleon, the 
" genuine offspring of love and gratitude. ^V ho 
" does not feel these sentiments for a benevolent 
" and enlightened monarch, equally active in dis- 
** covering the misfortunes of his subjects, and in 
applying the proper remedy ? This union of 
" wisdom and goodness particularly distinguishes 
** the decree by which we are this day assembled. 
It is new for us, it is even unprecedented in his- 
tory. No sovereign has ever done what Napo- 
leon has now affected for the people of God. A 
new career is open for us, and the doors which 
** lead to it are unbarred : all the Hebrews 
" residing in this vast empire, and in Europe, have 
" their eyes fixed on us. If our cotemporariesex* 
** pect their happiness from us, we also must expect 
" to be judged by posterity. Our conduct will be 
" recorded in history; the evil-intentioned watch 
" and observe us ; let us be on our guard, not to 
" afibrd any hold to their malignity. 



( 163 ) 



Moses and Joshua always recommend Rac^ 
chazac veametz — strength and courage. Now that 
we have nothing to fear, let us get rid of that 

** timidity which has overcome us ever since w« 

" have lived for ages in slavery^ This day the 
Grand Napoleon extends towards us his power- 

" ful, protecting hand; what have we to fear but 

" God and Posterity? 
^' Let us be calm in our discussions, wise in our 
deliberations, attentive and indulgent to those 
who deliver their sentiments. We all meet here 
with the purest intentions, of this let us never 
loose sight, and let this truth, which we all ac- 
knowledge, plead excuse for what ever may escape 

•'us in the warmth of debate. 

1 am the first to lay claim to the indulgence I 
recommend: the time I take up, in addressing 
you, is precious : you will excuse me for having 
trespassed on it, as I am conscious of having ex* 

" pressed sentiments congenial to your own. 

These sentiments have suggested to me the 

" following outlines of an arrete which I have the 

*• honour of submitting to your judgment. 

OUTLINES OF AN Arrete. 

" Art. I. The 2nd. 3rd. 4th. 6th- and 6th. arti- 
y2 



( 164 ) 



" cles of the imperial decree of the 30th. of May 
" last, shall be engraved on a marble tablet to be 

hung up in this hall, during the course of our 

sittings, and to be afterwards placed in the me-* 

tropolitan temple of the Jewish worship. 

" 11. The bust of His Majesty the Emperor and 

King shall be placed in this hall. 

" III. An address of thanks, expressive of our 
" gratitude, shall be presented to His Majesty by 