

Jeremiah, (chapter xxix.) exhorts the Jews to 
(consider Babylon as their country, although they 
were to remain in it only for seventy years. He 
exhorts them to till the ground, to build houses, 
to sow, and to plant. His' recommendation was so 



( 182 ) 



much attended to, that Ezra, (chapter ii.) says, 
that when Cyrus allowed them to return to Jerusa* 
lem to rebuild the Temple, forty- two thou- 
sand three hundred ^nd sixty only, left Baby- 
lon; and that this numberwas mostly composed of 
the poorer people, the wealthy having remained in 
that city. 

The lo.e of the country is in the heart of Jews a 
sentiment so natural, so pcverful, and so conso- 
nant to their religioas opinions, that a French Jew 
considers himself, in England, as among strangers, 
although he may be among Jews ; and the case is 
the same with English Jews in France. 

To such a pitch is this sentiment carried among 
them, that, during the last war, French Jews have 
been seen fighting desperately against other Jews, 
the subjects of countries then at war with France. 

Many of them are covered w}th honourable 
wounds, and others liave obtained, in the field of 
honour, the noble rewards of bravery, 

SEVENTH QUESTIOy. 

Who namea the Rabbica? 

ANSWER. 

Since the revolution, the majority of the chiefs oi' 



( 183 ) 



families names the Kabbi, wherever there is a^suffi- 
cient number of Jews to maintain one, after previ- 
ous inquiries as to the morality and learning of the 
candidate. This mode of election is not, how- 
ever, uniform ; it varies according to place, and, to 
this day, whatever concerns the elections of Rabbies 
is still in a stale of uncertainty. 



Sitting of the 12th of August^ 1806. 

The President took the chair precisely at eleven. 
He named as Commissioners to maintain order, 
MM. Baruch Cerf-Berr, Pato, jun. and Michel 
Berr. 

One of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 
sitting of the 7th of this month. 

A member said, that it was useless to mention 
the remarks made on the difference established be- 
tween German and Portuguese Jews by the draft 
of the answer to the fourth question. He said it 
was equally superfluous to insert the remark made 
on this head by a deputy from a northern depart* 
ment. 

The President observe, that the minutes must 
take notice of whatever is said in the assembly. 
A member called for the order of the day. 



( 184 ) 



Another seconded the motion of the first speaks 
er. 

A loud cry of Question^ 

The President put the minutes to the vote, and 
they were adopted by the majority. 

One of the Secretaries read the draft of the an- 
swer to the eighth question^ M. Avigdor transla- 
ted it into Italian, and M. Lyon Marx into Ger- 
man. 

A member requested leave to speak ; he obser- 
ved, that if in the north most marriages were 
blessed by the Kabbies, the case wasdifFerent in the 
southern departments, where there were but few 
Rabbies; and that, even in places where Rabbies 
were maintained, the father, or one of the elders of 
the family, frequently took pleasure in performing 
himself the marriage ceremony. 