

once meet with a monarch who called to the foot 
** of his throne those who might have been able to 
** help him in relieving the misfortunes and heal- 
" ing the w ounds of Israel. 



( 167 ) 



M^e live, thanks be to God, in happier times; 
we live under the salutary influence of philoso- 
<^ phy and of reason ; under the most astonishing, 
the most sublime of legislators and of heroes ; 
" under the greatest of mortals, whether consider- 
" ed as to his heart, his virtues, his fortune or his 
genius : it is to him that we are indebted for the 
unprecedented appearance of this assembly, of 
which I am proud to form a part. It is the first 
time, since the fatal epocha of our misfortunes 
" and of our dispersion, that a monarch convenes 
such an assembly, and that he thus shews, in our 
favour, his regard for the principles of reason. 
*' If, after the regenerating laws already existing^ 
the last traces of our humiliation and of our sla- 
" very are not completely erased from among all 
our brethren, if the reprehensible conduct of 
some of them, still hardened against these enlight* 
ened and renovated sentiments, has occasioned 
complaints which have found their way to the 
*' foot of the throne, yet, on the other hand, our 
august monarch deigns to consult and to associ- 
" ate, in the views of reform conceived in his wis- 
dom, the principal persons of the Jews, distin* 
*^ guished by their zeal, their learning, and their 
integrity; it is by acting in concert with us 
that he wishes to bring back all our brethren to 
a sea'^e of their duty, and to make them all wor- 



( 1«8 ) 



" thy of the indefeasiable rights of men, of subjects/ 
and of citizens. 

" We will fulfil theexpectationsof His Majesty^ 
" we will undertake with zeal the noblest task 
" which could be imposed upon us, by the love 
" of our country, of our Sovereign and of our re-* 
" ligion. Who but He could be destined to ac- 
complish such designs? Is he not the only mortal 
*' according to God's own hearty to whom he has 
" intrusted the fate of nations, because he alone 
"could govern them with wisdom? He has car- 
ried his triumphant eagles into the three parts 
" of the ancient world ; he has overcome, as con- 
" queror,the ancient land of the eternal pyramids, 
the scene of our ancestors' captivity; he has ap- 
" peared on the banks of the once sacred Jordan ; 
" he has fought in the valley Sichem, in the plains 
" of Palestine. He alone could conceive this 
" sublime idea to which we are indebted for our 
" being assembled in this place, this idea so well 
" calculated to do away the last traces of misfor- 
" tune, of shame, and of that ancient oppression 
" which has ceased first in France. 

" As Frenchmen and as Jews^ then let us indulge 
all the gratitude which fills our hearts. Let us 
swear never to separate these sacred titles : as 
*' Frenchmen we will defend the country we love, 
and strictly observe the laws of the empire ; as' 



( 169 ) 



Jews we will remain attached to the i&ith and tci 
** the religion of our ancestors: &s Jews and 
" Frenchfnenlet us swear an inviolable attachment 