

(17) Deut. X. 18. 19. 

(18) Psalm, cxlv. 9. 

(19) The precepts given by the ratriarch Noah. 



{ 179 ) 



the flesh of animals killed ; in short, to obsem the 
rules of justice; and therefore all the principles of 
our religion make it our duty to love Frenchmen 
as our brethren. 

A Pagan having consulted the Rabbi Hillel on 
the Jewish religion, and wishii^g to know in a few 
words in what it consisted, Hillel thus answered 
him: " Do not to others what thou shouldst not 
" like to have done to thyself. This,^* said he, " is 
"all our religion ; the rest are only consequences 
" of this principle.^^ 

A religion whose fundamental maxims are such 
—a religion which makesadutyof loving the stran- 
ger — which enforces the pi-actice of social virtues, 
must surely require that its followers should con« 
sider their fellow-citizens as brethren. 

And how could they consider them otherwise 
when they inhabit the same land, when they are 
ruled and protected by the same government, and 
by the same laws? when they enjoy thesame rights, 
and have the same duties to fulfil? There exists, 
even between the Jew and Christian, a tie which 
abundantly compensates for religion — it is the tie 
of gratitude. This sentiment was at first excited 
in us by the mere grant of toleration. It has been 
increased, these eighteen years, by new favours 
from government, to such a degree of energy, that 
now our fate is irrevocably linked with the com- 
A A 2 



( 180 ) 



mon fate of all Frenchmen. Yes, France is our 
country; all Frenchmen are our brethren, and 
this glorious title, by raising us in our own esteem, 
becomes a sure pledge that we shall never cease tq 
be worthy of iU 



FIFTH QUESTION. 

In either case^ wliat Rue of conduct does their lau> 
prescribe towards Frenchmen not of their religion? 

ANSWER, 

The line of conduct prescribed towards French- 
men not of our religion, is the same as that prescri- 
bed between Jews themselves; we admit of no 
difference but that of worshipping the Supreme 
Being, every one in his own way. 

The answer to the proceeding question has ex- 
plained the line of conduct which the law of Mo- 
ses and the Talmud prescribe towards Frenchmen 
not of our religion. At thepresent time, when the 
Jews no longer form a separate people, but enjoy 
the advantage of being incorporated with the 
Great Nation, (which privilege they consider as a 
kind of political redemption) it is impossible that 
a Jew should treat a Frenchman, riot of his reli- 



( 181 ) 



gion, in any other manner than he would treat 
One of his Israelitish brethren, 

I5IXTH QUESTION. 

Do Jews horn in France^ and treated by the law^ 
as French citizens^ consider France as their country? 
Are they bound to defend it? Are they bound to obey 
the laws and to conforms to the dispositions^ of the civil 
code? 

ANSWER. 

Men who have adopted a country, who have re- 
sided inil ihese many generations — who, even un* 
der the restraint of particular laws which abridged 
their civil rights, were so attached to it that they 
preferred being debarred from the advantages 
common to all otlier citizens, rather than leave it, 
pannot but consider themselves as Frenchmen in 
France; and they consider as equally sacred and 
honourable the bounden duty of defending their 
pountry. 