

If the tomb which contains the ashes of those 
virtuous men, who have written, who have 
♦•^ thought, who have served their country with 
zeal and disinterestedness, who have been 
*^ sought after by sovereigns, who have diffused 
instruction or encouraged those who propagated 
learning — if the tombs of Blien, of Gradix, 
Humbert, Mendelshon, Aaron-Mayer, of Cerf- 
Berr, could now open, and that their inhabitants, 
once more visiting this world, could sit with us in 
this august assembly, how eagerly would they pay 
their tribute of admiration to the benevolent de- 
signs of His Majesty ! How zealously would they 



( 160 ) 



** contribute to further his regenerating views! But 
why did they enjoy only the dawn of happiness? 
Why are we deprived of their assistance as guides, 
" in deliberations which are to realize our hopes and 
consolidate our happiness ? But if we have not 
" inherited their talents and their extensive learn- 
ing, we can, like them, boast of hearts truly 
French. We are animated by the same attach-* 
ment to public welfare, which entitles us to the 
" confidence of government. Have we not, be- 
*' sides, among us Zinzheimer, Moses Lipmann, 
" Eneishem? And who is there among us, who 
could hesitate to contribute to the great work, 
" by all the means in his power, when he consi- 
" ders that, in the military career, His Majesty has 
" indiscriminately placed eagles and laurels within 
thereach of our children? That hehaso{>ened for 
" them the sanctuary of the law, the temple of arts 
" and sciences, manufactures, &c. ? Some of our 
" children are even entitled to our praises, by their 
efforts to justify the good opinion His Majesty is 
" pleased to entertain of us. But how small their 
" number is still ! Yet my heail tells me that the 
Jewish people will prove worthy of the tender 
** regard of His Majesty : and, if wishes and good 
" intentions only were wanting, we are all disposed 
to give our brethren that impulse M hich has been 
rendered necessary by the torpid state in which 



( 161 ) 



we have so long languished ; and our grand child^ 
" ren, for I durst indulge in the consoling idea^ 

will one day mark the meeting of this august 
" Synod, as the epocha of the regeneration of the 
" people of God, and will bless the memory of 
" those wise and learned interpreter of the law, 

who, by their example, their erudition, their 
" virtues, and theirwritings, have opened for us th% 
" road to happiness; 



Discourse at the Opening of the general Assembly 
of the Jews, delivered by M. Lipmann Cerf- 
Berr, Deputy for the Department of the Upper 
Rhine. 

An ever-memorable imperial decree has called 
us together in this hall; I ascend this tribune to 
express those sentiments of gratitude which I 
" owe to our august Emperor, and to assure you, 
" my dear brethren, of my most inviolable and 
" most sincere affection; 

Government has called us round it, as a father 
" calls his children ; let us prove worthy of the 
" benefit; let us prove worthy of the trust reposed 
in us; let us prove worthy of ourselves in 
^' entering this hall: let us forget from whence we 