

A Secretary read the draft of the answer to the 
twelfth question. 

M. Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. Avigdor into Italian. 

No objections being made against it, the Presi- 
dent put it to the vote, and it passed unanimously. 

The President read the draft of an address to 
Ilis Majesty the Emperor and King, on the anni- 
versary of his birth-day, couched in the following 
terms: 



( 190 ) 



To His Majesty the Emperor of the French and 
King of Italy. 

" Sire, 

" Your French and Italian subjects, whatever 
religion they profess, celebrate this day the an- 
niversary of Your Majesty^s birth-day ; all im- 
plore the King of Kings in their respective tem- 
** pies that he may be pleased to pour his most 
" signal favours on your sacred person, and on the 
august imperial family. We, too, animated with 
the same sentiments, and impressed with a grati- 
** tude still livelier, if possible, put up our fervent 
prayers to heaven in the same frame of mind. 
" Providence, Sire, has given you this vast em- 
pire, to rescue it from the abyss into which it was 
" apparently hurried by the selfish views of jar- 
** ing factions. 

" After rendering France illustrious by your 
" victories, you have given it peace, the first bless- 
" ing on earth ; you astonish the universe, you ex- 
•* haust admiration by holding up to wondering 
** mortals the model of the wisest, the most benevo- 
" lent of lawgivers, and of the greatest of heroes. 

" Deign, Sire, graciously to accept, on this day, 
*' the expressions of those sentiments of profound 
" respect, love, and gratitude, towards your sacred 



( 191 ) 



" person, which fill the hearts of your Trench and 
Italian subjects professing the religion of Mo* 

The Assembly received this address with loud 
acclamations of Long live the Emperor j long live t/ie 
Imperial family. The President was directed to 
transmit it to His Excellency the Minister for the 
Interior, and to request, at the same, time that His 
Excellency would have the goodness to lay it be* 
fore His Majesty. 

M. Rodrigues, of La Gironde, ascended the tri«^ 
bune, and gave in the report of the Commission of 
five, who had been directed to prepare the cere* 
monies of the festival, to be celebrated on the 
15th, in the Jewish Temple of Rue Sainte-Aooie^ in 
honour of His Majesty's birth day. He proposed 
the ten following articles. 

1st. Precisely at ten o'clock in the morning the 
members shall assemble in the hall of meeting. 

2nd. The sitting shall begin by reading the mi- 
nutes of the sitting of the 12th, and the President 
shall leave the chair immediately after they shall 
be concluded. 

3rd. At elevei^ o'clock the deputies, with the Pre- 
sident at their head, shall proceed to the Temple; 
on their entering it, the orchestra shall strike the 
tune of Where can u man be better than in the bosom 



( 192 ) 



of his family? The President shall deliver a dis- 
course analogous to the festival. 

4th. At tvt^elve o'clock precisely an hymn of 
thanksgiving, in honour of His Majesty the Empe- 
ror and King, shall be sung by M. Andrade, ac- 
companied by a chorus. 