

5th. M . Abraham Andrade, deputy of Bayonne, 
shall deliver a French discourse, M. Zinzheimer, 
Rabbi, deputy of the Lower Rhine, a German dis- 
course; and M. Segre, Rabbi, deputy of Verceil, an 
Italian discourse. 

6th. The orchestra shall play a sjnmphony of 
Haydn. In the mean time Mile. Caroline Wolf, who 
lias had two brothers this great white in the army, 
the eldest decorated with the starpf the legion of 
honour, the second a lieutenant in .the 3d regi- 
ment of dragoons, wounded at Austerlitz, Miles. 
SchmoU and Julie Theodore Cerf-Berr,tbe first ac- 
companied by M. Rodrigue the eldest, the second 
by M. Castro jun. and the third by M. Avigdor, 
shall make a collection in the Temple. 

The produce of this collection shall be distribu- 
ted among the poor of all persuasions; and shall 
accordingly be divided between the several chari- 
table institutions. 

7th. The Temple shall be illuminated and orna- 
mented \^ i\h garlands and flowers ; the Imperial 
Eagle shall be placed above the Altar. 



( 193 ) 



8th. At night the outside of the Temple shall 
be illuminated as well as the hall in which the 
asseiifbly meets. 

9th. The President shall give the signal of de- 
parture, and the deputies shall return in the same 
order. 

10th. To avoid confusion, carriages shall wait 
in the second yard. 

The assembly approved these dispositions. 

The reporter added, that the Commission had 
also taken into its consideration the discourse of 
M. Lipmann Cerf-Berr. His opinion was to ad- 
journ the execution of the 1st, 3rd, 4th, and 5th 
articles of the proposed plan. There could be 
but one voice on the second article, which express* 
ed a wish to see His Majesty's bust in this halL 
The President was requested to transmit that wish 
of the assembly to His Excellency the Minister 
for he Interior. 

The President quitted the chair at half past three. 
The answers adoptedby the assembly to the eighth, 
ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth questions. 



EIGHTH QUESTION, 

What police jurisdiction do Rahhies exercise 
c c 



( 194 ) 

among the Jews? what judicial power do they enjoy 
among them. 

ANSWER, 

The Rabbies exercise no maniier of Police Ju^ 
lisdiction among the Jews. 

The qualification of Rabbi is no where to be 
found in the law of Moses, neither did it exist in 
the days of the first Temple ; it is only mentioned 
towards the end of those of the second. 

At these epochas the Jews were goveroed by 
Sanhedrim or tribunals. A supreme tribunal, cal- 
led the Grand iSawAcrfmn, sat in Jerusalem, and was 
composed of seventy-one J udges. 

There were inferior courts, composed of three 
judges for civil causes and for police; and ano* 
ther composed of twenty-two Judges, which satin 
the capital to decide matters of less importance, 
and which was called the Lesser Sanhedrim. 

It is only in the Misna and in the Talmu 
that the word Rabbi is found for the first time ap- 
plied to a doctor in the law ; and he was common- 
ly indebted for. this qualification to his reputation, 
and to tlie opinion generally entertained of his 
learning. 