

(26) Ixiv. xix. S3. 

(27) Exod. xxii. '^1, 
(QH) Lev. x\v. li. 



( 203 ) 



fallen in decay with thcey thou shalt then relieve 
" him; yca^ though he be a stranger^ or a sojourner. 

Hius the prohibition extended to the stranger 
who dwelt in Israel; the Holy Writ places them 
under the safe-guard of God ; he is a sacred guest, 
and God orders us to treat him like the widow and 
like tlie orphan. 

It is evident that the text of the Vulgate, Extra-' 
nei f(enaheris et fvatri tuo non foinaheris^ can be un- 
derstood only as meaning foreign nations in com*- 
niercial intercourse with us ; and, even in this case, 
the Holy A'^'rit, in allowing to take interest from the 
stranger, does not mean an extraordinary profit, 
oppressive and odious to the borrower. Non l{» 
cuisse Israelitis^ say the doctors, iisuras immodcra* 
(as exigere ab extraneis^ ctiam diviiibus^ res est per se 
nota. 

Can Moses be considered as the lawgiver of the 
univei-se, because he was the lawgiver of the Jews? 
Were the laws he gave to the people, which God 
had intrusted to his care, likely to become the ge- 
neral laws of mankind? Thou shait not lend upon 
interest to thy brother. AVhat security had he, that, 
in the intercourse u hich would be naturally esta* 
blished between the Jews and foreign nations, 
these last would renounce customs generally pre- 
vailing in trade, and lend to the Jews without re- 
quiring any interest ? Was he then bound to sa- 
p 1)2 



( 204 ) 

crifice the interest of his people, and to impoverish 
the Jews to enrich foreign nations? Is it not ab^ 
colutely absurd to reproach him with having put 
a restriction to the precept contained in Deutero* 
nomy? What lawgiver but would have considered 
such a restriction as anatural principle of recipro* 
city? 

How far superior in simplicity, generosity, jus- 
tice, and humanity, is the law of Moses, on this 
head, to those of the Greeks and of the Romans} 
Can we find, in the history of the antient Israelites, 
those scandalous scenes of rebellion excited by 
the harshness of creditors towards their debtors; 
those frequent abolitions of debts to prevent the 
multitude, impoverished by the extortions of lend-> 
crs, from being driven to despair? 

The law of Moses and its interpreters have dis- 
tinguished, with a praise worthy humanity, thd 
different uses of borrowed money. U it to main- 
tain a family ? Interest is forbidden. Is it to un- 
dertake a commercial speculation, by which the 
principal is adventured? Interest is allowed, even 
between Jews. Lend to the Poor^ says Moses. 
Here the tribute of gratitude is the only kind of 
interest allowed; the satisfaction of obliging is the 
sole recompencc of the conferred benefit, 'flie 
case is different in regard to capitals employed in 
extensive commerce: there, Moses allows the lend* 



I 



( ao5 ) 



er to come in for a share of the profits of the bor^ 
rower; and as commerce -wbh scarcely known 
among the Israelites, who were exclusively addict* 
ed to agricultural pursuits, and as it was carried 
on only with strangers, that is with neighbouring 
nations, it was allowed to share its profits with 
them 