

A member observed that this word was not ex- 
clusively applicable to men of the same religion ; 
he quoted the 4th verse of the 49th chapter of 
Genesis, where it is used in the more general ac- 
ception of friend. 

He quoted also the 12th verse of the 15th chap* 
ter of Deuteronomy, in which the word Hebrew is 
joined with the word ahiha. Hence he concluded 
that, since the law joined the word Hebrew w\i\\ that 
of brother^ where it meant a man of the same reli- 
gion, it clearly followed that, whenever these two 
expressions were not joined, the word brother had 
a more general acception. He quoted several 
other passages in support of this opinion. 

Another member examined critically the 20th 
verse of the 23d chapter of Deuteronomy, already 
alluded to. He observed that the word Nochri 
which means a stranger, had no reference to reli- 
gious belief, but only to the country or state ; 
that the verb tassich^ which means to make profit, 
was appl'cible to the fo eignerj not to the fellow* 
countryman. And that the substantive ahihuy which 



{ 188 ) 



means brother^ was to be taken in the acceptation 
of fellow-countryman and not of fellow Jew. (18) 
He observed, that the law was purely political; 
and that what preceded and what followed proved 
sufficiently, that profit, and not usury, was meant. 
He concluded by demanding that the answer pro- 
posed by the Commission, which ccmtained nearly 
the same principles, should be put to the vote. 

A member observed that this answer being very 
long, it was fit it should be read a second time. 

The President ordered the answer to be read a 
second time. 

A Rabbi observed, that the answer admitted that 
interest was lawful ; he declared that interest, of 
any kind, was forbidden by the law. 

Another member observed, that, in fact, tlie law 
allowed of no interest, but that, since the Jews 
have ceased to be a nation, and are become mer- 

(30) For tlie intelligence of this part of the debate, ive shall subjoin 
here the two versus alluded to : 

19. Thou shalt not lend upon usury to tl»y brother, usury of money^ 
usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury. 

20. Unto a stranger thou maycst lend upon usury, but unto thy bro- 
ther thou shalt not lend upon usury, that the I^rd thy God may bless 
thee in all that thou setlest thine hand to, in the land whither thou goest 
to possess it. 

It should seem that the Jewish doctors give a different meaning to the 
ivord a-HiuIly translated by usury. 



( 189 ) 

chants, they have been allowed to take a small 
profit; that the answer meant a moderate gain 
arising from a commercial speculation, and not 
usurious interest. 

A member observed, that, by explaining this 
idea to the Rabbies, they would perceive that the 
answer was agreeable to the principles of the law. 

Another demanded a third reading of the draft 
of the answer. 

A Secretary read it for the third time. 

A member moved that it should be put to the 
vote. 

The President put it to to the vote, by shew of 
hands, and it was adopted almost unanimously. 