

It is even impossible that it could ever have had 
that acception ; for usury is an expression relative 
to, and compared with, another and a lawful 

(31) English Translation, 



( ) 



interest; and the text contains nothing which al- 
ludes to the other term of comparison. AVhat do 
we understand by usury? Is it not an interest 
above the legal interest, above the rate fixed by 
the law? If the law of Moses has not fixed this 
rate, can it be said that the Hebrew word means 
an unlawful interest? The wordnechechm tlie He- 
brew language answers to the Latin word fconus: 
to conclude that it means ustirj/y another word 
should be found which would mean interest; and, 
as such a word does not exist, it follows tliat all in- 
terest is usury, and that all usury is interest. 

What was the aim of the lawgiver in forbidding 
one Hebrew to lend upon interest to another? It 
was to draw closer between them the bonds of fra- 
ternity, to give them a lesson of reciprocal benevo- 
lence, and to engage them to help and assist each 
other with disinterestedness. 

The first thought had been to establish among 
them the equality of property, and the mediocrity 
of private fortune; hence the institution of the 
sabbatical year, and of the year of jubilee; the 
first of which came every seventh year, and the 
other every fifty years. By the sabbatical year 
all debtors were released from their obligations: 
the year of jubilee brought with it the restitution 
of all estates sold or mortgaged. 



( 199 ) 



It was easy to foresee, that the diilerent quali^ 
ties of the ground, the greater or lesser industry, 
tlie untowardness of the seasons, which might af- 
fect both, would necessarily make a difference ia 
the produce of land, and that the more unfortu- 
nate Israelite would claim the assistance of him 
whom fortune should have better favoured. Mo- 
ses did not intend that this last should avail him- 
self of his situation, and that he should require 
from the other the price of the service he was soli*- 
citing ; that he should thus aggravate the misery 
jof his brother, and enrich himself by his spoils. 
It is with a view to this that he says, Thou shalt 
not lend upon interest to thy brother. But what 
want could there exist among the Jews, at a time 
when they had no trade of any kind? when so lit- 
tie money was in circulation, when the greatest 
equality prevailed in property ? It was, at most, 
a few bushels of corn, some cattle, some agricultu- 
ral implements; and Moses required that such 
services should be gratuitous; his intention was 
to make of his people a nation of husbandmen. 
For a long time after him, and though Idumea 
was at no great distance from the sea-shores, inha- 
bited by the Ty rians, the Sidonians, and other na- 
tions possessing shipping and commerce, we do 
not see the Hebrews much addicted to trade : all 



( 200 ) 



the regulations of their lawgiver seemed designed 
to divert their attention from commerce. 

The prohibition of Moses must therefore be 
considered only as a principle of charity, and not 
as a commercial regulation. According to the 
Talmud, the loan alluded to is to be considered 
almost as a family loan, as a loan made to a man 
in want ; for in case of a loan made to a merchant, 
even a Jew, profit adequate to the risk should be 
considered as lawful. 