

It was resolved that this remark should be in- 
s.i ted in the journal. 

A member observed that the words Kingdom of 
Italy ^ should be added to those of French Empire^ 
as the customs of both countries were similar. 

1 he President had the words inserted; and, af- 
ter a second reading, the draft of the answer was 
a*J.opted almost unanimously. 

A Sec ret ar}'^ read the draft of the answer to the 
Ki:^- h question* 



( 185 ) 

M, Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. Avigdor into Italian. 

A member requested the explanation of aphrase. 

The President explained it for him. 

He then put it to the vote ; it was adopted al- 
most unanimously. 

The President ordered afterwards the reading 
of the draft of the answer to the tenth question. 

M. Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. Avigdor into Italian. 

No objections being offered, the President put 
it to the vote, and it was adopted unanimously. 

One of the Secretaries read the draft of the an- 
swer to the eleventh question. 

M. Lyon Marx translated it into German, and 
M. A vigdor into Italian. 

A member requested leave to speak, and said, 
that, as this answer explained the text of the 24th 
chapter of Deuteronomy, it ought to be especially 
recommended to the attention of Rabbies, who have 
the care of preaching morality, in order that those 
among the Jews who are ignorant of their duty in 
their money ti-ansactions with other Frenchmen, 
should be made acquainted with them, to be on 
their guard against the temptation of cupidity. 

The proposition was seconded. 

Another member observed, that Rabbles, in 
B B 



( 186 ) 



preaching morality certainly would not forget this 
essential exhortation. 

A member ascended the tribune, and expressed 
his astonishment that the expression Law of Mo^ 
ses should always be used in speaking of the writ- 
ten law. " God/' said he, " is our legislator, 
and we must consequently say the Law of God^ 
and not the Law of Moses/^ He demanded that 
the expression should be altered accordingly. 

Another member appeared in the tribune after 
him. He began by praising the scrupulous zeal 
of the last speaker, but he did not think that his 
amendment ought to be adopted. " I can safely 
*' maintain,^' said he, without a wish to offend 
the last speaker, that my parents were, to the 
** full,a.< orthodox as he can possibly be. Yet I 
" well remember to have heard them say always 
" Torat Mosse^the Law of MoseSy in speaking of the 
written law/' He demanded that the wording 
of the Commission should be maintained. 

Some Rabbies delivered their sentiments in fa- 
vour of the first speaker. 

A member observed, that, whenever the expres- 
sion, the Law of Moses^ occurred, it was always un- 
derstood to mean the Law of God transmitted to 
the Jews by Moses. He thought that the best 
tvay to reconcile the different* opinions would be, 
to insert this explanation in the minutes. 



( 1»7 ) 



This proposition was adopted. 
Another member ascended the tribune and 
spoke on the word ahtha^ in the 19th and 20th 
verses of the 23d chapter of Deuteronomy, which 
means Brother , he thought that the word brother 
could be applied only to a fellow Jew. 