

It is in this view of the subject that M. Cler* 
mont-Tonnerre made use of these remarkable 
words in the first National Assembly : It is said 
that usury is permitted to the Jews; this asser* 
tion is grounded only on a false interpreta« 
tion of a principle of benevolence and fraternity 
which forbade them from lending upon interest 
to one another/^ 

This opinion is also that of Puflendorf and of 
other writers on the law of nations. 

The antagonists of the Jews have laid a great 
stress on a passage of Maimonides, who seems to 
represented as a precept, the expression Anochri 
tassik, (make profit of the stranger.) But although 
Maimonides has presumed to maintain this opinion, 
it is well known that his sentiments have been 
most completely refuted by the learned Rabbi 
AbarbaneL AVe find, besides, in the Talmud, a 
treatise of Macot^ (Perfection) that one of the ways 
to arrive at perfection, is to lend without interest 
jtp the stranger, even to the idolatof. Whatever 



( 206 ) 



besides might have been the condescension of God 
to the Jews, if we may be allowed the expression, 
it cannot be reasonably supposed that the common 
father of mankind could, at any time, make usury 
a precept. 

The opinion of Maimonides, which excited all 
Jewish Doctors against him, was principally con- 
demned by the famous Rabbies Moses de Gironna 
and Solomon Benadaret, upon tlie grounds, tirst, 
that he had relied on the authority of Siffri, a pri- 
vate doctor, whose doctrine has not been sanction- 
ed- by the Talmud; for it is a general rule that 
every rabbinical opinion w hich is not sanctioned 
by that work is considered as null and void. 
Secondhs because, if Maimonides understood that 
the word Nochri (stranger,) wsis applicable to the 
Canaanean people doomed by (iod to destruction, 
he ought not to liave confounded a public right, 
arising from an extraordinary order of God to the 
Israelites, considered as a nation, with tlie private 
right of an individual towards another indivi- 
dual of that same nation. 

It is an incontrovertible jK>int, according to tlie 
Talmud, that interest, even among Isnielites, is 
lawful in commercial operations, where the lender, 
running some of the risk of the borrower, becomes 
a sharer in his profits. This is the opinion of all 
Jewiiih doctoi^s. 



( 207 ) 



It is evident that opinions, teeming with absur- 
dities, and contrary to all rules of social morality, 
although advanced by a Kabbi, can no more be im- 
puted to the general doctrine of the Jews, than 
similar notions, if advanced by Catholic theolo- 
gians, could be attributed to the evangelical doc- 
trine. The same may be said of the general 
charge made against the Hebrews, that they are 
naturally inclined to usury: it cannot be denied 
that some of them are to be found, though not so 
many as is generally supposed, who follow that 
nefarious traffic condemned by their religion. 

But if there are some not over-nice in this par- 
ticular, is it just to accuse one hundred thousand 
individuals of this vice ? AVould it not be deemed 
an injustice to lay the same imputation on all 
Christians because some of them are guilty of usu- 
ry? 