

When the Israelites wei-e totally dispersed, thoy 
formed small communities in those places where 
they were allowed to settle in certain numbers. 



( 195 ) 



Sometimes, in these circumstances, a Rabbi and 
two other doctors formed a kind of tribunal, 
named Befhin, that is, I louse of Justice; the Ilabbi 
fulfilled the functions of judge, and the other two 
those of his assessors. 

The attributes, and even the existence of these 
tribunals, have, to this daj, always depended on 
the will of governments under which the Jews 
have lived, and on the degree of tolerance they 
have enjoyed. Since the revolution those i*abbini* 
cal tribunals are totally suppressed in France, and 
in Italy. The Jews, raised to the rank of citizens, 
have conformed in every thing to the laws of the 
stvte; and, accordingly, the functions of Rabbies, 
w herever any are established, are limited to preach- 
ing moi-ality inthe temples, blessingmarriages, and 
pronouncing divorces. 

In places where there are no Rabbies, the Jew 
who is best instructed in his religion, may, accord- 
ing to the law, impart the marriage-benediction 
w ithout the assistance of a Rabbi ; this is attend- 
ed with an inconveniency, the consequences of 
which it certainly w ould be proper to prevent, by 
extending to all persons, called uj^on to bless a 
marriage, the restrictions which the consixhir arrete 
placets on the functions of Rabbies in this par- 
ticular. 

As to judicial powers, they possess absolutely 

c c 2 



( 196 ) 



none ; for there is among them neither a settled 
ecclesiastical hierarchy, i*or any subordination 
in the exercise of their religious functions. 



MNTH QUESTION. 

Are these forms of Election^ and that police-judi^ 
eialiJurisdiction, regulated by the law, or are they 
only sanctioned by custom? 

ANSWER. 

The answer to the preceding questions makes 
it useless to say much on this, only it may be re- 
marked, that, even supposing that Kabbies should 
have, to this day, preserved some kind of police-- 
judicial-jurisdiction among us, which is not the 
case, neither such jurisdiction, nor the forms of the 
elections, could be said to be sanctioned by the 
law; they should be attributed solely to custom. 



TENTH QUESTION. 



Are there professions which the law of the Jews 
forbids them from exercising? 



( 197 ) 



ANSWER. 

There are none: on the contrary, the Talmud 
(vide Kiduschim, chap. 1st) expressly declares 
that the father who does not teach a profession 

to his child, rears him up to be a villain/* 



ELEVENTH QUESTION* 

jyoes the law forbid the Jews from taking usury 
from their brethren ? 

ANSWER. 

t>euteronomy (chap, xxiii. vers. 19,) says, 
thou shalt not lend upon interest (21) to thy 
brother, interest of money, interest of victuals, 
interest of any thing that is lent upon interest.*^ 
The Hebrew word nechech has been improperly 
translated by the word usury: in the Hebrew lan- 
guage it means interest of any kind, and not ti^m- 
ous interest. It cannot then be taken in the accep-^ 
tation now given in the word usury. 