

Formerly the word usury carried no invidious 
meaning ; it simply implied any interest whatever. 
The woi'd usury can no longer express the mean- 
ing of the Hebrew text : and accordingly the Bible 
of Osten;^ aid and that of the Portuguese Jews, 
call interest that which Sacy, from the Vulgate, has 
called usury. (22) 

The law of Moses, therefore, forbids all manner 
of interest on loan, not only bet^veen Je^^•s, but 
bet^veen a Jew and his counti-j man, without dis- 
tinction of religion. The loan must be gratuitous 
whenever it is to oblige those who claim our assist- 
ance, and when it is not intended for commercial 
speculation. 

We must not forget that these laws, so humane and 
60 admirable at these early periods, were made for 

(22) Vide Puffcndorir dc JureNatune ac Gentium. 



( 201 ) 



a people which then formed a state>and held a rank 
among nations. 

If the remnants of this people, now scattered 
among all nations, are attentively considered, it 
will be seen, that, since the Jews have been driven 
from Palestine, they no longer have had a com- 
mon country, they no longer have had to maintain 
among them the primeval equality of property. 
Although filled with the spirit of their legislation, 
they have been sensible that the letter of the law 
could no longer be obeyed when its principle was 
done away; and they have, therefore, without any 
scruple, lent money on interest to trading Jews, as 
well as to men of different persuasions. 



TWELFTBi QUESTION. 

Does it forbid or does it allow to take tisury from 
strangers? 

ANSWER. 

We have seen, in the answer to the foregoing 
question, that the prohibition of usury, considered 
as the smallest interest, was a maxim of charity 
and of benevolence, rather than a commercial re- 
gulation. In this point of view it is equally con- 
demned by the law of Moses and by the Talmud ; 

D 



( 202 ) 



^^e are generally forbidden, always on the score of 
charity, to lend upon interest to our fellow-citi- 
Tens of different persuasions, as well as to our fel- 
low-Jews* 

The disposition of the law, which allows to take 
interest from the stranger, evidently refers only to 
nations in commercial intercourse with us ; other- 
w ise there would be an evident contradiction be- 
tween this passage and twenty others of the sacred 
writings. 

" (23) The Lord your God loveth the stranger., in 
** giving him food and raiment; love ye therefore 
" the stranger^ for ye icere strangers in the land of 
*' Egyf)t. (24) One law shall be to him that is 
" home^horn^ and to the stranger. (25) Hear the 
" causes between your brethren^ and judge righteous^ 
" ly between every man and his brother^ and the 
" stranger that is with him. (26) If a stranger 
" sojourn with thee in your land you shall not vex 
" him. (27) Thou shall neither vex a stranger nor 
" oppress him^ for -ye were strangers in the land of 

I^gypt. (28) If thy brother be waxeti poor^ or 

(23) Dcut. X. 18, 19. 
(Q4) Exod. xii. 49, i.c. 
025) Dcut. i. ja. 