

there be peace," and the universe is at rest. 

VII. 

Firmly on wisdom is his throne fixed on high; justice 
and truth uphold his crown. He pours the balmy oil of 
grace into the wounds of innocence ; he heals the galling 
sores of oppression. The proud and the haughty he heeds 
not i they stand silent and abashed before him. 

VIII. 

He has placed in justice the delight of his heart : un- 
born races shall hail him Father of his people. By hira the 
happiness of nations rests on the tablet of the law as on a 
rock. The wreaths of victory adorn his brow, the gracious 
seat of law-inspiring wisdom. 



( 333 ) 



Exult, O Francfe ! queen of queens ! His powerful arm 
hath raised thee from the abyss, placing thee over nations ! 
Rejoice, O Italy ! thy days of greatness are near ; the hero 
pours his spirit on thee. Raise, O my country^ raise the 
song of joy! Rest and happmess await thee. 

X. 

Hail, bright dawn of gladness ! A Monarch is this day 
born unto us * in this day shall all other days of the year 
be blessed ! For a great light arose and shineth upon out 
age ; a light of happiness^ and distant generations shall be 
glad and rejoice in it« 

XI. 

But a voice, like the murmur of the breeze, whispereth 
in my ear, and saith : Cease the words of thy praise ; lin* 
speakable is his glory, and above thy strengtli are his deeds; 
too high for mortal man to sing. The name of him stand- 
eth aloft, proclaiming aloud glory and greatness infinite. 
He is Napoleon. 

XIL 

I said unto my soul> Repress thy bold flight.'* Silent 
is my tongue, but high beats my swelling heart, while be- 
fore thy glorious throne I bend my knee, O King beloved ! 
in thy goodness I place my trust; weak is my voice, and 
untaught my song, but my heart is pure and my mindj O 
King, dwelleth in righteousness. 



( 234 ) 



XIII. 

Raifie, Brethren, raise the song of gratitude to the 
hero ; he hath fulfilled his promises to Israel : his promises 
of peace and happiness ! Thanksgiving he loveth not Let 
the mind of youth be trained to wisdom ! let it be its guide 
in the path of virtue ; in such deeds his soul delighteth. 

XIV. 

O God, eteraal and terrible in thy judgments, hearken 
to the toice of thy people, to the prayers of the children of 
Jacob, pouring their souls at the foot of thy altar, in thy 
sanctuary: they cry unto thee, O Lord ! Preserve the life 
of our immortal immortal Emperor long and happy be 
his days. 

XV. 

Lengthen i O Lord, the happy days of his beloved 
spouse, virtuous among women and glorious among queens : 
of his mother* blessed among mothers, for her womb 
brought fonh the hero of the age. As long as the bright 
orb of the night shall shed its pale light on earth, as long 
as light itself shall keep divided from darkness, as thou 
didst set it, may the mighty house of Napoleon flourish 
in splendour and in majesty. 



( 235 ) 



ODE 

Composed in Hebrew hy M, J. Mayer, 

r 

My heart is troubled within me, my soul is on fire, lyir- 
ried by power resistless : tumultuous feelings confound my 
thoughts; wonders strike my eyes, wonders are echoed iu 
my ears. Tune the lyre of mighty deeds surpassing mor- 
tal. I will raise a song to the sons of men. Why is thy 
tongue mute? Pale is thy clieek, weak man ! Above thy 
ptrength is the praise of the hero. 