

F p 



( 218 ) 



** Thanks be this day to the Most High dispenser 
of all things! Infinite thanks be to the Hero of 
" France, the Solomon of our days! He looked 
** down on the cedars of Lebanon; neither did the 
" humble hyssop, which grows between rocks, 
" among briars, escape his attention : high seated 
" on his throne, surrounded with treasures, the 
hearts of his people are his sole delight. He has 
for ever erased those ancient marks of shame 
and of sorrow, whose baneful influence blasted 
in the bud the most sublime talents, and wither- 
ed the most virtuous hearts. The paternal hai^ 
of the monarch has removed our evils with their 
cause: he points out to us the road of glory and 
** of honour, arts, and sciences. O Israel ! no more 
*• sliall your tears embitter your bread; he says to 
us with the pious Jehosaphat, Deal courageously^ 
and the Lord shall be with the good. 2 Chron. 
" xix. 11. 

" Since our mild and heavenly religion recom- 
mends labour as an antidote to those vices which 
degrade man, and sciences as the worthy means 
" by which we may arrive at the knowledge of 
" God, and since the supreme orders of the Hero, 
whose wisdom fosters all sciences, are entitled to 
" the most religious obedience, what further in- 
" ducements do we want? What brighter exam- 



( 219 ) 



pies could we have to induce us to start in the 
*• noble career, than that of so many wise princes, 
" so many brave generals, and men distinguished 
•* in every branch of science? What efforts shall 
" we make to become, by our own talents, useful 
" to the state, to the country, and to ourselves? 
*' Now that our fate is connected with that of the 
" country, our heart is in a manner already enno* 
bled. Let us embrace, with eagerness, a happi* 
" ness so long unknown to us; call for arms to de- 
" fend from every insult that country so dear to 
us. Soon we shall see our sons passing from 
that state of uneasy listlessness which always 
accompanies idleness, to that happy calm which 
is always produced by the pursuit of useful 
" scienes, and by praise-worthy occupation*. 
*' For thou shall eat the labour of thine hands^ hap* 
py shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee* 
" Psalm cxxviii. 2. 
" Were we to receive only temporal advantages 
from the political regeneration wrought by the 
"wisdom and clemency of the Immortal Hero, 
what gratitude could ever repay such a blessing? 
But it goes much further, Brethren ; a safe and 
** permanent political existence will facilitate to 
us the practice of all religious and moral virtue 
towards God and his creatures ; precious virtues! 
hardly within our reach in the state of degrada* 



( 230 ) 



tion into which we were plunged ! Ennobled, I 
say it once more, by the career of sciences now 
" opened to them, our sons will find within them- 
sel\es powerful incitements to virtue. What a 
field lor instruction, for useful knowledge! 
" Now they will gradually acquire ideas more 
" worthy of God, of religion, of social virtues, and 
" of good manners. Such, Israel, such is the des- 
tiny God has in store for thee. There remains 
" but one wish for thee to form ; it is to have thine 
** eyes opened, that thou mayest discern thy true 
hotiour and thy true glory, and that the Most 
Kigh, on whom every grace depends, might this 
day deign to enlighten thee. And wisdom and 
knowledge shall be the stability/ of thy times^ and 
strength of salvation. Isaiah, chap, xxviii. vers, 
" 6- 