



( 223 ) 

" nations, from kingdoms to kingdoms, without 
" finding rest or safety any where; every whert 
" we saw enemies rising against us, because we 

remained faithful to our laws, to those laws which 
" the Lord himself gave us by his revelation amidst 
" thunder and lightning. (Exod. xix. and xx.) 

" The Lord had designed to take us a nation 
^^from the midst of another nation, by tempta^ 
" tionSy by signs J and by wonders, and by war, and by 
" a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm. (Deu- 
" ter. chap. iv. verse 34.) 

" But, on the other hand, when our ancestors 
** proved unfaithful to these laws, they experien- 
" ced the elfects of the terrible threats the Lord 

had denounced against them (29). 

" Then, Brethren, then, the nations who had 
" not yet received the light of wisdom, these na- 
" tions said. Come and let us cut them off from 
" being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no 

more in reinembrance. Psalm. Ixxxiii. verse. 4. 

" And in fact, can any one read the history of 

our nation without shuddering at the unparal« 
" leled series of calamities of every description 

(29) Deuteronomy, chapter xxviii. verse. 64 and 65. " And tbe 
Lord shall scatter thee among all people from the one end of the earth 
even unto the other;'^and among these nations shalt thou find no ease| 
neither shall the sole of thy foot have a res>.^ 



( 224 ) 



•* which befel our ancestors in France, in Italy, itt 
Germany, in Spain, in other lands ? 
"But notwithstanding all these pereecutions, 
admire, dear Brethren, the miracles and the 
•* power of the Most High : we escape through the 
** wrecks of centuries, and Providence has, at last, 
•* saved us from the total oblivion into which those 
** nations had determined to plunge us. Driven 
from one country to another, we always found 
some magnanimous and benevolent Prince whose 
heart God disposed to receive us, and allow us 
to remain faithful to our laws. Can any thing 
shew more clearly the fulfilment of the promi* 
"ses of the Lord? (30) 

" In the midst of these calamities the Lord^ 
•* about three centuries ago, took pity on our suf* 
*'ferings; he caused the dawn of philosophy to 
*' enlighten Europe especially, some rays of hope 
gladdened our sight, and enlivened our pros- 
pects; a dam was raised against the destructive 
torrent of fanaticism, and human blood no 
longer drenched the earth in the name of God. 
" But persecution did not cease entirely; it was 

(30) Leviticus, chap. xxvi. verse. 44. " And yet for all that, when they 
^ be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will 
^ I abhor them to destroy them utterly and to break my covenants with 
*^ them, for I am tht Lord their God.'' 



( 225 ) 



" reserved for other times to see this dawn of hap* 
piness ushering in a brilliant morning. Philo« 

" sophy now diffuses its light over Europe; hearts 
are now opened every where to the mild senti« 
ments of philanthropy and of tolerance. 
" Men are sensible that their Creator himself 