

M. Rodrigues, of La Gironde, had been directed 
by the Committee of Five to give in his report on 
the means best calculated to fuliil, to the utmost, 
the intentions of the assembly. 

He gave it in on the 12th of August, and it was 
adopted by the assembly as containing the means 
best calculated to manifest the sentiments which 
animated every member. 

In consequence, on the 15th of August, at ten 
o'clock in the morning, the deputies met in the 
hall of their sittings. The bust of his Majesty the 
Emperor adorned the hall. At this sight cries 
of Long live the Emperor burst from every one. 

The President presented to the assembly an ode 
in Hebrew composed by M. J. Mayer on theFestir 
val of Napoleon the Great. This ode was re- 
ceived with acclamations by the assembly. At 
eleven o'clock the deputies began their procession 
for the grand Synagogue ; they walked in silence, 
in the greatest order, with the President at their 
head. The Temple was ornamented with taste. 
The name of Jehovah, the cyphers, and the arms 
of Napoleon and of Josephine shone on every 
side. The ark, which contained the book of the 



( 213 ) 

law, was surrounded and over-shaded by shrubg 
and flowers ; seats were prepared for the President 
and the officers of the assembly, for the Kabbies, 
and some other persons. The deputies formed a 
circle, into which were admitted many Jewish and 
Christian spectators, from among the most distin- 
guished citizens. The ladies, according to cus- 
tom, had a separate gallery. Order and serenity 
prevailed every where: every countenance exhi- 
bited the most heart-felt satisfaction, mlinifesting, 
on so glorious, so fortunate a day, our gratitude to 
a monarch, who, amidst so many labours, has made 
the fate and the social happiness of the descend- 
ants of Israel the special object of his attention. 
Chorusses and hymns began the ceremony. The 
President, M. Furtado, afterwards delivered a dis- 
course, tracing a rapid sketch of the persecu- 
tions which the Jews had to encounter durinsr 
two thousand years, till the epocha when, recalled 
in France to the enjoyment of their civil and polit- 
ical rights, they saw the first dawn of their com- 
plete regeneration. He concluded by exhorling his 
brethren to bestow the greatest care on the educa- 
tion of their children, in order to enable them to 
repay to the country the manifold benefits confer- 
red upon them, and those which were still in ex- 
pectation. This discourse of the President was 
received with loud plaudits. 



( 214 ) 

iViM. Segre, Zinzheimer, and Andrade, Rabbles 
tod deputies, delivered sermons: thefirst ir\ 
Italian, the second in German, and the third in 
French. M. Segre clothed the sentiments of a 
mild and persuasive morality in elegant language. 
The sermon of M. Andrade v^as marked by nu«» 
merous and appropriate quotations from the Holy 
Writ. M. Zinzheimer traced a more detailed pic- 
ture of the different epochas of Jewish history. 
The same Rabby, in taking from the ark the book 
of the law, and in presenting it round the temple, 
pronounced a prayer for the happiness of all 
Frenchmen, which excited the liveliest emotion. 
Psalmns and Hymns were afterwards sung; and 
when they came to the prayer which Jews are accuse 
tomed to put up, for sovereigns, enthusiasm knew 
no bounds. Cries of Zjong live the Emperor and 
King, in Hebrew and in French, proceeded from 
every mouth. Thus has this festival been render^ 
ed remarkable by all the peculiarities which cha^ 
racterise the most antient people on earth, blended 
with the patriotic effusions so natural to all French* 
men. During a symphony of Haydn, collections 
were made by Mdlles. Julie-Theodore Cerf-Berr, 
Caroline Wolf, and Schmoll, accompanied by 
Avigdor, Rodrigues, sen. and Castro, jun. 
The produce was distributed among the poor of 
fill persuasions. 