



( 215 ) 



In the evening the synagogue, and the hall of 
the sittings of the assembly were illuminated : the 
deputies met afterwards in private parties, in which 
the health of the Emperor, and of his august fa- 
mily, were drank with fresh enthusiasm. 

Translation of the Sermon delivered in Italian by 
M. Segre, JRabbi^ Municipal Counsellor of Ver- 
ceil, Deputy of the Department ofL^ Sesia. 

My son^ fear thou the Jjqkd and the King. 

Trov. chap. xxiv. vers. 31. 

Scarcely were my eye-lids opened to the dawn 
•* of this day, when my mind was assailed by the 
crouded images of the victories of Montenotte, of 
" the laurels of Marengo blended with palms, of 
the atchievements and triumphs of Austerlitz. It 
is not then a vain illusion, did I exclaim! A su- 
** pematural genius has really appeared on earth, 
** surrounded with greatness and with glory infi- 
" nite. I saw in the night visions, and behold <me, 
like the son of man, came, and there was given him 
dominion, and glory, and a kingdmn^ Daniel, 
chap. vii. verses 13 and 14. 

Already this day of joy and of universal festi- 
vity arises in renewed splendour, marked in in- 
delible characters by predominant stars ; pur« 



( 216 ) 



" tod serene above all days; day for ever blessed, 
in which Heaven sent unto the earth the great 

" Napoleon enthroned in glory, the restorer of 

" piety, of justice, of good order, the father of na- 
tions, the friend, yea, the sincere friend, of peace ; 
the only title dear to his heart, and the most 

" grateful to his subjects. 

Amidst the far-sounding praises of the hero, 
amidst the joyful hymns of gratitude offered to 
the Etemalfor so precious, so sacred a gift, I has* 

" ten to the Holy Temple, with you, O venerable 
Deputies of France and of Italy. Deemed wor- 

•* thy to be heard among you, permit me to add 
some reflections to the discourse of our honour* 
able President, and to those of the two learned 
orators who have addressed you before me. Do 
not be depressed, if this day I call to your re- 
membrance our ancient calamities, and that 
flood of misfortunes which overwhelmed us be- 
fore we set our eyes on that bote in the cloudj 
which is for us a divine token of a covenant of 
calm and serenity. 

Compare, said Moses^ the condition of your 

<^ fathers and mothers, and that of your children: 
Remember the days of oldj consider the years of 

•* many generations^ (Deut. xxxii. vers. 7.) and 
you will know how to appreciate the invaluable 

^ blessings of the new order of things. 



( 217 ) 



" The scourge of war, Gentlemen, is usually 
ti-ansitory ; either the wisdom of government 
quickly repairs the losses it occasions, or an ho- 
hourable treaty soon relieves the people, and 

brings back peace and plenty. But as to us 

"as to us O God! ..the iron hand of op- 

pression under which we lived, or rather gtoan- 
ed, for so many centuries, crushed us down even 
in the bosom of peace, and hope itself could af- 
" ford no relief by holding the prospect of future 
" deliverance. iVe looked for peace ^ and no peace 
" came. (Jerem. viii. 15.) We were like the leaf, 
" which, torn from the parent bough, becomes the 
sport of the slightest rustling breeze, even after 
the rage of the tempest has subsided. And 
*' where is the man of any nation, even supposing 
him the most passive, who, on reflecting on his 
" situation, on seeing himself thus condemned to 
" sloth, and his talents become useless through 
contempt; where is the man, I say, who, in the 
bitterness of his anguish, would not renounce 
his native land as his country? Thus did King 
" David expresis his thoughts in similar circuni- 
" stances: / looked on mrj right handy and beheld, 
" but there was no man that would knoiv me; refuge 
failed me; no man cared for my soul. Psalm 
cxlii. 4, 