

" allows every one to worship him according to 

" the light of his reason. O Brethren, considei; 
here the wonderful fiavours of the Most High: 
by re-establishing concord among mankind, he 
has prepared the end of our tribulations and of 
our misfortunes. If persecution has not yet en*- 

" tirely ceased, because too many men, hurried by 
baneful habits, which becQine a second nature, 
have refused to open their eyes to the true light 
of philosophy; if, till now we, have seen only the 
dawn of happiness, this dawn will at last usher a 
pure and glorious light which will dissipate the 
last dark shades of ancient prejudices; all hearts 
will open to the noble enthusiasm of humanity, 
and we shall see clearly the infinite wonders t)f 
the Supreme Creator as predicted by Daniel. (30) 

" He has cho^ Napoleon to place him on the 
throne of France and Italy ; be has chosen him 

(31) Daniel, chap. ii. verse ^1. ^ And he changeth the times an^ the 
seasons ; he femoveth kings and setteth up kings : he gireth wisdom 
unto the wise and knowledge to them that know Andentandiqg.'' 

Q a 



( 226 ) 



*^ in the way I have marked in my text. And 
" we must apply to him what Pharoah said to his 
" servants, Can we find such a one as this is, a 
*' man in whom the spirit of God is? We must also 
" apply to him these words of my text, I have put 
" my spirit upon him. 

" And what else can we say when we consider his 
" wonderful works, his first campaigns in Italy, his 

his achievements inAsiaand in Africa,his second 
" campaigns in Italy, and, lastly, his astonishing 
^' campaigns in Germany, and that ever memorable 

victory of Austerlitz, which produced the glori- 

ouspeaceofPresburg? After these wonders, could 
" we one moment hesitate to apply toour invinci- 
^ ble Emperor these words of Isaiah : Thus said 

the Lord to his annointed Cyrus^ whose right hand 

I have holden^ to subdue nations before him; and 
" / will loose the loins of kings'^ to open before him 

the two-leaved gates^ and the gates shall not be 
*^ shut^ I mill go before thee and make the crooked 

places straight; I will break in pieces the gates of 
" brass, and cut in sunder the bars ofrt oji. Isaiah» 
^' chap. xlv. 1, 2. 

" Thus our invincible Emperor overcame that 

inaccessible mountain, the great Saint Bernard^ 
" to gain the immortal victory of Marengo. The 

Lord straightens all ways before him, and he 
" rushes on the land of the enemy ; he brealvs those 



( 227 ) 



" gates ofbfAss, that strong hold of Ulm surtound* 
ed with intrenchments. An innumerable nest of 
enemies occupied the strong hold, but as soon as 
theLord^sannointed appeared, the words of Isaiah 
" were fulfilled, " they that war against thee shall 
*' he as nothings and as a thing of nought » Isaiah, 
" chap, vei-s. 12. 

" O Brethren, 1 have hitherto pointed out to 
you only few of his glorious deeds; my voice is 
too weak to sing the praises of the mighty. I 
shall say with David, My heart is inditing a good 
*' matter: I speak of the things which I have made 
touching the Kingi my tongue is the pen of a ready 
writer^ Psalm xlv. 1. 