



( 1230 ) 



MM. Cologna, J. Mayer, and S. Wittersheiin, 
sen. celebrated that happy day by Odes and 
Hymns in Hebrew, which are remarkable by pleas- 
ing sentiments and energetic thoughts, by the 
justness of ideas, the classical elegance of diction, 
and the harmony, of versification* 

M. Moise Milland, deputy of Vaucluse, gained 
also much credit by a Canticle in Hebrew, replete 
with energy and poetical beauties; as did M. Elie- 
Aaron Lattes, a learned Rabbi of Sevigliano, de- 
puty for thiB department of La Stura,by a beauti- 
ful Hymn composed in Hebrew, aiid translated 
into Italian with much fidelity and eleg-ance« 

These several compositions will do the gi-eatest 
honour to their authors, not only among their bre- 
thren, but also among the learned of Europe, who 
are able to understand the originals ; they will be 
tead with pleasure by all lovers of belles-lettres in 
general, and of Hebrew poetry, and more espe- 
cially by those men who see with interest the con- 
vocation made by our august Sovereign, with a 
view to impart the advantages and the duties of 
society to a class of men, who have been sometimes 
degraded, only because they were always oppress- 
ed, and who always reckoned true religion, human- 
ity, and reason, as their auxiliaries against fanati- 
cism, hatred, and violence. 

I much regret the impossibility of giving my 



( 231 ) 



readers the original Hebrew text of these compo« 
sitioi s; I shall attempt to compensate for it by a 
translation of the most remarkable, 

ODE 

For the Birth'day of Napoleon the Great, 
composed in Hebrew by M. A. Cologna. 

I. 

Arise, O Mnse ! and take a lofty flight. Soft-sounding 
be my voice, and grateful to the ear. My heart indites a 
Bong of things most high. Pour thou grace into my lips, 

II. 

My soul is raised to thoughts immortal. My song is of 
glory and of wonder. O that my lips might drop as the 
honey-combat the fountains of the sacred springs, causing 
the tongue to flow with grace, and force, and brilliancy. 

III. 

On the deeds of the mighty will I raise a song ; on the 
deeds of the hero, chief of men, unmatched in battles. Near 
him the glory of kings fades and vanishes : they hide be- 
fore him their diminished heads. Their greatness is a thing 
of nought. 

IV. 

Which of his deeds shall first inspire the bard ? Won- 
ders upon wonders are engraved on glory's adamantine 



( 333 ) 



tablet ! Numberless are hin victories and countless his tri« 
umphs. Who to each bright orb in the starry heaven can 
assign a name, or fix a stedfast eye on the father of light, 
blazing forth in bis meridian glory i 

V. 

Early were his deeds in arms. The hills of Montenotte 
beheld him victorious : Egypt, that ancient land of slaveiy, 
felt the strength of his arm : Ulm, Marengo, Austerlitz wit- 
nessed his prowess, nor weak was there the strife of death. 

VI. 

Distant hills shook with his warlike thunder : by his 
strong arm his enemies were humbled. The mighty of tKe 
earth have bent before him. He has said to nations, *' Let 