

" called France! What gratitude would behave 

" prescribed to unfortunate children who thus found 
a second promised land ! How strictly would he 

£ £ 



( 210 ) 



have enjoined towards Frenchmen the indulgence 
of those sentiments of affection dictated by na- 
ture! Yes, Gentlemen, our holy prophet, who in 
" all his laws exhorts to union, to humanity, to the 
love of our neighbour, would have told us — Love 
*' Frenchmen ; they who open their arms to you, 
and deliver you from oppression, are your bre- 
thren ; let wreaths of friendship and fraternity be 
formed of those very fetters of ancient slavery 
in which prejudice had bound you/' 
" We will then say to His Majesty, " Yes, Sire, 
we can, according to religious principles, consi- 
" der France as our country; share the rights of 
" citizens of your empire; follow the dispositions 
•* of the civil code ; and obey, in every thing, the 
** will of the prince. Our duty is to defend the ter- 
** ritory of France, to pay our share of the burthens 
" of the state, and to use all the means in ourpower 
" for the prosperity of the empire^ The law of 
" God commands whatever is just and good; it 
never can raise an obstacle to the obedience due 
•*to the laws; for although we have a different 
** mode of worship, we are, nevertheless, bound to 
fulfil all the honourable duties which constitute 
good citizens/' 

You see. Gentlemen, that I have considered 
the question as relating to civil rights; I could 
have quoted many passages of our holy law, but 



( 211 ) 



" you know it as well as me, and I only made use 
of that particular precept which gives the great- 
est extent to our gratitude. I shall now submit 
to you the draft of an answer. May it prove agree- 
able to you ! May His Majesty the Emperor and 
" King find, in the expression of our sentiments, 
what can never be with him a matter of doubt, 
" a proof of our inviolable attachment to France, 
and to his sacred person!'* 
As the answers adopted by the assembly, differ 
but little from those proposed by M. Marg Foy, I 
have thought it useless to insert them, as he has 
not thought proper himself to have them printed, 
I could also mention the answers sent by the 
Rabbies of Turin, by the learned Rabbi Mardo-^ 
cheeCremieux, of Aix, but they also differ but lit-f 
tie from those adopted by the assembly. I shall 
therefore add but one word : the unanimity in the 
principles on which the declarations are grounded, 
will be, to future ages, one of the strongest testi- 
monies of their truth, and of the conspicuous loyaU 
ty which dictated the answers to all the questions. 

Gratitude and respect have also produced de- 
monstrations of a different nature on the day that 
all Frenchmen were called upon to celebrate the 
anniversary of the memorable period which, ibr the 
happiness of the world, gave birth to the Great Na- 
poleon, 



( 212 ) 



The assembly had unanimously resolved to set 
a part the whole day of the 15th of August, for 
prayers, thanksgivings, and all the demonstrations 
of a pure and lively joy. 