

II. 

No mortal eye can look on the father of light when, in 
mid career, bursting from clouds and mists, dark rolling on 
each side, he pursues the brightness of his steps. The 
green hills lift their dewy heads, the flowers glitter in the 
valley, the soft gale wafts fragrancy around. 

III. 

Such is Napoi^eon in his career of gloiy. Weak are 
the bards of present days to raise the song of bis fame : too 
Iiigh for tbem are his mighty deeds. In wonder their voice 
is lost; the untuned lyre drops from their uplifted hands. 
Thus the sun of wisdom and strength gladdens the world, 
rising above mortal praise. 

IV. 

How great tliy destiny, O Napoleon ! Who can be 

H H2 



( 236 ) 



compared with thee among the glory of nations ? Who 
among renowned warriors, among sage lawgivers, ever 
raised his fame near to thine, O first of mortal men ? — - 
Bright in days of old was the glory of Athens and of 
Kome: dim is their light now before thee. On thee the 
eyes of nations are fixed ; they wonder, and bless thy 
name. 

V. 

What light of joy bursts at once on my soul ! It moves 
my heart and agitates my frame. Give, O give, th^ sp^c! e4 
]yre— fl must pour forth the gladness of my soul, iiail, 
prosperous day of an immortal birth ! Hail, har piest 
among days ! Thy dawn is Xo France the dawn of glory. 
The staj-s which rule the divided year shall mark thy re- 
turn* August shall be the harbinger of peace and happi- 
ness. 

To thee belongs the dominion of the worlds thou hast 
created so sing the celestial seraphs before tlie tjirone 
of God; for thou hast made from nought the world and 
its wonders." To thee, O Napoleon, we sing, Rule in 
peace the empire thy wisdom has established. On truth 
and justice its glory is founded. On kings and heroes thou 
sheddestthy brightness. Thus, revolving round the father 
of light, planets glitter with borrowed rays, 

VII. 

Who is like unto thee, O Napoleon, in the days of thy 
glory, when thou graspest the deatli-dealing steel, that thy 
allies might rest behind its lightning ! Like the eagle of 



( 237 ) 



the rock was thy flight over Germany's plains. Thy he«* 
roes innumerable crouded around thee ; the thunder of war 
wai in their hands, carrying destruction among the foe. 
T]) :»s the cloud, rising from the abyss, borne along by the 
wes*3rri wind, dark, vast, terrible, overspreads the blacken- 
ed field. 

VIII. 

My soul abhorreth the snares of the wicked ; their shafts 
were levelled at ihee. They heard the sYwts of victory, 
the voice of our rejoicings, and were no more. From dis- 
tant shores the song of peace was heard, mingled with 
warlike praise. We mourned, like the tender youth la- 
menting the absence of his beloved sire, and behold he 
comes, high seated on his car, clad with gloiy* 

IX. 

The earth trembled, but now rests in peace. Far dis- 
tant nations bent before the majesty of thy brow. Ulm, 
Marengo, Austerlitz, the plains of Egypt, beheld the feats 
of Napoleon. ** Raise altars to the God of battles,*' he 
said, and altars arose from their ruins ; bitterness fled from 
our hearts, at the dawn of his grace. Happy, happy are 
the children of France. Nations had but a glimpse of the 
star of our pride, swiftly gliding through the misc tinged 
with its glory. 