



Sitting of the I9th of September^ 1806. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock; 
he read the law on the mode of ballotting by 
scrutiny; it appeared, from its contents, that the 
nomination of the third Italian member, which 

(32) The French, with their usual mctnphjsical distinctions, have 
iwo kinds of majority ; the absolute majority, requisite in the most 
important elections, must be composed of more than one half of all 
the voters. Tlie relative majority, is that majority which is decided by 
the actual majority of votes among any number of candidates^ without 
reference to the number of voters. 



( 258 ) 



had been made by ballot on the second scrutiny, 
was not regular. (33) 

It was proposed to proceed to the election of the 
German and Portuguese members, and afterwards 
to have a new ballot for a third Italian member. 

Othe*^ demanded that the nomination of the 
third member should be maintained, and that the 
law should only apply to the future nomination of 
German and Portuguese members. 

The President observed that as the law was 
clear on the point, it was impossible to act against 
it in any case. 

Some members insisted on having the nominati* 
on confirmed, because it had been made bana Jidt. 

Others thought, that the law was applicable 
only to electoral assemblies, and not to an assembly- 
like this; that M.Cracovia, having been proclaim- 
ed a member of the Committee by the President, 
his nomination was sanctioned, and it could not be 
annulled; but that, if any doubts were entertained, 
it was fit to consult the Commissioners of His Im- 
perial Majesty on this subject, before the assembly 
should come to any determination. 

(33) The second scrutiny was so far irregular, as the law directs that 
dU the members who have obtaioed votes in the first instance shall be 
balloted for in the second. Those only who have the majority on that 
repetition are balloted for the absolute majority on the third. 



( 259 ) 



A member maintained, that the of the 
electoral assemblies was not applicable to this: 
he mentioned the letter of His Excellency the Mi- 
nister of the Interior, by which the assembly was 
left at liberty to chuse such a mode of election as 
it might prefer. 

Others observed, that the question was to con^ 
form to the law, and not to confirm or reject the 
jjomination of the Italian member ; and that, even 
for the honour of that deputy, his nomination 
ought to be sanctioned by the legal mode. 

A member thought that the law alone could 
confirm or annul the election of M. Cracovia; 
and, till such time as the case was decided, he 
proposed to the assembly to proceed to the nomi*^ 
nation of the German and Portuguese members* 

To remove all doubts, it was proposed to send a 
deputation of three members to the Commission- 
ers of His Imperial and Koyal Msgesty, to know, 
from them, whether the assembly was to begin a 
new ballot to replace the Italian member, whose 
nomination did not appear regular. 