

X. 

Bards of Israel, let your harmonious songs thrill in my 
Boul^ that, amidst th.e voice of nations, the fame of the 
hero may be raised in the ancient words of Jacob, the words 
of the youth pf our people. The great Napoleon looked 



( 238 ) 



down on the children of woe, sport of the proud and of the 
oppressor: he gathered them round him like a tender fa- 
ther: from the dust he raised them to stand as a mark of 
his might. Just are his judgments ; great and big with 
gladness is the propitious light of his wisdom. Before it, 
the darkening cloud of shame retires, rolliiig back on the 
foes of our people, 

XI. 

Sons of Israel, children of happy France/ let songs of 
joy mark the birth of your king ! An eagle, O Israel, 
shelters thee under his wings. Hills and mountains melt 
before him ; he raiseth and keepeth thee on high : joy and 
comfort fill thy heart ; to the noble chiefs of thy tribes he 
imparteth knowledge and wisdom. The glory of Israel 
retumeth; clothe thyself with gladness and strength. The 
stormy cloud of misfortunes has retired behind the hills. 
The proud race of ancient France joins their friendly hands 
with their brethren of Israel. 

XII. 

Exult, O my country ! Thy ships, big with riches, 
shall fly to distant shores ; the bright day of happiness 
shall enliven thy fruitful plains; plenty and prosperity 
shall dwell in the land : for ever shall this song of grati- 
tude be echoed through thy hills -—Long, long may he live, 
our great, our powerful King, first of a thousand heroes ! 
May the beam of his joy, the wife of his bosom, comfort 
bis happy lengthened years. O God of the starry heavehs, 
take them under the protecting shade of thy hand! Oa 
their lives hangs the fate of nationSj O Creator of the 
World. 



( 239 ) 



HYMN, 

Sung hy the French Deputies of the Religion of 
MoseSi composed in Hebrew hy M. S. Wittersheim, 
and dedicated to M. Furtado, President of the 
Assembly^ 

Come ye all, O children of Israel; make a joyful noise 
unto God, with voices and instruments of music : gire 
thanks to the Eternal, and make his praise glorious, for he 
hath shewn mercy unto us this day— therefore shall this 
day be a day of joy unto Israel. 

In the space of a year the sun performeth his course^ 
and the moon begins a new cs^reer each month ; but these 
lights of Heaven do not mark a brighter day than this ; for 
on this day. Napoleon, the greatest of kings, was given 
unto us. 

Let us all sing and rejoice! Be comforted, ye elders; for 
you have witnessed the wonder of this day, the marvellous 
works, above man*s understanding! Rejoice, O jrouth ! the 
King is the dawn of gladness. Happy and blessed shall 
be the reign of our glorious Emperor and King. 

His name fills the universe; non^ have been like him 
among the sons of men ! The fatliers of praise cannot 
raise up their voices to the greatness of his deeds, to thf 
glory of hia works : they stand mute, lost in wonder ! 

Eminent in war is the hero among chiefs. The Nile and 