



( 255 ) 

" Great Sanhedrim will open in Paris, under the 
" protection and by the special permission of His 
" Majesty. 

" That the Rabbies, members of this ^embly, 
" shall beinvited to become membersof thisGREAX 
" Sanhedrim. 

" That five and twenty deputies, members of 
" this assembly shall be elected, by ballot, to be 
" also members of it. 

" That His Imperial and Royal Majesty shall 
" be most humbly requested to give the necessary 
" orders, that twenty-nine Rabbies, chosen in the 
Synagogues of his French empire, and in the 
kingdom of Italy, may come to Parid to assist 
*' at the Great Sanhedrim. 

" That this assembly shall proceed by ballot, 
" and by three different lists, to name a Committee 
" of Nine, which committee shall, in concert with 
the Commissioners of His Majesty, prepare such 
matters as are to be submitted to the Great 
" Sanhedrim. 

" That this assembly shall not separate till the 
" Great Sanhedrim has terminated its sittings ; 
" that it requests the Imperial Commissioners to 
" convey to His Imperial and Royal Majesty their 
" humble vrish of being admitted in a body to his 
" presence, to l^y at the foot of the throne theit 
"just tribute of love and respect. 



( 236 ) 

Resolved also that a copy of these resolutions 

sjiall be immediately delivered to the Commissi* 
"oners before the close of the sitting/^ 

These several resolutions m ere translated into 
Italian, and into German, and adopted unanimous-> 
ly amidst loud acclamations. 

Immediately after, the President and the 
ofiicers of the assembly went to meet the Com- 
missioners, and delivered them a copy of the 
above resolutions, requesting them to lay the 
same before His Imperial and Koyal Majesty. 

On returning into the assembly, the President 
proposed immediately to proceed, by ballot, to the 
nomination of the new Committee of Nine, 

Some members thought, that this might be put 
off till the day after; others were for beginning 
immediately. The assembly adopted this last pro- 
position, and the ballot commenced. 

Out of ninety-nine votes, M. Segre obtained 
seventy-eight, M.CoIogna sLxty-seven, and MM. 
Formiggini and Cracovia, thirty-four each. 

In consequence, the President declai-ed MM. 
Segre and Cologna members of the Committee of 
Mine, 

The assembly began afterwards a fresh ballot 
to name a third member among the Italian depu- 
ties. 

Out of one hundred votes M. Cracovia having 



( 257 ) 



obtained fifty-three, and M. Formigini forty- 
seven, the President proclaimed the former a mem^ 
ber of the Committee of Nine. 

The assembly proceeded afterwards to the elec- 
tion of three m-embers to be chosen from amongt: 
th€ deputies of the north. 

Out of ninety-eight votes, M. Jacob Gond- 
chauxobtainedforty-six; M. BeiT-Isaac-Berr, forty- 
six; M. Zinzheinier, forty ; M. J. Lazare, thirty- 
nine; M.Lyon Mai-x, twenty-five; M. Worms, 
twenty ; M. Moise Levi, twenty. 

None having obtained the absolute (32) majori- 
ty, the President deferred the election till next sit- 
ting, and left the chair. 