

May his fame, like his goodness, fill the universe I May 
our AUGUST Emperor live for ever — May our august 
Empress live for ever. This is our constant prayer, the 
dearest wish of our hearts : and may the Eternal pour his 
holy blessings on the Imperial Faynilij, Amciu 



Sitting of the 18th of September^ 1806. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock ; 
he named three deputies to maintain order, and 
announced that MM. Mole, Portalis, jun. andPas^ 
quier, were to come to the assembly with some 
fresh communications from His Royal and Impe- 
rial Majesty. He named MM. Formiggini, Co- 
logna, Cracovia, Gondchaux, Dreyfoss, Rodrigues, 
sen. Scawb, jun. and Lorich, to go to meet them 
and iritroduce them into the hall. 

Atone o'clock the Commissioners of His Majesty 
arrived, and took their places at the table. 

M. Mole, one of them, read the following dis- 
course : 

" Gentlemen, 
His Majesty the Emperor and Kins; is satis- 
fied with your answers; we are commanded by 



( 243 ) 



him to say, that he has approved the sense in 
which they are written ; but the communications 
" we are going to make in his name will prove, 
" much better than our words, to what extent this 
assembly may depend on his powerful protec- 
" tion. 

" In entering this hall for the second time, Gen- 
" tlemen, we are impressed with the same senti- 
ments, and the same ideas which occurred to us 
" when we were first admitted into it. And who 
" could behold without astonishment such a so- 
ciety of enlightened men, chosen among the 
^' descendants of the most ancient people of the 
" world? If one of those, who lived in former 
years, could again visit this world, and were to 
" be introduced into such an assembly, would he 
not think himself brought into the middle of the 
** Holy City, or would he not suppose that a terri- 
" ble revolution had renewed, from the very founda- 
** tions, the state of all human things? In this he 
would not be mistaken, Gentlemen. It is after a 
** revolution which threatened to s^vallow up all 
nations, thrones, and empires, that altars and 
thrones are raised every where fmm their ruins 
io protect theearth; a furious multitude attempt- 
ed to destroy every thing : a man has appeared, 
and has restored every thing; his eye embraces 
the whole world and past centuries even to their 
113 



( 5244 ) 

very origin ; he has seen the Avaiulcring remnant s 
of a nation, rendered as famous by its fall as 
others are by their greatness, scattered over the 

" face of the earth : it was just that he should 
consider their situation ; and it was right to ex- 
pect that these same Jews, who hold such a dis- 
tinguished place in the memory of mankind, 

" should fix the attention of the man who is to 
occupy it eternally. 

" The Jews, exposed to the contempt of nations, 
" and not imfrequently to the avarice of princes, 
" have never, as yet, been treated with justice. 
TJieir customs and their practices kept them afar 
from society, by which they wcrerqectedin their 
turn ; they have always attributed the ill-con- 
duct and the vices, laid to their charge, to the 
humiliating laws which oppressed them. Even 
" to this day they attribute the backwardness for 
" agricultural pursuits and useful employm€nts, 
manifested by some ot* them to the little reliance 
*' which they can place on futurity, after having 
becn,for so many centuries, the sport of circum- 
" stances, and seeing their very existence depend 
on tlie whim of men in power: they will have no 
cause to complain in future, and. this ground of 
defence will be taken from them. 
" His Majesty's inlentioji is, that no plea shall be 
** left to those who may refuse to become citizens; 
" the free exercise of your religious worship and 