

After the reading of this discourse, which was 
loudly applauded, the President answered as fol- 
lows: 

" Gentlemen, 
" The new communications you have transmit- 
ted to this assembly from His Imperial and Roy- 
" al Majesty, confirm, more and more, the hopes we 
had entertained of his paternal views in our be- 
half. 

" Any man, endowed with an enlightened mind 



( 248 ) 



and a benevolent heart, might conceive the idea 
of a political reform useful to mankind ; but 
these philanthropic conceptions usually remain 

" dormant ; they are considered as the idle dreams 
of benevolent men, either because these, being 

" too much taken up with the object in view, do 
not possess minds sufficiently expanded to em- 
brace the means of execution, or because these 

" means are generally beyond the reach of private 
individuals. 

" The case is widely different in regard to a 
powerful and venerated Prince, one of those ex- 

** traordinary beings who carry every thing along 
with them in their vortex, who give their name 
to the age in which they reign, and who are in- 
ces3antly hurried by an ardent desire of doing 

" good. 

" When Heaven gi-ants such sovereigns for the 
felicity of nations, no magnanimous designs 
escape them ; there are none which cannot be 
fully carried into execution by their just and 
"powerful determination. 

" By the ascendancy of theiV energy, they gix»e 
** to all their establiijhments a character of strength 
** and stability, which places them, as it were, 
^ above the reach of human instability and of hu- 
man passions. 
Such is the Prince under whose laws we live : 



( 249 ) 



«^ by his bravery he has obtained the appellation of 
Great — that of Beneficent will be the reward of 

♦Vhis benevolence. To him alone belonged the 
power to heal for ever the wounds which 
eighteen centuries of proscriptions and anathe- 
mas had inflicted on the unfortunate children of 
Israel. 

" Ever since their dispersion they have been the 
victims of a false and wavering policy, the sport 
of prejudices and the caprice of the moment ; and 
" it is a matter of wonder that, among somanydif- 
ferent princes who reigned in various countries, 
" even among those who seemed inclined to better 
" our fate, not one has been found who conceived, 
^' in their full extent and greatness, the idea and 
" the means of raising sober, industrious, and active 
" men from the civil and political nullity in which 
" they were kept. Outcasts of society, the butt of 
" calumny, the innocent victims of injushee, has 
uniformly been, for centuries, to suffer in silence 
" their melancholy fate. 

" His Majesty, amidst the great interests which 
" might absorb the whole attentiou of a man, 
" could not look on our situation with indiffe- 
" rence; our regenerationhasocQupiedhisthoughts; 
" this is abundantly proved by th^ new communica- 
tions we have just received. From the source of 
the evil itself the Emperor has drawn forth the 



( 250 ) 

remedy ; in some of the sad remains of tliebaneful 
" effects of ancient oppression, still lurking ^mong 
" the Jews of thenorth,hehasfound an opportunity 
" ofbringing about the happiness of all the Israelites 
" of the western world. It is like the rod of Moses 
" bringing forth living waters from the barren rock. 