



( 246 ) 



the full enjoyment of your political rights, are 

" secured to you. But, in return for his gracious 
protection, His Majesty requires a religious 
pledge for the strict adherence to the principles 
contained in your answers. This assembly, con* 
stituted as it is now, could not of itself give such 
a security. Its answers, converted into decisions 
by another assembly, of a nature still more dig« 
nified and more religious, must find a place near 
the Talmud, and thus acquire, in the eyes of the 
Jews of all countries and of all ages, the great** 
est possible authority. It is also the only means 
left to you to meet the grand and generous views 
of His Majesty, and to impart, to all of your 
persuasion, the blessings of this new aera. 

The purity of your law has, no doubt, been 
altered by the croud of commentators, and the 

" diversity of their opinions must have thrown 
doubts in the minds of those who read them. It 
will be then a most important service, conferred 

" on the whole Jewish community, to fix their be* 
lief on those points which have been submitted 
to you. To find, in the history of Israel, an assem* 

^' bly capable of attaining the object now in view, 
we must go back to the Great Sanhedrim, and it 
is the Great Sanhedrim, which His Majesty this 

" day intends to convene. This senate, destroyed 
together with the temple, will rise again to en« 



( 246 ) 



" lighten thepeople it formerly governed: although 
" dispersed throughout the whole world, it will 
bring back the Jews to the true meaning of the 
law, by giving interpretations, which shall set 
aside the corrupted glosses of commentators; it 
will teach them to love and to defend the country 
^* they inhabit; it will convince them that the land, 
where, for the first time since their dispersion, 
they have been able to raise their voice, is intitled 
to all those sentiments which rendered their an- 
" cient country so dear to them. 
" Lastly, the Great Sanhedrim, according to an- 
cient custom, will be composed of seventy mem- 
*' bers, exclusive of the President, Two thirds, or 
thereabout, shall be Rabbies, and among them, in 
" the first place, those who sit among you, and who 
have approved the answers. The other third 
" shall be chosen, by this assembly itself, among 
" its members, by ballot. The duties of the Great 
" Sanhedrim shall be to 9onvert into religious 
*^ doctrines the answers already given by this as^ 
*^ sembly, and likewise those whiqh may result 
from the continuation of your sittings. 
*^ For you will observe. Gentlemen, your mission 
*' is not yet fulfilled ; it will last as long as that of 
**the Great Sanhedrim, which will only ratify 
** your answers and give them a greater weight; 
" His Majesty is, besides, too well satisfied with j^om 



( 247 ) 



" zeal and with the purity of your intentions, to 
" dissolve this assembly before the accomplish* 
" ment of the great work in which you were cal- 
" led to assist. 

In the first instance it is fit that you should 
name by ballot a committee of nine members to 
" prepare, with us, the ground- work of your future 
discussions, and of the decisions of the Sanhe*- 
" drim. You will observe that the Portuguese, 
" German, and Italian Jews, are equally repre- 
" sented in this committee. We also invite you to 
" acquaint the several Synagogues of Europe of 
the meeting of the Great Sanhedrim without 
delay, that they may send deputies able to give to 
government additional information, and worthy 
" of communicating with you.^^ 