



{ 240 ) 



the Jordan have beheld his deeds, terrible in battles. The 

lightning of his steel gleams on the proud in arms but 

he exulteth not over the fallen foe : his mighty hand raiseth 
the fallen in the strife. 

In V^in the nations of the earth united agaifist him; 
weak was their arm, and powerless their blows. In Ma- 
jengo's and Austerlitz's bloody plains he broke the bow of 
the strong; the thickened phalanxes of his enemies were 
scattered before him. Grateful to humbled kings was the 
olive-branch 6f peace, mildly shining in the magnanimous 
hand of the conqueror. 

To imperial France he bent his victorious steps ; his 
faithful subjects greeted his return. Thus a &ther beholds 
his children, the pride of his heart, dutiful and affection- 
ate : they rejoice in £he firmness of his throne : it rests on 
victory— clemency— -virtue — humanity— justice. 

Let thy shouts, O Israel, proclaim thy gladness. Un*- 
matched are the designs of Napoleon for thee ; among 
the sons of his glory thou shalt be remembered. Away, ye 
scoffers of my people! no longer shall the head of Israel 
be humbled in dust before the pride of the wicked. 

A mournful captive, weighed down by fetters, groaned 
in the dark dwelling of the dungeon ; the sun had hid him 
from his eyes, nor did the mild beams of the moon cheer 
his sleepless eye-«-no light shone on his captivity. 



He heard a voice, as from the darkly-rolling cloud, and 
his soul arose. Is there an end to my sorrows? Shall tlie 



( 241 ) 



fetters be loosed from my hands ? Shall I again behold the 
light of the heavens ? Shall 1 visit, once more, the haunts 
of the living ? Shall 1 be one among them ? 

Such was Israel since he dwelled among nations ; a prey 
lo misfortune, the sport of scorn : his mind failed within 
him; oppressors sought after his soul; he bowed himself 
down heavily, as one sorely troubled with fear. 

Is it a vain illusion— or a vision from above r— Doth the 
dawn of happier days for him rise in the heavens? Is he 
delivered from bondage? Will the glory of his former 
days return, the honour of his name ? Shall he be num« 
bered among the children of magnanimous France ? 

It was a messenger from above ; truth is in his tidings; 
Napoleon hath undertaken our deliverance — in him is our 
trust: he will fulfil his words. Have we not beheld the 
wonders of his sublime genius ? He that has laid low the 
thrones of his enemies, he that has exalted others in their 
stead, and fixed them as on rocks, shall raise us from af- 
fliction and from shame. Under the shield of his wisdom 
we shall prosper in peace. 

From afar he called thee, O Israel, from his distant do- 
minions ; in the first of cities, queen of the world, he ga- 
thered thy chiefs around him : the wings of the eagle arc 
spread over the lamb ; their shadow is the shield of the 
weak. 

His voice sounded in our ears, pronouncing mercy ; like 

1 1 



( 242 ) 



a powerful blast it silenced the evil tongues of the wicked. 
The dawn of happiness shone upon us, ushering the bright 
day of Israel's glory. 