



( 283 ) 

" The experience of the past made you justly 
apprehend whatever tended to establish distinc- 
" tions, either in opinion or in deeds, between you 
" and the rest of Frenchmen. You had marked 
with grief tliat those different shades in man* 
" ners greatly widened the breach caused by the 
difference in religion^ and had an evident tend^ 
" ency to keep us farther removed from social in- 
" tercourse, and to perpetuate our forlorn sttUe, 
" Nothing like it is to be apprehended now. As 
" subjects of the French empire or of the king- 
" dom of Italy, the laws of both states contain no 
exceptions affecting us. As subjects of a particu- 
lar religion, the public authority places it imme* 
diately under its inspection^ and thus gives it a 
•* legal existence. As object s of the august protec- 
tion of the prince, we find, in his benevolence, a 
** sure pledge of experiencing, in fature, like sen- 
timents in the breasts of our fellow-citizens. His 
" Majesty himself has been pleased to declare, 
through his Commissioners, that, till now, you 
" had not been treated with justice. Where could 
" we find stronger grounds of Heliance than in the 
avowed intentions of so magnanimous a prince ? 

Who among us but sees and feels all the ad- 
vantages of our new liituation? who but finds in 
it an incitement to emulation, to loyalty, and to 
the most enthusiastic attachment to our country 
o o 2 



( 284 ) 

^ and to its illustrious ruler? Who, in short, does 

" not wish, most ardently, to prove himself worthy 

** of such favours? 

" The means are sure and easy; let the Israelit- 
ish youth take up again the profession of arms, 

** in which our ancestors shone so conspicuously ; 

" let them be numbered among the brave who are 
more particularly devoted to the service of a so- 
vereign who has so many rights to our most un- 
limited services. 

" It is, then, evident to every one, that the firm 
" and avowed intention of His Imperial and Royal 
" Majesty, is to restore our Israelitish brethren to 

the dignity of men and of citizens. As the plan 
" of regulations I am going to present contains all 
" the encouragement which benevolence and jus- 

tice could dictate for our protection, your Com- 
" mittee would think it an insult on your wisdom to 

doubt, for an instant, of its beings adopted in all 
" its parts." 

The plan is as follows: 

The Deputies composing the assembly of the Israelites^ 
convened by the Imperial decree of tlie 30th of May ^ 
having heard the report of the Committee of Nine^ 
named to prepare the ground-work of the delibera^ 
tions of the assembly^ considering what plan might 
Ifepresented to their brethren of France and of Italy 



K 285 ) 



for the better regulation of their religioiis wmihip 
and for the internal police of the same^ has imani- 
mously (36) adopted the following. 

PLAN. 

Art. I. A Synagogue and a Consistory shall be 
established in every department which contain^ 
two thousand individuals professing the religion of 
Moses. 