

This proposition was adopted by the assembly, 
and the President named MM, Cracovia, sen. Op- 
penheim, and J. Rodrigues, jun. Secretary, to com- 
pose that deputatioil. They immediately left the 
assembly to wait on the Commissioners of His Im* 
perial and Koyal Majesty. 

L L 2 



( 260 ) 

The assembly proceeded afterwards to aiseoond 
ballot to name the three German deputies. Out 
jof one handled votes, M. J. Lazare obtained fifty- 
five; M. Moiso Levy, fifty-five; M. Ljon Marx, 
forty-nine; M. Berr-isaac-Berr, forty-seven; M. 
David Zinzheimer, forty-^ix ; M. Cerl' Jacob Gou* 
cheaux, forty-one. In consequence, MM. J. La- 
zare and Moise Levv , hanng obtained the abso- 
lute majority of votes, the President proclaimed 
them members of the Committee of Nine. 

The three members deputed to the Comnussion« 
crsof His Imperial and Koyal Majesty entered the 
hall. They said, that they had brought the an- 
swer of M. Portalis, the only one of the Commis* 
sion^rs present ; that his idea was, that no opinio 
on could be formed of the legality or illegality of 
the nomination of the third Italian member till 
the minutes of the proceedings of the assembly 
were formally laid before the Commissioners; that 

a nomination might be annulled in two ways 

either at the request of a party interested, or on 
the requisition of the civil power intrusted with 
the care of enforcing the observ ation of the law . 

" The assembly," he said, may confirm this 

nomination, if it thinks it fit; but as the law 
" has not been attended to, should any interested 
parties object to it, the Commissioners would 
** be obliged to talce their objections into consi- 



( 261 ) 

deration, provided they were signed by the ob- 
jecting parties, and transmitted to the Commis- 
sioners by the assembly/^ As to the applicati- 
of the law to the assembly, he said that, although 
it had been made for electoral assemblies, yet it 
was general for all nominations made by ballot, 
and by an absolute majority. M. Fortalis added, 
that it appeared to him to be the best way to leave 
things as they were, until the Commissioners could 
be made officially acquainted with the doubts 
•which had arisen in the assembly as to the validi- 
ty of the nomination of the third Italian member 
for the Committee of Nine. 

The assembly took that advice, and proceeded 
to a third scrutiny to ballot MM. Lyon Marx and 
Berr-lsaac-Ben-, who, in the second scrutiny, had 
obtained the greatest number of votes after MM. 
Jacob L^zare and Moise Levy, who had an abso- 
lute majority. Out of one hundred votes M. Berr 
Isaac-Berr obtained fifty, and M. Lyon Marx for- 
ty-eight ; two votes were null, one of the lists be- 
ing blank, and another containing the name of an 
Italian member. In consequence the President 
proclaimed M. Berr-Isaae-Berr a member of the 
Committee of Nine. 

Tlie assembly continued the ballot for the no- 
mination of the Portuguese members. Out of one 
hundred votes M. Furtado the President obtaiiied 