



( 262 ) 



seventy; M. Avigdor, Secretary, fifty-one; 
Cremieux, forty-nine ; M. Abraham Andrade^ 
Rabbi, forty-six ; M. Sabbaton Constantini, thirty- 
five ; M. Marg Foy, sen. thirty-five. MM. Furta^ 
do and Avigdor, having obtained the absolute ma- 
jority of votes, were proclaimed members of the 
Committee of Nine. 

At the repetition of the ballot for the nomina? 
tion of the third Portuguese member, out of 
ninety-four votes M. Cremieux obtained thirty- 
seven; M. Andrade, Rabbi, thirty-seven; M. Marg 
Foy, sen. eleven; and M. Sabbaton Constantini, 
seven. None of these members having obtained 
the absolute majority of votes, it was proposed to 
postpone the third ballot for those two members 
who had the relative majority of votes, to the fol- 
lowing sitting. This proposition was adopted by 
the assembly. 

The President quitted the chair at half past four 
o'clock, and announced that, on Tuesday, the 23d 
inst. the assembly would resume its sittings. 



Sitting of the 23d of September, 1806. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock. 
The minutes of the proceedings of the last sitting 
were read, and adopted with a few slight alterations. 



( 263 ) 



MM. Cadet Carcassonne, Marg Foy, sen. and 
Lyon Marx, were named Commissioners to main- 
tain order in the assembly. The President an- 
nounced that the ballot between MM. Cremieux 
and Andrade, to complete the Committee of Nine, 
stood for the order of the day. Out of ninety- 
eight votes M. Andrade obtained fifty-one, and 
M. Cremieux forty-seven. The former was ac- 
cordingly proclaimed a member of the Commit- 
tee. 

The President after^vards read the draft of a cir- 
cular letter to all the Synagogues of France and 
Italy, as well as to all the Synagogues of the west- 
ern world, to announce the opening of the Sanhe- 
drim in Paris, and to invite them to send thither 
doctors of the law, to concur, by their advice, in 
the benevolent views of His Royal and Imperial 
Majesty. 

The assembly approved the design, but thought 
that, considering the importance of the measure, a 
single reading was not sufficient to sanction a re- 
solution on a document which was to be sent all 
over the world ; and thought it prudent to refer 
the circular letter to a Committee. 

After some observations from several members, 
on the question. Whether it should be referred to a 
n«w committee or to the Committee of Nine ? the 
assembly adopted this last proposition; and the 



( 264 ) 



President requested the members of the Commit- 
tee to meet at his residence, that very evening, to 
settle the plan of the proposed address^ and to this 
ena to add io tlieir number M, Zinzheimer, Rab- 
bi. This measure was approved by the assembly. 

A member proposed, that the address should be 
first written, in Hebrew, and afterwards translated 
into French and (ierman ; remarking that it was 
much more difficult to translate French into He- 
brew than Hebrew into French; that, besides, the 
Chiefs of the Synagogues, to whom the address 
was directed, understood Hebrew much better 
than modern languages ; that the first had a pe- 
culiar turn which made all literal translation ex- 
cessively difficult ; and lastly, that, in every point 
of view, the Chiefs of foreign Synagogues would 
place much more confidence in the address if writ* 
ten in Hebrew. 