

To prevent the recurrence of similar errors, it 
was proposed to form five Committees instead of 
three ; that each Committee should carefully keep 
the lists, to compare them when necessary. That 
one member only should be called at a time to de- 
liver his votes; that his list should be opened be- 
fore it was put in the box, to ascertain the number 
of names it contained. The assembly approved 
these propositions. 

A member demanded the reading of the Ad- 
dress to the Synagogue^ of Europe, which had been 
referred to the Committee of Nine. 

The President i-ead it. 

It was as follows: 



( 270 ) 



Our dear Brethren in Israel, 
* * The Most High clearly manifests his benevo- 
" lent designs in our behalf; a great event is pre- 
" paring. What our fathers had not seen for a 
" long course of centurif»s, what we could never 
expect to see ourselves, is now on the point of 
exciting the wonder of the world. 
" The 20th of October is the day fixed for 
the opening of the Great Sanhedrim, in the 
" capital of one of the most powerful Christian 
" empires, under the protection of the immortal 
Prince who governs it. 

Paris is to be the scene of this great event, 
" for ever memorable, and which shall be, for the 
scattered remnants of the children of Abraham, 
** a new aera of deliverance and of felicity. 

We this day incite you to partake of our joy, 
and to share those sentiments which our com-r 
mon origin and our common religion cannot 
" fail to excite, and which are deeply impressed in 
" our own hearts. 

** Who would not admire with us the impene- 
" trable designs of that Providence who, by means 
unknown to our weakness, changes the face of 
human affairs, consoles the afflicted, raises the 
humble from the dust, sets a term to those trials 
^* decreed in his wisdom, and excites the esteem 



( 271 ) 



and the benevolence of nations towards those 
whose hearts have remained faithful to his law! 

Since oar dispersion, numberless changes have 
manifested the vicissitude of human aiTairs : aa*' 
" tionshave been successively overwhelmed by na<« 
tions, and all have been afterwards mingled and 
heaped on each other; we alone have withstood 
** the torrent of ages and of revolutions. 

" Every thing seemed to announce for us, in 
*^ Europe, a happier state, and a less precarious 
" existence. But it was only a distant though 
" cheering prospect : to see those hopes realized, 
it was necessary that, from the midst of public 
tempests, from the tumultuoas fluctuations of 
an immense people, one of those powerful men, 
round whom nations rally from an instinct of 
self-preservation, should, conducted by Provi- 
" dence, raise his head above the roaring elements. 

" This benevolent and protecting genius wishes 
" to do away every humiliating distinction be- 
" tween us and his other subjects. His piercing 
eye has discovered, in our Mosaic code, those 
" principles of strength and of stability by which 
" it has stood the test of ages, and which formerly 
** gave our fathers that patriarchal simplicity, still 
an object of veneration in present times, and 
that heroical character so glowingly pourtrayed 
" in our history. 