



( 272 ) 

" In his wisdom he has thought it consdndnt to 

his paternal views to allow the convocation of a 
** Great Sanhedrim in Paris. The functions of 
" this body, and the objects it is to have in view, 
" are clearly laid down in the eloquent discourse 
" delivered by the Commissioners of His Imperial 

and Royal Majesty. We send it to j^u^ dear 
" Brethren, that you may yourselves judge of the 
" spirit in which it is written, and see that the sole 
" object in view is to bring us back to the prac- 
" tice of our ancient virtues, and to preserve our 
" holy religion in all its purity. 

" We now call upon you to assist your Brethren 
" with your knowledge, as the means of giving a 
" greater weight to the decisions of the Great 
" Sanhedrim, and of happily establishing among 
" us uniformity of doctrine, more consonant to 
the civil and political laws of the several states 
" which you have adopted as your country. 

" Your advice will be useful to us ; and we are 
" authorized by government to claim your assist- 
" ance. 

" Be not deaf to our voice, dear Brethren ! Se- 
^ led among you men known by their wisdom, 
the friends of truth and of justice, and able to 
assist us, in the completion of this great work. 
" Send them to take their places among us, that 



( 273 ) 



their wise and enlightened views, maj conduce 
" to general advantage. 

It must be a pleasing task for all the Israelites 
" of Europe to concur in the regeneration of their 
Brethren, as it must be glorious, for us, in par- 
ticular, to have fixed the attention of an illustri- 
" ous sovereign. 

" Never had men on earth motives equally pow- 
erful to love and to admire this sovereign, for 
none could ever boast of the effects of so signal a 
" justice, so marked a protection. To i-estore to 
" society a people commendable for private virtues, 
" to awake men to a sense of their dignity, by in- 
" suring to them the enjoyment of their rights, 
" such are the favours for which we are indebted 
" to Napoleon the Great. 

" The Sovereign Ruler of kingsand nations has 
" given him to this empire, to heal its wounds, 
to calm its political commotions, aggrandize its 
" destinies, and fix our own, and to be the delight 
" of two nations, which shall for ever bless the day 
" when they placed their happiness in his hands, 
" already intrusted with their defence. 

(Signed) " Fl RTADO, 

*' RODRIGUES, AviGDOR, 

** Secretaries" 



( 274 ) 



The assembly applauded the sentiments con- 
tained in this address, and adopted it unanimously. 

The President afterwards proposed to take into 
consideration the indemnities to be granted totlie 
deputies by their brethren in the departments; 
the assembly approved the plan almost unani- 
mously, and resolved, that the President should 
send it in a circular letter to all the departments 
of the French empire, and of the kingdom of Ita- 
ly, which have deputies in Paris, after having first 
obtained the approbation of His Excellency the 
Minister of the Interior. 