

Commissioners intrusted with tlie management 

of affairs which concern you. 

" Before we proceed further, I am directed by 
" your Committee to say, that it is an absolute 
" duty for every one of its members publicly to 
" declare that they have experienced, from theper- 

sons thus invested with His Majesty's confi- 

dence, amenity, good advice, benevolence, and 
" a constant and sincere wish to promote the salu- 
*' tary measures we thought it our duty to pro- 

pose. 

" If the Mosaic religion, its dogmas, and its 
*' pi-actices, had been as perfectly known to go- 
" vernment as the other forms of religion, our as- 
" sistance would have been altogether useless. 
, " Much better informed than we are ourselves of 
" what may tend to our happiness, government 

might have decided without calling us to Paris. 
" i he regulations which 1 am going to submit to 
" you formed an essential part of the objects for 

which this assembly ivas convened. 
Already more than once, Gentlemen, you have 



( 281 ) 



had opportunities of being convincedi that the 
" government, under whicti we have the happiness 
*^ to live, was far from attempting to act contrari* 
ly to our consciences by attacking, in the leasts 
very ancient religious opinions, or by shocking, 
" in the smallest degree, that sentiment of predi- 
" liction which men in general entertain for things 
they hold sacred from their very infancy* 
" And, in consequence, whatever could inter- 
fere with our religious dogmas, or with our reli- 
" gious practices, has been carefully avoided. We 
" have been consulted on every point connected 
*' with our faith ; and in none of the articles of 
these regulations will you find any point which 
either directly or indirectly militates against it. 
" You will, on the contrary, easily perceive that 
" now, for the first time, the Mosaic worship 
emerges from the obscurity in which it has been 
" involved these two thousand years ; that it 
emerges from that almost complete state of diis- 
organization in which it had been ever since the 
" revolution; that it now acquires a legal exist- 
ence; that its ministers are acknowledged by 
" public authority; their functions are fixed and 
settled ; their salary assured, and their influence 
directed to its true destination. 
" These regulations, while they preserve the Mosa- 
ic worship in all its purity, are far from encroach* 



( 282 ) 



** ing in the least on your civil and political rights. 
They afford, in general, and in every particu* 

" lar, aftiU confirmation of what you heard in your 
sitting of the 18th of September from the Com- 
missioners of His Majesty — The free exercise of 
yowr religious tvcrskip and Ike full enjoyment of 
your political rights are secured to you. But, in 

" return for his gracious protection, His Majesty 

" requires a religious pledge for the strict adhe- 
rence to the principles contained in your an- 
swers. 

" You know, Gentlemen, that such a pledge win 
" be found, in the doctrinal decisionsof the Great 
Sanhedrim, grounded on your answers. In the 
plan of regulations which is about to be sub- 
" mitted to you, and vt4iich, as I have already ob- 
" served, is the result of the instructions given by 
" His Majesty to the Commissioners, and of the 
" views of your Committee, every thing has been 
calculated with liie intention to give and 
strengthen such a pledge. 
" The paternal instructions of His Migesty, in 
this ipespect, cleariy evince his magnanimous 
design of raising an ancient and celebrated na* 
tion from the state of abasement in which it W9B 
" unjustly retained by prejudice. E%'ery thing is 
<^ disposed to secure the attainment of this phi« 
lanthropic object. 