

After a slight discussion on the proposition of 
the last speaker, the assembly resolved, that the 
address should be translated from the French into 
Hebrew and into German ; and that it trusted to 
the known talents of the Kabbies to give the trans- 
lation all the precision and all the correctness of 
the ideas contained in the original. 

A member thoudit, that this circular address 
ought not to be sent into the countries now at war 
with France. 



( 265 ) 



He was answered that, as the object His Majes- 
ty had in view, in allowing a Great Sanhedrim 
to be assembled under his protection, was evident- 
ly to attach more particularly the Israelites to the 
different countries they inhabit, and as it was the 
interest of every government, whether friendl;f or 
hostile, to adopt the principles which occupy the 
attention of the assembly, there could be no incon- 
veniency in sending the circular letter indiscrimi- 
nately to all the Synagogues of the western world. 
This proposition was referred to the Committee, 
with instructions to confer upon it with the Com- 
missioners of His Imperial Majesty on this subject. 

The President thouglit that no time should be lost 
in chusing, by ballot, the five and twenty lay mem- 
bers, who were to form a part of the Sanhedrim. 

One of the Rabbies thought that, before tlie as- 
sembly should proceed to such nomination, it 
seemed necessary to ascertain what qualifications 
were necessary to become a member of that au- 
gust assembly. 

A deputy observed that he, and several other 
members, had carefully investigated this subject ; 
that he had looked into all the Jewish antiquities 
without being able to find any rule which pre- 
scribed any particular qualifications as indispensa- 
ble to entitle any man to a seat in that august as- 
sembly. Several members supported that opi- 

M M 



( 266 ) 

nion, and the assembly passed to the order of the 
day. 

The assembly began the ballot for the nomination 
of the twenty-five members ; but after reading the 
first four lists, the President, observing that it was 
four o'clock, proposed to adjourn to tiie next day. 

A member, considering the tediousness of a bal- 
lot, in which the lists contained so many names, 
proposed to form several Committees for tlie regis- 
tering of the votes. 

The assemblyadjourned the consideration of this 
proposition to the next day. The President quit- 
ted the chair. 

It is, no doubt, worth while to remark, that the 
importance of thefunctions attributed to the Com- 
mittee of Nine has made the assembly most parti- 
cularly scrupulous in the choice of the members 
who were to compose it ; and it may safely be said, 
that the expectations raised in consequence have 
been completely fulfilled. 

The Italian llabbies, MM. Segre, Cologna, and 
Cracovia, are all three equally distinguished by 
their virtues, by their zeal, their talents, and their 
learning. The Rabbies of that country have 
been the first to give the example of literary and 
historical pursuits, connected v.ith theological 
learning, and a profound knowledge of the Holy 
^Vritings. The German memhers are all three 