



( 267 ) 

equally cbmnlendable for the qualities of the 
mind and of the heart. M. Berr-Isaac-Berr has 
been one of the first in France to claim for the 
Jews the indefeasible rights of citizens, and has 
strenuously laboured to make them worthy of these 
rights, by his example and by his writings. The 
productions of M. Michel Berr, his son, prove that 
he has rendered his zeal and his talents liereditary 
in his family, eoually distinguished by the learn- 
ing and polished manners of those who compose 
it. M. Moise Levy joins to an extensive fund of 
knowledge, and to various talents, the most ardent 
zeal for the interest of his Israelitish brethren ; he 
belongs to one of those Jewish families, equally 
respectable and respected, which, at all times, have 
ranked high in public esteem. M. Jacob Lazare 
joins active zeal to extensive learning: and 
lastly, the choice of the members taken among 
the Portuguese, completes the proof of the dis- 
cerning spirit of the assembly. The talents and 
the qualities of M. Furtado, the President, the 
zeal and the learning of M. Avigdor, Secretary, 
the profound erudition of M. Andrade, Rabbi, 
fulfil all the expectations which that nomination 
excited. The choice of such men may well justi- 
fy the most sanguine hopes entertained by all the 
Israelites of the happy result of the momentous 
undertaking which the Committee of Nine has to 

M M 3 



{ 268 ) 



commence and to complete under the directioti of 
the Imperial Commissioners, so worthy themselves 
of an unlimked confidence, and so well entitled to 
general esteem. 



Sitting of September 24, 1806. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock, 
and named as Commissioners to maintain order 
in the assembly, MM. Gumpel Levi, Wittersheim, 
and J. Benjamin. 

One of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 
sitting of the 23d which were adopted. 

The ballot for the nomination of the twentj^-five 
lay members, who are to form a part of the Great 
Sanhedrim, was resumed : to proceed with more 
dispatch, it was pi-oposed to form three Commit- 
tees to register the votes, one of the Scrutineers 
presiding over each. The assembly adopted this 
proposition : and the President named for the first 
Committee, MM. Emilie Vitta, Berr-Isaac-Berr, 
and May, of Paris; for the ^cond, MM. Theo- 
dore Cerf-Berr, Benjamin, and Castro, jun. ; for 
the third, MM. Olry-Hayem- Worms, Cerf-Jacob 
Gondchaux, and Baruch Cerf-Berr : fit four o'clock 
the registering of the votes was concluded. 

A member demanded that, before the result 



( 269 ) 



should be known, the votes should be reckoned, ia 
order to ascertain that the ballot was correct. 
There were, he said, one hundred deputies, which, 
at twenty-five votes each, made two thousand five 
hundred votes. This proposition was adopted, 
and the number of votes, registered in the three 
committees, amounted only to two thousand three 
hundred and eighty two. A member, seeing so 
great a diflference, proposed to annul the scrutiny, 
which was adopted. It being late, it was proposed 
to adjourn the new scrutiny for the nomination 
of the twenty-five lay members of the Great 
Sanuedrim to Friday, the 26th inst. ; thispropo- 
fiition was adopted. 