

A member proposed, that measures should be 
taken to send into the countries at war with France 
the proclamation addressed to the Synagogues of 
Europe. 

Another proposed to consult on this subject the 
Commissioners of His Majesty the Emperor and 
King, and to conform to their directions. The 
assembly approved this proposition, and directed 
the Committee of Nine to confer with the Com- 
missioners on this subject. 

The President quitted the chair at half past 
four, and announced that he should take it on the 
2(jth inst. at eleten o'clock. 



( 376 ) 



Sitting of September 26, 1806. 

The President took the chair at eleven o'clo6k ; 
he named, as Commissioners to maintain order, 
MM. Auguste Lorrich and Isaac Rodrigues. He 
announced that the nomination, by ballot, of 
twenty-five lay members, who are to form a part 
of the Great Sanhedrim, stood for the order of 
the day. 

A member observed, that, before the assembly 
should proceed to a new ballot, it was proper to 
decide whether the fii'st was irregular, as had been 
stated. 

Another maintained that the former ballot was 
Kgular, and that the hundred and eighteen votes 
wanting in the gross calculation, made by multi- 
plying one hundred by twenty-five, could not af- 
ford a motive for annulling the nomination of 
those who had obtained an absolute majority ; he 
therefore demanded that the assembly should an* 
nul the resolution adopted at the last sitting, and 
that the members already named should form a 
part of the Sanhedrim. 

Others observed, that the assembly had already 
annulled the ballot made at the last sitting ; that 
it found on its results sufiicient motives for that 
resolution, and moved for the order of the day. 

N N 3 



( 276 ) 

It was maintained, on the other side, that a bal- 
lot Gould not be considered as void, because the 
number of votes was less than that of voters. 
That nullity followed only in case the number of 
votes exceeded that of voters. 

Other members combat ted that opinion, and pre- 
tended that any difference, in more or in less, ren- 
dered the ballot void. They again called for the 
order of the day. The President put it to the 
vote, and it was adopted. 

Some deputies objected to the order of the day 
as it stood, and protested against the decision; 
they proposed to adjourn the sitting, and to refer 
the whole of the affair to the wisdom of the Com- 
missioners of His Majesty. 

It was answered, that a question already deci- 
ded required no further examination. The order 
of the day was again called for; the President 
put it again to the vote, and it was again adopted 
by the majority. 

One of the Secretaries called over the names of 
the deputies ; they, one by one, went to the table, 
and put their lists into a box. 

The Scrutineers registered the votes in propor- 
tion as they were given in : there were ninety- 
eight voters. The result of the ballot was as fol- 
lows: 



( 277 ) 



vo 


T£9. 


For M. Berr-Isaac-Berr, deputy of La 