

XIV. The Rabbies of the Central Consistory 
shall be selected from the Grand Rabbies, and the 
rules contained in the tenth article shall apply 
to all others. 

XV. A member of the Central Consistory shall 
go out every year, but he may always be re-elected. 

XVI. The vacant place shall be filled by the 
remaining members. The member elect shall not 
take his place till his election is approved by go- 
vernment. 

XVII. The functions of the Central Consistory 
are, 

1st. To correspond with the Consistories. 
2nd To watch over the execution of every 
article of the present regulations. 



( 289 ) 



3d. To denounce to the competent authority 
all inA*actions of these said regulations, 
either through negligence or through de- 
sign. 

4th. To confirm the nomination of Rabbies, 
and to propose to the competent authority, 
when necessary, the removal of ilabbies 
and of members of Consistories. 

XVIII. The Grand Rabbi shall be named by 
the twenty-five Notables, mentioned in the eighth 
article, 

XIX. The new Grand Rabbi elect shall not 
enter into his functions till he has been approved 
by the Central Consistory. 

XX. No Rabbi can be elected— 

1st. If he is not a native of France or of Ita- 
ly, or if he has not been naturalized. 

2d. ^If he does not produce a certificate of his 
abilities, signed by three Frenchmen, if he 
is a Frenchman, and by three Italians, if he 
is an Italian: and from the year 1820, if he 
does not understand the French language 
in France, and the Italian in the kingdom 
of Italy. The candidate who joins some 
praficiency in Greek or Latin to the know- 



( 290 ) 



ledge the Hebrew language, will be 
preferred, all things besides being equal. 

XXI. The functions of the Kabbies are— 
1st. To teach religion. 

2d. To inculcate the doctrines contained in 
the decisions of the Gfi^£AT Sanhedrim. 

3d. To preach obedience to the laws, and 
more particularly to those which relate to 
the defence of the country ; to dwell eq)e- 
cially on this point every year, at the epoch 
of the conscription, from the moment go- 
vernment shall first call upon the people 
tiU the law is fully executed. 

4th. To represent military service to the Is- 
raelites as a sacred duty, and to declare to 
them, that, while they are engaged in it, the 
law exempts them from the practices which 
might be found incompatible with it. 

5th. To preach in the Synagogues, and to re- 
cite the prayers which are publicly made 
for the £mp£ror and the Imperial Family. 

6th. To celebrate marriagesand to pronounce 
divorces, without, on any pretence, acting 
in either ease, till the parties wIk) require 
their ministry have produced due pir o's of 
the act having been sanctioned by tie civil 
authority* 



( 291 ) 

XXn. The salary of the Rahbies, meirbers of 
the Ceirtral Consistory, is fixed at six thousand 
Uvres; that of the Grand Rabbies of Consistorial 
Synagogues at three thousand livres; that of th# 
Rabbies of particular Synagogues shall be fixed 
by the community of Israelites which shall ha?^ 
required the establishment of such a Syna« 
gogue ; it cannot be less than a thousand livrai. 
The Israelites of the several districts may^ vote an 
augmentation of these salaries. 