



( 307 ) 



Sitting of December 11, 1806. 

The President took the chair precisely at twelve 
o'clock, and named, as Commissioners to maintain 
order, MM. Castro, jun, Hirch, and Lorich. 

One of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 
sitting of the 5th, which Were adopted with a few 
alterations. 

The President announced that the plan of the 
Arreidy already read to the assembly, stood for the 
order of the day, 

It was read again, and a member obtained leave 
to speak. He said that he caiue to protest against 
the resolution adopted in the last sitting, which 
went to approve the regulations of the Mosaic wor- 
ship. This resolution he maintained had not been 
adopted with the calmness it deserved. He ob- 
served, that as many amendments hadbeen propo- 
sed and seconded, they sJiould have been disposed 
of, before the whole of the Regulations could have 
been put to the vote. He complained of the 
mode adopted of voting by shew of hands, which 
had left doubts as to the state of the votes, and 
that no second trial had been made to ascertain 
on which side the majority was. He maintained, 
lastly, that the deliberation had been irregular, 
tliat a division had been called for ; and upon 

rr2 



( 308 ) 

these several grounds, he moved that the Resola* 
tion should be annulled. 

Other members answered successively, that the 
deliberation had been perfectly regular ; that tlie 
real irregularity consisted in the attempt of a mi- 
nority to dictate to the majority; that, in the shew 
of hands, the number of votes had been reckoned, 
and the majority ascertained ; that the Scrutineers, 
when called upon for their opinion, had formally 
declared that there was a majority; and, in conse? 
quence, they demanded the order of the day. 

A member opposed that motion, and maintained 
that the deliberation had been irregular : two others 
swpjiorted his opinion, which was combatted by a 
fourth. 

It was proposed that the assembly should divide 
on the question of the iiTCgularity of the last deli- 
beration: this proposition was carried. Out of 
$ixty one members present, forty-five voted for 
the deliberation, twelve against it, and four refused 
to vote. 

The President then opened the discussion on the 
plan of the Arrete. A member made several obser- 
vations on this plan; he thought that to call in the 
assistance of the Consistories to induce the Israel- 
i^h youth to follow the profession of arms, was tq 
appear to doubt its readiness to serve the country. 
He thought that this was an unfavourable and unr 



( 309 ) 

warranted judgment passed upon their childreiu 
Uc observed ih^t many Israelitish conscripts were 
now in the armies ; that others had joined befote 
the age which made them liable to be called upon{ 
that he knew personally seventeen Israelitish 
ofiicers of the northern departments; that what 
had induced a notion that so few Jews were among 
the conscripts was the repugnance they felt at 
owning themselves as such in their respective 
corps, where they took anom de guerre^ under whic^ 
they were generally known afterwards; that, in 
short, he did not believe, that, in proportion to the 
population, the Israelites were in fewer numbers ia 
the army than any other class of men. 