

4« 2 



( 300 ) 



laws under which the Jews live in foreign coun* 
tries, could certainly not be considered as useless; 
that the alarms excited by the twelfth article were 
equally groundless; for surely, honest fathers of fa- 
milies, who have no known means of subsistence, 
will not be driven from a country they have in- 
habited this great while solely on account of their 
misery. 

Another member observed that the objections 
which had been made on account of the police re- 
gulations which the plan was said to contain, were 
altogether groundless ; that if, in the eyes of those 
who profess a religion, the Regulations relative to 
its mode of worship appeared only in that plain 
point of view, the case was different with a govern- 
ment which connected those regulations with the 
political system: that, in this point of view, it was 
not to be wondered if there were in the Regulations 
clauses relating to the internal administration, 
necessary for the maintainance of social order. 

A member said that he would vote for the Regu- 
lations, provided the word usurer was expunged. 
He observed that a bankrupt was a thing notori- 
ous and ascertained by a variety of facts, but that 
the accusation of usury was vague and unsupport- 
ed; that such an expression would tend to confirm 
a prejudice which we should, on the contrary, en- 
deavour to do away ; he thought that the eleventh 



( 301 ) 



article was liable to be misunderstood, and he pro* 
posed to alter the wording of it. He also stated 
his apprehensions lest the twelfth artkleshoaldre^ 
vive thiQt spirit of community ^ which formerly kept 
the Israelites isolated from the great national family; 
He demanded that whatever, in that article, rela^ 
ted to civil matters, should be omitted, and that 
Consistories should have no other functions but 
those immediately connected with religion. 

Another spoke on the same side of the question; 
he presented the observations of the last speaker 
in a fuller point of view, protested against every 
clause which tended to establish distinctions, and 
demanded the adoption of the amendments alrea^ 
dy proposed. 

A third proposed to adopt the Regulations, Omit<^ 
ting the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth articles. 

A fourth proposed to add to the Regulations an 
article concerning charitable institutions, which 
he supposed connected with religious worship. 

A fifth wished for a clause allowing legacies or 
rents in the public funds, to be devised for pidttS^ 
purposes, as in other religions. 

Many members loudly called for the qu^nStion^ 
pthers wished to continue the debate. 

Others w ere for the Regulations with the amend- 
inents. 

A member proposed to adopt the whole of the 



( 302 ) 

Regulations as they stood, and that, influenced by 
the entire reliance which the assembly had in the 
wisdom and in the magnanimous views of the 
sovereign, it should only insert in its minutes an 
abstract of the objections made by several members 
principally against the tenth aiticle, that such ob- 
jections might be known as they deserved by 
Government, 