



( »4 ) 



^ b6 f Ie»fted to crown all his f^^^nirs by edntri- 
^ bating something to the salary of the Rabbies, 
^ and by directing the local authorities of the 
•* French empire, and of the kingdom of Italy, to 
" concert measures with the Consistories, that these 
last might, by their interference and their zeal, 
remove the remaining objections which might 
• still prevent the Israelitish youth from following 
^ the noble career of arm^, and thus insure an 
exact obedience to the laws of the conscription.'* 

When the reading was concluded, a member 
made several observations on various articles of 
the Regulations. 

He requested that a clause might be inserted in 
the second article, enacting, that the Israelites of 
a department should always belong to the same 
consistorial district, and that, in no case, the in- 
habitants of the same department should belong 
to different districts. 

That the assessment of the local expenditure 
should be made by the individuals belonging to 
each particular Synagogue, or by the Consistory, 
in case they could not agree. 

That when a Consistory should undertake the 
assessment of the charges of the district, each de- 
partment should have a right to send a deputy to 
assist at that assessment. 



( 293 ) 



Thst it sfaottld be enacted, in the tw^tfa arti-> 
cle, that the maintenance of the Grand Rabbi ons- 
\y should be charged on the district at Inrge^ fAtiA 
^at all other expences should be paid hj those 
who might think proper to incur them ; that eireh 
i»ne third of the salary of the Grand Rabbi should 
be paid, in the first instance, hy the inhabitants of 
the place where the seat of the Consistory is fixedf 
tind who shall, besides, fumii^ their share of tbe 
temaindev. The reason he gave fOr this t^as, thai) 
by the residence of the Grand Habbi, Aey were 
dispensed with maintaining an under Rabbi, who 
would be necessary for each particular Sytu^oigue. 

A member said, that the observations of the iert 
speaker were directed to details which might be 
taken into consideration by the local Consistories^ 
but that they were not sufficiently important to 
warrant any alteration in the general regulation. 
He called for the order of the day. 

Another member owned, that the obs^rviitione 
of the first speaker were mostly directed to de* 
tails ; some, however, were wdl intitled to the at^ 
tention of the assembly. He opposed the Order of 
the day. 

The President pot the order of the ikj to the 
vote; it was adopted; and a m«mb«r <3f (he Com* 
mittee of iNine obtained leave to speak. 



( 296 ) 



This member declared that he thought himself 
bound to renew in this assembly the objections he 
had already made in the Committee to several 
clauses of the Regulations, as unbecoming, ineffi- 
cient^ and inadmissible. That the word usurer^ 
which concludes the tenth article, tended, in a 
manner, to confirm the prevalent prejudice, that 
usury was an inherent vice of men of the Jewish 
persuasion, altho' it was to be solely attributed to 
indinduals, and not to the religion, which strongly 
condemned it, as had been proved in the answers 
of the assembly. That, because usurers were to 
be found in some departments, a phrase so vague 
and so unbecoming ought not to find a place in a 
series of Regulations which were to be common to 
all the Israelites of the French empire and of the 
kingdom of Italy. He thought that nothing could 
justify the clause of the twelfth article, which en- 
acted that the Consistories should report to govern- 
ment the names of those who could not render a 
satisfax^tory account of their means of subsistence* 
He thought this the duty of a police officer, and 
that it could not, ought not, to form a part of the 
functions of Consistories. That those assemblies, 
whose seat would be, in many cases, far removed 
from several members of the district, could not, 
without excessive difficulty, obey the injunction 