

II. In case a department should not contain two 
thousand Israelites, the jurisdiction of the Consis- 
torial Synagogue shall extend over as many of the 
adjoining departments as shall make up the said 
number. The seat of the Synagogue shall always 
be in the most populous city. 

HI. In no case can there be more than one Con* 
sistorial Synagogue for each department. 

IV. No particular Synagogue can be established, 
but after being proposed by theConsistorialSyna* 
gogue, to the competent authority. Each psurticu* 

(36) This anticipation of the unanimity of the assembly, which, in fact, 
was very far from reIishio|; the plan, must appear rather strange to aa 
FiH^UshmaD, 



( 286 ) 



lar Synagogue shall be superintended by a Rabbi 
and two elders, who shall be named by thecompe* 
tent authorities. 

V. There shal? be a Grand Rabbi in each Con- 
sistorial Synagogue. 

VI. The Consistories shall be composed, as much 
as possible, of a grand Kabbi, and of three other 
Israelites, two of whom shall be chosen among the 
inhabitants of the town which is the Seat of the 
Consistory. 

VII. The oldest member shall be President of the 
Consistory. He shall take the title of Elder qf the 
Consistory. 

VIII. In each Consistorial district the compe- 
tent authority shall name twenty-five Notables 
among the braelites who pay the largest contri- 
butions. 

IX. These Notables shall name the members of 
the Consistory, who must be approved by the com- 
petent authority. 



X. No one can be a member of the Consistory 
if be is not thirty years of age, if be has been a 



( 287 ) 



bankrupt, unless he honourably paid afterwards^ 
or if he is known to be a usurer. 

XI, Every Israelite, wishing to settle in France 
or in the kingdom of Italy, shall give notice of his 
intention, within three months after his arrival, to 
the Consistory nearest his place of residence. 

XII. The functions of the Consistory shall be-« 
1st. To see that the Rabbies do not, either in 

public or in private, give any instructions 
or explanations of the law, in contradiction 
to the answers of the assembly confirmed 
by the decisions of the Great SANHEDtiisr. 

2nd. To maintain order in the interior of 
Synagogues, to inspect the administration 
of particular Synagogues, to i^ettle the 
assessment, and to regulate the use of the 
sums necessary for the maintenance of the 
Mosaic worship, and to see that for causes 
or under the pretence of religion, no pray- 
ing assembly be formed without being ex- 
pressly authorized 

3d. To encourage, by all possible ineam^, the 
Israelites of the Consistorial district tofoI« 
low useful pitifessions, and to report to 
government the names of those who cannot 



( 288 ) 



renderasatisfactoiy account of their means 
of subsistence. 
4th. To give annually to government the 
number of the Israelitish conscripts within 
the district. 

XUL There shall be formed in Paris a Central 
Consistory, composed of three Kabbie^ and two 
other Israelites. 