



t ^ ) 



Mluded to. And lastly, that Consistories could 
not be burthened with police functions, foreign to 
religion, and which, besides, it would be impossi'* 
ble for them to fulfil ; and that, under that three?* 
fold point of view, the clause was inadmissible. 
He spoke afterwards against the clause of the same 
article which enacts that Consistories shall, ever^ 
year, report the number of Israelites within their 
district liable to the conscription. Shall the 
Consistories,'^ he said> " keep a register of the 
birth of everj'^ Jew in their district?'' He ob* 
served that the law of conscription called equally 
upon all Frenchmen, whatever religion they pro* 
fessed ; that, from the information conveyed by se- 
veral deputies, it appeared that the young Israel- 
ites, liable to that common duty, AilfiUed it as 
well as others; that this clause would tend to esta- 
blish a supposition that they were less devoted to 
their country than other Frenchmen; that such a 
supposition w as unfounded ; that, besides, if some 
were refractory, the law could enforce obedience; 
that it must not be believed that Consistories have 
more powerful means to induce the youth to follow 
the career of arms than the local authorities them- 
selves, which have the immediate inspection of the 
inhabitants of their particular districts ; that, td 
fix the attention of government more particularly 
on a class of men following any given religion, was, 

QQ 



( 298 ) 

in fact, establishing a civil difference on account 
,of a religious one ; and, in this point of view, he 
thought th6 clause inadmissible, as it was ineffici- 
ent in every other. Lastly, he observed^ that, as 
two-fifths of the members of Consistories were 
Rabbies, to direct them to watch that Kabbies 
should fulfil their duties, was, in fact, giving the 
power of inspection to those whose conduct was 
to be inspected. He also expressed a wish that 
the twenty-second, twenty-third, twenty-fourth, 
.and twenty-fifth articles should be replaced by a 
single one in these words : The expences of worship 
jshall be provided for. He concluded by moving 
the amendments alluded to in his. observations. 

Another member thought that the Regulations 
contained many equivocal clauses ; he demanded 
that the necessary amendments at least should be 
adopted, and a new plan of resolutions proposed. 

One of the members of the Committee of Nine 
defended the proposed Regulations in the m hole 
and in their details. He maintained that none of 
the clauses were injurious to civil liberty. 

He observed that the members who argued 
against separate clauses took a wrong view of the 
question, because they considered their Israelitish 
brethren, in general, to be, not such as they really 
were, but such as they ought to be, which was far 
from being the case in many parts of France. He 



( 299 ) 

thought diat, while the benevolent views of go« 
verament were so clearly ascertained — while no 
doubt could be entertained of its wisdom, it was 
unreasonable to suppose that it w anted our assist- 
ance to know the means which might complete our 
regeneration; that the word which concluded the 
tenth article reflected no more on the Israelites than 
the law of the republic of Geneva, which exclud-* 
ed from the magistracy the children of insolvent 
debtors, unless they paid the debts of their fathers, 
reflected on the Genevese; that the eleventh arti- 
cle had neither the importance nor was likely to 
produce the effects which bad been attributed to 
it. " Government,'^ said he, knows now the 
" amount of the Jewish population in both coun- 
tries ; its intention may be to ascertain, at some 
" future period, whether it has increased or dimi- 
nished. How could it be known, with certain 
ty, whether any emigi'ations have taken place, 
" from foreign countries, if the means are not ta» 
ken to distinguish the exterior causes which may 
have influenced the state of population from the 
** natural ones? Who, in short, has informed us 
that government is not seeking the solution of a 
^'statistical question He observed, bei^ides, 
jthat a measure which should tend to prevent or 
to lessen the too great influx of a foreign popula- 
tion, driven into France by the <^ression of th* 