

XXItl. Each Consistory shall present to the 
competent authority a plan of assessment among^ 
the Israelites of the district for the sums necessary* 
to pay the stipends of the Rabbies. The other 
expenees of worship shall be fixed and assessed by 
the competent authority, on the demands of the 
Consistories. The salary of the central Rabbies 
shall be proportionally paid out of the sums levied 
on the several districts. 

XXIV. Each Consistory shall name an Israelite, 
not a Rabbi, nor member of the Consistory, to 
receive the sums which shall be levied in the dis« 
trict. 

XXV. This Treasurer shall pay quarterly the 
salary of the Rabbies, and the other esxpeucee of 

pjp 2 



( 292 ) 

worship, upon orders, signed by at least three 
members of the Consistory. He shall give his ac- 
count every year, on a fixed day, in a full assem- 
bly of the Consistory. 

XXVI. Every Rabbi who, after the promulga- 
tion of the present regulations, shall be uuemr 
ployed, and will clioose, nevertheless, to remain in 
France or in Italy, shall be bound to adhere for- 
mally, and to sign a declaration of his adherence 
to, the decisions of the Great Sanhedrim. The 
copy of this declaration shall be sent to the Cen- 
tral Consistory, by the Consistory which shall have, 
received it. 

XXVII. The Rabbies who are members of the. 
Great Samhedrim shall be, as much as possible, 
preferred to all others, to fill the places of Grand 
Rabbies. 



Plan of an ArrSti. 

" The assembly of the Israelites of the French 
" empire, and of the kingdom of Italy, having 
** heard the report of its Committee of Nine, and 
" having adopted altogether the plan of regula- 

tions it has proposed ; considering that the close 



( 298 ) 



of their sitting is not very distant; and that it 
has thought it a duty to call the attention of His 
" Majesty on several measures, wnich it thinks 
calculated to promote the regeneration of the 
Jews, although these said measures could not 
all be included in the said plan of regulations; 
considering that among these measures, none 
could be more important than that which tends 
to enforce among the Israelites the obligation o£ 
military service, which the country has a right 
to require from all her children; considering, 
lastly, that it is the duty of all Israelites in the 
" French empire and the kingdom of Italy to shed 
" iheir blood in battle for the cause of France, 
with the same zeal and the same bravery which 
formerly animated their ancestors against th» 
^' enemies of the Holy City, and to seek every op- 
" portunity of proving worthy of the favours 
" which a great prince now deigns to confer on 
" them ; , 
*' Resolves, 

That the Commissioners of His Imperial and 
Royal Majesty shall be requested to lay at the 
foot of the throne the dutiful expressions of its 
unbounded and eternal gratitude. 

That the Commissioners shall likewise be re- 
quested to acquaint the Emperor with thehum- 
" ble wish of the assembly, that His Majesty, 