

The President put the Regulations to the vote, 
by shew of hands, and they were adopted by the 
majority. 

He gave afterwards in the following words, an 
abstract of the several objections against that part 
of the tenth article which states that no man shall 
be a member of the Consistory if he is known as 
a usurer. 

" If the evident intention of His Majesty is to 
" put an end to the abasement of the Jews, to in- 

corporate them more intimately with the rest of 
" Frenchmen, and to make them worthy of the 

dignity of man and of citizen, can it be doubt- 
" ed that one of the readiest means to eflTect that 
" purpose, is to do away as much as jxissible, all 

the shades which might, in public opinion, af- 
* ' ford some pretence to contempt, and thus im- 
•* pede the progress of that happy conformity in 

manners and in habits which make but quq 

family of a numerous nation ? 



( 363 ) 

" If in an act, sanctioned by pablicauthoiity, an 
exception is madeas to the Israelites onlj, which 
impeaches their probity and their morality, itii 

" matters of loans with interest, without any dis- 
tinction as to places, times, or persons, is it not 

" thi-owingon the whole nation the blame deserved 

" by a few individuals? 

" Will it not be said that the prejudice is in full 
force, and that the qualification of usurer, being 

" almost synonimous to that of Jew, the assimila* 
tion will be made, whether the article contains 
that clause or no? 

But if this qualification is acknowledged as 
ilnjust,w hen applied to all indiscriminately, wiH 
not the insertion of that allusion in a law, sane- 
tion, as it w ere, an injurious prejudice against a 

" worthy class of men, and extend its duration to 
an unlimited period? 

" If this law was not intended to be public, if 
it was not common to all, if it was only transi*^ 
tory, it would not be attended with the same in- 
" conveniences, and would, on the contrary, bepro- 
" ductive of some advantages. But this law is fot 
" all, and for ever ; for those against whom it is 
" thought necessary, and for those who stand in no 
need of it, and who consider the clause as an 
" unmerited insult offered to them; but the truth 
" is, that it is useless for every description of men; 



< 304 ) 



^ tfi>r it caimotbe rationally supposed that the five 
and twenty electors should chase for members 
of the Consistory men known as usurers; and 
*' if they should, by chance, so far forget them* 
" selves, could not the competent authority which 
*' approves or rejects their choice, easily exclude 
*' the usurer? 

" Those, who are $o hardened to contempt as to 
follow that vile pi'ofession, will not leave it oiT, 
to become members of the Consistory. To such 
men honour is nothing; they see no shame, where 
they can see profit. The clause will then hurt 
the honest, without changing the manners of 
the dishonest: towards these last, restrictive 
measures of quite another nature must be adopt- 
•*cd. 

*' Will it be said that this clause ought to be a 
matter of indifference to those who do not deserve 
to be excluded, since it does not concern them ? 