

•* Surely it would be a very wrong opinion to sup- 
pose that those members who strongly object to 
that article are apprehensive of its being ap- 
plied to them ; and it is precisely because they 
have no such apprehension iliat it gives them 

** more pain. 

" They are included in that general expression 
of jealousy, which the law attaches to all the 
followers of their religion, and which thus 



( 305 ) 



" stamps for ever an indelible mark of shame on 
" everyone of them. Those who are charged with 
" usury may renounce the practice, but the stain, 
" thrown on all indiscriminately, will last for ever. 

And besides, who is to fix the nature of usury, 
" since the laws are silent on the subject? where 
" is the line of separation between legal and illegal 
" interest ? Shall public opinion and general cha- 
" racter direct our judgment ? But then how can 
" we believe that the five and twenty Notables^that 
the cs^mpetent authority which shall inspect their 
" proceedings, can be so far led astray as to honour 
by their choice a man held iii public contempt ? 
** If the Consistories of the departments in 
which usury is practised, or even of those where 
it is unknown, were to adopt particular regula 
" tions, in order to exclude fi-om all honourable 
functions men degraded by that nefarious traf- 
fic, nothing could be more conducive to good 
manners, more congenial to social spirit, or more 
worthy of the approbation of a government 
bent upon reform: this falls, besides;, within the 
compass oi the jurisdiction of the Great 
Sanhedrim. But to have such a degrading 
expression sanctioned in an act of the supreme 
authority, would be again to debase, in their 
*^ own eyes, and in those of their fellow citizens, 
men whom it is meant to raise in the public es« 

R R 



( 306 ) 

" teem ; it would act in direct contradiction to 
the benevolent intentions of the Prince^ and as 

" an impediment to the regeneration he wishes to 
effect. 

" Consequently, to adopt the clause of the 
" tenth article, inasmuch as it affects those Israel- 
" ites of the two countries who form an immense 
" majority, would amount to this declaration in 
" other words, that none can be a membei of a 
" Consistory if he is known to have been guilty of 
*• robbery. Would not the supposition that it is 
" necessary to inforce such a motive of exclusion, 
" throw a slur over one hundred thousand indivi- 
" duals, and represent them as capable of giving 

their votes to a few wretches, who follow that 
" nefarious profession in a corner of the empire 

Such is the abstract of the objections made in 
the assembly against the last clause of the tenth 
article. 

The President afterwards opened the discussion 
on the plan of the Arrcte; but, foreseeing that it 
would be impossible to decide the question in that 
sitting, he proposed to adjourn, which was adopt* 
ed. 

The President then quitted the chair, and an* 
nonnced that he would take it again on the 11 tb, 
at twelve o'clock. 