

Another member spoke on the same side, and 
considered the interference of the Consistories, in 
a case where the law admits of no exception, as 
a humiliating distinction, 

Several articles were proposed to replace that 
which was objected to, but the assembly main* 
tained the original article as it stood in the 
minutes of the last sitting. 

A member observed that this plan of an Arrete 
contained no grounds, on which the request of the 
assembly, that His Msgesty would be pleased to 
contribute to the salary of the Kabbies, could 
possibly be established. 
A discussion arose on this; the President, seeing 



( 310 ) 

that it could not be closed in that sitting, adjourn- 
ed the debate to the next. 



Sitting of December 18, 18C6. 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock. 
One of the Secretaries read the minutes of the 
last sitting which were adopted nem. diss. 

The President announced afterwards that the 
continuation of the debate on the plan of the 
Arrete stood for the order of the day. 

A member pro))Osed to close the debate and to 
put the question to the vote. 

Another proposed to insert in the Arrete a hum- 
ble prayer to His Imperial and Royal Majesty, that 
lie might be pleased to modify his decree of the 
31st of May, in such a manner as he might, in his 
wisdom, think proper, to prevent the too great 
extension usually given to its meaning, which ex- 
tension was against the real design of the legislator, 
and was productive of the greatest hardships to al- 
most the whole of the inhabitants of the depart- 
ments named in the aforesaid decree. 

Another observed that such a petition ought to 
form a distinct object ; he proi>osed to put first to 
the vote the plan of the Arrete as it stood, and af- 



( 311 ) 



terwards to take into consideration the complaints 
of the Jews of the eigiit departments alluded tOi 
This proprosition was carried; the plan of the Arr Hi 
was put to the vote^ and adopted by a majofity. 

The President announced that the discussion 
was opened on the decree of the 31st of May: A 
member proposed to name a Committee which 
should examine into this affair, and makfe its re** 
port to the assembly. Another proposed tointrust 
the Committee of Nine with the investigation of 
this delicate point. Another wjis of the safne opi- 
nion, and proposed, by way df amendment, that a 
member of each of these departments should be 
added to the Committee of Nine, inorderto afibrd 
such information as was necessary to guide it iii 
its researches; This proposition was adopted^ andt 
the President named 



M. Cerf- Jacob Gondchaux for the department 
of La Moselle 

Hertz-Loeb Lorich, for Mount Terrible. 
Abraham Cohen, for the Lower Rhine: 
Caiman, for the Upper Rhine. 
Lyon Marx, for Rhin ct Moselle. 
Salomon Oppenheimer, for La Roer. 
Jacob Hirch, for La Sai-re. 
Jacob'Louis May, for Le Vosges, 



( 312 ) 

The President requested these members to ar- 
range, among themselves, the day on which they 
CQuld attend the Commission. 