

" As to you. Gentlemen, who are called together 
" to prepare the happiness of your brethren, let 
" not your zeal abate, and assist, with all your 

power, the benevolent intentions of your sove* 



( 916 ) 



" reign. If the wicked scorn your labours^ jou 
have the blessings of the wise, Comjdete the 
glorious work ibr which you hiive been caUe4 
together: immortal gkiry awaits you at the end 

" of your career. 

" We could wish, M, President and Gentlemen 
Deputies, that our sentiments and our sincere 

" good wishes for the success of your enterprize 
were better expressed.^' 
The President quitted the chair. 

Sitting of the 23d of December^ 1806, 

The President took the chair at twelve o'clock* 
One of the Secretaries read the minuter of the 
13th ; they were adopted nem. diss. 

He read aftervi^ards a letter of the 2d. inst< fron^ 
M. Belluomini, Minister of their Imperial and Se- 
rene Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Lucca 
and Piombino, at the court of His Majesty the 
Emperor of the French and King of Italy, in which 
that Minister informed the President, that^ from 
the new maxims adopted by his government, eve- 
ry individual, following the religion of Moses, 
would be at liberty to settle and acquire landed 

ss 2 



( 316 ) 



property in the principalities of Lucca and Piomr 
bino ; where they would enjoy the same protection 
and the same facilities which are granted to the 
other subjects of their Imperial and Serene High- 
nesses. This Minister concluded by requesting 
the President to impart this information to the 
assembly, to the Great Sanhedrim, and to ail 
Israelites with whom he was in the habit of cor- 
responding. 

The assembly received this communication with 
applauses, and resolved that the President, in an-r 
swering the Minister of their Imperial and Serene 
Highnesses, should express the dutiful gratitude of 
the deputies of the assembly for the new maxims 
of justice and humanity adopted by them. 

The same Secretary read ako a letter from the 
University of Leghorn, signed by M. Pellegrin 
Isaac Worms, dignitary of that respectable acadcr 
my, and by M. Delvecchio, its Chancellor. 

This letter, beingwritten in Hebrew and Italian, 
several mi^mbers demanded that it should be trans- 
lated into French, and inserted in the minutes. 

This proposition was adopted unanimously. 

M. Felix Levi, member of a Commission, named 
in the last General Committee of the Assembly, to 
wait on His Excellency the Minister of the Interi- 
or, and to deliver a letter from the President rela- 
tive to the salary of the members of the assembly, 



( 317 ) 



acquainted the President that His Excellency 
ivished to know the names of the departments 
which had refused to pay their deputies, and that 
he would suspend his judgment till then. 

A niecnber proposed that the President should 
name a Commission which would collect all the 
necessary documents to fulfil the intentions of Hi& 
Excellency the Minister for the Interior. 