

to their demigods, in short, to all the supersti- 
" tions of the blindest ignorance, must have de- 
" tested, hated, and persecuted the Jews, the avow- 

ed enemies of all these superstitions. But what 
" is really inconceivable, is to see that the Chris- 
" tians, who have the same origin with us, the 
" Christians, our feliow-sufFerers under Nero, Ves- 

pasian, Titus, Domitian, Adrian, and several 
" othei-s, could, contrary to their duty, have inherit- 

ed, from those irreligious nations, that hatred and 
" that cotitempt which we at first shared together. 

It is really difficult to find the solution of that 

problem. 

" This conduct is the more incomprehensible, as 
the most celebrated Chnstian moralists have for- 

** bidden persecution, professed toleration, and 

" preached Christian charity. 
" St. Athanasius (book i.) says. 
It is an abominable heresy to attempt to convert 



C 328 ) 



** f^^^^t ^9 blowsy by imprisonment^ those whom 
** reason has not been able to convince. 

Nothing is more contrary to religion than con- 
" straintyS^ys Justin Martyr (book v). 

" Shall we persecute those whom God tolerates? 

says St. Augustine. 

Lactantius (book iii.) says, on this subject. 

Compulsory religion is no longer religion: we must 

persuade^ not constrain. Religion is above the 
** reach of power. 

*' Advise^ says St. Bernard, but do not compel. 

" Since, therefore, Christian morality teaches 
** every one the love of his neighbour and of his 
" brother, the causes of the vexations and of the 
" persecutions which we have so frequently expe- 
" rienced must be sought for in ignorance and in- 

veterate prejudice. This is so true, that those 

sublime virtues of justice and humanity have 
" been frequently put into practice by Christians 
" truly learned, and especially by worthy minis- 

ters of that pure morality which calms the ef* 

fervescence of passion and instils the love of vir- 
♦* tue into the mind. 

" It is in conformity to these sacred principles 

of morality that, at different times; Roman pon- 
" tiffs have protected and received into their do- 

minions the Jews, persecuted and driven from 
" various parts of Europe, and that cler£;ymen, of 



( 329 ) 



" every countiy, have often raised their voice in their 
" defence in several states in that part of the world. 

Towards the middle of the seventh century, 
" St. Gregory defended the Jews, and protected 
" them in the Christian world. 

In the tenth century, the bishops of Spain re- 
" sisted, with the greatest energy^ the violence of 

a furious multitude, bent on their destruction. 

" The pontiff Alexander II. wrote to those bi- 

shops a letter full of congratulations on their be- 

haviour on that occasion. 

In the eleventh century, the Jews, then very 

numerous in the diocesses of Uzes and of Cler- 
" mont, were powerfully protected by the bishops. 

" St. Bernard defended them in the twelfth cen« 
" tury from the rage of the Crusaders. 

" They were protected likewise by Innocent IL 
" and Alexander III. 