

The assembly proceeded afterwards to name six 
lay \ ice-deputies for the Great SANnEDiuM. It 
w as agreed that this election should be made by 
the relative majority of votes* Ottoienghi ob* 
tained forty-seven ; M. Ghedeglia^ forty-^seven; M. 
EmilieVitta, thirty-eight; M. Dreyfoss, twenty- 
seven; M. Hirch, twenty; and M. Felix Levy^ six- 
teen: as they had the relative majority of votes, the 
President proclaimed them vice deputies to the 
Great Sanhedrim. 

One of the Secretaries read an address from the 
Israelites of Frankfort on the Maine, signed by 
two-hundred and fifty individuals ; it was applaud- 
ed by the assembly. A member demanded that it 
should be inserted in the minutes, and that the 
President should be requested to return an answer, 
and to express, to the brethren who have signed 
this address, the sincere wishes of the assembly 
that all the powers might adopt, towards all Israel- 
ites, those principles of justice and of humanity, 
of which France gives them an example this day. 

This proposition was adopted unanimously, and 
the President quitted the chair. 



( 018 



Address of the Israelites of Frslnkfort oa the Maine, 
to the President and to the Assembly of the De^ 
puties of those of France and of Italjr. 

" M. President, 

*' We could no longer remain silent without 
" belying our sentiments, and our wishes. The 
" convocation of the assembly, over which you 

preside, had at first filled us with joy, and with 

the most flattering hopes; our admiration h^s 

been excited by the answers you have returned 
" to the questions proposed by the Great Monarch. 
" Such answers could come only from men equally 
" and deeply impressed with thetrue spirit of their 
*' religion and with a just sense of the duties of 
" viituous citizens^ We have perceived in them 
*' the rectitude of upright negotiators, blended 

with those conciliating manners so well calcu- 

lated to remove difficulties. 

The Israelites, scattered in the immensity of 
" the French empire^ were already liappily rein- 

stated in the indefeasable rights of nature. 

" The Great Nation had already broke the fetters 
" of a people held too long in slavery^ and had 
" overthrown the fatal bander which separated the 
" Hebrews from their brethren. It had already 
" restored to the country useful citizens and de* 

s s 



( 314 ) 



" fenders too long neglected. Obstacles still im- 
•* peded the full enjoj ment of those inestimable 
** blessings, and the immortal Napoleon wias the 
" man destined to complete our hapj.nness. 

" His vast genius clearly perceived that abuses 
" had crept into our religion, which made reform 
" necessary: but, wishing to remove all apprehen- 
** sions of his intending to attack, in any degree, 
*' our ancient religious principles, he has called 
you as a father would call his diildren, to deli- 
berate with him on your dearest interests. May 
the glorious example of France extend beyond 
the limits of its empire ! May the humanity of 
" its sovereign gain ground over the whole earth, 
" and produce a noble sentiment of emulation, by 
" which we shall be admitted to share the happi- 
" ness of our brethren, instead of a barren senti- 
" ment of admiration ! May the Rulers of man^ 
kind lend an attentive ear to the mournful voic^ 
" of an insulted nation ! O Divine Goodness ! 
" deign to cast a look of mercy on a people for- 
" merly the object of thy complacency? Inspire 
" the masters of the world ! Move their hearts in 
favour of Israel!" 