

Another presented a plan of a general assesf«( 
ment for the payment of the d^uties. The as- 
sembly spontaneously manifested its uiiwiHing- 
ness to fonn a general assessment, which would 
include in one mass all the Israelites of France 
and of Italy. Several members took this occa- 
sion to declare that they were perfectly satisfied 
with the departments which had sent them^ and 
demanded that those deputies who had claims to 
make, should acquaint the President with it, that 
he might acquaint His Excellency the Minister for 
the Interior therewith. This proposition was 
adopted. 

The President read afterwards to the assembly 
the answer he had prepared to the address of their 
brethren at Frankfort on the Maine; it was as fol- 
lows: 

" Gentlemen, 

I have communicated the letter you did me 
the honour of writing tp me. On ihe 2dth of last 



( 318 ) 



month, and the address which acoompamed it, 
to the assembly of which I am President. 

The assembly heard it with the liveliest inte- 
" rest, and justly applauded the sentiments and 
" wishes expressed in it with such a peculiar ele- 
ration of sentiment. 

" It has done justice to your communication by 

unanimously voting its insertion in its minutes, 
" and by directing me, as President, to thank you 

for the honourable approbation you express of 
" our efibrts. 

" We have doxie what circumstances allowed; 
^ we shotdd hare done more and better, if part of 

what happens to day had taken place twenty 

five years ago. 

*• Providence, Gentlemen, has heefn particularly 
•* favourable to us; it inspires the great man who 
governs us with tlie idea of putting an end to 
our state of hunuliation and abasement. Among 
all the triumphal monuments raised e^ery where 
" to his glory, our restoration to all the rights of 
" nature will not be the least durable. 

The impulse given by France, the influence 
^* of its opinions on the European continent, in- 
^ dulge a hope that many states will be proud to 
follow its example. 

" The time will come when people shall no 
longer give vent to those odious and ridiculous 
passions which wei'e gratified by our humiliation. 



( 31» ) 



" The career of esteem and of consideration is 
open for us; let us enter it with a bold step; let 

" us divest ourselves of the rust of prejudices. — - 
1 hus shall we conquer the prejudices of others. 
" Among the followers of our religion we have 

^ too many merchants and bankers, and too few 
land-ownei's and artificers ; above all, too few 
husbandmen and soldiers. 
" We must all wish that sovereigns would adopt 
legislative measures to direct your exertions to 
these two professions. 

You share, no doubt. Gentlemen, our opinion 
on this subject; the good sense which pervades 
your address is a sure pledge of your sentiments, 
as it entitles you to the profound esteem of every 
member of this assembly, and in particular to 
that of 

« FURTADO, 

« Presidentr 

This letter was applauded and approved unani* 
mously. On the proposition of a member, the 
assembly resolved that it should be inserted in the 
minutes. The President quitted the chair at three 
o'clock. 