

" l o be convinced of this truth, it is enough 
*' rapidly to recur to the most remarkable aeras of 

our history, and to examine your own situation, 
" in respect to the nations among which you have 

lived. 

" You see, first, that Abraham has been the first 
" to proclaim the existence and the unity of a God 

w ho created all things by hi^ sole w ill. 

" Some years afterwards, Joseph, fourth des- 
•* cendant of Abraham, became, by his talents, the 
"arbiter of Egypt and of the neighbouring coun* 

trieSe 



{ 323 ) 



** This sildden elevation of Joseph may, in a 
" political point of view, be considered as the root 
of that astonishing hatred which has lasted to 
our very days, and which has been constantly 
** continued by the difference of religion. 

Every one is acquainted with the expressions 
" of Pharaoh to Joseph, to the great and the learn- 
*' ed of his court — Can we findsuch a one as this 
a man in whom the spirit of God isf 
" Then turning to Joseph : 

Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all things^ 
there is none so discreet and wise as thou art. Thou 
*' shalt be over my house ; and according unto thy 
" word shall all my people he ruled: only in the 
" throne will I be greater than thou.^^ 

" These words, pronounced with great dignity, 
" must have been keenly felt by all the courtiers 
" of that prince. 

" Fallen all at once in the opinion of so power- 
" fula monarch, obliged to bend before a stranger, 
" their sole sentiment must have been fm unjust 
" desire of revengingthemselvesfor somanyhumili- 
ations ; and as they could not wreak their re- 
" sentment on Joseph, it fell with redoubled 
violence on his posterity. 

" Thus ignorance and jealousy were the first 
" causes of the persecution which the Israelites ex- 
perieuced from the Egyptians. 

T T 2 

i 



( 324 ) 



Moses delivered them from the yoke of these 

oppressors, and conducted his people to the 
" frontiers of that land promised to Israel, but 
" of which he was to possess himself by conquest. 
It was there that God's elect, admonished 

that his death was at hand, intrusted to Joshua 
" the fate of the Hebrews. It was under thecom- 
" mand of that worthy successor of Moses, that 
** Israel entered the laud of Canaan. There he 
" fixed his dwelling; and the world beheld, for the 

first time, a regular code of civil, political, and 
" religious laws put into practice ; it was there, 

too, that, after long vicissitudes, Israel acknow- 
" ledged that a monarchical form of government 
*' was the only one which could suit a nation com- 

posed at the same time of husbandmen, soldiers, 
" and merchants, 

" As, however, this conquest had been necessari- 

ly attended with a vast eflusion of blood, the 
" vanquished, driven from their country, must 

have naturally hated a people who abominated 
" idolatry, and who had conquered their country 
" by force of arms. 

" JVevertheless, Solomon, third King of Israel, 
" by his wisdom succeeded in procuring peace from 
" his external enemies, and in inspiring his subjects 
" with the love of sciences, arts, and commerce. 
The description of the temple, raised by that 