

* 21 added for under-recording ** Increased by 50% from 42 for under-recording

DEA TH, DISEASE AND MEDECINE 243

Worthy Park was a typical Jamaican sugar plantation in most re 
spects, though somewhat larger, further inland, and consequently even 
more self-contained than the average. How then did its pattern of death 
and disease compare with other types of settlement and other areas? Al 
though comparable vital statistics were not obtainable, it has at least prov 
ed possible to compare the Worthy Park causes of death figures for 1792- 
1838 with the only previously published cause-of-death analysis for a 
West Indian slave population, derived from British Guiana, 1829-32, and 
with figures for the total population of heavily urbanised St. Catherine's 
parish, Jamaica, between 1774 and 1778, including free whites, coloureds 
and blacks as well as slaves. 10 
In fact, when looking for comparisons with the Worthy Park causes 
of death, it was the data from St. Catherine's - a lowland area with some 
sugar plantations but heavily dominated by Spanish Town, the Jamaican 
capital - which were first employed. The contrasts between a tightly 
knit but closed and rural population of slaves, and largely urbanised and 
geographically mobile population, including all races and classes, were 
immediately apparent. This was particularly so in the far greater incidence 
of death by 'fever' and the far smaller number of deaths by old age in 
Spanish Town and its environs. A tragically high proportion of those who 
died from fever in Spanish Town were members of the white army gar 
rison who, during their period of acclimatisation, suffered from one of the 
highest mortality rates in the world. 11 The evidence for mortality among 
urban slaves is ambivalent, 12 but it is almost certain that the beneficial 
effects stemming from the fact that they were largely Creoles, and from 
rather better food and working conditions than on plantations, were offset 
by a vulnerability induced by slum crowding, poor sanitation, nearby 
swamps, and the chances of reinfection by transients, particularly in re 
spect of epidemics. All in all, the mortality rates in tropical towns were 

9 These tables are all taken from the forthcoming Searching for the Invisible Man, Chapter III. 10 The British Guiana data is cited in ROBERTS, op. cit., 175. The St. Catherine's data is derived from Jamaica, Island Record Office, St. Catherine's Copy Register, Causes of Death, Vol. I. There.is a list of death causes in Edward BRATHWAITE, The Development of Creole Society in Jamaica (Oxford, Clarend6n Press, 1971), but since these refer to the deaths of soldiers in the military hospital, it is not comparable. Barry Highman, "Slave Population and Economy in Jamaica at the Time of Emancipation" (unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of the West Indies 1971) also has a cause of dath table for parts of Jamaica in the Registration period (1617-29). This suggests close parallels, but cannot be correlated with those given here because of the smallness of the samples (125) and the differing categories. Between 1817 and 1836 the average annual mortality for white troops stationed in Jamaica was 121.3 per thousand, of whom 101.9 died from favers. This compared with total figures for black troops of 30 per thousand (fevers 8.7). The comparable figures for the Windwards and Leewards station were 78.5 per thousand for white troops (fevers, 36.9), and 40 (fevers, 7. I) for black troops. ROBERTS, 165-72, quoting TULLOCH and MARSHALL.. 12 Barry Higman believes that 'race/geographic' origin was more important than rural/urban dichotomy, and that 'urban' slaves were healthier than plantation slaves. How ever, his definition of 'urban' includes concentrations no larger than a hamlet, as well as the few true Jamaican towns; Kingston, Port Royal, Spanish Town, Montego Bay.