

248 HISTOIRE SOCIALE - SOCIAL HISTORY

less likely to suffer from certain types of disease notoriously fatal to Eu 
ropeans in the tropics. Most types of malaria and yellow fever were Afri 
can in origin, and African slaves at least had inbuilt immunities. Sleeping 
sickness (trypanosomiasis), however, was only known among the African 
born, since the infection was carried by the tsetse fly, which never migrat 
ed from Central Africa to the West Indies. 
Rather more common killers than fever on plantations, even among 
acclimatised slaves, were the many varieties of pulmonary infection im 
ported from Europe. In these cases, resistance was low through lack of 
immunisation, but also was sapped by overcrowding, overwork, and de 
ficient diet. Influenza could kill directly, but even the common cold could 
accelerate into fatal pneumonia, or a cough or 'catarrh' degenerate into 
'galloping consumption'. Whooping cough, though not common, could 
be fatal to slave children. Diet and vitamin deficiencies also contributed 
to the high incidence of dropsy, a diagnosis applied to any swelling thought 
to be caused by an excess of one of the bodily fluids. 
Yet dropsies were at least as common among the whites as among 
the blacks in Jamaica, with liver, heart and urinary conditions often exac 
erbated by excessive drinking. Though some writers deplored the intem 
perance of town slaves, few slaves in fact had opportunities for such over 
indulgence. This probably also explains why they so rarely suffered from 
the gout, or the mysterious 'dry belly-ache' so common among Jamaican 
whites, now known to have been lead poisoning due to drinking rum dis 
tilled in vessels made of lead, and drunk from pewter pots. 
Some 'dropsies' and 'ulcers' among slaves were symptoms of horri 
fying diseases originally imported from Africa which remained endemic 
among blacks, though whites were seemingly immune ; elephantiasis, 
'coco bays' (alias 'Arabian leprosy'), scrofula, true leprosy, and yaws. 
Of these, yaws, a highly contagious but non-venereal variant of syphilis, 
was especially virulent. Often contracted in childhood, it was characteris 
ed first by raspberry-like eruptions, then by scarring and ulceration, and, 
in the prolonged tertiary stages, often by excruciating 'bone-ache' and 
damage to cartilages, spleen and brain. Many sufferers died of old age 
or general debility rather than of yaws itself, but the disease progressively 
sapped energy and will, as well as making the victims pathetically un 
sightly. On some Jamaican estates about a sixth of the slaves, at any one 
time , suffered seriously from yaws, and there was a separate 'yaws 
hothouse', or isolation hospital, where the worst cases withered away.1 8 
At Worthy Park, however, the disease was rather less serious and a second 
hothouse was not considered necessary. 
From the death diagnoses, true venereal disease seems to have been 
relatively uncommon at Worthy Park and elsewhere, though the effects 
of yaws were often indistinguishable from those of syphilis, and gonorrhea 