

18 14 I

38 3 I

3 I I 401

Helminthiasis 
Internal Parasites 
Cerebral Palsy VI 
Epilepsy 
Spinal Chord Disease 

VII Acute Common Cold VIII

Hernia IX Menstrual Disorder X

XI Chronic Skin Ulcers XIII Nervous System XVI

Cardiovascular, Lympathic Respiratory System Upper Gastro-intestinal Lower Gastro-intestinal Limbs & Joints

Senility

Sudden Death (Unknown Cause)

Other Sicknesses, Unspe cified

Suicide Legal Intervention

XVII

The 401 specific causes of death from Worthy Park represent perhaps the largest sample it is now possible to recover from a single Jamaican estate. However, any such single source needs careful preliminary eval uation before its general value is established. The two chief deficiencies of the data are that they are not complete, and that they are derived from a population which changed considerably during the 46 years covered, particularly in the gradual increase in the proportion ·Of Creole (island bom), and thus fully 'seasoned' (acclimatised) slaves. It is likely that be tween 1792 and 1838 some l, 100 slaves actually died at Worthy Park, so that causes of death are specifically unknown for almost two-thirds. How ever, the nature of the records determine that these causes of death can

240 HISTOIRE SOCIALE - SOCIAL HISTORY

be regarded as virtually a random sample, scattered evenly over the entire 
period and over the whole range of the population. 
Causes of death data are deficient for two periods of exceptional 
mortality, following a large influx of new Africans in the 1790s, and the 
arrival of more than 100 new Creoles in 1830. This may have led to a 
slight understatement of the deaths by 'fever' and 'flux'. Yet these periods 
of exceptional mortality occurred in only about four of the 46 years cover 
ed. Were all causes of death in those years specifically known and record 
ed, this would surely have led to a severe distortion of the overall situa 
tion. Moreover, only a minority of Jamaican estates had comparable in 
fluxes of population in slavery's last years. 
Another area of slight doubt was the degree to which causes of infant 
death were underrepresented. It is well known that infant mortality itself 
was commonly understated by plantation records, though not quite to 
the degree that some writers believe. 7 At Worthy Park, the number of 
those who were born and died during the intercensal periods and thus 
went unrecorded was probably no more than one in five overall. Over the 
period 1792-1838 just over 30 per cent of those born on the estate died 
in their first five years. Only about 20 per cent of the known causes of 
death related to deaths in this age range. But since about a third of Worthy 
Park's slaves were African-born and never were infants at Worthy Park 
it seems likely that causes of infant death were not underrepresented at 
all. 

It is a commonplace of plantation studies that new African slaves suffered far higher mortality rates and died from different diseases than seasoned Creoles. Yet it should be remembered that by the beginning of the period eovered an established plantation of 500 slaves would, on the average, receive only two or three new Africans a year, and that from the ending of the British slave trade in 1808 the flow dried up altogether. Accordingly, for Jamaica as a whole, and for most long-established estates, the proportion of Africans in the slave population declined from only about 50 per cent in 1792, to no more than IO per cent in 1838. The Worthy Park figures were 42.1 per cent in 1784, soaring to 63.4 per cent in 1794, and then declining gradually to 37.9 per cent in 1813 and 9.6 per cent in 1838. 8 If it is accepted then that the causes of death from Worthy Park for the last half century of slavery were more or less random and representa tive, it is worth stating here what were the average demographic char acteristics of that plantation during that period, in respect of the sex ratio, age cohorts, mortality and fertility levels, and life expectancies.