

16 For contemporary views on 'dirt eating' see Thomas DANCER, The Medical Assistant; or Jamaica Practice of Physic [ ... ) (Kingston, Jamaica : Aikman, 1801); James THOMPSON, A Treatise on the Diseases of Negroes as they occur in the Island of Jamaica (Kingston, Jamaica: Aikman, 1820), 24, 32 ; James STEWART, A View of the Past and Present State of the Island of Jamaica (Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, 1823), 307. Some modern commentators have suggested a connection between dirt eating and the deficiency disease beri-beri; Shyrock, 'Old South', 50.

DEATH, DISEASE AND MEDECINE 247

other reason, though, might have been that the Worthy Park doctor was 
less ready than other plantation doctors to diagnose lockjaw as a cause 
of death. 17 
At least two fevers which were later recognised as tropical scourges, 
the food and water-borne typhoid, and the louse, flea, and mite-borne 
typhus, were also encouraged by unhygienic conditions such as were found 
in West Indian plantations and towns. Unfortunately, certain identifica 
tion of these fevers in the West Indies during slavery days is now impos 
sible. However, if they did occur, typhoid was probably more common 
in the towns than on rural plantations, and of the three main types of ty 
phus, scrub typhus, carried by ticks and chiggers and characterised by 
dropsy-causing myocarditis, was that most likely to have occurred on plan 
tations. Cholera was apparently not known in the West Indies until after 
British slavery ended, though there were disastrous outbreaks later. Dip 
theria, if it existed, was not recognised during slavery days. 
Of the endemic fevers detectable in the records, malaria ('ague') 
and dengue were widespread, but the chief killer was probably yellow 
fever. This disease, so-called for the jaundicing that followed from liver 
infection, was technically endemic, but went through epidemic phases as 
different strains of virus went the rounds. Doctors correctly ass~ciated 
fevers with marshes, but erroneously attributed infection to 'miasmas' 
rising from them at night, rather than to the anopheles and aedes aegypti 
mosquitoes that bred in them and carried the viruses. Slaves did what 
they could to repel mosquitoes by sleeping with permanently smoking 
fires nearby, but this was to reduce the nuisance rather than through a 
perception of danger. It was the immunisation process of the passage of 
time rather than such preventative measures which . brqught about the 
gradual decline in deaths from fevers. Many slaves indeed were already 

17 In his report to a committee of the Jamaican House of Assembly in 1788, Dr. Quier was reported as saying, "That he has not in general observed any very great Mortality amongst the Negro Infants, soon after their Birth, in that part of the Country where he practises, nor any peculiar Disease to which they are more subject, than any other Children would be under the same Circumstances [ .. . ). That in his Opinion, difficult Labours happen as frequently amongst Negro Women here as amongst the Females of the Labouring Poor in England ; but that he has not observed that a greater. proportion of the Infants of the former perish in the Delivery than of the latter; that he does not conceive the Tetanus or Locked Jaw to be a disease common to Infants in the part where he practices; that he apprehends there may be a reason to suppose that a Symptom which generally attends approaching Death, from whatever Cause it may proceed, in Children vizt. a Paralysis of the Muscle of the Lower Jaw, has been frequently mistaken by People unacquainted with Medicine, for the Tetanus, as he has often observed the same name to be given in common discourse to both those Afflictions though of so very different a Nature [ ... ]." Report of the Assembly on the Slave Issues, enclosed in Lt. Gov. Clark's No. 92, 20 Nov. 1788, London, Public Record Office, C.O. 137/88. Relative to the common belief that many slave infants died of tetanus before they reached the age of nine days it is worth pointing out both that tetanus is rarely fatal in less than two weeks, and also that slave mothers probably regarded the killing of an ailing infant less than nine days old as abortion, not infanticide, since the humanising spirit was believed to be acquired after the ninth day. For tetanus, see also, Edward LONG, The History of Jamaica , 3 vols. (London, 1774), III, 713 ; DANCER, Medical Assistant . 269.