

244 HISTOIRE SOCIALE - SOCIAL HISTORY

probably twice the average for whole colonies, and higher than for any 
plantations. 13 
Though largely explicable, the very great differences between the 
causes of death from Worthy Park and from St. Catherine's left the ques 
tion of the typicality of Worthy Park as a sugar plantation up in the air. 
The discovery of the remarkable correlation between Worthy Park's fig 
ures and those for a far larger sample drawn from sugar plantations in a 
colony a thousand miles distant in a rather later period, was therefore 
very exciting. Many contemporary writers spoke of sugar plantations as 
if they were standard in every respect, and of the contrasts between dif 
ferent types of settlement and locations within the Caribbean. Some analy 
sis has recently been made of differences in overall mortality figures . 14 
But here for the first time was statistical evidence by specific causes of 
death. Moreover, from this it was clear that there were health characteris 
tics common and peculiar to sugar plantations wherever they were found 
within the Caribbean region. These contrasted to a marked degree with 
West Indian towns, and probably differed to a lesser but significant degree 
from smaller, less intensively cultivated plantations growing staples other 
than sugar, in hillier areas, for which similar work remains to be under 
taken. 
In drawing up both cause-of-death tables there were many difficulties 
of classification. Too many of the alleged explanations of death from 
Worthy Park were non-specific or downright evasive. What, for example, 
is learned from 'Accident'? And what can be made of 'At Hospital in 
Kingston', 'Suddenly', 'In the Night', or 'A Vindication of God'? In a 
dismaying number of cases the doctor was describing - and presumably 
had been treating - symptoms rather than actual diseases. 'Convulsions' 
and Gastro-Intestinal complications were particularly difficult to identify, 
but even the common diagnoses of 'flux', 'fever', 'ulcers', and 'dropsy' 
proved troublesome. At first sight there also seemed to be a remarkably 
high number of different causes of death. However, discriminating reclas 
sification - first along World Health Organization lines and then, less 
scientifically, into the categories used for the British Guiana slaves - elic 
ited a much clearer picture. 
Despite the depredations of epidemics (not all of which were killers) 
and the decimation of the 'seasoning' process among new slaves, the 
chief single cause of death on sugar plantations was still old age - or at 
least debility among elderly adults. That over a fifth of the slaves lived 
long enough to die of what were regarded as natural causes surely runs 
counter to the impression given by average survival rates, which suggest 
a life expectancy at birth of less than 30 years for Creoles, and for newly 
arrived Africans an average expectation of no more than a dozen more 
years. 
13 As late as 1851, the annual mortality rate in New Orleans was 81 per thousand, 
three times as high as contemporary rates in London, New York and Philadelphia. The 
rate for Jamaica as a whole in the last decades of slavery was about 35 per thousand, com 
pared with the 1792-1838 average for Worthy Park of 40 percent. 
14 For example, HIGMAN, op. cit. 