

238 HISTOIRE SOCIALE - SOCIAL HISTORY

Under the Jamaican Consolidated Slave Law of 1792, not only were overseers to hand in to the vestries annual lists of births and deaths on their plantations on a penalty of £50 for non-compliance, but every plan tation doctor was also, " ... on oath, to give-in an account of slaves dying, with, to the best of his judgement, the causes thereof, under penalty of £I 00 for each neglect... " 4

Thus, for at least those estates for which records have survived, there exist cause-of-death diagnoses up to the standards attained by eigh teenth century plantation doctors. In addition, at Worthy Park and some other estates the slave ledgers included, rather less systematically, com ments on the health of slaves whose efficiency was impaired, and lists of medicines used. Besides this, Worthy Park's chief slave doctor, John Quier (1739-1822), published an account of seven years of his practice in the district. 5

What follows is a table showing all the causes of death ascribed in the Worthy Park records between 1792 and 1838, applying to 401 slaves. Wherever possible, the slave doctor's diagnoses have been translated into modern terms, and grouped together into classes along the lines of the World Health Organisation categories. Further on, the significance of the diagnoses given in the 'Condition' columns of the Worthy Park slave ledgers is also discussed, but the Condition listings are so much less sys tematic and conclusive - so much less final - than Causes of Death, that they cannot easily be tabulated.

WORTHY PARK : INCIDENCE OF CAUSES OF DEATH NOTED, 1783-1838, ASSIGNED BY 
WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION CATEGORIES. 
Worthy Park Diagnoses Incidences Modern Diagnoses W.H.O. Categories 
(where different) 
Dysentery JO Bacillary Dysentery 004 
Flux 25 Diarrhoeal Disease 009 
Phthisis, Consumption 15 Tuberculosis Oil 
Coco Bays 2 Leprosy (Arabian) 030 
Whooping Cough, Croup 4 033 
Locked Jaw 2 Tetanus 037 
Measles 5 055 
Smallpox 2 056 
Diseased Brain, Water on the 
Brain 2 Encephalitis 062 
Yaws 24 102 
and cure several Distempers, but what I could see of their practice [ ... ] they do not perform 
what they pretend, unless in the vertues of some few Simples. Their ignorance of Anatomy, 
Diseases, Method, &c. renders even that knowledge of the vertues of Herbs, not only 
useless, but even sometimes hurtful to those who imploy them[ ... ]." A Voyage· to Madera .. . 
and Jamaica, 2 vols. (London, 1707, 1725), I, cxli. 
4 Jamaican Act of 32 George III, c. xxiii, 33-5. 
5 J. QuIER, J. HUME and others, Letters and Essays on the Smallpox (London, 

1778).

6 Manual of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases, Injuries, and Causes of Death , Based on the Recommendations of the Eighth Revision of Conference, 1965, and Adopted by the Nineteenth World Health Assembly , 2 vols., (Geneva: World Health Organisation, 1967).

DEATH, DISEASE AND MEDECINE

Dirt Eating 
Worms, Worm Fever 
Fever 
Palsy 
Fits, Convulsions, Epilepsy 
Complaint in Spine 
Apoplexy , Stroke 
Elephantiasis 
Violent Cold, Cough, Catarrh 
Influenza 
Pneumonia 
Asthma 
Pleurisy 
Abcess in Lungs 
Rupture 
Suppression of Menses 
Child bed 
Puny from Birth, At Birth, 
· Still Born 
Ulcers, Ulceration 
Spasms 
Dropsy, 'Cold, Bloated & 
Dropsical' 
Lung Trouble , Sore Throat 
Stomach Complaint 
Bloated, Swelled & Bloated, 
Inflammation of Bowels 
Swelled Leg, Sore Foot 
Old Age, Decline , Weakness, 
Infirmity, Invalid (where 
old) 
. Suddenly, In the Night, Sud 
den, Act of God, Vindication 
of God 
Diseased Many Years, Infir 
mity, Invalid (not aged), 
Sick Some Time, Worth- 
, less, At Hospital in King 
ston 
Accident 
Ate Poison, Suicide by Poi 
son 
Shot while Stealing 
Suffocation 