

18 At Braco Estate , Trelawny , for example, there were an average of 68 slaves " In the Hothouse , in Yaws house with sores, Pregnant, lying in & attendants" in June 1796, out of a population of 402 ; Braco Sla ve Book, April 1795-December 1797 (Braco : Trelawny).

DEATH, DISEASE AND MEDECINE 249

may have been so common as to be considered unworthy of notice. 19 Cer 
tain other diseases which afflict modern society, such as heart disease, 
stomach ulcers, and cancers, were noticeably rare on slave plantations, 
either because the slaves did not have the opportunities to contract them, 
or did not live long enough to develop the symptoms. With the possible 
exception of the single slave 'shot while stealing', no deaths recorded 
at Worthy Park were directly attributable to the slave condition. Deaths 
by accident were no more common than one would expect in any industrial 
situation with minimal safeguards; and suicides (of whom only three were 
certainly recorded) were probably no more common than in the British 
Army during National Service, or among undergraduates at a modern 
university. 
The data derived from the Condition listings at Worthy Park are not 
only more fragmentary and capricious than those for Causes of Death; 
for several reasons they also seriously understate the low level of general 
health on the plantation. Even for the years for which full records survive, 
the health of individual slaves was only noted if their condition incapacitat 
ed them. For example, there is no reference at all in the Worthy Park 
records to eye diseases, though it is unlikely that the plantation was en 
tirely free from forms of opthalmia common among slaves elsewhere 
Short-term or non-fatal illnesses such as colds and malaria were rarely 
recorded either. Cases of measles and smallpox which did not kill, how 
ever, sometimes were; for though immunisation theory was not yet dev 
eloped, it was already recognised that these diseases rarely recurred. 
Many other diseases were too common for diagnosis, not diagnosed 
in their early stages, or not recognised at all. From the incidence of death 
from yaws, 'coco bays', scrofula, and 'dropsy', it seems likely that at least 
a third of the slaves suffered from diseases of the skin and tissues at some 
time during their lives, and perhaps half from serious internal disorders. 
In most cases these diseases were incurable and progressive, though not 
invariably fatal in themselves. If the debilitating effects of deficient diet 
and parasites less crippling than hookworm are included, nearly all slaves 
were subject to tropical ailments which lowered their efficiency, their 
fertility, and enjoyment of life. 
In sum, though seasoned slaves on established sugar plantations 
were not more subject to fatality than most persons in the tropics - and 
much less so than those living in towns in the lowlands - the general 
level of their health was dismally low. 
* * * 
19 Modern Worthy Park offers an illuminating parallel. When the Sugar Industry 
Labour Welfare Board clinic was set up on the estate in 1951 , the doctor was called upon 
to treat no less than 331 cases of yaws and 250 of syphilis, but only 28 of gonorrhea. In a 
comparatively short time yaws and syphilis were contained, but the cases of gonorrhea 
treated multiplied to hundreds. Such is progress. Michael CRATON and James WALVIN, 
A Jamaican Plantation; The History of Worthy Park, 1670-1970 (London : W.H. Allen, and 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1970), 308. That gonorrhea was in fact common 
among the Worthy Park slaves, at least around 1824, is suggested by the purchase by the 
estate of the six penis syringes included in the list of medicines and equipment appended. 