

27 Heinz GOERKE, " The Life and Scientific Works of Dr. John Quier, Practitioner of Physic and Surgery, Jamaica, 1738-1822," West Indian Medical Journal, V, xviii, 22-7. 28 GUTHRIE , History of Medicine , 89.

DEATH, DISEASE AND MEDECINE 253

infection with the disease, was known in West Africa. 29 Quier himself 
acknowledged that he used the method developed by Thomas, Baron 
Dimsdale, consultant to Catherine the Great - infecting those who had 
not yet had the disease through a scratch on the arm, with matter drawn 
from smallpox pustules. Although effective in most individual cases - 
inducing only a mild form of the disease - it did not avert or check the 
general spread of smallpox, and could lead to serious cases and death. 
There is no evidence that John Quier or any slave-doctor in Jamaica 
adopted the much more satisfactory system of vaccination by cowpox 
matter introduced by Edward Jenner, even when it gained widespread 
acceptance in England after 1800. 
John Quier's method was to wait until a smallpox outbreak threaten 
ed, and then to inoculate large numbers of slaves together. In 1768 he treat 
ed over 700 slaves, receiving a flat fee of 6s. 8d. a head. As with his treat 
ments, at first Quier's methods were almost indiscriminate. Yet expe 
rience and empirical observation taught him that it was pointless to 'inocu 
late' those who already had the disease , and dangerous to infect the young, 
the old, the weakly , those far gone in pregnancy, and anyone he classified 
as having 'putrid blood'. By exercising such discrimination Quier diminish 
ed his income at first; but as his reputation for success grew, the call 
upon his services increased. 
Success for all West Indian doctors indeed came with moderation 
and common sense. A wise and humane doctor, such as John Quier clear 
ly became, was one who realised that since his medication could rarely 
cure, and no doctor could - or ought to - persuade planters to improve 
slave conditions in general, he should concentrate on ameliorating symp 
toms and, by providing care, cleanliness, fresh air, and decent food, en 
courage any natural tendency towards a cure , as well as the will to sur 
vive. Harsh medicine was simply for the peace of mind of those who paid, 
and those patients strong enough to take it who believed in it. 
Thus, while he continued to pay lip service to the crude, irrelevant, 
and harmful mysteries of his craft such as bleeding, blistering, and purg 
ing, John Quier more often came to prescribe strengthening diets, emol 
lients, cooling lotions, and analgesics such as the opiate laudanum. It was 
also during his regime that the slave 'hothouse' still standing at Worthy 
Park was built, as on many Jamaican properties one of the most substan 
tial buildings erected. For women in childbirth, John Quier recommended 
that they be allowed to 'lie in' at least two weeks. Observing that the 
blacks who worked in the stillhouse (distillery) were the fattest on the 
estate, he recommended that infants be drafted there to fatten up. Although 
Dr Quier disapproved of the African customs of swaddling new born in 
fants and suckling children into their second year, there is at least one 