

250 HISTOIRE SOCIALE - SOCIAL HISTORY

Masters and doctors alike were disposed by their 'interest' and igno rance to minimise slave ailments. Owners and overseers were determined to keep all but the dying at work, and to trim the costs of medical treat ment. To their eyes, a successful doctor was one who satisfied these re quirements. Paid a per capita fee, plantation doctors were rewarded posi tively for cursory treatment, and encouraged to ignore failure and simu late success. Faced by a level of general health that condemned the plan tation system by which they lived, or was beyond their care or ken, doc tors tended to disguise the inadequacy of their treatments and the ignorace of their diagnoses with accusations of malingering, self-inflicted injury, and 'natural' unhealthiness stemming from the slaves' racial origins. In this they perpetuated the malign ignorance of Dr John Trapham, who in 1679 attributed the high incidence of yaws among blacks to the alleged fact that they were an 'animal people', subject to an 'unhappy jumble of the rational with the brutal Nature;' 20 or even the distasteful fatalism of a slave trader in 1694:

[ .. . ] What the small-pox spar'd, the flux swept off to our great regret, after all our pains and care to give their messes in due order and season, keeping their lodgings as clean and sweet as possible, and enduring so much misery and stench so long among a parcel of creatures nastier than swine; and after all our expectations to be defeated by their mortality. 21

The medical profession, like all self-legislating and self-perpetuating 
'misteries', has always been a conservatising force. What particularly 
bedevilled eighteenth, and even nineteenth century medicine were the per 
sistence of the fallacy of the four 'humours' in the teeth of the clinical 
evidence, and the tradition that devalued surgery in favour of 'physic'. 
When Dr Trapham wrote his Discourse on the State of Health in Jamaica 
in 1679, belief in humoral theory was still absolute. Every human ailment, 
from hookworm to cancer, was said to be due to an excess of one of the 
four vital fluids which flowed from liver to heart; melancholy, phlegm, 
blood, choler - the counterparts of earth, water, air, and fire. The sole 
purpose of medicine, it was held, was to keep the elements in balance, 
the chief methods being bloodletting, 'salivation', blistering, and purging. 
Physicians were neither willing nor able to use the surgeon's knife, save 
in emergencies such as amputations. 
Besides this, doctors made indiscriminate use of at least two danger 
ous specifics; mercury and opium. The first, beloved of alchemists as 
'quicksilver', had some success with 'the pox', but produced crippling 

20 Thomas TRAPHAM, A Discourse on the State of Health in the Island of Jamaica (London: Boulter, 1679), passim. The equating of black slaves with animals by a plantation doctor immediately brings to mind a parallel between slave and veterinary medicine. If planters and their doctors regarded slaves as little more than valuable animals, it is not surprising that slave medicine was little better than 'horse doctor cures'. Veterinary science - probably because the treatment of animals has been required to remain cheap, and aniaml doctors are even less regarded as colleagues by MBs and MDs than once they were - has made comparatively far less progress than medicine for humans. For example, horses are still poulticed, blistered, and cauterised, much like eighteenth century slaves. 21 Elizabeth DONNAN,, Documents ll/ustrative of the History of the Slave Trade to America,4 vols. (Washington: Carnegie Institute, 1930-1), I, 410.