

30 This argument is developed in CRATON, "Jamaican Slave Mortality" (1971); Sinews of Empire , 194-9 (1974); "Jamaican Slavery" (1974). 31 The mortality of the slaves on the Middle Passage was probably about 20 per cent per voyage on the average at the beginning of the eighteenth century, and just about 15 per cent by the end of the century. This reperesented an annual rate of nearly double these figures, since voyages averaged only about six months. These rates of 300-400 pet thousand per year were probably equalled among the slaves from the time of their capture until the time of shipment; CRATON , Sinews of Empire, 96-8.

DEATH, DISEASE AND MEDECINE 255 the seasoning process on a West Indian plantation four years later. It likewise killed almost as high a ratio of all whites newly arriving in the sugar islands, and an even higher proportion of white crewmen on the slave ships, or white soldiers cramped and ill-fed in barracks in the West Indies and West Africa. 3 2

Owing to the fallacies of humoral theory, medical treatment for diseases was totally inadequate: never curative, at best palliative or in nocuous, at worst positively baneful. The greatest improvement came fortuitously, with the process of creolisation. The increasingly closed nature of the plantation population made it a closed disease environment, rather less subject to attack from passing epidemics than towns or vil lages. What remained, however, was serious enough; the general debility from ailments associated with unhygienic conditions, poor diet, and over work. Here, it might be argued, 'amelioration' legislation such as was passed in all British West Indian colonies from about 1787, and particular ly after 1823, should have improved health conditions, by regulating the workload, and establishing standards of food, clothing and medical care. 33 Yet these regulations were minimal, reflecting standards rather than im proving them, often a form of 'window-dressing'. Medical treatment was effectively beyond the control of legislation. Besides this, towards the very end of slavery the effects of any improvements were offset by the decline in plantation profits, which made masters inclined to work their slaves harder and spend less on their upkeep and care. If slaves towards the end of formal slavery were able to grow more food, to expand their homes, and to improve their clothing, this was mainly through their own efforts. It might also be argued that there was an ironic virtue in neces sity, since the decline in expenditure on slave medicine may have been actually beneficial to health.

32 The annual rate among white troops stationed in Jamaica of 121.3 deaths per thousand, though the second highest in the world, was made to seem quite moderate by the West African figures. As late as 1823-6, the death rate for British troops stationed in Sierra Leone was 483 per thousand , and for the Gold Coast, 668 per thousand. In the slave trade, between 20 and 25 per cent of all white crewmen died on each round trip, which averaged about a year, in the 1780s, compared with less than 3 per cent on ships sailing simply between England and the West Indies. ROBERTS, Population of Jamaica, 167; DAVIES, "The Living and the Dead" ; CRATON, Sinews of Empire, 97. 33 See, for example, Elsa GovEIA, Slave Society in the British Leeward Islands at the End of the Eighteenth Century (New Haven : Yale University Press, 1965), 183-8.