

29 Cotton Mather, who promoted inoculation in Boston in 1721 , wrote to a fellow member of the Royal Society in London in 1716 that he had heard of variolation from one of his own slaves, a 'Guaramantee' fittingly named Onesimus; Frederick C. KALGAN , " The Rise of Scientific Activity in Colonial New England," Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine , XXII, (December 1949), 130.

254 HISTOIRE SOCIALE - SOCIAL HISTORY

scrap of evidence that he came to place as much credence in 'African' 
medicine as in his own received pharmacy. Noticing that his black slave 
'doctoress' assistant was in the habit of bathing the swollen feet of yaws 
sufferers in urine he did not tell her to desist, and honesty compelled him 
to admit that the patients came to no further harm. 
To modern eyes, the wisest section of Dr John Guier's letters from 
Jamaica concerns a regimen for maintaining general health in a tropical 
climate. It could serve as a model in most respects even today: choose 
a dry, healthy location; practise temperance, drinking a little wine bu( 
selecting a diet more vegetable than animal, including fresh fruit; rise 
early, take a moderate amount of exercise, and avoid the night-time damp; 
bathe frequently, and change clothing according to the time of day and 
season; maintain a cheerful disposition. Unfortunately, however, these 
excellent suggestions (which John Quier perhaps followed himself, for 
he lived to 83) were absolutely irrelevant to the lives of slaves. As Hans 
Sloane had found long before, they were also almost reversed by the habits 
ot: most of the Jamaican whites. 
From the Worthy Park evidence for 1792-1838 it is clear that the 
level of health on slave plantations was low. Yet the situation should not 
be exaggerated. Disease alone did not account for the continuing natural 
decrease in the population, which was also influenced by purely demo 
graphic characteristics. 30 If sugar plantations, with their large cramped 
populations and intensive agriculture, were less healthy than mountain 
pens and coffee plantations, estates like Worthy Park in spacious highland 
areas were healthier than those in the swampy lowlands of St. Catherine, 
St. Thomas-in-the-East, St. Mary, or St. James; and all were far less 
disease-ridden than the kennels and yards of Spanish Town, Kingston and 
the other ports, the ships on the Middle Passage, and the barracoons of 
the African coast. 31 Besides this, the health situation which the Worthy 
Park records for 1792-1838 disclosed was almost certainly better than that 
which obtained in the plantation's earlier days - though the improvement, 
like that in the population's demographic balance, was largely beyond 
the understanding or control of planters, doctors, and 'amelioration' laws. 
The 'triangle trade' of trade goods, slaves, and sugar, made the West 
Indies a crossroads for the diseases of Europe, Africa, and tropical Amer 
ica. Until immunities built up over the years, newcomers were infected 
by unfamiliar strains of virus, germ, and parasite. This well-documented 
but unexplained phenomenon accounted for perhaps half of all African 
slaves between the time of their original seizure and the conclusion of 