

24 Douglas GUTHRIE, A History of Medicine (London: Nelson), revised edition, 1958). 216-31. 25 Hans SLOANE, A Voyage to ... Jamaica, I, passim. This work was not published until 1707, 18 years after Sloane's sojourn in Jamaica as physician to his kinsman, Governor Albemarle. 26 QuIER et al., Letters and Essays on the Smallpox. The letters, dating from 1769 to 1776, were addressed to Dr. Donald Munro of London, a member of the famous Edinburgh medical clan of that name.

252 HISTOIRE SOCIALE - SOCIAL HISTORY

theory, but still placed too great an emphasis upon bodily fluids and the 
efficacy of 'cleansing the blood'. From the descriptions of some of his 
early treatments it seems that his patients might well have stood a better 
chance with no treatment at all. For the eye disease he called 'the dry 
opthalmies' , for example, he specified a copious bleeding, 'antiphlogistic' 
purges, a 'cooling regimen' with nitre, and blisters behind the ears and 
on the side of the neck, as well as the 'emollient poultices' which alone 
might have brought any relief. 
What caused Dr Quier most concern were smallpox and measles, 
serious outbreaks of which occurred in Lluidas Vale during his first few 
years there. Indeed, he has been given credit, almost certainly exaggerat 
ed, for advances in the prevention and diagnosis of these diseases. 27 Al 
though distinguishing clearly between smallpox and measles, he attributed 
quite distinct afflictions such as dysentery, dry bellyache, and even tetanus 
as 'secondary manifestations' of them. In these respects, only in being 
able to diagnose whooping cough was Dr Quier farther advanced than the 
Persian medical authority Rhazes (A.D. 860-932) who, while being the ear 
liest correctly to identify smallpox and measles, was apparently not aware 
of any other endemic diseases. 28 
At least John Quier differed from the majority of his fellow slave 
doctors in learning somewhat from his failures. At first he believed that 
excessive heat made the blood 'putrescent', and he tended to let blood 
by venesection at the onset of any fever. He also administered savage 
purgatives such as the mercuric calomel, nitre, or jalap, in almost all 
cases of serious illness. When in some measles cases these led not to a 
'salutary salivation' and gentle evacuation, but to bloody vomiting and 
diarrhoea, he bled the patients more , applying blisters to the thighs. If 
the internal spasms and pains became too severe, he administered - lit 
erally almost as a last resort - heroic doses, up to four grains a day, of 
opium. 
Although he never admitted that it was the medicine rather than 
the disease which was killing his patients, John Quier soon realised that 
excessive purging and bleeding weakened them, and gradually relented. 
Ironically, strong 'medicine' became reserved for those unfortunates whom 
the well-intentioned doctor regarded as strong enough to stand them. In 
the cases of the very old or young, the seriously undernourished and 
'naturally' debilitated, nature was 'allowed to take its course', and some 
patients clearly gained a fortuitous reprieve. In the eighteenth century 
it was medicine as often as death itself which acted as a great leveller. 
As to inoculation for smallpox, John Quier was certainly no inno 
vator. The technique of inoculation had been introduced into England 
from Turkey by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu as early as 1717, and there 
is some evidence that some form of 'variolation', or intentional inoculative 