

DEATH, DISEASE AND MEDECINE 251

side effects which until recent times were thought to be symptoms of the 
disease it purported to cure. 22 The second quelled pain but was demor 
alisingly addictive, inducing withdrawal symptoms after very little use. 
That both mercurials and opiates were relatively expensive may have 
been positively beneficial to such dependent patients as slaves. The herbal 
remedies preferred for cheapness' sake were, where ineffectual, generally 
harmless. It might be argued that in the absence of antiseptics and anaes 
thetics the reluctance of doctors to operate was also to the slaves' advan 
tage.23 
What medical progress was made during the slavery period was not 
due to any revolution in theory or dramatic new methods (save inocula 
tion for smallpox), but a slightly more empirical attitude, a greater atten 
tion to the individual patient, and the first glimmerings of a belief in clean 
liness, rest, and restorative diet. In these respects, the pioneers were the 
English Thomas Sydenham ( 1624-89) and the Dutch clinicians such as Her 
mann Boerhaave of Leyden (1688-1738). 24 Hans Sloane, a disciple of Sy 
denham, displayed a comparatively open mind and a willingness to exper 
iment (honestly recording failures as well as successes) in the descriptions 
he published of the many cases he treated during his brief stay in Jamaica 
(1688-9). 25 But neither Sloane nor his eighteenth century successors made 
any systematic discoveries concerning causes or cures. At best they simply 
learned, through bitter experience, that a West Indian doctor was more 
likely to succeed the less he applied the 'scientific' humoral theory and 
the pharmacy he had learned in the European schools. 
This gradual awareness can be well illustrated by the career of Dr 
John Quier, graduate of Leyden and London, who was Worthy Park's 
doctor from 1767 to 1822, from six published letters written to a former 
colleague during Quier's first years in Jamaica,26 and from his later prac 
tice. From the letters it seems that Quier was not obsessed by humoral 

22 The miners of quicksilver at Almaden in Spain, the Japanese of Minimata who ate mercury poisoned fish, and the thousands of lraquis who ate mercury-dusted seed grain, were alike found to be suffering from locomotor ataxia and other manifestations thought to be classic symptoms of tertiary syphilis. It would be instructive to discover how often locomotor ataxia and the other symptoms occurred in persons with syphilis before they were treated with mercurials. 23 It was not long since surgery had been entirely in the hands of barbers. Readers of Samuel Pepys' diaries will recall with what trepidation Pepys submitted to surgery for the stone, and his gratitude to the Almighty for allowing him to survive what was technically a very simple operation. In Pepys' case the 'miracle' was almost certainly that the surgeon used a brand new knife. Until the days of Lister, deaths from appendicitis were far more common among those operated on than those with whom nature was allowed to takes its course.