 There was also continuity in the period in the growing peripheralisation of the Ottoman economy, represented in the commercial privileges system (capitulations) which extended to European powers and culminated in the 1838 commercial treaty with Great Britain, which forced free trade on Ottoman territories. The 1838–41 international crisis, when Mehmed Ali and his son Ibrahim threatened the very doorstep of Istanbul, represented the moment that indebtedness to Europe became a fait accompli . It is also known as the beginning of the era of the Tanzimat, which opened with the public promulgation of Ottoman intentions to reorganise society for the benefit of all subjects. The Crimean War worsened the debt problem, although foreign management of debt payments was only institutionalised in the 1881 Ottoman Public Debt Administration under French and British supervision. After the withdrawal of Mehmed Ali from Syria in 1841, the Ottomans and the Tanzimat bureaucrats clearly saw themselves in the role of ‘civilising’ monarchs in their peripheral and reoccupied territories such as Albania, Kurdistan, Iraq and Lebanon. 
 In the final chapter, I take a look at the origins of the Crimean War, and the Russo-Ottoman confrontations at Vidin on the Danube and at Kars in the Caucasus. What makes the Crimean War interesting is the confrontation of British and Ottoman military styles, and the drawing of the Ottoman Turk further into the European sphere of influence, and the global marketplace. For the first time on Ottoman battlefields, Turks, Albanians, and myriads of Caucasus tribesmen, fought side by side with, and were under the command of, dozens of foreigners, among them British, Polish, French, Hungarian, and Italian soldiers and officers. In truth, the military reforms of 1843 and 1846 mark the end of a particular period of military reform in the empire. In 1853–55, the ‘Turkish’ soldier, for better or worse, joined the modern historical record. 
 The impact of war and reform on the development of late Ottoman absolutism is of particular interest to me. This too will be comparative, especially with the Russian context, for though the balance of power had shifted to the northern empire by the end of this study, the process of transformation to a European-style absolutism looks somewhat similar. Ambivalence about foreign advisers, reappropriation of religious ideology as both a conservative and liberating force, increasing intolerance of multiethnic groups, and a more or less continuous problem with financing as suggested above, are some of the bases for comparison. The Austrian bid for empire, exemplified by the aggressive military build-up of Joseph II, could not be sustained when confronted at the turn of the century by the juggernaut of the Napoleonic ‘citizen’s armies’. Both Austrian and Russian contexts are instructive when examining the Ottoman evolution. So too is the Mehmed Ali era in Cairo, 1811–40, a phenomenal period of ruthless modernisation and militarism, culminating not just in altering Ottoman rule over Egypt, but also testing great power diplomacy at critical moments in world history. Arguably, Egypt was informally ‘colonised’ and drawn into world markets long before the British occupation of 1882, while the Ottomans found themselves colonised from within, by minority financiers and their international protectors, never more so than after the Crimean War. Austria, too, had a role to play in the final act of the three early modern empires, but it was not until the Balkan crisis of 1875–78 that Austria thrust east again, into Bosnia–Herzegovina. After 1848, and during the Crimean War, the Austrians played a tricky game of cards, which led to an increasing isolation of the Habsburgs from both eastern and western allies. 
 How to describe the new society that emerged by the end of Mahmud II’s reign has long eluded historians of the Ottomans. By 1856, it is possible to think in terms of an Ottoman–Muslim absolutism that eschewed the ‘secularism’ of the Janissary era as once argued by Ş erif Mardin. Mardin’s ‘secularism’ might better be described as a Muslim universalism, which managed benevolence, if not strictly speaking equality, among its subjects. Abdülhamid II’s reign is recognised as the age of ideology and the Ottoman Caliphate, especially in the work of Selim Deringil. 12 Later historiography has been so dominated by inter-related paradigms of imperialism and nationalism that the essential question of the re-Islamisation of Ottoman ideology in this earlier period has been overlooked. The reign of Abdülhamid II (1876–1908) is generally characterised as an era of extreme despotism, tremendous political upheaval, countryside violence and destruction, and a severe identity crisis, brought on by the ‘turning Turk’ of the military class. I argue that the crisis had its antecedents in the previous century of reform and the refashioning of the Ottoman ideological premises, which is a transition not yet very clearly delineated within Ottoman historiography. 