



===== FILE: text/part0005.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 List of plates 
    1  The Ottoman northern arc, Vidin to Kars, 1750–1830 
    2  The southern tier of the empire, 1800–50 
    3  Greece, the Danube and the Caucasus, 1820–56 
    4  Nineteenth-century lithograph of the Upper Danube 
    5  Members of various pre-reform Ottoman forces 
    6  Examples of Ottoman transport circa 1700 (Marsigli) 
    7  Map of Lower Danube at time of Habsburg-Ottoman campaigns, 1737–39 
    8  Map of Crimea and northern Black Sea Coast, 1737–39 
    9  The Danube basin (a map of the Russian dominions in Europe) 
 10  Cartoon satirising the French military mission in Istanbul in 1783 
 11  The Ottoman interior of the Baba Vida fortress in Vidin 
 12  Egyptian mamluks training in Cairo 
 13  Nineteenth-century print of Rusçuk 
 14  Mehmed Ali’s reformed army uniforms 
 15  Sultan Mahmud II, 1829 
 16  Uniforms of the Asakir-i Mansure of Mahmud II after the adoption of trousers 
 17  Column commemorating Mahmud II’s visit to Tutrekan in 1837 
 18  Campaigns of Mehmed Ali and his son İ brahim in Greece, 1824–33 
 19  A Redif muster roll from Nov–Dec 1836 
 20  Sketch of ba ş ı bozuk by James Robertson 
 21  Sketch of Silistre fortress system and Mecidiye tabya still standing 
 22  The Mecidiye tabya at Silistre 
 23  Map of fortress of Kars, 1854–55 



===== FILE: text/part0006.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Acknowledgements 
 I t is customary for an author to thank profusely a vast array of institutions, granting agencies, colleagues, anonymous readers, friends, neighbours and of course family for the patience with which they have endured the research journey just finished. I assume that as a given here, as I am very fortunate to be situated in a happy place as regards all of the above. Without the well-grounded sense and support of my partner in crime, Oktay Aksan, this book would never have been finished. I am also particularly blessed with the collegiality of a core group of Ottomanists, remarkable scholars all, who tolerate my naive rantings and ramblings with great good humour and sage advice. They know who they are. 
 I agreed to write the history of Ottoman wars without the least understanding of the journey that would entail, and how long it would take. The project has stretched in time through the seismic shifts in world politics engendered by the war on terror. To my complete horror, I found myself writing about the British bombarding Beirut in 1840, and the folly of the Crimean War, just as Washington made the benighted decision to make war on Iraq. That historians are trapped in their own eras may well be a truism, but finding oneself reflecting on the repeated global idiocy regarding the Middle East was emotionally wrenching. 
 Ottoman military historians writing in English are few in number: Caroline Finkel, Victor Ostapchuk and Gábor Ágoston have encouraged me to continue this madness. Suraiya Faroqhi, in spite of her well-known dislike of the subject of warfare, has read various pieces of the manuscript, for which I thank her. I am much indebted to Rossitsa Gradeva at the American University of Bulgaria, and her colleagues Fionera Filipova, Director of the Historical Museum in Vidin, and Theodora Bakardjieva at the Historical Museum in Rusçuk, for the particularly eye-opening trip from Vidin to Silistre to tour surviving Ottoman fortresses. Theodora has been instrumental in preserving the columns commemorating the tour of Mahmud II to Bulgaria in the 1830s, one of which is pictured in the book. 
 What came as the greatest surprise to me was the serendipity of the internet. I have corresponded with a number of scholars, most of whom I have yet to meet, who pointed me to new or otherwise unavailable sources, and even supplied them on occasion. This I wish to acknowledge with heartfelt thanks. They include Avigdor Levy, who sent me a copy of his unpublished PhD thesis which is so important to the discussion of the reforms of Mahmud II; Alexander Mikaberidze, who supplied me with his translation of Danilevsky’s history of the Russo-Ottoman War of 1806–12; Mesut Uyar, of Ankara, who is writing a history of the Ottoman military himself, and whose advice has been invaluable; Veysel Ş im ş ek, and Kahraman Ş akul, students both, whose own writings and references have enriched this manuscript immensely. I would also like to thank Peter Harrington, Curator of the Anne S.K. Brown Military Collection at Brown University, who sent along a number of possible illustrations, one of which adorns the cover. 
 I need to thank my colleagues at McMaster University, particularly John Weaver, Stefania Miller and Richard Rempel, for helping me steer the course by reading various parts of this manuscript. 
 To Hamish Scott I owe a debt of gratitude for taking me on as an untried military historian, and for his insistence that the Ottoman military post-1700 be included in Longman’s series Modern Wars in Perspective . I am also grateful for his seeing the work into press, and especially thank Christina Wipf Perry and Melanie Carter at Pearson Education for making it happen. 
 That I chose to situate the Ottomans among their neighbours, and write a comparative imperial history about war and society, should be laid at my door. The book has ambitions to educate a general audience as well as suggest to experts the inherent narrative possibilities of texts and documents. When I began the task such work was just beginning. As I finish, a generation of international scholars is taking up the challenge of comparative Russian–Ottoman history from the point of view of Ottoman as well as Russian sources. 
 I do not pretend to have dealt with the subject of Ottoman warfare from 1700 to 1870 with anything like completeness. Much of the material lends itself to snapshots of a particular moment, or a particular crisis. The Ottoman archives are immensely rich, vast and intimidating on the post-1826 period, but also require time to digest, share and interpret. At one point I had to abandon the hope of using the archives for all the wars, but remain optimistic that this introduction to the topic will encourage others to take up the cudgel. As they used to say in Turkish when a young child was surrendered to his first teacher at school: ‘Eti senin; kemi ğ i benim.’ ‘His flesh is yours, his bones are mine.’ 
 Virginia H. Aksan      
 McMaster University 
 October 2006           
 Publisher’s acknowledgements 
 We are grateful to the following for permission to reproduce copyright material: 
 Plate 9 courtesy of McMaster University Library; plate 19 Cevdet Askeriye 635, from Prime Ministry Ottoman Archives, Istanbul, with thanks to Veysel Ş im ş ek, graduate student, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey; plate 21 courtesy of the editors of the International Journal of Turkish Studies , Machiel Kiel, ‘Urban development in Bulgaria’, IJTS 4 (1989), 79–159. 
 In some instances we have been unable to trace the owners of copyright material, and we would appreciate any information that would enable us to do so. 