

 1882 

 British Occupation of Egypt 



===== FILE: text/part0009.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Plate 1 The Ottoman northern arc, Vidin to Kars, 1750–1830. 

 Plate 2 The southern tier of the empire, 1800–50. 

 Plate 3 Greece, the Danube and the Caucasus, 1820–56. 



===== FILE: text/part0010.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Introduction 
 I t is without doubt the height of folly to undertake a history of Ottoman warfare which spans more than a century of conflict, bridges early modern and modern-style military systems, and describes an evolution of an army from the Janissaries to the Regular Army ( Nizamiye ) of the Crimean War, especially as for most of the wars to be discussed, campaign histories from the Ottoman point of view are few and far between. 1 To do so is also to fly in the face of a formidable body of historical studies which, with notable exceptions, have consistently overlooked the Ottomans as agents in their own development, generally attributed all military reform to French or Prussian assistance, and buried Ottoman military history under the carpet of European international relations. 
 Writing the story of Ottoman warfare after the treaty of Karlowitz in 1699 is a daunting task, as the nineteenth-century views on the nature of European warfare have strongly influenced the way we consider both the nature of violence and conflict in early modern societies and the Ottoman place within that system. Not only does a historian of the Ottoman Empire work against the stereotypes of decline embodied in the ‘Eastern Question’ historiography; he or she is faced with assumptions about state systems on the raison d’état that emerged in Europe after 1648, contrasted with Ottoman strategy driven by continuous holy war and impermanent peace with infidel (that is to say Christian) nations. 2 While both assumptions about early modern society are gradually unravelling in the twenty-first century, it remains difficult to engage meaningfully in questions of military imperatives when the debate is framed by the European narrative. 
 This is an oversimplified critique of a very large literature about an extremely important period in international politics. In keeping with the aims of this work, I will make a conscious effort to tell the story from the vantage point of Istanbul rather than London, or Paris, or Vienna, or St Petersburg. To the extent possible, my intent is to provide a more detailed version of the Ottoman ‘Western Question’ of the period. The core of this book is about the evolution of a military system from a Janissary to a conscript army, especially as events unfolded during the reigns of Selim III (1789–1807) and Mahmud II (1808–39). 
 There remain significant barriers, however, to telling the story properly from the Ottoman point of view. Not the least of these problems is that Ottomanists find themselves caught in the twilight zone between the empirical and the mythical. Much of the English and French material of the period (on which present-day western historians continue to rely) was written when fiction and fact had merged in the fantastic tales of eighteenth-century entertainments concerning the Turk and his world. The life story of Ottoman ayan Ali Pasha of Iannina, popularised by Byron, is the most obvious example of the genre and the conundrum. 3 Recent discussions have led to a reconsideration of nineteenth-century imperialism, and of representations of non-western, non-Christian societies as part of the discourse of empires. Gradually, a more balanced picture is emerging of the eastern Mediterranean in an important moment of transformation of the global order. 
 The opacity of the Ottoman record in surviving archives, in addition to its daunting volume, also proves a formidable barrier to such a project. For the period in question, archival records are chaotic and disorderly, perhaps reflecting the political confusion of the age. Multiple and illdefined modern cataloguing projects have scattered related materials across confusing collections, and complicated the task of analysis. Nonetheless, we are gradually recovering the Ottomans through their archival history, and rethinking the role that nineteenth- and twentieth-century nationalist rhetoric has played in skewing our observations about the nature of pre-modern societies such as those of the Middle East. 
 Scholars working on the Ottomans in the Balkans, Anatolia, Egypt, and Syria have independently reached something of a consensus about the importance of the 1760–1830 period as a watershed for the Ottomans. 4 It was a moment when reform became necessary not just as a palace experiment, but as a matter of life and death for the dynasty and empire alike. Survival in the Ottoman dynastic context meant engaging in a series of multilateral negotiations, not only with foreign powers, but also with a host of new military, intellectual and religious elite groups, who emerged precisely because of shrinking borders, mobile military forces, and refugee populations. Arguably, the greatest challenge came not from external enemies, but from internal challengers who benefited from the central collapse and came to control the dialogue. Men such as Ali Pasha, as above, but also Alemdar Mustafa Pasha of Rusçuk, and Osman Pasvano ğ lu, to mention only the most famous, engaged in an elaborate pas-de-deux with the dynasty over the defence of the frontier, and supplying men and arms for increasingly difficult campaigns on the Danube. As the eighteenth century evolved, an alteration of the imperial premise emerged, in response to the intensification of appeal of co-religionists in Russia and Austria to their ‘countrymen’ still under Ottoman rule. Mahmud II (1808–39) understood the need to reiterate Sunni Muslim orthodoxy not just as part of campaign rhetoric, but also as a means of responding to those resisting his reforms. 
 The challenge to the dynasty from within the Muslim world has only begun to be assessed, particularly as regards reform impulses such as the Wahhabis in Arabia, and the Naqshbandi in Anatolia and Central Asia. To what extent the reformation of the Ottoman Empire in the nineteenth century consti tuted the iteration of a Muslim ‘colonising’ or ‘civilising’ mission comparable to a similar process in Russia, Britain or France, remains a major question of this study. 5 
 The passage from empire to nation in the modern world has been perceived as the natural trajectory of pre-modern empires. In that discussion, religious rhetoric has normally been couched as one aspect of proto-nationalism, or as one of the psychological tools of empire. Religious concerns were generally dismissed as irrelevant, or peripheral, to the concerns of realpolitik . By contrast, it has always been assumed that religion was the sole modus vivendi of the Ottomans, or of collaborationist groups, such as the Greek Orthodox community and patriarch of Istanbul, the Phanariots. Nationalist movements in parts of Europe, it has recently been argued, have evolved identities based exclusively on religion, which is assumed to be a distinctive, and resilient (read virulent) form of statehood. 6 The debate about the role of religion in the formation of the modern republic continues in Serbia and Greece, former territories of the Ottomans. More publicly, in Istanbul, where ‘secularism’ has been opposed to ‘Islamism’ in the political arena, the underlying assumption remains that a ‘modern’ state must be secular. My point is that the wholesale adoption of the western model to the history of the Ottomans continues to pervert discussion of vigorous internal debates over the conundrum of multi-national empires facing the modern age. It has prevented a more inclusive narrative of Ottoman history from emerging. 
 An intensification of Ottoman ‘Islamism’ was without a doubt one of the consequences of the revival of religious fervour stimulated by foreign Catholic–Orthodox rivalries, by missionaries, by the immense and complex web of sufi organisations, as well as by the heterodox exile communities thronging into remaining Ottoman lands from the Danube and Black Sea frontiers. 7 Reformer sultans such as Mahmud II were forced to recreate an ‘orthodoxy’ in the face of both Muslim and non-Muslim challenges to legitimacy. 
 There is another way of expressing the problem. In the Romanov and Ottoman contexts, military reform of the nineteenth century was invariably accompanied by religious symbolism, which military historians relegate to the realm of iconography (or regimental symbolism), except in the Ottoman (Muslim) case. Thus, for example, ‘fanatic’ as a descriptor belongs uniquely to the Ottoman armies of the period, although there are myriad contemporary European records of observers equally appalled at Russian troop ferocity, carried out in the name of the Virgin Mary, or Mother Russia, or Catherine the Great. What did it really mean for Mahmud II to ask of each of the surviving Janissaries after the massacre of the Istanbul troops in 1826, ‘Are you a Muslim?’ or to call his new army ‘The Victorious Army of Muhammad?’ Mahmud II’s elimination of the Janissary corps in 1826 struck down not just an obsolete military force, but an entire social stratum, nominally Muslim, but sprinkled with fellow travellers ( yolda ş ) of all religious (and ethnic) affiliations, who benefited from tax relief, entitlements and protection. So too he destroyed the foundation of a society that had tolerated (often contemptuously) a multiplicity of ethnicities and religions, more by neglect than actual application of principles. This, I wish to argue, is social transformation indeed, and leads directly into consideration of the fundamental contradictions of late imperial ‘Ottomanism’. Such contradictions were hardly unique to this empire. 
 So why take on the book at all? One reason is to fill a void. I was initially encouraged that Hamish Scott, the editor of the Modern Wars in Perspective series at Longman, felt the need to include a work devoted to the Ottoman military. My own dissatisfaction with the traditional historiography has also meant the reopening of a number of questions concerning Ottoman longevity and survival, part of ongoing discussions among Ottoman and world historians. There are three main aims in this particular narrative: one is to set the Ottomans among their neighbours, in a bid to contrast developments in the empire with those in Romanov and Habsburg domains. The second is to study the manning, maintenance, and sieges and battles in the fortresses along the Ottoman northern defensive line, which bristled from Belgrade to Ochakov on the Danube River and Black Sea, to Kars and Erzurum in the Caucasus. A third aim is to describe the transformation engendered by imitating the ‘infidel’ in both military and political spheres, which had an impact on social cohesion, and imperial logic. 
 Comparative empires 
