 Ottoman pre-nineteenth century history is usually divided into two periods: a golden or classical Ottoman age, when the Janissary-style military system was at its strongest (1400–1600), then a long, slow, two hundred year descent into stasis and decay (1600–1800). The latter period is envisioned as a process of decentralisation, when powerful local notables emerged who challenged the Ottoman dynasty itself. The brief recovery of Ottoman absolutism in the nineteenth century is largely attributed to clever statesmen modelling themselves on the Europeans, with little reference to the internal dynamics which prohibited or facilitated the transformation of the military system. Recent work, partly enabled by increasingly accessible and better catalogued archives, has questioned the paucity of documentary evidence which underpins the historical narrative after 1800. The internal dynamics of change, strategies of negotiation between centre and periphery, and political legitimation of the late Ottoman state have emerged as questions for discussion concerning the Ottoman evolution after 1600. These large themes form a backdrop for this study on military strategy and imperatives, which is grounded in the discussions of comparative empires. 
 In our case, three land-based empires stood poised at the edge of the modern world, facing similar problems of finance and control over internal and external violence. For all three, the imperial army was the central organisation responsible for the survival of the dynasty. They were certainly universal empires at some point in their long histories, whether one defines that in political, economic or cultural terms. The ways in which they differed from the overseas empires of western Europe, the French, British and Dutch, has been a much belaboured subject in recent historio-graphical debates, but the ways in which they were similar to one another, or shared some similar historical trajectories, has been less studied. Taking up the story of Habsburg, Romanov and Ottoman rivalries in 1700, one contemplates huge expanses of territory, bewildering religious and ethnic variations and intricate real or constructed lineages and genealogies as justification for conquest. I do not intend to tell the story of all three in any completeness. Rather, the more developed historiographies of the Habsburg and Romanov cases will help to illuminate the less well-known Ottoman example. 
 The northern defensive line 
 The Ottoman defensive line is where most of the major campaigns with external foes of the empire took place after 1700. Because this is essentially a military history, a number of assumptions drive the discussion. The geopolitics of the region from Belgrade to Kars are of particular interest to me, as are the degrees of absolutism and legitimacy expressed in three different contexts, and the relationships between a dynasty and its internal challengers. Warfare was very often the catalyst of change, and very often the centre of periods of political and economic crisis, which could severely challenge dynastic legitimacy. Ottoman survival strategies most engage me in this context. To the extent that material is currently available to me, I have focused on describing select campaigns. 8 
 At the beginning of the period under study, the three dynasties resembled one another more than they did at the end. In 1700, the Habsburgs had just triumphed over the Ottomans, acquired Hungary and a relatively stabilised border with their hereditary enemy. The victory was the greatest moment in the history of the Christian–Muslim struggle and the counter-reformation, and considerably enlarged the territories of the Habsburgs, bringing with it a destabilisation of the delicate balance of the federative, hierarchical Reich . The Ottomans, contained on their western front, had to come to terms with the erosion of both hegemony and legitimacy should they attempt to imitate the successful military systems of Europe. The Romanovs had stuck a claw in one end of the Black Sea, and were poised to burst on the European and Central Asian stages, with an arguably revolutionary modernised army and administration. In each case, there were western and eastern frontiers to subdue, requiring dexterity and ingenuity in styles of warfare. Ancient rights and privileged estates of various stripes continued to challenge the ruling houses for power. In each case, survival depended on the ability to mobilise and sustain long, debilitating and destructive, if episodic, campaigns. The conjunction of success and failure on the battlefields of the Danube, the Crimea and the Caucasus is a particularly apt way to compare and contrast the choices and consequences of power. Especially acute in the Romanov and Ottoman case was the question of vast, undefined frontiers, dominated by nomadic groups, or confederations, with their own proud traditions and styles of governance. These similar problems encouraged me to attempt to include the Ottomans in a normative discussion of limits and choices of early modern agrarian states, as exemplified in their military systems. There are limits to the comparative analysis, however, which are particularly apparent after 1750, when Austria began a long process of disengagement and accommodation with her neighbours to the north and east. 
 Military reform 
 This study argues that the struggle for survival was central to the changing dynamics of Ottoman society, especially in a period when war was generally proving too costly in human and economic terms, both for individuals as well as for the dynasty. Violence was endemic in the early modern period, when it was integral to daily life, accelerated when great campaigns were mounted, and never very far from one’s doorstep, either in battle, or accompanying disease and famine. The problem was hardly uniquely Ottoman, but one which afflicted the Habsburg and Romanov dynasties as well. 
 The problem of moving from mercenary to native, conscripted armies was a universal pre-modern preoccupation, which proved more difficult to achieve in the Ottoman context than elsewhere. Over the period 1700–1830, an Ottoman military system had emerged, which was drawn from manpower overwhelmingly Muslim and peripheral (nomadic, mountainous and tribal) to an Ottoman urbanity. When the Ottoman sultans first entertained reform, they emulated Napoleon and Peter the Great. By the mid-nineteenth century, Tsars Nicholas I and Alexander II, Napoleon III of France, and Franz Joseph and Metternich of Austria were the contemporaries, and models for the reforms of Abdülmecid I (1839–61). The Ottomans had just begun the social transformation to a loyal instrument ( Nizamiye ) that would allow them to monopolise violence within Ottoman realms, when revolutionary nationalism and constitutionalism burst upon the absolutists of Europe in 1848. Trickling into the Ottoman Empire, and finding fertile ground in disaffected and abused non-Muslim communities, new ethno-religious identities competed with the ‘Ottomanism’ of the Tanzimat era, 1839–76, to result in the authoritarianism of Sultan Abdülhamid II (1876–1908). 
 It is the period 1760–1830, a pivotal moment in world history, which is most lacking in detail about Ottoman military developments, and which is the core of this story. It was a do-or-die moment for the Ottoman house, hardly the moment to introduce liberalism, or constitutionalism. Reform, commonly ı slah in Turkish, was as much about improvement, or eliminating defects in the military system, as it was about Ottomanism. The parameters and imperatives of the late Ottoman state arose from the need to acquire and mobilise the means of war for survival and defence. The struggle by the late eighteenth century required a considerable alteration of the imperial premise, in order to convince the large non-Muslim population at home of the legitimacy of Ottoman power. The battle for the loyalties (suzerainty) of the Principalities (Wallachia and Moldavia) is particularly illuminating in that respect. 
 The Ottoman system militated against the development of a wealthy competitive or elite group in a number of ways which will be discussed. Nonetheless, provincial nobles play an enormous role in the success or failure of the war effort after the 1750s. While confiscation of estates, and more rarely, of charitable endowments, was within the power of the sultan, and frequently exercised, war profiteering generated powerful local elites who both challenged and cooperated with the late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century Ottoman state. Local committees of notables and Muslim judges were responsible for raising troops, supplying grain, baking and shipping biscuit, maintaining the bivouacs, especially along the army routes to the battlefront, and supplying horses and wagons, in the myriad of contractual relationships which characterised Ottoman centre and periphery. Loyalty to the system persisted even in the midst of widespread corruption and abuse of taxation privileges. The toll on local society was large, and accounts of deserted lands, increasing banditry and decimated populations are legion, yet many of the territories of the empire were not directly within the war zones. The balance of loss and gain for local populations must be considered. 
 The outline of the narrative 
 In short, the perspective of this study will be partially integrative and comparative, in an effort to draw the empire into the historiography of Europe and the Mediterranean. Certain fundamentals about the Ottoman side will also have to be established, including mobilisation, logistics, financing, ideological claims, and the impact of military choices and demands on the diverse populations and social groups under Ottoman hegemony. 
 Each narration of the campaigns of the period 1700–1870 will include a brief survey of the origin, causes, progress and conclusion of the wars, highlighting significant battles, and discussing the treaties and their geopolitical implications. More importantly, those descriptions will be followed by an assessment of Ottoman military mobilisation, financing, supply, leadership and strategy, emphasising continuity and change, and the creation of alternative fighting forces to the obsolete and obstreperous Janissaries. 
 The transformation which occurred at the centre, especially from 1792 to 1830, has been much described but little understood. Massive documentation is slowly being brought to bear on many questions which have remained unanswered except in the most facile way. What we do know is that by the end of the period covered by this book, both Ottoman bureaucratic and military classes were trained in western systems and languages, and represented the new Ottoman elites with aspirations concerning the nation and constitutionalism. Part of the investigation here is to determine who made up those elites, and why they became attached to the reform agenda. 
 This work is primarily a study of the warfare on the Danube, Crimean and Caucasus battlefronts between the years 1700 and 1870. The Ottomans confronted armies of different calibres on the Iranian and southern frontiers in the same period, but it is the Danube frontier fortress line to which they devoted the most attention. In fact, the neglect of the other ‘frontiers’ (if one is willing to accept Greater Syria as a ‘frontier’ in military terms) cost the Ottomans dearly – for example, once Safavid Persian hegemony, always tenuous, dissolved in the 1720s. Or, when Mehmed Ali and his new Egyptian army reconnected the Egyptian–Syrian geographical entity in the 1830s, reconfiguring a centuries-old topos which predated Ottoman hegemony. While it is the northern tier that is the subject of most of this narrative, the southern, or Arab, tier becomes important to the story after the 1760s, but especially with Napoleon Bonaparte’s invasion of Egypt in 1798. 
