 This is also a study of land warfare, logistics and their integration into and impact on local societies. The Ottoman navy will not feature significantly in this story. The importance of the Danube fleet to the movement of men and goods from Istanbul to the battlefront, and the possible impact that had on local populations, is of interest to our story, but not central. Arguably, the Ottomans shifted revenues to land-based defensive systems, especially after the exhausting but successful conquest of Crete (1669), which cemented supply systems for the eastern Mediterranean and meant the beginning of the end for the Venetians. The navy does return in the nineteenth century, and has already attracted considerable interest among historians. 9 
 Habsburg, Ottoman and Romanov diplomacy and politics in the seventeenth century open the story, followed by a description of the traditional military context circa 1700 in the second chapter. At the centre of the discussion are the challenge to Ottoman legitimacy in the Karlowitz Treaty of 1699 and the alteration to the sources of military manpower. Thereafter, the following chapters will include a brief review of the major diplomatic and military concerns of a particular period, with select campaigns, and select questions about Ottoman strategies and organisation as the focus of discussion. Under-utilised Ottoman texts and an attempt to describe warfare from the ground up, whenever feasible, will enhance the better-known political and diplomatic narratives. 
 For example, in discussing the 1737–39 Austro-Russian and Ottoman War, it seems appropriate to dwell on the Ottoman recuperative strengths and the nature of siege style warfare in the Balkans, in what proved to be the last great Ottoman war, and its illusionary triumph in the return of Belgrade. While the whole period is marked by monumental difficulties, notable successes, usually involving fortresses, and an ability to reestablish supply systems in desuetude suggest the resilience of an institutional apparatus, and, in fact, convinced contemporaries of the rightness of imperial aims. The 1768–92 Russo-Ottoman wars, the Küçük Kaynarca, Sistova and Jassy treaties and the significant loss of the Crimea, by contrast, will be followed by a discussion of the new methods of mobilisation, the complete dominance of provincial forces on the battlefield, and the bankruptcy of outmoded supply systems. 
 The 1768–74 Russo-Ottoman War remains the pivotal moment for the Ottomans, redolent in the literature as the inauguration of the ‘Eastern Question’, but also truly the greatest test to the traditional military systems, which had to be reorganised following the long, peaceful hiatus after 1740. That ‘Eastern Question’ generally would make of the Ottomans pawns on the international chessboard, disregarded except as a nuisance by the great powers. Three interrelated questions are embodied in the ‘Eastern Question’ as it concerned Britain, but also Russia and France: (1) access to India and trade; (2) access to the Dardanelles and the Black Sea for economic and strategic reasons; and (3) the problem of central and eastern European territories and the Ottoman Empire, more particularly the increasing threat of Russia. 
 The perception of the need to control Egypt, in order to have access to the trade routes to India, drove British policy discussions concerning the Ottomans during the Napoleonic period. Francophobe, and later, Russo-phobe British governments, often unwillingly, found British interests tied to the preservation of the Ottomans, colonial occupation and an informal empire that remained operative in the Middle East until the 1960s. The question of access to the Black Sea through the Aegean and Bosphorus straits, and all it implied for international trade and the balance of power after 1800, was a second underlying theme of the debates. The conflict between Mahmud II and Mehmed Ali (d. 1849) of Egypt was pivotal to the debates, especially during the the Syrian Crisis 1839–41, but beginning with the Greek Rebellion of 1821. 
 The third question concerned the struggle among Austria, Russia, and Prussia (and retreating Ottomans) over Poland, Ukraine and the Danubian territories. The general concern of European chancelleries was about the collapsing balance of power and prestige, expressed as concern over the fate of the Ottoman Empire but in reality driven by much posturing of empires and nation-states. Enlightenment views of liberation often conflicted with nineteenth-century religious and racial justifications for empire and domination. 
 Eastern questions and new Ottomans 
 The chronological boundaries of the Eastern Question in most surveys extend from the 1774 Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca, which ended the Russo-Ottoman War of 1768–74, to the collapse of the Ottoman, Habsburg and Romanov empires in World War I. It is possible, however, to break up the period 1760–1860 into two phases of European involvement in the East: the first, 1760–90, covers the period when investigative missions, diplomatic and military, characterised British and French involvement in eastern affairs. The French, long-standing friends of the Ottomans, pursued with vigour the development of trade networks in the east, both with the Russians and the emerging Greek entrepreneurial class. Secret initiatives and military missions gave the French a considerable tactical edge in the eastern Mediterranean, which facilitated the invasion of Alexandria in 1798 by Bonaparte and his army. Absorbed by intense rivalries with the French elsewhere, in North America and India, British policy makers failed to give the Mediterranean, the routes to India, and Russian aggrandisement serious consideration until the fall of Ochakov in 1788, the last Ottoman fortress on the northern coast of the Black Sea, served to forcibly remind Europe of the changed status of the region. 
 A second phase of the ‘Eastern Question’ after the 1790s involved the increasing importance of Britain as an ally to the Ottomans, in the long struggle with Napoleonic France, which was part of an emerging international consensus that the best solution to Russian encroachment was a live rather than a dead Ottoman Empire. This latter policy, which vacillated according to prime ministerial politics in London, committed Britain to an undeclared colonial domination of the Middle East crowned by the occupation of Egypt in 1882. The further consequence was the almost total eclipse of French political influence on subsequent events in the East except in greater Syria, especially Lebanon. The unresolved rivalries between France and Russia over the protection of Catholic and Orthodox communities resident in Ottoman territories, which centered around the holy sites in Jerusalem, were the casus belli of the Crimean War (1853–56). Ottoman, French, British, Italian and Russian armies became embroiled in one of the more tragic examples of pre-modern imperial warfare, fought, like the later American Civil War, in the full light of eye-witness journalism, photographs, and public opinion. 
 Caught up in global politics, the Ottomans struggled to survive and adapt to the new challenges of European financial and technical superiority. It is here that the book makes a contribution, by both injecting the Ottomans into the ‘Eastern Question’ and challenging two attitudes of enlightenment thought that have influenced the historiography concerning Ottoman military organisation and reform. One is the disregard of ‘Muslim’ protestations about ‘infidel innovations’, as nothing more than religious obscurantism. Most studies of the reform period to date have simply dismissed any protest cloaked in religious terms as non-progressive, backward and ignorant. The second inheritance is the discourse on ‘despotism’, particularly aimed at the kings of France in the eighteenth century, which settled on the Ottomans as the clearest example of the worst excesses of absolutist government, with China and Russia close behind. 10 Traces of both remain part of the narrative of empires into the present. My intention is not to nullify such generalisations, but rather to present more evidence from within the Ottoman context, as a way of balancing the picture. 
 If one measure of a modern state lies in its ability to centralise and monopolise the control of violence, the Ottomans failed to make the transition in the eighteenth century. They also failed to design a fiscal system as well-organised as their European foes around the business of war, another of the characteristics of European states of the same era. The consequences of the neglect of financing war made itself felt in 1768. Some long-term fiscal adjustment, and new taxation, however, can be traced over the period under discussion, at least until the disastrous 1787–92 war with Russia during the reign of Selim III. Bankruptcy faced Selim III, inhibiting the expansion of his ‘new order’ and accompanying economic reforms. Austria, meanwhile, reluctant partner of Russia throughout, withdrew from eastern adventures after the 1790 rapprochement of Prussia and Austria, and the signing of a Habsburg–Ottoman armistice. By 1791, the second ‘diplomatic revolution’ of the eighteenth century, and limited territorial gains from a costly war, ended centuries of Ottoman–Habsburg confrontation until the late nineteenth century. 
 I will argue for the continuity of indigenous military reform in both mobilisation and artillery systems from Selim III to Mahmud II, to counteract the historiographical reliance on works such as the Memoirs of Baron de Tott, the well-known technical adviser to Mustafa III (1757–74), who claims sole responsibility for artillery reform in Istanbul. (A colleague of mine once referred to Tott’s memoirs as the French equivalent of Twain’s The Connecticut Yankee at King Arthur’s Court . 11 ) Fictional or not, the cultural assumptions and full-blown Eurocentrism of Tott and others of his contemporaries, taken at face value, continue to influence the way this history is written. I do not evade a discussion of cultural difference, but rigid dichotomies such as civilised/barbaric, or occidental/oriental I have tried to avoid. 
 Thus, in examining the Napoleonic era, starting with the invasion of Egypt in 1798 and ending with the 1812 Bucharest Treaty, it seems particularly appropriate to emphasise the gradual redefinition (or perhaps more accurately, the reassertion) of the Muslim identity of the army. It had been re-fashioned on European models, particularly apparent in Mahmud II’s ‘Victorious Soldiers of Muhammad’ which replaced the Janissaries after 1826. The success and failure of the military reforms of Mahmud II, and the construction of the new absolutism around the ‘new’ Ottomans, modelled on their near neighbours, deserves serious reconsideration from the Ottoman perspective, and without the assumption that the key to success lay in mimicking western Europe. One of the great turning points in Ottoman history is in 1828, when Mahmud II declared war on Russia and marched 40,000 new model army troops to the mouth of the Danube, two years after eliminating the Janissaries and one year after France and Britain sank his fleet at Navarino. 
