

 Sir James Porter considers the army to be composed of the body of the people, and the janizaries to amount to two to three hundred thousand men, independently of those who get themselves enrolled to enjoy the privileges. Pey[s]sonnel supposes they may consist of many millions. Baron de Tott calculates them to be four hundred thousand: and finally, Mr. Eton … determines them to be an hundred and thirteen thousand four hundred. But the number of effective janizaries is best determined by the amount of their pay. Two thousand four hundred purses are issued every six months from the treasury; a sum which allows thirty piastres a man for an army calculated at forty thousand. 12 
 Thornton’s own estimates prove the most durable. Figures that exist for the earlier period indicate that the palace Janissary infantry corps grew from 11,000 to 12,000 in 1527, rising to ca. 20,000 in 1567 13 and to 37,000 by the end of the Long War (1593–1606). 14 Thereafter, the mustered fighting force of the imperial infantry may never have exceeded 40,000, the effective force probably being considerably smaller, especially in the later period when desertion became endemic. For the 1683 campaign with the Holy League, Marsigli reckoned 30,000 Janissaries. 15 An Ottoman source on the Vienna siege lists about half that number as actually in combat. 16 (The vanguard of the army which arrived in Ösijek in June of 1683 was composed of 3,000 Janissaries, 500 Cebecis (Armorers), 20,000 cavalry and 8,000 Tatars). 17 
 Similarly, for the 1768–74 Russo-Ottoman war, the estimates range from 60,000 to 400,000 for the total assembled force in that case. 18 A figure of 30,000–40,000 mustered Janissaries is consistent with Thornton’s evidence as well as that compiled by Rhoads Murphey, who notes, ‘[i]t cannot be said of any period of its [Ottoman] history that military institutions dominated civil society.’ 19 The sheer cost of maintaining the highly privileged Janissary corps constrained its enlargement and forced the creation of alternative, more temporary forces, a practice widely evident in the western European context. In fact, one of the most interesting contrasts among the Ottomans, Habsburgs and Romanovs is that just as the latter two were centralising the administration of warfare, the Ottomans decentralised it, though the social costs only became evident in the 1790s. 
 The Janissary system was originally organised by the conscription and forced conversion of young non-Muslim men, known as the dev ş irme . 20 New recruits were added to the acemio ğ lan corps, essentially the reserve for Janissary corps, and used to top up Janissary numbers as necessary. Manumission was automatic upon ceremonial admission into the Janissaries. Until 1600, the Ottoman army and palace bureaucracy were drawn almost entirely from this source, from lowest foot soldier to grand vizier. By 1700, however, the dev ş irme was finished as a means of recruitment. One of the last of the dev ş irme -style round-ups was in 1666, when 300–20 youths were reputedly gathered from the European territories. Official records indicate that, in 1687, only 130 new Janissaries were added to the corps in the traditional manner, promoted from within the acemio ğ lans . 21 These numbers are insignificant for the campaigns that preoccupied the Ottomans in that period. In other words, the military slave system had long since been abandoned as the chief source of Janissary recruits. Pressure from within the ranks of the regiments to admit outsiders, mostly Muslim-born, sometimes children of the corps itself, had in fact gradually replaced what were no doubt much resisted, and less than productive, round-ups. 22 The central dilemma of the Ottoman state for the next century was how to contain the size of the imperial infantry corps, whose members, initially deployed beyond Istanbul to the provinces to quell rebellion, merged with and contested the administrations of both local and Ottoman officials. Janissary elites as part of powerful local households dot the landscape of the late eighteenth century. Yet the dynasty had still to mobilise effective fighting forces for the far-distant, seasonal and siege warfare characteristic of the age, and maintain a series of fortresses along the north frontier. As the tightly-controlled recruitment system fell into desuetude, other means of recruitment and retention had to be employed. 
 The dilemma was not entirely the issue of payment, discipline and training, always offered as causes of discontent by Janissary rebels themselves. First and foremost to be a Janissary was to enter tax-free status: all those in the military were exempt from taxation. Discontent was equally a reflection of changing power structures, the rise of competing households, and the challenge to the privileged position of the Janissary. The Janissary barracks, organised as ocaks (literally, hearths); the symbols of the kitchen, the great soup cauldrons, and ceremonial meals shared with the sultan or his substitute, the grand vizier, on the eve of battle, continued to symbolise the patrimony of the Ottoman dynastic household. The demand for accession gifts from any new sultan signalled the voluntary submission to the new sovereign by his unruly children, the Janissaries. Yet, by 1700, there were reproductions of such patrimonial households, with their own armies, in all the major fortress cities and towns of the northern empire. The southern frontier, i.e. the largely Arab and Kurdish territories of the empire, as we shall see, operated somewhat differently. The assumption of political power by increasingly autonomous imperial troops is a constant refrain of latter-day Ottoman history. 
 Belonging to the Janissaries became an entitlement and an honorific. Extra privileges accorded the corps included annual allotments for uniforms; incentive bonuses before and after battles; ‘healing money’ for meritorious battle wounds; and money for retirees and widows. Such entitlements were regularly distributed to members of the corps in its heyday, and continued to be part of the demands in the eighteenth century. The Janissaries retained the status of a privileged caste, a Praetorian guard, long after their usefulness on the battlefield had declined. 
 Individual regiments developed an esprit de corps that resembled an extended family. To encourage participation in campaigns, provincial governors promised registration in the corps. Artisans of all kinds found it convenient to become attached to the corps, as noted by Raymond and others, for physical and economic protection. 23 Tott, in the Crimea as French consul, was made an honorary member of the corps in Perekop in 1770, a common practice of the period. 24 By the time Thornton was writing in the early decades of the nineteenth century, and just prior to the official elimination of the Janissaries in 1826, who they were and what they had become was difficult to determine. 