



===== FILE: text/part0011.html =====

 

 Ottoman Wars 1700–1870: An Empire Besieged 

 Chapter One 
 The political map of Central and Eastern Europe circa 1700 
 B y the Treaty of Karlowitz of 1699, which ended years of intermittent warfare with the Holy League (Austria, Poland, Russia, Venice and the Papacy), the Ottoman Empire ceded all of Ottoman Hungary (except Teme ş var), Transylvania, Slavonia and parts of Croatia to Austria; Kamenice, Podolia and parts of the southern Ukraine to Poland; and Azov to Russia, which opened the door to the Caucasus for Peter the Great and his successors. The Venetians kept their gains in the Morea and parts of Dalmatia, although their victory was elusive, as the Ottomans would recapture the territories within two decades. By any standard, it was a crushing defeat for the Ottomans, and rightly considered over the centuries the major turning point for the empire. Significantly, the Ottomans reorganised and remobilised their army four times over the course of the campaigns from 1683–99, but were unable to establish long-lasting supremacy on the battlefield. While Eugene of Savoy’s military command is generally recognised as the key to Austrian success, it is equally notable that Habsburg setbacks prompted much re-thinking of strategy and reform in the later decades of the eighteenth century. Russia, added to the League in 1686, emerged as the most significant player in these same decades, although the fruits of many of Peter the Great’s reforms would not be immediately apparent. 
 Before discussing the Ottoman military organisation of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, we must first examine the geopolitical theatre where much of the warfare unfolded. In what follows, with very broad strokes, I have tried to evoke an impression of place, and what it must have been like to live in that space and time. References to the Habsburgs and Romanovs are intended to evoke the familiar among readers, in order to highlight both similar military problems and different cultural solutions in three imperial contexts on the northern arc of the Ottoman Empire. The last part of the chapter briefly introduces the sultan and his Janissaries in Istanbul circa 1700. 
 The geopolitics of the Danube 
 From the perspective of the third millenium, it is difficult to perceive how someone living in the late seventeenth century might have envisioned the map of the Danube region and the Black Sea. The borders of the unknown were rapidly receding in Europe, but territories beyond Poland–Lithuania, east of Vienna and south of Budapest and Belgrade, evoked the exotic and the dangerous. The traveller on the Danube was among the adventurers of the age, facing ill-charted territories, fluctuating frontiers, and threats to health and well-being from displaced populations, bandits, disease-ridden marshes, and the seemingly unending warfare between the three greatest opponents of the age: Habsburg, Ottoman, and Venetian. Russia had just begun the empire’s relentless march south and east as this narrative begins. 
 Of the many accounts of diplomats, merchants and travelling ladies and gentlemen which provide much of our information and impressions of this territory, none is more thorough and colourful than the various reminiscences and other writings of Luigi Ferdinando Marsigli, nobleman, scientist, diplomat, cartographer, and factotum for both The Republic of Venice and the Austrian Habsburgs in the period. The Venetians, defeated in the long struggle with the Ottomans over control of Crete (1645–69), attempted to re-establish both diplomatic and commercial ties with Istanbul throughout the 1670s. As befitted young noblemen of his age, especially one interested in a future career in diplomacy, Marsigli first travelled abroad as a member of the entourage of the Venetian bailo to Istanbul in 1679. (Opportunities for foreign travel and adventure were generally arranged as part of an official entourage such as envoys to friendly or recently hostile neighbours.) Young and unencumbered with the task of making his way through the niceties of Istanbul diplomatic circles, Marsigli decided to return home overland through Bosnia and Dalmatia, territories within the Ottoman Empire. Thus began a twenty-year career in much uncharted territory. Within a decade, his knowledge of that region became essential to military strategists in Vienna, and his adventures in the Balkans were played out against the long series of annual campaigns between the Ottomans and the Holy League, stretching from 1683 to the treaty of Karlowitz in 1699. 
 William III, ruler of the Dutch Republic (1672–1702), and of England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales (1689–1702), was engaged in a long struggle with France’s Louis XIV (1643–1715), and sought the aid of Austria. He instructed the English Ambassador Sir William Hussey to attempt a mediation between Leopold I, ruler of the Habsburg Monarchy (1657–1705) and Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire (1658–1705) and Süleyman II, Sultan of the Ottoman Empire (1687–91) in Istanbul. Hussey would normally have travelled by sea, but in this case, and for the first time in English diplomatic annals, the embassy travelled down the Danube, embarking at Vienna. Leopold I’s handpicked representative, Luigi de Marsigli, joined the embassy at the great fortress of Esztergom (Gran) on the Danube in April 1691. 1 Esztergom had been captured from the Ottomans in the triumphant campaign of 1683, as the Ottomans retreated from the unsuccessful siege of Vienna and failed to regroup effectively to defend the fortress. That had ended an Ottoman residence of almost 150 years west of the great bend of the Danube, as is commemorated in a well-known Turkish ballad. 2 
 The embassy proceeded downriver, passing Buda, surrendered by the Ottomans to the Holy League in September 1686, which likely accounted for the apparent desolation, lack of culture and livestock, and even of river traffic. Arriving in Belgrade, they were greeted with proper politeness and ceremony by the Ottoman fortress commander. Belgrade had already switched hands, first captured by Austrian forces in 1688 and then recaptured by the Ottomans following a disastrous Habsburg 1690 campaign. As Secretary to the English Ambassador, Marsigli, was rather nervous about his reception, but commented that the Turks treated him ‘with perfect courtesy’. The embassy was to be escorted from Belgrade to Rusçuk (in present-day Bulgaria) by 150 Egyptian Janissaries who were on their way back to Cairo. The Ottomans themselves expressed fear of the hayduts (bandits) who might interfere with the smooth passage of the English envoy. 3 Eight days later Hussey and his party disembarked in Rusçuk, a ship-building port, to travel through the Balkan passes to Edirne to complete what would henceforth become the standard overland diplomatic passage to Istanbul. The embassy caught up with Sultan Süleyman II and Grand Vizier Faz ı l Mustafa Köprülü (1689–91) in Edirne, as they prepared for the spring campaign of 1691. While their reception was cordial, the embassy itself ended in failure, except that Marsigli, sole member of the four participants still alive in 1699, influenced the direction of the final Karlowitz negotiations by his long intimacy with the courses of the Danube and its tributaries. 4 It was he and an Ottoman commissioner by the name of Ibrahim (otherwise unidentified) who paced out the newly described fixed border of the treaty which opened a new era in Ottoman–European relations. 