

 Plate 4    Nineteenth-century lithograph of the Upper Danube (The Danube: Its History, Scenery, and Topography. Splendidly Illustrated from sketches taken on the spot, by Abresch and drawn by W.H. Bartlett. By William Beattie, M.D. George Virtue, London, 1844 ). 
 This was the terrain over which Habsburg and Ottoman fought for much of 200 years. The Danube River is emblematic of the trials and tribulations which pre-modern armies faced in the last frontier of Europe. 5 First and foremost, the topography and environment imposed different kinds of military strategies. Building bridges, crossing flooded streams, and drowning during retreats are constants of the chronicles of Danubian warfare. Vast stretches of marshes, hilly terrain, and difficult mountain passes mark the battlegrounds of this region. In addition, intense rivalries based on ethnicity and religion contributed to the normal strategic and logistical burdens which warfare of early modern Europe represented. The borders and much disputed territories of such regions as Croatia, Serbia, Transylvania, Wallachia, Moldavia, Bosnia, Albania, Bulgaria were home to a plethora of identities which we came to know intimately in the waning years of the twentieth century, in part because of resonating histories from the centuries in between. A ‘hedgehog of frontier fortresses’, built to prevent the further incursion of the Ottomans, and an ‘unruly band of border states’ resulted in ‘acute political instability; but this, in turn, reflected the fact that each of the great powers, the Ottomans included, had at times to operate at its extreme range of effectiveness of action when seeking to bring any of these marginal polities under control.’ 6 
 The Holy League was the last crusading alliance which took up arms against the Muslim intruder to Europe. Consider, for example, the exhortation of the delegates of Leopold I at the Russian court in 1684 to join the League: ‘Fight for the Cross of Christ! Lead your privileged peoples to destroy the cruel enemy … Occupy Constantinople, where your patriarch is forced to be a guest … Regain your seat of your Church, where now idols reign.’ 7 The revitalisation of the Catholic Church, often attributed to the counter-reformation, gained impetus as well from the defence of Europe against the Muslim occupier. The Catholic Habsburgs were necessary to Europe as a buffer state; after 1699, and the eclipse of the Ottoman threat to Europe, western Holy League-style Christian coalitions became increasingly irrelevant, but sectarian-based rivalries continued, particularly in the contested territories of the Balkans. 
 At the end of the seventeenth century, there had emerged a recognisable ‘concert’ of powers in Europe whose primary mode of rhetoric of inclusion was Christianity, and whose primary enemy remained the Ottoman ‘Turk’. However, the entangled communities of Orthodox, Catholic and Protestant Christianity which criss-crossed Holy Roman Empire and Ottoman territories alike remained a significant obstacle to collective action, and required a carefully-styled universality to appeal to the greatest number. Distrust of co-religionists continued to be a psychological barrier to Habsburg eastern ambitions, and a crucial aspect of their failure to follow up the striking victories of 1687 to 1690. 
 Arguably, it is also this war which began to weaken the loyalty of non-Muslims to their Ottoman rulers, and Christian and Muslim calls-to-arms remain an integral aspect of international relations for the next 200 years. Just how lodged the conflation of the Turks as Muslims is in the popular mentality can be demonstrated in an interview with Slav-speaking villagers from Ohri, observing Byzantine ruins in 1903. When asked if they knew who the builders of the ruins were, they responded: ‘The free men, our ancestors.’ ‘Were they Serbs, Bulgarians, Greeks or Turks?’ asked the interviewer. The young boys replied: ‘No, they were not Turks; they were Christians.’ 8 It should be noted that the word ‘Turk’ for ‘Ottoman’ was a European usage. The Ottomans thought of ‘Turks’ as uncultured ‘hicks’ or ‘rubes’ until well into the nineteenth century. 9 
 Members of the Holy League 
 The main pillar of the Holy League was Habsburg Austria, whose rulers were also the Holy Roman Emperors, defenders of Christendom, head of a commonwealth of electorates and a myriad of medium and smaller powers. Some have argued that the Holy Roman Empire after 1648 was ‘the great fiction of Europe’, while others emphasise its robust endurance. 10 Military strategy and decision-making were determined by constant concessions (or lack of them) to individual dynastic demands of territories such as Bohemia or Bavaria, demands which, unsatisfied, could force revolt and warfare such as erupted in the Thirty Years War (1618–48). On numerous occasions during the long period of conflict 1683–99, Leopold I stood almost alone against his Ottoman foes, especially before Brandenburg and Russia joined in 1686. The federative nature of Austrian imperialism has been well documented, accounting for the fluctuating success and failure of the Habsburg military endeavour over the 16 years. The last-minute arrival of King Jan Sobieski and some 20,000 Poles at the siege of Vienna in 1683 helped to push the relief forces to the spectacular defeat of the Ottomans, just as they were prepared to breach the walls of the city. The effort was extremely costly: there were up to 100,000 war-related deaths, and much of the lower Austrian territory had to be repopulated. 11 
 Historians of the period point to the vacillation of Habsburg policy between concerns for both a western front (against Louis XIV’s encroachments) and an eastern front against the perpetual enemy, the Ottomans. External conflicts were complicated by a major threat from Hungary under Imre Thököly (d. 1705), who succeeded in being declared the ‘King of Central Hungary’ by the Ottomans just as the Habsburgs were negotiating a renewal of the 1664 Ottoman–Habsburg Treaty of Vasvat. By 1684, Austria, Poland, and Venice had united in the Holy League, intent on a three-pronged attack on Ottoman territories: Austria on the Hungarian and Croatian frontier; Venice in Dalmatia and Greece, and Poland in the Ukraine and the Black Sea. The addition of Russia to the Holy League in 1686, and the first major thrust of Russian troops into the Crimea in 1687, might ultimately have meant even further incursion into the vast Ottoman territories, but by 1697 the original three partners were exhausted, over-extended and desirous of peace. (Austria, for example, was also involved in the Nine Years War on its western front.) The Ottomans, who had regrouped and recaptured Teme ş var in 1695, were beaten decisively at Zenta in 1697 by Eugene of Savoy. Only Peter the Great, fresh from the conquest of Azov in 1696, was desirous of continuing, and withdrew from the peace negotiations at Karlowitz, begun in 1698. The remaining belligerents signed the treaty on the basis of uti possidetis . The treaty permanently altered the relationship between Habsburg and Ottoman. 
 The Ottomans ceded their territories in Hungary, Croatia and Poland as described at the beginning of this chapter, although unresolved border disputes remained. Similarly, the Venetians retained the Morea and parts of Dalmatia, although they would only hold them for two decades. It was a tremendous victory for the Habsburgs and their allies. The fixed border measured out by Commissioners Marsigli and Ibrahim, with minor, later fluctuations around Belgrade and Teme ş var, remained the essential Austrian–Ottoman line well into the nineteenth century. Still, even as the notion of permanent borders seeped into Ottoman–Europe diplomacy, this border remained porous. By 1800, the Habsburg frontiers extended 1,000 miles from the Adriatic coast to the northern end of Moldavia. The Habsburgs manned the extensive military frontier with Croatian and Serbian Grenzer (dragoons) until 1870, settling out immigrants from conquered territories as a simultaneous process of pacification and defence. Almost nothing is known about the impact of fleeing populations and retreating armies on the Ottoman side of the border. Danube fortress towns such as Vidin, downriver from Belgrade, as we shall see, became the front line of defence. 
 There are a number of striking aspects to the Treaty of Karlowitz. First of all, intercession by western European mediators was instrumental in its conclusion, establishing a pattern of treaty negotiations with the Ottomans which continued for at least the next century, with the exception of 1774 as we shall see. Secondly, the language suggested a treaty among equals, the Holy Roman Emperor and the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire styled as ‘… Most Serene and Most Powerful Prince and Lord Leopold, and the Most Serene and Most Powerful Prince of the Ottomans and of Asia and Greece and his glorious predecessors’, a powerful evocation of the change in the balance of power. 12 
 Thirdly, the diplomatic representation from Istanbul was headed by ‘Lord Mehmet Effendi, Supreme Chancellor of the Ottoman Empire, and Lord Alexander Maurocordato, Privy Councillor and Secretary’, the latter in his capacity as Grand Dragoman of the Porte, the second time that a Greek had negotiated with western powers on behalf of the Turks, and certainly not the last. 13 Throughout the eighteenth and well into the nineteenth century, as much as one-third of the diplomatic corps of the Ottomans was drawn from the Greek Orthodox families of Istanbul, obviating the need for the development of a more representative corps of professional diplomats trained in the European languages to serve the Ottoman court abroad. The Venetian baili dubbed the tercüman (translator, interpreter) one of the three evils of Istanbul, fire and plague being the other two. 14 The Ottoman reliance on the Orthodox Greek community has been described in many ways, often as part of a western assumption that Muslim cultural superiority militated against the learning of non-Muslim languages, thus requiring intermediaries from the non-Muslim communities in diplomatic practice. 15 While Muslim learning certainly preferred Arabic, Persian and Turkish (Ottoman) to Latin or Greek, the reliance on established communities also naturally grew out of the eastern Mediterranean rivalries, missionary and trade relationships, which formed part of Ottoman trading and hence diplomatic culture of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries: ‘An Orthodox Hellenic style of culture had emerged from the shadows of the first Ottoman centuries, enriched by a strong infusion of skills from the Latin (mainly Italian, largely Venetian) west.’ 16 
 This style of negotiation was particularly characteristic of what Hurewitz has called the second phase of ‘The Europeanization of Ottoman Diplomacy’, the ‘unilateralism of a contracting empire’, when ‘dragomans or interpreters, who by definition should have been agents, [became] in fact principals.’ 17 In addition to the use of tercümans and diplomatic staff, the Ottomans sent more special embassies and envoys to European courts in the eighteenth century than ever before: 34 Ottoman reports and travelogues from European embassies have been identified. 18 The unintended consequence of the reliance on an ethnic exclusivity for delicate negotiations was a marginalisation of the Ottoman ability to participate in the French-speaking culture of European diplomacy, as was abundantly clear by the end of the eighteenth century. In 1793, Selim III (1789–1807) inaugurated permanent representation in the major capitals of Europe, which continued, in fits and starts, until the end of the period covered by this book. 
