 In fact, the whole latter half of the seventeenth century represents the culmination of a long process of evolution in Ottoman dynastic politics, from rule based on charisma, and legitimated by ancestral authority, to a more impersonal ‘institutional monarchy … Decentralizing the decision-making process, abandoning direct taxation based on regular land registration … and promoting the spread of “tax farms” … were connected with these changes in the style of sultanic rule.’ 40 Fruitful comparisons can be made between the Ottoman and European contexts, such as the French, whether the processes are described as ‘decentralisation’ in the Ottoman or ‘centralisation’ in the European case. The question remains of whether or not the Ottoman house ever succeeded in monopolising the control of violence, which is one of the more interesting arguments about early modern European state formation, and the rise of modern armies. 41 
 Of equal importance to sultanic legitimacy was the traditional notion of the household on campaign, perhaps a legacy of their Central Asian origins in the distant (and highly mythologised) past. The crescent formation order of the military forces which the Ottomans employed in major open field confrontations, even as new technical and strategic developments dictated otherwise, was driven by the idea that the military apparatus of the state was just that: an expression of the order and proximity to the privileges granted by the sultan, or his substitute, the grand vizier. That is to say, that the deployment of Ottoman assembled forces on the battlefield was representative of ‘the political hierarchy of the Ottoman state’. 42 Such representation of founding myths remained evocative well into the eighteenth century. 
 Admittance to the Janissaries meant acceptance into a circle of privilege, and many of the rebellions of the period under discussion were driven by the desire to see the circle of privilege enlarged, and admittance to a carefully maintained, if largely fictional, distinction between the askeri , or tax-exempt military, and the reaya , or taxable peasants, preserved. The major dilemma for the structure and functionality of the Ottoman state was that expanding the number of Janissaries meant a considerable drain on sources of revenues, so the tension between those who wanted in and those who wanted to keep them out is one of the leitmotifs of later Ottoman household dynamics. The sultans adapted many different strategies for mobilising and financing campaigns in order to solve the problem of their imperial guard, strategies which will be discussed in subsequent chapters. Suffice it to say that sustained challenges to the Ottoman ruling household of the seventeenth and eighteenth century were driven as much by evolution in the source and composition of the Ottoman armies as by the factional politics and the ‘rule of the women’ in the palace. 
 To go to war was to take the government on parade, and, it could be argued, stimulate the economy. The presence of the entire imperial household in frontier zones did guarantee a temporary restoration, voluntary or coerced, of the tributary relationships which characterised Ottoman administration. Theatrical ceremonies conveyed sultanic benevolence and power and reinforced the tenuous kinship bonds of independent and entrepreneurial troops. It was an empire-wide endeavour, and could be sustained only as long as local populations were not disadvantaged. As Stoye adroitly notes: ‘campaigning on a large scale justified enlarging the army to a maximum, and within this expanded force it was easier to contrive a balance of power which subdued the more refractory elements’, 43 a very considerable argument for the regularity with which the Ottomans mounted large campaigns until the period with which this book begins. The eighteenth century is remarkable for the restraint from warfare, especially the years 1740–68. The usual explanation is that the Habsburgs and Romanovs were preoccupied elsewhere, but it is also important to point out that the ‘limitless’ Ottoman horizons were no more. We now turn to an examination of what Sugar once called ‘A near perfect military society’. 44 